古文：乐三《但歌》四曲，出自汉世。
现代文：《但歌》有四支曲调，是从汉代产生的。
English: "Dange" has four tunes, which originated in the Han Dynasty.

古文：无弦节，作伎，最先一人倡，三人和。
现代文：没有弦管伴奏，表演的时候，最先由一人领唱，三人和唱。
English: There is no string accompaniment, when performing, the first to lead the singing is one person, and three people sing.

古文：魏武帝尤好之。
现代文：魏武帝尤为爱好。
English: Emperor Wu of Wei was particularly fond of this.

古文：时有宋容华者，清彻好声，善唱此曲，当时特妙。
现代文：当时有一位宋容华，其声清澈优美，善于演唱这一曲调，在那时特别美妙。
English: At that time, there was a Song Yonghua, whose voice was clear and beautiful, and who was good at singing this tune, which was particularly wonderful at that time.

古文：自晋以来，不复传，遂绝。
现代文：自从置朝以来，不再流传，于是就断绝了。
English: Since the establishment of the dynasty, it has not been passed on, so it was discontinued.

古文：《相和》，汉旧歌也。
现代文：《相和》，是漠代旧有的歌曲。
English: "Sohwa" is an old song from the desert era.

古文：丝竹更相和，执节者歌。
现代文：管弦更迭伴奏，由拍板的人歌唱。
English: Accompanied by a changing orchestra and sung by the clappers.

古文：本一部，魏明帝分为二，更递夜宿。
现代文：本来衹是一部，魏明帝分为两部，轮流在夜晚值宿演唱。
English: This is one part, Wei Mingdi is divided into two parts, and they take turns to stay overnight.

古文：本十七曲，硃生、宋识、列和等复合之为十三曲。《相和》
现代文：本来有十七支曲调，圭生、塞邀、乏四等人又把它合编成十三支曲调。《相和》
English: Originally, there were seventeen tunes, but Gui Sheng, Se Xing, Bao Si and others combined it into thirteen tunes.

古文：《驾六龙》、《气出倡》，武帝词：
现代文：《驾六龙》《气出倡》魏武帝词：
English: "Driving the Six Dragons" "Climbing the Mountain of Qi" Wei Wu Di's words:

古文：驾六龙乘风而行，行四海外。
现代文：用六条龙拉车，乘着风势游行，游行到四海以外。
English: With six dragons to pull the car, riding the wind parade, parade to the four seas outside.

古文：路下之八邦，历登高山，临溪谷，乘云而行，行四海外，东到泰山。
现代文：天路下到八国，登上了一座座高山，下临溪涧山谷，乘着云势游行，游行到四海之外，向东来到蠢山。
English: The heavenly road went down to the Eight Kingdoms, climbed a mountain, went down to the valley, took advantage of the cloud situation to march, marched to the four seas, and came to the east to the stupid mountain.

古文：仙人玉女，下来翱游，骖驾六龙，饮玉浆，河水尽，不东流。
现代文：仙人和王女，下来飞翔嬉游，用六条龙拉着车子，喝着玉浆，河水尽，不再向东流。
English: Fairies and princesses, fly down and frolic, pull the car with six dragons, drink the jade milk, and the river runs out and no longer flows eastward.

古文：解愁腹，饮玉浆。
现代文：解除心中愁闷，再饮一杯玉浆。
English: To relieve the gloom in your heart, drink another cup of jade syrup.

古文：奉持行，东到蓬莱山。上至天之门。
现代文：驾着龙，乘着风云，继续前行，向东到了蓬莱山上山来到天宫的门前。
English: Driving the dragon, riding the wind and clouds, continue to move forward, eastward to the Penglai Mountain, up the mountain to the gate of the Heavenly Palace.

古文：玉阙下，引见得入，赤松相对，四面顾望，视正焜煌。
现代文：在玉阙下面，仙人引导入见，得以进宫，叁捡壬与我对面而坐，向四方看去，满眼正是光彩明亮。
English: Beneath the Jade Scepter, the Immortal guided her into the palace, and she sat opposite me, gazing in all directions, her eyes full of radiance.

古文：开王心正兴，其气百道至，传告无穷。
现代文：开、王、心三星正在兴起，星气千百道到来，传告无穷无尽。
English: The three stars of open, king and heart are on the rise, and a thousand stars are coming, and the announcements are endless.

古文：闭其口，但当爱气，寿万年。
现代文：闭上嘴巴，衹要珍惜这口气，就能有万年的高寿。
English: If you keep your mouth shut and cherish your breath, you can live a long life.

古文：东到海，与天连。
现代文：向东来到大海，海水与天相连。
English: Eastwards to the sea, the sea is connected to the sky.

古文：神仙之道，出窈入冥。
现代文：神仙的事理，出入深远奥妙。
English: The affairs of the immortals are far-reaching and mysterious.

古文：常当专之，心恬忄詹无所愒欲，闭门坐自守，天与期气。
现代文：时常要专一神志，内心恬静平淡而没有什么贪欲，关起门来静坐自守，上天将及时赋予灵气。
English: You should always be single-minded, have a calm and flat heart without any greed, and meditate behind closed doors to protect yourself. God will give you a spiritual aura in time.

古文：愿得神之人，乘驾云车，骖驾白鹿，上到天之门，来赐神之药。
现代文：我希望与神灵相通，用白鹿驾着云车，上到天门，接受神灵赐药。
English: I hope to communicate with the gods, use the white deer to drive the cloud car, go up to the gate of heaven, and receive the medicine given by the gods.

古文：跪受之，敬神齐。
现代文：跪拜受药，敬神恭肃。
English: Kneel to worship and receive medicine, and be respectful to the gods.

古文：当如此，道自来。
现代文：应当这样恭肃，神道白会到来。
English: We should be so respectful, the Shinto White Council is coming.

古文：华阴山，自以为大，高百丈，浮云为之盖。
现代文：华阴山，自以为大山，高有百丈，浮云为它覆盖。
English: Huaying Mountain, which thinks it is a big mountain, has many peaks and is covered by floating clouds.

古文：仙人欲来，出随风，列之雨。
现代文：仙人就要到来，他出来时随着风，跟着雨。
English: The hermit is about to arrive. He comes out with the wind and the rain.

古文：吹我洞箫鼓瑟琴，何，酒与歌戏。
现代文：吹起我的洞箫，弹起我的瑟琴，多么和乐，多么愉院，饮酒唱歌来嬉戏。
English: Blow up my cymbals, play my harpsichord, what harmony, what a pleasure, drinking and singing to play.

古文：今日相乐诚为乐，玉女起，起儛移数时。
现代文：今日同仙人在一起嬉戏确实快乐，玉女起身，跳了好长时间的舞。
English: It was really fun to play with the fairy today. The princess got up and danced for a long time.

古文：鼓吹一何嘈嘈，从西北来时，仙道多驾烟，乘云驾龙，郁何々。
现代文：吹吹打打是多么嘈杂，仙人从西北方来的时候，他们大都驾着烟雾，乘着云，驾着龙，云雾是多么厚密。
English: How noisy the blowing and beating is, when the immortals come from the northwest, they mostly drive the smoke, ride the clouds, drive the dragons, how thick the clouds are.

古文：遨游八极，乃到昆仑之山，西王母侧。
现代文：逛完了八方极远的地方，就来到崑喻山，来到西王母身边。
English: After visiting places as far away as the eight directions, they came to the Ganymede Mountains, to the West Queen Mother's side.

古文：神仙金止玉亭，来者为谁？
现代文：神仙如金玉一般停留下来，来的神仙是谁?
English: Immortals like the golden ball generally stay down, who is the immortal who comes?

古文：赤松王乔，乃德旋之门。
现代文：是赤松子和王子乔，还有德星、旋星来到大门。
English: Red Pine and Prince Joe, as well as Virtue Star and Spin Star, came to the gate.

古文：乐共饮食到黄昏，多驾合坐，万岁长宜子孙。
现代文：大家共同吃喝玩乐直到黄昏，许多神仙坐在一起，千年万载，永远多子多孙。
English: Everyone eats, drinks and has fun together until dusk, many immortals sit together, for thousands of years, and there will always be more children and grandchildren.

古文：游君山，甚为真，磪磈砟硌，尔自为神。
现代文：游览洞庭君山，所见极为真切，山石高而不平，你自己作怪称神。
English: Touring Dongtingjun Mountain, what you see is extremely real, the mountain is high and uneven, and you yourself are called a god.

古文：乃到王母台，金阶玉为堂，芝草生殿旁。
现代文：于是来到王母台，黄金为台阶，白玉为殿堂，芝草就生长在殿旁。
English: So I came to Wangmadai. The gold is the steps, the white jade is the hall of fame, and the turf grass grows next to the hall.

古文：东西厢，客满堂。
现代文：东西两厢，宾客坐满殿堂。
English: There are two rooms, east and west, and the hall is full of guests.

古文：主人当行觞，坐者长寿遽何央。
现代文：主人将依次敬酒，祝在座的人长寿，永远健康。
English: The host will propose a toast in turn, wishing everyone present here a long and healthy life.

古文：长乐甫始宜孙子，常愿主人增年，与天相守。
现代文：长久的快乐刚开始，多孙多子，常常希望主人增加年岁，与天地同存共守。
English: Long-term happiness is just beginning, many grandchildren and more children, often hope that the owner will increase the age, and coexist with heaven and earth.

古文：《厥初生》、《精列》，武帝词：
现代文：《厥初生》《精列》魏武帝词：
English: "The Firstborn of Jue" and "The Elite" by Emperor Wu of Wei:

古文：厥初生，造化之陶物，莫不有终期。
现代文：开始有生命的时候，像天地造化养育万物，寿命都有终止的期限。
English: At the beginning of life, like the creation of heaven and earth and the nurturing of all things, life has a termination period.

古文：莫不有终期，圣贤不能免，何为怀此忧。
现代文：既然寿命都有终止的期限，就是圣贤也不能避免，又何必为死亡而忧虑。
English: Since life has an expiration date, even sages cannot avoid it, and why worry about death.

古文：愿螭龙之驾，思想昆仑居。
现代文：曾希望驾龙飞行，打算在崑昤山居住。
English: He once hoped to fly a dragon and planned to live in Lushan.

古文：思想昆仑居，见期于迂怪，志意在蓬莱。志意在蓬莱，周孔圣徂落，会稽以坟丘。
现代文：而打算在崑喻山居住，被看作迂腐怪诞的行径，于是心意又转向蓬莱山心志虽然转向蓬莱山，可是蚣、王迂这样的圣人都已死去，大禹在会稽衹有坟墓。
English: However, the plan to live in Mt. Ganyu was seen as a pedantic and bizarre act, so the mind turned to Mt. Penglai. Although the mind turned to Mt. Penglai, the saints such as Gong and Wang Yuan had already died, and there was a grave in the Da Yu Association.

古文：会稽以坟丘，陶陶谁能度，君子以弗忧。
现代文：左垦在盒擅也衹有坟墓，一个个跟着走又谁能避免，所以君子对此不必忧愁。
English: A left hook in the box is also a grave, and who can avoid following one by one, so a gentleman does not have to worry about this.

古文：年之暮，奈何，过时时来微。《江南可采莲》、《江南》，古祠：
现代文：年岁大了，怎么办呢。时光过去了，未来的时光已很稀少。《江南可采莲》《江南》古词：
English: What should you do when you are old? Time has passed, and time in the future is very scarce. "Lotus can be picked in the south of the Yangtze River" "South of the Yangtze River" ancient words:

古文：江南可采莲，莲叶何田田。
现代文：在逗南可采摘莲蓬，挺出水面的莲叶多么肥美啊!
English: In Zhunan, you can pick lotus pods. The lotus leaves that stick out of the water are so beautiful!

古文：鱼戏莲叶间，鱼戏莲叶东，鱼戏莲叶西，鱼戏莲叶南，鱼戏莲叶北。
现代文：鱼儿啊嬉游在莲叶之间，鱼儿嬉游在莲叶的东头，鱼儿嬉游在莲叶的西面，鱼儿嬉游在莲叶的南端，鱼儿嬉游在莲叶的北边。
English: The fish swims between the lotus leaves. The fish swims at the east end of the lotus leaves. The fish swims at the west end of the lotus leaves. The fish swims at the south end of the lotus leaves. The fish swims at the north end of the lotus leaves.

古文：《天地间》、《度关山》，武帝词：
现代文：《天地间》《度关山》魏武帝词：
English: "Between Heaven and Earth" and "Doguan Mountain" by Emperor Wu of Wei:

古文：天地间，人为贵。
现代文：在天地之间，要算人最为贵重。
English: Between heaven and earth, man is the most valuable.

古文：立君牧民，为之轨则。
现代文：设置君主来统治民众，为他们立下行为准则。
English: Set up a monarch to rule the people and set a code of conduct for them.

古文：车辙马迹，经纬四极。
现代文：乘车驾马而周行天下，规划治理那四面八方。
English: While traveling around the world by car and horse, planning and governance are omnipresent.

古文：绌陟幽明，黎庶繁息。
现代文：进用贤才而斥退奸邪，百姓们人丁兴旺。
English: By using their talents to repel evil, the people prospered.

古文：于铄贤圣，总统邦域，封建五爵，井田刑狱。有燔丹书，无普赦赎。
现代文：多么美好的圣君贤主，总管他的国家，封土建国有五等爵位，规定了井田刑法，宁可焚烧罪行记录而废除刑法，不可泛滥地赦免赎罪。
English: What a wonderful sage and sage, the chief administrator of his country, the founder of the feudal state, the holder of the fifth rank of nobility, established the Ida Criminal Law, preferred to burn criminal records and abolish the criminal law, not to pardon and expiate sins.

古文：皋陶《甫刑》，何有失职。
现代文：皋陶和吕侯制定刑法，何曾怠忽职务。
English: Juntao and Luhou enacted the criminal law, but they never neglected their duties.

古文：嗟哉后世，改制易律。
现代文：可叹的是到了后代，商鞅就改变制度而易法为律。
English: What is lamentable is that when it comes to future generations, it is easy to change the system and make it the law.

古文：劳民为君，役赋其力。舜漆食器，畔者十国；不及唐尧，采椽不斫。
现代文：从此使百姓为君主效劳，以赋役占用他们的劳力虞舜衹不过漆黑食器，背叛不服的就有十国；比不上那唐尧的美德，他架屋的木椽也不加雕斫。
English: From that time on, he made the people serve the monarch, using their labor to occupy their labor, and the state was nothing more than a black dish, and there were ten countries that rebelled; it was not comparable to the virtue of the Tang Dynasty, and the wooden beams of his frame house were not carved.

古文：世叹伯夷，欲以厉俗。
现代文：世上人赞叹伯夷，要用他来勉励民俗。
English: People around the world praise Bo Yi and want to use him to encourage folk customs.

古文：侈恶之大，俭为恭德。
现代文：奢侈是最大的恶行，节俭是一致遵守的美德。
English: Extravagance is the greatest vice, and frugality is the virtue universally observed.

古文：许由推让，岂有讼曲。
现代文：奎让天下而注止不受，这是非难道还用争辩?
English: Is it not still a matter of debate whether or not it is acceptable to try to win over the whole world without being stopped?

古文：兼爱尚同，疏者为戚。《东光乎》、《东光乎》，古词：
现代文：衹要兼爱交利上下相同，疏远的人也成为至亲。《束光乎》《束光乎》占词：
English: Love and friendship should be equal, and those who are estranged from each other should become close relatives.

古文：东光乎！
现代文：是到塞光吗?
English: Is it all over?

古文：仓梧何不乎！
现代文：为什么不到仓梧呢?
English: Why not Cangwu?

古文：仓梧多腐粟，无益诸军粮。
现代文：仓梧的米大都霉烂了，不能用来作军粮。
English: Most of the stored rice is moldy and cannot be used for military rations.

古文：诸军游荡子，蚤行多悲伤。
现代文：军士们都是游荡不归的人，一大早开拔足多么悲伤。
English: The sergeants were wanderers, and it was sad to set out so early in the morning.

古文：《登山有远望》、《十五》，文帝词：
现代文：《登山有远望》《十五》魏文帝词：
English: "Mountaineering has a long-term prospect" "Tenth Five-Year Plan" Wei Wendi's words:

古文：登山而远望，溪谷多所有。
现代文：登上山向远方眺望，溪涧山谷中有很多景物。
English: When you climb the mountain and look out into the distance, there are many sights in the valley.

古文：楩柟千余尺，众草之盛茂。
现代文：黄掖和楠木有一千多尺高，各种草长得很茂盛。
English: The osmanthus and camphor trees are more than a thousand feet high, and all kinds of grasses grow very luxuriantly.

古文：华叶耀人目。五色难可纪。
现代文：山花和树叶光彩照人，五彩缤纷而难以描述。
English: The mountain flowers and foliage are dazzling, and the colors are indescribable.

古文：雉雊山鸡鸣，虎啸谷风起。
现代文：山鶸啼鸣求偶，老虎吼叫而山谷风起。
English: The hawks sing for mates, the tigers roar and the valley winds blow.

古文：号罴当我道，狂顾动牙齿。
现代文：怒吼的熊熊挡着我的道路，凶狠地看着我，磨动牙齿。
English: A snarling bear blocks my path, glaring at me and grinding its teeth.

古文：《惟汉二十二世》、《薤露》，武帝词：
现代文：《惟汉二十二世》《薤露》魏武帝词：
English: "But Han the 22nd" and "Dao Lu" by Emperor Wu of Wei:

古文：惟汉二十二世，所任诚不良。
现代文：汉朝到了二十二代，任用的何进实在不贤良。
English: In the 22nd generation of the Han Dynasty, the appointment of He Jin was really not virtuous.

古文：沐猴而冠带，智小而谋强。
现代文：就像猴子穿上了官服，才智很少而图谋甚强。
English: They are like monkeys wearing official uniforms, with little intelligence and a lot of scheming.

古文：犹豫不敢断，因狩执君王。
现代文：他遇事迟疑不能决断，太监们就乘狩猎时作乱囚禁君王。
English: When he hesitated and could not make a decision, the eunuchs took advantage of the disturbance during the hunt to imprison the king.

古文：白虹为贯日，己亦先受殃。
现代文：天上的长虹横贯太阳，何进自身首先受到灾殃。
English: The rainbow in the sky crosses the sun, and He Jin himself is the first to be afflicted.

古文：贼臣持国柄，杀主灭宇京。
现代文：贼臣董皇把持了国政，杀了少帝毁灭了京城盗历。
English: The thieving vassal, Emperor Dong, took control of state affairs, killed the young emperor, and destroyed the imperial calendar.

古文：荡覆帝基业，宗庙以燔丧。
现代文：倾覆了逢帝的基业，型区的宗庙也焚烧净光。
English: The foundation of Emperor Feng was overturned, and the ancestral temple in the model district was also burned.

古文：播越西迁移，号泣而且行。
现代文：向量塞迁移流亡，一边行走一边流泪。
English: Vector plug migration exile, tears while walking.

古文：瞻彼洛城郭，微子为哀伤。
现代文：瞻望那洛阳的城郊，像微子那样的忠臣无限哀伤。
English: Looking out over the outskirts of Naroyang, loyal subjects like Weizi are infinitely saddened.

古文：《关东有义士》、《蒿里行》，武帝词：
现代文：《关东有义士》《蒿里行》武帝词：
English: "There is a righteous man in Kanto" and "A Trip to Bali"

古文：关东有义士，兴兵讨群凶。初期会孟津，乃心在咸阳。
现代文：关东有正义的人士，起兵讨伐董卓那些奸凶起初希望在亘违会合，他们的心思像刘邦、玺型那样攻入昼迩。
English: There are righteous people in Guandong, and they raised an army to fight against those traitors of Dong Zhuo, who initially hoped to violate the meeting, and their thoughts entered the daylight like Liu Bang and Zou Ge.

古文：军合力不齐，踌躇而雁行。
现代文：各路军队虽然会聚而力量不能合一，不能前进而徘徊观望。
English: Although the armies of all directions are converging, their strength cannot be unified, and they cannot advance, but linger and wait.

古文：势利使人争，嗣还自相戕。
现代文：势利使人相互争斗，其后不久更白相杀伤。
English: Snobbery pits people against each other, and soon they are killing each other.

古文：淮南弟称号，刻玺于北方。
现代文：弟弟袁术在淮南称帝号，哥哥塞绉谋立刘虞刻玺在北方。
English: His younger brother, Yuan Shou, became emperor in Huainan, while his older brother, Seyi, tried to establish Liu Yu Kegui in the north.

古文：铠甲生虮虱，万姓以死亡。
现代文：士兵的锁甲生长出虱子，成千上万的百姓在死亡。
English: Locks of soldiers' armor are sprouting lice, and thousands of civilians are dying.

古文：白骨露于野，千里无鸡鸣。
现代文：白骨在荒野暴露，千里之地听不到犬吠鸡唱。
English: The white bones are exposed in the wilderness, and you can't hear a dog bark or a chicken sing for thousands of miles.

古文：生民百遗一，念之绝人肠。《对酒歌太平时》、《对酒》，武帝词：
现代文：百人中能活下来的祇有一人，想起来使人痛断肝肠。《对酒歌太平时》《对酒》武帝词:
English: Out of a hundred people, only one can survive, and it breaks my heart to think about it. "When it's too hot to drink" "When it's too hot to drink" Emperor Wu's words:

古文：对酒歌，太平时，吏不呼门。
现代文：对着酒唱歌，正是太平时节，小吏不上门呼唤。
English: Singing to the wine, it is the Taiping season, the petty officials do not go to the door to call.

古文：王者贤且明，宰相股肱皆忠良，咸礼让，民无所争讼。
现代文：当皇帝的贤德而且英明，宰相和辅佐大臣都是忠诚贤良的人。人们都遵礼谦让，老百姓用不着去打官司。
English: When the emperor is virtuous and wise, the prime minister and the assistant minister are all loyal and virtuous people. People are courteous and humble, and the common people do not need to sue.

古文：三年耕有九年储，仓谷满盈，斑白不负戴。
现代文：耕种三年就有九年的储粮，谷仓裹装得满满的，头发斑白的老人不在路上背东西。
English: After three years of farming, there are nine years of grain reserves, the barns are packed full, and the grizzled old men do not carry things on the road.

古文：雨泽如此，五谷用成。却走马以粪其土田。
现代文：雨下得及时，五谷都得到丰收，战马退役用来拉粪肥田。
English: It rained just in time, and all the crops had a good harvest. The retired war horses were used to pull manure from the manure fields.

古文：爵公侯伯子男，咸爱其民，以黜陟幽明，子养有若父与兄。
现代文：封爵有公侯伯子男五等，都爱护他封国的百姓，用君子不用小人，养民如子，像是父亲和兄长。
English: There are five Dukes and Princes who have been knighted, and they all love the people they have knighted. They use gentlemen, not villains, to raise the people like children, like a father and an older brother.

古文：犯礼法，轻重随其刑。
现代文：谁要违犯了礼法，都按照刑律判定轻罪重罪。
English: Anyone who violates the code of etiquette will be convicted of a misdemeanor or felony according to the criminal law.

古文：路无拾遗之私，囹圄空虚，冬节不断人。
现代文：路上丢了东西，没有人私自拾取，牢房裹空空荡荡，冬至时没有罪犯可供判决。
English: Things are lost on the road, no one picks them up, the cells are empty, and there are no criminals to be sentenced at the winter solstice.

古文：耄耋皆得以寿终，恩德广及草木昆虫。
现代文：八九十岁的老人，都能在家裹寿终正寝。皇帝的恩德推广到草木昆虫。
English: People in their eighties and nineties can end their lives at home. The emperor's benevolence extends to plants and insects.

古文：《鸡鸣高树颠》、《鸡鸣》，古词：
现代文：《鸡鸣高树颠》《鸡呜》古词：
English: "Chicken chirping high in the trees" and "chickens crowing" are ancient words:

古文：鸡鸣高树颠，狗吠深宫中。
现代文：鸡在高树顶上长鸣，狗在深宅大院吠叫。
English: Chickens are chirping on the tops of tall trees, and dogs are barking in the courtyard.

古文：荡子何所之，天下方太平。
现代文：游手好闲的人啊你还要到哪里去?现在天下正是太平的时候。
English: Where do you want to go, you idler? Now is the time for peace.

古文：刑法非有贷，柔协正乱名。黄金为君门，璧玉为轩阑堂。
现代文：刑法并没有什么宽宥，安抚顺服的人而制裁犯法的人。用黄金镶造你的屋门，用碧玉装饰你堂上的栏杆。
English: There is no leniency in the penal code, appeasing the obedient and punishing the law-breakers. Encrust your door with gold, adorn the railings of your house with jasper.

古文：上有双尊酒，作使邯郸倡。
现代文：堂上摆着成双的酒杯，叫翅丰的歌女来歌唱。
English: There are pairs of wine glasses in the hall, and the singer from Yingfeng is invited to sing.

古文：刘玉碧青甓，后出郭门王。
现代文：屋上用的绿色琉璃瓦，后面是王家的宫外门。
English: The green glazed tiles used on the roof, behind which is the outer gate of the royal palace.

古文：舍后有方池，池中双鸳鸯。
现代文：宅舍后面还有大池塘，池塘中养着成对的鸳鸯。
English: There is also a large pond behind the house, in which pairs of toads are raised.

古文：鸳鸯七十二，罗列自成行。
现代文：鸳鸯有三十六对，各自排列成一行行。
English: There are thirty-six pairs of cymbals, each arranged in a row.

古文：鸣声何啾啾，闻我殿东厢。
现代文：它们的呜声啾啾动听，那声音传送到殿堂的束厢。
English: Their wailing is so beautiful, the sound carries to the throne room.

古文：兄弟四五人，皆为侍中郎。
现代文：你一家兄弟四五个，做官都做到侍中郎。
English: There are four or five brothers in your family, and all of them have served as chamberlains.

古文：五日一时来，观者满道傍。
现代文：放假的日子同时到来，观看你们的人站满路旁。
English: The day of the holiday arrives at the same time, watch your people stand by the roadside.

古文：黄金络马头，何煌煌。
现代文：用黄金镶镀的络头笼着马头，是多么的明亮辉煌。
English: The horse's head encased in a gold-encrusted headdress, how bright and glorious.

古文：桃生露井上，李树生桃傍，虫来啮桃根，李树代桃僵。
现代文：桃树生在井边，李树又生在桃树旁，蛀虫来咬桃树的根，不想李树倒替桃树而枯僵。
English: The peach tree was born at the edge of the well, and the plum tree was born next to the peach tree. The aphids came to bite the roots of the peach tree, not wanting the plum tree to wither instead of the peach tree.

古文：树木身相代，兄弟还相忘！
现代文：树木尚肯代同伴受害，兄弟间却衹知保全自身，彼此相忘!
English: Trees may suffer at the hands of their fellows, but brothers know how to protect themselves and forget each other!

古文：《乌生八九子》、《乌生》，古词：
现代文：《乌生八九子》《乌生》古词：
English: "Wu Sheng" "Wu Sheng" ancient words:

古文：乌生八九子，端坐秦氏桂树间。
现代文：乌鸦生下了八九个小乌鸦，稳稳地坐在秦家的桂树上。
English: The crow gave birth to eight or nine little crows, and sat steadily on the laurel tree of the Qin family.

古文：唶我秦氏，家有游遨荡子，工用睢阳强苏合弹。
现代文：啊我那秦家，他家有一个游手好闲的年轻人，善于使用睢阳的强力苏合弹弓。
English: Ah, my Qin family, there is a young idler in his family who is good at using the powerful Suhe slingshot in Shenyang.

古文：左手持强弹，两丸出入乌东西。
现代文：左手拿着强力弹弓，两枚弹丸向乌鸦两边射出。啊!
English: Holding a powerful slingshot in his left hand, he shoots two pellets at both sides of the crow.

古文：唶我一丸即发中乌身，乌死魂魄飞扬上天。
现代文：有一枚弹丸就射中了乌鸦，乌鸦死去而魂魄飞扬上天。
English: One projectile hit the crow, the crow died and its soul flew up to heaven.

古文：阿母生乌子时，乃在南山岩石间。
现代文：阿妈生小乌鸦时，是在南山岩石中。
English: When my mother gave birth to a baby crow, it was in the rocks of Nanshan Mountain.

古文：唶我人民安知乌子处，蹊径窈窕安从通。
现代文：啊!我人民哪裹知道小乌鸦在什么地方，小路弯曲幽深又从哪裹通行。
English: Alas, my people do not know where the crow is, or where the deep and winding paths are.

古文：白鹿乃在上林西苑中，射工尚复得白鹿脯哺。
现代文：白鹿已经在上林西苑之中，射猎的弓手还在捕获它做肉脯。啊!
English: The white deer is already in the West Garden of Shanglin, and the archer is still capturing it for meat. Ah!

古文：唶我黄鹄摩天极高飞，后宫尚复得烹煮之。
现代文：我黄鹄摩着天飞得极高，皇宫中的人还能捉到它烹煮。
English: My yellow dragonfly flew so high in the sky that people in the palace could catch it and cook it.

古文：鲤鱼乃在洛水深渊中，钓钩尚得鲤鱼口。
现代文：鲤鱼已经在渣深渊之中，渔人的钓钩尚且能钓住鲤鱼的嘴。啊!
English: The eel was already in the abyss, but the fisherman's hook was still able to catch the eel's mouth. Ah!

古文：唶我人民生各各有寿命，死生何须复道前后。《平陵东》、《平陵》，古词：
现代文：我人民活着各人有各人的寿命，死去后又何必再说些什么。《平陵束》《平陵》古词：
English: When our people are alive, everyone has his or her own lifespan. After death, there is no need to say anything. "Pingling bunch" "Pingling" ancient words:

古文：平陵东，松柏桐，不知何人劫义公。
现代文：在芒尘陵墓之束，长着松柏梧桐，不知道是什么人劫持盏公。
English: In the bundle of mossy tombs, there is a pine and cypress tree, I do not know what kind of person is kidnapping the prince.

古文：劫义公在高堂下，交钱百万两走马。
现代文：劫持盏公，在高堂之下，赎回盏公，要交钱一百万，再加两匹好马。
English: If you kidnap a lord and ransom him under the high hall, you have to pay one million, plus two good horses.

古文：两走马，亦诚难，顾见追吏心中恻。
现代文：交出两匹好马，也实在困难，看见追讨的吏卒心中悲痛。
English: It's really difficult to hand over two good horses, and it's heartbreaking to see the officials chasing them.

古文：心中恻，血出漉，归告我家卖黄犊。
现代文：心中悲痛，伤口渗出血，回去告诉家中人卖掉黄牛犊。
English: Heartbroken, bleeding from the wound, he went back to tell his family to sell the yellow calf.

古文：《弃故乡》《陌上桑》，文帝词：
现代文：《弃故乡》亦在瑟调《东西门行》。《陌上桑》魏文帝词：
English: "Abandoned Hometown" is also in the same key as "East-West Gate Line." "Strange Mulberry" Wei Wendi lyrics:

古文：弃故乡，离室宅，远从军旅万里客。
现代文：抛弃了故乡，离开了家宅，当兵远到万里外作客。
English: He abandoned his hometown, left his home, and traveled thousands of miles as a soldier.

古文：披荆棘，求阡陌，侧足独窘步，路局笮。
现代文：劈开荆棘丛，寻找可走的小路，侧着身子走而举步艰难，这小路是多么狭窄。
English: Splitting thornbushes, looking for a path to walk on, walking sideways with difficulty, how narrow the path is.

古文：虎豹嗥动，鸡惊，禽失群，鸣相索。
现代文：虎豹号叫声动，山鶸吃惊而飞乌失群，呜叫着彼此寻索。
English: The Tiger and Leopard hooted, and the hawks were so startled that they flew away, crying and searching for each other.

古文：登南山，奈何蹈盘石，树木丛生郁差错。
现代文：爬上茵山，踏上险峻的大石怎么办，丛生的树木茂盛而杂乱。
English: Climbing up the mountain, how about stepping on the steep rocks, the thick trees are lush and messy.

古文：寝蒿草，廕松柏，涕泣雨面沾枕席。
现代文：睡在蒿草上，用松柏遮盖，哭得泪流满面，沾湿了枕席。
English: Sleeping on the rushes, covered with conifers, weeping with tears, wetting the pillowcase.

古文：伴旅单，稍稍日零落，惆怅窃自怜，相痛惜。
现代文：旅伴孤单，渐渐一天天丧败，心中惆怅而私自哀怜，相互痛惜。
English: The traveling companion is lonely, gradually defeated day by day, heartbroken and self-pitying, mutual regret.

古文：《今有人》、《陌上桑》，《楚词》钞：
现代文：《今有人》《陌上桑》《楚词》钞
English: "There is someone now" "Strange Mulberry" "Chuzhi" banknote

古文：今有人，山之阿，被服薜荔带女萝。
现代文：今有一人在深山之边，身披薜荔而腰佩女萝。
English: Now there is a man on the edge of a deep mountain, wearing a long robe and a halter.

古文：既含睇，又宜笑，子恋慕予善窈窕。
现代文：眉目含情笑容满面，你爱慕我美好淑娴。
English: With your loving smile on your face, you adore my beautiful Sukhoi.

古文：乘赤豹，从文狸，辛夷车驾结桂旗。
现代文：乘驾着赤豹带着文狸，坐着辛木车桂枝为旗。
English: He rode in a red leopard with a civet, and rode in a cedar wagon with a laurel branch as a flag.

古文：被石兰，带杜衡，折芳拔荃遗所思。
现代文：披戴石兰花儿系带杜衡，采香花送给心上人。
English: Wear stone orchid flowers laced with Duheng, pick fragrant flowers to give to your sweetheart.

古文：处幽室，终不见，天路险艰独后来。
现代文：住在深宅裹终于难见，独自来迟了天路太艰险。
English: Living in a deep house, it is finally difficult to see, and it is too dangerous to come alone.

古文：表独立，山之上，云何容容而在下。
现代文：孤独地站在高高山巅上，飘浮的云彩在下面舒卷。
English: Standing alone on a high mountaintop, drifting clouds swirl below.

古文：杳冥冥，羌昼晦，东风飘濆神灵雨。
现代文：深山老林在白天也很幽暗，束风飘飘而神灵下雨。
English: The deep mountain forest is also very dark during the day, the wind blows and the rain falls.

古文：风瑟瑟，木搜搜，思念公子徒以忧。
现代文：风声瑟瑟，叶落声嗖嗖，思念你啊徒自忧愁。
English: The wind rustles, the leaves fall softly, I miss you and I'm sad.

古文：《驾虹霓》、《陌上桑》，武帝词：
现代文：《驾虹蜕》《陌上桑》魏武帝词：
English: "Driving the Rainbow" and "Strange Mulberry" by Emperor Wu of Wei:

古文：驾虹霓，乘赤云，登彼九疑历玉门。
现代文：乘驾着彩虹和红云，登上那九疑山，又经过玉门关。
English: Riding on the rainbow and the red cloud, we ascended the Nine Doubtful Mountains and passed through the Jade Gate.

古文：济天汉，至昆仑，见西王母，谒东君。
现代文：渡过了天河，来到崑蝓山，会晤西王旦，拜见塞星。
English: Crossed the Tianhe River, came to Lushan, met Xi Wangdan, and saw Xie Xing.

古文：交赤松，及羡门，受要秘道爱精神。
现代文：结交壶圭迂，还有羡门子高，接受秘传仙道而保养精神。
English: He befriended Jug Gui Yuan, and was also envious of Gao Menzi. He accepted the secret transmission of the Immortal Way and maintained his spirit.

古文：食芝英，饮醴泉，柱杖桂枝佩秋兰。
现代文：吃芝草叶，喝醴泉水，桂枝作扶杖而秋兰当佩饰。
English: Eat shibaso leaves, drink the spring water, use the cinnamon branch as a cane, and wear the autumn orchid as an ornament.

古文：绝人事，游浑元，若疾风游焱飘飘。
现代文：弃绝人间事务，遨游大气之中，快得像是吹过一阵风。
English: Abandoning human affairs, wandering in the atmosphere, fast as if passing through a gust of wind.

古文：景未移，行数千，寿如南山不忘愆。
现代文：光还没动，行走数千里，寿如南山而不忘过失
English: The light has not moved, walking thousands of miles, longevity is like the South Mountain without forgetting mistakes

古文：清商三调歌诗，荀勖撰，旧词施用者，平调。
现代文：清商三调歌词：荀勖撰旧词施用者。平调：
English: Lyrics in the Qing Shang three-tone style: The performer copied old words.

古文：《周西》、《短歌行》，武帝词：
现代文：《周西》《短歌行》武帝词六解
English: "Zhou Xi" "Tanka Performance" Wu Di Ci in Six Interpretations

古文：周西伯昌，怀此圣德，参分天下，而有其二。
现代文：周西伯担昌，怀有这至上的德行，天下分成三份，而他拥有两份。
English: Zhou Xibatanchang, with this supreme virtue, the world is divided into three parts, and he has two parts.

古文：修奉贡献，臣节不坠。
现代文：他向朝廷朝贡进献，不失臣子的忠节。
English: He paid tribute to the imperial court and did not lose the loyalty of his vassals.

古文：崇侯谗之，是以拘系。
现代文：崇侯虎说他坏话，因此才被囚禁。
English: Chong Houhu said bad things about him, and that's why he was imprisoned.

古文：后见赦原，赐之斧钺，得使征伐。
现代文：一解后来受到赦宥，赐给他弓矢斧钹，让他有掌管征伐之权。
English: He was later pardoned and given a bow, arrow, axe and plough, giving him the power to command the conquest.

古文：为仲尼所称，达及德行，犹奉事殷，论叙其美。
现代文：他受到王迂的称赞，都涉及他的德行，说他仍能侍奉壁直，论述了他的美德。
English: He was praised by Wang Xuan, all of which related to his virtues, saying that he could still serve the wall, and discussed his virtues.

古文：齐桓之功，为霸之首，九合诸侯，一匡天下。
现代文：二解齐桓公有功，为壹麸五霸之首，他九次会合诸侯，将天下纳入正轨。
English: The Second Qianlong Emperor was the first of the Five Great Emperors. He convened the Nine Meetings of Princes to put the world on the right track.

古文：一匡天下，不以兵车。正而不谲，其德传称。
现代文：他将天下纳入正轨，并不凭藉武力，行事合乎正道而不诡诈，他的美德足以传称。
English: He set the world on the right track, not by force, acted in a just and not deceitful manner, and his virtues are enough to be famous.

古文：孔子所叹，并称夷吾，民受其恩。
现代文：三解王迂所赞叹的人，同时还有管仲，百姓们受到他的恩惠。
English: Those who are admired by the Three Kingdoms King Byeong-woo, as well as Guanzhong, the people are favored by him.

古文：赐与庙胙，命无下拜。
现代文：旦王派人赐给变担公祭肉，命他接受时不必下拜。
English: The King of Dan sent someone to give the sacrificial meat to the bearer of the burden and ordered him not to bow down when he accepted it.

古文：小白不敢尔，天威在颜咫尺。
现代文：他声称： 我小白不敢这样。天子就近在我面前。 
English: He said, "I don't dare to do that. The Son of God is right in front of me."

古文：晋文亦霸，躬奉天王。
现代文：四解晋文公也是霸主，亲自侍奉周天子。
English: Fourthly, Jinwen Gong was also the overlord, and he personally served Zhou Tianzi.

古文：受赐珪瓚、秬鬯雕弓、卢弓、矢千，虎贲三百人。
现代文：他受赐珪瓒、柜鬯，肜弓、卢弓、矢千以及虎贲三百人。
English: And he was given three hundred men who drew the bow, and the javelin, and the javelin, and the javelin, and the arrow, and the javelin.

古文：威服诸侯，师之者尊，八方闻之，名亚齐桓。
现代文：五解他的声威使诸侯慑服，学习他的人地位增高。全国的民众都知道他，他的名声仅次于齐桓公。
English: His prestige made the princes tremble, and the status of those who learned from him increased. People all over the country know him, and his reputation is second only to that of King Qi Huan.

古文：河阳之会，诈称周王，是以其名纷葩。
现代文：他在河阳举行诸侯大会，伪称周王巡狩，所以他的名声很盛。
English: He held a great assembly of princes in Heyang, under the false name of the Zhou King's inspection tour, so his reputation was very prosperous.

古文：《秋风》、《燕歌行》，文帝词：
现代文：六解《秋风》《燕歌行》魏文帝词七解
English: Six commentaries on "Autumn Wind" and "Song of the Swallow"

古文：秋风萧瑟天气凉，草木摇落露为霜。
现代文：秋风飒飒啊天气寒凉，草木凋零啊白露凝成霜。
English: The autumn wind blows, the weather is cool, the grass withers, and the white dew condenses into cream.

古文：群燕辞归鹄南翔，念君客游多思肠。
现代文：一解群燕告别啊大雁向南飞，想起你远游不归啊我就百结愁肠。
English: As soon as the swarms of swallows say goodbye, and the geese fly south, I am heartbroken to think of you traveling far away and never returning.

古文：慊慊思归恋故乡，君何淹留寄它方。
现代文：二解谁不感到孤寂啊想回家，你为什么迟迟不回啊寄居他方。
English: If you don't feel lonely and want to go home, why don't you come back and live somewhere else?

古文：贱妾茕茕守空房，忧来思君不敢忘。
现代文：三解贱妾我一个人孤孤单单啊坐守空房，满腹忧伤想着你啊不能遗忘。
English: I'm all alone, lonely, sitting guarding an empty room, full of sadness, thinking of you, I can't forget.

古文：不觉泪下沾衣裳，援瑟鸣弦发清商。
现代文：四解不知不觉地流下泪水啊沾湿了衣裳，取过琴来弹起弦啊奏一曲清商。
English: The four unknowingly shed tears and wet their clothes, took the harp to play the strings and played a song Qing Shang.

古文：短歌微吟不能长，明月皎皎照我床。
现代文：五解短短的歌曲轻轻地吟唱啊难以延长，月光多么明亮啊照着我的床。
English: How bright the moon shines on my bed.

古文：星汉西流夜未央，牵年织女遥相望，尔独何辜限河梁。《仰瞻》、《短歌行》，文帝词：
现代文：六解银河向西流去啊漫漫夜长，牵牛星与织女星啊远远地隔河相望，你们难道有什么罪啊被阻隔而没有桥梁。《仰瞻》《短歌行》魏文帝词六解
English: The Milky Way is flowing westward, the night is long, the Altair and the Vega are far away from each other across the river, what is your sin, to be cut off without a bridge.

古文：仰瞻帷幕，俯察几筵。其物如故，其人不存。
现代文：仰起头来瞻望帷幕，低下头来察看几筵，那物品仍然照旧，而那人已不再留存。
English: Lift up thine eyes, and behold the vail: and look on the candlestick; for the piece is consumed, and there is none left of it.

古文：神灵倏忽，弃我遐迁。
现代文：一解
English: One solution

古文：靡瞻靡恃，泣涕连连。呦呦游鹿，衔草鸣麑。
现代文：逝去的灵魂飘飘渺渺，离开我远远移迁，没有父亲尊仰又没有母亲凭依，我禁不住哭泣而泪下涟涟。
English: The soul of the departed floats ethereally, far away from me, without a father to respect and without a mother to rely on, I can't help but cry and burst into tears.

古文：翩翩飞鸟，挟子巢栖。我独孤茕，怀此百离。忧心孔疚，莫我能知。
现代文：难道我孤孤单单，怀有这样的百般悲凄，忧闷的心是多么痛苦，没有谁能理解我的心意。
English: Am I alone, with such a myriad of sorrows, such a sorrowful heart, so full of pain, that no one can understand my thoughts?

古文：人亦有言，忧令人老。
现代文：四解人们曾经说过，忧愁使人衰老，啊!
English: People used to say that sadness makes you old, ah!

古文：嗟我白发，生一何早。
现代文：我头上的白发，长出来得是多么早。
English: How early the grey hairs on my head appear.

古文：长吟永叹，怀我圣考。曰仁者寿，胡不是保。
现代文：五解曼声吟咏叹息，怀念我圣明的亡父，仁慈的人会有长寿，为什么他不能长保。
English: I sing and sigh, remembering my saintly late father. The merciful man will have a long life, why can't he have a long life?

古文：《别日》、《燕歌行》，文帝词：
现代文：六解《别曰》《燕歌行》魏文帝词六解
English: Six renditions of "Farewell to You" and "Song of the Swallow" Six renditions of the words of Emperor Wei

古文：别日何易会日难，山川悠远路漫漫。
现代文：离别的日子多么轻易而相会的日子多么艰难，山川悠远而道路漫漫。
English: How easy are the days of parting and how difficult are the days of meeting, the mountains and rivers are long and the road is long.

古文：郁陶思君未敢言，寄书浮云往不还。
现代文：一解我深深思念你却未敢传言，所寄的书信像浮云一去不返。
English: I miss you deeply, but I didn't dare to spread rumours. The letters I sent were like floating clouds, never to return.

古文：涕零雨面毁形颜，谁能怀忧独不叹。
现代文：二解眼泪像雨似的淋湿面孔而毁坏容颜，谁能怀有忧愁而不慨叹。
English: If tears, like rain, drench the face and mar the countenance, who can be sad and not lament?

古文：耿耿伏枕不能眠，披衣出户步东西。
现代文：三解在床上辗转不安睡不成觉，披上衣服出门随意散步。四解
English: The third solution is to toss and turn in bed, unable to sleep, put on clothes and go out for a casual walk.

古文：展诗清歌聊自宽，乐往哀来摧心肝。
现代文：展开诗卷清歌姑且自宽，乐去哀来而摧伤心肝。
English: Unfolding the poem, Qing Ge said to himself, "Let the music be sad, but let it break my heart."

古文：悲风清厉秋气寒，罗帷徐动经秦轩。
现代文：悲风清劲，秋风阴寒，帷幕徐动，拂过西边窗轩。
English: The gloomy wind is strong, the autumn wind is gloomy, the curtain is slowly moving, passing through the west window.

古文：仰戴星月观云间，飞鸟晨鸣，声气可怜，留连顾怀不自存。
现代文：五解抬头观看云间的星月，飞乌在清晨啼呜，声音多么可怜，流连思念顾不了自身。
English: Fifthly, look up at the stars and moons in the clouds, the flying blackbirds chirp in the early morning, how pitiful the sound is, you can't linger and think about yourself.

古文：《对酒》、《短歌行》，武帝词：
现代文：六解《对酒》《短歌行》魏武帝词六解
English: Six renditions of "Wine Pairing" "Tanka Performance" Six renditions of Emperor Wu's poetry

古文：对酒当歌，人生几何！
现代文：饮着酒又唱着歌，人生能有几何!
English: Drinking wine and singing songs, what a life!

古文：譬如朝露，去日苦多。
现代文：就像那早晨的露水易干，逝去的日子衹恨太多。
English: Like the morning dew that dries easily, the days that are gone are too many to count.

古文：慨当以慷，忧思难忘。
现代文：一解应当慷慨歌唱，忧思实在难忘。
English: One should sing generously, the melancholy is really unforgettable.

古文：以何解愁，唯有 杜康 。
现代文：用什么来消解忧愁，衹有痛饮 杜康 。
English: What do you use to dispel sadness? Du Kang is a good choice.

古文：青青子衿，悠悠我心。
现代文：二解青青的是你的衣领，悠悠不断的是我的忧心。
English: It's your collar that's fading, it's my worries that linger on and on.

古文：但为君故，沈吟至今。
现代文：衹是为了你的缘故，我吟咏《子衿》造首诗直到现今。
English: It is for your sake that I have sung the "Sonnet" and composed a poem to this day.

古文：明明如月，何时可掇。
现代文：三解你像那明亮的月光，什么时候都可以拾取。
English: Thirdly, you are like the bright moonlight, which can be picked up at any time.

古文：忧从中来，不可断绝。
现代文：我的忧思从心中升起，实在无法使它断绝。
English: My sadness rises from my heart, and I can't seem to stop it.

古文：呦呦鹿鸣，食野之苹。
现代文：四解呦呦的是鹿儿在叫，吃着野地裹的艾蒿。
English: In the background, deer are calling, eating field-wrapped wormwood.

古文：我有嘉宾，鼓瑟吹笙。
现代文：我有美好的客人，就要弹琴吹笙。
English: I have beautiful guests, so I have to play the piano and whistle.

古文：山不厌高，水不厌深。
现代文：五解山不会满足它的高大，水不会满足它的幽深。
English: Mount Wuzhong will not satisfy its height, and water will not satisfy its depth.

古文：周公吐哺，天下归心。
现代文：我像旦公那样接待贤才，天下人自然归心。
English: I receive talents like Dangong, and the world naturally comes to its senses.

古文：清调
现代文：六解清调：
English: Six-part clear-tuning:

古文：《晨上》、《秋胡行》，武帝词：
现代文：《晨上》《秋胡行》魏武帝词四解
English: "Morning" and "Autumn Pilgrimage" by Emperor Weiwu

古文：晨上散关山，此道当何难！
现代文：早晨登上邀迩山，这山路又有什么艰难!
English: Climbing Mount Laos in the morning, what a difficult mountain road!

古文：晨上散关山，此道当何难！
现代文：早晨登上邈挝山，这山路又有什么艰难!
English: Climbing Mount Laos in the morning, what a difficult mountain road!

古文：牛顿不起，车堕谷间。
现代文：牛站着不动，车子堕落在山谷裹。
English: The cow stood still and the car fell into the valley.

古文：坐盘石之上，弹五弦之琴，作为清角韵，意中述烦。
现代文：坐在大石的上面，弹奏五弦琴，奏出清角曲韵，心意迷乱烦闷。
English: Sitting on the top of the boulder, playing the five-stringed fiddle, playing a clear-angle melody, my mind is confused and bored.

古文：歌以言志，晨上散关山。
现代文：用歌唱来表达情志，早晨登上散关山。
English: Use singing to express emotions, and climb Shankuan Mountain in the morning.

古文：有何三老公，卒来在我傍。
现代文：一解为什么三位老公，突然来到我身边。
English: Why did three husbands suddenly come to my side?

古文：有何三老公，卒来在我傍。
现代文：为什么三位老公，突然来到我身边。
English: Why did three husbands suddenly come to my side?

古文：员掩被裘，似非恆人。
现代文：裘袍上披着外衣，似乎不是一般人。
English: Wearing a coat over a frock coat, he does not seem to be an ordinary person.

古文：谓卿云何，困苦以自怨，徨徨所欲，来到此间。
现代文：他们问我为什么困苦而自己怨叹，心神不安地有所追求，来到这里。
English: They asked me why I was suffering and why I was lamenting, anxiously pursuing something and coming here.

古文：歌以言志，有何三老公。
现代文：用歌唱来表达情志，为什么有三位老公。
English: Why does she have three husbands?

古文：我居昆仑山，所谓者真人。
现代文：二解我住在崑喻山，就是所说的真人。
English: I live in Jiuquan, which is the real person.

古文：我居昆仑山，所谓者真人。
现代文：我住在崑蜘旦，就是所说的真人。
English: I live in Jiuquan, which is the real person.

古文：道深有可得。名山历观，遨游八极。
现代文：得到高深的天地之道，遍观各地名山，遨游宇宙之间。
English: Get the profound way of heaven and earth, visit famous mountains all over the country, and travel between the universe.

古文：枕石漱流饮泉。
现代文：用石头当枕，以流水洗漱，饮用甘泉。
English: Use stones as pillows, wash with running water, and drink from the hot springs.

古文：沈吟不决，遂上升天。
现代文：考虑不定，就上升天空。
English: When in doubt, reach for the sky.

古文：歌以言志，我居昆仑山。
现代文：用歌唱表达情志，我住在崑喻山。
English: I express my feelings through singing, and I live in Mt.

古文：去去不可追，长恨相牵攀。
现代文：三解逝去的难以追回，永久的遣恨纠缠着我。
English: It's hard to get back what's gone, and I'm haunted by a permanent grudge.

古文：去去不可追，长恨相牵攀。
现代文：逝去的难以追回，永久的遗恨纠缠着我。
English: It's hard to get back what's gone, and I'm haunted by a permanent grudge.

古文：夜夜安得寐，惆怅以自怜。
现代文：每夜裹哪能入睡，满心惆怅而自我怜惜。
English: Every night, I can't fall asleep, full of heartache and self-pity.

古文：正而不谲，辞赋依因。经传所过，西来所传。
现代文：公正而不诡诈，是辞赋所凭依，经传所述，是西方传授来的。
English: To be fair and not deceitful is the basis of honor, which is described in the sutras and transmitted from the West.

古文：歌以言志，去去不可追。
现代文：用歌唱来表达情志，逝去的难以追回。
English: Singing is used to express emotions, and it is difficult to recover lost songs.

古文：《北上》、《苦寒行》，武帝词：
现代文：四解《北上》《苦寒行》魏武帝词六解
English: Four commentaries on "Northward" and "Bitter Cold" and six commentaries on Emperor Wu's words

古文：北上太行山，艰哉何巍巍。
现代文：往北登卜太行山，艰难啊，它是何等的巍巍。
English: It's tough to climb Mount Taihang to the north. What a mountain it is.

古文：羊肠坂诘屈，车轮为之摧。
现代文：斜坡上羊肠小路曲曲弯弯，车轮都被它摧毁。
English: The wheels were destroyed by the twists and turns of the winding road on the slope.

古文：树木何萧瑟，北风声正悲。
现代文：一解树木是多么萧瑟，北风的声音正令人生悲。
English: No matter how desolate the trees are, the sound of the north wind is heartbreaking.

古文：熊罴对我蹲，虎豹夹道啼。
现代文：熊熊蹲在我面前，路两边虎豹在吼叫。
English: Xiong Xiong squatted in front of me, and tigers and leopards roared on both sides of the road.

古文：溪谷少人民，雪落何霏霏。
现代文：二解溪谷裹人家很少，雪下得是多么紧密。
English: There are very few people in the valley, and it snows very tightly.

古文：延颈长叹息，远行多所怀。
现代文：伸长脖子长长叹一日气，在远地旅行就格外思家。
English: Stretch your neck and breathe a long sigh of relief. When traveling far away, you're extra homesick.

古文：我心何佛郁，思欲一东归。
现代文：三解我的心是多么忧伤不乐，就想要向东返回。
English: When I realized how sad and unhappy my heart was, I wanted to go back east.

古文：水深桥梁绝，中道正裴回。
现代文：水既深而桥梁又断，半路上我正在徘徊。
English: The water is deep and the bridge is broken, and I am wandering halfway.

古文：迷惑失径路，暝无所宿栖。
现代文：四解因为迷失了前进的径路，傍晚还没有住宿之地。
English: Because they lost their way, they did not have a place to stay in the evening.

古文：行行日以远，人马同时饥。
现代文：不停地走啊一天天离家更远，人和马都饥饿疲劳。
English: Day after day they walked further and further away from home. Both man and horse were tired and hungry.

古文：担囊行取薪，斧冰持作糜。
现代文：五解背着袋子去拾柴，砍取冰块来煮粥。
English: He had to carry a bag to collect firewood and cut ice to make porridge.

古文：悲彼东山诗，悠悠使我哀。
现代文：想起那首写远征军人的《束山诗》，使我的哀伤悠悠不尽。六解
English: When I think of the "Soksan Poem," which was written by an expeditionary soldier, my sorrow is inexhaustible.

古文：《愿登》、《秋胡行》，武帝词：
现代文：《愿登》《秋胡行》魏武帝词五解
English: "Ji Deng" "Qiu Hu Xing" Five Interpretations of the Words of Emperor Wu of Wei

古文：愿登泰华山，神人共远游。
现代文：我希望登上泰华山，与神人一起远游。
English: I hope to climb Mount Taihua and travel far and wide with the gods and mortals.

古文：经历昆仑山，到蓬莱。
现代文：经过崑喻山，再到蓬莱山。
English: Passing through Mt. Ganyu, and then to Mt. Penglai.

古文：飘濆八极，与神人俱。
现代文：在宇宙中自由来往，同神人在起。
English: To move freely in the universe, to be one with the divine.

古文：思得神药，万岁为期。
现代文：我希望得到神仙的长生之药，能够活到万年。
English: I hope to receive the immortals' elixir of life so that I can live for ten thousand years.

古文：歌以言志，愿登泰华山。
现代文：用诗歌来表达情志，我希望登上泰华山。
English: Using poetry to express sentiments, I hope to climb Mount Taihua.

古文：天地何长久，人道居之短。
现代文：一解天地是多么长久，而人的寿命却很短促。
English: Consider how long the heavens and earth are, and yet how short man's life span is.

古文：世言伯阳，殊不知老，赤松王乔，亦云得道。
现代文：世上传说老子，他就不知衰老。赤松子和王子乔，据说也得了仙道。
English: There is a legend about Lao Zi, that he does not know how to grow old. It is said that Red Pine and Prince Qiao have also been blessed with immortality.

古文：得之未闻，庶以寿考。
现代文：虽然成仙的事传说渺茫，总是希望达到延年益寿。
English: Although the legend of the immortality of the soul is vague, it is always hoped to achieve longevity.

古文：歌以言志，天地何长久！
现代文：用诗歌来表达情志，天地是多么长久。
English: Using poetry to express sentiments, how long the heavens and the earth will last.

古文：明明日月光，何所不光昭。
现代文：二解多么明亮的日月光辉，有什么地方不受它照耀。
English: No matter how brightly the sun and moon shine, there is no place where they do not shine.

古文：二仪合圣化，贵者独人不。
现代文：圣人与天地同德，难道不是以人最为尊贵。
English: Isn't it true that a saint is a person who has the same virtue as heaven and earth?

古文：万国率土，莫非王臣。
现代文：境域内的众多国家，没有谁不是君王的臣民。
English: In the many countries within its borders, no one is not a subject of the monarch.

古文：仁义为名，礼乐为荣。
现代文：以仁义为名，以礼乐为荣。
English: In the name of benevolence and righteousness, we are proud of our ceremonial music.

古文：歌以言志，明明日月光。
现代文：用诗歌来表达情志，多么明亮的日月光辉。
English: Using poetry to express sentiments, how bright the sun and moon shine.

古文：四时更逝去，昼夜以成岁。
现代文：三解春夏秋冬轮流逝去，白昼与黑夜积聚成年岁。
English: Spring, summer, autumn and winter take turns to pass away, and day and night accumulate adult years.

古文：大人先天，而天弗违。
现代文：大人物成事在上天之前，而上天没有违背。
English: Great men accomplish great things before God, and God does not fail.

古文：不戚年往，世忧不治。存亡有命，虑之为蚩。
现代文：我不为年华逝去而忧愁，祇担心时世混乱而没有治理，生与死自有命定，为这一问题忧虑真是无知。
English: I don't worry about the passing of the years, I only worry about the chaos of the times and the lack of governance. Life and death are predetermined, and worrying about this issue is really ignorance.

古文：歌以言志，四时更逝去。
现代文：用诗歌来表达情志，春夏秋冬轮流逝去。
English: Using poetry to express sentiments, spring, summer, autumn and winter pass by in turn.

古文：戚戚欲何念，欢笑意所之。
现代文：四解有什么念头要忧愁恐惧，想要寻欢作乐就寻欢作乐。
English: If you want to be happy, be happy. If you want to be sad, be sad.

古文：盛壮智惠，殊不再来。
现代文：青壮年时候的智慧，已经不会再来。
English: The wisdom of youth will never return.

古文：爱时进趣，将以惠谁。
现代文：珍惜年华而力图进取，将会对谁都有益。
English: It will be good for everyone to cherish their youth and try to make progress.

古文：泛泛放逸，亦同何为。歌以言志，戚戚欲何念？
现代文：随随便便而无所作为，也和任何人没有关联。
English: It's casual, it doesn't do anything, it's not connected to anyone.

古文：《上谒》、《董桃行》，古词：
现代文：用诗歌来表达情志，有什么念头要忧愁恐惧。
English: Using poetry to express emotions, what thoughts to worry and fear.

古文：吾欲上谒从高山，山头危嶮大难。
现代文：五解《上谒》《董桃行》古词五解我想上到高山拜见神仙，山头又高又险难行走。
English: I want to go up to the mountains to worship the gods, the mountains are high and dangerous to walk.

古文：遥望五岳端，黄金为阙，班璘。
现代文：远望五岳顶峰，用黄金做宫阙，色彩鲜艳。
English: The peak of Mt. Wudu can be seen in the distance. The palace is made of gold and is brightly colored.

古文：但见芝草，叶落纷纷。
现代文：衹看见芝草，叶子纷纷飘落。
English: When the baboon saw the turfgrass, the leaves fluttered down.

古文：百鸟集，来如烟。
现代文：一解各种鸟聚集在一起，成群飞来好似一阵烟。
English: All kinds of birds gathered together, flying in flocks like a puff of smoke.

古文：山兽纷纶，麟辟邪其端。
现代文：各类山兽众多杂乱，麒麟和辟邪带头。
English: All kinds of mountain beasts are numerous and disorderly, with the unicorns and evil spirits leading the way.

古文：鹍鸡声鸣，但见山兽援戏相拘攀。
现代文：鵾鶸声声呜叫，衹见山兽相引游戏而彼此拘攀。
English: Beep, beep, beep, we see the beasts of the mountain playing and clinging to each other.

古文：小复前行玉堂，未心怀流还。
现代文：二解稍稍再向前走而到了玉堂，心中怀着不安。
English: Er解 walked a little further and arrived at the Jade Hall, feeling uneasy.

古文：传教出门来，门外人何求？
现代文：传达教令的人走出门来，问： 门外人有什么求告? 
English: And the herald went out, and said, What have they to do with thee, O stranger?

古文：所言欲从圣道，求一得命延。
现代文：回答说： 要皈依仙道，求得延长寿命。 三解
English: He replied, "To seek immortality and a long life."

古文：教敕凡吏受言，采取神药若木端。
现代文：神仙命凡间小吏接受教言，在神树若木顶端采神药。
English: Immortals live by the precepts of the gods, while lesser mortals receive the teachings and gather the divine medicine at the top of the divine tree.

古文：白兔长跪捣药虾蟆丸，奉上陛下一玉柈，服此药可得即仙。
现代文：白兔直身而跪来捣成虾蟆丸，放在玉盘中献给皇上，吃了这药就可以成仙。
English: The White Rabbit kneeled upright and pounded shrimp meatballs, placed them in a jade dish and offered them to the emperor. If you eat this medicine, you can become a fairy godmother.

古文：服尔神药，无不欢喜。
现代文：四解皇上吃下你的神药，人人无不欢喜。
English: The four-faced emperor ate your magic potion, and everyone was delighted.

古文：陛下长生老寿，四面肃肃稽首，天神拥护左右，陛下长与天相保守。
现代文：皇上长生不老，群臣肃敬地跪拜，天神保护在身边，皇上永远与天地同寿。
English: The emperor will live forever, the courtiers will kneel in reverence, the gods will protect him, and the emperor will live forever with heaven and earth.

古文：《蒲生》、《塘上行》，武帝词：
现代文：五解《蒲生》《塘上行》魏武帝词五解
English: Five interpretations of "Pouson" "Tang Shang Xing" and five interpretations of Emperor Wu's words

古文：蒲生我池中，其叶何离离。
现代文：香蒲生长在我的水池裹，它的叶子多么茂密。
English: The cattail grows in my pond, how thick its leaves are.

古文：傍能行仪仪，莫能缕自知。
现代文：它的身边能招来行人欣赏，却不能一一陈述自己感受的心意。
English: Its surroundings can attract pedestrians to appreciate it, but they cannot express their feelings one by one.

古文：众口铄黄金，使君生别离。
现代文：众人的毁谤能够销铄黄金，使你与我生生地别离。
English: The slander of the multitude is as the selling of fine gold, to separate thee from me.

古文：念君去我时，独愁常苦悲。
现代文：一解想起你离开我的时候，独愁闷而经常悲苦。
English: When I think of you leaving me, I feel sad and often miserable.

古文：想见君颜色，感结伤心脾。
现代文：想看到你的面容，伤感郁结得损害了心脾。
English: I want to see your face, but I'm too sad and depressed to do so.

古文：今悉夜夜愁不寐。
现代文：如今都是每夜愁得失眠。
English: Now I'm worried every night and can't sleep.

古文：莫用豪贤故，弃捐素所爱；莫用鱼肉贵，弃捐葱与薤；莫用麻枲贱，弃捐菅与蒯。
现代文：二解不要因为豪杰贤人的缘故，抛弃了平素所爱的人；不要因为鱼肉贵重，就抛弃了青葱和白薤，不要因为丝麻价贱，就抛弃了菅草蒯草。
English: Second, don't abandon your loved ones for the sake of heroes and sages; don't abandon green onions and egrets because fish meat is valuable; don't abandon the Chinese cedar because the price of flax is low.

古文：倍恩者苦栝，蹶船常苦没。
现代文：三解背恩的人要遭到不幸，走不动的船常常要淹没。
English: Those who are ungrateful will suffer misfortune, and boats that can't move will often be flooded.

古文：教君安息定，慎莫致仓卒。
现代文：让你安居宁定，千万不要遭到灾祸。
English: Let you live in peace and tranquility, and never be subjected to disaster.

古文：念与君一共离别，亦当何时共坐复相对。
现代文：想起同你在当年分别，又将在什么时候坐在一起而彼此相对。
English: Remembering when you and I separated, and when we will sit together and face each other.

古文：出亦复苦愁，入亦复苦愁。
现代文：四解
English: Four solutions

古文：边地多悲风，树木何萧萧。今日乐相乐，延年寿千秋。
现代文：出门也忧愁苦恼，进门也忧愁苦恼，边地上风声凄紧，树木是多么萧萧今天大家在一起欢聚作乐，延年益寿万万年。
English: Going out is also sad and distressed, entering the door is also sad and distressed, the wind on the edge is very strong, the trees are very sad Today, everyone gathers together to make music, extending life for thousands of years.

古文：《悠悠》、《苦寒行》，明帝词：
现代文：五解《悠悠》《苦寒行》魏明帝词五解
English: Five interpretations of "YuYu" and "Bitter Cold"

古文：悠悠发洛都，我征东行。
现代文：悠悠地从盗屋出发，我向东方征讨而远行。
English: I slowly set out from the thief's house, and I traveled far and wide to the East to seek justice.

古文：征行弥二旬，屯吹龙陂城。
现代文：征讨出行已有二十天，奏着军乐来驻扎龙陂城。
English: It's been twenty days since I traveled to collect money, and now I'm stationed in Yongpyeong with military music playing.

古文：顾观故垒处，皇祖之所营。
现代文：一解观看旧垒的地方，那是皇祖所营建。
English: This is where you can see the old fortress, which was built by the emperor's ancestors.

古文：屋室若平昔，栋宇无邪倾。
现代文：房屋还是像从前一样，梁柱都没有倾斜。
English: The house is still the same as before, the beams and columns are not tilted.

古文：奈何我皇祖，潜德隐圣形。
现代文：二解可是我皇祖又怎么样啊!
English: I don't know, but what about my ancestors!

古文：虽没而不朽，书贵垂休名。
现代文：他的美德和形体已经深深地隐藏。他虽然逝世却永垂不朽，史书中所贵的是留下美好名声。
English: His virtues and form have been deeply hidden, and although he has passed away, he is immortal, and what is precious in the history book is to leave a good reputation.

古文：光光我皇祖，轩耀同其荣。
现代文：三解我的皇祖多么光明显耀，与轩辕星同一光辉。
English: Thirdly, how brightly my imperial ancestor shone, with the same brilliance as the bright star.

古文：遗化布四海，八表以肃清。
现代文：留传的教化遍布天下，全国得以肃敬清宁。
English: The remaining teachings spread all over the world, and the whole country was able to pay homage to Qingning.

古文：虽有吴蜀寇，春秋足耀兵。
现代文：四解虽然有塞呈与酉蜀两处寇贼，春秋两季都可以炫耀兵威。
English: Although there are two bandits in Jiecheng and Shenshu, they can show off their military prowess in spring and autumn.

古文：徒悲我皇祖，不永享百龄。
现代文：衹是悲叹我的皇祖，不能享有百年长龄。
English: I lament that my ancestor did not live to be a hundred years old.

古文：赋诗以写怀，伏轼泪沾缨。
现代文：作诗来抒写怀抱，伏在车轼前而泪水沾湿冠缨。
English: Poems are written to describe embracing, kneeling before the chariot and tears drenching the crown.

古文：瑟调
现代文：五解瑟调
English: Five-part harmony

古文：《朝日》、《善哉行》，文帝词。
现代文：《朝日》《善哉行》魏文帝词五解
English: "Asahi" "Zenya Xing" Five Interpretations of Wei Emperor's Words

古文：朝日乐相乐，酣饮不知醉。
现代文：早晨起来欢聚作乐，畅饮而不知酒会醉人。
English: Getting up in the morning, having fun, drinking without knowing it can be intoxicating.

古文：悲弦激新声，长笛吐清气。
现代文：悲弦激扬起新的曲调，长笛吹出清越的声音。
English: The sad strings stir up a new melody, and the flute blows out the sound of Qingyue.

古文：弦歌感人肠，四坐皆欢说。寥寥高堂上，凉风入我室。
现代文：一解音乐和歌唱感动人心，所有在座的人都很欢悦，在高阔的厅堂上，凉风吹进了我的室中。
English: The music and singing were moving, and everyone present was happy. In the lofty hall, a cool breeze blew into my room.

古文：持满如不盈，有得者能卒。
现代文：二解持守盈满好像没有盈满，有德行的人要能始能终。
English: Second, holding on to fullness is like not having fullness. A virtuous person should be able to go all the way from beginning to end.

古文：君子多苦心，所愁不但一。
现代文：君子大都费尽心思，所忧虑的事不衹是一端。
English: Most of the nobles have worked hard, and the things they are worried about are all over.

古文：慊慊下白屋，吐握不可失。
现代文：三解用谦虚态度对待贫贱的人，礼贤下士不可有失。
English: Thirdly, treat the poor and lowly with a humble attitude, and the corporal must not fail.

古文：众宾饱满归，主人苦不悉。
现代文：众宾客醉饱而归，当主人的仍觉得未尽心意。
English: The guests come home drunk, and the host still feels he hasn't done enough.

古文：比翼翔云汉，罗者安所羁。
现代文：四解鸟儿双双在天空高飞，捕乌的人又哪能将它羁绊。
English: Both birds are soaring high in the sky, and there is no one to catch them.

古文：冲静得自然，荣华何足为。
现代文：冲和怡静而得自然之趣，荣华富贵又算得什么。
English: It is natural to be attracted to harmony and tranquility, but it is not natural to be attracted to glory and wealth.

古文：《上山》、《善哉行》，文帝词：
现代文：《上山》《善哉行》魏文帝词六解
English: "Climbing the Mountain" and "Good Deeds" by Wei Wendi in Six Interpretations

古文：上山采薇，薄莫苦饥。溪谷多风，霜露沾衣。
现代文：上山去采摘野豌豆，傍晚时苦于饥饿，溪谷裹不断吹风，霜露沾湿了衣裳。
English: I went up the mountain to pick wild peas, and by the evening I was suffering from hunger. The wind was constantly blowing in the valley, and my clothes were wet with frost.

古文：野雉群雊，猿猴相追。
现代文：一解野鶸成群地呜叫，猿猴相互追逐。
English: Once the wild baboons wailed in groups, and the monkeys chased each other.

古文：还望故乡，郁何垒垒，高山有崖，林木有支。
现代文：回望我的故乡，郁郁的山林层层叠叠。二解
English: Looking back at my hometown, the lush mountain forests are piled on top of each other.

古文：忧来无方，人莫之知。
现代文：谁都知道高山有崖，谁都明白林木有枝，可是忧愁到来没有边际，别人也无从得知。
English: Everyone knows that mountains have cliffs, and everyone understands that trees have branches, but there is no limit to the arrival of sadness, and others have no way of knowing.

古文：人生若寄，多忧何为。
现代文：三解人生本来就好像寄居，又何必多忧多虑。
English: A three-dimensional life is originally like a sojourn, and there is no need to worry.

古文：今我不乐，岁月其驰。
现代文：如今我不及时行乐，时光就徒然逝去。
English: Nowadays, if I don't have fun in time, time passes in vain.

古文：汤汤川流，中有行舟。
现代文：四解河中的流水浩浩荡荡，水中有行驶的舟船。
English: The flowing water in the Qilu River is vast and turbulent, and there are moving boats in the water.

古文：随波转薄，有似客游。
现代文：它随着波涛回转，好像是作客出游。
English: It turns with the waves, as if it were a guest.

古文：策我良马，被我轻裘。
现代文：五解鞭策我的好马，披着我的轻裘。
English: Whip my good horse, wear my light coat.

古文：载驰载驱，聊以忘忧。
现代文：一路上奔驰而去，贴且忘记忧愁。
English: Along the way, gallop away, and forget the sorrow.

古文：《朝游》、《善哉行》，文帝词：
现代文：六解《朝游》《善哉行》魏文帝词五解
English: Six commentaries on "Morning Tour," "Good Deeds" and five commentaries on the Wei Emperor's words

古文：朝游高台观，夕宴华池阴。
现代文：早晨在高高的台观游览，傍晚在华池的树荫下宴饮。
English: In the morning, take a tour of the high viewing platform, and in the evening, enjoy a banquet under the shade of the trees in Huaike.

古文：大酋奉甘醪，狩人献嘉禽。
现代文：酒官献上了好酒，兽官呈上了美禽。
English: The wine steward presented good wine, the veterinarian presented poultry.

古文：齐倡发东舞，秦筝奏西音。
现代文：一解齐地的侣女表演东方的舞蹈，秦地的筝奏出西方的音调。
English: Couples and women from all over the country perform oriental dances, while the kites from Qin play western tunes.

古文：有客从南来，为我弹清琴。
现代文：有一位客人从南方来，为我弹起清亮的琴声。
English: A guest came from the south and played a clear harp for me.

古文：五音纷繁会，拊者激微吟。
现代文：二解纷繁的五音会合，打拍子的人开始低声歌唱。
English: The five-note rhyme, which has many different rhythms, begins, and the person playing the beat begins to sing in a low voice.

古文：淫鱼乘波听，踊跃自浮沉。
现代文：鱼群游到水来聆听，跳跃着上下浮沉。
English: The fish swam to the water to listen, jumping up and down.

古文：飞鸟翻翔舞，悲鸣集北林。乐极哀情来，憀亮摧肝心。清角岂不妙，德薄所不任。大哉子野言，弭弦且自禁。
现代文：这清角曲调难道不够美妙，衹是功德不足的人不能承当，师旷说造话多么了不起，停止听乐我姑且白禁。
English: Isn't this clear-angle melody wonderful enough? No one who lacks merit can undertake it. How great is Shi Ku's ability to create words? I'm not allowed to stop listening to the music.

古文：《古公》、《善哉行》，武帝词：
现代文：五解《古公》《善哉行》魏武帝词七解
English: Five commentaries on the "Ancient Prince" and "Zen Ya Xing" and seven commentaries on the words of Emperor Weiwu

古文：古公亶甫，积德垂仁。
现代文：那古公宜甫，蓄积道德而留传仁义。
English: In ancient times, nobles were virtuous. They accumulated morality and passed down benevolence.

古文：思弘一道，哲王于幽。
现代文：他弘扬后稷、公刘的正道，在豳地成为圣明的君王。一解
English: He promoted the righteous path of Houyi and Gu Liu, and became the king of Shenming in Shunde.

古文：太伯仲雍，王德之仁。行施百世，断发文身。
现代文：那太伯和仲雍，是有最高道德的仁人，他们的美行可用于千年百代，为了让位而断发纹身。
English: That Tai Bo and Zhong Yong are benevolent people with the highest morals, their beauty can be used for thousands of years and hundreds of generations, in order to make room for the tattoo.

古文：伯夷叔齐，古之遗贤。
现代文：二解那伯夷与叔齐，是古代的贤人。
English: It is said that Naboi and his uncle Qi were sages in ancient times.

古文：让国不用，饿殂首山。
现代文：他们相互谦让不当国君，后来饿死在首阳山。
English: They made mutual concessions to the unsuitable sovereign, and later starved to death on Shouyang Mountain.

古文：智哉山甫，相彼宣王。
现代文：三解
English: Three solutions

古文：何用杜伯，累我圣贤。齐桓之霸，赖得仲父。
现代文：多么有智慧的仲山甫，他辅佐那位周宣王，可是为什么任用杜伯，使我们圣贤受到连累。四解蛮担公成为霸主，靠的是得到笪世。
English: How wise Zhong Shan Fu was, he assisted that Zhou Xuan Wang, but why did he appoint Du Bo to make our sages suffer?

古文：后任竖刁，虫流出户。
现代文：可是后来任用竖刁，以致他死后无人殓葬，尸体生虫，流出门外。
English: Later, however, a cross-beam was used, so that after his death there was no one to bury him, and his corpse grew worms and flowed out of the door.

古文：晏子平仲，积德兼仁。
现代文：五解那垦工王企，蓄积道德而兼有仁心。
English: Fifthly, those who are diligent in their work will accumulate morality and have a benevolent heart.

古文：与世沈德，未必思命。
现代文：他事齐三代而有潜在的美德，但未必知道天命。
English: He is of three generations and has latent virtues, but he may not know his destiny.

古文：仲尼之世，王国为君。
现代文：六解
English: Six solutions

古文：随制饮酒，扬波使官。
现代文：在仲尼所处时代，凰王已等于列国之君，他衹能随从礼制饮酒，在官场与世浮沉。
English: In Zhong Ni's time, the Phoenix King was equal to the kings of the nations. He was able to follow the etiquette of drinking, and rise and fall in the official world.

古文：《自惜》、《善哉行》，武帝词：
现代文：七解《自惜》《善哉行》魏武帝词六解
English: Seven commentaries on "Self-pity" and "Good Deeds" from Emperor Wu of Wei, six commentaries

古文：自惜身薄祜，夙贱罹孤苦。
现代文：可怜我生来没有福分，一向贫贱而遭受父母早亡的痛苦。
English: Alas, I was born without good fortune, have always been poor, and have suffered from the early death of my parents.

古文：既无三徙教，不闻过庭语。
现代文：既没有受到母亲的教育，也没听到父亲的诲语。
English: Neither was he educated by his mother, nor did he listen to his father's words.

古文：其穷如抽裂，自以思所怙。
现代文：一解穷得有如抽筋裂肤，自然足更想念亡父。
English: Being poor is like having a cramp, so naturally I miss my late father even more.

古文：虽怀一介志，是时其能与。
现代文：虽然怀有廉正的志向，这时又有谁能赏识。
English: Even if you have integrity, no one will appreciate you.

古文：守穷者贫贱，惋叹泪如雨。
现代文：二解想到自守穷困的人不免贫贱，不禁唉声叹气而泪流如雨。
English: Second, people who think of themselves as poor are inevitably poor, and can't help but sigh and shed tears.

古文：泣涕于悲夫，乞活安能睹。
现代文：我哭得多么悲哀，我父哪能见到我求活命。
English: How I wept and how my father did not see me pleading for my life.

古文：我愿于天穷，琅邪倾侧左。
现代文：三解我希望那上天，使我父遇害的琅邪郡向左倾入大海。
English: Thirdly, I hope that the heavens will cause the county where my father was killed to tilt to the left and fall into the sea.

古文：虽欲竭忠诚，欣公归其楚。
现代文：虽然要为君尽忠，又欣逢皇上迁回洛隧。
English: Although he had to be loyal to the emperor, he was glad when the emperor moved back to Luocheng.

古文：快人曰为叹，抱情不得叙。
现代文：四解人们欢欣而我仍然叹息，中尽忠之情不能向皇上倾诉。
English: Although people are rejoicing and I am still sighing, I cannot express my feelings of loyalty to the emperor.

古文：显行天教人，谁知莫不绪。
现代文：那些明显地施行天子教令的人，谁知道没有一个不成为残余。
English: Who knows but that there is a remnant of those who are manifestly doing the Son's bidding.

古文：我愿何时随，此叹亦难处。
现代文：五解我复仇的愿望何时能实现，这一尽忠不得的慨叹也难以处置。
English: It's hard to know when my desire for revenge will be fulfilled, and it's hard to deal with the regret of not being able to be faithful.

古文：今我将何照于光耀，释衔不如雨。
现代文：如今我将在何时受到日月的照耀，雨能停止而我的忧愁不能停止。
English: Now when will I be illuminated by the sun and the moon, the rain can stop and my sadness can not stop.

古文：《我徂》、《善哉行》，明帝词：我徂我征，伐彼蛮虏。
现代文：六解《我徂》《善哉行》魏明帝词八解我前往征伐，征伐那蛮虏。
English: Six explanations of the "We" and "Good Deeds" of Emperor Wei Ming's words, and eight explanations of the "I will go to the conquest" and "I will conquer the barbarians."

古文：练师简卒，爰正其旅。
现代文：训练军队而简选士卒，于是整齐了师旅。
English: While training the army, he selected officers and enlisted men, and then organized the division and brigade.

古文：轻舟竟川，初鸿依浦。
现代文：一解
English: One solution

古文：桓桓猛毅，如罴如虎。
现代文：轻快的战船在河中行驶，初来的鸿雁依傍着水边，多么威武猛毅，有如大熊与老虎。
English: The nimble warship is sailing in the river, and the newly arrived wild goose is leaning on the water's edge. How powerful and fierce they are, like a bear and a tiger.

古文：发砲若雷，吐气成雨。
现代文：二解
English: Two solutions

古文：旄旍指麾，进退应矩。百马齐辔，御由造父。
现代文：开炮发石的声音好像雷鸣，兵众吐出气来可以成雨，在旌旗指挥下，进退都合乎规矩。
English: The sound of the firing flints is like thunder, the soldiers exhale and it can rain, and under the command of the banner, the advance and retreat are orderly.

古文：休休六军，咸同斯武。兼涂星迈，亮兹行阻。行行日远，西背京许。
现代文：加倍赶路如流星奔驰，显露出军情紧急而此行有阻，一天天越走越远，背离了西边的许昌京都。
English: Doubling the speed of the journey was like a meteor, revealing that the military situation was urgent and there was an obstacle to this trip. Day by day, they went further and further away, deviating from Xu Chang Kyoto in the west.

古文：游弗淹旬，遂届扬土。
现代文：五解出行没上十天，就到了扬州地界。
English: After ten days of travel, we arrived at the border of Yangzhou.

古文：奔寇震惧，莫敢当御。
现代文：逃奔的贼寇震惊惶惧，没有谁胆敢抵御。
English: The fleeing bandits were shocked and frightened, and no one dared to resist.

古文：虎臣列将，怫郁充怒。
现代文：六解虎臣勇将，都同仇敌忾而充满愤怒。
English: The six tiger princes and six brave generals are all angry with the enemy.

古文：淮泗肃清，奋扬微所。
现代文：淮、泗一带的贼寇已全被肃清，他们要奋武扬威竟没有处所。
English: Thieves and bandits in the Huai and Handan regions have been completely eliminated, and there is no place for them to fight.

古文：运德耀威，惟镇惟抚。
现代文：七解运用恩德而显耀武力，既要镇守又要安抚。
English: Seven ways to use kindness to show strength, both to protect and to appease.

古文：反旆言归，告入皇祖。
现代文：得胜率军返回京城，将胜利禀告我武帝皇祖。
English: The victorious army returned to the capital and reported the victory to Emperor Wu.

古文：《赫赫》、《善哉行》，明帝词：
现代文：八解《赫赫》《善哉行》魏明帝词四解
English: Eight interpretations of "Hehe" and "Zen Ya Xing" from the Wei and Ming Dynasties

古文：赫赫大魏，王师徂征。
现代文：多么显赫的左魏，帝王的军队前去征讨。
English: What an illustrious Zuo Wei, the emperor's army went to conquer.

古文：冒暑讨乱，振耀威灵。
现代文：冒着暑热去讨平叛乱，振耀天子的威灵。
English: They braved the heat to quell the rebellion and celebrate the benevolence of the Son of Heaven.

古文：泛舟黄河，随波潺湲。
现代文：一解舟船在黄河中行驶，随着流水飘浮。
English: A rowing boat travels in the Yellow River, floating with the current.

古文：通渠回越，行路绵绵。
现代文：四通八达的河道迂回遥远，行路是多么绵长。
English: The circuitous route of the river is far away, and the journey is long.

古文：采旄蔽日，旗旒翳天。
现代文：二解彩旗遮盖了日头，旗旒布满天空。
English: The bunting blotted out the sun, and streamers dotted the sky.

古文：淫鱼瀺灂，游戏深渊。
现代文：沉鱼出没无常，在深水中游戏。三解
English: Sunken fish haunt impermanently, playing in deep water.

古文：唯塘泊，从如流。
现代文：吴地到处是塘泊，随从的人就如同流水。
English: Tongpo is everywhere in Wu, and the people who follow it are like running water.

古文：不为单，握扬楚。
现代文：不用更多的从军，就控制了扬、楚地区。
English: Without the need for more troops, they controlled the Yang and Chu regions.

古文：心惆怅，歌《采薇》。
现代文：我心中惆怅，唱起《采薇》之歌。
English: In my heart, I sang the song of "Cherry Blossoms."

古文：心绵绵，在淮肥。愿君速捷蚤旋归。
现代文：但又心意绵绵，想着那淮水、肥水，希望你迅速得胜早日回归。
English: But at the same time, my heart is full of thoughts, thinking about that bright and fertile water, hoping that you will quickly win and return as soon as possible.

古文：《来日》、《善哉行》，古词：
现代文：四解《来日》《善哉行》古词六解
English: Four commentaries on "Coming to Japan" and "Good Deeds" and six commentaries on ancient words

古文：来日大难，口燥脣干。今日相乐，皆当喜欢。
现代文：未来的日子甚是艰难，困苦得口燥热而唇发干，今天能相聚作乐，都应当喜喜欢欢。
English: The days ahead will be very difficult, and the hardships will make our mouths dry and our lips dry. We should all be happy to be able to make music together today.

古文：经历名山，芝草翻翻。仙人王乔，奉药一丸。
现代文：一解我经历过名山，芝草翩翩生长，那仙人王子乔，送给我仙药一丸。
English: Once I experienced the famous mountain, the grass grows, the fairy prince Qiao, sent me a pill of fairy medicine.

古文：自惜袖短，内手知寒。
现代文：二解
English: Two solutions

古文：惭无灵辄，以报赵宣。
现代文：自己可惜衣袖太短，放进手觉得寒冷，惭愧我不能像灵辄报答赵宣子那样来报答你。
English: I'm sorry that my sleeves are too short, I feel cold when I put my hand in, I'm ashamed that I can't repay you like the coffin repaid Zhao Xuanzi.

古文：月没参横，北斗阑干。亲交在门，饥不及餐。
现代文：月亮落下而参星横斜，北斗星纵横天上，亲戚朋友来到家门，饥饿着还没有吃饭。
English: The moon has set, but the star is tilted sideways, and the Big Dipper stretches across the sky. Relatives and friends come to the door, hungry and have not eaten yet.

古文：欢日尚少，戚日苦多。以何忘忧，弹筝酒歌。
现代文：四解欢乐的时光很少，悲伤的日子太多，用什么忘记忧愁，弹起筝来饮酒唱歌。
English: There are few moments of joy, and too many days of sorrow. How can we forget our sorrows? How can we play the kite, drink wine, and sing songs?

古文：淮南八公，要道不烦。参驾六龙，游戏云端。
现代文：五解淮南王有高才八人，他们的要道并不烦难，用六条龙来驾御车子，到云层上游戏。六解
English: The King of Huainan has eight high-caliber people, and their way is not difficult. They use six dragons to drive the car and play on the clouds.

古文：大曲
现代文：大曲：
English: Large piece:

古文：《东门》、《东门行》，古词：
现代文：《东门》《东门行》古词四解
English: "Dongmen" and "Dongmen Xing"

古文：出东门，不愿归；来入门，怅欲悲。
现代文：出得束门外，本想不回家，回家进了门，惆怅心伤悲。
English: Out of the door, I didn't want to go home. When I got home, I was heartbroken.

古文：盎中无斗储，还视桁上无县衣。
现代文：瓦罐襄面没有储藏斗米，回看衣架又无挂衣。
English: There is no storage bucket of rice on the side of the earthenware pot, and there is no hanging clothes on the clothes hanger.

古文：拔剑出门去，兒女牵衣啼。
现代文：一解拔剑出门去，儿女扯着衣服啼哭。
English: As soon as they unsheathed their swords and went out, their children tugged at their clothes and cried.

古文：它家但愿富贵，贱妾与君共饣甫糜。
现代文：妻子说： 人家有钱有势随他去吧，我情愿同你一起吃糠咽菜。二解
English: His wife said, "If a man has money and power, let him do as he pleases. I would rather eat throat stew with you."

古文：共铺糜，上用仓浪天故，下为黄口小兒。
现代文：一起吃糠咽菜，卜看老天的分上，下为你的小儿女。
English: Eat stewed throat vegetables together, and pray for God's will for your children.

古文：今时清廉，难犯教言，君复自爱莫为非。
现代文：眼下时世清平廉洁，难犯教诲的好言，你要自爱不干坏事。
English: Three solutions: At present, the world is clean and incorruptible, how can you violate the law, you still have to love yourself and not do bad things. I'm leaving!

古文：今时清廉，难犯教言，君复自爱莫为非。
现代文：三解眼下时世清明廉洁，哪能违犯法令，你还要自爱不干坏事。  我走了!
English: Three solutions: At present, the world is clean and incorruptible, how can you violate the law, you still have to love yourself and not do bad things. I'm leaving!

古文：行！吾去为迟，平慎行，望吾归。
现代文：我走得已经迟了，你平常要行为谨慎，等着我回来。 
English: I'm already late, and you should behave normally and wait for me to come back.

古文：《西山》、《折杨柳行》，文帝词：
现代文：四解《西山》《折杨柳行》魏文帝词四解
English: "Xishan" and "Folding Poplars and Willows"

古文：西山一何高，高高殊无极。
现代文：酉山多么高啊!高得甚至没有边际。
English: How high is Mount Lushan! It is so high that there is no edge.

古文：上有两仙僮，不饮亦不食。
现代文：山上有两位仙童，不喝也不吃。
English: There are two fairy children on the mountain, neither eating nor drinking.

古文：与我一丸药，光耀有五色。
现代文：给我一粒丸药，那光彩有五种颜色。
English: Give me a pill, the glow has five colors.

古文：服药四五日，身体生羽翼。轻举乘浮云，倏忽行万亿。
现代文：一解吃药后遇了四、五天，身体上长出翅膀，轻飘飘地飞起来驾着浮云，刹那间就走了亿万里路程。
English: After four or five days of taking the medicine, he grew wings on his body, flew up and drove the floating cloud, and walked hundreds of millions of miles in an instant.

古文：流览观四海，芒芒非所识。
现代文：看遍了四海之地，茫茫一片而无人相识，二解
English: See the land of the four seas, a vast expanse and no one knows each other, two solutions

古文：彭祖称七百，悠悠安可原。
现代文：彭祖据说活到七百岁，这太遥远又哪能再得。
English: It is said that Peng Zu lived to be seven hundred years old, which is too far away to be repeated.

古文：老聃适西戎，于今竟不还。
现代文：老子出关前往西戎，到现在竟然没有回来。
English: Laozi left the customs to go to Xi'an, but he has not come back yet.

古文：王乔假虚词，赤松垂空言。
现代文：王子乔假托虚妄的言辞，赤松子留下空洞的废话。
English: Prince Qiao put forward false rhetoric, and Red Pine Nut left behind empty nonsense.

古文：达人识真伪，愚夫好妄传。
现代文：三解通达的人能够辨认所谓神仙之说的真假，愚蠢的人才喜欢胡乱传说。
English: Those who are well-versed in the three arts can recognize the truth and falsehood of the so-called immortals, while stupid people prefer wild legends.

古文：追念往古事，愦愦千万端。百家多迂怪，圣道我所观。
现代文：回想往占的那些事情，千万桩糊裹糊涂，百家学说有很多迂腐怪诞，我所信奉的是圣人的正道。
English: When I think back to the things I used to believe in, there were a million things that were muddled, and a hundred schools of thought had a lot of pedantry and weirdness. What I believe in is the righteous path of a saint.

古文：《罗敷》、《艳歌罗敷行》，古词：日出东南隅，照我秦氏楼。
现代文：四解《罗敷》《艳歌罗敷行》古词：三解太阳从东方升起，照着我秦家的高楼。
English: Four interpretations of the ancient words "Roshiki" and "Anger Song Roshiki": Three interpretations of the sun rising from the east, shining on my Qin family's high-rise building.

古文：秦氏有好女，自名为罗敷。
现代文：秦家有一位漂亮姑娘，自称叫做罗敷。
English: The Qin family has a beautiful girl who calls herself Roshiki.

古文：罗敷喜蚕桑，采桑城南隅。青丝为笼系，桂枝为笼钩。
现代文：罗敷喜欢养蚕采桑，采桑来到城南边桑篮系着青丝绳，用桂树枝作成提柄。
English: Roshiki likes to raise silkworms and harvest mulberries. When the mulberry harvest comes to the southern edge of the city, the mulberry basket is tied with a blue silk rope, and the cucumber is made with a cinnamon branch.

古文：头上倭堕发，耳中明月珠。
现代文：头：梳着半偏的发髻，耳一挂着明月珠。
English: Head: combed with a half-parted bun, with a crescent moon hanging from one ear.

古文：缃绮为下群，紫绮为上襦。
现代文：下着杏黄色的丝裙，上穿紫色的绸衣。
English: She wore an apricot-yellow silk skirt underneath and a purple silk dress on top.

古文：行者见罗敷，下担捋髭须。
现代文：行路的人看到罗敷，放下担子摸胡须。
English: A passerby saw Roshiki, put down his burden and stroked his beard.

古文：少年见罗敷，脱帽著帩头。
现代文：少年人看到罗敷，脱下帽子又戴卜。
English: When the boy saw Roshiki, he took off his hat and wept.

古文：耕者忘其犁，锄者忘其锄。来归相怒怨，但坐观罗敷。
现代文：耕田的人忘了他的犁，锄草的人忘了他的锄，回家相互埋怨误了农活，衹是因为贪看罗敷。
English: The man who ploughs the fields forgets his plough, the man who ploughs the grass forgets his plough, and when they get home, they complain to each other that they missed the farm work, and the plough is because they are greedy.

古文：使君从南来，五马立歭躇。使君遣吏往，问是谁家姝？
现代文：一解使君从南边到来，驾车的五匹马停下来不走，使君派人去探问： 那是谁家的姑娘? 
English: When the prince arrived from the south, the five horses driving the carriage stopped and did not move, causing the prince to send someone to inquire: Whose girl is that?

古文：秦氏有好女，自名为罗敷。
现代文： 秦家有位漂亮的姑娘，自称叫做罗敷。 
English: The Qin family has a beautiful girl who calls herself Roshiki.

古文：罗敷年几何？
现代文： 罗敷有几多岁数? 
English: How old is Roshiki?

古文：二十尚不足，十五颇有余。
现代文： 二二厂岁还不到，十五岁才出头。 
English: The two-and-two-year-old is not yet old, and the fifteen-year-old is just beginning.

古文：使君谢罗敷，宁可共载不？
现代文：使君问罗敷： 愿不愿同我坐车走? 
English: A messenger asked Roshiki: Would you like to go by car with me?

古文：罗敷前置词，使君一何愚！使君自有妇，罗敷自有夫。
现代文：罗敷上前开说： 使君你多么愚蠢，你使君白有媳妇，我罗敷白有丈夫。 
English: Roshiki stepped forward and said: "How stupid of you, you have given your son-in-law a daughter-in-law, while I, Roshiki, have a husband.

古文：东方千余骑，夫婿居上头。
现代文：二解 束边有一千多人马，我丈夫带队走在前。
English: Solution 2: There are more than a thousand horses in Sokoban, and my husband is leading the way.

古文：何用识夫婿？白马从骊驹。青丝系马尾，黄金络马头。
现代文：靠什么来辨认我的丈夫，他骑的白马后面跟着小黑马，青色的丝带系在马尾上，马头上有黄金装饰的马勒。
English: How shall I know my husband? He rides on a white horse, followed by a little black horse, with a blue ribbon on its tail, and on its head is a golden crown.

古文：腰中鹿卢剑，可直千万余。十五府小史，二十朝大夫，三十侍中郎，四十专城居。
现代文：腰间佩带的鹿卢剑，价值千万钱他十五岁当州府的小史，二十岁在朝中当大夫，三卜岁官任侍中郎，四十岁是城之主。
English: The Deer Lure Sword he wears around his waist is worth tens of thousands of dollars. He was fifteen years old when he became the governor of a prefecture, twenty years old when he became a doctor in the imperial court, thirty years old when he became a courtier, and forty years old when he became the lord of a castle.

古文：为人洁白晳，鬑々颇有须。
现代文：他生得面貌白皙，有长长的胡须。
English: He was born with a fair complexion and a long beard.

古文：盈盈公府步，冉冉府中趋。
现代文：在座的官员有好几千，都说我夫婿与众不同。 
English: There are thousands of officers here and they all say my husband is different.

古文：坐中数千人，皆言夫婿殊。《西门》、《西门行》，古词：
现代文：三解前有艳词曲，后有趋。《西门》《西门行》古词六解
English: "Ximen" and "Ximen row" are ancient words with six explanations

古文：出西门，步念之。今日不作乐，当待何时。
现代文：走出西门，步步想念，今天不行乐，还要等何时。
English: Walk out of the West Gate, step by step miss, today is not fun, but when to wait.

古文：夫为乐，为乐当及时。何能坐愁怫郁，当复来兹。
现代文：一解大凡寻欢作乐，一定要及时，怎么能因忧愁而烦恼苦闷，再去等待来年。
English: If you want to find joy and have fun, you must do it in time. How can you be troubled and distressed by sorrow, and then wait for next year.

古文：饮醇酒，炙肥牛。
现代文：二解
English: Two solutions

古文：请呼心所欢，可用解愁忧。
现代文：喝醇美的酒，烤肥壮的牛，请你呼唤我心中所喜欢的人，可以用来解除忧愁。
English: Drinking mellow wine, roasting fat cattle, please call the person I like in my heart, can be used to relieve sadness.

古文：人生不满百，常怀千岁忧。昼短而夜长，何不秉烛游。
现代文：三解人生在世活不到一百岁，常常怀有上千年的忧愁，虽然白天短而夜晚长，为什么不秉烛夜游?
English: People under the age of one hundred live in the world, often harboring the sorrow of thousands of years. Although the day is short and the night is long, why not travel at night with a candle?

古文：自非仙人王子乔，计会寿命难与期。
现代文：四解如果不是仙人王子乔，计算寿命难到头。
English: If it is not Prince Joe, the calculation life is difficult to reach the end.

古文：人寿非金石，年命安可期；贪财爱惜费，但为后世嗤。
现代文：五解人的寿命比不上金石，活得多久不可预料，吝惜的人舍不得花费，衹是被后代人嗤笑。
English: The lifespan of a pentagonal person is not comparable to that of a precious stone. How long one can live is unpredictable. Those who are stingy are reluctant to spend, and those who are stingy are laughed at by future generations.

古文：《默默》、《折杨柳行》，古词：
现代文：六解一本 烛游 后 行去之，如云除，弊车羸马为自推 ，无 自非 以下四十八字。《默默》《折杨柳行》古词四解
English: The following 48 Chinese characters can be found in the Six Commentaries on the Book of the Candlestick, "After the journey of the candlestick, if the cloud is removed, the horse will be pushed by the cart, but not by itself." "Silence" "Folding the willow branch" Four Commentaries on Ancient Words

古文：默默施行违，厥罚随事来，末喜杀龙逢，桀放于鸣条。
现代文：无声无息地倒行逆施，这惩罚就追随着所干的坏事到来。苤喜杀死垄逢，夏丝就被流放到鸣条。
English: This punishment comes along with the bad things she has done, silently and silently doing the opposite of what she should have done. Xie Xi killed Ren Rongfeng, and Xia Si was exiled to Mingtang.

古文：祖伊言不用，纣头县白旄。
现代文：一解直挝不听圭迎的谏言，他的头被周武王悬挂在白旗上。
English: When Zhao Lao did not listen to Gui Ying's advice, his head was hung on a white flag by King Zhou Wu.

古文：指鹿用为马，胡亥以丧躯。
现代文：壹适欺骗圭眩而指鹿为马，胡亥就因此而丧失生命。
English: Hu Hai lost his life for deceiving Gui Dazzle into thinking the deer was a horse.

古文：夫差临命绝，乃云负子胥。
现代文：二解彭祖在临死的时候，才说对不起伍子资。
English: Second, it was only when Peng Zu was about to die that he said he was sorry to Wu Zizhu.

古文：戎王纳女乐，以亡其由余。
现代文：这王接受了台堕公赠送的女乐，就失去了他的贤臣虫金。
English: This king accepted the female music presented by the fallen emperor of Taiwan, and lost his virtuous retainer Zhou Jin.

古文：璧马祸及虢，二国俱为墟。
现代文：虞垦得到置厘的玉璧良马而借路伐越，两个国家都成为废墟。
English: The two countries fell into ruin when Yuxuan took advantage of a good horse to cross the border.

古文：三夫成市虎，慈母投杼趋。
现代文：三解有三个人说街上有老虎便使人相信，谣传曾参杀人而丰母也丢了织梭逃走。
English: If three people say there is a tiger in the street, it is believed that the rumor has been involved in a murder and the rich mother has lost her shuttle and fled.

古文：卞和之刖足，接予归草庐。
现代文：卞和向楚王献璞却被砍去两脚，楚狂圭迤便归隐草屋。
English: Zouhe presented a scepter to King Chu, but his feet were chopped off. Crazy Chu Gui Zou then returned to the hermitage.

古文：《园桃》、《煌煌京洛行》，文帝词：
现代文：四解《园桃》《煌煌京洛行》文帝词五解
English: Four interpretations of "The Peach Orchard" and "A Glorious Journey to Kyoto" and five interpretations of the Emperor's literary works

古文：夭夭园桃，无子空长。虚美难假，偏轮不行。
现代文：园中的桃花开得多么美盛，可是桃树不能结实而白白地生长。虚假的美难以凭藉，一只轮不能行车。
English: The peach blossoms in the garden are in full bloom, but the peach tree cannot grow solidly and in vain. False beauty is hard to rely on, and one wheel cannot drive.

古文：淮阴五刑，鸟得弓藏。
现代文：一解淮阴侯经值身受五刑，是因为高鸟尽而良弓收藏。
English: One of the reasons why Huaiyin Hou was sentenced to five years on duty was because he had a good collection of high-flying bows.

古文：保身全名，独有子房。
现代文：谁能够保全生命和声誉，衹有那张良。
English: Whoever can save his life and reputation is a good man.

古文：大愤不收，褒衣无带；多言寡诚，祗令事败。
现代文：有巨大愤慨而不知收敛，就像穿宽大的衣服却没有衣带；话说得多却没有诚意，衹能使办事失败。
English: A great indignation without restraint is like a robe without a belt; many words without sincerity, but few results.

古文：苏秦之说，六国以亡。
现代文：二解
English: Two solutions

古文：倾侧卖主，车裂固当。贤矣陈轸，忠而有谋，楚怀不从，祸卒不救。
现代文：由于苏秦的游说，六国遭到灭亡，他反覆无常而出卖主上，受到车裂酷刑本就很得当。陈轸是多么贤明，既有忠诚又有计谋，楚怀王不听从他的劝谏，大祸最终无法挽救。
English: As a result of Su Qin's lobbying, the Six Kingdoms were destroyed. He repeatedly betrayed his master, and it would have been appropriate for him to be tortured with a chariot crack. Chen Xi was so wise, both loyal and scheming. King Chu Hui did not listen to his advice, and the disaster could not be saved in the end.

古文：祸夫吴起，智小谋大，西河何健，伏尸何劣。
现代文：三解吴起白寻灾祸，才智薄弱而图谋大事，他任西河太守时多么刚强，而在楚国躲在楚王尸首下被杀又多么软弱。
English: Thirdly, Wu Qibai sought disaster, was intellectually weak and plotted great things. How strong he was when he was appointed the governor of the West River, and how weak he was when he was killed hiding under the corpse of King Chu in the State of Chu.

古文：嗟彼郭生，古之雅人，智矣燕昭，可谓得臣。
现代文：四解可赞叹的是那郭隗，他是古代的正人君子。燕昭王多么有智谋，可以称得上能识别贤臣。
English: The most admirable of the four explanations is that of Guo Zhao, who was an upright gentleman in ancient times. Yan Zhao Wang was so resourceful that he could be said to be able to recognize wise men.

古文：峨峨仲连，齐之高士；北辞千金，东蹈沧海。
现代文：鲁娃连端庄盛美，是壹国的高士，他推辞至愿昼的千金不受，宁可束蹈沧海也不肯向暴秦低头。
English: Lu Wa Lian, dignified and beautiful, is a high-ranking official of a country. He refused to accept the money of the day, preferring to go through the vicissitudes of life rather than bow down to the tyrant Qin.

古文：《白鹄》、《艳歌何尝》，古词：
现代文：五解《白鹄》《艳歌何尝》一口《飞鹄行》古词四解
English: Five explanations of "white egret" "how about erotic song" one mouthful "flying egret" four explanations of ancient words

古文：飞来双白鹄，乃从西北来。
现代文：一双双天鹅从西北方飞来。
English: A pair of swans flew in from the northwest.

古文：十十五五，罗列成行。
现代文：十对十而五对五，排列成一行行。
English: Ten against ten and five against five, line upon line.

古文：妻卒被病，行不能相随。五里一反顾，六里一裴回。
现代文：二解 我要衔着你走，嘴闭着不能开；我要背着你走，羽毛将要毁坏。 
English: Solution 2: I will walk behind you with my mouth closed, unable to open it; I will walk behind you, and my feathers will be destroyed.

古文：吾欲衔汝去，口噤不能开；吾欲负汝去，毛羽何摧颓。乐哉新相知，忧来生别离。躇踌顾群侣，泪下不自知。
现代文：三解 当初刚刚结合是多么快乐，如今痛苦的是生生别离，停下来看一看一群侣伴，流下泪水来不觉不知。 
English: At first, it was so happy just to be united, but now it is painful to be separated. I stopped to look at a group of couples and shed tears without realizing it.

古文：念与君离别，气结不能言。
现代文：四解 想到与你离别，气结住不能说话。
English: The thought of parting with you leaves me breathless and unable to speak.

古文：各各重自爱，道远归还难。
现代文：各自要多多保重，行远路回来艰难。
English: Everyone should take good care of themselves. It's hard to come back from a long trip.

古文：妾当守空房，闭门下重关。
现代文：我将一个人守在空房，关上门再加上门闩。
English: I keep one person in an empty room, close the door and add a deadbolt.

古文：若生当相见，亡者会黄泉。
现代文：如果活着就应当争取重逢，死了就在黄泉相见。 
English: If you are alive, you should strive to meet again. If you are dead, you will meet again in hell.

古文：今日乐相乐，延年万岁期。
现代文：今天在一起欢聚作乐，希望延长寿命千万年。 念与 下马趋曲，前有艳。
English: Today, we gather together to make music, hoping to extend our lifespan by tens of thousands of years.

古文：《碣石》、《步出夏门行》，武帝词：
现代文：《碣石》《步出夏门行》武帝词四解
English: "Zhanshi" "Step out of the Summer Gate" Wu Di Ci Si Xie

古文：云行雨步，超越九江之皋，临观异同。
现代文：云在移动而雨在行走，越过九江的岸边，观看时各不相同。
English: The clouds are moving and the rain is walking, crossing the bank of the Jiujiang River, and the view is different.

古文：心意怀游豫，不知当复何从。
现代文：我的心意犹豫不定，不知道何去何从。
English: My mind wavers, I don't know where to go from here.

古文：经过至我碣石，心惆怅我东海。
现代文：等到我伐乌桓而经过碣石山，束海使我心中惆怅。 云行 至此为艳。
English: Wait until I pass through the mountains of flint, and the sea of clouds makes my heart tremble.

古文：东临碣石，以观沧海。
现代文：到东方登临碣石山，来观赏大海。
English: After a long journey to Lintongshi, we were able to see the Canghai Sea.

古文：水何淡淡，山岛竦峙。
现代文：海中水波轻轻荡漾，岛高高地耸立。
English: The sea is as wide as it is shallow, and the mountains and islands are as far apart as they can be.

古文：树木丛生，百草丰茂。
现代文：树木密密地生长，各种草卉丰富茂盛。
English: The island is covered with trees, and the grass is thick and luxuriant.

古文：秋风萧瑟，洪涛涌起。
现代文：秋风阵阵吹来，涌起巨大的波涛。
English: Autumn wind gusts blow and huge waves rise.

古文：日月之行，若出其中；星汉粲烂，若出其里。
现代文：太阳和月亮的运行，好像从海中出没；灿烂的天上银河，也好像从海中呈现。
English: The movement of the sun and the moon seems to emerge from the sea; the galaxy in the brilliant sky also seems to appear from the sea.

古文：幸甚至哉！歌以咏志。
现代文：真是太幸福了，用歌咏来表达情志。
English: It's worth celebrating! Let's celebrate with a song.

古文：孟冬十月，北风裴回。天气肃清，繁霜霏霏。
现代文：《观沧海》一解在初冬十月时，北风吹来吹去，天气严冷清静，繁霜处处纷飞。
English: In the early winter of October, the north wind was blowing, the weather was cold and calm, and heavy frosts were everywhere.

古文：鹍鸡晨鸣，鸿雁南飞，鸷鸟潜藏，熊罴窟栖。
现代文：鵾鸡早晨啼鸣，大雁飞向南方，猛骛的鸟躲藏起来，熊和罢都住在洞中。
English: The pheasants chirp in the morning, the geese fly south, the mammoth birds hide, and the bears and badgers live in caves.

古文：钱袴停置，农收积场。
现代文：农具闲放不用，粮食堆聚在场圃。
English: Agricultural tools are idle, crops are piling up.

古文：逆旅整设，以通贾商。
现代文：整顿设置旅舍。以便商人贸易。
English: The guesthouse was renovated and became a lodging for visiting merchants.

古文：幸甚至哉！歌以咏志。
现代文：真是太幸福了，用歌咏来表达情志。
English: It's worth celebrating! Let's celebrate with a song.

古文：乡土不同，河朔隆寒。
现代文：《冬十月》二解乡土各有不同，黄河以北非常寒冷。
English: "Winter in October" is a tale of two very different places. North of the Yellow River is very cold.

古文：流澌浮漂，舟船行难。
现代文：河中漂浮流动的冰块，舟船行驶困难。
English: Ice floats on the river, making it difficult for boats to pass.

古文：锥不入地，蘴裛深奥。
现代文：锥子也钻不进冻硬的地面，荒芜的田亩衹长芜青和蒿草。
English: Cones can't drill into the frozen ground, and the barren fields are covered with long grass and rushes.

古文：水竭不流，冰坚可蹈。
现代文：有的地方旱得断了流水，坚硬的冰上可以行走。
English: Water freezes but does not flow, and ice is hard enough to walk on.

古文：士隐者贫，勇侠轻非。
现代文：人们忧虑痛心的就是贫困，轻易地仗勇违法。
English: The hermits are mostly poor and cold, while the valiant knights are often delinquent.

古文：心常叹怨，戚戚多悲。
现代文：我心中常常怨叹，忧惧得每多悲哀。
English: My heart often laments, relatives often grieve.

古文：幸甚至哉！歌以咏志。
现代文：真是太幸福了，用歌咏来表达情志。
English: It's worth celebrating! Let's celebrate with a song.

古文：神龟虽寿，犹有竟时；腾蛇乘雾，终为土灰。
现代文：《河朔寒》三解神龟虽然长寿，仍然有死的时候；神龙能腾云驾雾，最终成为土灰。
English: It is worth celebrating! Write a poem about it. Although the tortoise in "Different Soil" is long-lived, its life has an end. The snake can drive through the fog and eventually turn into dust.

古文：骥老伏枥，志在千里；烈士暮年，壮心不已。
现代文：老马伏在马槽裹，仍然想奔驰千里；烈士到了晚年，豪情壮志也不能停止。
English: An old horse, wrapped in a manger, still wants to gallop thousands of miles; when a martyr reaches old age, his heroic ambition cannot be stopped.

古文：盈缩之期，不但在天；养怡之福，可得永年。
现代文：人的寿命长短，不衹是受天的支配；衹要自己保养得好，就可以延年益寿。
English: Life has a length and a shortness, but it does not end in heaven; self-cultivation and self-benefit, can live for many years.

古文：幸甚至哉！歌以咏志。
现代文：真是太幸福了，用歌咏来表达情志。
English: It's worth celebrating! Let's celebrate with a song.

古文：《何尝》、《艳歌何尝行》，古词：
现代文：《神龟虽寿》凹解《何尝》《艳歌何尝行》古词五解
English: "God's Turtle is Long-Lived" Comprehension, "How to Taste," "How to Perform Erotic Songs," Five Ancient Chinese Words

古文：何尝快独无忧？
现代文：人生何曾快畅地没有忧愁?
English: When has life ever been happy without sadness?

古文：但当饮醇酒，炙肥牛。
现代文：衹是要能饮醇美的酒，吃烧烤的肥牛。
English: A yakitori is a fat cow that needs to be able to drink mellow wine and eat barbecue.

古文：长兄为二千石，中兄被貂裘。
现代文：一解大哥官任二干石，二哥身披貂皮裘。
English: The eldest brother was appointed as the second-ranking official, and the second brother was dressed in a mink coat.

古文：小弟虽无官爵，鞍马反反，往来王侯长者游。
现代文：二解小弟我虽然没有官爵，王侯显贵来往交游。骑着马儿快快跑。
English: Although I don't have a title of nobility, princes and dignitaries come and go. Ride a horse and run fast.

古文：但当在王侯殿上，快独摴蒲六博，对坐弹棋。
现代文：三解衹想在王侯的殿上，痛快地赌一局，坐下一盘棋。
English: The three of them wanted to play a game of chess in the prince's palace.

古文：男兒居世，各当努力；蹙迫日暮，殊不久留。
现代文：四解男子汉活在世上，各自要努力奋斗，迫转眼逝去，不能够长久停留。
English: Four kinds of men live in the world, each of them has to struggle hard, pass away in a blink of an eye, and cannot stay for long.

古文：少小相触抵，寒苦常相随，忿恚安足诤，吾中道与卿共别离。约身奉事君，礼节不可亏。
现代文：五解少小时处处碰壁，经常过着穷苦的日子，愤怒又有何用?我半路上同你别离。 约束自身侍奉你，礼节上岂能欠缺。 
English: When I was young, I often ran into obstacles, and I often lived in poverty. What's the use of anger? I won't leave you halfway. If you discipline yourself to serve you, you can't be lacking in etiquette.

古文：上惭沧浪之天，下顾黄口小兒。
现代文：向上看对不起老天，向下看对不起年幼的儿女。
English: Looking up, I feel sorry for God; looking down, I feel sorry for my young children.

古文：奈何复老心皇皇，独悲谁能知！
现代文：到老不安怎么办，独自悲哀谁能知? 少小 下属趋曲，前为艳。
English: How to do to the old uneasy, alone sad who can know? Small subordinates tend to bend, the front is bright.

古文：《置酒》、《野田黄雀行》，东阿王词：
现代文：《置酒》《野田黄雀行》《空侯引》亦用此曲。东阿王词四解
English: This song is also used in "Ochizake," "Noda Hwangjaku-gyo" and "Kuhou-hiki."

古文：置酒高殿上，亲交从我游。
现代文：在高大的殿堂上摆开酒宴，亲戚朋友随从我游乐。
English: I held a wine banquet on the tall hall of fame, and my relatives and friends followed me to enjoy the party.

古文：中厨办丰膳，烹羊宰肥牛。
现代文：厨房准备丰盛的菜肴，宰杀烹煮那肥羊壮牛。
English: The kitchen prepares sumptuous dishes, slaughtering and cooking the fatted calf.

古文：秦筝何慷慨，齐瑟和且柔。
现代文：豢地的筝声激昂悲壮，查地的瑟音和穆温柔。
English: The sound of the kite in Shunde is passionate and tragic, while the sound of the se in Chongde is gentle and mellow.

古文：阳阿奏奇舞，京洛出名讴。
现代文：一解阳阿的人表演美妙的舞蹈，京洛的人施展动人的歌喉。
English: The people from Yang'a performed a wonderful dance, and the people from Jingluo performed a moving song.

古文：乐饮过三爵，缓带倾庶羞，主称千金寿，宾奉万年酬。
现代文：喝过了三杯美酒，宽松腰带以便大啖各种珍馐。主人以千金祝寿，客人以万岁相酬。
English: After drinking three glasses of fine wine, they loosen their belts so that they can enjoy a variety of delicacies. The host wishes them a happy birthday with thousands of dollars, and the guests reciprocate with a long life.

古文：久要不可忘，薄终义所尤。
现代文：二解旧交不可忘记，道义不允许终薄始厚。
English: Second, old friendships should not be forgotten, and morality should not be allowed to fade away.

古文：谦谦君子德，磬折欲何求。
现代文：谦虚是君子的美德，恭恭敬敬有何追求。
English: Modesty is the virtue of a gentleman, but what is the pursuit of respect?

古文：盛时不再来，百年忽我遒。
现代文：青春的年华不再到来，老死突然向我迫近。
English: The years of youth no longer come, and old age suddenly approaches me.

古文：惊风飘白日，光景驰西流。生存华屋处，零落归山丘。
现代文：三解迅疾的风吹走了白日，光影飞快地向西方流走，活时住在华美的房屋，死后抛弃在荒野山丘。
English: The swift wind blows away the day, light and shadow flow swiftly to the west, living in gorgeous houses while alive, abandoned in the wilderness hills after death.

古文：先民谁不死，知命复何忧！
现代文：古人有谁能不死，认识了天命还有什么忧愁!
English: Who among the ancients could not die, and what sorrow would there have been if they had known the will of heaven!

古文：《为乐》、《满歌行》，古词：
现代文：四解《为乐》《满歌行》古词四解
English: Four explanations of the ancient words of "For Fun" and "Full of Song"

古文：为乐未几时，遭世险戏，逢此百离；伶丁荼毒，愁懑难支。
现代文：寻欢作乐没有多少时候，就遭逢艰难危困的时世，遇到各种忧苦；孤孤单单地受尽了残害。忧愤得难以支持。
English: When there is not much time to seek pleasure, there are times of hardship and danger, and all kinds of sorrows are encountered. Alone, I suffered all the damage. Sorrow and anger are difficult to support.

古文：遥望辰极，天晓月移。
现代文：远望天上的北极星，天快亮了而月亮落下。
English: Looking far and wide at the North Star in the sky, it's getting light and the moon is setting.

古文：忧来阗心，谁当我知。
现代文：心中填满了忧愁，又有谁将会对我了解。
English: My heart is filled with sadness, who will understand me?

古文：戚戚多思虑，耿耿不宁。
现代文：一解思前想后就更多忧惧，烦躁得不能安宁。
English: If you think about it before and after, you will be more worried, and you will be restless.

古文：祸福无形，唯念古人，逊位躬耕。
现代文：得祸得福难以预料，衹是想学习古人，让国退位而归耕。
English: It is difficult to predict whether it will be a blessing or a curse. He wants to learn from the ancients and let the country abdicate and return to farming.

古文：遂我所愿，以兹自宁。
现代文：实现我这一愿望，用它来使自己安宁。
English: Fulfill this wish of mine, and use it to calm yourself.

古文：自鄙山栖，守此一荣。
现代文：我乐意做山林中鄙野的人，安守贫贱而自以为荣。
English: I am happy to be a lowly person in the mountains and forests. I am proud to be poor and secure.

古文：莫秋冽风起。
现代文：二解
English: Two solutions

古文：西蹈沧海，心不能安。
现代文：暮秋时节吹起冷冽的风，到西边投身大海，心中不能安定。
English: At the end of autumn, a cold wind blows, and I throw myself into the sea to the west, feeling unstable.

古文：揽衣起瞻夜，北斗阑干。
现代文：披衣起身看看夜色，北斗星纵横天上。
English: Put on your clothes and get up to look at the night sky. The Big Dipper is streaking across the sky.

古文：星汉照我，去去自无它。
现代文：银河照着我前去，这一去自是没有其他的事。
English: The Milky Way shines on me, and there is nothing else to do.

古文：奉事二亲，劳心可言。
现代文：侍奉我父母双亲，说不上劳心费力。
English: I can't say I've ever worked harder to serve my parents.

古文：穷达天所为，智者不愁，多为少忧。
现代文：三解贫贱富贵都是上天安排，聪明的人不会发愁，多多做事而少有烦忧。
English: The third solution is that the poor, the lowly, and the rich are all arranged by heaven, and the clever people will not worry. They will do more things and have fewer worries.

古文：安贫乐正道，师彼庄周。
现代文：安于贫贱而乐守正道，学习那古人庄周。
English: Be content to be poor and happy, but keep to the right path, and learn the ancient manor week.

古文：遗名者贵，子熙同戏。
现代文：遣弃名声的人可贵，子熙同样的坎坷不遇。
English: People who renounce fame are valuable, and Zixi has the same bumpy road.

古文：往者二贤，名垂千秋。
现代文：从前造两位贤士，大名流传万代。
English: Once upon a time, two sages were created, and the legend has been passed down for generations.

古文：饮酒歌舞，不乐何须！
现代文：四解对着歌舞痛饮美酒，不去寻欢作乐还等待什么时候!
English: Four solutions to drinking wine while singing and dancing, when to wait instead of having fun!

古文：善哉照观日月，日月驰驱。
现代文：多么好啊去观照日月，日月在不停地奔走。
English: How good it is to watch the sun and the moon, the sun and the moon are constantly running.

古文：轗轲世间，何有何无！贪财惜费，此一何愚！
现代文：人世间道路不平，得失有无又何必营求，贪恋钱财而吝惜花费，这是多么的愚蠢!
English: The road of the human world is not smooth, why should you seek to gain or lose, covet money and begrudge spending, how foolish it is!

古文：命如凿石见火，居世竟能几时？
现代文：生命如同凿石头冒一点火花，活在世上究竟能有多少时候?
English: Life is like a chiseled stone that emits a spark. How long can one live on earth?

古文：但当欢乐自娱，尽心极所熙怡。安善养君德性，百年保此期颐。《夏门》、《步出夏门行》，明帝词：
现代文：衹应高高兴兴地自我娱乐，称心如意地尽量愉快，修养你的德性到至善的地步，就能保持这百年长寿。 饮酒 下为趋《夏门》《步出夏门行》一日陇西行》。魏明帝词二解
English: You should cheerfully entertain yourself, enjoy yourself to your heart's content, cultivate your virtue to the best of your ability, and you will be able to maintain this hundred-year longevity.

古文：步出夏门，东登首阳山。
现代文：我走出夏门，登上东边的首阳山。
English: I walked out of the summer gate and climbed up Shouyang Mountain in the east.

古文：嗟哉夷叔，仲尼称贤。
现代文：啊，那伯裹和扭变，丛王赞美他们是贤人。
English: Ah, Nabo Wrapped and Twisted, Cong Wang praises them as sages.

古文：君子退让，小人争先；惟斯二子，于今称传。
现代文：君子事事退让，小人处处争先。衹有这两位贤人，到今天还流传美名。
English: Nobles concede everything, villains compete for the first place everywhere. With these two wise men, the reputation has been passed down to this day.

古文：林钟受谢，节改时迁。日月不居，谁得久存。
现代文：夏季转眼逝去，时节又到了秋天，日月不能停留，谁又能长久生存。
English: Summer is gone in the blink of an eye, the season has come to autumn, the sun and moon cannot stay, and who can survive for a long time.

古文：善哉殊复善，弦歌乐情。
现代文：好啊!实在是好，奏乐唱歌使我心情愉悦。
English: Good! It's really good, playing music and singing makes me happy.

古文：商风夕起，悲彼秋蝉，变形易色，随风东西。
现代文：一解
English: One solution

古文：乃眷西顾，云雾相连，丹霞蔽日，采虹带天。
现代文：晚间吹起了秋风，那秋蝉令人悲哀。它的形貌已经改变，跟着风到处飘零。抬头向西边看去，云和雾连成一片，红霞遮蔽了太阳，彩虹映带天际。
English: The autumn wind blew up in the evening, and the autumn cicada was sad. Its appearance had changed, and it drifted everywhere with the wind. Looking up to the west, clouds and fog merged into one, the red haze obscured the sun, and the rainbow reflected the sky.

古文：弱水潺潺，落叶翩翩，孤禽失群，悲鸣其间。
现代文：浅水潺潺地流着，树叶翩翩地落下，孤单的鸟失去伴侣，在这裹哀哀呜叫。
English: Shallow water gurgles, leaves fall, and lonely birds, bereft of their mates, wail.

古文：善哉殊复善，悲鸣在其间。
现代文：好啊!实在是好，在这裹哀哀呜叫。
English: Good! It's really good. I'm crying my eyes out.

古文：朝游清泠，日莫嗟归。
现代文：二解早晨出游时冷冷清清，傍晚时嗟叹着归来。 朝游 上为艳。
English: When you go out in the morning, you will be cold and clear, and when you return in the evening, you will be sighing.

古文：蹙迫日莫，乌鹊南飞。
现代文：时光迫近黄昏时候，乌鹊向南方飞去。
English: As dusk approached, the blackbirds flew south.

古文：绕树三匝，何枝可依。
现代文：它围绕着树飞了三圈，有哪一枝可以栖息。
English: It circled around the tree three times, finding a branch to perch on.

古文：卒逢风雨，树折枝摧。
现代文：终于遭到了风雨，树断了枝条摧毁。
English: Finally, it was wind and rain, and the tree was broken and destroyed.

古文：雄来惊雌，雌独愁栖。
现代文：雄乌飞来惊动了雌乌，雌鸟孤单地栖息。
English: The male cormorant flying in startled the female cormorant, and the female bird roosted alone.

古文：夜失群侣，悲鸣裴回。
现代文：夜裹失去了一群伴侣，飞来飞去。
English: Lost a bunch of mates in the night, flying around.

古文：芃芃荆棘，葛生绵绵。
现代文：荆棘生长茂盛，野葛绵绵不断。
English: The thorns grow luxuriantly, and the horsetails continue to grow.

古文：感彼风人，惆怅自怜。
现代文：那古人的诗使我伤感，我心中失意自叹自怜。
English: The old man's poem made me sad, and I was heartbroken and felt sorry for myself.

古文：月盈则冲，华不再繁；古来之说，嗟哉一言。
现代文：月亮圆满后就要亏缺，花儿谢了就不再盛开。自古以来有此一说，造句话是多么令人嗟叹。 蹙迫 下为趋。
English: After the full moon, there will be a shortage, and the flowers will no longer bloom. Since ancient times, there has been this saying, how amazing it is to make a sentence.

古文：《王者布大化》、《翟歌行》，明帝词：
现代文：《王者布大化》《棹歌行》魏明帝词五解君王施行深广的教化。
English: "King Bu Dahua" and "Song of Songs" of the Wei and Ming Dynasties, the five-sentence monarchs carried out profound and extensive enlightenment.

古文：王者布大化，配乾稽后祗。阳育则阴杀，晷景应度移。
现代文：配合天地神灵。阳气蕴育阴气就收敛，曰影合着曰晷的刻度转移。
English: In cooperation with the gods of heaven and earth, the yang qi contains and nurtures the yin qi to converge, and the scales of yin and yang are shifted.

古文：文德以时振，武功伐不随。
现代文：一解礼乐教化及时振兴，用武力征伐不服从的人。
English: It is necessary to enlighten and invigorate them in a timely manner, and use force to conquer those who do not obey.

古文：重华儛干戚，有苗服从妫。
现代文：虞舜执干戚而舞，有苗氏便向他降服。二解
English: If the gourd insists on dancing, the seedlings will submit to him.

古文：蠢尔吴蜀虏，冯江栖山阻。哀哀王士民，瞻仰靡依怙。
现代文：你这不恭顺的吴、蜀虏寇，凭藉江山险要割据一方，可怜我王家的士人百姓，就像失去父亲那样没有依靠。
English: You disobedient Wu and Shuruko, taking advantage of the perils of the country to gain a foothold, pity the people of my royal family, as if you had lost your father.

古文：皇上悼愍斯，宿昔奋天怒。
现代文：三解皇上对他们非常怜悯，从前就大发愤怒。
English: Emperor Sanchi felt very sorry for them and was very angry with them.

古文：发我许昌宫，列舟于长浦。
现代文：从我许昌的宫殿发兵，在长长的洲浦排开战船。
English: I sent troops from the palace of Xu Chang and launched warships in the long Zhoupu platoon.

古文：翌日乘波扬，棹歌悲且凉。大常拂白日，旗帜纷设张。
现代文：四解次日乘波扬帆，桌歌慷慨悲凉，日月旗飘拂白曰，旗帜纷纷高张。
English: On the fourth day, the next day, the sails are riding the waves, the table songs are generous and sad, the sun and moon flags are flying, and the flags are flying high.

古文：将抗旄与钺，耀威于彼方。伐罪以吊民，清我东南疆。
现代文：五解将要举起白旄与黄娥，到敌方耀武扬威，讨伐罪人而慰问民众，肃清我东南边疆。 将抗 下为趋。
English: The Fifth Division will raise the White Eagle and the Yellow Eagle, soar to the enemy side, fight the criminals and console the people, and clean up our southeastern border.

古文：《洛阳行》、《雁门太守行》，古词：
现代文：《洛阳行》《雁门太守行》古词八解
English: "Luoyang line" "Ganmen Taizhou line" eight ancient words

古文：孝和帝在时，洛阳令王君，本自益州广汉民，少行宦，学通五经论。
现代文：孝和帝在位的时候，洛阳县令王涣，他本是益州广汉人，年轻时在外做官，学问博通五经。
English: When Emperor Xiaowu was on the throne, Luoyang County was ruled by Wang Yao, who was originally from Yizhou, Guangxi and Han, and was an official when he was young. He was well-versed in the Five Classics.

古文：明知法令，历世衣冠。
现代文：一解他知晓法令，世代都是士大夫。
English: Once he knew the law, all generations were Shidafu.

古文：从温补洛阳令，治行致贤，拥护百姓，子养万民。
现代文：从温县县令补授洛阳县令，行政治理最为贤明，扶助百姓，爱民如子。
English: Luoyang County Government was added to Wenzhou County Government. It is the wisest political administration, supports the people and loves the people like a son.

古文：外行猛政，内怀慈仁。
现代文：二解表面上施行猛烈的政令，而内裹怀有仁慈的心肠。
English: Both of them, on the surface, carry out violent decrees, but on the inside, they are benevolent.

古文：文武备具，料民富贫，移恶子姓名，五篇著里端，伤杀人，比伍同罪对门。禁镏矛八尺，捕轻薄少年，加笞决罪，诣马市论。
现代文：三解如有伤人、杀人事件，邻居都要一同治罪。禁止私藏八尺长的锢矛，收捕轻浮放荡的青年，施加笞刑定罪，到马市处置。
English: Thirdly, if there is a case of wounding or killing, the neighbors should jointly punish the crime. It is forbidden to hide the eight-foot-long crossbow lance, arrest the frivolous and dissolute youths, impose the punishment of beating, and dispose of the case in Ma City.

古文：无妄发赋，念在理冤，敕吏正狱，不得苛烦。
现代文：四解不随便增加赋税，考虑治理民众冤屈，命令吏人公平执法，不准苛刻烦琐。
English: The four interpretations do not arbitrarily increase taxes, consider the management of people's grievances, order officials to enforce the law fairly, and are not allowed to be harsh and cumbersome.

古文：财用钱三十，买绳礼竿。
现代文：衹要用三十个钱，就可以租借土地。
English: You can rent land for as little as 30 yuan.

古文：贤哉贤哉！
现代文：五解贤明啊!贤明啊!
English: The five solutions are wise! Wise!

古文：我县王君。臣吏衣冠，奉事皇帝。
现代文：我县的王涣县令，臣吏身穿官服为皇上尽忠效力。
English: According to the Wangye County Ordinance of our county, the courtiers wear official uniforms and serve the emperor faithfully.

古文：功曹主簿，皆得其人。
现代文：县府的功曹主簿，担任的人都很称职。
English: In the county government's record of meritorious service, the people in charge are all very competent.

古文：临部居职，不敢行恩。清身苦体，夙夜劳勤。
现代文：六解在他居官任职的时候，不敢施行私人的恩德，过着清苦的日子，早晚劳动辛勤。
English: When he was in office, Li Qiye did not dare to practice private benevolence. He lived a hard life, working hard day and night.

古文：治有能名，远近所闻。
现代文：他的治理有干练的称誉，远近的人都知道他的名声。
English: He has a reputation for competent governance, and his reputation is known far and wide.

古文：天年不遂，蚤就奄昏。
现代文：七解可惜他未得长寿，早早就突然逝世。
English: Unfortunately, he did not live long and died suddenly at an early age.

古文：为君作祠，安阳亭西。
现代文：为你建一座祠堂，就在安阳亭西侧。
English: I will build an ancestral hall for you on the west side of Anyang Pavilion.

古文：欲令后世，莫不称传。
现代文：要让后代的人，无不称颂流传。
English: We want the praise to be passed down to future generations.

古文：《白头吟》、与《棹歌》同调，古词：
现代文：八解《白头吟》与《棹歌》同调，古词五解
English: Eight renditions of "Bai Tou Jing" and "Yingge" in the same key, five renditions of ancient words

古文：晴如山上云，皎若云间月。闻君有两意，故来相决绝。
现代文：晴朗像山上的云，皎洁像云间的月，听说你已经变了心，所以来和你永别。
English: Clear as the clouds on the mountain, clear as the moon in the clouds, I heard that you had changed your mind, so I came to say goodbye to you.

古文：平生共城中，何尝斗酒会。
现代文：一解平时同你在城中，何曾备一斗酒来聚会。
English: If I were in town with you in normal times, I would never prepare a barrel of wine for a party.

古文：今日斗酒会，明旦沟水头。蹀踥御沟上，沟水东西流。
现代文：今天备酒相会，明早就在沟水边分手，我在御沟上慢慢地走，那沟水也东西分流。
English: Today we meet to prepare the wine, tomorrow morning we part on the edge of the ditch, I walk slowly on the ditch, the ditch water also shunts things.

古文：郭东亦有樵，郭西亦有樵。两樵相推与，无亲为谁骄？
现代文：二解城郭束边有樵夫，城郭西边也有樵夫，两位樵夫相互推重，没有亲人又为谁夸耀?
English: There is a widower on the edge of the castle, and there is a widower on the west side of the castle. The two widowers are pushing each other. Who are they boasting about if they have no relatives?

古文：凄凄重凄凄，嫁娶亦不啼；愿得一心人，白头不相离。
现代文：三解悲凄啊又悲凄，嫁人也不必哀啼，衹希望嫁到同心的人，到白头不相离弃。
English: It's sad and sad, and you don't have to mourn to get married. I hope to marry someone with the same heart, and never abandon each other.

古文：竹竿何弱弱，鱼尾何离簁，男兒欲相知，何用钱刀为？
现代文：四解钓鱼的竹竿多么轻柔，出水的鱼尾不停摆动，男子汉要讨到知心的妻子，金钱又有什么用处?
English: How soft the fishing rod is, the fish's tail swings endlessly out of the water, a man wants to woo his beloved wife, and what use is money?

古文：如五马啖萁，川上高士嬉。
现代文：今天在一起寻欢作乐，但希望寿命绵延千万年。
English: Let's have fun together today, but let's hope that our lives will last for tens of thousands of years.

古文：今日相对乐，延年万岁期。
现代文：五解一本云：词说上有 紫罗咄咄奈何 。
English: Five solutions, one cloud: There is a violet on the word saying.

古文：楚调怨诗
现代文：楚调怨诗：
English: Chu tune grievance poem:

古文：《明月》，东阿王词：
现代文：《明月》束阿王词七解：
English: "Ming Yue" is composed of seven lines:

古文：明月照高楼，流光正裴回。
现代文：明月照着高楼，流动的光影正在徘徊。
English: The bright moon shines on the tall building, and the flowing light and shadow are wandering.

古文：上有愁思妇，悲叹有余哀。
现代文：楼上有一位愁闷苦思的少妇，她悲叹着有说不尽的哀怨。
English: Upstairs, a pensive young woman wails with inexpressible sorrow.

古文：借问叹者谁？
现代文：一解请问悲叹的人是谁?
English: Could you please tell me who the mourners are?

古文：自云客子妻。
现代文：她自称是旅客的妻子。
English: She claimed to be the traveller's wife.

古文：夫行逾十载，贱妾常独栖。
现代文：丈夫出外已超过十年，我经常是一个人歇息。
English: My husband has been away for more than ten years, and I often rest alone.

古文：念君过于渴，思君剧于饥。君为高山柏，妾为浊水泥。
现代文：二解我思念夫君胜过口渴，我想望大君甚于腹饥，夫君是高山上的柏树，我是浊水中的污泥。
English: Second, I miss my husband more than I am thirsty. I want my husband more than I am hungry. My husband is the cypress tree on the mountain, and I am the mud in the swamp.

古文：北风行萧萧，烈烈入吾耳。心中念故人，泪堕不能止。
现代文：三解北风萧萧地吹来，烈烈地吹入我耳，心中想念旧人，泪落不能停止。
English: The north wind is blowing, blowing fiercely into my ears. I miss the old man in my heart, and I can't stop crying.

古文：沉浮各异路，会合当何谐？
现代文：四解一沉一浮各走一条路，会合将何时得谐?
English: Four solutions, one sink, one float, each go one way. When will the meeting be harmonious?

古文：愿作东北风，吹我入君怀。
现代文：我希望化作东北风，吹进夫君的胸怀。
English: I hope to turn into the northeast wind and blow into my husband's heart.

古文：君怀常不开，贱妾当何依。
现代文：五解夫君的胸怀常常不放开，我还有什么凭依。
English: Wuzhefukun's heart often does not let go, what else can I rely on.

古文：恩情中道绝，流止任东西。
现代文：夫妻的恩情半路上断绝，双方的动止各任东西。
English: The couple's affection was cut off halfway through, and both sides were left to their own devices.

古文：我欲竟此曲，此曲悲且长。
现代文：六解我想唱完这支曲子，这曲子悲苦得唱不完。
English: I want to finish singing this song, this song is too sad to sing.

古文：今日乐相乐，别后莫相忘！
现代文：今天在一起欢聚快乐，分别后不要把我忘记。
English: Let's have a happy get-together today. Don't forget me after the break-up.

