古文：马永，字天锡，迁安人。
现代文：马永，字天锡，迁安人。
English: Ma Yong, also known as Tian Xi, was from Qian'an.

古文：生而魁岸，骁果有谋。
现代文：人生得魁岸，骁勇有谋略。
English: Life is full of ups and downs, so be brave and have a plan.

古文：习兵法，好《左氏春秋》。
现代文：熟习兵法，爱好《左氏春秋》。
English: He is familiar with the art of war, and likes "The Spring and Autumn of Zuo Shi."

古文：嗣世职为金吾左卫指挥使。
现代文：继承世职为金吾左卫指挥使。
English: He succeeds to the post of Commander-in-Chief of the Kingozawei.

古文：正德时，从陆完击贼有功，进都指挥同知。
现代文：正德年代时，马永随从陆完攻击敌贼有功，晋升为都指挥同知。
English: During the Zhengde era, Ma Yong followed Lu Gan to attack the enemy and was promoted to the commander of the capital.

古文：江彬练兵西内，永当隶彬，称疾避之。
现代文：江彬在西内练兵，马永当隶属于江彬，马永称自己有病来避开这件事。
English: Jiang Bin was training soldiers in the West, Ma Yongdang was subordinate to Jiang Bin, Ma Yong said he was ill to avoid this matter.

古文：守备遵化，寇入马兰峪，参将陈乾被劾，擢永代。
现代文：守备遵化，敌寇攻入马兰峪，参将陈乾遭弹劾，提升马永代替他。
English: While defending Zunhua, the enemy invaded Malan County. Chen Qian was impeached, and Ma Yong was promoted to replace him.

古文：战柏崖、白羊峪，皆有功。
现代文：马永在柏崖、白羊峪作战，都有功。
English: Ma Yong fought in the Battle of Baiyao and the Battle of Baiyangtao, both of which are meritorious.

古文：十三年进都督佥事，充总兵官，镇守苏州。
现代文：十三年晋为都督佥事，充任总兵官，镇守蓟州。
English: In 13 years, he was promoted to the governor of Anji, served as the chief military officer, and became the town guard of Anzhou.

古文：尽汰诸营老弱，听其农贾，取备直给健卒，由是永所将独雄于诸镇。
现代文：全部淘汰诸营中的老弱之兵，让他们从事农业和商业，赚取钱财给养强壮之兵，由此马永所镇守的地方在诸镇之中是一支独一无二的雄兵。
English: All the old and weak soldiers in the battalions were eliminated, so that they could engage in agriculture and commerce, earn money and raise strong soldiers. As a result, the place guarded by Ma Yong was a unique hero among the towns.

古文：武宗至喜峰口，欲出塞，永叩马谏。
现代文：武宗到喜峰口，想出塞去，马永叩马劝谏。
English: Wu Zong went to the mouth of the peak and wanted to get out of the jam. Ma Yong tapped his horse to persuade him.

古文：帝注视久之，笑而止。
现代文：皇帝注视他良久，笑而停止出塞。
English: The emperor looked at him for a long time, laughed and stopped coughing.

古文：中路擦崖当敌冲，无城堡，耕牧者辄被掠。
现代文：边塞中路擦崖正当敌人进入的要道，没有城堡，耕牧的人总是被抢掠。
English: The middle road of the border fortress scrapes the cliff just as the enemy enters the main road, there is no castle, and the farmers and herdsmen are always robbed.

古文：永令人持一月粮，营崖表，版筑其内。
现代文：马永命令人们带一月粮食，扎营高崖上，筑城其内。
English: Ma Yong ordered the people to bring a month's supply of grain, camp on a high cliff, and build a city within it.

古文：城廨如期立，乃迁军守之。
现代文：城池官署按期建立，于是马永遣调军兵守卫这个地方。
English: The city government office was established on schedule, so Ma Yong sent soldiers to guard this place.

古文：录功，进署都督同知。
现代文：朝廷录马永的功劳，让他署理都督同知。
English: The imperial court recorded Ma Yong's merits and made him the acting governor-general.

古文：嘉靖元年，金山矿盗作乱。
现代文：嘉靖元年，金山的矿盗作乱。
English: In the first year of the Jiajing Dynasty, there was a mine robbery in Jinshan.

古文：遣指挥康雄讨平之，塞其矿。
现代文：遣派指挥康雄讨平他们，闭塞此矿。
English: Commander Kang Xiong was dispatched to subdue them and shut down the mine.

古文：朵颜把儿孙结诸部邀赏不得，盗边。
现代文：乃木颜把儿孙集结诸部邀赏没有得逞，于是抢劫边地。
English: Nogi Yan gathered his children and grandchildren to invite rewards from various departments, but was unsuccessful, so he robbed the edge.

古文：永迎击洪山口，而伏兵断其后，斩获过当，进右都督。
现代文：马永迎击于洪山口，并伏兵断掉他们的后路，斩获敌人较多，晋官右都督。
English: Ma Yong met the attack at the Hongshan Pass, and the ambush cut off their rear path, gained more enemies, and was promoted to the right-hand governor.

古文：已，复馘其骁将，把儿孙不敢复扰边。
现代文：此后，又击毙敌寇骁将，乃木颜把儿孙不敢再侵扰边关。
English: After that, he also killed an enemy bandit, and his children and grandchildren no longer dared to invade the border.

古文：大同兵变，杀巡抚张文锦，命桂勇为总兵官往镇，而议将抚之。
现代文：大同发生兵变，杀害巡抚张文锦，任命桂勇为总兵前去大同镇压，而朝廷却对他们进行安抚。
English: A mutiny occurred in Datong, the governor Zhang Wenjin was killed, and Gui Yong was appointed as the general to suppress Datong, but the imperial court appeased them.

古文：永言： 逆贼干纪，朝廷赦其胁从，恩至渥也，顾犹抗命。
现代文：马永说 ：逆贼冒犯军纪，朝廷如果赦宥他们的胁从罪，皇恩太优厚了，他们反而还会抗命。
English: Ma Yong said: if the imperial court pardoned the traitors who violated military discipline, they would still disobey orders. The imperial grace is too generous.

古文：今不剿，春和北寇南牧，叛卒勾连，祸滋大。
现代文：现在如果不剿灭他们，春天天气暖和后北寇到南边放牧，叛卒与他们勾连，那么祸害更大。
English: If we don't annihilate them now, when the weather warms up in the spring and the North Koreans go to the south to graze, and the traitors collude with them, then the disaster will be even greater.

古文：宜亟调邻镇兵，克期攻城，晓譬利害，悬破格之赏，令贼自相斩为功，元凶不难殄也。 
现代文：应当亟调邻镇之兵，克期攻城，对他们晓谕利害，破格悬赏，好让敌贼为了争功而自相残杀，元凶就不难灭绝。 
English: The soldiers of the neighboring towns should be urgently dispatched to attack the city in a timely manner, explain the interests to them, and offer an unprecedented reward, so that the enemy thieves will kill each other in order to compete for merits, and the culprits will not be difficult to exterminate.

古文：乃命永督诸军与侍郎胡瓒往。
现代文：于是任命马永督率诸军和侍郎胡瓒前往。
English: Therefore, he appointed Ma Yongdu to lead the troops and the attendant Hu Yao to go.

古文：会乱平，乃还镇。
现代文：待变乱平定后，于是回任本镇。
English: After the turmoil was quelled, he returned to his position in the town.

古文：永上书为陆完请恤典，且乞宥议礼获罪诸臣。
现代文：马永上书为陆完请求朝廷的恤典，并且乞求皇上原宥因议礼而犯罪的诸臣。
English: Ma Yong wrote a letter to request the Imperial Court's mercy for Lu Gan, and begged the emperor to pardon the ministers who had committed crimes.

古文：帝大怒，夺永官，寄禄南京后府。
现代文：皇帝大怒，夺去马永官职，寄禄南京后府。
English: Enraged, the emperor deprived Ma Yong of his official post and sent him to the imperial palace in Nanjing.

古文：巡按御史丘养浩言： 永仁以恤军，廉以律已，固边防，却强敌，军民安堵，资彼长城。
现代文：巡按御史丘养浩说 ：马永以仁恤军，以廉律己，巩固边防，退却强敌，军民安堵，认为他有长城之固。
English: According to the inspector of records, Qiu Yaohao, "Ma Yong was the most benevolent in his treatment of the troops, the most honest and self-disciplined, he consolidated the border defense, the strong enemy retreated, the military and the people were relieved, and he was considered to have the strength of the Great Wall."

古文：闻永去，遮道乞留，且携子女欲遂逃移。
现代文：边民听说马永离去，遮道乞留，并且携带子女想逃亡流移。
English: Border residents heard that Ma Yong had left, begged to stay behind, and wanted to flee with their children.

古文：夫陆完久死炎瘴，非有权势可托。
现代文：陆完久死炎瘴，不是有权势可以依靠的。
English: It is not the powerful who can be relied upon.

古文：永徒感国士知，欲救区区之报。
现代文：马永只是感国士知心，想效区区之报。
English: Ma Yong just impressed the countrymen with his wisdom, and wanted to follow suit.

古文：不负知己，宁负国家？
现代文：不负知己，宁负国家？
English: Would you rather fail your country than your friends?

古文：祈曲赐优容，俾还镇。 
现代文：希望曲赐优容，让他回到镇上去。 
English: Let's hope the song brings him back to town.

古文：顺天巡抚刘泽及给事、御史交章救之，俱被谴。
现代文：顺天巡抚刘泽与给事中、御史纷纷上奏章营救他，都被贬谪。
English: Shuntian's procurator Liu Ze and, in the middle of the incident, Goshi, all of whom had to play the role of rescuing him, were disgraced.

古文：永竟废不用。
现代文：马永竟被废不用。
English: Ma Yong was eventually scrapped.

古文：永杜门读书，清约如寒士。
现代文：马永杜门读书，清约像寒士。
English: Ma Yong Dumen is reading, and he looks like a cold man.

古文：久之，用荐佥书南京前府。
现代文：很久之后，因人推荐用为南京前府佥书。
English: After a long time, it was recommended by others to be used as the Nanjing former prefectural seal book.

古文：大同军再乱，廷臣交荐。
现代文：大同军再次发生叛乱，廷臣交相举荐。
English: The Datong army rebelled again, and courtiers came to recommend each other.

古文：召至，已就抚，复还南京。
现代文：马永被召至，已而叛军就抚，马永再回南京。
English: Ma Yong was called to the scene, and after the rebels were subdued, Ma Yong returned to Nanjing.

古文：十四年，辽东兵变。
现代文：十四年，辽东发生兵变。
English: Fourteen years ago, there was a mutiny in Liaodong.

古文：罢总兵官刘淮，以永代之。
现代文：罢去总兵官刘淮，用马永代替他。
English: General Liu Huai was dismissed and replaced by Ma Yong.

古文：大清堡守将徐颢诱杀泰宁卫九人。
现代文：大清堡守将徐颢诱杀泰宁卫九人。
English: The keeper of the Daqing Fortress, Xu Xi, lured Taining Wei and nine others to their deaths.

古文：部长把当孩怒，寇边，永击斩之。
现代文：部长把当孩大怒，侵犯边关，马永将他击毙。
English: The minister got angry with the child and violated the border, and Ma Yong shot him dead.

古文：其族属把孙借朵颜兵报雠，复为永所却。
现代文：他的族属把孙借乃木颜的兵来报仇，又被马永击退。
English: His kinsmen enlisted Sun's soldiers to avenge him, but they were repulsed by Ma Yong.

古文：已，复入犯。
现代文：此后，他们又入犯我边境。
English: After that, they violated our border again.

古文：中官王永战败，永坐戴罪。
现代文：中官王永被敌寇打败，马永也被坐罪。
English: Vice Admiral Wang Yong was defeated by enemy raiders, and Ma Yong was also convicted.

古文：辽东自军变后，首恶虽诛，漏纲者众。
现代文：辽东自从发生兵变之后，首恶虽然被诛，但漏网的人也很多。
English: Since the mutiny in Liaodong, although the chief villain has been arrested, there are also many people who have slipped through the net.

古文：悍卒无所惮，结党叫呼，动怀不逞。
现代文：悍兵无所忌惮，结党呼叫，动怀不逞。
English: The brave soldiers are unscrupulous, they call for a party, but do not dare to move.

古文：广宁卒佟伏、张鉴等乘旱饥，倡众为乱，诸营军惮永无应者。
现代文：广宁的士兵佟伏、张鉴等人利用旱灾饥荒，倡导士兵们作乱，诸营军士惮怕马永而没有响应作乱的人。
English: The soldiers in Guangning, such as Hao Bu, Zhang Jian and others, took advantage of the drought and famine to advocate the soldiers to riot. The battalion sergeants were afraid of Ma Yong and did not respond to the rioters.

古文：伏等登谯楼，鸣鼓大噪，永率家众仰攻。
现代文：佟伏等人登上谯楼，鸣鼓大噪，马永率领家众仰攻。
English: Hao Bu and others boarded the mirage, the drums were beating loudly, and Ma Yong led the family to attack.

古文：千户张斌被杀，永战益力，尽歼之。
现代文：千户张斌被杀，马永更加尽力作战，将作乱的人全部歼灭。
English: Qianhu Zhangbin was killed, and Ma Yong made more efforts to fight and annihilate all the troublemakers.

古文：事闻，进左都督。
现代文：事情奏闻朝廷，马永晋官左都督。
English: The matter was reported to the Imperial Court, and Ma Yong Jin was appointed Governor of the Left Capital.

古文：永畜士百余人，皆西北健儿，骁勇敢战。
现代文：马永畜养壮士一百多人，都是西北健儿，他们骁勇敢战。
English: Ma Yong raised more than a hundred strong men, all of whom were Northwest athletes, and they fought bravely.

古文：辽东变初定，帝问将于李时。
现代文：辽东兵变刚刚平定，皇帝问李时当今将才为谁。
English: The Liaodong Mutiny had just been quelled, and the emperor asked Li Shizhe who the new emperor would be.

古文：时荐永，且曰： 其家众足用也。 
现代文：李时推荐马永，并且说： 他的家众也足用。 
English: Li Shih recommended Ma Yong, and said: His family is also sufficient.

古文：帝曰： 将须文武兼，宁专恃勇乎？ 
现代文：皇帝说 ：将必须兼有文武，怎能专门倚恃武勇呢？ 
English: The emperor said, "Since it is necessary to have both literature and martial arts, how can one rely exclusively on martial arts?"

古文：时曰： 辽土新定，须有威力者镇之。 
现代文：李时说： 辽土新定，必须让有威力的人镇守。 
English: Li Si said: Liaodong is newly settled, we must let powerful people guard the town.

古文：至是，竟得其力。
现代文：至此，终得其力。
English: At this point, it finally gained its strength.

古文：都御史王廷相言： 永善用兵，且廉洁，宜仍用之苏镇，作京师藩屏。 
现代文：都御史王廷相说 ：马永善于用兵，并且廉洁，应当仍然将他用在蓟州镇，做京师藩屏。 
English: Metropolitan Wang Tingxiang said: Ma Yong is good at using soldiers, and he is honest. He should still be used in Zhangzhou Town, as a screen for the Beijing division.

古文：未及调，卒。
现代文：没有等到调动，马永就死去了。
English: Without waiting for the transfer, Ma Yong died.

古文：辽人为罢市。
现代文：辽人为他罢市哀悼。
English: Liao people went on strike to mourn him.

古文：丧过苏州，州人亦洒泣。
现代文：死后灵柩经过蓟州，蓟州人也为他哭泣流泪。
English: After his death, his coffin passed through Bozhou. People in Bozhou also shed tears for him.

古文：两镇并立祠。
现代文：两镇都为他立祠纪念。
English: Both towns have set up small shrines in his memory.

古文：后落职，起镇延绥，改甘肃。
现代文：马永在做边将期间，厚抚间谍，屡次获得敌人的内部情形，所以作战总是取胜。
English: During his time as a border guard, Ma Yong was fond of spies and repeatedly obtained the internal situation of the enemy, so he always won the battle.

古文：卒，亦谥武襄。
现代文：他素来知人，他所提拔的士卒小校，后来大多官至大帅。
English: He had always known people whom he had promoted from the rank of petty officer to the rank of major general.

古文：周尚文，字彦章，西安后卫人。
现代文：尚书郑晓称马永和梁震有古代良将的风范。周尚文，字彦草，西安后卫人。
English: Shangshu Zheng Xiao said that Ma Yong and Liang Zhen had the demeanor of ancient good generals. Zhou Shangwen, Zi Yan Cao, Xi'an guardsmen.

古文：幼读书，粗晓大义。
现代文：幼年读书，就粗略通晓大义。
English: If you read books at an early age, you will have a rough understanding of the truth.

古文：多谋略，精骑射。
现代文：多谋略，精通骑射之术。
English: He is a man of many stratagems and is proficient in horse archery.

古文：年十六，袭指挥同知。
现代文：十六岁时，承袭指挥同知。
English: At the age of sixteen, he succeeded his friend as conductor.

古文：屡出塞有功，进指挥使。
现代文：屡次出塞作战有功，晋升为指挥使。
English: He was promoted to the rank of commander-in-chief after he repeatedly distinguished himself in the war against the Turks.

古文：寘铄反，遏黄河渡口，获叛贼丁广等，推掌卫事。
现代文：安化王蜫钅番造反，周尚文遏止黄河渡口，俘虏叛贼丁广等人，被推举掌管卫事。
English: Anhua Wang Xifan rebelled, Zhou Shangwen stopped the Yellow River ferry, captured the traitor Ding Guang and others, and was elected to be in charge of the guard.

古文：关内回贼四起，倚南山，尚文次第平之。
现代文：关内回贼四起，倚靠南山为根据地，周尚文依次平定他们。
English: The bandits in Guanzhong rebelled four times, relying on Nanshan as their base, and Zhou Shangwen subdued them in turn.

古文：御史刘天和劾中贵廖堂系诏狱，事连尚文。
现代文：御史刘天和因弹劾中贵廖堂被下诏狱，事情牵连到周尚文。
English: The imperial historian Liu Tianhe and Gui Liao Tong were sent to prison for impeachment, and Zhou Shangwen was implicated in the affair.

古文：拷掠令引天和，终不承，久之始释。
现代文：拷掠令其引罪，刘天和、周尚文始终不承认，很久才将他释放。
English: Liu Tianhe and Zhou Shangwen did not admit to the crime, and it was a long time before he was released.

古文：已，守备阶州。
现代文：之后，守备阶州。
English: After that, it's time to defend Joshu.

古文：计擒叛番，进署都指挥佥事，充甘肃游击将军。
现代文：周尚文设计擒住叛番，晋职署理都指挥佥事，充任甘肃游击将军。
English: Zhou Shangwen planned to arrest the traitor, and promoted the deputy to command the anecdote, and served as the guerrilla general of Gansu.

古文：嘉靖元年改宁夏参将。
现代文：嘉靖元年周尚文改任宁夏参将。
English: In the first year of the Jiajing Dynasty, Zhou Shangwen was promoted to the post of Ningxia general.

古文：寻进都指挥同知，为凉州副总兵。
现代文：不久晋为都指挥同知，任凉州副总兵。
English: Soon he was promoted to the same rank as the commander of the capital, and was appointed deputy commander-in-chief of Liangzhou.

古文：御史按部庄浪，猝遇寇。
现代文：御史巡视庄浪，猝然遇上敌寇。
English: On a historical inspection tour of Shonan, he suddenly encountered an enemy corsair.

古文：尚文亟分军拥御史，而自引麾下射之，寇乃遁。
现代文：周尚文急分军保护御史，而自己则带领麾下射击敌人，敌寇这才逃遁。
English: Zhou Shangwenku's detachment protected Goshi, while he led his men to shoot the enemy, and the enemy bandits fled.

古文：尝追寇出塞，寇来益众。
现代文：他曾经追击敌寇而到塞外，敌寇来的更多。
English: He once chased an enemy bandit out of the country, and more enemy bandits came.

古文：尚文军半至，麾下皆恐。
现代文：周尚文军只到一半，他们的部下都感到恐惧。
English: Zhou Shangwen's troops were only halfway there, and their men were terrified.

古文：乃从容下马，解鞍背崖力战，所杀伤相当。
现代文：周尚文于是从容下马，解鞍背崖力战，所杀敌人与自己部队所受创伤相当。
English: Zhou Shangwen then calmly dismounted from his horse, unbuckled his saddle and fought bravely against the cliff. The enemy killed was equivalent to the trauma suffered by his own troops.

古文：部将丁杲来援，寇始退。
现代文：他的部将丁杲来支援他，敌寇才退去。
English: His subordinate, Ding Jun, came to support him, but the enemy bandits retreated.

古文：尚文被创甚，乃告归。寻起故官。
现代文：周尚文受伤过重，于是告归家乡，不久又被起用为故官。
English: Zhou Shangwen was injured too much, so he returned to his hometown, and was soon appointed as an old official.

古文：吉囊数踏冰入。
现代文：吉囊多次踏冰侵入内地。
English: Yoshizuku repeatedly stepped on the ice to invade the mainland.

古文：尚文筑墙百二十里，浇以水，冰滑不可上。
现代文：周尚文筑墙一百二十里，用水浇墙，结冰后滑溜不能上。
English: Zhou Shangwen built a wall of one hundred and twenty miles, poured water on the wall, and after it froze, it was too slippery to climb.

古文：冰泮则令力士持长竿铁钩，钩杀渡者。
现代文：冰化开则让力士持长竿铁钩，钩杀渡河的敌人。
English: At the opening of the ice, the wrestlers hold a long rod with an iron hook to kill the enemy crossing the river.

古文：九年，擢署都督佥事，充宁夏总兵官。
现代文：九年周尚文被提升为署部督佥事，充任宁夏总兵官。
English: In the ninth year, Zhou Shangwen was promoted to the post of director of the department, and was appointed as the chief military officer of Ningxia.

古文：王琼筑边墙，尚文督其役。
现代文：王琼筑边墙，周尚文督其役。
English: Wang Qiong built the border wall, and Zhou Shangwen played the role of governor.

古文：且浚渠开屯，军民利之。
现代文：而且疏渠开屯，军民得利。
English: Moreover, the canal was dredged and the military and the people benefited.

古文：寇掠西海，过宁夏，巡抚杨志学议发兵邀。
现代文：敌寇抢掠西海，经过宁夏，巡抚杨志学提议发兵半路拦击敌人。
English: When the enemy raiders plundered the West Sea and passed through Ningxia, the governor Yang Zhixue proposed to send troops halfway to intercept the enemy.

古文：尚文不从，劾解职。
现代文：周尚文不听从，被参劾而解除职务。
English: Zhou Shangwen disobeyed, was impeached and relieved of his duties.

古文：久之，起山西副总兵。
现代文：过了很久，周尚文被起用为山西副总兵。
English: After a long time, Zhou Shangwen was appointed as the Shanxi deputy general.

古文：寇由偏头关趋岢岚，尚文转战三百里，破之，与子君佐俱伤，赉银币。
现代文：敌寇从偏头关向岢岚进发，周尚文转战三百里，攻破敌贼，但自己和儿子周君佐都受伤，朝廷赐他银币。
English: The enemy raiders advanced from Yehotou Pass to Handan. Zhou Shangwen fought for three hundred miles and defeated the enemy, but he and his son Zhou Junza were injured, and the court gave him silver coins.

古文：寻以总兵官镇延绥。
现代文：不久他以总兵官的身份镇守延绥。
English: Soon he rose to the position of commander-in-chief of Yancheng.

古文：寇犯红山墩，力战败之，被赉。
现代文：敌寇侵犯红山墩，周尚文力战击败敌人，又受到赏赐。
English: Enemy raiders invaded Hongshan, and Zhou Shang defeated the enemy in the battle and was rewarded.

古文：吉囊复大掠清平堡，坐夺俸。
现代文：吉囊又大举抢掠清平堡，周尚文受到夺俸的处分。
English: Yoshizuku also plundered Qingping Castle on a large scale, and Zhou Shangwen was punished with loss of salary.

古文：尚文优将才，负气桀傲，所至与文吏竞。
现代文：周尚文很有将才，负气桀骜，所到的地方都与文官相争逐。
English: Zhou Shangwen was very talented, but he was discouraged. Everywhere he went, he had to compete with civil servants.

古文：文吏又往往挫折之，以故弥不相得。
现代文：文官又往往挫折他，所以他们的关系总是处理不好。
English: Civil servants often frustrate him, so their relationship is always handled badly.

古文：巡抚贾启劾尚文老誖，兵部请调之甘肃。
现代文：巡抚贾启弹劾周尚文老而执拗，兵部请求将他调到甘肃。
English: Governor Jiaqi impeached Zhou Shangwen, who was old and persistent, and the military department requested that he be transferred to Gansu.

古文：帝不从，各夺其俸。
现代文：皇帝不允许，夺去他们各自的俸禄。
English: The emperor did not allow it, and deprived them of their respective salaries.

古文：巡按张光祖言两人必不可共处，乃革尚文任，亦贬启秩。
现代文：巡按张光祖说他们两人必定不能共处，于是革除周尚文的任职，也贬去贾启的官俸级别。
English: Zhang Guangzu, the inspector-general, said that the two of them must not coexist, so he dismissed Zhou Shangwen and reduced Jiaqi's official salary level.

古文：吉囊大入，抵固原。
现代文：吉囊大举侵入，抵达固原。
English: Yoshizuku made a large-scale invasion and arrived in Guhara.

古文：天和时已为总督，激尚文立功。
现代文：刘天和这时已为总督，激励周尚文立功。
English: Liu Tianhe, who was already the governor at this time, encouraged Zhou Shangwen to make contributions.

古文：奋击之黑水苑，杀其子号小十王者，获首功百三十余。
现代文：周尚文在黑水苑攻击吉囊，杀他的儿子叫小十王的人，获首级一百三十多。
English: Zhou Shangwen, who attacked Ji Zac in Heishuiyuan and killed his son called Xiao Shiguang, received more than one hundred and thirty heads.

古文：乃以为都督同知。
现代文：于是任周尚文为都督同知。
English: As a result, Ren Zhou Shangwen became the governor's confidant.

古文：二十一年，用荐为东官厅听征总兵官兼佥后府事。
现代文：二十一年周尚文因为有人推荐而被任用为东官厅听征总兵官兼佥后府事。
English: In 1921, Zhou Shangwen was recommended by someone and was appointed as the chief military officer of the Eastern Government Office and the post of postmaster.

古文：严嵩为礼部尚书，子世蕃官后府都事，骄蹇。
现代文：严嵩任礼部尚书，他的儿子严世蕃任后府都事，很骄横。
English: Yan Song was in charge of ceremonial affairs, and his son Yan Shihong was in charge of the capital affairs. They were very arrogant.

古文：尚文面叱，将劾奏之，嵩谢得免。
现代文：周尚文当面叱责他，准备上奏弹劾他，严嵩道歉，严世蕃才得幸免。
English: Zhou Shangwen reprimanded him in person, prepared to impeach him, Yan Song apologized, and Yan Shiyan was spared.

古文：调世蕃治中，以避尚文，衔次骨。
现代文：严嵩调严世蕃为治中，以回避周尚文，而对周尚文恨之入骨。
English: In order to avoid Zhou Shangwen, Yan Song and Yan Shijie set up a middle-level government, and they hated Zhou Shangwen to the bone.

古文：其秋以总兵官镇大同，请增饷及马。
现代文：这年秋天周尚文以总兵官的身份镇守大同，请求朝廷增加粮饷和马匹。
English: In the autumn of that year, Zhou Shangwen, in his capacity as chief military officer of Datong, requested the imperial court to increase grain and horses.

古文：兵部言尚文陈请过当，方被诏切责，而尚文与巡抚赵锦不协，乞休，弗允，日相构。
现代文：兵部说周尚文的陈请超过限度，正被诏书切责，而周尚文与巡抚赵锦不和洽，周尚文乞求退休，没有得到许可，他们天天相互构陷。
English: The military department said that Zhou Shangwen's request exceeded the limit and was being punished by the edict, while Zhou Shangwen and the governor Zhao Jin did not get along, Zhou Shangwen begged for retirement and did not get permission, and they framed each other every day.

古文：御史王三聘乞移之他镇。
现代文：御史王三聘请求调移周尚文镇守其他地方。
English: Mishi Wang Sanhe requested to transfer Zhou Shangwen to other places.

古文：廷议：大同敌冲，尚文假此避，不宜堕其奸谋。
现代文：朝廷讨论说：大同地处敌人要冲，周尚文借此逃避，不应当堕入他的计谋。
English: The imperial court discussed: the enemy is in the same place and wants to rush, Zhou Shangwen uses this to escape, should not fall into his scheme.

古文：乃以锦为甘肃巡抚。
现代文：于是让赵锦任甘肃巡抚。
English: So he appointed Zhao Jin as the inspector of Gansu Province.

古文：吉囊数万骑犯前卫。
现代文：吉囊数万骑兵侵犯前卫。
English: To make matters worse, tens of thousands of cavalry invaded the vanguard.

古文：尚文与战黑山，杀其子满罕歹，追至凉城。
现代文：周尚文在黑山与他交战，杀掉他的儿子满罕歹，追到凉城。
English: Zhou Shangwen fought with him in Montenegro, killed his son Manqian, and chased him to Liangcheng.

古文：斩获多，进右都督。
现代文：斩俘敌人甚多，周尚文晋升为右都督。
English: He killed and captured many enemies, and Zhou Shangwen was promoted to the right-hand governor.

古文：已，寇由宣府逼畿甸，出大同塞而北。
现代文：不久，敌寇由宣府直逼畿甸，出大同关塞而向北去。
English: Soon, the enemy raiders pushed from Xuanfu straight to Kidian, leaving Datong Pass and heading north.

古文：尚文邀之，稍有俘获。
现代文：周尚文半路拦击他们，稍有俘获。
English: Zhou Shangwen stopped them halfway and captured a few.

古文：后寇复大举，犯鹁鸽谷，将南下。
现代文：后敌寇又大举侵犯鹁鸽谷，准备南下。
English: After that, the enemy raiders invaded the Dove Valley in large numbers and prepared to go south.

古文：尚文备阳和，遣骑四出邀寇。
现代文：周尚文在阳和防备，派遣骑兵四出攻击敌寇。
English: Zhou Shangwen made preparations in the sun and sent cavalry out to attack the enemy.

古文：寇遁，赐敕奖劳之。
现代文：敌寇逃遁，朝廷赐敕奖赏慰劳他们。
English: When the enemy bandits fled, the imperial court rewarded and consoled them.

古文：总督翁万达议筑边墙，自宣府西阳和至大同开山口，延袤二百余里，以属尚文。
现代文：总督翁万达建议修筑边墙，从宣府西的阳和到大同的开山口，延袤二百多里，由周尚文负责。
English: Governor Weng Wanda suggested building a border wall, stretching more than two hundred miles from Yanghe in the west of Xuanfu to Kaishangkou in Datong, and Zhou Shangwen was responsible for it.

古文：乃益筑阳和以西至山西丫角山，凡四百余里，敌台千余。
现代文：于是加筑阳和以西到山西丫角山，共四百多里，敌台一千多个。
English: As a result, Tsukiyama and Iseki were added to Mount Maakaku in Shanxi, a total of more than four hundred miles and more than a thousand enemy troops.

古文：斥屯田四万余顷，益军万三千有奇。
现代文：开拓屯田四万多顷，增加军士一万三千多人。
English: More than 40,000 hectares of military camps have been developed, and more than 13,000 military personnel have been added.

古文：帝嘉其功，进左都督，加太子太保，永除屯税。
现代文：皇帝为嘉奖他的功劳，晋升他为左都督，加封太子太保，永免边屯之税。
English: In recognition of his services, the emperor promoted him to the post of Zuo governor, he was also given the title of crown prince, and he was exempted from paying the border-town tax.

古文：叛人充灼召小王子寇边，尚文侦得其使者，加太保，荫子锦衣世千户。
现代文：叛人充灼召小王子侵犯边关，周尚文侦察获得他的间谍，被加封太保，荫子锦衣卫世职千户。
English: The traitor called on the little prince to invade the border, Zhou Shangwen obtained his spy by reconnaissance, was awarded the title of the guardian, and became the guardian of thousands of households.

古文：终明之世，总兵官加三公者，尚文一人而已。
现代文：一直到明朝结束，总兵官加封三公的人，只有周尚文一人而已。
English: Until the end of the morning, only Zhou Shangwen was the only person to be awarded the title of General of the Armies and Commander-in-Chief.

古文：初，俺答及吉囊诸子盛强，诸边岁受其患，大同尤甚。
现代文：起初，俺答和吉囊诸子强盛，诸边关年年受到他们的祸患，大同尤为突出。
English: At the beginning, the sons of Ippon and Yoshizaki were powerful, and the provinces were plagued by them year after year, with Datong being particularly prominent.

古文：自尚文莅镇，与总督万达、巡抚詹荣规画战守备边，民息肩者数年。
现代文：自从周尚文到大同镇守，和总督翁万达、巡抚詹荣规划边防战守，百姓有数年没有受到敌寇的侵扰。
English: Since Zhou Shangwen came to Datong to guard the town, and together with the governor Ong Wanda and the inspector Zhan Rong planned the border defense, the people have not been disturbed by the enemy for several years.

古文：尚文益招叛人，孤敌势，归者相属。
现代文：周尚文以好处招来叛人，孤立敌势，归者不断。
English: Zhou Shangwen invited traitors with benefits, isolated the enemy, and the returnees continued.

古文：二十七年八月，俺答伏兵五堡旁，诱指挥顾相等出，围之弥陀山。
现代文：二十七年八月，俺答在五堡旁埋伏军队，引诱指挥顾相等人出关，将他们围在弥陀山。
English: In August of the 27th year, I decided to ambush the army next to the Five Castles, lure the commander Gu Xiang and others out of the pass, and surround them on Midasan.

古文：尚文急督副总兵林椿、参将吕勇、游击李梅及二子君佐、君仁出塞援，围始解。
现代文：周尚文急督副总兵林椿、参将吕勇、游击李梅和自己的两个儿子周君佐、周君仁出塞援助，才得解围。
English: Zhou Shangwen, vice-governor, vice-commander Lin Chin, general Lyu Yong, guerrilla fighter Li Mei, and his two sons Zhou Junza and Zhou Junren came to help, and the siege was lifted.

古文：相及指挥周奉，千户吕恺、郝经等已阵殁。
现代文：顾相与指挥周奉，千户吕恺、郝经等人已经阵亡。
English: Gu Xiang and commander Zhou Bong, and others such as Qianhu Lvong and Zou Jing were killed in the battle.

古文：尚文转战，次野口，伏突起。
现代文：周尚文转战，到达野口，敌伏兵突起。
English: Zhou Shangwen turned to battle, arrived at Noguchi, and the enemy ambush soldiers sprang up.

古文：殊死战，斩其长一人。
现代文：周尚文殊死作战，斩敌人的长官一人。
English: Zhou Shangwen fought to the death and killed one of the enemy's officers.

古文：相持月余乃引去。
现代文：相持一个多月敌人才退去。
English: The enemy held out for more than a month before retreating.

古文：尚文设伏，杀其殿卒而还。
现代文：周尚文设立埋伏，杀敌人的殿后士卒而归。
English: Zhou Shangwen set up an ambush, killed the enemy's palace guards and then returned.

古文：尚文三子俱罪戍，至是以父功得释。
现代文：周尚文三子都因罪戍边，到这时因父功而获得释放。
English: Zhou Shangwen's three sons were all punished for their crimes, but they were released because of their father's merits.

古文：俺答数万骑犯宣府，万达檄尚文大破之曹家床。录功兼太子太傅，赐赉有加。
现代文：俺答数万骑兵侵犯宣府，翁万达檄令周尚文在曹家庄大破敌军，录功，周尚文兼为太子太傅，赐赏有加。
English: In response, tens of thousands of cavalry invaded Xuanfu, and Weng Wanda ordered Zhou Shangwen to defeat the enemy army in Caojiazhuang. Zhou Shangwen also served as the prince's daifu, and was awarded a lot.

古文：其年卒，年七十五。
现代文：这一年周尚文死去，享年七十五岁。
English: That year, Zhou Shangwen died at the age of 75.

古文：尚文清约爱士，得士死力。
现代文：周尚文清廉俭约爱护士卒，得战士死力。
English: Zhou Shangwen was a thrifty and frugal man who loved nurses. He was a great warrior.

古文：善用间，知敌中曲折，故战辄有功。
现代文：善于用间，知道敌人内部详情，所以作战总是有功。
English: Good at using space, know the enemy's internal details, so the battle is always meritorious.

古文：自二十年后，俺答频扰边。
现代文：自从嘉靖二十年后，俺答频频侵扰边关。
English: After 20 years since Jiajing, I have been frequently intruding on the border.

古文：宿将王效、马永、梁震皆前死，惟尚文存，威名最盛。
现代文：宿将王效、马永、梁震都已先死，只有周尚文还活着，他的威名最盛。
English: The innkeepers Wang Hui, Ma Yong, and Liang Zhen all died first. Only Zhou Shangwen is still alive, and his prestige is at its peak.

古文：严嵩父子谋倾陷。
现代文：严嵩父子图谋倾轧陷害周尚文。
English: Yan Song and his son plotted to frame Zhou Shangwen.

古文：功高，帝方籍以抗强敌，谗不得入。
现代文：但周尚文功高，皇帝正凭借他来抗御强敌，谗言才不得起作用。
English: However, Zhou Shangwen's merits were high, and the emperor was relying on him to resist the strong enemy.

古文：暨卒，格恤典不予，给事中沈束以为言。
现代文：等到周尚文死后，不按礼给予他抚恤，给事中沈束言说这件事。
English: After Zhou Shangwen's death, it was not polite to give him a pension, and the matter was not discussed.

古文：历两镇，缮亭障，练士马，边防赖之。马芳，字德馨，蔚州人。
现代文：严嵩激怒皇帝，将沈束禁锢在诏狱。穆宗即位，才赠周尚文为太傅，谥号武襄。马芳，字德馨，蔚州人。
English: Yan Song infuriated the emperor and had Shen Zhu imprisoned in the imperial prison. When Mu Zong ascended the throne, he gave Zhou Shangwen the title of Taifu, the posthumous name of Wu Xiang. Ma Fang, the name of Dezhong, was from Ulshu.

古文：十岁为北寇所掠，使之牧。
现代文：十岁时被北方少数民族掳掠去，让他放牧。
English: At the age of ten, he was abducted and plundered by the northern ethnic minority, and was put out to pasture.

古文：芳私以曲木为弓，剡矢射，俺答猎，虎虓其前，芳一发毙之。
现代文：马芳暗中用曲木做箭弓，削箭矢习射。俺答打猎，猛虎在他前面怒吼，马芳一箭将老虎射死。
English: In the dark, Ma Fang made an arrowhead from bent wood and sharpened the arrow to practice shooting. I promised to go hunting, the tiger roared in front of him, and Ma Fang shot the tiger dead with one arrow.

古文：乃授以良弓矢、善马，侍左右。
现代文：于是俺答授予马芳上等弓矢和好马，让他在左右侍候。
English: So I agreed to give Ma Fang a first-class bow and arrow and a good horse, and let him wait around.

古文：芳阳为之用，而潜自间道亡归。
现代文：马芳明里为他所用，而暗地从小路逃回。
English: Ma Fang secretly fled back from the path while he was using it.

古文：周尚文镇大同，奇之，署为队长。
现代文：周尚文镇守大同，对马芳从敌方逃回感到惊奇，安排他任队长。
English: Zhou Shangwen, the warden of Datong, was surprised that Ma Fang had escaped from the enemy and arranged for him to be made captain.

古文：数御寇有功，当得官，以父贫，悉受赏以养。
现代文：马芳多次防御敌寇有功，应该被封官，因他的父亲贫穷，都改为受赏来供养他父亲。
English: Ma Fang has repeatedly defended the enemy invaders and should have been banned, but because his father was poor, he was rewarded to support his father.

古文：嘉靖二十九年秋，寇犯怀柔、顺义。
现代文：嘉靖二十九年秋天，敌寇侵犯怀柔、顺义。
English: In the autumn of the 29th year of Jiajing, the enemy invaded Huairou and Shunyi.

古文：芳驰斩其将，授阳和卫总旗。
现代文：马芳驰马斩敌将，授职为阳和卫总旗官。
English: Ma Fang rode his horse to defeat the enemy and was appointed as the flag officer of Yanghewei.

古文：寇尝入威远，伏骁骑盐场，而以二十骑挑战。
现代文：敌寇曾经进入威远，在盐场埋伏骁勇骑兵，而用二十骑兵挑战。
English: An enemy raider once entered Dafeng, ambushed the brave cavalry in the salt field, and challenged them with twenty cavalry.

古文：芳知其诈，用百骑薄伏所，三分其军锐，以次击之。
现代文：马芳知敌人有诈，用百骑迫近埋伏的地方，将作战部队分成三部分，依次轮番攻击敌人。
English: Knowing that the enemy was cunning, Ma Fang used a hundred horsemen to approach the ambush site, divided the combat troops into three parts, and attacked the enemy in turn.

古文：奋勇跳荡，敌骑辟易十里，斩首凡九十级。
现代文：马芳军奋勇跳跃，敌人骑兵惊退十里，马芳军共斩敌人首级九十多。
English: Ma Fang's army bravely jumped, the enemy cavalry retreated ten miles, and Ma Fang's army cut off more than ninety enemy heads.

古文：已，复御之新平。
现代文：其后，又在新平抵御敌人。
English: Later, it resisted the enemy again in Xinping.

古文：寇营野马川，克日战。
现代文：敌寇扎营在野马川，约定作战日期。
English: The enemy encamped in the Mustang River and agreed on a date for the battle.

古文：芳度寇且遁，急乘之，斩级益多。
现代文：马芳估计敌寇要逃遁，紧急追逐他们，斩敌更多。
English: Ma Fang estimated that the enemy bandits wanted to escape, urgently chased them, and killed more enemies.

古文：众方贺，芳遽策马曰： 贼至矣。 
现代文：部队正在庆贺，马芳急忙策马说： 贼寇来了。 
English: The troops are celebrating. Ma Fang quickly mounts his horse and says, "The bandits are coming."

古文：趣守险，而身断后。
现代文：命人赶快守住险要，而自己断后。
English: He ordered his men to hold fast to the perilous situation, and then cut himself off.

古文：顷之，寇果麕至。
现代文：过了不一会儿，敌寇果然成群到达。
English: After a short while, the invaders arrived in droves.

古文：芳战益力，寇乃去。
现代文：马芳战斗得更加尽力，敌寇才退去。
English: Ma Fang fought harder, and the bandits retreated.

古文：亡何，战泥河，复大破之。
现代文：不久，在泥河进行战斗，又大破敌寇。
English: Soon after, they fought in the Mud River and defeated the enemy corsairs.

古文：累迁指挥佥事。
现代文：马芳逐渐升迁为指挥佥事。
English: Ma Fang was gradually promoted to the position of conductor.

古文：以功，进都指挥佥事，充宣府游击将军。
现代文：因功，马芳晋为都指挥佥事，充任宣府游击将军。
English: Due to his merits, Ma Fangjin became the commander of the capital and served as the guerrilla general of Xuanwu.

古文：复以功，超迁都督佥事，隶总督为参将。
现代文：又因功，破格升迁为都督佥事，隶属总督为参将。
English: Also, due to his merits, he was exceptionally promoted to the post of the governor of the capital, and became a general officer under the governor.

古文：战镇山墩不利，夺俸。
现代文：在镇山墩作战失利，马芳被夺去俸禄。
English: After losing the battle in Zhenshanhan, Ma Fang was deprived of his salary.

古文：已，袭寇有功，进二秩，为右都督。
现代文：之后，袭击敌寇有功，他又被加俸二级，任右都督。
English: After that, he was promoted to the second grade and appointed as the right-hand governor.

古文：寻以功进左，赐蟒袍。
现代文：不久因功晋为左都督，赐给蟒袍。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to left-wing governor for his achievements, and was given a ceremonial robe.

古文：偏裨加左都督，自芳始也。
现代文：偏将被加封左都督，是从马芳开始的。
English: However, it was Ma Fang who was the first to be awarded the title of Zuo Tudou.

古文：三十六年，迁蓟镇副总兵，分守建昌。
现代文：三十六年马芳迁为蓟镇副总兵，分守建昌。
English: In 1936, Ma Fang was transferred to be the deputy commander-in-chief of Shanzhen, and was assigned to guard Jianchang.

古文：土蛮十万骑薄界岭口，芳与总兵官欧阳安斩首数十，获骁骑猛克兔等六人。
现代文：土蛮十万骑兵逼近界岭口，马芳和总兵官欧阳安歼敌数十人，俘获骁骑猛克兔等六人。
English: A hundred thousand cavalrymen approached Jielingkou, Ma Fang and the general officer Ouyang An annihilated dozens of enemies and captured six people such as the rider Meng Kehua.

古文：寇不知芳在，芳免胄示之，惊曰： 马太师也！ 
现代文：敌寇不知道马芳在，马芳去掉头盔给敌寇知道，敌寇大惊说 ：是马太师！ 
English: The enemy raider did not know that Ma Fang was there. Ma Fang took off his helmet to let the enemy raider know. The enemy raider was shocked and said, "It's Master Matthew!"

古文：遂却。
现代文：于是敌寇退去。
English: So the enemy raiders retreated.

古文：捷闻，荫世总旗。
现代文：捷报传到朝廷，朝廷赐荫庇马芳后代为总旗官。
English: The news of the victory reached the imperial court, and the court gave the descendants of Yingbi Ma Fang as the chief flag officer.

古文：未几，辛爱、把都儿大入，躏遵化、玉田。
现代文：不久，辛爱把都儿大举侵入，蹂躏遵化、玉田。
English: Soon, Xin Ai invaded the capital in a big way, ravaging Zunhua and Tamada.

古文：芳追战金山寺有功，而州县破残多，总督王忬以下俱获罪，芳亦贬都督佥事。
现代文：马芳追到金山寺作战有功，但州县破残得不少，总督王忄予以下都获罪，马芳也被贬为都督佥事。
English: Ma Fang's pursuit to Jinshan Temple was a success in battle, but the prefectures and counties suffered a lot of damage. Governor Wang Xiyu and his subordinates were all convicted, and Ma Fang was also demoted to the status of a mere prefectural governor.

古文：寻移守宣府。
现代文：不久移调马芳镇守宣府。
English: He was soon transferred to Ma Fang, the town guard of Xuanfu.

古文：寇大入山西，芳一日夜驰五百里及之，七战皆捷。
现代文：敌寇大举入侵山西，马芳一昼夜急驰五百里追上敌人，七次战斗都取得了胜利。
English: The enemy raiders invaded Shanxi on a large scale. Ma Fang raced 500 miles in one day and night to catch up with the enemy, and won all seven battles.

古文：已，复为左都督，就擢总兵官，以功进二秩。
现代文：稍后，他又迁为左都督，就地被提升为总兵官，因功进二级俸禄。
English: Later, he moved to the left as the governor and was promoted to the chief military officer on the spot, receiving a second-class salary for his service.

古文：寇薄通州，芳入卫，令专护京师。
现代文：敌寇迫近通州、马芳入卫，下令专护京师。
English: As the enemy raiders approached Tongzhou, Ma Fang entered the imperial guard and ordered the special protection of the Beijing division.

古文：寇退，再进一秩。
现代文：敌寇退去，马芳再晋俸一级。
English: The enemy bandits retreated, and Ma Fang was promoted to the first grade.

古文：寻与故总兵刘汉出北沙滩，捣寇巢。
现代文：不久马芳与故总兵刘汉出北沙滩，捣毁敌巢。
English: Soon after, Ma Fang and the late General Liu Han went to the North Beach to destroy the enemy's nest.

古文：已，坐寇入，令戴罪。
现代文：不久，坐寇入侵之罪，令马芳戴罪立功。
English: Soon after, Ma Fang was made to pay a fine for the crime of incursion.

古文：四十五年七月，辛爱以十万骑入西路，芳迎之马莲堡。
现代文：四十五年七月，辛爱以十万骑兵入侵西路，马芳在马莲堡迎击他们。
English: In July, 455, Xin Ai invaded the West Road with 100,000 cavalry, and Ma Fang met them at Malienburg.

古文：堡圮，众请塞之，不可。
现代文：堡坍塌，军众人请求将这个地方堵塞起来，马芳不同意。
English: When the fort collapsed, the soldiers asked to block up the area, but Ma Fang did not agree.

古文：请登台，亦不可。
现代文：众人又请求登台，马芳也不同意。
English: The crowd again asked to go on stage, but Ma Fang did not agree.

古文：开堡四门，偃旗鼓，寂若无人。
现代文：马芳下令开堡四门，偃旗息鼓，寂静得就像没有人一样。
English: Ma Fang ordered the four gates of the castle to be opened, the flags were lowered, and the silence was like no one was there.

古文：比暮，野烧烛天，嚣呼达旦。
现代文：等到日暮，野烧烛天，嚣呼达旦。
English: Wait until nightfall, the wildfire candle sky, shouting loudly.

古文：芳卧，日中不起，敌骑窥者相属，莫测所为。
现代文：马芳卧睡，太阳当中还不起来，敌人骑兵窥探者不断，不知马芳要干什么。
English: Ma Fang is sleeping, he can't get up in the sun, the enemy cavalry is constantly spying on him, I don't know what Ma Fang is going to do.

古文：明日，芳蹶然起，乘城，指示众曰： 彼军多反顾，且走。 
现代文：第二天，马芳一跳而起，登城，指示军众说： 敌军多回头看，将要离去。 
English: The next day, Ma Fang jumped up and went to the city, instructing the troops and saying, "The enemy troops often look back and are about to leave.

古文：勒兵追击，大破之。
现代文：他勒兵追击，大破敌人。
English: He gave chase and routed the enemy.

古文：隆庆初，或为辛爱谋，以五万骑犯蔚州，诱芳出，而以五万骑袭宣府城，可得志。
现代文：隆庆初年，有人为辛爱出谋，用五万骑兵侵犯蔚州，引诱马芳出来，再用五万骑兵袭击宣府城，可以获得成功。
English: In the first year of Longqing, someone plotted to invade Ulsan with 50,000 cavalry, lure Ma Fang out, and then attack Xuanfu City with 50,000 cavalry, which could be successful.

古文：芳豫伐木环城，寇至不可上，遂解去。
现代文：马芳预先伐木护城，敌寇到达后不能登上城，于是解散退去。
English: Ma Fang cut down trees in advance to protect the city. When the enemy raiders arrived, they were unable to enter the city, so they disbanded and left.

古文：顷之，率参将刘潭等出独石塞外二百里，袭其帐于长水海。
现代文：不大一会儿，马芳率参将刘潭等人出独石塞外二百里，袭击敌人军帐于长水海。
English: A short while later, Ma Fang led General Liu Tan and others 200 miles out of Shigu, attacking the enemy's military headquarters in the Changshui Sea.

古文：还至塞，追者及鞍子山。
现代文：马芳回到塞，敌人追赶的人到达鞍子山。
English: Ma Fang returned to Sai, and those pursued by the enemy arrived at Khuanzhishan.

古文：迎战，又大败之。
现代文：马芳迎战，又大败敌军。
English: Ma Fang fought back and defeated the enemy.

古文：子千户。
现代文：马芳又被荫子千户。
English: Ma Fang was once again defeated by Inigo Chika.

古文：芳有胆智，谙敌情，所至先士卒。
现代文：马芳有胆有智，了解敌情，所到的地方都是身先士卒。
English: Ma Fang has courage and wisdom, understands the enemy situation, and is the first to arrive everywhere.

古文：一岁数出师捣巢，或躬督战，或遣裨将。
现代文：一年之中多次出师捣毁敌巢。或者亲自督战，或者派遣裨将督战。
English: In the course of a year, he went out to destroy the enemy's nest several times. Either he personally supervised the battle, or he dispatched a general to supervise the battle.

古文：家蓄健儿，得其死力。
现代文：马芳得家蓄健儿的死力。
English: Ma Fang's family had to conserve energy.

古文：尝命三十人出塞四百里，多所斩获，寇大震。
现代文：他曾经命令三十人出塞四百里，歼俘敌人甚多，敌寇大震。
English: He once ordered thirty men to march four hundred miles out of the fortress, killing and capturing a great many enemies, and causing a great earthquake among the enemy raiders.

古文：芳乃帅师至大松林，顿旧兴和卫，登高四望，耀兵而还。
现代文：马芳于是率师到大松林，驻扎在兴和卫，登高四望，耀兵而还。
English: Ma Fang then led his division to the Great Pine Forest, stationed in Xinghewei, climbed high and looked around, and returned with a shout.

古文：时大同被寇，视宣府尤甚。
现代文：当时大同遭敌寇侵略，较宣府更加厉害。
English: At that time, Datong was invaded by enemy invaders, which was more severe than Xuanwu.

古文：总督陈其学恐扰畿辅，令总兵官赵岢扼紫荆关。
现代文：总督陈其学恐敌寇侵扰畿辅，下令总兵官赵岢扼守紫荆关。
English: The governor, Chen Qigong, feared that the enemy would invade Kiyosu, and ordered the commander-in-chief, Zhao Jun, to guard the Bauhinia Pass.

古文：寇乃纵掠怀仁、山阴间，岢坐贬三秩，遂调芳与易镇。
现代文：敌寇于是纵掠怀仁、山阴等地，赵岢坐罪被贬俸三级，于是调马芳与赵岢易换镇守。
English: As a result, the enemy raiders plundered Huairen, Shanyin and other places, and Zhao Yao was demoted to the third level for the crime of sitting. Therefore, Ma Fang and Zhao Yao Yi were transferred to the town guard.

古文：俺答转犯威远几破，会其学率胡镇等救，而芳军亦至，相拒十余日，乃走。
现代文：俺答，转而侵犯威远，几乎攻破，正巧陈其学率领胡镇等来救援，而马芳军也到达了，相拒十多日，敌寇才退走。
English: We replied that we would invade Wiyuan instead, and almost broke through. It just so happened that Chen Qigong led Hu Zhen and others to come to the rescue, and Ma Fang's army also arrived. It took more than ten days for the enemy bandits to retreat.

古文：芳谓诸将曰： 大同非宣府比，与我间一墙耳。
现代文：马芳对诸将说： 大同不比宣府，大同敌我之间只有一墙之隔。
English: Ma Fang said to the generals: I am no better than Xuanfu, there is only a wall between me and the enemy.

古文：寇不时至，非大创之不可。 
现代文：敌寇不时到来，非大受创伤不可。 
English: Invaders come from time to time, and it is inevitable that they will suffer great trauma.

古文：乃将兵出右卫，战威宁海子，破之。
现代文：于是将兵出右卫，战威宁海子，并攻破他们。
English: Therefore, he sent his soldiers out of the right guard, won the battle of Ninghaizi, and defeated them.

古文：其年，俺答就抚，塞上遂无事。
现代文：这一年，明朝招抚了俺答，塞上于是相安无事。
English: This year, in the morning, I answered, plugged in, so there was no problem.

古文：万历元年，阅视侍郎吴百朋发芳行贿事，勒闲住。
现代文：万历元年，阅视侍郎吴百朋揭发马芳行贿之事，马芳被勒令闲住。
English: In the first year of Wanli, Ma Fang was ordered to stay idle after Wu Bai Peng, a courtier, exposed Ma Fang's bribe-taking.

古文：已，起佥书前军都督府。
现代文：之后，马芳被起用为佥书前军都督府。
English: After that, Ma Fang was appointed as the prefectural governor of Yingshu.

古文：顺义王要赏，声言渝盟，复用芳镇宣府。
现代文：顺义王要赏，声言要背弃盟约，又用马芳镇守宣府。
English: Shunyi Wang wanted to reward, claimed to renege on the covenant, and used Ma Fang Town to guard Xuanfu.

古文：七年以疾乞归。
现代文：七年马芳因病请求回到家乡。
English: After seven years of illness, Ma Fang requested to return to her hometown.

古文：又二年卒。
现代文：又过了两年马芳死去。
English: Two more years passed before Ma Fang died.

古文：芳起行伍，十余年为大帅。
现代文：马芳出身行伍，十多年后成为大帅。
English: Ma Fang was born in the infantry, and became a general more than ten years later.

古文：战膳房堡、朔州、登鹰巢、鸽子堂、龙门、万全右卫、东岭、孤山、土木、乾庄、岔道、张家堡、得胜堡、大沙滩，大小百十接，身被数十创，以少击众，未尝不大捷。
现代文：在膳房堡、朔州、登鹰巢、鸽子堂、龙门、万金右卫、东岭、孤山、土木、乾庄、岔道、张家堡、得胜堡、大沙滩等地作战，身经大小战斗百十次，受伤数十次，他以少击多，未尝不获大胜。
English: He fought in Zhenfang Fort, Shuozhou, Dengying Nest, Pigeon Hall, Longmen, Wanjin Yuwei, Dongling, Lone Mountain, Civil Engineering, Qianzhuang, Shantou, Zhangjiagang, Victory Fort, Daxi Beach and other places. He fought a hundred times and was injured dozens of times. He hit more with less, and never failed to win a big victory.

古文：擒部长数十人，斩馘无算，威名震边陲，为一时将帅冠。
现代文：他擒获敌人部长数十人，斩敌首级无数，威名震边陲，是一时将帅之冠。
English: He captured dozens of enemy ministers, decapitated countless enemy leaders, and his reputation was legendary. He was at one time the crown of generals.

古文：石州城陷，副将田世威、参将刘宝论死，芳乞寝己荫子，赎二将罪，为御史所劾，敕戒谕。
现代文：石州城被敌寇攻陷，副将田世威、参将刘宣被判论死罪，马芳乞求放弃自己的荫子之赏赐，来赎二将之罪，被御史所参劾，皇帝下敕诫谕他。
English: Sekishu Castle was captured by the enemy, Vice-Commander Tian Shwei and General Liu Xuan were sentenced to death. Ma Fang begged to give up the reward of his own shadow to atone for the sin of the two generals. He was impeached by the Imperial Historian, and the emperor gave him a command.

古文：后世威复为将，遇芳薄，芳不与校，识者多之。
现代文：后来田世威又作将，对待马芳很刻薄，马芳不与他计较，有识之士以此赞赏马芳。
English: Later, Tian Shiyi also made a match, treating Ma Fang very meanly. Ma Fang did not care about him, and people with insight appreciated Ma Fang.

古文：二子，栋、林。
现代文：马芳有两个儿子，马栋、马林。
English: Ma Fang has two sons, Madong and Marin.

古文：栋官至都督，无所见。
现代文：马栋官到都督，没有什么突出事迹。
English: Ma Dongguan to the governor, there is nothing outstanding.

古文：林，由父荫累官大同参将。
现代文：马林，由父荫累官大同参将。
English: Marin, who was raised by his father, a high-ranking government official, to the rank of general.

古文：万历二十年，顺义王撦力克絷献史、车二部长，林以制敌功，进副总兵。
现代文：万历二十年，顺义王扌奢力克絷拘献史、车二部长，马林因制敌有功，晋为副总兵。
English: After twenty years of hard work, Shunyi Wang Qi was promoted to vice-commander-in-chief, and became the second minister of chariots and cavalry. Marin was promoted to vice-commander-in-chief for his distinguished service in subduing the enemy.

古文：二十七年擢署都督佥事，为辽东总兵官。
现代文：二十七年马林升为署都督佥事，任辽东总兵官。
English: In the 27th year, Marin was promoted to the post of provincial governor and appointed as the chief military officer of Liaodong.

古文：林雅好文学，能诗，工书，交游多名士，时誉籍甚，自许亦甚高。
现代文：马林素来好文学，能诗，工书，交游的人多是名士，当时名声很大，他自视也很高。
English: Marin has always been good at literature, poetry, book design, and his acquaintances are mostly celebrities. At that time, his reputation was very high, and his self-esteem was very high.

古文：尝陈边务十策，语多触文吏，寝不行。
现代文：他曾经上陈边关事务十策，语词之中对文官多有抵触，被搁置而不能实行。
English: He once proposed ten measures on border affairs, and many of his words conflicted with the civil officials, and were shelved and could not be implemented.

古文：税使高淮横恣，林力与抗。
现代文：税使高淮骄横恣肆，马林极力与他抗争。
English: The tax made Gao Huai arrogant and reckless, and Marin tried his best to fight him.

古文：淮劾奏之，坐夺职。
现代文：高淮参劾上奏马林，马林被夺职。
English: Gao Huai participated in the impeachment of Ma Lin, and Ma Lin was deprived of his post.

古文：给事中侯先春论救，改林戍烟瘴，先春亦左迁二官。
现代文：给事中侯先春上书论救马林，改判马林守戍烟瘴，侯先春也被降官二级。
English: In the middle of the matter, Hou Xianchun wrote a book about saving Marin, and the sentence of Marin's detention was revised. Hou Xianchun was also demoted to the second level.

古文：久之，遇赦免。
现代文：过了很久，马林遇赦免。
English: After a long time, Marin was pardoned.

古文：辽左用兵，诏林以故官从征。
现代文：辽东用兵，诏令马林以原官的身份从征。
English: Liaodong enlisted soldiers and ordered Marin to enlist as a former officer.

古文：杨镐之四路出师也，令林将一军由开原出三岔口，而以游击窦永澄监北关军并进。
现代文：杨镐兵分四路而出，令马林带领一军从开原出三岔口，而以游击窦水澄监北关军与马林并进。
English: Yang Hui's soldiers went out in four directions, leaving Marin to lead an army from Kaibara to Samcheok, while the guerrilla army of Dou Shui Cheng Guan marched alongside Marin.

古文：林军至尚间崖结营浚壕，严斥堠自卫。
现代文：马林军到尚间崖结营疏通沟壕，严防哨所敌台自卫。
English: Marin's army encamped on the cliff in Shangma, cleared the ditch, and guarded the sentry post against enemy self-defense.

古文：及闻杜松军败，方移营，而大清兵已逼。
现代文：等到听说杜松军被打败，才移换军营，但是大清的兵已经逼近。
English: They waited until they heard that the Juniper Army had been defeated before moving to a new camp, but the soldiers of the Qing Dynasty were already approaching.

古文：乃还兵，别立营，浚壕三周，列火器壕外，更布骑兵于火器外，他士卒皆下马，结方阵壕内。
现代文：马林于是还兵，别立营，挖战壕三周，在战壕外面布列火器，再在火器外面布置骑兵，其他的士卒都下马，在战壕内结成方阵。
English: Marin therefore returned the troops, set up camp, dug trenches three times around, laid out firearms outside the trenches, and then arranged cavalry outside the firearms. The other soldiers dismounted and formed a phalanx inside the trenches.

古文：又一军西营飞芬山。
现代文：另有一军在飞芬山扎营。
English: Another army encamped at Feifen Mountain.

古文：杜松军既覆，大清兵乘锐薄林军。
现代文：杜松军覆没之后，大清兵乘其锐气逼近马林军。
English: After the Juniper Army was wiped out, the Great Qing Army took advantage of its momentum to close in on the Marin Army.

古文：见林壕内军已与壕外合而陈，纵精骑直前冲之。
现代文：见马林的军队在壕内和壕外已经结合成方阵，于是大清军纵精锐骑兵直往前冲击它。
English: Seeing that Marin's troops had already formed a square formation both inside and outside the trench, the elite cavalry of the Great Qing Army rushed straight ahead to attack it.

古文：林军不能支，遂大败。
现代文：马林军不能支持，于是大败。
English: The Mariners couldn't hold it, and lost badly.

古文：副将麻岩战死，林仅以数骑免。
现代文：副将麻岩战死，马林只带数骑逃脱。
English: His second-in-command, Ma Yan, was killed in the battle, and Marin escaped with only a few horses.

古文：死者弥山谷，血流尚间崖下，水为之赤。
现代文：死的人遍满山谷，血流到尚间崖下，水被血染红了。
English: The valley was full of dead men, blood flowed to the foot of the Shonan cliff, and the water was red with blood.

古文：大清遂移兵击飞芬山。
现代文：大清于是调兵攻击飞芬山。
English: Therefore, the Qing Dynasty sent troops to attack Feifen Mountain.

古文：佥事潘宗颜等一军亦覆。
现代文：佥事潘宗颜等一军也全军覆没。
English: Anecdotally, Pan Zongyan and other soldiers were also wiped out.

古文：北关兵闻之，遂不敢进。
现代文：北关的兵听说后，于是不敢前进。
English: When the soldiers of Beiguan heard of this, they did not dare to advance.

古文：林既丧师，谪充为事官，俾守开原。
现代文：马林丧失军队后，被谪贬充任军官，让他镇守开原。
English: After the loss of the army, Marin was demoted to an officer and left to guard Kaibara.

古文：时蒙古宰赛、爰兔许助林兵，林与结约，恃此不设备。
现代文：当时蒙古宰赛、暖兔许诺援助马林兵，马林和他结成盟约，依靠这而没有设立防备。
English: At that time, the Mongolian emperors Zaisei and Nonghu promised to help the Marin soldiers, and Marin made an alliance with him, relying on this without setting up defenses.

古文：其年六月，大清兵忽临城。
现代文：这一年六月，大清兵突然来到城下。
English: In June of that year, the soldiers of the Great Purge suddenly came to the outskirts of the city.

古文：林列众城外，分少兵登陴。
现代文：马林列众在城外，分出少部分兵登城上的矮墙。
English: Marin led the crowd outside the city and sent out a small number of soldiers to climb the low wall above the city.

古文：大清兵设盾梯进攻，而别以精骑击破林军之营东门外者。
现代文：大清兵设梯进攻，而另用精锐骑兵击破马林军营的东门外设防。
English: The soldiers of the Great Qing Dynasty set up a ladder to attack, and in addition, they used elite cavalry to break through the defenses set up outside the east gate of the Malin military camp.

古文：军士争门入，遂乘势夺门，攻城兵亦逾城入。
现代文：马林军的兵士争门入城，大清兵于是乘势夺门，攻城的大清兵也越墙入城。
English: The soldiers of the Marin Army fought for the gate to enter the city, and the Qing soldiers then took advantage of the situation to seize the gate, and the Qing soldiers who attacked the city also entered the city through the wall.

古文：林城外军望见尽奔。
现代文：马林军城外的兵士望见后全都逃奔。
English: When the soldiers of Marin's army outside the city were seen, they all ran away.

古文：大清兵据城邀击，壕不得渡，悉歼之。
现代文：大清兵据城拦截攻击，马林军的这部分兵士被战壕阻隔不能渡过，全部被歼灭。
English: The Great Qing soldiers blocked the attack according to the city, this part of the soldiers of the Marine Corps was blocked by the trench and could not pass through, and all were annihilated.

古文：林及副将于化龙、参将高贞、游击于守志、守备何懋官等，皆死焉。
现代文：马林和副将于化龙、参将高贞、游击于守志、守备何懋官等人，都战死了。
English: Marin and vice-commander Hualong, general Gao Zhen, guerrilla in Shou Zhi, guard He Yiguan and others, all died in the battle.

古文：寻赠都督同知，进世荫二秩。
现代文：不久赠给马林都督同知，进世荫二级。
English: It was soon given to Marin Tudor Tongzhi, who was promoted to the second grade.

古文：林虽更历边镇，然未经强敌，无大将才。
现代文：马林虽然更历边镇，但是没有经遇强敌，无大将才。
English: Although Marin is more experienced, he has not encountered a strong enemy, and he is not a great general.

古文：当事以虚名用之，故败。
现代文：当事以虚名用之，所以失败。
English: The parties used fictitious names and therefore failed.

古文：林五子，燃、熠、炯、爌，飚。
现代文：马林有五个儿子：马燃、马熠、马炯、马火广、马飚。
English: Marlin has five sons: Magma, Magma, Magma, Magma, Magma and Magma.

古文：燃、熠，战死尚间崖。
现代文：马燃、马熠战死在尚间崖。
English: The battle between horse and mule ended in death at Shangma Cliff.

古文：炯，天启中湖广总兵官。
现代文：马炯在天启年代中任湖广总兵官。
English: Ma Jun served as the commander-in-chief of Hukang in the years of the Apocalypse.

古文：协讨贵州叛贼，从王三善至大方，数战皆捷。
现代文：马炯协助讨伐贵州叛贼，跟从王三善到大方，几次战斗都取得了胜利。
English: Ma Jun assisted in the fight against the Guizhou traitors, followed Wang Sanshan to Dafang, and won several battles.

古文：已，大败，三善自杀。炯溃归。
现代文：之后，大败，王三善自杀，马炯军溃败而归。
English: After the crushing defeat, Wang Sanshan committed suicide, and the Ma Wei army returned home in defeat.

古文：得疾而卒。
现代文：马炯患病而死。
English: The foal fell ill and died.

古文：爌幼习兵略，天启中为辽东游击。
现代文：马火广幼习兵略，天启年间任辽东游击。
English: Ma Huiguang was a cadet, and he was in charge of the Liaodong guerrilla attack during the years of the Apocalypse.

古文：督师阁部孙承宗以其父死王事，奖用之，命代王楹守中右所。
现代文：督师阁部大臣孙承宗因他的父亲死于王事，奖励性地任用他，让马火广代替王木盈镇守中右所。
English: Supervisor and Cabinet Minister Sun Chengzong, because his father died in a royal event, appointed him as a reward, and let Ma Huiguang replace Wang Mu Ying as the commander of the center-right.

古文：及巡抚袁崇焕更营制，以故官掌前锋左营。
现代文：等到巡抚袁崇焕更改营制后，马火广以原官的身份掌管前锋右营。
English: After Yuan Chonghuan, the inspector, changed the battalion system, Ma Huiguang took charge of the forward right battalion as the original officer.

古文：数有功，屡迁至副总兵，守徐州。
现代文：他多次有功，以致迁升为副总兵，镇守徐州。
English: He made many meritorious deeds, so much so that he was promoted to vice-commander-in-chief and became the town guard of Xuzhou.

古文：崇祯八年正月，贼陷凤阳，大掠而去。
现代文：崇祯八年正月，敌贼攻陷凤阳，大肆抢掠而去。
English: In the first month of the eighth year of Chongzhen, the enemy invaded Fengyang and plundered it.

古文：爌及守备骆举率兵入，以恢复告，遂留戍其地。
现代文：马火广和守备骆举率兵入城，以恢复报告，于是马火广留守这个地方。
English: Ma Huaguang and Guo Zi Luo led the troops into the city to resume the report, so Ma Huaguang stayed in this place.

古文：八月，贼扰河南。
现代文：八月，敌贼侵扰河南。
English: In August, the enemy intruded into Henan Province.

古文：总督朱大典命移驻颖、毫。
现代文：总督朱大典命令他移驻颍、亳。
English: Governor Zhu Dadian ordered him to move to Shao, Shao.

古文：事定，还徐州。
现代文：事情定下来之后，马火广返回徐州。
English: After the matter was settled, Ma Huiguang returned to Xuzhou.

古文：十年，贼犯桐城，爌赴救，破之罗唱河。
现代文：十年，敌贼侵犯桐城，马火广奔赴救援，在罗唱河攻破敌人。
English: Ten years later, when the enemy invaded Tongcheng, Ma Huiguang rushed to the rescue and defeated the enemy at Luochang River.

古文：寻以护陵功，增秩一级。
现代文：不久马火广因护陵有功，增俸一级。
English: Soon after, Ma Huiguang received a one-level pay raise for his contribution to the protection of the mausoleum.

古文：归德、徐州间有地曰朱家厂，土寇据之，时出掠。
现代文：归德、徐州之间有个地方叫朱家厂，土寇占据这个地方，不时出来抢掠。
English: Between Gui De and Xuzhou, there is a place called Zhu Jiafang. The Turks occupy this place and come out from time to time to loot.

古文：爌剿灭之。
现代文：马火广剿灭他们。
English: The horse-drawn fire destroyed them.

古文：贼犯固始，大典檄爌及游击张士仪等分戍霍兵西南，扼贼东下，贼遂走六安。
现代文：敌贼侵犯固始，朱大典檄令马火广和游击张士仪等人分别戍守霍丘西南，扼住贼寇东下之路，敌寇于是逃到六安。
English: The enemy bandits encroached on Gushan. Zhu Da Dianqi ordered Ma Huiguang and the guerrilla Zhang Shiyi and others to guard the southwest of Huoqiu separately, strangling the bandits' eastward route. The enemy bandits then fled to Lu'an.

古文：大典又移爌等驻寿州东，兼护二陵。
现代文：朱大典又调马火广等人驻扎寿州东，兼护二陵。
English: Zhu Dadian and others such as Ma Huagang were stationed in the east of Shoushou to protect the two mausoleums.

古文：当是时，长、淮南北，专以陵寝为重。
现代文：就在这个时候，长江淮河南北，专以陵寝为重。
English: Just at this time, the Yangtze River and the Huaihe River in the north and south are dominated by the mausoleum.

古文：爌驰驱数年，幸无失事。
现代文：马火广驰驱数年，幸而没有失事。
English: Ma Huaguang drove for several years, but fortunately there was no accident.

古文：十二年六月擢总兵官，镇守天津。
现代文：十二年六月，马火广被提升为总兵官，镇守天津。
English: In June of the same year, Ma Huiguang was promoted to chief military officer and became the town guard of Tianjin.

古文：久之，移镇甘肃。
现代文：过了很久，被调到甘肃镇守。
English: After a long time, he was transferred to Gansu Town Guard.

古文：十五年督三协副将王世宠、王加春、鲁胤昌等讨破叛番，斩首七百余级，抚安三十八族而还。
现代文：十五年他督三协副将王世宠、王加春、鲁胤昌等人讨伐攻破叛番，斩敌人七百多首级，抚慰安定三十八族才回来。
English: In the fifteenth year of his reign, the vice-commanders of the Three Associations, Wang Shizhong, Wang Kachun, and Lu Yinchang, and others fought and defeated the rebels, cut off more than seven hundred heads of the enemy, and comforted and stabilized thirty-eight ethnic groups before returning.

古文：其冬，督师孙传庭檄召不至，疏劾之。
现代文：这一年冬天，督师孙传庭檄召他不去，遭弹劾。
English: In the winter of that year, superintendent Sun Chuanting summoned him not to go, and he was impeached.

古文：帝令察爌堪办贼，许戴罪图功，否即以赐剑从事。
现代文：皇帝诏令因为马火广能够剿贼，允许戴罪立功，否则即以军法从事。
English: Emperor Zhao decreed that because Ma Huiguang could defeat the bandits, he was allowed to bear the crime and make meritorious service, otherwise he would be engaged in military law.

古文：及爌至军，传庭贷其罪。
现代文：等到马火广到达军中，孙传庭宽恕他的罪过。
English: When Ma Huiguang arrived in the army, Sun Chuning forgave him for his sins.

古文：已，复以逗留淫掠被劾，帝仍令载罪自效。
现代文：不久，马火广又因逗留淫掠而被弹劾，皇帝仍让他戴罪效命。
English: Soon after, Ma Huo-guang was impeached again for staying and looting, but the emperor still let him serve out his sentence.

古文：明年秋，传庭将出关。
现代文：第二年秋天，孙传庭准备出关。
English: In the autumn of the following year, Sun Chuanting prepared to leave the palace.

古文：有传贼自内乡窥商、雒者，檄爌移商州扼其北犯。
现代文：有传闻说敌贼从内乡窥探商、洛的，孙传庭檄令马火广到商州扼住敌人的北犯。
English: There is a rumor that the enemy bandits came from inland to spy on merchants and people in Luo, and Sun Chuan Ting ordered horses to spread the fire to Shangzhou to strangle the enemy's northern criminals.

古文：已而传庭师覆，爌遂还镇。
现代文：这以后孙传庭的军队覆没，马火广于是回到原地镇守。
English: After this, Sun Chuanting's army was wiped out, and Ma Huaguang returned to the town to defend it.

古文：未几，贼陷延绥、宁夏，遂陷兰州，渡河抵甘州还攻之。
现代文：不久，敌贼攻陷延绥、宁夏，终于攻陷兰州，渡过黄河抵达甘州进行围攻。
English: Soon, the enemy invaded Yancheng, Ningxia, and finally Lanzhou, and crossed the Yellow River to besiege Ganzhou.

古文：爌与巡抚林日瑞竭力固守。
现代文：马火广和巡抚林日瑞竭尽全力进行固守。
English: Ma Huiguang and the patrolman Lin Rizhu did their best to hold fast.

古文：贼乘雪夜坎而登。
现代文：敌贼乘雪夜因坎登城。
English: The enemy bandits took advantage of the snowy night to attack the city of Kanden.

古文：士卒寒甚，不能战，城遂陷。
现代文：马、林军士卒十分寒冷，不能作战，城池终于被攻陷。
English: Sgt. Ma and Sgt. Lin were too cold to fight, and the castle was finally captured.

古文：爌、日瑞及中军哈维新、姚世儒皆死焉。
现代文：马火广、林日瑞和中军哈维新、姚世儒都战死疆场。
English: Ma Huiguang, Lin Rongrui and the Chinese soldiers Harvey Xin and Yao Shiru all died on the battlefield.

古文：弟飚为沔阳州同知，城陷，亦死之。
现代文：马火广的弟弟马飚任沔阳州同知，沔阳城陷落，也死去。
English: Ma Huiguang's younger brother, Ma RongRen, was an acquaintance of his in Poyang Prefecture. When Poyang fell, he also died.

古文：爌父子兄弟并死国难。
现代文：马火广父子兄弟一并死于国难。
English: Ma Huagang's father and brother died together in the national tragedy.

古文：何卿，成都卫人。
现代文：何卿，成都卫人。
English: Lord He, the guardian of Chengdu.

古文：有志操，习武事。
现代文：有志操，习武事。
English: If you have the will, you can learn martial arts.

古文：正德中，嗣世职为指挥佥事。
现代文：正德年间，承袭世职任指挥佥事。
English: During the Zhengde years, the succession to the post of conductor was an anecdote.

古文：以能，擢筠连守备。
现代文：因他的能力，被提升为筠连守备。
English: Because of his ability, he was promoted to the top guard of Qilian.

古文：从巡抚盛应期击斩叛贼谢文礼、文义。
现代文：随从巡抚盛应期攻击歼斩叛贼谢文礼、谢文义。
English: Subordinate to the procurator Sheng should attack and annihilate the traitors Xie Wenli and Xie Wenyi.

古文：世宗立，论功，进署都指挥佥事，充左参将，协守松潘。
现代文：世宗即位，论功晋升为署都指挥佥事，充任左参将，协助镇守松潘。
English: When Sejong ascended the throne, he was promoted to the post of commander-in-chief for his meritorious service. He served as the left assistant general and assisted the town warden, Songpan.

古文：嘉靖初，芒部土舍陇政、土妇支禄等叛。
现代文：嘉靖年代初期，芒部土舍陇政、土妇支禄等人反叛。
English: At the beginning of the Jiajing era, Mangbe, Toushe, Yongsheng, Tujing, and others rebelled.

古文：卿讨之，斩首二百余级，降其众数百人。
现代文：何卿征讨他们，斩敌人二百多首级，降俘叛众有好几百人。
English: Heqing conscripted them, beheaded more than two hundred enemies, and captured several hundred rebels.

古文：政奔乌撒，卿檄土官安宁擒以献。
现代文：陇政逃奔到乌撒，何卿檄令土官安宁将陇政擒获献来。
English: He fled to Usa, and Ho Ching ordered the local official Anning to bring him back.

古文：宁佯诺，而匿政不出。
现代文：安宁假装承诺，而实际上将陇政藏匿起来不交出来。
English: Anning pretends to promise, but actually hides the puppet regime and does not hand it over.

古文：巡抚汤沐言状，帝夺卿冠带。
现代文：巡抚汤沐说明了这种情况，皇帝剥夺了何卿的官职。
English: The governor, Tang Mu, explained the situation, and the emperor deprived He Qing of his official position.

古文：川、贵兵合讨，贼始灭，还冠带如初。
现代文：川、贵之兵联合征讨，叛贼才被消灭，何卿恢复到原有官职。
English: The river and the distinguished soldiers were jointly requisitioned, the traitors were eliminated, and He Qing was restored to his original official position.

古文：五年春擢卿副总兵，仍镇松潘。
现代文：五年春天提升何卿为副总兵，仍然镇守松潘。
English: In the spring of the fifth year, He Xing was promoted to deputy commander-in-chief, and he still guarded Songpan.

古文：陇氏已绝，改芒部为镇雄府，设流官。
现代文：陇氏已经灭绝，改芒部为镇雄府，设流官。
English: The Min clan had died out, and the area was changed to Zhenxiong Prefecture, and a line of officials was established.

古文：未几，政遗党沙保复叛。
现代文：不久，陇政的遗党沙保又进行叛乱。
English: Soon after, Sa Pao, the surviving party of Chiang Kai-shek, rebelled again.

古文：卿偕参将魏武、参议姚汝皋等并进，斩保等贼首七人，余尽殄。
现代文：何卿和参将魏武、姚汝皋等人并进，斩除沙保等叛贼首领七人，余党也全部被歼。
English: He Xing and the senior generals Wei Wu, Yao Ruxuan and others marched side by side and killed seven of the rebel leaders, including Sha Bao, and the rest of the party was also annihilated.

古文：录功，武最，卿次之，赐赉有差。
现代文：记录功劳，魏武最大，何卿第二，赐赏各有不同。
English: Records of merit, Weiwu the largest, Heqing the second, rewards are different.

古文：黑虎五砦番反，围长安诸堡，乌都、鹁鸽诸番亦继叛。
现代文：黑虎五砦番谋反，围住长安诸堡，乌都、鹁鸽诸番也相继反叛。
English: The Black Tiger's five fortresses banded together to plot a rebellion, encircling the Chang'an fortresses, and the Udu and Qin Dove bands also rebelled one after another.

古文：卿皆破平之，就进都督佥事。
现代文：何卿都攻破平定了他们，升为都督佥事。
English: He defeated and pacified all of them, and was promoted to the post of governor.

古文：威茂番十余砦连兵劫军饟，且攻茂州及长宁诸堡，要抚赏。
现代文：威茂番十多砦连兵劫抢军饷，而且攻打茂州和长宁诸堡，索要抚恤赏赐。
English: The soldiers of more than ten forts in Weimoban plundered the army pay, and attacked the forts in Mochou and Changning, demanding compensation and reward.

古文：卿与副使朱纨筑茂州外城以困之。
现代文：何卿和副使朱纨筑茂州外城来围困他们。
English: Lord He and his deputy Zhu Xi besieged them outside the city of Chikuma.

古文：旋以计残其众，战屡捷，遂攻深沟，焚其碉砦。
现代文：不久又用计残害他们的部众，屡战屡胜，于是攻打深沟，焚烧他们的碉砦。
English: Not long after, he used a strategy to cripple their subordinates, repeatedly winning battles, so he attacked the deep ditch and burned their fortifications.

古文：诸番窘，请赎罪。
现代文：诸番处境困迫，请求让他们赎罪。
English: Many were in a difficult situation and asked to atone for their sins.

古文：卿责献首恶，番不应。
现代文：何卿责令他们献出首恶，番人不答应。
English: Lord He ordered them to offer the first evil, but the guards did not agree.

古文：复分剿浅沟、浑水二砦歼之。
现代文：何卿又分别剿攻浅沟、浑水二砦，并歼灭他们。
English: He Xing also separately attacked the two forts of Shallow Ditch and Muddy Water, and annihilated them.

古文：诸番乃争献首恶，插血断指耳，誓不复叛。
现代文：诸番于是争献首恶，歃血断指耳，誓不再反叛。
English: All the guards then fought over who was the worst, drew blood, cut off their fingers, and swore never to rebel again.

古文：卿乃与刻木为约，分处其曹，画疆守，松潘路复通。
现代文：何卿于是与他们刻木为约，分处其部众，划疆为守，松潘的道路又畅通起来。
English: Therefore, He Xing made a contract with them, divided his subordinates, and defended his territory. The road of Songpan became smooth again.

古文：巡抚潘鉴等上二人功，诏赉银币，进署都督同知，镇守如故。
现代文：巡抚潘鉴等人奏上他们两人的功劳，皇帝下诏赏赐何卿、朱纨银币，晋升何卿为署都督同知，镇守如故。
English: The governor Pan Jian and others praised the merits of the two of them, and the emperor rewarded He Xing and Zhu Xi with silver coins, promoted He Xing to the post of prefectural governor, and the town guard remained unchanged.

古文：久之，以疾致仕。
现代文：过了很久，何卿因疾病辞官。
English: After a long time, He Xing resigned due to illness.

古文：二十三年，塞上多警。
现代文：二十三年，塞上战事频起。
English: Twenty-three years later, war broke out frequently.

古文：召卿，以疾辞。
现代文：朝廷召何卿，何卿以疾病相辞。
English: The imperial court summoned Heqing, but Heqing claimed to be ill.

古文：帝怒，夺其都督，命以都指挥使诣部听调。
现代文：皇帝发怒，夺去何卿的都督官职，命他以都指挥使的官职到兵部听候调遣。
English: Enraged, the emperor took away He Xing's post of the governor of the capital and ordered him to take the post of the commander of the capital to the military department to await transfer.

古文：未几，寇逼畿辅，命营卢沟桥。
现代文：不久，敌寇逼近畿辅，命扎营在卢沟桥。
English: Soon, the enemy raiders approached Kievo and were ordered to set up camp at Lugo Bridge.

古文：松潘副总兵李爵为巡抚丘养浩劾罢，诏以卿代。
现代文：松潘的副总兵李爵被巡抚丘养浩弹劾而罢去官职，皇帝下诏用何卿代替他。
English: Songpan's vice-commander-in-chief, Li Jie, was impeached and removed from office by the procurator Yau Yang Ho, and the emperor issued an edict to replace him with He Xing.

古文：给事中许天伦言卿贿养浩劾爵，自为地。
现代文：给事中许天伦说何卿贿赂丘养浩弹劾李爵，自为后路。
English: In the case, Xu Tianlun said that He Jing bribed Qiu Yanghao to impeach Li Jie, which was his own way back.

古文：帝怒，褫卿及养浩官，令巡按冉崇礼核实。
现代文：皇帝发怒，革除何卿和丘养浩的官职，令巡按冉崇礼调查核实。
English: The emperor was enraged and dismissed He Qing and Yau Yang Ho from their official positions, and ordered a patrol to investigate and verify the matter according to Ran Chongli.

古文：时兵事棘，翁万达复荐卿，还其都督佥事，都东官厅军马。
现代文：当时兵事棘手，翁万达又推荐何卿，恢复他的都督佥事官职，督东官厅军马。
English: At that time, the military affairs were difficult, and Onwanda recommended Ho Ching to resume his post as the governor of the capital, and the military horses of the governor's office were ridden.

古文：已而崇礼具言爵贪污， 卿镇松潘十七年，为蜀保障，军民颂德，且贫，安所得贿？ 
现代文：之后冉崇礼具言说李爵贪污 ，何卿镇守松潘有十七年，为蜀保障，军民颂德，但他还贫穷，哪有所得的钱财进行贿赂呢？ 
English: After that, Ran Chongli said that Li Jue was corrupt, He Jian had been the town guard of Songpan for seventeen years, and was the protection of Shu and the praise of the military and the people, but he was still poor. Where did he get the money to bribe?

古文：帝意乃解。
现代文：皇帝怒意才消解。
English: It was only then that Mingzong put his heart into it.

古文：四川白草番为乱，副总兵高冈凤被劾。
现代文：四川白草番叛乱，副总兵高冈凤被弹劾。
English: Sichuan Bai Caoban rebellion, vice-commander Gao Gangfeng was impeached.

古文：兵部尚书路迎奏卿代之。
现代文：兵部尚书路迎上奏让何卿代替他。
English: Shang Shullu of the Ministry of Military Affairs came forward and asked He Xing to replace him.

古文：卿再莅松潘，将士咸喜。
现代文：何卿再次莅临松潘，将士都很喜欢。
English: General Ho visits Songpan again, and the generals all like him.

古文：乃会巡抚张时彻讨擒渠恶数人，俘斩九百七十有奇，克营砦四十七，毁碉房四千八百，获马牛器械储积各万计。
现代文：何卿于是会聚巡抚张时彻征讨擒获首恶数人，俘斩九百七十多人，攻克四十七营砦，摧毁四千八百碉房，缴获马牛器械储积各以万计。
English: Heqing then gathered with the inspector Zhang Shichechu to recruit and capture several top villains, captured and killed more than 970 people, conquered 47 battalion forts, destroyed 4,800 mule houses, and seized tens of thousands of horse and cattle equipment.

古文：进署都督同知。
现代文：何卿进署都督同知。
English: He is an acquaintance of the governor of Shibakucho Kanshin post.

古文：卿素有威望，为番人所惮。
现代文：何卿素有威望，为番人所忌惮。
English: Lord He is well-known for his prestige and is feared by the guards.

古文：自威茂迄松潘、龙安夹道筑墙数百里，行旌往来，无剽夺患。
现代文：自从威茂到松潘、龙安夹道筑墙数百里，行旅往来，没有剽夺的祸患。
English: From Weimao to Songpan and Long'an, they have built hundreds of miles of walls and traveled back and forth, without the scourge of usurpation.

古文：先后莅镇二十四年，军民戴之若慈母。
现代文：他先后在镇二十四年，军民像爱戴慈母一样爱戴他。
English: He has been in the town for twenty-four years, and the soldiers and civilians love him as much as they love their mother.

古文：再以疾归。
现代文：他再次因病回到家乡。
English: He was ill again and returned to his hometown.

古文：三十三年，倭寇海上。
现代文：三十三年，倭寇侵略海上。
English: Thirty-three years ago, the Japanese invaded Korea by sea.

古文：诏卿与沈希仪各率家众赴苏、松军门。
现代文：皇帝诏令何卿和沈希仪各率家众奔赴苏、松军门。
English: Emperor Zhao ordered He Qing and Shen Xiyi to each lead their families to rush to the Soviet and Songun gates.

古文：明年充副总兵，总理浙江及苏、松海防。
现代文：第二年何卿充任副总兵，总理浙江和苏、松海防。
English: In the following year, He Xing was appointed Deputy Commander-in-Chief and Premier of Zhejiang, Suzhou and Songhai Provinces.

古文：卿，蜀中名将，不谙海道，年已老，兵与将不习，竟不能有所为。
现代文：何卿是蜀中名将，不熟悉海道，年纪已老，兵与将不熟悉，竟不能有所作为。
English: He Xing is a famous general in Shuzhong, not familiar with the sea route, old, not familiar with soldiers and generals, but unable to make a difference.

古文：为巡按御史周如斗劾罢，卒。
现代文：他被巡按御史周如斗弹劾而罢除官职，死去。
English: He was removed from office by impeachment and died.

古文：沈希仪，字唐佐，贵县人。
现代文：沈希仪，字唐佐，贵县人。
English: Shen Xiyi, surnamed Tangza, from Guixian County.

古文：嗣世职为奉议卫指挥使。
现代文：承袭世职任奉议卫指挥使。
English: He succeeded to the post of commander of the Imperial Guards.

古文：机警有胆勇，智计过绝于人。
现代文：他机警有胆有勇，并且智计过人。
English: He is alert, daring and cunning.

古文：正德十二年，调征永安。
现代文：正德十二年他被调出征永安。
English: In the twelfth year of Zhengde, he was transferred to Yongan.

古文：以数百人捣陈村砦，马陷淖中，腾而上，连馘三酋，破其余众。
现代文：沈希仪用数百人攻打陈村寨，马陷在泥沼中，腾跃而上，连杀三个敌人头领，破除其余敌众。
English: Shen Xiyi used hundreds of people to attack Chen Cunzhai. The horse got stuck in the mud and leapt up, killing three enemy leaders in succession and eliminating the rest of the enemy.

古文：进署都指挥佥事。
现代文：沈希仪升为署都督佥事。
English: Shen Xiyi was promoted to the post of prefectural governor.

古文：义宁贼寇临桂，还巢，希仪追之。
现代文：义宁的敌贼侵犯监桂，又回到巢穴，沈希仪追击他们。
English: Yining's enemy thieves violated the jailer, returned to the lair, and Shen Xiyi chased them.

古文：巢有两隘，贼伏兵其一，使熟瑶绐官兵入。
现代文：敌贼的巢穴有两处险隘，敌贼在其中一处埋有伏兵，让熟瑶欺骗官兵从这里攻入。
English: The den of the enemy thief has two narrow places. The enemy thief has an ambush in one of the places, so that the soldiers and officers who are familiar with deception can enter from here.

古文：希仪策其诈，急从别隘直抵贼巢。
现代文：沈希仪估计到敌贼有诈，急从另一险隘直抵贼寇的巢穴。
English: Shen Xiyi estimated that the enemy thief was deceitful and rushed from another narrow pass straight to the burglar's lair.

古文：贼仓卒还救，遂大破之。
现代文：敌贼仓促回救，于是被沈希仪大举攻破。
English: The enemy thief hastily came to the rescue, so it was broken by Shen Xiyi in a big way.

古文：荔浦贼八千渡江东掠，希仪率五百人驻白面砦，待其归。
现代文：荔浦敌贼八千人渡江到东方抢掠，沈希仪率领五百人驻扎在北面寨，等待敌贼归来。
English: Eight thousand Liipu invaders crossed the river to the east to plunder, and Shen Xiyi led five hundred people to stay in Beimenzhai, waiting for the invaders to return.

古文：砦去蛟龙、滑石两滩各数里。
现代文：北面寨距蛟龙、滑石两滩各有数里。
English: The northern wall is several miles away from the two beaches of Longtan and Talc.

古文：希仪以滑石滩狭，虽众可薄，蛟龙滩广，济则难图，欲诱致之滑石。
现代文：沈希仪因滑石滩狭窄，即使部队众多仍可进击，蛟龙滩宽广，渡过去也难于歼敌，想将敌贼引诱到滑石滩。
English: Because of the narrowness of the talc beach, Shen Xiyi could still attack even if there were many troops. The dragon beach was wide, and it was difficult to defeat the enemy after crossing it. He wanted to lure the enemy thieves to the talc beach.

古文：乃树旗百蛟龙滩，守以羸卒，然柴以疑之。
现代文：于是在蛟龙滩树起百旗，用弱兵守住，燃烧柴禾来惑乱敌人。
English: So he set up a hundred flags on the trees of Longtan, guarded them with weak soldiers, and burned firewood to confuse the enemy.

古文：贼果趋滑石。
现代文：敌贼果然趋向滑石滩。
English: The enemy was indeed moving towards Talc Beach.

古文：希仪预以小舰载劲卒伏葭苇中。
现代文：沈希仪预先用小舰载劲卒埋伏在葭苇之中。
English: Shen Xiyi pre-emptively used small ships to carry reinforcements to lie in ambush in the reeds.

古文：贼渡且半，乘泷急冲之，两岸军噪而前，贼众多坠水死，收所掠而还。
现代文：敌贼渡过一半，乘急流冲之，两岸军兵鼓噪上前，敌贼众多人坠入水中淹死，沈希仪收获他们所掠抢的东西回来。
English: Halfway across, the enemy bandits took the rapids and rushed forward. The soldiers on both sides of the strait roared forward. Many of the enemy bandits fell into the water and drowned. Shen Xiyi recovered what they had looted.

古文：从副总兵张祐连破临桂、灌阳、古田贼。
现代文：沈希仪随从副总兵张连破临桂、灌阳、古田的敌贼。
English: Shen Xiyi's subordinate Zhang Lian, the deputy commander-in-chief, defeated the enemy bandits in Lingui, Guanyang and Gutian.

古文：进署都指挥同知，掌都司事。
现代文：他被晋升为署都督指挥同知，掌管都司事。
English: He was promoted to the post of prefectural governor, commanding a comrade-in-arms, in charge of the prefectural governor.

古文：嘉靖五年，总督姚镆将讨田州岑猛。
现代文：嘉靖五年，总督姚镆准备征讨田州岑猛。
English: In the fifth year of the Jiajing Dynasty, Governor Yao Jun was preparing to recruit the ferocious warriors of Tianzhou.

古文：用希仪计，间猛妇翁归顺土酋岑璋，使图猛，而分兵五哨进。
现代文：他用沈希仪的计谋，离间岑猛的岳丈归顺和土酋岑璋的关系，而分兵五哨进击。
English: He used Shen Xiyi's stratagem to separate the fierce relationship between the father-in-law, Quixun, and the local chiefs, and the detachment of five sentries to attack.

古文：希仪将中哨，当工尧。
现代文：沈希仪带领中哨。挡住工尧。
English: Shen Xiyi led the middle sentry. Blocked the workers' march.

古文：工尧，贼要地，聚众守之。
现代文：工尧是敌贼的要地，他们聚众守卫这个地方。
English: The forge is a key area for the enemy, and they have gathered to guard the place.

古文：希仪夜遣军三百人，缘山上，绕出其背。
现代文：沈希仪夜间派遣军兵三百人，缘山而上，绕出其背。
English: At night, Shen Xiyi sent three hundred soldiers to march up the edge of the mountain and round its back.

古文：比明合战，则所遣军已立帜山巅，贼大溃败。
现代文：等到第二天会战，所派遣的士兵已在山巅树立旗帜，敌贼被打得大败。
English: By the next day's battle, the dispatched soldiers had set up a banner on the top of the mountain, and the enemy was defeated.

古文：猛走归顺，为璋所执，田州平。
现代文：岑猛逃跑到归顺那里，被岑璋捉住，田州于是平定。
English: He ran away furiously to Kushun and was caught by a dragonfly. Thus, the state of Tianzhou was pacified.

古文：希仪功最，镆抑之，止受赉。
现代文：沈希仪的功最大，姚镆压抑他的功劳，只是受到赏赐。
English: Shen Xiyi's merit is the greatest, and Yao Xi suppressed his merit, only to be rewarded.

古文：镆议设流官，希仪曰： 思恩以流官故，乱至今未已。
现代文：姚镆建议设立流官，沈希仪说： 思恩因流官的缘故，祸乱到现在还没有停止。
English: Yao Yao suggested the establishment of a stream official, Shen Xiyi said: Because of the stream official, the calamity has not yet stopped.

古文：田州复然，两贼且合从起。 
现代文：田州又设立流官，两处之敌贼将会合起来作乱。 
English: Tianzhou will also set up a stream official, and the two enemies will come together to make trouble.

古文：镆不从。
现代文：姚镆不听从他的话。
English: Yao Yao didn't listen to him.

古文：以希仪为右参将，分守思、田。
现代文：以沈希仪任右参将，分守思恩和田州。
English: Shen Xiyi was appointed as the right-hand adjutant general, in charge of Shenn and Tianzhou.

古文：希仪请还乡治装。以参将张经代守。
现代文：沈希仪请求回乡整束行装，用参将张经代守。
English: Shen Xiyi requested to go back to his hometown to pack the bundles and sent Zhang Jing as a substitute.

古文：甫一月，田州复叛，镆罢归。
现代文：刚刚一个月，田州又发生叛乱，姚镆被罢去官职而回到家乡。
English: Just a month ago, there was another rebellion in Tianzhou, and Yao Wei was dismissed from his post and returned to his hometown.

古文：王守仁代，多用希仪计，思、田复定。
现代文：王守仁代替姚镆的官位，王守仁多用沈希仪的计策，思恩和田州又被平定。
English: Wang Shouren replaced Yao Jun's official position, Wang Shouren mostly used Shen Xiyi's strategy, and Sian and Tianzhou were also subdued.

古文：改右江柳庆参将，驻柳州。
现代文：沈希仪改任右江柳庆参将，驻扎在柳州。
English: Shen Xiyi was transferred to the post of Yujiang Liuqing general and stationed in Liuzhou.

古文：象州、武宣、融县瑶反，讨破之。
现代文：象州、武宣、融县瑶民造反，沈希仪出兵征讨攻破。
English: The people of Xiangzhou, Wuxuan and Rong County rebelled, and Shen Xiyi sent troops to fight and defeat them.

古文：谢病归，顷之还故任。
现代文：他因病回到家乡，不久又回到原任。
English: He returned to his hometown due to illness, and soon returned to his original post.

古文：柳在万山中，城外五里即贼巢，军民至无地可田，而官军素罢不任战。
现代文：柳州在万山之中，城外五里之处就是敌贼的巢穴，军民已到无地可耕的地步，而官军向来不能胜任战斗。
English: Liuzhou is in the mountains. Five miles outside the city is a den of traitors. The military and civilians have reached the point where there is no land to cultivate, and the government army has never been able to fight competently.

古文：又贼耳目遍官府，闺闼动静无不知。
现代文：又加上敌贼耳目遍官府，对官府里的事情动静无所不知。
English: In addition, the eyes and ears of the enemy are all over the government, and they know everything about what is going on in the government.

古文：希仪谓欲大破贼，非狼兵不可，请于制府。
现代文：沈希仪说要想大破敌贼，非用狼兵不可，向制府请求这件事。
English: Shen Xiyi said that if he wanted to smash the enemy, he had to use wolf soldiers, and requested this from the government.

古文：调那地狼兵二千来，戍兵稍振。
现代文：调那地的狼兵二千人来，守戍之兵才稍有振作。
English: Two thousand wolf soldiers from that area were brought in, and only then did the soldiers guarding the castle perk up a bit.

古文：乃求得与瑶通贩易者数十人，持其罪而厚抚之，使诇贼。
现代文：又寻找到与瑶通贸易商贩的有几十人，抓住他们犯罪根据而厚抚他们，让他们刺探敌贼。
English: They also found dozens of people who were trading with Yan Tong, seized their criminal bases and petted them, allowing them to spy on the enemy.

古文：贼动静，希仪亦无不知。
现代文：这样敌贼的动向，沈希仪也无所不知。
English: Shen Xiyi also knew everything about the enemy's movements.

古文：希仪每出兵，虽肘腋亲近不得闻。
现代文：沈希仪每次出兵，虽然是肘腋亲近的人，也不告诉他们去向。
English: Every time Shen Xiyi sent out troops, although they were close to him, he did not tell them where to go.

古文：至期鸣号，则诸军咸集。
现代文：到期鸣号，则诸军都集合起来。
English: When the last trumpet sounds, all the armies muster.

古文：令一人挟旗引诸军行，不测所往。
现代文：令一人挟旗带领诸军行军，不让他们测知到哪里去。
English: He ordered one man to hold a banner and lead the troops on the march, not letting them know where they were going.

古文：及驻军设伏，贼必至，遇伏辄奔。
现代文：等到驻军设立埋伏，敌贼必定到达，敌贼遇到埋伏总是逃奔。
English: Wait for the garrison to set up an ambush, the enemy will certainly arrive, and the enemy will always flee when ambushed.

古文：官军击之，无不如志。
现代文：官军攻击他们，总是能取得预期的胜利。
English: The government army attacks them and always achieves the expected victory.

古文：已，贼寇他所，官军又先至。
现代文：之后，敌贼侵犯其他地方，官军又比他们先到达。
English: Later, the enemy bandits invaded other places, and the government troops arrived before them.

古文：远村僻聚，贼度官军所不逮者，往寇之，官军又未尝不在，贼惊以为神。
现代文：远村僻地，敌贼估计是官军不能到达的地方，前往侵犯，官军又未尝不在，敌贼惊服他是神人。
English: In a remote village, the enemy thief estimated that it was a place where the government army could not reach, went to invade, the government army was not absent, and the enemy thief convinced him that he was a god.

古文：希仪得贼巢妇女畜产，果邻巢者悉还之，惟取阴助贼者。
现代文：沈希仪获得的贼巢妇女牲畜财产，果真是邻巢的都归还他们，只取暗中帮助敌贼之人的东西。
English: From the thieves' nest, women and livestock property obtained by Shen Xiyi, it is true that the neighbors of the nest all returned to them, only taking the things of those who secretly helped the enemy thieves.

古文：诸瑶尽詟伏，无敢向贼。
现代文：诸瑶全部恐惧降伏，不敢响应敌贼。
English: They were all afraid to surrender and did not dare to respond to the enemy.

古文：希仪初至，令熟瑶得出入城中，无所禁。
现代文：沈希仪初到，令熟瑶能够出入城中，无所禁忌。
English: When Shen Xiyi first arrived, he made it possible for practitioners to go in and out of the city without any restrictions.

古文：因厚赏其黠者，使为谍。
现代文：厚赏瑶人中的智黠之人，让他们做间谍。
English: Let the wisest among you become spies.

古文：后渐令瑶妇入见其妻，赉以酒食缯帛。
现代文：后来逐渐让瑶妇进入到官府和她们的丈夫见面，并赐给她们酒食布帛。
English: Later, they gradually allowed the concubines to enter government offices to meet their husbands, and gave them alcohol, food and cloth bags.

古文：其夫常以贼情告者，则阴厚之。
现代文：这些瑶妇的丈夫经常告诉他敌情，则暗中厚赏。
English: These women's husbands often tell them of their hostility and secretly reward them.

古文：诸瑶妇利赏，争劝其夫输贼情，或自入府言之。
现代文：诸瑶妇贪爱赏赐，争相劝说自己的丈夫偷告敌情，或者亲自入沈希仪府中说明敌贼情况。
English: Greedy for rewards, all the concubines tried to persuade their husbands to secretly denounce the enemy, or to personally enter Shen Xiyi's palace to explain the situation of the enemy.

古文：以故，贼益无所匿形。
现代文：正因为这个原因，敌贼更加没有地方隐藏匿形。
English: Because of this, the enemy has nowhere to hide.

古文：希仪每于风雨晦冥夜，侦贼所止宿，分遣人赍铳潜伏舍旁。
现代文：沈希仪每于风雨晦黑的夜晚，侦察敌贼住宿停顿的地方，分别派遣人携带火铳潜伏在舍旁。
English: Every dark and stormy night, Shen Xiyi scouted out the places where the enemy bandits were staying and sent people to lurk around the house with torches.

古文：中夜铳举，贼大骇曰： 老沈来矣！ 
现代文：半夜发铳，敌贼大骇说： 老沈来了！ 
English: In the middle of the night, the enemy came and said, "Old Shen is coming!"

古文：咸挈妻子匍匐上山。
现代文：都携带妻氏儿女匍匐上山。
English: They all carried their wives, children and families up the mountain.

古文：儿啼女号，或寒冻触厓石死，争怨悔作贼非计。
现代文：儿啼女号，有的因寒冻触岩石而死，有的后悔当贼寇不是好办法。
English: Some of them died because they hit the rocks due to the cold, and some regretted that it was not a good way to be a thief.

古文：至晓下山，则寂无人声。
现代文：到天明后下山，又寂静而没有人声。
English: When I came down from the mountain after dawn, it was quiet and there was no sound.

古文：他巢亦然，众愈益惊。
现代文：其他巢穴也遇到同样的情况，贼众更加惊恐。
English: Other nests were in the same situation, and the thieves were even more terrified.

古文：潜遣人入城侦之，则希仪故居城中不出也。
现代文：暗中派遣人进城侦察，发现沈希仪像原来一样居住在城中没有外出。
English: They secretly sent someone into the city to investigate and found that Shen Xiyi was still living in the city as before, without going out.

古文：贼胆落，多易面为熟瑶。
现代文：敌贼丧魂落魄，他们大多易容为熟瑶。
English: The enemy bandits are downhearted, and most of them are easy to tolerate.

古文：韦扶谏者，马平瑶魁也，累捕不得。
现代文：韦扶谏是马平瑶的敌贼魁首，多次捕捉他而没有成功。
English: Wei Fuxuan was the leader of Ma Pingyao's enemy bandits. He was captured many times without success.

古文：有报扶谏逃邻贼三层巢者，希仪潜率兵剿之，则又与三层贼往劫他所。
现代文：有人报告说韦扶谏逃到邻贼三层巢去，沈希仪暗中率领兵马剿他，他又与三层巢的敌贼到其他戍所去抢劫。
English: Some people reported that Wei Fuxuan fled to a neighboring three-story nest of thieves, and Shen Xiyi secretly led the Terracotta Warriors and Horses to capture him, and he and the three-story nest of enemy thieves went to other brothels to rob.

古文：希仪尽俘三层巢妻子归，希仪俘贼妻子尽以畀狼兵，至是独闭之空舍，饮食之。
现代文：沈希仪尽俘三层巢敌贼的妻子儿女，一并带回来，过去沈希仪俘获的敌贼妻子儿女全部用来给与予狼兵，到这时却将他们独闭在空舍中，给他们饮食。
English: Shen Xiyi captured all the wives and children of the three-storey nest of enemy thieves and brought them back together. In the past, all the wives and children of the enemy thieves captured by Shen Xiyi were used to give to the wolf soldiers, but at this time they were locked up alone in the empty house and given food.

古文：使熟瑶往语其夫曰： 得韦扶谏，还矣。 
现代文：让熟瑶去对他们的丈夫说 ：你们捉到韦扶谏，就让你们的妻子儿女回来。 
English: Let the skilled women go and say to their husbands, 'When you have captured the unskilled men, let your wives and children return to you.'

古文：诸瑶闻，悉来谒希仪。
现代文：诸瑶听说后，都来谒见沈希仪。
English: After hearing the news, all of them came to see Shen Xiyi.

古文：今入室视之，妻子固无恙。
现代文：沈希仪让他们到房室中去看，见他们的妻子儿女都安然无恙。
English: Shen Xiyi let them go to the room to see that their wives and children were safe and sound.

古文：乃共诱扶谏出巢，缚以献，易妻子还。
现代文：于是他们共同引诱韦扶谏出巢，将他捆缚着献给沈希仪，来换他们的妻子儿女回去。
English: So together they lured Wei Fuxuan out of the nest, tied him up and dedicated him to Shen Xiyi, in exchange for their wives and children.

古文：希仪剜扶谏目，支解之，悬诸城门。
现代文：沈希仪剜去韦扶谏的眼睛，将他肢解后，悬挂在诸城门。
English: Shen Xiyi gouged out Wei Fuxuan's eyes, dismembered him, and hung him from the city gates.

古文：诸瑶服希仪威信，益不敢为盗。
现代文：诸瑶服沈希仪威信，更加不敢做强盗。
English: All of them respected Shen Xiyi's authority, and even more dared not to be robbers.

古文：自是，柳城四旁数百里，无敢攘夺者。
现代文：从此，柳城四旁的数百里，没有敢抢夺的人。
English: From then on, for hundreds of miles around Liucheng, no one dared to snatch it.

古文：希仪尝上书于朝，言狼兵亦瑶、僮耳。
现代文：沈希仪曾经向朝廷上书，说狼兵也是瑶、僮人。
English: Shen Xiyi once wrote a letter to the imperial court, saying that the wolf soldiers were also barbarians.

古文：瑶、僮所在为贼，而狼兵死不敢为非，非狼兵顺，而瑶、僮逆也。
现代文：瑶、僮所在为贼，但狼兵至死不敢为非作歹，并不是狼兵顺服，而瑶、僮叛逆。
English: and  are thieves, but the wolf soldiers dare not do anything wrong until death. It is not the wolf soldiers who obey, but  and  who are rebellious.

古文：狼兵隶土官，瑶、僮隶流官。
现代文：狼兵隶属土官，而瑶、僮隶属流官。
English: The wolf soldiers were subordinate to the local officials, while the wolf cubs and wolf cubs were subordinate to the stream officials.

古文：土官令严足以制狼兵，流官势轻不能制瑶、僮。
现代文：土官令严足以控制狼兵，流官势轻则不能控制瑶僮。
English: The land officer's order was strict enough to control the wolf soldiers, but the stream official's power was too weak to control the wolf soldiers.

古文：若割瑶、僮分隶之旁近土官，土官世世富贵，不敢有他望。
现代文：如果将瑶、僮分割开来分别隶属旁近的土官，土官世世代代富贵，不敢有他望。
English: If  and  are divided to belong to the adjacent local officials separately, the local officials will be rich and valuable for generations to come, and they dare not look down on others.

古文：以国家之力制土官，以土官之力制瑶、僮，皆为狼兵，两广世世无患矣。
现代文：这样以国家的力量控制土官，以土官之力来控制瑶、僮，将他们都变成狼兵，两广就世世代代没有祸患了。
English: In this way, the power of the state was used to control the local officials, and the power of the local officials was used to control the hawks and rooks, turning them all into wolf soldiers, and the two regions were free from evil for generations.

古文：时不能用。
现代文：当时没有采用他的建议。
English: The recommendation was not implemented.

古文：至十六年而有思恩岑金之变。
现代文：到十六年就发生了思恩岑金的叛乱。
English: By the 16th year, Shine's rebellion had taken place.

古文：初，思恩土官岑浚既诛，改设流官，以其酋二人韦贵、徐五为土巡检，分掌其兵各万余。
现代文：起初，思恩土官岑氵睿被诛后，改设流官，以其酋二人韦贵、徐五任土巡检，分别掌管兵马各有一万多人。
English: At first, after Xiong Rui, the local official of Xiong'an, was arrested, he was replaced by a roving officer, with his two chiefs, Wei Gui and Xu Wu, in charge of the local inspection, each in charge of more than 10,000 soldiers and horses.

古文：夷民不乐汉法，凡数叛。
现代文：夷民不喜欢汉法，共有多次叛乱。
English: The barbarians did not like the Han Dynasty and rebelled many times.

古文：镇安有男子名金，自言浚子。
现代文：镇安有个男人名叫岑金，他自称是岑氵睿的儿子。
English: In Zhen'an, there is a man named Bao Jin, who claims to be the son of Ya Rui.

古文：镇安土官乃潜召其旧部酋长，出金而与之盟曰： 若小主也。 
现代文：镇安土官于是暗中召集旧部酋长，叫出岑金而与旧部酋长结盟说： 这是你们的小主人。 
English: The local official of Zhen'an then secretly summoned the chiefs of the old department, called out the money and allied with the chiefs of the old department, saying: This is your little master.

古文：诸酋罗拜，拥金归，聚兵五千，将攻城，复故地，远近汹汹。
现代文：诸酋罗拜，拥岑金而归，聚兵五千人，准备攻城，恢复旧地，远近汹汹。
English: The chieftains worshipped, returned with gold, gathered five thousand soldiers, prepared to attack the city, and restored the old land.

古文：浚诛时，其酋杨留者无所归，率党千余人诣宾州，应募为打手。
现代文：岑氵睿被诛时，他的酋长杨留没有地方去，率同党一千多人到宾州去，应募为打手。
English: When Zhaorui was arrested, his chief Yang had no place to go, so he and more than a thousand of his party members went to Pennsylvania to be recruited as thugs.

古文：希仪在宾，留入言，欲往见小主人。
现代文：沈希仪在宾州，杨留到沈希仪府中说，他想去见他的小主人。
English: Shen Xiyi was in Pennsylvania, and Yang stayed at Shen Xiyi's house, saying that he wanted to see his little master.

古文：希仪故患金，及闻留言，益大骇。
现代文：沈希仪向来担忧岑金，等听到杨留的话后，更加大骇。
English: Shen Xiyi has always been worried about money laundering, and after hearing Yang Liu's words, he was even more shocked.

古文：因好谓留曰： 是岑浚第九子耶？
现代文：因而问杨留说 ：是岑氵睿的第九个儿子吗？
English: Therefore, Yang Liu asked: Is he the ninth son of Zhaorui?

古文：我向征田州固闻之。 
现代文：我从前征讨田州所以听说过这件事。 
English: I've heard about it because I've been to Tianzhou before.

古文：因自语： 岑氏其复乎？ 
现代文：因而自语说 ：岑氏又恢复了吗？ 
English: Therefore, I said to myself, "Has Mr. Zou recovered?"

古文：欲以深动留，留果喜。
现代文：想以此打动杨留，杨留果然大喜。
English: Wanting to impress Yang Liu with this, Yang Liu was overjoyed.

古文：已，召留密室，言： 予我重赂，即为金复官。 
现代文：之后，沈希仪召杨留到密室中说： 给我重贿，就为岑金复官。 
English: After that, Shen Xiyi called Yang to stay in a secret room and said, "Give me a heavy bribe, and I will reinstate Bao Jin."

古文：且出，复呼入曰： 韦贵、徐五今分将思恩兵，必雠金，善防之。 
现代文：出去后又呼他回来说： 韦贵、徐五现今分别管掌思恩兵马，必定仇恨岑金，必须妥善防备他们。 
English: After he left, he called him back and said, "Weigui and Xu Wuzhong are now respectively in charge of the Shenn soldiers and horses. They must hate Bao Jin. We must properly guard against them."

古文：留益大信。
现代文：杨留更加大信。
English: Yang Liu is more confident.

古文：金遂从五千人因留以见。
现代文：岑金于是跟从五千人依靠杨留来见沈希仪。
English: Therefore, Yan Jin followed the five thousand people to rely on Yang to stay and see Shen Xiyi.

古文：门者奔告，请无纳。
现代文：门人奔告，请求沈希仪不要收纳岑金的贿赂。
English: The doorkeepers rushed to ask Shen Xiyi not to accept the bribe of money.

古文：希仪骂曰： 金，土官子，非贼，奈何不纳？ 
现代文：沈希仪骂着说 ：岑金是土官的儿子，不是贼寇，为什么不收纳？ 
English: Shen Xiyi scolded and said, "Bai Jin is the son of a local official, not a bandit, why not accept him?"

古文：引入，厚结之，又引以诣兵备副使，随以计渐散其五千人。
现代文：将岑金引入，与他厚结，又引他诣见兵备副使，随后用计逐渐解散岑金的五千人。
English: He brought in Bao Jin, knitted a thick knot with him, and brought him to see the deputy military attaché, and then gradually disbanded the five thousand people of Bao Jin.

古文：卒缚金，留亦自恨死，思恩复宁。
现代文：兵卒捆缚岑金，杨留也惭愧而死，思恩又恢复安宁。
English: The soldiers tied up the money changers, and Yang Rui died of shame, and peace was restored to the city.

古文：已，从总督张经大破断藤峡、弩滩贼，受赉归。
现代文：之后，随从总督张经大破断藤峡、弩滩的敌贼，受到赏赐而归。
English: After that, he accompanied Governor Zhang Jing to break through the enemy's ditch and beach, and was rewarded and returned.

古文：希仪镇柳、庆久，渠魁宿猾捕诛殆尽。
现代文：沈希仪镇守柳州、庆州很久，大盗宿猾被捕诛殆尽。
English: Shen Xiyi was in charge of Liuzhou and Gyeongju for a long time, and all the great thieves were arrested and executed.

古文：先后捣巢，斩馘积五千余级，未尝悉奏功，故多不叙。
现代文：先后捣毁敌巢，斩敌人积有五千多个，未尝全部上奏报功，所以多不叙功。
English: He destroyed the enemy's nests one after another, and killed more than five thousand enemies. He did not report all of his exploits, so he did not report his exploits.

古文：十九年复谢病，柳人祀之山云祠。
现代文：十九年又谢病，柳人在山云洞为他祭祀。
English: In the 19th year of Jia Xie's illness, Liu Ren went to make a sacrifice for him in the mountain cave.

古文：旋起四川左参将，分守叙、沪及贵州迤西诸处。
现代文：不久被起用为四川左参将，分守叙州、泸州和贵州迤西等处。
English: He was soon appointed as Sichuan's left-hand general, and was assigned to guard Syuzhou, Luzhou, and the western part of Guizhou.

古文：其冬，擢署都督佥事，充总兵官，镇贵州。
现代文：这一年冬天，被提升为署都督佥事，充任总兵官，镇守贵州。
English: In the winter of this year, he was promoted to the post of prefectural governor of Anji, appointed as the chief military officer, and became the town guard of Guizhou.

古文：复谢病归。
现代文：又谢病回到家乡。
English: Thanks to his illness, he returned to his hometown.

古文：塞上多警，召天下名将至京师，希仪在召中。
现代文：塞上多警，朝廷召令天下名将到京师，沈希仪在召之中。
English: Many policemen were put on duty, the imperial court summoned the world's famous generals to Beijing, and Shen Xiyi was among those summoned.

古文：希仪镇柳、庆，每战必先登，身数被创，阴雨辄痛剧，故数谢病。
现代文：沈希仪镇守柳、庆时，每战必身先士卒，身体多次受伤，遇阴雨天气总是剧痛，所以多次谢病。
English: Shen Xiyi was always at the forefront of every battle, and he was injured many times. When it was cloudy and rainy, he was always in severe pain, so he got sick many times.

古文：至京，亦以病辞。
现代文：到京后，也因病辞谢。
English: After arriving in Beijing, he also resigned due to illness.

古文：帝疑其规避，褫都督官，令赴部候用。
现代文：皇帝怀疑他是回避，夺去他的都督官职，命令他赴兵部听候调用。
English: The emperor suspected him of evasion, deprived him of the post of governor-general, and ordered him to go to the military headquarters to await a summons.

古文：翁万达荐其才。
现代文：翁万达推荐他的才能。
English: Onwanda commends his talent.

古文：会江、淮多盗，议设督捕总兵官，乃复希仪署都督佥事以往。
现代文：正遇上江、淮多盗，议设督捕总兵官，于是恢复沈希仪署都督佥事官职前往剿匪。
English: When Shangjiang and Huai Doduo were robbed, it was proposed to set up a governor to capture the general officer, so the Shenxi Ceremonial Affairs Department was restored to the official post of the governor and went to the bandits.

古文：二十六年以为广东副总兵。
现代文：二十六年任沈希仪为广东副总兵。
English: For twenty-six years, Shen Xiyi served as deputy commander-in-chief of Guangdong.

古文：命自今将领至自川、广、云、贵者，毋推京营及西北边，著为令。
现代文：命自今将领至四川、广西、云南、贵州者，毋推京营及西北边，著为令。
English: Those who are ordered to go to Sichuan, Guangxi, Yunnan and Guizhou from now on, should go to Beijing and the northwest.

古文：从总督张岳大破贺县贼倪仲亮等，予实授，仍赉银币。
现代文：沈希仪随从总督张岳大破贺县的敌贼倪仲亮等人，予实际授官，仍然赏他银币。
English: Shen Xiyi followed the governor Zhang Yue to defeat the enemy Ni Zhongliang and others in He County, and he was actually awarded an official post, but he was still awarded silver coins.

古文：琼州五指山熟黎素畏法，供徭赋，知州邵浚虐取之。
现代文：琼州五指山熟黎向来畏法，供徭赋，知州邵氵睿残虐榨取他们的血汗。
English: Qiongzhou Wuzhishan has always been familiar with Li Dangfa, for endowment, and Zhizhou Shao Zhe Rui brutally squeezed their blood and sweat.

古文：其酋那燕遂结崖州、感恩、昌化诸黎为乱。
现代文：黎酋那燕于是勾结崖州、感恩、昌化诸黎作乱。
English: Li Nanyan then colluded with Yazhou, Chongqing and Changhua to create turmoil in Lijiang.

古文：总督欧阳必进议并万州、陵水黎讨之，分兵五道。
现代文：总督欧阳必进提议一并讨伐万州、陵水之黎，兵分五路。
English: Governor Ouyang Bijin proposed to attack Wanzhou and Lingshui simultaneously, dividing the army into five groups.

古文：希仪适病，最后至，谓必进曰： 万州、陵水黎未有党恶之实，奈何并诛，益树敌？
现代文：沈希仪正在患病，最后到来，他对欧阳必进说： 万州、陵水之黎人没有从恶的事实，如果一并诛讨，更加树敌。
English: Shen Xiyi was suffering from illness, and when he finally arrived, he said to Ouyang Bijin: The fact that people in Wanzhou and Lingshui did not commit evil, if they fight together, they will make more enemies.

古文：莫若止三道。 
现代文：不如只分兵三道。 
English: It would be better to divide the soldiers into three groups.

古文：必进从之。
现代文：欧阳必进听从了他的话。
English: Ouyang Bijin obeyed his words.

古文：希仪乃偕参将武鸾、俞大猷等直入五指山下，斩那燕及其党五千四百有奇，俘获者五之一，招降三千七百人。
现代文：沈希仪于是偕同参将武鸾、俞大猷等人直入五指山下，斩那燕及其党徒五千四百多人，俘获的有五分之一，招降三千七百人。
English: Therefore, Shen Xiyi and his fellow generals Wu Xuan and Yu Daxuan marched straight to the foot of the Five Fingers Mountain, killed more than 5,400 of Nayan and his party members, captured one-fifth of them, and recruited 3,700 people.

古文：捷闻，进都督同知，改贵州总兵官。
现代文：捷报奏闻朝廷，沈希仪晋升为都督同知，改任贵州总兵官。
English: The winning newspaper was reported to the imperial court, and Shen Xiyi was promoted to the same rank as the governor and appointed as the chief military officer of Guizhou.

古文：复从岳平铜仁叛苗龙许保、吴黑苗。
现代文：又从张岳军定铜仁的叛苗龙许保、吴黑苗等人。
English: Also from Zhang Yue's army were Ding Tongren's rebels Long Xu Bao, Wu Heyao and others.

古文：又以病归。
现代文：又因病回到家乡。
English: Due to illness, he returned to his hometown.

古文：倭寇海上，命督川、广兵赴剿。
现代文：倭寇侵犯海上，命令沈希仪督川、广之兵赴剿。
English: The wokou invaded the sea, and ordered Shen Xiji, the commander of the river, and Guang's soldiers to go to Lijiang.

古文：无功，为周如斗劾罢。
现代文：无功，沈希仪被周如斗弹劾罢去官职。
English: To no avail, Shen Xiyi was impeached and removed from office by Zhou Ruto.

古文：希仪为人坦率，居恒谑笑，洞见肺腑。
现代文：沈希仪为人坦率，常居喜欢说俏皮话，性格开朗，没有城府。
English: Shen Xiyi is a frank person, often likes to say jokes, has a cheerful personality, and does not have a city government.

古文：及临敌，应变出奇，人莫测。
现代文：等到面临敌人，则应变出奇，让人莫测。
English: When confronted with the enemy, the response is surprising and unpredictable.

古文：尤善抚士卒。
现代文：特别善于安抚士卒。
English: He is particularly good at placating his subordinates.

古文：常染危病，卒多自戕以祷于神。
现代文：沈希仪经常染病垂危，士卒多自残来向神祷告。
English: Shen Xiyi often fell ill and was in danger of dying, and many of the priests came to pray to God.

古文：最后一人，至以箭穿其喉。
现代文：甚至有一人，为沈希仪祈祷到达用箭穿自己咽喉的地步。
English: One person even prayed for Shen Xiyi to the point of putting an arrow through his own throat.

古文：其得士心如此。
现代文：沈希仪是如此深得士卒之心。
English: Shen Xiyi is so deeply endowed with the heart of a scholar.

古文：石邦宪，字希尹，贵州清平卫人。
现代文：石邦宪，字希尹，贵州清平卫人。
English: Shi Bangxian, the character Xiyin, Guizhou Qingping Wei Ren.

古文：嘉靖七年嗣世职为指挥使。
现代文：嘉靖七年承袭世职为指挥使。
English: After seven years, Jiajing succeeded to the post of commander.

古文：累功，进署都指挥佥事，充铜仁参将。
现代文：累功，晋官署都指挥佥事，充任铜仁参将。
English: For his hard work, the Jin government all commanded the anecdote, and he was appointed as a bronze reliever.

古文：苗龙许保、吴黑苗叛，总督张岳议征之，而贼陷印江、石阡，邦宪坐逮问。
现代文：苗人龙许保、吴黑苗反叛，总督张岳提议征讨他们，而敌贼攻陷印江、石阡，石邦宪被坐罪逮问。
English: Miao people Long Xu Bao and Wu Hei Miao rebelled, Governor Zhang Yue proposed to conscript them, and the enemy attacked and captured Yingjiang and Shijiazhuang. Shi Bangxian was arrested and interrogated.

古文：岳以铜仁贼巢穴，而邦宪有谋勇，乃奏留之。
现代文：张岳因为铜仁是敌贼的巢穴，而石邦宪有勇有谋，于是上奏留用石邦宪。
English: Zhang Yue, because Tongren was a den of traitors, and Shibang Xian was brave and resourceful, kept Shibang Xian in the upper section.

古文：邦宪遂与川、湖兵进贵州，破苗砦十有五。
现代文：石邦宪于是与川、湖之兵共进贵州，攻破苗砦十分之五。
English: Shi Bangxian then marched into Guizhou with the soldiers of the rivers and lakes and broke through five-tenths of the Miao Fort.

古文：窜山箐者，搜戮殆尽。
现代文：躲藏在山中竹林子里的人，被搜杀殆尽。
English: People hiding in the bamboo forest in the mountains were searched and killed.

古文：上功，邦宪第一。
现代文：上功，石邦宪居第一。
English: Shibang Xian was the first to win.

古文：未及叙，而许保等突入思州，执知府李允简以去。
现代文：未及叙功，而龙许保等人突入到思州，捉住知府李允简而去。
English: Long Xu Bao and others rushed into Shizhou and captured the prefectural governor Li Yunjian.

古文：邦宪急邀，夺之归。
现代文：石邦宪紧急半路拦击，将李允简夺回来了。
English: Shi Bangxian made an emergency half-way interception and recaptured Li Yunjian.

古文：坐是停俸戴罪。
现代文：石邦宪被停止俸禄，让他戴罪立功。
English: Shi Bangxian's salary was suspended, and he was made to pay for his crime.

古文：贼既破思州，复纠余党，与湖广蜡尔山苗合，欲攻石阡。
现代文：敌贼攻破思州后，又纠集余党，与湖广蜡尔山苗人会合，想攻石阡。
English: After the invaders broke through Shizhou, they gathered the rest of the party and met with the Miao people of Waxer Mountain in Hukang to attack Shizhu.

古文：不克，还过省溪。
现代文：没有攻克，经过省溪而回去。
English: They did not conquer it, but went back via the provincial stream.

古文：千户安大朝等邀之，斩获大半，尽夺其辎重，贼不能军。
现代文：千户安大朝等人半路拦击他们，俘歼敌人大半，夺下敌贼的全部辎重，敌人溃不成军。
English: Qianhu Anda Dajo and others intercepted them halfway, captured and destroyed most of the enemy, seized all the weight of the enemy, and the enemy could not be defeated.

古文：邦宪乃使使购老穀、老犭革等执许保送军门，而黑苗窜如故。
现代文：石邦宪于是让使者重金收买老、老亻革等人擒住龙许保送到军门，而黑苗如过去一样躲藏。
English: Shi Bangxian then asked the emissary to pay a large sum of money to bribe Lao, Lao Yingge and others to capture Long Xu Bao and bring him to the military gate, while Hei Miao hid as in the past.

古文：复以计购乌朗土官田兴邦等斩黑苗，贼尽平。
现代文：又用计重金收买乌朗土官田兴邦等人斩黑苗，敌贼于是被平定。
English: He also used the weighting money to bribe Ulan local official Tian Xingbang and others to cut down black seedlings, and the enemy was then subdued.

古文：遂进署都督佥事，充总兵官，代沈希仪镇贵州。
现代文：石邦宪于是晋为署都督佥事，充任总兵官，代沈希仪镇守贵州。
English: Shi Bangxian was then promoted to the post of prefectural governor, served as chief military officer, and guarded Guizhou on behalf of Shen Xiyi.

古文：台黎砦苗关保倡乱，四川容山、广西洪江诸苗应之。
现代文：台黎砦苗人关保倡导作乱，四川容山、广西洪江诸苗响应。
English: Miao Ren Guan Bao of Tai Li Fort advocated disorder, and Yongshan of Sichuan and Zhu Miao of Hongjiang of Guangxi responded.

古文：远近骚然，抚剿莫能定。
现代文：远近骚然，朝廷上是安抚还是剿歼不能定下来。
English: With unrest in the near and far, the imperial court can't decide whether to appease or annihilate.

古文：邦宪与湖广兵分道讨破之，传檄十八砦，许执首恶赎罪。
现代文：石邦宪与湖广分兵讨破他们，传檄十八砦，许他们捉拿首恶赎罪。
English: Shi Bangxian and the soldiers of the Hukang Division defeated them, built eighteen forts, and allowed them to take their heads to atone for their sins.

古文：诸苗听抚，设盟受约而还。
现代文：诸苗听从安抚，设盟受约而回去。
English: Zhu Miao listened to the pacification, set up an alliance, accepted the agreement and went back.

古文：播州宣慰杨烈杀长官王黼，黼党李保等治兵相攻且十年，总督冯岳与邦宪讨平之。
现代文：播州宣慰杨烈杀长官王黼，王黼的同党李保等人治兵相攻快有十年，总督冯岳与石邦宪讨平他们。
English: It has been nearly ten years since Yang Li, the governor of Banzhou, consoled Yang Li for the murder of the governor Wang Xi, and Li Bao, a member of the same party as Wang Xi, and others, have been attacking each other militarily. Governor Feng Yue and Shi Bangxian have evened them out.

古文：真州苗卢阿项为乱，邦宪以兵七千编筏渡江，直抵磨子崖。
现代文：真州苗人卢阿项作乱，石邦宪用兵七千人编筏渡江，直抵磨子崖。
English: Miao people from Zhenzhou made a disturbance at Lua Xiang, and Shibang gendarmes, seven thousand strong, waded across the river as far as Mazi Cliff.

古文：策贼必夜袭，先设备。
现代文：估计敌贼必定来进行夜袭，预先防备。
English: It was estimated that the enemy bandits would certainly come for a night attack, so they had to prepare in advance.

古文：贼至，击败之。
现代文：敌贼到达后，被他们击败。
English: When the invaders arrived, they were defeated.

古文：贼求援于播州吴鲲。
现代文：敌贼向播州吴鲲求援。
English: The enemy bandits appealed to Banzhou Wusong for help.

古文：诸将惧，邦宪曰： 水西宣慰安万铨，播州所畏也。
现代文：诸将感到恐惧，石邦宪说： 水西宣慰安万铨，是播州所畏怕的。
English: Shibang Xian said, "Suixi Xuanjie is feared by Banzhou.

古文：吾调水西兵攻乌江，声杨烈纵鲲助逆罪，烈奚暇救人乎？ 
现代文：我调水西之兵攻乌江，声讨杨烈纵吴鲲助叛逆之罪，杨烈哪有空暇救人呢？ 
English: I transferred soldiers from the west to attack the Wujiang River, and denounced Yang Rongzhong and Wu Rongzhong for the crime of treason. How could Yang Rongzhong have time to save people?

古文：已，水西兵至。
现代文：之后，水西之兵到达。
English: After that, Mizuki's soldiers arrived.

古文：邦宪进逼其巢，乘风纵火，斩关而登，贼大奔溃，擒贼首父子，斩获四百七十余人。
现代文：石邦宪进逼敌人的巢穴，乘风放火，斩关而登，敌贼大崩溃，擒住敌贼首领父子，歼俘四百七十多人。
English: Shi Bangxian forced his way into the enemy's lair, took advantage of the wind to set fire, and climbed up the pass. The enemy bandits collapsed, captured the leader of the enemy bandits and his son, and killed and captured more than 470 people.

古文：进署都督同知。
现代文：石邦宪晋署都督同知。
English: He is an acquaintance of the governor of Shibakucho Kanshin post.

古文：破地隆阡叛苗四砦，又破答千诸砦，擒其渠魁。
现代文：石邦宪攻破地隆阡叛苗四砦，又攻破答千诸砦，擒住他们的巨魁。
English: Shi Bangxian broke through the four fortresses of the rebels in Longjing, and broke through the thousands of fortresses, and captured their leader.

古文：地隆阡遗贼龙老三、龙得奎结龙停苗老夭、扳凳苗石章保等纵兵掠，执石耶洞土官妻冉氏以归，攻梅平砦。
现代文：地隆阡派遣敌贼龙老三、龙得奎勾结龙停苗人老夭、扳凳苗人石章保等人纵兵抢掠，捉拿石耶洞土官的妻子冉氏带回去，攻击梅平砦。
English: Di Longtao sent the enemy thieves Long Lao San, Long De Kui, in collusion with Long Zui Miao Ren Lao Yao, Wrench Bench Miao Ren Shizhang Bao and others, to loot and capture the wife of the governor of Shiyadong, Ran, and bring her back to attack Meiping Fort.

古文：官军要擒老三。
现代文：官军要擒拿龙老三。
English: The government army wants to capture Long Lao San.

古文：得奎走免，复与老夭等攻破平南营囤。
现代文：龙得奎走脱幸免，又与老夭等人攻破平南营囤。
English: Long Dekui escaped and was spared, and he broke through the southern camp of Pingnan with the old people.

古文：邦宪侦冉氏在老夭所，阳议赎，而潜击杀老夭。
现代文：石邦宪侦察得知冉氏在老夭那里，表面议说要赎她，而暗中击杀老夭。
English: Shi Bangxian reconnaissance learned that Mr. Ran was there, ostensibly to ransom her, but secretly killed the old man.

古文：官军遂入龙停砦，并执扳凳砦苗龙老内，令执献章保。
现代文：官军于是进入龙停砦，一并捉拿扳凳砦苗人龙老丙，命令他献出石章保。
English: The government army then entered the Longji Fort, and together they captured the wrench bench of the Fort Miao people, Long Laobing, and ordered him to offer the Stone Insignia.

古文：于是诸苗悉降。
现代文：由此诸苗全部被降服。
English: As a result, all the seedlings were subdued.

古文：白洗、养鹅诸苗叛，讨擒其魁，降百余砦。
现代文：白洗、养鹅的诸苗反叛，石邦宪征讨并擒住敌魁，降服一百多砦。
English: Bai Rong and Zhu Miao, who raised geese, rebelled. Shibang Xian subdued and captured the enemy leader, and conquered more than a hundred forts.

古文：湖广溆浦瑶沈亚当等为乱，总督石勇檄邦宪讨之，生擒亚当，斩获二百有奇。
现代文：湖广溆浦瑶人沈亚当等作乱，总督石勇檄令石邦宪讨伐他们，石邦宪生擒沈亚当，俘歼二百多人。
English: The people of Hukang and Pu'er, including Shen Adam, started a riot. Governor Shi Yongkang ordered Shibang Xian to fight them, and Shibang Xian fought Shen Adam. More than 200 people were captured and killed.

古文：溆浦甫平，铜仁、都匀苗相煽叛。
现代文：甫溆浦平，铜仁、都匀的苗人互相煽动进行反叛。
English: The Miao people of Fuchuuping, Tongren and Duyun incited each other to rebel.

古文：邦宪亟驰还，率守备安大朝进剿。
现代文：石邦宪亟驰回来，率领守备安大朝进剿。
English: Shi Bangxian rushed back and led the defenders of Bei'an to advance into the city.

古文：先破彪山砦贼，乘胜略定诸砦。
现代文：先攻破彪山砦的敌贼，乘胜以谋略平定诸砦。
English: The enemy first broke through the fort of Biao Mountain, and used the victory to plan and pacify the forts.

古文：获贼首龙老罗、王三等，余党尽平。
现代文：俘虏敌贼的头子龙老罗、王三等人，余党全部平定。
English: Long Lao Luo, Wang San, the leader of the captured enemy and traitors, and the rest of the party were all subdued.

古文：又与总督黄光升，修湖北墩台、烽堠百十所，招降冷水溪诸洞苗二十八砦。
现代文：石邦宪又与总督黄光升，修筑湖北的墩台、烽土侯一百多所，招降冷水溪诸洞苗二十八砦。
English: Shi Bangxian also worked with Governor Huang Guangsheng to build more than a hundred Xingtai and Xingtu villages in Hubei, and recruited 28 forts in Lengshuixi and Zhudongmiao.

古文：播州容山副长官土舍韩甸与正长官土舍张问相攻，甸屡胜，遂纠生苗剽湖、贵境，垂二十年。
现代文：播州容山的副长官土舍韩甸与正长宫土舍张问相互攻击，韩甸多次取得胜利，于是他纠集生苗在湖、贵境内抢劫，将近二十年。
English: The vice-governor of Banzhou Yongshan, Doushe Hantian, and the vice-governor of Zhengchang, Doushe Zhang, attacked each other. Hantian won many victories, so he gathered seedlings in the lake and robbed the territory of Guizhou for nearly twenty years.

古文：问亦纠党自助。
现代文：张问也纠集党徒自助。
English: Zhang Qian also rallied party members to help themselves.

古文：邦宪讨之，斩百余人。问潜出，被获。
现代文：石邦宪讨伐张问，斩敌一百多人，张问潜逃，被擒获。
English: Shi Bangxian fought against Zhang Qian and defeated more than one hundred of his enemies. Zhang Qian escaped and was captured.

古文：官军乘胜入甸巢。
现代文：官军乘胜攻入韩甸的巢穴。
English: The government army took advantage of the victory to invade Han Dian's lair.

古文：会暮，大雨，迷失道。
现代文：遇上天黑，下大雨，官军迷失路径。
English: When it was dark and raining heavily, the government troops lost their way.

古文：守备叶勋、百户魏国相等陷伏中，死焉。
现代文：守备叶勋、百户魏国相等人陷入埋伏之中，战死。
English: Guard Ye Xun, Baihu Wei Guozhong and others fell into an ambush and died in battle.

古文：邦宪夺围出，还军镇远。
现代文：石邦宪突围而出，带军回到镇远。
English: Shi Bangxian broke out of the encirclement and led the army back to the town.

古文：再征之，贼沿江守。
现代文：再次征讨韩甸，敌贼沿江防守。
English: The Han Dynasty was once again conquered, and the enemy continued to defend along the river.

古文：邦宪佯与争，而别自上流三十里编竹以渡。
现代文：石邦宪佯装与他抗争，而另外从上游三十里处缚竹渡江。
English: Shi Bangxian disguised himself to fight him, but another thirty miles upstream chained him to the Bamboo River.

古文：水陆并进，大破之。
现代文：水陆并进，大破敌贼。
English: Water and land go hand in hand, destroying the enemy.

古文：斩甸，容山平。
现代文：斩杀韩甸，容山被平定。
English: Han Dian was killed and Yongshan was pacified.

古文：进右都督。
现代文：石邦宪晋右都督。
English: He was promoted to the position of the right-hand governor.

古文：寻与巡抚吴维岳招降平州叛酋杨珂，剿平龙里卫贼阿利等。
现代文：不久石邦宪与巡抚吴维岳招降平州叛酋杨珂，剿平龙里卫敌贼阿利等人。
English: Soon, Shi Bangxian and the governor Wu Weiyue recruited Yang Ke, the traitor chief of Pingzhou, and Ali, the traitor of Pinglongli, to defend the enemy.

古文：当是时，水西宣慰安国亨恃众跋扈，谒上官，辞色不善，辄鼓众讙噪而出。
现代文：在这个时候，水西宣慰安国亨恃众跋扈，谒见上官时，辞色不善，往往煽动兵众喧哗鼓噪而出。
English: At this time, Shuixi Xuan comforted the country's henchmen, and when he met with his superiors, his words were not good, and he often incited the soldiers to make a lot of noise.

古文：邦宪召责之曰： 尔欲反耶？
现代文：石邦宪召见他谴责说 ：你想造反吗？
English: Shi Bangxian summoned him and reprimanded him, saying: "Do you want to rebel?

古文：吾视尔釜中鱼尔。
现代文：我看见你如釜中的游鱼。
English: I see you like a fish swimming in a pot.

古文：尔兵孰与云、贵、川、湖多？
现代文：你的兵与云、贵、川、湖的兵相比谁的多？
English: Who are your soldiers more than the soldiers of the clouds, rivers, lakes?

古文：尔四十八酋长，吾铸四十八印畀之。
现代文：你有四十八个酋长，我铸四十八个印给与他们。
English: And thou shalt have forty and eight chiefs: and I will make forty and eight princes.

古文：朝下令，夕灭尔矣。 
现代文：早上下令，傍晚就把你给灭了。 
English: Ordered in the morning, you were eliminated in the evening.

古文：国亨叩头谢，为敛戢。
现代文：安国亨叩头谢罪，颇为收敛。
English: An Guofeng kowtowed to Xie Sin and was quite restrained.

古文：隆庆元年剿平镇远苗。
现代文：隆庆元年石邦宪剿平镇远的苗人。
English: In the first year of Longqing, Miao people from Shibang Xianbinping Town left.

古文：已，又破诛白泥土官杨赟及苗酋龙力水等。
现代文：之后，他又攻破诛灭白泥土官杨斌贝和苗人酋长龙力水等人。
English: After that, he defeated and exterminated the white mud official Yang Binbei and the Miao people chief Long Lishuo and others.

古文：部内帖然。
现代文：部内之人对他服服帖帖。
English: People in the department were in awe of him.

古文：邦宪生长黔土，熟苗情。
现代文：石邦宪生长在黔土，熟悉苗人风土人情。
English: Shi Bangxian grew up in Yunnan Province and is familiar with the customs of the Miao people.

古文：善用兵，大小数十百战，无不摧破。
现代文：他善于用兵，经过的战斗大小有数十近百次，无不被他摧毁攻破。
English: He is good at using soldiers. He has been through dozens of battles and nearly a hundred battles, and none of them have been broken by him.

古文：前后进秩者四，赉银币十有三。
现代文：先后晋俸禄有四次，赏赐银币十三次。
English: He was promoted four times and awarded silver coins 13 times.

古文：所得俸赐，悉以飨士，家无赢资。
现代文：他所得的俸赐，全部用来招待士兵，家中没有多余的资财。
English: All of his salary was spent on entertaining soldiers, and there was no extra money in the family.

古文：为总兵官十七年，威镇蛮中。
现代文：做总兵官十七年，威镇蛮中。
English: He has been a general officer for 17 years, and is a middle-aged man from Weizhen.

古文：与四川何卿、广西沈希仪并称一时名将。
现代文：他和四川的何卿、广西的沈希仪并称一时的名将。
English: He and He Qing of Sichuan and Shen Xiyi of Guangxi were also famous for a while.

古文：明年卒官。
现代文：第二年死在官任上。
English: He died in office the following year.

古文：赠左都督。
现代文：赠官左都督。
English: He was awarded the post of Left Governor.

