古文：起玄黓执徐七月，尽阏逢敦牂闰正月，凡一年有奇。
现代文：起玄黓执徐七月，尽阏逢敦牂闰正月，凡一年有奇。
English: Every year is a strange one, from the beginning of July to the first day of the new year.

古文：明宗圣德和武钦孝皇帝下长兴三年秋，七月，辛巳，朔方奏夏州党项入寇，击败之，追至贺兰山。
现代文：后唐明宗长兴三年秋季七月，辛丑朔，朔方上表奏报：夏州党项来侵犯，击败了他们，追击到贺兰山。
English: In the autumn of July of the third year after the Tang and Ming Dynasties, Changxing was attacked and defeated by the Xiazhou faction, which was pursued to Mount Helan.

古文：己丑，加镇海、镇东军节度使钱元瓘中书令。
现代文：己丑，加封镇海、镇东节度使钱元守中书令。
English: He was ugly, and the addition of the Zhenhai and Zhendong festivals made the Qianyuan keep the middle letter.

古文：庚寅，李存瑰至成都，孟知祥拜泣受诏。
现代文：庚寅，李存到了成都，孟知祥拜泣着接受后唐明宗诏书。
English: Geng Yin, Li Xun arrived in Chengdu, Meng Zhixiang bowed in tears and accepted the post-Tang Ming Emperor's edict.

古文：武安、静江节度使马希声以湖南比年大旱，命闭南岳及境内诸神祠门，竟不雨。
现代文：武安、静江节度使马希声因湖南连年大旱，下令关闭南岳及境内诸神祠的大门，到底没有下雨。
English: The Wu'an and Jingjiang festivals caused Ma Xisheng to order the closure of the gates of Nanyue and the shrines in the territory due to the consecutive years of drought in Hunan. There was no rain at all.

古文：辛卯，希声卒，六军使袁诠、潘约等迎镇南节度使希范于朗州而立之。
现代文：辛卯，马希声去世，六军使袁诠、潘约等迎请镇南节度使马希范于朗州而拥立他为主。
English: Xinwu, Ma Xisheng passed away, and the six military envoys Yuan Yan, Pan You and others invited the Zhenan Festival to make Ma Xifan in Lanzhou and support him as the main.

古文：乙未，孟知祥遣李存瑰还，上表谢罪，且告福庆公主之丧。
现代文：乙未，孟知祥让李存回洛阳，向朝廷上表谢罪，并报告福庆公主的丧事。
English: However, Meng Zhixiang sent Li Cun back to Luoyang to apologize to the imperial court and report the funeral of Princess Fuqing.

古文：自是复称籓，然益骄倨矣。
现代文：从此又向后唐朝廷自称藩属。
English: From then on, the Tang court claimed to belong to the domain.

古文：庚子，以西京留守、同平章事李从珂为凤翔节度使。
现代文：庚子，任用西京留守、同平章事李从珂为凤翔节度使。
English: Geng Zi appointed Dongping Zhang Zhizhi Li Cong Ke as Feng Xiang's chief envoy to the Western Capital.

古文：废武兴军，复以凤、兴、文三州隶山南西道。
现代文：废除武兴军，恢复凤、兴、文三州隶属于山南西道。
English: The Wu Xing Army was abolished, and the three prefectures of Feng, Xing, and Wen were restored to Shannan West Road.

古文：丁未，以门下侍郎，同平章事赵凤同平章事，充安国节度使。
现代文：丁未，后唐命门下侍郎、同平章事赵凤以同平章事衔，充当安国节度使。
English: Ding Wei, the attendant under the tutelage of the late Tang Dynasty, and Tongping Zhangji Zhao Feng, with the title of Tongping Zhangji, served as the Anguo Festival envoy.

古文：八月，庚申，马希范至长沙；辛酉，袭位。
现代文：八月，庚申，荆南马希范到达长沙；辛酉，承袭其兄马希声的职位。
English: In August, Geng Shen, Jing Nan and Ma Xifan arrived in Changsha; Xin Yao, inherited the position of his brother Ma Xisheng.

古文：甲子，孟知祥令李昊为武泰赵季良等五留后草表，请以知祥为蜀王，行墨制，仍自求旌节，昊曰： 比者诸将攻取方镇，即有其地，今又自求朝廷节铖及明公封爵，然则轻重之权皆在群下矣；借使明公自请，岂不可邪！ 
现代文：甲子，孟知祥让李昊为武泰赵季良等五个留后起草表章，请求朝廷封孟知祥为蜀王，行使墨书制命的权力，允许他自行委任将吏，同时为他们自己请求朝廷赐给节度使的旌节，李昊说： 近来诸将攻取一方军镇，就占有其地域，现在又自己要求给予旌节斧钺以及您的封爵，这样，职位轻重的权衡就都落在下属部众之手了；假如您自己请封，岂不更好！ 
English: The eldest son, Meng Zhixiang, asked Li Hao to draft a seal for Wu Tai, Zhao Jiliang and five other retainers, and requested the court to appoint Meng Zhixiang as the king of Shu, exercise the power of the ink-writing system, allow him to appoint generals on his own, and at the same time request the imperial court to grant the seal to the imperial envoy. Li Hao said: Recently, the generals captured a military town and occupied its area, and now they are demanding the seal and your knighthood. In this way, the weight of the position will fall on the hands of the subordinates; if you ask for the seal yourself,

古文：知祥大悟，更令昊为己草表，请行墨制，补两川刺史已下；又表请以季良等五留后为节度使。
现代文：孟知祥一下明白过来，便让李昊替自己起草表章，请求施行墨书制命，可以补授缺额的两川刺史以下的官职；又上表请求朝廷任命赵季良等五个留后为节度使。
English: As soon as Meng Zhixiang understood, he asked Li Hao to draft a form for him, requesting the implementation of the ink writing system, and that he could fill in the vacant posts below the two rivers; and the above form requested the court to appoint Zhao Jiliang and other five retainers as ceremonial envoys.

古文：初，安重诲欲图两川，自知祥杀李严，每除刺史，皆以东兵卫送之，小州不减五百人，夏鲁奇、李仁矩、武虔裕各数千人，皆以牙队为名。
现代文：起先，安重诲图谋占取两川，自从孟知祥杀死李严，每次任命刺史，都用东方的军队护送他们赴任，小的州府不少于五百人，像夏鲁奇、李仁矩、武虔裕，都各领数千人，号称牙队。
English: At first, An Chongyun plotted to occupy the two rivers. Since Meng Zhixiang killed Li Yan, every time a new leader was appointed, they were escorted to their posts by the Eastern army. In small prefectures, there were no less than five hundred people, and in big cities, there were thousands of people led by leaders such as Xialuqi, Li Rincang, and Wu Qianyu. They were known as the tooth team.

古文：及知祥克遂、阆、利、夔、黔、梓六镇，得东兵无虑三万人，恐朝廷征还，表请其妻子。
现代文：及至孟知祥攻下遂州、阆州、利州、夔州、黔州、梓州六镇，得到护从东兵不下三万人，怕朝廷征召东兵返回，就上表请求允许他们的妻子到驻地来。
English: When Meng Zhixiang conquered the six towns of Suizhou, Zhangzhou, Lizhou, Zhangzhou, Zhangzhou, and Zizhou, and was protected by no less than 30,000 Eastern soldiers, he requested that their wives be allowed to come to the garrison, fearing that the imperial court would call the Eastern soldiers to return.

古文：吴徐知诰广金陵城周围二十里。
现代文：吴国徐知诰扩建金陵城周围二十里。
English: Xu Zhisheng of the State of Wu expanded the area around Jinling City by twenty miles.

古文：初，契丹既强，寇抄卢龙诸州皆遍，幽州城门之外，虏骑充斥。
现代文：起初，契丹已经强大，把卢龙诸州都抢掠遍了，幽州城门以外，到处是契丹的骑兵。
English: At first, the Khitans were already strong and had plundered all of Lulong Province. Outside the city gates of Yuzhou, the Khitans' cavalry was everywhere.

古文：每自涿州运粮入幽州，虏多伏兵于阎沟，掠取之。
现代文：往往从涿州运粮到幽州，契丹兵众大多埋伏在阎沟，进行掠夺。
English: They often transported grain from Ganzhou to Yuzhou, and most of the Khitan soldiers lay in ambush and plundered.

古文：及赵德钧为节度使，城阎沟而戍之，为良乡县，粮道稍通。
现代文：到赵德钧为节度使时，在阎沟筑城守卫，设立良乡县，粮道略有通便。
English: When Zhao Deyu was the festival envoy, he built a city guard in Yangu and established Liangxiang County, which made the grain route slightly more convenient.

古文：幽州东十里之外，人不敢樵牧；德钧于州东五十里城潞县而戍之，近州之民始得稼穑。
现代文：幽州以东十里之外，百姓不敢打柴放牧；赵德钧在州东五十里建立潞县城，加以守卫，靠近州城的百姓才得以进行农耕种庄稼。
English: Ten miles east of Yuzhou, the people did not dare to collect firewood for grazing. Zhao Deyao built the county seat of Zou County 50 miles east of Yuzhou and guarded it. The people near the county seat were only able to farm and grow crops.

古文：至是，又于州东北百馀里城三河县以通蓟州运路，虏骑来争，德钧击却之。
现代文：到此时，又在幽州东北百余里处，建立三河县城来疏通蓟州运路，契丹骑兵来争夺，赵德钧便把他们击退。
English: At this time, more than a hundred miles to the northeast of Yuzhou, the county town of Sanhe was established to clear the transportation route of Yuzhou. The Khitan cavalry came to fight, and Zhao Dejun repulsed them.

古文：九月，庚辰朔，奏城三河毕。
现代文：九月，庚辰朔，奏报三河县城建设完毕。
English: In September, Geng Chenshuo reported that the construction of the county seat of Sanhe was completed.

古文：边人赖之。
现代文：边民赖以生存。
English: Border residents depend on it for their survival.

古文：壬午，以镇南节度使马希范为武安节度使，兼侍中。
现代文：壬午，任用镇南节度使马希范为武安节度使，兼任侍中。
English: In Renwu, Zhenan Jiedu appointed Ma Xifan as Wu'an Jiedu envoy, and he also served as a chamberlain.

古文：孟知祥命其子仁赞摄行军司马，兼都总辖两川牙内马步都军事。
现代文：孟知祥命令他的儿子孟仁赞代理行军司马，兼任都总辖两川牙内马步都军事。
English: Meng Zhixiang ordered his son, Meng Renzan, to act as Sima of the marching army, and also served as the military commander of the two rivers.

古文：冬，十月，己酉朔，帝复遣李存瓘如成都，凡剑南自节度使、刺史以下官，听知祥差罢讫奏闻，朝廷更不除人；唯不遣戍兵妻子，然其兵亦不复征也。
现代文：冬季十月，己酉朔，明宗再派李存赴成都，凡是在剑南的将吏，从节度使、刺史以下的官员，听凭孟知祥差派任命后，向朝廷奏报即可，朝廷不再另行任命别人；只是不让戍兵的妻子去戍所，然而对那些兵众也不再征召东还。
English: In the winter of October, the Ming Dynasty sent Li Cun to Chengdu again. All the officials in the south of Jian, from the chief of staff to the chief of staff, could report to the imperial court after being appointed by Meng Zhixiang. The imperial court would not appoint anyone else. However, the wives of the soldiers would not be allowed to go to the detention center. However, the soldiers would not be conscripted again.

古文：秦王从荣喜为诗，聚浮华之士高辇等于幕府，与相唱和，颇自矜伐。
现代文：秦王李从荣喜欢作诗，聚集浮华放荡的文士高辇等人在幕府中，同他们相与唱和，很是标榜自夸。
English: Qin King Li Congrong liked to write poetry. He gathered the flashy and debauched scribes Gao Yao and others in the shogunate and sang harmony with them. He was very boastful.

古文：每置酒，辄令僚属赋诗，有不如意者面毁袭抵弃。
现代文：每次设宴摆酒，往往让僚属们吟赋诗篇，有作得不如意的，当面撕毁丢弃。
English: Every time a banquet is held and wine is served, colleagues and relatives are often asked to chant a poem. If the poem is not satisfactory, it is torn up and thrown away.

古文：壬子，从荣入谒，帝语之曰： 吾虽不知书，然喜闻儒生讲经义，开益人智思。
现代文：壬子，李从荣入朝谒见，明宗对他说道： 我虽然不识文字，然而喜欢听取儒生讲说经文大义，可以开发人的智识和思考。
English: On the other hand, when Li Rongrui saw him at the imperial court, Mingzong said to him: Although I do not know the characters, I like to listen to Confucianism talk about the great meaning of the scriptures, which can develop people's intelligence and thinking.

古文：吾见庄宗好为诗，将家子文非素习，徒取人窃笑，汝勿效也。 
现代文：我见庄宗皇帝喜好作诗，武将家的儿子文墨不是素所研习，只是白白让人背地笑话，你不要效法那个。 
English: I saw that Emperor Zhuangzong liked to write poetry, and the son of a military commander did not study writing and painting, but made jokes behind people's backs. You should not follow that example.

古文：丙辰，幽州奏契丹屯捺剌泊。
现代文：丙辰，幽州报奏：契丹人马屯驻捺剌泊。
English: Hsin-Chen, Yuzhou report: the Khitan Ma Tun stationed in Xiangbo.

古文：前影义节度使李金全屡献马，上不受，曰： 卿在镇为治何如？
现代文：前彰义节度使李金全屡次向朝廷献马，后唐明宗不接受，并说： 你在镇所治理得怎么样？
English: The former Zhangyi Festival made Li Jinquan repeatedly offer horses to the imperial court, but the later Tang Mingzong did not accept, and said: How is your governance in the town?

古文：勿但以献马为事！ 
现代文：且不要只做献马这样的事！ 
English: And don't just do things like donating horses!

古文：金全，吐谷浑人也。
现代文：李金全是吐谷浑的人。
English: Li Jin are all from Tugu.

古文：壬申，大理少卿康澄上疏曰： 臣闻童谣非祸福之本，妖祥岂隆替之源！
现代文：壬申，大理少卿康澄上书启奏： 为臣听说，童谣不是祸福的根据，妖祥岂能当做兴变的本源！
English: Jinshin, Dali Shaoqing Kangcheng's opening of the book: I heard that the nursery rhyme is not the basis of misfortune and fortune, and the evil omen can not be the source of change!

古文：故雊雉升鼎而桑谷生朝，不能止殷宗之盛；神马长嘶而玉龟告兆，不能延晋祚之长。
现代文：所以，商代出现飞雉落于鼎耳而鸣、桑谷共生于朝的祥瑞，不能中止殷王宗庙之盛；晋朝发生神马长嘶、水涌石龟的异兆，不能延缓晋国传位之长。
English: Therefore, the prosperity of the Yin Wang's ancestral temple could not be stopped by the occurrence of the Shang Dynasty's flying kites, which fell on deaf ears, and the Sangu symbiosis with the auspiciousness of the Shang Dynasty; the occurrence of the Jin Dynasty's miraculous signs of the long-haired horse and the water-spring stone turtle could not delay the long-term succession of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：是知国家有不足惧者五，有深可畏者六：阴阳不调不足惧，三辰失行不足惧，小人讹言不足惧，山崩川涸不足惧，蟊贼伤稼不足惧；贤人藏匿深可畏，四民迁业深可畏，上下相徇深可畏，廉耻道消深可畏，毁誉乱真深可畏，直言蔑闻深可畏。
现代文：由此悟出国家有不足惧的事情五件，有深可畏的事情六条：阴阳不协调不足惧，三星运行失常不足惧，小人传播讹言不足惧，山崩河涸不足惧，害虫伤害禾稼不足惧；贤人藏匿不出深可畏，四民迁业不安深可畏，上下通同作弊深可畏，廉耻之道消亡深可畏，诋毁赞誉混淆真伪深可畏，正直言论听不到深可畏。
English: From this, it was realized that the country has five things to be afraid of and six things to be deeply feared: Yin and yang are not coordinated, the three stars are out of order, the villain is not afraid to spread slander, the landslide and river are not afraid, and the pests are not afraid to damage the crops; the wise man cannot hide is deeply feared, the four people's migration is deeply feared, the up and down is deeply feared, the way of dishonesty is deeply feared, the discrediting praise is deeply feared, the truth is deeply feared, and the honest speech is not heard is deeply feared.

古文：不足惧者，愿陛下存而勿论；深可畏者，愿陛下修而靡忒。 
现代文：不足惧的事情愿陛下任其存在而不必多去计较；深可畏的事情愿陛下修治而不要差失。 
English: The things that are not to be feared, may His Majesty allow them to exist and not worry about them; the things that are to be feared, may His Majesty deal with them and not miss them.

古文：优诏奖之。
现代文：明宗用嘉许的诏书奖励他。
English: Emperor Mingzong rewarded him with a letter of commendation.

古文：秦王从荣为人鹰视，轻佻峻急；既判六军诸卫事，复参朝政，多骄纵不法。
现代文：秦王李从荣为人像鹰眼一样常常侧目看人，既轻薄又尖刻；他被任用为判理六军诸卫事务后，又参与朝政，往往骄纵不守法纪。
English: Li Congrong, the king of Qin, was an eagle-eyed person who often looked sideways at people, both light-hearted and sharp; after he was appointed to judge the affairs of the six armies and guards, he also participated in court politics, often being arrogant and not abiding by the law.

古文：初，安重诲为枢密使，上专属任之。
现代文：以前，安重诲做枢密使，明宗特别依重他。
English: In the past, An Chong Chou was a Privy Counsellor, and Emperor Mingzong attached great importance to him.

古文：从荣及宋王从厚自襁褓与之亲狎，虽典兵，常为重诲所制，畏事之。
现代文：李从荣及宋王李从厚从幼儿时就和他亲昵戏闹，后来，虽然成为统兵大吏，也常被安重诲所牵制，对安重诲很敬重。
English: Li Congrong and Song King Li Conghou played with him from the time they were toddlers. Later, although they became generals, they were often held back by An Chongyu, for whom they had great respect.

古文：重诲死，王淑妃与宣徽使孟汉琼宣传帝命，范延光、赵延寿为枢密使，从荣皆轻侮之。
现代文：安重诲死后，王淑妃与宣徽使孟汉琼宣布传达皇帝意旨，由范延光、赵延寿做枢密使，而李从荣对他们都很轻慢、看不起。
English: After the death of An Chongyun, Wang Shuxi and Xuan Hui made Meng Hanqiong announce the transmission of the emperor's will, with Fan Yanguang and Zhao Yanshou as confidential envoys, while Li Congrong was very contemptuous of them.

古文：河阳节度使、同平章事石敬瑭兼六军诸卫副使，其妻永宁公主与从荣异母，素相憎疾。
现代文：河阳节度使、同平章事石敬瑭兼任六军诸卫副使，他的妻子永宁公主与李从荣是异母所生，素来就相互憎恶不和。
English: Heyang Jiedu envoy, Tongping Zhangjishi Jingyu, concurrently served as the deputy envoy of the Six Army Guards. His wife, Princess Yongning, and Li Congrong were born from different mothers, and they have always hated each other.

古文：从荣以从厚声名出己右，尤忌之；从厚善以卑弱奉之，故嫌隙不外见。
现代文：李从荣因为李从厚的名声比自己高，便尤其忌恨他。李从厚善于，用谦卑软弱的姿态对待李从荣，所以嫌隙之状表面上看不出来。
English: Li Congrong especially hated him because Li Conghou's reputation was higher than his own. Li Conghou was good at treating Li Congrong with a humble and weak attitude, so the gap could not be seen on the surface.

古文：石敬瑭不欲与从荣共事，常思外补以避之。
现代文：石敬瑭因不愿与李从荣共事，常想到外面藩镇补领一职来避开他。
English: Due to his unwillingness to work with Li Congrong, Shi Jingyao often thought of applying for a position outside the town to avoid him.

古文：范延光、赵延寿亦虑及祸，屡辞机要，请与旧臣迭为之，上不许。
现代文：范延光、赵延寿也顾虑弄不好招祸，多次请求辞去枢要职务，与可信用的老臣更换充任，明宗不答应。
English: Fan Yanguang and Zhao Yanshou were also worried about causing trouble. They repeatedly requested to resign from key positions and replace them with trustworthy old ministers. Mingzong did not agree.

古文：会契丹欲入寇，上命择帅臣镇河东，延光、延寿皆曰： 当今帅臣可往者，独石敬瑭、康义诚耳。 
现代文：当时正逢契丹要来侵扰，明宗授命秉政大臣选择可当统帅的人材去镇守河东，范延光、赵延寿都说： 现在可任统帅去河东的只有石敬瑭、康义诚而已。 
English: At that time, when Khitan was about to invade, Emperor Mingzong ordered Minister Bing to choose a person who could be the commander to defend the town of Hedong. Fan Yanguang and Zhao Yanshou both said: Now, only Shi Jingyao and Kang Yicheng can be appointed commander to go to Hedong.

古文：敬瑭亦愿行，上即命除之。
现代文：石敬瑭也愿意前去，于是，明宗就任命委派他去。
English: Shi Jingyao was also willing to go, so Mingzong appointed him to go.

古文：既受诏，不落六军副使，敬瑭复辞，上乃以宣徽使硃弘昭知山南东道，代义诚诣阙。
现代文：等到诏书下来，不落六军副使的职位名款，石敬瑭又辞谢不受，明宗便任用宣徽使朱弘昭主持山南东道的事务，代替康义诚的职位，让康义诚到朝廷来。
English: When the imperial edict came down, the post title of the deputy envoy of the Six Armies did not fall, and Shi Jingyao's resignation and thanks were not accepted, Mingzong appointed Xu Hui to make Zhu Hongzhao preside over the affairs of Shannan Host, replace Kang Yicheng's post, and let Kang Yicheng come to the imperial court.

古文：十一月，辛巳，以三司使孟秸为忠武节度使，以忠武节度使冯赟充宣徽南院使，判三司。
现代文：十一月，辛巳，任用三司使孟鹄为忠武节度使，用忠武节度使冯充任宣徽南院使，判理三司。
English: In November, Xin Si appointed the third envoy, Meng Xuan, as the envoy of the Loyalty and Martial Arts Festival, and the third envoy of the Loyalty and Martial Arts Festival, Feng Zongren, as the envoy of the Southern Yuan of Xuanhui, to judge the three divisions.

古文：鹄本刀笔吏，与范延光乡里厚善，数年间引擢至节度使；上虽知其太速，然不能违也。
现代文：孟鹄本来是个掌案牍的书吏，与范延光是同乡，友谊深厚，几年之间荐引提拔到节度使；明宗虽然晓得提拔太快，然而不能不认可。
English: Meng Qian was originally a clerk in charge of the case file, and Fan Yanguang was a fellow villager, with a deep friendship. He was recommended and promoted to the festival envoy within a few years. Although Mingsong knew that the promotion was too fast, he could not but recognize it.

古文：乙酉，上以胡寇浸逼北边，命趣议河东帅；石敬瑭欲之，而范延光、赵延寿欲用康义诚，议久不决。
现代文：乙酉，明宗因为契丹人越来越侵逼北部边疆，命速议选任河东统帅；石敬瑭想要承担，而范延光、赵延寿想任用康义诚，议论了很长时间不能决定。
English: Because the Khitan people were increasingly encroaching on the northern border, the Ming Dynasty hastily discussed the appointment of the commander of Hedong; Shi Jingyao wanted to undertake, while Fan Yanguang and Zhao Yanshou wanted to appoint Kang Yicheng. They discussed for a long time and could not decide.

古文：枢密直学士李崧以为非石太尉不可。延光曰： 仆亦累奏用之，上欲留之宿卫耳。 
现代文：代理枢密直学士李崧以为此任非石太尉不可，范延光说： 我也几次奏请用他，皇上要想把他留在身边统领宿卫军呐。 
English: Acting Privy Councilor Li Qian thought that this appointment was a must, Fan Yanguang said: I have also asked him several times to use him. The emperor wants to keep him around to lead the imperial guards.

古文：会上遣中使趣之，众乃从崧议。
现代文：正好明宗命内使来催促，大家便接受了李崧的意见。
English: Just as Mingzong's envoy came to urge, everyone accepted Li Yao's opinion.

古文：丁亥，以石敬瑭为北京留守、河东节度使，兼大同、振武、彰国、威塞等军蕃汉马步总管，加兼侍中。
现代文：丁亥，任用石敬瑭为北京留守、河东节度使，兼任大同、振武、彰国、威塞等军蕃汉马步总管，加兼侍中。
English: Ding Hai appointed Shi Jingyao as the Beijing resident and the Hedong Festival envoy, and also served as the general manager of the troops of Datong, Zhenwu, Zhangguo and Wessai, as well as the attendant.

古文：己丑，加枢密使赵延寿同平章事。
现代文：己丑，加封枢密使赵延寿同平章事。
English: He was so ugly that he was given the title of Privy Counsellor, making Zhao Yanju the same rank as him.

古文：吴以诸道都统徐知诰为大丞相、太师，加领德胜节度使；知诰矢丞相、太师。
现代文：吴国任用诸道都统徐知诰为大丞相、太师、加领德胜节度使；徐知诰辞却丞相、太师。
English: The State of Wu appointed Xu Zhisheng, the Grand Chancellor and Grand Master of all the Taoist Dynasties, as the Grand Chancellor and Grand Master, as well as the leader of the De Sheng Sect; however, Xu Zhisheng resigned as the Prime Minister and Grand Master.

古文：大同节度使张敬达聚兵要害，契丹竟不敢南下而还。
现代文：大同节度使张敬达集中兵力防守要害关塞，契丹兵竟然不敢南下而退还本地。
English: Due to the great festival, Zhang Jingda concentrated troops to defend the fortress of Guan Sai. The Khitan soldiers did not dare to go south and returned to the local area.

古文：敬达，代州人也。
现代文：张敬达是代州人。
English: Zhang Jingda is from Daizhou.

古文：蔚州刺史张彦超本沙陀人，尝为帝养子，与石敬瑭有隙；闻敬瑭为总管，举城附于契丹，契丹以为大同节度使。
现代文：蔚州刺史张彦超本来是沙陀人，曾经是明宗的养子，与石敬瑭有嫌隙；听说石敬瑭当了总管，便把整个城池降附于契丹，契丹任命他为大同节度使。
English: Zhang Yanchao, the governor of Ulshu, was originally from Satao, and was once the adopted son of the Ming Dynasty. He had a rift with Shi Jingyao. When he heard that Shi Jingyao had become the governor, he sent the entire city to the Khitan. The Khitan appointed him as a delegate to the Great Unity Festival.

古文：石敬瑭至晋阳，以部将刘知远、周瑰为都押衙，委以心腹；军事委知远，帑藏委瑰。
现代文：石敬瑭到了晋阳，任用他的部将刘知远、周为都押衙，依靠他们做心腹；军事委托刘知远，财政收入委托周。
English: When Shi Jingyao arrived in Jinyang, he appointed his subordinate generals Liu Zhiyuan and Zhou Weiguo, and relied on them to be his confidants; Liu Zhiyuan was entrusted with military affairs, and Zhou was entrusted with fiscal revenue.

古文：瑰，晋阳人也。
现代文：周是晋阳人。
English: Zhou is from Jinyang.

古文：十二月，戊午，以康义诚为河阳节度使，兼侍卫亲军马步都指挥使；以硃弘昭为山南东道节度使。
现代文：十二月，戊午，任用康义诚为河阳节度使，兼任侍卫亲军马步都指挥使；任用朱弘昭为山南东道节度使。
English: In the afternoon of December, Kang Yicheng was appointed as the festival envoy to Heyang, and he also served as the commanding envoy to Maabudu, the capital of Shandong Province. Zhu Hongzhao was appointed as the host festival envoy to Shandong Province.

古文：是岁，汉主立其子耀枢为雍正，龟图为康王，弘度为宾王，弘熙为晋王，弘昌为越王，弘弼为齐王，弘雅为韶王，弘泽为镇王，弘操为万王，弘杲为循王，弘为思王，弘邈为高王，弘简为同王，弘建为益王，弘济为辩王，弘道为贵王，弘昭为宜王，弘政为通王，弘益为定王；未几，徙弘度为秦王。
现代文：这一年，南汉国主刘龚立他的儿子刘耀枢为雍王，刘龟图为康王，刘弘度为宾王，刘弘熙为晋王，刘弘昌为越王，刘弘弼为齐王，刘弘雅为韶王，刘弘泽为镇王，刘弘操为万王，刘弘杲为循王，刘弘为思王，刘弘邈为高王，刘弘简为同王，刘弘建为益王，刘弘济为辩王，刘弘道为贵王，刘弘昭为宜王，刘弘政为通王，刘弘益为定王；没有多久，把刘弘度调迁为秦王。
English: In this year, the South Han Dynasty's ruler Liu Hongzhi made his son Liu Yaozhu the king of Yong, Liu Guotu the king of Kang, Liu Hongdu the king of Bin, Liu Hongxi the king of Jin, Liu Hongchang the king of Yue, Liu Hongzhe the king of Qi, Liu Hongya the king of Zhi, Liu Hongzhe the king of Zhen, Liu Hongzhu the king of Wan, Liu Hongzhi the king of Xun, Liu Hongzhu the king of Si, Liu Hongzhu the king of Gao, Liu Hongzhan the king of Tong, Liu Hongjian the king of Yi, Liu Hongji the

古文：明宗圣德和武钦孝皇帝下长兴四年春，正月，戊子，加秦王从荣守尚书令，兼侍中。
现代文：长兴四年春季正月，戊子，加封秦王李从荣担任尚书令，兼任侍中。
English: In the first month of the spring of the fourth year of Changxing, Wu Zi and Qin Wang Li Zong Rong served as Shang Shuling and also served as a chamberlain.

古文：庚寅，以端明殿学士归义刘昫为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：庚寅，任用端明殿学士归义人刘为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: Geng Yin appointed Duan Ming palace scholar Gui Yijin Liu as the secretary of the middle school, and Tong Ping as the secretary.

古文：闽人有言真封宅龙见者，闽王延钧更命其宅曰龙跃宫。
现代文：闽国有人说，闽王王延钧未成国主之前所住的真封宅有龙出现，便把这所宅第改名为龙跃宫。
English: It is said that a dragon appeared in the residence of King Yan Xuan before he became the ruler of the country, and this residence was renamed the Dragon Leaping Palace.

古文：遂诣宝皇宫受册，备仪卫，入府，即皇帝位，国号大闽，大赦，改元龙启；更名璘。
现代文：接着就谒拜宝皇宫受其册封，设置仪仗军卫，返回王府，即位称帝，国号大闽，实行大赦，改年号为龙启，把自己的姓名改叫王。
English: Then, he had the Imperial Palace of the Baobao Emperor canonized, set up a military guard of honor, returned to the royal palace, was enthroned as emperor, the country's name was changed to Daxing, an amnesty was implemented, the year name was changed to Longqi, and his name was changed to Wang.

古文：追尊父祖，立五庙。
现代文：上尊号追谥自己的父亲和祖父，立五世的庙号。
English: Shangzong followed in the footsteps of his father and grandfather, and became the fifth head of the temple.

古文：以其僚属李敏为左仆射、门下侍郎，其子节度使继鹏为右仆射、中书侍郎，并同平章事；以亲吏吴勖为枢密使。
现代文：任命他的僚属李敏为左仆射、门下侍郎，他的儿子节度副使王继鹏为右仆射、中书侍郎，二人都为同平章事；任命亲信属吏吴勖为枢密使。
English: He appointed his colleague Li Min as his left-hand retainer and attendant, and his son Wang Jipeng as his right-hand retainer and attendant, both of whom were Tongping officials. He also appointed his close confidant Wu Xi as a confidential envoy.

古文：唐册礼使裴杰、程侃适至海门，闽主以杰为如京使；侃固求北还，不许。
现代文：后唐朝廷的册礼使裴杰、程侃正好来到闽地海门，闽主任用裴杰为如京使；程侃坚持要求北还后唐，闽主不准。
English: After the Tang Dynasty, Pei Jie and Cheng Kan, the courtiers of the imperial court, came to the sea gate of Handi, and the director of Handi used Pei Jie as the Beijing envoy; Cheng Kan insisted that the north should return to the Tang Dynasty, but the lord of Handi did not allow it.

古文：闽主自以国小地僻，常谨事四邻，由是境内差安。
现代文：闽主自己知道国小地偏，经常注意和四面邻境搞好关系，因此闽地境内还算安定。
English: Knowing that his country is small, he always pays attention to building a good relationship with the four neighboring countries. Therefore, his territory is relatively stable.

古文：二月，戊申，孟知祥墨制以赵季良等为五镇节度使。
现代文：二月，戊申，孟知祥墨制署授赵季良等人为五镇节度使。
English: In February, Wushin, Meng Zhixiang, and others were appointed by the Bureau of Engraving and Printing as the five towns' festival envoys.

古文：凉州大将拓跋承谦及耆老上表，请以权知留后孙超为节度使。
现代文：凉州大将拓跋承谦及耆老上表，请求后唐朝廷任命暂为留后的孙超为节度使。
English: The general of Liangzhou, Tuoba Chengqian and Zou Lao, petitioned the Tang court to appoint Sun Chao, who had temporarily stayed behind, as the festival envoy.

古文：上问使者： 超为何人？ 
现代文：明宗问来使： 孙超是什么人？ 
English: Mingzong asked the envoy: Who is Sun Chao?

古文：对曰： 张义潮在河西，朝廷以天平军二千五百人戍凉州。自黄巢之乱，凉州为党项所隔，郓人稍稍物故皆尽，超及城中之人皆其子孙也。 
现代文：使者回答： 大唐宣宗时张义潮来归河西，朝廷用天平军二千五百人守戍凉州，自从黄巢之乱以后，凉州被党项族隔断，郓州随军来的人渐渐都死完了，孙超及城中之人都是他们的后代子孙。 
English: The envoy replied: When Emperor Xuanzong of the Great Tang Dynasty, Zhang Yichao returned to the west of the river, the imperial court used the balance army of two thousand five hundred people to guard the city of Liangzhou. Since the Yellow Nest Rebellion, Liangzhou has been cut off by the party and clan, and the people who came to Liangzhou with the army have gradually died. Sun Chao and the people in the city are their descendants.

古文：乙卯，以马希范为武安、武平节度使，兼中书令。
现代文：乙卯，任用马希范为武安、武平节度使，兼任中书令。
English: Second, he appointed Ma Xifan as the Wu'an and Wuping sectional envoy, and also served as the middle secretary.

古文：戊午，定难节度使李仁福卒；庚申，军中立其子彝超为留后。
现代文：戊午，定难节度使李仁福去世；庚申，军队里立他的儿子李彝超为留后。
English: In the afternoon of the 15th day of the 11th month, Li Renfu died in the festival of Dingan; in the morning of the 15th day of the 11th month, his son Li Yingchao was appointed to stay behind in the army.

古文：癸亥，以孟知祥为东西川节度使、蜀王。
现代文：癸亥，后唐任用孟知祥为东西川节度使、封蜀王。
English: Later, the Tang Dynasty appointed Meng Zhixiang as the envoy of the East-West River and the ruler of Shu.

古文：先是，河西诸镇皆言李仁福潜通契丹，朝廷恐其与契丹连兵，并吞河右，南侵关中，会仁福卒，三月，癸未，以其子彝超为彰武留后，徙彰武节度使安从进为定难留后，仍命静难节度使药彦稠将兵五万，以宫苑使安重益为监军，送从进赴镇。
现代文：过去，河西诸镇都说李仁福暗通契丹，后唐朝廷怕他和契丹联合用兵，并吞河右之地，南向侵掠关中。正好，李仁福去世，三月，癸未，任用他的儿子李彝超为彰武留后，调迁彰武节度使安从进为定难留后，仍然命令静塞节度使药彦稠带兵五万人，由宫苑使安重益为监军，护送安从进赴镇所上任。
English: In the past, all the towns in the west of the river said that Li Renfu had secretly communicated with the Khitan. Later, the Tang court was afraid that he and the Khitan would jointly use troops to annex the land on the right side of the river and invade and plunder Guanzhong to the south. It was just right that Li Renfu died in March, just before the New Year. After appointing his son Li Yingchao to stay in Zhangwu, and transferring the Zhangwu festival to make An Zongjin stay in Dingnan, he still ordered the Jingjie festival to make Yuhang thick with fifty thousand soldiers, and the palace to make An Shou

古文：从进，索葛人也。
现代文：安从进是振武军索葛人。
English: An Congjin is a Sogdian from the Zhenwu army.

古文：乙酉，始下制除赵季良等为五镇节度使。
现代文：乙酉，明宗方始下诏，任命赵季良等为五镇节度使。
English: The Emperor of the Ming Dynasty issued an edict, appointing Zhao Jiliang as the envoy of the Five Towns Festival.

古文：丁亥，敕谕夏、银、绥、宥将士吏民，以 夏州穷边，李彝超年少，未能扞御，故徙之延安，从命则有李从严、高允韬富贵之福，违命则有王都、李匡宾覆族之祸。 
现代文：丁亥，明宗下敕文告谕夏州、银州、绥州、宥州的将士吏民，说： 夏州贫穷边远，李彝超年轻，不能捍卫防御外敌，所以让他去延安。服从朝廷调遣就可以有李从、高允韬那样的富贵福份，违背朝廷调遣就要遭到王都、李匡宾那样的覆亡灭族之祸。 
English: Ding Hai, Mingzong's second imperial edict, announced to the officials and people of Xiazhou, Yinzhou, Zhangzhou, and Yuzhou, saying: Xiazhou is poor and remote, Li Qian is very young, and cannot defend against foreign enemies, so let him go to Yan'an. Obedience to the court's disposition can have the rich fortune of Li Cong and Gao Yunqi, and disobeying the court's disposition will be subjected to the disaster of Wangdu and Li Kuangbin.

古文：夏，四月，彝超上言，为军士百姓拥留，未得赴镇，诏遣使趣之。
现代文：夏季，四月，李彝超上表奏称，他被军士百姓所拥护挽留，没有能够去延安赴任。
English: In the summer, in April, Li Yingchao said in a statement that he was supported and retained by the soldiers and the people, and was not able to go to Yan'an to take office.

古文：言事者请为亲王置师傅，宰相畏秦王从荣，不敢除人，请令王自择。
现代文：明宗下诏派使者去催促他。秦事的人建议给亲王们设立师傅，宰相惧怕秦王李从荣，不敢派人，请求让秦王自己选择师傅。
English: The Ming Emperor sent an envoy to urge him. The Qin officials suggested that the princes should have a teacher. The prime minister was afraid of the Qin king, Li Congrong, and did not dare to send someone. He asked the Qin king to choose his own teacher.

古文：秦王府判官、太子詹事王居敏荐兵部侍郎刘瓚于从荣，从荣表请之。
现代文：秦王府判官、太子詹事王居敏荐举兵部侍郎刘瓒给李从荣，李从荣上表请求选派他。
English: The judge of the Qin royal court, Prince Zhan Zhi Wang Ju Min, recommended to Li Cong Rong that Liu Wei, the attendant of the military department, be appointed, and Li Cong Rong requested that he be appointed.

古文：癸丑，以瓚为秘书监、秦王傅，前襄州支使山阳鱼崇远为记室。
现代文：癸丑，朝廷任命刘瓒为秘书监、秦王傅，前襄州支使山阳人鱼崇远为记室。
English: At the same time, the imperial court appointed Liu Wei as secretary supervisor, Qin Wangfu, and the former Yangzhou supporting envoy Sanyang Mermaid Chongyuan as secretary.

古文：瓚自以左迁，泣诉，不得免。
现代文：刘瓒自己以为这是降职，涕泣诉说，不能得到改免。
English: Liu Wei himself thought it was a demotion, and cried bitterly, saying that he could not get a promotion.

古文：王府参佐皆新进少年，轻脱谄谀，瓚独从容规讽，从荣不悦。
现代文：秦王府里的参谋佐辅人员都是新进拔的少年，轻浮放荡而好谄媚阿谀奉承，唯有刘瓒从容冷静地进行规劝，李从荣便不高兴。
English: The staff officers and ancillary personnel in Qin Wangfu were all newly promoted juveniles, frivolous and debauched but good at flattering and flattering. Only Liu Ye calmly and calmly carried out the persuasion, and Li Congrong was not happy.

古文：瓚虽为傅，从荣一概以僚属待之，瓚有难色；从荣觉之，自是戒门者勿为通，月听一至府，或竟日不召，亦不得食。
现代文：刘瓒虽为师傅，李从荣以对僚属的态度对待他；刘瓒有难堪之色；李从荣觉察到了，从此告诫守门人不要给他通报，每月听凭他一到府内，或者一天也不召见他，也不供膳。
English: Although Liu Ye was a master, Li Congrong treated him with a superior attitude towards his colleagues; Liu Ye was embarrassed; Li Congrong noticed this and henceforth warned the gatekeeper not to inform him, to allow him to come to the mansion once a month, or not to summon him for a day, and not to provide meals.

古文：李彝超不奉诏，遣共兄阿啰王守青岭门，集境内党项诸胡以自救。
现代文：李彝超不按明宗的诏书办事，派遣他的哥哥阿王把守青岭门，聚集境内党项诸部胡人自己救援。
English: Li Yingchao did not act according to the edict of the Ming Dynasty, but sent his brother Ah Wang to guard the Qingling Gate, and gathered Hu people from all parts of the country to rescue themselves.

古文：药彦稠等进屯芦关，彝超遣党项抄粮运及攻具，官军自芦关退保金明。
现代文：药彦稠等进驻芦关，李彝超派党项兵抄掠官军粮运及攻城器具，官军从芦关退守金明。
English: Yakuhiko Choshi and others were stationed in Lugang. Li Yuchao sent party soldiers to loot the official army's grain transportation and siege equipment. The official army retreated from Lugang to defend Jinming.

古文：闽王璘立子继鹏为福王，充宝皇宫使。
现代文：闽国主王立他的儿子王继鹏为福王，充任宝皇宫使。
English: Wang Ji Peng, the son of Wang Jipeng, was appointed as the "King of Good Fortune" and served as the envoy of the treasure palace.

古文：五月，戊寅，立皇子从珂为潞王，从益为许王，从子天平节度使从温为兗王，护国节度使从璋为洋王，成德节度使从敏为泾王。
现代文：五月，戊寅，后唐朝廷立皇子李从珂为潞王，李从益为许王，皇侄天平节度使李从温为兖王，护国节度使李从璋为洋王，成德节度使李从敏为泾王。
English: In May, Wu Yin, after the Tang Dynasty, the imperial court appointed the prince Li Congke as the king of Shun, Li Congyi as the king of Xu, the emperor's nephew Tianping Festival made Li Congwen as the king of Shun, the National Defense Festival made Li Congwen as the king of Yang, and the Chengde Festival made Li Congmin as the king of Shun.

古文：庚辰，闽地震，闽主璘避位修道，命福王继鹏权总万机。
现代文：庚辰，闽地地震，闽主王避位修道，命令福王王继鹏暂管一切机务。
English: Geng Chen, the earthquake in Loudi, and the abdication of the king, ordered Fu Wang and Wang Jipeng to temporarily take charge of all operations.

古文：初，闽王审知性节俭，府舍皆庳陋；至是，大作宫殿，极土木之盛。
现代文：起初，第一任闽王王审知性情节俭，府舍都比较简陋；到此时，大肆兴建宫殿，极尽土木之豪华。
English: At the beginning, the first king of the Qin Dynasty was very frugal, and the government buildings were relatively simple; at this time, the palace was built lavishly, and the luxury of civil engineering was exhausted.

古文：甲申，帝暴得风疾；庚寅，小愈，见群臣于文明殿。
现代文：甲申，明宗突然患风疾，庚寅，病稍好些，在文明殿接见群臣。
English: Gao Shin, Mingzong suddenly fell ill with a cold, and Geng Yin, who was a little better, received the ministers at the Hall of Civilization.

古文：壬辰夜，夏州城上举火，比明，杂虏数千骑救之，安从进遣先锋使宋温击走之。
现代文：壬辰夜，夏州城上点起烽火，天刚亮，各路胡兵数千人马驰奔而至，安从进派先锋使宋温把他们击走。
English: On the evening of the 13th, a bonfire was lit on the castle of Xiazhou. At first light, thousands of Hu soldiers from all directions galloped to the castle, and An Cong sent a vanguard to make Song Wen drive them away.

古文：吴宋齐丘劝徐知诰徙吴主都金陵，知诰乃营宫城于金陵。
现代文：吴国宋齐丘劝徐知诰把吴主杨溥迁都金陵，徐知诰便在金陵营建宫城。
English: Song Qiqiu of the State of Wu advised Xu Zhisheng to move the capital of the State of Wu, Yangpu, to Jinling, and Xu Zhisheng proceeded to build a palace city in Jinling.

古文：帝旬日不见群臣，都人忷惧，或潜窜山野，或寓止军营。
现代文：明宗十天不见群臣，京都的人惶恐，或者暗中流窜到山林荒野，或者躲藏到军营。
English: Myongjong did not see his retainers for ten days, and people in Kyoto panicked, or secretly fled to the mountains and forests, or hid in military camps.

古文：秋，七月，庚辰，帝力疾御广寿殿，人情始安。
现代文：秋季，七月，庚辰，明宗带病勉强驾临广寿殿，人心才安定下来。
English: In autumn, July, Gengchen, Mingzong was ill and reluctantly drove to Guangshu Hall, and people's hearts settled down.

古文：安从进攻夏州。
现代文：安从进攻打夏州。
English: Ahn played Chashu from the attack.

古文：州城赫连勃勃所筑，坚如铁石，斫凿不能入。
现代文：夏州的城垣是赫连勃勃所筑，坚固得像铁石一般，斫凿不能使它破毁。
English: The city wall of Xiazhou was built with great vigor. It is as strong as iron and stone, and no chisel can break it.

古文：又党项万馀骑徜徉四野，抄掠粮饷，官军无所刍牧。
现代文：那里又有党项四万多骑兵在四野流动，抢掠粮食财物，致使官军不能进行农耕、畜牧。
English: There were also more than forty thousand cavalrymen of the party moving in the four fields, looting grain and property, so that the government army could not carry out farming and animal husbandry.

古文：山路险狭，关中民输斗粟束藁费钱数缗，民间困竭不能供。
现代文：山路又艰险又狭小，关中百姓运输一斗米、一捆柴草，要费钱数贯，民间困若竭尽，无力供应。
English: Mountain roads are arduous, dangerous and narrow. The people of Guanzhong have to spend a lot of money to transport a bucket of rice and a bundle of firewood. If the people are exhausted, they are unable to supply.

古文：李彝超兄弟登城谓从进曰： 夏州贫瘠，非有珍宝蓄积可以充朝廷贡赋也；但以祖父世守此土，不欲失之。
现代文：李彝超兄弟登上城垣对安从进说： 夏州很贫穷，没有珍宝积畜可以充当对朝廷的贡品和财赋的地方，只是因为祖父、父亲世代据守此地，不想把它丢失了。
English: Li Yingchao's brothers climbed onto the city wall and said to An Congjin: "Xiazhou is very poor, there is no place to accumulate precious animals that can be used as tribute and wealth for the imperial court, just because my grandfather and father's generation kept this place and didn't want to lose it.

古文：蕞尔孤城，胜之不武，何足烦国家劳费如此！
现代文：这个小小孤城，战胜它也不足以宣扬威武，何必这样麻烦国家劳师费财！
English: Defeating this small, isolated city is not enough to proclaim the might of martial arts. Why should the country go to such trouble and expense?

古文：幸为表闻，若许其自新，或使之征伐，愿为众先。 
现代文：请您上表把情况报告朝廷，如果朝廷能准许我们自新，或者派遣我们去征伐异城，我愿意去打先锋。 
English: Please report the situation to the imperial court at the table. If the imperial court can allow us to reform, or send us to conquer a foreign city, I am willing to play the vanguard.

古文：上闻之，壬午，命从进引兵还。
现代文：明宗听说这种情况，壬午，命令安从进带兵返回。
English: Mingzong heard of the situation and, at noon, ordered An to return from bringing in the soldiers.

古文：其后有知李仁福阴事者，云： 仁福畏朝廷除移，扬言结契丹为援，契丹实不与之通也；致朝廷误兴是役，无功而还。 
现代文：其后，有人知道李仁福的隐怀，指出： 李仁福怕朝廷调动他的人马，便放风说要联合契丹相互支援，其实契丹并未与他勾结；致使朝廷这次错误地兴兵讨伐，结果无功而还。 
English: Later, someone who knew about Li Renfu's secret thoughts pointed out: Li Renfu was afraid that the imperial court would mobilize his men and horses, so he said that he would unite with the Khitan to support each other. In fact, the Khitan did not collude with him. As a result, the imperial court mistakenly raised an army to fight this time, but the result was futile.

古文：自是夏州轻朝廷，每有叛臣，必阴与之连以邀赂遗。
现代文：从此，夏州疏远朝廷，每逢有人叛变，必然暗中与之通连勾结，来达到要求贿赂遗赠的目的。
English: From then on, Xiazhou distanced itself from the imperial court, and whenever someone rebelled, it was inevitable to secretly collude with them to achieve the purpose of demanding bribes and bequests.

古文：上疾久未平，征夏州无功，军士颇有流言，乙酉，赐在京诸军优给有差；既赏赉无名，士卒由是益骄。
现代文：当时，明宗久病未愈，征讨夏州无所获而归，军士中有很多流言，乙酉，按等级优厚赏赐在京各军；这样，赏施没有正当理由，士兵从此更加骄纵了。
English: At that time, Emperor Mingzong had been ill for a long time, and there was nothing to be gained from the conquest of Xia Prefecture. There were many rumors among the soldiers, and acetylene was generously awarded to each army in Beijing according to their rank. Thus, there was no legitimate reason for the reward, and the soldiers became more arrogant.

古文：丁亥，赐钱元瓘爵吴王。
现代文：丁亥，赐予钱元封爵为吴王。
English: Dinghai gave Qianyuan the title of King of Wu.

古文：元瓘于兄弟甚厚，其兄中吴、建武节度使元瓘自苏州入见，元瓘以家人礼事之，奉觞为寿，曰： 此兄之位也，而小子居之，兄之赐也。 
现代文：钱元对他的兄弟们很是敦厚，他的哥哥中吴、建武节度使钱元从苏州来朝见他。钱元用家人礼法待他，举杯向他祝福，并说： 这是哥哥的王位，而小弟我占有了，这是兄长所赐予我的啊。 
English: Qianyuan was very generous to his brothers. His elder brothers, Zhongwu and Jianwu, made Qianyuan come from Suzhou to see him at court. Qianyuan treated him with family etiquette, toasted him with a blessing, and said: "This is my brother's throne, but I have my younger brother, this is what my elder brother gave me."

古文：元瓘曰： 先王择贤而立之，君臣位定，元瓘知忠顺而已。 
现代文：钱元说： 先王是选择贤能而扶立的，现在君臣之位已定，元明白要忠贞顺从而已。 
English: Qianyuan said, "The former king chose the virtuous and supported them. Now the position of the monarch and the minister has been determined. The former understood that he should be loyal and obedient.

古文：因相与对泣。
现代文：因而兄弟相对涕泣。
English: This left the brothers in tears.

古文：戊子，闽主璘复位。
现代文：戊子，闽主王复位。
English: Boshi, the lord of the castle, is restored to his throne.

古文：初，福建中军使薛文杰，性巧佞，璘喜奢侈，文杰以聚使用求媚，璘以为国计使，亲任之。
现代文：起先，福建中军使薛文杰，为人乖巧谄媚，王喜爱奢侈，薛文杰便用搜刮民财的手段来迎会他，王任用他当国计使，视为亲信。
English: At first, the Chinese military envoy to Fujian, Xue Wenjie, was a well-behaved and charming person, and Wang loved luxury. Xue Wenjie welcomed him with the means of scrounging people's wealth, and Wang appointed him as a state planner and regarded him as a close confidant.

古文：文杰阴求富民之罪，籍没其财，被榜捶者胸背分受，仍以铜斗火熨之。
现代文：薛文杰暗中探查有钱人家的罪过，抄没其家财，被拷打的人胸背受刑，用烧红了的铜斗烙灼。
English: Xue Wenjie secretly investigated the sins of rich people, confiscated their family wealth, tortured people's chests and backs, and burned them with red-hot copper buckets.

古文：建州土豪吴光入朝，文杰利其财，求其罪，将治之；光怨怒，帅其众且万人叛奔吴。
现代文：建州的土豪吴光来朝拜闽主，薛文杰看中他的财产，搜求他的罪过，将要处治他；吴光怨恨恼怒，率领自己的徒众几乎上万人，反叛而奔入吴国。
English: Wu Guang, the local strongman of Jianzhou, came to worship the Lord. Xue Wenjie took a fancy to his property, searched for his sins, and was going to punish him. Wu Guang was resentful and angry, and led his followers, almost tens of thousands of people, to rebel and rush into the State of Wu.

古文：帝以工部尚书卢文纪、礼部郎中吕琦为蜀王册礼使，并赐蜀王一品朝服。
现代文：明宗任命工部尚书户文纪、礼部郎中吕琦为蜀王册礼使，并赐蜀王一品朝服。
English: Emperor Mingzong appointed Lyu Hao, a member of the Ministry of Works, Literature and Culture, and the Ministry of Ceremonies, as an envoy to the King of Shu, and gave the King of Shu a royal robe.

古文：知祥自作九旒冕、九章衣，车服旌旗皆拟王者。
现代文：孟知祥自己制作九旒冠冕，九章衣，车舆服饰旌旗都比照天子。
English: Meng Zhixiang made his own nine-branched crown, nine-branched garment, chariot dress and banner, all of which were compared to the heavenly son.

古文：八月，乙巳朔，文纪等至成都。
现代文：八月，乙巳朔，卢文纪等到达成都。
English: In August, at the dawn of the new year, Lu Wenji waited until the capital was reached.

古文：戊申，知祥服痛冕，备仪卫诣驿，降阶北面受册，升玉辂。
现代文：戊申，孟知祥穿上兖服、冠冕，准备好仪仗军卫来到驿舍，降阶行礼。
English: Wushin, Meng Zhixiang put on the imperial robe and crown, ready for the guard of honor to come to the imperial villa and bow down.

古文：至府门，乘步辇而归。文纪，简求之孙也。
现代文：面向北方接受册封，坐上带着玉辂的车，到达王府门前，坐着人抬的步辇而进入内庭。卢文纪是卢简求的孙子。
English: He faced north to receive the conferment of the title, got on a car with a jade scepter, arrived in front of the gate of the royal palace, and entered the inner courtyard on a man-carried palanquin. Lu Wenji is the grandson of Lu Jianqiu.

古文：戊申，群臣上尊号曰圣明神武广道法天文德恭孝皇帝，大赦。
现代文：戊申，群臣为明宗上尊号为圣明神武广道法天文德恭孝皇帝，实行大赦。
English: Wushin, a group of courtiers for the Ming Dynasty's honorific title for the Holy Emperor Ming Shenwu Guangdao Law and Astronomy Degyongxiao, the implementation of amnesty.

古文：在京及诸道将士各等第优给。
现代文：对在京城及诸道的将士，各按等级进行优赏。
English: For the soldiers in the capital and the provinces, they will be rewarded according to their rank.

古文：时一月之间再行优给，由是月度益窘。
现代文：当时在不到一个月的时间里，再次实行优赏，从此用度更加困窘。
English: At that time, in less than a month's time, the preferential reward was implemented again, and since then, it has become even more embarrassing.

古文：太仆少卿致仕何泽见上寝疾，秦王从荣权势方盛，冀己复进用，表请立从荣为太子。
现代文：太仆少卿何泽看到明宗卧病，秦王李从荣权势正在发展，他希望自己能重新得到起用，便上表请求立李从荣为太子。
English: Seeing that Mingzong was bedridden and that the power of Qin King Li Congrong was growing, he hoped that he could be re-appointed, so he went up to the table to request the appointment of Li Congrong as crown prince.

古文：上览表泣下，私谓左右曰： 群臣请立太子，朕当归老太原旧第耳。 
现代文：明宗看到表章流下眼泪，私下对左右亲近的人说： 群臣请求立太子，朕自当归老在太原旧府第了。 
English: When Emperor Mingzong saw the prince shed tears, he privately said to those close to him, "The courtiers have requested that a crown prince be appointed, so I should return to the old palace in Taiyuan."

古文：不得已，丙戌，诏宰相枢密使议之。
现代文：不得已，壬戌，下诏让宰相、枢密使议论此事。
English: I had to, reluctantly, issue an edict to let the Prime Minister and the Privy Council discuss the matter.

古文：丁卯，从荣见上，言曰： 窃闻有奸人请立臣为太子；臣幼小，且愿学治军民，不愿当此名。 
现代文：丁卯，李从荣谒见明宗，说道： 听说有奸臣请陛下立臣为太子，臣年纪幼小，并且臣愿意学习带兵，不愿担当这个名义。 
English: Dingwu, Li Congrong met Mingzong and said: I heard that a treacherous vassal asked His Majesty to appoint him as the crown prince. The vassal was young, and the vassal was willing to learn to lead soldiers, but did not want to take on this role.

古文：上曰： 群臣所欲也。 
现代文：明宗说： 这是群臣所要求的。 
English: Mingzong said, "This is what the courtiers asked for."

古文：从荣退，见范延光、赵延寿曰： 执政欲以吾为太子，是欲夺我兵柄，幽之东宫耳。 
现代文：李从荣退下来，去见范延光、赵延寿说： 你们执政的各位要让我当太子，我是想夺我的兵权，把我幽禁在东宫而已。 
English: Li retired from Rong and went to see Fan Yanguang and Zhao Yanshou, saying: "You people in power want me to be crown prince. I just want to seize my military power and confine myself to the East Palace.

古文：延光等知上意，且惧从荣之言，即具以白上；辛未，制以从荣为天下兵马大元帅。
现代文：范延光等知道明宗并不愿立太子，而且畏惧李从荣讲的话，就把他的话如实上奏明宗；辛未，明宗下制书，任命李从荣为天下兵马大元帅。
English: Fan Yanguang and others knew that Mingzong did not want to establish a crown prince, and they were afraid of Li Congrong's words, so they reported his words to Mingzong truthfully; Xin Wei, a bookmaker under Mingzong, appointed Li Congrong as the grand marshal of the world's soldiers and horses.

古文：九月，甲戌朔，吴主立德妃王氏为皇后。
现代文：九月，甲戌朔，吴主立德妃王氏为皇后。
English: In September, the Emperor of Wu crowned Empress Dowager De as empress.

古文：戊寅，加范延光、赵延寿兼侍中。
现代文：戊寅，加封范延光、赵延寿兼任侍中。
English: Wu Yin, Fan Yan Guang, and Zhao Yan Shou were also appointed as attendants.

古文：癸未，中书奏节度使见元帅仪，虽带平章事，亦以军礼廷参，从之。
现代文：癸未，中书上奏：节度使见元帅的仪礼，虽然带衔平章事，仍用军人礼节进见和参拜；批准了这样办。
English: In the middle of the day, the following was written in the book: The ceremonial of the marshal, although with the title and insignia, still uses the military etiquette to visit and worship; approved this.

古文：帝欲加宣徽使、判三司冯赟同平章事；赟父名章。
现代文：后唐明宗要加封宣徽使、判三司冯同平章事；冯的父亲叫冯章。
English: Later, the Tang and Ming dynasties wanted to add the title of Xuanhuizi and the title of Sanzhi Feng Tongping; Feng's father was called Feng Zhang.

古文：执政误引故事，庚寅，加赟同中书门下二品，充三司使。
现代文：执政者弄错了唐制旧规定，庚寅，加封冯同中书门下二品，充当三司使。
English: The rulers made a mistake of the old regulations of the Tang system. Geng Yin and Jafeng Feng Tong, who were second in line to the throne, acted as the three envoys.

古文：秦王从荣请严卫、捧圣步骑两指挥为牙兵。
现代文：秦王李从荣请求把严卫军和捧圣军的步骑两指挥作为从属于自己的牙兵。
English: Qin King Li Congrong requested that the two commanders of Yan Wei Army and Hup Sheng Army be made subordinate to him.

古文：每入朝，从数百骑，张弓挟矢，驰骋衢路；令文士试草《檄淮南书》，陈己将廓清海内之意。
现代文：每逢他入朝，随从几百骑马的兵勇，张着弓，带着箭，奔驰在通衢大路上；又令文士替他试着起草征讨淮南的宣言，表示他将要平定海内的意志。
English: Whenever he entered the imperial court, he was accompanied by hundreds of soldiers on horseback, with bows and arrows, galloping on the Tonglu Road; he also had scribes try to draft a declaration to conquer Huainan for him, indicating that he would subdue the will of the sea.

古文：从荣不快于执政，私谓所亲曰： 吾一旦南面，必族之！ 
现代文：李从荣对执政者不满意，私下对他的亲信讲： 我有朝一日做了皇帝，必定把他们灭门诛杀。 
English: Li Congrong was not satisfied with the ruler and said privately to his cronies: "Once I become emperor, I will surely kill them."

古文：范延光、赵延寿惧，屡求外补以避之。
现代文：范延光、赵延寿害怕，几次请求补放在外镇为官以躲避灾祸。
English: Fan Yanguang and Zhao Yanshou were afraid, and several times requested to be placed as officials outside the town to avoid the disaster.

古文：以上为见己病而求去，甚怒，曰： 欲去自去，奚用表为！ 
现代文：明宗以为他们是看到自己有病而要求离去，很恼火，说： 要走便自己走；何必上表！ 
English: Mingzong thought that they saw that he was ill and asked him to leave. He was very angry and said, "If you want to leave, you can leave on your own; why do you have to go to the table!

古文：齐国公主复为延寿言于禁中，云 延寿实有疾，不堪机务。 
现代文：赵延寿的妻子齐国公主又替赵延寿在内宫进言，说： 赵延寿确实有病，承担不了机要重务。 
English: Zhao Yanshou's wife, Princess Qi Guo, also spoke on behalf of Zhao Yanshou in the inner palace, saying: Zhao Yanshou is indeed ill and cannot undertake important tasks.

古文：丙申，二人复言于上曰： 臣等非敢惮劳，愿与勋旧迭为之。
现代文：丙申，范、赵二人再次上奏明宗说： 我们不是怕辛劳，而是愿意与勋旧老臣轮流担负枢要重任。
English: In response, Fan and Zhao both appealed to Emperor Mingzong again, saying, "We are not afraid of hard work, but we are willing to take turns in shouldering the key responsibilities with the honored old vassals.

古文：亦不敢俱去，愿听一人先出。
现代文：我们也不敢一下都走，希望能允许先走一个。
English: We don't dare to go all at once, and hope to be allowed to go first.

古文：若新人不称职，复召臣，臣即至矣。 
现代文：如果新任的人不称职，可以再把我们召回，我们必定马上回来。 
English: If the new people are not competent, they can call us back again, and we will definitely come back.

古文：上乃许之。
现代文：明宗这才准许了。
English: The Emperor agreed.

古文：戊戌，以延寿为宣武节度使；以山南节道节度使硃弘昭为枢密使、同平章事。
现代文：戊戌，外调赵延寿为为宣武节度使，另行调入山南东道节度使朱弘昭为枢密使、同平章事。
English: In Wuyi, Zhao Yanshou was transferred to serve as the envoy of the Xuanwu Festival, and Zhu Hongzhao was transferred to serve as the envoy of the Shannan Host Festival.

古文：制下，弘昭复辞，上叱之曰： 汝辈皆不欲在吾侧，吾蓄养汝辈何为！ 
现代文：明宗制命下来，朱弘昭又推辞不受，明宗斥责他说： 你们这些人都不想在我身边，我供养你们干什么！ 
English: Mingzong issued the order, but Zhu Hongzhao refused to accept it. Mingzong rebuked him, saying: "You people don't want to be around me, why should I support you!

古文：弘昭乃不敢言。
现代文：朱弘昭才不敢再说。
English: Zhu Hongzhao didn't dare to say anything.

古文：吏部侍郎张文宝泛海使杭州，船坏，水工以小舟济之，风飘至天长；从者二百人，所存者五人。
现代文：吏部侍郎张文宝经海路出使吴越杭州，途中船坏了，水手用小船接济他，靠风力飘流至吴国的天长；原有随从二百人，留存下来的只剩五人。
English: Zhang Wenbao, the steward of the cadre department, sent the envoy of Wu Yue to Hangzhou by sea. The ship broke down on the way, the sailors used a small boat to help him, and drifted to the Tianlong of Wuxi by wind. There were originally two hundred followers, and only five people remained.

古文：吴主厚礼之，资以从者仪服钱币数万，仍为之牒钱氏，使于境上迎侯。
现代文：吴国君主接待他很优厚，资助他随从人员的仪礼服装、钱币数万，仍然为他转达公文给吴越国主钱元，让他们派人在境界上迎候。
English: The monarch of Wu received him very graciously, subsidized the ceremonial clothing of his entourage and tens of thousands of coins, and still conveyed official documents to Qianyuan, the lord of Wuyue, for him to send someone to greet him at the border.

古文：文宝独受饮食，馀皆辞之，曰： 本朝与吴久不通问，今既非君臣，又非宾主，若受兹物，何辞以谢！ 
现代文：张文宝只接受了饮食，其他东西都没有要，并说： 本朝与吴国很长时间不通问讯了，现在既不是君主关系，又不是宾主关系，如果接受了这些东西，用什么言词来致谢！ 
English: Zhang Wenbao only accepted food and drink, and did not ask for anything else, and said: This dynasty has not communicated with Wu Guo for a long time, and now it is neither a monarch relationship nor a guest relationship. If you accept these things, what words should you use to express your thanks!

古文：吴主嘉之，竟达命于杭州而还。
现代文：吴主杨溥很赞赏他。他居然完成了朝廷委派的任务，到杭州而还。
English: The lord of the State of Wu, Yang Hui, appreciated him very much. He actually completed the task assigned by the imperial court and returned to Hangzhou.

古文：庚子，以前义成节度使李赞化为昭信节度使，留洛阳食其俸。
现代文：庚子，任用前义成节度使李赞华为昭信节度使，人留在洛阳而享受节度使的俸给。
English: Geng Zi appointed Li Zanghua, the former Yi Cheng Sect Emissary, to serve as the honorary Sect Emissary, and he stayed in Luoyang to enjoy the Sect Emissary's salary.

古文：辛丑，诏大元帅从荣位在宰相上。
现代文：辛丑，明宗下诏：大元帅李从荣地位在宰相之上。
English: Sin ugly, Ming Zong issued an edict: Grand Marshal Li Cong Rong's status was higher than that of the prime minister.

古文：吴徐知诰以国中水火屡为灾，曰： 兵民困苦，吾安可独乐！ 
现代文：吴国徐知诰因为境内屡次遭受水火灾害，说道： 军队和百姓生活困苦，我怎么可以独享逸乐！ 
English: Xu Zhisheng of the State of Wu said, "The army and the people live in hardship, how can I enjoy pleasure alone?" because of the repeated water and fire disasters in the country.

古文：悉纵遣侍妓，取乐器焚之。
现代文：便把所有的侍妓全部打发出去，把歌舞演奏的乐器都焚烧了。
English: He then sent out all the courtesans and burned all the musical instruments used for singing and dancing.

古文：闽内枢密使薛文杰说闽王抑挫诸宗室；从子继图不胜忿，谋反，坐诛，连坐者千馀人。
现代文：闽国的内枢密使薛文杰劝说闽王王抑制控压各个宗室；王的侄儿王继图很愤恨，谋反失败，被诛杀，连坐的有一千余人。
English: Xue Wenjie, the emissary of the Inner Privy Council of the State of Qi, persuaded the king of Qi to suppress and control the various families; Wang Jitu, the nephew of the king, was very angry, failed to rebel, was killed, and there were more than a thousand people sitting together.

古文：冬，十月，乙卯，范延光、冯赟奏： 西北诸胡卖马者往来如织，日月绢无虑五千匹，计耗国用什之七，请委缘边镇戍择诸胡所卖马良者给券，具数以闻。 
现代文：冬季十月，乙卯，后唐范延光、冯奏称： 西北的各族胡人卖马的往来像穿梭，每天用于换马交易的绢恐怕不少于五千匹，计算起来耗费国家费用达到十分之七，请朝廷委派沿边界的镇所，选择各族胡人所卖马中优良的发给价券，价购多少按数上报。 
English: In the winter of October, Fan Yanguang and Feng Song, both of whom were born after the Tang Dynasty, said: "The horse-selling transactions of the Hu people of all ethnic groups in the northwest are like a shuttle service. The number of mules used for horse-swapping transactions is probably no less than five thousand per day, which is calculated to consume seven-tenths of the national expenses. Please ask the imperial court to appoint townships along the border to select the best-selling horse among the horses sold by the Hu people of all ethnic groups, and report the purchase price according to the number.

古文：从之。
现代文：明宗同意施行。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：戊午，以前武兴节度使孙岳为三司使。
现代文：戊午，任用前武兴节度使孙岳为三司使。
English: In the afternoon, Sun Yue was appointed as the third envoy of the former Wu Xing Festival.

古文：范延光屡因孟汉琼、王淑妃以求出。庚申，以延光为成德节度使，以冯赟为枢密使。
现代文：范延光由于孟汉琼、王淑妃的缘故，屡次请求明宗准许委派他到外镇为官；庚申，任用范延光为成德节度使，而以冯为枢密使。
English: Fan Yanguang, because of Meng Hanqiong and Wang Shufei, repeatedly requested the Ming Dynasty to allow him to be appointed as an official in a foreign town; Goshun appointed Fan Yanguang as the Chengde Festival envoy, and Feng as the Privy Envoy.

古文：帝以亲军都指挥使、同平章事康义诚为朴忠，亲任之。
现代文：明宗以亲军都指挥使、河阳节度使、同平章事康义诚为人淳朴忠实，很亲近和信任他。
English: Mingzong was a simple and faithful person who was close to and trusted Tongping Zhangji Kang Yicheng, who was the commander of the Mingzong's troops and the envoy of the Kheyang Festival.

古文：时要近之官多求出以避秦王之祸，义诚度不能自脱，乃令其子事秦王，务以恭顺持两端，冀得自全。
现代文：当时朝廷重要和亲近的官员大多要求外调以躲避秦王的加祸，康义诚料想自己不能解脱，便让他的儿子侍奉秦王，遇事力求用恭敬顺从、左右两可的态度去对待，希望借此保全自己。
English: At that time, most of the important and close officials of the imperial court requested to be transferred abroad to avoid the aggravation of the Qin King. Kang Yicheng thought that he could not be relieved, so he let his son serve the Qin King. In case of trouble, he tried to treat him with a respectful, obedient and ambiguous attitude, hoping to protect himself.

古文：权知夏州事李彝超上表谢罪，求昭雪；壬戌，以彝超为定难军节充使。
现代文：暂任主持夏州事务的李彝超上表向朝廷谢罪，请求昭雪讨伐他的罪行；壬戌，任命李彝超为定难军节度使。
English: Li Yingchao, who temporarily presided over the affairs of Xiazhou, expressed his apology to the imperial court and requested that his crimes be punished; after that, Li Yingchao was appointed as the commander of the expeditionary force.

古文：十一月，甲戌，上饯范延光，酒罢，上曰： 卿今远去，事宜尽言。 
现代文：十一月，甲戌，明宗给范延光饯行，喝完了酒，明宗说： 你现在要远离我而去，有什么事尽管说出来。 
English: In November, in Jiajing, Mingzong took Fan Yanguang for a walk. After drinking wine, Mingzong said, "You should stay away from me now. If you have anything to say, please say it."

古文：对曰： 朝廷大事，愿陛下与内久辅臣参决，勿听群小之言。 
现代文：范延光回答说： 朝廷的大事，希望陛下同内外辅佐的大臣商量决定，不要听那些小人的话。 
English: Fan Yanguang replied, "Important matters of the imperial court are at stake. I hope that His Majesty will discuss and decide with the ministers of internal and external aide, and not listen to the words of those villains."

古文：遂相泣而别。
现代文：随即相互流泪而别。
English: They then bid each other a tearful farewell.

古文：时孟汉琼用事，附之者共为朋党以蔽惑上听，故延光言及之。
现代文：当时，孟汉琼弄权操纵一切，依附他的人相互结为朋党，共同蒙蔽惑乱皇帝的耳目，所以范延光说起这些话。
English: At that time, Meng Han Qiong manipulated everything with power, and the people who depended on him formed a crony party with each other to jointly blind the ears and eyes of the emperor, so Fan Yanguang said these words.

古文：庚辰，改慎州怀化军。
现代文：庚辰，更改慎州怀化军为昭化军。
English: Geng Chen changed the name of Shenzhou Huaihua Army to Zhaohua Army.

古文：置保顺军于洮州，领洮、鄯等州。
现代文：设置保顺军于洮州，领有洮州、鄯州等地。
English: He set up the Bozhun Army in Ganzhou and occupied Ganzhou, Ganzhou and other places.

古文：戊子，帝疾复作，己丑，大渐，秦王从荣入问疾，帝俯首不能举。
现代文：戊子，明宗的病复发，己丑，明显见好，秦王李从荣进宫问候，明宗低着头不能抬起。
English: Wuzi, Mingzong's illness relapses, he is ugly, he is obviously happy, Qin Wang Li sends greetings from Rongjin Palace, Mingzong can't lift his head.

古文：王淑妃曰： 从荣在此。 
现代文：王淑妃说： 从荣在这里。 
English: Wang Shuxi said: "I am honored to be here.

古文：帝不应。
现代文：明宗没有回答。
English: Gaozu did not answer.

古文：从荣出，闻宫中皆哭，从荣意帝已殂，明旦，称疾不入。
现代文：李从荣出来，听到宫中人都在恸哭，他以为明宗已经死了，第二天早上，自称有病不进宫省问。
English: When Li Congrong came out and heard everyone in the palace crying, he thought Mingzong had died. The next morning, he said he was too sick to go to the palace.

古文：是夕，帝实小愈，而从荣不知。
现代文：这天晚上，明宗实际上是稍见好转，而李从荣却不知道。
English: That night, Mingzong actually showed a slight improvement, but Li Congrong didn't know.

古文：从荣自知不为时论所与，恐不得为嗣，与其党谋，欲以兵入侍，先制权臣。
现代文：李从荣自己知道当时人心舆论对他不利，害怕继承不了皇帝大位，便同他的党羽策划，要用武力入宫侍卫，先要制服权臣。
English: Li Congrong himself knew that public opinion was unfavorable to him at that time, and he was afraid that he would not be able to inherit the emperor's throne, so he planned with his party members to use force to enter the palace guards and first subdue the powerful ministers.

古文：辛卯，从荣遣都押牙马处钧谓硃弘昭、冯赟曰： 吾欲帅牙兵入宫中侍疾，且备非常，当止于何所？ 
现代文：辛卯，李从荣派都押牙马处钧告诉朱弘昭、冯说： 我要带兵进入宫内侍候皇上疾病，并且防备非常之变，应该在哪里居处？ 
English: Xinwu, Li Congrong sent an envoy to Zhu Hongzhao, Feng said: I want to take soldiers into the palace to wait for the emperor's illness, and guard against unexpected changes. Where should I live?

古文：二人曰： 王自择之。 
现代文：朱、冯二人答称： 请王爷自己选择地方。 
English: Zhu and Feng both replied, "Ask the prince to choose the place himself."

古文：既而私于处钧曰： 主上万福，王宜竭心忠孝，不可妄信人浮言。 
现代文：接着私下对马处钧说： 皇上平安无事，秦王应该竭尽心力实行忠孝之道，不可乱信坏人的胡说。 
English: Then he said to Ma Shudai in private, "The emperor is safe and sound. King Qin should make every effort to practice the way of loyalty and filial piety, and must not believe the nonsense of bad people."

古文：从荣怒，复遣处钧谓二人曰： 公辈殊不爱家族邪？
现代文：李从荣大怒，又派马处钧告诉朱、冯二人： 你们两位难道不爱惜自己的家族吗？
English: Li Congrong was furious and sent a horse to tell Zhu and Feng: "Don't you two care about your family?

古文：何敢拒我！ 
现代文：怎么敢抗拒我！ 
English: How dare you resist me!

古文：二人患之，入告王淑妃及宣徽使孟汉琼，咸曰： 兹事不得康义诚不可济。 
现代文：朱、冯二人害怕，入宫报告王淑妃及宣徽使孟汉琼，都说： 这件事不得到康义诚的合作和支持就不可能办好。 
English: Zhu and Feng were both afraid. Wang Shuxi, who reported to the palace, and Meng Hanqiong, the imperial envoy, both said, "This matter cannot be handled well without the cooperation and support of Kang Yicheng."

古文：乃召义诚谋之，义诚竟无言，但曰： 义诚，将校耳，不敢预议，惟相公所使。 
现代文：便把康义诚召入内廷和他商议办法，康义诚竟然不拿主意，只是说： 义诚是带兵的军人，不敢干预朝廷政务，我只听从宰相大人的驱使。 
English: He summoned Kang Yicheng to the Inner Court to discuss the matter with him. However, Kang Yicheng did not take the advice, but said, "Yicheng is a soldier who leads soldiers. He does not dare to interfere in the affairs of the Imperial Court. I only follow the orders of the Grand Vizier."

古文：弘昭疑义诚不欲众中言之，夜，邀至私第问之，其对如初。
现代文：朱弘昭怀疑康义诚不想当着众人表态，夜间，把他邀请到家里再次问他，康义诚对答得和原来一样。
English: Zhu Hongzhao suspected that Kang Yicheng did not want to make a statement in front of everyone. At night, he invited him to his home and asked him again. Kang Yicheng gave the same answer as before.

古文：壬辰，从荣自河南府常服将步骑千人陈于天津桥。
现代文：壬辰，李从荣穿着平常服装从河南府带领步骑兵马千人列阵于天津桥。
English: In Imjin, Li Congrong dressed in ordinary clothes from Henan Province led the infantry cavalry horse thousands of people lined up in Tianjin Bridge.

古文：是日黎明，从荣遣马处钧至冯赟第，语之曰： 吾今日决入，且居兴圣宫。
现代文：当日黎明，李从荣派马处钧到冯府第，对他说： 我今天决定进入皇宫，并且要住进准备嗣位的兴圣宫。
English: At dawn on the same day, Li sent a horse-drawn carriage from Rongpai to Fengfudi and said to him: I have decided to enter the imperial palace today, and I want to live in the Xingsheng Palace, which is preparing for the succession.

古文：公辈各有宗族，处事亦宜详允，祸福在须臾耳。 
现代文：你们各位枢要大臣都各有自己的宗族，做事也应该仔细慎重，是祸是福就决定在顷刻之间了。 
English: All of you key ministers have your own clans. You should also be careful and prudent in your work. Whether it is a blessing or a curse will be decided in an instant.

古文：又遣处钧诣康义诚，义诚曰： 王为则奉迎。 
现代文：又派马处钧去见康义诚，康义诚答复说： 只要秦王来到，我必奉迎。 
English: He also sent horses and mules to meet Kang Yicheng. Kang Yicheng replied, "As long as King Qin comes, I will welcome him."

古文：赟驰入右掖门，见弘昭、义诚、汉琼及三司使孙岳方聚谋于中兴殿门外，赟具道处钧之言，因让义诚曰： 秦王言 祸福在须臾， 其事可知，公勿以儿在秦府，左右顾望。
现代文：冯快马奔入右掖门，见到朱弘昭、康义诚、孟汉琼及三司使孙岳正聚集在中兴殿门外会商，冯便把马处钧的传语告诉他们，并因而责难康义诚说： 秦王说 是祸是福决于顷刻 ，这件事的利害十分清楚，您可不要因为自己儿子在秦王府中供职而左顾右望！
English: Feng Kuaima ran into the right antechamber and saw Zhu Hongzhao, Kang Yicheng, Meng Hanqiong, and the three commissioners Sun Yue were gathered in the outer gate of the Zhongxing Hall for a conference. Feng then told them the legend of the horse's whip, and thus reproached Kang Yicheng, saying: The Qin King said that whether it is a misfortune or a blessing depends on the moment. The interest of this matter is very clear. You should not look to the right or to the left because your son is serving in the Qin King's palace!

古文：主上拔擢吾辈，自布衣至将相，苟使秦王兵得入此门，置主上何地？
现代文：皇上提拔我们这些人，从平民百姓高升至将相，假如让秦王的兵卒得以进入这禁内大门，把皇上置于何等地位？
English: The emperor promoted these people of ours from commoners to generals. If the soldiers of King Qin were allowed to enter this forbidden gate, what status would the emperor be placed in?

古文：吾辈尚有遗种乎？ 
现代文：我们这些人还能有遗族吗？ 
English: Can we still have a bereaved family?

古文：义诚未及对，监门白秦王已将兵至端门外。
现代文：康义诚还未来得及回答，监门官进来报告：秦王已经带领兵丁到达端门之外。
English: Kang Yicheng did not have time to answer, the gatekeeper came in to report: Qin Wang has led the soldiers to the end of the gate.

古文：汉琼指衣起曰： 今日之事，危及君父，公犹顾望择利邪？
现代文：孟汉琼一甩袖子站起来说道： 今天的事，危害到了皇上，您还犹豫观望，计较个人的利害得失吗？
English: Meng Han Qiong rolled up her sleeves and stood up and said: Today's event has harmed the emperor, are you still hesitating to wait and see, considering your personal gains and losses?

古文：吾何爱馀生，当自帅兵拒之耳！ 
现代文：我怎么能爱惜自己的余生，只能带领兵士去抗拒他！ 
English: How can I spare myself the rest of my life, only to lead soldiers to resist him!

古文：即入殿门，弘照、赟随之，义诚不得已，亦随之入。
现代文：立即进入中兴殿门，朱弘昭、冯跟着他，康义诚不得已，也随着他进入内宫。
English: He immediately entered the gate of the Zhongxing Palace, Zhu Hongzhao and Feng followed him, and Kang Yicheng had no choice but to follow him into the inner palace.

古文：汉琼见帝曰： 从荣反，兵已攻端门，须臾入宫，则大乱矣！ 
现代文：孟汉琼见了明宗，奏报说： 秦王从荣造反了，他的兵众已攻到端门，马上要打进宫内来，可要大乱了。 
English: Meng Hanqiong saw Mingzong and reported: "Qin King Rongzong has rebelled. His soldiers have reached the front gate and are about to break into the palace. There will be chaos."

古文：宫中相顾号哭，帝曰： 从荣何苦乃尔！ 
现代文：宫里的人相视号哭，明宗说： 从荣何苦要这样干！ 
English: The people in the palace looked at each other and cried, and Emperor Mingzong said, "What a hard thing it must be to do such a thing!

古文：问弘昭等： 有诸？ 
现代文：便向朱弘昭等说： 有没有这回事？ 
English: Then he said to Zhu Hongzhao and others: Is there such a thing?

古文：对曰： 有之，适已令门者阖门矣。 
现代文：朱等回答说： 有这回事，刚才已经命令守门人关上了大门。 
English: Zhu et al. replied: There is such a thing, we have just ordered the gatekeeper to close the gate.

古文：帝指天泣下，谓义诚曰： 卿自处置，勿惊百姓！ 
现代文：明宗指着天落泪不止，对康义诚说： 请你自己做主去处理，不要惊扰百姓！ 
English: Pointing to the sky, Mingzong shed more and more tears and said to Kang Yicheng: Please handle it on your own, don't disturb the people!

古文：控鹤指挥使李重吉，从珂之子也，时侍侧，帝曰： 吾与尔父，冒矢石定天下，数脱吾于厄；从荣辈得何力，今乃为人所教，为此悖逆！
现代文：控鹤指挥使李重吉，是李从珂的儿子，当时正侍奉在明宗身边，明宗对他说： 我和你的父亲，冒着枪林箭雨，平定了天下，几次把我从危难中抢救出来；从荣他们这些人出过什么力，现在竟被人教唆，干这种悖逆不道的事！
English: The commander of the controlling cranes was Li Chongji, the son of Li Congke, who was serving alongside Mingzong at the time. Mingzong said to him, "I and your father braved a hail of bullets and arrows, pacified the world, and rescued me from danger several times. What power have these people exerted since Rong, and now they are being incited to do such a rebellious and immoral thing!

古文：我固知此曹不足付大事，当呼尔父授以兵柄耳。
现代文：我本来就知道这种人不足以把大事托付给他们，理当召唤你父亲前来，把掌兵的大权交付给他。
English: I should have known that such men were not fit to be trusted with great matters, and that I ought to have called your father and given him the command of the army.

古文：汝为我部闭诸门。 
现代文：你替我部署关闭所有宫门，把它们防守好。 
English: You will close all the palace gates for me and guard them well.

古文：重吉即帅控鹤兵守宫门。
现代文：李重吉立即率领控鹤兵士守卫着宫门。
English: Li Chongji immediately led the soldiers to guard the palace gate.

古文：孟汉琼被甲乘马，召马军都指挥使硃洪实，使将五百骑讨从荣。
现代文：孟汉琼披挂铠甲，骑上战马，召来马军都指挥使朱洪实，让他带领五百名骑兵去讨伐李从荣。
English: Meng Han Qiong put on armor, mounted a war horse, called Zhu Hongsheng to command the horse army, and let him lead five hundred cavalry to fight Li Congrong.

古文：从荣方据胡床，坐桥上，遣左右召康义诚。
现代文：此时，李从荣正倚据着胡床，坐在桥上，让左右侍从召唤康义诚来。
English: At this time, Li Congrong was leaning against the wooden bed, sitting on the bridge, and letting the attendants on his right and left summon Kang Yicheng.

古文：端门已闭，叩左掖门，从门隙中窥之，见硃洪实引骑兵北来，走白从荣。从荣大惊，命取铁掩心擐之，坐调弓矢。
现代文：由于端门已经被关闭，便叩打左掖门，并从门缝中向内窥视，看见朱洪实正率领骑兵从北面驰来，急忙报告李从荣；李从荣大为吃惊，命令取来铁掩心盔甲披挂，坐在那里调拨弓矢。
English: Since the end door had already been closed, he knocked on the left lintel door and peered through the cracks in the door. He saw that Zhu Hongshi was leading the cavalry from the north and hurriedly reported to Li Congrong. Li Congrong was very surprised and ordered to take the iron armor to cover his heart and sit there to adjust the bow and arrow.

古文：俄而骑兵大至，从荣走归府，僚佐皆窜匿，牙兵掠嘉善坊溃去。
现代文：不多久，骑兵大量奔压过来，李从荣退避逃归河南府署，他的僚属都逃窜藏匿起来，牙兵抢掠嘉善坊之后溃逃四散。
English: Not long after, a large number of cavalry rushed over, Li fled from Rongyue to Henan Prefecture, his colleagues and subordinates all fled and hid, and the dental soldiers looted Jiashanfang and then scattered.

古文：从荣与妃刘氏匿床下，皇城使安从益就斩之，并杀其子，以其首献。
现代文：李从荣和他的妃子刘氏藏躲在床下，皇城使安从益就地把他们杀了，并杀了他的儿子，把他们的首级进献朝廷。
English: Li Congrong and his concubine Liu Jiu hid under the bed, and the imperial city ordered An Congyi to kill them on the spot, as well as his son, and present their heads to the imperial court.

古文：初，孙岳颇得豫内廷密谋，冯、硃患从荣狼伉，岳尝为之极言祸福之归；康义诚恨之，至是，乘乱密遣骑士射杀之。
现代文：起初，孙岳参预内廷密谋陷得很深，冯、朱弘昭害怕李从荣乖戾难于应付，孙岳曾经为他们竭力剖析利害之所归；康义诚很厌恨他，此时便趁着混乱之中暗地派骑兵把他射杀了。
English: At first, Sun Yue, the prefect of the Inner Court, was deeply involved in the conspiracy. Feng and Zhu Hongzhao were afraid that Li Congrong would be difficult to deal with. Sun Yue had tried his best to analyze the interests for them; Kang Yicheng hated him very much. At this time, he took advantage of the chaos to secretly send cavalry to shoot him.

古文：帝闻从荣死，悲骇，几落御榻，绝而复苏者再，由是疾复剧。
现代文：明宗听说李从荣被杀，很是吃惊悲伤，几乎从床榻上跌落下来，几次昏蹶又复苏过来，从此病情加剧。
English: When Mingzong heard that Li Congrong had been killed, he was so shocked and saddened that he almost fell off his bed. He fainted several times and then recovered, and his condition worsened.

古文：从荣一子尚幼，养宫中，诸将请除之，帝泣曰： 此何罪！ 
现代文：李从荣有一个儿子还很幼小，养于宫中，众将要求把他杀掉，明宗涕泣着说： 这孩子有什么罪！ 
English: Li Congrong had a very young son, who was raised in the palace. The people demanded that he be killed. Mingzong cried and said, "What is the sin of this child?"

古文：不得已，竟与之。
现代文：不得已竟把孩子交给了众将。
English: I had to hand my child over to the generals.

古文：癸巳，冯道帅群臣入见帝于雍和殿，帝雨泣呜咽，曰： 吾家事至此，惭见卿等！ 
现代文：癸巳，冯道带领群臣入朝，在雍和殿觐见明宗，明宗泪下如雨，鸣咽不止，悲痛地说： 我家的事情闹到这样，实在惭愧见到你们众位公卿！ 
English: Suddenly, Feng Dao led a group of courtiers into the imperial court and met Mingsong at the Yonghe Hall. Mingsong was in tears, sobbing uncontrollably, and said sadly, "Things in my family have gotten so out of hand. I'm really ashamed to see all of you nobles!"

古文：宋王从厚为天雄节度使；甲午，遣孟汉琼征从厚，且权知天雄军府事。
现代文：宋王李从厚正为天雄节度使；甲午，明宗派遣孟汉琼去征召李从厚入朝侍疾，并使孟汉琼暂时主持天雄军的事务。
English: Song King Li Cong Huzheng was the messenger of Tianxiong for the festival; in the afternoon of the 1st day of the 1st month, Meng Han Qiong was sent by the Ming Dynasty to recruit Li Cong Huzheng to the imperial court, and Meng Han Qiong temporarily presided over the affairs of Tianxiong's army.

古文：丙申，追废从荣为庶人。
现代文：丙申，追废李从荣为平民。
English: Bishen, Li Congrong was ousted and became a civilian.

古文：执政共议从荣官属之罪，冯道曰： 从荣所亲者高辇、刘陟、王说而已，任赞到官才半月，王居敏、司徒诩在病告已半年，岂豫其谋！
现代文：执政诸人共同评议李从荣所属官吏的罪名，冯道说： 从荣所亲信的是高辇、刘陟、王说而已，任赞在秦王府到官才半个月，王居敏、司徒诩在病中告假已经半年，怎能参预他的阴谋！
English: The ruling people jointly reviewed the crimes of the officials belonging to Li Congrong. Feng Dao said: From Rongrong's confidants, it is only Gao Gan, Liu Ye, and Wang Yao, Ren Zan has only been in the Qin royal palace for half a month, and Wang Jumin and Sittuo have been on sick leave for half a year, how can they participate in his conspiracy!

古文：居敏尤为从荣所恶，昨举兵向阙之际，与辇、陟并辔而行，指日景曰： 来日及今，已诛王詹事矣。 
现代文：王居敏更是受李从荣的厌恶，昨日举兵叛乱中，向宫阙进军的时候，李从荣同高辇、刘陟并马而行，他指着日晷之影说： 来日到了这个时候，已经把王詹事诛杀了。 
English: Wang Jumin was even more detested by Li Congrong. During yesterday's mutiny, when Li Congrong marched towards the Imperial Palace with Gao Yao and Liu Yao, he pointed to the shadow of the sun and said, "By this time, I have already killed Wang Zhan Shijie."

古文：自非与之同谋者，岂得一切诛之乎！ 
现代文：证明王居敏不是作乱的同谋，怎能一切属官都加以诛杀呢！ 
English: To prove that Wang Jumin was not an accomplice in creating turmoil, how could all subordinate officials fight and kill him!

古文：硃弘昭曰： 使从荣得入光政门，赞等当如何任使，而吾辈犹有利乎！
现代文：朱弘昭说： 如果李从荣能够打进光政门，任赞那一伙人会怎样行事，那时我们这些人还能留下遗族吗！
English: Zhu Hongzhao said, "If Li Congrong is able to enter the gate of Guangzheng, how will that group of people act, and will we still be able to leave our families behind?"

古文：且首从差一等耳，今首已孥戮而从皆不问，主上能不以吾辈为庇奸人乎！ 
现代文：并且，首犯与从犯只能罪差一等，现在首犯已经拿获受戮，而对从犯都不追问罪，皇上岂不要以为我们是在庇护奸人吗？ 
English: Moreover, the first offender and the accomplice are only one crime away from each other. Now that the first offender has been punished and the accomplice is not being prosecuted, won't the emperor think that we are protecting the traitor?

古文：冯赟力争之，始议流贬。
现代文：冯极力为他争辩，这才议定为流放和贬官。
English: Feng argued strenuously on his behalf, and it was agreed that he would be exiled and demoted.

古文：时咨议高辇已伏诛。
现代文：当时，咨议高辇已经被杀。
English: At that time, Councillor Gao Tong had already been killed.

古文：丁酉，元帅府判官、兵部侍郎任赞、秘书监兼王傅刘瓚、友苏瓚、记室鱼崇远、河南少尹刘陟、判官司徒诩、推官王说等八人并长流，河南巡官李瀚、江文蔚等六人勒归田里，六军判官、太子詹事王居敏、推官郭晙并贬官。
现代文：丁酉，元帅府判官、兵部侍郎任赞、秘书监兼王傅刘瓒、好友苏瓒、记室鱼崇远、河南府少尹刘陟、判官司徒诩、推官王说等八人，一并长期流放到远方为民，河南巡官李浣、江文蔚等六人勒令回归田里，六军判官、太子詹事王居敏、推官郭一并贬职。
English: Eight people, including Ding Jun, the marshal's magistrate, Ren Zhan, the military commissary, Wang Fu Liu Jun, the secretary and supervisor, Su Jun, the close friend, Chongyuan, the chamber fish, Liu Jun, the Henan minor, Sittu Jun, the magistrate, and Wang Xian, the adjudicator, were all exiled to distant places for a long time. Six people, including Li Jun, the Henan inspector, and Jiang Wenyi, were ordered to return to the fields. The six military magistrates, Prince Zhan Ji Wang Jimin, and the adjudicator Guo were all demoted.

古文：瀚，回之族曾孙也；诩，贝州人；文蔚，建安人也。
现代文：李浣是唐武宗朝宰相李回的同族曾孙；司徒诩是贝州人；江文蔚是建安人。
English: Li Wei is a great-grandson of the same family as Li Hui, the prime minister of the Tang Wuzong Dynasty; Sittu Wei is from Bechu; Jiang Wenrui is from Jian'an.

古文：文蔚奔吴，徐知诰厚礼之。
现代文：江文蔚投奔吴国，徐知诰给了他很隆重礼遇。
English: When Jiang Wenwei went to the State of Wu, Xu Zhisheng gave him a grand reception.

古文：初，从荣失道，六军判官、司谏郎中赵远谏曰： 大王地居上嗣，当勤修令德，奈何所为如是！
现代文：起初，李从荣行为不合常道，六军判官、司谏郎中赵远劝谏他说： 大王您居于优先嗣业的地位，应该经常修养德行，为什么尽干这些样不妥当的事！
English: At first, Li Congrong's behavior was out of the ordinary. Zhao Yuan, the judge of the Six Armies and the secretary, advised him, "Your Majesty, you are in the position of priority inheritance, you should always cultivate virtue, why do you do these inappropriate things!

古文：勿谓父子至亲为可恃，独不见恭世子、戾太子乎！ 
现代文：不要以为有父子至亲的关系可以依恃无恐，难道您没有看到春秋时晋献公杀了恭世子和汉武帝杀了戾太子的事例吗？ 
English: Don't think that a parent-child relationship can be embraced without fear. Didn't you see the cases of Jin Xian Gong killing Prince Gong and Emperor Hanwu killing Prince Gong in the Spring and Autumn Period?

古文：从荣怒，出为泾州判官；及从荣败，远以是知名。
现代文：李从荣听了恼火，把他贬放为泾州判官；待到李从荣失败，赵远因为讲过这些话而声名流播。
English: Li Congrong was annoyed and demoted him to judge of Zhangzhou; after Li Congrong's defeat, Zhao Yuan became famous for having said these words.

古文：远，字上交，幽州人也。戊戌，帝殂。
现代文：赵远字上交，幽州人。戊戌，明宗去世。
English: Zhao Yuan, a native of Yuzhou, submitted his resignation, and Mingzong passed away.

古文：帝性不猜忌，与物无竞，登极之年已逾六十，每夕于宫中焚香祝天曰： 某胡人，因乱为众所推；愿天早生圣人，为生民主。 
现代文：明宗皇帝性格不行猜忌，与外物不做竞争，登基那一年已经过了六十岁，他每天夜间在宫中焚香向天神祝告说： 我是个沙陀族胡人，由于动乱被众人推举出来继位；愿上天早降圣人，做百姓的君主。 
English: Emperor Mingzong's character was not to be suspicious or competitive with outsiders. He was over sixty years old the year he ascended the throne. Every night, he would burn incense in the palace to make a wish to the gods, saying: "I am a Hu man from the Shatou tribe. Due to the turmoil, I was chosen by the people to succeed to the throne. May God grant me to become a saint and the ruler of the people.

古文：在位年谷屡丰，兵革罕用，校于五代，粗为小康。
现代文：他在位时粮谷多次丰收，兵戈战乱少见，从五代时期来衡量，稍称小康。
English: During his reign, there were many bumper harvests of grain and grain, armed conflicts and wars were rare. Measured from the five-generation period, it was slightly well-off.

古文：辛丑，宋王至洛阳。
现代文：辛丑，宋王李从厚到达洛阳。
English: Sin ugly, Song Wang Li from thick to reach Luoyang.

古文：闽主尊鲁国太夫人黄氏为皇太后。
现代文：闽国主王尊鲁国太夫人黄氏为皇太后。
English: The lady-in-waiting of the king of the country, Wang Zunlu, Mrs. Huang, became the empress dowager.

古文：闽主好鬼神，巫盛韬等皆有宠。
现代文：闽主王喜好崇拜鬼神，巫人盛韬等都受到宠信。
English: The king likes to worship ghosts and gods, and the sorcerer Sheng Yao and others are favored.

古文：薛文杰言于闽主曰： 陛下左右多奸臣，非质诸鬼神，不能知也。
现代文：薛文杰对闽主说： 陛下左右有很多奸臣，不询问于鬼神，就不能知道谁是奸臣。
English: Xue Wenjie said to his master: There are many treacherous vassals around His Majesty. Without asking the ghosts and gods, it is impossible to know who the treacherous vassals are.

古文：盛韬善视鬼，宜使察之。 
现代文：盛韬善于见鬼，可以让他去察看。 
English: Sheng Yao was good at seeing ghosts, so he could be allowed to inspect them.

古文：闽主从之。
现代文：闽主听从了这个意见。
English: The Lord listened to this advice.

古文：文杰恶枢密使吴勖，勖在疾，文杰省之，曰： 主上以公久疾，欲罢公近密，仆言公但小苦头痛耳，将愈矣。
现代文：薛文杰厌恶枢密使吴勖，有一次正当吴勖有病，薛文杰去探望他，薛文杰对吴勖说： 主上因为您久病不愈，想罢免您的枢密职务，我对主上说您只不过患头痛小病，已经快要好了。
English: Xue Wenjie detested the confidential envoy Wu Gan. On one occasion, when Wu Gan was ill, Xue Wenjie went to visit him. Xue Wenjie said to Wu Gan: "Lord, because you have been ill for a long time, I want to remove you from your confidential duties. I told the Lord that you only have a headache and a minor illness, and you are about to get better."

古文：主上或遣使来问，慎勿以它疾对也。 
现代文：主上也许要派人来探问，请您慎重，不要说有其他疾病。 
English: The Lord may want to send someone to inquire, so please be careful not to say that there are other diseases.

古文：勖许诺。
现代文：吴勖答应了。
English: Wu Gan agreed.

古文：明日，文杰使韬言于闽主曰： 适见北庙崇顺王讯吴勖谋反，以铜钉钉其脑，金椎击之。 
现代文：第二天，薛文杰唆使盛韬上奏闽主说： 刚才我见到北庙崇顺王审讯吴勖谋反的事，用铜钉钉他的脑顶，并用金椎锤击。 
English: The next day, Xue Wenjie, who suggested that Sheng Yao play the harp, said: "Just now, I saw the Northern Temple's King Chong Shun interrogate Wu Yao about plotting a rebellion, nail the top of his head with a copper nail, and hit him with a gold hammer.

古文：闽主以告文杰，文杰曰： 未可信也，宜遣使问之。 
现代文：闽主把此事告诉薛文杰，薛说： 不一定可信，最好派人去查问一下。 
English: The boss told Xue Wenjie about this, and Xue said, "It's not necessarily credible, it's best to send someone to investigate."

古文：果以头痛对，即收下狱，遣文杰及狱吏杂治之，勖自诬服，并其妻子诛之。
现代文：吴勖果然回答说是头病，闽主便把吴勖收拿下狱，派遣薛文杰及狱吏用各种办法去惩治他，吴勖只得承认所诬陷的谋反罪，于是便连同他的妻儿都诛杀了。
English: Wu Gan answered that he was suffering from a head disease, and his master sent Xue Wenjie and the prison officials to punish him in various ways. Wu Gan had to admit to the crime of plotting against the state, so he and his wife and children were killed.

古文：由是国人益怒。
现代文：从此以后，闽国百姓更加愤怒不满。
English: Since then, the Chinese people have become more angry and dissatisfied.

古文：吴光请兵于吴，吴信州刺史将延徽不俟朝命，引兵会光攻建州，闽主遣使求救于吴越。
现代文：闽国土豪吴光请求吴国派兵攻闽，吴国信州刺史蒋延徽不等接受吴国朝廷的命令，便领兵与吴光会师攻打建州，闽主派使者求救于吴越国。
English: The national hero Wu Guang requested that the State of Wu send troops to attack Jianzhou. Jiang Yanhui, the governor of the State of Wu, did not wait to receive the order from the imperial court of the State of Wu, and then led the troops and Wu Guang's division to attack Jianzhou. The warlord sent an envoy to seek help in the State of Wuyue.

古文：十二月，癸卯朔，始发明宗丧，宋王即皇帝位。
现代文：十二月，癸卯朔，才开始发明宗丧，宋王李从厚即后唐皇帝之位，是为闵帝。
English: It was not until December that Emperor Wu Shuo began to invent the funeral rites, and Emperor Song Wang Li took the throne of Emperor Hou Tang from Emperor Wu.

古文：秦王从荣既死，硃洪实妻入宫，司衣王氏与之语及秦王，王氏曰： 秦王为人子，不在左右侍疾，致人归祸，是其罪也；若云大逆，则厚诬矣。
现代文：秦王李从荣死后，朱洪实之妻入宫，与宫中司掌衣饰的王氏说到秦王，王氏说： 秦王作为王子，不在父皇左右侍奉疾病，以致被人归加罪名，是他自己招的；如果说他大逆不道，那是诬陷他太过份了。
English: After the death of Qin King Li Rong Rong, the wife of Zhu Hongsi entered the palace, and spoke with the Wang clan, who was in charge of clothing in the palace, about the Qin King. The Wang clan said: Qin King, as a prince, did not serve the illness around his father Emperor, so that he was blamed, he invited it himself; if he was rebellious, it was too much to frame him.

古文：硃司徒最受王恩，当时不为之辨，惜哉！ 
现代文：朱司徒是最受秦王恩宠的，当时不替他辩护，真是太可惜了。 
English: Zhu Xi Tuo was the most favored by the Qin King. It was a real shame not to defend him at that time.

古文：洪实闻之，大惧，与康义诚以其语白闵帝，且言王氏私于从荣，为之诇宫中事，辛亥，赐王氏死。
现代文：朱洪实听到这些话，很恐惧，与康义诚一起把这些话上奏闵帝，并说王氏同李从荣私通替李从荣刺探宫中之事，辛亥，把王氏赐死。
English: Zhu Hongshi heard these words and was very frightened. Together with Kang Yicheng, he reported these words to the emperor, and said that Wang and Li Congrong went to investigate the palace on behalf of Li Congrong. Xinhai put Wang to death.

古文：事连王淑妃，淑妃素厚于从荣，帝由是疑之。
现代文：事情还牵连到王淑妃，王淑妃平素对李从荣很厚待，闵帝从此便对王淑妃产生了怀疑。
English: Wang Shufei was also implicated in the affair. Wang Shufei had always treated Li Congrong very generously, and Emperor Qian became suspicious of Wang Shufei.

古文：丙辰，以天雄左都押牙宋令询为磁州刺史。
现代文：丙辰，任用天雄左都押牙宋令询为磁州刺史。
English: Hsin-Chen, appointed Tianxiong Zuoduo and Song Lingquan as the magnetic state history.

古文：硃弘昭以诛秦王立帝为己功，欲专朝政；令询侍帝左右最久，雅为帝所亲信，弘昭不欲旧人在帝侧，故出之。
现代文：朱弘昭以为诛杀秦王立闵帝是自己的功劳，想要独专朝政；而宋令询陪侍闵帝左右最久，素来被闵帝所亲信，朱弘昭不想让旧人在皇帝身边，所以把他调出去。
English: Zhu Hongzhao thought that it was his own merit to assassinate the Qin King and establish the Qin Emperor, and he wanted to be the sole ruler of the imperial court. However, Song Lingquan had accompanied the Qin Emperor for the longest time, and had always been trusted by the Qin Emperor. Zhu Hongzhao did not want the old man to be around the emperor, so he transferred him out.

古文：帝不悦而无如之何。
现代文：闵帝不愉快，但也无可奈何。
English: Emperor Xuan is not happy, but there is nothing he can do.

古文：孟知祥闻明宗殂，谓僚佐曰： 宋王幼弱，为政者皆胥史小人，其乱可坐俟也。 
现代文：孟知祥听说明宗病逝，对他的僚属亲信说： 宋王年轻而软弱，当政的都是掌理案牍的小人，可以坐着等待那里发生乱子。 
English: Meng Zhixiang listened to the explanation of Zong's death from illness and said to his colleagues and relatives: King Song is young and weak, and those in power are all villains who are in charge of cases. You can sit and wait for trouble to happen there.

古文：辛未，帝始御中兴殿。
现代文：辛未，闵帝开始驾临中兴殿处理朝政。
English: Soon after, Emperor Xian began to come to Zhongxing Palace to deal with the affairs of the court.

古文：帝自终易月之制，即召学士读《贞观政要》、《太宗实录》，有致治之志；然不知其要，宽柔少断。
现代文：闵帝自从结束守丧礼制之日，就召学士为他读讲《贞观政要》、《太宗实录》，怀有谋求天下大治的志愿；然而不懂求治的要领所在，宽容软弱，缺乏决断。
English: Ever since Emperor Xuan ended the funerary system, he has called on scholars to read "Zhenguan Zhengyao" and "Taizong Shihlu" for him. He has the will to seek world peace; however, he does not know the essentials of seeking peace, he is tolerant and weak, and lacks determination.

古文：李愚私谓同列曰： 吾君延访，鲜及吾辈，位高责重，事亦堪忧。 
现代文：宰相李愚私下对与他同列执政的官员说： 主上的召请和咨询，很少临到我们这些人，我们处高位，责任重大，事情真不好办。 
English: Privately, Prime Minister Li Yu said to the officials in his ruling group: The Lord's call and advice rarely come to us, we are in high positions, with great responsibilities, and things are really hard to do.

古文：众惕息不敢应。
现代文：大家屏住气息不敢回答。
English: Everyone held their breath, not daring to answer.

古文：顺化节度使、同平章事、判明州钱元珦骄纵不法，每请事于王府不获，辄上书悖慢。
现代文：顺化节度使、同平章事、判明州钱元，骄横放纵，不守法度，每当有事请求于王府而得不到满足时，就上书侮慢顶抗而发泄不满。
English: He was arrogant and indulgent, did not abide by the law, and whenever he had a request for something from the royal palace and it was not satisfied, he would vent his dissatisfaction by sending a letter to the emperor.

古文：尝怒一吏，置铁床炙之，臭满城郭。
现代文：他曾经恼怒一个属吏，便放置在铁床上烤炙他，焦臭气味弥漫满城。
English: He once angered a subordinate official by placing him on an iron bed and roasting him. The smell of burning permeated the city.

古文：吴王元瓘遣牙将仰仁诠诣明州召之，仁诠左右虑元珦难制，劝为之备，仁诠不从，常服径造听事。
现代文：吴王钱元派牙将仰仁诠到明州去召唤他，仰仁诠的左右人等担心钱元难以制服，劝他做好应急准备，仰仁诠没有听从，穿着日常服装径直到钱元官署听理事务。
English: Wu King Qianyuan sent Yangren Yin to Mingzhou to summon him. Yangren Yin's right and left people were worried that Qianyuan would be difficult to subdue and advised him to make emergency preparations. Yangren Yin did not listen and walked in his daily clothes until the Qianyuan Government Office heard the business.

古文：元珦见仁诠至，股忄栗，遂还钱塘，幽于别第。
现代文：钱元看到到仰仁诠来了，吓得直打颤。于是就回归吴越国都杭州，被幽禁在别设的府第。
English: When Qianyuan saw Yangren Qian coming, he trembled with fear. So he returned to Hangzhou, the capital of Wuyue, and was confined to a separate palace.

古文：仁诠，湖州人也。
现代文：仰仁诠是湖州人。
English: Yangren Yi is a native of Huzhou.

古文：闽主改福州为长乐府。
现代文：闽主王把福州改为长乐府。
English: Emperor Qian changed Fuzhou to Changlefu.

古文：亲从都指挥使王仁达有擒王延禀之功，性慷慨，言事无所避。
现代文：闽国亲从都指挥使王仁达有擒获叛将王延禀之功，性情慷慨，对主上奏事无所忌避。
English: Guo Guozhong commanded Wang Renda from the capital to win the victory over the renegade general Wang Yanqi. He was generous in nature and did not shy away from important matters.

古文：闽主恶之，尝私谓左右曰： 仁达智有馀，吾犹能御之，非少主臣也。 
现代文：闽主厌恶他，曾经私下对其亲信说： 王仁达智谋太多，我还能够驾御他，但他不会臣服于少主。 
English: The tyrant hated him, and once said privately to his intimates: "Wang Rinda is too clever, I can still control him, but he will not submit to the young master."

古文：至是，竟诬以叛，族诛之。
现代文：到此时，竟诬陷他要叛乱，诛杀了他全族。
English: At this time, he was falsely accused of wanting to rebel, and his entire family was killed.

古文：初，马希声、希范同日生。希声母曰袁德妃，希范母曰陈氏。
现代文：以前，楚王马殷的众多儿子中，马希声、马希范是同一天出生的，马希声的母亲是袁德妃，马希范的母亲为陈氏。
English: In the past, among the many sons of King Ma Yin of Chu, Ma Xisheng and Ma Xifan were born on the same day. Ma Xisheng's mother was Yuan Defei, and Ma Xifan's mother was Chen.

古文：希范怨希声先立不止，及嗣位，不礼于袁德妃。
现代文：马希范怨恨马希声先立为王而不辞让，等到马希范接替马希声继承王位后，对袁德妃很不礼貌。
English: Ma Xifan resented that Ma Xisheng was made king first and refused to give in. When Ma Xifan succeeded Ma Xisheng to the throne, he was very rude to Yuan Defei.

古文：希声母弟希旺为亲从都指挥使，希范多谴责之。袁德妃请纳希旦官为道士，不许，解其军职，使居竹屋草门，不得预兄弟燕集。
现代文：马希声的同母弟马希旺任亲从都指挥使，马希范常常谴责他；袁德妃请求免去马希旺的官职，让他去做道士，马希范不答应，解除了马希旺的军职，让他居住在竹屋草门之中，不得参与兄弟间的饮宴聚会。
English: Ma Xisheng's younger half-brother, Ma Xiwang, was appointed commander of the imperial army, and Ma Xifan often condemned him; Yuan Defei requested that Ma Xiwang be relieved of his official duties and allowed to become a Taoist priest. Ma Xifan did not agree, and relieved Ma Xiwang of his military duties, and allowed him to live in a bamboo hut with a straw gate, and he was not allowed to participate in the brothers' banquets.

古文：德妃卒，希旦忧愤而卒。
现代文：袁德妃死后，马希旺也忧愤而死。
English: After the death of Yuan Defei, Ma Xiwang also died of grief.

古文：潞王上
现代文：潞王上
English: 王上 says

古文：明宗圣德和武钦孝皇帝下清泰元年春，正月，戊寅，闵帝大赦，改元应顺。壬午，加河阳节度使兼侍卫都指挥使康义诚兼侍中，判六军诸卫事。
现代文：后唐潞王清泰元年春季正月，戊寅，闵帝实行大赦，更改年号为应顺。壬午，加封河阳节度使兼侍卫都指挥使康义诚兼任侍中，判理六军诸卫事。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of the first year of the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Wu of the State of Wei and Emperor Wu of the State of Yin issued an amnesty and changed the year name to Ying Shun. In the morning of the first month of the first year of the first year of the first year of the First Year of the State of Qing, Emperor Wu of the State of Wei and Emperor Wu of the State of Yin issued an amnesty and changed the year name to Ying Shun. In the morning of the first month of the first year of the first year of the First Year of the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Wu of the State of Wei and Emperor Wu of the State of Yin

古文：硃弘昭、冯赟忌侍卫马军都指挥使、宁国节度使安彦威、侍卫步军都指挥使、忠正节度使张从宾，甲申，出彦威为护国节度使，以捧圣马军都指挥使硃洪实代之；出从宾为彰义节度使，以严卫步军都指挥使皇甫遇代之。
现代文：朱弘昭、冯嫉妒侍卫马军都指挥使安彦威、侍卫步军都指挥使、忠正节度使张从宾，甲申，调出安彦威为护国节度使，任用捧圣马军都指挥使朱洪实代替他；调出张从宾为彰义节度使，任用严卫步军都指挥使皇甫遇代替他。
English: Zhu Hongzhao and Feng Zhengyi made An Yanwei the commander of the Guards and Horse Army, and Zhang Congbin the commander of the Guards and Foot Army, and Zhongzheng the commander of the Guard and Foot Army, and Jia Sheng transferred An Yanwei to be the commander of the Guard and Foot Army, and appointed Zhu Hongshi to be the commander of the Guards and Horse Army to replace him; Zhang Congbin was transferred to be the commander of the Guard and Foot Army, and appointed Yan Congbin to be the commander of the Guard and Foot Army to replace him.

古文：彦威，崞人；遇，真定人也。
现代文：安彦威是崞县人；皇甫遇是真定人。
English: Yan Yanwei was from Jixian County; Wang Fuyu was from Zhending County.

古文：戊子，枢密使、同平章事硃弘昭、同中书门下二品冯赟、河东节度使兼侍中石敬瑭并兼中书令。
现代文：戊子，枢密使、同平章事朱弘昭，同中书门下二品冯，河东节度使兼侍中石敬瑭，都兼任中书令。
English: Wu Zi, the Privy Councilor, Zhu Hongzhao, the Co-equal Secretary of State, Feng Nipin, the Co-Equal Secretary of State, and Zhongshi Jingyao, the Co-Equal Secretary of State of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, were also appointed as the Co-Equal Secretaries of State.

古文：赟以超迁太过，坚辞不受；己丑，改兼侍中。
现代文：冯因为越级升迁太多，坚辞不受；己丑，改兼侍中。
English: Feng was promoted too much because he was over-ranked, and he was not accepted; he was ugly, and he was also changed to a chamberlain.

古文：壬辰，以荆南节度使高从诲为南平王，武安、武平节度使马希范为楚王。
现代文：壬辰，封荆南节度使高从诲为南平王，武安、武平节度使马希范为楚王。
English: In Imjin, the Southern Jing Festival made Gao Congyu the king of Nanping, and the Wu'an and Wuping festivals made Ma Xifan the king of Chu.

古文：甲午，以镇海、镇东节度使吴王元瓘为吴越王。
现代文：甲午，封镇海、镇东节度使吴王钱元为吴越王。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st, the sealing of Zhenhai and Zhendong Festival made Wu King Qianyuan the king of Wu Yue.

古文：吴徐知诰别治私第于金陵，乙未，迁居私第，虚府舍以待吴主。
现代文：吴国徐知诰别治私第在金陵，乙未，他迁居到私第，腾出了府舍以等待吴主杨溥来住。
English: Xu Zhisheng of the State of Wu moved to a private residence in Jinling, while Wu Wei moved to a private residence and vacated his residence to wait for the Lord of Wu, Yang Hui, to come to live.

古文：凤翔节度使兼侍中潞王从珂，与石敬瑭少从明帝征伐，有功名，得众心。硃弘昭、冯赟位望素出二人下远甚，一旦执朝政，皆忌之。
现代文：后唐凤翔节度使兼侍中潞王李从珂，年轻时与石敬瑭跟从明宗征伐，立过功，有声望，又得人心；朱弘昭、冯的地位和声望，历来距李从珂、石敬瑭二人很远，朱、冯一旦执掌朝政，都憎恶这两个人。
English: After the Tang and Fengxiang Dynasties, Li Congke, who was also the attendant of the King of Wei, and Shi Jingyu, who followed the Ming Dynasty when they were young, made great achievements, had a reputation, and won the hearts of the people; Zhu Hongzhao and Feng's status and reputation have always been far away from Li Congke and Shi Jingyu. Zhu and Feng hated these two people once they took control of the imperial government.

古文：明宗有疾，潞王屡遣其夫人入省侍；及明宗殂，潞王辞疾不来，使臣至凤翔者或自言伺得潞王阴事。
现代文：明宗有病时，潞王经常让他的夫人入宫省候侍奉；等到明宗病逝后，潞王却托词有病不来，朝廷使臣到过凤翔的人中有人自称伺探得潞王阴私之事。
English: When Mingzong was ill, King Yao often had his wife wait in the palace to serve him. After Mingzong's death, however, King Yao did not come on the pretext that he was ill. Some of the imperial envoys who visited Fengxiang claimed to have inquired about the private affairs of King Yao.

古文：时潞王长子重吉为控鹤都指挥使，硃、冯不欲其典禁兵，己亥，出为亳州团练使。
现代文：当时，潞王长子李重吉在朝廷任控鹤都指挥使，朱弘昭、冯不想让他掌管禁中兵权，巳亥，调出任亳州团练使。
English: At that time, Li Chongji, the eldest son of the king of Qi, was appointed as the commander of the control of the cranes in the imperial court. Zhu Hongzhao and Feng did not want him to take charge of the military power in the middle of the ban, and he was transferred to serve as the training envoy of the Zhangzhou Regiment.

古文：潞王有女惠明为尼，在洛阳，亦召入禁中。
现代文：潞王有个女儿李惠明出家为尼，住在洛阳，也被召入禁中。
English: Gong Wang has a daughter, Li Huiming, who has become a nun and lives in Luoyang. She was also summoned to the detention center.

古文：潞王由是疑惧。
现代文：潞王李从珂由此产生疑惧。
English: This aroused the suspicion of King Li Zongke.

古文：吴蒋延徽败闽兵于浦城，遂围建州，闽主璘遣上军张彦柔、骠骑大将军王延宗将兵万人救建州。
现代文：吴将蒋延徽在浦城打败闽兵，接着包围建州，闽主王派遣上军使张彦柔、骠骑大将军王延宗统兵万人救援建州。
English: Wu defeated Jiang Yanhui's soldiers in Pucheng and then surrounded Jianzhou. The king of Yan dispatched the envoy Zhang Yanru and the cavalry general Wang Yanzong to rescue Jianzhou.

古文：延宗军及中涂，士卒不进，曰： 不得薛文杰，不能讨贼。 
现代文：王延宗的军队行至中途，士兵不肯前进，扬言： 不得到薛文杰，不能去讨贼。 
English: When Wang Yanzong's army reached the halfway point, the soldiers refused to advance, threatening: "If we don't get Xue Wenjie, we can't go to solicit thieves."

古文：延宗驰使以闻，国人震恐。
现代文：王延宗急忙派使者上报闽主王，闽国百姓震惊和恐惧。
English: Wang Yanzong hurriedly sent an envoy to report to the lord king, and the people of the country were shocked and frightened.

古文：太后及福王继鹏泣谓璘曰： 吾无如卿何，卿自为谋。 
现代文：太后和福王王继鹏涕泣着对闽主王说： 薛文杰盗弄国家权柄，任意残害无辜吏民，上上下下对他怨恨愤怒已经很久了。
English: The empress dowager and the king of fortune, Wang Jipeng, wept and said to the king of the eunuchs: Xue Wenjie stole the power of the state, arbitrarily killed innocent officials and people, and the resentment and anger of the upper and lower levels have been with him for a long time.

古文：文杰出，继鹏伺之于启圣门外，以笏击之仆地，槛车送军前，市人争持瓦砾击之。文杰善术数，自云过三日则无患。
现代文：现在，吴兵深入我国国境，抗敌士兵不肯前进，社稷江山一旦倾覆，留着薛文杰有什么好处！ 当时，薛文杰也在场，互相诉说利害。王说： 我不想把你怎么样，你自己考虑怎么办吧。 薛文杰出来，王继鹏暗伺在启圣门外，用朝笏把他击倒在地，用槛车押送军前，市街上的人们争着用瓦砾投掷他。薛文杰善于巫术，自称超过三天就没有祸患了。
English: At that time, Xue Wenjie was also present, and they discussed their interests with each other. Wang said, "I don't want to do anything to you, you should think about what to do." When Xue Wenjie came out, Wang Jipeng secretly waited outside the Qisheng Gate, knocked him to the ground with a sledgehammer, and used a threshing machine to escort him to the front of the army. People in the streets fought to throw rubble at him. Xue Wenjie was good at witchcraft and claimed that there would be no calamity for more than three days.

古文：部送者闻之，倍道兼行，二日而至，士卒见之踊跃，脔食之；闽主亟遣赦之，不及。
现代文：押送他的人听到这个话，加倍赶路，两天就到达军前，士兵见了他，踊跃愤怒，割他的肉，嚼他的骨；闽主急忙派人赦免他，但已经来不及。
English: When his escort heard this, they made double haste and arrived at the front of the army in two days. When the soldiers saw him, they were enraged, they cut his flesh and chewed his bones. The tyrant quickly sent someone to pardon him, but it was too late.

古文：初，文杰以为古制槛车疏阔，更为之，形如木匮，攒以铁铓，内向，动辄触之。
现代文：起初，薛文杰认为按古制制造的槛车太宽松，便重新制作，形如木柜，四面攒插铁，锋尖朝内，人一活动便要触碰它。
English: At first, Xue Wenjie thought that the thresholds made according to the old system were too loose, so he re-made them. They were shaped like wooden cabinets, with iron on all sides and sharp edges on the inside, so people had to touch them as soon as they moved.

古文：车成，文杰首自入焉。
现代文：这种槛车刚制成，薛文杰自己首先装进去了。
English: This threshold car has just been made, and Xue Wenjie himself was the first to install it.

古文：并诛盛韬。
现代文：与此同时，党附薛文杰的盛韬也被杀了。
English: At the same time, Sheng Yao, a party follower of Xue Wenjie, was also killed.

古文：蒋延徽攻建州垂克，徐知诰以延徽吴太祖之婿，与临川王濛素善，恐其克建州奉濛以图兴复，遣使召之。
现代文：蒋延徽攻建州即将攻克，徐知诰因为蒋延徽是吴太祖杨行密的女婿，与临川王杨素来友好，害怕他攻克了建州会拥戴杨以图恢复吴国的王权，便派人把他召回。
English: Jiang Yanhui's attack on Jianzhou was about to be defeated. Xu Zhisheng, because Jiang Yanhui was the son-in-law of Yang Xingmi, the great-grandfather of Wu, and had been friendly with Yang, the king of Linchuan, was afraid that if he conquered Jianzhou, he would support Yang in order to restore the royal power of Wu, so he sent someone to recall him.

古文：延徽亦闻闽兵及吴越兵将至，引兵归；闽人追击，败之，士卒死亡甚众，归罪于都虞侯张重进，斩之。
现代文：蒋延徽也闻报闽国和吴越国的援兵将要到来，于是，引兵归还；闽兵趁势追击，打败吴兵，士兵死亡了很多，却把责任归罪给都虞候张重进，并把他杀了。
English: Jiang Yanhui also heard the news that reinforcements from Shan State and Wu Yue State would be arriving, so he withdrew the troops; the Shan soldiers took advantage of the situation to pursue and defeat the Wu soldiers. Many soldiers died, but he blamed the responsibility on the governor Zhang Chongjin and killed him.

古文：知诰贬延徽为右威卫将军，遣使求好于闽。
现代文：徐知诰把蒋延徽贬降为右威卫将军，遣派使者到闽国以求和好。
English: Xu Zhisheng demoted Jiang Yanhui to the rank of General of the Right Division of Weiwei and sent an envoy to Shandong to seek reconciliation.

古文：闰月，以左谏议大夫唐汭、膳部郎中、知制诰陈乂皆为给事中，充枢密直学士。
现代文：闰正月，后唐闵帝把左谏议大夫唐和膳部郎中、知制诰陈义同时任命为给事中，充当枢密直学士。
English: In the first month of the leap year, Emperor Gaozong of the Later Tang Dynasty appointed Zuo Jianli, the doctor of Tang and the vice-minister of the Ministry of Cuisine, and Zhi Zhe, the vice-minister of the Ministry of Education, as the vice-minister of the Ministry of Education, and Zhi Zhe, the vice-minister of the Ministry of Education, as the vice-minister of the Ministry of Education, and Zhi Zhe, the vice-minister of the Ministry of Education, as the vice-minister of the Ministry of Education, and Zhi Zhe, the vice-minister of the Ministry of Education.

古文：汭以文学从帝，历三镇在幕府。
现代文：唐因擅长文学侍从闵帝，经历宣武、河东、天雄三度迁镇都在幕府中。
English: Because he was good at literature, Tang served Emperor Xizong and experienced three relocations to Xuanwu, Hedong and Tianxiong, all of which were in the Shogunate.

古文：及即位，将佐之有才者，硃、冯皆斥逐之。
现代文：及至即位称帝，原来将佐中有才干的，朱弘昭、冯都把他们排斥放逐出去了。
English: When the emperor was enthroned, Zhu Hongzhao and Feng, who were originally talented in the imperial court, expelled them.

古文：汭性过疏，硃、冯恐帝含怒有时而发，乃引汭于密近，以其党陈乂监之。
现代文：唐性情迂腐疏阔，朱弘昭、冯怕遇上闵帝发怒，便把唐引入枢密近侍，而用他们的党羽陈监视他。
English: Tang's nature was pedantic and broad-minded. Zhu Hongzhao and Feng were afraid of angering Emperor Xizong, so they brought Tang into the inner circle and used their followers Chen to keep an eye on him.

古文：丙午，尊皇后为皇太后。
现代文：丙午，尊明宗曹皇后为皇太后。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd day of the 3rd month, Empress Cao of the Zonming Dynasty became the empress dowager.

古文：安远节度使符彦超奴王希全、任驾儿见朝廷多事，谋杀彦超，据安州附于吴，夜，叩门称有急递，彦超出至听事，二奴杀之，因以彦超之命召诸将，有不从己者辄杀之。
现代文：安远节度使府彦超的奴仆王希全、任贺儿看到朝廷多事，很不安定，阴谋杀害符彦超，占据安州依附于吴国。某夜，叩门谎称有紧急文书传递到来，符彦超出来办事，这两个奴仆杀了他，接着便用符彦超的名义召见诸将，有不听从他们的，往往杀掉。
English: The Anyuan Festival made the servants of Fu Yanchao, Wang Xiquan and Ren Heer, see that the imperial court was troubled and unstable. They plotted to kill Fu Yanchao and occupy Anzhou and attach it to the State of Wu. One night, they knocked on the door and falsely claimed that an urgent document had arrived. Fu Yanchao went out to do some work, and the two servants killed him. They then used the name of Fu Yanchao to summon the generals. If they did not listen to them, they often killed them.

古文：己酉旦，副使李端帅州兵讨诛之，并其党。
现代文：己酉，天刚亮，节度副使李端率领本州兵杀了他们，把他们的党羽也都杀了。
English: At the break of dawn, Li Duan, vice-minister of the festival, led the Honshu soldiers to kill them, and they also killed their party members.

古文：甲寅，以王淑妃为太妃。
现代文：甲寅，封王淑妃为太妃。
English: Ka Ting, King Suk Hei is crowned as the Queen of Hearts.

古文：蜀将吏劝蜀王知祥称帝。己巳，知祥即皇帝位于成都。
现代文：蜀国将吏向蜀王孟知祥劝进称帝；己巳，孟知祥在成都即皇帝位。
English: The generals of Shu persuaded Meng Zhixiang, the king of Shu, to become emperor; Meng Zhixiang became emperor in Chengdu.

