古文：虎贲氏掌先后王而趋以卒伍。
现代文：虎贲氏掌管王外出时率领虎士按照军事编制列队在王前后行进，以护卫王。
English: When the king was out of the country, the Tigresses led by the Tigress clan marched in front of and behind the king in military formation to protect the king.

古文：军旅、会同亦如之。
现代文：王出征、会同时也这样做。
English: When the king goes to war, so does the crown.

古文：舍则守王闲。
现代文：留宿时就守卫王行宫周围的栏桓。
English: When he stayed there, he guarded the fence around Wang Xing Palace.

古文：王在国，则守王宫。
现代文：王的国都，就守卫王宫。
English: The king's city is a stronghold; the king's palace is a refuge.

古文：国有大故，则守王门。
现代文：国家有大变故，就守卫王的宫门。
English: Because of the great change in the country, they guarded the palace gate of the king.

古文：大丧，亦如之。及葬，従遣车而哭。
现代文：有大丧也这样做；到出葬时，跟从遣车而哭。
English: If there is a great mourning, do the same; if there is a funeral, follow the hearse and weep.

古文：适四方使，则従士大夫。
现代文：出使四方，就护从担任使者的士或大夫。
English: When the envoys were sent out to the four directions, they were escorted by a taxi driver or a doctor who acted as an emissary.

古文：若道路不通，有征事，则奉书以使于四方。
现代文：如遇兵寇或泥水致使道路不通而有征调军队或役徒的事，就奉持王的征令简书出使四方之国。
English: In the event of a military expedition or muddy water causing the road to be impassable, and there is a matter of conscripting troops or servants, they will be dispatched to the country of Shifang with the king's conscription letter.

古文：旅贲氏掌执戈盾，夹王车而趋，左八人，右八人。车止，则持轮。
现代文：旅贲氏负责手持戈盾夹在王车的两边而行，左边八人，右边八人，车停下来就站在车轮两旁。
English: Mr. Briggs is responsible for holding a shield and clamping it on both sides of the royal carriage, eight people on the left and eight people on the right. When the carriage stops, they stand on both sides of the wheels.

古文：凡祭祀、会同、宾客，则服而趋。
现代文：凡举行祭祀、会同或接待宾客，就穿玄端服夹在王车两边而行。
English: Whenever there is a religious service, meeting or reception of guests, they wear black clothes and walk on both sides of the royal carriage.

古文：丧纪则衰葛执戈盾。军旅，则介而趋。
现代文：有丧事，就身穿斩衰服、系葛首经和葛腰经、手持戈盾夹在嗣王的车两边而行。
English: If there is a funeral, he will walk in his mourning clothes, wearing the Ge Shou Jing and the Ge Wa Zi Jing, and holding a shield on both sides of the king's chariot.

古文：节服氏掌祭祀朝觐衮冕，六人维王之大常。
现代文：出征，就身穿甲衣夹在王车的两边而行。节服氏掌管王祭祀、朝觐时的衮冕，当王祭祀或朝觐时由六人执持王的大常旗的旒。
English: When they go to war, they wear armor and walk on the two sides of the royal chariot.The Sekifuku clan is in charge of the crown at the royal sacrifice and the morning prayer, and six people hold the scepter of the king's great banner at the royal sacrifice or the morning prayer.

古文：诸侯则四人，其服亦如之。
现代文：诸侯就由四人持旒，诸侯祭祀、朝觐的服装也由节服氏掌管。
English: Four lords held the scepter, and the costumes for the lords' rituals and the morning meal were also controlled by the Seifuku clan.

古文：郊祀裘冕，二人执戈，送逆尸従车。
现代文：王郊祭天服大裘而戴冕，就由二人持戈盾，迎送尸的时候跟从在尸车的后边。
English: At the King's Suburbs Festival, two people hold shields and follow behind the hearse as it carries the corpse.

古文：方相氏掌蒙熊皮，黄金四目，玄衣朱裳，执戈扬盾，帅百隶而时难，以索室驱疫。
现代文：方相氏负责蒙着熊皮，戴着黄金铸造的有四只眼的面具，上身穿玄衣而下著朱裳，拿着戈举着盾，率领群隶四季行傩法，以搜索室中的疫鬼而加以驱逐。
English: Mr. Fang Xiang was in charge of wearing a bear skin, wearing a four-eyed mask cast in gold, wearing a black coat on the upper body and a red dress on the lower body, holding a go and holding a shield, leading a group of subordinates in the four seasons to expel them with the pestilence in the search room.

古文：大丧，先。
现代文：有大丧，出葬时走在柩车前边。
English: There was great mourning, and at the funeral they walked in front of the hearse.

古文：及墓，入圹，以戈击四隅，驱方良。
现代文：到达墓地，将把棺柩下入墓穴时，用戈击刺墓穴的四角，驱逐魍魉。
English: When arriving at the cemetery, the coffin will be lowered into the grave, and the four corners of the grave will be stabbed with a crossbow to expel the maggots.

古文：大仆掌正王之服位，出入王之大命，掌诸侯之复逆。
现代文：大仆负责规正王行礼时的服装和所在的位置，对外发布有关国家大事的命令并转奏群臣执行王命的报告，掌管转达诸侯的奏事和上书。
English: The Great Servant was responsible for regulating the king's attire and the location of the throne when he performed the salute, issuing orders to the outside world concerning national events and relaying reports on the execution of the king's orders by the courtiers, and in charge of conveying reports and letters from the princes.

古文：王眡朝，则前正位而退。
现代文：王上朝，就在前引导王就朝位而后退到己位。
English: During the previous reign of the king, he led the king to the throne and retreated to his throne.

古文：入，亦如之。
现代文：王退朝入路门时也这样做。
English: Wang Qi did the same when he entered the gate.

古文：建路鼓于大寝之门外，而掌其政，以待达穷者与遽令。闻鼓声，则速逆御仆与御庶子。
现代文：在大寝门外树路鼓，而掌管有关击鼓的每，以等待达穷者引导冤民前来击鼓或遽令前来击鼓，听到鼓声，就迅速迎接在路鼓处当值的御仆和御庶子，听他们报告情况而转达王。
English: The road drum is set up outside the main door, and the person in charge of the drumming is waiting for the poor to lead the wrongdoers to come to the drumming or to come to the drumming. When he hears the drumming, he quickly greets the servants and bastards who are on duty at the road drum, listens to their report and conveys it to the king.

古文：祭祀、宾客、丧纪，正王之服位，诏法仪，赞王牲事。
现代文：有祭祀、接待宾客或丧事，规正王所应穿的服装和应，在的位置，告教王应行的礼仪，协助王做杀牲、解割牲体和用匕捞取牲体放在俎上等事。
English: There are sacrificial rites, reception of guests or funerals, regulation of the clothing the king should wear and the position he should be in, teaching the king the etiquette he should follow, assisting the king in killing animals, cutting up animals and using a plough to get the animals on the plough and so on.

古文：王出入，则自左驭而前驱。
现代文：王出入宫门、国门，就亲自在副车的左边驾驭副车而为王车做前导。
English: When the king enters and leaves the palace gate and the national gate, he personally drives the side car on the left side of the side car and guides the royal car.

古文：凡军旅、田役赞王鼓。
现代文：凡征伐、田猎，协助王击鼓。
English: Everyone who went out to conquer or hunt helped the king to play the drums.

古文：救日月亦如之。
现代文：解救日食、月食也协助王击鼓。
English: The relief of the solar eclipse and the lunar eclipse also helped Wang to play the drums.

古文：大丧，始崩，戒鼓，传达于四方。
现代文：有大丧，王始死，击鼓警众，鼓声传达到四方。
English: There was a great mourning, Wang Shi died, the police beat the drums, and the sound of the drums spread to all directions.

古文：窆亦如之，县丧首服之法于宫门，掌三公孤卿之吊劳。
现代文：把棺柩下入墓穴时也这样击鼓。悬挂丧服的首服的法式在宫门前，使人们依此而服。
English: When the coffin is lowered into the grave, the drums are beaten in the same way. The French style of the first dress of the funeral dress is hung in front of the palace gate, so that people can dress accordingly.

古文：王燕饮，则相其法。
现代文：负责奉王命前往吊唁或慰劳三公、孤、卿。王行燕饮酒礼，就协助王行礼。
English: He is responsible for going to offer condolences or consolation to the three princes, orphans, and nobles by the order of the king. He will assist the king in the drinking ceremony.

古文：王射，则赞弓矢。
现代文：王行大射礼，就协助王拿弓矢。
English: When the king performed the great shooting ceremony, he helped the king to take the bow and arrows.

古文：王眡燕朝，则正位，掌摈相。
现代文：王在燕朝处理政事，就引导王就朝位，并负责引导和协助王行礼。
English: In the Yan Dynasty, the king handled political affairs, guided the king to the throne, and was responsible for guiding and assisting the king to perform the ritual.

古文：王不眡朝，则辞于三公及孤卿。
现代文：王因故不能上朝处理朝政，就通告三公和孤、卿。
English: For some reason, the king could not go to the court to deal with the court's affairs, so he notified the three princes and his courtiers.

古文：小臣掌王之小命，诏相王之小法仪。
现代文：小臣负责传达王随时有事要敕问臣下的小命令，告教和协助王有关行走、拱手行揖礼等小礼仪。
English: The ministers are responsible for conveying the minor orders of the king to his subordinates whenever he has something to ask, and for teaching and assisting the king with minor etiquettes such as walking and bowing.

古文：掌三公及孤卿之复逆，正王之燕服位。
现代文：掌管转达三公及孤、卿的奏事和上书。规正王闲暇时的服装和所处的位置。
English: He is in charge of the transmittal of reports and letters to the three princes, princes and nobles, and the regulation of the king's leisure time clothing and position.

古文：王之燕出入，则前驱。
现代文：王闲暇时出入宫门、国门，就为王做前导。
English: When the king went in and out of the palace gate and the national gate in his spare time, he would act as a guide for the king.

古文：大祭祀、朝觐，沃王盥。
现代文：举行大祭祀、大朝觐时，浇水供王盥手。
English: When a grand ritual or a grand morning meal is held, water is poured for the king to wash his hands.

古文：小祭祀、宾客、飨食、宾射掌事，如大仆之法。
现代文：举行小祭祀、用飨礼和食礼招待小宾客、举行宾射礼，所掌管的事如同大仆掌事之法。
English: Holding small rituals, inviting small guests with bowing and eating ceremonies, and holding a guest shooting ceremony, the things they are in charge of are like the way of a great servant.

古文：掌士大夫之吊劳。凡大事，佐大仆。
现代文：负责奉王命前往吊唁或慰劳士、大夫。凡有大事，协助大仆。
English: Responsible for going to condolence or consolation workers and doctors on the king's orders. In case of any major events, assist the servant.

古文：祭仆掌受命于王以眡祭祀，而警戒祭祀有司，纠百官之戒具。
现代文：祭仆负责奉王命视察祭祀的准备情况，而警诫负有祭祀职责的官吏，检查和记录各官依事前的告诫所当具备的牲物。
English: According to the king's order, the sacrificial servant is responsible for inspecting the preparation of the sacrificial rites, and the officials with sacrificial duties are warned to check and record the animals that each official should have according to the previous warning.

古文：既祭，帅群有司而反命，以王命劳之，诛其不敬者。
现代文：祭祀之后，率领负有祭祀职责的官吏们向王汇报，奉王命慰劳负有祭祀职责的官吏，责罚那些不严肃认真的人。
English: After the sacrificial rites, the leading officials with sacrificial duties reported to the king, and the officials with sacrificial duties were consoled by the king's order, and those who were not serious were punished.

古文：大丧，复于小庙，凡祭祀王之所不与，则赐之禽。
现代文：有大丧，就在诸小庙为死者招魂。凡畿外同姓诸侯祭祀，王不参加的，就以王的名义赐给牺牲。
English: When there is a great mourning, the spirits of the dead are invoked in the small temples. Wherever there is a sacrificial rite for princes with the same family name, the king does not participate, and sacrifices are offered in the name of the king.

古文：都家亦如之，凡祭祀致福者，展而受之。
现代文：对于畿内同姓采邑主也这样。凡臣下祭祀毕而向王馈送祭肉的，就记录所送的牲体数而接受下来。
English: It was the same for the lord of the same surname in the Kinai region. If a vassal offered sacrificial meat to the king after the sacrifice, he would record the number of animals and accept it.

古文：御仆掌群吏之逆，及庶民之复，与其吊劳。
现代文：御仆负责向王转达群臣的上书，以及百姓的奏事，和三对他们的吊唁、慰劳。
English: The messenger is responsible for conveying to the king the letters of the ministers, as well as the reports of the people, and the condolences and consolations to them.

古文：大祭祀，相盥而登。
现代文：举行大祭祀时，帮助王盥手并将牲体载于俎上。
English: When a great sacrifice is held, they help the king chop the hands and carry the animal on the yoke.

古文：大丧，持翣，掌王之燕令，以序守路鼓。
现代文：有大丧时，负责持要。负责传达王闲暇时对外发布的命令。轮流守候在路鼓旁。
English: When there is a great mourning, they are responsible for holding important matters. They are responsible for conveying the orders issued by the king to the outside world during his leisure time. They take turns to wait by the road drum.

古文：隶仆掌王寝之扫、除、粪、洒之事。祭礼，修寝。
现代文：隶仆掌管五寝打扫卫生的事。将举行祭祀，打扫五寝。
English: Subordinate servants are in charge of cleaning the five dormitories. A ritual will be held to clean the five dormitories.

古文：王行，洗乘石，掌跸宫中之事。
现代文：王将乘车出行，为王洗登车石。宫中有事负责禁止通行。
English: The king will travel by car, and it is a stepping stone for the king to wash. The palace is responsible for prohibiting traffic.

古文：大丧，复于小寝大寝。
现代文：有大丧，负责在小寝、大寝招魂。
English: There are great mourners, responsible for summoning spirits in the small sleep and the big sleep.

古文：弁师掌王之五冕，皆玄冕、朱里、延纽，五采缫十有二就，皆五采玉十有二，玉笄，朱纮。
现代文：弁师掌管王的五冕，五冕的延都是玄表、朱里，武的两侧都有贯笄的纽，冕的前沿都悬有五彩丝绳贯穿玉珠做成的十二旒，每旒都有五彩玉珠十二颗，纽中都贯玉笄，笄两端都系朱纭。
English: Benshi is in charge of the king's five crowns. The five crowns are made up of black and white and red, and both sides of the crown have cords running through the cords. The front of the crowns are hung with twelve cords made of multicolored silk cords running through jade beads. Each cord has twelve multicolored jade beads. The cords run through the middle of the cords, and both ends of the cords are made of vermilion.

古文：诸侯之缫斿九就，瑉玉三采，其余如王之事，缫斿皆就，玉瑱、玉笄。
现代文：诸侯的冕上有彩色丝绳做的九旒，每旒都有三彩的□玉珠九颗，其他方面如延纽等与王冕相同。丝线绳做的旒都具备三彩，冕两侧缀有玉填，纽中贯有玉笄。
English: Princes' crowns have nine hoops made of colored silk ropes. Each hoop has nine tri-colored jade beads. Other aspects, such as the extension, are the same as the royal crown. Hoops made of silk ropes all have tri-colors. Both sides of the crown are decorated with jade filling, and there is a jade hook in the knot.

古文：王之皮弁，会五采玉璂，象邸玉笄，王之弁绖，弁而加环绖。
现代文：王的皮弁，缝中饰有用五彩的玉珠贯结的瑾，弁下有象骨做的周缘，弁中贯有玉笄。王吊丧戴的弁经，是在弁上面加环经。
English: The king's skin valve is decorated with a multicolored jade bead knot in the middle of the seam, a circumferential rim made of ivory under the valve, and a jade bead running through the valve. The bengyo worn by the king is to add a ring to the valve.

古文：诸侯及孤卿大夫之冕，韦弁、皮弁、弁绖，各以其等为之，而掌其禁令。
现代文：诸侯及孤、卿、大夫的冕、韦弁、皮弁和弁经，各依他们的爵等来装饰缫旒和玉瑾，而掌管有关的禁令，严禁僭越。
English: Princes and lords, nobles, doctors' crowns, weiben, piben and bensho, each according to their peerage, decorate the urns and jade urns, and control the relevant prohibitions, strictly prohibit transgressing.

古文：司兵掌五兵、五盾，各辨其物与其等，以待军事。
现代文：司兵掌管五种兵器、五种盾牌，辨别它们的种类和质量等级，以供军事所需。
English: The captain of the guard is in charge of five kinds of weapons and five kinds of shields, distinguishing their types and quality levels for military use.

古文：及授兵，従司马之法以颁之，及其受兵输，亦如之。
现代文：到出兵打仗发授兵器时，遵从司马的法令而颁授。到打完仗接受送还的兵器时，也遵从司马的法令。
English: When weapons are issued to soldiers who go to war, they are issued in accordance with Sima's edict. When weapons are returned after the war, they are also issued in accordance with Sima's edict.

古文：及其用兵，亦如之。
现代文：授给守卫所需的兵器时，也遵从司马的法令颁授。
English: Sima's decree was also followed when the guards were given the weapons they needed.

古文：祭祀，授舞者兵。大丧，廞五兵。
现代文：举行祭祀时，授给舞蹈者用作舞具的兵器有大丧时，陈列用作明器的五种兵器。
English: When a ritual is held, dancers are given weapons to use as dance props, and when there is a great funeral, five types of weapons are displayed to be used as props.

古文：军事，建车之五兵。会同，亦如之。
现代文：有军事行动，装备战车上的五种兵器；会同时也这样做。
English: If there is a military operation, equip the five weapons on the chariot; it will do so at the same time.

古文：司戈盾掌戈盾之物而颁之。
现代文：司戈盾掌管戈盾之类的兵器而负责颁授。
English: Scudun is in charge of weapons such as shields and is responsible for awarding them.

古文：祭祀，授旅贲殳，故士戈盾。
现代文：举行祭祀就授给旅贲氏殳和王族故士戈盾以保卫王，并同样授给舞蹈者。
English: When the festival is held, the pallbearers and dancers are also awarded with the royal pallbearers' pall and the royal pallbearers' pallbearers' pallbearers' shields.

古文：授舞者兵，亦如之。
现代文：安器用作舞具。
English: The fixtures are used as dancing props.

古文：军旅、会同，授贰车戈盾，建乘车之戈盾，授旅贲及虎士戈盾。
现代文：王出征、会同，就授给副车的车右戈盾，给伍所乘坐的车装备戈盾，并授给担任保卫的旅贲氏和虎士戈盾。
English: When Wang went to the front and accompanied him, he awarded the right shield to the car of the second car, equipped the shield to the car Wu was riding in, and awarded the shield to the brigade commander and the tiger.

古文：及舍，设藩盾，行则敛之。
现代文：到王在外停宿时，就设置盾作为屏藩，起行时就收起来。
English: When the king stopped outside, he set up a shield as a screen, and put it away when he started.

古文：司弓矢掌六弓、四弩、八矢之法，辨其名物，而掌其守藏与其出入。
现代文：司弓矢掌管六种弓、四种弩、八种矢的制作的法式，辨别它们的名称和种类，负责它们的保管，以及它们的颁授收回。
English: The Bow and Arrow Division is in charge of the French style of making six kinds of bows, four kinds of crossbows and eight kinds of arrows, distinguishing their names and types, and is responsible for their safekeeping, as well as their issuance and withdrawal.

古文：中春，献弓弩；中秋，献矢箙。
现代文：仲春献弓和弩，仲秋献矢和菔。
English: In mid-spring, bow and shovel are offered, and in mid-autumn, arrow and shovel.

古文：及其颁之。王弓、孤弓以授射甲革、椹质者；夹弓、庾弓以授射豻侯、乌兽者；唐弓、大弓以授学射者、使者、劳者，其矢箙皆従其弓。
现代文：到颁授弓的时候，王弓和弧弓颁授给射革甲、椹板以习武的人，夹弓和庾弓授给射犴侯、鸟兽的人，唐弓和大弓授给学射的人、出使之臣以及慰问远方之臣用。
English: At the time of awarding the bows, the king's bow and the arc bow were awarded to those who practiced martial arts by shooting leather armor and armor plates, the clip bow and the crossbow were awarded to those who shot warlords, birds and beasts, the Tang bow and the big bow were awarded to those who learned to shoot, and were used to send out their ministers and to console distant ministers.

古文：凡弩，夹、庚利攻守，唐、大利车战、野战。
现代文：所颁授的矢和簸的数量，都依照弓数配给。凡弩，夹弩、庾弩利于进攻和防守，唐弩、大弩利于车战和野战。
English: The number of arrows and crossbows awarded are all distributed according to the number of bows. The general crossbow, clip crossbow, and crossbow are good for attack and defense, while the Tang crossbow and large crossbow are good for car battles and field battles.

古文：凡矢，枉矢、絜矢利火射，用诸守城车战；杀矢、鍭矢用诸近射田猎；矰矢茀矢，用诸弋射；恒矢、庳矢用诸散射。
现代文：凡矢，枉矢、絮矢利于结火而射，用于守城或车战。杀矢、铁矢用于近射或田猎。赠矢、茆矢用于弋射飞鸟。恒矢、庳矢用于礼射或习射等散射。
English: Fan-ya, yaku-ya, and suki-ya are good at shooting with fire, and are used to defend the city or in chariot battles. Kisai-ya and tetsuya are used for close-range shooting or hunting in the fields. Gozai-ya and shaku-ya are used to shoot flying birds. Heng-ya and shaku-ya are used for scattering such as ceremonial shooting or practice shooting.

古文：天子之弓，合九而成规，诸侯合七而成规，大夫合五而成规，士合三而成规。
现代文：天子的弓连接九张弓而成一圆周，诸侯连接七张弓而成一圆周，大夫连接五张弓而成一圆周，士连接三张弓而成一圆周。
English: The god's bow connects nine bows to form a circle, the princes connect seven bows to form a circle, the doctors connect five bows to form a circle, and the priests connect three bows to form a circle.

古文：句者谓之弊弓。
现代文：弯曲弧度过大的弓是劣弓。
English: A bow with an excessively large curved arc is a bad bow.

古文：凡祭祀，共射牲之弓矢。
现代文：凡举行祭祀，就供给王射牲所用的弓矢。
English: Whenever a religious service is held, the king is provided with a bow and arrow for shooting animals.

古文：泽，共射椹质之弓矢。
现代文：在泽宫习射，就供给射椹板所用的弓矢。
English: While practicing archery in Ze Palace, he was provided with a bow and arrow for the archery board.

古文：大射，燕射，共弓矢如数并夹。
现代文：举行大射或燕射，就按参加人数供给弓矢、并供给并夹。
English: For large archery or swallow archery, bow and arrows will be provided according to the number of participants.

古文：大丧，共明弓矢。
现代文：有大丧，就供给用作明器的弓矢。
English: If there is a great disaster, they will provide bows and arrows to be used as light weapons.

古文：凡师役、会同，颁弓弩各以其物従，授兵甲之仪。
现代文：凡有巡狩、征伐、会同的事，各依所需颁授弓弩矢菔等，颁授时依从颁授其他兵器和铠甲的仪法。
English: Whenever there is a patrol, a campaign, or a meeting, everyone will award bows, crossbows, arrows, and crossbows as needed, and the ceremony for awarding other weapons and armor will be followed.

古文：田弋，充笼箙矢，共矰矢。
现代文：田猎弋射，供给盛有矢的笼箍，并供给赠矢。
English: They hunted and shot arrows in the fields, provided cages filled with arrows, and gave away arrows.

古文：凡亡矢者，弗用则更。
现代文：凡丢失矢的，如果不是用掉的就要赔偿。
English: Whoever loses an arrow, if it is not used, must make restitution.

古文：缮人掌王之用弓弩、矢箙、矰弋、抉拾，掌诏王射，赞王弓矢之事。
现代文：缮人掌管王所用的弓、弩、矢、菔、赠、弋、抉、拾等射具。负责告教王行射礼，并协助王拿弓矢的事。
English: The archer is in charge of the king's bows, crossbows, arrows, crossbows, gifts, spears, picks, and other shooting tools. He is responsible for teaching the king how to shoot and assisting the king with the bow and arrows.

古文：凡乘车，充其笼箙载其弓弩。
现代文：凡王乘车，就给笼菔盛满矢，为车装备弓弩，射毕车还就收藏起来。
English: Whenever the king rides in a car, he fills the cage with arrows, equips the car with bows and arrows, and collects the car after shooting.

古文：既射，则敛之，无会计。槀人，掌受财于职金，以赍其工。
现代文：不计算用矢的多少。槁人负责从职金那里领取财货，以授给工匠。
English: No matter how many arrows are used, the eunuch is responsible for collecting goods and money from the guild to give to the craftsman.

古文：弓六物，为三等；弩四物，亦如之。
现代文：弓六种分为三等，弩四种也分为三等。
English: Six kinds of bows are divided into three classes, and four kinds of cranes are also divided into three classes.

古文：矢八物，皆三等。箙亦如之。
现代文：矢八种都分为三等，箙也分为三等。
English: Eight kinds of arrows are divided into three classes, and cormorants are also divided into three classes.

古文：春献素，秋献成，书其等以飨工，乘其事，试其弓弩，以下上其食而诛赏，乃入功于司弓矢及缮人。
现代文：春季呈献未经漆饰的矢菔，秋季呈献制作成功的矢菔，记载所献矢菔质量的等级以决定酬劳工匠所备酒肴的厚薄。计算工匠的事功，试验他们所制作的弓弩的好坏，以作为增减发给他们的食粮和进行赏罚的依据。把匠人制造的弓弩矢菔交到司弓矢和缮人那里。
English: In the spring, unpainted arrowheads are presented, and in the fall, arrowheads that have been successfully made are presented. The quality level of the arrowheads presented is recorded to determine the thickness of the dishes prepared by the craftsmen. The craftsmen's work is calculated, and the quality of the bow and arrowheads they have made is tested as a basis for increasing or decreasing the amount of food given to them and for rewards and punishments. The bow and arrowheads made by the craftsmen are handed over to the bow and arrow makers.

古文：凡赍财与其出入，皆在槀人，以待会而考之，亡者阙之。
现代文：凡颁授财货给匠人以及弓弩矢菔的颁发和收进，账册都在稿人那里收藏，以待核计考察，弓弩矢菔消耗丢失的就除去不计。
English: The account books of all awards of goods to artisans, as well as the awards and receipts of bows and arrows, are kept by the author, to be audited and examined, and the loss of bows and arrows is not taken into account.

古文：戎右掌戎车之兵革使，诏赞王鼓，传王命于陈中。
现代文：戎右负责在戎车中担任王的兵革使，告教并协助王击鼓，向军阵中传达王的命令。
English: The eunuch on the right is responsible for serving as the king's military envoy in the eunuch car, teaching and assisting the king in drumming, and conveying the king's orders to the army.

古文：会同，充革车。
现代文：王外出会同，就居处革车左边的位置跟从王车。
English: When Wang Waige met him, he moved to the left side of the cart and followed Wang Che.

古文：盟，则以玉敦辟盟，遂役之。
现代文：盟誓时，就用玉敦盛牲血，打开敦盖以供歃血盟誓，传授玉敦给所看当盟誓的人。
English: When swearing an oath, he would use jade to hold the blood of the animal, open the lid of the jar to swear the blood of the animal, and teach the jade jar to the person he thought should swear the oath.

古文：赞牛耳桃茢。齐右掌祭祀。
现代文：协助王割牛耳、执牛耳和取牲血，并协助王用桃枝和笤帚拂除不祥。
English: Assist the king to cut the cow's ear, hold the cow's ear and take the blood of the animal, and assist the king to use the peach branch and gourd to dispel the ominous.

古文：会同、宾客、前齐车，王乘则持马，行则陪乘。
现代文：齐右负责在有祭祀、会同、接待宾客等事时站在齐车前等候王乘车，王上车时就扶持驾车的马，车子行进时就担任参乘。
English: Qi Yu is responsible for standing in front of the carriage to wait for the king to get on the carriage when there are rituals, gatherings, reception of guests, etc. When the king gets on the carriage, he will support the horse driving the carriage, and when the carriage is moving, he will serve as a passenger.

古文：凡有牲事，则前马。
现代文：凡遇有王在车上向牲行轼礼的事，就下车到马的前边退行而监视马。
English: Whenever there is a case of the king bowing to an animal in the carriage, he will get off the carriage, walk back to the front of the horse and watch the horse.

古文：道右掌前道车。王出入，则持马陪乘，如齐车之仪，自车上谕命于従车，诏王之车仪。
现代文：道右负责站在道车前等候王上车，王出入宫门，就为王扶持驾车的马，并担任参乘，如同齐右侍候王乘齐车的仪法。从车上把王的命令告诉从车。告教王在车上的威仪。
English: Daodei is responsible for standing in front of the carriage to wait for the king to get on the carriage. When the king enters and leaves the palace gate, he will support the horse driving the carriage for the king and participate in the ride, just as the right and left attendants wait for the king to ride in the carriage. Tell the king's order to the servant from the carriage. Tell the king's dignity on the carriage.

古文：王式，则下，前马。
现代文：王行轼礼时就下车，到马前边监视马。
English: When Wang made the salute, he got out of the car and went to the front of the horse to monitor the horse.

古文：王下，则以盖従。
现代文：王下车，就取下车盖跟从王。
English: When the king got out of the carriage, he took off the cover and followed the king.

