古文：日为太阳之精，主生恩德，人君之象也。
现代文：太阳是旺盛的阳气和精华，主管生养恩德，是人君的象徵。
English: The sun is the exuberant yang and essence, responsible for nurturing benevolence, and is a symbol of the human being.

古文：人君有瑕，必露其慝以告示焉。
现代文：人君如果有了瑕疵，一定会显现出它的阴暗邪恶来昭告标示出来。
English: If there is a flaw in a person, it will certainly reveal its dark evil to reveal it.

古文：故日月行有道之国则光明，人君吉昌，百姓安宁。
现代文：所以太阳月亮运行在有道之国则光辉明亮，人君吉祥昌盛，百姓安康宁和。
English: Therefore, when the sun and moon move in a country with Tao, it is bright and bright, the people are auspicious and prosperous, and the people are healthy and peaceful.

古文：人君乘土而王，其政太平，则日五色无主。
现代文：人君冯藉着土地而称王，其国政太平，则殒丧侯王。
English: The human ruler Feng became king by virtue of the land, and his national politics were peaceful, but he died as a lord of a manor.

古文：日变色，有军，军破；无军，丧侯王。
现代文：如果人君无德，大臣乱国，那么太阳赤红而无光。
English: If there is no virtue in a man, and a minister who disturbs the state, then the sun is red and has no light.

古文：其君无德，其臣乱国，则日赤无光。
现代文：太阳失去了正常的色泽，所照临的国家就不会昌盛。
English: The sun has lost its normal color, and the country it shines on will not prosper.

古文：日失色，所临之国不昌。日昼昏，行人无影，到暮不止者，上刑急，下不聊生，不去一年有大水。
现代文：太阳在白昼时昏暗无光，行人没有影子，到黄昏这种现象还没有结束的话，上面动用刑罚紧迫而严酷，下面民不聊生，不出一年就会有大水灾。
English: In the daytime, the sun is dim and without light, pedestrians have no shadow, and if this phenomenon has not ended by dusk, the punishment above will be urgent and severe, the people below will not enjoy life, and there will be a big flood in less than a year.

古文：日昼昏，乌鸟群鸣，国失政。
现代文：太阳白昼昏暗无光，乌鸦成群鸣叫，国家就会政刑混乱。
English: When the sun is dark and the day is gloomy, and the crows are chirping in flocks, the country will be in a state of chaos.

古文：日中乌见，主不明，为政乱，国有白衣会，将军出，旌旗举。
现代文：太阳正中有乌鸦出现，君主不清明，处理政务混乱不清，国中将有王室丧事，将军出现，旌旗乱举。
English: In the middle of the sun, crows appear, the monarch is unclear, the handling of government affairs is unclear, there will be a royal funeral in the country, a general appears, and flags are raised.

古文：日中有黑子、黑气、黑云，乍三乍五，臣废其主。
现代文：太阳正中有黑子、黑气、黑云，三五不定，臣下将废弃其君主。
English: When the sun is directly overhead, there will be black spots, black air, and black clouds.

古文：日蚀，阴侵阳，臣掩君之象，有亡国。
现代文：日食，阴气侵袭了阳气，是臣下掩蔽了君主的徵象，将会亡国。
English: The solar eclipse, the yin invaded the yang, is a sign that the vassal has covered the monarch, and the country will perish.

古文：月为太阴之精，以之配日，女主之象；以之比德，刑罚之义；列之朝廷，诸侯大臣之类。
现代文：月亮是太阴的精华，用它来匹配太阳，是女主的象徵；用它来比拟德行，表现了刑罚的意义；排列于朝廷之上，属于诸侯大臣之类。
English: The moon is the essence of the yin and yang. It is used to match the sun and is a symbol of the mistress; it is used to compare virtue and shows the meaning of punishment; it is ranked above the imperial court and belongs to the princes and ministers.

古文：故君明，则月行依度；臣执权，则月行失道；大臣用事，兵刑失理，则月行乍南乍北；女主外戚擅权，则或进或退。
现代文：所以君主圣明，则月亮依照法度运行；臣下执掌朝政，则月亮运行就偏离了轨道；大臣当权，用兵动刑失去了原则规矩，则月亮的运行忽南忽北；王后女主和外戚擅权，则月亮的运行忽进忽退。
English: Therefore, if the monarch is saintly, the moon will move in accordance with the law; if the vassals are in charge of the government, the moon will deviate from the track; if the minister is in power and has lost the principle and rules by using military punishment, the moon will move south and north; if the queen and her relatives are in power, the moon will move in and out.

古文：月变色，将有殃。
现代文：月亮改变了常色，将要灾祸。
English: The moon has changed its color, and there will be disaster.

古文：月昼明，奸邪并作，君臣争明，女主失行，阴国兵强，中国饥，天下谋僭。
现代文：月亮在白昼非常明亮，则奸诈邪恶将同时发生，君主与臣下争权夺势，王后女主丧失德行，使国事昏暗战争不断，中原大地闹饥荒，天下阴谋僣越。
English: If the moon is very bright in the daytime, then treacherous evil will occur at the same time. The monarch and his vassals will compete for power, the queen will lose her virtue, the state affairs will be darkened, the war will continue, the Central Plains will suffer famine, and the world will conspire.

古文：数月重见，国以乱亡。
现代文：几个月亮同时出现，国家会因为动乱而灭亡。
English: When several moons appear at the same time, the country will be destroyed by turmoil.

古文：岁星曰东方春木，于人，五常，仁也；五事，貌也。
现代文：岁星叫做东方春木，对于人来说，是五常中的仁，五事中的貌。
English: The year star is called the Oriental Spring Wood. For people, it is the benevolence of the five constants and the appearance of the five things.

古文：仁亏貌失，逆春令，伤木气，则罚见岁星。
现代文：如果仁有所污、貌有所失，违逆了春的节令，损伤了木之气，则惩罚显现在岁星上。
English: If the benevolence is tainted, the appearance is lost, the spring festival is violated, and the wood is damaged, the punishment will appear on the lucky star.

古文：岁星盈缩，以其舍命国。
现代文：岁星早出晚出不同，根据它的位置确定国家的兴衰。
English: According to its position, the rising and falling of a country is determined according to the difference of the rising and setting of the stars.

古文：其所居久，其国有德厚，五谷丰昌，不可伐。
现代文：它所停留的时间长，那个国家就德政仁厚，五谷丰昌，不可征伐。
English: If it stays for a long time, that country must be virtuous and benevolent, rich and fertile, and must not be conquered.

古文：其对为冲，岁乃有殃。
现代文：它所对的如果是冲的话，那年就会有灾祸。
English: If it is negative, there will be disaster in that year.

古文：岁星安静中度，吉。
现代文：岁星安静不变合乎常度，是吉象。
English: The year star is quiet and constant, which is normal, and it is auspicious.

古文：盈缩失次，其国有忧，不可举事用兵。
现代文：它的盈满减缩失去了常态，那个国家就有忧患，不能举兵兴事。
English: Its expansion and contraction have lost their normality, and that country is in trouble, unable to raise an army.

古文：又曰，人主之象也，色欲明，光色润泽，德合同。
现代文：又有一说认为是人君的象徵，色泽应该明亮，色泽光亮涧泽，政德和睦相同。
English: There is another saying that it is considered to be a symbol of the ruler, the color should be bright, the color should be bright and shiny, and the government and morality should be harmonious.

古文：又曰，进退如度，奸邪息；变色乱行，主无福。
现代文：还有一说认为如果它进退运行合乎常度，奸佞邪恶就止息不生；如果色泽运行变乱失常，人主将无福无禄。
English: There is also a saying that if it advances and retreats in accordance with the norm, the evil will not stop; if the color and luster run erratically, the owner will have no luck.

古文：又主福，主大司农，主齐吴，主司天下诸侯人君之过，主岁五谷。
现代文：它又主掌福禄，主掌大司农，主掌齐、吴之地，主管天下诸侯君主的过失，主管每年的五谷收成。
English: It is also in charge of the fortune, in charge of the chief farmer, in charge of the land of Qi and Wu, in charge of the faults of the princes and monarchs of the world, and in charge of the annual grain harvest.

古文：赤而角，其国昌；赤黄而沈，其野大穰。
现代文：颜色正红而显出光芒，那个国家就昌盛；颜色黄红而且深暗，其田野繁盛丰收。
English: The land is red and flourishing; its fields are green and flourishing.

古文：荧惑曰南方夏火，礼也，视也。礼亏视失，逆夏令，伤火气，罚见荧惑。
现代文：荧惑是南方夏火的精华，礼仪和微察失度，违逆了夏令，损伤了火气，徵罚显现在灾惑星上。
English: Fluorescence is the essence of the southern summer fire, etiquette and miscalculation, violated the summer time, damaged the fire, and the punishment appeared on the disaster planet.

古文：荧惑法使行无常，出则有兵，入则兵散。
现代文：荧惑的法象是使运行失常，它出现就会有兵乱，它隐没兵乱就将消散。
English: Fluorescent illusion is to make the operation abnormal, if it appears, there will be a riot, if it is hidden, the riot will dissipate.

古文：以舍命国，为乱为贼，为疾为丧，为饥为兵，所居国受殃。
现代文：以它的位置确定国家的兴衰，有动乱有寇贼，有疾病有丧亡，有饥荒有战乱，它所停留的国家会遭受灾难。
English: Its location determines the rise and fall of the country, there are riots and bandits, there are diseases and deaths, there is famine and war, the country where it stays will suffer disaster.

古文：环绕钩已，芒角动摇，变色，乍前乍后，乍左乍右，其为殃愈甚。
现代文：它若环绕排列，其形如钩似已，其光亮芒角动摇不定，色泽变化，忽前忽后，忽左忽右，它所造成的灾难更严重。
English: If it is arranged around, its shape is like a hook, its light angle fluctuates, the color changes, suddenly before and after, suddenly left and right, the disaster caused by it is more serious.

古文：其南丈夫、北女子丧。
现代文：位居南方则男人丧亡，位居北方则女子丧亡。
English: In the south, men die, in the north, women die.

古文：周旋止息，乃为死丧；寇乱其野，亡地。
现代文：它的周旋运转停止了，就是死人的徵兆，贼寇祸乱其野，土地沦丧。
English: Its revolving operation has stopped, which is a sign of a dead man. Thieves and robbers have wreaked havoc, and the land has fallen into ruin.

古文：其失行而速，兵聚其下，顺之战胜。
现代文：它偏离了轨道而且运行疾速，军队聚集在它的下方，顺之就会取胜。
English: It is off course and running fast, the army is gathering below it, and it will win.

古文：又曰，荧惑主大鸿胪，主死丧，主司空。
现代文：又说，荧惑星主掌大鸿胪，主掌死丧，主掌司空。
English: He also said that the fluorescent planets are ruled by the great dragon, the ruler of death, and the ruler of the sky.

古文：又为司马，主楚吴越以南；又司天下群臣之过，司骄奢亡乱妖孽，主岁成败。又曰，荧惑不动，兵不战，有诛将。
现代文：又主管天下群臣的过失，主管骄奢亡乱妖孽之事，主管年景的好与坏。又说，荧惑静止不动，部队不打仗，会诛杀将领。
English: He is also in charge of the faults of the world's ministers, in charge of the matter of arrogance and chaos, in charge of the good and bad years. It is also said that Fu Zha is immobile, the troops do not fight, and they will fight and kill the generals.

古文：其出色赤怒，逆行成钩已，战凶，有围军；钩已，有芒角如锋刃，人主无出宫，下有伏兵；芒大则人众怒。
现代文：它出现后色泽赤红而且强烈，逆行形成钩子形，其光之芒角像刀锋，人君不要出宫，其下有伏兵；芒角大则人多且气势强盛。
English: After it appears, the color is reddish-red and strong, and the retrograde movement forms a hook shape. Its light angle is like a blade, people should not leave the palace, there are ambushes under it; the angle is large, there are many people and the momentum is strong.

古文：又为理，外则理兵，内则理政，为天子之理也。
现代文：又主掌治理，对外则治理军队，对内则治理政务，是为天子之理。
English: Moreover, it is the Son of Heaven who is in charge of governance, who governs the army externally, and who governs government affairs internally.

古文：故曰，虽有明天子，必视荧惑所在。
现代文：所以说，虽然有圣明的天子，也必须审视荧惑星的位置。
English: Therefore, although there is a heavenly son of light, we must also examine the position of the fluorescent planets.

古文：其入守犯太微、轩辕、营室、房、心，主命恶之。
现代文：如果它的出现侵犯了太微星、轩辕星、营室星、房星和心星，是它主掌对应的对象所忌讳的。
English: If its appearance infringes on the Taiwuxing, Xuanwuxing, Yingwuxing, Fangxing and Xinxing, it is taboo by the object corresponding to its main palm.

古文：填星曰中央季夏土，信也，思心也。
现代文：镇星叫做中央季夏土，是诚信、思维的象徵。
English: The town star is called the Central Quarter Summer Earth, which is a symbol of honesty and thinking.

古文：仁义礼智，以信为主，貌言视德，以心为正，故四星皆失，填乃为之动。
现代文：仁义礼智，以诚信为主，貌言视听，以心为正，所以四星若全部失却常态，镇星就会因此而动。
English: Benevolence, righteousness, propriety and wisdom, with honesty as the main, appearance, speech and hearing, with the heart as the positive, so if all four stars lose their normal state, the town star will move as a result.

古文：动而盈，侯王不宁。
现代文：动荡而且早出，诸侯君王就不安宁。
English: Turbulent and early, the princes and kings are restless.

古文：缩，有军不复。
现代文：晚出，军队出战无法返回。
English: The troops went out late and couldn't get back.

古文：所居之宿，国吉，得地及女子，有福，不可伐；去之，失地，若有女忧。
现代文：它所止居的宿位，国家吉祥，获得土地女子，有福瑞，不可征伐；镇星离开，丧失土地，或者有女忧。
English: The lodging place where it stays is auspicious for the country. If a woman obtains land, she will have good fortune and cannot be conquered; if a town star leaves, he will lose land, or he will have women's worries.

古文：居宿久，国福厚；易则薄。
现代文：止留在宿位的时间长，国家就福泽就厚重；改变了宿位福泽就浅薄。
English: If you stay in the position for a long time, the country will be rich in blessings; if you change the position, the blessings will be shallow.

古文：失次而上二三宿曰盈，有主命不成，不乃大水。
现代文：偏离了它的位置向上了二三个宿位叫做盈，所主对象难以成就，否则就会发大水。
English: If it deviates from its position and rises two or three places, it is called ying. The main object is difficult to achieve, otherwise it will be a big mess.

古文：失次而下曰缩，后戚，其岁不复，不乃天裂若地动。
现代文：偏离位次而向下叫缩，君主有灾祸，其年不安，否则就会开崩或者地震。
English: If it deviates from the order and shrinks downwards, there will be disaster for the monarch, and his year will be uneasy, otherwise there will be a collapse or an earthquake.

古文：一曰，填为黄帝之德，女主之象，主德厚安危存亡之机，司天下女主之过。
现代文：一说，镇星为黄帝之德，是女主的象徵，主掌恩德深厚与安危存亡的迹象徵兆，主管天下女主的过失。
English: The first said that Zhenxing was the virtue of the Yellow Emperor, the symbol of the mistress, the sign of deep benevolence and safe survival, and the fault of the mistress of the world.

古文：又曰，天子之星也。
现代文：又说，是天子之星。
English: He also said that it was the star of the Son of God.

古文：天子失信，则填星大动。
现代文：天子失去诚信，则镇星激烈动荡。
English: If the godson loses his integrity, the town will be in a state of violent turmoil.

古文：太白曰西方秋金，义也，言也。
现代文：太白星叫做西方秋金，是道义和言语的象徵。
English: The too-white star is called Western gold, and is a symbol of morality and speech.

古文：义亏言失，逆秋令，伤金气，罚见太白。
现代文：道义污缺言语失理，违逆秋令，损伤了金气，其惩罚显现于太白星。
English: Morality is tainted, speech is irrational, autumn decrees are disobeyed, and gold and gas are damaged. The punishment is manifested in Taibaixing.

古文：太白进退以候兵，高埤迟速，静躁见伏，用兵皆象之，吉。
现代文：太白星的进退能占验出兵乱，高低快慢、静躁隐现，动用军队都是仿照太白星的状况，就吉祥平安。
English: The advance and retreat of the Taibai Star can account for and test out the military turmoil, the high and low speed, and the restlessness appear. The use of the military is modeled on the situation of the Taibai Star, and it is auspicious and safe.

古文：其出西方，失行，夷狄败；出东方，失行，中国败。
现代文：它出现在西方，打乱常行，夷狄就会失败；它出现在东方，打乱常行，中原就会失败。
English: If it appears in the West, it will disrupt the normal operation, and Yidi will fail; if it appears in the East, it will disrupt the normal operation, and Zhongyuan will fail.

古文：未尽期日，过参天，病其对国。
现代文：没有竭尽它的周期时日，行过高天之时，会危及它所应对的国家。
English: If it does not exhaust its cycle, if it overshoots, it endangers the country it is dealing with.

古文：若经天，天下革，民更王，是谓乱纪，人众流亡。
现代文：如果行经整个天空，天下会出现变革，百姓更换君主，这就叫做变乱常纲，百姓流亡。
English: If it travels across the sky, there will be a change in the world, and the people will change the monarch. This is called a chaotic routine, and the people will go into exile.

古文：昼见，与日争明，强国弱，小国强，女主昌。
现代文：太白星白昼出现，与太阳争明，强国变弱，小国变强，女主帝后强悍放纵。
English: A too-white star appears in the daytime, competing with the sun, a strong country becomes weak, a small country becomes strong, and the empress is strong and indulgent.

古文：又曰，太白主大臣，其号上公也，大司马位谨候此。
现代文：又说，太白星主掌大臣，其号称上公，相当于大司马之位，谨占候如此。
English: He also said that the prime minister of Taibai Star, who is known as Shangguo, is equivalent to the position of Daishima, and I would like to predict this.

古文：辰星曰北方冬水，智也，听也。
现代文：辰星对应北方、冬、水，代表智慧和听政。
English: The hour star corresponds to the north, winter, and water, and represents wisdom and listening to the government.

古文：智亏听失，逆冬令，伤水气，罚见辰星。
现代文：智慧欠缺、听政失当，违逆冬令，损伤水气，惩罚显现在辰星上。
English: Lack of wisdom, improper listening to the government, violation of winter regulations, damage to water and gas, punishment appears on the star.

古文：辰星见，则主刑，主廷尉，主燕赵，又为燕、赵、代以北；宰相之象。
现代文：辰星出现，则主掌刑罚，主掌廷尉，主掌燕地、赵地，又掌管燕、赵、代以北的地方，是宰相之象。
English: When the star appears, the ruler is in charge of punishment, the ruler is in charge of court officials, the ruler is in charge of Yan, Zhao, and the north of Yan, Zhao, and Dai, and is the prime minister's elephant.

古文：亦为杀伐之气，战斗之象。
现代文：也象徵诛杀征伐之气，战斗之象，没有战事就会发生刑罚之事。
English: It also symbolizes the spirit of fighting and conquering, the image of battle, and if there is no battle, there will be punishment.

古文：又曰，军于野，辰星为偏将之象，无军为刑事。和阴阳，应效不效，其时不和。
现代文：调和阴阳，京郊而不效，其时会不和。
English: If you try to reconcile yin and yang, it will not work in the suburbs of Beijing, and then there will be discord.

古文：出失其时，寒署失其节，邦当大饥。
现代文：它的出现不合时宜，寒暑混淆节气，国家就会闹大饥荒。
English: Its appearance is untimely, cold and heat confuse the solar terms, and the country will have a great famine.

古文：当出不出，是谓击卒，兵大起。
现代文：它应当出现而不出现，这就叫击卒，主天下兵革大起。
English: If it should appear, but does not, it is a false alarm, and the whole world will be at war.

古文：在于房心间，地动。
现代文：它若在房星、心星之间，就会发生地震。
English: If it is between the house star and the heart star, an earthquake will occur.

古文：亦曰，辰星出入躁疾，常主夷狄。
现代文：又说，辰星出入躁进快慢，常常主掌夷狄。
English: He also said that the rising and setting of the stars is always fast and furious.

古文：又曰，蛮夷之星也，亦主刑法之得失。
现代文：又说，是蛮夷之星，也对应刑罚之法的得失。
English: He also said that it is the star of barbarism, and it also corresponds to the gains and losses of the criminal law.

古文：色黄而小，地大动。
现代文：它的颜色发黄，体积变小，就会发生严重地震。
English: Its color turns yellow, its volume shrinks, and a severe earthquake occurs.

古文：光明与月相逮，其国大水。
现代文：它的光亮与月亮相近时，所应对的国家会发大水。
English: When its brightness is close to that of the moon, the corresponding country will be flooded.

古文：凡五星有色，大小不同，各依其行而顺时应节。
现代文：五星是有颜色的，大小也不相同，各自依照自己的运行轨迹并顺应着时间和节气。
English: The five stars are colored and different in size, each following its own trajectory and corresponding to the time and solar terms.

古文：色变有类，凡青皆比参左肩，赤比心大星，黄比参右肩，白比狼星，黑比奎大星。
现代文：颜色的改变是有规律的，凡青色可比于参宿左肩，赤可比于心大星，黄可比于参宿右肩，折可比于狼星，黑可比于奎大星。
English: The color change is regular, where blue can be compared to Betelgeuse's left shoulder, red can be compared to Antares, yellow can be compared to Betelgeuse's right shoulder, folded can be compared to Lupus, and black can be compared to Ganymede.

古文：不失本色而应其四时者，吉；色害其行，凶。
现代文：不失其本色而顺应其四时，则吉祥；其颜色与其行相违，则凶祸。
English: If it does not lose its natural color but conforms to the four seasons, it is auspicious; if its color contradicts its behavior, it is evil.

古文：凡五星所出所行所直之辰，其国为得位。
现代文：五星所出入、所运行、所当值的辰位，所对应之国得位。
English: Five-star entry and exit, operation, the value of the hour, the corresponding country ranked.

古文：得位者，岁星以德，荧惑有礼，填星有福，太白兵强，辰星阴阳和。
现代文：得位者，岁星主德，荧惑星主礼，土星主福，太白星主兵强，辰星主阴阳调和。
English: The winner of the position, the Year Star Lord, the Fluorescent Planet Lord, the Saturn Lord, the Taibai Star Lord, the Yin and Yang Lord.

古文：所行所直之辰，顺其色而有角者胜，其色害者败。
现代文：所运行所当值的辰位，顺应其颜色而且有芒角的能取胜，其颜色相违的则失败。
English: The position of the hour of the value to be run, according to its color and the angle of the angle can win, its color contrary to the failure.

古文：居实，有德也；居虚，无德也。
现代文：居于所当居，则有德；居于所不当居，则无德。
English: If you live where you ought to live, you have virtue; if you live where you ought not to live, you have no virtue.

古文：色胜位，行胜色，行得尽胜之。
现代文：颜色胜过了它的居位，运行又胜过了它的颜色，运行得以胜过其它的一切。
English: Color trumps placement, movement trumps color, and movement trumps everything else.

古文：营室为清庙，岁星庙也。
现代文：营室是天上的清庙，是岁星的庙。
English: The camp room is the celestial Qing Temple, the temple of the year star.

古文：心为明堂，荧惑庙也。
现代文：心星是天上的明堂，是荧惑星的庙。
English: The Heart Star is the bright hall in the sky, the temple of the fluorescent planets.

古文：南斗为文太室，填星庙也。
现代文：南斗是天上的文太室，是土星的庙。
English: Nanto is the literary room in the sky, the temple of Saturn.

古文：亢为疏庙，太白庙也。
现代文：亢星是天上的疏庙，是太白的庙。
English: The Pleiades is a sparse temple in the sky, a temple that is too white.

古文：七星为员宫，辰星庙也。
现代文：七是是天上的员宫，是辰星的庙。
English: The seventh is the mansion of heaven, the temple of the star.

古文：五星行至其庙，谨候其命。
现代文：五星运行到自己的庙位时，谨候其命。
English: When the five stars run to their temple, they wait for their lives.

古文：凡五星盈缩失位，其精降于地为人。
现代文：五星早出晚出或失其位次，其精华降到地面为人。
English: The five stars rise early and set late, or lose their rank, and their essence descends to the ground as human beings.

古文：岁星降为贵臣；荧惑降为童兒，歌谣嬉戏；填星降为老人妇女；太白降为壮夫，处于林麓；辰星降为妇人。
现代文：岁星降而为贵族大臣；荧惑星降而为儿童，每天唱歌嬉耍；土星降而为老人妇女；太白星降而为壮夫，身处山林之中；辰星降而为妇人。
English: The year star descends to be a noble minister; the fluorescent planet descends to be a child, singing and playing every day; Saturn descends to be an old woman; the white star descends to be a strong man, in the middle of the mountain forest; the hour star descends to be a woman.

古文：吉凶之应，随其象告。
现代文：吉凶的应对，各随其徵兆而昭示。
English: The auspicious and inauspicious responses are revealed according to their signs.

古文：凡五星，木与土合，为内乱，饥；与水合，为变谋而更事；与火合，为饥，为旱；与金合，为白衣之会，合斗，国有内乱，野有破军，为水。
现代文：凡五星，木星与土星会合，将有内乱，会发生饥荒；与水星会合，就会改变政策、变更行事；与火星会合，会产生饥荒，形成旱灾；与金星会合，会有帝室之更丧，内部产生斗争，国内有战乱，野有败军，发生水灾。
English: Where the five stars, Jupiter and Saturn meet, there will be civil unrest and famine will occur; meeting with Mercury, there will be changes in policies and actions; meeting with Mars, there will be famine and drought; meeting with Venus, there will be mourning for the imperial family, internal struggle, domestic war, defeat, and floods.

古文：太白在南，岁星在北，名曰牝牡，年谷大熟。
现代文：太白星在南方，岁星在北方，称为牝牡，这年五谷丰收。
English: Taibai Star in the south, Guoxing in the north, known as Jiu Miao, this year's grain harvest.

古文：太白在北，岁星在南，年或有或无。
现代文：太白星在北方，岁星在南方，年景时好时坏。
English: The white star is in the north, the year star is in the south, and the seasons are good and bad.

古文：火与金合，为烁，为丧，不可举事用兵。
现代文：火星与金星会合，其年为烁，主丧不可以举兵兴事。
English: When Mars and Venus meet, it is the year of the scintillations, and it is not allowed to raise an army.

古文：从军，为军忧；离之，军却。
现代文：追随太白，会造成军队覆灭；离开太白，军队将退却。
English: If you follow Taibai, the army will be destroyed; if you leave Taibai, the army will retreat.

古文：出太白阴，分宅；出其阳，偏将战。
现代文：出现于太白之阴，将为分宅；出现于期阳，将有副将出战。
English: If it appears in the shade of Taibai, it will be a branch; if it appears in the sun, there will be a vice-commander to fight.

古文：与土合，为忧，主孽卿。
现代文：与土星会合，产生忧祸，主掌有忤逆不顺的公卿。
English: A meeting with Saturn, bringing sorrow, ruled by a rebellious nobleman.

古文：与水合，为北军，用兵举事大败。
现代文：与水会合，将有失败的军队，举后用事就会惨败。
English: Meeting with water, there will be a failed army, and raising it will be a fiasco.

古文：一曰，火与水合，为焠，不可举事用兵。
现代文：一说，火星与水星会合为焠，不能举兵用事。
English: One said that the conjunction of Mars and Mercury was a thunderbolt, and could not be used for military purposes.

古文：土与水合，为壅沮，不可举事用兵，有覆军下师。
现代文：土星与水星会合将会产生壅障不通的现象，不能举兵用事，会有全军覆灭的结果。
English: The conjunction of Saturn and Mercury will produce a phenomenon of obstacles and impassability, unable to raise an army, and the result will be the destruction of the entire army.

古文：一曰，为变谋更事，必为旱。
现代文：一说，表明会有谋变更替之事，一定会产生旱灾。
English: One said, indicating that there will be a change of plan, there will be a drought.

古文：与金合，为疾，为白衣会，为内兵，国亡地。
现代文：与金星会合，会产生疾病，造成国之丧事，内有军队叛乱，国家丧失土地。
English: Conjunction with Venus, will produce disease, resulting in a national tragedy, including army mutinies, the country lost land.

古文：与木合，国饥。
现代文：与木星会合，国内大饥。
English: Conjunction with Jupiter, great famine in the country.

古文：水与金合，为变谋，为兵忧。
现代文：水星与金星会合，表示有阴谋变乱之事，有战争之灾。
English: Mercury and Venus meet, indicating that there will be conspiracies and turmoil, and there will be war.

古文：入太白中而上出，破军杀将，客胜；下出，客亡地。
现代文：其入太白星之中而自上方出来，表示军队战败，将领被杀，客军胜利；从其下文而出，客军丧失土地。
English: If it falls into the white star and rises from above, it means that the army was defeated, the general was killed, and the guest army was victorious; if it falls from below, the guest army lost the land.

古文：视旗所指，以命破军。
现代文：要看旗星的指向，来占卜何方为破军。
English: It is necessary to look at the direction of the flag star to divinize which side is the defeated army.

古文：环绕太白，若与斗，大战，客胜。
现代文：水星环绕太白星，若与太白星相斗，将有大战，客军胜利。
English: Mercury encircles Taibai Star. If it fights with Taibai Star, there will be a great battle, and the guest army will win.

古文：凡木、火、土、金与水斗，皆为战。
现代文：凡是木星、火星、土星、金星、与水星相斗，都会发生战争。
English: Whenever Jupiter, Mars, Saturn, Venus, and Mercury fight, there is war.

古文：兵不在外，皆为内乱。
现代文：军队没有出国作战，全在国内造成内乱。
English: The army did not go abroad to fight, and all of them caused civil unrest in the country.

古文：凡同舍为合，相陵为斗。
现代文：凡几个星在同一舍内为全，相凌迫为门。
English: Where several stars are complete in the same house, the opposite must be the door.

古文：二星相近，其殃大；相远，毋伤，七寸以内必之。
现代文：二星相接近，其灾祸大；离开较远，没有伤害，相距在七寸之内一定会有应验。
English: If two stars are close together, there will be great calamity; if they are far apart, there will be no harm, and if they are within seven inches of each other, there will be fulfillment.

古文：凡月蚀五星，其国皆亡。
现代文：凡是月亮蚀五星，其分野之国都会衰亡。
English: Whenever there is a total lunar eclipse, the country will be destroyed.

古文：岁以饥，荧惑以乱，填以杀，太白以强国战，辰以女乱。
现代文：月食岁星是因为饥荒，蚀火星是因为战乱，蚀土星是因为大开杀戒，蚀太白是因为强国战败，蚀辰星则因女人之乱。
English: Lunar eclipses are caused by famine, Mars eclipses are caused by war, Saturn eclipses are caused by mass murder, Taibai eclipses are caused by the defeat of a powerful country, and Chenxing eclipses are caused by women's turmoil.

古文：凡五星入月，岁，其野有逐相；太白，将僇。
现代文：凡五星入合月亮，若是岁星，则所应对的国家将有被斥逐的宰相；若是太折星，将有杀戮。
English: For every five-pointed star coinciding with the moon, if it is the year star, the country will have an ousted prime minister; if it is the eclipsed star, there will be killing.

古文：凡五星所聚，其国王，天下从。
现代文：凡五星所聚之处，其所对应的国家将主宰天下，天下之人都会遵从。
English: Wherever the five stars are gathered, the corresponding country will dominate the world, and everyone in the world will obey.

古文：岁以义从，荧惑以礼从，填以重从，太白以兵从，辰以法从，各以其事致天下也。
现代文：岁星表示以道义而遵从，火星表示以礼仪而遵从，土星表示以厚重而遵从，太白表示以兵力而遵从，辰星表示以刑法而遵从，各自以其所主之事而招致天下。
English: The year star means to obey with morality, Mars means to obey with etiquette, Saturn means to obey with weight, Taibai means to obey with military force, and the hour star means to obey with criminal law. Each of them attracts the world with its own affairs.

古文：三星若合，是谓惊立绝行，其国外内有兵与丧，百姓饥乏，改立侯王。
现代文：如果三星会合，这就会有兵丧而中断星之正常运行，这个国家的内外都会有战争和动乱，百姓饥寒困乏，将改立侯王。
English: If the three stars meet, there will be a military funeral and the normal operation of the stars will be interrupted. There will be war and turmoil both inside and outside the country. The people will be hungry, cold and poor, and the prince will be re-elected.

古文：四星若合，是谓大阳，其国兵丧并起，君子忧，小人流。
现代文：若是四星会合，这就叫太阳，战争和丧亡将会在这个国家同时发生，当政的君子忧虑，而下民流亡。
English: If the four stars should meet, it would be called the sun, and war and death would go hand in hand in that country, the nobles being alarmed, and the people driven into exile.

古文：五星若合，是谓易行，有德承庆，改立王者，奄有四方，子孙蕃昌；亡德受殃，离其国家，灭其宗庙，百姓离去，被满四方。
现代文：若是五星会合，这就叫易行，有德之人承受祥庆，改立为王的人，能据有天下四方，其子孙繁盛昌茂；无德之人将遭受灾祸，离开自己的国家，宗庙被毁坏，百姓离去，灾难遍及四方。
English: If it is a five-star meeting, it is easy to do. A virtuous person will inherit the auspicious celebration, and a person who is re-established as a king will be able to rule the world in all directions, and his descendants will prosper. A person without virtue will suffer disasters, leave his country, the ancestral temple will be destroyed, the people will leave, and the disaster will spread to all directions.

古文：皆角，赤，犯我城；黄，地之争；白，哭泣声；青，有兵忧；黑，有水。五星同色，天下偃兵，百姓安宁，歌舞以行，不见灾疾，五谷蕃昌。
现代文：五颗星都很硕大，其事就大；都比较小，其事也小。凡五星的颜色，都成圆圈状，白色主丧，是旱灾的徵兆；呈赤色内有不平，主战乱；青色主忧患，是水灾的徵兆；黑色主疾病瘟疫，是大批死亡的徵兆；黄色主吉祥。都出现芒角，红色，则有敌军侵犯本国城池；黄色，有土地之争；白色，会出现哭泣之声；青色，将有战火之灾；黑色，有火灾。五星呈现同一颜色，则天下偃兵自武。百姓安宁。载歌载舞。见不到灾难疾病，五谷丰盛。
English: The five stars are very large, so the matter is big; they are all relatively small, so the matter is small. The colors of the five stars are all in a circle. White is the main mourning, which is a sign of drought; red is uneven, mainly war; blue is the main sorrow, which is a sign of flood; black is the main disease, plague, which is a sign of a large number of deaths; yellow is the main auspicious. All appear horns, red is an enemy army invading the country's city; yellow is a land dispute; white will appear crying; blue will have the scourge of war; black is a fire. If the five stars appear the same color

古文：凡五星，岁，政缓则不行，急则过分，逆则占。
现代文：此五星中，岁星，政教缓和则不行，疾历则过分，违逆则占。
English: Among these five stars, the year star, the relaxation of politics and religion is not possible, the illness calendar is excessive, and the disobedience is accounted for.

古文：荧惑，缓则不出，急则不入，违道则占。
现代文：荧惑星，缓和则不出，疾历则超过其居舍，违逆则占。
English: Fluorescent planets, mitigation does not occur, the disease calendar exceeds its residence, and disobedience is accounted for.

古文：填，缓则不还，急则过舍，逆则占。
现代文：太白星，缓和则不出，疾历则不入，违逆则占。
English: Too white star, mitigation does not appear, illness does not enter, and disobedience is accounted for.

古文：太白，缓则不出，急则不入，逆则占。
现代文：蜃生，缓和则不出，疾历则不入，非其时则占。
English: When it comes to health, mitigation is out, when it comes to illness, it's out, and when it's not, it's accounted for.

古文：五星不失行，则年谷丰昌。
现代文：五星不失基常行，则当年五谷丰收。
English: Five stars without losing the foundation, the grain harvest of the year is the best.

古文：凡五星分天之中，积于东方，中国利；积于西方，外国用兵者利。
现代文：从中分天为两部，若五星聚于东方，则对中原有利；若聚于西方，则外国用兵者有利。
English: If the Five Stars gather in the East, it will be beneficial to the Central Plains; if they gather in the West, it will be beneficial to foreign soldiers.

古文：辰星不出，太白为客；其出，太白为主。
现代文：若辰星不出现，则太折为客；辰星出现，则太白为主。
English: If the star does not appear, it is too folded to be a guest; if the star appears, it is too white.

古文：出而与太白不相从，及各出一方，为格，野虽有军，不战。
现代文：辰星出现而不跟丛着太折，以及各从一方出现，就是格，国土中虽有军队，不会发生战争。
English: The fact that the stars appear without clustering, and that each side appears separately, means that although there are armies in the country, there will be no war.

古文：凡五星见伏、留行、逆顺、迟速应历度者，为得其行，政合于常；违历错度，而失路盈缩者，为乱行。
现代文：凡五星之出现或隐没、留止或运行、违逆或顺从、迟缓或疾速应全历法时度的，就符合它的规律，政教全于常规；违反历法时度而迷失常道或缩时，就是乱行。
English: Whenever the appearance or disappearance, stay or movement, disobedience or obedience, slowness or rapidity of the five stars should be in accordance with the full calendar time, it will conform to its laws. Politics and religion are all in accordance with the rules; violating the calendar time and losing the normal way or shortening the time is disorderly.

古文：乱行则为天矢彗孛，而有亡国革政，兵饥丧乱之祸云。
现代文：乱行就成了天矢星、彗孛星，而国家衰亡、政令更革的变故，以及战乱饥荒、丧乱等灾祸。
English: Disorderly conduct has become a meteor and a comet, while the decline and fall of the country, the change of government decrees, as well as war, famine, death and other disasters.

古文：○杂星气
现代文：○晋书杂星气翻译
English: ○Jinshu miscellaneous starry translation

古文：图纬旧说，及汉末刘表为荆州牧，命武陵太守刘睿集天文众占，名《荆州占》。
现代文：按照河图纬书的旧说，到汉末刘表任荆州牧时，命武陵太守刘睿号集关于天文的众多占卜成书，定名为《荆州占》。
English: According to the old saying of the book of the river map, when Liu Biao was appointed as the pastor of Jingzhou at the end of the Han Dynasty, he ordered Liu Rui, the governor of Wuling, to compile a number of divination books on astronomy, which was named "Jingzhou Zhan."

古文：其杂星之体，有瑞星，有妖星，有客星，有流星，有瑞气，有妖气，有日月傍气，皆略其名状，举其占验，次之于此云。
现代文：那些杂星的本身，有瑞星，有妖星，有客星，有流星，有瑞气，有妖气，有的是日月旁边的云气，都简要举出它们的名称形状，列举出它们占卜应验的情况，依次排列于此。
English: The mixed stars themselves, including the auspicious star, the evil star, the guest star, the meteor, the auspicious gas, the evil gas, and the cloud gas next to the sun and the moon, all briefly list their names and shapes, list the circumstances of their divination fulfillment, and are arranged here in order.

古文：○瑞星
现代文：○瑞星
English: ○Suisei Group

古文：一曰景星，如半月，生于晦朔，助月为明。
现代文：第一是景星，像半个月亮，在农历月初和月末出现，协助月亮放射光芒。
English: The first is the star, like a half moon, which appears at the beginning and end of the lunar month, helping the moon to radiate light.

古文：或曰，星大而中空。
现代文：有的说，此星硕大而中间空。
English: Some say that this star is huge and empty in the middle.

古文：或曰，有三星，在赤方气，与青方气相连，黄星在赤方气中，亦名德星。
现代文：有的说，有三颗星，在南方这云气兴与东方之云气相连，黄星在南方的云气之中，也叫做德星。
English: Some say that there are three stars. In the south, this cloud is connected to the eastern cloud, and the yellow star is in the southern cloud, also called the German star.

古文：二曰周伯星，黄色，煌煌然，所见之国大昌。
现代文：第二是周伯星，呈黄色，闪闪发光，在哪个国家出现哪个国家就会非常昌盛。
English: The second is Zhou Bo Xing, which is yellow and sparkling. Whichever country it appears in will be very prosperous.

古文：三曰含誉，光耀似慧，喜则含誉射。
现代文：第三叫含誉，光芒似彗星，有喜事则含誉星放射光芒。
English: The third is the star of fame. Its light resembles a comet, and when there is a happy event, the star of fame emits radiant light.

古文：四曰格泽，如炎火，下大上锐，色黄白，起地而上。
现代文：第四是格泽，像炎炎的火焰，下面圆浑上面尖锐，颜色呈黄白色，从地上升起。
English: The fourth is the lattice, like a blazing fire, round below and sharp above, yellow-white in color, rising from the ground.

古文：见则不种而获，有土功，有大客。
现代文：它一出现则不用耕种而有收获，有治水筑城等工程，有尊贵的客人。
English: As soon as it appears, there is a harvest without cultivation, there are projects such as flood control and city construction, and there are distinguished guests.

古文：○妖星
现代文：○妖星
English: ○ yokoboshi

古文：一曰彗星，所谓扫星。
现代文：一种叫彗星，就是所说的扫帚星。
English: One is called a comet, the so-called broom star.

古文：本类星，末类彗，小者数寸，长或竟天。
现代文：基本体像星星，其末尾像扫帚，小的数寸长，长的有贯穿整个天空。
English: The basic body is like a star, and its end is like a broom, small ones are a few inches long, and long ones stretch across the entire sky.

古文：见则兵起，大水。
现代文：它一出现就会兴起战火，发大水。
English: As soon as it appears, it will ignite the flames of war and cause a lot of trouble.

古文：主扫除，除旧布新。
现代文：它主掌扫除，即除旧迎新。
English: Its main task is to sweep away, that is, to remove the old and welcome the new.

古文：有五色，各依五行本精所主。
现代文：它有五种颜色，各自依照五行之精华所对应。
English: It has five colors, each corresponding to the essence of the five elements.

古文：史臣案，彗体无光，傅日而为光，故夕见则东指，晨见则西指。
现代文：史臣认为，彗星星体没有光泽，依靠太阳而产生光泽，所以晚上出现则光芒指向东方，早晨出现则光芒指向西方。
English: Shichen believes that the comet body has no luster, and relies on the sun to produce luster, so when it appears at night, the light points to the east, and when it appears in the morning, the light points to the west.

古文：在日南北，皆随日光而指。
现代文：在太阳的南方北方，都随着太阳的光芒而有所指向。
English: In the north and south of the sun, everything is oriented according to the sun's rays.

古文：顿挫其芒，或长或短，光芒所及则为灾。
现代文：其光芒顿挫转折，有时长有时短，光芒所及之处就会产生灾祸。
English: Its light is ever-changing, sometimes long, sometimes short, and wherever it shines, it brings disaster.

古文：二曰孛星，彗之属也。
现代文：第二是孛星，属于彗星一类。
English: The second is Iridium, which belongs to the class of comets.

古文：偏指曰彗，芒气四出曰孛。
现代文：光芒偏向一方就叫彗，芒气四散发身就叫孛。
English: If the light is deflected to one side, it is called a coma, and if the light radiates in all directions, it is called a pimple.

古文：孛者，孛孛然非常，恶气之所生也。
现代文：孛，就是说光芒四射孛孛然不同寻常，是产生凶恶之气的徵验。
English: , that is to say, the radiance is unusually bright, and it is a test that produces a ferocious atmosphere.

古文：内不有大乱，则外有大兵，天下合谋，暗蔽不明，有所伤害。
现代文：国内无大乱，则国外有严重的战争，天下联合谋划，月末暗隐蔽而不明，会有所伤害。
English: If there is no big turmoil at home, then there will be serious wars abroad, the world will jointly plan, and the end of the month will be hidden and unknown, which will cause harm.

古文：晏子曰： 君若不改，孛星将出，彗星何惧乎！ 
现代文：晏子说： 君主若不改过，孛星就会出现，彗星有什么可怕的呢！ 
English: The lame man said, "If the ruler does not mend his ways, the planet Krypton will appear. What's so terrible about a comet?"

古文：由是言之，灾甚于彗。
现代文：据此而言，孛星灾害比彗星严重。
English: In this respect, the Iridium disaster is more serious than the comet.

古文：三曰天棓，一名觉星。
现代文：第三叫天棓，又叫觉星。
English: The third is called the Celestial Dragonfly, also known as the Star of Enlightenment.

古文：本类星，末锐，长四丈。
现代文：本体与星相类，末端尖锐，四丈长。
English: The body is similar to that of a star, with a sharp end and a long tail.

古文：或出东北方西方，主奋争。
现代文：有时在东方方或西方出现，标志奋争之事。
English: Sometimes appearing in the East or West, it is a sign of strife.

古文：四曰天枪。
现代文：第四种是天枪。
English: The fourth type is the space gun.

古文：其出，不过三月，必有破国乱君，伏死其辜。
现代文：它出现后不超过三个月，必定会有破灭的国家和乱国之君，因其罪恶伏地而死。
English: Not more than three months after its appearance, there will certainly be a ruined country and a ruler of a chaotic country, who will die because of his evil.

古文：殃之不尽，当为旱饥暴疾。
现代文：灾祸没有完结，还会有旱灾、饥荒、寇暴和瘟疫。
English: The plagues are not over, there will be drought, famine, pogroms and pestilence.

古文：五曰天欃。
现代文：第五叫天欃。
English: The fifth is called the heavenly harp.

古文：石氏曰，云如牛状。
现代文：石氏说，其支形状像牛。
English: Its branches are shaped like a cow, Mr. Ishii said.

古文：甘氏，本类星，末锐。
现代文：甘氏认为，本体与星相类似，末端尖锐。
English: According to Mr. Kan, the body is similar to a star, with a sharp end.

古文：巫咸曰，彗星出西方，长可三丈，主捕制。
现代文：巫咸说，似彗星出现在西方，有二三丈长，主就捕捉之制。
English: Wuxian said that a comet-like comet appeared in the west, two or three meters long, and the main thing was to catch it.

古文：六曰蚩尤旗，类彗而后曲，象旗。
现代文：第六是蚩尤旗，类似彗星而后部弯曲，象旗子。
English: The sixth is the Chau flag, which resembles a comet and is curved at the back, like a flag.

古文：或曰，赤云独见。
现代文：有人说，赤色之云独立显现。
English: Some say the red clouds appear independently.

古文：或曰，其色黄上白下。
现代文：有人说，它的颜色是下黄下白。
English: Some people say that its color is from yellow to white.

古文：或曰，若植雚而长，名曰蚩尤之旗。
现代文：有人说，像一棵直立的莞草而比较长，取名叫蚩尤之旗。
English: Some people say that it looks like an upright plant and is relatively long, and it is called the flag of Fuyou.

古文：或曰，如箕，可长二丈，末有星。
现代文：有人说，像一个畚箕，有二丈长，末端有星星。
English: Some people say that it is like a dragonfly, two feet long, with stars at the end.

古文：主伐枉逆，主惑乱，所见之方下有兵，兵大起；不然，有丧。
现代文：主应对伐邪恶叛逆的人，主应有惑乱，在它所出现的方位的下面会有战乱，大兴兵革；不然的话，也会有丧亡。
English: The Lord should fight against the evil and rebellious people, the Lord should have confusion, and under the direction it appears, there will be war, and there will be a great war; otherwise, there will be loss.

古文：七曰天冲，出如人，苍衣赤头，不动。
现代文：第七叫天冲，它出现时开奖似人，穿着青黑色的衣服，光着头，一动不动。
English: The seventh is called Tianchong. When it appears, it looks like a person, wearing blue-black clothes, bareheaded, and motionless.

古文：见则臣谋主，武卒发，天子亡。
现代文：它一出现则臣下图谋君主，武装的士兵奋起，天子丧亡。
English: As soon as it appears, the vassals plot against the monarch, the armed soldiers rise up, and the emperor is killed.

古文：八曰国皇，大而赤，类南极老人星。
现代文：第八叫国皇，硕大而呈红色，与南极老人星相类似。
English: The eighth is called Guo Guo, which is large and red, similar to the South Pole old man star.

古文：或曰，去地一二丈，如炬火，主内寇内难。
现代文：有人说，离开地一、二丈、像火炬，主应国内发生贼寇动乱。
English: Some people say that leaving the country for one or two years is like a torch, mainly due to the occurrence of bandit unrest in the country.

古文：或曰，其下起兵，兵强。
现代文：有人说，它的宿位所对应的下方有战事，兵力很强。
English: Some people said that there was a war going on in the area below where he was staying, and that the troops there were very strong.

古文：或曰，外内有兵丧。
现代文：有人说，国外国内都有兵乱。
English: Some people say that there are mutinies both at home and abroad.

古文：九曰昭明，象如太白，光芒，不行。
现代文：第九叫昭明，形象如太白星，光有芒角，不行。
English: The ninth one is called Zhao Ming. His image is too white and he has a light mane, which is unacceptable.

古文：或曰，大而白，无角，乍上乍下。
现代文：有人说，它硕大而色白，没有芒角，忽上忽下。
English: Some people say that it is large and white in color, has no horns, and goes up and down all at once.

古文：一曰，赤彗分为昭明，昭明灭光，以为起霸起德之征，所起国兵多变。
现代文：有人说，赤色的彗星分为昭明星，照明星的光暗淡月末灭，被认为是霸业兴起、德政兴起的徵兆，所对应的国家与兵多变。
English: Some people say that the red comet is divided into a shining star, and the light of the shining star is dim at the end of the month. It is considered to be a sign of the rise of hegemony and the rise of German politics, and the corresponding countries and soldiers are changeable.

古文：一曰，大人凶，兵大起。
现代文：有人说，在上位的人不吉利，将发生严重的战乱。
English: Some people say that it is unlucky for those in power, and that there will be a serious war.

古文：十曰司危，如太白，有目。
现代文：第十叫司危，状如太折星，有眼。
English: The tenth is called Sige, shaped like a star, with eyes.

古文：或曰，出正西，西方之野星，去地可六丈，大而白。
现代文：有人说，出于正西方，是西方之野星，离地大约六丈，硕大而色白。
English: Some people say that it comes from the west, it is the wild star of the west, about six feet from the ground, huge and white.

古文：或曰，大而有毛，两角。
现代文：有人说，硕大而有毛，有两个角。
English: Some say it is a large hairy cucumber with two horns.

古文：或曰，类太白，数动，察之而赤，为乖争之征，主击强兵。
现代文：有的说，类似太白星，经常闪动，细看它颜色发红，是违逆争斗的徵兆，主应抗击强兵。
English: Some say that it is similar to the white star, which often flashes, and if you look closely, its color turns red. It is a sign of rebellion and struggle, and the Lord should resist the strong soldiers.

古文：见则主失法，豪杰起，天子以不义失国，有声之臣行主德。
现代文：显现则主群失去。豪杰纷起，天子会因为不义而失国，有声望的臣下行使君主之德政。
English: When they appear, the main group is lost. Heroes arise, heavenly sons lose their country because of injustice, and prestigious vassals exercise the monarch's moral government.

古文：十一曰天谗，彗出西北，状如剑，长四五丈。
现代文：第十一叫天谗，彗尾出现于西北方，其状如剑，长四、五丈。
English: The eleventh is called the heavenly harpoon. The comet's tail appears in the northwest, its shape is like a sword, and it is four to five meters long.

古文：或曰，如钩，长四丈。
现代文：有人说，形状像钩，有四丈长。
English: Some people say that it is shaped like a hook and is four feet long.

古文：或曰，状白小，数动，主杀罚。
现代文：有的说，其形状又小女白，经常闪动，主应杀戮诛罚。
English: Some say that its shape is small and white, often flashing, and should be killed and punished.

古文：出则其国内乱，其下相谗，为饥兵，赤地千里，枯骨藉藉。
现代文：出现则所应对的国家内部发生动乱，在下位的臣子想到谗谤，产生饥荒兵乱，千里赤地，到处是枯骨。
English: When it appeared, there were upheavals within the country it was supposed to deal with, the lower-ranking courtiers thought of slandering, there were famines and wars, and there were dead bones everywhere.

古文：十二曰五残，一名五鏠，出正东，东方之星。
现代文：第十二叫五残，双叫五锋，出于正东方，是东方之星。
English: The twelfth is called Wuzhun, and the two are called Wufeng. It comes from the east and is the star of the east.

古文：状类辰，可去地六七丈。
现代文：开奖类似长星，离地大约六、七丈。
English: The jackpot is similar to a long star, about six or seven feet above the ground.

古文：或曰，苍彗散为五残，如辰星，出角。
现代文：有人说，苍色的彗星散开成为五残星，状如辰星，有芒角。
English: Some say that the pale comet dispersed to become a pentagram, shaped like a star, with a crescent.

古文：或曰，星表有气如晕，有毛。
现代文：有的说，星的表面有一层气好像晕环，有毛。
English: Some say that the surface of the star has a layer of gas like a halo, with hairs.

古文：或曰，大而赤，数动，察之而青。
现代文：有的说，大而色赤，经常闪动，细看它呈青色。
English: Some say that it is large and red in color, often flashes, and looks bluish when looked at closely.

古文：主乖亡；为五分，毁败之征，亦为备急兵。
现代文：主应乘逆丧亡；分为五，是毁败的徵兆，也象徵备充紧急战事。
English: The Lord should take advantage of the reverse and perish; divided into five, it is a sign of destruction, but also a symbol of preparation for emergency warfare.

古文：见则主诛，政在伯，野乱成，有急兵，有丧，不利冲。
现代文：显现出则主应诛杀，政权旁落于伯，四野形成动乱，有紧急兵事，有丧乱，不利于对应分野
English: When it becomes apparent that the master should fight and kill, the political power falls to the side of the subject, the four fields form a turmoil, there is an emergency military affairs, there is a death riot, which is not conducive to the corresponding field

古文：十三曰六贼，见出正南，南方之星。
现代文：第十三叫六贼，出现于正南方，是南方之星。
English: The thirteenth is called the Six Thieves. It appears in the south and is the star of the south.

古文：去地可六丈，大而赤，动有光。
现代文：离地大约六丈，大而色赤，闪动而有光辉。
English: About six feet off the ground, large and red, flashing and shiny.

古文：或曰，形如彗，五残、六贼出，祸合天下，逆侵关枢；其下有兵，冲不利。
现代文：有的说，其形如彗。五残星、六贼星出现。灾祸合降于天下，逆兵侵犯关口要塞；所对应的地方有兵灾，对卫宿位所应之地不利。
English: Some say that it is shaped like a comet, with the five remaining stars and the six thief stars appearing. The calamity fell to the world, and the rebel soldiers invaded the pass fortress; the corresponding place had a military disaster, which was unfavorable to the place where the guards were stationed.

古文：十四曰狱汉，一名咸汉，出正北，北方之野星，去地可六丈，大而赤，数动，察之中青。
现代文：第十四叫狱汉星，又叫咸汉，出现于正北，是北方分野之星，离地大约六丈，大而色赤，经常闪动，仔细地观察，中间是青色的。
English: The fourteenth is called the Prison Star, also known as Ham Ham, appearing in the due north, is the star of the northern field, about six feet from the ground, large and red, often flashing, carefully observed, the middle is blue.

古文：或曰，赤表，下有三彗从横。
现代文：有人说，它表面呈赤色，下面有三颗彗星纵横。
English: Some say that its surface is red, with three comets below.

古文：主遂王，主刺王。
现代文：它象徵着放逐君主、刺杀君主。
English: It symbolizes the exile of the monarch, the assassination of the monarch.

古文：出则阴精横，兵起其下。
现代文：出现则阴邪之精横行，它所对应的地区战事兴起。
English: When it appears, the evil spirit is rampant, and the war in the area corresponding to it arises.

古文：又为丧，动则诸侯惊。
现代文：又象徵动乱，它闪动则诸侯惊恐。
English: It is also a symbol of turmoil. When it flashes, the lords are terrified.

古文：十五曰旬始，出北斗旁，如雄鸡。
现代文：第十五叫旬始，出现在北斗星旁，形状象雄鸡。
English: The fifteenth is called Shun Shi, appearing next to the Big Dipper, shaped like a rooster.

古文：其怒，有青黑，象伏鳖。
现代文：发怒时，呈青黑色，像一只匍匐而卧的鳖。
English: When angry, it is blue-black, like a crouching toad.

古文：或曰，怒，雌也，主争兵。
现代文：有人说，发怒时，是雌性，象徵军事争斗。
English: Some say that when angry, it is a female, symbolizing a military battle.

古文：又曰，黄彗分为旬始，为立主之题，主乱，主招横。
现代文：又说，黄彗星分为旬始星，已成为立主的标志，象徵祸乱，象徵招致横逆。
English: It is also said that the yellow comet is divided into the star of the season and has become the sign of the founder, symbolizing calamity, symbolizing the cause of rebellion.

古文：见则臣乱兵作，诸侯虐，期十年，圣人起伐，群猾横恣。
现代文：出现则臣下谋反，战事兴作，诸侯肆虐，为期十年，圣人起兵讨伐，众多猾佞之人横行恣纵。
English: When it did, the vassals plotted a rebellion, war broke out, the lords raged for a period of ten years, saints raised an army to fight, and many cunning people ran amok.

古文：或曰，出则诸侯雄鸣。
现代文：有人说，旬始星出现则诸侯势力强盛。
English: Some people say that when the star appears, the power of the feudal lords is strong.

古文：十六曰天锋，彗象矛锋。
现代文：第十六叫天锋星，彗尾像矛锋。
English: The sixteenth is called the leading star, and the tail of the comet is like a spearhead.

古文：天下从横，则天锋星见。
现代文：天下有战乱时，则天锋星出现。
English: When there is war in the world, the celestial beacon appears.

古文：十七曰烛星，如太白。
现代文：第十七叫烛星，形状像太白星。
English: The seventeenth is called Candlestick, shaped like a white star.

古文：其出也不行，见则不久而灭。
现代文：它出现而不移动，出现后不久就消失了。
English: It appears without moving and disappears soon after it appears.

古文：或曰，主星上有三彗上出，所出城邑乱，有大盗不成，又以五色占。
现代文：有人说，主星上有三条彗尾出现，所出现的城邑则大乱，有强大的寇贼但于事无成，又用五色占卜。
English: Some people say that three comet tails appear on the main star, the cities that appear are chaotic, there are powerful robbers but nothing is accomplished, and they use five-color divination.

古文：十八曰蓬星，大如二斗器，色白，一名王星。
现代文：第十八叫蓬星，其大如能容二斗之器，白色，又叫王星。
English: The eighteenth is called Peng Xing, which is as big as a vessel that can hold two buckets, white, and is also called Pluto.

古文：出而易处。星见，不出三年，有乱臣戮死。
现代文：形状像夜间生之光，多至四五个，少则一二个。又说，蓬星在西南方，长数丈，不出三年，应付有乱臣被告杀戮而死。
English: Shaped like a nocturnal ray of light, there are as many as four or five, and as few as one or two. It is also said that Peng Xing is in the southwest, is a few meters tall, not more than three years old, and was killed by the accused.

古文：又曰，所出大水大旱，五谷不收，人相食。
现代文：又说，所出现的地方有大水或干旱，五谷不收，人吃人。
English: He also said that wherever there is a flood or drought, grain will not be harvested, and people will eat each other.

古文：十九曰长庚，如一匹布著天。
现代文：第十九叫长庚，像一匹布附着在天上。
English: The 19th is called Chang Geng, like a horse cloth attached to the sky.

古文：见则兵起。
现代文：它一出现则战乱纷起。
English: When it appears, war breaks out.

古文：二十曰四填，星出四隅，去地六丈余，或曰可四丈。
现代文：第二十叫四填星，此星出现于四角，离地高丈多远，有人说大约是四丈。
English: The 20th is called the Four-Filled Star. This star appears in the four corners. How far is it from the ground in height? Some say it is about four feet.

古文：或曰，星大而赤，去地二丈，常以夜半时出。见，十月而兵起，皆为兵起其下。
现代文：有人说，此星大而色赤，离地两丈，常常在夜半时分出现，一出现，十月之后兵乱即起，都在它所对应的地区兴起战乱。
English: Some people say that this star is big and red, high above the ground, and often appears at midnight. As soon as it appears, there will be a war after October, and wars will arise in the regions corresponding to it.

古文：二十一曰地维藏光，出四隅。
现代文：第二十一叫地维藏光，出现于四角。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the earth is said to retain light, which appears in the four corners.

古文：或曰，大而赤，去地二三丈，如月始出。
现代文：有人说，它大而色赤，离地二三丈，像是月亮开始升起。
English: Some people say that it is big and red, two or three feet off the ground, like the moon is beginning to rise.

古文：见则下有乱，乱者亡，有德者昌。
现代文：它一出现则下方有战乱，作乱之人死亡，有德之人兴盛发达。
English: As soon as it appears, there are wars below, the perpetrators of the riots die, and the virtuous people prosper and develop.

古文：《河图》云：
现代文：《河图》中说：
English: "The River Map" says:

古文：岁星之精，流为天棓、天枪、天猾、天冲、国皇、反登、苍彗。
现代文：岁星的精华，流散为天棓、天枪、天猾、天冲、国皇、反登、苍彗众星。
English: The essence of the stars of the year is scattered among the stars of heaven, the heavenly gun, the heavenly cunning, the heavenly rush, the king of the country, the anti-climbing, and the comet.

古文：荧惑散为昭旦、蚩尤之旗、昭明、司危、天欃、赤彗。
现代文：荧惑星流散为昭旦、蚩尤之旗、昭明、司危、天欃、赤彗。
English: Fluorescent planets scattered by the stream include Zhaotan, Qiyou's Banner, Zhaoming, Sige, Tianyao, and Red Comet.

古文：填星散为五残、狱汉、大贲、昭星、绌流、旬始、蚩尤、虹蜺、击咎、黄彗。
现代文：土星散为五残、狱汉、大贲、昭星、绌流、旬始、蚩尤、虹蜺、击咎、黄彗众星。
English: Saturn is divided into five elements, the Prisoner, the Great Dragon, the Bright Star, the Stream, the Beginning of the Year, the Youth, the Rainbow, the Blame, and the Yellow Comet.

古文：太白散为天杵、天柎、伏灵、大败、司奸、天狗、天残、卒起、白彗。
现代文：太白星散为天杵、天柎、伏灵、大败、司奸、天狗、天残、卒起、白彗。
English: The too-white stars are scattered as the heavenly beacon, the heavenly beacon, the phoenix, the great defeat, the traitor, the heavenly dog, the heavenly remnant, the pawn, and the white comet.

古文：辰星散为枉矢、破女、拂枢、灭宝、绕綎、惊理、大奋祀、黑彗。
现代文：辰星散为枉矢、破女、拂枢、灭宝、绕綎、惊理、大奋祀、黑彗。
English: The stars of the hour are Wusheya, Banzhe, Wuzhu, Zhaobao, Wuchuan, Surprised, Greatly Devoted, and Black Comet.

古文：五色之彗，各有长短，曲折应象。
现代文：五色之彗，各有长短，曲曲折折顺应天象。
English: The five-coloured comet, each with its own length, twists and turns in accordance with the celestial body.

古文：汉京房著《风角书》有《集星章》，所载妖星皆见于月旁，互有五色方云，以五寅日见，各有五星所生云：
现代文：汉代京房氏著《风角书》中有《集星章》，文中所记载的妖星都出现在月亮旁边，彼此间有五色的方云，在五寅日出现，各由五星所生。
English: In "The Book of Wind Angles" written by the Han Dynasty's Kyofusa, there is a "Star-gathering Chapter." The monster stars recorded in the text all appear next to the moon, with five-colored square clouds between them. They appear on the 5th day of the 5th month, and are each born from five stars.

古文：天枪、天根、天荆、真若、天榬，天楼、天垣，皆岁星所生也。
现代文：天枪、天根、天荆、真若、天榬，天楼、天垣，都是岁星所生的。
English: Tianyu, Tiangen, Tianjing, Zhenyao, Tianyao, Tianlou, Tiange, are all born from the year star.

古文：见以甲寅，其星咸有两青方在其旁。
现代文：在甲寅日出现，这些星都有两块青色的方云在旁边。
English: Appearing on the day of the Goat, these stars have two blue square clouds next to them.

古文：天阴、晋若、官张、天惑、天崔、赤若、蚩尤，皆荧惑之所生也。
现代文：天阴、晋若、官张、天惑、天崔、赤若、蚩尤，都是荧惑之所生的。
English: Tianyin, Jinrao, Guanzhang, Tianzhao, Tiantai, Akrao, Qiuyu, are all born from fluorescence.

古文：出在丙寅日，有两赤方在其旁。
现代文：在丙寅日出现，其旁边有两块赤色的方云。
English: It appears on the day of Yin and Yang, with two red square clouds next to it.

古文：天上、天伐、从星、天枢、天翟、天沸、荆彗，皆填星所生也。
现代文：天上、天伐、从星、天枢、天翟、天沸、荆彗，都是填星所生的。
English: The heavens, the celestial path, the stars, the celestial center, the heavens, the heavens, the constellations, are all born from the stars.

古文：出在戊寅日，有两黄方在其旁。
现代文：出现在戊寅日，有两块黄色的方云在它两边。
English: Appearing on the day of Wu Yin, there are two yellow square clouds on either side of it.

古文：若星、帚星、若彗、竹彗、墙星、榬星、白雚，皆太白之所生也。
现代文：若星、帚星、若彗、竹彗、墙星、榬星、白雚，都是太白之所生的。
English: The young star, the starling, the young comet, the bamboo comet, the wall star, the starling, the egret, are all born from Taibai.

古文：出在庚寅日，有两白方在共旁。
现代文：出现在庚寅日，有两块白方的方云在旁边。
English: Appearing on the Day of the Goat, there are two white square square clouds next to it.

古文：天美、天欃、天杜、天麻、天林、天蒿、端下，皆辰星之所生也。
现代文：天美、天欃、天杜、天麻、天林、天蒿、端下，都是辰星之所生的。
English: Tianmei, Tianzhu, Tindu, Tianma, Tianlin, Tianzhu, and Dangxia are all born from the star.

古文：出以壬寅日，有两黑方在其旁。
现代文：出现在壬寅日，有两块黑色方它旁边。
English: Appeared in Ren Yin Sun, there are two black squares next to it.

古文：已前三十五星，即五行气所生，皆出于月左右方气之中，各以其所生星将出不出日数期候之。
现代文：此前所述三十五颗星，即由五行气所生，都是出现在月亮左右的方气之中，各自以其所生之星将要出现、尚未出现之时的数日之前可看到。
English: The previously mentioned thirty-five stars, that is, born from the five elements, all appear in the square around the moon, each of which can be seen a few days before its star is about to appear or has not yet appeared.

古文：当其未出之前而见，见则有水旱，兵丧，饥乱；所指亡国，失地，王死，破军，杀将。
现代文：在其未出之前出现，一出现就会有水旱灾害，有战事死亡，有饥荒动乱；所对应的国家灭亡，失掉土地，君王横死，军队失败，将领被杀。
English: Before it appears, there will be floods and droughts, war deaths, famine and turmoil; the corresponding countries will perish, lose land, the king will die violently, the army will fail, and the general will be killed.

古文：○客星
现代文：○客星
English: ○ Guest stars

古文：张衡曰： 老子四星及周伯、王蓬絮、芮各一，错乎五纬之间。
现代文：张衡说： 老子四星及周伯、王蓬絮、芮各一，错乎五纬之间。
English: Zhang Heng said: Laozi's four stars and Zhou Bo, Wang Peng Xu, and Zou Yi are one each, and they are almost five degrees apart.

古文：其见无期。
现代文：其见无期。
English: There is no end in sight.

古文：其行无度 。
现代文：其行无度 。
English: It's been going on forever.

古文：《荆州》占云： 老子星色淳白，然所见之国，为饥为凶，为善为恶，为喜为怒。
现代文：《荆州占》中说： 老子星呈淳白色，但是所出现的国度，会有饥荒有凶灾，有善有恶，有喜有怒。
English: "Jingzhou Zhan" said: Laozixing is pure white, but the country that appears will have famine and disaster, good and evil, joy and anger.

古文：周伯星黄色煌煌，所至之国大昌。
现代文：周伯星色黄而明亮，它所历经的国度会很昌盛。
English: Zhou Bo's star is yellow and bright, and the country it has passed through will be very prosperous.

古文：蓬絮星色青而荧荧然，所至之国风雨不节，焦旱，物不生，五谷不登，多蝗虫。 
现代文：蓬絮星颜色青黑且荧荧然微弱，所至之国度风雨失时，天旱物焦，万物不生，五谷不登，有严重的蝗灾。 
English: The color of the star is bluish-black and the fluorescence is weak. When the wind and rain of the country is lost, the weather is dry, the things are scorched, nothing is born, the grain is not ascended, and there is a serious locust plague.

古文：又云： 东南有三星出，名曰盗星，出则人下有大盗。
现代文：又说： 东南方有三颗星出现，其名叫盗星，出现则天下有强悍的强盗。
English: He also said: Three stars appear in the southeast, which are called the robber stars. When they appear, there will be strong robbers in the world.

古文：西南有三星出，名曰种陵，出则天下谷贵十倍。
现代文：西南方有三颗大星出现，名叫种陵，出现则天下大事谷价增长十倍。
English: In the southwest, three great stars appeared, called seedling cranes. When they appeared, the world's grain prices increased tenfold.

古文：西北三大星出而白，名曰天狗，出则人相食，大凶。
现代文：西北方有三颗大星出现，其色白，名叫天狗，出现则人吃人，天下大凶。
English: Three large stars appear in the northwest. They are white in color and are named Tengu. If they appear, people will eat each other, and the world will be in turmoil.

古文：东北有三大星出，名曰女帛，见则有大丧。 
现代文：东北方有三颗大星出现，名叫白帛，出现则有严重的死亡这事。 
English: In the northeast, three large stars appeared, called the egrets, and there was a serious death.

古文：○流星
现代文：○流星
English: ○ shooting stars

古文：流星，天使也。
现代文：流星，是天使。
English: A meteor is an angel.

古文：自上而降曰流，自下而升曰飞。
现代文：从上面降下来的叫流，从下面升上去的叫飞。
English: The stream that descends from above cries out, the one that rises from below cries out.

古文：大者曰奔，奔亦流星也。
现代文：大的叫奔，奔也是流量。
English: Big is rushing, rushing is also flow.

古文：星大者使大，星小者使小。声隆隆者，怒之象也。
现代文：星体大的使命就大，星体小的使命就小，发出的隆隆声响的，是发怒的徵象。
English: A large star has a large mission, a small star has a small mission, and a booming sound is a sign of anger.

古文：行疾者期速，行迟者期迟。
现代文：行进得快的，是期限短促，行进得缓慢的，是期限迟缓。
English: If you go fast, the deadline is short; if you go slowly, the deadline is late.

古文：大而无光者。众人之事；小而有光者，贵人之事；大而光者，其人贵且众也。
现代文：体大而无光泽的，主宰民众之事；体小而有光泽的，主宰贵人之事；又大又有光泽的，这个人高贵而且势众。
English: He that is great and of a low degree ruleth over the people: but he that is small and of a high degree ruleth over the nobles: but he that is great and of a high degree is lord of many things.

古文：乍明乍灭者，贼败成也。
现代文：乍明乍灾的，象徵贼寇或成或败。
English: The flash of lightning and sudden disaster symbolize the success or failure of the bandit.

古文：前大后小者，恐忧也；前小后大者，喜事也。蛇行者，奸事也；往疾者，往而不反也。
现代文：前面大后面小的，像徵恐惧忧愁之事；前面小后面大的，是喜事，像蛇一样行进的，是奸佞之事；过往得很快的，过去就不返回了。
English: The large in front and the small behind symbolize fear and sorrow; the small in front and the large behind are joyous events; those that travel like a snake are treacherous; those that pass quickly will not return.

古文：长者，其事长久也；短者，事疾也。
现代文：形体长的，其所发之事长久；短的，事情发生得也短促。
English: When the body is long, the things it does are long; when it is short, the things it does are short.

古文：奔星所坠，其下有兵。
现代文：奔星所坠落的地方，有战事。
English: Where the shooting star falls, there is war.

古文：无风云，有流星见，良久间乃入，为大风，发屋折木。
现代文：无风无云，有流量出现，时间很长后消失，就会有大风，毁屋折树。
English: There is no wind or cloud, there is a flow, it disappears after a long time, there will be a strong wind, destroying houses and trees.

古文：小流星百数四面行者，众庶流移之象。
现代文：有数百颗小流量在四面流行，是众生百姓迁移的象徵。
English: There are hundreds of small streams flowing on all sides, symbolizing the migration of people.

古文：流星之类，有音如炬火下地，野雉鸣，天保也；所坠国安，有喜。
现代文：流星的种类，有的声音像大火流串于地，又像野鸡鸣叫，是上天之保；所坠落的国家，有喜事。
English: The kinds of meteors, some sounding like torrents of fire streaking to the ground, and like pheasants chirping, are heaven's protection; the countries they fall on are joyful.

古文：若小流星色青赤，名曰地雁，其所坠者起兵。
现代文：如果是小流星呈青赤色的，名叫地雁，它所坠落的地方会兴起兵乱。
English: If it is a small bluish-red meteor, called a geese, the place where it falls will rise to mutiny.

古文：流星有光青赤，长二三丈，名曰天雁，军中之精华也；其国起兵，将军当从星所之。
现代文：流星有光泽颜色青赤，二三丈长，其名叫天雁，是军旅中的精华；其所对应的国家如果有战事，将军应该遵从流星所住的方向。
English: The meteor has a shiny color of blue and red, two or three meters long, its name is Tianyan, which is the essence of military travel; if there is a war in the corresponding country, the general should follow the direction in which the meteor lives.

古文：流星晖然有光，光白，长竟天者，人主之星也；主相、将军从星所之。
现代文：流星辉然有光泽，光呈白色，其长度至天者，是人主之星，主掌相，将军遵从流星之所住。
English: The meteor is brilliant and shiny, the light is white, and its length is up to the sky. It is the master star, the master palm phase, and the general obeys the meteor.

古文：飞星大如缶若甕，后皎然白，前卑后高，此谓顿顽，其所从者多死亡。
现代文：飞星体大如缶像瓮，其后皎然泛白，前面低而后面高，这叫做顿顽，跟随其后的大多死亡。
English: A flying star as big as a can looks like a dragonfly, followed by a sudden whitening, low in front and high behind, which is called a blizzard, followed by mostly death.

古文：飞星大如缶若甕，后然皎白，星灭后，白者曲环如车轮，此谓解衔，其国人相斩为爵禄。
现代文：飞星若体大如缶像瓮一样，其后蛟然泛白，此星灭后，白光成曲环形介车轮一般，这叫做解衔，其下之国人为爵禄而相互斩杀。
English: If the flying star is as big as a can, like a dragonfly, and then it suddenly turns white, after the star is extinguished, the white light will become a curved ring-shaped conveyor wheel. This is called dethronement, and the compatriots under it will kill each other for peerage.

古文：飞星大如缶若甕，其后皎然白，长数丈，星灭后，白者化为云流下，名曰大滑，所下有流血积骨。
现代文：飞星若体大如缶像瓮一样，其后蛟然泛白，其长数丈，此星灭后，白光变化为云流散而下，叫做大滑，其落下的地方人死血流，尸骨堆积。
English: If the body of a flying star is as big as a can, like a cocoon, then it suddenly turns white, and its length is a few meters. After the star is extinguished, the white light changes to a cloud and disperses downwards, which is called a large slide. Where it falls, people's blood flows and dead bones accumulate.

古文：枉矢，类流星，色苍黑，蛇行，望之如有毛，目长数匹，著天，主反萌，主射愚。
现代文：枉矢，类似流星，呈苍黑色，像蛇一样逶迤而行，看上云像是有毛，望云长有数匹，附在天上，主反萌，主射愚。
English: False arrows, similar to meteors, pale black in color, waddle like snakes, look at clouds as if they have hair, look at clouds with several long ones, attached to the sky, mainly anti-moths, mainly arrows.

古文：见则谋反之兵合射所诛，亦为以乱伐乱。
现代文：此星出现时则谋反之兵当射所诛管家人，也就是以乱讨伐乱。
English: When this star appears, the rebel soldiers should shoot the family members, that is, fight chaos with chaos.

古文：天狗，状如大奔星，色黄，有声，其止地，类狗。所坠，望之如火光，炎炎冲天，其上锐，其下员，如数顷田处。或曰，星有毛，旁有短彗，下有狗形者。
现代文：天狗，形状像大奔星，呈黄色，有声音，其所停留之地，像狗一样，坠落时，看上云像火光，明亮而冲天，其上部尖锐，下部浑圆，像几顷田地，有人说，此星有毛，旁边有短的彗尾，下方有狗的形状。
English: The celestial dog, shaped like a large star, is yellow, has a sound, its place of stay, like a dog, when falling, looks at the clouds like fire, bright and soaring, its upper part is sharp, the lower part is round, like several hectares of fields. Some people say that this star has hair, next to it is a short comet tail, and below it is the shape of a dog.

古文：或曰，星出，其状赤白有光，下即为天狗。
现代文：有人说，此星一出，其形状赤白色而有光，下面即是天狗。
English: Some people say that once this star appears, its shape is reddish-white and shiny, and the one below it is Tengu.

古文：一曰，流星有光，见人面，坠无音，若有足者，名曰天狗。
现代文：一种说法是，流星有光泽，出现在人眼前，坠落无声，好像有脚一样，星名叫天狗。
English: One theory is that meteors are shiny, appear in front of people's eyes, and fall silently, as if they have feet. The star is called Tengu.

古文：其色白，其中黄，黄如遗火状。
现代文：星呈白色，其中为黄色，其黄色像遗留的火光。
English: The star is white, of which is yellow, and its yellow is like the leftover firelight.

古文：主候兵讨贼。
现代文：像徵候望军队讨伐贼寇。
English: It is a symbol of waiting for the army to fight against the bandits.

古文：见则四方相射，千里破军杀将。
现代文：星出现则四方相互射杀，千里之地政破敌军，斩杀敌将。
English: When a star appears, the four sides shoot each other, and the local government thousands of miles away breaks the enemy army and kills the enemy general.

古文：或曰，五将斗，人相食，所往之乡有流血。
现代文：有人说，五将相斗，人彼此相食，所经过的地方人死血流。
English: Some people say that the five generals fight each other, people eat each other, and the places they pass through are full of bloodshed.

古文：其君失地，兵大起，国易政，戒守御。
现代文：那里的君主失掉国土，战事兴起，国家易主，需要戎守卫。
English: The monarchs there lost their lands, war broke out, the country changed hands, and needed to be guarded by the army.

古文：营头，有云如坏山堕，所谓营头之星，所堕，其下覆军，流血千里。
现代文：营头，有云如崩裂的山峰向下坠落，这就是所说的营头之星。所坠之地，它的下面会有败军，血流千里。
English: At the head of the camp, there is a cloud like a cracked mountain peak falling down, this is the so-called star of the head of the camp. Where it falls, there will be a defeated army below it, and blood will flow for thousands of miles.

古文：亦曰流星昼陨名营头。
现代文：又说是流星白日陨落就叫营头。
English: It is also said that if a meteor falls during the day, it is called a yakitori.

古文：○云气
现代文：○云气
English: ○Clouds

古文：瑞气：一曰庆云。
现代文：祥瑞之气：第一种叫庆云。
English: The first is called Qingyun.

古文：若烟非烟，若云非云，郁郁纷纷，萧索轮困，是谓庆云，亦曰景云。
现代文：它像是烟而又不是烟，像是云又不是云，盛多而纷繁，内中萧疏而空散，外缘如圆形的车轮，这种为庆云，又叫做景云。
English: It looks like smoke but is not smoke, like a cloud but is not a cloud. It is numerous and complex, with a sparse and empty interior, and a round wheel on the outer edge. This is Qingyun, also known as Jingyun.

古文：此喜气也，太平之应。
现代文：这表示喜气，是太平的徵兆。
English: It's a sign of joy, a sign of peace.

古文：二曰归邪。
现代文：第二咱是归邪。
English: The second is to fall into evil.

古文：如星非星，如云非云。
现代文：像星而非星，像云而非云。
English: Like a star but not a star, like a cloud but not a cloud.

古文：或曰，星有两赤彗向上，有盖，下连星。
现代文：有人说，此星有两个赤色的彗尾向上扬起，有盖，下方与星相连。
English: Some say that this star has two red comet tails that rise up, are covered, and are connected to the star below.

古文：见，必有归国者。
现代文：一出现，必定有归国之人。
English: As soon as they appear, there are bound to be returnees.

古文：三曰昌光，赤，如龙状，圣人起，帝受终，则见。
现代文：第三种叫昌光，赤色，像龙的形状；每逢圣人出现，君主继位，此星则出现
English: The third is called Chang Guang, red, dragon-like in shape; whenever a saint appears and a monarch succeeds, this star appears

古文：妖气：一曰虹蜺，日旁气也，斗之乱精。
现代文：妖佞之气：第一种叫虹蜺，是太阳旁边之气，北斗散乱之精。
English: The first one is called the Rainbow Dragonfly, which is the gas next to the sun, and the Beidou Scattering Fairy.

古文：主惑心，主内淫，主臣谋君，天子诎，后妃颛，妻不一。
现代文：象徵着惑乱人心，内部淫乱，臣下图谋君位，天子被废黜，后妃专宠，妻子不专一。
English: It symbolizes the bewilderment of the people, internal debauchery, vassals scheming for the throne, the emperor being dethroned, the empress's exclusive favorite, and the wife not being exclusive.

古文：二曰云，如狗，赤色，长尾；为乱君，为兵丧。
现代文：第二种叫牜羊云，状似狗，赤色，长尾，象徵乱国之君，象徵战乱死亡
English: The second kind is called the "goat cloud," shaped like a dog, red, with a long tail, symbolizing the ruler of a turbulent country, symbolizing death in war

古文：○十煇
现代文：○十军
English: ○The 10th Army

古文：《周礼》眡昆氏掌十煇之法，以观妖祥，辨吉凶。
现代文：《周礼》记载，眡昆氏掌十军之法，以来观察妖佞祥瑞，辨别吉凶。
English: "Weekly Rituals" records that the Shao Kun clan has been observing auspicious and inauspicious events and distinguishing between auspicious and inauspicious events ever since.

古文：一曰昆，谓阴阳五色之气，浸淫相侵。
现代文：第一叫昆，指阴阳五色之气，渐次深入，相互侵袭。
English: The first is called Kun, which refers to the yin and yang five-color qi, gradually deepening and invading each other.

古文：或曰，抱珥背璚之属，如虹而短是也。
现代文：有人说，属于日旁气抱珥和背璚之类，像虹而短的那种既是。
English: Some people say that it belongs to the sun, the wind, and the back, like the rainbow and the short one.

古文：二曰象，谓云气成形，象如赤乌，夹日以飞之类是也。
现代文：第二种叫象，指云气成形，好像是赤色之鸟，夹日而飞之类即是。
English: The second kind is called elephant, which refers to the formation of cloud gas, which looks like a red bird, such as a crane flying across the sky.

古文：三曰觿日傍气，刺日，形如童子所佩之觿。
现代文：第一叫觿，是日旁之气，直刺太阳，形状如童子所佩带的觿。
English: The first one is called the cormorant. It is the air around the sun, which pierces the sun directly. It is shaped like a cormorant worn by a boy.

古文：四曰监，谓云气临在日上也。
现代文：第四种叫监，指云气临罩在太阳之上。
English: The fourth kind is called "supervision," which refers to the clouds hovering over the sun.

古文：五曰闇，谓日月蚀，或曰脱光也。
现代文：第种是暗，指日食与月食，有人说，是失去光泽。
English: The first is dark, referring to solar eclipses and lunar eclipses, some say, is tarnished.

古文：六曰瞢，谓瞢瞢不光明也。
现代文：第六种是瞢，指月朦朦胧胧不甚光明。
English: The sixth is the waxing gibbous, meaning the moon is dim and not very bright.

古文：七曰弥，谓白虹弥天而贯日也。
现代文：第七种叫弥，指白虹弥漫苍天并穿过太阳。
English: The seventh type of yami refers to the white rainbow that fills the sky and passes through the sun.

古文：八曰序，谓气若山而在日上。
现代文：第八种叫序，指气若高山而在太阳之上。
English: The eighth kind of call sequence indicates that the breath rises like a mountain and is above the sun.

古文：或曰，冠珥背璚，重叠次序，在于日旁也。
现代文：有人说，日旁气冠珥与背璚，其次重重叠叠，在太阳之旁。
English: Some people say that the sun is next to the crown and dorsal fin of the qi, and then it is next to the sun.

古文：九曰隮，谓晕气也。
现代文：第九种叫隮，指晕气。
English: The ninth kind is called "swoon," which refers to fainting.

古文：或曰，虹也，《诗》所谓 朝隮于西 者也。
现代文：有人说，就是虹，即《诗经》中所说的 朝隮于西 。
English: Some people say that it is the rainbow, that is, the sunrise in the west mentioned in the "Song of Songs."

古文：十曰想，谓气五色有形想也，青饥，赤兵，白丧，黑忧，黄熟。
现代文：第十种叫想，指气呈五色并有形可象，青色象包饥，赤色象兵，白色象丧，黑色象忧，黄色象熟。
English: The tenth kind is called thought, and the breath is five-colored and can be seen in shape. Blue is like hunger, red is like soldiers, white is like mourning, black is like sorrow, and yellow is like ripe.

古文：或曰，想，思也，赤气为人狩之形，可思而知其吉凶也。
现代文：有人说，想，就是思，赤色是人狩猎之形，可以思考而知道它的吉凶。
English: Some people say that to think is to think, red is the shape of a man hunting, can think and know its fate.

古文：凡游气蔽天，日月失色，皆是风雨之候也，沈阴，日月俱无光，昼不见日，夜不见星，有云障之，两敌相当，阴相图议也。
现代文：凡游动天气遮蔽苍天，日月失色，都是是风雨的徵候，阴阴沉沉，日月都没有光辉，白天不见太阳，夜晚不见星星，有云障蔽着，是两敌相当，暗暗彼此图谋。
English: All wandering weather obscures the sky, the sun and the moon lose their color, are signs of wind and rain, gloomy and dull, the sun and the moon have no brilliance, the sun is not seen during the day, the stars are not seen at night, covered by a cloud barrier, the two enemies are equal, and they secretly plot against each other.

古文：日蒙蒙无光，士卒内乱。
现代文：太阳蒙蒙无光，士兵在部队作乱。
English: The sun was not shining and soldiers were fighting in the ranks.

古文：又曰，数日俱出，若斗，天下兵起，大战。
现代文：又说，几个太阳都同时出现，好像在争斗，天下有兵乱兴起，将发生大战。
English: He also said that several suns would appear at the same time, as if they were fighting, that there would be turmoil in the world, and that there would be a great war.

古文：日斗，下有拔城。
现代文：太阳相斗，下文就出现攻占城池之事。
English: The suns fight each other, and the capture of the city occurs below.

古文：日戴者，形如直状，其上微起，在日上为戴。
现代文：所谓日戴，其形呈直状，上方微微翘起，在太阳之上所以叫戴。
English: The so-called sundress, its shape is straight, the top is slightly upturned, so it is called a sundress above the sun.

古文：戴者，德也，国有喜也。
现代文：戴，是德的意思，象徵国家有喜事。
English: Dai, which means virtue, symbolizes the nation's happiness.

古文：一云，立日上为戴。
现代文：一种说法是，立在太阳之上叫戴。
English: One way to describe it is to stand on the sun and howl.

古文：青赤气抱在日上，小者为冠，国有喜事。青赤气小而交于日下为缨，青赤气小而员，一二在日下左右者为纽。
现代文：国家将有喜事。青赤之气量小而相交于太阳之下就是婴气，青赤之气量小而圆，一二围在太阳下方或左或右就是纽气。
English: The country will have a happy event. The amount of blue-red gas is small and intersected under the sun is the baby gas, the amount of blue-red gas is small and round, one or two circumferences under the sun or to the left or right is the key gas.

古文：青赤气如小半晕状，在日上为负，负者得地为喜。
现代文：青赤之气像一个小的半贺月晕之状，在太阳之上就是负气，负气意味着得到土地而为喜。
English: The blue and red qi is like a small halo around the moon. Above the sun is negative qi, and negative qi means being happy to get land.

古文：又曰，青赤气长斜倚日旁为戟。
现代文：又说，青赤之气长而斜倚在太阳之旁就是戟。
English: He also said that a blue-and-red dragonfly reclining next to the sun is a dragonfly.

古文：青赤气员而小，在日左右为珥，黄白者有喜。
现代文：青赤之气圆而小，在太阳的左右就是珥气，呈黄色者有喜事。
English: The blue-red qi is round and small, and on the right and left of the sun is the miasma, and those who are yellow have a happy event.

古文：又曰，有军，日有一珥为喜。
现代文：又说，有军事行动的话，太阳旁有一珥为喜。
English: He also said that if there is a military action, there will be joy next to the sun.

古文：在日西。西军战胜。
现代文：在太阳的西边，西军战胜。
English: On the west side of the sun, the western army won.

古文：在日东，东军战胜。
现代文：在太阳的东边，东军战胜。
English: On the eastern side of the sun, the Eastern Army won.

古文：南北亦如之。
现代文：南方北方也是这样。
English: It's the same from south to north.

古文：无军而珥，为拜将。
现代文：没有军事行动而出现了珥气，象徵着拜任将领。
English: In the absence of military action, there was a hailstorm, symbolizing the arrival of the generals.

古文：又日旁如半环向日为抱。
现代文：又有在太阳旁边如半环形的，向日而环就是抱气。
English: There is also a semi-circular shape next to the sun, and the ring towards the sun is holding the breath.

古文：青赤气如月初生，背日者为背，又曰，背气青赤而曲，外向为叛象，分为反城。璚者如带，璚在日四方。
现代文：青赤之气像是月亮初生，背日而环就是背气。又说，背气呈青赤色而弯曲的，向外弯曲是叛乱之象，分开就是覆城之象，璚气象带子一样，在太阳四方。
English: The bluish-reddish gas is like the first-born of the moon, and the ring on the back of the sun is the back gas. It is also said that the back gas is bluish-reddish and curved, and the outward curvature is the image of rebellion, and the separation is the image of covering the city. Like the meteorological band, the sun is in all directions.

古文：青赤气长而立日旁为直，日旁有一直，敌在一旁欲自立，从直所击者胜。
现代文：青赤之气长而立于日旁就是直气，太阳旁有一直气，敌人在一旁想要自立，顺向直气所打击对象胜利。
English: Blue and red qi long and standing next to the sun is straight qi, there is straight qi next to the sun, the enemy wants to stand up on the side, and the object hit by straight qi wins.

古文：日旁有二直三抱，欲自立者不成，顺抱击者胜，杀将。
现代文：太阳旁边有二直气三抱气，想要自立者不成事，顺向抱气打击者胜，斩杀将领。
English: Next to the sun, there are two positive and three negative energies. Those who want to be self-reliant will not succeed, those who follow the positive energy will win, and kill the general.

古文：气形三角，在日西方为提，青赤气横在日上下为格。
现代文：云气形成三角状，在太阳的四方就是提气，青赤之气横在太阳上下是格气。
English: The cloud gas forms a triangular shape. In the four sides of the sun is the lifting gas, and the blue-red gas is the interstellar gas above and below the sun.

古文：气如半晕，在日下为承。
现代文：云气像半晕状，在太阳之下是承气。
English: The gas cloud is semi-circular in shape, and under the sun it is a carrier gas.

古文：承者，臣承君也。
现代文：承，就是臣下秉承君主。
English: Succession means that the vassals follow the monarch.

古文：又曰，日下有黄气三重若抱，名曰承福，人主有吉喜，且得地。
现代文：又说，太阳之下有三屋黄气像环抱一样，名字叫承福，预示人主有吉喜之事，而且将得到土地。
English: He also said that under the sun, there are three houses of yang qi, which are like embracing each other. The name is Cheng Fu, which indicates that the owner will have good luck and will get land.

古文：青白气如履，在日下者为履。
现代文：青白色的云气像鞋子的形状，在太阳下方的就是履气。
English: The bluish-white clouds are shaped like shoes, and just below the sun is the trailing wind.

古文：日旁抱五重，战顺抱者胜。
现代文：太阳旁边环抱着五层云气，若有战争，顺向抱气者胜利。
English: The sun is surrounded by five layers of clouds. If there is a war, the one who follows the direction of the clouds will win.

古文：日一抱一背，为破走。抱者，顺气也；背者，逆气也。
现代文：太阳旁一包气一背气，是破走之气，抱，是顺气；背是逆气。
English: Beside the sun, a pack of air and a back of air are the air of breaking away, the embrace is the favorable air; the back is the adverse air.

古文：两军相当，顺抱击逆者胜，故曰破走。
现代文：两军相对，顺向抱气者攻击逆向者而胜，所以主是破走。
English: The two armies are opposed to each other, and the one with a positive spirit attacks the one with a negative spirit and wins, so the main thing is to break away.

古文：日抱且两珥，一虹贯抱至日，顺虹击者胜，杀将。
现代文：太阳旁有抱气并且有两珥气，一条虹贯穿抱气直达日旁，顺虹而击者必胜，斩杀将领。
English: Beside the sun there is a wind and there are two winds, a rainbow runs through the wind straight to the sun, whoever hits the rainbow will win and kill the general.

古文：日抱两珥且璚，二虹贯抱至日，顺虹击者胜。
现代文：太阳被两珥气环抱并有璚气出现，二条长虹贯穿抱气直达日旁，顺虹而攻者必胜。
English: The sun is encircled by two rays of helium and helium appears. Two long rainbows run through the embrace and reach the sun. Whoever follows the rainbow and attacks will win.

古文：日重抱，内有璚，顺抱击者胜。
现代文：日旁抱气重叠，内中还有璚气，顺抱而击者必胜。
English: The sun and the wind are overlapping, and there is a gust of wind in the middle. Whoever embraces and strikes will win.

古文：亦曰，军内有欲反者。
现代文：又说，预示军中有想谋反的人。
English: He also said that it indicates that there are people in the army who want to rebel.

古文：日重抱，左右二珥，有白虹贯抱，顺抱击胜，得二将。
现代文：太阳被抱气重围，左右有二珥气，又有白虹贯穿抱气，顺抱而击者必胜，获取两将。
English: The sun is surrounded by two halves, with two halves on the left and right, and a white rainbow runs through the two halves. Whoever embraces the two halves will win and obtain the two stars.

古文：有三虹，得三将。
现代文：有三条长虹，获取三将。
English: There are three long rainbows, get three generals.

古文：日抱黄白润泽，内赤外青，天子有喜，有和亲来降者；军不战，敌降，军罢。
现代文：日旁之抱气呈黄白之色且很润泽，里面赤红名呈青色，预示天子有喜事，有前来投降和亲的人；部队不用开战，敌军就投降了，战事结束。
English: Beside the sun, the atmosphere is yellow-white and very moist, and inside the red-red name is blue, indicating that there is a happy event, and there are people who have come to surrender and relatives; the troops do not have to go to war, the enemy army surrenders, and the war is over.

古文：色青黄，将喜；赤，将兵争，白，将有丧，黑，将死。
现代文：颜色青黄，将有喜事；赤红，将有战争；呈白色，将有丧事；呈黑色，将会死人。
English: If it is blue and yellow, there will be joy; if it is red and red, there will be war; if it is white, there will be mourning; if it is black, there will be death.

古文：日重抱且背，顺抱击者胜，得地，若有罢师。
现代文：太阳被抱气重围且有两背气，顺抱而击者必胜，获得土地，像有疲惫之师。
English: The sun is heavily encircled and has two backs. Those who embrace and strike will win and gain land, like a tired teacher.

古文：日重抱，抱内外有璚，两珥，顺抱击者胜，破军，军中不和，不相信。
现代文：太阳被抱气重围，抱气内外有璚气，两珥气，顺抱而击者必胜，失败之军，军中不和，彼此没有诚信。
English: The sun is encircled by the embracing spirit, the embracing spirit has its own internal and external evil spirits, two evil spirits, the one who embraces and strikes is sure to win, the army of defeat, discord in the army, and there is no integrity in each other.

古文：日旁有气，员而周匝，内赤外青，名为晕。
现代文：太阳之旁有云气，圆而环绕四周，内呈赤色外呈青色，名叫晕。
English: Beside the sun there is a cloud, round and encircling, reddish within and blue without, called the halo.

古文：日晕者，军营之象。周环匝日，无厚薄，敌与军势齐等。
现代文：日晕，是军营的象徵，从四面环绕太阳，没有厚薄之别，敌军与自己力量均衡齐等。
English: The sun halo is the symbol of the military camp. It surrounds the sun on all sides. There is no difference between thick and thin, and the enemy forces are equal to their own forces.

古文：若无军在外，天子失御，民多叛。
现代文：若没有军队在外，天子则失去了控制，百姓多生叛乱。
English: If there is no army outside, the Son of Heaven will lose control, and the people will rebel.

古文：日晕有五色，有喜；不得五色者有忧。
现代文：日晕出现五种颜色，有喜事；没有五色的则有忧患。
English: If the sun's halo appears in five colors, there will be joy; if it does not appear in five colors, there will be sorrow.

古文：凡占，两军相当，必谨审日月晕气，知其所起，留止远近，应与不应，疾迟，大小，厚薄，长短，抱背为多小，有无，虚实，久亟，密疏，泽枯。
现代文：凡是占卜，当两军力量相当时，一定要谨慎地审视日月这晕气，明白它们从何而起，其停留之远近，应与不应，疾速迟缓，形体大小，厚薄，长短，抱将各为多少，有与无，虚与实，长久与短促，密集与疏散，润泽与干枯。
English: In all divination, when the strength of the two armies is equal, it is necessary to carefully examine the sun and the moon, to understand where they come from, how far they stay, should and should not, rapidity and slowness, body size, thickness, length, how much they will hold each other, with and without, virtual and real, long and short, dense and dispersed, moist and dry.

古文：相应等者势等。
现代文：彼此相应等的势均力敌。
English: They are evenly matched opponents.

古文：近胜远，疾胜迟，大胜小，厚胜薄，长胜短，抱胜背，多胜少，有胜无，实胜虚，久胜亟，密胜疏，泽胜枯。
现代文：近者胜远者，疾速者胜迟缓者，大胜小，厚胜薄，长胜短，抱气胜背气，多胜少，有胜无，实胜虚，久胜短，密胜疏，泽胜枯。
English: The near wins over the far, the swift over the slow, the big over the small, the thick over the thin, the long over the short, the high over the low, the many over the few, the true over the false, the long over the short, the close over the loose, and the thin over the thin.

古文：重背，大破；重抱为和亲；抱多，亲者益多；背为天下不和，分离相去，背于内者离于内，背于外者离于外也。
现代文：背气重叠，将会大败；抱气重叠为和亲，抱气越多，亲和的人就越多。背气预示着天下不和，分散背离而彼此相去，北气在内的离散于内，背气在外的离散于外。
English: If there is an overlap of enmity, there will be a big defeat; if there is an overlap of enmity, there will be an affinity. The more there is an affinity, the more people there will be. Enmity portends discord in the world, dispersion and departure from each other, dispersion within, including the north, and dispersion without, including the south.

古文：○杂气
现代文：○杂气
English: ○ Miscellaneous gases

古文：天子气，内赤外黄，四方所发之处当有王者。
现代文：天子之气，内呈赤色而外呈黄色，四方所出发现的地方会产生君王。
English: The spirit of the son of heaven, which is red on the inside and yellow on the outside, emanates from the four directions, and wherever it is found, it produces kings.

古文：若天子欲有游往处，其地亦先发此气。
现代文：如果天子想去巡游某地，那个地方也会预先出现这种气。
English: If the heavenly son wants to go on a tour of a certain place, that place will also have this kind of qi in advance.

古文：或如城门隐隐在气雾中，恆带杀气森森然。
现代文：有的像是城门隐隐约约笼在雾气中，永远带有一股森森然的杀气。
English: Some of them look like the city gate is vaguely caged in the fog, always with a pervasive murderous atmosphere.

古文：或如华盖在雾气中，或气象青衣人无手，在日西，或如龙马，或杂色郁郁冲天者，此皆帝王气。
现代文：有的像是车上的伞盖笼在雾气中，有的气像一个无手的青衣人，在太阳之西，有的像龙马，有的颜色混杂郁郁葱葱直冲苍天，这者是帝王之气。
English: Some are like umbrella covers on a car in the fog, some are like a handless man in blue, in the west of the sun, some are like dragons, some are a mixture of colors, lush and lush, straight up to the sky, this is the emperor's breath.

古文：猛将之气，如龙，如猛兽；或如火烟之状；或白如粉沸；或如火光之状，夜照人；或白而赤气绕之，或如山林竹木，或紫黑如门上楼；或上黑下赤，状似黑旌；或如张弩；或如埃尘，头锐而卑，本大而高。
现代文：猛将之气，像是龙，又像是猛兽；有的像烟之状；有的像白色粉末沸涌；有的像是火光之状，夜晚能够照人；有的色白而赤色这气环绕，有的像山林的竹木，有的呈紫黑色像门上之楼；有的上面呈黑色下面呈赤色，形状像是黑色的旌旗；有的像是张开的弓弩；有的像是尘埃，头部尖而低，根部大而高。
English: Some are like smoke, some are like boiling white powder, some are like firelight that illuminates the night, some are white and red, some are like bamboo in the mountain forest, some are purple-black like the building above the door, some are black above and red below, shaped like a black banner, some are like an open bow, and some are like dust, the head is pointed and low, and the roots are large and high.

古文：此皆猛将之气也。
现代文：这都是猛将之气。
English: It's all the makings of a monster.

古文：气发渐渐如云，变作山形，将有深谋。
现代文：此气出现之后渐渐堆积如云，变化为山的形状，将会产生深远的计谋。
English: After the appearance of this gas, it gradually accumulates like a cloud and changes to the shape of a mountain, which will produce far-reaching strategies.

古文：凡军胜之气，如堤如坂，前后磨地。
现代文：凡是军队取胜之气，就像是堤坝像是坂坡，其前后磨地。
English: The winning spirit of any army is like a dike, like a slope, which grinds back and forth.

古文：或如水光；将军勇，士卒猛。
现代文：有的像火光；预示将领勇敢，士兵凶猛。
English: Some are like sparks of fire, foretelling that generals will be brave and soldiers fierce.

古文：或如山堤，山上若林木；将士骁勇。
现代文：有的像山堤，山上好像是林木；预示将士骁勇。
English: Some are like mountain walls, and on the mountains are like trees of the forest, foreshadowing the coming of the mighty warriors.

古文：或如埃尘粉沸，其色黄白；或如人持斧向敌；或如蛇举首向敌，或气如覆舟，云如牵牛；或有云如斗鸡，赤白相随，在气中；或发黄气，皆将士精勇。
现代文：有的像尘埃飞扬沸涌，呈黄白色；有的像人手持大斧砍向敌军；有的像蛇举首噬敌；有的气像翻船，有的云像牛；还有的云像争斗之鸡，赤色与白色相随，翻滚于气中；有的发出黄色之气，这都象徵着将士精悍勇猛。
English: Some are like swirling clouds of dust, yellow and white; some are like a man holding a large axe and slashing at the enemy army; some are like a snake raising its head and devouring the enemy; some are like a capsized ship, some clouds are like cows; some clouds are like fighting chickens, red and white, rolling in the air; some emit yellow gas, all of which symbolize brave and courageous soldiers.

古文：凡气上黄下白，名曰善气；所临之军，敌欲求和退。
现代文：凡是气，若上黄下白，名叫善气；所临罩的军队，其敌人希望求和而退。
English: All qi that is yellow on top and white on the bottom is called good qi. When an army is encircled, its enemy hopes to sue for peace and withdraws.

古文：凡负气，如马肝色，或如死灰色；或类偃盖，或类偃鱼；或黑气如坏山坠军上者，名曰营头之气；或如群牛群猪，在气中。
现代文：大凡负气，如同马肝的颜色，或像死灰色；有的好像是偃伏的伞盖，有的像是偃伏的鱼；有的黑气像是倒塌的山峰坠落在军队之上，名叫营头之气；有的像一群群羊和猪，处于大气之中。
English: There are many negative gasses, like the color of horse liver, or like dead gray; some are like a crouching umbrella cover, some are like a crouching fish; some black gasses are like a collapsed mountain falling on an army, called the camp head gasses; some are like a herd of sheep and pigs, in the atmosphere.

古文：此衰气也。
现代文：这时衰气。
English: That's when I lost it.

古文：或如悬衣，如人相随；或纷纷如转蓬，或如扬灰；或云如卷席，如匹布乱穰者，皆为败征。
现代文：有的像悬挂着的衣服，像人与人相随，有的乱纷纷如随风飘转的蓬草，有的像扬起的灰尘；有的云像卷起的席子，又像布匹杂乱盛多，都是失败的徵兆。
English: Some are like hanging clothes, like people following each other, some are disorderly like fluffy grass floating with the wind, some are like raised dust, some clouds are like rolled-up mats, and there is a lot of clutter like cloth, all of which are signs of failure.

古文：气如系牛，如人卧，如双蛇，如飞鸟，如决堤垣，如坏屋，如惊鹿相逐，如两鸡相向，此皆为败军之气。
现代文：其气像牛，像卧倒的人，像双蛇，飞鸟，如决口的堤坝，像倒塌的房屋，像受惊的鹿群彼此相逐，像两只鸡相对而视，这都是败军之气。
English: Its breath is like that of an ox, a fallen man, a pair of snakes, a flying bird, a burst dam, a collapsed house, a herd of frightened deer chasing each other, two chickens looking at each other. It is the breath of a defeated army.

古文：凡降人气，如人十十五五，皆叉手低头；又云，如人叉手相向。
现代文：凡是向投降之气，就像人十五成群，都叉着手，低着头；又说，像人叉着手面面相对。
English: Everyone who surrenders to the spirit is like fifteen groups of people, all with their hands crossed and heads bowed; again, like people with their hands crossed facing each other.

古文：或气如黑山，以黄为缘者，皆欲降伏之象也。
现代文：有的气像黑山，以黄色为边的，都是想要降伏的徵兆。
English: Some are like Montenegro, bordered by yellow, a sign of wanting to surrender.

古文：凡坚城之上，有黑云如星，名曰军精。
现代文：大凡坚固的城池之上，有像星星一样的黑云，名叫军精。
English: Above the immensely strong city, there is a black cloud like a star, called the army spirit.

古文：或白气如旌旗，或青云黄云临城。
现代文：有的是白气如旌旗一般，有的是青云黄云临罩城上。
English: Some are white as snow, some are blue and yellow clouds hovering over the city.

古文：皆有大喜庆。
现代文：都是大喜大庆的事情。
English: It's all a matter of great joy.

古文：或气青色如牛头触人，或城上气如烟火。
现代文：有的气呈青色如牛头触人，有的城上之气如同烟火。
English: Some of the gas is blue, like a cow's head, and some of the gas on the city is like fireworks.

古文：如双蛇，如杵形向外，或有云分为两彗状者，皆不可攻。
现代文：如同双蛇，如春杵之形而向外，还有的云分为两个彗尾的形状，都预示着不可攻取。
English: Like the double snake, like the shape of the spring egret and outwards, there are also clouds divided into the shape of two comet tails, all portending impregnability.

古文：凡屠城之气，或赤如飞鸟，或赤气如败车，或有赤黑气如狸皮斑，或城中气聚如楼，出见于外；营上有云如众人头，赤色，其城营皆可屠。
现代文：大凡将被屠城的气，有的呈赤色形如飞鸟，有的是赤色之气形如破败之车，还有的呈赤黑色、气似狸皮之斑点，有的城池之中云气聚集如楼，溢出现出现在城外；营房之上有聚云像是众多人头，呈赤色，这些城池营垒都可屠杀。
English: The general will be slaughtered by the qi of the city, some of which are red in shape like birds, some are red in shape like a broken car, and some are reddish-black, qi-like spots of raccoon skin. In some cities, clouds gather in the middle of the city, such as buildings, overflowing and appearing outside the city; above the barracks, there are clouds like many human heads, red in color. These city camps can be slaughtered.

古文：气如雄雉临城，其下必有降者。
现代文：其气像是雄雉临其城上，它的下面一定会有败降之人。
English: Its spirit is like that of a great warrior who has come to the city, and there will certainly be a defeated person beneath it.

古文：凡伏兵有黑气，浑浑员长，赤气在其中：或白气粉沸，起如楼状；或如幢节状，在乌云中；或如赤杵在乌云中，或如乌人在赤云中。
现代文：大凡伏兵有黑气，浑浑沌沌又长又圆，赤色之气在其中：有的是白气飞扬沸涌，升起像楼的形状；有的像幢幡符节的形状，在乌云之中；有的如赤杵在乌云之中，有的像是黑人立于赤云之中。
English: The great ambush has a black aura, the chaos is long and round, and the red aura is in it: some white aura is flying and surging, rising in the shape of a tower; some like the shape of a flag knot, in the dark clouds; some like a red dragonfly in the dark clouds, and some like a black man standing in the red clouds.

古文：凡暴兵气，白，如瓜蔓连结，部队相逐，须臾罢而复出；或白气如仙人，如仙人衣，千万连结，部队相逐，罢而复兴，当有千里兵来。
现代文：凡暴兵之气，色白，像瓜蔓一样连结在一起，像部队一样彼此相逐，瞬息之间疲惫而退出；有的白气像仙人一般，像仙人的衣服，千千万万连结在一起，部队彼此相逐，疲惫而又兴起，会有千里之外的军队前来。
English: Some white spirits are like fairies, like the clothes of fairies, thousands and thousands of them are linked together, the troops are chasing each other, tired and rising, and there will be an army coming from thousands of miles away.

古文：或气如人持刀楯，云如人，色赤，所临城邑有卒兵至。
现代文：有的云气像人手持刀盾，云形似人，呈赤色，所临罩的城邑有军队来到。
English: And the appearance of the clouds was like men with swords and shields in their hands; and the appearance of the clouds was like the appearance of men, and they were red.

古文：或赤气如人持节，兵来未息。
现代文：有的赤色之气像人手持节，像徵兵来而战事未息。
English: Some of the red gas is like a person holding a festival, like a conscript coming and the war is not over.

古文：云如方虹。
现代文：云气像方虹一样。
English: The clouds look like rainbows.

古文：此皆有暴兵之象。
现代文：这都是有暴虐之兵的徵兆。
English: These are all signs of a tyrannical military.

古文：凡战气，青白如膏；如人无头；如死人卧；如丹蛇，赤气随之，必大战，杀将。
现代文：大凡战争之气，青白色介膏脂；又像是人而无头；像是死人偃卧；像是红色的蛇，赤色之气又随之，一定会有大战，斩杀将领。
English: The great spirit of war, the bluish-white goo; also like a man without a head; like a dead man lying; like a red snake, the red spirit follows, there will definitely be a great war, killing generals.

古文：四望无云，见赤气如狗入营，其下有流血。
现代文：四面远望而元云，只见赤气形似狗而流入营中，其临罩之下必会流血。
English: Looking far and wide, I saw the red gas, shaped like a dog, flow into the camp. Under its protective cover, blood would surely flow.

古文：凡连阴十日，昼不见日，夜不见月，乱风四起，欲雨而无雨，名曰蒙，臣有谋。
现代文：凡连阴十数日，白天见不到太阳，夜晚见不到月亮，乱风从四面刮起，想要下雨而又没有雨，名叫蒙，臣下会有阴谋。
English: Whenever it is cloudy for ten days in a row, the sun cannot be seen during the day, the moon cannot be seen at night, the stormy wind blows from all sides, it wants to rain but there is no rain, it is called monsoon, and the vassals will have a conspiracy.

古文：雾气若昼若夜，其色青黄，更相奄冒，乍合乍散，亦然。
现代文：雾气濛濛，像是白天又像是夜晚，呈青黄色，彼此更叠掩映，乍合乍散，也是这样。
English: The fog is thick, as if it were day and as if it were night, bluish-yellow, overlapping each other, merging and dispersing, and so on.

古文：视四方常有大云五色具者，其下贤人隐也。
现代文：看到四方常有大块云朵并五色俱全的情况，其下有贤德之人隐居。
English: It is often seen that there are large clouds in all directions with all five colors, under which virtuous people live in seclusion.

古文：青云润泽蔽日，在西北，为举贤良。
现代文：青云润泽具遮蔽太阳，位于西北方，是推举贤良之人的像徵。
English: Located in the northwest, it is a symbol of the election of a virtuous person.

古文：云气如乱穰，大风将至，视所从来。
现代文：云气又乱又密，将有大风来临，看它来的方向而躲避它。
English: The clouds are turbulent and dense, there will be a strong wind coming, look at the direction it is coming from and avoid it.

古文：云甚润而厚，大雨必暴至。
现代文：云非常光泽而且厚密，大暴雨会突然来临。
English: The clouds are very shiny and thick, and heavy rainstorms can come suddenly.

古文：四始之日，有黑云气如阵，厚大重者，多雨。
现代文：四始这一天，有黑色云气如同兵阵，厚大而且密重，肯定雨水多。
English: At the beginning of this day, there was a black cloud like a line of soldiers, thick and dense, and there was definitely a lot of rain.

古文：气若雾非雾，衣冠不濡，见则其城带甲而趣。日出没时有雾气横截之，白者丧，乌者惊，三日内雨者各解。
现代文：气像是雾又不是雾，衣冠不会被浸湿，一旦出现那个城邑就会迅速发生战事，黑色有的惊变，三天之内下雨就各自散开了。
English: The atmosphere is like a fog, but it is not a fog, the clothes will not be soaked, and once the city appears, there will be a quick war, a sudden change of black, and the rain will disperse separately within three days.

古文：有云如蛟龙，所见处将军失魄。
现代文：有云出现似蛟龙一般，所出现的地方将军失魂落魄。
English: There are clouds that appear like dragons, and the local generals who appear are distraught.

古文：有云如鹄尾来廕国上，三日亡。
现代文：有云出现像鹄尾来荫蔽国土，三是之内必定灭亡。
English: When clouds appear, they are like the tails of a rooster, overshadowing the land. Within three days they will be destroyed.

古文：有云赤黄色四塞，终日竟夜照地者，大臣纵恣。
现代文：出现赤黄色的云堵塞四方，整日整夜照临大地，预示大臣纵横恣虐。
English: A reddish-yellow cloud appeared to block the four directions, shining on the earth all day and all night, foreshadowing the minister's arbitrary abuse.

古文：有云如气，昧而浊，贤人去，小人在位。
现代文：云像气一样，暗昧而且浑浊，贤人离去，小人在位。
English: Clouds are like the wind, dark and turbid. Wise men depart, but fools remain.

古文：凡白虹者，百殃之本，众乱所基。
现代文：凡是白虹，是各种灾祸的由来，众民祸乱的根基。
English: The white rainbow is the origin of all kinds of disasters, and the foundation of the people's calamity.

古文：雾者，众邪之气，阴来冒阳。
现代文：雾，是众邪之气，是阴气来冒犯阳气。
English: Fog is the air of many evils, it is the yin to offend the yang.

古文：凡白虹雾，奸臣谋君，擅权立威。
现代文：凡是白虹雾，预示着奸臣图谋君主，擅夺权位树立己威。
English: Whenever there is white rainbow mist, it indicates that treacherous vassals are plotting against the monarch, usurping power and establishing their own authority.

古文：昼雾夜明，臣志得申。
现代文：白昼有雾夜晚明亮，臣下的心志会得以伸展。
English: When the day is foggy and the night is bright, the spirit of the vassals will be expanded.

古文：凡夜雾白虹见，臣有忧；昼雾白虹见，君有忧。虹头尾至地，流血之象。
现代文：凡夜间有雾而白虹出现的，君主有忧难。长虹头尾至地，是死人流血的徵象。
English: Whenever there is fog at night and a white rainbow appears, the monarch is saddened. The long rainbow stretching from head to tail to the ground is a symbol of the bloodshed of the dead.

古文：凡雾气不顺四时，逆相交错，微风小雨，为阴阳气乱之象。
现代文：凡是雾气没有顺应车时，相互违逆交错，有微风小雨，是阴阳二气相乱之象。
English: Whenever the fog does not conform to the car, mutual violations and reversals are interlaced, there is a breeze and light rain, which is a sign of the chaos of yin and yang.

古文：积日不解，昼夜昏暗，天下欲分离。
现代文：连续好几天不散去，昼夜昏暗，是天下将要分离的徵象。
English: For several days in a row, it does not disperse, and day and night are dark, which is a sign that the world will be separated.

古文：凡天地四方昏蒙若下尘，十日五日已上，或一月，或一时，雨水沾衣而有土，名曰霾。
现代文：凡是天地四方昏暗朦朦像是下尖土一样，达十天五天以上，或者一个月，或者一个季度，雨水并不沾衣而有尖土，名叫霾。
English: Whenever the sky and the earth are dark and hazy in all directions, like the lower pointed soil, for more than ten days, five days, or a month, or a quarter, the rainwater does not stick to the clothes, but there is pointed soil, called haze.

古文：故曰，天地霾，君臣乖。
现代文：所以说，天地有阴霾，君臣相乖逆。
English: Therefore, it is said that there is haze in heaven and earth, and princes and ministers are pitted against each other.

古文：凡海旁蜄气象楼台，广野气成宫阙，北夷之气如牛羊群畜穹庐，南夷之气类舟船幡旗。
现代文：凡是海旁蜃气呈现楼台的形状，广野之气呈现宫阙状，北夷之气有如牛羊群畜穹庐之状，南夷之气类似舟船幡旗之状。
English: Generally, the seaside miasma takes the shape of a tower, the air of the open country takes the shape of a palace, the air of the north is like a dome of cattle and sheep, and the air of the south is similar to the shape of a boat flag.

古文：自华以南，气下黑上赤；嵩高、三河之郊，气正赤；恆山之北，气青；勃碣海岱之间，气皆正黑；江淮之间，气皆白；东海气如员簦；附汉河水，气如引布；江汉气劲如杼，济水气如黑，渭水气如狼白尾，淮南气如白羊，少室气如白兔青尾，恆山气如黑牛青尾。
现代文：从华山以南，气色下黑上赤；嵩高、三河之郊，气呈正赤色；恒山之北，气呈青色；勃、碣、海、岱之间，气都是黑色；江淮之间，气都是白色；东海之气像是圆形的竹笠；附于汉水，黄河，其气如张开的布匹；长江、汉水之气劲如户杼，济水之气如黑犭屯，渭水之气如白狼的尾巴，淮南之气如白羊，少室之气如白兔而青尾，恒山之气如黑牛而青尾。
English: From the south of Mount Huashan, the qi color is black to red; from the suburbs of Songgao and Sanhe, the qi color is red; from the north of Hengshan, the qi color is blue; between the mountains, rivers, seas and lakes, the qi color is black; between the rivers and lakes, the qi color is white; in the East China Sea, the qi color is like a round bamboo hat; attached to the Han River and the Yellow River, the qi color is like an open cloth; in the Yangtze River and the Han River, the qi color is like a house curtain; in the water supply, the qi color is

古文：东夷气如树，西夷气如室屋，南夷气如阇台，或类舟船。
现代文：东夷之气如树，西夷之气如室屋，南夷之气如城门之台，有的类似舟船。
English: The spirit of the eastern barbarians is like a tree, the spirit of the western barbarians is like a room, and the spirit of the southern barbarians is like the platform of the city gate, and some are similar to boats.

古文：阵云如立垣。
现代文：阵云像是直立的干部墙垣。
English: The phalanx of clouds looks like an upright wall of cadres.

古文：杼轴云类轴，搏，两端兑。
现代文：杼轴云类似轴，椭圆形，两头尖。
English: An axial cloud is similar to an axis, elliptical in shape, with two points.

古文：杓云如绳，居前亘天，其半半天；其者类阙旗故。
现代文：杓云如绳，在前面横亘全天，它的一半也有半天宽；这时由于它的屈虹像缺损的旗子的缘故。
English: The cirrus cloud is like a rope, stretching across the whole sky in front of it, and half of it is half a sky wide; at this time, because of its bent rainbow, it looks like a defective flag.

古文：钩云句曲。
现代文：钩云像钩子般弯曲。
English: The hook cloud is curved like a hook.

古文：诸此云见，以五色占。
现代文：这些云出现的时候，要用五色一起占卜。
English: When these clouds appear, it is necessary to use the five colors together for divination.

古文：而泽抟密，其见动人，乃有兵必起，合斗其直。
现代文：而云色亮泽，椭圆或密集在一起，它一出现就能耸动人心，则必有战争兴起，全门于所对应之地。
English: But if the clouds are shiny, elliptical or dense together, it can be sensational as soon as it appears, then there must be a war, the whole door is in the corresponding place.

古文：云气如三匹帛，广前兑后，大军行气也。
现代文：云气像三匹帛布，前面宽广，后面尖锐，是大部队行动的云象。
English: The clouds are like three horses, broad at the front and sharp at the back. They are the clouds of a large army in action.

古文：韩云如布，赵云如牛，楚云如日，宋云如车，鲁云如马，卫云如犬，周云如车轮，秦云如行人，魏云如鼠，郑云如绛衣，越云如龙，蜀云如囷。
现代文：韩地之云像布，赵地之云像牛，楚地之云像日，宋地之云像车，鲁地之云像马，卫地之云像狗，周地之云像车轮，秦地之云像行人，魏地之云像鼠，郑地之云像绛色之衣，越地之云像是龙，蜀地之云像是囷仓。
English: Han clouds are like cloth, Zhao clouds are like cattle, Chu clouds are like the sun, Song clouds are like chariots, Lud clouds are like horses, Wei clouds are like dogs, Zhou clouds are like wheels, Qin clouds are like pedestrians, Wei clouds are like mice, Zheng clouds are like colorful clothes, Yue clouds are like dragons, and Shu clouds are like warehouses.

古文：车气乍高乍下，往往而聚。
现代文：车驾的云气忽高忽低，往往聚在一起。
English: The cloudiness of the car ride fluctuates from high to low, often coming together.

古文：骑气卑而布。
现代文：骑队之气低而广。
English: The spirit of the cavalry is low and broad.

古文：卒气搏。
现代文：士卒之气专搏扭曲。
English: The morale of the soldiers is distorted.

古文：前卑后高者，疾。
现代文：前低后高的云气飞行疾速。
English: Before low and after high, clouds are flying at a rapid speed.

古文：前方而高后锐而卑者，却。
现代文：前面方而高、后面锐而低的云气倒退着飞行。
English: The clouds, high in the front and sharp and low in the back, fly backwards.

古文：其气平者其行徐。前高后卑者，不止而返。
现代文：那些平直的云气行速舒缓，前高而后低的云气，不会停留而向后后退返。
English: Those flat clouds are slow moving, high in front and low behind, they don't linger and recede.

古文：校骑之气，正苍黑，长数百丈。
现代文：校骑之气，呈正苍黑色，长数百丈。
English: It's like a schoolboy riding a horse. It's completely black and hundreds of feet long.

古文：游兵之气如彗扫，一云长数百丈，无根本。
现代文：游兵之气好像彗星扫过，一说长数百丈，没有根基。
English: The wanderer's breath sweeps like a comet, hundreds of feet long, without a base.

古文：平视则千里，举目望即五百里；仰瞻中天，即百里内。
现代文：凡是占候云气之法，气开始出现时，像是云而不是云，像是雾而不是雾，仿佛像是能看见。
English: When the qi begins to appear, it is like a cloud but not a cloud, like fog but not fog, like being able to see.

古文：平望，桑榆间二千里；登高而望，下属地者，三千里。敌在东，日出候之；在南，日中候之，在西，日入候之；在北，夜半候之。
现代文：开始出现时阴森森，在桑榆树间二千里。敌军在东方，日出之时进行占候；在南方，太阳中之时进行占候；在西方，日落之时进行占候；在北方，夜半之时进行占候。
English: At the beginning of the appearance, it was gloomy, and there were two thousand li between the mulberry trees. The enemy army performed divination in the east, at sunrise; in the south, in the sun; in the west, at sunset; and in the north, at midnight.

古文：军上气，高胜下，厚胜薄，实胜虚，长胜短，泽胜枯。
现代文：军上之气，高者胜低者，厚者胜薄者，实者胜虚者，长者胜短者，亮泽者胜枯涸者。
English: The spirit of the army, the higher one wins over the lower one, the thick one wins over the thin one, the real one wins over the weak one, the old one wins over the short one, the shiny one wins over the dry one.

古文：气见以知大，占期内有大风雨，久阴，则灾不成。
现代文：云气出现以知大，占卜其内有大风雨，长久阴天，则构不成灾。
English: If clouds appear in Zhida, there will be heavy wind and rain in the divination, and if it is cloudy for a long time, it will not be a disaster.

古文：◎史传事验
现代文：◎晋书史传事验翻译
English: ◎Translation of the History of the Jin Dynasty

古文：○天变
现代文：○天变
English: ○ A sudden change

古文：惠帝元康二年二月，天西北大裂。
现代文：惠帝元康二年二月，天西天空大裂。
English: In February of the second year of Hui Di Yuan Kang, the western sky cracked.

古文：案刘向说： 天裂，阳不足，地动，阴有余。 
现代文：案刘向说： 天裂是阳气不足，地动是阴气有余。 
English: Liu Xiang said: The sky crack is a lack of yang, and the earth movement is a surplus of yin.

古文：是时人主昏瞀，妃后专制。
现代文：这时人主昏庸不明，后妃专权。
English: At this time, it was unclear who was in charge, and the empress had absolute power.

古文：太安二年八月庚午，天中裂为二，有声如雷者三。
现代文：太安二年八月庚午，天中断裂为二，有像雷一样的声音响三次。
English: On the afternoon of the second day of the eighth month of the second year of Taian, the sky split in two, and a sound like thunder rang out three times.

古文：君道亏而臣下专僭之象也。
现代文：这时群道亏损而臣下僣越专权的徵象。
English: At this time, it was a sign that the vassals were losing money and the vassals were gaining power.

古文：是日，长沙王奉帝出距成都、河间二王，后成都、河间、东海又迭专威命，是其应也。
现代文：这时，长沙王随奉君主出生阻击成都和河间两位谋反之王，后来，成都、河间、东海等王又接连专权擅命，正是天变的应验。
English: At this time, the King of Changsha followed the birth of the monarch and blocked the two rebel kings of Chengdu and Hema. Later, the kings of Chengdu, Hema, and Donghai successively took dictatorial powers, which was the fulfillment of the heavenly change.

古文：穆帝升平五年八月已卯夜，天中裂，广三四丈，有声如雷，野雉皆鸣。
现代文：穆帝升平五年八月已卯之夜，天空从中裂开，宽三四丈，发出如雷的声响，野鸡都鸣叫起来。
English: In the late evening of August in the fifth year of Mu Di's rise, the sky cracked open from the middle, three or four meters wide, emitting a thunderous sound, and the pheasants began to sing.

古文：是后哀帝荒疾，海西失德，皇太后临朝，太宗总万机，桓温专权，威振内外，阴气盛，阳气微。
现代文：这以后哀帝病重，海西失德，皇太后临朝听政，太宗总理万机，桓温专权，威震内外，阴气强盛，阳气衰微。
English: After this, Emperor Ai fell seriously ill, Emperor Haisi lost his virtue, Empress Dowager Lin listened to the government, Emperor Taizong became the prime minister, Emperor Kuanwen had absolute power, the empire was shaken inside and out, the yin was strong, and the yang was weak.

古文：元帝太兴二年八月戊戌，天鸣东南，有声如风水相薄。
现代文：元帝太兴二年八月戊戌，东南天空发出鸣声，其声像风水相激。
English: In August of the second year of the Yuan Emperor Taixing, the southeast sky emitted a chanting sound, and its sound and feng shui were intense.

古文：京房易妖占曰： 天有声，人主忧。 
现代文：京房氏《易妖占》上说： 天上发出声响，人主定有忧患。 
English: Mr. Kyofusa said in "Easy Demon Conquest": When the heavens make a sound, people are bound to be troubled.

古文：三年十月壬辰，天又鸣，甲午止。
现代文：三年十月壬辰，天上又出现鸣声，到甲午日停止。
English: In October of the third year of Imjin, there was another singing in the sky, and it stopped by the afternoon of the first day.

古文：其后王敦入石头，王师败绩。
现代文：这以后王敦攻入石头，王师大败。
English: After that, Wang Dun attacked the stone, and Wang Shi suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：元帝屈辱，制于强臣，即而晏驾，大耻不雪。
现代文：元帝屈辱地受制于强悍之臣，不久就去世了，深辱大耻未得雪洗。
English: Humiliated by his powerful vassal, Emperor Yuan died soon after, deeply humiliated.

古文：安帝隆安五年闰月癸丑，天东南鸣。
现代文：安帝隆安五年闰月癸丑，东南天空了出声音。
English: The intercalary month of the 5th year of the Long An Dynasty was ugly, and there was a sound in the southeastern sky.

古文：六年九月戊子，天东南又鸣。
现代文：六年九月戊子，东南天空又有声鸣。
English: In September of the sixth year, the south-eastern sky was once again filled with voices.

古文：是后桓玄篡位，安帝播越，忧莫大焉。
现代文：这以后桓玄篡位，安帝流亡在外，没有比这更大的忧难了。
English: After this, Kuan Xuan usurped the throne, and An Di went into exile. There is no greater sorrow than this.

古文：鸣每东南者，盖中兴江外，天随之而鸣也。
现代文：每当鸣声发生在东南方时，一般预示着长江之外中兴，天随之而发出鸣声。
English: Whenever the chirp occurs in the southeast, it generally indicates that the Yangtze River is rising, and the sky will then emit a chirp.

古文：义熙元年八月，天鸣，在东南，京房《易传》曰： 万姓劳，厥妖天鸣。 
现代文：义熙元年八月，天鸣声，在东南方，京房氏《易传》说： 万民劳累，妖兴天鸣。 
English: In August of the first year of Yixi, the sky began to sing, and in the southeast, Jingfang's "Yi Zhuan" said: All the people are tired, and the demons are singing the sky.

古文：是时安帝虽反正，而兵革岁动，众庶勤劳也。
现代文：这时安帝虽然反归帝位，但年年有兵革战乱，百姓庶众万分劳累。
English: At this time, although Emperor An Di returned to the throne, there were wars and turmoil every year, and the common people were very tired.

古文：○日蚀
现代文：○日蚀
English: ○ solar eclipse

古文：魏文帝黄初二年六月戊辰晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：魏文帝黄初二年六月戊辰这天是月末，有日食发生。
English: In June of the second year of Emperor Wen of Wei and the first year of Emperor Huang of Wu, this day was the end of the month, and a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：有司奏免太尉，诏曰： 灾异之作，以谴元首，而归过股肱，岂禹汤罪已之义乎！
现代文：办事人员奏请免太尉，皇帝下诏书说： 灾异兴起，是用来谴责居于元首之位的人，而把过失归罪于畏助之臣下，难道符合禹、汤归罪于己的道理吗？
English: The clerks petitioned for the dismissal of the captain, and the emperor issued an edict saying: The rise of the calamity is used to condemn the person who is in the position of the head of state, and the fault is attributed to the subordinates who fear help. Is it consistent with the principle that Yu and Tang are guilty?

古文：其令百官各虔厥职。
现代文：还是令百官各自谨慎地恪其职守吧。
English: Let each of the hundred officials prudently fulfill his duties.

古文：后有天地眚，勿腹劾三公。 
现代文：以后再发生天地之凶兆，不要再弹劾三公。 
English: Do not impeach the Three Wise Men again if the evil omens of heaven and earth occur in the future.

古文：三年正月丙寅朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：三年正月丙寅是日初一，有日食。
English: In the first month of the third year, the first day of the new year, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：十一月庚申晦，又日有蚀之。
现代文：十一月月末庚申，又有日食。
English: At the end of November, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：五年十一月戊申晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：五年十一月月末戊申，发生日食。
English: At the end of November in the year of the Horse, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：明帝太和初，太史令许芝奏，日应蚀，与太尉于灵台祈禳。
现代文：明帝太和初年，太史令许芝上奏说，大概会有日食，应和太尉一起在灵台祝福。
English: In the first year of Emperor Ming's reign, the Grand Historian ordered Xu Zhi to report that there would probably be a solar eclipse, and that he should bless the tomb together with the captain.

古文：帝曰： 盖闻人主政有不德，则天惧之以灾异，所以谴告，使得自修也。
现代文：明帝说 人君执政有不德之外，则上天会用灾难来让他惊醒，以此来谴责警告他，让他自我修养。
English: Emperor Ming said that if a ruler is not virtuous, then heaven will use disasters to wake him up, condemn and warn him, and let him cultivate himself.

古文：故日月薄蚀，明治道有不当者。
现代文：所以日月有薄食现象发生，说明治国之道有不得当之处。
English: Therefore, the phenomenon of thin eclipses of the sun and moon has occurred, indicating that the way of governing the country is inappropriate.

古文：朕即位以来，即不能光明先帝圣德，而施化有不合于皇神，故天上有寤之。
现代文：我即位以来，既不能光大显明先帝的圣德，旅行教化又不符合皇神之帝，所以上天用这些来感悟我。
English: Since I ascended the throne, I have not been able to fully demonstrate the holiness of the previous emperor, nor have I been enlightened by my travels, nor do I meet the standards of the Emperor of God. Therefore, God uses these things to inspire me.

古文：宜敕政自修，有以报于神明。
现代文：我应该整敕政行、自修其身，用此来上报于神明。
English: I should rectify my political conduct and self-cultivation, and use this to report to the gods.

古文：天之于人，犹父之于子，未有父欲责其子，而可献盛馔以求免也。
现代文：上天对于人，就像是父对于子，没有父亲想要责求他的孩子，却可以用奉献丰盛肴馔来求得恕免的。
English: God is to man as a father is to his son. No father wants to blame his child, but he can ask for forgiveness by offering a plentiful meal.

古文：今外欲谴上公与太史令俱穰祠之，于义未闻也。
现代文：现在民间想让上公和太史令一起云行禳除之祭，于道义上没有听说过。
English: Now, people want Shangguo and Taishi to perform the wiping out ceremony together, which is morally unheard of.

古文：群公卿士大夫，其各勉修厥职。
现代文：各位公卿士大夫，一定要各自勤勉地修敕自己的职守。
English: Distinguished court nobles and officials, you must each diligently perform your duties.

古文：有可以补朕不逮者，各封上之。 
现代文：凡是有可以补正我所未及的意见，都要封奏给我。 
English: Anyone who has an opinion that can correct what I've missed should send it to me.

古文：太和五年十一月戊戌晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：太和五年十一月戊戌日是月末，发生日食。
English: In November of the 5th year of Taihei, the last day of the month, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：六年正月戊辰朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：六年正月戊辰日初一，发生了日食。
English: On the first day of the first month of the sixth year, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：见吴历。
现代文：见于吴历。
English: It is found in the Wu Calendar.

古文：青龙元年闰月庚寅朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：青龙元年闰月庚寅日初一，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the leap month of the first year of the dragon.

古文：少帝正始元年七月戊申朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：少帝正始元年七月戊申是日初一，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on July Boshin, the first day of the first month of the young emperor's first year.

古文：三年四月戊戌朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：三年四月戊戌日初一，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the third month of April.

古文：四年五月丁丑朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：四年五月丁丑日初一，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the month of May on the day of the Ugly Duckling.

古文：五年四月丙辰朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：五年四月丙辰日初一，发生日食。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the fifth year, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：六年四月壬子朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：六年四月壬子日初一，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the month of April in the sixth year.

古文：十月戊申朔，又日有蚀之。
现代文：十月戊申日初一，又发生日食。
English: On the first day of October, another solar eclipse occurred.

古文：八年二月庚午朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：八年二月庚午日初一，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the morning of the first day of the second month of the eighth year.

古文：是时曹爽专政，丁谧、邓飏等转改法度。
现代文：这时曹爽专政，丁谧、邓飏等转改法度。
English: At this time, Cao Shuang's dictatorship, Ding Xi, Deng Xi and others changed the law.

古文：会有日蚀之变，诏群臣问得失。
现代文：恰逢有日食这一变异，少帝向群臣问得失。
English: A solar eclipse coincided with this change, and the young emperor asked his ministers about the pros and cons.

古文：蒋济上疏曰： 昔大舜佐治，戒在比周。
现代文：蒋济上疏说： 从前大舜佐治国，禁戒结党营私之事。
English: Jiang Jishang Soo said: Formerly, the Great Helmsman of the State of Georgia, forbade the formation of the party camp and personal affairs.

古文：周公辅政，慎于其朋。
现代文：周公辅政，警惕那些朋党之人。
English: Zhou Gongsu, beware of those who are party cronies.

古文：齐侯问灾，晏子对以布惠；鲁君问异，臧孙答以缓役。塞变应天，乃实人事。 
现代文：齐侯问询灾难之事，晏子回答说要广布恩惠；鲁君咨询变异之情，臧孙回答说要缓解堵塞引发变异的源头。顺应天意，这都有助于人事。 
English: Qi Hou inquired about the disaster, Zizi replied that he wanted to spread grace; Lu Jun inquired about the feeling of variation, and Sun Sun replied that he wanted to ease the blockage that caused the source of variation. Conforming to the will of heaven, this all helps personnel.

古文：济旨譬甚切，而君臣不悟，终至败亡。
现代文：将济的比喻非常深切，但君臣毫不醒悟，最终至于败亡。
English: The metaphor of generals and statesmen is very profound, but monarchs and statesmen do not wake up, and eventually they are defeated.

古文：九年正月乙未朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：九年正月乙未日初一，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the second month of the ninth year.

古文：嘉平元年二月二月已示朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：嘉平元年二月二月已示日初一，发生日食。
English: In February of the first year of Jiaping, a solar eclipse occurred on the first day of February.

古文：高贵乡公甘露四年七月戊子朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：高贵乡公甘露四年七月戊子日初一，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the seventh month of the fourth year on the first day of the eighth month in Gonganlu, Gaogui Township.

古文：五年正月乙酉朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：五年正月乙酉日初一，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the second month of the fifth year.

古文：京房易占曰： 日有蚀乙酉，君弱臣强。
现代文：京房易占卜说： 乙酉发生日食，预示君弱臣强。
English: Keifang Yi divination said: The occurrence of a solar eclipse in acetylene indicates that you are weak and your vassal is strong.

古文：司马将兵，反征其王。 
现代文：司马领兵征战，反征征伐了自己的君王。 
English: Sima led an army to war, and his own king was conscripted in return.

古文：五月，有成济之变。
现代文：五月，就发生了成济变乱。
English: In May, the Genghis Khan Mutiny occurred.

古文：元帝景元二年五月丁未朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：元帝景元二年五月丁未日初一，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the second month of the second year of Emperor Jingyuan.

古文：三年十一月已亥朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：三年十一月已亥日初一，发生日食。
English: In November of the third year, on the first day of the year of the boar, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：武帝泰始二年七月丙午晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：武帝泰始二年七月丙午月末，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred at the end of the afternoon of July in the second year of Emperor Wu's reign.

古文：十月丙午朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：十月丙午日初一，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the third month, October, at noon.

古文：七年十月丁丑朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：七年十月丁丑日初一，发生日食。
English: In October of the seventh year, on the first day of the month of the Ugly Duckling, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：八年十月辛未朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：八年十月辛未日初一，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the third month of the eighth year in October.

古文：九年四月戊辰朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：九年四月戊辰日初一，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the fourth month of the ninth year.

古文：又，七月丁酉朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：又，七月丁酉日初一，发生日食。
English: Also, on the first day of the seventh month, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：十年正月乙未，三月癸亥，并日有蚀之。
现代文：十年正月乙未，三月癸亥，都发生了日食。
English: Solar eclipses occurred in January of the tenth year, and in March of the eleventh year.

古文：咸宁元年七月甲申晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：咸宁元年七月甲申月末，发生日食。
English: In July of the first year of Xianning, at the end of the month of Jiaxing, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：三年正月丙子朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：三年正月丙子日初一，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the third lunar month, Cixi.

古文：四年正月庚午朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：四年正月庚午日初一，发生日食。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：太康四年三月辛丑朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：太康四年三月辛丑日初一，发生日食。
English: On the first day of March in the 4th year of Taikang, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：七年正月甲寅朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：七年正月甲寅日初一，发生日食。
English: On the first day of the first month of the seventh year, the solar eclipse occurred.

古文：八年正月戊申朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：八年正月戊申日初一，发生日食。
English: On the first day of the first month of the eighth year, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：九年正月壬申朔，六月庚子朔，并日有蚀之。
现代文：九年正月壬申日初一，六月庚子日初一，都发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the first month of the ninth year, Jinshin, and on the first day of the sixth month, Koshi.

古文：永熙元年四月庚申，帝崩。
现代文：永熙元年四月庚申，武帝去世。
English: In April of the first year of Yongxi, Emperor Wu died.

古文：惠帝元庚九年十一月甲子朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：惠帝元庚九年十一月甲子日日初一，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the first month of November in the ninth year of Emperor Hui.

古文：十二月，废皇太子为庶人，寻杀之。
现代文：十二月，废除皇太子为庶人，不久又杀死了他。
English: In December, he deposed the crown prince as a commoner and killed him soon after.

古文：永康元年正月已卯，四月辛卯朔，并日有蚀之。
现代文：永康元年正月已卯，四月辛卯日初一，都有发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the first month of the first year of Yongkang and on the first day of the second month of April.

古文：永宁元年闰月丙戌朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：永宁元年闰月丙戌日日初一，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the leap month in the first year of Yongning.

古文：光熙元年正月戊子朔，七月乙酉朔，并日有蚀之。
现代文：光熙元年正月戊子日日初一，七月乙酉日日初一，都发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month.

古文：十一月，惠帝崩。
现代文：十一月，惠帝崩。
English: In November, Hui Di passed away.

古文：十二月壬午朔，又日有蚀之。
现代文：十二月壬午日初一，又发生日食。
English: On the first day of the lunar month of December, another solar eclipse occurred.

古文：怀帝永嘉元年十一月戊申朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：怀帝永嘉元年十一月戊申日初一，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the first month of November in the first year of Huai Di Yongjia.

古文：二年正月丙子朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：二年正月丙子日初一，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the third month of the second year.

古文：六年二月壬子朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：六年二月壬子日初一，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the second month of the sixth year.

古文：愍帝建兴四年六月丁巳朔，十二月甲申朔，并日有蚀之。
现代文：愍帝建兴四年六月丁巳日初一，十二月甲申日初一，都发生日食。
English: In the 4th year of Emperor Jianxing, a solar eclipse occurred on the 1st day of the 1st month of June and on the 1st day of December.

古文：五年五月丙子，十一月丙子，并日有蚀之。
现代文：五年五月丙子，十一月丙子，都发生日食。
English: Solar eclipses occurred on the third day of May and the third day of November in 2005.

古文：时帝蒙尘于平阳。
现代文：当时愍帝正在平阳受难。
English: At that time, Emperor Xuan was suffering in Pingyang.

古文：元帝太兴元年四月丁丑朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：元帝太兴元年四月丁丑日初一，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the fourth month of the first year of Emperor Taixing.

古文：明帝太宁三年十一月癸已朔，日有蚀之，在卯至斗。
现代文：明帝太宁三年十一月癸已日初一，发生日食，在卯时至斗宿之位。
English: It was the first day of the third month of November in the reign of Emperor Tanin of the Ming Dynasty, when a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：斗，吴分也。
现代文：斗宿，是吴的分界。
English: Duoshuku is the dividing line of Wu.

古文：其后苏峻作乱。
现代文：这以后苏峻犯上作乱。
English: After this, Su Jun committed the crime of starting a riot.

古文：成帝咸和二年五月甲申朔，日有蚀之，在井。
现代文：成帝咸和二年五月甲申日初一，发生日食，在井宿之位。
English: On the first day of the sixth month of the second year of Emperor Chengxian's reign, a solar eclipse occurred at the well.

古文：井，主酒食，女主象也。
现代文：井宿，主应酒食，是女主的徵象。
English: The well-house, where the master is wined and dined, is a symbol of the mistress.

古文：明年，皇太后以忧崩。
现代文：第二年，皇太后因忧虑而亡。
English: The following year, the Empress Dowager died of worry.

古文：六年三月壬戌朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：六年三月壬戌日初一，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the third month of the sixth year.

古文：是时帝已年长，每幸司徒第，犹出入见王导夫人曹氏如子弟之礼。
现代文：这时成帝已经年长，每次临幸司徒的府第，出入时还见王导夫人曹氏执子弟之礼。
English: At this time, Emperor Cheng was already elderly, and every time he visited the residence of Stutts, he also saw Wang Dao's wife Cao holding his younger brother's hand.

古文：以入君而警敬人臣之妻，有亏君德之象也。
现代文：以人君的身份而恭敬臣下的妻子，有是有亏于君德的徵象。
English: To defer to a subordinate's wife as a vassal is a sign of a lack of nobility.

古文：九年十月乙未朔，日有蚀之。是时帝既冠，当亲万机，而委政大臣，著君道有亏也。
现代文：此时成帝已行冠礼为成人，应当亲掌一切事务，而将政事委于大臣，就表明了为群之道有亏缺之处
English: At this time, Emperor Cheng Rong had been crowned as an adult, and he should personally handle all affairs, and entrusting the political affairs to the minister showed that there was a shortcoming in the way of being a group

古文：咸康元年十月乙未朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：咸康元年十月乙未日初一，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the first month of October in the first year of Xiankang.

古文：七年二月甲子朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：七年二月甲子日初一，发生日食。
English: On the first day of the second month of the seventh year, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：三月，杜皇后崩。
现代文：三月，杜皇后去世。
English: In March, Empress Du passed away.

古文：八年正月乙未朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：八年正月乙未日初一，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the second month of the eighth year.

古文：京都大雨，郡国以闻。
现代文：京都降大雨，郡国以内都听说。
English: Heavy rain fell in Kyoto, and the whole county heard about it.

古文：是谓三朝，王者恶之。
现代文：这就叫三朝，即年初的月末日，为王之人都很厌恶这种情况。
English: This is called the Three Dynasties, that is, the end of the month at the beginning of the year, and the king's people are very disgusted with this situation.

古文：六月而帝崩。
现代文：六月成帝就去世了。
English: In June, Emperor Jung Il died.

古文：穆帝永和二年四月己酉，七年正月丁酉，八年正月辛卯，并日有蚀之。
现代文：穆帝永和二年四月己酉日，七年正月丁酉日，八年正月辛卯日，都发生日食。
English: Solar eclipses have occurred on the first day of April in the second year of Mu Di Yonghe, the first day of January in the seventh year of Ding Xi, and the first day of January in the eighth year of Xin Wu.

古文：十二年十月癸巳朔，日有蚀之，在尾。
现代文：十二年十月癸巳日初一，发生日食，在尾宿之位。
English: On the first day of the new year in October 12th, a solar eclipse occurred at the end of the year.

古文：燕分，北狄之象也。
现代文：尾，是燕地的分界，北狄的徵象。
English: The tail is the dividing line between Yan and Di, the symbol of North Di.

古文：是时边表姚襄、苻生互相吞噬，朝廷忧劳，征伐不止。
现代文：当时边境之地姚襄、苻生互相吞噬，朝廷忧虑劳顿，连年征伐不止。
English: At that time, Yao Xiang and Xinsheng were devouring each other in the borderland, and the imperial court was worried and exhausted, and the conquest continued year after year.

古文：升平四年八月辛丑朔，日有蚀之，几既在角。
现代文：升平四年八月辛丑日初一，发生日食，几乎在角宿里。
English: On the first day of August in the eighth year of the Heian period, a solar eclipse occurred, almost in Kakunodate.

古文：凡蚀，浅者祸浅，深者祸大。
现代文：凡有日食，浅的祸就小，深的祸就大。
English: Whenever there is a solar eclipse, the shallow disaster will be small and the deep disaster will be big.

古文：角为天门，入主恶之。
现代文：角宿为天门，人主都很厌恶它。
English: Kakunodate is the gateway to heaven, and everyone hates it.

古文：明年而帝崩。
现代文：第二年穆帝就去世了。
English: The following year, Mudi passed away.

古文：哀帝隆和元年三月甲寅朔，十二月戊午朔，并日有蚀之。
现代文：哀帝隆和元年三月甲寅日初一，十二月戊午日初一，都发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the month of March and the first day of the month of December.

古文：明年而帝有疾，不识万机。
现代文：第二年哀帝就生病了，不能处理日常政务。
English: In the second year, Emperor Ai fell ill and was unable to handle the daily affairs of government.

古文：海西公太和三年三月丁巳朔，五年七月癸酉朔，并日有蚀之。
现代文：海西公太和三年三月丁巳日初一，五年七月癸酉日初一，都发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the third month of the third year of King Haisei, and on the first day of the seventh month of the fifth year.

古文：皆海西被废之应也。
现代文：都是海西被废掉的徵兆。
English: These are all signs that Haisi has been abolished.

古文：孝武帝宁康三年十月癸酉朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：孝武帝宁康三年十月癸酉日初一，发生日食。
English: On the first day of October in the third year of Emperor Ningkang, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：太元四年闰月己酉朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：太元四年闰月己酉日初一，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the leap month in the fourth year of the Taigen era.

古文：是时苻坚攻没襄阳，执硃序。
现代文：这时苻坚攻破了襄阳城，抓住了朱序。
English: At this time, Yan Jian broke through the Xiangyang City and caught Zhu Xuan.

古文：六年六月庚子朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：六年六月庚子日初一，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the second month of the year in June.

古文：九年十月辛亥朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：九年十月辛亥日初一，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of October in the ninth year of Xinhai.

古文：十七年五月丁卯朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：十七年五月丁卯日初一，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the fifth month of the 17th year of Dingwu.

古文：二十年三月庚辰朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：二十年三月庚辰日初一，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the third month of the 20th century.

古文：明年帝崩。
现代文：第二年孝武帝去世。
English: Emperor Xiaowu died the following year.

古文：安帝隆安四年六月庚辰朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：安帝隆安四年六月庚辰日初一，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the month of Geng Chen in June of the 4th year of An Di Rong'an.

古文：是时元显执政。
现代文：这时元显执政。
English: At this time, Yuan Xian came to power.

古文：元兴二年四月癸巳朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：元兴二年四月癸巳日初一，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the fourth month of the second year of the Genko era.

古文：其冬桓玄篡位。
现代文：这年冬天桓玄图谋篡位。
English: This winter, Kangen plotted to usurp the throne.

古文：义熙三年七月戊戌朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：义熙三年七月戊戌日初一，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the seventh month of the third year of the reign of Emperor Yixi.

古文：十年九月丁巳朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：十年九月丁巳日初一，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the ninth month of the tenth year.

古文：十一年七月辛亥晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：十一年七月辛亥月末，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on July 11, at the end of Xinhai.

古文：十三年正月甲戌朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：十三年正月甲戌日初一，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the first month of the 13th year.

古文：明年，帝崩。
现代文：第二年，安帝去世。
English: The following year, Andi passed away.

古文：恭帝元熙元年十一月丁亥朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：恭帝元熙元年十一月丁亥日初一，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of Dinghai in November in the year of Emperor Qianlong of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：自义熙元年至是，日蚀皆从上始，皆为革命之征。
现代文：自义熙元年到此时，日食都是从上面开始，都是更革天命的象徵。
English: From the first year of Yixing to this time, solar eclipses have all started from above, and are a symbol of the revolution of fate.

古文：《周礼》只眡祲氏掌十煇之法，以观妖祥，辩吉凶，有祲、象、镌、监、闇、瞢、弥、序、隮、想凡十。
现代文：《周礼》只眡祲氏掌十种占望日光云气的方法，来观察妖祥之徵，辩明吉凶之兆，分别有祲、象、镌、监、闇、瞢、弥、序、隮、想共十种。
English: In "Zhou Li," there are only ten methods of observing the sun and clouds to observe the ominous signs and identify the auspicious signs. There are ten methods of observing the sun and clouds to observe the ominous signs and identify the auspicious signs, respectively, including, 象,, 监,闇,,弥,序,,想.

古文：后代名变，说者莫同。
现代文：后代名称变化，述说的人都不相同。
English: Subsequent generations of the name change, the narrator is not the same.

古文：今录其著应以次之云。
现代文：现在将其明显的应验事记录在后。
English: Now record its obvious corroboration.

古文：吴孙权赤乌十一年二月，白虹贯日。
现代文：吴孙权赤乌十一年二月，有白虹贯穿太阳。
English: In February of the eleventh year of Wu Sun Quan's reign, a white rainbow appeared across the sun.

古文：权发诏戒惧。
现代文：孙权发诏以表戒惧。
English: Sun Quan issued an edict to show his fear.

古文：武帝泰始五年七月甲寅，日晕再重，白虹贯之。
现代文：武帝泰始五年七月甲寅，出现了两重太阳的光晕，白虹贯而过。
English: In July of the fifth year of Emperor Wu Tai, there was a double sun halo, and a white rainbow ran through it.

古文：太康元年正月已丑朔，五色气冠日，自卯至酉。
现代文：太康元年正月已丑日初一，有五色云气罩在太阳之上，自卯时至酉时。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of Taikang, there was a five-colored cloud cover over the sun from midnight to midnight.

古文：占曰： 君道失明，丑为斗牛，主吴越。 
现代文：占卜说： 为君之道失云明德，丑时为斗宿牛宿，主主地吴越地。 
English: The soothsayer said, "For the king, the way is blind; for the king, the way is bright; for the king, the way is dark; for the king, the way is bright; for the king, the way is dark; for the king, the way is cloudy; for the king, the way is bright; for the king, the way is cloudy; for the king, the way is cloudy; for the king, the way is cloudy; for the king, the way is cloudy; for the king, the way is cloudy; for the king, the way is cloudy; for the king, the way is cloudy; for the king, the way

古文：是时孙皓淫暴，四月降。
现代文：这时孙皓荒淫暴虐，四月就投降了。
English: At this time, Sun Yat-sen became violent and capitulated in April.

古文：惠帝元康元年十一月甲申，日晕，再重，青赤有光。
现代文：惠帝元康元年十一月甲申日，太阳四周出现光晕，有两重，呈青赤色有光泽。
English: In November of the first year of Hui Di Yuan Kang, on the 6th day of the 9th month, a halo appeared around the sun, two-fold, bluish-red and shiny.

古文：九年正月，日中有若飞燕者，数日乃消。
现代文：九年正月，太阳之中出现了好像飞燕一样的东西，好几天都没有消失。
English: In the first month of the ninth year, something like a swallow appeared in the sun and did not disappear for several days.

古文：王隐以为愍怀废死之征。
现代文：王隐认为愍怀被废而死的徵兆。
English: Wang Yin believes that it is a sign of the death of Zhai Huai.

古文：永康元年正月癸亥朔，日晕，三重。
现代文：永康元年正月癸亥日初一，日晕，有三重。
English: The first day of the first month of the first year of Yongkang, the first day of the first day of the first month of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of

古文：十月乙未，日闇，黄雾四塞。
现代文：十月乙未，太阳暗淡无光，黄雾充塞四面。
English: In October, the sun was dim and the yellow fog was thick on all sides.

古文：占曰： 不及三年，下有拔城大战。 
现代文：占卜说： 不到三年，下面将有攻陷城邑的大战。 
English: The soothsayer said: In less than three years, there will be a great battle to capture the city.

古文：十二月庚戌，日中有黑气。
现代文：十二月庚戌日，太阳之中有黑气。
English: On the day of the Chinese lunar new year in December, there was a dark atmosphere in the sun.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 祭天不顺兹谓逆，厥异日中有黑气。 
现代文：京房氏《易传》说： 祭天而不顺就叫做逆，这种厥异就是太阳中有黑气。 
English: Kyofusa's "I Chuan" said: "If you worship the sun and it does not go well, it is called the opposite. This kind of anomaly means that there is black gas in the sun.

古文：永宁元年九月甲申，月中有黑子。
现代文：永宁元年九月甲申，月中有黑子。
English: In September of the first year of Yongning, there was a black spot in the moon.

古文：京房易占： 黑者阴也，臣不掩君恶，令下见，百姓恶君，则有此变。 
现代文：京房易占： 黑者阴也，臣不掩君恶，令下见，百姓恶君，则有此变。 
English: Jing Fang Yi Zhan: The blacks are evil, the vassals are evil, the government is evil, the people are evil, and so on.

古文：又曰： 臣有蔽主明者。 
现代文：又说： 臣有蔽主明者。 
English: He also said, "A vassal is one who conceals his master's identity."

古文：太安元年十一月，日中有黑气。
现代文：太安元年十一月，太阳中有黑气。
English: In November of the first year of the Taian era, there was black gas in the sun.

古文：永兴元年十一月，日中有黑气分日。
现代文：永兴元年十一月，太阳中有黑气分日。
English: In November of the first year of Yongxing, there was a black spot in the sun.

古文：光熙元年五月壬辰、癸巳，日光四散，赤如血流，照地皆赤。
现代文：光熙元年五月壬辰、癸巳，日光四散，赤如血流，照地都是赤。
English: In May of Guangxi in the first year of Guangxi, the sun rose and set, the sunlight scattered everywhere, red like blood, and the sunlit ground was red.

古文：甲午又如之。
现代文：甲午又如之。
English: It was the same in the afternoon.

古文：占曰： 君道失明。 
现代文：占卜说： 君道失明。 
English: Divination says: You are going blind.

古文：怀帝永嘉元年十一月乙亥，黄黑气掩日，所照皆黄。
现代文：怀帝永嘉元年十一月乙亥，黄黑气掩日，所照之外都是黄色。
English: In November of the first year of the Yongjia Emperor, the year of the boar, yellow and black gas covered the sun, and everything except the sun was yellow.

古文：案《河图》占曰： 日薄也 。
现代文：案《河图》占上说： 这是日薄 。
English: "It's a bad day," he said of the "river map" case.

古文：其说曰： 凡日蚀皆于朔晦，有不于晦朔者为日薄。
现代文：它的说法是：凡是日食都发生在月末或者是月初，不在这两天的就是日薄。
English: What it says is: All solar eclipses take place at the end of the month or the beginning of the month. If it doesn't happen on these two days, the sun will be too weak.

古文：虽非日月同宿，时阴气盛，掩日光也。 占类日蚀。
现代文：虽然不是日月同宿，但当时阴气太盛，掩蔽了日光 占卜认为类似日食。
English: Although the sun and moon were not co-located, the weather was too cloudy at the time, obscuring the sunlight. Divination considered it to be similar to a solar eclipse.

古文：二年正月戊申，白虹贯日，二月癸卯，白虹贯日，青黄晕，五重。
现代文：二年正月戊申日，有白虹贯日，二月癸卯，白虹贯日，出现青黄的光晕，有五重。
English: In the second year, on the first day of the month of Boshin, there was a white rainbow across the day, and in the second year, on the second day of the month of February, there was a white rainbow across the day, and a bluish-yellow halo appeared, with five layers.

古文：占曰： 白虹贯日，近臣为乱，不则诸侯有反者。
现代文：占卜说： 白虹贯日，预示着贴近之世犯上作乱，不然的话就是诸侯中有谋反的人。
English: The soothsayer said, "When the white rainbow crosses the sun, it portends that the people who are close to the world will start a riot. Otherwise, it is the people in the provinces who are plotting a rebellion."

古文：晕五重，有国者受其祥，天下有兵，破亡其地。 
现代文：日晕五重，统治国家的人将感受到它的徵兆，天下有战乱，他的国土将被攻破沦丧。 
English: The sun will be eclipsed five times, and those who rule the country will feel its signs. There will be wars all over the world, and his country will be invaded and destroyed.

古文：明年，司马越暴蔑人主。
现代文：第二年，司马越放肆地轻蔑君主。
English: The following year, Sima Yue brazenly defied the monarch.

古文：五年，刘聪破京都，帝蒙尘于寇庭。
现代文：五年，刘聪破破京都，怀帝跑到贼寇的所在地。
English: Five years later, Liu Cong broke through Kyoto, and Emperor Huai ran to the location of the bandits.

古文：五年三月庚申，日散光，如血下流，所照皆赤。
现代文：五年三月庚申日，日光散乱，像是鲜血下流，所照射的地方都呈赤色。
English: On the day of the Chinese New Year in March of the fifth year, the sunlight was scattered, like blood flowing downhill, and all the irradiated areas were red.

古文：日中有若飞燕者。
现代文：太阳之中有一个像是飞燕的东西。
English: In the sun, there is something that looks like a swallow.

古文：愍帝建兴二年正月辛未辰时，日陨于地。
现代文：愍帝建兴二年正月辛未辰时，太阳陨落于地。
English: In the early morning of the first month of the second year of Emperor Jianxing, the sun fell to the ground.

古文：又有三日相承，出于西方而东行。
现代文：又有三个太阳相继而行，从西方出来向东运行。
English: And there were three suns, one after another, coming out of the west and going to the east.

古文：五年正月庚子，三日并照，虹蜺弥天。
现代文：五年正月庚子，三个太阳并排而照，虹蜺弥漫整个天空。
English: In the first month of the fifth year, Geng Zi, three suns shone side by side, and the rainbow filled the entire sky.

古文：日有重晕，左右两珥。
现代文：太阳四周有两屋光晕，左右有两个珥气。
English: Around the sun there are two halos of light, and to the right and left there are two constellations.

古文：占曰： 白虹，兵气也。
现代文：占卜说： 白虹，是兵战之气。
English: The soothsayer said: The white rainbow is the breath of war.

古文：三四五六日俱出并争，天下兵作，丁巳亦如其数。 
现代文：有三四五六个太阳同时出现并相互而争，天下将兴起战争，嗣立的君主也和太阳的数目一样多。 
English: Three thousand four hundred and fifty-six suns will appear at the same time and fight with each other. Wars will break out all over the world, and there will be as many rulers as there are suns.

古文：又曰： 三日并出，不过三旬，诸侯争为帝。
现代文：又说： 三日并出，不过三十天，诸侯争着为帝。
English: He also said, "Three days are almost the same, but in thirty days, the princes will fight for the throne.

古文：日重晕，天下有立王。
现代文：太阳四周有重叠的光晕，天下将确立王。
English: Around the sun there is an overlapping halo, and the world will establish a king.

古文：晕而珥，天下有立侯。 
现代文：有光晕而且珥气，天下将确立侯位。 
English: With a halo and a halo, the world will be established.

古文：故陈卓曰： 当有大庆，天下其三分乎！ 
现代文：所以陈卓说： 当有大庆，天下大概三分了！ 
English: So Chen Zhuo said: When there is a big celebration, the world is about three points!

古文：三月而江东改元为建武、刘聪、李雄亦跨曹刘疆宇，于是兵连累叶。
现代文：三月江东就改元为建武、刘聪、李雄也跨越了曹、刘的疆宇，于是战事连年不断。
English: In March, Jiangdong changed its name to Jianwu, Liu Cong and Li Xiong also crossed the borders of Cao and Liu, so the war continued for years.

古文：元帝太兴元年十一月乙卯，日夜出，高三丈，中有赤青珥。
现代文：元帝太兴元年十一月乙卯日，太阳在夜间出现，有三丈高，其中有赤青色的珥气。
English: On the 1st day of the 1st month of the 1st year of the Yuan Emperor Taixing, the sun appeared at night, three feet high, with reddish-blue argon gas.

古文：四年二月癸亥，日斗。
现代文：四年二月癸亥日，太阳相斗。
English: In February of the fourth year, on the day of the boar, the suns fight each other.

古文：三月癸未，日中有黑子，辛亥，帝亲录讯囚徒。
现代文：三月癸未，太阳中有黑子，辛亥日，元帝亲自审录讯囚徒。
English: On the last day of March, there was a black spot in the sun, and on the day of the Chinese New Year, Emperor Yuan personally interrogated the prisoners.

古文：永昌元年十月辛卯，日中有黑子。
现代文：永昌元年十月辛卯，太阳中有黑子。
English: In October of the first year of Yongchang, there was a black spot in the sun.

古文：时帝宠幸刘隗，擅威福，亏伤君道，王敦因之举兵，逼京都，祸及忠贤。
现代文：当时元帝宠幸刘隗，刘隗擅权专政，作威作福，有伤君道，王敦因此举兵发难，直逼京都，灾祸殃及忠贤之人。
English: At that time, Liu Bei was favored by the former emperor. Liu Bei was a dictator, a tyrant, and a despot. Wang Dun therefore raised an army and attacked Kyoto, bringing disaster to the loyal and virtuous.

古文：明帝太宁元年正月乙卯朔，日晕无光。
现代文：明帝太宁元年正月乙卯日初一，日晕无光。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of Emperor Taining of the Ming Dynasty, the sun was dull.

古文：癸巳，黄雾四塞。
现代文：癸巳日，黄雾充塞四方。
English: On the following day, the yellow fog was thick in all directions.

古文：占曰： 君道失明，阴阳昏，臣有阴谋。 
现代文：占卜说： 君道失明，阴阳昏，臣有阴谋。 
English: Divination says: Monarchy is blind, yin and yang are dim, and vassals have conspiracies.

古文：京房曰： 下专刑，兹谓分威，蒙微而日不明。 
现代文：京房说： 专刑之权下移，就叫做分割权威，蒙微尘而太阳不明亮。 
English: Kyofusa said: The downward shift of the power of special punishment is called the division of authority, and the sun is not bright.

古文：先是，王敦害尚书令刁协、仆射周顗、骠骑将军戴若思等，是专刑之应。
现代文：此事之前，王敦迫害尚书令刁协、仆射周顗、骠骑将军戴若思等人，是专刑的应验。
English: Prior to this, Wang Dun's persecution of Shang Shuling, Zhaoxie, Zhou Qi, and General Dai Ruosi was the fulfillment of the special punishment.

古文：敦既陵上，卒伏其辜。
现代文：王敦犯了凌上欺主之罪，最终伏法被杀。
English: Wang Dun committed the crime of lording over and deceiving his master, and was eventually killed.

古文：十一月丙子，白虹贯日。
现代文：十一月丙子日，白虹贯日。
English: In November, on the third day of the month, the white rainbow appears.

古文：史官不见，桂阳太守华包以闻。
现代文：史官没有见到，桂阳太守华包说他看到了。
English: The historian did not see it, but Guiyang Governor Hua Bao said he did.

古文：成帝咸和九年七月，白虹贯日。
现代文：成帝咸和九年七月，白虹贯日。
English: In July of the ninth year of Emperor Chengdu's reign, a white rainbow stretched across the sky.

古文：咸康元年七月，白虹贯日。
现代文：咸康元年七月，白虹贯日。
English: In July of the first year of Xiankang, the white rainbow appeared.

古文：二年七月，白虹贯日。
现代文：二年七月，白虹贯日。
English: In July of the second year, Bai Hong was born.

古文：自后庾氏专政，由后族而贵，盖亦妇人擅国之义，故频年白虹贯日。
现代文：由于皇后族人而显贵，这也是女人擅掌国家权力的表现，所以连年白虹贯日。
English: This is also a manifestation of women's mastery of the power of the state, so the white rainbow continues to rise year after year.

古文：八年正月壬申，日中有黑子，丙子乃灭。
现代文：八年正月壬申日，太阳中有黑子，至丙子才消失。
English: On the first day of the first month of the eighth year, Jinshin, there was a spot in the sun, and it did not disappear until the third day.

古文：夏，帝崩。
现代文：夏天，成帝去世。
English: In the summer, Emperor Chengdu passed away.

古文：穆帝永和八年，张重华在凉州，日暴赤如火，中有三足为乌，形见分明，五日乃止。
现代文：穆帝永和八年，张重华在凉州，太阳暴烈，赤红如火，中间有一只三足的乌鸦，形象分明，五日后才消失。
English: In the eighth year of Mu Di Yonghe, Zhang Chonghua was in Liangzhou. The sun was fierce, red as fire, and there was a three-legged crow in the middle. The image was distinct, and it only disappeared five days later.

古文：十年十月庚辰，日中有黑子，大如鸡卵。
现代文：十年十月庚辰日，太阳之中有黑子，大小像鸡蛋一样。
English: On the 10th day of the 10th month of October, there was a spot in the sun the size of an egg.

古文：十一年三月戊申，日中有黑子，大如桃，二枚。
现代文：十一年三月戊申，太阳中有黑子，大得像桃子，一共两枚。
English: In March 11th, Boshin, there were two spots in the sun, as big as a peach.

古文：时天子幼弱，久不亲国政。
现代文：当时天子年岁尚幼，长时间不能亲理国政。
English: At that time, Tianzi was still young and could not take care of state affairs for a long time.

古文：升平三年十月丙午，日中有黑子，大如鸡卵。
现代文：升平三年十月丙午，太阳中有黑子，大得像鸡蛋。
English: At noon on October 3rd, there was a spot in the sun as big as an egg.

古文：少时而帝崩。
现代文：不久穆帝就去世了。
English: Mudi died soon after.

古文：海西公太和三年九月戊辰夜，二虹见东方。
现代文：海西公太和三年九月戊辰夜里，二条彩虹出现在东方。
English: Two rainbows appeared in the east on the night of September 3rd in the year of King Haisei.

古文：四年四月戊辰，日晕，厚密，白虹贯日中。
现代文：四年四月戊辰，日晕，很厚密，白虹贯太阳中。
English: In April of the year four, at the time of the full moon, the sun's halo was very thick, and a white rainbow streaked through the sun.

古文：十月乙未，日中有黑子。
现代文：十月乙未，太阳中有黑子。
English: In October, there was a black spot in the sun.

古文：五年二月辛酉，日中有黑子，大如李。
现代文：五年二月辛酉，太阳中有黑子，大如李。
English: In February of the fifth year, it was hot and humid, and there were spots in the sun as big as plums.

古文：六年三月辛未，白虹贯日，日晕，五重。
现代文：六年三月辛未，白虹贯日，日晕，五重。
English: In March of the sixth year, the sun was eclipsed, a white rainbow stretched across the sky, and the sun was eclipsed.

古文：十一月，桓温废帝，即简文咸安元年也。
现代文：十一月，桓温废掉帝，即简文咸安元年。
English: In November, Emperor Kan'en abolished the emperor, which was the first year of Emperor Jianwen's reign.

古文：简文咸安二年十一月丁丑，日中有黑子。
现代文：简文咸安二年十一月丁丑，太阳中有黑子。
English: In November of the second year of Xian'an, there was a black spot in the sun.

古文：孝武宁康元年十一月己酉，日中有黑子，大如李。
现代文：孝武宁康元年十一月己酉，太阳中有黑子，大如李。
English: In November of the first year of Xiaowu Ningkang, there was a black spot in the sun, as big as a plum.

古文：二年三月庚寅，日中有黑子二枚，大如鸭卵。
现代文：二年三月庚寅，太阳中有黑子二枚，大如鸭蛋。
English: In March of the second year of Goyang, there were two sunspots in the sun, as big as duck eggs.

古文：十一月己巳。
现代文：十一月己巳。
English: It's November already.

古文：日中有黑子，大如鸡卵。
现代文：太阳中有黑子，大如鸡蛋。
English: There are spots in the sun as big as eggs.

古文：时帝已长，而康献皇后以从嫂临朝，实伤君道，故日有瑕也。
现代文：当时皇帝已长大，但康献皇后仍以堂嫂的身份临朝听政，实在是有伤君道，所以太阳中有瑕点。
English: At that time, the emperor had grown up, but the Kangxian Empress still listened to politics as a cousin. It was really a way to hurt the monarch, so there was a flaw in the sun.

古文：太元十三年二月庚子，日中有黑子二，大如李。
现代文：太元十三年二月庚子，太阳中有两个黑子，大如李。
English: In February of the thirteenth year of Taiyuan, there were two spots in the sun, as big as plums.

古文：十四年六月辛卯，日中又有黑子，大如李。
现代文：十四年六月辛卯，太阳中又有黑子，大如李。
English: In June of the fourteenth year of Xinwu, there was a black spot in the sun, as big as a plum.

古文：二十年十一月辛卯，日中又有黑子。
现代文：二十年十一月辛卯，太阳中又有黑子。
English: In the twelfth month of November, there was a black spot in the sun.

古文：是时会稽王以母弟干政。
现代文：这时会稽王以孝武帝同胞弟弟的身份干涉朝政。
English: At this time, King Heungcheon interfered in the imperial government as a younger brother of Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：安帝隆安元年十二月壬辰，日晕，有背璚。
现代文：安帝隆安元年十二月壬辰日，日晕，有背璚。
English: On the 1st day of the 12th month of the 1st year of the 12th month of the 1st year of the 12th month of the 1st year of the 12th year of the 1st year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 14th year of the 15th year of the 15th year of the 15th year of the 15th year of the 16th year of the 15th year of the 16th year of the 17th year of the 16th year of the 17th year of the 18th year of the 19th year of the 19

古文：是后不亲万机，会稽王世子元显专行威罚。
现代文：这之后安帝就不能亲自料理种种政务，会稽王世子元显专行独揽大权。
English: After that, Emperor An could no longer personally handle various government affairs, and the heir apparent, Prince Motohide, was allowed to monopolize power.

古文：四年十一月辛亥，日中有黑子。
现代文：四年十一月辛亥，太阳中有黑子。
English: In November of the 4th year of Xinhai, there was a sunspot in the sun.

古文：元兴元年二月甲子，日晕，白虹贯日中。
现代文：元兴元年二月甲子，日晕，白虹贯太阳中。
English: In February of the first year of the Genxing Dynasty, the sun was eclipsed, and a white rainbow streaked across the sun.

古文：三月庚子，白虹贯日。
现代文：三月庚子日，白虹贯日。
English: March Geng Zi Day, Bai Hong Guan Day.

古文：未几，桓玄克京都，王师败绩。
现代文：不久，桓玄攻克京都，王师大败。
English: Soon after, Kangen conquered Kyoto, and Wang Shi suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：明年，玄篡位。
现代文：第二年，桓玄篡位。
English: The following year, Kangen usurped the throne.

古文：义熙元年五月庚午。
现代文：义熙元年五月庚午。
English: It was the late afternoon of May in the first year of Yixi.

古文：日有彩珥。
现代文：日有彩珥。
English: The sun is shining.

古文：六年五月丙子，日晕，有璚。
现代文：六年五月丙子，日晕，有璚气。
English: In May of the sixth year, the sun was faint and there was a miasma.

古文：时有庐循逼京都，内外戒严。
现代文：当时庐循逼近京都，城内外戒备森严。
English: At that time, the Shinsengumi was approaching Kyoto, and the city and its environs were heavily guarded.

古文：七月，循走。
现代文：七月，庐循败走。
English: In July, he was defeated.

古文：七年七月，五虹见东方。
现代文：七年七月，东方出现五条彩虹。
English: In July of the seventh year, five rainbows appeared in the east.

古文：占曰： 天子黜。 
现代文：占卜说： 天子将被废黜。 
English: Divination says: The Son of Heaven will be dethroned.

古文：其后刘裕代晋十年，日在东井，有白虹十余丈在南干日。
现代文：这之后刘裕取代了晋朝。十年，太阳位于东井一带，有一条十余丈的白虹在南方干犯了太阳。
English: After that, Liu Yu replaced the Jin Dynasty. In ten years, the sun was located in the Dongjing area, and a more than ten-length white rainbow interfered with the sun in the south.

古文：灾在秦分，秦亡之象。
现代文：灾祸在秦地分野之内，是秦亡的象徵。
English: The calamity is within the realm of Qin, and is a symbol of Qin's demise.

古文：恭帝元熙二年正月壬辰，白气贯日，东西有直珥各一丈，白气贯之交匝。
现代文：恭帝元熙二年正月壬辰日，白气贯穿太阳，东西方各有一条一丈长的直向珥气，白气贯穿珥气并与之交匝。
English: On the first day of the second month of the second year of the reign of Emperor Yuanxi, the white gas penetrated the sun, and there was a long straight line of white gas in the east and west, and the white gas penetrated the white gas and intersected with it.

古文：○月变
现代文：○月变
English: ○Changes every month

古文：魏文帝黄初四年十一月，月晕北斗。
现代文：魏文帝黄初四年十一月，月边晕气掩蔽北斗。
English: In November of the first year of Emperor Wen of Wei and Emperor Huang, the moon's fainting obscured the Big Dipper.

古文：占曰： 有大丧，赦天下。 
现代文：占辞说： 有大丧之事，会大赦天下。 
English: Fortune-telling said: If there is a great mourning, it will be forgiven by the world.

古文：七年五月，帝崩，明帝既位，大赦天下。
现代文：七年五月，文帝去世，明帝即位，大赦天下。
English: In May of the seventh year, Emperor Wen died, Emperor Ming ascended the throne, and pardoned the world.

古文：孝怀帝永嘉五年三月壬申丙夜，月蚀，既。
现代文：孝怀帝永嘉五年三月壬申丙夜，月食，全食。
English: Xiao Huai Di Yongjia five years March Jinshen Hun night, lunar eclipse, total eclipse.

古文：丁夜又蚀，既。
现代文：丁夜又有月食，也是全良。
English: There will be a lunar eclipse on the evening of the 13th, which is also a good omen.

古文：占曰： 月蚀尽，大人忧。 
现代文：占卜说： 月全食，大人忧。 
English: Divination says: total lunar eclipse, adults are worried.

古文：又曰： 其国贵人死。 
现代文：又说： 其国之贵人要死亡。 
English: And he said, The noblest of his people shall die by the sword.

古文：海西公太和四年闰月乙亥，月晕轸，复有白晕贯月北，晕斗柄三星。
现代文：海西公太和四年闰月乙亥日，月晕掩蔽了轸星，又有白色的晕气贯穿了月亮北面，晕气掩蔽了斗柄的三颗星。
English: On the day of Haixi Gongta and the four-year leap month of Yihai, the moon's halo covered the bright star, and the white halo passed through the north side of the moon, and the halo covered the three stars on the handle of the bucket.

古文：占曰： 王者恶之。 
现代文：占卜说： 君王以此为恶。 
English: The diviner said, "The king has done evil in this."

古文：六年，桓温废帝。
现代文：六年，桓温废黜了怀帝。
English: Six years later, Emperor Kuanwen deposed Emperor Huai.

古文：安帝隆安五年三月甲子，月生齿。
现代文：安帝隆安五年三月甲子日，月边生齿。
English: On March 1st, 5th year of An Di Long'an, a tooth appeared on the side of the moon.

古文：占曰： 月生齿，天子有贼臣，群下自相残。 
现代文：占卜说： 月边生齿，天子身边产生乱臣贼子，群下自相互残害。 
English: Fortune-telling says: The edge of the moon produces teeth, the heavenly son's side produces disorderly vassals and thieves, and the group self-mutilates.

古文：桓玄篡逆之征也。
现代文：是桓玄篡权叛逆的徵兆。
English: It is a sign of rebellion against Kuan Xuan's usurpation of power.

古文：义熙九年十二月辛卯朔，月犹见东方。
现代文：义熙九年十二月辛卯日初一，月亮还出现在东方。
English: On the first day of the first month of Xinwu in December of the ninth year of Yixi, the moon still appeared in the east.

古文：是谓之仄匿，则侯王其肃。
现代文：这叫仄匿，则侯王会衰微。
English: This is called insinuation, then the lord will decline.

古文：是时刘裕辅政，威刑自己，仄匿之应云。
现代文：这时刘裕辅佐朝政，威刑自己，正是仄匿之应。
English: At this time, Liu Yusuke, an aide to the imperial court, threatened to punish himself, which was exactly the right thing to do.

古文：十一年十一月乙未，月入舆鬼而晕。
现代文：十一年十一月乙未日，月入舆鬼星并有光晕。
English: On November 11th, the 18th day of the 11th month, the moon entered the ghost star and had a halo.

古文：占曰： 主忧，财宝出。 
现代文：占卜说： 君主忧患，财宝出现。 
English: Divination says: When the sovereign is in distress, treasure appears.

古文：一曰： 月晕，有赦。 
现代文：一说是： 月旁有晕，天下大赦。 
English: One said: "If there is a halo around the moon, the whole world will be forgiven."

古文：○月奄犯五纬
现代文：○月奄犯五纬
English: Five more to be sentenced in October

古文：凡月蚀五星，其国皆亡。
现代文：凡月食五星，其国都会灭亡。
English: Whenever there is a total lunar eclipse, the country will be destroyed.

古文：五星入月，其野有逐相。
现代文：五星侵入月亮，其分野之地有放逐之相。
English: The five stars invade the moon, and the land of their field has the appearance of exile.

古文：魏明帝太和五年十二月甲辰，月犯填星。
现代文：魏明帝太和五年十二月甲辰日，月亮犯及土星，占卜说： 女主当应此象。 
English: On the first hour of December in the fifth year of Emperor Wei Ming's reign, when the moon was conjunct Saturn, the soothsayer said, "The lady should look like this."

古文：青龙二年十月乙丑，月又犯填星。
现代文：青龙二年十月乙丑日，月亮又儿及土星。
English: On October 2nd, the year of the dragon, the moon and Saturn were born.

古文：占同上。
现代文：占卜同上。
English: That's the same as last year.

古文：戊寅，月犯太白，占曰： 人君死，又为兵。 
现代文：戊寅日，月亮犯太白星，占卜说： 人君死亡，又主发生兵乱。 
English: On the day of Wu Yin, the moon was too white and the star was too white, soothsayers said: The ruler died, and the war broke out.

古文：景初元年七月，公孙文懿叛。
现代文：景初元年七月，公孙文懿叛乱。
English: In July of the first year of the Jing era, Gongsun Wenyu rebelled.

古文：二年正月，遣宣帝讨之。
现代文：二年正月，派遣宣帝云征讨他。
English: In the first month of the second year, Xuan Diyun was sent to collect him.

古文：三年正月，天子崩。
现代文：三年正月，天子去世。
English: In the first month of the third year, Tianzi passed away.

古文：四年三月已巳，太白与月俱加景昼见，月犯太白。
现代文：四年三月己巳日，太白星与月亮都重影在白昼出现，月亮犯及太白星。
English: On the same day in March of the fourth year, Taibai Star and the moon both appeared in the daytime, and the moon and Taibai Star collided.

古文：占同上。
现代文：占卜同上。
English: That's the same as last year.

古文：景初元年十月丁未，月犯荧惑。
现代文：景初元年十月丁未日，月亮犯及荧惑星。
English: The scene is the first day of October in the year of the Dog, with the moon and the planet in the foreground.

古文：占曰： 贵人死。 
现代文：占卜说： 贵人死。 
English: The soothsayer said: The noble man is dead.

古文：二年四月，司徒韩既薨。
现代文：二年四月，司徒韩去世。
English: In April of the following year, Szeto Han passed away.

古文：齐王嘉平元年正月甲午，太白袭月。
现代文：齐王嘉平元年正月甲午日，太白星袭犯月亮。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of King Jiaping, Taibai Star attacked the moon.

古文：宣帝奏永宁太后废曹爽等。
现代文：宣帝奏请永宁太后废曹爽等人。
English: Emperor Xuanzong invited Empress Dowager Yongning, Cao Shuang and others to perform.

古文：惠帝太安二年十一月庚辰，岁星入月中。
现代文：惠帝太安二年十一月庚辰日，岁星侵入月中。
English: In November of the second year of Hui Di Tai'an, Geng Chen Day, the year star entered the middle of the month.

古文：占曰： 国有逐相。 
现代文：占卜说： 国中有放逐之相。 
English: Divination says: There are signs of exile in the country.

古文：十二月壬寅，太白犯月。
现代文：十二月壬寅日，太白星犯月。
English: December, the day of the moon, is the month of the moon.

古文：占曰： 天下有兵。 
现代文：占卜说： 天下会有战乱。 
English: Divination says: There will be war.

古文：三年正月乙卯，月犯太白，占同青龙元年。
现代文：三年正月乙卯日，月亮犯及太白星，占卜与青龙二年相同。
English: On the 1st day of the 1st month of the 3rd year, the moon is full and the star is too white, and the divination is the same as in the 2nd year of the blue dragon.

古文：七月，左卫将军陈等率众奉帝伐成都王，六军败绩，兵逼乘舆。
现代文：七月，左卫将军陈眕等率众奉帝伐成都王，六军大败，叛军逼迫朝廷。
English: In July, the Left Guard General Chen Qi and others led the people to worship the emperor and attack the king of Chengdu, the six armies were defeated, and the rebels persecuted the imperial court.

古文：后二年，帝崩。
现代文：以后二年，惠帝去世。
English: Two years later, Hui Di passed away.

古文：元帝太兴二年十一月辛巳，月犯荧惑。
现代文：元帝太兴二年十一月辛巳日，月亮犯及荧惑星。
English: In November of the second year of the Yuan Emperor Taixing's reign, the Moon and a fluorescent planet collided.

古文：占曰： 有乱臣。 
现代文：占卜说： 出现了乱臣。 
English: The soothsayer said, "A disorderly retainer has appeared."

古文：三年十二月己未，太白入月，在斗。
现代文：三年十二月己未，太白入月，在斗宿之位。
English: In December of the third year, Taibai entered the moon, in the position of fighting accommodation.

古文：郭璞曰： 月属《坎》，阴府法象也。
现代文：郭璞说： 月亮应全《坎》卦，是阴府的法象。
English: Guo Wei said: The moon should be full of "Kan" gua, it is the image of the underworld.

古文：太白金行而犯之，天意若曰，刑理失中，自毁其法。 
现代文：太白金行运行来犯，天意好像在说，刑理失去中正，自己毁坏其法纪。 
English: Too much money is flowing to criminals, and it seems that the providence is saying that the criminal justice system has lost its legitimacy and is destroying its own legal discipline.

古文：四年十二月丁亥，月犯岁星，在房。
现代文：四年十二月丁亥日，月亮犯及岁星，在房宿之位。
English: In December of the fourth year, on the day of Dinghai, the moon and the year star were in the room.

古文：占曰： 其国兵饥，人流亡。 
现代文：占卜说： 所应之国军队饥荒，人民流亡。 
English: Divination says: The army of the country to which it belongs will go hungry, and the people will go into exile.

古文：永昌元年三月，王敦作乱，率江荆之众来攻，败京都，杀将相。
现代文：永昌元年三月，王敦作乱，率江荆之众来攻打，京都之师战败，将相被杀。
English: In March of the first year of Yongchang, Wang Dun caused a riot and led the people of Jiangjing to attack. Kyoto's division was defeated, and the commander was killed.

古文：又，镇北将军刘隗出奔，百姓并去南亩。困于兵革。
现代文：又，镇北将军刘隗兵败出逃，百姓都离开了田地，被困在战乱之中。
English: In addition, the Zhenbei general Liu Xuan defeated and fled, and the people left the fields and were trapped in the turmoil of war.

古文：四月，又杀湘州刺史、谯王司马承，镇南将军甘卓。
现代文：四月，叛军又斩杀了湘州刺史、谯王司马承，镇南将军甘卓。
English: In April, the rebels also killed Xiangzhou Zhishi, Shao Wang Sima Cheng, and Zhenan General Ganzhuo.

古文：成帝咸康元年二月乙未，太白入月。
现代文：成帝咸康元年二月乙未，太白星入侵月亮。
English: In February of the first year of Emperor Chengzong's reign, the moon was invaded by a white star.

古文：四月甲午。
现代文：四月甲午。
English: It's the first afternoon of April.

古文：月犯太白。
现代文：月亮犯及太白星。
English: The moon criminal and the too-white star.

古文：四年四月已巳，七月乙巳，月俱奄太白。
现代文：四年四月己巳日，七月乙巳日，月亮全都掩蔽了太白星。
English: In April and July of the same year, the moon completely covered the white star.

古文：占曰： 人君死。
现代文：占卜说： 君主死亡。
English: The soothsayer said: People die.

古文：又为兵，人主恶之。 
现代文：还会发生战乱，人主以此为恶。 
English: There will also be a war, and people will take this as an evil.

古文：明年，石季龙之众大冠沔南，于是内外戒严。
现代文：第二年，石季龙的人马大举进犯沔水之南，于是内外戒备森严。
English: In the second year, Shijilong's men invaded the south of Surabaya on a large scale, so the internal and external defenses were strict.

古文：五年四月辛示，月犯岁星，在胃。
现代文：五年四月辛未日，月亮干犯了岁星，在胃宿之野。
English: On the last day of April in the fifth year, the moon interfered with the star of the year, in the field of gastro-lodging.

古文：占曰： 国饥，人流。 
现代文：占卜说： 国内饥荒，人民流亡。 
English: The soothsayer said, "There will be famine in the country, and the people will go into exile."

古文：乙未，月犯岁星，在昴。
现代文：乙未日，月犯岁星，在昴宿之野。
English: On the eve of the second day of the second month, the moon criminal year star, in the field of Oyado.

古文：及冬，有沔南、邾城之败，百姓流亡万余家。
现代文：到冬天，发生了沔南、邾城的兵败之事，百姓流亡有万余家。
English: By the winter, the defeat of the southern part of Handan and Handan City had occurred, and more than ten thousand families had been exiled.

古文：六年二月乙未，太白入月。
现代文：六年二月乙未日，太白入月。
English: In February of the sixth year, on the day of the second day of the second month, Taibai entered the moon.

古文：占曰： 人主死。 
现代文：占卜说： 人君死亡。 
English: The soothsayer said, "Death is certain."

古文：四月甲午，月犯太白。
现代文：四月甲午日，月亮干犯了太白星。
English: On the afternoon of April 1st, the moon interfered with the white star.

古文：占曰： 人主恶之。 
现代文：占卜说： 人主以上为恶。 
English: The soothsayer said: "More than a human master is evil."

古文：穆帝永和八年十二月，月在东井，犯岁星。
现代文：穆帝永和八年十二月，月在东井之地，犯了岁星。
English: In December of the eighth year of Mu Di Yonghe, in the land of Dongjing, the moon and stars of the year were born.

古文：占曰：秦饥，人流亡。 
现代文：占卜说：秦地饥荒，人民流亡。 
English: The divination said: famine in Qin, people in exile.

古文：是时兵革连起。
现代文：这时兵革连年发生。
English: At this time, armed conflicts occurred year after year.

古文：十年十一月，月奄填星，在舆鬼。
现代文：十年十一月，月亮振荡了土星，在舆鬼宿之野。
English: In November of the tenth year, the moon oscillated Saturn, in the field of ghosts.

古文：占曰： 秦有兵。 
现代文：占卜说： 秦地有战争。 
English: The soothsayer said: There will be war in Qin.

古文：时桓温伐苻健，健坚壁长安，温退。
现代文：当时桓温伐苻健，苻健坚守长安城，桓温部队撤退。
English: At that time, Kuan-Wen cut off Jian Jian, Jian Jian firmly defended Chang'an City, and Kuan-Wen's troops retreated.

古文：十二年八月，桓温破姚襄。
现代文：十二年八月，桓温打败了姚襄。
English: In August of the 12th year, Huan Wen defeated Yao Xiang.

古文：升平元年十一月壬午，月奄岁星，在房。
现代文：升平元年十一月壬午日，月亮振荡了岁星，在房宿之野。
English: On the first day of the lunar new year, November, the moon oscillated the year star, in the field of lodging.

古文：占曰： 人饥。 
现代文：占卜说： 百姓饥荒。 
English: The diviner said: The people are starving.

古文：一曰： 豫州有灾。 
现代文：又说： 豫州有灾难。 
English: He also said: There is a disaster in Yuzhou.

古文：二年闰三月乙亥，月犯岁星，在房。
现代文：二年闰三月乙亥日，月犯岁星，在房宿。
English: The second year of the leap March, the day of the Boar, the lunar New Year, begins in the room.

古文：占同上。
现代文：占同上。
English: That's the same as last year.

古文：三年，豫州刺史谢万败。
现代文：三年，豫州刺史谢万兵败。
English: In the third year, YuZhou stabbed ShiXie Wan and was defeated.

古文：三年三月乙酉，月犯太白，在昴。
现代文：三年三月乙酉日，月犯太白星，在昴宿。
English: On the third day of the month of March in the year of acetylene, the moon was too white to be a star, in Shibuya.

古文：占曰： 人君死。 
现代文：占卜说： 人君死。 
English: The soothsayer said: People die.

古文：一曰： 赵地有兵，胡不安。 
现代文：又说： 赵地有战事，胡人不安。 
English: He also said: There is war in Zhao, and the Hu people are uneasy.

古文：四年正月，暮容俊卒。
现代文：四年正月，暮容俊去世。
English: In the first month of the fourth year, Gureyongjun passed away.

古文：五年正月乙丑辰时，月在危宿，奄太白。
现代文：五年正月乙丑辰时，月亮出现在危宿之野，掩蔽太白星。
English: In the first month of the fifth year, the moon appeared in the field of dangerous lodgings, covering the white star.

古文：占曰： 天下靡散。 
现代文：占卜说： 天下靡离散乱。 
English: Divination says: The world is falling apart.

古文：三月丁未，月犯填星，在轸。
现代文：三月丁未日，月犯土星，在轸宿。
English: On the third day of the third month, the moon offends Saturn, in Oshuku.

古文：占曰： 为大丧。 
现代文：占卜说： 日大丧徵兆。 
English: Divination says: Nichidai's demise is imminent.

古文：五月，穆帝崩。
现代文：五月，穆帝去世。
English: In May, Mudi passed away.

古文：七月，慕容恪攻冀州刺史吕护于野王，拔之，护奔走。
现代文：七月，慕容恪在野王攻打冀州刺史吕护，占领了野王城，吕护战败逃亡。
English: In July, Murong Ke attacked the Jizhou vassal Lvong in the Wild King, occupied the Wild King's City, and Lvong was defeated and fled.

古文：时桓温以大众次宛，闻护败，乃退。
现代文：当时桓温率领大队人马驻扎在宛，听说吕护战败，就撤退了。
English: At that time, Kuan Wen led a large group of men and horses stationed in Wan. When they heard that Lvong was defeated, they retreated.

古文：哀帝兴宁元年十月丙戌，月奄太白，在须女。
现代文：哀帝兴宁元年十月丙戌，月奄太白，在须女星之野。
English: In October of the first year of the Xingning Emperor, the moon was too white, in the field of the female star.

古文：占曰： 天下靡散。 
现代文：占卜说： 天下靡散。 
English: Divination says: The world is falling apart.

古文：一曰： 灾在扬州。 
现代文：又说： 灾难发生在扬州。 
English: He also said: The disaster occurred in Yangzhou.

古文：三年，洛阳没。
现代文：三年，洛阳被攻陷。
English: Three years later, Luoyang fell.

古文：其后桓温倾扬州资实北讨，败绩，死亡太半。
现代文：这以后桓温使出扬州的全部钱财产物征讨北方，大绩，死亡士兵大半。
English: After that, Kuan Wen used all the money, property and goods from Yangzhou to conquer the north, which was a great achievement, and most of the soldiers died.

古文：及征袁真，淮南残破。
现代文：等到征讨袁真时，淮南一带已经残破败落。
English: By the time Yuan Zhen was conquered, the area around Huainan had fallen into ruin.

古文：后慕容及苻坚互来侵境。
现代文：其后慕容暐和苻坚交替来侵犯边境。
English: After that, Murong Hao and Hao Jian took turns to violate the border.

古文：三年正月乙卯，月奄岁星，在参。
现代文：三年正月乙卯，月奄岁星，在参宿。
English: In the first month of the third year, the moon was eclipsed, and the star for the year of the pig was at the guesthouse.

古文：占曰： 参，益州分也。 
现代文：占卜说： 参宿，是益州的分野。 
English: The soothsayer said, "Banshuku is a field in Yishu."

古文：六月，镇西将军益州刺史周抚卒。
现代文：六月，镇西将军益州刺史周抚去世。
English: In June, Zhenxi General Yizhou Jishi Zhou Fu passed away.

古文：十月，梁州刺史司马勋入益州以叛。
现代文：十月，梁州刺史司马勋进入益州并叛乱。
English: In October, the governor of Liangzhou, Sima Xun, entered Yizhou and rebelled.

古文：硃序率众助刺史周楚讨平之。
现代文：朱序率兵帮助刺史周楚讨伐并平定了叛军。
English: Zhu Xue and his soldiers helped Zhang Shi and Zhou Chu to fight and subdue the rebels.

古文：海西太和元年二月丙子，月奄荧惑，在参。
现代文：海西太和元年二月丙子日，月亮掩蔽了荧惑星，在参宿之野。
English: The moon occulted the fluorescent planet in the field of Betelgeuse on the third day of the second month of the first year of the Western Heian period.

古文：占曰： 为内乱，帝不终之征。 
现代文：占卜说： 这是发生内乱，君主不能寿终的徵兆。 
English: The soothsayer said: This is a sign that there will be civil unrest and that the monarch will not live to see the end of his days.

古文：一曰： 参，魏地。 
现代文：又说： 参宿，对应魏地。 
English: He also said: "Banshuku, corresponding to Wei."

古文：五年，慕容为苻坚所灭。
现代文：五年，慕容暐被苻坚所灭。
English: Five years later, Murong Yao was wiped out by Zou Jian.

古文：孝武太元十二年二月戊寅，荧惑入月。
现代文：孝武太元十二年二月戊寅，荧惑星侵入月亮。
English: In February of the 12th year of Emperor Xiaowu, the planet Mercury invaded the moon.

古文：占曰： 有乱臣死，若有相戮者。 
现代文：占卜说： 将有乱臣死亡，或有相互杀戮之人。 
English: Divination says: There will be the death of a chaotic minister, or people killing each other.

古文：一曰： 女亲为政，天下乱。 
现代文：又说： 女亲内戚当政，天下大乱。 
English: He also said, "When a female relative is in power, the whole country is in turmoil."

古文：是时琅邪王辅政，王妃从兄王国宝以姻昵受宠。
现代文：当时琅邪王辅政，王妃堂兄王国宝因为是姻亲内戚而受宠。
English: At that time, the wicked Wang Fu Zheng and Wang Hui's cousin Wang Guobao were favored because they were relatives by marriage.

古文：又陈郡人袁悦昧私苟进，交遘主相，扇扬朋党。
现代文：同时陈郡人袁悦暗地晨私交苟进，挑拨主相之间的关系，勾结朋党。
English: At the same time, Yuan Yue, a resident of Chen County, was secretly pursuing personal relationships, stirring up the relationship between the main parties, and colluding with his friends.

古文：十三年，帝杀悦于市。
现代文：十三年，孝武帝在闹市上斩杀了袁悦。
English: In the thirteenth year, Emperor Xiaowu killed Yuan Yue in the busy market.

古文：于是主相有隙，乱阶兴矣。
现代文：于是主相之间产生了隔阂，战乱随之开始。
English: As a result, a rift developed between the chief ministers, and the war began.

古文：十三年十二月戊子，辰星入月，在危。
现代文：十三年十二月戊子日，辰星入月，在危宿。
English: On the 13th day of the 12th month of the lunar calendar, the hour star entered the moon.

古文：占曰： 贼臣欲杀主，不出三年，必有内恶。 
现代文：占卜说： 贼逆之臣想杀掉君主，不出三年，必定有内恶。 
English: Divination says: If a treacherous vassal wants to kill the sovereign, within three years, there must be an internal evil.

古文：是后慕容垂、翟辽、姚苌、苻登、慕容永并阻兵争强。
现代文：这之后慕容垂、翟辽、姚苌、苻登、慕容永同时依恃军队争强斗胜。
English: After that, Murongtui, Gongliao, Yao Jun, Xudeng, and Murongyong simultaneously supported the army to fight for victory.

古文：十四年十二月乙未，月犯岁星。
现代文：十四年十二月乙未日，月亮干犯了岁星。
English: On December 14th, the day before New Year's Eve, the moon interfered with the stars.

古文：占并同上。
现代文：占卜同上。
English: Divination ditto.

古文：十五年，翟辽据司兗，众军累讨弗克，慕容氏又跨略并冀。
现代文：十五年，翟辽占据了司州兖州，许多军马数次讨伐都没有攻克，慕容氏又同时侵犯并州冀州。
English: In the fifteenth year, Liaoyang occupied Sizhou and Ganzhou. Many armies and horses failed to conquer them in several crusades, and the Murong clan invaded and annexed Jizhou at the same time.

古文：七月，旱。
现代文：七月，天旱。
English: July, drought.

古文：八月，诸郡大水，兗州又蝗。
现代文：八月，沔中各郡县发大水，兖州又出现了蝗灾。
English: In August, all counties in Luzhong Province were flooded, and another locust plague occurred in Luzhong Province.

古文：十八年正月乙酉，荧惑入月。
现代文：十八年正月乙酉，荧惑入月。
English: In the first month of the 18th year, acetylene, fluorescence into the moon.

古文：占曰： 忧在宫中，非贼乃盗也。 
现代文：占卜说： 忧在宫中，非贼乃盗也。 
English: The diviner said: Sorrow is in the palace; it is not a thief, but a robber.

古文：一曰： 有乱臣，若有戮者。 
现代文：又说： 有乱臣，若有戮者。 
English: He also said, "If there are disorderly ministers, there will be slaughter."

古文：二十一年九月，帝暴崩内殿，兆庶宣言，夫人张氏潜行大逆。
现代文：二十一年九月，孝武帝暴死于内殿，民众宣言，夫人张氏私行叛逆。
English: In September 21st, Emperor Xiaowu died violently in the inner hall, and the people declared that his wife was a traitor to the Zhang clan.

古文：又，王国宝邪狡，卒伏其辜。
现代文：又，王国宝邪恶狡诈，最终被斩杀。
English: In addition, the evil and cunning treasure of the kingdom was finally killed.

古文：十九年四月已巳，月奄岁星，在尾。
现代文：十九年四月己巳，月奄岁星，在尾。
English: In April of the 19th year, the moon will be full, and the lunar new year star will be at the end.

古文：占曰： 为饥，燕国亡。 
现代文：占卜说： 为饥，燕国亡。 
English: The soothsayer said, "Hunger will be the death of the nation of Yan."

古文：二十年，慕容垂遣宝伐魏，反为所破，死者数万人。
现代文：二十年，慕容垂派遣其子慕容宝伐魏，反而被击败，数万人战死。
English: Twenty years later, Murong Du sent his son Murong Bao to Wei, but he was defeated and tens of thousands of people died in the war.

古文：二十一年，垂死，国遂衰亡。
现代文：二十一年，慕容垂去世，燕国从此衰亡了。
English: In the twenty-first year, Murong Du passed away, and Yan's country fell into decline.

古文：安帝隆安元年六月庚午，月奄太白，在太微端门外。
现代文：安帝隆安元年六月庚午，月奄太白，在太微端门外。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of June in the first year of An Di Long'an, the moon was too white, and it was outside the door of the Taibo side.

古文：占曰： 国受兵。 
现代文：占卜说： 国家将有战争。 
English: The soothsayer said: The country will have war.

古文：乙酉，月奄岁星，在东壁。
现代文：乙酉日，月奄岁星，在东壁。
English: The acetylene sun, the moon and the year star are on the east wall.

古文：占曰： 为饥，卫地有兵。 
现代文：占卜说： 有饥荒，卫地有战乱。 
English: The soothsayer said: There will be famine, and there will be war in the Holy Land.

古文：二年六月，郗恢遣邓启方等以万人伐慕容宝于滑台，启方败。
现代文：二年六月，郗恢遣派邓启方等人率领一万人在滑台伐慕容宝，启方失败。
English: In June of the second year, Zou Wei sent Deng Qifang and others to lead ten thousand people to attack Murongbao on the slide, but the Qifang failed.

古文：三年九月，桓玄等并举兵，于是内外戒严。
现代文：三年九月，桓玄等人一起举兵开战，于是内外戒严。
English: In September of the third year, Kuan Xuan and others raised an army to go to war, and martial law was imposed both at home and abroad.

古文：四年正月乙亥，月犯填星，在牵牛。
现代文：四年正月乙亥，月犯填星，在牵牛星之分野。
English: In the first month of the fourth year, Yihai, the moon criminal filled with stars, in the field of the cowherd star.

古文：占曰： 吴越有兵丧，女主忧。 
现代文：占卜说： 吴越有兵丧之事，女主忧难。 
English: The soothsayer said: Wu Yue has a soldier's funeral, and the mistress is sad.

古文：六月乙未，月又犯填星，在牵牛。
现代文：六月乙未，月又犯填星，在牵牛星之分野。
English: In June, the moon was once again full of stars, in the area of the Morning Glory.

古文：十月乙未，月奄岁星，在北河。
现代文：十月乙未，月奄岁星，在北河星之分野。
English: October 乙未, moon 奄岁 star, is in the field of Beihe star.

古文：占曰： 为饥，胡有兵。 
现代文：占卜说： 为饥，胡地有战乱。 
English: The soothsayer said: "Because of famine, there will be war in the Huts."

古文：其四年五月，孙恩破会稽，杀内史谢琰。
现代文：四年五月，孙恩攻破会稽，杀死内史谢琰。
English: In May of the fourth year, Sun En broke through the committee and killed Neishi Xie Yao.

古文：后又破高雅之于余姚，死者十七八。
现代文：后来又在余姚击败了高雅之，死亡人数有十之七八。
English: Later, it defeated Gao Yazhi in Yuyao, with a death toll of seven out of ten.

古文：七月，太皇太后李氏崩。
现代文：七月，太皇太后李氏去世。
English: In July, Empress Dowager Yi passed away.

古文：元兴元年，孙恩寇临海，人众饿死，散亡殆尽。
现代文：元兴元年，孙恩侵犯临海，饿死众多平民百姓，几乎全部离散逃亡。
English: In the first year of the Yuanxing, Sun En invaded Linhai, starved many civilians to death, and almost all of them scattered and fled.

古文：元兴元年四月辛丑，月奄辰星。
现代文：元兴元年四月辛丑，月亮振荡了辰星。
English: In April of the first year of the Great Leap Forward, the moon oscillated the hour star.

古文：七月，大饥，人相食。
现代文：七月，发生严重饥荒，人吃人。
English: In July, there was a severe famine and people were eating each other.

古文：二年十一月辛巳，月犯荧惑。
现代文：二年十一月辛巳日，月犯荧惑。
English: In November of the second year, on the day of Xin Si, the monthly delinquency was rampant.

古文：占悉同上。
现代文：占悉同上。
English: The divination is exactly the same as the previous one.

古文：二年十二月，桓玄篡位，放迁帝、后于寻阳，以永安何皇后为零陵君。
现代文：二年十二月，桓玄篡位，放迁帝、后于寻阳，以永安何皇后为零陵君。
English: In December of the second year, Huan Xuan usurped the throne, exiled the emperor, and later in the search for the sun, with the empress Yongan He as the zero mausoleum.

古文：三年二月，刘裕尽诛桓氏。
现代文：三年二月，刘裕将桓氏家族杀光。
English: In February of the third year, Liu Yu wiped out the Huan family.

古文：三年二月甲辰，月腌岁星于左角。
现代文：三年二月甲辰，月腌岁星于左角。
English: February 3rd, Jia Chen, the crescent moon rising in the left corner.

古文：占曰： 天下兵起。 
现代文：占卜说： 天下兵起。 
English: Divination says: There will be war in the world.

古文：是年二月丙辰，刘裕起义兵，杀桓修等。
现代文：是年二月丙辰，刘裕起义兵，杀死桓修等人。
English: In February of the same year, Liu Yu, a rebel, killed Kanshu and others.

古文：明年正月，众军攻桓振，卒灭诸桓。
现代文：第二年正月，各路人马攻打桓振，最终消灭了桓氏各族。
English: In the first month of the second year, people from all walks of life attacked Kuan Zhen, eventually wiping out all the tribes of the Kuan clan.

古文：义熙元年四月己卯，月犯填星，在东壁。
现代文：义熙元年四月己卯日，月犯土星，在东壁星的分野。
English: In April of the first year of Yixi, the moon collided with Saturn in the sector of the eastern wall star.

古文：占曰： 其地亡国。 
现代文：占卜说： 某地要亡国。 
English: The soothsayer said: A certain place is about to be destroyed.

古文：一曰： 贵人死。 
现代文：又说： 象徵贵人死亡。 
English: He also said: It symbolizes the death of a noble person.

古文：七月己未，月奄填星，在东壁。
现代文：七月己未日，月亮掩蔽土星，在东壁星之分野。
English: It's late July, and the moon is occulting Saturn in the eastern sky.

古文：占曰： 其国以伐己。 一曰： 人流。 
现代文：占卜说： 某国将因为讨伐而亡 一说： 象徵国人流亡。 
English: The divination said: A certain country will die because of the crusade. One said: It symbolizes the exile of the countrymen.

古文：十月丁巳，月奄填星，在营室。
现代文：十月丁巳，月奄土星，在营室星之分野。
English: October is just around the corner, and the Moon and Saturn are in the sector of the Camp of the Stars.

古文：占同上。
现代文：占同上。
English: That's the same as last year.

古文：十一月，荆州刺史魏咏之卒。
现代文：十一月，荆州刺史魏咏之去世。
English: In November, the Jingzhou assassin Shi Wei Junzhi passed away.

古文：二年二月，司马国璠等攻没弋阳。
现代文：二年二月，司马国璠等攻陷弋阳。
English: In February of the second year, Sima Guozhen and others invaded Shenyang.

古文：三年，恆徒扬州刺史王谧薨。
现代文：三年，司徒打扬州刺史王谧去世。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, Wang Xi of Yangzhou died.

古文：四年正月，太保、武陵王遵薨。
现代文：四年正月，太保、武陵王司马遵去世。
English: In the first month of the fourth year, Taiho and Wuling Wang Sima Zun passed away.

古文：三月，左仆射孔安国薨。
现代文：三月，左仆射孔安国去世。
English: In March, his left-hand man, Shoko Yasukuni, died.

古文：二年十二月丙午，月奄太白，在危。
现代文：二年十二月丙午日，月掩蔽太白星，在危星之分野。
English: On the afternoon of December 2nd, the moon occulted a very white star in the sector of dangerous stars.

古文：占曰： 齐亡国。 
现代文：占卜说： 齐亡国。 
English: Divination says: The country is doomed.

古文：一曰： 强国君死。 
现代文：又说： 强国之君将死。 
English: He also said, "The prince of a mighty nation is about to die."

古文：五年四月，刘裕大军北讨慕容超，卒灭之。
现代文：五年四月，刘裕大军北讨慕容超，最终消灭了他们。
English: In April of the fifth year, Liu Yu's army marched north to fight Murong Chao, and finally eliminated them.

古文：七年六月庚子，月犯岁星，在毕。
现代文：七年六月庚子，月亮侵犯了岁星，在毕星之分野。
English: In June of the seventh year of Geng Zi, the moon encroached on the year star, in the field of the year star.

古文：占曰： 有边兵，且饥。 
现代文：占卜说： 边境之地有战事，而且有饥荒。 
English: The diviner said: There is war on the borders, and there is famine.

古文：八月乙未，月犯岁星，在参。占曰： 益州兵饥。 
现代文：八月乙未，月亮冲犯了岁星，在参风韵生之分野。
English: In August, the moon will collide with the year star, in the field of wind and rhyme.

古文：七月，硃龄石克蜀，蜀人寻反，又讨之。
现代文：占卜说： 益州有战事和饥荒。 七月，朱龄石克蜀，蜀人很快造，朱龄又讨伐他们。
English: The soothsayer said: There are wars and famines in Yizhou. In July, Zhu Ling was attacked by the Shu people. The Shu people were quickly defeated, and Zhu Ling attacked them again.

古文：八年正月庚戌，月犯岁星，在毕。
现代文：八年正月庚戌，月犯岁星，在毕星之分野。
English: In the first month of the eighth year, Geng Zi, the moon criminal year star, is in the field of the year star.

古文：占同上。
现代文：占同上。
English: That's the same as last year.

古文：九年七月，硃龄石灭蜀。
现代文：九年七月，朱龄石灭了蜀国。
English: In July of the ninth year, Zhu Lingshi conquered Shu.

古文：十二年五月五月甲申，月犯岁星，在左角。
现代文：十二年五月五月甲申日，月犯岁星，在左角之分野。
English: On the twelfth day of the fifth month of the twelfth year, the moon criminal year star, in the left corner field.

古文：占曰： 为饥。 
现代文：占卜说： 会发生饥荒。 
English: The oracle says: There will be a famine.

古文：十四年四月壬申，月犯填星于张。
现代文：十四年四月壬申日，月亮冲犯了土星，在张星分野。
English: On April 14th, the Jinshin day, the moon collided with Saturn, in the zhang star field.

古文：占曰： 天下有大丧。 
现代文：占卜说： 天下有大丧。 
English: The soothsayer said: There is great sorrow in the world.

古文：其明年，帝崩。
现代文：这之后第二年，安帝去世。
English: The following year, Andi died.

古文：恭帝元熙元年七月，月犯岁星。
现代文：恭帝元熙元年七月，月亮冲犯岁星。
English: In July of the first year of Emperor Gong, the moon collided with the stars.

古文：占悉同上。
现代文：占卜完全与前面的占卜相同。
English: The divination is exactly the same as the previous one.

古文：十二月丁巳，月犯太白于羽林。
现代文：十二月丁巳，月亮在羽林星附近冲犯了太白星。
English: In December, the moon collided with Taibai Star near Hualin Star.

古文：二年六月，帝逊位，禅宋。
现代文：二年六月，恭帝退位，禅让给宋。
English: In June of the second year, Emperor Gong abdicated, and Zen was given to Song.

古文：○五星聚舍
现代文：○五星聚舍
English: ○ Five-star dormitories

古文：魏明帝太和四年七月壬戌，太白犯岁星。
现代文：魏明帝太和四年七月壬戌日，太白星星犯了岁星。
English: In July of the year 4 of the Wei and Ming Dynasties, the Taibai Star became the New Year Star.

古文：占曰； 太白犯五星，有大兵。 
现代文：占卜说； 太白星犯五星，有大规模战乱。 
English: Soothsayers say: Too white a star offends the five stars, and there will be large-scale wars.

古文：五年三月，诸葛亮以大众寇天水。
现代文：五年三月，诸葛亮率领大部队侵犯天水。
English: In March of the fifth year, Zhuge Liang led a large force to invade Tianshui.

古文：时宣帝为大将军，距退之。
现代文：当时宣帝任大将军，抵抗并击退了他们。
English: At that time, Emperor Xuanzong, who was a general, resisted and repulsed them.

古文：青龙二年二月己未，太白犯荧惑。
现代文：青龙二年二月己未日，太白星犯荧惑星。
English: In February of the second year of the blue dragon, the day had not yet come, and the white star became a fluorescent planet.

古文：占曰： 大兵起，有大战。 
现代文：占卜说： 将有大军发动，发生大规模战争。 
English: The soothsayer said: A great army will be unleashed and a large-scale war will occur.

古文：是年四月，诸葛亮据渭南，吴亦起兵应之，魏东西奔命。
现代文：这年四月，诸葛亮占据渭南，吴也起兵应合他，魏军向东西两方奔命。
English: In April of that year, Zhuge Liang occupied the south of Hunan, Wu also raised an army to meet him, and the Wei army ran for their lives to the east and west.

古文：惠帝元康三年，填星、岁星、太白三星聚于毕昴。
现代文：惠帝元康三年，土星、岁星、太白星三星聚于毕昴星附近。
English: In the third year of Hui Di Yuan Kang, Saturn, the Year Star, and the Three Stars of Taibai Star gathered near the Big Dipper.

古文：占曰： 为兵丧。
现代文：占卜说： 为兵丧。
English: The soothsayer said, "It is a soldier's funeral."

古文：毕昴，赵地也。 
现代文：毕昴是昴星，对应的是赵地。 
English: Bi is the star of Yin, corresponding to Zhao Di.

古文：後贾后陷杀太子，赵王废后，又杀之，斩张华、裴頠，遂篡位，废帝为太上皇，天下从此遘乱连祸。
现代文：其后贾后陷害并杀死太子，赵王废黜了皇后，又杀死了她，并斩杀了张华、裴頠，于是遂篡皇位，将废帝废为太上皇，天下从此动乱灾祸接连不断。
English: After that, Jia Hou framed and killed the prince, Zhao Wang deposed the queen, killed her again, and killed Zhang Hua and Pei Yao, so he usurped the throne and abolished the deposed emperor as the last emperor, and the world has been plagued by turmoil ever since.

古文：永宁二年十一月，荧惑、太白斗于虚危。
现代文：永宁二年十一月，荧惑、太白二星相斗于虚危宿。
English: In November of the second year of Yongning, the two stars of fluorescence and whiteness fought with each other in a dangerous place.

古文：占曰： 大兵起，破军杀将。
现代文：占卜说： 将有大规模战争发生，军队被击败，将领被斩杀。
English: The soothsayer said: There will be a large-scale war, the army will be defeated, and the generals will be killed.

古文：虚危，又齐分也。 
现代文：虚危宿，其分野之地是齐地。 
English: In the case of a dangerous lodging, the place of the field is the same.

古文：十二月，荧惑袭太白于营室。
现代文：十二月，荧惑星在营室星附近侵袭太白星。
English: In December, a fluorescent planet encroached on a white dwarf star near Yingmuro.

古文：占曰； 天下兵起，亡君之戒。 
现代文：占卜说； 天下会发生战乱，这是亡君的凶兆。 
English: The soothsayer said: There will be war in the world, which is a bad omen for the late emperor.

古文：一曰： 易相。 
现代文：又说： 将要更换国相。 
English: He also said that the country's minister would have to be replaced.

古文：初，齐王冏之京都，因留辅政，遂专傲无君。
现代文：最初，齐王司马冏到了京都，因而留下辅佐朝政，于是专横傲慢。
English: In the beginning, King Sima Yi of Qi came to Kyoto and remained an aide to the imperial government, and he became arrogant and domineering.

古文：是月，成都、河间檄长沙王乂讨之，冏、乂交战，攻焚宫阙，冏兵败，夷灭。
现代文：目无君主，这一月中，成都王、河间王传檄文给长沙王司马乂讨伐他之，司马冏、司马乂交战，攻打焚烧皇朝宫殿，司马冏兵败，被诛杀消灭。
English: In the middle of this month, the king of Chengdu and the king of Hema sent a letter to the king of Changsha, Sima Yi, to fight against him. Sima Yi and Sima Yi fought, attacked and burned the imperial palace, and Sima Yi was defeated and killed.

古文：又杀其兄上军将军寔以下二千余人。
现代文：又斩杀了他的哥哥上军将军司马寔以下二千余人。
English: He also killed more than two thousand people, including his brother, General Sima Yu, who had joined the army.

古文：太安二年，成都又攻长沙，于是公私饥困，百姓力屈。
现代文：太安二年，成都王又攻打长沙王，于是公家私家均饥苦困顿，百姓财力殆尽。
English: In the 2nd year of Taian, the king of Chengdu attacked the king of Changsha again. As a result, both the public and private sectors were starving, and the people's financial resources were exhausted.

古文：太安三年正月，荧惑犯岁星。
现代文：太安三年正月，荧惑犯岁星。
English: In the first month of the third year of the Taian era, the year star was born.

古文：占曰： 有战。 
现代文：占卜说： 会发生战争。 
English: The soothsayer said: There will be war.

古文：七月。
现代文：七月。
English: July.

古文：左卫将军陈奉帝伐成都，六军败绩。光熙元年九月，填星犯岁星。
现代文：左卫将军陈眕奉帝伐成都，六军惨败。光熙元年九月，土星犯岁星。
English: In September of the first year of the Guangxi dynasty, Saturn was the lucky star.

古文：占曰： 填与岁合，为内乱。 
现代文：占卜说： 土星与岁星会合，是内乱的徵兆。 
English: Divination says: Saturn's conjunction with the year star is a sign of civil unrest.

古文：是时司马越专权，终以无礼破灭，内乱之应也。
现代文：当时司马越专权，最终因为傲慢无礼被消灭，正是内乱的应验。
English: At that time, Sima Yue's autocratic power was finally eliminated because of arrogance and rudeness, which was the fulfillment of civil unrest.

古文：十二月癸未，太白犯填星。
现代文：十二月癸未日，太白星犯土星。
English: On the last day of December, Taibai Xing fell in love with Saturn.

古文：占曰： 为内兵，有大战。 
现代文：占卜说： 国内将发生兵乱，有大规模战争。 
English: The soothsayer said: There will be civil unrest in the country and a large-scale war.

古文：是后河间王为东海王越所杀。
现代文：这之后河间王为东海王越所杀。
English: After that, King Kawama was killed by King Yue of the East Sea.

古文：明年正月，东海王越杀诸葛玫等。
现代文：第二年正月，东海王越杀诸葛玫等。
English: In the first month of the second year, Wang Yue of the East Sea killed Zhuge Mei and others.

古文：五月，汲桑破冯嵩，杀东燕王。
现代文：五月，汲桑打败了冯嵩的部队，杀死了东燕王。
English: In May, Kuisang defeated Feng Song's troops and killed Dongyan Wang.

古文：八月，苟晞大破汲桑。
现代文：八月，苟晞大破汲桑。
English: In August, ginseng is in full bloom.

古文：怀帝永嘉六年七月，荧惑、岁星、太白聚牛、女之间，徘徊进退。
现代文：怀帝永嘉六年七月，荧惑、岁星、太白星聚于牛宿、女宿之间，徘徊进退。
English: In July of the sixth year of the Yongjia Emperor's reign, the fluorescent, the year star, and the too-white star gathered in the cattle inn and the women's inn, wandering in and out.

古文：案占曰： 牛女，扬州分 ，是后两都倾覆，而元帝中兴场土。
现代文：案占卜说： 牛宿女宿，在扬州分野 ，这之后两都颓败倾覆，而元帝在扬州大地得以中兴。
English: The divination said: the Cow Inn and the Girl's Inn are in the Yangzhou area, after which both were defeated and overturned, and the Yuan Emperor was able to prosper in the Yangzhou area.

古文：建武元年五月癸未，太白、荧惑合于东井。
现代文：建武元年五月癸未，太白星、荧惑二星在东井附近会合。
English: In the early morning of May in the first year of Jianwu, the two stars of Taibai and Fu Rong met near Dongjing.

古文：占曰： 金火合曰烁，为丧。 
现代文：占卜说： 金、火相合叫做烁，预兆有丧事。 
English: The soothsayer said, "The combination of gold and fire is called a scintillation, and it is an omen of death."

古文：是时愍帝蒙尘于平阳，七月崩于寇庭。
现代文：当时愍帝蒙难流落在平阳，七月死于寇庭之地。
English: At that time, Emperor Gao was exiled to Pingyang, and died in July in the land of Kuotian.

古文：元帝太兴二年七月甲午，岁星、荧惑会于东井。
现代文：元帝太兴二年七月甲午，岁星、荧惑星在东井附近会合。
English: On the first afternoon of July in the second year of the Yuan Emperor Taixing, the year star and the fluorescent planet rendezvoused near Dongjing.

古文：八月乙未，太白犯岁星，合在翼。
现代文：八月乙未日，太白星犯岁星，在翼星附近会合。
English: On August 18th, the Taibai Star and the New Year's Eve Star meet near the Winged Star.

古文：占曰： 为兵饥。 
现代文：占卜说： 是军队闹饥荒的徵兆。 
English: The soothsayer said: It portends a famine in the army.

古文：三年六月丙辰，太白与岁星合于房。
现代文：三年六月丙辰日，太白星与岁星在房宿附近会合。
English: On the third day of June, Taibai Xing and Jiuxing met near their room.

古文：占同上。
现代文：占卜同上。
English: That's the same as last year.

古文：永昌元年王敦攻京师，六军败绩。
现代文：永昌元年王敦攻打京师，六军大败。
English: In the first year of Yongchang, Wang Dun attacked the Beijing division, and the six armies were defeated.

古文：王敦寻死。
现代文：王敦不久就去世了。
English: Wang Dong died soon after.

古文：成帝咸康三年十一月乙丑，太白犯岁星于营室。
现代文：成帝咸康三年十一月乙丑日，太白星犯岁星于营室。
English: On the second day of the eleventh month of the third year of Emperor Chengxiankang, Taibaixing committed a New Year's Eve in the camp room.

古文：占曰： 为兵饥。 
现代文：占卜说： 是军队闹饥荒的徵兆。 
English: The soothsayer said: It portends a famine in the army.

古文：四年二月，石季龙破幽州，迁万余家以南。
现代文：四年二月，石季龙攻占了幽州，将万余家百姓迁往南方。
English: In February of the fourth year, Shi Jilong captured Yuzhou and moved more than 10,000 people to the south.

古文：五年，季龙众五万寇沔南，略七千余家而去。
现代文：五年，石季龙率领五万敌军侵犯沔南，抢掠了七千余家百姓而去。
English: In five years, Shi Jilong led fifty thousand enemy troops to invade southern Anhui Province, robbed more than seven thousand people and left.

古文：又骑二万围陷邾城，杀略五千余人。
现代文：又率两万骑兵围困并攻陷了邾城，斩杀、抢掠了五千余人。
English: He also led twenty thousand cavalrymen to besiege and capture Lucheng, killing and robbing more than five thousand people.

古文：四年十二月癸丑，太白犯填星，在箕。
现代文：四年十二月癸丑日，太白星犯土星，在箕宿的附近。
English: On the day of the Ugly Duckling in December of the fourth year, Taibai Star fell in love with Saturn, in the vicinity of Oshuku.

古文：占曰： 王者亡地。 
现代文：占卜说： 君主会丧失土地。 
English: The oracle said: The monarch will lose his land.

古文：七年，慕容皝自称燕王。
现代文：七年，慕容皝自称燕王。
English: For seven years, Murong Yao called himself the King of Swallows.

古文：七年三月，太白荧惑合于太微中，犯左执法。
现代文：七年三月，太白星荧惑星在太微中会合，冲犯了左执法星。
English: In March of the seventh year, the Taibai star and the fluorescent planet met in the Taibai, and collided with the left law enforcement star.

古文：明年，显宗崩。
现代文：第二年，显宗去世。
English: The following year, Emperor Gensong passed away.

古文：八年十二月己酉，太白犯荧惑于胃。
现代文：八年十二月己酉，太白星犯荧惑星在胃宿附近。
English: In December of the same year, the Taibai star collided with the fluorescent planet near the gastric inn.

古文：占曰： 大兵起。 
现代文：占卜说： 将有大规模战争发生。 
English: The oracle said: There will be a large-scale war.

古文：其后庾翼大发兵，谋伐石季龙，专制上流。
现代文：这之后庾翼大举发兵，谋伐要讨石季龙，从而在高层得以专制。
English: After that, Gong Ying sent troops in large numbers to fight against Shi Jilong, thus achieving autocracy at the top level.

古文：康帝建元元年八月丁未，太白犯岁星，在轸。
现代文：康帝建元元年八月丁未日，太白星犯岁星，在轸宿附近。
English: On the eve of August in the year of Kangdi Jianyuan, Taibai Star committed the New Year's Eve, in the vicinity of Oshuku.

古文：占曰： 有大兵。 
现代文：占卜说： 将发生大规模战争。 
English: The soothsayer said: There will be a large-scale war.

古文：是年石季龙将刘宁寇没狄道。
现代文：这一年石季龙的将领刘宁侵犯攻陷了狄道。
English: This year, Shi Jilong's general Liu Ning invaded and captured Dido.

古文：穆帝永和四年五月，荧惑入娄，犯填星。
现代文：穆帝永和四年五月，荧惑星进入娄宿，冲犯了土星。
English: In the fourth year of Mu Di Yong and May, the fluorescent planet entered the Pleiades and collided with Saturn.

古文：占曰： 兵大起，有丧，灾在赵。 
现代文：占卜说： 战乱大规模发生，有丧事，灾难产生在赵地。 
English: Divination says: Large-scale wars occur, there are funerals, and disasters occur in Zhao.

古文：其年石季龙死，来年冉闵杀石遵及诸胡十万余人，其后褚裒北伐，丧众而薨。
现代文：这一年石季龙死了，第二年冉闵杀了石遵及各少数民族十万余人，其后褚裒向北讨伐，丧失军队而死亡。
English: In the same year, Shi Jilong died, and the following year, Ran Zheng killed more than 100,000 people from the Shizhong and other ethnic minorities. Later, Ran Zheng marched north and died after losing his army.

古文：六年三月戊戌，荧惑犯岁星。
现代文：六年三月戊戌日，荧惑犯岁星。
English: In March of the sixth year, the day of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year.

古文：占曰： 为战。 
现代文：占卜说： 有战争。 
English: The soothsayer said: There will be war.

古文：七年三月戊子，岁星、荧惑合于奎。
现代文：七年三月戊子，岁星、荧惑合于奎宿。
English: In March of the seventh year, Bo Zi, the year star, and Fu Zhao met in Kui Shuku.

古文：其年刘显杀石祗及诸胡帅，中士大乱。
现代文：这年刘显杀石祗及各位胡人将领，中原地带大乱。
English: In this year, Liu Xian killed Shijie and all the Hu generals, and the Central Plains region was in turmoil.

古文：十二有年七月丁卯，太白犯填星，在柳。
现代文：十二有年七月丁卯日，太白星在柳宿附近冲犯了土星。
English: On the twelfth day of the seventh month of the twelfth year, Taibai Star collided with Saturn near the willow lodge.

古文：占曰： 周地有大兵。 
现代文：占卜说： 周地有大战事。 
English: The soothsayer said: There will be a great war in the surrounding area.

古文：其年八月，桓温伐苻健，退，因破姚襄于伊水，定周地。
现代文：这年八月，桓温伐苻健，败退，顺势在伊水击破了姚襄，稳定了周地。
English: In August of this year, Huan Wen defeated Yao Xiang in Yishui and stabilized Zhou.

古文：升平二年八月戊午，荧惑犯填星，在张。
现代文：升平二年八月戊午，荧惑犯土星，在张宿附近。
English: In August of the 2nd year of the Heian period, at noon, the planet Saturn was sighted in the vicinity of Zhangshu.

古文：占曰： 兵大起。 
现代文：占卜说： 兵大起。 
English: The soothsayer said: The army will rise up.

古文：三年八月庚午，太白犯填星，在太微中。
现代文：三年八月庚午，太白星犯土星，在太微之中。
English: In the afternoon of August 3, Taibai Star met Saturn, in the middle of Taibai.

古文：占曰： 王者恶之。 
现代文：占卜说： 王者以此为恶。 
English: The diviner said, "The king has done evil in this."

古文：五年十月丁卯，荧惑犯岁星，在营室。
现代文：五年十月丁卯日，荧惑星在营室附近冲犯了岁星。
English: In October of the fifth year, on the day of Dingwu, the fluorescent planet collided with the year star near the camp room.

古文：占曰： 大臣有匿谋。 
现代文：占卜说： 大臣有匿谋。 
English: Divination says: The minister has a hidden agenda.

古文：一曰： 卫地有兵。 
现代文：又说： 卫地有战乱。 
English: He also said, "There is war in the North."

古文：时桓温擅权，谋移晋室。
现代文：当时桓温擅权，阴谋策划颠覆晋室。
English: At that time, Kuan-Wen usurped power and plotted to overthrow Jinshitsu.

古文：海西公太和元年八月戊午，太白犯岁星，在太微中。
现代文：海西公太和元年八月戊午，太白星犯岁星，在太微之中。
English: In the afternoon of August in the first year of the Heisei era, the Taibai Star, the New Year's Eve Star, appeared in the Taibai.

古文：三年六月甲寅，太白奄荧惑，在太微端门中。
现代文：三年六月甲寅日，太白星掩蔽了荧惑星，在太微端门之中。
English: In June of the third year, on the day of Jia Yin, the white star covered the fluorescent planet, in the middle of the gate.

古文：六年，海西公废。
现代文：六年，海西公被废。
English: Six years later, Haixi Gong was abolished.

古文：简文咸安二年正月己酉，岁星犯填星，在须女。
现代文：简文咸安二年正月己酉，岁星在须女星的附近犯了土星。
English: In the first month of the second year of Xian'an, the year star made Saturn in the vicinity of the female star.

古文：占曰： 为内乱。 
现代文：占卜说： 将发生内乱。 
English: Divination says: There will be civil unrest.

古文：七月，帝崩，桓温擅权，谋杀侍中王坦之等，内乱之应。
现代文：七月，穆帝去世，桓温擅权，谋杀侍中王坦之等人，正是内乱之应。
English: In July, Mu Di died, and Kuan Wen usurped power, murdering the chamberlain Wang Tan Zhi and others, which was exactly the time for civil unrest.

古文：孝武宁康二年十一月癸酉，太白奄荧惑，在营室。
现代文：孝武宁康二年十一月癸酉日，太白星掩蔽了荧惑星，在营室星附近。
English: On the 30th day of November in the second year of Xiaowu Ningkang, Taibai Star occulted a fluorescent planet, near Yingmuro Star.

古文：占曰： 金火合为烁，为兵丧。 
现代文：占卜说： 金火合为烁，预示着战争丧亡。 
English: The soothsayer said, "When gold and fire combine to form a spark, it portends the loss of war."

古文：太元元年七月，苻坚伐凉州，破之，虏张天锡。
现代文：太元元年七月，苻坚讨伐凉州，并攻破了它，俘虏了张天锡。
English: In July of the first year of the Taiyuan era, Zou Jian besieged and defeated Liangzhou and captured Zhang Tianxi.

古文：太元十一年十二月己丑，太白犯岁星。
现代文：太元十一年十二月己丑日，太白星犯岁星。
English: December of the eleventh year of the Taigen was an ugly day, and the Taibai Star was the star of the year.

古文：占曰： 为兵饥。 
现代文：占卜说： 预示着军队有饥荒。 
English: The soothsayer said: It portends a famine in the army.

古文：是时河朔未平，兵连在外，冬大饥。
现代文：当时黄河以北未平定，军队连年在外，冬天发生了严重的饥荒。
English: At that time, the north of the Yellow River was not pacified, the army was away for years, and a severe famine occurred in the winter.

古文：十七年九月丁丑，岁星、荧惑、填星同在亢、氐。
现代文：十七年九月丁丑日，岁星、荧惑星、土星同时出现在亢宿、氐宿附近。
English: On September 17th, the day of the Ugly Duckling, the year star, the fluorescent planet, and Saturn all appeared at the same time in and near Oshuku.

古文：十二月癸酉，填星去，荧惑、岁星犹合。
现代文：十二月癸酉日，土星离去，荧惑星、岁星仍会合在一起。
English: On the third day of December, Saturn left, but the fluorescent planet and the new year star still gathered together.

古文：占曰： 三星合，是谓惊立绝行，内外有兵丧与饥，改立王公。 十九年十月，太白、填星、荧惑辰星合于氐。
现代文：占卜说： 三星会合，这就是中断了星宿正常运行，预示内外将有兵丧的饥荒，要改立君王公卿 十九年十月，太白星、土星、荧惑星会合于氐宿附近。
English: The soothsayer said: The three stars meeting, that is, the normal operation of the stars was interrupted, indicating that there would be a famine of military deaths at home and abroad, and kings and nobles should be re-established. In October of the 19th year, the white star, Saturn, and the fluorescent planet met near Pengshu.

古文：十二月癸丑，太白犯岁星，在斗。
现代文：十二月癸丑日，太白星犯岁星，在斗宿。
English: On the day of the Ugly Duckling in December, Taibai Xing committed the New Year's Eve, at Douju.

古文：占曰： 为乱饥，为内兵。
现代文：占卜说： 预示着有动乱饥荒。国内有战事。
English: The soothsayer said: It portends turmoil and famine. There will be war in the country.

古文：斗吴越分。 
现代文：斗宿，是吴越两地的分野。 
English: Duoshuku is a field of the two places in Wu and Yue.

古文：至隆字元年，王恭等举兵，显王国宝之罪，朝廷杀之。
现代文：到隆安元年，王恭等人举兵发难，彰扬王国宝的罪过，朝廷斩杀了他。
English: In the first year of the Long'an era, Wang Qiong and others raised an army and launched an attack, extolling the sins of the kingdom treasure, and the court killed him.

古文：是后连岁水旱饥。
现代文：这之后连年发生水旱饥荒。
English: This was followed by years of drought and famine.

古文：安帝隆安元年二月，岁星、荧惑皆入羽林。
现代文：安帝隆安元年二月，岁星、荧惑都是入羽林。
English: In February of the first year of An Di Rong'an, the New Year's Star and the Fluorescent Illumination were both in the feather forest.

古文：占曰： 中军兵起。 
现代文：占卜说： 中军将有战事。 
English: The soothsayer said: The Chinese army will be at war.

古文：四月，王恭等举兵，内外戒严。
现代文：四月，王恭等举兵问事，内外戒严。
English: In April, Wang Qiong and others raised an army, and martial law was imposed at home and abroad.

古文：元兴元年八月庚子，太白犯岁星，在上将东南。
现代文：元兴元年八月庚子日，太白星犯岁星，在上将星的东南方。
English: On Geng Zi Day in August of the first year of the Guangxing Dynasty, the Taibai Star, the New Year's Eve Star, was in the southeast of the Shang Zheng Star.

古文：占曰： 楚兵饥。 
现代文：占卜说： 楚地之兵会发生饥荒。 
English: The soothsayer said: There will be a famine among the soldiers of Chu.

古文：一曰： 灾在上将。 
现代文：又说： 灾难发生在上将星的分野之地。 
English: He also said: The disaster occurred in the general star field.

古文：二年，桓玄篡位。
现代文：二年，桓玄篡位。
English: In the second year, Kangen usurped the throne.

古文：三年，刘裕尽诛桓氏。
现代文：三年，刘裕将桓氏家族尽行斩杀。
English: Three years later, Liu Yu killed the entire Huan family.

古文：二年十月丁丑，太白犯填星，在娄。
现代文：二年十月丁丑日，太白星犯土星，在娄宿附近。
English: In October of the second year, on the day of the Ugly Duckling, Taibai Star fell in love with Saturn, in the vicinity of Oshuku.

古文：占同上。
现代文：占同上。
English: That's the same as last year.

古文：三年二月壬辰，太白、荧惑合于羽林。
现代文：三年二月壬辰日，太白星、荧惑星在羽林星附近会合。
English: In February of the third year, on the day of Yinchuan, Taibai Star and Fluorescent Planet rendezvoused in the vicinity of Yulin Star.

古文：二年十二月，桓玄篡位，放迁帝、后。
现代文：二年十二月，桓玄篡位成功，将安帝、皇后流行到外面。
English: In December of the second year, Kuan Xuan succeeded in usurping the throne, spreading the rumours about Emperor An and Empress Dowager to the outside world.

古文：三年二月，刘裕起义兵，桓玄逼帝东下。
现代文：三年二月，刘裕发动义兵，桓玄逼迫安帝东下。
English: In February of the third year, Liu Yu mobilized volunteers, and Kuan Xuan forced An Di to leave for the east.

古文：义熙二年十二月丁未，荧惑、太白皆入羽林，又合于壁。
现代文：义熙二年十二月丁未，荧惑星、太白星都是入羽林星，又在壁宿附近会合。
English: On the evening of December in the second year of Yixi, the fluorescent planet and the too-white star both entered the feather forest star, and met again near the wall lodge.

古文：三年正月，慕容超寇淮北、徐州，至下邳。
现代文：三年正月，慕容超进犯淮北、徐州，直至下邳。
English: In the first month of the third year, Murong Chao invaded Huaibei and Xuzhou, until the end of the year.

古文：八月，遣刘敬宣伐蜀。
现代文：八月，派遣刘敬宣伐蜀。
English: In August, Liu Jing was dispatched to preach the destruction of Shu.

古文：三年二月癸亥，荧惑、填星、太白、辰星聚于奎、娄、从填星也，徐州分。
现代文：三年二月癸亥日，荧惑星、土星、太白星、辰星聚于奎宿、娄宿附近、随从着土星，徐州之分野。
English: In February of the third year, on the day of the Boar, the fluorescent planets, Saturn, Taibai Star, and Chenzing Star gathered in the vicinity of Kuishuku and Shishuku, followed by Saturn and Xuzhou.

古文：是时，慕容超僭号于齐，兵连徐兗，连岁寇抄，至于淮泗，姚兴、谯纵僭号秦蜀，卢循及魏南北交侵。
现代文：当时，慕容超在齐地称越名号，军事部署从徐州直至兖州，连年进犯抢掠，一直到淮水泗水。姚兴、谯纵分别在秦地蜀地称越名号。卢循和魏从南北各方相交入侵。
English: At that time, Murong Chao claimed the name of Yue in Qi, and the military deployment from Xuzhou to Bozhou attacked and plundered for years, all the way to Huai Shui and Surabaya. Yao Xing and Xiang Zong claimed the name of Yue in Qin and Shu respectively. Lu Xun and Wei invaded each other from the north and south.

古文：其五年，刘裕北殄慕容超。
现代文：五年，刘裕向北灭掉了慕容超。
English: In five years, Liu Yu eliminated Murong Chao to the north.

古文：其六月辛卯，荧惑犯辰星，在翼。
现代文：六月辛卯日，荧惑星犯辰星，在翼宿。
English: On the day of June Xinwu, the fluorescent planet Zongcheng star, in the wing.

古文：占曰： 天下兵起。 
现代文：占卜说： 天下将有战乱发生。 
English: Divination says: There will be war in the world.

古文：八月己卯，太白奄荧惑。
现代文：八月己卯，太白星振荡了荧惑星。
English: In August, the Taibai star oscillated the fluorescent planet.

古文：占曰： 有大兵。 
现代文：占卜说： 将发生大规模战事。 
English: The soothsayer said: There will be a large-scale war.

古文：其四年，姚略遣众征赫连勃勃，大为所破。
现代文：四年，姚略派遣众将士征伐赫连勃勃，被他们打得大败。
English: In four years, Yao Liao dispatched a large number of soldiers to conquer Herengong, and was defeated by them.

古文：五年四月甲戌，荧惑犯辰星，在东井。
现代文：五年四月甲戌日，荧惑星犯辰星，在东井宿。
English: In April of the fifth year, on the day of the Armor, the fluorescent planet committed the star, in Higashiijuku.

古文：占曰： 皆为兵。 
现代文：占卜说： 都会发生战事。 
English: Divination says: There will be war.

古文：十二月辛丑，太白犯岁星，在奎。
现代文：十二月辛丑日，太白星犯岁星，在奎宿附近。
English: December Xin Ugly Day, Tai Bai Xing Xuan Xing, in the vicinity of Kui Shuku.

古文：占曰： 大兵起，鲁有兵。 
现代文：占卜说： 大规模战乱将会发生，鲁地有战乱。 
English: The soothsayer said: Large-scale wars will occur, and there will be wars in the Ludian region.

古文：是年四月，刘裕讨慕容超。
现代文：这年四月，刘裕征讨慕容超。
English: In April of this year, Liu Yusei went after Murong Chao.

古文：六年二月，灭慕容超于鲁地。
现代文：六年二月，在鲁地灭掉慕容超。
English: In February of the sixth year, Murong Chao was eliminated in Ludi.

古文：七年七月丁卯，岁星犯填星，在参。
现代文：七年七月丁卯日，岁星犯土星，在参宿附近。
English: In July of the seventh year, on the day of Dingwu, the new year's star, Saturn, was close to Betelgeuse.

古文：占曰： 岁填合，为内乱。 
现代文：占卜说： 岁星、土星相会全，是内乱的徵兆。 
English: Divination says: The meeting of the year star and Saturn is a sign of civil unrest.

古文：一曰： 益州战，不胜，亡地。 
现代文：又说： 益州会发生战争，不能取胜，会丧失土地。 
English: He also said: There will be a war in Yizhou, if we cannot win, we will lose our land.

古文：是时硃龄石伐蜀，后竟灭之。
现代文：这时朱龄石伐蜀地，后来竟灭亡了它。
English: At this time, Zhu Lingshi felled Shu, and later it actually perished.

古文：明年，诛谢混、刘毅。
现代文：第二年，诛杀了谢混、刘毅。
English: The following year, he killed Xie Ming and Liu Yi.

古文：八年七月甲申，太白犯填星，在东井。
现代文：八年七月甲申日，太白星犯土星，在东井宿附近。
English: On July 6th, Taibai Xing fell in love with Saturn, in the vicinity of Dongjing Inn.

古文：占曰： 秦有大兵。 
现代文：占卜说： 秦地有大规模战乱。 
English: The soothsayer said: There is a large-scale war in Qin.

古文：九年二月丙午，荧惑、填星皆犯东井。
现代文：九年二月丙午日，荧惑星、土星都是犯东井宿。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of February in the ninth year, the fluorescent planet and Saturn are both in the east.

古文：占曰？ 秦有兵。 
现代文：占卜说？ 秦地有战事。 
English: According to divination, there is war in Qin.

古文：三月壬辰，岁星、荧惑、填星、太白聚于东井，从岁星也。
现代文：三月壬辰日，岁星、荧惑星、土星、太白星聚于东井宿，随从着岁星。
English: On the day of Imjin in March, the year star, the fluorescent planet, Saturn, and Taibai star gather in Higashii-juku, following the year star.

古文：东井，秦分。
现代文：东井，是秦地之分野。
English: East well, is the field of Qin and Qian.

古文：十三年，刘裕定关中，其后遂移晋祚。
现代文：十三年，刘裕平定了关中，这之后就将晋的君位传承摇动了。
English: Thirteen years ago, Liu Yu leveled Guanzhong, after which Jin's royal succession was shaken.

古文：十四年十月癸巳，荧惑入太微，犯西蕃上将，仍顺行至左掖门内，留二十日乃逆行。
现代文：十四年十月癸巳，荧惑星进入太微之中，犯了西蕃上将星，仍顺行至左掖门内，停留二十日再逆行。
English: On October 14th, the fluorescent planet entered the great void and collided with the West Dragon Admiral Star. It still moved along to the inner part of the left main gate, stayed there for 20 days, and then moved backwards.

古文：至恭帝元熙元年三月五日，出西蕃上将西三尺许，又顺还入太微。
现代文：至恭帝元熙元年三月五日，离开西蕃上将星向西三尺左右，又顺行回到太微之中。
English: On March 5, the first year of the reign of Emperor Goryeo, he left Xi'an and headed west for about three feet, and then returned to Taibai.

古文：时填星在太微，荧惑绕填星成钩己，其年四月丙戌，从端门出。
现代文：当时土星在太微之中，荧惑星和土星成钩己形，这年四月丙戌日，从端门离去。
English: At that time, Saturn was too faint, and the fluorescent planet and Saturn formed a hook shape, and left from the end gate in April this year.

古文：占曰： 荧惑填星钩己天庭，天下更纪。 
现代文：占卜说： 荧惑星和土星钩己形于天庭，天下将变更朝纪。 
English: The soothsayer said: The fluorescent planet and the Saturn hook have formed in the heavens, and the world will change the morning discipline.

古文：十二月，安帝母弟琅邪王践阼，是曰恭帝。
现代文：十二月，安帝的同母弟弟琅邪王即位为天子，这就是恭帝。
English: In December, Emperor An's younger brother by the same mother, Emperor He, ascended to the throne as the Son of Heaven. This is Emperor Gong.

古文：来年，禅于宋。
现代文：第二年，禅位给宋。
English: In the second year, the post of Zen master was given to Song.

