古文：取善辅仁，皆资朋友；往来交际，迭为主宾。
现代文：吸取朋友的长处来培养自己的仁德，讲的是依靠朋友；朋友之间的往来交际，是轮流做主人和客人。
English: To draw on the strengths of friends to cultivate one's own benevolence is to rely on friends; the interaction between friends is to take turns as host and guest.

古文：尔我同心，曰金兰；朋友相资，曰丽泽。
现代文：你我同心的朋友叫做 金兰 ；朋友之间的相互资助叫做 丽泽 。
English: Your friend with whom you share the same heart is called Jinlan; mutual support between friends is called Lizhe.

古文：东家曰东主，师傅曰西宾。
现代文：东家叫做 东主 ，师傅叫做 西宾 。
English: The host family is called the host family, and the master is called the master.

古文：父所交游，尊为父执；己所共事，谓之同袍。
现代文：父亲的朋友尊为 父执 ；与自己共事的人称为 同袍 。
English: A father's friend is respected as a father; a person who works with him is called a comrade.

古文：心志相孚为莫逆，老幼相交曰忘年。
现代文：心意相通坦诚相待的朋友称为 莫逆 ，老人和年轻的人交朋友称作 忘年 。
English: Friends who are like-minded and treat each other with sincerity are called "Mochou," and old people and young people who make friends are called "Forgotten Years."

古文：刎颈交，相如与廉颇；总角好，孙策与周瑜。
现代文： 刎颈之交 ，说的是战国时候的蔺相如和廉颇生死与共的情谊； 总角之好 ，是说三国时期的孙策和周瑜在小的时候就是好朋友。
English: The neck-to-neck friendship refers to the friendship between Sun Ce and Zhou Yu during the Warring States period; the overall angle is good, which means that Sun Ce and Zhou Yu during the Three Kingdoms period were good friends when they were young.

古文：胶漆相投，陈重之与雷义；鸡黍之约，元伯之与巨卿。
现代文：像胶漆一样粘在一起的友谊，说的是雷义和陈重坚不可破的友情；虽然隔了两年依然杀鸡作黍等待好友到来，说的是范式和张劭的约定。
English: The friendship that sticks together like glue paint refers to the unbreakable friendship between Lei Yi and Chen Chong; although two years have passed, they are still waiting for their friends to arrive, they are talking about the agreement between the paradigm and Zhang Ye.

古文：与善人交，如入芝兰之室，久而不闻其香；与恶人交，如入鲍鱼之肆，久而不闻其臭。
现代文：和好人交往，就像进入放满香草的屋子，时间久了就无法闻到它的香味了；和恶人交往，就好像进入了卖咸鱼的铺子，时间久了也闻不到它的腥臭味了。
English: To associate with good people is like entering a room full of herbs, and after a long time you can't smell the fragrance; to associate with evil people is like entering a shop selling salted fish, and after a long time you can't smell the stench.

古文：肝胆相照，斯为腹心之友；意气不孚，谓之口头之交。
现代文：以诚相待，这才是推心置腹的朋友；志趣不同，只可算做口头上的交情。
English: Treating each other with sincerity, this is a true friend; different interests, can only be regarded as a verbal friendship.

古文：彼此不合，谓之参商；尔我相仇，如同冰炭。
现代文：彼此之间的不合，称之为 参商 ；你我相互仇视，就像不能兼容的冰炭。
English: The disagreement between each other is called "negotiation"; you and I hate each other, like incompatible ice coals.

古文：民之失德，乾糇以愆；他山之石，可以攻玉。
现代文：人如果丧失道德，朋友间连干粮这样的小事情也可能会发生纠纷；别的山上的石头可以用来雕琢玉器。
English: If one loses one's morality, even such a small matter as dry grain may cause disputes among friends; other stones on the mountain can be used to carve jade.

古文：落月屋梁，相思颜色；暮云春树，想望丰仪。
现代文： 落月屋梁 是描绘杜甫梦见李白的容颜； 暮云春树 则表达了杜甫想望李白的风采。
English: The fallen moon roof beam is a depiction of Du Fu's dream of Li Bai's face; the twilight cloud spring tree expresses Du Fu's desire for Li Bai's style.

古文：王阳在位，贡禹弹冠以待荐；杜伯非罪，左儒宁死不徇君。
现代文：王阳当了官，贡禹就弹掉自己帽子上的灰尘等待被推荐做官；杜伯无罪却被杀，左儒宁愿与朋友一起死也不屈从周宣王。
English: Wang Yang became an official, Gong Yu flicked the dust off his hat and waited to be recommended as an official; Du Bo was innocent but was killed, Zuo Ru would rather die with his friends than submit to Zhou Xuan Wang.

古文：分首判袂，叙别之辞；拥彗扫门，迎迓之敬。
现代文： 分首 和 判袂 都是表示朋友告别的词语； 拥彗 和 扫门 ，则是迎接客人的到来而表示的敬意。
English: "分首" and "判" are words used to say goodbye to a friend, while "拥彗星" and "扫门" are expressions of respect for the arrival of a guest.

古文：陆凯折梅逢驿使，聊寄江南一枝春；王维折柳赠行人，遂唱《阳关三叠》曲。
现代文：陆凯折一枝梅花托驿使转给范晔，告诉他江南早春的信息；王维折一枝柳条送给将远行的朋友，于是有了《阳关三叠》曲。
English: Lu Kai folded a plum blossom and gave it to Fan Yu, telling him the message of the early spring in the south of the Yangtze River; Wang Wei folded a willow branch to give to a friend who was going to travel far away, so there was a "Yangguan Triad" song.

古文：频来无忌，乃云入幕之宾；不请自来，谓之不速之客。
现代文：经常来往没有顾忌的人，称之为 入幕之宾 ；不请却自己来的客人，称之为 不速之客 。
English: People who often come and go without scruples are called "guests of the curtain"; guests who are not invited but come on their own are called "uninvited guests."

古文：醴酒不设，楚王戊待士之意怠；投辖于井，汉陈遵留客之心诚。
现代文：宴会不再设醴酒，说明楚王戊对待士人的心意已经大不如前了；把车轴上的销钉丢入井中，说明汉代陈遵挽留客人的心非常诚恳。
English: The banquet no longer features wine, indicating that Chu Wang Wu's intention to treat the scholars is not as good as before; throwing the pins on the axle into the well indicates that the Han Dynasty Chen Zun's guests are very sincere.

古文：蔡邕倒屣以迎宾，周公握发而待士。
现代文：蔡邕急着迎接客人把鞋子都穿倒了，周公洗头发的时候有客人来访，他捏着头发就出去了。
English: When Zhou Gong was washing his hair, a guest came to visit. He pinched his hair and went out.

古文：陈蕃器重徐稚，下榻相延；孔子道遇程生，倾盖而语。
现代文：陈蕃特别器重名士徐稚，专门设置了一个床榻接待他；孔子在路上遇见程生，停车亲密交谈，车盖倾斜相交。
English: Chen Yao specially arranged a bed for Xu Zhi, a famous person, to receive him; Confucius met Cheng Sheng on the road, stopped for an intimate conversation, and the car lids tilted to intersect.

古文：伯牙绝弦失子期，更无知音之辈；管宁割席拒华歆，调非同志之人。
现代文：俞伯牙弄断琴弦不再弹琴，是因为钟子期死后，世上再没有能听懂他琴音的人了；管宁割断席子拒绝和华歆同坐一席读书，只因他们不志同道合。
English: Zou Boya broke the strings and stopped playing the piano, because after the death of Zhong Ziqi, there was no one in the world who could understand the sound of his piano; Guan Ning cut the seat and refused to sit with Hua Wei to read, just because they did not want to go the same way.

古文：分金多与，鲍叔独知管仲之贫；绨袍垂爱，须贾深怜范叔之窘。
现代文：经商分利时宁肯让管仲多拿一份，因为鲍叔牙知道管仲家里很贫穷；把绨袍送给范雎，是须贾对他的困窘表示同情。
English: When discussing the division of profits, he would rather let Guan Zhong take more than one share, because Bao Shouya knew that Guan Zhong's family was very poor; Sujia gave the robe to Fan Yao to sympathize with his predicament.

古文：要知主宾联以情，须尽东南之美；朋友合以义，当展切偲之诚。
现代文：要知道主人和宾客要靠感情来联络，那么双方都应该是某一方的名人；朋友之间的交往要合乎道义，双方都要表现自己的诚意。
English: To know that the host and the guests should be connected by feelings, then both sides should be celebrities of one side; the interaction between friends should be moral, and both sides should show their sincerity.

