古文：显祖文宣皇帝讳洋，字子进，神武第二子，文襄之母弟也。
现代文：显祖文宣皇帝名洋，字子进，是神武帝的二儿子，文襄帝同母弟弟。
English: Emperor Wenxuan, the founder of Xianzu, was the second son of Emperor Shenwu and the half-brother of Emperor Wenxiang.

古文：武明太后初孕帝，每夜有赤光照室，太后私怪之。
现代文：武明太后刚怀宣帝时，每夜有红光照亮内室，太后私下十分奇怪。
English: When Empress Dowager Wu Ming was pregnant with Emperor Xuan, a red light lit up the inner room every night. Privately, the Empress Dowager was very strange.

古文：及产，命之曰侯尼于。
现代文：当宣帝出生时，把他称为侯尼于。
English: When Emperor Xuan was born, he was called Hou Ni Yu.

古文：鲜卑言有相子也。
现代文：鲜卑话就是有福相的人。
English: In layman's terms, it means a person who is blessed.

古文：以生于晋阳，一名晋阳乐。
现代文：因为他在晋阳出生，所以有一个名字叫晋阳乐。
English: Because he was born in Jinyang, he has a name called Jinyang Le.

古文：时神武家徒壁立，后与亲姻相对，共忧寒馁。
现代文：当时神武帝穷得家中四壁空空，太后和亲戚们在一起对坐，共同担忧饥寒。
English: At that time, Emperor Shenwu was so poor that the four walls of his home were empty. The empress dowager and her relatives sat opposite each other, worried about hunger and cold.

古文：帝生始数月，尚未能言，欻然曰： 得活。 
现代文：宣帝当时只生下几个月，还不会讲话，却突然开口说： 得活下去。 
English: Emperor Xuancheng was only a few months old at the time and could not yet speak, but he suddenly opened his mouth and said, "I have to live."

古文：太后及左右大惊，不敢言。
现代文：太后和身边的人大吃一惊，不敢再说话了。
English: The Queen Mother and those around her were so shocked that they did not dare to speak.

古文：及长，黑色，大颊兑下，鳞身重踝。
现代文：长大以后，他皮肤很黑，宽脸颊尖下巴，身上长有鳞甲，脚踝重叠。
English: When he grew up, he had very dark skin, broad cheeks, a pointed chin, scaly body, and overlapping ankles.

古文：瞻视审定，不好戏弄，深沈有大度。
现代文：看东西时目光专注，不喜欢玩耍，深沉而有大器度。
English: When looking at things, the eyes are focused, they do not like to play, they are deep and have a large capacity.

古文：晋阳有沙门，乍愚乍智，时人不测，呼为阿秃师。
现代文：晋阳有个僧人，有时胡涂有时聪明，人们都摸不透他，称他为阿秃师。
English: There is a monk in Jinyang. Sometimes he is foolish and sometimes he is wise. People can't figure him out, and they call him Abaddon.

古文：太后见诸子焉，历问禄位。
现代文：太后让他看了看几位儿子，一个个地问他们的后来的秩禄和地位。
English: The empress dowager asked him to look at several of her sons and ask them one by one about their future ranks and positions.

古文：至帝，再三举手指天而已，口无所言，见者异之。
现代文：当看到宣帝时，他只是不停地举手指天而已，不说一句话，见到的人都感到吃惊。
English: When he saw Emperor Xuan, he just kept raising his finger to the sky. Without saying a word, everyone who saw him was surprised.

古文：神武尝从诸子过凤阳门，有龙在上，唯神武与帝见之。
现代文：神武帝曾经带着几个儿子经过凤阳门，有龙在天上，惟有神武帝和宣帝能够见到。
English: Emperor Shenwu once passed through the Fengyang Gate with several sons. There are dragons in the sky, but only Emperor Shenwu and Emperor Xuan can see them.

古文：内虽明敏，貌若不足。
现代文：宣帝内心虽然很明白，表面上却显得不怎样。
English: Although Emperor Xuan's heart was very clear, on the surface it did not look good.

古文：文襄每嗤之曰： 此人亦得富贵，相法亦何由可解。 
现代文：文襄帝常常嗤之以鼻，说道： 这个人要是能富贵，相术还有什么能让人理解明白的。 
English: Emperor Wenxiang often sniffed and said, "If this person can be rich and noble, there is nothing else in the art of physiognomy that can be understood."

古文：神武以帝貌陋，神彩不甚发扬。曾问以时事，帝略有所辨，傥语一事，必得事衷。
现代文：神武帝因宣帝面目丑陋，不是那种神采飞扬的样子，曾经拿时局大事探问他，他也略能说出一些，如果讲了某件事，就一定说清其中的原委。
English: Emperor Shenwu, because Emperor Xuan's face was ugly, was not that dazzling appearance. He once asked him about the current situation. He was also able to say something. If he said something, he would definitely clarify the reason.

古文：又尝令诸子，各使理乱丝，帝独抽刀斩之，曰： 乱者须斩。 
现代文：神武帝又让几个儿子把乱丝整理好，宣帝独自拿出刀来一斩而断，并说： 乱的东西就要斩断。 
English: Emperor Shenwu asked several of his sons to tidy up the mess, and Emperor Xuan took out a sword to cut it off, saying, "Anything out of order must be cut off."

古文：神武以为然。
现代文：神武帝认为他说得有理。
English: Emperor Jinwu thought he was right.

古文：又各配兵四出，而使彭乐率甲骑伪攻之。
现代文：神武帝又让他们各人领兵四外出动，暗中让彭乐带领骑兵假装进攻，文襄帝等人都非常害怕，宣帝却领着众军和彭乐对阵。
English: Emperor Shenwu also let them each lead their troops out four times, secretly letting Peng Le lead the cavalry to pretend to attack, Emperor Wenxiang and others were very afraid, but Emperor Xuan led the army and Peng Le against.

古文：文襄等怖挠，帝勒众与彭乐相格，乐免胄言情，犹禽之以献。由是神武称异之，谓长史薛琡曰： 此兒意识过吾。 
现代文：彭乐便脱去甲胄把实情相告，但宣帝依然把他捉住进献给神武帝。于是，神武帝十分赞赏并感到惊奇，他对长史薛说 ：这孩子见识超过了我。 
English: Peng Le took off his armor to tell the truth, but Emperor Xuan still captured him and dedicated him to Emperor Shenwu. As a result, Emperor Shenwu was very impressed and surprised. He said to Chang Shi Xue, "This child knows more than I do."

古文：琡亦私怪之。
现代文：薛也私下觉得奇怪。
English: Xue also privately felt strange.

古文：幼时，师事范阳卢景裕，默识过人，未尝有所自明，景裕不能测也。
现代文：幼年时，以范阳的卢景裕为老师，宣帝心中识见过人，可是却从来不曾自己说出，卢景裕也摸不清他的底细。
English: When he was a child, Lu Jingyu of Fanyang was his teacher. Xuan Di knew people in his heart, but he never said it himself. Lu Jingyu couldn't figure him out.

古文：天平二年，封太原郡公，累迁尚书左仆射。
现代文：天平二年，被封为太原郡公，累次升迁至尚书左仆射。
English: In the second year of the Tenpyo era, he was appointed as Taiyuan County magistrate, and was promoted to Shangshu Zuopuzha in succession.

古文：后从文襄行过辽阳山，独见天门开，余无人见者。
现代文：后来跟着文襄帝走过辽阳山，独自看见天门打开了，其他人没有一个看到。
English: Later, he followed Emperor Wenxiang as he walked through Liaoyang Mountain. He alone saw the Heaven's Gate open, but no one else did.

古文：武定五年，神武崩。犹秘凶事，众情疑骇。
现代文：武定五年，神武帝去世，还保守秘密，众人都又怀疑又害怕。
English: In the fifth year of Wuding, Emperor Shenwu died, but he still kept it a secret, and many people were suspicious and afraid.

古文：帝虽内婴巨痛，外若平常，人情颇安。
现代文：宣帝虽然内心极为痛苦，而外表却和平时一样，大家情绪才比较安定下来。
English: Although Emperor Xuan's heart was extremely painful, his appearance was the same as usual, and everyone's mood was relatively stable.

古文：魏帝授帝尚书令、中书监、京畿大都督。
现代文：魏帝便任命他为尚书公、中书监、京畿大都督。
English: Emperor Wei then appointed him as Shang Shukong, the Central Book Supervisor, and the Governor of Gyeonggi Province.

古文：七年八月，文襄遇贼。帝在城东双堂，事出仓卒，内外震骇。
现代文：七年八月，文襄帝遇到贼党袭击，宣帝当时在城东的双堂，因为事情过于突然，内外都十分震惊。
English: In August of the seventh year, Emperor Wenxiang encountered a Kleptocratic attack. Emperor Xuan was in the east of the city at that time, because the event was too sudden, both inside and outside were very shocked.

古文：帝神色不变，指麾部分，自脔斩群贼而漆其首，秘不发丧。
现代文：宣帝神色不变，指挥部下，自己把这些贼党杀掉，头颅漆成黑色，秘密不发丧。
English: Emperor Xuan's expression did not change, he commanded his subordinates to kill these thieves themselves, painted their heads black, and secretly did not mourn.

古文：徐言奴反，大将军被伤，无大吉也。
现代文：不久便传话说奴仆谋反，大将军受了伤，但没有什么大事。
English: Soon word came that the slaves were plotting a revolt, and the general was wounded, but nothing serious.

古文：当时内外，莫不惊异。
现代文：这时内外众人，无不惊异。
English: At this time, everyone inside and outside was surprised.

古文：乃讽魏朝立皇太子，因以大赦。
现代文：便请魏帝立皇太子，于是大赦天下。
English: He then asked Emperor Wei to make him crown prince, and the emperor pardoned him.

古文：乃赴晋阳总庶政。
现代文：接着他前往晋阳总理政务。
English: He then went to the Prime Minister's Office in Jinyang.

古文：帝内虽明察，外若不了，老臣宿将皆轻帝。
现代文：宣帝内心虽然清楚，而外表仿佛不怎么明白，那些老臣老将们都轻视他。
English: Although Emperor Xuan's heart was clear, he didn't seem to understand much on the outside. Those veteran ministers despised him.

古文：于是帝推诚接下，务从宽厚，事有不便者咸蠲省焉，群情始服。
现代文：于是，宣帝推心置腹对待下属，凡事务必宽厚待人，有些事情不太好办的便废除或减省，大家这才对他信服了。
English: As a result, Emperor Xuan put his heart and soul into treating his subordinates. He treated people generously in all matters, and abolished or reduced some things that were not easy to do. This convinced everyone.

古文：八年正月辛酉，魏帝为文襄举哀于东堂。
现代文：武定八年正月十一，魏帝在东堂为文襄帝举行丧礼。
English: On the 11th day of the first month of the 8th year of Wuding, Emperor Wei held a funeral for Emperor Wenxiang in the East Hall.

古文：戊辰，诏进帝位使持节、丞相、都督中外诸军、录尚书事、大行台、齐郡王，食邑一万户。
现代文：十八日，下诏晋封宣帝为使持节、丞相、都督中外诸军、录尚书事、大行台、齐郡王，食邑一万户。
English: On the 18th day of the following year, Emperor Jinfeng proclaimed Emperor Xuan as the envoy of the festival, the prime minister, the governor of the armies at home and abroad, the record of the records, the grand march, the king of Qi County, and the 10,000 households of the food village.

古文：三月庚申，又进封齐王，食冀州之勃海、长乐、安德、武邑、瀛州之河间五郡，邑十万户。
现代文：三月十一日，又晋封为齐王，食冀州的渤海、长乐、安德、武邑、瀛州的河间五郡，邑十万户。
English: On March 11th, he was promoted to the King of Qi. The five counties of Bohai, Changle, Ande, Wuyi, and Hema in Jizhou had 100,000 households.

古文：帝自居晋阳，寝室每夜有光如昼。
现代文：宣帝自己住在晋阳，寝室里每晚都亮得如同白天。
English: Xuan Di himself lives in Jinyang, and his bedroom is as bright as day every night.

古文：既为王，梦人以笔点己额。
现代文：他被封为王以后，梦见有人用笔在自己的额上点了一点。
English: After he was crowned king, he dreamt that someone had marked a spot on his forehead with a pen.

古文：旦日，以语馆客王昙哲，曰： 吾其退乎？ 
现代文：第二天早晨，他告诉了馆客王昙哲，并说 ：我大概要退位了吧？ 
English: The next morning, he told his guest Wang Xizhe and said, "I'm probably going to abdicate, aren't I?"

古文：昙哲拜贺曰： 王上加点为主，当进也。 
现代文：昙哲向他拜贺说 ：王字上面加了一点，这就是主字，应当是晋位啊！ 
English: Zou Zhe congratulated him and said, "The king's character has a dot added to it, which is the main character. It should be a promotion!"

古文：五月辛亥，帝如鄴。
现代文：五月初三，宣帝到达邺城。
English: On the third day of the fifth lunar month, Emperor Xuan arrived in Handan.

古文：光州获九尾狐以献。
现代文：光州抓到九尾狐狸进献。
English: Gwangju caught nine-tailed foxes for offering.

古文：甲寅，魏帝遣兼太尉彭城王韶、司空潘相乐奉册，进帝位相国，总百揆。
现代文：初六，魏帝派兼太尉彭城王韶、司空潘相乐奉带册文，晋封宣帝为相国，总理百事。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Emperor Wei sent Pengcheng Wang Yao, who was also a lieutenant general, and Siku Pan Sangye, who was also a lieutenant general, with a written document to be promoted to Emperor Xuan of the same country and to be the prime minister of the same country.

古文：以冀州之勃海、长乐、安德、武邑；瀛州之河间、高阳、章武；定州之中山、常山、博陵十郡，邑二十万户，加九锡殊礼，齐王如故。
现代文：以冀州的渤海、长乐、安德、武邑，瀛州的河间、高阳、章武，定州的中山、常山、博陵共十郡，食邑二十万户，加九锡的特殊礼遇，齐王封号如常。
English: With Bohai, Changle, Ande, and Wuyi in Jizhou, Hema, Gaoyang, and Zhangwu in Ganzhou, and Zhongshan, Changshan, and Boling in Dingzhou, a total of ten counties, 200,000 households in food villages, and special courtesy in Jiuxi, it is business as usual for Qi Wangfeng.

古文：丙辰，魏帝逊位别宫，又使兼太尉彭城王韶、兼司空敬显俊奉册禅位，致玺书于帝，并奉皇帝玺绶，禅代之礼，一依唐、虞、汉、魏故事。帝累表固辞，诏不许。
现代文：初八，魏帝让位居于别宫，又让兼太尉彭城王韶、兼司空敬显亻隽奉册文禅位于宣帝，送来诏书，并带着皇帝的印玺给宣帝。禅位的礼仪，全部依照唐尧、虞舜和汉、魏时的做法，宣帝屡次上表辞谢，魏帝下诏不同意。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Emperor Wei abdicated his throne to live in the Second Palace, and also had the concubines Pengcheng Wangyao and Sikuo Jingxianyao, both of whom were also grand lieutenants, deliver a copy of a book on Zen to Emperor Xuan. An imperial edict was sent to Emperor Xuan, bearing the emperor's seal. The etiquette of Zen was all in accordance with the practices of the Tang Dynasty, the Yuan Dynasty, the Han Dynasty, and the Wei Dynasty. Emperor Xuan repeatedly expressed his thanks, but Emperor Xuan did not agree.

古文：于是尚书令高隆之率百僚劝进。
现代文：于是，尚书令高隆之率领百官劝宣帝晋位。
English: As a result, Shosho ordered Takataka to lead hundreds of officials to persuade Emperor Xuan to ascend the throne.

古文：天保元年夏五月戊午，皇帝即位于南郊，升坛，柴燎告天。
现代文：天保元年夏五月初十，宣帝在南郊即位，登坛，以柴燎向上天祭告。
English: In the summer of Tenpo in the first year of the Heian period, on the tenth day of the fifth month, Emperor Xuan ascended to the throne in the southern suburbs, ascended the altar, and made an offering to the heavens with a firecracker.

古文：是日，鄴下获赤雀，献于郊所。
现代文：当天，邺城人捕获了红色鸟雀，进献到南郊祭所。
English: On the same day, the people of Lucheng captured a red bird finch and presented it to the southern suburb festival hall.

古文：事毕还宫，御太极前殿，大赦，改元。
现代文：禅让礼仪结束后回宫，宣帝在太极前殿坐听朝政，大赦天下，更改年号。
English: After the ceremony, Emperor Xuan returned to the palace. Emperor Xuan sat in front of the Taiji Hall to listen to the court's policy, pardoned the world, and changed the year.

古文：百官进两大阶；六州缘边职人三大阶。
现代文：百官晋封两大品级，六州沿边的官员晋封三大品级。
English: Hundreds of officials were promoted to two grades, and officials along the six states were promoted to three grades.

古文：自魏孝庄已后，百官绝禄，至是复给焉。
现代文：自从魏孝庄帝之后，百官已经没有俸禄了，到这时恢复供给。
English: Since Emperor Xiaozhuang of the Wei Dynasty, there has been no salary for the hundred officials. At this time, the supply was restored.

古文：己未，诏封魏帝为中山王。
现代文：十一日，下诏封魏帝为中山王。
English: On the 11th day, Emperor Wei was enthroned as the King of Zhongshan.

古文：追尊皇祖文穆王为文穆皇帝；皇祖妣为文穆皇后；皇考献武王为献武皇帝；皇兄文襄王为文襄皇帝。
现代文：追封皇祖父文穆王为文穆皇帝，皇祖母为文穆皇后，皇考献武王为献武皇帝，皇兄文襄王为文襄皇帝。
English: His grandfather, King Wenmu, was named Emperor Wenmu, his grandmother, Empress Wenmu, was named Emperor Wenmu, his brother, King Wenxiang, was named Emperor Wenxiang.

古文：命有司议祖宗以闻。
现代文：命令有关方面商议祖宗庙号上奏。
English: The relevant parties were ordered to discuss the issue of the ancestral temple.

古文：辛酉，尊王太后为皇太后。
现代文：十三日，尊封王太后为皇太后。
English: On the 13th, the Queen Mother was enthroned as the Empress Dowager.

古文：乙酉，降魏朝封爵各有差。
现代文：十七日，降原魏朝封爵，有所差别。
English: On the 17th, he was demoted to the peerage of the former Wei Dynasty, which is different.

古文：其信都从义，及宣力霸朝者，又西来人，并武定六年以来南来投化者，不在降限。
现代文：凡是在信都时随同举义的，因效力而得以专掌朝政者，以及从西魏归降的人，和武定六年以来从南朝前来归顺的人，不在降爵的范围内。
English: Those who followed the imperial edict when the capital was established, and who were able to take charge of the government due to their effectiveness, as well as those who surrendered from the Western Wei Dynasty, and those who surrendered from the Southern Dynasty since the sixth year of Wuding, are not within the scope of the knighthood.

古文：辛未，遣大使于四方观察风俗，问人疾苦。
现代文：二十三日，派大使到四方观察民间风俗，访问民众疾苦。
English: On the 23rd, ambassadors were sent to the four directions to observe folk customs and visit the people.

古文：甲戌，迁神主于太庙。
现代文：二十六日，将神主迁入太庙。
English: On the 26th, the deity was moved to the main temple.

古文：六月辛巳，诏改封崇圣侯孔长为恭圣侯，邑一百户，以奉孔子祀。并下鲁郡，以时修葺庙宇。
现代文：六月初三，下诏改封崇圣侯孔长为恭圣侯，食邑一百户，以侍奉孔子的祀礼，并且下诏给鲁郡，及时修整庙宇。
English: On the third day of the first month of June, the next edict changed the title of Chong Sheng Hou Kong Chang to Gong Sheng Hou, and a hundred households were served to serve Confucius, and the next edict was issued to Lu County to repair the temple in time.

古文：又诏：吉凶车服制度，各为等差，具立条式，使俭而获中。
现代文：又下诏说 ：办吉凶事时，车服制度，各有等级区别，详细列好条文和样式，做到节俭而又适中。 
English: The next edict said, "When dealing with auspicious and inauspicious events, there is a system of uniforms, each with a grade difference, with detailed provisions and styles, so as to be frugal and appropriate."

古文：分遣使人致祭于五岳、四渎，其尧祠、舜庙下及孔父、老君等载于祀典者，咸秩罔遗。
现代文：又分别派人去祭祀五岳、四渎，凡是尧祠、舜庙以及孔子、李老君等载于祭典的，全都加以祭祀不要遗漏。
English: In addition, people were sent separately to offer sacrifices to the Five Mountains and the Four Deities, and all of the Ancestral Halls and Temples, as well as Confucius and Li Laojun, which were included in the festival, should not be omitted.

古文：又诏：冀州之勃海、长乐二郡，先帝始封之国，义旗初起之地，并州之太原、青州之齐郡，霸朝所在，王命是基。
现代文：又下诏说 ：冀州的渤海、长乐两郡，是先帝最早的封国，也是初举义旗的地方；并州的太原、青州的齐郡，是霸业所在地，王朝的根基。
English: The next edict said: The two counties of Bohai and Changle in Jizhou were the first to be fenced by the former emperor and the first to raise the flag of righteousness; Taiyuan in Binzhou and Qi County in Qingzhou were the seat of hegemony and the foundation of the dynasty.

古文：君子有作，贵不忘本，齐郡、勃海，可并复一年，长乐复二年，太原复三年。
现代文：君子有所作为，富贵而不忘根本，齐郡和渤海，可都免交一年租赋，长乐免二年，太原免三年。 
English: Nobles who have made a difference, are rich and do not forget the fundamentals, Qi County and Bohai are exempt from paying one year's rent, Changle is exempt from two years, and Taiyuan is exempt from three years.

古文：壬午，诏故太傅孙腾、故太保尉景、故大司马娄昭、故司徒高敖曹、故尚书左仆射慕容绍宗、故领军万俟干、故定州刺史段荣、故御史中尉刘贵、故御史中尉窦泰、故殷州刺史刘丰、故济州刺史蔡俊等，并左右先帝，经赞皇基，或不幸早殂，或陨身王事，可遣使者就墓致祭，并抚问妻子。
现代文：初四，下诏说，已故的太傅孙腾、太保尉景、大司马娄昭、司徒高敖曹、尚书左仆射慕容绍宗、领军万俟干、定州刺史段荣、御史中尉刘贵、御史中尉窦泰、殷州刺史刘丰、济州刺史蔡亻隽等人，都是先帝近臣，经营和赞助皇家基业，有的不幸早逝，有的献身王事，可派使者到他们墓前祭祀，并且安抚他们的妻儿。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the next imperial edict said that the late Tai Fu Sun Teng, Tai Bao Yeung King, Daishi Ma Ying Zhao, Shitou Gao Yeong Cao, Shangshu's left-hand servant Sha Murong Shaozong, the leader of the army Wan Xuan Gan, Dingzhou Ying Shi Dan Rong, Yingzhou Ying Shi Liu Gui, Yingzhou Ying Shi Dou Tai, Yinzhou Ying Shi Liu Feng, Jeju Ying Shi Cai Wei and others were all close vassals of the former emperor, operating and sponsoring the royal foundation, some died early and some dedicated themselves

古文：又诏封宗室，太尉高岳为清河王，太保高隆之为平原王，开府仪同三司高归彦为平秦王，徐州刺史高思宗为上洛王，营州刺史高长弼为广武王，兼武卫将军高普为武兴王，兼武卫将军高子瑗为平昌王，兼北中郎将高显国为襄乐王，前太子庶子高睿为赵郡王，扬州县开国公高孝绪为修城王。
现代文：又下诏封皇家宗室：太尉高岳为清河王，太保高隆之为平原王，开府仪同三司高归彦为平秦王，徐州刺史高思宗为上洛王，营州刺史高长弼为广武王，兼武卫将军高普为武兴王，兼武卫将军高子瑗为平昌王，兼北中郎将高显国为襄乐王，前太子庶子高睿为赵郡王，扬州县开国公高孝绪为修城王。
English: The following royal families were also given imperial seals of approval: the first lieutenant Gao Yue was the king of Qinghe, the second lieutenant Gao Long was the king of the plain, the third captain Gao Guihang was the king of Pingqin, the third captain Gao Shizong was the king of Shangluo, the third captain Gao Changxuan was the king of Guangwu, the second captain Gao Pu was the king of Wuxing, the second captain Gao Ziquan was the king of Pyeongchang, the third captain Gao Xingguo was the king of Xiangle, the third captain Gao Guihang was the king of

古文：又诏封功臣，太师库狄干为章武王，大司马斛律金为咸阳王，并州刺史贺拔仁为安定王，殷州刺史韩轨为安德王，瀛州刺史可硃浑道元为扶风王，司徒公彭乐为陈留王，司空公潘相乐为河东王。
现代文：又下诏大封功臣：太师厍狄干为章武王，大司马斛律金为咸阳王，并州刺史贺拔仁为安定王，殷州刺史韩轨为安德王，瀛州刺史可朱浑道元为扶风王，司徒公彭乐为陈留王，司空公潘相乐为河东王。
English: The following were also awarded the title of Great Meritorious Servant: Grand Master Zhi Dikang was named King of Zhangwu, Grand Master Ma Zhi Rujin was named King of Xianyang, and the Provincial Grand Master He Bajin was named King of Stability, the Provincial Grand Master of Yin Province was named King of Hanluo, the Provincial Grand Master of Yin Province was named King of Ande, the Provincial Grand Master of Yin Province was named King of Zhuhun, the Provincial Grand Master of Zhangwu was named King of Fu Feng, the Provincial Grand Master of Szeto Province was named King of Chenliu, and the Provincial Grand Master of Si Quang Province was named

古文：癸未，诏封诸弟，青州刺史浚为永安王；尚书左仆射淹为平阳王，定州刺史浟为彭城王，仪同三司演为常山王，冀州刺史涣为上党王，仪同三司淯为襄城王，仪同三司湛为长广王，湝为任城王，湜为高阳王，济为博陵王，凝为新平王，润为冯翊王，洽为汉阳王。
现代文：初五，下诏封各位弟弟：青州刺史高浚为永安王，尚书左仆射高淹为平阳王，定州刺史高氵攸为彭城王，仪同三司高演为常山王，冀州刺史高涣为上党王，仪同三司高氵育为襄城王，仪同三司高湛为长广王，高谐为任城王，高为高阳王，高济为博陵王，高凝为新平王，高润为冯翊王，高洽为汉阳王。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the lunar calendar, the following brothers were enthroned: Gaojun of Qingzhou was crowned King of Yong'an, Gaozhong of Shangshu was crowned King of Pingyang, Gaozhou of Dingzhou was crowned King of Pengcheng, Jidong of the three Gaozhi was crowned King of Changshan, Jizhou of the three Gaozhi was crowned King of Shangdang, Jidong of the three Gaozhi was crowned King of Xiangcheng, Jidong of the three Gaozhan was crowned King of Changguang, Gaojun was crowned King of

古文：丁亥，诏立王子殷为皇太子，王后李氏为皇后。
现代文：初九，下诏立王子殷为皇太子，王后李氏为皇后。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, the emperor decreed that Prince Yin would be crown prince and Queen Li would be empress.

古文：庚寅，诏以太师库狄干为太宰，司徒彭乐为太尉，司空潘相乐为司徒，开府仪同三司司马子如为司空。
现代文：十二日，任命太师厍狄干为太宰，司徒彭乐为太尉，司空潘相乐为司徒，开府仪同三司司马子如为司空。
English: On the 12th, Grand Master Zou Dickan was appointed as Dazai, Stowe Peng Le as Tai Lai, Siku Pan Sang Le as Stowe, and Kaifu Yi and San Si Ma Zi Ru as Siku.

古文：己亥，以皇太子初入东宫，赦畿内及并州死罪已下，降余州死罪已下囚。
现代文：二十一日，因皇太子初次进入东宫，特赦京畿内和并州死罪以下的囚犯，其他州的死罪以下囚犯减罪。
English: On the 21st, as the Crown Prince entered the East Palace for the first time, prisoners in Gyeonggi Province and annexed prefectures who had committed crimes punishable by death or less were granted amnesty, and prisoners in other prefectures who had committed crimes punishable by death or less had their sentences commuted.

古文：秋七月辛亥，尊文襄妃元氏为文襄皇后，宫曰静德。
现代文：秋七月初三，尊封文襄帝的妃子元氏为文襄皇后，宫名为静德。
English: On the 3rd day of the 7th month of the autumn, the consort of Emperor Wenxiang was crowned Empress Wenxiang, and her palace name was Jingde.

古文：又封文襄子孝琬为河间王，孝瑜为河南王。
现代文：又封文襄的儿子孝琬为河间王，孝瑜为河南王。
English: He also made Wenxiang's son, Xiaojun, the king of Kawama, and Xiaoyu, the king of Henan.

古文：乙卯，以尚书令、平原王封隆之为录尚书事，尚书左仆射、平阳王淹为尚书令，改御史中尉还为中丞。
现代文：初七，任命尚书令、平原王高隆之为录尚书事，尚书左仆射、平阳王高淹为尚书令，改称御史中尉恢复为中丞。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, he appointed Shang Shuling, Pingyuan Wang Gaolong to record Shang Shuling, Shang Shuling Zuofei, and Pingyang Wang Gaozhun to be Shang Shuling, and changed his name to Lieutenant of History and restored to Junior Secretary.

古文：诏魏御府所有珍奇杂彩常所不给人者，悉送内后园，以供七日宴赐。
现代文：下令将原魏帝御府内所有的珍宝奇物杂采等平时不给人的，全部送到内院后花园，以供七日宴饮时作为赏赐之物。
English: It was ordered that all the treasures, curiosities, and miscellaneous items in the imperial palace of the former Wei Emperor, which were normally not given to anyone, were all sent to the back garden of the inner courtyard to be used as a reward during the seven-day banquet.

古文：八月，诏郡国修立黉序，广延髦俊，敦述儒风。
现代文：八月，下令在各郡国修建学校，广泛招收贤俊之士，以促成和弘扬儒家学风。
English: In August, he ordered the construction of schools in various counties and provinces to widely recruit talented people in order to promote and carry forward the Confucian school style.

古文：其国子学生，亦依旧铨补。往者文襄皇帝所运蔡邕石经五十二枚，移置学馆，依次修立。
现代文：其中的国子学生，也依照旧例选拔增补，以前文襄皇帝曾经运来蔡邕撰写的石经五十二块，移放到学馆，按照次序树立起来。
English: Among them, Kuniko students were also selected and supplemented in accordance with the old practice. Previously, the Emperor Wenxiang had transported fifty-two pieces of stone scriptures written by Cai Xuan, transferred to the school hall, and erected in accordance with the order.

古文：又诏求直言正谏之士，待以不次。命牧人之官，广劝农桑。
现代文：又下诏征求敢于直言正谏的人士，破格予以礼待，命令各地方官员，大力劝课农耕和蚕桑。
English: He also issued an edict to solicit people who dare to be outspoken and honest, treat them with extraordinary courtesy, and order all local officials to vigorously encourage them to learn farming and silkworm.

古文：庚寅，诏曰： 朕以虚薄，嗣弘王业，思所以赞扬盛绩，播之万古。
现代文：十三日，下诏说： 我才虚德薄，继承和弘扬国家大业，希望能够实现宏伟的业绩，以传播万古。
English: On the 13th day of the month, he issued the following edict: "I am a man of rare virtue, inheriting and carrying forward the great cause of the country. I hope to achieve great achievements and spread them throughout the ages."

古文：虽史官执笔，有闻无坠，犹恐绪言遗美，时或未书。
现代文：虽然有史官记录，有闻无缺。但还担心言而未尽，遗漏美言，以致未能尽载史书。
English: Although there is a historian's record, there is no shortage of information. However, there is also concern that the words have not been exhausted, and the words have been omitted, so that the history book has not been completed.

古文：在位王公、文武大小，降及庶人，爰至僧徒，或亲奉音旨，或承传旁说，凡可载之文籍，悉条封上。 
现代文：凡在位的王公、大小文武官员，下至庶民百姓，以至僧人等，或是亲耳听到，或是承传旁人之说，凡是可以载入文籍的，全部写清封好上奏朝廷。 
English: All the reigning princes, great and small officials, from the common people to the monks, either heard it with their own ears or inherited it from others, and all that can be recorded in the literature should be written down and sealed and submitted to the imperial court.

古文：甲午，诏曰： 魏世议定《麟趾格》，遂为通制，官司施用，犹未尽善。
现代文：十六日，下诏说： 魏朝议定的《麟趾格》，后来做为通用的制度，官府施行，尚未尽善。
English: On the 16th, the next imperial edict said: "The Lin Zi Ge" agreed upon by the Wei Dynasty, which was later made into a universal system and implemented by the government, has not yet been perfected.

古文：群官可更论讨新令。
现代文：众官可以再行讨论新的法令。
English: Officials can discuss the new law again.

古文：未成之间，仍以旧格从事。 
现代文：未完成之前，仍按照旧格行事。 
English: Until that is done, we will continue to operate under the old system.

古文：九月癸丑，以领东夷校尉、辽东郡开国公、高丽王成为使持节、侍中、骠骑大将军、领护东夷校尉，王、公如故。
现代文：九月初六，任命原领东夷校尉、辽东郡开国公、高丽国王成为使持节、侍中、骠骑大将军、领护东夷校尉，原来的王、公封号如故。
English: On the 6th day of the 9th month of the year, the King of Goryeo, the founder of Liaodong County and the former commander of Dongyi, was appointed as the envoy, the attendant, the cavalry general, and the commander of Dongyi. The former king and the official title remained unchanged.

古文：丁卯，诏以梁侍中、使持节、假黄钺、都督中外诸军事、大将军、承制邵陵王萧纶为梁王。
现代文：二十日，下诏封梁朝的侍中、使持节、假黄钺、都督中外诸军事、大将军、承制邵陵王萧纶为梁王。
English: On the 20th, it was decreed that Liang Dynasty's attendants, envoys, emperors, military commanders, generals, and the successor of King Shao Ling, Xiao Wei, would be crowned as the King of Liang.

古文：庚午，幸晋阳。
现代文：二十三日，巡行至晋阳。
English: On the 23rd, the parade went to Jinyang.

古文：是日，皇太子入居凉风堂，监国。
现代文：当天，皇太子住进凉风堂，监理国家。
English: On the same day, the Crown Prince moved into the Cool Breeze Hall to supervise the state.

古文：冬十月己卯，法驾，御金辂，入晋阳宫，朝皇太后于内殿。
现代文：冬十月初三，皇帝乘法驾金车，进入晋阳宫，朝见皇太后于内殿。
English: On the 3rd day of the 10th month of the winter, the emperor drove a golden carriage, entered the Jinyang Palace, and met the empress dowager in the inner hall.

古文：辛巳，曲赦并州太原郡晋阳县及相国府四狱囚。
现代文：初五，特赦并州、太原郡、晋阳县以及相国府四所监狱的囚犯。
English: On the 5th day of the first month, prisoners from four prisons in Nianzhou, Taiyuan County, Jinyang County and Xiangguo Prefecture were pardoned.

古文：乙酉，以特进元绍为尚书左仆射，并州刺史段绍为右仆射。
现代文：初七，任命特进元韶为尚书左仆射，并州刺史段韶为右仆射。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the new year, he appointed Specially Promoted Geng Yao as the left footman of Shangshu, and appointed Zhou Zhishidan Yao as the right footman.

古文：壬辰，罢相国府，留骑兵、外兵曹，各立一省，别掌机密。
现代文：十六日，撤消相国府，留下骑兵和外兵曹，各自成为一个省，另掌机密要事。
English: On the 16th, the provincial government was abolished, leaving the cavalry and foreign petty officers, each of which became a province, in charge of confidential and important matters.

古文：十一月，周文帝帅师至陕城，分骑北度至建州。
现代文：十一月，周文帝领军队到达陕城，分派骑兵北渡河到达建州。
English: In November, Emperor Zhou Wen led the army to arrive in Shaanxi, and dispatched cavalry to cross the river to Jianzhou.

古文：甲寅，梁湘东王萧绎遣使朝贡。
现代文：初八，梁朝的湘东王萧绎派使者朝贡。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, King Xiaoyan of the Eastern Hunan of the Liang Dynasty sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：丙寅，帝亲戎出次城东，周文帝见军容严盛，叹曰： 高欢不死矣！ 
现代文：二十日，齐宣帝亲自领兵出至城东，周文帝见军容整齐兵力兴盛，长叹说： 高欢还没有死啊！ 
English: On the 20th, Emperor Qixuan personally led the troops out to the east of the city. Emperor Zhouwen saw the neat appearance of the army and the prosperity of the troops, and said with a long sigh: Gaohuan is not dead!

古文：遂班师。
现代文：于是便回兵了。
English: Then the class teacher came out.

古文：十二月辛丑，车驾至自晋阳。
现代文：十二月二十六日，车驾从晋阳回来。
English: On December 26th, he drove back from Jinyang.

古文：是岁，高丽、蠕蠕、吐谷浑、库莫奚并遣使朝贡。
现代文：当年，高丽、蠕蠕、吐谷浑、库莫奚都派使者朝贡。
English: In that year, Goryeo, Cm Cm, Tuy Hn and Cu Mn all sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：二年春正月丁未，梁湘东王萧绎遣使朝贡。
现代文：二年春正月初二，梁朝湘东王萧绎派使者朝贡。
English: On the second day of the first month of the second year of spring, Liang Dynasty's East Hunan King Xiao Yu sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：辛亥，祀圆丘，以神武皇帝配。
现代文：初六，在圆丘祭祀上天，以神武皇帝配祭。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, a sacrifice was offered to heaven at the round mound, with the divine emperor as the officiant.

古文：癸亥，亲耕籍田。
现代文：十八日，皇帝亲耕籍田。
English: On the 18th, the emperor himself went to work on his family farm.

古文：乙丑，享太庙。
现代文：二十日，祭祀太庙。
English: On the 20th, the memorial service was held at the Imperial Temple.

古文：二月壬辰，太尉彭乐谋反，伏诛。
现代文：二月十八日，太尉彭乐谋反，被杀。
English: On February 18th, Lieutenant Peng Le led a rebellion and was killed.

古文：三月丙午，襄城王淯薨。
现代文：三月初二，襄城王高氵育去世。
English: On the second day of March, Xiangcheng Wang Gaoqian passed away.

古文：己未，诏梁承制湘东王绎为梁使持节、假黄钺、相国，建梁台，总百揆、承制梁王。
现代文：十五日，下诏封梁承制湘东王萧绎为梁使持节、假黄钺、相国，建梁台，总揽百事、承制梁王。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, Xiao Yu, the crown prince of eastern Hunan, was awarded the title of Liang Zhi Jie, Fake Huang Qi, Liang Guo, Liang Tai, and Liang Wang.

古文：庚申，司空司马子如坐事免。
现代文：十六日，司空司马子如因事被免职。
English: On the 16th, Sifu Sima Ziru was removed from his post due to the incident.

古文：是月，梁交、梁、义、新四州刺史，各以地内附。
现代文：当月，梁朝的交、梁、义、新四州刺史，都带本州领地前来归降。
English: That month, the Liang Dynasty's leaders of Jiaotong, Liang, Yi, and Xinxizhou, all came to surrender with their home territory.

古文：西魏文帝崩。
现代文：西魏文帝去世。
English: Emperor Wen of the Western Wei Dynasty died.

古文：夏四月壬辰，梁王萧绎遣使朝贡。
现代文：夏四月壬辰，梁王萧绎派使者朝贡。
English: In the summer of April, Liang Wang Xiaoyu sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：六月庚午，以前司空司马子如为太尉。
现代文：六月二十八日，任命原司空司马子如为太尉。
English: On June 28th, he appointed the former Sifu Sima Ziru as the first lieutenant.

古文：秋七月己卯，改显阳殿还为昭阳殿。
现代文：秋七月初八，改显阳殿名，仍称为昭阳殿。
English: On the 8th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the name was changed to Shinyang Hall, but it is still called Shoyang Hall.

古文：辛卯，改殷州为赵州以避太子之讳。
现代文：二十日，改殷州名为赵州，是因为要避皇太子名字的讳。
English: On the 20th, he changed the name of Yinzhou to Zhaozhou, because he wanted to avoid the stigma of the crown prince's name.

古文：是月，侯景废梁简文帝，立萧栋为主。
现代文：当月，侯景废梁简文帝，立萧栋为国君。
English: That month, Hou Jing deposed Emperor Liang Jianwen and installed Xiaodong as the sovereign.

古文：九月壬申，免诸伎作屯牧杂色役隶之徒为白户。
现代文：九月初二，废除各种艺人、屯牧户、各种差役和僮隶户，让他们成为平民户。
English: On the second day of September, all kinds of entertainers, herdsmen households, all kinds of dispatched workers and subordinate households were abolished, and they became civilian households.

古文：癸巳，行幸赵、定二州，因至晋阳。
现代文：二十三日，巡行到赵州和定州，因而到达晋阳。
English: On the 23rd, the parade went to Zhaozhou and Dingzhou, and thus arrived in Jinyang.

古文：冬十月戊申，起宣光、建始、嘉福、仁寿诸殿。
现代文：冬十月初八，建宣光、建始、嘉福、仁寿各殿。
English: On the 8th day of the 10th month of winter, the construction of Xuanguang, Jianzhi, Jiafu and Renshou halls began.

古文：庚申，萧绎遣使朝贡。
现代文：二十日，萧绎派使者朝贡。
English: On the 20th, Emperor Xiao Yu sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：丁卯，文襄皇帝神主入于庙。
现代文：二十七日，把文襄皇帝的神主送进太庙。
English: On the 27th, Emperor Wenxiang's patron saint was sent to the Imperial Temple.

古文：十一月，侯景废梁主栋，僭即伪位于建鄴，自称曰汉。
现代文：十一月，侯景废掉梁国国君萧栋，篡皇帝位，即位于建邺，自称国号汉。
English: In November, Hou Jing abolished Liang Guo Guojun Xiaodong and usurped the imperial throne, that is, he was located in Jianye and called himself Guo Han.

古文：十二月，中山王殂。
现代文：十二月，中山王死去。
English: In December, King Zhongshan passed away.

古文：是岁，蠕蠕、室韦、高丽并遣使朝贡。
现代文：当年，蠕蠕、室韦、高丽都派使者朝贡。
English: In that year, Cm Cm, Su V and Goryeo all sent emissaries to pay tribute.

古文：三年春正月丙申，帝亲讨库莫奚于代郡，大破之，以其口配山东为百姓。
现代文：三年春正月二十七日，宣帝亲自到代郡讨伐库莫奚，大破库莫奚部，把该部人分配到山东作为百姓。
English: On the 27th day of the 1st month of the 3rd year of the Spring, Emperor Xuan personally went to the county to fight against the Kumo clan, defeated the Kumo clan, and assigned the members of the clan to Shandong as commoners.

古文：二月，蠕蠕主阿那瑰为突厥所破。瑰自杀。
现代文：二月，蠕蠕国君阿那瞔被突厥击败，阿那瞔自杀。
English: In February, Anaxagoras, the king of the Cimmerian state, was defeated by the Turks, and Anaxagoras committed suicide.

古文：其太子庵罗辰及瑰从弟登注俟刑、登注子库提并拥众来奔。
现代文：蠕蠕国太子盭罗辰和阿那瞔的堂弟登注俟利、登注的儿子库提等都带领部众前来投奔。
English: The prince of the Demu-Demu Kingdom, Jiro-Chen, and Ananias's cousin, Denchu-Kiri, and Denchu's son, Kuti, all led their followers to flee.

古文：蠕蠕余众立注次子铁伐为主。
现代文：蠕蠕国的余下部众立登注的二儿子铁伐当国君。
English: The second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the country.

古文：辛丑，契丹遣使朝贡。
现代文：三日，契丹派使者朝贡。
English: On the third day, Khitan sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：三月戊子，诏清河王岳、司徒潘相乐、行台辛术帅师南伐。
现代文：三月二十日，令清河王岳、司徒潘相乐、行台辛术领军队南征。
English: On March 20th, Qinghe Wangyue, Stuban Xiangle, and Xingtaishun led the army to march south.

古文：癸巳，诏进梁王萧绎为梁主。
现代文：二十五日，下诏晋封梁王萧绎为梁国国君。
English: On the 25th, Liang Wang Xiaoyan was enthroned as the Prince of Liang Province.

古文：夏四月壬申，东南道行台辛术于广陵送传国八玺。
现代文：夏四月壬申，东南道行台辛术从广陵送来传国的八个玉玺。
English: In the summer of April in Jinshin, eight jade urns were sent from Guangling to the southeastern province of Taiwan.

古文：甲申，以吏部尚书杨愔为尚书右仆射。
现代文：甲申，任命吏部尚书杨为尚书右仆射。
English: Gao Shen, appointed the official Shang Shuxu Yang as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man.

古文：六月己亥，清河王岳等班师。
现代文：六月初三，清河王岳等回师。
English: On the third day of the sixth month, Qinghe Wangyue and others returned to the division.

古文：乙卯，车驾幸晋阳。
现代文：十九日，车驾到达晋阳。
English: On the 19th, the driver arrived in Jinyang.

古文：冬十月乙未，次黄栌岭。
现代文：冬十月初一，到达黄栌岭。
English: On the first day of October in winter, we arrived at Huangpi Ridge.

古文：仍起长城，北至社于戍，四百余里，立三十六戍。
现代文：继续修建长城，北到社于戍，四百多里路，设立三十六戍。
English: Continue to build the Great Wall, north to Sheyuan, more than four hundred miles of road, set up thirty-six rafts.

古文：十一月辛巳，梁主萧绎即位于江陵，是为元帝，遣使来聘。
现代文：十一月十七日，梁国君萧绎在江陵即位，称为元帝，派使者来聘问。
English: On November 17th, Liang Guojun Xiaoyan ascended the throne in Jiangling, known as the Yuan Emperor, and sent an envoy to ask questions.

古文：十二月壬子，车驾还宫。
现代文：十二月十九日，车驾回宫。
English: On December 19th, he drove back to the palace.

古文：戊午，幸晋阳。
现代文：二十五日，前往晋阳。
English: On the 25th, he went to Jinyang.

古文：是岁，西魏废帝元年。
现代文：当年，正是西魏的废帝元年。
English: At that time, it was the first year of the abolition of the Western Wei Dynasty.

古文：四年春正月丙子，山胡围离石戍，帝亲讨之。
现代文：四年春正月十三日，山胡围困离石戍，宣帝亲自带兵讨伐。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the fourth year of the Spring, Emperor Xuan personally led an army to fight against the siege of Shanhu from Shifang.

古文：未至而逃。因巡三堆戍，大狩而旋。
现代文：大军未到而山胡已经逃走，便巡视三堆戍，大举围猎而回。
English: Before the large army arrived, when the beech had already fled, he inspected three piles of earthworms and returned with a large amount of hunting.

古文：戊寅，库莫奚遣使朝贡。
现代文：十五日，库莫奚派使者朝贡。
English: On the 15th, Cuomo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：自魏末用永安钱，又有数品，皆轻滥。
现代文：自从魏朝末年以来使用永安钱，又有几种品种，都是轻薄滥铸而成的。
English: Since the end of the Wei Dynasty, Yong'an money has been used, and there are several varieties, all of which are light and thin.

古文：己丑，铸新钱，文曰常平五铢。
现代文：二十六日，铸造新钱，上面有文字，常平五铢。
English: On the 26th, a new coin was minted with the inscription "常平五."

古文：二月，送蠕蠕铁伐父登注及子库提还北。
现代文：二月，送蠕蠕铁伐的父亲登注和他儿子库提回归北方。
English: In February, Deng Zhu, the father who sent Demu Demu to die, and his son Cuti returned to the north.

古文：铁伐寻为契丹所杀。国人复立登注为主。仍为其大人阿富提等所杀，国人复立库提为主。
现代文：铁伐不久被契丹人所杀，国人又立登注为国君，却又被本国的大人阿富提等杀害，国人又立库提为国王。
English: Tieba was soon killed by the Khitans, and the Chinese installed Dengzhu as the king, but he was killed by the adults of his country, such as Afuti, and the Chinese installed Kuti as king.

古文：夏四月，车驾还宫。
现代文：夏四月，车驾回宫。
English: In the summer of April, I drove back to the palace.

古文：戊午，西南有大声如雷。
现代文：二十六日，西南方有巨大声音如同雷鸣。
English: On the 26th, there was a huge sound like thunder in the southwest.

古文：五月庚午，校猎于林虑山。
现代文：五月初九，在林虑山围猎。
English: On the 9th day of the 5th month, a goose hunt was held in Linxi Mountain.

古文：戊子，还宫。
现代文：二十七日，回宫。
English: On the 27th, he returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：六月甲辰，章武王库狄干薨。
现代文：六月十三日，章武王厍狄干去世。
English: On June 13th, Zhangwu Wangcheng Dikan passed away.

古文：秋，北巡冀、定、幽、安，仍北讨契丹。
现代文：秋天，北巡冀、定、幽、安四州，仍北伐契丹。
English: In autumn, the Northern Patrol visited the four provinces of Hebei, Ding, Yu and An, and the Northern Expedition continued.

古文：冬十月丁酉，车驾至平州，遂西道趣长堑。
现代文：冬十月初八，车驾到达平川，便顺着西路直进长堑。
English: On the 8th day of the 10th month of winter, I drove to Hirakawa and drove along the west road straight to Nagatoro.

古文：甲辰，帝步逾山岭，为士卒先，指麾奋击，大破契丹。
现代文：十五日，宣帝徒步穿越山岭，身先士卒，指挥军队奋击敌人，大败契丹。
English: On the fifteenth day, Emperor Xuan walked across the mountains, leading the troops, commanding the army to fight the enemy, and defeated the Khitan.

古文：是行也，帝露头袒身，昼夜不息，行千余里。唯食肉饮水，气色弥厉。
现代文：这次出行，皇帝露着脑袋、光着身子，日夜兼程，急行军一千多里路，只是吃肉喝水，而神色越加威严。
English: On this trip, the emperor went bareheaded and naked, traveling both day and night, and marching more than a thousand miles. He only ate meat and drank water, but his appearance became more and more majestic.

古文：丁巳，登碣石山，临沧海。
现代文：二十八日，登上碣石山，临观沧海。
English: On the 28th, I climbed Mount Zhishi and gazed at the Canghai Sea.

古文：十一月己未，帝自平州还，遂如晋阳。
现代文：十一月初一，宣帝从平州回来，便前往晋阳。
English: On the first day of November, Emperor Xuan returned from Pingzhou and went to Jinyang.

古文：闰月壬寅，梁人来聘。
现代文：闰十一月二十五日，梁人前来问聘。
English: On the 25th day of the 11th month, Liang came to inquire about employment.

古文：十二月己未，突厥复攻蠕蠕，蠕蠕举国来奔。
现代文：十二月初二，突厥又进攻蠕蠕，蠕蠕全国前来投奔。
English: On the second day of the twelfth month, the Turks attacked the Cree again, and the Cree fled across the country.

古文：癸亥，帝北讨突厥，迎纳蠕蠕。
现代文：初六，宣帝北伐突厥，迎接蠕蠕人。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Emperor Xuanzang led the Turks in the Northern Expedition to meet the Cree people.

古文：乃废其主库提，立阿那瑰子庵罗辰为主，置之马邑川。
现代文：于是，废蠕蠕国君库提，立阿那瞔的儿子盭罗辰为国王，把他们安置在马邑川。
English: As a result, Kuti, the dethroned ruler of Cumhuriyet, made Ananias's son, Palatine, king, and settled them in the Maeup River.

古文：五年春正月癸丑，帝讨山胡大破之。
现代文：在北方追击突厥，突厥请求归降，宣帝应许了，于是回兵。
English: They chased the Turks in the north, the Turks asked to surrender, Emperor Xuan promised, so they returned.

古文：男子十二已上皆斩，女子及幼弱以赏军。
现代文：从此以后，突厥的朝贡进献一直没有停止。五年春正月二十六日，皇帝征讨山胡，大败山胡部，男人十二岁以上全部斩首。
English: On the 26th day of the 1st month of the 5th year of the Spring, the emperor conquered Sanhu, defeated Sanhu, and beheaded all men over the age of twelve.

古文：遂平石楼。
现代文：妇女和小孩子赏赐给士兵们，于是讨平石楼。
English: Women and children were given to the soldiers, and they succeeded in levelling the stone tower.

古文：石楼绝险，自魏代所不能至。
现代文：石楼地势十分险峻，从魏朝以来就没能到达。
English: The stone tower is very steep, and it has not been reached since the Wei Dynasty.

古文：于是远近山胡，莫不慑伏。
现代文：因此远近的山胡人，无不恐惧而降服。
English: As a result, the Sanhu people, both near and far, were terrified into submission.

古文：是役也，有都督战伤，其什长路晖礼不能救，帝命刳其五藏，使九人分食之，肉及秽恶皆尽。
现代文：这次战斗，有位都督作战受伤，他部下的什长路晖礼却没有救他。宣帝命令剖开他的五脏，让九个人分吃掉，连肉和其余杂碎都吃光了。
English: In this battle, there was a governor who was wounded in battle, but his subordinates' heroics did not save him. Emperor Xuan ordered his entrails to be cut open and divided among nine people, and they ate all the meat and other scraps.

古文：自是始行威虐。
现代文：从此以后，他开始肆行暴虐。
English: From then on, he became violent.

古文：是月，周文帝废西魏帝而立齐王廓，是为恭帝。
现代文：当月，周文帝废西魏皇帝而立齐王廓，称为恭帝。
English: In the same month, Emperor Zhouwen deposed the Western Wei Emperor and established the Qi royal family, known as Emperor Gong.

古文：三月，蠕蠕庵罗辰叛，帝亲讨大破之，辰父子北遁。
现代文：三月，蠕蠕的盭罗辰叛乱，宣帝亲自领兵征讨，大破蠕蠕部，盭罗辰父子北逃。
English: In March, Emperor Xuanzong personally led the troops to fight against the rebellious Min Luo-Chen, and the Min Luo-Chen's father and son fled north.

古文：太保贺拔仁坐违缓，拔其发，免为庶人，使负炭输晋阳宫。
现代文：太保贺拔仁没有按期到达有罪，被拔去头发，免为庶人，让他背着炭送往晋阳宫。
English: Taiho He Bajin was found guilty of not arriving on schedule, had his hair plucked, was excused from being a commoner, and was sent to Jinyang Palace with charcoal on his back.

古文：夏四月，蠕蠕寇肆州。
现代文：夏四月，蠕蠕入侵肆州。
English: In the summer of April, the creepy-crawlies invaded Wuzhou.

古文：丁巳，帝自晋阳讨之，至恆州。
现代文：初二，皇帝从晋阳发兵征讨，到达恒州。
English: On the second day of the first month, the emperor sent soldiers from Jinyang to enlist and arrived in Hengzhou.

古文：时虏骑散走，大军已还，帝帅麾下二千余骑为殿，夜宿黄瓜堆。
现代文：这时，敌人的骑兵分散退走，大部队便返回了，只有宣帝统率的二千多骑兵断后，夜间住在黄瓜堆。
English: At this time, the enemy's cavalry dispersed and retreated, and the main force returned. Only the more than two thousand cavalry led by Emperor Xuanzang stayed in the cucumber heap at night.

古文：蠕蠕别部数万骑，扣鞍而进，四面围逼。
现代文：蠕蠕的别部几万骑，紧扣马鞍进逼，四面团团围困。
English: Tens of thousands of cavalrymen from the rest of the army, tightly clutching their saddles, pressed forward and besieged.

古文：帝安睡，平明方起。神色自若，指画军形，溃围而出。
现代文：宣帝安然入睡，天大亮才起身，神色自若，指挥军队排列阵形，破围而出。
English: Emperor Xuan fell into a peaceful sleep. It was only at dawn that he got up, looking confident, and commanded the army to line up in formation and break out of the siege.

古文：虏走，追击之，伏尸二十里。
现代文：敌人退走时，宣帝又指挥队伍追击，敌人的尸体躺了二十里路远。
English: When the enemy retreated, Emperor Xuan led the troops in pursuit, and the enemy's corpse lay twenty miles away.

古文：获庵罗辰妻子、生口三万余。
现代文：抓住了盭罗辰的妻子和俘虏二万多人。
English: He captured Zi Luo Chen's wife and more than twenty thousand prisoners.

古文：五月丁亥，地豆干、契丹并遣使朝贡。
现代文：五月初二，地豆干、契丹都派使者朝贡。
English: On the second day of the first month of May, Jiuzogan and Khitan both sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：丁未，北讨蠕蠕，又大破之。
现代文：二十二日，北攻蠕蠕，又大破该部。
English: On the 22nd, the North attacked again, and again destroyed the camp.

古文：六月，蠕蠕远遁。
现代文：六月，蠕蠕人远逃了。
English: In June, the worms fled far away.

古文：秋七月戊子，肃慎遣使朝贡。
现代文：秋七月初四，肃慎派使者朝贡。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Sozen sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：壬辰，降罪人。
现代文：初七，给罪犯减刑。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the lunar calendar, criminals will have their sentences reduced.

古文：庚戌，至自北伐。
现代文：二十六日，北伐归来。
English: On the 26th, the Northern Expedition returned.

古文：八月庚午，以司州牧、清河王岳为太保，以安德王轨为大司马，以扶风王可硃浑道元为大将军，以司空尉粲为司徒，以太子少师侯莫陈相为司空，以尚书令、平阳王淹为录尚书事，以常山王演为尚书令，以上党王涣为尚书右仆射。
现代文：八月十六日，任命司州太守、清河王高岳为太保，安德王韩轨为大司马，扶风王可朱浑道元为大将军，司空尉粲为司徒，太子少师侯莫陈相为司空，尚书令、平阳王高淹为录尚书事，常山王高演为尚书令，上党王高涣为尚书右仆射。
English: On August 16th, he appointed the governor of Shizhou, the governor of Qinghe, Wang Gao Yue, as the governor of Taiba, the governor of Anding, Wang Han Lu, as the governor of Daima, the governor of Fu Fu, Wang Ke, Zhu Hun Dogen, as the general, the governor of Siku, the lieutenant of Siku, the governor of Siku, the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the

古文：丁丑，行幸晋阳。
现代文：二十三日，出行到达晋阳。
English: On the 23rd, the trip arrived in Jinyang.

古文：辛巳，录尚书事、平原王高隆之薨。
现代文：二十七日，录尚书事、平原王高隆之去世。
English: On the 27th, according to records, King Goryeo of the Plain passed away.

古文：封冀州刺史段韶为平原王。
现代文：封冀州刺史段韶为平原王。
English: He was named the king of the plain in the history of Jizhou.

古文：是月，诏常山王演、上党王涣、清河王岳、平原王段韶率众于洛阳西南筑伐恶城、新城、严城、河南城四镇。
现代文：当月，诏令常山王高演、上党王高涣、清河王高岳、平原王段韶带领民众在洛阳西南修建伐恶城、新城、严城、河南城四座城镇。
English: In the same month, Emperor Gaozong ordered the people to build four towns in the southwestern part of Luoyang, namely, Jangsan Wang Gaoyuan, Shangdang Wang Gaojun, Qinghe Wang Gaoyue and Plain Wang Duanzhang.

古文：九月，帝亲自临幸，欲以致西师。
现代文：九月，宣帝亲自来到这里，准备攻打西魏。
English: In September, Emperor Xuan personally came here to prepare to attack Western Wei.

古文：西师不出，乃如晋阳。
现代文：西魏不肯出兵，于是便前往晋阳。
English: West Wei did not want to send troops, so they went to Jinyang.

古文：冬十月，西魏攻陷江陵，杀梁元帝。
现代文：冬十月，西魏攻克江陵，杀了梁元帝。
English: In the winter of October, the Western Wei conquered Jiangling and killed Emperor Liang Yuan.

古文：梁将王僧辩在建业，推其晋安王萧方智为太宰、都督中外诸军事、承制置百官。
现代文：梁将王僧辩在建业推举梁晋安王萧方智为太宰、都督中外诸军事，承制设置文武百官。
English: Liang general Wang Sangyan promoted Liang Jinan king Xiao Fangzhi to the position of Dazai, the military governor of foreign countries, and set up a hundred civil and military officials.

古文：十二月庚申，车驾北巡，至达速岭，亲览山川险要，将起长城。
现代文：十二月初八，车驾北巡，到达达速岭，亲自视察山川险要地方，准备修建长城。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of December, he went on a tour of the north by car and arrived at Dazaoling. He personally inspected the mountains and rivers in critical areas and prepared to build the Great Wall.

古文：是岁，西魏恭帝元年。
现代文：当年，为西魏恭帝元年。
English: That year was the first year of the Western Wei Dynasty.

古文：六年春正月壬寅，清河王岳度江，克夏首。
现代文：六年春正月二十一日，清河王高岳渡过长江，攻克夏首。
English: On the 21st day of the first month of spring in the sixth year, King Gao Yue of the Qing River crossed the Yangtze River and conquered Xia Shou.

古文：梁司徒、郢州刺史陆法和请降。
现代文：梁司徒、郢州刺史陆法和请降。
English: Liang Sitou, Zhangzhou Jishi, Lu Fa, and please step down.

古文：诏以梁贞阳侯萧明为梁主，遣尚书右仆射、上党王涣送之江南。
现代文：下诏以梁贞阳侯萧明为梁朝国君，派尚书右仆射、上党王高涣护送他去江南。
English: The following edict named Liang Zhengyang Hou Xiao Ming as the prince of the Liang Dynasty, and sent Shang Shuxu, his right-hand man, to accompany him to the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：二月甲子，以陆法和为使持节、都督十州诸军事、太尉、大都督、西南道大行台。
现代文：二月十三日，封陆法和为使持节、都督十州诸军事、太尉、大都督、西南道大行台。
English: On February 13th, the law on land confiscation and the celebration of the Day of Enlistment, the military governors of the ten prefectures, the lieutenant governors, the grand governors, and the grand marchers of Southwest Province were formed.

古文：三月丙戌，上党王涣克东关，斩梁将裴之横。
现代文：三月初六，上党王高涣攻下东关，斩了梁将裴之横。
English: On the 6th day of the 3rd month of the year, Gao Jian, the king of Shang Dynasty, captured Dongguan and beheaded the general Pei Ziyang.

古文：丙申，车驾至自晋阳。
现代文：十六日，车驾从晋阳归来。
English: On the 16th, he drove back from Jinyang.

古文：封文襄二子，孝珩为广宁王，延宗为安德王。
现代文：封文襄帝的两个儿子，孝珩封为广宁王，延宗封为安德王。
English: The two sons of Emperor Xiang of Fongwen, Prince Xiaojun of Guangning and Prince Enzong of Ande.

古文：戊戌，帝临昭阳殿决狱。
现代文：十八日皇帝亲临昭阳殿判决案件。
English: On the 18th, the emperor himself came to Shoyang Palace to adjudicate the case.

古文：是月，发寡妇以配军士筑长城。
现代文：当月，送寡妇给军士当配偶修建长城。
English: That month, he sent a widow to serve as a consort to a sergeant in the construction of the Great Wall.

古文：夏五月，萧明入于建业。
现代文：夏五月，萧明入居建业。
English: Xiao Ming moved into the building in May.

古文：六月甲子，河东王潘相乐薨。
现代文：六月十五日，河东王潘相乐去世。
English: On June 15, the King of Hedong, Pan Sangre, passed away.

古文：壬申，帝亲讨蠕蠕。
现代文：二十三日，皇帝亲自征讨蠕蠕。
English: On the twenty-third day, the emperor personally conscripted Cormorants.

古文：甲戌，诸军大会祁连池。
现代文：二十六日，各部队会集在祁连池。
English: On the 26th, all the troops gathered at Qilian Pond.

古文：乙亥，出塞，至库狄谷。百余里无水泉，六军渴乏，俄而大雨。
现代文：二十七日，出兵塞外，到达厍狄谷，一百多里路没有见到水池和泉水，六军又渴又累，不久下了大雨。
English: On the 27th, the troops were sent outside the city and arrived at Shendi Valley. There were no pools or springs for more than a hundred miles. The six armies were thirsty and tired, and it soon rained heavily.

古文：秋七月己卯，帝顿白道，留辎重，亲率轻骑五千，追蠕蠕。
现代文：秋七月初一，皇帝在白道止歇，留下辎重，亲自率领五千轻骑兵，追赶蠕蠕。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of the autumn, the emperor rested on the White Road, leaving behind the heavy baggage, and personally led five thousand light cavalry to chase down the Cree.

古文：壬午，及之怀朔镇。
现代文：初四，在怀朔镇追上蠕蠕。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, catch up with Creep Creep in Wai Shuo Town.

古文：帝躬犯矢石，频大破之，遂至沃野。
现代文：皇帝亲冒乱箭飞石进行战斗，几次大败蠕蠕部，直追到沃野。
English: The emperor himself risked everything to fight, and several times he defeated the enemy and chased them all the way to Wuye.

古文：壬辰，还晋阳。
现代文：十四日，回到晋阳。
English: On the 14th, he returned to Jinyang.

古文：九月己卯，车驾至自晋阳。
现代文：九月初二，车驾从晋阳回京。
English: On the second day of September, I drove back to Beijing from Jinyang.

古文：冬十月，梁将陈霸先袭杀王僧辩，废萧明，复立萧方智为主。
现代文：冬十月，梁朝将军陈霸先偷袭并杀死王僧辩，废掉萧明，又立萧方智为国君。
English: In the winter of October, Liang Dynasty General Chen Ba first attacked and killed Wang Sofen, abolished Xiao Ming, and established Xiao Fangzhi as the king.

古文：辛亥，行幸晋阳。
现代文：初四，巡行至晋阳。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, the parade went to Jinyang.

古文：十一月，梁秦州刺史徐嗣徽、南豫州刺史任约等袭据石头城，并以州内附。
现代文：十一月，梁朝秦州刺史徐嗣徽、南豫州刺史任约等人攻下并占领了石头城，并以所管辖的州归降。
English: In November, Liang's subordinates, such as Qin's provincial governor Xu Shihui and Southern Yu's provincial governor Ren You, captured and occupied Stone Town, and returned to the state under their jurisdiction.

古文：壬辰，大都督萧轨帅众至江，遣都督柳达摩等度江，镇石头。
现代文：十五日，大都督萧轨领军队到达长江，派都督柳达摩等渡江，镇守石头城。
English: On the fifteenth day, the great governor Xiao Liao led the army to the Yangtze River, and sent the governor Liu Damo and others to cross the river and guard the stone city.

古文：己亥，太保、清河王岳薨。
现代文：二十二日，太保、清河王高岳去世。
English: On the 22nd, Taibo and Qinghe King Gao Yue passed away.

古文：柳达摩为霸先攻逼，以石自头降。
现代文：柳达摩被陈霸先攻势所逼，以石头城投降。
English: Liu Damo was forced to surrender Stone Town by Chen Baxian's offensive.

古文：是岁，高丽、库莫奚并遣使朝贡。
现代文：当年，高丽、库莫奚都派使者朝贡。
English: In that year, both Goryeo and Kumo sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：诏发夫一百八十万人筑城，自幽州北夏口，西至恆州，九百余里。
现代文：下诏征召民夫一百八十万人修建长城，从幽州北面的夏口开始，西到恒州，长九百多里。
English: The following edict called for the conscription of 1.8 million people to build the Great Wall, starting from Xiakou in the north of Yuzhou and stretching west to Hengzhou, with a length of more than 900 miles.

古文：七年春正月辛丑，封司空侯莫陈相为白水郡王。
现代文：七年春正月二十五日，封司空侯莫陈相为白水郡王。
English: On the 25th day of the first month of the seventh year of the Spring, the feudal lord Ku Hou Mo Chen Xiang became the king of Baishui County.

古文：车驾至自晋阳。
现代文：车驾从晋阳归来。
English: Driving back from Jinyang.

古文：于鄴城西马射，大集众庶观之。
现代文：在邺城西骑马射箭，召集大批民众围观。
English: He went horseback archery in the west of Fucheng and gathered a large number of onlookers.

古文：二月辛未，诏常山王演等于凉风堂读尚书奏案，论定得失，帝亲决之。
现代文：二月二十六日，令常山王高演在凉风堂读尚书省奏案，讨论和确定得失，由皇帝亲自裁决。
English: On February 26th, Changshan Wang Gaoyuan was ordered to read the provincial report in Liangfeng Hall, discuss and determine the gains and losses, and be personally adjudicated by the emperor.

古文：三月丁酉，大都督萧轨等帅众济江。
现代文：三月二十二日，大都督萧轨等领军队渡江。
English: On March 22nd, the great governor Xiao Liao and other leaders of the army crossed the river.

古文：夏四月乙丑，仪同三司娄睿讨鲁阳蛮，大破之。
现代文：夏四月二十一日，仪同三司娄睿又攻打鲁阳蛮，大败他们。
English: On the 21st day of the 4th month of the summer, Yi and the three magicians attacked Lu Yang and the barbarians, and defeated them.

古文：丁卯，造金华殿。
现代文：二十三日，修建金华殿。
English: On the 23rd, the construction of Jinhua Hall began.

古文：五月，汉阳王洽薨。
现代文：五月，鲁阳王高洽去世。
English: In May, Luyang King Gaochao passed away.

古文：帝以肉为断慈，遂不复食。
现代文：宣帝认为吃肉是没有慈爱之心，因而不再吃肉。
English: Emperor Xuan believed that eating meat was uncharitable, so he stopped eating meat.

古文：六月乙卯，萧轨等与梁师战于钟山西，遇霖雨失利，轨及都督李希光、王敬宝、东方老、军司裴英起并没，士卒还者十二三。
现代文：六月十二日，萧轨等和梁军在钟山西大战，因遇到大雨而失利，萧轨和都督李希光、王敬宝、东方老，军司裴英起一同战死，士卒归来的十分之二三。
English: On June 12th, Xiao Rong and Liang's army lost the battle in the west of Zhongshan due to heavy rain. Xiao Rong and the governor Li Xiguang, Wang Jingbao, Dongfanglao, and the military secretary Pei Yingqi died together. The number of returning soldiers was 23 out of 10.

古文：乙丑，梁湘州刺史王琳献驯象。
现代文：二十二日，梁朝湘州刺史王琳进献驯象。
English: On the 22nd, Liang Zhaozhou invited Wang Lin to present a tamed elephant.

古文：秋七月。
现代文：秋七月。
English: Autumn in July.

古文：乙亥，周文帝殂。
现代文：初二，周文帝死去。
English: On the second day of the first month, Emperor Zhou Wenzong died.

古文：是月，发山东寡妇二千六百人配军士，有夫而滥夺者十二三。
现代文：当月，召山东寡妇二千六百人给军士当配偶，其中已有丈夫而被乱抢去的占十分之二三。
English: In the same month, 2,600 widows from Shandong Province were summoned to serve as spouses for soldiers. Of these, 23 out of 10 had already been robbed of their husbands.

古文：十一月壬子，并省州三，郡一百五十三。县五百八十九，镇三，戍二十六。
现代文：十一月十二日，合并掉三个州，一百五十三郡，五百八十九县，三个镇，二十六个戍。
English: On November 12, three prefectures, one hundred fifty-three counties, five hundred eighty-nine counties, three towns and twenty-six counties were merged.

古文：十二月庚子，魏恭帝逊位于周。
现代文：十二月三十日，魏恭帝让位给周。
English: On December 30, Emperor Wei Gong gave way to Zhou.

古文：是岁，库莫奚、契丹遣使朝贡。
现代文：当年，库莫奚、契丹都派使者朝贡。
English: That year, both Kumo and Khitan sent emissaries to pay tribute.

古文：修广三台宫殿。
现代文：重修和扩建三台宫殿。
English: Renovation and expansion of three palaces.

古文：先是，自西河总秦戍筑长城东至海。前后所筑，东西凡三千余里，六十里一戍，其要害置州镇凡二十五所。
现代文：起先，从西河的总秦戍修筑长城，东南延伸到大海边，前后所修筑的，东西长共有三千多里，以六十里设一个戍，在要害的地方设置州镇共二十五处。
English: At first, the Great Wall was built from the Qin estuary in the west to the coast in the southeast. The total length of the wall was more than 3,000 miles from east to west, with a 60-mile fence and a total of 25 prefectures and towns in critical areas.

古文：八年春三月，大热，人或栗死。
现代文：八年春三月，极为炎热，有的人因暴热致死。
English: In the spring and March of the eighth year, it was extremely hot, and some people died of heatstroke.

古文：夏四月庚午，诏禁取虾蟹蚬蛤之类，唯许私家捕鱼。
现代文：夏四月初二，下诏禁止捕捉虾、蟹、蚬、蛤之类，只许私人捕鱼。
English: On the second day of the fourth month of summer, it is forbidden to catch shrimps, crabs, clams, oysters and the like, and only private fishing is allowed.

古文：乙酉，诏公私禁取鹰鹞。
现代文：十七日，下诏禁止公家和私人捉鹰鹞。
English: On the 17th, the following edict prohibited both public and private individuals from catching eagle owls.

古文：以太师、咸阳王斛律金为右丞相，以前大将军、扶风王可硃浑道元为太傅，以开府仪同三司贺拔仁为太保，尚书令、常山王演为司空，以录尚书事、长广王湛为尚书令，以尚书右仆射杨愔为左仆射，以并省尚书左仆射崔暹为右仆射，以上党王涣为录尚书事。
现代文：任命太师、咸阳王斛律金为右丞相，前大将军、扶风王可朱浑道元为太傅，开府仪同三司贺拔仁为太保，尚书令、常山王高演为司空、录尚书事，长广王高湛为尚书令，尚书右仆射杨为左仆射，并省尚书右仆射崔暹为右仆射，上党王高涣为录尚书事。
English: He appointed the Grand Master, Xianyang Wang Shilujin, as the Minister of the Right, the former Grand General, Fu Feng Wang Ke Zhuhun Dogen as the Grand Master, Kaifu Yi and the three departments He Bajin as the Grand Master, Shang Shuling, Changshan Wang Gao Rong as the Secretary, Shang Shuling, Changguang Wang Gaotan as Shang Shuling, Shang Shuling's right-hand servant Sho Yang as the left-hand servant Sho, and the provincial Shang Shuling's right-hand servant Sho Cui Siam as the right-hand servant Sho, and the upper party king Gao Jie as the

古文：是月，帝在城东马射，敕京师士女悉赴观，不赴省，罪以军法，七日乃止。
现代文：当月，皇帝在城东骑马射箭，下令京城中的士女都前去观看，不去的以违反军法论罪，七天后才停止。
English: That month, the emperor rode a horse to the east of the city to shoot arrows, and ordered all the men and women in the capital to go and watch. Those who did not go were accused of violating military law, and only stopped seven days later.

古文：五月辛酉，冀州人刘向于鄴谋逆，党与皆伏诛。
现代文：五月二十三日，冀州人刘向在邺城叛乱，同党人都被杀。
English: On May 23, Liu Xiang, a resident of Jizhou, rebelled in Lucheng, and his fellow party members were all killed.

古文：秋八月己巳，库莫奚遣使朝贡。
现代文：秋八月初三，库莫奚派使者朝贡。
English: In autumn, on the third day of the first month of August, Cuomo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：庚辰，诏丘郊禘祫时祭，皆市取少牢，不得刲割，有司监视，必令丰备。
现代文：十二日，下诏说，在圆丘和四郊祭神，宗庙中的舉以及四时祭祀，都只用少牢的祭祀，不得切割，有关方面严加监视，一定要做到十分丰富齐备。
English: On the 12th, the next edict said that in the round mound and the four suburbs of the deities, the lifting in the ancestral temple and the four-hour sacrifice, only the sacrificial rites of the lesser deities should be used, and they should not be cut, and the relevant parties should strictly monitor, and they must be very rich and complete.

古文：农社、先蚕，酒肉而已。雩、衤某、风、雨、司人、司禄、灵星杂祀，果饼酒脯。
现代文：祭祀农社、先蚕，只用酒肉而已；祭虹神、高、风、雨、司人、司禄、灵星杂祀，用果品、饼、酒、肉干。
English: Only wine and meat are used for the worship of the agricultural community and the first silkworm; for the worship of the rainbow god, the mountain, the wind, the rain, the magistrate, the seraphim, and the spirit star, fruit, bread, wine, and dried meat are used.

古文：唯当务尽诚敬，义同如在。
现代文：务必极尽诚意，恭恭敬敬，犹如神祗下凡受祭一样。
English: We must do our best to be sincere, respectful, and reverent, just like all the sacrifices under God's command.

古文：辛巳，制榷酤。
现代文：十五日，实行酒的专卖制度。
English: On the 15th, the liquor monopoly system came into effect.

古文：自夏至九月，河北六州、河南十三州、畿内八郡大蝗，飞至鄴，蔽日，声如风雨。
现代文：从夏天到九月，河北六州、河南十三州。京畿内八郡发生大蝗灾，当蝗虫飞到邺城时，遮天蔽日，响声如同狂风大雨一般。
English: From summer to September, six prefectures in Hebei Province and 13 prefectures in Henan Province, and eight counties in Gyeonggi Province, were affected by a large locust plague. When the locusts flew to Yeongseong, they covered the sky and the sun, and their noise was like a strong wind and heavy rain.

古文：甲辰，诏今年遭蝗处，免租。
现代文：初八，下诏凡今年遭受蝗灾的地方，免去田租。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the emperor decreed that all places that suffered locust plagues this year would be exempt from land rent.

古文：冬十月乙亥，梁主萧方智逊位于陈。陈武帝遣使称籓朝贡。
现代文：冬十月十日，梁国国君萧方智让位给陈朝，陈武帝派使者自称藩国前来朝贡。
English: On the 10th day of the 10th month of the winter, Xiao Fangzhi, the ruler of Liang Province, abdicated to the Chen Dynasty, and Emperor Chen Wu sent an envoy claiming to be from the Han Dynasty to pay tribute.

古文：是岁，周闵帝元年。
现代文：当年是周闵帝元年。
English: That year was the first year of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：周冢宰宇文护杀闵帝而立明帝，又改元焉。
现代文：周冢宰宇文护杀闵帝另立明帝，又更改年号。
English: Emperor Zhou Enlai and Emperor Wen were killed, and Emperor Ming was established, and the year was changed.

古文：初于长城内筑重城。库洛拔而东，至于坞纥戍，凡四百余里。
现代文：开始在长城里面又修建内长城，从库洛拔往东，直到坞纥戍，共四百多里远。
English: They began to build the Inner Great Wall inside the Great Wall, from Kulob to the east to the dock, a total of more than four hundred miles away.

古文：九年春二月丁亥，降罪人。
现代文：九年春二月二十四日，给罪犯减刑。
English: On February 24th, the spring of the ninth year, the sentence was reduced.

古文：己丑，诏燎野限以仲冬，不得他时行火，损昆虫草木。
现代文：二十六日，下令烧荒野的时间须在阴历十一月的仲冬时候，不能在其他时间放火，以免损伤昆虫和草木。
English: On the 26th, it was ordered that the time for burning the wilderness must be in the middle of winter in November of the lunar calendar, and it must not be set on fire at other times, so as not to damage insects and plants.

古文：三月丁酉，车驾至自晋阳。
现代文：三月初四，车驾从晋阳归来。
English: On the fourth day of March, I drove back from Jinyang.

古文：夏四月辛巳，大赦。
现代文：夏四月十九日，大赦天下。
English: In the summer, on the second day of April, there is a general amnesty.

古文：是月，北豫州刺史司马消难以城叛于周。
现代文：当月，北豫州刺史司马消难以所管辖地方叛降周朝。
English: In the same month, the area under the jurisdiction of North Henan Province rebelled against the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：大旱，帝以祈雨不降，毁西门豹祠，掘其冢。
现代文：天大旱，皇帝因求雨而不见下，毁坏西门豹祠，挖了他的墓。
English: Due to the severe drought, the emperor did not come down to pray for rain, so he destroyed the West Gate Leopard's Shrine and dug his grave.

古文：五月辛丑，以尚书令、长广王湛为录尚书事，以骠骑大将军、平秦王归彦为右仆射。
现代文：五月初九，任命尚书令、长广王高湛为录尚书事，骠骑大将军、平秦王归彦为右仆射。
English: On the ninth day of the fifth lunar month, Shang Shuling and Chang Guang Wang Gaotan were appointed to record Shang Shuling, and the commander of the cavalry, Ping Qin Wang Guihang, was appointed as the right-hand man.

古文：甲辰，以前左仆射杨愔为尚书令。
现代文：十二日，任命原左仆射杨为尚书令。
English: On the 12th, he appointed his former left-hand man, Sho Yang, as Shang Shuling.

古文：六月乙丑，帝自晋阳北巡。
现代文：六月初三，皇帝从晋阳出发北巡。
English: On the third day of the sixth lunar month, the emperor set out from Jinyang on a northern inspection tour.

古文：己巳，至祁连池。
现代文：初七，到达祁连池。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, they arrived at Qilian Pond.

古文：戊寅，还晋阳。
现代文：十六日，回到晋阳。
English: On the 16th, he returned to Jinyang.

古文：是夏，山东大蝗，差人夫捕而坑之。
现代文：这年夏天，山东大蝗灾，派人进行捕捉并且掩埋。
English: This summer, Shandong locust plague, sent people to catch and bury.

古文：秋七月辛丑，给畿内老人刘奴等九百四十三人版职及杖帽，各有差。
现代文：秋七月初十，赐给京畿内老人刘奴等九百四十三人朝笏、职位以及手杖、帽子，各有所区别。
English: On the 10th day of the 7th month of the autumn, 943 people including Liu Nu, an old man in Gyeonggi Province, were given a pilgrimage, a post, a cane and a hat, each with its own distinction.

古文：戊申，诏赵、燕、瀛、定、南营五州，及司州广平、清河二郡，去年螽涝损田，兼春夏少雨，苗稼薄者，免今年租税。
现代文：十六日，下诏说，赵、燕、瀛、定、南营五州以及司州的广平、清河两郡去年遭蝗、涝灾害，农田受损失，兼春夏以来雨水少，禾苗庄稼出得稀少的，免去今年租税。
English: On the 16th, the next edict said that the five prefectures of Zhao, Yan, Zhai, Ding, and Nanying, as well as the two counties of Guangping and Qinghe in Shizhou, suffered from locust and grasshopper disasters last year, suffered losses of farmland, and had less rain since spring and summer, and the production of grain seedlings was scarce, and were exempt from tax this year.

古文：八月乙丑，车驾至自晋阳。
现代文：八月初四，车驾从晋阳回京。
English: On the fourth day of August, I drove back to Beijing from Jinyang.

古文：甲戌，行幸晋阳。
现代文：十三日，前往晋阳。
English: On the 13th, he went to Jinyang.

古文：先是，发丁匠三十余万人营三台于鄴，因其旧基而高博之，大起宫室及游豫园。
现代文：早先，皇帝征召工匠三十多万人在邺城营建三台。按照旧地基加高并加大，大建宫室和游豫园。
English: Earlier, the emperor conscripted more than 300,000 artisans to build three towers in Lucheng. According to the old foundation, they were raised and enlarged, and the palace room and Yuyuan Garden were built.

古文：至是，三台成。改铜爵曰金凤，金武曰圣应，冰井曰崇光。
现代文：到这时，三台建成，将铜爵台改为金凤台，金武台改名圣应台，冰井台改名崇光台。
English: By this time, three stations had been built, and the Bronze Duke Station was renamed the Jinfeng Station, the Jinwu Station was renamed the Shengying Station, and the Ice Well Station was renamed the Soaring Station.

古文：冬十一月甲午，车驾至自晋阳。
现代文：冬十一月初五，车驾从晋阳归来。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of winter in November, I drove back from Jinyang.

古文：登三台，御乾象殿，朝宴群臣。
现代文：登上三台，坐在乾象殿上，设早宴宴请群臣。
English: He ascended the three platforms, sat on the hall of dried elephants, and held a breakfast banquet for the courtiers.

古文：以新宫成，丁酉，大赦内外，文武官并进一大阶。
现代文：因新宫建成，初八，大赦内外罪人，文武官员都进一大阶。
English: Due to the completion of the new palace, the eighth grade, the amnesty of criminals at home and abroad, and the civil and military officials have all advanced to a higher level.

古文：丁巳，梁湘州刺史王琳遣使请立萧庄为梁主，仍以江州内属，令庄居之。
现代文：二十八日，梁朝的湘州刺史派使者来，请求立萧庄为梁朝国君，仍以江州归附齐国，让萧庄住在江州。
English: On the 28th, the Hunan governor of the Liang Dynasty sent an envoy to request that Xiao Zhuang be made the sovereign of the Liang Dynasty, and that Jiangzhou still be annexed to Qi, and Xiao Zhuang be allowed to live in Jiangzhou.

古文：十二月癸酉，诏以梁王萧庄为梁主，进居九派。
现代文：十二月十四日，下诏以梁王萧庄做为梁国国君，进住在九派。
English: On December 14th, the following edict named Liang Wang Xiaozhuang as Liang Guo Guojun, and he entered and lived in Jiufai.

古文：戊寅，以太傅可硃浑道元为太师，以司徒尉粲为太尉，以冀州刺史段韶为司空，以录尚书事、常山王演为大司马，以录尚书事、长广王湛为司徒。
现代文：十九日，任命太傅可朱浑道元为太师，任命司徒尉粲为太尉，冀州刺史段韶任司空，录尚书事、常山王高演任大司马，录尚书事、长广王高湛任司徒。
English: On the 19th, Zhu Hun Dogen was appointed as the grand master, Jizhou Zhishidan as the secretary, Jizhou Zhishidan as the secretary, Changshan Wang Gao as the secretary, and Changguang Wang Gaotan as the secretary.

古文：起大庄严寺。
现代文：建造大庄严寺。
English: The construction of the Great Solemn Temple.

古文：是岁，杀永安王浚、上党王涣。
现代文：当年，杀了永安王高浚、上党王高涣。
English: That year, he killed Yongan King Gaojun and Shangdang King Gaojun.

古文：十年春正月戊戌，以司空侯莫陈相为大将军。
现代文：十年春正月初十，任命司空侯莫陈相为大将军。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the tenth year of the Spring, he appointed Siku Hou Mo Chen Xiang as the general.

古文：辛丑，太尉长乐郡公尉粲、肆州刺史濮阳公娄仲远并进爵为王。
现代文：十三日，太尉长乐郡公尉粲、肆州刺史濮阳公娄仲远都晋爵为王。
English: On the thirteenth day, Taifu Changle County's Guanzhong, Wuzhou's Zhishi, Yang's Guanzhong and Zhongyuan's Zhongyuan were all promoted to the peerage.

古文：甲寅，行幸辽阳甘露寺。
现代文：二十六日，出行到辽阳的甘露寺。
English: On the 26th, he traveled to Liaoyang's Kanlu Temple.

古文：二月丙戌，帝于甘露寺禅居深观，唯军国大政奏闻。
现代文：二月二十八日，皇帝住在甘露寺禅房内观，只有军国大政才能进内奏知。
English: On February 28th, the emperor stayed in the meditation room of Kanro-ji Temple to meditate. Only the military government could enter the room to meditate.

古文：三月戊戌，以侍中高德正为尚书右仆射。
现代文：三月十一日，任命侍中高德正为尚书右仆射。
English: On March 11th, Gao De Zheng was appointed as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man.

古文：丙辰，车驾至自辽阳。
现代文：二十九日，车驾从辽阳归来。
English: On the 29th, the driver returned from Liaoyang.

古文：是月，梁主萧庄至郢州，遣使朝贡。
现代文：当月，梁国国君萧庄到达郢州，派使者朝贡。
English: In the same month, Liang Guo Guo Jun Xiaozhuang arrived in Zhangzhou and sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：夏闰四月丁酉，以司州牧、彭城王浟为兼司空，以侍中、高阳王氵是为尚书左仆射。
现代文：夏闰四月十一日，任命司州刺史、彭城王高氵攸为兼司空，任命侍中、高阳王高为尚书左仆射。
English: On the 11th day of the 4th month of the lunar calendar, he appointed Shizhou Shishi and Pengcheng Wang Gaoqiu as concurrently Shigu, and appointed Zhizhong and Gaoyang Wanggao as Shangshuji's subordinates.

古文：乙巳，以兼司空、彭城王浟为兼太尉，摄司空事，封皇子绍廉为长乐王。
现代文：十九日，任命兼司空、彭城王高氵攸为兼太尉，摄司空事，封皇子绍廉为长乐王。
English: On the 19th, Gao Jianyou, who was also the first secretary of the Air Force and Pengcheng Wang, was appointed as the second lieutenant, the second secretary of the Air Force, and the prince Shaolin was appointed as the king of Changle.

古文：五月癸未，诛始平公元世、东平公元景式等二十五家，禁止特进元韶等十九家。寻并诛之，男子无少长皆斩，所杀三千人，并投漳水。
现代文：五月二十七日，杀始平公元世、东平公元景式等二十五家，禁押特进元韶等十九家，不久又把他们全部杀掉，男人无论年纪大小都斩首，所杀害共三千人，全部扔到漳水里。
English: On May 27th, they killed twenty-five families, including the Shihping family and the Dongping family, and detained nineteen families, including the Tujin family, and soon killed them all. The men, regardless of age, were beheaded, killing a total of three thousand people, all of whom were thrown into the Surabaya River.

古文：六月，陈武帝殂。
现代文：六月，陈武帝死去。
English: In June, Emperor Chen Wu died.

古文：秋八月戊戌，封皇子绍义为广阳王。
现代文：秋八月十四日，封皇子绍义为广阳王。
English: On the 14th day of the 8th month of autumn, the crown prince, Shao Yi, became the king of Guangyang.

古文：以尚书右仆射、河间王孝琬为左仆射。
现代文：任命尚书右仆射、河间王孝琬为左仆射。
English: He appointed Shosho as his right-hand man and Kawama no Okimi as his left-hand man.

古文：癸卯，诏诸军人，或有父祖改姓冒入元氏，或假托携认，妄称姓元者，不问世数远近，悉听改复本姓。
现代文：十九日，下诏说，所有军人，如果有父亲、祖父原来冒姓改姓元氏的，或者假托以提携，冒称姓元的，不论世代的远近，全部听由他们恢复本来姓氏。
English: On the 19th, the next edict said that all soldiers whose fathers and grandfathers had changed their surnames from their original surnames to the surname Yuan, or who had assumed affiliation and pretended to be surnamed Yuan, regardless of generation, were all allowed to restore their original surnames.

古文：是月，杀左仆射高德正。
现代文：当月，杀了左仆射高德正。
English: That month, he killed his left-hand man, Gao Dezhong.

古文：九月己巳，行幸晋阳。
现代文：九月十五日，前往晋阳。
English: On September 15, he left for Jinyang.

古文：冬十月甲午，帝暴崩于晋阳宫德阳堂，时年三十一。
现代文：冬十月十日，宣帝突然崩于晋阳宫德阳堂，年纪三十一岁。
English: On the 10th day of winter in October, Emperor Xuan suddenly passed away in the Deyang Hall of the Jinyang Palace at the age of 31.

古文：遗诏，凶事一从俭约，丧月之断，限以三十六日。嗣子百僚，内外遐迩，奉制割情，悉从公除。
现代文：遗诏说，丧事一律按照节俭方法办理，丧月的截止期限为三十六天，皇太子和文武百官，不论内外远近，依照制度停止哀丧，一律因公而除服。
English: The edict said that all funerals should be conducted in an economical manner, with a deadline of thirty-six days for the month of death. The crown prince and all civil and military officials, both at home and abroad, should stop mourning in accordance with the system, and all should remove their clothes for public reasons.

古文：癸卯，发丧，佥于宣德殿。
现代文：十九日，发丧，在宣德殿收殓。
English: On the 19th, the funeral was held, and the coffin was received at Xuande Hall.

古文：十一月辛未，梓宫还鄴。
现代文：十一月十八日，棺木送往邺城。
English: On November 18th, the coffin was sent to Shicheng.

古文：十二月乙酉，殡于太极前殿。
现代文：十二月初二，灵柩停放在太极前殿。
English: On December 2nd, the casket was placed in the front hall of the Taiji Temple.

古文：乾明元年二月丙申，葬于武宁陵，谥曰文宣帝，庙号显祖。
现代文：乾明元年二月十三日，埋葬在武宁陵，谥号为文宣帝，庙号称显祖。
English: On February 13, the first year of the Qianming Dynasty, he was buried in the Wu Ning Mausoleum. His posthumous name was Wen Xuan Di, and his temple name was Xian Zu.

古文：帝沈敏有远量，外若不远，内鉴甚明。
现代文：齐宣帝稳重机敏而又高瞻远瞩，表面上似乎目光并不远大，可是内心却十分清楚。
English: Qixuan Emperor is steady, agile and far-sighted. On the surface, his eyes do not seem to be far-sighted, but his heart is very clear.

古文：文襄年长英秀，神武特所爱重，百僚承风，莫不震惧。
现代文：文襄帝年长，又兼英俊秀美，神武帝特别喜爱和看重他。百官们都会看风行事，无不对他诚惶诚恐。
English: Emperor Wenxiang was elderly, handsome and beautiful, and Emperor Shenwu especially loved and valued him. All the officials would act according to the wind, and they were all terrified of him.

古文：而帝善自晦迹，言不出口，恆自贬退，言咸顺从。故深见轻，虽家人亦以为不及。
现代文：宣帝善于隐晦自己，有话都不说出，时常自我贬责，自愿退居后位，皇帝说什么他都表示顺从，所以深为别人看轻，虽是家里人也都认为他比不上文襄帝。
English: Emperor Xuan was good at concealing himself, never saying a word, often self-deprecating, and voluntarily taking a back seat. He obeyed everything the emperor said, so he was deeply despised by others. Even his family members thought he was no better than Emperor Xiang.

古文：文襄嗣业，帝以次长见猜嫌。
现代文：文襄帝继位以后，宣帝因为是老二常受到文襄帝的猜疑。
English: After Emperor Wenxiang succeeded to the throne, Emperor Xuan was often suspected by Emperor Wenxiang because he was the second son.

古文：帝后李氏色美，每预宴会，容貌远过靖德皇后，文襄弥不平焉。
现代文：宣帝的皇后李氏长得美丽动人，每次参加宴会时，她的容貌远远压过了靖德皇后，文襄帝更加不高兴。
English: Emperor Xuan's queen, Li, was beautiful and charming. Every time she attended a banquet, her appearance far outweighed that of Empress Jingde. Emperor Wenxiang was even more displeased.

古文：帝每为后私营服玩，小佳，文襄即令逼取。
现代文：宣帝每当为李皇后私下制作衣服和玩耍的东西，稍为好一点的，文襄帝立即让人前来逼着拿走。
English: Whenever Emperor Xuan privately made clothes and playthings for Empress Li, Emperor Wenxiang would immediately have someone come and take them away.

古文：后恚，有时未与。
现代文：李氏很不高兴，有时不肯给他。
English: Mr. Li was not happy and sometimes refused to give him water.

古文：帝笑曰： 此物犹应可求，兄须，何容吝。 
现代文：宣帝就笑着说 ：这种东西还是能够再弄的，兄长想要，怎么能够吝惜呢？ 
English: Emperor Xuan laughed and said, "This kind of thing can still be made again. If my elder brother wants it, how can I begrudge it?"

古文：文襄或愧而不取，便恭受，亦无饰让。
现代文：文襄帝有时也自感惭愧不肯拿走，宣帝便恭敬地收了下来，并不装出谦让的样子。
English: Emperor Wenxiang sometimes felt ashamed and did not want to take it away, but Emperor Xuan accepted it respectfully, and did not pretend to be humble.

古文：每退朝还第，輙闭阁静坐，虽对妻子，能竟日不言。
现代文：每次退朝回府，便关起门来静坐，即使对妻子，也能够成天不说一句话。
English: Every time he returns to the capital, he closes the door and sits in silence. Even with his wife, he can go a whole day without saying a word.

古文：或袒跣奔跃。后问其故，对曰： 为尔漫戏。 
现代文：有时他却裸体赤脚奔跑跳跃，皇后问他这是干什么，他回答说： 我是给你看着玩的。 
English: Sometimes, however, he would run and jump naked and barefoot. When the queen asked him what he was doing, he replied, "I am just playing for you."

古文：此盖习劳而不肯言也。
现代文：其实这是他在锻炼身体的耐劳能力而不肯说明罢了。
English: In fact, he was just exercising his physical endurance and refused to explain it.

古文：所寝至夜曾有光，巨细可察，后惊告帝。帝曰： 慎勿妄言。 
现代文：他睡觉的地方夜间曾经放出光芒，屋里大小物品都看得一清二楚。皇后吃惊地告诉宣帝，宣帝说： 小心不要出去瞎讲。 
English: The place where he slept used to emit light at night, and everything large and small in the room could be seen clearly. The queen was surprised and told Emperor Xuan. Emperor Xuan said, "Be careful not to go out and talk nonsense."

古文：自此唯与后寝，侍御皆令出外。
现代文：自此之后他只和皇后一起寝宿，其余侍姬都让她们出外。
English: After that, he only slept with the empress, and the other ladies-in-waiting let them go out.

古文：文襄崩，秘不发丧。
现代文：文襄帝去世之后，开始时保守秘密，不发丧。
English: After the death of Emperor Wenxiang, he initially kept it a secret and did not mourn.

古文：其后渐露，魏帝窃谓左右曰： 大将军此殂，似是天意，威权当归王室矣。 
现代文：后来消息渐渐传了出来。魏帝私下对身边的人说： 大将军这次死去，似乎是天意安排的，从此威权应当回归王室了。 
English: Later, the news gradually spread. Emperor Wei said privately to those around him: The general's death this time seems to have been arranged by providence. From now on, authority should return to the royal family.

古文：及帝将赴晋阳，亲入辞谒于昭阳殿，从者千人，居前持剑者十余辈。
现代文：当宣帝将去晋阳，亲自到昭阳殿拜见并向魏帝辞别时，身边随从有千人之多，走在前面手握宝剑的有十多人。
English: When Emperor Xuan will go to Jinyang and personally visit the Zhoyang Palace to meet and bid farewell to Emperor Wei, he will be accompanied by more than a thousand people, and more than ten people will walk in front holding swords.

古文：帝在殿下数十步立，而卫士升阶已二百许人，皆攘袂扣刃，若对严敌。
现代文：宣帝在殿下离有几十步远的地方站立着，而走上台阶的卫士已有二百多人，个个都卷起衣袖紧握刀刃，就像面对强敌。
English: Emperor Xuan stood a few dozen paces away from His Royal Highness, while more than two hundred guardsmen walked up the steps, all of them rolling up their sleeves and gripping their blades tightly, as if facing a powerful enemy.

古文：帝令主者传奏，须诣晋阳。言讫，再拜而出。
现代文：宣帝让主管人传奏说，他必须前往晋阳，说完，再拜而出。
English: Xuan Di asked the person in charge to tell him that he must go to Jinyang. After saying this, he bowed and went out.

古文：魏帝失色，目送帝曰： 此人似不能见容，吾不知死在何日。 
现代文：魏帝大惊失色，目送宣帝说 ：这个人似乎不能见容，我不知将死在哪天了！ 
English: Emperor Wei was taken aback and lost his composure. As he watched Emperor Xuan leave, he said, "This man seems unable to show his face. I don't know when he will die!"

古文：及至并州，慰谕将士，措辞款实。众皆欣然，曰： 谁谓左仆射翻不减令公。 
现代文：当宣帝到达并州以后，举止言辞都诚恳而实在，众人都很高兴地说 ：谁认为左仆射比不上令公呢？ 
English: When Emperor Xuan arrived after annexing the state, his demeanor and words were sincere and real, and everyone was happy to say: Who thinks that the left-handed shot is not as good as the general?

古文：令公即指文襄也。
现代文：令公就是说的文襄帝。
English: The emperor is called Emperor Wenxiang.

古文：时讹言上党出圣人。
现代文：当时有谣言说上党出皇帝。
English: At that time, there was a rumor that the emperor would abdicate.

古文：帝闻之，将从一郡。
现代文：宣帝听说后，准备把这一郡人都迁走。
English: When Emperor Xuan heard about it, he was ready to move the county people away.

古文：而郡人张思进上言，殿下生于南宫，坊名上党，即是上党出圣人，帝悦而止。
现代文：这时郡人张思进对宣帝说： 殿下您就生在南宫，宫坊名为上党，这就是所说的上党的圣人。 
English: At this time, Zhang Sijin, a resident of the county, said to Emperor Xuan, "Your highness, you were born in the Southern Palace. The palace is called Shangdang. This is the so-called saint of Shangdang.

古文：先是童谣曰： 一束藁，两头然，河边羖历飞上天。 
现代文：宣帝听后很高兴，便停止了迁郡人的想法。起先有童谣说： 一束藁、两头燃，河边羊殳瞕飞上天。 
English: Emperor Xuan was very happy after hearing this, and he stopped the idea of moving the county people. At first, there was a nursery rhyme that said: A bunch of reeds, two-headed flame, riverside reeds fly up to the sky.

古文：藁然两头，于文为高。河边羖历为水边羊，指帝名也。
现代文：藁烧掉上下两头，就剩下高字；河边羊殳瞕是水边的羊，指宣帝名洋。
English: If the upper and lower ends of the yakitori are burned, the high-pitched character will remain; the riverside yakitori is a waterside yakitori, which refers to the yakitori of Emperor Xuan.

古文：于是徐之才盛陈宜受禅。
现代文：于是，徐元才便大谈应当接受魏帝禅位。
English: As a result, Xu Yuancai began to talk about accepting the Wei Emperor's zen position.

古文：帝曰： 先父亡兄，功德如此，尚终北面，吾又何敢当。 
现代文：宣帝说 ：先父和去世的哥哥，功德这样巨大，尚且终身为北面之臣，我又怎么敢当呢？ 
English: Emperor Xuan said, "My father and my deceased brother have made such great contributions, yet I have been a subject of the North for my entire life. How dare I do this?

古文：之才曰： 正为不及父兄，须早升九五。
现代文：元才说： 正因为您不如父兄，应该早登帝位，如果不干，别人就会怀有异心。
English: Yuan Zai said: Just because you are not as good as your father and brother, you should have ascended the throne earlier. If you don't, others will harbor ill will.

古文：如其不作，人将生心，且谶云： 羊饮盟津角挂天。 盟津，水也，羊饮水，王名也，角挂天，大位也。
现代文：况且图谶上说 ：羊饮盟津角柱天 ，盟津，是水，羊饮水，正是大王的名字。角柱天，就是皇帝的大位。
English: Moreover, it is said in the painting: "Sheep drinking Mengjin, the cusp of heaven, Mengjin, is water, sheep drinking water, is the name of the great king.

古文：又阳平郡界面星驿傍有大水，土人常见群羊数百，立卧其中，就视不见。事与谶合，愿王勿疑。 
现代文：又在阳平郡界的面星驿旁有片大水，当地人常见群羊几百头，在水中站立或卧下，可是近看却什么也见不到，这些异事正跟图谶相符，请大王不要再有所怀疑。 
English: On the border of Yangping County, there is a large expanse of water next to Mianxinglu. Locals often see hundreds of sheep standing or lying in the water, but they can't see anything when they look closer. These strange occurrences are consistent with the map. Please stop doubting.

古文：帝以问高德正。德正又赞成之，于是始决。
现代文：宣帝又问高德正，高德正大为赞同，于是才下了决心。
English: Emperor Xuan also asked Gao Dezheng, Gao Dezheng greatly agreed, so he made up his mind.

古文：乃使李密卜之，遇《大横》，曰： 大吉，汉文帝之封也。 
现代文：他便让李密占卜，得到 大横 的卦像，便说： 大吉，这是当年汉文帝占卜所得的卦。 
English: He then asked Li Mi to do divination and got the image of the Great Dragon, and then said, "Dakichi, this is the image of the Great Dragon obtained by the divination of Emperor Hanwen that year.

古文：帝乃铸象以卜之，一写而成。
现代文：宣帝便造像以占卜，一铸而成。
English: Emperor Xuan made the statue with the help of divination.

古文：使段韶问斛律金于肆州，金来朝，深言不可，以铠曹宗景业首陈符命，请杀之。
现代文：他又派段韶到肆州向斛律金询问此事。斛律金立即前来朝见，坚决认为不能这样做，由于铠曹宋景业是最早向宣帝陈说符命的，斛律金请求将他杀掉。
English: He also sent Duan Er to Wuzhou to inquire about the matter with Gong Lujin. Gong Lujin immediately came to see the emperor and firmly believed that this could not be done. Since Gong Cao, Song Jingye was the first to tell Emperor Xuan the fate of the phoenix, Gong Lujin asked him to kill him.

古文：乃议于太后前。
现代文：他们便在太后跟前商议。
English: They discussed it in front of the Empress Dowager.

古文：太后谓诸贵曰： 我兒狞直，必自无此意，直高德正乐祸，教之耳。 
现代文：太后对各权贵们说： 我儿为人刚直，自己一定没有这种想法，肯定是高德正乐于看见祸事，教他的。 
English: The empress dowager said to the dignitaries: My son is an upright person, he must not have this kind of thought, it must be Gao De who is happy to see evil and teach him.

古文：帝意决，乃整兵而东。
现代文：宣帝主意已定，便整好军队往东出发。
English: Emperor Xuan's mind was made up, and he prepared his army and set off to the east.

古文：使高德正之鄴，讽喻公卿，莫有应者。
现代文：他让高德正先去邺城，把这件事情告诉公卿大臣，可是没有一个人表示赞同。
English: He asked Gao Dezheng to go to Shicheng first and tell the matter to the Minister of Justice, but no one agreed.

古文：司马子如逆帝于辽阳，固言未可。
现代文：司马子如在辽阳拦住宣帝，坚决地认为不能这样做。
English: Sima Zi, if he stopped Xuan Di in Liaoyang, firmly believed that he could not do so.

古文：杜弼亦抱马谏。
现代文：杜弼也抱着皇帝的马头进谏。
English: Cuckoo also carried the emperor's horse's head into the cocoon.

古文：帝欲还，尚食丞李集曰： 此行事非小，而言还？ 
现代文：宣帝想要回军。尚食丞李集说： 这种事不同于一般小事，怎么就想回军？ 
English: Emperor Xuan wanted to return to the army. Shang Shizhen and Li Ji said: This kind of thing is different from ordinary trifles, how can you want to return to the army?

古文：帝伪言使向东门杀之，而别令赐绢十疋。
现代文：皇帝便假称说把他送去东门杀掉，其实暗中吩咐人赏赐给他十匹绢。
English: The emperor then pretended that he had sent him to the East Gate to be killed, but in fact he secretly ordered that he be given ten yakitori.

古文：四月，夜，禾生于魏帝铜研，旦长数寸，有穗。
现代文：四月，夜间有禾苗长在魏帝的铜砚上，而且高达几寸，上面结有穗子。
English: In April, at night, there are grass seedlings growing on Wei Di's gong, and they are a few inches high, with spikes on them.

古文：五月，帝复东赴鄴，令左右曰： 异言者斩。 
现代文：五月间，宣帝又东行前往邺城，他对左右随从们说 ：有不同意见的斩首。 
English: In May, Emperor Xuan traveled east to Shicheng again. He said to his left and right followers, "Behead those who have different opinions."

古文：是月，光州献九尾狐。
现代文：当月，光州进献九尾狐狸。
English: That month, Gwangju presented nine foxes.

古文：帝至鄴城南，召入，并赍板策。
现代文：宣帝到邺城后，召集民夫，交给他们建筑工具。
English: After Emperor Xuancheng arrived in Lucheng, he summoned the commoners and gave them construction tools.

古文：旦，高隆之进谒曰： 用此何为？ 
现代文：天亮时，高隆之进见，问道： 要筑具干什么？ 
English: At dawn, Gao Longzhi asked, "What do you want to build?"

古文：帝作色曰： 我自作事，若欲族灭耶！ 
现代文：宣帝板着脸说： 我自有事要做，你想灭族之祸吗？ 
English: Emperor Xuan said with a straight face: I have my own things to do. Do you want to destroy the nation?

古文：隆之谢而退。
现代文：高隆之谢罪退出。
English: Takahiro Yoshizane withdrew from the race.

古文：于是乃作圆丘，备法物，草禅让事。
现代文：于是，便建筑圆丘，准备祭祀的各种用具，筹措禅让事宜。
English: As a result, they built a round mound, prepared all kinds of equipment for the ritual, and began to discuss the matter of transferring Zen.

古文：及登极之后，神明转茂，外柔内刚，果于断割，人莫能窥。
现代文：当他登上帝位之后，精神变得十分旺盛，外柔内刚，敢于当机立断，常人难以窥测他的心思。
English: After he ascended to the throne, his spirit became very strong. He was gentle on the outside and firm on the inside, and dared to make decisions on the fly. It is difficult for ordinary people to spy on his thoughts.

古文：又特明吏事，留心政术，简靖宽和，坦于任使。故杨愔等得尽于匡赞，朝政粲然。
现代文：他又特别明察有关吏治的事情，留心于治政之术，以简要安定、宽松和睦为本，任人坦率无私，不偏不党，所以得到杨等人的尽心辅助，朝政政绩辉煌。
English: In addition, he was particularly clear-sighted about matters related to the governance of officials, paid attention to the art of governance, based on concise stability, relaxation and harmony, was candid and selfless, and was not biased against the party. Therefore, he was diligently assisted by Yang and others, and his performance in the government was brilliant.

古文：兼以法驭下，不避权贵。或有违犯，不容勋戚，内外莫不肃然。
现代文：更兼以法则驾驭下属，不避权贵，如有违犯，即使是功臣贵戚，也不宽容，因而内外都恭听号令。
English: Moreover, they both use the law to control their subordinates, do not avoid the powerful, and are not tolerant of violations, even if they are meritorious relatives. Therefore, they obey orders both at home and abroad.

古文：至于军国机策，独决怀抱，规谋宏远，有人君大略。
现代文：至于军国要事和机密决策，最后都由他独自决断，规划谋略都宽大深远，确有国君的雄才大略。
English: As for important military and state affairs and confidential decision-making, in the end, he made his own decisions, and his plans and strategies were broad and far-reaching, truly showing the magnanimity of a sovereign.

古文：又以三方鼎峙，缮甲练兵，左右宿卫，置百保军士。
现代文：又因当时正是三方鼎立对峙，修治甲兵，严加训练，左右宫中警卫，设置百保军士。
English: Also, because it was a three-way standoff at that time, armored soldiers were repaired and trained strictly, guards were left and right in the palace, and a hundred guards were set up.

古文：每临行阵，亲当矢石。锋刃交接，唯恐前敌不多。
现代文：每当临阵作战时，他都亲临飞箭乱石纷飞的前线；刀枪相交时，他只怕前方敌人数量不多。
English: Whenever he was engaged in close combat, he was on the front line, where there was a flurry of flying arrows and rocks; when there was a clash of swords and guns, he was only afraid of the small number of enemies in front.

古文：屡犯艰厄，常致克捷。
现代文：他多次遇到十分危险艰难的处境，却常常能够克敌制胜。
English: He has repeatedly encountered very dangerous and difficult situations, but has often been able to overcome them.

古文：尝追及蠕蠕，令都督高阿那肱率骑数千，塞其走道。
现代文：有一次他曾经追上了蠕蠕的军队，便命令都督高阿那肱率领几千名骑兵，前去堵住敌军的通道。
English: Once he had caught up with Cormac's army, he ordered the viceroy, Gao Ananyuan, to lead several thousand cavalry to block the enemy's passage.

古文：时虏军犹盛，五万余人。
现代文：这时敌军气势很盛，有五万多人。
English: At this time, the enemy was in full swing, with more than fifty thousand men.

古文：肱以兵少请益，帝更减其半骑。
现代文：高阿那肱因为兵少而请求增派，宣帝却减去原先所说的人数的一半。
English: Gao Ananyuan requested an increase in the number of soldiers due to the shortage of soldiers, but Emperor Xuan reduced the number by half of the original number.

古文：那肱奋击。遂大破之。
现代文：高阿那肱奋力攻击敌军，终于大败蠕蠕。
English: Gao Ananzhang fought hard to attack the enemy forces and finally suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：虏主逾越岩谷，仅以身免。
现代文：蠕蠕的主帅翻越山谷，仅仅单身逃脱。
English: Creep's boss climbs across the valley, only to escape single-handed.

古文：都督高元海、王师罗并无武艺，先称怯弱；一旦交锋，有逾骁壮。
现代文：都督高元海、王师罗并没有学过武艺，原先都认为两人比较胆小软弱，可是一旦对阵作战，却超过那些武艺高强的壮汉。
English: The local governors, Gao Yuanhai and Wang Shilao, had not studied martial arts. Originally, they both thought that the two were timid and weak, but once they fought against each other, they surpassed those strong men with high martial arts.

古文：尝于东山游宴，以关陇未平，投杯震怒。召魏收于前，立为诏书，宣示远近，将事西行。
现代文：曾经有一回到东山游玩，饮宴时，因想到关中和陇地未平，摔了酒盂，十分恼怒，召魏收来到跟前，立刻起草诏书，发往远近各处，准备进行西征。
English: Once upon a time, when he was back in Dongshan for a visit and had a banquet, he was very angry because he thought of Guanzhong and Shantian, and he dropped his wine goblet. He summoned Wei Jie to come to him, and immediately drafted an edict and sent it to all parts of the country, in preparation for the Western Expedition.

古文：是岁，周文帝殂，西人震恐，常为度陇之计。
现代文：当年，周文帝刚死去，西魏人十分恐慌，经常计划要迁往陇地。
English: In that year, Zhou Wendi had just died, and the West Wei people were very panicked and often planned to move to Handan.

古文：既征伐四克，威振戎夏。六七年后，以功业自矜。遂留情耽湎，肆行淫暴。
现代文：当时宣帝南征北战，捷报频传，威震中外，六七年以后，他便以所建立的功业而自我陶醉了，从此便沉溺于酒色之中，大逞淫威，凶暴残忍。
English: At that time, Emperor Xuanzong's Southern Expedition and Northern War were widely reported in the news, causing a shock to the world. After 1967, he became self-absorbed with the achievements he had made. From then on, he indulged in alcohol, was arrogant, violent and cruel.

古文：或躬自鼓舞，歌讴不息，从旦通宵，以夜继昼；或袒露形体，涂傅粉黛，散发胡服，杂衣锦彩，拔刃张弓，游行市肆。
现代文：有时他亲自击鼓起舞，歌唱不停，通霄达旦，夜以继日；有时便裸露身体，涂脂抹粉，披头散发，身穿胡服，杂衣锦采，拔刀弯弓，在闹市上游走。
English: Sometimes he personally played the drums and danced, sang non-stop, and was on top of the world, day in and day out; sometimes he bared his body, put on grease and powder, spread his head, wore Hu clothing, mixed clothes, drew a knife and bow, and walked uptown.

古文：勋戚之第，朝夕临幸。
现代文：那些功臣亲戚的府第，他从早到晚都去光顾。
English: He visited the residences of the relatives of those heroes from morning till night.

古文：时乘鹿车、白象、骆驼、牛、驴，并不施鞍勒。
现代文：有时乘坐鹿车、白象、骆驼、牛、驴，上面并不安放鞍子和勒口。
English: Sometimes they ride in a deer cart, a white elephant, a camel, a cow or a donkey, without a saddle or bridle.

古文：或盛暑炎赫，日中暴身；隆冬酷寒，去衣驰走。
现代文：有时在盛夏酷暑，他赤身在日中暴晒；有时在隆冬严寒，还脱掉衣服骑马奔驰。
English: Sometimes, in the heat of summer, he ran naked in the sun; sometimes, in the cold of winter, he took off his clothes and rode a horse.

古文：从者不堪，帝居之自若。
现代文：随从的人都觉得难以忍受，宣帝神色自若。
English: The attendants all found it unbearable, and Emperor Xuan looked very pleased with himself.

古文：街坐巷宿，处处游行。多使刘桃枝、崔季舒负之而行。
现代文：街上闲坐，巷间住宿，到处游逛，经常让刘桃枝、崔季舒背着他行走。
English: Sitting idly on the street, sleeping on the street, wandering around, often letting Liu Taozhi and Cui Jishu walk behind him.

古文：或担胡鼓而拍之。
现代文：有时他挑着胡鼓沿路拍打。
English: Sometimes he picks up a wooden drum and beats it along the road.

古文：亲戚贵臣，左右近习，侍从错杂，无复差等。
现代文：亲戚贵臣，左右近随，侍从人员等等，交错混杂，不分高低。
English: Relatives, dignitaries, close attendants, attendants, etc. are intertwined and mixed, regardless of rank.

古文：征集淫妪，悉去衣裳，分付从官，朝夕临视。
现代文：又召集淫妇人，命令脱光衣服，吩咐侍从们，早晚前去观看。
English: And he called for the harlots, and commanded that they should be made naked, and commanded the porters to watch, morning and evening.

古文：或聚棘为马，纽草为索，逼遣乘骑，牵引来去，流血洒地，以为娱乐。
现代文：有时用荆棘捆成马形，用草结成绳索，逼令她们乘骑，牵拉着来回行走，血流满地，以此取乐。
English: Sometimes they made horses out of thorns and ropes out of grass and forced them to ride them, dragging them back and forth and making them bleed for fun.

古文：凡诸杀害，多令支解。或焚之于火，或投之于河。
现代文：凡是被他下令杀死的，大多让肢解尸体，有的用火烧掉，有的扔到河里。
English: Most of those he ordered to be killed had their bodies dismembered, some were burned, and some were thrown into the river.

古文：沈酗既久，弥以狂惑。
现代文：他沉缅于酒色之中，时间越长，便越加疯狂。
English: He was addicted to alcohol, and the longer he drank, the crazier he became.

古文：每至将醉，辄拔剑挂手，或张弓傅矢，或执持牟槊。游行高廛阝，问妇人曰： 天子何如？ 
现代文：每当喝到将醉时，就拔剑挂在手上，有时张弓搭箭，有时手执长槊，在街市上乱走，遇到妇女便问 ：天子怎样？ 
English: Whenever he gets too drunk, he draws his sword and hangs it in his hand. Sometimes he draws a bow and arrows, sometimes he holds a long scepter. He wanders the streets, and when he meets a woman, he asks: "How is the Son of God?"

古文：答曰： 颠颠痴痴，何成天子。 
现代文：回答说 ：疯疯癫癫，像什么天子。 
English: He answered, "He is mad, mad, mad, like a madman."

古文：帝乃杀之。
现代文：宣帝便立即把她杀掉。
English: Emperor Xuan killed her immediately.

古文：或驰骋衢路，散掷钱物，恣人拾取，争竞喧哗，方以为喜。
现代文：有时他骑马在大道上奔驰，边跑边扔钱物，任人拾取，看他们争吵喧闹，便觉得高兴。
English: Sometimes he would ride down the boulevard on his horse, throwing money and things as he ran, and people would pick them up, and it made him happy to see them quarreling noisily.

古文：太后尝在北宫，坐一小榻。
现代文：太后曾经在北宫闲坐，她坐在一张小床上。
English: The Empress Dowager used to sit idly in the North Palace. She sat on a small bed.

古文：帝时已醉，手自举床，后便坠落，颇有伤损。
现代文：宣帝已经喝醉，便用手把床抬起来，太后摔在地上，受了点伤。
English: Emperor Xuan was already drunk, so he lifted the bed with his hands. The Empress fell to the ground and was slightly injured.

古文：醒悟之后，大怀惭恨。遂令多聚柴火，将入其中。
现代文：他醒来之后，大感惭愧和悔恨，便让人堆了一堆柴禾，准备跳入火中。
English: When he woke up, he felt so ashamed and remorseful that he had a pile of wood heaped up and was about to jump into the fire.

古文：太后惊惧，亲自持挽。
现代文：太后十分惊恐，亲自把他拉住。
English: The Queen Mother was so alarmed that she stopped him herself.

古文：又设地席，令平秦王高归彦执杖，口自责疏，脱背就罚。
现代文：他便又让在地上铺好席子，命令平秦王高归彦拿着木棒，他自己责骂自己，脱下衣服光背受罚。
English: He then had a mat laid on the ground and ordered Ping Qin Wang Gao Guihong to come out with a wooden stick. He scolded himself and took off his clothes and bare back to be punished.

古文：敕归彦： 杖不出血，当即斩汝。 
现代文：并对高归彦说： 打不出血，我就斩了你。 
English: He also said to Takakihiko, "If you don't bleed, I'll cut you."

古文：太后涕泣，前自抱之。
现代文：太后流下泪来，上前抱住他。
English: The Queen Mother burst into tears and ran forward to embrace him.

古文：帝流涕苦请，不肯受于太后。
现代文：皇帝也流泪苦苦请求太后让他受罚，不肯听命于太后。
English: The emperor also cried and begged the empress dowager to let him be punished, and refused to obey the empress dowager.

古文：太后听许，方舍背杖，笞脚五十，莫不至到。衣冠拜谢，悲不自胜，因此戒酒。
现代文：太后答应后，才停止打后背，改成打脚五十次，两脚都打遍了，这才穿好衣服，整好头上的帽子，向太后跪拜谢罪，伤心得难以自制。这次事情过后，他便戒了酒。
English: Only after the Empress consented did he stop beating her on the back and begin to beat her on the feet fifty times, beating both feet thoroughly. Only then did he put on his clothes, straighten the bonnets on his head, kneel before the Empress and offer thanks. He was so sad that he could not control himself. After this incident, he gave up drinking.

古文：一旬，还复如初。
现代文：可是，十天以后，他又故态复萌。
English: However, ten days later, he was back to his old self.

古文：自是耽湎转剧。
现代文：从此以后，他加倍沉缅于酒中。
English: Since then, he's doubled down on the booze.

古文：遂幸李后家，以鸣镝射后母崔，正中其颊。因骂曰： 吾醉时尚不识太后，老婢何事！ 
现代文：他跑到李皇后家里，用响箭射皇后的母亲崔氏，射中了面颊，他还骂着说 ：我喝醉后连太后都不认得，射老婢有什么关系！ 
English: He ran to the home of Queen Li and shot the queen's mother, Cui, in the cheek with a ringing arrow. He also cursed and said, "I don't even recognize the empress dowager when I'm drunk, what does it matter if I shoot a maid!"

古文：马鞭乱打一百有余。
现代文：又用马鞭乱打一百多下。
English: They also whipped him more than a hundred times.

古文：三台构木高二十七丈，两栋相距二百余尺，工匠危怯，皆系绳自防。
现代文：邺城的三台以木架起，高达二十七丈，两台之间相距二百多尺远，工匠们也觉得危险而胆怯，在上面行走时要系着绳子以防身。
English: The three towers in Lucheng rise from a wooden frame to a height of 27 meters, and the distance between the two towers is more than 200 feet. The craftsmen also feel dangerous and timid, and they have to tie a rope to protect themselves when walking on them.

古文：帝登脊疾走，都无怖畏。
现代文：宣帝却登上台顶来回飞跑，毫无恐惧的模样。
English: Emperor Xuan, however, climbed to the top of the stage and ran back and forth, seemingly without fear.

古文：时复雅舞，折旋中节；傍人见者，莫不寒心。
现代文：有时他还在上面起舞，曲折旋转，竟都符合音乐的节拍，旁边人见了都心惊胆战。
English: Sometimes he danced on it, twisting and turning to match the beat of the music, to the horror of those around him.

古文：又召死囚，以席为翅，从台飞下，免其罪戮。
现代文：他又喊来已判死罪的囚犯，让他们用席子当成飞行的翅膀，从台上飞下去，可以免除死罪。
English: He then called for the condemned prisoners to use the mats as wings and fly down from the stage to be spared the death penalty.

古文：果敢不虑者，尽皆获全。疑怯犹豫者，或致损跌。
现代文：那些胆大没有顾虑的人，竟然都毫无损伤；而胆小犹犹豫豫的人，有的就受伤或跌断骨头。
English: Those who were fearless and reckless had no injuries at all, while those who were timid and hesitant had injuries or broken bones.

古文：沈酗既久，转亏本性。
现代文：沉迷于酒中时间长久了，本性也就受到亏损。
English: If you are addicted to alcohol for a long time, your nature will suffer losses.

古文：怒大司农穆子容，使之脱衣而伏，亲射之。不中，以橛贯其下窍，入肠。
现代文：他对大司农穆子容有气，就让他脱掉衣服趴在地上，亲自用箭射他，没有射中，就用木橛插进他的肛门，直插进肠子里头。
English: He had the hots for the head of the department, Farmer Mu Zi Rong, so he made him take off his clothes and lie on the ground. He shot him with an arrow himself. When he missed, he used a wooden stake to pierce his anus and head straight into his intestines.

古文：虽以杨愔为宰辅，使进厕筹。
现代文：他虽然任用杨为丞相，让他在身边筹谋划策。
English: Although he appointed Yang as chancellor, he let him be around to plan and strategize.

古文：以其体肥，呼为杨大肚。马鞭鞭其背，流血浃袍。以刀子剺其腹藁。
现代文：由于杨长得肥胖，宣帝喊他为杨大肚，用马鞭鞭打后背，鲜血把官袍都渗透了，又用刀子划开他的肚子。
English: Because Yang was fat, Emperor Xuan called him Yang Danggu, whipped his back with a horsewhip, soaked his robe with blood, and cut open his stomach with a knife.

古文：崔季舒托俳言曰： 老小公子恶戯？ 
现代文：崔季舒便假托俳优的口吻说 ：老小公子在恶作剧？ 
English: Cui Jishu said, pretending to be a haiku poet: Is the little old man playing a trick?

古文：因掣刀子而去之。
现代文：这才把他手里的刀子拿开了。
English: That's when he removed the knife from his hand.

古文：又置愔于棺中，载以轜车，几下钉者数四。
现代文：宣帝还把杨放到棺材里，用治丧的车拉着走，好几回都打算把钉子钉上。
English: Emperor Xuan also put Yang in a coffin and pulled it with a funeral car, intending to nail it several times.

古文：曾至彭城王浟宅，谓其母尔硃曰： 忆汝辱我母婿时，向何由可耐。 
现代文：他曾经跑到彭城王氵攸的家里，对氵攸的母亲尔朱氏说： 想起当年你夺了我母亲的宠时，我怎么还能忍耐呢！ 
English: He once ran to the home of Pengcheng Wang Xiyou and said to Xiyou's mother, Er Zhu: "When I think back to the time when you stole my mother's favor, how can I bear it!

古文：手自刃杀。
现代文：便亲手用刀把她砍死。
English: He then hacked her to death with a knife.

古文：又至故仆射崔暹第，谓暹妻李曰： 颇忆暹不？ 
现代文：他又到原仆射崔暹的家，对崔的妻子李氏说： 还想念崔暹吗？ 
English: He also went to the home of Choi Siam, the original servant, and said to Choi's wife, Lee: Do you still miss Choi Siam?

古文：李曰： 结发义深，实怀追忆。 
现代文：李氏说： 结发夫妻，情义深厚，实在想念。 
English: Mr. Li said, "I really miss my husband and wife, who are very affectionate.

古文：帝曰： 若忆时，自往看也。 
现代文：宣帝说： 既然想念，自己去看吧！ 
English: Emperor Xuan said: Since you miss it, go see it for yourself!

古文：亲自斩之，弃头墙外。
现代文：便亲手把她斩首，把头扔到墙外去。
English: He then decapitated her with his own hands and threw her head over the wall.

古文：尝在晋阳，以槊戏刺都督尉子耀，应手而死。
现代文：有一次在晋阳，开玩笑用槊刺都督尉子耀，尉子耀应手而死在地上。
English: On one occasion in Jinyang, he jokingly stabbed the city's governor, Lieutenant Zi Yao, with a pickaxe, but he died on the ground.

古文：在三台太光殿上，锯杀都督穆嵩。
现代文：在三台的太光殿上，锯死了都督穆嵩。
English: On the three Tai Kwang halls, the governor Mu Song was sawed to death.

古文：又幸开府暴显家，有都督韩哲无罪，忽众中召，斩之数段。
现代文：他又到开府暴显的家里，当时都督韩哲并没有犯罪，宣帝突然把他从人群中喊出来，砍成了几段。
English: He also went to the home of Kaifu Buxing. At that time, the governor, Han Zhe, had not committed a crime. Emperor Xuan suddenly called him out of the crowd and cut him into several pieces.

古文：魏乐安王元昂，后之姊婿。
现代文：魏乐安王元昂，是李皇后的姐夫。
English: Wei Le'an Wang Yuan'ang was the brother-in-law of Empress Li.

古文：其妻有色，帝数幸之，欲纳为昭仪。
现代文：他的妻子长得漂亮，宣帝多次前去逼奸。后来又要把她召入宫中充当昭仪。
English: His wife was beautiful, and Emperor Xuan went to her many times to force her to have sex with him. Later, he wanted to call her into the palace to serve as a concubine.

古文：召昂令伏，以鸣镝射一百余下，凝血垂将一石，竟至于死。
现代文：宣帝召来元昂要他答应，用响箭对着他射了一百多次，流下的鲜血在地上凝结有近一石之多，竟因此死去。
English: Emperor Xuan summoned Yuan Ang to ask him to agree, and shot him more than a hundred times with a loud arrow. The blood he shed congealed to nearly a stone on the ground, and he died as a result.

古文：后帝自往吊哭，于丧次逼拥其妻。
现代文：后来宣帝又亲自前去吊唁，在哭丧的过程中，又强逼元昂的妻子和他同床。
English: Later, Emperor Xuan personally went to offer condolences, and in the process of weeping and mourning, he forced Yuan's wife to sleep with him.

古文：仍令从官脱衣助襚，兼钱彩，号为信物。一日所得，将逾巨万。
现代文：又让随从官员脱衣助丧，同时又兼助彩礼，作为定婚的信物，一天所得的钱物，将近巨万。
English: In addition, officials from the entourage were allowed to strip off their clothes to help with the funeral, and at the same time to help with the bride price, as a token of the betrothal, the money earned in one day was nearly a million.

古文：后啼不食，乞让位于姊。
现代文：李皇后啼哭着不肯吃饭，请求把皇后的位子让给姐姐。
English: Weeping, Empress Li refused to eat and begged her sister to take her place as empress.

古文：太后又为言，帝意乃释。
现代文：太后又再三劝说，宣帝这才打消了念头。
English: The empress dowager tried to persuade him again and again, but Emperor Xuan finally gave up the idea.

古文：所幸薛嫔，甚被宠爱。忽意其经与高岳私通，无故斩首，藏之于怀。
现代文：所宠幸的薛嫔，一向十分喜爱，忽然想起她曾经和高岳私通，便无缘无故地把她斩首，脑袋装在怀里。
English: His favorite, Xue Yao, whom he had always loved very much, suddenly remembered that she had once had an affair with Gao Yue, and he beheaded her for no reason, cradling her head in his arms.

古文：于东山宴，劝酬始合，忽探出头，投于柈上。
现代文：参加在东山举行的宴会，众人互相劝酒酬让，刚刚有些兴趣，宣帝突然从怀里拿出薛嫔的头颅扔在盘子上。
English: Attending a banquet held in Higashiyama, everyone tried to persuade each other to give up drinking. Just when there was some interest, Emperor Xuan suddenly took Xue Yao's head out of his arms and threw it on a plate.

古文：支解其尸，弄其为琵琶。
现代文：他还把薛嫔的尸体肢解以后，把她的骨毕骨取出来制成琵琶。
English: He also dismembered Xue Yao's body and took out her bones to make a lute.

古文：一座惊怖，莫不丧胆。
现代文：满座的人都十分恐怖，无不魂飞胆丧。
English: The entire auditorium was filled with people who were absolutely terrified, absolutely terrified.

古文：帝方收取，对之流泪云： 佳人难再得，甚可惜也。 
现代文：宣帝这才把骨头收了起来，对着众人流泪说： 佳人难再得，真是可惜啊！ 
English: It was only then that Emperor Xuan took the bones away, and in tears he said to the crowd: It's a pity that it's so hard to get a beautiful woman again!

古文：载尸以出，被发步哭而随之。
现代文：让人载着薛嫔的尸体运出去，自己披散着头发，步行跟随在车后，边走边哭。
English: They had someone carry Xue Yao's body out of the car, and she tousled her hair and followed behind the car on foot, crying as she walked.

古文：至有闾巷庸猥，人无识知者，忽令召斩鄴下。
现代文：甚至于有的闾巷中平庸低下的小人，并没有什么人知道名字的，忽然命令召来并在邺城斩首。
English: Even some of the most mediocre and low-level villains, whose names no one knew, were suddenly summoned by order and beheaded in Lucheng.

古文：系徒罪至大辟，简取随驾，号为供御囚，手自刃杀，持以为戏。
现代文：监狱中犯有死罪的囚犯，他让选取当随从车驾，叫做 供御囚 ，他亲手用刀杀死，把这事当成戏耍。
English: In the prison, there was a prisoner who had committed a capital crime. He had an attendant drive a chariot, called the "prisoner's chariot," and he killed the prisoner with his own hands with a knife, treating the matter as a joke.

古文：凡所屠害，动多支解，或投之烈火，或弃之漳流。
现代文：凡是被他杀死的，动不动就肢解尸体，或者扔到火堆中焚烧，或抛进漳水里。
English: Whenever he killed someone, he would immediately dismember the body, or throw it into a fire to burn it, or throw it into the river.

古文：兼以外筑长城，内营台殿，赏费过度，天下骚然；内外惨惨，各怀怨毒。
现代文：他更兼外筑长城，内建宫殿亭台，奖赏和耗费财物过度，引起天下人骚乱，内外众人都惶惶不安，心怀怨恨苦毒。
English: He also built the Great Wall on the outside, built a palace pavilion on the inside, rewarded and consumed excessive wealth, causing unrest in the world. People at home and abroad are anxious and resentful.

古文：而素严断临下，加之默识强记，百僚战栗，不敢为非。
现代文：但由于宣帝一向以严厉手段对待下属，加上内心强于记忆，百官们都战战兢兢，不敢胡作非为。
English: However, as Emperor Xuan had always treated his subordinates harshly, and his heart was stronger than his memory, the officials were afraid to do anything wrong.

古文：曾有典御丞李集面谏，比帝有甚于桀纣。
现代文：曾经有一回，典御丞李集当面向他进谏，把宣帝比作有过于夏桀和商纣王。
English: Once upon a time, the Emperor's Grand Vizier, Li Xi, confronted him in public and compared Emperor Xuan to the King of Xia and Shang.

古文：帝令缚置流中。沈没久之，复令以出，谓曰： 吾何如桀纣？ 
现代文：宣帝令人把他缚住，沉到河里，过了好久，才把他拉出来，问道： 我比桀纣怎样？ 
English: Emperor Xuan had him tied up and sunk in the river. It was a long time before he was pulled out and asked, "How am I better than a baboon?"

古文：集曰： 回来弥不及矣。 
现代文：李集说 ：越来越不如了！ 
English: Li Ji said: It's getting worse and worse!

古文：帝又令沈之，引出更问，如此数四，集对如初。
现代文：宣帝又让把他沉入河中，拉出以后又问，这样连续几回，李集的回答仍然像起初那样。
English: Emperor Xuan also let him sink into the river, and after pulling him out, he asked again, so several times in a row, Li Ji's answer was still the same as at the beginning.

古文：帝大笑曰： 天下有如此痴汉！
现代文：宣帝大笑起来，说： 天下竟有这样的呆子！
English: Emperor Xuan laughed loudly and said, "How can there be such an idiot in the world!"

古文：方知龙逢、比干，非是俊物。 
现代文：我这才知道古代的龙逢、比干，肯定也不是聪明人。 
English: Only then did I know that the ancient dragon meetings and competitions were definitely not clever.

古文：遂解放之。
现代文：这才让人把他绳子解开释放了。
English: That's when he was cut free.

古文：又被引入见，似有所谏，帝令将出腰斩。
现代文：接着又被召入引见，他似乎还想劝谏，皇帝立即命令把他推出腰斩。
English: Then he was called in again, and he seemed to be trying to persuade him, but the emperor immediately ordered him to be beheaded.

古文：其或斩或赦，莫能测焉。
现代文：他处置人时，或杀或放，没有人能够猜得到。
English: When he dealt with people, either killing or releasing, no one could guess.

古文：初，帝登阼，改年为天保。
现代文：宣帝刚登基时，改年号为天保。
English: When Emperor Xuancheng ascended the throne, he changed his era name to Tianbao.

古文：士有深识者曰： 天保之字，为一大人只十，帝其不过十乎。 
现代文：有位很有学问的士人便说： 天保两字，是一大人只十，他当皇帝不过十年。 
English: A very learned scholar said, "Tenpo is only ten years old, and he has been emperor for only ten years.

古文：又先是谣云： 马子入石室，三千六百日。 
现代文：又起先就有民谣说： 马子入石室，三千六百日。 
English: At the beginning, there was a folk song that said: The horse enters the stone room, three thousand six hundred days.

古文：帝以午年生，故曰 马子 。三台，石季龙旧居，故曰 石室 。三千六百日，十年也。
现代文：宣帝是午年出生的，所以说是 马子 ；三台，原是石季伦的旧居，所以称为 石室 ；三千六百日，也就是十年。
English: Emperor Xuan was born in the year of the horse, so it is Ma Zi; San Tai, originally the old residence of Shi Jilun, so it is called the stone room; 3600 days, that is, ten years.

古文：又，帝曾问太山道士曰： 吾得几年为天子？ 
现代文：有一次皇帝曾经问太山道士说 ：我能当几年皇帝？ 
English: Once, the emperor asked the Taoist priest of Taishan, "How many years can I be emperor?"

古文：答曰： 得三十年。 
现代文：回答说： 得三十年。 
English: And he said, Thirty years.

古文：道士出后，帝谓李后曰： 十年十月十日，得非三十也？
现代文：道士走后，宣帝对李皇后说： 十年十月十日，难道不是三个十吗？
English: After the Taoist priest left, Emperor Xuan said to Empress Li, "Isn't the 10th day of the 10th month of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year?

古文：吾甚畏之，过此无虑。
现代文：我很害怕，过了这个期限就不用忧虑了。
English: I'm scared. After this deadline, there's nothing to worry about.

古文：人生有死，何得致惜，但怜正道尚幼，人将夺之耳。 
现代文：人生总是要死的，又有什么可惜的，只是可怜正道这孩子小，人家将会夺去他的位子。 
English: Life is always about to die, and what a pity, but pity the righteous path, this child is small, others will take away his place.

古文：帝及期而崩，济南竟不终位，时以为知命。
现代文：宣帝果然到了期限就死去了，而济南王也到底不能终居帝位，当时人都认为宣帝是知天命的人。
English: Emperor Xuan died right on schedule, and the king of Jinan could not stay on the throne forever. At that time, everyone thought that Emperor Xuan was a man who knew the fate of heaven.

古文：曾幸晋阳，夜宿杠门岭。
现代文：宣帝曾经前往晋阳，夜间在杠门岭投宿。
English: Emperor Xuanxuan once went to Jinyang and camped in the Leimenling at night.

古文：岭有数株栢树，皆将千年，枝叶嫩茂，似有神物所托。
现代文：岭上有几株大柏树，都有千年之久，枝叶嫩绿繁茂，仿佛有神物寄托在上面。
English: There are several large cypress trees on the ridge, all of which are thousands of years old, with lush green branches and leaves, as if a sacred object had been placed on them.

古文：时帝已被酒，向岭瞋骂。射中一株，未几，立枯而死。
现代文：当时宣帝已经喝醉酒，便向着山岭大骂，并用箭射中了一株大柏树，不久，这棵树立即枯萎而死。
English: At that time, Emperor Xuan was already drunk, so he shouted at the mountains and shot an arrow into a large cypress tree. Soon, the tree immediately withered and died.

古文：又出言屡中，时人故谓之神灵。
现代文：他又常常说出话时把事情结果说中，所以当时人称他为神灵。
English: He also used to say things in the middle of his speech, so people called him a god at that time.

古文：虽为猖獗，不专云昏暴。
现代文：他虽然很横行霸道，但也不是一直昏庸残暴。
English: Although he is very domineering, he is not always stupid and cruel.

古文：末年遂不能进食，唯数饮酒，曲蘖成灾，因而致毙。
现代文：晚年竟然不能吃东西，只是不断喝酒，喝多了成为病，因而致死。
English: In his later years, he couldn't eat at all. He just kept drinking, and when he drank too much, he became ill and died.

古文：先是，霍州发楚夷王女冢，尸如生焉。得珠襦玉匣，帝珍之，还以敛焉。
现代文：起初，霍州人挖了楚夷王女儿的墓，尸体如同活人一样，从坟墓中得到了珍珠襦和玉匣，宣帝很珍爱，于是便又把它作为殉葬品。
English: At first, the Hozhou people dug up the grave of the daughter of King Chu Yi, and the body was like a living person. From the grave, they got a pearl bracelet and a jade box. Emperor Xuan was very precious, so they used it as a funerary gift.

古文：始祖珽以险薄多过，帝数罪之，每谓为老贼。
现代文：起初祖因为人阴险刻薄，多次有过错，宣帝几次处罚他，常称他为老贼。
English: At first, the ancestor made many mistakes because he was insidious and mean, and Emperor Xuan punished him several times, often calling him an old thief.

古文：及武成时，珽被任遇，乃说武成曰： 文宣甚暴，何得称文？
现代文：武成帝在位时，祖受到重用，便对武成帝说 ：文宣帝十分残暴，怎么能够称为 文 ？
English: When Emperor Wucheng was on the throne, Zou was given a lot of power, so he said to Emperor Wucheng: Emperor Wenxuan is very cruel, how can he be called Wen?

古文：既非创业，何得称祖？
现代文：他又不是创世之君，怎么能称为 祖 ？
English: He is not the prince of creation, so how can he be called the progenitor?

古文：若宣帝为祖，陛下万岁后将何以称？ 
现代文：如果宣帝称为祖，陛下万岁之后，怎么称呼呢？ 
English: If Emperor Xuan is called the ancestor, long live his majesty, then what should he be called?

古文：武成溺于珽说，天统初，有诏改谥景烈，庙号威宗。
现代文：武成帝被祖说动了，便在天统初年下诏更改谥号为景烈，庙号威宗。
English: Emperor Wucheng was moved by his ancestor's words and issued an edict in the first year of the unification of China, changing his surname to Jing Rong and his temple name to Wei Zong.

古文：武平初，赵彦深执政，又奏复帝本谥，庙号显祖云。
现代文：武平初年，赵彦深执政，又上奏恢复宣帝本来的谥号，庙号为显祖。
English: In the first year of Wuping, Zhao Yanshen was in power, and the Emperor Xuan's original posthumous name was restored, and the temple name was Xianzu.

古文：废帝殷，字正道，小名道人，文宣帝之长子也。
现代文：废帝名殷字正道，小名道人，是文宣帝的长子。
English: The deposed emperor was called Yin Zi Zheng Dao (殷字正道) and Xiao Ming Dao Ren (小名道人). He was the eldest son of Emperor Wenxuan.

古文：母曰李皇后。
现代文：母亲为李皇后。
English: His mother was Empress Li.

古文：天保元年，立为皇太子，时年六岁。
现代文：天保元年，立为皇太子，当时只有六岁。
English: He was only six years old when he was crowned crown prince.

古文：性敏慧，初学反语，于迹字下注云 自反 。
现代文：他生性聪明灵慧，开始学反语时，在  字下面注上 自反 。
English: He was naturally intelligent and clever, and when he began to learn irony, he wrote "self-refutation" under the word.

古文：时侍者未达其故，太子曰： 迹字足傍亦为迹，岂非自反邪。 
现代文：这时侍者不明白是什么原因，太子说： 字的足旁也是，岂不是自反吗？ 
English: At this time, the waiter did not understand what the reason was, and the prince said, "So is the foot of the character, isn't that self-contradictory?"

古文：尝宴北宫，独令河间王勿入，左右问其故，太子曰： 世宗遇贼处，河间王复何宜在此。 
现代文：曾经有一次在北宫参加宴会，他特别吩咐不要让河间王入内，身边侍从问他是什么原因，太子说： 这是世宗皇帝遇到盗贼的地方，河间王又怎么适宜在这里呢？ 
English: Once, when attending a banquet at the Northern Palace, he gave special orders not to allow the King of Kawama to enter. The attendants around him asked him what the reason was. The prince said: This is the place where Emperor Sejong encountered thieves. How is the King of Kawama appropriate here?

古文：文宣每言： 太子得汉家性质，不似我 ，欲废之，立太原王。
现代文：文宣帝经常说 ：太子得了汉人的性格，不像我。 便想废了他，另立太原王。
English: Emperor Wenxuan often said, "The crown prince has acquired the character of a Han Chinese, unlike me," and he wanted to abolish him and set up a new King Taiyuan.

古文：初诏国子博士李宝鼎傅之。宝鼎卒，复诏国子博士邢峙侍讲。
现代文：开始时，让国子博士李宝鼎当他的师傅，宝鼎死后，又令国子博士邢峙侍讲。
English: At the beginning, Dr. Guo Zi had Dr. Li Baoding as his teacher. After Baoding's death, Dr. Guo Zi also had Dr. Guo Zi as a guest speaker.

古文：太子虽富于春秋，而温裕开朗，有人君之度。
现代文：太子虽然年轻，但性情温和开朗，有当国君的器度。
English: Although he is young, the prince is mild-mannered and cheerful, with the demeanor of a sovereign.

古文：贯综经业，省览时政，甚有美名。
现代文：他融会贯通各种经义，审视观察时政，很有美名。
English: He is well-known for integrating and penetrating all kinds of teachings, scrutinizing and observing current affairs.

古文：七年冬，文宣召朝臣文学者及礼学官于宫宴会，令以经义相质，亲自临听。
现代文：天保七年冬，文宣帝召集朝臣中有文学才能和礼学方面知识的官员在宫中举行宴会，让他们以经义相互质询，文宣帝亲临听问。
English: In the winter of the 7th year of the Tenpo era, Emperor Mencius summoned court officials with literary talent and knowledge of etiquette to hold a banquet in the palace, allowing them to question each other with scripture, and Emperor Mencius himself came to listen.

古文：太子手笔措问，在坐莫不叹美。
现代文：太子以手笔提问，在座的人无不赞叹不已。
English: The prince asked questions by hand, to the amazement of everyone present.

古文：九年，文宣在晋阳，太子监国，集诸儒讲《孝经》。令杨愔传旨谓国子助教许散愁曰： 先生在世，何以自资？ 
现代文：天保九年，文宣帝到晋阳，留太子在京中监国，他便召集所有儒者来讲述《孝经》，他让杨忄音问国子助教许散愁说： 先生在世，怎样自立？ 
English: In the ninth year of the Tenpo era, Emperor Wenxuan went to Jinyang, and Crown Prince Rui supervised the country in Beijing Middle School. He then called together all the Confucians to recite the "Filial Piety." He asked Yang Xuanyin to ask the assistant teacher of the provincial son, Xu Sanshou, "How can you stand on your own when your teacher is still alive?"

古文：对曰： 散愁自少以来，不登娈童之床，不入季女之室，服膺简策，不知老之将至。
现代文：许散愁回答说： 散愁从年少时起，就不登娈童之床，不进少女之室，一心一意读书，不知老之将至。
English: Xu Shanshu replied, "Since I was young, I have never climbed into a boy's bed, never entered a girl's room, and devoted myself to reading. I don't know when I will grow old.

古文：平生素怀，若斯而已。 
现代文：平生心怀，如此而已。 
English: It's all in the mind, that's all.

古文：太子曰： 颜子缩屋称贞，柳下妪而不乱，未若此翁白首不娶者也。 
现代文：太子说： 颜回居于陋屋而被称为守贞，柳下惠坐怀而不乱，但都比不上这位老翁到白头仍不娶亲啊！ 
English: The prince said: Yan Hui lived in a shabby house and was known as a chaste woman, and Liu Xi Hui sat with her arms around her and did not make a fuss, but they were not as good as this old man who did not marry until he was old!

古文：乃赍绢百疋。
现代文：便赏赐给他绢百匹。
English: and he was given three hundred camels.

古文：后文宣登金凤台，召太子使手刃囚。
现代文：后来文宣帝登上金凤台，召来太子让他亲手杀死囚犯。
English: Later, Emperor Wenzhong ascended the Golden Pagoda and summoned the prince to personally kill the prisoner.

古文：太子恻然有难色，再三不断其首。
现代文：太子心中恻然面有难色，连砍几回还没能砍断囚犯的头颅。
English: In his heart, the crown prince looked puzzled. He had not been able to cut off the prisoner's head even after several times.

古文：文宣怒，亲以马鞭撞太子三下。
现代文：文宣帝大怒，亲自用马鞭打了太子三次。
English: In a rage, Emperor Wenxuan personally whipped the prince three times with a horse whip.

古文：由是气悸语吃，精神时复昏扰。
现代文：从此，太子因受惊而口吃，时常精神昏乱。
English: From then on, the prince stuttered from fright and was often mentally disturbed.

古文：十年十月，文宣崩，癸卯，太子即帝位于晋阳宣德殿，大赦。内外百官普加泛级，亡官失爵，听复资品。
现代文：天保十年十月，文宣帝驾崩。十九日，太子在晋阳宣德殿即皇帝位，大赦天下，内外百官普遍晋升品级，原失去官爵的，让他们恢复资历和爵位品级。
English: On the 19th, the prince ascended to the throne at the Xuande Hall in Jinyang, and the country was amnestied. Hundreds of officials at home and abroad were promoted to higher ranks, and those who had lost their titles were allowed to restore their titles and ranks.

古文：庚戌，尊皇太后为太皇太后，皇后为皇太后。
现代文：二十六日，尊称皇太后为太皇太后，皇后为皇太后。
English: On the 26th, the empress dowager was given the title of grand empress dowager, and the empress dowager was given the title empress dowager.

古文：诏九州军人七十已上，授以板职。武官年六十已上，及癃病不堪驱使者，并皆放免。土木营造金铜铁诸杂作工，一切停罢。
现代文：下诏让九州军人七十岁以上的，授给朝笏和官职；武官年龄六十岁以上的，或因生病而不能再作战的，全部放回；土木建筑和制造金铜铁等各种杂役工匠，全部停止和废除。
English: The following edict ordered that Kyushu soldiers over the age of seventy should be granted the pilgrimage and official posts; military attachés over the age of sixty, or those who can no longer fight due to illness, should all be returned; civil engineering and construction and all kinds of craftsmen engaged in the manufacture of gold, copper and iron should all be suspended and abolished.

古文：十一月乙卯，以右丞相、咸阳王斛律金为左丞相。以录尚书事、常山王演为太傅。以司徒、长广王湛为太尉。以司空段韶为司徒，以平阳王淹为司空。高阳王湜为尚书左仆射，河间王孝琬为司州牧，侍中燕子献为右仆射。
现代文：十一月初二，任命右丞相、咸阳王斛律金为左丞相、录尚书事，常山王高涣为太傅，司徒、长广王高湛为太尉，司空段韶为司徒，平阳王高淹为司空，高阳王高为尚书左仆射，河间王孝琬为司州牧，侍中燕子献为右仆射。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, he appointed the minister of the right, Xianyang Wang Shilujin, as the minister of the left, and recorded the official records. Changshan Wang Gaoqi was appointed as the taifu, the tutor, Changguang Wang Gaotan as the taifu, Sikuo Duanqi as the tutor, Pingyang Wang GaoRen as the tutor, GaoYang Wang Gao as the tutor of the left, Kawama Wang Xiaoyan as the tutor of the right, and the attendant YanZi as the tutor of the right.

古文：戊午，分命使者，巡省四方，求政得失，省察风俗，问人疾苦。
现代文：初五，分别委任使者，巡视四方，访求政事之得失，省察各地风俗，访问民间疾苦。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, envoys were separately appointed to inspect the four directions, visit the gains and losses of political affairs, examine the customs of various regions, and visit the people's sufferings.

古文：十二月戊戌，改封上党王绍仁为渔阳王，广阳王绍义为范阳王，长乐王绍广为陇西王。
现代文：十二月十五日，改封上党王绍仁为渔阳王，广阳王绍义为范阳王，长乐王绍廉为陇西王。
English: On December 15th, the former Party King Shaoren was renamed as Yuyang King, Guangyang King Shaoyi was renamed as Fanyang King, and Changle King Shaolian was renamed as Shaanxi King.

古文：是岁，周武成元年。
现代文：这一年，是周的武成元年。
English: This year is the first year of Zhou Wucheng.

古文：乾明元年春正月癸丑朔，改元。
现代文：乾明元年春正月初一，改年号。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the first year of Qianming, the year name was changed.

古文：己未，诏宽徭赋。
现代文：初七，下令减轻徭役和赋税。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month, he ordered the reduction of taxes and taxes.

古文：癸亥，高阳王湜薨。
现代文：十一日，高阳王去世。
English: On the 11th day, King Goyang passed away.

古文：是月，车驾至自晋阳。
现代文：当月，车驾从晋阳回来。
English: That month, he drove back from Jinyang.

古文：己亥，以太傅、常山王演为太师、录尚书事，以太尉、长广王湛为大司马、并省录尚书事。以尚书左仆射、平秦王归彦为司空，赵郡王睿为尚书左仆射。
现代文：二月十七日，任命太傅、常山王演为太师、录尚书事，太尉、长广王湛为大司马、并省录尚书事，尚书左仆射、平秦王归彦为司空，赵郡王睿又为尚书左仆射。
English: On February 17th, Tai Fu and Changshan Wang Ren were appointed as Tai Shi and Shang Shuxi, Tai Li and Changguang Wang Zhan as Dai Sima and Shang Shuxi, Ping Qin Wang Gui Yan as Siku, and Zhao Gu Wang Rui as Shang Shuxi and Shang Shuxi.

古文：诏诸元良口配没宫内及赐人者，并放免。
现代文：下令各姓元的人家家口被发配而进入宫廷以及赐给别人的，全部放回免罪。
English: All the families of those who ordered that the surnames of their ancestors be distributed and entered the court, as well as those who gave them to others, were all released and pardoned.

古文：甲辰，帝幸芳林园，亲录囚徒，死罪已下，降免各有差。
现代文：二十二日，皇帝亲往芳林园，查阅囚徒材料，死罪以下的减罪或免罪不等。
English: On the 22nd, the emperor personally went to the Fanglin Garden to inspect the prisoners' materials, and reduced or pardoned the crimes below the death penalty.

古文：乙巳，太师、常山王演矫诏诛尚书令杨愔、尚书右仆射燕子献、领军大将军可硃浑天和、侍中宋钦道、散骑常侍郑子默。
现代文：二十三日，太师、常山王高演假传皇帝诏令杀了尚书令杨、尚书右仆射燕子献、领军大将军可朱浑天和、侍中宋钦道、散骑常侍郑子默。
English: On the 23rd, the Grand Master, Changshan Wang Gao, acting on a false imperial edict, killed Shang Shuling Yang, Shang Shuling's right-hand man, Yan Zi Xian, the leading general, Zhu Hun Tianhe, the chamberlain Song Qin Dao, and the cavalryman Zheng Zimiao.

古文：戊申，以常山王演为大丞相、都督中外诸军、录尚书事。以大司马、长广王湛为太傅、京畿大都督。以司徒段韶为大将军。以前司空、平阳王淹为太尉。以司空、平秦王归彦为司徒，彭城王浟为尚书令。
现代文：二十六日，任命常山王演为大丞相、都督中外诸军事、录尚书事，大司马、常广王高湛为太傅、京畿大都督，司徒段韶任大将军，前司空、平阳王高淹为太尉，司空、平秦王归彦为司徒，彭城王氵攸为尚书令。
English: On the 26th, Changshan Wang En was appointed as the grand secretary of the prime minister, the military governor of China and other countries, and the secretary of the Shang, the grand secretary of the Ma, Changguang Wang Gaotan was the taifu, the governor of Gyeonggi Province, and the general of the general, the former secretary of the Air Force, Pingyang Wang Gaotan was the lieutenant, the secretary of the Air Force, Pingqin Wang Guihang was the secretary of the Air Force, and the Pengcheng Wang Xuyuan was the secretary of the Air Force.

古文：又以高丽王世子汤为使持节、领东夷校尉、辽东郡公、高丽王。
现代文：又任命高丽王的世子汤为使持节、领东夷校尉、辽东郡公、高丽王。
English: He also appointed King Goryeo's heir, Tang, as envoy, lieutenant of Liaodongyi, governor of Liaodong County, and King of Goryeo.

古文：是月，王琳为陈所败，萧庄自拔至和州。
现代文：当月，王琳被陈朝打败，萧庄自动拔营至和州。
English: That month, Wang Lin was defeated by the Chen Dynasty, and Xiao Zhuang automatically withdrew to Hezhou.

古文：三月甲寅，诏军国事皆申晋阳，禀大丞相常山王规算。
现代文：三月初三，下诏令所有军国大事都到晋阳申报，禀告大丞相常山王谋划安排。
English: On the 3rd day of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3

古文：壬申，封文襄第二子孝珩为广宁王，第三子长恭为兰陵王。
现代文：二十一日，封文襄帝的二儿子孝珩为广宁王，第三个儿子长恭为兰陵王。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the second son of Emperor Fongwen Xiangdi, Xiaojun, became the King of Guangning, and the third son, Changgong, became the King of Lanling.

古文：夏四月癸亥，诏河南定、冀、赵、瀛、沧、南胶、光、南青九州，往因螽水，颇伤时稼，遣使分涂赡恤。
现代文：夏四月癸亥，下诏说，河南定、冀、赵、瀛、沧、南胶、光、南青九州，过去因为蝗虫和水灾，庄稼受到损害，派使者分道赈济抚恤。
English: In the summer of April, the following edict was issued: Henan, Ding, Hebei, Zhao, Handan, Cang, Nanguo, Guangxi, Nanqing and Kyushu, in the past, because of locusts and floods, crops were damaged, and envoys were sent to separate ways to help and support.

古文：是月，周明帝崩。
现代文：当月，周明帝去世。
English: That month, Zhou Mingdi passed away.

古文：五月壬子，以开府仪同三司刘洪徽为尚书右仆射。
现代文：五月初二，任命开府仪同三司刘洪徽为尚书右仆射。
English: On the second day of the first month of May, Liu Honghui, the third secretary of the Kaifu Yi Tong, was appointed as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man.

古文：秋八月壬午，太皇太后令废帝为济南王，全食一郡。
现代文：秋八月初三，太皇太后下令废黜皇帝，封为济南王，食邑一郡。
English: On the 3rd day of the 8th month of the autumn, the Empress Dowager ordered the dethronement of the emperor, and he was crowned King of Jinan, with a county of food.

古文：以大丞相、常山王演入纂大统。
现代文：由大丞相、常山王演继承帝位。
English: The Imperial Throne was succeeded by the Grand Minister, Tsuneyama Wangen.

古文：是日，王居别宫。
现代文：当天，济南王出居别宫。
English: On the same day, the king of Jinan left the palace.

古文：皇建二年九月，殂于晋阳，时年十七。
现代文：皇建二年九月，死于晋阳，年纪十七岁。
English: In September of the second year of Emperor Jian, he died in Jinyang, at the age of seventeen.

古文：帝聪慧夙成，宽厚仁智，天保间，雅有令名。
现代文：废帝聪慧天成，宽厚而仁智，天保年间，很有美名。
English: Emperor Wuzhong was intelligent, generous, and wise. During the Tenpo era, he was very famous.

古文：及承大位，杨愔、燕子献、宋钦道等同辅。
现代文：当继承皇位之后，杨、燕子献、宋钦道等一同辅佐他。
English: When he succeeded to the throne, Yang, Yan Zichen, Song Qin Dao and others assisted him.

古文：以常山王地亲望重，内外畏服。加以文宣初崩之日，太后本欲立之，故愔等并怀猜忌。
现代文：因常山王为皇族至亲，很有人望，内外敬畏服从，加上文宣帝刚去世时，太后本有立他为帝的意思，所以杨等人都对他怀有疑忌之心。
English: Because King Jangsan was a close relative of the imperial family, he was highly respected, feared and obeyed at home and abroad, and when Emperor Wenzhong had just died, the empress dowager had intended to make him emperor, so Yang and others were suspicious of him.

古文：常山王忧怅，乃白太后，诛其党。
现代文：常山王为此感到忧虑不安，便告诉了太后，杀了这批同党。
English: King Jangsan felt worried and uneasy about this, so he told the empress dowager and killed this group of comrades.

古文：时平秦王归彦亦预谋焉。
现代文：当时，平秦王归彦也参与了这次谋划。
English: At that time, Ping Qin Wang Guihang also participated in this plan.

古文：皇建二年秋，天文告变，归彦虑有后害，仍白孝昭，以王当咎，乃遣归彦驰驷至晋阳害之。
现代文：皇建二年秋天，天文发生变异，归彦害怕以后有灾难，便告诉了孝昭，认为济南王应当承担祸患。孝昭帝便派归彦立即驰赴晋阳杀害了废帝。
English: In the autumn of the second year of the reign of Emperor Jian, there was a change in the astronomy, and Gui Yan, fearing that there would be a disaster in the future, told Xiao Zhao that the King of Jinan should bear the disaster. Emperor Xiao Zhao immediately sent Gui Yan to Jinyang to kill the deposed emperor.

古文：王薨后，孝昭不豫，见文宣为祟。
现代文：济南王死后，孝昭帝身体不适，常常见到文宣帝作祟。
English: After the death of the King of Jinan, Emperor Xiaozhao was unwell and often saw Emperor Wenzhong as a bad omen.

古文：孝昭深恶之，厌胜术备设而无益也。
现代文：孝昭帝十分厌恶，便用了各种厌胜之术来镇伏，但都毫无用处。
English: Emperor Xiao Zhaodi was very disgusted, so he used all kinds of tricks to subdue him, but they were all useless.

古文：薨三旬而孝昭崩。
现代文：济南王去世三十天后，孝昭帝也去世了。
English: Thirty days after the death of the King of Jinan, Emperor Xiaozhao also passed away.

古文：大宁二年，葬于武宁之西北，谥闵悼王。
现代文：太宁二年，废帝被葬于武宁的西北面，谥为闵悼王。
English: In the second year of Taining, the deposed emperor was buried on the northwest side of Wuming, and he was known as the mourning king.

古文：初，文宣命邢邵制帝名殷字正道，从而尤之， 殷家弟及， 正 字一止，吾身后兒不得也。 
现代文：当初，文宣帝让邢邵给废帝起名字，名殷字正道。文宣帝听从了可是却又很生气，他说： 殷朝是兄终弟及， 正 字是一止，在我的身后儿子不得帝位啊！ 
English: At first, Emperor Wenzhong asked Yao Shao to give the deposed emperor a name, the name Yin Zi Zheng Dao. Emperor Wenzhong obeyed, but he was very angry. He said, "Yin Dynasty is the brother of all brothers, the word is one, my son will not succeed to the throne after me!"

古文：邵惧，请改焉。
现代文：邢邵听后大惊，请求改换名字。
English: After hearing this, Zou Shao was shocked and asked to change his name.

古文：文宣不许，曰： 天也。 
现代文：文宣帝不答应，说： 天意啊！ 
English: Emperor Wenxuan did not agree and said, "It's God's will!"

古文：因谓昭帝曰： 夺时但夺，慎勿杀也。 
现代文：他便对昭帝说： 想夺位时就夺，但千万不要杀他。 
English: He then said to Emperor Zhao: If you want to seize the throne, seize it, but do not kill him.

