古文：宗弼亨张邦昌刘豫挞懒宗弼，本名斡啜，又作兀术，亦作斡出，或作晃斡出，太祖第四子也。
现代文：宗弼，本名叫斡啜，又叫兀术，也叫斡出，或者晃斡出，是金太祖阿骨打的第四个儿子。
English: Zong Yao, whose real name was Miao Suo, also known as Miao Shu, Miao Suo, or Miao Miao Suo, was the fourth son of King Taizu Akechi.

古文：希尹获辽护卫习泥烈，问知辽帝猎鸳鸯泺。
现代文：希尹擒获辽国护卫习泥烈，通过盘问他得知辽国皇帝在鸳鸯泺打猎。
English: Xi Yinqian was escorted to Liao by the Liao guards, and through interrogation he learned that the Liao emperor was hunting.

古文：都统杲出青岭，宗望、宗弼率百骑与马和尚逐越卢、孛古、野里斯等，驰击败之。
现代文：都统杲从青岭出兵，宗望、宗弼率领一百骑兵和马和尚追逐越卢、孛古、野里斯等，战马驰骋英勇攻击，打败了越卢等人的军队。
English: Du Tonglu dispatched troops from Qingling. Zongwang and Zonglu led a hundred cavalrymen and horse monks to chase after Yue Lu, Gongu, and Yulis. The horses galloped and attacked bravely, defeating the army of Yue Lu and others.

古文：宗弼矢尽，遂夺辽兵士枪，独杀八人，生获五人，遂审得辽主在鸳鸯泺畋猎，尚未去，可袭取者。
现代文：宗弼的箭放完了，于是夺取辽兵的枪，单独杀了八个敌人，活捉五人，经审问俘虏得知辽国君主还在鸳鸯泺打猎，还没有离开那里，袭击可以擒获他。
English: After Zonglu's arrows were released, he seized the Liao soldier's gun, killed eight enemies alone, and captured five people alive. After interrogating the prisoners, he learned that the Liao monarch was still hunting in Zou, had not left there, and the attack could capture him.

古文：及宗望伐宋，宗弼从军。取汤阴县，降其卒三千人。
现代文：宗望攻伐宋朝军，宗弼随军，率军队攻取了汤阴县，接受汤阴三千士兵投降。
English: Zongwang attacked the Song Dynasty army, Zonglu followed the army and led the army to capture Tangyin County, accepting the surrender of Tangyin's three thousand soldiers.

古文：至御河，宋人已焚桥，不得渡，合鲁索以七十骑涉之，杀宋焚桥军五百人。
现代文：到御河，宋人已经把御河桥烧毁了，不能渡过去，合鲁索带骑兵七十人马涉过河，杀死宋朝烧毁桥的军队五百人。
English: By the time they reached the Okawa River, the Song people had already burned the Okawa Bridge and were unable to cross it. Han Russo waded across the river with seventy horsemen and killed five hundred soldiers of the Song Dynasty who had burned the bridge.

古文：宗望遣吴孝民先入汴谕宋人，宗弼以三千骑薄汴城。宋上皇出奔，选百骑追之，弗及，获马三千而还。
现代文：宗望派遣吴孝民先进入汴京晓谕宋人，宗弼以三千人马侵入汴城，宋朝皇上出城逃亡，宗弼又选一百骑兵去追捕，没能追上，缴获三千匹战马而归。
English: Zongwang sent Wu Xiaomin to enter Shijing first to tell the Song people, Zongwang invaded Shicheng with three thousand horses, the Emperor of the Song Dynasty fled from the city, Zongwang also selected one hundred cavalry to pursue, but failed to catch up, and returned with three thousand horses.

古文：宗望薨，宗辅为右副元帅，徇地淄、青。
现代文：宗望逝世，宗辅出任右副元帅，率领军队巡行淄、青一带。
English: After the death of Zongwang, Zongfu served as the right vice-marshal and led the troops on a parade through the Min and Qing regions.

古文：宗弼败宋郑宗孟数万众，遂克青州。
现代文：宗弼打败宋朝郑宗孟数万大军，攻克了青州。
English: Zonglu defeated tens of thousands of troops of Zheng Zongmen of the Song Dynasty and conquered Qingzhou.

古文：复破贼将赵成于临朐，大破黄琼军，遂取临朐。
现代文：接着又在临朐打败敌将赵成，大破黄琼的军队，夺取了临朐。
English: Next, he defeated the enemy general Zhao Cheng in Linyi, defeated Huang Qiong's army, and captured Linyi.

古文：宗辅军还，遇敌三万众于河上，宗弼击败之，杀万余人。
现代文：宗辅的军队巡行回师路上，在河上与敌军三万人遭遇，宗弼击败了敌军，杀敌一万多人。
English: Zongfu's army marched back to the division road and encountered 30,000 enemy troops on the river. Zongfu defeated the enemy troops and killed more than 10,000 of them.

古文：诏伐宋康王，宗辅发河北，宗弼攻开德府，粮乏，转攻濮州。
现代文：皇帝下诏命令攻伐宋朝康王，宗辅发兵河北，宗弼攻打开德府，由于缺乏军粮，又转而进攻濮州。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict to attack King Kang of the Song Dynasty, Zong Fu sent troops to Hebei, Zong Li attacked and opened the German capital, and due to the lack of military grain, he turned to attack Zhangzhou.

古文：前锋乌林答泰欲破王善二十万众，遂克濮州，降旁近五县。
现代文：前锋官乌林答泰欲打败王善军队二十万人，于是攻克了濮州，使周围五县投降。
English: Ulin Dathai, the vanguard officer, wanted to defeat Wang Shan's army of 200,000, so he conquered Zhangzhou and made the surrounding five counties surrender.

古文：攻开德府，宗弼以其军先登，奋击破之。
现代文：攻打开德府的时候，宗弼率领他的军队先登城，奋勇攻击，破了开德府。
English: When attacking Kaedefu, Zonglu led his army to the city first, attacked bravely, and broke through Kaedefu.

古文：攻大名府，宗弼军复先登，破其城。
现代文：攻打大名府，宗弼又是率军捷足先登，攻破了这座城。
English: Attacking the daimyo's palace, Zonglu led the army to the top of the hill and broke through the city.

古文：河北平。
现代文：这样，河北被收复平定。
English: In this way, Hebei was recovered and pacified.

古文：宋主自扬州奔于江南，宗弼等分道伐之。
现代文：宋朝君王从扬州奔逃到江南，宗弼等人分道去讨伐他。
English: The king of the Song Dynasty fled from Yangzhou to the south of the Yangtze River, and Zonglu and others went their separate ways to fight him.

古文：进兵归德，城中有自西门北门出者，当海复败之。
现代文：宗弼进军归德，城中有从西门、北门出兵的，当海打败了他们。
English: Zonglu marched to return to Germany. There were soldiers from the West Gate and the North Gate in the city, but they were defeated by the sea.

古文：乃绝隍筑道，列炮隍上，将攻之。城中人惧，遂降。
现代文：宗弼于是阻绝没有水的护城河，筑成通道，然后把炮排列在上面，就要发动攻击，城中人惧怕，于是投降。
English: So Zonglu blocked the waterless moat, built a passage, and then lined up the cannons on top. He was about to launch an attack. The people in the city were afraid, so they surrendered.

古文：先遣阿里、蒲卢浑至寿春，宗弼军继之。
现代文：先派遣阿里、蒲卢浑到寿春，宗弼的军队继他们之后开来。
English: He first sent Ali and Bulughun to Shuchun, and Zonglu's army followed them.

古文：宋安抚使马世元率官属出降。
现代文：宋朝安抚使马世元率领众官吏出来投降。
English: To appease the Song Dynasty, Ma Shiyuan led all the officials to surrender.

古文：进降卢州，再降巢县王善军。
现代文：宗弼进军降服了庐州，又迫使巢县王善的军队投降。
English: Zonglu marched into and conquered Zhangzhou, and forced the army of Wang Zhen of Chaoxian to surrender.

古文：当海等破郦琼万余众于和州，遂自和州渡江。
现代文：当海等人在和州把郦琼一万多人马打得大败，然后从和州渡长江。
English: Danghai and others defeated more than ten thousand people in Hezhou, and then crossed the Yangtze River from Hezhou.

古文：将至江宁西二十里，宋杜充率步骑六万来拒战，鹘卢补、当海、迪虎、大抃合击破之。
现代文：将要到达江宁西约二十里的时候，宋朝杜充率领步骑六万人马来抵抗，鹘卢补、当海、迪虎、大白大共同击败了杜充的六万大军。
English: When it was about to reach about 20 miles west of Jiangning, the Song Dynasty led by Du Chong led 60,000 people on horseback to resist. Gong Lushu, Danghai, Dihu and Dabai jointly defeated Du Chong's 60,000-strong army.

古文：宋陈邦光以江宁府降。
现代文：宋朝陈邦光拱手交出江宁府宣布投降。
English: Chen Bangguang of the Song Dynasty surrenders Jiangning Prefecture and announces his surrender.

古文：留长安奴、斡里也守江宁。使阿鲁补、斡里也别将兵徇地，下太平州、濠州及句容、溧阳等县，溯江而西，屡败张永等兵，杜充遂降。
现代文：宗弼留下长安奴、斡里也据守江宁，派阿鲁补、斡里也副将带兵巡行各地，使各地降服，他们先后巡行太平州、濠州及句容、溧阳等县，溯江而西行，屡次打败张永等的军队，杜充于是投降。
English: Zonglu left Chang'an and Jiaoli to defend Jiangning, and sent Aruzi and Jiaoli's vice-commanders to lead troops on a tour of various regions to make them surrender. They successively toured Taiping, Zhangzhou, Jujong, and Shenyang counties, and traveled west along the Yangtze River. They repeatedly defeated Zhang Yong's army, and Du Chong surrendered.

古文：宗弼自江宁取广德军路，追袭宋主于越州。
现代文：宗弼从江宁出发走上攻取广德军的道路，到越州追袭宋主。到湖州，攻取了这座城。
English: Zonglu set out from Jiangning on the road to capture the Guang German army, went to Yuezhou to pursue Song Lord, and went to Huzhou to capture this city.

古文：至湖州，取之。先使阿里、蒲卢浑趋杭州，具舟于钱塘江。
现代文：先派阿里、蒲卢浑赶往杭州，都乘船走钱塘江水路。
English: He first sent Ali and Pu Luhun to Hangzhou, and they all took a boat to travel along the Qiantang River.

古文：宗弼至杭州，官守巨室皆逃去，遂攻杭州，取之。
现代文：宗弼到达杭州的时候，达官贵人及其眷属都已逃离了，于是进攻杭州，攻克了杭州。
English: When Zonglu arrived in Hangzhou, the dignitaries and their families had already fled, so he attacked Hangzhou and conquered Hangzhou.

古文：宋主闻杭州不守，遂自越奔明州。
现代文：宋朝君主听说杭州失守，就从越州逃奔明州。
English: When the monarch of the Song Dynasty heard that Hangzhou was lost, he fled from Yuezhou to Mingzhou.

古文：宗弼留杭州，使阿里、蒲卢浑以精兵四千袭之。讹鲁补、术列速降越州。
现代文：宗弼留在杭州，派阿里、蒲卢浑用精兵四千人去袭击宋主，讹鲁补、术列速使越州降服。
English: Zonglu stayed in Hangzhou and sent Ali and Buluhun with 4,000 elite soldiers to attack the Lord of Song. Zonglu and Buluhun quickly subdued Yuezhou.

古文：大抃破宋周汪军，阿里、蒲鲁浑破宋兵三千，遂渡曹娥江。去明州二十五里，大破宋兵，追至其城下。
现代文：大白大击败宋周汪的军队，阿里、蒲鲁浑打败宋兵三千人，然后就渡过曹娥江，在离明州二十五里的地方，把宋兵打得大败，追击他们到明州城下。
English: Da Bai Da defeated Song Zhou Wang's army, Ali and Bulugun defeated 3,000 Song soldiers, and then crossed the Cao E River, defeated the Song soldiers in a place 25 miles from Mingzhou, and chased them to the city of Mingzhou.

古文：城中出兵，战失利，宋主走入于海。
现代文：城中出兵抵抗，我军失利，宋主逃跑乘船入海。
English: Troops were sent to the city to resist, our army was defeated, and Lord Song fled by boat into the sea.

古文：宗弼中分麾下兵，会攻明州，克之。
现代文：宗弼把麾下兵士分为两部分，夹击明州，攻克了它。
English: Zonglu divided the soldiers under his command into two parts, clamped down on Mingzhou and conquered it.

古文：阿里、蒲卢浑泛海至昌国县，执宋明州守赵伯谔，伯谔言： 宋主奔温州，将自温州趋福州矣。 
现代文：阿里、蒲卢浑乘船至昌国县，捕获了宋朝明州守备赵伯谔，伯谔说： 宋主逃往温州，将从温州再奔向福州。 
English: Ali and Pu Luhun took a boat to Changguo County and captured the Song Dynasty Ming State guard Zhao Boqin. Boqin said: The Song Lord fled to Wenzhou, and will run from Wenzhou to Fuzhou.

古文：遂行海追三百余里，不及，阿里、蒲卢浑乃还。
现代文：于是阿里、蒲卢浑等乘船在海上追踪三百多里，没有追到，阿里、蒲卢浑只好回还。
English: As a result, Ali, Bulughun and others followed them by boat for more than three hundred miles at sea. They did not catch up, and Ali and Bulughun had to turn back.

古文：宗弼还自杭州，遂取秀州。
现代文：宗弼自杭州回师，又攻取了秀州。
English: Zonglu returned to his division from Hangzhou and captured Xiuzhou.

古文：赤盏晖败宋军于平江，遂取平江。
现代文：赤盏晖在平江打败宋军收取了平江。
English: He defeated the Song army in Pingjiang and took Pingjiang.

古文：阿里率兵先趋镇江，宋韩世忠以舟师扼江口。宗弼舟小，契丹、汉军没者二百余人，遂自镇江溯流西上。
现代文：阿里率领军队先向镇江挺进，宋朝大将韩世忠用舟船部队扼住江口要道，宗弼部队的舟小，契丹兵、汉兵被淹没二百多人，于是从镇江溯流西上。
English: Ali led the army to advance to the Zhenjiang River first. The Song Dynasty general Han Shizhong used the boat troops to strangle the main road at the mouth of the river. The boat of the Zongyi troops was small. More than 200 Khitan soldiers and Han soldiers were flooded, so they followed the flow of the Zhenjiang River to the west.

古文：世忠袭之，夺世忠大舟十艘，于是宗弼循南岸，世忠循北岸，且战且行。
现代文：韩世忠袭击他们，宗弼的将士夺取韩世忠的大船十艘，于是宗弼沿着平江南岸巡行，韩世忠沿着平江北岸巡行，边战边行。
English: Han Shizhong attacked them, Zonglu's soldiers captured ten of Han Shizhong's large ships, so Zonglu marched along the south bank of the Pingjiang River, and Han Shizhong marched along the north bank of the Pingjiang River, marching side by side.

古文：世忠艨艟大舰数倍宗弼军，出宗弼军前后数里，击柝之声，自夜达旦。
现代文：韩世忠拥有的艨艟大舰是宗弼的几倍，与宗弼军前后相距数里，报更敲击梆子的声音，从夜晚到天明没停。
English: Han Shizhong's ship was several times larger than Zonglu's, and it was several miles away from Zonglu's army. The sound of the hammering of the hammer did not stop from night to dawn.

古文：世忠以轻舟来挑战，一日数接。
现代文：韩世宗用轻舟来挑战，一天接战好几次。
English: Han Shizong used a light boat to challenge, racing several times a day.

古文：将至黄天荡，宗弼乃因老鹳河故道开三十里通秦淮，一日一夜而成，宗弼乃得至江宁。
现代文：船队将要到达黄天荡的时候，宗弼沿着老鹳河故道开通了三十里，直通到泰淮河，一天一夜就开通了，所以宗弼才得以到达江宁。
English: When the fleet was about to reach Huangtianlang, Zonglu opened thirty miles along the old road of the Laotian River, straight to the Taihuai River. It was opened overnight, so Zonglu was able to reach Jiangning.

古文：挞懒使移剌古自天长趋江宁援宗弼，乌林答泰欲亦以兵来会，连败宋兵。
现代文：挞懒派移剌古从天长直奔江宁援助宗弼，乌林答泰欲亦带兵前来会合，他们连连打败宋兵。
English: The lazy faction moved from Tianchang to Jiangning to aid Zonglu, and Ulin and Tai also brought soldiers to the meeting. They defeated the Song soldiers one after another.

古文：宗弼发江宁，将渡江而北。
现代文：宗弼率军从江宁出发，打算渡过江而向北行进。
English: Zonglu led the army from Jiangning, intending to cross the river and march north.

古文：宗弼军渡自东，移剌古渡自西，与世忠战于江渡。
现代文：宗弼的军队从江的东边渡过来，移剌古的军队从西边渡过来，两边夹击和韩世忠的军队在平江渡口开了战。
English: Zonglu's army crossed over from the east side of the river, Yigonggu's army crossed over from the west side, and the two sides clashed with Han Shizhong's army at the Pingjiang ferry.

古文：世忠分舟师绝江流上下，将左右掩击之。
现代文：世忠指挥船队分头行动，阻绝江流上下水路，率领左右掩护攻击宗弼军。
English: Shizhong commanded the fleet to split up, block the upstream and downstream waterways of the river, and lead the left and right cover to attack the Zongyi army.

古文：世忠舟皆张五纟两，宗弼选善射者，乘轻舟，以火箭射世忠舟上五纟两，五纟两著火箭，皆自焚，烟焰满江，世忠不能军，追北七十里，舟军歼焉，世忠仅能自免。
现代文：韩世忠的船都是张开五纟两，宗弼选出善于射箭的兵士，乘轻便舟船，用火箭射世忠船上的五纟两，五纟两被射中，全部燃烧焚毁，火焰和浓烟弥漫整个江面，韩世忠不能指挥军队作战，宗弼向北追击七十里，韩世忠的舟军被歼灭了，他仅能保住自己幸免。
English: Han Shizhong's ships were five-masted and two-masted. Zonglu selected soldiers who were good at archery. He took a light boat and used a rocket to hit the five-masted and two-masted ships on Han Shizhong's ship. The five-masted and two-masted ships were hit and all burned and destroyed. Flames and thick smoke filled the entire river. Han Shizhong could not command the army to fight. Zonglu chased seventy miles north. Han Shizhong's boat army was annihilated. He could only save himself.

古文：宗弼渡江北还，遂从宗辅定陕西。
现代文：宗弼渡江向北回还，接着又跟宗辅平定了陕西。
English: Zonglu waded across the river to the north and returned, and then he and Zongfu leveled Shaanxi.

古文：与张浚战于富平。宗弼陷重围中，韩常流矢中目，怒拔去其矢，血淋漓，以土塞创，跃马奋呼搏战，遂解围，与宗弼俱出。
现代文：在富平与张浚作战时，宗弼陷入重围之中，韩常被流矢射中眼睛，他怒不可遏，自己拔下那支飞来的箭，眼睛鲜血淋漓，他用土堵塞伤口，又飞身上马奋力呼喊拼搏，才解了围，救得宗弼一块儿冲出来。
English: During the battle between Fuping and Zhang Jun, Zonglu was caught in the middle of a heavy siege. Han was often shot in the eye by a stray arrow. He was furious. He pulled out the flying arrow himself. His eyes were covered in blood. He plugged the wound with soil. He then flew on his horse and shouted for a fight. Only then was the siege broken and Zonglu was able to rush out together.

古文：既败张浚军于富平，遂与阿卢补招降熙河、泾原两路。
现代文：在富平打败了张浚的军队以后，宗弼又与阿鲁补招降熙河、泾原两路人马。
English: After Fuping defeated Zhang Jun's army, Zonglu and Aru recruited more soldiers from Heihe and Zhangyuan.

古文：及攻吴玠于和尚原，抵险不可进，乃退军。伏兵起，且战且走。行三十里，将至平地，宋军阵于山口，宗弼大败，将士多战没。
现代文：等到在和尚原进攻吴，当地守军据险抵抗，宗弼军不能前进，于是退兵，不想伏兵又起，只好且战且退，走了三十里，就要上平地了，宋军在山口排出阵势，宗弼军大败，将士大多都战死了。
English: They waited until they attacked Wu in Monchohara, where the local defenders were in a position to resist dangerously, and the Zonglu army could not advance, so they withdrew. They did not want to set up another ambush, so they had no choice but to fight and retreat. After walking thirty miles, they were about to level the ground. The Song army deployed in Yamaguchi, the Zonglu army was heavily defeated, and most of the soldiers were killed in battle.

古文：明年，复攻和尚原，克之。
现代文：第二年，再次进攻和尚原，攻克了。
English: The next year, he attacked Monchohara again and conquered it.

古文：天会十五年，为右副元帅，封沈王。
现代文：天会十五年，宗弼出任右副元帅，被封为沈王。
English: In the fifteenth year of the Heaven's Fair, Zonglu served as the right vice-marshal and was given the title of Shen Wang.

古文：天眷元年，挞懒、宗磐执议以河南之地割赐宋，诏遣张通古等奉使江南。
现代文：天眷元年，挞懒、宗磐主张把河南地盘割赐予宋朝，皇上诏令张通古等人奉命出使江南。
English: In the first year of Tianxin, Zailao and Zongban advocated the allocation of Henan territory to the Song Dynasty, and the emperor ordered Zhang Tonggu and others to be sent to the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：明年，宋主遣端明殿学士韩肖胄奉表谢，遣王伦等乞归父丧及母韦氏兄弟。
现代文：第二年，宋朝君主派遣端明殿学士韩肖胄奉表来朝答谢，派遣王伦等请求回归故里料理父亲丧事及母亲韦氏的兄弟。
English: In the second year, the Song Dynasty monarch sent Han Xiaoqi, a scholar of the Duanming Palace, to the morning to express his thanks, and sent Wang Lun and other brothers to request the return of the father's funeral and the mother of the Wei family.

古文：宗弼自军中入朝，进拜都元帅。
现代文：宗弼从军中回来入朝见君，官拜都元帅。
English: Zonglu came back from the army and entered the court to see you. He was given the title of marshal.

古文：宗弼察挞懒与宋人交通赂遗，遂以河南、陕西与宋，奏请诛挞懒，复旧疆。
现代文：宗弼查清楚了挞懒和宋人勾结互相贿赂，馈赠礼品，竟将河南、陕西拱手献给宋朝，所以上奏请求杀了挞懒，恢复旧有疆土。
English: Zonglu's investigation made it clear that Zailao and the Song people had colluded to bribe each other and give gifts to each other, to the point of sacrificing Henan and Shaanxi to the Song Dynasty. Therefore, Zonglu asked Zailao to kill Zailao and restore the old territory.

古文：是时，宗磐已诛，挞懒在行台，复与鹘懒谋反。
现代文：当时，宗磐已经被杀，挞懒在行台，他于是又与鹘懒谋划造反。
English: At that time, Soiwan had already been killed, and he was on his way to the capital, so he plotted a rebellion with Soi Lazy.

古文：会置行台于燕京，诏宗弼为太保，领行台尚书省，都元帅如故，往燕京诛挞懒。挞懒自燕京南走，将亡入于宋，追至祁州，杀之。
现代文：行台正好设置在燕京，皇上诏令宗弼为太保，领导行台尚书省，原任都元帅还像以前一样，宗弼以这样的身份前往燕京诛杀挞懒，挞懒从燕京向南跑，将要逃亡进入宋朝，被宗弼追到祁州，杀了他。
English: The procession platform was set up in Yanjing. The emperor's edict ordered Zonglu to be the guardian of the throne and to lead the procession to Shangshu Province. The former marshal of the capital was still the same as before. Zonglu went to Yanjing in this capacity to kill the lazy man. The lazy man ran south from Yanjing and was about to flee into the Song Dynasty. Zonglu chased him to Zhangzhou and killed him.

古文：诏 诸州郡军旅之事，决于帅府。
现代文：皇上诏令： 诸州郡有关军旅的事情，由帅府决定。
English: Emperor's edict: Matters concerning the military expedition to Zhouzhou County shall be decided by the General Headquarters.

古文：民讼钱谷，行台尚书省治之 。
现代文：民事诉讼关于钱财谷物的事情，归行台尚书省治理。 
English: Civil lawsuits involving money, property and grain are under the jurisdiction of the Taishang Provincial Government.

古文：宗弼兼总其事，遂议南伐。
现代文：宗弼则兼管军旅和民事两方面的事，所以商议向南攻伐的大计。
English: Zonglu, on the other hand, was in charge of both military and civil affairs, so they discussed the general plan of attacking the south.

古文：太师宗干以下皆曰： 构蒙再造之恩，不思报德，妄自鸱张，祈求无厌，今若不取，后恐难图。 
现代文：太师宗干及其部下都说 ：只图谋承蒙再造之恩，不想着报答恩德，狂妄嚣张，像鸱鸟张开翅膀一样凶暴，请求赐予，贪得无厌。现在如果不攻取，今后恐怕再图收复就难了。 
English: Grandmaster Zong Gan and his subordinates all said, "He only seeks to inherit the grace of being reborn, and does not want to repay the grace. He is arrogant and arrogant, and is as fierce as an ostrich with its wings open. He asks for gifts and is insatiably greedy. If he does not conquer now, I am afraid it will be difficult to try to recover in the future."

古文：上曰： 彼将谓我不能奄有河南之地。
现代文：皇上说： 他们将说我没有覆盖河南的气概。
English: The emperor said: They will say that I do not have the courage to cover Henan.

古文：且都元帅久在方面，深究利害，宜即举兵讨之。 
现代文：况且都元帅在那一方时间长了，深深了解利害关系，应该立即发兵讨伐他。 
English: Moreover, the marshal has been on that side for a long time, deeply understands the stakes, and should immediately send troops to fight him.

古文：遂命元帅府复河南疆土，诏中外。
现代文：于是命令元帅府收复河南疆土，并诏示中外。
English: Therefore, he ordered the marshal's office to recover the territory of Henan Province, and issued a proclamation.

古文：宗弼由黎阳趋汴，右监军撒离喝出河中趋陕西。
现代文：宗弼率军从黎阳直奔汴州，右监军撒离喝从河中出兵赴陕西。
English: Zonglu led the army from Liyang straight to Bozhou, and the Right Supervisor's Army left and went to Shaanxi from the middle of the river.

古文：宋岳飞、韩世忠分据河南州郡要害，复出兵涉河东，驻岚、石、保德之境，以相牵制。
现代文：宋朝岳飞、韩世忠分别据守河南州郡的要害之地，又出兵渡河到河东，驻守在岚、石、保德境内，用来牵制宗弼兵力。
English: Yuefei and Han Shizhong of the Song Dynasty respectively guarded the key places in Henan County, and sent troops across the river to the east of the river, stationed in the territory of Yunnan, Shiyan and Baode, and used them to contain Zongyi's forces.

古文：宗弼遣孔彦舟下汴、郑两州，王伯龙取陈州，李成取洛阳，自率众取亳州及顺昌府，嵩、汝等州相次皆下。
现代文：宗弼派孔彦舟去进攻汴、郑两州，派遣王伯龙去攻打陈州，李成攻打洛阳，宗弼自己率领军队去攻打亳州及顺昌府，嵩、汝等州也都相继攻下。
English: Zonglu sent Kong Yanzhou to attack Min and Zheng Provinces, sent Wang Bolong to attack Chen Province, Li Chengdu to attack Luoyang, Zonglu himself led the army to attack Min Province and Shunchang Prefecture, and Song and You Provinces were also successively conquered.

古文：时暑，宗弼还军于汴，岳飞等军皆退去，河南平，时天眷三年也。
现代文：当时正值夏天，宗弼军队回师汴州，岳飞等人的军队已经都退了兵，河南平定了，当时是天眷三年。
English: At that time, it was summer, Zonglu's army had returned to its base in Bozhou, Yuefei's army and others had all retreated, and Henan had been pacified. At that time, it had been three years.

古文：上使使劳问宗弼以下将士，凡有功军士三千，并加忠勇校尉。
现代文：皇上派遣使者来慰劳宗弼及其属下将士，立功的军士三千人，一起加封为忠勇校尉。
English: The emperor sent an envoy to comfort Lao Zongyu and his subordinate soldiers. Three thousand meritorious soldiers were awarded the title of "loyal lieutenant."

古文：攻岚、石、保德皆克之。
现代文：后来攻打岚、石、保德，也都攻克了。
English: Later, the attacks on Handan, Shiyan and Baodong were also defeated.

古文：宗弼入朝，是时，上幸燕京，宗弼见于行在所。
现代文：宗弼入朝见君，这时皇上巡察燕京，宗弼在皇上巡行所在场所朝见了皇上。
English: Zonglu entered the imperial court to see the emperor. At this time, the emperor was inspecting Yanjing. Zonglu met the emperor in the morning at the place where the emperor was marching.

古文：居再旬，宗弼还军，上起立，酌酒饮之，赐以甲胄弓矢及马二匹。
现代文：居住十天，宗弼要回部队，皇上起立给他斟酒喝，并赐给他甲胄、弓矢及两匹马。
English: After living there for ten days, Zonglu wanted to return to the army. The emperor stood up, poured him wine, and gave him armor, a bow and arrow, and two horses.

古文：宗弼已启行四日，召还。
现代文：宗弼已经启行四天了，又被召回。
English: It's been four days since Zong Yao set off, and he's been called back again.

古文：至日，希尹诛。
现代文：到达那一天，希尹被杀。
English: On the day of his arrival, Xi Yin was killed.

古文：越五日，宗弼还军，进伐淮南，克庐州。
现代文：又过五天，宗弼回到军队，进攻征伐淮南，攻克卢州。
English: Five days later, Zonglu returned to the army to attack and conquer Huainan and Luzhou.

古文：上幸燕京，宗弼朝燕京，乞取江南，上从之。制诏都元帅宗弼比还军，与宰臣同入奏事。
现代文：皇上驾临燕京，宗弼到燕京朝见，请求去攻取江南，皇上采纳了他的谏议，并制发诏书，令都元帅宗弼与宰相大臣一同入朝奏事。
English: When the emperor arrived in Yanjing, Zonglu went to Yanjing to see the emperor and asked him to invade the south of the Yangtze River. The emperor accepted his suggestion and issued an imperial edict ordering the Grand Marshal Zonglu and the Prime Minister to report to the emperor.

古文：俄为尚书左丞相兼侍中，太保、都元帅、领行台如故。
现代文：不久又任命宗弼为尚书左丞相兼侍中，原任太保、都元帅、领行台依然如故。
English: Soon after, he appointed Sosho as Shojo-zojo (Minister of the Left) and chamberlain, and the original positions of Taiho, metropolitan marshal, and head of the procession remained unchanged.

古文：诏以燕京路隶尚书省，西京及山后诸部族隶元帅府。
现代文：诏书中还命令燕京路隶属尚书省，西京和山后诸部族隶属元帅府。
English: In the imperial edict, Yanjing Road was also ordered to be subordinated to Shangshu Province, while West Beijing and the tribes in the mountains were subordinated to the Marshal's Office.

古文：乃还军，遂伐江南。
现代文：宗弼这才回到军中，去征伐江南。
English: It was only then that Zong Yao returned to the army and went to conquer the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：既渡淮，以书责让宋人，宋人答书乞加宽宥。
现代文：宗弼率军渡过了淮河，下书信责令宋人投降，宋人回信乞求放宽占地界限。
English: Zonglu led the army across the Huai River and sent a letter ordering the Song people to surrender. The Song people replied begging to relax the territorial boundaries.

古文：宗弼令宋主遣信臣来禀议，宋主乞 先敛兵，许弊邑拜表阙下 ，宗弼以便宜约以画淮水为界。
现代文：宗弼下令宋朝君主派信臣来禀报详情，共同商议，宋主乞求 先收兵，允许弊邑拜表阙下 ，宗弼放宽政策，相约以淮水为界划地。
English: Zonglu ordered the Song Dynasty monarch to send a trusted vassal to Zonglu to report the details and discuss together. Lord Song begged to withdraw the troops first, allow our county to bow to Zonglu, relax Zonglu's policy, and agree to demarcate the border at Huai Shui.

古文：上遣护卫将军撒改往军中劳之。
现代文：皇上派遣护卫将军撒改到宗弼军中慰劳。
English: The emperor sent the general of the escort, Sako, to work as a consoler in the army of Emperor Zongye.

古文：皇统二年二月，宗弼朝京师，兼监修国史。
现代文：皇统二年二月，宗弼到京师朝见天子，奉命兼监修国史。
English: In February of the second year of imperial unification, Zonglu went to Beijing to see the emperor and was ordered to supervise the national history.

古文：宋主遣端明殿学士何铸等进誓表，其表曰： 臣构言，今来画疆，合以淮水中流为界，西有唐、邓州割属上国。
现代文：宋朝君主派遣端明殿学士何铸等进呈誓表，这表上说 ：臣立下誓言，今天来划疆界，以淮水中流为界限，西边的唐州、邓州割属贵国。
English: The monarch of the Song Dynasty dispatched Duanming Palace's scholar He Shih to present an oath form, which said: "I solemnly swear to delimit the border today, with the Huai Shui Current as the boundary, and Tangzhou and Dengzhou on the west side belong to your country.

古文：自邓州西四十里并南四十里为界，属邓州。
现代文：从邓州西四十里并南四十里为界，属邓州。
English: It is located 40 miles west and 40 miles south of Denzhou and belongs to Denzhou.

古文：其四十里外并西南尽属光化军，为弊邑沿边州城。
现代文：从邓州四十里以外并西南全部归属光化军，是弊邑的沿边州城。
English: From 40 miles outside of Dengzhou and to the southwest, it all belongs to the Guanghua Army. It is the city along the border of our county.

古文：既蒙恩造，许备藩方，世世子孙，谨守臣节。
现代文：既然承蒙贵国恩惠，允许保留一方地面，那么我朝世世子孙，将谨慎奉守臣子礼节。
English: Since I have been allowed to keep one side of the land thanks to your country's favor, I will carefully observe the etiquette of a vassal throughout my life.

古文：每年皇帝生辰并正旦，遣使称贺不绝。
现代文：每年皇帝生辰和正月初一，我朝要派使臣来朝贺，决不间断。
English: Every year, on the emperor's birthday and the first day of the first month, I will send envoys to congratulate the emperor, without interruption.

古文：岁贡银、绢二十五万两、匹，自壬戌年为首，每春季差人般送至泗州交纳。
现代文：每年进贡白银二十五万两，细绢二十五万匹，以壬戌年为第一年，每年春季差遣人员将礼金礼品搬送到泗州交纳。
English: Every year, the tribute of silver is 250,000 taels and that of fine enamel is 250,000 taels, with the first year being the year of the dragon. Every spring, officials are dispatched to take the gifts to Ganzhou for payment.

古文：有渝此盟，明神是殛，坠命亡氏，踣其国家。
现代文：如果有违背上述盟誓之处，圣明天神予以诛戮，丢掉身家性命，失去姓氏家族，国家灭亡。
English: If there is any violation of the above-mentioned oaths, the Saint Tomorrow God will be killed, lose his life, lose his surname and family, and the country will perish.

古文：臣今既进誓表，伏望上国蚤降誓诏，庶使弊邑永有凭焉。 
现代文：臣今天冒然进献誓表，乞望上国能早降誓诏，从而使弊邑永远持有凭据才好。 
English: Today, the vassal ventured to present the oath form, begging Shangguo to issue the oath early, so that we would always have the certificate.

古文：宗弼进拜太傅。乃遣左宣徽使刘筈使宋，以衮冕圭宝佩璲玉册册康王为宋帝。
现代文：宗弼晋升拜为太傅，于是差遣左宣徽使刘薚出使宋朝，拿衮冕圭宝玉册册封康王为宋朝皇帝。
English: Zong Pi was promoted to Tai Fu, so he sent Zuo Xuan Hui to make Liu Bei send an envoy to the Song Dynasty, and took the crown jewel Gui Bao Yu to proclaim King Kang as the Emperor of the Song Dynasty.

古文：其册文曰 皇帝若曰：咨尔宋康王赵构。
现代文：册文是 ：皇帝若曰：咨尔宋康王赵构。
English: The text of the book is: If the emperor says: Zheer Song Kang Wang Zhao Jie.

古文：不吊，天降丧于尔邦，亟渎齐盟，自贻颠覆，俾尔越在江表。
现代文：不幸，天降国丧于尔邦，屡次轻慢同盟，自己落下颠覆的下场，使尔越过长江来上表。
English: Unhappily, the fallen country perished in the state of Er, the alliance of the careless was repeated many times, and he himself fell to the subversion, causing him to cross the Yangtze River to come to the table.

古文：用勤我师旅，盖十有八年于兹。
现代文：因为两国关系而让我军辛劳，也有十八年了。
English: Because of the relations between the two countries, it has been eighteen years since our army has toiled.

古文：朕用震悼，斯民其何罪。
现代文：朕极其震动悲悼，然而这里人民有什么罪？
English: I am extremely shocked and saddened, but what is the people's fault here?

古文：今天其悔祸，诞诱尔衷，封奏狎至，愿身列于藩辅。
现代文：现在上天对它所造成的灾祸表示悔恨，谎言诱骗尔等的衷情，封奏亲近而来，愿意将身列在臣服的属国。
English: Now that Heaven has expressed its remorse for the calamity it has caused, and its sincerity in the face of lies and deception, it has come closer and closer, and is willing to be included in the subject vassal state.

古文：今遣光禄大夫、左宣徽使刘筈等持节册命尔为帝，国号宋，世服臣职，永为屏翰。
现代文：现在派遣光禄大夫、左宣徽使刘薚等持节册封尔为皇帝，国号定为宋，世代服臣职，永做卫国的重臣。
English: Now, they have dispatched Guanglu Daifu, Zuo Xuanhui, Liu Xuan and others to hold the festival book to make Huan the emperor, the country name to be Song, the generations to serve as vassals, and to always be the chief vassal of the country.

古文：呜呼钦哉，其恭听朕命。 
现代文：呜呼钦哉，请恭敬地听朕命令。 
English: Please listen to my command respectfully.

古文：仍诏天下。
现代文：并诏告天下。
English: And announced it to the world.

古文：赐宗弼人口牛马各千、驼百、羊万，仍每岁宋国进贡内给银、绢二千两、匹。
现代文：皇上赐予宗弼人口一千，牛一千头，马一千匹，骆驼一百头，羊一万只，仍然从每年宋国进贡物中拨给白银二千两，绢二千匹。
English: The emperor gave Zonglu a thousand people, a thousand cattle, a thousand horses, a hundred camels, and ten thousand sheep, and still allocated two thousand taels of silver and two thousand donkeys from the Song state tribute every year.

古文：宗弼表乞致仕，不许，优诏答之，赐以金券。
现代文：宗弼上表请求辞去官职，皇上不允许，反而用优诏回答他，赐给他金券。
English: Zonglu requested to resign from his post on the table, but the emperor did not allow him to do so. Instead, he answered him with an imperial edict and gave him a gold certificate.

古文：皇统七年，为太师，领三省事，都元帅、领行台尚书省事如故。
现代文：皇统七年，宗弼任太师，领导三省事，都元帅、领行台尚书省事依然如故。
English: In the seventh year of imperial unification, Zonglu was appointed Grand Master, leading the three provincial affairs, the Marshal of the Capital, and the leader of the Provincial Affairs is still the same.

古文：正隆间，降二品以上官封，改赠特进、息国公。
现代文：皇统八年，宗弼逝世。大定十五年，谥号 宗烈 ，十八年，配享太宗庙廷。
English: In the eighth year of Emperor Unification, Zonglu died. In the fifteenth year of Dating, his posthumous name was Zongre, and in the eighteenth year, he was assigned to Taizong Temple.

古文：昌，本名挞懒，穆宗子。
现代文：宗弼的儿子是孛迭。完颜昌本名完颜挞懒，穆宗的儿子。
English: Zonglu's son was Xuan Dui. Gan Yanchang's real name was Gan Yan Lazy, the son of Mu Zong.

古文：宗翰袭辽主于鸳鸯泺，辽都统马哥奔捣里，挞懒收其群牧。
现代文：完颜宗翰在鸳鸯泺袭击辽国君主时，辽国都统马哥逃奔捣里，完颜挞懒收了他的群牧。
English: When Yan Zonghan attacked the monarch of Liao in Zhai, the ruler of Liao fled to Zhai, and Yan Zonghan lazily gathered his herds.

古文：宗翰使挞懒追击之，不及，获辽枢密使得里底及其子磨哥、那野以还。
现代文：完颜宗翰命令完颜挞懒追击辽军，没有追上，然而却俘获了辽国枢密使得里底及其儿子磨哥、那野，并带回了他们。
English: Yan Zonghan ordered Yan Lazy to pursue the Liao army, but he did not catch up. However, he captured Liao State Privy Councillor Lidi and his sons Moga and Nano, and brought them back.

古文：太祖自将袭辽主于大鱼泺，留辎重于草泺，使挞懒、牙卯守之。
现代文：金太祖皇帝亲自率兵将在大鱼泺袭击辽主，将辎重留在草泺，命令完颜挞懒、牙卯保卫它。
English: Emperor Jin Taizu personally led the troops to attack the Liao Lord in the large fish pond, leaving the weight of the fish pond in the grass pond, and ordered the laziness of the fish pond and the teeth of the fish pond to defend it.

古文：奚路兵官浑黜不能安辑其众，遂以挞懒为奚六路军帅镇之。
现代文：奚路兵首领完颜浑黜不能安定部下，于是让完颜挞懒做奚六路军统帅安定他们。
English: The leader of the Kushiro soldiers could not stabilize his subordinates, so he let the lazy commander of the Kushiro Sixth Route Army stabilize them.

古文：习古乃、婆卢火护送常胜军及燕京豪族工匠自松亭关入内地，上戒之曰： 若遇险厄，则分兵以往。 
现代文：完颜习古乃、完颜婆卢火护送常胜军及燕京豪族工匠自松亭关进入内地，金太祖皇帝告诫他们说： 如果遇上险要地势，就分兵前往通过。 
English: After Yan Xi Gunei and Yan Ba Lu Hui escorted the Chang Sheng Army and Yanjing Gao craftsmen from Songting Pass into the inland, Emperor Jin Taizu warned them: If you encounter a dangerous situation, send a detachment of soldiers to pass.

古文：习古乃、婆卢火乃合于挞懒。
现代文：完颜习古乃、完颜婆卢火于是同完颜挞懒会合。
English: After Yan Xi Gu Nao and Yan Ba Lu Hui, they then met with Yan Xilai Lazy.

古文：久之，讨劾山速古部奚人。奚人据险战，杀且尽，速古、啜里、铁尼十三砦皆平之。
现代文：很久以后，金朝军队讨伐劾山速古部奚人，奚人凭借险要地势作战抵抗，金军杀光了奚人，速古、啜里、铁尼等十三处险要地方都被平定了。
English: A long time later, the army of the Kim dynasty fought against the instigators in the mountainous areas of Hekou and Gubei. The instigators fought and resisted on the basis of the critical situation. The gold army killed all the instigators. Thirteen critical areas such as Hekou, Sourri and Tienyi were pacified.

古文：诏曰： 朕以奚路险阻，经略为难，命汝往任其事，而克副所托，良用嘉叹。
现代文：金太祖皇帝下诏说 ：我认为奚路地势险要，巡视很困难，命令你前往那里掌握政事，你要完成我的嘱托。
English: Emperor Jin Taizu issued an edict saying, "I think the situation at the fork in the road is imminent, and inspection is very difficult. I order you to go there to take charge of government affairs, and you must complete my commission."

古文：今回离保部族来附，余众奔溃，无能为已。
现代文：现在回离保部族已经来归附我们，其他的人溃散，他们不能再对我们做出什么。
English: Now that the Hui and Bao tribes have come to join us and the others have dispersed, they can't do anything to us anymore.

古文：比命习古乃、波卢火获送降人，若遇险阻，即分兵以行，余众悉与汝合。
现代文：同时命令完颜习古乃、完颜婆卢火收捕遣送投降的人，如果遇到险阻，就分开行走，其他的人都同你会合。
English: At the same time, he ordered those who had surrendered after Yan Xi Gunei and Yan Ba Lu to be arrested and deported. If you encounter obstacles, you should walk separately, and the others should join you.

古文：降诏二十，招谕未降，汝当审度其事，从宜处之。 
现代文：给你诏书二十个，用以招抚还没投降我们的人，你应当审度这件事，灵活处理。 
English: I will give you twenty edicts to use to appease those who have not yet surrendered to us. You should examine this matter and deal with it flexibly.

古文：其后抚定奚部及分南路边界，表请设官镇守。
现代文：后来安抚平定了奚部及部分南路边界，完颜挞懒上奏章请求在此地设官府镇守。
English: Later, the pacification leveled the lower part and part of the South Road border, and the petition to set up a government town guard in this place was completed.

古文：上曰： 依东京渤海列置千户、谋克。 
现代文：金太祖皇帝回答说 ：按照东京渤海的官制设千户、置谋克。 
English: Emperor Kim Taejo replied, "In accordance with the official system of the Tokyo Bokkai, 1,000 households will be established, and the number of households will be determined.

古文：辽外戚遥辇昭古牙部族在建州，斜野袭走之，获其妻孥及官豪之族。
现代文：辽国外戚遥辇昭古牙部族住在建州，完颜斜野袭击打跑了他们，俘获了他们的妻儿和官吏豪门的家族。
English: Liao's foreign relatives, the Yanzhang and Zhao Guya tribes, lived in Jianzhou. They attacked and drove them away, capturing their wives and children and the families of high-ranking officials.

古文：挞懒复击之，擒其队将曷鲁燥、白撒葛，杀之，降民户千余，进降金源县。
现代文：完颜挞懒再次攻击他们，擒获他们的队将曷鲁燥、白撒葛，并杀了他俩，收降了千余户百姓，进而降服了整个金源县。
English: They attacked them again, and the team that captured them killed two of them, Zhaolushu and Bai Zagge, and subdued more than a thousand households, thereby subduing the entire Jinyuan County.

古文：诏增赐银牌十。
现代文：金太祖皇帝下诏赐完颜挞懒银牌十枚。
English: Emperor Jin Taizu issued an edict awarding ten silver medals to the winners.

古文：又降遥辇二部，再破兴中兵，降建州官属，得山砦二十，村堡五百八十。
现代文：不久，完颜挞懒又降服了遥辇二部，打败了兴中辽兵，收降了建州官吏，得山砦二十，村堡五百八十座。
English: Soon after, he conquered the two parts of Yalong Bay, defeated the Liao soldiers in Xingzhong, and subdued the Jianzhou officials, gaining 20 mountain forts and 580 village forts.

古文：阿忽复败昭古牙，降其官民尤多。
现代文：阿忽也再次打败遥辇昭古牙部族，收降了他的多数官吏百姓。
English: Ah Qu also defeated the Yao Xing Zhaogu tribe again, and brought down most of his officials and people.

古文：昭古牙势蹙亦降，兴中、建州皆平。
现代文：遥辇昭古牙势力困窘被迫投降，兴中、建州都被平定。
English: Distressed, the forces of Yaogan Zhaogu were forced to surrender, and both Xingzhong and Jianzhou were pacified.

古文：诏第将士功赏，抚安新民。
现代文：金太祖皇帝下诏依功奖赏将士，安抚当地百姓。
English: Emperor Jin Taizu issued an edict to reward soldiers according to their merits to appease the local people.

古文：挞懒请以遥辇九营为九猛安。
现代文：完颜挞懒请示用遥辇九营作为九猛安。
English: If you are lazy, please use the nine battalions of the Far East as the nine vigorous troops.

古文：上以夺邻有功，使领四猛安，昭古牙仍为亲管猛安。
现代文：金太祖皇帝认为他夺邻有功，让他统领四猛安，遥辇昭古牙仍做亲管猛安。
English: Emperor Jin Taizu believed that he had made a great contribution to winning over his neighbors, so he put him in charge of the Four Great Ancestors, while Yao Jie and Zhaogu Yao were still personally in charge of the Four Great Ancestors.

古文：五猛安之都帅，命挞懒择人授之。
现代文：其余五猛安的都帅，命令完颜挞懒选择合适人授予他们。
English: The remaining five were all handsome, so he ordered the laziness to choose the right person to award them.

古文：挞懒与刘彦宗举萧公翊为兴中尹，郡府各以契丹、汉官摄治，上皆从之。
现代文：完颜挞懒和刘彦宗举荐萧公翊为兴中尹，郡府各用契丹人、汉人做官治理，对此皇帝都批准了。
English: Xiao Gongyao was recommended by Guan Yin and Liu Yanzong as Xing Zhongyin, and the county government used Qidan people and Han people as officials to govern, which was approved by the emperor.

古文：及宗翰、宗望伐宋，挞懒为六部路都统。
现代文：到完颜宗翰、完颜宗望进攻宋朝时，完颜挞懒做六部路都统。
English: When Yan Zonghan and Yan Zongwang attacked the Song Dynasty, Yan Zonghan lazily made a six-part road to the capital.

古文：宗望已受宋盟，军还，挞懒乃归中京。
现代文：不久，完颜宗望接受了宋朝的盟约，班师回国，完颜挞懒于是回到中京。
English: Not long after, Kanyan Zongwang accepted the Song Dynasty's covenant, the teacher returned to China, and Kanyan Lazy then returned to Zhongjing.

古文：天会四年八月，复伐宋。
现代文：天会四年八月，金朝再次攻打宋朝。
English: In August of the 4th year of the Heian period, the Kim dynasty once again attacked the Song dynasty.

古文：闰月，宗翰、宗望军皆至汴州。
现代文：闰十一月，完颜宗翰、完颜宗望军都到达汴州。
English: In late November, Ganyan Zonghan and Ganyan Zongwang's army arrived in Zhangzhou.

古文：挞懒、阿里刮破宋兵二万于杞，覆其三营，获京东路都总管胡直孺及其二子与南路都统制隋师元及其三将，遂克拱州，降宁陵，破睢阳，下亳州。
现代文：完颜挞懒、阿里刮在杞地打败二万宋兵，覆灭了宋兵三个营垒，俘获京东路都总管胡直孺及其二个儿子、南路都统制隋师元及其三员大将，顺利地攻克拱州，降宁陵，破睢阳，下亳州。
English: After being lazy, Ali defeated twenty thousand Song soldiers in Handan, destroyed three camps of Song soldiers, captured Hu Zhizhong, the head of the Beijing East Road Capital, and his two sons, Sui Shiyuan, the head of the Southern Road Capital, and his three generals, and successfully conquered Gongzhou, downgraded Ningling, broke Poyang, and downgraded Zhangzhou.

古文：宋兵来复睢阳，又击走之，擒其将石瑱。
现代文：宋兵来收复睢阳，又打跑了他们，并擒获宋兵大将石調。
English: The Song soldiers came to recapture Fenyang, but they were defeated and captured by the Song general Shi Chou.

古文：宋二帝已降，大军北还，挞懒为元帅左监军，徇地山东，取密州。
现代文：宋朝二皇帝已投降，金军北撤回国，完颜挞懒担任元帅左监军，带兵巡行占领山东，夺取密州。
English: The second emperor of the Song Dynasty had surrendered, the gold army had retreated to the north of the country, and he had served as the marshal of the Left Supervision Army, leading the troops to occupy Shandong and seize Mizhou.

古文：迪虎取单州，挞懒取巨鹿，阿里刮取宗城，迪古不取清平、临清，蒙刮取赵州，阿里刮徇下浚、滑、恩及高唐，分遣诸将趣磁、信德，皆降之。
现代文：迪虎夺取单州，完颜挞懒夺取钜鹿，阿里刮夺取宗城，迪古不夺取清平、临清，蒙刮夺取赵州，阿里刮带兵巡行占领、滑、恩及高唐，分别派遣诸将进取磁、信德，宋朝兵都纷纷投降。
English: Dihu captured Shanzhou, Guan Lazy captured Mule Deer, Ali scraped to capture Zongcheng, Digu did not capture Qingping, Linqing, Meng scraped to capture Zhaozhou, Ali scraped to lead the troops to patrol the occupation, slip, En and Gaotang, respectively, sent generals to enter the magnetic, Shunde, Song Dynasty soldiers have surrendered.

古文：刘豫以济南府降，诏以豫为安抚使，治东平，挞懒以左监军镇抚之，大事专决焉。
现代文：刘豫用济南府作为投降礼，金太宗皇帝下诏用刘豫做安抚使，治理东平，完颜挞懒以左监军的身份抑制安抚他，并有决断大事的权力。
English: Liu Yu used Jinan Prefecture as a surrender ceremony, and Emperor Taizong of Jin used Liu Yu as a pacifying envoy to govern Dongping. He did not hesitate to restrain and pacify him as the left overseer, and had the power to decide major events.

古文：后为右副元帅。
现代文：后来完颜挞懒做了右副元帅。
English: Later, he was promoted to the rank of vice-marshal.

古文：天会十五年为左副元帅，封鲁国王。
现代文：天会十五年，完颜挞懒做了左副元帅，封为鲁国王。
English: In the 15th year of the Heavenly Reunion, he was promoted to vice marshal of the left and crowned as the King of Lu.

古文：初，宋人既诛张邦昌，太宗诏诸将复求如邦昌者立之，或举折可求，挞懒力举刘豫。
现代文：当初，宋朝人杀了张邦昌后，金太宗皇帝诏令诸将寻求像张邦昌那样的人立为皇帝，有人举荐折可求，完颜挞懒则极力举荐刘豫。
English: At first, after the Song Dynasty killed Zhang Bangchang, Emperor Jin Taizong issued an edict to the generals to seek someone like Zhang Bangchang to be appointed as emperor. Some people could ask for recommendations, but Liu Yu was strongly recommended.

古文：豫立为帝，号大齐。
现代文：刘豫被立为皇帝，国号大齐。
English: Liu Yu was made emperor, and the country was unified.

古文：豫为帝数年，无尺寸功，遂废豫为蜀王。
现代文：刘豫当皇帝几年，没有一点功绩，于是废刘豫为蜀王。
English: When Liu Yu was emperor for several years, he did not have any achievements, so Liu Yu was dethroned as the king of Shu.

古文：挞懒与右副元帅宗弼俱在河南，宋使王伦求河南、陕西地于挞懒。
现代文：完颜挞懒与右副元帅完颜宗弼都在河南，宋朝派王伦向完颜挞懒乞求还河南、陕西两地。
English: Guan Yan Zonglu and Right Vice-Marshal Guan Yan Zonglu were both in Henan. The Song Dynasty sent Wang Lun to Guan Yan Zonglu to beg for the return of Henan and Shaanxi.

古文：明年，挞懒朝京师，倡议以废齐旧地与宋，熙宗命群臣议，会东京留守宗隽来朝，与挞懒合力，宗干等争之不能得。
现代文：第二年，完颜挞懒朝拜到京城，倡议用废齐国旧地给宋朝，金熙宗皇帝命令群臣议论此事，刚好东京留守完颜宗隽来朝拜，他与完颜挞懒合力坚持那样做，完颜宗干等没能争过他们。
English: In the second year, Emperor Jinxizong ordered his ministers to discuss the matter. Just as Yan Zongye came to pay homage to the emperor after staying in Tokyo, he and Yan Zongye jointly insisted on doing so. Yan Zongye and others could not compete with them.

古文：宗隽曰： 我以地与宋，宋必德我。 
现代文：完颜宗隽说 ：我们拿地送给宋朝，宋朝一定会感恩戴德我们。 
English: Yan Zonglu said, "We took the land and gave it to the Song Dynasty, and the Song Dynasty will surely be grateful to us."

古文：宗宪折之日： 我俘宋人父兄，怨非一日。
现代文：完颜宗宪驳斥他说 ：我们俘虏了宋朝人的父老兄弟，并非一日之怨恨。
English: Kanyan Zongxian refuted him, saying, "We have captured the fathers and brothers of the Song Dynasty. This is not a one-day grudge.

古文：若复资以土地，是助仇也，何德之有。
现代文：如果再资助他们土地，这是帮助敌人，哪里会有恩德。
English: If we continue to subsidize their land, this is aiding the enemy, and there will be no reward.

古文：勿与便。 
现代文：不要给他们好处。 
English: Don't give them an advantage.

古文：挞懒弟勖亦以为不可。
现代文：完颜挞懒的弟弟完颜勖也认为不可。
English: His lazy younger brother also thinks it's a bad idea.

古文：既退，挞懒责勖曰： 他人尚有从我者，汝乃异议乎。 
现代文：退朝后，完颜挞懒责备完颜勖说： 别人还有顺从我的，你却有异议。 
English: After retreating from the imperial court, Guan Yanqian scolded Guan Yanqian and said, "Others still obey me, but you have objections.

古文：勖曰： 苟利国家，岂敢私邪。 
现代文：完颜勖回答说 ：如果对国家有利，岂敢有私心。 
English: Guan Yan replied, "If it is good for the country, how dare you be selfish."

古文：是时，太宗长子宗磐为宰相，位在宗干上，挞懒、宗隽附之，竟执议以河南、陕西地与宋。
现代文：此时，金太宗的长子完颜宗磐任宰相，位在完颜宗干之上，完颜挞懒、完颜宗隽依附于他，竟然执行了将河南、陕西的地给宋朝的决议。
English: At this time, King Taizong's eldest son, King Yanzong Ban, was appointed as prime minister. He was above King Yanzong, King Yanzong was lazy, and King Yanzong Yao was attached to him. He even carried out the resolution to give the land of Henan and Shaanxi to the Song Dynasty.

古文：张通古为诏谕江南使。
现代文：张通古做诏谕江南使。
English: Zhang Tonggu issued an edict to the Jiangnan envoy.

古文：久子，宗磐跋扈尤甚，宗隽亦为丞相，挞懒持兵柄，谋反有状。
现代文：时间一长，完颜宗磐非常跋扈，完颜宗隽也担任了丞相，完颜挞懒兵权在握，他们有谋反迹象。
English: With the passage of time, Kanyan Zongban became very powerful, Kanyan Zonglu also served as chancellor, and Kanyan Zonglu held power, and there were signs that they were plotting to rebel.

古文：宗磐、宗隽皆伏诛，诏以挞懒属尊，有大功，因释不问，出为行台尚书左丞相，手诏慰遣。
现代文：完颜宗磐、完颜宗隽被杀，而金熙宗皇帝下诏，上写挞懒地位高，有大功，释放不问罪，放出后任行台尚书左丞相，遣出京城。
English: Kanyan Zongban and Kanyan Zonglu were killed, and Emperor Kim Hee-tsung issued an edict, saying that he was of high status and had made great contributions, and that he would be released without being charged with a crime. He was later released and sent out of the capital as Minister of Foreign Affairs.

古文：挞懒至燕京，愈骄肆不法，复与翼王鹘懒谋反，而朝议渐知其初与宋交通而倡议割河南、陕西之地。
现代文：完颜挞懒到燕京后，越发骄恣不法，又与翼土完颜鹘懒谋反，而朝中慢慢知道他当初与宋朝达有协议才极力倡议割让河南、陕西之地。
English: After he arrived in Yanjing, he became more and more arrogant and lawless, and he plotted a rebellion with his vassals. However, the central government gradually learned that he originally had an agreement with the Song Dynasty before he strongly advocated ceding the land of Henan and Shaanxi.

古文：宗弼请复取河南、陕西。
现代文：完颜宗弼请求再夺取河南、陕西。
English: Yan Zongxuan requested to recapture Henan and Shaanxi.

古文：会有上变告挞懒者，熙宗乃下诏诛之。
现代文：适逢有人向皇帝告发了完颜挞懒，金熙宗皇帝于是下诏杀完颜挞懒。
English: When someone reported to the emperor that he was lazy, Emperor Kim Hee-sung then issued an edict to kill him.

古文：挞懒自燕京南走，追而杀之于祁州，并杀翼王及宗人活离胡土、挞懒二子斡带、乌达补，而赦其党与。
现代文：完颜挞懒从燕京南逃，在祁州被追上杀死，一同被杀死的还有冀王及宗族人完颜活离胡土、完颜挞懒的两个儿子完颜斡带、完颜乌达补，赦免了他们的亲族。
English: King Yan fled from the south of Yanjing and was caught and killed in Zhangzhou. King Ji and his clan were also killed together. King Yan's two sons, King Yan Yu and King Yan Wuda, were pardoned by their relatives.

古文：宗弼为都元帅，再定河南、陕西。
现代文：完颜宗弼任都元帅，再次安定河南、陕西。
English: Yan Zonglu was appointed as the Marshal of the Capital, and Henan and Shaanxi were once again stabilized.

古文：伐宋渡淮，宋康王乞和，遂称臣，画淮为界，乃罢兵。
现代文：后金军攻打宋朝渡过了淮河，宋朝康王乞求和解，向金朝称臣，划淮河作为疆界，于是撤兵停战。
English: After the Jin army attacked the Song Dynasty and crossed the Huai River, King Kang of the Song Dynasty begged for reconciliation, declared himself a vassal to the Kim Dynasty, and drew the Huai River as the border, so the troops withdrew and the war ended.

