古文：晋孙谈之子周适周，事单襄公，立无跛，视无还，听无耸，言无远；言敬必及天，言忠必及意，言信必及身，言仁必及人，言义必及利，言智必及事，言勇必及制，言教必及辩，言孝必及神，言惠必及和，言让必及敌；晋国有忧未尝不戚，有庆未尝不怡。
现代文：晋国孙谈的儿子公子周来到周室，侍奉单襄公。他站不歪身，目不斜视，听不侧耳，言不高声；谈到敬必定连及上天，谈到忠必定连及心意，谈到信必定连及自身，谈到仁必定连及他人，谈到义必定连及利益，谈到智必定连及处事，谈到勇必定连及制约，谈到教必定连及明辨，谈到孝必定连及神灵，谈到惠必定连及和睦，谈到让必定连及同僚；晋国有忧患他总是为之悲戚，有喜庆他总是为之高兴。
English: He did not stand crooked, his eyes did not squint, he did not listen with his ears, he did not speak loudly; when he spoke, respect must be connected to heaven, when he spoke, loyalty must be connected to his heart, when he spoke, faith must be connected to himself, when he spoke, benevolence must be connected to others, when he spoke, righteousness must be connected to interests, when he spoke, wisdom must be connected to affairs, when he spoke, courage must be connected to restrictions, when he spoke, teaching must be connected to discernment, when he spoke, filial piety must be connected to gods, when he spoke, benefit must be connected to harmony, when he

古文：襄公有疾，召顷公而告之曰： 必善晋周，将得晋国。
现代文：单襄公病重，叫来儿子顷公告诉他说： 你一定要好好对待周公子，他将来会成为晋国的国君。
English: Shan Xiang Gong was seriously ill, so he called his son Hao Gong to tell him: You must treat Zhou Gongzi well, he will become the ruler of Jin Province in the future.

古文：其行也文，能文则得天地。
现代文：他的品行可称得上 文 ，具有文德就会得到天地的保佑。
English: His conduct can be called literary, and with literary virtue, he will be blessed by heaven and earth.

古文：天地所胙，小而后国。
现代文：有了天地的赐福，至少可成为国君。
English: With the blessings of heaven and earth, he can at least become the king.

古文：夫敬，文之恭也；忠，文之实也；信，文之孚也；仁，文之爱也；义，文之制也；智，文之舆也；勇，文之帅也；教，文之施也；孝，文之本也；惠，文之慈也；让，文之材也。
现代文：敬，是恭谦的美德；忠，是诚实的美德；信，是信用的美德；仁，是慈爱的美德；义，是节制的美德；智，是德行的寄托；勇，是德行的表率；教，是德行的教化；孝，是德行的源泉；惠，是德行的恩惠；让，是德行的运用。
English: Respect is the virtue of humility; loyalty is the virtue of honesty; faith is the virtue of trust; benevolence is the virtue of love; righteousness is the virtue of restraint; wisdom is the foundation of virtue; courage is the example of virtue; teaching is the education of virtue; filial piety is the source of virtue; benefit is the grace of virtue; and let is the use of virtue.

古文：象天能敬，帅意能忠思身能信，爱人能仁，利制能义，事建能智，帅义能勇，施辩能教，昭神能孝，慈和能惠，推敌能让。
现代文：效法上天才能敬，遵循心意才能忠，反躬自省才能信，爱护他人才能仁，处处利人才能义，善于处事才能智，循义而行才能勇，明辨事非才能教，尊奉神灵才能孝，慈爱和睦才能惠，谦待同僚才能让。
English: It is only by following the example of Heaven that one can respect Heaven, only by following one's heart that one can be loyal, only by self-examination that one can believe, only by loving others that one can be benevolent, only by benefiting others that one can be righteous, only by being good at one's job that one can be wise, only by following one's principles that one can be brave, only by knowing the difference between right and wrong that one can teach others, only by honoring the gods that one can be filial, only by loving and living in harmony that one can benefit others, and only by being humble to one's colleagues that one can be forgiving.

古文：此十一者，夫子皆有焉。
现代文：这十一个方面的优点，公子周都具备了。
English: All of these eleven advantages are possessed by Gongzi Zhou.

古文： 天六地五，数之常也。
现代文： 这十一正合天六、地五的常数。
English: This eleven corresponds to the constants of six in the heavens and five in the earth.

古文：经之以天，纬之以地，经纬不爽，文之象也。
现代文：以天之六为经，以地之五为纬，十一与之毫不相差，这正是具备文德的表现啊。
English: Taking the six of the heavens as the sutra, the five of the earth as the latitude, and the eleven as no difference, this is exactly the performance of possessing virtue.

古文：文王质文，故天胙之以天下。
现代文：周文王具有文德，所以上天赐予他整个天下。
English: King Zhou Wen was virtuous, so God gave him the whole world.

古文：夫子被之矣，其昭穆又近，可以得国。
现代文：公子周也具备了这样的德行，而且他与晋君的亲缘又接近，所以能继承君位。
English: Prince Zhou also possessed such virtue, and he was closely related to Jinjun, so he was able to inherit the throne.

古文：且夫立无跛，正也，视无还，端也；听无耸，成也；言无远，慎也。
现代文：他站不歪身，是正；目不斜视，是端；听不侧耳，是成；言不高声，是慎。
English: If he does not stand crooked, he is upright; if he does not squint, his eyes are too far apart; if he does not listen, his ears are too far apart; if he does not speak loudly, he is cautious.

古文：夫正，德之道也；端，德之信也；成，德之终也；慎，德之守也。
现代文：正，是德行的根本；端，是德行的凭据；成，是德行的归宿；慎，是德行的守护。
English: Right is the foundation of virtue; end is the evidence of virtue; accomplishment is the destination of virtue; prudence is the guardian of virtue.

古文：守终纯固，道正事信，明令德矣。
现代文：守护牢固而归宿不偏，根本端正而行事有据，是阴于美德的表现。
English: Guarding firmly and not deviating from the destination, being fundamentally correct and acting well-founded, is the manifestation of yin in virtue.

古文：慎成端正，德之相也。
现代文：慎、成、端、正，是德的辅助。
English: Prudence, accomplishment, accomplishment, and righteousness are the auxiliary of virtue.

古文：为晋休戚，不背本也。
现代文：为晋国高兴和悲戚，是不忘祖国。
English: For the joy and sorrow of Jin, do not forget the motherland.

古文：被文相德，非国何取！
现代文：具备了美德又有善行辅助，不继承君位还得什么呢？
English: With virtue and good deeds as a complement, what do you get if you don't inherit the throne?

古文： 成公之归也，吾闻晋之筮之也，遇《乾》之《否》，曰： 配而不终，君三出焉。 
现代文： 晋成公回国继位时，我听说晋国占了一卦，得《乾》卦而变卦为《否》卦，卦辞说： 德虽配天而不能长久保有，将有三个国君从周归国继位。 
English: When Emperor Jincheng returned to China to succeed to the throne, I heard that there was a rumor in Jin Province, which was "dry" rumor and changed to "no" rumor. The rumor said: Although virtue is a match made in heaven and cannot be kept for a long time, there will be three emperors who will succeed to the throne after returning to China.

古文：一既往矣，后之不知，其次必此。
现代文：第一个是成公，已经当了国君，第三个是谁还不知道，第二个一定是公子周。
English: The first is Cheng Gong, who has already become the country's ruler, the third is still unknown, and the second must be Gong Zhou.

古文：且吾闻成公之生也，其母梦神规其臀以墨，曰： 使有晋国，三而畀驩之孙。 
现代文：我听说晋成公出生时，他的母亲梦见神在他的臀上画了个黑痣，说： 让他成为晋君，三传之后把君位给予驩的曾孙。 
English: I heard that when Jin Chenggong was born, his mother dreamed that God drew a black dragonfly on his hip and said: Let him become Jinjun, and after three generations, give the throne to the great-grandson of the dragonfly.

古文：故名之曰 黑臀 ，于今再矣。
现代文：所以给他取名为 黑臀 ，成公传下的君位已经历了两代。
English: So they named him Black Buttocks, and the throne has been passed down through two generations.

古文：襄公曰驩，此其孙也。
现代文：晋襄公名为驩，公子周就是他的曾孙。
English: Prince Jinxiang's given name was Zou, and Prince Zhou was his great-grandson.

古文：而令德孝恭，非此其谁？
现代文：而且他具有谦恭孝敬的美德，不是他又是谁呢？
English: And he has the virtue of modesty and filial piety, isn't that who he is?

古文：且其梦曰： 必驩之孙，实有晋国。 
现代文：况且那梦中说： 必定是驩的曾孙，才能得到晋国。 
English: Moreover, in that dream, he said, "One must be a great-grandson of Shun in order to be promoted to the highest rank."

古文：其卦曰： 必三取君于周。 
现代文：那个卦辞说： 一定三次从周迎还国君。 
English: The riddle says: The emperor must be returned from Zhou Ying three times.

古文：其德又可以君国，三袭焉。
现代文：公子周的德行又能够君临国家，梦、卦、德三者都契合了。
English: Prince Zhou's virtue can also reign over the country, and the dream, the story, and the virtue all fit together.

古文：吾闻之《大誓》，故曰： 朕梦协朕卜，袭于休祥，戎商必克。 
现代文：我听说周武王伐商誓词中说： 我的梦与我的卦相符，又和吉祥的预兆相合，讨伐殷商必定能取胜。 
English: I heard that Zhou Wu, the king of the merchants, said in his oath: My dream is consistent with my dream, and it is also consistent with the auspicious omens. The crusade against the merchants will surely win.

古文：以三裘也。
现代文：也是因为梦、卦、兆三者相契合。
English: It's also because dreams, sagas, and trillions fit together.

古文：晋仍无道而鲜胄，其将失之矣。
现代文：晋厉公屡行不道而子孙稀少，将要失去君位了。
English: Jin Liguo has committed many crimes and has few descendants. He is about to lose his throne.

古文：必早善晋子，其当之也。 
现代文：你一定要趁早善待公子周，他将应验预言。 
English: You must be kind to Prince Zhou as soon as possible, and he will fulfill the prophecy.

古文：顷公许诺。
现代文：单顷公应承了他父亲的告诫。
English: The prince heeded his father's admonition.

古文：及厉公之乱，召周子而立之，是为悼公。
现代文：到晋厉公被弑时，晋人迎回公子周立为国君，就是晋悼公。
English: When Jin Li Gong was captured, the Jin people welcomed back Prince Zhou Li as the country's ruler, which was the beginning of Jin Li Gong.

