古文：或谓韩公仲曰： 夫孪子之相似者，唯其母知之而已；利害之相似者，唯智者知之而已。
现代文：有人对韩国的公仲说： 双胞胎长得很相似，只有他们的母亲才能将他们分辨出来；利与害看起来也很相似，只有明智的人才能将它们分辨出来。
English: Someone said to Gongzhong of Korea: Twins are so alike that only their mothers can tell them apart; good and evil are so alike that only wise people can tell them apart.

古文：今公国，其利害之相似，正如孪子之相似也。
现代文：现在您的国家利、害相似，就如同双胞胎长得相似。
English: Now your country's interests and harms are similar, just as twins look alike.

古文：得以其道为之，则主尊而身安；不得其道，则主卑而身危。
现代文：用正确的方法来治理国家，就能让君主尊贵，自身安稳；不用正确的方法来治理国家，就会让君主卑贱，身陷危难境地。
English: If you govern the country in the right way, you can make the monarch noble and yourself stable; if you don't govern the country in the right way, you will make the monarch humble and be in a dangerous situation.

古文：今秦、魏之和成，而非公适束之，则韩必谋矣。
现代文：如果秦、魏两国联合成功，却不是您来促成的，那么韩国一定会遭到秦、魏两国的谋算。
English: If the joint success of Qin and Wei is not brought about by you, then Korea will certainly be subjected to the schemes of Qin and Wei.

古文：若韩随魏以善秦，是为魏从也，则韩轻矣，主卑矣。
现代文：假如韩国跟随魏国去讨好秦国，韩国就成了魏国的附庸，一定会受到轻视，国君的地位就降低了。
English: If South Korea followed Wei to please Qin, South Korea would become a vassal of Wei, it would be despised, and the status of the sovereign would be lowered.

古文：秦已善韩，必将欲置其所爱信者，令用事于韩以完之，是公危矣。
现代文：秦国和韩国交好，秦国一定会安置它亲信的人，让他在韩国执掌政权，来巩固秦国的势力。如果这样的话，您就危险了。
English: Qin State is friendly with South Korea, and Qin State will definitely install someone who is close to it and let him hold power in South Korea to consolidate the power of Qin State. If so, you are in danger.

古文：今公与安成君为秦、魏之和，成固为福，不成亦为福。
现代文：如果您和安成君帮秦、魏联合，成功固然是福气，就算不成功也是好事。
English: If you and An Chengjun help Qin and Wei unite, success is certainly a blessing, even if it is not successful, it is a good thing.

古文：秦、魏之和成，而公适束之，是韩为秦、魏之门户也，是韩重而主尊矣。
现代文：秦、魏两国联合成功，而且是由您来促成的，这样，韩国就成了秦、魏两国往来的通道，韩国的地位肯定会得到提高，君主也会更受尊重。
English: Qin and Wei successfully united, and it was you who made it happen. In this way, Korea became a channel for Qin and Wei to come and go. Korea's status will surely be improved, and the monarch will be more respected.

古文：安成君东重于魏，而西贵于秦，操右契而为公责德于秦、魏之主，裂地而为诸侯，公之事也。
现代文：安成君在东面受到魏国的重视，在西面得到秦国的尊崇，掌握着这样的优势，可以替您向魏、秦两国的君主索取好处，将来分封土地，成为诸侯，这是您头等的功业。
English: In the East, An Chengjun was valued by Wei, and in the West, he was respected by Qin. He possessed such an advantage that he could obtain benefits for you from the monarchs of Wei and Qin. In the future, he would subdivide land and become a prince. This was your first-class achievement.

古文：若夫安韩、魏而终身相，公之下服，此主尊而身安矣。
现代文：至于使韩魏相安无事，您终身能做相国，这是您次一等的功业。这都能使国君尊贵自身安稳。
English: As for making the Han and Wei dynasties safe and sound, you will be able to do this for the rest of your life, which is your second-class work. This can make the sovereign dignified and stable.

古文：秦、魏不终相听者也。齐怒于不得魏，必欲善韩以塞魏；魏不听秦，必务善韩以备秦，是公择布而割也。
现代文：再说秦魏两国不可能长期友好下去，秦国恼怒得不到魏国，必然会亲近韩国以便遏制魏国，魏国也不会永远听从秦国，一定设法和韩国修好来防备秦国，这样您就可以像选择布匹随意剪裁一样轻松应付。
English: Moreover, it is impossible for the two countries of Qin and Wei to remain friendly for a long time. If the Qin State is not able to irritate the Wei State, it will inevitably get close to South Korea in order to contain the Wei State. The Wei State will not always listen to the Qin State, and it will definitely try to make arrangements with South Korea to prevent the Qin State. In this way, you can deal with it as easily as choosing a cloth and cutting it at will.

古文：秦、魏和，则两国德公；不和，则两国争事公。
现代文：如果秦魏两国联合，那么两国都会感激您；如果不能联合，那么又都会争着讨好您。
English: If the two countries of Qin and Wei unite, then both countries will be grateful to you; if they cannot unite, then they will compete to please you.

古文：所谓成为福，不成亦为福者也。
现代文：这就是我所说的成功了是福气，不成功也是好事的道理，希望您不要再犹豫了。 
English: This is what I mean by saying that success is a blessing and failure is a good thing. I hope you will not hesitate any longer.

