古文：吐蕃上吐蕃本西羌属，盖百有五十种，散处河、湟、江、岷间，有发羌、唐旄等，然未始与中国通。居析支水西。
现代文：吐蕃本是西羌族，有一百五十个部落，散居于河、湟、江、岷之间；还有发羌、唐旄等，都不与中国往来，他们住在析支水之西。
English: The Tubo are originally Xidi people, with one hundred and fifty tribes, scattered among the rivers, creeks, rivers, and rivulets; there are also the Fang, Tang, etc., who do not interact with China, they live in the west of the outflow.

古文：祖曰鹘提勃悉野，健武多智，稍并诸羌，据其地。
现代文：始祖叫鹘提勃悉野，强健勇武而多智谋，逐渐吞并羌族各部落，据有其地。
English: The founding fathers called the Qutian Bu Xianye, strong, brave and resourceful, gradually swallowed up the various tribes of the Yi people, according to their own land.

古文：蕃、发声近，故其子孙曰吐蕃，而姓勃窣野。
现代文：蕃、发两字音近，所以其子孙称为吐蕃而姓勃野。
English: The two characters  and发 sound similar, so his descendants are called 吐 and their surname is 博野.

古文：或曰南凉秃发利鹿孤之后。二子，曰樊尼，曰傉檀。
现代文：有人说他们是南凉国秃发利鹿孤的后代，有两个儿子：樊尼、亻辱檀。
English: Some people say that they are the descendants of the bald-haired Lixia Guo from the South Liang Province. They have two sons: Zhenyi and Zhaotang.

古文：傉檀嗣，为乞佛炽盘所灭。
现代文：亻辱檀即位，被西秦国乞佛炽盘所灭。
English: He ascended to the throne, but was overthrown by the Western Qin State's begging bowl.

古文：樊尼挈残部臣沮渠蒙逊，以为临松太守。
现代文：樊尼带领残部向北凉国沮渠蒙逊称臣，被任为临松太守。
English: Rui Ni led the remnants to the north of Liang Province to overthrow Meng Song, and was appointed as the governor of Lin Son.

古文：蒙逊灭，樊尼率兵西济河，逾积石，遂抚有群羌云。
现代文：蒙逊灭亡后，樊尼率兵西渡黄河，越过积石，招抚了各羌族部落。
English: After the death of Monson, Zeni and his soldiers crossed the Yellow River westward, crossed the boulders, and appeased the various Yi tribes.

古文：其俗谓强雄曰赞，丈夫曰普，故号君长曰赞普，赞普妻曰末蒙。
现代文：其习俗称强雄者为 赞 ，称男子汉为 普 ，所以称君长为 赞普 ，赞普的妻子称 末蒙 。
English: According to the custom, a strong man is called Zan, a man is called Pu, so the king is called Zamp, and Zamp's wife is called Matsu Meng.

古文：其官有大相曰论茝，副相曰论茝扈莽，各一人，亦号大论、小论；都护一人，曰悉编掣逋；又有内大相曰曩论掣逋，亦曰论莽热，副相曰曩论觅零逋，小相曰曩论充，各一人；又有整事大相曰喻寒波掣逋，副整事曰喻寒觅零逋，小整事曰喻寒波充：皆任国事，总号曰尚论掣逋突瞿。
现代文：其官员大相称 论臣艹 ，副相称论臣艹 扈莽 ，各设一人，或叫 大论 、 小论 ；设都护一人，称 悉编掣逋 ；又有内大相称 曩论掣逋 ，副相称 曩论觅零逋 ，小相称 曩论充 ，各一人；还有整事大相称 喻寒波掣逋 ，副整事称 喻寒觅零逋 ，小整事称 喻寒波充 。他们都担任国家政事，总称呼为 尚论掣逋突瞿 。
English: The officials of the Grand Council of State, the Vice-Council of State, and the Vice-Council of State, each have one person, or they are called the Grand Council and the Small Council; there is one person for the protection of the capital, who is called the Chief Secretary; there is also one person each for the Inner Council of State, the Vice-Council of State, the Small Council of State, and the Great Council of State, the Vice-Council of State, the Small Council of State, and the Small Council of State. All of them are in charge of state affairs, and their general title is the Grand Council of State.

古文：地直京师西八千里，距鄯善五百里，胜兵数十万。
现代文：其地在京都西八千里，距鄯善五百里，有强兵数十万。
English: It is located eight thousand miles west of Kyoto, five hundred miles from Aomori, and has hundreds of thousands of strong soldiers.

古文：国多霆、电、风、雹，积雪，盛夏如中国春时，山谷常冰。地有寒疠，中人辄痞促而不害。
现代文：气候多雷霆、闪电、大风、冰雹、积雪，盛夏气候如同中国的春天，山谷常年冰封，且有寒疫，人受疠往往心闷气促但无大妨害。
English: The weather is often thunder, lightning, high winds, hail, and snow. The midsummer climate is like the spring in China. The valley is frozen all year round, and there are cold epidemics. People are often depressed, but there are no major obstacles.

古文：其赞普居跋布川，或逻娑川，有城郭庐舍不肯处，联毳帐以居，号大拂庐，容数百人。
现代文：赞普住在跋布川，或者逻娑川，有城郭房屋不肯住，要联结毡帐而居，称大拂庐，可容数百人。
English: Zampu lived in the Babo River, or the Luo Ying River. He refused to live in a castle-like house, and preferred to live in a group of houses, called a large hut, which could accommodate hundreds of people.

古文：其卫候严，而牙甚隘。
现代文：其警卫严密而王庭险隘。
English: Its security is tight and the palace is narrow.

古文：部人处小拂庐，多老寿至百余岁者。
现代文：部族人居小拂庐，很多长寿者活到一百多岁。
English: Tribal people live in small villages, and many long-livers live to be more than a hundred years old.

古文：衣率氈韦，以赭涂面为好。
现代文：衣服都是毡和皮制成，以脸上涂赤褐色为美。
English: Their clothes are made of felt and leather, and their faces are painted reddish-brown.

古文：妇人辫发而萦之。
现代文：妇女把头发编成辫子盘绕在头上。
English: Women wore their hair in braids around their heads.

古文：其器屈木而韦底，或氈为般，凝面为碗，实羹酪并食之，手捧酒浆以饮。
现代文：其器皿弯木而成，皮革作底，或用毡做盘，用炒面捏成碗，装上羹和奶酪连碗一起吃掉，酒浆用手捧饮。
English: Its crockery is made of bent wood, with leather as a base, or with straw as a plate, with fried noodles kneaded into a bowl, filled with soup and cheese eaten together with the bowl, and the wine pulp drunk by hand.

古文：其官之章饰，最上瑟瑟，金次之，金涂银又次之，银次之，最下至铜止，差大小，缀臂前以辨贵贱。
现代文：官员的标识最上等的是瑟瑟，其次是金，再次是银质包金，然后是银，最下等到铜为止，大小也有差别，挂在臂前分辨贵贱。
English: An official's badge is first of all a diamond, then gold, then silver, then silver, and finally bronze. The size of the badge also varies, and it can be hung on the arm to distinguish between the rich and the poor.

古文：屋皆平上，高至数丈。
现代文：房屋都是平顶，高至数丈。
English: The houses are all flat-roofed and several stories high.

古文：其稼有小麦、青稞麦、荞麦、豆。
现代文：农作物有小麦、青稞、荞麦、野绿豆。
English: Crops include wheat, barley, buckwheat and wild mung beans.

古文：其兽，牦牛、名马、犬、羊、彘，天鼠之皮可为裘，独峰驼日驰千里。
现代文：家畜有牦牛、名马、狗、羊、猪，天鼠的皮可制成裘皮，独峰驼可日行千里。
English: Domestic animals include snails, famous horses, dogs, sheep, and pigs. The skin of the guinea pig can be made into fur, and the dromedary camel can travel thousands of miles in a day.

古文：其宝，金、银、锡、铜。
现代文：珍宝有金、银、锡、铜。
English: The precious things are of gold, silver, tin, and brass.

古文：其死，葬为冢，塈涂之。
现代文：人死后，入葬筑高坟，以白土涂墓。
English: After a person's death, they are buried in a high grave, and the grave is covered with white soil.

古文：其吏治，无文字，结绳齿木为约。
现代文：官吏治理，没有文字，靠结绳刻木为记。
English: There is no written language for the administration of government officials, which is recorded by tying a rope to a piece of wood.

古文：其刑，虽小罪必抉目，或刖、劓，以皮为鞭抶之，从喜怒，无常算。
现代文：其刑法，虽小罪也定挖眼珠，或剁脚、割鼻，用皮鞭鞭打，依喜怒行刑，没一定的条例。
English: Its criminal law, although a minor crime, also stipulates eye gouging, or stomping, cutting the nose, whipping with a leather whip, and execution according to joy and anger, there is no certain regulation.

古文：其狱，窟地深数丈，内囚于中，二三岁乃出。
现代文：其牢狱，挖几丈深的坑，将囚犯放进去，两三年后才放出。
English: His prison consisted of digging a pit several feet deep, putting the prisoners in, and only letting them out after two or three years.

古文：其宴大宾客，必驱耗牛，使客自射，乃敢馈。
现代文：宴请贵宾，定要驱赶牦牛，让客人亲自射杀后才能做成菜肴。
English: If you invite a VIP to a banquet, you must drive away the snails, so that the guests can shoot the snails themselves before making the dish.

古文：其俗，重鬼右巫，事原羝为大神。
现代文：民俗重鬼尊巫，把羊原羝看作大神。
English: Folk customs place great importance on ghosts and venerate witches, and regard Yangyuan Zhai as a great god.

古文：喜浮屠法，习呪诅，国之政事，必以桑门参决。
现代文：信仰佛教，通晓经咒，国家政事，必请僧人参与决断。
English: Belief in Buddhism, familiarity with scriptures and mantras, and national politics, it is imperative to invite monks to participate in decision-making.

古文：多佩弓刀。饮酒不得及乱。妇人无及政。
现代文：人多佩弯刀，饮酒不可醉，妇女不干政。
English: Many people wear machetes, alcohol cannot be drunk, and women do not participate in politics.

古文：贵壮贱弱，母拜子，子倨父，出入前少而后老。
现代文：尊重健壮者，轻视孱弱者。母亲尊敬儿子，儿子傲视父亲。无论出入均少者在前老者在后。
English: Respect the strong, despise the weak. Mothers respect their sons, and sons despise their fathers. No matter who comes and goes, the fewest people are at the top, and the old people are at the bottom.

古文：重兵死，以累世战没为甲门，败懦者垂狐尾于首示辱，不得列于人。拜必手据地为犬号，再揖身止。
现代文：极尊重战死者。对几代都战死的称为甲门，战败及怯懦者则在他头上挂狐尾以羞辱，不能列于人类，拜时定要手趴地做狗叫，再鞠躬两次才罢。
English: Great respect for the war dead. For several generations, the war dead are called A-gate, and the defeated and cowards hang a fox tail on his head to humiliate him. He cannot be listed as a human being. When bowing, he must make a dog howl with his hands on his stomach, and then bow twice.

古文：居父母丧，断发、黛面、墨衣，既葬而吉。
现代文：父母去世，要剪发，用青黛色涂脸，穿黑衣，入土而后安。
English: When their parents died, they had to cut their hair, paint their faces with lilac, wear black, go into the ground, and then be buried.

古文：其举兵，以七寸金箭为契。
现代文：调动军队，以七寸长的金箭做约契。
English: Mobilize the army and make a treaty with seven-inch-long golden arrows.

古文：百里一驿，有急兵，驿人臆前加银鹘，甚急，鹘益多。
现代文：一百里设一驿站，有紧急战事，送信人胸前挂银鹘，越紧急，银鹘挂的越多。
English: If there is a war emergency, the sender will wear a silver badge on his chest. The more urgent the situation, the more silver badges will be worn.

古文：告寇举烽。
现代文：有敌人入寇，就点烽火。
English: If an enemy invades, light a bonfire.

古文：其畜牧，逐水草无常所。
现代文：其放牧者逐水草而居。
English: Its herders live off the land.

古文：其铠胃精良，衣之周身，窍两目，劲弓利刃不能甚伤。
现代文：他们的铠胄精良，裹住全身，只留两只眼睛，强弓利刀也不能伤以致命。
English: Their beaks are good, they wrap around the whole body, leaving only two eyes, and a strong bow and sword can't kill them.

古文：其兵法严，而师无馈粮，以卤获为资。
现代文：治军甚严，但部队没有军饷，全靠掳掠供应。
English: The army was governed very strictly, but the troops had no pay, relying entirely on plunder for supplies.

古文：每战，前队尽死，后队乃进。
现代文：每次作战，前面的队伍死尽了，后面的队伍才上前。
English: In every battle, the team in front dies, and the team behind comes forward.

古文：其四时，以麦熟为岁首。
现代文：其四季，以麦熟为年初。
English: Its four seasons, with wheat ripening at the beginning of the year.

古文：其戏，棋、六博。
现代文：游戏有棋、六博。
English: Games include Go and Roppongi.

古文：其乐，吹螺、击鼓。
现代文：音乐则吹螺、击鼓。
English: The music is made by blowing cones and beating drums.

古文：其君臣自为友，五六人曰共命。
现代文：君臣间相结为友，五六个人在一起称 共命 。
English: Princes and courtiers become friends, and five or six of them live together.

古文：君死，皆自杀以殉，所服玩乘马皆瘗，起大屋冢颠，树众木为祠所。
现代文：君主死，其他几人都自杀殉君，君主的衣服珍玩及所乘马等都一起埋掉。在坟上建一大屋，周围种树做祭祠之所。
English: When the monarch died, several others committed suicide to become martyrs, and the monarch's precious clothes and horses were all buried together. A large house was built on the grave, and trees were planted around it to make it a place of worship.

古文：赞普与其臣岁一小盟，用羊、犬、猴为牲；三岁一大盟，夜肴诸坛，用人、马、牛、闾为牲。
现代文：赞普与他的臣子一年一次小盟，用羊、狗、猴做供品；三年一大盟，夜间在各坛设供，用人、马、牛、山驴做供品。
English: Once a year, Zamp and his vassals made a small offering of sheep, dogs, and monkeys; three years later, they made a large offering of people, horses, cattle, and donkeys.

古文：凡牲必折足裂肠陈于前，使巫告神曰： 渝盟者有如牲。 
现代文：凡供品，一定要折断腿剖开肚陈列神前，让巫祈祷： 不守盟约的人就像供品一样。 
English: Every offering must be presented to the Lord with the legs broken and the stomach cut open, and the witch must pray: "He who does not keep the covenant is like an offering."

古文：其后有君长曰瘕悉董摩，董摩生佗土度，佗土生揭利失若，揭利生勃弄若，勃弄生讵素若，讵素生论赞索，论赞生弃宗弄赞，亦名弃苏农，亦号弗夜氏。
现代文：后来有个君主叫瘕悉董摩，董摩生佗土度，佗土度生揭利失若，揭利失若生勃弄若，勃弄若生讵素若，讵素若生论赞索，论赞索生弃宗弄赞，也称弗夜氏。
English: Later, there was a monarch who said, "If you know Dongma, if you know Dongma, if you know Dongma, if you know Dongma, if you know Dongma, if you know Dongma, if you know Dongma, if you know Dongma, if you know Dongma, if you know Dongma, if you know Dongma, if you know Dongma, if you know Dongma, if you know Dongma, if you know Dongma, if you know Dongma, if you know Dongma, if you know Dongma, if you know Dongma, if you know Dongma, if you know Dongma, if you know Dongma, if you know Dongma,

古文：其为人慷慨才雄，常驱野马、牛，驰刺之以为乐，西域诸国共臣之。
现代文：他为人慷慨有雄略，常驱赶野马牦牛奔跑，然后飞驰上前刺杀为乐，西域各国都臣服他。
English: He was a generous man with a cunning plan. He often chased wild horses and yaks, and then galloped forward to stab and kill for fun. All the countries in the western region were subjugated to him.

古文：太宗贞观八年，始遣使者来朝，帝遣行人冯德遐下书临抚。
现代文：太宗贞观八年，才派使者来朝，皇帝派外交官冯德遐带诏书去抚慰。
English: It took Taizong Zhenguan eight years to send an envoy to the North, and the emperor sent the diplomat Feng Deyu with an edict to appease the North.

古文：弄赞闻突厥、吐谷浑并得尚公主，乃遣使赍币求昏，帝不许。
现代文：弄赞听说突厥、吐谷浑都娶了公主，于是派使者带了财礼来求婚，皇帝不同意。
English: Zanzan heard that Turku and Tugu had both married princesses, so he sent an envoy with a gift of money to propose marriage, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：使者还，妄语曰： 天子遇我厚，几得公主，会吐谷浑王入朝，遂不许，殆有以间我乎？ 
现代文：使者回去乱说道： 天子对我很优厚，几乎得到公主了，恰好吐谷浑王入朝，于是皇帝变卦，是不是他搞了离间活动？ 
English: When the messenger returned, he said, "God has been very kind to me. I almost got the princess. It just so happened that King Tugu Hun came to the throne, so the emperor changed his mind. Was he trying to sow discord?

古文：弄赞怒，率羊同共击吐谷浑，吐谷浑不能亢，走青海之阴，尽取其赀畜。又攻党项、白兰羌，破之。
现代文：弄赞怒，率兵与羊同兵共攻吐谷浑。吐谷浑抵抗不住，逃到青海之南，弄赞掠尽他们的资财牲畜，又去攻破了党项和白兰羌。
English: Dazzan Rage led his soldiers and sheep together to attack Tugu Hun. Tugu Hun could not resist and fled to the south of Qinghai. Dazzan plundered all their resources and livestock, and went to break through the party and the White Lantern.

古文：勒兵二十万入寇松州，命使者贡金甲，且言迎公主，谓左右曰： 公主不至，我且深入。 
现代文：整军二十万人入寇松州，又派使者进贡金甲，说是来迎娶公主的。还对左右说： 公主迎不来，我们就深入唐地。 
English: He also sent an envoy to pay tribute to Jin Jia, saying that he had come to marry the princess. He also said to the right and left: If the princess does not come, we will go deep into Tang.

古文：都督韩威轻出觇贼，反为所败，属羌大扰，皆叛以应贼。
现代文：都督韩威轻骑出来察看敌情，反被打败，原归附的各羌都骚动起来，叛唐与贼相应。
English: The governor, Han Wei, rode out to inspect the enemy situation, but was defeated. The provinces that had been annexed to the Tang Dynasty were in an uproar, and the traitors and thieves reacted accordingly.

古文：乃诏吏部尚书侯君集为行军大总管，出当弥道，右领军大将军执失思力出白兰道，右武卫大将军牛进达出阔水道，右领军将军刘兰出洮河道，并为行军总管，率步骑五万进讨。进达自松州夜鏖其营，斩首千级。
现代文：皇帝诏令吏部尚书侯君集任行军大总管，带当弥道的兵，右领军大将军执失思力为白兰道行军总管，右武卫大将军牛进达为阔水道行军总管，右领将军刘兰为洮河道行军总管，率领步兵骑兵共五万人讨贼，进达从松州夜袭贼营，杀敌一千人。
English: The emperor issued a decree to appoint Shang Shuxu, the head of the general staff, as the general officer in charge of the march, with the soldiers of the Mido Road, the general officer of the right leading the army, the general officer of the right leading the army, the general officer of the right leading the army, the general officer of the right leading the army, the general officer of the right leading the army, the general officer of the right leading the army, the general officer of the right leading the army, the general officer of the right leading the army, the general officer of the right leading the army, the general officer of the right leading the army, the general officer of the right leading the army,

古文：初东寇也，连岁不解，其大臣请返国，不听，自杀者八人。
现代文：当初弄赞东来入寇，连年不止，大臣谏请回国，不听。大臣自杀者八人。
English: At the beginning, there was a joke that they were going to invade the country, but after years and years, the ministers did not listen to the invitation to return to the country. Eight ministers committed suicide.

古文：至是弄赞始惧，引而去，以使者来谢罪，固请昏，许之。
现代文：弄赞这才害怕，撤军离去，另派使者来谢罪，坚持求婚，皇帝同意。
English: Dazzan was afraid of this, withdrew his troops, sent another envoy to apologize, insisted on proposing marriage, and the emperor agreed.

古文：遣大论薛禄东赞献黄金五千两，它宝称是，以为聘。
现代文：派大论薛禄东赞带了黄金五千两及相等数量的其他珍宝来正式下聘礼。
English: Grandpa Xue Lu Dongzan brought 5,000 taels of gold and an equal amount of other precious treasures to officially present the betrothal gift.

古文：十五年，妻以宗女文成公主，诏江夏王道宗持节护送，筑馆河源王之国。
现代文：贞观十五年，将文成公主下嫁弄赞，诏令江夏王道宗持节护送。在河源王之国筑馆暂驻。
English: In the fifteenth year of Zhenguan, he married Princess Wencheng to Zhan, and ordered Jiangxia King Dao Zongjie to escort him. He temporarily resided in King Heyuan's State Mansion.

古文：弄赞率兵次柏海亲迎，见道宗，执婿礼恭甚，见中国服饰之美，缩缩愧沮。
现代文：弄赞领兵到柏海亲迎，见到道宗，行子婿之礼十分恭敬。见中国服饰之美，俯仰间颇有愧色。
English: When Zanzan led the soldiers to welcome the relatives in Baohai, he was very respectful when he saw Daozong and performed the son-in-law's salute. When he saw the beauty of Chinese clothing, he felt ashamed.

古文：归国，自以其先未有昏帝女者，乃为公主筑一城以夸后世，遂立宫室以居。
现代文：归国后，因其祖先还没有娶皇帝女儿的，所以特为公主筑一城以夸示后代。于是建立宫室居住。
English: After returning to Japan, because her ancestors had not yet married the emperor's daughter, they built a castle especially for the princess to show off to future generations. So they built a palace to live in.

古文：公主恶国人赭面，弄赞下令国中禁之。
现代文：公主厌恶人们把脸涂成褐色，弄赞下令国内禁止涂面。
English: The princess detested people painting their faces brown and ordered a ban on face painting in the country.

古文：自褫氈罽，袭纨绡，为华风。
现代文：自己脱下毡皮裘而穿绸缎衣服，学习中华风气。
English: He took off his mink coat and put on a silk dress to learn about the Chinese culture.

古文：遣诸豪子弟入国学，习《诗》、《书》。又请儒者典书疏。
现代文：又派各首领子弟入国学，学习《诗》、《书》，又请中国的儒者掌管表、疏事。
English: He also sent the children of the leaders to study in China, studying "Poetry" and "Books," and asked the Chinese Confucians to take charge of the table and the affairs of the country.

古文：帝伐辽还，使禄东赞上书曰： 陛下平定四方，日月所照，并臣治之。
现代文：皇帝讨伐辽东回来，弄赞派禄东赞上书 ：陛下平定四方，日月所照之国，均已臣服。
English: When the emperor returned from the Liaodong Campaign, he sent a letter to Luo Dongzhan, saying, "Your Majesty has subdued the four directions, and all the countries illuminated by the sun and moon have been conquered.

古文：高丽恃远，弗率于礼，天子自将度辽，隳城陷阵，指日凯旋，虽雁飞于天，无是之速。
现代文：只有高丽持其偏远，臣礼疏缺。天子亲自将兵渡辽，毁城陷阵，指日凯旋。即使天上飞雁也没有这样快捷。
English: Only Goryeo maintains its remoteness and lacks court etiquette. The Son of Heaven personally led the army to Liao, destroyed the city, and returned in triumph. Even the geese flying in the sky are not so fast.

古文：夫鹅犹雁也，臣谨冶黄金为鹅以献。 
现代文：鹅是雁类，臣谨冶制一黄金鹅贺捷。 
English: Geese are geese, and the minister is honored to make a golden goose, He Jie.

古文：其高七尺，中实酒三斛。
现代文：该金鹅高七尺，中间可盛酒三斛。
English: The golden goose is seven feet tall and can hold up to three measures of wine.

古文：二十二年，右卫率府长史王玄策使西域，为中天竺所钞，弄赞发精兵从玄策讨破之，来献俘。
现代文：贞观二十二年，右卫率府长史王玄策出使西域，金鹅被中天竺掠去，弄赞发精兵随玄策打败中天竺，派使节来献俘。
English: In the 22nd year of Zhenguan, the right guard led by the prefect Shi Wang Xuan Zhao sent an envoy to the western region. The golden goose was stolen by the Middle Heavenly Palace, and Zozan sent elite soldiers with Xuan Zhao to defeat the Middle Heavenly Palace and sent envoys to offer prisoners.

古文：高宗即位，擢驸马都尉、西海郡王。
现代文：高宗即位，升弄赞为驸马都尉，封西海郡王。
English: Gao Zong ascended to the throne, and was promoted to lieutenant of the imperial horse, and became the king of Xihai County.

古文：弄赞以书诒长孙无忌曰： 天子初即位，下有不忠者，愿勒兵赴国共讨之。 
现代文：弄赞写信给司徒长孙无忌 ：天子初即位，如臣下有不忠的，愿率兵前来共同讨伐。 
English: Zanzan wrote a letter to his eldest grandson, Sutou Mubi: The emperor has ascended the throne for the first time. If there is disloyalty among his vassals, I would like to lead an army to come and fight together.

古文：并献金琲十五种以荐昭陵。
现代文：同时献金银珠宝十五种祭献昭陵。
English: At the same time, 15 kinds of gold, silver and jewelry were offered to Shouling.

古文：进封賨王，赐饷蕃渥。
现代文：高宗进封他为躴王，赏赐甚丰。
English: Gaozong promoted him to be the king of the eunuchs and rewarded him very richly.

古文：又请蚕种、酒人与碾硙等诸工，诏许。
现代文：弄赞又请赐蚕种、酒工及制碾、磨等物的工匠，得到允许。
English: It is allowed to praise and ask for the blessing of silkworm seeds, brewers and craftsmen who make, grind and grind things.

古文：永徽初，死，遣使者吊祠。
现代文：永徽初年，弄赞去世，皇帝派使者前去吊祭。
English: In the first year of Yonghui, Zozan died, and the emperor sent an envoy to the hanging ceremony.

古文：无子，立其孙，幼不事，故禄东赞相其国。
现代文：弄赞子早死，立其孙，孙年幼不能主事，所以禄东赞执政。
English: Nanzanzi died early, and his grandson was appointed. Since the grandson was too young to be in charge, Lu Dongzan took over the government.

古文：显庆三年，献金盎、金颇罗等，复请昏。
现代文：显庆三年，献金盎、金颇罗等物，再次求婚。
English: After three years of celebration, offering gold ounces, gold coins and other things, he proposed marriage again.

古文：未几，吐谷浑内附，禄东赞怨忿，率锐兵击之，而吐谷浑大臣素和贵奔吐蕃，槊以虚实，故吐蕃能破其国。
现代文：不久，吐谷浑归顺，禄东赞怨恨，率精兵攻打。吐谷浑大臣素和贵逃奔吐蕃，告诉国内虚实，所以吐蕃能破其国。
English: Not long after, Tugu Hun surrendered, Lutong praised and resented, and led the elite soldiers to attack. Tugu Hun minister Su and Gui fled to Tubo, telling the country the truth, so Tubo could break his country.

古文：慕容诺曷钵与弘化公主引残落走凉州，诏凉州都督郑仁泰为青海道行军大总管，率将军独孤卿云等屯凉、鄯，左武候大将军苏定方为安集大使，为诸将节度，以定其乱。
现代文：河源王慕容诺曷钵与弘化公主带领残部逃奔凉州。皇帝诏令凉州都督郑仁泰任青海道行军大总管，率将军独孤卿云等驻扎凉、善阝，令左武侯大将军苏定方任安集大使，为各将总统帅以调停战乱。
English: The emperor ordered the governor of Liangzhou, Zheng Rintai, to serve as the commander-in-chief of the Qingdao campaign, leading the general Du Guoqing Yun and others to stay in Liangshan and Shanxi, and ordered the general Zuo Wuhou, Su Dingfang, to serve as the ambassador of Anji, to lead the presidents to mediate the war.

古文：吐蕃使论仲琮入朝，表吐谷浑罪，帝遣使者谯让，乃使来请与吐谷浑平憾，求赤水地牧马，不许。
现代文：吐蕃派论仲琮入朝，陈述吐谷浑的罪行，皇帝派使者谴责，吐蕃再派使者来请求与吐谷浑修好，要求能在赤水地牧马，皇帝不许。
English: The Tubo faction discussed the invasion of the imperial court by the Chunghwa clan and reported the crimes of the Tubo clan. The emperor sent an envoy to condemn them. Tubo sent another envoy to ask for reconciliation with the Tubo clan and to be allowed to graze horses in Chokushui, but the emperor would not allow it.

古文：会禄东赞死。
现代文：此时禄东赞去世。
English: At this time, Lu Dongzan passed away.

古文：东赞不知书而性明毅，用兵有节制，吐蕃倚之，遂为强国。
现代文：东赞虽不识汉字，但明智果断，用兵有节制，吐蕃依靠他，逐步成为强国。
English: Although Tozan could not read Chinese characters, he was wise and decisive, he used his troops with restraint, and Tibetans relied on him to gradually become a powerful country.

古文：始入朝，占对合旨，太宗擢拜右卫大将军，以琅邪公主外孙妻之。
现代文：初入朝时，应对很合皇帝的心意，太宗升任他为右卫大将军，要把琅笽公主的外孙女嫁给他。
English: When he first entered the imperial court, he responded to the emperor's wishes. Emperor Taizong promoted him to the rank of the General of the Right Division of the Imperial Guard, and he wanted the granddaughter of Princess Zou to marry him.

古文：禄东赞自言： 先臣为聘妇，不敢奉诏。
现代文：禄东赞回答 ：我的父亲已替我娶妻，所以不敢承接诏令。
English: Lutongzan replied: My father has already married a wife for me, so I dare not accept the edict.

古文：且赞普未谒公主，陪臣敢辞！ 
现代文：况且赞普尚未请得公主，小臣请辞。 
English: Moreover, Zampu has not yet invited the princess, and the junior minister has tendered his resignation.

古文：帝异其言，然欲怀以恩，不听也。
现代文：皇帝赞叹其言语得体，想对他特加厚恩，所以不许他的辞谢。
English: The emperor praised his words as appropriate, and wanted to be especially generous to him, so he did not allow him to resign.

古文：有子曰钦陵、曰赞婆、曰悉多于、曰勃论。
现代文：东赞有子五人：钦陵、赞婆、悉多于、勃论，长子赞悉若早死。
English: Dongzan has five children: Qinling, Zhanba, Sidioyu, and Boon, and the eldest son, Zansi, died young.

古文：禄东赞死，而兄弟并当国。
现代文：禄东赞死后，兄弟共同执政。
English: After the death of Luk Dongzan, the brothers ruled together.

古文：自是岁入边，尽破有诸羌羁縻十二州。
现代文：从此年年骚扰边界，攻破有羌族的十二州。
English: Since then, they have been harassing the border year after year, breaking through the twelve states where the Yi people live.

古文：总章中，议徙吐谷浑部于凉州旁南山。
现代文：总章年间，曾商议将吐谷浑部迁到凉州旁的南山。
English: During the period of the General Chapter, there was a discussion about moving the Tukoku Hunbe to Nanshan next to Liangzhou.

古文：帝刈吐蕃之入，召宰相姜恪阎立本、将军契苾何力等议先击吐蕃。
现代文：皇帝要惩戒吐蕃的入侵，召宰相姜恪、阎立本，将军契必艹何力等人商议先击吐蕃。
English: The emperor wanted to punish the invasion of the Tujia, and summoned the prime minister Jiang Ke, Yan Liben, the general Qibing He Li and others to discuss how to defeat the Tujia first.

古文：立本曰： 民饥未可以师。 
现代文：立本说： 百姓饥馑，不能出兵。 
English: Lippon said: "The people are starving and can't send troops.

古文：何力曰： 吐蕃介在西极，臣恐师到，兽窜山伏，捕讨无所得，至春复侵吐谷浑。
现代文：何力说： 吐蕃地处西方边陲，臣担心王师到达，他们都已逃窜埋伏，我们征讨追捕无所得。到春天，他们又会侵犯吐谷浑。
English: Ho Li said: "Tu Gan is located on the western border, and the courtiers are worried about Wang Shi's arrival. They have all fled and are lying in ambush. We have nothing to gain from hunting them down. In the spring, they will invade Tu Guhun again.

古文：臣请勿救，使疑吾力困而骄之，一举可灭也。 
现代文：臣请不去救援，让他们以为我们力不足而骄傲自大。到那时，一举就能成功。 
English: Minister, please do not go to the rescue, let them think that we are weak and arrogant. At that time, it will be a success.

古文：恪曰： 不然，吐谷浑方衰，吐蕃负胜，以衰气拒胜兵，战必不亢，不救则灭。
现代文：司戎太常伯姜恪说： 不，吐谷浑正败弱，吐蕃正胜骄，以衰败之气来抗拒骄胜之兵，必败无疑，不去援救，吐谷浑就会灭亡的。
English: Shi Rong too often said to Bao Jiang, "No, Tu Gu Hun is weak, and Tu Han is proud of his victory. If he resists the victorious soldiers with a spirit of decline, he will undoubtedly be defeated. If he does not seek help, Tu Gu Hun will perish."

古文：臣谓王师亟助之，使国幸存，后且徐图可也。 
现代文：臣以为王师应尽快去援助，保存其国家，以后再慢慢设法解决根本问题。 
English: The vassal thought that Wang Shi should help as soon as possible, save his country, and then slowly try to solve the fundamental problem.

古文：议不决，亦不克徙。
现代文：议论没有结果，吐谷浑也没有搬迁。
English: There was no result of the discussion, and Tugu Hun was not relocated.

古文：咸亨元年，入残羁縻十八州，率于阗取龟兹拨换城，于是安西四镇并废。
现代文：咸亨元年，吐蕃接连攻陷西域十八州，又合于阗兵袭击龟兹，攻取拨换城。于是安西四镇全沦陷。
English: In the first year of the Xian Heng, the Tu Wei successively attacked and conquered the eighteen states in the western region, and the soldiers of the Han Dynasty attacked the Guizi and captured the transfer city. As a result, the four towns in Anxi all fell.

古文：诏右威卫大将军薛仁贵为逻娑道行军大总管，左卫员外大将军阿史那道真、左卫将军郭待封自副，出讨吐蕃，并护吐谷浑还国。
现代文：皇帝诏任右威卫大将军薛仁贵为逻娑道行军大总管，任左卫员外大将军阿史那道真、左卫将军郭待封为副总管，出兵讨伐吐蕃，并保护吐谷浑回国。
English: Emperor Zhao appointed General Xue Rengui of the Right Division of Wei as the commander-in-chief of the troops marching along the Lushan Road, and appointed General Ashina Daozhen of the Left Division of Wei and General Guo Jifeng of the Left Division as deputy commanders-in-chief, and sent troops to fight against the Tuyun and protect the Tuyun back to the country.

古文：师凡十余万，至大非川，为钦陵所拒，王师败绩，遂灭吐谷浑而尽有其地。
现代文：王师共十多万，到达大非川时，被钦陵拦击，王师败。吐蕃于是灭了吐谷浑，占有了它全部领土。
English: There were more than a hundred thousand Wang Shis in total. When they reached the Great Af River, they were stopped by the Qinling and defeated. The Tu Wei then destroyed the Tu Gu Hun and occupied all of its territory.

古文：诏司戎太常伯、同东西台三品姜恪为凉州道行军大总管出讨，会恪卒，班师。
现代文：皇帝又诏令司戎太常伯、同东西台三品姜恪为凉州道行军大总管领兵讨伐，正逢姜恪死，即班师回朝。
English: The emperor also decreed that Sijong Taizhongbo and Jiang Ke, the three-star general of the Eastern and Western Divisions, should lead the troops to fight for the commander-in-chief of the march on the Liangzhou Road. Just as Jiang Ke died, the division returned to the imperial court.

古文：吐蕃遣大臣仲琮入朝。
现代文：吐蕃派大臣仲琮入朝。
English: The minister of the Tubo faction, Nakao, entered the imperial court.

古文：仲琮少游太学，颇知书。
现代文：仲琮年轻时就读于太学，颇有学问。
English: When he was young, he studied at Taihaku, and he is quite knowledgeable.

古文：帝召见问曰： 赞普孰与其祖贤？ 
现代文：皇帝召见问他： 赞普与其祖父相比谁更贤能？ 
English: The emperor summoned him and asked, "Compared to his grandfather, who is more virtuous than Zampu?"

古文：对曰： 勇果善断不逮也，然勤以治国，下无敢欺，令主也。
现代文：仲琮回答 ：赞普勇毅果敢，善于决断这方面比不上；但治国有方，下不敢欺，是个好君主。
English: Zhong Li replied: Zampu was courageous and brave, but he was not good at making decisions. However, he was a good ruler who ruled the country and did not dare to deceive the people.

古文：且吐蕃居寒露之野，物产寡薄，乌海之阴，盛夏积雪，暑毼冬裘。
现代文：吐蕃居于地高气寒的偏野，物产不丰。乌海之南，盛夏积雪，夏穿毛冬着皮。
English: The spoonbill lives in the highlands, where the weather is cold and produce is scarce. In the southern part of the Ukai region, snow accumulates in midsummer, and the fur is shed in summer and the skin is shed in winter.

古文：随水草以牧，寒则城处，施庐帐。
现代文：随水草而牧，寒冬则在城中搭帐篷而居。
English: They graze on water and grass, and in the cold winter, they live in tents in the city.

古文：器用不当中国万分一。
现代文：器物用品不及中国的万分之一。
English: The number of articles and supplies is less than one ten-thousandth of that in China.

古文：但上下一力，议事自下，因人所利而行，是能久而强也。 
现代文：不过上下一心，议事以下面的意见为主，对人们有利的事才做，所以能历久而强盛。 
English: However, the top and the bottom are of one mind, the deliberation is based on the opinions below, and only do things that are beneficial to people, so it can be long-lasting and strong.

古文：帝曰： 吐谷浑与吐蕃本甥舅国，素和贵叛其主，吐蕃任之，夺其土地。
现代文：皇帝说： 吐谷浑与吐蕃本是姻亲国，素和贵背叛其主，吐蕃竟纳叛弃和，夺其土地。
English: The emperor said, "Tugukhun and Tubo were originally related by marriage. Tubo betrayed his lord, but Tubo accepted the betrayal and seized his land.

古文：薛仁贵等往定慕容氏，又伏击之，而寇我凉州，何邪？ 
现代文：薛仁贵等前往抚定慕容氏，你们又发兵伏击，且侵扰我凉州，这是为什么？ 
English: Xue Rengui and others went to Fuding to arrest Murong, and you sent troops to ambush and harass me in Liangzhou. Why is that?

古文：仲琮顿首曰： 臣奉命来献，它非所闻。 
现代文：仲琮叩拜回答： 臣奉命来入贡，别的事不是臣应管的。 
English: Zhonglu bowed and replied: I was ordered to pay tribute, other matters are not my responsibility.

古文：帝韪其答。
现代文：皇帝认为他答得好。
English: The emperor thought his answer was good.

古文：然以仲琮非用事臣，故杀其礼。
现代文：不过因为仲琮不是用事之臣，所以仅只收下礼物。
English: However, since Nakasone was not a retainer, he only accepted gifts.

古文：上元二年，遣大臣论吐浑弥来请和，且求与吐谷浑脩好，帝不听。
现代文：上元二年，吐蕃派大臣论吐浑弥来请和，且请求与吐谷浑修好，皇帝不同意。
English: In the 2nd year of the Yuan Dynasty, the minister of the Tubo faction, Ong Tubunmi, came to ask for peace, and requested to make peace with Tubo, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：明年，攻鄯、廓、河、芳四州，杀略吏及马牛万计。
现代文：第二年，侵扰鄯、廓、河、芳四州，杀掠人吏牛马以万计。
English: In the second year, they invaded the four prefectures of Gansu, Guizhou, Hebei, and Fang, killing tens of thousands of people, cattle, and horses.

古文：乃诏周王显为洮州道行军元帅，率工部尚书刘审礼等十二总管，以相王轮为凉州道行军元帅，率左卫大将军契苾何力、鸿胪卿萧嗣业等军讨之。
现代文：于是诏令周王显任洮州道行军元帅，统率工部尚书刘审礼等十二总管，令相王轮任凉州道行军元帅，统率左卫大将军契必艹何力、鸿胪卿萧嗣业等人带领大军前往讨伐。
English: Therefore, he ordered Zhou Wangxian to be appointed as the marshal of the march of the Liangzhou Road, led the 12 general managers such as Shangshu Liu Xunli of the Ministry of Industry, and ordered Siang Wang to be appointed as the marshal of the march of the Liangzhou Road, and led the left guard general Qibing He Li, Hongyuqing Xiao Ziye and others to lead the army to the crusade.

古文：二王不克行。
现代文：二王均未成行。
English: Neither king made the trip.

古文：吐蕃进攻叠州，破密恭、丹岭二县，又攻扶州，败守将。
现代文：吐蕃进攻叠州，击破密恭、丹岭二县，又进击扶州，打败守将。
English: Tubo attacked Jiaozhou, broke through the two counties of Mikong and Danling, and then attacked Fuzhou, defeating the defenders.

古文：乃高选尚书左仆射刘仁轨为洮河镇守使，久之，无功。
现代文：于是另选派尚书左仆射刘仁轨为洮河镇守使，很久亦无功。
English: As a result, Shang Shuxu's second-in-command Liu Renluo was selected to be the town guardian of Luohe, but he did not succeed for a long time.

古文：吐蕃与西突厥连兵攻安西，复命中书令李敬玄为洮河道行军大总管、西河镇抚大使、鄯州都督，代仁轨。
现代文：吐蕃与西突厥连兵攻安西，又命中书令李敬玄为洮河道行军大总管、西河镇抚大使、善阝州都督，替下刘仁轨。
English: Tubo and the West Turkic Company attacked Anxi, and Li Jingxuan was ordered to be the general manager of the Minhe Road Campaign, the ambassador of the West River Zhenfu, and the governor of Zhenmin County, replacing Liu Renlu.

古文：下诏募猛士，毋限籍役痕负，帝自临遣。
现代文：还诏令招募勇士，不限是普通百姓还是曾为仕宦，皇帝亲自来指挥出发。
English: He also issued a decree to recruit warriors, whether they were ordinary people or ex-servicemen, and the emperor himself came to command the departure.

古文：又敕益州长史李孝逸、巂州都督拓王奉益发剑南、山南士。
现代文：又下令益州长史李孝逸、州都督拓王奉调发剑南、山南的士兵协助出战。
English: He also ordered the governor of Yixing Province, Shi Li Xiaoying, and the governor of Yixing Province, Tuo Wang, to send soldiers from Jiannan and Shannan to assist in the battle.

古文：先战龙支，吐蕃败。
现代文：先在龙支一仗，吐蕃败。
English: First, there was a battle in Longzhi, but it ended in defeat.

古文：敬玄率刘审礼击吐蕃青海上，审礼战没。
现代文：敬玄率领刘审礼与吐蕃战于青海，审礼战死，敬玄困在承风岭，被险谷所阻无法逃脱。
English: Jing Xuan led Liu Xunli and Tubo in the Battle of Qinghai. Xunli was killed in the battle. Jing Xun was trapped in Chengfeng Ridge and could not escape because of the dangerous valley.

古文：敬玄顿承风岭，碍险不得纵，吐蕃压王师屯，左领军将军黑齿常之率死士五百，夜斧其营，虏惊，自相轥藉而死者甚众，乃引去。敬玄仅脱。
现代文：吐蕃屯兵对面高山，凌高直逼唐营。左领军将军黑齿常之率敢死士五百人，夜劫吐蕃营，虏贼惊，溃乱中自相蹂践而死的甚多，引兵退走，敬玄仅得脱身。
English: On the other side of the high mountain, Ling Gao drove the Tang camp. The left-leading army, led by General Black Tooth Chang, dared to kill five hundred people. At nightfall, the camp was raided, the captors were terrified, and many people died from trampling on each other during the riot. The troops were led away, and Jing Xuan had no choice but to escape.

古文：帝既儒仁无远略，见诸将数败，乃博咨近臣，求所以御之之术。
现代文：皇帝儒雅仁厚而无远略，见将领们多次战败，于是广泛向近臣咨询，寻求抵御的办法。
English: Emperor Juya was generous and far-sighted. Seeing that his generals had been defeated many times, he consulted widely with his close vassals to find a way to resist.

古文：帝曰： 朕未始擐甲履军，往者灭高丽、百济，比岁用师，中国骚然，朕至今悔之。
现代文：皇帝说： 我不想披甲出战，过去灭高丽、百济，连年用兵，全国不安，我至今还懊悔。
English: The emperor said, "I don't want to put on armor and go to war. In the past, I destroyed Goryeo and Baekje, I used soldiers for several years, and the whole country was uneasy. I still regret it.

古文：今吐蕃内侵，盍为我谋？ 
现代文：现在吐蕃侵扰，谁替我出个主意？ 
English: Now, if you don't mind, who would like to make a suggestion for me?

古文：中书舍人刘祎之等具对，须家给人足可击也。或言贼险黠不可与和，或言营田严守便。
现代文：中书舍人刘之等人回答说必须要国富民足才能出击；有的说贼人险诈，不能言和；有的说要严设守备，同时营田以便供应。
English: Liu Zhi, a member of the Central Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference, and others replied that it was necessary for the country to be rich and the people to be able to attack; some said that the thieves were treacherous and could not be reconciled; some said that they should set up a strict defense, and at the same time camp in order to supply.

古文：惟中书侍郎薛元超谓： 纵敌生患，不如料兵击之。 
现代文：中书侍郎薛元超说： 放过敌人后患无穷，不如选精兵出击。 
English: Xue Yuanchao, the attendant of the middle book, said: After letting go of the enemy, the suffering is endless, it is better to select the best soldiers to attack.

古文：帝顾黄门侍郎来恒曰： 自李勣亡，遂无善将。 
现代文：皇帝看着黄门侍郎来恒说 ：自从李责力死后，就再没有勇将了。 
English: The emperor looked at the Yellow Gate attendant Lai Heng and said, "Since the death of Li Baili, there are no more brave generals.

古文：恒即言： 向洮河兵足以制敌，但诸将不用命，故无功。 
现代文：恒立即回答： 以前洮河的兵足以控制敌人，只是各位将领不肯效力，所以无功。 
English: Heng immediately replied: In the past, the soldiers of Luohe were enough to control the enemy, but the generals refused to work, so it was useless.

古文：帝殊不悟，因罢议。
现代文：皇帝懵懂不语，议而无结果。
English: The emperor did not understand and did not speak, and the discussion was fruitless.

古文：仪凤四年，赞普死，子器弩悉弄立，钦陵复擅政，使大臣来告丧，帝遣使者往会葬。
现代文：仪凤四年，赞普去世，子器弩悉弄立，钦陵又执政，派大使来朝告丧，皇帝派使者前往参加葬礼。
English: In the fourth year of Yifeng, Zampu passed away, and his son Juxing was enthroned, and Qinling ruled again. He sent an ambassador to the North to mourn, and the emperor sent an envoy to attend the funeral.

古文：明年，赞婆、素和贵率兵三万攻河源，屯良非川，敬玄与战湟川，败绩。
现代文：第二年，赞婆、素和贵率兵三万来攻河源，屯兵良非川，敬玄在湟川迎战而败溃。
English: In the second year, Zhanba, Su and Gui led 30,000 soldiers to attack the source of the river. The soldiers were stationed in Liangfei River, and Jing Xuan was defeated in the Battle of Lu River.

古文：左武卫将军黑齿常之以精骑三千夜捣其营，赞婆惧，引去。
现代文：左武卫将军黑齿常之带精锐骑兵三千人夜袭敌营。赞婆惧怕，退兵。
English: Zuo Wuwei's general, the black-toothed Tsuneyoshi, led 3,000 elite cavalry in a night attack on the enemy camp. Zhanba was afraid and withdrew.

古文：遂擢常之为河源军经略大使。
现代文：于是升常之为河源军经略大使。
English: As a result, he was promoted to the position of ambassador of economy and strategy of the Heyuan Army.

古文：乃严烽逻，开屯田，虏谋稍折。
现代文：常之加强巡逻及烽火管理，开屯田。吐蕃侵略的打算受挫。
English: They constantly strengthened patrols and campfire management, and set up camps. The plan to invade Tibet was thwarted.

古文：初，剑南度茂州之西筑安戎城，以迮其鄙。
现代文：当初，剑南兵在茂州之西筑安戎城以威逼吐蕃边境，不久有生羌为吐蕃做向导攻取而后驻守。
English: At first, the soldiers from Jian'nan used intimidation to force the border between Tibet and Yunnan at Chikuan Rongcheng in the west of Maozhou. Soon, a rusty yakitori was used as a guide to capture the yakitori and then stationed there.

古文：俄为生羌导虏取之以守，因并西洱河诸蛮，尽臣羊同、党项诸羌。其地东与松、茂、巂接，南极婆罗门，西取四镇，北抵突厥，幅圆余万里，汉、魏诸戎所无也。
现代文：接着合并西洱河各蛮部，收取羊同、党项及诸羌之地，其版图东与松、茂、等州接壤，南到婆罗门，西又攻陷四镇，北抵突厥，方圆有万余里，是汉、魏以来西戎从未有过的。
English: Then, it merged all the barbarian parts of the Xidi River, taking the lands of Yodong, Danzhang and Zhuye. Its territory bordered Song, Mao and other states in the east, Brahman in the south, four towns in the west, and Turk in the north. It had a radius of more than 10,000 miles, which Xi Rong had never had since the Han and Wei dynasties.

古文：永隆元年，文成公主薨，遣使者吊祠，又归我陈行焉之丧。
现代文：永隆元年，文成公主去世，派使者前往吊祭。送归陈行焉的灵柩。
English: In the first year of Yonglong, Princess Wencheng died and sent an envoy to the hanging ceremony. The coffin of Chen Xingyan was sent back.

古文：初，行焉使虏，论钦陵欲拜己，临以兵，不为屈，留之十年。
现代文：当初，行焉出使吐蕃，论钦陵要他拜自己，且以兵胁迫，行焉不屈，因而被留十年，直到发丧才送回国。
English: At first, Xing Yan sent an envoy to Tubo to ask him to worship himself, and he was forced to do so by soldiers. As a result, Xing Yan was detained for ten years until he was sent back to China.

古文：及是丧还，赠睦州刺史。
现代文：皇帝追赠他为睦州刺史。
English: The emperor posthumously bestowed him with the title of "Mutsu no Sashihime."

古文：赞婆复入良非川，常之击走之。
现代文：赞婆又攻打良非川，常之将他击退。
English: Zhanba also attacked Liangfei River, but Changzhi repulsed him.

古文：武后时，与蛮夷同朝贺。
现代文：武后时，吐蕃与蛮夷同来朝贺。
English: When she was Empress Dowager Wu, Tubo and the barbarians came together for morning greetings.

古文：永昌元年，诏文昌右相韦待价为安息道大总管，安西大都护阎温古副之，以讨吐蕃，兵逗留，坐死、徙。
现代文：永昌元年，诏令文昌右相韦待价为安息道大总管，安西大都护阎温古为副总管，讨伐吐蕃。逗留不进，温古处斩，待价流放。
English: In the first year of Yongchang, the emperor ordered Wenchang U Xiang Wei to wait for the price to become the general manager of Sabbatao, and Anxi Daduo Yan Wengu to be the deputy general manager, and to fight against the Tuyi. If they did not stay, they would be punished, and the price would be exiled.

古文：明年，复诏文昌右相岑长倩为武威道行军大总管讨之，兵半道罢。
现代文：第二年又诏令文昌右相岑长倩为武威道行军大总管出兵讨伐，半路退回。
English: In the following year, he also ordered Wenchang's right-hand man, Emperor Gaozong, to dispatch troops to fight for the general in charge of marching troops in Wuwei Province, but they withdrew halfway.

古文：又明年，大首领曷苏率贵川部与党项种三十万降，后以右玉钤卫将军张玄遇为安抚使，率兵二万迎之，次大度水，吐蕃禽曷苏去。
现代文：如意元年，吐蕃大首领曷苏率贵川部落与党项族三十万人请降，武后派右玉钤卫将军张玄遇为安抚使率兵两万去迎。驻扎在大度水。吐蕃擒曷苏而去。
English: In the first year of Ruyi, the great leader of Tubo, Gansu, led 300,000 people from Guichuan tribe and Dangxiang ethnic group to ask for surrender, and Wu Hou sent the right jade guardian general Zhang Xuan to send 20,000 soldiers as a pacifier. They were stationed in Dadu Water. Tubo and Su left.

古文：而它酋昝插又率羌、蛮八千自来，玄遇即其部置叶州，用昝插为刺史，刻石大度山以纪功。
现代文：另一酋长昝插又率羌、蛮部落八千人来降。玄遇将他们安置在叶州，以昝插为刺史，在大度山刻石记功。
English: Another chieftain, 插, led the, and eight thousand people from the barbarian tribe came down. Xuan Yu placed them in Yezhou, using 插 as a record, and recorded their achievements in stone engraving on Dadu Mountain.

古文：是岁，又诏右鹰扬卫将军王孝杰为武威道行军总管，率西州都督唐休璟、左武卫大将军阿史那忠节击吐蕃，大破其众，复取四镇，更置安西都护府于龟兹，以兵镇守。
现代文：这一年又诏令右鹰扬卫将军王孝杰任武威道行军总管，率领西州都督唐休瞡、左武卫大将军阿史那忠节去讨伐吐蕃。大胜，攻克四镇，在龟兹置安西都护府，发兵镇守。
English: In the same year, he also ordered Wang Xiaojie, the general of Right Eagle Yangwei, to be the general manager of the march of Wuwei Road, and led Tang Xiuyong, the governor of Xizhou, and Ashina Zhongjie, the general of Left Eagle Yangwei, to fight against Tujia. They won a great victory, conquered four towns, set up the Anxi Capital Guard in Guizi, and sent soldiers to guard the town.

古文：议者请废四镇勿有也，右史崔融献议曰： 戎狄为中国患尚矣，五帝、三王所不臣。
现代文：朝中有人请求放弃四镇，右史崔融提出看法 ：戎狄成为中国的祸患由来已久，五帝、三王时即不臣服，汉时百万兵众被困平城。
English: Someone in the North Korean government asked for the four towns to be abandoned, and the Right Honourable Choe Ryong put forward the view that the army of Di had long been a scourge to China. Five emperors and three kings were not subjugated, and during the Han Dynasty, a million soldiers were trapped in Heijo.

古文：汉以百万众困平城，其后武帝赫然发愤，甘心四夷，张骞始通西域，列四郡，据两关，断匈奴右臂，稍稍度河、湟，筑令居，以绝南羌。
现代文：以后武帝赫然发奋，与四夷和好。于是张骞通西域，安置四郡，据守两关，断了匈奴的右臂；以后渐渐渡黄河、湟水，筑令居城，断绝南羌入侵之路。
English: Later, Emperor Wu became very enthusiastic and made peace with the Si Yi. Therefore, Zhang Jian penetrated into the western region, settled four counties, guarded two passes, and broke the right arm of the Xiongnu; later, he gradually crossed the Yellow River and Surabaya, built a castle, and cut off the road of invasion by the Southern Wei.

古文：于是鄣候亭燧出长城数千里，倾府库，殚士马，行人使者岁月不绝，至作皮币，算缗法，税舟车，榷酒酤。夫岂不怀，为长久计然也！
现代文：那时，鄣候亭的烽火台出长城数千里，每年国内外使者来往不绝，府库支付甚巨，驿站人马疲惫，甚至对域外制作皮币，计缗钱法，赠送车船，专卖酒业，是为了长久之计而做安抚之策。
English: At that time, the campfire platform of the pavilion was thousands of miles away from the Great Wall, the envoys from home and abroad came and went every year, the treasury paid a lot, the station staff was tired, and even the production of foreign coins, the method of calculating money, the gift of cars and ships, and the monopoly of the liquor industry were for the long term and to appease.

古文：匈奴于是孤特远窜，遂开西域，置使者领护。
现代文：匈奴因之孤立远窜。于是开拓西域，设置使者。
English: The Xiongnu were far away because of their isolation, so they explored the western regions and set up emissaries.

古文：光武中兴，皆复内属，至于延光，三绝三通。
现代文：光武中兴，戎狄又皆内附，直至延光年间，三绝三通。
English: Guangwu, Zhongxing, and Eun Di were all subordinate to the emperor until the Yanguang era.

古文：太宗文皇帝践汉旧迹，并南山抵葱岭，剖裂府镇，烟火相望，吐蕃不敢内侮。
现代文：太宗文皇帝遵循汉朝旧法，连南山，到葱岭，剖析府镇，烽火相望，使吐蕃不敢内侵。
English: Emperor Taizongwen followed the old law of the Han Dynasty, and went to Nanshan and then to Nianling, dissected the prefectures and towns, and watched the bonfires, so that Tubo would not dare to invade.

古文：高宗时，有司无状，弃四镇不能有，而吐蕃遂张，入焉耆之西，长鼓右驱，逾高昌，历车师，钞常乐，绝莫贺延碛，以临燉煌。
现代文：高宗时，有司无能，不能保守四镇。吐蕃因之而逐步扩张，进入焉耆之西，进而横冲直闯，逾越高昌，经过车师，掠取常乐，渡过莫贺延碛，终临敦煌。
English: At the time of Gaozong, Yushi was incompetent and unable to maintain the four towns. As a result, Tubo gradually expanded, entering the west of Yancheng, and then rushing straight ahead, crossing Gaochang, passing through Cheji, plundering Changle, crossing Moga Yancheng, and finally Dunhuang.

古文：今孝杰一举而取四镇，还先帝旧封，若又弃之，是自毁成功而破完策也。
现代文：如今孝杰一举而取回四镇，恢复先帝所封。若再弃去，是自毁已成之功，破坏完整之策。
English: Now, in one fell swoop, Xiaojie has taken back the four towns and restored the former emperor's seal. If he abandons it again, it will be a self-defeating achievement and a strategy to destroy the integrity.

古文：夫四镇无守，胡兵必临西域，西域震则威憺南羌，南羌连衡，河西必危。
现代文：四镇若不能守，胡兵必临西域；西域震惊，就威慑南羌；南羌若连衡，河西必危。
English: If the four towns can't be defended, the Hu soldiers will have to attack the western region; if the western region is shocked, it will deter the southern Yunnan; if the southern Yunnan is even, the west of the river will be in danger.

古文：且莫贺延碛袤二千里，无水草，若北接虏，唐兵不可度而北，则伊西、北庭、安西诸蕃悉亡。 
现代文：况且莫贺延碛广袤二千里，旱无水草，若北连虏人，唐兵就无法北上，那时伊西、北庭、安西各蕃将全部灭亡。 
English: Moreover, Moga stretches over a vast area of two thousand li, with dry land and no water plants. If the northern troops were captured, the Tang soldiers would not be able to go north. At that time, Issi, Beiting, and Anxi provinces would all perish.

古文：议乃格。
现代文：议论没有结果。
English: The discussion was inconclusive.

古文：于是首领勃论赞与突厥伪可汗阿史那俀子南侵，与孝杰战冷泉，败走。
现代文：那时，吐蕃首领勃论赞与突厥伪可汗阿史那亻妥子共同南侵，与孝杰在冷泉交战，败退。
English: At that time, the leader of the Tubo clan, Bu Xuan Zan, invaded the south together with the Turkic pseudo-Khan, Ashina Xuan Tuo Zi, and fought with Xiaojie in Lengquan, but were defeated.

古文：碎叶镇守使韩思忠破泥熟没斯城。
现代文：碎叶镇守使韩思忠击破泥熟没斯城。
English: Han Sizhong defeated the muddy city of Mingshi with the help of the Broken Leaf Town Guard.

古文：证圣元年，钦陵、赞婆攻滥洮，孝杰以肃边道大总管战素罗汗山，虏败还。
现代文：证圣元年，钦陵、赞婆攻临洮，孝杰以肃边道大总管身份与之在素罗汗山交战，战败。
English: In the first year of Zheng Sheng, Qinling and Zhanba attacked Linyi, and Xiaojie fought with them in Subei Road as the general manager and was defeated.

古文：又攻凉州，杀都督。
现代文：虏又攻凉州，杀都督。
English: The captors also attacked Liangzhou and killed the governor.

古文：遣使者请和，约罢四镇兵，求分十姓地。武后诏通泉尉郭元振往使，道与钦陵遇。
现代文：此时吐蕃又派使者请和，要求罢去四镇的守兵，索分十姓之地，武后诏派通泉尉郭元振出使，半路上遇见钦陵。
English: At this time, Tubo also sent an envoy to ask for peace, demanding that the guards of the four towns be removed, and in the place where there were ten surnames, the Empress Dowager sent Tongquan Lieutenant Guo Yuanzhen as an envoy, and met Qinling halfway.

古文：元振曰： 东赞事朝廷，誓好无穷，今猥自绝，岁扰边，父通之，子绝之，孝乎？
现代文：元振说 ：东赞臣事朝廷，发誓永远友好。如今竟自绝朝廷，年年骚扰。父亲通好，儿子绝交，能说是孝吗？
English: Yuan Zhen said, "Dong Zan was a subject of the imperial court and swore to be friendly forever. Now he has renounced the imperial court and has been harassed year after year. Father is good, son is estranged, can it be said to be a filial son?

古文：父事之，子叛之，忠乎？ 
现代文：父亲奉事，儿子叛乱，能说是忠吗？ 
English: The father serves, the son rebels, can it be said to be loyal?

古文：钦陵曰： 然！
现代文：钦陵答： 不错！
English: Qin Ling replied: Not bad!

古文：然天子许和，得罢二国戍，使十姓突厥、四镇各建君长，俾其国自守若何？ 
现代文：不过天子允许和好，撤掉两国的戍兵，使十姓突厥，四镇各各自建君长，使各国自守不好吗？ 
English: But isn't it better for the Son of Heaven to allow the two countries to make peace, remove the foreign troops of the two countries, let the ten Turkic families and four towns each establish their own monarchs, and let the countries defend themselves?

古文：元振曰： 唐以十姓、四镇抚西土，为列国主，道非有它，且诸部与吐蕃异，久为唐编人矣。 
现代文：元振说： 唐以十姓、四镇安抚西域，为列国之主。而且这些部落与吐蕃不同，早就入唐编制了。 
English: Yuan Zhen said: Tang used ten surnames and four towns to pacify the Western Regions, and was the master of all countries. Moreover, these tribes, unlike the Tubo, had long been established in Tang.

古文：钦陵曰： 使者意我规削诸部为唐边患邪？
现代文：钦陵说： 使者以为我想吞并各部成为唐的边患吗？
English: Qinling said: Did the envoy think that I wanted to annex all the provinces and become a border trouble for Tang?

古文：我若贪土地财赋，彼青海、湟川近矣，今舍不争何哉？突厥诸部碛漠广莽，去中国远甚，安有争地万里外邪？
现代文：我若贪图土地财货，那青海、湟州更近些，而我却舍而不争，突厥各部沙漠广袤，离中国甚远，哪有夺地万里之外的呢？
English: If I am greedy for land, wealth and goods, then Qinghai and Zhangzhou are closer, but I do not want to compete. The deserts of the Turkic countries are vast and far away from China. What is there to conquer thousands of miles away?

古文：且四夷唐皆臣并之，虽海外地际，靡不磨灭，吐蕃适独在者，徒以兄弟小心，得相保耳。
现代文：况且四夷都已被唐征服，即使远在海外地边，也均被剿灭，而吐蕃依然独立的原因，只是兄弟们小心谨慎，才得能相保。
English: Moreover, all of the Yi have been conquered by the Tang Dynasty, and even if they are far away on the edge of the world, they have all been annihilated, and the reason why Tubo is still independent is that the brothers have to be careful in order to be able to protect each other.

古文：十姓五咄陆近安西，于吐蕃远，俟斤距我裁一碛，骑士腾突，不易旬至，是以为忧也。
现代文：十姓五咄陆地近安西，距吐蕃远，俟斤距我只一片沙漠，骑士飞驰，不消十天就到了，是我的忧患。
English: Ten surnames, five countries, close to Anxi, far away from Tibet, only a desert away from me, the knight is flying, it will arrive in ten days, it is my sorrow.

古文：乌海、黄河，关源阻奥，多疠毒，唐必不能入；则弱甲孱将易以为蕃患，故我欲得之，非规诸部也。
现代文：乌海、黄河，关山阻隔，多瘴疠，唐定不能入；他们的弱兵孱将也会成为我们的祸患，所以我想得到，并非由此觊觎其他各部。
English: Wuhai, the Yellow River, and Guanshan are too far apart, and Tangding cannot enter; their weak soldiers will also be a disaster for us, so I think that this is not the reason for the other departments.

古文：甘、凉距积石道二千里，其广不数百，狭才百里，我若出张掖、玉门，使大国春不耕，秋不获，不五六年，可断其右。
现代文：甘、凉两州距积石二千里，长不过数百里，宽才百里。我若从张掖、玉门出兵，使大国春不能耕，秋不能收，不出五六年，就可断其要害。
English: Gannan and Liangzhou are two thousand miles away from Jueishi, but they are only hundreds of miles long and only a hundred miles wide. If I send troops from Zhangye and Yumen to make the great country unable to cultivate in spring, unable to harvest in autumn, and unable to harvest for five or six years, I can break its key.

古文：今弃不为，亦无虞于我矣。
现代文：如今不这样做也无害于我。
English: If I don't do it now, it won't hurt me.

古文：青海之役，黄仁素约和，边守不戒，崔知辩径俟斤掠我牛羊万计，是以求之。 
现代文：青海之战，黄仁素约和，边防遂不警戒，而崔知辩借道俟斤掠我牛羊以万计。
English: In the Battle of Qinghai, Huang Ren agreed to a truce, but the border guards were not alerted, and Cui Zhian took advantage of this to plunder tens of thousands of cattle and sheep.

古文：使使者固请，元振固言不可许，后从之。
现代文：这就是提出要求的原因。 吐蕃派使者再三请求，元振坚持说不可答应。武后听从。
English: This is the reason for the request. The emissaries of the Tubo faction made repeated requests, but Yuan Zhen insisted that he could not agree. Wu Hou obeyed.

古文：钦陵专国久，常居中制事，诸弟皆领方面兵，而赞婆专东境几三十年，为边患。
现代文：钦陵执政久，常独断专行，几个弟弟各领一方面兵。赞婆专营东境近三十年，成为边患。
English: Qinling had been in power for a long time, often acting arbitrarily, with several younger brothers each leading an army. Zhanba had been operating exclusively in the eastern region for nearly thirty years, and had become a border problem.

古文：兄弟皆才略沈雄，众惮之。
现代文：他们兄弟都勇猛有才略，大家都畏惧。
English: Their brothers are brave and resourceful, and they are feared by all.

古文：器弩悉弄既长，欲自得国，渐不平，乃与大臣论岩等图去之。
现代文：器弩悉弄长大后，想要自己掌国，渐渐心中不平，于是与大臣论岩等商议除去钦陵。
English: After he grew up, he wanted to rule the country by himself. Gradually, he felt uneasy, so he discussed with the minister about the rock and other issues to remove the Qinling.

古文：钦陵方提兵居外，赞普托言猎，即勒兵执其亲党二千余人杀之，发使者召钦陵、赞婆，钦陵不受命，赞普自讨之。
现代文：此时钦陵正领兵在外，赞普托言打猎，召兵将钦陵的亲党二千多人抓住杀掉，又派使者召回钦陵、赞婆。钦陵不听命，赞普亲自讨伐。
English: At this time, Qinling was leading the troops outside. Zamputo said that he would go hunting. He called for soldiers to capture and kill more than two thousand of Qinling's relatives. He also sent an envoy to call back Qinling and Zampa. Qinling did not obey, and Zamp personally fought.

古文：未战，钦陵兵溃，乃自杀，左右殉而死者百余人。
现代文：还未战，钦陵兵溃，于是自杀，其左右殉死的百余人。
English: Before the war, Qinling soldiers were routed, so they committed suicide, and more than a hundred people around them died as martyrs.

古文：赞婆以所部及兄子莽布支等款塞，遣羽林飞骑迎劳，擢赞婆特进、辅国大将军、归德郡王，莽布支左羽林大将军、安国公，皆赐铁券，礼尉良厚。
现代文：赞婆带领部属及哥哥的儿子莽布支等人降唐。朝廷派羽林军飞骑迎接犒劳，升赞婆为特进、辅国大将军、归德郡王，任莽布支为左羽林大将军、安国公，皆赐铁券，礼赐甚厚。
English: Zhanba led his subordinates and his brother's son Mengbuzhi and others in the fall of Tang. The imperial court sent the Ulin army to fly to meet the reward, promoted Zhanba to the special advance, the auxiliary general, the king of Guide County, and appointed Mengbuzhi to the left Ulin general and the prince of An. All were given iron coupons, and the gifts were very generous.

古文：赞婆即领部兵戍河源，死，赠安西大都护。
现代文：赞婆领部兵就戍守河源。死后，追赠安西大都护。
English: Zhanba led the soldiers to guard the source of the river. After his death, he was posthumously awarded the protection of Anxi.

古文：又遣左肃政台御史大夫魏元忠为陇右诸军大总管，率陇右诸军大使唐休璟出讨。
现代文：朝廷又派左肃政台御史大夫魏元忠为陇右诸军大总管，率陇右诸军大使唐休瞡出兵讨伐。
English: In addition, the imperial court sent Wei Yuanzhong, an official of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC) and the Central Committee of the Chinese People's Liberation Army (CPA), to be the commander-in-chief of the right-wing troops, and led the right-wing troops' ambassador Tang Xiuyun to dispatch troops for the crusade.

古文：方虏攻凉州，休璟击之，斩首二千级。
现代文：此时吐蕃正攻凉州，休瞡迎击，杀二千人。
English: At this time, Tubo was attacking Liangzhou, and Huchen counterattacked, killing two thousand people.

古文：于是论弥萨来朝请和。
现代文：于是论弥萨来朝请和。
English: So I came to the morning mass to ask for a reconciliation.

古文：赞普自将万骑攻悉州，都督陈大慈四战皆克。
现代文：赞普自己带领一万骑兵攻悉州，都督陈大慈四战四捷。
English: Zamp himself led ten thousand cavalry to attack Sichuan, and Governor Chen Daci won four battles and four victories.

古文：明年，乃献马、黄金求昏。
现代文：第二年，来朝献马、黄金，且求婚。
English: The following year, he came to present horses and gold to the emperor, and proposed marriage.

古文：而虏南属帐皆叛，赞普自讨，死于军。
现代文：那时，吐蕃南境属国皆叛，赞普自己前往讨伐，死于军中。
English: At that time, all the subjects of the country in the southern border of Tubo were traitors, Zamp himself went to the crusade and died in the army.

古文：诸子争立，国人立弃隶赞为赞普，始七岁，使者来告丧，且求盟。
现代文：诸子争立，国人立弃隶赞为赞普，时年七岁。派使者来告丧，且求和盟。
English: When he was seven years old, his countrymen renounced their allegiance to him and became Zampu. They sent an envoy to mourn his death and to sue for peace.

古文：又使大臣悉董热固求昏，未报。
现代文：又派大臣悉董热再三恳请求婚，没有答复。
English: He also sent a minister to meet Dong Re, who repeatedly and earnestly asked for her hand in marriage, but received no reply.

古文：会监察御史李知古建讨姚州蛮，削吐蕃向导，诏发剑南募士击之。
现代文：此时监察御史李知古建议讨伐姚州蛮以削吐蕃的向导。诏令发剑南招募之兵前往。
English: At this time, Li Zhigu, the inspector of the imperial historian, proposed to fight the guide of Yaozhou Manchu who used to cut the spade. He ordered the soldiers recruited from Jiannan to go there.

古文：蛮酋以情输虏，杀知古，尸以祭天，进攻蜀汉。
现代文：蛮酋把情况告诉吐蕃，乃杀知古，陈尸祭天，进攻蜀汉。
English: The barbarian chieftain told the situation to Tubo, but it was to kill Zhigu, sacrifice Chen's corpse to heaven, and attack Shu Han.

古文：诏灵武监军右台御史唐九征为姚巂道讨击使，率兵击之。
现代文：于是诏令灵武监军右台御史唐九征为姚隽道讨击使，率兵击之。
English: Therefore, Lingwu ordered the commander of the Right Division, Tang Jiu Zheng, to negotiate with Yao Xingdao and lead the troops to attack him.

古文：虏以铁絙梁漾、氵鼻二水，通西洱蛮，筑城戍之。
现代文：虏用铁索在漾、濞二水之间架桥，直通西洱蛮，筑城守卫。
English: Ru Ru used an iron cable to build a bridge between the two rivers, the Yangtze and the Yangtze, which led directly to the West Yangtze River, and guarded the city.

古文：九征毁絙夷城，建铁柱于滇池以勒功。中宗景龙二年，还其昏使。
现代文：九征断桥毁城，在滇池树铁柱记功。中宗景龙二年，遣还求婚使。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Jinglong, Emperor Zhongzong sent back an envoy to propose marriage.

古文：或言彼来逆公主，且习闻华言，宜勿遣，帝以中国当以信结夷狄，不许。
现代文：有人说他是来接公主的，习惯了中华的言语，该不让他回去。皇帝认为中国应以信义交结夷狄，不同意建议。
English: Some people said that he had come to pick up the princess, that he was used to the Chinese language, and that he should not be allowed to go back. The emperor thought that China should deal with the barbarians in good faith, and did not agree with the suggestion.

古文：明年，吐蕃更遣使者纳贡，祖母可敦又遣宗俄请昏。
现代文：第二年，吐蕃又派使者来入贡，祖母可敦又派宗俄来求婚。
English: In the following year, Tubo sent another envoy to pay tribute, and his grandmother Kedon sent Zong Rui to propose marriage.

古文：帝以雍王守礼女为金城公主妻之，吐蕃遣尚赞咄名悉腊等逆公主。
现代文：皇帝封雍王守礼的女儿为金城公主，许配赞普。吐蕃派尚赞咄名悉腊等人来迎公主。
English: The emperor named the daughter of Yong Wang Shurei as the princess of Jincheng, and she was awarded the title of Zampu. People such as the famous Zampu of the Tubo faction came to welcome the princess.

古文：帝念主幼，赐锦缯别数万，杂伎诸工悉从，给龟兹乐。
现代文：皇帝顾念公主年幼，赐锦缎等数万，还有各种技术工匠和艺人都随之而去，还赐龟兹乐。
English: In memory of the young princess, the emperor gave tens of thousands of brocades and other gifts, as well as various technical craftsmen and artists, and also gave turtles and tortoises.

古文：诏左卫大将军杨矩持节送。
现代文：诏令左卫大将军杨矩持节护送。
English: He ordered the escort of the General of the Left Division, Yang Rui, on the day of the festival.

古文：帝为幸始平，帐饮，引群臣及虏使者宴，酒所帝悲涕嘘欷，为赦始平县，罪死皆免，赐民繇赋一年，改县为金城，乡曰凤池，里曰怆别。
现代文：皇帝送行到始平，在帐中设宴与群臣及虏使者共饮。饮酒中，皇帝欷悲泣，赦始平县中当死的罪犯皆免死，免民徭赋一年，改县为金城，乡为凤池，里为怆别。
English: The emperor was escorted to Shihping, and a banquet was set up in the account to drink with the courtiers and the envoys. While drinking, the emperor wept with grief, pardoned the criminals who were to die in Shihping County, exempted them from death for one year, and changed the county to Jincheng, the township to Fengchi, and the village to Fenwei.

古文：公主至吐蕃，自筑城以居。拜矩鄯州都督。
现代文：公主到吐蕃后，筑城而居，朝廷任杨矩为鄯州都督。
English: After the princess arrived in Tubo, she built a city and lived there. The imperial court appointed Yang Rui as the governor of Bozhou.

古文：吐蕃外虽和而阴衔怒，即厚饷矩，请河西九曲为公主汤沐，矩表与其地。
现代文：吐蕃外表和顺内心却怨恨。厚赂杨矩，请求将河西九曲作为公主的汤沐邑。矩上表请给他们地。
English: However, both outwardly and inwardly, he resented her. He bribed Yang Jie with a large sum of money and asked her to make Hexi Jiuqu as the princess's souvenir. At the table, he asked her to give him land.

古文：九曲者，水甘草良，宜畜牧，近与唐接。
现代文：九曲，水甘草良，宜于放牧，且与唐接壤。
English: Jiuqu, water licorice is good, suitable for grazing, and it borders with Tang.

古文：自是虏益张雄，易入寇。
现代文：从此虏越发雄健有威，易于入寇。
English: From then on, he became more and more powerful and easy to invade.

古文：玄宗开元二年，其相坌达延上书宰相，请载盟文，定境于河源，丐左散骑常侍解琬涖盟。
现代文：玄宗开元二年，其相坌达延上书宰相，请求记载盟文，在河源定境界，要求左散骑常侍解琬泣艹临盟誓。
English: In the second year of the first year of the Xuanzong era, his relatives reached Yan Shangshi, the prime minister, requesting that the alliance document be recorded, and that the boundary be set at the source of the river, and requesting that the left rider always ride around to relieve the crying and swear an oath.

古文：帝令姚崇等报书，命琬持神龙誓往。
现代文：皇帝命姚崇写回信，命解琬带神龙誓前往。
English: The emperor ordered Yao Chong to write a reply, and ordered him to take the Dragon's Oath and go.

古文：吐蕃亦遣尚钦藏、御史名悉腊献载辞。
现代文：吐蕃也派尚钦藏、御史名悉腊献盟辞。
English: Tubo also sent Shang Qinzang, a famous historian, to present the alliance.

古文：未及定，坌达延将兵十万寇临洮，入攻兰、渭，掠监马。
现代文：盟誓尚未定，坌达延率兵十万侵犯临洮，入攻兰、渭，掠夺监马。
English: The oath has not yet been determined, and Zunda Yan led 100,000 soldiers to invade Linyi, invade Lan and Handan, and plunder Juma.

古文：杨矩惧，自杀。
现代文：杨矩害怕，自杀。
English: Yang Rui was scared and committed suicide.

古文：有诏薛讷为陇右防御使，与王晙等并力击。
现代文：诏令薛讷为陇右防御使，与王等合力迎敌。
English: The emperor ordered Xue Ne to serve as the right-wing defense envoy, joining forces with Wang and others to meet the enemy.

古文：帝怒，下诏自将讨之。
现代文：皇帝怒，下诏将亲征。
English: The emperor was furious, and issued an edict that he himself would be conscripted.

古文：会晙等战武阶，斩首万七千，获马羊无虑二十万。
现代文：此时等在武阶驿胜敌，斩首一万七千，俘获马羊不下于二十万。
English: At this time, he defeated the enemy in the military ranks, beheaded 17,000 people, and captured no less than 200,000 horses and sheep.

古文：又战长子，丰安军使王海宾战死。
现代文：又战于长子，丰安军使王海宾战死。
English: They also fought in the eldest son, the Feng'an Army caused Wang Haibin to die in battle.

古文：乘之，虏大败，众奔突不能去，相枕藉死，洮水为不流。
现代文：等率兵而进，虏大败，众人奔脱不得，相枕藉而死，洮水为之不流。
English: He led the soldiers in, the captors were soundly defeated, the people were unable to escape, they were crushed to death, and there was no water to drink.

古文：帝乃罢行。
现代文：皇帝亲征事作罢。
English: Let the emperor himself do the recruiting.

古文：诏紫微舍人倪若水临按军实战功，且吊祭战亡士，敕州县并瘗吐蕃露胔。
现代文：诏令紫微舍人倪若水前往按实记战功，且吊祭阵亡将士，敕令州县埋葬吐蕃的战死者。
English: The imperial edict ordered Ziwei to release Ni Ruoshui to go to the war record according to the truth, and to hold a memorial service for the fallen soldiers, and to bury the war dead of Tubo in Lingzhou County.

古文：宰相建言： 吐蕃本以河为境，以公主故，乃桥河筑城，置独山、九曲二军，距积石二百里。
现代文：宰相建议： 吐蕃本以河为界，因公主下嫁，于是架桥筑城，置独山、九曲二军，距积石二百里。
English: The prime minister suggested: Tubo was originally bounded by a river, and since the princess was getting married, a bridge was built to build a city, and Dokuzan, Jiuquan and the Second Army were set up, 200 miles away from Jieshi.

古文：今既负约，请毁桥，复守河如约。 
现代文：如今彼既负约，请毁桥，仍守河为界。 
English: Now that he has broken the contract, please destroy the bridge and still keep the river as the boundary.

古文：诏可。遣左骁卫郎将尉迟瑰使吐蕃，慰安公主。
现代文：皇帝同意，派左骁卫郎将尉迟瑰出使吐蕃，安慰公主。
English: The emperor agreed and sent General Zuo Jianwei to comfort the princess.

古文：然小小入犯边无闲岁，于是郭知运、王君■相继节度陇右、河西，一以捍之。
现代文：吐蕃小规模侵犯边界之事每年不断，乃派郭知运、王君耯相继统辖陇右、河西，时时捍卫。
English: The small-scale violations of the border by the Tubo continued every year, and Guo Zhiyun and Wang Junya were sent to take charge of the right bank of the Yangtze River and the west bank of the Yangtze River in succession, and constantly defended them.

古文：吐蕃遣宗俄因子到洮水祭战死士，且请和。然恃盛强，求与天子敌国，语悖傲。
现代文：吐蕃派宗俄因子到洮水祭战死将士，且请和，但自恃强盛，要求与天子为对等国，言语甚为傲慢。
English: The Russian-speaking faction of the Tujia sect came to the Lishui Festival to pray for the war dead, but they claimed to be powerful and demanded to be an equal country with the Son of Heaven. Their words were very arrogant.

古文：使者至临洮，诏不内。
现代文：使者到临洮，诏令不纳。
English: The envoys to Linyi did not accept the imperial edict.

古文：金城公主上书求听脩好，且言赞普君臣欲与天子共署誓刻。
现代文：金城公主上书要求允许修好，还说赞普君臣想与天子共同签刻盟书。
English: Jincheng Princess wrote a letter asking for permission to repair it, and also said that Zampu Junchen wanted to sign and engrave a covenant with Tianzi.

古文：吐蕃又遣使者上书言： 孝和皇帝尝赐盟，是时唐宰相豆卢钦望、魏元忠、李峤、纪处讷等凡二十二人及吐蕃君臣同誓。
现代文：吐蕃又派使者上书说 ：孝和皇帝曾经赐盟，那时唐宰相豆卢钦望、魏元忠、李峤、纪处讷等二十二人及吐蕃君臣同誓。
English: Tubo also sent an envoy with a letter saying: Xiao and the emperor once made an alliance. At that time, twenty-two Tang prime ministers, including Doulu Qinwang, Wei Yuanzhong, Li Qian, and Ji Zhanna, as well as Tubo's princes and ministers swore the same oath.

古文：孝和皇帝崩，太上皇嗣位，脩睦如旧。
现代文：孝和皇帝崩，太上皇嗣位，修睦和好一如既往。
English: Emperor Xiaowu passed away, Emperor Taishang succeeded to the throne, and the reconciliation continued as before.

古文：然唐宰相在誓刻者皆殁，今宰相不及前约，故须再盟。
现代文：然而唐宰相在誓约上签刻者都已谢世。现在的宰相不在前约中，所以需再盟誓。
English: However, all the Tang chancellors who signed the oath have passed away. The current chancellor is not in the previous covenant, so he needs to swear again.

古文：比使论乞力等前后七辈往，未蒙开许，且张玄表、李知古将兵侵暴甥国，故违誓而战。
现代文：已接连派遣论乞力等前后七人前往，未蒙允许，且张玄表、李知古领兵侵掠我甥国，这才违誓而战。
English: He has successively sent seven people, including Tong Qili, to go there without permission, and Zhang Xuanbai and Li Zhigu led troops to invade and plunder my nephew's country, which is a violation of the oath.

古文：今舅许湔贷前恶，归于大和，甥既坚定，然不重盟为未信，要待新誓也。甥自总国事，不牵于下，欲使百姓久安。
现代文：如今伯舅允许洗刷以前的错误，重归和好。甥意既坚，但不重盟不足为信，因此必需重新盟誓，甥自理国事，想使百姓久安。
English: Now, his uncle has allowed him to wash away the previous mistakes and return to peace. His nephew's intention is firm, but it is not enough to believe that the alliance will be renewed. Therefore, it is necessary to swear anew that his nephew will take care of state affairs and want to keep the people safe.

古文：舅虽及和，而意不专，于言何益？ 
现代文：伯舅虽允和，但意不专，说来何益？ 
English: Although the uncle is agreeable, he does not intend to be exclusive, so what is the benefit?

古文：又言： 舅责乞力徐集兵，且兵以新故相代，非集也。
现代文：又说 ：伯舅责备乞力徐集兵，实际上是新旧兵替换，并非集兵。
English: He also said: My uncle accused Kilic of gathering soldiers, but it was actually a replacement of old and new soldiers, not a gathering of soldiers.

古文：往者疆埸自白水皆为闲壤，昨郭将军屯兵而城之，故甥亦城。
现代文：过去边界自白水起都是旷野，日前郭将军屯兵筑城，所以甥也筑城。
English: In the past, the border has been a wasteland since Baishui. Recently, General Guo sent troops to build a city, so his nephew also built a city.

古文：假令二国和，以迎送；有如不通，因以守境。
现代文：如果两国和好，可用以迎送；如果不通，也可用以守境。
English: If the two countries are reconciled, it can be used to meet and greet; if not, it can also be used to guard the border.

古文：又疑与突厥骨咄禄善者，旧与通聘，即日舅甥如初，不与交矣。
现代文：又疑我与突厥骨咄禄友善事，以前与之通聘，如今舅甥和好如初，已不与交往了。
English: He also suspected that I had been on friendly terms with the Turk, with whom I had previously been on friendly terms. Now, my uncle and nephew are as good as ever, and I no longer have any dealings with them.

古文：因奉宝瓶、杯以献。 
现代文：特奉上宝瓶、宝杯以献。 
English: A treasure bottle and a treasure cup were specially presented.

古文：帝谓昔已和亲，有成言，寻前盟可矣，不许复誓。
现代文：皇帝说昔日已和亲，有成言，遵循前盟即可，不允许再誓，依礼接待使者，礼毕送还，另厚赐赞普。
English: The emperor said that he had made peace with his relatives in the past, and had a saying that it was enough to follow the former alliance, and it was not allowed to swear again. He received the envoys according to etiquette, sent them back politely, and gave them praise.

古文：礼其使而遣，且厚赐赞普，自是岁朝贡不犯边。十年，攻小勃律国，其王没谨忙诒书北庭节度使张孝嵩曰： 勃律，唐西门。
现代文：从此每年朝贡，不再犯边。开元十年，吐蕃攻打小勃律国，其王没谨忙送信给北庭节度使张孝嵩说 ：勃律，是唐的西门。
English: In the 10th year of the first century, when Tubo attacked the small country of Bodu, its king did not hesitate to send a message to Beiting Jiedu to make Zhang Xiaosong say: Bodu is the west gate of Tang.

古文：失之，则西方诸国皆墯吐蕃，都护图之。 
现代文：如果失陷，则西方各国都将毁于吐蕃，请都护考虑。 
English: If it falls, then all Western countries will be destroyed in Tibet, so please think about it.

古文：孝嵩听许，遣疏勒副使张思礼以步骑四千昼夜驰，与谨忙兵夹击吐蕃，死者数万，多取铠仗、马羊，复九城故地。
现代文：孝嵩派疏勒副使张思礼带四千人马昼夜驰往，与谨忙兵夹击吐蕃，死了几万人。获取兵器马羊无数，恢复九城旧地。
English: Xiao Song dispatched the deputy envoy Zhang Sili to Sule with four thousand horses, and they raced there day and night. Together with the soldiers of Ji Bushe, they attacked Tuyun, killing tens of thousands of people. They acquired countless weapons and restored the old land of Jiucheng.

古文：始勃律王来朝，父事帝。
现代文：当初勃律王来朝，将皇帝视作父亲。
English: When King Bodu came to the court, he regarded the emperor as his father.

古文：还国，置绥远军以捍吐蕃，故岁常战。
现代文：回国后设置绥远军以防御吐蕃，每年均有战事。
English: After returning to China, he set up the Xingyuan Army to defend Tubo, and there were battles every year.

古文：吐蕃每曰： 我非利若国，我假道攻四镇尔。 
现代文：吐蕃总说： 我不是图你国的利，而是借路攻四镇罢了。 
English: Tubo always said, "I am not after your country's interests, I am just taking a detour to attack the four towns."

古文：及是，累岁不出兵。
现代文：至此，几年都不出兵。
English: So far, no troops have been dispatched for several years.

古文：于是陇右节度使王君请深入取偿。
现代文：于是陇右节度使王君耯请求深入。
English: Therefore, Wang Junxuan's request was deepened by the right section.

古文：十二年，破吐蕃，献俘。
现代文：开元十二年，攻破吐蕃，献俘入朝。
English: In the 12th year of the first year of the year, he broke through the Tu Wei and took prisoners to the imperial court.

古文：后二年，悉诺逻兵入大斗拔谷，遂攻甘州，火乡聚。
现代文：后二年，悉诺逻兵入大斗拔谷，进攻甘州，焚烧乡聚。
English: In the last two years, the Sino-Russian soldiers entered the great battle of the valley, attacked Ganzhou, and burned the town gathering.

古文：王君勒兵避其锐，不战。
现代文：王君耯避其锐，不战。
English: The king avoids the sharp and does not fight.

古文：会大雪，吐蕃皲冻如积，乃逾积石军趋西道以归。
现代文：遇天大雪，吐蕃冻死者甚众，于是越过积石军，从西道回去。
English: In the event of heavy snowfall, there were a lot of frozen dead people in Tujie, so they crossed the army of boulders and went back from the west road.

古文：君豫遣谍出塞，烧野草皆尽，悉诺逻顿大非川，无所牧，马死过半。
现代文：君耯事先派出侦察兵，将塞外野草烧尽，悉诺逻困屯大非川，无处放牧，半数以上的马饿死。
English: Junya sent scouts ahead of time to burn all the wild grass outside the camp. Sino-Luo was stranded in the Dafu River, with nowhere to graze, and more than half of the horses starved to death.

古文：君率秦州都督张景顺约赍穷蹑，出青海西，方冰合，师乘而度。
现代文：君耯率秦州都督张景顺跟踪追击，出青海之西，正好海水结冰，将士乘冰而渡。
English: Qin State Governor Zhang Jingshun, led by his son-in-law, followed and chased them. When they got to the west of Qinghai, the sea froze, and the soldiers had to cross the sea on the ice.

古文：于时虏已逾大非山，留辎重疲弱滨海，君纵兵俘以旋。
现代文：此时虏兵已越过大非山，辎重及疲弱之兵还留在海滨，君耯纵兵俘获后回朝。
English: At this time, the invaders had already crossed the Dafu Mountain, and the heavy and weak soldiers still remained on the seashore. After the capture of the Junlong soldiers, they returned to the North.

古文：时中书令张说以吐蕃出入数十年，胜负略相当，甘、凉、河、鄯之人奉调发困甚，愿听其和。
现代文：当时中书令张说认为吐蕃出入十几年，胜负彼此相当，而甘、凉、河、鄯的人民承受的负担太重，应该允许和谈。
English: At that time, Zhang said that he thought that the people of Gan, Liang, He and Handan had been going in and out of Tubo for more than ten years, and the wins and losses were equal to each other, but the burden borne by the people of Gan, Liang, He and Handan was too heavy, and peace talks should be allowed.

古文：帝方宠君，不听。
现代文：此时皇帝正宠信君耯，不接纳张说的建议。
English: At this time, the emperor was favoring Xinjunjun and did not accept Zhang's suggestion.

古文：未几，悉诺逻恭禄、烛龙莽布支入陷瓜州，毁其城，执刺史田元献及君父，遂攻玉门军，围常乐，不能拔，回寇安西，副都护赵颐贞击却之。
现代文：不久，悉诺逻恭禄、烛龙莽布支攻陷瓜州，毁其城，俘获刺史田元献和君耯的父亲，接着攻玉门军，围常乐，不能取胜。又回击安西，副都护赵颐贞将他们击退。
English: Soon, Sino-Luo-Gong-Luo and Zeng-Long-Mang-Bu-Zhi-Tang invaded Guazhou, destroyed its city, captured the father of Shishi Tian Yuanxian and Junyao, then attacked the Yumen Army, encircled Changle, and could not win. They also counterattacked Anxi, and the deputy capital guard Zhao Yuzhen repulsed them.

古文：会君为回纥所杀，功不遂。
现代文：这时君耯被回纥所杀，战无功。
English: At this time, Jun Yao was killed by Hui Yao, and the battle was fruitless.

古文：帝乃用萧嵩为河西节度使，左金吾将军张守珪瓜州刺史，复城之。
现代文：皇帝任萧嵩为河西节度使，左金吾将军张守王圭为瓜州刺史，再筑城。
English: Emperor Ren Xiao Song was the envoy of the Hexi Festival, and the Left Kingu General Zhang Shou Wang Gui was the historian of Guazhou, and then built the city.

古文：嵩纵反间，杀悉诺逻恭禄。
现代文：嵩用反间计杀了悉诺逻恭禄。
English: Takeshi killed Shino Logoyakuro with a backhand.

古文：明年，大将悉末朗攻瓜州，守珪击走之；鄯州都督张志亮又战青海西，破大莫门城，焚橐它桥；陇右节度使杜宾客以强弩四千射虏，破之祁连城下，斩副将一，上级五千首。
现代文：第二年，吐蕃大将悉末朗攻瓜州，守王圭将他们击走；善阝州都督张志亮再战青海西，破大莫门城，焚橐它桥；陇右节度使杜宾客率弓箭手四千人在祁连城下与吐蕃战，斩副将一人，杀敌五千人。
English: In the second year, the general of Tuyun attacked Guazhou, and the guard Wang Gui drove them away; the good governor of Tuyun, Zhang Zhiliang, fought again in the west of Qinghai, broke the Great Momen City, and burned its bridge; the right festival made Dubin guest and four thousand archers fight with Tuyun under the city of Qilian, killing one vice-commander and killing five thousand enemies.

古文：虏败，恸而走山。
现代文：虏军败，恸哭而逃往山中。
English: Defeated, they cried and fled to the mountains.

古文：又明年，守珪率伊、沙等州兵破虏大同军；又信安王祎出陇西，拔石堡城，即之置振武军，献俘于庙。
现代文：又过了一年，守王圭率伊、沙等州的兵击破虏大同军；信安王出陇西，攻克石堡城，就地置振武军，献俘于太庙。
English: A year later, Gui Wang, who led the troops from Yi, Sha and other prefectures, defeated the Krutong army; Xin'an Wang went to Shaanxi, conquered Shibao City, set up the Zhenwu army on the spot, and sacrificed the prisoners in the Great Temple.

古文：帝以书赐将军裴旻曰： 敢有掩战功不及赏者，士自陈，将吏皆斩。
现代文：皇帝赐信给将军裴 ：有敢于掩盖战功而使战士未得褒赏者，士兵可以自报，这样的将吏都斩首。
English: The emperor gave a letter to General Pei: If a soldier dares to cover up his war exploits so that he does not receive a reward, the soldier can report it himself, and such officers will be beheaded.

古文：战有逗留，举队如军法。
现代文：战争中逗留不前的，全队军法处置。
English: The whole team is to be court-martialled for staying behind in the war.

古文：能禽其王者，授大将军。 
现代文：能抓获敌王的，封大将军。 
English: If you can capture the enemy king, you will be promoted to general.

古文：于是士益奋。
现代文：士兵于是越加振奋。
English: The soldiers became more and more excited.

古文：吐蕃令曩骨委书塞下，言： 论莽热、论泣热皆万人将，以赞普命，谢都督刺史：二国有舅甥好，昨弥不弄羌、党项交构二国，故失欢，此不听，唐亦不应听。 
现代文：吐蕃令曩骨送信塞下： 论莽热、论泣热都是统领万人的将领，奉赞普命，敬谢都督刺史：我们两国有舅甥之好，日前弥不弄羌、党项挑拨两国，以致失欢。现在我们不听他们的，唐也不应听信他们。 
English: On the subject of impetuous heat, and on the subject of weeping heat, they are the generals who rule over all people. I praise the general's order, and I pay tribute to the history of the duke: Our two countries have a good uncle and nephew. A few days ago, they did not make fun of each other, and the party instigated the two countries, resulting in a loss of friendship. Now we do not listen to them, and the Tang should not listen to them.

古文：都督遣腹心吏与曩骨还议盟事。曩骨，犹千牛官也。
现代文：都督派心腹与曩骨商量和议，曩骨，相当于千牛官。
English: The governor sent a confidant to negotiate a peace treaty with the shinbone. The shinbone is equivalent to a thousand cattle officials.

古文：于是忠王友皇甫惟明并言约和便。
现代文：于是忠王的友人皇甫惟明也说约和的好处。
English: As a result, the loyal king's friend, the Empress Dowager, also spoke clearly about the benefits of the peace treaty.

古文：帝曰： 赞普向上书悖慢，朕必灭之，毋议和！ 
现代文：皇帝说 ：赞普过去所上奏书悖慢无礼，我一定要消灭他，不议和。 
English: The emperor said: Zampu was insolent and disrespectful in the past, I must destroy him and not discuss peace.

古文：惟明曰： 昔赞普幼，是必边将好功之人为之，以激怒陛下。
现代文：惟明说： 过去赞普年幼，这些信一定是边将中想邀功的人干的，用来激怒陛下。
English: However, he clearly said: In the past, when Zampu was young, these letters must have been written by people who wanted to get credit, and were used to infuriate His Majesty.

古文：且二国交恶必兴师，师兴则隐盗财利，诈功级，希陛下过赏以甘心焉。
现代文：而且两国交恶定会兴师动众。师一兴，就暗藏着盗财利、诈功级，希望陛下能多赏。
English: Moreover, the bad relations between the two countries will definitely motivate the teachers. If a teacher is successful, he will secretly steal money and benefit, and defraud grades. I hope His Majesty will reward him more.

古文：今河西、陇右赀耗力穷，陛下幸诏金城公主许赞普约，以纾边患，息民之上策也。 
现代文：如今河西陇右财尽力穷。如果陛下能诏谕金城公主允许赞普约和，这是解缓边祸、休养生息的上策。 
English: If His Majesty can order the princess of Jincheng to allow Zampu to make peace, this is the best way to alleviate the border disaster and recuperate.

古文：帝采其言，敕惟明及中人张元方往聘，以书赐公主。
现代文：皇帝采纳他的建议，令惟明及中人张元方前去问候致意，且赐公主信。
English: The emperor accepted his suggestion and ordered Wei Ming and the middle man Zhang Yuan to go to the front to greet and give the princess a letter.

古文：惟明见赞普言天子意，赞普大喜，因悉出贞观以来书诏示惟明，厚馈献。
现代文：惟明见到赞普，说了天子的意思，赞普大喜，拿出贞观以来的全部诏书给惟明看，馈赠贡献甚厚。
English: However, he clearly saw Zampu, said the will of the heavenly son, Zampu was overjoyed, and took out all the edicts since Zhenguan to show them to Zampu. The gift was a great contribution.

古文：使名悉腊随使者入朝，奉表言： 甥，先帝舅显亲也。
现代文：派名悉腊随使者入朝，奉表说： 甥，是先帝舅的宿亲。
English: He sent an emissary with the name of Silla to the imperial court, and received a letter saying: Nephew, you are the former uncle's cousin.

古文：曩为张玄表、李知古交斗，遂成大衅。
现代文：过去因张玄表、李知古而互相征讨，以致酿成大隙。
English: In the past, because of Zhang Xuanbiao and Li Zhiguo, they had to solicit each other, resulting in a big gap.

古文：甥以文成、金城公主，敢失礼乎？
现代文：甥以文成、金城两公主之故，哪敢失礼？
English: For the sake of the two princesses of Wencheng and Jincheng, how dare my nephew be so rude?

古文：特以冲幼，枉为边将谗乱。
现代文：只因年幼，枉遭边将谗言惑乱。
English: Only because of his young age, he was unfairly bullied and confused.

古文：如蒙澄亮，死且万足，千万岁不敢先负盟。 
现代文：如蒙澄清，死也万分满足。今后千万年也不敢先负盟约。 
English: If clarified, death is also very satisfied. In the next ten thousand years, it will not dare to be bound by the covenant.

古文：且献怪宝。
现代文：同时献上怪宝。
English: At the same time, a treasure trove was presented.

古文：使者至，帝御前殿，列羽林仗内之。
现代文：使者入朝，皇帝在前殿，排列羽林仗而见之。
English: Envoys enter the court, the emperor is in the vestibule, and the battle of the feathers takes place.

古文：悉腊略通华文，既宴与语，礼甚厚，赐紫服、金鱼。
现代文：悉腊略通华文，皇帝宴请与之交谈，礼甚厚，赐他紫袍、金鱼。
English: Silla was fluent in Chinese, and the emperor invited him to a banquet to converse with him. He was very courteous and gave him a purple robe and a goldfish.

古文：悉腊受服辞鱼，曰： 国无是，不敢当。 
现代文：悉腊受袍辞鱼，说 ：本国没有这样的制度，不敢当这样殊异的赏赐。 
English: Accepting the award, Sylla said, "Our country does not have such a system, and I would not dare to receive such a special award."

古文：帝遣御史大夫崔琳报聘。
现代文：皇帝派御史大夫崔琳去回报问候。
English: The emperor sent the Imperial Historian, Cui Lin, to return the greeting.

古文：吐蕃又请交马于赤岭，互市于甘松岭。
现代文：吐蕃又要求在赤岭交马，并以甘松岭为互市。
English: Tubo also requested to exchange horses in Akhaling, and to use Gansongling as an exchange market.

古文：宰相裴光庭曰： 甘松中国阻，不如许赤岭。 
现代文：宰相裴光庭说： 甘松，中国去很不便，不如定赤岭为好。 
English: Prime Minister Pei Guangting said: Amatsu, it is very inconvenient to go to China, it is better to go to Dingkailing.

古文：乃听以赤岭为界，表以大碑，刻约其上。
现代文：于是以赤岭为界，立大碑为标记将盟约刻在上面。
English: Therefore, with Akamine as the boundary, a large monument was erected as a marker to inscribe the covenant on it.

古文：又请《五经》，敕秘书写赐，并遣工部尚书李往聘，赐物万计。
现代文：吐蕃还请求《五经》，皇帝命秘书抄写赐与，并派工部李詗前往礼聘，赐物以万计。
English: Tubo also requested the "Five Classics," the emperor ordered the secretary to copy and give it, and sent the Ministry of Industry Li Xi to Lihe, with gifts of tens of thousands of yuan.

古文：吐蕃遣使谢，且言： 唐、吐蕃皆大国，今约和为久长计，恐边吏有妄意者，请以使人对相晓敕，令昭然具知。 
现代文：吐蕃派使者入谢，且说： 唐、吐蕃都是大国，现在约和是长久之计。担心边吏中有自作主张者，请派使臣互相晓谕，使大家都了解遵守。 
English: The envoys sent by Tubo expressed their thanks and said: "Tang and Tubo are both great powers, and the current peace treaty is a long-term solution. If you are worried that some of the border officials have made their own claims, please send envoys to talk to each other so that everyone understands and complies.

古文：帝又令金吾将军李佺监赤岭树碑，诏张守珪与将军李行祎、吐蕃使者莽布支分谕剑南、河西州县曰： 自今二国和好，无相侵暴。 
现代文：皇帝又令金吾将军李亻全监督在赤岭树碑，诏令张守王圭与将军李行、吐蕃使者莽布支，分别告知剑南、河西各州县： 自今起两国和好，不得相互侵略行暴。 
English: The emperor also ordered Kingu's general, Li Shizhen, to supervise the construction of the Akhaling Tree Monument, and ordered Zhang Shou Wang Gui and the general Li Xing and the emissary of Tubo, Mangbushi, to inform the states and counties of Jian'an and Hexi separately: From now on, the two countries will be reconciled, and they must not invade each other and commit violence.

古文：乃使悉诺渤海纳贡，并以币器遍遗执政。
现代文：吐蕃派悉诺勃海纳贡，并对所有执政者均有馈赠。
English: Tubo paid tribute to Sino-Burmese nobles and gave gifts to all rulers.

古文：明年，上宝器数百具，制冶诡殊，诏置提象门示群臣。
现代文：第二年，贡献宝器几百件，都制作新异奇巧。皇帝令陈列于提象门，供群臣观赏。
English: In the second year, hundreds of pieces of treasure were donated, all of which were new and wonderful. The emperor ordered them to be displayed at the Titian Gate for the courtiers to enjoy.

古文：其后吐蕃西击勃律，勃律告急，帝谕令罢兵，不听，卒残其国。
现代文：后来，吐蕃西击勃律，勃律来告急。皇帝谕令吐蕃罢兵，不听，最后攻破勃律国。
English: Later, when the west of Tibet attacked Tibet, Tibet panicked. The emperor ordered the Tibetans to disband, but they did not listen, and finally invaded Tibet.

古文：于是崔希逸为河西节度使，镇凉州，故时疆畔皆树壁守捉，希逸谓虏戍将乞力徐曰： 两国约好，而守备不废，云何？
现代文：那时，崔希逸为河西节度使，镇守凉州。那时疆界处都树栅，并有守兵防卫，希逸对吐蕃的守将乞力徐说 ：两国和好了而守备不撤，这是为什么？
English: At that time, Cui Xiyi was the envoy of the Hexi Festival and guarded Liangzhou. At that time, the border was surrounded by trees and guarded by guards. Cui Xiyi said to the guard of Tubo: The two countries are reconciled and the guard is not withdrawn. Why is this?

古文：请皆罢，以便人。 
现代文：我们都撤，以便人民来往。 
English: We all withdrew so that people could come and go.

古文：乞力徐曰： 公忠诚，无不可，恐朝廷未皆信，脱掩吾不备，其可悔？ 
现代文：乞力徐说： 您忠诚，当然可以，只是担心朝中人不是都能互相信任，如果有人趁我无备时掩杀过来，后悔也来不及了。 
English: "Of course you can be loyal, but I'm just worried that people in North Korea and China can't trust each other. If someone takes advantage of my unpreparedness and tries to cover up for me, I won't have time to regret it.

古文：希逸固邀，乃许。即共刑白犬盟，而后悉彻障壁，虏畜牧被野。
现代文：希逸坚持，于是同意，杀白狗盟誓，然后撤除所有障壁，吐蕃人能遍野放牧。
English: Xiyi insisted, so he agreed to kill the white dog and vowed to do so. Then, all the barriers would be removed, and the Tibetan mastiff would be able to graze everywhere.

古文：明年，傔史孙诲奏事，妄言 虏无备，可取也 。
现代文：第二年，亻兼史孙诲入朝奏事，说 虏人没有防备，可以攻取。 
English: In the second year, Zou Kaneshisun entered the imperial court to make a report, saying that the Kruts were unprepared and could be captured.

古文：帝采之，诏内竖赵惠琮共往按状。
现代文：皇帝采纳他的意见，派内竖赵惠琮一同去查看。
English: The emperor accepted his opinion and sent the empress Zhao Huiyan to inspect it.

古文：小人欲徼幸，至凉州，因共矫诏，诏希逸发兵袭破吐蕃青海上，斩获不赀，乞力徐遁走。
现代文：小人想邀功，到了凉州后，伪造诏书，令希逸发兵袭击吐蕃。在青海一战中斩获不计其数，乞力徐逃走。
English: The villain wanted to claim the credit, and after arriving in Liangzhou, he forged an imperial edict, ordering Xi Yat to send troops to attack Tubo. He made countless gains in the First World War in Qinghai, and fled.

古文：吐蕃恚，不朝。
现代文：吐蕃恼怒，不再入朝。
English: He flew into a rage and no longer entered the imperial court.

古文：二十六年，大入河西，希逸拒破之。
现代文：开元二十六年，吐蕃发重兵攻打河西，希逸打败了他们。
English: On the twenty-sixth day of the first month of the year, Tubo sent heavy troops to attack Hexi, and Xiyi defeated them.

古文：鄯州都督杜希望又拔新城，更号威戎军。
现代文：鄯州都督杜希望又攻克新城，改称威戎军。
English: The governor of Zhangzhou, Du Hope, also conquered Xincheng and renamed it Wei Rongjun.

古文：希逸顾失信，悒悒怅恨，召拜河南尹。
现代文：希逸因自己失信，怏怏怅恨，调任河南尹。
English: Xi Yiyi was transferred to Henan Yin because of his dishonesty and hatred.

古文：既而与惠琮俱见犬崇，疑而死，诲亦及它诛。
现代文：后来与惠琮都看见白狗的鬼魅，疑惧而死，诲也因别的事被杀。
English: Later, both he and Hui Yao saw the ghost of the white dog and died of fear, while Yao was also killed for other reasons.

古文：萧炅代为河西节度留后，杜希望陇右节度留后，王昱剑南节度使，分道经略，碎赤岭碑。
现代文：萧炅代为河西节度留后，杜希望任陇右节度留后，王昱为剑南节度使，分道指挥打碎赤岭上的界碑。
English: After Xiao Jun stayed behind for the Hexi Festival, Du Xinghe stayed behind for the Renhui Right Festival, and Wang Jun stayed behind for the Jianan Festival, the division commander smashed the boundary monument on the Red Ridge.

古文：希望发鄯州兵夺虏河桥，并河筑盐泉城，号镇西军，破吐蕃兵三万。
现代文：杜希望调鄯州的兵夺取河上吐蕃的桥，在河边筑盐泉城，号称镇西军，破吐蕃兵三万。
English: Du hoped to transfer the soldiers of Bozhou to seize the bridge of Tuyi on the river and build a salt spring city on the river, known as Zhenxi Army, breaking the 30,000 soldiers of Tuyi.

古文：昱以剑南兵入攻安戎城，筑二少垒左右之，兵次蓬婆岭，输剑南粟饷军。
现代文：王昱带剑南兵入攻安戎城，筑两个堡垒左右夹峙，兵驻蓬婆岭，运剑南的粮食供军用。
English: Wang Qi led the soldiers from Jian Nan to attack An Rong City, built two fortresses, stationed the soldiers in Pengba Ling, and transported grain from Jian Nan for the military.

古文：吐蕃悉锐来救，昱大败，少垒皆没，士死凡数万。
现代文：吐蕃调所有精兵来救，王昱大败，两个堡垒亦被占领，士兵战死好几万。
English: Tubo dispatched all his elite soldiers to come to the rescue, and Wang Yao was defeated. Two fortresses were also occupied, and tens of thousands of soldiers died in the battle.

古文：昱贪妄，非将选，故败，贬死高要。
现代文：王昱本是贪妄之徒，不是将才，所以战败，贬死在高要。
English: Wang Xuan was a greedy person, not a general, so he was defeated and died in a high-ranking position.

古文：明年，吐蕃攻白草、安人军，诏临洮、朔方分援。
现代文：第二年，吐蕃攻白水、安人等军，诏令临洮、朔方分别援助。
English: In the second year, when Tubo attacked the armies of Baishui and Anren, he ordered the Linyi and Shuo sides to provide assistance separately.

古文：虏绝临洮道，白水军使高柬于拒守，虏引去。
现代文：虏兵断绝临洮军之路，白水军派高柬于抵抗，虏兵退走。
English: The Krupp soldiers cut off the Linyi army's path, the White Water Army sent high-ranking Cambodians to resist, and the Krupp soldiers retreated.

古文：炅遣将追尾，有云出军上，白兔舞，大破吐蕃。
现代文：萧炅派将追杀，队伍头上有白云，中有白兔跳舞，大破吐蕃。
English: Xiao Yao's faction will chase and kill, there are white clouds at the head of the team, there are white rabbits dancing, and they will break and spit.

古文：昱之败，以张宥代节度剑南，以章仇兼琼为益州司马。宥，文吏，不知兵，委事兼琼。
现代文：王昱败后，派张宥代理，派章仇兼琼为益州司马。张宥，是文官，不懂军事，委权给章仇兼琼。
English: After Wang Yao's defeat, Zhang Yu was appointed as his deputy, and Zhang Qian Qiong was appointed as the Sima of Yizhou. Zhang Yu was a civil servant, and did not understand military affairs, so he delegated power to Zhang Qian Qiong.

古文：兼琼因得入奏，天子果其议，拔兼琼代宥节度。
现代文：兼琼因而得入朝奏事，天子同意他的策略，提拔他代张宥节度之职。
English: As a result, Keng Qiong was allowed to report to the emperor. The emperor agreed with his strategy and promoted him to the post of regent in place of Zhang Yu.

古文：兼琼谍诱吐蕃安戎城主为应，导官军入，尽杀虏戍，以监察御史许远守之。
现代文：兼琼秘密诱使吐蕃安戎城主做内应，引官军入城，杀尽吐蕃戍卫，派监察御史许远镇守。
English: Can Qiong secretly enticed the lord of the city of Tuboan Rong to do his bidding, brought the army into the city, killed all the Tubo guards, and sent the inspector Gu Shi to guard the town.

古文：吐蕃围安戎，绝水泉，会石裂泉涌，虏惊引去。
现代文：吐蕃围安戎，断绝水源，城中竟石裂泉涌，吐蕃惊恐撤退。
English: The Tuoba surrounded An Rong, cut off the water source, and a stone-cracked spring gushed in the city. The Tuoba retreated in fear.

古文：复攻维州，不得志。
现代文：又去攻维州，不能取胜。
English: Went to Victoria again, couldn't get a win.

古文：诏乃改安戎曰平戎云。
现代文：有诏令将安戎改称平戎。
English: An Rong was renamed Ping Rong by imperial decree.

古文：是岁，金城公主薨。明年，为发哀，吐蕃使者朝，因请和，不许。
现代文：这一年，金城公主逝世，明年为之发丧，吐蕃使者入朝告哀，同时请和，未得允许。
English: In that year, Princess Kinjo passed away, and the following year, she was mourned. The envoy from Tubo went to the Imperial Palace to offer condolences, and at the same time, he was not allowed to accompany her.

古文：虏乃悉众四十万攻承风堡，抵河源军，西入长宁桥、安仁军，浑崖烽骑将臧希液以锐兵五千破之。
现代文：于是发四十万兵马攻承风堡，到达河源军，西入长宁桥、安仁军，浑崖烽骑将臧希液率精兵五千攻而破之。
English: As a result, four hundred thousand soldiers and horses were sent to conquer the wind fortress, reaching the Heyuan Army, entering the Changning Bridge in the west, the Anren Army, and the muddy cliff. The cavalry attacked and defeated the five thousand soldiers led by the elite soldiers.

古文：吐蕃又袭廓州，败一县，屠吏人。攻振武军石堡城，盖嘉运不能守。
现代文：吐蕃又袭击廓州，打败一县，杀死守吏，再攻振武军石堡城，盖嘉运守不住。
English: Tubo attacked Guozhou again, defeated a county, killed the guards, and then attacked the Zhenwu army's Shibao City. Gejia Yun could not defend it.

古文：天宝元年，陇右节度使皇甫惟明破虏大岭军；战青海，破莽布支，斩首三万级。
现代文：天宝元年，陇右节度使皇甫惟明攻破吐蕃大岭军；战青海，又击败莽布支，杀敌三万人。
English: In the first year of Tianbao, Emperor Xuanzong sent Emperor Fuxue to defeat the Tujia and Daling armies; in the Battle of Qinghai, he also defeated Mengbu and killed 30,000 of the enemy.

古文：明年，破洪济城，战石堡，不克，副将诸葛誗死之。
现代文：第二年，攻破洪济城，战石堡，不能取胜，副将诸葛讠利战死。
English: In the second year, the attack on Hongji City and the battle stone fortress failed to win, and Vice Admiral Zhu Geli died in the battle.

古文：又明年，惟明破虏，献俘京师。
现代文：又过了一年，惟明击败吐蕃，献俘京师。
English: A year later, Wo Ming defeated Tubo and captured the Beijing division.

古文：帝以哥舒翰节度陇右，翰攻拔石堡，更号神武军。
现代文：皇帝派哥舒翰为陇右节度使，翰攻克石堡，改石堡为神武军。
English: The emperor sent his brother Shuhan as the envoy of the right-hand section, and Han conquered the stone castle and changed the stone castle into the army of the gods.

古文：又禽其相兀论样郭。
现代文：吐蕃相兀论样郭被俘获。
English: The guild was captured.

古文：十载，安西节度使高仙芝俘大酋以献。
现代文：天宝十年，安西节度使高仙芝俘获大首领来献。
English: In the tenth year of Tianbao, the Anxi Festival made Gao Xianzhi capture the great leader to offer.

古文：是时，吐蕃与蛮阁罗凤联兵攻泸南，剑南节度使杨国忠方以奸罔上，自言： 破蛮众六万于云南，拔故洪州等三城，献俘口。 
现代文：这时，吐蕃与南诏门合罗凤联兵攻泸南，剑南节度使杨国忠正以奸邪欺瞒皇帝，奏称： 攻破蛮兵六万于云南，收复原洪州等三城，献俘虏。 
English: At this time, Tubo and Nan Zhaomen combined with Luo and Feng to attack the southern part of Yunnan, and the southern section of Jian led Yang Guozhong to deceive the emperor with treachery and evil, saying: Defeat sixty thousand barbarians in Yunnan, recover three cities such as the original Hongzhou, and offer captives.

古文：哥舒翰破洪济、大莫门诸城，收九曲故地，列郡县，实天宝十二载。
现代文：哥舒翰攻破洪济、大莫门等城，收复九曲故地，安置郡县其实是天宝十二年的事。
English: Goshukhan conquered Hongji, Damomen and other cities, and recovered the hometown of Jiuqu, and the resettlement of counties was actually a matter of the 12th year of Tianbao.

古文：于是置神策军于临洮西、浇河郡于积石西、及宛秀军以实河曲。
现代文：于是在临洮西置神策军，置浇河郡于积石之西，另有宛秀军等以加强河曲的守卫。
English: As a result, the Shinsaka army was placed in the west of Linyi, the Gaohe army was placed in the west of Jishi, and the Wanxiu army was placed to strengthen the guard of Hequ.

古文：后二年，苏毘子悉诺逻来降，封怀义王，赐李氏。
现代文：两年后，苏毗之子悉诺逻来降，封为怀义王，赐姓李。
English: Two years later, Subi's son, Siddhartha, was crowned as the King of Huaiyi and given the surname Li.

古文：苏毘，强部也。
现代文：苏毗，是个强部。
English: Suvi is a strong point.

古文：是岁，赞普乞黎苏笼腊赞死，子挲悉笼腊赞嗣，遣使者脩好，诏京兆少尹崔光远持节赍册吊祠。
现代文：这一年，赞普乞黎苏笼腊赞死，子沙手悉笼腊赞嗣，派使者来修好。诏令京兆少尹崔光远持节带了国信册命去吊祭。
English: In the same year, Zhan Pu Kili Su Keng La Zhan died, and his son, Zha Jia Jian Keng La Zang Zi, sent an envoy to mend fences. He ordered Jing Zhao Shao Yin Cui Guangyuan to hold the festival and bring the national letter to the hanging ceremony.

古文：还而安禄山乱，哥舒翰悉河、陇兵东守潼关，而诸将各以所镇兵讨难，始号行营，边候空虚，故吐蕃得乘隙暴掠。
现代文：回国时，安禄山已叛，哥舒翰发河、陇的全部兵马东守潼关。诸将也各领所辖兵马讨伐叛乱，称为行营。边防空虚，吐蕃得以乘机入侵掳掠。
English: When he returned to China, Anlu Mountain had already rebelled, and all the soldiers and horses of Goshukhan, Fahe, and Shun were guarding Shouguan in the east. The generals also led the soldiers and horses of each territory to fight the rebellion, which was called the camp. The border defense was empty, and Tubo was able to take advantage of the opportunity to invade and plunder.

古文：至德初，取巂州及威武等诸城，入屯石堡。
现代文：至德初年，吐蕃攻取州及威武等城，驻军石堡。
English: In the first year of the Tokugawa Shogunate, Tubo captured the cities of Shuzhou and Weiwu, and stationed troops in Shibaku.

古文：其明年，使使来请讨贼且脩好。
现代文：第二年，派使者来修好且请共同讨伐安禄山。
English: The following year, he sent an envoy to mend fences and invite them to jointly fight against Anlu Mountain.

古文：肃宗遣给事中南巨川报聘。
现代文：肃宗派给事中南巨川前往回答并聘问。
English: The Su Sect sent Zhongnan Juchuan to answer and answer questions.

古文：然岁内侵，取廓、霸、岷等州及河源、莫门军。
现代文：但年年仍有骚扰事，先后攻取廓、霸、岷等州，击败河源军、莫门军。
English: However, there were still incidents of harassment year after year, and they successively captured the provinces of Guka, Ba, and Handan, and defeated the Heyuan Army and the Momen Army.

古文：使数来请和，帝虽审其谲，姑务纾患，乃诏宰相郭子仪、萧华、裴遵庆等与盟。
现代文：吐蕃使者多次来请和，皇帝虽然深知其狡诈，但为了暂时缓解，还是诏令宰相郭子仪、萧华、裴遵庆等人与之盟誓。
English: The emissaries of Tubo came many times to invite peace, and although the emperor was well aware of their cunning, in order to temporarily alleviate the situation, he ordered the prime ministers Guo Ziyi, Xiao Hua, Pei Zunqing and others to swear an oath to them.

古文：宝应元年，陷临洮，取秦、成、渭等州。
现代文：宝应元年，吐蕃攻陷临洮，夺取秦、成、渭等州。
English: In the first year of Baoying, Tubo invaded Linyi and captured Qin, Chengdu, Handan and other provinces.

古文：明年，使散骑常侍李之芳、太子左庶子崔伦往聘，吐蕃留不遣。
现代文：第二年朝廷派散骑常侍李之芳、太子左庶子崔伦前去聘问，吐蕃留下他们不让回去。
English: In the following year, the imperial court sent Li Zhifang, the imperial equerry, and Cui Lun, the prince's illegitimate son, to ask questions, but they were not allowed to return.

古文：破西山合水城。
现代文：又攻破西山合水城。
English: They also broke through the West Mountain and Water Town.

古文：明年，入大震关，取兰、河、鄯、洮等州，于是陇右地尽亡。
现代文：第二年入大震关，夺取兰、河、善阝、洮等州，至此，陇右地全失。
English: In the second year, they entered the Great Quake Pass and captured the provinces of Lan, He, Zenshan and Handan. At this point, they lost all of Handan.

古文：进围泾州，入之，降刺史高晖。
现代文：吐蕃更进而围攻泾州，攻入后刺史高晖降。
English: Tubo further besieged Bozhou, and after the invasion, Shigao was defeated.

古文：又破邠州，入奉天，副元帅郭子仪御之。
现代文：又破州，入奉天，副元帅郭子仪率兵西御。
English: Vice-Marshal Guo Ziyi led the troops westward, breaking the state and entering Fengtian.

古文：吐蕃以吐谷浑、党项兵二十万东略武功，渭北行营将吕日将战盩厔西，破之。
现代文：吐蕃征调了吐谷浑、党项的兵合共二十万东来攻武功，渭北行营将领吕日将在周至西与之战，吐蕃败。
English: Tubo conscripted and dispatched Tugu Hun and a total of 200,000 soldiers from the party to the east to attack Wu Gong, and the general Lv R, who went to the north of Shandong, fought with him from Zhou to the west, and Tubo was defeated.

古文：又战终南，日将走。
现代文：又战于终南，日将逃走。
English: And fight to the bitter end, and the sun will flee away.

古文：代宗幸陕，子仪退趋商州。
现代文：此时代宗到达陕州，郭子仪退军商州。
English: At this time, Zong arrived in Shaanxi, and Guo Ziyi withdrew to Shangzhou.

古文：高晖导虏入长安，立广武王承宏为帝，改元，擅作赦令，署官吏。
现代文：高晖引导虏军入长安，立广武王承宏为帝，改年号，大赦，安置官员。
English: Gao Jun led the Kripo army into Chang'an, established Guangwu Wang Chenghong as emperor, changed the year name, amnesty, and resettled officials.

古文：衣冠皆南奔荆、襄，或逋栖山谷，乱兵因相攘钞，道路梗闭。
现代文：其时士族世绅们或南奔荆、襄，或隐匿山谷，乱兵因而得肆意抢掠，道路为之梗塞。
English: At that time, the gentry and the gentry of the gentry and the gentry either went to Nanbenjing, Xiang, or the hidden valley, so the soldiers were allowed to loot at will, and the road was blocked.

古文：光禄卿殷仲卿率千人壁蓝田，选二百骑度浐，或绐虏曰： 郭令公军且来！ 
现代文：光禄卿殷仲卿率一千人坚守蓝田，选骑兵二百人渡过水，骗虏人说： 郭子仪的军队马上到了。 
English: Guoluqing Yinzhongqing led a thousand people to defend Lantian, and 200 cavalrymen crossed the water, deceiving the invaders and saying: Guo Ziyi's army is about to arrive.

古文：吐蕃大震。会少将王甫与恶少年伐鼓噪苑中，虏惊，夜引去。
现代文：吐蕃震怒，正遇少将王甫与城中二流子等在宫苑击鼓呐喊，虏兵惊，夜里退走。
English: Furious, Major-General Wang Fu and the second-rate citizens of the city were beating drums and shouting in the palace courtyard. The soldiers panicked and retreated in the night.

古文：子仪入长安，高晖东奔至潼关，守将李日越杀之。
现代文：郭子仪入长安，高晖东逃至潼关，守将李日越杀之。
English: Guo Ziyi entered Chang'an, Gao Zhidong fled to Shaoguan, and killed the commander Li Nichie.

古文：吐蕃留京师十五日乃走，天子还京。
现代文：吐蕃留京师十五天后撤退，天子回京都。
English: Fifteen days later, the Tokugawa army, which had remained in Kyoto, withdrew, and the Emperor returned to Kyoto.

古文：吐蕃退围凤翔，节度使孙志直拒守，镇西节度使马璘以千骑战却之，吐蕃屯原、会、成、渭间，自如也。
现代文：吐蕃逼围凤翔，节度使孙志直据守拒敌，镇西节度使马瞞率一千骑兵将虏军杀退。吐蕃驻军原、会、成、渭间。
English: Tubo forced the encirclement of Fengxiang, Zhengdu made Sun Zhi directly defend against the enemy, and Zhenxi Zhengdu made the horse concealment rate of one thousand cavalry kill the Krup army. Tubo garrisoned between Yuan, He, Cheng, and Han.

古文：是岁，南入松、维、保等州及云山新笼城。
现代文：这一年又向南攻入松、维、保等州及云山新笼城。
English: In the same year, they invaded Song, Wei, Bao and other prefectures in the south, as well as Yunsan Xingu City.

古文：明年，还使人李之芳等。
现代文：第二年，遣还使者李之芳等人。
English: The following year, the envoy Li Zhifang and others were sent back.

古文：剑南严武破吐蕃南鄙兵七万，拔当狗城。
现代文：剑南严武军击败吐蕃南疆的兵七万，攻克当狗城。
English: The Jiannan Yanwu Army defeated 70,000 soldiers from the Southern Xinjiang Province of Tubo and conquered Dangucheng.

古文：会仆固怀恩反，自灵武遣其将范志诚、任敷合吐蕃、吐谷浑兵攻邠州，白孝德、郭晞婴垒守，乃入居奉天西。
现代文：恰逢仆固怀恩反叛，从灵武派其将范志诚、任敷联合吐蕃、吐谷浑的兵攻州，白孝德、郭坚壁固守。虏军至奉天西郊驻军。
English: It coincided with the rebellion of the servant Gu Wai Yan. From Lingwu, he sent his generals Fan Zhicheng, Renjiki, and the combined forces of Tubo and Tubo to attack the state, while Bai Xiaode and Guo Jianbi held fast. The Krup army was stationed in the western suburb of Bontian.

古文：子仪入奉天，按军不战。
现代文：子仪入奉天，按军不战。
English: Zi Yi entered the service of heaven, according to the army did not fight.

古文：郭晞以锐士夜捣其营，斩首数千级，夺马五百，取四将，吐蕃引去。
现代文：郭带精兵夜袭贼营，杀敌数千人，夺马五百，俘获将领四人，吐蕃退走。
English: Guo and his elite soldiers attacked the bandits' camp at night, killed thousands of enemies, captured five hundred horses, captured four generals, and then retreated.

古文：是时严武拔盐川，又战西山，取其众八万。
现代文：这时严武攻克盐川，又战于西山，克敌八万人。
English: At this time, Yanwu defeated Shiokawa, and fought in Xishan, defeating 80,000 enemies.

古文：虏围凉州，河西节度使杨志烈不能守，跳保甘州，而凉州亡。
现代文：吐蕃围攻凉州，河西节度使杨志烈守不住，脱身投奔甘州，凉州失守。
English: When Yang Zhilei was besieged and besieged Liangzhou by Tubo, Yang Zhilei was unable to defend himself because of the Hexi Festival, so he escaped and went to Ganzhou, and Liangzhou was lost.

古文：永泰元年，吐蕃请和，诏宰相元载、杜鸿渐与虏使者同盟。
现代文：永泰元年，吐蕃请和，诏令宰相元载、杜鸿渐与吐蕃使者盟誓。
English: In the first year of the Yongtai era, Tu Han invited peace and ordered the prime minister, Du Hongqian, to take an oath with the Tu Han envoy.

古文：怀恩不得志，导虏与回纥、党项羌、浑、奴刺犯边，吐蕃大酋尚结息、赞摩、尚悉东赞等众二十万至醴泉、奉天，邠将白孝德不能亢，任敷以兵略凤翔、盩厔，于是京师戒严。
现代文：仆固怀恩不得志，诱吐蕃、回纥、党项羌、浑、奴刺等入寇。吐蕃大酋尚结息、赞摩、尚悉东赞等率二十万人马到醴泉、奉天，州将领白孝德抵御不住。任敷又领兵侵凤翔、銩稨，于是京师戒严。
English: The servant Gu Wai En was discouraged, and induced Tu Quan, Hui Quan, Dang Xiang Quan, Hun, and Nong Zang to invade. Tu Quan's great chief was still at peace, Zammo, still knew Dong Zan, and so on, with a rate of 200,000 people, went to Quanquan and Mingtian, and the state general Bai Xiaode could not resist. Ren Shiki also led troops to invade Fengxiang and Shun, so the Beijing division was placed under martial law.

古文：朔方兵马使浑日时、孙守亮屯奉天，诏子仪以河中兵屯泾阳，李忠臣屯东渭桥，李光进屯云阳，马璘、郝廷玉屯便桥，骆奉先、李日越屯盩厔，李抱玉屯凤翔，周智光屯同州，杜冕屯坊州，天子自率六军屯于苑。
现代文：朔方兵马使浑日进、孙守亮屯兵奉天。诏令郭子仪领河中兵屯守泾阳，李忠臣屯兵东渭桥，李光进屯兵云阳，马瞞、郝廷玉屯兵便桥，骆奉先、李日越屯兵銩稨，李抱玉屯兵凤翔，周智光屯兵同州，杜冕屯兵坊州，天子自率六军屯兵宫苑。
English: He ordered Guo Ziyi to lead the soldiers from the middle of the river to garrison Fenyang, Li Zhongchen to garrison Dongluqiao, Li Guangjin to garrison Yunyang, Ma Xie to garrison Binqiao, Luo Fengxian to garrison Fenyang, Li Rizhou to garrison Fenyang, Li Baoju to garrison Fengxiang, Zhou Zhiguang to garrison Tongzhou, Du Rong to garrison Fangfang, and Tian Zi himself to garrison Gongyuan.

古文：吐蕃逼奉天，日进以单骑驰之，士二百踵进，左右击刺，射皆应弦仆，虏大惊辟易。
现代文：吐蕃兵逼奉天，浑日进单人匹马冲去，骁骑二百继进，左右击刺，箭无虚发。虏军大惊败退。
English: The soldiers of Tubo forced Bongtian to advance all day, and the single horse rushed forward, and the two hundred horsemen continued to advance, stabbing left and right, and the arrows were flawless. The Krup army was greatly defeated and retreated.

古文：日进挟虏一将跃出，举军望而噪，士还，无一矢著身者。
现代文：日进挟着一蕃将出，全军望着鼓噪，骑兵归来，没一人受伤的。
English: Day in, day out, the whole army watched the drumming, the cavalry returned, and no one was hurt.

古文：明日，虏薄城，日进发机石劲弩，故兵多死。
现代文：第二天，虏军围城，日进开动机车投石，再加强弓，贼死伤甚多。
English: The next day, the Krupp army besieged the city, and on the following day, they drove a motor vehicle and threw stones, and then strengthened their bows. Many thieves were killed and injured.

古文：凡三日，虏敛军入壁，日进知虏曲折，即夜斫其营，斩千余级，生禽五百。
现代文：战三天，吐蕃收军入壁垒。日进知道贼营情况，夜袭，杀敌千余人，活捉五百。
English: After three days of fighting, Tubo gathered his troops and entered the ramparts. He knew the situation of the thief camp during the day, and attacked at night, killing more than a thousand people and capturing five hundred alive.

古文：又战马嵬，凡七日，破贼万人，斩首五千，获马、橐它、帜械甚众。
现代文：又在马嵬交战，七天破贼万人，斩首五千，缴获马、骆驼、旗帜兵械甚多。
English: They also fought in Malatya. In seven days, they killed ten thousand bandits, beheaded five thousand, and captured many horses, camels, flags, and weapons.

古文：帝欲自讨贼，下诏大搜马，京师始置团练，都人震扰，凿垣亡去者十八，诏中人户都门，不能止。
现代文：皇帝要亲征，下诏大搜马，京城置团练。京中人大惊，凿墙逃跑的十有八九。诏令中人关闭都门也禁止不了。
English: The emperor wanted to personally recruit soldiers, issued a decree to search for horses, and set up a troop drill in the capital. The people in Kyoto were shocked, and in all likelihood they scaled the walls to escape. The closing of the capital's gates could not be prohibited by the decree.

古文：吐蕃游骑四百略武功，镇西节度使马璘使健士五十击之，歼，士气益奋。
现代文：吐蕃的游骑四百人侵略武功，镇西节度使马瞞派壮士五十人将他们歼灭，士气振奋。
English: Four hundred cavalrymen from Tubo invaded Wugong, and the town's Western Festival made fifty strong men of the Ma Xie faction annihilate them, boosting morale.

古文：虏徙营九之阴，掠醴泉居人数万，焚室庐，田皆赤地。
现代文：吐蕃迁营至九萯之北，掠夺醴泉百姓几万人，纵火烧庐舍，田均成荒地。
English: They moved the camp from Tubo to the north of Jiuquan, plundered tens of thousands of people in Jiuquan, set fire to their homes, and turned their fields into wasteland.

古文：周智光与虏战澄城，破之。
现代文：周智光在澄城将吐蕃战败。
English: Zhou Zhiguang defeated Tubo in Chengcheng.

古文：吐蕃至邠北，复与回纥合，还攻奉天，抵马嵬。
现代文：虏退至北，又与回纥合兵，回攻奉天，抵达马嵬。
English: The invaders retreated to the north, joined forces with the Hui, and returned to attack Mukden, arriving at Malang.

古文：任敷以兵五千掠白水，残同州。
现代文：任敷带五千人马夺取白水，践踏同州。
English: Ren Zhi took five thousand horses to seize Baishui and trampled on Tongzhou.

古文：于是城中渭桥、鄠以屯兵。会怀恩死，虏谋无主，遂与回纥争长。
现代文：于是驻军中渭桥、丰城。仆固怀恩死，众虏没了谋主，吐蕃与回纥争当头领。
English: As a result, the garrison was divided into the bridge and the city of Fengcheng. The servant Gu Huai died, the captives lost their leader, and Tubo and Hui fought for the leadership.

古文：回纥怒，诣子仪请击吐蕃自效，子仪许之，使白元光合兵攻吐蕃于灵台西，大破之，降仆固名臣，帝乃班师。
现代文：回纥怒，到郭子仪处请击吐蕃以示效力朝廷。子仪同意，派南阳郡王白元光与之合兵在灵台西大破吐蕃。仆固名臣降，皇帝停止亲征。
English: In response to his anger, Guo Ziyi asked Guo Ziyi to strike a blow to demonstrate the effectiveness of the imperial court. Ziyi agreed to send Nanyang County King Baiyuan Guang to join forces with him to smash the blow to the west of Lingtai. Minions and eminent retainers surrendered, and the emperor stopped his own enlistment.

古文：吐蕃下永泰、大历间，再遣使者来聘，于是户部尚书薛景仙往报。
现代文：永泰、大历年间，再派使者来朝聘问，由户部尚书薛景仙去答礼。
English: During the Yongtai and Taalit eras, envoys were sent to the North to ask questions, and the head of the household, Shangshu Xuejingxian, went to answer the questions.

古文：诏宰相与吐蕃使者盟。
现代文：诏令宰相与吐蕃使者盟誓。
English: He ordered the prime minister to take an oath with the emissary of Tubo.

古文：俄寇灵州，掠宜禄，郭子仪精甲三万戍泾阳，入屯奉天。
现代文：不久，吐蕃又入寇灵州，掠取宜禄。郭子仪精兵三万戍守泾阳，屯兵奉天。
English: Not long after, Tubo entered Koling Prefecture again and plundered Yilu. Guo Ziyi's elite troops of thirty thousand guarded Poyang, and the garrison was sent to Tian.

古文：灵州兵破虏二万，上级五百首。
现代文：灵州兵杀敌两万，上献首级五百。
English: Lingzhou soldiers killed 20,000 of the enemy and presented 500 severed heads.

古文：景仙与伦泣陵偕来，请境凤林关，而路悉等十五人又来。
现代文：薛景仙还朝，吐蕃首领伦泣陵随同而来，请以凤林关为疆界，又派路悉等十五人来朝。
English: Xue Jingxian also arrived in the morning, accompanied by the leader of the Tubo, Lun Weiling, and asked for the border to be Fenglin Pass. He also sent 15 people, including Lu Xie, to come to the morning.

古文：三年，虏引众十万复攻灵州，略邠州。
现代文：大历三年，吐蕃十万人又攻灵州，掠州。
English: In the third year of the lunar calendar, 100,000 people from Tubo invaded Lingzhou and pillaged it.

古文：先是，尚悉结自宝应后数入边，以功高请老，而赞磨代之，为东面节度使，专河、陇。
现代文：起先，尚悉结自宝应年后多次入边，因功高而请求告老还乡，由赞磨代任东面节度使，专理河、陇。
English: At first, Shang Siyu, who had visited the country many times since the year of Bao, requested to return to his hometown because of his great achievements. He was replaced by Zhanma as the East Festival Commissioner, specializing in river and river rafting.

古文：邠宁马璘、朔方将白元光再破其众，获马羊数千，剑南亦破虏万人。
现代文：宁将马瞞、朔方将白元光再击破其众，获马羊数千，剑南也杀敌万人。
English: Ning hid the horses, and Shuo defeated Bai Yuanguang again, gaining thousands of horses and sheep. Jianan also killed tens of thousands of enemies.

古文：尚悉摩复来朝。
现代文：尚悉摩再度来朝。
English: It's time to come to the morning again.

古文：天子以虏数入塞，诏治守障，徙当、悉、柘、静、恭五州，皆据险以守。
现代文：天子由于吐蕃多次入塞，诏令整治边守，将当、悉、柘、静、恭五州迁到山陵险要处而后固守。
English: Due to the fact that Tuxi was besieged several times, the emperor issued a decree to rectify the border guards and moved the five states of Dang, Siyi, Handan, Jing and Qiong to the important place of the mountain and then kept it.

古文：八年，虏六万骑侵灵州，败民稼，进寇泾、邠，浑瑊与战不利，副将死，略数千户。
现代文：大历八年，吐蕃六万骑兵侵略灵州，践踏庄稼，进而攻泾？浑蠨与之交战，不能胜，副将战死，被掠数千户。
English: In the eighth year of the lunar calendar, 60,000 cavalrymen from Tubo invaded Lingzhou, trampled on crops, and then attacked and fought with Yunnan. They could not win, the vice-general died in battle, and thousands of households were plundered.

古文：瑊整卒夜袭其营；泾原马璘以兵掩之潘原，射豹皮将死，军中哭，乃遁去。
现代文：浑蠨集军夜间袭营，泾源马瞞在潘原掩杀过来，将虏军豹皮将射死，贼军哭，撤军。
English: The turbid army attacked the camp at night, the Xinyuan horse hid in Panyuan and killed it, the Leopard skin of the Krup army was shot to death, the thief army cried and withdrew.

古文：璘收所俘士及男女而还。
现代文：瞞收获被俘的士兵及百姓。
English: The capture of captured soldiers and civilians was concealed.

古文：郭子仪又破其众十万。
现代文：郭子仪又击破吐蕃十万人马。
English: Guo Ziyi defeated another 100,000-strong crowd.

古文：九年，帝遣谏议大夫吴损修好，虏亦使使者入朝。
现代文：大历九年，皇帝派谏议大夫吴损修好，吐蕃也派使者入朝。
English: In the 9th year of the lunar calendar, the emperor sent the doctor Wu Qi to negotiate and repair, and also sent an envoy to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：于是子仪屯邠州，李抱玉屯高壁，马璘屯原州，李忠臣屯泾州，李忠诚屯凤翔，臧希让屯渭北，备虏之入。
现代文：这时郭子仪屯兵州，李抱玉屯兵高壁，马瞞屯兵原州，李忠臣屯兵泾州，李忠诚屯兵凤翔，臧希让屯兵渭北，防备吐蕃的入侵。
English: At this time, Guo Ziyi stationed troops in Zhouzhou, Li Baoyu stationed troops in Gaowei, Ma Shide stationed troops in Yuanzhou, Li Zhongchen stationed troops in Shanzhou, Li Li Zhizhong stationed troops in Fengxiang, and He Xizhong stationed troops in Beibei to guard against the invasion of Tubo.

古文：明年，西川节度使崔宁破虏于西山。
现代文：第二年，西川节度使崔宁在西山攻破虏兵。
English: In the second year, Saikawa Setsudou made Choening break the Krup soldiers in the West Mountain.

古文：虏攻临泾、陇州，次普润，焚掠人畜；与抱玉战义宁，破之；道泾州，璘尾追，败之于百里。
现代文：虏兵攻临泾、陇州，到达普润，焚掠人畜；在义宁与李抱玉交战，吐蕃败；道经泾州，马瞞追击，在百里将虏兵打败。
English: The invaders attacked Linyi and Zhangzhou, reached Purun, and burned and plundered people and animals; in Yining, they fought with Li Baoyu, and were defeated by him; they passed through Zhangzhou, pursued by horses, and defeated the invaders at Baili.

古文：又明年，崔宁破虏故洪节度、氐、蛮、党项等兵，斩首万级，禽酋领千人，牛羊廪铠甚众，献之朝。
现代文：大历十一年，崔宁击败吐蕃故洪节度及氐、蛮、党项等的兵马，斩首万级，擒获酋领千人，牛羊辎重等甚多，上献朝廷。
English: In the eleventh year of the lunar calendar, Cui Ning defeated the troops and horses of the old Hong Jiedu of Tubo, as well as the troops and horses of the Han, the Mongols, and the Kuomintang, decapitated ten thousand, captured a thousand chiefs, and slaughtered a great number of cattle and sheep, and presented them to the imperial court.

古文：吐蕃不得志，入掠黎、雅，于是剑南兵合南诏与战，破之，禽大笼官论器然。
现代文：吐蕃不得志，攻掠黎、雅，于是剑南兵联合南诏与之战，得胜，擒获大笼官论器然。
English: Unable to resist, Tubo attacked and plundered Lijiang and Ya, so the soldiers of Jian'nan allied with Nanzhao to fight against Tubo, won the battle, and captured Daegu.

古文：又侵坊州，取党项牧马。
现代文：吐蕃又侵坊州，掠取党项的牧马。
English: Tubo invaded Fangzhou again and plundered the party's herd of horses.

古文：崔宁攻望汉城，破之。
现代文：崔宁在望汉城攻破虏军。
English: Cui Ning defeated the invading army in the city of Wanshan.

古文：山南西道节度使张献恭战岷州，吐蕃走。宁破西山三路及邛南兵，斩首八千级。
现代文：山南西道节度使张献恭在岷州将吐蕃赶走，崔宁又击败西山三路及邛南虏兵，斩首八千。
English: At the festival of Shannan West Road, Zhang Xianqiong drove out the Tuyi army in Luzhou, and Cui Ning defeated the Xishan Third Route and the Southern Luzhou army, beheading eight thousand people.

古文：十三年，虏大酋马重英以四万骑寇灵州，塞汉、御史、尚书三渠以扰屯田，为朔方留后常谦光所逐，重英残盐、庆而去。
现代文：大历十三年，吐蕃大酋马重英带四万骑兵入寇灵州，填塞汉、御史、尚书三条水渠来破坏屯田，朔方留后常谦光将他们赶走，重英践踏盐、庆后撤走。
English: In the 13th year of the lunar calendar, the great chieftain of Tubo, Ma Chongying, led 40,000 cavalry into Koling State, filling the three canals of Han, Gushi and Shangshu to destroy the military camps. After the Shuo side stayed, Chang Qianguang drove them away. Chongying trampled the salt and withdrew after the celebration.

古文：乃南合南诏众二十万攻茂州，略扶、文，遂侵黎、雅。
现代文：于是会合南诏兵二十万攻茂州，侵扶、文，袭击黎、雅各州。
English: As a result, 200,000 Nanzhao soldiers gathered to attack Maozhou, invade Fuxi and Wenzhou, and attack Li and Yaojia.

古文：时天子已发幽州兵驰拒，虏大奔破。
现代文：其时，天子已发幽州兵来讨伐，吐蕃大败。
English: At that time, the heavenly son had sent the Yuzhou soldiers to fight, and they were soundly defeated.

古文：初，虏使数至，留不遣，所俘虏口，悉部送江南。
现代文：当初，吐蕃多次派使者来，都留下没有遣返，战争中的俘虏，全部押送江南。
English: At first, Tubo sent emissaries many times, but they all left without repatriation. The prisoners of war were all escorted to the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：德宗即位，先内靖方镇，顾岁与虏确，其亡获相偿，欲以德绥怀之，遣太常少卿韦伦持节归其俘五百，厚给衣褚，切敕边吏护亭障，无辄侵虏地。
现代文：德宗即位，先要平定内部藩镇之乱，回顾每年与吐蕃争战，得失相抵，因此想以德安抚之。派太常少卿韦伦持节送还俘虏五百人，厚赠衣物，且切嘱守边将领不得侵扰。
English: When Emperor Dezong ascended to the throne, he first had to quell the internal feud between the domains and towns, review the annual war with Tu Wei, and balance the gains and losses, so he wanted to appease him with virtue. He sent the Grand Vizier Wei Lun to return five hundred captives on the festival day, generously gave him clothes, and ordered the border guards not to intrude.

古文：吐蕃始闻未信，使者入境，乃皆感畏。
现代文：吐蕃听说，开始不相信，及至使者入境，全都感恩惧威。
English: Upon hearing the news, the people of Tubo did not believe it at first, but when the envoy arrived, they were all filled with gratitude and awe.

古文：是时，乞立赞为赞普，姓户虏提氏，曰： 我乃有三恨：不知天子丧，不及吊，一也；山陵不及赙，二也；不知舅即位，而发兵攻灵州，入扶、文，侵灌口，三也。 
现代文：这时，乞立赞为赞普，姓户卢提氏，对韦伦说 ：我有三件憾事：一，不知天子之丧，没有吊祭；二，不知天子入葬之期，未能贡献礼物；三，不知皇帝舅圣明继立，竟然发兵攻灵州，入扶、文，侵灌口。 
English: At this time, Kili Litzan, surnamed Hoo Luti, who was the leader of Zampu, said to Waylon: I have three regrets: First, I did not know the death of the heavenly son, and there was no hanging sacrifice; second, I did not know the time of the heavenly son's burial, and I could not contribute a gift; third, I did not know that the emperor's uncle, Sheng Ming Jili, actually sent an army to attack Lingzhou, to bring aid and money, and to invade Guanzhou.

古文：即发使者随伦入朝。
现代文：随即派使者随韦伦入朝。
English: He immediately sent an envoy to accompany Waylon to the imperial court.

古文：帝又遣伦还蜀俘。
现代文：皇帝又派韦伦归还蜀地所获俘虏。
English: The emperor also sent Wei Lun to return the captives from Shu.

古文：虏以伦再至，欢甚，授馆，作声乐，九日留，以论钦明思等五十人从献方物。
现代文：吐蕃见伦又来，非常高兴，在宾馆招待，还作声乐供娱乐。留住九天，派论钦明思等五十人随伦入朝献特产。
English: He was very happy to see Lun again and invited Lun to his hotel. He also made vocal music for entertainment. He kept Lun for nine days and sent 50 people, including Ong Chin Ming Si, to accompany Lun to the palace to present special products.

古文：明年，殿中少监崔汉衡往使，赞普猥曰： 我与唐舅甥国，诏书乃用臣礼卑我。 
现代文：建中二年，殿中少监崔汉衡出使吐蕃。赞普说： 我与唐是舅甥国，而诏书却用臣礼贬我。 
English: In the second year of the middle school, Choi Han, the junior warden of the palace, issued an envoy to Tubo. Zamp said: I and Tang are uncle-nephew countries, but the imperial edict demeaned me with a courtier salute.

古文：又请云州西尽贺兰山为吐蕃境，邀汉衡奏天子。
现代文：又要求云州西以贺兰山为吐蕃边境，胁迫汉衡向天子奏请。
English: He also demanded that the west of Yunnan take Mount Helan as the border of Tibet and Tibet, and coerced Han Heng to appeal to the emperor.

古文：乃遣入蕃使判官常鲁与论悉诺罗入朝，道赞普语，且引景龙诏书曰 唐使至，甥先与盟，蕃使至，舅亦将亲盟 ；赞普曰 其礼本均。 
现代文：于是派入蕃使判官常鲁与论悉诺罗一同入朝，转述赞普的话，又引景龙年的诏书 唐使到吐蕃，甥先与盟誓；吐蕃使到此，舅也将亲与盟誓 。赞普认为礼是对等的。
English: Therefore, he sent the envoys, the judge Chang Lu and the scholar Noro, to the imperial court. They recounted Zampu's words and illustrated the edict of the Year of the Dragon. When the Tang envoys came to Tubo, the nephew swore an oath; when the Tubo envoys came here, the uncle also swore an oath. Zampu believed that courtesy was equal.

古文：帝许之，以 献 为 进 ， 赐 为 寄 ， 领取 为 领之 。
现代文：皇帝同意，将诏书中 献 字改为 进 ，将 赐 字改 寄 ，将 领取 改为 领之 。
English: The emperor agreed to change the word "offering" in the edict to "sending," the word "giving" to "sending," and the word "receiving" to "receiving."

古文：以前宰相杨炎不通故事为解，并约地于贺兰。
现代文：还解释所以用了这些词是因为前宰相杨炎不了解历史的缘故。并约定以贺兰山为界。
English: He also explained that these words were used because former Prime Minister Yang Yan did not understand history. And it was agreed that Mount Helan would be the boundary.

古文：其大相尚悉结嗜杀人，以剑南之败未报，不助和议，次相尚结赞有谋，固请休息边人，赞普卒用结赞为大相，乃讲好。
现代文：吐蕃大相尚悉结嗜杀人，认为剑南之败尚未报仇，不应与唐议和，次相尚结赞有心计，坚持要让人民休养生息。赞普终于用结赞为大相，与唐修好。
English: The senior minister of Tubo still had a penchant for killing, and believed that the defeat of Jiannan had not yet been avenged, and peace should not be discussed with the Tang. The second minister, Shang Jizan, had a plan, insisting that the people should rest and recuperate. Zamp finally used Jizan as the senior minister and made peace with the Tang.

古文：汉衡与其使区颊赞偕来，约盟境上。
现代文：崔汉衡与吐蕃使者区颊赞同来，在边境约盟。
English: Cui Hanheng and the envoy of Tubo District agreed to come and make an agreement at the border.

古文：拜汉衡鸿胪卿，以都官员外郎樊泽为计会使，与结赞约；且告陇右节度使张镒同盟。
现代文：任汉衡为鸿胪卿，派都官员外郎樊泽为计会使，与结赞约定日期，且令陇右节度使张镒亦来盟誓。
English: Han Heng was appointed as the Lord of Hung Hom, and he sent the official of the capital, Wai Lang Yu Ze, to plan the meeting, and agreed on the date with Yie Zhan, and ordered him to make Zhang Yu also take the oath.

古文：泽与结赞约盟清水，以牛马为牲。
现代文：樊泽与结赞在清水约盟，以牛马为牺牲。
English: Hanzawa and Kiezan made a pact in Shimizu, sacrificing a cow and a horse.

古文：镒欲末其礼，乃绐结赞曰： 唐非牛不田，蕃非马不战，请用犬、豕、羊。 
现代文：张镒想将盟礼降级，就骗结赞说： 唐没有牛不能耕田，蕃没有马不能作战，请用狗、猪、羊为牺牲。 
English: Zhang Xuan wanted to downgrade the alliance, so he tricked Zizang into saying: "Tang can't farm without cattle, and Handan can't fight without horses. Please use dogs, pigs, and sheep as sacrifices."

古文：结赞听诺。
现代文：结赞同意。
English: I agree wholeheartedly.

古文：将盟，乃除地为坛，约二国各以二千士列遣外，冗从立坛下。
现代文：将盟，筑土为坛，约定两国各用两千兵士列在坛外，随从站在坛下。
English: The two countries agreed to form an alliance and build an altar of earth, with two thousand soldiers from each country lined up outside the altar, and their followers standing under the altar.

古文：镒与幕府齐映齐抗、鸿胪汉衡、计会使于頔及泽、鲁皆朝服，结赞与论悉颊藏、论臧热、论利陀、论力徐等对升坛，刑牲坛北，杂其血以进，约： 唐地泾州右尽弹筝峡，陇州右极清水，凤州西尽同谷，剑南尽西山、大度水。
现代文：张镒与幕府齐映、齐抗、鸿胪崔汉衡、计会使于由页及樊泽、常鲁都穿朝服，结赞与论悉颊藏、论臧热、论利陀、论力徐等亦七人，双方共同登坛，在坛北杀牺牲，混其血歃盟。约定： 唐地泾州西至弹筝峡西口，陇州西至清水县，凤州西到同谷县，剑南则至西山大渡河东。
English: Zhang Ye and the shogunate wore the imperial robes at the ceremonies of Yuchai, Heze, and Changlu, and Zhang Ye and the shogunate wore the imperial robes at the ceremonies of Qi Ying, Qi Nian, Hung Nian, Cui Han Heng, and Zhe Jie, and there were also seven people who wore the imperial robes at the ceremonies of Yuzhe, Heze, and Changlu, and seven people who wore the imperial robes at the ceremonies of Xie Zhan, Zhe Nian, Lidao, and Lixu, and the two sides jointly ascended the altar, sacrificed at the altar, and mingled their blood.

古文：吐蕃守镇兰、渭、原、会，西临洮，东成州，抵剑南西磨些诸蛮、大度水之西南。
现代文：吐蕃守镇在兰、渭、原、会，西至临洮，东至成州，连接剑南西界磨些诸蛮、大渡水之西南。
English: Tubo Shou Town is located in Lan, Handan, Yuan, Hui, west to Linyi, east to Chengzhou, connecting the southwest of Jianan, west to the border of Muzhuang and Datushui.

古文：尽大河北自新泉军抵大碛，南极贺兰橐它岭，其间为闲田。二国所弃戍地毋增兵，毋创城堡，毋耕边田。 
现代文：黄河以北，从新泉军直到大碛，南至贺兰山骆驼岭，中间都是闲田，两国已丢弃了的戍地不得再增兵，不再建城堡，也不得耕种。 
English: To the north of the Yellow River, from the Xinquan Army to Dalat, south to the Camel Ridge of Helan Mountain, there are idle fields in the middle. The ploughed land that has been abandoned by the two countries shall not be increased, no castle shall be built, and no farming shall be done.

古文：既盟，请镒诣坛西南隅浮屠幄为誓。
现代文：盟毕，结赞请张镒到坛西南隅佛幄中焚香为誓。
English: In conclusion, I would like to ask Zhang Ye to burn incense in the southwest corner of the altar.

古文：于是升坛大享，献酬乃还。
现代文：于是登坛饮酒，互相献酬而归。
English: So they went up to the altar, drank, gave each other gifts, and left.

古文：帝命宰相、尚书与虏使者盟长安，而清水之约，疆埸不定，复令汉衡决于赞普，乃克盟。
现代文：皇帝令宰相、尚书与吐蕃使者在长安约盟，而清水之约，疆界不定，又令汉衡与赞普商定。
English: The emperor ordered the prime minister, Shang Shu, and the envoy from Tubo to conclude the Treaty of Chang'an, while the Treaty of Shimizu had an uncertain boundary, and also ordered Han Heng to reach an agreement with Zampu.

古文：于是宰相李忠臣卢杞关播崔宁、工部尚书乔琳、御史大夫于颀、太府卿张献恭、司农卿段秀实、少府监李昌夔、京兆尹王翃、金吾卫大将军浑瑊与区颊赞等同盟京城之右郊，礼如清水。
现代文：于是宰相李忠臣、卢杞、关播、崔宁、工部尚书乔琳、御史大夫于颀、太府卿张献恭、司农卿段秀实、少府监李昌夔、京兆尹王罖、金吾卫大将军浑蠨与区颊赞等会盟于京城右郊，礼仪与清水盟同。
English: As a result, the Prime Minister Li Zhongcheng, Lu Wei, Guan Bo, Cui Ning, the Minister of Industry Shang Shujiao Lin, the Minister of History Yu Yao, the Grand Mufu Zhang Xianqiong, the Secretary of Agriculture Duan Xiusi, the Junior Mufu Supervisor Li Changyao, the Mayor of Beijing Zhao Yin Wangyao, the General of Jingwuwei Dunyao and the District Chekzan, etc. gathered in the right suburb of Beijing, and the etiquette was the same as that of Qingshui.

古文：前二月告庙，齐，三日，关播跪读载书，已盟，乃大享。
现代文：盟前二月，有司告于太庙，盟官斋三日，关播跪读盟文，盟毕赐宴。
English: In February before the alliance, a magistrate was reported to the Imperial Temple, the alliance officials fasted for three days, Guan Bo knelt to read the alliance document, and the alliance was given a banquet.

古文：诏左仆射李揆为入蕃会盟使，还区颊赞等。
现代文：诏令左仆射李揆为入蕃会盟使，送区颊赞等人归。
English: He ordered his left-hand man, Li Jie, to become the envoy of the Ryukyuan Association of Korean Residents in Japan, and sent people such as Jian Zhan and others back home.

古文：硃泚之乱，吐蕃请助讨贼，诏右散骑常侍于颀持节慰抚，太常少卿沈房为安西、北庭宣慰使以报之。
现代文：朱氵此乱起，吐蕃要求帮助讨贼，诏令右散骑常侍于颀持节抚慰，太常少卿沈房为安西、北庭宣慰使回答所请。
English: Zhu Xi started the riot, Tu Xi asked for help to catch the thief, Zhao Li ordered the right rider to often serve as a consolation on the Day of Restitution, and too often Shaoqing Shen Fang was invited by Anxi and Beiting to answer.

古文：浑瑊用论莽罗兵破泚将韩旻于武亭川。
现代文：浑蠨用论莽罗的兵在武亭川击破朱氵此将领韩。
English: He defeated Zhu Xi, the Han general, at the Wuting River with his reckless soldiers.

古文：初，与虏约，得长安，以泾、灵四州畀之。
现代文：当初，与吐蕃约定：攻得长安，就把泾、灵四州给吐蕃。
English: At the beginning, it was agreed with Tubo that if Chang'an was conquered, Tubo and Lingshizhou would be given to Tubo.

古文：会大疫，虏辄引去。
现代文：恰遇大疫，吐蕃兵撤退。
English: In the event of a major epidemic, the soldiers of Tubo retreated.

古文：及泚平，责先约求地。
现代文：及朱氵此之乱平，吐蕃据约来要地。
English: According to Zhu Xi, this is a chaotic level, and according to Zhu Xi, this is an important place.

古文：天子薄其劳，第赐诏书，偿结赞、莽罗等帛万匹，于是虏以为怨。
现代文：天子认为他们功劳不大，只赐给诏书，补偿结赞、莽罗等人绸一万匹。吐蕃因之而生怨。
English: The heavenly son thought that their contribution was not great, and only gave them the imperial edict, compensating them with ten thousand pieces of silk such as yakitori, makuro, etc. This caused resentment among the people of Tubo.

古文：贞元二年，诏仓部郎中赵建往使，而虏已犯泾、陇、邠、宁，掠人畜，败田稼，内州皆闭壁。
现代文：贞元二年，诏派仓部郎中赵建出使。此时吐蕃已侵犯泾、陇？宁几道，抢掠人畜，破坏庄稼，诸道各镇都坚壁自守。
English: In the second year of the Zhengyuan era, Zhao Jian, the vice-chairman of the warehouse department, sent an envoy. At this time, Tubo had invaded several provinces of Yunnan, Fujian and Ningxia, looting people and animals, and destroying crops. All towns in these provinces had strong walls to protect themselves.

古文：游骑至好畤，左金吾将军张献甫、神策将李升昙等屯咸阳，河中浑瑊、华州骆元光援之。以左监门将军康成使焉。
现代文：吐蕃的游动骑兵到达好，左金吾将军张献甫、神策将李升昙等统兵屯守咸阳，河中的浑蠨、华州的骆元光助之，又派左监门将军康成出使吐蕃。
English: The roving cavalrymen of Tubo arrived safely. General Zhang Xianfu of the Left Jingu Army and General Li Shengkun of the Shengzhe Army were stationed in Xianyang, and General Luo Yuan Guangsu of the Huazhou Army and General Kangcheng of the Left Jingu Army were dispatched to Tubo.

古文：尚结赞屯上砦原，亦令使论乞陀来请盟。
现代文：尚结赞屯驻上砦原，也派使者论乞陀来请盟。
English: Shang Jie Zantun was stationed in Shang Fort Plain, and also sent an envoy to On Kido to ask for allies.

古文：凤翔李晟遣部将王佖以锐兵三千夜入汧阳，明日，薄其中军，虏惊溃走，结赞仅自脱。
现代文：凤翔李晟派部将王亻必领精兵三千夜入阳，第二天逼近吐蕃中军，虏兵惊恐溃逃，结赞仅得自己脱身。
English: Fengxiang Li Ya sent his troops to escort Wang Yao's elite soldiers to the three-thousand-night journey into the sun. The next day, they approached the Chinese army in Tubo. The soldiers panicked and fled, leaving Yao Zhan to escape on his own.

古文：虏众二万侵凤翔，李晟击却之，因袭破摧沙堡，烧储，斩守者。
现代文：虏军两万侵袭凤翔，李晟出兵击退，进而袭破摧沙堡，焚烧积储，斩杀守卫者。
English: Twenty thousand Krupp troops invaded Fengxiang, Li Lan sent troops to repel them, and then attacked and destroyed the sand castle, burned the storage, and killed the guards.

古文：吐蕃攻盐、夏，刺史杜彦光、拓拔乾晖不能守，悉其众南奔，虏遂有其地。
现代文：吐蕃攻盐、夏，刺史杜彦光、拓拔乾晖守不住，带领人马南逃，吐蕃占有其地。
English: Tubo attacked Yan'an, Xia, Zhishi, Du'an, and Qian'an, but could not hold out. He led his men south and fled, and Tubo took possession of his territory.

古文：天子以边人残没，下诏避正殿，痛自咎。诏骆元光经略盐、夏。
现代文：天子因边民受到残害，下诏避开正殿，沉痛自责，诏骆元光整顿治理盐、夏等地。
English: As a result of the border people being harmed, the emperor avoided the main hall and severely reproached himself. Emperor Luo Yuan Guang rectified and governed salt, summer and other places.

古文：三年，命左庶子崔瀚、李刮踵使。
现代文：贞元三年，命左庶子崔遆、李接连出使吐蕃。
English: In the third year of the Zhengyuan era, the emissaries of the emissaries of the emissaries of the emissaries of the emissaries of the emissaries of the emissaries of the emissaries of the emissaries of the emissaries of the emissaries of the emissaries of the emissaries

古文：结赞得盐、夏，皆戍以兵，乃自屯鸣沙，然馈饷数困。
现代文：结赞得了盐、夏，用兵戍守，自己则屯守鸣沙，但粮饷缺乏。
English: Yizan won salt and summer, and guarded with soldiers, while he himself guarded Mingsha, but there was a lack of grain.

古文：于是骆元光、韩游瑰滨塞而屯，而燧次石州，跨河相掎角。
现代文：此时骆元光、韩游瑰屯兵塞边，马燧驻守石州，分兵跨河与元光等成掎角。
English: At this time, Luo Yuan Guang and Han Yu Ji were stationed on the border, Ma Wei was stationed in Shizhou, and the detachment of soldiers crossed the river and came into conflict with Yuan Guang.

古文：结赞大惧，屡请盟，天子不许。
现代文：结赞大惧，多次派使请和，天子不许。
English: He was so afraid of being praised that he repeatedly sent envoys to ask for peace, but God forbid.

古文：即以贵将论颊热厚赂乞和于燧，燧以为情，身入见天子，诸将以燧入，皆守壁不战。
现代文：又派大将论颊热厚礼卑词向马燧乞和。马燧认为他心诚，就入朝见天子。诸将因马燧入朝，所以都坚壁不战。
English: He also sent a general to beg for peace with warm and courteous words to Ma Xuan. Ma Xuan thought he was sincere, so he entered the court to see the emperor. All the generals refused to fight because of Ma Xuan's entry into the court.

古文：结赞遽还走，马多死，士不能步，有饥色。
现代文：结赞突然撤军而归，马大多死了，兵士只能徒步，面有饥色。
English: Ying Zhan suddenly withdrew and returned, the horses were mostly dead, and the soldiers could only walk on foot, looking hungry.

古文：瀚始至鸣沙，传诏让结赞破约陷盐、夏，对曰： 本以武亭功未偿乃来，又候碑仆，疆埸不明，故行境上。
现代文：崔遆才到鸣沙，传来诏书责备结赞破约攻陷盐、夏。结赞回答： 本来是因助讨朱氵此的功未得赏赐而来，又遇到定界碑被仆倒，疆界不明，所以到境上来。
English: It was not until Cui Xuan arrived in Mingsha that an imperial edict was issued to reprimand Jie Zhan for breaking the agreement to invade and conquer Salt and Xia. Jie Zhan replied: Originally, I came because I was not rewarded for my service in helping Zhu Xuan, but then I encountered a boundary marker that had been knocked down, and the boundary was unclear, so I came to the territory.

古文：泾州乘城自保，凤翔李令不纳吾使，虽康成等来，皆不能致委曲。
现代文：泾州闭城自守，凤翔李令公也不接纳我的使者。虽然派来了康成等人，但都不能解决问题。
English: Zhangzhou closed the city to protect itself, and Fengxiang Lilinggong did not accept my envoy. Although Kangcheng and others were sent, they could not solve the problem.

古文：我日望大臣而卒无至者，我故引还。
现代文：我每天都盼望大臣来临但终无来者，所以领兵回归。
English: I waited every day for the minister to come, but he never came, so I led the soldiers back.

古文：盐、夏守将惧吾众，以城丐我，非我敢攻也。
现代文：盐、夏的守将害怕我们人多，把城给我，不是我攻陷的。
English: The salt and summer keepers will be afraid of our many men. Give me the city, I didn't take it.

古文：若天子复许盟，虏之愿也，唯所命，当以盐、夏还唐。 
现代文：若天子能结好复盟，是我们切盼的，将惟命是听，归还盐、夏。 
English: If the heavenly son can make a good reunion, we are eagerly looking forward to it. We will listen to his command and return salt and summer.

古文：又言清水盟，大臣少，故约易坏，请悉遣宰相元帅二十一人会盟。
现代文：又说清水之盟大臣少，所以和约易遭破坏。请求派全部宰相元帅二十一人会盟。
English: He also said that the number of ministers in Shimizu's alliance was small, so it was easy to break the treaty. He requested that all the prime ministers and marshals be sent to the twenty-one-member alliance.

古文：并言灵盐节度使杜希全、泾原节度使李观，外蕃所信，请主盟。
现代文：还说灵盐节度使杜希全、泾原节度使李观，是外蕃信任的人，请一同主盟。
English: He also said that the spiritual salt festival made Du Xiquan, and the Xingyuan festival made Li Guan, are people who are trusted by outsiders, please be the host.

古文：帝复使瀚报结赞曰： 希全守灵州，有分地，不可以越境；观既徙官，以浑瑊为盟会使。 
现代文：皇帝又派崔遆回报结赞说 ：杜希全守灵州，职有所专，不可越境，李观已调任他官。故以浑蠨为盟会使。 
English: The emperor also sent Cui Jie to return the praise and said: Du Xi will stay in Lingzhou, he has a special job, he cannot cross the border, Li Guan has been transferred to another official. Therefore, he will ally with Tangguo.

古文：约五月盟清水，使先效二州，以验虏信。
现代文：约定五月在清水约盟，要求先归还两州以检验其信用。
English: They agreed to sign a treaty in Shimizu in May, demanding the return of the two states first in order to test their credit.

古文：结赞辞清水非吉地，请会原州之土梨树，乃归二州。
现代文：结赞说清水不是吉地，请在原州的土梨树会盟，同时归还两州。
English: If you agree that Shimizu is not an auspicious place, please join the Pear Tree Association in the original state and return the two states at the same time.

古文：天子从之。
现代文：天子同意。
English: Tenshi agreed.

古文：瑊来受命，拜汉衡兵部尚书以副瑊。
现代文：浑蠨来接受任务，天子委任崔汉衡为兵部尚书做浑蠨的副使。
English: He came to accept the task, and the Son of Heaven appointed Cui Hanheng to be the deputy envoy of Heibin Shangshu.

古文：瑊率师二万待期，诏骆元光助之。
现代文：浑蠨率师二万等待盟期，诏令骆元光协助。
English: He ordered Luo Yuanguang to assist him, as he had 20,000 soldiers waiting for the alliance period.

古文：宰相议所盟地，左神策将马有邻建言： 土梨树林荟岩阻，兵易诡伏，不如平凉夷漫坦直，且近泾，缓急可保也。 
现代文：宰相们议论会盟的地点。左神策将马有邻建议 ：土梨树林深地险，易于安置伏兵，不如平凉宽广平坦，而且靠近泾州，缓急都可相保。 
English: The prime ministers discussed the location of the alliance. Zuo Sheng Zhao suggested that Ma have a neighbor: the soil pear forest is deep and dangerous, it is easy to place ambushes, it is not as wide and flat as Pingliang, and it is close to Zhangzhou, and the priorities can be protected.

古文：乃定盟平凉。
现代文：于是在平凉定盟。
English: So they formed an alliance in Pingliang.

古文：瑊约结赞，主客均以兵三千至坛外，诞从四百叩坛，以游军交逻相入。
现代文：蠨约结赞，主客各带兵三千在坛外，随从四百人在坛下，另有游动军互相巡逻。
English: At the conclusion of the ceremony, the host and guest each led three thousand soldiers outside the altar, followed by four hundred people under the altar, and another army patrolled each other.

古文：将盟，结赞伏精骑三万于西，纵逻骑出入瑊军，瑊将梁奉贞亦駷马入虏军营，阴执之，而瑊不知也。
现代文：将盟，结赞伏精骑三万在西面，放任巡逻队出入蠨军，蠨将梁奉贞也策马入吐蕃军营，吐蕃暗中把他们都扣留了而蠨尚不知道。
English: Liang Fengzhen, the commander of Tuyun, also rode into Tuyun's camp and secretly detained them without Tuyun's knowledge.

古文：客请咸等具冠剑，皆就幄更衣，从容胖肆。
现代文：结赞又请蠨等穿戴衣冠佩剑，大家都进幄更衣，从容舒缓。
English: He also complimented and asked them to wear cap and gown and carry swords, and everyone went into the changing room and relaxed.

古文：虏忽三伐鼓，众噪而兴，瑊不知所出，走幄后，得马不衔而驰，十里始得衔。
现代文：吐蕃方面突然击鼓三声，众人呼啸而来，蠨不知从哪里能出去，转到幄后，偶得一马，来不及加马嚼子就驰马奔逃，直跑出十里，衔才安好。
English: Suddenly, there were three drumbeats from the side of the spittoon, and everyone came whistling. The spittoon did not know where to go. After turning to the spittoon, it occasionally got a horse. When it was too late to add the horse chewing gum, the horse ran away. It ran straight out of ten miles, and the rank was safe.

古文：虏追，矢若雨不伤也，至元光营乃脱。
现代文：虏兵尾追，箭如雨下，均未射中，到元光营才算脱身。
English: The enemy soldiers chased after them, and the arrows rained down, but none of them were hit. It was not until they reached the camp of Yuan Guang that they were able to escape.

古文：裨将辛荣兵数百据北阜与虏战，矢尽乃降。
现代文：副将辛荣领几百人靠着北山与虏兵战，箭尽后降。
English: Vice-commander Xin Rong led several hundred people to fight against the Krup soldiers near the North Mountain, and then fell after the arrow was exhausted.

古文：判官韩弇、监军宋凤朝死之。
现代文：判官韩、监军宋凤朝战死。
English: Judge Han and military overseer Song Feng died in the battle.

古文：汉衡与判官郑叔矩路泌、掌书记袁同直、列将扶余准马宁孟日华李至言乐演明范澄马弇、中人刘延邕俱文珍李朝清等六十人皆被执，士死者五百，生获者千余人。
现代文：汉衡与判官郑叔矩、路泌，掌书记袁同直，列将扶余准、马宁、孟日华、李至言、乐演明、范澄、马，中人刘延邕、俱文珍、李朝清等六十人都被擒，士兵战死的五百人，被俘者千余人。
English: Sixty people, including Han Heng, judges Zheng Shujin and Lu Xiu, chief secretary Yuan Tongzhi, generals Fu Yujun, Maning, Meng Rihua, Li Zhiyan, Le Yuanming, Fan Cheng and Ma, and middle-ranking officials Liu Yanqi, Qu Wenzhen and Li Chaoqing, were taken prisoner. Five hundred soldiers died in the battle, and more than a thousand were captured.

古文：汉衡语虏曰： 我，崔尚书也，结赞与我善。
现代文：汉衡对虏兵说： 我是崔尚书，结赞与我交善。
English: Han Heng said to the captives: I am Cui Shangshu, praise and friendship with me.

古文：若杀我，结赞亦杀若。 
现代文：你杀了我，结赞就会杀你的。 
English: If you kill me, praise will kill you.

古文：乃不死。
现代文：因而不死。
English: So you don't die.

古文：人负一木，以绳三约之，系其发驱之；夜则杙地系而仆，蒙以罽，守者寝其上。
现代文：吐蕃兵让他们每人背后竖一根木柱，用绳子把身子与木柱捆在一起，共捆三道，又用绳子系住头发拉着驱赶；夜里都扑倒在地上且拴在橛子上，用毛覆盖。
English: The soldiers of the Spitfires made each of them stand with a wooden post behind his back, and with a rope they tied his body to the post, in a total of three ways, and with a rope they tied his hair and drove him away; at night they threw him to the ground and tied him to the post, and covered him with hair.

古文：始结赞将劫希全、观，急以锐兵直趣京师，既不克，又欲禽瑊等，扌寿虚入寇，其谋本然。
现代文：守卫的就睡在他们身上，起初，结赞想劫持杜希全和李观，匆匆以精兵直扑京师，不能取胜。又想擒获浑蠨，乘虚入寇，是早就计划好了的。
English: The guards were sleeping on them. At first, Yie Zhan wanted to kidnap Du Xiquan and Li Guan, and hurriedly attacked the Beijing Division with elite soldiers, but could not win. He also wanted to capture Hun Ye, and took advantage of the situation to invade, which was planned long ago.

古文：既引去，至故原州，坐帐中见汉衡等，慢言： 浑瑊战武功，我力也。
现代文：浑蠨既脱逃，结赞等到达旧原州，坐在帐中召见汉衡等人，傲慢地说： 浑蠨战于武功能取胜，是我的力量。
English: After escaping and receiving praise, Hun Sen arrived in Old Wonju, sat in his tent, summoned Han Heng and others, and arrogantly said, "Hun Sen's ability to win the war is my strength."

古文：许裂地偿我，而自食其言。
现代文：当初许诺划地给我，结果食言。
English: At first, he promised to give it to me, but then he reneged.

古文：吾既作金枷，将必得瑊以见赞普，乃今失之，徒致公等，无益也。当使人归报。 
现代文：我做了一副金枷，一定要得到浑蠨以见赞普。现在他跑掉了却抓住了你们，没用处，我一定派人送你们回去。 
English: I made a pair of gold shackles, and I must get muddy to see Zampu. Now he has run away and caught you. It's no use. I must send someone to take you back.

古文：初，汉衡遇乱，从史吕温身蔽兵，温伤而汉衡脱，虏人嘉其义，厚给养之。
现代文：起初，汉衡遇乱，从史吕温以自身来挡兵器，汉衡得脱身而吕温受伤，结赞赞扬吕温的忠义，为他养伤且赠送厚礼。
English: At first, Han Heng was caught up in the turmoil, and he used himself to block weapons from Shi Luwen. Han Heng was able to escape, but Luwen was injured. He praised Luwen's loyalty, nursed him back to health, and gave him a gift.

古文：结赞屯石门，以俱文珍、马宁、马弇归唐，而囚汉衡、叔矩河州，辛荣廓州，扶余准鄯州。
现代文：结赞屯守石门，让俱文珍、马宁、马归唐，而将汉衡、叔矩囚于河州，辛荣囚于廓州，扶余准囚于善阝州。
English: Kiezan kept Shimen, and allowed Qu Wenzhen, Maning, and Ma to return to Tang, while Han Heng and Shu Rong were imprisoned in Hezhou, Xin Rong was imprisoned in Guozhou, and Fu Yu was imprisoned in Zhengyangzhou.

古文：帝犹使中人赍诏书赐结赞，拒不受。
现代文：皇帝还派中人送诏书赐给结赞，结赞不受。
English: The emperor also sent a high-ranking official to deliver an imperial edict to bestow the title of zizan, and zizan would not be accepted.

古文：虏戍盐、夏，涉春疫大兴，皆思归。
现代文：虏兵屯扎盐、夏，春天疫病流行，都想回家。
English: Peasants want to go home because of the salt, summer and spring epidemics.

古文：结赞以骑三千迎之，火二州庐舍，颓郛堞而去，杜希全分兵保之。
现代文：结赞派三千骑兵接戍兵，纵火烧毁两州房屋并推倒城壁而去。杜希全分兵保之。
English: Jie Zhan sent three thousand cavalry to pick up the soldiers, set fire to the houses of the two states and knocked down the city wall and left. Du Xi was fully protected by the army.

古文：帝哀汉衡等陷辱，下诏赐其子七品官，叔矩、泌、弇、日华、荣、至言、澄、良贲、演明一子八品官，袁同直而下一子九品官。
现代文：皇帝哀痛汉衡等人陷入虏手受辱，下诏赐其子七品官，赐郑叔矩、路泌、韩、孟日华、辛荣、李至言、范澄、乐演明、王良贲等人各一子八品官，袁同直以下各一子九品官。
English: The emperor grieved for Han Heng and others who fell into disgrace, and issued an edict to give his sons seven court ranks, to give one son of each of Zheng Shu Rui, Lu Xiu, Han, Meng Rihwa, Xin Rong, Li Zhigen, Fan Cheng, Le Yuanming, Wang Liangqi and others eight court ranks, and one son of each of Yuan Tong Zhi and below nine court ranks.

古文：以决胜军使唐良臣屯潘原，神策将苏太平屯陇州。
现代文：派决胜军使唐良臣屯守潘原，神策将苏太平屯守陇州。
English: The decisive army sent Tang Liangchen to Panyuan, and the divine plan sent Su Taiping to Bozhou.

古文：结赞召汉衡、日华、延邕至石门，以五骑送境上，遣使者奉表来。
现代文：结赞召汉衡、日华、延邕到石门，派五骑兵送他们到边境，并派使者奉表入朝。
English: He called Han Heng, Nichia, and Yan Qi to Shimen, sent five horsemen to escort them to the border, and sent an envoy to the imperial court.

古文：李观曰： 有诏不内吐蕃使者。 
现代文：到潘原，李观说： 有诏令不接纳吐蕃的使者。 
English: Arriving at Pan Yuan, Li Guan said, "There is an imperial edict not to accept envoys from Tibet.

古文：受汉衡等，放其使。
现代文：接待了汉衡等人，放还吐蕃使者。
English: Han Heng and others were received, and the envoys were released.

古文：结赞以羌、浑众屯潘口，傍青石岭，三分其兵趋陇、汧阳间，连营数十里，中军距凤翔一舍，诡汉服，号邢君牙兵，入吴山、宝鸡，焚聚落，略畜牧、丁壮，杀老孺，断手剔目，乃去。
现代文：结赞用羌、浑的兵众屯守潘口，紧靠青石岭，分兵三路开往陇州、阳之间，连营几十里，中军距凤翔仅三十里。穿汉服，自称是邢君牙的兵。侵入吴山、宝鸡，焚烧房屋，掠夺牲畜及丁壮，杀死老幼，或砍手剜眼。
English: Yie Zhan kept Pan's Mouth, close to the Qingshi Ridge, with soldiers of the Han and Qiang clans. The detachment of soldiers drove three ways to Luzhou and Yang, and the company camp was dozens of miles away. The Chinese army was only 30 miles away from Fengxiang. Wearing Han clothes, they claimed to be soldiers of the Qiang Junya. They invaded Wushan and Baoji, burned houses, plundered livestock and Ding Zhuang, killed the old and the young, or cut off their hands and eyes.

古文：李晟尝蹙大木塞安化隘处，虏过，悉焚之。
现代文：李晟曾砍大树堵塞安化险要处，虏兵过，全都烧毁。
English: Li Qian once cut down a large tree to block the key area of the Anhua and Rui soldiers, and all of them were burned.

古文：诏神策将石季章壁武功，良臣移师百里城。
现代文：诏令神策将石季章坚守武功，令唐良臣移兵驻守百里城。
English: The imperial edict ordered the divine plan to keep Shi Jizhang's military exploits, and ordered Tang Liangcheng to move his troops to guard Baili City.

古文：虏又剽汧阳、华亭男女万人以畀羌、浑，将出塞，令东向辞国，众恸哭，投堑谷死者千数。
现代文：虏兵又剽夺阳、华亭的男女一万人送给羌、浑。即将出塞，令被俘者朝东向家、国告别。众人痛哭，投崖谷而死的有几千人。
English: The captors also gave 10,000 men and women from Zhurayang and Huating to Yan and Hun. When they were about to leave the fortress, they ordered the captives to head east to say goodbye to their home and country. Everyone cried bitterly, and several thousand people died after falling into the cliff valley.

古文：吐蕃又入丰义，围华亭，绝汲道。
现代文：吐蕃又攻入丰义，围困华亭，断绝汲水之道。
English: Tubo invaded Fengyi again, besieged Huating, and cut off the water supply.

古文：守将王仙鹤请救于陇州，刺史苏清沔合太平兵赴之，虏逆战，太平不胜，引还。
现代文：守将王仙鹤向陇州求援，刺史苏清沔会合太平的兵往救，虏兵迎战，太平不能取胜，引兵返回。
English: The commander-in-chief, Wang Cenghe, appealed to Zhangzhou for help, and Su Qingyao met with Taiping's soldiers to come to the rescue. However, the invaders met with a fight, and Taiping could not win, so he led his troops back.

古文：虏日千骑四掠，陇兵不敢出。
现代文：虏每日有上千骑兵四出掠夺，陇州兵不敢出战。
English: Every day, more than a thousand cavalrymen go out to plunder, and the soldiers of Zhangzhou do not dare to go to war.

古文：虏积薪将焚华亭，仙鹤以众降。
现代文：虏兵堆积柴薪准备焚毁华亭，仙鹤只得带领众人投降。
English: The enemy soldiers were piling up firewood in preparation for burning down the Chinese pavilion, and Cranes had to lead the crowd to surrender.

古文：清沔潜兵大象龛，夜半，约城中举火烛天，虏众惊，因袭其营，乃去。
现代文：清沔暗暗进军大象龛，半夜，约好城中点火把照得如同白昼，虏兵大惊，清沔袭击虏营后离去。
English: The Qing Dynasty secretly marched into the Elephant's Thigh. In the middle of the night, it was agreed that the torches in the city would shine like daylight. The captors were shocked. The Qing Dynasty attacked the captors' camp and left.

古文：更攻连云堡，飞石投中，井皆满。
现代文：吐蕃再攻连云堡，飞石击堡中，堡里的井都被石块填满了。
English: Tubo attacked Lianyungang again, and when the flying stones hit the castle, the wells in the castle were filled with stones.

古文：为虚梁绝堑而升，守将张明远降于虏。
现代文：又架飞桥越过壕堑而登堡。守将张明远降。
English: A flying bridge was also erected to cross the trench and ascend the castle. The guard Zhang Ming fell far down.

古文：虏分捕山间亡人及牛羊率万计，泾、陇、邠之民荡然尽矣。
现代文：虏兵分头搜捕逃匿山里的人及牛羊等以万计。泾、陇、等州的百姓一个都没留下。
English: The army of captors split up to search for and capture tens of thousands of people, cattle, and sheep that had fled to the mountains. Not a single person from the provinces of Handan, Handan, and other provinces remained behind.

古文：诸将曾不能得一俘，但贺贼出塞而已。
现代文：边将上报时只能奏贺贼退而已。连云堡，是泾州的要地，三面全是峭壁，北面连原居高。
English: Lianyungang is an important place in Luzhou, with cliffs on all three sides and high mountains to the north.

古文：连云堡，泾要地也，三垂峭绝，北据高，虏所进退，候火易通。既失之，城下即虏境，每艺稼，必陈兵于野，故多失时。
现代文：吐蕃有什么行动，侦候及烽火很快就能传递消息。及堡失陷，城下就是吐蕃的地盘，耕种收割，一定要有大军保护，所以不能及时。
English: If there is any action in Tubo, the reconnaissance and campfire can quickly transmit the news. If the castle is lost, the city is Tubo's territory. Cultivation and harvest must be protected by a large army, so it cannot be timely.

古文：是岁，三州不宿麦。
现代文：这一年，三州都没有麦子。
English: This year, there was no wheat in the three states.

古文：虏数千骑犯长武城，城使韩全义拒之。
现代文：虏几千骑兵再犯长武城，城使韩全义率众抵抗。
English: Several thousand cavalry re-invaded Changwu City, and Han Quan Yi led the resistance.

古文：韩游瑰兵不出，于是虏安行邠、泾间，诸屯西门皆闭，虏治故原州保之。
现代文：韩游瑰却不肯出兵助战。于是虏兵在、泾间安然往来。各城的西门都紧闭。吐蕃修治故原州城，屯兵驻守。
English: Han Yu-kui, however, refused to send troops to help in the war. Therefore, the Krip soldiers traveled safely between the cities. The western gates of each city were tightly closed. The former Wonju City was governed by Tubo, and the garrison was stationed there.

古文：帝取所获吐蕃生口不二百，徇诸市以安京师。
现代文：皇帝将俘获的一百多吐蕃人斩首示众，以安京师的人心。
English: The emperor beheaded more than a hundred captured Tujian people to show the public, with the human heart of Anjing division.

古文：四年五月，虏三万骑略泾、邠、宁、庆、鄜五州之鄙，焚吏舍民阎，系执数万。
现代文：贞元四年五月，吐蕃骑兵三万多侵略泾？宁、庆、五州的边野，焚烧官舍民屋，俘获几万人畜。
English: In May of the fourth year of the Zhengyuan era, more than thirty thousand cavalrymen from Tubo invaded the border areas of Jining, Qing, and Wuzhou, burned official residences and private houses, and captured tens of thousands of livestock.

古文：韩全义以陈许兵战长武，无功。
现代文：韩全义领陈许的人马在长武迎敌，无功而还。
English: Han Quan Yi led Chen Xu's men to meet the enemy in Changwu, but without success.

古文：初，吐蕃盗塞，畏春夏疾疫，常以盛秋。
现代文：当初，吐蕃偷袭边塞，害怕春夏时的疫病流行，所以常在秋季。
English: At first, the Tibetan mastiff sneaked into the border fortress, afraid of the epidemic epidemic in spring and summer, so it was often in the autumn.

古文：及是得唐俘，多厚给产，质其孥，故盛夏入边。
现代文：等到俘获唐人，多半给以丰厚的资产，以其妻儿为质，因而现在盛夏入寇。
English: Wait until the capture of the Chinese, most likely to give a rich asset, with his wife and children as a pledge, so now the midsummer invasion.

古文：尚悉董星、论莽罗等又寇宁州，张献甫拒斩裁百级，转剽鄜、坊乃去。
现代文：尚悉董星、论莽罗等又侵扰宁州，张献甫迎战，斩杀百人。吐蕃转而剽掠、坊州后退去。
English: It is also known that Dong Xing, On Meng Luo and others also invaded Ningzhou, Zhang Xianfu fought and killed hundreds of people. Tubo turned to plunder, and Fangzhou retreated.

古文：五年，韦皋以剑南兵战台登，杀虏将乞臧遮遮、悉多杨硃，西南少安。
现代文：贞元五年，韦皋用剑南兵在台登迎战吐蕃，杀虏将乞臧遮遮、悉多杨朱，西南略安。
English: In the fifth year of the Zhengyuan era, Wei Wei used the Jian Nan soldiers to fight against the Tubo in the Taiden, and the killers will be the beggars, the Siddos, the Yangzhu, and the southwesterners.

古文：不三年，尽得巂州地。
现代文：不到三年，尽得州地。
English: In less than three years, the entire state is gone.

古文：久之，北庭沙陀别部叛，吐蕃因是陷北庭都护府，安西道绝。独西州人尚为唐守。
现代文：很久后，北庭沙陀的别部反叛，吐蕃因此攻陷北庭都护府，安西通道由此断绝，独有西州人还是唐守地的人。
English: A long time later, other parts of Beiting Shado rebelled, and as a result, Tubo captured Beiting Duofu, and the Anxi passage was cut off. Only the people of Xizhou were still the guardians of Tang.

古文：八年，寇灵州，陷水口，塞营田渠。
现代文：贞元八年，吐蕃攻灵州，陷水口，堵塞营田的水渠。
English: In the eighth year of the Zhengyuan era, Tubo attacked Lingzhou and blocked the water channels of Yingtian.

古文：发河东、振武兵，合神策军击之，虏引还。
现代文：朝廷发河东、振武兵与神策军合力反击，吐蕃退去。
English: The imperial court sent troops to the east of the river, and the Zhenwu soldiers and the Shenzhao army jointly counterattacked, and the Tubo retreated.

古文：又寇泾州，掠田军千人，守捉使唐朝臣战不利。
现代文：又去侵扰泾州，掠屯田的军人千人。守捉使唐朝臣拒战，不胜。
English: He also went to invade Bozhou and plundered a thousand soldiers from Tun Tian. He was unable to defeat the Tang courtiers who refused to fight.

古文：山南西道节度使严震破虏于芳州，取黑水壁，焚积聚。
现代文：山南西道节度使严震在芳州击破虏军，攻克黑水壁，焚毁吐蕃的积储。
English: Shannan West Road Festival made the severe earthquake in Fangzhou break the Krup Army, conquer the Black Water Wall, and burn the storage of spade.

古文：自虏得盐州，塞防无以障遏，而灵武单露，鄜、坊侵迫，寇日以骄，数入为边患。
现代文：自从吐蕃得到盐州，边塞没了屏障，灵武暴露孤立，坊州迫近虏地。吐蕃日见骄慢，多次侵扰成为边患。
English: Since Tubo gained Yanzhou, the border fort has lost its barrier, Lingwu has been exposed and isolated, and Fangzhou is approaching Ruiji. Tubo has become increasingly arrogant, and has repeatedly become a border problem.

古文：帝复诏城之，使泾原、剑南、山南深入穷讨，分其兵，毋令专向东方。
现代文：皇帝又下诏筑城，另派泾原、剑南、山南之兵深入穷伐，使吐蕃兵力分散，不能专向东方。
English: The emperor also issued an edict to build a city, and sent soldiers from the provinces of Yingyuan, Jianan and Shannan deep into the desert, so that the forces of Tubo were dispersed and could not be directed to the east.

古文：诏朔方河中晋绛邠宁兵马副元帅浑瑊、朔方灵盐丰夏绥银节度都统杜希全、邠宁节度使张献甫、右神策军行营节度使邢君牙、夏绥银节度使韩潭、鄜坊丹延节度使王栖曜、振武麟胜节度使范希朝合兵三万，以左神策将军胡坚、右神策将军张昌为盐州行营节度使，板筑之，役者六千人，余皆阵城下。
现代文：诏令朔方、河中、晋绛、宁兵马副元帅浑蠨，朔方、灵、盐、丰、夏、绥、银节度都统杜希全，宁节度使张献甫，右神策军行营节度使邢君牙，夏、绥、银节度使韩潭，坊、丹、延节度使王栖曜，振武、麟胜节度使范希朝等七人合兵三万，派左神策将军胡坚、右神策将军张昌为盐州行营节度使筑城墙，筑城者六千人，其余都列阵城下以防卫。
English: Zhao ordered the vice-marshals of the Shuo, Hechu, Jin, and Ning armies and horses to be confused; the Shuo, Ling, Salt, Feng, Xia, Ren, and Yin regiments to make Du Xi Quan; the Ning regiments to make Zhang Xian Fu; the Yu Sheng Zhao army camp to make Yu Junya; the Xia, Yu Sheng, and Yin regiments to make Han Tan, Fang, Dan, and Yan regiments to make Wang Xiyou; the Zhenwu and Lin Sheng regiments to make Fan Xichang and seven others to make 30,000 soldiers; the Zuo Sheng Zhao general Hu Jian and the

古文：九年始栽，阅二旬讫功，而虏兵不出，遂以兼御史大夫纥干遂与兼中丞杜彦光戍之。
现代文：贞元九年开工，二十天即完成。吐蕃兵不出。就派兼御史大夫纥干遂与兼中丞杜彦光戍守。
English: Construction began in the 9th year of the Jōgen era, and was completed in 20 days. When no soldiers came from Tōhoku, it was decided to send Shōgansaku, who was also the chief historian, and Tōhinkō, who was also a junior middle officer, to guard the castle.

古文：当是时，韦皋功最多，破堡壁五十余所，败其南道元帅论莽热没笼乞悉蓖；又与南诏破之于神川、于铁桥，皋俘馘三万，降首领论乞髯汤没藏悉诺硉。
现代文：当时，韦皋功最大，破敌堡垒五十多所，击败吐蕃南道元帅论莽热没笼乞悉蓖；又与南诏合力在神川击破吐蕃兵，在铁桥，韦皋杀敌俘虏共三万，并使其首领论乞髯汤没藏悉诺石聿降。
English: At that time, Wei Xuan's greatest achievement was to break through more than 50 enemy fortresses and defeat the marshal of the southern province of Tubo; he also joined forces with Nanzhao to break through the Tubo soldiers in Jinchuan. In the Iron Bridge, Wei Xuan killed a total of 30,000 enemy prisoners and made his leaders surrender.

古文：十二年，寇庆州及华池，杀略吏人。
现代文：贞元十二年，吐蕃入寇庆州及华池，杀掠吏人。
English: In the twelfth year of the Zhengyuan, Tubo invaded Keqingzhou and Huachi, killing and plundering officials.

古文：是岁，尚结赞死。
现代文：这一年，尚结赞逝世。
English: That year, Shang Jizan passed away.

古文：明年，赞普死，其子足之煎立。
现代文：第二年赞普逝世，其子足之煎立。
English: The following year, Zampu died, and his son, Azuchi, took over.

古文：邢君牙筑永信城于陇州以备虏，虏使者农桑昔来请脩好，朝廷以其无信，不受。
现代文：邢君牙在陇州筑永信城做防卫，吐蕃使者农桑昔来请求修好，朝廷因他们不讲信用，不同意。
English: Zhai Junya defended Chikuyongxin City in Zhangzhou, and the envoy of the envoy of the envoy of the envoy of the envoy of the envoy of the envoy of the envoy of the envoy of the envoy of the envoy of the envoy of the envoy of the envoy of the envoy of the envoy of the envoy of the envoy of the envoy of the envoy of the envoy of the envoy of the envoy.

古文：韦皋取新城，虏治剑山、马岭，进寇台登，巂州刺史曹高仕击却之，禽笼官，斩级三百，获马、粮、械数千。
现代文：韦皋攻克新城，吐蕃整治剑山、马岭，进攻台登，州刺史曹高仕将他们击退，擒获其笼官，杀敌三百，缴获马、粮、兵械好几千。
English: Wei Wei conquered Xincheng, Tu Wei rectified Jianshan and Ma Ling, and attacked Taitung. Cao Gaoshi, the statesman, repulsed them, captured their cages, killed 300 enemies, and captured thousands of horses, grain, and weapons.

古文：十四年，韩全义破虏于盐州。
现代文：贞元十四年，韩全义在盐州击退吐蕃。
English: In the 14th year of the Zhengyuan era, Han Quan Yi defeated Tu Wei in Yanzhou.

古文：十六年，灵州破虏于乌兰桥，韦皋拔末恭、颙二城。
现代文：十六年，灵州兵在乌兰桥击败吐蕃，韦皋攻克末恭、二城。
English: In the 16th year, Lingzhou soldiers defeated Tubo at Ulan Bridge, and Wei Wei conquered Kemukyang and Ercheng.

古文：十七年，寇盐州，陷麟州，杀刺史郭锋，湮隍堕陴，系居人，掠党项诸部，屯横槽烽。
现代文：十七年吐蕃又侵扰盐州，攻陷灵州，杀刺史郭锋，毁掉城墙壕堑，掠走百姓。又掠夺党项各部落，然后屯兵横槽烽。
English: In the seventeenth year, Tubo again invaded Yanzhou, captured Lingzhou, assassinated Shi Guofeng, destroyed the city walls and trenches, and plundered the people. He also plundered the tribes of the party, and then the soldiers were defeated.

古文：虏将徐舍人者，语俘道人延素曰： 我乃司空英公裔孙也。
现代文：吐蕃将领徐舍人，对被俘的道人延素说： 我是司空英公的五代孙。
English: Xu Sheren, the commander of the Tubo, said to the captured Taoist Yan Su: I am the fifth generation grandson of Siku Yinggong.

古文：武后时，家祖以兵尊王室不克，子孙奔播绝域，今三世矣。
现代文：武后时，家高祖父用兵保卫王室不胜，子孙逃散到边城，至今已三代了。
English: At the time of Empress Wu, Ietaka's grandfather used soldiers to defend the royal family, and his descendants fled to the border town. It has been three generations since then.

古文：我虽握兵，心未尝忘归也，顾不能自拔耳。 
现代文：我虽在此掌兵，但心未尝忘掉本土，只是无从自拔。 
English: Although I'm here, I haven't forgotten my home country, I just can't help myself.

古文：阴使延素夜逸。
现代文：暗中让延素夜里逃跑。
English: He secretly let Yan Su run away in the night.

古文：又言： 吾按边求资粮，至麟而守者无备，遂入之。
现代文：又说： 我戍守边界，为求钱粮，到麟州见守卫者毫无戒备，这才入境。
English: He also said, "I was guarding the border to ask for money and grain, but when I arrived in Linzhou and saw that the guards were unprepared, I entered the country."

古文：知郭使君勋臣家，欲全安之，不幸死乱兵。 
现代文：知道郭使君是功臣家，本想保护他，不幸死于乱兵。 
English: Knowing that Guo Jijun was a meritorious subject, he wanted to protect him, but unfortunately died in a riot.

古文：语方已，会飞鸟使至，召其军还，遂引去。
现代文：话才说完，有飞鸟使来，召徐舍人军回，于是领兵回去。
English: After he had finished speaking, a bird came and called Xu She's army back, so he led the soldiers back.

古文：飞鸟，犹传骑也。
现代文：飞鸟，就是通讯骑兵。
English: Asuka is the communications cavalry.

古文：韦皋出西山与虏战，破之雅州。
现代文：韦皋兵出西山与吐蕃交战，在雅州大败之。
English: Wei's soldiers went out of Xishan to fight against Tu Wei, and were soundly defeated in Yazhou.

古文：笼官马定德本虏之知兵有策虑者，周知山川险易，每用兵，常驰驿计议，授诸将以行。
现代文：笼官马定德原是吐蕃中既懂军事又有策略的人，对山川地形极熟悉，每次用兵，常乘驿马察看后定计谋，交与诸将执行。
English: The cage officer, Ma Dingde, was originally a military and strategic man in the Tuyu, very familiar with the mountain and river terrain. Every time he used soldiers, he would often ride a steed to look at it and then make a plan and hand it over to the generals for execution.

古文：比年寇黎、巂，皋常折其兵，定德畏得罪，遂来降，因定昆明诸蛮。
现代文：吐蕃连年侵犯黎、隽，韦皋常损兵折将。定德害怕得罪结怨，于是来降。也由此平定了昆明诸蛮部。
English: Tubo repeatedly invaded Lijiang and Shandong, and Wei and Shandong often lost soldiers. Dingde was afraid of offending and causing resentment, so he came down. This also leveled the barbarians in Kunming.

古文：吐蕃以下屡叛，大侵灵州。
现代文：吐蕃因其下属多次叛变，大侵灵州。
English: Tubo rebelled many times because of his subordinates and invaded Lingzhou.

古文：时皋围维州，赞普使论莽热没笼乞悉蓖兼松州五道节度兵马都统、群牧大使，引兵十万援维州。
现代文：那时韦皋围维州，赞普派论莽热没笼乞悉蓖兼松州五道节度兵马都统、群牧大使，领兵十万援救维州。
English: At that time, Wei and Qiu besieged Wizhou, and the Zampa faction's reckless fever begged for help, and the Songzhou Five-District Festival led the soldiers and horses to unite, the herdsmen ambassador, and led 100,000 soldiers to rescue Wizhou.

古文：皋率南诏兵薄险设伏以待，才使千人尝敌，乞悉蓖见兵寡，悉众追，堕伏中，兵四合急击，遂禽之，献京师。
现代文：皋率南诏兵在险要处设伏兵，仅派一千人正面迎敌。乞悉蓖见兵少，全军追击，进入埋伏圈，皋兵四面包围，活捉乞悉蓖，献入京师。
English: He led the Nanzhao soldiers to set up an ambush at a critical point, and only sent a thousand men to face the enemy. When he saw that there were few soldiers, the whole army chased and entered the ambush circle, surrounded the soldiers on all sides, and captured the soldiers alive and presented them to the Beijing division.

古文：明年，吐蕃使者论颊热复来，右龙武大将军薛伾往报。
现代文：第二年，吐蕃使者论颊热再来，右龙武大将军薛亻丕前往回礼。
English: In the second year, the emissary from Tubo came again, and the right dragon general Xue Yao went to return the salute.

古文：二十年，赞普死，遣工部侍郎张荐吊祠，其弟嗣立，再使使者入朝。
现代文：贞元二十年，赞普去世，朝廷派工部侍郎张荐前往吊祭。其弟即位，再派使者入朝。
English: Twenty years after Zhan Pu's death, the imperial court sent Zhang, a chamberlain of the Ministry of Works, to recommend him to go to the hanging ceremony. His brother ascended to the throne, and then sent an envoy to the imperial court.

古文：顺宗立，以左金吾卫将军田景度、库部员外郎熊执易持节往使。
现代文：顺宗立，派左金吾卫将军田景度和库部员外郎熊执易持节出使吐蕃。
English: Shun Zongli, sent the left-wing general Tian Jie and the treasury department member Wai Lang Xiong to Tujia.

古文：永贞元年，论乞缕勃藏归金币、马牛助崇陵，有诏陈太极廷中。
现代文：永贞元年，论乞缕勃藏送来金币、马牛助祭崇陵，有诏书陈列在太极庭中。
English: In the first year of Yongzheng, gold coins were sent for the collection of beggars, the horse and ox were enshrined in the mausoleum, and the edict was displayed in the Taiji Garden.

古文：宪宗初，遣使者脩好，且还其俘。
现代文：宪宗初，吐蕃派使者来修好，且归还俘虏。
English: At the beginning of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, Tubo sent an envoy to repair the damage and return the captives.

古文：又以使告顺宗丧，吐蕃亦以论勃藏来。
现代文：朝廷派使臣去告顺宗之丧，吐蕃又派论勃藏来。
English: The imperial court sent envoys to pay tribute to Shunzong's death, and the Tibetans sent envoys to discuss the excavation.

古文：后比年来朝，然以五万骑入振武拂鹈泉，万骑至丰州大石谷，钞回鹘还国者。
现代文：以后年年入朝，然而仍以五万之众侵入振武拂弟鸟泉，一万人马来攻丰州的大石谷，掠夺回鹘后回国。
English: Year after year, he entered the imperial court, yet he still invaded Zhenwu buttock bird spring with fifty thousand people, attacked the great stone valley of Fuzhou with ten thousand people, plundered and returned to China.

古文：五年，以祠部郎中徐复往使，并赐钵阐布书。
现代文：元和五年，派祠部郎中徐复出使吐蕃，并赐书给钵阐布。
English: In the 5th year of the Yuan Dynasty, he sent the minister of the ancestral hall, Langzhong Xu, to resurface the Tuyi, and gave a book to Tuyi to interpret.

古文：钵阐布者，虏浮屠豫国事者也，亦曰 钵掣逋 。
现代文：钵阐布，是吐蕃参与国事的僧人，也称 钵掣逋 。
English: 阐布, is a monk from Tubo who participated in state affairs, also known as 浪.

古文：复至鄯州擅还，其副李逢致命赞普，复坐贬。
现代文：徐复到善阝州后即擅自回来，副使李逢单独见赞普完成使命，徐复被贬。
English: After Xu Fu went to Zhengyangzhou, he returned without permission. Vice-envoy Li Feng went to see Zampu alone to complete his mission. Xu Fu was demoted.

古文：虏以论思邪热入谢，且归郑叔矩、路泌之柩，因言原归秦、原、安乐州。
现代文：吐蕃派论思邪热入谢，且送还郑叔矩、路泌的灵柩，并说愿意归还秦、原、安乐州。
English: The Tujia faction was grateful for the hot discussion of evil thoughts, and returned the coffins of Zheng Shukun and Lu Xiu, and said that it was willing to return Qin, Yuan and Anle Prefecture.

古文：诏宰相杜佑等与议中书，论思邪热拜于廷，佑答拜堂上，复以鸿胪少卿李铦、丹王府长史吴晕报之。
现代文：诏令宰相杜佑等在中书省与之共议。论思邪热拜于廷，杜佑在堂上答拜。又派鸿胪少卿李、丹王府长史吴晕回报。
English: He ordered Prime Minister Du You and others to discuss the matter with him at the Ministry of Chinese Literature. Du You paid homage to the imperial court, and Du You answered the homage in the hall. He also sent Hongyao Shaoqing Li and Danwang prefect Shi Wu Huan to reciprocate.

古文：自是朝贡岁入。又款陇州塞，丐互市，诏可。
现代文：从此每年都奉朝贡。又与陇州要塞和好，请求互通买卖。
English: Since then, it has paid tribute every year. It has also made peace with Zhangzhou Fortress and requested mutual trade.

古文：十二年，赞普死，使者论乞髯来，以右卫将军乌重、殿中侍御史段钧吊祭之。
现代文：皇帝同意。贞元十二年，赞普去世，派使者论乞髯来，朝廷派右卫将军乌重王巳和殿中侍御史段钧前往吊祭。
English: The emperor agreed. In the twelfth year of the Zhenpo era, when Zampu died, he sent an envoy to discuss the begging, and the court sent the right guard general Wu Chongwang and the palace attendant Shi Duan to the hanging ceremony.

古文：可黎可足立为赞普，重以扶余准、李骖偕归。
现代文：可黎可足立为赞普。重王巳和扶余准、李骖一同回来。
English: However, Li Ke Adachi is Zampu. Shige-Wang Mi returns with Fu Yu-Juan and Li Yao.

古文：准，东明人，本朔方骑将；骖，陇西人，贞元初战没于虏者。
现代文：扶余准，是东明人，原是朔方的骑将；李骖，陇西人。是贞元初年战争中被俘的。
English: Fuyujun, a native of Dongming, was a cavalry commander of the Shuo side; Li Xi, a native of Shaanxi, was captured in the first year of the Zhenyuan War.

古文：使者知不死，求之，乃得还。
现代文：使者知道他们没死，向赞普请求才得归来。
English: The messengers knew they were not dead and had to return to Zamp to ask for help.

古文：诏以准为澧王府司马，骖嘉王友。
现代文：诏任扶余准为澧王府司马、李骖为嘉王友。
English: Zhao appointed Fuyujun as the secretary of the Shao Wang Prefecture, and Li Xi as the friend of the Jia Wang.

古文：吐蕃使论矩立藏来朝，未出境，吐蕃寇宥州，与灵州兵战定远城，虏不胜，斩首二千级。
现代文：吐蕃使者论矩立藏来朝，还未出境，吐蕃入寇宥州，与灵州兵在定远城交战，吐蕃败，被斩杀二千人。
English: The envoys from Tubo came to Korea, but before they left, Tubo entered Ko Yu Province and fought with Ling soldiers in Dingyuan City. Tubo was defeated, and two thousand people were killed.

古文：平凉镇遏使郝玼又破虏兵二万，夏州节度使田缙破其众三千，诏留矩立藏等不遣。
现代文：平凉镇遏使郝繣又破虏兵二万，夏州节度使田缙破虏兵三千。诏留矩立藏等人不让回国。
English: Hei Liang Zhen (平凉镇) defeated another 20,000 invaders, and Xia Zhou Jiedu (夏州節度) defeated 3,000 invaders from Tian Zhen (田). Zhao Liu Momotri and others were not allowed to return to China.

古文：剑南兵拔峨和、栖鸡城。
现代文：剑南兵攻克峨和、栖鸡城。
English: Jiannan soldiers conquered Ewa and Suicheng.

古文：十四年，乃归矩立藏等。
现代文：贞元十四年，放矩立藏等人归。
English: In the 14th year of the Jōgen era, people such as Hōkaku Ritsuko returned.

古文：吐蕃节度论二摩、宰相尚塔藏、中书令尚绮心儿总兵十五万围盐州，为飞梯、鹅车攻城，刺史李文悦拒之，城坏辄补，夜袭其营，昼出战，破虏万人，积三旬不能拔。
现代文：吐蕃节度论二摩、宰相尚塔藏、中书令尚绮心儿统兵十五万围盐州，制了飞梯、鹅车来攻城，刺史李文悦抗敌，城被攻坏立刻就补。夜间偷袭其营，白天又与之交战，破敌万人。
English: On the second day of the Tuyn Festival, the prime minister, Shantazang, and the general of the Chinese army, Shanshen Xin'er, ordered 150,000 soldiers to encircle Yanshou, made flying ladders and goose carts to attack the city, and stabbed Li Wenyue to resist the enemy. When the city was attacked, it was immediately repaired. They attacked his camp at night, and fought with it during the day, defeating tens of thousands of enemies.

古文：朔方将史敬奉以奇兵绕出虏背，大破之，解围去。
现代文：三十天吐蕃兵都无所获。朔方将史敬奉派奇兵绕到吐蕃兵背面，大胜。解围。
English: For thirty days, the Tuoba soldiers did not gain anything. The Shuo side sent Shi Jing Bong to send a miracle soldier to go around the back of the Tuoba soldiers, and won a great victory.

古文：始，沙州刺史周鼎为唐固守，赞普徙帐南山，使尚绮心儿攻之。
现代文：当初，沙州刺史周鼎为唐固守，赞普迁帐至南山，派尚绮心儿攻之。
English: At the beginning, Zhou Ding, the governor of Shazhou, was a Tang loyalist. Zampu moved his capital to Nanshan and sent Shang Xingxin to attack it.

古文：鼎请救回鹘，逾年不至，议焚城郭，引众东奔，皆以为不可。
现代文：鼎请救，但一年都无救兵来。于是议论焚毁城郭，带领大家东奔，但都认为不可。
English: He begged for help, but no rescuers came for a year. So he discussed burning the castle and leading everyone to flee, but they all thought it was impossible.

古文：鼎遣都知兵马使阎朝领壮士行视水草，晨入谒辞行，与鼎亲吏周沙奴共射，彀弓揖让，射沙奴即死，执鼎而缢杀之，自领州事。
现代文：周鼎派都知兵马使阎朝带领壮士巡视水草。早晨辞行，与周鼎的亲信周沙奴同射箭，已拉开弓又互相谦让，箭发射中沙奴，转身将周鼎捉住勒死。阎朝自己统管州事。
English: In the morning, he resigned and went on an archery trip with Zhou Shanu, a close confidant of Zhou Ding. They had already drawn their bows and bowed to each other. When the arrows were fired, Shanu turned around and caught Zhou Ding and strangled him to death. Yan Dynasty was in charge of state affairs.

古文：城守者八年，出绫一端募麦一斗，应者甚众。
现代文：据城而守八年，用六丈绸子换一斗麦，来换的人甚多。
English: According to the city's eight-year defense, there are many people who exchange six-feet of silk for a barrel of wheat.

古文：朝喜曰： 民且有食，可以死守也。 
现代文：阎朝高兴地说： 人民有了粮食，就可以死守了。 
English: Yan Zhao said happily: "Once the people have food, they can hold out.

古文：又二岁，粮械皆竭，登城而讠虖曰： 苟毋徙佗境，请以城降。 
现代文：又过了两年，粮食兵械都完了。于是登城大呼： 如果不要我们迁到别的地方，我就率众投降。 
English: After another two years, the grain and weapons were all gone. So he went to the city and shouted: If you don't want us to move to another place, I will lead the people to surrender.

古文：绮心儿许诺，于是出降。
现代文：绮心儿答应，于是出降。
English: Xing Xin'er agreed, so he surrendered.

古文：自攻城至是凡十一年。
现代文：自攻城到现在已十一年。
English: It has been eleven years since the siege of the city.

古文：赞普以绮心儿代守。后疑朝谋变，置毒鞾中而死。
现代文：赞普让绮心儿代守，后来怀疑阎朝有意叛变，在他靴中放毒药，阎朝死。
English: Zhan Pu had Zou Xin'er stand in for him. Later, suspecting that Yan Chao intended to defect, he put poison in his shoes, and Yan Chao died.

古文：州人皆胡服臣虏，每岁时祀父祖，衣中国之服，号恸而藏之。
现代文：州人都穿胡服臣服吐蕃，每年按时祭祀祖宗，祭祀时穿中国服装，哭祭以后收藏起来。
English: The people of the prefecture all wear Hu clothing and Tujia submissive clothing. Every year, the ancestors are sacrificed on time, and the Chinese clothing is worn during the sacrifice. After the wailing festival, it is collected.

古文：穆宗即位，遣秘书少监田洎往告，使者亦来。
现代文：穆宗即位，派秘书少监田洎去吐蕃告知，吐蕃亦派使者来。
English: When Mu Zong ascended the throne, he sent his secretary, Junior Warden Tian Xuan, to Tujing to inform him, and Tujing also sent an envoy.

古文：虏引兵入屯灵武，灵州兵击却之。
现代文：吐蕃领兵入驻灵武，灵州兵将其击退。
English: The leading troops of Tubo were stationed in Lingwu, but the Lingzhou soldiers repulsed them.

古文：又犯青塞烽，进寇泾州，濒水而营，绵五十里。
现代文：又去侵犯青塞烽，进攻泾州，滨水扎营，绵延五十里。
English: They also invaded Qingdao and Shandong, attacked Zhangzhou, and camped on the waterfront, stretching for fifty miles.

古文：始洎至牙，虏欲会盟长武，洎含糊应之。
现代文：当初田洎到王廷，吐蕃要求在长武会盟，洎含糊应付。
English: At first, when Tian Rong went to the royal court, Tu Rong requested to be in the Changwu League, but he was vague.

古文：至是显言： 洎许我盟，我是以来。 
现代文：此时吐蕃明白扬言 ：田洎许我盟誓，我为此而来。 
English: At this time, he clearly threatened: "I swear to you, I'm here for this."

古文：逼泾一舍止。
现代文：靠近泾州三十里驻军。
English: Thirty-mile garrison near Zhangzhou.

古文：诏右军中尉梁守谦为左右神策军、京西北行营都监，发卒合八镇兵援泾州，泛洎郴州司户参军，以太府少卿邵同持节为和好使。
现代文：皇帝诏令右军中尉梁守谦为左右神策军、京西北行营都监，带兵会合八镇人马援救泾州，贬田洎为郴州司户参军。派太府少卿邵同为和好使持节前往。
English: Emperor Zhao ordered Lieutenant Liang Shouqian of the Right Army to be the strategist of the Left and Right Armies and the inspector of the Beijing Northwest Campaign. He led the troops to gather eight towns to rescue Bozhou, and sent Tianyao to join the army as the governor of Bozhou. He sent Shao Tong, Shaofu Shaoqing, to make peace and hold the festival.

古文：初，夏州田缙裒沓，党项怨之，导虏入钞，郝玼与战，多杀其众。
现代文：当初，夏州的田缙贪婪狠毒，党项怨恨，因此领吐蕃来掠夺。郝王此与之战，杀敌甚多。
English: At first, Tian Xuan of Xiazhou was greedy and vicious, and the party was resentful, so he led Tuo Xuan to plunder. The king of Xuan fought with him and killed a lot of enemies.

古文：李光颜又以邠兵至，乃引去。复遣使者来。
现代文：李光颜又带兵来，吐蕃退兵，再派使者前来。
English: Li Guangyan once again brought soldiers, while Tu Youyou withdrew, and then sent an envoy.

古文：南略雅州，诏方镇与虏接者谨备边。
现代文：另南侵雅州。皇帝诏令各与吐蕃接壤的方镇要加强防卫。
English: Yazhou was also invaded from the south. The emperor issued an imperial edict to strengthen the defenses of all the towns bordering on Tubo.

古文：长庆元年，闻回鹘和亲，犯清塞堡，为李文悦所逐。
现代文：长庆元年，吐蕃听说唐与回鹘和亲，又侵犯清塞堡，被李文悦击走。
English: In the first year of Changqing, Tubo heard that Tang had made peace with Hui, and invaded Qingsi Fort, and was driven away by Li Wenyue.

古文：乃遣使者尚绮力陀思来朝，且乞盟，诏许之。
现代文：于是派使者尚绮力陀思来朝，并乞盟，获准。
English: So he sent an envoy, Shang Xun Li Du Si, to come to the North and beg for an alliance, which was granted.

古文：崔植、杜元颖、王播辅政，议欲告庙。
现代文：崔植、杜元颖、王播辅政，商议要告太庙。
English: Cui Zhi, Du Yuanying, Wang Boan Fu Zheng, discussed to report to the Grand Temple.

古文：礼官谓： 肃宗、代宗皆尝与吐蕃盟，不告庙。
现代文：礼官说： 肃宗、代宗时都曾与吐蕃会盟，都不告太庙。
English: The etiquette official said, "Su Zong and Daizong both had an alliance with the Tuyi, but neither of them reported it to the Grand Temple.

古文：德宗建中之盟，将重其约，始诏告庙。
现代文：德宗建中之盟。为了加强约束力，才诏令告庙。
English: In order to strengthen the binding force, the imperial edict was issued.

古文：至会平凉，不复告，杀之也。 
现代文：后来会盟平凉，不再告庙，是为了降其等级。 
English: Later, Hui Meng Ping Liang no longer reported to the temple, in order to lower its level.

古文：乃止。
现代文：建议作罢。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：以大理卿刘元鼎为盟会使，右司郎中刘师老副之，诏宰相与尚书右仆射韩皋、御史中丞牛僧孺、吏部尚书李绛、兵部尚书萧俯、户部尚书杨于陵、礼部尚书韦绶、太常卿赵宗儒、司农卿裴武、京兆尹柳公绰、右金吾将军郭鏦及吐蕃使者论讷罗盟京师西郊。
现代文：派大理卿刘元鼎为盟会使，右司郎中刘师老为副使。诏令宰相与尚书右仆射韩皋、御史中丞牛僧孺、吏部尚书李绛、兵部尚书萧亻免、户部尚书杨于陵、礼部尚书韦绶、太常卿赵宗儒、司农卿裴武、京兆尹柳公绰、右金吾将军郭钅从及吐蕃使者论纳罗盟于京师西郊。
English: He sent Liu Yuanding, Grand Secretary of the Party, as the deputy envoy, Liu Shilong, Right Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, as the vice-envoy, and ordered the prime minister to discuss the alliance with Han Zhao, the right-hand man of Shangshu, Guo Han, the right-hand man of Guo Shizhong, the right-hand man of Guo Zong, the right-hand man of Guo Zong, the right-hand man of Guo Zong, the right-hand man of Guo Zong, the right-hand man of Guo Zong, the right-hand man of Guo Zong, the right

古文：赞普以盟言约： 二国无相寇雠，有禽生问事，给服粮归之。 
现代文：赞普以盟言相约： 两国互不侵犯。若有捉生问事，给衣粮放还。 
English: Zampu agreed to a pact: the two countries would not invade each other. If there were any problems, they would return the food and clothing.

古文：诏可。
现代文：皇帝许可。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：大臣豫盟者悉载名于策。
现代文：大臣参与会盟的都列姓名于册。
English: The names of all ministers participating in the alliance are listed in the register.

古文：方盟时，吐蕃以壮骑屯鲁州，灵州节度使李进诚与战大石山，破之。
现代文：正盟时，吐蕃将骁骑屯驻鲁州，灵州节度使李进诚大败虏骑于大石山。
English: At the time of Zhengmeng, Tubo stationed his cavalry in Luzhou, and the Lingzhou Festival made Li Jinsheng ride in Dashi Mountain.

古文：虏遣使者赵国章来，且致宰相信币。
现代文：吐蕃派使者赵国章来朝，另有致宰相的信币。
English: Tubo sent an envoy, Zhao Guozhang, to the DPRK, and also sent a letter of credence to the prime minister.

古文：明年，请定疆候，元鼎与论讷罗就盟其国，敕虏大臣亦列名于策。
现代文：长庆二年，派使者来请定疆界，刘元鼎与论纳罗就在吐蕃会盟，令吐蕃大臣也列姓名于册。
English: In the second year of the Long Qing Dynasty, an envoy was sent to request the establishment of the border. Liu Yuanding and Onnaro were in the Tuyn League, and the Minister of Tuyn was also listed in the register.

古文：元鼎逾成纪、武川，抵河广武梁，故时城郭未隳，兰州地皆杭稻，桃、李、榆柳岑蔚，户皆唐人，见使者麾盖，夹道观。
现代文：元鼎经越成纪、武川，又到达黄河广武梁，旧时的城郭未毁，兰州田里种水稻，岸上桃、李、榆、柳繁茂，住户都是唐人。见使者的仪仗车马，出来夹道观看。
English: The original trip went through Yuechengji and Wuchuan, and arrived at Guangwuliang on the Yellow River. The old castle was not destroyed, rice was grown in the fields of Lanzhou, and peaches, plums, maples, and willows flourished on the shore. The residents were all Chinese. See the messenger's ceremonial chariot and horse, and come out to watch.

古文：至龙支城，耋老千人拜且泣，问天子安否，言： 顷从军没于此，今子孙未忍忘唐服，朝廷尚念之乎？兵何日来？ 言己皆呜咽。
现代文：大军何日来临 ，说罢泪下。
English: How many days before the great army arrives, he said, breaking down in tears.

古文：密问之，丰州人也。
现代文：仔细问来，原是丰州人。
English: On closer inspection, it turned out to be someone from Toyosu.

古文：过石堡城，崖壁峭竖，道回屈，虏曰铁刀城。
现代文：又经过石堡城，悬崖峭壁，道路回还曲折，土蕃称为铁刀城。
English: It also passes through the stone castle city, cliffs, road twists and turns, and the mound is called the iron sword city.

古文：右行数十里，土石皆赤，虏曰赤岭。
现代文：西行几十里，土石都是赤红色，吐蕃称之为赤岭。
English: Dozens of miles to the west, the soil and rocks are reddish-red, and it is called Akamine.

古文：而信安王祎、张守珪所定封石皆仆，独虏所立石犹存。
现代文：当年信安王礻韦、张守王圭所定的界碑都倒了，而吐蕃树的石碑还在。
English: The boundary markers set up by Xin'an's Wang Zhiwei and Zhang Shou's Wang Gui have both fallen, but the stone marker for Tu Yingju is still there.

古文：赤岭距长安三千里而赢，盖陇右故地也。曰闷怛卢川，直逻娑川之南百里，臧河所流也。
现代文：赤岭离长安三千多里，是陇右的故地，闷怛卢川，在逻娑川之南一百里，是臧河的支流。
English: Akaling is more than three thousand miles away from Chang'an, and is the ancestral home of the Zoroastrians. The Lu River, a hundred miles south of the Luo River, is a tributary of the Li River.

古文：河之西南，地如砥，原野秀沃，夹河多柽柳。
现代文：河的西南是平原，原野秀沃，夹河多种红柳树。
English: Southwest of the river is a plain, with beautiful fields and many kinds of red willow trees.

古文：山多柏，坡皆丘墓，旁作屋，赪涂之，绘白虎，皆虏贵人有战功者，生衣其皮，死以旌勇，徇死者瘗其旁。
现代文：山上多柏树，坡上都是坟墓，墓旁有屋，涂成赤褐色，画着白虎。都是吐蕃贵人中有战功的，活着时着虎皮，死了画上虎褒扬其功，殉死者就埋在旁边。
English: There are many cypress trees on the mountain, and there are graves on the slope. There is a house next to the grave, painted reddish-brown, with a white tiger. They are all Tuvan nobles who had war exploits, wore tiger skins when they were alive, painted tigers to praise their exploits when they died, and the martyrs were buried next to them.

古文：度悉结罗岭，凿石通车，逆金城公主道也。
现代文：跨过悉结罗岭，凿石路可通车，是当年迎接金城公主的路。
English: Straddling the Shijiazhuang-Laoshan Ridge, the chiseled stone road can be opened to traffic, which was the road to meet the princess of Jincheng.

古文：至麋谷，就馆。
现代文：最后到麋谷，至宾馆休息。
English: Finally to Shibuya, to the hotel to rest.

古文：臧河之北川，赞普之夏牙也。
现代文：臧河的北川，有赞普夏天的王廷。
English: The Beichuan of the Li River has the royal court of the summer.

古文：周以枪累，率十步植百长槊，中剚大帜为三门，相距皆百步。
现代文：四周都排着枪，十步就树一百支长槊，中间插大旗成为三个门，相距均有百步。
English: Guns were lined up on all sides, and at ten paces there were a hundred long shields, and a large flag was planted in the middle to form three gates, all a hundred paces apart.

古文：甲士持门，巫祝鸟冠虎带击豉，凡入者搜索乃进。
现代文：甲士守门。巫祝戴鸟形帽系虎皮带击鼓，入内都要先搜身。
English: A warrior guards the gate. A wizard wearing a bird-shaped hat and a tiger's leather belt plays the drums. Before entering, you must be searched.

古文：中有高台，环以宝楯，赞普坐帐中，以黄金饰蛟螭虎豹，身被素褐，结朝霞冒首，佩金镂剑。
现代文：中间有高台，用宝盾环绕，赞普坐在帐中，用黄金做成蛟螭虎豹为饰，身披白袍，头顶朝霞结，佩金镂剑。
English: There is a platform in the middle, surrounded by treasure shields. Zamp sits in the middle of the table, adorned with a tiger leopard made of gold, wearing a white robe, with an Asaka knot at the top of his head, and a gold-plated sword.

古文：钵掣逋立于右，宰相列台下。
现代文：钵掣逋立于右，宰相列台下。
English: He stands on the right, with the prime minister behind him.

古文：唐使者始至，给事中论悉答热来议盟，大享于牙右，饭举酒行，与华制略等，乐奏《秦王破阵曲》，又奏《凉州》、《胡渭》、《录要》、杂曲，百伎皆中国人。
现代文：唐使者才到，给事中论悉答热来议盟。在王廷西设宴，敬酒进食其礼仪与华人差不多。音乐奏《秦王破阵曲》，又奏《凉州》、《胡渭》、《录要》，还有杂曲等，演技者都是中国人。
English: The Tang emissaries had just arrived and were eager to discuss the matter. A banquet was held in the west wing of the palace, and the etiquette for eating and drinking toasts was similar to that of the Chinese. Music was played from "Qin Wang Breakdance," as well as "Liangzhou," "Hu Xi," "Record," and miscellaneous pieces. The performers were all Chinese.

古文：盟坛广十步，高二尺。
现代文：盟坛宽十步，高二尺。
English: The altar of alliance is ten paces wide and two feet high.

古文：使者与虏大臣十余对位，酋长百余坐坛下，上设巨榻，钵掣逋升，告盟，一人自旁译授于下。
现代文：使者与吐蕃大臣十余人相对而列，酋长百余人坐坛下。坛上设一大榻，钵掣逋登榻，向天告盟，有一人在旁边向下译述。
English: More than ten emissaries lined up opposite the minister of Tubo, and more than a hundred chieftains sat under the altar. A large couch was set up on the altar, and a donkey sat on it, announcing the alliance to the sky, with a person next to it translating it downwards.

古文：已歃血，钵掣逋不歃。
现代文：歃血时，钵掣逋不歃。
English: When you draw blood, you don't draw blood.

古文：盟毕，以浮屠重为誓，引郁金水以饮，与使者交庆，乃降。
现代文：盟毕，由僧侣再为誓，引郁金水饮，与使者相互庆祝，然后下坛。
English: After the pledge, the monks take another oath, drink the tulip water, celebrate with the messenger, and then leave the altar.

古文：元鼎还，虏元帅尚塔藏馆客大夏川，集东方节度诸将百余，置盟策台上，遍晓之，且戒各保境，毋相暴犯。
现代文：元鼎回来，吐蕃元帅尚塔藏请客人住在大夏川，召集东方节度各将一百多人，将盟册放在台上，告诉所有的人盟册的内容，且告戒各自保卫自己的疆域，不得互相侵犯。
English: After the return of the Yuan Dynasty, the Marshal of Tuvalu, Shang Ta Zang, invited the guests to stay in Daxia River, gathered more than a hundred people from each of the Oriental Festivals, put the alliance book on the stage, told everyone the contents of the alliance book, and warned each other to defend their own territory and not to encroach on each other.

古文：策署彝泰七年。
现代文：盟册上签署 彝泰七年 。
English: It has been seven years since Chiang Kai-shek signed the alliance.

古文：尚塔藏语元鼎曰： 回鹘小国，我尝讨之，距城三日危破，会国有丧乃还，非我敌也。
现代文：尚塔藏对元鼎说： 回鹘小国，我曾去征讨，距城还有三日路程，一到定能攻破，恰逢国内有丧，于是回来。
English: Shantazang said to Yuan Ding: I once went to recapture a small country. It was a three-day journey from the city. Once I arrived, I was sure to be able to break through. It coincided with a national tragedy, so I came back.

古文：唐何所畏，乃厚之？ 
现代文：他们不是我的对手，唐怕他什么，如此厚待他们？ 
English: They are not my rivals. What is Don afraid of and why does he treat them so well?

古文：元鼎曰： 回鹘有功，且如约，未始妄以兵取尺寸地，是以厚之。 
现代文：元鼎回答 ：回鹘有功，且守约，从未乱用兵侵夺尺寸之地，所以厚待他们。 
English: Gunding replied: Hui Xuan did a good job and kept his promise. He never abused his soldiers to invade other countries, so he treated them well.

古文：塔藏默然。
现代文：塔藏默然无以应。
English: Tashiro was speechless.

古文：元鼎逾湟水，至龙泉谷，西北望杀胡川，哥舒翰故壁多在。
现代文：元鼎越过湟水，到龙泉谷，西北望杀胡川，哥舒翰的旧壁垒多半还在。
English: The old ramparts of Gunding, across Surabaya, Longquan Valley, northwest of Wangzhi Hu River, and Goshuhan are mostly still there.

古文：湟水出蒙谷，抵龙泉与河合。
现代文：湟水从蒙谷出，到龙泉与黄河会合。
English: Surabaya's water flows from Menggu to Longquan, where it meets the Yellow River.

古文：河之上流，繇洪济梁西南行二千里，水益狭，春可涉，秋夏乃胜舟。
现代文：河的上流，由洪济梁西南行二千里，水很狭，春天可徒涉过，秋、夏可以行船。
English: The upstream of the river, from Hongjiliang to the southwest, is two thousand miles long. The water is very narrow. In spring, you can wade through it, and in autumn and summer, you can travel by boat.

古文：其南三百里三山，中高而四下，曰紫山，直大羊同国，古所谓昆仑者也，虏曰闷摩黎山，东距长安五千里，河源其间，流澄缓下，稍合众流，色赤，行益远，它水并注则浊，故世举谓西戎地曰河湟。
现代文：其南三百里有三山，中间高四面低，称为紫山，接大羊同国，就是古代称为昆仑的。吐蕃称之为闷摩黎山，东离长安五千里，黄河源于其间。水流清澈缓慢，渐渐会合各河之水，水色变红，流得越远，别的水汇集变浊，所以天下都称西戎地为河湟。
English: Three hundred miles to the south, there are three mountains, the middle is high and the four sides are low, called the Purple Mountain, and the country with the largest number of sheep is called Kunlun in ancient times. Tubo is called the Mummoli Mountain, five thousand miles east of Chang'an, and the Yellow River originates from it. The water flow is clear and slow, gradually joining the water of each river, the water color turns red, and the farther it flows, the more turbid the other water becomes, so the whole world is called Xi Rong Land.

古文：河源东北直莫贺延碛尾殆五百里，碛广五十里，北自沙州，西南入吐谷浑浸狭，故号碛尾。
现代文：河源头东北接莫贺延碛尾，将近五百里。碛广五十里，北起沙州，西南入吐谷浑慢慢狭窄，所以称为碛尾。
English: The source of the river is northeast of Moga Yan Shanwei, nearly five hundred miles. It is fifty miles wide, from Shazhou in the north to Tuyun in the southwest, it is gradually narrow, so it is called Shanwei.

古文：隐测其地，盖剑南之西。
现代文：估摸这里是剑南之西。
English: It is estimated that this is the west of Jiannan.

古文：元鼎所经见，大略如此。
现代文：元鼎所经过及见到的，大概是这些。
English: This is roughly what Gunding went through and saw.

古文：虏遣论悉诺息等入谢，天子命左卫大将军令狐通、太仆少卿杜载答之。
现代文：吐蕃派论悉诺息等人入朝致谢，天子命左卫大将军令狐通、太仆少卿杜载回报。
English: The Tubo faction thanked the emperor for allowing them to enter the imperial court, and Emperor Taishi ordered General Zao to reward him with the title of "Foxtong" (狐通) and the title of "Taigu Shaoqing" (太僕少卿杜载).

古文：是岁，尚绮心儿以兵击回鹘、党项，小相尚设塔率众三万牧马木兰梁。
现代文：这一年，尚绮心儿派兵击回鹘、党项，小相尚设塔率三万人马在木兰梁牧马。
English: In that year, Shang Xun Xin'er sent soldiers to beat back the Xiong, the party, and Xiao Xiang still set up a tower of 30,000 people in the Mulan Liang Moo Ma.

古文：比岁，使者献金盎、银冶犀、鹿，贡牦牛。
现代文：第二年派使者献金盎、银冶犀、鹿，并进贡牦牛。
English: In the second year, an envoy was sent to donate gold ounces, silver ore, deer, and yakitori.

古文：宝历至大和，再遣使者朝。
现代文：宝历至大和年间，吐蕃两次派使者入朝。
English: During the years from the Horyu era to the Yamato era, Tubo twice sent envoys to the Joseon Dynasty.

古文：五年，维州守将悉怛谋挈城以降，剑南西川节度使李德裕受之，收符章仗铠，更遣将虞藏俭据之。
现代文：大和五年，维州守将悉怛谋举城归降，剑南西川节度使李德裕接纳，收下符章仗铠，另派将领虞藏俭据守。
English: In the 5th year of the Yamato era, the governor of Wizhou tried every trick in the book to surrender the city. The governor of Jianan and the governor of Saikawa accepted Li Deyu and received the insignia, and sent the governor of Guizhou and the governor of Tibet to defend the city.

古文：州南抵江阳岷山，西北望陇山，一面崖，三涯江，虏号无忧城，为西南要捍。
现代文：该州南抵江北岷山，西北望陇山，一面是崖，三面临江，吐蕃称之为无忧城，是西南的重地。
English: Lushan in the south of the province, Lushan in the north of the province, Wanglushan in the northwest, with a cliff on one side and three rivers on the other, is known as the worry-free city in Tubo. It is the center of gravity in the southwest.

古文：会牛僧孺当国，议还悉怛谋，归其城。
现代文：当时牛僧孺执政，商议让悉怛谋回去，把城也还给他。
English: At that time, Niu Sangyu was in power, and they negotiated to let Siyuan Muo go back and return the city to him.

古文：吐蕃夷诛无遗种，以怖诸戎。
现代文：但吐蕃却诛灭他全族以警戒他人。
English: But Tubo wiped out his entire family as a warning to others.

古文：自是比五年虏使来，必报。
现代文：自此以后的五年，吐蕃派使者来，必有回报。
English: In the five years since then, Tibetans have sent emissaries to Tibet, and they are sure to be rewarded.

古文：所贡有玉带、金皿、獭褐、牦牛尾、霞氈、马、羊、橐它。
现代文：他们所进贡的有玉带、金皿、獭褐、牦牛尾、霞毡、马、羊、骆驼等。
English: The tribute they brought in included jade belts, gold plates, jade bronzes, jade ox tails, jasper wreaths, horses, sheep, and camels.

古文：赞普立几三十年，病不事，委任大臣，故不能抗中国，边候晏然。
现代文：赞普在位近三十年，患病不能理事，国事委任大臣，所以不能违抗中国，边界安然。
English: Zampu reigned for nearly thirty years. Due to illness, he was unable to serve as a director or minister of state. Therefore, he could not defy China, and the border was safe.

古文：死，以弟达磨嗣。
现代文：去世后，由弟达磨即位。
English: After his death, his younger brother Daruma succeeded to the throne.

古文：达磨嗜酒，好畋猎，喜内，且凶愎少恩，政益乱。
现代文：达磨嗜酒，喜打猎，好女色，且凶狠固执、刻毒寡恩，国政乱。
English: Damas are fond of drinking, hunting, and women. They are also stubborn, venomous, and ungrateful, leading to political turmoil.

古文：开成四年，遣太子詹事李景儒往使，吐蕃以论集热来朝，献玉器羊马。
现代文：开成四年，唐派太子詹事李景儒出使吐蕃，吐蕃派论集热来朝，献玉器羊马。
English: In the fourth year of the Qing Dynasty, the Tang prince Zhan Zhi Li Jing Ru sent an envoy to Tubo, and the Tubo faction came to the DPRK to discuss the collection and presented a jade sheep and horse.

古文：自是国中地震裂，水泉涌，岷山崩；洮水逆流三日，鼠食稼，人饥疫，死者相枕藉。
现代文：此时国中地震，泉水上涌，岷山崩裂，洮水逆流三天，老鼠将庄稼吃光，疫病流行，死者无数。
English: At this time, there was an earthquake in the middle of the country, the spring water gushed up, the Lushan mountain collapsed, the Lushan water counter-flowed for three days, the mice ate up the crops, the epidemic spread, and there were countless deaths.

古文：鄯、廓间夜闻鼙鼓声，人相惊。
现代文：善阝、廓间夜里能听见鼓声，人人惊骇。
English: The sound of drums can be heard at night in the ghetto, and everyone is shocked.

古文：会昌二年，赞普死，论赞热等来告，天子命将作监李璟吊祠。
现代文：会昌二年，赞普去世，论赞热等来告丧，天子命将作监李瞡前去吊祭。
English: In the second year of Huichang, Zampu passed away, and he was mourned by Onzanre, etc. Tianzi Myou will go to the hanging ceremony as the prisoner Li Yao.

古文：无子，以妃綝兄尚延力子乞离胡为赞普，始三岁，妃共治其国。
现代文：赞普无子，以王妃纟林的哥哥尚延力的儿子乞离胡为赞普。这时才三岁，王妃共同治国。
English: Zampu had no son, so he took the son of Wangfei Yulin's brother, Shang Yanli, who was only three years old, as Zampu. At that time, Wangfei jointly governed the country.

古文：大相结都那见乞离胡不肯拜，曰： 赞普支属尚多，何至立綝氏子邪？ 
现代文：大相结都那见乞离胡时不肯拜，说： 赞普支系亲属尚多，何至于要立纟林氏子？ 
English: When the grand consort, Keddu, saw the begging, she refused to bow and said, "There are still many relatives of the Zampu branch, why should I set up a member of the Yulin clan?"

古文：哭而出，用事者共杀之。
现代文：哭着出来。执政者将他杀了。
English: He came out crying, and the governor killed him.

古文：别将尚恐热为落门川讨击使，姓末，名农力， 热 犹中国号 郎 也，谲诡善幻，约三部得万骑，击鄯州节度使尚婢婢，略地至渭州，与宰相尚与思罗战薄寒山。
现代文：别将尚恐热是落门川讨击使，姓末，名农力。 热 ，犹如中国称 郎 。他狡猾善变，集中三部兵力得一万骑兵，攻击善阝州节度使尚婢婢，夺地直至渭州，又与宰相尚与思罗战于薄寒山。
English: He was cunning and mercurial. He concentrated three armies and gained ten thousand cavalry, attacked the virtuous Bozhou Sect and forced Shang Hanyi to seize land as far as Bozhou, and fought with Prime Minister Shang and Siro in the Bitter Cold Mountains.

古文：思罗败走松州，合苏毘、吐浑、羊同兵八万保洮河自守，恐热谓苏毘等曰： 宰相兄弟杀赞普，天神使我举义兵诛不道，尔属乃助逆背国耶？ 
现代文：思罗败，逃松州，会合苏毗、吐浑、羊同兵八万保洮河坚守。恐热对苏毗等说 ：宰相兄弟杀赞普，天神派我兴义兵诛灭无道，你们竟然帮助叛逆者而背叛国家吗？ 
English: Si Luo was defeated and fled to Songzhou. He joined Su Fei, Tu Hun and Yang to defend Baoji River with 80,000 soldiers. He was afraid and said to Su Fei and others, "Brother Prime Minister, kill Zampu. God has sent me to arouse the righteous soldiers and destroy the wicked. Are you actually helping the traitors and betraying the country?"

古文：苏毘等疑而不战，恐热麾轻骑涉河，诸部先降，并其众至十余万，禽思罗缢杀之。
现代文：苏毗等疑而不战，恐热指挥轻骑渡河，各部先降，并其人马约十多万，抓住思罗，缢杀。
English: Suspicious, Su Wei did not fight, fearing the heat, the commander rode lightly across the river, the various departments fell first, and more than one hundred thousand men and horses seized Silo and fought to the death.

古文：婢婢，姓没卢，名赞心牙，羊同国人，世为吐蕃贵相，宽厚，略通书记，不喜仕，赞普强官之。
现代文：婢婢，姓没卢，名赞心牙，羊同国人，世代均为吐蕃贵相，为人宽厚，略通书记，不喜欢当官，赞普强要他当。
English: Handmaid, maidservant, surnamed Mian Lu, famous for his heart and teeth, a compatriot of the sheep, all generations are of the noble family of Tubo, he is a generous person, a good secretary, he does not like being an official, Zhan Puqiang wants him to be.

古文：三年，国人以赞普立非是，皆叛去。
现代文：会昌三年，国人都认为赞普立得不对，背叛而去。
English: Three years after Huichang, the Chinese people all thought that Zampli was wrong and betrayed him.

古文：恐热自号宰相，以兵二十万击婢婢，鼓鼙、牛马、橐它联千余里，至镇西军，大风雷电，部将震死者十余人，羊、马、橐它亦数百。
现代文：恐热自称宰相，以二十万人马攻击婢婢。鼓、牛马、骆驼联绵一千多里。到镇西军，大风雷电，部将被震死的有十多人，羊、马、骆驼亦死几百。
English: Fearing heat, he called himself the prime minister and attacked the maidservants with 200,000 horses. Drums, oxen, horses and camels stretched for more than a thousand miles. When the Western Army came to the town, there were strong winds and lightning, more than ten people were killed by the earthquake, and hundreds of sheep, horses and camels also died.

古文：恐热恶之，按军不进。
现代文：恐热担心，按军不进。
English: Afraid of the heat and worried, the army did not advance.

古文：婢婢闻之，厚币诒书约，恐热大喜曰： 婢婢，书生，焉知军事。
现代文：婢婢听说，厚赂送信约和。恐热大喜说： 婢婢是书生，哪里懂得军事。
English: When the maid heard that the bribe was about to be paid, she was overjoyed and said, "I am a scholar, but I don't know anything about the military.

古文：我为赞普，当以家居宰相处之。 
现代文：我当赞普，一定让他当家居宰相。 
English: If I were Zampu, I would definitely make him the Minister of Home Affairs.

古文：于是退营大夏川。
现代文：于是退营大夏川。
English: As a result, they left the camp in Daxia River.

古文：婢婢遣将厖结心、莽罗薛吕击恐热于河州之南，伏兵四万，结心据山射书极骂，恐热怒甚，盛兵出斗。
现代文：婢婢派将领结心、莽罗薛吕在河州之南袭击恐热，伏兵四万。结心据山射信给恐热，信中痛骂他。恐热大怒，盛兵出战。
English: In the south of Hezhou, Hidehidehi dispatched the generals, Tie Xin and the reckless Luo Xuerlu, to attack and ambush the forty thousand soldiers of the Terror. Tie Xin sent a letter to the Terror from the mountains, in which he severely scolded the Terror. The Terror was enraged, and a large number of soldiers went to war.

古文：结心伪北，恐热追至数十里，莽罗薛吕以伏兵衷击，大风雨，河溢，溺死甚众，恐热单骑而逃。
现代文：结心假装败逃，恐热追至几十里，莽罗薛吕以伏兵拦击，天大风雨，河水猛涨，溺死甚多，恐热单骑逃走。
English: They pretended to run away, fearing the heat, and chased them for dozens of miles. The reckless Luo Xue Lyu intercepted them with an ambush. The weather was stormy, the river was raging, and many people drowned. They fled on horseback, fearing the heat.

古文：既不得志，尤猜忍杀戮，部将岌藏、丰赞皆降，婢婢厚遇之。
现代文：恐热既不遂心，更加猜疑残忍。部将岌藏、丰赞都降，婢婢待之厚。
English: Fear is not only unfulfilling, it is also more suspicious and cruel. Ministers are treacherous, rich praise is downgraded, and they are treated like slaves.

古文：明年，恐热复攻鄯州，婢婢分兵五道拒守，恐热保东谷山，坚壁不出。
现代文：第二年，恐热再攻善阝州，婢婢分兵五道拒守，恐热保东谷山，坚壁不出。
English: In the second year, fearing that the fever would attack Zhengyangzhou again, the soldiers refused to defend the five provinces, fearing that the fever would protect Dongguan Mountain, and the strong wall did not appear.

古文：岌藏缭以重栅，断汲道，旬日，恐热走薄寒山，募散卒稍至，得数千人，复战鹖鸡山，再战南谷，皆大败。
现代文：岌藏用栅栏将他围住，断他取水道。十天恐热逃至薄寒山，召募散兵，得几千人，又战曷鸟鸡山，再战南谷，都大败。
English: Precariously hiding, they surrounded him with fences and cut off his access to water. For ten days, he fled in fear and fever to Mount Bokang. He gathered a few thousand scattered soldiers, fought in the Ostrich and Chicken Mountains, and then fought in the South Valley, but was soundly defeated.

古文：兵拿仍岁不解。
现代文：兵乱仍每年不断。
English: Hostilities continue year after year.

古文：大中三年，婢婢屯兵河源，闻恐热谋度河，急击之，为恐热所败。
现代文：大中三年，婢婢屯兵河源，听说恐热准备渡河，先去打他，被恐热打败。
English: In his third year of junior high school, he was stationed at Heyuan. When he heard that Hefei was preparing to cross the river, he went to fight him first and was defeated by Hefei.

古文：婢婢统锐兵扼桥，亦不胜，焚桥而还。
现代文：婢婢率精兵扼守桥上，也不胜。于是焚桥后归。
English: The elite soldiers, led by me and my wife, stood guard on the bridge, but they were not victorious. So they returned after burning the bridge.

古文：恐热间出鸡顶岭关，冯硖为梁攻婢婢，至白土岭，败其将尚鐸罗榻藏，进战牦牛硖。
现代文：恐热从小路出鸡顶岭关，凭硖为桥攻婢婢。至白土岭，击败其将尚铎罗榻藏，进战牦牛硖。
English: Fear of heat from the path out of the chicken top ridge pass, using the plow to attack the bridge. To the white soil ridge, beat it will Shangyu Luo Tatang, into the battle of the yakitori.

古文：婢婢将烛卢巩力欲负硖自固以困恐热，大将磨离罴子不从，乃辞疾先归。
现代文：婢婢的将烛卢巩力想背硖固守牵制恐热，大将磨离罴子不听，说自己有病先回去。
English: Lu Gongli, the servant of the servant, wanted to hold on to the shovel for fear of heat, but the general did not listen to the shovel and said that he would go back if he was sick.

古文：罴子急击恐热，一战而死。
现代文：罴子急攻恐热，一战而死。
English: Zou Zi made a sudden attack fearing heat and died in the battle.

古文：婢婢粮尽，引众趋甘州西境，以拓拔怀光居守，恐热麾下多归之。
现代文：婢婢粮尽，领了人马去甘州西，派拓拔怀光据守。恐热手下很多人都归附他。
English: When his food supply was exhausted, he led his men and horses to the west of Ganzhou and sent Tuoba Kaigu to defend the city. Many of his men were afraid of the heat and joined him.

古文：恐热大略鄯、廓、瓜、肃、伊、西等州，所过捕戮，积尸狼藉，麾下内怨，皆欲图之。
现代文：恐热大肆进攻善阝、廓、瓜、肃、伊、西等州，所过处捕杀无度，积尸狼藉。手下颇怨，都想除掉他。
English: He feverishly attacked the provinces of Zhenyao, Kuo, Gua, Su, Yi and Xi, killing and piling up corpses everywhere he went. His subordinates were resentful and wanted to get rid of him.

古文：乃扬声将请唐兵五十万共定其乱，保渭州，求册为赞普，奉表归唐。
现代文：于是扬言将请唐兵五十万来共同平乱，保渭州，求册封为赞普，奉表归附朝廷。
English: Therefore, he threatened to invite five hundred thousand Tang soldiers to jointly quell the turmoil and protect Zhangzhou, apply for the title of Zampu, and submit the form to the imperial court.

古文：宣宗诏太仆卿陆耽持节慰劳，命泾原、灵武、凤翔、邠宁、振武等兵迎援。
现代文：宣宗诏令太仆卿陆耽持节去慰劳，命泾原、灵武、凤翔、宁、振武等兵迎援。
English: Emperor Xuanzong issued an edict ordering the eunuch Lu Danzhi to go to work, and ordered soldiers such as Xuan Yuan, Lingwu, Fengxiang, Ning and Zhenwu to come to his aid.

古文：恐热既至，诏尚书左丞李景让就问所欲。
现代文：恐热来后，诏令尚书左丞李景让问恐热的愿望。
English: After the arrival of the dreaded heat, Li Jing was ordered by the emperor to ask the dreaded heat's wish.

古文：恐热倨夸自大，且求河渭节度使，帝不许。
现代文：恐热倨傲自大，要求任河渭节度使，皇帝不许。
English: Afraid of the heat, proud and arrogant, he demanded to be appointed as the river's magistrate, but the emperor would not allow it.

古文：还过咸阳桥，咄叹曰： 我举大事，觊得济此河与唐分境。 
现代文：回去时走过咸阳桥，感叹道： 我举大事，希望能借这条河与唐分界。 
English: On his way back, he walked across Xianyang Bridge and said, "I am making a big decision. I hope to use this river to demarcate the border with Tang."

古文：于是复趋落门川收散卒，将寇边，会久雨粮绝，恐热还奔廓州。
现代文：于是又去落门川收集散兵，准备入寇，恰遇久雨粮绝，恐热回奔廓州。
English: So he went to the Lomon River to collect stragglers, preparing to invade, just in case of long rain and no food, fearing the heat, he returned to Bengguzhou.

古文：于是凤翔节度使李玭复清水；泾原节度使康季荣复原州，取石门等六关，得人畜几万；灵武节度使李钦取安乐州，诏为威州；邠宁节度使张钦绪复萧关；凤翔收秦州；山南西道节度使郑涯得扶州。凤翔兵与吐蕃战陇州，斩首五百级。
现代文：于是凤翔节度使李王比收回清水；泾原节度使康季荣收回原州，取石门等六关，得人畜几万；灵武节度使李钦取安乐州，诏改为威州；宁节度使张钦绪收回萧关；凤翔收秦州；山南西道节度使郑涯得扶州，凤翔兵与吐蕃战于陇州，斩首五百。
English: As a result, the Fengxiang Festival made Li Wangbi recover clear water; the Bonwon Festival made Kang Jirong recover the original state, took six passes such as the stone gate, and gained tens of thousands of people and animals; the Lingwu Festival made Li Qin take Anle State, and the Zhao was changed to Weizhou; the Ning Festival made Zhang Qingsu recover Xiaoguan; the Fengxiang Festival took Qin State; the Shannan West Road Festival made Zheng Lai take Fuzhou, and the Fengxiang soldiers fought with the Tubo in Zhangzhou, and beheaded five hundred.

古文：是岁，河、陇高年千余见阙下，天子为御延喜楼，赐冠带，皆争解辫易服。
现代文：这一年，河、陇的高龄老人一千多人见到皇帝。天子到延喜楼，赐给冠带。大家争着解开辫子改换服装。
English: In that year, more than a thousand elderly people from Hebei and Fujian came to see the emperor. Tianzi went to Yanxi Tower and gave them crowns and sashes. Everyone was scrambling to undo their braids and change their clothes.

古文：因诏差赐四道兵，录有劳者；三州七关地腴衍者，听民垦艺，贷五岁赋；温池委度支榷其盐，以赡边；四道兵能营田者为给牛种，戍者倍其资饷，再岁一代；商贾往来于边者，关镇毋何留；兵欲垦田，与民同。
现代文：于是诏令赏赐四道的兵士，记录有功劳者；三州七关内肥沃的土地，听任百姓开垦耕种，免去五年的赋税。温池委派度支专营食盐买卖，以所得供边区费用；四道的兵能种田的给耕牛种子，戍卫的加倍给军饷，两年一换；商贩往来边区的，关镇不得扣留；兵想垦田的，与百姓一样待遇。
English: Therefore, the edict rewarded the soldiers of the four provinces, who had records of meritorious service; the fertile land in the seven provinces of the three states was allowed to be cultivated and cultivated by the people, and they were exempted from five years of tax. Wenchi assigned the government to support the sale and purchase of salt, and the income was used to cover the expenses of the border area; the soldiers in the four provinces who could farm were given cattle seeds, and the guards were doubled to the military pay, which was changed every two years; merchants traveling to and from the border area could not be detained in the border town; soldiers who wanted to plow the fields were treated the same as the people.

古文：初，太宗平薛仁杲，得陇上地；虏李轨，得凉州；破吐谷浑、高昌，开四镇。
现代文：当初，太宗平定薛仁杲，得陇上地；虏李轨，得凉州；破吐谷浑、高昌，开发四镇。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Taizong subdued Xue Renzhen, and gained Shangdi; conquered Li Rail, and gained Liangzhou; destroyed Guhun and Gaochang, and developed four towns.

古文：玄宗继收黄河积石、宛秀等军，中国无斥候警者几四十年。
现代文：玄宗又收黄河积石、宛秀等军，中国不用侦察兵望台近四十年。
English: Xuanzong also received the Yellow River Jishi, Wanxiu and other troops, and China did not need a reconnaissance watchtower for nearly forty years.

古文：轮台、伊吾屯田，禾菽弥望。
现代文：轮台、伊吾屯田，庄稼连片。
English: Wheeled platform, Igu tonden, continuous piece of crops.

古文：开远门揭候署曰 西极道九千九百里 ，示戍人无万里行也。
现代文：开远门揭侯曾题字 西极道九千九百里 ，表示戍边之人不需走万里。
English: "Kai Yuanmen Jie Hou Zeng" (開远门揭侯曾) is inscribed with the words "Xidi Dao Jie Zhenjiu Li" (西極道九千九百里), which means that people living in the fringes of the country do not need to travel thousands of miles.

古文：乾元后，陇右、剑南西山三州七关军镇监牧三百所皆失之。
现代文：乾元以后，陇右、剑南西山三州七关军镇监牧三百处全都丢失。
English: After the Qianyuan era, all the 300 overseers of the seven military towns in the three states of Zhenyu and Jiannan Xishan were lost.

古文：宪宗常览天下图，见河湟旧封，赫然思经略之，未暇也。
现代文：宪宗曾看天下地图，见到河湟旧地，跃跃然想整顿治理，但没有时间。
English: Kenzong once looked at the world map, saw the old land of Hebei, and immediately wanted to rectify the governance, but he did not have time.

古文：至是群臣奏言： 王者建功立业，必有以光表于世者。
现代文：至此，群臣上奏 ：为王者建功立业，必有能耀然显示于世的事。
English: At this point, the courtiers began to chant, "For a king to accomplish great feats, there must be something that can be shown to the world."

古文：今不勤一卒，血一刃，而河湟自归，请上天子尊号。 
现代文：现在不劳一兵，不流一滴血而河湟自己回归，请上天子尊号。 
English: Now, without exerting a single soldier, without shedding a single drop of blood, and without the river flowing back on its own, please call upon the name of the Son of Heaven.

古文：帝曰： 宪宗尝念河、湟，业未就而殂落。
现代文：皇帝说 ：宪宗曾念叨河湟，业未成而就谢世。
English: The emperor said: "Kenjong Zong used to chant about a river raft, but he died before he could accomplish it.

古文：今当述祖宗之烈，其议上顺、宪二庙谥号，夸显后世。 
现代文：现在该述祖宗的显赫，建议上顺、宪二庙谥号，用以夸显后代。 
English: Now, the illustrious ancestors of the above-mentioned ancestors suggest Shang Shun and Xian Er Miao as their surnames to show off their descendants.

古文：又诏： 朕姑息民，其山外诸州，须后经营之。 
现代文：又下诏 现在让百姓休养生息，山外各州，以后再经营 。
English: He also issued an edict to let the people rest and recuperate now, and to let the states outside the mountainous areas run the business later.

古文：明年，沙州首领张义潮奉瓜、沙、伊、肃、甘等十一州地图以献。
现代文：第二年，沙州首领张义潮，奉瓜、沙、伊、肃、甘等十一州地图来献。
English: In the second year, Zhang Yichao, the leader of Shazhou, presented maps of eleven states including Fenggua, Sha, Yi, Su and Gan.

古文：始，义潮阴结豪英归唐，一日，众擐甲噪州门，汉人皆助之，虏守者惊走，遂摄州事。
现代文：当初，义潮私下结交一些豪杰归唐，一天，众兵士在州门喧哗，汉人都来助威，吐蕃的守者惊逃，于是掌管州事。
English: At first, the Yichao privately made friends with some heroes who returned to Tang. One day, the soldiers were clamoring at the state gate, the Han people came to cheer, and the defenders of Tubo fled in surprise, so he took charge of state affairs.

古文：缮甲兵，耕且战，悉复余州。
现代文：义潮修缮兵甲，一面耕田一面作战，其他各州也都恢复。
English: The righteous current repaired the armor, fought on the farmland side by side, and the other states were also restored.

古文：以部校十辈皆操挺，内表其中，东北走天德城，防御使李丕以闻。
现代文：派部校十人都拿着棍棒，把表藏在其中，朝东北去天德城。防御史李丕上报朝廷。
English: The ten members of the faction took sticks, hid the watch in them, and headed northeast to Tiantecheng. The defense history of Lihong was reported to the imperial court.

古文：帝嘉其忠，命使者赍诏收慰，擢义潮沙州防御使，俄号归义军，遂为节度使。
现代文：皇帝嘉奖其忠心，命使者带诏书收慰之。升义潮为沙州防御使，称为归义军，接着任节度使。
English: The emperor commended his loyalty, and sent an envoy with an edict to comfort him. He was appointed as the envoy for the defense of Shazhou against the rising tide of righteousness, known as the envoy for the defense of Shazhou against the rising tide of righteousness, and then as the envoy for the defense of Shazhou.

古文：其后河、渭州虏将尚延心以国破亡，亦献款。
现代文：后来河、渭虏将尚延心因国破亡，也来归附。
English: Later, the Hebei and Hebei captains, who were still reluctant to surrender due to the collapse of the country, also came to join.

古文：秦州刺史高骈诱降延心及浑末部万帐，遂收二州，拜延心武卫将军。
现代文：秦州刺史高骈诱降延心及浑末部一万帐，收了二州，任延心为武卫将军。
English: Qin Zhou assassinated Gao Zheng, forced Yan Xin and Hun Taibe to abdicate, collected ten thousand accounts, took over two states, and appointed Yan Xin as the general of Wuwei.

古文：骈收凤林关，以延心为河、渭等州都游弈使。
现代文：高骈收复凤林关，任延心为河、渭等州的游弈使。
English: Gaochun recovered Fenglin Pass, and Yanxin was appointed as the envoy of the game in He, Handan and other states.

古文：咸通二年，义潮奉凉州来归。
现代文：咸通二年，义潮奉凉州来归。
English: In the second year of Hamdong, the righteous tide returned to Liangzhou.

古文：七年，北庭回鹘仆固俊击取西州，收诸部。
现代文：七年北庭回鹘仆固俊击取西州，收取各部。
English: In the seventh year of the Northern Court, Gu Jun, a retainer of the Northern Court, captured Xizhou and took over all the provinces.

古文：鄯州城使张季颙与尚恐热战，破之，收器铠以献。
现代文：善阝州城史张季与尚恐热战，将他击败，收兵械铠甲而献。
English: Zhang Ji, a good scholar of Zhangzhou City, fought a hot battle with Shang Han, defeated him, and presented him with armored armor.

古文：吐番余众犯邠、宁，节度使薛弘宗却之。
现代文：吐蕃余众侵犯、宁，节度使薛弘宗将他们击退。
English: The encroachment of the rest of the people in Tubo, Ning, caused Xue Hongzong to repel them.

古文：会仆固俊与吐蕃大战，斩恐热首，传京师。
现代文：正遇仆固俊与吐蕃大战，斩杀恐热，传首京师。
English: He was in the midst of a great war between his servant, Gu Jun, and Tubo, and was killed in the heat of battle, and the head of the Beijing division was beheaded.

古文：八年，义潮入朝，为右神武统军，赐第及田，命族子淮深守归义。
现代文：咸通八年义潮入朝，任右神武统军，赐田产住宅，命族子淮深驻守归义。
English: In the eighth year of the Yixing tide, Hamdang entered the imperial court, and was appointed to the Right Divine Martial United Army. He was given a farm and a house, and his son Huai Sheng was stationed in Yixing.

古文：十三年卒。沙州以长史曹义金领州务，遂授归义节度使。
现代文：咸通十三年义潮去世，沙州由长史曹义金接管州务，委任为归义节度使。
English: When Hamdong passed away in the 13th year of the Yichao, Cao Yijin, the chief historian of Shazhou, took over the state affairs and was appointed as the envoy to Guiyi.

古文：后中原多故，王命不及，甘州为回鹘所并，归义诸城多没。
现代文：后来中原多变故，王命达不到，甘州被回鹘吞并、归义诸城也都丢失。
English: Later, due to the vicissitudes of the Central Plains, the king's order could not be achieved, Gansu was annexed by the Uighurs, and the cities that were converted to Christianity were also lost.

古文：浑末，亦曰嗢末，吐蕃奴部也。
现代文：浑末，也称末，是吐蕃的奴部。
English: Hunmai, also known as Mawu, is a slave of the Tujue.

古文：虏法，出师必发豪室，皆以奴从，平居散处耕牧。
现代文：虏法，出兵一定要征发富豪人家，他们都派奴隶参与，平常分散耕种或放牧。
English: According to the law, rich families must be conscripted to send troops. They all send slaves to participate, usually dispersed farming or grazing.

古文：及恐热乱，无所归，共相啸合数千人，以嗢末自号，居甘、肃、瓜、沙、河、渭、岷、廓、叠、宕间，其近蕃牙者最勇，而马尤良云。
现代文：至恐热作乱，无所归属，共聚了几千人，就以末自称，居住在甘、肃、瓜、沙、河、渭、岷、廓、叠、宕之间。靠近吐蕃王廷的最勇猛，而马格外优良。
English: Afraid of causing a disturbance, having no place to belong, and having gathered several thousand people, he called himself Imma, and lived between Gan, Su, Gua, Sha, He, Yao, Yao, Kuo, Ju, and Gao. He was the bravest one near the royal court of Tubo, and he was exceptionally good.

古文：赞曰：唐兴，四夷有弗率者，皆利兵移之，蹙其牙，犁其廷而后已。
现代文：评论：唐兴，四夷中有不跟随的，都发利兵去攻打，必挫其王廷折其旗帜才罢。
English: Comment: Tang Xing, if any of the Four Emperors do not follow, they will all send their soldiers to attack, and only then will they defeat their royal court and fold their banner.

古文：惟吐蕃、回鹘号强雄，为中国患最久。
现代文：只有吐蕃、回鹘强盛，犯乱中国最久。
English: Only Tubo and Huizhou are strong, and they have been in turmoil for the longest time in China.

古文：赞普遂尽盗河湟，薄王畿为东境，犯京师，掠近辅，残馘华人。
现代文：赞普乃尽取河湟之地，迫近王畿，进而侵犯京师，掠夺近城，残害华人。
English: Zampuno did his best to take the land of Hefei, approaching Wanggi, and then invaded the capital division, plundered the city, and destroyed the Chinese.

古文：谋夫虓帅，圜视共计，卒不得要领。
现代文：与骁帅们商量共计，终于不得要领。
English: After a total of discussions with the team captains, we finally came to an agreement.

古文：晚节二姓自亡，而唐亦衰焉。
现代文：晚年二姓自亡，而唐亦衰微。
English: In his later years, Nisei committed suicide, and the Tang Dynasty also declined.

古文：夫外抚内宁，惟圣人不让。
现代文：抚外安内之责只有圣人才能担当。
English: Only a saint can be responsible for bringing peace and tranquility to the outside world.

古文：玄宗有逸德，而拓地太大，务远功，忽近虞，逆贼一奋，中原封裂，讫二百年不得复完，而至陵夷。
现代文：玄宗有过人之德，而拓地太大，致力于远功，忽略了近忧，逆贼突起，中原残破，以致二百年不得恢复，终而至于灭亡。
English: Xuanzong had superior virtue, but he expanded too much, devoted himself to long-term achievements, ignored short-term worries, rebelled, and left the Central Plains in ruins. As a result, it could not be restored for two hundred years, and eventually perished.

古文：然则内先自治，释四夷为外惧，守成之良资也。
现代文：若能先治理好内部，把四夷作为外惧之戒，这是守成的好办法。
English: If we can first manage the internal affairs well, and take the "four evils" as the commandment of fearing the outside world, this is a good way to protect ourselves.

