古文：天地未形，冯冯翼翼，洞洞灟灟，故曰太昭。
现代文：天地还没有形成的时候，混混沌沌，无形无象，所以叫做太昭。
English: When heaven and earth had not yet been formed, it was chaotic, formless and featureless, which is why it was called Taizhao.

古文：道始于虚廓，虚廓生宇宙，宇宙生气，气有涯垠，清阳者薄靡而为天，重浊者凝滞而为地，清妙之合专易，重浊之凝竭难，故天先成而地后定。
现代文：道最初的状态是清虚空廓，清虚空廓演化出宇宙，宇宙产生出元气。这种元气是有一定的边涯和形态的，其中清明部分飘逸扩散形成天，浊混部分凝结聚集形成地。清明部分的气汇合容易，浊混部分的气凝聚困难。所以天先形成而地后定形。
English: The initial state of the Tao is a clear void. The clear void evolved into the universe, and the universe generated the original energy. This original energy has a certain edge and form, in which the clear part is floating and diffusing to form the sky, and the mixed part is condensing and gathering to form the earth. The gas of the clear part is easy to merge, and the gas of the mixed part is difficult to condense. Therefore, the sky is formed first and the earth is shaped later.

古文：天地之袭精为阴阳，阴阳之专精为四时，四时之散精力万物。
现代文：天和地的精气融合起来产生了阴阳二气，阴、阳二气的精华融合集中产生春秋冬夏四季，四季各自的精气分散产生万物。
English: The essence of heaven and earth fused together to produce yin and yang, and the essence of yin and yang fused together to produce the four seasons of spring, autumn, winter and summer. The essence of each of the four seasons dispersed to produce all things.

古文：积阳之热气生火，火气之精者为日；积阴之寒气为水，水气之精者为月。
现代文：阳气中的热气积聚便产生了火，而火气的精华部分形成太阳；阴气中的寒气积聚便产生了水，而水气的精华部分形成月亮。
English: The accumulation of hot gas in the yang gas produced fire, and the essence part of the fire gas formed the sun; the accumulation of cold gas in the yin gas produced water, and the essence part of the water gas formed the moon.

古文：日月之淫为精者为星辰。
现代文：太阳、月亮溢出之气的精华散逸为星辰。
English: The essence of the overflowing air of the sun and moon dissipates into stars.

古文：天受日月星辰，地受水潦尘埃。
现代文：天空容纳着日月星辰，大地承载着水潦尘埃。
English: The sky contains the sun, moon and stars, and the earth carries the water and dust.

古文：昔者共工与颛顼争为帝，怒而触不周之山，天柱折，地维绝。天倾西北，故日月星辰移焉；地不满东南，故水潦尘埃归焉。
现代文：以前共工和颛顼争当天帝，一怒之下头撞不周山。擎天的柱子撞折了，系地的绳子扯断了，天向西北方倾斜，所以日月星辰都向西北运行移动；地向东南方陷塌，所以水流尘土都向东南流泄沉淀。
English: In the past, they worked together and fought for the same emperor, but in a fit of anger, they bumped their heads against the mountain. The pillar of the sky crashed and broke, the rope of the earth broke, the sky tilted to the northwest, so the sun, moon and stars moved to the northwest; the earth collapsed to the southeast, so the water and dust flowed to the southeast and precipitated.

古文：天道曰圆，地道曰方；方者主幽，圆者主明。
现代文：天是圆的，地是方的。方的大地主宰幽暗，圆的天穹主宰光明。
English: The sky is round, the earth is square. The square earth dominates the darkness, the round firmament dominates the light.

古文：明者吐气者也，是故火曰外景；幽者含气者也，是故水曰内景。
现代文：光明的天吐散阳气，所以火和日的光照耀在外；幽暗的地蕴含阴气，所以水和月的光泽内藏。
English: The bright sky spits out yang, so fire and sunlight shine outside; the dark earth contains yin, so water and the luster of the moon are hidden inside.

古文：吐气者施，含气者化，是故阳施阴化。
现代文：吐散阳气的管给予，蕴含阴气的管化育，所以阴阳二气分管化育和给予。
English: Ying and yang are divided into two types of qi: the yang qi that is emitted and given out, and the qi that is contained and nurtured in the qi pipe.

古文：天之偏气，怒者为风；地之含气，和者为雨。
现代文：阴阳二气相偏离，形成怒气便产生风；阴阳二气相交合，便形成雨。
English: Yin and yang two gas phase deviation, the formation of anger will produce wind; yin and yang two gas phase intersection, will form rain.

古文：阴阳相薄，感而为雷，激而为霆，乱而为雾。
现代文：阴阳二气相迫近，感应即成响雷，激荡而成闪电，散乱便成浓雾。
English: Yin and yang of the two phases of the atmosphere are approaching, the induction will become thunder, the agitation will become lightning, and the scattering will become thick fog.

古文：阳气胜则散而为雨露，阴气胜则凝而为霜雪。
现代文：如果阳气强盛，雾便散开成露水，如果阴气强盛，雾便凝结成霜雪。
English: If the yang is strong, the fog will disperse into dew, if the yin is strong, the fog will condense into frost and snow.

古文：毛羽者，飞行之类也，故属于阳；介鳞者，蛰伏之类也，故属于阴。
现代文：长有羽毛，在天空飞翔的鸟类，因而属于阳类。长有鳞甲，在地下冬眠的龟蛇，因而属于阴类。
English: Birds, which have feathers and fly in the sky, belong to the male; turtles, which have scales and hibernate underground, belong to the female.

古文：日者阳之主也，是故春夏则群兽除，日至而麋鹿解；月者阴之宗也，是以月虚而鱼脑减，月死而赢蛖膲。
现代文：太阳是阳类的主宰，因此春夏两季兽类都要脱掉旧毛，夏至冬至时麋鹿都会脱落旧角。月亮是阴类的根本，因此月亮亏损时鱼的脑髓便减少，月亮晦死时螺蚌的肉便瘪缩。
English: The sun is the master of the masculine, so the animals in spring and summer have to shed their old hair, and the elk will shed their old horns during the summer solstice and winter solstice. The moon is the root of the female, so when the moon loses, the brain marrow of the fish is reduced, and when the moon is dying, the flesh of the snail will contract.

古文：火上荨，水下流，故鸟飞而高，鱼动而下。
现代文：火往上炎，水向下流，所以属于阳类的鸟往高飞翔，属于阴类的鱼向下潜游。
English: Fire goes up to the flame, water flows down, so the birds belonging to the masculine class fly high, and the fish belonging to the feminine class swim down.

古文：物类相动，本标相应。
现代文：万物因同类而互相触动，本和末互相感应。
English: All things touch each other because they are the same, and the beginning and the end mutually influence each other.

古文：故阳燧见日，则燃而为火；方诸见月，则津而为水。
现代文：所以取阳燧置阳光下就会聚光燃艾起火，将方诸放月光下就会气化成液为水。
English: Therefore, if you take yang and place it under the sun, the light will be concentrated and the fire will be ignited, and if you put it under the moonlight, it will be vaporized into liquid and become water.

古文：虚啸而谷风至，龙举而景云属，麒麟斗而日月食，鲸鱼死而彗星出，蚕珥丝而商弦绝，贲星坠而勃海决。
现代文：老虎咆哮就有东风吹来，蛟龙升飞就有祥云聚集，麒麟相斗就有日食和月食，鲸鱼死去就有彗星出现，蚕吐丝时则商弦易断，流星坠落则海水漫溢。
English: When tigers roar, the east wind blows; when dragons soar, auspicious clouds gather; when unicorns fight, there are solar and lunar eclipses; when whales die, comets appear; when silkworms spit, the merry-go-round is easily broken; when meteors fall, the sea overflows.

古文：人主之情上通于天，故诛暴则多飘风，在法令则多虫螟，杀不辜则国赤地，令不收则多淫雨。
现代文：人间君主的性情与天相通，所以刑法暴虐就多暴风，法令酷苛就多虫灾，滥杀无辜就多旱灾，政令失时就多淫雨。
English: The temperament of human monarchs is connected with the heavens, so the tyranny of criminal law will bring more storms, the severity of laws will bring more insect plagues, the indiscriminate killing of innocents will bring more droughts, and the loss of government orders will bring more rain.

古文：四时者，天之吏也；日月者，天之使也；星辰者，天之期也；虹蜺彗星者，天之忌也。
现代文：四季是天的差吏，日月是天的使节，星辰是上天的会合处，虹霓彗星是上天的禁忌表现。
English: The four seasons are the agents of heaven, the sun and moon are the envoys of heaven, the stars are the meeting place of heaven, and the rainbow comet is the forbidden manifestation of heaven.

古文：天有九野，九千九百九十九隅，去地五亿万里；五星，八风，二十八宿，五官，六府紫宫，太微，轩辕，咸池，四守，天阿。
现代文：天分成九个区域，共有九千九百九十九个小区，离大地五亿万里；天上还有五星、八风、二十八宿、五官、六府，以及紫宫、太微、轩辕、咸池、四守和天阿等。
English: Heaven is divided into nine regions, with a total of 9,999 sub-regions, and is 500 million li away from the earth. There are also five stars, eight winds, twenty-eight mansions, five officials, six prefectures, as well as the Purple Palace, Taimiao, Xuanwu, Hamchi, Shishou and Tian'a in heaven.

古文：何谓九野？
现代文：什么是天的九个区域？
English: What are the nine regions of the sky?

古文：中央曰钧天，其星角、亢、氏。
现代文：中央区域叫钧天，这一区域分布着角宿、亢宿和氐宿。
English: The central area is called Shantian, and this area is dotted with Jiaoju, Shishu and Shizhu.

古文：东方曰苍天，其星房、心、尾。
现代文：东方区域叫苍天，这一区域分布着房宿、心宿和尾宿。
English: The eastern region is called Cangtian, and this region is home to the inn, the heart, and the tail.

古文：东北曰变天，其星箕、斗、牵牛。
现代文：东北区域叫变天，这一区域分布着箕宿、斗宿和牵牛宿。
English: The northeastern region is called Changeling. This region is dotted with yakitori inns, fight inns, and cowherd inns.

古文：北方曰玄天，其星须女、虚、危、营室。
现代文：北方区域叫玄天，这一区域分布着须女宿、虚宿、危宿和营室宿。
English: The northern region is called Xuan Tian, and this area is dotted with women's hostels, bogus hostels, dangerous hostels, and dormitory hostels.

古文：西北方曰幽天，其星东壁、奎、娄。
现代文：西北区域叫幽天，这一区域分布着东壁宿、奎宿、娄宿。
English: The northwestern region is called Yutian, and this region is home to Dongbi-juku, Kui-juku, and Min-juku.

古文：西方曰颢天，其星胃、昂、毕。
现代文：西方区域叫颢天，这一区域分布着胃宿、昴宿和毕宿。
English: The western region is called Shantian, and this region is home to the Gastoshuku, Shoshuku, and Bi-shuku.

古文：西南方曰朱天，其星觜巂、参、东井。
现代文：西南区域叫朱天，这一区域分布着觜巂宿、参宿和东井宿。
English: The southwestern region is called Zhutian, and this region is home to Zouyuan, Banshuyuan and Dongjing.

古文：南方曰炎天，其星舆鬼、柳、七星。
现代文：南方区域叫炎天，这一区域分布着舆鬼宿、柳宿和七星宿。
English: The southern region is called Yan Tian. This region is dotted with ghost towns, willow towns and seven-star towns.

古文：东南方曰阳天，其星张、翼、轸。
现代文：东南区域叫阳天，这一区域分布着张宿、翼宿和轸宿。
English: The southeastern region is called Yangtian, and this region is home to Zhangyuan, Yingyuan, and Minyuan.

古文：何谓五星？
现代文：什么是五星？
English: What is five stars?

古文：东方，木也，其帝太皞，其佐句芒，执规而治春，其神为岁星，其兽苍龙，其音角，其日甲乙。
现代文：东方是木星，它的天帝是太皞，辅佐大臣则是句芒，句芒执规尺而治理春季。东方的护神是岁星，它的代表兽物是苍龙，它代表的音是角音，日干用的是甲乙。
English: The East is Jupiter, its celestial emperor is Taiko, and the assistant minister is Juman, Juman is the ruler of the spring. The guardian deity of the East is the year star, its representative animal is the dragon, its representative sound is the horn, and the sun is used for the second half of the year.

古文：南方，火也，其帝炎帝，其佐朱明，执衡而治夏，其神为荧惑，其兽朱鸟，其音徽，其日丙丁。
现代文：南方是火星，它的天帝是炎帝，辅佐大臣则是朱明，朱明执衡器而治理夏季。南方的护神是荧惑，它的代表兽物是朱鸟，它代表的音是徵音，日干用的是丙丁。
English: The south is Mars, its celestial emperor is the Emperor of Fire, the assistant minister is Zhu Ming, and Zhu Ming holds the balance and governs the summer. The guardian deity of the south is fluorescence, its representative animal is the scarlet bird, its representative sound is the call, and the sun is used for drying.

古文：中央，土也，其帝黄帝，其佐后土，执绳而制四方，其神为镇星，其兽黄龙，其音宫，其日戊己。
现代文：中央是土星，它的天帝是黄帝，辅佐大臣则是后土，后土执绳墨而治理四方。中央的护神是镇星，它的代表兽物是黄龙，它代表的音是宫音，日干用戊己。
English: In the center is Saturn, its celestial emperor is the Yellow Emperor, and the assistant minister is the Back Earth, the Back Earth holds the rope and governs the four directions. The central guardian deity is the town star, its representative animal is the yellow dragon, its representative sound is the palace sound, and the sun is used.

古文：西方，金也，其帝少吴，其佐蓐收，执矩而治秋，其神为太白，其兽白虎，其音商，其日庚辛。
现代文：西方是金星，它的天帝是少昊，辅佐大臣则是蓐收，蓐收执矩尺而治理秋季。西方的护神是太白，它的代表兽物是白虎，它代表的音是商音，日干用庚辛。
English: The West is Venus, its celestial emperor is Shao Hao, and its vice-minister is Ru Ru Ru, who governs the autumn season. The West's guardian deity is Taibai, its representative animal is the white tiger, its representative sound is Shangyin, and its representative sun is Geng Xin.

古文：北方，水也，其帝颛顼，其佐玄冥，执权而治冬，其神为辰星，其兽玄武，其音羽，其日壬癸。
现代文：北方是水星，它的天帝是颛顼，辅佐大臣则是玄冥，玄冥执权器而治理冬季。北方的护神是辰星，它的代表兽物是玄武，它代表的音是羽音，日干用壬癸。
English: The north is Mercury, its celestial emperor is the dragonfly, the assistant minister is the dark side, and the dark side is the power implement to govern the winter. The guardian deity of the north is the star, its representative animal is the dragonfly, its representative sound is the feather sound, and the sun is used for drying.

古文：太阴在四仲，则岁星行三宿；太阴在四钩，则岁星行二宿。
现代文：太阴处在十二辰次的子午卯酉四辰次时，岁星每辰次行经二十八宿中的三星宿。太阴处在四角相连的辰次时，岁星每辰次行经二十八宿中的二星宿。
English: When the sun is eclipsed at the meridian of the 12th hour and the meridian of the 4th hour, the year star passes through 3 stars of the 28 mansions every hour. When the sun is eclipsed at the hour when the four corners are connected, the year star passes through 2 stars of the 28 mansions every hour.

古文：二八十六，三四十二，故十二岁而行二十八宿。
现代文：二乘八得十六，三乘四得十二，所以十二年运行二十八宿一周。
English: Two times eight is sixteen, three times four is twelve, so twelve years run twenty-eight lodgings a week.

古文：日行十二分度之一，岁行三十度十六分度之七，十二岁而周。
现代文：岁星一天运行分之度，一年运行又分之度，十二年环绕一周天又分之度。
English: The year star orbits the earth every minute of the day, every minute of the year, and every minute of the twelve years.

古文：荧惑常以十月入太微，受制而出行列宿，司无道之国，为乱为贼，为疾为丧，为饥为兵，出入无常，辩变其色，时见时匿。
现代文：荧惑星通常在十月进入太微垣，受天帝命令而出巡各星宿，监察无道的国家，使之有动乱、灾害、疾疫、丧亡、饥荒和战争。荧惑星的出入没有常规，自身不断改变亮度颜色，时而出现时而藏匿。
English: Fluorescent planets usually enter the solar eclipses in October, and are ordered by the heavenly emperor to go out and patrol the stars, monitor the countries that have no roads, causing turmoil, disasters, diseases, death, famine and war. There is no routine for the entry and exit of fluorescent planets, and they constantly change their brightness and color, appearing and hiding from time to time.

古文：镇星以甲寅元始建斗，岁镇行一宿，当居而弗居，其国亡土；未当居而居之，其国益地，岁熟。
现代文：镇星在甲寅年正月从斗宿部位开始运行，每年镇守巡行一个星宿。如果它应处在某一星宿时而没有处在那里的话，那么这一星宿所分野的国家就要丧失疆土；如果还不该处在某一星宿时而处在那里的话，那么这一星宿所分野的国家就会扩大疆土，粮食丰收。
English: In the first month of the year of the Goat, the town star began to run from the location of the fight. Every year, the town watch patrols one star. If it should be in a certain star but is not there, then the country of this star will lose its territory; if it should not be in a certain star but is there, then the country of this star will expand its territory and harvest grain.

古文：日行二十八分度之一，岁行十三度百一十二分度之五，二十八岁而周。太白元始，以正月建寅，与荧惑晨出东方。
现代文：镇星一天运行分之度，一年运行又分之度，二十八年环绕一周天。太白金星于甲寅年正月和营室宿一起在早晨运行出现在东方。
English: The town star orbits every minute of the day, every minute of the year, and every day of the 28th year. Taibai Venus appears in the east in the morning of the first month of the year and the camp room.

古文：二百四十日而入，入百二十日而夕出西方；二百四十日而入，入三十五日而复出东方；出以辰戌，入以丑未；当出而不出，未当入而入，天下惬兵；当入而不入，当出而不出，天下兴兵。
现代文：经过天后消失，消失天后又于傍晚出现在西方，天后又消失，消失天后再次出现在东方。
English: After the disappearance of the diva, the disappeared diva reappeared in the west in the evening, and the disappeared diva reappeared in the east.

古文：辰星正四时，常以二月春分劾奎、娄，以五月夏至效东井、舆鬼，以八月秋分效角、亢，以十一月冬至効斗、牵牛。
现代文：它出现时处在辰位、戌位，消失时是在丑位、未位。如果当它应该出现时却没有出现、不该消失时却消失了，那么天下兵戈止息。如果当它应该消失时却没有消失、不该出现时却出现了，那么天下战火燃起。辰星的运行能确定一年四季，它通常在二月春分时运行在奎宿、娄宿之间，五月夏至时运行在东井宿、舆鬼宿之间，在八月秋分时运行在角宿、亢宿之间，在十一月冬至时运行在斗宿、牵牛宿之间。
English: When it appears, it is in the position of the hour and the day, and when it disappears, it is in the position of the evil and the unlucky. If it does not appear when it should appear, and disappears when it should not disappear, then the world war will cease. If it does not disappear when it should disappear, but appears when it should not appear, then the world war will be ignited. The movement of the hour star can determine the four seasons of the year. It usually runs between Kuijuku and Okujuku at the time of the spring equinox in February, between Higashiijuku and Utsugijuku at the time of the summer solstice in May

古文：出以辰戌，入以丑未，出二旬而入，晨候之东方，夕候之西方；一时不出，其时不和，四时不出，天下大饥。
现代文：它出现时在辰、戌的方位，消失时在丑、未方位，出现天后便消失。清晨候望在东方，傍晚候望在西方。如果哪一季它没有按时出现，那么这一季就不和谐；如果一年四季它都没有按时出现，那么天下就要闹饥荒了。
English: When it appears, it appears in the direction of the hour and the day; when it disappears, it appears in the direction of the evil and the absent; and when it reappears, it disappears. In the morning, it waits in the east; in the evening, it waits in the west. If it does not appear on time in any season, then that season is not harmonious; if it does not appear on time in all four seasons of the year, then there will be famine in the world.

古文：何谓八风？距日冬至四十五日，条风至；条风至四十五日，明庶风至；明庶风至四十五日，清明风至；清明风至四十五日，景风至；景风至四十五日，凉风至；凉风至四十五日，阊阖风至；阊阖风至四十五日，不周风至：不周风至四十五日，广莫风至。条风至，则出轻系，去稽留；明庶风至，则正封疆，修田畴；清明风至，则出币帛，使诸候；景风至，则爵有位，赏有功；凉风至，则报地德，祀四郊；阊阖风至，则收县垂，琴瑟不张；不周风至，则修宫室，缮边城；广莫风至，则闭关梁，决刑罚。
现代文：广莫风来临就要封闭关卡和桥梁，判决案件和执行刑罚。
English: When the wind comes, it is necessary to close checkpoints and bridges, adjudicate cases and enforce punishments.

古文：何谓五官？
现代文：什么叫五官？
English: What are the five senses?

古文：东方为田，南方为司马，西方为理，北方为司空，中央为都。
现代文：东方木星是主持农事的田官，南方火星是主持军事的司马，西方金星是主持刑法的理官，北方水星是主持土木建筑的司空，中央土星是官之都总。
English: In the east, Jupiter is the field officer who presides over agricultural affairs, Mars in the south is the Sima who presides over military affairs, Venus in the west is the magistrate who presides over criminal law, Mercury in the north is the Siku who presides over civil engineering, and Saturn in the center is the general of the capital.

古文：何谓六府？
现代文：什么叫六府？
English: What are the six prefectures?

古文：子午、丑未、寅申、卯西、辰戌、巳亥是也。
现代文：是指十二辰中的子午相配、丑未相配、寅申相配、卯酉相配、辰戌相配和巳亥相配。
English: It refers to the twelve hours in which the meridian is congruent, the ugly is not congruent, the Yin is congruent, the Wu is congruent, the Chen is congruent and the Boar is congruent.

古文：太微者，太一之庭也。
现代文：太微垣是天帝的宫廷。
English: Taikogaki is the court of the heavenly emperor.

古文：紫宫者，太一之居也。
现代文：紫微垣是天帝的住处。
English: Zi Weigaki is the residence of the Heavenly Emperor.

古文：咸池者，水鱼之囿也。
现代文：轩辕是嫔妃的宫室。咸池是水神的鱼池。
English: Xuanwu is the palace of the Empress Dowager, and the Salt Pond is the fish pond of the Water God.

古文：天阿者，群神之闭也。
现代文：天阿是群神的城墙。
English: Heaven is a city wall of gods.

古文：四宫者，所以为司赏罚。太微者主朱雀。紫宫执斗而左旋，日行一度，以周于天。
现代文：四守则主管奖赏惩罚。太微主管朱雀，紫微宫持北斗而左旋，每天运行一度而环绕周天。
English: The Four Precepts are responsible for reward and punishment. The Tai-Wei is responsible for the Suzaku, and the Zi-Wei-Gong holds the Big Dipper and rotates to the left, running once a day and encircling the circumference of the sky.

古文：日冬至峻狼之山，日移一度，凡行百八十二度八分度之五，而夏至牛首之山。
现代文：冬至这天在峻狼山这方位，每天运行一度，运行了又分之度时正值夏至日到达牛首山这方位，然后往回走完又分之度，时间正好一年。
English: On the day of the winter solstice, it runs once a day in the direction of the wolf mountain, and when it runs another minute, it is the summer solstice day to reach the direction of the oxhead mountain, and then walk back another minute, the time is exactly one year.

古文：反覆三百六十五度四分度之一而成一岁，天一元始，正月建寅，日月俱入营室五度。
现代文：太岁纪年的开始是在斗柄指向寅的正月初一晨旦，太阳月亮一起出现在营室宿五度的部位。
English: The beginning of the lunar year is on the morning of the first day of the first month of the year, when the handle of the bucket points to the tiger, and the sun and moon appear together at the fifth degree of the camp.

古文：天一以始建七十六岁，日月复以正月入营室五度，无余分，名曰一纪，凡二十纪，一千五百二十岁大终，日月星辰复始甲寅元。
现代文：太岁纪年起经过年，太阳月亮又在正月初一晨旦一起出现在营室宿五度的部位，而运行的时间没有余数，这就叫 一纪 。而二十纪，即一千五百二十年就是 大终 ，这时的太阳月亮星辰又回复到以甲寅年作为纪年的元年位置。
English: The solar and lunar calendars pass from year to year, and the sun and moon appear together on the morning of the first day of the first month in the fifth degree of the camp room, and the running time has no remainder, which is called the first year. And the twentieth year, that is, the year 1520, is the end of the year, at which time the sun, moon and stars return to the position of the first year of the year with the year of Jia Yin as the calendar year.

古文：日行一度而岁有奇四分度之一，故四岁而积千四百六十一日而复合，故舍八十岁而复故曰。
现代文：北斗日行一度，一年就有分之的零头数，所以经过四年就积累天，北斗星又回复到原来的起点位置，经过八十年，又回复到第一个始用的记日干支。
English: When the Big Dipper travels once a day, there are fractions of a year, so after four years of accumulating days, the Big Dipper will return to its original starting position, and after eighty years, it will return to the first day of the year.

古文：子午、卯酉为二绳，丑寅、辰巳、未申、戌亥为四钩。
现代文：子午和卯酉分别连成经纬两条互相垂直的线。丑寅、辰巳、未申、戌亥分别组成东北、东南、西南、西北四角，即 四钩 。
English: The meridian and ecliptic are connected to form two mutually perpendicular lines of longitude and latitude, respectively. Ushi-in, Tatsumi, Mishin, and Shihai respectively form the northeast, southeast, southwest, and northwest four corners, that is, Shihaku.

古文：东北为报德之维也，西南为背阳之维，东南为常羊之维，西北为蹄通之维。
现代文：东北位于由阴复阳，所以叫阳气恢复之角，西南位于由阳复阴，所以叫阳气背离之角，东南阳气不盛不衰，所以叫阳气徜徉之角，西北纯阴，阳气将萌，需号使通之，所以叫呼号疏通之角。
English: The northeast is located from yin to yang, so it is called the angle of yang restoration, the southwest is located from yang to yin, so it is called the angle of yang deviation, the southeast yang does not rise and fall, so it is called the angle of yang, the northwest is pure yin, the yang is budding, and it is necessary to call it, so it is called the angle of call.

古文：日冬至则斗北中绳，阴气极，阳气萌，故曰冬至为德。
现代文：冬至时北斗北指子辰部位，与子午经线相合，这时阴气达到极限，阳气开始萌动，所以说冬至是给万物带来阳德的节气。
English: At the time of the winter solstice, the position of the Big Dipper's northern finger, coincides with the rising of the meridian. At this time, the yin reaches its limit, and the yang begins to germinate. Therefore, the winter solstice is the solar term that brings the yang virtue to all things.

古文：日夏至则斗南中绳，阳气极，阴气萌，故曰夏至为刑，阴气极则北至北极，下至黄泉，故不可以凿地穿井。
现代文：夏至时北斗南指午辰部位，与子午经线相合，这时阳气达到极限，阴气开始萌动，所以说夏至是给万物带来刑杀的节气。阴气达到极限时，北至北极、下至黄泉都充满着阴气，所以这时不宜凿地打井。
English: At the summer solstice, Beidou South refers to the noon position, which coincides with the meridian. At this time, the yang reaches its limit and the yin begins to sprout, so the summer solstice is a solar term that brings death to all things. When the yin reaches its limit, the north to the north pole and down to the yellow spring are full of yin, so it is not appropriate to drill a well at this time.

古文：万物闭藏，蛰虫首穴，故曰德在室。
现代文：这时万物幽闭深藏，虫类进洞穴冬眠，所以说阳德在室内。
English: At this time, all things are closed and deeply hidden, and insects enter the cave to hibernate, so it is said that Yang De is indoors.

古文：阳气极则南至南极，上至朱天，故不可以夷丘上屋。
现代文：阳气达到极限时，南至南极、上至朱天都充满着阳气，所以这时不宜平整山丘、上房顶做事。
English: When the yang reaches its limit, the south to the South Pole and up to Zhu Tian are full of yang, so it is not appropriate to level hills and work on roofs at this time.

古文：万物蕃息，五谷兆长，故曰德在野。
现代文：这时万物生殖繁衍，五谷开始生长，所以说这时阳德在野外。
English: At this time, all things reproduce and multiply, and grain begins to grow, so it is said that Yang De is in the field at this time.

古文：日冬至则水从之，日夏至则火从之，故五月火正而水漏，十一月水正而阴胜。
现代文：冬至时虽阴水旺盛，但阳火也随之相伴，夏至时虽阳火旺盛，但阴水也随之相伴。所以五月火气旺盛而水气渗源出来，十一月水气旺盛而火气伴随上升。
English: At the winter solstice, although the water is cloudy, the fire is accompanied by it. At the summer solstice, although the fire is strong, the water is also accompanied by it. Therefore, in May, the fire is strong and the water gas seeps out, and in November, the water gas is strong and the fire gas rises.

古文：阳气为火，阴气为水。
现代文：阳气为火，阴气为水。
English: Yang is fire, yin is water.

古文：水胜，故夏至湿；火胜，故冬至燥。
现代文：水气上升，所以夏至时空气潮湿；火气上升，所以冬至时空气干燥。
English: Water vapor rises, so the air is moist during the summer solstice; fire vapor rises, so the air is dry during the winter solstice.

古文：燥故炭轻，湿故炭重。
现代文：空气干燥则木炭吸湿少而显得轻，空气潮湿则木炭吸湿多而显得重。
English: When the air is dry, the charcoal absorbs less moisture and appears lighter, while when the air is humid, the charcoal absorbs more moisture and appears heavier.

古文：日冬至，井水盛，盆水溢，羊脱毛，麋角解，鹊始巢，八尺之修，日中而景丈三尺。
现代文：冬至时井水上升，盆水也膨胀，羊脱毛和麋换角，鸟鹊开始建窝筑巢。中午树立八尺长的圭表，能测出它一丈三尺长的日影。
English: At the winter solstice, the well water rises, the basin water also expands, the sheep sheds its hair and the beak changes its angle, and the bird beak begins to build a nest. At noon, set up an eight-foot-long Gui watch, which can measure a three-foot-long shadow.

古文：日夏至而流黄泽，石精出，蝉始鸣，半夏生，蚊虻不食驹犊，鸷鸟不搏黄口，八尺之景，修径尺五寸，景修则阴气胜，景短则阳气胜。
现代文：夏至时地流黄泽，石精也冒水气，蝉开始鸣叫而半夏长成，蚊虻不咬马驹牛犊，猛禽不抓雏鸟。中午树立八尺长的圭表，能测出它一尺五寸长的日影。日影长则说明阴气强而日离地远，日影短则说明阳气强而日离地近。
English: At the time of the summer solstice, the ground is yellowish, the stone sprite also emits water vapor, the cicada begins to sing and grows in the middle of summer, the mosquito does not bite the horse, the bull calf, and the raptor does not catch the baby bird. At noon, an eight-foot-long Gui watch can be set up to measure its one-foot-five-inch-long shadow. The long shadow indicates that the yin is strong and the sun is far from the ground, and the short shadow indicates that the yang is strong and the sun is close to the ground.

古文：阴气胜则为水，阳气胜则为旱。
现代文：阴气过强则多雨水，阳气过强则多干旱。
English: If the yin is too strong, there will be more rain, and if the yang is too strong, there will be more drought.

古文：阴阳刑德有七舍。
现代文：主刑杀的阴气和主生长的阳气有七处居住地方。
English: There are seven dwelling places for the yin qi of the master executioner and the yang qi of the master grower.

古文：何谓七舍？
现代文：什么是七处居住地方？
English: What are the seven habitations?

古文：室、堂、庭、门、巷、术、野。
现代文：就是指室、堂、庭、门、巷、术、野。
English: It means room, hall, garden, gate, lane, skill, and field.

古文：十二月德居室三十日，先日至十五日，后日至十五日，而徙所居各三十日。
现代文：十一月份阳气在内室居留三十天，也即冬至前后各居留十五天，然后依次转移至各舍，每在一舍均居留三十天。
English: In November, yang qi stays in the inner room for 30 days, that is, it stays for 15 days before and after the winter solstice, and then it is transferred to each house in turn, staying in each house for 30 days.

古文：德在室则刑在野，德在堂则刑在术，德在庭则刑在巷。
现代文：阳气在内室时则阴气在郊野，阳气在厅堂时则阴气在街道，阳气在庭院时则阴气在巷里。
English: When the yang is in the inner room, the yin is in the countryside; when the yang is in the hall, the yin is in the street; when the yang is in the courtyard, the yin is in the alley.

古文：阴阳相德则刑德合门。
现代文：阳气和阴气平衡时，它们便集合在大门。
English: When yang and yin are in balance, they gather at the gate.

古文：八月、二月，阴阳气均，日夜分平，故曰刑德合门。
现代文：八月秋分和二月春分时，阴阳二气不盛不衰平衡相处则昼夜相等，所以说阴气阳气便集合在大门。
English: At the autumn equinox in August and the spring equinox in February, when yin and yang are in balance, day and night are equal, so yin and yang gather at the gate.

古文：德南则生，刑南则杀，故曰二月会而万物生，八月会而草木死。
现代文：阳气由南遍及北，万物就生长，而阴气由北遍及南，万物就萧杀。所以说阴阳二气聚合于二月春分时，万物就生长，阴阳二气聚合于八月秋分时，草木就枯死。
English: When the yang and the yang circulate from south to north, all things grow, but when the yin and the yang circulate from north to south, all things die. Therefore, when the yin and the yang coalesce at the vernal equinox in February, all things grow, and when the yin and the yang coalesce at the autumnal equinox in August, plants die.

古文：两维之间，九十一度十六分度之五而升，日行一度，十五日为一节，以生二十四时之变。
现代文：东北和东南两角之间各是又分之度，而北斗每天运行一度，运行十五天为一个节气，产生出一年二十四节气的变化。
English: The north-east and south-east corners are separated by another degree, while the Big Dipper runs once a day, and its 15-day run is a solar term, producing 24 solar terms in a year.

古文：斗指子则冬至，音比黄钟。
现代文：斗柄指向子位时就是冬至，音律配黄钟。
English: When the handle of the bucket points to the sub-position, it is the winter solstice, and the melody is accompanied by a yellow bell.

古文：加十五日指癸则小寒，音比应钟。
现代文：经过十五天斗柄指向癸位时就是小寒，音律配应钟。
English: After fifteen days, when the handle of the bucket points to the gong, it is cold, and the melody accompanies the bell.

古文：加十五日指丑是大寒，音比无射。
现代文：经过十五天斗柄指向丑位时就是大寒，音律配无射。
English: After fifteen days, when the handle points to the ugly position, it is very cold, and there is no rhythm.

古文：加十五日指报德之维，则越阴在地，故曰距日冬至四十六日而立春，阳气冻解，音比南吕。
现代文：经过十五天斗柄指向报德之维的丑寅之间，这时表示阴气已散扩到地底下。所以说距离冬至四十六天就是立春，阳气消融冰冻，音律配南吕。
English: After fifteen days between the ugly cranes pointing to the dimension of virtue, this time indicates that the yin has spread to the bottom of the earth. Therefore, forty-six days from the winter solstice is the beginning of spring, the yang melts and freezes, and the melody is accompanied by Nan Lv.

古文：加十五日指寅则雨水，音比夷则。
现代文：经过十五天斗柄指向寅位时就是雨水，音律配夷则。
English: After fifteen days, when the handle of the bucket points to the "T" position, it is rain, and the melody is complete.

古文：加十五日指甲则雷惊蛰，音比林钟。
现代文：经过十五天斗柄指向甲位时就是惊蛰，春雷惊动万物，音律配林钟。
English: After fifteen days, when the handle of the bucket points to the first place, it is the alarm, the spring thunder alarms all things, and the rhythm is set by the forest bell.

古文：加十五日指卯中绳，放曰春分则雷行，音比蕤宾。
现代文：经过十五天斗柄指向卯辰，与卯酉纬线相合，故这是春分而雷鸣发生，音律配蕤宾。
English: After fifteen days, the handle of the dipper points to Ucun, coinciding with the latitude of Ucun, so this is the vernal equinox and thunder occurs, accompanied by music.

古文：加十五日指乙则清明风至，音比仲吕。
现代文：经过十五天斗柄指向乙位时就是清明风到，音律配仲吕。
English: After fifteen days, when the handle of the bucket points to the second place, it is clear and windy, and the melody is in tune.

古文：加十五日指辰则谷雨，音比姑洗。
现代文：经过十五天斗柄指向辰位时就是谷雨，音律配姑洗。
English: After fifteen days, when the handle of the bucket points to the hour, it is the valley rain, and the melody is accompanied by a purge.

古文：加十五日指常羊之维则春分尽，故曰有四十六日而立夏，大风济，者比夹钟。
现代文：经过十五天斗柄指向常羊之维的辰巳之间，这时表示春季时令结束。所以说春分以后四十六天就是立夏，大风止息，音律配夹钟。
English: After fifteen days between the hour when the handle of the bucket points to the dimension of the sheep, this indicates the end of the spring season. Therefore, forty-six days after the vernal equinox is the beginning of summer, the wind stops, and the music is accompanied by a clock.

古文：加十五日指已则小满，音比太蔟。
现代文：经过十五天斗柄指向巳位时就是小满，音律配太蔟。
English: After fifteen days, when the handle of the bucket points to the snake position, it is small and full, and the melody is too loud.

古文：加十五日指丙则芒种，音比大吕。
现代文：经过十五天斗柄指向丙位时就是芒种，音律配大吕。
English: After fifteen days, when the handle of the bucket points to the C position, it is the male seed, and the melody is accompanied by a large bow.

古文：加十五日指午则阳气极，故曰有四十六日而夏至，音比黄钟。
现代文：经过十五天斗柄指向午位时，这时阳气达到极点。所以说立夏以后四十六天就是夏至，音律配黄钟。
English: After fifteen days, when the handle of the dipper points to the noon, the yang reaches its peak. Therefore, forty-six days after the beginning of summer is the summer solstice, and the melody is accompanied by a yellow bell.

古文：加十五日指丁则小暑，音比大吕。
现代文：经过十五天斗柄指向丁位时就是小暑，音律配大吕。
English: After fifteen days, when the handle of the bucket points to the Ding position, it is a small heat, and the melody is accompanied by a large Lu.

古文：加十五日指未则大暑，音比太蔟。
现代文：经过十五天斗柄指向未位时就是大暑，音律配太蔟。
English: After fifteen days, when the handle of the bucket is not pointed, it is very hot, and the music is too loud.

古文：加十五日指背阳之维则夏分尽，故曰有四十六日而立秋，凉风至，音比夹钟。
现代文：经过十五天斗柄指向背阳之维的未申之间，这时表示夏季时令结束。所以说夏至以后四十六天就是立秋，凉风吹来，音律配夹钟。
English: After fifteen days, when the handle of the compass points to the rising sun, it indicates the end of the summer season. Therefore, forty-six days after the summer solstice is the beginning of autumn, the cool wind blows, and the melody is accompanied by a clock.

古文：加十五日指申则处暑，音比姑洗。
现代文：经过十五天斗柄指向申位时就是处暑。音律配姑洗。
English: After fifteen days, when the handle of the bucket points to the seat, it is to deal with the heat.

古文：加十五日指庚则白露降，音比仲吕。
现代文：经过十五天斗柄指向庚位时就是白露，露水降临，音律配仲吕。
English: After fifteen days, when the handle of the bucket points to the Geng position, it is white dew, dew falls, and the melody is accompanied by Zhong Lv.

古文：加十五日指西中绳，故曰秋分雷戒，蛰虫北乡，音比蕤宾。
现代文：经过十五天斗柄指向酉辰，与酉卯纬线相合，故这是秋分而雷鸣收藏，冬眠动物开始钻进面南的洞穴，音律配蕤宾。
English: After fifteen days, the handle of the bucket points to the meridian and coincides with the meridian line, so this is the autumnal equinox and thunder collection. Hibernating animals began to enter the cave to the south of the face, and the melody was accompanied by thunder.

古文：加十五日指辛则寒露，音比林钟。
现代文：经过十五天斗柄指向辛位就是寒露，音律配林钟。
English: After fifteen days, the handle of the bucket points to the hot spot, which is cold dew, and the melody accompanies the forest bell.

古文：加十五日指戌则霜降，音比夷则。
现代文：经过十五天斗柄指向戌位时就是霜降，音律配夷则。
English: After fifteen days, when the handle of the bucket points to the gong, the frost falls, and the rhythm is complete.

古文：加十五日指蹄通之维则秋分尽，故曰有四十六日而立冬，草木毕死，音比南吕。
现代文：经过十五天斗柄指向蹄通之维的戌亥之间，这时表示秋季时令结束。所以说秋分以后四十六天就是立冬，草木枯死，音律配南吕。
English: After 15 days, when the handle of the dipper points to the hoof between the hooves of the boar, it indicates the end of the autumn season. Therefore, 46 days after the autumn equinox is the beginning of winter, the plants die, and the melody is accompanied by Nan Lü.

古文：加十五日指亥则小雪，音比无射。
现代文：经过十五天斗柄指向亥位时就是小雪，音律配无射。
English: After fifteen days, when the handle of the bucket points to the boar's position, it is light snow, and the rhythm is matched without overshoot.

古文：加十五日指壬则大雪，音比应钟。
现代文：经过十五天斗柄指向壬位时就是大雪，音律配应钟。
English: After fifteen days, when the handle of the bucket is pointed at Imo, it is heavy snow, and the melody is matched to the bell.

古文：加十五日指子，故曰阳生于子，阴生于午。
现代文：经过十五天斗柄指向子位时表示一年二十四节气运转完毕。所以说阳气生于子辰，阴气生于午辰。
English: After 15 days, when the handle of the bucket points to the child, it means that the 24 solar terms of the year have run out. Therefore, the yang is born at the child, and the yin is born at the noon.

古文：阳生于子，故十一月日冬至，鹊始加巢，人气钟首。
现代文：阳气生于子辰，所以冬至十一月，喜鹊开始筑巢建窝，人之阳气也运行升聚到头部。
English: Yang qi is born in children, so in the winter to November, magpies begin to build nests, and human yang qi also runs up to the head.

古文：阴生于午，故五月为小刑，荠麦亭历枯，冬生草木必死。
现代文：阴气生于午辰，所以五月有轻微的杀气，荠、麦、葶历这时成熟枯萎，冬天长出的草木这时一定死亡。
English: Yin qi is born at noon, so there is a slight killing qi in May. The millet, wheat and rye ripen and wither at this time, and the plants that grow in winter will certainly die at this time.

古文：斗杓为小岁，正月建寅，月从开行十二辰。
现代文：北斗七星中斗柄三星叫做小岁，它在正月指向寅辰时开始运行，每月从左至右运行，十二辰为一周天。
English: The three-pointed star in the middle of the Big Dipper is called Xiaolai. It starts to run when it points to Yin Chen in the first month. It runs from left to right every month, and the 12th hour is a weekday.

古文：咸池为太岁，二月建卯，月从右行四仲，终而复始。
现代文：咸池三星称为大岁，它在二月从卯位开始运行，每月从右至左运行，四仲为一周天，终而复始。
English: Hamchi three-star is called the oldest, it starts running in February from Uchi, it runs from right to left every month, it is a weekday between the four, and it starts all over again.

古文：太岁迎者辱，背者强；左者衰，右者昌。
现代文：就大岁而言，如果逆着它就会受辱、顺着它就会强盛；违反它则衰落、顺从它则昌盛。
English: As far as the great age is concerned, if you go against it, you will be humiliated, and if you follow it, you will prosper; if you violate it, you will decline, and if you obey it, you will prosper.

古文：小岁东南则生，西北则杀，不可迎也，而可背也；不可左也，而可右也，其此之谓也。
现代文：同样，小岁指向东南时万物生长，指向西北时万物萧杀；不可逆违它，只能顺从它；不可左行而只可右行。上述就是这个意思。
English: In the same way, when the small year points to the southeast, all things grow, and when it points to the northwest, all things die; you can't go against it, you can only follow it; you can't go left, but you can only go right. The above is the meaning.

古文：大时者，咸池也；小时者，月建也。
现代文：用来确定大时四季的是大岁的运行，用来确定小时月份的是小岁的运行。
English: The four seasons are determined by the movement of the major years, and the hours and months are determined by the movement of the minor years.

古文：天维建元，常以寅始起，右徒一岁而移，十二岁而大周天，终而复始。
现代文：以太岁来纪年，通常是从寅辰部位开始的。从右运行，一年后移动到下一辰次，经过十二年走完一周天，终而复始。
English: According to the lunar calendar, the year usually starts from the hour of the tiger. It runs from the right, moves to the next hour after one year, and ends after twelve years.

古文：淮南元年冬，太一在丙子，冬至甲午，立春丙子。
现代文：淮南王元年冬，太岁在丙子，甲午日冬至，丙子日立春。
English: The winter of Huainan Wangyuan in the first year, the summer solstice in the second year, the winter solstice in the first year, and the spring solstice in the second year.

古文：二阴一阳成气二；二阳一阴成气三。
现代文：二阴一阳成阴气二，二阳一阴成阳气三。
English: Two yin and one yang make two yang, and two yang and one yin make three yang.

古文：合气而为音，合阴而为阳，合阳而为律，故曰五音六律。
现代文：阴气二阳气三合成五行之气而为宫、商、角、徵、羽五音，二阴合一阳为三，合二个阳数便得六而为六律。所以五音六律就是这样的。
English: Yin qi, two yang qi, and three yang qi combine to form the five elements of qi, resulting in the five sounds of palace, merchant, horn, sign, and feather. Two yin qi and one yang qi make three, and two yang qi and two yang qi make six, resulting in the rule of six. Therefore, the rule of six tones is like this.

古文：音自倍而为日，律自倍而为辰，故日十而辰十二。
现代文：而五音的倍数就是十，也就形成十日干数，六律的倍数就是十二，也就形成十二地支数。
English: And the multiple of the five tones is ten, which forms the decimal number, and the multiple of the six laws is twelve, which forms the decimal number.

古文：月日行十三度七十六分度之二十六，二十九日九百四十分日之四百九十九而为月，而以十二月为岁。岁有余十日九百四十分之八百二十七，故十九岁而七闰。
现代文：所以天干是十而地支是十二。月球每天运行又分之度，又分之天为一个月。一年定为十二个月，这样一年就有余数又分之天，所以十九年积累的余数约合七个月， 故十九岁而七闰 。
English: Therefore, the heavenly stem is ten and the earthly branch is twelve. The moon orbits the earth every day by one minute, and one minute is one month. A year is set at twelve months, so there is a surplus of one minute a year, so the accumulated surplus of nineteen years is about seven months, so nineteen years old and seven leap years.

古文：日冬至子午，夏至卯西。
现代文：冬至日通常在子日或午日，夏至日通常在卯日或酉日。
English: The winter solstice is usually on the first day of the month or at noon, and the summer solstice is usually on the second day of the month or on the third day of the month.

古文：冬至加三日，则夏至之日也。
现代文：冬至的日子加上三天就是夏至的日子。
English: The day of winter solstice plus three days is the day of summer solstice.

古文：岁迁六日，终而复始。
现代文：而从夏至到下一个冬至则日子移迁六天。这种加三迁六现象一年一循环，周而复始。
English: From the summer solstice to the next winter solstice, however, the days shift by six days. This phenomenon of adding three and shifting by six is a cycle that repeats itself every year.

古文：壬午冬至，甲子受制，木用事，火烟青。
现代文：如果冬至壬午日，那么甲子受命起行主管春季，这时木气为主宰，火烟呈青色。
English: If the winter solstice is in the afternoon, then Kozi was ordered to start the spring, when the wood gas is dominant and the smoke is blue.

古文：七十二日，丙子受制，火用事，火烟赤。
现代文：从冬至七十二天后，丙子受命起行主管季夏，这时火气为主宰，火烟呈红色。
English: Seventy-two days after the winter solstice, Cun Zi was ordered to start leading Ji Xia. At this time, the fire was dominant, and the smoke was red.

古文：七十二日戊子受制，土用事，火烟黄。
现代文：再过七十二天后，戊子受命起行主管季夏，这时土气为主宰，火烟呈黄色。
English: Seventy-two days later, Bosi was appointed as the starting supervisor, Ji Xia. At that time, the atmosphere was mainly earthy, and the smoke was yellow.

古文：七十二日，庚子受制，金用事，火烟白。
现代文：再过七十二天后，庚子受命起行主管秋季，这时金气为主宰，火烟呈白色。
English: Seventy-two days later, Geng Zi was given the task of supervising the start of the fall season. At this time, gold was the main element, and the smoke was white.

古文：七十二日，壬子受制，水用事，火烟黑。
现代文：再过七十二天后，壬子受命起行主管冬季，这时水气为主宰，火烟呈黑色。
English: Seventy-two days later, Renzi was ordered to start the winter, when water and gas dominated, and the smoke was black.

古文：七十二日而岁终，庚子受制。
现代文：再过七十二天一年结束，下一年庚子受命起行主管春节。
English: Seventy-two days later, the year ends, and the next year, Geng Zi is ordered to be in charge of the Spring Festival.

古文：岁迁六日，以数推之，七十岁而复至甲子。
现代文：每年移迁六天，按这个数字来推算，七十年又回到冬至甲子受命起行主宰春季。
English: It moves six days a year, and according to this figure, it will return to the winter solstice in seventy years.

古文：甲子受制则行柔惠，挺群禁，开阖扇，通障塞，毋伐木。
现代文：甲子受命的春季，应当实施仁慈和恩惠，解除各种禁令，敞开城门，疏通路障关卡，不要砍伐正在生长的树木。
English: In the springtime of the year of the Monkey's order, benevolence and grace should be practiced, all kinds of prohibitions should be lifted, city gates should be opened, roadblocks and checkpoints should be cleared, and trees that are growing should not be cut down.

古文：丙子受制，则举贤良，赏有功，立封侯，出货财。
现代文：丙子受命的夏季，应当推举贤良之士，奖赏有功之臣，封立王侯，颁发财物。
English: In the summer, when the son of the emperor received the order, it was necessary to promote virtuous men, reward meritorious vassals, enthrone princes, and award property.

古文：戊子受制，则养老鳏寡，行粰鬻，施恩泽。
现代文：戊子受命的季夏，应当赡养老人及寡妇鳏夫，施舍黏稠米粥，广施恩泽。
English: The Qixia ordered by Wu Zi should support the elderly and widows and widowers, give alms of sticky rice porridge, and extend grace.

古文：庚子受制，则缮墙垣，修城郭，审群禁，饰兵甲，做百官，诛不法。
现代文：庚子受命的秋季，应当修缮院墙城廓，审察各种禁令，整治兵器装备，儆诫百官，惩治犯罪分子。
English: In the autumn, when Geng Zi received the order, he should repair the courtyard wall and the city wall, examine various prohibitions, rectify weapons and equipment, admonish hundreds of officials, and punish criminals.

古文：壬子受制，则闭门闾，大搜客，断刑罚，杀当罪，息关梁，禁外徙。
现代文：壬子受命的冬季，应当关闭城门闾门，全面搜查外流人员，判定刑罚，处决死罪犯人，封锁关卡桥梁，禁止人员迁徙。
English: In the winter, when Renzi received the order, the city gate and gate should be closed, the outflow personnel should be comprehensively searched, the punishment should be decided, the criminals should be executed, the checkpoints and bridges should be blocked, and the migration of personnel should be prohibited.

古文：甲子气燥浊，丙子气燥阳，戊子气湿浊，庚子气燥寒，壬子气清寒。
现代文：甲子之气干燥混浊，丙子之气干燥温热，戊子之气温热混浊，庚子之气干燥寒冷，壬子之气清冽寒冷。
English: The qi of the yang qi is dry and turbid, the qi of the yang qi is dry and warm, the temperature of the yang qi is hot and turbid, the qi of the yang qi is dry and cold, and the qi of the yang qi is clear and cold.

古文：丙子干甲子，蛰虫早出，故雷早行。
现代文：如果丙子之气犯甲子之气，则冬眠动物就会提早出来和春雷也提早出现。
English: If the qi of the third son is inferior to the qi of the first son, the hibernating animals will come out early and the spring thunder will also appear early.

古文：戊子干甲子，胎夭卵毈，鸟虫多伤。
现代文：如果戊子之气犯甲子之气，则动物胎儿夭折，禽卵孵不出幼雏和虫鸟受伤害。
English: If the mother's qi is worse than the father's qi, the animal's fetus will die prematurely, the eggs will not hatch, and the insects and birds will be harmed.

古文：庚子干甲子，有兵。
现代文：如果庚子之气犯甲子之气，则会有战事兵祸。
English: If the qi of Geng Zi offends the qi of Jia Zi, then there will be a military disaster.

古文：壬子干甲子，春有霜。
现代文：如果壬子之气犯甲子之气，则春有霜冻。
English: If 壬子之氣 offends 甲子之气, then there will be frost in spring.

古文：戊子干丙子，霆。
现代文：如果戊子之气犯丙子之气，则有雷霆出现。
English: If Boshi's anger offends Boshi's anger, a thunderbolt appears.

古文：庚子干丙子，夷。
现代文：如果庚子之气犯戊子之气，则会发生闪电。
English: If the qi of Geng Zi offends the qi of Wu Zi, lightning will occur.

古文：壬子干丙子，雹。
现代文：如果壬子之气犯丙子之气，则会有冰雹出现。
English: If the child's anger is greater than the child's anger, there will be hail.

古文：甲子干丙子，地动。
现代文：如果甲子之气犯丙子之气，则会发生地震。
English: If the qi of the yang son offends the qi of the yang son, an earthquake will occur.

古文：庚子干戊子，五谷有殃。
现代文：如果庚子之气犯戊子之气，则五谷遭残害。
English: If the qi of the kenko offends the qi of the woshi, the gotani will be mutilated.

古文：壬子干戊子，夏寒雨霜。
现代文：如果壬子之气犯戊子之气，则夏天寒冷甚至下霜。
English: If 壬子之气 violates 戊子之气, the summer will be cold and even frosty.

古文：甲子干戊子，介虫不为。
现代文：如果甲子之气犯戊子之气，则介甲动物发育不正常。
English: If the qi of the yang son violates the qi of the yang son, then the development of the armadillo is abnormal.

古文：丙子干戊子，大旱，苽封熯。
现代文：如果丙子之气犯戊子之气，则大旱和茭白枯死。
English: If the qi of the third son offends the qi of the fourth son, then the great drought and the white locust will die out.

古文：壬子干庚子，大刚，鱼不为。
现代文：如果壬子之气犯庚子之气，则鱼儿不能正常生长。
English: If the male's qi is inferior to the female's qi, the fish cannot grow normally.

古文：甲子干庚子，草木再死再生。
现代文：如果甲子之气犯庚子之气，则草木死而复生。
English: If the qi of the yang son offends the qi of the yang son, then the plants and trees will die and come back to life.

古文：丙子干庚子，草木复荣，戊子干庚子，岁或存或亡。
现代文：如果丙子之气犯庚子之气，则草木再次开花。如果戊子之气犯庚子之气，则收成或有或无。
English: If the qi of the cormorant offends the qi of the rooster, then the plants will bloom again. If the qi of the peony offends the qi of the rooster, then the harvest may or may not be.

古文：甲子干壬子，冬乃不藏。
现代文：如果甲子之气犯壬子之气，则温暖如春冬天不利收藏。
English: If a child's temper offends a child's temper, then warm weather, such as spring and winter, is unfavorable for collecting.

古文：丙子干壬子，星坠。
现代文：如果丙子之气犯壬子之气，则有流星坠落。
English: If the child's anger offends the child's anger, a meteor will fall.

古文：戊子干壬子，蛰虫冬出其乡。
现代文：如果戊子之气犯壬子之气，则冬眠动物在冬天会跑出洞穴。
English: Hibernating animals will come out of their burrows in the winter if the hibernator's anger is greater than the hibernator's anger.

古文：庚子干壬子，冬雷其乡。
现代文：如果庚子之气犯壬子之气，则冬天响雷。
English: If the kenko's anger offends the konko's anger, then the winter will be thunderous.

古文：季春三月，丰隆乃出，以将其雨。
现代文：季春三月，丰隆便露面，开始行雨。
English: In March of the spring season, Honglong appeared and it began to rain.

古文：至秋三月，地气不藏，乃收其杀，百虫蛰伏，静居闭户，青女乃出，以降霜雪。
现代文：季秋三月，地气向下伏藏，大自然有了收敛的萧杀之气。各种昆虫蛰伏起来，关闭门户静静地待在洞穴里。
English: In the spring, autumn, and March, the earth's atmosphere hides beneath the surface, and nature has an astringent air of stagnation. All kinds of insects lie down, close the portal, and stay quietly in the cave.

古文：行十二时之气，以至于促春二月之夕，乃收其藏而闭其寒。
现代文：这时青女便露面，降霜下雪，施行十二时令之气，直到明年仲春二月下旬，才结束伏藏阳气而闭塞阴寒之气。
English: At this time, the young woman appeared, the frost fell, the snow fell, and the twelve-hour air was implemented. It was not until late February of the next year that the yang air of Fuzo was ended and the cold air was blocked.

古文：女夷鼓歌，以司天和，以长百谷禽鸟草木。
现代文：女夷出来踏乐而歌，主管着上天自然温和之气，促使百谷禽鸟草木发育生长。
English: Female eagles come out to dance and sing, presiding over the natural mildness of heaven, promoting the development and growth of grains, birds and plants.

古文：孟夏之月，以熟谷禾，雄鸠长鸣，为帝候岁。
现代文：孟夏四月，温和阳气使谷物成熟，雄鸠不断鸣叫，为天帝预报节候。
English: In April of Mengxia, the mild yang makes the grain ripe, and the male crickets chirp incessantly, predicting the weather for the Heavenly Emperor.

古文：是故天不发其阴，则万物不生；地不发其阳，则万物不成。
现代文：因此，天如果不释放阴冷之气，则万物不能生育；地如果不散发阳热之气，则万物不能成熟。
English: Therefore, if the sky does not release the cold and gloomy air, then all things cannot bear fruit; if the earth does not emit the hot and sunny air, then all things cannot mature.

古文：天圆地方，道在中央。
现代文：天圆地方，而道则在中央。
English: Heaven is round, and the road is in the middle.

古文：日为德，月为刑。
现代文：太阳为德泽，月亮为刑杀。
English: The sun stands for virtue, the moon for punishment.

古文：月归而万物死，日至而万物生。
现代文：月刑到来则万物死亡，日德到来则万物生存。
English: When the moon comes, all things die; when the sun comes, all things live.

古文：远山则山气藏，远水则水虫蛰，远木则木叶槁。日五日不见，失其位也，圣人不与也。
现代文：太阳如果远离山则山气就藏伏，如果远离水则水中鱼就蛰伏，如果远离树木则树叶就枯萎，这就是说太阳如果连续五天不出来露脸，就是失职，连圣人都不会高兴的。
English: If the sun is far away from the mountains, the mountain air will hide, if it is far away from the water, the fish in the water will lie down, and if it is far away from the trees, the leaves will wither. That is to say, if the sun does not show its face for five consecutive days, it is a dereliction of duty, and even the saints will not be happy.

古文：日出于旸谷，浴于咸池，拂于扶桑，是谓晨明。
现代文：太阳从旸谷出来，在咸池沐浴以后，掠过扶桑树木，这时叫晨明。
English: When the sun comes out of the valley of the reeds, after bathing in the salt pond, and passes through the Fusang trees, it is called the dawn.

古文：登于扶桑，爱始将行，是谓胐明。
现代文：升上扶桑树顶，于是开始启程，这时叫黎明。
English: He climbed to the top of the Fusang tree, and then began his journey. It was dawn.

古文：至于曲阿，是谓旦明。
现代文：到达曲阿山时，叫旦明。
English: When he arrived at Qiaoshan, he was called Tanming.

古文：至于曾泉，是谓蚤食。
现代文：到达水泽曾泉，正是用早点时间。
English: Arriving at Mizusawa Zosen, it is best to arrive early.

古文：至于桑野，是谓晏食。
现代文：而到达桑野是用午餐时间。
English: It was lunchtime when we arrived in Kuwano.

古文：至于衡阳，是谓隅中。
现代文：到达衡阳山顶，正好接近中午。
English: We reached the top of Hengyang Mountain just before noon.

古文：至于昆吾，是谓正中。
现代文：到达昆吾山时，日在正中。
English: When we arrived at Kunwushan, it was the middle of the day.

古文：至于鸟次，是谓小还。
现代文：到达鸟次，这时是中午偏西。
English: When we arrived at Bird's Nest, it was midday in the west.

古文：至于悲谷，是谓餔时。
现代文：到了悲谷正是餔时，该用晚饭了。
English: It was dinnertime in the Valley of Misery. It was time for dinner.

古文：至于女纪，是谓大还。
现代文：再到西北的女纪，太阳更是偏西。
English: Further to the northwest, the sun is even further west.

古文：至于渊虞，是谓高舂。
现代文：到达渊虞后，已是傍晚舂米时。
English: After arriving at Yuanyu, it was already late afternoon.

古文：至于连石，是谓下舂。
现代文：再到连石山时，太阳也就快要隐没了。
English: By the time we reached Lianshi Mountain, the sun was about to set.

古文：至于悲泉，爱止其女，爱息其马，是谓县车。
现代文：而到了悲泉，全天行程将完，于是让御手卸车息马，悬车休息。
English: However, when we arrived at the pathetic spring, the whole day's trip would be over, so I let my hands unload the car and rest.

古文：至于虞渊，是谓黄昏。
现代文：到了虞渊，已是黄昏时分。
English: By the time we reached Yuyuan, it was already dusk.

古文：至于蒙谷，是谓定昏。
现代文：再到蒙谷，天已黑，是黄昏之后的定昏了。
English: When I got to Menggu, it was already dark. It was dusk after dusk.

古文：日入于虞渊之汜，曙于蒙谷之浦，行九州七舍，有五亿万七千三百九里，禹以为朝昼昏夜。
现代文：这时太阳入息于虞渊水边，阳光余辉映照着蒙谷之畔。太阳每天行经九州、七舍，行程五亿万七千三百零九里，可将此分为早晨、白天、黄昏和夜晚四个阶段。
English: At this time, the sun sets on the water's edge of the Yuyuan, and the sun's afterglow shines on the banks of the Meng Valley. The sun passes through Kyushu and Shichisho every day, traveling 5 billion 73009 miles, which can be divided into four stages: morning, daytime, dusk and night.

古文：夏日至则阴乘阳，是以万物就而死；冬日至则阳乘阴，是以万物仰而生。
现代文：夏至时阳气回落阴气上升，所以万物趋于死亡。冬至时阴气回落阳气上升，所以万物向往着而生长。
English: At the summer solstice, the yang falls back and the yin rises, so everything tends to die. At the winter solstice, the yang falls back and the yang rises, so everything yearns and grows.

古文：昼者阳之分，夜者阴之分，是以阳之胜则日修而夜短，阴令胜则日短而夜修。
现代文：白昼属阳气管辖，夜晚属阴气主管。因此，阳气为主时白天长而夜晚短，阴气为主时白天短而夜晚长。
English: Daytime is governed by yang, and nighttime is governed by yin. Therefore, when yang is predominant, the day is long and the night is short; when yin is predominant, the day is short and the night is long.

古文：帝张四维，运之以斗，月徙一辰，复反其所。
现代文：天帝张开周天四角，北斗循之旋转，每月移动一辰，运行十二个月又返回到原出发的部位。
English: The celestial emperor opens the four corners of the sky, the Big Dipper follows the rotation, moves one hour a month, runs for twelve months and returns to the original starting point.

古文：正月指寅，十二月指丑，一岁而匝，终而复始。
现代文：正月斗柄指向寅辰，十一月斗柄指向丑辰，一年环绕一周，终而复始。
English: In the first month, the handle of the bucket points to Yin Chen, in the second month, the handle of the bucket points to Ugly Chen, in the third month, the handle of the bucket points to Yin Chen, in the fourth month, the handle of the bucket points to Ugly Chen.

古文：指寅，则万物螾螾也，律受太蔟；太蔟者，簇而未出也。
现代文：斗柄指向寅辰，寅是万物复苏蠕动的意思，音律用太蔟，太蔟的意思是万物聚集而尚未出土。
English: The handle of the bucket points to "寅辰," "寅" means the resuscitation of all things, and "太" means the gathering of all things that have not yet been unearthed.

古文：指卯，卯则茂茂然，律受夹钟；夹钟者，种始荚也。
现代文：斗柄指向卯辰，卯是草木茂盛的意思，音律用夹钟，夹钟的意思是种子破壳而出。
English: The handle of the bucket points to "U," which means lush vegetation, and the melody uses a bell, which means that the seeds come out of the shell.

古文：指辰，辰则振之也，律受姑洗；姑洗者，陈去而新来也。
现代文：斗柄指向辰时，辰是震动万物的意思，音律用姑洗，姑洗的意思是洗旧迎新。
English: When the handle of the bucket points to the cuckoo, the cuckoo means to shake all things, and the melody is purified. Purification means to wash away the old and welcome the new.

古文：指巳，巳则生已定也，律受仲吕；仲吕者，中充大也。
现代文：斗柄指向巳辰，巳是万物生长定型的意思，音律用仲吕，仲吕的意思是中间充实长大。
English: The handle of the bucket points to the cusp, cusp is the meaning of the growth pattern of all things, the melody uses Zhonglu, Zhonglu means to grow up fully in the middle.

古文：指午，午者忤也，律受蕤宾；蕤宾者，安而服也。
现代文：斗柄指向午辰，午是阴阳交逢的意思，音律用蕤宾，蕤宾的意思是安柔阴气将为主、阳气将宾服。
English: The handle of the bucket points to the noon, and the noon means the meeting of yin and yang. The melody uses the Chinese character 宾, and 宾 means that the yin will be the master and the yang will be the guest.

古文：指未，未，昧也，律受林钟；林钟者，引而止也。
现代文：斗柄指向未辰，未是阴气已长万物稍衰的意思，音律用林钟，林钟的意思是阳气将止万物衰败。
English: The handle of the bucket points to the future, meaning that all things that have long been in the yin will not decay, and the melody uses the forest bell. The forest bell means that the yang will stop the decay of all things.

古文：指申，申者，呻之也，律受夷则；夷则者，易其则也，德以去矣。
现代文：斗柄指向申辰，申是万物萧杀呻吟的意思，音律用夷则，夷则的意思是阳德已去阴气杀物。
English: The handle of the bucket points to Shen Chen. Shen means that all things are moaning and groaning, and the melody is Yi Zi. Yi Zi means that Yang De has gone to Yin Qi to kill things.

古文：指西，西者饱也，律受南吕；南吕者，任包大也。
现代文：斗柄指向酉辰，酉是黍成饱满的意思，音律用南吕，南吕的意思是阴气助万物成熟，大收之际。
English: The handle of the bucket points to 辰,  is the meaning of 成满, the melody is based on 南吕,南吕 means yin qi helps all things to mature, the time of harvest.

古文：指戌，戌者灭也，律受无射；无射，入无厌也。
现代文：斗柄指向戌辰，戌是阳气微弱万物尽灭的意思，音律用无射，无射的意思是阴气残杀万物尚未终止。
English: The handle of the bucket points to the hour of the dragon, and the dragon means that the weak yang is about to destroy everything. The melody uses no shot, and no shot means that the killing of everything by the yin has not yet ended.

古文：指亥，亥者阂也，律受应钟；应钟者，应其钟也。
现代文：斗柄指向亥辰，亥是阳气藏匿地下的意思，音律用应钟，应钟的意思是万物应时聚藏。
English: The handle of the bucket points to Hai Chen, Hai is the meaning of the yang hiding underground, the melody uses the bell, and the bell means that all things should be collected.

古文：指子，子者兹也，律受黄钟；黄钟者，钟已黄也。
现代文：斗柄指向子辰，子是万物孕育滋长的意思，音律用黄钟，黄钟的意思是阳气自黄泉而出。
English: The handle of the bucket points to the child, the child is the meaning of the birth and growth of all things, the melody uses the yellow bell, and the yellow bell means that the yang qi comes out of the yellow spring.

古文：指丑，丑者纽也，律受大吕；大吕者，旅旅而去也，其加卯西，则阴阳分，日夜平矣。
现代文：斗柄指向丑辰，丑是阳气尚未降于万物、万物厄纽未敢出的意思，音律用大吕，大吕的意思是助阳气升腾以萌万物。而当斗柄指向卯、酉时，正好阴和阳平分、春分秋分日和夜均等。
English: The handle of the bucket points to Ugly Chen, Ugly is the meaning that the yang has not yet descended to all things, and all things have not yet dared to emerge. The melody uses Dalu, and Dalu means to help the yang rise to sprout all things. And when the handle of the bucket points to U and Z, it is just the yin and yang equinox, the vernal equinox and the autumnal equinox, and the day and night are equal.

古文：故曰：规生矩杀，衡长权藏，绳居中央，为四时根。道曰规，始于一，一而不生，故分而为阴阳，阴阳合和而万物生，故曰： 一生二，二生三，三生万物。 
现代文：所以说，规代表阳气助万物蠢动的春天主仁主生长，矩代表阴气迁落万物的秋天主义主刑杀，衡代表阳气养万物的夏天主礼主成长，权代表阳气伏下万物终藏的冬天主智主收藏，而绳代表的中央是端直通达，所以可成为春夏秋冬四季的总根本。道初始于混沌不分的 一 ，但 一 还不能直接产生天地万物，所以要从混沌不分的 一 中分化出阴阳二气，阴阳二气交和合气便产生万物，因此说： 一生二，二生三，三生万物。 
English: Therefore, the rule represents the yang qi to help the spring god benevolent growth of all things, the moment represents the yin qi to move and fall of all things, the autumn principle is the main punishment, the balance represents the yang qi to nurture the growth of all things, the summer god worship the main growth, the authority represents the yang qi to fall under the winter god wisdom collection, and the center of the rope represents the end direct access, so it can become the general foundation of the four seasons of spring, summer, autumn and winter. The beginning of the Tao began with chaos indivisible one, but one can not directly produce heaven and earth, so it is necessary to

古文：天地三月而为一时，故祭祀三饭以为礼，丧纪三踊以为节，兵重三罕以为制。
现代文：天地运行的时间以三个月为一季，所以祭祀时要以尸受 三饭 作为仪式，丧事要以 三踊 作为礼节，军事上要以 三军 作为制度。
English: The time for the movement of heaven and earth is three months for one season, so the three meals should be used as a ritual for sacrifices, the three dances should be used as etiquette for funerals, and the three armies should be used as a system for military affairs.

古文：以三参物，三三如九，故黄钟之律九寸而宫音调。
现代文：以 三 来参验计算事物，三三得九，所以黄钟的律管长九寸，以此来校正宫音的和谐程度。
English: According to the principle of three to three, three times three is nine. Therefore, the ratchet of the yellow bell is nine inches long, which is used to calibrate the degree of harmony of the palace tone.

古文：因而九之，九九八十一，故黄钟之数立焉。黄者土德之色，钟者气之所种也。
现代文：然后用九乘，九九八十一，这样黄钟律管的粗细和长度便确定了。 黄 是土德的颜色， 钟 是气相聚的意思。
English: Then, the number 9 was used, representing the number 9981, so that the thickness and length of the yellow bell were determined.Yellow is the color of patriotism, and the bell means the gathering of qi.

古文：日冬至，德气为土，土色黄，故曰黄钟。
现代文：冬至时五行之气中的土气旺盛，而土的颜色是黄的，所以和冬至十一月相应的音律就叫 黄钟 。
English: At the time of the winter solstice, the earth element in the five elements is strong, and the color of the earth is yellow, so the music corresponding to the winter solstice in November is called the yellow bell.

古文：律之数六，分为雌雄，故曰十二钟，以副十二月。
现代文：音律之数是六，分成阴阳雌雄两类，所以一共为十二律，用十二律配十二月。
English: The number of rhythms is six, divided into yin and yang, male and female, so there are a total of twelve rhythms, and twelve rhythms are used to match December.

古文：十二各以三成，故置一而十一，三之，为积分十七万六千一百四十七，黄钟大数立焉。
现代文：十二律的积数各自都可用三相乘而得之，所以设定一个首律，其余十一律逐一用三来乘，得积数为十七万七千一百四十七，这样，黄钟十二律管的积数就确定了。
English: The product of each of the twelve laws can be obtained by multiplying by three, so a first law is set, and the remaining eleven laws are multiplied by three one by one, resulting in a product of 177,147. In this way, the product of the twelve laws of the yellow bell is determined.

古文：凡十二律，黄钟为宫，太蔟为商，姑洗为角，林钟为徽，南吕为羽。
现代文：在所有的十二律中，黄钟定宫音，太蔟定商音，姑洗定角音，林钟定徵音，南吕定羽音。
English: Among all the twelve rhythms, Huang Zhong Ding Gongyuan, Taizhu Ding Shangyuan, Gu Zai Ding Qiangyuan, Lin Zhong Ding Xuanyuan, Nanlu Ding Yuanyin.

古文：物以三成，音以五立，三与五如八，故卵生者八窍。
现代文：万物由 三 所产生，乐音由 五 所形成， 三 加 五 等于 八 ，所以用卵繁殖的动物都有八窍。
English: All things are created from three, music is created from five, and three plus five equals eight, so animals that reproduce from eggs all have eight nostrils.

古文：律之初生也，写凤之音，故音以八生。黄钟为宫，宫者音之君也，故黄钟位子，其数八十一，主十一月，下生林钟。林钟之数五十四，主六月，上生太蔟。太簇之数七十二，主正月，下生南吕。南吕之数四十八，主八月，上生姑洗。
现代文：音律最初产生的时候是古人摹拟凤凰的鸣唱声音来确定的，所以音律隔八相生产生，黄钟定宫音，而宫音又是五音中的主音，所以黄钟在子位，其律管的粗细和长度的数是八十一，主管十一月。黄钟律下生林钟律，林钟的数是五十四，主管六月。林钟律上生太蔟律，太蔟的数是七十二，主管正月。太蔟律下生南吕律，南吕的数是四十八，主管八月。
English: When the melody was first created, it was determined by the ancient people's chanting sound of the phoenix, so the melody was produced in eight phases. The yellow bell determined the palace sound, and the palace sound was the main sound of the five tones. Therefore, the yellow bell was in the subposition, and the number of the thickness and length of the rhythm tube was 81, which was in charge of November. Under the yellow bell rhythm, the forest bell rhythm was born, the number of the forest bell was 54, which was in charge of June. The forest bell rhythm was born above the forest bell rhythm, the number of the palace bell was 72, which was in charge of the first month

古文：姑洗之数六十四，主三月，下生应钟。应钟之数四十二，主十月，上生蕤宾。
现代文：南吕律上生姑洗律，姑洗的数是六十四，主管三月。姑洗律下生应钟律，应钟的数是四十二，主管十月。
English: According to the Southern Ryukyuan calendar, the number of birthdays is 64 and the month is March. According to the Northern Ryukyuan calendar, the number of birthdays is 42 and the month is October.

古文：蕤宾之数五十七，主五月，上生大吕。大吕之数七十六，主十二月，下生夷则。
现代文：应钟律上生蕤宾律，蕤宾的数是五十七，主管五月。蕤宾律上生大吕律，大吕的数是七十六，主管十二月。
English: According to the rules of the clock, the number of constellations is 57 and the month is May. According to the rules of the clock, the number of constellations is 76 and the month is December.

古文：夷则之数五十一，主七月，上生夹钟。夹钟之数六十八，主二月，下生无射。
现代文：大吕律下生夷则律，夷则的数是五十一，主管七月。夷则律上生夹钟律，夹钟的数是六十八，主管二月。
English: Under the Great Lu Law, the birth of the eunuch is governed by the eunuch law, the number of the eunuch law is fifty-one, and it is in charge of July.

古文：无射之数四十五，主九月，上生仲吕。仲吕之数六十，主四月，极不生。
现代文：夹钟律下生无射律，无射的数是四十五，主管九月。无射律上生仲吕律，仲吕的数是六十，主管四月。
English: Under the bells and whistles, there is no shooting, the number of no-shooting is up to forty-five, in charge of September. There is no-shooting, the number of no-shooting is up to sixty in charge of April.

古文：徽生宫，宫生商，商生羽，羽生角，角生姑洗。
现代文：到了仲吕，十二律也就到此为止，不再相生了。
English: When they reached Zhonglu, the Twelve Laws ended here, and they were no longer intertwined.

古文：姑洗生应钟，比于正音，故为和。应钟生蕤宾，不比正音，故为缪。
现代文：宫产生徵，徵产生商，商产生羽，羽产生角，角主姑洗，姑洗又产生应钟，是为 变宫 ，它不接近正音，因此称它为 和 音。应钟产生蕤宾，就是 变徵 ，它也不合正音，因此称它为 缪 音。
English: The palace produces the sign, the sign produces the merchant, the merchant produces the feather, the feather produces the horn, the horn is cleaned, and the cleaning produces the answering bell. It is for the changing palace, it is not close to the positive tone, so it is called the harmonic tone. The answering bell produces the sibilant, that is, the changing sign, it is also not the positive tone, so it is called the mute tone.

古文：日冬至，音比林钟，浸以浊。日夏至，音比黄钟，浸以清。
现代文：冬至起音接近应钟，由冬至到夏至按十二律逆序逐一配合节气，律管依次增长，所以声音逐渐变浊；夏至起音接近黄钟，由夏至到冬至按十二律顺序逐一配合节气，律管依次减短，所以声音逐渐变清。
English: The winter solstice starts close to the bell, and from the winter solstice to the summer solstice, according to the reverse order of the law of twelve, it increases one by one to match the solar terms, and the law pipe increases in turn, so the sound gradually becomes hoarse; the summer solstice starts close to the yellow bell, from the summer solstice to the winter solstice, according to the order of twelve, it increases one by one to match the solar terms, and the law pipe decreases in turn, so the sound gradually becomes clear.

古文：以十二律应二十四时之变：甲子，仲吕之徽也；丙子，夹钟之羽也；戊子，黄钟之宫也；庚子，无射之商也；壬子，夷则之角也。
现代文：这种十二律的顺逆排列是适应二十四节气阴阳盛衰变化的。以音、律配日，就有甲子为仲吕之徵，丙子为夹钟之羽，戊子为黄钟之宫，庚子为无射之商，壬子为夷则之角，六十律为一周。
English: This reverse order of the 12 precepts corresponds to the changes in the rise and fall of the yin and yang of the 24 solar terms. In terms of the sounds and the precepts that correspond to the days of the year, there is the yang for the sign of Zhonglu, the yang for the feather of the pendulum, the yang for the palace of the yellow bell, the yang for the merchant without arrow, and the yang for the angle of the arrow, and the sixty precepts for a week.

古文：古之为度量，轻重生乎天道。
现代文：古时候制定度量衡的标准，是从大自然的运动法则中产生的。
English: In ancient times, the standards for measuring and measuring were derived from the laws of nature.

古文：黄钟之律修九寸，物以三生，三九二十七，故幅广二尺七寸。
现代文：黄钟律管长九寸，万物以 三 而生成，三三得九，三九二十七，所以布帛的宽幅为二尺七寸。
English: According to the law of the yellow bell, the length of the tube is nine inches, and all things are created by three, three times three is nine, and three times three is twenty-nine, so the width of the cloth is two feet and seven inches.

古文：音以八相生，故人修八尺，寻自倍，故八尺而为寻。
现代文：音是隔八相生成，所以人身长一般是八尺。寻等于人之身长，所以一寻定为八尺。
English: Sound is generated in eight phases, so a person's height is generally eight feet. Seeking is equal to a person's height, so one search is set to eight feet.

古文：有形则有声。音之数五，以五乘八，五八四十，故四丈而为匹。
现代文：有了形体事物也就有了声音，音的数量是五，以五乘八，五八四十，所以布是四丈为一匹。
English: With physical things, there is also sound. The number of sounds is five, five times eight, fifty-eight forty, so cloth is four times a horse.

古文：匹者，中人之度也。一匹而为制。
现代文：匹是指一般人裁制衣服所需的用布量，所以裁制衣服以一匹为定制。
English: The horse refers to the amount of cloth needed by the average person to tailor clothes, so the tailored clothes are customized with one horse.

古文：秋分蔈定，寞定而禾熟。
现代文：秋分时节禾穗的芒尖长成，芒尖长成表示禾谷成熟。
English: At the time of the autumn equinox, the tips of the ears of grain are growing, and the growth of the tips indicates the maturity of the grain.

古文：律之数十二，故十二蔈而当一粟，十二粟而当一寸。
现代文：音律的数目是十二，所以十二根禾芒相当于一粟，十二粒粟的长度相当于一寸。
English: The number of measures is twelve, so twelve ears of corn is equal to one millet, and the length of twelve millets is equal to one inch.

古文：律以当辰，音以当日。
现代文：十二音律与十二辰相配，五音与记日天干相配。
English: The 12-tone rhythm matches the 12-hour cycle, and the five-tone rhythm matches the solar calendar.

古文：日之数十，故十寸而为尺，十尺而为丈。
现代文：日干数为十，所以十寸为一尺，十尺为一丈。
English: The number of days is ten, so ten sun is one shaku, and ten shaku is one jo.

古文：其以为量，十二粟而当一分，十二分而当铢，十二铢而当半两。
现代文：用这种相似法制定重量标准，十二粒粟的重量就是一分，十二分等于一铢，十二铢等于半两。
English: Using this similarity method to establish a weight standard, the weight of twelve corns is one point, twelve points equal one hoe, and twelve hoes equal half a hoe.

古文：衡有左右，因倍之，故二十四铢而为一两。
现代文：衡器分为左右两边，因而将十二铢翻倍，于是二十四铢为一两。
English: The balance was divided into right and left, and the twelve bases were doubled, so that the twenty-four bases became one and two.

古文：天有四时，以成一岁，因而四之，四四十六，故十六两而为一觔。
现代文：天有四季而成一年，因此以四乘之，四四十六，所以十六两等于一斤。
English: There are four seasons in a year, so four multiplied by four is forty-six, so sixteen and two is equal to one pound.

古文：三月而为一时，三十日为一月，故三十觔为一钧。
现代文：三个月成为一季，三十天成为一月，所以三十斤为一钧。
English: Three months became a season, and thirty days became a month, so thirty catties became a mule.

古文：四时而为一岁，故四钧为一石。
现代文：四季合成一年，所以四钧为一石。
English: The four seasons make one year, so the four harvests make one stone.

古文：其以为音也，一律而生五音，十二律而为六十音。
现代文：就音律来说，一个音律可以生五音，十二音律就可以生成六十旋宫音调。
English: As far as musical rhythms are concerned, one musical rhythm can produce five tones, and twelve musical rhythms can produce sixty tones.

古文：因而六之，六六三十六，故三百六十音以当一岁之日。
现代文：以此乘以六，六六三十六，所以有三百六十音，相当于一年的天数。
English: Then multiply by six to get 6636, so 360 tones can correspond to the number of days in a year.

古文：故律历之数，天地之道也。
现代文：所以说音律历法的制定产生，符合天地运行的规律和法则。
English: Therefore, the number of rites and calendars reflects the principle of heaven and earth.

古文：下生者倍，以三除之；上生者四，以三除之。
现代文：十二律中的律吕相生法是，下生是原律数乘二再用三去除；上生是原律数乘四再用三去除。
English: In the Law of Twelve Laws, the Law of Reciprocal Growth is that the lower growth is the original law number multiplied by two and then removed by three; the upper growth is the original law number multiplied by four and then removed by three.

古文：太阴元始，建于甲寅，一终而建甲戌，二终而建甲午，三终而复得甲寅之元。
现代文：太阴纪年建元开始于甲寅年，经过一千五百二十年一终而后开始于甲戌年，三千零四十年二终而后开始于甲午年，四千五百六十年三终而后又回复到甲寅年开始建元。
English: According to the lunar calendar, the founding of the Yuan Dynasty began in the year of Jia Yin. After the end of the year 1520, the founding of the Yuan Dynasty began in the year of Jia Yao. After the end of the year 3040, the founding of the Yuan Dynasty began in the year of Jia He. After the end of the year 4560, the founding of the Yuan Dynasty returned to the beginning of the year of Jia Yin.

古文：岁徙一辰，立春之后，得其辰而迁其所顺，前三后五，百事可举。
现代文：它每年移动一辰，立春后处于新的一辰，顺次运行在应处的辰次。在它到达某一辰的前三天或后五天，什么事情都可施行。
English: It moves one hour every year, and after the spring, it is in the new hour, and runs sequentially in the corresponding hour. Three days before or five days after it arrives at a certain hour, anything can be done.

古文：太阴所建，蛰虫首穴而处，鹊巢乡而为户。
现代文：太阴建元之时，蛰虫头朝着这个方向而居，鹊鸟也向着这个方向建造巢穴门户。
English: At the time of the lunar new year, the head of the ladybug lives in this direction, and the ostrich also builds the nest portal in this direction.

古文：太阴在寅，朱鸟在卯，勾陈在子，玄武在戌，白虎在西，苍龙在辰。
现代文：当太阴在寅辰之时，朱鸟就在卯辰，句陈星在子辰，玄武在戌辰，白虎在酉辰，苍龙在辰辰。
English: When the Great Yin is in the Yin, the Vermilion Bird is in the Yin, the Sentient Star is in the Zi, the Xuanwu is in the Ren, the White Tiger is in the Ren and the Celestial Dragon is in the Ren.

古文：寅为建，卯为除，辰为满，已为平，主生；午为定，未为执，主陷；申为破，主衡；西为危，主构；戌为成，主少德；亥为收，主大德；子为开，主太岁；丑为闭，主太阴。
现代文：太阴运行到寅辰时，是时为建，运行到卯辰时，是时为除，运行到辰辰时，是时为满，运行到巳辰时，是时为平，主管生长发育；太阴运行到午辰时，是时为定，运行到未辰时，是时为执，主管陷损；太阴运行到申辰时，是时为破，衡星主事；太阴运行到酉辰时，是时为危，斗杓主事；太阴运行到戌辰时，是时为成，主管少德；太阴运行到亥辰时，是时为收，主管大德；太阴运行到子辰时，是时为开，大岁咸池主事；太阴运行到丑辰时，是时为闭，主管某某。
English: When the sun rises, it is time to build; when the sun sets, it is time to subtract; when the sun sets, it is time to fill; when the sun sets, it is time to level; when the sun sets, it is time to fix; when the sun sets, it is time to hold; when the sun sets, it is time to break; when the sun sets, it is time to weigh; when the sun sets, it is time to fight; when the sun sets, it is time to succeed; when the sun sets, it is time to grow; when the sun sets, it is time to grow; when the sun sets, it is time to die; when the sun sets

古文：太阴在寅，岁名曰摄提格，其雄为岁星，舍斗、牵牛，以十一月与之晨出东方，东井、舆鬼为对。
现代文：太阴在寅辰时，这一年的年名叫摄提格。所对应的雄星是岁星，处在斗宿、牵牛宿之间，在夏历正月与斗宿、牵牛宿凌晨一起出现在东方，东井宿、舆鬼宿和它们遥遥相对。
English: The corresponding male star is the year star, which is located between the fighting inn and the cowherd's inn. In the early morning of the first month of the lunar calendar, it appears in the east together with the fighting inn and the cowherd's inn, while the east inn and the ghost inn are far away from each other.

古文：太阴在卯，岁名曰单阏，岁星舍须女、虚、危，以十二月与之；晨出东方，柳、七星、张为对。
现代文：太阴在卯辰时，这一年的年名叫单阏。岁星处在须女宿、虚宿、危宿之间，在二月与须女、虚、危三宿凌晨一起出现在东方，柳宿、七星宿、张宿和它们遥遥相对。
English: At the time of the eclipse, the year of the year is called the single eclipse. The year star is located between the sub-women's lodgings, the false lodgings, and the dangerous lodgings. In the early morning of February, it appears in the east together with the sub-women's lodgings, the false lodgings, and the dangerous three lodgings. The willow lodgings, the seven-star lodgings, and the Zhang lodgings are far away from them.

古文：大阴在辰，岁名曰执除，岁星舍营室、东壁，以正月与之；晨出东方，翼、较为对。
现代文：太阴在辰辰时，这一年的年名叫执除。岁星处在营室宿、东壁宿之间，在三月与营室、东壁二宿凌晨一起出现在东方，翼宿、轸宿和它们遥遥相对。
English: The lunar eclipse occurs at the hour of the hour, and this year's year is called the exorcism. The year star is located between the camp room inn and the east wall inn. In March, it appears in the east together with the camp room and the east wall inn in the early morning, and the wing inn and the lodge inn are far away from them.

古文：太阴在已，岁名曰大荒落，岁星舍奎、娄，以二月与之；晨出东方，角、亢为对。
现代文：太阴在巳辰时，这一年的年名叫大荒落。岁星处在奎宿、娄宿之间，在四月与奎、娄二宿凌晨一起出现在东方，角宿、亢宿与它们遥遥相对。
English: The lunar eclipse occurs at midnight, and the year is called the year of great desolation. The year star is located between Kui-juku and Haku-juku. In April, it appears in the east together with Kui and Haku-juku in the early morning, and Kakuno-juku and Haku-juku are far away from them.

古文：太阴在午，岁名曰敦牂，岁星舍胃、昴、毕，以三月与之；晨出东方，氐、房、心为对。
现代文：太阴在午辰时，这一年的年名叫敦牂。岁星处在胃宿、昴宿、毕宿之间，在五月与胃、昴、毕三宿凌晨一起出现在东方，氐宿、房宿、心宿和它们遥遥相对。
English: At the time of the lunar eclipse at noon, the year of the year is called Dunhuang. The year star is located between the stomach, palate, and abdomen. In the early morning of May, it appears in the east together with the stomach, palate, and abdomen. The stomach, palate, and heart are far away from each other.

古文：太阴在未，岁名曰协洽，岁星舍觜巂、参，以四月与之；晨出东方，尾箕为对。
现代文：太阴在未辰时，这一年的年名叫协洽。岁星处在觜巂宿、参宿之间，在六月与觜巂、参二宿凌晨一起出现在东方，尾宿、箕宿和它们遥遥相对。
English: When the lunar eclipse occurs before dawn, the year is called the Year of the Rat. The year star is located between the Pleiades and the Pleiades. In the early morning of June, it appears in the east together with the Pleiades and the Pleiades. The Pleiades and the Pleiades are far away from each other.

古文：太阴在申，岁名曰涒滩，岁星舍东井、舆鬼，以五月与之；晨出东方，斗、牵牛为对。
现代文：太阴在申辰时，这一年的年名叫涒滩。岁星处在东井宿、舆鬼宿之间，在七月与东井、舆鬼二宿凌晨一起出现在东方，斗宿、牵牛宿和它们遥遥相对。
English: At the time of the lunar eclipse at the time of the lunar new year, the year of the year is called the Year of the Rooster. The year star is located between the East Well Inn and the Ghost Inn. In the early morning of July, it appears in the east together with the East Well Inn and the Ghost Inn. The Fighting Inn and the Cowherd Inn are far away from each other.

古文：太阴在西，岁名曰作鄂，岁星舍柳、七星、张，以六月与之；晨出东方，须女、虚、危为对。
现代文：太阴在酉辰时，这一年的年名叫鄂。岁星处在柳宿、七星宿、张宿之间，在八月与柳、七星、张三宿凌晨一起出现在东方，须女宿、虚宿、危宿和它们遥遥相对。
English: At the time of the lunar eclipse, the year of the year is called E. The year star is located between the willow lodge, the seven star lodge, and the Zhang lodge. In the early morning of August, it appears in the east together with the willow lodge, the seven star lodge, and the Zhang three lodges, and the willow lodge, the false lodge, and the dangerous lodge are far away from them.

古文：太阴在戌，岁名曰阉茂，岁星舍翼、轸，以七月与之；晨出东方，营室、东壁为对。
现代文：太阴在戌辰时，这一年的年名叫阉茂。岁星处在翼宿、轸宿之间，在九月与翼、轸二宿凌晨一起出现在东方，营室宿、东壁宿和它们遥遥相对。
English: When the eclipse is at twilight, the year of the year is called the year of the rooster. The year star is located between the wings and the beak, and in the early morning of September it appears in the east together with the wings and the beak, and the camp room and the east wall are far away from them.

古文：太阴在亥，岁名曰大渊献，岁星舍角、亢，以八月与之；晨出东方，奎、娄为对。
现代文：太阴在亥辰时，这一年的年名叫大渊献。岁星处在角宿、亢宿之间，在十月与角、亢二宿凌晨一起出现在东方，奎宿、娄宿和它们遥遥相对。
English: At the time of the lunar eclipse, the year of the year is called the year of the great abyss. The year star is located between the horn and the pupa. In October, it appears in the east together with the horn and the pupa in the early morning, and the pupa and the pupa are far away from each other.

古文：太阴在子，岁名曰困敦，岁星舍氐、房、心，以九月与之；晨出东方，胃、昂、毕为对。
现代文：太阴在子辰时，这一年的年名叫困敦。岁星处在氐宿、房宿、心宿之间，在十一月与氐、房、心三宿凌晨一起出现在东方，胃宿、昴宿、毕宿和它们遥遥相对。
English: When the lunar eclipse is at the child's hour, the year of the year is called the year of the year. The year star is located between the inn, the room and the heart. In the early morning of November, it appears in the east together with the three inns, the stomach, the room and the heart. The stomach, the room and the heart are far away from each other.

古文：太阴在丑，岁名曰赤奋若，岁星舍尾、箕，以十月与之；晨出东方，觜巂、参为对。
现代文：太阴在丑辰时，这一年的年名叫赤奋若。岁星处在尾宿、箕宿之间，在十二月与尾、箕二宿凌晨一起出现在东方，觜巂宿、参宿和它们遥遥相对。
English: When the lunar eclipse is in the Ugochin, the year of the year is called Akitenzuru. The year star is located between the tail lodge and the pupa lodge. In the early morning of December, it appears in the east together with the tail lodge and the pupa lodge. The pupa lodge and the pupa lodge are far away from each other.

古文：太阴在甲子，刑德合东方宫，常徒所不胜，合四岁而离，寓十六岁而复合。
现代文：太阴在甲子年时，刑与德会合于东方宫。
English: At the time of the lunar new year in the year of the Goat, Ji and De met at the Oriental Palace.

古文：所以离者，刑不得入中宫，而徒于木。太阴所居，日德，辰为刑；德，纲日自倍，因柔日徒所不胜。
现代文：按 刑 以东西南北为序运动， 德 以东西南北中为序运动的规律， 德 入中宫，则 刑 迁移离开它所不胜任的方位而转移到它所应处的方位，这样 刑 、 德 会合同行四年后偏离，而偏离十六年后又会合同行于东西南北四宫。
English: According to the law of the sequence movement of the east-west and south-north, and the sequence movement of the east-west and south-north, and the sequence movement of the east-west and south-north, and the movement of the east-west and south-north, and the movement of the east-west and south-north, and the movement of the east-west and south-south, and the movement of the east-west and south-north, and the movement of the east-west and south-south, and the movement of the east-west and south-north-south, and the movement of the east-west and south-s

古文：刑，水辰之木，木辰之水，金火立其处。凡徙诸神，朱鸟在太阴前一，钩陈在后三，玄武在前五，白虎在后六，虚垦乘钩陈，而天地袭矣。
现代文：大凡诸神的运行序次和位置，以太阳为标准来确定：朱鸟在太阴所居前一辰，钩陈在太阴所居后三辰，玄武在太阴所居前五辰，白虎在太阴所居后六辰。钩陈如运行到子辰，并与子辰所对应的玄枵次中的虚星相接近，这时天地和顺平安。
English: The order and position of the movement of the great gods are determined by the sun as the standard: Zhu Bird is one hour before the Great Yin, Hook Chen is three hours after the Great Yin, Xuanwu is five hours before the Great Yin, and White Tiger is six hours after the Great Yin. If Hook Chen runs to the Son, and is close to the imaginary star in the Great Yin corresponding to the Son, then heaven and earth are in peace.

古文：凡日，甲刚乙柔，丙刚丁柔，以至于癸。
现代文：十日天干中，甲为刚、乙为柔、丙为刚、丁为柔，依次类推，一直到壬为刚、癸为柔。
English: On the 10th day of the dry season, A is hard, B is soft, C is hard, D is soft, and so on until M is hard and Y is soft.

古文：木生于亥，壮于卯，死于未，三辰皆木也。
现代文：五行中的木生于亥月，壮在卯月，死于未月，这亥、卯、未三辰都属木。
English: The wood in the five elements was born in the month of Hai, grew strong in the month of U, and died in the month of Misi. This Hai, U, and Misi are all wood.

古文：火生于寅，壮于午，死于戌，三辰皆火也。
现代文：五行中的火生于寅月，壮在午月，死于戌月，这寅、午、戌三辰都属火。
English: The fire in the five elements was born in the crescent moon, grew strong in the meridian moon, and died in the crescent moon. This crescent moon, meridian moon, and crescent moon are all fire.

古文：土生于午，壮于戌，死于寅，三辰皆土也。
现代文：五行中的土生于午月，壮在戌月，死于寅月，这午、戌、寅三辰都属土。
English: Among the five elements, the native was born in the afternoon moon, grew strong in the crescent moon, and died in the crescent moon. This afternoon, crescent moon, and crescent moon are all earth.

古文：金，生于巳，壮于酉，死于丑，三辰皆金也。
现代文：五行中的金生于巳月，壮在酉月，死于丑月，这巳、酉、丑三辰都属金。
English: Of the five elements, gold is born in the crescent moon, strong in the crescent moon, and dies in the ugly moon. The crescent moon, the dragonfly, and the ugly moon are all gold.

古文：水生于申，壮于子，死于辰，三辰皆水也。
现代文：五行中的水生于申月，壮在子月，死于辰月，这申、子、丑三辰都属水。
English: Of the five elements, water is born in the crescent moon, grows strong in the crescent moon, and dies in the crescent moon. The crescent moon, crescent moon, and ugly moon are all water.

古文：故五胜生一，壮五，终九，五九四十五，故神四十五日而一徙。
现代文：五行相胜，在它们从生到死的整个时期中，生于第一个月，壮在第五个月，死于第九个月，整个时期为九个月。五九四十五，所以北斗天神四十五天迁移一时段。
English: In the entire period from their birth to death, the five elements compete with each other. The dragon is born in the first month, grows strong in the fifth month, and dies in the ninth month. The entire period is nine months. 5945. Therefore, the Big Dipper moves one time period of 45 days.

古文：以三应五，故八徙而岁终。
现代文：以三辰对五行，即三应五得八，所以北斗天神迁移八个时段，正好是一年。
English: With three hours to five lines, that is, three should be five and get eight, so the Big Dipper Tenjin migration eight time periods, just one year.

古文：凡用太阴，左前刑，右背德，击钧陈之冲辰，以战必胜，以攻必克。
现代文：凡利用太阴刑德术来考察社会时事的关系，行事取左前方不吉利、取右后方吉利，攻击钩陈星所向星辰方位，一定战必胜攻必克。
English: Anyone who uses the Taiyin chastisement technique to examine the relationship between social current affairs, takes the left front as unlucky, takes the right back as lucky, and attacks the direction of the star that Chen Xing is facing, will surely win the battle.

古文：欲知天道，以日为主，六月当心；左周而行，分而为十二月，与日相当，天地重袭，后必无殃。
现代文：要想明白天道，应以太阳为主，太阳六个月运行完二十八宿的一半，正好对着天中的心宿，它从左环绕而行，将一年分成十二个月，如果太阴的运行和太阳的运行和合，这样天地阴阳和协，往后人间一定没有灾殃。
English: To understand the heavenly way, the sun should be the main one. The sun completes half of the twenty-eight quarters after six months of operation, just opposite the heavenly heart, it goes around from the left and divides the year into twelve months. If the movement of the sun and the sun are in harmony, then the heaven and the earth will be in harmony with the yin and the yang, and there will be no disaster in the future.

古文：星，正月建营室，二月建奎、娄，三月建胃，四月建毕，五月建东井，六月建张，七月建翼，八月建亢，九月建房，十月建尾，十一月建牵牛，十二月建虚。
现代文：日行的星次是：正月日在营室宿，二月日在奎宿、娄宿，三月日在胃宿，四月日在毕宿，五月日在东井宿，六月日在张宿，七月日在翼宿，八月日在亢宿，九月日在房宿，十月日在尾宿，十一月日在牵牛宿，十二月日在虚宿。
English: The daily star rankings are as follows: on the first day of the month, stay in the camp room; on the second day of the month, stay in the guesthouse; on the third day of the month, stay in the guesthouse; on the fourth day of the month, stay in the guesthouse; on the fifth day of the month, stay in the guesthouse; on the sixth day of the month, stay in the guesthouse; on the seventh day of the month, stay in the guesthouse; on the tenth day of the month, stay in the guesthouse; on the eleventh day of the month, stay in the guesthouse; on the twelfth day

古文：星分度：角十二，亢九，氏十五，房五，心五，尾十八，箕十一四分一，斗二十六，牵牛八，须女十二，虚十，危十七，营室十六，东壁九，奎十六，娄十二，胃十四，昂十一，毕十六，觜巂二，参九，东井三十三，舆鬼四，柳十五，星六，张、翼各十八，轸十七，凡二十八宿也。
现代文：二十八宿的赤道距度是：角宿十二度，亢宿九度，氐宿十五度，房宿五度，心宿五度，尾宿十八度，箕宿十一又四分之一度，斗宿二十六度，牵牛宿八度，须女宿十二度，虚宿十度，危宿十七度，营室宿十六度，东壁宿九度，奎宿十六度，娄宿十二度，胃宿十四度，昴宿十一度，毕宿十六度，觜巂宿二度，参宿九度，东井宿三十三度，舆鬼宿四度，柳宿十五度，星宿七度，张宿、翼宿各十八度，轸宿十七度，一共二十八宿计三百六十五又四分之一度。
English: The equatorial distances of the twenty-eight lodgings are as follows: Tsunotsu-juku, 12 degrees; Utsu-juku, 9 degrees; Utsu-juku, 15 degrees; Haya-juku, 5 degrees; Shin-juku, 5 degrees; Oze-juku, 18 degrees; Utsu-juku, 11 and a quarter degrees; Dou-juku, 26 degrees; Utsu-juku, 8 degrees; Shujo-juku, 12 degrees; Haku-juku, 10 degrees; Kikaku-juku, 17 degrees; Yakitori-juku, 16 degrees; Higashi-kabe-

古文：星部地名：角、亢郑；氐、房、心宋；尾、箕燕；斗、牵牛：越；须女：吴；虚、危：齐；营室、东壁：卫；奎、娄：鲁；胃、昂、毕：魏；觜巂、参：赵；东井、舆鬼：秦；柳、七星、张：周；翼、轸：楚。
现代文：星部地名，即二十八宿的分野是：角、亢二宿对应诸侯国是郑国；氐、房、心三宿对应诸侯国是宋国；尾、箕二宿对应诸侯国是燕国；斗、牵牛二宿对应诸侯国是越国；须女宿对应诸侯国是吴国；虚、危二宿对应诸侯国是齐国；营室、东壁二宿对应诸侯国是卫国；奎、娄二宿对应诸侯国是鲁国；胃、昴、毕三宿对应诸侯国是魏国；觜巂、参二宿对应诸侯国是赵国；东井、舆鬼二宿对应诸侯国是秦国；柳、七星、张三宿对应诸侯国是周王室；翼、轸二宿对应诸侯国是楚国。
English: Xingbu place names, that is, the fields of the twenty-eight lodgings, are: the corner,  two lodgings corresponding to the vassal state is Zheng;, 房, 心 three lodgings corresponding to the vassal state is Song; 尾,  two lodgings corresponding to the vassal state is Yan; 斗, 牵牛 two lodgings corresponding to the vassal state is Yue; 须女 two lodgings corresponding to the vassal state is Wu; 虚, 危 two lodgings corresponding to the vassal state is Qi; 营室, 東壁 two lod

古文：岁星之所居，五谷丰昌，其对为冲，岁乃有殃。当居而不居，越而之他处，主死国亡。
现代文：如果岁星按常理应该到某星宿而没有按时居留，反到别的星宿去了，这就意味着其星宿的分野国国君死亡、国家灭亡。
English: If the year star, according to common sense, should go to a certain star, but did not stay on time, but went to another star, this would mean the death of the country ruler and the death of the country in the star's field.

古文：太阴治春，则欲行柔惠温凉。太阴治夏，则欲布施宣明。太阴治秋，则欲修备缮兵。太阴治冬，则欲猛毅刚强。
现代文：太阴治理春季的时候，国家当政者就宜推行柔惠温和的政令；太阴治理夏季的时候，国家当政者就宜广加施予，宣明圣旨；太阴治理秋季的时候，国家当政者就应修缮兵器城防；太阴治理冬季的时候，国家当政者就应施行猛严强硬的政令。
English: When the spring is ruled by the lunar eclipse, the country's political leaders should implement soft and gentle decrees; when the summer is ruled by the lunar eclipse, the country's political leaders should make extensive donations and proclaim the holy will; when the autumn is ruled by the lunar eclipse, the country's political leaders should repair weapons and city defenses; when the winter is ruled by the lunar eclipse, the country's political leaders should implement strict and tough decrees.

古文：三岁而改节，六岁而易常，故三岁而一饥，六岁而一衰，十二岁一康。甲齐，乙东夷，丙楚，丁南夷，戊魏，己韩，庚秦，辛西夷，壬卫，癸越。子周，丑翟，寅楚，卯郑，辰晋，巳卫，午秦，未宋，申齐，西鲁，戌赵，亥燕。甲乙寅卯，木也；丙丁巳午，火也；戊己四季，土也；庚辛申西，金也；壬癸亥子，水也。
现代文：戊己居中土主四季，属土。庚辛、申酉属金。壬癸、亥子属水。
English: Wuji, the lord of the four seasons, belongs to the earth. Geng Xin and Shen Yi belong to the gold. Ren Ren and Hai Zi belong to the water.

古文：水生木，木生火，火生土，土生金，金生水。
现代文：它们的关系是：水生木，木生火，火生土，土生金，金生水。
English: Their relationship is: water begets wood, wood begets fire, fire begets earth, earth begets gold, gold begets water.

古文：子生母曰义，母生子曰保，子母相得曰专，母胜子曰制，子胜母曰困。
现代文：子生母的日子叫 义 日，母生子的日子叫 保 日；子和母投合的日子叫 专 日，母克子的日子叫 制 日，子克母的日子叫 困 日。
English: The day of a mother giving birth to a son is called the day of righteousness; the day of a mother giving birth to a son is called the day of protection; the day of a son joining his mother is called the special day; the day of a mother giving birth to a son is called the day of establishment; and the day of a son giving birth to a mother is called the day of distress.

古文：以胜击杀，胜而无报。
现代文：在 制 日去攻击杀伐，即使胜利了也不会得到回报。
English: If you attack and kill in the system, even if you win, you will not get a reward.

古文：以专从事而有功。
现代文：在 专 日去从事各种事情就会取得成功。
English: If you do all kinds of things on special days, you will be successful.

古文：以义行理，名立而不堕。
现代文：在 义 日去实施主张就会得到声望而不会失毁。
English: To carry out one's ideas on the Day of Righteousness is to gain reputation, not to lose it.

古文：以保畜养，万物蕃昌。
现代文：在 保 日去养畜就会使万物昌盛繁荣。
English: Raising livestock in Bao'an will bring prosperity to all things.

古文：以困举事，破灭死亡。
现代文：在 困 日去办事就会失败灭亡。
English: If you try to do things on a bad day, you will fail and perish.

古文：北斗之神有雌雄，十一月始建于子，月从一辰，雄左行，雌右行，五月合午谋刑，十一月合子谋德。
现代文：北斗之神分雌雄两神，均是在十一月从子辰开始运行。每月移动一辰。雄神向左运行，雌神向右运行。它们到五月会合于午辰，准备转向阴刑；到十一月会合于子辰，准备转向阳德。
English: The deities of the Big Dipper are divided into male and female gods, both of which begin to move from the cubs in November. They move one hour every month. The male god moves to the left, and the female god moves to the right. They meet at noon in May to prepare for the transition to Yin; they meet at the cubs in November to prepare for the transition to Yangde.

古文：太阴所居辰为厌日，厌日不可以举百事，堪舆徐行，雄以音知雌，故为奇辰，数从甲子始，子母相求，所合之处为合。十日十二辰，周六十日，凡八合，合于岁前则死亡，合于岁后则无殃。
现代文：记数从甲子开头，天干地支相配成对如同母子，雌雄两神所对的天干地支互相配合，叫做 合 。十天干、十二地支相配成六十干支一周表示六十日周而复始，一年有 八合 。合于太阴经过之前辰位时，是凶年，主会死亡，合于太阴经过之后辰位时，是吉年，就没有灾殃。
English: From the beginning of the count, the heavenly stems are paired like a mother and son, and the heavenly stems matched by the male and female gods are called a match. The 10 heavenly stems and 12 earthly stems are paired to form 60 heavenly stems in a week, which means that 60 days are repeated, and there are 8 matches in a year. When the match is made before the lunar eclipse, it is a bad year, and the host will die. When the match is made after the lunar eclipse, it is a good year, and there will be no disaster.

古文：甲戌，燕也，乙酉，齐也，丙午，越也，丁巳，楚也，庚申，秦也，辛卯，戌也，壬子，代也，癸亥，胡也，戊戌、己亥，韩也，己酉、已卯，魏也，戊午、戊子，八合天下也。
现代文：雌雄两神三月甲戌之合配燕地，二月乙酉之合配齐地，十一月丙午之合配越地，十月丁巳之合配楚地，九月庚辰之合配秦地，八月辛卯之合配西戎，五月壬子之合配代地，四月癸亥配胡地。这是八大会所对应的地上区域。三月戊辰之合配某地，十月己亥之合配韩地，八月己酉之合配某地，二月己卯之合配魏地，五月戊午之合配某地，十一月戊子之合配某地这是八小会所对应的地上中原区域。这也就是 八合 分野所对应的天下各区域。
English: The male and female deities in March are Yanzhi, in February are Qi, in November are Bi, in October are Chu, in September are Qin, in August are Xinwu, in May are Renzi, and in April are Hai. These are the above-ground regions that correspond to the eight great assemblies. In March are Wuchen, in October are Han, in August are Ji, in February are Wei, in May are Wu, in November are Wuzi.

古文：太阴、少岁、星、日、辰五神皆合，其日有云气风雨，国君当之。
现代文：太阴、斗杓三星、岁星、日、辰五神会合的时候，就会出现云气、风雨，国君应注意这类异常天象。
English: When the five deities of yin, yang, yang, yin and yang meet, clouds, wind and rain will appear. The sovereign should pay attention to such unusual celestial phenomena.

古文：天神之贵者，莫贵于青龙，或曰天一，或曰太阴。
现代文：天神中最尊贵者，莫过于青龙，或称之为天下，或称之为太阴。
English: The most honored of the gods is none other than the Blue Dragon, also known as the Celestial King or the Great Yin.

古文：大阴所居，不可背而可向。
现代文：太阴所处某辰，所对应的区域的人不能违背它，而只能顺应它。
English: When the lunar eclipse occurs at a certain time, people in the corresponding area cannot go against it, but can only comply with it.

古文：北斗所击，不可与敌。
现代文：北斗斗柄指向区域的对应国家，不能与之对抗。
English: The handle of the Big Dipper points to the corresponding country in the region and cannot be opposed.

古文：天地以设，分而为阴阳。
现代文：天地设定之后，分为阴和阳，阳生于阴，阴生于阳。
English: After heaven and earth are set, they are divided into yin and yang, yang is born in yin, yin is born in yang.

古文：有其岁司也：
现代文：这可以探候出一定年成好坏的。
English: This could portend a good year or a bad one.

古文：辰卯甲
现代文：辰卯甲
English: Tatsuoka

古文：丁午丙寅
现代文：丁午丙寅
English: Dingwu Bingying

古文：未火已火
现代文：未火已火
English: Before the fire is the fire

古文：壮水木生
现代文：壮水木生
English: Zhuangshui Mousheng

古文：木土金土
现代文：木土金土
English: Wood, earth, gold and soil

古文：老生生老壮老
现代文：老生生老壮老
English: Grow old, grow old, grow old

古文：井东鬼舆柳星七张翼轸角亢氏房心尾箕
现代文：井东鬼舆柳星七张翼轸角亢氏房心尾箕
English: Jingdong Ghost, Liu Xing, Seven Wings, Angle of the Dragon, House of the Dragon, Heart of the Dragon, Tail of the Dragon

古文：丑子亥辛庚申
现代文：丑子亥辛庚申
English: Ugly son Hai Xin Goshun

古文：戍
现代文：戍
English: 

古文：金水木火酉水
现代文：金水木火酉水
English: Money, water, wood, fire, fire, water

古文：老
现代文：老
English: Old Town

古文：老壮生土金
现代文：老壮生土金
English: Old and strong produce land money

古文：壮壮生
现代文：壮壮生
English: Grown-ups

古文：斗牛牵女须虚危室壁奎娄胃昂毕觜参
现代文：斗牛牵女须虚危室壁奎娄胃昂毕觜参
English: Bull-dragging women must be weak-willed, weak-stomached, weak-stomached, weak-stomached

古文：摄提格之岁，岁早水晚旱，稻疾，蚕不登，菽麦昌，民食四升。
现代文：如岁名叫摄提格的年份，雨水来得早，秋季又干旱，稻子有病害，养蚕没有收获，而豆类和麦类长得倒茂盛，百姓口粮有四升。
English: For example, in the year of the tiger, the rain came early, the autumn was dry, the rice was diseased, the silkworms were not harvested, but the beans and wheat were flourishing, and the people's rations were four liters.

古文：寅在甲曰阏蓬，单阉之岁，岁和，稻菽麦蚕昌，民食五升。
现代文：这一年寅在甲名叫阏蓬。又如岁名叫单阏的年份，全年气候和顺，稻子、豆类、麦子和蚕都长得茂盛。百姓口粮有五升。
English: This was the year of the cormorant in A, and the year of the cormorant in B, and the year of the cormorant in C. The climate was mild throughout the year, and rice, beans, wheat, and silkworms grew abundantly. The ration for the common people was five liters.

古文：卯在乙曰旃蒙，执徐之岁，岁早旱晚水，小饥，蚕闭，麦熟，民食三升。
现代文：这一年是卯在乙名叫旃蒙。又如岁名叫执徐的年份，春季旱、秋季涝，这样造成小的饥荒；同时蚕又孵化不出，而麦子倒成熟，百姓口粮有三升。
English: This year was a year of drought in the spring and famine in the autumn, which caused a small famine; at the same time, silkworms could not hatch, while the wheat was ripe, and the people's rations were three liters.

古文：辰在丙曰柔兆，大荒落之岁，岁有小兵，蚕小登，麦昌，寂疾，民食二升。
现代文：这一年是辰在丙名叫柔兆。又如岁名叫大荒落的年份，会有小规模的战争，蚕有小的收成，麦子长得茂盛而豆类有病害，百姓口粮有二升。
English: This year was a year of small wars, small harvests of silkworms, flourishing wheat and diseased beans, and two-liter rations for the common people.

古文：已在丁曰强国。
现代文：这一年是巳在丁名叫强圉。
English: This year it was a snake named Qiang Xuan in Dingzhou.

古文：敦牂之岁，岁大旱，蚕登，稻疾，菽麦昌，禾不为，民食二升。
现代文：又如岁名叫敦牂的年份，当年大旱，蚕有收成，稻子有病害，豆类和麦子倒长得茂盛，禾苗没有长成，百姓口粮有二升。
English: Another example is the year named Dunhuang, when there was a drought, the silkworms had a good harvest, the rice had diseases, the beans and wheat grew luxuriantly, the seedlings did not grow, and the people's rations were two liters.

古文：午在戊曰著雍协洽之岁，岁有小兵，蚕登，稻昌，菽麦不为，民食三升。
现代文：这一年是午在戊名叫著雍。又如岁名叫协洽的年份，会有小规模的战争，蚕丰收，稻子长得茂盛而豆类和麦子没有成熟，百姓口粮有三升。
English: This year is the year of the Mid-Autumn Festival, also known as the Year of the Dragon, and the Year of the Horse, also known as the Year of the Horse, there will be small-scale wars, a bumper harvest of silkworms, the rice will grow luxuriantly while the beans and wheat are not mature, and the people's rations will be three liters.

古文：未在己曰屠维沼滩之岁，岁和，小雨行，蚕登，菽麦昌，民食三升。
现代文：这一年是未在己名叫屠维。又如岁名叫涒滩的年份，全年气候和顺，常有小雨降落，蚕丰收，豆类和麦子长得茂盛，百姓口粮有三升。
English: This year was the year of Tu Wei, also known as the Year of the Dragonfly, and the year of the Cormorant, with a mild climate throughout the year, often with light rain, a bumper harvest of silkworms, flourishing beans and wheat, and three liters of rations for the people.

古文：申在庚曰上章作鄂之岁，岁有大兵，民疾，蚕不登，寂麦不为，禾虫，民食五升。
现代文：这一年是申在庚名叫上章。又如岁名叫作鄂的年份，会有大规模的战争，闹疾病瘟疫，蚕没有收成，豆类和麦子没有成熟，禾苗受虫害侵袭，百姓口粮有五升。
English: It was the year of Shen Zi Geng, also known as Shangzhang, and the year of Ru Ru Rui Geng, also known as Zhougu, in which there would be large-scale wars, diseases and plagues, silkworms would not be harvested, beans and wheat would not be ripe, grass seedlings would be attacked by pests, and the people's rations would be five liters.

古文：西在辛曰重光掩茂之岁，岁小饥，有兵，蚕不登，麦不为，寂昌，民食七升。
现代文：这一年是酉在辛名叫重光。又如岁名叫掩茂的年份，全年会有小的饥荒，并会发生小规模的战争，蚕没有收获，麦子没有成熟，而豆类长得茂盛，百姓口粮有七升。
English: This year is the year of the dragonfly in Xin, called the heavy light. It is also the year of the dragonfly in Guanmao. Throughout the year, there will be small famines, and small-scale wars will occur. Silkworms are not harvested, wheat is not mature, but beans grow luxuriantly, and people's rations are seven liters.

古文：戌在壬曰玄默大渊献之岁，岁有大兵，大饥，蚕开，菽麦不为，禾虫，民食三升。
现代文：这一年是戌在壬名叫玄黓。又如岁名叫大渊献的年份，当年会有大规模的战争和大的饥荒，蚕能孵化出来，但豆类和麦子生长不好，禾苗受虫害侵袭，百姓口粮有三升。
English: This year is the year of the dragonfly in Ren named Xuanzang. It is also the year of the rooster in Ren named Dayuan. In that year, there will be large-scale wars and great famine. Silkworms can hatch, but beans and wheat do not grow well. Grass seedlings are attacked by pests, and the people's rations are three liters.

古文：困敦之岁，岁大雾起，大水出，乔稻麦昌，民食三斗。
现代文：又如岁名叫困敦的年份，年中有大雾，发洪水，但蚕、稻子、麦子却丰收，百姓口粮有三升。
English: Another example is the year known as the year of Jiedong, in which there was heavy fog and flooding, but there was a bumper harvest of silkworms, rice, and wheat, and the people's rations were three liters.

古文：子在癸曰昭阳赤奋若之岁，岁有小兵，早水，蚕不出，稻疾，菽不为，麦昌，民食一升。
现代文：这一年是子在癸名叫昭阳。还如岁名叫赤奋若的年份，当年会有小规模的战争，春季雨水多，蚕孵化不出，稻子有病害，豆类生长不好，麦子倒长得茂盛，百姓口粮有一升。
English: This year is the year of Zi in Zhai named Zhao Yang. It is also the year of Zi in Zhai named Qi Fen Rong. In that year, there will be small-scale wars, more rain in the spring, silkworms cannot hatch, rice is diseased, legumes grow poorly, wheat grows luxuriantly, and people's rations are one liter.

古文：正朝夕，先树一表东方，操一表却去前表十步，以参望，日始出北廉，日直入。又树一表于东方，因西方之表以参望，日方入北廉，则定东方。
现代文：以朝夕确定东、西方向是：先在早晨树立一标竿于东面作为观察基点，然后手持另一标竿在第一标竿后十步处配合参照观测，当太阳日升在东北角时，调整手中的标竿，使两标竿和太阳处一条直线，两标竿的重叠日影投向西南方时就可将手中的标竿固定下来。
English: To determine the east and west direction in the morning and evening: first, in the morning, set up a standard rod in the east as the observation base point, then hold another standard rod at ten steps after the first standard rod with reference observation. When the sun rises in the northeast corner, adjust the standard rod in your hand so that the two standard rods and the sun are in a straight line. When the overlapping sunshade of the two standard rods is cast to the southwest, you can fix the standard rod in your hand.

古文：两表之中，与西方之表，则东西之正也。日冬至，日出东南维，入西南维；至春、秋分，日出东中，入西中。夏至，出东北维，入西北维，至则正南。
现代文：到太阳日落于西北角时，又手持一标竿在第一标竿的东面，以西面第一标竿为参照观测，使太阳和两标竿处一条直线，两标竿的重叠日影投向东南方时，将手中的第三标竿尽可能地固定在第二标竿的正南方，这样就可以测定出正东、正西的方向来了，即第二、第三标竿间的垂直线的中点与西面第一标竿的连接线的两端就分别指向正东和正西。冬至时，太阳从东南方升起，向西南方落下。在春分和秋分时，太阳从正东升起，正西落下。夏至时太阳从东北方升起，向西北方落下。冬至夏至日太阳在正午的位置正好是正南和正北。
English: When the sun sets in the northwest corner, he will also hold a yardstick in the east of the first yardstick, and observe with the first yardstick in the west as a reference, so that the sun and the two yardsticks are in a straight line. When the overlapping sunshade of the two yardsticks is cast to the southeast, he will fix the third yardstick in his hand as far as possible to the south of the second yardstick. In this way, the direction of east and west can be determined, that is, the midpoint of the vertical line between the second and third yardsticks and the two ends of the connecting line of the first yardstick in the west point to east

古文：欲知东西南北广袤之数者，立四表以为方一里歫。
现代文：要想知道大地东西南北的宽广度，可以树四根标竿组成每边长一里的正方形。
English: If you want to know the width of the earth from east to west and from north to south, you can use four rods to make a square one mile long on each side.

古文：先春分若秋分十余日，从炬北表参望日始出及旦，以候相应，相应则此与日直也。辄以南表参望之，以入前表数为法，除举广，除立表袤，以知从此东西之数也。
现代文：在春分或秋分之前十多天，从正方形北前后两根标竿配合看观测刚出现并升临地平线的太阳，以观测随季节变化的太阳日出方位是否与节候相符，如相符合，则说明北前后两根标竿与太阳处同一条直线，然后立即用正方形南前后两根标竿配合着观测太阳，用太阳与南后标竿连线和南北前标竿连线相交的有关数值作为除数，去除南前后标竿的距离，除南北后标竿的距离，从而知道从此地到大地东极的距离了。
English: More than ten days before the vernal or autumnal equinox, observe the sun that has just appeared and is rising to the horizon from the square north and south poles, and observe whether the sun's sunrise position, which changes with the season, is consistent with the seasons. If it is consistent, it means that the north pole and the two poles are in the same straight line with the sun. Then immediately use the square south pole and the two poles to observe the sun. Use the relevant value of the intersection of the sun and the south pole and the north pole as the divisor, remove the distance between the south pole and the north pole, remove the distance between the north pole and the south pole, and thus

古文：假使视日出，入前表中一寸，是寸得一里也。一里积万八千寸，得从此东万八千里。
现代文：假定测得出的日出时入前表数为一寸，这一寸就相当于一里，一里合一万八千寸，这样便可知道从观测点到大地东极的距离是一万八千里。
English: Assuming that the measured number of meters before sunrise is one inch, this inch is equivalent to one mile, and one mile is equal to eighteen thousand inches, so we can know that the distance from the observation point to the east pole of the earth is eighteen thousand miles.

古文：视日方入，入前表半寸，则半寸得一里。
现代文：用同样的方法观测太阳西落时的入前表数假定为半寸，那么半寸就相当于一里。
English: Using the same method to observe the sun setting in the west, if the number of sunsets is assumed to be half an inch, then half an inch is equivalent to one mile.

古文：半寸而除一里，积寸得三万六千里，除则从此西里数也。
现代文：用半寸除一里，得三万六千里。此数就是从观测点到大地西极的距离。
English: If you divide one mile by half an inch, you get 36,000 miles, which is the distance from the observation point to the west pole of the earth.

古文：并之，东西里数也，则极径也。
现代文：将东西两极的距离加起来，也就是大地东极到西极的距离了。
English: Add up the distance between the east and west poles, that is, the distance between the east pole of the earth and the west pole.

古文：未春分而直，已秋分而不直，此处南也。
现代文：如果还没有到春分时标竿与太阳成直线，或已到秋分时标竿与太阳不成直线，这说明观测点偏南。
English: If the pole is not aligned with the sun at the vernal equinox, or is not aligned with the sun at the autumnal equinox, this indicates that the observation point is southward.

古文：未秋分而直，已春分而不直，此处北也。
现代文：如果还没有到秋分时标竿与太阳成直线，或已到春分时标竿与太阳不成直线，这说明观测点偏北。
English: If the pole is not in a straight line with the sun by the autumn equinox, or if the pole is not in a straight line with the sun by the spring equinox, this indicates that the observation point is northward.

古文：分至而直，此处南北中也。
现代文：如果春分、秋分时标竿与太阳成直线，说明观测点处南北正中点。
English: If at the vernal and autumnal equinoxes the pole is in a straight line with the sun, this indicates that the observation point is at the midpoint between north and south.

古文：从中处欲知中南也，未秋分而不直，此处南北中也。从中处欲知南北极远近，从西南表参望日，日夏至始出，与北表参，则是东与东北表等也。
现代文：如果处南北正中点来测南北极的距离，可以从南后标竿朝北前标竿观测太阳：夏至那天当太阳初升时，当南后标竿与北前标竿和太阳三者成一条直线时，观测的结果和从北后标竿经北前标竿向东观测日成直线时测得的结果相同。
English: If the north-south midpoint is used to measure the distance between the north and south, the sun can be observed from the south-rear yardstick to the north-front yardstick: on the day of the summer solstice, when the sun rises, when the south-rear yardstick is in a straight line with the north-front yardstick and the sun, the observation results are the same as those measured from the north-rear yardstick to the east through the north-front yardstick.

古文：正东万八千里，则从中北亦万八千里也。
现代文：测得的正东方距离是一万八千里，那么从南北正中点到北极的距离也是一万八千里。
English: The measured distance due east is approximately 18,000 miles, so the distance from the midpoint of north and south to the North Pole is also 18,000 miles.

古文：倍之，南北之里数也。
现代文：这个数乘上一倍，也就是南北极相距离的数，也即是三万六千里。
English: Multiply this number by a factor of two, which is the distance between the North Pole and the South Pole, and you get 36,000 miles.

古文：其不从中之数也，以出入前表之数益损之，表入一寸，寸减日近一里，表出一寸，寸益远一里。
现代文：假如不是处南北正中点来测量，而是处中点偏南或偏北来测量，那就可根据太阳和南后标竿连线进入或偏出北前后标竿连线和南北前标竿连线的多少来获得。如两连线相交点入一寸，入一寸则距离减少一里；如两连线相交点出一寸，出一寸则距离增加一里。
English: If it is not measured at the midpoint of north and south, but at the midpoint of south or north, it can be obtained according to how much the sun and the south pole connection enter or deviate from the north pole connection and the north pole connection. If the two lines intersect by one inch, the distance will be reduced by one inch; if the two lines intersect by one inch, the distance will be increased by one mile.

