古文：萧近高，字抑之，庐陵人。
现代文：萧近高，字抑之，江西庐陵人。
English: Xiao Jian Gao, Zha Jizhi, Jiangxi Fuling people.

古文：万历二十三年进士。授中书舍人。擢礼科给事中。
现代文：万历二十三年进士，授职中书舍人，提拔礼科给事中。
English: In the 23rd year of the Manchurian calendar, he was promoted to the post of scholar, and he was promoted to the post of etiquette.

古文：甫拜官，即上疏言罢矿税、释系囚、起废弃三事，明诏已颁，不可中止。
现代文：刚上任，就上疏议论罢免矿税、释放囚犯、起用旧臣三件事，声明诏书已颁布，不可以中途停止。
English: As soon as he took office, he began to casually discuss three things: the cancellation of the mining tax, the release of prisoners, and the appointment of former ministers. He declared that the edict had been issued and could not be stopped in the middle.

古文：帝怒，夺俸一年。
现代文：皇帝不高兴，剥夺俸禄一年。
English: The emperor was angry again, and cancelled Shoujing's one-year salary.

古文：顷之，论江西税使潘相擅刑宗人罪，不报。
现代文：不久，疏论江西税使潘相擅自处罚皇室宗族人的罪行，没有回音。
English: Soon after, there was no response to Pan Xiang's unauthorized punishment of members of the imperial family for the crime of neglecting Jiangxi taxation.

古文：既而停矿分税之诏下，相失利，擅移驻景德镇，请专理窑务。
现代文：不久停止征收矿税的诏书下达，潘相无利可图，擅自移驻景德镇，请求专门管理窑务。
English: Soon after, an edict was issued to stop the collection of mining tax, and since Pan Sang was not profitable, he moved to Jingdezhen without authorization and requested special management of the kiln.

古文：帝即可之，近高复力争。
现代文：皇帝就同意他的请求，萧近高又极力争论。
English: The emperor agreed to his request, but Xiao Jiangao continued to argue.

古文：后江西抚按并劾相，相以为近高主之，疏诋甚力。
现代文：后来江西巡抚、巡按一起弹劾潘相，潘相以为是萧近高主使的，上疏极力诋毁他。
English: Later, the governor of Jiangxi Province and the inspectors jointly impeached Pan Xiang. Pan Xiang thought that he was the chief envoy of Xiao Qiangao, and Shang Soo tried his best to discredit him.

古文：近高疏辨，复劾相。
现代文：萧近高上疏辩解，又弹劾潘相。
English: Xiao nearly defended Gao Shangso and impeached Pan Xiang.

古文：疏虽不行，相不久自引去。
现代文：虽然没有按奏疏实行，潘相不久自己引咎辞职了。
English: Although it was not carried out according to protocol, Pan Xiang soon resigned, blaming himself.

古文：屡迁刑科都给事中。知县满朝荐、诸生王大义等皆忤中使，系狱三年。
现代文：提升为刑科都给事中，知县满朝荐、诸生王大义等人都由于冒犯太监关进监狱三年了。
English: Among those promoted to the Criminal Investigation Department, Zhixian Manchao Ruo, Zhu Sheng Wang Dayi and others have been imprisoned for three years for offending eunuchs.

古文：近高请释之，不报。
现代文：萧近高请求释放他们，没有回音。
English: There was no response to Xiao Jiangao's request to release them.

古文：辽东税使高淮激民变，近高劾其罪，请撤还，帝不纳。
现代文：辽东税使高淮激起人民造反，萧近高弹劾他的罪状，请求撤回税使，皇帝不接受。
English: Liaodong taxation caused Gao Huai to incite the people to revolt. Xiao Jiangao impeached him and requested the withdrawal of taxation. The emperor did not accept it.

古文：又以淮诬奏逮同知王邦才、参将李获阳，近高复论救。
现代文：又因为高淮诬告逮捕同知王邦才、参将李获阳，萧近高又一次营救他们。
English: In addition, because Gao Huai falsely accused and arrested his confidant Wang Bangcai and general Li Zhuoyang, Xiao Jingao once again rescued them.

古文：会廷臣多劾淮者，帝不得已征还，而邦才等系如故。
现代文：正好有很多廷臣弹劾高淮，皇帝不得已把他召回了，而王邦才等人照样关押着。
English: Just as many courtiers impeached Gao Huai, the emperor had no choice but to recall him, while Wang Bangcai and others were still imprisoned.

古文：无何，极陈言路不通、耳目壅蔽之患。
现代文：不久，极力陈述言路不开通，耳目堵塞看不见的害处。
English: Soon, the invisible harm of not being able to speak and having blocked ears and eyes was forcefully stated.

古文：未几，又言王锡爵密揭行私，宜止勿召；朱赓被弹六十余疏，不当更留。
现代文：没多久，又说王锡爵营公行私，应停止征召。朱赓被六十多道奏疏弹劾，不应当还留用他。
English: Not long after, he also said that Wang Xizhe should stop being conscripted because of his private and public activities. Zhu Xi was impeached by more than sixty provinces, and he should not be retained.

古文：皆不报。
现代文：都没有批复。
English: None of this has been approved.

古文：故事，六科都给事中内外递转。人情轻外，率规避，近高自请外补。
现代文：按过去的惯例，六科都给事中内外轮流任职，人们轻视外任，都回避，萧近高自动请求到外地任职。
English: According to the past practice, the six disciplines all rotate their posts in and out of the country. People despise external appointments and avoid them. Xiao Xinggao automatically requested to serve in other countries.

古文：吏部侍郎杨时乔请亟许以成其美。
现代文：吏部侍郎杨时乔请求皇帝尽快同意以实现他的愿望。
English: Yang Shijiao, an attendant of the cadre department, asked the emperor to agree to fulfill his wish as soon as possible.

古文：乃用为浙江右参政，进按察使。
现代文：于是任命他为浙江右参政，提升按察使。
English: As a result, he was appointed as a right-wing politician in Zhejiang and promoted to inspector.

古文：以病归。起浙江左布政使。
现代文：因病回家，起用为浙江左布政使。
English: Due to illness, he returned home and was appointed as the political envoy of Zhejiang Zuo Bu.

古文：所至以清操闻。
现代文：所到之处以清廉有操守而闻名。
English: He is known for his integrity wherever he goes.

古文：泰昌元年召为太仆卿。
现代文：泰昌元年征召为太仆卿。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taichang, he was conscripted as a servant of the Emperor.

古文：廷议 红丸 之案，近高言崔文升、李可灼当斩，方从哲当勒还故里，张差谋逆有据，不可蔽以疯癫。
现代文：廷议 红丸案 ，萧近高说崔文升、李可灼应当斩首，方从哲应当勒令他回归故里，张差谋反有真凭实据，不能够拿疯癫做掩护。
English: The court deliberated on the Red Marbles Case, Xiao Jiangao said that Cui Wensheng and Li Kegui should be beheaded, Fang Congzhe should order him to return to his hometown, but Zhang Shizhao had real evidence and could not use insanity as a cover.

古文：历工部左、右侍郎。
现代文：历任工部左、右侍郎。
English: He served as the Left and Right Attendant of the Ministry of Works.

古文：天启二年冬，引疾去。
现代文：天启二年冬天，称病离职。
English: In the winter of the second year of the Apocalypse, he resigned from his post, claiming illness.

古文：御史黄尊素因言近高暨侍郎余懋衡、曹于汴、饶伸，太仆少卿刘弘谟、刘宗周并辞荣养志，清风袭人，亟宜褒崇，风励有位。
现代文：御史黄尊素于是说萧近高以及侍郎余懋衡、曹于汴、饶伸，太仆少卿刘弘谟、刘宗周都有志向、不爱虚荣、清风袭人，应立即表彰以示尊重，劝勉在位的官员。
English: He then said that Xiao Chinkang Gao, as well as his attendants Yu Yu Heng, Cao Yuxuan, and Rao Sheng, and his lackeys Liu Hongmu and Liu Zong Zhou, all had ambition, were not vain, and were a breath of fresh air. They should be commended immediately to show respect and encourage the officials in power.

古文：诏许召还。
现代文：下诏同意征召还朝。
English: He agreed to be conscripted and returned to the imperial court.

古文：五年冬，起南京兵部，添注左侍郎。力辞，不允。
现代文：五年冬天，起用为南京兵部，注籍左侍郎，极力推辞，皇上不答应。
English: In the winter of the fifth year, he was appointed to the Nanjing Military Department, registered as the left attendant, and he tried his best to refuse, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：时魏忠贤势张，诸正人屏斥已尽。
现代文：当时魏忠贤势力嚣张，正人君子已被排斥一空。
English: At that time, Wei Zhongxian's forces were arrogant, and the righteous gentleman had been completely ostracized.

古文：近高不欲出，迁延久之。
现代文：萧近高不想出来做官，拖延了很长一段时间。
English: Xiao Jian Gao did not want to become an official and delayed for a long time.

古文：给事中薛国观劾其玩命，遂落职。
现代文：给事中薛国观弹劾他轻视皇帝的任命，于是解除他的职务。
English: In the process, Xue Guoguan impeached him for despising the emperor's appointment and dismissed him.

古文：崇祯初，乃复。
现代文：崇祯初年，又恢复他的官职。
English: In the first year of Chongzhen, he resumed his official position.

古文：卒于家。
现代文：死在家里。
English: He died at home.

