古文：文王之为世子，朝于王季，日三。
现代文：周文王做太子的时候，每天三次到他父亲王季那里去请安。
English: When Zhou Wenwang was crown prince, he went to his father Wang Jiwu three times a day to ask for his blessing.

古文：鸡初鸣而衣服，至于寝门外，问内竖之御者曰： 今日安否何如？ 
现代文：鸡叫头遍就穿好了衣服，来到父王的寝门外，问值班的内竖： 今天父王身体是否安好？ 
English: The rooster crowed loudly and dressed, came to the outside of his father's bedroom door, and asked the porter on duty: Is his father well today?

古文：内竖曰： 安。 
现代文：内竖回答： 一切安好。 
English: Inner vertical answer: Everything is fine.

古文：文王乃喜。
现代文：听到这样的回答，文王就满脸喜色。
English: Upon hearing this answer, King Wen's face lit up with joy.

古文：及日中，又至，亦如之。
现代文：第二次是中午，第三次是傍晚，请安的仪节都和第一次一样。
English: The second time is at noon, the third time is in the evening, and the greeting rituals are the same as the first time.

古文：及莫，又至，亦如之。其有不安节，则内竖以告文王，文王色忧，行不能正履。
现代文：如果王季身体欠安，内竖就会向文王察告，文王听说之后，就满脸忧色，连走路都不能正常迈步。
English: If Wang Ji is not in good health, the Inner Court will report to King Wen. After King Wen hears about it, his face is sad and he can't even walk normally.

古文：王季腹膳，然后亦复初。
现代文：王季的饮食恢复如初，然后文王的神态才能恢复正常。
English: Wang Ji's diet is back to normal, and then King Wen's appearance can return to normal.

古文：食上，必在，视寒暖之节，食下，问所膳；命膳宰曰： 末有原！ 
现代文：每顿饭端上来的时候，文王一定要亲自察看饭菜的冷热；每顿饭撤下去的时候，文王一定要问吃了多少。同时交待掌厨的官员： 吃剩的饭菜不要再端上去。 听到对方回答 是 ，文王才放心地离开。
English: Every time a meal is served, King Wen must personally inspect the hot and cold of the meal; every time a meal is withdrawn, King Wen must ask how much has been eaten. At the same time, he told the official in charge of the kitchen: Do not serve the leftover meal again. When he heard the other party answer yes, King Wen left with confidence.

古文：应曰： 诺。 然后退。武王帅而行之，不敢有加焉。
现代文：武王做太子时，就以文王做太子时的行为为榜样，不敢有一点走样。
English: When King Wu was crown prince, he followed the example of King Wen's behavior when he was crown prince, and did not dare to deviate a bit.

古文：文王有疾，武王不脱冠带而养。
现代文：文王如果有病，武王就头不脱冠衣不解带地昼夜侍养。
English: If King Wen is ill, King Wu will serve him day and night without taking off his crown.

古文：文王一饭，亦一饭；文王再饭，亦再饭。
现代文：文王吃饭少，武王也就吃饭少；文王吃饭增多，武王也就随着增多。
English: When King Wen eats less, King Wu also eats less; when King Wen eats more, King Wu also eats more.

古文：旬有二日乃间。文王谓武王曰： 女何梦矣？ 
现代文：如此这般的十二天以后，文王的病也就好了。文王问武王道： 你做过什么梦吗？ 
English: After twelve days like this, King Wen's illness was cured. King Wen asked King Wu: Did you have any dreams?

古文：武王对曰： 梦帝与我九龄。 
现代文：武王答道： 我梦见天帝给我九龄。 
English: King Wu replied: I dreamt that the Heavenly Emperor gave me nine years of age.

古文：文王曰： 女以为何也？ 
现代文：文王说： 你认为这个梦是暗示什么呢？ 
English: King Wen said, "What do you think this dream means?"

古文：武王曰： 西方有九国焉，君王其终抚诸？ 
现代文：武王说： 西方还有九国尚未归顺，君王您大概最终要将他们占有吧。 
English: King Wu said: There are still nine countries in the West that have not yet surrendered. You, the king, will probably eventually take possession of them.

古文：文王曰： 非也。
现代文：文王说： 你理解的不对。
English: King Wen said, "Your understanding is wrong.

古文：古者谓年龄，齿亦龄也。
现代文：古代把年也叫做龄，齿也是龄。
English: In ancient times, the year was also called the age, and the tooth was also the age.

古文：我百尔九十，吾与尔三焉。 
现代文：我的寿限是一百，你的寿限是九十，我把我的寿限给你三年。 
English: My lifespan is one hundred, your lifespan is ninety, I give you my lifespan of three years.

古文：文王九十七乃终，武王九十三而终。
现代文：于是，文王活到九十七岁就死了，而武王活到九十三岁才死。
English: As a result, King Wen lived to the age of ninety-seven and died, while King Wu lived to the age of ninety-three and died.

古文：成王幼，不能莅阼，周公相，践阼而治。
现代文：成王年幼，不能即位履行天子职务，由周公出面辅助，代行天子职权。
English: King Cheng was too young to perform the duties of the emperor on the throne, so Zhou Gong came forward to assist and act as the emperor's representative.

古文：抗世子法于伯禽，欲令成王之知父子、君臣、长幼之道也；成王有过，则挞伯禽，所以示成王世子之道也。文王之为世子也。
现代文：周公把教育太子的一套规定搬了出来，要求自己的儿子伯禽在陪伴成王时首先做到，目的就是要让成王懂得父子、君臣、长幼之道。成王如果有做不到的地方，周公就痛打伯禽，使成王看了懂得如何做个太子。以上是《文王之为世子》。
English: Zhou Gong brought out a set of regulations for the education of the prince, and required his son, Bo Chien, to do it first when accompanying Cheng Wang. The purpose was to let Cheng Wang understand the way of father and son, ruler and vassal, and raising children. If Cheng Wang could not do it, Zhou Gong beat Bo Chien, so that Cheng Wang could see and understand how to be a prince. The above is "Wen Wang Wei Zi Shi Zi."

古文：凡学世子及学士，必时。
现代文：太学对太子及学士进行教育，一定要根据季节的不同。
English: The education of princes and bachelors must be different according to the season.

古文：春夏学干戈，秋冬学羽龠，皆于东序。
现代文：春夏二季教手执干戈的武舞，秋冬二季教手执羽篱的文舞，地点都是在东序。
English: In the spring and summer, the instructor performs the martial dance of the go-go, and in the autumn and winter, the instructor performs the literary dance of the feather hedge, both in the eastern sequence.

古文：小乐正学干，大胥赞之。龠师学戈，龠师丞赞之。
现代文：小乐正负责教执干舞，太骨帮助他；篱师负责教执戈舞，篱师皿帮助他。
English: Xiaole is in charge of teaching and leading the stem dance, and Taibo helps him; Hedger is in charge of teaching and leading the go dance, and Hedger helps him.

古文：胥鼓南。春诵夏弦，大师诏之。
现代文：旎人负责教南夷之乐，太青则在旁击鼓为节。春季诵读诗章，夏季练习为诗章谱曲，这两项都由太师来教。
English: The eunuchs are in charge of teaching the music of the Nanyi, while the drummers are on the sidelines. In the spring, they recite poems, and in the summer, they practice composing poems, both of which are taught by the eunuchs.

古文：瞽宗秋学礼，执礼者诏之；冬读书，典书者诏之。
现代文：秋冬在警宗学礼，由主管礼的官员来教。冬季读《尚书》，由精通《尚书》的官员来教。
English: In the autumn and winter, officers in charge of etiquette will teach at the Police Academy. In the winter, officers who are proficient in "Shangshu" will teach "Shangshu."

古文：礼在瞽宗，书在上庠。
现代文：教礼是在警宗，教《书》是在上库。
English: The religious gift is in the police department, and the teaching of the "Book" is in the upper library.

古文：凡祭与养老，乞言，合语之礼，皆小乐正诏之于东序。
现代文：凡是祭祀、养老乞言和合语的礼节，都由小乐正在东序教太子及太学生。
English: All the etiquette of sacrificial rites, begging for alms, and speaking in tongues were taught to the prince and his students by Xiaole Zeng.

古文：大乐正学舞干戚，语说，命乞言，皆大乐正授数，大司成论说在东序。
现代文：太乐正教他们手执干戚的武舞。合语、养老乞言的礼节，都由太乐正传授其义理，由大司成评说，地点也在东序。
English: Tai Le Orthodoxy teaches them the martial dance of holding hands. The etiquette of speaking in unison and begging for alms is taught by Tai Le Zheng and commented on by Daizi Cheng, also in the eastern sequence.

古文：凡侍坐于大司成者，远近间三席，可以问。
现代文：凡在大司成身旁陪坐，与大司成之间要有三席的距离。
English: Anyone who sits next to Daisicheng must be three seats away from Daisicheng.

古文：终则负墙，列事未尽，不问。
现代文：可以向大司成发问，间毕则退回靠墙的位置。大司成的话还没有讲完，不可发问。
English: You can ask questions to Daisicheng, but in the meantime, return to the position against the wall. Daisicheng's words have not yet been finished, and you cannot ask questions.

古文：凡学，春官释奠于其先师，秋冬亦如之。
现代文：每季开学，都要向先师行释奠礼。春季的释奠由春季的主讲教师主持，夏、秋、冬三季也是这样。
English: At the beginning of each school term, a memorial service is held for the previous teacher. In the spring, the memorial service is conducted by the teacher who was the main speaker in the spring, and the same applies to the summer, autumn and winter terms.

古文：凡始立学者，必释奠于先圣先师；及行事，必以币。
现代文：凡是诸侯根据天子命令始建的学校，一定要对先圣先师行释奠礼，而且祭品要比平常贵重，用束帛。
English: All schools founded by the princes according to the order of the Son of Heaven must pay tribute to the first saint and teacher, and the offerings are more precious than usual, with bundles of straw.

古文：凡释奠者，必有合也，有国故则否。
现代文：凡行释奠礼，必有音乐、舞蹈的联合演出；如果碰上国家有战争灾荒，那就只行释奠礼，取消演出。
English: Whenever there is a memorial service, there must be a joint performance of music and dance; if there is a war or disaster in the country, then only a memorial service will be held and the performance will be cancelled.

古文：凡大合乐，必遂养老。
现代文：凡天子视学时的大规模音乐、舞蹈演出的次日，天子一定要接着举行养老之礼。
English: On the day after the large-scale music and dance performance, which usually takes place when the emperor is visiting a school, the emperor must then hold a retirement ceremony.

古文：凡语于郊者，必取贤敛才焉。
现代文：凡是在郊学中考评学生，一定要把出类拔萃的人才举荐上来。
English: When evaluating students in suburban schools, we must recommend outstanding talents.

古文：或以德进，或以事举，或以言扬。
现代文：有的因品德优异而被录取，有的因才能卓绝而被选拔，有的因善于辞令而被录用。
English: Some were admitted because of their excellent moral character, some were selected because of their outstanding talent, and some were hired because they were good at making speeches.

古文：曲艺皆誓之，以待又语。
现代文：对于有一技之长的手艺人，也在训话中加以劝勉，促其上进，以待下次考评。
English: For a skilled craftsman, he is also exhorted in the lecture, urging him to advance, to wait for the next evaluation.

古文：三而一有焉，乃进其等，以其序，谓之郊人，远之。于成均以及取爵于上尊也。
现代文：对于有一技之长的人，如果三个问题他有一个回答得好，就按照曲艺系列晋升其等级，并称之谓 郊人  郊人 的待遇低于选士、俊士，他们不能进入国家最高学府，也不能在乡饮酒礼中充当宾、介。
English: For a person with a skill, if he answers one of the three questions well, he will be promoted according to the acrobatic series, and will be called a "suburban man." Suburban men are treated lower than samurai and young men. They cannot enter the country's highest university, nor can they serve as guests and intermediaries in the township drinking ceremony.

古文：始立学者，既兴器用币，然后释菜不舞不授器，乃退。
现代文：诸侯国刚开始建立学校的，对新制成的礼乐之器要杀牲祭之，并涂以牲血，祭时要用束帛。然后举行释菜礼，此后没有歌舞演出，也用不着分发舞具。
English: At the beginning of the establishment of a school in a princely state, the newly made ceremonial instruments had to be sacrificed and painted with animal blood, and a bundle of straw had to be used for the sacrifice. Then a dish-laying ceremony was held, after which there were no song and dance performances, and there was no need to distribute dance equipment.

古文：傧于东序，一献，无介语可也。
现代文：礼毕，在东序招待来宾，用一献之礼，没有槟相，没有合语，简单完事就行了。
English: After the etiquette, invite the guests in the eastern sequence, with a dedication, no puns, no slang, just a simple finish.

古文：教世子。
现代文：以上为《教世子》节。
English: The above is the "Godson" festival.

古文：凡三王教世子必以礼乐。
现代文：夏商周三代的国君在教育太子时，一定要用礼乐。
English: Xia Shang, the third generation of the country's ruler, must use music when educating the prince.

古文：乐，所以修内也；礼，所以修外也。
现代文：乐，可以陶冶精神；礼，可以美化外表。
English: Music can cultivate the spirit; etiquette can beautify the appearance.

古文：礼乐交错于中，发形于外，是故其成也怿，恭敬而温文。
现代文：礼乐互相渗透于心，表现于外，其结果就能使太子顺利成长，养成外貌恭敬而又有温文尔雅的气质。
English: The music of the ritual permeates the heart and is expressed externally. As a result, the prince can grow up smoothly and develop a respectful and gentle temperament.

古文：立大傅、少傅以养之，欲其知父子、君臣之道也。
现代文：设立太傅、少傅来培养太子，目的是要让他知道父子、君臣的关系该如何相处。
English: Taifu and shoofu were set up to train the prince, with the aim of letting him know how to get along in the relationship between father and son, prince and vassal.

古文：大傅审父子、君臣之道以示之；少傅奉世子，以观大傅之德行而审喻之。
现代文：太傅的责任是把父子、君臣之道讲说明白并且身体力行做出榜样，少傅的责任是把太傅所讲的、所做的给太子仔细分析使之领会。
English: It is the duty of the Grand Master to explain clearly the way of the father and son, the prince and the subject, and to set an example by his own efforts. It is the duty of the Junior Master to carefully analyze what the Grand Master has said and done for the prince to understand.

古文：大傅在前，少傅在后；入则有保，出则有师，是以教喻而德成也。
现代文：太傅、少傅、师、保，他们时时刻刻都在太子左右，形影不离，所以他们讲的内容太子都能够明白，而太子的美德也就容易培养成功。
English: Taifu, Shaofu, Shi, Bao, they are always around the prince, inseparable, so the prince can understand what they are talking about, and the prince's virtue is easy to cultivate.

古文：师也者，教之以事而喻诸德者也；保也者，慎其身以辅翼之而归诸道者也。
现代文：师的责任，是把古人的行事说给太子听，并分析其善恶得失，使太子懂得择善而从。保的责任，是谨言慎行，以身作则，以此来影响太子，从而使太子的一言一行都合乎规范。
English: The duty of the teacher is to explain the actions of the ancients to the prince, and analyze their good and evil gains and losses, so that the prince knows how to choose the good and follow it. The duty of the guardian is to speak and act prudently, and lead by example, in order to influence the prince, so that the prince's every word and deed conforms to the norm.

古文：《记》曰： 虞、夏、商、周，有师保，有疑丞。 
现代文：古《记》上说： 虞夏商周四代，有师、保、疑、承作为太子的辅佐。
English: The ancient "Record" said: Yu Xia, the fourth generation of merchants, had a teacher, a guarantor, a doubt, and a successor as an assistant to the prince.

古文：设四辅及三公。不必备，唯其人。
现代文：设立四辅及三公之官，不一定全套都设，有合适的人选则设，否则就不设，宁缺勿滥。 
English: The establishment of the four auxiliary and three public officials does not necessarily mean the establishment of a complete set. If there is a suitable candidate, it will be set up, otherwise it will not be set up. It is better to have more than enough.

古文：语使能也。
现代文：这话的意思是说设官必须任能。
English: What this means is that the appointee must be able-bodied.

古文：君子曰德，德成而教尊，教尊而官正，官正而国治，君之谓也。
现代文：君子说： 太子的道德非常重要，太子的道德养成了，负责教育太子的师保也会被人尊重；负责教育太子的师保受人尊重，则百官正直；百官正直，就会国家大治。
English: The gentleman said: The prince's morals are very important. The prince's morals have been cultivated, and the tutors and guardians responsible for the prince's education will be respected. If the tutors and guardians responsible for the prince's education are respected, then all officials will be honest. If all officials are honest, then the country will be governed well.

古文：仲尼曰： 昔者周公摄政，践阼而治，抗世子法于伯禽，所以善成王也。
现代文：这是指太子有朝一日为君而言的。 仲尼说： 从前周公代替成王处理国事，治理天下，把教育太子的一套规定搬了出来，要求自己的儿子伯禽在陪伴成王时做到，这是为了使成王养成好的品德。
English: Zhong Ni said, "From the previous day, Zhou Gong took the place of Cheng Wang in handling state affairs and governing the world. He brought out a set of rules for the education of the prince, and required his son, Baoji, to do so when he accompanied Cheng Wang. This was in order to make Cheng Wang develop a good character.

古文：闻之曰：为人臣者，杀其身有益于君则为之，况于其身以善其君乎？
现代文：听人说： 作臣子的，如果牺牲自己但却能为国君带来好处，这样的事就值得做。 
English: The listener said: "As a courtier, if you sacrifice yourself but can bring benefits to the sovereign, such a thing is worth doing."

古文：周公优为之！ 
现代文：何况仅仅是暂时改变一下身份就能使国君从中得到好处呢？
English: What's more, can a mere temporary change of status benefit the sovereign?

古文：是故知为人子，然后可以为人父；知为人臣，然后可以为人君；知事人，然后能使人。
现代文：周公自然是乐于这样做的。 所以，懂得了如何做人的儿子，然后才可以做人的父亲；懂得了如何做人的臣子，然后才可以做人们的国君；懂得了如何侍奉他人，然后才能使唤他人。
English: Therefore, only when you know how to be a son of man can you be a father of man; only when you know how to be a vassal of man can you be a sovereign of man; only when you know how to serve others can you use others.

古文：成王幼，不能莅阼，以为世子，则无为也，是故抗世子法于伯禽，使之与成王居，欲令成王之知父子、君臣、长幼之义也。
现代文：成王年幼，不能即位，把他作为太子来培养，也没有什么实际意义。所以周公才把教育太子的一套规定搬了出来，要求本来不是太子的伯禽遵守，让伯禽整天和成王在一起，就是想叫成王懂得父子、君臣、长幼的道理。
English: As Cheng Wang was too young to ascend the throne, it was of no practical significance to train him as the crown prince. Therefore, Zhou Gongcai brought out a set of regulations for the education of the crown prince, requiring the non-princeling courtiers to abide by, and let the courtiers stay with Cheng Wang all day, in order to make Cheng Wang understand the principles of father and son, ruler and subject, and father and son.

古文：君之于世子也，亲则父也，尊则君也。有父之亲，有君之尊，然后兼天下而有之。是故，养世子不可不慎也。
现代文：国君和太子的关系，从血缘来讲是父亲，从尊卑来讲是国君，既有为父之亲，又有为君之尊，然后才能统治天下，由此可见，培养太子不可不慎重。
English: The relationship between the sovereign and the crown prince, from the point of view of blood, is the father, from the point of view of superiority and inferiority, it is the sovereign, both as a father's relative and as a prince's honor, and then they can rule the world. Thus, it can be seen that the training of the crown prince must not be careless.

古文：行一物而三善皆得者，唯世子而已。其齿于学之谓也。
现代文：做一件事情而能同时得到三个好的结果，只有太子一人而已，这是指太子在太学里不摆架子，不自命不凡，而是按年龄大小来和同学们叙礼之事而言。
English: There is only one princeling who can do one thing and get three good results at the same time. This means that the princeling does not put on airs and pretensions in the school, but according to the age of the students.

古文：故世子齿于学，国人观之曰： 将君我而与我齿让何也？ 
现代文：所以，太子在太学中按年龄大小与众叙礼，国人看到后，说： 太子是我们未来的国君却与我们按年龄叙礼 ，如此谦让是为什么呢？ 
English: Therefore, when the crown prince was in Taigaku, he bowed to the crowd according to his age. When the Chinese people saw this, they said, "The crown prince is our future king, but he bows to us according to our age. Why is he so modest?"

古文：曰： 有父在则礼然，然而众知父子之道矣。 
现代文：回答是： 太子有父在就礼当如此。 于是众人也就懂得父子之道了。
English: The answer was: When a prince has a father, this is how he should behave, so everyone understood the way of the father and son.

古文：其二曰： 将君我而与我齿让何也？ 
现代文：这是第一个好结果。第二个，有人会问： 太子是我们未来的国君却与我们按年龄叙礼，如此谦让是为什么呢？ 
English: This is the first good result. Second, some people will ask: Why is the crown prince, our future king, bowing to us according to our age?

古文：曰： 有君在则礼然，然而众着于君臣之义也。 
现代文：回答是： 太子在有国君在的时候就礼当如此。 于是众人也就明白君臣之义了。
English: The answer was: When the prince is in the presence of the sovereign, he should behave in such a manner, and then everyone will understand the righteousness of the sovereign.

古文：其三曰： 将君我而与我齿让何也？ 
现代文：第三个，还有人会问： 太子是我们未来的国君却与我们按年龄叙礼，如此谦让是为什么呢？ 
English: Third, there are those who will ask: Why is the crown prince, our future king, bowing to us according to our age, and why is he so modest?

古文：曰： 长长也，然而众知长幼之节矣。 
现代文：回答是： 年幼者应当尊敬年长者。 于是众人也就明白长幼之间的礼节了。
English: The answer was: The younger ones should respect the older ones, so everyone understood the etiquette between the old and the young.

古文：故父在斯为子，君在斯谓之臣，居子与臣之节，所以尊君亲亲也。
现代文：所以说，父在，太子就是儿子；君在，太子就是臣子，一太子具有儿子和臣子的双重身份，所以他既要尊敬国君，也要热爱父亲。
English: Therefore, when the father is present, the prince is the son; when the prince is present, the prince is the vassal. A prince has the dual identity of a son and a vassal, so he must both respect the sovereign and love his father.

古文：故学之为父子焉，学之为君臣焉，学之为长幼焉，父子、君臣、长幼之道得，而国治。
现代文：所以要教育他如何处理好父子关系，如何处理好君臣关系 ，如可处理好长幼关系。父子、君臣、 长幼的关系处理得好，一然后国家才可以得到治理。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to teach him how to handle the father-son relationship well, how to handle the monarch-minister relationship well, for example, how to handle the elder-child relationship well. The father-son, monarch-minister, elder-child relationship is handled well, and then the country can be governed.

古文：语曰： 乐正司业，父师司成，一有元良，万国以贞。 
现代文：古人有这样一句话： 乐正负责太子的学业精进，太师负责太子的道德培养，造就二个德业卓绝的领袖，天下便会得到太平。 《周公践昨》说的就是太子。以上是
English: The ancients have such a saying: Le Zheng is responsible for the prince's academic advancement, Taishi is responsible for the prince's moral cultivation, and if two leaders with outstanding virtue are created, the world will be peaceful.

古文：世子之谓也。
现代文：庶子的政务是管理国君的族人，用孝梯、睦友、慈爱的伦理教育他们，使他们明白父子关系的含义，长幼之间的礼节。
English: The government affairs of the son-in-law is to manage the relatives of the sovereign, to educate them with the ethics of filial piety, friendship and love, to make them understand the meaning of the father-son relationship, and the etiquette between the elder and the younger.

古文：周公践阼。庶子之正于公族者，教之以孝弟、睦友、子爱，明父子之义、长幼之序。
现代文：国君的族人朝见国君，如果是在内朝，则面向东，以北为上位；朝臣中如有地位尊贵者，其位置顺序也只按照年龄辈分排列，由庶子负责安排，即令是贵为上卿，其位置也要在父兄之后。
English: The members of the sovereign's family face the sovereign in the morning, and if they are in the Inner Court, they face the east, with the north as the superior; if there are dignitaries among the courtiers, their position order is also only arranged according to age, and the illegitimate son is responsible for arranging it. Even if you are a nobleman, your position should be after your father and brother.

古文：其朝于公：内朝，则东面北上；臣有贵者，以齿。
现代文：如果是在外朝，那就要以官爵的高低排列位置，由司士具体负责。
English: If it is in the Outer Court, then it is necessary to arrange positions according to the rank of courtier, and the magistrate is specifically responsible.

古文：其在外朝，则以官，司士为之。
现代文：如果是在宗庙之中，位置的排列如同外朝，根据爵位的高低和官职的不同，由宗人负责给他们分派差使。
English: If it is in the ancestral temple, the position is arranged as in the Outer Dynasties. According to the different levels of nobility and official positions, the ancestral person is responsible for assigning them.

古文：其在宗庙之中，则如外朝之位。宗人授事，以爵以官。
现代文：但是，祭祀中的登堂分食祭品、向尸献酒、饮奠解，这些事一定要由国君的嫡长子来做。
English: However, it is the eldest son of the sovereign who must perform the rituals, such as entering the hall to distribute food and offerings, offering wine to the corpse, and drinking libations.

古文：其登馂献受爵，则以上嗣。庶子治之，虽有三命，不逾父兄。其公大事，则以其丧服之精粗为序。
现代文：遇到国君的丧事，则按照丧服的精粗排列顺序，即令是国君族人的丧事，也照此办理，由孝子领头，其后按亲疏关系逐个往下排。
English: In the case of the funeral of a sovereign, the order of the coarse and fine mourning clothes is followed, even if it is the funeral of a sovereign, it is also handled accordingly, led by the filial son, and then one by one down the line according to the relationship.

古文：虽于公族之丧亦如之，以次主人。
现代文：如果是国君与族人宴饮，就要由异姓的人作宾，由膳宰代理主人，以便酬醉尽礼。
English: If it is a banquet for the sovereign and his people, it is necessary for the guest to be a person with a different surname, and for the caterer to act as the host, so that the guests can get drunk.

古文：若公与族燕，则异姓为宾，膳宰为主人，公与父兄齿。
现代文：至于席位的座次，国君对其父辈兄辈，还要按辈分年龄来排。
English: As for the order of seats, the sovereign ranks higher than his or her parents and siblings, and is also ranked according to age.

古文：族食，世降一等。其在军，则守于公祢。
现代文：合族聚餐的活动，按照族人与国君的亲疏关系，每隔一世则递降一等。族人如果随军外出，要守卫在行主旁边。
English: According to the relationship of kinship between the tribesmen and the sovereigns, the activities of the joint meal are downgraded every other life. If the tribesmen go out with the army, they should be guarded next to the host.

古文：公若有出疆之政，庶子以公族之无事者守于公宫，正室守大庙，诸父守贵宫贵室，诸子诸孙守下宫下室。
现代文：国君如果有出国活动，庶子留守国内，就要派公族中没有职事的人守卫宫庭，派公族中的嫡子守卫太祖之庙，派诸父辈守卫路寝，派诸子辈守卫亲庙，派诸孙辈守卫燕寝。
English: If the sovereign has overseas activities and his son-in-law remains in the country, he should send a person from the public who does not have a job to guard the palace, send a legitimate son from the public to guard the ancestral temple, send his parents to guard the road, send his children to guard the family temple, and send his grandchildren to guard the swallow's nest.

古文：五庙之孙，祖庙未毁，虽为庶人，冠，取妻，必告；死，必赴；练祥则告。
现代文：同一高祖的子孙，只要高祖的神主尚未迁出，即使有的族人已沦为平民，遇到举行冠礼、娶妻，一定要向国君察告，有丧事也要讣告，到了小祥、大祥之祭，也要察告。
English: The descendants of the same great-grandfather, as long as the god of the great-grandfather has not moved out, even if some members of the tribe have been reduced to civilians, must report to the sovereign when crowning ceremonies are held and wives are married. They must also report to the sovereign when there is a funeral, and when there is a small auspicious or great auspicious festival.

古文：族之相为也，宜吊不吊，宜免不免，有司罚之。
现代文：族人之间的互相往来，应该吊唁的不去吊唁，应该戴免的不戴免，有关官员将给予处罚。
English: In mutual contacts between members of the same ethnic group, if they do not offer condolences when condolences should be offered, or if they do not offer forgiveness when forgiveness should be granted, the relevant officials will punish them.

古文：至于赗赙承含，皆有正焉。
现代文：至于帽膊赠含，也都有一定之规。
English: As far as the hat is concerned, there are certain rules.

古文：公族其有死罪，则磬于甸人。
现代文：国君的族人如果犯有死罪，则交付甸人将其绞死。
English: If a member of the sovereign's family committed a capital crime, he was handed over to the people to be hanged.

古文：其刑罪，则纤剸，亦告于甸人。
现代文：国君的族人如果犯有刑罪，则或针刺或刀割，也告于甸人由其执行。
English: If a member of the sovereign's family commits a crime, he or she is either needled or cut with a knife.

古文：公族无宫刑。
现代文：国君的族人犯罪，不适用宫刑，这是为了不绝其类。
English: If a member of the sovereign's family commits a crime, the palace punishment does not apply, in order not to be out of the ordinary.

古文：狱成，有司谳于公。其死罪，则曰 某之罪在大辟 ；其刑罪，则曰 某之罪在小辟 。
现代文：案件判决之后，有关官吏向国君请示，如果所犯是死罪，就说： 族人某某所犯之罪属于大辟。 如果所犯是刑罪，就说： 族人某某所犯之罪属于小辟。 
English: After the case was adjudicated, the officials concerned asked the sovereign to instruct them that if the crime committed was a capital crime, they should say, "The crime committed by the member of a certain ethnic group is a major crime," and if the crime committed was a criminal offense, they should say, "The crime committed by the member of a certain ethnic group is a minor crime."

古文：公曰： 宥之。 
现代文：国君说： 饶了他吧。 
English: The sovereign said: Spare him.

古文：有司又曰： 在辟。 
现代文：有关官吏则回答： 法不容恕。 国君又说： 饶了他吧。 
English: The officials concerned replied: The law does not allow it. The sovereign also said: Please forgive him.

古文：公又曰： 宥之。 
现代文：有关官吏也照旧回答： 法不容恕。 
English: Relevant officials also answered as before: The law does not allow it.

古文：有司又曰： 在辟。 及三宥，不对，走出，致刑于于甸人。
现代文：等到国君第三次求情，有关官员就不再回答，径自走出，将犯人交付甸人行刑。
English: After the sovereign's third plea for mercy, the officials concerned stopped answering and walked out, handing the prisoner over to the executioner.

古文：公又使人追之曰： 虽然，必赦之。 
现代文：国君又派人追来，传命说： 即令有罪，也一定要赦免他。 
English: The sovereign sent someone in pursuit, with orders to say: Even if he is found guilty, he must be pardoned.

古文：有司对曰： 无及也！ 
现代文：有关官员回答说： 已经来不及了。 
English: Officials replied: "It's too late."

古文：反命于公，公素服不举，为之变，如其伦之丧。无服，亲哭之。
现代文：行刑之后，报告国君。国君为其改穿素服，取消盛撰，并依照与死者亲疏关系应有的礼数，为之改变日常生活。但因其有辱祖宗，所以不为之穿孝，而亲哭之于异姓之庙。
English: After the execution, he reported to the sovereign. The sovereign changed his name to plainclothes, cancelled the posthumous name, and changed his daily life in accordance with the number of courtesies due to the close relationship with the deceased. However, because he had insulted the ancestors, he did not wear filial piety, but wept for him in the temple of a different name.

古文：公族朝于内朝，内亲也。
现代文：国君的族人可以在内朝朝见，这表示族人内部的相亲。
English: The members of the sovereign's clan can see each other at home and abroad, which indicates that there are mutual friends among the members of the clan.

古文：虽有贵者以齿，明父子也。
现代文：族人中即使有地位高贵者也得按辈分叙礼，这是表示父子之情重于爵位贵贱。
English: Even if there are high-ranking nobles among the tribe, they have to recite the eulogy according to their generation, which means that the love of father and son is more important than the rank of nobility.

古文：外朝以官，体异姓也。
现代文：在外朝朝见以官位高低为序，这是为了表示对异姓的亲近。
English: In the Outer Court, court ranks are in order of precedence, which is to show the closeness of the different surnames.

古文：宗庙之中，以爵为位，崇德也。
现代文：宗庙之中，按爵位高低安排位置，这是表示尊崇有德之人。
English: Among the ancestral temples, the positions are arranged according to the level of nobility, which is a sign of respect for virtuous people.

古文：宗人授事以官，尊贤也。
现代文：宗人按照官职分派差使，这是表示尊重贤人。
English: Sohito dispatched envoys according to their official positions, which was an expression of respect for the sages.

古文：登馂受爵以上嗣，尊祖之道也。
现代文：登堂分食祭品、饮奠解的工作由嫡长子来做，这是表示尊祖敬宗。
English: The work of distributing food offerings and drinking libations in the temple is done by the eldest son, which is a sign of reverence for the founder.

古文：丧纪以服之轻重为序，不夺人亲也。
现代文：丧事以丧服的轻重为序，这是为了避免亲疏关系乱套。
English: Funerals are conducted according to the order of importance of the funeral attire, in order to avoid a chaotic relationship between relatives.

古文：公与族燕则以齿，而孝弟之道达矣。
现代文：国君同族人一道宴饮，其席位按辈分年龄排列，这样一来，孝佛的道理就体现出来了。
English: The sovereign and his compatriots feasted together, and their seats were arranged according to their ages. In this way, the principle of filial piety was reflected.

古文：其族食世降一等，亲亲之杀也。
现代文：合族聚餐，每隔一代，递降一等，这表示对待亲疏是有区别的。
English: Family dinners, every other generation, descend one grade, which means that there is a difference in the treatment of relatives and strangers.

古文：战则守于公祢，孝爱之深也。
现代文：作战时由族人守卫行主，这表示孝敬祖先的深切。
English: During the war, members of the tribe guarded the procession, which showed their deep respect for their ancestors.

古文：正室守大庙，尊宗室，而君臣之道着矣。
现代文：由嫡子们守卫太庙，这是表示尊重宗室，而君臣之道也可从而得到体现。
English: The fact that the temple is guarded by the legitimate sons is a sign of respect for the family line, and the principle of lordship can also be reflected in this way.

古文：诸父诸兄守贵室，子弟守下室，而让道达矣。
现代文：由诸父诸兄守卫路寝，子辈孙辈守卫燕寝，谦让之道也就体现出来了。
English: From fathers and brothers guarding the road to sleep, children and grandchildren guarding sleep, the way of modesty is also reflected.

古文：五庙之孙，祖庙未毁，虽及庶人，冠，取妻必告，死必赴，不忘亲也。
现代文：彼此是同一个高祖的子孙，祖庙的神主尚未迁出，那么大家就都是五服以内的亲属，即令有的人沦为平民，在加冠、娶亲的时候也要向国君察告，死了也一定要讣告，这是表示不忘记亲属。
English: Each of them is a descendant of the same great-grandfather, and the god of the ancestral temple has not yet moved out, so everyone is a relative within five generations. Even if some people are reduced to civilians, they must report to the sovereign when crowning and marrying, and must also report when they die. This is to say that relatives are not forgotten.

古文：亲未绝而列于庶人，贱无能也。
现代文：有的族人与国君的血亲关系还没有超过五服而已沦为平民，这表示国君卑视无能之人。
English: Some tribesmen and the blood relatives of the sovereign have not yet exceeded five years of service and have been reduced to civilians, which means that the sovereign despises incompetent people.

古文：敬吊临赙赗，睦友之道也。
现代文：对族人的丧事，吊唁、哭临、赠送财物、赠送车马，这体现了同族人的互相关心和帮助。
English: At the funeral of a member of the same ethnic group, condolences, tears, gifts of property, gifts of cars and horses were given, which reflected the mutual concern and help of members of the same ethnic group.

古文：古者，庶子之官治，而邦国有伦；邦国有伦，而众乡方矣。
现代文：古时候，只要庶子之官能够胜任其职，国家就会井然有序；国家井然有序，民众也就争着趋向礼义了。
English: In ancient times, as long as the illegitimate officials were able to perform their duties, the country would be in order; if the country was in order, the people would strive to be polite.

古文：公族之罪，虽亲不以犯有司，正术也，所以体百姓也。
现代文：国君的族人犯罪，尽管有亲属关系，国君也不因此而干扰司法部门的公正执行法令，以此表明公族犯法，与庶民同罪。
English: The crime was committed by a member of the sovereign's family, and despite the fact that they were related, the sovereign did not interfere with the justice department's impartial enforcement of the law, thereby showing that members of the public were guilty of the same crime as the common people.

古文：刑于隐者，不与国人虑兄弟也。
现代文：在隐蔽之处行刑，这是为了不使国人联想到族人自相残杀。
English: Executions were carried out in hidden places, so as not to remind the people of the country of the atrocities committed by members of the tribe against each other.

古文：弗吊，弗为服，哭于异姓之庙，为忝祖远之也。
现代文：对犯了死罪的族人，不去吊唁，不为之穿孝，哭于异姓之庙，这是因为他有辱祖宗，所以疏远他。
English: For a member of the tribe who has committed a capital crime, he does not offer condolences, does not show filial piety, and cries in the temple of a different surname. This is because he has insulted his ancestors, so he is estranged from him.

古文：素服居外，不听乐，私丧之也，骨肉之亲无绝也。
现代文：但又为之改穿素服，住在室外，不听音乐，这只是表示个人的哀悼，骨肉之亲的感情尚存。
English: However, they changed to wearing plain clothes, living outside, and not listening to music. This was just an expression of personal mourning, and the feelings of their relatives still remain.

古文：公族无宫刑，不翦其类也。
现代文：公族犯罪，不适用于宫刑，这是为了不绝其后代。
English: Public crime does not apply to palace punishment, this is in order not to ruin their descendants.

古文：天子视学，大昕鼓征，所以警众也。
现代文：天子视察太学这一天，天刚亮就擂起集合的鼓声，好让学生们迅速起床。
English: On the day of the heavenly son's inspection of Taixue, the students were woken up at the crack of dawn by the sound of drums.

古文：众至，然后天子至。乃命有司行事。兴秩节，祭先师先圣焉。
现代文：学生们到齐之后，等待天子驾临，于是命令有关官员开始行事，举行常规的礼仪，祭奠先圣先师。
English: After the students arrived, they waited for the arrival of the heavenly son, and then ordered the relevant officials to begin to act, hold a regular ceremony, and pay tribute to the holy pioneer.

古文：有司卒事，反命。始之养也：适东序，释奠于先老，遂设三老五更群老之席位焉。
现代文：有关官员把这些事情做完后向天子报告，天子这才动身到举行养老典礼的会场。天子来到东序，亲自释奠于先老，然后就安排三老、五更、群老的席位。
English: After the officials concerned had completed these things, they reported to the heavenly son, who then set off to the venue where the pension ceremony was held. The heavenly son came to Dongxu, personally paid tribute to the elders, and then arranged the seats for the three elders, the five elders, and the elders.

古文：适馔省醴，养老之珍，具；遂发咏焉，退修之以孝养也。
现代文：天子亲自检查肴撰酒醛，过问孝敬老人的各种美味是否齐备。当这一切就绪之后，于是奏乐迎接被养的贵宾。贵宾进门后先即位于西阶下，天子退酌醛酒敬献，行孝养老人之礼。
English: The heavenly son himself checked the dishes for alcohol and asked whether the various delicacies for the elderly were ready. When everything was ready, the music was played to welcome the honored guests. After the guests entered the door, they were immediately placed under the west steps, and the heavenly son poured out alcohol and offered it to the guests as a gift to show their filial piety to the elderly.

古文：反，登歌清庙，既歌而语，以成之也。
现代文：礼毕，贵宾登堂入席，由乐队登堂歌唱《清庙》。歌毕，贵宾们自由发言，谈听歌的感想，以成就天子养老的重要意义。
English: After the ceremony, the guests of honor entered the hall, and the band entered the hall to sing "Clear Temple." After the song, the guests of honor spoke freely and talked about their impressions of the song, in order to achieve the important significance of the heavenly son's retirement.

古文：言父子、君臣、长幼之道，合德音之致，礼之大者也。
现代文：贵宾的发言，都是围绕着父子、君臣、长幼之道，以印证《清庙》之歌的深刻涵义，这是养老礼中最重要的环节。
English: The speeches of the guests of honor were all centered around the father-son, monarch-servant, and elder-younger way, to confirm the profound meaning of the song "Qing Temple," which is the most important part of the pension ceremony.

古文：下管《象》，舞《大武》。大合众以事，达有神，兴有德也。
现代文：堂下管乐队奏着《象》曲，舞蹈队跳着《大武》的舞蹈，挑选大批的学生从事演奏，以表达周之灭商，是天命神授，文王、武王有德当兴。
English: The pipe band under the hall played the "Elephant" song, the dance team danced the "Great Warrior" dance, and a large number of students were selected to perform, to express that Zhou's extermination of merchants was God's providence, and King Wen and King Wu had the virtue to be popular.

古文：正君臣之位、贵贱之等焉，而上下之义行矣。
现代文：明确了君臣之位、贵贱之等，上下的关系就容易处理了。
English: After clarifying the position of monarchs and ministers, nobility and lowliness, it is easy to deal with the relationship between the upper and lower classes.

古文：有司告以乐阕，王乃命公侯伯子男及群吏曰： 反！养老幼于东序。 
现代文：等到有关官员报告演奏完毕，天子就命令与会的公侯伯子男诸侯及百官： 你们回去后也要在东序举行养老之礼。 
English: After the officials had finished their reports, the emperor ordered the princes, nobles and officials who were present: "When you go back, you should also hold a retirement ceremony at Dongxu.

古文：终之以仁也。
现代文：天子以这句仁及天下的话结束了这场养老之礼。
English: With these words of benevolence to the world, the Son of Heaven ended the gift of old age.

古文：是故圣人之记事也，虑之以大，爱之以敬，行之以礼，修之以孝养，纪之以义，终之以仁。
现代文：所以，圣人的记录养老之事，是从大处着眼，爱老敬老，以典礼的形式进行，极尽其孝养的能事，不仅记述的都合乎义理，而且末了还体现了天子的大恩大德。
English: Therefore, the record of the saint's old-age care is from a broad perspective, love the old and respect the old, in the form of a ceremony, to the best of his filial piety, not only is the record consistent with justice, but also reflects the great grace of the Son of God.

古文：是故古之人一举事而众皆知其德之备也。
现代文：因此，古人举行一次大的典礼，众人可以从中看出他的无德不备。
English: Therefore, the ancients held a grand ceremony, from which everyone could see his virtuousness.

古文：古之君子，举大事，必慎其终始，而众安得不喻焉？
现代文：古时的君子，举行大的典礼，从头到尾都极其谨慎，这样一来，众人怎会不理解其意义呢。
English: The ancient gentlemen, when they held a great ceremony, were extremely careful from beginning to end, so that the people would not understand its meaning.

古文：《兑命》曰： 念终始典于学。 
现代文：《说命》中说： 思念终和始常在于学习。 
English: "Shangshu·fulfillment of orders" said in the article: Don't forget to study classics from the beginning to the end, that's the reason we're talking about!

古文：世子之记曰：朝夕至于大寝之门外，问于内竖曰： 今日安否何如？ 
现代文：《世子之记》上说：作为太子，应于一早一晚到父王路寝门外，向内竖问道： 父王今天身体好吗？ 
English: "The Chronicle of the World's Children" says: "As a prince, you should go outside your father's bedroom door in the morning and evening, and ask: Is your father well today?

古文：内竖曰： 今日安。 
现代文：内竖回答： 今天很好。 
English: Inner vertical answer: Today is good.

古文：世子乃有喜色。
现代文：听到这种回答，太子才面有喜色。
English: Upon hearing this answer, the crown prince was overjoyed.

古文：其有不安节，则内竖以告世子，世子色忧不满容。
现代文：父王如有身体不适，内竖就应向太子报告，太子就面有忧色，表情失常。
English: If the father-in-law is unwell, he should report it to the prince, who has a gloomy look on his face and an unsteady expression.

古文：内竖言 复初 ，然后亦复初。
现代文：等到内竖报告说国王已经康复，然后太子的一切也才恢复正常。
English: It wasn't until the palace reported that the king had recovered that everything went back to normal for the prince.

古文：朝夕之食上，世子必在，视寒暖之节。食下，问所膳羞。
现代文：早晚的饭菜端上来时，太子一定要察看饭菜的凉热是否合适；饭菜撤下来时，太子要问父王吃得怎样。
English: When the morning and evening meals are served, the prince must check whether the coolness of the meal is appropriate; when the meal is withdrawn, the prince must ask his father how he is eating.

古文：必知所进，以命膳宰，然后退。
现代文：父王的饭菜，一定要知道下顿该进什么，向掌厨的官员交代清楚，然后才离开。
English: For my father's meal, I had to know what to put in, explain it clearly to the officials in charge of the kitchen, and then leave.

古文：若内竖言 疾 ，则世子亲齐玄而养。
现代文：如果内竖报告父王患病较重，太子就要亲自斋戒祈祷，穿戴玄冠玄端，精心侍养。
English: If the courtiers report that his father is seriously ill, the prince must personally fast and pray, wear a crown and carefully attend to him.

古文：膳宰之馔，必敬视之；疾之药，必亲尝之。
现代文：厨房送来的饭菜，一定要仔细检查；治病的药，一定要自己先尝一尝。
English: Meals sent from the kitchen must be carefully inspected; medicines to treat illnesses must be tasted first.

古文：尝馔善，则世子亦能食；尝馔寡，世子亦不能饱；以至于复初，然后亦复初。
现代文：父王如果能够较多进食，则太子也能随着多吃；父王如果进食较少，则太子也不可能吃饱。只有到了父王一切恢复正常之日，太子才能一切恢复正常。
English: If the father can eat more, then the prince can eat more; if the father eats less, then the prince can not eat enough. Only when the father is back to normal, can the prince be back to normal.

