古文：贯休楚安应天三绝八仙图黄筌杂编
现代文：贯休楚安应天三绝八仙图黄筌杂编
English: The Three Immortals and the Eight Immortals of Chu'an

古文：贯休
现代文：贯休
English: Ongoing suspension

古文：唐沙门贯休，本婺州兰溪人也，能诗善书妙画。
现代文：唐朝时，佛门僧人贯休，是婺州兰溪人。贯休和尚能吟诗，写一手好字，擅长绘画。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was a Buddhist monk named Jianyu, who was from Lanxi, Zhangzhou. Jianyu could chant poetry, write well, and was good at painting.

古文：王氏建国时，来居蜀中龙华之精舍。
现代文：王建在蜀建立前蜀王朝时，他来到蜀中，居住在龙华寺专供他修行参禅的居室里。
English: When Wang Jian founded the former Shu Dynasty in Shu, he came to Shu and lived in a room at Longhua Temple dedicated to his practice of Zen.

古文：因纵笔，用水墨画罗汉一十六身并一佛二大士。
现代文：他用水墨画法为寺里画了十六个罗汉和一幅佛像、二幅菩萨像。
English: He drew 16 arhats, one Buddha and two Bodhisattvas for the temple with ink painting.

古文：巨石萦云，枯松带蔓。
现代文：画上，巨大的岩石萦绕着云雾，虺节的苍松盘绕着古藤。
English: In the painting, huge rocks surround clouds and mist, and gnarled pines encircle ancient vines.

古文：其诸古貌，与他人画不同。
现代文：而佛、菩萨和十六位罗汉的相貌都古岸异常，跟别的画师画的不一样。
English: However, the appearance of Buddha, Bodhisattva and the sixteen Arhats are all very unusual and different from other painters.

古文：或曰：梦中所睹，觉后图之。谓之 应梦罗汉 。
现代文：贯休自己时常说：我是在梦中见到了这些神佛，醒来后将他们画出来的，也可以称他们为 应梦罗汉 吧。
English: Throughout his life, he often said: "I saw these gods and Buddhas in a dream, and after waking up, I drew them. You can also call them dream-answering arhats."

古文：门人昙域、昙弗等，甚秘重之。
现代文：他的弟子昙域、昙弗等人，将这些画密秘收藏起来，看成珍贵的艺术品。
English: His disciples, Zou Wei, Zou Fu and others, secretly collected these paintings and regarded them as precious works of art.

古文：蜀主曾宣入内。
现代文：蜀王曾经宣召贯休进宫，非常赞赏他的画。
English: King Shu once invited Guan Hui to the palace and highly appreciated his paintings.

古文：叹其笔迹狂逸，供养经月，却令分付院中。
现代文：说他用笔狂放飘逸，在宫中供养了一个月后，分配他到翰林院。
English: He said that he was wild and free with his pen, and after a month of being supported in the palace, he was assigned to the Hanlin Academy.

古文：翰林学士欧阳炯亦曾观之。
现代文：翰林学士欧阳炯也曾观察过贯休和尚，并写了一首诗赠送给他。
English: The scholar of Hanlin, Ouyang Xuan, also observed the monk and wrote a poem to present to him.

古文：赠以歌曰：西岳高僧名贯休，孤情峭拔凌清秋。
现代文：诗称：西岳高僧名贯休，孤情峭拔凌清秋。
English: The poem says: Xiyue Gaosheng's name is retired, and his lonely feelings are soaring.

古文：天教水墨画罗汉，魁岸古容生笔头。
现代文：天教水墨画罗汉，魁岸古容生笔头。
English: Tianjiao ink painting of Arhat, written by Quigang Gu Rong.

古文：时捐大绢泥高壁，闭日焚香坐禅室。
现代文：时捐大绢泥高壁，闭日焚香坐禅室。
English: During the day, they burn incense and sit in the meditation room.

古文：或然梦里见真仪，脱去袈裟点神笔。
现代文：或然梦里见真仪，脱云袈裟点神笔。
English: Maybe I'll see Zhenyi in my dreams, and I'll see a divine pencil.

古文：高抬节腕当空掷，窸窣毫端任狂逸。
现代文：高抬节腕当空掷，窸窣毫端任狂逸。
English: The high-lifting knuckle is like an empty throw, and the little end is allowed to go wild.

古文：逡巡便是两三躯，不似画工虚费日。
现代文：逡巡便是两三躯，不似画工虚费日。
English: It takes two or three people to make a painting, unlike a painter who spends days on it.

古文：怪石安排嵌复枯。
现代文：怪石安排嵌复枯。
English: Strange stone arrangement inlaid withered.

古文：真僧列坐连跏趺。
现代文：真僧列坐连跏跌。
English: True monks sit in a row.

古文：形如瘦鹤精神健，顶似伏犀头骨粗。
现代文：形如瘦鹤精神健，顶似伏犀头骨粗。
English: Shaped like a slender crane, it is mentally strong, resembling the thick skull of a rhinoceros.

古文：倚松根，傍岩缝，曲录腰身长欲动。
现代文：倚松根，傍岩缝，曲录腰身长欲动。
English: Leaning pine roots, rock crevices, waist-length movement.

古文：看经弟子拟闻声，瞌睡山童疑有梦。
现代文：看经弟子拟闻声，瞌睡山童疑有梦。
English: Looking at the sutra disciple's quasi-hearing voice, the sleepy mountain boy suspected that he had a dream.

古文：不知夏腊几多年，一手搘颐偏袒肩。
现代文：不知夏腊几多年，一手搘颐偏袒肩。
English: I don't know how many years it's been since I've been in summer.

古文：口开或若共人语，身定复疑初坐禅。
现代文：口开或若供人语，身定复疑初坐禅。
English: If you open your mouth or speak in a conversational manner, your mind will be calmed and you will begin to meditate.

古文：案前卧象低垂鼻，岸畔戏猿斜展臂。
现代文：案有卧象低垂鼻，岸畔戏猿斜展臂。
English: In this case, the reclining elephant has a low-hanging nose, while the shore-side performing monkey has a slanting arm.

古文：芭蕉花里刷轻红，苔藓纹中晕深翠。
现代文：芭蕉花里刷轻红。苔藓纹中晕深翠。
English: The plantain flowers are lightly reddish in the middle, and the moss patterns are faintly deep green in the middle.

古文：硬筇杖，矮松床，雪色眉毛一寸长。
现代文：硬筇杖，矮松床，雪色眉毛一寸长。
English: A stiff cane, a short pine bed, snow-colored eyebrows an inch long.

古文：绳开梵夹两三片，线补衲衣千万行。
现代文：绳开梵夹两三片，线补纳衣千万行。
English: Two or three pieces of rope to open the clamp, tens of thousands of lines to mend the garment.

古文：林间乱叶纷纷堕，一印残香断烟火。
现代文：林间乱叶纷纷堕，一印残香断烟火。
English: The leaves of the forest have fallen one after another, and the remaining incense and fireworks have been extinguished.

古文：皮穿木屐不曾拖，笋织蒲团镇长坐。
现代文：皮穿木屐不曾拖。笋织蒲团镇长坐。
English: The mayor of the town is sitting on a wicker futon.

古文：休公休公，逸艺无人加，声誉喧喧遍海涯。
现代文：休公休公，逸艺无人加，声誉喧喧遍海涯。
English: A public holiday is a public holiday, and no one adds to the art, and the reputation is noisy all over the world.

古文：五七字句一千首，大小篆书三十家。
现代文：五七字句一千首，大小篆书三十家。
English: There are one thousand poems of fifty-seven syllables, and thirty large and small poems.

古文：唐朝历历多名士，萧子云兼吴道子。
现代文：唐朝历历多名士，萧子云兼吴道子。
English: There were many eminent scholars in the Tang Dynasty, including Xiao Ziyun and Wu Daozi.

古文：若将书画比休公，只恐当时浪生死。
现代文：苦将书画比休公，只恐当时浪生死。
English: He compared painting and calligraphy with retirement from public service, fearing only that he would die penniless at that time.

古文：休公休公，始自江南来入秦，于今到蜀无交亲。
现代文：休公休公，始自江南来入秦。于今到蜀无交亲。
English: He came to Qin from the south of the Yangtze River and now has no relatives in Shu.

古文：诗名画手皆奇绝，觑你凡人争是人。
现代文：诗名画手皆奇绝，觑你凡人争是人。
English: Poets and famous painters are all amazing, but you ordinary people are human.

古文：瓦棺寺里维摩诘，舍卫城中辟支佛。
现代文：瓦棺寺里维摩诘，舍卫城中辟支佛。
English: The tiled coffin temple is in Livermore, and there is a Buddha statue in the middle of the castle.

古文：若将此画比量看，总在人间为第一。
现代文：若将此画比量看，总在人间为第一。
English: If you compare this painting to a crane, it will always be the first in the world.

古文：楚安
现代文：楚安
English: Chu'an

古文：西蜀圣寿寺僧楚安妙画山水，而点缀甚细。
现代文：西蜀圣寿寺僧人楚安山水画画得非常好，而且画的特别细腻。
English: The landscape painting of the monk Chu An of the West Shu Sheng Shou Temple is very good, and the painting is particularly delicate.

古文：至于尺素之上，山川林木，洞府峰峦，寺观烟岚人物，悉皆有之。
现代文：在一尺宽的白细绢上，可以画出来山川林木，洞府峰峦，寺观烟雾岚气及人物。
English: On a one-foot-wide white felt, you can draw mountains, rivers, forests, caves, peaks, temples, clouds, and people.

古文：每画一小团扇，内安姑苏台或画滕王阁，其有千山万水尽在目前。
现代文：他就是画一柄小小的团扇，也可以在上面画出来姑苏台呀滕王阁等楼台亭榭，可以让你在团扇上看到山山水水。
English: He just draws a small fan, and can also draw the Suzudai, Tengwang Pavilion and other pavilions on it, allowing you to see the mountains and rivers on the fan.

古文：然须一季已来，方就一扇。
现代文：然而，楚安画扇一个季度只画一柄。
English: However, Chu'an painted only one fan per quarter.

古文：其时诸王宰辅竞相有请。
现代文：诸位王公大臣争着请他去画扇子。
English: All the princes and ministers vied with each other to invite him to paint a fan.

古文：得之者奉遗甚厚，有不得画者恨恨然。
现代文：得到他画的扇子的人给他很丰厚的酬金，未得到的很是不满。
English: The person who got the fan he painted gave him a very generous reward, and he was very unhappy when he didn't get it.

古文：楚安言山僧自以此适意而已。
现代文：但是楚安自己说他画扇子仅仅为了好玩罢了。
English: But Chu An himself said that he drew the fan just for fun.

古文：归寂后，有好事者，往往收得其笔踪。
现代文：楚安去世后，有喜爱收藏的人，每每得到楚安生前的遗画、遗作。
English: After Chu An's death, people with a fondness for collecting were given every one of Chu An's posthumous paintings and works.

古文：或谓之墨宝也。
现代文：有人说这是墨宝啊！
English: Some people say this is the beginning of Mo Bao!

古文：应天三绝
现代文：应天三绝
English: By the three winds of heaven

古文：唐僖宗皇帝翠华西幸之年，有会稽山处士孙位随驾止蜀。
现代文：唐朝僖宗皇帝到西蜀巡视那年，有位会稽山的隐士孙位随皇驾一块儿来到蜀地。
English: In the year that Emperor Jianzong of the Tang Dynasty made an inspection tour of West Shu, a hermit named Sun Di, who was a member of the mountain inspection committee, came to Shu together with the emperor.

古文：位有道术，兼攻书画，皆妙得笔精。
现代文：孙位会道术，还擅长书法、绘画，每有作品都是上乘之作。
English: Sun Yi is good at Taoism, calligraphy and painting, and each of his works is a masterpiece.

古文：曾于应天寺门左壁上画天王一座，部从鬼神。
现代文：他曾在应天寺门左面墙壁上绘画一幅天王像。
English: He once painted a portrait of the King of Heaven on the wall to the left of the Yingtian Temple gate.

古文：奇怪斯存，笔势狂纵，莫之与京。
现代文：天王的随从鬼神，形像怪异，笔势狂放，没有比这幅画画得更好的了。
English: There is no better painting of the king's retinue of ghosts and gods, with their strange shapes and wild brushstrokes.

古文：三十余年无有敌者。
现代文：三十多年来，没有超过孙位的人。
English: For more than three decades, no one has been crowned more than a grandson.

古文：景焕其先亦专书画，尝与翰林欧阳学士炯乃忘形之交。
现代文：景焕从前也专门学习过书法、绘画，曾经跟翰林学士欧阳炯是无拘束的朋友。
English: In the past, Jing Huan had also studied calligraphy and painting, and had been an unrestrained friend of Hanlin Scholar Ouyang Xuan.

古文：一日连骑同游兹寺，偶画右壁天王以对之。
现代文：一天，他们一同骑马游应天寺。景焕突发兴趣，在寺门右边墙壁上也画一幅天王像，想跟孙位画的那幅比试高低。
English: One day, they rode together to visit the Temple of Heaven. Keng Hwan suddenly became interested and also painted a portrait of the King of Heaven on the wall to the right of the temple gate. He wanted to compare the height of the portrait with the one painted by his grandson.

古文：渤海在旁观其逸势，复书歌行一篇以纪之。
现代文：渤海在旁边看到景焕画的这幅天王像笔势峻逸，又作了一篇歌行诗来记载这件事情。
English: Bohai saw the painting of the Heavenly King by Jing Huan next to him, and wrote a poem to record the event.

古文：续有草书僧梦龟后至。又请书之于廊壁上。
现代文：后来擅长草书的僧人梦龟刚巧也来了，于是请他将这篇歌行题书在廊壁上面。
English: Later, the monk Dream Turtle, who was good at cursive, also happened to come, so he asked him to hang this song-and-dance inscription on the corridor wall.

古文：故书画歌行，一日而就。
现代文：由此，画、歌行、书法，一天内都完成了。
English: As a result, painting, singing, and calligraphy were all completed in one day.

古文：倾城人看，阗咽寺中，成都之人。
现代文：全城的人都争相来观看，整个应天寺内拥挤喧嚷的，都是成都的市人们。
English: People from all over the city flocked to watch. The entire crowded and noisy inside of Yingtian Temple was made up of the citizens of Chengdu.

古文：故号为应天三绝。
现代文：由此人们称为应天三绝。
English: As a result, it is known as the three peaks of the world.

古文：歌行今亦录附曰：锦城东北黄金地，故迹何人兴此寺。
现代文：现将这首歌行附录在下面，是：锦城东北黄金地，故迹何人兴此寺。
English: The following is an appendix to this song line: Jincheng, the northeast golden land, is the place where the temple was founded.

古文：白眉长老重名公，曾识会稽山处士。
现代文：白眉长老重名公，曾识会稽山处士。
English: Elder Bai Mei is a well-known figure in the community. He is a member of the Zengxu Association's mountain inspection team.

古文：寺门左壁图天王，威仪部从来何方。
现代文：寺门左壁图天王，威仪部从来何方。
English: On the left wall of the temple gate, there is a picture of the king of heaven.

古文：鬼神怪异满壁走，当檐飒飒生秋光。
现代文：鬼神怪异满壁走，当檐飒飒生秋光。
English: Ghosts and gods are everywhere, and it's autumn.

古文：我闻天王分理四天下，水精宫殿琉璃瓦。
现代文：我闻天王分理四天下，水精宫殿琉璃瓦。
English: I have heard that the king divides the land into four parts, and that the palace of the water spirits is made of glazed tiles.

古文：采仗时驱拂琳装，金鞭频策骐驎马。
现代文：采仗时驱拂琳装，金鞭频策骐驎马。
English: When waging war, the whip drives the horse, and the gold whip often drives the horse.

古文：毗沙大像何光辉，手擎巨塔凌云飞。
现代文：毗沙大像何光辉，手擎巨塔凌云飞。
English: The great Visha is like a shining star, and the hand-cranked giant tower soars above the clouds.

古文：地神对出宝瓶子，天女倒披金缕衣。
现代文：地神对出宝瓶子，天女倒披金缕衣。
English: The earth god holds out a treasure bottle, while the heavenly maiden is draped in a golden robe.

古文：唐朝说著名公画，周昉毫端善图写。
现代文：唐朝说著名公画，周昉毫端善图写。
English: The Tang Dynasty said that the famous official painting, Zhou Yanzhong, was very good at drawing.

古文：张僧繇是有神人，吴道子称无敌者。
现代文：张僧繇是有神人，昊道子称无敌者。
English: Zhang Xiangyao is a man of God, and Hao Daozi calls him invincible.

古文：奇哉妙手传孙公，能于此地留神踪。
现代文：奇怪妙手传孙公，能于此地留神踪。
English: It is said that Sun Quan, who had a strange skill, was able to keep track of the gods here.

古文：斜窥小鬼怒双目，直倚越狼高半胸。
现代文：斜窥小鬼怒双目，直倚越狼高半胸。
English: Squinting at the small demon's angry eyes, leaning straight over the wolf's high chest.

古文：宝冠动惚生威容，趋跄左右来倾恭。
现代文：宝冠动惚生威容，趋跄左右来倾恭。
English: Bao Guan is full of swagger and tends to sway from side to side.

古文：臂横鹰爪尖纤利，腰缠虎皮斑剥红。
现代文：臂横鹰爪尖纤利，腰缠虎皮斑剥红。
English: The horizontal eagle's claws are sharp and slender, and the tiger's skin around its waist is mottled red.

古文：飘飘但恐入云中，步骤还疑归海东。
现代文：飘飘但恐入云中，步骤还疑归海东。
English: Floating, but afraid of falling into the clouds, the steps are still doubtful to the east of the sea.

古文：蟒蛇拖得浑身堕，精魅搦来双眼空。
现代文：蟒蛇拖得浑身堕，精魅搦来双眼空。
English: The boa constrictor drags its whole body down, and its eyes are empty.

古文：当时此艺实难有，镇在宝坊称不朽。
现代文：当时此艺实难受。镇在宝坊称不朽。
English: At that time, this art was really unbearable. The town was immortalized in the treasure house.

古文：东边画了空西边，留与后人教敌手。
现代文：东边画了空西边，留与后人教敌手。
English: The east side drew an empty west side, leaving the future generations to teach the enemy.

古文：后人见者皆心惊，尽为名公不敢争。
现代文：后人见者皆心惊，尽为名公不敢争。
English: Those who saw it later were shocked and did not dare to dispute it.

古文：谁知未满三十载，或有异人来间生。
现代文：谁知未满三十载，或有异人来间生。
English: Who knows if it's been less than thirty years, or if someone else has come into the world.

古文：匡山处士名称朴，头骨高奇连五岳。
现代文：匡山处士各称朴，头骨高奇连五岳。
English: Kuangshan's clerks are all named Park, and Gao Qi's skull is named Five Peaks.

古文：曾持象简累为官，又有蛇珠常在握。
现代文：曾持象简累为官，又有蛇珠常在握。
English: He once held an elephant in his right hand and a snake in his left.

古文：昔年长老遇奇踪，今日门师识景公。
现代文：昔年长老遇奇踪，今日门师识景公。
English: Once upon a time, an elderly elder was haunted by a mysterious presence. Today, the door is open to Master Zhujing.

古文：兴来便请泥高壁，乱抢笔头如疾风。
现代文：兴来便请泥高壁，乱抢笔头如疾风。
English: When he feels like it, he'll go to the muddy high wall and grab the pen like a whirlwind.

古文：逡巡队仗何颠逸，散漫奇形皆涌出。
现代文：逡巡队仗何颠逸，散漫奇形皆涌出。
English: What a farce the battle of the falcon patrols is, and all sorts of strange shapes are pouring out.

古文：交加器械满虚空，两面或然如斗敌。
现代文：交加器械满虚空，两面或然如斗敌。
English: The device is full of emptiness, and the two sides may be like enemies.

古文：圣王怒色览东西，剑刃一挥皆整齐。
现代文：圣王怒色览东西，剑刃一挥皆整齐。
English: The holy king looks at everything with anger, and everything is neat with a single swing of the blade.

古文：腕头狮子咬金甲，脚底夜叉擎络鞮。马头壮健多筋节，乌嘴弯环如屈铁。
现代文：腕头狮子咬金甲，脚底夜叉擎络鞮，马头壮健多筋节，乌嘴弯环如屈铁。
English: The wrist of the lion bites the golden armor, the sole of the foot of the night fork is full of wrinkles, the horse's head is robust and multi-jointed, and the black mouth is bent like a piece of iron.

古文：遍身蛇虺乱纵横，绕颔髑髅干孑裂。
现代文：遍身蛇虺乱纵横，绕颔髑髅干孑裂。
English: There are snake bites all over his body, both vertically and horizontally.

古文：眉粗眼竖发如锥，怪异令人不可知。
现代文：眉粗眼竖发如锥，怪异令不可知。
English: His thick eyebrows and vertical hair like a cone are so strange that it's hard to tell.

古文：科头巨卒欲生鬼，半面女郎安小儿。
现代文：科头巨卒欲生鬼，半面女郎安小儿。
English: The head of science, the giant, wants to give birth to a ghost, and the half-faced girl, An Xiao'er.

古文：况闻此寺初兴置，地脉沈沈当正气。
现代文：况闻此寺初兴置，地脉沈沈当正气。
English: It is said that this temple was built for the first time, and that it was built in a very auspicious time.

古文：如何请得二山人，下笔咸成千古事。
现代文：如何请得二山人，下笔咸成千古事。
English: How to invite two mountain people, the next step is a thousand years old.

古文：君不见，明皇天宝年，画龙致雨非偶然。
现代文：君不见，明皇天宝年，画龙致雨非偶然。
English: It is no accident that the painting of dragons caused rain in the auspicious year of the Ming Emperor.

古文：包含万象藏心里，变现百端生眼前。
现代文：包含万象藏心里，变现百端生眼前。
English: It contains all things hidden in the heart, and it is realized in front of the eyes of hundreds of people.

古文：后来画品列名贤，唯此二人堪比肩。
现代文：后未画品列名贤，唯此二人堪比肩。
English: After all, there are no paintings of famous sages, but these two are on a par.

古文：人间是物皆求得，此样欲于何处传？
现代文：人间是物皆求得，此样欲于何处传？
English: In the human world, everything is sought after. Where does this desire come from?

古文：尝忧壁底生云雾，揭起寺门天上去。
现代文：尝忧壁底生云雾，揭起寺门天上去。
English: Taste the clouds at the bottom of the wall, and lift the temple gate up to the sky.

古文：八仙图
现代文：八仙图
English: Eight Immortals

古文：西蜀道士张素卿，神仙人也。
现代文：西蜀道士张素卿，是神人。
English: Zhang Suqing, the Western Shu Taoist, is a godman.

古文：曾于青城山丈人观，绘画五岳四渎真形并十二溪女数堵。
现代文：张素卿曾经在青城山丈人观的几堵墙上，绘画泰山、华山、衡山、恒山、嵩山等五岳，长江、黄河、淮水、济水等四渎，和十二溪女等。
English: Zhang Suqing once painted five mountains including Mount Taishan, Mount Huashan, Mount Heng, Mount Hengshan and Mount Song, four rivers including the Yangtze River, Yellow River, Huai River and Jishui, and a girl from the Twelve Creeks on several walls of Mount Qingcheng.

古文：笔迹遒健，精彩欲活。
现代文：笔力遒健，不论是山、是水、还是溪女，都画得栩栩如生，呼之欲活。
English: His penmanship is so strong that whether it is a mountain, water, or a creek girl, they are all drawn vividly, making them come to life.

古文：见之者心悚神悸，足不能进。实画中之奇绝也。
现代文：看到这些壁画的人，都不由得顿生敬慕之情，停下脚步不愿意离开。这些画真是画中的奇谲绝世之作。
English: People who see these murals can't help but admire them, and they don't want to leave. These paintings are truly amazing works of art.

古文：蜀主累遣秘书少监黄筌令取模样。及下山，终不相类。
现代文：后蜀君主孟知祥，多次派秘书少监黄筌去丈人观取这些壁画的摹写图本，但是拿回来的图本始终都不象原壁画。
English: Later, Meng Zhixiang, the monarch of Shu, repeatedly sent his secretary, the minor procurator Huang Qi, to his father-in-law to inspect the copies of these murals, but the copies he got back were never like the original murals.

古文：因生日，或有收得素卿所画《八仙》真形八幅，以献孟昶。
现代文：有人过生日，收到张素卿所画的《八仙图》，献给孟知祥的第三子孟昶。
English: On someone's birthday, they received "The Eight Immortals" painted by Zhang Suqing, dedicated to Meng Zhixiang's third son, Meng Yao.

古文：观古人之形相，见古人之笔妙，观赏者久之。且曰：非神仙之人，无以写神仙之质也。
现代文：观看画上的古人形象，欣赏古人的画作。孟昶久久地欣赏把玩这幅《八仙图》，说：不是神人，不能绘出神仙的姿质啊！
English: Watching the images of the ancients on the paintings, and appreciating the paintings of the ancients, Meng Yao took a long time to admire the painting of the "Eight Immortals" and said: "It's not a god, you can't draw the posture of a god!"

古文：赐物甚厚。
现代文：他给献画的人很丰厚的赏赐。
English: He gives generous rewards to those who donate paintings.

古文：一日，令伪翰林学士欧阳炯次第赞之，又遣水部员外郎黄居宝八分题之。
现代文：一天，孟昶又让前朝翰林学士欧阳炯按着顺序为《八仙图》写赞词，又让水部员外郎黄居宝用八分题写在画上。
English: One day, Meng Yao also asked the former Hanlin Scholar Ouyang Yao to write a praise for the "Eight Immortals" in order, and also asked the water department member Huang Ji Bao to write on the painting with an eight-point title.

古文：每观其画，叹笔迹之纵逸；览其赞，赏文词之高古；视其书，爱点画之宏壮。
现代文：孟昶每次观赏《八仙图》，都不由得称赞这幅画笔力恣肆飘逸，称赞画上的赞词文彩高雅古拙，称赞画上的题书笔势宏壮。
English: Every time Meng Wei watched "The Eight Immortals," he couldn't help but praise this painting for its flowing brushstroke, the elegant and ancient praise on the painting, and the magnificent inscription on the painting.

古文：顾为八仙。不让三绝。
现代文：他说：《八仙图》一点也不比《应天寺》的三绝壁画逊色。
English: He said: "The Eight Immortals" is not at all inferior to the "Three Immortals" mural in the Temple of Heaven.

古文：黄筌
现代文：黄筌
English: Huang Qi

古文：昔吴道子所画一钟馗，衣蓝衫，鞹一足，眇一目，腰一笏，巾裹而蓬发垂鬓。
现代文：从前，唐朝人吴道子画的一幅《钟馗捉鬼图》，钟馗穿的是蓝衣衫，一只脚用皮裹着，一只眼睛眯细，腰上挂着一只笏板。头发上面系一头巾，蓬乱的头发一直垂到鬓角。
English: Once upon a time, there was a painting by Wu Daozi from the Tang Dynasty, "Chung Yeon-soo Catching Ghosts." Chung Yeon-soo was wearing a blue shirt, with one foot wrapped in leather, one eye narrowed, and a cutting board hanging from his waist. A headscarf was tied above his hair, and his unkempt hair hung down to his sideburns.

古文：左手捉一鬼，以右手第二指剜鬼眼睛。
现代文：左手捉住一只鬼，用右手第二指剜鬼眼睛。
English: Catch a ghost with your left hand and poke the eyes of the ghost with the second finger of your right hand.

古文：笔迹遒劲，实有唐之神妙。
现代文：这幅画笔力遒劲，实在是深得唐朝时的绘画的神妙。
English: This painting, with its vigorous brushstrokes, is truly a masterpiece of Tang Dynasty painting.

古文：收得者将献伪蜀主，甚爱重之。
现代文：收藏这幅画的人，将它进献给后蜀君王孟昶。
English: The person who collected this painting dedicated it to the late King of Shu, King Mencius.

古文：常悬于内寝。
现代文：昶非常喜爱珍重这幅画，曾一度将它悬挂在宫寝内。
English: Empress Dowager Cixi loved and treasured this painting so much that she once hung it in her bedchamber.

古文：一日，召黄筌令看之。
现代文：一天，孟昶召见黄筌让他来欣赏这幅《钟馗捉鬼图》。
English: One day, Meng Yao summoned Huang Yao to let him enjoy this painting of "The Bell and the Dragon."

古文：筌一见，称其绝妙。
现代文：黄筌一看到这幅画，连称妙绝。
English: As soon as Huang Qi saw this painting, he said it was wonderful.

古文：谢恩讫。昶谓曰：此钟馗若拇指掐鬼眼睛，则更校有力。
现代文：黄筌谢过恩后，孟昶说：画上的钟馗如果用拇指掐鬼眼睛，会更有力些。
English: After Huang Yao expressed his gratitude, Meng Yao said, "If you poke the ghost's eyes with your thumb, the bell on the painting will be more powerful."

古文：试为我改之。
现代文：请你试着为我修改一下。
English: Please try to fix it for me.

古文：筌请归私第。
现代文：黄筌听了后请孟昶允许他拿回家里去改。
English: After listening to Huang Qi, he asked Meng Qi to allow him to take it home and change it.

古文：数日看之不足。
现代文：仔细捉摸了好几天，黄筌总觉得没法改动。
English: After several days of careful consideration, Huang Qi always felt that it was impossible to change.

古文：别絣绢素，画一钟馗，以拇指掐鬼眼睛。并吴本一时进纳。
现代文：于是另外繃好一幅白绢重画了一幅《钟馗捉鬼图》，和吴道子的原画一起进献给孟昶。
English: As a result, in addition to the original painting by Wu Daozi, an egret re-painted a painting of "The Bell Beetle Catching Ghosts" and dedicated it to Meng Wei.

古文：昶问曰：比令卿改之，何为别画？
现代文：孟昶看了后问：我本来让你改画，为什么另画了一幅？
English: After looking at it, Meng Xuan asked: I originally asked you to change the painting, why did you paint another one?

古文：筌曰：吴道子所画钟馗，一身之力，气色眼貌，俱在第二指，不在拇指。
现代文：黄筌回答说：吴道子所画的钟馗，全身的力量，人物的神情、眼神，都集聚在第二指上，不在拇指。
English: Huang Yao replied, "In the painting of the bell tower by Wu Daozi, the strength of the whole body, the facial expression and the eyes of the characters are all concentrated in the second finger, not in the thumb.

古文：所以不敢辄改。
现代文：所以，我不敢轻易给改动。
English: Therefore, I do not dare to make changes easily.

古文：筌今所画，虽不及古人，一身之力，意思并在拇指。
现代文：我现在画的这幅，虽然赶不上吴道子画的那幅，但是人物和全身力气和心思却都集聚在拇指上了。
English: The one I am painting now, although it is not as good as the one painted by Wu Daozi, but the figure and the whole body's strength and mind are concentrated on the thumb.

古文：昶甚悦，赏筌之能。
现代文：孟昶听了后非常高兴，非常赞赏黄筌的才能。
English: Meng Yao was very happy after listening to Huang Yao's speech and highly appreciated Huang Yao's talent.

古文：遂以彩缎银器，旌其别识。
现代文：于是赏赐给他彩缎、银器等物，用以表彰他的卓有见识。
English: As a result, he was presented with a medal, silverware and other items in recognition of his outstanding insight.

古文：杂编
现代文：杂编
English: Editor-in-chief

古文：敬爱寺复有雉尾病龙，莫知画者谁氏。绘素奇巧，皆入神之迹。
现代文：敬爱寺还有雉尾病龙，不知道是谁绘画的，这幅画奇异美妙，都可以列入精妙无比的艺术珍品的行列。
English: The Temple of Worship and the Dragon with Appendicitis, I don't know who painted it, but this painting is so strange and wonderful that it can be included in the ranks of exquisite and incomparable art treasures.

古文：国朝李嗣真评画云：顾画屈居第二。
现代文：本朝李嗣真论评绘画说：顾凯之的画位居第二位。
English: This morning, Li Shizhen commented on the painting and said: Gu Kaizhi's painting ranks second.

古文：然虎头又伏卫协画北风图。
现代文：然而顾恺之又佩服卫协画的《北风图》。
English: However, Gu Yanzhi also admires the "North Wind Map" jointly drawn by the National Guard.

古文：张弘靖平康里宅，乃崔司业融旧第。
现代文：《北风图》曾经收藏在韩史部家中。现在藏在长靖平康里的宅第里。张家的这所宅第，乃是司业崔融的旧宅。
English: "The Map of the North Wind" was once kept in the home of the Korean History Department. Now it is kept in the house of Chang Ching Ping Kang Ri. This house of the Zhang family is the old house of the Secretary Choe Ryong.

古文：有司业题壁处犹在。
现代文：崔融当年在墙壁上题的字还存在。
English: The words "Cui Rong" inscribed on the wall that year still exist.

古文：僧道芬，会稽人。
现代文：僧人道芬，会稽人。
English: The monk Dufeng, the auditor of the association.

古文：萦阳人郑町。处士梁洽。处士项容。青州处士吴恬，一名汾，字建康。
现代文：荥阳人郑町、隐士梁洽、隐士项容、青州隐士吴恬，还有一个名字叫汾，字建康。
English: Zhengchong, a native of Shenyang, the hermit Liang Cai, the hermit Xiang Rong, the hermit Wu Yao of Qingzhou, there is also a name called Yao, the character Jian Kang.

古文：已上并画山水。
现代文：上述这些人都擅长画山水。
English: All of these people are good at painting landscapes.

古文：道芬格高。郑町雅淡。梁洽美秀。项容顽涩。
现代文：道芬的画格调高尚，郑町的画雅淡，梁洽的画美秀，项容的画顽冥晦涩。
English: Dao Fen's painting style is noble, Zheng Town's painting is elegant and light, Liang Cai's painting is beautiful, and Xiang Rong's painting is stubborn and obscure.

古文：吴恬险巧，有画《山水录》，记平生所画在绢素者凡百余面。传之好事。
现代文：吴恬的画险巧，有画卷《山水录》，上面记载着他平生在素绢上画的画，一共有一百多幅传给后世，这也是件有益的事情。
English: Wu Yao's paintings are dangerous and skillful. There is a picture book "Landscape Record," which records the paintings he has painted on the tablecloth in his lifetime. A total of more than one hundred paintings have been passed down to future generations, which is also a beneficial thing.

古文：自云：初梦有神人指授画法。
现代文：他自己说：最初，是在梦中来了一位神人传授给我如何绘画的。
English: He himself said: "At first, a genie came to me in a dream and taught me how to paint.

古文：恬好为顽石，气象深险，能为云雨气象。
现代文：吴恬喜爱画顽石。他画的顽石景象深奇幽险，能产生出云雨等现象。
English: Wu Yao likes to draw rocks. The rocks he draws are mysterious and dangerous, and can produce phenomena such as clouds and rain.

古文：又有王默，师项容，风颠酒狂。
现代文：还有王默，师法项容，性情颠狂好饮。
English: There's also Wang Mo, who has a teacher's demeanor and a temperament of a wild drinker.

古文：松石虽有高奇，流俗所好。
现代文：他画的松石虽然高雅奇异，也为一般人所喜爱。
English: Although his paintings of pine stones are elegant and bizarre, they are also loved by the general public.

古文：醉后以头髻抵于绢素。
现代文：王默喝醉了后，用头顶的发髻在白绢上作画。
English: After getting drunk, Wang Mo used the top of his hair to draw on the egret.

古文：王默早年受笔法于台州郑虔。
现代文：王默早年跟台州人郑虔学画。
English: In his early years, Wang Mo studied painting with Zheng Qian, a native of Taizhou.

古文：贞之末，于润州殁。
现代文：唐德宗贞元末年，王默病逝在润州。
English: In the last years of Tang Dezongzheng, Wang Mo died of illness in Runzhou.

古文：举柩若空，时人多言化去。
现代文：出殡时，抬着他的灵柩象抬个空柩一样的轻，当时有很多人说他是羽化升仙了。
English: At the funeral, carrying his coffin was as light as carrying an empty coffin. At that time, many people said that he was a reincarnation.

古文：平生大有奇事。
现代文：王默一生中有很多奇异的事情。
English: There are many strange things in Wang Mo's life.

古文：顾著作知新亭监时，默请为海中都巡。
现代文：顾著作任新亭监时，王默请求担任海中都巡。
English: When Gu Wei served as the inspector of the new pavilion, Wang Mo requested to serve as the inspector of the Central Coast.

古文：问其意，云：要见海中山水耳。
现代文：问他有什么用意，回答说：我要看看海中的山水啊！
English: I asked him what he was up to, and he replied: I want to see the landscape in the sea!

古文：为职半年后解去。
现代文：王默担任了半年海中都巡后离职而去。
English: Wang Mo left the position after he had been in charge of the naval inspection for half a year.

古文：尔后落笔有奇趣。
现代文：从这以后，每有画作必有奇趣。
English: From then on, every painting had to be a curiosity.

古文：乃项生弟子耳。
现代文：王默是项容的弟子。
English: Wang Mo is a disciple of Xiang Rong.

古文：彦远从兄监察御史厚，与余具言此事。
现代文：我的堂兄彦远官任监察御史，跟我的关系很好，把王默的这些奇事都跟我讲了。
English: My cousin, Hikone, who has a good relationship with me, told me all these wonderful things about Wang Mo.

古文：然余不甚觉默画有奇也。
现代文：然而我并不觉得王默的画有什么奇异之处。
English: However, I don't think there is anything strange about Wang Mo's paintings.

古文：有别画者，与人同游寺。看壁画音声一铺曰：此凉州第几遍。
现代文：另外有一个画家，和人同游一处寺院，看到寺内墙壁上画着一套演奏乐曲的壁画。
English: In addition, there was a painter who was touring a temple with others and saw a mural of a set of musical pieces painted on the walls of the temple.

古文：不信，召乐官奏凉州。
现代文：这个画家指着其中的一幅说：这幅绘的是演奏《凉州》第×遍。
English: Pointing to one of the paintings, the artist said: "This painting depicts the performance of "Liangzhou" for the umpteenth time.

古文：至画处，用指更无差异。故德州王使君椅家有笔一管约一寸，粗与常用笔管，两头各出半寸以来。中间刻《从军行》一铺。人马毛发屋木亭台远水，无不精绝。
现代文：同去的人不相信，召来乐师演奏《凉州》，演奏到他指的那幅画那儿，指法果然一点差异没有。已故德州人王椅，他家有一管笔粗约一寸，比一般的笔粗，两端各让出半寸多，中间雕刻着《从军行》一套，有诗有画，雕刻的异常精细绝妙，人马、毛发、屋木、亭台、远水，纤毫毕现。
English: Those who went with him did not believe it, and a musician was summoned to play "Liangzhou." The piece was played to the painting he pointed to, and there was no difference in the fingering. The late Texan King's Chair, his family had a pen about an inch thick, thicker than a normal pen, with more than half an inch at each end, and a set of "From the Military Campaign" was carved in the middle. There were poems and paintings, and the carving was extremely fine and exquisite. People, horses, hair, roof trees, pavilions, and distant water were all present.

古文：每一事刻从军行两句，若庭前琪树已堪攀，塞外征人殊未还是也。
现代文：每一幅画刻上《从军行》的诗二句。例如：庭前琪树已堪攀，塞外征人殊未还这两句诗，就刻在绘有诗中意境的那幅画上。
English: Each painting is engraved with two lines of the poem "From the Military." For example: "The trees in front of the courtyard are already climbing, and the foreign conscripts have not yet returned." These two lines of the poem are engraved on the painting that depicts the mood of the poem.

古文：似非人功。
现代文：真不象是人工刻的。
English: It doesn't look like it was carved by hand.

古文：其画迹若粉描，向明方可辨之。
现代文：画，类似用的白描笔法，迎着光亮可以看到。
English: Paintings, similar to the white-on-white method, can be seen against the light.

古文：云，用鼠牙刻。
现代文：据说是用鼠牙雕刻上去的。
English: It is said to have been carved with rat's teeth.

古文：故崔郎中鋋文，有《王氏笔管记》是也。
现代文：已故郎中崔鋋文，撰写过一篇《王氏笔管记》，记载了这件事情。
English: His late brother-in-law, Cui Yuwen, wrote an article entitled "Wang's Diary," which recorded this event.

古文：类韩文公《画记》。
现代文：这篇《王氏笔管记》类似韩愈的《画记》。
English: This "Wang's Diary" is similar to Han Yu's "Picture Diary."

古文：椅，玄质子、绍孙，高雅博古，善琴阮。
现代文：王椅，是王玄质的儿子，王绍的孙子。性情高雅，通晓古玩器用，擅长弹奏古琴。
English: Wang Xicheng is the son of Wang Xuanzi and the grandson of Wang Shao. He has an elegant temperament, knows how to use antique toys, and is good at playing the guqin.

古文：余旧宅在东洛归德坊南街，厅屋是杏木梁。西壁有韦旻郎中散马七疋，东壁有张旭草真踪数行。
现代文：我家的旧宅在东都洛阳归德坊南街。厅堂是杏木房梁，西墙壁上有郎中韦旻画的散放着的马七匹，东墙壁上有张旭的草书真迹数行。
English: My family's old house is located in the eastern capital of Luoyang, Guidefang South Street. The hall is an apricot wooden beam, the west wall has seven scattered horses painted by Langzhong Weiqi, and the east wall has several lines of Zhang Xu's cursive handwriting.

古文：旭世号张颠。
现代文：张旭世人称他为张颠。
English: Zhang Xu The world calls him Zhang Bitch.

古文：宅之东果园，《两京新记》是马周旧宅。
现代文：旧宅东边的果园，《两京新记》上说，是唐太宗在位期间任过中书令的马周的旧宅。
English: The orchard on the east side of the old house, according to "Ryakyo Shinki," is the old house of Ma Zhou, who served as the second secretary during the reign of Emperor Taizong of Tang.

古文：荥阳外郎赞宰万年日，有荷校者以贼呼之。言尝绐妇人廉市马画。
现代文：荥阳员外郎赞任万年县知县时，有一个负枷的囚犯窃贼，曾说他欺骗了一位妇女，用非常便宜的价钱买下了她的绘有马的画。
English: When Wei Yang member Wei Lang Zhan was appointed as a county magistrate, there was a jailed thief who once said that he had deceived a woman and bought her horse painting at a very cheap price.

古文：赞责之，命取以视。
现代文：赞追问他，命令这个窃贼将画拿来看看。
English: Zhan questioned him and ordered the thief to take the painting and look at it.

古文：则古丝烟晦，幅联三四。蛮罽裁缥，斑繴皮轴。
现代文：只见丝绢已很古旧，上面烟气熏染遍是污迹，约三四绢联在一起，用蛮毡裁裱的，用槃龟的皮做的轴。
English: All I can see is a very old silk scarf, smoky and stained with smudges, with about three or four loops joined together, cut with a scythe, and a shaft made of tortoise skin.

古文：赞曰：是画也。
现代文：赞看完后说：确实是画。
English: After appreciating it, he said, "It really is a painting."

古文：太尉李公所宝惜，有赞皇图书篆焉。
现代文：李太尉珍藏过这幅画，上面有赞皇县篆文的图书印迹。
English: Lieutenant Li treasured this painting, which bears the imprint of a book praising the imperial edict.

古文：人有七万购献牢盆者，得漕渠横梁梗舯倅职。
现代文：有个人用了七万钱曾将这幅画买到手进献给了监务官，换来个在漕运河上掌管横梁梗船的副职。
English: A man had bought the painting for seventy thousand dollars and presented it to the superintendent, in exchange for a deputy position in charge of the cross-beam boats on the canal.

古文：因出妓于阁。又落民间。
现代文：正在这时，从别处来了一位妇女，她自述说：当年我从家里出来作了妓女，沦落人间。
English: Just then, a woman arrived from another part of the world. She said to herself, "I left home to become a prostitute, and I ended up in the world."

古文：言是寇倖其不鉴，以卑价市之。
现代文：遇见了你们关押的这个贼人，他侥幸欺骗了我，用很低的价钱将画买了去。
English: I met this thief in your custody, who managed to deceive me and bought the painting at a very low price.

古文：为妓人自他方归所诉，请以所亏价书罪。
现代文：现在请知县大人根据他用很少的钱骗买我的家传名画来给他定罪。
English: Now, please inform the adults in the county to convict him on the basis that he used a small amount of money to buy my family's famous painting.

古文：赞不能决。
现代文：赞鉴别不了这幅画的真伪优劣。
English: It is impossible to judge the authenticity of this painting.

古文：时延寿里有水墨李处士，以精别画品游公卿门。
现代文：当时延寿里有个会绘画的李处士，凭着他鉴别画品的高超技艺出入于达官贵人家。
English: At that time, there was a painter in Yanshou, Li Shanzhi, who used his superb skills to identify paintings to enter the homes of high-ranking dignitaries.

古文：召之辨之。
现代文：赞将李处士请来鉴别一下这幅名画。
English: I would like to invite Mr. Li to come and identify this famous painting.

古文：瞪目三叹云：韩展之上品也。
现代文：李处士拿过来一看，立刻吃惊地瞪大了眼睛，连连称赞道：这是古人韩展的珍品画啊！
English: When Officer Li took a look at it, his eyes immediately widened in surprise, and he praised it again and again, saying, "This is a rare painting from the Ancients Han exhibition!"

古文：黄沙之情已具，丹笔之断尚疑。
现代文：一幅古画沉没黄沙现在终于又让它重见天日了，但是这幅画的来龙去脉还有可疑之处。
English: An ancient painting that sank into the sands of time has finally been brought back to life, but the painting's provenance remains dubious.

古文：会有赍籍自禁军来忍者。
现代文：正在这时，有人携带着户籍来认领这位妇女。
English: Just then, someone came with a household registration to claim the woman.

古文：赞以且异奸盗，非愿苛留，因并画径送。
现代文：赞认为这一男一女不是奸盗之徒，不愿意再扣留下去。于是将他们和这幅古画一起放行了。
English: Zang believed that the man and woman were not thieves and did not want to detain them any longer, so he released them together with the ancient painting.

古文：后永绝其耗。
现代文：从这以后，再也没有这幅古画的下落消息了。
English: Since then, there has been no news of the whereabouts of this ancient painting.

古文：晋以前目所不睹，难以平议。
现代文：晋朝以前的画看不到了，难以评论它们的优劣。
English: You can't see paintings from before the Jin Dynasty, so it's hard to comment on their merits.

古文：晋以来，厥迹存者，可得而言。顾长康、张僧繇、陆探微，异才间出，是为三祖。
现代文：晋朝以来，尚存在的这些画中，从可以见得到的来看，顾长康、张僧繇、陆探微三家，都是具有特殊才能的人，可称为画界的三位宗师。
English: Among these paintings that have existed since the Jin Dynasty, from what can be seen, Gu Changkang, Zhang Soen and Lu Tanwei are all people with special talents, and can be called the three masters of the painting world.

古文：后世虽有作者，难可加焉。
现代文：后来虽然也有新的画家不断出现，但是都不能跟他们相媲美。
English: Later, although new painters continued to appear, none could match them.

古文：昔萧武帝博学好古，鸠集图画。
现代文：前朝梁武帝萧衍知识广博爱好古玩字画。
English: Xiao Yan, the former Emperor of Liangwu, was very knowledgeable and fond of antique calligraphy and painting.

古文：令朝臣攻丹青者，详其名氏，并定品第，藏于秘府，以备阅玩。
现代文：他曾收集历代的许多绘画作品，让朝臣中通晓绘画的人，查清每幅画的作者，并评定品第档次，将这些画藏在密秘的地方，专门供他自己欣赏把玩。
English: He used to collect a lot of paintings from different eras, ask courtiers who are familiar with painting to find out the author of each painting and grade it, and hide these paintings in a secret place, just for him to enjoy and play with.

古文：及侯景之乱，元帝迁都。而王府图书，悉归荆土。
现代文：待到侯景废掉简文帝酿成战乱以来，梁元帝迁都江陵，王府中的书画都运到江陵。
English: After the war, Emperor Liang Yuan moved the capital to Gangneung, and all the paintings and calligraphy in the royal palace were transported to Gangneung.

古文：洎周师来伐，帝悉焚之。
现代文：后来北周来征讨，敬帝将这些书画全付之一炬。
English: Later, Northern Zhou came to collect, and Emperor Jing completely burned these paintings and calligraphy.

古文：历周隋至国朝，重加购募，稍稍复出。
现代文：从此周、隋到本朝，重又收购征集，又得到一些。
English: From this week, Sui Dynasty to this dynasty, heavy acquisition and collection, and get some more.

古文：无何。遂盈秘府。
现代文：没出什么差乱，又将这些画收藏在秘府。
English: Nothing went wrong, and these paintings were collected in a secret place.

古文：长安初，张易之奏召天下名工，修葺图画。
现代文：建都长安初时，张易之奏请召集天下名工修葺这些画。
English: At the beginning of the construction of the capital Chang'an, Zhang Yizhong called for the world's famous craftsmen to repair these paintings.

古文：潜以同色故帛，令各推所长，共成一事。
现代文：他暗地里用同一颜色的古绢，让这些画工临摹仿制。
English: He surreptitiously used the same color ancient ink to let these painters copy.

古文：仍旧缥轴，不得而别也。
现代文：仿制的画，依然用旧的缥轴，让人很难辨识出来。
English: The imitation painting, still using the old frame, is difficult to identify.

古文：因而窃换。张氏诛后，为少保薛稷所收。
现代文：于是，张易之用这些仿制品将古画真迹偷换出来窃为己有。张易之事发被处死后，由少保薛稷接替他收藏这些画。
English: As a result, Zhang Yizhi used these imitations to steal the original ancient paintings for himself. After Zhang Yizhi was executed, the collection of these paintings was taken over by Shao Bao Xuejun.

古文：稷败后，悉入岐王。
现代文：薛稷事情败露后，这些古画都落入岐王手中。
English: After Xue Yao's affair was exposed, these ancient paintings fell into the hands of Qi Wang.

古文：初不奏闻，窃有所虑，因又焚之。
现代文：起初，岐王不将这些画上奏朝廷，后来有所顾虑。因此将这些古画又都焚烧了。
English: At first, King Qi did not show these paintings to the imperial court, but later he had misgivings. Therefore, he burned all these ancient paintings.

古文：于是图画奇迹，荡然无遗矣。
现代文：于是，到这时历代遗留下来的古画已经全都毁掉，所剩无几了。
English: As a result, by this time, all the ancient paintings that have been left over from past generations have been destroyed, and there are very few left.

