古文：起昭阳大渊献正月，尽十月，不满一年。
现代文：起昭阳大渊献正月，尽十月，不满一年。
English: Zhi Zhaoyang Dayuan was dedicated in the first month of the year and completed in October, less than a year later.

古文：德宗神武圣文皇帝三
现代文：德宗神武圣文皇帝三
English: Emperor Dezong Shenwu Shenwen III

古文：建中四年癸亥，公元七八三年春，正月，丁亥，陇右节度使张镒与吐蕃尚结赞盟于清水。
现代文：唐纪四十四唐德宗建中四年春季正月，丁亥，陇右节度使张镒与吐蕃尚结赞在清水结盟。
English: In the spring of the first month of the fourth year of the Tang Dynasty, Dinghai, 右節度, Zhang Xi and Tu Xi Shang Jizan made an alliance in Shimizu.

古文：庚寅，李希烈遣其将李克诚袭陷汝州，执别驾李元平。
现代文：庚寅，李希烈派遣他的将领李克诚袭击并攻陷了汝州，捉住别驾李元平。
English: Geng Ying, Li Xilai sent his general Li Kecheng to attack and capture Ruzhou, and capture the viceroy Li Yuanping.

古文：元平，本湖南判官，薄有才艺，性疏傲，敢大言，好论兵。
现代文：李元平原来是湖南判官，稍有才学技艺，生性疏散傲慢，敢说大话，喜欢谈论用兵，关播将他视为奇才，便向德宗推荐，说他有出将入相的才能。
English: Li Yuanping was originally a judge in Hunan Province. He had a little talent for learning skills, was naturally arrogant, dared to talk big, and liked to talk about the use of soldiers. Guanbao regarded him as a genius, and recommended him to Dezong, saying that he had the talent to be a star.

古文：中书侍郎关播奇之，荐于上，以为将相之器，以汝州距许州最近，擢元平为汝州别驾，知州事。元平至州，即募工徒治城。
现代文：由于汝州距离许州最近，便提升李元平为汝州别驾，并且代理州中事务。李元平来到汝州，立即招募工匠和劳力整治州城。
English: Since Ruzhou is the closest to Xuzhou, Li Yuanping was promoted to Ruzhou Distinguished Driver and acting for the state. Li Yuanping came to Ruzhou and immediately recruited craftsmen and labor to rectify the state city.

古文：希烈阴使壮士往应募执役，入数百人，元平不之觉。
现代文：李希烈暗地里让军中勇士前去应募服役，入城有数百人之多，李元平没有觉察。
English: Li Xilei secretly let the warriors in the army go to enlistment service, and there were hundreds of people entering the city, but Li Yuanping did not notice.

古文：希烈遣克诚将数百骑突至城下，应募者应之于内，缚元平驰去。
现代文：李希烈派遣李克诚带领骑兵数百人突击到汝州城下，应募的人在城里响应，捆绑着李元平急奔而去。
English: Li Xilai dispatched Li Kecheng to lead hundreds of cavalry in a surprise attack on the city of Ruzhou. Recruits in the city responded by tying up Li Yuanping and rushing away.

古文：元平为人眇小，无须，见希烈恐惧，便液污地。
现代文：李元平个子矮小，不长胡须，见到李希烈，惊恐畏惧，粪尿齐下，污臭满地。
English: Li Yuanping is a short man with a short beard. When he saw Li Xilai, he was shocked and afraid. He was covered in excrement and urine, and the stench filled the entire floor.

古文：希烈骂之曰： 盲宰相以汝当我，何相轻也！ 
现代文：李希烈骂他说： 瞎了眼的宰相用你来抵挡我，真是太小看我了！ 
English: Li Xilai scolded him, saying: "The blinded prime minister is using you to resist me. He really thinks too little of me!"

古文：以判官周晃为汝州刺史，又遣别将董待名等四出抄掠，取尉氏，围郑州，官军数为所败。
现代文：李希烈任命判官周晃为汝州刺史，又派遣别将董待名等人四下里抢劫财物，攻取尉氏县，围困郑州城，官军好几次都被董待名等人打败。
English: Li Xilai appointed the judge Zhou Xiao as the chief historian of Ruzhou, and dispatched others such as Dong Zhiming and others to rob property in all directions, capture Yi County, and besiege Zhengzhou City. The government army was defeated several times by Dong Zhiming and others.

古文：逻骑西至彭婆，东都士民震骇，窜匿山谷。留守郑叔则入保西苑。
现代文：李希烈巡逻游弋的骑兵向西到了彭婆镇，东都洛阳的士绅百姓为之震惊恐骇，纷纷逃避到山谷，留守郑叔则也入城西守卫西苑。
English: The cavalry of Li Xili's patrol rover went west to Pengba Town. The gentry and commoners of the eastern capital Luoyang were shocked and terrified and fled to the valley. Uncle Zheng, who stayed behind, also entered the west of the city to guard the West Garden.

古文：上问计于卢杞，对曰： 希烈年少骁将，恃功骄慢，将佐莫敢谏止。
现代文：德宗向卢杞询问计策，卢杞回答说： 李希烈是一员年轻骁勇的将领，仗恃着立了军功，骄横简慢，将佐工人敢于规劝和阻止他。
English: Dezong asked Lu Wei about his strategy, and Lu Wei replied: Li Xilei is a young and brave general. He has made great military achievements. He is arrogant and short-tempered. The Zhao workers dared to dissuade and stop him.

古文：诚得儒雅重臣，奉宣圣泽，为陈逆顺祸福，希烈必革心悔过，可不劳军旅而服。
现代文：假如能够选出一位温文尔雅的朝廷重臣，奉旨前去宣示圣上的恩泽，向李希烈讲清逆为祸、顺为福的道理，李希烈一定能够革心洗面，翻然悔过，可以不用兴师动众而使他归服。
English: If it were possible to choose a mild-mannered court dignitary, who would go forth by order to proclaim the holy grace, and explain to Li Xilai the principle that doing evil is evil and doing good is good, Li Xilai would certainly be able to wash his face, repent, and make him submit without the need to incite the masses.

古文：颜真卿三朝旧臣，忠直刚决，名重海内，人所信服，真其人也！ 
现代文：颜真卿是玄宗、肃宗、代宗三朝老臣，为人忠厚耿直，刚正果决，名声为海内所推重，人人都信服他，真是出使的最好人选！ 
English: Yan Zhenqing is an old retainer of the three dynasties of Xuanzong, Su Zong and Dai Zong. He is a loyal and upright person, with a firm and decisive attitude. His reputation is highly respected at home. Everyone is convinced of him. He is truly the best person to send!

古文：上以为然。
现代文：德宗认为有理。
English: Tenshi thinks it makes sense.

古文：甲午，命真卿诣许州宣慰希烈。诏下，举朝失色。
现代文：甲午，德宗命令颜真卿到许州安抚李希烈，诏书颁下，举朝大惊失色。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the second month, Emperor Dezong ordered Yan Zhenqing to go to Huzhou to appease Li Xilai, and issued an imperial edict. The emperor was shocked and disgraced.

古文：真卿乘驿至东都，郑叔则曰： 往必不免，宜少留，须后命。 
现代文：颜真卿乘驿车来到东都洛阳，郑叔则说： 若是前往，一定不能幸免。最好是稍作逗留，等待尔后发来的命令。 
English: Yan Zhenqing took a tuk-tuk to Luoyang, the eastern capital, and Uncle Zheng said: "If you go, you must not be spared. It is best to stay for a while and wait for orders to be sent later."

古文：真卿曰： 君命也，将焉避之！ 
现代文：颜真卿说： 这是皇上的命令啊，我能躲避到哪里去呢！ 
English: Yan Zhenqing said: This is the emperor's order, where can I go to avoid it!

古文：遂行。
现代文：于是出发了。
English: So he went to Qi Province without hesitation.

古文：李勉表言： 失一元老，为国家羞，请留之。 
现代文：李勉上表说： 丧失一位元老，乃是朝廷的羞辱，请将颜真卿留下来吧。 
English: Li Qian said, "The loss of a senator is a humiliation for the imperial court. Please keep Yan Zhenqing."

古文：又使人邀真卿于道，不及。
现代文：李勉又让人拦截颜真卿，但没有赶上他。
English: Li Tsun had another man intercept Yan Zhenqing, but he did not catch up with him.

古文：真卿与其子书，但敕以 奉家庙，抚诸孤 而已。
现代文：颜真卿给他儿子去信，只命他 供奉家庙，抚育孤子 罢了。
English: Yan Zhenqing sent a letter to his son, ordering him to dedicate the family temple and raise the orphan.

古文：至许州，欲宣诏旨，希烈使其养子千馀人环绕慢骂，拔刃拟之，为将剸啖之势。
现代文：来到许州，颜真卿准备宣布诏旨，李希烈让他的养子千余人环绕着他谩骂，还拔出刀剑向他比划着，作出要将他细割吞食的架势。
English: When he came to Xuzhou, Yan Zhenqing was preparing to announce the imperial edict. Li Xilei let his adopted son, Zhuang, and more than a thousand people surround him and abuse him. He also pulled out his sword and made a gesture of slicing and devouring him.

古文：真卿足不移，色不变。
现代文：颜真卿脚不移动，脸不变色。
English: Yan Zhenqing's feet did not move and his face did not change color.

古文：希烈遽以身蔽之，麾众令退，馆真卿而礼之。
现代文：李希烈急忙用身体遮挡他，挥手命令众人退下，将颜真卿安置在馆舍，礼貌地对待他。
English: Li Xilei hurriedly shielded him with his body, waved his hand to order everyone to retreat, placed Yan Zhenqing in the building, and treated him politely.

古文：希烈欲遣真卿还，会李元平在座，真卿责之，元平惭而起，以密启白希烈。
现代文：李希烈打算将颜真卿放回去，正值李元平在座，颜真卿责备了他。李元平惭愧地站起来，以密信向李希烈提出建议。
English: Li Xilai planned to send Yan Zhenqing back, but when Li Yuanping was present, Yan Zhenqing rebuked him. Li Yuanping stood up shamefacedly and sent a secret letter to Li Xilai with a suggestion.

古文：希烈意遂变，留真卿不遣。
现代文：于是李希烈改变了主意，把颜真卿留下，不让他回去。
English: So Li Xilei changed his mind and kept Yan Zhenqing and did not let him go back.

古文：硃滔、王武俊、田悦、李纳各遣使诣希烈，上表称臣，劝进。
现代文：朱滔、王武俊、田悦、李纳各自派遣使者到李希烈处，上表称臣，劝他称帝。
English: Zhu Tao, Wang Wujun, Tian Yue, and Li Na each sent envoys to Li Xili, presented themselves as his vassals, and persuaded him to proclaim himself emperor.

古文：使者拜舞于希烈前，说希烈曰： 朝廷诛灭功臣，失信天下。
现代文：使者们在李希烈面前行拜舞礼，劝李希烈说： 朝廷杀害有功之臣，对天下言而无信。
English: The emissaries performed a worship dance in front of Li Xilai, and advised Li Xilai to say: The imperial court killed a meritorious vassal, but they did not believe the world.

古文：都统英武自天，功烈盖世，已为朝廷所猜忌，将有韩、白之祸，愿亟称尊号，使四海臣民知有所归。 
现代文：都统英明威武，得自天授，功业压倒当世，已经遭到朝廷的嫌猜疑忌，将有如韩信、白起被害的大祸。希望都统早称皇帝尊号，使全国的臣民知道有所归依。 
English: The wise and powerful Emperor Tudong, who received his power from heaven and whose achievements have overwhelmed the world, has already been treated with suspicion by the imperial court, and will suffer a great disaster like Han Xin. It is hoped that the Emperor Tudong will be called the emperor's honorific title, so that the subjects of the whole country will know that they have been converted.

古文：希烈召颜真卿示之曰： 今四王遣使见推，不谋而同，太师观此事势，岂吾独为朝廷所忌无所自容邪！ 
现代文：李希烈叫来颜真卿，让他看四镇派来的使者，并说： 现在冀、魏、赵、齐四王派遣使者推戴我，不谋而合，太师看看这事态时势，难道我仅仅被朝廷猜忌而无地自容吗？ 
English: Li Xili called Yan Zhenqing and asked him to look at the messengers sent from the four towns, and said: Now the four kings of Hebei, Wei, Zhao, and Qi have sent messengers to push me, coincidentally, the Grand Master looks at this state of affairs, is it just that I am suspected by the court and have no self-respect?

古文：真卿曰： 此乃四凶，何谓四王！
现代文：颜真卿说： 这四人乃是四凶，怎么叫四王！
English: Yan Zhenqing said, "These four people are the four villains, how can they be called the four kings!

古文：相公不自保功业，为唐忠臣，乃与乱臣贼子相从，求与之同覆灭邪！ 
现代文：你不肯自保所建树的功劳业绩，做唐朝的忠臣，反而与乱臣贼子相互追随，是要和他们一齐覆灭吗？ 
English: You are not willing to safeguard the merits and achievements of the trees you have built, be a loyal vassal of the Tang Dynasty, but instead follow each other with chaotic vassals and thieves. Do you want to perish together with them?

古文：希烈不悦，扶真卿出。
现代文：李希烈心中不快，将颜真卿扶了出去。
English: Unhappy in his heart, Li Xilei helped Yan Zhenqing out.

古文：他日，又与四使同宴，四使曰： 久闻太师重望，今都统将称大号而太师适至，是天以宰相赐都统也。 
现代文：另一天，颜真卿又与四镇的使者一起参加宴会，四镇的使者说： 早就听说太师崇高威望，现在都统就要称帝号，而太师恰好到来，这是上天把宰相赐给都统啊。 
English: On another day, Yan Zhenqing again attended a banquet with the emissaries from the four towns. The emissaries from the four towns said, "We have long heard about the high prestige of the Grand Master, and now Douton is to be called the Emperor, and the Grand Master has just arrived. This is God's gift of the Prime Minister to Douton."

古文：真卿叱之曰： 何谓宰相！
现代文：颜真卿大声呵斥四镇使者说： 说什么宰相！
English: Yan Zhenqing loudly rebuked the messengers from the four towns, saying: "What a prime minister!

古文：汝知有骂安禄山而死者颜杲卿乎？
现代文：你们知道有个痛骂安禄山而死的颜杲卿吗？
English: Did you know that there was a Yan Xuanqing who died after cursing Anlu Mountain?

古文：乃吾兄也。
现代文：他便是我的哥哥。
English: He's my brother.

古文：吾年八十，知守节而死耳，岂受汝曹诱胁乎！ 
现代文：我已经八十岁了，只知道恪守臣节而死，难道受你们的引诱胁迫吗！ 
English: I am already eighty years old, and I only know how to observe the Day of the Subordinate and die. Am I being tempted and coerced by you?

古文：四使不敢复言。
现代文：四镇使者不敢再说话了。
English: The envoys from the four towns no longer dare to speak.

古文：希烈乃使甲士十人守真卿于馆舍，掘坎于庭，云欲坑之。
现代文：于是李希烈让甲士十人在馆舍中看守颜真卿，在庭院中挖了一个坑穴，说是准备活埋他。
English: So Li Xili asked ten soldiers to guard Yan Zhenqing in the mansion, and dug a pit in the courtyard, saying that they were preparing to bury him alive.

古文：真卿怡然，见希烈曰： 死生已定，何必多端！
现代文：颜真卿神色安然，见李希烈说： 既然我的生死已经决定，何必玩弄花样！
English: Yan Zhenqing looked relieved to see Li Xilei say: Since my life and death have been decided, why play games!

古文：亟以一剑相与，岂不快公心事邪！ 
现代文：赶快一剑砍死我，岂不使你心中更痛快些吗？ 
English: Would it not cheer your heart to kill me at once with your sword?

古文：希烈乃谢之。
现代文：于是李希烈向他道歉。
English: So Li Xirei apologized to him.

古文：戊戌，以左龙武大将军哥舒曜为东都、汝州节度使，将凤翔、邠宁、泾原、奉天、好畤行营兵万馀人讨希烈，又诏诸道共讨之。
现代文：戊戌，德宗任命左龙武大将军哥舒曜为东都、汝州节度使，率领凤翔、宁、泾原、奉天、好行营兵马一万余人讨伐李希烈，又颁诏命各道共同讨伐。
English: In Wuyi, Dezong appointed the general of the Great Army of the Left Dragon, Brother Shu, as the festival envoy of Dongdu and Ruzhou, and led more than ten thousand soldiers and horses of Fengxiang, Ning, Lianyuan, Mingtian, and Hoying battalions to fight against Li Xilai, and issued an order to fight together in all directions.

古文：曜行至郏城，遇希烈前锋将陈利贞，击破之。希烈势小沮。
现代文：哥舒曜来到郏城时，与李希烈的前锋将领陈利贞遭遇，并打败了他，李希烈军的声势稍挫。
English: When Brother Shu came to Handan on Saturday, he encountered Chen Lizhen, Li Xilai's forward general, and defeated him. Li Xilai's army was slightly weakened.

古文：曜，翰之子也。
现代文：哥舒曜是哥舒翰的儿子。
English: Brother Shu You is the son of Brother Shu Han.

古文：希烈使其将封有麟据邓州，南路遂绝，贡献、商旅皆不通。
现代文：李希烈让他的将领封有麟占据邓州，南方的通路于是断绝了，运送贡物以及商人旅客都不能通过。
English: Li Xili allowed his general, Huan Youlin, to occupy Dengzhou, and the southern route was cut off, preventing the passage of tributes and merchant travelers.

古文：壬寅，诏治上津山路，置邮驿。
现代文：壬寅，德宗颁诏修治上津县的山路，并设置了通邮的驿站。
English: In Renin, Dezong issued an edict to repair the mountain roads in Shangjin County and set up a postal station.

古文：二月，戊申朔，命鸿胪卿崔汉衡送区颊赞还吐蕃。
现代文：二月，戊申朔，德宗命令鸿胪卿崔汉衡送区颊赞返回吐蕃。
English: In February, Wu Shengshuo, Dezong ordered Hongyuqing Cui Hanheng to send Zhaozan back to Tubo.

古文：丙寅，以河阳三城、怀、卫州为河阳军。
现代文：丙寅，朝廷以河阳三城、怀州、卫州设置河阳军。
English: Hsin-yin, the imperial court set up the Hayao Army with the three cities of Hayao, Waizhou and Weizhou.

古文：丁卯，哥舒曜克汝州，擒周晃。
现代文：丁卯，哥舒曜攻克汝州，擒获周晃。
English: Dingwu and his brother Shu conquered Ruzhou on Saturday and captured Zhou Xing.

古文：三月，戊寅，江西节度使曹王皋败李希烈将韩霜露于黄梅，斩之。
现代文：三月，戊寅，江西节度使曹王李皋在黄梅打败李希烈的将领韩霜露，并斩杀了他。
English: In March, Wu Yin, the governor of Jiangxi Province, sent Cao Wang Li Yao to defeat Li Xili's general Han Shomu Lu in Huangmei and killed him.

古文：辛卯，拔黄州。
现代文：辛卯，曹王李皋攻克黄州。
English: Xinwu, Cao Wang Lijun conquered Huangzhou.

古文：时希烈兵栅蔡山，险不可攻。
现代文：当时，李希烈的兵马在蔡山树起栅垒，形势险要，难以攻打。
English: At that time, Li Xilai's soldiers and horses set up a barricade in Cai Shan Shu. The situation was precarious and difficult to attack.

古文：皋声言西取蕲州，引舟师溯江而上，希烈之将引兵循江随战。
现代文：李皋声称西取蕲州，带领水军溯长江而上，李希烈的将领带兵沿着长江尾随而战。
English: Li Shizhen claimed to have taken Bozhou from the west and led the navy up the Yangtze River. Li Xilai's generals and soldiers followed along the Yangtze River.

古文：去蔡山三百馀里，皋乃复放舟顺流而下，急攻蔡山，拔之。
现代文：当离开蔡山三百余里的时候，李皋便又放开船只，顺流而下，急攻蔡山，并将蔡山攻克。
English: When he was more than three hundred miles away from Mount Cai, Li Gan let go of the boat and sailed down the river to attack Mount Cai and conquer it.

古文：希烈兵还救之，不及而败。
现代文：李希烈回军救援不及而失败。
English: Li Xili failed to rescue the returnees.

古文：皋遂进拔蕲州，表伊慎为蕲州刺史，王锷为江州刺史。
现代文：李皋接着进军攻克蕲州，上表请求任命伊慎为蕲州刺史，王锷为江州刺史。
English: Li Xi then marched into and conquered Zhangzhou, and requested the above table to appoint Yishen as the Zhangzhou chief historian, and Wang Xi as the Jiangzhou chief historian.

古文：淮宁都虞侯周曾、镇遏兵马使王玢、押牙姚憺、韦清密输款于李勉。
现代文：淮宁都虞候周曾、镇遏兵马使王玢、押牙姚、韦清暗中向李勉表示归诚之意。
English: Zhou Zeng, the governor of Huaining, and the commanders of the troops and horses, Wang Qian, Wu Yao, and Wei Qing, secretly expressed their sincerity to Li Miao.

古文：李希烈遣曾与十将康秀琳将兵三万攻哥舒曜，至襄城，曾等密谋还军袭希烈，奉颜真卿为节度使，使玢、憺、清为内应。
现代文：李希烈派遣周曾与十将康秀琳带领兵马三万人攻打哥舒曜，来到襄城以后，周曾等人秘密策划回军袭击李希烈，拥戴颜真卿为节度使，让王玢、姚、韦清担任内应。
English: Li Shili dispatched Zhou Zeng and the tenth general Kang Xiulin to lead 30,000 soldiers and horses to attack Brother Shu. After arriving in Xiangcheng, Zhou Zeng and others secretly planned to attack Li Shili, supported Yan Zhenqing as the envoy, and let Wang Xuan, Yao, and Wei Qing serve as internal correspondents.

古文：希烈知之，遣别将李克诚将骡军三千人袭曾等，杀之，并杀玢、憺及其党。
现代文：李希烈得知此事以后，派遣别将李克诚带领骡军三千人袭击周曾等人，杀掉了周曾，并且杀掉王玢、姚及其同党。
English: After Li Xilai learned of this, he dispatched Li Kecheng to lead 3,000 soldiers of the Kuomintang to attack Zhou Zeng and others, killing Zhou Zeng, and killing Wang Qian, Yao and his fellow party members.

古文：甲午，诏赠曾等官。
现代文：甲午，朝廷颁诏追赠周曾等人官位。
English: In the afternoon, the imperial court issued an edict to posthumously award Zhou Zeng and others official positions.

古文：始。韦清与曾等约，事泄不相引，故独得免。
现代文：开始的时候，韦清与周曾等人约定，一旦事情泄露，不可相互牵连，所以他独自得以幸免。
English: At the beginning, Wei Qing and Zhou Zeng and others agreed not to implicate each other once the matter was leaked, so he alone was spared.

古文：清恐终及祸，说希烈请诣硃滔乞师，希烈遣之，行至襄邑，逃奔刘洽。
现代文：韦请担心终究还会招致祸患，便劝说李希烈请让他到朱滔那里请求援兵，李希烈派他去了，他来到襄邑县的时候，便逃奔到刘洽那里去了。
English: Wei Peng was worried that he would eventually cause a disaster, so he persuaded Li Xilai to let him go to Zhu Tao to ask for reinforcements. Li Xilai sent him there. When he came to Xiangyi County, he fled to Liu Cai.

古文：希烈闻周曾等有变，闭壁数日。其党寇尉氏、郑州者闻之，亦遁归。
现代文：李希烈听说周曾等人已有变故，便将营垒关闭了好几天，他的那些前去侵犯尉氏、郑州的党羽闻知此事，也逃了回来。
English: When Li Xilei heard that Zhou Zeng and others had changed their ways, he closed the camp for several days. Those of his followers who had gone to attack the lieutenant and Zhengzhou party members heard about this and fled back.

古文：希烈乃上表归咎于周曾等，引兵还蔡州，外示悔过从顺，实待硃滔等之援也。
现代文：于是，李希烈向朝廷上表，将一切罪名都推到周曾等人身上，自己领兵返回蔡州，表面上表示悔过，顺从朝廷，实际上却是等候朱滔等人的援兵。
English: As a result, Li Xilai presented himself to the imperial court and blamed all the crimes on Zhou Zeng and others. He led the troops back to Caizhou, ostensibly expressing remorse and obeying the imperial court, but actually waiting for reinforcements from Zhu Tao and others.

古文：置颜真卿于龙兴寺。
现代文：他把颜真卿安置在龙兴寺。
English: He placed Yan Zhenqing in Longxing Temple.

古文：丁酉，荆南节度使张伯仪与淮宁兵战于安州，官军大败，伯仪仅以身免，亡其所持节。
现代文：丁酉，荆南节度使张伯仪与淮宁兵在安州交战，官军大败，张伯仪仅自身幸免于难，还失去了所持旌节。
English: Ding Rong, Jing Nan festival made Zhang Bo Yi and Huaining soldiers fight in Anzhou, the official army was defeated, Zhang Bo Yi only himself survived, but also lost the possession of the festival.

古文：希烈使人以其节及俘馘示颜真卿。真卿号恸投地，绝而复苏，自是不复与人言。
现代文：李希烈叫人把张伯仪的旌节以及被俘士兵的左耳给颜真卿看，颜真卿痛哭扑地，气绝而复苏，从此不再与人讲话。
English: Li Xilai asked someone to show Yan Zhenqing the skull and crossbones of Zhang Bo Yi and the left ear of the captured soldier. Yan Zhenqing burst into tears, breathlessly recovered, and never spoke to anyone again.

古文：夏，四月，上以神策军使白志贞为京城召募使，募禁兵以讨李希烈。
现代文：夏季四月，德宗任命神策军使白志贞为京城召募使，招募禁兵以讨伐李希烈。
English: In the summer of April, Emperor Dezong appointed Baizhizhen, the envoy of the Divine Providence Army, as the envoy of the capital to recruit forbidden soldiers to fight against Li Xili.

古文：志贞请诸尝为节度、观察、都团练使者，不问存没，并勒其子弟帅奴马自备资装从军，授以五品官。
现代文：白志贞请求让各个曾经担任过节度使、观察使、都团练使的官员，不论在世的或殁世的，都勒令他们的子弟带着奴仆与马匹，自己备办衣物参军，授给他们五品官职。
English: Bai Zhizhen requested that all officials who had served as festival envoys, observation envoys, and capital corps training envoys, whether alive or dead, should order their sons to prepare their own clothes to join the army with slaves and horses, and give them five official posts.

古文：贫者甚苦之，人心始摇。
现代文：家境贫寒的人深以为苦，民心开始动摇。
English: People from poor families were deeply distressed, and people's hearts began to waver.

古文：上命宰相、尚书与吐蕃区颊赞盟于丰邑里，区颊赞以清水之盟，疆场未定，不果盟。
现代文：德宗命令宰相、尚书与吐蕃区颊赞在丰邑里会盟，区颊赞因清水会盟未将边疆确定，便没来会盟。
English: Emperor Dezong ordered the prime minister, Shangshu, and Jianzan of Tubo District to form an alliance in Fengyur, but Jianzan of Qingshui District did not come to the alliance because the alliance had not determined the border.

古文：己未，命崔汉衡入吐蕃，决于赞普。
现代文：己未，德宗命令崔汉衡前往吐蕃，由吐蕃赞普作出决断。
English: Not long after, Emperor Dezong ordered Cui Hanheng to go to Tubo, and let Tubo Zampu make the final decision.

古文：庚申，加永平、宣武、河阳都统李免淮西招讨使，东都、汝州节度使哥舒曜为之副，以荆南节度使张伯仪为淮西应援招讨使，山南东道节度使贾耽、江西节度使曹王皋为之副。
现代文：庚申，德宗加任永平、宣武、河阳都统李勉为淮西招讨使，以东都、汝州节度使哥舒曜作他的副职，任命荆南节度使张伯仪为淮西应援招讨使，以山南东道节度使贾耽、江西节度使曹王李皋作为他的副职。
English: Goshun and Dezong appointed Yongping, Xuanwu and Heyang Dynasties' Li Mian as the Huaixi recruiting envoy, Dongdu and Ruzhou Dynasties' Guo Shuyang as his deputy, Jingnan Dynasties' Zhang Bo Yi as the Huaixi recruiting envoy, Shannan Dynasties' Jia Tan as his deputy, and Jiangxi Dynasties' Cao Wang Lijun as his deputy.

古文：上督哥舒曜进兵，曜至颍桥，遇大雨，还保襄城。
现代文：德宗督促哥舒曜到颖桥时，遇到大雨，便回军防守襄城。
English: When Emperor Dezong urged his brother Shu You to go to Yingqiao, he encountered heavy rain and returned to defend Xiangcheng.

古文：李希烈遣其将李光辉攻襄城，曜击却之。
现代文：李希烈派遣他的将领李光辉攻打襄城，哥舒曜将他击退。
English: Li Xilai sent his general Li Guanghui to attack Xiangcheng, but his brother Shu You repulsed him.

古文：五月，乙酉，颍王璬薨。
现代文：五月，乙酉，颍王李去世。
English: In May, Acetylene and Molybdenum King Li passed away.

古文：乙未，以宣武节度使刘洽兼淄青招讨使。
现代文：乙未，德宗让宣武节度使刘洽兼任淄青招讨使。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Wu, Emperor Dezong made Liu Cai concurrently serve as the envoy to recruit indigo workers.

古文：李晟谋取涿、莫二州，以绝幽、魏往来之路，与张孝忠之子升云围硃滔所署易州刺史郑景济于清苑，累月不下。
现代文：李晟策划攻取涿、莫二州，以便截断幽州与魏州往来的通路，与张孝忠的儿子张升云在清苑围困朱滔所署任的易州刺史郑景济，但好几个月未能攻打下。
English: In order to cut off the passage between Yuzhou and Weizhou, Li Shizhen planned to capture Luzhou and Mozhou, and together with Zhang Xiaozhong's son Zhang Shengyun besieged Zheng Jingji, the governor of Yizhou appointed by Zhu Tao, in Qingyuan, but failed to attack him for several months.

古文：滔以其司武尚书马寔为留守，将步骑万馀守魏营，自将步骑万五千救清苑。
现代文：朱滔任命他的司武尚书马为留守，带领步兵骑兵一万余人防守魏州营垒，自己带领步兵、骑兵一万五千人援救清苑。
English: Zhu Tao appointed his second-in-command, Shang Shuma, to stay behind and lead more than 10,000 infantry and cavalry to defend the camp in Weizhou. He himself led 15,000 infantry and cavalry to rescue Qingyuan.

古文：李晟军大败，退保易州。
现代文：李晟军被打得大败，退守易州。
English: Li Lan's army was soundly defeated and retreated to Yizhou.

古文：滔还军瀛州，张升云奔满城。
现代文：朱滔回军瀛州，张升云逃奔满城。
English: Zhu Tao returned to Bozhou, Zhang Shengyun fled across the city.

古文：会晟病甚，引军还保定州。
现代文：适逢李晟患病甚重，便带领军队回保定州。
English: When Li Yao fell seriously ill, he led the army back to Baoding.

古文：王武俊以滔既破李晟，留屯瀛州，未还魏桥，遣其给事中宋端趣之。
现代文：由于朱滔打败李晟，留在瀛州屯驻，没有返回魏桥，王武俊便派遣他的给事中宋端前去催促朱滔。
English: Since Zhu Tao defeated Li Xi and stayed in Zhangzhou and did not return to Weiqiao, Wang Wujun sent his agent Song Duan to urge Zhu Tao.

古文：端见滔，言颇不逊，滔怒，使谓武俊曰： 滔以热疾，暂未南还，大王二兄遽有云云。
现代文：宋端见到朱滔，说话颇欠谦恭，朱滔很生气，让他告诉王武俊说： 我因身患热病，暂时未能南回，大王二哥便骤然有如此说法。
English: When Song Duan saw Zhu Tao, his speech was not very courteous. Zhu Tao was very angry, and asked him to tell Wang Wujun: "I am suffering from fever, and I have not been able to return to the south for the time being. The second eldest brother suddenly made such a statement.

古文：滔以救魏博之故，叛君弃兄，如脱屣耳。
现代文：我因救援魏博的原故，背叛国君，抛弃兄弟，就象脱去无跟的鞋子一样。
English: For the reason of rescuing Wei Bo, I betrayed the sovereign and abandoned my brother, just like taking off shoes without a heel.

古文：二兄必相疑，惟二兄所为！ 
现代文：二哥如果一定要怀疑我，那就但凭二哥为所欲为吧！ 
English: If the second brother must doubt me, then let the second brother do as he pleases!

古文：端还报，武俊自辨于马寔，寔以状白滔，言： 赵王知宋端无礼于大王，深加责让，实无他志。 
现代文：宋端回报王武俊，王武俊向马为自己分辩，马将此情状禀告朱滔说： 赵王知道宋端对大王无礼，狠狠地责备了他，赵王实在并无他意。 
English: Song Duan replied to Wang Wujun, and Wang Wujun defended himself to Ma Duan. Ma denounced this situation to Zhu Tao, saying: Zhao Wang knew that Song Duan was rude to the great king, and severely reproached him. Zhao Wang really had no other intention.

古文：武俊亦遣承令官郑和随寔使者见滔，谢之。
现代文：王武俊也派遣承令官郑和跟随马的使者去见朱滔，向他表示歉意。
English: Wang Wujun also sent his second-in-command Zheng He to accompany Ma's envoy to meet Zhu Tao and apologize to him.

古文：滔乃悦，相待如初。
现代文：于是朱滔高兴起来，对待王武俊一如既往。
English: So Zhu Tao became happy and treated Wang Wujun as before.

古文：然武俊以是益恨滔矣。
现代文：然而，王武俊因此事却益发怨恨朱滔了。
English: However, Wang Wujun became increasingly resentful of Zhu Tao as a result of this.

古文：六月，李抱真使参谋贾林诣武俊壁诈降。武俊见之。
现代文：六月，李抱真让参谋贾林到王武俊的营垒诈称归降，王武俊接见了贾林。
English: In June, Li Baozhen asked staff officer Jialin to go to Wang Wujun's camp and claim to have surrendered. Wang Wujun received Jialin.

古文：林曰： 林来奉诏，非降也。 
现代文：贾林说： 我是奉诏而来的，并不是投降的。 
English: Jalin said: "I came here in accordance with the edict, I did not surrender.

古文：武俊色动，问其故，林曰： 天子知大夫宿著诚效，及登坛之日，抚膺顾左右曰： 我本徇忠义，天子不察。 
现代文：王武俊脸色变了，问其中原故，贾林说： 皇上知道大夫对朝廷一向归诚效命，及至登上坛场称王时，还捶着胸口环顾随从说： 我本来是要献身忠义的，奈何皇上不能详察。 
English: Wang Wujun's face changed, and when asked why, Jialin said: The emperor knew that the doctor had always been loyal to the court, and when he ascended the altar to praise the king, he also looked around the entourage with his chest and said: I was originally going to devote myself to loyalty, but why can't the emperor see it in detail.

古文：诸将亦尝共表大夫之志。天子语使者曰： 朕前事诚误，悔之无及。
现代文：诸将领也曾经共同上表讲过大夫的志向，皇上对使者说： 以前的事，诚然是朕的失误，后悔也来不及了。
English: The generals had also spoken together about the doctor's ambitions, and the emperor said to the envoy: What happened before was indeed my mistake, and it's too late to regret it.

古文：朋友失意，尚可谢，况朕为四海之主乎。  
现代文：朋友之间意见不合，还可以道歉，何况我是四海之主呢！  
English: Friends can disagree and apologize, and I'm the king of the world!

古文：武俊曰： 仆胡人也，为将尚知爱百姓，况天子，岂专以杀人为事乎！
现代文：王武俊说： 我是个胡人，作为将领，还知道爱护百姓，何况身为皇上，哪能专门从事杀人呢！
English: Wang Wujun said, "I am a Hu man. As a general, I also know how to love and protect the people. What's more, as an emperor, how can I specialize in killing people?"

古文：今山东连兵，暴骨如莽，就使克捷，与谁守之！
现代文：现在崤山以东接连用兵，白骨暴露，有如草莽，即使朝廷能够获胜，将与何人来共守呢！
English: Now, to the east of Lushan, soldiers are being used one after another, the white bones are exposed, like grass. Even if the imperial court can win, who will they defend with?

古文：仆不惮归国，但已与诸镇结盟。
现代文：我并不害怕归顺国家，只是我已经与各镇结下盟约。
English: I am not afraid to submit to the state, but I have made a covenant with the towns.

古文：胡人性直，不欲使曲在己。
现代文：胡人生性耿直，不愿让自己委曲。
English: Hu is a straightforward person, unwilling to let himself be dictated to.

古文：天子诚能下诏赦诸镇之罪，仆当首唱从化。诸镇有不从者，请奉辞伐之。
现代文：倘若皇上能够下诏赦免各镇的罪过，我自当第一个倡议归顺王化，各镇如有不服从的，请让我遵奉正义之辞讨伐他们。
English: If the emperor can issue a decree to pardon the sins of the towns, I will be the first to submit to the king. If there are any towns that do not obey, please let me fight them in accordance with the words of justice.

古文：如此，则上不负天子，下不负同列，不过五旬，河朔定矣。 
现代文：果能如此，我便上不辜负皇上，下不辜负与我同列之人，不超过五十天，河朔地区便可安定了。 
English: If I can do this, I will live up to the emperor, and I will live up to my peers, and in no more than fifty days, the Hexuo region will be stable.

古文：使林还报抱真，阴相约结。
现代文：王武俊让贾林回报李抱真，暗中相互联络。
English: Wang Wujun asked Jialin to reciprocate Li Bozhen and secretly contacted each other.

古文：庚戌，初行税间架、除陌钱法。
现代文：庚戌，开始施行税间架法和除陌钱法。
English: Geng Hui, began to implement the inter-duty structure law and the removal of foreign money law.

古文：时河东、泽潞、河阳、朔方四军屯魏县，神策、永平、宣武、淮南、浙西、荆南、江泗、沔鄂、湖南、黔中、剑南、岭南诸军环淮宁之境。
现代文：当时，河东、泽潞、河阳、朔方四军屯驻在魏县，神策、永平、宣武、淮南、浙西、荆南、江泗、沔鄂、湖南、黔中、剑南、岭南各军环绕在淮宁周围。
English: At that time, the four armies of Hedong, Zeyu, Heyang and Shuo were stationed in Wei County, while the armies of Shinshe, Yongping, Xuanwu, Huainan, West Zhejiang, Jingnan, Jiangxi, Hubei, Hunan, Yuzhong, Jiannan and Lingnan surrounded Huaining.

古文：旧制，诸道军出境，则仰给度支。
现代文：根据原有制度，各道军队开出本道，一概由度支提供给养。
English: According to the original system, the military forces of each province set up their own roads, and were all supported by the government.

古文：上优恤士卒，每出境，加给酒肉，本道粮仍给其家。一人兼三人之给，故将士利之。各出军才逾境而止，月费钱百三十馀万缗，常赋不能供。
现代文：德宗优待体恤士兵，每当出境时，增加酒肉供给，士兵在本道的口粮仍然拨给他们的家庭，一人可以得到三人的给养，所以将士愿从中获利，于是各自出军，才越过本道便停下来，每月消耗钱一百三十余万缗，通常的赋税无法保证供给。
English: The Dezong treated the soldiers with consideration. Whenever they left the country, they increased the supply of meat and wine. The soldiers' rations in this province were still allocated to their families. One person could feed three people, so the generals were willing to profit from it. So they went to the army separately, and only after crossing this province did they stop. They consumed more than 1.3 million baht of money per month, and the usual taxation could not guarantee supply.

古文：判度支赵赞乃奏行二法：所谓税间架者，每屋两架为间，上屋税钱二千，中税千，下税五百，吏执笔握算，入人室庐计其数。
现代文：判度支赵赞于是上奏施行税间架和除陌钱二法。所谓税间架法，每房屋两架为一间，上等房屋征税二千钱，中等的征税一千，下等的征税五百。吏人拿着笔，握着计算工具算，进入百姓家中，计算应征税额。
English: Judge Zhao Zhan then announced the implementation of the two methods of tax brackets and removal of foreign money. The so-called tax bracket method, two shelves per house are one, the upper-class houses are taxed two thousand dollars, the middle-class tax is one thousand, and the lower-class tax is five hundred. The official took a pen, held a calculation tool and entered the people's home to calculate the amount of tax to be paid.

古文：或有宅屋多而无它资者，出钱动数百缗。
现代文：有些住宅房屋多而没有其他资财的人家，交出的税钱动不动就是数百缗。
English: For some people who have many houses but no other assets, the tax they have to pay is hundreds of baht.

古文：敢匿一间，杖六十，赏告者钱五十缗。
现代文：敢于隐藏房屋一间的，杖责六十，奖赏告发人钱五十缗。
English: If you dare to hide a room in a house, you will be punished with sixty lashes and the informant will be rewarded with fifty shekels.

古文：所谓除陌钱者，公私给与及卖买，每缗官留五十钱，给它物及相贸易者，约钱为率。
现代文：所谓除陌钱法，就是凡公家私人所给与和买卖所得的钱，官家每缗钱中留取五十钱，对于给与其他物品和以物易物所得到的，约计成钱，进行计算。
English: The so-called law on the removal of foreign money is the money given and bought and sold by the public and private sectors. The government and private sectors set aside 50 yuan from every 100 yuan, and calculate the approximate amount of money given and received in exchange for other goods and barter.

古文：敢隐钱百，杖六十，罚钱二千，赏告者钱十缗，其赏钱皆出坐事之家。
现代文：敢于瞒钱一百的，杖责六十，罚钱二千，奖赏告发人钱十缗，这奖赏钱一律出在获罪的人家。
English: Anyone who dares to conceal one hundred dollars will be punished with sixty strokes of the cane, fined two thousand, and the person who reported the crime will be rewarded with ten shekels. This reward money will all go to the family of the person who committed the crime.

古文：于是愁怨之声，盈于远近。
现代文：于是，愁苦怨恨之声，充满了远近各地。
English: As a result, the voices of sorrow and resentment filled every corner of the country.

古文：丁卯，徙郴王逾为丹王，鄜王遘为简王。
现代文：丁卯，德宗改封郴王李逾为丹王，王李为简王。
English: Dingwu, Dezong changed the title of King Li to King Dan, and King Li to King Jian.

古文：庚午，答蕃判官监察御史于頔与吐蕃使者论剌没藏至自青海，言疆场已定，请遣区颊赞归国。
现代文：庚午，答蕃判官、监察御史于与吐蕃使者论剌没藏从青海回朝，说是双方边界已经确定，请让区颊赞回国。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, the magistrate and the inspector, Gu Shi Rong, discussed with the envoy of Tubo, who had returned to the DPRK from Qinghai, and said that the border between the two sides had been determined. Please let Gu Xizan return to the country.

古文：秋，七月，甲申，以礼部尚书李揆为入蕃会盟使。
现代文：秋季，七月，甲申，德宗任命礼部尚书李揆为入蕃会盟使。
English: In the autumn, in July, in Jiaxing, Dezong appointed the Minister of Rites, Shangshu Li Jun, as the envoy of the Ryukyuan Association.

古文：壬辰，诏诸将相与区颊赞盟于城西。
现代文：壬辰，德宗颁诏命令诸将相与区颊赞在城西会盟。
English: In Imjin, Emperor Dezong issued an edict ordering all generals and officials to praise the alliance in the western part of the city.

古文：李揆有才望，卢杞恶之，故使之入吐蕃。
现代文：李揆素有才干与威望，卢杞憎恶他，所以让他出使吐蕃。
English: Li Xuan had talent and prestige, but Lu Xun detested him, so he sent him to Tujing.

古文：揆言于上曰： 巨不惮远行，恐死于道路，不能达诏命！ 
现代文：李揆对德宗说： 我不害怕走远路，只是担心死在路途之中，不能将诏命送到。 
English: Li Qiye said to Dezong: I am not afraid of going a long way, but I am afraid of dying on the way and not being able to deliver the edict.

古文：上为之恻然，谓杞曰： 揆无乃太老！ 
现代文：德宗为李揆的话而悲伤，便对卢杞说： 李揆恐怕过于老迈了吧！ 
English: De Zong was saddened by Li Yao's words and said to Lu Yao: I'm afraid Li Yao is too old!

古文：对曰： 使远夷，非谙练朝廷故事者不可。
现代文：卢杞说： 到远方的夷人出使，不熟悉朝廷旧典的人是不行的。
English: Lu Yao said: It is not proper for those who are not familiar with the old imperial documents to send envoys to distant barbarians.

古文：且揆行，则自今年少于揆者，不敢辞远使矣。 
现代文：而且，李揆去了，今后年纪小于李揆的人，便不敢推辞去远方出使了。 
English: Moreover, if Li Qiye goes, people who are younger than Li Qiye in the future will not dare to refuse to go on a long-distance mission.

古文：八月，丁未，李希烈将兵三万围哥舒曜于襄城，诏李勉及神策将刘德信将兵救之。
现代文：八月，丁未，李希烈领兵三万人在襄城包围哥舒曜，诏令李勉以及神策军将领刘德信领兵援救哥舒曜。
English: In August, Ding Wei, Li Xili led 30,000 soldiers to encircle Brother Shu You in Xiangcheng, and ordered Li Tian and Liu Dexin, the general of the Divine Providence Army, to lead soldiers to rescue Brother Shu You.

古文：乙卯，希烈将曹季昌以随州降，寻复为其将康叔夜所杀。
现代文：乙卯，李希烈的将领曹季昌率随州归降，不久又被他的将领康叔夜杀死。
English: Second, Li Xilai's general Cao Jichang led Suizhou to surrender, and was soon killed by his general Kang Shuangye.

古文：初，上在东宫，闻监察御史嘉兴陆贽名，即位，召为翰林学士，数问以得失。
现代文：当初，德宗在东宫当太子时，听说监察御史嘉兴人陆贽的名声。德宗即位以后，便召陆贽担任翰林学士，屡次向他询问朝政得失。
English: At first, when Dezong was the crown prince in the East Palace, he heard about the reputation of Lu Xun, the inspector of the Jiaxing Emperor. After Dezong ascended the throne, he called Lu Xun to serve as a scholar of Hanlin and repeatedly asked him about the merits and demerits of imperial politics.

古文：时两河用兵久不决，赋役日滋，贽以兵穷民困，恐别生内变，乃上奏，其略曰： 克敌之要，在乎将得其人；驭将之方，在乎操得其柄。
现代文：当时河南、河北地区用兵长久不能结束，赋税劳役日益增多，陆贽因兵源穷竭，百姓困顿，恐怕内部生出别的变故，便进上奏章，大略是说： 打败敌人的关键，在于任用将领能够得当；驾驭将领的办法，在于掌握用人的权柄。
English: At that time, the use of soldiers in Henan and Hebei regions could not be ended for a long time, the tax and labor service was increasing day by day, the land was exhausted due to the exhaustion of military resources, the people were in trouble, and I am afraid that other internal changes would occur, so I wrote a report, roughly saying: The key to defeating the enemy lies in the proper appointment of generals; the way to control generals lies in mastering the power of employing people.

古文：将非其人者，兵虽众不足恃；操失其柄者，将虽材不为用。 
现代文：任用将领不得当，兵马虽然众多，也是不足依恃的；失去用人的权柄，将领虽然有才干，还是不能为朝廷所用。 
English: The appointment of generals is not appropriate, although there are many soldiers and horses, it is not enough to rely on; without the authority to employ people, generals, although talented, cannot be used by the imperial court.

古文：又曰： 将不能使兵，国不能驭将，非止费财玩寇之弊，亦有不戢自焚之灾。 
现代文：陆贽又说： 将领不能指挥士兵，国家不能驾驭将领，这不仅有耗费资财、玩忽寇盗的弊端，而且也会有兵火不息而终至自焚的灾祸。 
English: Lu Wei also said: Generals cannot command soldiers, and the country cannot control generals. This not only has the drawbacks of expending resources and neglecting robberies, but also has the disaster of continuous war and self-immolation.

古文：又曰： 今两河、淮西为叛乱之帅者，独四五凶人而已。
现代文：又说： 现在河北、河南、淮西发起叛乱的主将，只是四五个凶人罢了。
English: He also said: At present, the ringleaders of the rebellion in Hebei, Henan and Huaixi are only four or five thugs.

古文：尚恐其中或傍遭诖误，内蓄危疑。苍黄失图，势不得止。
现代文：尚且恐怕其中有的人是遭受连累而受到损害，心中积蓄着自危的疑虑，匆忙之间，考虑不周，为情势所趋，不能停止。
English: In addition, I am afraid that some of them are suffering from entanglement and damage, accumulating self-dangerous doubts in their hearts, rushing, ill-considered, driven by the situation, and unable to stop.

古文：况其馀众，盖并胁从，苟知全生，岂愿为恶！ 
现代文：何况其余众人，恐怕全是因受人胁迫而跟随反叛的，如果知道还有生路，哪里还愿意作恶呢！ 
English: Not to mention the rest of the people, I'm afraid all of whom followed the rebels under duress. If they knew there was a way out, where would they be willing to do evil?

古文：又曰： 无纾目前之虞，或兴意外之患。
现代文：又说： 如果不解除眼前的忧虑，也许还会引起意外的变故。
English: He also said: If we do not relieve the immediate worries, it may also cause unexpected changes.

古文：人者，邦之本也。
现代文：百姓是国家的根本，财利是百姓的核心。
English: The people are the foundation of the country, and financial interests are the core of the people.

古文：财者，人之心也。其心伤则其本伤，其本伤则枝干颠瘁矣。 
现代文：核心受到伤害，根本也就会受到伤害；根本受到伤害，枝干也就因过度疲劳跌落。 
English: If the core is harmed, it will be harmed at all; if it is harmed at all, the branches will fall down due to excessive fatigue.

古文：又曰： 人摇不宁，事变难测，是以兵贵拙速，不尚巧迟。
现代文：又说： 人心动摇，不得安宁，事故变幻，难以测度，所以用兵以拙而速为可贵，不以巧而迟为可贵。
English: He also said: People's hearts are shaken, and there is no peace, accidents change, and it is difficult to measure. Therefore, it is valuable to use soldiers quickly, and it is valuable to use them slowly.

古文：若不靖于本而务救于末，则救之所为，乃祸之所起也。 
现代文：假如不能安定根本而去致力于救助末梢，那么，救助末梢所做的事情，也正是祸患所起的原因。 
English: If you can't be stable at the root and devote yourself to saving the periphery, then what you do to save the periphery is also the cause of the calamity.

古文：又论关中形势，以为： 王者蓄威以昭德，偏废则危；居重以驭轻，倒持则悖。
现代文：陆贽又论说关中的形势，他认为： 做天子的应该积蓄威严，昭示恩德，若是偏废，便有危险；应该居于重兵防守之地，以便控制轻兵屯戍之地，如果轻重颠倒，便不合乎事理。
English: Lu Yao also discussed the situation in Guanzhong. He believed that: to be a son of heaven, one should accumulate majesty and show benevolence. If one is partial, there will be danger; one should live in a place of heavy defense in order to control a place where light soldiers are stationed. If the weight is reversed, it is unreasonable.

古文：王畿者，四方之本也。
现代文：皇上所在的京都周围地区，是四方的根本。
English: The area around Kyoto, where the Emperor resides, is the foundation of Shikoku.

古文：太宗列置府兵，分隶禁卫，大凡诸府八百馀所，而在关中者殆五百焉。举天下不敌关中之半，则居重驭轻之意明矣。
现代文：太宗布置府兵，分别隶属于禁卫，大概军府共有八百余所，而安排在关中的军府便约有五百所，全国敌不住关中，那么，居于重兵防守之地，以便控制轻兵屯戍之地的意图是很明白的了。
English: There are more than eight hundred military headquarters in Taizong, and there are about five hundred military headquarters in Guanzhong. The whole country cannot resist Guanzhong. Therefore, the intention of living in a heavily defended area in order to control a lightly defended area is very clear.

古文：承平渐久，武备浸微，虽府卫具存而卒乘罕习。
现代文：国家安定的日子长了，军备逐渐衰败，虽然军府、卫所都依然存在，但是兵马演练却很罕见了。
English: The days of national stability are long gone, and armaments are gradually decaying. Although military headquarters and garrisons still exist, troop and horse drills are rare.

古文：故禄山窃倒持之柄，乘外重之资，一举滔天，两京不守。
现代文：所以安禄山窃取被重颠倒的权柄，乘着外有重兵的资本，发动叛乱，有如洪水滔天，两京相继失守。
English: Therefore, Anlu Mountain stole the power that had been turned upside down, took advantage of the capital of heavy foreign troops, and launched a rebellion, which was like a flood, and the two capitals were lost one after another.

古文：尚赖西边有兵，诸牧有马，每州有粮，故肃宗得以中兴。
现代文：还是靠着西部边疆有军队，诸牧监有马，各州有粮食，所以肃宗才得以复兴。
English: It was still thanks to the western frontier that there were troops, that the pastoralists had horses, and that the states had grain, that Suizong was able to be revived.

古文：乾元之后，继有外虞，悉师东讨，边备既弛，禁戒亦空，吐蕃乘虚，深入为寇，故先皇帝莫与为御，避之东游。
现代文：乾元以后，外患又相继发生，整个军队向东讨伐，边疆的军备既已废驰，禁兵复又空虚，吐蕃乘国家虚弱，深入内地侵扰，所以先帝无法抵御，便避开吐蕃东游。
English: After the Qianyuan, foreign plagues occurred one after another, the entire army went to the east to fight, the frontier's armaments had already been scrapped, the prohibition of soldiers was empty, and the Tuobao took advantage of the country's weakness and penetrated deep into the inland, so the former emperor could not resist and avoided the Tuobao eastward travel.

古文：是皆失居重驭轻之权，忘深根固柢之虑。
现代文：这都是因为失去居于重兵防守之地，以控制轻兵屯戍之地的权柄，忘记考虑深深培固根柢。
English: This is all due to the fact that they lost the power of living in a heavily defended area to control a lightly defended area, and forgot to consider deeply entrenching their roots.

古文：内寇则汧、函失险，外侵则汧、渭为戎。
现代文：内有寇盗，崤山、函谷关便失去险要；外有攻侵，州、渭州便都成了外族的天下。
English: If there were robberies inside, Lushan and Hantan Pass would lose their strategic importance; if there were invasions outside, the prefectures and Zhangzhou would all become under the control of foreigners.

古文：于斯之时，虽有四方之师，宁救一朝之患，陛下追想及此，岂不为之寒心哉！
现代文：在这样的时候，虽有各地的军队，难道能救助一朝发生的祸患吗？陛下回顾往事至此，难道不为此而寒心吗？
English: At such a time, even if there are troops from all over the country, will they be able to rescue the disaster that happened all of a sudden? Looking back at the past, isn't His Majesty chilled by this?

古文：今朔方、太原之众，远在山东；神策六军之兵，继出关外。
现代文：现在朔方、太原的军队远在崤山以东，神策等六军又相继开出关外。
English: Now, the armies of Shuo and Taiyuan are far to the east of Lushan, and the six armies of Shinshe and others have successively left the pass.

古文：傥有贼臣啖寇，黠虏觑边，伺隙乘虚，微犯亭障，此愚臣所窃忧也。未审陛下其何以御之！
现代文：倘若在贼臣勾引敌寇，狡猾的敌虏窥伺边疆，看准缝隙，乘虚而入，悄悄侵犯边防的亭障，这是愚臣在私下里所担忧的啊，不知陛下将如何抵御？
English: If a traitor seduces an invader, and a cunning enemy spy on the frontier, watch for a gap, take advantage of a loophole, and quietly invade the border fortifications, this is what a fool worries about in private, I don't know how His Majesty will resist?

古文：侧闻伐叛之初，议者多易其事，佥谓有征无战，役不逾时，计兵未甚多，度费未甚广，于事为无扰，于人为不劳；曾不料兵连祸拏，变故难测，日引月长，渐乖始图。
现代文：我从侧面得知，开始讨伐叛军时，议事的人大多把用兵看得轻而易举，都说只有调兵出征而实无战事，兵役不会超越时限，算起来需要兵员不会太多，估计费用也不会太大，国事并无骚扰，百姓并无辛劳。谁曾料到后来战事相继，灾祸频仍，变故难以测度，随着时间延长，逐渐背离了初始的谋划。
English: I learned from the sidelines that when the crusade against the rebels began, most of the negotiators saw the use of soldiers as easy. They all said that there would be no war only if the troops were sent out, the military service would not exceed the time limit, the number of soldiers would not be too many, the estimated cost would not be too large, the national affairs would not be harassed, and the people would not have to work hard. Who had expected that the wars would follow one after another, the disasters would be frequent, the reasons would be difficult to measure, and with the extension of time, they gradually deviated from the initial plan.

古文：往岁为天下所患，咸谓除之则可致升平者，李正己、李宝臣、梁崇义、田悦是也。往岁谓国家所信，咸谓任之则可除祸乱者，硃滔、李希烈是也。
现代文：以往被天下视为灾祸，都说铲而除之便可再回到太平之世的，是李正己、李宝臣、梁崇义、田悦诸人；以往被朝廷所信任，都说任而用之便可除去祸乱的，是朱滔、李希烈等人。
English: In the past, it was Li Zhengyi, Li Baochen, Liang Chongyi, Tian Yue and others who were regarded as disasters by the world and were said to be able to return to a peaceful world if they were eradicated. In the past, it was Zhu Tao, Li Xilei and others who were trusted by the imperial court and were said to be able to remove the disaster if they were used.

古文：既而正己死，李纳继之；宝臣死，惟岳继之；崇义卒，希烈叛；惟岳戮，硃滔携。
现代文：不久前，李正己死了，李纳接续了他；李宝臣死了，李惟岳接续了他；梁崇义被平定了，李希烈又反叛了；李惟岳被杀掉了，朱滔又叛离了。
English: Not long ago, Li Zhengji died, Li Na succeeded him; Li Baochen died, Li Wei Yue succeeded him; Liang Chongyi was pacified, Li Xilei rebelled again; Li Wei Yue was killed, Zhu Tao rebelled again.

古文：然则往岁之所患者，四去其三矣，而患竟不衰；往岁之所信者，今则自叛矣，而馀又难保。
现代文：这样说来，以往年被视为祸患的人，四个已经去掉三个了，但祸患终竟未曾减弱；以住被信任的人，现在却自行反叛了，而剩下来的人也难保不叛。
English: In this way, four of those who had been regarded as a scourge in previous years have been eliminated, but the scourge has not abated; those who have been trusted have now rebelled on their own, and those who remain are difficult to protect.

古文：是知立国之安危在势，任事之济否在人。
现代文：由此可知，立国的安定与否在于形势，办事的成功与否在于用人。
English: From this, it can be seen that the stability of the founding of the country depends on the situation, and the success of the work depends on the employment of people.

古文：势苟安，则异类同心也；势苟危，则舟中敌国也。
现代文：如果形势安定，那么异族也会与朝廷一条心的；如果形势危殆，那么同船之人也会成为敌人的。
English: If the situation is stable, then the foreign people will be on the same page with the imperial court; if the situation is dangerous, then the people on the ship will also become the enemy.

古文：陛下岂可不追鉴往事，惟新令图，修偏废这柄以靖人，复倒持之权以固国！而乃孜孜汲汲，报思劳神，徇无巳之求，望难必之效乎！
现代文：陛下岂能不以往事为借鉴，革新法度，修复被偏废的权柄，以便安定人心，恢复被倒持的权力，以巩固国家，却反而这样孜孜不倦，汲汲以求，费尽思索，劳尽心神，屈从于没完没了的欲求，而期待难以必成的功效呢！
English: How could His Majesty not learn from the past, reform the law, restore the authority that had been overturned, in order to stabilize the people's hearts, restore the power that had been overthrown, in order to strengthen the country, but on the contrary, work tirelessly, seek diligently, think hard, work hard, succumb to endless desires, and expect results that are difficult to achieve!

古文：今关辅之间，征发已甚，宫苑之内，备卫不全。
现代文：如今关中畿辅地区征发兵员已经太多，宫廷苑囿之中警备不全。
English: Today, there are already too many conscripts in the Guanzhong-Kiev region, and the guard is not fully prepared in the Palace Courtyard.

古文：万一将帅之中，又如硃滔、希烈，或负固边垒，诱致豺狼，或窃发郊畿，惊犯城阙，此亦愚臣所窃为忧者也，夫审陛下复何以备之！
现代文：万一将帅中有人又步朱滔、李希烈的后尘，或者依仗边塞壁垒险固，引诱招致异族入侵，或者偷偷发兵京郊畿辅，震动京城，干犯宫阙，这也是我私下里所担忧的啊，不知陛下又如何防备这种情况呢？
English: In the unlikely event that one of the generals were to follow in the footsteps of Zhu Tao and Li Xilai, or rely on the fortifications of the border to entice an invasion of an alien race, or secretly send troops to the outskirts of Beijing, Kiyosu, shake the capital, and commit a palace coup, this is what I am privately worried about. I don't know how His Majesty can prevent such a situation.

古文：陛下傥过听愚计，所遣神策六军李晟等及节将子弟，悉可追还。
现代文：倘使陛下肯屈尊听我的计策，那么，应该全部追回朝廷派遣的神策六军李晟等人以及诸使节、将领的子弟，明文敕令泾、陇？
English: If Your Majesty would deign to listen to my strategy, then, should all the divine strategies dispatched by the imperial court, such as the six armies of Li Xi and others, as well as the envoys and generals' sons, be recovered?

古文：明敕泾、陇、邠，宁，但令严备封守，仍云更不征发，使知各保安居。
现代文：宁各州，只要严密防守四境，还要说明再不征调兵员，使人们知道各保安定生活。
English: Ning states, as long as they strictly defend the four borders, should also explain that they will no longer recruit and transfer soldiers, so that people know that they will maintain a stable life.

古文：又降德音，罢京城及畿县间架等杂税，则冀已输者弭怨，见处者获宁，人心不摇，邦本自固。 
现代文：又须颁降德音，罢除京城与畿辅各县的间架等杂税，此则可望使已经交税的人消弭怨恨，使现在居住在京城与畿辅各县的人们获得安宁，人心不再动摇，国家的根本自然就强固了。 
English: In addition, it is necessary to issue a decree of abdication of the throne, and abolish the intermediate tax between the capital city and the counties of Kiyosu, which is expected to eliminate the resentment of those who have already paid taxes, so that the people who now live in the capital city and the counties of Kiyosu can have peace, the hearts of the people will no longer be shaken, and the foundation of the country will naturally be strong.

古文：上不能用。
现代文：德宗未能采用这些建议。
English: The daimyō did not follow his advice.

古文：壬戌，以汴西运使崔纵兼魏州四节度都粮料使。
现代文：壬戌，德宗让汴西运使崔纵兼任魏州四节度都粮料使。
English: According to the legend, Emperor Dezong asked the Western Wei envoy Cui Zheng to also serve as the grain envoy to the four provincial capitals of Wei and Zhou.

古文：纵，涣之子也。
现代文：崔纵是崔涣的儿子。
English: Cui Zheng is Cui Yao's son.

古文：九月，丙戌，神策将刘德言、宣武将唐汉臣与淮宁将李克诚战，败于沪涧。
现代文：九月，丙戌，神策军将领刘德信、宣武军将领唐汉臣与淮宁军将领李克诚接战，在涧被打败。
English: In September, Liu Dexin, the general of the Shenzhao Army, Tang Hancheng, the general of the Xuanwu Army, and Li Kecheng, the general of the Huaining Army, fought and were defeated in Handan.

古文：时李勉遣汉臣将兵万人救襄城，上遣德信帅诸将家应募者三千人助之。
现代文：当时，李勉派遣唐汉臣领兵一万人援救襄城，德宗派遣刘德信率领在诸将领家应募的三千人协助唐汉臣。
English: At that time, Li Mian dispatched Tang Han Sen to lead 10,000 soldiers to rescue Xiangcheng, and Dezong dispatched Liu Dexin to lead 3,000 soldiers recruited from generals to assist Tang Han Sen.

古文：勉奏： 李希烈精兵皆在襄城，许州空虚，若袭许州，则襄城围自解。 
现代文：李勉上奏说： 李希烈的精兵都在襄城，许州空虚，如果袭击许州，襄城的围兵便自然解除了。 
English: Li Min said: Li Xilai's elite soldiers are all in Xiangcheng, and Huzhou is empty. If they attack Huzhou, the siege of Xiangcheng will naturally be lifted.

古文：遣二蒋趣许州，未至数十里，上遣中使责其违诏，二将狼狈而返，无复斥候。
现代文：李勉派遣高德信、唐汉臣两位将领进趋许州。还没有走出几十里地，德宗派遣中使责备刘德信、唐汉臣违抗诏旨，两位将领狼狈而归，不再侦察敌情。
English: Li Mian sent Gao Deshin and Tang Hanzhong to escort the two generals into Xizhou. Before they had gone more than a few dozen miles, the envoy sent by Dezong reproached Liu Deshin and Tang Hanzhong for disobeying the imperial edict, and the two generals returned in disarray, no longer surveying the enemy situation.

古文：克诚伏兵邀之，杀伤大半。
现代文：李克诚埋伏兵马，拦击两位大将领，杀伤两位将领的兵马有一大半。
English: Li Kecheng ambushed soldiers and horses, intercepted two generals, and killed more than half of the soldiers and horses of the two generals.

古文：汉臣奔大梁，德信奔汝州。希烈游兵剽掠至伊阙。
现代文：唐汉臣逃往大梁，刘德信逃往汝州，李希烈流动巡哨的兵马已经劫掠到了伊阙。
English: Tang Hanchen fled to Daliang, Liu Deshin fled to Ruzhou, Li Xilai's mobile patrol soldiers and horses have been looted to Yili.

古文：勉复遣其将李坚帅四千人助守东都，希烈以兵绝其后，坚军不得还。
现代文：李勉再派遣他的将领李坚率四千人协助守东都，李希烈派兵截断李坚军的后路，李坚军无法返还。
English: Li Mian then sent his general Li Jian and four thousand men to help defend the Eastern Capital. Li Xilai sent soldiers to cut off the rear of Li Jian's army, and Li Jian's army could not return.

古文：汴军由是不振，襄城益危。
现代文：由此，汴军不能振作，襄城愈加危殆。
English: As a result, the Han army could not cheer up, and Xiangcheng became more and more dangerous.

古文：上以诸军讨淮宁者不相统壹，庚子，以舒王谟为荆襄等道行营都元帅，更名谊。以户部尚书萧复为长史，右庶子孔巢父为左司马，谏议大夫樊泽为右司马，自馀将佐皆选中外之望。
现代文：因讨伐淮宁各军相互之间不能统一，庚子，德宗任命舒王李谟为荆襄等道行营都元帅，改名为李谊，任命户部尚书萧复为长史，右庶子孔巢父为左司马，谏议大夫樊泽为右司马，其余将佐，也都是选任朝廷内外有名望的人物。
English: Due to the inability to unify the armies of Huainin due to the war, Geng Zi and Dezong appointed Shu Wang Li Mu as Jing Xiang and other marshals of the capital and changed his name to Li Yi, appointed Hubei Shangshu Xiao Fu as Chang Shi, the right son of the son of the son of the son of the father of the son of the father of the son of the father of the son of the father of the son of the son of the father of the son of the father of the son of the father of the son of the father of the son of the father of the son of the son of the father of the son of the father of the son of

古文：未行，会泾师作乱而止。
现代文：这些人还未启程，适逢泾原军发生叛乱，只好作罢。
English: These people had not yet set off, when the Shu Yuan army rebelled, they had no choice but to give up.

古文：复，嵩之也；巢父，孔子三十七世孙也。
现代文：萧复是萧嵩的孙子。孔巢父是孔子的三十七世孙。
English: Xiao Fu is the grandson of Xiao Song. Kong Xuefu is the thirty-seventh generation grandson of Confucius.

古文：上发泾原等诸道兵救襄城。
现代文：德宗征发泾原各道兵马援助襄城。
English: Emperor Dezong conscripted soldiers and horses from all the provinces of Yunnan to help Xiangcheng.

古文：冬，十月，丙午，泾原节度使姚令言将兵五千至京师。
现代文：冬季，十月，丙午，泾原节度使姚令言领兵五千人来到京城。
English: In winter, in October, on the afternoon of the third day of the third month, the Spring Festival made Yao Lingyan lead five thousand soldiers to Beijing.

古文：军士冒雨，寒甚，多携子弟而来，冀得厚赐遗其家，既至，一无所赐。
现代文：士兵冒雨而行，甚是寒冷，他们多数携带着自家子弟前来，希望得到丰厚的赏赐送给自己家中的人，来到以后，却没有得到任何赏赐。
English: The soldiers marched in the rain and the bitter cold, many of them bringing their children with them, hoping to receive a rich reward to give to their families, but they did not receive any reward after they arrived.

古文：丁未，发至浐水，诏京兆尹王浐犒师，惟粝食菜啖。
现代文：丁未，泾原军出发来到水，诏命京兆尹王犒劳军队，送去的只有粗米饭和菜饼。
English: Ding Wei, the Yuyuan army set out and came to the water. He ordered Jing Zhao and Yin Wang to support the army. They only sent coarse rice and vegetable cakes.

古文：众怒，蹴而覆之，因扬言曰： 吾辈将死于敌，而食且不饱，安能以微命拒白刃邪！
现代文：众人愤怒了，便踢翻了犒劳品，并借机扬言说： 我们将要赴敌而死，却连口饱饭都吃不上，怎么能够拿自己的小命去往雪白的刀刃上撞呢！
English: The people were enraged, they kicked over the spoils, and took the opportunity to threaten: "We are going to die fighting the enemy, but we can't even eat our fill, how can we take our own little lives and run into the snow-white blade!"

古文：闻琼林、大盈二库，金帛盈溢，不如相与取之。 
现代文：听说皇上琼林、大盈两个内库里金银锦帛装得满满的，我们不如一块儿去取吧。 
English: I heard that the Emperor Qionglin and Daying's two inner storehouses are full of gold and silver brocades. Let's go get them together.

古文：乃擐甲张旗鼓噪，还趣京城。
现代文：于是众人穿上铠甲，举起旗帜，擂鼓呐喊，回军开向京城。
English: As a result, everyone put on armor, raised flags, played drums and shouted, and the returning army drove to the capital.

古文：令言入辞，尚在禁中，闻之，驰至长乐阪，遇之。
现代文：姚令言入朝辞行，还在宫中，听说此事，乘马急驰来到长乐坂，与众人相遇。
English: Yao Lingyan was still in the palace when he heard the news. He took a horse-drawn carriage to the Changle Slope and met many people.

古文：军士射令言，令言抱马鬣突入乱兵，呼曰： 诸君失计！
现代文：士兵用箭射姚令言，姚令言伏在马背上冲进哗乱的士兵之中，呼喊道： 诸位打错了主意！
English: The soldiers shot Yao Lingyan with arrows, and Yao Lingyan rushed on horseback into the midst of the rioting soldiers, shouting: You have the wrong idea!

古文：东征立功，何患不富贵，乃为族灭之计乎！ 
现代文：这次东征，前去立功，还愁不能富贵吗，怎么竟作这种满族抄斩的打算呢！ 
English: This Eastern Expedition, going forward to make meritorious contributions, are you still worried that you cannot be rich and noble? How can you make such a plan to copy the Manchu people?

古文：军士不听，以兵拥令言而西。
现代文：士兵不听劝告，用兵器簇拥着姚令言西进京城。
English: The soldiers did not listen to the advice, and with their weapons they swarmed around Yao Lingyan and marched west into Beijing.

古文：上遽命赐帛，人二匹。
现代文：德宗急忙命令赐给锦帛，每人两匹。
English: Desong hurriedly gave the order to give the koi carp, two per person.

古文：众益怒，射中使。
现代文：众人更加愤怒，用箭射中使。
English: The crowd got even angrier, hitting him with arrows.

古文：又命中使宣慰，贼已至通化门外，中使出门，贼杀之。
现代文：德宗又命令中使前去安抚，而乱兵已经来到通化门外，中使才出了通化门，乱兵便将他杀死。
English: Dezong also ordered the middle envoy to go forward to pacify, but the ruffians had already come outside the Tonghua Gate, the middle envoy only came out of the Tonghua Gate, and the ruffians killed him.

古文：又命出金帛二十车赐之。贼已入城，喧声浩浩，不复可遏。
现代文：德宗又命令拿出金银锦帛二十车赐给乱兵，但是乱兵已经进入城内，喧哗之声浩大，再不能够遏止。
English: Dezong also ordered that twenty carts of gold and silver brocade be given to the rioters, but the rioters had already entered the city, and the noise was so loud that it could no longer be contained.

古文：百姓狼狈骇走，贼大呼告之曰： 汝曹勿恐，不夺汝商货僦质矣！不税汝间架陌钱矣！ 
现代文：百姓惊惶狼狈而逃，乱兵大声喊叫着告诉他们： 你们不必恐慌，不会夺取你们的商货典当的利钱了，不会向你们征缴间架税和除陌钱了！ 
English: The people fled in panic, and the soldiers shouted to them: "Don't panic, they won't take away the interest on your pawned goods, they won't collect the sales tax from you, and they won't take away your money!"

古文：上遣普王谊、翰林学士姜公辅出慰谕之。贼已陈于丹凤门外，小民聚观者以万计。
现代文：德宗派遣普王李谊与翰林学士姜公辅出来劝慰乱兵，而乱兵已经在丹凤门外结成阵列，聚来观看的百姓数以万计。
English: Emperor Dezong sent Pu Wang Liyi and Hanlin Scholar Jiang Gongfu out to console the rebels, and the rebels had formed an array outside the Danfeng Gate, attracting tens of thousands of people to watch.

古文：初，神策军使白志贞掌召募禁兵，东征死亡者志贞皆隐不以闻，但受市井富儿赂而补之，名在军籍受给赐，而身居市廛为贩鬻。
现代文：当初，神策军使白志贞主持招募禁兵，对东征死亡的兵员一概隐瞒不报，但凡收受到市井商贾富人的贿赂，便将他补为兵员。这些人名字写在军籍里，享受供给与赏赐，而自身仍然住在商肆之中贩卖货物。
English: At first, the Shenzhao Army made Bai Zhizhen preside over the recruitment of forbidden soldiers, and did not report any soldiers who died in the Eastern Expedition. However, those who received bribes from Jia Fu, a merchant in the city, were added as soldiers. These people's names were written in the military register, and they enjoyed supplies and rewards, while they themselves still lived in shops and sold goods.

古文：司农卿段秀实上言： 禁兵不精，其数全少，卒有患难，将何待之！ 
现代文：司农卿段秀实上言： 禁兵不精良，员额全都缺少，倘若猝然发生祸难，那将如何防御呢！ 
English: Minister of Agriculture and Rural Affairs Duan Xiushi said: "The ban on soldiers is not good, all posts are lacking. If a disaster suddenly occurs, how will it be defended?

古文：不听。
现代文：德宗不听段秀实的进言。
English: The emperor does not allow it.

古文：至是，上召禁兵以御贼，竟无一人至者。
现代文：至此，德宗召集禁兵去抵御乱兵，竟然没有一人到来。
English: At this point, Emperor Dezong called for soldiers to defend against the rioters, but no one came.

古文：贼已斩关而入，上乃与王贵妃、韦淑妃、太子、诸王、唐安公主自苑北门出，王贵妃以传国宝系衣中以从。后宫诸王、公主不及从者什七八。
现代文：乱兵已经杀开关门而入，德宗这才与王贵妃、韦淑妃、太子、诸王、唐安公主等人从宫苑的北门出走，王贵妃把传国之宝系在衣服中从行，后宫中的诸王、公主来不及跟从德宗出走的人有十分之七八。
English: The disorderly soldiers had already entered through the closed doors. It was only then that De Zong and Wang Guifei, Wei Shuifei, the prince, the kings, Princess Tang An and others fled from the north gate of the palace courtyard. Wang Guifei wore the national treasure in her clothes and followed the procession. Seventy-eight out of ten kings and princesses in the harem were too late to follow those who fled from De Zong.

古文：初，鱼朝恩既诛，宦官不复典兵，有窦文场、霍仙鸣者，尝事上于东宫，至是，帅宦官左右仅百人以从，使普王谊前驱，太子执兵以殿。
现代文：当初，鱼朝恩既已诛除，宦官不再掌管军事。有名叫窦文场、霍仙鸣的，曾经在德宗居东宫时事奉过他，至此，他们带领宦官侍从仅一百人跟随德宗出走。德宗让普王李谊在前面开路，太子手握兵器殿后。
English: At first, since Yucho En had been eliminated, the eunuchs no longer controlled the military. The famous Dou Wenchang and Huo Xianming, who had served him when De Zong lived in the East Palace, led the eunuch servants from only a hundred people to follow De Zong. De Zong let Pu Wang Liyi open the way in front, and the prince held the weapon behind the palace.

古文：司农卿郭曙以部曲数十人猎苑中，闻跸，谒道左，遂以其众从。
现代文：司农卿郭曙带着家兵数十人在禁苑中打猎，听说德宗车驾出行，便在道东谒见，并带着他的家兵随行。
English: Secretary of Agriculture Guo Akebono went hunting in the Forbidden Garden with dozens of his family soldiers. When he heard that Dezong was traveling by car, he met him in the east of the province and accompanied him with his family soldiers.

古文：曙，暧之弟也。
现代文：郭曙是郭暧的弟弟。
English: Guo Shou is Guo Yao's younger brother.

古文：右龙武军使令狐建方教射于军中，闻之，帅麾下四百人从，乃使建居后为殿。
现代文：右龙武军使令狐建正在军中教练射箭，得知消息后，便率领部下四百人从行，于是德宗让令狐建在后面作为殿军。
English: The Right Dragon Army sent Ling Foo Jian, a middle-ranking military instructor, to shoot arrows. After learning the news, he led four hundred of his subordinates to follow, so Dezong let Ling Foo Jian stay behind as a palace army.

古文：姜公辅叩马言曰： 硃訿尝为泾帅，坐弟滔之故，废处京师，心尝怏怏。
现代文：姜公辅挽住德宗的马缰进言说： 朱曾经担任过泾原的节帅，由于受到弟弟朱滔牵连的原故，遭到废黜，闲居京城，内心一度郁郁不乐。
English: Jiang Gongfu took hold of Dezong's horse-drawn carriage and said, "Zhu Rong once served as the commander of the Spring Festival in Yingyuan. Due to the reason that he was implicated by his brother Zhu Tao, he was dethroned and lived idly in the capital. At one time, he was depressed.

古文：臣尝谓陛下既不能推心待之，则不如杀之，毋贻后患。
现代文：我认为陛下既然不能推心置腹地对待他，便不如将他杀掉，不要留下后患。
English: I think that since His Majesty cannot treat him with sincerity, it would be better to kill him and not leave him behind.

古文：今乱兵若奉以为主，则难制矣。
现代文：现在哗乱的士兵如果拥戴他为首领，那就难于控制了。
English: If the soldiers now in revolt embrace him as their leader, they will be difficult to control.

古文：请召使从行。 
现代文：请将朱召来，让他随从出走。 
English: Please call Zhu and let him follow you.

古文：上仓猝不暇用其言，曰： 无及矣！ 
现代文：德宗在仓猝间无暇照着姜公辅的话去办，说： 来不及了！ 
English: In his haste, Dezong did not have time to follow Jiang Gongyu's words and said, "It's too late!

古文：遂行。
现代文：便出发了。
English: So he went to Qi Province without hesitation.

古文：夜至咸阳，饭数匕而过。
现代文：夜里来到咸阳，大家只吃了几勺饭便过去了。
English: When we arrived in Xianyang at night, we only ate a few spoonfuls of rice before passing out.

古文：时事出非意，群臣皆不知乘舆所之。
现代文：当时，事情出于意料之外，群臣都不知道德宗的去向。
English: At that time, the matter was unexpected, and the ministers did not know where Dezong was going.

古文：卢杞、关播逾中书垣而出。
现代文：卢杞、关播从中书省逾墙而出。
English: Lu Yao and Guan Bao went out from Zhongshuo across the wall.

古文：白志贞、王翃及御史大夫于颀、中丞刘从一、户部侍郎赵赞、翰林学士陆贽、吴通微等追及上于咸阳。
现代文：白志贞、王以及御史大夫于颀、中丞刘从一、户部侍郎赵赞、翰林学士陆贽、吴通微等人在咸阳追上了德宗。
English: Bai Zhizhen, Wang, as well as the Grand Historian Yu Xi, the Junior Middle Officer Liu Congyi, the Household Attendant Zhao Zan, the Hanlin Scholar Lu Yao, Wu Tongwei and others caught up with Dezong in Xianyang.

古文：颀，頔之从父兄弟；从一，齐贤之从孙也。
现代文：于颀是于的叔伯兄弟。刘从一是刘齐贤的从孙。
English: Yu Qi is Yu's uncle's brother. Liu Zongyi is Liu Qixian's great-great-grandson.

古文：贼入宫，登含元殿，大呼曰： 天子已出，宜人自求富！ 
现代文：乱兵进入宫中，登上含元殿，大声喊叫着说： 皇上已经出走，应该让人各自想法发财了！ 
English: The rioters entered the palace and boarded the Hall of Han Yuan, shouting loudly: "The emperor has fled, it's time to let people pursue their own ideas!"

古文：遂欢噪，争入府库，运金帛，极力而止。
现代文：于是乱兵欢呼鼓噪，争着进入府库，运走金银锦帛，直到运不动了，才停止下来。
English: As a result, the rioting soldiers cheered and drummed, fighting to enter the government treasury and carry away the gold and silver brocade, until the movement stopped.

古文：小民因之，亦入宫盗库物，出而复入，通夕不已。
现代文：乘此时机，百姓也进入宫中，盗窍库房中的物品，彻夜不止。
English: Taking advantage of this opportunity, the common people also entered the palace and stole items from the storeroom, continuing throughout the night.

古文：其不能入者，剽夺于路。
现代文：那些未能进入宫中库房的人们，便在路上抢劫。
English: Those who couldn't get into the palace's storeroom looted on the way.

古文：诸坊居民各相帅自守。
现代文：诸坊的居民都各自聚在一起自行守卫。
English: The residents of all the villages gathered together to guard themselves.

古文：姚令言与乱兵谋曰： 今众无主，不能持久，硃太尉闲居私第，请相与奉之。 
现代文：姚令言和哗乱士兵商议说： 现在大家没有主子，不可能长久。朱太尉正在私人府第中闲居，请一起拥戴他吧。 
English: Yao Lingyan discussed with the rioting soldiers and said: Now we have no master, it can't last long. Lieutenant Zhu is idling in a private house, please embrace him together.

古文：众许诺。乃遣数百骑迎泚于晋昌里第。
现代文：大家答应，便派出几百人骑马到晋昌里府第迎接朱。
English: Everyone agreed, and several hundred people were sent on horseback to Jinchangli Prefecture to welcome Zhu.

古文：夜半，泚按辔列炬，传呼入宫，居含元殿，设警严，自称权知六军。
现代文：半夜时分，朱紧扣马缰缓行，张列火炬，前后传呼着进入宫中，在含元殿住下，设置了严密的警戒，自称暂且统辖六军。
English: In the middle of the night, Zhu tightly clasped the reins of his horse, walked slowly, set up a torch, and entered the palace, calling back and forth. Under the residence of Han Yuan, he set up a strict vigilance, claiming to temporarily control the six armies.

古文：戊申旦，泚徙居白华殿，出榜于外，称： 泾原将士久处边陲，不闲朝礼，辄入宫阙，致惊乘舆，西出巡幸。
现代文：戊申，早晨，朱移居白华殿，在宫外张出告示，声称： 泾原的将士长期身居边疆，不熟悉朝廷的礼仪，便进入宫中，使圣上受到惊动，西出巡幸。
English: According to the legend, in the morning, Zhu moved into the Baihua Palace and put up a notice outside the palace, claiming: "The soldiers of Xingyuan have been living in the frontier for a long time and are not familiar with the etiquette of the imperial court, so they entered the palace, causing the saint to be alarmed, and went on a tour of the west.

古文：太尉已权临六军，应神策等军士及文武百官凡有禄食者，悉诣行在。不能往者，即诣本司。
现代文：朱太尉已经暂且统辖六军。神策军士兵以及文武百官凡是靠俸禄过活的，应当全部前往圣上出巡的地方，不能前往的，可到本官官署来。
English: Lieutenant Zhu has temporarily taken control of the six armies. The soldiers of the Shen Zhe Army and the civil and military officials who live on salaries should all go to the place where the saint went on patrol. If they can't go, they can come to their own government office.

古文：若出三日，检勘彼此无名者，皆斩！ 
现代文：如果超过三天，查出两处都未具名的人，一概斩首。 
English: If it takes more than three days to find two unnamed people, they will all be beheaded.

古文：于是百官出见泚。
现代文：于是百官只好出来见朱。
English: So the centurion had no choice but to come out and see Zhu.

古文：或劝迎乘舆，泚不悦，百官稍稍遁去。
现代文：有的人劝说朱前去迎接德宗，朱不高兴，于是百官逐渐逃走。
English: Some people persuaded Zhu to go to meet Dezong, but Zhu was not happy, so the officials gradually fled.

古文：源休以使回纥还，赏薄，怨朝廷，入见泚，屏人密语移时，为泚陈成败，引符命，劝之僭逆。
现代文：源休出使回纥归来，由于赏赐菲薄而埋怨朝廷，这时他入宫去见朱，屏退在场的人，秘密交谈了一段时间。他为朱陈述古今成败之理，征引符命之说，劝朱称帝。
English: When Yuan Hui's envoy Hui Xuan returned, he complained to the imperial court because of the poor reward. At this time, he went to the palace to meet Zhu, and secretly talked with the people present for a period of time. He stated the reason for Zhu's success and failure in the past and present, the reason for Zhu's life, and persuaded Zhu to be named emperor.

古文：泚喜，然犹未决。
现代文：朱大喜，但还犹豫未决。
English: Zhu is overjoyed, but hesitant.

古文：宿卫诸军举白幡降者，列于阙前甚众。
现代文：在宫中为皇上值宿警卫的各支军队举起白旗归降朱的人，排列在宫门前面，为数很多。
English: In front of the palace gate, there were a large number of people who had raised white flags for the emperor's guards on duty in the palace.

古文：泚夜于苑门出兵，旦自通化门入，骆驿不绝，张弓露刃，欲以威众。
现代文：朱在夜间由宫苑大门放出士兵，到天亮再由通化门进来，络绎不绝，弩张剑拔，打算以此向群众示威。
English: At night, Zhu sent soldiers out from the palace gate, and at dawn, they came in through the Tonghua gate, and they were incessant, brandishing swords, intending to demonstrate to the masses.

古文：上思桑道茂之言，自咸阳幸奉天。
现代文：德宗想起桑道茂的话，便从咸阳前往奉天。
English: When Dezong remembered Sando Mao's words, he traveled from Xianyang to Mingtian.

古文：县僚闻车驾猝至，欲逃匿山谷，主簿苏弁止之。
现代文：县中的官员听说皇上的车驾突然来到，打算逃到山谷中躲藏起来，主薄苏弁制止了他们。
English: When the officials in the county heard that the emperor's chariot had suddenly arrived, they were about to run away and hide in the valley, but Lord Bo Su Ben stopped them.

古文：弁，良嗣之兄孙也。
现代文：苏弁是苏良嗣之兄的孙子。
English: Su Ben is the grandson of Su Ryoji's older brother.

古文：文武之臣稍稍继至。
现代文：这时，文武臣僚逐渐地相继到来。
English: At this time, Wen Wu's ministers gradually arrived one after another.

古文：己酉，左金吾大将军浑瑊至奉天。
现代文：己酉，左金吾大将军浑到达奉天。
English: The great general Zuo Kingu arrived in Mukden.

古文：瑊素有威望，众心恃之稍安。
现代文：浑素来便有威望，大家倚恃浑，心情稍微安定。
English: Humidity has always been a source of prestige, and people rely on it to keep their moods somewhat stable.

古文：庚戌，源休劝硃泚禁十城门，毋得出朝士，朝士往往易服为佣仆潜出。
现代文：庚戌，源休劝说朱关闭长安的十个城门，不许将朝廷官员放出城外。朝廷官员往往改换服装，扮作雇工或仆人，暗中出城。
English: Genghis Khan and Yuan Hui persuaded Zhu to close the ten gates of Chang'an and not to let the court officials out of the city. The court officials often changed their clothes, disguised as employees or servants, and secretly left the city.

古文：休又为泚说诱文武之士，使之附泚。
现代文：源休又为朱劝诱文武官员，让他们依附朱。
English: Genkyu also persuaded and enticed civil and military officials for Zhu, so that they would follow Zhu.

古文：检校司空、同平章事李忠臣久失兵柄，太仆卿张光晟自负其才，皆郁郁不得志，泚悉起而用之。
现代文：检校司空、同平章事李忠臣长期失去兵权，太仆卿张光晟以才干自负，都郁郁不得志，朱全都起用了他们。
English: Li Zhongcheng, the chief inspector of schools, and Tongping Zhang, who had been deprived of military power for a long time, as well as Zhang Guangyao, the servant of the emperor, who had been overconfident in their abilities, were depressed and discouraged, and Zhu appointed all of them.

古文：工部侍郎蒋镇出亡，坠马伤足，为泚所得。
现代文：工部侍郎蒋镇出逃时，掉下马来，脚部摔伤，也被朱得到。
English: When Jiang Zhen, the attendant of the Ministry of Works, fled, he fell off his horse and hurt his foot. He was also beaten up by Zhu.

古文：先是，休以才能，光晟以节义，镇以清素，都官员外郎彭偃以文学，太常卿敬釭以勇略，皆为时人所重，至是皆为泚用。
现代文：在此之前，由于源休才能出众，张光晟能守节义，蒋镇清正俭朴，都官员外郎彭偃有文采学识，太常卿敬勇敢而有谋略，都为当时人所推重，至此，他们都被朱所起用。
English: Prior to this, because of the outstanding talent of Yuan Hui, Zhang Guangyao's ability to keep the festival, Jiang Zhen's uprightness and frugality, the official's brother-in-law Peng Yao's literary and scholarly knowledge, and Tai Changqing's respect, bravery and strategy, all of them were promoted by the people at that time. So far, they were all used by Zhu.

古文：凤翔、泾原将张廷芝、段诚谏将数千人救襄城，未出潼关，闻硃泚据长安，杀其大将陇右兵马使戴兰，溃归于泚。
现代文：凤翔、泾原将领张廷芝、段诚谏带领数千人援助襄城，还未走出潼关，听说朱占据长安，便杀死大将陇右兵马使戴兰，乱哄哄地归降了朱。
English: Feng Xiang, Zhang Tingzhi, and Duan Chengyi, former generals of the Kuomintang, led thousands of people to help Xiangcheng. Before leaving Shaoguan, they heard that Zhu had occupied Chang'an, so they killed Dai Lan, general of the Kuomintang's Right Division, and capitulated to Zhu.

古文：泚于是自谓众心所归，反谋遂定，以源休为京兆尹、判度支，李忠臣为皇城使。
现代文：朱因此自认为人心所向，便决定谋反。他任命源休为京兆尹、判度支，李忠臣为皇城使。
English: As a result, Zhu decided to rebel, as he thought that this was what the people wanted. He appointed Genkyu as the Keizhoin, Shando branch, and Li Zhongcheng as the imperial envoy.

古文：百司供亿，六军宿门，咸拟乘舆。
现代文：各部门的供给，六军宿卫宫禁，都仿照皇帝的设置。
English: The supply of various departments and the ban of the six armies to stay in the palace were all modeled on the emperor's setup.

古文：辛亥，以浑瑊为京畿、渭北节度使，行在都虞候白志贞为都知兵马使，令狐建为中军鼓角使，以神策都虞候侯仲庄为左卫将军兼奉天防城使。
现代文：辛亥，德宗任命浑为京畿、渭北节度使，行在都虞候白志贞为都知兵马使，令狐建为中军鼓角使，神策都虞候侯仲庄为左卫将军兼任奉天防城使。
English: In Xinhai, Dezong appointed Hun as the festival envoy for Gyeonggi and North Gyeongsang, and Bai Zhizhen as the envoy for the soldiers and horses in the capital city, Ling Jijian as the envoy for the drums and horns of the Chinese army, and Shen Zhe as the general of the left guard and the envoy for the defense of the city.

古文：硃泚以司农卿段秀实久失兵柄，意其必怏怏，遣数十骑召之。
现代文：朱因司农卿段秀实长期失去兵权，猜想他必定会郁郁不乐，便派遣数十人骑马传召他。
English: Zhu Yingshi sent dozens of men on horseback to summon Duan Xiusi, the Minister of Agriculture, who had lost his military power for a long time, assuming that he would be depressed.

古文：秀实闭门拒之，骑士逾垣入，劫之以兵。
现代文：段秀实闭门拒绝来使，骑兵跳墙而入，用兵器劫持了他。
English: When Duan Xiushi refused to be sent behind closed doors, the cavalry jumped over the wall and seized him at gunpoint.

古文：秀实自度不免，乃谓子弟曰： 国家有患，吾于何避之，当以死徇社稷；汝曹宜人自求生。 
现代文：段秀实估计自己不能幸免，便对子弟说： 国家蒙受灾难，我能够躲避到何处去！我自当为国家殉难，你们应去自求生路。 
English: Duan Xiushi estimated that he could not be spared, so he said to his son: The country has suffered a disaster, where can I go to escape! I consider myself a martyr for the country, you should go to find a way to survive.

古文：乃往见泚。
现代文：于是段秀实去见朱。
English: So Duan Xiushi went to see Zhu.

古文：泚喜曰： 段公来，吾事济矣。 
现代文：朱高兴地说： 段公一来，我的大事可望成功了。 
English: Zhu said happily, "As soon as Duan Gong comes, I hope that my great event will be a success."

古文：延坐问计。秀实说之曰： 公本以忠义著闻天下，今泾军以犒赐不丰，遽有披猩，使乘舆播越。
现代文：朱请段秀实入坐，向他询问计谋，段秀实劝说他道： 你本来以忠义著称于天下，现在泾原军因犒劳赏赐不丰厚，骤然猖獗而起，致使圣上流离失所。
English: Zhu invited Duan Xiusi to sit down and asked him about his strategy. Duan Xiusi persuaded him, saying, "You used to be famous throughout the world for your loyalty. Now, because the reward for your hard work is not abundant, the Yuyuan Army has suddenly become rampant, resulting in the displacement of the sacred.

古文：夫犒赐不丰，有司之过也，天子安得知之！
现代文：若说犒劳赏赐不够丰厚，那是有关部门的过错，圣上哪里能够知道此事！
English: If it is said that the reward is not rich enough, it is the fault of the relevant departments. How can the Holy Father know this?

古文：公宜以此开谕将士，示以祸福，奉迎乘舆，复归宫阙，此莫大之功也！ 
现代文：你最好用这个道理开导将士，讲清祸福，迎接圣上，再回宫中，这是没有比这更大的功劳了！ 
English: You had better use this principle to enlighten the generals, clarify the calamities and blessings, welcome the saint, and then return to the palace. There is no greater merit than this!

古文：泚默然不悦，然以秀实与己皆为朝廷所废，遂推心委之。
现代文：朱默不作声，心中不快，但是认为段秀实与自己都是被朝廷所废黜的，所以还是推心置腹地委任他。
English: Zhu Mo was silent and unhappy, but he thought that Duan Xiusi and himself had both been deposed by the imperial court, so he still appointed him wholeheartedly.

古文：左骁卫将军刘海滨、泾原都虞候何明礼、孔目官岐灵岳，皆秀实素所厚也，秀实密与之谋诛泚，迎乘舆。
现代文：左骁卫将军刘海宾、泾原都虞候何明礼、孔目官岐灵岳，都是段秀实平素所厚待的人，段秀实暗中与他们计议诛杀朱，迎接德宗。
English: Zuo Wei General Liu Haibin, He Mingli, the governor of Suwon, and Qiling Yue, the official of Confucius, were all well-received by Duan Xiushi. Duan Xiushi secretly plotted with them to kill Zhu and welcome Dezong.

古文：上初至奉天，诏征近道兵入援。
现代文：德宗来到奉天之初，下诏征调邻近各道兵马前来援救。
English: When Emperor Dezong arrived at the beginning of the Battle of Mukden, he ordered soldiers and horses from neighboring provinces to come to the rescue.

古文：有上言： 硃泚为乱兵所立，且来攻城，宜早修守备。 
现代文：有人上言说： 朱被哗乱的士兵所拥立，将来攻打奉天城，应早做防守的准备。 
English: Some people said: Zhu was supported by the mutinous soldiers, and in the future, he would attack and attack the Heavenly City. He should have made defensive preparations earlier.

古文：卢杞切齿言曰： 硃泚忠贞，群臣莫及，奈何言其从乱，伤大臣心！
现代文：卢杞咬牙切齿地说： 朱的忠贞，是群臣所赶不上的，怎么能说他随从作乱，而伤大臣的心呢！
English: Lu Xun gritted his teeth and said, "Zhu's loyalty is unmatched by other ministers. How can he be said to have followed and caused turmoil, and hurt the minister's heart!

古文：臣请以百口保其不反。 
现代文：我请求以举家一百口人担保朱不会造反。 
English: I asked for a guarantee from 100 members of my family that Zhu would not rebel.

古文：上亦以为然。又闻群臣劝泚奉迎，乃诏诸道援兵至者皆营于三十里外。
现代文：德宗也认为是这样，又听说群臣劝说朱迎接自己，便下诏已经到来的各道援兵都在距离奉天三十里外扎营。
English: Dezong also thought so, and when he heard that the courtiers had persuaded Zhu to meet him, he announced that reinforcements from all provinces had arrived and were encamped thirty miles away from Mingtian.

古文：姜公辅谏曰： 今宿卫单寡，防虑不可不深，若泚竭忠奉迎，何惮于兵多；如其不然，有备无患。 
现代文：姜公辅规劝说： 现在宫中值宿警卫的兵力非常薄弱，防范和顾虑不能不缜密一些。如果朱竭尽忠心迎接陛下，他对援兵多有什么忌惮的？倘若朱并不是这样，那也是有备无患。 
English: Jiang Gongfu advised, "Nowadays, the strength of the guards on duty at the palace is very weak, and precautions and concerns must be more careful. If Zhu is loyal to welcome His Majesty, what is he afraid of? If Zhu is not like this, then there is no danger.

古文：上乃悉召援兵入城。
现代文：于是德宗传召援兵全部入城。
English: As a result, Dezong summoned all reinforcements to enter the city.

古文：卢杞及白志贞言于上曰： 臣观硃泚心迹，必不至为逆，愿择大臣入京城宣慰以察之。 
现代文：卢杞及白志贞对德宗说： 我看朱内心的真情，必定不至于叛逆。希望陛下选择大臣前往京城安抚他，以便观察他的态度。 
English: Lu Xun and Bai Zhizhen said to Dezong: I see the true feelings of Zhu's heart, I certainly will not rebel. I hope that His Majesty will choose a minister to go to Beijing to appease him in order to observe his attitude.

古文：上以问从臣皆畏惮，莫敢行。金吾将军吴溆独请行，上悦。
现代文：德宗因诸随从出走的朝臣都心怀畏惧，不敢前去，只有金吾将军吴溆请求前去，心中很高兴。
English: De Zong was afraid to go because of all the courtiers who had followed him. Only Kingu's general Wu Xi asked him to go, and he was very happy.

古文：溆退而告人曰： 食其禄而违其难，何以为臣！
现代文：吴溆退朝后告诉别人说： 接受国家的俸禄而逃避国家的危难，怎么能够做人臣呢！
English: After retiring from the imperial court, Wu Gan told others: "How can you be a vassal if you accept the state's salary and escape the country's peril?

古文：吾幸托肺附，非不知往必死，但举朝无蹈难之臣，使圣情慊慊耳！ 
现代文：我有幸做为帝室的微末之亲，不是不知道前往必定会死，但是举朝没有赴难的臣下，也太让圣上遗憾了！ 
English: I have the privilege of being a very close relative of the imperial family, not because I do not know that I will certainly die, but because I am a vassal who did not go to the disaster, it is too regrettable for the saint!

古文：遂奉诏诣泚。
现代文：于是，吴溆带着诏书去见朱。
English: As a result, Wu Gan went to see Zhu with the edict.

古文：泚反谋已决，虽阳为受命，馆溆于客省，寻杀之。
现代文：朱已经决定谋反，虽然佯装接受诏命，把吴溆安置在客省，但不久便将他杀了。
English: Zhu had already decided to rebel, and although he pretended to accept the imperial command to place Wu Gan in Hakka Province, he soon killed him.

古文：溆，氵奏之兄也。
现代文：吴溆是吴凑的哥哥。
English: Wu Yao is the elder brother of Wu Qiao.

古文：泚遣泾原兵马使韩旻将锐兵三千，声言迎大驾，实袭奉天。
现代文：朱泚派遣泾原兵马使韩带领精锐兵马三千人，声称迎接德宗，实际上是袭击奉天。
English: Zhu Xi dispatched three thousand soldiers and horses from Yuyuan to Han to lead the elite soldiers and horses, claiming to welcome Dezong, but in fact it was an attack on Mukden.

古文：时奉天守备单弱，段秀实谓岐灵岳曰： 事急矣！ 
现代文：当时奉天的防守非常薄弱，段秀实对岐灵岳说： 事情危急了！ 
English: At that time, the defense of Mukden was very weak, and Duan Xiusi said to Ki Ling Yue: Things are critical!

古文：使灵岳诈为姚令言符，令旻且还，当与大军俱发。
现代文：他让岐灵岳盗用姚令言的印符，命令韩暂且回军，与大队人马同时出发。
English: He let Qi Lingyue steal the seal of Yao Lingyan, ordered Han to temporarily return to the army, and set off at the same time as the brigade.

古文：窃令言印未至，秀实倒用司农印印符，募善走者追之。
现代文：由于姚令言的印信未能盗来，段秀实便倒用司农印的印符，招募了擅长奔走的人去追赶韩。
English: Since Yao Lingyan's seal letter could not be stolen, Duan Xiusi used the seal of the Secretary of Agriculture and recruited people who were good at running to catch up with Han.

古文：旻至骆驿，得符而还。
现代文：韩行至骆驿，得到印符便回军了。
English: Han Xing went to Luojun, and when he received the seal, he returned to the army.

古文：秀实谓同谋曰： 旻来，吾属无类矣！
现代文：段秀实与共同策划的人们说： 韩一回来，我辈是要无一幸免的了。
English: "Once Han comes back, none of us will be spared," said Duan Xiushi and his co-planners.

古文：我当直搏泚杀之，不克则死，终不能为之臣也！ 
现代文：我自当直接与朱搏斗，将他杀死，若不能成功，便一死了之，终究不能作朱的臣属的！ 
English: I should fight Zhu directly and kill him. If I don't succeed, I will die. After all, I can't be Zhu's subordinate!

古文：乃令刘海宾、何明礼阴结军中之士，欲使应之于外。
现代文：于是段秀实让刘海宾、何明礼暗中联络军中的将士，准备使他们从外部响应。
English: Therefore, Duan Xiushi asked Liu Haibin and He Mingli to secretly contact the soldiers in the army to prepare them to respond from the outside.

古文：旻兵至，泚、令言大惊。岐灵岳独承其罪而死，不以及秀实等。
现代文：韩军回来后，朱和姚令言极为震惊，岐灵岳独自承担了罪名而死，没有牵连段秀实等人。
English: After the Korean troops returned, Zhu and Yao Lingyan were extremely shocked. Qi Lingyue alone took the blame and died, without implicating Duan Xiushi and others.

古文：是日，泚召李忠臣、源休、姚令言及秀实等议称帝事。秀实勃然起，夺休象笏，前唾泚面，大骂曰： 狂贼！
现代文：这一天，朱传召李忠臣、源休、姚令言以及段秀实等人商议称帝事宜，段秀实猛然站起来，夺去源休的象牙朝笏，走上前去，唾朱的脸，大骂道： 狂妄的叛贼！
English: On this day, Zhu summoned Li Zhongcheng, Yuan Hui, Yao Lingyan and Duan Xiushi to discuss the matter of becoming emperor. Duan Xiushi suddenly stood up, snatched Yuan Hui's ivory hajib, walked forward, spit on Zhu's face, and cursed: Arrogant traitor!

古文：吾恨不斩汝万段，岂从汝反邪！ 
现代文：我恨不能将你斩为万段，岂肯随从你造反呢！ 
English: If I could chop you into a million pieces, would I follow you and rebel?

古文：因以笏击泚，泚举手扞之，才中其额，溅血洒地。
现代文：于是用朝笏击打朱，朱举起手来抵挡笏击，朝笏只击中了朱的额头，血花溅到地上。
English: So he hit Zhu with a hammer. Zhu raised his hand to fend off the hammer blow. The hammer only hit Zhu's forehead, and blood spattered onto the ground.

古文：泚与秀实相搏忷忷，左右猝愕，不知所为。
现代文：朱与段秀实呼喝着相互搏斗，他的侍从由于事出仓猝，惊慌不知如何是好。
English: Zhu and Duan Shuxin shouted and fought with each other, and his attendant panicked because of the suddenness of the incident.

古文：海宾不敢进，乘乱而逸。
现代文：刘海宾不敢上前，乘着混乱逃走。
English: Liu Haibin did not dare to go forward and took advantage of the chaos to escape.

古文：忠臣前助泚，泚得匍匐脱走。
现代文：李忠臣前去帮助朱，朱得以匍匐着脱身逃走。
English: Li Zhongchen went to help Zhu, and Zhu was able to escape.

古文：秀实知事不成，谓泚党曰： 我不同汝反，何不杀我！ 
现代文：段秀实知道事情不能成功，便对朱的党羽说： 我不和你们一起造反，为什么不杀死我！ 
English: Duan Xiushi knew that things could not succeed, so he said to Zhu's followers: I will not rebel with you, why not kill me!

古文：众争前杀之。泚一手承血，一手止其众曰： 义士也，勿杀。 
现代文：众人争着上前去杀段秀实，朱一手给自己止着血，一手制止众人说： 他是义士啊！不要杀他。 
English: Everyone rushed forward to kill Duan Xiushi. Zhu used one hand to stop his own blood and the other to stop everyone from saying, "He's a righteous man! Don't kill him."

古文：秀实已死，泚哭之甚哀，以三品礼葬之，海宾缞服而逃，后二日，捕得，杀之。亦不引何明礼。
现代文：段秀实死去以后，朱哭他甚是悲哀，还以三品官的丧礼埋葬了他。刘海宾穿着丧服逃走，过了两天，朱逮捕了他，将他杀了，而他也不曾牵连何明礼。
English: After Duan Xiusheng died, Zhu wept for him with great sorrow and buried him with the funeral rites of a three-ranked official. Liu Haibin fled in mourning clothes. Two days later, Zhu arrested him and killed him, but he did not implicate He Mingli.

古文：明礼从泚攻奉天，复谋杀泚，亦死。
现代文：何明礼跟随朱攻打奉天，再次策划诛杀朱，也死去了。
English: He Mingli followed Zhu to attack and fight Bongtian, and again plotted to fight and kill Zhu. He also died.

古文：上闻秀实死，恨委用不至，涕泗久之。
现代文：德宗听到段秀实的死讯，悔恨当初没有任用他，涕泪交流地哭了许久。
English: When Dezong heard the news of Duan Xiusheng's death, he regretted not appointing him at the beginning, and cried for a long time with tears.

古文：壬子，以少府监李昌雏为京畿、渭南节度使。
现代文：壬子，德宗任命少府监李昌为京畿、渭南节度使。
English: Imshi, Dezong appointed the minor prefectural inspector Li Chang as the Gyeonggi and South Gyeongsang special envoy.

古文：凤翔节度使、同平章事张镒，性儒缓，好修饰边幅，不习军事，闻上在奉天，欲迎大驾，具服用货财，献于行在。
现代文：凤翔节度使、同平章事张镒，性情儒雅迂徐，喜欢修饰边幅，并不熟悉军事。张镒听说德宗出走奉天，准备迎驾，备办衣服用具、货物资财，献到行在。
English: Fengxiang, a military commander, and Tongping, a military commander, were not familiar with military affairs. Fengxiang liked to decorate the edges and was not familiar with military affairs. Zhangye heard that Dezong had fled to Fucheng, and prepared to meet him, preparing clothes and equipment, goods and resources, and presented them to him.

古文：后营将李楚琳，为人剽悍，军中畏之，尝事硃泚，为泚所厚。
现代文：后营将领李楚琳为人矫捷勇猛，军中将士都畏惧他。他曾事奉过朱，朱待他不薄。
English: Li Chulin, the rear camp commander, was a bold and brave man, and the lieutenant generals were afraid of him. He had served Zhu, and Zhu treated him well.

古文：行军司马齐映与同幕齐抗言于镒曰： 不去楚琳，必为乱首。 
现代文：行军司马齐映与幕僚齐抗对张镒说： 若不将李楚琳除去，他必定会成为变乱的祸首。 
English: Marching Sima Qieying and his staff resisted Zhang Ye and said: If Li Chulin is not removed, he will surely become the cause of chaos.

古文：镒命楚琳出屯陇州。楚琳托事不时发。
现代文：张镒命令李楚琳出去戍守陇州，李楚琳借口有事，没有按时出发。
English: Zhang Ye ordered Li Chuling to go out to defend Ganzhou. Li Chuling did not leave on time, saying that she had something to do.

古文：镒方以迎驾为忧，谓楚琳已去矣。
现代文：张镒正在因迎接大驾而忧心，自以为李楚琳已经离开了。
English: Zhang Rong was worried because of the large number of visitors and thought that Li Chuling had already left.

古文：始，上以奉天迫隘，欲幸凤翔。
现代文：李楚琳与他的同党在夜间发起变乱，张镒系绳越城逃走，李楚琳追上了他，将他杀死。判官王沼等人全都死去。
English: Li Chuling and his fellow party members initiated a mutiny in the night. Zhang Ye escapes across the city on a rope. Li Chuling catches up with him and kills him. Judge Wang Numa and the others all die.

古文：户部尚书萧复闻之，遽请见曰： 陛下大误，凤翔将卒皆硃泚故部曲，其中必有与之同恶者。
现代文：齐映从水洞中出城，齐抗扮成雇工背负肩挑地逃了出去，均得不死。开始时，德宗嫌奉天过于狭小，打算前往凤翔，户部尚书萧复闻讯，急忙求见德宗说： 陛下大大地错了。凤翔将士都是朱过去的家兵，其中必定有人与朱共同作恶。
English: Qi Ying went out of the city from the water cave, Qi Yan disguised himself as a hired worker and ran away shoulder to shoulder, and both of them did not die. At the beginning, Dezong did not like Boten to be too small and planned to go to Fengxiang. When the head of the household, Shang Shu, heard the news, he hurried to see Dezong and said, "Your Majesty is greatly mistaken. The soldiers of Fengxiang are Zhu's former soldiers, and there must be someone among them who has committed evil together with Zhu."

古文：臣尚忧张镒不能久，岂得以銮舆蹈不测之渊乎！ 
现代文：对张镒我尚且担心他不能长久，岂能让陛下的车驾陷入不可测度的深渊呢！ 
English: As far as Zhang Ye is concerned, I'm still worried that he won't be able to last long, and that he won't be able to let His Majesty's car fall into an unfathomable abyss!

古文：上曰： 吾行计已决，试为卿留一日。 
现代文：德宗说： 我去凤翔，主意已定，权且为你逗留一天吧！ 
English: Dezong said, "I'm going to Fengxiang. I've made up my mind. Let me stay for a day just for you."

古文：明日，闻凤翔乱，乃止。
现代文：次日，德宗听说凤翔已经发生变乱，便不再到凤翔去。
English: The next day, when Dezong heard that there had been a disturbance in Fengxiang, he no longer went to Fengxiang.

古文：齐映、齐抗皆诣奉天，以映为御史中丞，抗为侍御史。
现代文：齐映、齐抗都到达奉天，德宗任命齐映为御史中丞，齐抗为侍御史。
English: Qi Ying and Qi Rong both arrived in Fengtian, and Dezong appointed Qi Ying as the vice-chancellor of the imperial history, and Qi Rong as the attendant of the imperial history.

古文：楚琳自为节度使，降于硃泚。陇州刺史郝通奔于楚琳。
现代文：李楚琳自称节度使，投降朱；陇州刺史郝通投奔了李楚琳。
English: Li Chuling claimed to be an envoy of the Qing Dynasty, and surrendered to Zhu; Zhang Zizhi of Zhangzhou and Shantong defected to Li Chuling.

古文：商州团练兵杀其刺史谢良辅。
现代文：商州练团练的士兵杀死了他们的刺史谢良辅。
English: The soldiers of the Shangzhou drill team killed their assassin, Xie Liangyu.

古文：硃泚自白华殿入宣政殿，自称大秦皇帝，改元应天。
现代文：朱泚从白华殿进入宣政殿，自称大秦皇帝，更改年号为应天。
English: Zhu Xi entered the Xuanzheng Palace from the Baihua Palace, claimed to be the Great Qin Emperor, and changed his era name to Yingtian.

古文：癸丑，泚以姚令言为侍中、关内元帅，李忠臣为司空兼侍中，源休为中书侍郎、同平章事、判度支，蒋镇为吏部侍郎，樊系为礼部侍郎，彭偃为中书舍人，自馀张光晟等各拜官有差。
现代文：癸丑，朱任命姚令言为侍中、关内元帅，李忠臣为司空兼侍中，源休为中书侍郎、同平章事、判度支，蒋镇为吏部侍郎，樊系为礼部侍郎，彭偃为中书舍人，其余张光晟等人也都分别封拜官职，大小不等。
English: At the same time, Zhu appointed Yao Lingyan as an attendant and Guanai marshal, Li Zhongchen as a secretary and attendant, Yuan Hui as a secretary, Tongping Zhangji, and Zhandu branch, Jiang Zhen as a secretary of the Department of Personnel, Yu Xie as a secretary of the Department of Ceremonies, Peng Yao as a secretary of the Department of Personnel, and the rest of Zhang Guangya and others also held official positions, varying in size.

古文：立弟滔为皇大弟。
现代文：又立弟弟朱滔为皇太弟。
English: He also appointed his younger brother Zhu Tao as the crown prince's younger brother.

古文：姚令言与源休共掌朝政，凡泚之谋画、迁除、军旅、资粮，皆禀示休。
现代文：姚令言与源休共同执掌朝政，凡是朱的谋划、任官、军事和物资粮草等事，都要向源休禀报。
English: Yao Lingyan and Yuan Hui jointly presided over the government of the dynasty. All matters of Zhu's planning, appointment of officials, military affairs and supplies of grain and grass were to be reported to Yuan Hui.

古文：休劝泚诛翦宗室在京城者以绝人望，杀郡王、王子、王孙凡七十七人。
现代文：源休劝说朱消灭留在京城的宗室，以便根绝人们的期望，杀郡王、王子、王孙共七十七人。
English: In order to eradicate people's expectations, Genkyu persuaded Zhu to exterminate the royal family that remained in the capital, killing a total of seventy-seven county kings, princes, and kings' sons.

古文：寻又以蒋镇为门下侍郎，李子平为谏议大夫，并同平章事。
现代文：不久，朱又任命蒋镇为门下侍郎，李子平为谏议大夫，二人并同平章事。
English: Soon after, Zhu also appointed Jiang Zhen as a subordinate attendant, and Li Ziping as an advisor, and the two of them worked together.

古文：镇忧惧，每怀刀欲自杀，又欲亡窜，然性怯，竟不果。
现代文：蒋镇又愁又怕，每每怀揣刀子，准备自杀，又打算逃亡，然而生性怯懦，终究未能实施。
English: Jiang Zhen was both sad and afraid. He always carried a knife, prepared to commit suicide, and planned to escape. However, due to his natural cowardice, he ultimately failed to carry it out.

古文：源休劝泚诛朝士之窜匿者以胁其馀，镇力救之，赖以全者甚众。
现代文：源休劝说朱诛杀逃亡隐匿的朝臣，以便胁迫其余的朝臣，蒋镇尽力营救他们，赖蒋镇得以全身的人甚多。
English: Yuan Xiu persuaded Zhu Xi to kill the courtiers who had fled and hidden in order to coerce the remaining courtiers. Jiang Zhen did his best to rescue them, and many people in Jiang Zhen were able to save themselves.

古文：樊系为泚撰册文，既成，仰药而死。
现代文：樊系为朱撰写册文，写完以后，便服毒自杀。
English: He wrote a book for Zhu, and after finishing it, he took poison and committed suicide.

古文：大理卿胶水蒋沇诣行在，为贼所得，逼以官，沇绝食称病，潜窜得免。
现代文：大理卿胶水人蒋前往行在，被叛军捉住。蒋拒绝进食，佯称染病，暗中逃去，幸免于难。
English: Jiang, the glue man of Daliqing, was captured by the rebels. Jiang refused to eat, pretended to be ill, secretly fled, and survived.

古文：哥舒曜食尽，弃襄城奔洛阳。李希烈陷襄城。
现代文：哥舒曜军粮吃光，放弃襄城，逃奔洛阳，李希烈攻陷了襄城。
English: Brother Shu ran out of army rations on the morning of the 4th, abandoned Xiangcheng, and fled to Luoyang. Li Xili attacked and captured Xiangcheng.

古文：右龙武将军李观将卫兵千馀人从上于奉天，上委之召募，数日，得五千馀人，列之通衢，旗鼓严整，城人为之增气。
现代文：右龙武将军李观带领卫兵一千余人到奉天跟随德宗，德宗委托他招募兵员。数天之后，李观募得五千余人，将他们排列在大道上，军容布列严整，奉天城中的人们因此而勇气大增。
English: Several days later, Li Guan gathered more than 5,000 soldiers and lined them up on the main road. The number of soldiers was neatly arranged, and the people in the city of Mukden gained a lot of courage.

古文：姚令言之东出也，以兵马使京兆冯河清为泾原留后，判官河中姚况知泾州事。
现代文：姚令言东出泾原时，让兵马使京兆人冯河清担任泾原留后，让判官河中人姚担任知泾州事。
English: When Yao Lingyan went out of Hebei Province, he asked the soldiers and horses to make the Jinghao man Feng Heqing serve as Hebei Province, and let the judge Yao, a man from Hebei Province, serve as Zhili Province.

古文：河清、况闻上幸奉天，集将士大哭，激以忠义，发甲兵、器械百馀车，通夕输行在。
现代文：冯河清和姚况听说德宗出走奉天，集合将士，当场大哭，以忠义激发将士，发出铠甲、兵器、器械等一百余车，彻夜运往行在。
English: When Feng Heqing and Yao Quan heard that Dezong had fled to Feng Tian, they gathered the soldiers, cried loudly on the spot, inspired the soldiers with loyalty, and sent out more than a hundred cars of armor, weapons, and equipment, which were transported all night.

古文：城中方苦无甲兵，得之，士气大振。
现代文：奉天城中正苦于没有铠甲兵器，得到这些供给，士气大振。
English: The supply boosted the morale of the city, which was suffering from a lack of armored weapons.

古文：诏以河清为四镇、北庭行营、泾原节度使，况为行军司马。
现代文：德宗颁诏任命冯河清为四镇、北庭行营、泾原节度使，姚况为行军司马。
English: Emperor Dezong issued an edict appointing Feng Heqing as the envoy to the four towns, Beiting marching camp, and Yuyuan festival, and Yao Zhou as the marching steward.

古文：上至奉天数日，右仆射、同平章事崔宁始至，上喜甚，抚劳有加。
现代文：德宗来到奉天数日，右仆射、同平章事崔宁方始来到，德宗甚为高兴，对他大加抚慰。
English: Dezong came to Mingtian for a few days, and his right-hand man Sho and Tongping's subordinate Choi Ning came first. Dezong was very happy and greatly comforted him.

古文：宁退，谓所亲曰： 主上聪明英武，从善如流，但为卢杞所惑，以至于此！ 
现代文：崔宁退下来后，对亲近的人说： 皇上聪慧明达，英俊威武，从善如流，只是被卢杞所迷惑，以至落到这般地步！ 
English: After Cui Ning retreated, he said to those close to him: The emperor is intelligent, handsome, and powerful. He has been good from the start, but he was deceived by Lu Yao and ended up in this situation!

古文：因潸然出涕。
现代文：于是扑簌簌地流下了眼泪。
English: She burst into tears.

古文：杞闻之，与王翃谋陷之。
现代文：卢杞闻知此事，便与王图谋陷害他。
English: When Lu Wei heard about this, he plotted with Wang to frame him.

古文：翃言于上曰： 臣与宁俱出京城，宁数下马便液，久之不至，有顾望意。 
现代文：王对德宗说： 我与崔宁一块儿从京城出来，崔宁好几次下马便溺，以至好长时，这是存心观望。 
English: Wang said to Dezong: I came out of the capital together with Cui Ning. Cui Ning dismounted several times to urinate, so for a long time, it was with the intention of watching.

古文：会硃泚下诏，以左丞柳浑同平章事，宁为中书令。
现代文：适逢朱颁下诏旨，任命左丞柳浑为同平章事，崔宁为中书令。
English: At the right time, Zhu issued an imperial edict, appointing the left-hand senator Liu Hun as Tongping, and Cui Ning as Zhongshirong.

古文：浑，襄阳人也，时亡在山谷。
现代文：柳浑是襄阳人，当时正逃亡在山谷。
English: Liu Hun, a native of Yangyang, was on the run in the valley.

古文：翃使盩厔尉康湛诈为宁遗硃泚书，献之。
现代文：王指使县尉康湛伪造崔宁给朱的书信，并将书信献给朝廷。
English: Wang ordered County Lieutenant Kang Zhan to forge Cui Ning's letter to Zhu and present the letter to the imperial court.

古文：杞因谮宁与硃泚结盟，约为内应，故独后至。
现代文：卢杞因此诬陷崔宁与朱结有盟约，约定做朱的内应，所以只有崔宁后到奉天。
English: Lu Yao therefore framed Cui Ning for having a pact with Zhu Jie, an agreement to be Zhu's inside man, so only Cui Ning later went to Mingtian.

古文：乙卯，上遣中使引宁就幕下，云宣密旨，二力士自后缢杀之，中外皆称其冤。上闻之，乃赦其家。
现代文：乙卯，德宗派遣中使将崔宁领到帐幔下面，说是传达密旨，让两个力士从背后将他缢杀。朝廷内外都说崔宁冤枉，德宗听说以后，便将崔宁全家赦免了。
English: Second, the envoy sent by Emperor Dezong brought Choi Ning under the curtain, saying that he was conveying a secret order to have two wrestlers kill him from behind. Both inside and outside the court said that Choi Ning was wronged, and after Emperor Dezong heard about it, he pardoned Choi Ning's entire family.

古文：硃泚遣使遗硃滔书，称： 三秦之地，指日克平；大河之北，委卿除殄，当与卿会于洛阳。 
现代文：朱派遣使者给朱滔送信，内称： 三秦一带，在屈指可数的日子里使可平定。大河以北，委托你来消灭敌军，我自当与你在洛阳见面。 
English: Zhu sent an emissary to Zhu Tao with a message, saying: The Sanqin region can be pacified in a few days. To the north of the Great River, I entrust you to destroy the enemy army. I will meet you in Luoyang.

古文：滔得书，西向舞蹈宣示军府，移牒诸道，以自夸大。
现代文：朱滔接到书信便向军府宣布，并向诸道发布文书，借以自夸自大。
English: When Zhu Tao received the letter, he announced it to the military government and issued a document to all the provinces, boasting about it.

古文：上遣中使告难于魏县行营，诸将相与恸哭。
现代文：德宗派遣中使向魏县行营通告蒙难，各位大将在一块儿放声大哭。
English: During the dispatch of Emperor Dezong, the announcement of the march to Wei County was difficult, and the generals cried loudly together.

古文：李怀光帅众赴长安，马燧、李艽各引兵归镇，李抱真退屯临洺。
现代文：李怀光率领部众开赴长安，马燧、李各自领兵回归本镇，李抱真退兵屯扎临。
English: Li Huaguang led the troops to go to Chang'an, Ma Zhen and Li each led the troops to return to the town, and Li Bozhen retired from the army.

古文：丁巳，以户部尚书萧复为吏部尚书，吏部郎中刘从一为刑部侍郎，翰林学士姜公辅为谏议大夫，并同平章事。
现代文：丁巳，德宗任命户部尚书萧复为吏部尚书，吏部郎中刘从一为刑部侍郎，翰林学士姜公辅为谏议大夫，三人并同平章事。
English: At that time, Desong appointed the head of the household department, Shangshu Xiaofu, as the head of the personnel department, the head of the personnel department, Liu, as the head of the criminal department, and the scholar of Hanlin, Jiang Gongfu, as the doctor of deliberation, and the three of them were appointed together.

古文：硃泚自将逼奉天，军势甚盛。
现代文：朱亲自领兵进逼奉天，军队的声势甚为盛大。
English: Zhu personally led the army to force Fengtian, and the army's momentum was very grand.

古文：以姚令言为元帅，张光晟副之，以李忠臣为京兆尹、皇城留守，仇敬忠为同、华等州节度使、拓东王，以扞关东之师，李日月为西道先锋经略使。
现代文：他任命姚令言为元帅，张光晟为其副职，任命李忠臣为京兆尹、皇城留守，仇敬忠为同、华等州节度使、拓东王，以抵御关东的军队，还任命李日月为西道先锋经略使。
English: He appointed Yao Lingyan as a marshal, Zhang Guangya as his deputy, Li Zhongchen as the Jing Zhaoyun, the imperial city left-behind, Qiu Jingzhong as the Tong, Hua and other states' delegate, and Tuodong Wang to resist the Guandong army, and also appointed Li Rixue as the West Road vanguard delegate.

古文：邠宁留后韩游瑰，庆州刺史论惟明，监军翟文秀，受诏将兵三千拒泚于便桥，与泚遇于醴泉。游瑰欲还趣奉天，文秀曰： 我向奉天，贼亦随至，是引贼以迫天子也。
现代文：邠宁留后韩游、庆州刺史论惟明、监军翟文秀，接受诏旨，带领兵马三千人在便桥抵御朱，与朱在醴泉遭遇，韩游打算回军直趋奉天，翟文秀说： 我军开向奉天，敌军也会随后而来，这是招引敌军来逼迫圣上啊。
English: After Huning stayed, Han Yu, the historian of Gyeongju, Wo Ming, and the supervisor of the army, Han Wenxiu, accepted the imperial order, led three thousand soldiers and horses to resist Zhu in the bridge, and encountered Zhu in the spring. Han Yu planned to return to the army and go straight to Bokcheon. Han Wenxiu said: Our army will go to Bokcheon, and the enemy army will also come later. This is to attract the enemy army to persecute the saint.

古文：不若留壁于此，贼必不敢越我向奉天。
现代文：不如留下来，在此扎营，敌军必定不敢越过我军，开向奉天。
English: It would be better to stay and set up camp here. The enemy army would not dare to cross our army and go to Mukden.

古文：若不顾而过，则与奉天夹攻之。 
现代文：如果敌军不顾我军便开过去，那我军便与奉天军两面夹攻敌军。 
English: If the enemy army drove past in spite of our army, then our army would attack the enemy army with the Feng Tian army on both sides.

古文：游瑰曰： 贼强我弱，若贼分军以缀我，直趣奉天，奉天兵亦弱，何夹攻之有！
现代文：韩游说： 敌强我弱，如果敌军分出一支军队拖住我军，大军直趋奉天，奉天的兵马也很薄弱，还谈什么两面夹攻！
English: Han Yu said: The enemy is strong and I am weak. If the enemy detaches an army to hold back our army, the big army will go straight to heaven, and the soldiers and horses of heaven are also weak. What kind of two-sided attack!

古文：我今急趣奉天，所以卫天子也。
现代文：现在我军赶忙开往奉天，这正是为了保卫圣上啊。
English: Now our army is hurrying to head for Mukden, precisely to defend the holy place.

古文：且吾士卒饥寒而贼多财，彼以利诱吾卒，吾不能禁也。 
现代文：而且，我军士兵饥饿寒冷，而敌军的财物很多，敌军若用财物诱惑我军士兵，我是无法禁止的。 
English: Moreover, our soldiers are hungry and cold, while the enemy has a lot of wealth. If the enemy tempts our soldiers with wealth, I cannot forbid it.

古文：遂引兵入奉天，泚亦随至。
现代文：于是韩游领兵开入奉天。朱随在韩游后面也赶到了，官军出城交战失利。
English: As a result, Han Yu led the troops into Mukden. Zhu Sui also arrived behind Han Yu, and the government troops went out of the city and lost the battle.

古文：官军出战，不利，泚兵争门，欲入。
现代文：朱军争夺城门，打算进城，浑与韩游血战了一整天。
English: Zhu's army fought for the city gate, intending to enter the city, and fought a bloody battle with Han Yu for a whole day.

古文：浑瑊与游瑰血战竟日。门内有草车数乘，瑊使虞候高固帅甲士以长刀斫贼，皆一当百，曳车塞门，纵火焚之。众军乘火击贼，贼乃退。
现代文：城门里面有几辆草车，浑让虞候高固率领身穿铠甲的战士用长刀砍杀敌人，个个以一当百，又把草车拖过来堵塞在城门口，放火烧车，各军乘着火势出击敌人，敌军只好后退。
English: Inside the city gate, there were several grass carts. Hun Zhan Guo Gaogu led the armor-clad soldiers to cut down the enemy with a long knife, one by one, and dragged the grass carts to block the city gate and set fire to the carts. Each army took advantage of the fire to attack the enemy, and the enemy army had to retreat.

古文：会夜，泚营于城东三里，击柝张火，布满原野，使西明寺僧法坚造攻具，毁佛寺以为梯冲。
现代文：到了夜晚，朱在奉天城东三里扎营，击木梆报时的声音和燃起的火堆布满了原野。朱让西明寺僧人法坚制造攻城用具，毁掉指寺，取其木材，制作云梯和冲车。
English: In the evening, Zhu set up camp three miles east of the city of Fengtian. The sound of the cymbals being struck and fires being lit filled the fields. Zhu asked the monk of Ximing Temple, Fajian, to make siege tools, destroy the temple, take its wood, and make a ladder and a cart.

古文：韩游瑰曰： 寺材皆干薪，但具火以待之。 
现代文：韩游说： 西明寺的木材都是干燥柴禾，只要准备好火种，等着敌人攻城。 
English: Han Yu said: The timber of Ximing Temple is all dry firewood. Just prepare the kindling and wait for the enemy to attack the city.

古文：固，侃之玄孙也。
现代文：高固是高侃的玄孙。
English: Gao Gu is Gao Kan's great-great-grandson.

古文：泚自是日来攻城，瑊、游瑰等昼夜力战。
现代文：此后朱每天都来攻城，浑、韩游等昼夜奋力作战。
English: After that, Zhu came to attack the city every day, and fought hard day and night, such as Hun and Han Yu.

古文：幽州兵救襄城者闻泚反，突入潼关，归泚于奉天，普润戍卒亦归之，有众数万。
现代文：派去援救襄城的幽州兵听说朱造反，便冲入潼关，在奉天归附了朱，戍守普润的士兵也归附了他，朱的兵马达到数万人。
English: The Yuzhou soldiers sent to rescue Xiangcheng heard of Zhu's rebellion and rushed into Shaoguan. Zhu's soldiers numbered in the tens of thousands.

古文：上与陆贽语及乱故，深自克责。
现代文：德宗与陆贽谈到变乱的原故，深深自责。
English: Desong and Lu Yao talked about the cause of the turmoil and deeply blamed themselves.

古文：贽曰： 致今日之患，皆群臣之罪也。 
现代文：陆贽说： 招致今日的祸患都是群臣的罪过。 
English: Lu Yao said: It is the fault of the vassals that have brought about today's disaster.

古文：上曰： 此亦天命，非由人事。 
现代文：德宗说： 这也是天命，并不关乎人事。 
English: Desong said, "This is also the fate of heaven, and it is not related to personnel.

古文：贽退，上疏，以为： 陛下志壹区宇，四征不庭，凶渠稽诛，逆将继乱，兵连祸结，行及三年，征师日滋，赋敛日重，内自京邑，外洎边陲，行者有锋刃之忧，居者有诛求之困。
现代文：陆贽退朝后，奏上章疏，他认为： 陛下志在统一疆域，四次征伐不朝之徒，凶恶的魁首终至受戮，叛逆的将领却又相继作乱，战争的灾祸接连不断，已经有三个年头。征发军队日渐增多，征收赋税日渐繁重，内起京城，外至边疆，行路之人有刀兵的忧虑，居家之人有苛刻索求的困苦。
English: After the abdication of Emperor Lu Xun, he wrote an epitaph, saying: "Your Majesty aspires to unify the territory, four times conquering the non-royalists, the evil leaders were finally defeated, but the traitorous generals continued to make trouble, and the scourge of war has continued for three years. The number of conscripted troops has been increasing day by day, and the collection of taxes has become more and more burdensome. From the capital to the frontier, those who travel have the worries of swordsmen, and those who stay at home have the hardships of demanding.

古文：是以叛乱继起，怨讟并兴，非常之虞，亿兆同虑，唯陛下穆然凝邃，独不得闻，至使凶卒鼓行，白昼犯阙，岂不以乘我间隙，因人携离哉！
现代文：所以叛乱相继发生，痛恨与怨言一同兴起，非同寻常的忧患，为民众所共同担心。只有陛下蒙在鼓里，不得而知，以致使凶兵击鼓噪进，在大白天里干犯宫门，这难道不就是由于朝廷出现漏洞，人心已经背离，给他们造成了可乘之机吗！
English: That is why there have been successive rebellions, hatreds and complaints have arisen together, and the people are worried about the unusual sorrow. Only His Majesty was kept in the dark, and did not know, so that the murderous soldiers beat drums noisily and broke into the palace gate in broad daylight. Isn't it because of the loopholes in the court that the people's hearts have deviated, creating an opportunity for them to take advantage of?

古文：陛下有股肱之臣，有耳目之任，有谏诤之列，有备卫之司，见危不能竭其诚，临难不能效其死。臣所谓致今日之患，群臣之罪者，岂徒言欤！
现代文：陛下有辅政得力的大臣，有亲信，有谏官，有防卫部门，他们见到危险而不能够竭尽诚心，面临灾难而不能够效力赴死，我所说的招致今日的祸患，是群臣的罪过的话，难道只是空言吗！
English: Your Majesty, you have powerful ministers who support your government, you have confidants, you have eunuchs, and you have a defense department. When they see danger, they cannot be sincere. When they face disaster, they cannot be effective. When I say that it is the sins of your ministers that have led to today's disaster, is this just empty talk?

古文：圣旨又以国家兴衰，皆有天命。
现代文：陛下又认为国家的兴盛与衰落，都是有天命的。
English: His Majesty also believes that the prosperity and decline of the country are predestined.

古文：臣闻天所视听，皆因于人。
现代文：我听说上天的所见所闻，都是本着人们的所见所闻的。
English: What I have heard, seen and heard from Heaven is based on what people have seen and heard.

古文：故祖伊责纣之辞曰： 我生不有命在天！ 
现代文：所以祖伊斥责殷纣的文辞说： 我生来是没有在天之命的！ 
English: So Zui rebuked the insinuating words and said: I was born without a heavenly calling!

古文：武王数纣之罪曰： 乃曰吾有命，罔惩其侮。 
现代文：周武王数落殷纣的罪行说： 竟然说我有天命的在身，不肯以自己所受的侮辱为戒。 
English: Zhou Wu Wang said: "He went so far as to say that I had a heavenly destiny and refused to take the insults he received as a warning.

古文：此又舍人事而推天命必不可之理也！
现代文：这又是在说明抛开人事来推求天命是定然不可的道理啊。
English: This again illustrates the reason why it is absolutely essential to put aside personnel matters and seek one's destiny.

古文：《易》曰： 视履考祥。 
现代文：《易经》说： 观此履卦，考究吉祥。 
English: "I Ching" said: Watching this performance is auspicious.

古文：又曰： 吉凶者，失得之象。 
现代文：又说： 吉凶是得失的表象。 
English: He also said, "Good or bad is the appearance of gain or loss."

古文：此乃天命由人，其义明矣。
现代文：这便是说天命是由人掌握的，天命的意义是讲得很明了的了。
English: This is to say that the Mandate of Heaven is controlled by man, and the meaning of the Mandate of Heaven is very clear.

古文：然则圣哲之意，《六经》会通，皆谓祸福由人，不言盛衰有命。
现代文：这样说来，圣人贤哲的本意，在《六经》中会合贯通，都说祸福是由人掌握的，没有说过盛衰是由天命支配的。
English: In this way, the original intention of the sages and wise men, which is consistent throughout the "Six Classics," all said that misfortune and fortune are controlled by people, and did not say that prosperity and decline are controlled by the fate of heaven.

古文：盖人事理而天命降乱者，未之有也；人事乱而天命降康者，亦未之有也。
现代文：一般地说来，把人事治理好了而天命却降下变乱的事，是没有的；把人事处理乱了而天命却降下安康的事，也是没有的。
English: Generally speaking, there is no such thing as good personnel management but chaotic destiny; there is no such thing as chaotic personnel management but healthy destiny.

古文：自顷征讨颇频，刑网稍密，物力耗竭，人心惊疑，如居风涛，汹汹靡定。
现代文：自不久以前，征讨颇为频繁，刑法稍嫌过密，物力消耗已尽，民心惊恐疑虑，就象置身于风波之上，总是动荡不安。
English: Since not long ago, the collection of taxes has been quite frequent, the criminal law has been a little too dense, material resources have been exhausted, and the people's hearts have been frightened and doubtful, as if they were in a storm, always unstable.

古文：上自朝列，下达蒸黎，日夕族党聚谋，咸忧必有变故，旋属泾原叛卒，果如众庶所虞。
现代文：上自朝臣，下至百姓，宗族邻里日夜相聚商量，都担心必定要发生变故，不久恰有泾原叛兵事件，果真便如大家所曾预料。
English: From the courtiers down to the common people, clans and neighborhoods gathered day and night to discuss, all worried that something was bound to happen. Soon, the Hahara mutiny happened, and it turned out to be as everyone had expected.

古文：京师之人，动逾亿计，固非悉知算术，皆晓占书，则明致寇之由，未必尽关天命。
现代文：京城的百姓，往往超过十万，固然不会人人尽知推算之术，个个都懂占卜之书，这正说明招致敌寇的原由，未必全都与天命有关。
English: The people of the capital, often more than a hundred thousand, of course, not everyone knows the art of calculation, everyone understands the book of divination, which just shows that the reasons for inviting invaders are not necessarily all related to the fate of heaven.

古文：臣闻理或生乱，乱或资理，有以无难而失守，有因多难而兴邦。
现代文：我听说治理有时会生出变乱，变乱有时会有助于治理；有因没有危难而失去成业的，有因诸多磨难而振兴邦国的。
English: I have heard it said that government sometimes produces disorders, and that disorders sometimes promote government; that there is no prosperity without adversity, but that there is plenty of adversity without prosperity.

古文：今生乱失守之事，则既往不可复追矣；其资理兴邦之业，在陛下克励而谨修之。
现代文：现在，生出变乱和失去成业的事情，已经成为既往，是不能再追回来的；而那有助于治理和振兴邦国的业绩，就看陛下是否能够深自勉励而慎重地修明其事了。
English: Now that the events that gave rise to the turmoil and the loss of achievements have become a thing of the past, they can no longer be recovered; and the performance that will help to govern and revitalize the country depends on whether His Majesty can work hard and carefully to rectify the matter.

古文：何忧乎乱人，何畏乎厄运！
现代文：叛乱之人有什么可担心的，苦难的命运有什么可怕的！
English: What is there to fear from a rebel, what is there to dread from a fate of suffering!

古文：勤励不息，足致升平，岂止荡涤祆氛，旋复宫阙而已！ 
现代文：勤勉自励不止，足以再致太平之世，岂是只扫荡叛敌，光复朝廷罢了！ 
English: Hard work and self-improvement are more than enough to bring about a world of peace. Isn't it just a matter of sweeping away the rebels and restoring the imperial court?

古文：田悦说王武俊，使与马寔共击李抱真于临洺，抱真复遣贾林说武俊曰： 临洺兵精而有备，未易轻也。
现代文：田悦劝说王武俊，让他与马在临共同进击李抱真。李抱真又派遣贾林规劝王武俊说： 临士卒精锐，并有防备，是不应该轻视的。
English: Tian Yue persuaded Wang Wujun to let him and Ma jointly attack Li Po Zhen in front of him. Li Po Zhen also sent Jialing to persuade Wang Wujun, saying: "It should not be taken lightly to have elite soldiers and be prepared.

古文：今战胜得地，则利归魏博；不胜，则恒冀大伤。
现代文：如今您战胜了，得到地盘，而利益却归于魏博；如果不能取胜，恒冀便大遭伤害。
English: Now you have won, gained territory, but the benefits go to Weibo; if you can't win, Hengji will be greatly hurt.

古文：易、定、沧、赵，皆大夫之故地也，不如先取之。 
现代文：易、定、沧、赵各州，都是大夫您原来就有的辖地，不如先攻取这些地方。 
English: The provinces of Yi, Ding, Cang and Zhao are all your original provinces. It is better to conquer these places first.

古文：武俊乃辞悦，与马寔北归，壬戌，悦送武俊于馆陶，执手泣别，下至将士，赠遗甚厚。
现代文：于是王武俊推辞了田悦的请求，与马回军北归。壬戌，田悦在馆陶给王武俊送行，拉着王武俊的手洒泪而别，对王武俊的将士，他所赠送的物品都甚为丰厚。
English: Therefore, Wang Wujun declined Tian Yue's request and returned to the north with Ma Hui's army. After all, Tian Yue gave Wang Wujun a send-off at the pavilion, holding Wang Wujun's hand and shedding tears before leaving. For Wang Wujun's soldiers, the items he presented were very rich.

古文：先是，武俊召回纥兵，使绝李怀光等粮道，怀光等已西去，而回纥达干将回纥千人、杂虏二千人适至幽州北境。
现代文：在此之前，王武俊招来回纥兵马，让回纥人断绝李怀光等人的运粮通道。李怀光等人已经西去，而回纥达干带领回纥一千人和杂编各族兵马两千人却恰好来到幽州北部边境。
English: Prior to this, Wang Wujun had called for troops and horses to go back and forth to cut off the grain transport channel of Li Huaguang and others. Li Huaguang and others had already gone west, but Huizhong Dagan led a thousand soldiers and horses and two thousand soldiers and horses of all ethnic groups to the northern border of Yuzhou.

古文：硃滔因说之，欲与俱诣河南取东都，应接硃泚，许以河南子女、金帛赂之。
现代文：朱滔因而劝说回纥人，打算与回纥人一起到河南地区去攻取东都洛阳，接应朱，并答应将那里的男女用来贿赂回纥。
English: Zhu Tao therefore persuaded the Uyghurs that he planned to go to Henan Province with the Uyghurs to capture the eastern capital Luoyang to answer Zhu, and promised to use the men and women there to bribe the Uyghurs.

古文：滔娶回纥女为侧室，回纥谓之硃郎，且利其俘掠，许之。
现代文：朱滔娶了回纥女子作为偏房，回纥人把朱滔称为朱郎，而且贪图对河南地区的俘获虏掠，便应承了朱滔。
English: Zhu Tao married an Uygur woman as a concubine, and the Uygur people called Zhu Tao "Zhulang." Moreover, he was eager to capture and plunder the Henan region, so he accepted Zhu Tao.

古文：贾林复说武俊曰： 自古国家有患，未必不因之更兴。况主上九叶天子，聪明英武，天下谁肯舍之共事硃泚乎！
现代文：贾林再次劝王武俊说： 自古以来，国家蒙受祸患，未必不因祸患而再次兴起，何况圣上已是九世天子，聪慧明达，英俊威武，天下之人有谁肯于舍弃圣上而共同事奉朱呢！
English: Jalin once again advised Wang Wujun, saying: Since ancient times, the country has suffered calamities, and it is not inevitable that it will rise again due to calamities. Moreover, the Holy One is the ninth generation of the Heavenly Son, intelligent, wise, handsome and powerful. Who in the world is willing to abandon the Holy One and serve Zhu together?

古文：滔自为盟主以来，轻蔑同列，河朔古无冀国，冀乃大夫之封域也。
现代文：朱滔自从当了盟主以来，看不起共同发难的人们，河朔自古以来便没有冀国，冀乃是大夫的封地。
English: Ever since Zhu Tao became the commander-in-chief, he has looked down on the people who share the hardships. Since ancient times, Hexuo has not had a Jizhou province. Jizhou is the fiefdom of the doctor.

古文：今滔称冀王，又西倚其兄，北引回纥，其志欲尽吞河朔而王之，大夫虽欲为之臣，不可得矣。
现代文：如今朱滔号称冀王，又在西边依赖他的哥哥，从北边招引回纥，他的意图是想将河朔全部吞并，自称为王，尽管大夫想做他的臣属，也是不可能的。
English: Now Zhu Tao claims to be the king of Hebei, and relies on his brother in the west to lure back Yao from the north. His intention is to annex all of Hexuo and call himself king. Although the doctor wants to be his vassal, it is impossible.

古文：且大夫雄勇善战，非滔之比。
现代文：况且，大夫雄强勇武，善于作战，不是朱滔所能比拟的。
English: Moreover, the doctor is strong, brave and good at fighting, which cannot be compared to Zhu Tao.

古文：又本以忠义手诛叛臣，当时宰相处置失宜，为滔所诳诱，故蹉跌至此，不若与昭义并力取滔，其势必获。
现代文：加之，大夫原是本着忠义亲手诛杀叛臣李惟岳的，当时宰相处理失当，又被朱滔所诳骗诱惑，所以才失误到这个地步。不如与昭义合力攻取朱滔，势必成功。
English: In addition, the doctor was originally loyal and killed the traitor Li Wei Yue with his own hands. At that time, the prime minister handled it improperly and was deceived and tempted by Zhu Tao, which is why he made this mistake. It would be better to work together with Shao Yi to capture Zhu Tao, which is bound to succeed.

古文：滔既亡，则泚自破矣。
现代文：朱滔既已灭亡，朱便自然会被打败。
English: Now that Zhu Tao has perished, Zhu Biao will naturally be defeated.

古文：此不世之功，转祸为福之道也。
现代文：这是并非每个世代都有的功绩，是转祸为福的途径啊。
English: This is not the achievement of every generation, but it is a way to turn misfortune into blessing.

古文：今诸道辐凑攻泚，不日当平。
现代文：现在，各道兵马象辐条集中于车毂般地合力攻打朱，过不了多久，自当将朱平定。
English: Now, the soldiers and horses of each province are concentrated like spokes in a chariot to jointly attack Zhu, and it will not be long before they will level Zhu.

古文：天下已定，大夫乃悔而归国，则已晚矣！ 
现代文：到天下已经安定，大夫才去悔悟过错，归顺国家，那就为时太晚了！ 
English: By the time the world has stabilized, and the doctor has come to regret his mistakes and submit to the state, it will be too late!

古文：时武俊已与滔有隙，因攘袂作色曰： 二百年天子吾不能臣，岂能臣此田舍儿乎！ 
现代文：当时，王武俊与朱滔已经有了嫌隙，因而捋起袖子，奋然作色地说： 对于享有二百年国祚的天子，我都不能给他做臣属，我又怎么能给这个乡下穷小子做臣属呢！ 
English: At that time, Wang Wujun and Zhu Tao had already had a rift, so he rolled up his sleeves and said enthusiastically: "For the son of heaven who has enjoyed two hundred years of state power, I can't be his vassal, how can I be a vassal to this poor boy from the countryside!

古文：遂密与抱真及马燧相结，约为兄弟。
现代文：王武俊于是与李抱真以及马燧相结纳，约定互为兄弟，但表面上仍然事奉朱滔，执礼甚是小心。
English: Wang Wujun then made a pact with Li Bozhen and Ma Jun, agreeing to treat each other as brothers. On the surface, however, they still served Zhu Tao, and they were very careful when performing the ritual.

古文：然犹外事滔，礼甚谨，与田悦各遣使见滔于河间，贺硃泚称尊号，且请马寔之兵共攻康日知于赵州。
现代文：他与田悦各自派遣使者在河间拜见朱滔，祸贺朱加称皇帝尊号，而且邀请马的兵马与他共同在赵州攻打康日知。
English: He and Tian Yue both sent envoys to pay their respects to Zhu Tao in Hebei Province. Woe to Zhu Ga, who called the emperor by his honorific title, and invited Ma's soldiers and horses to join him in attacking Kangrizhi in Zhao Province.

古文：汝、郑应援使刘德信将子弟军在汝州，闻难，引兵入援，与泚众战于见子陵，破之。
现代文：汝、郑应援使刘德信带领由诸使子弟组成的军队驻扎在汝州，听说德宗蒙难，便领兵入援，与朱兵在见子陵接战，并打败了朱兵。
English: You, Zheng, should help Liu Dexin to lead an army composed of the sons and brothers of the envoys stationed in Ruzhou. When he heard that Dezong was in trouble, he led soldiers to come to his aid, and fought with Zhu soldiers at Mizi Mausoleum, and defeated Zhu soldiers.

古文：以东渭桥有转输积粟，癸亥，进屯东渭桥。
现代文：由于东渭桥有转运输送时积下来的粮食。癸亥，刘德信便进兵屯驻东渭桥。
English: Due to the transfer of grain that had accumulated during transportation to Dongluqiao, Liu Dexin entered the army and stationed in Dongluqiao.

古文：硃泚夜攻奉天东、西、南三面。甲子，浑瑊力战却之。左龙武大将军吕希倩战死。
现代文：朱泚在夜间攻打奉天城的东、西、南三面，甲子，浑奋力而战，击退了朱，左龙武大将军吕希倩战死。
English: Zhu Xi attacked the east, west and south of Fengtiancheng at night, and Jia Zi fought with all his might and repulsed Zhu. Zuo Longwu's general Lü Xizhe was killed in the battle.

古文：乙丑，泚复攻城，将军高重捷与泚将李日月战于梁山之隅，破之。
现代文：乙丑，朱又来攻城，将军高重捷与朱的将领李日月在梁山的一个角落中交战，打败了李日月。
English: Second Ugly, Zhu came to attack the city again. General Gao Shujie and Zhu's general Li Rizhou fought in a corner of Liangshan and defeated Li Rizhou.

古文：乘胜逐北，身先士卒，贼伏兵擒之。
现代文：高重捷乘胜追击败兵，身先士卒，敌军用伏兵将他擒获。
English: Gao Chong took advantage of the victory and chased the defeated soldiers, leading the way, and the enemy army ambushed and captured him.

古文：其麾下十馀人奋不顾死，追夺之。贼不能拒，乃斩其首，弃其身而去。
现代文：高重捷部下有十余人奋不顾身，追赶并援救高重捷，敌军不能抵挡，便砍去高重捷的头颅，丢下他的躯体走了。
English: More than ten of Gao Shujie's subordinates risked their lives to chase and rescue Gao Shujie. Unable to resist, the enemy army chopped off Gao Shujie's head and left his body behind.

古文：麾下收之入城，上亲抚而哭之尽哀，结莆为首而葬之，赠司空。
现代文：部下将高重捷的躯体收起，带进城来，德宗亲自抚摩着高重捷的躯体，极度悲哀地向他哭泣着，用香蒲结扎成头颅将他埋葬，还追封他为司空。
English: His subordinates collected Gao Jie's body and brought it back to the city. Dezong personally stroked Gao Jie's body, wept for him with great sorrow, buried him with a cattail, and sealed him as a monk.

古文：硃泚见其首，亦哭之曰： 忠臣也！ 
现代文：朱见到高重捷的头颅，也哭着说： 他是一位忠臣啊！ 
English: When Zhu saw Gao Shujie's head, he also cried and said, "He is a loyal subject!"

古文：束蒲为身而葬之。
现代文：朱用香蒲结扎成躯体而埋葬了他。
English: Zhu buried him by tying a cattail around his body.

古文：李日月，泚之骁将也，战死于奉天城下。泚归其尸于长安，厚葬之。
现代文：李日月是朱的一员骁将，在奉天城下战死，朱将他的尸体送回长安，予以厚葬。
English: Li Rixing was a member of Zhu's general staff. He died in battle under the Fengtian Castle. Zhu sent his body back to Chang'an for a proper burial.

古文：其母竟不哭，骂曰： 奚奴！
现代文：他的母亲始终没有哭，还骂着说： 奚人的奴才！
English: His mother didn't cry at all, but scolded him and said: "Stabbing slave!

古文：国家何负于汝而反？
现代文：国家哪儿辜负了你，你非要造反？
English: What country has failed you that you have to rebel?

古文：死已晚矣！ 
现代文：你死得已经很晚了！ 
English: You're too late to die!

古文：及泚败，贼党皆族诛，独日月之母不坐。
现代文：及至朱败亡，敌人的同党都遭到灭族的杀戮，只有李日月的母亲未受牵连。
English: By the time of Zhu's defeat, the enemy's fellow party members had all been killed by the exterminators. Only Li Rizhou's mother was not implicated.

古文：己巳，加浑瑊京畿、渭南、北、金商节度使。
现代文：己巳，德宗加封浑为京畿、渭南北、金商节度使。
English: Now, Dezong Jiafeng is the festival envoy for Gyeonggi, South Gyeonggi and North Gyeonggi, and Gyeongsangnam.

古文：壬申，王武俊与马寔至赵州城下。
现代文：壬申，王武俊与马来到赵州城下。
English: In Jinshin, Wang Wujun and Ma came to the outskirts of Zhaozhou.

古文：初，硃泚镇凤翔，遣其将牛云光将幽州兵五百人戍陇州，以陇右营田判官韦皋领陇右留后。
现代文：当初，朱出任凤翔节帅，派遣他的部将牛云光带领幽州兵五百人戍守陇州，任命陇右营田判官韦皋兼任陇右留后。
English: At first, Zhu served as the Fengxiang Festival commander, sent his general Niu Yunguang to lead 500 Yuzhou soldiers to defend Zhangzhou, and appointed Wei Wei, the judge of Zhangyu Yingtian, to stay in Zhangyu.

古文：及郝通奔凤翔，牛云光诈疾，欲俟皋至，伏兵执之以应泚，事泄，帅其众奔泚。
现代文：及至郝通逃奔凤翔，牛云光佯病，打算等韦皋到来，用伏兵擒获韦皋以响应朱，由于事情泄露了，他便率领部下逃奔朱。
English: As far as Wei Tong fled to Fengxiang, Niu Yunguang fell ill. He planned to wait for Wei Xuan to arrive and use the ambush to capture Wei Xuan to respond to Zhu. Since the matter was leaked, he led his subordinates to flee to Zhu.

古文：至汧阳，遇泚遣中使苏玉赍诏书加皋中丞，玉说云光曰： 韦皋，书生也。君不如与我俱之陇州，皋幸而受命，乃吾人也。
现代文：牛云光来到阳，遇到朱派遣中使苏玉携带诏书前去加封韦皋为中丞，苏玉劝牛云光说： 韦皋是一个书生，你不如与我一起前往陇州，如果韦皋幸而接受任命，便是我们的人。
English: When Niu Yunguang came to Yang, he encountered Zhu dispatching Su Yu to carry the imperial rescript and go to add Wei Xuan as a middle-ranking officer. Su Yu advised Niu Yunguang, saying: Wei Xuan is a scholar, you'd better come to Zhangzhou with me. If Wei Xuan is fortunate enough to accept the appointment, then he is one of us.

古文：不受命，君以兵诛之，如取孤犭屯耳！ 
现代文：不接受任命，你派兵杀掉他，就象抓一只没有爹娘的猪崽子一样！ 
English: If he does not accept the appointment, you send soldiers to kill him, just like catching a pig without parents!

古文：云光从之。
现代文：牛云光听从了苏玉的话。
English: Niu Yunguang obeyed Su Yu's words.

古文：皋从城上问云光曰： 曏者不告而行，今而复来，何也？ 
现代文：韦皋从城上问牛云光说： 前些时候，你不告诉我一声就走了，如今再次回来，这是为什么呢？ 
English: Wei Yao asked Niu Yunguang from the top of the city: "Some time ago, you left without telling me, and now you're back again. Why is that?

古文：云光曰： 曏者未知公心，今公有新命，故复来，愿托腹心。 
现代文：牛云光说： 过去我不知道你的本心，现在你有了新的任命，所以我再次回来，愿意把诚心交托给你。 
English: Niu Yunguang said, "In the past, I didn't know your true intentions. Now you have a new appointment, so I've come back again, and I'm willing to entrust my sincerity to you."

古文：皋乃先纳苏玉，受其诏书，谓云光曰： 大使苟无异心，请悉纳甲兵，使城中无疑，众乃可入。 
现代文：于是韦皋先接纳了苏玉，接受了他带来的诏书，然后对牛云光说： 大使如果没有别的心思，请将铠甲兵器悉数交出来，使城中人没有疑虑，你的人马才可以进城。 
English: So Wei Xuan first received Su Yu, accepted the edict he brought, and then said to Niu Yunguang: Ambassador, if you have no other thoughts, please hand over all your armor and weapons, so that the people in the city have no doubts, your men and horses can enter the city.

古文：云光以皋书生，易之，乃悉以甲兵输之而入。
现代文：牛云光因韦皋是个书生，轻看了他，于是将全部铠甲兵器搬送给韦皋，然后进了城。
English: Niu Yunguang looked down on Wei Wei because he was a scholar, so he brought all the armored weapons to Wei Wei, and then entered the city.

古文：明日，皋宴玉、云光及其卒于郡舍，伏甲诛之。
现代文：次日，韦皋在郡中的公舍里宴请苏玉、牛云光及其士兵，伏下甲兵，诛杀了牛云光。
English: The next day, Wei Wei invited Su Yu, Niu Yunguang and his soldiers to a banquet in a public house in the county. The soldiers fell to the ground and killed Niu Yunguang.

古文：筑坛，盟将士曰： 李楚琳贼虐本使，既不事上，安能恤下，宜相与讨与！ 
现代文：韦皋筑起坛场，与将士立盟说： 李楚琳残害本部的节度使，既然不能事奉上司，怎能怜恤部下，应该一起讨伐他！ 
English: Wei Wei built an altar and made a covenant with the soldiers, saying: Li Chuling has destroyed the discipline of the headquarters, so since he cannot serve the boss, how can he have mercy on his subordinates, they should fight him together!

古文：遣兄平、弇诣奉天，复遣使求援于吐蕃。
现代文：韦皋派遣哥哥韦平、韦前往奉天，又派遣使者向吐蕃求援。
English: Wei Wei sent his brothers Wei Ping and Wei Wei to Fengtian, and also sent an envoy to Tubo to ask for help.

