古文：孔子与柳下季为友，柳下季之弟名曰盗跖。
现代文：孔子是柳下季的朋友，柳下季的弟弟名为盗跖。
English: Confucius was a friend of Liu Shijie, whose younger brother was named Toru.

古文：盗跖从卒九千人，横行天下，侵暴诸侯。
现代文：盗跖的手下有九千人，在天下间横行霸道，侵凌诸侯各国。
English: There are nine thousand of the bandit's minions, who run amok in the world, encroaching on the countries of the princes.

古文：穴室枢户，驱人牛马，取人妇女。
现代文：砸破人家的门户，掠夺人家牛马，掳劫人家妇女。
English: They broke down people's doors, plundered their cattle and horses, and abducted their women.

古文：贪得忘亲，不顾父母兄弟，不祭先祖。
现代文：贪图财物遗弃亲人，不顾念父母兄弟，不拜祖宗。
English: covet possessions, forsake relatives, disregard parents and brothers, and do not worship ancestors.

古文：若父不能诏其子，兄不能教其弟，则无贵父子兄弟之亲矣。
现代文：他们所经过的城邑，大国的就闭关守城，小国的躲进城堡，民众为此深感痛苦。
English: In the cities they passed through, the great nations closed their gates and guarded their cities, and the small nations hid in their citadels. The people were deeply pained by this.

古文：今先生，世之才士也，弟为盗跖，为天下害，而弗能教也，丘窃为先生羞之。
现代文：孔子对柳下季说： 做人父亲的，肯定能够教好他的孩子，为人兄长的，肯定能够教好他弟弟，如若不然那么父子兄弟的亲情就不足珍贵了。当今先生您可是世上的有才之士，弟弟却是盗跖，是天下的祸害，要是不能规劝他，我私下替先生感到羞耻。
English: Confucius said to Liu Xiaoqi: If you are a father, you must be able to teach your children well. If you are an elder brother, you must be able to teach your younger brother well. If not, then the affection between father and son is not precious enough. Today, you are a talented person in the world, but your younger brother is a thief and a scourge to the world. If you cannot persuade him, I am privately ashamed of you.

古文：丘请为先生往说之。 
现代文：我情愿代先生去说服他。 
English: I would like to persuade him on behalf of my husband.

古文：柳下季曰： 先生言为人父者必能诏其子，为人兄者必能教其弟，若子不听父之诏，弟不受兄之教，虽今先生之辩，将奈之何哉？
现代文：柳下季说： 先生说做人父亲的肯定教好他的孩子，做人兄长的肯定能教好他的弟弟，假如孩子不听从父亲的教诲，弟弟不接受兄长的劝说，即使像先生这么能言善辩，又能拿他怎么样呢？
English: Liu Xiaoji said, "The teacher said that being a father is sure to teach his child well, and being an elder brother is sure to teach his younger brother well. If the child does not listen to the father's teachings, and the younger brother does not accept the elder brother's persuasion, even if he is so eloquent like the teacher, what can we do with him?

古文：且跖之为人也，心如涌泉，意如飘风，强足以距敌，辩足以饰非。
现代文：况且盗跖这个人，血气冲动，意气风发，强悍足以抵挡敌人，口才足以掩饰过错。
English: Moreover, this person is impulsive, spirited, strong enough to resist the enemy, and eloquent enough to cover up mistakes.

古文：顺其心则喜，逆其心则怒，易辱人以言。先生必无往。 
现代文：顺着他的心意他就高兴，违背他的心意他就发怒，动不动就恶语伤人。先生千万不要去。 
English: If he follows his heart, he will be happy, if he goes against his heart, he will be angry, and if he doesn't move, he will curse and hurt people. Don't go, sir.

古文：孔子不听，颜回为驭，子贡为右，往见盗跖。
现代文：孔子没听柳下季劝告，布置颜回驾车，子贡做助手，前往会见盗跖。
English: Confucius did not listen to Liu Shijie's advice and arranged for Yan to drive back, with Zigong as his assistant, to meet the thief.

古文：盗跖乃方休卒徒大山之阳，脍人肝而餔之。
现代文：盗跖正在大山的南面休整士卒，切碎人肝来吃。
English: The bandits are resting on the south side of the mountain, chopping up human livers to eat.

古文：孔子下车而前，见谒者曰： 鲁人孔丘，闻将军高义，敬再拜谒者。 
现代文：孔子下车走上前，看见传命官，说： 鲁国人孔丘，听说将军高尚正义，敬请传令官传达。 
English: Confucius got out of the car, walked forward, saw the messenger and said: Lu Kongqiu, I have heard that the general is noble and righteous. Kindly ask the messenger to convey.

古文：谒者入通。
现代文：传令官入内通报。
English: The person in charge of the notification went in to denounce Zhao Jianzi.

古文：盗跖闻之大怒，目如明星，发上指冠，曰： 此夫鲁国之巧伪人孔丘非邪？
现代文：盗跖听到此事，大怒，眼像明星，怒发冲冠，说： 这个人是不是鲁国的巧伪人孔丘？
English: Upon hearing this, the thief was furious, his eyes were like stars, his hair bristled with anger, and he said, "Is this man the Lu country's ingenious man, Kongyue?

古文：为我告之：尔作言造语，妄称文、武，冠枝木之冠，带死牛之胁，多辞缪说，不耕而食，不织而衣，摇唇鼓舌，擅生是非，以迷天下之主，使天下学士不反其本，妄作孝弟，而侥幸于封侯富贵者也。
现代文：替我告诉他： 你做花言造巧语，虚妄地称道文王、武王，头戴装饰像树枝般的帽子，腰缠死牛胁的皮带，繁辞谬说，不耕而食，不织而衣，摇唇鼓舌，专生是非，用以迷惑天下的君主，使天下的书生，不务正业，装作孝悌，而侥幸得到封侯富贵。
English: Tell him for me: You made up fancy words, falsely praised King Wen and King Wu, wore a hat decorated like a twig on your head, a leather belt with a dead ox tied around your waist, made up nonsense words, ate without plowing, wore without weaving, wagged your tongue, and was born to be right, all of which were used to confuse the monarchs of the world and make the scholars of the world pretend to be filial pals without doing any real work, and luckily got rich.

古文：子之罪大极重，疾走归！
现代文：你的罪恶严重，快滚回去吧！
English: Your crime is serious. Go back!

古文：不然，我将以子肝益昼餔之膳。 
现代文：不然，我要用你的肝当作午餐。 
English: Or I'll eat your liver for lunch.

古文：孔子复通曰： 丘得幸于季，愿望履幕下。 
现代文：孔子再次请求通报接见，说： 我幸运地得到柳下季的介绍，希望到帐幕下拜见。 
English: Confucius again asked for an interview, saying: I was lucky to be introduced to Liu Xiaoqi, and I hope to meet him under the tent.

古文：谒者复通。盗跖曰：使来前！ 
现代文：禀报人员再次通报，盗跖说： 让他到我面前来！ 
English: When the reporter called again, the thief said: Let him come to me!

古文：孔子趋而进，避席反走，再拜盗跖。
现代文：孔子小心翼翼地快步走进帐去，又远离坐席连退数步，向盗跖深深施礼。
English: Confucius cautiously walked quickly into the tent, and retreated a few steps away from the table, bowing deeply to the thief.

古文：盗跖大怒，两展其足，案剑瞋目，声如乳虎，曰： 丘来前！
现代文：盗跖一见孔子大怒不已，伸开双腿，按着剑柄怒睁双眼，喊声犹如哺乳的母虎，说： 孔丘你上前来！
English: At the sight of Confucius, the robber egret flew into a rage. It stretched out its legs, opened its eyes angrily in accordance with the hilt of its sword, and shouted like a suckling tigress, saying: "Confucius, come forward!"

古文：若所言顺吾意则生，逆吾心则死。 
现代文：你所说的话，合我的心意有你活的，不合你的心意你就等着一死。 
English: If what you say is in accordance with my heart, you will live. If it is not in accordance with your heart, you will die.

古文：孔子曰： 丘闻之，凡天下有三德：生而长大，美好无双，少长贵贱见而皆说之，此上德也；知维天地，能辩诸物，此中德也；勇悍果敢，聚众率兵，此下德也。
现代文：孔子说： 我听说，凡是天下的人具有三种德性：天生高大，美好无比，无论少年、老年、贵人、贱人见了都欢喜，这是上等德性；才智可以收容天地，才能可以分析事理，这是中等德性；勇猛果敢，聚集人马统率军队，这是下等德性。
English: Confucius said: I have heard that all the people in the world have three kinds of virtues: they are naturally tall and beautiful beyond compare. No matter whether they are young or old, noble or common, they all rejoice when they see them. This is a superior virtue. Intelligence can contain heaven and earth, and can analyze things rationally. This is a medium virtue. Bravery and courage, gathering people and leading the army, this is a lower virtue.

古文：凡人有此一德者，足以南面称孤矣。
现代文：一般人具有一种德性，就足以南面称王了。
English: The average man has one virtue, and that is enough to be king in the south.

古文：今将军兼此三者，身长八尺二寸，面目有光，唇如激丹，齿如齐贝，音中黄钟，而名曰盗跖，丘窃为将军耻不取焉。
现代文：如今将军兼备这三种德性，身高八尺二寸，满面红光，双目炯炯有神，嘴唇有如鲜红的丹砂，牙齿有如整齐的贝壳，声音符合黄钟音律，可是名叫盗跖，我暗暗替将军感到羞耻。
English: Today, the general possesses all three of these virtues. He is eight feet two inches tall, his face is flushed, his eyes are bright, his lips are like bright red sands, his teeth are like neat shells, and his voice is in accordance with the melody of the yellow bell, but his name is Thief. I am secretly ashamed of the general.

古文：将军有意听臣，臣请南使吴越，北使齐鲁，东使宋卫，西使晋楚，使为将军造大城数百里，立数十万户之邑，尊将军为诸侯，与天下更始，罢兵休卒，收养昆弟，共祭先祖。
现代文：将军要是有心听在下的劝谕，在下情愿往南出使吴国越国，往北出使齐国鲁国，往东出使宋国卫国，往西出使晋国楚国，让他们为将军造一座几百里的大城，封你几十万户的食邑，推立将军为诸侯，跟天下各国并立，让士兵都休息，收养起他们的兄弟，供奉拜祭祖宗。
English: If the generals have the heart to listen to the advice below, they would like to go to the south to send envoys to the State of Wu, to the north to send envoys to the State of Qi, to the east to send envoys to the State of Song, to the west to send envoys to the State of Jin, to the State of Chu, to have them build a large city of several hundred miles for the generals, to seal you hundreds of thousands of food villages, to promote the generals as princes, to stand alongside the countries of the world, to let the soldiers rest, to adopt their brothers, and to offer worship and sacrifice to the ancestors.

古文：此圣人才士之行，而天下之愿也。 
现代文：这才是圣人智士的行为，也是天下人的愿望啊。 
English: This is the behavior of a sage, and it is also the desire of the people of the world.

古文：盗跖大怒曰： 丘来前！
现代文：盗跖大怒说： 孔丘上前来！
English: The robber said angrily, "Kongqiu, come up here!"

古文：夫可规以利而可谏以言者，皆愚陋恒民之谓耳。
现代文：凡是可以用利禄来规劝、用言语来谏正的，都只能称作愚昧、浅陋的普通顺民。
English: Anyone who can use a lilo to persuade, and words to correct, can only be called a stupid, shallow ordinary follower.

古文：今长大美好，人见而悦之者，此吾父母之遗德也，丘虽不吾誉，吾独不自知邪？
现代文：如今我身材高大魁梧面目英俊美好，人人见了都喜欢，这是我的父母给我留下的美德。你孔丘即使不当面吹捧我，我难道不知道吗？
English: Now I am tall, big, handsome, and beautiful, and everyone likes to look at me. This is a virtue my parents have passed down to me. Don't I know that you, Confucius, even if you don't flatter me with your face?

古文：且吾闻之，好面誉人者，亦好背而毁之。
现代文：而且我听说，喜好当面夸奖别人的人，也好背地里诋毁别人。
English: And I've heard it said that people who like to praise others to their face are also good at denigrating others behind their backs.

古文：今丘告我以大城众民，是欲规我以利而恒民畜我也，安可久长也！
现代文：如今你把建造大城、汇聚众多百姓的意图告诉给我，这是用功利来诱惑我，而且是用对待普通顺民的态度来对待我，这怎么可以长久呢！
English: Now that you have told me of your intention to build a great city and gather a large number of people, you are tempting me with utilitarianism and treating me with the attitude of an ordinary citizen. How can this go on for long?

古文：城之大者，莫大乎天下矣。
现代文：城池最大的，莫过于整个天下。
English: There is no bigger castle than the whole world.

古文：尧、舜有天下，子孙无置锥之地；汤、武立为天子，而后世绝灭。非以其利大故邪？
现代文：尧舜拥有天下，子孙却没有立锥之地；商汤与周武王立做天子，可是后代却遭灭绝，这不是因为他们贪求占有天下的缘故吗？ 
English: A baboon owns the whole world, but his descendants have no place to stand; Shang Tang and Zhou Wu Wang established themselves as heavenly sons, but their descendants were exterminated. Isn't this because they coveted to occupy the whole world?

古文：且吾闻之，古者禽兽多而人少，于是民皆巢居以避之。昼拾橡栗，暮栖木上，故命之曰 有巢氏之民 。
现代文： 况且我还听说，古时候禽兽多而人少，于是人们都在树上筑巢而居躲避野兽，白天拾取橡子，晚上住在树上，所以称他们叫做有巢氏之民。
English: Moreover, I have heard that in ancient times there were more beasts and fewer people, so people built nests in the trees to hide from the beasts, picked acorns during the day, and lived in the trees at night, so they were called the people with nests.

古文：古者民不知衣服，夏多积薪，冬则炀之，故命之曰 知生之民 。
现代文：古时候人们不知道穿衣，夏天多多存积柴草，冬天就烧火取暖，所以称他们叫做懂得生存的人。
English: In ancient times, people did not know how to dress. In summer, they stored a lot of firewood and grass, and in winter they lit fires to keep warm. Therefore, they were called people who knew how to survive.

古文：神农之世，卧则居居，起则于于。民知其母，不知其父，与麋鹿共处，耕而食，织而衣，无有相害之心。此至德之隆也。
现代文：到了神农时代，居处是多么安静闲暇，行动是多么优游自得，人们只知道母亲，不知道父亲，跟麋鹿生活在一起，自己耕种自己吃，自己织布自己穿，没有伤害别人的心思，这就是道德鼎盛的时代。
English: In Shennong's time, how quiet and leisurely the place of residence was, how self-sufficient the actions were, people only knew their mother, did not know their father, lived with elk, cultivated their own food, weaved their own cloth, and did not harm others. This was the era of moral prosperity.

古文：然而黄帝不能致德，与蚩由战于涿鹿之野，流血百里。
现代文：然而到了黄帝就不再具有这样的德行，跟蚩尤在涿鹿的郊野上争战，流血百里。
English: However, by the time of the Yellow Emperor, he no longer possessed such virtue, and fought with Qiu You in the countryside of Elk, shedding a hundred li of blood.

古文：尧、舜作，立群臣，汤放其主，武王杀纣。
现代文：尧舜称帝，设置百官，商汤放逐了他的君主，武王杀死了纣王。
English: Shun proclaimed himself emperor, set up a hundred officials, Shang Tang banished his monarch, King Wu killed Shun Wang.

古文：自是之后，以强陵弱，以众暴寡。
现代文：从此以后，世上总是依仗强权欺凌弱小，依仗势众侵害寡少。
English: Since then, the world has always relied on the strong to bully the weak, and on the powerful to infringe on the weak.

古文：汤、武以来，皆乱人之徒也。
现代文：商汤、武王以来，就都是属于篡逆叛乱的人了。 
English: Ever since Shang Tang and King Wu, they have all been usurpers and rebels.

古文：今子修文、武之道，掌天下之辩，以教后世。缝衣浅带，矫言伪行，以迷惑天下之主，而欲求富贵焉。
现代文： 如今你研修文王、武王的治国方略，控制天下的舆论，一心想用你的主张传教后世子孙，穿着宽衣博带的儒式服装，说话与行动矫揉造作，用以迷惑天下的诸侯，而且一心想用这样的办法追求高官厚禄，要说大盗再没有比你大的了。
English: Now you are studying the strategies of King Wen and King Wu for governing the country and controlling the world's public opinion. You are bent on using your ideas to preach to future generations. You are wearing a wide-brimmed Confucian robe, and your speech and actions are pretentious to confuse the princes of the world. Moreover, you are bent on using this method to pursue high-ranking officials and rich rewards. To put it bluntly, there is no greater thief than you.

古文：盗莫大于子，天下何故不谓子为盗丘，而乃谓我为盗跖？
现代文：天下为什么不叫你作盗丘，反而竟称我是盗跖呢？
English: Why is it that the world does not call you a thief, but calls me a thief?

古文：子以甘辞说子路而使从之。使子路去其危冠，解其长剑，而受教于子。天下皆曰： 孔丘能止暴禁非。
现代文：你用甜言蜜语说服了子路让他死心塌地地跟随你，使子路去掉了勇武的高冠，解除了长长的佩剑，受教于你的门下，天下人都说你孔子能够制止暴力禁绝不轨。
English: With your sweet words, you convinced Zilu to follow you wholeheartedly. Zilu removed the high crown of valor, removed the long sword, and was taught by you. People all over the world say that you are the Confucius who can stop violence and forbid wrongdoing.

古文：其卒之也，子路欲杀卫君而事不成，身菹于卫东门之上，是子教之不至也。
现代文：可是后来，子路想要杀掉篡逆的卫君却不能成功，而且自身还在卫国东门上被剁成了肉酱，这就是你那套说教的失败。
English: However, later, Zilu's attempt to kill the usurping Emperor did not succeed, and he himself was turned into meat sauce at the East Gate of the Imperial Palace. This is the failure of your preaching.

古文：子自谓才士圣人邪，则再逐于鲁，削迹于卫，穷于齐，围于陈蔡，不容身于天下。
现代文：你不是自称才智的学士、圣哲的人物吗？却两次被逐出鲁国，在卫国被人铲削掉所有足迹，在齐国被逼得走投无路，在陈国蔡国之间遭受围困，不能容身于天下。
English: Aren't you a self-proclaimed brilliant scholar and saint? But you have been expelled from the Lu Kingdom twice, your footprints have been wiped out in the Wei Kingdom, you have been cornered in the Qi Kingdom, and you have been besieged between the Chen Kingdom and the Cai Kingdom. You can't be accommodated in the world.

古文：子教子路菹。此患，上无以为身，下无以为人。子之道岂足贵邪？
现代文：而你所教育的子路却又遭受如此的祸患，做师长的没有办法在社会上立足，做学生的也就没有办法在社会上为人，你的那套主张难道还有可贵之处吗？ 
English: But the path you are educating has suffered such a disaster. As a teacher, there is no way to establish a foothold in society, and as a student, there is no way to be a person in society. Is there anything valuable in your set of propositions?

古文：世之所高，莫若黄帝。黄帝尚不能全德，而战于涿鹿之野，流血百里。
现代文： 世上所尊崇的，莫过于黄帝，黄帝尚且不能保全德行，而征战于涿鹿的郊野，流血百里。
English: There is nothing more revered in the world than the Yellow Emperor. Even though the Yellow Emperor was unable to preserve virtue, he went to war in the countryside of Menglu and shed a hundred miles of blood.

古文：尧不慈，舜不孝，禹偏枯，汤放其主，武王伐纣，文王拘羑里。
现代文：唐尧不慈爱，虞舜不孝顺，大禹半身不遂，商汤放逐了他的君主，武王出兵征讨商纣，文王曾经被囚禁在羑里。
English: Tang Zi was not kind, Gu Zi was not filial, Dayu was not able to fulfill his duties, Shang Tang banished his monarch, King Wu sent troops to negotiate, and King Wen was once imprisoned in Yili.

古文：此六子者，世之所高也。孰论之，皆以利惑其真而强反其情性，其行乃甚可羞也。世之所谓贤士：伯夷、叔齐。
现代文：这以上的六个人，都是世人所尊崇的，但是仔细评论起来，都是因为追求功利迷惑了真性而强迫自己违反了自然的禀赋，他们的做法实在是极为可耻的。 世人所称道的贤士，就如伯夷、叔齐。
English: The above six people are all revered by the world, but when carefully reviewed, they are all forced to violate their natural endowments because the pursuit of utilitarianism has confused the true nature, and their practices are really extremely shameful.

古文：伯夷、叔齐辞孤竹之君，而饿死于首阳之山，骨肉不葬。
现代文：伯夷、叔齐辞让了孤竹国的君位，却饿死在首阳山，尸体都未能埋葬。
English: Bo Yi and his uncle abdicated the throne of the Lone Bamboo Kingdom, but died of starvation on Shouyang Mountain, and their bodies were not buried.

古文：鲍焦饰行非世，抱木而死。
现代文：鲍焦着意清高非议世事，竟抱着树木而死去。
English: Bao Jiao, who was intent on clearing up the highly controversial world affairs, actually died while hugging a tree.

古文：申徒狄谏而不听，负石自投于河，为鱼鳖所食。
现代文：申徒狄多次进谏不被采纳，背着石块投河而死，尸体被鱼鳖吃掉。
English: Shentudi repeatedly refused to be adopted, threw herself into the river with rocks on her back and died, and her body was eaten by fish hooks.

古文：介子推至忠也，自割其股以食文公。文公后背之，子推怒而去，抱木而燔死。
现代文：介子推算是最忠诚的了，割下自己大腿上的肉给晋文公吃，文公返国后却背弃了他，介子推一怒之下逃出都城隐居山林，也抱着树木焚烧而死。
English: Jie Zi was the most loyal. He cut off the meat from his thigh to give to Jin Wengong to eat. Wengong turned his back on him after returning to China. Jie Zi flew into a rage and fled the capital to live in seclusion in the mountains. He also burned to death while hugging trees.

古文：尾生与女子期于梁下，女子不来，水至不去，抱梁柱而死。
现代文：尾生跟一女子在桥下约会，女子没有如期赴约，河水涌来尾生却不离去，竟抱着桥柱子而淹死。
English: Owase went on a date with a woman under a bridge. The woman did not go to the rendezvous as planned, and when the river surged, Owase did not leave, but drowned while holding on to a bridge pillar.

古文：此六子者，无异于磔犬流豕、操瓢而乞者，皆离名轻死，不念本养寿命者也。
现代文：这以上的六个人，跟肢解了的狗、沉入河中的猪以及拿着瓢到处乞讨的乞丐相比没有什么不同，都是重视名节轻生赴死，不顾念身体和寿命的人。 
English: The above six people are no different from the mutilated dogs, the pigs that sank into the river, and the beggars who go around begging with shovels. They are all people who attach importance to the festival of life and death, and do not care about their body and life expectancy.

古文：世之所谓忠臣者，莫若王子比干、伍子胥。
现代文： 世人所称道的忠臣，没有超过王子比干和伍子胥的了。
English: The loyal vassals praised by the world are no better than the princes Bi Gan and Wu Zixuan.

古文：子胥沉江，比干剖心。此二子者，世谓忠臣也，然卒为天下笑。
现代文：伍子胥被抛尸江中，比干被剖心而死，这两个人，世人都称作忠臣，然而最终被天下人讥笑。
English: Wu Zihong was thrown into the river of corpses, Bi Gan was dissected and died, these two people, the world is called loyal, but ultimately ridiculed by the world.

古文：自上观之，至于子胥、比干，皆不足贵也。
现代文：从上述事实看来，直到伍子胥、王子比干之流，都是不值得推崇的。 
English: From the above-mentioned facts, even Wu Zixuan and Prince Bi Gan are not worthy of respect.

古文：丘之所以说我者，若告我以鬼事，则我不能知也；若告我以人事者，不过此矣，皆吾所闻知也。
现代文： 你孔丘用来说服我的，假如告诉我怪诞离奇的事，那我是不可能知道的；假如告诉我人世间实实在在的事，不过如此而已，都是我所听闻的事。
English: If you use Confucius to convince me, if you tell me bizarre things, then I can't possibly know; if you tell me things that are real in the human world, then they are just that, things I have heard about.

古文：今吾告子以人之情：目欲视色，耳欲听声，口欲察味，志气欲盈。
现代文：现在让我来告诉你人之常情，眼睛想要看到色彩，耳朵想要听到声音，嘴巴想要品尝滋味，志气想要满足、充沛。
English: Now let me tell you about human nature. The eyes want to see colors, the ears want to hear sounds, the mouth wants to taste flavors, and the spirit wants to be satisfied and full.

古文：人上寿百岁，中寿八十，下寿六十，除病瘦死丧忧患，其中开口而笑者，一月之中不过四五日而已矣。
现代文：人生在世高寿为一百岁，中寿为八十岁，低寿为六十岁，除掉疾病、死丧、忧患的岁月，其中开口欢笑的时光，一月之中不过四、五天罢了。
English: The highest lifespan in the world is one hundred years, the middle lifespan is eighty years, and the lowest lifespan is sixty years. After eliminating the years of illness, death, and sorrow, the time to open one's mouth and laugh is only four or five days in January.

古文：天与地无穷，人死者有时。操有时之具，而托于无穷之间，忽然无异骐骥之驰过隙也。
现代文：天与地是无穷尽的，人的死亡却是有时限的，拿有时限的生命托付给无穷尽的天地之间，迅速地消逝就像是千里良驹从缝隙中骤然驰去一样。
English: Heaven and earth are inexhaustible, but human death has a time limit. Entrusting a time-limited life to the endless heaven and earth, it quickly disappears like a thousand-mile egret suddenly rushing away from a crevice.

古文：不能说其志意、养其寿命者，皆非通道者也。
现代文：凡是不能够使自己心境获得愉快而颐养寿命的人，都不能算是通晓常理的人。 
English: Anyone who is not able to keep himself in a happy frame of mind and prolong his life is not a man of common sense.

古文：丘之所言，皆吾之所弃也。
现代文： 你孔丘所说的，全都是我想要废弃的，你赶快离开这里滚回去，不要再说了！
English: Everything you said, Confucius, I want to throw away, so get out of here, go back, and stop talking!

古文：亟去走归，无复言之！子之道狂狂汲汲，诈巧虚伪事也，非可以全真也，奚足论哉！ 
现代文：你的那套主张，颠狂失性钻营奔逐，全都是巧诈、虚伪的东西，不可能用来保全真性，有什么好谈论的呢！ 
English: Your set of propositions, the frenzied and erratic drilling and scrambling, are all cunning and hypocritical things, and cannot be used to preserve authenticity. What is there to talk about!

古文：孔子再拜趋走，出门上车，执辔三失，目芒然无见，色若死灰，据轼低头，不能出气。
现代文：孔子再行个礼就快步离开了，出了门上了车，几次都没有拿起马缰，两眼发呆什么也看不见，脸色如同死灰一样，扶着车前横木低下头去喘不过气来。
English: Confucius bowed again and left at a brisk pace, went out the door and got into the car, several times did not pick up the stirrup, his eyes were dazed and could not see anything, his face was like ashes, holding the crossbar in front of the car and bowing his head to catch his breath.

古文：归到鲁东门外，适遇柳下季。
现代文：回到鲁都东门外边，恰好遇上柳下季。
English: Back outside the east gate of Rudo, I happened to meet Ryo Shitose.

古文：柳下季曰： 今者阙然，数日不见，车马有行色，得微往见跖邪？ 
现代文：柳下季说： 你几天没露面了，车马看上去像行了远路，莫非你去跟跖会面吗？ 
English: Liu Shitai said: You haven't appeared for a few days, and the carriage and horses look like they've come a long way. Aren't you going to meet with Zhai?

古文：孔子仰天而叹曰： 然！ 
现代文：孔子昂起头对天叹气说： 是啊。 
English: Confucius raised his head to heaven and sighed, "Yes."

古文：柳下季曰： 跖得无逆汝意若前乎？ 孔子曰： 然。
现代文：柳下季说： 跖可是像我以前说的那样违背你的意愿吗？ 孔子说： 是的。
English: Liu Shitai said, "But is it against your will, as I said before?" Confucius said, "Yes."

古文：丘所谓无病而自灸也。
现代文：我正是常言说的无病自灸了。
English: I am exactly what is commonly referred to as a disease-free moxibustion.

古文：疾走料虎头，编虎须，几不免虎口哉！ 
现代文：孔子说： 正是这样。我这样做真叫做没有生病而自行扎针一样，自找苦吃，急急忙忙地跑去撩拨虎头、编理虎须，几乎不免被虎口吞掉啊！ 
English: Confucius said, "That's right. I'm really doing this as if I'm not sick and I'm self-piercing a needle. I'm looking for hardships, and I'm running in a hurry to pluck the tiger's head and trim the tiger's whiskers. I'm almost bound to be swallowed by the tiger's mouth!"

古文：子张问于满苟得曰： 盍不为行？
现代文：子张向满苟得问道： 怎么不推行合于仁义的德行呢？
English: Zi Zhang asked Manggoru: Why not promote the virtue of benevolence and righteousness?

古文：无行则不信，不信则不任，不任则不利。
现代文：没有德行就不能取得别人的信赖，不能取得别人的信赖就不会得到任用，不能得到任用就不会得到利益。
English: Without virtue, one cannot gain the trust of others; without trust, one cannot be appointed; without appointment, one cannot benefit.

古文：故观之名，计之利，而义真是也。
现代文：所以，从名誉的角度来观察，从利禄的角度来考虑，能够实行仁义就真是这样的。
English: Therefore, from the perspective of honor to observe, from the perspective of Li Luo to consider, to be able to practice benevolence is really like this.

古文：若弃名利，反之于心，则夫士之为行，不可一日不为乎！ 
现代文：假如弃置名利，只在内心求得反思，那么士大夫的所作所为，也不可能一天不讲仁义啊！ 
English: If you abandon fame and fortune and only seek reflection in your heart, then it is impossible for the actions of a scholar to be without benevolence and righteousness for a day!

古文：满苟得曰： 无耻者富，多信者显。
现代文：满苟得说： 没有羞耻的人才会富有，善于吹捧的人才会显贵。
English: It can be said that only those who have no shame can be rich, and only those who are good at touting can be distinguished.

古文：夫名利之大者，几在无耻而信。
现代文：大凡获得名利最大的，几乎全在于无耻而多言。
English: The greatest gains of fame and fortune are almost entirely due to shamelessness and verbosity.

古文：故观之名，计之利，而信真是也。
现代文：所以，从名誉的角度来观察，从利禄的角度来考虑，能够吹捧就真是这样的。
English: Therefore, from the perspective of honor, from the perspective of Liluo, it is really like this to be able to tout.

古文：若弃名利，反之于心，则夫士之为行，抱其天乎！ 
现代文：假如弃置名利，只在内心求得反思，那么士大夫的所作所为，也就只有保持他的天性了啊！ 
English: If one abandons fame and fortune and only seeks reflection in the heart, then the actions of the scholar and scholar can only preserve his nature!

古文：子张曰： 昔者桀、纣贵为天子，富有天下。今谓臧聚曰： 汝行如桀、纣。 则有怍色，有不服之心者，小人所贱也。
现代文：子张说： 当年桀与纣贵为天子，富有到占有天下，如今对地位卑贱的奴仆说，你的品行如同桀纣，那么他们定会惭愧不已，产生不服气的思想，这是因为桀纣的所作所为连地位卑贱的人也瞧不起。
English: Zi Zhang said: In the past, Zou and Zou Gui were the sons of Heaven, and they were so rich that they owned the whole world. Now, if they say to a low-ranking slave, "Your conduct is like that of Zou," then they will surely feel ashamed and have thoughts of not being convinced. This is because Zou's conduct is despised even by low-ranking people.

古文：仲尼、墨翟，穷为匹夫，今谓宰相曰 子行如仲尼、墨翟。 则变容易色，称不足者，士诚贵也。
现代文：仲尼和墨翟穷困到跟普通百姓一样，如今对官居宰相地位的人说，你的品行如同仲尼和墨翟，那么他一定会除去傲气谦恭地说自己远远比不上，这是因为士大夫确实有可贵的品行。
English: Zhong Ni and Mo Xun were as poor as ordinary people. Now, if you were to say to someone in the position of official and prime minister, "Your character is like Zhong Ni and Mo Xun," then he would surely remove his arrogance and humbly say that he is far from being comparable. This is because the scholar actually has a valuable character.

古文：故势为天子，未必贵也；穷为匹夫，未必贱也。贵贱之分，在行之美恶。 
现代文：所以说，势大为天子，未必就尊贵；穷困为普通百姓，未必就卑贱；尊贵与卑贱的区别，决定了德行的美丑。 
English: Therefore, the powerful son of heaven is not necessarily honorable; the poverty of ordinary people is not necessarily lowly; the difference between honorable and lowly determines the beauty and ugliness of virtue.

古文：满苟得曰： 小盗者拘，大盗者为诸侯。诸侯之门，义士存焉。
现代文：满苟得说： 小的盗贼被拘捕，大的强盗却成了诸侯，诸侯的门内，方才存有道义之士。
English: Manggot said: Small thieves are arrested, but big robbers become lords. It is only within the gates of the lords that there are moral people.

古文：昔者桓公小白杀兄入嫂，而管仲为臣；田成子常杀君窃国，而孔子受币。
现代文：当年齐桓公小白杀了兄长、娶了嫂嫂而管仲却做了他的臣子，田成子常杀了齐简公自立为国君而孔子却接受了他赠与的布帛。
English: At that time, Qiguan Prince Xiaobai killed his brother and married his sister-in-law, but Guanzhong became his vassal. Tian Chengzi often killed Qijian Prince and became the sovereign, but Confucius accepted his gift of cloth.

古文：论则贱之，行则下之，则是言行之情悖战于胸中也，不亦拂乎！
现代文：谈论起来总认为桓公、田常之流的行为卑下，做起来又总是使自己的行为更加卑下，这就是说言语和行动的实情在胸中相互矛盾和斗争，岂不是情理上极不相合吗！
English: When talking about it, they always think that the behavior of Huan Gong and Tian Chang is inferior, and when doing it, they always make their own behavior even more inferior. That is to say, the truth of words and actions contradict and struggle with each other in their hearts. Isn't it logically incompatible?

古文：故《书》曰： 孰恶孰美，成者为首，不成者为尾。  
现代文：所以古书上说过：谁坏谁好？成功的居于尊上之位，失败的沦为卑下之人。 
English: Therefore, the ancient book said: Who is bad and who is good? The successful live in a position of respect, and the unsuccessful are reduced to a lowly person.

古文：子张曰： 子不为行，即将疏戚无伦，贵贱无义，长幼无序。五纪六位，将何以为别乎？ 
现代文：子张说： 你不推行合于仁义的德行，就必将在疏远与亲近之间失去人伦关系，在尊贵与卑贱之间失去规范和准则，在长上与幼小之间失去先后序列；这样一来五伦和六位，又拿什么加以区别呢？ 
English: Zi Zhang said, "If you do not practice the virtue of benevolence and righteousness, you will inevitably lose the interpersonal relationship between the distant and the close, lose the norms and standards between the noble and the lowly, and lose the order of precedence between the eldest and the youngest. In this way, what is the difference between five generations and six generations?

古文：满苟得曰： 尧杀长子，舜流母弟，疏戚有伦乎？
现代文：满苟得说： 尧杀了亲生的长子，舜流放了同母的兄弟，亲疏之间还有伦常可言吗？
English: Manggot said: "You killed your own eldest son, you exiled a brother of the same mother, is there any common decency between estranged relatives?

古文：汤放桀，武王杀纣，贵贱有义乎？
现代文：商汤逐放夏桀，武王杀死商纣，贵贱之间还有准则可言吗？
English: Shang Tang expelled Xia Yao, King Wu killed Shang Yao, is there still a standard between the high and low?

古文：王季为适，周公杀兄，长幼有序乎？
现代文：王季被立为长子，周公杀了两个哥哥，长幼之间还有序列可言吗？
English: Wang Ji was established as the eldest son, Zhou Gong killed two brothers, is there still a sequence between the eldest and the youngest?

古文：儒者伪辞，墨子兼爱，五纪六位，将有别乎？且子正为名，我正为利。
现代文：儒家伪善的言辞，墨家兼爱的主张， 五纪 和 六位 的序列关系还能有区别吗？ 而且你心里所想的正在于名，我心里所想的正为了利。
English: Can there still be a difference between the hypocritical rhetoric of Confucianism and the dual-love claim of Mohism, and the sequence relationship between the five ages and the six figures? Moreover, what you think of in your heart is in the name, and what I think of in my heart is for the benefit.

古文：名利之实，不顺于理，不监于道。
现代文：名与利的实情，不合于理，也不明于道。
English: The truth of fame and profit is not reasonable, nor is it clear.

古文：吾日与子讼于无约，曰 小人殉财，君子殉名，其所以变其情、易其性则异矣；乃至于弃其所为而殉其所不为则一也。 
现代文：我往日跟你在无约面前争论不休： 小人为财而死，君子为名献身。然而他们变换真情、更改本性的原因，却没有不同；而竟至舍弃该做的事而不惜生命地追逐不该寻求的东西，那是同一样的。 
English: I used to argue with you in front of no agreement: the small man dies for money, the gentleman dies for the name. However, the reasons for changing their true feelings and changing their nature are no different; and it is the same to abandon what should be done and pursue what should not be sought at the expense of life.

古文：故曰：无为小人，反殉而天；无为君子，从天之理。
现代文：所以说，不要去做小人，反过来追寻你自己的天性；不要去做君子，而顺从自然的规律。
English: Therefore, do not be a villain, but seek your own nature; do not be a gentleman, but obey the laws of nature.

古文：若枉若直，相而天极。面观四方，与时消息。
现代文：或曲或直，顺其自然；观察四方，跟随四时变化而消长。
English: Or tune or straight, go with the flow; observe the four directions, follow the four-hour change and ebb and flow.

古文：若是若非，执而圆机。独成而意，与道徘徊。
现代文：或是或非，牢牢掌握循环变化的中枢；独自完成你的心意，跟随大道往返进退。
English: Whether or not, firmly grasp the center of the cycle of change; complete your mind alone, follow the road back and forth.

古文：无转而行，无成而义，将失而所为。
现代文：不要执着于你的德行，不要成就于你所说的规范；那将会丧失你的禀性。
English: Don't cling to your virtue, don't live up to what you say is the norm; that will take away your toughness.

古文：无赴而富，无殉而成，将弃而天。
现代文：不要为了富有而劳苦奔波，不要为了成功而不惜献身，那将会舍弃自然的真性。
English: Don't work hard to be rich, don't sacrifice yourself to be successful, that would be giving up your true nature.

古文：比干剖心，子胥抉眼，忠之祸也；直躬证父，尾生溺死，信之患也；鲍子立干，申子不自理，廉之害也；孔子不见母，匡子不见父，义之失也。
现代文：比干被剖心，子胥被挖眼，这是忠的祸害；直躬出证父亲偷羊，尾生被水淹死，这是信的祸患；鲍焦抱树而立、干枯而死，申生宁可自缢也不申辩委屈，这是廉的毒害；孔子不能为母送终，匡子发誓不见父亲，这是义的过失。
English: Bi Gan's heart was cut open, Zi Gan's eyes were gouged out, which is the scourge of loyalty; Zhiguo testified that his father stole a sheep, Tail Sheng was drowned in water, which is the scourge of faith; Bao Jiao held a tree and died, Shen Sheng preferred to commit suicide rather than defend his grievances, which is the poison of laziness; Confucius could not send his mother to death, Kuanzi swore not to see his father, which is the fault of righteousness.

古文：此上世之所传、下世之所语以为士者，正其言，必其行，故服其殃、离其患也。 
现代文：这些现象都是上世的传闻，当代的话题，总认为士大夫必定会让自己的言论正直，让自己的行动跟着去做，所以深受灾殃，遭逢如此的祸患。 
English: These phenomena are ancient rumors, contemporary topics, always think that scholars and doctors will certainly let their words be honest and let their actions follow, so they are deeply plagued and suffer such a disaster.

古文：无足问于知和曰： 人卒未有不兴名就利者。
现代文：无足向知和问道： 人们终究没有谁不想树立名声并获取利禄的。
English: Wuzhu Xiangzhihe asked: After all, there is no one who does not want to establish a reputation and obtain a reward.

古文：彼富则人归之，归则下之，下则贵之。
现代文：那个人富有了人们就归附他，归附他也就自以为卑下，以自己为卑下就更会尊崇富有者。
English: When a man becomes rich, people admire him, and when they admire him, they think they are inferior to him. When they think they are inferior to him, they admire the rich even more.

古文：夫见下贵者，所以长生安体乐意之道也。
现代文：受到卑下者的尊崇，就是人们用来延长寿命、安康体质、快乐心意的办法。
English: To be revered by the lowly is the method people use to prolong life, health, and happiness.

古文：今子独无意焉，知不足邪？
现代文：如今唯独你在这方面没有欲念，是才智不够用呢？
English: Now, however, you have no desire in this area, is your talent not enough?

古文：意知而力不能行邪？
现代文：还是有了念头而力量不能达到呢？
English: Or is there a thought but no power to achieve it?

古文：故推正不妄邪？ 
现代文：抑或推行正道而一心不忘呢？ 
English: Or do you pursue the right path and never forget it?

古文：知和曰： 今夫此人，以为与己同时而生，同乡而处者，以为夫绝俗过世之士焉，是专无主正，所以览古今之时、是非之分也。
现代文：知和说： 如今有这么一个兴名就利的人，就认为跟自己是同时生、同乡处，而且认为是超越了世俗的人了；其实这样的人内心里全无主心，用这样的办法去看待古往今来和是非的不同，只能是混同流俗而融合于世事。
English: Zhihe said: Nowadays, there is such a famous person who thinks that he is a contemporary, a fellow countryman, and that he is a transcendent person; in fact, such a person has no initiative in his heart, and using such a method to look at the difference between the past and the present and the right and wrong can only be mixed with the vulgar and integrated into the world.

古文：与俗化世，去至重，弃至尊，以为其所为也。此其所以论长生安体乐意之道，不亦远乎！
现代文：舍弃了贵重的生命，离开了最崇高的大道，而追求他一心想要追求的东西；这就是他们所说的延长寿命、安康体质、快乐心意的办法，不是跟事理相去太远吗！
English: To give up a precious life, to leave the most exalted avenue, and to pursue what he wants to pursue; this is what they call a way to extend life, health, and happiness, isn't it too far from the truth!

古文：惨怛之疾，恬愉之安，不监于体；怵惕之恐，欣欣之喜，不监于心。知为为而不知所以为。
现代文：悲伤所造成的痛苦，愉快所带来的安适，对身体的影响自己不能看清；惊慌所造成的恐惧，欢欣所留下的喜悦，对于心灵的影响自己也不可能看清。
English: The pain caused by sadness, the comfort brought by happiness, the influence on the body cannot be seen by oneself; the fear caused by panic, the joy left by joy, the influence on the mind cannot be seen by oneself.

古文：是以贵为天子，富有天下，而不免于患也。 
现代文：知道一心去做自己想要去做的事却不知道为什么要这样去做，所以尊贵如同天子，富裕到占有天下，却始终不能免于忧患。 
English: They know how to concentrate on doing what they want to do, but they don't know why they want to do it. Therefore, they are noble as the son of heaven, rich enough to occupy the whole world, but they are still not free from sorrow.

古文：无足曰： 夫富之于人，无所不利。穷美究势，至人之所不得逮，贤人之所不能及。侠人之勇力而以为威强，秉人之知谋以为明察，因人之德以为贤良，非享国而严若君父。
现代文：无足说： 富贵对于人们来说，没有什么不利的，享尽天下的美好并拥有天下最大的权势，这是道德极高尚的人所不能得到的，也是贤达的人所不能赶上的；挟持他人的勇力用以显示自己的威强，把握他人的智谋用以表露自己的明察，凭借他人的德行用以赢得贤良的声誉，虽然没有享受过国家权力所带来的好处却也像君父一样威严。
English: Suffice it to say: there is nothing unfavourable to men in being rich, in enjoying the best of the world, and in possessing the greatest power in the world, which the most virtuous man cannot obtain, and the wisest man cannot equal; in holding the courage of others to show his strength, in grasping the wit of others to show his sagacity, in winning a reputation for virtue by the virtues of others, and in being as dignified as a monarch, without having enjoyed the benefits of state power.

古文：且夫声色滋味权势之于人，心不待学而乐之，体不待象而安之。
现代文：至于说到乐声、美色、滋味、权势对于每一个人，心里不等到学会就自然喜欢，身体不需要模仿早已习惯。
English: When it comes to music, beauty, taste, and power, for everyone, the heart naturally likes it without waiting for learning, and the body does not need to imitate it.

古文：夫欲恶避就，固不待师，此人之性也。
现代文：欲念、厌恶、回避、俯就，本来就不需要师传，这是人的禀性。
English: Desire, aversion, avoidance, submission, originally do not need a teacher, this is human stubbornness.

古文：天下虽非我，孰能辞之！ 
现代文：天下人即使都认为我的看法不对，谁又能摆脱这一切呢？ 
English: Even if everyone in the world thinks that my opinion is wrong, who can get rid of all this?

古文：知和曰： 知者之为，故动以百姓，不违其度，是以足而不争，无以为故不求。
现代文：知和说： 睿智的人的做法，总是依从百姓的心思而行动，不去违反民众的意愿，所以，知足就不会争斗，无所作为因而也就无有所求。
English: Zhihe said: Wise people always act in accordance with the thoughts of the people, and do not go against the wishes of the people. Therefore, contentment will not fight, and there is nothing to do, so there is nothing to seek.

古文：不足故求之，争四处而不自以为贪；有余故辞之，弃天下而不自以为廉。
现代文：不能知足所以贪求不已，争夺四方财物却不自认为是贪婪；心知有余所以处处辞让，舍弃天下却不自认为清廉。
English: They cannot be satisfied, so they are greedy, but they do not think they are greedy when they compete for the wealth of the four directions; they know they have more than enough, so they make concessions everywhere, but they do not think they are clean when they give up the world.

古文：廉贪之实，非以迫外也，反监之度。
现代文：廉洁与贪婪的实情，并不是因为迫于外力，应该转回头来察看一下各自的禀赋。
English: The reality of corruption and greed is not due to external forces. We should look back and examine our respective endowments.

古文：势为天子，而不以贵骄人；富有天下，而不以财戏人。
现代文：身处天子之位却不用显贵傲视他人，富裕到拥有天下却不用财富戏弄他人。
English: In the position of the son of heaven, he does not need to show off and look down on others. He is rich enough to own the world, but he does not need to tease others with wealth.

古文：计其患，虑其反，以为害于性，故辞而不受也，非以要名誉也。
现代文：想一想它的后患，再考虑考虑事情的反面，认为有害于自然的本性，所以拒绝而不接受，并不是要用它来求取名声与荣耀。
English: Think about its after-effects, and then consider the opposite side of the matter, that it is harmful to the nature of nature, so rejecting and not accepting it is not to use it to seek fame and glory.

古文：尧、舜为帝而雍，非仁天下也，不以美害生；善卷、许由得帝而不受，非虚辞让也，不以事害己。
现代文：尧与舜做帝王天下和睦团结，并非行仁政于天下，而是不想因为追求美好而损害生命；善卷与许由能够得到帝王之位却辞让不受，也不是虚情假意的谢绝禅让，而是不想因为治理天下危害自己的生命。
English: To be the emperor of the world in harmony and unity with the emperor is not to carry out benevolent politics in the world, but to not want to harm life because of the pursuit of beauty; to be able to get the throne of the emperor but not to accept concessions, nor is it a false pretense to refuse to concede, but to not want to endanger one's life because of governing the world.

古文：此皆就其利、辞其害，而天下称贤焉，则可以有之，彼非以兴名誉也。 
现代文：这些人都能趋就其利，辞避其害，因而人们称誉他们是贤明的人，可见贤明的称誉也是可以获取的，不过他们的本心并非建树个人的名誉。 
English: These people are able to seek their own benefit and avoid their own harm, so people praise them as wise people. It can be seen that the praise of wisdom can also be obtained, but their real intention is not to build personal reputation.

古文：无足曰： 必持其名，苦体绝甘，约养以持生，则亦久病长厄而不死者也。 
现代文：无足说： 必定要保持自己的名声，即使劳苦身形、谢绝美食、俭省给养以维持生命，那么这一定是个长期疾病困乏而没有死去的人。 
English: Suffice it to say: one must keep up one's reputation, even if one has to work hard, deny oneself good food, and economize on sustenance in order to maintain one's life, then this must be a person who has been suffering from a long-term illness without dying.

古文：知和曰： 平为福，有余为害者，物莫不然，而财其甚者也。
现代文：知和说： 均平就是幸福，有余便是祸害，物类莫不是这样，而财物更为突出。
English: Zhihe said: "Average is happiness, and excess is a scourge. This is true of all things, but wealth is more prominent.

古文：今富人，耳营钟鼓管籥之声，口惬于刍豢醪醴之味，以感其意，遗忘其业，可谓乱矣；侅溺于冯气，若负重行而上阪，可谓苦矣；贪财而取慰，贪权而取竭，静居则溺，体泽则冯，可谓疾矣；为欲富就利，故满若堵耳而不知避，且冯而不舍，可谓辱矣；财积而无用，服膺而不舍，满心戚醮，求益而不止，可谓忧矣；内则疑劫请之贼，外则畏寇盗之害，内周楼疏，外不敢独行，可谓畏矣。
现代文：如今富有的人，耳朵谋求钟鼓、箫笛的乐声，嘴巴满足于肉食、佳酿的美味，因而触发了他的欲念，遗忘了他的事业，真可说是迷乱极了；深深地陷入了愤懑的盛气之中，像背着重荷爬行在山坡上，真可说是痛苦极了；贪求财物而招惹怨恨，贪求权势而耗尽心力，安静闲居就沉溺于嗜欲，体态丰腴光泽就盛气凌人，真可说是发病了；为了贪图富有追求私利，获取的财物堆得像齐耳的高墙也不知满足，而且越是贪婪就越发不知收敛，真可说是羞辱极了；财物囤积却没有用处，念念不忘却又不愿割舍，满腹的焦心与烦恼，企求增益永无休止，真可说是忧愁极了；在家内总担忧窃贼的伤害，在外面总害怕寇盗的残杀，在内遍设防盗的塔楼和射箭的孔道，在外不敢独自行走，真可说是畏惧极了。
English: The man who is now rich, his ear attuned to the music of the tambourine and the flute, his mouth satisfied with the taste of meat and wine, which aroused his desires and made him forget his business, is truly bewildered; he is deeply entangled in the pomp of anger, crawling on the hillside like a burden, is truly painful; greed for wealth arouses resentment, greed for power exhausts the heart, quiet idleness indulges the craving, the body is rich and shiny, it is arrogant, and it is truly a disease; for the sake of greed and the pursuit of self-interest, the acquired wealth is piled up like a

古文：此六者，天下之至害也，皆遗忘而不知察。及其患至，求尽性竭财单以反一日之无故而不可得也。
现代文：以上的六种情况，是天下最大的祸害，全都遗忘不求审察，等到祸患来临，想要倾家荡产保全性命，只求返归贫穷求得一日的安宁也不可能。
English: The above six situations are the greatest scourge in the world. All of them are forgotten without seeking examination. When the disaster comes, it is impossible to save one's life by running away from home, and it is impossible to return to poverty and seek a day's peace.

古文：故观之名则不见，求之利则不得。缭意绝体而争此，不亦惑乎！ 
现代文：所以，从名声的角度来观察却看不见，从利益的角度来探求却得不到，使心意和身体受到如此困扰地竭力争夺名利，岂不迷乱吗！ 
English: Therefore, from the point of view of fame to observe but not see, from the point of view of profit to explore but not obtain, so that the mind and body are so troubled to strive for fame and profit, is not it confusing!

