古文：宰夫之职，掌治朝之法，以正王及三公、六卿、大夫、群吏之位，掌其禁令。
现代文：宰夫的职责，掌管有关治朝的法令，以规正王及三公、六卿、大夫和群吏的朝位，监察他们是否违反禁令。
English: The duties of the zaif, in charge of the laws governing the reign of the dynasty, to regulate the king and the three princes, six lords, doctors and officials of the dynasty, and to monitor whether they violate the ban.

古文：叙群吏之治，以待宾客之令，诸臣之复，万民之逆。
现代文：依尊卑安排群吏的职事，以待治理来朝宾客的小事，受理诸臣的奏事，以及民众的上书。
English: He arranged the duties of the group officials according to their rank, handled the minor matters of the guests, accepted the reports of the ministers, and the letters from the people.

古文：掌百官府之征令，辨其八职。
现代文：掌管官府的征召和命令，分辨官府的八类职责。
English: In charge of the recruitment and order of the government, and distinguish eight types of duties of the government.

古文：一曰正，掌官法以治要。
现代文：一是正一级的职责，掌管官府的法规制度而审核一年的会计总账。
English: First, it is the responsibility of the first level, in charge of the government's legal system, to audit one year's accounting ledger.

古文：二曰师，掌官成以治凡。
现代文：二是师一级的职责，掌管官府的成事品式而审核一月的会计总账。
English: The second is the responsibility of the division level, which is in charge of the finished product of the government and audits the January accounting ledger.

古文：三曰司，掌官法以治目。
现代文：三是司一级的职责，掌管官府的法规制度而审核每天的会计账目。
English: The third is the responsibility of the department level, which is in charge of the government's legal system and audits the daily accounting accounts.

古文：四曰旅，掌官常以治数。
现代文：四是旅一级的职责，掌管按照官吏的常职而的工作进度进行考核。
English: The fourth is the responsibility of the brigade level, in charge of assessing the work progress in accordance with the permanent duties of officials.

古文：五曰府，掌官契以治藏。
现代文：五是府的职责，掌管书契而负责收藏。
English: The fifth is the responsibility of the prefectural government, which is in charge of the book contract and is responsible for the collection.

古文：六曰史，掌官书以赞治。
现代文：六是史的职责，掌管官府文书而协助治理。
English: The sixth is the duty of the historian, who is in charge of government documents and assists in governance.

古文：七曰胥，掌官叙以治叙。
现代文：七是胥的职责，掌管依照官事的轻重缓急而指派徒属。
English: The seventh is the duties of the magistrate, who is in charge of assigning subordinates according to the priorities of official affairs.

古文：八曰徒，掌官令以征令。
现代文：八是徒的职责，负责根据官府的命令而供召呼役使。
English: Eight is the duty of the messenger, who is responsible for summoning the messenger according to the order of the government.

古文：掌治法以考百官府、群都、县、鄙之治，乘其财用之出入。凡失财用物、辟名者，以官刑诏冢宰而诛之。
现代文：掌管治法用以考核各官府、各采邑以及县、鄙的政绩，计算他们钱粮财物的收支情况，凡钱粮财物使用失当，以及造假账的，就要根据官刑报告冢宰加以惩罚。
English: Those in charge of administering the law should use it to assess the political performance of all government offices, counties and townships, and counties and townships, and calculate their income and expenditure of money, grain and property. Those who misuse money, grain and property, and those who make false accounts, should be punished according to the official punishment report.

古文：其足用、长财、善物者，赏之。
现代文：那些用度充足、能够增殖财物、能使物产精良的，就奖赏。
English: Reward those who work hard enough, who can increase their wealth, and who can make excellent products.

古文：以式法掌祭祀之戒具，与其荐羞，从大宰而视涤濯。
现代文：依照祭祀礼法负责祭祀时告诫有关官吏供给祭祀牲物，以及祭祀用的脯醢和各种食物，跟从大宰视察祭器是否洗涤干净。
English: In accordance with the sacrificial ritual law, when in charge of the sacrifice, he warned the relevant officials to supply the sacrificial animals, as well as the sacrificial bowl and various foods, and followed the Dazai to inspect whether the sacrificial utensils were clean.

古文：凡礼事，赞小宰比官府之具。
现代文：凡举行礼仪的事，协助小宰检查校核各官府所准备的器物。
English: Whenever there is a ceremonial event, he assists Koza in inspecting and verifying the equipment prepared by various government offices.

古文：凡朝觐、会同、宾客，以牢礼之法，掌其牢礼、委积、膳献、饮食、宾赐之飱牵，与其陈数。
现代文：凡是朝觐、会同或有宾客到来，依照牢礼之法，负责供应牲肉和活牲、供应路途所需粮草和牲、供应宾客留居期间所需牲肉和禽鸟、供应燕礼和飨礼所需酒食、供应宾客初到时所赐便宴的用牲，以及陈列的数量。
English: Whenever a pilgrim, together with or without a guest, arrives, he is responsible for the supply of meat and live animals, the supply of grain and grass and animals required for the journey, the supply of meat and poultry required during the guest's stay, the supply of alcohol and food required for the ritual and the feast, the supply of animals for the banquet given to the guests when they first arrived, and the number of animals on display, in accordance with the law of the prisoner.

古文：凡邦之吊事，掌其戒令，与其币、器、财用，凡所共者。
现代文：凡王国有吊唁的事，掌管进行告诫和命令，负责供给所当用的币帛、明器、财物，以及凡所当供给的器物。
English: In all the kingdoms of the Gentiles he shall have power to grant reprimands and punishments, and to provide money, vessels, and victuals, and such other things as shall be necessary.

古文：大丧、小丧，掌小官之戒令，帅执事而治之。
现代文：有大丧或小丧，负责对小官进行告诫和命令，率领有关官吏办理丧事。
English: If there is a large or small funeral, he is responsible for admonishing and ordering the minor officials and leading the relevant officials to handle the funeral.

古文：三公、六卿之丧，与职丧帅官有司而治之。
现代文：三公、六卿的丧事，与职丧一起率领有关官吏办理。
English: The funerals of the three princes and six nobles, together with the official funerals, will be led by the relevant officials.

古文：凡诸大夫之丧，使其旅帅有司而治之。
现代文：凡是大夫的丧事，就使众下士率领有关官吏办理。
English: Whenever there is a doctor's funeral, all the non-commissioned officers are sent to lead the relevant officials to deal with it.

古文：岁终则令群吏正岁会，月终则令正月要，旬终则令正日成，而以考其治。
现代文：年终就命令官吏们总结确定一年的会计文书，月终就命令总结确定当月的会计文书，旬终就命令总结确定本旬的会计文书，而用以考核官吏们的政绩。
English: At the end of the year, the officials were ordered to summarize and determine the accounting documents of the year, at the end of the month, the officials were ordered to summarize and determine the accounting documents of the month, and at the end of the week, the officials were ordered to summarize and determine the accounting documents of the week, which were used to assess the performance of the officials.

古文：治不以时举者，以告而诛之。
现代文：政令不按时施行的，就报告加以责罚。
English: If the decree is not implemented on time, the report will be punished.

古文：正岁，则以法警戒群吏，令修宫中之职事。
现代文：正月，就用法警戒官吏们，让他们做好王宫中的各项工作。
English: In the first month of the year, he used the law to warn officials to do their jobs well in the royal palace.

古文：书其能者与其良者，而以告于上。
现代文：记载他们当中的贤能者和优秀者，而用以报告上级。
English: to record the able and the excellent among them, and to report to their superiors.

