古文：礼，王者祭天地，诸侯祭山川，卿大夫祭五祀，土庶人祭其先；宗庙社稷之祀，自天子达於庶人。
现代文：《礼记》说：天子祭祀天地，诸侯祭祀山川，卿、大夫祭祀五祀，士及平民祭祀他们的祖先。对祖先、土地神及谷神的祭祀，是从天子一直到平民都要举行的。
English: "Riki" says: the heavenly sons sacrifice heaven and earth, the princes sacrifice mountains and rivers, the lords and doctors sacrifice the five gods, and the nobles and commoners sacrifice their ancestors. The sacrifices to the ancestors, the land gods and the valley gods are held from the heavenly sons all the way to the commoners.

古文：《尚书》曰： 肆类於上帝，禋于六宗，望于山川，遍於群臣。 
现代文：《尚书》说： 于是对上天进行 类 祭，又祭祀天地四方，祭祀山川，遍祭群神。 
English: "Shoshu" says: Therefore, a similar festival was held for the heavens, and sacrifices were also made for the four directions of heaven and earth, for the mountains and rivers, and for all the gods.

古文：《礼》曰： 有虞氏禘黄帝而郊喾，祖颛顼而宗尧。夏後氏亦禘黄帝而郊鲧，祖颛顼而宗禹。殷人禘喾而郊冥，祖契而宗汤。周人喾而郊稷，祖文王而宗武王。
现代文：《礼记》说： 舜时把黄帝作为远祖来祭祀而以帝喾配祭，把颛顼作为始祖来祭祀而以尧配祭；夏朝也把黄帝作为远祖来祭祀而以鲧配祭，把颛顼作为始祖来祭祀而以禹配祭；商朝把帝喾作为远祖来祭祀而以冥配祭，把契作为始祖来祭祀而以汤配祭；周朝把帝喾作为远祖来祭祀而以稷配祭，把文王作为始祖来祭祀而以武王配祭。
English: "Riki" says: In ancient times, the Yellow Emperor was worshipped as a distant ancestor and the imperial gong was used as an accompaniment; in ancient times, the Emperor was worshipped as an ancestor and the gong was used as an accompaniment; in the Xia Dynasty, the Yellow Emperor was worshipped as a distant ancestor and the gong was used as an accompaniment; in the Shang Dynasty, the Emperor was worshipped as a distant ancestor and the gong was used as an accompaniment; in the Shang Dynasty, the Emperor was worshipped as a distant ancestor and the gong was used as an accompaniment; in the Zhou Dynasty, the

古文：燔柴於大坛，祭天也；瘗埋於大折，祭地也，用骍犊。
现代文：在大坛上烧柴以祭天，在大折下埋祭品以祭地，祭天地都用纯赤色的小牛作为牺牲。
English: On the large altar, wood is burned to offer sacrifices to the deities, and offerings are buried under the large altar to offer sacrifices to the deities. The pure red calf is used as a sacrifice for both the deity and the deity.

古文：埋少牢於大昭，祭时也；相近於坎坛，祭寒暑也。王宫，祭日也。夜明，祭月也；幽宗，祭星也。雩宗，祭水旱也。
现代文：埋少牢在大昭下以祭四时；在坎坛禳祈以祭寒暑；在王宫祭日：在夜明祭月，在幽祭星，在雩祭水旱，在四坎坛祭四方。
English: Buried in the minor dungeon under the great fire with a sacrifice at four o'clock; in the altar of incense with a sacrifice of cold and heat; in the royal palace festival day: in the evening of the month, in the evening of the month, in the evening of the month, in the evening of the month, in the evening of the month, in the evening of the month, in the evening of the month, in the evening of the month, in the evening of the month, in the evening of the month, in the evening of the month, in the evening of the month, in the evening of the month, in the evening of the month, in the evening of the month, in

古文：四坎坛，祭四方也。山林川谷丘陵能出云，为风雨，见怪物，皆曰神。有天下者祭百神。
现代文：山林、川谷、丘陵能生出云，产生风雨，出现怪物，都称为神。统治天下的帝王祭祀百神。
English: Mountains, forests, valleys and hills can produce clouds, wind and rain, and monsters, all of which are called gods. The emperors who ruled the world worshiped hundreds of gods.

古文：诸侯在其地则祭，亡其地则不祭。 
现代文：诸侯拥有封地就举行祭祀，失去了他的封地就不祭祀。 
English: If a feudal lord owned a fief, he would hold a ritual, but if he lost his fief, he would not.

古文：此皆法度之祀，礼之常制也。
现代文：这些都是法定的祭祀，是礼所规定的正常制度。
English: These are all statutory rituals and are the normal system stipulated by the rite.

古文：王者父事天，母事地，推人事父母之事，故亦有祭天地之祀。
现代文：君王像对待自己的父亲一样侍奉天，像对待自己的母亲一样侍奉地，根据人间侍奉父母的事例来类推，所以也就有了对天地的祭祀。
English: The king served heaven as he did his father, and earth as he did his mother. By analogy with the example of serving one's parents on earth, there was also a sacrifice to heaven and earth.

古文：山川以下，报功之义也。
现代文：祭祀山川以下诸神，用意在于报答它们的功劳。
English: Deities such as mountains and rivers are worshipped in order to repay their merits.

古文：缘生人有功得赏，鬼神有功亦祀之。
现代文：根据活人有功劳就获得奖赏的道理，鬼神有了功劳也应祭祀它们。
English: According to the principle that living people should be rewarded for their merits, ghosts and gods should also be sacrificed if they have merits.

古文：山出云雨润万物，六宗居六合之间，助天地变化，王者尊而祭之。故曰六宗。
现代文：山中涌出云雨来滋润万物，六方游神居处在六合之间，辅助天地的变化，君王尊重它们而祭祀它们，所以称为六宗。
English: Clouds and rain pour out of the mountains to moisturize all things, and the residence of the six wandering deities is located between the six confluences, assisting the changes of heaven and earth. Kings respect them and worship them, so they are called the six sects.

古文：社稷报生万物之功：社报万物，稷报五谷。
现代文：祭祀社稷神是为了报答它们生育万物的功劳。祭祀社神是报答它生育万物，祭祀谷神是报答它生育五谷。
English: The purpose of worshipping the shrine gods is to repay their merits of giving birth to all things. The purpose of worshiping the shrine gods is to repay them for giving birth to all things, and the purpose of worshiping the valley gods is to repay them for giving birth to grain.

古文：五祀报门户井灶中霤之功：门户人所出入，井灶人所饮食，中霤人所托处。五者功钧，故俱祀之。
现代文：进行五祀，是报答门神、户神、井神、灶神、室中霤神的功劳，门、户是人们出入的地方，井、灶是供人饮食的处所，中霤是人依托和居住的地方，五种神的功劳相等，所以都应当祭祀它们。
English: Carrying out the five rites is to reward the merits of the door god, the door god, the well god, the kitchen god, and the god of the middle room. The door and the house are the places where people go in and out, the well and the kitchen are the places for people to eat and drink, and the middle room is the place where people rely on and live. The merits of the five gods are equal, so they should all be sacrificed.

古文：周弃曰： 少昊有四叔，曰重，曰该，曰修，曰熙，实能金木少及水。
现代文：有的传上说： 少昊有子孙四人，名叫重、该、修、熙，他们确实能管理金、木和水。
English: Some legends say: Xiao Hao had four sons and grandsons, whose names were Chong, Ge, Xiu and Xi. They were indeed able to manage gold, wood and water.

古文：使重为句芒，该为蓐收，修及熙为玄冥，世不失职，遂济穷桑，此其三祀也。
现代文：假如重任句芒，该任蓐收，修和熙任玄冥，世代不变它们的职位，于是完成了少昊传下来的功业，这就是报答木正、金正、水正功劳的祭祀。
English: If there is a heavy responsibility, the person in charge will receive the reward, and the person in charge of restoring harmony will remain in the dark, and the generations will not change their positions, so the work passed down by Shao Hao will be completed. This is the sacrifice to repay the merits of Muzheng, Kim Jong and Mizuzheng.

古文：颛顼氏有子曰犁，为祝融。共工氏有子曰句龙，为後土，此其二祀也。
现代文：颛顼氏有个儿子叫犁，当火官；共工氏有个儿子叫句龙，当土官，这就是报答火正、土正功劳的祭祀。
English: The Zou clan had a son named Zou, who was a fire official, and the Gonggong clan had a son named Gu Long, who was a local official. This was a sacrifice to repay the merits of the fire official and the local official.

古文：後土为社。
现代文：后土是社神。
English: The back ground is a shrine.

古文：稷，田正也。
现代文：后稷是田官。
English: In the back, there is a field officer.

古文：有烈山氏之子曰柱，为稷。自夏以上祀之。
现代文：有烈山氏的儿子叫柱，是谷神，夏朝以前一直都祭祀他。
English: A son of the Leshan clan named Zhuang is the god of the valley. Prior to the Xia Dynasty, sacrifices were always made to him.

古文：周弃亦为稷，自商以来祀之。 
现代文：周弃也是谷神，从商朝以来一直都祭祀他。
English: Zhou Kuo is also a Valley God, and has been worshipped since the Shang Dynasty.

古文：《礼》曰： 列山氏之有天下也，其子曰柱，能殖百谷。
现代文：《礼记》说： 烈山氏拥有天下，他的儿子叫柱，能种植百谷。
English: "Li Ji" said: Mr. Leshan owns the world, and his son is called Zhu, who can grow a hundred grains.

古文：夏之衰也，周弃继之，故祀以为稷。
现代文：夏朝衰落，周弃接替了柱，所以把他当谷神来祭祀。
English: After the decline of the Xia Dynasty, Zhou Qian took over the pillar, so he was worshipped as a valley god.

古文：共工氏之霸九州也，其子曰後土，能平九土，故祀以为社。 
现代文：共工氏称霸九州，他的儿子叫后土，能安定九州的土地，所以把他当土地神来祭祀。 
English: The Koko clan dominated Kyushu, and his son, called Houdo, was able to stabilize the land of Kyushu, so he was worshipped as a land god.

古文：传或曰： 炎帝作火，死而为灶。
现代文：有的传说： 炎帝造火，死了就成灶神。
English: There is a legend: Emperor Yan created fire, and when he died, he became the god of the hearth.

古文：禹劳力天下，水死而为社。 
现代文：禹历尽辛苦治理天下水患，死了就成土地神。 
English: Yu Lian worked hard to control floods around the world. After his death, he became a land god.

古文：《礼》曰： 王为群姓立七祀，曰司命，曰中霤，曰国门，曰国行，曰泰厉，曰户，曰灶。
现代文：《礼记》说： 帝王为百姓规定了七种祭祀，祭司命、中霤、国门、国行、泰厉、户、灶。
English: "Li Ji" said: The emperor prescribed seven kinds of sacrificial rites for the people, priestly life, middle bowl, national gate, national line, Tai Li, house and hearth.

古文：诸侯为国立五祀，曰司命，曰中霤，曰国门，曰国行，曰公厉。
现代文：诸侯为封国规定了五种祭祀，祭司命，中霤、国门、国行、公厉。
English: The lords stipulated five kinds of sacrifices for the fiefdom, the priestly life, the middle bowl, the gate of the country, the national procession, and the public execution.

古文：大夫立三祀，曰族厉，曰门，曰行。
现代文：大夫规定了三种祭祀，祭族厉、门、行。
English: The doctor prescribed three kinds of sacrificial rites, including ritual sacrifice, door, and procession.

古文：适士立二祀，曰门，曰行。
现代文：適士规定了两种祭祀，祭门、行。
English: There are two types of rituals prescribed by the priest, the ritual gate and the ritual procession.

古文：庶人立二祀，或立户，或立灶。 
现代文：庶人规定了一种祭祀，或祭户神，或祭灶神。 
English: The common people prescribed a kind of sacrifice, either to the deity of the house or to the deity of the hearth.

古文：社稷五祀之祭，未有所定，皆有思其德，不忘其功也。
现代文：对社稷、五祀的祭祀，没有具体的规定，都是为了思念它们的功德，不忘记它们的功劳。
English: There are no specific regulations for the rites of the Five Immortals and the Eight Immortals, but they are all for the purpose of remembering their merits and not forgetting their merits.

古文：中心爱之，故饮食之。
现代文：心中思慕鬼神，因此供给鬼神吃喝。
English: They yearn for ghosts and gods in their hearts, so they offer them food and drink.

古文：爱鬼神者祭祀之。
现代文：思慕鬼神的人就祭祀它们。
English: Those who yearn for ghosts and gods worship them.

古文：自禹兴修社稷，祀後，稷其後绝废。
现代文：自从夏禹兴建社坛、稷坛祭祀后稷，其后这些祭祀就全都废除了。
English: Since Xia Yu built the altar and the altar of sacrifice, these sacrifices have all been abolished.

古文：高皇帝四年诏天下祭灵星，七年，使天下祭社稷。
现代文：汉高祖四年，诏令天下祭祀灵星；七年，又令天下祭祀土地神和谷神。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Gaozu, the emperor ordered the whole country to offer sacrifices to the spirit star; in the seventh year, he also ordered the whole country to offer sacrifices to the land god and the valley god.

古文：灵星之祭，祭水旱也，於礼旧名曰雩。
现代文：对灵星的祭祀是由于天旱而求雨，照礼来说这种祭祀的旧名称叫雩。
English: According to the ritual, the old name of the sacrifice to the spirit star was called "Ram" because it was to pray for rain due to the drought.

古文：雩之礼，为民祈谷雨，祈谷实也。
现代文：举行雩祭之礼，是为老百姓祈求降下滋润谷物的雨水，祈求谷物有好收成。
English: The celebration of the burnt offering is for the common people to pray for rainwater to fall to moisten the grain, and to pray for a good harvest of the grain.

古文：春求实，一岁再祀，盖重谷也。
现代文：春天祈求降雨，秋天祈求有收成，一年祭祀两次，这是由于重视谷物的缘故。
English: In spring they pray for rain, in autumn for a good harvest, and twice a year they offer sacrifices, because of the importance they attach to grain.

古文：春以二月，秋以八月。
现代文：春天在二月里祭祀，秋天在八月里祭祀。
English: In spring, the ritual is held in February, and in autumn, in August.

古文：故《论语》曰： 暮春者，春服既成，冠者五六人，童子六七人，浴乎沂，风乎舞雩，咏而归。 
现代文：所以《论语》上说： 暮春时节，春天的衣服已经做好穿上了，相约五六个成年人，六七个小孩，在沂水里洗洗澡，在舞雩台上吹吹风，一路唱着歌走回来。 
English: Therefore, "The Analects" said: At the end of the spring season, spring clothes have been prepared and put on, about five or six adults and six or seven children take a bath in the brackish water, blow in the wind on the dance floor, and sing songs all the way back.

古文：暮春，四月也。
现代文：暮春时节，是四月份。
English: It was late spring, in April.

古文：周之四月，正岁二月也。
现代文：周历的四月是夏历的二月。
English: April of the lunar calendar is February of the solar calendar.

古文：二月之时，龙星始出，故传曰： 龙见而雩 。
现代文：二月的时候，龙星初次出现，所以《左传》上说： 龙星出现就举行雩祭。 
English: In February, the dragon star appeared for the first time, so "Zo Zhuan" said: "When the dragon star appears, the burnt offering will be held."

古文：龙星见时，岁己启蛰，□□□： □□而雩。
现代文：龙星出现的时候，节气已经到了惊蛰，所以又说： 到了惊蛰就举行雩祭。 
English: When the dragon and star appeared, the solar terms had already reached the spring equinox, so it was said, "When the spring equinox comes, hold a burnt offering."

古文：春雩之礼废，秋雩之礼存，故世常修灵星之祀，到今不绝。
现代文：春天求雨的祭祀被废除了，秋天求雨的祭祀仍然保存下来，所以社会上常年举行对灵星的祭祀，到现在一直不间断。
English: The spring rain-seeking ritual was abolished, but the autumn rain-seeking ritual was still preserved, so the society has been holding the ritual for the spirit star all year round, and it has been uninterrupted until now.

古文：名变於旧，故世人不识；礼废不具，故儒者不知。
现代文：祭祀的名称和从前不一样了，所以世人不明白；祭礼废除不用了，所以儒者不知道。
English: The name of the ritual is different from before, so the world does not understand it; the abolition of the ritual is unnecessary, so Confucians do not know it.

古文：世儒案礼，不知灵星何祀，其难晓而不识，说县官名曰明星。缘明星之名，说曰岁星，岁星东方也。
现代文：世儒考察祭礼。不知道为什么祭祀灵星，因为它难懂也就不知道怎么解释，由于皇帝称它叫 明星 ，根据明星这一名称，就把它解释为 岁星 。岁星，与东方相配属。
English: I don't know why the spiritual star is sacrificed, because it is difficult to understand and I don't know how to explain it. Since the emperor called it a star, according to the name of the star, it was interpreted as the star of the year. The star of the year belongs to the East.

古文：东方主春，春主生物，故祭岁星求春之福也。
现代文：东方与春天相配属，春天掌管生长万物，因此祭祀岁星，是祈求春天之福。
English: The East and spring belong together, and spring governs the growth of all things. Therefore, the sacrifice of the year star is to pray for the blessing of spring.

古文：四时皆有力於物，独求春者，重本尊始也。
现代文：四季对万物生长都有贡献，只在春天祈求，是因为重视根本尊重一年的开始。
English: The four seasons contribute to the growth of all things, and to pray only in the spring is to respect the beginning of the year.

古文：审如儒者之说，求春之福，及以秋祭，非求春也。
现代文：如果真像儒者说的那样，求春之福，反而在秋天祭祀，这就不是祈求春天之福了。
English: If it is true, as the Confucians say, that we should seek the blessings of spring, and instead offer sacrifices in autumn, this is not praying for the blessings of spring.

古文：《月令》祭户以春，祭门以秋，各宜其时。
现代文：《月令》中规定在春天祭户神，在秋天祭门神，各自根据合适的季节祭祀。
English: The "Monthly Calendar" stipulates that the deities of the house should be offered in spring, and the deities of the door should be offered in autumn, and they should be offered according to the appropriate season.

古文：如或祭门以秋，谓之祭户，论者肯然之乎？
现代文：如果有人在秋天祭门神，却说是祭户神，评论的人能同意这种说法吗？
English: If someone worships the god of doors in autumn, but says that he worships the god of doors, can the commentator agree with this statement?

古文：不然，则明星非岁星也，乃龙星也。
现代文：不是这样的话，那么明星就不是岁星，而是龙星。
English: If this is not the case, then the star is not the lucky star, but the dragon star.

古文：龙星二月见，则雩祈谷雨。龙星八月将入，则秋雩祈谷实。
现代文：龙星在二月出现，就举行春雩祈求滋养谷物的雨水；龙星在八月将要看不见了，就举行秋雩祈求谷物有收成。
English: When the dragon star appears in February, the spring equinox is held to pray for rain to nourish the grain; when the dragon star disappears in August, the autumn equinox is held to pray for the grain to be harvested.

古文：儒者或见其义，语不空生。
现代文：有的儒者可能明白其中的意思，所以他们的话不是凭空说的。
English: Some Confucians may understand the meaning, so their words are not empty.

古文：春雩废，秋雩兴，故秋雩之名，自若为明星也，实曰灵星。
现代文：春雩废除了，秋雩兴起了，所以秋雩的名称，自然就像是对明星的祭祀了，实际上它应该叫灵星。
English: The spring egret was abolished, and the autumn egret arose, so the name of the autumn egret is naturally like a sacrifice to the star. In fact, it should be called the spirit star.

古文：灵星者，神也；神者，谓龙星也。
现代文：灵星是神，神，讲的就是龙星。
English: The spirit star is God, God, we are talking about the dragon star.

古文：群神谓风伯雨师雷公之属。
现代文：众神指的是风伯、雨师、雷公之类的神。
English: The gods refer to the wind god, rain god, thunder god and other gods.

古文：风以摇之，雨以润之，雷以动之，四时生成，寒暑变化。
现代文：风摇动万物，雨滋润万物，雷震动万物，四季使万物生长、成熟，寒暑使万物发生变化。
English: Wind shakes all things, rain moistens all things, thunder shakes all things, the four seasons make all things grow and mature, and cold and heat make all things change.

古文：日月星辰，人所瞻仰。水旱，人所忌恶。
现代文：日月星辰，是人们所瞻仰的，水旱灾害，是人们所憎恨的。
English: The sun, the moon and the stars are what people admire, and floods and droughts are what people hate.

古文：四方，气所由来。
现代文：四方，是气产生出来的处所。
English: Shifang is the place where qi is generated.

古文：山林川谷，民所取材用。
现代文：山林川谷，是老百姓取得资财的地方。
English: Mountains, forests, rivers and valleys are the places where the common people acquire wealth.

古文：此鬼神之功也。
现代文：这就是百神的功劳。
English: This is the merit of a hundred gods.

古文：凡祭祀之义有二：一曰报功，二月修先。
现代文：大凡祭祀的道理有两点：一是报答功劳，二是敬奉祖先。
English: There are two points to the reason for the great sacrifice: one is to repay merit, and the other is to honor ancestors.

古文：报功以勉力，修先以崇恩。
现代文：报答功劳是为了勉励尽心尽力的人，敬奉祖先是为了尊崇有恩德的人。
English: Rewarding merit is to encourage those who have done their best, and honoring ancestors is to respect those who have kindness.

古文：力勉恩崇，功立化通，圣王之务也。
现代文：尽心尽力受到勉励，恩德受到尊崇，功业树立教化广布，是圣王的职责。
English: It is the duty of a saintly king to do his best to be encouraged, to be respected for his benevolence, and to establish and spread enlightenment.

古文：是故圣王制祭祀也，法施於民则祀之，以死勤事则祀之，以劳定国则祀之，能御大灾则祀之，能捍大患则祀之。
现代文：所以 圣王制定了祭祀的标准，凡制定法律能在民间施行的人就祭祀他，凡勤劳国事而死的人就祭祀他，凡有战功安定国家的人就祭祀他，凡能防御大灾害的人就祭祀他，凡能抵御大祸患的人就祭祀他。 
English: Therefore, the holy king established the standard of sacrifice. All those who make laws that can be enforced by the people will sacrifice him, all those who work hard and die in national affairs will sacrifice him, all those who have war merits and a stable country will sacrifice him, all those who can defend against great disasters will sacrifice him, and all those who can resist great disasters will sacrifice him.

古文：帝喾能序星辰以著众，尧能赏均刑法以义终，舜勤民事而野死，鲧勤洪水而殛死，禹能修鲧之功，黄帝正名百物以明民共财，颛顼能修之；契为司徒而民成，冥勤其官而水死，汤以宽治民而除其虐，文王以文治，武王以武功去民之灾。凡此功烈，施布於民，民赖其力，故祭报之。
现代文：文王用文治，武王用武功，除掉了百姓的灾祸。 
English: The king of literature used literature and the king of martial arts used martial arts to eliminate the scourge of the people.

古文：宗庙先祖，己之亲也，生时有养亲之道，死亡义不可背，故修祭祀，示如生存。
现代文：所有这些功业，普遍地给老百姓带来了好处，老百姓依靠了他们的力量，所以祭祀报答他们。宗庙供奉的祖先，是自己的亲人，他们活着的时候有赡养他们的道义，死亡后按礼不能背弃他们，所以举行祭祀，表示和活着的时候一样对待他们。
English: All these achievements have generally brought benefits to the common people. The common people rely on their strength, so the sacrifices reward them. The ancestors offered by the ancestral temple are their own relatives. When they are alive, they have the morality to support them. According to the ritual, they cannot abandon them after death, so they hold sacrifices to show that they treat them the same way as when they were alive.

古文：推人事鬼神，缘生事死，人有赏功供养之道，故有报恩祀祖之义。
现代文：根据人间的事例来侍奉鬼神，依照对待活人的道理来侍奉死人。人有赏赐功劳供养亲人的道理，因此也有报答恩德祭祀祖先的道理。
English: According to the example of human beings, they serve ghosts and gods, and according to the principle of treating the living, they serve the dead. People have the principle of rewarding merit and providing for relatives, so there is also the principle of rewarding and sacrificing ancestors.

古文：孔子之畜狗死，使子赣埋之，曰： 吾闻之也，弊帷不弃，为埋马也；弊盖不弃，为埋狗也。
现代文：孔子养的狗死了，派子贡去埋狗，并说： 我听说，破旧的帐幕不丢掉，是用来埋马；破旧的车盖不丢掉，是用来埋狗。
English: A dog owned by Confucius died, and he sent a tribute to bury the dog, saying, "I heard that if you don't throw away a worn-out tent, you can bury a horse; if you don't throw away a worn-out car cover, you can bury a dog."

古文：丘也贫，无盖，於其封也，亦与之席，毋使其首陷焉。 
现代文：我贫穷，没有车盖，对于狗的埋葬，也要给它用席子，不要让它的头陷在泥土中。 
English: I'm poor, I don't have a car cover, and for the dog's burial, I have to give it a mat, and not let its head sink into the dirt.

古文：延陵季子过徐，徐君好其剑。季子以当使於上国，未之许与。
现代文：延陵季子路过徐国，徐国国君喜欢他的剑，季子因为正要出使到中原各国去，所以没有答应把剑赠送他。
English: Yanling Qizi passed by Xu Guo, the ruler of Xu Guo liked his sword, Qizi did not agree to give him the sword because he was about to be sent to Central Plains countries.

古文：季子使还，徐君已死，季子解剑带其冢树。
现代文：季子出使回来路过徐国，徐国国君已经死了。季子解下佩剑挂在徐君坟墓的树上。
English: When Ji Zi returned from his mission, he passed by Xu Guo, who was already dead. Ji Zi took off his sword and hung it on the tree of Xu Guo's tomb.

古文：御者曰： 徐君已死，尚谁为乎？ 
现代文：驾车的人问： 徐君已经死了，剑还赠给谁呢？ 
English: The driver asked, "Xu Jun is dead, who will the sword be given to?"

古文：季子曰： 前已心许之矣。可以徐君死故负吾心乎？ 
现代文：季子说： 先前我心里已答应赠剑给他了，难道能够因为徐君已经死了的缘故而违背我的本心吗？ 
English: Ji Zi said, "Previously, I had already promised in my heart to give the sword to him. Is it possible to go against my original intention because Xu Jun is dead?

古文：遂带剑於冢树而去。
现代文：于是就挂剑在坟墓的树上而离开了徐国。
English: So he hung his sword on the tree of the tomb and left Xu Province.

古文：祀为报功者，其用意犹孔子之埋畜狗也。祭为不背先者，其恩犹季子之带剑於冢树也。
现代文：祭祀为报功，用意就同孔子埋葬所养的狗一样；祭祀是为了不背弃祖先，报答恩德就同季子挂剑在坟墓的树上一样。
English: Sacrifices are made to reward merit, with the same intention as the dogs raised by Confucius are buried; sacrifices are made so as not to betray the ancestors, and repaying kindness is the same as hanging a sword on the tree of the grave.

古文：圣人知其若此，祭犹斋戒畏敬，若有鬼神，修兴弗绝，若有祸福。
现代文：圣人知道祭祀的意义是这样，可是祭祀前还要斋戒，祭祀时还要严肃恭敬，好像真有鬼神一样，连续不断地举行祭祀，好像鬼神真能消祸降福一样。
English: The saints knew that this was the meaning of the sacrifice, but they had to fast before the sacrifice, and they had to be serious and respectful during the sacrifice, as if there really were ghosts and gods, and they had to hold the sacrifice continuously, as if the ghosts and gods could really eliminate evil and bring good fortune.

古文：重恩尊功，殷勤厚恩，未必有鬼而享之者。
现代文：实际上这是尊重祖先的恩德和前人的功绩，殷勤地厚爱他们，未必有什么鬼神来享用祭品。
English: In fact, this is to respect the ancestors' virtue and the merits of the predecessors, to love them diligently, and there may not be any ghosts and gods to enjoy the offerings.

古文：何以明之？
现代文：用什么来证明这一点呢？
English: How do you prove it?

古文：以饮食祭地也。
现代文：用吃饭时祭地这件事就可以证明。
English: This can be proved by the fact that the ground is consecrated during meals.

古文：人将饮食，谦退，示当有所先。
现代文：人们将要吃饭时，先谦让，表示应当先祭地。
English: When people are about to eat, they should first humbly concede, indicating that the sacrificial ground should come first.

古文：孔子曰： 虽疏食菜羹，瓜祭必斋如也。 
现代文：孔子说： 即使吃的是粗米饭蔬菜汤，也必定要拿出一点来祭一祭，而且一定要像斋戒那样诚心敬意。 
English: Confucius said: Even if you eat coarse rice and vegetable soup, you must offer a little sacrifice, and you must sincerely respect it like fasting.

古文：《礼》曰 侍食於君，君使之祭，然後饮食之。 
现代文：《礼记》上说： 伺候君王吃饭，君王要让他先祭祀，然后才吃饭。 
English: "The Book of Etiquette" says: "When serving the king for dinner, the king must first have him make a sacrifice, and only then eat.

古文：祭，犹礼之诸祀也。
现代文：吃饭前祭地，就像礼所规定的各种祭祀一样。
English: Before the meal, there is a ritual, just like the various rituals prescribed by the rite.

古文：饮食亦可毋祭，礼之诸神，亦可毋祀也。
现代文：吃饭之前也可以不祭祀，礼所规定要祭的各种神，也可以不祭祀。
English: It is also possible not to offer sacrifices before a meal, and it is also possible not to offer sacrifices to the various gods that the ritual stipulates should be offered.

古文：祭祀之实一也，用物之费同也。
现代文：饮食之祭和诸神之祀实质上是一样的，使用祭品的耗费也是相同的。
English: The ritual of eating and drinking is essentially the same as the worship of the gods, and the cost of using the offerings is also the same.

古文：知祭地无神，犹谓诸祀有鬼，不知类也。
现代文：知道祭地并没有什么神，但是还要说各种祭祀都有鬼，这是不懂得类推的缘故。
English: I know that there is no god in the sacred place, but I still want to say that there are ghosts in all kinds of rituals. This is because I don't know how to make an analogy.

古文：经传所载，贤者所纪，尚无鬼神，况不著篇籍，世间淫祀非鬼之祭，信其有神为祸福矣？
现代文：经传上记载的，贤者所记载的，尚且没有鬼神，何况没有写在书上的呢！社会滥祭不该祭的鬼，迷信他们有神灵能造成祸福。
English: There are no ghosts and gods recorded in history or by sages, let alone written in a book. Society has made sacrificial offerings to demons that should not be offered, believing that they have spirits that can cause misfortune and good fortune.

古文：好道学仙者，绝谷不食，与人异食，欲为清洁也。
现代文：喜好法术求仙的人，不吃谷食，和一般人吃的不相同，是想身心清洁。
English: People who like magic and seeking immortality do not eat grains, which is different from what ordinary people eat. They want to be physically and mentally clean.

古文：鬼神清洁於仙人，如何与人同食乎？
现代文：鬼神比仙人更清洁，怎么会跟人吃同样的东西呢？
English: Ghosts and gods are cleaner than fairies, so how can they eat the same things as humans?

古文：论之以为人死无知，其精不能为鬼。
现代文：评论认为人死后是没有知觉的，他的精神不会变成鬼。
English: The commentary holds that a person is unconscious after death, and his spirit will not turn into a ghost.

古文：假使有之，与人异食。
现代文：假使有变成鬼的，和人吃的就不一样。
English: If there are ghosts, it's not the same as what people eat.

古文：异食则不肯食人之食，不肯食人之食，则无求於人。无求於人，则不能为人祸福矣。
现代文：吃的东西不同就不肯吃人的食物；不肯吃人的食物就对人无所求；对人无所求就不能给人造成祸福。
English: If you don't want to eat people's food, you don't need to ask for anything from them; if you don't need to ask for anything from them, you can't cause them any harm or benefit.

古文：凡人之有喜怒也，有求得与不得。
现代文：大凡人有喜怒，在于对所追求的东西得与不得。
English: Great mortals have joys and sorrows, depending on what they are pursuing.

古文：得则喜，不得则怒。
现代文：得到就欢喜，不得就愤怒。
English: Rejoice when you get it, be angry when you don't.

古文：喜则施恩而为福，怒则发怒而为祸。
现代文：欢喜就施恩而成福，愤怒就发怒而成祸。
English: Rejoiceth in doing good, and rejoiceth with doing good; but wrath is furious, and falleth into mischief.

古文：鬼神无喜怒，则虽常祭而不绝，久废而不修，其何祸福於人哉？
现代文：鬼神没有喜怒，那么即使经常不断地进行祭祀，长时间地废弃而不进行祭祀，对人又会有什么祸福呢？
English: Ghosts and gods do not have emotions, so even if they are constantly performing sacrifices and abandoning them for a long time without performing sacrifices, what will be the harm and benefit to people?

