古文：顾时吴祯薛显郭兴陈德王志梅思祖金朝兴唐胜宗陆仲亨费聚陆聚郑遇春黄彬叶升顾时，字时举，濠人。
现代文：顾时，字时举，濠州人。
English: Gu Shih, Zi Shih Jiu, Zhangzhou people.

古文：倜傥好奇略。
现代文：风流倜傥，有胆略。
English: She's flirtatious and daring.

古文：从太祖渡江，积功由百夫长授元帅。
现代文：跟从太祖渡江，积功从百夫长晋升为元帅。
English: Following in the footsteps of his great-grandfather, Wujiang, he was promoted from centurion to marshal.

古文：取安庆、南昌、庐州、泰州，擢天策卫指挥同知。
现代文：攻取安庆、南昌、庐州、泰州，晋升为天策卫指挥同知。
English: He conquered Anqing, Nanchang, Zhangzhou, and Taizhou, and was promoted to commander of the Tianzewei.

古文：李济据濠州，时从平章韩政讨降之。
现代文：李济占据濠州，顾时跟从平章韩政讨伐，使之投降。
English: Li Jie occupied Bozhou, and Gu Shih followed the crusade of Pingzhang Han Zheng and forced him to surrender.

古文：攻张士诚升山水寨，引小舫绕敌舟，舟中多俯视而笑。
现代文：进攻张士诚升山水寨，率小船绕过敌船，敌人在船上俯视讥笑。
English: Zhang Shicheng attacked Shanshui Zhai, and led a small boat to bypass the enemy ship. The enemy looked down on the boat and laughed.

古文：时乘其懈，帅壮士数人，大呼跃入舟。
现代文：顾时乘敌人懈怠，率壮士数人，大呼跃入敌船中。
English: Gu Shiji took advantage of the enemy's slackness and led several strong men to leap into the enemy ship.

古文：众大乱，余舟竞进。
现代文：敌人大乱，其余的船只争相前进。
English: With the enemy in disarray, the remaining ships scrambled forward.

古文：五太子来援，薛显又败之，五太子等降。
现代文：五太子前来援助，又被薛显打败，五太子等人投降。
English: The Five Princes came to help, but were defeated by Xue Xian, and the Five Princes and others surrendered.

古文：遂从大将军平吴，旋师取山东。
现代文：于是跟从大将军徐达平定吴地，攻取山东。
English: So he followed the great general Xu Da to pacify Wu and conquer Shandong.

古文：洪武元年，拜大都督府副使兼同知率府事。
现代文：洪武元年，被任命为大都督府副使并兼同知率府事。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, he was appointed the vice-envoy of the great governor's office and concurrently led the prefectural affairs with the governor.

古文：从大将军定河南北，浚闸以通舟师，自临清至通州。
现代文：跟从大将军徐达平定黄河南北，使舟师得以从临清到通州通行无阻。
English: He followed the great general Xu Da to pacify the north and south of the Yellow River, so that the boatmen could pass from Linqing to Tongzhou unhindered.

古文：下元都，与诸将分逻古北诸隘口。
现代文：攻下元都，和诸将分守古北各个隘口。
English: After capturing the Yuan capital, He Zhu would guard all the passes in the ancient north.

古文：从大军取平阳，克崞州，获逃将王信等四十六人。
现代文：跟从大军攻取平阳，攻克崞州，俘虏王信等四十六逃将。
English: Forty-six fugitive generals followed the great army to capture Pingyang, conquer Bozhou, and capture Wang Xin.

古文：取兰州，围庆阳。
现代文：攻取兰州，围攻庆阳。
English: They captured Lanzhou and besieged Qingyang.

古文：张良臣耀兵城下，击败之，获其劲将九人。
现代文：张良臣在城下炫耀兵力，顾时将其击败，俘虏敌得力将领九人。
English: Zhang Liangchen showed off his military strength at the foot of the castle. Gu Shi defeated him and captured nine of the enemy's most powerful generals.

古文：良臣乃不敢复出。
现代文：于是张良臣不敢再出来挑战。
English: As a result, Zhang Liangchen did not dare to challenge again.

古文：庆阳平。
现代文：又平定了庆阳。
English: Qingyang was also pacified.

古文：徐达还京，令时将骑兵略静宁州，走贺宗哲。
现代文：徐达班师回京，命令顾时带骑兵经略静宁州，赶跑了贺宗哲。
English: Xu Daban's division returned to Beijing, ordered Gu Shiji to take cavalry to Jingning Prefecture, and chased away He Zongzhe.

古文：西边悉平。
现代文：西边得以全部平定。
English: The west side was completely pacified.

古文：三年进大都督同知，封济宁侯，禄千五百石，予世券。
现代文：三年，晋升为大都督同知，赐封济宁侯，食禄一千五百石，给予世袭凭证。
English: Three years later, he was promoted to Daduo Tongzhi, given the fief of Jining, a stipend of 1,500 koku, and a certificate of inheritance.

古文：四年为左副将军，副傅友德帅河南、陕西步骑伐蜀。
现代文：四年，担任左副将军，协助傅友德率河南、陕西的步、骑兵讨伐蜀地。
English: For four years, he served as the left deputy general and assisted Fu Youde to lead the infantry and cavalry of Henan and Shaanxi to fight against Shu.

古文：自兴元进克阶、文，败蜀兵于汉州，遂克成都。
现代文：顾时从兴元进克阶、文，在汉州打败了蜀兵，于是攻克成都。
English: Gu Shiji defeated Shu soldiers in Hanzhou, and then conquered Chengdu.

古文：明年副李文忠北征，分道入沙漠。
现代文：第二年协助李文忠北征，分兵进入沙漠。
English: In the second year, he assisted Li Wenzhong in the Northern Expedition and led a detachment of soldiers into the desert.

古文：迷失道，粮且尽。遇寇，士疲不能战。
现代文：迷失了方向，粮已尽，又遇敌人，士兵疲乏而不能作战。
English: They lost their way, ran out of food, encountered the enemy again, and the soldiers were too tired to fight.

古文：时帅麾下数百人，跃马冲击。
现代文：顾时率麾下数百人，跃马出击。
English: Hundreds of people under Gu Jizhong's command leapt to the attack.

古文：敌众引去，获其辎重粮畜以归，军声大振。
现代文：敌人退去，顾时缴获其辎重、粮食、牲畜而归，军威大振。
English: The enemy retreated, and Gu Shih returned with his baggage, grain, and livestock, and his military power was greatly enhanced.

古文：六年从徐达镇北平。
现代文：六年跟从徐达镇守北平。
English: For six years, he followed Xu Dazhen to guard Beiping.

古文：逾年，召还。
现代文：过了一年，被召回。
English: After a year, he was recalled.

古文：八年复出镇。
现代文：八年再次镇守北平。
English: Eight years later, he was once again in charge of Beiping.

古文：十二年卒，年四十六。葬钟山。
现代文：十二年顾时去世，终年四十六岁，安葬于钟山。
English: Twelve years later, Gu died at the age of 46, and was buried in Zhongshan.

古文：追封滕国公，谥襄靖，祔祭功臣庙。
现代文：追封为滕国公，谥号襄靖，牌位附祭功臣庙。
English: His posthumous name was Teng Guogong, his posthumous name was Xiang Jing, and his posthumous name was inscribed on a plaque at the Temple of Meritorious Servants.

古文：时能以少击众，沉鸷不伐。
现代文：顾时能以少胜多，沉鸷不伐，深得皇上器重。
English: Gu Shiji is able to win more with less, win without losing, and win the emperor's weight with depth.

古文：帝甚重之。
现代文：他的儿子顾敬，金吾卫镇抚。
English: Emperor Jing was very fond of him.

古文：子敬，金吾卫镇抚，十五年嗣侯，为左副将军。平龙泉山寇有功。
现代文：十五年继承侯位，担任左副将军，平定龙泉山寇有功。
English: He succeeded to the post of marquess for fifteen years, served as the left deputy general, and played a significant role in suppressing the Longquan Mountain Invasion.

古文：二十三年追论胡惟庸党，榜列诸臣，以时为首，敬坐死，爵除。
现代文：二十三年追查胡惟庸党，榜列群臣，顾时名列榜首，顾敬受牵连而被杀，爵位被剥夺。
English: In the 23rd year of the persecution of Hu Wei Yong's party, the list of ministers included Gu Jie at the top of the list, Gu Jing was implicated and killed, and was deprived of his title.

古文：吴祯，江国襄烈公良弟也。
现代文：吴祯，江国襄烈公吴良的弟弟。
English: Wu Yao, the younger brother of Wu Liang, the Yongle Emperor of Jiangxi.

古文：初名国宝，赐名祯。
现代文：最初名叫国宝，赐名为祯。
English: It was originally called the National Treasure and was given the name "Matsura."

古文：与良俱从克滁、和，渡江克采石，从定集庆。下镇江、广德、常州、宣城、江阴，皆有功。
现代文：与吴良一起从大军攻克滁州、和州，渡江攻克采石，又随大军定集庆，下镇江、广德、常州、宣城、江阴，都立有战功。
English: Together with Wu Liang, he started from the great army to conquer Bozhou and Hezhou, crossed the river to conquer quarrying, and followed the great army to set up the celebration, and went down to Zhenjiang, Guangde, Changzhou, Xuancheng, and Jiangyin, all of which have military achievements.

古文：又从常遇春自铜陵取池州，以舟师毁其北门，入城。
现代文：又跟从常遇春自铜陵攻取池州，用水师摧毁池州的北门，进入城中。
English: He also followed Changyu Chun to capture Chizhou from Tongling, and the sailors destroyed the north gate of Chizhou and entered the city.

古文：敌舰百余至，复大败之，遂克池州。积功，由帐前都先锋累迁为天兴翼副元帅。
现代文：敌舰百余艘驶来，皆被打败，于是攻克池州，积功由帐前都先锋晋升为天兴翼副元帅。
English: More than a hundred enemy ships sailed in, all of which were defeated, so Chizhou was conquered, and the pioneer was promoted to Vice-Marshal Tianxing Ying.

古文：以千人助良守江阴，数败吴兵，破士诚水寨，擒其骁将朱定。
现代文：带领千人协助吴良镇守江阴，多次打败张士诚的军队，攻破张士诚的水寨，活捉其猛将朱定。
English: He led a thousand people to help Wuliang Town defend Jiangyin, repeatedly defeated Zhang Shicheng's army, broke through Zhang Shicheng's water fort, and captured his fierce general Zhu Ding alive.

古文：授英武卫亲军指挥使。
现代文：被授予英武卫亲军指挥使。
English: He was awarded the title of Commander of the Imperial Guards.

古文：又大破吴兵于浮子门。从大将军徐达帅马步舟师取湖州，勒奇兵出旧馆，大捷。
现代文：于浮子门大破吴兵。跟从大将军徐达率马步舟师夺取湖州，指挥奇兵出旧馆，大胜。
English: He defeated the Wu soldiers at the Floating Gate. He followed the general Xu Daru to lead the horse and boat division to seize Huzhou, and commanded the strange soldiers to leave the old pavilion, and won a great victory.

古文：湖州平，遂戍之。
现代文：平定湖州，并带兵戍守。
English: He pacified Huzhou and took soldiers to defend it.

古文：从围平江，破葑、胥二门，进佥大都督府事，抚平江。
现代文：从大军围攻平江，攻破葑、胥二门，晋升为佥大都督府事，安抚平江。
English: He besieged Pingjiang with a large army, broke through the two gates of Yunnan and Shandong, and was promoted to the post of governor of Shandong Province to pacify Pingjiang.

古文：寻副征南将军汤和讨方国珍，乘潮入曹娥江，毁坝通道，出不意直抵军厩。
现代文：不久，又随征南将军汤和讨伐方国珍，乘涨潮进入曹娥江，毁坝通道，出其意外地抵达了敌营。
English: Soon, he followed the Southern General Tang and the crusader Guo Zhen, rode the rising tide into the Cao E River, destroyed the dam passage, and unexpectedly arrived at the enemy camp.

古文：国珍亡入海。追及之盘屿，合战，自申至戌，败之，尽获其战舰士卒辎重，国珍降。
现代文：方国珍逃入海上，追至盘屿，会战，从申时战至戌时，打败了方国珍，全部缴获了其战舰、辎重，俘其士兵，方国珍投降。
English: Fang Guozhen fled into the sea, pursued to Panyu, fought, defeated Fang Guozhen, captured all of his warships and baggage, captured his soldiers, and surrendered.

古文：复自海道进取福州，围其西、南、水部三门，一鼓克之。
现代文：再次从海道进攻福州，包围了其西、南、水部三门，一举攻克。
English: Once again, they attacked Fuzhou from the seaway, encircled its west, south, and waterfront, and conquered it in one fell swoop.

古文：洪武元年，进兵破延平，擒陈友定。
现代文：洪武元年，出兵攻占延平，活捉了陈友定。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, troops were dispatched to capture Yanping and Chen Youding was captured alive.

古文：闽海悉平。
现代文：福建沿海得以全部平定。
English: The coast of Fujian was completely pacified.

古文：还次昌国。会海寇劫兰秀山，剿平之。
现代文：回到昌国，正遇海盗在兰秀山抢劫，于是剿平这股海盗。
English: Back in Changguo, he was robbed by pirates in Lanxiu Mountain, so he defeated the pirates.

古文：兼率府副使。寻为吴王左相兼佥大都督府事。
现代文：兼任率府副使，不久担任吴王左相兼佥大都督府事。
English: He also served as the deputy envoy of the provincial government, and soon he served as the Wu Wang Zuo Minister and the governor of the provincial government.

古文：二年，大将军平陕西还，祯与副将军冯胜驻庆阳。
现代文：二年，大将军平定陕西回来，吴祯与副将军冯胜驻守庆阳。
English: Two years later, when the general returned from subduing Shaanxi, Wu Gan and his deputy general Feng Sheng were stationed in Qingyang.

古文：三年讨平沂州答山贼。
现代文：三年，讨平沂州答山贼。
English: For three years, the fight against the mountain bandits in Luzhou has been going on.

古文：命为靖海将军，练军海上。
现代文：任命为靖海将军，在海上练兵。
English: Appointed as General Jinghai, he trained soldiers at sea.

古文：其冬，封靖海侯，食禄千五百石，予世券。
现代文：这年冬天，封为靖海侯，食禄为一千五百石，给予世袭的凭证。
English: In the winter of that year, he was given the title of Jinghai Hou, with a stipend of fifteen hundred koku, and was given a certificate of inheritance.

古文：与秦、晋二王傅金朝兴、汪兴祖并专傅王，解都督府事。
现代文：与秦、晋二王教导金朝兴、汪兴祖，并专门辅佐二王，解除了都督府事的官职。
English: He taught Kim Chaoxing and Wang Xingzu with Qin and Jin kings, and specially assisted the two kings, and relieved the official position of the governor of the capital.

古文：仇成戍辽阳，命祯总舟师数万，由登州饷之。
现代文：仇成戍守辽东，命令吴祯总管数万舟师，由登州供应粮饷。
English: Qiu Chengyu, the governor of Liaodong, ordered the general manager of Wuyi to send tens of thousands of boats to supply grain from Dengzhou.

古文：海道险远，经理有方，兵食无乏。完城练卒，尽收辽海未附之地，降平章高家奴等。
现代文：海道险远，他经营有方，军队的粮草充足，同时修固城池，练习士兵，全部收复辽海未归附的地方，使平章高家奴等人投降。
English: The sea route was far away, he managed well, the army's grain and grass were sufficient, at the same time, he repaired the castle, trained soldiers, and recovered all the places that were not annexed by the Liao Sea, so that Pingzhang Gao Jia Nong and others surrendered.

古文：坐事谪定辽卫指挥使，寻召还。
现代文：因牵连被贬职为定辽卫指挥使，不久被召回。
English: Because of the implication, he was demoted to Ding Liaowei's commanding officer, and was soon recalled.

古文：七年，海上有警，复充总兵官，同都督佥事于显总江阴四卫舟师出捕倭。至琉球大洋，获其兵船，献俘京师。
现代文：七年，海上有敌情，吴祯再次担任总兵官，同都督佥事於显统领江阴四卫的水师，出海追捕倭寇，到了琉球大洋，缴获敌兵船，把俘获物品呈献京师。
English: In the seventh year, when there was a hostile situation at sea, Wu Xi once again served as the chief military officer. Together with the governor, he dispatched sailors to the provinces of Xian and Yin and Shibe, went to sea to hunt wokou, went to the Ryukyu Ocean, captured enemy warships, and presented the captured items to the Beijing division.

古文：自是常往来海道，总理军务数年，海上无寇。
现代文：从此吴祯常常往来在海道上，总理军务数年，海上无寇贼。
English: From then on, Wu Gan often traveled on the sea route. He served as prime minister for several years, and there were no pirates on the sea.

古文：十一年，奉诏出定辽，得疾，舆还京师。
现代文：十一年奉诏出师定辽，患病，乘车回到京师。
English: In the eleventh year of his apprenticeship, Ding Liao fell ill and had to return to Beijing by car.

古文：明年卒。追封海国公，谥襄毅，与良俱肖像功臣庙。
现代文：第二年去世，追封为海国公，谥号襄毅，他和吴良的肖像均放在功臣庙里。
English: He died the following year and was posthumously awarded the title of Prince of Hai Guo, with the posthumous name of Xiang Yi. His and Wu Liang's portraits are both placed in the Temple of Merit.

古文：子忠嗣侯。
现代文：儿子吴忠继承侯位。
English: His son Wu Zhong succeeds him.

古文：二十三年追论祯胡惟庸党，爵除。
现代文：二十三年，追究吴祯是胡惟庸同党，爵位被削去。
English: In 233, Wu Gan was investigated for being a member of Hu Wei Yong's party, and his title was taken away.

古文：薛显，萧人。
现代文：薛显，萧人。
English: Starring Xue Xian and Xiao Ren.

古文：赵均用据徐州，以显为元帅，守泗州。
现代文：赵均用据守徐州时，任命薛显为元帅，镇守泗州。
English: When Zhao Junye was garrisoning Xuzhou, he appointed Xue Xian as marshal and garrisoned Bozhou.

古文：均用死，以泗州来降，授亲军指挥，从征伐。
现代文：赵均用死后，薛显带泗州地盘归附太祖，被授予亲军指挥，从征讨伐。
English: After the death of Zhao Junyong, Xue Xian took the Bozhou site to the ancestor, was awarded the command of the pro-army, and joined the crusade.

古文：南昌平，命显从大都督朱文正守之。
现代文：平定南昌后，命薛显随从都督朱文正镇守。
English: After the pacification of Nanchang, Xue Xian was ordered to follow the governor Zhu Wenzheng to guard the town.

古文：陈友谅寇南昌，显守章江、新城二门。
现代文：陈友谅进犯南昌，薛显守卫章江、新城二门。
English: Chen You Rong invaded Nanchang, and Xue Xian guarded Zhangjiang and Xincheng.

古文：友谅攻甚急。
现代文：陈友谅进攻十分激烈。
English: Chen Youzong's attack was very fierce.

古文：显随方御之，间出锐卒搏战，斩其平章刘进昭，擒副枢赵祥。
现代文：薛显随机应变，其间派出精兵与敌搏击，斩敌平章刘进昭，活捉副将赵祥。
English: Xue Xian made a random response, during which he sent elite soldiers to fight with the enemy, killed the enemy Ping Zhang Liu Jin Zhao, and captured Vice Admiral Zhao Xiang alive.

古文：固守三月，乃解。
现代文：固守南昌三个月，终于解围。
English: After holding onto Nanchang for three months, the siege was finally lifted.

古文：武昌既平，邓仲谦据新淦不下，显讨斩之，因徇下未附诸郡县。
现代文：平定武昌，邓仲谦占据新淦不下，薛显征讨斩首，降服没有归附的郡县。
English: Wuchang was pacified, Deng Zhongqian occupied Xinjiang, Xue Xian was beheaded, and counties that had not been annexed were surrendered.

古文：以功擢江西行省参政。
现代文：因功晋升为江西行省参政。
English: He was promoted to participate in politics in Jiangxi Province for his merits.

古文：从徐达等收淮东，遂伐张士诚。
现代文：跟从徐达等人收复淮东，讨伐张士诚。
English: He followed Xu Da and others to recover Huadong and fight against Zhang Shicheng.

古文：与常遇春攻湖州。别将游军取德清，攻升山水寨。
现代文：随常遇春攻打湖州，另派军队攻取德清，攻破升山水寨。
English: He often attacked Huzhou in the spring, and dispatched another army to conquer Deqing and break through the Shangshan Water Village.

古文：士诚遣其五太子盛兵来援，遇春与战，小却。显帅舟师奋击，烧其船。
现代文：张士诚遣五太子带众兵来援，常遇春与之交战后稍微退却，薛显率水师奋击，焚烧敌人的船只，敌众溃败。
English: Zhang Shicheng sent five princes with soldiers to come to the rescue, and often retreated slightly after fighting with the spring. Xue Xian led the sailors to fight hard, burn the enemy's ships, and the enemy was defeated.

古文：众大溃，五太子及朱暹、吕珍等以旧馆降，得兵六万人。
现代文：五太子及朱暹、吕珍等人以旧馆投降，俘敌兵六万人。
English: The Five Princes, Zhu Siam, Lü Zhen and others surrendered in the old pavilion, capturing 60,000 enemy soldiers.

古文：遇春谓显曰： 今日之战，将军功，遇春弗如也。 
现代文：常遇春对薛显说： 今日之战，是将军你的功劳，我遇春自叹不如啊。 
English: He often said to Xue Xian, "Today's battle is the general's and your merit. I feel sorry for you."

古文：五太子等既降，吴人震恐，湖州遂下。
现代文：五太子等人已经投降，吴人十分震恐，湖州于是得以平定。
English: The Five Princes and others had already surrendered, the Wu people were terrified, and Huzhou was thus pacified.

古文：进围平江，与诸将分门而军。
现代文：进围平江，和诸将分门而驻军。
English: They encircled the Pingjiang River and garrisoned the troops separately from the generals.

古文：吴平，进行省右丞。
现代文：平定吴后，薛显晋升为行省右丞。
English: After Wu was pacified, Xue Xian was promoted to the position of acting provincial right-hand man.

古文：命从大将军徐达取中原。
现代文：太祖命薛显跟从大将军徐达攻取中原。
English: The great-grandfather ordered Xue Xian to follow the great general Xu Da to conquer the Central Plains.

古文：濒行，太祖谕诸将，谓 薛显、傅友德勇略冠军，可当一面。 
现代文：临行前太祖告谕诸将，说薛显、傅友德最为勇敢和富有胆略，可以独挡一面。
English: Before leaving, the great-grandfather told the generals that Xue Xian and Fu Youde were the bravest and most daring, and could stand alone.

古文：进克兖、沂、青、济，取东昌、棣州，乐安。
现代文：进攻兖、沂、青、济，攻取东昌、棣州、乐安。
English: We will attack Shandong, Fujian, Qingdao and Fujian provinces, and capture Dongchang, Zhangzhou and Le'an.

古文：还收河南，捣关、陕。
现代文：收复河南，直捣关、陕。
English: The recovery of Henan, Zhouzhuang, Shaanxi.

古文：渡河，取卫辉、彰德、广平、临清。
现代文：渡过黄河，攻取卫辉、彰德、广平、临清。
English: He crossed the Yellow River and conquered Weihui, Changde, Guangping and Linqing.

古文：帅马步舟师取德州、长芦。败元兵于河西务，又败之通州，遂克元都。
现代文：率马步舟师攻取德州、长芦，在河西务打败元兵，又在通州再次打败元兵，攻克元都城。
English: He led the horse and foot boat division to capture Dezhou and Changlu, defeated the Yuan soldiers in Hexi, defeated the Yuan soldiers again in Tongzhou, and conquered the Yuan capital city.

古文：分兵逻古北诸隘口，略大同，获乔右丞等三十四人。
现代文：分兵巡逻古北的各个隘口，进攻大同，俘乔右丞等三十四人。
English: The detachment patrolled the various passes of the ancient north, attacked Datong, captured Qiao Yu Rong and thirty-four others.

古文：进征山西，次保定，取七垛寨，追败脱因贴木儿。
现代文：进而征讨山西、保定，占领七垛寨，追击脱因帖木儿。
English: They then went on to conquer Shanxi and Baoding, occupy Qizhaozhai, and pursue Deying Timur.

古文：与友德将铁骑三千，略平定西。取太原，走扩廓，降豁鼻马。
现代文：与傅友德率骑兵三千人，扫平定西，占领太原，赶走扩廓，降服豁鼻马。
English: He and Fu Youde led 3,000 cavalrymen to sweep Dingxi, occupy Taiyuan, drive out Zangguo, and subdue Huizhongma.

古文：邀击贺宗哲于石州，拔白崖、桃花诸山寨。
现代文：在石州痛击贺宗哲，攻破白崖、桃花诸山寨。
English: He defeated He Zongzhe in Shizhou, and broke through the White Cliffs and Peach Blossom Villages.

古文：与大将军达会平阳，以降将杜旺等十一人见，遂从入关中。
现代文：和大将军徐达在平阳会师，以降将杜旺等十一人为见面礼。于是进入关中，抵达临洮。
English: He met with General Xu Da in Pingyang, after which he met with Du Wang and eleven others. He then entered Guanzhong and arrived in Linyi.

古文：抵临洮，别将攻马鞍山西番寨，大获其畜产，袭走元豫王，败扩廓于宁夏。复与达会师取平凉。
现代文：另派兵攻打马鞍山西番寨，大获敌牲畜财产，袭击赶跑了元豫王，在宁夏打败了扩廓，再与徐达会师后攻取平凉。
English: In addition, he sent troops to attack the West Fanzhai of Ma'anshan Mountain, greatly won the enemy's livestock property, attacked and chased away the Yuan Yu Wang, defeated the expansion in Ningxia, and then joined the division with Xu Da to capture Pingliang.

古文：张良臣伪以庆阳降，显往纳之。
现代文：张良臣伪称以庆阳投降，薛显前去受降。
English: Zhang Liangchen pretended to surrender to Qingyang, and Xue Xian went to accept the surrender.

古文：良臣蒲伏道迎，夜劫显营，突围免。
现代文：张良臣伏兵迎击，趁黑夜袭击薛显的兵营，薛显突围。
English: Zhang Liangchen ambushed and took advantage of the darkness to attack Xue Xian's barracks, and Xue Xian broke through.

古文：良臣据城叛，达进围之。
现代文：张良臣据城反叛，徐达围攻。
English: Zhang Liangchen rebelled against the city, and Xu Darong besieged it.

古文：扩廓遣韩紥儿攻原州，以挠明师。
现代文：扩廓派韩扎儿进攻原州，以此来分散明军的力量。
English: He sent Hanzar to attack Wonju in order to disperse the Ming forces.

古文：显驻兵灵州，遏之。
现代文：薛显驻兵灵州加以阻击。
English: Xue Xian stationed in Lingzhou to block it.

古文：良臣援绝，遂败。
现代文：张良臣断绝了后援，于是被打败。
English: Zhang Liangchen cut off the support and was defeated.

古文：追贺宗哲于六盘山，逐扩廓出塞外，陕西悉平。
现代文：追击贺宗哲到六盘山，把扩廓赶出塞外，于是陕西得以全部平定。
English: They chased He Zongzhe to Liupanshan and drove him out of Shaanxi. As a result, Shaanxi was completely pacified.

古文：洪武三年冬，大封功臣。
现代文：洪武三年冬，大封功臣。
English: In the winter of the third year of Hongwu's reign, he became a great vassal.

古文：以显擅杀胥吏、兽医、火者、马军及千户吴富，面数其罪。
现代文：因薛显擅杀胥吏、兽医、火者、马军及千户吴富，当面数落其罪。
English: Because of Xue Xian's unauthorized killing of officials, veterinarians, firemen, horse soldiers and thousands of Wu Fu, he was convicted in person.

古文：封永城侯，勿予券，谪居海南。
现代文：赐封为永城侯，没给予凭证，被贬居海南。
English: He was given the title of Yongcheng marquis, but was not given a certificate, and was relegated to Hainan.

古文：分其禄为三：一以赡所杀吴富及马军之家；一以给其母妻，令功过无相掩。
现代文：把他的食禄一分为三：一份用以赡养他所杀的吴富及马军的家人，一份给他的母亲和妻子，并命令功过不能相抵。
English: He divided his stipend into three parts: one part to support the families of Wu Fu and Ma Jun, whom he had killed, and one part to his mother and wife, and ordered that the merits and demerits should not be offset.

古文：显居海南逾年，帝念之，召还。予世券，食禄一千五百石。
现代文：薛显居住海南过了一年，皇上十分想念他，把他召回，给予世袭的凭证，食禄一千五百石。
English: After Xue Xian had lived in Hainan for a year, the emperor missed him very much, called him back, and gave him a certificate of inheritance and a stipend of fifteen hundred koku.

古文：复从大将军征漠北。
现代文：再次从大将军征讨漠北。
English: Once again, the general conscripted the north of the desert.

古文：数奉命巡视河南，屯田北平，练军山西，从魏国公巡北边，从宋国公出金山。
现代文：多次奉命巡视河南，在北平屯田，在山西练兵，跟从魏国公巡行北疆，跟从宋国公出师金山。
English: He was ordered to patrol Henan many times, to set up a garrison in Peiping, to train soldiers in Shanxi, to patrol Northern Xinjiang with the Emperor of Wei, and to set out for Jinshan with the Emperor of Song.

古文：二十年冬，召还，次山海卫，卒。
现代文：二十年冬被召回，驻扎山海卫，不久，去世。
English: He was recalled in the winter of 20 and stationed at Shanhaiguan. He died soon after.

古文：赠永国公，谥桓襄。
现代文：赐封永国公，谥号桓襄。
English: He was given the title Prince Nagakuni, and his posthumous name was Kanjo.

古文：无子，弟纲幼。
现代文：无子，弟弟薛纲年幼。
English: He had no children, but his younger brother, Xue Gang, was very young.

古文：二十三年追坐显胡惟庸党，以死不问，爵除。
现代文：二十三年追究薛显为胡惟庸余党，因他已死而不予追究，爵位被削去。
English: In 233, Xue Xian was investigated for being a member of the Hu Wei Yong Yu Party, but since he was dead, he was not investigated and his title was taken away.

古文：郭兴，一名子兴，濠人。
现代文：郭兴，又名子兴，濠州人。
English: Guo Xing, also known as Zixing, is from Zhangzhou.

古文：滁阳王郭子兴据濠，称元帅，与隶麾下。
现代文：滁阳王郭子兴占据濠州，自称元帅，统率部下。
English: Guo Zixing, the king of Shenyang, occupied Shengzhou, calling himself a marshal and commanding his subordinates.

古文：太祖在甥馆，兴归心焉。
现代文：太祖在甥馆时，郭兴就归附了，部队前行，曾充任宿卫。
English: When the great-grandfather was at the nephew's residence, Guo Xing was attached, the troops advanced, and he served as a night watchman.

古文：军行，尝备宿卫，累功授管军总管，进统军元帅。围常州，昼夜不解甲者七月。
现代文：累计功劳被授予管军总管，晋升为统军元帅。围攻常州，郭兴昼夜不解甲长达七个月。
English: For his accumulated merits, Guo Xing was awarded the title of Chief of the Central Military Commission and promoted to Marshal of the United Army. Guo Xing besieged Changzhou day and night for seven months.

古文：城下，受上赏。
现代文：城被攻下，郭兴受到皇上赞赏。
English: The city was captured, and Guo Xing was highly praised by the emperor.

古文：从攻宁国、江阴、宜兴、婺州、安庆、衢州，皆下之。
现代文：从大军攻宁国、江阴、宜兴、婺州、安庆、衢州，都被攻下。
English: Ningguo, Jiangyin, Yixing, Zhangzhou, Anqing and Zhangzhou were all conquered by large armies.

古文：战于鄱阳，陈友谅连巨舰以进，我师屡却，兴献计以火攻之。
现代文：交战于鄱阳，陈友谅连接巨舰进攻，太祖军屡败，郭兴献计用火攻。
English: The war was fought in Shenyang, Chen Youxian connected the huge ships to attack, the Taizu Army repeatedly lost, and Guo Xingxian planned to attack with fire.

古文：友谅死。
现代文：陈友谅死。
English: Chen Youyou died.

古文：从征武昌，斩获多，进鹰扬卫指挥使。
现代文：又从大军征武昌，杀、俘敌兵许多，晋升为鹰扬卫指挥使。
English: He also recruited Wuchang from the large army, killed and captured many enemy soldiers, and was promoted to the Eagle Yangwei Commander.

古文：从徐达取庐州，援安丰，大败张士诚兵。
现代文：跟从徐达取庐州，支援安丰，大败张士诚部队。
English: He followed Xu Da to take Bozhou, supported Anfeng, and defeated Zhang Shicheng's troops.

古文：平襄阳、衡、澧。还克高邮、淮安。转战湖州，围平江，军于娄门。
现代文：平定襄阳、衡、澧，攻克高邮、淮安，转战湖州，围攻平江，在娄门驻军。
English: He pacified Xiangyang, Heng and Handan, conquered Gaoyou and Huai'an, turned to Huzhou, besieged Pingjiang, and garrisoned troops in Shimen.

古文：吴平，擢镇国将军、大都督府佥事。
现代文：平定吴后，晋升为镇国将军、大都督府佥事。
English: After Wu was pacified, he was promoted to the general of the township and the grand governor of Anji.

古文：洪武元年，从达取中原，克汴梁，守御河南。
现代文：洪武元年，跟从徐达攻取中原，攻克汴梁，守卫河南。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, he followed Xu Da in conquering the Central Plains, conquered Qilian, and guarded Henan.

古文：冯胜取陕州，请益兵守潼关。
现代文：冯胜占领陕州后，请求派兵守卫潼关。
English: After Feng Sheng occupied Shaanxi, he requested that soldiers be sent to guard Shaoguan.

古文：达曰： 无如兴者。 
现代文：徐达说： 没有比郭兴更合适的。 
English: Xu Da said: Nothing is more suitable than Guo Xing.

古文：遂调守之。
现代文：于是郭兴被调守潼关。
English: As a result, Guo Xing was transferred to guarding Shaoguan.

古文：潼关，三秦门户，时哈麻图据奉元，李思齐、张思道等与为犄角，日窥伺欲东向。兴悉力捍御。
现代文：潼关是三秦的门户，当时，哈麻图据守奉元，李思齐、张思道等互为掎角，窥伺机会准备东犯，郭兴全力守卫。
English: Shaoguan was the gateway to the Three Qin Dynasties. At that time, Hamatou was under the protection of Bongyuan, Li Siqi, Zhang Sidao and others were at each other's throats, watching for opportunities to prepare Eastern criminals, and Guo Xing was on full guard.

古文：王左丞来攻，大败之。
现代文：王左丞进攻，被郭兴击败。
English: Wang Zu Rong attacked and was defeated by Guo Xing.

古文：从徐达帅轻骑直捣奉元。
现代文：跟从徐达率轻骑直捣奉元。
English: Followed by Xu Daxi lightly riding straight and pounding Feng Yuan.

古文：大军继进，遂克之。
现代文：大军继进，终被攻克。
English: A large army followed and was eventually defeated.

古文：移镇巩昌，边境帖然。
现代文：郭兴移镇巩昌，边境安然。
English: Guo Xingyi moved to Gongchang Town, and the border was safe.

古文：三年为秦王武傅，兼陕西行都督府佥事。
现代文：三年为秦王武傅，兼任陕西行都督府佥事。
English: For three years, he was Qin King Wu Fu, and also served as the governor of Shaanxi Province.

古文：其冬，封功臣，兴以不守纪律，止封巩昌侯，食禄一千五百石，予世券。
现代文：这年冬天，赐封功臣，郭兴因以不守纪律的原因，只被封了个巩昌侯，食禄一千五百石，给予世袭的凭证。
English: This winter, Guo Xing was awarded the title of meritorious vassal. Due to his lack of discipline, he was only awarded the title of Gongchang Hou, with a stipend of 1,500 koku, and was given a certificate of inheritance.

古文：四年伐蜀，克汉州、成都。
现代文：四年，讨攻蜀地，攻克汉州、成都。
English: In four years, it planned to attack Shunde, conquer Hanzhou and Chengdu.

古文：六年从徐达镇北平，同陈德败元兵于答刺海口。
现代文：六年，跟从徐达镇守北平，和陈德于答剌海口打败元的部队。
English: Six years later, he followed Xu Dazhen to defend Peking, and defeated Yuan's troops with Chen De at the mouth of the Bohai Sea.

古文：十一年练兵临清。
现代文：十一年在临清练兵。
English: Eleven years of training soldiers in Linqing.

古文：十六年巡北边。召还，逾年卒。
现代文：十六年巡行北疆，被召回，过一年去世。
English: After 16 years of marching in northern Xinjiang, he was recalled and died a year later.

古文：帝谓宁妃曰： 始以汝兄戏言，今实为之，真风汉也。 
现代文：封陕国公，谥号宣武。二十三年，追究胡惟庸党，受牵连，取消爵位。
English: He was named the Prince of Shaanxi Province, and his posthumous name was Xuanwu. In 233, he was involved in the investigation of Hu Wei Yong's party, and his title was revoked.

古文：后党事起，坐死者相属，德成竟得免。陈德，字至善，濠人。
现代文：郭兴的女儿为宁妃，弟弟郭英为武定侯。陈德，字至善，濠州人。
English: Guo Xing's daughter is Ningfei, and his brother Guo Ying is Wudinghou. Chen De, Zhi Shan, is from Zhangzhou.

古文：世农家，有勇力。
现代文：世代务农，勇敢有力气。
English: Generations of farming, courageous and energetic.

古文：从太祖于定远，以万夫长从战，皆有功，为帐前都先锋。
现代文：在定远跟从太祖，担任万夫长，从战皆立功，晋升为帐前都先锋。
English: In Dingyuan, he followed the great-grandfather, served as the commander-in-chief, distinguished himself in the war, and was promoted to the vanguard before the account.

古文：同诸将取宁、徽、衢、婺诸城，擢元帅。
现代文：和诸将一同攻取宁、徽、衢、婺诸城，晋升为元帅。
English: He and his generals captured the cities of Ning, Hebei, Shandong and Fujian, and were promoted to field marshal.

古文：李伯升寇长兴，德往援，击走之。
现代文：李伯升侵犯长兴，陈德支援，打败李伯升。
English: Li Bo-sheng invaded Changxing, Chen De supported and defeated Li Bo-sheng.

古文：从援南昌，大战鄱阳湖，擒水寨姚平章。
现代文：随大军支援南昌，大战鄱阳湖，擒拿水寨姚平章。
English: With the great army supporting Nanchang, the great battle of Poyang Lake, Yao Pingzhang took the water.

古文：太祖舟胶浅，德力战，身被九矢，不退。
现代文：太祖的船被搁浅，陈德奋力迎敌，身上中了九箭而不退缩。
English: Grandfather's ship was stranded, Chen De struggled to meet the enemy, and was hit by nine arrows without flinching.

古文：从平武昌。大败张士诚兵于旧馆，擢天策卫亲军指挥使。
现代文：又从大军平武昌，在旧馆打败张士诚的部队，晋升为天策卫亲军指挥使。
English: He also defeated Zhang Shicheng's troops from the great army of Pingwuchang in the old pavilion and was promoted to the commander of the Tianzhe Weixin Army.

古文：吴平，进佥大都督府事。
现代文：平定吴地后，晋升为佥大都督府事。
English: After the pacification of Wudi, he was promoted to the post of the governor of Shandong Province.

古文：从大将军北取中原，克元汴梁。立河南行都督府，以德署府事，讨平群盗。
现代文：跟从大将军徐达北取中原，攻克元汴梁，建立河南行都督府，任命陈德为府事，讨伐平定群盗。
English: He followed the general Xu Dadu to the north to take the Central Plains, conquered the Yuan Yiliang, established the Henan Provincial Governor's Office, appointed Chen De as the prefectural official, and fought and pacified the bandits.

古文：征山西，破泽州磨盘寨，获参政喻仁，遂会大军克平阳、太原、大同。
现代文：征讨山西，攻破泽州磨盘寨，俘虏参政喻仁，会同大军攻克平阳、太原、大同。
English: He conquered Shanxi Province, broke through the Zezhou Milling Village, made prisoners participate in politics, and conquered Pingyang, Taiyuan, and Datong together with a large army.

古文：渡河取奉元、凤翔，至秦州，元守将吕国公遁，追擒之。
现代文：渡黄河攻取奉元、凤翔，抵达秦州。元守将吕国公逃跑了，被追赶擒拿。
English: He crossed the Yellow River to capture Fengyuan and Fengxiang and arrived in Qinzhou. The former governor of Lvgukong fled and was chased away.

古文：徐达围张良臣于庆阳，良臣恃其兄思道为外援，间使往来，德悉擒获，庆阳遂下。
现代文：徐达在庆阳围攻张良臣，张良臣依恃其兄张思道为外援，派使者往来，陈德全部擒获，庆阳于是被攻下。
English: Xu Da besieged Zhang Liangchen in Qingyang. Zhang Liangchen sent envoys to Qingyang with the help of his brother Zhang Sidao. Chen De captured everything, and Qingyang was conquered.

古文：又大破扩廓于古城，降其卒八万。
现代文：又在古城打败扩廓，敌兵八万投降。
English: In the ancient city, the enemy was defeated and 80,000 soldiers surrendered.

古文：洪武三年，封临江侯，食禄一千五百石，予世券。
现代文：洪武三年赐封为临江侯，食禄一千五百石，给予世袭的凭证。
English: In the third year of Hongwu's reign, he was given the title of Lord of Linjiang, a stipend of fifteen hundred koku, and a certificate of inheritance.

古文：明年，从颍川侯傅友德伐蜀，分道入绵州，破龙德，大败吴友仁之众，乘胜拔汉州。
现代文：第二年跟从颍川侯傅友德讨伐蜀地，分道进入绵州，攻破友德，大败吴友仁的部队，乘胜攻占了汉州。
English: In the second year, he followed Fu Youde, the lord of Shichuan, to fight against Shu, and went to Mianzhou. He defeated Youde, the army of Wu Youren, and conquered Hanzhou.

古文：向大亨、戴寿等走成都，追败之，遂与友德围成都。
现代文：向大亨、戴寿等人逃到成都。陈德率兵追击，与傅友德围攻成都。
English: Xiang Tycoon, Dai Shou and others fled to Chengdu. Chen De led the troops to chase them and besieged Chengdu with Fu Youde.

古文：蜀平，赐白金彩币。复还汴。
现代文：平定蜀地，被赐给白金彩币，再回到汴梁。
English: He subdued Shu, was given platinum coins, and then returned to Qilian.

古文：五年为左副将军，与冯胜征漠北，破敌于别笃山，俘斩万计。
现代文：五年担任左副将军，和冯胜征讨漠北，在别笃山打败敌兵，共杀敌、俘虏数以万计。
English: He served as the left deputy general for five years, and fought with Feng Shengzheng against the north of the desert, defeated the enemy soldiers in Mount Bedu, and killed tens of thousands of enemies and prisoners.

古文：克甘肃，取亦集乃路，留兵扼关而还。
现代文：攻克甘肃，占领亦集乃路，留下部队扼守关口后回师。
English: After conquering Gansu, the occupation also concentrated on the road, leaving the troops to guard the pass and then return to the division.

古文：明年复总兵出朔方，败敌三岔山，擒其副枢失剌罕等七十余人。
现代文：第二年再次带兵出师朔方，在三岔山打败敌人，活捉副枢失剌罕等七十多人。
English: The next year, he again led his troops to the Shuo side, defeated the enemy in Sanliao Mountain, and captured more than seventy people alive, including the vice-emperor.

古文：其秋，再出战于答剌海口，斩首六百级，获其同佥忻都等五十四人。
现代文：这年秋天，再次出战答剌海口，杀敌六百人，俘虏同佥忻都等五十四人。
English: In the autumn of the same year, he went out again to fight in Danghaigou, killed six hundred enemies, and captured fifty-four people including his classmates.

古文：凡三战三捷。
现代文：三战三捷。
English: Three wars, three victories.

古文：七年练兵北平。
现代文：七年在北平练兵。
English: He trained in Peiping for seven years.

古文：十年还凤阳。
现代文：十年回到凤阳。
English: Ten years later, he returned to Fengyang.

古文：王志，临淮人。
现代文：王志，临淮人。
English: Wang Zhi, Lin Huai Ren.

古文：以乡兵从太祖于濠，下滁、和。
现代文：带领乡兵自濠州跟从太祖。攻下滁州、和州。
English: He led the townspeople from Bozhou to follow his ancestor. He conquered Bozhou and Hezhou.

古文：从渡江，屡腾栅先登，身冒矢石。授右副元帅。
现代文：随太祖渡江，冒着炮火，身先士卒，授予右副元帅。
English: Accompanied by the great-great-grandfather, Wujiang, he braved the gunfire and was awarded the title of Right Vice-Marshal.

古文：从取常州、宁国、江阴。复宜兴，攻高邮，捣九江，下黄梅，鏖战鄱阳。
现代文：跟随大军攻取常州、宁国、江阴，回到宜兴，攻占高邮，捣毁九江，挥师攻下黄梅，激战鄱阳。
English: He followed the great army to capture Changzhou, Ningguo, and Jiangyin, returned to Yixing, captured Gaoyou, destroyed Jiujiang, captured Huangmei, and fought fiercely in Poyang.

古文：从平武昌，还克庐州，败张士诚兵，追奔四十里。
现代文：又随大军平武昌，攻克庐州，打败张士诚部队，追敌四十里。
English: He also followed the great army of Pingwuchang to conquer Zhangzhou, defeated Zhang Shicheng's troops, and chased the enemy for forty miles.

古文：以亲军卫指挥使改六安卫，守六安。
现代文：由亲军卫指挥使改任六安卫指挥使，镇守六安。
English: The pro-army guard commander was replaced by the commander of the Rokan Guard, the town guard of Rokan.

古文：从幸汴梁，渡河，取怀庆、泽、潞，留守平阳。
现代文：从皇上到汴梁，渡黄河，攻取怀庆、泽、潞，留守平阳。
English: From the emperor to Qilian, crossed the Yellow River, captured Huaiqing, Ze, Zou, and stayed in Pingyang.

古文：大将军徐达西伐，会师克兴元。
现代文：大将军徐达西征，会师后攻克兴元。
English: The great general Xu Dasi marched west and defeated Xingyuan after joining forces.

古文：洪武三年，进同知都督府事，封六安侯，岁禄九百石，予世券。
现代文：洪武三年，晋升为同知都督府事，封为六安侯，年食禄九百石，给予世袭的凭证。
English: In the third year of Hongwu's reign, he was promoted to the post of Tongzhi's prefectural governor, given the title of Lu'an Hou, an annual stipend of 900 koku, and a certificate of inheritance.

古文：移守汉中，帅兵出察罕脑儿塞，还镇平阳。
现代文：移守汉中，率兵出师察罕脑儿塞，回师镇守平阳。
English: He moved to Hanzhong, and led his troops out of the division at Zhanhan Nengsai, and returned to the division at Pingyang.

古文：复从大将军征沙漠。
现代文：又从大将军徐达征讨沙漠。
English: And from the great general Xu Da to conquer the desert.

古文：其后用兵西南，皆以偏将军从，虽无首功，然持重，未尝败衄。
现代文：这以后出兵西南，都是以偏将军随从。虽然没有头功，但也负责辎重，从来没有失败过。
English: After this, the troops were dispatched to the southwest, all of which were accompanied by the general. Although there was no first prize, they were also responsible for the heavy burdens, and they never failed.

古文：其攻合肥，败楼儿张，擒吴副使，为战功第一。
现代文：他攻打合肥时，打败楼儿张，擒拿了吴副使，立下战功第一。
English: When he attacked Hefei, he defeated Lou'er Zhang, captured Wu's vice-envoy, and won the first place in the war.

古文：领山西都司卫所军务，帝称其处置得宜。
现代文：统管山西都司卫所军务，皇上称赞他处理得当。
English: He was in charge of the military affairs of the Shanxi Garrison, and the emperor praised him for handling it properly.

古文：十六年督兵往云南品甸。缮城池，立屯堡，置驿传，安辑其民。
现代文：十六年，率部队前往云南品甸，修缮城池，建立屯堡，设置驿站，安抚百姓。
English: Sixteen years later, he led the troops to Pingtian, Yunnan, to repair the city, build a camp, set up a post, and pacify the people.

古文：十九年卒。追封许国公，谥襄简。
现代文：十九年去世，追封为许国公，谥号襄简。
English: He died in 19 and was posthumously given the title of Xu Guoguang (许国公). His posthumous name was Xiang Jian.

古文：子威，二十二年嗣侯。
现代文：儿子王威，二十二年继承侯位。
English: His son, Wang Wei, succeeded to the throne in 1922.

古文：明年，坐事谪安南卫指挥使。
现代文：第二年，犯罪被贬任安南卫指挥使。
English: The following year, he was demoted to the post of Annan's defense attaché.

古文：卒，无子。弟琙嗣，改清平卫，世袭。
现代文：去世后，没有儿子，由弟弟王王或继承，改任清平卫，允准世袭。
English: After his death, without a son, he was succeeded by his brother, Wang Wang, who was given the title of Qingpingwei and allowed to succeed to the throne.

古文：志亦追坐胡惟庸党，以死不问。
现代文：王志也被追究为胡惟庸同党，因已去世而不追究。
English: Wang Zhi was also investigated for being a member of Hu Wei Yong's party, but was not investigated because he was dead.

古文：梅思祖，夏邑人。
现代文：梅思祖，夏邑人。
English: Meszu, a native of Natsuura.

古文：初为元义兵元帅，叛从刘福通。
现代文：当初为元义兵元帅，后投靠了刘福通。
English: At first, he was a former volunteer marshal, but later he joined Liu Futong.

古文：扩廓醢其父。
现代文：扩廓于是残酷地杀害了他的父亲。
English: He then brutally murdered his father.

古文：寻弃福通，归张士诚，为中书左丞，守淮安。
现代文：不久他背弃了刘福通归附张士诚，担任中书左丞，镇守淮安。
English: Soon after, he abandoned Liu Futong to join Zhang Shicheng, and served as the Second Secretary of the Central Military Commission and the town guard of Huai'an.

古文：徐达兵至，迎降，并献四州。
现代文：徐达的军队打来，梅思祖迎降，并献上泗州。
English: Xu Da's army called, Meizu accepted the surrender, and presented Zhangzhou.

古文：士诚杀其兄弟数人。
现代文：张士诚杀了他兄弟几人。
English: Zhang Shicheng killed several of his brothers.

古文：太祖擢思祖大都督府副使。
现代文：太祖提拔梅思祖为大都督府副使。
English: The great-grandfather promoted Meizu to vice-envoy of the great governor's office.

古文：从大军伐吴，克升山水寨。下湖州，围平江，皆有功。
现代文：跟随大军讨伐吴，攻克升山水寨，下湖州，围攻平江，都立有战功。
English: Following the great army to fight in Wu, conquer the Shengshan Water Village, the Lower Huzhou, and besiege the Pingjiang, all of them have made great achievements in war.

古文：吴平，迁浙江行省右丞。
现代文：平定吴地后，晋升为浙江行省右丞。
English: After the pacification of Wudi, he was promoted to the Zhejiang Provincial Right-hand Man.

古文：从大将军伐中原，克山东，取汴、洛，破陕州，下潼关。
现代文：跟从大将军讨伐中原，攻克山东，攻取汴、洛，占领陕州，下潼关。
English: Follow the great general to fight in the Central Plains, conquer Shandong, capture Handan and Luo, occupy Shaanxi, and pass through Shimo Shiguan.

古文：旋师徇河北，至卫辉。
现代文：凯旋回师，巡视河北，抵达卫辉。
English: The Triumphal Roundabout Division inspected Hebei and arrived at Weihui.

古文：元平章龙二弃城走彰德，师从之。
现代文：元平章龙二弃城逃跑到彰德，派兵追击。
English: Yuanping Zhanglong abandoned the city and fled to Zhangde, sending soldiers to chase him.

古文：龙二复出走，遂降其城，守之。
现代文：龙二再次逃跑，于是攻占了彰德城，并派兵镇守。
English: Long Er ran away again, so he captured the city of Changde and sent soldiers to guard the town.

古文：略定北平未下州郡。
现代文：平定了北平尚未攻下的州郡。
English: He leveled Zhoushan County, which had not yet been conquered by Peiping.

古文：从大军平晋、冀，复从平陕西。别将克邠州，获元参政毛贵等三十人。
现代文：跟从大军平定晋、冀，又跟随大军平定陕西，另派部队攻克州，俘虏了元参政毛贵等三十人。
English: He followed the great army to subdue Jin and Hebei, and also followed the great army to subdue Shaanxi. He also sent troops to conquer the state and captured thirty people including Mao Gui, a former politician.

古文：从大将军破扩廓于定西。
现代文：跟从大军在定西打败扩廓。
English: Follow the great army in Dingxi to defeat the expansion.

古文：还自秦州，破略阳，入沔州，取兴元。
现代文：回到秦州，攻破略阳，进入沔州，占领兴元。
English: Back to Qinzhou, break through Liaoyang, enter Zhangzhou, occupy Xingyuan.

古文：洪武三年，论功封汝南侯，食禄九百石，予世券。
现代文：洪武三年，论功行赏被封为汝南侯，食禄九百石，给予世袭的凭证。
English: In the third year of Hongwu's reign, he was awarded the title of Junanhou, with a stipend of 900 koku, and was given a certificate of inheritance.

古文：四年伐蜀。
现代文：四年，讨伐蜀地。
English: Four years later, the campaign against Shunde began.

古文：五年征甘肃。
现代文：五年，征讨甘肃。
English: Five years, the conquest of Gansu.

古文：还命巡视山、陕、辽东城池。
现代文：受命巡视山、陕、辽东城池。
English: He was ordered to inspect Shan, Shaanxi, and Liaodong.

古文：十四年，四川水尽源、通塔平、散毛诸洞长官作乱，命思祖为征南副将云南军，与江夏侯周德兴帅兵讨平之。
现代文：十四年，四川水尽源、通塔平、散毛诸洞的首领作乱，命令梅思祖为征南副将军，与江夏侯周德兴率兵讨伐平定了诸洞。
English: In the 14th year, the leaders of Zhuodong, Tongtaping and Shanmao of the Sichuan water source, made a riot, ordered Meizu to be the vice-general of the south, and fought against the soldiers led by Jiangxia Hou Zhou Dexing and leveled Zhuodong.

古文：十五年复与傅友德平云南，置贵州都司，以思祖署都指挥使。
现代文：十五年，再与傅友德平定云南，设置贵州都司，任命梅思祖担任都指挥使。
English: Fifteen years later, he and Fu Youde pacified Yunnan, set up the Guizhou Capital Office, and appointed Meizu as the capital commander.

古文：寻署云南布政司事，与平章潘元明同守云南。
现代文：不久担任云南布政司事，与平章潘元明共同守卫云南。
English: Soon he served as Yunnan Bu Secretary of State, and jointly guarded Yunnan with Pingzhang Pan Yuanming.

古文：思祖善抚辑，远人安之。
现代文：梅思祖善于安抚，使远方的百姓能安居乐业。
English: Mestizo was good at placating, so that people far away could live and work in peace.

古文：是年卒，赐葬钟山之阴。
现代文：就在这一年，梅思祖去世，赐葬于钟山之北。
English: In the same year, Meizu died and was buried in the north of Zhongshan.

古文：子义，辽东都指挥使。
现代文：梅思祖的儿子梅义，辽东都指挥使。
English: Meizu's son, Mei Yi, became the commander of the Liaodong capital.

古文：二十三年追坐思祖胡惟庸党，灭其家。
现代文：二十三年，追究为胡惟庸同党，全家被杀。
English: In 233, he was investigated for being a Hu Wei Yong party member, and his entire family was killed.

古文：思祖从子殷，为驸马都尉，别有传。
现代文：思祖的从子梅殷，为驸马都尉，另有传。
English: It is also said that Sizu's son, Mei Yin, was a lieutenant of the imperial horse.

古文：金朝兴，巢人。
现代文：金朝兴，巢人。
English: Kim Chaoxing, the nester.

古文：淮西乱，聚众结寨自保。
现代文：淮西战乱，他聚众结寨自保。
English: When war broke out in Huaixi, he rallied the people to protect themselves.

古文：俞通海等既归太祖，朝兴亦帅众来附。
现代文：俞通海等人已归附太祖，金朝兴也率部前来归附。
English: Gong Tonghai and others have been annexed to Taizu, and Kim Chaoxing has also come to annex.

古文：从渡江，征伐皆预，有功。
现代文：从太祖渡江，征伐各地，立下战功。
English: From the time of Emperor Taizu's crossing of the Yangtze River to the conquest of various regions, military exploits have been made.

古文：克常州，为都先锋。
现代文：攻克常州，担任都先锋。
English: Conquered Changzhou and served as the vanguard.

古文：复宜兴，为左翼副元帅。
现代文：收复宜兴，担任左翼副元帅。
English: He recovered Yixing and served as the deputy marshal of the left wing.

古文：平武昌，进龙骧卫指挥同知。
现代文：平定武昌，晋升为龙骧卫指挥同知。
English: Wuchang was pacified and he was promoted to the rank of Longyuwei Commander.

古文：平吴，改镇武卫指挥使。
现代文：平定吴地，改任镇武卫指挥使。
English: He subdued Wudi and was appointed commander of the town guards.

古文：克大同，改大同卫指挥使。
现代文：攻克大同，改任大同卫指挥使。
English: After conquering Datong, he was appointed as the commander of Datong Guards.

古文：取东胜州，获元平章刘麟等十八人。
现代文：占领东胜州，俘虏元平章刘麟等十八人。
English: Occupied Dongshengzhou, captured Yuan Pingzhang, Liu Lin and 18 others.

古文：洪武三年，论功为都督佥事兼秦王左相。
现代文：洪武三年，论功行赏封为都督佥事，兼任秦王左相。
English: In the third year of Hongwu's reign, he was awarded the title of governor-general on the basis of his meritorious deeds, and also served as Qin's minister of the left.

古文：未几，解都督府事，专傅王。
现代文：没多久，解除都督府事，专门辅佐秦王。
English: Not long after, he was relieved of his duties as governor and became a special assistant to King Qin.

古文：四年从大军伐蜀。
现代文：四年，跟从大军讨伐蜀地。
English: For four years, he followed the great army to fight against Shu.

古文：七年帅师至黑城，获元太尉卢伯颜、平章帖儿不花并省院等官二十五人。
现代文：七年，统率军队打到黑城，俘虏元太尉卢伯颜、平章帖儿不花和省院等官二十五人。
English: In the seventh year, he led the army to attack Heicheng, and captured the former first lieutenant Lu Boyan, Pingzhang Jie Er Nianhua, and twenty-five provincial officials.

古文：遂从李文忠分领东道兵，取和林，语具文忠传。
现代文：跟从李文忠统领东道兵，攻取和林，详情记载在《李文忠传》里。
English: He followed Li Wenzhong to lead the host army and capture Warim. The details are recorded in "Biography of Li Wenzhong."

古文：朝兴沉勇有智略，所至以偏师取胜，虽未为大帅，而功出诸将上。
现代文：金朝兴沉着勇敢，足智多谋，所到之处常常以少胜多，虽没担任大帅，但功劳高出诸将士。
English: He was calm and brave, resourceful and resourceful. He often used the principle of "less is more" wherever he went. Although he did not serve as commander-in-chief, his achievements were higher than those of other generals.

古文：十一年从沐英西征，收纳邻七站地。
现代文：十一年，跟从沐英西征，收复纳邻七站地。
English: In the eleventh year, he followed Mu Ying's westward expedition and recovered seven stations in the vicinity of Nanning.

古文：明年论功封宣德侯，禄二千石，世袭指挥使。
现代文：第二年论功赐封为宣德侯，食禄二千石，世袭指挥使。
English: In the second year, he was awarded the title of Xuan Dehu, with a stipend of 2,000 koku, and became a hereditary commander.

古文：十五年从傅友德征云南，驻师临安，元右丞兀卜台、元帅完者都、土酋杨政等俱降。
现代文：十五年，跟从傅友德征讨云南，在临安驻军，元右丞兀卜台、元帅完者都、土酋杨政等人都投降了。
English: In the 15th year, following Fu Youde's conquest of Yunnan and garrisoning troops in Lin'an, Yuan Yubutai, Marshal Guanzhong, and Yang Zheng, the local chief, all surrendered.

古文：朝兴抚辑有方，军民咸悦。
现代文：金朝兴安抚有方，军民都十分高兴。
English: The military and the people are very happy that the Kim dynasty has been able to pacify Xing.

古文：嘉靖元年，命立傅友德、梅思祖及朝兴庙于云南，额曰 报功 。唐胜宗，濠人。
现代文：进入会川后，不幸逝世，追封为沂国公，谥号武毅。十七年，论平定云南功劳，变更赐世侯券，增加食禄五百石。唐胜宗，濠州人。
English: After entering Huichuan, he died an unfortunate death and was posthumously named the Duke of Yunnan, with the posthumous name of Wuyi. In the 17th year, he was awarded the title of "Meritorious Servant of Yunnan," and his stipend was increased by 500 koku. Tang Shengzong, a native of Zhangzhou.

古文：太祖起兵，胜宗年十八，来归。
现代文：太祖起兵时，唐胜宗才十八岁，前来归附。
English: When the great-grandfather raised an army, Tang Shengzong was only eighteen years old and came to join.

古文：从渡江，积功为中翼元帅。
现代文：从太祖渡江，积功被赐封为中翼元帅。
English: From the time of Emperor Wujiang, Ji Gong was given the title of Middle Wing Marshal.

古文：从徐达克常州，进围宁国，扼险力战，败其援兵。
现代文：跟从徐达攻克常州，进而围攻宁国，扼守险关力战，打败了敌人的援兵，于是攻下宁国城。
English: He followed Xu Da in conquering Changzhou, and then besieged Ningguo, fought a desperate battle, defeated the enemy's reinforcements, and then captured the city of Ningguo.

古文：城遂降。
现代文：从征婺州，力攻而克。
English: From the conquest of Bozhou, we will attack and defeat.

古文：从征婺州，克之。从征池州，力战，败陈友谅兵，擢龙骧卫指挥佥事。从征友谅，至安庆，敌固守。
现代文：从征池州，力战打败陈友谅的部队，提升为龙骧卫指挥佥事。从征陈友谅，抵达安庆，敌人固守。
English: An anecdote about Chen You Rong, who was promoted to the commander of the Yongle Guards after defeating Chen You Rong's troops in the Battle of Chizhou. Chen You Rong arrived in Anqing after defeating Chen You Rong's troops, and the enemy held fast.

古文：胜宗为陆兵疑之，出不意，捣克其水寨。
现代文：唐胜宗以陆军迷惑敌人，出其不意捣毁敌人水寨。
English: Tang Shengzong used the army to confuse the enemy and destroy the enemy's water fort by surprise.

古文：从下南昌，略定江西诸郡。
现代文：从大军下南昌，平定江西诸郡。
English: Nanchang fell from the great army, and counties in Jiangxi Province were pacified.

古文：援安丰，攻庐州，战鄱阳，邀击泾江口，皆有功。擢骠骑卫指挥同知。
现代文：援助安丰，攻打庐州，激战鄱阳，攻击泾江口，都立下战功，晋升为骠骑卫指挥同知。
English: He assisted Anfeng, attacked Bozhou, fought fiercely against Fenyang, and attacked the mouth of the Minjiang River. He was promoted to the commanding officer of the Horse Guards.

古文：从定武昌，徇长沙、沅陵、澧阳。
现代文：从定武昌，巡行长沙、沅陵、澧阳。
English: From Dingwuchang, the parade will go to Changsha, Fuling and Shenyang.

古文：从徐达取江陵，还定淮东。穴城克安丰，追获元将忻都。为安丰卫指挥使守之。
现代文：跟从徐达攻取江陵，回师平定淮东，用挖洞穴的方法攻克了安丰，追获元将忻都，担任安丰卫指挥使。
English: He followed Xu Da in conquering Jiangling, returned to his division to pacify Huadong, conquered Anfeng by digging a cave, captured the former general Xindu, and served as the commander of Anfeng Wei.

古文：从大将军伐中原，克汴梁、归德、许州，辄留守。
现代文：跟从大将军徐达讨伐中原，攻克汴梁、归德、许州，并留守。
English: He followed the great general Xu Da to fight in the Central Plains, conquered Qilian, returned to Germany, and Huzhou, and stayed behind.

古文：从大军克延安，进都督府同知。
现代文：跟从大军攻克延安，晋升为都督府同知。
English: He followed the great army to conquer Yan'an and was promoted to the post of prefectural governor.

古文：洪武三年冬封延安侯，食禄千五百石，予世券。
现代文：洪武三年冬，封为延安侯，食禄一千五百石，给予世袭的凭证。
English: In the winter of the third year of Hongwu's reign, he was given the title of Yan'an Hou, with a stipend of 1,500 koku, and was given a certificate of inheritance.

古文：坐擅驰驿骑，夺爵，降指挥。
现代文：因擅驰驿骑，被削去爵位，降职为指挥。
English: He was stripped of his knighthood for riding without permission and demoted to the rank of conductor.

古文：捕代县反者。
现代文：捕俘了代县谋反之人。
English: The person who plotted the rebellion on behalf of the county was captured.

古文：久之，复爵。
现代文：一段时间后，恢复了爵位。
English: Some time later, his title was restored.

古文：十四年，浙东山寇叶丁香等作乱，命总兵讨之，擒贼首并其党三千余人。
现代文：十四年，浙东山寇叶丁香等人作乱，受命统兵讨伐，擒拿了贼首和同党三千多人。
English: In the 14th year, Guo Ye Ding Xiang and others in the eastern mountains of Zhejiang Province made a riot, and were ordered to lead the army to fight, and captured the thief's head and more than 3,000 people of the same party.

古文：分兵平安福贼，至临安，降元右丞兀卜台等。
现代文：分兵平定安福贼，抵达临安，降服了元右丞兀卜台等人。
English: The division of troops subdued the Anfu bandits, arrived in Lin'an, and subdued the Yuan Rongtai and others.

古文：十五年巡视陕西，督屯田，简军士。
现代文：十五年巡视陕西，督促屯田，精简军队。
English: He toured Shaanxi Province for 15 years, urging the consolidation of the countryside and streamlining the army.

古文：明年镇辽东，奉敕勿通高丽。
现代文：第二年镇守辽东，奉敕令不与高丽往来。
English: In the second year, he was appointed as the governor of Liaodong Province, and he was ordered not to have any dealings with Goryeo.

古文：高丽使至，察其奸，表闻。赐敕褒美，比魏田豫却乌桓赂，称名臣。
现代文：高丽使者来，观其狡诈，赶紧上表报呈，受到皇上称赞，将他比为魏国拒绝乌桓的贿赂的田豫，一时称为名臣。
English: An envoy from Goryeo came to see Wu Huan's cunning and quickly reported the matter to the emperor. The emperor praised him, comparing him to Tian Yu, who refused Wu Huan's bribe in Wei, and called him a great minister for a while.

古文：在镇七年，威信大著。
现代文：在镇七年，威信大增。
English: In the town for seven years, the prestige has increased greatly.

古文：召还，帅师讨平贵州蛮。练兵黄平。
现代文：被召回后，率兵讨平了贵州蛮，在黄平练兵。
English: After being recalled, he led the troops to defeat the Guizhou barbarians and trained soldiers in Huangping.

古文：二十三年坐胡惟庸党诛，爵除。
现代文：二十三年，因是胡惟庸同党而被杀，削去了爵位。
English: In 233, he was killed for being a party member of Hu Weiyong, and his title was taken away.

古文：陆仲亨，濠人。
现代文：陆仲亨，濠州人。
English: Lu Zhongheng, from Zhangzhou.

古文：归太祖，从征滁州，取大柳树诸寨。
现代文：归附太祖，从征滁州，攻取大柳树诸寨。
English: Attached to the great ancestor, from the conquest of Bozhou, the capture of the Great Willow Village.

古文：克和阳，击败元兵。逐青山群盗。
现代文：攻克和阳，击败元兵，赶跑青山群盗。
English: Conquer Heyang, defeat the Yuan soldiers, and drive away the Aoyama bandits.

古文：从渡江，取太平，定集庆，从徐达下诸郡县。授左翼统军元帅。
现代文：从太祖渡江，攻取太平，平定集庆，跟从徐达攻下诸郡县，授予左翼统军元帅。
English: He crossed the Yangtze River from Taizu, conquered Taiping, pacified Jieqing, conquered counties and counties from Xu Da, and was awarded the title of Marshal of the Left United Army.

古文：从征陈友谅，功多，进骠骑卫指挥使。
现代文：从征陈友谅，功劳较大，晋升为骠骑卫指挥使。
English: Conscript Chen Youjun, with great merit, was promoted to the commanding officer of the Horse Guards.

古文：从常遇春讨赣州，降熊天瑞，为赣州卫指挥使，节制岭南北新附诸郡。
现代文：跟从常遇春讨伐赣州，降服熊天瑞，担任赣州卫指挥使，节制岭南北新归附的诸郡。
English: He followed the Changshu Spring Crusade to conquer Zhangzhou, subdued Xiong Tianrui, served as the commander of the Zhangzhou garrison, and controlled the newly annexed counties from the north to the south of the ridge.

古文：调兵克梅州、会昌、湘乡，悉平诸山寨。
现代文：调兵攻克梅州、会昌、湘乡，全部平定了诸山寨。
English: Troops were dispatched to conquer Meizhou, Huichang, and Hunan, all of which were leveled to the ground.

古文：洪武元年，帅卫军与廖永忠等征广东，略定诸郡县，会永忠于广州，降元将卢左丞。广东平。
现代文：洪武元年，率卫军与廖永忠等人征讨广东，平定诸郡县，在广州和廖永忠会师，降服元将卢左丞，平定广东。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, he led the Guards and Liao Yongzhong and others to conquer Guangdong and pacify the counties. In Guangzhou and Liao Yongzhong, he defeated and subdued the former general Lu Zuorong and pacified Guangdong.

古文：改美东卫指挥使，擢江西行省平章，代邓愈镇襄阳，改同知都督府事。
现代文：改任美东卫指挥使，担任江西省平章。代替邓愈镇守襄阳，改任同知都督府事。
English: He was reappointed as the commander of the East Coast Guard of the United States and served as the commander of Jiangxi Province. He replaced Deng Yu as the town guard of Xiangyang and was reappointed as the governor of Tongzhi.

古文：三年冬封吉安侯，禄千五百石，予世券。
现代文：三年冬，封为吉安侯，食禄一千五百石，给予世袭凭证。
English: In the winter of the third year, he was given the title of Ji'an Hou, a stipend of 1,500 koku, and a certificate of inheritance.

古文：与唐胜宗同坐事降指挥使。捕寇雁门，同复爵。
现代文：和唐胜宗同因犯事降为指挥使，在雁门捕抓寇贼，此后又与唐胜宗一同恢复爵位。
English: He and Tang Shengzong were both demoted to the rank of commander due to a crime, and they caught a robber at the Wild Goose Gate, after which they were reinstated to the peerage together with Tang Shengzong.

古文：十二年与周德兴、黄彬等从汤和练兵临清。
现代文：十二年，与周德兴、黄彬等人跟从汤和在临清练兵。
English: In the twelfth year, with Zhou Dexing, Huang Bin and others, he followed Tang and Linqing to train soldiers.

古文：未几，即军中逮三人至京，既而释之。
现代文：没多久，逮捕军中三人押送京城，不久又释放了他们。
English: Not long after, three members of the arresting force were escorted to the capital, and they were soon released.

古文：移镇成都，平巨津州叛蛮。
现代文：移镇成都，平定巨津州叛蛮。
English: He moved the capital to Chengdu and put down the rebellion in Jiuquan.

古文：乌撒诸蛮复叛，从傅友德讨平之。
现代文：乌撒诸蛮再次叛乱，跟从傅友德前往平定。
English: Usa-zuman rebelled again and followed Fu Youde to Pingding.

古文：二十三年，治胡惟庸逆党，家奴封贴木告仲亨与胜宗、费聚、赵庸皆与通谋，下吏讯。
现代文：二十三年，惩治胡惟庸逆党，家奴封帖木告陆仲亨、唐胜宗、费聚、赵庸都和胡惟庸通谋，于是加以逼供，投入监狱。
English: In the 23rd year, Hu Wei Yong was punished for rebelling against the Party. His family slave, Zhang Mu, accused Lu Zhongheng, Tang Shengzong, Feizhu, and Zhao Yongdu of conspiring with Hu Wei Yong, and forced them to confess and put them in prison.

古文：狱具，帝曰： 朕每怪其居贵位有忧色。 
现代文：皇上说 ：我常常责怪他身居贵位而面有忧色。 
English: The Emperor said, "I have often reproached him for his gloomy countenance in his high position.

古文：遂诛仲亨，籍其家。
现代文：于是下令杀了陆仲亨，抄了他的家。
English: He then gave the order to kill Lu Zhongheng and loot his home.

古文：初，仲亨年十七，为乱兵所掠。父母兄弟俱亡，持一升麦伏草间。
现代文：最初，陆仲亨年方十七，被乱兵所掠，父母兄弟都死了，他手持一升麦伏在草中。
English: In the beginning, when Lu Zhongheng was 17 years old, he was captured by the soldiers, his parents and brothers were all dead, and he was lying in the grass with a liter of wheat.

古文：帝见之，呼曰 来 ，遂从征伐，至封侯。
现代文：太祖见到他，叫道， 来 ，于是陆仲亨就跟随太祖征伐，后来爵至封侯。
English: When the great-grandfather saw him, he called out, "Come," so Lu Zhongheng followed the great-grandfather on the campaign, and later he was given the title of feudal lord.

古文：帝尝曰： 此我初起时腹心股肱也。 
现代文：太祖曾经说 ：他是我最初起兵时的心腹助手啊。 
English: My great-grandfather once said: "He was my closest aide when I first joined the army."

古文：竟诛死。
现代文：竟然也被杀。
English: He was also killed.

古文：费聚，字子英，五河人。
现代文：费聚，字子英，五河人。
English: Fei Ju, Zi Zi Ying, Wuhe people.

古文：父德兴，以材勇为游徼卒。
现代文：父亲叫费德兴，因才智勇猛担任游徼卒。
English: His father's name was Fei Dexing, and he was a tour guide because of his intelligence and bravery.

古文：聚少习技击。
现代文：费聚年少时就操练击技。
English: Fei Ju practiced striking techniques from a young age.

古文：太祖遇于濠，伟其貌，深相结纳。
现代文：和太祖相遇于濠州，因费聚相貌伟岸，深得太祖喜爱，被接纳。
English: He met his great-grandfather in Zhangzhou, and was accepted because of his great-grandfather's deep love for him.

古文：定远张家堡有民兵，无所属，郭子兴欲招之，念无可使者。
现代文：定远张家堡的民兵没有归属，郭子兴想招抚，但思虑着没有使者。
English: The militia of Zhangjiakou, which is far away, has no affiliation. Guo Zi would like to caress them, but he is worried that there is no messenger.

古文：太祖力疾请行，偕聚骑而往，步卒九人俱。
现代文：太祖立即请求前往，带上了费聚和步兵九人。
English: The great-grandfather immediately requested to go and brought Fei Ju and nine infantrymen with him.

古文：至宝公河，望其营甚整，弓弩皆外向。
现代文：到了宝公河，看到民兵的兵营十分整齐，弓弩都向外。
English: When we arrived at the Baogong River, we saw that the militia's barracks were very neat, and the bows and arrows were all facing outward.

古文：步卒惧，欲走。
现代文：步卒害怕，想逃走。
English: The pawn is scared and wants to run away.

古文：太祖曰： 彼以骑蹴我，走将安往？ 
现代文：太祖说： 他们像坐骑一样，如果踢我，又能逃到哪里去？ 
English: She said, "They are like horses. If they kick me, where will they go?"

古文：遂前抵其营。
现代文：于是抵达了民兵的军营。
English: They arrived at the militia's barracks.

古文：招谕已定，约三日。太祖先归，留聚俟之。
现代文：招谕事宜已定，约定三天后，太祖先回去了，留下费聚等候。
English: The matter of the invitation had already been decided. Three days after the appointment, the great-grandfather went back, leaving Feiyu to wait.

古文：其帅欲他属，聚还报。
现代文：民兵的首领想另附他人，费聚回去报告。
English: The militia leader wanted to attach someone else, so they gathered to go back and report.

古文：太祖复偕聚以三百人往，计缚其帅，收卒三千人。
现代文：太祖和费聚带领三百人再次前往，用计谋抓住了民兵的首领，收编了其部下三千人。
English: Taizu and Fei Ju led 300 people to go there again, and they used stratagems to capture the leader of the militia and recruit 3,000 of his subordinates.

古文：豁鼻山有秦把头八百余人，聚复招降之。
现代文：豁鼻山有秦把头八百多人，费聚再次招降了他们。
English: There are more than 800 people in Qinqiao, Huanhanshan, and Feiyu has recruited and demoted them again.

古文：遂从取灵璧，克泗、滁、和州。
现代文：于是从太祖取灵璧，攻克泗、滁、和州。
English: So he took inspiration from his great-great-grandfather to conquer Min, Shan, and Zhoushou.

古文：授承信校尉。
现代文：授予承信校尉。
English: Awarded the rank of lieutenant.

古文：既定江东，克长兴，立永兴翼元帅府，以聚副耿炳文为元帅。
现代文：平定江东后，攻克长兴，设立永兴翼元帅府，耿炳文为元帅，费聚为副。
English: After pacifying the eastern part of the Yangtze River, he conquered Changxing and established the Yongxing Wing Marshal's Office, with Geng Bingwen as marshal and Fei Ju as deputy.

古文：张士诚入寇，击败之。
现代文：张士诚入侵，被打败。
English: Zhang Shicheng invaded and was defeated.

古文：召领宿卫。
现代文：召领宿卫。
English: Call the captain and the guards.

古文：援安丰，两定江西，克武昌，皆从。
现代文：援助安丰，两次平定江西，攻克武昌，费聚都从战。
English: Aid to Anfeng, twice pacified Jiangxi, conquered Wuchang, and Feizhu all went to war.

古文：改永兴翼元帅府为永兴亲军指挥司，仍副炳文为指挥同知。
现代文：改永兴翼元帅府为永兴亲军指挥司，费聚仍协助耿炳文担任指挥同知。
English: He changed the Yongxing Wing Marshal's Office to Yongxing Pro-army Command Division, and Fei Ju still assisted Geng Bingwen to serve as commander.

古文：士诚复入寇，获其帅宋兴祖，再败之。
现代文：张士诚再次入侵，费聚等俘虏其帅宋兴祖，再次将其击败。
English: Zhang Shicheng invaded again, Feizhu and others captured his handsome Song Xingzu, and defeated him again.

古文：士诚夺气，不敢复窥长兴。
现代文：张士诚元气大伤，不敢再窥视长兴。
English: Zhang Shicheng's vitality was severely injured, and he dared not look at Changxing again.

古文：随征淮安、湖州、平江，皆有功，进指挥使。
现代文：随征淮安、湖州、平江，都立有战功，晋升为指挥使。
English: He was enlisted in Huai'an, Huzhou and Pingjiang, and was promoted to commander.

古文：汤和讨方国珍，聚以舟师从海道邀击。
现代文：汤和讨伐方国珍，费聚率领舟师从海道袭击。
English: Tang and the crusader Guozhen, Fei Ju led the boatmen to attack from the highway.

古文：浙东平，复由海道取福州，破延平。
现代文：浙东平定了，费聚又从海道攻取福州，攻破延平。
English: East Zhejiang was leveled, Feiyu also captured Fuzhou from the sea route and defeated Yanping.

古文：归次昌国，剿海寇叶、陈二姓于兰秀山。至是，聚始独将。
现代文：回到昌南，在兰秀山围剿叶、陈二姓海寇，至此，费聚开始独立作战了。
English: Back in Changnan, in the Lanxiu Mountain area, Chen II, surnamed Haikou, began to fight independently.

古文：洪武二年会大军取西安，改西安卫指挥使，进都督府佥事。镇守平凉。
现代文：洪武二年，会同大军攻取西安，改任西安卫指挥使，晋升为都督府佥事，镇守平凉。
English: In the second year of Hongwu, he led a large army to conquer Xi'an. He was appointed as the commander of the Xi'an Guards, promoted to the post of prefectural governor, and served as the governor of Pingliang.

古文：三年封平凉侯，岁禄千五百石，予世券。
现代文：三年，封为平凉侯，年食禄一千五百石，给予世袭的凭证。
English: Three years later, he was given the title of Ping Liang Hou (平凉侯) with an annual stipend of 1,500 koku and was given a certificate of inheritance.

古文：时诸将在边屯田募伍，岁有常课。
现代文：当时诸将在边疆屯田招兵，每年都上缴常规的赋税。
English: At that time, they would recruit soldiers in the frontier garrison and pay regular taxes every year.

古文：聚颇耽酒色，无所事事。
现代文：费聚沉溺酒色，无所事事。
English: Fei Jiu indulged in alcoholism and idleness.

古文：又以招降无功，召还，切责之。
现代文：又因招降无功，被召回，受到痛责。
English: He was also severely reprimanded for failing to win a promotion and demotion, and was recalled.

古文：明年从傅友德征云南，大战白石江，擒达里麻。
现代文：第二年跟从傅友德征讨云南，大战白石江，活捉了达里麻。
English: In the second year, he followed Fu Youde to conquer Yunnan, fought in the Baishijiang River, and captured Darima alive.

古文：云南平，进取大理。
现代文：云南平定后，进而攻取大理。
English: After Yunnan was pacified, they went on to capture Dali.

古文：未几，诸蛮复叛，命副安陆侯吴复为总兵。授以方略，分攻关索岭及阿咱等寨，悉下之。蛮地始定。
现代文：没多久，诸蛮又叛乱，命安陆侯吴复担任总兵，费聚协从，授以计策，分头攻击关索岭和阿咱等寨，全部被攻下，蛮地最终得以平定。
English: Not long after, the barbarians rebelled again, and Anlu Hou Wu Fu was appointed as the commander-in-chief, Fei Juxi followed, and was given a strategy, and attacked Guansoling and Azi and other villages separately. All of them were captured, and the barbarians were finally subdued.

古文：置贵州都指挥使司，以聚署司事。
现代文：设置贵州都指挥使司，任命费聚担任司事。
English: Set up the Guizhou Capital Command and Envoy Department, and appointed Feizhu as the secretary.

古文：十八年命为总兵官，帅指挥丁忠等征广南，擒火立达，俘其众万人。
现代文：十八年，受命担任总兵官，率领指挥丁忠等人征讨广南，活捉了火立达，俘虏其部下上万人。
English: In 18 years, he was appointed as the chief military officer, led the command of Ding Zhong and others to conquer Guangnan, captured Hu Lida alive, and captured tens of thousands of his subordinates.

古文：还镇云南。
现代文：回守云南。
English: It's time to defend Yunnan.

古文：孙宏，从征云南，积功为右卫指挥使。
现代文：二十三年被召回。李善长事败，供词中牵连到费聚。太祖说 ：费聚以前出使姑苏不称旨，我曾谴责他，于是他想造反了！ 
English: Twenty-three years later, he was recalled. Li Shanzhong was defeated, and Feizhu was implicated in his confession. Taizu said: Feizhu's previous envoy, Gu Su, was not up to the task, I had condemned him, so he wanted to rebel!

古文：坐奏对不实，戍金齿。陆聚，不知何许人。元枢密院同知。
现代文：最终费聚坐胡惟庸党而被杀，削去了爵位。陆聚，不知是哪里人，元枢密院同知。
English: In the end, Fei Ju, a member of Hu Wei Yong's party, was killed and stripped of his title. Lu Ju, I don't know who he is, is a former privy councillor.

古文：脱脱败芝蔴李于徐州，彭大等奔濠。
现代文：脱脱在徐州打败芝麻李，彭大等人逃奔濠州。
English: Defeated Zhima Li in Xuzhou, Peng Da and others fled to Ganzhou.

古文：聚抚戢流亡，缮城保境，寇不敢犯。
现代文：陆聚招抚流亡，修缮城堡保卫境内，敌人不敢来犯。
English: The land gathers, the exile is attracted, the castle is repaired, the territory is defended, and the enemy does not dare to come.

古文：徐达经理江、淮，聚以徐、宿二州降。
现代文：徐达治理江、淮，陆聚以徐、宿二州来降。
English: Xu Da governed Jiang and Huai, while Lu Ju ruled the two states of Xu and Shu.

古文：太祖尝诏谕： 二州，吾桑梓地，未忍加兵。 
现代文：太祖曾经诏谕 ：二州是我的桑梓之地，不忍心派兵攻打。 
English: The great-grandfather once decreed: "Niju is my land of mulberry trees, I can't bear to send troops to attack."

古文：及归附，大悦。以聚为江南行省参政，仍守徐州。遣兵略定沛、鱼台、邳、萧、宿迁、睢宁。
现代文：听到归附的消息，太祖十分高兴，任命陆聚为江南行省参政，仍镇守徐州，派兵平定沛、鱼台、邳、萧、宿迁、睢宁等地。
English: Hearing the news of the annexation, Taizu was very happy. He appointed Lu Zhuang to participate in politics as a province in the south of the Yangtze River. He still guarded Xuzhou and sent troops to pacify Dingpei, Yutai, Handan, Xiao, Suqian, Handan and other places.

古文：扩廓遣李左丞侵徐，驻陵子村。
现代文：扩廓派李左丞进犯徐州，在陵子村驻兵。
English: Li Zu Rong sent Li Zu Rong to invade Xuzhou and stationed troops in Lingzi Village.

古文：聚遣指挥傅友德击之，俘其众，擒李左丞。
现代文：陆聚派指挥傅友德前去迎战，俘虏许多敌军，活捉了李左丞。
English: The commander Fu Youde of the Luju faction went to meet the battle, captured many enemy troops, and captured Li Zuoren alive.

古文：又败元兵于宿州，擒佥院邢端等。
现代文：又在宿州打败了元兵，活捉佥院邢端等人。
English: They also defeated the Yuan soldiers in Suzhou, and captured alive Yu Yingjun, Yu Dongtang and others.

古文：从定山东，平汴梁。
现代文：随大军定山东，攻取汴梁。
English: With a large army, Ding Shandong marched to capture Yan Liang.

古文：还镇，改山东行省参政。
现代文：回守徐州，改任山东行省参政。
English: He returned to defend Xuzhou and was appointed to Shandong Province to participate in politics.

古文：从平元都，略大同、保定、真定。攻克车子山及凤山、城山、铁山诸寨，分守井陉故关，会师陕西，克承天寨。
现代文：随大军平定元都，进攻大同、保定、真定，攻克车子山和凤山、城山、铁山诸寨，分兵镇守井陉故关，在陕西会师，攻克承天寨。
English: With the great army, they conquered the Yuan capital, attacked Datong, Baoding, and Zhending, conquered Chezishan and Fengshan, Chengshan, and Tieshan villages, divided their forces to defend Jingyao Old Pass, joined the division in Shaanxi, and conquered Chengdian Village.

古文：聚所部皆淮北劲卒，虽燕、赵精骑不及也。
现代文：陆聚的部队由淮北精锐士兵组成，燕、赵的精骑无与伦比。
English: The troops of Luju were composed of elite soldiers from Huaibei, and the fine riding of Yan and Zhao was unparalleled.

古文：北征，沂、邳山民乘间作乱，召聚还，讨平之。
现代文：北征，沂、邳山民乘机作乱，召回陆聚，讨伐平定了他们。
English: The Northern Expedition, and the Lushan and Shaoshan people took advantage of the opportunity to create turmoil, recalled the land gathering, and the crusade leveled them.

古文：洪武三年，封河南侯，岁禄九百石，予世券。
现代文：洪武三年封为河南侯，年食禄九百石，给予世袭的凭证。
English: Hongwu was made a Henan marquess for three years, with an annual stipend of 900 kilos, and was given a certificate of inheritance.

古文：八年，同卫国公愈屯田陕西，置卫戍守。
现代文：八年，和卫国公邓愈在陕西屯田，设置卫戍守。
English: In the eighth year, together with Deng Yu, the Prince of Wei, he set up the garrison in Tunden, Shaanxi.

古文：十二年同信国公和练兵临清。
现代文：十二年，和信国公汤和在临清练兵。
English: In the twelfth year, and Xin Guo Gong Tang and Lin Qing train soldiers.

古文：寻理福建军务。
现代文：不久负责福建的军务。
English: He was soon put in charge of military affairs in Fujian.

古文：召还，赐第凤阳。
现代文：被召回，赐住宅于凤阳。
English: He was recalled and given a residence in Fengyang.

古文：二十三年坐胡惟庸党死，爵除。
现代文：二十三年，因胡惟庸党案牵连，被杀，削去爵位。
English: In 233, he was implicated in the Hu Wei Yong Party case, killed, and stripped of his title.

古文：郑遇春，濠人。
现代文：郑遇春，濠州人。
English: Zheng Yichun, from Zhangzhou.

古文：与兄遇霖俱以勇力闻。
现代文：和兄长郑遇霖都以勇敢闻名。
English: He and his older brother, Zheng Yu-lin, are both known for their bravery.

古文：遇霖与里人有郤，欲杀之，遇春力护，得解取。
现代文：郑遇霖和里人有矛盾，想杀了他们，郑遇春极力调解并化解了矛盾。
English: Zheng Yuchun tried his best to mediate and resolve the conflict between Zheng Yulin and the villagers, who had a conflict and wanted to kill them.

古文：众皆畏遇霖，而以遇春为贤。
现代文：众人都害怕郑遇霖，而认为郑遇春十分贤良。
English: Many people are afraid of Zheng Rulin, but think that Zheng Ruchun is very virtuous.

古文：太祖下滁州，遇霖为先锋。取铁佛冈、三郤河、大柳等寨，遇春亦累功至总管。
现代文：太祖攻下滁州，郑遇霖担任先锋，攻取铁佛冈、三汊河、大柳等寨，郑遇春累计功劳被任命为总管。
English: The great ancestor conquered Bozhou, Zheng Yu Lin served as the vanguard, and conquered the Iron Buddha Hill, the Three Gorges River, the Big Willow Village, etc. Zheng Yu Chun was appointed as the general manager for his accumulated merits.

古文：攻芜湖，遇霖战死，遇春领其众。
现代文：攻打芜湖，郑遇霖战死，郑遇春统率了他的部队。
English: Attacking Wuhu, Zheng Yulin was killed in battle, and Zheng Yuchun led his troops.

古文：时诸将所部不过千人，遇春兼两队，而所部尤骁果。累战功多，授左翼元帅。
现代文：当时诸将的部队不过千人，而郑遇春则兼任两支部队的首领，他的部下又十分骁勇，多次勇战，功绩卓著，授予左翼元帅。
English: At that time, the troops of the generals were only a thousand people, while Zheng Yuchun concurrently served as the leader of two troops. His subordinates were very brave, fought bravely many times, performed outstanding feats, and were awarded the left wing marshal.

古文：从平陈友谅，身先士卒，未尝自言功，太祖异之。
现代文：从大军平定陈友谅，身先士卒，从不自夸其功。太祖认为他十分奇特。
English: Chen Youyong, who was the first to pacify a large army, never boasted of his achievements. The great-grandfather thought he was very strange.

古文：取六安，为六安卫指挥佥事。
现代文：攻取六安，担任六安卫指挥佥事。
English: He captured Lu'an and served as the commander of the Lu'an garrison.

古文：从大将军定山东、河南北，克朔州，改朔州卫指挥副使。
现代文：跟从大将军平定山东、黄河南北，攻克朔州，改任朔州卫指挥副使。
English: He followed the general to pacify Shandong and the north and south of the Yellow River, and conquered Shuozhou. He was appointed deputy commander of Shuozhou Military Region.

古文：洪武三年，进同知大都督府事，封荥阳侯，岁禄九百石，予世券。
现代文：洪武三年，晋升为同知大都督府事，封为荥阳侯，年食禄九百石，给予世袭的凭证。
English: In the third year of Hongwu's reign, he was promoted to the post of Tongzhi Datu Governor, given the title of Poyang Marquis, an annual stipend of nine hundred koku, and a certificate of inheritance.

古文：明年命驻临濠，开行大都督府。坐累夺爵。
现代文：第二年受命驻守临濠，开行大都督府，因受到牵累而被削去爵位。
English: In the following year, he was ordered to stay in Linyi and run the Dadu Prefecture. He was stripped of his knighthood because of his involvement.

古文：寻复之，复守朔州。
现代文：不久得以恢复，再次镇守朔州。
English: It was soon able to recover and once again garrisoned Shuozhou.

古文：从傅友德平云南，帅杨文等经略城池屯堡。
现代文：跟从傅友德平定云南，率杨文等人经略城池屯堡。
English: He followed Fu Youde in pacifying Yunnan, and led Yang Wen and others to conquer cities and fortified towns.

古文：还京，督金吾诸卫，造海船百八十艘，运饷辽东，籍陕西岷州诸卫官马。
现代文：回到京城，统率金吾诸卫，兴造海船一百八十艘，运饷辽东，登记陕西岷州诸卫的官马。
English: Returning to Beijing, he led the Jinwu Zhuwei, built 180 ships, transported them to Liaodong, and registered the official horses of the Zhuwei in Luzhou, Shaanxi.

古文：二十三年坐胡惟庸党死。爵除。
现代文：二十三年，受胡惟庸党案牵连，被杀，削去爵位。
English: In 233, he was implicated in Hu Wei Yong's party case, killed, and stripped of his title.

古文：黄彬，江夏人。
现代文：黄彬，江夏人。
English: Huang Bin, from Jiangxia.

古文：从欧普祥攻陷袁、吉属县，徐寿辉以普祥守袁州。
现代文：跟从欧普祥攻陷袁、吉属县，徐寿辉任用欧普祥镇守袁州。
English: After Ou Puxiang conquered Yuan and Jizhen County, Xu Shouhui appointed Ou Puxiang as the town guard of Yuanzhou.

古文：及陈友谅杀寿辉，僣伪号，彬言于普祥曰： 公与友谅比肩，奈何下之？
现代文：到了陈友谅杀害徐寿辉，僭称伪号时，黄彬对欧普祥说： 您和陈友谅一样高，为什么矮他一等？
English: When it came to Chen Youzhen killing Xu Shouhui and calling him a fake name, Huang Bin said to Ou Puxiang: You are as tall as Chen Youzhen, why are you shorter than him?

古文：友谅骄恣，非江东敌也。
现代文：陈友谅骄横恣意，不是江东的对手。
English: Chen Youyou is not an opponent of Jiangdong.

古文：保境候东师，当不失富贵。 
现代文：保卫境内，等候东面军队的到来，这样才不失富贵。 
English: Protect the territory and wait for the arrival of the eastern army, so as not to lose wealth.

古文：普祥遂遣使纳款。
现代文：欧普祥于是派使者前来归附。
English: Ou Puxiang then sent an emissary to return it.

古文：友谅遣弟友仁攻之。
现代文：陈友谅派其弟陈友仁进攻。
English: Chen Youzhen sent his brother Chen Youren to attack.

古文：彬与普祥败其众，获友仁。
现代文：黄彬和欧普祥打败了来犯之敌，俘虏了陈友仁。
English: Huang Bin and Ou Puxiang defeated the invading enemy and captured Chen Youren.

古文：友谅惧，约分界不相犯，乃释友仁。
现代文：陈友谅害怕了，相约分界互不侵犯，于是黄彬释放了陈友仁。
English: Chen Youren was scared and agreed not to encroach on the demarcation line, so Huang Bin released Chen Youren.

古文：时江、楚诸郡皆为陈氏有，袁扼其要害，潭、岳、赣兵不得出。友谅势大蹙。
现代文：当时江、楚诸郡都被陈友谅占据，袁处在其要害处，所以，潭、岳、赣的部队不敢出击，陈友谅的势力深感窘迫。
English: At that time, Jiang and Chu counties were all occupied by Chen Youpeng, and Yuan was at the critical point. Therefore, the troops of Tan, Yue and Handan did not dare to attack, and Chen Youpeng's forces were deeply embarrassed.

古文：太祖兵临之，遂弃江州，彬力也。
现代文：太祖兵临城下，陈友谅丢弃了江州，这是黄彬的功劳。
English: Huang Bin is to be credited with the fact that Chen Youxian abandoned Jiangzhou when the soldiers of the Great Ancestor were approaching the city.

古文：太祖至龙兴，令普祥仍守袁州，而以彬为江西行省参政。
现代文：太祖到了龙兴，命令欧普祥仍镇守袁州，而任命黄彬为江西行省参政。
English: When the great-grandfather arrived in Longxing, he ordered Ou Pu Xiang to continue to guard Yuanzhou, and appointed Huang Bin to participate in politics in Jiangxi Province.

古文：未几，普祥死，彬领其众。
现代文：没多久，欧普祥死了，黄彬统领了他的军队。
English: Not long after, Ou Puxiang died, and Huang Bin took command of his army.

古文：普祥故残暴，彬尽反所为，民甚安之。
现代文：欧普祥十分残暴，而黄彬则完全相反，老百姓深感十分安宁。
English: Ou Puxiang is very violent, while Huang Bin is the complete opposite, and the people feel very peaceful.

古文：从常遇春征赣州。
现代文：跟从常遇春征讨赣州。
English: To follow the Spring Festival Campaign to discuss Bozhou.

古文：饶鼎臣据吉安，为熊天瑞声援。
现代文：饶鼎臣占据吉安，熊天瑞声援。
English: Rao Dingchen occupies Ji'an, Xiong Tianrui supports.

古文：遇春兵至，鼎臣走安福，彬以兵蹑之。
现代文：常遇春的部队来到，饶鼎臣逃至安福，黄彬带兵跟踪追击。
English: When the Spring Army came, Rao Dingchen fled to Anfu, and Huang Bin and his soldiers followed and chased them.

古文：鼎臣走茶陵，天瑞乃降。
现代文：饶鼎臣逃到茶陵，熊天瑞投降。
English: Rao Dingchen fled to Chaling, Xiong Tianrui surrendered.

古文：永新守将周安叛，彬从汤和执安，鼎臣亦殪。
现代文：永新守将周安反叛，黄彬跟从汤和平定叛乱，饶鼎臣也被杀。
English: Yong Xinshu rebelled against Zhou An, Huang Bin followed Tang to pacify the rebellion, and Rao Dingchen was also killed.

古文：移镇袁州，招集诸山寨。江西悉定。
现代文：移镇袁州，招集诸山寨，江西全部得以平定。
English: They moved the town of Yuanzhou and summoned all the cottages, and all of Jiangxi was pacified.

古文：进江淮行省中书左丞。
现代文：晋升为江淮行省中书左丞。
English: He was promoted to the Third Secretary of the Central Government of Jianghuai Province.

古文：洪武三年封宜春侯，岁禄九百石，予世券。
现代文：洪武三年，封为宜春侯，岁食禄九百石，给予世袭的凭证。
English: In the third year of Hongwu's reign, he was given the title of Yichun Hou, a stipend of nine hundred koku, and a certificate of inheritance.

古文：四年，赣州上犹山寇叛，讨平之。
现代文：四年，赣州上犹山寇叛乱，黄彬征讨平定。
English: In four years, the insurgency of the Shangyu-Yushan-Kou rebellion in Zhangzhou was subdued by the Huangbin Conscription.

古文：五年，古州等洞蛮叛，以邓愈为征南将军，三道出师，彬与营阳侯璟出澧州。
现代文：古州等洞蛮叛，任命邓愈为征南将军，分三路出兵，黄彬和营阳侯杨瞡出师澧州。
English: Gushu and other provinces rebelled violently, and Deng Yu was appointed as a general to invade the south. He dispatched troops in three directions, and Huang Bin and Yang Jiong, the governor of Yingyang Province, were dispatched to Zhangzhou.

古文：师还，赐第中都。
现代文：回师后，赐房屋于中都。
English: After returning to his teacher, he was given a house in Zhongdu.

古文：明年从徐达镇北平，出练兵沂州、临清。
现代文：第二年，跟从徐达镇守北平，在沂州、临清练兵。
English: In the second year, he followed Xu Dazhen to guard Beiping, and trained soldiers in Luzhou and Linqing.

古文：二十三年坐胡惟庸党死，爵除。
现代文：二十三年，因胡惟庸党案牵连，被杀，削去爵位。
English: In 233, he was implicated in the Hu Wei Yong Party case, killed, and stripped of his title.

古文：叶升，合肥人。
现代文：叶升，合肥人。
English: Ye Sheng, from Hefei.

古文：左君弼据庐，升自拔来归。
现代文：左君弼占据庐州，叶升前来归附。
English: Zuo Junya occupied Zhangzhou, and Ye Sheng came to annex it.

古文：以右翼元帅从征江州，以指挥佥事从取吴，以府军卫指挥使从定明州。
现代文：以右翼元帅的身份从征江州，以指挥佥事身份随大军攻取吴地，以府军卫指挥使身份从定明州。
English: As the right wing marshal, he led the conquest of Jiangzhou, as the commander of Anji, he followed the large army to conquer Wudi, and as the commander of the palace guards, he led the conquest of Dingmingzhou.

古文：洪武三年论功，佥大都督府事。
现代文：洪武三年论功行赏，担任大都督府事。
English: In the third year of Hongwu's tenure, he was awarded for his meritorious service and assumed the post of prefectural governor.

古文：明年从征西将军汤和以舟师取蜀。
现代文：第二年跟从征西将军汤和用水师攻取蜀地。
English: In the second year, he followed the general Tang and the water engineer to conquer Shu.

古文：越二年，出为都指挥使，镇守西安，讨平庆阳叛寇。
现代文：再过二年，出任都指挥使，镇守西安，讨平庆阳叛敌。
English: Two years later, he was appointed as the commander of the capital, the town guard of Xi'an, and fought against the Qingyang rebels.

古文：十二年复佥大都督府事。
现代文：十二年，再任大都督府事。
English: In 2012, he was reappointed to the post of prefectural governor.

古文：西番叛，与都督王弼征之，降乞失迦，平其部落。
现代文：西番叛乱，与都督王弼一同率兵征讨，降服了乞失迦，平定其部落。
English: Xifan rebelled, and together with the governor Wang Qian, led the soldiers to enlist, subdued Qigong Gao, and pacified his tribe.

古文：复讨平延安伯颜帖木儿，擒洮州番酋。
现代文：又讨伐平定延安伯颜帖木儿，活捉洮州番酋。
English: He also fought against and pacified Yan'an Boyan Timur, and captured the Zhangzhou chiefs alive.

古文：论功，封靖宁侯，岁禄二千石，世指挥使。
现代文：评论功劳，封其为靖宁侯，年食禄二千石，世袭指挥使。
English: Commenting on his merits, he was awarded the title of Jing Ning Hou, an annual stipend of 2,000 koku, and the title of hereditary commander.

古文：镇辽东，修海、盖、复三城。
现代文：镇守辽东，修缮海、盖、复三座城市。
English: Zhengu Liaodong, repair the sea, cover, complex three cities.

古文：在镇六年，边备修举，外寇不敢犯。
现代文：在镇六年，边防设施得到修缮，敌人不敢侵犯。
English: After six years in the town, the border defense facilities have been repaired, and the enemy does not dare to invade.

古文：发高丽赂遗，帝屡赐敕，与唐胜宗同褒。
现代文：发高丽赂遗，太祖多次赐敕，和唐胜宗一道得到褒奖。
English: Emperor Gaoli bestowed posthumous honors on her, and Emperor Taizu bestowed posthumous honors on her many times. She received awards together with Emperor Tang Shengzong.

古文：二十年，命同普定侯陈桓总制诸军于云南定边、姚安，立营、屯田，经理毕节卫。
现代文：二十年，受命同普定侯陈桓在云南定边、姚安总制诸军，设立军营屯田，治理毕节卫。
English: Twenty years ago, Chen Huan, the Marquis of Puting, was ordered to organize the troops in Yunnan's Dingbian and Yao'an provinces, set up military camps and garrisons, and govern Bijiewei.

古文：明年，东川、龙海诸蛮叛，升以参将从沐英讨平之。
现代文：第二年，东川、龙海诸蛮叛乱，叶升以参将身份跟从沐英讨伐平定诸蛮。
English: In the second year, Dongchuan and Longhai rebelled against the barbarians, and Ye Sheng, as a general, followed Mu Ying to fight and pacify the barbarians.

古文：已而湖广安福所千户夏德忠诱九溪洞蛮为寇，升同胡海等讨之。潜兵出贼后，掩击，擒德忠。立永定、九溪二卫，因留屯襄阳。
现代文：不久，湖广安福所千户夏德忠引诱九溪洞蛮为寇贼，叶升同胡海等人讨伐平定，派兵侵袭敌人后方，活捉了夏德忠，设立永定、九溪二卫，留兵屯守襄阳。
English: Soon after, the thousand households of the Hukangan Welfare Institute of Xia Dezhong lured the Jiuxi Cave barbarians to become robbers. Ye Sheng, together with Hu Hai and others, fought and pacified them, sent troops to invade the enemy's rear, captured Xia Dezhong alive, set up Yongding and Jiuxi Erwei, and left soldiers to guard Xiangyang.

古文：赣州山贼复结湖广峒蛮为寇。
现代文：赣州山贼又联合湖广洞蛮为敌。
English: The mountain bandits of Zhangzhou and the United Lake Guangdong are fierce enemies.

古文：升为副将军，同胡海等讨平之，俘获万七千人。
现代文：叶升为副将军，同胡海等人讨伐平定，俘虏敌人一万七千人。
English: Ye Sheng was promoted to vice-general, fought and pacified with Hu Hai and others, and captured 17,000 enemies.

古文：升凡三平叛蛮。再出练兵甘肃、河南。
现代文：叶升三次平定了蛮人的叛乱，又出师甘肃、河南练兵。
English: Ye Sheng quelled the rebellion of the barbarians three times, and sent troops to Gansu and Henan to train soldiers.

古文：二十五年八月，坐交通胡惟庸事觉，诛死。
现代文：二十五年八月，由于牵涉胡惟庸党案，被杀。
English: In August 2005, he was killed due to his involvement in the Hu Wei Yong Party case.

古文：凉国公蓝玉，升姻也，玉败，复连及升，以故名隶两党云。
现代文：凉国公蓝玉是叶升的姻亲，蓝玉失败后，又牵连了叶升。叶升故名 两党 。
English: Liang Guogong and Blue Jade were Ye Sheng's in-laws. After Blue Jade's defeat, Ye Sheng was implicated. Ye Sheng's former name was Two Parties.

古文：赞曰：诸将当草昧之际，上观天命，委心明主，战胜攻取，克建殊勋，皆一时之智勇也。及海内宁谧，乃名隶党籍，或追论，或身坐，鲜有能自全者。
现代文：所以，叶升属于 两党 人物。
English: Therefore, Ye Sheng belongs to both parties.

