古文：同光元年冬十月辛未朔，日有食之。
现代文：同光元年十月一日，日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on October 1 of the same year.

古文：是日，皇后刘氏、皇子继岌归鄴宫，帝送于离亭，歔欷而别。
现代文：这一天，皇后刘氏、皇子李继岌回邺宫，庄宗在离亭送行，唏嘘而别。
English: On this day, Empress Liu and Prince Li Jizhe returned to the Summer Palace, and Zhuo Zong saw them off at the departure pavilion.

古文：诏宣徽使李绍宏、宰相豆卢革、租庸使张宪、兴唐尹王正言同守鄴城。
现代文：诏令宣徽使李绍宏、宰相豆卢革、租庸使张宪、兴唐尹王正言一同守卫邺城。
English: Li Shaohong, Prime Minister Zhu Ruge, Zengyong envoy Zhang Xian, and Xingtang Yin Wang Zhengyan were sent to defend Lucheng together.

古文：壬申，帝御大军自杨刘济河。
现代文：二日，庄宗率大军从杨刘渡黄河。
English: On the second day, Zhuang Zong led a large army to cross the Yellow River from Yang Liu.

古文：癸酉，至郓州。
现代文：三日，到郓州。
English: On the third day, to Ganzhou.

古文：是夜三鼓，渡汶。
现代文：这晚三鼓时分，渡汶河。
English: This evening, at the time of the three drums, it is time to cross the Wen River.

古文：时王彦章守中都。
现代文：这时王彦章守卫中都。
English: At this time, Wang Hanzhang was guarding the capital.

古文：甲戌，帝攻之，中都素无城守，师既云合，梁众自溃。
现代文：四日，庄宗进攻，中都平时没守备，军队临时集合，梁军自然溃败。
English: On the fourth day, Zhuangzong attacked, Zhongdu did not defend in peacetime, the army temporarily assembled, and Liang's army was naturally defeated.

古文：是日，擒梁将王彦章及都监张汉杰、赵廷隐、刘嗣彬、李知节、康文通、王山兴等将吏二百余人，斩馘二万，夺马千匹。
现代文：这一天，俘获梁将王彦章和都监张汉杰、赵廷隐、刘嗣彬、李知节、康文通、王山兴等将官二百多人，斩杀二万，夺取马匹上千。
English: On this day, more than 200 generals, including Liang general Wang Yanzhang, and governors Zhang Hanjie, Zhao Tingyin, Liu Zibin, Li Zhisai, Kang Wentong, and Wang Shanxing, were captured, 20,000 were killed, and thousands of horses were captured.

古文：时既获中都之捷，帝召诸将谋其所向，或言且徇兗州，徐图进取，唯李嗣源曰： 宜急趋汴州。
现代文：此时取得大捷，庄宗召各位将军谋划下一步去向，有人说先攻取兖州，再慢慢计划进取，只有李嗣源说： 应该急去汴州。
English: At this time, a great victory was achieved, Zhuang Zong called on the generals to plan the next step. Some people said that they should first capture Zhangzhou, and then slowly plan to advance. Only Li Siyuan said: We should rush to Zhangzhou.

古文：段凝方领大军驻于河上，假如便来赴援，直路又阻决河，须自滑州济渡，十万之众，舟楫焉能卒办？
现代文：段凝正带大军驻在黄河边，假如他来救援，走直路受黄河阻隔，必须从滑州渡河，十万之众，渡船哪能一下子解决？
English: Duan Rong is stationed with a large army on the edge of the Yellow River. If he comes to the rescue, he will have to cross the river from Slanting, a hundred thousand people, how can the ferry solve it all at once?

古文：此去汴城咫尺，若昼夜兼程，信宿即至，段凝未起河堧，夷门已为我有矣。
现代文：从这里去汴城只有咫尺，如果昼夜兼程，连着两个晚上就能到，段凝还没从河边出发，夷门已被我们占据了。
English: It's just a stone's throw from here to Lucheng. If you travel both day and night, you can get there in two consecutive nights. Even before we set off from the river, Yimen has been occupied by us.

古文：臣请以千骑前驱，陛下御军徐进，鲜不克矣。 
现代文：请给我一千骑兵打前锋，陛下率军慢慢走，没有不成功的。 
English: Please give me a thousand cavalry to play the forward, his majesty led the army to walk slowly, there is no unsuccessful.

古文：帝嘉之。
现代文：庄宗赞许他。
English: Zhuang Zong praised him.

古文：是夜，嗣源率前军先进。
现代文：这晚，李嗣源率前军先走。
English: That night, Li Siyuan led the former army to go first.

古文：翼日，车驾即路。
现代文：第二天，大军上路。
English: The next day, the army hit the road.

古文：丁丑，次曹州，郡将出降。
现代文：七日，到曹州，郡将出城投降。
English: On the 7th, in Caozhou, Gu will leave the city and surrender.

古文：己卯迟明，前军至汴城，嗣源令左右捉生攻封丘门，梁开封尹王瓚请以城降。
现代文：九日天亮，前军到汴城，李嗣源令左右捉生将攻封丘门，梁开封尹王瓒献城投降。
English: At dawn on the 9th, the front army arrived in Lucheng. Li Siyuan ordered his troops to capture Qiumen and Liang Kaifeng surrendered.

古文：俄而帝与大军继至，王瓚迎帝自大梁门入。
现代文：不久，庄宗和大军赶到，王瓒迎接庄宗从大梁门入城。
English: Not long after, Zhuangzong and his army arrived, and Wang Yao greeted Zhuangzong as he entered the city through the Great Beam Gate.

古文：梁朝文武官属于马前谒见，陈叙世代唐臣陷在伪廷，今日再睹中兴，虽死无恨。
现代文：梁朝文武官员在庄宗马前拜见，陈述自己世代是唐臣陷落在伪朝廷里，今天再见唐朝中兴，虽死无恨。
English: Liang Chao Wenwu officials met in front of Zhuang Zongma, stating that his generation was a Tang courtier trapped in the pseudo-court, and today he would see Tang Chao Zhongxing again, although he died without hatred.

古文：帝谕之曰： 朕二十年血战，盖为卿等家门无足忧矣，各复乃位。 
现代文：庄宗对他们说： 我血战二十年，都是为了你们等人，用不着忧虑，各回原位吧。 
English: Zhuangzong said to them, "I have been fighting for twenty years, all for you and others. There is no need to worry. Let's go back to our original positions."

古文：时梁末帝硃锽已为其将皇甫麟所杀，获其首，函之以献。
现代文：这时梁末帝朱钅皇已被他的将军皇甫麟杀了。砍下头，装在匣子里献上。
English: At this time, Emperor Zhu Rong, the last emperor of the Liang Dynasty, had been killed by his general, Emperor Fulin. He cut off his head and presented it in a box.

古文：是日，赐乐工周匝币帛。
现代文：这一天，赐给乐工周匝钱布。
English: On this day, the musician Zhou Ye Qianbo was given.

古文：周匝者，帝之宠伶也，胡柳之役陷于梁，帝每思之，至是谒见，欣然慰接。
现代文：周匝是庄宗宠爱的演员，胡柳之战时被梁朝抓走，庄宗常常思念他，现在进见，十分高兴。
English: Zhou Qi was a favorite actor of Zhuang Zong. He was captured by the Liang Dynasty during the Battle of Hu Liu. Zhuang Zong often missed him. Now he is very happy to see him.

古文：周匝因言梁教坊使陈俊保庇之恩，垂泣推荐，请除郡守，帝亦许之。
现代文：周匝趁机说受到梁教坊使陈俊保庇之恩，哭泣推荐，请任为郡守，庄宗也答应了。
English: Zhou Qian took the opportunity to say that he was recommended by Liang Qiaofang's envoy Chen Jun Bao Pi, and asked to be appointed as the county governor. Zhuang Zong also agreed.

古文：庚辰，帝御元德殿，梁百官于朝堂待罪，诏释之。
现代文：十日，庄宗到元德殿，梁朝百官在朝堂请罪，下诏免除。
English: On the tenth day, Zhuangzong went to the Yuan De Palace, and hundreds of officials of the Liang Dynasty pleaded guilty in the palace and were absolved.

古文：壬午，段凝所部马步军五万解甲于封丘。
现代文：十二日，段凝所率骑兵步兵五万在封丘缴械。
English: On the twelfth day, 50,000 cavalry and infantry soldiers led by the Danjong disarmed at Fenqiu.

古文：凝等率大将先至请死，诏各赐锦袍、御马、金币。
现代文：段凝等率大将先到请死，庄宗下诏各赐锦袍、御马、金币。
English: Duan Rong and other generals arrived first to ask for death, and Zhuangzong issued an edict to give each of them a brocade robe, a horse, and gold coins.

古文：帝幸北郊，抚劳降军，各令还本营。
现代文：庄宗到北郊，慰问降军，令他们各回军营。
English: Zhuangzong went to the northern suburbs to offer condolences to the troops who had fallen, and ordered them to return to their barracks.

古文：丙戌，诏曰： 惩恶劝善，务振纪纲；激浊扬清，须明真伪。盖前王之令典，为历代之通规，必按旧章，以令多士。而有志萌僭窃，位忝崇高，累世官而皆受唐恩，贪爵禄而但从伪命，或居台铉，或处权衡，或列近职而预机谋，或当峻秩而掌刑宪，事分逆顺，理合去留。
现代文：十六日，下诏说： 惩恶劝善，务必振兴纪纲；激浊扬清，必须明辨真伪，前王的令典，是历代通规，必须按照旧有的章程来指导官吏，而有存心窃取，身居高官，几代受唐朝恩典却贪图官禄侍奉伪朝，或当宰相，或掌大权，或参预机谋，或掌刑司法，事情有逆有顺，按理来决定你们的去留。
English: On the 16th, the next imperial edict said: To punish evil and encourage good, it is imperative to revitalize the discipline; to inspire clarity, it is necessary to clearly distinguish between truth and falsehood. The former king's edict is the general rule of all generations. It is necessary to guide officials in accordance with the old regulations. However, there are those who deliberately steal and hold high positions. For several generations, they have been favored by the Tang Dynasty, but covet official positions to serve the False Dynasty. Whether it is to be the prime minister, or to hold great power, or to participate in pre-emptive tactics, or to hold the judicial power, things have ups and downs,

古文：伪宰相郑珏等一十一人，皆本朝簪组，儒苑品流。
现代文：伪宰相郑珏等十一人，都是本朝贵官，儒林名流。
English: The eleven people, including the pseudo-prime minister Zheng Qi, were all high-ranking officials of this dynasty and famous figures in the Confucianism.

古文：虽博识多闻，备明今古；而修身慎行，颇负祖先。
现代文：虽然博学多识，通知古今，但在修养品格上颇对不住祖先。
English: Although erudite and knowledgeable, inform the ancients and moderns, but in the cultivation of character quite sorry for the ancestors.

古文：昧忠贞而不度安危，专利禄而全亏名节，合当大辟，无恕近亲。
现代文：不明忠贞而不能同度艰难，留恋利禄而损害名节，应当处死，连近亲也不能饶恕。
English: If one does not know how to be loyal without being difficult at the same time, and if one harms one's reputation by clinging to a lucrative job, one should be put to death, and even close relatives cannot be forgiven.

古文：朕以缵嗣丕基，初平巨憝，方务好生之道，在行含垢之恩。
现代文：我因为刚继承帝位，刚平定大恶，正务求好生之道，力行含垢之恩。
English: Because I have just inherited the throne, I have just quelled the great evil, I am trying to seek a good way of life, and I am doing my best to contain the dirt.

古文：汤网垂仁，既矜全族；舜刑投裔，兼贷一身。
现代文：汤施法网时讲仁义，哀怜全族；舜设刑典时讲慈爱，兼全一身。
English: When Tang gave the law, he spoke of benevolence and righteousness, and pitied the whole nation; when he issued the criminal code, he spoke of mercy and compassion, and he was the best of both worlds.

古文：尔宜自新，我全大体，其为显列，不并庶僚。
现代文：你们应当自新，我保全你们，仍为显要，不与一般官员并列。
English: Be renewed in the spirit of your minds; for I will keep you, and ye shall be established, and shall not be reckoned among the rulers.

古文：余外应在周行，悉仍旧贯，凡居中外，咸体朕怀。 
现代文：其他的应在官列，仍全部按以前次序，凡朝廷内外都应体会我的心意。 
English: Others should be in the line of succession, still all according to the previous order, and everyone inside and outside the imperial court should experience my heart.

古文：乃贬梁宰相郑珏为莱州司户，萧顷为登州司户，翰林学士刘岳为均州司马，任赞房州司马，姚顗复州司马，封翘唐州司马，李怿怀州司马，窦梦征沂州司马，崇政院学士刘光素密州司户，陆崇安州司户，御史中丞王权随州司户，并员外置同正员。
现代文：于是贬梁宰相郑珏为莱州司户，萧顷为登州司户，翰林学士刘岳为均州司马，任赞为房州司马，姚岂页为复州司马，封翘为唐州司马，李怿为怀州司马，窦梦征为沂州司马，崇政院学士刘光素为密州司户，陆崇为安州司户，御史中丞王权为随州司户，全为员外官而待遇同正员官。
English: As a result, Liang Zheng, the prime minister, was appointed the governor of Laizhou; Xiao He, the governor of Dengzhou; Liu Yue, the scholar of Hanlin, the governor of Junzhou; Ren Zhan, the governor of Fangzhou; Yao Zhaozhe, the governor of Fuzhou; Huan Gao, the governor of Tangzhou; Li Hui, the governor of Huizhou; Dou Mengsheng, the governor of Zhangzhou; Liu Guangsu, the scholar of Chongzheng Academy, the governor of Myizhou; Lu Chong, the governor of Anzhou; and Wang Quan, the governor of Suizhou, all of

古文：是日，以梁将段凝上疏奏： 梁朝权臣赵严等，并助成虐政，结怨于人，圣政惟新，宜诛首恶。 
现代文：这一天，因梁将段凝上书说： 梁朝权臣赵岩等人，助成虐政，与人结怨，圣政新起，应除掉首恶。 
English: On this day, because Liang put the paragraph into writing, he said: Liang's powerful vassal Zhao Yan and others helped the tyrannical government and made grievances with people. A new holy government should get rid of the first evil.

古文：乃下诏曰：
现代文：于是庄宗下诏说：
English: So Zhuangzong issued an edict:

古文：朕既殄伪庭，显平国患。
现代文： 我既已消灭伪朝，平除国患。
English: I have already eliminated the false dynasty and eliminated the national disease.

古文：好生之令，含宏虽切于予怀；惩恶之规，决断难违于众请。
现代文：好生之令，在我胸中常有；惩恶之规，却难违民众的要求。
English: The commandment to live a good life is often in my heart; the rule to punish evil, however, is difficult to go against the demands of the people.

古文：况赵严、赵鹄等，自朕收城数日，布惠四方，尚匿迹以潜形，罔悛心而革面，须行赤族，以谢众心。
现代文：况且赵岩、赵鹄等人，自从我收城几天来，传布恩惠，他们还躲藏不见，不愿洗心革面，必须杀掉全家，以谢众人之心。
English: What's more, Zhao Yan, Zhao Yao and others have been spreading the good news of bounty for a few days since I took back the city. They are still in hiding. Unwilling to change their ways, they had to kill their entire family in order to win the hearts of the people.

古文：其张汉杰昨于中都与王彦章同时俘获，此际未详行止，偶示哀矜。
现代文：张汉杰昨在中都和王彦章同时被俘，还不知他们所作所为究竟如何，偶然还表示哀怜。
English: Zhang Hanjie was captured yesterday in Zhongdu at the same time as Wang Yanzhang. He did not know what they had done, and he happened to express his sorrow.

古文：今既上将陈词，群情激怒，往日既彰于僭滥，此时难漏于网罗，宜置国刑，以塞群论。
现代文：现在既有将军告状，群情激怒，以前做尽坏事，现在难逃法网，应予严惩，以平民愤。
English: Now that a general has been sued, the public is outraged, he has done all kinds of bad things before, now he can't escape the net of the law, he should be severely punished, and the public is angry.

古文：除妻兒骨肉外，其他疏属仆使，并从释放。
现代文：除妻儿骨肉外，其他远亲仆吏，都予释放。
English: Except for the flesh and blood of his wife and children, all other servants who are distant relatives will be released.

古文：敬翔、李振，首佐硃温，共倾唐祚，屠害宗属，杀戮朝臣，既寰宇以皆知，在人神而共怒。
现代文：敬翔、李振，最先辅佐朱温，一同倾覆唐朝社稷，杀害皇帝亲属和朝臣，天下人都知道，人神共怒。
English: Qian Xiang, Li Zhen, first assisted by Zhu Wen, together overthrew the Tang Dynasty and killed the emperor's relatives and courtiers. The whole world knows that people and gods are angry together.

古文：敬翔虽闻自尽，未豁幽冤，宜与李振并族于市。疏属仆使，并从原宥。
现代文：敬翔虽已自杀，仍不能逃出冥界惩罚，应与李振一起全族人都杀掉，关系疏远的仆役加以宽恕。
English: Although Qixiang has committed suicide, he still cannot escape the punishment of the underworld. He and Li Zhen should be killed together with the whole family, and the servant who is distantly related should be pardoned.

古文：硃珪素闻狡蠹，唯务谗邪，斗惑人情，枉害良善，将清内外，须切去除，况众状指陈，亦宜诛戮。
现代文：朱王圭一贯狡猾，谗言邪行，惑乱人心，枉害良善，如要内外清静，必须去掉，况且大家指控他，也应杀掉。
English: Zhu Wanggui has always been cunning, saying and doing evil things, confusing people's minds, and harming goodness. If he wants to be calm inside and outside, he must be removed. Moreover, everyone accused him, and he should be killed.

古文：契丹实喇鄂博，既弃其母，又背其兄。
现代文：契丹撒剌阿拨，既离开母亲，又背叛兄长。
English: Khitan Sagar Adzhel, who left his mother and betrayed his brother.

古文：朕比重怀来，厚加恩渥，看同骨肉，锡以姓名，兼分符竹之荣，叠被颁宣之渥。
现代文：我怀柔远来之人，厚待于他，看作骨肉，赐给姓名，又给他官做，又常赏赐他。
English: Whom I have loved from afar, I have treated as my own flesh and blood. I have given him a name, a position, and a reward.

古文：而乃辄辜重惠，复背明廷，罔顾欺违，窜归伪室，既同枭獍，难贷刑章，可并妻子同戮于市。
现代文：却辜负大恩，背弃我朝，不顾欺违，逃窜到伪朝，既然和畜牲行径相同，难予宽恕，应和妻子一同杀掉。
English: But he betrayed the great grace, betrayed my dynasty, disregarded the deception, and fled to the false dynasty. Since his behavior is the same as that of an animal, it is hard to forgive, and he should be killed together with his wife.

古文：其硃氏近亲，赵鹄正身，赵严家属，仰严加擒捕。
现代文：还有朱氏近亲，赵鹄本人、赵岩家属，都要严加搜捕。
English: There are also Zhu's close relatives, Zhao Yao himself, and Zhao Yan's family members, who must be strictly searched and arrested.

古文：其余文武职员将校，一切不问。
现代文：其余文武职员将校，一律不追究。 
English: The remaining civil and military staff officers will not be investigated.

古文：是日，赵严、张希逸、张汉杰、张汉伦、张汉融、硃珪、敬翔、李振及契丹实喇鄂博等，并其妻孥，皆斩于汴桥下。
现代文：这一天，赵岩、张希逸、张汉杰、张汉伦、张汉融、朱王圭、敬翔、李振以及契丹撒剌阿拨等人，和他们的妻子儿女都在汴桥下杀掉。
English: On this day, Zhao Yan, Zhang Xiyi, Zhang Hanjie, Zhang Hanren, Zhang Han Rong, Zhu Wanggui, Qian Xiang, Li Zhen, and Qidan Zangadi, as well as their wives and children, were all killed under the bridge.

古文：又诏除毁硃氏宗庙神主，伪梁二主并降为庶人。
现代文：又下诏毁掉朱氏宗庙神主，伪梁二主一并降为庶人。
English: He also issued an edict to destroy the deity of the Zhu family temple, and the two false Liang deities were reduced to commoners.

古文：《洛阳缙绅旧闻记》载张全义表云： 伏念臣误栖恶木，曾饮盗泉，实有瑕疵，未蒙昭雪。 
现代文：天下官名府号及寺观门额曾经改过名的，一起回复原名。此时庄宗欲挖梁祖之墓，斫棺焚柩，河南尹张全义上书说理，请求恩典。庄宗才作罢，只是下令铲除阙室。
English: At this time, Zhuangzong wanted to dig up the tomb of Liang Zu, burn the coffin, and Henan Yin Zhang Quan Yi sent a letter to reason and ask for grace. Zhuangzong only gave up and ordered the destruction of the burial chamber.

古文：因下诏雪之。以枢密使、检校太保、守兵部尚书郭崇韬权行中书事。
现代文：二十一日，梁朝百官因诛凶族，在崇元殿等候请罪，庄宗下诏各复原位。任枢密使、检校太保、守兵部尚书郭崇韬暂行中书公事。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, hundreds of officials of the Liang Dynasty were waiting in the Suyuan Palace to plead guilty for instigating the barbarians, and the Zhuangzong issued an edict to restore each of them to their original positions.

古文：己丑，御崇元殿。
现代文：二十三日，庄宗到崇元殿。
English: On the 23rd, Shōzō went to Sōgen-den.

古文：制曰：
现代文：发文书说：
English: The release said:

古文：仗顺讨逆，少康所以诛有穷；缵业承基，光武所以灭新莽。
现代文： 顺天行道讨伐逆贼，少康所以诛有穷；继承先业，光武所以灭王莽。
English: To fight against the traitors in accordance with the heavenly path, it is necessary to be poor to be less well-off; it is necessary to inherit the first occupation, and it is necessary to be brave to destroy the king.

古文：咸以中兴景命，再造王猷，经纶于草昧之中，式遏于乱略之际。
现代文：都以中兴天命，再造王朝，从草莽中起事，奋战于乱世之中。
English: All of them took the ZTE Mandate of Heaven, rebuilt the dynasty, rose up from the grass, and fought in the chaotic world.

古文：朕以钦承大宝，显荷鸿休，虽继前修，固惭凉德，誓平元恶，期复本朝，属四海之阽危，允万邦之推戴。
现代文：我以天赐大宝，担负大任，虽继承前贤业绩，却有愧于薄德难以匹配，发誓平定首恶，复兴本朝，遇上四海之危，受万邦拥护。
English: With the great treasure bestowed by Heaven, I shouldered a great responsibility. Although I inherited the performance of the forerunners, I am ashamed of my poor virtue, which is hard to match. I swear to put down the first evil, revive this country, encounter the danger of the four seas, and be supported by all nations.

古文：近者亲提组练，径扫氛袄，振已坠之皇纲，殄偷安之寇孽。
现代文：最近亲自率军扫除妖氛，振兴已衰落的皇纲、消灭偷安的寇贼。
English: Recently, he personally led the army to sweep away the demonic atmosphere, revitalize the fading imperial system, and eliminate the bandits who stole the peace.

古文：国雠方雪，帝道爰开，拯编氓覆溺之艰，救率土倒悬之苦。
现代文：刚报国仇，帝道大开，救百姓于覆灭之境，解天下于倒悬之中。
English: He has just waged national revenge, opened up the imperial road, saved the people from destruction, and solved the problem of the world being upside down.

古文：粤自硃温构逆，友贞嗣凶，篡杀二君，隳残九庙，虺毒久伤于宇宙，狼贪肆噬于华夷。剥丧元良，凌辱神主，帝里动黍离之叹，朝廷多栋桡之危。
现代文：自从朱温叛逆、朱友贞继续作恶，篡杀二君，摧残九庙，像毒蛇一样伤害天下，像豺狼一样吞灭华夷，剥丧良善，凌辱神主，皇帝故里多叹息，朝廷上下多艰危。
English: Since Zhu Wen rebelled and Zhu Youzhen continued to do evil, assassinating two princes, destroying nine temples, harming the world like a viper, devouring China like a jackal, stripping away the good, and insulting the Lord, the emperor has sighed more and the court has been more difficult.

古文：弃德崇奸，穷兵黩武，战士疲劳于力役，蒸民耗竭其膏腴，言念于斯，轸伤弥切。
现代文：弃德从奸，穷兵黩武，战士疲劳转战，百姓耗竭资产，每想到这里，哀伤尤深。
English: Every time I think of this, my sorrow is especially deep.

古文：今则已枭逆竖，大豁群情，睹历数之有归，实神灵之匪昧。
现代文： 今天已杀叛逆，群情振奋，这是天命有归，神灵佑护。
English: Today, the rebels have been killed, and the people are excited. This is God's will and God's protection.

古文：得不临深表诫，驭朽为怀，将宏济于艰难，宜特行于赦宥。
现代文：岂可不临深诫告，驾驭衰朽，要渡过艰难，应该特行宽恕。
English: How can we not be deeply admonished to control decay, to overcome hardships, and to practice forgiveness?

古文：应伪命流贬责授官等，已经量移者，并可复资，徒流人放归乡里。
现代文：凡是受伪职该流放贬斥的官员已经改移近地的，可以恢复俸禄，一般流放的放归本乡。
English: Any official who has been transferred to a nearby place and who has been censured by the fake post and the banishment may have his or her salary restored, and those who have been banished can generally return to their hometowns.

古文：京畿及诸道见禁囚徒，大辟罪降从流，已下咸赦除之。
现代文：京郊及诸道被囚禁的犯人，犯死罪的降为流放，以下刑徒全部赦免。
English: The prisoners in the suburbs of Beijing and in various provinces who had committed capital crimes were reduced to exile, and all the following prisoners were pardoned.

古文：其郑珏等一十一人，未在移复之限。
现代文：郑珏等十一人不在移复之内。
English: Eleven people, including Zheng Qi, were not included in the repatriation.

古文：应扈从征讨将校，及诸官员、职掌节级、马步兵士及河北诸处屯驻守戍兵士等，皆情坚破敌，业茂平淮，副予戡定之谋，显尔忠勤之节，并据等第，续议奖酬。
现代文：凡是随从征战的将校，以及各官员、职掌节级、骑兵步兵及河北各地屯驻守戍士兵等，都坚心破敌，功业超过平定淮蔡，助我勘定大计，显示忠诚节操，都按等级论功行赏。
English: All the officers who accompanied the war, as well as the officials, officials, cavalry infantrymen and soldiers stationed in various parts of Hebei Province, are determined to defeat the enemy, their achievements exceed the pacification of Huai Cai, help me calculate the overall plan, show loyalty and discipline, and are rewarded according to the grade theory.

古文：其有殁于王事未经追赠者，各与赠官；如有子孙堪任使者，并量材录任。
现代文：战死而没追赠的各予赠官；如有子孙可担任职务的，一并量材录用。
English: Those who died in the war but did not receive a posthumous award were given positions; if there are descendants who can hold positions, they will be hired together.

古文：应伪庭节度、观察、防御、团练等使及刺史、监押、行营将校等，并颁恩诏，不议改更，仍许且称旧衔，当俟别加新命。
现代文：凡是伪朝节度、观察、防御、团练等使以及刺史、监押、行营将校等，一并颁给恩诏，不再更改，仍允许暂称旧衔，等以后另授新职。
English: All the envoys of the pseudo-Dynasty, such as those in charge of ceremonies, observation, defense, and group training, as well as those in charge of history, detention, and camp officers, will be awarded the edict at the same time, and will not be changed. It is still allowed to temporarily call them the old titles, and they will be awarded new positions later.

古文：理国之道，莫若安民；劝课之规，宜从薄赋。
现代文： 治国之道，莫如安民；劝民生产，应该薄赋。
English: There is no better way to govern a country than to keep the people safe; the best way to persuade the people to work is to give them a small stipend.

古文：庶遂息肩之望，冀谐鼓腹之谣。应诸道户口，并宜罢其差役，各务营农。
现代文：这样庶几可以顺应百姓轻松歇息的愿望，希望谐合鼓腹而歌的民谣，凡是各道户口，一并免除差役，各务农业。
English: In this way, they can comply with the people's desire to rest easily, and hope to harmonize the folk songs that are sung by the people. All households in each province will be exempted from duty, and all agricultural affairs will be exempted.

古文：所系残欠赋税，及诸务悬欠积年课利，及公私债负等，其汴州城内，自收复日已前，并不在征理之限；其诸道，自壬午年十二月已前，并放。
现代文：欠交税款以及往年积下的利息和公私债务，在汴州城内，从收复之日以前，不在征收之限；在各道，从壬午年十二月以前，一并放免。
English: Tax arrears, as well as interest and public and private debts accumulated in previous years, are not subject to collection in Zhangzhou City until the day of recovery; in all provinces, they are exempted from December of the Year of the Horse.

古文：北京及河北先以祆祲未平，配买征马，如有未请却官本钱，及买马不迨者，可放免。
现代文：北京和河北以前因没平定，配置征马，如有没领到官府本钱，以及买马不到的，可放免。
English: Beijing and Hebei have not been pacified before, the allocation of requisitioned horses, if they have not received the government capital, and can not buy horses, can be released.

古文：应有本朝宗属及内外文武臣僚，被硃氏无辜屠害者，并可追赠。
现代文：凡是本朝宗属及内外文武官员，被朱氏无辜杀害者，都可追赠。
English: All those who were innocently killed by the Zhu clan, including the officials of the imperial family and the civil and military officials at home and abroad, can be posthumously awarded.

古文：如有子孙及本身逃难于诸处漂寓者，并令所在寻访，津置赴阙。
现代文：如有子孙及本人逃难到各处流居的，都令所在机构查访，安置回原地。
English: If there are children and grandchildren and the person himself/herself who have fled to various places to live, have the organization visit them and resettle them back to their original place.

古文：义夫节妇，孝子顺孙，旌表门闾，量加赈给。或鳏寡惸独，无所告者，仰所在各议拯救。
现代文：义夫节妇，孝子贤孙，要予以表彰，按量救济，还有鳏寡孤独无所依靠的，要所在官府加以拯救。
English: The righteous husbands' wives, the filial sons and the wise grandsons should be commended and given relief according to the amount, and the widows and widowers who are alone and have nothing to rely on should be rescued by the government.

古文：民年过八十者，免一子从征。
现代文：百姓有过八十岁的，免去一子从征。
English: If a commoner is over 80 years old, one son is exempted from conscription.

古文：其有先投过伪庭将校官吏等，一切不问云。
现代文：凡有原先在伪廷干过的将校官吏，一概不加追问。 
English: All officers and officials who had previously worked in the pseudo-court were not questioned.

古文：甲午，以枢密使、检校太保、守兵部尚书、太原县男郭崇韬为开府仪同三司、守侍中、监修国史、兼真定尹、成德军节度使，依前枢密使、太原郡侯，仍赐铁券。
现代文：二十八日，任枢密使、检校太保、守兵部尚书、太原县男郭崇韬为开府仪同三司、守侍中、监修国史、兼真定尹、成德军节度使，依任前枢密使、太原郡侯，仍赐铁券。
English: On the 28th, Guo Chongyi, a man from Taiyuan County, who was appointed as a privy councilor, inspector of schools, guarding the military headquarters, and the third secretary of the Kaifu ceremony, guarding the attendants, supervising the national history, and the commander of the German army, was still given iron coupons according to his position as a former privy councilor and the governor of Taiyuan County.

古文：乙未，诏宰相豆卢革权判吏部上铨，御史中丞李德休权判东西铨事。
现代文：二十九日，诏任宰相豆卢革暂管吏部上铨，任御史中丞李德休暂管东西铨事。
English: On the 29th, Zhao appointed the prime minister, Zhu Ruge, to temporarily take charge of the upper echelon of the cadre department, and appointed the vice-minister of history, Li Dexu, to temporarily take charge of the eastern and western affairs.

古文：丙申，滑州留后、检校太保段凝可依前滑州留后，仍赐姓，名继钦。
现代文：三十日，滑州留后、检校太保段凝依旧任前滑州留后，又赐姓，名绍钦。
English: On the 30th, after he stayed in Slate, the inspector of the school, Taibo Duan, still remained in his previous post in Slate, and he was given a surname, his name was Shaochin.

古文：以金紫光禄大夫、检校司空、守辉州刺史杜晏球为检校司徒，依前辉州刺史，仍赐姓，名绍虔。
现代文：任金紫光禄大夫、检校司空、守辉州刺史杜晏球为检校司徒，依旧任辉州刺史，又赐姓，名绍虔。
English: He was appointed as the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu, the inspector of the school, and the inspector of the school of Huizhou Zhishi Duyuanqiu. He was still appointed as the inspector of the school of Huizhou, and he was also given a surname, his name was Shao Qian.

古文：诏处斩随驾兵马都监夏彦朗于和景门外。
现代文：下诏在和景门外处死随驾兵马都监夏彦朗。
English: The following edict was issued for the execution of Xia Yanlang, the military governor of the capital, outside Hejingmen Gate.

古文：时宦官怙宠，广侵占居人第舍，郭崇韬奏其事，乃斩彦朗以徇。
现代文：当时宦官恃宠，大为侵占民宅府第，郭崇韬报告此事，于是杀夏彦朗平息民愤。
English: At that time, the eunuch's favorite, greatly encroached on people's homes, Guo Chongyi reported the matter, and then killed Xia Yanlang to quell the people's anger.

古文：丁酉，赐百官绢二千匹、钱二百万，职事绢一千匹、钱百万。
现代文：一日，赐给百官二千匹绢、二百万钱，给职事一千匹绢、一百万钱。
English: On one day, he gave two thousand horseshoes and two million money to the officials, and one thousand horseshoes and one million money to the officials.

古文：戊戌，以竭忠启运匡国功臣、天平军节度使、开府仪同三司、检校太傅、兼侍中、蕃汉马步总管副使、陇西郡侯李嗣源为依前检校太傅、兼中书令、天平军节度使、特进，封开国公，加食邑实封，余如故。
现代文：二日，任竭忠启运匡国功臣、天平军节度使、开府仪同三司、检校太傅、兼侍中、蕃汉马步军总管副使、陇西郡侯李嗣源为依前检校太傅，兼中书令、天平军节度使、特进，封开国公，加食邑实封，其余如旧。
English: On the second day, Ren Jiezhong was appointed as the commander-in-chief of the Kuomintang, the commander-in-chief of the Tianping Army, the third secretary of the Kaifu Rites and Ceremonies, the inspector-in-chief of the school, the assistant-in-chief, the vice-commander-in-chief of the Shihammabushi Army, the deputy-commander-in-chief of the Shihammabushi Army, the prince of Shaanxi County, Li Siyuan, was appointed as the inspector-in-chief of the school, the deputy-commander-in-chief of the Tianping Army,

古文：以开府仪同三司、检校太傅、北都留守、兴圣宫使、判六军诸卫事李继岌为检校太尉、同平章事，充东京留守。
现代文：任开府仪同三司、检校太傅、北部留守、兴圣宫使、判六军诸卫事李继岌为检校太尉、同平章事，充东京留守。
English: He was appointed as Kaifu giri, Tong San Shi, Kengyo taifu, Northern errand boy, Xing Sheng Gongshi, and the guards of the Six Armies. Li Jidaku was appointed as Kengyo taifu, Tong Hei chapter boy, and stayed in Tokyo.

古文：诏御史台，班行内有欲求外职，或要分司，各许于中书投状奏闻。
现代文：诏告御史台，官员中有想求外官，或要分管某事，允许他们到中书投状上报。
English: He told the History Channel that some officials wanted to ask foreign officials, or to be in charge of something, to allow them to submit a report to the Chinese government.

古文：己亥，宴勋臣于崇元殿，梁室故将咸预焉。
现代文：三日，在崇元殿宴请功臣，梁朝故将都参加了。
English: On the third day, a banquet was held for the meritorious vassals at the Chongyuan Hall, which was attended by all the generals of the Liang Dynasty.

古文：帝酒酣，谓李嗣源曰： 今日宴客，皆吾前日之勍敌，一旦同会，皆卿前锋之力也。 
现代文：庄宗酒酣对李嗣源说 ：今日宴请的客人，都是我以前的劲敌，今天能结为同盟，都是您当前锋的功劳。 
English: Zhuang Zong said to Li Siyuan: "The guests at today's banquet are all my former rivals. The fact that we can form an alliance today is all thanks to you, the vanguard.

古文：梁将霍彦威、戴思远等皆伏陛叩头，帝因赐御衣、酒器，尽欢而罢。
现代文：梁将霍彦威、戴思远等都伏在地上叩头，庄宗赐给御衣酒器，尽欢而散。
English: Liang placed Huo Yanwei, Dai Siyuan, and others prostrate on the ground and bowed their heads. Zhuo Zong gave them imperial robes and drinking vessels, and they dispersed in joy.

古文：齐州刺史孟璆上章请死，诏原之。
现代文：齐州刺史孟趚上书请求死罪，庄宗下诏原谅他。
English: Zhuangzong issued an imperial edict to pardon Mengyao, the assassin of Qizhou, who had petitioned for the death penalty.

古文：璆初事帝为骑将，天祐十三年，帝与刘鄩莘县对垒，璆领七百骑奔梁，至是来请罪。帝报之曰： 尔当吾急，引七百骑投贼，何面目相见！ 
现代文：孟趚以前是庄宗的骑将，天十三年，庄宗与刘寻阝在莘县对垒，孟趚带七百骑兵投奔梁军，现在来请罪，庄宗回答说 ：你在我危急时，带七百骑兵投贼，有脸相见吗？ 
English: Meng Yao used to be Zhuangzong's cavalry commander. On the 13th day of the 13th month, Zhuangzong and Liu Xingyao had a confrontation in Lixian County. Meng Yao took seven hundred cavalrymen to join Liang's army. Now to plead guilty, Zhuangzong replied, "In my time of crisis, you took seven hundred cavalrymen to join the thieves. Do you have a face to face?

古文：璆惶恐请死，帝恕之。
现代文：孟趚惶恐请死，庄宗饶恕了他。
English: Meng Yu panicked and asked for death, but Zhuang Zong forgave him.

古文：未几，移贝州刺史。
现代文：不久，调他任贝州刺史。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the post of Beizhou chief historian.

古文：庚子，帝畋于汴水之阳。
现代文：四日，庄宗在汴水北边打猎。
English: On the fourth day, Zhuo Zong went hunting in the north of Surabaya.

古文：十一月辛丑朔，有司奏： 河南州县见使伪印，望追毁改铸。 
现代文：十一月一日，官员上奏： 河南州县发现使用伪印，请追毁改铸。 
English: On November 1, officials announced: Henan Prefecture found the use of forged stamps, please destroy and recast.

古文：从之。
现代文：答应了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：以光禄大夫、检校太傅、左金吾上将军兼领左龙武军事、汾州刺史李存渥为滑州节度使，加特进、同平章事；以杂指挥散员都部署、特进、检校太傅、忻州刺史李绍荣为徐州节度使；以滑州兵马留后、检校太保李绍钦为兗州节度使。
现代文：任光禄大夫、检校太傅、左金吾上将军兼领左龙武军事、汾州刺史李存渥为滑州节度使，加特进、同平章事；任杂指挥散员都部署、特进、检校太傅、忻州刺史李绍荣为徐州节度使；任滑州兵马留后、检校太保李绍钦为兖州节度使。
English: Ren Guanglu doctor, school inspection officer, Zuo Kingu superior general and leader of Zuo Longwu military, Zhangzhou inspector Li Cunwu was the festival envoy of Slanting, Gatjin, Tongping chapter; all other commanders and staff were deployed, special advance, school inspection officer, Zhangzhou inspector Li Shaorong was the festival envoy of Xuzhou; after Ren Slanting soldiers stayed, school inspection officer Li Shaoqin was the festival envoy of Zhangzhou.

古文：壬寅，凤翔节度使、秦王李茂贞遣使贺收复天下。
现代文：二日，凤翔节度使、秦王李茂贞派使者来庆贺收复天下。
English: On the second day, Fengxiang Festival envoy, Qin King Li Maozhen sent an envoy to celebrate the recovery of the country.

古文：癸卯，河中节度使、西平王硃友谦来朝。
现代文：三日，河中节度使、西平王朱友谦来朝见。
English: On the third day, Zhu Youqian, the king of Xiping, came to see the emperor.

古文：乙巳，赐友谦姓，改名继麟，帝令皇子继岌兄事之。
现代文：五日，赐友谦姓，改名继麟，庄宗令皇子李继岌把他当哥哥。
English: On the fifth day, Zhuang Zong gave Youqian his surname and changed his name to Jilin, and ordered the prince Li Jizhe to take him as his brother.

古文：以捧日都指挥使、博州刺史康延孝为郑州防御使、检校太保，赐姓，名继琛。
现代文：任捧日都指挥使、博州刺史康延孝为郑州防御使、检校太保，赐姓，名绍琛。
English: Kang Yanxiao, who was appointed as the commander of the Japanese capital and the governor of Bozhou, was appointed as the defense envoy of Zhengzhou and the inspector of the school. He was given a surname, and his name was Shao Jun.

古文：以宋州节度使、检校太尉、平章事袁象先依前为宋州节度使，仍赐姓，名绍安。
现代文：任宋州节度使、检校太尉、平章事袁象先保留宋州节度使职，又赐姓李，名绍安。
English: Yuan Xiang, who was appointed Songzhou Festival Delegate, Inspector of Schools, and Pingzhang, retained the post of Songzhou Festival Delegate, and was given the surname Li and the name Shao'an.

古文：以许州匡国军节度使、检校太尉、同平章事温韬依前许州节度使，仍赐姓，名绍冲。
现代文：任许州匡国军节度使、检校太尉、同平章事温韬保留许州节度使职，又赐姓，名绍冲。
English: He was appointed as the delegate to the National Day of the Xu Province Kuangguo Army, promoted to the rank of lieutenant in charge of inspection of schools, and was awarded the title of Tongping Zheng, and retained the post of delegate to the National Day of the Xu Province Kuangguo Army. He was also given a surname, and his name was Shao Chong.

古文：丁未，日南至，帝不受朝贺。
现代文：七日，冬至，庄宗不接受朝贺。
English: On the seventh day, the winter solstice, Shouzong does not accept morning greetings.

古文：戊申，中书门下上言： 以朝廷兵革虽宁，支费犹阙，应诸寺监各请置卿、少卿监、祭酒、司业各一员，博士二员，余官并停。
现代文：八日，中书门下上书说：朝廷战事虽停，费用仍缺乏，各寺监分别设置卿、少卿监、祭酒、司业各一人，博士两人，其余官员都撤掉。
English: On the 8th, a letter was posted on the door of the Chinese Academy of Letters, saying: Although the imperial court war has stopped, the expenses are still lacking. Each temple overseer will separately set up a chief overseer, a junior chief overseer, a sacrificial wine, and a secretary, two doctors, and the rest of the officials will be removed.

古文：唯太常寺事关大礼，大理寺事关刑法，除太常博士外，许更置丞一员，其王府及东宫官、司天五官正、奉御之属，凡关不急司存，并请未议除授。
现代文：只有太常寺事关大礼，大理寺事关刑法，除太常博士外，允许再设丞一人。王府及东宫官、司天五官正、奉御之类，凡属不关紧要的部门，请都不要授官。
English: Only the Taijo-ji Temple is related to the Great Rite, and the Dali-ji Temple is related to the Criminal Law. In addition to the Taijo-hakase, it is allowed to set up one more chojo. Please do not award positions to the king's palace and the East palace officials, the secretary of heaven and earth, the five officials, and the servants, all of which are not important departments.

古文：其诸司郎中、员外应有双曹者，且置一员。
现代文：各司郎中、员外凡有双职的，设置一人。
English: If there is a person who has a dual position among the members of the board of directors or outside the board of directors, one person shall be appointed.

古文：左右常侍、谏议大夫、给事中、起居郎、起居舍人、补阙、拾遗，各置一半。三院御史仍委御史中丞条理申奏。
现代文：左右常侍、谏议大夫、给事中、起居郎、起居舍人、补阙、拾遗，各设一半官员，三院御史仍委托御史中丞条理上奏。
English: The left and right attendants, the doctor of deliberation, the person in charge, the steward, the steward's son, the steward's son's son, the steward's son-in-law, the steward's son-in-law, the steward's son-in-law, the steward's son-in-law, the steward's son-in-law, the steward's son-in-law, the steward's son-in-law, the steward's son-in-law, the steward's son-in-law, the steward's son-in-law

古文：其停罢朝官，仍各录名衔，具罢任时日，留在中书，候见任官满二十五个月，并据资品，却与除官。
现代文：那些停职朝官，仍各登录他们的名衔，注明罢任时间，留在中书，等候现任官满二十五个月，根据资历品级，授予官职。
English: The suspended officials still record their titles, indicate the time of resignation, and remain in the official record, waiting for the incumbent official to complete twenty-five months, according to the seniority grade, to be awarded official positions.

古文：其西班上将军已下，仍望宣示枢密院斟酌施行。 
现代文：西班上将军以下的，仍望告诉枢密院斟酌施行。
English: Those below the rank of general are still expected to report to the Privy Council for consideration.

古文：从之。
现代文：庄宗答应了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：时议者以中兴之朝，事宜恢廓，骤兹自弱，顿失物情。
现代文：当时有人议论说中兴之朝，应当宏大有气派，突然削弱，立即会失去人心。
English: At that time, some people argued that the ZTE morning should be grand and dignified, suddenly weakened, and will immediately lose people's hearts.

古文：己酉，诏：应随处官吏、务局员僚、诸军将校等，如闻前例，各有进献，直贡章奏，不唯亵黩于朝廷，实且傍滋于诛敛，并宜止绝，以肃化风。
现代文：九日，下诏： 凡是在职官僚、诸军将校，如闻以前事例，各有进献，直接上奏，不只是亵渎朝廷，而且助长聚敛，应一并禁绝，以端正风俗。 
English: On the 9th, the following edict was issued: All serving bureaucrats and military officers, as has been heard in previous cases, have their own offerings and play directly, not only desecrating the imperial court, but also promoting gathering, and should be banned together to rectify customs.

古文：又诏：左降均州司马刘岳，有母年逾八十，近闻身故，准故事许归，候三年丧服阕，如未量移，即却赴贬州。
现代文：又下诏 ：被贬为均州司马的刘岳，母亲过了八十岁，最近听说去世，准许按习俗回去。服丧三年后，如没被改移近地，便仍须到被贬地方任职。 
English: He also issued the following edict: Liu Yue, who was demoted to the post of Sima of Junzhou, and whose mother had passed the age of eighty and was recently reported to have passed away, was allowed to return according to custom. After three years of mourning, if he had not been transferred to a place nearby, he would still have to serve in the place where he was demoted.

古文：壬子，诏取今月二十四日幸洛京，以十二月二十三日朝献太微宫，二十四日朝献太庙，二十五日有事于南郊。
现代文：十二日，诏令在本月二十四日到洛京，十二月二十三日祭祀太微宫，二十四日祭祀太庙，二十五日在南郊祭祀。
English: On the 12th day of the month, the imperial edict decreed that on the 24th day of the month, sacrifices would be held in Luojing, on the 23rd day of the month, sacrifices would be held at the Grand Palace, on the 24th day of the month, sacrifices would be held at the Grand Temple, and on the 25th day, sacrifices would be held in the southern suburbs.

古文：癸未，中书门下奏： 应随驾及在京有带兼官者，并望落下，只守本官。 
现代文：十四日，中书门下上奏： 凡是随驾以及在京兼有官职的，请予免兼职，只保留本职。 
English: On the 14th, the following announcement was made at the gate of the Chinese Academy of Letters: Anyone who accompanies and has an official position in Beijing, please be exempted from part-time work and retain only this position.

古文：从之。
现代文：庄宗答应了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：是日，有司自石桥具仪仗法物，迎引入于大内。
现代文：十八日，任中书侍郎、平章事豆卢革判租庸使，兼诸道盐铁、转运等使。
English: On the 18th, he was appointed as the secretary of the Central Committee, the envoy of the Taira no Shosho, and the envoy of salt, iron and transportation.

古文：戊寅，诏德胜寨、莘县、杨刘口、通津镇、胡柳陂皆战阵之所，宜令逐处差人收掩战士骸骨，量备祭奠，以慰劳魂。
现代文：新罗王金朴英派使者进贡土特产。二十日，安义军节度使李继韬进见请罪，下诏释放他。十二月一日，驾临西京。这一天，有关官员从石桥设置仪仗法物，将庄宗迎进皇帝居所。二日，因百官刚到，停止朝拜三天。三日，诏令改在明年二月一日举行郊礼。九日，诏令德胜寨、莘县、杨刘口、通津镇、胡柳陂曾经都是大战阵地，应令各地派人收掩战士尸骨，予以祭奠，以慰亡灵。
English: The King of Silla, Jin Pu Ying, sent an envoy to pay tribute to the local special products. On the 20th, the festival of the Anyi Army made Li Jixuan come to the court to plead guilty, and issued an edict to release him. On December 1, he arrived in West Beijing. On this day, the relevant officials set up ceremonial objects from the stone bridge to welcome Zhuangzong to the emperor's residence. On the 2nd, because hundreds of officials had just arrived, they stopped worshiping for three days. On the 3rd, the edict was changed to hold a suburban ceremony on February 1 next year. On the 9th, the edict

古文：诏改伪梁永平军大安府复为西京京兆府；改宋州宣武军为归德军，汴州开封府复为宣武军，华州感化军为镇国军，许州匡国军复为忠武军，华州宣义军复为义成军，陕府镇国军复为保义军，耀州静胜军复为顺义军，潞州匡义军复为安义军，朗州武顺军复为武贞军，延州为彰武军，邓州为威胜军，晋州为建雄军，安州为安远军。
现代文：下诏改伪梁永平军大安府再为西京京兆府；改宋州宣武军为归德军，汴州开封府再为宣武军，华州感化军为镇国军，许州匡国军再为忠武军，滑州宣义军再为义成军，陕府镇国军再为保义军，耀州静胜军再为顺义军，潞州匡义军再为安义军，朗州武顺军再为武贞军，延州为彰武军，邓州为威胜军，晋州为建雄军，安州为安远军。
English: The following edict changed the fake Liang Yongping Army's Da'an Army to the West Beijing Jingzhao Army; changed the Songzhou Xuanwu Army to the German Army; changed the Bozhou Kaifeng Army to the Xuanwu Army; changed the Huazhou Qianhua Army to the Zhenguo Army; changed the Huzhou Kuang Army to the Zhongwu Army; changed the Luzhou Kuang Army to the Yicheng Army; changed the Shaanxi Kuang Army to the Baoying Army; changed the Yaozhou Jing Sheng Army to the Shunyi Army; changed the Bozhou Kuang Army to the Anyi Army

古文：淮南杨溥遣使贺登极，称 大吴国主书上大唐皇帝 。
现代文：淮南杨溥派使者庆贺登帝位，称 大吴国主书上大唐皇帝 。
English: Huainan Yang Di sent an envoy to celebrate his accession to the throne, saying that the Great Tang Emperor was the head of the Great Wu Kingdom.

古文：《十国春秋·吴世家》云：唐以灭梁来告，始称诏，我国不受，唐主随易书，用敌国礼，曰 大唐皇帝致书于吴国主 ，王遣司农卿卢苹献金器二百两、银器三千两、罗锦一千二百疋、龙脑香五斤、龙凤丝奚一百事于唐。又遣使张景报聘，称 大吴国主上书大唐皇帝 ，辞礼如笺表。己卯，禁屠牛马。庚辰，御史台上言： 请行用本朝律令格式，今访闻唯定州有本朝法书，望下本州写副本进纳。 从之。
现代文：十日，禁止杀牛马。十一日，御史台上言： 请使用本朝律令格式，今查访只有定州有本朝法书，望下诏令该州写副本进献上来。 
English: On the tenth day, the killing of cattle and horses was prohibited. On the eleventh day, the Imperial Historian issued a proclamation: Please use the format of this morning's ritsuryo. Currently, only Dingzhou has this morning's law. Look down and order the state to write a copy and submit it.

古文：乙酉，以翰林学士承旨卢质权知汴州军府事，以礼部尚书崔沂为尚书左丞、判吏部尚书铨事，以兵部侍郎崔协为吏部侍郎，以刑部侍郎、充集贤殿学士、判院事卢文纪为尚书兵部侍郎，依前充集贤殿学士、判院事。丁亥，泽州刺史董璋上言：潞州军变，李继达领兵出城，自刎而死，节度副使李继珂已安抚军城。己丑，有司上言： 上辛祈谷于上帝，请奉高祖神尧皇帝配；孟夏雩祀，请奉太宗文皇帝配；季秋大享于明堂，请奉太祖武皇帝配；冬至日祀圜丘，请奉献祖文皇帝配；孟冬祭神州地祇，请奉懿祖昭圣皇帝配。 从之。
现代文：十二日，下诏贬安义军节度使李继韬为登州长史，随之在天津桥杀掉，因他再次谋反。十五日，淮南杨溥、奚族首领李绍威一起派使者来朝庆贺。十八日，泽州刺史董璋奏称：潞州军叛变，李继达领兵出城，自杀而死，节度副使李继珂已安抚全城军民。二十日，有关官员进言 ：皇上向上天祈求五谷丰收，请奉高祖神尧皇帝配享；夏天求雨，请奉太宗文皇帝配享；秋天在明堂上供时，请奉太祖武皇帝配享；冬至祭祀圜丘，请奉献祖文皇帝配享；冬天祭神州地祗，请奉懿祖昭圣皇帝配享。 庄宗允准了。
English: On the 12th, the imperial edict to denounce the Anzhi Uyghur Army's festival made Li Jigao the governor of the city, and then killed him at Tianjin Bridge because he once again plotted a rebellion. On the 15th, Huainan Yang Jie and the leader of the Yao people, Li Shaowei, sent an envoy to the North to celebrate. On the 18th, Zhezhou's chief historian, Dong Yuxiao, said: "The Yao State Army mutinied, Li Jida led the soldiers out of the city, and died by suicide, and the deputy envoy of the festival, Li Jigao, has

古文：辛卯，亳州太清宫道士上言，圣祖殿前古桧萎瘁已久再生一枝，图画以进。
现代文：二十二日，亳州太清宫道士进言，圣祖玄元皇帝殿前枯死的桧树重新长出新枝，画了图献上。
English: On the 22nd, the Taoist priest of the Chenzhou Taiqing Palace said that the dead eucalyptus tree in front of the hall of the holy ancestor Xuanyuan Emperor had regrown new branches, and drew a picture to present.

古文：诏曰： 当圣祖旧殿生枯桧新枝，应皇家再造之期，显大国中兴之运。
现代文：下诏说： 圣祖旧殿前枯桧生出新枝，符合皇家再造之期，显示大国中兴之运。
English: The next edict said: A new branch has sprung up from the dead branches in front of the Holy Ancestor's former palace, which is in line with the period of royal reconstruction and shows the prosperity of a great country.

古文：同上林仆柳，祥既叶于汉宣；比南顿嘉禾，瑞更超于光武。
现代文：和汉朝上林苑的倒仆柳树那样，祥瑞与汉宣帝时相合；可比于南顿县嘉禾的吉兆，吉庆更超过汉光武帝时期。
English: Like the fallen servant willow tree in Shanglin Court during the Han Dynasty, Xiang Rui coincides with the time of Emperor Xuan of Han; it can be compared to the auspicious sign of Jiahuo in Nantong County, and the auspicious sign even exceeds the period of Emperor Guangwu of Han.

古文：至是再生一枝，长二尺余。壬辰，幸伊阙。
现代文：应该在史册上记载，向天下显明。 二十三日，庄宗到伊阙。
English: It should be recorded in the annals of history and made clear to the world.On the 23rd, Zhuozong arrived in Yili.

