古文：卢损，其先范阳人也，近世任于岭表。
现代文：卢损，祖先为范阳人，近世在岭南任职。
English: Lu Zi, whose ancestors were from Fanyang, served in Lingnan in the early modern period.

古文：父颖，游宦于京师。
现代文：父亲卢颖，到京师游历做官。
English: His father, Lu Ying, traveled to Beijing to work as an official.

古文：损少学为文，梁开平初，举进士，惟颇刚介，以高情远致自许。
现代文：卢损少时学文，后梁开平初年，中进士，性情颇为刚强耿介，以宁静澹泊自得为乐。
English: Lu Jia was a student of literature when he was young. Later, Liang Kaiping was a junior high school student in his first year. His temperament was quite strong, and he enjoyed the tranquility and solitude.

古文：与任赞、刘昌素、薛钧、高总同年擢第，所在相诟，时人谓之 相骂榜 。
现代文：与任赞、刘昌素、薛钧、高总等人同一年同榜及第，而在一起时总是互相诋毁，当时人叫他们为 相骂榜 。
English: With Ren Zhan, Liu Changsu, Xue Qi, Gao Zongru and others, they were in the same year and the same list, and they always slandered each other when they were together. At that time, they were called the list of mutual abuse.

古文：及任赞、刘昌素居要切之地，而损自异，不相亲狎。
现代文：到任赞、刘昌素升居要害地位后，卢损自己相异于他们，不与他们亲近往来。
English: After Zhan Ren and Liu Changsu were promoted to key positions, Lu Zi himself was different from them and did not have close contacts with them.

古文：时左丞李琪素薄刘昌素之为人，常善待损。
现代文：当时左丞相李琪一向鄙薄刘昌素的为人，经常善待卢损。
English: At that time, the Minister of the Left, Li Qi, who had always despised Liu Changsu, often treated Lu Ji kindly.

古文：琪有女弟眇，长年婚对不售，乃以妻损，损慕琪声称纳之，及琪为辅相，致损仕进。
现代文：李琪有位妹妹一只眼睛失明，长年嫁不出去，于是嫁给卢损。卢损仰慕李琪的声誉，就娶了他妹妹，到李琪任宰相，就帮助卢损进入仕途。
English: Li Qi had a sister who was blind in one eye and could not marry for a long time, so she married Lu Zai. Lu Zai admired Li Qi's reputation and married his sister. When Li Qi became the prime minister, he helped Lu Zai to enter the career.

古文：梁贞明中，累迁至右司员外郎。
现代文：后梁贞明年间，接连迁升至右司员外郎。
English: Later, Liang Zhen was successively promoted to the position of the right secretary, Wairo.

古文：唐天成初，由兵部郎中、史馆修撰转谏议大夫。
现代文：后唐天成初年，由兵部郎中、史馆修撰转任谏议大夫。
English: In the first year of the Later Tang Dynasty, Tiancheng, he was transferred from the middle-ranking official of the Military Department and the History Museum to the position of the doctor of the Council.

古文：屡上书言事，词理浅陋，不为名流所知。
现代文：多次上书议论政事，文辞道理浅薄粗陋，不被名流所知。
English: He has written about politics many times, but his writing is shallow and crude, and he is not known by celebrities.

古文：清泰中，卢文纪作相，密与损参议时政。
现代文：清泰年间，卢文纪做宰相，密切与卢损参议时政。
English: During the Qing and Thai dynasties, Lu Wenji was the prime minister, and he was closely associated with Lu Ji, a member of the Council of State.

古文：初，长兴中，唐末帝镇河中，损尝为加恩使副，及末帝即位，用为御史中丞。
现代文：当初，在长兴年间，唐末帝镇守河中，卢损曾任加恩副使，到末帝即位，任为御史中丞。
English: At the beginning, during the Changxing period, the last emperor of the Tang Dynasty was stationed in the middle of the river, and Lu Zi was the vice-envoy of Gan. When the last emperor ascended to the throne, he was appointed the vice-president of history.

古文：拜命之日，以自前宪司不能振举纲领，俾风俗颓坏，乃大为条奏，而有 平明放钥，日出守端 之语，大为士人嗤鄙。
现代文：任命那天，卢损因为以前的执法部门不能振兴朝纲法纪，致使风气颓废败坏，于是大加条列上奏，而有 平明放钥，日出守端 的话，大为文士嗤笑鄙视。
English: On the day of his appointment, because the previous law enforcement departments were unable to revitalize the legal code of the dynasty, resulting in a decadent and corrupt atmosphere, Lu Zi greatly increased the number of articles to be played, and the words of "placidly release the key" and "sunrise guard the end" were ridiculed and despised by the scribes.

古文：有顷，误详赦书，失出罪人，停任。
现代文：不久，因误审赦书，错放了罪犯，被停职。
English: Soon after, he was suspended from his post for issuing a pardon in error and releasing a criminal by mistake.

古文：晋天福中，复为右散骑常侍，转秘书监，大失所望，即拜章辞位，乃授户部尚书致仕，退居颍川。
现代文：后晋天福年间，又任右散骑常侍，转任秘书监，而其作为大失所望，于是上奏辞职，朝廷授他以户部尚书的官爵退休，居住在颍川。
English: During the Tenpu era of the Later Jin Dynasty, he was also appointed as the right rider's attendant, and was transferred to the secretary supervisor. As a great disappointment, he resigned, and the court awarded him the official title of household secretary to retire and live in Luochuan.

古文：时少保李鏻年将八十，善服气导引，损以鏻之遐龄有道术，酷慕之。
现代文：这时少保李王年近八十，善于气功导引，卢损因为李王高龄而有道术，非常仰慕他。
English: At this time, Li Wang, who was nearly eighty years old, was good at guiding qigong. Lu Zi admired him very much because Li Wang was old and had the ability to teach.

古文：仍以颍川逼于城市，乃卜居阳翟，诛茅种药，山衣野服，逍遥于林圃之间，出则柴车鹤氅，自称具茨山人。
现代文：又因为颍川迫近于都市，于是住到阳翟，开掘荒地种植草药，穿着山民的衣服，逍遥于山林药圃之间，出去就坐着粗鄙的车子，披着鸟羽做成的衣服，自称 具茨山人 。
English: Also, because the Lugu River is close to the city, they live in impotence, excavate wastelands to grow herbs, wear mountain people's clothes, roam freely between mountain and forest medicine gardens, and go out in a crude car, wearing clothes made of bird feathers, calling themselves "Mt. Guz."

古文：晚年与同辈五六人，于大隗山中疏泉凿坯为隐所，誓不复出山，久之，齿发不衰，似有所得。
现代文：晚年与五六位同辈人，在大隗山中引山泉凿山洞居住，发誓不再出山，长久，牙齿头发不见衰老之相，好像有所获益。
English: In his later years, he lived with five or six of his contemporaries in a cave carved out of a mountain spring in the middle of the Dafeng Mountains. He vowed never to go out of the mountains again, and for a long time, his teeth and hair did not show signs of aging, which seemed to be a benefit.

古文：广顺三年秋卒，时年八十余。
现代文：广顺三年秋去世，时年八十多岁。
English: Guangshun passed away in the autumn of the third year of his reign, at the age of over eighty.

古文：赠太子少傅。
现代文：追赠为太子太傅。
English: He was posthumously given the title of Prince Taifu.

古文：王仁裕，字德辇，天水人。
现代文：王仁裕，字德辇，天水人。
English: Wang Renyu, also known as De Zheng, was born in Tianshui.

古文：少孤，不从师训，年二十五，方有意就学。
现代文：小时丧父，不听老师教导，年二十五岁，才想学习。
English: When I lost my father, I didn't listen to my teachers. It took me until I was 25 years old to want to study.

古文：一夕梦剖其肠胃，引西江水以浣之，又睹水中砂石，皆有篆文，因取而吞之。
现代文：一天晚上做梦剖开肠子和胃，引西江水来清洗它们，又看见水中的砂石，上面都有篆文，于是捡起来吞下肚去。
English: One night he had a dream in which he cut open his intestines and stomach and drew water from the Xijiang River to clean them. He also saw the gravel in the water, which had writing on it, so he picked it up and swallowed it.

古文：及寤，心意豁然，自是资性绝高。
现代文：到梦醒时，心胸豁然开朗，从此悟性天资极高。
English: By the time of waking, the mind is suddenly cheerful, and from then on, the ability to understand is extremely high.

古文：有诗万余首，勒成百卷，目之曰《西江集》，盖以尝梦吞西江文石，遂以为名焉。
现代文：写有一万多首诗，归为一百卷，名字叫《西江集》，因为他曾做梦吞下西江有文字的砂石，于是以西江为名，后任兵部尚书、太子少保。
English: He wrote more than ten thousand poems, classified into one hundred volumes, the name of which is "Xijiang Collection," because he had a dream of swallowing the sand and gravel of the Xijiang River, so he named himself Xijiang. He later served as Hyobu Shoshu and Prince Shobo.

