古文：李邴，字汉老，济州任城县人。
现代文：李邴字汉老，济州任城县人。
English: Li Shanzi is a Han Chinese elder and a native of Rencheng County, Jeju.

古文：中崇宁五年进士第，累官为起居舍人，试中书舍人。
现代文：崇宁五年中进士及第，历任起居舍人、中书舍人。
English: In the fifth year of Chongning Middle School, he was promoted to the first and second grade, and successively became a resident and a student.

古文：北方用兵，酬功第赏，日数十百，邴辞命无留难。
现代文：当时正值北方同金交战，酬赏功劳，每天数十百起，李邴拟制诏令没有留难。
English: At that time, the North was at war with China, and rewards for meritorious service were in the tens of hundreds every day, so it was not difficult for Li Xi to draft the edict.

古文：除给事中、同修国史兼直学士院，迁翰林学士。
现代文：任给事中、同修国史兼直学士院，迁任翰林学士。
English: At the time of his appointment, he was a fellow student of National History and a member of the Academy, and was transferred to the Hanlin Academy.

古文：尝与禁中曲宴，徽宗命赋诗，高丽使入贡，邴为馆伴，徽宗遣中使持示，使者请传录以归。
现代文：曾参加宫内曲宴，徽宗令他做诗，高丽派使节入朝进贡，李邴作为陪伴，徽宗派宦官将李邴所做的诗词交给高丽使者观看，高丽使者请求记录下来拿回去。
English: He once attended a banquet at the Imperial Palace. Huizong ordered him to compose a poem. A Goryeo envoy came to pay tribute to the Emperor, accompanied by Ri Su Yong. The eunuch of Huizong sent the poem composed by Ri Su Yong to the Goryeo envoy to read, and the Goryeo envoy requested to record it and take it back.

古文：未几，坐言者罢，提举南京鸿庆宫。
现代文：不久，被言者弹劾罢免，提举南京鸿庆宫。
English: Soon, the speaker was impeached and removed from office, and the Nanjing Hongqing Palace was raised.

古文：钦宗即位，除徽猷阁待制、知越州。
现代文：钦宗即位，李邴任徽猷阁待制、知越州。
English: Emperor Qin Zong ascended to the throne, and Emperor Li Rong was appointed as the governor of Hubei Province and the governor of Chiyoda Province.

古文：久之，再落职，提举西京嵩山崇福宫。
现代文：过了很久，再次被罢免，提举西京嵩山崇福宫。
English: After a long time, he was once again removed from office and elevated to the West Beijing Songshan Chongfu Palace.

古文：高宗即位，复徽猷阁待制。
现代文：高宗即位，复任徽猷阁待制。
English: Gao Zong ascended to the throne, and was reinstated as the governor of Hebei Province.

古文：逾岁，召为兵部侍郎兼直学士院。
现代文：过了一年，召任兵部侍郎兼直学士院。
English: A year later, he was called to serve as an attendant of the military department and the direct academy.

古文：苗傅、刘正彦迫上逊位，上顾邴草诏，邴请得御札而后敢作。
现代文：苗傅、刘正彦逼迫高宗退位，高宗示意李邴草拟诏令，李邴请求得到高宗亲笔书信然后才敢做。
English: Miao Fu and Liu Zhengyuan forced Gao Zong to abdicate. Gao Zong ordered Li Qiye to draft the edict. Li Qiye requested to get Gao Zong's personal letter before he dared to do it.

古文：朱胜非请降诏赦，邴就都堂草之。
现代文：朱胜非请降诏赦免，李邴在都堂草拟。
English: Zhu Shengfei asked for abdication and amnesty, and Li Xi drafted it in the Great Hall.

古文：除翰林学士。
现代文：任翰林学士。
English: He holds the title of Hanlin Scholar.

古文：初，邴见苗傅，面谕以逆顺祸福之理，且密劝殿帅王元俾以禁旅击贼，元唯唯不能用，即诣政事堂白朱胜非，适正彦及其党王世修在焉，又以大义责之，人为之危，邴不顾也。
现代文：当初，李邴见到苗傅，当面对他讲明叛逆顺服福祸的道理，并秘密劝说殿前司将领王元率领禁军攻击苗傅，王元唯唯诺诺不敢采纳，李邴即到政事堂向朱胜非报告，正好刘正彦及其党羽王世修也在这里，李邴又用大义责备他，人人都为李邴的安危担心，李邴义无返顾。
English: At first, Li Lan saw Miao Fu, and when confronted with him, he clearly explained the principle of rebellion and obedience to fortune and misfortune, and secretly persuaded the former general of the palace, Wang Yuan, to lead the forbidden army to attack Miao Fu. Wang Yuan did not dare to accept, Li Lan immediately went to the government hall to report to Zhu Shengfei. It just so happened that Liu Zhengyuan and his party feather, Wang Shixiu, were also here. Li Lan also reproached him with great righteousness. Everyone was worried about Li Lan's safety, and Li Lanyi did not look back.

古文：时御史中丞郑瑴又抗疏言睿圣皇帝不当改号，于是邴、瑴为端明殿学士、同签书枢密院事。
现代文：当时御史中丞郑又抗疏说高宗不应当改号，于是李邴、郑被任端明殿学士、同签书枢密院事。
English: At that time, the Imperial Historian, Zheng Yuanzhuo, said that Gaozong should not change his name, so Li Xi and Zheng were appointed as academicians of the Duanming Palace and Privy Councillors of the same signature.

古文：邴与张守分草百官章奏，三奏三答，及太后手诏与复辟赦文，一日而具。
现代文：李邴和张守分别草拟百官章奏，三奏三答，以及太后手诏和高宗复位赦文，一天之内全部办理完毕。
English: Li Qian and Zhang Shou separately drafted the Hundred Officials' Chapter and Verse, the Three Songs and Three Answers, as well as the Empress Dowager's Handshake and Emperor Gaozong's Letter of Pardon, all of which were completed within one day.

古文：四月，拜尚书右丞，未几，改参知政事。
现代文：四月，任尚书右丞，不久，改任参知政事。
English: In April, he was appointed Shojo-jo, and soon after, he was appointed to the post of Sanchi-seiji.

古文：上巡江宁，太后六宫往豫章，命邴为资政殿学士、权知行台三省枢密院事。
现代文：高宗前往江宁，太后六宫前往豫章，命令李邴任资政殿学士、权知行台三省枢密院事。
English: Gaozong went to Jiangning, and the Empress Dowager Liugong went to Yuzhang, and ordered Li Jie to be appointed as the Vice-President of the Academy of the Three Provinces and the Privy Councillor of the Three Provinces.

古文：以与吕颐浩论不合，乞罢，遂以本职提举杭州洞霄宫。
现代文：由于同吕颐浩意见不合，请求罢免，于是以本职提举杭州洞霄宫。
English: Due to disagreements with Lv Yinghao, he requested to be dismissed, so he was promoted to Hangzhou Dongxiao Palace in his own capacity.

古文：未阅月，起知平江府。
现代文：不满一月，起知平江府。
English: In less than a month, Pingjiang Prefecture will be known.

古文：会兄邺失守越州，坐累落职。
现代文：恰逢兄长李邺失守越州，受牵连落职。
English: This coincided with the loss of his elder brother, Li Yan, to the defense of Yuezhou. He was implicated and demoted.

古文：明年，即引赦复之，又升资政殿学士。
现代文：次年，即引用大赦例复职，又升为资政殿学士。
English: The following year, he was reinstated on the basis of an amnesty, and was promoted to the rank of Shiseido scholar.

古文：绍兴五年，诏问宰执方略，邴条上战阵、守备、措画、绥怀各五事。
现代文：绍兴五年，高宗下诏征询治国方略，李邴进呈战阵、守备、措画、绥怀各五件事项。
English: In the fifth year of Shaoxing, Gao Zong issued an edict to inquire about the strategy of governing the country, and Li Yujin presented five matters of battle formation, defense, strategy, and strategy.

古文：战阵之利五，曰出轻兵、务远略、储将帅、责成功、重赏格，大略谓： 关陕为进取之地，淮南为保固之地。
现代文：作战有利的有五点，就是出轻兵、务远略、储将帅、责成功、重赏格，大概意思是说 ：关陕地区是进取之地，淮南地区是保固之地。
English: There are five points that are advantageous in combat, that is, light soldiers, far-reaching strategy, reserve commander, successful responsibility, and high reward, which probably means: Guanshan area is a place of advancement, Huainan area is a place of security.

古文：关陕虽利于进取，然不用师于京东以牵制其势，则彼得一力以拒我。
现代文：关陕地区虽有利于进取，但如不在京东地区用兵以牵制分散敌人势力，那么敌人就能集中力量进攻我们。
English: Although the Guanshan area is conducive to forging ahead, if troops are not used in the East Beijing area to contain and disperse enemy forces, then the enemy will be able to concentrate their forces to attack us.

古文：今大将统兵者数人，皆所恃以为根本，万一失利，将不可复用。
现代文：现在大将统率军队的不过数人，都被朝廷依恃作为根本，万一失利，将不能再用。
English: At present, there are only a few generals at the head of the army, all of whom have been embraced by the imperial court as fundamental, and in the event of defeat, they will no longer be able to be used.

古文：偏裨中如牛皋、王进、杨珪、史康民皆京东土人，知地险易，可各配以部曲三五千人，或出淮阳，或出徐、泗，彼将奔命之不暇，此不动而分陕西重兵之一端也。
现代文：偏将中如牛皋、王进、杨王圭、史康民都是京东地区人士，了解地形的险隘平坦，可各配属部队三五千人，或出淮阳，或出徐、泗，敌人将疲于奔命，这是不动而分散敌人陕西重兵的一种方法。
English: Some generals, such as Niu Qian, Wang Jin, Yang Wang Gui, and Shi Kangmin, were from the East Beijing region. They understood the narrow and flat terrain, but with 35,000 troops assigned to each unit, they could either go to Huaiyang, or to Xu or Handan, and the enemy would be exhausted from running for their lives. This was a way to distract the enemy's heavy Shaanxi troops without moving.

古文：关陕今虽有二宣抚，其体尚轻，非遣大臣不可。
现代文：关陕现在虽有两个宣抚，但其权还轻，非派遣大臣前去不可。
English: Although Guan Shan now has two proclamations, its power is still light, and it is necessary to send a minister.

古文：吕颐浩气节高亮，李纲识量宏远，威名素著，愿择其一而用之，必有以报陛下。 又言： 陛下即位之初，韩世忠、刘光世、张俊威名隐然为大将，今又有吴玠、岳飞者出矣。
现代文：吕颐浩气节高亮，李纲识见宏远，威名素著，希望在两人中选择一人使用他，必然会有成效以报答陛下。 又说 ：陛下即位之初，韩世忠、刘光世、张俊三人威名隐然成为大将，现在又有吴、岳飞等人脱颖而出。
English: He also said, "At the beginning of His Majesty's reign, Han Shizhong, Liu Guangzhe, and Zhang Jun became generals, and now Wu, Yuefei, and others have come to the fore.

古文：愿诏大将，于所部举智谋忠勇可以驭众统师各两三人，朝廷籍记。
现代文：希望诏令各大将，在所部中举荐智谋忠勇能够驾驭部众统领军队的各两三人，朝廷登记在册。
English: It is hoped that the imperial edict will order the generals to recommend two or three persons in the headquarters who are wise, loyal and brave enough to lead the troops, and the imperial court will register them.

古文：遇有事宜，使当一队，毋隶大将，则诸人竞奋才智，皆飞、玠之俦矣。
现代文：遇到需要时，使他们各率一部，不隶属于大将，那么各位就会竞相贡献才智，都成为像岳飞、吴那样的将领了。
English: When there is a need, let them each lead a part, not subordinate to the general, then everyone will compete to contribute their talents and become a general like Yuefei and Wu.

古文：大将爵位已崇，难相统一，自今用兵，第可授以成算，使自为战而已，慎勿遣重臣临之，以轻其权而分其功。
现代文：各大将爵位已经十分崇高，互相之间难以统一，自今以后用兵，只能授以成算，让他们各自为战罢了，切不要派遣重臣节制他们，以削减他们的权力分散他们的功劳。
English: The ranks of generals have become very lofty, and it is difficult to unify them with each other. From now on, the use of troops can only be based on performance. Let them fight for themselves. Don't send chief ministers to restrain them, to reduce their power and disperse their merits.

古文：今却敌退师之后，必论功行赏，愿因此诏有司预定赏格，谓如得城邑及近上首领之类，自一命至节度使，皆差次使足相当。 
现代文：现在正值打退敌军之后，必须论功行赏，希望借此机会诏令有关部门预先制定奖赏的标准，就像所说的得到城池和得到敌军首领之类，从一命至节度使，都给予不同的奖励使同他们所立的功劳相当。 
English: Now is the time when, after driving back the enemy, we must discuss the merits and rewards. I hope you will take this opportunity to order the relevant departments to set up the reward standards in advance. Like the so-called "getting the castle" and "getting the leader of the enemy army," from the first life to the victory, they will give different awards to make it equivalent to the merits they have established.

古文：所谓守备之宜有五，曰固根本、习舟师、防他道、讲遗策、列长戍，大略谓： 江、浙为今日根本，欲保守则失进取之利，欲进取则虑根本之伤。
现代文：所谓守备事宜有五项，就是固根本、习舟师、讲遗策、列长戍，大概意思是说： 江、浙地区为当今的根本所在，要保守此地就会失去进取之利，要进取就会伤害到保守根本。
English: The so-called defensive matters have five items, that is, to fix the foundation, to learn the boat, to talk about the legacy, and to make a long list, which probably means: the Jiangsu and Zhejiang regions are the foundation of today. If you want to maintain this place, you will lose the benefits of progress, and if you want to be aggressive, you will hurt the foundation of conservation.

古文：古之名将，内必屯田以自足，外必因粮于敌。
现代文：古代的名将，在内必实行屯田自给自足，在外必须因粮于敌以补助借给。
English: The famous generals of ancient times had to practice self-sufficiency in their garrisons at home, while abroad they had to borrow grain from the enemy with subsidies.

古文：诚能得以功名自任如祖逖者，举淮南而付之，使自为进取，而不至虚内以事外。
现代文：果真能得到像祖逖那样以功名自任的将领，将淮南地区交付给他，让他自为进取事宜，而不至于虚内以事外。
English: If you can really get a general who is self-appointed as Zu Xi, the Huainan region will be handed over to him, so that he can take matters into his own hands, rather than taking things from others.

古文：臣闻朝廷下福建造海船七百只，必如期而办，乞仿古制，建伏波、下濑、楼船之官，以教习水战，俾近上将佐领之，自成一军，而专隶于朝廷。
现代文：臣听说朝廷下令福建建造海船七百艘，必须按时造成，请求仿效古代制度，建立伏波、下濑、楼船之官，以教练水战，使亲信将领统率，自成一军，专门隶属于朝廷。
English: The vassal heard that the imperial court ordered Fujian to build 700 seagoing ships, which must be completed on time, and requested that the ancient system be imitated, establishing officers of the fore, aft, and main ships to coach naval warfare, so that close confidants could lead the generals and form their own army, specially subordinated to the imperial court.

古文：无事则散之缘江州郡，缓急则聚而用之。
现代文：无事时分散到沿江州郡，紧急时集中使用。
English: In case of emergency, they will be dispersed to the counties along the Yangtze River. In case of emergency, they will be used in a concentrated manner.

古文：臣度敌人他年入寇，惩创今日之败，必先以一军来自淮甸，为筑室反耕之计，以缀我师。
现代文：臣估计敌人以后入寇，必接受今天失败的教训，先以一部从淮甸南下，进行筑屋耕种的计策，以牵制我军。
English: The vassal estimated that the enemy would come to invade later, so he would accept the lesson of today's failure, and first go south from Huai Dian to build houses and carry out farming, in order to contain our army.

古文：然后由登、莱泛海窥吴、越，以出吾左，由武昌渡江窥江、池，以出吾右，一处不支则大事去矣。
现代文：然后从登州、莱州渡海窥伺吴、越，以出我左翼，以武昌渡江窥伺江、池，以出我右翼，一处不能支撑大事就去了。
English: Then, from Dangzhou and Laizhou, I crossed the sea to see Wu and Yue, to show my left wing, and from Wuchang I crossed the river to see the river and pond, to show my right wing. If I couldn't support a big event, I left.

古文：愿预讲左支右吾之策。
现代文：希望预先讲求左抵右挡的计策。
English: It is hoped that the strategy of shifting from the left to the right will be discussed in advance.

古文：夫兵之形无穷，愿诏临江守臣，凡可设奇以误敌者，如吴人疑城之类，皆预为措画。
现代文：兵形无穷，希望诏令沿江守将，凡是能够设奇误敌的，像吴人设立疑城之类，都预先措置谋划。
English: The military forms are endless, and it is hoped that the imperial edict will be guarded along the river, and all measures that can set up a surprise enemy, such as the Wu people setting up a suspicious city, are planned in advance.

古文：今长江之险，绵数千里，守备非一，苟制得其要，则用力少而见功多。
现代文：现在长江天险，连绵数千里，守备不一，如果措施得当，就会用力少而收效大。
English: Now the Yangtze River is a natural hazard, stretching for thousands of miles, with uneven protection. If the measures are appropriate, they will be less forceful and more effective.

古文：愿差次其最紧处，屯军若干人，一将领之，听其郡守节制，次紧稍缓处差降焉，有事则以大将兼统之。
现代文：希望在其中最要害的地方，屯驻军队若干人，由一将领统率，听从当地郡守指挥，次紧要的地方随之减少兵力，有事时由大将兼领。
English: It is hoped that a number of troops will be stationed in the most critical areas, led by a general, who will obey the command of the local county magistrate, and the troops will be reduced in the less critical areas, and the general will also lead the troops in case of emergency.

古文：既久则谙熟风土，缓急可用，与旋发之师不侔矣。 
现代文：时间一长就会熟悉当地风土民情，紧急时能够使用，与临时派遣的军队不能相提并论。 
English: After a long time, they will be familiar with the local customs and can be used in an emergency, which cannot be compared with the temporary dispatch of troops.

古文：所谓措画之方有五，曰亲大阅、补禁卫、讲军制、订使事、降敕榜，大略谓： 因秋冬之交，辟广场，会诸将，取士卒才艺绝特者而爵赏之。
现代文：所谓措施谋画的方法有五项，就是亲大阅、补禁卫、讲军制、订使事、降敕榜，大概意思是说： 借秋冬之交，开辟广场，会合众将，选取士卒中才能武艺出众的给予爵赏。
English: The so-called "measures and methods of planning" have five items, namely, reading aloud, supplementing the guards, talking about the military system, making envoys, and lowering the rank list, which probably means: taking advantage of the autumn and winter friendship, opening up the square, gathering the general public, and selecting the junior high school graduates to be awarded a knighthood for outstanding martial arts.

古文：建炎以来，禁卫单寡，乃藉五军以为重，臣常寒心。
现代文：建炎以来，禁卫军兵力单薄，于是依赖五军以为重，臣常常感到寒心。
English: Since the fire was built, the strength of the Imperial Guard was thin, so it was important to rely on the five armies, and the minister often felt cold.

古文：愿择忠实严重之将以为殿帅，稍补禁卫之阙，使隐然自成一军，则其驭诸将也，若臂之使指矣。
现代文：希望选择忠实严格稳重的将领担任殿前司军统帅，弥补禁卫军缺额，让它隐然自成一军，那么驾驭众将，就像手臂指使手指一样了。
English: It is hoped that a loyal, strict and steady general will be chosen to serve as the commander of the palace advance guard, to make up for the shortage of the imperial guard, and let it become an army of its own, then the control of the generals will be like the arm pointing the finger.

古文：今诸郡厢禁冗占私役者，大郡二三千人，小郡亦数百人。
现代文：现在各郡厢禁军士兵担任私人差役的，大郡二三千人，小郡也有数百人。
English: At present, there are 23,000 soldiers of the Forbidden Army serving as private guards in each county, and hundreds of soldiers in small counties.

古文：臣愿讲求，除郡守兵将官自禁军给事外，余兼从衣粮使自僦人以役。
现代文：臣希望讲求兵制，除了郡守兵将官从禁军中抽人差役外，其余的亻兼从衣粮让他们自己雇人役使。
English: The vassal wanted to have a conscription system. In addition to the county garrison generals, who would draw dispatchers from the forbidden army, the rest of the officials would let them hire their own dispatchers from the clothing and grain.

古文：大抵杀厢军三分之二，而以其衣粮之数尽募禁军。
现代文：大概减少厢军的三分之二，而以节省的衣粮数目全部用来召募禁军。
English: About two-thirds of the van army was reduced, and the entire amount of saved food and clothing was used to recruit the forbidden army.

古文：金人自用兵以来，未尝不以和好为言，此决不可恃。
现代文：金朝自用兵南侵以来，没有不以和好为言，这决不能相信。
English: Since the Kim dynasty invaded the south with troops, it has never spoken of reconciliation, which is absolutely not to be believed.

古文：然二圣在彼，不可遂已，姑以余力行之耳。
现代文：但徽、钦二帝在其手中，不能断然拒绝，姑且用余力同它周旋。
English: However, since the emblem of Emperor Qin is in his hands, he can't refuse it outright, even if he tries his best to negotiate with it.

古文：臣谓宜专命一官，如古所谓行人者，或止左右司领之，当遣使人，举成法而授之，庶免临时斟酌之劳，而朝廷得以专意治兵矣。
现代文：臣以为应专命一官员，如古代所谓的行人那样，或让左右司统领，应当派遣使者时，按照成法授予他，才能免除临时斟酌的烦劳，而朝廷得以专心治理军队了。
English: When a vassal thought that an official should be specially appointed, such as the so-called pedestrians in ancient times, or that the commander of the left and right divisions should send an envoy, he should be granted to him in accordance with the law, in order to avoid the hassle of temporary consideration, and the court could concentrate on governing the army.

古文：刘豫僣叛，理必灭之，谓宜降敕榜，明著豫僣逆之罪，晓谕江北士民，此亦兵家所谓伐谋伐交者。 
现代文：刘豫僭叛，按理必须将他消灭，臣以为应降敕榜，明告刘豫僭逆的罪行，晓谕江北地区民众，这也就是兵家所说的伐谋伐交。 
English: Liu Yuanzhang was a traitor and should have been eliminated. The vassal thought that he should be demoted to the lowest rank, publicly denounced Liu Yuanzhang's treasonous crimes, and told the people in the northern part of the Yangtze River, which is what the soldiers called "making plans to make peace."

古文：所谓绥怀之略有五，曰宣德意、先振恤，通关津、选材能、务宽贷，大略谓： 山东大姓结为山砦以自保，今虽累年，势必有未下者。
现代文：所谓绥怀的方略有五项，就是宣德意、先振恤、通关津、选材能、务宽贷，大概意思是说： 山东豪杰结居山寨以自保，现在虽然过了不少年，势必有未被金军攻下的。
English: The so-called compassionate side has five items, that is, the proclamation of virtue, the first to raise the shirt, the clearance of customs duties, the ability to select materials, and the wide range of loans. It probably means: Shandong heroes live in a cottage to protect themselves. Although it has been a long time, there is bound to be one that has not been conquered by the Golden Army.

古文：愿募有心力之人，密往诏谕。
现代文：希望召募有心计才干的人，秘密前往诏谕。
English: They hope to recruit people with the necessary skills to secretly travel to the imperial edict.

古文：应淮北遗民来归者，令淮南州郡给以行由，差船津济，量差地分人护送，毋得邀阻。
现代文：淮北地区民众前来归顺，应令淮南州郡分发路引，派船济渡，根据情况派当地有关部门人员护送，不得拦阻。
English: If the people in Huaibei region come to surrender, they should order Huainan County to distribute road guides, send ships to Jidu, and send local relevant departments to escort them according to the situation. They must not be blocked.

古文：有官人先次注授差遣，无官而贫乏者，令沿江州郡以官舍居之，仍量给钱米三两月，其能自营为生乃止。
现代文：有官职的先注授差遣，没有官职而又贫困的人，命令沿江州郡用官府房舍安置他们，并根据情况给予三两个月的钱米，到他们能够自谋生计时为止。
English: Those with official posts will be dispatched first, and those without official posts but in poverty will be ordered to be resettled in government buildings along Jiangzhou County, and will be given money and rice for three or two months according to the situation, until they can earn their own living.

古文：内有才智可用之人，随宜任使，勿但縻以爵秩而已。
现代文：其中有才智可以任用的人，随其才能任用，不要只是给予爵秩就算了。
English: Among them, those who have the talent to be appointed should be appointed according to their talent, not just given a peerage.

古文：凡诸将行师入境，敢抗拒者，固在剿戮。
现代文：凡是各将用兵入境，有敢于抗拒的，固然应当杀戮。
English: Anyone who dares to resist the invasion of troops by either side should of course be killed.

古文：其有善良、老弱之人，皆从宽贷，使之有更生之望。 不报。
现代文：但其中善良、老弱，都应从宽发落赦免，让他们有获得新生的希望。 朝廷没有回答。
English: However, the good, the old and the weak among them should all be pardoned with leniency, so that they have the hope of being reborn.

古文：邴闲居十有七年，薨于泉州，年六十二，谥文敏。
现代文：李邴闲居十七年，在泉州去世，时年六十二岁，谥号 文敏 。
English: Li Yao lived idly for seventeen years and died in Quanzhou at the age of sixty-two. His nickname was Wen Min.

古文：有《草堂集》一百卷。
现代文：著有《草堂集》一百卷。
English: He is the author of the 100-volume "Grass Hall Collection."

