古文：房光庭
现代文：房光庭
English: Fangguang Court

古文：房光庭为尚书郎，故人薛昭流放，而投光庭，光庭匿之。
现代文：房光庭做尚书郎，老朋友薛昭被流放，来投奔光庭，光庭把他藏了起来。
English: Fang Guangting was Shang Shuro. His old friend Xue Zhao was exiled and came to join him. Guangting hid him.

古文：既败，御史陆遗逸逼之急。
现代文：事情败露以后，御史陆遗逸逼着跟他要人，要得很急。
English: After the affair was exposed, Mishi Luyi Yatong was in a hurry to force someone to marry him.

古文：光庭惧，乃见时宰。
现代文：光庭害怕了，就去见当时的执政官。
English: Guangting was scared and went to see the then-regent.

古文：时宰曰： 公郎官，何为匿此人？ 
现代文：当时的执政官说： 您是郎官，干什么要隐藏这个人呢？ 
English: The then-consul said: "You are the steward, why do you want to hide this man?

古文：曰： 光庭与薛昭有旧，以途穷而归光庭，且所犯非大故，得不纳之耶？
现代文：房回答说： 我与薛昭有老交情，他现在是因为走投无路来投奔我；再说所犯的也不是大事，能不收留他吗？
English: Fang replied, "I have an old friendship with Xue Zhao. He is now running to me because he has no other choice. Besides, what he has done is not a big deal. Can we not take him in?

古文：若擒以送宫，居庙堂者，复何以待光庭？ 
现代文：如果抓起他来送给宫中，在朝廷上的人，又会用什么态度对待我光庭呢？ 
English: If I were to seize him and give him to someone in the palace, to someone in the court, what kind of attitude would they have towards me?

古文：时宰义之，乃出为慈州刺史，无他累。
现代文：当时的执政官认为他很讲义气，就派他出朝做慈州刺史，没受到连累。
English: The consul at the time thought he was very loyal, so he sent him to the imperial court to do the history of Cizhou, but he was not implicated.

古文：光庭尝送亲故之葬，出鼎门，际晚且饥，会鬻糕饼者，与同行数人食之。素不持钱，无以酬值。
现代文：光庭曾为亲戚故旧送葬，出了鼎门，就接近黄昏，并且肚子很饿了。正好有卖糕饼的，光庭就和同行的几个人吃起来，但一向身上不带钱，没法付帐。
English: Guangting had been to a relative's funeral before, and when he came out of the gate, it was close to dusk, and he was very hungry. There happened to be a cake seller, and Guangting and several of his companions ate it, but he never had any money on him and couldn't pay the bill.

古文：鬻者逼之，光庭命就我取直，鬻者不从。
现代文：卖饼的人逼着要钱，光庭就叫卖饼的人跟他去拿钱，卖饼的人不同意。光庭说： 告诉你官衔！
English: The man selling cakes insisted on asking for money, so Kota called the man selling cakes to go with him to get the money. The man selling cakes did not agree. Kota said, "Tell me your rank!"

古文：光庭曰： 与你官衔，我右台御史也，可随取值。 
现代文：我是右台御史，可随我去拿钱。 
English: I'm a member of the Right Division, but you can follow me to get the money.

古文：时人赏其放逸。
现代文：当时的人都很欣赏他的放任自由。
English: People at the time appreciated his freedom.

古文：崔思兢
现代文：崔思兢
English: Cui Sijian

古文：崔思兢，则天朝，或告其再从兄宣谋反，付御史张行岌按之。
现代文：崔思兢在武则天当政时，有人告他的堂兄崔宣谋反，于是武则天让御史张行岌审查这件事。
English: When Cui Sijian was in power in Wu Zetian, someone accused his cousin Cui Xuan of plotting a rebellion, so Wu Zetian asked the historian Zhang Xingru to review the matter.

古文：告者先诱藏宣家妾，而云妾将发其谋，宣乃杀之，投尸于洛水。
现代文：告密的人先用引诱的手段藏起了崔宣家的妾，却说崔妾将要揭发崔的阴谋，崔宣就杀了她，把尸体扔到了洛水中。
English: The informant first used seduction to hide Cui Xuan's concubine, but said that Cui Xuan's concubine was going to expose Cui's plot. Cui Xuan then killed her and threw her body into the Luoshui River.

古文：行岌按，略无状。
现代文：张行岌调查后，一点证据也没查出。
English: After Zhang Xingtu's investigation, no evidence was found.

古文：则天怒，令重按，行岌奏如初。
现代文：武则天很生气，命令重新审查。重新审查后，张行岌上奏内容仍像上次一样。
English: Wu Zetian was very angry and ordered a re-examination. After the re-examination, Zhang Xing still played the same content as last time.

古文：则天曰： 崔宣反状分明，汝宽纵之。
现代文：武则天说： 崔宣造反的表现很清楚，你宽大放纵他。
English: Wu Zetian said: Cui Xuanrou's act of rebellion is very clear, you indulge him generously.

古文：我令俊臣勘，汝母悔。 
现代文：我要让来俊臣调查，你可别后悔！ 
English: I'm going to have my son-in-law investigate. Don't regret it!

古文：行岌曰： 臣推事不若俊臣，陛下委臣，须实状。若顺旨妄族人，岂法官所守？
现代文：张行岌说： 臣推断事情不如俊臣，陛下委托臣来办这事，我得掌握实情，如果只顺从旨意胡乱的族灭人家，哪里是执法官应信守的？
English: Zhang Xingru said: "A minister inferring things is not as good as a young minister. Your Majesty entrusted me to handle this matter. I have to grasp the truth. If I only obey the will of a chaotic clan to exterminate people, where is the law enforcement officer supposed to abide by?

古文：臣必以为陛下试臣尔。 
现代文：臣认为陛下一定是在考试为臣罢了。 
English: The vassal thought that his majesty must be a vassal during the examination.

古文：则天厉色曰： 崔宣若实曾杀妾，反状自然明矣。
现代文：武则天脸色严肃地说： 崔宣如果确曾杀了小老婆，造反的情形自然就清楚了。
English: Wu Zetian looked serious and said, "If Cui Xuan really did kill his little wife, the situation of rebellion will naturally become clear.

古文：不获妾，如何自雪？ 
现代文：不把小老婆找出来，怎么洗清自己？ 
English: Without finding out the little wife, how can you clean yourself?

古文：行岌惧，逼宣家令访妾。
现代文：张行岌害怕了，逼着崔宣家去寻找小老婆。
English: Zhang Xing was terrified and forced Cui Xuanjia to go and look for the little wife.

古文：思兢乃于中桥南北，多置钱帛，募匿妾者，数日略无所闻。
现代文：思兢于是在中桥南面北面，放了很多钱帛，悬赏广泛征求知道窝藏小老婆的人。
English: Sijin then placed a lot of money on the north side of the south side of the middle bridge, offering a wide range of rewards to those who knew where to hide the little wife.

古文：而其家每窃议事，则告者辄知之。
现代文：但过了好几天，一点消息也没听到。可是他家每次偷偷商量的事，告密的人却都知道。
English: But after several days, there was no news at all. But the informant knew everything that his family secretly discussed.

古文：思兢揣家中有同谋者，乃佯谓宣妻曰： 须绢三百匹，顾刺客杀告者。 
现代文：思兢揣测家中有同谋的人，于是假装对崔宣的妻子说： 得用三百匹绢，雇刺客杀死告密的人。 
English: Suspecting that there was an accomplice in the family, Sijin pretended to say to Cui Xuan's wife, "We must hire an assassin to kill the informant with three hundred donkeys."

古文：而侵晨伏于台前。
现代文：而在天蒙蒙亮的时候思兢就潜伏在御史府前。
English: But when the sky is overcast and it's getting light, Sijin is lurking in front of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：宣家有馆客姓舒，婺州人，言行无缺，为宣家服役，宣委之同于子弟。
现代文：崔宣家有个门客姓舒，是婺州人，平时言行没有什么缺点，一直为崔宣家效劳。
English: Cui Xuan's family has a concubine surnamed Shu, who is from Zhangzhou. He has no faults in his words and deeds, and has always served Cui Xuan's family.

古文：须臾，见其人至台赂阍人，以通于告者。
现代文：崔宣委派他办事就跟委派子孙一样放心。不一会儿，思兢就看见姓舒的那个人贿赂看门人，以便让他通报告密的人。
English: Cui Xuan was as comfortable appointing him as he was appointing his children and grandchildren. Soon, Si Jing saw the man surnamed Shu bribe the doorman in order to let him inform the informant.

古文：告者遂称云： 崔家顾人刺我，请以闻。
现代文：告密的人于是说道： 崔家雇人刺我，请把情况告诉我。 
English: The informant then said: The Cui family hired someone to stab me, please tell me the situation.

古文：台中惊忧。
现代文：御史府中惊慌混乱。
English: There was panic and confusion in the goshi-fu.

古文：思兢素重馆客，不知疑。
现代文：思兢一向器重这个门客，没怀疑过他。
English: Sijin has always valued this customer and has never doubted him.

古文：密随之，到天津桥，料其无由至台。
现代文：便偷偷尾随着他，到了天津桥，思兢估计他不会再到御史府去，就骂他说： 无赖阴险的獠子！
English: So he secretly followed him to Tianjin Bridge. Thinking that he would not go to the Imperial Palace again, he scolded him: "Thieving, treacherous scoundrel!"

古文：乃骂之曰： 无赖险獠，崔家破家，必引汝同谋，何路自雪？
现代文：崔家破家，一定供出你是同谋，看你有什么办法洗清自己！
English: Cui Jia, who broke up the family, must confess that you are an accomplice, and see what you can do to clear yourself!

古文：汝幸能出崔家妾，我遗汝五百缣，归乡足成百年之业。
现代文：如果你侥幸能找出崔家的小老婆，我送你五百匹缣。回到家乡足够建成百年的基业。
English: If you are lucky enough to find the little wife of the Cui family, I will give you five hundred yaks. It is enough to build a hundred-year foundation back home.

古文：不然，则亦杀汝必矣。 
现代文：不这样做，那么你也一定会被杀。 
English: If you don't, you will be killed.

古文：其人悔谢，乃引思兢于告者之家，搜获其妾。
现代文：那个人后悔道歉，于是带着思兢到了告密者的家里，搜出了那个小老婆。
English: The man regretted his apology, so he went to the informant's house with trepidation and found the little wife.

古文：宣乃得免。
现代文：崔宣才得以免罪。
English: Cui Xuan was only exonerated.

古文：崔湜
现代文：崔湜
English: Choi Min-soo

古文：唐崔湜，弱冠进士登科，不十年，掌贡举，迁兵部。
现代文：唐代的崔湜二十岁时就考中了进士，不到十年工夫，开始主管国家考试录取人才的工作，后来升为兵部侍郎。
English: At the age of twenty, the Tang Dynasty's Cui Zhen passed the entrance examination. Less than ten years later, he began to be in charge of the national examination for the admission of talents. Later, he was promoted to the position of the secretary of the military department.

古文：父揖，亦尝为礼部，至是父子累日同省为侍郎。
现代文：崔湜的父亲叫崔揖，也曾做礼部侍郎，到这时候父子天天在同一官署中做侍郎。
English: Cui Yao's father, Cui Yao, was also a waiter in the etiquette department. By this time, father and son were working as waiters in the same government office every day.

古文：后三登宰辅，年始三十六。
现代文：后来多次登上辅政大臣的位置，而年龄才三十六岁。
English: Later, he rose to the position of Vice-Minister of State several times, and he was only thirty-six years old.

古文：崔之初执政也，方二十七，容止端雅，文词清丽。
现代文：崔湜刚开始执政的时候，才二十七岁，形貌举动端正美好，文章的词句清新华美。
English: When Cui Wei first came to power, he was only 27 years old, his appearance and behavior were neat and beautiful, and the words of the article were fresh and beautiful.

古文：尝暮出端门，下天津桥，马上自吟： 春游上林苑，花满洛阳城。 
现代文：曾在黄昏时候出了端门，到了天津桥，坐在马上自己吟诵： 春游上林苑，花满洛阳城。 
English: At dusk, he went out of the gate, came to Tianjin Bridge, and sat on the horse to chant: Spring tour to Shanglin Court, Luoyang City is full of flowers.

古文：张说时为工部侍郎，望之杳然而叹曰： 此句可效，此位可得，其年不可及也。 
现代文：张说当时是工部侍郎，望见了崔湜意味深长地叹息说： 这句子可以效法，这个地位也可以得到，但是他的年龄是达不到的。 
English: Zhang said that at that time he was a chamberlain of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce. He sighed meaningfully when he saw Cui Yingran and said: This sentence can be imitated, this position can also be obtained, but his age is beyond his reach.

古文：吕太一
现代文：吕太一
English: Lyu Taichi

古文：吕太一为户部员外郎，户部与吏部邻司。
现代文：吕太一做户部员外郎。户部与吏部的官署相邻。
English: Lü Taichi was the second son of a member of the household department. The household department was adjacent to the government office of the personnel department.

古文：时吏部移牒，令户部于墙宇自竖棘，以备铨院之交通。
现代文：当时吏部发文，让户部在院墙外自己栽上酸枣树，以防备吏部的人通过。
English: At that time, the cadre department issued a document, asking the household department to plant a sour jujube tree outside the courtyard wall to prevent the cadre department from passing.

古文：太一答曰： 眷彼吏部，铨惣之司，当须简要清通，何必竖篱种棘。 
现代文：太一答复说： 我想那吏部，是选拔人才，总管众务的部门，应当简明扼要，清楚畅通。何必竖起篱笆，种上酸枣树？ 
English: Taichi replied, "I think that the personnel department, which selects talent and is the department in charge of general affairs, should be concise, clear and smooth. Why erect a fence and plant a sour jujube tree?

古文：省中赏其清俊。
现代文：部内诸公都赞赏他的清高超群。
English: All the officials in the ministry praised him for his outstanding performance.

古文：许诫言
现代文：许诫言
English: Saying the Commandments

古文：许诫言为瑯邪太守，有囚缢死狱中，乃执去年修狱典鞭之。
现代文：许诫言担任瑯邪太守，有个囚犯在狱中自己吊死了，他便把去年主管修狱的抓来进行鞭打。
English: A prisoner hanged himself in prison, so he brought in last year's head of prison maintenance to carry out the flogging.

古文：修狱典曰： 小人主修狱耳，如墙垣不固，狴牢破坏，贼自中出，犹以修治日月久，可矜免。况囚自缢而终，修狱典何罪？ 
现代文：主管修狱的人说： 小人掌管修监狱而已。像墙壁不坚固，牢狱被破坏，犯人从里面逃出，还可以因为修建时间长了，而免罪，何况是囚犯自己上吊而死呢？主管修监狱的有什么罪？ 
English: The superintendent of the prison said: A villain is in charge of building the prison. If the walls are not strong, the prison is destroyed, and the prisoner escapes from inside, he can also be exonerated because the construction time is long, not to mention that the prisoner hanged himself. What is the crime of the superintendent of the prison?

古文：诫言犹怒曰： 汝胥吏，举动自合笞，又何诉？ 
现代文：许诫言仍生气地说： 你是小吏，这样的行动自然应该鞭打，还有什么可申诉的？ 
English: Saying the precepts, he still said angrily, "You are a petty official, such actions should naturally be whipped, what else can you complain about?

古文：杜丰
现代文：杜丰
English: Dufeng

古文：齐州历城县令杜丰，开元十五年，东封泰山，丰供顿。
现代文：齐州的历城县令杜丰，在开元十五年，皇帝上泰山祭天，由杜丰张罗供应。
English: Dufeng, the ruler of Licheng County in Qizhou, was supplied by Dufeng Zhangluo when the emperor went to Mount Taishan to hold a festival in the 15th year of the first century.

古文：乃造棺器三十枚，置行宫。
现代文：杜丰于是制造了棺材三十口，放在行宫中。
English: Du Feng then made thirty coffins and placed them in the palace.

古文：诸官以为不可，丰曰： 车驾今过，六宫偕行，忽暴死者，求棺如何可得？
现代文：各位官员认为这不行。杜丰说： 皇帝现在经过，六宫都随行，忽然得急病而死的，临时找棺材怎么能找到？
English: Du Feng said: The emperor is passing by now, the six palaces are accompanying him, he suddenly got sick and died, how can I find the coffin in time?

古文：若事不预备，其悔可追乎？ 
现代文：如果事情不预先作准备，那后悔就来不及了。 
English: If things are not prepared in advance, it will be too late to regret.

古文：及置顿使入行宫，见棺木陈于幕下，光彩赫然，惊而出，谓刺史曰： 圣主封岳，祈福祚延长，此棺器者，谁之所造？
现代文：官员看见棺材摆在帐幕下，光彩触目惊心，就惊讶地出来了。对刺史说： 圣明的国君到泰山祭天，祈求福气延长，这些棺材，是谁制造的？
English: When the official saw the coffin placed under the tent, its brilliance dazzling the eye, he came out in surprise. He said to Zushi: The king of the holy land went to Mount Taishan to offer sacrifices to the heavens and pray for the extension of his good fortune. Who made these coffins?

古文：且将何施？
现代文：将要用它做什么？多么不吉利？ 
English: What are you going to do with it? How unlucky?

古文：何不祥之甚？ 
现代文：于是打算上奏皇帝。
English: So he planned to play the emperor.

古文：将奏闻，刺史令求丰。丰逃于妻卧床下，诈称赐死，其家哭之。
现代文：刺史让人去把杜丰找来，杜丰逃到妻子睡觉的床底下，假称皇帝已让他死，他家的人都为他哭。
English: Tashi sent someone to find Du Feng. Du Feng fled under the bed where his wife was sleeping, pretending that the emperor had let him die. Everyone in his family was crying for him.

古文：赖妻兄张抟为御史，解之，乃得已。
现代文：后仗着大舅哥张抟做御史，从中周旋排解，才把这件事了结了。
English: Afterward, with the help of his elder brother Zhang Jun, he made the history and solved the problem from the middle, and only then did he end the matter.

古文：丰子钟，时为兖州参军，都督令掌厩马刍豆。
现代文：杜丰的儿子杜钟，当时做兖州的参军。都督让他掌管马圈里的马和草料。
English: Du Zhong, Du Feng's son, was serving in the military in Ganzhou at the time. The governor put him in charge of the horses and hay in the stable.

古文：钟曰： 御马至多，临日煮粟，恐不可给，不如先办。 
现代文：杜钟说： 皇帝的马极多，到了用的日子再煮小米，恐怕供应不足，不如先办。 
English: Du Zhong said: The emperor's horses are very numerous. When it comes to the day of use, the millet will be boiled again. I am afraid that the supply is insufficient. It is better to do it first.

古文：乃以镬煮粟豆二千余石，纳于窖中，乘其热封之。
现代文：于是便用锅煮了两千多斤的小米和豆子，放入窖里，趁热封严了窖。
English: So he boiled more than two thousand pounds of millet and beans in a pot, put them in the cellar, and sealed the cellar while it was still hot.

古文：及供顿取之，皆臭败矣。
现代文：等到张罗供应时取出一看，全都腐烂发臭了。
English: When Zhang Luo served it, he took it out and saw that it was all rotten and smelly.

古文：乃走，犹惧不免。命从者市半夏半升，和羊肉煮而食之，取死，药竟不能为患而愈肥。
现代文：于是逃跑，仍害怕不能免罪，就叫随从的人买了半夏半升，和在羊肉里煮着吃了，以便自杀。可是药竟然不能药死人，人反而更胖了。
English: Then he ran away, still fearing that he would not be exonerated, so he ordered his followers to buy a half-liter of cow's milk, boil it in mutton and eat it in order to commit suicide.

古文：时人云，非此父不生此子。
现代文：当时的人说： 除非这样的父亲生不出这样的儿子。 
English: People at the time said: "Only such a father could produce such a son."

古文：修武县民
现代文：修武县民
English: Residents of Shouwu County

古文：开元二十九年二月，修武县人嫁女，婿家迎妇，车随之。
现代文：开元二十九年二月，修武县有户人家女儿出嫁，女婿家迎媳妇，是带着车去的。
English: In February of the 29th year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, the daughter of a family in Xiuwu County was getting married, and the son-in-law was welcoming his daughter-in-law. They went there with a car.

古文：女之父惧村人之障车也，借俊马，令乘之，女之弟乘驴从，在车后百步外行。
现代文：女方的父亲怕村里人挡住了车不能前进，就借了好马，让女儿骑着它。女方的弟弟骑着驴在后边跟着，在车后百步以外走着。
English: The woman's father was afraid that the villagers would block the car and prevent it from moving forward, so he borrowed a good horse and let his daughter ride it. The woman's brother followed behind on a donkey, walking a hundred paces behind the car.

古文：忽有二人出于草中，一人牵马，一人自后驱之走，其弟追之不及，遂白其父。
现代文：忽然有两个人从草中出来，一人牵着驮新娘子的马，另一个人从后面赶着马跑。新娘的弟弟追不上，于是报告了父亲。
English: Suddenly two men came out of the grass, one leading the bride's horse and the other running after it. The bride's brother could not catch up and reported to the father.

古文：父与亲眷寻之，一夕不能得。
现代文：父亲便与亲属一起寻找新娘子，一个晚上也没找到。
English: The father and his relatives then searched for the bride, but did not find her for one night.

古文：去女家一舍，村中有小学，时夜学，生徒多宿。
现代文：距离女方家三十里处，有个村子里有所小学校，当时上夜学，所以学生多住宿。
English: Thirty miles away from the woman's home, there is a village with an elementary school. At that time, they went to night school, so the students had to stay overnight.

古文：凌晨启门，门外有妇人，裸形断舌，阴中血皆淋漓。
现代文：早晨起来开门时，看见门外有个妇女，赤身露体，舌头也被弄断了，阴部血淋淋的。
English: When I got up in the morning and opened the door, I saw a woman outside the door, naked, her tongue was also broken, and her genitals were bloody.

古文：生问之，女启齿流血，不能言。
现代文：学生问她，那女人一张口就血流不止，说不出话来。
English: The woman's mouth was bleeding profusely and she was unable to speak, the student said.

古文：生告其师，师出户观之，集诸生谓曰： 吾闻夫子曰，木石之怪夔魍魉，水之怪龙罔象，土之怪坟羊。
现代文：学生就告诉了老师。老师走出门来看了看，召集学生们对他们说： 我听孔夫子说过，山上的怪物叫夔魍魉，水里的怪物叫龙罔象，土里的怪物叫坟羊。
English: The teacher went out of the door to have a look, gathered the students and said to them, "I heard Confucius say that the monster on the mountain is called a dragonfly, the monster in the water is called a dragonfly elephant, and the monster in the soil is called a grave sheep.

古文：吾此居近太行，怪物所生也，将非山精野魅乎？
现代文：我们住的这地方靠近太行山，是怪物生长的地方，这女人莫不是山精野妖吗？
English: This place where we live, near Mount Taihang, is a place where monsters grow. Isn't this woman a mountain spirit?

古文：盍击之？ 
现代文：何不一块打她？ 
English: Why not beat her up together?

古文：于是投以砖石，女既断舌，不能言，诸生击之，竟死。
现代文：于是一起用砖石投击她。女的舌头已断，说不了话，学生们不断打她，最后被打死了。
English: Together they pelted her with masonry. The woman's tongue was broken and she was unable to speak. The students continued to beat her until she died.

古文：及明，乃非魅也。
现代文：等到天亮了一看，并不是妖怪。
English: When I looked at it in the morning, it wasn't a monster.

古文：俄而女家寻求，至而见之，乃执儒及弟子诣县。
现代文：不一会儿这个女人的家里人来此寻找。来到后看到了女儿惨死的样子，于是把那个教书的先生和他的学生都抓到了县里。
English: Soon after, the woman's family came looking for her. When they arrived, they saw their daughter's gruesome death and arrested the teacher and his students in the county.

古文：县丞卢峰讯之，实杀焉，乃白于郡。
现代文：县丞卢峰审讯这件事，审讯证明确实是师生杀了人。
English: County magistrate Lu Feng tried the case, and the trial proved that it was indeed the students and teachers who killed people.

古文：笞儒生及弟子，死者三人，而劫竟不得。
现代文：于是上报于郡，判先生和学生笞刑。被鞭笞而死的有三个人，可是那两个真正的劫人犯，最后也没有抓到。
English: The case was reported to the county, and the teacher and the student were sentenced to caning. Three people died as a result of the caning, but the two real robbers were never caught.

古文：李元皛
现代文：李元皛
English: Lee Won-soo

古文：李元皛为沂州刺史，怒司功郄承明，命剥之屏外，承明狡猾者也。
现代文：李元皛做沂州刺史，对司功郄承明很生气，命人到屏帐外面剥去他的衣服。
English: Li Yuanxuan, who was the chief historian of Zhangzhou, was very angry with Shigong Rongcheng, and ordered someone to strip him of his clothes outside the screen.

古文：既出屏，适会博士刘琮琎后至，将入衙。
现代文：承明是个很狡猾的人，出了屏帐以后，恰好碰到了博士刘琮琎来晚了，将要进入衙门。
English: Admittedly, he is a very cunning person. After leaving the screen, he happened to meet Dr. Liu Wei, who was late and was about to enter the court.

古文：承明以琮琎儒者，则前执而剥之，绐曰： 太守怒汝衙迟，使我领人取汝，令便剥将来。 
现代文：承明因为琮琎是个文人，就上前抓住他，剥他的衣服，欺骗他说： 太守对你来晚了很生气，让我带着人来捉你，并且叫立即剥下衣服带上去。 
English: Acknowledging that Hao was a man of letters, he went up to him, grabbed him, stripped him of his clothes, and tricked him by saying: "The governor is very angry with you for coming late. Let me bring someone to catch you, and tell you to immediately strip off your clothes and take them with you."

古文：琮琎以为然，遂解衣。
现代文：琮琎以为是真的，就脱下了衣服。
English: Thinking it was real, she took off her clothes.

古文：承明目吏卒，擒琮琎以入，承明乃逃。
现代文：承明给吏卒使眼色，让他们抓着琮琎进去。承明于是逃走了。
English: Chengming winked at the officers and told them to grab the shovel and go inside. Chengming then fled.

古文：元皛见剥至，不知是琮琎也，遂杖之数十焉。
现代文：元皛见剥下衣服的人来了，也不知道是琮琎，就叫人用棍子打了数十下。
English: When Yuan Yu saw the man who had stripped off his clothes coming, he didn't know it was Yao, so he ordered someone to beat him dozens of times with a stick.

古文：琮琎起谢曰： 蒙恩赐杖，请示罪名。 
现代文：琮琎站起来谢罪说： 承蒙恩惠，赏给我这么多棍。
English: Zou stood up and said, "Thank you for giving me so many sticks.

古文：元皛曰： 为承明所卖。 
现代文：请告诉我犯了什么罪？ 元皛说： 被承明出卖。 
English: Please tell me what crime I committed? Yuan Qi said: I was betrayed.

古文：竟无言，遂入户。
现代文：琮琎竟没话说，便进了门。
English: Without saying a word, she walked through the door.

古文：王琚
现代文：王琚
English: Wang Yao

古文：玄宗在藩邸时，每游戏于城南韦杜之间，尝因逐狡免，意乐忘返。
现代文：玄宗在诸侯王的府第里时，常常在长安城南的韦曲和杜曲之间游戏，曾经因为追赶狡猾的兔子，心情高兴而忘了回家。
English: When Xuanzong was in the court of the princes, he often played games between Wei Qu and Du Qu in the south of Chang'an City. Once, because he was chasing a cunning rabbit, he was so happy that he forgot to go home.

古文：与其徒十数人，饥倦甚，因休息村中大树之下。
现代文：他和手下的十几个人，都饥饿疲倦得厉害，于是在村中的大树下面休息。
English: He and a dozen or so of his men, famished and exhausted, rested under a tree in the village.

古文：适有书生，延帝过其家，其家甚贫，止村妻一驴而已。
现代文：恰好有个书生，延请玄宗访问他家。他的家中很贫困，只有一位乡下妻子和一头驴而已。
English: There happened to be a scholar who invited Yan Xuan Zong to visit his home. His family was very poor, with only a peasant wife and a donkey.

古文：帝坐未久，书生杀驴煮秫，备膳馔，酒肉滂沛，帝顾而甚奇之。
现代文：玄宗坐的时间还不长，书生杀驴煮粘高粱，准备饭食。酒肉丰盛，玄宗看了感到很奇怪。
English: Xuanzong had not been seated for long. He was busy killing donkeys, cooking sticky sorghum, and preparing meals. The meat and wine were plentiful, and Xuanzong felt very strange when he looked at them.

古文：及与语，磊落不凡，问其姓，乃王琚也。
现代文：等到与书生交谈，发现书生洒脱、直率、开朗，跟一般人不同。问他姓名，原来叫王琚。
English: When he talked to Shousheng, he found that Shousheng was easygoing, straightforward, and cheerful, different from ordinary people. When he asked his name, he was originally called Wang Yao.

古文：自是帝每游韦杜间，必过琚家，琚所语议，合帝意，帝日益亲善。
现代文：从此后玄宗每到韦、杜间游玩，一定造访王琚家。王琚的谈话和主张，都合乎玄宗心意，玄宗一天比一天跟他更加亲近友好。
English: From then on, whenever Xuanzong traveled to Wei and Du, he would visit Wang Xuan's home. Wang Xuan's conversations and ideas were in line with Xuanzong's heart, and Xuanzong became closer and friendlier with him day by day.

古文：及韦氏专制，帝忧甚，独密言于琚。
现代文：等到韦后专权时，玄宗很忧虑，单独跟王琚谈了这件事。
English: When the time came for Emperor Wei to assume absolute power, Emperor Xuanzong was very worried and discussed the matter with Emperor Wang alone.

古文：琚曰： 乱则杀之，又何亲也？ 
现代文：王琚说： 乱政就杀了她，又有什么可爱惜的？ 
English: Wang Yao said, "The chaotic government killed her, so what is there to be sorry for?

古文：帝遂纳琚之谋，戡定内难。
现代文：玄宗便采纳了王琚的策略，平定了朝廷内的祸乱。
English: Xuanzong then adopted Wang Yao's strategy and quelled the calamity within the imperial court.

古文：累拜琚为中书侍郎，实预配飨焉。
现代文：连续提升最后任命王琚为中书侍郎。死后成为配享之臣。
English: Continuously promoted, Wang Xi was finally appointed as the attendant of the middle book. After his death, he became the vassal of the distribution.

古文：李适之
现代文：李适之
English: Li Shizhi

古文：李适之入仕，不历丞簿，便为别驾；不历两畿官，便为京兆尹；不历御史及中丞，便为大夫；不历两省给舍；便为宰相；不历刺史，便为节度使。
现代文：李适之进入仕途，不做县丞主簿，就做了别驾；不做东西两京附近的官，就做了京兆尹；不做御史和中丞，就做了大夫；不做两省的给事中和舍人，就做了宰相；不做刺史，就做了节度使。
English: When Li Shizhi entered the career path, he did not do the chief record of the county magistrate, he did the part-time driving; he did not do the official near the two capitals, he did the Beijing Zhaoyun; he did not do the historian and the middle-ranking magistrate, he did the doctor; he did not do the middle-ranking and subordinate people in the two provinces, he did the prime minister; he did not do the history, he did the governor.

古文：白履忠
现代文：白履忠
English: Bai Ruzhong

古文：白履忠博涉文史，隐居梁城，王志愔、杨玚皆荐之。
现代文：白履忠广泛阅读文史书籍，隐居在梁城。王志愔、杨玚都推荐了他。
English: Bai Ruzhong read widely in literary and historical books and lived in seclusion in Liangcheng. Wang Zhisheng and Yang Hui both recommended him.

古文：寻请还乡，授朝散大夫。
现代文：不久白履忠请求回乡，朝廷就授给他朝散大夫的官衔。
English: Soon after, Bai Luzhong requested to return to his hometown, and the imperial court granted him the official title of Choshan Doctor.

古文：乡人谓履忠曰： 吾子家贫，竟不沾一斗米，一匹帛，虽得五品，止是空名，何益于实也？ 
现代文：乡里的人对白履忠说： 您家很穷，竟然不接受一斗米，一匹帛。虽然做了五品官衔，也只是个空名，对实际生活有什么好处呢？ 
English: The people in the village said to Bai Luzhong, "Your family is very poor, and you don't even accept a bucket of rice or a donkey. Even though you have made the title of the fifth grade official, it is just an empty name. What is the benefit to your actual life?"

古文：履忠欣然曰： 往岁契丹入寇，家家尽署排门夫。履忠特以读少书籍，县司放免，至今惶愧。
现代文：但白履忠很高兴地说： 往年契丹入侵时，家家都要派人守城门，我履忠只因读了少量书籍，县里主管免了我的差事，到现在我还感到惭愧惶恐。
English: But Bai Luzhong happily said: In previous years, when the Khitan invaded, every family had to send someone to guard the city gate. I only read a small number of books, and the county supervisor exempted me from my duties. To this day, I still feel ashamed and afraid.

古文：虽不得禄赐，且是五品家。
现代文：虽然得不到俸禄，但还是五品之家。
English: Although they do not receive a salary, they are still a family of five.

古文：终身高卧，免有徭役，不易得之也。 
现代文：终身高枕而卧，不服徭役，这是不容易得到的呀。 
English: It's not easy to lie on your back for the rest of your life and not serve in the military.

古文：夜明帘
现代文：夜明帘
English: The evening curtain

古文：姚崇为相，尝对于便殿。举左足，不甚轻利。
现代文：姚崇作宰相，曾在皇帝休息娱乐的别殿中回答皇帝的问话，抬左脚时，显得不轻松，不利索。
English: As the prime minister, Yao Chong once answered the emperor's question in the emperor's rest and entertainment hall. When he lifted his left foot, he appeared uneasy and uncomfortable.

古文：上曰： 卿有足疾耶？ 
现代文：皇上说： 你的脚有病吗？ 
English: The emperor said, "Are your feet ill?

古文：崇曰： 臣有心腹疾，非足疾也。 
现代文：姚崇说： 我有心腹之病，不是脚病。 
English: Yao Chong said: I have a heart disease, not a foot disease.

古文：因前奏张说罪状数百言。
现代文：于是走上前向皇帝诉说张说的罪状，说了有数百句话。
English: So he stepped forward to tell the emperor about Zhang's crime and said hundreds of words.

古文：上怒曰： 卿归中书，宜宣与御史中丞共按其事。
现代文：皇上生气地说： 你属于中书省，应该反映给御史中丞，共同检举他的罪恶！ 
English: The emperor said angrily, "You belong to the Ministry of Chinese Literature, you should report to the Imperial Historian, and jointly denounce his crimes!"

古文：而说未之知。
现代文：而张说一点也不知道这事。
English: Zhang said he did not know anything about it.

古文：会吏报午后三刻，说乘马先归。
现代文：恰巧有个小吏报告午后三刻张说骑着马先回去了。
English: It just so happened that a minor official reported to Zhang at three o'clock in the afternoon that he had ridden back first.

古文：崇急呼御史中丞李林甫，以前诏付之。
现代文：姚崇急忙找来御史中丞李林甫，把前些时候皇帝的命令交给了他。
English: Yao Chong hurried to find the imperial historian, Li Linfu, and gave him the emperor's order.

古文：林甫谓崇曰： 说多智，是必困之，宜以剧地。 
现代文：林甫对姚崇说： 张说足智多谋，如果一定想把他困起来，应该让他处于险恶的环境中。 
English: Lin Fu said to Yao Chong: Zhang said he was resourceful. If you really want to trap him, you should put him in a dangerous environment.

古文：崇曰： 丞相得罪，未宜太逼。 
现代文：姚崇说： 丞相犯罪，不应该太胁迫。 
English: Yao Chong said: If the prime minister commits a crime, he should not be too coerced.

古文：林甫又曰： 公必不忍，即说当无害。 
现代文：林甫又说： 您一定不忍心，那么张说该不会有什么灾祸。 
English: Lin Fu also said: You must not be able to bear it, so Zhang said that there would be no disaster.

古文：林甫止将诏付于小御史，中路以马坠告。
现代文：林甫只把诏书交给了小御史，中途用从马上摔下来的理由来告了假。
English: Lin Fu only handed over the edict to Xiao Youshi, and halfway through, he used the reason of falling off his horse as an excuse.

古文：说未遭崇奏前旬月，家有教授书生，通于说侍儿最宠者。会擒得奸状，以闻于说。
现代文：张说在未遭姚崇参奏的一个月前，家中有个教书的书生，跟张说最宠爱的侍女私通，恰巧被人发现，便报告了张说。
English: Zhang said that a month before she was visited by Yao Chong, there was a student at home who had an affair with Zhang's favorite maid, and it happened to be discovered by someone, who reported it to Zhang.

古文：说怒甚，将穷狱于京兆。
现代文：张说非常气愤，打算把这个案子交给京兆尹彻底处理。
English: Zhang said that he was very angry and planned to give the case to Jing Zhaoyun to deal with thoroughly.

古文：书生厉声言曰： 睹色不能禁，亦人之常情。
现代文：书生声音严厉地说： 看到美丽的女子不能控制自己，也是人之常情。
English: In a stern voice, the student said, "It is human nature to see a beautiful woman unable to control herself.

古文：缓急有用人乎，公何靳于一婢女耶？ 
现代文：您遇到危急情况有可用的人吗？您对一个婢女为何这样吝惜呢？ 
English: Do you have anyone to help you in a crisis? Why are you so stingy with a servant?

古文：说奇其言而释之，兼以侍儿与归。
现代文：张说觉得他的话挺出奇，就放了他，并把侍女送与他让他们一同回家了。
English: Zhang said that he thought his words were very strange, so he released him and sent the maid with him to let them go home together.

古文：书生一去数月余，无所闻知。
现代文：书生一去好几个月，一点消息也没听到。
English: The student went for months without hearing any news.

古文：忽一曰，直访于说，忧色满面。言曰： 某感公之恩，思有以报者久矣。
现代文：忽然有一天，书生直接来访张说，满脸愁容，说： 我感激您的恩情，考虑有所报答已经很久了。
English: Suddenly one day, a scholar came to visit Zhang directly and said, with a sad face, "I am grateful for your kindness, and I have been thinking about repaying you for a long time."

古文：今闻公为姚相国所构，外狱将具，公不知之，危将至矣。
现代文：现在听说您被姚宰相构陷，对外的审判材料即将完备，而您还不知道！危险就要到了。
English: Now I hear that you have been framed by Prime Minister Yao, the external trial materials are about to be completed, and you don't know it yet! Danger is coming.

古文：某愿得公平生所宝者，用计于九公主，可能立释之。 
现代文：我愿得到您平生最宝贵的东西，在九公主身上用计，可能立刻就会化解了您的官司。 
English: I'd like to get the most precious thing in your life. If I use my trick on the Nine Princesses, I may be able to resolve your lawsuit immediately.

古文：说因自历指己所宝者，书生皆云，未足解公之难。
现代文：张说便一一说出了自己所宝贵的东西，书生都说： 不足以解除您的灾难。 
English: Zhang said that he told his precious things one by one, and the students all said: It is not enough to relieve your disaster.

古文：书生曰： 吾事济矣。 因请说手札数行，恳以情言，遂急趋出。
现代文：张说又集中精力想了好一会儿，忽然说： 最近有鸡林郡托人送我的一件夜明帘。 书生说： 我们的事情成了。 于是请张说亲手写了几行话，用真情进行恳求。
English: Zhang said that he concentrated on thinking for a while, and suddenly said: Recently, there was a night curtain given to me by a trustee from Qilin County. The scholar said: Our business is done. So he asked Zhang to write a few lines with his own hand and plead with true feelings.

古文：逮夜，始及九公主第。
现代文：书生带着信匆匆忙忙地走了。到了夜晚，书生才到了九公主的住宅。
English: The scholar hurried away with the letter. In the evening, the scholar arrived at the residence of the nine princesses.

古文：书生具以说事言，兼用夜明帘为贽。且谓主曰： 上独不念在东宫时，思必始终，恩加于张丞相乎，而今反用谗耶？ 
现代文：书生把张说的事全告诉了公主，又送上夜明帘作为见面礼，并且对公主说， 皇上难道忘了在东宫时，想一定要加恩于张丞相吗？今天怎么反而采纳了谗言呢？ 
English: The scholar told the princess everything that Zhang had said, and gave her a night-light curtain as a gift for the meeting, and said to the princess, "Did the emperor forget that when he was in the East Palace, he wanted to be grateful to Premier Zhang? Why did he accept the criticism today?

古文：明早，公主上谒，具为奏之。
现代文：第二天早上，公主上朝谒见皇上，把书生的话全反映给了皇帝。
English: The next morning, the princess went to the imperial court to see the emperor, and reflected all the words of the scholar to the emperor.

古文：上感动，因急命高力士就御史台宣： 前所按事，并宜罢之。 
现代文：皇上很感动，就急忙命令高力士到御史台宣布圣旨： 以前所检举张说的事，应该全部停止，不再追究。 
English: The emperor was very moved, and he hurriedly ordered Gao Lixin to go to the Grand Historian's Office to announce the sacred edict: The things that Zhang had previously reported should all be stopped and no longer investigated.

古文：书生亦不复再见矣。
现代文：而这个书生以后也再没有见到。
English: The student was never seen again.

古文：班景倩
现代文：班景倩
English: by Pan Jingjun

古文：开元中，朝廷选用群官，必推精当。
现代文：开元年间，朝廷选用各位官员，一定举荐精干恰当的人物。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the year, the imperial court selected various officials, and they were sure to recommend capable and appropriate people.

古文：文物既盛，英贤出入，皆薄具外任。
现代文：礼乐典章制度很发达，杰出人才出出进进，都只用简单的宴会招待那些去外地做官的人。
English: The ceremonial music award system is very developed, outstanding talents come and go, and only simple banquets are used to invite those who go abroad to work as officials.

古文：虽雄藩大府，由中朝冗员而授，时以为左迁。
现代文：即使是强大的藩镇和辖区广大的府的长官，都由朝中多余的官员充任，当时认为这是降低了官职。
English: Even the governors of powerful provinces and towns and the prefectures of vast regions were filled by superfluous officials from the central government, which at the time was considered to be a downgrading of official positions.

古文：班景倩自扬州采访使，入为太理少卿，路由大梁。
现代文：班景倩由扬州采访使入朝任大理寺少卿。
English: Ban Jingyao was sent to the imperial court from Yangzhou to be appointed as the junior high priest of Dali Temple.

古文：倪若水为郡守，西郊盛设祖席。
现代文：途经大梁，倪若水是该郡郡守，就在城西郊安排了盛大的饯行宴会为班景倩饯行。
English: Passing through the girders, Ni Rausui is the county governor of the county, and a grand banquet was arranged in the western suburb of the city for the stars of the film.

古文：宴罢，景倩登舟，若水望其行尘，谓掾吏曰： 班公是行，何异登仙乎？
现代文：宴会结束，景倩上船赶路，倪若水远望他的人马的背影对手下属员说： 班公这一去，跟登了仙境有什么区别呢？
English: At the end of the banquet, Jingyao boarded the ship to catch his way. Ni Ruoshui looked far and wide at the back of his horse and men. The rival subordinate said: What is the difference between Pan Gong's departure and his arrival in the fairyland?

古文：为之驺殿，良所甘心。 
现代文：为他做侍从，跟在他后面，也实在是心甘情愿的！ 
English: To be his attendant, to follow behind him, is also very willing!

古文：默然良久，方整回驾。
现代文：沉默了好久，才整理人马回衙。
English: There was silence for a long time before anyone came back.

古文：既而为诗投相府，以道其诚，其词为当时所称赏。
现代文：不久倪若水作了诗寄到宰相府去，用以表达自己的真情实感，他的诗句很为当时的人们所称赞欣赏。
English: Soon after, Ni Rausui composed a poem and sent it to the Prime Minister's Office, using it to express his true feelings. His poem was highly appreciated by the people at the time.

古文：薛令之
现代文：薛令之
English: Xue Lingzhi

