古文：天文三晋简文咸安元年十二月辛卯，荧惑逆行入太微，二年三月犹不退。
现代文：晋简文帝成安元年十二月辛卯，火星逆行入太微垣，至咸安二年三月仍不退出。
English: In December of the first year of Jin Jianwen Emperor Cheng'an, Mars retrograde entered Taibiao, and did not withdraw until March of the second year of Xi'an.

古文：占曰： 国不安，有忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示国家不安宁，有忧患。 
English: Divination says: The country is restless and troubled.

古文：是时，帝有桓温之逼，恆怀忧惨。七月，帝崩。
现代文：当时简文帝被但湿逼迫，经常怀着忧虑悲伤，至七月逝世。
English: At that time, Emperor Jianwen was persecuted by the Dan Mo, and he was often worried and sad, until he died in July.

古文：咸安二年正月己酉，岁星犯填星，在须女。
现代文：咸安二年正月己酉，木星在须女之宿犯土星。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Heian period, Jupiter was transiting Saturn in the sign of Aries.

古文：占曰： 为内乱。 
现代文：占辞说： 将有内乱。 
English: Divination says: There will be civil unrest.

古文：五月，岁星形色如太白。
现代文：五月，木星的形状与颜色像金星。
English: In May, Jupiter takes on the shape and color of Venus.

古文：占曰： 进退如度，奸邪息。
现代文：占辞说： 行星运行情况与预测的相同则奸邪息灭。
English: The fortune-teller said: If the planetary movement is the same as predicted, the evil will be eliminated.

古文：变色乱行，主无福。
现代文：行星颜色变异或运行情况纷乱则国主无福。
English: If the planet's color changes or if its movement is chaotic, then the sovereign is out of luck.

古文：岁星囚于仲夏，当细小而不明，此其失常也；又为臣强。 
现代文：木星在仲夏之时应当细小而明亮。但现在其形状颜色与金星相似，这是失常的表现。显示臣太强。 
English: Jupiter should be small and bright in midsummer, but now its shape and color are similar to Venus, which is an aberration.

古文：六月，太白昼见在七星。
现代文：六月，金星白天出现在七星之宿。
English: In June, Venus appears during the day at the Seven Stars Inn.

古文：乙酉，太白犯舆鬼。
现代文：乙酉，金星犯舆鬼宿。
English: Acetylene, venus impact the ghost.

古文：占曰： 国有忧。 七月，帝疾甚，诏桓温曰： 少子可辅者辅之；如不可，君自取之。 
现代文：占辞说： 国家有忧患 七月，简文帝病重，遣诏于桓温说： 少子如果值得辅佐你就辅佐他；如果不值得辅佐，你就取而代之。 
English: In July, Emperor Jianwen fell seriously ill and sent an imperial edict to Emperor Huanwen, saying: If the younger son is worthy of support, you should support him; if he is not worthy of support, you should take his place.

古文：赖侍中王坦之毁手诏，改使如王导辅政故事。
现代文：幸好侍中王坦之毁掉简文帝的手诏，改为与旦蔓辅政的旧事一样。
English: Fortunately, the handwritten edict of the Emperor Jianwen, which was destroyed by the attendant Wang Tan, was changed to the same as the old thing of the assistant government of Tan Man.

古文：温闻之大怒，将诛坦之等，内乱之应也。
现代文：桓温听说后大怒，准备谋杀王坦之等人，这是内乱的应验。
English: When Kan-Wen heard of this, he flew into a rage and prepared to murder Wang Tan-Zhi and others. This was the fulfillment of the civil war.

古文：是月，帝崩。
现代文：当月简文帝逝世。
English: Emperor Jianwen died that month.

古文：咸安二年五月丁未，太白犯天关。
现代文：咸安二年五月丁未，金星犯天关。
English: In May of the second year of the Heian era, on the morning of the third day of the fifth month, Venus passed through the heavens.

古文：占曰： 兵起。 
现代文：占辞说： 将有战事。 
English: The soothsayer said: Let war arise.

古文：六月，庾希入京城。十一月，卢悚入宫，并诛灭。
现代文：六月，庾希带兵进入京城，十一月，爱速进入皇宫，二人都被杀死。
English: In June, Rong Xi led an army into the capital, and in November, Ai Su entered the imperial palace. Both were killed.

古文：晋孝武宁康元年正月戊申，月奄心大星。
现代文：晋孝武帝室尘元年正月戊申，月掩心宿大星。
English: Emperor Jinxiao Wu's wife died in the first month of the first year of the first month of the first year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the first year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the third year of the first year of the first year of the second

古文：案占，灾不在王者，则在豫州。
现代文：考查占书可知，灾不应在君王身上，则应在邀业之地。
English: The examination of the record shows that the disaster should not be on the monarch, but should be in the place of the invitation.

古文：一曰： 主命恶之。 三月丙午，月奄南斗第五星。
现代文：另一说： 应这天象的人不利 三月丙午，月掩南斗第五星。
English: Another said: "Those who respond to this celestial elephant are at a disadvantage. On the afternoon of the third day of the third month, the moon hides the fifth star of the Southern Cross.

古文：占曰： 大臣有忧，忧死亡。 
现代文：占辞说： 大臣有死亡之忧。 
English: The fortune-teller said, "The minister is in danger of death."

古文：一曰： 将军死。 
现代文：另一说： 将军死。 
English: Another said: "The general is dead."

古文：七月，桓温薨。
现代文：七月，桓温去世。
English: July. Kanon passed away.

古文：宁康二年正月丁巳，有星孛于女虚，经氐、亢、角、轸、翼、张。
现代文：窒尘二年正月丁巳，有彗星出现于女虚之宿，经过氐、亢、角、轸、翼、张六宿。
English: In the twilight of the first month of the second year, a comet appeared in the inn of the female void, passing through the,, 角,, 翼, and 张六宿.

古文：九月丁丑，有星孛于天市。
现代文：九月丁丑，有彗星出现于天市垣。
English: In September, Ding Yuxi, the evil star, appeared in the sky.

古文：十一月癸酉，太白奄荧惑，在营室。
现代文：十一月癸酉，金星在营室掩火星。
English: At the end of November, Venus occulted Mars in the camp.

古文：占曰： 金火合为烁，此灾皆为兵丧。 
现代文：占辞说： 金与火合则熔化，上述天象预示的灾变都是战争和丧乱。 
English: The fortune-teller said: Gold and fire are melted together, and the disasters foreshadowed by the above-mentioned celestial phenomenon are all wars and turmoil.

古文：太元元年五月，氐贼苻坚伐凉州。七月，氐破凉州，虏张天锡。
现代文：太元元年五月，氐族苻坚征伐凉州，至七月凉州被攻破，张天锡被俘虏。
English: In May of the first year of the Taiyuan Dynasty, the Yao people led a campaign to conquer Liangzhou. By July, Liangzhou was conquered, and Zhang Tianxi was taken prisoner.

古文：十一月，桓冲发三州军军淮、泗，桓豁亦遣军备境上。
现代文：十一月，桓冲发三州部队驻于淮水、泗水之间，桓豁也派遣军队守备于边境之上。
English: In November, Huan Chongfa stationed troops of the three states between Huai Shui and Surabaya, and Huan Huan also dispatched troops to guard the border.

古文：宁康二年闰月己未，月奄牵牛南星。
现代文：宁康二年闰月己未，月掩牵牛南星。
English: In the second year of Ningkang, the leap month has not yet come, and the moon hides the cow and the south star.

古文：占曰： 左将军死。 
现代文：占辞说： 造天象预示左将军死。 
English: Divination says: General Zuo is dead.

古文：三年五月，北中郎将王坦之薨。
现代文：三年五月，北中郎将王坦之死。
English: In May of the third year, Kitanakura ordered the death of Wang Tan.

古文：宁康三年六月辛卯，太白犯东井。
现代文：宁康三年六月辛卯，金星犯束井之宿。
English: In June of the third year of Ningkang, the jinxing of the jinxing of the jinxing of the jinxing

古文：占曰： 秦地有兵。 
现代文：占辞说： 秦地将有战争。 
English: The soothsayer said: There will be war in Qin.

古文：九月戊申，荧惑奄左执法。
现代文：九月戊申，火星掩左执法星。
English: In September, the waxing gibbous, Mars covers the left law enforcement star.

古文：占曰： 执法者死。 
现代文：占辞说： 执法大臣将死。 
English: Divination says: The Minister of Law Enforcement is dead.

古文：太元元年，苻坚破凉州。
现代文：太元元年，苻坚攻破凉州。
English: In the first year of the Taiyuan era, Yan Jian conquered Liangzhou.

古文：十月，尚书令王彪之卒。
现代文：十月，尚书令王彪之死。
English: In October, the death of Wang Biao was announced.

古文：晋孝武太元元年四月丙戌，荧惑犯南斗第三星。
现代文：晋孝武帝太元元年四月丙戌，火星犯南斗第三星。
English: Emperor Jinxiaowu died in April of the first year of the Taiyuan Dynasty, and Mars became the third planet of the Southern Cross.

古文：丙申，又奄第四星。
现代文：丙申，又掩第四星。
English: The fourth star was also covered.

古文：占曰： 兵大起，中国饥。 一曰： 有赦。 
现代文：占辞说： 造天象预示将有大规模战争，中原地区将发生饥荒。 另一说： 将有大赦。 
English: A fortune-teller said: "The creation of the celestial object foretells that there will be a large-scale war, and famine will occur in the Central Plains region," while another said: "There will be an amnesty."

古文：八月癸酉，太白昼见在氐。
现代文：八月癸酉，金星白天出现在氐宿。
English: At the end of August, Venus appears in the daytime in Oshuku.

古文：氐，兗州分野。
现代文：氐宿与地上的兖州相对应。
English: Shishuku corresponds to barbarism.

古文：九月，荧惑犯哭泣星，遂入羽林。
现代文：九月，火星犯哭泣星，接着入羽林星。
English: In September, Mars will collide with the Weeping Star, and then enter the Forest of Feathers.

古文：占曰： 天子有哭泣事，中军兵起。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示将有使天子哭泣的事发生，中军将有军事行动。 
English: The soothsayer said, "The Son of Heaven has cause to weep. The Chinese soldiers are on the rise."

古文：十一月己未，月奄左角。
现代文：十一月己未，月掩左角星。
English: November has not yet come, the moon hides the left-hand star.

古文：占曰： 天子有兵。 
现代文：占辞说： 天子将有军事行动。 
English: The fortuneteller said, "The Son of Heaven will launch a military campaign."

古文：一曰： 国有忧。 
现代文：另一说： 这预示国家有忧患。 
English: Another way of putting it is: The country is in trouble.

古文：三年六月，荧惑守羽林。
现代文：三年六月，火星守羽林星。
English: In June of the third year, Mars was the guardian of the feather forest.

古文：占曰： 禁兵大起。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示禁兵有大行动。 
English: Divination says: The Imperial Guard will rise up on a large scale.

古文：九月壬午，太白昼见在角，兗州分。
现代文：九月壬午，金星白天出现在与兖州对应的角宿。
English: At midsummer in September, Venus appears during the day in the horn corresponding to Luzhou.

古文：元年五月，大赦。
现代文：元年五月，大赦。
English: In May of the first year, there was a general amnesty.

古文：三年八月，氐贼韦钟入汉中东下，苻融寇樊、邓，慕容暐围襄阳，氐兗州刺史彭超围彭城。
现代文：三年八月，氐贼童钟进入汉中向东而下，苻融侵犯樊、邓，慕容暐围攻襄阳，氐兗州刺史彭超围攻彭城。
English: In August of the third year, the bandit Tongzhong entered Hanzhong and moved eastward, encroaching on Shandong, Deng, Murong and besieging Xiangyang, and besieging Pengcheng in Zhangzhou.

古文：四年二月，襄阳城陷，贼获硃序。
现代文：四年二月，襄阳城被攻陷，硃序被俘。
English: In February of the fourth year, the city of Xiangyang was invaded and captured.

古文：彭超舍彭城，获吉挹。
现代文：彭超放弃围攻彭城，获吉挹。
English: Peng Chao gave up the siege of Pengcheng and was victorious.

古文：彭超等聚广陵三河众五万。
现代文：彭超同其他将领聚集广陵三回军共五万。
English: Peng Chao and other generals gathered a total of fifty thousand troops in Guangling three times.

古文：于是征虏谢石次涂中，右卫毛安之、游击河间王昙之等次堂邑，发丹阳民丁，使尹张涉屯卫京都。
现代文：当时征虏将军谢石驻扎在涂中，右卫将军毛安之、游击将军过问王司马昙之等领军驻于堂旦，征发旦阳民丁，使尹亟涉屯卫京都。
English: At that time, the conscript general Xie Shi was stationed in Tuizhong, the right guard general Mao Anzhi and the guerrilla general Wang Simaqin were stationed in Dotan, and the conscript general Danyang Mingting was stationed in Doton, so that Yin Rong was stationed in Kyoto.

古文：六月，兗州刺史谢玄讨贼，大破之，余烬皆走。
现代文：六月，兖业刺史谢玄讨伐贼兵取得大胜，残余贼兵都逃走。
English: In June, Xie Xuan, the leader of the Xieye clan, won a great victory in the fight against the bandits, and the remaining bandits fled.

古文：是时中外连兵，比年荒俭。
现代文：当时中外连年战争、饥荒。
English: At that time, war and famine raged in China and abroad for years on end.

古文：是年，又发扬州万人戍夏口。
现代文：同年又征发扬州万人戍卫夏口。
English: In the same year, Yangzhou's 10,000 men were conscripted to defend Xiakou.

古文：太元四年十一月丁巳，太白犯哭星。
现代文：太元四年十一月丁巳，金星犯哭星。
English: In November of the 4th year of the Taiyuan Dynasty, Venus became the crying star.

古文：占曰： 天子有哭泣事。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示天子将有哭泣之事。 
English: The soothsayer said: The Son of Heaven has something to cry about.

古文：五年七月丙子，辰星犯轩辕。
现代文：五年七月丙子，水星犯轩辕星。
English: In July of the year five, Mercury entered the sign of Aries.

古文：占曰： 女主当之。 
现代文：占辞说： 女主应验这天象预示的灾变。 
English: The fortune-teller said: The lady must bear the consequences foretold by this star.

古文：九月癸未，皇后王氏崩。
现代文：九月癸未，皇后王氏去世。
English: On the last day of September, Empress Wang passed away.

古文：太元六年十月乙卯，有奔星东南经翼轸，声如雷。
现代文：太元六年十月乙卯，有流星向东南快速运行，经过翼、轸二宿，伴有如雷之声。
English: In October of the second month of the sixth year of the Taiyuan era, a meteor moved rapidly to the southeast, passing through the wings and the second quarter of the dragonfly, accompanied by a thunderous sound.

古文：《星说》曰： 光迹相连曰流，绝迹而去曰奔。 
现代文：《星说》上说： 星快速运行光迹相连称为流星，绝迹而离去则称为奔星。 
English: According to "Hosensha" (The Tale of the Stars), a star that moves quickly and whose light trails are connected is called a meteor, while one that disappears and moves away is called a shooting star.

古文：案占： 楚地有兵。 
现代文：考查占书可知 这预示楚地有战争 。
English: An examination of the accounts shows that this foreshadowed a war.

古文：一曰： 军破民流。 
现代文：或者 军队被打败民众流散 。
English: Or the army was defeated and the people scattered.

古文：十二月，氐荆州刺史梁成、襄阳太守阎震率众伐竟陵，桓石虔击大破之，生禽震，斩首七千，获生万人。
现代文：十二月，氐族荆州刺史梁成、襄阳太守阎震率军征伐竟陵，被桓石虔击败，活捉间震以下万人，斩首七千。
English: In December, Liangcheng Zhishi of Jingzhou and Yan Zhen, Yangyang's daimyo, led an army to conquer Jingling Mausoleum. They were defeated by Huan Shikian, captured less than ten thousand people alive, and beheaded seven thousand.

古文：声如雷，将帅怒之象也。
现代文：声如雷是将帅愤怒的征兆。
English: His voice was hoarse, a sign of his anger.

古文：七年九月，硃绰击襄阳，拔将六百余家而还。
现代文：七年九月，朱绰攻伐襄阳，带领六百余家而归。
English: In September of the seventh year, Zhu Qiao invaded Xiangyang, leading more than six hundred families to return.

古文：太元七年十一月，太白昼见，在斗。
现代文：太元七年十一月，金星白天在斗宿出现。
English: In November of the seventh year of the Taiyuan Dynasty, Venus appeared in the daytime at Douju.

古文：占曰： 吴有兵丧。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示吴地有战争及丧乱。 
English: The soothsayer said: There will be war and death in Wu.

古文：八年四月甲子，太白又昼见，在参。
现代文：八年四月甲子，金星又白天在参宿出现。
English: In April of the eighth year, Venus appeared again in broad daylight, residing in the Betelgeuse.

古文：占曰： 魏有兵丧。 
现代文：占辞说： 魏地将有战争、丧乱。 
English: Divination says: There will be war and death in Wei.

古文：是月，桓冲征沔汉，杨亮伐蜀，并拔城略地。
现代文：当月，桓冲征伐沔汉，杨亮征伐蜀，都攻克城镇侵占土地。
English: This month, Huanchong's expedition to cut off the main water and desert areas, as well as the attack on Shu, all captured the city and seized the land.

古文：八月，苻坚自将号百万，九月，攻没寿阳。
现代文：八月，苻坚亲自率领大军，号称百万，九月，攻陷寿阳。
English: In August, Yu Jian personally led a large army, known as the million, in September, invaded Shouyang.

古文：十月，刘牢之破坚将梁成斩之，杀获万余人。
现代文：十月，刘牢之打败苻坚部将梁成，将其斩杀，杀死俘获共万余人。
English: In October, Liu Dangzhi defeated and beheaded Liang Cheng, the commander of the Shenjian Division, and killed and captured more than 10,000 people.

古文：谢玄等又破坚于淝水，斩其弟融，坚大众奔溃。
现代文：谢玄等又于淝水大败苻坚，斩杀其弟苻融，苻坚大军奔逃崩溃。
English: Xie Xuan and others also defeated Gong Jian in Surabaya, killed his brother Gong Rong, and Gong Jian's large army fled and collapsed.

古文：九年六月，皇太后褚氏崩。
现代文：九年六月，皇太后褚氏去世。
English: In June of the ninth year, Empress Dowager Shun passed away.

古文：八月，谢玄出屯彭城，经略中州。
现代文：八月，谢玄出兵屯于彭城，经管中州事务。
English: In August, Xie Xuan sent troops to Pengcheng to manage the affairs of Zhongzhou.

古文：十年八月，苻坚为其将姚苌所杀。
现代文：十年八月，苻坚被其部将姚苌杀死。
English: In August of the 10th year, Yu Jian was killed by his subordinate Yao Yao.

古文：太元十年十二月己丑，太白犯岁星。
现代文：太元十年十二月己丑，金星犯木星。
English: December of the tenth year of the first century was ugly, Venus offending Jupiter.

古文：占曰： 为兵饥。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示军队将发生饥荒。 
English: The soothsayer said: It portends a famine in the army.

古文：是时河朔未一，兵连在外，冬，大饥。
现代文：当时黄河、朔方之间未统一，军队连年在外，冬天，大饥。
English: At that time, there was no unification between the Yellow River and the Shuo side, the army was away for years, and there was great famine in the winter.

古文：太元十一年三月戊申，太白昼见，在东井。
现代文：太元十一年三月戊申，金星白天在东井之宿出现。
English: In March of the eleventh year of the Taiyuan, Venus appeared in the daytime at the Higashii no Yado.

古文：占曰： 秦有兵，臣强。 
现代文：占辞说： 秦地将有战争，臣强欺君。 
English: Divination says: There is war on the plateau, the minister is strong.

古文：六月甲午，岁星昼见，在胃。
现代文：六月甲午，木星白天在胃宿出现。
English: On the afternoon of June 1st, Jupiter appeared in the daytime in the stomach.

古文：占曰： 鲁有兵，臣强。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示鲁地有战争，臣强欺君。 
English: Divination says: There is war in Ludi, and the minister is strong.

古文：十二年，慕容垂寇东阿，翟辽寇河上，姚苌假号安定，苻登自立陇上，吕光窃据凉土。
现代文：十二年，慕容垂进攻束阿，翟辽侵犯黄河两岸，姚苌自立于安定，苻登自立于陇上，吕光占据凉州之地。
English: In the twelfth year, Murong Du attacked Dong'a, Qiao Liao attacked Dacun, Qian Du proclaimed himself emperor in Bao, Zheng Deng declared himself emperor in Mian, and Dangguang occupied the land of Hengye.

古文：太元十一年三月，客星在南斗，至六月乃没。
现代文：太元十一年三月，有客星出现在南斗，至六月才消失。
English: In March of the eleventh year of the Taiyuan, the guest star resided in the Southern Dipper, and only disappeared in June.

古文：占曰： 有兵。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示将有战争。 
English: The soothsayer said: There will be war.

古文：一曰： 有赦。 
现代文：另一说： 将有赦。 
English: Another way of putting it is: there is an amnesty.

古文：是后司、雍、兗、冀常有兵役。
现代文：此后司、雍、查、冀四州常有战争。
English: Since then, the states of Shih, Yong, Qu and Ji have often been at war.

古文：十二年正月，大赦。
现代文：十二年正月，大赦。
English: In the first month of 2012, the amnesty ended.

古文：八月，又赦。
现代文：八月，又赦。
English: In August, he was pardoned again.

古文：太元十二年二月戊寅，荧惑入月。
现代文：太元十二年二月戊寅，火星入月。
English: In February of the twelfth year of Taiyuan, Mars entered the moon.

古文：占曰： 有乱臣死，相若有戮者。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示有乱臣死，宰相可能被杀。 
English: The soothsayer said, "This foretells that there will be a chaotic death of a minister, and the prime minister may be killed."

古文：一曰： 女亲为败，天下乱。 
现代文：另一说： 外戚衰败，天下乱。 
English: Another said: "When a relative falls into decline, the whole world is in turmoil."

古文：是时琅邪王辅政，王妃从兄国宝以姻昵受宠。
现代文：当时琅邪王辅政，王妃堂兄王国宝因为是姻亲而受宠。
English: At that time, the wicked Wang Fu Zheng and Wang Hui's cousin Wang Guobao were favored because they were relatives by marriage.

古文：又陈郡人袁悦昧私苟进，交遘主相，扇扬朋党。
现代文：又陈郡人袁悦贪求私欲，苟图进宫，离间君主宰相，拉帮结派成朋党。
English: At the same time, Yuan Yue, a resident of Chen County, was secretly pursuing personal relationships, stirring up the relationship between the main parties, and colluding with his friends.

古文：十三年，帝杀悦。
现代文：十三年，袁悦被孝武帝处死。
English: In 133, Yuan Yue was executed by Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：于是主相有隙，乱阶兴矣。
现代文：于是皇帝宰相之间出现了裂痕，内乱的根源形成。
English: As a result, a rift developed between the chief ministers, and the war began.

古文：太元十二年十月庚午，太白昼见，在斗。
现代文：太元十二年十月庚午，金星白天在斗宿出现。
English: On the afternoon of October 12th, Venus appeared in the daytime at Douju.

古文：十三年闰月戊辰，天狗东北下有声。
现代文：十三年闰月戊辰，天狗东北下而有声。
English: In the 13th year of the leap month, Bo Chen, Tengu went to the northeast and there was a sound.

古文：十二月戊子，辰星入月，在危。
现代文：十二月戊子，水星于危宿入月。
English: In December, Mercury enters the Moon at Pisces.

古文：占曰： 贼臣欲杀主，不出三年，必有内恶。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示奸臣想杀君主，不出三年，必有内乱。 
English: Divination says: If a treacherous vassal wants to kill the sovereign, within three years, there must be an internal evil.

古文：是月，荧惑在角亢，形色猛盛。
现代文：同月，火星在角、亢二宿，突然变大增亮。
English: In the same month, Mars suddenly became larger and brighter in the sign of Capricorn and Cancer.

古文：占曰： 荧惑失其常，吏且弃其法，诸侯乱其政。 
现代文：占辞说： 火星失常，预示官吏舍弃法律，诸侯乱政。 
English: Divination says: Mars is out of order, officials are flouting the law, lords are disrupting political affairs.

古文：自是后慕容垂、翟辽、姚苌、苻登、慕容永并阻兵争强。
现代文：从此以后慕容垂、翟辽、姚苌、苻登、慕容永都恃仗军队争雄斗强。
English: From then on, Murongdiao, Bao Liao, Yao Zhen, Xudeng, and Murong have always fought against each other in the army.

古文：十四年正月，彭城妖贼又称号于皇丘，刘牢之破灭之。
现代文：十四年正月，彭城妖贼又自立于皇旦，被刘牢之消灭。
English: In the first month of the 14th year, the devils of Pengcheng once again claimed to be the emperor in Wangqiu, and Liu Youzhi annihilated them.

古文：三月，张道破合乡，围泰山，向钦之击走之。
现代文：三月，遍篁攻破金翅，围攻台山，被向钦之击走。
English: In March, Zhang Dao captured He Xiang, encircled Taishan, and drove him away from Qinzhi.

古文：是年，翟辽又攻没荥阳，侵略陈、项。
现代文：同年，垄随又攻陷茔坠，侵略速、项。
English: In the same year, the ridge was followed by the fall of the ridge, and the invasion speed increased.

古文：于时政事多弊，治道陵迟矣。
现代文：当时政事多弊病，治世之道败坏。
English: At that time, there were many maladies in politics, and the way of governing the world was corrupt.

古文：太元十四年十二月，荧惑入羽林。
现代文：太元十四年十二月，火星入羽林。
English: In December of the 14th year of the Taiyuan, Mars entered the Forest of Feathers.

古文：乙未，月犯岁星。
现代文：乙未，月犯木星。
English: Bi Wei, moon-criminal Jupiter.

古文：占并同上。
现代文：占辞与前面相应天象相同。
English: Divination ditto.

古文：十五年，翟辽陆掠司、兗，众军累讨弗克。
现代文：十五年，翟辽多次侵掠旦、鸾二州，众军多次征讨而不克。
English: In the fifteenth year, Gongliao repeatedly invaded and plundered Dan and the two states of Yunnan.

古文：鲜卑又跨略并、冀。
现代文：鲜卑又侵犯并、冀二州。
English: The two states of Hebei have been humiliated and violated.

古文：七月，旱。
现代文：七月，旱。
English: July, drought.

古文：八月，诸郡大水，兗州又蝗。
现代文：八月，各郡大水，兖州又出现蝗灾。
English: In August, all counties in Luzhong Province were flooded, and another locust plague occurred in Luzhong Province.

古文：太元十五年七月壬申，有星孛于北河戒，经太微、三台、文昌，入北斗，长十余丈。
现代文：太元十五年七月壬申，有长十余丈的彗星出现于北河戒，经过太微垣、三台星、文昌星而入北斗。
English: In July of the 15th year of Taiyuan, Jinshin, a comet with a length of more than ten meters appeared in Beihekai, passing through Taiyuan, Sandai and Wenchang and entering the Big Dipper.

古文：八月戊戌，入紫微，乃灭。
现代文：八月戊戌入紫微后才消失。
English: In August, it faded to purple before disappearing.

古文：占曰： 北河戒，一名胡门。
现代文：占辞说： 北河戒又称为胡门。
English: The fortune-teller said: Beihekai is also known as Humen.

古文：胡门有兵丧。
现代文：胡门将有战争及丧乱。
English: There will be war and turmoil in Humen.

古文：扫太微，入紫微，王者当之。
现代文：扫遇太微垣而入紫微垣，王者当有此灾。
English: Sweeping past Taimiao and entering Ziwei, the emperor inherits the result of this constellation.

古文：三台为三公，文昌为将相，将相三公有灾。
现代文：三台星代表三公，文昌星代表将相，将相三公将有灾。
English: The three islands symbolize the three kings, and Wenchang symbolizes the three phases, and the three phases will bring disaster.

古文：入北斗，强国发兵，诸侯争权，大夫忧。 
现代文：入北斗，预示强国将发兵，诸侯争权，大夫有忧患。 
English: Entering the Beidou, foreshadowing that the powerful country will send troops, the feudal lords will fight for power, and the doctor will be in trouble.

古文：十一月，太白入羽林。
现代文：十一月，金星入羽林。
English: In November, Venus enters the fallow forest.

古文：占曰： 天子为军自守，有反臣。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示天子将率军自守，有叛臣。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This indicates that the heavenly son will lead the army to defend itself, and there will be traitors.

古文：二十一年九月，孝武帝崩。
现代文：二十一年九月，孝武帝逝世。
English: In September 1921, Emperor Xiaowu passed away.

古文：隆安元年，王恭、殷仲堪、桓玄等并发兵表诛王国宝，朝廷从而杀之，并斩其从弟绪，司马道子由是失势，祸乱成矣。
现代文：隆叁元年，王茎、殷倥堡？蛙等发兵上表请朝廷诛杀王国宣，朝廷从而杀之，并杀其弟王绪，司马道子从此失去权势，祸乱形成。
English: In the first year of the Long March, Wang Zhi, Yin Qibao, Frog and others sent troops to ask the imperial court to kill Wang Guoxuan, and the imperial court killed him, and killed his brother Wang Xu. Sima Daozi lost power, and the calamity was formed.

古文：太元十六年十一月癸巳，月奄心前星。
现代文：太元十六年十一月癸巳，月掩心宿前星。
English: In November of the 16th year of the Taiyuan Emperor, the moon occulted the previous star.

古文：占曰： 太子忧。 
现代文：占辞说 这预示太子有忧患。 
English: The soothsayer said: The prince is troubled.

古文：是时太子常有笃疾。
现代文：当时太子常犯重病。
English: At that time, the crown prince was often seriously ill.

古文：太元十七年九月丁丑，岁星、荧惑、填星同在亢氐。
现代文：太元十七年九月丁丑，木星、火星、土星同时在亢、氐二宿。
English: In September of the 17th year of the Taiyuan Dynasty, Jupiter, Mars, and Saturn were simultaneously in the 2nd and 3rd quarters.

古文：占曰： 三星合，是谓惊位绝行，内外有兵丧与饥，改立王公。 
现代文：占辞说： 三星合被称为惊位绝行，预示国内外将有战争、丧乱与饥荒，改立王公。 
English: The fortune-teller said, "The three-star conjunction is known as the sudden death, which indicates that there will be war, chaos and famine at home and abroad, and the prince will be re-established."

古文：太元十八年正月乙酉，荧惑入月。
现代文：太元十八年正月乙酉，火星入月。
English: In the first month of the 18th year of the Taiyuan Emperor, Mars entered the moon.

古文：占曰： 忧在宫中，非贼乃盗也。 
现代文：占辞说： 忧患在宫中，不是贼便是盗。 
English: The diviner said: Sorrow is in the palace; it is not a thief, but a robber.

古文：一曰： 有乱臣，若有戮者。 
现代文：另一说： 有乱臣，可能有被杀戮者。 
English: He also said, "If there are disorderly ministers, there will be slaughter."

古文：二十一年九月，帝暴崩内殿，兆庶宣言夫人张氏潜行大逆。
现代文：二十一年九月，孝武帝突然病死于内殿，老百姓中传言这是夫人张氏暗中所为。
English: In September 21st, Emperor Xiaowu suddenly died of illness in the inner hall. The common people rumored that this was the secret deed of his wife, the Zhang family.

古文：于时朝政暗缓，不加显戮，但默责而已。又王国宝邪狡，卒伏其辜。
现代文：但当时朝政昏暗，张氏并没有被审判处决，衹是暗中谴责而已又王国宝奸邪狡猾，最终被诛杀。
English: However, at that time, the dynastic politics were dark, and the Zhang clan was not tried and executed. They were secretly condemned and the kingdom was treacherous and cunning, and they were eventually killed.

古文：太元十八年二月，有客星在尾中，至九月乃灭。
现代文：太元十八年二月，有客星出现在尾宿之中，到九月才消失。
English: In February of the 18th year of the Taiyuan, a guest star appeared in the tail lodge, only to disappear in September.

古文：占曰： 燕有兵丧。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示燕地有战争、丧乱。 
English: Divination says: War and death will come to Swallowland.

古文：十九年四月己巳，月奄岁星，在尾。
现代文：十九年四月己巳，月于尾宿掩木星。
English: In April of the year nineteen, the moon occulted Jupiter in Oyado.

古文：占曰： 为饥，燕国亡。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示将有饥荒，燕国灭亡。 
English: The soothsayer said, "Hunger will be the death of the nation of Yan."

古文：二十年，慕容垂遣息宝伐什圭，为圭所破，死者数万人。
现代文：二十年，摹查垂派遣其子摹窖宜征伐仕王而被仕王打败，死者数万人。
English: Twenty years later, Emperor Zhaotie sent his son, Emperor Jiao, to invade the Shih King. The Shih King was defeated, and tens of thousands of people died.

古文：二十一年，垂死，国遂衰亡。
现代文：二十一年，慕容垂死，其国遂衰亡。
English: In the twenty-first year, Murong Du passed away, and Yan's country fell into decline.

古文：太元十九年十月癸丑，太白犯岁星，在斗。
现代文：太元十九年十月癸丑，金星在斗宿犯木星。
English: In October of the 19th year of the 1st lunar month, Venus is at war with Jupiter.

古文：占曰： 为饥，为内兵。
现代文：占辞说： 将有饥荒，内战。
English: The fortune-teller said: There will be famine, civil war.

古文：斗，吴、越分。 
现代文：斗宿对应吴、越二地。 
English: Duoshuku corresponds to Wu and Yue.

古文：至隆安元年，王恭等举兵显王国宝之罪，朝廷赦之。
现代文：至日谴元年，王苤等起兵声讨王厘宣之罪，王国宝被杀而朝廷不追究王恭等人擅自起兵之罪。
English: By the first year of the year, Wang Xuan and others raised their voices to condemn Wang Lixuan's crime, and the imperial treasure was killed, but the court did not investigate Wang Qiong and others for the crime of raising troops without authorization.

古文：是后连岁水旱民饥。
现代文：此后连年大水、干旱以致白姓饥荒。
English: Since then, successive years of floods and droughts have led to famine.

古文：太元二十年六月，荧惑入天囷。
现代文：太元二十年六月，火星入天困。
English: In June of the 20th year of the Taiyuan, Mars entered the sky.

古文：占曰： 天下饥。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示天下有饥荒。 
English: The soothsayer said, "There will be a famine in the land."

古文：七月丁亥，太白入太微。
现代文：七月丁亥，金星入太微。
English: July Dinghai, Venus is too faint.

古文：占曰： 太白入太微，国有忧。
现代文：占辞说： 金星入太微则国家有忧患。
English: The soothsayer said: "Venus has entered the Great Wall, and the country is in trouble."

古文：昼见，为兵丧。 
现代文：白天出现则将有战争、丧乱。 
English: If it appears during the day, there will be war and turmoil.

古文：九月，有蓬星如粉絮，东南行，历女虚至哭星。
现代文：九月，有像粉絮一样的蓬星向东南运行，历经女虚二宿至哭星。
English: In September, there was a powder-puff-like pengxing that moved southeastward, passing through the second house of the female deity to the weeping star.

古文：占曰： 蓬星见，不出三年，必有乱臣戮死于市。 
现代文：占辞说： 蓬星出现，不出三午，必有乱臣被杀死。 
English: The soothsayer said, "Within three years after the appearance of the phoenix, there will surely be a rebellious minister who will be executed in the market."

古文：十二月己巳，月犯楗闭及东西咸。
现代文：十二月己巳，月犯楗闭及东西咸。
English: In December, the moon collided with the Pleiades, the Pleiades, and the Pleiades.

古文：占曰： 楗闭司心腹喉舌，东西咸主阴谋。 
现代文：占辞说 楗闭代表心腹喉舌之臣，东西咸代表阴谋。 
English: The soothsayer said, "Close your heart, stomach, throat, and tongue to the Lord of the Stars.

古文：是时王国宝交构朝政。二十一年九月，帝崩；隆安元年，王恭等举兵，而朝廷戮王国宝、王绪。
现代文：当时王国宝扰乱朝政，二十一年九月，帝逝世，隆安元年，王恭等起兵而朝廷杀王国宝、王绪。
English: At that time, Wang Guobao disrupted the imperial government. On September 21, the emperor died, and in the first year of Longan, Wang Qiong and others raised an army, and the imperial court killed Wang Guobao and Wang Xiu.

古文：又连岁水旱，兼三方动众，民饥。
现代文：又连年大水、干旱，加上三军行动以致民饥。
English: Another year of floods and droughts, coupled with the actions of the three armed forces, have led to famine.

古文：太元二十一年三月，太白连昼见，在羽林。
现代文：太元二十一年三月，金星连续白天在羽林出现。
English: In March of the twenty-first year of the Taiyuan, Venus appeared in the daytime continuously in the forest of feathers.

古文：占曰： 有强臣，有兵丧，中军兵起。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示有强臣，战争及丧乱，中军有行动。 
English: Divination says: There will be powerful ministers, there will be war, death, and the rise of Chinese soldiers.

古文：四月壬午，太白入天囤。
现代文：四月壬午，金星入天困。
English: At the meridian of April, Venus enters the sky.

古文：占曰： 为饥。 
现代文：占辞说： 将有饥荒。 
English: The oracle says: There will be a famine.

古文：六月，岁星犯哭星。
现代文：六月，木星犯哭星。
English: In June, Jupiter turns into a crying star.

古文：占曰： 有哭泣事。 
现代文：占辞说： 将有丧乱。 
English: The diviner said: There is weeping.

古文：是年九月，孝武帝崩。
现代文：当年九月，孝武帝逝世。
English: In September of that year, Emperor Xiaowu passed away.

古文：隆安元年，王恭举兵胁朝廷，于是中外戒严，戮王国宝以谢之。
现代文：隆安元年，王恭起兵胁迫朝廷，于是京城内外戒严，朝廷杀王国宝以谢天下。
English: In the first year of Longan, Wang Qiong raised an army to coerce the imperial court. As a result, martial law was imposed in and around the capital, and the imperial court killed the treasure of the kingdom to thank the world.

古文：晋安帝隆安元年正月癸亥，荧惑犯哭星。
现代文：晋安帝隆安元年正月癸亥，火星犯哭星。
English: In the first month of the first year of the Jin and An Dynasty, the Martian criminal crying star.

古文：占曰： 有哭泣事。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象表示有哭泣之事。 
English: The diviner said: There is weeping.

古文：二月，岁星荧惑皆入羽林。
现代文：二月，木星与火星都入羽林。
English: In February, both Jupiter and Mars enter the fallow forest.

古文：占曰： 军兵起。 
现代文：占辞说： 这表示将有军事行动。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This indicates that there will be military action.

古文：四月丁丑，太白昼见，在东井。秦有兵丧。
现代文：四月了丑，金星白天在束井之宿出现，这预示秦有战争及丧乱。
English: April was ugly, Venus appeared in the daytime in the inn of Sokai, which foreshadowed war and turmoil in Qin.

古文：是月，王恭举兵，内外戒严。寻杀王国宝等。
现代文：同月，王恭起兵而京城内外戒严，不久杀王国宝等人。
English: In the same month, Wang Qiong raised an army and imposed martial law inside and outside the capital, soon killing Wang Guobao and others.

古文：六月，羌贼攻洛阳，郗恢遣兵救之。
现代文：六月，羌贼进攻洛坠，翅垣派兵救援。
English: In June, the bandits attacked Loket, and Yingge sent soldiers to the rescue.

古文：姚苌死，子略代立。
现代文：型昵死，其子型噬继位。
English: The type dies and its daughter phagocytic type succeeds.

古文：什圭自号于中山。
现代文：仕圭自立于史山。
English: Shigye became independent from Shisan.

古文：隆安元年六月庚午，月奄太白，在太微端门外。
现代文：隆安元年六月庚午，月在太微垣端门外掩金星。
English: In the late afternoon of June in the first year of the Long'an era, the moon occulted Venus outside the gate of Taiyukagatana.

古文：占曰： 国受兵。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示国家将遭受战乱。 
English: The soothsayer said: The country will have war.

古文：乙酉，月奄岁星，在东壁。
现代文：乙酉，月在束壁之宿掩木星。
English: The acetylene sun, the moon and the year star are on the east wall.

古文：占曰： 为饥。
现代文：占辞说： 将有饥荒。
English: The oracle says: There will be a famine.

古文：卫地有兵。 
现代文：街地有战争。 
English: There is war in the streets.

古文：八月，荧惑守井钺。
现代文：八月，火星守井宿之铁。
English: In August, the iron of Mars Morii-juku was broken.

古文：占曰： 大臣有诛。 
现代文：占辞说： 大臣有被杀者。 
English: The soothsayer said: The minister has been killed.

古文：二年六月戊辰，摄提移度失常，岁星昼见在胃。
现代文：二年六月戊辰，摄提移动失常，木星白天在胃宿出现。
English: In June of the second year of the Pentecost, Jupiter appeared in the daytime in the stomach.

古文：九月，王恭、庾楷、殷仲堪、桓玄等并举兵表诛王愉、司马尚之兄弟。
现代文：胃宿与兖州对应。同年六月，郄蜒派遣垫主边等率万人与胡虏战于滑台，失败而归。迢台属卫地九月，王恭、庾揩、殷仲堪、盘等人起兵上表请求诛杀王愉、司马尚之兄弟。
English: In June of the same year, thousands of people were dispatched to fight against the Khuruks on the plateau of Xingtai, but they failed and returned home. Xingtai is a sacred place. In September, Wang Qiong, Yao, Yin Zhongkang, Pan and others raised an army and requested to kill the brothers of Wang You and Sima Shang.

古文：于是内外戒严，大发民众。
现代文：于是朝廷内外戒严，大量征发民众。
English: As a result, martial law was imposed inside and outside the imperial court, and a large number of people were conscripted.

古文：仲堪军至寻阳，禽江州刺史王愉，楷将段方攻尚之于杨湖，为所败，方死。
现代文：殷仲堪进军全曼盐，擒获丝业刺史王愉，座拢部将垦方在扰趋进攻司马尚之而失败，堕眯死。
English: Yin Zhongkang marched into the whole Manchurian salt, and won the silk industry prize. The encircling unit failed to disrupt the attack of Sima Shang, and fell and died.

古文：王恭司马刘牢之反恭，恭败。
现代文：王茎的司马刘空之反叛王茎，王茎失败。
English: Wang Zong's Sima Liu Kui rebelled against Wang Zong, and Wang Zong failed.

古文：桓玄至白石，亦奔退。
现代文：鱼直至直互，也逃退。
English: The fish, which had come right up to each other, also fled.

古文：仲堪还江陵。
现代文：殷仲堪还归江陵。
English: Yin Zhongkang returned to Gangneung.

古文：三年冬，荆州刺史殷仲堪为桓玄所杀。
现代文：三年冬天，荆州刺史殷仲堪被桓玄所杀。
English: In the winter of the third year, Jingzhou assassin Yin Zhongkan was killed by Huan Xuan.

古文：隆安二年闰月，太白昼见，在羽林。
现代文：隆安二年闰月，金星白天在羽林出现。
English: In the leap month of the second year of Longan, Venus appears in the daytime in the forest of feathers.

古文：丁丑，月犯东上相。
现代文：丁丑，月犯东上相星。
English: Ding ugly, the moon impinges on the east phase star.

古文：三年五月辛酉，月又奄东上相。
现代文：三年五月辛酉，月又掩东上相星。
English: In May of the third year of Hsinchu, the moon covered the star cluster again.

古文：辛未，辰星犯轩辕星。
现代文：辛未，水星犯轩辕星。
English: In recent years, Mercury has been the star of the show.

古文：占悉同上。
现代文：占辞与前面相同天象一样。
English: The divination is exactly the same as the previous one.

古文：是年正月，杨佺期破郗恢，夺其任，殷仲堪又杀之。
现代文：同年正月，杨佺期打败郗恢，夺其职，邮拯被殷仲堪所杀。
English: In the first month of the same year, Yang Xizhong defeated Zou Huai and took over his post. Po Zheng was killed by Yin Zhongkang.

古文：六月，鲜卑攻没青州。
现代文：六月，鲜卑攻陷青州。
English: In June, Qingzhou was captured by Xianbei.

古文：十月，羌贼攻没洛阳。
现代文：十月，差贼攻陷络屋。
English: In October, thieves broke into a brothel.

古文：桓玄破荆、雍，杀殷仲堪、杨佺期。
现代文：担玄攻破荆、雍二州，杀壁仲堪、杨佺期。
English: Zhang Xuan broke through Jing, Yong Erzhou, killed the wall, and the Yang Hui period began.

古文：孙恩聚众攻没会稽，杀内史王凝之，刘牢之东讨走之。
现代文：孙恩聚众攻陷会稽，杀内史王凝之，被刘生之束讨败走。
English: Sun En rallied the masses to attack and capture the auditorium, killed the secretary Wang Genzhi, and was defeated by Liu Sheng's group.

古文：四年七月，太皇太后李氏崩。
现代文：四年七月，太皇太后圭旦去世。
English: In July of the same year, Empress Dowager Guidan passed away.

古文：隆安四年正月乙亥，月犯填星，在牵牛。
现代文：隆安四年正月乙亥，月在牵牛犯土星。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of Longan, the month of Yihai, the month of the cowherd Saturn.

古文：占曰： 吴、越有兵丧。
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示吴、越之地有战争、丧乱。
English: The fortune-teller said, "This celestial phenomenon foretells that there will be war and turmoil in the land of Yue.

古文：女主忧。 
现代文：女主有忧患。 
English: The mistress is troubled.

古文：二月己丑，有星孛于奎，长三丈，上至阁道紫宫西蕃，入斗魁，至三台、太微、帝座、端门。
现代文：二月己丑，有彗星出现于奎宿，长三丈，上至阁道紫宫西蕃，入斗魁，至三台、太微、帝座、端门。
English: February has been ugly, with comets appearing in Kui-juku, Nagasanzho, up to the west side of the Purple Palace on Gakudo, into Doukui, to Sandai, Taimu, Teiza, and Danmon.

古文：占曰： 彗拂天子廷阁，易主之象。 
现代文：占辞说： 彗星拂遇天子廷阁是更替天子的天象。 
English: The soothsayer said: The comet meets the son of heaven, and Tingge is the replacement of the son of heaven.

古文：经三台，入北斗，占同上条。
现代文：经三台，入北斗，其占辞与前面相应天象相同。
English: After passing through the three constellations and entering the Big Dipper, its divination is the same as that of the corresponding celestial object in front.

古文：六月己未，月又犯填星，在牵牛。辛酉，又犯哭星。
现代文：六月乙未，月又在牵十犯土星。辛酉，又犯哭星。
English: In June, the moon is in retrograde, and Saturn is retrograde. It is also retrograde, and a crying star.

古文：十月，奄岁星在北河。
现代文：十月，掩木星于北河。
English: In October, Jupiter occulted the North River.

古文：占曰： 为饥。 
现代文：占辞说： 这些天象都表示将有饥荒。 
English: The oracle says: There will be a famine.

古文：十二月戊寅，有星孛于贯索、天市、天津。
现代文：十二月戊寅，有彗星出现于贯索、天市、天津。
English: In December, the star appeared in the constellation of Orion, the Heavens and the Earth, and the constellation of Tientsin.

古文：占曰： 贵臣狱死，内外有兵丧。
现代文：占辞说： 贵臣死于狱中，内外有战争、丧乱。
English: The soothsayer said: A distinguished minister died in prison, and there were wars and deaths both inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：天津为贼断，王道天下不通。 
现代文：天津被贼绝断，王道天下不畅通。 
English: The Tianhe ferry was cut off by thieves, and the royal road was impassable.

古文：十二月，太白在斗昼见，至五年正月乙卯。
现代文：十二月，金星白天在斗宿出现，一直到五年正月乙卯。
English: In December, Venus appears in the daytime at Douju, and continues to do so until the first month of the fifth year.

古文：案占，灾在吴、越。
现代文：考查占书可知，灾应在昱、越之地。
English: An examination of the records shows that the disaster occurred in the provinces of Handan and Yue.

古文：三月甲寅，流星赤色众多，西行经牵牛、虚、危、天津、阁道，贯太微、紫宫。
现代文：三月甲寅，有众多的赤色流星向西运行经牵牛、虚、危、天津、阁道，贯太微、紫宫。
English: In March, there are many red meteors moving westward through the Cowherd, Deception, Danger, Tianjin, and Lofty Road, penetrating Taimiao and Purple Palace.

古文：占曰： 星者庶民，类众多西流之象。
现代文：占辞说： 小流星代表老百姓，将有众多百姓向西流亡。
English: The fortune-teller said: Small meteors represent the common people, and there will be many people exiled to the west.

古文：径行天子庭，主弱臣强，诸侯兵不制。 
现代文：行经天子之庭，表示君弱而臣强，诸侯之兵无法控制。 
English: Walking through the garden of the son of heaven means that the ruler is weak and the vassal is strong, and the soldiers of the lords cannot be controlled.

古文：七月癸亥，大角星散摇五色。
现代文：七月癸亥，大角星散而摇出现赤青黄白黑五色。
English: In July, at the time of the Year of the Boar, the great horned star shimmers in five colors.

古文：占曰： 王者流散。 
现代文：占辞说： 这表示王者流散。 
English: Divination says: Princes and kings will be scattered.

古文：丁卯，月犯天关。
现代文：丁卯，月犯天关。
English: Dingwu, the moon crashes into the heavens.

古文：占曰： 王者忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 王者有忧患。 
English: The soothsayer said: The emperor is troubled.

古文：九月庚子，荧惑犯少微，又守之。
现代文：九月庚午，火星犯少微，又守之。
English: In September, Geng Zi, the Mars offender is small and weak, and he stays in a cocoon.

古文：占曰： 处士诛。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示处士将被杀。 
English: The soothsayer said: The hermit has been killed.

古文：十月戊子，月犯东蕃次相。
现代文：十月戊子，月犯束蕃次相星。
English: October Boshi, monthly offender bundle second phase star.

古文：四年五月，孙恩复破会稽，杀内史谢琰；遣高雅之等讨之。
现代文：四年五月，孙恩再次攻破会稽，杀内史谢壁。派遣高整之等征讨。
English: In May of the fourth year, Sun En once again broke through the audit committee and killed the internal history wall. Dispatched Gaozhei and others to investigate.

古文：七月，太皇太后李氏崩。
现代文：七月，太皇太后奎旦去世。
English: In July, Empress Dowager Yi passed away.

古文：十月，妖贼大破高雅之于余姚，死者十七八。
现代文：十月，妖贼大破高雅之于余姚，死者十分之七八。
English: In October, the bandits suffered a crushing defeat at Yuyao, and 78 out of every 10 people died.

古文：五年二月，孙恩攻句章，高祖拒之。
现代文：五年二月，孙恩进攻句章被高祖所拒。
English: In February of the fifth year, Sun En's attack was rejected by Gao Zu.

古文：五月，吴郡内史袁山松出战，为所杀，死者数千人。
现代文：五月，呈邓内史重旦拴出战而被其所杀，死者数干人。
English: In May, Chieng Dang Neishi was killed in battle by a heavy dragonfly, resulting in several deaths.

古文：六月，孙恩至京口，高祖击破之。
现代文：六月，逐墨至直旦而被直担打败。
English: In June, it was defeated by Zhishang.

古文：恩军蒲洲，于是内外戒严，营阵屯守，栅断淮口。
现代文：逐墨驻军于渣剑，于是内外戒严，扎营列阵屯守，用栅隔断进旦。
English: The troops were garrisoned in Jia Jian, and martial law was imposed both at home and abroad. They were encamped in a row and separated from the outside world by a fence.

古文：恩遣别将攻广陵，杀三千余人。
现代文：逸墨派遣部将进攻广陵，杀三干余人。
English: The Yimo dispatching department will attack Guangling, killing more than three hundred people.

古文：恩遁据郁洲。
现代文：还墨遁走占据郁泌。
English: It is also said to occupy the secretions of the bladder.

古文：是月，高祖又追破之。
现代文：同月，被高祖追而打败。
English: In the same month, he was chased and defeated by Gaozu.

古文：九月，桓玄表至，逆旨陵上。
现代文：九月，但玄上表违逆圣旨欺凌皇上。
English: In September, Kanzen Sojo went to the Imperial Court, defied the Emperor's will, and bullied the Emperor.

古文：十月，司马元显大治水军，将以伐玄。
现代文：十月。司马元显大练水军准备讨伐桓玄。
English: In October, Sima Yuanxian carried out a large-scale reorganization of the naval forces and ordered them to attack Kuan Xuan.

古文：元兴元年正月，桓玄东下。
现代文：元兴元年正月，担玄束下。
English: At the beginning of the first month of the first year of the year of Genxing, under the guidance of Xuanzang.

古文：是月，孙恩在临海，人众饿死散亡，恩亦投水死。
现代文：同月，孙恩在临海，部众饿死散亡，彊墨也投水而死。
English: In the same month, Sun En was at the seaside, his followers died of starvation and dispersed, and Diao Mo also died after being thrown into the water.

古文：卢循自称征虏将军，领其余众，略有永嘉、晋安之地。
现代文：卢循自称征虏将军，率领孙恩余部，占有永嘉、晋安之地。
English: Lu Xun claimed to be a conscript general and led the rest of Sun En, occupying the lands of Yongjia and Jinan.

古文：二月，帝戎服遣西军。
现代文：二月，晋帝身穿军服亲自派遣西征军。
English: In February, Emperor Andi put on his military uniform and dispatched the Western Army.

古文：丁卯，桓玄至姑孰，破历阳，司马尚之见杀，刘牢之降于玄。
现代文：丁卯，桓玄到达姑孰，攻破历阳，司马尚之被杀，刘牢之向桓玄投降。
English: Dingwu and Huanxuan reached Guzheng and defeated Liyang. Sima Shangzhi was killed and Liu Diaozhi surrendered to Huanxuan.

古文：三月，玄克京都，杀司马元显，放太傅道子。
现代文：三月，桓玄攻克京都，杀司马元显，流放太傅司马道子。
English: In March, Kangen conquered Kyoto, killed Sima Motohide, and exiled the daifu Sima Doshi.

古文：七月，大饥，人相食。
现代文：七月因大饥而出现人吃人的现象。
English: In July, there was a severe famine and people were eating each other.

古文：浙江东饿死流亡十六七，吴郡、吴兴户口减半；又流奔而西者万计。
现代文：浙江以束饿死流亡十分之六七，吴郡、吴兴户口减半。又向西逃亡者以万计。
English: In Zhejiang, 67 out of every 10 people died of starvation, and the number of households in Wuxian and Wuxing was halved. In addition, tens of thousands of people fled to the west.

古文：十月，桓玄遣将击刘轨，破走奔青州。
现代文：十月，桓玄遣将打败刘轨，使其逃奔青州。
English: In October, Huan Xuan's envoys defeated Liu Rail and forced him to flee to Qingzhou.

古文：四年，玄遂篡位，迁帝寻阳。
现代文：四年，桓玄篡夺皇位，迁晋帝于寻阳。
English: In the fourth year, Kangen usurped the imperial throne and moved the imperial court to Hoyang.

古文：晋安帝元兴元年三月戊子，太白犯五诸侯，因昼见。
现代文：晋安帝元兴元年三月戊子，金星犯五诸侯，接着白天出现。
English: In March of the first year of the reign of Emperor Jian of the Andean Dynasties, Emperor Wuxing of the First Year of the Western Han Dynasty, Gu Zi, Gu Xing of the Five Kingdoms, and then appeared in the daytime.

古文：四月辛丑，月奄辰星。
现代文：四月辛丑，月掩水星。
English: April is gloomy, the moon hides Mercury.

古文：七月戊寅，荧惑在东井，荧惑犯舆鬼、积尸，占并同上。
现代文：七月戊寅，火星在束井之宿，又犯舆鬼、积尸。占辞与前面相应天象占辞相同。
English: In July, when the moon is waxing gibbous and the planet Mars is at its home in Sokai, there will also be ghosts and dead bodies. The horoscope is the same as the previous horoscope for the corresponding celestial body.

古文：八月庚子，太白犯岁星，在上将东南。占曰： 楚兵饥。 
现代文：八月庚子，金星在上将星东南犯木星占辞说： 这天象预示楚地有战争及饥荒。 
English: In August, Geng Zi said, "Venus is in the southeast of the general star, and Jupiter is in the southeast of the general star. This celestial phenomenon foretells that there will be war and famine.

古文：一曰： 灾在上将。 
现代文：另一说： 灾应在上将身上。 
English: He also said: The disaster occurred in the general star field.

古文：丙寅，太白奄右执法。
现代文：丙寅，金星掩右执法星。
English: He Yin, Venus hides the right law enforcement star.

古文：九月癸未，太白犯进贤。
现代文：九月癸未，金星犯进贤星。
English: At the end of September, Venus crashes into Virgo.

古文：占曰： 贤者诛。 
现代文：占辞说： 贤者将被杀。 
English: Fortune-telling says: The wise will be killed.

古文：十月，客星色白如粉絮，在太微西，至十二月，入太微。
现代文：十月，有白色像粉絮一样的客星出现在太微垣之西，至十二月入太微。
English: In October, a white, powder-puff-like guest star appeared west of the Taibo hedge, and it entered the Taibo area in December.

古文：占曰： 兵入天子庭。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示将有兵进入天子之庭。 
English: The fortuneteller said: The army has entered the imperial court of the Son of Heaven.

古文：二年二月，岁星犯西上将。
现代文：二年二月，木星犯西上将星。
English: In February of the second year, Jupiter collided with the star West Admiral.

古文：六月甲辰，奄斗第四星。
现代文：六月甲辰，掩斗第四星。
English: June Jia Chen, cover the fourth star.

古文：占曰： 大臣诛，不出三年。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示不出三年有大臣被杀。 
English: The soothsayer said: In less than three years, the minister will be killed.

古文：八月癸丑，太白犯房北第二星。
现代文：八月癸丑，金星犯房宿北第二星。
English: August is gloomy, Venus impinges on the second star in the north.

古文：九月己丑，岁星犯进贤，荧惑犯西上将。
现代文：九月己丑，木星犯进贤，火星犯西上将星。
English: September is ugly, Jupiter attacks the star of wisdom, Mars attacks the star of the West Admiral.

古文：十月甲戌，太白犯泣星。
现代文：十月甲戌，金星犯泣星。
English: The October Armor, the Venus Impacting the Crying Star.

古文：十一月丁丑，荧惑犯填星。辛巳，月犯荧惑。
现代文：十一月丁丑，火星犯土星辛巳，月犯火星。
English: November ding ugly, Mars offend Saturn bad luck, the moon offend Mars.

古文：十二月乙巳，月奄轩辕第二星，占悉同上。
现代文：十二月乙巳，月掩轩辕第二星。占辞与前面各自相同。
English: In December, the moon occulted the second star. The divination is the same as before.

古文：元年冬，索头破羌军。
现代文：元年冬，索头打败羌军。
English: In the winter of the first year of the year, Sokotou defeated the Shan army.

古文：二年十二月，桓玄篡位，放迁帝后于寻阳，以永安何皇后为零陵君。
现代文：二年十二月，担玄篡夺皇位，流放迁徙皇帝皇后于寻阳，封丞昼何皇后为零陵君。
English: In December of the second year, Tang Xuan usurped the imperial throne, exiled the emigration emperor and empress to Xuanyang, and sealed the empress as the zero mausoleum.

古文：三年二月，高祖尽诛桓氏。
现代文：三年二月，高祖杀桓氏家族。
English: In February of the third year, Gao Zu killed the Huan family.

古文：元兴三年正月戊戌，荧惑逆行犯太微西上相。
现代文：元兴三年正月戊戌，火星逆行犯太微西上相。
English: In the first month of the third year of Genxing, the Mars retrograde was too weak westward phase.

古文：占曰： 天子战于野，上相死。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示天子战于野外，上相死亡。 
English: Divination says: The Son of Heaven fought in the countryside and died on the battlefield.

古文：二月甲辰，月奄岁星于左角。
现代文：二月甲辰，月掩木星于左角。
English: In the first hour of February, the Moon occults Jupiter in the left corner.

古文：占曰： 天下兵起。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示天下有战事。 
English: Divination says: There will be war in the world.

古文：丙辰，荧惑逆行在左执法西北。
现代文：丙辰，火星逆行在左执法星西北。
English: On the 4th, Mars retrogrades to the northwest of the left planet.

古文：占曰： 执法者忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 执法大臣有忧患。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This indicates that the Minister of Law Enforcement is in trouble.

古文：四月甲午，月奄轩辕第二星，填星入羽林，十二月，荧惑太白皆犯羽林，占同上。
现代文：四月甲午，月掩轩辕第二星，土星入羽林。十二月，火星与金星都犯羽林。占辞与前面一样。
English: At the stroke of April, the moon hides behind the second star, Saturn enters the forest of feathers. In December, Mars and Venus both enter the forest of feathers. The fortune-telling is the same as before.

古文：是年二月丙辰，高祖杀桓修等。
现代文：同年二月丙辰，高祖杀桓脩等人。
English: In February of the same year, Gao Zu killed Huan Chen and others.

古文：三月己未，破走桓玄，遣军西讨。
现代文：三月己未，击走桓玄，派遣部队西征。
English: It was not until March that Kangen was defeated and troops were dispatched to the West.

古文：辛巳，诛左仆射王愉及子荆州刺史绥。
现代文：辛酉，诛杀左仆射王愉及其子荆州刺史王绥。
English: Xin Xin, killed his left-hand man, Sha Wang Yu, and his son, Jing Zhou, stabbed Wang Yu.

古文：桓玄劫帝如江陵。
现代文：桓玄劫持晋安帝到江陵。
English: Kuan Xuan abducted Emperor Jin to Gangneung.

古文：五月，玄下至峥嵘洲，义军破灭之。
现代文：五月，桓玄向下至峥嵘洲被义军攻破。
English: In May, Kuan Xuan went down to Luzhou, and the rebels wiped him out.

古文：桓振又攻没江陵，幽劫天子。明年正月，众军攻之，振走，乘舆乃旋。
现代文：桓振又攻陷江陵，劫持关押晋安帝第二年正月，被众军进攻而退走，安帝才得以还归。
English: In the first month of the second year of the reign of Emperor Jin, Emperor Kuan Zhen attacked and occupied Gangneung again, abducted Emperor An and imprisoned him. He was attacked by many armies and retreated, but Emperor An was able to return.

古文：七月，永安何皇后崩。
现代文：七月，永安何皇后去世。
English: In July, Empress Yonganhe passed away.

古文：三月，桓振又袭江陵，荆州刺史司马休之败走。
现代文：三月，桓振又袭击江陵，荆州刺史司马休之败走。
English: In March, Kuan Zhen attacked Jiangling again, and Jingzhou assassin Sima Hui was defeated and fled.

古文：是月，刘怀肃击振灭之。
现代文：同月，刘怀肃消灭桓振。
English: In the same month, Liu HuaiSu defeated Kan Zhen.

古文：其年二月，巴西人谯纵杀益州刺史毛璩及璩弟西夷校尉瑾，跨有西土，自号蜀王。
现代文：同年二月，巴西人谯纵杀益州刺史毛璩及其弟西夷校尉毛瑾，占有西部之地，自立为蜀王。
English: In February of the same year, the Brazilians plotted to kill Yizhou's Prince Mao Jun and his brother, Colonel Xi'er Mao Jun, to occupy the western part of the country and establish themselves as the King of Shu.

古文：晋安帝义熙元年三月壬辰，月奄左执法，占同上。
现代文：晋安帝义熙元年三月壬辰，月掩左执法星。占辞同上。
English: Emperor An of Jin and Emperor Yixi in March of the first year of the Jin Dynasty, the moon occulted the left law enforcement star.

古文：丁酉，月奄心前星。
现代文：丁酉，月掩心宿前星。
English: Ding dong, the moon covers the preset star.

古文：占曰： 豫州有灾。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示豫州有灾。 
English: The soothsayer said: There is a calamity in Yuzhou.

古文：太白犯东井。
现代文：金星犯东井之宿。
English: Venus impinging on the perpetrator of the Sokujuku.

古文：占曰： 秦有兵。 
现代文：占辞说： 秦地将有战争。 
English: The soothsayer said: There will be war in Qin.

古文：四月己卯，月犯填星，在东壁。
现代文：四月己卯，月在束壁犯土星。占辞说： 东壁对应之国亡。 
English: The month of April, the month of Saturn in the cedar wall. Astrology says: the east wall corresponds to the death of the country.

古文：占曰： 其地亡国。 
现代文：另一说： 贵人死。 
English: The soothsayer said: A certain place is about to be destroyed.

古文：一曰：贵人死。 七月庚辰，太白比昼见，在翼、轸。占曰： 为臣强。
现代文：七月庚辰，金星连续白天在翼、轸二宿出现。占辞说： 这表示臣强。
English: In July, Geng Chen, Venus continuously appeared in the daytime in the wings and in the second house of the zodiac. The fortune-teller said: This indicates a strong vassal.

古文：荆州有兵丧。 
现代文：荆州有战争、丧乱。 
English: Jingzhou has experienced war and turmoil.

古文：己未，月奄填星，在东壁。
现代文：己未，月掩土星于东壁之宿。
English: The moon occulted Saturn in the east wall of the inn.

古文：占曰： 其国以伐亡。 
现代文：占辞说： 东壁对应之国因征伐而灭亡。 
English: Fortune-telling says: The country corresponding to the East Wall will perish due to the conquest.

古文：一曰： 民流。 
现代文：另一说： 民众流散。 
English: Another said: "People are running away.

古文：八月丁巳，月犯斗第一星。
现代文：八月丁巳，月犯斗宿第一星。
English: In August, the moon collided with the first star.

古文：占曰： 天下有兵。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示天下有战争。 
English: Divination says: There will be war.

古文：一曰： 大臣忧。 
现代文：另一说： 大臣有忧患。 
English: Another way of putting it is: the minister is worried.

古文：案江左来，南斗有灾，则吴越会稽、丹阳、豫章、庐江各随其星应之。
现代文：考查江左以来的情况，南斗有灾，则吴越会稽、丹阳、豫章、庐江随各自对应之星应验。
English: Examining the situation since Jiangzu, Nandu suffered a disaster, while Wuyue Huiqi, Danyang, Yuzhang and Minjiang followed their respective corresponding stars.

古文：淮南失土，殆不占耳。
现代文：淮南失去国土大概都无法占验。
English: If Huainan loses its territory, it will probably not be able to make up for it.

古文：史阙其说，故不列焉。
现代文：史书缺乏记载，所以这裹无法列出。
English: The historical record is lacking, so this cannot be listed.

古文：九月戊子，荧惑犯少微。
现代文：九月戊子，火星犯少微。
English: In September, the number of Martian prisoners rose slightly.

古文：占曰： 处士诛。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示处士被杀。 
English: The soothsayer said: The hermit has been killed.

古文：庚寅，荧惑犯右执法。
现代文：庚寅，火星犯右执法星。
English: Geng Yin, the Mars-impacted right-wing law enforcement star.

古文：癸卯，荧惑犯左执法。
现代文：癸卯，火星犯左执法星。
English: Ah, Mars, the law enforcement planet of the left.

古文：占并同上。
现代文：占辞与前面相同。
English: Divination ditto.

古文：十月丁巳，月奄填星营室，占同七月。
现代文：十月丁巳，月掩土星于营室。占辞同七月。
English: October is just around the corner, the moon hides Saturn in the camp room. The horoscope is the same as in July.

古文：十一月丙戌，太白奄钩钅句钤。占曰： 喉舌臣忧。 
现代文：十一月丙戌，金星掩钩钤。占辞说： 喉舌之臣有忧患。 
English: In November, Venus will cover the cormorant. A fortune-teller said: The mouthpiece's vassal is in trouble.

古文：十二月己卯，岁星犯天江。
现代文：十二月己卯，木星犯天江。
English: In December, Jupiter will collide with the Milky Way.

古文：占曰： 有兵乱，河津不通。 
现代文：占辞说： 将有兵乱，河之渡口不通。 
English: Divination says: There is a war, the Yellow River crossing is impassable.

古文：是年六月，索头寇沛土，使伪豫州刺史索度真戍相县，太傅长沙景王讨破走之。
现代文：同年六月，索头侵犯沛土，派伪辽州刺史索度真戍于扭题，被太傅长沙景王击败而退走。
English: In June of the same year, Sokotou invaded Pei Tu, and sent the pseudo-Liaozhou assassin Sokodu Zhen to twist the issue. He was defeated by the Taifu Changsha King Jing and retreated.

古文：十一月，荆州刺史魏咏之薨。
现代文：十一月，荆州刺史魏咏之死亡。
English: In November, Jingzhou stabbed Shi Weiqi to death.

古文：二年二月，司马国璠等攻没弋阳。四月，羌伐仇池，仇池公杨盛击走之。
现代文：二年二月，司马国墦等攻陷土阳四月，羌征伐仇迤，被仇池公查疆打败退走。
English: In February of the second year, Sima Guozhen and others attacked and conquered Tuyang in April, and they were defeated and retreated by their enemy, Chajiang.

古文：九月，益州刺史司马荣期为其参军杨承祖所害，时文处茂讨蜀屡有功，会荣期死，乃退。
现代文：九月，益州刺史司马荣期被其参军扰丞祖杀害，当时文处茂讨伐蜀屡有功绩，正好司马荣期被杀，衹得撤退。
English: In September, Sima Rongji, a member of the Yizhou Military Academy, was killed by his father, Zhan Rongji, who had joined the army. At that time, the Ministry of Education and the People's Liberation Army had made many achievements in fighting against the Shu invasion. Sima Rongji was killed at that time, and the army had to retreat.

古文：三年十二月，司徒扬州刺史王谧薨。
现代文：三年十二月，司徒扬州刺史王谧去世。
English: In December of the third year, Wang Xuan, a disciple of Yangzhou, died.

古文：四年正月，太保武陵王遵薨。
现代文：四年正月，太保武陵王司马遵去世。
English: In the first month of the fourth year, the Taiho of Wuling Wang Sima Zun died.

古文：三月，左仆射孔安国卒。
现代文：三月，左仆射孔安国去世。
English: In March, his left-hand man, Shoko Ankoku, died.

古文：五年，高祖讨鲜卑，并定旧兗之地。
现代文：五年，高祖征讨鲜卑，平定旧兖州之地。
English: In the fifth year, Gaozhu conquered Xianbei and conquered the land of the former Zhangzhou.

古文：义熙二年二月己丑，月犯心后星。
现代文：义熙二年二月己丑，月犯心宿后星。
English: In February of the second year of Yixi's reign, he became ugly, and he became a star after committing a monthly crime.

古文：占曰： 豫州有灾。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示豫州有灾。 
English: The soothsayer said: There is a calamity in Yuzhou.

古文：四月癸丑，月犯太微西将。
现代文：四月癸丑，月犯太微西上将星。
English: April is ugly, the moon is too faint, and the west is full of stars.

古文：己未，月犯房南第二星。
现代文：己未，月犯房宿南第二星。
English: Before I knew it, the moon collided with the second star to the south of the room.

古文：乙丑，岁星犯天江，占悉同上。
现代文：乙丑，木星犯天江。占辞与前面一样。
English: The second is ugly, Jupiter offends the heavenly river. The fortune-telling is the same as before.

古文：五月癸未，月犯左角。
现代文：五月癸未，月犯左角星。
English: In the early morning of May, the moon collided with the star in the constellation of Capricorn.

古文：占曰： 左将军死，天下有兵。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示左将军死，天下有战争。 
English: The soothsayer said: General Zuo is dead, there will be war all over the world.

古文：壬寅，荧惑犯氐。
现代文：壬寅，火星犯氐宿。
English: Minshin, Mars collides with Shibuya.

古文：占曰： 氐为宿宫，人主忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 氐宿代表皇帝宿宫，火星犯之则君主有忧患。 
English: The soothsayer said, "Shu-juku is a place of lodging, and one who enters it will have troubles."

古文：六月庚午，荧惑犯房北第二星。
现代文：六月庚午，火星犯房宿北第二星。
English: In the late afternoon of June, Mars will collide with the second star to the north.

古文：八月癸亥，荧惑犯斗第五星。
现代文：八月癸亥，火星犯斗第五星。
English: In August, at the time of the Year of the Boar, Mars is the fifth planet.

古文：丁巳，犯建星。
现代文：丁巳，犯建星。
English: Ding Si, a street criminal star.

古文：九月壬午，荧惑犯哭星，又犯泣星，占悉同上。
现代文：九月壬午，火星犯哭星，又犯泣星。占辞各与前面一样。
English: In September, at noon, Mars will make a crying star, and then another crying star. The fortune-telling is the same as before.

古文：十二月丙午，月奄太白，在危。
现代文：十二月丙午，月于危宿掩金星。
English: On the afternoon of December 3rd, the moon occulted Venus at Jingjuku.

古文：占曰： 齐亡国。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示齐将亡国。 
English: Divination says: The country is doomed.

古文：一曰： 强国君死。 
现代文：另一说： 强国之君死。 
English: He also said, "The prince of a mighty nation is about to die."

古文：丁未，荧惑、太白皆入羽林。
现代文：丁未，火星、金星都入羽林。
English: Ding Wei, Mars, Venus are in the feather forest.

古文：是年二月甲戌，司马国璠等攻没弋阳。
现代文：同年二月甲戌，司马国瑶等人攻陷弋阳。
English: In February of that year, Jia Jiao, Sima Guozhen and others invaded Shenyang.

古文：三年正月，鲜卑寇北徐州，至下邳。
现代文：三年正月，鲜卑侵犯北徐州，至下邳。
English: In the first month of the third year, Xianbei invaded northern Xuzhou and reached the lower Yunnan.

古文：八月，遣刘敬宣伐蜀。
现代文：八月，派遣刘敬宣征伐蜀地。
English: In August, Liu Jing was dispatched to preach the destruction of Shu.

古文：十二月，司徒王谧薨。
现代文：十二月，司徒王谧死。
English: In December, King Stephen died.

古文：四年正月，武陵王遵薨。
现代文：四年正月，武陵王司马遵死。
English: In the first month of the fourth year, Wuling Wang Sima Zun died.

古文：五年，鲜卑复寇淮北。
现代文：五年，鲑皇再次侵犯进韭。
English: Five years later, Salmon Emperor invaded Jincheng again.

古文：四月，高祖大军讨之。
现代文：四月，产担率大军征讨。
English: In April, the production rate of the large army was raised.

古文：六月，大战临朐城，进围广固。
现代文：六月，大战于临胞球，进而围庐厘。
English: In June, the Great War broke out in Lin Piao's sphere, followed by the siege of Yili.

古文：十月，什圭为其子伪清河公所杀。
现代文：十月，仕王被其子伪道垄尘所杀。
English: In October, Shi Wang was killed by his son, Xu Daorong.

古文：六年二月，拔广固，禽慕容超，坑斩其众三千余人。
现代文：六年二月，晋军攻克广固，擒慕容超，杀死其部众三千余人。
English: In February of the sixth year, the Jin army conquered Guanggu, defeated Murongchao, and killed more than three thousand of his subordinates.

古文：义熙三年正月丙子，太白昼见，在奎。
现代文：义熙三年正月丙子，金星白天在奎宿出现二月庚寅，月掩心宿后星。
English: In the first month of the third year of Yixi, Cixi, Venus appeared in the daytime in Kui, in February, Geng Yin, and the moon covered the heart of Houxing.

古文：二月庚寅，月奄心后星，占悉同上。癸亥，荧惑、填星、太白、辰星聚于奎、娄，从填星也。
现代文：占辞同前面相应天象一样。癸亥，火星、土星、金星、水星聚于奎、娄二宿，这是金、火、水三星跟从土星的缘故。
English: The divination is the same as that of the corresponding celestial body in the foreground. In the year of the boar, Mars, Saturn, Venus, and Mercury gather in Kuei and Erju, which is the reason why the three stars of gold, fire, and water follow Saturn.

古文：其说见上九年。
现代文：其占辞见羞毖九年。
English: It has been nine years since he made his famous prediction.

古文：五月己丑，太白昼见，在参。
现代文：五月己丑，金星白天在参宿出现。
English: May is ugly, Venus appears in the daytime in Betelgeuse.

古文：占曰： 益州有兵丧，臣强。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示益州有战争、丧乱，臣强。 
English: Divination says: There is war and death in Yizhou, and the minister is powerful.

古文：六月辛卯，荧惑犯辰星，在翼。
现代文：六月辛卯，火星在翼宿犯水星。
English: June is hot, with Mars stalking Mercury on the wing.

古文：占曰： 天下兵起。 
现代文：占辞说： 天下之兵有行动。 
English: Divination says: There will be war in the world.

古文：八月己卯，太白奄荧惑，又犯执法。占曰： 奄荧惑，有大兵。 
现代文：八月己卯，金星掩火星，又犯执法星占辞说： 金星掩火星表示有大战。 
English: In August, Venus occulted Mars, and the criminal law enforcement astrologer said: Venus occulting Mars means there is a big war.

古文：辛卯，荧惑犯左执法。
现代文：辛卯，火星犯左执法星。
English: Xinwu, the Mars-impacted left law enforcement star.

古文：九月壬子，荧惑犯进肾。
现代文：九月壬子，火星犯进贤。
English: September Ren Zi, Mars prisoner Jin Xian.

古文：是年正月丁巳，鲜卑寇北徐，至下邳。
现代文：同年正月丁巳，鲜卑侵犯北徐而至下邳。
English: In the first month of the same year, the Xianbei invaded the north and the Xu to the lower Yunnan.

古文：八月，刘敬宣伐蜀，不克而旋。
现代文：八月，刘敬宣征伐蜀地不克而还。
English: In August, Liu Jingxuan began the conquest of Shu.

古文：四年三月，左仆射孔安国卒。七月，司马国璠等攻没邹山，鲁郡太守徐邕破走之。
现代文：四年三月，左仆射孔安国死七月，司马国墦等攻陷邹山，但被鲁郡太守徐邕打败而退走。
English: In March of the fourth year, his left-hand man, Shoko Ankoku, died, and in July, Sima Kunimaro and others attacked Shaoshan, but were defeated by Lu County Governor Xu Xi and retreated.

古文：姚略遣众征佛佛，大为所破。
现代文：姚略遣军征伐佛佛，被打得大败。
English: Yao Liao sent troops to conquer the Buddhas and was soundly defeated.

古文：五年，高祖讨鲜卑。
现代文：五年，高祖征讨鲜卑。
English: In five years, Gao Zuzheng was defeated by Xianbei.

古文：六年三月，妖贼徐道覆杀镇南将军、江州刺史何无忌于豫章。
现代文：六年三月，妖贼徐道覆在豫章杀死镇南将军、江州刺史何无忌。
English: In March of the sixth year, the monster thief Xu Daohui killed Zhenan General in Yuzhang, and there was no way out for Jiangzhou stabbing history.

古文：四月，妖贼卢循寇湘中巴陵。
现代文：四月，妖贼卢循进攻湘中巴陵。
English: In April, the bandit Lu Xun led an attack on Hunan Baling.

古文：五月丙子，循、道覆败抚军将军、豫州刺史刘毅于桑落洲，毅仅以身免。
现代文：五月丙子，卢循、徐道覆于桑落洲打败抚军将军、豫州刺史刘毅，刘毅幸免于难。
English: In May, Cixi, Lu Cun and Xu Daowu defeated the general of the Fuzhou army and the governor of Yuzhou, Liu Yi, in Sanluo Zhou. Liu Yi survived.

古文：丁丑，循等至蔡洲，遣别将焚京口。
现代文：丁丑，卢循等至蔡洲，派遣部将焚烧京。
English: Dingwu, Lu Cun, etc. to Caizhou, the dispatching department will burn Beijing.

古文：庚辰，贼攻焚查浦，查浦戍将距战不利，高祖遣军渡淮击，大破之。
现代文：庚辰，贼军攻焚查浦，查浦守将拒战不利，贼被高祖遣军渡过秦淮河打败。
English: Geng Chen, the bandit army attacked and burned Zhapu, Zhapu's defenders refused to fight, and the bandits were defeated by Gao Zu's dispatch of troops across the Qin Huai River.

古文：司马国璠寇砀山，竺夔讨破之。
现代文：司马国墦进攻蛋山被竺夔打败。
English: Sima Guozhang's attack on Egg Mountain was defeated by Zou.

古文：七月，妖贼南走据寻阳，高祖遣刘钟等追之。
现代文：七月，妖贼向南进军占据寻阳，高祖派遣刘钟等人追击。
English: In July, the bandits marched south to occupy Xuanyang, and Gaozu sent Liu Zhong and others to pursue them.

古文：八月，孙季高乘海伐广州。
现代文：八月，孙季高从海上征伐广州。
English: In August, Sun Jigao conquered Guangzhou from the sea.

古文：桓谦以蜀众聚枝江，卢循将荀林略华容，相去百里。
现代文：桓谦以蜀众聚集在枝江，卢循部将荀林侵犯华容，二者相隔百里。
English: Huan Qian gathered in Shijiang with the Shu people, and Lu Xun invaded Huarong with the Yulin people. The two were separated by a hundred miles.

古文：临川烈武王讨谦之，又讨林，林退走。
现代文：临烈武王征讨谦之，又征讨荀林，荀林退走。
English: Lin Lie took King Wu to fight against Qian Zhi, and also fought against Yulin, and Yulin retreated.

古文：鄱阳太守虞丘进破贼别帅于上饶。
现代文：鄱阳太守虞丘进于上饶打败贼兵将帅。
English: The governor of Shenyang, Yu Qiu, marched to Shangrao to defeat the general of the bandits.

古文：九月，烈武王使刘遵击荀林于巴陵，斩之。
现代文：九月，烈武王派遣刘遵至巴陵攻打荀林，斩荀林。
English: In September, Liu Zun was dispatched by Liu Wu Wang to attack Yulin and cut off Yulin.

古文：桓道兒率蔡猛向大薄，又遣刘基讨之，斩猛。
现代文：桓道儿率蔡猛迫向大薄，又遣刘基征讨而杀蔡猛。
English: Huan Daoer led Cai Meng to Da Bo, and sent Liu Ji to recruit and kill Cai Meng.

古文：十月，高祖以舟师南征。
现代文：十月，高祖率水军南征。
English: In October, Gao Zu led a naval expedition to the south.

古文：是时徐道覆率二万余人攻荆州，烈武王距之。
现代文：当时徐道覆率二万余人进攻荆州，烈逮王出兵抗拒。
English: At that time, Xu Daohui led more than twenty thousand people to attack Jingzhou, and Liu Fangwang sent troops to resist.

古文：战于江津，大破之，枭殄其十八九。
现代文：战于辽津，大胜徐道覆，被杀者十有八九。
English: The battle was fought in Liaozuo, and the great victory was quickly overturned. Nine out of ten people were killed.

古文：道覆弃战船走。
现代文：徐道覆丢弃战船逃走。
English: Xu Daohui abandoned the warship and fled.

古文：十二月，高祖在大雷，与贼交战，大破之。贼走左里，进击，又破，死者十八九。
现代文：十二月，高祖在左重大破贼兵。贼兵退走至左旦，又被高祖进击，死者十有八九。
English: In December, Gaozu defeated the bandits in Zuotan. The bandits retreated to Zuotan and were attacked again by Gaozu, and nine out of ten died.

古文：贼还广州，刘籓等追之。
现代文：贼兵还归庐州，刘籓等人又领军追击。
English: The bandits also returned to Zhangzhou, and Liu Ye and others led the army in pursuit.

古文：七年二月，籓拔始兴城，斩徐道覆、卢循还番禺，攻围孙季高，不能克。走交州，交州刺史杜慧度斩之。
现代文：七年二月，刘藩攻克始兴越，斩杀徐道覆。卢循还归番禺，围攻孙季高而不能克，退走交州而被交州刺史杜慧度斩杀。
English: In February of the seventh year, the Liu clan conquered Shi Xingyue and killed Xu Daojun. Lu Xun also returned to Panyu, besieged Sun Jigao but could not defeat him, retreated to Jiaozhou and was killed by Jiaozhou assassin Du Huidu.

古文：四月，到彦之攻谯道福于白帝，拔之。
现代文：四月，到彦之进攻谯道福于白帝而克之。
English: In April, Zuihiko's attack led to the defeat of Emperor Baekje.

古文：义熙四年正月庚子，荧惑犯天江，占同上。
现代文：义熙四年正月庚子，火星犯天江。占辞同上。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Yixi, Geng Zi, the Martian, invaded the Tianjiang River.

古文：五月丁未，月奄斗第二星，占同上。
现代文：五月丁未，月掩斗第二星。占辞同前面相应天象。
English: In May, Ting Wei, the moon hides the second star. The horoscope is the same as the corresponding celestial object in front.

古文：壬子，填星犯天廪。
现代文：壬子，土星犯天廪。
English: In the morning, Saturn will collide with Uranus.

古文：占曰： 天下饥，仓粟少。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示粮仓中粮食太少，天下饥荒。 
English: The diviner said: There is famine in the land, and there is not enough grain in the storehouse.

古文：六月己丑，太白犯太微西上将。
现代文：六月己丑，金星犯太微西上将星。
English: June is ugly. Venus is too weak to attack the Western General Star.

古文：己卯，又犯左执法。
现代文：己卯，又犯左执法星。
English: He committed another crime and became a star law enforcement officer.

古文：十月戊子，荧惑入羽林。
现代文：十月戊子，火星入羽林。
English: October Boshi, Mars enters the forest of feathers.

古文：占悉同上。
现代文：占辞同上。
English: The divination is exactly the same as the previous one.

古文：五年，高祖讨鲜卑。
现代文：五年，高祖征讨鲜卑。
English: In five years, Gao Zuzheng was defeated by Xianbei.

古文：六年，左仆射孟昶仰药卒。
现代文：六年，左仆射孟昶饮毒药而死。
English: In the sixth year, Zuo Min shot Meng Yao, who drank poison and died.

古文：是后南北军旅，运转不息。
现代文：此后军队南北征战频繁，运转不息。
English: Since then, the army has been frequently sent to fight in the north and south, and has been in continuous operation.

古文：义熙五年二月甲子，月犯昴。
现代文：义熙五年二月甲子，月犯昴宿。
English: In February of the 5th year of Yixi, he was arrested and detained for a month.

古文：占曰： 胡不安；天子破匈奴。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示胡不安宁。天于打败匈奴。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This celestial phenomenon indicates that Hu is restless. Heaven is to defeat the Xiongnu.

古文：四月甲戌，荧惑犯辰星，在东井，占同三年。
现代文：四月甲戌，火星犯水星于束井之宿。占辞同义熙三年。
English: In April, the armadillo, the Mars, and the Mercury meet at the Sokai Inn. Three years have passed since the fortune-telling with Yixi.

古文：五月戊戌，岁星入羽林，占同上。
现代文：五月戊戌，木星入羽林。占辞同上。
English: In May, when the moon is waning, Jupiter enters the forest of feathers.

古文：九月壬寅，月犯昴，占同二月。
现代文：九月壬寅，月犯昴宿，占辞同二月。
English: September Renin, the month of crime and lodging, is the same as February.

古文：十月，荧惑犯氐，占同二年。
现代文：十月，火星犯氐宿。占辞同义熙二年。
English: In October, the Martian was imprisoned in Shizuku. It has been two years since his arrest.

古文：闰月丁酉，月犯昴，占同二月。
现代文：闰月丁酉，月犯昴宿，占辞同二月。
English: The intercalary month of Ding'an, the month of Guanzhong, coincides with the month of February.

古文：辛亥，荧惑犯钩钤。占同元年。
现代文：辛亥，火星犯钩钤，占辞同义熙元年。
English: Xinhai, the year of the Martian, the year of divination, the first year of Yixi.

古文：十二月辛丑，太白犯岁星，在奎。
现代文：十二月辛丑，金星在奎宿犯木星。
English: December Xin Ugly Day, Tai Bai Xing Xuan Xing, in the vicinity of Kui Shuku.

古文：占曰： 大兵起。
现代文：占辞说： 将有大规模军事行动。
English: The oracle said: There will be a large-scale war.

古文：鲁有兵。 
现代文：鲁地有战争。 
English: There is a war in Ludi.

古文：己酉，月奄心大星。
现代文：己酉，月掩心宿大星。
English: Self-congratulation, the moon hides the heart, and the great star shines.

古文：占曰： 王者恶之。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象于王者不利。 
English: The diviner said, "The king has done evil in this."

古文：是年四月，高祖讨鲜卑。
现代文：同年四月，高祖征讨鲜卑。
English: In April of the same year, Gao Zu conquered Xianbei.

古文：什圭为其子所杀。
现代文：什圭被其子所杀。
English: Shigye was killed by his son.

古文：十一月，西虏攻安定，姚略自以大众救之。
现代文：十一月，西虏进攻安定，姚略亲自率大军救援。
English: In November, Xiru's attack was stable, and Yao Liao personally led a large army to rescue.

古文：六年二月，鲜卑灭。
现代文：六年二月，鲑卑被消灭。
English: In February of the sixth year, Saompi was wiped out.

古文：皆胡不安之应也。
现代文：这些都是曲不安宁的应验。
English: All of this is the fulfillment of the Song of Restless Peace.

古文：是时鲜卑跨鲁地，又鲁有兵之应也。
现代文：当时缝卑占有鲁地，又是叠地有战争的应验。
English: At that time, the lowland was occupied by the lowland, and there was the fulfillment of the war in the stacked land.

古文：五月，卢循逼郊甸，宫卫被甲。
现代文：五月，卢循进逼京郊，宫卫披战甲迎敌。
English: In May, Lu Xun forced his way into the suburbs of Beijing, and the palace guards, clad in battle armor, met the enemy.

古文：义熙六年三月丁卯，月奄房南第二星。
现代文：义熙六年三月丁卯，月掩房宿南第二星。
English: In the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Yixi, March Dingwu, the second star of the South Moon-covered House.

古文：占曰： 灾在次相。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象灾在次相。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This day, the disaster is in the second phase.

古文：己巳，又奄斗第五星。
现代文：己巳，又掩斗宿第五星。
English: Suddenly, the moon covered the fifth star of Douju again.

古文：占曰： 斗主兵，兵起。 
现代文：占辞说： 斗掌管战争，将有战事。 
English: Fortune-teller said: fight to control the war, there will be fighting.

古文：一曰： 将军死。 
现代文：另一说： 将军死。 
English: Another said: "The general is dead."

古文：太白犯五诸侯。
现代文：金星犯五诸侯。
English: Venus collides with the Five Lords of the Zodiac.

古文：占曰： 诸侯有诛。 
现代文：占辞说： 诸侯有被杀者。 
English: Divination says: Princes have been killed.

古文：五月甲子，月奄斗第五星，占同三月。
现代文：五月甲子，月掩斗第五星。占辞同三月。
English: The moon hides the fifth star in May. The divination is the same as in March.

古文：己亥，月奄昴。
现代文：己亥，月掩昴宿。
English: Ji Hai, Tsukikage, Shizuoka.

古文：占曰： 国有忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示国家有忧患。 
English: Divination says: The country is in trouble.

古文：一曰： 有白衣之会。 六月己丑，月犯房南第二星。
现代文：另一说： 有凶灾。 六月己丑，月犯房宿南第二星。
English: Another said, "There will be a terrible disaster. June will be ugly, and the second star of the month will be the second star in the south."

古文：甲午，太白昼见，占并同上。
现代文：甲午，金星白天出现。占辞同上。
English: In the afternoon of the second day, Venus appears in the daytime.

古文：七月己亥，月犯舆鬼。
现代文：七月己亥，月犯舆鬼之宿。
English: In July, the moon drives away evil spirits.

古文：占曰： 国有忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示国家有忧患。 
English: Divination says: The country is in trouble.

古文：一曰： 秦有兵。 
现代文：另一说： 秦地有战争。 
English: Another saying is: There is war in Qin.

古文：八月壬午，太白犯轩辕大星。
现代文：八月壬午，金星犯轩辕大星。
English: At midday in August, Venus will collide with the great star of Virgo.

古文：甲申，月犯心前星。
现代文：甲申，月犯心宿前星。
English: A-shin, the moon impinging on the precursor star.

古文：灾在豫州。
现代文：其灾在逸州。
English: The calamity fell on Yuzhou.

古文：丙戌，月犯斗第五星，占悉同上五月。
现代文：丙戌，月犯斗宿第五星。占辞同上五月。
English: Hefei, the fifth star of the monthly criminal fight. The fortune-telling is the same as last May.

古文：丁亥，月奄牛宿南星。
现代文：丁亥，月掩牛宿南星。
English: Dinghai, the moon covers the South Star of the Cow Inn.

古文：占曰： 天下有大诛。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示天下有大杀戮。 
English: Divination says: There will be widespread killing.

古文：乙未，太白犯少微。
现代文：乙未，金星犯少微。
English: In the second half of the year, the impact of Venus is slight.

古文：丙午，太白在少微而昼见。
现代文：丙午，金星在少微而白天出现。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, Venus appears in the daytime, and resides in the minor meridian.

古文：九月甲寅，太白犯左执法。
现代文：九月甲寅，金星犯左执法星。
English: September Kato, Venus is the left law enforcement star.

古文：丁丑，填星犯毕。
现代文：丁丑，土星犯毕宿。
English: Ding Yuxi, Saturn impingement is over.

古文：占曰： 有边兵。 
现代文：占辞说： 边境将有战争。 
English: The soothsayer said, "There will be war in the borderlands."

古文：是年三月，始兴太守徐道覆反，江州刺史何无忌讨之，大败于豫章，无忌死之。
现代文：同年三月，始兴太守徐道覆反叛，江州刺史何无忌领兵征讨而大败身死于豫章。
English: In March of the same year, Shixing's eunuch governor Xu Dao led a counter-rebellion, and the governor of Jiangzhou, Zishi, was forced to lead the army to fight, but he was defeated and died in Yuzhang.

古文：四月，卢循寇湘中，没巴陵。
现代文：四月，卢循侵犯湘中，攻陷巴陵。
English: In April, Lu Xun invaded Hunan Province and captured Baling.

古文：五月，循等大破豫州刺史刘毅，毅仅以身免；循率众逼京畿。
现代文：五月，卢循等大破豫州刺史刘毅，刘毅侥幸逃脱。卢循率军进逼京郊。
English: In May, Lu Xun and others defeated Liu Yi, the governor of Yuzhou, and Liu Yi narrowly escaped. Lu Xun led the army into the suburbs of Beijing.

古文：是月，左仆射孟昶惧王威不振，仰药自杀。
现代文：同月，左仆射孟昶惧怕王威不振，饮药自杀。
English: This month, Zuo Mengyao committed suicide by drinking poison, fearing that the imperial army would fail.

古文：七年二月，刘籓枭徐道覆首，杜慧度斩卢循，并传首京都。
现代文：七年二月，刘藩悬挂徐道覆之首以示众，杜慧度斩杀卢循，并且传送其首级至京都。
English: In February of the seventh year, the Liu clan hanged the head of Xu Daoji to demonstrate to the public, and Du Huidu killed Lu Xun and sent his head to Kyoto.

古文：八年六月，临川烈武王道规薨，时为豫州。
现代文：八年六月，临川烈武王刘道规死亡，当时在豫州刺史任上。
English: In June of the eighth year, Liu Daojian, the King of the Linchuan Martyrs, died. At that time, he was in charge of the history of Yuzhou.

古文：八月，皇后王氏崩。
现代文：八月，皇后王氏去世。
English: In August, Empress Wang passed away.

古文：九月，兗州刺史刘籓、尚书仆射谢混伏诛。高祖西讨刘毅，斩之。
现代文：九月，兖州刺史刘藩、尚书仆射谢混被杀，高祖西讨刘毅而斩之。
English: In September, the governor of Zhangzhou, Liu Han, and Shang Shufu were killed, and Gao Zuxi was beheaded for his criticism of Liu Yi.

古文：十二月，遣益州刺史硃龄石伐蜀。
现代文：十二月，派遣益州刺史朱龄石征伐蜀地。
English: In December, he sent Zhu Lingshi from Yizhou to conquer Shu.

古文：九年，诸葛长民伏诛。
现代文：九年，诸葛长民被杀。
English: In nine years, Zhuge Changmin was killed.

古文：林邑王范胡达将万余人寇九真，九真太守杜彗期距破之。
现代文：林邑王范胡达率万余人进攻九真，被九真太守杜慧期打败。
English: Lin Yip Wang Fan Huda led more than ten thousand people to attack Jiu Zhen, and was defeated by Jiu Zhen's governor Du Hui.

古文：七月，硃龄石灭蜀。
现代文：七月，朱龄石灭蜀。
English: In July, Zhu Lingshi destroyed Shu.

古文：义熙七年四月辛丑，荧惑入舆鬼。
现代文：义熙七年四月辛丑，火星入舆鬼之宿。
English: In April of the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Yixi, Mars entered the house of the ghosts.

古文：占曰： 秦有兵。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示秦地有战争。 
English: The soothsayer said: There will be war in Qin.

古文：一曰： 雍州有灾。 
现代文：另一说： 雍州有灾。 
English: Another saying is: There is a calamity in Yongzhou.

古文：六月，太白昼见在翼，占同元年。
现代文：六月，金星白天在翼宿出现。占辞同元年。
English: In June, Venus appears during the day in Pleiades.

古文：己亥，填星犯天关。
现代文：己亥，上星犯天关。
English: At the end of the year, Saturn impacts the celestial gate.

古文：占曰： 臣谋主。 庚子，月犯岁星，在毕。
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示臣下图谋君主 庚子，月在毕宿犯木星。
English: The fortune-teller said: This celestial phenomenon foretells that the vassals will plot against the monarch, Geng Zi, and that the moon will eventually capture Jupiter.

古文：占曰： 有边兵，且饥。 
现代文：占辞说： 边境将有战争且有饥荒。 
English: The diviner said: There is war on the borders, and there is famine.

古文：七月丁卯，岁星在参。
现代文：七月丁卯。木星于嘉宿犯土星。
English: In July, Jupiter will attack Saturn in Jiashu.

古文：占曰： 岁、填合为内乱。 
现代文：占辞说： 木星与土星合预示将有内乱。 
English: The astrological oracle says: Jupiter conjunct Saturn portends civil unrest.

古文：一曰： 益州战不胜，亡地。 
现代文：另一说： 益州战而不胜，丢失国土。 
English: Another said: "Yizhou lost the war and lost the land.

古文：五虹见东方。占曰： 天子黜，圣人出。 
现代文：五色彩虹出现在东方，占辞说： 这表示天子被废黜，圣人出世。 
English: The five-colored rainbow appeared in the east, and the fortune-teller said: This indicates that the heavenly son has been dethroned and a saint has been born.

古文：八月乙未，月犯岁星，在参。占曰： 益州兵饥。 
现代文：八月乙未，月在参宿犯木星，占辞说： 董业将有战争、饥荒。 
English: In August, the moon will collide with the year star, in the field of wind and rhyme.

古文：太白犯房南第二星。
现代文：金星犯房宿南第二星。
English: Venus is the second brightest star in the southern sky.

古文：十一月丙午，太白犯哭泣星。
现代文：十一月丙午，金星犯哭泣星。
English: At noon on the third day of November, Venus will be conjunct the Weeping Star.

古文：占悉同上。
现代文：占辞全部同上。
English: The divination is exactly the same as the previous one.

古文：七月，硃龄石克蜀，蜀民寻又反，又讨灭之。
现代文：七月，朱龄石攻克蜀，但不久蜀民又反叛，又被消灭。
English: In July, Zhu Lingshi began to conquer Shu, but soon the Shu people rebelled and were eliminated.

古文：八年，诛刘籓、谢混，灭刘毅。
现代文：八年，杀刘藩、谢混，消灭刘塑。
English: In eight years, they killed Liu Han, Xie Ming, and eliminated Liu Shuo.

古文：皇后王氏崩。
现代文：皇后工区去世。
English: The Queen's Works passed away.

古文：九年，诛诸葛长民。
现代文：九年，杀诸葛长民。
English: Nine years later, he killed Zhuge Changmin.

古文：义熙八年正月庚戌，月犯岁星，在毕，占同上。
现代文：十一年，打败荆州刺史司马休之、雍州刺史垒塞之。义熙八年正月庚戌，月在毕宿犯木星。占辞同前面相应天象。
English: In the eleventh year, he defeated Ma Xiu of Jingzhou and Yu Si of Yongzhou. In the first month of the eighth year of Yixi, he defeated Geng Yao, and in the last month, he defeated Jupiter. The prediction is the same as the corresponding celestial object in front.

古文：七月癸亥，月奄房北第二星，占同上。
现代文：七月癸亥，月掩房宿北第二星占辞同上。
English: In July, at the time of the Year of the Boar, the second star of the North, the Moon, is occulted by the Moon.

古文：甲申，太白犯填星，在东井。占曰： 秦有大兵。 
现代文：甲申，金星在东井之宿犯土星，占辞说： 蠢地将有大战。 
English: According to astrology, Venus will attack Saturn in the East, and there will be a great war.

古文：己未，月犯井钺。
现代文：己未，月犯井铁。
English: Before I knew it, the moon was crashing into the starry sky.

古文：八月戊申，月犯泣星。
现代文：八月戊申，月犯泣星。
English: In August, the moon beats the weeping star.

古文：十月辛亥，月奄天关。
现代文：十月辛亥，月掩天关。
English: In October, Xinhai, the moon covers the heavenly star.

古文：占曰： 有兵。 
现代文：占辞说： 将有战争。 
English: The soothsayer said: There will be war.

古文：十月丁丑，填星犯东井。
现代文：十月丁丑，土星犯束井之宿。
English: October Ding Ugly, Saturn Guilty of Sokujin no Yado.

古文：占曰： 大人忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 王公贵族有忧患。 
English: Divination says: A high-ranking person has worries.

古文：十二月癸卯，填星犯井钺。
现代文：十二月癸卯，土星犯井钹。
English: At the end of December, Saturn will collide with the Forge Star.

古文：是年八月，皇后王氏崩。
现代文：同年八月，皇后王氏去世。
English: In August of the following year, Empress Wang died.

古文：九月，诛刘籓、谢混，灭刘毅。
现代文：九月，杀刘藩、谢混，消灭刘毅。
English: In September, Liu Han and Xie Ming were killed, and Liu Yi was eliminated.

古文：九年三月，诛诸葛长民。
现代文：九年三月，杀诸葛长民。
English: In March of the ninth year, Zhuge Changmin was killed.

古文：西虏攻羌安定戍，克之。十二月，硃龄石伐蜀。
现代文：西虏攻克羌属安定戍。十二月，朱龄石伐蜀。
English: In December, Zhu Lingshi cut down cedar trees.

古文：九年七月，硃龄石灭蜀。
现代文：九年七月，朱龄石灭蜀。
English: In July of the ninth year, Zhu Lingshi conquered Shu.

古文：义熙九年二月丙午，荧惑、填星皆犯东井。
现代文：义熙九年二月丙午，火星、土星都犯东井之宿。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of the second month of the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Yixi, Mars and Saturn both visited Dongjing.

古文：占曰： 秦有兵。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示秦地将有战争。 
English: The soothsayer said: There will be war in Qin.

古文：壬辰，岁星、荧惑、填星、太白聚于东井，从岁星也。
现代文：三月壬辰，木星、火星、土星、金星聚于束井之宿，这是跟从木星的缘故。
English: At the end of March, Jupiter, Mars, Saturn, and Venus gather at Sokai no Yado, which is due to following Jupiter.

古文：荧惑入舆鬼，太白犯南河。
现代文：火星入舆鬼宿。金星犯南河。
English: Mars enters the House of the Spirits. Venus enters the South Stream.

古文：初，义熙三年，四星聚奎，奎、娄，徐州分。
现代文：义熙三年，四星聚于奎宿，奎、娄二宿与徐州相对应。
English: In the third year of Yixi, the four stars gathered in Guizhou, and Guizhou and Shandong corresponded to Xuzhou.

古文：是时慕容超僭号于齐，侵略徐、兗，连岁寇抄，至于淮、泗。
现代文：当时慕容超自立于齐，侵略徐、兖二州，连年侵掠，至于淮水、泅水之间。
English: At that time, Murong overreached itself in Qi, invaded Xu and Min two states, invaded and plundered for years, and as for Huai Shui, Surabaya.

古文：姚兴、谯纵僭伪秦、蜀。
现代文：姚兴自立为秦王、谯纵自立为蜀王。
English: Yao Xing established himself as the King of Qin, and Zheng Zong established himself as the King of Shu.

古文：卢循、木末，南北交侵。
现代文：卢循、木末，南北侵掠。
English: Lu Xun, the end of the tree, the north and south invaded and plundered.

古文：五年，高祖北殄鲜卑，是四星聚奎之应也。
现代文：五年，高祖灭鲜卑，这是四大行星聚于奎宿的应验。
English: In five years, Gaozhu will vanquish Xianbei, which is the fulfillment of the four planets gathering in Kui.

古文：九年，又聚东井。
现代文：九年，四星又聚于束井之宿。
English: Nine years later, the four stars gathered again at Sokai no Yado.

古文：东井，秦分。
现代文：束井宿与秦地对应。
English: East well, is the field of Qin and Qian.

古文：十三年，高祖定关中，又其应也。
现代文：十三年，高祖平定关山，又是其应验。
English: In the thirteenth year, Gaozhu conquered Dingguanshan, which is also its fulfillment.

古文：而纵、循群凶之徒，皆己剪灭，于是天人归望，建国旧徐。元熙二年，受终纳禅，皆其征也。
现代文：而谯纵、卢循都已被消灭，于是天人归望，建国于以前的徐州，元熙二年，高祖接受晋帝的禅让，这些都是天象的验证。
English: However, both Xizhong and Lu Xun had been eliminated, so the celestial beings returned their hopes. The founding of the country was in the former Xuzhou, and in the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, Gao Zu accepted the Emperor Jin's offer of Zen. These are all verifications of celestial phenomena.

古文：《星传》曰： 四星若合，是谓太阳，其国兵丧并起，君子忧，小人流。
现代文：《星传》上说： 四大行星合称为太阳，其对应之国将有战争、丧乱，君子有忧，小人流散。
English: In "The Tale of the Star," it says: The four planets are collectively called the sun, and the country corresponding to it will have war and turmoil, the gentleman will have worries, and the villain will be scattered.

古文：五星若合，是谓易行。
现代文：五大行星合则称为易行即改朝换代。
English: The conjunction of the five major planets is called a change of dynasty.

古文：有德受庆，改立王者，奄有四方；无德受罚，离其国家，灭其宗庙。 
现代文：有德者受到嘉奖，改立帝王，拥有四方；无德者受到惩罚，失去国家，宗庙湮灭。 
English: Those who were virtuous received awards, were reinstated as emperors, and possessed the Four Directions; those who were not virtuous were punished, lost their country, and their ancestral temples were destroyed.

古文：今案遗文所存，五星聚者有三：周汉以王齐以霸，周将伐殷，五星聚房。
现代文：现在考查保存下来的记载，五星聚合有三次：周、汉二朝因五星聚而称王于天下，齐桓公因此而称霸诸侯，注：周武王准备征伐殷商而力：大行星聚于房宿。
English: According to the records that have been preserved, the Five-Star Convergence has occurred three times: the Zhou and Han dynasties became famous for the Five-Star Convergence, and King Qi Huan thus became the ruler of the princes. Note: King Zhou Wu was preparing to conquer the Shang Dynasty: the planets converged on the mansion.

古文：齐桓将霸，五星聚箕。
现代文：齐桓公将称霸诸侯而五星聚于箕宿。
English: Prince Qi Kuan will dominate the lords and the five stars will gather in Shibuya.

古文：汉高入秦，五星聚东井。
现代文：汉高祖刘邦入秦而五星聚于东井之宿。
English: Liu Bang, the founder of Henkel, entered Qin, and the Five Stars gathered at Dongjing's inn.

古文：齐则永终侯伯，卒无更纪之事。
现代文：齐国灭亡时还是侯伯，最后并没有改朝换代之事。
English: At the time of the fall of Qi, it was still Hou Bo. In the end, there was no change of dynasty.

古文：是则五星聚有不易行者矣。
现代文：这证明五星聚也有可能不改朝换代。
English: This proves that the Five-Star Gathering is also possible without changing the dynasty.

古文：四星聚者有九：汉光武、晋元帝并中兴，而魏、宋并更纪。
现代文：四大行星聚发生过九次：汉光武帝、晋元帝中兴，曹魏代刘汉、刘宋代晋。
English: The four planets have come together nine times: Emperor Guangwu of Han, Emperor Zhongxing of the Jin and Yuan Dynasties, Liu Han of the Cao Wei Dynasty, and Liu Jin of the Song Dynasty.

古文：是则四星聚有以易行者矣。
现代文：这证明四星相聚也可能改朝换代。
English: This proves that the gathering of four stars may also change the dynasty.

古文：昔汉平帝元始四年，四星聚柳、张，各五日。
现代文：汉平帝元始四年，四大行星聚于柳宿、张宿各五天。
English: In the first four years of Emperor Hanping's reign, the four major planets gathered in Liuju and Zhangju for five days each.

古文：柳、张，三河分。
现代文：柳、张：二宿与三河对应。
English: Liu and Zhang: corresponding to Erjuku and Sanhe.

古文：后有王莽、赤眉之乱，而光武兴复于洛。晋怀帝永嘉六年，四星聚牛、女，后有刘聪、石勒之乱，而元皇兴复扬土。
现代文：后来有王莽、赤眉之乱，而光武帝十兴于洛阳，晋怀帝永嘉六年，四星聚于牛、女：宿，后有刘聪、石勒之乱。而晋元帝中兴于扬州。
English: Later, there were the Wang Mang and Red Eyebrow Revolts, while Emperor Guangwu was 10 years old in Luoyang, Emperor Jianhuai was 6 years old in Yongjia, and the Four Stars gathered in Niu and Nian:ju, followed by the Liu Cong and Shi Le Revolts. Emperor Jianyuan was born in Yangzhou.

古文：汉献帝初平元年，四星聚心，又聚箕、尾。
现代文：汉献帝初平元年，四星聚于心宿，又聚于箕、尾二宿。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the Heian period, the four stars gathered in Shinshuku, and again in Shizuku and Obijuku.

古文：心，豫州分。后有董卓、李傕暴乱，黄巾、黑山炽扰，而魏武迎帝都许，遂以兗、豫定，是其应也。
现代文：心宿属豫州分野后有董卓、李催暴乱，黄巾、黑山贼大乱，而魏武帝曹操迎汉献帝于许昌定都，遂以兖、豫二州而乎定中原，这是四星相聚的应验。
English: After the rebellion of Dong Zhuo and Li Chaozhou, the Yellow Turban Rebellion and the Black Robber Rebellion, Wei Emperor Cao Cao invited the Han Emperor to the capital of Xu Changding, and then the two states of Yunnan and Henan to the Central Plains of Dingding. This was the fulfillment of the four stars gathering.

古文：一曰： 心为天王，大兵升殿，天下大乱之兆也。 
现代文：另一说： 心宿代表天王，四星聚于心宿是大兵升殿，天下大乱的征兆。 
English: Another said: "The four stars gathered in the heart represent the heavenly king, and the four stars gathered in the heart are the soldiers ascending to heaven, and are a sign of great turmoil in the world."

古文：韩馥以为尾箕燕兴之祥，故奉幽州牧刘虞，虞既距之，又寻灭亡，固已非矣。
现代文：韩馥认为四星聚于尾、箕二宿是燕地将有帝王兴起的征兆，所以想推奉幽州牧刘虞为帝，被其拒绝，不久刘虞灭亡，这足以证明韩馥的看法是错误的。
English: Han Zheng believed that the four stars gathering at the tail and the two houses of the egret were signs that there would be a rise of an emperor in Yan, so he wanted to promote Yuzhou herdsman Liu Yu as an emperor. He was rejected, and Liu Yu soon died, which was enough to prove that Han Zheng's view was wrong.

古文：尾为燕，又为吴，此非公孙度，则孙权也。
现代文：尾宿既与燕地又与吴地对应，四星聚于尾宿若不应在公孙度则在孙权身上。
English: The tail lodge corresponds to both the swallow land and the Wu land. If the four stars are gathered in the tail lodge, they should not be in the Gongsundu, but in the Sun Quan.

古文：度偏据僻陋，然亦郊祀备物，皆为改汉矣。
现代文：公孙度虽然偏据于僻陋的辽东之地，但仿照帝王之制郊祀、置百官，这已是改汉而另立新朝了。
English: Although Gongsundu was located in the remote Liaodong region, it was modeled on the emperor's system of suburb worship and the appointment of hundreds of officials. This was already a change of Han and the establishment of a new dynasty.

古文：建安二十二年，四星又聚。
现代文：建叁二十二年，四星又聚。
English: Twenty-two years later, the four stars gathered again.

古文：二十五年而魏文受禅，此为四星三聚而易行矣。蜀臣亦引后聚为刘备之应。
现代文：二十五年而魏文帝曹丕接受汉献帝的禅让，这是四星三次相聚而改朝换代，蜀臣也援引后一次四星相聚作为刘备称帝的应验。
English: Twenty-five years later, the Wei Emperor Cao Pi accepted the Han Emperor's offer of Zen concessions. This was the third time that the four stars met to change the dynasty. Shuxen also cited the last time the four stars met as the fulfillment of Liu Bei's claim to the throne.

古文：案太元十九年、义熙三年九月，四星各一聚，而宋有天下，与魏同也。
现代文：考查左五十九年、盏毖三年九月，各有一次四大行星相聚，而宋遂得天下，与萱翘代选相同。
English: According to the examination, in 1959 and in September of 1956, the four major planets met each other once, and Song won the world, which was the same as the election of Gonggao.

古文：鱼豢云： 五星聚冀方，而魏有天下。 
现代文：复董说： 五大行星聚冀，而魏得天下。 
English: Fudong said: The five planets gather in Hebei, and Wei wins the world.

古文：荧惑入舆鬼。
现代文：火星入舆鬼宿。
English: Mars enters the house of the dead.

古文：占曰： 兵丧。 
现代文：占辞说： 将有战争、丧乱。 
English: The fortune-teller said: There will be war and disorder.

古文：太白犯南河。
现代文：金星犯南河。
English: Venus crashes into the South River.

古文：占曰： 兵起。 
现代文：占辞说： 将有战事。 
English: The soothsayer said: Let war arise.

古文：后皆有应。
现代文：后来都有应验。
English: Later, they were all fulfilled.

古文：五月壬辰，太白犯右执法，昼见，占同上。
现代文：五月壬辰，金星犯右执法星，白天出现。占辞同前面相应大象。
English: In May, Venus, the planet of justice, appears during the day. The horoscope is the same as the corresponding elephant in front.

古文：七月庚午，月奄钩钤。
现代文：七月庚午，月掩钩钤。
English: In the late afternoon of July, the moon hides the hook.

古文：占曰： 喉舌臣忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 逭表示喉舌之臣有忧患。 
English: The soothsayer said: The mouthpiece's vassal is in trouble.

古文：九月庚午，岁星犯轩辕大星。
现代文：九月庚午，木星犯轩辕大星。
English: In the late afternoon of September, Jupiter will collide with the great star.

古文：己丑，月犯左角。
现代文：己丑，月犯左角。
English: Self-loathing, the moon collides with the left star.

古文：十年正月丁卯，月犯毕。
现代文：十年正月丁卯。月犯毕宿。
English: On the 10th day of the 1st month of the year, the moon hits the house.

古文：占曰： 将相有以家坐罪者。 
现代文：占辞说： 将相之中有人犯罪而累及全家。 
English: The fortune-teller said: Someone in the family committed a crime, which affected the whole family.

古文：二月己酉，月犯房北星。
现代文：二月己酉，月犯房宿北星。
English: In February, the moon collides with the North Star.

古文：五月壬寅，月犯牵牛南星。
现代文：五月壬寅，月犯牵牛南星。
English: In May, the moon will collide with the South Star, the home of the cowherd.

古文：乙丑，岁星犯轩辕大星，占悉同上。
现代文：乙丑，木星犯轩辕大星。占辞全部同上。
English: Second ugly, Jupiter is a great star. All the fortune-telling is the same.

古文：六月丙申，月奄氐。
现代文：六年丙申，月掩氐宿。
English: In June, the moon covers Shibuya.

古文：占曰： 将死之，国有诛者。 
现代文：占辞说： 将军死，国有被诛杀者。 
English: The soothsayer said, "The general will die because of this, and there are people in the country who will be killed."

古文：七月庚辰，月犯天关。
现代文：七月庚辰，月犯天关。
English: In July, Geng Chen, the moon collides with the celestial star.

古文：占曰： 兵起。 
现代文：占辞说： 车队将有行动。 
English: The soothsayer said: Let war arise.

古文：荧惑犯井钺，填星犯舆鬼，遂守之。
现代文：火星犯井铁，土星犯舆鬼宿，接着守之。
English: Mars haunts the well, Saturn haunts the haunted house, then guards it.

古文：占曰： 大人忧，宗庙改。 
现代文：占辞说： 人人有忧患，改朝换代。 
English: The soothsayer said: The high-ranking people are worried, and the ancestral temple will be reformed.

古文：八月丁酉，月奄牵牛南星，占同上。九月，填星犯舆鬼。
现代文：八月丁酉，月掩牵牛南星。占辞同上，九月，土星犯舆鬼宿。
English: August ding dong, the moon hides the cow to the south star. Astrology ditto, September, Saturn is a ghost.

古文：占曰： 人主忧。 丁巳，太白入羽林。
现代文：占辞说： 君主有忧患： 丁巳，金星入羽林。
English: The fortune-teller said: The monarch is in distress: Ding Si, Venus enters the forest of feathers.

古文：十二月己酉，月犯西咸。
现代文：十二月己酉，月犯西咸。
English: In December, the moon collides with the west star.

古文：占曰： 有阴谋。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示将有阴谋。 
English: Divination says: There is a plot.

古文：十一年三月丁巳，月入毕。
现代文：十一年三月丁巳，月入毕宿。
English: In March of the eleventh year, the moon entered its final quarter.

古文：占曰： 天下兵起。 
现代文：占辞说： 天下将有军事行动。 
English: Divination says: There will be war in the world.

古文：一曰： 有边兵。 己卯，填星入舆鬼。
现代文：另一说： 边境有战争 己卯，土星入舆鬼宿。
English: Another said: "There's a war on the border. Saturn has entered the house of the dead."

古文：闰月丙午，填星又入舆鬼。
现代文：闰月丙午，土星又入舆鬼。
English: At the crescent of the crescent moon, Saturn enters the sign of Scorpio.

古文：占曰： 为旱，为疫，为乱臣。 
现代文：占辞说： 遣表示将有干旱、瘟疫，有乱臣。 
English: The fortune-teller said, "Sending a messenger indicates that there will be drought, plague, and disorderly retainers."

古文：五月甲申，彗星出天市，扫帝座，在房、心。
现代文：五月甲申，彗星出天市垣，扫过帝座，在房、心二宿。
English: In May, at the time of the Keshen, the comet came out of the sky, swept across the constellation of the emperor, and entered the house and the heart.

古文：房、心，宋之分野。
现代文：房、心二宿与宋对应。
English: The second quarter of the house and the heart correspond to the Song Dynasty.

古文：案占，得彗柄者兴，除旧布新，宋兴之象。
现代文：考查占书可知，得彗柄者兴旺，除旧布新，这是宋兴盛的象征。
English: An examination of the records shows that those who obtained the comet handle prospered, and the old cloth was removed and replaced with a new one, which is a symbol of the Song Dynasty's prosperity.

古文：癸卯，荧惑从行入太微。
现代文：癸卯，火星纵向运行入太微垣。
English: At the same time, the longitudinal movement of Mars into the solar eclipses.

古文：甲辰，犯右执法。
现代文：甲辰，犯右执法星。
English: Jia Chen, the star of the right-wing law enforcement.

古文：六月己未，太白犯东井。
现代文：六月己未，金星犯东井之宿。
English: It's not even June yet, and Venus is about to crash into Sakui-juku.

古文：占曰： 秦有兵。 
现代文：占辞说： 这表示秦地将有战争。 
English: The soothsayer said: There will be war in Qin.

古文：戊寅，犯舆鬼。
现代文：戊寅，犯舆鬼宿。
English: Wuching, the ghost town of the moon.

古文：占曰： 国有忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 国家有忧患。 
English: Divination says: The country is in trouble.

古文：七月辛丑，月犯异，占同上。
现代文：七月辛丑，月犯毕宿占辞同上。
English: July is a tough month, so it's best to make the most of it.

古文：八月壬子，月犯氐，占同上。
现代文：八月壬子，月犯氐宿。占辞同上。
English: In August, Jinshi, the moon is a criminal. The same as above.

古文：庚申，太白从行从右掖门入太微。
现代文：庚申，金星纵向运行从右掖门入太微垣。
English: Koshin, Venus runs longitudinally from the right gate into the too small wall.

古文：丁卯，奄左执法。
现代文：丁卯，掩左执法。
English: Dingwu, cover up the left enforcement star.

古文：十一月癸亥，月入毕，占同上。
现代文：十一月癸亥，月入毕宿。占辞同上。
English: November is the month of the boar, and the month of the pig is the end of the year.

古文：乙未，月入舆鬼而晕。
现代文：乙未，月入舆鬼宿而晕。
English: In the evening, the moon enters the mirage, surrounded by an aperture.

古文：占曰： 主忧，财宝出。 
现代文：占辞说： 造天象预示君主有忧患。财宝出皇宫。 
English: Divination says: When the sovereign is in distress, treasure appears.

古文：一曰： 晕，有赦。 
现代文：另一说： 月晕则有赦。 
English: Another said: "I'll forgive you if you're moonstruck."

古文：十二年五月甲申，月犯岁星，在左角。
现代文：十二年五月甲申，月在左角犯木星。占辞说： 将有饥荒。
English: In May of the 12th year of Jiaxing, the moon captured Jupiter in the left corner. The horoscope said: There will be a famine.

古文：占曰： 为饥。留房、心之间，宋之分野，与武王伐纣同，得岁者王。 于时晋始封高祖为宋公。
现代文：停留在与宋地对应的房、心二宿之间，与周武王伐商纣时天象相同，得木星保佑者得天下 当时晋帝加封高祖为塞公。
English: He stayed in the house corresponding to the Song Dynasty, between the two inns of the heart, and was the same as the celestial elephant when King Zhou Wu attacked the merchants, and was blessed by Jupiter.

古文：六月壬子，太白从行入太微右掖门。
现代文：六月壬子，金星纵向运行入太微垣右掖门。
English: In June, Venus moves longitudinally into the right lintel of the Taiyukagaki Gate.

古文：己巳，月犯毕，占同上。
现代文：己巳，月犯毕宿。占辞同上。
English: It's time to put an end to monthly offenses. Same as above.

古文：七月，月犯牛宿。
现代文：七月，月犯牛宿。
English: In July, the moon crashes into the Cow Inn.

古文：占曰： 天下有大诛。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示天下有大杀戮。 
English: Divination says: There will be widespread killing.

古文：十月丙戌，月入毕，占同上。
现代文：十月丙戌，月入毕宿。占辞同上。
English: The month of October, the month of the moon, the end of the year. The same as above.

古文：十三年五月丙子，月犯轩辕。
现代文：十三年五月丙子，月犯轩辕。
English: On May 13th, the moon broke through the clouds.

古文：丁亥，犯牵牛。癸巳，荧惑犯右执法。
现代文：丁亥，犯牵牛癸巳，火星犯右执法星。
English: Dinghai, Guilty Cowherd, Mars, Guilty Law Enforcement Star.

古文：八月己酉，月犯牵牛。
现代文：八月己酉，月犯牵牛。
English: In August, the moon hits the cowherd's home.

古文：丁卯，月犯太微。
现代文：丁卯，月犯太微垣。
English: Dingwu, the moon's impact is too small.

古文：占曰： 人君忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 君主有忧患。 
English: Divination says: The monarch is in trouble.

古文：九月壬辰，荧惑犯轩辕。
现代文：九月壬辰，火星犯轩辕。
English: In September, when the moon is full, the Mars will collide with the Earth.

古文：十月戊申，月犯毕，占悉同上。
现代文：十月戊申，月犯毕宿。占辞全部同上。
English: October Boshin, the end of the month. All the predictions are the same as above.

古文：月犯箕。
现代文：月犯箕宿。
English: The moon crashes into the inn.

古文：占曰： 国有忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 国家有忧患。 
English: Divination says: The country is in trouble.

古文：甲寅，月犯毕，占同上。
现代文：甲寅，月犯毕宿。占辞同上。
English: Katora, the month of crime is over. Same as above.

古文：乙卯，填星犯太微，留积七十余日。
现代文：乙卯，土星犯太微垣，留积七十多天。
English: Second, Saturn will collide with the Earth and stay for more than 70 days.

古文：占曰： 亡君之戒。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象是亡君的警戒。 
English: The soothsayer said: This is a warning from the ruler of a doomed country.

古文：壬戌，月犯太微，占同上。
现代文：壬戌，月犯太微垣。占辞同上。
English: 壬,月犯太微垣. Same as above.

古文：十一月，月于太微，奄填星。
现代文：十一月，月入太微垣，掩土星。
English: In November, the moon sets too close to the horizon, obscuring Saturn.

古文：占曰： 王者恶之。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象王者不利。 
English: The diviner said, "The king has done evil in this."

古文：十四年三月癸丑，太白犯五诸侯，占同上。
现代文：十四年三月癸丑，金星犯五诸侯。占辞同上。
English: In March of the 14th year, the ugly, Venus offends five princes. Fortune-telling is the same as above.

古文：四月壬申，月犯填星，于张。
现代文：四月壬申。月于张宿犯土星。
English: The month of April is Jinshin. The moon is in Jangjuku when Saturn is.

古文：占曰： 天下有大丧。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示天下有大丧乱。 
English: The soothsayer said: There is great sorrow in the world.

古文：五月庚子，月犯太微，占同上。
现代文：五月庚子，月犯太微垣。占辞同上。
English: May Geng Zi, the moon is too small. The same as above.

古文：壬子，有星孛于北斗魁中。
现代文：壬子，有彗星出现于北斗魁之中。
English: According to the legend, a comet appeared in the middle of the Big Dipper.

古文：占曰： 有圣人受命。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示有圣人受天命。 
English: The fortune-teller said, "This indicates that a saint has been chosen by Heaven."

古文：七月甲辰，荧惑犯舆鬼。
现代文：七月甲辰，火星犯舆鬼宿。
English: In July, the first hour of the month, the planet Mars collides with the sun.

古文：占曰： 秦有兵。 
现代文：占辞说： 秦地有战争。 
English: The soothsayer said: There will be war in Qin.

古文：丁巳，月犯东井。
现代文：丁巳，月犯东井之宿。
English: Just then, the moon hits Higashii-juku.

古文：占曰： 军将死。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示军将死亡。 
English: The diviner said: The general is dead.

古文：癸亥，彗星出太微西，柄起上相星下，芒渐长至十余丈，进归北斗紫微中台。
现代文：癸亥，有彗星出现于太微垣之西，彗柄起自上相星之下，光芒渐渐增长达十余丈，进扫北斗紫微中台。
English: In the year of the boar, a comet appeared in the west of the Great Wall of China. The comet's tail rose from under the star above, and its light gradually increased to more than ten times its height, sweeping into the middle of the Big Dipper.

古文：占曰： 彗出太微，社稷亡，天下易王。
现代文：占辞说： 彗星出太微垣则国家灭亡，改朝换代。
English: The fortune-teller said: If the comet is too small, the country will perish and the dynasty will be replaced.

古文：入北斗紫微，帝宫空。 
现代文：入北斗紫微，皇宫变空。 
English: Entering Beidou Ziwei, the imperial palace becomes empty.

古文：一曰： 天下得圣主。 
现代文：另说： 天下得圣明君主。 
English: In addition, he said: The world deserves a saintly monarch.

古文：八月甲子，太白犯轩辕。
现代文：八月甲子，金星犯轩辕。
English: August is the year of the Goat, and Venus is about to invade the sign of Virgo.

古文：癸酉，填星入太微，犯右执法，因留太微中，积二百余日乃去。
现代文：癸酉，土星入太微垣，犯右执法星，接着留于太微垣之中二百余天才离去。
English: At that time, Saturn entered the Great Wall, collided with the right law enforcement star, and thus remained in the Great Wall for a total of more than 200 days.

古文：占曰： 填星守太微，亡君之戒，有徙王。 
现代文：占辞说： 土星守太微是亡君的警戒，有王被迁徙。 
English: The soothsayer said: Saturn's presence is too weak, it is an omen of the loss of the sovereign, there is a dethroned prince.

古文：九月乙未，太白入太微，犯左执法。
现代文：九月乙未，金星入太微垣，犯左执法星。
English: In September, Venus will enter the fourth house of the zodiac, and it will impact the left law enforcement planet.

古文：丁巳，月入太微。
现代文：丁巳，月入太微垣。
English: Just then, the moon entered the small window.

古文：占曰： 大人忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象警示王公贵族有忧患。 
English: Divination says: A high-ranking person has worries.

古文：十月癸巳，荧惑入太微，犯西蕃上将，仍从行至左掖门内，留二十日乃逆行。
现代文：十月癸巳，火星入太微垣犯西蕃上将星，然后纵行至左掖门内，留二十天后逆行。
English: At the end of October, Mars will enter the Taibi-gaki and collide with the West Dragon Admiral Star, and then it will travel longitudinally to the inside of the Left Dragon Gate, and stay there for twenty days before retrograde.

古文：至恭帝元熙元年三月五日，出西蕃上将西三尺许，又从还入太微。
现代文：至恭帝元熙元年三月五日，出西蕃上将星之西三尺多，又纵向运行还入太微垣。
English: On March 5, the first day of the year of King Goryeo's accession to the throne, the warship sailed more than three feet west of the star, and ran vertically back into the sea.

古文：时填星在太微，荧惑绕填星成钩已。
现代文：当时：卜星也在太微垣，火星绕土星成钩戟之状。
English: At that time: the Pleiades was also too far away, and Mars was in the shape of a hook around Saturn.

古文：其年四月二十七日丙戌，从端门出。
现代文：同年四月二十七日丙戌，从端门而出。
English: On April 27 of the same year, he got up and walked out of the front door.

古文：占曰： 荧惑与填星钩已，天下更纪。 甲申，月入太微，占同上。
现代文：占辞说： 火星与土星成钩戟之状则改朝换代 甲申，月入太微垣，占辞同上。
English: Fortune-telling says: Mars and Saturn are linked, and the shape of the cormorant changes from the morning to the evening, and the moon is too far away. Fortune-telling is the same.

古文：十一年正月，高祖讨司马休之、鲁宗之等，溃奔长安。
现代文：十一年正月，高祖征讨司马休之、鲁宗之等，将其军击溃，逃奔长安。
English: In the first month of the eleventh year, Gao Zu marched against Sima Xiu, Lu Zong and others, defeated their army, and fled to Chang'an.

古文：五月，林邑寇交州，交州刺史杜慧度距战于九真，大为所败。
现代文：五月，林邑进攻交州，交州刺史杜慧度拒战于九真而失败。
English: In May, Lin Yip attacked Jiaozhou, but Jiaozhou's leader Du Huidu refused to fight in Jiu Zhen and was defeated.

古文：十二年七月，高祖伐羌。
现代文：十二年七月，高祖征伐羌。
English: In July of the 12th year, Gao Zu went on a logging expedition.

古文：十月，前驱定陕、洛。
现代文：十月，前锋平定陕、洛。
English: In October, the forwards pacified Shaanxi and Luo.

古文：十三年三月，索头大众缘河为寇，高祖讨之奔退，其别帅托跋嵩交战，又大破之，嵩众歼焉。
现代文：十三年三月，索头大军沿黄河侵扰，被高祖击退，又歼灭其别帅托跋嵩所率之军。进而再攻关中。
English: In March of the thirteenth year, the Sokoto army invaded along the Yellow River, was repulsed by Gaozu, and annihilated the army led by his second-in-command, Tobasaku. Then, they attacked Guanzhong.

古文：进复攻关。八月，擒姚泓，司、兗、秦、雍悉平，索头凶惧。
现代文：八月，擒获姚泓，司、兖、秦、雍之地全部平定。索头震惧。
English: In August, the provinces of Yao, Si, Qu, Qin, and Yong were all pacified.

古文：十四年，高祖还彭城，受宋公。
现代文：十四年，高祖还归彭城，受封为宋公。
English: Fourteen years later, Gao Zu returned to Pengcheng and was named Song Gong.

古文：十一月，左仆射前将军刘穆之卒。
现代文：十一月，左仆射前将军刘穆之死。
English: In November, the death of Liu Mu, a former general, was announced.

古文：明年，西虏寇长安，雍州刺史硃龄石诸军陷没，官军舍而东。
现代文：明年，西虏进攻长安，雍州刺史宋龄石诸军失败，官军舍弃长安向东撤退。
English: In the second year, the enemy in the west attacked Chang'an, and the various armies in Yongzhou and Zhulingshi were destroyed. The imperial army abandoned Dansai and retreated to the east.

古文：十二月，安帝崩，母弟琅邪王践阼，是曰恭帝。
现代文：十二月，安帝去世，同母弟琅邪王继位，称为恭帝。
English: In December, Emperor An died, and his younger half-brother, Emperor Xizang, succeeded to the throne. He was called Emperor Gong.

古文：晋恭帝元熙元年正月丙午，三月壬寅，月犯太微，占悉同上。
现代文：晋恭帝互感元年正月丙午，三月壬寅，月犯太微垣。占辞全部同上。
English: In the first month of the first year of the Emperor Jingu's reign, Emperor Jingu's feelings were reciprocated in the morning, in the second month of the first year, in the third month of the first year, in the fourth month of the first year, and in the fifth month of the first year.

古文：乙卯，辰星犯轩辕。
现代文：乙卯，水星犯轩辕。
English: Second, Mercury impinging on the meridian.

古文：六月庚辰，太白犯太微。
现代文：六月庚辰，金星犯太微垣。
English: June Gengchen, Venus impact crime is too small.

古文：七月，月犯岁星。
现代文：七月，月犯木星。
English: In July, the moon offends Jupiter.

古文：己卯，月犯太微，太白昼见。
现代文：己卯，月犯太微垣，金星白天出现。
English: The moon is too faint, and Venus appears during the day.

古文：占悉同上。
现代文：占辞全部同上。
English: The divination is exactly the same as the previous one.

古文：自义熙元年至是，太白经天者九，日蚀者四，皆从上始。
现代文：从羞毖元年到本年，金星经天九次，日食四次，都是从上开始。
English: From just after the first of the year to this year, Venus has passed through the heavens nine times and the sun has been eclipsed four times, all from above.

古文：革代更王，臣民失君之象也。
现代文：这是改朝换代，臣民失君的天象。
English: This is the celestial phenomenon of changing dynasties and generations, and subjects losing their lords.

古文：是夜，太白犯哭星。
现代文：当夜，金星犯哭星。
English: On this night, Venus collides with the Weeping Star.

古文：十二月丁巳，月、太白俱入羽林。
现代文：十二月丁巳，月与金星都入羽林。
English: In December, the moon and Venus both enter the feather forest.

古文：二年二月庚午，填星犯太微。
现代文：二年二月庚午，土星犯太微垣。
English: On the afternoon of February 2nd, Saturn was too close to the sun.

古文：占悉同上。
现代文：占辞全部同上。
English: The divination is exactly the same as the previous one.

古文：元年七月，高祖受宋王。
现代文：元年七月，高祖被加封为宋王。
English: In July of the first year of the year, Gaozu was given the additional title of King of Song.

古文：二年六月，晋帝逊位，高祖入宫。
现代文：二年六月，晋帝让位，高祖入宫。
English: In June of the second year, Emperor Jin abdicated and Emperor Gaozu entered the palace.

