古文：壬午，突厥遣使朝贡。
现代文：天福六年秋七月一日，高祖驾临崇元殿接受朝拜。
English: On the first day of July in the autumn of the sixth year of Tenpu, Gao Zu drove to the Chongyuan Hall to receive worship.

古文：以遥领寿州忠正军节度使兼侍卫马军都指挥使李怀忠为同州节度使，以宣徽北院使李守贞遥领忠正军节度使、侍卫马军指挥使。
现代文：二日，将陈州升格为防御使的级别。四日，泾州上奏，西凉府留后李文谦，今年二月四日关闭宅第门户自焚而死，原派往西凉府的翻译官和从西凉来的人带着三个蕃族部落的书信上呈给高祖。诏令将拱辰、威和、内直等军合并为兴顺军。十一日，任邺都留守兼侍卫亲军马步军都指挥使、广晋尹刘知远为太原尹，并任北京留守、河东节度使，又划辽、泌二州归属河东。
English: On the second day, Chenzhou was upgraded to the level of defense envoy. On the fourth day, Li Wenqian was sent to Zhangzhou and stayed in Xiliangfu. On February 4 of this year, he closed the door of his residence and died of self-immolation. The translator who was originally sent to Xiliangfu and the person who came from Xiliang with the letters of the three Yi tribes were presented to Gaozu. The imperial decree merged the armies of Gongchen, Weihe, and Inner Zhi into the Xingshun Army. On the 11th day, Ren Yudu stayed and guarded the troops of Ma Bu. The troops of Ma Bu were commanded by the en

古文：甲申，降御札，取八月五日暂幸鄴都，沿路供顿，并委所司以官物排比，州县不得科率人户。
现代文：二十六日，传下御旨，决定在八月五日暂时驾临邺都，沿途的供应安顿，全交主管部门用官府财物依次安排，州县不得摊派到百姓身上。
English: On the 26th, the imperial edict was passed down, and it was decided that on August 5th, they would temporarily drive to Lintu, and the supplies along the way would be settled, and all of them would be arranged in turn by the competent department with the government's property, and the state and county would not be allocated to the people.

古文：丙戌，以右谏议大夫赵远为中书舍人，吏部郎中郑受益为右谏议大夫，刑部郎中殷鹏为水部郎中、知制诰。八月戊子朔，以皇子开封尹、郑王重贵为东京留守，以天平军节度使兼侍卫亲军马步军副都指挥使杜重威为侍卫亲军马步军都指挥使，以宣徽南院使张从恩为东京内外兵马都监。
现代文：八月一日，任皇子、开封尹、郑王石重贵为东京留守，任天平军节度使兼侍卫亲军马步军副都指挥使杜重威为侍卫亲军马步军都指挥使，任宣徽南院使张从恩为东京内外兵马都监。
English: On August 1, Prince Ren, Kaifeng Yin, and Zheng Wang Shizhonggui stayed in Tokyo; Du Chongwei was appointed as the Deputy Commander of the Horse Guards and Deputy Commander of the Horse Guards of the Tianping Army; Du Chongwei was appointed as the Commander of the Horse Guards and Deputy Commander of the Horse Guards of the Imperial Army; and Zhang Cong'en, the Envoy of the Southern Yuan of Xuanhui, was appointed as the Supervisor of the Terracotta Warriors and Horses in and around Tokyo.

古文：改奉德马军为护圣。
现代文：改奉德马军为护圣马军。
English: The German-Habsburg army was assigned to protect the Holy Roman army.

古文：放文武百官朝参，取便先赴鄴都。
现代文：停止文武百官入朝参拜，以便先期奔赴邺都。
English: Stop hundreds of civil and military officials from entering the DPRK to visit, so that they can rush to the capital ahead of time.

古文：壬辰，车驾发东京。
现代文：五日，高祖起驾从东京出发。
English: On the fifth day, Gao Zu drove from Tokyo.

古文：壬申，忠武建武等军节度使、守太傅、兼中书令、行苏州睦州刺史钱元璙进封彭城郡王，遥领广州清海军节度使、判婺州军州事钱元懿为检校太师。乙亥，遣前邢州节度使杨彦询使于契丹，锡赍甚厚。
现代文：十二日，到达邺都，左右金吾六军仪仗排列威严隆重，迎接高祖进入宫内。改原澶州具有德清军番号。二十五日，将邺都皇城南门应天门改为乾明门，大明馆改为都亭驿。二十七日，派光禄卿张澄、国子博士谢攀出使高丽举行册封礼仪。九月四日，滑州黄河溃口，一泻千里，乡村百姓扶老携幼爬上山丘高坡，相互被洪水隔开，饿死的人非常多。十八日，派原邢州节度使杨彦询出使契丹，赏赐契丹钱物非常丰厚。二十日。
English: On the twelfth day, after arriving in Luzhou, the six armies of the King and the Six Armies lined up in a dignified and grand manner to welcome Gao Zu into the palace. The original Luzhou was given a German-Qing army number. On the twenty-fifth day, the southern gate of the imperial city of Luzhou was changed to the Qianming Gate, and the Daming Hall was changed to the Du Ting Courtyard. On the twenty-seventh day, Guangluqing Zhang Cheng and Dr. Guo Zi Xie climbed out to hold the canonization ceremony for Goryeo. On September 4, at the mouth of the Yellow River in Luzhou, thousands of miles

古文：丁丑，吐浑遣使朝贡。
现代文：吐谷浑派使臣前来朝拜进贡。
English: He sent envoys to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：壬午夜，有彗星出于西方，长二丈余，在房一度，尾迹穿天市垣东行，逾月而灭。
现代文：二十五日夜晚，彗星在西方出现，长二丈多，在离房宿一度的位置，彗星尾部穿过天市垣向东运行，一个月后消失。
English: On the evening of the 25th, the comet appeared in the west, more than two feet long, at a position one degree from the house, and the tail of the comet passed through the sky and moved eastward, disappearing a month later.

古文：丙戌，兗州上言，水自西来，漂没秋稼。
现代文：二十九日，兖州上奏，从西边下来大水，漂流淹没了秋季庄稼。
English: On the 29th, Luzhou played up, and heavy water came down from the west, flooding the autumn crops.

古文：冬十月丁亥朔，遣鸿胪少卿魏玭等四人，分往滑、濮、郓、澶视水害苗稼。
现代文：冬十月一日，派鸿胪少卿魏王比等四人，分别去滑、濮、郓、澶四地观察被水冲毁的禾苗庄稼。
English: On the first day of winter in October, he sent four people, including Hongyao Shaoqing Wei Wangbi, to the four regions of Nanning, Xi'an, Xi'an and Xi'an to observe the water-damaged grain seedlings.

古文：己丑，诏以胡梁度月城为大通军，浮桥为大通桥。
现代文：三日，诏令将胡梁度的月城建置大通军番号，浮桥称为大通桥。
English: On the third day, the edict gave the military number of Datong to Yuecheng in Hu Liangdu, and the pontoon bridge was called Datong Bridge.

古文：壬寅，诏唐梁国公狄仁杰可赠太师。
现代文：十六日，诏令将唐朝梁国公狄仁杰追赠为太师。
English: On the 16th, the imperial edict posthumously made Di Renjie, the leading statesman of the Tang Dynasty, Grand Master.

古文：十一月丁未，郑王夫人张氏薨。
现代文：十一月丁未日，郑王夫人张氏去世。
English: On November 3rd, Mrs. Zheng Wang Zhang passed away.

古文：福州王延义遣使贡方物。
现代文：福州王延羲派使臣贡地方土产。
English: King Yan of Fuzhou sent envoys to pay tribute to local products.

古文：甲寅，遣太子宾客聂延祚、吏部郎中卢撰持节册天下兵马元帅、守尚书令、吴越国王钱元瓘。
现代文：甲寅日，派太子宾客聂延祚、吏部郎中卢撰持节册封天下兵马元帅、守尚书令、吴越国王钱元馞。
English: On the day of Jia Yin, he sent the prince's guests, Yan Yanqi, the chief of the General Staff, Lang Zhonglu, to hold the ceremony of awarding the title of Marshal of the World's Armies, Shushang Shuling, and the king of Wuyue, Qian Yuanqi.

古文：甲子，以御史中丞王松为尚书右丞，中书舍人、史馆修撰判馆事王易简为御史中丞，户部侍郎张昭远为兵部侍郎，国子祭酒田敏以本官兼户部侍郎。辛未，太妃、皇后至自东京。
现代文：十五日，太妃、皇后从东京回来。
English: On the 15th, the Empress and Empress Dowager returned from Tokyo.

古文：壬申，遣给事中李式、考功郎中张铸持节册闽国王王延义。
现代文：十六日，派给事中李式、考功郎中张铸持节册封闽国王王延羲。
English: On the 16th, Li Shih, one of the judges, and Zhang Jizhi, one of the judges, were assigned to seal the King's seal of Wang Yanjun.

古文：生擒衙内都指挥使安宏义，获山南东道之印，安从进单骑奔逸。丁亥，诏襄州行营都部署高行周权知襄州军州事。是日，镇州节度使安重荣称兵向阙，以侍卫亲军马步军都指挥使杜重威为北面行营招讨使，率兵击之，以邢州节度使马全节为副，以前贝州节度使王周为马步军都虞候。癸巳，武德使焦继勋奏，安从进遣弟从贵领兵千人，取接均州刺史蔡行遇，寻领所部兵掩杀贼军七百余人，生擒安从贵，截其双腕，却放入城。
现代文：二日，诏令襄州行营都部署高行周临时执掌襄州军政事务。这天，镇州节度使安重荣举兵反叛杀向京城，高祖任命侍卫亲军马步军都指挥使杜重威为北面行营招讨使，率领军队进击安重荣，任命邢州节度使马全节为副帅，任命原贝州节度使王周为马步军都虞候。八日，武德使焦继勋上奏，安从进派他弟弟安从贵带领一千名士兵，接应均州刺史蔡行遇，旋即焦继勋率领所属军队掩杀叛军七百多人，活捉安从贵，砍下他的双腕，放他进入均州城里。
English: On the second day, Gao Zhizhou ordered the deployment of Gao Zhizhou to temporarily take charge of the military and political affairs of Xiangzhou. On this day, the Zhenzhou Festival ordered An Chong Rong to raise an army to rebel against the capital, Gao Zu appointed the bodyguard to command the pro-army horse-marching army, ordered Du Chong Wei to recruit the envoy for the northern campaign, led the army to attack An Chong Rong, appointed the Zhangzhou Festival to make Ma Quan Jie as the deputy commander, and appointed the former Beizhou Festival to make Wang Zhou as the horse-marching army commander. On the eighth day, the

古文：戊戌，以皇子重睿为银青光禄大夫、检校尚书左仆射。
现代文：三日，高祖任命皇子石重睿为银青光禄大夫、检校尚书左仆射。
English: On the third day, Gao Zu appointed the prince Shi Chongrui as the silver Qingguanglu doctor and the school inspector Shangshu Zuopu.

古文：己亥，北面军前奏，十三日未时，于宗城县西南大破镇州贼军，杀一万五千人，余党走保宗城县。
现代文：十四日，北面军前方上奏，十三日下午二时，在宗城县西南大败镇州叛军，杀死一万五千多人，残余叛军逃奔防守宗城县。
English: On the 14th, the front of the Northern Army was raised, and at 2:00 p.m. on the 13th, the Zhenzhou rebels were defeated in the southwest of Zongcheng County, killing more than 15,000 people. The remaining rebels fled to defend Zongcheng County.

古文：是夜三更，破县城，前深州刺史史虔武自缚归降。获马三千匹，绢三万余匹，余物称是。
现代文：这天夜里三更时分，攻破宗城县城，原深州刺史史虔武捆缚自己，归顺投降，缴获战马三千匹，丝绢三万多匹，其余的物品若干。
English: At three o'clock in the morning on this day, they broke through the county town of Zongcheng, and the former Shenzhou assassin Shi Qianwu tied himself up, surrendered, captured three thousand horses, more than thirty thousand silks, and a number of other items.

古文：安重荣脱身遁走。
现代文：安重荣脱身逃跑。
English: An Chongrong got away and ran away.

古文：是日，百官称贺。
现代文：这天，文武百官称贺。
English: On this day, hundreds of civil and military officials congratulated.

古文：癸卯，削夺安从进、安重荣在身官爵。
现代文：十八日，削夺安从进、安重荣所任官职爵位。
English: On the 18th, the official ranks and titles of An Congjin and An Chongrong were reduced.

古文：右金吾上将军苌从简卒，废朝，赠太师。
现代文：右金吾上将军苌从简去世，停止上朝，追赠太师。
English: Kingu, the right-hand general, died without issue, ending his reign, and was posthumously awarded the title of Grand Master.

古文：乙巳，天下兵马都元帅、守尚书令、吴越国王钱元瓘薨，废朝三日，谥曰文穆。
现代文：二十日，天下兵马都元帅、守尚书令、吴越国王钱元馞去世，停止上朝三天，谥号为文穆。
English: On the 20th, Qian Yuanzhang, Marshal of the World's Armies and Horses, Keeper of the Imperial Rescript, and King of Wuyue, passed away, three days after his accession to the throne. His posthumous name was Wenmu.

古文：是日，帝习射于后苑，诸军都指挥使已上悉预焉，赐物有差。
现代文：这天，高祖在后苑练习射猎，各军都指挥使以上都参与射猎，按等级赏赐物品。
English: On this day, Gao Zu was practicing shooting in the backyard. All the troops were commanded to participate in the shooting, and they were rewarded according to their rank.

古文：丁未，南面行营都部署高行周奏，今月十三日，部领大军至襄州城下，相次降贼军二千人。
现代文：二十二日，南面行营都部署高行周上奏，本月十三日，率领大军到襄州城下，接连降伏二千叛军。
English: On the 22nd, Gao Xing Zhou, commander of the Southern Expeditionary Force, led a large army to the city of Xiangzhou on the 13th of this month, and successively surrendered 2,000 rebels.

古文：其降兵马军诏以 彰圣 为号，步军以 归顺 为号。
现代文：这些投降的军队中的马军诏令以 彰圣 为番号，步军以 归顺 为番号。
English: Among these surrendered armies, the horse army's edict was numbered "Chang Sheng" and the infantry army's was numbered "Chu Shun."

古文：庚戌，以权知吴越国事钱宏佐为起复镇军大将军、检校太师、兼中书令、杭州越州大都督、镇海镇东等军节度使，封吴越国王。
现代文：二十五日，以临时掌管吴越国事的钱弘佐在服丧期满后担任镇军大将军、检校太师、兼中书令，杭州、越州大都督、镇海镇东等军节度使，封为吴越国王。
English: On the 25th, Qian Hongsa, who was temporarily in charge of the state affairs of Wuyue, served as the general of the town army, the inspector-general of the school, and the secretary of the central government, and the military governor of Hangzhou, the great capital of Yuezhou, and the east of Zhenhai Town, and was named the king of Wuyue.

古文：北面招讨使杜重威奏，今月二日收复镇州，斩安重荣，传首阙下。
现代文：二十七日，杜重威率领大军到达镇州城下。天福七年春一月一日，高祖没有接受朝贺，是因为用兵作战的原因。三日，北面招讨使杜重威上奏，本月已收复镇州，斩杀了安重荣，将安重荣的头颅送到京城。
English: On the 27th, Du Chongwei led a large army to the town of Zhenzhou. In the spring of the seventh year of Tianfu, on the 1st of January, Gaozu did not accept the morning greeting, because of the reason of using soldiers to fight. On the 3rd, the north side invited Du Chongwei to play, and this month has recovered Zhenzhou, killed An Chong Rong, and sent the head of An Chong Rong to Beijing.

古文：帝御乾明楼，宣露布讫，大理卿受馘，付市徇之，百官称贺。
现代文：高祖驾临乾明楼，宣谕捷报完毕，大理卿接过安重荣头颅，把它挂在街市中示众，百官称贺。
English: Gao Zu drove to the Qianming Building, the proclamation was successfully completed, and Dali Sir took over the head of An Chong Rong and hung it in the market to show the public. Hundreds of officials congratulated him.

古文：曲赦广晋府禁囚。
现代文：赦免广晋府囚禁人犯。
English: Pardoned prisoners in Guangjin.

古文：《辽史》云：戊辰，晋函安重荣首来献，上数欲亲讨重荣，至是乃止。辛酉，追赠皇弟三人：故沂州马步军都指挥使、赠太傅德再赠太尉，追封福王；故检校太子宾客、赠太傅殷再赠太尉，追封通王；故彰职右第三军都指挥使长州刺史、赠大傅威再赠太尉，追封广王。
现代文：六日，追赠高祖弟弟三人：已故沂州马步军总指挥使、赠太傅石敬德再追赠为太尉，追封为福王；已故检校太子宾客、赠太傅石敬殷再追赠为太尉，追封为通王；已故彰圣右第三军总指挥使、长州刺史、赠太傅石敬威再追赠为太尉，追封为广王。
English: On the 6th, three of Gao Zu's younger brothers were posthumously awarded: the late commander-in-chief of the Luzhou Horse and Foot Army, the late Taifu Shi Jingde, was posthumously awarded the rank of captain, and was posthumously awarded the title of Fu Wang; the late guest of the prince of the inspection school, the late Taifu Shi Jingyin, was posthumously awarded the rank of captain, and was posthumously awarded the title of Tong Wang; the late commander-in-chief of the Third Army of the Zhang Shengde, the Choshu Shishi, was awarded the rank of captain, and was posthumously awarded the

古文：壬戌，追赠皇子五人：故右卫将军、赠太保重英再赠太傅，追封虢王；故权东京留守、河南尹、赠太傅重乂再赠太尉，追封寿王；故皇城副使、赠太保重裔再赠太傅，追封郯王；故河阳节度使、赠太尉重信再赠太师，追封沂王；故左金吾卫将军、赠太保重进再赠太傅，追封夔王。
现代文：七日，追赠皇子五人：已故右卫将军、赠太保石重英再追赠为太傅，追封为虢王；已故代理东京留守、河南尹、赠太傅石重繧再追赠为太尉，追封为寿王；已故皇城副使，赠太保石重裔再追赠为太傅，追封为郯王；已故河阳节度使、赠太尉石重倍再追赠为太师，追封为沂王；已故左金吾卫将军、赠太保石重进再追赠为太傅，追封为葵王。
English: On the seventh day, five princes were posthumously awarded: the late General Uwei and the late Taibo Shih Chung were posthumously awarded the title of Taifu and the title of Shao Wang; the late Acting Tokyo Resident, Henan Yin, was awarded the title of Taifu Shih Chung and the title of Taifu was posthumously awarded the title of Taifu and the title of Shou Wang; the late Vice-Minister of the Imperial Capital, Taibo Shih Chung, was awarded the title of Taifu and the title of Shao Wang; the late Koyang Jiedu, was awarded the title of Taifu and the title

古文：癸亥，改镇州为恆州，成德军为顺国军。
现代文：八日，将镇州改为恒州，威德军改为顺国军。
English: On the 8th, the Zhenzhou was changed to Hengzhou, and the Wei German Army was changed to the Shun Guo Army.

古文：是日上元节，六街诸寺燃灯，御乾明门观之，夜半还宫。壬申，延州节度使丁审琦加爵邑，邓州节度使安审徽加检校太傅，陕州节度使石赟加检校太傅。
现代文：十一日，任命门下侍郎、平章事、监修国史赵莹为侍中；青州节度使杨光远增加食邑，改赐功臣名号；兖州节度使桑维翰加封检校太保；河东节度使刘知远兼任侍中；任命郓州节度使、北面行营招讨使、侍卫亲军都指挥使杜重威为恒州顺国军节度使，兼任侍中；皇子、广晋尹、兼任功德使、齐王石重贵加官兼任侍中。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Zhao Ying, the attendant of his disciple, Ping Zhangji, and the supervisor of the national history, was appointed as an attendant; the Qingzhou festival made Yang Guangyuan increase the food and change the name of the meritorious subject; the Zhangzhou festival made San Weihan add the title of school inspector; the Hedong festival made Liu Zhiyuan also serve as an attendant; the Zhangzhou festival envoy, the north side of the camp invitation envoy, and the guard commander were appointed; Du Chongwei was appointed as the festival envoy of the Hengzhou Shun Army and also served as an attendant; the prince,

古文：乙亥，契丹遣使来聘。
现代文：十五日，契丹派遣使臣问候。
English: On the 15th, Khitan dispatched envoys to send greetings.

古文：河阳节度使兼侍卫马步军都虞候景延广加检校太尉，改郓州节度使，典军如故。
现代文：这天是元宵节，六街各寺所燃放灯火。高祖驾临乾明门观灯，到半夜才回到寝宫。二十日，契丹又派使臣来朝拜问候。河阳节度使兼侍卫马步军都虞候景延广加封检校太尉，调任郓州节度使，仍旧主持军事。
English: This day was the Lantern Festival, and the lights of the temples in the Sixth Street were lit. Gao Zu drove to the Qianming Gate to watch the lights, and returned to the sleeping palace at midnight. On the 20th, the Khitan also sent envoys to pay homage to the emperor. Kheyang's festival envoy and attendant of the horse-marching army waited for Jing Yanguang to be promoted to the rank of school inspector, and he was transferred to the post of Bozhou's festival envoy, still presiding over the military.

古文：壬午，以河阳节度使王周为泾州节度使，以恆州节度副使王钦祚为殿中监。
现代文：任命原贝州节度使、北面行营马步军都虞候王周为河阳节度使，加封检校太保。二十七日，任命河阳节度使王周为泾州节度使。
English: Wang Zhou, the former Baizhou festival envoy, was appointed as the festival envoy of Heyang, and the official seal was added. On the 27th, Wang Zhou, the festival envoy of Heyang, was appointed as the festival envoy of Zhangzhou.

古文：二月丁亥，皇妹清平公主进封卫国长公主。
现代文：二月三日，皇妹清平公主进封为卫国长公主。
English: On February 3, Princess Qingping, the younger sister of the emperor, was enthroned as the first princess of the country.

古文：契丹遣使来聘。
现代文：契丹派使臣问候。
English: The Khitan envoys sent their greetings.

古文：己丑，宴于武德殿，新恆州节度使杜重威已下、诸军副兵马使已上悉预焉，赐物有差。
现代文：五日，在武德殿宴会群臣，新任恒州节度使杜重威以下和各军副兵马使以上官员全部参加了宴会，高祖按等级赏赐了礼物。
English: On the fifth day, at the banquet held at the Wude Hall, all the ministers, including the newly-appointed Hengzhou Festival envoy Du Chongwei and all the officials above and below the deputy envoys of the various armies, attended the banquet, and Gaozu rewarded the gifts according to their ranks.

古文：己亥，以曹州防御使何建为延州留后。泾州奏，差押牙陈延晖赍敕书往西凉府，本府都指挥使等请以陈延晖为节度使。辛丑，宰臣李崧丁母忧，起复旧任。
现代文：十五日，泾州上奏，派遣押牙陈延晖携带诏书前往西凉府，泾州总指挥使等请求任命陈延晖为节度使。十七日，宰相李崧服完母丧后，恢复任原职。
English: On the 15th, Bozhou made a report and dispatched Chen Yanqi, the chief commander of Bozhou, to Xi'an with an imperial edict. The chief commander of Bozhou requested that Chen Yanqi be appointed as the envoy of the festival. On the 17th, Prime Minister Li Rong resumed his original post after his mother's funeral.

古文：延州蕃寇作乱，同州、鄜州各起牙兵讨平之。
现代文：延州蕃寇作乱，同州、州各率军队讨伐平定叛乱。
English: Yanzhou raiders made a riot, and troops from the same and different prefectures fought to quell the rebellion.

古文：丙午，诏： 邓、唐、随、郢诸州，多有旷土，宜令人户取便开耕，与免五年差税。 
现代文：二十二日，高祖颁令： 邓、唐、随、郢各州，有很多的荒废土地，应让人民随便开垦耕种，给与免除五年差役税收的优惠。 
English: On the 22nd, Gao Zu issued an order: From the states of Deng, Tang, Sui and Qin, there are a lot of wasteland, people should be allowed to open up and cultivate at will, and they should be given the privilege of being exempted from five years of labor tax.

古文：三月己未，兵部尚书韩恽卒。
现代文：三月五日，兵部尚书韩恽去世。
English: On March 5th, Hyobu Shoshu Han Mi passed away.

古文：庚申，遣前齐州防御使宋光鄴、翰林茶酒使张言使于契丹。
现代文：二十五日，派原齐州防御使宋光邺、翰林茶酒使张言出使契丹。
English: On the 25th, Song Guangyao, the former defense minister of Qizhou, and Zhang Yan, the minister of tea and wine of Hanlin, were sent to dispatch Khitan.

古文：壬戌，分命朝臣诸寺观祷雨。
现代文：八日，分别派遣在朝官员到各佛寺道观祈求下雨。
English: On the 8th, officials in the DPRK were sent to various Buddhist temples to pray for rain.

古文：丙寅，皇后为妹契丹枢密使赵延寿妻燕国长公主卒于幽州，举哀于外次。
现代文：十二日，皇后替在幽州去世的妹妹、契丹枢密使赵延寿的妻子、燕国长公主，在后宫举行哀悼。
English: On the 12th, the empress held a mourning ceremony in the harem for her sister, the wife of the Khitan envoy Zhao Yanshou, the eldest princess of Yan Guo, who died in Youzhou.

古文：辛未，滑州节度使、驸马都尉史匡翰卒，辍朝，赠太保。
现代文：十七日，滑州节度使、驸马都尉史匡翰去世，停止上朝，追赠为太保。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, Lieutenant Shi Kuanghan, the envoy to the festival in Slanting, died, and was posthumously awarded the title of Taibo.

古文：丙申，以鄜州节度使周密为晋州节度使，以左羽林统军符彦卿为鄜州节度使。壬寅，诏百官五日一度起居，日轮定两员，具所见以封事奏闻。
现代文：诏令唐州湖阳县蓼山神庙应赐封号为蓼山显顺之神。二十二日，赏给宰相李崧白藤做的轿子，是因为他在母丧期满后复任旧职的缘故。二十三日，宰臣们在佛寺道观祈求下雨。闰三月九日，宋州节度使安彦威上奏，修复滑州黄河工程完成，高祖下令在黄河决口的地方立碑建庙。十九日，高祖诏令百官每五天进宫侍候一次，每天轮流指定两名官员，把所见事情写成密封的奏章上报高祖。
English: On the 22nd, a palanquin made by white wisteria was given to the prime minister, Li Qibai, because he had resumed his old post after his mother's death. On the 23rd, the vice-ministers prayed for rain at the Buddhist temple, Dao Guan. On the 9th of leap March, the Songzhou festival made An Yanwei play, the restoration of the Yellow River project in Slum was completed, and Gaozu ordered to erect a monument to build a temple at the mouth of the Yellow River. On the 19th, Gaozu ordered the officials to enter the palace every five days to wait, and designated two officials each day in turn to write what they saw

古文：诏改鄴都宣明门为硃凤门；武德殿为视政殿，文思殿为崇德殿，画堂为天清殿，寝殿为乾福殿，其门悉从殿名；皇城南门为乾明门，北门为元德门，东门为万春门，西门为千秋门；罗城南砖门为广运门，观音门为金明门，橙槽门为清景门，寇氏门为永芳门，朝臣门为景风门；大城南门为昭明门，观音门为广义门，北河门为静安门，魏县门为应福门，寇氏门为迎春门，朝城门为兴仁门，上斗门为延清门，下斗门为通远门。
现代文：诏令邺都宜明门改为朱凤门，武德殿改为视政殿，文思殿改为崇德殿，画堂命名为天清殿，寝殿命名为乾福殿，它们的门名都按殿的名字命名。皇城南门命名为乾明门，北门命名为玄德门，东门命名为万春门，西门命名为千秋门。罗城南博门改为广运门，观音门改为金明门，橙槽门改为清景门，冠氏门改为永芳门，朝臣门改为景风门。大城南门改为昭明门，观音门改为广义门，北河门改为静安门，魏县门改为应福门，寇氏门改为迎春门，朝城门改为兴仁门，上斗门改为延清门，下斗门改为通远门。
English: According to the edict, the South Gate of the Imperial City was named Qianming Gate, the North Gate was named Xuande Gate, the East Gate was named Wanchun Gate, and the West Gate was named Qiqiu Gate. The South Gate of Luocheng was named Guangyun Gate, the Guanyin Gate was named Jinming Gate, the Orange Groove Gate was named Qingjing Gate, the Crown Prince's Gate was named Yonghong Gate, and the Courtier's Gate was named Jingfeng Gate. The South Gate of the Imperial City was named Zhaoming Gate, the Guanyin Gate was named Guangyi Gate, and the North Gate was named Beichuan Gate

古文：戊申，宋州节度使安彦威封邠国公，赏修河之劳也。
现代文：二十五日，宋州节度使安彦威封为分阝国公，奖赏他修治黄河的功劳。
English: On the 25th day of the month, the Songzhou Festival made An Yan Weifeng the governor of Fenglin, and rewarded him for his efforts in cultivating the Yellow River.

古文：癸丑，泾州节度使王周奏，前节度使张彦泽在任日不法事二十六条，已改正停废。诏褒之。
现代文：三十日，泾州节度使王周上奏，原节度使张彦泽在任时期的二十件不法事情，现已改正停止，高祖下令褒奖了他。
English: On the 30th, the Zhangzhou Festival made Wang Zhou play, and the original festival made Zhang Yanzhe correct 20 illegal things during his tenure, which has now been corrected and stopped. Gaozu ordered to praise him.

古文：是春，鄴都、凤翔、兗、陕、汝、恆、陈等州旱，郓、曹、澶、博、相、洺诸州蝗。
现代文：这年春天，邺都、风翔府以及兖、陕、汝、恒、陈等州发生旱灾，郓、曹、澶、博、相、氵名各州发生蝗灾。
English: In the spring of this year, droughts occurred in the provinces of Putuo, Fengxiangfu, Handan, Shaanxi, Ru, Henan and Chen, and locust plagues occurred in the provinces of Handan, Cao, Handan, Bo, Xiang and Yunnan.

古文：夏四月甲寅朔，避正殿不视朝，日食故也。
现代文：夏四月一日，高祖避开正殿不上朝，是因为日蚀的原因。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, Gao Zu avoided the main hall and did not go to the morning, because of the eclipse.

古文：是日，太阳不亏，百官上表称贺。
现代文：这天，太阳没有亏损，文武百官上表称贺。
English: On this day, the sun did not lose money, and hundreds of civil and military officials congratulated the table.

古文：诏沿河籓君节度使、刺史并兼管内河堤使。
现代文：高祖诏令沿黄河的州郡节度使、刺史一并兼任管区内的河堤使。
English: Gao Zu's edict made him the official in charge of the state and county festivals along the Yellow River, and he also served as the official in charge of the river dikes in the region.

古文：己未，右谏议大夫郑受益两疏论张彦泽在泾州之日，违法虐民，支解掌书记张式、部曲杨洪等，请下所司，明申其罪。皆留中不出。
现代文：六日，右谏议大夫郑受益两次上疏指斥张彦泽在任泾州节度使时，违背法律，虐害百姓，肢解掌书记张式、部曲杨洪等人尸体，请求除去他的官职，揭露他的罪行，这些奏疏都被扣留在朝廷没有给予公开。
English: On the sixth day of the month, Zheng Guobin, the doctor of the Right Hand of the State Council, made two slanders against Zhang Yanzhe, accusing him of violating the law, abusing the people, dismembering the bodies of Zhang Shiki, the secretary of the State Council, and Yang Hong, requesting that his official position be removed and his crimes be exposed. These slanders were kept in the imperial court and were not made public.

古文：辛酉，诏： 张彦泽刳剔宾从，诛剥生聚，冤声秽迹，流闻四方，章表继来，指陈甚切。
现代文：七日，刑部郎中李涛、张麟，员外郎麻麟、王禧，一起到阁门上疏，陈述张彦泽犯的罪行，词语非常恳切。八日，高祖颁布诏令： 张彦泽残杀宾客幕僚，屠戮生灵，冤枉人的名声，秽浊的形迹，流传四方，奏折表疏接连到来，指控、陈词非常恳切。
English: On the seventh day, Li Tao and Zhang Lin, the vice-commanders of the Criminal Investigation Department, and the members of the Foreign Affairs Department, Lang Marlin and Wang Xie, went to the upper gate of the pavilion to report the crimes committed by Zhang Yanzhe, and the words were very sincere. On the eighth day, Gaozu issued a decree: Zhang Yanzhe brutally killed the guest staff, slaughtered living beings, wronged people's reputation, and the appearance of filth, spread to all directions. The report card arrived one after another, and the accusations and statements were very sincere.

古文：尚以曾施微功，特示宽恩。深怀曲法之惭，贵徇议劳之典。
现代文：只因为他曾经对朝廷有些功劳，特赐以宽宥之恩，希望他深刻反思枉法的罪责，重视遵循按功论赏的典章。
English: Only because he had some merit to the imperial court, he was specially granted the grace of forgiveness, and it was hoped that he would deeply reflect on the guilt of the crime, and attach importance to following the rules of reward according to merit.

古文：其张彦泽宜削一阶，仍降爵一纪。
现代文：张彦泽应降官一级，再降低一个等级的爵位。
English: Zhang Yanze should be demoted by one rank, and his peerage reduced by one rank.

古文：其张式宜赠官，张式父铎、弟守贞、男希范并与除官。
现代文：张式应追赠官职，张式的父亲张铎、弟弟张守贞、儿子张希范一并给予官职。
English: Zhang Xi should be posthumously awarded an official post. Zhang Xi's father Zhang Jun, his brother Zhang Shuzhen, and his son Zhang Xifan should all be given an official post.

古文：仍于泾州赐钱十万，差人津置张式灵柩并骨肉归乡，所有先收纳却张式家财物畜，并令却还。
现代文：再在泾州赏赐他们钱币十万，派人把张式的灵柩和至亲骨肉一并转运移置送回他的故乡。原先没收的张式所有的家庭财物牲畜，一起让退还给他的家属。
English: In addition, they were awarded 100,000 coins in Zhangzhou, and someone was sent to transport Zhang's coffin together with his family's bones and flesh back to his hometown. All of Zhang's family property and livestock that had been confiscated were returned to his family.

古文：其泾州新归业户，量与蠲减税赋。 
现代文：泾州新归来的民户，酌情给予减免税收徭役。 
English: The newly returned private households in Ganzhou will be given tax relief and exemption as appropriate.

古文：翌日，以前泾州节度使张彦泽为左龙武大将军。
现代文：第二天，任原泾州节度使张彦泽为左龙武大将军。
English: The next day, Zhang Yanze was appointed as the General of Zalongwu by the former Zhangzhou Festival.

古文：戊辰，废雄州为昌化军，警州为威肃军，其军使委本道差补。
现代文：十五日，废除雄州建立昌化军节镇，废除警州建立威肃军节镇，其军使委托本道差派补充。
English: On the 15th, the establishment of the Changhua Military Festival Town in Xiongzhou was abolished, and the establishment of the Wishu Military Festival Town in Guizhou was abolished. The military envoys entrusted the dispatch of this road to supplement.

古文：故泾州节度掌书记张式赠尚书虞部郎中，以式父铎为沁州司马致仕，弟守贞为贝州清河县主簿，男希范为兴元府文学。
现代文：已故泾州节度使掌书记张式追赠为尚书虞部郎中，张式的父亲以泌州司马官职退隐，弟弟张守贞担任贝州清河县主簿，儿子张希范担任兴元府文学。
English: Zhang Shifu, the late secretary of the Bozhou Festival, posthumously presented Zhang Shifu as the younger brother of Shang Shuyu, Zhang Shifu's father retired as the secretary of Bozhou, his brother Zhang Shuzhen served as the main book of Bozhou Qinghe County, and his son Zhang Xifan served as the literature of Xingyuanfu.

古文：甲戌，诏皇子齐王就前河府节度使康福第，以教坊乐宴会前、见任节度使。
现代文：二十一日，诏令皇子、齐王石重贵前往原河中府节度使康福的宅第，以教坊礼乐宴请原任和现任节度使。
English: On the 21st, the emperor ordered the prince and Qi Wang Shizhong to go to the residence of Kangfu, the former festival envoy to Central Prefecture, and invite the former and current festival envoys to a ceremonial banquet.

古文：《契丹国志》云：辽以晋招纳吐谷浑，遣使责让，晋高祖忧悒成疾。
现代文：二十五日，原庆州刺史米廷训被削夺现任官职，发配流放到麟州，是因为他强奸他妻子的哥哥的女儿。这个月，十六处州郡发生了蝗灾。
English: On the 25th, the former Gyeongju magistrate, Smi Tingxun, was stripped of his current official position and exiled to Linzhou because he raped his wife's brother's daughter. This month, locust plagues occurred in 16 prefectures.

古文：左威卫上将军卫审余卒，赠太子少保。
现代文：五月十六日，左威卫上将军卫审山余去世，追赠为太子少保。
English: On May 16th, General Wei Shan Yu passed away and was posthumously awarded the title of Prince Junior Protector.

古文：乙巳，尊皇太妃刘氏为皇太后。
现代文：二十二日，尊奉皇太妃刘氏为皇太后。
English: On the 22nd, Her Imperial Highness Crown Princess Liu was enthroned as empress dowager.

古文：襄州都部署高行周奏，安从进观察判官李光图出城请援，送赴阙。
现代文：这个月，各州郡有五处上奏发大水，十八处上奏遭受旱灾蝗灾。六月五日，襄州都部署高行周上奏，安从进的观察判官李光图出城请求外援而被抓获送往朝廷。
English: This month, five counties in each prefecture were affected by floods, and 18 counties were affected by droughts and locust plagues. On June 5, Yangzhou deployed high-altitude patrols for flood relief, and Li Guangtu, an observer magistrate from Anzong, went out of the city to request foreign aid and was arrested and sent to the imperial court.

古文：乙丑，帝崩于保昌殿，寿五十一。遗制齐王重贵于柩前即皇帝位，丧纪并依旧制，山陵务从节俭，马步诸军优纪并从嗣君处分。
现代文：十三日，高祖在保昌殿去世，终年五十一岁，留下遗书，令齐王石重贵在灵柩前继承皇位，丧葬礼仪全依旧有规制，安葬的陵墓力求节俭，马步各军的协调治理全由即位新君处理安排。
English: On the 13th, Gao Zu died in Baochang Hall at the age of fifty-one, leaving a suicide note, ordering Qi Wang Shiguang to succeed to the throne before the coffin. The funeral rites are still regulated, the mausoleum where he was buried strives to be frugal, and the coordination and management of the various armies in Maobu are all handled and arranged by the newly crowned emperor.

古文：八月，太常卿崔棁上谥曰圣文章武明德孝皇帝，庙号高祖。以其年十一月十日庚寅葬于显陵，宰臣和凝撰谥册哀册文。
现代文：八月，太常卿崔木兑进上谥号 圣文章武明德孝皇帝 ，庙号高祖，在这一年的十二月二十日安葬在显陵，宰相和凝撰写谥册和哀册文字。
English: In August, Tai Changqing Cui Mu was enshrined in the tomb of Emperor Wu Mingde Xiao, also known as Emperor Gaozu, and was buried in Xianling Mausoleum on December 20 of that year. Prime Minister He Jie wrote the epitaph and condolence book.

