古文：袁安字邵公，汝南汝阳人也。
现代文：◆袁安传，袁安，字邵公，汝南郡汝阳县人。
English: ◆ Yuan An Chuan, Yuan An, surnamed Shao Gong, from Ruyang County, Runan County.

古文：祖父良，习《孟氏易》，平帝时举明经，为太子舍人；建武初，至成武令。
现代文：祖父袁良，学习《孟氏易》，汉平帝时，因明经而被举荐，做了太子舍人。建武初年做了成武县令。
English: His grandfather, Yuan Liang, studied "Meng Shiyi" and was recommended by Emperor Han Ping because of his knowledge of the Ming Dynasty. He became the crown prince. In the first year of Jianwu, Yuan Liang became the governor of Chengwu County.

古文：安少传良学。
现代文：袁安年轻时继承祖父袁良的学问。
English: Yuan An inherited the learning of his grandfather Yuan Liang when he was young.

古文：为人严重有威，见敬于州里。
现代文：为人很庄重，有威信，被州里人敬重。
English: He is a very dignified man, he has authority, he is respected by the people of the state.

古文：初为县功曹，奉檄诣从事，从事因安致书于令。安曰： 公事自有邮驿，私请则非功曹所持。 
现代文：开始做县功曹，有一次，捧着檄文到州从事那里办事，从事托袁安捎封信给县令，袁安说 ：你是为公事，自有邮驿替你传送；如果是私事，就不应找我功曹。 
English: He began to be a county gong cao. Once, he went to the state to do business there, holding a letter, and engaged in entrusting Yuan Antao with a letter to the county magistrate. Yuan An said: You are on official business, and your own postman will deliver it for you; if it is a private matter, you should not look for my gong cao.

古文：辞不肯受，从事惧然而止。
现代文：辞谢不肯接信，办事人有些害怕，就不托他了。
English: The clerk was a little afraid, so he didn't ask him to do it.

古文：后举孝廉，除阴平长、任城令，所在吏人畏而爱之。
现代文：后来，被举荐为孝廉，先后做了阴平县长和任城县令。他所任职的地方，官吏百姓都很畏敬和爱戴他。
English: Later, he was recommended as a filial son, and successively became the Yinping County Governor and the Rencheng County Governor. Where he served, the officials and the people respected and loved him.

古文：永平十三年，楚王英谋为逆，事下郡复考。
现代文：永平十二年，楚王刘英阴谋反叛朝廷，案情交郡核实。
English: In the twelfth year of Yongping, Chu King Liu Ying conspired to rebel against the imperial court, and the case was submitted to the county for verification.

古文：明年，三府举安能理剧，拜楚郡太守。
现代文：第二年三府推荐袁安办案，认为他能处理复杂的案件，皇帝命他为楚郡太守。
English: The next year, the three prefectures recommended Yuan An to handle the case, believing that he could handle complex cases. The emperor appointed him as the governor of Chu County.

古文：是时英辞所连及系者数千人，显宗怒甚，吏案之急，迫痛自诬，死者甚众。
现代文：这时受楚王刘英的供辞牵连关押的有几千人，显宗大发脾气，办案人急于定案，严刑威逼不少人招供，判死罪的很多。
English: At this time, several thousand people were detained and implicated by Chu Wang Liu Ying's confession. Emperor Xuanzong lost his temper, the case handlers were eager to finalize the case, many people were forced to confess under severe torture, and many were sentenced to death.

古文：安到郡，不入府，先往案狱，理其无明验者，条上出之。
现代文：袁安到郡后，先不进衙门，而到监狱去，审理那些无明显证据的，逐一上报，让他们出狱。
English: After arriving at the county, Yuan Anc first did not enter the court, but went to the prison to try those without obvious evidence, report them one by one, and let them out of prison.

古文：府丞掾史皆叩头争，以为阿附反虏，法与同罪，不可。
现代文：府丞掾史都向袁安叩头力争，认为凡附和楚王刘英的，按法与刘英同罪，袁安不同意。
English: The prefectural governors and provincial governors all tried to kowtow to Yuan An, believing that anyone who sided with Chu King Liu Ying was, by law, guilty of the same crime as Liu Ying. Yuan An disagreed.

古文：安曰： 如有不合，太守自当坐之，不以相及也。 
现代文：袁安说 ：如有不合律例，我负完全责任，不连累你们。 
English: Yuan An said: If there is any violation of the law, I take full responsibility and will not involve you.

古文：遂分别具奏。
现代文：于是分别一一上报。
English: As a result, they were reported one by one.

古文：帝感悟，即报许，得出者四百余家。
现代文：皇帝感动觉悟，当即同意，被释放出狱的有四百余家。
English: The emperor was moved to consciousness and immediately agreed. More than four hundred families were released from prison.

古文：岁余，征为河南尹。
现代文：一年以后，袁安被征为河南尹。
English: A year later, Yuan An was conscripted as a Henan Yin.

古文：政号严明，然未曾以臧罪鞠人。
现代文：政令非常严明，但从来没有因贿赂罪来审讯人。
English: The decree is very strict, but no one has ever been tried for bribery.

古文：常称曰： 凡学仕者，高则望宰相，下则希牧守。锢人于圣世，尹所不忍为也。 
现代文：他常常说： 凡做官的人，高则望当宰相，下则希冀当州牧太守，在圣明之世禁锢人才，这是我不忍心去作的事。 
English: He often said, "For all officials, the highest hope is to become prime minister, and the lowest hope is to become the state patriarch, and to imprison talented people in the holy world. This is something I cannot bear to do.

古文：闻之者皆感激自励。
现代文：听到这话的人，都很感动，并勉励自己要廉洁奉公。
English: Those who heard this were very moved and encouraged themselves to serve the public with integrity.

古文：在职十年，京师肃然，名重朝廷。
现代文：袁安在职十年，京师的政纪很整饬，他的名声深得朝廷看重。
English: Yuan An has been in office for ten years, the political discipline of the Beijing division is very neat, and his reputation is highly valued by the imperial court.

古文：建初八年，迁太仆。
现代文：建初八年升为太仆。
English: In 1868, he was promoted to taibu.

古文：元和二年，武威太守孟云上书： 北虏既已和亲，而南部复往抄掠，北单于谓汉欺之，谋欲犯边。
现代文：元和二年，武威太守孟云上书道 ：北匈奴已经和亲了，可是南匈奴又去抢劫，北单于说汉朝欺骗他们，想进犯边疆。
English: In the first and second years of the Yuan Dynasty, Meng Yun, the military governor of Wuwei, wrote: The Northern Huns had made peace, but the Southern Huns went to rob again. The Northern Huns said that the Han Dynasty had deceived them and wanted to invade the frontier.

古文：宜还其生口，以安慰之。 
现代文：应该将俘虏发还，来安慰他们。 
English: The captives should be sent back to comfort them.

古文：诏百官议朝堂。公卿皆言夷狄谲诈，求欲无，既得生口，当复妄自夸大，不可开许。
现代文：皇帝下诏召集百官到朝廷商议，公卿都认为夷狄狡诈，贪心不足，得到俘虏以后，还会妄自夸大，不能开这个例。
English: The emperor issued an edict summoning hundreds of officials to the imperial court for deliberation. The nobles all thought that the Yidi were cunning and not greedy enough. After they were captured, they would continue to boast. They could not set such an example.

古文：安独曰： 北虏遣使奉献和亲，有得边生口者，辄以归汉，此明其畏威，而非先违约也。
现代文：袁安却说 ：北匈奴派使者进贡请求和亲，还把被掳去的人归还汉朝，这说明他们害怕大汉声威，而不是先违背条约。
English: Yuan An, however, said: The Northern Xiongnu sent envoys to demand tribute and friendship, and also returned the captives to the Han Dynasty, which shows that they were afraid of Han prestige, rather than breaking the treaty first.

古文：云以大臣典边，不宜负信于戎狄，还之足示中国优贷，而使边人得安，诚便。 
现代文：孟云以大臣的身份守卫边疆，不应对夷狄不讲信用。让俘虏回去，足以表明中国对他们的宽大，而使边境百姓得到安宁，真是太好了。 
English: Meng Yun guards the border as a minister, and should not be discredited. It is enough to let the prisoners go back to show that China is lenient towards them, and it is really great to give the border people peace.

古文：司徒桓虞改议从安。
现代文：司徒桓虞改变主意听从袁安。
English: Sittu Kanyu changed his mind and obeyed Yuan An.

古文：太尉郑弘、司空第五伦皆恨之。
现代文：太尉郑弘、司空第五伦等都恨袁安。
English: First Lieutenant Zheng Hong, Siku Fifth Lun and others all hated Yuan An.

古文：弘因大言激励虞曰： 诸言当还生口者，皆为不忠。 
现代文：郑弘还大声激怒桓虞说 ：凡是主张释放俘虏的，都是对皇上不忠。 
English: Zheng Hong also loudly infuriated Kanyu, saying: Anyone who advocates the release of prisoners is disloyal to the emperor.

古文：虞廷叱之，伦及大鸿胪韦彪各作色变容，司隶校尉举奏，安等皆上印绶谢。
现代文：桓虞当场叱责他。第五伦和大鸿胪韦彪都恼怒得脸上变了颜色，司隶校尉把全部情况奏明皇上，袁安等都把印绶交给皇帝请罪。
English: Kanyu reprimanded him on the spot. Both the Fifth Lun and the Grand Dragon Wei Biao were so angry that their faces changed color. Captain Sili reported the entire situation to the emperor, and Yuan An and the others all handed the seal to the emperor to plead guilty.

古文：肃宗诏报曰： 久议沉滞，各有所志。
现代文：肃宗下诏书道： 议政时间很长，说明各人看法不同。
English: Su Zong issued an imperial edict: The deliberation time is long, which shows that everyone has different opinions.

古文：盖事以议从，策由众定，得礼之容，寝嘿抑心，更非朝廷之福。君何尤而深谢？
现代文：朝廷大事应该多听议论，计策靠大家商定。说话时态度中正和税，符合礼节，固然很好；但遇事不敢吱声，决不是朝廷的福气，你们有何过错值得引咎自责的呢？
English: In matters of the imperial court, more discussion should be encouraged, and strategies should be agreed upon by all. It is certainly good to speak with a conciliatory attitude and in accordance with etiquette; however, it is by no means the imperial court's good fortune to remain silent in the face of adversity. What mistakes have you made that are worthy of self-reproach?

古文：其各冠履。 
现代文：还是把帽子戴上，鞋子穿上吧！ 
English: Put on your hat and shoes!

古文：帝竟从安议。
现代文：最后皇帝还是听从了袁安的建议。
English: In the end, the emperor followed Yuan An's advice.

古文：明年，代第五伦为司空。
现代文：第二年，袁安代替第五伦做了司空。
English: In the second year, Yuan An took the place of the fifth Ron and became a flight attendant.

古文：章和元年，代桓虞为司徒。
现代文：章和元年他又代替桓虞做了司徒。
English: In the first year of the Zhangwa era, he replaced Kanyu as the leading disciple.

古文：和帝即位，窦太后临朝，后兄车骑将军宪北击匈奴，安与太尉宋由、司空任隗及九卿诣朝堂上书谏，以为匈奴不犯边塞，而无故劳师远涉，损费国用，徼功万里，非社稷之计。
现代文：和帝即位，因年幼，窦太后临朝听政，太后的哥哥车骑将军窦宪向北攻打匈奴，袁安与太尉宋由、司空任隗和九卿一起到朝庭上书劝阻，认为匈奴没有进犯边塞，无故出兵远征，耗费国家钱财，邀功于万里之外，这不是应有的国策。
English: When Emperor He ascended to the throne, due to his young age, Dowager Empress Dowager Dou listened to the government, and her brother General Dou Xian rode north to attack the Huns. Yuan An, together with Lieutenant Song Yu, Secretary Kuo Rensheng, and the nine nobles, went to the imperial court to write a letter to dissuade them, arguing that the Huns did not invade the border fortress, sent troops on an expedition without reason, spent national money and resources, and solicited credit from thousands of miles away. This was not a proper national policy.

古文：书连上辄寝。
现代文：连上几封书都被扣住没有上报。
English: Even the last few books were withheld and not reported.

古文：宋由惧，遂不敢复署议，而诸卿稍自引止。
现代文：宋由有些害怕，不敢联连名上书了，而那些卿相也渐渐不吱声了。
English: Somewhat afraid, Song Yu did not dare to write down the names in succession, and those high-ranking officials gradually became silent.

古文：惟安独与任隗守正不移，至免冠朝堂固争者十上。
现代文：只有袁安与任隗仍坚持正道，毫不退让，甚至摘掉帽子到朝廷力争达十次以上。
English: Only Yuan An and Ren Zheng still adhered to the right path, made no concessions, and even took off their hats to the imperial court to strive for more than ten times.

古文：太后不听，众皆为之危惧，安正色自若。
现代文：太后还是不听，大家都替袁安捏了一把汗，但袁安还是镇定自如。
English: The empress dowager still wouldn't listen, and everyone worked up a sweat for Yuan An, but Yuan An remained calm and composed.

古文：窦宪既出，而弟卫尉笃、执金吾景各专威权，公于京师使客遮道夺人财物。
现代文：窦宪已经出兵打仗，他的弟弟卫尉窦笃、执金吾窦景各仗自己的权势，公然在京师放纵其爪牙拦路抢劫财物。
English: Dou Xian had already sent troops to fight the war, and his younger brothers Dou Tu, the guard lieutenant, and Dou Jing, the treasurer, each fought for their own power, and openly indulged their minions in roadblocks and robberies of property in Beijing.

古文：景又擅使乘驿施檄缘边诸郡，发突骑及善骑射有才力者，渔阳、雁门、上谷三郡各遣吏将送诣景第。
现代文：窦景又擅自派人乘驿马散发檄文到边境各郡，调集骑兵突击队和射手有本领的，命令渔阳、雁门、上谷三郡各派官吏将他们送到窦景住地。
English: Dou Jing also sent people on horseback to distribute the edict to the border counties without authorization, mobilized cavalry commandos and skilled archers, and ordered officials from the three counties of Yuyang, Yanmen, and Shanggu to send them to Dou Jing's residence.

古文：有司畏惮，莫敢言者。
现代文：有关官员害怕，没敢说半个不字。
English: The officials concerned were afraid and did not dare to say anything.

古文：安乃劾景擅发边兵，惊惑吏人，二千石不待符信而辄承景檄，当伏显诛。
现代文：袁安就弹劾窦景擅自调集边防军，惊扰官吏百姓，府尹不待符信而听从窦景安排，应该杀头示众。
English: Yuan An impeached Dou Jing for mobilizing border guards without authorization, alarming officials and the people. The government did not wait for the letter and obeyed Dou Jing's arrangement, and should show the public.

古文：又奏司隶校尉、河南尹阿附贵戚，无尽节之义，请免官案罪。
现代文：又上奏司隶校尉、河南尹讨好依附贵戚，没有坚持正义，请求罢免官职，依法治罪。
English: He also reported to the magistrate that Lieutenant Li and Henan Yin had cozied up to their relatives, failed to uphold justice, and requested that they be removed from their posts, which was a crime according to the law.

古文：并寝不报。
现代文：这些奏折都被扣住没有上报。
English: These reports were withheld and not reported.

古文：宪、景等日益横，尽树其亲党宾客于名都大郡，皆赋敛吏人，更相赂遗，其余州郡，亦复望风从之。
现代文：而窦宪、窦景更加专横，在各名都大邑布置他们的亲信，都向官吏百姓征收赋税，收取贿赂，其余州郡也都望风仿效。
English: But Dou Xian and Dou Jing were even more despotic. They placed their cronies in every major city and town, collected taxes and bribes from officials and commoners, and the rest of the states and counties followed suit.

古文：安与任隗举奏诸二千石，又它所连及贬秩免官者四十余人，窦氏大恨。
现代文：袁安与任隗一道检举那些二千石府尹，以及与之牵连降级罢官的有四十多人，窦氏一帮怀恨在心。
English: Yuan An and Ren Hao jointly prosecuted those two thousand koku Fufu Yin, and there were more than forty people who were involved in the demotion and dismissal, and Dou's gang held a grudge.

古文：但安、隗素行高，亦未有以害之。
现代文：但袁安、任隗一向品行高尚，也没有办法加害他们。
English: However, Yuan An and Ren Wei have always been of high moral character, and there is no way to harm them.

古文：时，窦宪复出屯武威。
现代文：当时窦宪又出兵驻武威。
English: At that time, Dou Xian also sent troops to Wuwei.

古文：明年，北单于为耿夔所破，遁走乌孙，塞北地空，余部不知所属。
现代文：第二年，北单于被耿夔所攻破，逃到乌桓去了，塞北空无人管，匈奴余部不知归谁管属。
English: In the second year, Beidanyu was defeated by Geng Yao and fled to Wuhuan. No one was in charge of Beidanyu, and no one knew who was in charge of the rest of Xiongnu.

古文：宪日矜己功，欲结恩北虏，乃上立降者左鹿蠡王阿佟为北单于，置中郎将领护，如南单于故事。
现代文：窦宪每天夸耀自己的功绩，想用恩惠与北匈奴余部搞好关系，于是上书立投降的左鹿蠡王阿佟做北单于，设中郎将领护，像过去立南单于那么样。
English: Dou Xian boasted of his exploits every day, and wanted to use his favor to make good relations with the rest of the Northern Huns. Therefore, he wrote a letter to the surrendering Zuo Lugao Wang Aqi to do the north single yu, and set up a middle man to take care of him, just like the south single yu in the past.

古文：事下公卿议，太尉宋由、太常丁鸿、光禄勋耿秉等十人议可许。
现代文：皇上把这事交给公卿讨论，太尉宋由、太常丁鸿、光禄勋耿秉等十人认为可以这么办。
English: The emperor referred the matter to the court nobles for discussion, and ten people, including Tai Ye Song Yu, Tai Chang Ding Hong, and Guang Lu Xun Geng Bing, thought that this could be done.

古文：安与任隗奏，以为 光武招怀南虏，非谓可永安内地，正以权时之算，可得御北狄故也。
现代文：袁安与任隗上奏，认为 光武帝招守南匈奴，并不是让他永远安居内地，而是一个权宜之计，是出于想让他们去抵抗北匈奴的缘故。
English: Yuan An and Ren Zheng made an appeal, arguing that Emperor Guangwu's invitation to defend the Southern Huns was not to let him live safely in the interior forever, but a stopgap measure, for the sake of wanting them to resist the Northern Huns.

古文：今朔漠既定，宜令南单于反其北庭，并领降众，无缘复更立阿佟，以增国费 。
现代文：现在北方已经安定，应该让南单于回到北边去，一起领导投降的群众，不必再立阿佟来增加国家的负担。 
English: Now that the north has been stabilized, Nan Dan should be allowed to return to the north to lead the surrendering masses together, and there is no need to set up an imam to increase the burden on the state.

古文：宗正刘方、大司农尹睦同安议。
现代文：宗正刘方、大司农尹睦赞同袁安的意见。
English: Zongzheng Liu Fang and Daizi Nong Yinmou agreed with Yuan An's opinion.

古文：事奏，未以时定。
现代文：事情报上去了，没有及时决定下来。
English: The information went up, but the decision was not made in time.

古文：安惧宪计遂行，乃独上封事曰：臣闻功有难图，不可豫见；事有易断，较然不疑。
现代文：袁安害怕窦宪一意孤行，于是单独上密封奏章道 ：我听说功业有些难求，因为不可预见；有些事容易判断，因为道理明摆着不必怀疑。
English: Yuan An was afraid of Dou Xian's single-minded pursuit, so he played the seal separately and said: I heard that some deeds are difficult to seek, because they are unpredictable; some things are easy to judge, because the truth is clear and there is no need to doubt.

古文：伏惟光武皇帝本所以立南单于者，欲安南定北之策也，恩德甚备，故匈奴遂分，边境无患。
现代文：我想光武帝立南单于的本意，无非是想使南北单于得到安定，恩德很齐备，所以匈奴分成两块，边境平安无事。
English: I think Emperor Guangwu's original intention in establishing the Southern Separation Zone was nothing more than to stabilize the Southern and Northern Separation Zones, and Ende was well prepared, so the Xiongnu was divided into two parts, and the border was safe.

古文：孝明皇帝奉承先意，不敢失坠，赫然命将，爰伐塞北。
现代文：孝明皇帝继承先帝遗愿，不敢失掉传统，于是派遣大将，出兵攻打塞北。
English: Emperor Xiaoming, inheriting the last wishes of the former emperor, did not dare to lose the tradition, so he sent a general to attack the north of Tibet.

古文：至乎章和之初，降者十余万人，议者欲置之滨塞，东至辽东，太尉宋由、光禄勋耿秉皆以为失南单于心，不可，先帝从之。
现代文：到了章帝、和帝初年，降汉的有十多万人，当时有人建议将他们安置海滨，东到辽东，太尉宋由、光禄勋耿秉都认为这样做将使南单于失望，不能同意，先帝听从了。
English: In the first year of Emperor Zhang and Emperor He, there were more than one hundred thousand people in the Han Dynasty. At that time, it was suggested that they should be placed on the seashore, east to Liaodong. Taifeng Songyu and Guanglu Xun Gengbing both believed that doing so would disappoint Nandan and could not agree, and the former emperor obeyed.

古文：陛下奉承洪业，大开疆宇，大将军远师讨伐，席卷北庭，此诚宣明祖宗，崇立弘勋者也。
现代文：陛下继承大业，大开疆土，大将军远征讨伐，把北匈奴全部消灭，这真是宣明祖宗的宏愿，建立大功啊。
English: His Majesty inherited a great cause, opened up the territory, led an expeditionary campaign, and wiped out the Northern Xiongnu. This is truly the great wish of the ancestors and a great achievement.

古文：宜审其终，以成厥初。
现代文：但宜于审慎处理，完成祖先最初的设想。
English: However, it is advisable to handle it carefully and complete the original idea of the ancestors.

古文：伏念南单于屯，先父举众归德，自蒙恩以来，四十余年。
现代文：我想到南单于屯即屠何的父亲带领众人投降汉朝，蒙受国恩已经四十多年。
English: I thought of Nan Shan Yu Tun, that is, Tu He's father led the people to surrender to the Han Dynasty, and has received the grace of the state for more than forty years.

古文：三帝积累，以遗陛下。陛下深宜尊述先志，成就其业。
现代文：经过三代，传到陛下应该遵照先帝遗志，成就其大业。
English: After three generations, it has been passed down to his majesty that he should follow the last wishes of the former emperor and accomplish his great cause.

古文：况屯首唱大谋，空尽北虏，辍而弗图，更立新降，以一朝之计，违二世之规，失信于所养，建立于无功。
现代文：何况屯首先提出意见，让北虏全部归顺，现不让他出来领导，另立新降的阿佟，用一时的主意，违背三代的遗规，对培养的屯失信，而树立无功的阿佟。
English: What's more, Tun first proposed the idea of making all the Northern Ruthenians submit, but now he is not allowed to lead, and a newly-demoted grandma will be set up, using a temporary idea, violating the legacy of three generations, losing faith in the training of Tun, and setting up a useless grandma.

古文：由、秉实知旧议，而欲背弃先恩。
现代文：宋由、耿秉本来知道原来的打算，却想背弃先王的恩德。
English: Song Yu and Geng Bing originally knew the original plan, but they wanted to betray the kindness of the former king.

古文：夫言行君子之枢机，赏罚理国之纲纪。
现代文：大凡一言一行，都是君子立身的关键，有赏有罚，本是治国的根本。
English: Every great word and deed is the key to a gentleman's success. There are rewards and punishments. This is the essence of governing the country.

古文：《论语》曰； 言忠信，行笃敬，虽蛮貊行焉。 
现代文：《论语》上说过： 言语讲求忠信，品行力求笃实虔敬，即使走到野蛮的外国也行得通呀！ 
English: It was said in the Analects: "Speak words of faithfulness, and practice deeds of sincere piety. Even if you go to a barbaric foreign country, it will work!"

古文：今若失信于一屯，则百蛮不敢复保誓矣。
现代文：现在如失信于一个南单于，那么其他的异族都不敢保证实践自己的誓言了。
English: Now, if you break faith with a Southern Han, then other foreign ethnic groups will not dare to guarantee the implementation of their vows.

古文：又乌桓、鲜卑新杀北单于，凡人之情，咸畏仇雠，今立其弟，则二虏怀怨。
现代文：又乌桓、鲜卑刚杀掉北单于，一般人的常情，都害怕人家报复，现在立了他们的弟弟，那么南北二虏就怀恨在心。
English: In addition, Wu Huan and Xian Bei just killed Beidan Yu, and ordinary people are afraid of retaliation. Now they have set up their younger brother, so the North and South are holding grudges.

古文：兵、食可废，信不可去。
现代文：古人认为，武器和食物有时可以不顾，惟有信用不可丢掉。
English: The ancients believed that weapons and food can sometimes be disregarded, but trust must not be lost.

古文：且汉故事，供给南单于费直岁一亿九十余万，西域岁七千四百八十万。
现代文：况且遵照汉朝的旧例，供给南单于费用每年一亿九十余万，供给西域每年七千四百八十万。
English: Moreover, in accordance with the old practice of the Han Dynasty, the supply of South China alone will cost more than 109 million yuan per year, and the supply of the western region will cost 74.8 million yuan per year.

古文：今北庭弥远，其费过倍，是乃空尽天下，而非建策之要也。
现代文：现在北匈奴很远，费用必须加倍，这是让国库空虚，而不是处理国家大计的好办法。 
English: Now that the North Huns are far away, the cost must be doubled, which is a good way to empty the treasury, but not to deal with the national budget.

古文：诏下其议，安又与宪更相难折。
现代文：皇帝下诏让大家讨论。袁安又与窦宪展开针锋相对的辩论。
English: The emperor issued an edict to let everyone discuss the matter, and Yuan An and Dou Xianrong engaged in a tit-for-tat debate.

古文：宪险急负势，言辞骄讦，至诋毁安，称光武诛韩歆、戴涉故事，安终不移。
现代文：窦宪很阴险地仗恃自己的权势，言词骄傲，揭人之短，甚至恶言骂袁安，并提出光武帝杀韩歆、戴涉的例子来威逼袁安，袁安始终寸步不让。
English: Dou Xian very insidiously took advantage of his own power, was proud of his words, belittled others, and even cursed Yuan An. He also raised the example of Emperor Guangwu killing Han Zang and interfering with Dai to intimidate Yuan An, but Yuan An never gave in.

古文：宪竟立匈奴降者右鹿蠡王於除鞬为单于，后遂反叛，卒和安策。
现代文：最后窦宪还是立了匈奴降将右鹿蠡王於除建做了单于，不久就反叛了，正像袁安预计的那样。
English: In the end, Dou Xian still made the Xiongnu subordinate to the Right Deer King, and soon rebelled, just as Yuan An expected.

古文：安以天子幼弱，外戚擅权，每朝会进见，及与公卿言国家事，未尝不噫呜流涕。
现代文：袁安认为天子幼弱，外戚当权，每次上朝，和公卿谈到国家大事，没有不痛哭流涕的。
English: Yuan An believed that the heavenly son was young and weak, and that the maternal relative was in power. Every time he went to the court and spoke with the nobles about national affairs, there was no one who did not shed tears.

古文：自天子及大臣皆恃赖之。
现代文：从天子到大臣都依仗他。
English: From the son of heaven to the minister, all rely on him.

古文：四年春，薨，朝廷痛惜焉。
现代文：四年春，袁安死了，朝廷官员们非常痛惜。
English: In the spring of the fourth year, Yuan An died, and the imperial officials were very sorry.

古文：后数月，窦氏败，帝始亲万机，追思前议者邪正之节，乃除安子赏为郎。
现代文：过了几个月，窦氏垮台了，皇帝开始亲自执政，回想以前议论国事的正反两派的情况，于是封袁安的儿子袁赏为郎。
English: A few months later, the Dou clan collapsed, and the emperor began to govern in person. Recalling the situation of the two factions that had previously discussed state affairs, Yuan Yuan, the son of Yuan An, became the heir.

古文：子孙之盛，不亦宜乎？
现代文：罢免宋由，用尹睦做太尉，刘方做司空。尹睦，河南人，死在官位上。
English: Song Yu was removed from his post, and Yin Mu was made a captain and Liu Fang a secretary. Yin Mu, a native of Henan Province, died in office.

古文：张字孟侯，汝南细阳人，赵王张敖之后也。
现代文：刘方，平原人，后来犯了罪，免职回家，自杀了。◆张酉甫传，张酉甫字孟侯，汝南细阳人，赵王张敖的后代。
English: Liu Fang, a man of the plains, later committed a crime, was dismissed from his post, returned home, and committed suicide. ◆ Zhang Xifu's biography, Zhang Xifu, surnamed Meng Hou, a native of Xiyang, Yunnan Province, a descendant of Zhao Wang Zhang Ye.

古文：敖子寿，封细阳之池阳乡，后废，因家焉。
现代文：张敖之子张寿，封细阳之池阳乡，后来被废，于是在此安家。
English: Zhang Shou's son, Zhang Shou, founded Xieyang's Chihyang Township, which was later abolished, and made his home here.

古文：少从祖父充受《尚书》，能传其业，又事太常桓荣。
现代文：张酉甫年少时从祖父张充学《尚书》，能继承其学业。又侍奉太常桓荣。
English: When he was young, Zhang Xiufu learned "Shangshu" from his grandfather Zhang Cheng, and was able to inherit his studies. He also served Taizhang Huanrong.

古文：勤力不怠，聚徒以百数。
现代文：勤恳不懈怠，聚徒上百人。
English: Diligently and tirelessly, hundreds of people gathered.

古文：永平九年，显宗为四姓小侯开学于南宫，置《五经》师。
现代文：永平九年，显宗为四姓小侯开学于南宫，设《五经》师。
English: In the 9th year of the Yongping era, Xianzong, the fourth name of Xiaohong, began to study in the South Palace, setting up the "Five Classics" division.

古文：以《尚书》教授，数讲于御前，以论难当意，除为郎，赐车马衣裳，遂令入授皇太子。
现代文：张酉甫用《尚书》教授门徒，数次在御前讲学。因论难合乎君主之意，除为郎，赐车马衣裳，便叫他入宫授皇太子。
English: Zhang Xiufu used "Shang Shu" to teach his disciples, and lectured in front of the emperor several times. Because the theory was difficult to meet the monarch's wishes, in addition to being a son, he was given a chariot, a horse and clothes, and he was asked to enter the palace to confer the crown prince.

古文：为人质直，守经义，每侍讲间隙，数有匡正之辞，以严见惮。
现代文：张酉甫为人质朴正直，遵守经义，每次侍讲之余，多次有匡正过失之辞，因为严肃使人害怕。
English: Zhang Xuanfu was a simple and honest person, abiding by the teachings of the sutras. In addition to each lecture, he often spoke of rectifying mistakes, because seriousness makes people afraid.

古文：及肃宗即位，擢为侍中、虎贲中郎将。
现代文：等到肃宗即位，提升张酉甫做侍中、虎贲中郎将。
English: When Emperor Suzong ascended to the throne, Zhang Xifu was promoted to the position of chamberlain and vice-commander of the Tiger Regiment.

古文：数月，出为东郡太守。
现代文：几个月后，出为东郡守。
English: A few months later, he became the governor of Higashi County.

古文：自以尝经亲近，未悟见出，意不自得，上疏辞曰： 臣愚以经术给事左右，少不更职，不晓文法，猥当剖符典郡，班政千里，必有负恩辱位之咎。
现代文：张酉甫自以为曾经亲近过皇上，未悟见出，意思有些不自得。于是上疏辞道 ：臣愚把经术给事左右，少不更职，不晓文法，应当剖符典郡，班政千里，一定有负恩辱位的过错。
English: Zhang Xiufu thought that he had been close to the emperor, but he did not realize it, and his meaning was a little self-satisfied. So Shang Shou said: the vassal was stupid to give the sutra to the matter, he did not know the position, he did not know the grammar, he should dissect the county of the symbols, and he was thousands of miles away from the government, he must have the fault of losing the position of honor.

古文：臣窃私自分，殊不虑出城阙，冀蒙留恩，托备冗官，群僚所不安，耳目所闻见，不敢避好丑。 
现代文：臣私下自思，殊不考虑出城阙，希望留恩，托备冗官，群僚所不安，耳目所闻见，不敢避好丑。 
English: Privately, the vassal thinks to himself, especially not considering leaving the city, hoping to retain favor, preparing for redundant officials, colleagues are uneasy, ears and eyes have heard, and dare not avoid the ugly.

古文：诏报曰： 经云： 身虽在外，乃心不离王室。 
现代文：诏回报说 ：经书上说 ：身虽在外，乃心不离王室。 
English: The imperial edict replied, "The scripture says, 'Though I am away from home, yet my heart is not far from the imperial palace.'

古文：典城临民，益所以报效也，好丑必上，不在远近。
现代文：典城临民，更是极效哩。好丑必上，不在远近。
English: It is even more effective to be close to the people. If you are ugly, you must be on top, not far away.

古文：今赐装钱三十万，其亟之官。 
现代文：今赐装钱三十万，赶快到任上去吧。 
English: Now give me 300,000 yuan, and let's hurry to the post.

古文：虽儒者，而性刚断。
现代文：张酉甫虽是儒生，但性格刚断。
English: Although Zhang Yifu was a Confucian, his character was rigid.

古文：下车擢用义勇，搏击豪强。
现代文：到任后便提拔义勇，搏击豪强。
English: After taking office, he promoted Yiyong, a strong fighter.

古文：长吏有杀盗徒者，辄案之，以为令长受臧，犹不至死，盗徒皆饥寒佣保，何足穷其法乎！
现代文：长吏有杀盗徒的，张酉甫就查处之，以为令长受赃，还不至死罪，盗徒都是饥寒亻庸保之人，怎能穷尽其法呢！
English: If a magistrate killed a thief, Zhang Xifu would investigate and punish him. He thought that if he sentenced the magistrate to be beaten, it would not be a capital crime. Thieves are people who are hungry, cold and unprotected. How can he exhaust his methods?

古文：郡吏王青者，祖父翁，与前太守翟义起兵攻王莽，及义败，余众悉降，翁独守节力战，莽遂燔烧之。
现代文：郡吏王青，祖父王翁，与前太守翟义起兵攻打王莽，等到翟义失败，余众全部投降，王翁独自守节力战，王莽就用火烧他。
English: The county magistrate Wang Qing, the grandfather Wang Weng, together with the former grand marshal Jiyi, raised an army to fight Wang Mang. When Jiyi failed, the rest of the people all surrendered. Wang Weng fought alone, and Wang Mang burned him with fire.

古文：父隆，建武初为都尉功曹，青为小史。
现代文：父王隆，建武初年做都尉功曹，王青为小史。
English: His father, Wang Long, was a captain in the first year of Jianwu, and Wang Qing was a junior officer.

古文：与父俱从都尉行县，道遇贼，隆以身卫全都尉，遂死于难；青亦被矢贯咽，音声流渴。
现代文：与父都跟都尉行县，路上遇贼，王隆用身子保卫全都尉，于是死于难；王贲也被箭射中咽喉，声音嘶哑。
English: He and his father were traveling with the captain when they were attacked by thieves on the road. Wang Long used his body to protect all the captains, and died from the ordeal. Wang Yao was also shot in the throat with an arrow, and his voice was hoarse.

古文：前郡守以青身有金夷，竟不能举。
现代文：前郡守认为王青身有全伤，竟不能举。
English: The former county governor thought that Wang Qing was completely injured and could not lift.

古文：见之，叹息曰： 岂有一门忠义而爵赏不及乎？ 
现代文：张酉甫见了，叹息道： 难道有一家忠义而爵赏不到的吗？ 
English: Zhang Xiufu saw this and sighed, "Is there a family that is loyal but cannot be awarded a peerage?

古文：遂擢用极右曹，乃上疏荐青三世死节，宜蒙显异。
现代文：于是提拔他作极右曹，还上疏荐王青家三代死节之事，应蒙受显异之赐。
English: As a result, he was promoted to the position of ultra-right Cao, and he was also recommended to be the leader of the three generations of the Wang Qing family on the day of their death.

古文：奏下三公，由此为司空所辟。
现代文：奏文下达给三公，由此被司空所授职。
English: The report was sent to the three princes, and he was appointed to the post by Siku.

古文：由出后，帝每见诸王师傅，常言： 张前入侍讲，屡有谏正，恻恻，出于诚心，可谓有史鱼之风矣。 
现代文：自张酉甫出去后，帝每见诸王师傅，常说 ：张酉甫从前当侍讲时，屡有谏正，言语忠正恳切，出于一片诚心。可说有史鱼的风度了。 
English: After Zhang Xiufu left, the emperor met with all the kings' masters and often said, "When Zhang Xiufu used to give lectures, he often spoke with sincerity, and his words were sincere and sincere. It can be said that he had the demeanor of a historical fish."

古文：元和二年，东巡狩，幸东郡，引及门生并郡县掾史并会庭中。帝先备弟子之仪，使讲《尚书》一篇，然后修君臣之礼。
现代文：元和二年，帝东巡狩，巡幸东郡，引张酉甫和他的门生及郡县掾史集会庭中，皇帝先备弟子之仪，使张酉甫讲《尚书》一篇，然后修君臣之礼。
English: In the first and second years of the Yuan Dynasty, when the emperor went on a hunting tour to the East and a tour to the fortunate East County, and brought Zhang Xifu and his disciples and the county and county historians to the assembly court, the emperor first prepared the disciple's ceremony, made Zhang Xifu speak an article of "Shang Shu," and then performed the monarch and minister's salute.

古文：赏赐殊特，莫不沾洽。
现代文：赏赐特殊，没有不认为恰当的。
English: A special award is not considered out of place.

古文：视事十五年，和帝初，迁魏郡太守。
现代文：张酉甫做官十五年，和帝初年，升为魏郡太守。
English: Zhang Xiufu served as an official for fifteen years, and in the first year of Emperor He, he was promoted to the governor of Wei County.

古文：郡人郑据时为司隶校尉，奏免执金吾窦景。
现代文：郡人郑据当时作司隶校尉，奏呈免去执金吾窦景之职。
English: At that time, county resident Zheng Quan, who was a lieutenant of the Sili school, submitted a report to be relieved of his duties as the head of the Jinwu Doujing.

古文：景后复位，遣掾夏猛私谢曰： 郑据小人，为所侵冤。
现代文：窦景后来复位，派掾夏猛私谢酉甫道 ：郑据是小人，我被他所侵犯而受冤。
English: Dou Jing was later reinstated, and sent Xia Mengyi to Xie Junfu. Xie Junfu said: Zheng Zi is a villain, I was wronged by him.

古文：闻其兒为吏，放纵狼藉。
现代文：听说他的儿子为吏，放纵狼藉。
English: I heard that his son is a bureaucrat, and he's a loose cannon.

古文：取是曹子一人，足以惊百。 
现代文：取这曹子一人，是以警百。 
English: It takes a hundred policemen to arrest this man.

古文：大怒，即收猛系狱，檄言执金吾府，疑猛与据子不平，矫称卿意，以报私仇。
现代文：张酉甫大怒，立即将夏猛关进牢狱，檄言执金吾府，疑夏猛与郑据之子不平，矫称您的意见，以报私仇。
English: Zhang Xiufu was furious and immediately put Xia Meng in prison. He criticized the leader of the Jinwu government, suspected that Xia Meng was not on an equal footing with Zheng Zuo's son, and pretended to be your opinion to take personal revenge.

古文：会有赎罪令，猛乃得出。
现代文：碰上有赎罪之令，夏猛才得出狱。
English: Xia Meng only got out of prison when there was an atonement order.

古文：顷之，征入为河南尹。
现代文：不久，征为河南尹。
English: Soon after, he was conscripted as Henan Yin.

古文：窦景家人复击伤市卒，吏捕得之，景怒，遣缇骑侯海等五百人欧伤市丞。
现代文：窦景家人又击伤市卒，官吏捕得之，窦景怒，派缇骑侯海等五百人殴伤市丞。
English: Dou Jing's family members also injured a city policeman, officials arrested him, Dou Jing was angry, and sent 500 people to ride Houhai and beat up the city magistrate.

古文：部吏杨章等穷究，正海罪，徙朔方。
现代文：张酉甫之部吏杨章等穷究，正侯海之罪，充军朔方。
English: Yang Zhang, a member of Zhang Xifu's staff, and others were investigated and found guilty of being vassals of the emperor. They were forced to join the army.

古文：景忿怨，乃移书辟章等六人为执金吾吏，欲因报之。
现代文：窦景忿怒，便移书提杨章等六人为执金吾吏，想借此报复他们。
English: Dou Jing was furious, so he moved the book to mention Yang Zhang and six others as the executors of the money, hoping to use this to take revenge on them.

古文：章等惶恐，入白，愿自引臧罪，以辞景命。
现代文：杨章等害怕，报告张酉甫，愿自引臧罪，以辞景命。
English: Yang Zhang and others were afraid and reported to Zhang Xiufu that they were willing to incriminate themselves and take their own lives.

古文：即上言其状。
现代文：张酉甫即上书明其情况。
English: Zhang Yifu immediately wrote to clarify the situation.

古文：窦太后诏报： 自今执金吾辟吏，皆勿遣。 
现代文：窦太后诏报说： 从今后执金吾辟吏，皆勿遣。 
English: The Dowager Empress Dowager Dou issued an edict saying, "From now on, do not send anyone to carry out the duties of the Emperor."

古文：及窦氏败，乃上疏曰： 臣实愚蠢，不及大体，以为窦氏虽伏厥辜，而罪刑未著，后世不见其事，但闻其诛，非所以垂示国典，贻之将来。
现代文：等到窦氏失败，张酉甫便上疏道： 臣实愚蠢，不及大体，以为窦氏虽然伏了罪，而罪行没有揭露，后世人没有看见他的罪行，只听说他被杀了，不是垂示国典，留给将来的办法。
English: After Dou's defeat, Zhang Xuanfu said: Subordinates are stupid, they don't understand the big picture. They think that although Dou committed a crime, his crime wasn't revealed. Later, the world didn't see his crime, but only heard that he was killed. This is not the way to show the country's code and leave it for the future.

古文：宜下理官，与天下平之。
现代文：应该下达给理官，让天下人共同评论。
English: It should be sent to the magistrate for the whole world to comment on.

古文：方宪等宠贵，群臣阿附唯恐不及，皆言宪受顾命之托，怀伊、吕之忠，至乃复比邓夫人于文母。
现代文：当窦宪等人宠贵时，群臣讨好他们还怕来不及，都说窦宪受顾命之托，怀着伊尹、吕尚的忠心，甚至把邓夫人比之于文王之妻。
English: When Dou Xian and others were favored, the courtiers were afraid that it was too late to please them. They all said that Dou Xian was entrusted by God with the loyalty of Yi Yin and Lushan, and even compared Mrs. Deng to the wife of King Wen.

古文：今严威既行，皆言当死，不复顾其前后，考折厥衷。
现代文：现在严威既行，都说该当死罪，不再顾其前后，考析其衷。
English: Now, as long as they are strict, they all say that it should be a capital crime, and no longer pay attention to its front and back, and analyze its heart.

古文：臣伏见夏阳侯瑰，每存忠善，前与臣言，常有尽节之心，检敕宾客，未尝犯法。
现代文：臣看到夏阳侯，每存忠善之心，前次与臣说，常有尽节之心，检敕宾客，不曾犯法。
English: The vassal saw that Xia Yang Hou was always loyal and kind, and said to the vassal the previous time that he often had a heart of filial piety, checked the guests, and never violated the law.

古文：臣闻王政骨肉之刑，有三宥之义，过厚不过薄。
现代文：臣听说骨肉之刑，有三宥之义，过厚不过薄。
English: The vassal heard that the punishment of the flesh and blood, there are three yoke of righteousness, too thick but not thin.

古文：今议者为瑰选严能相，恐其迫切，必不完免，宜裁加贷宥，以崇厚德。 
现代文：今议者认为是选严能相，恐他迫切，必不完免，应该裁加宽贷，以崇厚德。 
English: Now, the legislator thinks that the strict choice is the best, and he is afraid that he is urgent and will not be forgiven. It is necessary to reduce and increase the loan, and to respect the virtues.

古文：和帝感言，徙瑰封，就国而已。
现代文：和帝被张酉甫的话感动，改变之封号，回封地去了。
English: Emperor He was moved by Zhang Xiufu's words, changed his seal number, and went back to his fief.

古文：永元五年，迁为太仆。
现代文：永元五年，升迁张酉甫为太仆。
English: In the fifth year of the Yong Yuan Dynasty, Zhang Xifu was promoted to the position of Taibu.

古文：数月，代尹睦为太尉。
现代文：数月后，代尹睦为太尉。
English: A few months later, he was promoted to the rank of captain.

古文：数上疏以疾乞身，荐魏郡太守徐防自代。
现代文：几次上疏因病请求退职，荐魏郡太守徐防代替自己。
English: Several times, because of illness, Shang Soo requested retirement and recommended Wei County Governor Xu Bao to replace him.

古文：帝不许，使中黄门问病，加以珍羞，赐钱三十万。
现代文：皇上不允许，使中黄门问病，加赐珍馐，赐钱三十万。
English: The emperor didn't allow it, so Zhonghuangmen asked for a cure, and he also gave Zhenyao and 300,000 yuan.

古文：遂称笃。
现代文：张酉甫的病更重。
English: Zhang Xiufu's illness is more serious.

古文：时子蕃以郎侍讲，帝因令小黄门敕蕃曰： 阴阳不和，万人失所，朝廷望公思惟得失，与国同心，而托病自洁，求去重任，谁当与吾同忧责者？
现代文：当时子张蕃以郎作侍讲，皇帝于是派小黄门束力蕃道 ：阴阳不和，万人流离失所，朝廷希望公考虑得失，与国家一条心，而托病自洁，求去重任，谁和我共同忧责呢？
English: At that time, Zhang Ye's son Zhang Rong used his brother as an assistant speaker, and the emperor then sent Xiao Huangmenzhu to force his way: Yin and Yang are not at peace, thousands of people have been displaced, the court hopes to consider gains and losses fairly, and have one heart with the country, but to make excuses for illness, to purify oneself, and to seek heavy responsibilities, who is jointly responsible with me?

古文：非有望地断金也。
现代文：不是有望于同心同德哩。
English: It is not possible to work in the same direction.

古文：司徒固疾，司空年老，公其伛偻，勿露所敕。 
现代文：司徒刘方身患固疾，司空张奋年岁已老，希望公佝偻从命，勿露所束力。 
English: Liu Fang, a scholar, is suffering from a chronic illness, and Zhang Fen, a scholar, is old. He hopes that the public will follow his orders and not reveal their power.

古文：皇恐诣阙谢，还复视事。
现代文：张酉甫于是害怕到朝廷谢罪，回到原职视事。
English: Zhang Xiufu was afraid to go to the imperial court to apologize, so he returned to his original post to look into the matter.

古文：虽在公位，而父常居田里，每有迁职，辄一诣京师。
现代文：张酉甫虽在公位，而父亲常居田里，张酉甫每次职务变动，就到京师一次。
English: Although Zhang Xiufu was in a public position, and his father often lived in the fields, Zhang Xiufu went to Beijing to study once every time his position changed.

古文：尝来候，适会岁节，公卿罢朝，俱诣府奉酒上寿，极欢卒日，众人皆庆羡之。
现代文：欣赏张酉甫的人，每逢岁节，公卿罢朝之后，都到张酉甫的府上捧酒祝寿，尽欢一天，众人都很羡慕他。
English: People who admire Zhang Xifu go to Zhang Xifu's residence to celebrate his birthday every New Year's Day, after the nobles' retirement from the imperial court. Everyone envies him.

古文：及父卒，既葬，诏遣使赍牛、酒为释服。
现代文：等到父死，既葬，诏书派使者拿着牛酒替他解除丧服。
English: When his father died and was buried, the emperor sent an envoy with ox wine to take off his mourning clothes.

古文：后以事与司隶校尉晏称会于朝堂，从容谓称曰： 三府辟吏，多非其人。 
现代文：后来因事与司隶校尉晏称会于朝堂，张酉甫从容对晏称道 ：三府征召的吏，多数用人不当。 
English: Later, due to an incident, he was summoned to the Imperial Palace together with the sub-lieutenant of the Imperial Guard, Zhang Yifu. Zhang Yifu calmly said to the sub-lieutenant: Most of the officials conscripted from the three prefectures were improperly employed.

古文：称归，即奏令三府各实其掾史。
现代文：晏称回后，即奏令三府各查实其掾史。
English: Immediately after the announcement, the three prefectures were ordered to verify their own history.

古文：本以私言，不意称奏之，甚怀恨。
现代文：张酉甫本来是私人谈话，没想到晏称会上奏，很怀恨。
English: Zhang Yifu was originally a private conversation, I did not expect that he would falsely claim that he would play it, and he held a grudge.

古文：会复共谢阙下，因责让于称，称辞语不顺，怒，遂廷叱之，称乃劾奏有怨言。
现代文：碰上又一道谢阙下，张酉甫于是责备晏称。晏称词语不顺，张酉甫发怒，就在廷上叱骂，晏称便劾奏张酉甫有怨言。
English: Encountering another thank-you, Zhang Xifu then rebuked him, saying that the words were not appropriate. Zhang Xifu became angry and scolded him in court. He then accused Zhang Xifu of complaining.

古文：天子以先帝师，有诏公卿、博士、朝臣会议。
现代文：天子因为张酉甫是先帝之师，有诏给公卿、博士、朝臣会议。
English: Because Zhang Xifu was the former emperor's teacher, Tianzi issued an edict to the court nobles, doctors, and the courtier conference.

古文：司徒吕盖奏位居三司，知公门有仪，不屏气鞠躬以须诏命，反作色大言，怨让使臣，不可以示四远。
现代文：司徒吕盖奏张酉甫位居三司，知道公门有仪节，不屏气鞠躬以待诏命，反作色大言，怨恨责备使臣，不可以做四远的榜样。
English: Zhang Xuanfu, who was in the third grade, knew that there was a ceremony at the public gate, bowed without holding his breath to wait for the imperial edict, spoke arrogantly, resented and blamed the envoys, and could not be a distant example.

古文：于是策免。
现代文：于是策免其职。
English: As a result, he was relieved of his duties.

古文：归里舍，谢遣诸生，闭门不通宾客。
现代文：张酉甫回到里舍，谢遣诸生，闭门不与宾客交往。
English: Zhang Yifu returned to Lisha, thanked all the guests, and did not interact with the guests behind closed doors.

古文：左中郎将何敞及言事者多讼公忠，帝亦雅重之。
现代文：左中郎将何敞及言事者多数称赞张酉甫公忠，皇帝也很尊重他。
English: Zuo Zhonglang will be more open and most of the speakers praised Zhang Xifu Gongzhong, and the emperor also respected him.

古文：十六年，复拜为光禄勋。
现代文：十五年，又拜为光禄勋。
English: Fifteen years later, he was awarded the Order of the Star.

古文：数月，代鲁恭为司徒。
现代文：几月后代鲁恭做司徒。
English: For a few months, the descendants of Lu Qiong worked as apprentices.

古文：月余薨。
现代文：月余死去。
English: He died a month later.

古文：乘舆缟素临吊，赐冢茔地，赗赠恩宠异于它相。
现代文：朝廷大臣坐着缟素之车吊丧，赐冢茔地，贝冒赐恩宠不同于他相。
English: The minister of the imperial court sits in the carriage of the emperor, bestows the imperial land, and receives the imperial grace, which is different from his appearance.

古文：其年，追济侍讲有劳，封子根为蔡阳乡侯。
现代文：酉甫病临危时，束力其子道： 显节陵埽地露祭，想给天下做出俭约的模式。
English: When Yan Fu was on the verge of death from illness, he urged his son to do the following: hold a festival and hold a ground-breaking ceremony. He wanted to create a model of frugality for the world.

古文：济弟喜，初平中为司空。韩棱字伯师，颍川舞阳人，弓高侯穨当之后也。
现代文：我做三公，既不能宣扬王化，使吏人从制办事，难道可以不讲节约么？死后不必起祠堂，可用草盖屋，施祭其下罢了。 ◆韩棱传，韩棱字伯师，颍川舞阳人，弓高侯秀贵当的后代。
English: As I am the Three Princes, I can neither promote the rise of kings nor make officials responsible for affairs, so can I not talk about economy? After death, there is no need to build an ancestral hall, you can just use a grass-covered house and make a sacrifice under it. ◆ Han Ren Chuan, Han Ren's brother-in-law, Luchuan Maiyang people, descendants of Bow Gao Xiu Gui Dang.

古文：世为乡里著姓。
现代文：世代是乡里著名的姓。
English: Generation is a well-known surname in the countryside.

古文：父寻，建武中为陇西太守。
现代文：父韩寻，建武年间做陇西太守。
English: His father, Han Huan, was the governor of Shaanxi Province during the Jianwu era.

古文：棱四岁而孤，养母弟以孝友称。
现代文：韩棱四岁时失去父亲，养母弟以孝友之名著称。
English: Han Ren lost his father when he was four years old. His foster mother and younger brother are known for their filial piety.

古文：及壮，推先父余财数百万与从昆弟，乡里益高之。
现代文：到了壮年，推让父亲的余财数百万给堂兄弟，乡里人更加称他风格很高。
English: When he came of age, he gave away millions of his father's surplus money to his cousins, and the villagers said that he had a very high style.

古文：初为郡功曹，太守葛兴中风，病不能听政，棱阴代兴视事，出入二年，令无违者。
现代文：开始作郡功曹，太守葛兴患中风之病，不能听政，韩棱暗地代葛兴处理公事，出入两年，命令没有违抗的。
English: He began to be a county meritorious person. Ge Xing, the Tai Shou, suffered from a stroke and could not listen to politics. Han Ren secretly handled public affairs on behalf of Ge Xing. He was in and out of the county for two years and did not disobey orders.

古文：兴子尝发教欲署吏，棱拒执不从，因令怨者章之。
现代文：葛兴的儿子曾经发教想做官，韩棱拒绝不听，于是令怨者上章告发他。
English: Ge Xing's son once wanted to be an official, but Han Ren refused to listen, so he ordered the offender to denounce him.

古文：事下案验，吏以棱掩蔽兴病，专典郡职，遂致禁锢。
现代文：公文交下来查验，吏认为韩棱遮盖葛兴生病情况，擅自管理郡守职务，于是将韩棱关起来。
English: After the official document was submitted for inspection, the officials believed that Han Ren had covered up Ge Xing's illness and managed the county governor's duties without authorization, so Han Ren was locked up.

古文：显宗知其忠，后诏特原之。
现代文：显宗知道韩棱的忠心，后来下诏特原谅他。
English: Emperor Xuanzong knew of Han Ren's loyalty, and later issued an edict to pardon him.

古文：由是征辟，五迁为尚书令，与仆射郅寿、尚书陈宠，同时俱以才能称。
现代文：从此征召入朝，五次升迁为尚书令，与仆射郅寿、尚书陈宠，同时都以才能著称。
English: From then on, he was conscripted into the imperial court, promoted five times to Shang Shuling, and was known for his talent as well as his servants, Shao Xuan Shou and Shang Shuling Chen Qi.

古文：肃宗尝赐诸尚书剑，唯此三人特以宝剑，自手署其名曰： 韩棱楚龙渊，郅寿蜀汉文，陈宠济南椎成。 
现代文：肃宗曾经赐给诸尚书宝剑，只有这三个人特在宝剑上，亲自写上他们的名字叫： 韩棱楚龙渊，郅寿蜀汉文，陈宠济南椎成。 
English: Su Zong had given the swords to all the scholars, but only these three people wrote their names on the swords: Han Ren Chu Long Yuan, Su Shou Shu Han Wen, and Chen Ji Ji Nan Shi Cheng.

古文：时论者为之说；以棱渊深有谋，故得龙渊；寿明达有文章，故得汉文；宠敦朴，善不见外，故得椎成。
现代文：当时论者替它解说：认为韩棱渊深有谋略，所以得了龙渊；郅寿明达有文章，所以得到汉文；陈宠敦厚朴实，美不表现于外，所以得到椎成。
English: At that time, commentators explained for it: they thought that Han Ren Yuan was a deep strategist, so he got Long Yuan; Zou Shou Mingda had articles, so he got Chinese; Chen Ji Dun thick and simple, beauty did not show outside, so he got Shi Cheng.

古文：和帝即位，侍中窦宪使人刺杀齐殇王子都乡侯暢于上东门，有司畏宪，咸委疑于暢兄弟。
现代文：和帝即位，侍中窦宪派人刺杀齐殇王之子都乡侯刘畅于上东门，有司害怕窦宪，都故意怀疑于刘畅之兄弟。
English: When Emperor He ascended the throne, the courtier Dou Xian sent someone to assassinate Liu Chang, the son of King Qi, at Shangdong Gate. Some officials were afraid of Dou Xian and deliberately suspected Liu Chang's brother.

古文：诏遣侍御史之齐案其事。
现代文：皇上诏遣御史到齐国查这件事。
English: The emperor sent his emissary to Qi to investigate the matter.

古文：棱上疏以为贼在京师，不宜舍近问远，恐为奸臣所笑。
现代文：韩棱上疏认为贼在京师，不应舍近而问远，恐被奸臣所笑话。
English: Han Ren Shang Shou thought that the thief was in Beijing, and that he should not go near but ask far, for fear of being ridiculed by the traitor.

古文：窦太后怒，以切责棱，棱固执其议。
现代文：窦太后发怒，切责韩棱，韩棱坚持他的看法。
English: Empress Dowager Dou was furious and scolded Han Ren, who insisted on his opinion.

古文：及事发，果如所言。
现代文：等到事情揭发后，果真像他所言。
English: After the affair came to light, it turned out to be as he said.

古文：宪惶恐，白太后求出击北匈奴以赎罪。
现代文：窦宪很害怕，向太后请求出击匈奴以赎罪。
English: Dou Xian was very afraid and asked the empress dowager to attack the Xiongnu to atone for his sins.

古文：棱复上疏谏，太后不从。
现代文：韩棱又上疏谏阻，太后不听从。
English: Han Ren once again raised objections, and the empress dowager did not listen.

古文：及宪有功，还为大将军，威震天下，复出屯武威。
现代文：等到窦宪立了功，回来做了大将军，威名震惊天下，又出兵驻在武威。
English: When Dou Xian made a great achievement and came back as a great general, his prestige shocked the world, and he sent troops to stay in Wuwei.

古文：会帝西祠园陵，诏宪与车驾会长安。
现代文：碰上皇帝西祠园陵，诏窦宪与车驾相会于长安。
English: Encountering the Emperor's West Ancestral Hall and Mausoleum, the imperial edict Dou Xian and the car meet in Chang'an.

古文：及宪至，尚书以下议欲拜之，伏称万岁。
现代文：等窦宪到了，尚书以下的官吏商量想拜窦宪时，伏地口称万岁。
English: When Dou Xian arrived, and the officials below Shang Shu wanted to worship Dou Xian, Voldemort said, "Long live Dou Xian."

古文：棱正色曰： 夫上交不谄，下交不黩，礼无人臣称万岁之制。 
现代文：韩棱正言厉色地说 ：对上不谄媚，对下不亵黩，礼无人臣称万岁的规定。 
English: Han Ren sternly said, "There is no flattery towards superiors, no blasphemy towards inferiors, and there is no rule that no one should be praised for long life."

古文：议者皆惭而止。
现代文：议论人都惭愧地作罢论。
English: The commentators all shamefacedly went on strike.

古文：尚书左丞王龙私奏记上牛、酒于宪，棱举奏龙，论为城旦。
现代文：尚书左丞王龙，私自奏记上牛酒给窦宪，韩棱举奏珑，判为城旦罪。
English: Wang Long, the left-hander of Shangshu, and I, who played the cow wine for Dou Xian, and Han Ren, who played the cymbals, were sentenced to death.

古文：棱在朝数荐举良吏应顺、吕章、周纡等，皆有名当时。
现代文：韩棱在朝廷数次荐举良吏应顺、吕章、周纡等，都有名于当时。
English: Han Ren recommended several times in the imperial court to promote good officials such as Ying Shun, Luchang, and Zhou Qi, all of whom were famous at that time.

古文：及窦氏败，棱典案其事，深竟党与，数月不休沐。
现代文：等窦氏失败，韩棱负责查究这个案子，深深追究其党羽，数月不曾休息沐浴。
English: After Dou's defeat, Han Ren was responsible for investigating the case, deeply investigating his party members, and did not take a shower for several months.

古文：帝以为忧国忘家，赐布三百匹。
现代文：皇帝以为韩棱忧国忘家，赐布三百匹。
English: The emperor thought that Han Ren was worried about the country and had forgotten his home, and gave him three hundred horses.

古文：迁南阳太守，特听棱得过家上冢，乡里以为荣。
现代文：韩棱升为南阳太守，朝廷特让韩棱能回家上祖坟，乡里以为光荣。
English: Han Rensheng became the governor of Nanyang, and the court allowed Han Rensheng to go home to his ancestral grave, which was considered a great honor in the village.

古文：棱发奸盗，郡中震栗，政号严平。
现代文：韩棱揭发奸盗坏人，郡中坏人都很害怕，政治号为严格公平。
English: Han Ren exposes the villains who commit theft, the villains in the county are very afraid, and the political slogan is strict fairness.

古文：数岁，征入为太仆。
现代文：数年后，召入朝做太仆。
English: A few years later, he was called to the imperial court to serve as a servant.

古文：九年冬，代张奋为司空。
现代文：九年冬，代张奋做司空。
English: In the winter of the ninth year, Zhang Fen became the deputy chief.

古文：后复征拜司隶校尉。
现代文：第二年死去。儿子韩辅，安帝时做了赵王良之孙刘商之相。
English: He died the following year. His son Han Fu, An Di, became the son of Liu Shang, the grandson of Zhao Wang Liang.

古文：周荣字平孙，庐江舒人也。
现代文：◆周荣传，周荣字平孙，庐江舒人。
English: ◆Zhou Rongzhuan, Zhou Rongzhu Pingsun, Minjiang Shuren.

古文：肃宗时，举明经，辟司徒袁安府。
现代文：肃宗时，举明经科，召到司徒袁安之府为吏。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xuanzong, he was summoned to the Yuan'an residence by Emperor Xuanzong.

古文：安数与论议，甚器之。
现代文：袁安数次和周荣论议，非常器重他。
English: Yuan An had several discussions with Zhou Rong and held him in high regard.

古文：及安举奏窦景及与窦宪争立北单于事，皆荣所具草。
现代文：等到袁安举奏窦宪、窦景争立北单于事，都是周荣起草的。
English: Zhou Rong drafted the Constitution when Yuan An proposed it and the North Korean Constitution when Dou Jing proposed it.

古文：窦氏客太尉掾徐齮深恶之，胁荣曰： 子为袁公腹心之谋，排奏窦氏，窦氏悍士刺客满城中，谨备之矣！ 
现代文：窦氏的宾客太尉掾徐齿奇十分讨厌他，威胁周荣道： 你是袁公心腹之谋士，排奏窦氏，窦氏的打手刺客满城中，仔细防备好了！ 
English: Dou's guest, Second Lieutenant Zou Xu Jianqi, hated him very much and threatened Zhou Rong: You are Yuan Gongxin's confidant, orchestrate Dou, Dou's hitman assassins are all over the city, carefully prepare!

古文：荣曰： 荣江淮孤生，蒙先帝大恩，以历宰二城。
现代文：周荣说： 我是江淮孤生子，承蒙先帝大恩，做过两城的主宰。
English: Zhou Rong said: I am the only son of Jianghuai, and I have been the master of the two cities thanks to the great kindness of the former emperor.

古文：今复得备宰士，纵为窦氏所害，诚所甘心。 
现代文：现在又能升为司徒府，即使被窦氏所害，也很甘心。 
English: Now that I've been promoted to the position of Shuto-fu, I'm very happy even though I was victimized by the Dou clan.

古文：故常敕妻子，若卒遇飞祸，无得殡敛，冀以区区腐身觉悟朝廷。
现代文：所以常告诫妻子，如果猝然碰上飞来之大祸，不要急于殡殓，希望以区区的腐身使朝廷觉悟。
English: Therefore, he often admonished his wife that if she suddenly encountered a sudden disaster, she should not rush to the funeral, hoping to use the rotting corpse to make the imperial court aware.

古文：及窦氏败，荣由此显名。
现代文：等到窦氏失败，周荣由此名声大显。
English: After Dou's defeat, Zhou Rong became famous.

古文：自郾令擢为尚书令。
现代文：从郾令提为尚书令。
English: From the imperial edict to the imperial edict.

古文：出为颍川太守，坐法，当下狱，和帝思荣忠节，左转共令。
现代文：出为颍川太守，触犯法令，当下狱，和帝想到周荣忠节，降为共县县令。
English: He was made the governor of Shichuan, broke the law, went to prison, and thought of Emperor Zhou Rongzhong and was reduced to the rank of county magistrate.

古文：岁余，复以为山阳太守。
现代文：一年多，又用他作山阳太守。
English: For more than a year, he was also used as the governor of Shanyang.

古文：所历郡县，皆见称纪。
现代文：所经过的郡县，都被称赞。
English: Every county we passed through was praised.

古文：以老病乞身，卒于家，诏特赐钱二十万，除子男兴为郎中。
现代文：因年老多病请求退职，死在家中。诏特赐钱二十万，除儿子周兴为郎中。
English: Due to old age and illness, he asked to retire and died at home. Zhao gave him 200,000 yuan, except for his son Zhou Xing.

古文：兴少有名誉，永宁中，尚书陈忠上疏荐兴曰： 臣伏惟古者帝王有所号令，言心弘雅，辞必温丽，垂于后世，列于典经。
现代文：周兴年少时有名誉，永宁年间，尚书陈忠上疏荐周兴道 ：臣想起古代帝王有所号令，言语必弘雅，辞藻必温丽，垂于后代，列在典经。
English: Zhou Xing was famous when he was young, and during the Yongning era, Shang Shu Chen Zhong Shang recommended Zhou Xing Dao: The minister recalled that the ancient emperors had a slogan, the language must be elegant, the words must be gentle, and it must be passed down to future generations and listed in the classics.

古文：故仲尼嘉唐、虞之文章，从周室之郁郁。
现代文：所以仲尼称赞唐虞的文章，追随周朝的文雅。
English: Therefore, Zhongni praised the article of Tang Yu and followed the gentleness of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：臣窃见光禄郎周兴，孝友之行，著于闺门，清厉之志，闻于州里。
现代文：臣私下看到光禄郎周兴，孝友之行，著于闺门，清厉之志，闻于州里。
English: The vassal privately saw Guanglu Rong Zhouxing, the line of filial piety, written in the boudoir, the clear and strong will, and heard in the state.

古文：蕴椟古今，博物多闻，《三坟》之篇，《五典》之策，无所不览。
现代文：研究古今，博物多闻。《三坟》之篇，《五典》之策，没有不看。
English: Studying ancient and modern times, I have heard a lot about the natural history museum. "Three Graves" and "Five Classics" are worth a look.

古文：属文著辞，有可观采。
现代文：写出文章，很有可观。
English: Writing an article is very impressive.

古文：尚书出纳帝命，为王喉舌。
现代文：尚书出纳帝命，作王之喉舌。
English: Shang Shuxun accepted the emperor's order and became the king's mouthpiece.

古文：臣等既愚暗，而诸郎多文俗吏，鲜有雅才，每为诏文，宣示内外，转相求请，或以不能而专己自由，辞多鄙固。
现代文：臣等既愚暗，而诸郎又多文俗吏，少有雅才，每次起草诏文，宣示内外，转相求请，有的以不能而专己自由，言辞很多鄙俗固陋。
English: The courtiers are stupid and ignorant, while the princes are more literary and vulgar, and few of them are elegant. Every time they draft a decree, they proclaim it at home and abroad, and ask for it in turn. Some are unable to do so, but are free to do so, and their words are often vulgar and vulgar.

古文：兴抱奇怀能，随辈栖迟，诚可叹惜。 
现代文：周兴抱奇怀能，随着流辈栖迟，很可叹息。 
English: Zhou Xing's ability to be full of wonder, along with the delay of the current generation, is very lamentable.

古文：诏乃拜兴为尚书郎。
现代文：诏书于是拜兴为尚书郎。
English: The imperial edict then changed Bai Xing to Shang Shuro.

古文：卒。
现代文：后来死了。
English: To die.

古文：兴子景。
现代文：儿子名周景。
English: His son was named Zhou Jing.

