古文：唐崔安潜为西川节度使，到官不诘盗。曰： 盗非所由通容，则不能为。 
现代文：唐朝的崔安潜被委任为西川节度使，到任后并不先去整治社会上的盗贼，他说： 如果没有所经之处人们的通容，盗贼就无法达到目的。 
English: The Tang Dynasty's Cui Anqian, who was appointed as the envoy of the Saikawa Secession, did not first go to rectify the thieves in society after taking office. He said: If there is no tolerance of people everywhere, the thieves will not be able to achieve their goal.

古文：乃出库钱置三市，置榜其上，曰： 告捕一盗，赏钱五百缗。
现代文：于是，他从公家仓库里拨出巨款放到三个市场上，并且张贴告示宣布： 告发和捕捉到一名盗贼，赏钱五百缗。
English: As a result, he allocated a huge amount of money from the public warehouse to three markets, and posted a notice announcing: 500 baht reward for reporting and catching a thief.

古文：侣者告捕，释其罪，赏同平人。 
现代文：如果同伙告捕，则免其罪，赏钱和一般人一样多。 
English: If an accomplice denounces the arrest, he is exonerated and rewarded with the same amount of money as an ordinary person.

古文：未几，有捕盗而至者。
现代文：不久，有人送来了一个盗贼。
English: Soon after, a thief was brought in.

古文：盗不服，曰： 汝与我同为盗十七年，赃皆平分，汝安能捕我？ 
现代文：盗贼很不服气地向捕捉他的人嚷道： 你和我一同为盗十七年，赃物都平分，你怎么能捉我呢？ 
English: Unconvinced, the thief shouted at his captors: "You and I have been stealing for seventeen years, and the stolen goods are equally divided. How can you catch me?

古文：安潜曰： 汝既知吾有榜，何不捕彼以来？
现代文：崔安潜说： 你既然知道已经出了告示，为什么不将他捉来？
English: Cui Anqian said: Since you know that a notice has been issued, why don't you arrest him?

古文：则彼应死，汝受赏矣。
现代文：如果你把他捉来，那么他应当被处死，而你则要受到奖赏。
English: If you capture him, he will be put to death and you will be rewarded.

古文：汝既为所先，死复何辞？ 
现代文：现在你既然已经被人家告发了，就应当处死，还有什么可说的呢？ 
English: Now that you have been denounced and are to be put to death, what more is there to say?

古文：立命给捕者钱，使盗视之，然后杀盗于市。
现代文：随即下令付给捕盗者赏钱，让盗贼亲眼看见，然后将这个盗贼在街市上处死。
English: He then ordered that a reward be paid to the thief, that the thief be made to see it with his own eyes, and that the thief be put to death in the marketplace.

古文：于是诸盗与其侣互相疑，无地容足，夜不及旦，散逃出境，境内遂无一人为盗。
现代文：于是，盗贼们与其伙伴们相互猜疑，竟然在一夜之间纷纷散逃出境，从此境内再无一人为盗。
English: As a result, the thieves and their partners were suspicious of each other, to the point that they scattered and fled the country overnight, and from then on, no one in the country was a thief.

古文：予每读此事，以为策之上者。
现代文：我每读此事，总认为崔安潜的做法的确是治盗贼的上策。
English: Every time I read about this, I always think that Cui Anqian's approach is indeed the best way to deal with thieves.

古文：及得李公择治齐州事，则又不然。
现代文：后来，当我读了李公择治理齐州的事迹，才知道还有更高明的办法。
English: Later, when I read the story of Li Gongzhe's governance of Qizhou, I knew that there was a better way.

古文：齐素多盗，公择痛治之，殊不止。
现代文：齐地一向多盗贼，李公择严加治理，但是屡禁不止。
English: There have always been many thieves in Qi Di, and Li Gongzhe has strictly controlled them, but they have been repeatedly banned.

古文：他日得黠盗，察其可用，刺为兵，使直事铃下。
现代文：有一次，一名狡猾的惯犯落网，李公择发现他可以利用，便在他的脸上刺字编入军队，分在自己帐下听差。
English: Once, when a cunning recidivist was caught, Li Gongcai found he could take advantage of him, so he tattooed his face with the words "enlisted in the army" and assigned him to be an errand boy under his own account.

古文：间问以盗发辄得而不衰止之故。曰： 此由富家为之囊。
现代文：李公择询问齐州盗贼大量被捕却屡禁不止的原因，那个盗贼回答说： 这是由于富裕之家为他们作掩护的缘故。
English: Li Gongzhe asked the reason why a large number of thieves in Qizhou were arrested but repeatedly banned, the thief replied: This is due to the rich family's cover-up for them.

古文：使盗自相推为甲乙，官吏巡捕及门，擒一人以首，则免矣。 公择曰： 吾得之矣。 乃令凡得藏盗之家，皆发屋破柱，盗贼遂清。
现代文：假如使盗贼自相为甲乙，而管理巡捕上门搜查，捉住一个窝藏犯予以重罚，借此杀一儆百，这样不久之后，就可以没有盗贼之患了。 李公择说： 我有办法了！ 
English: If the thieves are made into A and B, and the management patrol makes a door-to-door search, catches a hiding criminal and severely punishes him, thereby killing a hundred, then soon there will be no more thieves. Li Gongzhe said: I have a solution!

古文：予乃知治世间事，不可泥纸上陈迹。
现代文：于是，便下令凡是窝藏盗贼的人家被发现后，一律拆除房子。没过多久，盗贼就绝迹了。
English: As a result, he ordered the demolition of the house of anyone found to be harbouring the thieves. It didn't take long for the thieves to disappear.

古文：如安潜之法可谓善矣，而齐盗反恃此以为沈命之计，则变而通之，可不存乎其人哉！
现代文：我从上述两件事中认识到，世上的事情，不能拘泥于书本上的记载。像崔安潜的办法可以说是高明的了，但齐地的盗贼反而借此作为保命之计，可见根据具体情况有所变通，关键还是事在人为。
English: From the above two things, I realized that things in the world cannot be confined to the records in books. The method like Cui An's diving can be said to be ingenious, but the thieves in Qi used this as a life-saving measure. It can be seen that there are some workarounds according to the specific situation. The key is in the human factor.

