古文：起重光赤奋若，尽玄黓摄提格，凡二年。
现代文：起，止，一共两年。
English: From start to finish, a total of two years.

古文：安皇帝丁隆安五年
现代文：晋安帝隆安五年
English: The Fifth Year of Emperor Jinnang's Reign

古文：春，正月，武威王利鹿孤欲称帝，群臣皆劝之。
现代文：春季，正月，南凉武威王秃发利鹿孤准备称皇帝，大臣们也都一致劝他进位。
English: In the spring and the first month of the year, the king of the Southern Liang Wu Wei Dynasty, the bald-headed Lixia Guo, was preparing to be named emperor, and the ministers unanimously advised him to be promoted to the throne.

古文：安国将军鍮勿仑曰： 吾国自上世以来，被发左衽，无冠带之饰，逐水草迁徙，无城郭室庐，故能雄视沙漠，抗衡中夏。
现代文：只有安国将军勿仑说： 我们国家自从祖先到现在，都习惯于披散头发，左边开衣襟，从来没有帽子腰带之类的装饰，只是追逐选择有水、有草的地方不断迁徙居住，没有城郭家室居所的拖累，所以我们能够在沙漠的各部族中称雄，与中原的汉族人相抗衡。
English: Only An Guo's general Belun said: Our country, from our ancestors to the present, has always been accustomed to wearing loose hair, wearing the left side open, and has never had a hat, belt or other decoration. We just chase and choose places with water and grass to continuously migrate and live. There is no drag of the castle and family residence. So we can be a champion among the tribes in the desert and compete with the Han people in the Central Plains.

古文：今举大号，诚顺民心。然建都立邑，难以避患，储畜仓库，启敌人心。不如处晋民于城郭，劝课农桑以供资储，帅国人以习战射。
现代文：现在提高为皇帝的名号，当然是顺应民心的事情，但是，如果设立都城，建筑固定的居住地，那么，就很难灵活地躲避战乱；如果把我们的积蓄全部储存在仓库之中，又容易引起敌人贪心，所以，我看不如把汉人安置在城郭之中，鼓励他们从事农田、养蚕，来供应我们的给养储备。同时再统领我们本族的人进行战斗射箭的训练。
English: Raising the title of emperor now is, of course, a matter of complying with the people's will, but if we establish a capital city and build a fixed place of residence, then it is difficult to flexibly avoid war; if we store all our savings in warehouses, it is easy to arouse the greed of the enemy. Therefore, I do not see how to place Han people in the city walls, encourage them to engage in farmland and silkworm rearing to supply our supply reserves, and at the same time lead our own people to carry out combat archery training.

古文：邻国弱则乘之，强则避之，此久长之良策也。
现代文：一旦我们相邻的国家弱小，那么我们就乘机把它吞并；相邻的国家强大，那么我们也可以随时躲避。这才是长久的好策略。
English: Once our neighboring country is weak, then we will take the opportunity to absorb it; if the neighboring country is strong, then we can also avoid it at any time. This is a good long-term strategy.

古文：且虚名无实，徒足为世之质的，将安用之！ 
现代文：况且，帝王的虚名，没有什么实际的意义，只是足够做世人的刀砧箭靶，成为别人攻击的目标，还能拿它干什么用呢？ 
English: Moreover, the emperor's false name has no practical significance, but it is enough to be the target of the world's swords and arrows, to become the target of others' attacks. What else can it be used for?

古文：利鹿孤曰： 安国之言是也。 
现代文：秃发利鹿孤说： 安国将军所说的太对了。 
English: Bald-haired Lixia Guo said: What General An Guo said is too right.

古文：乃更称河西王，以广武公傉檀为都督中外诸军事、凉州牧、录尚书事。
现代文：于是改称为河西王，又任命广武公秃发檀为都督中外诸军事、凉州牧、录尚书事。
English: As a result, he changed his name to the King of Hexi, and appointed Guangwu Gong Balfadan as the military governor of the Middle and Outer Provinces, the pastor of Liangzhou, and the recorder of records.

古文：二月，丙子，孙恩出浃口，攻句章，不能拔。
现代文：二月，丙子，孙恩又从浃口返回陆地，进攻句章，没有攻克。
English: In February, Cixi and Sun En returned to the land from the estuary, attacked and did not conquer.

古文：刘牢之击之，恩复走入海。
现代文：刘牢之率兵向他发起进攻，孙恩再一次逃进大海的岛中。
English: Liu Diao's soldiers attacked him, and Sun En once again fled to an island in the sea.

古文：秦王兴使乞伏乾归还镇苑川，尽以其故部众配之。
现代文：后秦王姚兴派乞伏乾归回去镇守苑川，把他过去的老部下、军队，全部分配给他。
English: Later, Qin King Yao Xing sent Qian to return to the town of Zhengu Yuanchuan, and all of his former subordinates and troops were assigned to him.

古文：凉王纂嗜酒好猎，太常杨颖谏曰： 陛下应天受命，当以道守之。
现代文：后凉王吕纂生性喜欢喝酒，爱好打猎，太常杨颖劝告他说： 陛下顺应上天的意旨，接受了治理国家的重任，所以应当用符合正道的方式恪守自己的使命。
English: Later Liang Wang Lyu, who was born with a penchant for drinking and hunting, was often advised by Yang Ying: "Your Majesty has accepted the important task of governing the country in accordance with God's will, so you should adhere to your mission in a way that is consistent with the right path.

古文：今疆宇日蹙，崎岖二岭之间，陛下不兢兢夕惕以恢弘先业，而沈湎游畋，不以国家为事，臣窃危之。 
现代文：现在，我们国家的疆土面积一天比一天缩小，仅仅局限在坎坷不平的两道山岭中间，陛下不小心谨慎地早晚考虑，用什么办法恢复弘扬祖先的事业，反而却沉溺于游玩打猎，不把国家的事情当做一回事，依臣下的愚见，这样是很危险的呀！ 
English: Now that the territory of our country is shrinking day by day, confined only to the middle of two rugged mountain ranges, His Majesty carelessly and cautiously considers sooner or later how to resume the promotion of the cause of his ancestors, but indulges in playing and hunting, does not take the country's affairs as a matter of course, and follows the foolish opinions of his subjects. This is very dangerous!

古文：纂逊辞谢之，然犹不悛。
现代文：吕纂非常谦恭地向他道歉，感谢他的提醒，但是却没能改过。
English: Lu Xuan very humbly apologized to him and thanked him for the reminder, but failed to make amends.

古文：番禾太守吕超擅击鲜卑思盘，思盘遣其弟乞珍诉于纂，纂命超及思盘皆入朝。
现代文：番禾太守吕超擅自攻击鲜卑部落的首领思盘，思盘派他的弟弟乞珍向吕纂告状。吕纂命令吕超和思盘都到朝中来。
English: The governor of Panhe, Luchao, attacked the leader of the Xianbei tribe, Sipan, without authorization. Sipan sent his brother, Qizhen, to sue Luchao. Luchao ordered both Luchao and Sipan to come to the imperial court.

古文：超惧，至姑臧，深自结于殿中监杜尚。
现代文：吕超很害怕，到了姑臧之后，私自与殿中监杜尚结成很深的交情。
English: Luchao was very scared. After arriving in Gushan, I personally formed a deep friendship with Du Shang, the supervisor of the palace.

古文：纂见超，责之曰： 卿恃兄弟桓桓，乃敢欺吾。要当斩卿，天下乃定！ 
现代文：吕纂召见吕超，斥责他说： 你依仗你们兄弟勇武，结成一伙，竟敢欺侮到我的头上，我应当杀了你，天下才能安定吧？ 
English: Lü Zang summoned Lü Chao and rebuked him: "You rely on your brothers' bravery and strength, and band together as a group. How dare you bully me? I should kill you, so that the world can be stable."

古文：超顿首谢。
现代文：吕超磕头认错。
English: Lv Chao Shantou admitted his mistake.

古文：纂本以恐愒超，实无意杀之。因引超、思盘及群臣同宴于内殿。
现代文：吕纂本来也就是要恐吓一下他，其实并没有杀他的意思，所以，把吕超、思盘，以及大臣们全部带到内殿，一起赴宴。
English: Originally, Lu Xuan wanted to intimidate him, but he didn't actually mean to kill him, so he brought Lu Chao, Sipan, and the ministers all to the inner hall to go to the banquet together.

古文：超兄中领军隆数劝纂酒，纂醉，乘步挽车，将超等游禁中。
现代文：吕超的哥哥中领军吕隆在宴会上不断地向吕纂劝酒，致使吕纂酩酊大醉，醒眼朦胧地乘坐着人拉着的辇车，带着吕超等人游玩观赏禁宫。
English: Lyu Chao's brother, Lulong, the leader of the middle army, kept persuading Lyu Chao to drink alcohol at the banquet, causing Lyu Chao to get very drunk. He took a carriage pulled by people, and took Lyu Chao and others to visit and enjoy the Forbidden City.

古文：至琨华堂东阁，车不得过，纂亲将窦川、骆腾倚剑于壁，推车过閤。
现代文：到了琨华堂东阁，辇车不能过去，吕纂的亲信将领窦川、骆腾便把佩剑取下，倚靠在墙上，然后把车推过阁去。
English: When they arrived at the east pavilion of the Summer Palace, the carriage could not pass. Lu Zuo's trusted generals Dou Chuan and Luo Teng took off their swords, leaned against the wall, and then pushed the carriage past the pavilion.

古文：超取剑击纂，纂下车禽超，超刺纂洞胸；川、腾与超格战，超杀之。
现代文：吕超突然拿起剑刺杀吕纂，吕纂赶紧下车来擒拿吕超，被吕超在胸口刺穿了一个血洞。窦川、骆腾空着手与吕超格斗，也被吕超杀掉。
English: Luchao suddenly picked up a sword and stabbed Luchao to death. Luchao quickly got out of the car to grab Luchao, and Luchao pierced a blood hole in his chest. Douchuan and Luo Tengku started to fight with Luchao, and were also killed by Luchao.

古文：纂后杨氏命禁兵讨超，杜尚止之，皆舍仗不战。
现代文：吕纂的皇后杨氏闻讯后赶出，命令禁卫军攻击吕超，但殿中监杜尚却出来阻止他们动手，所以，那些士兵们也都扔下武器，不参加战斗。
English: After hearing the news, the Empress Yang of Lüzang drove them out and ordered the imperial guard to attack Lü Chao, but the palace overseer Du Shang came out to prevent them from doing so, so those soldiers also threw down their weapons and did not participate in the battle.

古文：将军魏益多入，取纂首，杨氏曰： 人已死，如土石，无所复知，何忍复残其形骸乎！ 
现代文：这时，将军魏益多进宫，把吕纂的脑袋砍了下来，杨皇后说： 他人已经死了，尸体跟土和石头那样，再也没有什么知觉了，你怎么忍心又去摧残他的形骸呢？ 
English: At this time, General Wei Yiduo entered the palace and cut off the head of Lu Zuo. Empress Yang said, "He is already dead, the corpse is like earth and stone, it no longer has any consciousness. How can you bear to destroy his remains?

古文：益多骂之，遂取纂首以徇，曰： 纂违先帝之命，杀太子而自立，荒淫暴虐。
现代文：魏益多大骂杨皇后，于是，把吕纂的人头拿出去对外面说： 吕纂违背先帝的遗嘱，杀害了太子，自己夺占皇位，并且荒淫、残暴、凶恶。
English: Wei Yiduo scolded Empress Yang, so he took out the head of Lyu Tsang and said to the outside world: Lyu Tsang violated the last emperor's will, killed the crown prince, seized the throne for himself, and was lewd, cruel, and vicious.

古文：番禾太守超顺人心而除之，以安宗庙。凡我士庶，同兹休庆！ 
现代文：番禾太守吕超顺应人心，把他除掉了，使国家的宗庙社稷得到和平安宁，凡是我国的官民人等，都应该一起庆贺！ 
English: Panhe Taishu Luchao complied with the people's will and got rid of him, bringing peace and tranquility to the country's ancestral temples and shrines. All officials and people in our country should celebrate together!

古文：纂叔父巴西公佗、弟陇西公纬皆在北城。
现代文：吕纂的叔叔巴西公吕佗、弟弟陇西公吕纬此时都在北城。
English: At this time, Lyu Zuo's uncle, Prince Lyu Bin, and his brother, Prince Lyu Wei, were both in Beicheng.

古文：或说纬曰： 超为逆乱，公以介弟之亲，仗大义而讨之。姜纪、焦辨在南城，杨桓、田诚在东苑，皆吾党也，何患不济！ 
现代文：有人对吕纬说： 吕超制造叛乱，您以皇弟的名义和亲情，依仗大义来讨伐他们，又有姜纪、焦辨在南城，杨桓、田诚在东苑，都是我们的死党亲信，还有什么担心不能成功的！ 
English: Some people said to Lu Wei: Lu Chao created the rebellion, you fought them in the name of the imperial brothers and relatives, relying on the great cause, and Jiang Ji and Jiaoban were in Nancheng, Yang Huan and Tian Cheng were in Dongyuan, all of them were our closest friends, what else is there to worry about if you can't succeed!

古文：纬严兵欲与佗共击超。
现代文：因此，吕纬便号令部队整装待发，准备与吕佗一起发兵去进攻吕超。
English: Therefore, Lv Wei ordered the troops to be ready for the attack, ready to send troops to attack Luchao together with Lv Wei.

古文：佗妻梁氏止之曰： 纬、超俱兄弟之子，何为舍超助纬，自为祸首乎！ 
现代文：吕佗的妻子梁氏阻止他说： 吕纬、吕超都是我们的侄儿，你为什么要舍弃吕超而来帮助吕纬呢？难道要自己主动去做罪魁祸首吗？ 
English: Mr. Liang, the wife of Lv Ying, stopped him and said, "Lv Ying and Lv Chao are our nephews. Why would you abandon Lv Chao to help Lv Ying? Do you want to be the main culprit?

古文：佗乃谓纬曰： 超举事已成，据武库，拥精兵，图之甚难。且吾老矣，无能为也。 
现代文：吕佗于是去对吕纬说： 吕超发动事变已经成功，他占领了武器仓库，把持了精壮的部队，现在再去攻击他实在难以取胜，况且我们已经老了，不能再有什么作为了。 
English: Lv Wei then went to Lv Wei and said: Lv Chao's attempt to start an incident has been successful. He has occupied the weapons warehouse and taken control of the strong troops. It is really difficult to win if we attack him now. Besides, we are old and can no longer do anything.

古文：超弟邈有宠于纬，说纬曰： 纂贼杀兄弟，隆、超顺人心而讨之，正欲尊立明公耳。
现代文：吕超的弟弟吕邈，得到吕纬的宠信，也劝说吕纬道： 吕纂这家伙，杀害自己的兄弟，吕隆、吕超顺应人心来讨伐他，正准备要来尊崇拥立明公您啊。
English: Lv Chao's younger brother Lv Chao, who was favored by Lv Wei, also persuaded Lv Wei: Lv Chao, this guy, killed his own brother. Lulong and Lv Chao obeyed the will of the people to fight him. They were preparing to come to honor and support Lv Minggong.

古文：方今明公先帝之长子，当主社稷，人无异望，夫复何疑！ 
现代文：现在您是先帝的儿子中最年长的，无疑应当主持国家大局，别人都没有别的想法，您还有什么可以怀疑的呢？ 
English: Now that you are the eldest son of the former emperor, you should undoubtedly preside over the overall situation of the country. Others have no other idea. What else can you doubt?

古文：纬信之，乃与隆、超结盟，单马入城；超执而杀之。
现代文：吕纬听信了他的话，于是，跟吕隆、吕超缔结了盟约，自己便一个人骑马进了都城，但吕超马上把他抓住杀了。
English: Lv Wei listened to his words, so he concluded a covenant with Lulong and Luchao. He rode into the capital alone, but Luchao immediately caught and killed him.

古文：让位与隆，隆有难色。
现代文：吕超让位给吕隆，吕隆的脸上露出为难的表情。
English: Luchao gave way to Lulong, whose face showed a puzzled expression.

古文：超曰： 今如乘龙上天，岂可中下！ 
现代文：吕超说： 今天你好像是骑着龙向天上飞，怎么可以半路上下来呢？ 
English: Lu Chao said, "Today, you seem to be riding a dragon to fly up to the sky. How can you get down halfway?

古文：隆遂即天王位，大赦，改元神鼎。尊母卫氏为太后；妻杨氏为后；以超为都督中外诸军事、辅国大将军、录尚书书事，封安定公；谥纂曰灵帝。
现代文：吕隆于是登上了天王的座位，实行大赦，改年号为神鼎，尊称母亲卫氏为皇太后，立妻子杨氏为皇后，任命吕超为都督中外诸军事、辅国大将军、录尚书事，封安定公；追谥吕纂为灵帝。
English: Lulong then ascended to the throne of the heavenly king, implemented an amnesty, changed the year name to Shending, respectfully called his mother Wei as the empress dowager, appointed his wife Yang as the empress, appointed Lü Chao as the governor of all military and auxiliary generals, recorded the records, and granted him the title of dowager emperor; and pursued Lü Zuo as the spiritual emperor.

古文：纂后杨氏将出宫，超恐其挟珍宝，命索之。
现代文：吕纂的皇后杨氏，即将出宫，吕超怕她带走珍宝，便命人去搜查她。
English: The Empress Yang of Lv Cao was about to leave the palace. Lv Chao was afraid that she would take away the precious treasure, so he ordered someone to search her.

古文：杨氏曰： 尔兄弟不义，手刃相屠。我旦夕死人，安用宝为！ 
现代文：杨皇后说： 你们兄弟不义，互相亲手屠杀，我也是早晚要死的人，还用珍宝干什么？ 
English: Empress Yang said, "Your brothers are unjust and slaughter each other with their own hands. I am also a person who will die sooner or later. What are you doing with the precious treasure?

古文：超又问玉玺所在，杨氏曰： 已毁之矣。 
现代文：吕超又问她玉玺在什以地方，杨皇后说： 已经把它毁掉了。 
English: Luchao also asked her where the jade figurine was. Empress Yang said, "I have already destroyed it."

古文：后有美色，超将纳之，谓其父右仆射桓曰： 后若自杀，祸及卿宗！ 
现代文：杨皇后相貌很美。吕超打算娶她，告诉她的父亲右仆射杨桓说： 杨皇后如果自杀，大祸就要降临你们全家族。 
English: Empress Yang looked very beautiful. Lü Chao planned to marry her and told her father's right-hand man, Yang Huan: "If Empress Yang commits suicide, a great disaster will befall your entire family."

古文：桓以告杨氏。
现代文：杨桓把这话告诉了杨皇后。
English: Yang Huan told this to Queen Yang.

古文：杨氏曰： 大人卖女与氐以图富贵，一之谓甚，其可再乎！ 
现代文：杨皇后说： 父亲把女儿卖给氐人，用来谋求荣华富贵，卖一次就已经很过分了，怎么还可以再卖第二次呢？ 
English: Empress Yang said, "The father sold his daughter to a baboon to seek glory and wealth. Selling her once was already too much. How could he sell her a second time?

古文：遂自杀，谥曰穆后。
现代文：于是自杀，谥号叫穆后。
English: As a result, he committed suicide, and his posthumous name was Mu Hou.

古文：桓奔河西王利鹿孤，利鹿孤以为左司马。
现代文：杨桓投奔南凉的河西王秃发利鹿孤，秃发利鹿孤任命他为左司马。
English: Yang Huan defected to Nanliang from the King of Hexi, Bald-Faced Lulu. Bald-Faced Lulu appointed him as his left-hand man.

古文：三月，孙恩北趣海盐，刘裕随而拒之，筑城于海盐故治。
现代文：三月，孙恩又回到大陆，向北逼近海盐。刘裕紧追不放，与他抵抗，在海盐的旧城址上修筑阵地。
English: In March, Sun En returned to the mainland and approached Haiyan to the north. Liu Yu followed him closely, resisted him, and built a position on the old city site of Haiyan.

古文：恩日来攻城，裕屡击破之，斩其将姚盛。
现代文：孙恩几乎每天都来对刘裕阵地发动进攻，但刘裕几次都把孙恩击败，斩杀了他的将领姚盛。
English: Sun En came almost every day to launch an attack on Liu Yu's position, but Liu Yu defeated Sun En several times and killed his general Yao Sheng.

古文：城中兵少不敌，裕夜偃旗匿众，明晨开门，使羸疾数人登城。
现代文：城里的部队因为太少难以抵挡，刘裕当夜就把战旗全部放倒，把精锐部队埋伏起来，第二天早晨打开城门，让几个老弱残兵登上城墙，变民部队一看，远远地向他们打听刘裕到哪里去了。
English: Because the troops in the city were too few to resist, Liu Yu put down all the battle flags that night and ambushed the elite troops. The next morning, he opened the city gate and let a few old and weak remnants of soldiers board the city wall. When the mutineers saw them, they asked them from a distance where Liu Yu had gone.

古文：贼遥问刘裕所在，曰： 夜已走矣。 贼信之，争入城。
现代文：他们说： 昨天夜里已经逃跑了。 那些变民部队的士卒相信了他们的话，争先恐后地进了城。
English: They said, "He ran away last night," and the mutineers believed them and rushed into the city.

古文：裕奋击，大破之。
现代文：刘裕突然向他们发动了猛攻，将变民部队打得大败。
English: Liu Yu suddenly launched an onslaught against them and defeated the mutineers.

古文：恩知城不可拔，乃进向沪渎，裕复弃城追之。
现代文：孙恩知道不可能把这座城攻克，于是改向沪渎进军，刘裕便也放弃了这座城池，追击孙恩。
English: Sun En knew that it was impossible to conquer this city, so he marched to Shanghai. Liu Yu also abandoned the city and pursued Sun En.

古文：海盐令鲍陋遣子嗣之帅吴兵一千，请为前驱。
现代文：海盐令鲍陋遣派他的儿子鲍嗣之率领吴地的军卒一千人，请求做刘裕部队的前锋。
English: Haiyan ordered Bao Huan to send his son Bao Shizhi to lead 1,000 soldiers from Wudi and ask them to be the vanguard of Liu Yu's army.

古文：裕曰： 贼兵甚精，吴人不习战，若前驱失利，必败我军；可在后为声势。 
现代文：刘裕说： 强盗们的兵力非常精良，吴地人又不习惯于征战，如果一旦前锋部队失利，那么，必定会使我军遭到失败。你们可以在后面制造声势。 
English: Liu Yu said, "The bandits' troops are very powerful, and the Wu people are not used to fighting. If the frontline troops are defeated, then our army will certainly be defeated. You can create momentum in the rear.

古文：嗣之不从。裕乃多伏旗鼓，前驱既交，诸伏皆出。
现代文：鲍嗣之却不听从安排，刘裕于是只好埋伏下很多战旗战鼓。
English: However, Baozhizhi did not listen to the arrangement, so Liu Yu had to ambush a lot of battle flags and drums.

古文：裕举旗鸣鼓，贼以为四面有军，乃退。嗣之追之，战没。
现代文：吴地人的前锋部队与变民军队交上战之后，几支伏兵便都一齐杀出，刘裕又让人挥舞旗帜，呜击战鼓，变民的军队以为是四下里都有军队伏击，才退了下去。鲍嗣之莽撞跟踪追击，在战斗中被杀死。
English: After the Wu people's forward troops and the mutineers' army fought, several ambush troops were killed together. Liu Yu also had people wave flags and beat war drums. The mutineers' army thought that there were army ambushes everywhere, and then retreated. Baozhi recklessly followed and chased, and was killed in the battle.

古文：裕且战且退，所领死伤且尽，至向战处，令左右脱取死人衣以示闲暇。
现代文：刘裕也一边交战一边撤退，所带领的军卒几乎全部伤亡，退到刚开始接战的地方，命令左中的军卒脱下死人的衣服拿走，用来显示自己情志闲暇，从容不迫。
English: Liu Yu also retreated while fighting, and the soldiers he led were almost all casualties. He retreated to the place where the battle had just begun, and ordered the soldiers in the middle left to take off the dead man's clothes and take them away, which was used to show that he was leisurely and relaxed.

古文：贼疑之，不敢逼。
现代文：变民军队果然满腹狐疑，不敢逼进。
English: As expected, the mutineers were full of suspicion and did not dare to force their way in.

古文：裕大呼更战，贼惧而退，裕乃引归。
现代文：刘裕突然高声呐喊，指挥军队回头再战，孙恩军队恐惧异常，掉头撤退，这样，刘裕才安全地带着部队回去。
English: Liu Yu suddenly shouted loudly, commanding the army to turn back and fight again. Sun En's army was extremely afraid and turned back to retreat. Thus, Liu Yu was able to return safely with his troops.

古文：河西王利鹿孤伐凉，与凉王隆战，大破之，徙二千馀户而归。
现代文：南凉河西王秃发利鹿孤讨伐后凉，与后凉王吕隆接战，将吕隆打得大败，强行迁移二千多户居民之后便回去了。
English: In Nanlianghe, the West King Bald-Faced Deer Lone fought against Houliang, and engaged in a battle with Houliang King Lulong. He defeated Lulong and forcibly relocated more than two thousand residents before returning.

古文：夏，四月，辛卯，魏人罢鄴行台，以所统六郡置相州，以庾岳为刺史。
现代文：夏季，四月，辛卯，北魏朝廷撤销设置在邺城的行台，把原由行台所管辖的六郡建置相州，任命庾岳为相州刺史。
English: In the summer, April, Xinwu, the Northern Wei Dynasty court revoked the gangway set up in Shicheng, and built the six counties originally under the jurisdiction of the gangway into Xiangzhou, and appointed Xiangyue as the history of Xiangzhou.

古文：乞伏乾归至苑川，以边芮为长名，王松寿为司马，公卿、将帅皆降为僚佐偏裨。
现代文：后秦归义侯乞伏乾归回到苑川，任命边芮为长史，王松寿为司马，原来的公卿、将帅都降为慕僚佐属、偏军牙将等小官。
English: After the Qin Dynasty was overthrown, Qian Hui returned to Yuanchuan and appointed Benqi as Chang Shi, Wang Song Shou as Sima, and the former noblemen and generals were all reduced to minor officials such as Mu Liang Zui, Bi Jun Zagong and so on.

古文：北凉王业惮沮渠蒙逊勇略，欲远之；蒙逊亦深自晦匿，业以门下侍郎马权代蒙逊为张掖太守。
现代文：北凉王段业对张掖太守沮渠蒙逊的勇武谋略都很忌惮，所以打算疏远他，沮渠蒙逊也对此有所察觉，暗自尽量地韬光养晦，不使自己的才能外露。段任命门下侍郎马权代替沮渠蒙逊担任张掖太守。
English: King Duan of the Northern Liang Dynasty was very wary of the courageous strategy of Zhang Qiuqiu Meng Rong, so he planned to alienate him. De Duqiu Meng Rong was also aware of this and secretly tried his best to keep a low profile so as not to expose his talents. Du appointed his servant Ma Quan to replace De Duqiu Meng Rong as Zhang Qiuqiu.

古文：权素豪隽，为业所亲重，常轻侮蒙逊。
现代文：马权平时为人豪放俊拔，一直被段业亲信重用，所以，他常常依仗这轻慢、欺侮沮渠蒙逊。
English: In ordinary times, Ma Quan was a heroic and brilliant person. He had always been taken advantage of by Duan Ye's cronies. Therefore, he often relied on this arrogance, bullying and frustration.

古文：蒙逊谮之于业曰： 天下不足虑，惟当忧马权耳。 
现代文：沮渠蒙逊于是向段业说马权的坏话道： 天下没有什么值得忧虑的事，您只应当提防马权就可以了。 
English: Dejected, Monson then spoke ill of horse power to Duan Ye: There is nothing to worry about in the world, you should just beware of horse power.

古文：业遂杀权。
现代文：段业于是杀了马权。
English: Duan Ye then killed Ma Quan.

古文：蒙逊谓沮渠男成曰： 段公无鉴断之才，非拨乱之主，向所惮者惟索嗣、马权。今皆已死，蒙逊欲降之以奉兄，何如？ 
现代文：沮渠蒙逊对沮渠男成说： 段公没有鉴别真假、判断优劣的才能，不是一个平定乱世的圣明君主，我以前所忌惮担心的只有索嗣，马权二人，现在他们都已经死了，我沮渠蒙逊准备除掉段业而来拥戴兄长您，怎么样？ 
English: Deshu Monson said to Deshu Mancheng: Duan Gong has no ability to distinguish between true and false, to judge the merits and demerits, and is not a saintly monarch to pacify the chaotic world. I used to be afraid of only So He, Ma Quan and two others, but now they are all dead. I, Deshu Monson, am ready to get rid of Duan Ye and embrace you, my brother. How about it?

古文：男成曰： 业本孤客，为吾家所立，恃吾兄弟，犹鱼之有水。
现代文：沮渠男成说： 段业本来就是一个孤身而来的外乡人，是我们沮渠家拥立他登上王位的，他依靠我们兄弟就像鱼必须有水那样。
English: "Tan Ye was originally a foreigner who came alone. It was we, the Deshu family, who supported him to ascend to the throne. He relied on our brothers like a fish must have water," said Deshu Mancheng.

古文：夫人亲信我而图之，不祥。
现代文：像这样，人家亲近宠信我们，但我们却反过来要图谋他，一定不吉利。 
English: It must be unlucky for someone to be so close to us and trust us, but for us to plot against him.

古文：蒙逊乃求为西安太守。业喜其出外，许之。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊于是请求出京去做西安太守，段业对他能远远离开自己，到外地去做官，非常高兴，马上答应了他。
English: Dejected, Mengxun then requested to go to Beijing to become the governor of Xi'an. Duan Ye was very happy that he could leave himself far away and go to a foreign country to become an official, and immediately agreed to it.

古文：蒙逊与男成约同祭兰门山，而阴使司马许咸告业曰： 男成欲以取假日为乱。若求祭兰门山，臣言验矣。 
现代文：沮渠蒙逊与沮渠男成约定一起去兰门山祭祀，但是，又暗地里派司马许咸事先向段业报告说： 沮渠男成打算在请假休息的时候发动政变，如果他来请求到兰门山去设祭，那么，臣的话就应验了。 
English: Depuqiu Mengxun and Depuqiu Nanchong agreed to go to the Lanmen Mountain for the sacrifice, but secretly sent Sima Xuxian to report to Duanye in advance: Depuqiu Nanchong planned to launch a coup while on leave. If he came to request to go to the Lanmen Mountain to hold the sacrifice, then the minister's words would be fulfilled.

古文：至期，果然。
现代文：到了那一天，果然是这样。
English: When the day came, it was like that.

古文：业收男成，赐死。
现代文：段业不分青红皂白，把沮渠男成抓了起来，命令他自杀。
English: Duan Ye indiscriminately grabbed the depressed man and ordered him to commit suicide.

古文：男成曰： 蒙逊先与臣谋反，臣以兄弟之故。隐而不言。
现代文：沮渠男成马上明白了这件事的原委，说： 沮渠蒙逊一开始与臣阴谋造反，臣因为是兄弟的原因，才把这件事隐瞒下来没有说。
English: Depuqiu Nansheng immediately understood the cause of the matter, saying: Depuqiu Mengxun initially plotted with the minister to rebel. The minister concealed the matter and did not say anything because he was a brother.

古文：今以臣在，恐部众不从，故约臣祭山而返诬臣，其意欲王之杀臣也。
现代文：现在因为有臣在这里，他害怕造反之后部众不肯跟他，所以事先约臣去兰门山设祭，但马上又反过来诬陷臣，他的意思就是让凉王您杀了臣呀。
English: Now, because there is a vassal here, he is afraid that his subordinates will not follow him after the rebellion, so he asked the vassal to go to Lanmen Mountain to hold a festival in advance, but he immediately framed the vassal. His intention was to have Liang Wang kill the vassal.

古文：乞诈言臣死，暴臣罪恶，蒙逊必反；臣然后奉王命而讨之，无不克矣。 
现代文：我请求陛下先假装着说臣已经死，并把臣的所谓罪恶公开。沮渠蒙逊一定会造反，臣随后奉陛下的命令、带兵去讨伐他，没有不能战胜的道理。 
English: I implore Your Majesty to first pretend that I am dead, and then expose my so-called crimes. If I fail, Monson will surely rebel, and I will then, on Your Majesty's orders, lead an army to fight him. There is no reason why we cannot defeat him.

古文：业不听，杀之。
现代文：但是，段业不听，把沮渠男成杀了。
English: However, Duan Ye did not listen and killed the frustrated man.

古文：蒙逊泣告众曰： 男成忠于段王，而段王无故枉杀之，诸君能为报仇乎？
现代文：沮渠蒙逊哭着对手下的众人说： 沮渠男成对段王忠诚不二，但是段王却无缘无故地把他给冤杀了，你们诸位能为他报仇雪恨吗？
English: Depuqiu Mengxun cried and said to his opponents: Depuqiu Nansheng was loyal to Duan Wang, but Duan Wang killed him for no reason. Can you avenge his death?

古文：且始者共立段王，欲以安众耳，今州土纷乱，非段王所能济也。 
现代文：况且一开始的时候，我们一起拥立段王，本打算能使大家的生活安定。现在各地的疆土纷乱不堪，事实证明段王已经不能有所作为，拯救乱世了。 
English: Moreover, at the beginning, we supported King Duan together, with the intention of making everyone's life stable. Now, the territories around the country are in turmoil, and the facts have proved that King Duan can no longer make a difference and save the chaotic world.

古文：男成素得众心，众皆愤泣争奋，比至氐池，众逾一万。
现代文：沮渠男成平素很得人心，因此，大家一听此话，都慷慨激昂，悲愤流泪，奋勇争先，等开进到了氐池的时候，主动参加进来的人已经超过一万。
English: "Despondent man" has always been popular, so when everyone heard this, they were all impassioned, sad, angry and tearful, and bravely competed for the first place. By the time they entered Dianchi Lake, more than ten thousand people had taken the initiative to participate.

古文：镇军将军臧莫孩帅所部降之，羌、胡多起兵应蒙逊者。
现代文：镇军将军臧莫孩率领着他所带的队伍也投降了过来，羌族、胡人也有许多人拉起队伍响应沮渠蒙逊。
English: The general of the town army, Zou Mo Hao, led his team to surrender, and many people from the Yao and Hu people also pulled up their teams to respond to the disaster.

古文：蒙逊进壁侯坞。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊的队伍向前逼近到了侯坞。
English: Dejected, Monson's party edged forward to the dock.

古文：业先疑右将军田昂，囚之；至是召昂，谢而赦之，使与武卫将军梁中庸共讨蒙逊。别将王丰孙言于业曰： 西平诸田，世有反者。昂貌恭而心险，不可信也。 
现代文：段业在这之前怀疑右将军田昂对自己不忠实，因此，把他囚禁起来。到了这时，又把田昂召了回来，向他道歉并赦免了他，派他与武卫将军梁中庸一起去征讨沮渠蒙逊，别将王丰孙向段业进言道： 西平郡出来的那些姓田的人，哪一代都有叛变的，田昂这个人外貌看来谦恭谨慎，但是内心里却阴险狡诈，不可信赖。 
English: Prior to this, Duan Ye suspected that the right-wing general Tian Ang was not loyal to him, so he imprisoned him. At this time, he recalled Tian Ang, apologized to him and pardoned him, and sent him to go with the general of the armed forces Liang Zhongyang to solicit the defection of Wang Fusong. Don't put Wang Fusong into Duan Ye, he said: Those people with the surname Tian who come from Xiping County have mutinies in every generation. This person, Tian Ang, looks courteous and cautious, but he is insidiously cunning and untrustworthy.

古文：业曰： 吾疑之久矣，但非昂无可以讨蒙逊者。 
现代文：段业说： 我怀疑他已经很久了，但是如果不是田昂，我这里就再也没有可以带兵去征讨沮渠蒙逊的人了。 
English: Duan Ye said: I suspect that he has been gone for a long time, but if it wasn't for Tian Ang, I would no longer have anyone here who could lead an army to recruit people who are depressed.

古文：昂至侯坞，帅骑五百降于蒙逊，业军遂溃，中庸亦诣蒙逊降。
现代文：田昂带兵来到侯坞，率领着五百名骑兵向沮渠蒙逊投降，段业的军队于是便不战而自行溃散，梁中庸也来面见沮渠蒙逊投降。
English: Tian Ang led his soldiers to Hou dock, and led 500 cavalrymen to surrender to Deshu Mengsong. Duan Yip's army then broke up without a fight, and Liang Zhongyong also came to see Deshu Mengsong surrender.

古文：五月，蒙逊至张掖，田昂兄子承爱斩关内之，业左右皆散。
现代文：五月，沮渠蒙逊的大军到达张掖，田昂的侄儿田承受砍开城门把他们放进城内，段业的左右侍从卫士们也都跑散了。
English: In May, Emperor Mengsong's great army arrived in Zhangye. Tian Ao's nephew Tian Xiang cut open the city gate and let them into the city. The guards on the left and right of Duan Ye also ran away.

古文：蒙逊至，业谓蒙逊曰： 孤孑然一己，为君家所推，愿匄馀命，使得东还与妻子相见。 
现代文：沮渠蒙逊进城，段业对沮渠蒙逊说： 我孤零零地只有一个人，被你们家推举，才坐上了王位。我请求你留下我的活命，让我能够回到东土去，和我的妻子儿女相见。 
English: When Deshu Monson entered the city, Duan Ye said to Deshu Monson, "I am the only one left, and I was chosen by your family to sit on the throne. I beg you to spare my life so that I can return to the East and see my wife and children."

古文：蒙逊斩之。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊没有答应，把他杀了。
English: Frustrated, Mengxun did not agree and killed him.

古文：业，儒素长者，无他权略，威禁不行，群下擅命；尤信卜筮、巫觋，故至于败。
现代文：段业，是一个仅死板地信奉儒家学说的长者，并没有什么其它的权谋和智略，因此，他的声威和命令都不能很好地得到尊重和传达，他手下的人也都擅做主张，不听朝廷的调遣，尤其是，他又特别相信占卜和巫术，所以才导致了最后的失败。
English: Duan Ye was an elder who only rigidly believed in the Confucian doctrine, and had no other stratagems and stratagems. As a result, his authority and orders could not be well respected and conveyed. His subordinates also arbitrarily advocated and did not listen to the court's dispatch. In particular, he particularly believed in divination and witchcraft, which led to the final failure.

古文：沮渠男成之弟富占、将军俱傫帅户五百降于河西王利鹿孤。
现代文：沮渠男成的弟弟沮渠富占、将军俱统率着五百户居民向南凉河西王秃发利鹿孤投降。
English: Deqiu Nanzheng's younger brother, Deqiu Fuzhou, led the general and 500 residents to surrender to the West King of the South Lianghe River, Bald Hairy Deer.

古文：傫，石子之子也。
现代文：俱是俱石子的儿子。
English: He is the son of Shiroishi.

古文：孙恩陷沪渎，杀吴国内史袁崧，死者四千人。
现代文：孙恩的军队攻克了沪渎，杀了吴国内史袁崧，在这场战斗中死亡四千人。
English: Sun En's army conquered Huzhong, killed Wuzhong Jinshi Yuan Qi, and four thousand people died in this battle.

古文：凉王隆多杀豪望以立威名，内外嚣然。人不自保。
现代文：后凉王吕隆，采用大肆杀戮有声望的豪门大族的办法，用来树立自己的威信和名望，因此，朝廷内外议论纷纷，一片哗然，人人自危。
English: King Lulong of the Later Liang Dynasty used the method of indiscriminate killing of prestigious families to establish his prestige and fame. As a result, discussions inside and outside the imperial court were in an uproar, and everyone was at risk.

古文：魏安人焦朗遣使说秦陇西公硕德曰： 吕氏自武皇弃世，兄弟相攻，政纲不立，竞为威虐。百姓饥馑，死者过半。
现代文：魏安人焦朗派遣使节向后秦陇西公姚硕德游说道： 吕氏自从武皇吕光去世之后，兄弟之间互相攻击残害，朝廷的大政法纪也不能确立遵守，人们只是比赛着看谁更加粗鲁暴虐，百姓却因为饥饿灾荒，死的已经超过一半。
English: Jiaolang of Wei'an sent an envoy to Yao Shuo Deyu, the Emperor of Qin and Western Wei, saying: Since the death of Emperor Wu and Emperor Luguang of the Lv dynasty, the brothers have attacked and mutilated each other, and the great political and legal discipline of the imperial court cannot be established and observed. People are just competing to see who is more rude and tyrannical, but more than half of the people have died due to famine.

古文：今乘其纂夺之际，取之易于返掌，不可失也。 
现代文：现在乘他们之间正在热心于互相篡夺残杀的机会，消灭他们易如反掌。千万不可失去机会呀！ 
English: Now that they are eager to usurp the opportunity to kill each other, eliminating them is as easy as pie. Don't miss the opportunity!

古文：硕德言于秦王兴，帅步骑六万伐凉，乞伏乾归帅骑七千从之。
现代文：姚硕德把这话向后秦国主姚兴作了汇报，然后便率步、骑兵六万人，对后凉发动了大规模的进攻，归义侯乞伏乾归也带着一支七千人的骑兵部队，跟着姚硕德一起出征。
English: Yao Shuo De reported this to Yao Xing, the ruler of Houqin, and then led 60,000 cavalry to launch a large-scale attack on Houyang. Gui Yihou and Gui Fu Qian Gui also took a cavalry force of 7,000 men and followed Yao Shuo De to go to war.

古文：六月，甲戌，孙恩浮海奄至丹徒，战士十馀万，楼船千馀艘，建康震骇。
现代文：六月，甲戌，孙恩从海上发兵，突然出现在丹徒，有士兵十多万人，战舰一千多艘。这使东晋的都城建康大为震惊恐慌。
English: In June, Ji Kun and Sun En sent troops from the sea and suddenly appeared in Dantu, with more than one hundred thousand soldiers and more than one thousand warships. This caused great shock and panic in Jiankang, the capital of East Jin.

古文：乙亥，内外戒严，百官入居省内。
现代文：乙亥，东晋都城内外戒严，文武百官全部聚集在台省机构内居住，随时办公。
English: In the Yihai and Eastern Jin Dynasties, martial law was imposed inside and outside the capital, and all the civil and military officials gathered in the institutions of Taiwan Province to live and work at any time.

古文：冠军将军高素等守石头，辅国将军刘袭栅断淮口，丹阳尹司马恢之戍南岸，冠军将军桓谦等备白石，左卫将军王嘏等屯中堂，征豫州刺史谯王尚之入卫京师。
现代文：冠军将军高素等人据守石头，辅国将军刘袭则带兵用木栅栏将淮口切断，丹阳尹司马恢之戍守在长江南岸，冠军将军桓谦等人在白石驻防，左卫将军王嘏等屯兵中堂，征召豫州刺史谯王司马尚之来京师卫守。
English: The champion general Gao Su and others guarded the stone, the auxiliary general Liu Wei led the soldiers to cut off the Huaijiao with a wooden fence, Danyang Yin Sima Hui's troops guarded the south bank of the Yangtze River, the champion general Huan Qian and others were stationed in Baishi, and the left guard general Wang Qi and other soldiers were stationed in the middle of the hall, and the Yuzhou general Wang Sima Shang was called up to guard the Beijing division.

古文：刘牢之自山阴引兵邀击恩，未至而恩已过，乃使刘裕自海盐入援。
现代文：刘牢之从山阴带兵前来截击孙恩，还没有赶到，孙恩的兵马已经过去了，于是，他让刘裕从海盐迅速赶来援助。
English: Liu Duozhi came from Shanyin with soldiers to intercept Sun En, but he had not arrived yet, Sun En's soldiers had already passed, so he asked Liu Yu from Haiyan to quickly come to his aid.

古文：裕兵不满千人，倍道兼行，与恩俱至丹徒。
现代文：刘裕的兵众一共也不满一千人，日夜兼程，一路急行军才与孙恩的部队几乎同时赶到了丹徒。
English: Liu Yu's soldiers totaled less than a thousand, traveling day and night, and they arrived in Dantu almost at the same time as Sun En's troops.

古文：裕众既少，加以涉远疲劳，而丹徒守军莫有斗志。
现代文：刘裕的兵卒本来就少，再加上赶很远的路，已经疲惫不堪，而丹徒原有的东晋守军又没有丝毫的斗志。
English: Liu Yu's soldiers were already too few and exhausted from the long journey, while Dantu's original East Jin defenders did not have the slightest fighting spirit.

古文：恩帅众鼓噪，登蒜山，居民皆荷担而立。
现代文：孙恩率领他的部队一齐高声呐喊，擂鼓助威，登上了蒜山，而当地的居民则都挑着担子站在那里。
English: Sun En led his troops in a high-pitched yell, beating drums and cheering, and ascended the Garlic Mountain, while the local residents stood there with their burdens.

古文：裕帅所领奔击，大破之，投崖赴水死者甚众，恩狼狈仅得还船。
现代文：刘裕率领着他手下的士兵奔向前去，对孙恩部队发动攻击，并把他们打得大败，变民从山崖上摔下，落入水中淹死的非常多，孙恩也仓惶狼狈得仅仅逃回到船上，才保住了命。
English: Liu Yu led his soldiers to rush forward to attack Sun En's troops and defeated them. Many of the mutineers fell off the cliff and drowned in the water. Sun En was so panicked that he only escaped back to the ship to save his life.

古文：然恩犹恃其众，寻复整兵径向京师。
现代文：但是他仍然依仗他自己的兵多，很快便重新整顿好部队，径直向京师开进了。
English: However, he still relied on his own large number of soldiers, quickly reorganized his troops, and drove straight into the Beijing Division.

古文：后将军元显帅兵拒战，频不利。
现代文：后将军司马元显率领部队前来迎战，但却不断地战败失利。
English: Later, General Sima Yuanxian led the troops to come to fight, but they were constantly defeated.

古文：会稽王道子无他谋略，唯日祷蒋侯庙。
现代文：会稽王司马道子没有其他办法，只是天天去到蒋侯庙去祭祀祈祷。
English: The auditor Wang Sima Daozi had no other choice but to go to the Jiang Hou Temple every day to offer sacrifices and prayers.

古文：恩来渐近，百姓恟惧。
现代文：孙恩的部队距离建康已经越来越近了，百姓人心惶惶，非常恐惧。
English: Sun En's troops were getting closer and closer to Jiankang, and the people were panicked and very afraid.

古文：谯王尚之帅精锐驰至，径屯积弩堂。
现代文：谯王司马尚之统领着他的精锐部队及时赶到，直接驻守在积弩堂。
English: King Sima Shangzhi, the leader of the Xiongnu, arrived in time with his elite troops and stationed them directly in Jiexuan Hall.

古文：恩楼船高大，溯风不得疾行，数日乃至白石。
现代文：孙恩的战舰非常高大，逆风行驭速度便无法加快，所以几天之后才到达白石。
English: Sun En's warship was very tall and could not speed up against the wind, so it took a few days to reach Shiroishi.

古文：恩本以诸军分散，欲掩不备；既而知尚之在建康，复闻刘牢之已还，至新洲，不敢进而去，浮海北走郁洲。
现代文：孙恩本来以为东晋各支部队驻守的地区比较分散，因此打算趁他们没有准备，发动突然袭击。但是到达白石后，得知司马尚之的部队正在建康，又听说刘牢之也已经回军，据守在新洲，所以，他再也不敢继续前进，只好回军，从海路，向北直扑郁洲。
English: Sun En originally thought that the areas garrisoned by the various East Jin troops were relatively scattered, so he planned to take advantage of their unpreparedness and launch a surprise attack. However, after arriving in Baishi, he learned that Sima Shangzhi's troops were recovering, and he also heard that Liu Diaozhi had returned to the army and was stationed in Xinzhou. Therefore, he no longer dared to continue moving forward, so he had to return to the army and attack Yuzhou from the north by sea.

古文：恩别将攻陷广陵，杀三千人。
现代文：孙恩手下的其他将领攻克了广陵，杀死了三千人。
English: Other generals under Sun En conquered Guangling and killed three thousand people.

古文：宁朔将军高雅之击恩于郁洲，为恩所执。
现代文：宁朔将军高雅之在郁洲向孙恩发动进攻，却被孙恩的军队抓获。
English: Ningshuo General Gao Yazhi launched an attack on Sun En in Yuzhou, but was captured by Sun En's army.

古文：桓玄厉兵训卒，常伺朝廷之隙，闻孙恩逼京师，建牙聚众，上疏请讨之。
现代文：荆州刺史桓玄无时无刻不在磨砺兵器，训练部队，经常严密注视着朝廷内部所出现的每一个对自己有利的微小变化。当他听说孙恩逼近京师，便赶紧树起军旗，集结队伍，向朝廷呈上疏奏，请求带兵去征讨孙恩。
English: Jingzhou admiral Huan Xuan was always sharpening his weapons and training his troops, and he often kept a close eye on every small change within the imperial court that was beneficial to him. When he heard that Sun En was approaching the Beijing division, he quickly raised the flag, assembled the team, presented it to the imperial court, and asked to lead the soldiers to solicit Sun En.

古文：元显大惧。
现代文：司马元显对此大为恐惧。
English: Sima Yuanxian was very afraid of this.

古文：会恩退，元显以诏书止之，玄乃解严。
现代文：正好赶上孙恩的军队撤了回去，于是，司马元显以诏书制止桓玄起兵，桓玄无奈，只好命令部队解除戒备。
English: Just in time for Sun En's army to withdraw, Sima Yuanxian issued an edict to stop Huan Xuan from raising an army. Huan Xuan had no choice but to order his troops to disarm.

古文：梁中庸等共推沮渠蒙逊为大都督、大将军、凉州牧、张掖公，赦其境内，改元永安。
现代文：北凉武卫将军梁中庸等人，一起推举沮渠蒙逊担任大都督、大将军、凉州牧、张掖公，他下令在他所管辖的范围内实行大赦，改年号为永安。
English: Liang Zhongyong, the general of the Northern Liangshan Military Region, and others jointly elected Deshu Mengsong as the grand governor, grand general, mayor of Liangzhou, and Zhang Yigong. He ordered an amnesty within the scope of his jurisdiction and changed the year name to Yongan.

古文：蒙逊署从兄伏奴为张掖太守、和平侯，弟挐为建忠将军、都谷侯，田昂为西郡太守，臧莫孩为辅国将军，房晷、梁中庸为左、右长史，张骘、谢正礼为左右司马。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊又任命他的堂兄沮渠伏奴为张掖太守、和平侯，任命他的弟弟沮渠为建忠将军、都谷侯，田昂为西郡太守，命臧莫孩为辅国将军，房晷、梁中庸为左右长史，张骘、谢正礼为左右司马。
English: Depuqiu Mengxun also appointed his cousin Depuqiu Funu as the Zhangye governor-general and warlord, appointed his brother Depuqiu as the Jianzhong general and the Dugu warlord, appointed Tian'ang as the Xi County governor-general, appointed Muye Mokha as the Auxiliary National General, appointed Fang Yu and Liang Zhongyong as the Left and Right Longshis, and appointed Zhang Yu and Xie Zhengli as the Left and Right Sima.

古文：擢任贤才，文武咸悦。
现代文：这样，他擢升、任用的都是贤明有才干的人物，文武官员都感到很舒心、很高兴。
English: In this way, his promotion and appointment were all wise and talented people, and the civil and military officials all felt very comfortable and happy.

古文：河西王利鹿孤命群臣极言得失。
现代文：南凉河西王秃发利鹿孤下令，让群臣畅所欲言，指出他为政的得失好坏。
English: The Western King of the Southern Liang River, Bald Rikku, ordered that his courtiers should speak freely, pointing out the merits and demerits of his policies.

古文：西曹从事史暠曰： 陛下命将出征，往无不捷。
现代文：西曹从事史说： 陛下命令将领们去出征伐战，去了便没有不得胜的。
English: Sicao engaged in history said: His Majesty ordered the generals to go to the conquest, and they did not fail to win.

古文：然不以绥宁为先，唯以徙民为务；民安土重迁，故多离叛，此所以斩将拔城而地不加广也。 
现代文：但是，我们打仗，不把安定民心、使他们的生活得到安宁作为首要的目的，而只是把迁移人口作为要务，百姓喜定居本土，不愿迁徙，所以经常出现离心叛逆的现象，这就是我们之所以斩杀敌将、攻克敌城，但是地域却不能更加拓展的原因。 
English: However, when we go to war, we do not regard the stability of the people's hearts and minds and the tranquility of their lives as the primary objective, but only regard the relocation of the population as an important task. The people prefer to settle on the mainland and do not want to migrate, so the phenomenon of centrifugal rebellion often occurs. This is the reason why we have killed the enemy general and conquered the enemy city, but the area cannot be further expanded.

古文：利鹿孤善之。
现代文：秃发利鹿孤觉得他说得很对。
English: The bald man thought he was right.

古文：秋，七月，魏兗州刺史长孙肥将步骑二万南徇许昌，东至彭城，将军刘该降之。
现代文：秋季七月，北魏兖州刺史长孙肥带领着步、骑兵共二万人，向南夺取了东晋的许昌，又向东进军到彭城。东晋将军刘该投降了他。
English: In the autumn of July, Sun Hui, the chief historian of the Northern Wei state of Bozhou, led a total of 20,000 cavalry on foot and marched south to capture Xu Chang in the Eastern Jin, and then marched east to Pengcheng. The Eastern Jin general Liu Gai surrendered to him.

古文：秦陇西公硕德自金城济河，直趣广武，河西王利鹿孤摄广武守军避之。
现代文：后秦陇西公姚硕德从金城附近渡过黄河，径直向广武逼近，南凉河西王秃发利鹿孤调动他在广武的守军撤退，避开了后秦国讨伐后凉国的军队。
English: After the Western Qin Emperor Yao Shuo De crossed the Yellow River from the vicinity of Jincheng and approached Guangwu directly, the Western King of the South Lianghe, Bald Rikku, mobilized his defenders in Guangwu to retreat, avoiding the army of the Western Qin Empire to fight against the Western Liang Empire.

古文：秦军至姑臧，凉王隆遣辅国大将军超、龙骧将军邈等逆战，硕德大破之，生擒邈，俘斩万计。
现代文：后秦军队到达姑臧，后凉王吕隆派遣辅国大将军吕超、龙骧将军吕邈等和后秦军迎战，姚硕德把他们打得大败，活捉了吕邈，俘虏杀戮的后凉军卒数以万计。
English: After the Qin army arrived in Guzheng, King Lulong of the Later Liang Dynasty sent General Luchao of the Auxiliary State and General Lv Ying of the Long March to fight against the Later Qin army. Yao Shuo De defeated them, captured Lv Ying alive, and killed tens of thousands of prisoners of the Later Liang army.

古文：隆婴城固守，巴西公佗帅东苑之众二万五千降于秦。西凉公暠、河西王利鹿孤、沮渠蒙逊各遣使奉表入贡于秦。
现代文：吕隆围绕着都城，指挥固守阵地。后凉巴西公吕佗率领着东苑的部队二万五千人向后秦投降，西凉公李、南凉河西王秃发利鹿孤、北凉张掖公沮渠蒙逊等都分别派遣使节捧着奏章，去向后秦纳贡。
English: Lulong encircled the capital, commanding and holding his ground. Later Liang, the Brazilian prince, led 25,000 troops from Dongyuan to surrender to Later Qin. Later Liang, the West Liang prince, Lulong, the West King of the South Liang River, and Zhang, the North Liang prince, sent envoys to pay tribute to Later Qin.

古文：初，凉将姜纪降于河西王利鹿孤，广武公傉檀与论兵略，甚爱重之，坐则连席，出则同车，每谈论，以夜继昼。
现代文：当初，后凉将军姜纪向南凉河西王秃发利鹿孤投降，广武公秃发檀与他探讨兵家战略，对他非常喜爱、推崇，如果坐下的话，便紧挨着、坐垫相连，如果出门的话，便一定要同坐一辆车，每次在一起谈论事情，都是白天说不完，晚上接着说。
English: At the beginning, General Jiang Ji of the Rear Liang surrendered to the West King of the South Lianghe River, Bald Rikugo. Guangwu Gong Bald Rikugo discussed military strategy with him. He was very fond of and respected by him. If they sat down, they sat next to each other, with cushions connected. If they went out, they had to ride in the same car. Every time they talked about things together, they couldn't finish talking during the day, and continued talking at night.

古文：利鹿孤谓傉檀曰： 姜纪信有美才，然视候非常，必不久留于此，不如杀之。纪若入秦，必为人患。 
现代文：秃发利鹿孤对秃发檀说： 姜纪的确具有很高的才华，但是我通过观察，觉得他不是一个有常性的人，一定不会长久地留在我们这里，所以，不如把他杀了，否则，姜纪如果去了秦，一定会成为我们的祸患。 
English: Bald-haired Lixia Guo said to Bald-haired Tan: Jiang Ji is indeed very talented, but through observation, I feel that he is not a person with constancy and will not stay with us for a long time. Therefore, it is better to kill him. Otherwise, if Jiang Ji goes to Qin, he will definitely become our scourge.

古文：傉檀曰： 臣以布衣之交待纪，纪必不相负也。 
现代文：秃发檀说： 我以平民的身分，平等地对待他，和他交朋友，姜纪一定不会对不起我。 
English: "As a commoner, I treat him as an equal and make friends with him. Jiang Ji will definitely not feel sorry for me.

古文：八月，纪将数十骑奔秦军，说硕德曰： 吕隆孤城无援，明公以大军临之，其势必请降；然彼徙文降而已，未肯遂服也。
现代文：八月，姜纪带着几十个骑兵投奔后秦军，对姚硕德说： 吕隆只守住一座孤城，却没有外来的部队援助，明公您指挥大军围困在他的城下，在那种情况下，他一定会请求投降。
English: In August, Jiang Ji took dozens of cavalrymen to join the Qin army, and said to Yao Shuo De: Lulong only guarded a lone city, but there was no outside military assistance. Ming Gong, you commanded a large army to besiege his city. In that case, he will definitely ask for surrender.

古文：请给纪步骑三千，与王松匆因焦朗、华纯之众，伺其衅隙，隆不足取也。
现代文：但是，他这只是嘴上说投降而已，心里并不一定马上便肯于服从我们。请您交给我步、骑兵三千人，与王松匆将军一起，利用后凉归顺过来的焦朗、华纯所带的部队，在旁边等待着他们内部矛盾的产生和机会的出现，那么，吕隆的被征服，就根本不成问题了。
English: However, he was only paying lip service to surrender, and his heart was not necessarily ready to obey us immediately. Please give me the march, three thousand cavalry, and, together with General Wang Songxuan, use the troops led by Jiao Lang and Hua Chun, who came over after Liang Liang's surrender, and wait for the emergence of internal contradictions and the emergence of opportunities. Then, the conquest of Lulong will not be a problem at all.

古文：不然，今秃发在南，兵强国富，若兼姑臧而据之，威势益盛，沮渠蒙逊、李暠不能抗也，必将归之，如此，则为国家之大敌矣。 
现代文：如果不这样的话，现在秃发利鹿孤在南方，军队强壮、国家富有，假若再把姑臧城兼并占有的话，那么，他的威霸之势便会越发强盛，而沮渠蒙逊和李没有力量抵抗他们，也一定会向他归附。一旦这样，那可就是秦的强大敌人了。 
English: If this were not the case, Bald-Faced Deer would be alone in the south now, with a strong army and a rich country. If he were to annex and occupy Guzheng, then his hegemony would become stronger and stronger, and if Mengxun and Li did not have the power to resist them, they would certainly join him. Once this happened, they would be a powerful enemy of Qin.

古文：硕德乃表纪为武威太守。配兵二千，屯据晏然。
现代文：姚硕德于是上奏请求任命姜纪做武威太守，并配给他一支两千人的部队，让他在晏然驻守。
English: Yao Shuo De then made a request to appoint Jiang Ji as Wuwei's eunuch, and assigned him a force of two thousand men to garrison the capital.

古文：秦王兴闻杨桓之贤而征之，利鹿孤不敢留。
现代文：后秦王姚兴听说杨桓非常贤明能干，便征召他到京师长安来，南凉河西王秃发利鹿孤也不敢擅自把他留下来。
English: Later, Qin King Yao Xing heard that Yang Huan was very wise and capable, so he conscripted him to come to Beijing Shifang and Chang'an. Nan Lianghe West King Bald Deer Lone did not dare to keep him without authorization.

古文：诏以刘裕下邳太守，讨孙恩于郁洲，累战，大破之。恩由是衰弱，复缘海南走，裕亦随而邀击之。
现代文：东晋朝廷下诏，任命刘裕为下邳太守，命他去郁洲征讨孙恩，几次接战，都把变民部队打得大败，孙恩的势力从此衰弱下来，再一次沿海向南败逃，刘裕也紧追不放，不断地向孙恩部队发动进攻。
English: The Eastern Jin Dynasty issued an edict, appointing Liu Yu as the next Jiaotong governor, and ordered him to go to Yuzhou to fight Sun En. Several battles were fought, and Sun En's forces were defeated. Sun En's forces were weakened from this point on, and he once again fled south along the coast. Liu Yu was also in hot pursuit, constantly launching attacks on Sun En's forces.

古文：燕王盛惩其父宝以懦弱失国，务峻威刑，又自矜聪察，多所猜忌，群臣有纤介之嫌，皆先事诛之。由是宗亲、勋旧，人不自保。
现代文：后燕王慕容盛鉴于他的父亲慕容宝因为过于懦弱，所以才丢掉国家大权的教训，所以，一心要加强自己的威严，施刑苛刻，加上他又自以为很明察，对手下的很多人都非常猜疑忌恨，大臣们稍有一点嫌疑，他都先杀掉再说，因此，即便是王室宗亲，功臣元老，也都不能自保。
English: In view of the fact that his father, Murong Bao, was too cowardly, he lost the lesson of state power. Therefore, he was determined to strengthen his dignity and impose harsh punishments. In addition, he thought he was very clear. Many of his opponents were very suspicious and envious. If the ministers had the slightest suspicion, he would kill them first. Therefore, even the royal family and meritorious veterans could not protect themselves.

古文：丁亥，左将军慕容国与殿上将军秦舆、段赞谋帅禁兵袭盛，事发，死者五百馀人。
现代文：丁亥，左将军慕容国与殿上将军秦舆、段阴谋率领禁卫军袭击慕容盛，事情暴露，牵连致死的有五百多人。
English: Ding Hai, the left general Murong Guo and the high-ranking generals Qin Yiwu and Duan conspired to lead the imperial guards to attack Murong Sheng, the matter was exposed, and more than five hundred people were implicated in the death.

古文：壬辰夜，前将军段玑与秦舆之子兴、段赞之子泰潜于禁中鼓噪大呼。
现代文：壬辰夜里，前将军段玑与秦舆的儿子秦兴、段的儿子段泰潜进禁宫之中擂鼓呐喊，大声呼叫。
English: In the middle of the night, the former general Duan Yu, Qin Yu's son Qin Xing, and Duan's son Duan Tai sneaked into the Forbidden City, beating drums and shouting loudly.

古文：盛闻变，帅左右出战，贼众逃溃。
现代文：慕容盛听到有兵变的消息，率领着左右的亲兵出来迎战，兵变的众人逃跑溃散。
English: When Murong Sheng heard the news of a mutiny, he led his left and right soldiers out to fight, and the mutineers fled and dispersed.

古文：玑被创，匿厢屋间。
现代文：段玑受了伤，藏到旁边的房屋之内。
English: Duan Qi was injured and hid in a nearby house.

古文：俄有一贼从暗中击盛，盛被伤，辇升前殿，申约禁卫，事宁而卒。
现代文：不一会儿，有一个参预兵变的士兵从黑暗中突然向慕容盛偷袭，刺中慕容盛，使他受到重伤。但在这种情况下，慕容盛还是坐着轿来到前殿，重新申述强调禁宫的规定，布置警卫，等事情安定之后才断气而死。
English: Soon after, a soldier who had participated in the pre-emptive mutiny suddenly attacked Murong Sheng from the darkness, stabbing him and seriously injuring him. However, under these circumstances, Murong Sheng still came to the front hall in a sedan, reiterated the rules of the Forbidden City, arranged guards, and waited for things to stabilize before he died.

古文：中垒将军慕容拔、冗从仆射郭仲白太后丁氏，以为国家多难，宜立长君。
现代文：中垒将军慕容拔、冗从仆射郭仲向太后丁氏禀报，认为现在国家多灾多难，应该拥立一个年龄较大的人。
English: The middle-ranking general Murongba and the long-serving servant Guozhong reported to the Empress Dowager Ding that the country was now plagued by many disasters and difficulties, and that an older person should be appointed.

古文：时众望在盛弟司徒、尚书令、平原公元，而河间公熙素得幸于丁氏，丁氏乃废太子定，密迎熙入宫。
现代文：当时，大家的希望寄托在慕容盛的弟弟司徒、尚书令、平原公慕容元身上，但是河间公慕容熙在平时却很得丁太后的宠爱，于是丁太后便废黜了太子慕容定，秘密迎接慕容熙进宫。
English: At that time, everyone's hopes were pinned on Murong Sheng's younger brother Sitoru, Shang Shuling, and Pingyuan Gong Murong Yuan, but Kawama Gong Murong Xi was very fond of Empress Dowager Ding in ordinary times, so Empress Dowager Ding deposed Prince Murong Ding and secretly welcomed Murong Xi into the palace.

古文：明旦，群臣入朝，始知有变，因上表劝进于熙。
现代文：第二天早晨，文武大臣们进朝议政，才知道事情发生了变化，因此只好呈上奏章劝说慕容熙进位。
English: The next morning, the ministers of culture and armed forces went to the North to discuss politics, only to learn that things had changed, so they had no choice but to present a petition to persuade Murongxi to ascend the throne.

古文：熙以让元，元不敢当。
现代文：慕容熙让位给慕容元，慕容元不敢接受。
English: Murongxi gave way to Murong Yuan, but Murong Yuan did not dare to accept.

古文：癸巳，熙即天王位，捕获段玑等，皆夷三族。
现代文：癸巳，慕容熙登上了天王的位子，把段玑等人抓获，把他们的三族全部杀了。
English: Soon after, Murongxi ascended to the throne of heaven, captured Duan Yao and others, and killed all three of their clans.

古文：甲午，大赦。
现代文：甲午，实行大赦。
English: On the 22nd, an amnesty was implemented.

古文：丙申，平原公元以嫌赐死。
现代文：丙申，平原公慕容元，因为受猜忌，慕容熙命令他自杀。
English: According to Bishin, because of suspicion, Murongxi ordered him to commit suicide.

古文：闰月，辛酉，葬盛于兴平陵，谥曰昭武皇帝，庙号中宗。
现代文：闰月，辛酉，把慕容盛埋葬在兴平陵，追谥他叫昭武皇帝，庙号中宗。
English: The intercalary moon, Hsin Yi, buried Murong Sheng in Xingping Mausoleum. He was called Emperor Zhaowu and his temple name was Zhong Zong.

古文：丁氏送葬未还，中领军慕容提、步军校尉张佛等谋立故太子定，事觉，伏诛，定亦赐死。
现代文：丁太后出城为儿子送葬还没有回城的时候，中领军慕容提、步军校尉张佛等阴谋拥立原太子慕容定，事情被发觉，他们又全都被杀。
English: When Empress Dowager Ding went out of the city to attend her son's funeral and had not yet returned to the city, the middle leader Murong Ti and the infantry lieutenant Zhang Fo conspired to support the former crown prince Murong Ding. The matter was discovered and they were all killed.

古文：丙寅，大赦，改元光始。
现代文：慕容熙又命令慕容定自杀。丙寅，实行大赦，改年号为光始。
English: Murongxi also ordered Murongding to commit suicide. Xiong Yin implemented an amnesty and changed the year name to Guangxi.

古文：秦陇西公硕德围姑臧累月，东方之人在城中者多谋外叛，魏益多复诱扇之，欲杀凉王隆及安定公超，事发，坐死者三百馀家。
现代文：后秦陇西公姚硕德围困姑臧已经几个月，城中的许多原籍东方一带的人，都计划着向城外的后秦军叛降。后凉将军魏益多又在里面诱骗煽动人们，准备杀了后凉王吕隆和安定公吕超，不想事情败露，因此牵连被杀的人有三百多家。
English: After the Western Qin Emperor Yao Shuo De besieged Guzhen for several months, many people in the city who were originally from the East were planning to surrender to the Western Qin Army outside the city. The Western Qin Emperor Wei Yiduo also deceived and incited people inside, preparing to kill the Western Qin Emperor Lulong and the Western Qin Emperor Luchao. He did not want the matter to be revealed, so more than three hundred people were involved in the killing.

古文：硕德抚纳夷、夏，分置守宰，节食聚粟。
现代文：姚硕德接纳安抚夷族汉族的所有当地居民，并分别安排了一些地方官吏，如太守、县宰等。
English: Yao Shuo De accepted and appeased all local residents of the Han nationality of the Yi nationality, and separately arranged some local officials, such as the governor-general and the county magistrate.

古文：为持久之计。凉之群臣请与秦连和，隆不许。
现代文：他又命令手下的部队，节省粮食、积聚稻米，以此作为准备坚持长久围困姑臧的办法。后凉大臣们请求与后秦讲和联手，但吕隆坚决不同意。
English: He also ordered his troops to save grain and accumulate rice as a means of preparing to maintain a long siege of Gudang. Hou Liang's ministers requested to join forces with Hou Qin to declare peace, but Lulong firmly disagreed.

古文：安守公超曰： 今资储内竭，上下嗷嗷，虽使张、陈复生，亦无以为策。
现代文：安定公吕超说： 现在，我们内部的蓄积已经基本枯竭，上上下下全部嗷嗷待哺，在这种情况下，即使让张良、陈平复活，他们也不会有用来摆脱这种困境的方法。
English: Lu Chao said: Now, our internal reserves have been basically depleted, and we are all starving. Under these circumstances, even if Zhang Liang and Chen Ping were to be revived, they would not have the means to get out of this predicament.

古文：陛下当思权变屈伸，何爱尺书、单使为卑辞以退敌！
现代文：陛下应该考虑根据情况有所权宜变通，能屈能伸，为什么那么看重一纸书信和一介使节，而不愿以几句谦卑的话就把强大的敌人骗得退兵呢？
English: His Majesty ought to consider the situation as flexible and flexible as possible. Why should he attach so much importance to a letter and an envoy, and not be willing to deceive the powerful enemy into retreating with a few humble words?

古文：敌去之后，修德政以息民，若卜世未穷，何忧旧业之不复！
现代文：敌人撤退之后，我们可以致力于完善仁德的政事，用来使百姓获得休养生息。如果我们国家天定的气运还没有穷尽，何必担忧旧有的大业不能够恢复呢？
English: After the enemy's retreat, we can devote ourselves to perfecting the benevolent political affairs and use them to enable the people to obtain rest and recuperation. If our country's predestined fortune has not yet been exhausted, why worry that the old great cause cannot be restored?

古文：若天命去矣，亦可以保全宗族。
现代文：如果天命到头了，这样也可以保全我们的宗族。
English: If the fateful day comes to an end, this will also preserve our clan.

古文：不然，坐守困穷，终将何如！ 
现代文：如果不这样的话，只是坐在这里等着困乏穷极，到头来能怎么样呢？ 
English: Otherwise, what's the point of just sitting here waiting for exhaustion to set in?

古文：隆乃从之，九月，遣使请降于秦。
现代文：吕隆这才听从。九月，派遣使者向后秦请求投降。
English: In September, an envoy was sent to Houqin to request his surrender.

古文：硕德表隆为镇西大将军、凉州刺史、建康公。
现代文：姚硕德向朝廷呈上奏章，请求任命吕隆为镇西大将军、凉州刺史、建康公。
English: Yao Shude submitted a petition to the imperial court, requesting the appointment of Lulong as Zhenxi Grand General, Liangzhou Shishi, and Jiankang.

古文：隆遣子弟及文武旧臣慕容筑、杨颖等五十馀家入质于长安。
现代文：吕隆派遣子弟以及一些原来的文武大臣慕容筑、杨颖等五十多家的人口到长安去做人质。
English: Lulong sent his sons and some of the former ministers of culture and armed forces, such as Mu Rongzhu and Yang Ying, and more than fifty other people to Chang'an to become hostages.

古文：硕德军令严整，秋毫不犯，祭先贤，礼名士，西土悦之。
现代文：姚硕德军令严厉整肃，对当地的居民一丝一毫也不予侵犯，并且祭祀历史上的贤明之士，对当世有名望的人也是厚礼相待，所以，在西部土地上生活的百姓，都非常高兴。
English: Yao Shuo ordered the German army to severely clean up, not to infringe on the local residents at all, and to sacrifice the wise men of history, and to treat the famous people of the present world with courtesy, so the people living in the western land are very happy.

古文：沮渠蒙逊所部酒泉、凉宁二郡叛降于西凉，又闻吕隆降秦，大惧，遣其弟建忠将军挐、牧府长史张潜见硕德于姑臧，请帅其众东迁。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊所属的酒泉、凉宁两个郡，都向西凉叛降，他又听说吕隆也投降了后秦，因此，非常害怕，他派遣他的弟弟建忠将军沮渠、牧府长史张潜去姑臧拜见姚硕德，请求允许他带着他的所有部众向东迁移。
English: The two counties of Jiuquan and Liangning, both of which belonged to Deqiu Mengxun, had all surrendered to Xiliang. He also heard that Lulong had also surrendered to Houqin. Therefore, he was very afraid. He sent his brother, General Jianzhong Deqiu, and the head of the pastoral department, Zhang Xian, to visit Yao Shuo De in Guqiu and request permission to move east with all his followers.

古文：硕德喜，拜潜张掖太守，挐建康太守。
现代文：姚硕德非常高兴，任命张潜为张掖太守，沮渠为建康太守。
English: Yao Shude was very pleased and appointed Zhang Qian as Zhang Ye's daimyo, and Du Du as Jian Kang's daimyo.

古文：潜劝蒙逊东迁。
现代文：张潜竭力地劝沮渠蒙逊率部属向东迁移。
English: Zhang Qian tried his best to persuade his subordinates to migrate eastward.

古文：挐私谓蒙逊曰： 姑臧未拔，吕氏犹存，硕德粮尽将还，不能久也。何为自弃土宇，受制于人乎！ 
现代文：沮渠却在私下里对沮渠蒙逊说： 姑臧现在还没有被攻克，吕氏政权也还继续存在，姚硕德的部队粮草用尽之后，一定就会回去，不能呆得太久，为什么自己主动放弃已有的疆土，而去受别人的控制呢？ 
English: However, Deshu Quan said to Deshu Mengxun in private, "Gujing has not yet been conquered, and the Lv regime still exists. After Yao Shuo De's troops run out of grain and grass, they will definitely go back. They cannot stay too long. Why should they voluntarily give up the existing territory and be controlled by others?

古文：臧莫孩亦以为然。
现代文：臧莫孩也深以为然。
English: Zou Moyao is also deeply convinced.

古文：蒙逊遣子奚念为质于河西王利鹿孤，利鹿孤不受，曰： 奚念年少，可遣挐也。 
现代文：沮渠蒙逊把自己的儿子沮渠奚念派到南凉秃发利鹿孤那里去做人质，向秃发利鹿孤求援。秃发利鹿孤不接受沮渠奚念，说： 沮渠奚念年纪太小，可以把沮渠派来。 
English: Deshu Monson sent his own son, Deshu Miao Nian, to Nanliang to be a hostage and to ask for help from Bald Bald Deer Alley. Bald Bald Deer Alley did not accept Deshu Miao Nian, saying: Deshu Miao Nian is too young, you can send Deshu.

古文：冬，十月，蒙逊复遣使上疏于利鹿孤曰： 臣前遣奚念具披诚款，而圣旨未昭，复征弟挐。
现代文：冬季，十月，沮渠蒙逊再一次派使节，向秃发利鹿孤上疏说： 臣下前次派遣奚念到陛下那里去，的确是寄托着臣的一片诚意，但是陛下的圣意却未能明鉴臣的良苦用心，所以才再向臣索要弟沮渠。
English: In the winter, in October, Deshu Monson once again sent an envoy to the bald-headed Rikka alone, saying: "The last time the vassal sent his thoughts to His Majesty, it was indeed a piece of sincerity entrusted to the vassal, but His Majesty's holy will could not clearly judge the good intentions of the vassal, so he asked the vassal for his brother Deshu again.

古文：臣窃以为苟有诚信，则子不为轻；若其不信，则弟不为重。
现代文：臣下心中认为，如果有诚心信义的话，那么儿子的重量就不轻，如果不讲信义，那么即使是弟弟，分量也不是很重的。
English: In the minds of his subjects, if there is sincerity and loyalty, then the weight of a son is not light, if there is no loyalty, then even a younger brother, the weight is not very heavy.

古文：今寇难未夷，不获奉诏，愿陛下亮之。 
现代文：现在，臣这里强盗来犯的危难还没有平复，所以，不能遵奉陛下的旨意，但愿陛下能够知道臣的难处，原谅臣。 
English: Now, my lord, the danger caused by the bandits here has not yet been resolved, so I cannot follow your majesty's will. I hope your majesty can understand my lord's predicament and forgive me.

古文：利鹿孤怒，遣张松侯俱延、兴城侯文支将骑一万袭蒙逊，至万岁临松，执蒙逊从弟鄯善苟子，虏其民六千馀户。
现代文：秃发利鹿孤被沮渠蒙逊的话所激怒，派遣张松侯秃发俱延，兴城侯秃发文支，带领一万骑兵袭击沮渠蒙逊，很快便把部队推进到了万岁、监松一线，抓获了沮渠蒙逊的堂弟沮渠鄯善苟子，并虏掠了北凉百姓六千多户。
English: Bald Rikuo was enraged by the words of Deshu Monson, sent Zhang Songguo Bald Rikuo and Xingcheng Hou Bald Rikuo to lead ten thousand cavalry to attack Deshu Monson, and soon pushed the troops to the first line of Wanzhong and Guanzhong, captured Deshu Monson's cousin Deshu Zhenggouzi, and plundered more than six thousand Beilang people.

古文：蒙逊从叔孔遮入朝于利鹿孤，许以挐为质。利鹿孤乃归其所掠，召俱延等还。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊的堂叔沮渠孔遮，代表北凉来到南凉朝见秃发利鹿孤，答应把沮渠送来做人质，秃发利鹿孤这才把这次出兵抢回来的人口等，全部送还给了他们，召秃发俱延他们收兵回来。
English: Deshu Mengsong's cousin, Deshu Kongzhao, on behalf of the Northern Liang Clan, came to the Southern Liang Clan in the morning to see Balfa Lixia Guo, and promised to send Deshu to be a hostage. Balfa Lixia Guo then returned to them all of the people who had been snatched back by this expedition, and called on Balfa Guo to take back their soldiers.

古文：文支，利鹿孤之弟也。
现代文：秃发文支是秃发利鹿孤的弟弟。
English: Bald-haired Wen Zhi is the younger brother of Bald-haired Li Shuguo.

古文：南燕主备德宴群臣于延贤堂，酒酣，谓君臣曰： 朕可方自古何等主？ 
现代文：南燕国主慕容备德，在延贤堂宴请文武大臣们，酒喝得最痛快、情绪最高涨的时候，他对大臣们说： 朕可以和自古以来的什么等级的君主相比？ 
English: The Nanyan sovereign, Murong Bei De, invited the ministers of literature and armed forces to a banquet in Yan Xiantang. When he was drinking the most delicious wine and his mood was at its peak, he said to the ministers: I can be compared to what level of monarch since ancient times?

古文：青州刺史鞠仲曰： 陛下中兴圣主，少康、光武之俦。 
现代文：青州刺史鞠仲回答说： 陛下是中兴国运的圣明君主，当然与夏朝的少康帝、汉朝的光武帝是一样的了。 
English: Jizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizh replied: Your Majesty is the Holy Emperor of Zhongxing National Movement, of course, it is the same as the Xia Dynasty's Emperor Shoko and the Han Dynasty's Emperor Guangwu.

古文：备德顾左右赐仲帛千匹，仲以所赐多，辞之。
现代文：慕容备德示意左右侍从，赏赐鞠仲一千匹绸缎。鞠仲因为赏赐的东西太多，连忙辞谢。
English: Murong Bide gestured to the attendants on his right and left, and rewarded Mu Zhong with a thousand silk cocoons. Mu Zhong hurriedly declined the offer because the reward was too much.

古文：备德曰： 卿知调朕，朕不知调卿邪！
现代文：慕容备德说： 你知道拿话来调笑我，难道朕就不知道调笑调笑你吗？
English: Murong Bei De said: You know how to use words to make fun of me, don't I know how to make fun of you?

古文：卿所以非实，故朕亦以虚言赏卿耳。 
现代文：你回答我的话不是实话，所以，朕也不过是用虚言空话来赏赐你罢了。 
English: You have not answered me with the truth, so I have rewarded you with nothing but lies.

古文：韩范进曰： 天子无戏言。今日之论，君臣俱失。 
现代文：韩范进言道： 作为天子，是不应该说玩笑话的，今天你们两人所说的话，君主与臣下都是不对的。 
English: Han Fan Jin said, "As a heavenly son, you should not joke. What you two said today is not right for a monarch or a subject.

古文：备德大悦，赐范绢五十匹。
现代文：慕容备德非常高兴，赏赐给韩范绢绸五十匹。
English: Murong Beide was very pleased and rewarded Han Fan with fifty silkworms.

古文：备德母及兄纳皆在长安，备德遣平原人杜弘往访之。
现代文：慕容备德的母亲和哥哥慕容纳，都留在长安居住，慕容备德派遣平原人杜弘前去探望他们。
English: Murong Bei De's mother and elder brother, Murong Bei De, both lived in Chang'an. Murong Bei De sent Du Hong, a Plainsman, to visit them.

古文：弘曰： 臣至长安，若不奉太后动止，当西如张掖，以死为效。
现代文：杜弘说： 我到长安之后，如果找不到太后，不能了解太后们的身体生活等情况，那么，我会向西再到张掖去打听，尽全力完成任务，一直到死。
English: Du Hong said, "After I get to Chang'an, if I can't find the empress dowager and can't understand the physical life and other conditions of the empress dowager, then I will go west to Zhangye to inquire and do my best to complete the task until I die."

古文：臣父雄年逾六十，乞本县之禄以申乌鸟之情。 
现代文：但是，我的父亲杜雄，年龄已经过了六十岁，我请求陛下能给他一个做本县县令的俸禄，这样，才可以代我表明象乌鸦反哺那样的孝敬父母的心情。 
English: However, my father, Du Xiong, is over sixty years old. I ask Your Majesty to give him a salary to be the county magistrate of this county, so that I can express my feelings of filial piety to my parents like a crow.

古文：中书令张华曰： 杜弘未行而求禄，要君之罪大矣。 
现代文：中书令张华说： 杜弘还没有走，便事先请求俸禄，这样要挟君王，罪过太大了。 
English: Zhang Hua said: Du Hong has not left yet, he asked for a salary in advance, so he blackmailed the king, the crime is too great.

古文：备德曰： 弘为君迎母，为父求禄，忠孝备矣，何罪之有！ 
现代文：慕容备德却说： 杜弘既然为君主去寻找、迎接母亲，为自己的老父亲请求俸禄，可以说是忠孝两全了，有什么罪过呢？ 
English: Murong Bei De said, "Since Du Hong went to find and greet his mother for the monarch and asked for a salary for his old father, it can be said that he was loyal and filial, what is the crime?

古文：以雄为平原令。
现代文：果然任命杜雄为平原县令。
English: Du Xiong was appointed as the county magistrate of Pingyuan County.

古文：弘至张掖，为盗所杀。
现代文：杜弘到达张掖之后，就被强盗杀害了。
English: After Du Hong arrived in Zhangye, he was killed by robbers.

古文：十一月，刘裕追孙恩至沪渎、海盐，又破之，俘斩以万数，恩遂自浃口远窜入海。
现代文：十一月，东晋刘裕追击变民孙恩的部队，来到沪渎、海盐，又一次把他们打败，俘虏斩杀的人数以万计，孙恩于是只好从浃口远远地逃向大海。
English: In November, Liu Yu of the Eastern Jin Dynasty chased Sun En's army of mutineers, came to Huzhou and Haiyan, defeated them again, and killed tens of thousands of prisoners. Sun En then had to flee far away from Hekou to the sea.

古文：十二月，辛亥，魏主珪遣常山王遵、定陵公和跋帅众五万袭没弈干于高平。
现代文：十二月，辛亥，北魏国主拓跋派遣常山王拓跋遵、定陵公和跋，率领军卒五万人，在高平进攻后秦车骑将军没弈干。
English: In December, Xinhai, the Northern Wei sovereign Tuoba dispatched the Changshan King Tuoba Zun, Dingling Gong and Tuoba, leading an army of fifty thousand soldiers. After the Gaoping attack, the Qin chariot and cavalry general did not do anything.

古文：乙卯，魏虎威将军宿沓干伐燕，攻令支；乙丑，燕中领军宇文拔救之。
现代文：乙卯，北魏虎威将军宿沓干带兵讨伐后燕，向令支发起进攻。乙丑，后燕中领军宇文拔赶来援救。
English: At the same time, the Northern Wei Tiger General Succubus led an army to fight against Houyan and launched an attack on Lingzhi. At the same time, the leader of Houyan, Uwenba, came to the rescue.

古文：壬午，宿沓干拔令支而戍之。
现代文：壬午，宿沓干攻克令支，据守在那里。
English: In the morning of the third day of the third month, Suqian attacked and conquered Lingshi, and was garrisoned there.

古文：吕超攻姜纪，不克，遂攻焦朗。
现代文：后凉安定公吕超，进攻后秦姜纪驻守的晏然，没有攻克，于是，又转而去进攻焦朗所驻守的魏安。
English: After Liang Liang and Guan Luchao, after the attack, Qin Jiangji's garrison was not defeated, so he turned to attack Wei'an, which was garrisoned by Jiao Lang.

古文：朗遣其弟子嵩为质于河西王利鹿孤以请迎，利鹿孤遣车骑将军傉檀赴之。
现代文：焦朗派他的侄儿焦嵩到南凉河西王秃发利鹿孤那里去做人质，请求他们派兵前来营救，秃发利鹿弧于是派遣车骑将军秃发檀向魏安进军。
English: Jiao Lang sent his nephew Jiao Song to the Southern Lianghe West King Bald Fa Li Shuguo to be a hostage and asked them to send troops to come to the rescue. Bald Fa Li Shuguo then sent the chariot and cavalry general Bald Fa Dan to march to Wei'an.

古文：比至，超已退，朗闭门拒之。何檀怒，将攻之，镇北将军俱延谏曰： 安土重迁，人之常情。
现代文：等他们赶到的时候，吕超已经带兵退走，焦朗却紧闭城门，拒绝迎接他们进城，秃发檀为此大怒，打算进攻魏安城。镇北将军秃发俱延劝阻说： 安于故土而不愿随便迁徙，这是人之常情。
English: By the time they arrived, Lü Chao had already retreated with his troops, but Jiaolang closed the city gates tightly and refused to welcome them into the city. Baldur was furious about this and planned to attack Wei'an City. Zhenbei General Baldur dissuaded him, saying, "It is human nature to be at ease in one's native land and not want to move at will."

古文：朗孤城无食，今年不降，后年自服，何必多杀士卒以攻之！
现代文：焦朗据守着一座孤城，没有粮食，即使今年不投降，再过一年也会自己前来拜服，何必现在一定要过多地杀戮士卒，来进攻他们呢？
English: Jiaolang was guarding an isolated city and had no food. Even if they did not surrender this year, they would come to pay homage in another year. Why must they kill too many soldiers to attack them now?

古文：若其不捷，彼必去从他国。
现代文：如果一旦攻打他又不能取胜，他一定会去归附别的国家。
English: If he is attacked and cannot win, he will certainly go and join another country.

古文：弃州境士民以资邻敌，非计也；不如以善言谕之。 
现代文：这样放弃本州地域之内的居民士人，送给与我们相邻的敌国，不是一个好办法。我看不如用好话来好好地安抚他们。 
English: It's not a good idea to give up the residents of our state to a neighboring enemy country, and I don't think it's a good idea to appease them with kind words.

古文：檀乃与朗连和，遂曜兵姑臧，壁于胡阬。
现代文：秃发檀这才与焦朗和好结盟，于是，他又到后凉国的都城姑臧去大肆炫耀自己的兵力。然后，便在胡扎下大营。
English: It was only then that Bald-Faced Sandalwood made an alliance with Jiaolang, so he went to the capital of Houliang to show off his troops. Then, he made a big camp under the Huza.

古文：傉檀知吕超必来斫营，畜火以待之。超夜遣中将军王集帅精兵二千斫傉檀营，傉檀徐严不起。
现代文：秃发檀料知吕超当天晚上一定会来劫营，所以事先准备好了火把，等待他们，晚上吕超果然派遣中垒将军王集率领精锐部队二千人前来袭击秃发檀大营，秃发檀命令部队暂时不要反击。
English: Bald-headed Dan knew that Luchao would certainly come to rob the camp that evening, so he prepared torches in advance and waited for them. In the evening, Luchao sent the middle-ranking general Wang to gather and lead 2,000 elite troops to attack Bald-headed Dan's camp. Bald-headed Dan ordered the troops not to fight back for the time being.

古文：集入垒中，内外皆举火，光照如昼；纵兵击之，斩集及甲首三百馀级。
现代文：等到王集的部队全部冲进他的壁垒之中，他这才命令大军在营帐内外一同点起火把，火光把黑夜照得像白天一样，同时又驱兵攻打王集的军队，斩杀了王集以及其他顶盔带甲的士兵三百多人。
English: He waited until all of Wang Ji's troops had stormed into his ramparts, and then he ordered the large army to light torches inside and outside the camp together. The light of the fire lit the night like day, and at the same time drove the soldiers to attack Wang Ji's army, killing Wang Ji and more than three hundred other soldiers with armor.

古文：吕隆惧，伪与檀通好，请于苑内结盟，傉檀遣俱延入盟，俱延疑其有伏，毁苑墙而入。
现代文：吕隆为此大为害怕，假装要和秃发檀互相交好，并邀请他去宫中内花园里去缔结盟约。秃发檀派秃发俱延进城参加结盟仪式。秃发俱延怀疑后凉设有埋伏，因此捣毁了一处花园墙壁进入园中。
English: Lulong was very afraid of this and pretended to make friends with Balfa and invited him to the palace garden to make an alliance. Balfa sent Balfa into the city to participate in the alliance ceremony. Balfa suspected Houliang of setting up an ambush, so he destroyed a garden wall to enter the garden.

古文：超伏兵击之，俱延失马步走，氵夌江将军郭祖力战拒之，俱延乃得免。
现代文：吕超设下的伏兵果然向他偷袭，秃发俱延失去了战马，只好步行逃走，凌江将军郭阻竭力奋战，抵挡后凉伏兵的追杀，秃发俱延才得免一死。
English: The ambush set up by Lü Chao did indeed attack him. Bald-haired Gu Yan lost his horse and had to flee on foot. Lingjiang General Guo fought hard to resist the pursuit of the cold-blooded ambush, and Bald-haired Gu Yan was spared death.

古文：傉檀怒，攻其昌松太守孟礻韦于显美。
现代文：秃发檀在显美对后凉吕松太守孟发动猛攻。
English: Bald-headed Sandalwood launched an onslaught on Houliang Liusong Taishou Meng in Henmei.

古文：隆遣广武将军荀安国、宁远将军石可帅骑五百救之。安国等惮傉檀之强，遁还。
现代文：吕隆派遣广武将军苟安国、宁远将军石可带领骑兵五百人前去救援，但是，苟安国等人却因为害怕秃发檀部队的强大势力，很快便逃了回去。
English: Lulong dispatched Guangwu General Guo Anguo and Ningyuan General Shike to lead 500 cavalrymen to the rescue, but Guo Anguo and others quickly fled back because they were afraid of the powerful forces of the bald troops.

古文：桓玄表其兄伟为江州刺史，镇夏口；司马刁畅为辅国将军、督八郡军事，镇襄阳；遣其将皇甫敷、冯该戍湓口。移沮、漳蛮二千户于江南，立武宁郡；更招集流民，立绥安郡。
现代文：东晋荆州刺史桓玄向朝廷奏请，任命他的哥哥桓伟做了江州刺史，镇守夏口；任命司马刁畅为辅国将军、督八郡军事，镇守襄阳。桓玄派他手下大将皇甫敷、冯该据守湓口，强行迁移沮水、漳水流域的二千户蛮族居民，到长江以南去居住，设置了武宁郡。
English: Eastern Jin Jingzhou statesman Huan Xuan appealed to the imperial court, appointing his brother Huan Wei as the statesman of Jiangzhou and the town guard of Xiakou; appointed Sima Yuchang as the general of the auxiliary state, the military governor of eight counties, and the town guard of Xiangyang. Huan Xuan sent his subordinate generals Huan Fuxi and Feng Kei to guard Hukou, forcibly relocate two thousand barbarian residents in the Deshui and Surabaya watersheds to live south of the Yangtze River, and set up Wuming County.

古文：诏征广州刺史刁逵、豫章太守郭昶之，玄皆留不遣。
现代文：他又把一些四处流浪的饥民招集在一起，增设了绥安郡。朝廷下诏书，征召广州刺史刁逵、豫章太守郭昶之进京，桓玄都把他们留住，不让他们去。
English: He also gathered together some of the starving people who were wandering around, and added Lian'an County. The imperial court issued an edict to conscript Guangzhou's Zhang Shizhen and Yuzhang's governor Guo Jizhi to go to Beijing, but Huan Xuan kept them and did not let them go.

古文：玄自谓有晋国三分之二，数使人上己符瑞，欲以惑众；又致笺于会稽王道子曰： 贼造近郊，以风不得进，以雨不致火，食尽故去耳，非力屈也。
现代文：桓玄自以为已经拥有了东晋三分之二的疆土，所以多次让人向他呈上他可以做君主的天命符征和吉兆，打算用这些来迷惑百姓；又给会稽王司马道子写信说： 孙恩那些盗贼，上次逼近京城的近郊，因为风不顺而没有能够攻打进来，又因为天下大雨，而没有机会运用火攻，所以在粮食吃完之后，自然便回去了，并不是力量不足。
English: Huan Xuan thought that he already owned two-thirds of the territory of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, so he repeatedly asked people to present him with the symbols of fate and good omens that he could be a monarch, intending to use these to confuse the people; he also wrote to the king of the court, Sima Daozi, saying: Sun En, those thieves, last time they approached the outskirts of Beijing, because the wind was not favorable and they were not able to attack, and because of the heavy rain, they did not have the opportunity to use fire, so after eating the grain, they naturally went back, it was not a lack of strength.

古文：昔国宝死后，王恭不乘此威入统朝政，足见其心非侮于明公也，而谓之不忠。
现代文：过去，王国宝死了之后，王恭没有乘这时的威势，进一步统领朝廷政务，这就完全可以让人看出他的居心，并没有对您有丝毫的不敬和侮辱，但是，您却说他不忠。
English: In the past, after the death of Wang Guobao, Wang Qiong did not take advantage of the power of the moment to further lead the government affairs of the imperial court. This can fully show his intention. He did not disrespect or insult you in the slightest, but you said that he was disloyal.

古文：今之贵要腹心，有时流清望者谁乎？
现代文：现在的朝中权要贵官，国家的心腹栋梁，深孚众望声名远播的人，是谁？
English: Who are the current high-ranking officials of the DPRK and China, the pillars of the country, and the people who are widely respected and famous?

古文：岂可云无佳胜！
现代文：怎么能说没有更好的？
English: How can you say there's nothing better?

古文：直是不能信之耳！
现代文：只不过是您不能相信他罢了！
English: It's just that you can't trust him!

古文：尔来一朝一夕，遂成今日之祸。
现代文：从此以来，日复一日，才酿成像今天这样的祸患。
English: Since then, day after day, it has only grown into the scourge it is today.

古文：在朝君子皆畏祸不言，玄忝任在远，是以披写事实。 
现代文：在朝廷中的那些王公大臣们因为害怕大祸临头，所以，不敢说话。桓玄我有愧远在外地任职，才有胆量揭露这样的事实。 
English: Those princes and ministers in the imperial court did not dare to speak out for fear of a catastrophe. I am ashamed to say that I had to work far away to have the courage to reveal such a fact.

古文：元显见之，大惧。
现代文：司马元显看到了这封信，非常害怕。
English: Sima Yuanxuan saw the letter and was very scared.

古文：张法顺谓元显曰： 桓玄承籍世资，素有豪气，既并殷、扬，专有荆楚，第下之所控引止三吴耳。
现代文：张法顺对司马元显说： 桓玄继承凭借他家世的名望和资历，双向来具有一股豪气，已经吞并了殷仲堪、杨期，自己独霸了荆楚一带的广大地区，但是您所能控制的真正可以算做属于您的疆界，也不过就是三吴之地罢了。
English: Zhang Faxun said to Sima Yuanxian: Huan Xuan, inheriting the fame and seniority of his family, has always had a strong spirit in both directions. He has already annexed Yin Zhongkan and Yang period, and he has dominated the vast areas around Jingchu. However, what you can control can really be regarded as your border, but it is just the land of Sanwu.

古文：孙恩为乱，东土涂地，公私困竭，玄必乘此纵其奸凶，窃用忧之。 
现代文：孙恩制造祸乱，使东部地区损失巨大，一片荒芜，朝廷、百姓积蓄枯竭，生活窘困，桓玄一定会乘此机会大肆施展他的奸恶凶残的手段，实现他的阴险目的。
English: Sun En wreaked havoc, causing huge losses in the eastern region, a wasteland, the depletion of the savings of the imperial court and the people, and a miserable life. Huan Xuan will certainly take this opportunity to make full use of his treacherous and cruel means to achieve his insidious purpose.

古文：元显曰： 为之奈何？ 
现代文：我心中以为这是值得我们忧虑的一件事。 司马元显说： 对此我们能怎么办呢？ 
English: In my mind, I thought it was something we should be worried about.Sima Yuanxian said: What can we do about it?

古文：法顺曰： 玄始得荆州，人情未附。方务绥抚，未暇他图。
现代文：张法顺说： 桓玄刚刚把荆州强占到手，当地百姓的人心和情感也都并没有完全归附他，因此，他也正在努力平定局势，安定民心，没有功夫考虑别的事。
English: Zhang Faxun said: Huan Xuan has just occupied Jingzhou by force, and the local people's hearts and emotions have not been completely attached to him. Therefore, he is also working hard to calm the situation and stabilize the people's hearts, and has no time to think about other things.

古文：若乘此际使刘牢之为前锋，而第下以大军继进，玄可取也。 
现代文：如果乘着这个时候派遣刘牢之为前锋，而您随后亲自带领大部队进发征剿，那么，桓玄一定可以被我们消灭。 
English: If you take advantage of this time to send Liu Diao as a striker, and then you personally lead the large force to go and collect the plunder, then, Huan Xuan can certainly be eliminated by us.

古文：元显以为然。
现代文：司马元显以为这话很对。
English: Sima Yuanxian thought this was very right.

古文：会武昌太守庾楷以玄与朝廷构怨，恐事不成，祸及于己，密使人自结于元显，云： 玄大失人情，众不为用，若朝廷遣军，己当为内应。 
现代文：正好这时武昌太守庾楷因为桓玄与朝廷的权要结下仇怨，恐怕事情以后不能成功，大祸牵连自己，所以偷偷地派人前来，主动向司马元显投靠，说： 桓玄非常不得人心，他的部下也不太听从他的命令，如果朝廷这时派军队去征讨，那么我一定作内应。 
English: It was just at this time that Wuchang Taishu Shunkai, because Huan Xuan and the power of the imperial court wanted to make a grudge, I am afraid that things will not be successful in the future, a great calamity will implicate himself, so he secretly sent someone to come and take the initiative to support Sima Yuanxian, saying: Huan Xuan is very unpopular, his subordinates are not very obedient to his orders, if the imperial court sends troops to collect at this time, then I will definitely do my duty.

古文：元显大喜，遣张法顺至京口，谋于刘牢之；牢之以为难。
现代文：司马元显非常高兴，马上派遣张法顺到京口去，找刘牢之商量。刘牢之却觉得征讨桓玄很困难。
English: Sima Yuanxian was very pleased and immediately sent Zhang Fashun to Beijing to seek Liu Diao's advice. Liu Diao, however, found it very difficult to conquer Huan Xuan.

古文：法顺还，谓元显曰： 观牢之言色，必贰于我，不如召入杀之；不尔，败人大事。 
现代文：张法顺回来后，对司马元显说： 我观察刘牢之的表情言谈，一定是与我们怀有二心，所以不如把他召到京城来杀掉。如果不这样，他就会败坏了我们的大事。 
English: After Zhang Faxun returned, he said to Sima Yuanxuan: "I observed Liu Diaozhi's expression and speech, he must have a grudge against us, so it's better to call him to Beijing to kill him. If not, he will ruin our big event."

古文：元显不从。
现代文：司马元显没有听他的活。
English: Sima Yuanxian did not listen to him.

古文：于是大治水军，征兵装舰，以谋讨玄。
现代文：东晋朝廷从此开始大规模地整治训练水上部队，征选兵卒、装备战舰，准备用来对桓玄发动进攻。
English: From then on, the Eastern Jin Dynasty court began large-scale rectification and training of water forces, recruiting soldiers and equipping warships, preparing to launch an attack on Kuan Xuan.

古文：安皇帝丁元兴元年
现代文：元兴元年
English: In the first year of the Genko era

古文：春，正月，庚午朔，下诏罪状桓玄，以尚书令元显为骠骑大将军、征讨大都督、都督十八州诸军事，加黄钺，又以镇北将军刘牢之为前锋都督，前将军谯王尚之为后部，因大赦，改元，内外戒严；加会稽王道子太傅。
现代文：春季，正月，庚午朔，东晋朝廷下诏书，历数荆州刺史桓玄的罪状，任命尚书令司马元显为骠骑大将军、征讨大都督、都督十八州诸军事，并把黄钺也加授给了他。又任命镇北将军刘牢之为前锋都督，任命前将军谯王司马尚之统率后卫部队。又下令实行大赦，改年号。在都城内外戒严，任命会稽王司马道子为太傅。
English: In the spring, in the first month of the year, at the dawn of the new year, the Eastern Jin Dynasty issued an edict to count the number of times Jingzhou stabbed Shih Huan Xuan, and appointed Shang Shou to appoint Sima Yuanxian as the cavalry general, the grand governor, and the governor of the eighteen states of the military, and also awarded him the Yellow Ribbon. He also appointed Zhenbei General Liu Du as the forward governor, and appointed the former general Shao Wang Sima Shang to lead the rear guard. He also ordered an amnesty and changed the year. In the capital and outside the city, he appointed the inspector Wang Sima Daozi as

古文：元显欲尽诛诸桓。
现代文：司马元显打算借此机会把桓氏家族的人全部诛灭。
English: Sima Yuanxian planned to use this opportunity to exterminate all members of the Huan family.

古文：中护军桓修，骠骑长史王诞之甥也，诞有宠于元显，因陈修等与玄志趣不同，元显乃止。
现代文：中护军桓是骠骑长史王诞的外甥，王诞又很得司马元显的宠爱信任，所以，他向司马元显禀告了桓等人与桓玄的志趣完全不同，司马元显才放弃了那个想法。
English: The middle bodyguard, Huan, was the nephew of the cavalry commander, Wang Zhao. Wang Zhao was also very fond and trusted by Sima Yuanxian. Therefore, he told Sima Yuanxian that the interests of Huan and others were completely different from those of Huan Xuan. Only then did Sima Yuanxian give up that idea.

古文：诞，导之曾孙也。
现代文：王诞是王导的曾孙。
English: Wang Zhao is the great-grandson of Wang Tao.

古文：张法顺言于元显曰： 桓谦兄弟每为上流耳目，宜斩之以杜奸谋。
现代文：张法顺对司马元显说： 骠骑司马桓谦兄弟常常当长江上游荆州方面的耳目，为桓玄提供情报，应该把他们斩了，来杜绝今后类似奸计阴谋的发生。
English: Zhang Faxun said to Sima Yuanxian: The brothers riding Sima Huanqian often served as the ears and eyes of Jingzhou in the upper reaches of the Yangtze River to provide information for Huanxuan. They should be beheaded to prevent similar treacherous plots from happening in the future.

古文：且事之济不，系在前军，而牢之反覆，万一有变，则祸败立至。
现代文：而且此次出军讨伐桓玄，能否达到预期目的，关键就在前锋部队如何，但是刘牢之为人反复无常，万一他那里发生什么变化，那么我们的失败和大祸就会马上到来。
English: Moreover, the key to whether this expedition to fight against Huan Xuan can achieve the expected goal is how the vanguard troops are, but Liu Diao is a capricious person. If anything happens to him, then our failure and disaster will come immediately.

古文：可令牢之杀谦兄弟以示无贰心，若不受命，当逆为其所。 
现代文：所以，您可以让刘牢之杀掉桓谦兄弟，来说明他和我们没有二心。如果他不接受命令，那么我们好在祸患到来之前，先打算好怎么办。 
English: Therefore, you can let Liu Diao Zhi kill Brother Huan Qian to show that he has no hard feelings towards us. If he does not accept the order, then we had better think about what to do before the calamity comes.

古文：元显曰： 今非牢之，无以知玄；且始事而诛大将，人情不安。 
现代文：司马元显说： 现在如果不是刘牢之，没有人可以与桓玄对敌。况且刚开始做这件事，便诛杀自己的大将，容易使人心不得安宁。 
English: Sima Yuanxian said, "Nowadays, if it were not for Liu Dolezhi, no one would be able to fight against Huan Xuan. Moreover, when he first started doing this, he killed his own general, which easily made people feel restless.

古文：再三不可。
现代文：一而再、再而三地拒绝张法顺的请求，不加允许。
English: Zhang Fa Shun's request was repeatedly denied without permission.

古文：又以桓氏世为荆土所附，桓冲特有遗惠，而谦，冲之子也，乃自骠骑司马除都督荆、益、宁、梁四州诸军事、荆州刺史，欲以结西人之心。
现代文：他又因为桓氏家族世代都得到荆州一带居民的归附，桓冲尤其是为那里的百姓留下了很多好处，而桓谦又是桓冲的儿子，所以才把桓谦由骠骑司马调任都督荆、益、宁、梁四州诸军事及荆州刺史，打算用这种方法收买西部地区百姓的人心。
English: In addition, because the generations of the Huan family have been attached by the residents around Jingzhou, Hanchong in particular has left a lot of benefits for the people there, and Huanqian is also the son of Huanchong, so he transferred Huanqian from the commander of the cavalry to the military governor of Jing, Yick, Ning, Liang four states and the history of Jingzhou, intending to use this method to buy the hearts of the people in the western region.

古文：丁丑，燕慕容拔攻魏令支戍，克之，宿沓干走，执魏辽西太守那颉。
现代文：丁丑，后燕中垒将军慕容拔向北魏戍守令支的部队发动进攻，攻克了令支，北魏将领宿沓干逃走。莫容拔抓获了北魏辽西太守那颉。
English: After the Battle of Dingwu, General Mu Rongba of the Central Base of the Later Yan launched an attack on the troops of the Northern Wei Dynasty's Liao Shouling Branch, and conquered the Liao Shouling Branch. The Northern Wei Dynasty's general led the Liao Shouling Branch to escape. Mo Rongba captured the Northern Wei Dynasty's Liao Xi Taishou Branch.

古文：燕以拔为幽州刺史，镇令支，以中坚将军辽西阳豪为本郡太守。
现代文：后燕国任命慕容拔为幽州刺史，镇守令支；任命中坚将军辽西人阳豪为他家乡辽西郡的太守。
English: Later, Yan Guo appointed Mu Rongba as the chief historian of Yuzhou and the town guardian of the county; and appointed the key general of Liaoxi, Yang Hao, as the governor of his hometown, Liaoxi County.

古文：丁亥，以章武公渊为尚书令，博陵公虔为尚书左仆射，尚书王腾为右仆射。
现代文：丁亥，后燕国又任命章武公慕容渊为尚书令，博陵慕容虔为尚书左仆射，尚书王腾为右仆射。
English: After Dinghai, Yan Guo also appointed Zhang Wukong Murong Yuan as Shang Shuling, Boling Murong Qian as Shang Shuling's left and Shang Shuling Wang Teng as his right.

古文：戊子，魏材官将国和突攻黜弗、素古延等诸部，破之。
现代文：戊子，北魏材官将军和突进攻黜弗、素古延等几个部落，把他们全都打败。
English: Wu Zi, the general of the Northern Wei Lumber Office, and the Turks attacked several tribes such as Su Fu and Su Gu Yan, and defeated them all.

古文：初，魏主珪遣北部大人贺狄干献马千匹求昏于秦，秦王兴闻珪已立慕容后，止狄干而绝其昏；没弈干、黜弗、素古延，皆秦之属国也，而魏攻之，由是秦、魏有隙。
现代文：当初，北魏国主拓跋派遣北部大人贺狄干向后秦进献一千匹马，为自己求亲。后秦王姚兴听说拓跋已经册立慕容氏为皇后，于是便把贺狄干扣留，拒绝了拓跋通婚的请求。而没弈干、黜弗、素古延几个部落，也都是后秦的附属国，北魏却经常去攻打他们，因此，后秦、北魏两个国家便产生了矛盾。
English: At first, Tuoba, the ruler of Northern Wei, sent the northern adult, He Dikang, to offer a thousand horses to the Later Qin to ask for a relative. The Later Qin king, Yao Xing, heard that Tuoba had crowned the Murong family as empress, so he detained He Dikang and refused Tuoba's request for a marriage. And several tribes, including Wuyigang, Shufu, and Sukoyan, were also subordinate states of the Later Qin, but the Northern Wei often attacked them. As a result, conflicts arose between the Later Qin and Northern Wei.

古文：庚寅，珪大阅士马，命并州诸郡积谷于平阳之乾壁，以备秦。
现代文：庚寅，北魏国主拓跋大规模地检阅自己的军队人马，并且命令并州的几个郡在平阳的乾壁城聚积粮草，用来防备后秦国的进攻。
English: Gao Yin, the ruler of Northern Wei, inspected his troops on a large scale, and ordered several counties of the unified state to accumulate grain and grass in the dry wall city of Pingyang to prevent the attack of the post-Qin state.

古文：柔然社仑方睦于秦，遣将救黜弗、素古延；辛卯，和突逆击，大破之，社帅仑其部落远遁漠北，夺高车之地而居之。
现代文：柔然可汗郁久闾社仑正在与后秦国和睦邦交，于是派遣将领带兵去救助黜弗、素古延部落。辛卯，北魏和突迎战郁久闾社仑，将他打得大败。郁久闾社仑率领他的部落远远地逃到大漠以北，夺取了高车部落的一些地方定居下来。
English: At that time, the gentle khan, Ikukyu Sharen, was in the process of establishing diplomatic relations with the post-Qin Kingdom and the Mutsu Kingdom, so he dispatched soldiers with neckties to rescue the Su Fu and Sugu Yan tribes. However, the Northern Wei Dynasty and the Tokugawa Shogunate fought against Ikukyu Sharen and defeated him. Ikukyu Sharen led his tribe to flee far to the north of the desert, seized some places of the Taka tribe and settled down.

古文：斛律部帅倍侯利击社仑，大为所败，倍侯利奔魏。
现代文：斛律部落的统帅斛律倍侯利袭击郁久闾社仑，却被郁久闾社仑打得大败。斛律倍侯利于是又投奔北魏。
English: The commander-in-chief of the Baloch tribe, Baloch Beholi, attacked the Ikukyu Shogunate, but was defeated by the Ikukyu Shogunate. Baloch Beholi then went to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：社仑于是西北击匈奴遗种日拔也鸡，大破之，遂吞并诸部，士马繁盛，雄于北方。
现代文：郁久闾社仑从此又攻击西北部的匈奴族遗留下来的后裔日拔也鸡，并且把他们打得大败，于是侵吞兼并了其他很多部落，兵马强壮，在北方地区称雄。
English: From then on, Ikukyu Shosha attacked the remaining descendants of the Huns in the northwestern part of the country, and defeated them. As a result, he annexed many other tribes. He had a strong army and was dominant in the northern region.

古文：其地西至焉耆，东接朝鲜，南临大漠，旁侧小国皆羁属焉。自号豆代可汗。
现代文：他所统辖的疆土向西直至焉耆，向东与朝鲜接壤，南部与大荒漠相临，左近的许多小国全部被其征服而附属于他，郁久闾社仑自称为豆代可汗。
English: The territory under his control extended westward to Yancheng, bordered North Korea to the east, bordered the great desert to the south, and many of the nearby small countries were all conquered by him and attached to him. Ikukyu Shosherun called himself Doudai Khan.

古文：始立约束，以千人为军，军有将；百人为幢，幢有帅。
现代文：并开始建立规章制度，把每千名兵卒整编为一个军，在军中设立将军；把每百名兵卒整编为一个幢，在幢中设立帅。
English: And it began to establish rules and regulations to integrate every thousand soldiers into an army and establish a general in the army; to integrate every hundred soldiers into a block and establish a commander in the block.

古文：攻战先登者赐以虏获，畏懦者以石击其首而杀之。
现代文：在进攻作战时，抢先上前占领敌阵的人，便把一些缴获的战利品赏赐给他，临阵怯懦、畏缩不前的人便用石头砸他的脑袋，把他处死。
English: During the attack and battle, those who were the first to occupy the enemy's front were rewarded with some of the captured trophies, and those who were cowardly and cowered in the face of the enemy were stoned to death.

古文：秃发礻韦檀克显美，执孟礻韦而责之，以其不早降。
现代文：南凉车骑将军秃发檀攻克显美，抓住后凉国昌松郡守孟，对他大加斥责，因为他迟迟不降。
English: Nan Liang Chariot riding General Bald-haired Sandalwood attacked Xianmei, seized Meng, the governor of Changsong County of Houliang Province, and severely reprimanded him because he was slow to surrender.

古文：礻韦曰： 礻韦受吕氏厚恩，分符守土；若明公大军甫至，望旗归附，恐获罪于执事矣。 
现代文：孟说： 我孟接受吕氏的厚诚恩戴，承蒙他分授给我虎符，让我镇守一方疆土，如果不等到你们大军的到来，看见你们的旌旗便去依附投奔，恐怕要受到您的怪罪呀！ 
English: Meng said, "I, Meng, have accepted the generous grace of the Lü Clan, and have been given the Tiger Emblem by him, so that I can defend one side of the territory. If I do not wait for the arrival of your large army, and see your banner, then I will run away, I am afraid I will be blamed by you!"

古文：礻韦檀释而礼之，徙二千馀户而归，以礻韦为左司马。
现代文：秃发檀把他释放，并且礼相待，强行迁移了二千多户当地居民，便撤兵回去了。他又任命孟为左司马。
English: Baldidan released him, treated him with courtesy, forcibly relocated more than two thousand local residents, and then withdrew his troops. He also appointed Meng as the Left Sima.

古文：礻韦辞曰： 吕氏将亡，圣朝必取河右，人无愚智皆知之。
现代文：孟辞谢说： 吕氏就要灭亡了，圣明的贵国朝廷一定会攻占黄河以西的地方，这是无论聪明还是愚蠢的人都可以一目了然的事。
English: Meng Jiexie said, "The Lv clan is about to perish, and the sacred imperial court of your country will surely occupy the west of the Yellow River. This is something that can be seen at a glance by both smart and stupid people.

古文：但礻韦为人守城不能全，复忝显任，于心窃所未安。
现代文：但是，我孟给人家戍守城池却不能完成使命，保全防地，如果又厚颜冒然地接受您这么高的职务，我在内心里实在觉得不安。
English: However, if I entrust the defense of the city to someone else and fail to fulfill my mission and protect the defense, and if I have the audacity to accept such a high position from you, I really feel uneasy in my heart.

古文：若蒙明公之惠，使得就戮姑臧，死且不朽。 
现代文：如果我要承蒙您的恩惠的话，就请您让我到姑臧去接受故国对我的诛杀，那么即使死，我也是不朽的了。 
English: If I were to accept your favor, I would ask you to let me go to Gudang to accept my homeland's killing of me. Then, even if I die, I will be immortal.

古文：礻韦檀义而归之。
现代文：秃发檀被他的气节所感动，把他放回去了。
English: Bald-headed Sandan was touched by his kindness and let him go.

古文：东土遭孙恩之乱，因以饥馑，漕运不继。
现代文：东晋东部地区遭受孙恩变民所导致的战乱的影响，继以灾荒年景，百姓饥饿贫困，水路的粮食运输不能继续。
English: The eastern region of the Eastern Jin Dynasty suffered from the impact of the war caused by Sun Enming, followed by years of disaster and famine, the people were starving and poor, and the transportation of grain by water could not continue.

古文：桓玄禁断江路，商旅俱绝，公私匮乏，以粰、橡给士卒。
现代文：荆州刺史桓玄又禁闭断绝长江通道，致使官府和私人间的物资积蓄全部空乏，部队也只能用一些粮食的麸皮和橡树的果实等给战士充饥。
English: Jingzhou assassin Huan Xuan also closed and cut off the Yangtze River channel, resulting in the depletion of all material savings between government and private, and the troops could only use some grain bran and oak fruit to feed the soldiers.

古文：玄谓朝廷方多忧虞，必未暇讨己，可以蓄力观衅。
现代文：桓玄以为朝廷正处在多事之秋，值得忧虑的事很多，一定没有闲暇来讨伐自己，因此，可以趁此机会积蓄力量，等待时机。
English: Huan Xuan thought that the imperial court was in the autumn of many things, there were many things worth worrying about, there must be no leisure to fight oneself, so he could take this opportunity to accumulate strength and wait for the opportunity.

古文：及大军将发，从兄太傅长史石生密以书报之。玄大惊，欲完聚保江陵。
现代文：等到朝廷征讨他的大部队就要出发的时候，他的堂兄太傅长史桓石生秘密地用书信告诉了他这个消息，桓玄大吃一惊，打算把部队全部集结到江陵来据守。
English: When the imperial court was about to send out a large force to recruit him, his cousin, Tai Fu Chang Shi Huan Shisheng, secretly told him the news in a letter. Huan Huan was taken aback and planned to gather all the troops to Gangneung to defend it.

古文：长史卞范之曰： 明公英威振于远近，元显口尚乳臭，刘牢之大失物情，若兵临近畿，示以祸福，土崩之势可翘足而待，何有延敌入境，自取穷蹙者乎！ 
现代文：长史卞范之说： 明公的英名威振于远近，司马元显却是个嘴里还有乳臭的小孩子，刘牢之已经非常丧失民心，如果我们把大部队抢先开拔到都城建康的临近地区，向他指明安危祸福，那么，他们土崩瓦解的趋势，我们踮起脚尖就可以等到的了，怎么能把敌人引入自己境内心腹重地，自己找穷困呢？ 
English: Chief historian Zou Fanzhi said: Ming Gong's fame and power are far and near, but Sima Yuanxian is a child who still has the smell of milk in his mouth. Liu Diaozhi has already lost the hearts of the people. If we take the lead in dispatching a large force to the area near the capital Jiankang, and point out to him the dangers and blessings, then the trend of their collapse and disintegration can wait as long as we tiptoe. How can we bring the enemy into our own territory, into our backyard, and find poverty ourselves?

古文：玄从之，留桓伟守江陵，抗表传檄，罪状元显，举兵东下。
现代文：桓玄听从了他的话，留下桓伟镇守江陵，向朝廷呈上奏表，并把檄文公告传遍各地，揭露司马元显的各项罪行，同时挥师向东部进发。
English: Huan Xuan obeyed his words and left Huan Wei Zhenguo to guard Jiangling. He submitted a report to the imperial court, and spread the report throughout the country, exposing Sima Yuanxian's various crimes, and at the same time sent an army to the east.

古文：檄至，元显大惧。
现代文：檄文传到都城建康，司马元显看到之后，非常害怕。
English: The letter reached Jiankang in the capital, and Sima Yuanxian was very scared when he saw it.

古文：二月，丙午，帝饯元显于西池，元显下船而不发。
现代文：二月，丙午，安帝在西池为司马元显饯行。司马元显害怕桓玄，登上战船，却没有马上出发。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of the second month of the year, An Di set out for Sima Yuanxian in West Pond. Sima Yuanxian was afraid of Huan Xuan and boarded a warship, but did not set out immediately.

古文：癸丑，魏常山王遵等至高平，没弈干弃其部众，帅数千骑与刘勃勃奔秦州。
现代文：癸丑，北魏常山王拓跋遵等率领袭击没弈干的部队，抵达高平，没弈干放弃他的所有部众，率数千名骑兵，跟刘勃勃一起逃奔秦州。
English: Yan Yuxiu, Northern Wei Changshan King Tuoba Zun and others led the attack on the troops who did not have the ability to do so, arrived in Gaoping, did not have the ability to give up all his subordinates, led thousands of cavalry, and fled to Qinzhou with Liu Gong.

古文：魏军追至瓦亭，不及而还，尽获其府库蓄积，马四万馀匹，杂畜九万馀口，徙其民于代都，馀种分迸。
现代文：北魏国的部队追赶到瓦亭，没有追上便回去了，把没弈干的仓库中所有的物资积蓄，全部收缴，并掠获了马匹四万多匹，其他各种牲畜九万多头，又把没弈干所属辖的百姓迁到代都去居住，剩下的为数不多的那个种族的人，也都分崩离析。
English: The troops of the Northern Wei Dynasty chased them to Watei, but they did not catch up with them and went back. They confiscated all the material savings in the warehouse of the Miao people, and captured more than forty thousand horses and more than ninety thousand other kinds of livestock. They also moved the people under the jurisdiction of the Miao people to the capital to live. The few remaining people of that race also fell apart.

古文：平阳太守贰尘复侵秦河东，长安大震，关中诸城昼闭，秦人简兵训卒以谋伐魏。
现代文：北魏平阳太守贰尘，再次侵犯后秦国河东郡，使后秦都城长安受到很大震动，函谷关以西关中地区的各个城池，在白天也都紧闭城门，后秦人选择武器，训练士卒，以此图谋征伐北魏。
English: The Northern Wei Pingyang Emperor invaded the Eastern Qin state of Hedong County again, causing the post-Qin capital city of Chang'an to be greatly shaken. All the cities in the western Guanzhong area west of Hanyu Pass also closed their gates during the day. The post-Qin people chose weapons and trained soldiers in an attempt to conquer the Northern Wei.

古文：秦王兴立子泓为太子，大赦。
现代文：后秦王姚兴立子姚泓为太子，实行大赦。
English: Later, Qin King Yao Xing made his son Yao Jun the crown prince, and implemented an amnesty.

古文：泓孝友宽和，喜文学，善谈咏，而懦弱多病。兴欲以为嗣，而狐疑不决，久乃立之。
现代文：姚泓为人孝顺友善，谦和宽厚，喜欢文学，擅长清谈歌咏，但是性格懦弱，身体一直多病，姚兴打算让他做自己的继承人，但又因此迟疑不决，拖了很长时间，才最后决定立他为太子。
English: Yao Xing was a filial and friendly person, modest and generous, fond of literature, good at chatting and singing, but his character was weak and his body was always ill. Yao Xing planned to make him his heir, but he hesitated and delayed for a long time before finally deciding to make him the prince.

古文：姑臧大饥，米斗直钱五千，人相食，饥死者十馀万口。
现代文：后凉都城姑臧发生严重的饥荒，一斗米价值五千钱，出现了人吃人的现象，被饿死的人达到了十多万口。
English: A serious famine occurred in Guzheng, the capital of the Later Liang Dynasty. A barrel of rice was worth five thousand yuan, and there was a phenomenon of people eating people. More than one hundred thousand people died of starvation.

古文：城门昼闭，樵采路绝，民请出城为胡虏奴婢者，日有数百，吕隆恶其沮动众心，尽坑之，积尸盈路。
现代文：城门白天紧紧关闭，人们出城砍柴的道路也被断绝，百姓中请求出城做胡人奴隶、婢女的人，每天都有几百人，吕隆讨厌他们这样扰乱人心，所以，把他们全部活埋在大坑之中，积攒起来的尸体堆满道路。
English: The gates of the city were tightly closed during the day, and the way for people to leave the city to cut wood was also cut off. Among the people who asked to leave the city to be Hu slaves and maids, there were several hundred people every day. Lulong hated them for disturbing people's hearts in this way, so he buried them all alive in large pits, and the accumulated bodies piled up on the road.

古文：沮渠蒙逊引兵攻姑臧，隆遣使求救于河西王利鹿孤，利鹿孤遣广武公傉檀帅骑一万救之，未至，隆击破蒙逊军，蒙逊请与隆盟，留谷万馀斛遣之而还。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊带兵进攻后凉都城姑臧。吕隆遣派使节向南凉河西王秃发利鹿孤求救。秃发利鹿孤派广武公秃发檀率骑兵一万前去救援吕隆，还没有赶到，吕隆就已经把沮渠蒙逊的部队打垮。沮渠蒙逊请求与吕隆讲和结盟，并把粮谷一万多斛遗留下来，送给吕隆，便回去了。
English: After the attack of Deshu Mengxun, Lulong sent an envoy to the West King of the South Lianghe River, Bald Fa Lulu, to ask for help. Bald Fa Lulu sent Guangwu Gong Baldan with 10,000 cavalry to rescue Lulong. Before he arrived, Lulong had already defeated Deshu Mengxun's troops. Deshu Mengxun asked for peace and alliance with Lulong, and left more than 10,000 grains to Lulong, and then returned.

古文：傉檀至昌松，闻蒙逊已退，乃徙泽段冢民五百馀户而还。
现代文：秃发檀来到昌松，听说沮渠蒙逊已经退兵，于是，便把凉泽、段冢一带的五百多户居民强行裹胁着迁移回去了。
English: Baldfattan came to Changsong and heard that Deshu Mengsong had withdrawn from the army, so he forced more than five hundred households in the Liangze and Duanlu areas to move back.

古文：中散骑常侍张融言于利鹿孤曰： 焦朗兄弟据魏安，潜通姚氏，数为反覆，今不取，后必为朝廷忧。 
现代文：南凉中散骑常侍张嘈对秃发利鹿孤进言道： 焦朗兄弟据守在魏安，暗地里勾结后秦姚氏，已经反复了几次了，现在不消灭他们，以后一定会成为朝廷的忧患。 
English: Zhang Nian, a strolling attendant of Nanliang Middle School, said to the bald-haired Lishu Lone: The Jiaolang brothers have been kept in Wei'an, secretly colluding with the late Qin Yao clan. It has been repeated several times. If they are not eliminated now, they will surely become a worry for the imperial court in the future.

古文：利鹿孤遣傉檀讨之，朗面缚出降，傉檀送于西平，徙其民于乐都。
现代文：秃发利鹿孤于是便派遣秃发檀前去征讨他们，焦朗将双手反绑着出城投降。秃发檀把他押送到西平，并把他统辖的百姓迁移到乐都。
English: Bald-faced Li Degu then sent Bald-faced Dang to go and fight them, and Jiao Lang went out of the city with his hands tied behind his back to surrender. Bald-faced Dang sent him to Xiping, and moved the people under his control to Letu.

古文：桓玄发江陵，虑事不捷，常为西还之计。及过寻阳，不见官军，意甚喜，将士之气亦振。
现代文：东晋荆州刺史桓玄，从江陵出发，担心这次大规模军事行劝不能取胜，因此，常常怀着向西回军的打算，等到过了寻阳，还是没有看见朝廷的军队，心中非常高兴，其他将士的斗志和士气也振作、旺盛起来。
English: Eastern Jin statesman Jing Shi Huan Xuan, who set out from Gangneung, was worried that this large-scale military campaign could not win. Therefore, he often planned to return to the west with the intention of returning to the army. When he passed the sun, he still did not see the imperial army. He was very happy. The fighting spirit and morale of other soldiers also perked up and flourished.

古文：庾楷谋泄，玄囚之。
现代文：武昌太守庾楷做朝廷讨伐桓玄的内应的阴谋泄露，桓玄把他囚禁起来。
English: Emperor Wuchang's eunuch, Zou Kai, leaked a secret plot by the imperial court to subdue Kuan Xuan, and Kuan Xuan imprisoned him.

古文：丁巳，诏遣齐王柔之以驺虞幡宣告荆、江二州，使罢兵；玄前锋杀之。
现代文：丁巳，东晋朝廷下诏，派齐王司马柔之持驺虞幡到荆州、江州两地及军中展示，告谕他们赶快停止军事行动。桓玄的前锋将领，把司马柔之杀了。
English: At that time, the Eastern Jin Dynasty issued an edict, and sent Qi Wang Sima Rong with a banner to Jingzhou, Jiangzhou and the army, telling them to stop military operations immediately. Huan Xuan, the front commander, killed Sima Rong.

古文：柔之，宗之子也。
现代文：司马柔之是司马宗的儿子。
English: Sima Rong is the son of Sima Zong.

古文：丁卯，玄至姑孰，使共将冯该等攻历阳，襄城太守司马休之婴城固守。
现代文：丁卯，桓玄抵达姑孰，派遣他的部将冯该等人进攻历阳，襄城太守司马休之围绕城池坚持据守。
English: Dingwu and Huanxuan arrived in Guzheng and sent his general Feng Jia and others to attack Liyang. The Yangcheng governor Sima Xiuqi surrounded the city and insisted on defending it.

古文：玄军断洞浦，焚豫州舟舰。
现代文：桓玄的部队切断了洞浦的道路，焚烧了豫州的舰船。
English: Huan Xuan's troops cut off the road to Dongpu and burned the ships of Yuzhou.

古文：豫州刺史谯王尚之帅步卒九千阵于浦上，遣武都太守杨秋屯横江，秋降于玄军。
现代文：豫州刺史谯王司马尚之率领步兵九千多人，在洞浦之上摆开战阵，派遗武都太守杨秋驻扎在横江，但杨秋却投降了桓玄的部队。
English: Sima Shangzhi, the king of Yuzhou, led more than 9,000 infantrymen and set up a battle line on the top of Dongpu. He sent Yang Qiu, the hereditary military governor, to be stationed in Hengjiang, but Yang Qiu surrendered to Huan Xuan's troops.

古文：尚之众溃，逃于涂中，玄捕获之。
现代文：司马尚之的部队溃散，他自己也逃到涂河之中，桓玄把他抓获。
English: Sima Shangzhi's troops dispersed, and he himself fled into the Tuo River, where he was captured by Huan Xuan.

古文：司马休之出战而败，弃城走。
现代文：司马休之出城迎战失败，放弃了城池逃走。
English: Simakyu's departure from the city failed, and he abandoned the city and fled.

古文：刘牢之素恶骠骑大将军元显，恐桓玄既灭，元显益骄恣，又恐己功名愈盛，不为元显所容，且自恃材武，拥强兵，欲假玄以除执政，复伺玄之隙而自取之，故不肯讨玄。
现代文：刘牢之平时一向厌恶骠骑大将军司马元显，他恐怕桓玄被消灭之后，司马元显会越发的骄横任性，同时又担心自己的功劳声威越来越高，不能被司马元显容留、忍受。而且，他自恃勇猛无敌，又拥有一支强大的部队，打算借桓玄的手来铲除朝中的当权者，而自己则等待桓玄的漏洞、机会再把他消灭，所以，他并不热心于去讨伐桓玄。
English: In peacetime, Liu Diao always disliked the cavalry general Sima Yuanxian. He was afraid that after Huan Xuan was eliminated, Sima Yuanxian would become more and more arrogant and self-willed. At the same time, he was worried that his reputation was getting higher and higher, and he could not be tolerated by Sima Yuanxian. Moreover, he believed himself to be invincible and had a powerful army. He planned to use Huan Xuan's hand to eradicate those in power in the North, while he was waiting for Huan Xuan's loophole and opportunity to eliminate him again. Therefore, he was not eager to fight Huan X

古文：元显日夜昏酣，以牢之为前锋。牢之骤诣门，不得见，及帝出饯元显，遇之公坐而已。
现代文：司马元显白天黑夜酣饮昏醉，他任命刘牢之为前锋，刘牢之未经事先约定，而冒然前去晋见他，没有见到，直到安帝出来为司马元显饯行，刘牢之才在公众场合与他匆匆相遇面己。
English: Sima Yuanxian was drunk all day and night. He appointed Liu Diao as his striker. Liu Diao, without prior agreement, ventured to meet him. He did not see him until An Di came out to walk for Sima Yuanxian. Liu Diao only met him in a public place.

古文：牢之军溧洲，参军刘裕请击玄，牢之不许。
现代文：刘牢之驻军溧州，参军刘裕请求进攻桓玄，刘牢之没有允许。
English: Liu Dole's garrison was in Bozhou, Liu Yu, who had joined the army, requested to attack Huan Xuan, but Liu Dole did not give permission.

古文：玄使牢之族舅何穆说牢之曰： 自古戴震主之威，挟不赏之功而能自全者，谁邪？
现代文：桓玄派刘牢之的一位族舅何穆向刘牢之游说道： 从古到今，带着震慑主上的威望，身负无法再加奖赏的功勋而又能保全自己的人，是谁呢？
English: Huan Xuan sent Liu Diao's uncle He Mu to say to Liu Diao Yu: From ancient times to the present, with the prestige of the Lord, who is the person who can protect himself while bearing the merit that cannot be rewarded?

古文：越之文种，秦之白起，汉之韩信，皆事明主，为之尽力，功成之日，犹不免诛夷，况为凶愚者之用乎！
现代文：越国的文种，秦国的白起，汉朝的韩信，都能有幸为圣明的主上作事，并为之尽心竭力，但是，在他们功业完成的时候，仍旧还免不了遭到诛戮屠杀，更何况是被凶狠残暴、愚蠢昏庸的人所利用呢！
English: Wenshu of Yue, Baiqi of Qin, and Han Xin of Han all had the honor to work for the Lord of Sacred Light and did their best, but when their work was completed, they still had to be slaughtered, not to mention being used by vicious, cruel, and stupid people!

古文：君如今日战胜则倾宗，战败则覆族，欲以此安归乎！
现代文：您这一次如果打了胜仗，就会被杀了全家，如果打了败仗，那么，您的家族自然更会遭到夷灭，您难道还打算就这样平安地回去吗？
English: This time, if you win the battle, your whole family will be killed, if you lose the battle, then your family will naturally be destroyed, do you still plan to return safely?

古文：不若翻然改图，则可以长保富贵矣。
现代文：依我看，不如反过来改变自己的主意，那样就可以永远保住您的荣华富贵了。
English: In my opinion, it is better to change your mind in turn, so that you can keep your glory and wealth forever.

古文：古人射钩、斩祛，犹不害为辅佐，况玄与君无宿昔之怨乎！ 
现代文：古人有因为谋害君主而用箭射中带钩和因为追捕后来的君主而用剑砍断衣襟的，都还并不影响他当国家的辅佐大臣，更何况桓玄与您并没有任何宿怨呢！ 
English: The fact that the ancients killed a monarch by shooting him with an arrow and cutting off his collar with a hook, or that they hunted down a later monarch and cut off his collar with a sword, does not affect his position as the country's vice-minister. What's more, Kuan Xuan and you do not have any old grudges!

古文：时谯王尚之已败，人情愈恐，牢之颇纳穆言，与玄交通。
现代文：当时，谯王司马尚之已经惨遭失败，人们的情绪更加恐慌。刘牢之基本上接受了何穆的劝告，与桓玄勾通了相互间的联系。
English: At that time, Shao Wang Sima Shangzhi had already failed miserably, and people's emotions were even more panicked. Liu Diaozhi basically accepted He Mu's advice and made contact with Huan Xuan.

古文：东海中尉东海何无忌，牢之之甥也，与刘裕极谏，不听。
现代文：东海中尉、东海人何无忌，是刘牢之的外甥，与刘裕一起极力劝阻他，他根本不听。
English: The lieutenant of the East China Sea, a native of the East China Sea, is Liu Dolezhi's nephew. Together with Liu Yu, they tried their best to dissuade him, but he would not listen.

古文：其子骠骑从事中郎敬宣谏曰： 今国家衰危，天下之重在大人与玄。
现代文：他的儿子骠骑从事中郎刘敬宣劝说他道： 现在国家衰弱，危在旦夕，整个朝廷的重心与关键，都在您和桓玄两个人手中。
English: His son, Liu Jingxuan, advised him: "Now that the country is weak and in danger, the center of gravity and the key to the entire imperial court are in the hands of you and Huan Xuan.

古文：玄藉父、叔之资，据有全楚，割晋国三分之二，一朝纵之使陵朝廷，玄威望既成，恐难图也，董卓之变，将在今矣。 
现代文：桓玄凭借着他父亲、叔父所遗留下来的权位与威望，盘据并占有了整个楚地，割据了晋国三分之二的土地，如果放纵他、让他有朝一日凌驾于朝廷之上，那么，桓玄的威势声望形成之后，再想图谋铲除他，恐怕就更加困难了。像东汉董卓之变那样的灾难性的战乱，即将在现今重现了。 
English: Huan Xuan took advantage of the power and prestige left behind by his father and uncle to seize and occupy the entire Chu region, carving out two-thirds of the land of Jin. If he is indulged and allowed to one day dominate the imperial court, then, after Huan Xuan's power and prestige have been established, it will probably be more difficult to try to eradicate him. A disastrous war like the Donghan Dong Zhuo Revolution is about to reappear today.

古文：牢之怒曰： 吾岂不知！
现代文：刘牢之愤怒地说： 我怎能不知道这些！
English: Liu Diao said angrily, "How could I not know about this!"

古文：今日取玄如反覆手耳；但平玄之后，令我奈骠骑何！ 
现代文：我今天消灭桓玄，易如反掌，但是，扫平桓玄之后，你让我如何对付骠骑大将军司马元显？ 
English: If I were to eliminate Kuan Xuan today, it would be as easy as a snap of the fingers. However, after eliminating Kuan Xuan, how would you have me deal with the cavalry general Sima Yuanxian?

古文：三月，乙巳朔，牢之遣敬宣诣玄请降。
现代文：三月，乙巳朔，刘牢之派遣刘敬宣去拜见桓玄，请求投降。
English: In March, Liu Jingxuan, who had been sent by Liu Dole, went to see Huan Xuan and asked him to surrender.

古文：玄阴欲诛牢之，乃与敬宣宴饮，陈名书画共观之，以安悦其意；敬宣不之觉，玄佐吏莫不相视而笔。
现代文：桓玄暗地里打算把刘牢之杀掉，于是便与刘敬宣一起开宴饮酒，并把一些著名的书法绘画陈列出来，陪同他观看欣尚，希望使他的心情安定舒畅。刘敬宣对桓玄的用心根本就没有任何察觉，桓玄手下那些辅佐的官吏们看见这种情形，没有不相视会意、点头暗笑的。
English: Kuan Xuan secretly planned to kill Liu Du, so he held a banquet and drank alcohol with Liu Jing Xuan, and displayed some famous calligraphy paintings to accompany him to watch Xin Shang, hoping to make his mood stable and comfortable. Liu Jing Xuan did not have any awareness of Kuan Xuan's intentions at all, and those supporting officials under Kuan Xuan saw this situation and did not hesitate to nod and smile.

古文：玄板敬宣为咨议参军。
现代文：桓玄暂时任命刘敬宣为谘议参军。
English: Kuan Xuan temporarily appointed Liu Jingxuan as an adviser to join the army.

古文：元显将发，闻玄已至新亭，弃船，退屯国子学。辛未，陈于宣阳门外。
现代文：司马元显刚刚准备出发，听说桓玄的大部队已经到了新亭，便马上扔掉船只，反身上岸，退到城中的国子学里驻守，辛未，又到宣阳门外去排列开战阵，扎下大营。
English: Sima Yuanxian had just prepared to set out, when he heard that Huan Xuan's large force had arrived at Xingting, he immediately threw away the ships, went ashore instead, retreated to the city's Guozihouli to garrison, and then went to Xuanyang Gate to line up for battle and set up a large camp.

古文：军中相惊，言玄已至南桁，元显引兵欲还宫。
现代文：军营之中惊恐不安，传说桓玄的部队已经抵达南桁。
English: Amidst the panic and anxiety in the military camp, the legend spread that Kuan Xuan's troops had already reached the south ditch.

古文：玄遣人拔刀随后大呼曰： 放仗！ 
现代文：司马元显带着部队准备回宫，这时，桓玄派遣先头部队拔出刀来，紧跟在他们的后边大声呐喊着说： 放下武器！ 
English: Sima Yuanxian was preparing to return to the palace with his troops, when Huan Xuan sent the leading troops to draw their swords and followed closely behind them, shouting loudly: "Put down your weapons!

古文：军人皆崩溃，元显乘马走入东府，唯张法顺一骑随之。
现代文：司马元显的部队彻底崩溃。司马元显乘着一匹马跑进了东府，只有张法顺一个人骑马紧跟着他。
English: Sima Yuanxian's troops completely collapsed. Sima Yuanxian ran into Dongfu on a horse, with only Zhang Fashun riding closely behind him.

古文：元显问计于道子，道子但对之涕泣。
现代文：司马元显向司马道子询问有没有什么办法，司马道子也只是面对着儿子哭泣不止。
English: Sima Yuanxian asked Sima Daozi if there was anything he could do, but Sima Daozi just kept crying in front of her son.

古文：玄遣太傅从事中郎毛泰收元显送新亭，缚于舫前而数之。
现代文：桓玄派遣太傅从侍中郎毛泰把司马元显收押起来，送到新亭。
English: Kuan Xuan sent Maotai, the second-in-command, to arrest Sima Yuanxian and bring him to Xingting.

古文：元显曰： 为王诞、张法顺所误耳。 
现代文：桓玄把他绑在大船的前头，一条条列举他的罪状，司马元显说： 我不过是被王诞、张法顺所迷惑耽误罢了。 
English: Kuan Xuan tied him to the front of the big boat and listed his crimes one by one. Sima Yuanxian said, "I was only confused and delayed by Wang Xing and Zhang Fashun."

古文：壬申，复隆安年号，帝遣侍中劳玄于安乐渚。
现代文：壬申，东晋恢复隆安这个年号。安帝派侍中到安乐渚去慰劳桓玄。
English: In Jinshin, the Eastern Jin Dynasty restored Longan in this year. Emperor An sent an attendant to Anle to console Lao Kuan Xuan.

古文：玄入京师，称诏解严，以玄总百揆、都督中外诸军事、丞相、录尚书事、扬州牧、领徐、荆、江三州刺史，假黄钺。
现代文：桓玄进入京师，宣称皇帝下诏书，命令解除戒严。朝廷于是便任命桓玄统领文武百官，都督中外诸军事、丞相、录尚书事、扬州牧，兼任徐、荆、江三州刺史，加授给他黄钺。
English: Huan Xuan entered the capital and announced that the emperor had issued an imperial edict ordering the lifting of martial law. The imperial court then appointed Huan Xuan to be the leader of the military and civilian officials, the military governor, the chancellor, the record keeper, the Yangzhou pastoralist, and the historian of the three states of Xu, Jing, and Jiang, and awarded him the Yellow Ribbon.

古文：玄以桓伟为荆州刺史，桓谦为尚书左仆射，桓修为徐、兗二州刺史，桓石生为江州刺史，卞范之为丹阳尹。
现代文：桓玄任命桓伟为荆州刺史，桓谦为尚书左仆射，桓为徐、兖二州刺史，桓石生为江州刺史，卞范之为丹杨尹。
English: Kuan Xuan appointed Kuan Wei as the chief historian of Jing Province, Kuan Qian as the deputy chief historian of Shang Province, Kuan as the chief historian of Xu Province, Kuan Shi Sheng as the chief historian of Jiang Province, and Kuan Fan as the deputy chief historian of Danyang.

古文：初，玄之举兵，侍中王谧奉诏诣玄，玄亲礼之。
现代文：当初，桓玄起兵的时候，侍中王谧曾经到江陵来见桓玄，传达安帝的诏书，桓玄亲自接待他，礼遇非常优厚。
English: At first, when Huan Xuan raised an army, the chamberlain Wang Xuan had come to Gangneung to see Huan Xuan and convey Emperor An's edict. Huan Xuan received him in person and treated him with great courtesy.

古文：及玄辅政，以谧为中书令。
现代文：等到桓玄入朝辅佐国家政要，便任命王谧为中书令。
English: When Kuan Xuan entered the court as an aide-de-camp to a state dignitary, he appointed Wang Xi as the Clerk of the Supreme Court.

古文：谧，导之孙也。
现代文：王谧是王导的孙子。
English: Wang Yao is the grandson of Wang Dao.

古文：新安太守殷仲文，觊之弟也，玄姊为仲文妻。
现代文：新安太守殷仲文是殷觊的弟弟，桓玄的姐姐是殷仲文的妻子。
English: Yin Zhongwen, the eunuch of Xin'an, was the younger brother of Yin Xi, and Huan Xuan's sister was the wife of Yin Zhongwen.

古文：仲文闻玄克京师，弃郡投玄，玄以为咨议参军。
现代文：殷仲文听说桓玄征服了京师，所以，也放弃了自己所辖的新安郡，前来投靠桓玄，桓玄任命他做谘议参军。
English: Yin Zhongwen heard that Huan Xuan had conquered the Beijing division, so he also gave up the Xin'an County under his jurisdiction and came to support Huan Xuan. Huan Xuan appointed him as an adviser to join the army.

古文：刘迈往见玄，玄曰： 汝不畏死，而敢来邪？ 
现代文：当年曾经指责过桓玄的刘迈前去晋见桓玄，桓玄说： 你难道不害怕死，还敢来见我？ 
English: That year, Liu Mai, who had once accused Huan Xuan, went to Jin to see Huan Xuan. Huan Xuan said, "Aren't you afraid to die and still dare to come to see me?"

古文：迈曰： 射钩斩祛，并迈为三。 
现代文：刘迈说： 射中带钩的管仲，斩断衣襟的勃，再加上我刘迈，正好合为三个。 
English: Liu Mai said, "Shooting Guanzhong with a hook, cutting off the erection of the collar, plus me, Liu Mai, just make three.

古文：玄悦，以为参军。
现代文：桓玄非常高兴。任命他做参军。
English: Kangen was very happy. He was appointed to join the army.

古文：癸酉，有司奏会稽王道子酣纵不孝，当弃市，诏徙安成郡；斩元显及东海王彦璋、谯王尚之、庾楷、张法顺、毛泰等于建康市。
现代文：癸酉，有关部门呈上奏章，指责会稽王司马道子放纵酗酒，忤逆不孝，应该斩首弃尸示众。东晋朝廷下诏，命令把他赶出京城，贬逐到安成郡居住；把司马元显及其儿子东海王司马彦璋和谯王司马尚之，以及庾楷、张法顺、毛泰等人，押到建康城的街市上，全部斩首。
English: The East Jin Dynasty court issued an edict, ordering him to be expelled from the capital and banished to live in Ancheng County; Sima Yuanxian and his sons Donghai Wang Sima Yanxuan and Shao Wang Sima Shangzhi, as well as Zou Kai, Zhang Fashun, Mao Tai and others, were pushed onto the streets of Jiankang City and all beheaded.

古文：桓修为王诞固请，得流岭南。
现代文：桓为王诞竭力求情，所以，把他长期流放到大庾岭以南的偏荒地区去了。
English: Huan tried his best to intercede for the king's birthday, so he was exiled to a desolate area south of the Dalat Mountains for a long time.

古文：玄以刘牢之为会稽内史。
现代文：桓玄任命刘牢之为会稽内史。
English: Kuan Xuan appointed Liu Duxing as the inspector of the history of the association.

古文：牢之曰： 始尔，便夺我兵，祸其至矣！ 
现代文：刘牢之说： 刚开始就来剥夺我的兵权，大祸就要来了。 
English: Liu Dolezhi said, "If you come to deprive me of my military power at the very beginning, a big disaster will come.

古文：刘敬宣请归谕牢之，使受命，玄遣之。
现代文：刘敬宣向桓玄请求回到京口去劝告刘牢之，让他赶快上任，桓玄派他去了。
English: Liu Jingxuan asked Huan Xuan to return to Beijing to advise Liu Ducheng and let him take office as soon as possible, and Huan Xuan sent him there.

古文：敬宣劝牢之袭玄，牢之犹豫不决，移屯班渎，私告刘裕曰： 今当北就高雅之于广陵，举兵以匡社稷，卿能从我去乎？ 
现代文：刘敬宣回到京口后，却劝说刘牢之袭击桓玄，刘牢之犹豫，拿不定主意，只是把部队移到班渎去驻扎，并在私下里告诉刘裕说： 现在，我们应当北上，去到广陵和驻守在那里的高雅之会合，一同发动部队，来匡扶社稷，你能跟着我去吗？ 
English: After Liu Jingxuan returned to Beijing, he persuaded Liu Diao to attack Huan Xuan. Liu Diao hesitated and could not make up his mind, but moved the troops to Banfu to station, and told Liu Yu in private: Now, we should go north, go to Guangling and Gaoya's meeting stationed there, launch troops together, come to Kuang Fu She, can you follow me?

古文：裕曰： 将军以劲卒数万，望风降服，彼新得志，威震天下，朝野人情皆已去矣，广陵岂可得至邪！
现代文：刘裕说： 将军以拥有几万精壮士卒的实力，对桓玄也还都听见风声就去投降臣服，所以，他刚刚得以实现志向，声威震动天下，从朝廷到民间，人们的心愿都已经归附到他那里去了，您要去广陵，怎么可能顺利到达呢？
English: Liu Yu said: The general, with the strength of tens of thousands of elite soldiers, also heard the news of Huan Xuan and went to surrender and submit. Therefore, he has just been able to realize his ambition, and his voice has shaken the world. From the imperial court to the people, people's wishes have been attached to him. If you want to go to Guangling, how can you arrive smoothly?

古文：裕当反服还京口耳。 
现代文：我刘裕可要脱去军服，穿上百姓的衣服，回到京口去了。 
English: I, Liu Yu, want to take off my military uniform, put on civilian clothes, and go back to Beijing.

古文：何无忌谓裕曰： 我将何之？ 
现代文：何无忌对刘裕说： 我怎么办才好？ 
English: Why not say to Liu Yu: What should I do?

古文：裕曰： 吾观镇北必不免，卿可随我还京口。
现代文：刘裕说： 我看镇北将军一定难逃一死，你可以跟随我回京口去。
English: Liu Yu said: I think General Zhenbei will certainly die, you can follow me back to Beijing.

古文：桓玄若守臣节，当与卿事之；不然，当与卿图之。 
现代文：桓玄如果遵守做臣属的节度，我和你应当去为他做事；如果不那样，我便当和你一起想办法对付他。 
English: If Kuan Xuan observes the rules of being a vassal, you and I should go to work for him; if not, I should work with you to find a way to deal with him.

古文：于是牢之大集僚佐，议据江北以讨玄。
现代文：在这个时候，刘牢之把各级将领僚属，全部集中到一起，商议据守长江以北的地区来讨伐桓玄。
English: At this time, Liu Diao Zhi gathered together all the generals and their subordinates at all levels to discuss how to defend the area north of the Yangtze River to fight against Kuan Xuan.

古文：参军刘袭曰： 事之不可者莫大于反。
现代文：参军刘袭说： 不可以去做的事情中，最大的不过于谋反。
English: Liu Wei, who joined the army, said: Among the things that cannot be done, the biggest is nothing more than plotting rebellion.

古文：将军往年反王兗州，近日反司马郎君，今复反桓公；一人三反，何以自立！ 
现代文：将军在以前反王恭，近些日子反司马元显，现在又要来反叛桓玄，一个人连续三次谋反，还能用什么使自己在天下立脚？ 
English: In the past, the general was anti-Wang Jiong, in recent days he was anti-Sima Yuanxian, and now he is going to rebel against Huan Xuan. If a person plots rebellion three times in a row, what else can he use to gain a foothold in the world?

古文：语毕，趋出，佐吏多散走。
现代文：话刚说完，便快步走了出去，其他的将佐官吏也多一哄而散地走了。
English: As soon as he had finished speaking, he walked out at a brisk pace, and the other generals and officials also dispersed.

古文：牢之惧，使敬宣之京口迎家；失期不至，牢之以为事已泄，为玄所杀，乃帅部曲北走，至新洲，缢而死。
现代文：刘牢之非常害怕，派刘敬宣去京口迎接家属，过了约定的日期，也没有来。刘牢之以为谋反的事情已泄，被桓玄杀掉了，所以率领现有的部下向北逃跑，到达新洲的时候，终于上吊自杀。
English: Liu Dechi was very scared and sent Liu Jingxuan to meet his family in Jingkou, but he did not come after the agreed date. Liu Dechi thought that the rebellion had been leaked and was killed by Huan Xuan, so he led his current subordinates to escape to the north. When he reached Xinzhou, he finally hanged himself.

古文：敬宣至，不暇哭，即渡江奔广陵。
现代文：刘敬宣赶到这里之后，没有时间痛哭，便渡过长江，投奔广陵去了。
English: After Liu Jingxuan arrived here, he did not have time to cry, so he crossed the Yangtze River and went to Guangling.

古文：将吏共殡敛牢之，以其丧归丹徒。
现代文：刘牢之手下的将帅官吏们一起把他装敛起来，并把他的棺木运送回丹徒。
English: Liu Diao's generals and officials worked together to restrain him and transport his coffin back to Dantu.

古文：玄令斫棺斩首，暴尸于市。
现代文：桓玄下令劈开棺木，把刘牢之尸首上的脑袋也砍了下来，并把他的尸体扔到街上示众。
English: Kuan Xuan ordered to split open the coffin, cut off the head from Liu Diao's corpse, and throw his body into the street for the public to see.

古文：大赦，改元大亨。
现代文：东晋实行大赦，改年号为大亨。
English: Eastern Jin implemented an amnesty and changed the year name to Tycoon.

古文：桓玄让丞相荆、江、徐三州，改授太尉、都督中外诸军事、扬州牧、领豫州刺史，总百揆；以琅邪王德文为太宰。
现代文：桓玄辞去丞相及荆、江、徐三州刺史的职佐，改任太尉、都督中外诸军事、扬州牧，兼任豫州刺史，统领文武百官。任命琅邪王司马德文为太宰。
English: Huan Xuan resigned from the post of chancellor and vice-premier of Jing, Jiang and Xu three states, and was reappointed as captain, governor of the Middle and Outer Military Provinces and Yangzhou, and concurrently as the governor of Yuzhou, the leader of the military and civilian officials. He appointed the evil king Sima Dewen as Dazai.

古文：司马休之、刘敬宣、高雅之俱奔洛阳，各以子弟为质于秦以求救。
现代文：司马休之、刘敬宣、高雅之都逃奔到洛阳，各把自己的儿子兄弟送到后秦做人质，以此向后秦请求救助。
English: Sima Xiu Zhi, Liu Jing Xuan, and Gao Ya Zhi all fled to Luoyang, and each sent their sons and brothers to Houqin as hostages, in order to request help from Houqin.

古文：秦王兴与之符信，使于关东募兵，得数千人，复还屯彭城间。
现代文：后秦王姚兴交给他们兵符印信，让他们到关中一带去招募兵丁，招到了几千人。然后，他们又回到彭城一带驻守去了。
English: Later, Qin King Yao Xing gave them a letter of enlistment, and asked them to go to the Guanzhong area to recruit soldiers, which attracted several thousand people. Then, they returned to the Pengcheng area to garrison.

古文：孙恩寇临海，临海太守辛景击破之，恩所虏三吴男女，死亡殆尽。
现代文：变民首领孙恩又来进犯临海，临海太守辛景把他打得大败，孙恩所抢掠的三吴地区的男女百姓，在战乱中全部被杀死。
English: Sun En, the leader of the mutants, attacked Linhai again. Linhai's eunuch Sin Jing defeated him. The men and women of the Sanwu region, whom Sun En had plundered, were all killed in the war.

古文：恩恐为官军所获，乃赴海死，其党及妓妾从死者以百数，谓之 水仙 。
现代文：孙恩恐怕自己被朝廷的部队抓获，于是跳海自杀，他的部下党羽以及姬妾艺妓等人中跟着他一起自杀的有上百人，人们把这些人称为 水仙 。
English: Sun En feared that he would be captured by the troops of the imperial court, so he jumped into the sea and committed suicide. Among his subordinates and followers, as well as concubines and geishas, there were hundreds of people who committed suicide with him. People called these people Narcissus.

古文：馀众数千人复推恩妹夫卢循为主。
现代文：其余的部众几千人又推举孙恩的妹夫卢循为首领。
English: The remaining several thousand followers elected Sun's brother-in-law Lu Xun as their leader.

古文：循，谌之曾孙也，神采清秀，雅有材艺。
现代文：卢循是卢谌的曾孙，神态风采清秀雅静，多才多艺。
English: Lu Xun is the great-grandson of Lu Yao. His demeanor is clean, elegant and quiet, and he is multi-talented.

古文：少时，沙门惠远尝谓之曰： 君虽体涉风素，而志存不轨，如何？ 
现代文：小的时候，佛门僧人惠远曾经对他说： 你虽然体态状貌比较有素雅的儒风，但是心里却隐藏着不遵守法度的志向，是不是？ 
English: When he was a child, the Buddhist monk Huiyuan once said to him: Although you have a more elegant Confucian style in your physique and appearance, you have hidden in your heart the desire not to abide by the law, isn't it?

古文：太尉玄欲抚安东土，乃以循为永嘉太守。
现代文：太尉桓玄打算用安抚的手段使东部地区的局势稳定下来，于是，任命卢循为永嘉太守。
English: Captain Huan Xuan intended to use appeasement to stabilize the situation in the eastern region, and appointed Lu Xun as Yongjia's governor.

古文：循虽受命，而寇暴不已。
现代文：卢循虽然接受了任命，但是却依然为非作歹，行劫施暴。
English: Although he accepted the appointment, Lu Xun continued to plunder and pillage.

古文：甲戌，燕大赦。
现代文：甲戌，后燕实行大赦。
English: Armor-piercing war, after Yan implemented amnesty.

古文：河西王秃发利鹿孤寝疾，遣令以国事授弟傉檀。
现代文：南凉河西秃发利鹿孤病重，卧床不起，遗嘱命令把国家的政事交给弟秃发檀管理。
English: Nan Lianghe West Bald-Faced Deer alone is seriously ill, bedridden, the will orders to give the country's political affairs to his brother Bald-Faced Deer management.

古文：初，秃发思复鞬爱重傉檀，谓诸子曰： 傉檀器识，非汝曹所及也。 
现代文：当初，他们的父亲秃发思复喜爱、推重秃发檀，对儿子们说： 秃发檀的气度和见识，不是你们哥儿几个能赶得上的。 
English: At the beginning, their father, a bald man, thought about his fondness for, and preference for, bald men, and said to his sons: "Bald men do not have the grace and insight of your brothers.

古文：故诸兄不以传子而传于弟。
现代文：所以几个哥哥都不把王位传给儿子，而只是传给弟弟。
English: Therefore, several brothers do not pass the throne to their sons, but only to their younger brothers.

古文：利鹿孤在位，垂拱而已，军国大事皆委于傉檀。
现代文：秃发利鹿孤登位之后，实际上也只是垂衣拱手地不做什么实事，军队国家的大事都委托给秃发檀处理决定。
English: After Baldur's ascension to the throne, in fact, he just did not do anything practical, and the important matters of the army and the country were entrusted to Baldur to deal with.

古文：利鹿孤卒，傉檀袭位，更称凉王，改元弘昌，迁于乐都，谥利鹿孤曰康王。
现代文：秃发利鹿孤去世，秃发檀继承王位，改称凉王，改年号为弘昌，并把都城迁到乐都，追谥秃发利鹿孤为康王。
English: Bald-haired Lixia Guo passed away, and Bald-haired Dangling succeeded to the throne. He was renamed Liang Wang, the year changed to Hongchang, and the capital was moved to Ledu. He became Kang Wang.

古文：夏，四月，太尉玄出屯姑孰，辞录尚书事，诏许之，而大政皆就咨焉，小事则决于尚书令桓谦及卞范之。
现代文：夏季四月，太尉桓玄出都城建康，去姑孰驻扎，辞去了录尚书事的官职，安帝下诏同意，但是凡是大政方针，却都还要去他那里请示，其他小事就由尚书令桓谦和卞范之决定。
English: In the summer of April, Taifu Kuan Xuan left the capital, Jiankang, and went to stay in Guzheng. He resigned from his post as the official recorder of official documents. Emperor An agreed, but he still had to go to him for instructions on major policies. Other minor matters were decided by Shang Shuling Kuan Qian and Zhan Fan.

古文：自隆安以来，中外之人厌于祸乱。
现代文：自隆安以来，东晋全国上下的百姓，对接连不断的天灾人祸、动乱战争，深感厌倦。
English: Since Longan, the people up and down the whole country of East Jin have been deeply tired of the continuous natural disasters, man-made disasters, and turbulent wars.

古文：及玄初至，黜奸佞，擢俊贤，京师欣然，冀得少安。
现代文：等到桓玄刚刚来到京师，罢黜奸佞的小人，选拔贤明的才俊，建康的百姓非常高兴，都希望能得到一点安定的生活环境。
English: By the time Huan Xuan had just arrived in Beijing, the villains of the traitors were ousted, the wise and talented were selected, and the people of Jiankang were very happy, all hoping to get a stable living environment.

古文：既而玄奢豪纵逸，政令无常，朋党互起，陵侮朝廷，裁损乘舆供奉之具，帝几不免饥寒，由是众心失望。
现代文：但是，不久，桓玄便骄奢横暴，放纵享乐，政令变化无常，朋雄奸党纷纷出现，甚至对朝廷也大加欺凌侮辱，并把皇家御用的车马轿乘、供奉的食品用具等，也都随意裁减，连安帝也几乎不免不挨冻受饿。从此，民众的心里非常失望。
English: Soon, however, Emperor Huan Xuan became arrogant and tyrannical, indulged in pleasures, government decrees were fickle, cronies and traitors appeared one after another, and he even bullied and insulted the imperial court. He also arbitrarily reduced the number of royal carriages and food utensils, and even Emperor An suffered from cold and hunger. From then on, the hearts of the people were very disappointed.

古文：三吴大饥，户口减半，会稽减什三、四，临海、永嘉殆尽，富室皆衣罗纨，怀金玉，闭门相守饿死。
现代文：三吴地区发生大饥荒，住户人口都减少了一半左右，其中，会稽郡是十人之中，能减少三四人；临海、永嘉两地人口则几乎全部死亡。即使是富贵人家，也都穿着绫罗绸缎，怀里抱着金玉，关起门来相互之间看着饿死。
English: When the Great Famine occurred in the Sanwu region, the population of all households was reduced by about half. Among them, the county of Heji was one of the ten, and could reduce three or four people; the population of Linhai and Yongjia was almost all dead. Even the rich people's families were wearing silk and satin, holding gold in their arms, and looking at each other starving to death behind closed doors.

古文：乞伏炽磐自西平逃归苑川，南凉王傉檀归其妻子。
现代文：被留在南凉的乞伏炽磐，终于从西平逃回苑川，南凉王秃发檀把他的妻子儿女也都归还给他。
English: He was left in Nanliang, begging on the blazing rock, and finally fled from Xiping back to Yuanchuan. Nanliang King Bald Dragonfly also returned his wife and children to him.

古文：乞伏乾归使炽磐入朝于秦，秦主兴以炽磐为兴晋太守。
现代文：他的父亲乞伏乾归又让乞伏炽磐去到后秦都城长安去晋见后秦国主姚兴。姚兴任命乞伏炽磐为兴晋太守。
English: His father begged him to go back to Qian and let him go to Chang'an, the capital of Later Qin, to meet with Yao Xing, the ruler of Later Qin. Yao Xing appointed him as the governor of Later Qin.

古文：五月，卢循自临海入东阳，太尉玄遣抚军中兵参军刘裕将兵击之，循败，走永嘉。
现代文：五月，东晋变民首领卢循从临海进犯东阳，太尉桓玄派遣抚军中兵参军刘裕带兵去进攻他。卢循失败，逃往永嘉。
English: In May, Lu Xun, the leader of the East Jin mutineers, invaded Dongyang from Linhai. Lieutenant Huan Xuan sent soldiers from the Fuxing Army to join Liu Yu's army to attack him. Lu Xun failed and fled to Yongjia.

古文：高句丽攻宿军，燕平州刺史慕容归弃城走。
现代文：高句丽对宿军城发动进攻，后燕国平州刺史慕容归放弃城池逃走。
English: Goguryeo launched an attack on Sukuk Juncheng, after which Murong, the governor of the state of Yanzhou, abandoned the city and fled.

古文：秦主兴大发诸军，遣义阳公平、尚书右仆射狄伯支等将步骑四万伐魏，兴自将大军继之，以尚书令姚晃辅太子泓守长安，没弈干权镇上邽，广陵公钦权镇洛阳。
现代文：后秦国主姚兴大规模地发动各支军队，派遣义阳公姚平、尚书右仆射狄伯支等带领步、骑兵四万人，征伐北魏，姚兴自己带领大部队，紧跟他们而来。他派尚书令姚晃辅佐太子姚泓镇守都城长安，派没弈干暂时镇守上，派广陵公姚钦暂时镇守洛阳。
English: Later, the Qin sovereign, Yao Xing, massively launched various armies, dispatched Yiyang Gong Yao Ping, Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, Shao Di Bo, and other leaders, with cavalry of forty thousand, to conquer the Northern Wei, and Yao Xing himself led a large army to follow them closely. He sent Shang Shuxu to order Yao Xing Zhen, the assistant of the Prince Yao, to guard the capital Chang'an, sent Meng Yijian to temporarily guard the city, and sent Guangling Gong Yao Qin to temporarily guard Luoyang.

古文：平攻魏乾壁六十馀日，拔之。
现代文：姚平对北魏乾壁城发动攻击，经过六十多天的激战，终于攻克。
English: Yao Ping launched an attack on the Northern Wei Drywall City, and after more than sixty days of fierce fighting, he finally conquered it.

古文：秋，七月，魏主珪遣毘陵王顺及豫州刺史长孙肥将六万骑为前锋，自将大军继发以击之。
现代文：秋季七月，北魏国主拓跋，派遣毗陵王拓跋顺、以及豫州刺史长孙肥，带领六万骑兵做先锋，亲自统领大部队跟着出发，前来迎击后秦军。
English: In the autumn of July, Tuoba, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, sent Tuoba Shun, the king of Viling, and Sun Hui, the chief historian of Yuzhou, to lead 60,000 cavalry as the vanguard, and personally led a large army to set off to meet the post-Qin army.

古文：八月，太尉玄讽朝廷以玄平元显功封豫章公，平殷、杨功封桂阳公，并本封南郡如故。
现代文：八月，太尉桓玄婉转地暗示朝廷根据桓玄平定司马元显的功劳，封他为豫章公，又根据他平定殷仲堪、杨期的功劳，而封他为桂阳公，并且还像原来那样，保持他原来受封的南郡公的爵位。
English: In August, Taifu Kuan Xuan subtly hinted that the Imperial Court had appointed him as the Duke of Yuzhang based on Kuan Xuan's achievements in suppressing Sima Yuanxian, and as the Duke of Guiyang based on his achievements in suppressing Yin Zhongkang and Yang Di, and that he would retain his former title of the Duke of Nanshun as before.

古文：玄以豫章封其子昇，桂阳封其兄子俊。
现代文：桓玄把豫章公封给了他的儿子桓升，把桂阳公封给了他的侄儿桓俊。
English: Kuan Xuan gave the imperial title of Yuzhang to his son Kansheng, and the imperial title of Guiyang to his nephew Kuanjun.

古文：魏主珪至永安，秦义阳公平遣骁将帅精骑二百觇魏军，长孙肥逆击，尽禽之。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋的大军抵达永安，后秦义阳公姚平派遣骁将率领精壮的骑兵二百人前去侦察北魏军的虚实动静，长孙肥迎击他们，并把这些兵卒全部抓获。
English: The great army of Tuoba, the ruler of Northern Wei, arrived in Yong'an. Later, Yao Ping, the ruler of Qin and Yiyang, sent Yao Zheng, who led 200 strong cavalrymen, to reconnoiter the movement of the Northern Wei army. The eldest grandson, Fei, met them and captured all of these soldiers.

古文：平退走，珪追之，乙巳，及于柴壁。
现代文：姚平带领部队撤退而走，拓跋追击他们。乙巳，在柴壁城追上。
English: Yao Ping led the troops to retreat, and Tuoba chased after them, and finally caught up with them at Chibi Castle.

古文：平婴地固守，魏军围之。
现代文：姚平环城顽强据守，北魏大军把他们团团围住。
English: The ring city of Yao Ping was tenaciously defended, and the Northern Wei army encircled them.

古文：秦王兴将兵四万七千救之，将据天渡运粮以馈平。
现代文：后秦国主姚兴带领军卒四万七千人前去救援姚平，准备占据汾水以西的天渡，从这里运送粮食接济坚守柴壁的姚平部队。
English: Later, Yao Xing, the ruler of Qin, led 47,000 soldiers to rescue Yao Ping, preparing to occupy Tiantu to the west of Surabaya, from where they would transport grain to aid Yao Ping's troops, who were holding out at Chaiwu.

古文：魏博士李先曰： 兵法：高者为敌所栖，深者为敌所囚。
现代文：北魏博士李先说： 兵法云：驻军在高的地方，就要被敌人围困；驻军在地势低洼的地方，就要被敌人囚禁。
English: Li Xian, a doctor of the Northern Wei Dynasty, said: "The art of war is cloudy: if the garrison is in a high place, it will be besieged by the enemy; if the garrison is in a low-lying place, it will be imprisoned by the enemy.

古文：今秦皆犯之，宜及兴未至，遣奇兵先据天渡，柴壁可不战而取也。 
现代文：现在秦军同时犯了这两项错误，我们应该赶在姚兴没有抵达之前，派遗一支出其不意的突击部队，抢先占据天渡，那样的话，柴壁城就可以不用开仗便拿下来了。 
English: Now the Qin Army has made both mistakes at the same time. We should hurry before Yao Xing did not arrive, send a surprise assault force to occupy Tiantu ahead of time. In that case, Chibi City can be taken down without going to war.

古文：珪命增筑重围，内以防平之出，外以拒兴之入。
现代文：拓跋下令增加修筑一重又一重的围墙，对内预防姚平的向外突围，对外用来抗拒姚兴的向内进攻。
English: Tuoba ordered the construction of more and more walls to prevent Yao Ping's outward breakthrough and to resist Yao Xing's inward attack.

古文：广武将军安同曰： 汾东有蒙坑，东西三百馀里，蹊径不通。
现代文：广武将军安同说： 汾水的东面，有一个地方叫蒙坑，东西绵延三百多里，没有道路可以与它相通。
English: General Guangwu Antong said: On the east side of Surabaya, there is a place called Mengkeng. It stretches more than three hundred miles from east to west, and there is no road that can connect to it.

古文：兴来，必从汾西直临柴壁；如此，虏声势相接，重围虽固，不能制也。
现代文：姚兴如果来，一定会从汾水的西岸，直接逼临柴壁，倘若这样，敌军的声势互相呼应连接，那么我们设下的重重围障再坚固，也不能把他们制服。
English: If Yao Xing comes, he will surely come from the west coast of Surabaya, directly approaching the wooden wall. If this is the case, and the enemy's voices echo and connect with each other, then no matter how strong the barriers we set up are, we will not be able to subdue them.

古文：不如为浮梁，渡汾西，筑围以拒之。虏至，无所施其智力矣。 
现代文：所以，依我看，不如在汾水之上搭起浮桥，把大部队渡到汾水西岸，在那里筑起围墙，用来抗拒敌人的进攻，这样，敌军即使来到这里，也已经没有他们施展智慧和力量的地方了。 
English: Therefore, in my opinion, it would be better to build a pontoon bridge over Surabaya and ferry a large force to the west coast of Surabaya, and build a wall there to resist the enemy's attack, so that even if the enemy comes here, there is no place for them to exert their wisdom and strength.

古文：珪从之。
现代文：拓跋听从了他的主张。
English: Tuoba followed his advice.

古文：兴至蒲阪，惮魏之强，久乃进兵。
现代文：姚兴抵达蒲阪，畏惧北魏兵力的强大，拖延很久才将部队向前推进。
English: When Yao Xing arrived in Busan, he was afraid of the powerful Northern Wei forces and delayed for a long time before moving his troops forward.

古文：甲子，珪帅步骑三万逆击兴于蒙坑之南，斩首千馀级，兴退走四十馀里，平亦不敢出。
现代文：甲子，拓跋率领步、骑兵三万人在蒙坑之南，迎击姚兴军，杀死一千多人，姚兴被迫撤退四十多里，姚平也不敢冲出柴壁接战。
English: Gao Zi, Tuoba led the way, and 30,000 cavalry were in the south of Mengkeng to meet Yao Xing's army, killing more than a thousand people. Yao Xing was forced to retreat more than forty miles, and Yao Ping did not dare to rush out of the wall to fight.

古文：珪乃分兵四据险要，使秦兵不得近柴壁。
现代文：拓跋于是分派部队到四处去据守险峻重要的关卡，使后秦军无法接近柴壁城。
English: As a result, Tuoba dispatched troops everywhere to defend the dangerous and important checkpoints, so that the post-Qin army could not approach Chaiwibicheng.

古文：兴屯汾西，赁壑为垒，束柏树从汾上流纵之，欲以毁浮梁，魏人皆钩取以为薪蒸。
现代文：姚兴也把主力驻扎在汾水以西的地区，凭借着山谷，建起营寨壁垒，又把一些柏树等木材捆缚在一起，从汾水上游投放河中，使其顺流而下，打算用这种方法来摧毁北魏军搭在汾水上的浮桥，但北魏军队却把这些木材全部用钩捞上岸来，当做取暖煮饭的劈柴了。
English: Yao Xing also stationed the main force in the area west of Surabaya, relying on the valley to build camp walls. He also tied together some timber such as cypress trees and threw it into the river from the upper reaches of Surabaya to make it flow down the river. He intended to use this method to destroy the pontoon bridge built by the Northern Wei Army on Surabaya. However, the Northern Wei Army fished all this timber ashore with hooks and used it as firewood for heating and cooking.

古文：冬，十月，平粮竭矢尽，夜，悉众突西南围求出；兴列兵汾西，举烽鼓噪为应。
现代文：冬季十月，姚平驻守的柴壁粮草吃完，箭矢用尽。夜里，姚平率领所有的军队从西南向外突围，姚兴也在汾水西岸列开阵势，燃起烽火，擂动战鼓，高声呼喊着，策应姚平军。
English: In the winter of October, Yao Ping's garrison ran out of firewood, grain and grass, and ran out of arrows and arrows. At night, Yao Ping led all the troops to break out from the southwest, and Yao Xing also lined up on the west coast of Surabaya, lit bonfires, beat war drums, and shouted loudly to counter Yao Ping's army.

古文：兴欲平力战突免，平望兴攻围引接，但叫呼相和，莫敢逼围。
现代文：姚兴想让姚平拚死力战突围出来，而姚平则盼望姚兴能向北魏的包围圈发动进攻，导引、接应他们出来，因此，彼此双方只是叫喊呼唤交相应和，却都不敢逼近北魏的重围。
English: Yao Xing wanted Yao Ping to break out of the encirclement, while Yao Ping hoped that Yao Xing could launch an attack on the encirclement of the Northern Wei Dynasty, guide and meet them. Therefore, both sides only shouted and called for corresponding peace, but they did not dare to approach the heavy encirclement of the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：平不得出，计穷，乃帅麾下赴水死，诸将多从平赴水；珪使善游者钩捕之，无得免者。
现代文：姚平没有突围出来，无计可施，于是，率领部下跳入汾水自杀，很多将领都跟着姚平跳水求死。拓跋派善于游泳的人把他们一一钩抓捕获，没有得到幸免的。
English: Yao Ping did not break out of the encirclement, there was nothing he could do, so he led his subordinates to jump into the Surabaya water to commit suicide. Many generals followed Yao Ping to dive for their lives. Tuoba sent good swimmers to catch them one by one, and no one was spared.

古文：执狄伯支及越骑校尉唐小方等四十馀人，馀众二万馀人皆敛手就禽。
现代文：被捕的有狄伯支、以及越骑校尉唐小方等四十多人，其余留下来的二万多部众，也都束手被擒。
English: Among those arrested were more than forty people, including Di Bo Zhi and the Vietcong cavalry captain Tang Xiao Fang, and the remaining more than twenty thousand people were also arrested.

古文：兴坐视其穷，力不能救。举军恸哭，声震山谷。
现代文：姚兴坐在汾水西岸，眼睁睁看着他们走投无路，却没有力量能够救援他们，因此，全军不禁失声恸哭，哭声震撼山谷。
English: Yao Xing sat on the west coast of Surabaya, watching them cornered, but had no power to rescue them, so the whole army could not help but weep, and the cries shook the valley.

古文：数遣使求和于魏，珪不许，乘胜进攻蒲阪，秦晋公绪固守不战。
现代文：姚兴几次派遣使节去向北魏国请求讲和，拓跋坚决不许，乘胜对薄阪发动进攻。反秦守将晋公姚绪只是坚守，并不出战。
English: Yao Xing several times sent envoys to North Wei to request peace, but Tuoba resolutely refused to allow it, and launched an attack on Wusan after the victory. The anti-Qin commander Jin Gong Yao Xu only held out and did not go to war.

古文：会柔然谋伐魏，珪闻之，戊申，引兵还。
现代文：正好赶上柔然打算征伐北魏，拓跋听说之后，戊申，带领部队撤退。
English: Just in time for Zhu Ran's plan to invade Northern Wei, after Tuoba heard about it, Wu Shen led the troops to retreat.

古文：或告太史令晁崇及弟黄门侍郎懿潜召秦兵，珪至恶阳，赐崇、懿死。
现代文：有人告发太史令晁崇，和他的弟弟黄门侍郎晁懿，在暗地里招引后秦军队来进攻。
English: It was reported that Taishi Ling Yu Chong and his brother Huangmen Zirong Yu secretly invited the Qin army to attack.

古文：秦徙河西豪右万馀户于长安。
现代文：拓跋到达晋阳，赐令晁崇，晁懿二人自杀。后秦把河西的豪门大户等一万多户迁移到都城长安居住。
English: When Tuoba arrived in Jinyang, he gave the order to Gong Chong, and the two of them committed suicide. Later, Qin relocated more than ten thousand families, including big families from the west of the river, to live in the capital Chang'an.

古文：太尉玄杀吴兴太守高素、将军竺谦之及谦从兄朗之、刘袭并袭弟季武，皆刘牢之北府旧将也。
现代文：太尉桓玄杀掉了吴兴太守高素、将军竺谦之以及竺谦之的堂兄竺朗之、刘袭和刘袭的弟弟刘季武，这些人都是原来刘牢之所统辖的北府的旧部将。
English: Captain Kuan Xuan killed Wu Xing's governor Gao Su, general Yu Qian Zhi, and Yu Qian Zhi's cousin Yu Lang Zhi, Liu Hei, and Liu Hei's younger brother Liu Ji Wu, all of whom were former generals of the Northern Prefecture under Liu Ye.

古文：袭兄冀州刺史轨邀司马休之、刘敬宣、高雅之等共据山阳，欲起兵攻玄，不克而走，将军袁虔之、刘寿、高长庆、郭恭等皆往从之。
现代文：刘袭的哥哥冀州刺史刘轨邀请司马休之、刘敬宣、高雅之等人一起占据山阳，打算发动军队进攻桓玄，不能成功，因而退走。将军袁虔之、刘寿、高长庆、郭恭等人也都赶到这里跟他们一起逃亡。
English: Liu Bei's elder brother, Jizhou statesman Liu Rail, invited Sima Xuzhi, Liu Jingxuan, Gao Ya and others to occupy the mountains together, intending to launch an army to attack Huan Xuan, but it was not successful, so he retreated. Generals Yuan Qianzhi, Liu Shou, Gao Changqing, Guo Qiong and others also arrived here to flee with them.

古文：将奔魏，至陈留南，分为二辈：轨、休之、敬宣奔南燕；虔之、寿、长庆、恭奔秦。
现代文：先是准备投奔北魏，到了陈留以南的时候，便分为两路：刘轨、司马休之、刘敬宣等人投奔南燕，袁虔之、刘寿、高长庆、郭恭等人投奔后秦。
English: At first, they were preparing to go to the Northern Wei Dynasty, but when they stayed south of Chen, they were divided into two groups: Liu Rail, Sima Huizhi, Liu Jingxuan and others went to the Southern Yan Dynasty, and Yuan Qianzhi, Liu Shou, Gao Changqing, Guo Qiong and others went to the Later Qin Dynasty.

古文：魏主珪初闻休之等当来，大喜。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋一开始的时候听说司马休之等人打算前来，非常高兴。
English: When the head of the Northern Wei State, Tuoba, heard at the beginning that Sima Xiu and others were planning to come, he was very happy.

古文：后怪其不至，令兗州求访，获，其从者，问其故，皆曰： 魏朝威声远被，是以休之等咸欲归附；既而闻崔逞被杀，故奔二国。 
现代文：后来他们没有来，觉得很奇怪，便命令兖州刺史长孙肥代为查访他们不来的原因，果然抓到了司马休之等的随从，询问缘故，都说： 魏朝的声威，传播很远，所以司马休之等人都打算来归附。但是，不久又听说崔逞被杀的事，因此又改变了主意，逃奔到其他两个国家去了。 
English: Later, they didn't come and felt very strange, so they ordered the chief historian of Zhangzhou, Sun Hui, to investigate the reason why they didn't come, and he caught the followers of Sima Xiu and others. When asked about the reason, they all said: The voice of the Wei Dynasty has spread far and wide, so Sima Xiu and others are planning to return. However, they soon heard about the murder of Cui Gang, so they changed their minds and fled to two other countries.

古文：珪深悔之。
现代文：拓跋深深懊悔自己逼杀了崔逞。
English: Tuoba deeply regretted forcing himself to kill Cui Gang.

古文：自是士人有过，颇见优容。
现代文：从此以后，读书人即使有什么过错，也很能得到宽容和优待。
English: From then on, even if the reader is at fault, he or she is likely to receive tolerance and preferential treatment.

古文：南凉王傉檀攻吕隆于姑臧。
现代文：南凉王秃发檀进攻据守姑臧的吕隆。
English: Nan Liang Wang Zaldan attacked Lulong, which was defended by Gu Yao.

古文：燕王熙纳故中山尹苻谟二女，长曰戎娥，为贵人，幼曰训英，为贵嫔，贵嫔尤有宠。
现代文：后燕王慕容熙收纳原中山尹苻谟的两个女儿为妃。其中，大女儿叫苻娥，做了贵人；小女儿叫苻训英，做了贵嫔。苻训英尤其受到宠爱。
English: Later, Yan King Murongxi received the two daughters of the former Zhongshan Yin Shumu as his wives. Among them, the eldest daughter was named Chang'e, and became a noblewoman; the youngest daughter was named Gong Xunying, and became a noblewoman. Gong Xunying was especially loved.

古文：丁太后怨恚，与兄子尚书信谋废熙立章武公渊。
现代文：丁太后因此怨恨愤怒，跟自己的侄儿尚书丁信谋划废黜慕容熙，改立章武公慕容渊为帝。
English: As a result, Empress Dowager Ding was filled with resentment and anger, and plotted with her nephew Shangshu Dingxin to depose Murongxi and install Zhangwu Gong Murongyuan as emperor.

古文：事觉，熙逼丁太后自杀，葬以后礼，谥曰献幽皇后。
现代文：事情被发觉，慕容熙逼迫丁太后，让她自杀，仍用皇后的礼仪安葬，追谥她为献幽皇后。
English: When the affair was discovered, Murongxi persecuted Empress Dowager Ding, made her commit suicide, buried her with the etiquette of an empress, and pursued her as the queen of Xianyu.

古文：十一月，戊辰，杀渊及信。
现代文：十一月，戊辰，斩了慕容渊和丁信。
English: In November, Wu Chen beheaded Murong Yuan and Ding Xin.

古文：辛未，熙畋于北原，石城令高和与尚方兵于后作乱，杀司隶校尉张显，入掠宫殿，取库兵，胁营署，闭门乘城。
现代文：辛未，慕容熙在龙城的北郊原野上打猎，石城令高和与一些守卫宫廷库房的士兵在京城内发动叛乱，杀了司隶校尉张显，冲入宫廷大殿抢掠，取出国库中的武器，胁迫军营官署，紧闭城门。占领城池。
English: Soon after, Murongxi was hunting in the fields on the northern outskirts of Longcheng. Shicheng Ronggao and some soldiers who were guarding the palace treasury staged a rebellion in the capital, killed Sili lieutenant Zhang Xian, stormed into the palace hall to loot, took out the weapons in the treasury, forced the military camp official office, and closed the gate. Occupy the city.

古文：熙驰还，城上人皆投仗开门；尽诛反者，唯和走免。
现代文：慕容熙等飞马回城，来到城下，城上的人都扔下手中的武器，打开城门，把参与叛乱的人全部杀死，只有高和逃走，免于一死。
English: Mu Rongxi and the other Pegasus horses returned to the city and came to the bottom of the city. The people on the city threw down their weapons, opened the city gate, and killed all the people involved in the rebellion. Only Gao He escaped and was spared death.

古文：甲戌，大赦。
现代文：甲戌，实行大赦。
English: Kuching, Liu Song pardoned the world.

古文：魏以庾岳为司空。
现代文：北魏任命庾岳为司空。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Zou Yue as Sikuo.

古文：十二月，辛亥，魏主珪还云中。
现代文：十二月，辛亥，北魏国主拓跋回到云中。
English: In December, Xinhai, Tuoba, the head of the Northern Wei Dynasty, returned to the clouds.

古文：柔然可汗社仑闻珪伐秦，自参合陂侵魏，至豺山，及善无北泽，魏常山王遵以万骑追之，不及而还。
现代文：柔然可汗郁久闾社仑听说拓跋出兵去征伐后秦，所以，便从参合陂出发向南进发，侵入北魏，兵到豺山，到达善无北面的草泽地带，才撤兵回北方，北魏常山王拓跋遵派遣一万骑兵前去追击他们，没有追上便回来了。
English: Hearing that Tuoba sent soldiers to conquer the Qin Dynasty, Zhu Ranzhan Khan Yujujun Sharen heard that Tuoba sent soldiers to conquer the post-Qin Dynasty, so he set out from Sanghe County to the south to invade the Northern Wei Dynasty. The soldiers went to Shaoshan and reached the grassy area on the north side of Zhenwu, before withdrawing back to the north. Northern Wei Mountain King Tuoba Zun sent ten thousand cavalrymen to chase them, but they did not catch up and returned.

古文：太尉玄使御史杜林防卫会稽文孝王道子至安成，林承玄旨，鸩道子，杀之。
现代文：太尉桓玄派御史杜林到安城，去监防护卫会稽文孝王司马道子。杜林接受桓玄的旨意，让司马道子喝下毒酒，把他杀了。
English: Captain Kuan Xuan sent Gostulin to Ancheng to supervise the guard of honor Wang Sima Daozi. Durin accepted Kuan Xuan's order to let Sima Daozi drink poisoned wine and killed him.

古文：沮渠蒙逊所署西郡太守梁中庸叛，奔西凉。
现代文：北凉沮渠蒙逊所统辖的西郡太守梁中庸叛变，投奔西凉。
English: Liang Zhongyong, the governor of Xi County, which was under the control of Mengxun, rebelled and went to Xiliang.

古文：蒙逊闻之，笑曰： 吾待中庸，恩如骨肉，而中庸不我信，但自负耳，孤岂在此一人邪！ 
现代文：沮渠蒙逊听说这个消息后，笑着说： 我对待梁中庸恩情深厚，如同骨肉一般，但是他却对我不讲信义，因此，他只是自己背叛自己罢了。我怎么能在意他这样一个人呢？ 
English: After hearing the news, Depu Qu Mengxun said with a smile: "I treated Liang Zhongyong with deep kindness, like flesh and blood, but he did not trust me, so he only betrayed himself. How can I care about a person like him?

古文：乃尽归其孥。
现代文：于是，把梁中庸的妻子儿女全部送还给他。
English: As a result, Liang Zhongyong's wife and children were all returned to him.

古文：西凉公暠问中庸曰： 我何如索嗣？ 
现代文：西凉公李问梁中庸说： 我与索嗣相比，怎么样？ 
English: Xilang Gong Li asked Liang Zhongyong, "How do I compare with Suozhe?

古文：中庸曰： 未可量也。 
现代文：梁中庸说： 未可估量。 
English: Liang Zhongyong said: It's immeasurable.

古文：暠曰： 嗣才度若敌我者，我何能于千里之外以长绳绞其颈邪？ 
现代文：李说： 索嗣的才能如果能够和我相敌的话，我怎么能在千里之外用长绳索绞住他的脖颈？ 
English: Li said, "If Suozhi's talent can compete with me, how can I tie a long rope around his neck thousands of miles away?

古文：中庸曰： 智有短长，命有成败。殿下之与索嗣，得失之理，臣实未之能详。
现代文：梁中庸说： 人的智慧，有的时候显得有余，有的时候又显得不足；人的命运，有的时候可以让人成功，有的时候又可以让人失败。殿下与索嗣，得失成败的道理、原因，我实在还不能想明白。
English: Liang Zhongyong said, "A person's wisdom sometimes appears to be more than enough, and sometimes it appears to be insufficient; a person's fate can sometimes make people succeed, and sometimes it can make people fail. Your Royal Highness and your heirs, I really can't figure out the reason and cause of success and failure.

古文：若以身死为负，计行为胜，则公孙瓚岂贤于刘虞邪？ 
现代文：但是如果认为身死的人，就是失败者，能够对自己设计得到顺遂的就是胜利者，那么，公孙瓒难道还要比刘虞贤能吗？ 
English: But if you think that a person who dies is a loser, and a person who can succeed in his own design is a winner, then, is Gongsun Yao really more capable than Liu Yu Xianfeng?

古文：暠默然。
现代文：李沉默不语。
English: Li was silent.

古文：袁虔之等至长安，秦王兴问曰： 桓玄才略何如其父？
现代文：袁虔之等人到达长安，后秦王姚兴问道： 桓玄的才能谋略与他的父亲桓温相比，怎么样？
English: After Yuan Qianzhi and others arrived in Chang'an, the Qin king Yao Xing asked: How does Huan Xuan's talent for strategy compare with that of his father Huan Wen?

古文：卒能成功乎？ 
现代文：最后能不能成就大的功业？ 
English: In the end, can we achieve a great feat?

古文：虔之曰： 玄乘晋室衰乱，盗据宰衡，猜忌安忍，刑赏不公。以臣观之，不如其父远矣。
现代文：袁虔之说： 桓玄乘晋室衰微动乱之机，窃取占据了可以操纵大局的宰相高位，为人多疑猜忌，刻薄残忍，刑罚赏赐又极不公平，根据我的观察，远不如他的父亲。
English: Yuan Qianzhi said: Huan Xuan took the opportunity of the decline and turmoil of the Jin dynasty to steal the high position of the prime minister who could manipulate the overall situation. He was suspicious, cruel, and the punishment was extremely unfair. According to my observation, he was far inferior to his father.

古文：玄今已执大柄，其势必将篡逆，正可为他人驱除耳。 
现代文：桓玄现在已经掌据了朝中的大权，看他的趋势是一定要篡夺政权，叛逆晋朝的，这样正可以为别的人起来驱逐铲除他提供口实。 
English: Huan Xuan has now seized the great power of the central government of the Jin Dynasty. His tendency is to usurp power and rebel against the Jin Dynasty. This can provide an excuse for other people to rise up and expel and eradicate him.

古文：兴善之，以虔之为广州刺史。
现代文：姚兴觉得这番话很有道理，任命袁虔之为广州刺史。
English: Yao Xing thought that this was very reasonable and appointed Yuan Qian as the chief historian of Guangzhou.

古文：是岁，秦王兴立昭仪张氏为皇后，封子懿、弼、洸、宣、谌、愔、璞、质、逵、裕、国儿皆为公，遣使拜秃发傉檀为车骑将军、广武公，沮渠蒙逊为镇西将军、沙州刺史、西海侯，李暠为安西将军、高昌候。
现代文：这一年，后秦王姚兴册立昭仪张氏为皇后，册封儿子姚懿、姚弼、姚、姚宣、姚谌、姚、姚璞、姚质、姚逵、姚裕、姚国儿等都为公爵。他又派遣使节任命秃发檀为车骑将军、广武公，沮渠蒙逊为镇西将军、沙州刺史、西海侯，李为安西将军，高昌侯。
English: In the same year, King Yao Xing of the Later Qin Dynasty made Zhaoyi Zhang the empress, and made his sons Yao Jun, Yao Jun, Yao, Yao Xuan, Yao Jun, Yao, Yao Jun, Yao Jia, Yao Jia, Yao Jia, Yao Jun, Yao Yu, Yao Guo'er, and so on, dukes. He also sent envoys to appoint Bald-Faced Tan as the General of Cavalry and Cavalry, Guangwu Gong, Deqiu Mengxun as the General of Zhenxi, Shazhou Zhishi, Xi Hai Hou, Li as

古文：秦镇远将军赵曜帅二万西屯金城，建节将军王松匆帅骑助吕隆守姑臧。
现代文：后秦镇远将军赵曜率领部众二万人向西驻扎在金城，建节将军王松匆率领骑兵协助后凉国吕隆戍守姑臧。
English: After the Qin Dynasty, Zhenyuan General Zhao You led 20,000 people to the west and stationed in Jincheng, and Jianjie General Wang Songxu led cavalry to assist Lulong Fortress of Houliang Province to defend Guzhen.

古文：松匆至魏安，傉檀弟文真击而虏之。
现代文：王松匆途经魏安的时候，秃发檀的弟弟秃发文真向他发动进攻，并把他抓获。
English: When Wang Song was passing through Wei'an in a hurry, the younger brother of the bald-headed sandalwood, Bald-headed Wenzhen, launched an attack on him and captured him.

古文：傉檀大怒，送松匆还长安，深自陈谢。
现代文：秃发檀为此非常愤怒，赶快把王松匆送回长安，又上奏章对自己深加谴责，一再道歉、认罪。
English: Balding was very angry about this, and hurriedly sent Wang Song back to Chang'an. He also condemned himself in his report, and repeatedly apologized and pleaded guilty.

