古文：梁惠王问尉缭子曰： 黄帝刑德，可以百胜，有之乎？ 
现代文：梁惠王问尉缭子说： 黄帝当初靠刑罚杀戮和施行恩赏，所以才会百战百胜，真有这回事吗？ 
English: Liang Hui Wang asked the lieutenant: "The Yellow Emperor originally relied on punishment, killing, and reward, which is why he won so many battles. Is this really the case?"

古文：尉缭子对曰： 刑以伐之，德以守之，非所谓天官时日阴阳向背也。
现代文：尉缭子回答说： 所谓刑罚杀戮是说用武力征伐敌人，用仁德安定天下，不是指天官、时日、阴阳、向背等而说的。
English: The lieutenant replied, "The so-called punishment killing refers to conquering the enemy by force and stabilizing the world with benevolence. It does not refer to celestial officials, time, day, yin and yang, or the direction of the back.

古文：黄帝者，人事而已矣。
现代文：黄帝所说的，不过是强调人的作用罢了。
English: What the Yellow Emperor said was just to emphasize the role of man.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么这样说呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：今有城，东西攻不能取，南北攻不能取，四方岂无顺时乘之者耶？
现代文：譬如现在要攻下一座城池，从东西两方进攻，不能取胜；从南北两方进攻，也不能取胜，难道四方面都没有适应吉利时辰的方位吗？
English: For example, if you want to attack a city, you can't win if you attack from the east and west, and you can't win if you attack from the north and south. Aren't all four directions suited to the auspicious time?

古文：然不能取者，城高池深，兵器备具，财谷多积，豪士一谋者也。
现代文：其所以攻不下来，是因防守者的城垣高，城壕深，武器装备完善，财物和粮食充足，豪杰之士同心协力的缘故。
English: The reason why it could not be conquered was due to the defenders' high walls, deep trenches, perfect weapons and equipment, sufficient wealth and food, and the concerted efforts of heroes.

古文：若城下池浅守弱，则取之矣。
现代文：如果它的城垣低，战壕浅，守备弱，就能攻下来了。
English: If its walls are low, its trenches shallow and its defences weak, it can be taken.

古文：由是观之，天官时日不若人事也。
现代文：由此看来，相信天官时日，不如充分发挥人的作用。
English: From this point of view, I believe that it is better to give full play to the role of man.

古文：天官曰： 背水陈为绝，向阪陈为废军。 
现代文：按《天官》书上说： 背水列阵是置军队于绝境，向坡列阵是把军队置于无用之地。 
English: According to the "Heavenly Officer" book: the backwater formation is to put the army in a desperate situation, and the slope formation is to put the army in a useless place.

古文：武王伐纣，背济水向山阪而陈，以二万二千五百人，击纣之亿万而灭商，岂纣不得天官之陈哉？
现代文：但武王伐纣的时候，却背着济水，向着山坡列阵，以二万二千人，击败众多的纣军，灭亡了商朝，难道是纣王所布的阵势没有得到天官之利吗！
English: However, when King Wu was felling straw, he took the water supply on his back and lined up on the hillside. With 22,000 men, he defeated a large number of straw soldiers and destroyed the Shang Dynasty. Could it be that the position laid out by the straw king did not receive the benefit of heaven?

古文：楚将公子心与齐人战，时有彗星出，柄在齐。柄所在胜，不可击。
现代文：楚将公子心与齐国作战，当时天上出现彗星，彗星的柄搦向齐国方面，有人认为柄所指的方向的取胜国家一定会，因而不能进攻。
English: At that time, a comet appeared in the sky. The comet's tail pointed in the direction of Qi. Some people believed that the country in the direction indicated by the tail would win, so they could not attack.

古文：公子心曰： 彗星何知！
现代文：公子心说： 彗星哪里有什么预知事情的能力！
English: He said to himself, "What is the comet's ability to predict things?

古文：以彗斗者，固倒而胜焉。 
现代文：用扫帚打人的，本来就应当倒转头来用柄去打才能取胜 。
English: If you hit someone with a broom, you should turn your head upside down to hit with the handle in order to win.

古文：明日与齐战，大破之。
现代文：第二天楚国与齐国交战，果然大破齐军。
English: The next day, Chu and Qi fought, and the Qi army was defeated.

古文：黄帝曰： 先神先鬼，先稽我智。 
现代文：正如皇帝所说： 与其先去求神问鬼，不如先考察自己的才智 。
English: As the emperor said: It is better to first examine one's own talents than to first go to God and ask the devil.

古文：谓之天，人事而已。 
现代文：所谓天文星象的应验，不过是发挥人的才智尽全力去做事罢了。
English: The so-called fulfillment of astronomical constellations is merely the exertion of human ingenuity to do things to the best of one's ability.

