古文：河间王弘，字辟恶，文帝从祖弟也。
现代文：河间王杨弘，字辟恶，隋文帝杨坚从祖之弟。
English: King Yanghong of Kawama, also known as the Evil One, was the younger brother of Emperor Yangjian of the Sui Dynasty.

古文：祖爱敬，早卒。
现代文：祖父爱敬。早卒。
English: Grandfather Ai Jing. He died young.

古文：父元孙，少孤，随母郭氏养于舅族。
现代文：父杨元孙，自幼便成为孤儿，随母亲郭氏寄养在舅族家。
English: His father, Yang Yuan-sun, was orphaned at a young age and was fostered with his mother, Guo, in the family of his in-laws.

古文：及武元帝与周文建义关中，元孙时在鄴，惧为齐人所诛，因假外家姓为郭氏。
现代文：武元帝与周文帝在关中树起义旗的时候，元孙在邺城，害怕被齐人杀害，于是就借舅族家的姓氏为姓，改姓郭。
English: When Emperors Wuyuan and Zhou Wenzong were raising the banner of uprising in Guanzhong, Yuan Sun was in Lucheng. He was afraid of being killed by the Qi people, so he took the surname of his uncle's family and changed his surname to Guo.

古文：元孙死，齐为周灭，弘始入关。
现代文：元孙死后，齐国被周国消灭，弘才进入关中。
English: After the death of Yuan Sun, Qi was destroyed by Zhou, and Hongcai entered Guanzhong.

古文：与文帝相得，帝哀之，为买田宅。
现代文：与周文帝相处得很融洽，文帝哀其不幸，替他置买田地宅院。
English: He got along very well with Zhou Wendi, who mourned his misfortune and bought a farmstead for him.

古文：弘性明悟，有文武干略。
现代文：弘生性聪明颖悟，有文韬武略。
English: Hong Sheng is intelligent and insightful, with a literary and military background.

古文：数从征伐，累迁开府仪同三司。
现代文：经常跟随文帝征伐，多次升迁至开府仪同三司。
English: He often followed Emperor Wen in his conquests, and was promoted to Kaifu Yi and the Third Division many times.

古文：文帝为丞相，常置左右，委以心腹。
现代文：文帝任丞相时，常将弘置于左右，视为心腹。
English: When Emperor Wen served as chancellor, he often placed Hong on his right and left, and regarded him as a confidant.

古文：帝诣周赵王宅，将及于难，弘时立于户外，以卫文帝。
现代文：文帝到周赵王宅院，将要被害，弘此时立在门外，保护文帝，使文帝幸免于难。
English: When Emperor Wen came to Zhou Zhao Wang's residence, he was about to be killed. At this time, Hong stood outside the door to protect Emperor Wen and save Emperor Wen from being killed.

古文：寻加上开府，赐爵永康县公。
现代文：很快加官为上开府，赐爵永康县公。
English: He was soon promoted to the post of Shangkaifu and given the title of Yongkang County Governor.

古文：及爱禅，拜大将军，进爵郡公。
现代文：及文帝受禅，弘官拜大将军，晋爵郡公。
English: And Emperor Wen accepted Zen, Hongguan became a general, and Jinzhe became a county official.

古文：寻赠其父柱国、尚书令、河间郡公。
现代文：不久，追赠弘父元孙为柱国、尚书令、河间郡公。
English: Soon after, Hiroshi, his father, and his grandson were posthumously awarded the titles of Shukoku, Shoshinrei, and Kawama County.

古文：其年，立弘为河间王，拜右卫大将军。
现代文：这一年，立弘为河间王，官拜右卫大将军。
English: In this year, Tatsuhiro became the king of Kawama, and was given the title of Udaisho (Major General of the Right Division of Inner Palace Guards).

古文：寻进柱国，以行军元帅出灵州道征突厥，大破之。
现代文：不久又晋位柱国，以行军元帅之职出兵灵州道征讨突厥，大破突厥军。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the position of pillar state, and dispatched troops as a marching marshal to Lingshou Road to fight the Turks, defeating the Turkish army.

古文：拜宁州总管，进上柱国。
现代文：官拜宁州总管，晋位上柱国。
English: General Manager of Baining Prefecture, promoted to Shangzhuang Province.

古文：政尚清静，甚有恩惠。
现代文：为政崇尚清静，甚有恩惠德政。
English: He advocated a clean and quiet government, and a benevolent and virtuous government.

古文：迁蒲州刺史，得以便宜从事。
现代文：改任蒲州刺史，遇事可以不用上奏，自行决断。
English: He was appointed as the governor of Puzhou. In case of emergency, he can make his own decision without recital.

古文：时河东多盗贼，弘奏为盗者百余人，投之边裔，州境恬然，号为良吏。
现代文：其时，河东盗贼丛生，弘奏请将盗贼百余人送到边庭，州境于是安定，都称弘为好官。
English: At that time, there were a lot of thieves in Hedong, and Hongso asked to send more than 100 thieves to the border court. The state border was then stable, and everyone praised Hong as a good official.

古文：每晋王广入朝，弘辄领扬州总管，及王归籓，弘复还蒲州。
现代文：每逢晋王杨广入朝，弘则代为扬州总管，等晋王回归扬州，弘再回蒲州。
English: Whenever the Jin king Yang Guang entered the imperial court, Hong Zetian became the Yangzhou governor-general, and when the Jin king returned to Yangzhou, Hong Zetian returned to Puzhou.

古文：长曰房陵王勇，次炀帝，次秦孝王俊，次庶人秀，次庶人谅。
现代文：在蒲州十多年，风俗礼教都很融洽。炀帝继位，弘官拜太子太保。过了一年多就死去了。
English: For more than ten years in Bushu, customs and rituals were very harmonious. Emperor Shun succeeded to the throne, and the crown prince was called Taibo. He died more than a year later.

古文：房陵王勇，小名睍地伐。
现代文：大业六年，追封郇王。子杨庆继承爵位。房陵王杨勇，小名目见地伐。
English: In the sixth year of Daye's reign, King Gong was posthumously crowned. His son Yang Qing succeeded to the title of nobility.

古文：周世以武元军功，封博平县侯。
现代文：周朝时，因武元军功封为博平县侯。
English: During the Zhou Dynasty, he was awarded the title of Hou of Boping County for his military service.

古文：及文帝辅政，立为世子，拜大将军、左司卫，封长宁郡公。
现代文：文帝辅政时，立为太子，官拜大将军、左司卫，封为长宁郡公。
English: When Emperor Wen was in an auxiliary government, he was made the crown prince, given the title of grand general, the title of Zuo Siwei, and the title of Changning County governor.

古文：出为洛州总管、东京少冢宰，总统旧齐之地。
现代文：出京任洛州总管、东京少冢宰，总理已灭亡的北齐之地。
English: He went to Beijing to serve as the governor of Lozhou and the vice-governor of Tokyo, a place in northern Qi where the prime minister had died.

古文：后徵还京师，进上柱国、大司马，领内史御正，诸禁卫皆属焉。
现代文：后来诏回京师，晋位上柱国、大司马，兼任内史御正，统领京师所有的禁卫军。
English: Later, he returned to Beijing Division and was promoted to Shangzhu Guo and Daishima, concurrently serving as Inner Historian and Commander of all Imperial Guards of Beijing Division.

古文：文帝受禅，立为皇太子，军国政事及尚书奏死罪已下，皆令勇参决。
现代文：文帝接受禅让即皇帝位，杨勇被立为太子，军国政事和尚书所奏死罪以下诸事，皆令杨勇参与决策。
English: Emperor Wen accepted the abdication of the emperor, Yang Yong was appointed as the crown prince, and the military, political affairs and the death penalty played by the monk's book, all of which made Yang Yong participate in decision-making.

古文：帝以山东人多流冗，遣使案检，又欲徙人北实边塞。
现代文：文帝认为山东人多流离失所，派遣使者去调查核实，又想迁移一些人充实北部边疆。
English: Wen Di believed that many people in Shandong had been displaced, sent an envoy to investigate and verify, and wanted to relocate some people to enrich the northern border.

古文：勇上书谏，以为 恋土怀旧，人之本情，波迸流离，盖不获已。
现代文：杨勇上书谏阻，认为： 怀恋故土，是人与生俱来的感情。流离失所，或许多出于不得已。
English: Yang Yong wrote a letter to oppose the move, arguing that: nostalgia for the motherland is an innate feeling. Displacement, or many out of necessity.

古文：有齐之末，主暗时昏，周平东夏，继以威虐，人不堪命，致有逃亡，非厌家乡，原为羁旅。
现代文：北齐后期，君主暗昧，时政腐败，周朝平定东夏，继之以威虐，人民难以忍受，以至于逃离家乡，不是厌弃家乡，情愿到处流浪。
English: In the late Northern Qi Dynasty, the monarch was obscure, the politics was corrupt, the Zhou Dynasty pacified the Eastern Xia, followed by the tyranny, the people were unbearable, so that they fled their hometown, not abandoning their hometown, but rather wandering everywhere.

古文：若假以数岁，沐浴皇风，逃窜之徒，自然归本。
现代文：假如能给几年的时间，给他们更多的恩德，流离逃窜之人，自然都会返归本土。
English: If we can give them a few more years and give them more benefits, the displaced people will naturally return to the mainland.

古文：虽北夷犯边，令所在严固，何待迁配，以致劳扰？ 
现代文：虽然北方夷族侵犯边境，但是，只要加固边防，就足以抵御入侵了，何用移民入边，劳民伤财？ 
English: Although the northern barbarians violated the border, as long as the border defense is strengthened, it is enough to resist the invasion. Why use immigrants to enter the border and hurt the people's labor and wealth?

古文：上览而嘉之。
现代文：文帝看后，嘉奖杨勇。
English: After reading the article, Emperor Wen praised Yang Yong.

古文：时晋王广亦表言不可，帝遂止。
现代文：这时，晋王杨广也上表说不可，文帝于是作罢。
English: At this time, the Jin king Yang Guang also said on the table that it was impossible, so Emperor Wen gave up.

古文：是后时政不便，多所损益，帝每纳之。
现代文：自此之后，时政凡有不适宜处，杨勇多有增减，常常为文帝所采纳。
English: Since then, whenever there was an unsuitable situation in the current politics, Yang Yong mostly increased or decreased, which was often adopted by Emperor Wen.

古文：帝常从容谓群臣曰： 前世皇王，溺于嬖幸，废立之所由生。
现代文：文帝常从容对群臣说： 前世帝王，沉溺于所宠幸的嫔妃，废立太子之事由此而生。
English: Emperor Wen often calmly said to his courtiers: In the past, emperors indulged in their favorite concubines, which led to the abdication of the crown prince.

古文：朕傍无姬侍，五子同母，可谓真兄弟也。
现代文：朕别无侍妾，五子同母所生，可以说是真正的兄弟。
English: I have no concubine, five sons born of the same mother, can be said to be a true brother.

古文：岂若前代，多诸内宠，孽子忿争，为亡国之道邪！ 
现代文：岂会像前代那样，宠妃甚多，庶子纷纷争立，以至于亡国呢？ 
English: Will there be, as in the previous generation, so many favorite concubines, and so many illegitimate children, that the country will be ruined?

古文：勇颇好学，解属词赋，性宽仁和厚，率意任情，无矫饰之行。
现代文：杨勇颇喜爱学习，能填词作赋，性格宽仁和厚，任性自然，做事从不矫揉造作。
English: Yang Yong is quite fond of learning, can fill in words, has a generous and thick personality, is headstrong and natural, and never makes things up.

古文：引明克让、姚察、陆开明等为之宾友。
现代文：将明克让、姚察、陆开明等引为宾朋。
English: Ming Kejan, Yao Zha, Lu Kaiming and others are listed as friends.

古文：勇尝文饰蜀铠，帝见而不悦，恐致奢侈之渐，因诫之曰： 我历观前代帝王，未有奢华而能长久者。
现代文：杨勇曾经装饰一件蜀人打造的铠甲，文帝看见后就不高兴了，担心这就是奢侈的开始，因此告诫他说： 我历观前代帝王，没有奢侈糜烂而能长久在位的。
English: Yang Yong once decorated a suit of armor made by the Shu people. Emperor Wen was not happy when he saw it, fearing that this was the beginning of luxury, so he warned him: I have seen the previous emperors, without luxury decay and can reign for a long time.

古文：汝当储后，若不上称帝心，下合人意，何以承宗庙之重，居兆人之上？
现代文：你身为太子，若不能上使皇帝称心，下合诸人之意，怎么能够承担朝廷的重任，居于亿兆人之上呢？
English: As a prince, if you can't make the emperor happy and meet everyone's wishes, how can you take on the heavy responsibilities of the imperial court and live above billions and billions of people?

古文：吾昔衣服，各留一物，时复看以自警戒。
现代文：我过去穿的衣服，各保留了一件，经常再拿出来看看，自诫不可奢侈。
English: I used to wear clothes, each kept a piece, often take it out to see, self-discipline should not be extravagant.

古文：又拟分赐汝兄弟。
现代文：又曾准备分赐给你们兄弟。
English: And I have a gift for you, my brothers.

古文：恐汝以今日皇太子之心，忘昔时之事，故令高颎赐汝我旧所带刀子一枚，并菹酱一合，汝昔作上士时所常食如此。
现代文：恐怕你居于皇太子之位，忘记了过去的事情，因此就令高赹将我往日所带的刀子一枚，咸菜酱一盒赐给你，你过去作上士的时候，经常吃的就是这样的食物。
English: I'm afraid you're in the position of crown prince and have forgotten the past, so I'll have Gao Yao give you a knife I used to carry and a box of pickled cabbage sauce, which is the kind of food you used to eat when you were a staff sergeant.

古文：若存忆前事，应知我心。 
现代文：你若能记起以前的事情，就应该明白我的用心。 
English: If you can remember the past, you should understand my intentions.

古文：后经冬至，百官朝勇，勇张乐受贺。
现代文：后来过冬至节，文武百官朝觐杨勇，杨勇置乐接受祝贺。
English: Later, during the Winter Solstice Festival, Yang Yong, the civil and military leader, received congratulations from hundreds of officials.

古文：帝知之，问朝臣： 近闻至节，内外百官相率朝东宫，是何礼也？ 
现代文：文帝知道了这件事，问朝中大臣说： 近日听说冬至节时，内外百官都陆续去朝贺东宫太子，这是什么礼节呢？ 
English: When Emperor Wen learned of this, he asked the chancellor: "Recently, I heard that during the Winter Solstice Festival, hundreds of officials at home and abroad have successively gone to the East Palace to congratulate the crown prince. What kind of etiquette is this?

古文：太常少卿辛亶对曰： 于东宫是贺，不得言朝。
现代文：太常少卿辛回答说 ：对东宫来说是祝贺，不能说是朝贺。 
English: Too often, Shaoqing Xin replied: For the East Palace, it is a congratulation, not a morning greeting.

古文：帝曰： 改节称贺，正可三数十人，逐情各去，何因有司徵召，一朝普集，太子法服设乐以待之？
现代文：文帝说 ：祝贺改换季节，有三几十人，酌情分别去祝贺就可以了，为何让有司征召，满朝文武都聚集起来，太子穿着法定的服装置乐招待群臣呢？
English: Emperor Wen said: Congratulations on the change of season, there are more than 30 people, it is enough to congratulate them separately as appropriate. Why should there be a general conscription, the whole court should gather, and the prince should wear the statutory clothing and music to invite the ministers?

古文：东宫如此，殊乖礼制。 
现代文：东宫太子这样做，大违礼法！ 
English: For the Crown Prince of the Eastern Court to do so is a serious breach of etiquette!

古文：乃下诏曰： 皇太子虽居上嗣，义兼臣子，而诸方岳牧正冬朝贺，任土作贡，别上东宫。
现代文：于是就下诏书说 ：皇太子虽然位居皇嗣，但名义上还是臣子，而各地长官正冬朝贺，带着本地的贡物，另贡奉给东宫。
English: Therefore, the imperial rescript said: Although the crown prince is the heir to the throne, he is still nominally a vassal, and the governors of various regions are congratulating in the winter, bringing local tributes and paying another tribute to the East Palace.

古文：事非典则，宜悉停断。 
现代文：此事不合礼法，应全部停止。 
English: This is against the code of etiquette and should be stopped altogether.

古文：自此恩宠始衰，渐生凝阻。
现代文：自此以后，恩宠开始减少，疑虑阻隔渐渐滋生。
English: From then on, the favours began to dwindle and doubts began to creep in.

古文：时帝令选强宗入上台宿卫，高颎奏： 若尽取强者，恐东宫宿卫太劣。 
现代文：其时，文帝命令选择豪强之士进入皇宫护卫，高赹奏道： 如果把强壮之士都选进来，恐怕东宫的护卫太弱。 
English: At that time, Emperor Wen ordered the selection of brave and strong men to enter the palace escort, and Gao Yu sang: If the strong men are selected, I am afraid that the escort of the East Palace is too weak.

古文：帝作色曰： 我有时行动，宿卫须得雄毅。
现代文：文帝厉色道： 我有时要走动走动，护卫一定要雄健刚毅。
English: Wen Di Li Si said: I sometimes have to walk around and around, the escort must be strong and courageous.

古文：太子毓德东宫，左右何须强武？
现代文：太子德布东宫，手下的人何须强壮英武？
English: Prince De Bu Donggong, why do his subordinates need to be strong and valiant?

古文：如我商量，恆于交番之日，分向东宫上下，团伍不别，岂非好事邪？
现代文：如果像你对我说的那样，轮流值班的时候，护卫一直分别在东宫下巡护，与禁卫军的职责没有什么区别，岂不是多此一举？
English: If, as you said to me, when on duty in rotation, the guards have been patrolling separately under the East Palace, and there is no difference between the duties of the Imperial Guard, wouldn't that be too much?

古文：我熟见前代，公不须仍踵旧风！ 
现代文：前朝的事情我很熟悉，你不必用前朝的旧俗来劝我！ 
English: I am very familiar with the events of the previous morning. You don't have to use the old customs of the previous morning to persuade me!

古文：盖疑颎男尚勇女，形于此言，以防之。
现代文：原来，文帝对高赹的儿子娶杨勇的女儿有怀疑，故意说出这番话来防备他们。
English: It turned out that Emperor Wen had doubts about Gao Jun's son marrying Yang Yong's daughter, and deliberately said these words to prevent them.

古文：勇多内宠，昭训云氏嬖幸，礼匹于嫡。
现代文：杨勇有许多宠幸，昭训云氏原是侍妾，礼义却与正妻一样。
English: Yang Yong has many favorites. Shao Xunyun used to be his concubine, but her manners and etiquette are the same as his wife's.

古文：而妃元氏无宠，尝遇心疾，二日而薨。
现代文：妃子元氏不得宠爱，曾经害有心痛病，二日就死了。
English: Princess Motouji is not allowed to be pampered. She once suffered from a heart disease and died two days later.

古文：献皇后意有他故，甚责望勇。
现代文：献皇后另有想法，对杨勇大加责备。
English: The queen had other ideas and scolded Yang Yongru.

古文：又自妃薨，云昭训专擅内政，后弥不平，颇求勇罪过。
现代文：自妃元氏死后，云昭训独断东宫内政，献皇后更加不高兴，多次追究杨勇的罪过。
English: After the death of Empress Yuan, Yun Zhaoxun arbitrarily decided the internal affairs of the East Palace. Empress Xian was even more displeased and repeatedly investigated Yang Yong's crimes.

古文：晋王广知之，弥自矫饰，姬妾恆备员数，唯与萧妃居处。
现代文：晋王杨广知道后，愈加装模作样，诸多姬妾只是充数而已，只宠幸萧妃一人。
English: After the Jin king Yang Guang knew, he increasingly pretended to be a model, many concubines were just a filling number, and only favored Xiaofei.

古文：皇后由是薄勇，愈称晋王德行，后晋王来朝，车马侍从，皆为俭素，接朝臣，礼极卑屈，声名籍甚，冠于诸王。
现代文：皇后因此看不起杨勇，愈加称赞晋王的德行。后来，晋王入京朝见，车马侍从，都很节俭朴素，与朝臣交往，礼仪极为谦卑，因此声名大振，超过了其他诸王。
English: As a result, the empress looked down on Yang Yong and praised the moral conduct of Jin Wang more and more. Later, when Jin Wang entered the imperial court in Beijing, the attendants of the carriage and horses were very frugal and simple, they interacted with the courtiers, and the etiquette was extremely humble. Therefore, his reputation was greatly enhanced, surpassing that of other kings.

古文：临还扬州，入内辞皇后，因哽咽流涕，伏不能兴。
现代文：临回扬州，晋王进宫向皇后辞行，哽咽流涕，伏地而不能起。
English: On his return to Yangzhou, Jin Wang entered the palace and resigned to the empress, choking and unable to get up.

古文：皇后泫然泣下，相对歔欷。
现代文：皇后凄然泪下，相对哭泣。
English: The Empress burst into tears and began to weep.

古文：王曰： 臣性识愚下，常守平生昆弟之意，不知何罪，失爱东宫，恆蓄盛怒，欲加屠陷。
现代文：晋王说 ：臣生性愚鲁，平生常守兄弟之意，不知因为什么罪，得罪了东宫，常怀盛怒，欲对臣加以屠戮陷害。
English: Jin Wang said, "The subject was born with a foolish nature, he always kept the brotherly feeling throughout his life, I don't know for what crime, he offended the East Palace, he was always angry, and he wanted to kill and frame the subject.

古文：每恐谗谮出于杼轴，鸠毒遇于杯杓。 
现代文：常恐谗陷出于妇人，鸩毒遇于杯杓。 
English: A woman is often afraid of falling into a pit, but poison is found in a cup.

古文：皇后忿然曰： 睍地伐渐不可耐，我为伊索得元家女，望隆基业，竟不闻作夫妻，专宠阿云，有如许豚犬。
现代文：皇后愤怒地道 ：目见地伐越来越让人不能忍受，我替他娶得元家女子，希望基业兴隆，竟然没听说有夫妻之事，而独宠阿云，竟有这样的猪狗！
English: The empress angrily said, "It's getting more and more unbearable to see him like this. I married a woman from the Yuan family for him, hoping that the foundation would flourish. I hadn't even heard of a husband and wife, but there was such a pig dog who was the sole favorite of Ah Yun!"

古文：前新妇本无病痛，忽尔暴亡，遣人投药，致此夭逝。
现代文：元妃先前本来没有病痛，忽然就死了。定是太子投毒，致使元妃早逝。
English: The former empress, who had not been ill before, died suddenly. It must have been the prince who poisoned her, causing her early death.

古文：事已如此，我亦不穷。
现代文：事情已经这样了，我也不深加追究。
English: That's the way it is, and I don't want to dig deeper into it.

古文：何因复于汝处发如此意？
现代文：为何又在你这里生出这样的念头？
English: Why does such a thought arise in you?

古文：我在尚尔，我死后当鱼肉汝乎？
现代文：我活着时他尚且这样做，我死后你还不任人宰割吗？
English: He did it while I was alive. Won't you be slaughtered when I'm dead?

古文：每思东宫竟无正嫡，至尊千秋万岁后，遣汝等兄弟向阳云兒前再拜问讯，此是几许大苦痛邪！ 
现代文：我常常想东宫至今尚无正妻，等你父亲死后，让你们兄弟向阿云拜揖问安，这该是多么大的痛苦啊！ 
English: I often think that the East Palace still has no legal wife, and when your father dies, let your brothers say hello to Ayun Bayon, what a great pain it must be!

古文：晋王又拜，呜咽不能止，皇后亦悲不自胜。
现代文：晋王又拜，哭泣不止。皇后亦不胜悲痛。
English: King Jin bowed again and wept more and more. The queen was also overcome with grief.

古文：此别之后，知皇后意移，始构夺宗之计。
现代文：自这次分别之后，晋王知道皇后已移意他人，就开始谋划争夺太子之位。
English: After this separation, Jin Wang, knowing that the Empress had changed her mind, began to plan to compete for the position of crown prince.

古文：因引张衡定策，遣褒公宇文述深交杨约，令喻旨于越公素，具言皇后此语。
现代文：于是就传唤张衡商定计策，派遣褒公宇文述深交杨约，令他传旨给越公杨素，把皇后那一番话都告诉杨素。
English: Therefore, he summoned Zhang Heng to agree on a strategy, and sent Bo Gongwu Wenshu, who was a close friend of Yang Yo, to convey his message to the Duke of Yue, Yang Su, and to tell Yang Su all the words of the queen.

古文：素瞿然曰： 但不知皇后如何？
现代文：杨素惊异道 ：只是不知道皇后会怎么样？
English: Yang Su said in surprise, "I just don't know what will happen to the empress."

古文：但如所言，吾又何为者！ 
现代文：如果像说的那样，我又能够做些什么！ 
English: If it's like that, I can do anything!

古文：后数日，素入侍宴，微称晋王孝悌恭俭有礼，用此揣皇后意，后泣曰： 公言是也。
现代文：过了几天，杨素入宫侍宴，稍稍称赞晋王孝悌恭俭有礼，借此揣度皇后的意思。皇后哭着说： 你说的很对。
English: A few days later, Yang Su attended a banquet at the palace and praised the Jin king for his filial piety, frugality and courtesy, thereby guessing the queen's meaning. The queen cried and said: You are right.

古文：我兒大孝顺，每闻至尊及我遣内使到，必迎于境首。
现代文：晋王十分孝顺，每次听说皇上和我派遣使者到扬州，必定到州境边迎候。
English: Jin Wang is very filial, every time he hears that the emperor and I are sending an envoy to Yangzhou, he will certainly go to the state border to meet us.

古文：又其新妇亦大可怜，我使婢去，常与同寝共食。
现代文：他新纳的嫔妃也十分可怜，我的使婢到那里，常常和那些嫔妃同寝共食。
English: His new concubines were also very poor, and my maidservants and maidservants went there and often slept and ate with those concubines.

古文：岂如睍地伐共阿云相对而坐，终日酣宴，昵近小人，疑阻骨肉！
现代文：怎么会像目见地伐和阿云那样相对而坐，终日酣宴，亲近小人，怀疑阻隔亲骨肉呢？
English: How is it possible to sit opposite each other, feasting all day long, close to villains, and suspicious of relatives?

古文：我所以益怜阿者，尝恐暗地杀之。 
现代文：我所以更加怜爱阿，就是恐怕他被人暗害。 
English: That's why I pity him even more, because I'm afraid he'll be assassinated.

古文：素既知意，盛言太子不才。
现代文：杨素既然知道了皇后的意思，大说特说太子没有能力。
English: Since Yang Su knew the meaning of the empress, he boasted that the prince had no ability.

古文：皇后遂遗素金，始有废立之意。
现代文：皇后就赠给杨素金钱，开始有了废立太子的意思。
English: The empress presented Yang Su with money and began to have the intention of abolishing the position of crown prince.

古文：勇颇知其谋，忧惧，计无所出。
现代文：杨勇对晋王的计谋有所知晓，忧愁恐惧，没有什么对策。
English: Yang Yong knew something about Jin Wang's stratagem, but he was worried and afraid, and had no countermeasures.

古文：闻新丰人王辅贤能占候，召而问之。
现代文：听说新丰人王辅贤会占星相，召来询问。
English: I heard that Wang Fuxian, a person from Xinfeng, would come to inquire about astrology.

古文：辅贤曰： 白虹贯东宫门，太白袭月，皇太子废退象也。 
现代文：辅贤说： 白虹横贯东宫之门，太白星袭于月宫，这是皇太子废退之象。 
English: Fu Xian said: The white rainbow crosses the gate of the East Palace, and the white star strikes the Moon Palace. This is the sign of the crown prince's retirement.

古文：以铜铁五兵造诸厌胜。
现代文：用铜铁五种兵器打造符咒以镇邪。
English: Use the five weapons of copper and iron to create spells to ward off evil.

古文：又于后园内作庶人村，屋宇卑陋，太子时于中寝息，布衣草褥，冀以当之。
现代文：又在后园中修庶人村，房屋低下简陋，太子时常在里面休息，布衣草垫，希望能借此阻挡恶运。
English: In addition, a commoner's village was built in the back garden. The houses were low and simple, and the prince often rested there on a cloth cushion, hoping to prevent bad luck.

古文：帝知其不安，在仁寿宫，使杨素观勇，素至东宫，偃息未入，勇束带待之，故亦不进以怒勇，勇衔之，形于言色。
现代文：文帝知道杨勇心中不安，在仁寿宫召见杨素，让他去观察杨勇的动静。杨素到了东宫，悄声无息地躲在外面，没有进去。杨勇穿戴整齐等待他，他就故意不进去，用以激怒杨勇。杨勇怨恨杨素失礼，怒形于色。
English: Emperor Wen knew that Yang Yong was uneasy in his heart, and summoned Yang Su to Renshou Palace to let him observe Yang Yong's movements. When Yang Su arrived at the East Palace, he quietly hid outside and did not go in. Yang Yong was neatly dressed and waiting for him, and he deliberately did not go in to provoke Yang Yong. Yang Yong resented Yang Su's discourtesy, and his anger was palpable.

古文：素还，言勇怨望，恐有他变。
现代文：杨素回宫，说杨勇甚为怨恨，恐怕发生变故。
English: Yang Su returned to the palace, saying that Yang Yong was very resentful, I'm afraid there will be a change.

古文：帝甚疑之。
现代文：文帝非常怀疑。
English: Wendi is very skeptical.

古文：皇后又遣人伺觇东宫，纤介事皆闻奏，因加媒蘖，构成其罪。
现代文：皇后又派人偷偷地去东宫察望，大小事情都要奏报，借以构陷诬害，谋成其罪。
English: The empress also sent someone to secretly go to the East Palace to observe, and all matters large and small were to be reported, so as to frame and frame the crime.

古文：帝惑之，遂疏忌勇。
现代文：文帝被他们迷惑，就开始疏远忌恨杨勇。
English: Emperor Wen was confused by them and began to alienate and hate Yang Yong.

古文：乃于玄武门达至德门量置人候，以伺动静，皆随事奏闻。
现代文：于是就在玄武门至至德门之间安排岗哨，窥伺东宫的动静，有事立即奏知。
English: As a result, sentries were arranged between the Xuanwu Gate and the German Gate to spy on the movement of the East Palace and report anything immediately.

古文：又东宫宿卫人，侍官已上，名籍悉令属诸卫府，有健兒者咸屏去之。
现代文：又将东宫侍官以上的护卫，都划归卫府管辖，强壮勇武的卫士也都被调开了。
English: In addition, the guards of the East Palace who were above the rank of chamberlain were all placed under the jurisdiction of the Guard Bureau, and the strong and brave guards were also transferred.

古文：晋王又令段达私货东宫幸臣姬威，令取太子消息，密告杨素。
现代文：晋王又命令段达私下买通东宫所宠幸之人姬威，让他将有关太子的消息，秘密报告给杨素。
English: Jin Wang also ordered Duan Da to secretly bribe Ji Wei, the favorite of the East Palace, to let him secretly report the news about the prince to Yang Su.

古文：于是内外宣谤，过失日闻。
现代文：于是朝廷内外到处都在说杨勇的坏话，各种过失每天都传到文帝那里。
English: As a result, bad things were said about Yang Yong everywhere inside and outside the imperial court, and all kinds of faults were passed on to Emperor Wen every day.

古文：段达胁姬威曰： 东宫罪过，主上皆已知之。
现代文：段达威胁姬威说： 东宫的罪过，皇上已经都知道了。
English: Duan Da threatened Ji Wei, saying, "The sins of the Eastern Palace are already known to the emperor.

古文：已奉密诏，定当废立。
现代文：已得到密诏，定要废立太子。
English: He has received a secret edict to abolish the position of crown prince.

古文：君能告之，则大富贵。 
现代文：你若能把东宫的罪过告诉我们，就会大富大贵。 
English: If you can tell us the sins of the Eastern Palace, you will be very rich.

古文：威遂许诺。
现代文：姬威就答应了。
English: Jiwei agreed.

古文：开皇二十年，车驾至自仁寿宫，御大兴殿，谓侍臣曰： 我新还京师，应开怀欢乐，不知何意，翻悒然愁苦。 
现代文：开皇二十年，文帝车驾自仁寿宫御临大兴殿，对侍臣说： 我刚回到京师，理应开怀欢乐，可是不知怎么了，反而愁苦不乐。 
English: Twenty years after the emperor's death, Emperor Wen drove from the Renju Palace to the Daxing Hall and said to his attendant: "I have just returned to Beijing, I should be happy, but somehow, I am sad and unhappy.

古文：吏部尚书牛弘对曰： 由臣等不称职，故至尊忧劳。
现代文：吏部尚书牛弘答道 ：因为臣等不称职，所以让皇上忧愁劳心。 
English: The clerk, Shoshu Niuhiro, replied, "Because the vassals are incompetent, let the emperor worry about his work."

古文：帝既数闻谗谮，疑朝臣具委，故有斯问，冀闻太子之愆。
现代文：文帝已经多次听到谗言，怀疑朝臣都为东宫遮掩，所以有这样的问话，希望听到太子的罪过。
English: Emperor Wen has heard the criticism many times, suspecting that courtiers are covering up for the East Palace, so there is such a question, hoping to hear the prince's sins.

古文：弘既此对，大乖本指。
现代文：牛弘这样回答，完全违背了文帝的意思。
English: Ushihiro answered this way, completely contrary to the meaning of Emperor Wen.

古文：帝因作色谓东宫官属曰： 仁寿宫去此不远，令我每还京师，严备如入敌国。
现代文：文帝于是神色严肃地对东宫属官说： 仁寿宫距这里不远，让我每次回京师，都严加戒备，像进入敌国一样。
English: Emperor Wen then looked solemnly at the officials of the East Palace and said: Renshou Palace is not far from here, so every time I return to Beijing, I am on high alert, as if I were entering an enemy country.

古文：我为患利，不脱衣卧。
现代文：我因患有痢疾，卧不脱衣。
English: I'm bedridden with dysentery, so I can't undress.

古文：夜欲得近厕，故在后房。
现代文：夜里想找一个近一些的厕所，却故意把厕所设在后房。
English: At night, I wanted to find a toilet that was closer, but I deliberately put the toilet in the back room.

古文：恐有惊急，还就前殿。
现代文：恐怕有惊变，又回到前殿。
English: I'm afraid there will be a sudden change, and I'll go back to the vestibule.

古文：岂非尔辈欲坏我家国邪！ 
现代文：你们岂不是想毁坏我的国家吗！ 
English: Don't you want to destroy my country?

古文：乃执唐令则等数人，付所司讯鞫。
现代文：于是就令将唐令则等人抓了起来，交付有司审讯。
English: As a result, Tang Ling Ze and others were arrested and handed over to the court for trial.

古文：令杨素陈东宫事状，以告近臣。
现代文：命令杨素陈述东宫的罪状，告知亲近之臣。
English: He ordered Yang Su to report Donggong's crime and inform his close vassals.

古文：素显言之曰： 奉敕向京，令皇太子检校刘居士余党。太子忿然作色，肉战泪下，云： 居士党已尽，遣我何处穷讨？
现代文：杨素明白地说： 我奉旨到京师，令皇太子追查刘居士余党，太子愤怒得变了颜色，浑身打战，泪水流了下来，说： 刘居士的同党都已遣散了，让我去哪里追查？
English: Yang Su said plainly, "I was ordered to go to Beijing to ask the crown prince to investigate Liu Jingshi's remaining party. The prince turned red with anger, fought with his whole body, and shed tears. He said, "Liu Jingshi's fellow party members have all been dismissed. Where should I go to investigate?"

古文：尔作右仆射，受委自求，何关我事！ 
现代文：你官居右仆射，受委托自己追查，关我什么事！ 
English: Your right-hand man in your official residence shoots, you are commissioned to investigate yourself, what does it have to do with me!

古文：又云： 昔大事不遂，我先被诛。
现代文：又说： 当初大事若不成功，我先被诛杀了。
English: He also said, "If the great undertaking does not succeed at first, I will be killed first."

古文：今作天子，竟乃令我不如弟，一事已上，不得自由。 
现代文：如今做了天子，竟然让我不如弟弟们，什么事情都不能自己作主。 
English: Now that I'm a godson, I'm not as good as my brothers, and I can't do anything on my own.

古文：因长叹回视云： 我大觉身妨！ 
现代文：于是长叹一口气，回视我说： 我彻底明白了，我妨碍了别人！ 
English: Then, with a long sigh, I looked back and said: I completely understand, I got in other people's way!

古文：又云： 诸王皆得奴，独不与我！ 
现代文：又说： 诸王皆得到了赏赐的奴仆，惟独不给我！ 
English: And he said, All kings have had their servants rewarded, but not me.

古文：乃向西北奋头，喃喃细语。 
现代文：就昂首向西北，喃喃细语。 
English: He raised his head to the northwest and muttered.

古文：帝曰： 此兒不堪妨承嗣久矣。
现代文：文帝说： 这个儿子早就不适合当太子了。
English: Emperor Wen said, "This son is no longer fit to be crown prince."

古文：皇后恆劝我废，我以布素时生，复长子，望其渐改，隐忍至今。
现代文：皇后一直劝我废掉他，我因他是我为平民时所生，又是长子，希望他慢慢地改正过来，一直隐忍到今天。
English: The Queen has been urging me to get rid of him. As he was my firstborn son, born when I was a commoner, I hoped that he would gradually mend his ways, and I have put up with him to this day.

古文：勇昔从南兗州来，语卫王曰： 阿娘不与我一好妇女，亦是可恨。 
现代文：杨勇当初从南兖州来，对卫王说 ：阿娘不给我一个好媳妇，亦是可恨。 
English: Yang Yong originally came from South Luzhou and said to Wei Wang: "If my daughter does not give me a good daughter-in-law, it is also hateful."

古文：因指皇后侍兒曰： 皆我物。 
现代文：于是就指着皇后的侍儿说 ：都是我的人。 
English: Then he pointed to the queen's attendants and said, "They are all my people."

古文：此言几许异事！
现代文：这话有多少不同的意思！
English: How many different meanings this word has!

古文：其妇初亡，即以斗帐安余老妪。
现代文：其妻刚刚亡故，即用斗帐把其余的老妇人都安置起来了。
English: His wife had just passed away, so he used the basket to put the rest of the old women in place.

古文：新妇初亡，我深疑使马嗣明药杀。
现代文：新媳妇刚死的时候，我就十分怀疑是杨勇使马嗣明毒死的。
English: When my new daughter-in-law had just died, I strongly suspected that Yang Yong had poisoned Ma Siuming.

古文：我曾责之，便怼曰： 会当杀元孝矩。 
现代文：我曾经责问他，他回答说： 一定要杀了元孝矩。 
English: I once scolded him, and he replied, "We must kill Mototaka Takamori."

古文：此欲害我而迁怒耳。
现代文：这是想害我而迁怒元孝矩。
English: This is an attempt to harm me and anger Genko Takanori.

古文：初，长宁诞育，朕与皇后共抱养之，自怀彼此，连遣来索。
现代文：当初，长宁王诞生，朕与皇后共同抱养他。自从彼此产生了隔阂，就连接派人来索要。
English: At first, Changning Wang was born, and I held him together with the empress. Ever since there was a rift between us, I sent someone to claim him.

古文：且云定兴女，在外私合而生，想此由来，何必是其体胤？
现代文：况且，云定兴之女，是在外私通而生的，想其由来，未必一定是云定兴的后代！
English: Moreover, the daughter of Yun Dingxing was born out of fornication, and if you think about its origin, it may not necessarily be the offspring of Yun Dingxing!

古文：昔晋太子取屠家女，其兒即好屠割。
现代文：过去，晋太子娶屠户家的女儿，他的儿子就好屠杀。
English: In the past, if the crown prince married the daughter of a butcher, his son would be slaughtered.

古文：今傥非类，便乱宗祐。
现代文：如今云定兴女倘若不是正经一类，便会祸乱宗庙。
English: Nowadays, if Yun Dingxing's women are not of a serious nature, they will cause havoc in the ancestral temple.

古文：又刘金驎，佞人也，呼定兴作家翁。
现代文：还有，刘金是一个谄媚之人，称云定兴为父。
English: In addition, Liu Jin is a charming person who calls Yun Dingxing his father.

古文：定兴愚人，受其此语。
现代文：云定兴也是个傻瓜，接受他这种称呼。
English: Yun Dingxing is also a fool to accept such a title.

古文：我前解金驎者，为其此事。
现代文：我从前解除刘金之职，就是因这件事。
English: It was because of this that I relieved Liu Jin of his duties.

古文：勇昔在宫，引曹妙达共定兴女同宴，妙达在外云 我今得劝妃酒。 
现代文：杨勇以前在宫中，把曹妙达领来与云定兴之女同宴，曹妙达在外面说： 我如今能劝云妃喝酒。 
English: Yang Yong used to bring Cao Myaeda to the palace for a banquet with the daughter of Yun Dingxing. Cao Myaeda said outside: I can now persuade Yunfei to drink.

古文：直以其诸子偏庶，畏人不服，故逆纵之，欲收天下望耳。
现代文：因为其诸子都是偏房庶出，害怕人们不服，故意纵容他们，想获取天下人之心。
English: Because all of his children are illegitimate, he is afraid of people's disapproval, deliberately indulges them, and wants to win the hearts of the world.

古文：我虽德惭尧舜，终不以万姓付不肖子。
现代文：我虽然德业不及尧舜，终究不能把天下交给不肖之子。
English: Although I am not good at virtue, after all, I can't hand over the world to a bad son.

古文：我恆畏其加害，加防大敌，令欲废之，以安天下。 
现代文：我一直害怕他加害于我，像防强敌一样，今日准备废掉他，以安定天下。 
English: I've always been afraid of him harming me, like defending against a powerful enemy, and today I'm preparing to abolish him in order to stabilize the world.

古文：左卫大将军元旻谏曰： 废立大事，天子无贰言，诏旨若行，后悔无及。
现代文：左卫大将军元谏阻道 ：废立太子这样的大事，天子说过就无法更改，诏令如果颁行，后悔就来不及了。
English: General Zuo Wei (左衛大將元) objected, saying, "Such a big event as the dethronement of the crown prince cannot be changed once it is decreed by Heaven. If the edict is carried out, it will be too late to regret it."

古文：谗言罔极，惟陛下察之。 
现代文：谗言没有穷尽，愿陛下详察。 
English: There is no end to the criticism, and I hope His Majesty will take a closer look.

古文：辞直争强，声色俱厉，帝不答。
现代文：元据理强争，声色俱厉，文帝不作回答。
English: The argument is strong, the voices are strident, and Emperor Wen does not answer.

古文：时姬威又表告太子非法，帝使威尽言。
现代文：这时姬威又上表告太子违法，文帝让姬威详细说一说。
English: At this time, Jiwei also went on record to accuse the crown prince of breaking the law, and Emperor Wen asked Jiwei to elaborate.

古文：威对曰： 皇太子由来共臣语，唯意在骄奢，欲得樊川以至散关，总规为苑。
现代文：姬威回答说 ：皇太子一直对臣说，其意只在骄奢，想把樊川至散关统统作为林苑。
English: Jiwei replied, "The crown prince has always told his ministers that his intention was only to be arrogant, and that he wanted to make the whole area from the Hechuan River to the San Pass into a forest park."

古文：兼云： 昔汉武将起上林苑，东方朔谏，赐朔黄金百斤，几许可笑！
现代文：还说 ：当年汉武帝准备起造上林苑，东方朔谏阻，赐给东方朔黄金百斤，实在可笑！
English: He also said: When Emperor Hanwu was preparing to build Shanglinyuan, Dongfang Shuo resisted and gave Dongfang Shuo 100 jin of gold, which was really ridiculous!

古文：我实无金辄赐此等。
现代文：我实在没有黄金赐给这些人。
English: I really don't have any gold to give these people.

古文：若有谏者，正当斩之，不过杀百许人，自然永息。 
现代文：若有谏阻的人，正应该杀掉，杀不过百十人，自然平息。 
English: If there are any who resist, they should be killed, but if only a hundred are killed, the situation will calm down naturally.

古文：前苏孝慈解左卫率，皇太子奋髯扬肘曰： 大丈夫当有一日，终不忘之，决当快意。 
现代文：从前，苏孝慈被解除左卫率之职，皇太子须髯乍起，挥臂说： 大丈夫只要活一天，就终究不会忘记这件事，一定要快意而行。 
English: Once upon a time, when Su Xiao Ci was relieved of his duties as the head of the Left Division of the Imperial Guard, the crown prince must have woken up, waved his arm and said: "It's okay, as long as you live for one day, you won't forget this matter after all, you must do your best."

古文：又宫内所须，尚书多执法不与，便怒曰： 仆射已下五人，会展三人脚，便使知慢我之祸。 
现代文：还有，宫内需要的东西，尚书多依法不给，太子便怒道： 仆射以下五人，应该砍下三个人的脚，就让他们知道怠慢我会有什么样的祸了。 
English: Furthermore, the things that the palace needed were not given to Shang Shuxu in accordance with the law, and the prince became angry and said, "If I have to shoot five people, I should cut off the feet of three people, so that they know what kind of disaster it would be to neglect me."

古文：又于苑内筑一小城，春夏秋冬作役不辍，营起亭殿，朝造夕改。
现代文：又在苑内建一座小城，春夏秋冬劳作不停，起造亭殿，朝造夕改。
English: In addition, a small city was built in the garden, and the work in spring, summer, autumn and winter was incessant, starting with the construction of the pavilion, and continuing in the morning and evening.

古文：每云： 至尊嗔我多侧庶，高纬、陈叔宝岂是孽子乎？ 
现代文：常常说： 皇上怪我多偏房侧室，高纬、陈叔宝这些亡国之君难道是庶出的吗？ 
English: He often said, "The emperor has many concubines, Gao Wei and Chen Shubao. Are these princes of a ruined country illegitimate?"

古文：尝令师姥卜吉凶，语臣曰： 至尊忌在十八年，此期促矣。  
现代文：曾令卜人占卜吉凶，对臣说： 皇上忌在十八年，这个日期快到了。  
English: He once ordered a fortuneteller to tell fortunes, and said to his vassal: The emperor's death anniversary is in eighteen years, and this date is approaching.

古文：帝泫然曰： 谁非父母生，乃至于此！
现代文：文帝流着泪说： 谁不是父母所生，以至于这样！
English: With tears streaming down his face, Wendi said, "Who hasn't been born to parents like this!

古文：我有旧使妇女，令看东宫。奏云： 勿令广平王至皇太子处。
现代文：我有过去的使女，令她们看察东宫，回奏说： 不要让广平王到皇太子那里。
English: I had my former maidservants inspect the East Palace, and they said, "Don't let Guangping Wang go to the crown prince."

古文：东宫憎妇，亦广平王教之。 
现代文：东宫憎恨妇人，也是广平王教他的。 
English: Donggong hated women, which was also taught to him by King Guangping.

古文：元赞亦知其阴恶，劝我于左藏东加置两队。
现代文：元赞也知道他阴狠恶毒，劝我在左藏东边加置两队护卫。
English: Yuan Zang also knew that he was shady and vicious, so he advised me to add two teams of guards on the east side of Zuozang.

古文：初平陈后，宫人好者悉配春坊，如闻不知厌足，于外更有求访。
现代文：当初平陈国后，漂亮的宫人都配给了太子宫，听说他还不知满足，又到外面访求美女。
English: At first, after Ping Chen's reign, all the beautiful courtiers were assigned to the prince's uterus. It was said that he was still unsatisfied, and went outside to visit the beautiful women.

古文：朕近览《齐书》，见高欢纵其兒子，不胜忿愤，安可效尤！ 
现代文：朕近日观览《齐书》，见高欢纵容他的儿子，不胜愤怒，怎么能够明知不对而仿效之呢！ 
English: When I recently watched "Qi Shu" and saw Gao Huan indulge his son, I was furious. How could I knowingly imitate him?

古文：于是勇及诸子皆被禁锢，部分收其党与。
现代文：于是，勇及诸子皆被囚禁，党羽也抓起来一部分。
English: As a result, Yong and his sons were all imprisoned, and party members also arrested some of them.

古文：杨素舞文锻炼，以成其狱。
现代文：杨素舞文划墨，审讯拷打，铸成大狱。
English: Yang Su-wu was drawn in ink, interrogated and tortured, and cast into a big prison.

古文：勇由是遂败。
现代文：杨勇因此而败。
English: As a result, Yang Yong was defeated.

古文：居数日，有司承素意，奏 元旻身备宿卫，常曲事于勇，情有附托。
现代文：过了几天，有司秉承杨素之意，奏道 ：元身为宿卫，常曲意迎逢杨勇，依附杨勇。
English: A few days later, adhering to the meaning of Yang Su, Yuji played the following song: Originally, he was a night watchman. The song means to meet Yang Yong, and to follow Yang Yong.

古文：在仁寿宫，裴弘将勇书于朝堂与旻，题封云，勿令人见。 
现代文：在仁寿宫，裴弘将杨勇的书信在朝堂上转交给，信封上写着： 不要让人看见。  
English: At Renshou Palace, Pei Hong handed Yang Yong's letter to him in the morning hall. On the envelope was written: "Don't let anyone see."

古文：帝曰： 朕在仁寿宫。
现代文：文帝说： 朕在仁寿宫，大小有点事情，东宫必定知道，比驿马传递得还快。
English: Emperor Wen said: I am in the Palace of Renshou, the size is a bit of a matter, the East Palace must know that it is faster than a horse.

古文：有纤小事，东宫必知，疾于驿马，怿之甚久，岂非此徒邪？ 遣武士执旻及弘付法。
现代文：我很早就感到奇怪，原来都是元这个人干的！ 于是就派遣武士把元和裴弘抓了起来，交付有司审理。
English: I felt very strange early on, as it turned out that this person, Yuan, was the one who did it! So I sent samurai to arrest Yuan and Pei Hong and hand them over to the magistrate.

古文：先是，勇尝于仁寿宫参起居还，途中见一枯槐树，根干蟠错，大且五六围，顾左右曰： 此堪作何器用？ 
现代文：当初，杨勇在仁寿宫参省回来，途中见到一棵枯槐树，树根枝干蟠杂错综，有五六抱那么粗。杨勇回头问随从的人说 ：这棵枯槐树能做什么器物用？ 
English: At the beginning, Yang Yong was returning from a visit to the province at the Renshou Palace. On the way, he saw a dead eucalyptus tree. The roots and branches of the tree were tangled and intertwined. It was as thick as five or six arms. Yang Yong turned to his followers and asked, "What can this dead eucalyptus tree be used for?"

古文：或对曰： 古槐尤堪取火。 
现代文：有人回答说 ：古槐特别适于取火用。 
English: Someone replied: "Ancient jars are particularly suitable for lighting fires."

古文：于时卫士皆佩火燧，勇因令匠者造数千枚，欲以分赐左右。
现代文：当时卫士都佩带火镜，杨勇于是命令工匠制火镜数千枚，准备分赐给手下的人。
English: At that time, the guards all wore fire mirrors, so Yang Yong ordered craftsmen to make thousands of fire mirrors and prepare to distribute them to his men.

古文：至是，获于库。
现代文：到了如今，都被从仓库中查获。
English: To date, all have been seized from warehouses.

古文：又药藏局贮艾数斛，亦搜得之。
现代文：另外，药藏局贮存有艾数斛，也被搜了出来。
English: In addition, the Medicines and Health Products Regulatory Agency's stockpile of aconite was also searched.

古文：大将为怪，以问姬威。威曰： 太子此意别有所在。
现代文：大将觉得奇怪，问姬威，姬威说 ：太子贮存这些另有用意。
English: The general found it strange and asked Jiwei. Jiwei said, "The crown prince has other plans for storing these things."

古文：比令长宁王已下，诣仁寿宫还，每常急行，一宿便至。
现代文：并命令长宁王等诸王，自仁寿宫回来时，常常急速赶路，一个晚上就回来了。
English: He also ordered Channing Wang and other kings, when returning from the Palace of Mercy, to make haste and return in one night.

古文：恆饲马千匹，云径往捉城门，自然饿死。 
现代文：一直饲养有骏马千匹，说直接赶到仁寿宫，封闭城门，里边的人自然都会被饿死。 
English: He had been raising thousands of horses, and said that he would rush directly to the Renshou Palace, close the gates, and the people inside would naturally starve to death.

古文：素以威言诘勇，勇不服曰： 窃闻公家马数万匹，勇忝备位太子，有马千匹，乃是反乎？ 
现代文：杨素拿姬威这些话审问杨勇，杨勇不服，说 ：我私下听说你家有马几万匹，我位居太子，有马千匹，就是要造反吗？ 
English: Yang Su Su took these words from Ji Wei and interrogated Yang Yong. Yang Yong was not convinced and said: I have heard privately that your family has tens of thousands of horses, I am a prince and have thousands of horses, is it necessary to rebel?

古文：素又发泄东宫服玩似加琱饰者，悉陈于庭，以示文帝群官，为太子罪。
现代文：杨素又把东宫的服饰器玩中带有雕饰的器物都拿出来，摆在大庭上，让文帝和百官观看，作为太子罪状。
English: Yang Su also took out all the carved objects from the Eastern Palace's costume play and placed them in the courtyard for Emperor Wen and the officials to see, as the crown prince's crime.

古文：帝曰： 前簿王世积，得妇女领巾，状似槊幡，当时遍示百官，欲以为戒。
现代文：文帝说 ：前有簿记王世积，得到一条妇女的领巾，形状像槊上的旗子，当时就让百官都看一看，想引为鉴戒。
English: Emperor Wen said, "Once upon a time, a bookkeeper, Wang Shijian, obtained a woman's neckerchief, shaped like a flag on a plow, and asked all the officials to take a look at it, hoping to set an example.

古文：今我兒乃自为之。
现代文：如今我儿竟然自己做这些东西。
English: Now my son even makes these things himself.

古文：领巾为槊幡，此是服妖。 
现代文：领巾做槊上旗子的样子，是奇装异服。 
English: The neck scarf looks like a flag draped over the collar. It's fancy dress.

古文：使将诸物示勇以诘之。
现代文：让人把这些东西拿给杨勇看，问他为何这样。
English: Have someone show these things to Yang Yong and ask him why.

古文：皇后又责之罪。
现代文：皇后又责备杨勇的罪过。
English: The empress also reproached Yang Yong for his sins.

古文：帝使使问勇，勇不服。
现代文：文帝派使者诘问杨勇，杨勇不服罪。
English: Emperor Wen sent an envoy to interrogate Yang Yong, but Yang Yong refused to admit guilt.

古文：太史令袁充进曰： 臣观天文，皇太子当废。 
现代文：太史令袁充进言说： 臣观天象，皇太子应该废掉。 
English: Emperor Taishi ordered Yuancheng to give the following advice: "Vassal, look at the celestial elephant. The crown prince should be abolished."

古文：上曰： 玄象久见矣。 
现代文：文帝说 ：天象早就出现了。 
English: Wen Di said: The celestial elephant has already appeared.

古文：群臣无敢言者。
现代文：群臣没有敢说话的。
English: The courtiers did not dare to speak.

古文：于是使人召勇。
现代文：于是使人召见杨勇。
English: As a result, Yang Yong was summoned.

古文：勇见使者，惊曰： 得无杀我邪？ 
现代文：杨勇见到使者，大惊道： 难道要杀我吗？ 
English: When Yang Yong saw the messenger, he was shocked and said, "Are you going to kill me?

古文：帝戎服陈兵，御武德殿，集百官立于东面，诸亲立于西面，引勇及诸子烈于殿庭。
现代文：文帝身着戎装，列兵殿前，亲临武德殿，聚集文武百官站立东面，诸皇亲站立西面，引杨勇及诸子列于殿前。
English: Emperor Wen, dressed in military attire, in front of the Palace of Military Parade, came to the Palace of Martial Arts in person, gathered hundreds of civil and military officials to stand on the east side, the imperial family to stand on the west side, and led Yang Yong and his sons to stand in front of the palace.

古文：命薛道衡宣诏废勇及其男女为王、公主者并为庶人。
现代文：命令薛道衡宣读诏书，废除杨勇及其儿女为王、为公主者皆为庶人。
English: He ordered Xue Daoheng to read out the edict, abolishing Yang Yong and his children as kings, and those who were princesses were commoners.

古文：命道衡谓勇曰： 尔之罪恶，人神所弃，欲求不废，其可得邪！ 
现代文：命令薛道衡对杨勇说 ：你的罪恶，人神共弃，想请求不废，怎么可能呢？ 
English: He ordered Xue Daoheng to say to Yang Yong: "Your sin, abandoning both man and God, if you want to ask for forgiveness, how is that possible?

古文：勇再拜曰： 臣合尸之都市，为将来鉴诫。
现代文：杨勇再次拜谢说： 臣理应斩首于市曹，作为后来人的鉴诫。
English: Yang Yong once again said, "The minister should have beheaded Yu Shi Cao as a warning to future generations."

古文：幸蒙哀怜，得全性命 。
现代文：承蒙哀怜，得以保全性命。 
English: He was spared and saved his life.

古文：言毕，泣下流襟，既而舞蹈而去。
现代文：说罢，泪下湿襟，接着就手舞足蹈地离开了。
English: With that, he burst into tears and left, dancing on his hands.

古文：左右莫不悯默。
现代文：手下的人都默然哀怜。
English: All of his subordinates silently lamented.

古文：又下诏： 左卫大将军元旻，任掌禁兵，委以心膂，乃包藏奸伏，离间君亲，崇长厉阶，最为魁首。
现代文：又下诏令说： 左卫大将军元，执掌禁卫军，委以重任，竟然包藏祸心，离间君亲，滋长祸端，是罪魁祸首。
English: The imperial edict also said: General Zuo Wei, former commander of the Imperial Guard, entrusted with a heavy responsibility, actually harbored evil intentions, alienated relatives, and nurtured evil ends, and was the main culprit.

古文：太子左庶子唐令则，策名储贰，位长宫僚，谄曲取容，音技自进，躬执乐器，亲教内人，赞成骄侈，导引非法。
现代文：太子左庶人唐令则，供职东宫，位居东宫僚属之首，曲意逢迎，进献音乐，自执乐器，亲自教授宫人，赞成骄纵奢侈，引导太子违法。
English: Prince Zuo, a commoner of the Tang Dynasty, served in the East Palace and was the highest-ranking member of the East Palace staff. He was fond of music, presented music, played musical instruments himself, personally taught palace staff, approved of extravagant luxury, and guided the prince to break the law.

古文：太子家令邹文腾，专行左道，偏被亲昵，占问国家，希觊灾祸。
现代文：太子家令邹文腾，专行左道旁门，受到太子宠幸，占问国家大事，希望出现灾祸。
English: The prince's family order Zou Wenten, dedicated to the left side of the road, was favored by the prince, inquired about national events, and hoped for a disaster.

古文：左卫率司马夏侯福，内事谄谀，外作威势，陵侮上下，亵浊宫闱。
现代文：左卫率司马夏侯福，在内阿谀拍马，在外作威作福，凌辱上下，亵渎宫闱。
English: Zuo Wei led by Sima Xia Houfu, in the inner grandma beat the horse, in the outer work of arrogance, insulting, blaspheming the imperial edict.

古文：典膳监元淹，谬陈爱憎，开示怨隙，进引妖巫，营事厌祷。
现代文：典膳监元淹，挑拨是非，招尤惹怨，引进妖巫，从事符咒祷告。
English: The supervisor of the ceremonial meal, instigated trouble, provoked resentment, introduced witches and wizards, and engaged in spells and prayers.

古文：前吏部侍郎萧子宝，往居省阁，旧非宫臣，进画奸谋，要射荣利。
现代文：前任吏部侍郎萧子宝，身居省阁，不是东宫之臣，却向太子进献奸计，讨取荣利。
English: Xiao Zi Bao, the previous attendant of the cadre department, lived in the provincial cabinet and was not a vassal of the East Palace, but he offered the prince a treacherous plan to gain honor and profit.

古文：前主玺下士何竦，假托玄象，妄说妖怪，志图祸乱，心在速发；兼诸奇服，皆竦规模，增长骄奢，糜费百姓。
现代文：前任主玺下士何竦，假借天象，胡说妖异怪事，图谋为祸作乱，希望灾祸速至；各种奇装异服，都是何竦谋划设计的，滋长太子的骄奢之意，浪费百姓资财。
English: His predecessor, Corporal He Yao, pretended to be a celestial being, talked nonsense about strange and weird things, plotted to create chaos, and hoped that the disaster would come soon; all kinds of strange clothes were planned and designed by He Yao, nurturing the prince's pride and wasting the people's wealth.

古文：此之七人，为害斯甚，并处斩刑，妻妾子孙皆没官。
现代文：这七个人为害如此过分，并处斩刑，妻妾子孙皆籍没入官。
English: These seven people did so much harm that they were beheaded, and their wives, concubines, and children were all disqualified from holding public office.

古文：车骑将军阎毗、东郡公崔君绰、游骑尉沈福宝、瀛州人章仇太翼等四人，所为之事，并是悖逆，论其状迹，罪合极刑。
现代文：车骑将军阎毗、东郡公崔君绰、游骑尉沈福宝、瀛州人仇太翼等四人，所为之事，皆是抗命叛逆，论其罪状，理所当诛。
English: Four people, including the cavalry general Yan Fei, the Dong County official Cui Junqiao, the ranger captain Shen Fubao, and the Zhangzhou resident Qutai Ying, all committed acts of disobedience and rebellion, and they should be punished for their crimes.

古文：但未能尽戮，并特免死，各决杖一百，身及妻子资财田宅悉没官。
现代文：只是不能都杀掉，一并特意免除死刑，各决杖一百，其自身及妻子儿女财产田舍全部没收归官。
English: However, they could not all be killed, and they were all specifically exempted from the death penalty. Each was sentenced to one hundred strokes of the cane, and they and their wives, children, property, and homes were all confiscated and returned to the officials.

古文：副将作大匠高龙叉，预追番丁，辄配东宫使役，营造亭舍，进入春坊；率更令晋文建、通直散骑侍郎判司农少卿事元衡，料度之外，私自出给，虚破丁功，擅割园地。
现代文：副将作大匠高龙叉，预先征集丁役，配给东宫役使，修建亭台房舍，进入东宫；率更令晋文建、通直散骑侍郎判司农少卿事元衡，在法律规定之外，私自供给太子资财，虚耗人力，擅自割给园地，并处以自尽。 
English: The vice-commander acted as the master craftsman Gao Longfor, pre-solicited Ding Rong, allocated Dong Gong Rong, built pavilion buildings, and entered the East Palace; he also ordered Jin Wen Jian and Tong Zhizhong to ride on horseback to judge the farmer Shaoqing Ji Yuan Heng. In addition to the provisions of the law, he privately supplied the prince with resources, wasted manpower, arbitrarily allocated to the park, and was punished with suicide.

古文：并处自尽， 于是集群官于广阳门外，宣诏以戮之。
现代文：于是，将诸多犯官聚集于广阳门外，宣读诏书后就都杀掉了。
English: As a result, many criminal officials were gathered outside the Guangyang Gate, and they were all killed after the edict was read out.

古文：乃移勇于内史省，给五品料食。
现代文：把杨勇移交给内史处，按五品官对待。
English: Yang Yong was handed over to the Internal History Office and treated as a fifth-grade official.

古文：立晋王广为皇太子，仍以勇付之，复囚于东宫。
现代文：立晋王杨广为皇太子，于是就把杨勇交给杨广，再次囚禁在东宫。
English: Yang Guang, the king of Jin, was made crown prince, so Yang Yong was handed over to Yang Guang and imprisoned again in the East Palace.

古文：赐杨素物三千段，元胄、杨约并千段，杨难敌五百段，皆鞫勇之功赏也。
现代文：赐给杨素丝绢三千段，元胄、杨约各千段，杨难敌五百段，奖赏他们审讯杨勇的功劳。
English: Yang Suxin was awarded 3,000 dan, Yuan Qi and Yang Jiao each received 1,000 dan, and Yang Nanyuan received 500 dan. They were rewarded for their merits in interrogating Yang Yong.

古文：时文林郎杨孝政上尽谏，言： 皇太子为小人所误，不宜废黜。 
现代文：这时，文林郎杨孝政上书谏阻道： 皇太子被小人所误，不应该废黜。 
English: At this time, Wenlin's son, Yang Xiao Zheng, wrote a letter saying: The crown prince was mistaken for a villain and should not be dethroned.

古文：帝怒，挞其胸。
现代文：文帝大怒，令人鞭挞其胸。
English: Emperor Wen was so angry that he lashed his chest.

古文：寻而贝州长史裴肃表称： 庶人罪黜已久，当克已自新，请封一小国。 
现代文：不久，贝州长史裴肃上表道： 庶人杨勇罪黜已久，应当让他悔过自新，请求封给他一个小国。 
English: Not long after, the governor of Bay Province, Shi Pei Su, came out and said: the commoner Yang Yong has been a criminal for a long time, he should be made to repent and reform, and he should be granted a small country.

古文：帝知勇黜不允天下情，乃徵肃入朝，具陈废立意。
现代文：文帝知道废黜杨勇有违天下人之情，就征召裴肃入朝，让他详述废立的见解。
English: Emperor Wen knew that the dethronement of Yang Yong was against the will of the people, so he conscripted Pei Su into the imperial court and asked him to detail his views on the dethronement.

古文：时勇自以废非其罪，频请见上，面申冤屈。
现代文：当时，杨勇认为自己无罪被废，频繁地请求面见皇上，当面申诉冤屈。
English: At that time, Yang Yong believed that his innocence had been nullified, and he frequently requested to meet the emperor to complain about his grievances in person.

古文：皇太子遏不得闻。
现代文：皇太子杨广封锁消息，不让皇上知道。
English: Crown Prince Yang Guang blocked the news from reaching the emperor.

古文：勇于是升树叫，闻于帝，冀得引见。
现代文：杨勇于是爬上大树叫喊，想让皇上听见，希望得以引见。
English: Yang Yong then climbed up the tree and shouted, wanting the emperor to hear, hoping to be introduced.

古文：杨素因奏言： 勇情志昏乱，又癫鬼所著，不可复收。 
现代文：杨素借机奏道 ：杨勇神志昏乱，又被疯鬼附身，不能再收留。 
English: Yang Su took the opportunity to recite: Yang Yong's conscience is confused, and he is possessed by a madman, and he can no longer be taken in.

古文：帝以为然，卒不得见。
现代文：文帝认为有理，终于没见。
English: Emperor Wen thought it was reasonable, and finally did not see it.

古文：帝遇疾于仁寿宫，皇太子入侍医，奸乱事闻于帝。
现代文：文帝在仁寿宫患有疾病，皇太子入宫侍侯，淫乱宫闱的事让文帝知道了。
English: Emperor Wen suffered from an illness in the Palace of Renshou. The crown prince entered the palace as an attendant and let Emperor Wen know about the adulterous concubine.

古文：帝抵床曰： 枉废我兒！ 
现代文：文帝捶床道 ：枉废了杨勇儿！ 
English: Emperor Wen's bedside manner: You wasted Yang Yong'er!

古文：遣追勇。
现代文：遣使追杨勇回宫。
English: He sent an envoy to chase Yang Yong back to the palace.

古文：未及发使而崩，秘不发丧。
现代文：使者还未来得及出发，文帝就驾崩了，皇太子秘不发丧。
English: Before the envoys could leave, Emperor Wen passed away, and the crown prince was secretly in mourning.

古文：遽收柳述、元岩，系大理狱，伪敕赐庶人死。
现代文：急收捕柳述、元岩，投进大理寺狱，假传圣旨赐庶人杨勇死。
English: Liu Shu and Yuan Yan were arrested, thrown into the Dali Temple prison, and the commoner Yang Yong died.

古文：追封房陵王，不为立嗣。
现代文：追封为房陵王，不立子嗣。
English: He was enthroned as the Funryo King, but he did not have any children.

古文：勇有十男：云昭训生长宁王俨、平原王裕、安城王筠。高良娣生安平王嶷、襄城王恪。王良媛生高阳王该、建安王韶。成姬生颍川王煚。
现代文：勇有十个儿子：云诏训生长宁王俨、平原王裕、安城王筠；高良娣生安平王嶷、襄城王恪；王良媛生高阳王该、建安王韶；成姬生颍川王胄。
English: Yong had ten sons: Yun Zhaoxin had Ning Wangqi, Pingyuan Wangyu, Ancheng Wangqi; Gao Liangqi had Anping Wangqi, Xiangcheng Wangqi; Wang Liangyuan had Gaoyang Wangqi, Jian'an Wangqi; Chengji had Xichuan Wangqi.

古文：秦王俊，字阿祗。开皇元年，立为秦王。
现代文：后宫生孝实、孝范。秦王杨俊，字阿祗，开皇元年立为秦王。
English: The children of the harem were Takasada and Takafan. Yangjun, the king of Qin, called Aya, was crowned king of Qin in the first year of the emperor's reign.

古文：二年，拜上柱国、河南道行台尚书令、洛州刺史，时年十二。
现代文：二年，拜上柱国、河南道行台尚书令、洛州刺史。这年杨俊十二岁。
English: In the second year, Yang Jun was 12 years old when he became the chief editor of Shangzhu Guo, the chief editor of Henan Province, and the chief editor of Luozhou.

古文：加右武卫大将军，领关东兵。
现代文：又加授右武卫大将军之职，统领关东兵。
English: He was also given the additional post of General of the Right Division of the Middle Palace Guards, commanding the soldiers of Guandong Province.

古文：三年，迁秦州总管，陇右诸州尽隶焉。
现代文：三年，改任秦州总管，统辖陇西诸州郡。
English: Three years later, he was transferred to the post of Qinzhou chief administrator, with overall jurisdiction over Zhuzhou County in western Shaanxi Province.

古文：俊仁恕慈爱，崇敬佛道，请为沙门，不许。
现代文：杨俊宽仁慈爱，崇敬佛道，请求为僧徒，未被允许。
English: Yang Junquan was benevolent and loving, revered Buddhism, and asked to become a monk, but was not allowed.

古文：六年，迁山南道行台尚书令。
现代文：六年，改任山南道行台尚书令。
English: Six years later, he was reappointed as the Shandong Provincial Governor of Shandong Province.

古文：伐陈之役，为山南道行军元帅，督三十总管，水陆十余万，屯汉口，为上流节度。
现代文：讨伐陈国的战事中，任山南道行军元帅，都督三十总管，水陆兵马十多万，驻扎在汉口，为上流节度。
English: During the war to subdue Chen Guo, he served as the marshal of Shannan Road, the thirty-third governor of the capital, and more than 100,000 soldiers, sailors, and horses were stationed in Hankou, which was the upper level of discipline.

古文：寻授扬州总管、四十四州诸军事，镇广陵。
现代文：不久，授扬州总管、四十四州诸军事，镇守广陵。
English: Soon, he was given the title of Yangzhou governor-general, military commander of forty-four prefectures, and town guard of Guangling.

古文：转并州总管、二十四州诸军事。
现代文：转任并州总管、二十四州诸军事。
English: He was transferred to the post of the director-general of the military of 24 states.

古文：初颇有令问，文帝闻而大悦。
现代文：当初，杨俊颇有好名声，文帝听到后非常高兴。
English: At first, Yang Jun had quite a good reputation, and Emperor Wen was very happy to hear this.

古文：后渐奢侈，违犯制度，出钱求息。
现代文：后来，渐渐奢侈浮华，违犯法令，放债出去，收取利息。
English: Later, it gradually became extravagant and flashy, violating laws and regulations, lending money, and charging interest.

古文：帝遣按其事，与相连坐者百余人。
现代文：文帝派人查究其事，牵连到一百多人。
English: Emperor Wen sent people to investigate the matter, implicating more than a hundred people.

古文：于是盛修宫室，穷极侈丽。
现代文：于是，杨俊就大修宫室，极尽奢侈华丽。
English: As a result, Yang Jun overhauled the palace, making it as luxurious and gorgeous as possible.

古文：俊有巧思，每亲运斤斧，工巧之器，饰以珠玉。
现代文：杨俊很灵巧，常常亲自运斤使斧，精工巧妙的器物，都用珠玉装饰起来。
English: Yang Jun is very dexterous. He often personally transports jars to make axes, and the skillfully crafted objects are all decorated with jewels.

古文：为妃作七宝幕篱，重不可戴，以马负之而行。
现代文：为妃子作七宝幂篱，沉重得没法戴，用马驮着而行。
English: He made a cloak of seven treasures for his concubine, which was too heavy for her to wear, and she walked with it on her horse.

古文：徵役无已。
现代文：征用民夫，无休无止。
English: The requisition of civilian workers continues without respite.

古文：置浑天仪、测景表。
现代文：设置浑天仪，测景表。
English: Set up the armillary sphere and the surveyor.

古文：又为水殿，香涂粉壁，玉砌金堦，梁柱楣栋之间，周以明镜，间以宝珠，极莹饰之美。
现代文：又建造水殿，用香粉涂饰墙壁，玉砌金阶，梁柱楣栋之间，绕置明镜，中间饰以珠宝，极尽晶莹华饰之美。
English: In addition, a water hall was built, the walls were decorated with incense powder, the steps were made of jade, the beams and columns were placed between the buildings, mirrors were placed around them, and the middle was decorated with jewels to maximize the beauty of the crystal decoration.

古文：每与宾客伎女弦歌于上。
现代文：常常和宾客妓女在水殿之上歌舞作乐。
English: She often sings and dances with her guests, prostitutes, on top of the hall.

古文：俊颇好内，妃崔氏性妒，甚不平之，遂于瓜中进毒。
现代文：杨俊颇为喜好女色，妃子崔氏生性妒嫉，心里气不过，就在瓜中投毒。
English: Yang Jun is quite fond of women, and the concubine Cui Shi is jealous and angry, so she poisons the melon.

古文：俊由是遇疾，徵还京师。
现代文：杨俊因此生病，征还京师。
English: As a result, Yang Jun fell ill and was conscripted back to Beijing.

古文：以俊奢纵，免官，以王就第。
现代文：因奢侈纵欲而被免官，归秦王封地。
English: He was dismissed from his post for extravagant debauchery and returned to the fiefdom of King Qin.

古文：左武卫将军刘升谏曰： 秦王非有他过，但费官物、营廨舍而已。
现代文：左武卫将军刘癉谏阻道 ：秦王没有别的过错，只不过耗费公物，修造宫室而已。
English: Liu Ye, General of the Left Division of the Middle Palace Guards, objected, saying that the Qin King had no other fault but that he had spent public money to build the palace.

古文：臣谓可容。 
现代文：我以为可以原谅。 
English: I thought I could be forgiven.

古文：帝曰： 法不可违。 
现代文：文帝道 ：法度不可违犯。 
English: Wen Di Dao: You can't violate the law.

古文：升固谏，帝忿然作色，升乃止。
现代文：刘癉坚持劝谏，文帝愤然变色，刘癉才作罢。
English: Liu Bei persisted in persuading him, but Emperor Wen changed his tone angrily, and Liu Bei had to give up.

古文：杨素复进谏，以秦王过不应至此。
现代文：杨素又进谏，认为秦王罪过不应至此。
English: Yang Su went into mourning again, thinking that Qin Wang's crime should not go so far.

古文：帝曰： 我是五兒之父，非兆人之父。
现代文：文帝说 ：我是五个儿子的父亲，不是天下人的父亲。
English: Emperor Wen said: I am the father of five sons, not the father of the whole world.

古文：若如公意，何不别制天子兒律！
现代文：如果像你这样说的，为何不为天子之子另制定一套法律！
English: If it is as you say, why not have a different set of laws for the Son of God!

古文：以周公为人，尚诛管、蔡。
现代文：像周公那样的人，尚且诛杀管叔、蔡叔。
English: People like Zhou Gong also killed Uncle Guan and Uncle Cai.

古文：我诚不及周公远矣，安能亏法乎！ 
现代文：我确实比周公差远了，但怎能够违背法度呢？ 
English: I am indeed far worse than Zhou, but how can I violate the law?

古文：卒不许。
现代文：终于没有答应。
English: In the end, he did not agree.

古文：俊疾笃，含银，银色变，以为遇蛊。
现代文：杨俊病得很厉害，口中含银，银子变色，以为中了蛊毒。
English: Yang Jun was very ill. He had silver in his mouth, and the silver was discolored, so he thought he had been poisoned.

古文：未能起，遣使奉表陈谢。
现代文：病不能起，遣使者奉表入京谢罪。
English: Unable to recover from his illness, he sent an envoy to Beijing to express his gratitude.

古文：帝责以失德。
现代文：文帝责备他因失德而至此。
English: Emperor Wen reproached him for being immoral and coming here.

古文：大都督皇甫统上表请复王官，不许。
现代文：大都督皇甫统上表请求恢复秦王的官位，文帝不答应。
English: Emperor Wen did not agree to the request of the Grand Governor, Emperor Fu, to restore the official rank of the Qin King.

古文：岁余，以疾笃，复拜上柱国。
现代文：过了一年多，因病情严重，重又任命为上柱国。
English: More than a year later, due to his serious illness, he was reappointed as Shangzhuangguo.

古文：二十年六月，薨于秦邸。
现代文：二十年六月，死于秦王官邸。
English: In June of the 20th, he died at the official residence of King Qin.

古文：帝哭之数声而已，曰： 晋王前送一鹿，我令作脯，拟赐秦王。
现代文：文帝只是哭了几声，说： 晋王日前送给我一只鹿，我令人做成鹿脯，准备赐给秦王。
English: Emperor Wen only cried a few times and said, "King Jin gave me a deer a few days ago, and I had it made into a deer's mane to give to King Qin.

古文：今亡。可置灵坐之前。
现代文：如今秦王死了，可把鹿脯放在他的灵位前。
English: Now that King Qin is dead, the deer skull can be placed in front of his coffin.

古文：心已许之，不可亏信。 
现代文：我既已准备赐给秦王，不能失信。 
English: Since I have already prepared to give it to King Qin, I cannot break my word.

古文：帝及后往视，见大蜘蛛、大蛷螋从枕头出，求之不见。
现代文：文帝和皇后去看视，见大蜘蛛和大蚰蜒从枕头中爬出，找又找不见。
English: Emperor Wen and the empress went to have a look and saw a big spider and a big snake crawling out of the pillow. They couldn't find it.

古文：穷之，知妃所为也。
现代文：仔细查找，知道是妃子们干的。
English: Look it up and you'll know it was the concubines who did it.

古文：俊所为侈丽物悉命焚之。
现代文：杨俊所做的侈丽之物，命令统统焚烧掉。
English: Yang Jun was ordered to burn all the luxurious things he had made.

古文：敕送终之具，务从俭约，以为从世法。
现代文：敕令送葬的东西，一定要节俭，为后世树立个榜样。
English: According to the imperial edict, the things to be sent for burial must be frugal, setting an example for future generations.

古文：王府僚佐请立碑，帝曰： 欲求名，一卷史书足矣，何用碑为！
现代文：秦王府的僚属请求立一块碑，文帝说： 想求名的话，一卷史书就够了，何必用石碑！
English: Colleagues of Qin Wangfu requested to erect a monument, and Emperor Wen said: "If you want to be famous, a history book is enough, why use a stone monument!

古文：若子孙不能保家，徒与人作镇石耳。 
现代文：如果子孙不能保家，白白地送给别人作镇石用罢了。 
English: If the children and grandchildren can't keep the house, just give it to someone else for free to use as a foundation stone.

古文：妃崔氏以毒王故，下诏废绝，赐死于其家。
现代文：妃子崔氏因为毒害秦王，下诏废绝，赐死于家。
English: Empress Dowager Cui, because she poisoned King Qin, was excommunicated and allowed to die at home.

古文：子浩，崔氏所生也。
现代文：子杨浩，崔氏所生。
English: His son, Yang Hao, was born to the Cui family.

古文：以其母谴死，遂不得立。
现代文：因为崔氏被赐死，就没有能够立嗣。
English: Because the Cui clan was given death, they were not able to establish a successor.

古文：于是以秦国官为丧主。
现代文：于是秦王之宫就没有了主人。
English: As a result, the palace of King Qin was left without an owner.

古文：俊长女永丰公主，年十三，遭父忧，哀慕尽礼，免丧，遂绝酒肉。
现代文：杨俊长女永丰公主，十三岁，遭父丧，哀毁尽礼，丧服满后，就不再食酒肉。
English: Yang Jun's eldest daughter, Princess Yongfeng, was thirteen years old when her father passed away. After the mourning period was over, she stopped eating meat and wine.

古文：每忌日，辄流涕不食。
现代文：每逢父丧之日就哭泣不进饭食。
English: On the day of his father's death, he would cry and not eat.

古文：有开府王延者，性忠厚，领俊亲信兵十余年，俊甚礼之。
现代文：开府王延，生性忠厚，统领杨俊的亲兵十多年，杨俊非常尊重他。
English: The governor, Wang Yan, was loyal by nature and had led Yang Jun's troops for more than ten years. Yang Jun respected him very much.

古文：及俊疾，延恆在閤下，衣不解带。
现代文：杨俊生病的时候，王延一直守候在阁下，衣不解带。
English: When Yang Jun was ill, Wang Yan had been waiting for him at the palace, unable to take off his clothes.

古文：至玄武门，诡奏曰： 臣卒中恶，命悬俄顷，请得面辞，死无所恨。 
现代文：杨俊死，王延数日滴水不进，瘦得只剩下一把骨头。文帝听到后哀怜他，赐给他御药，授予骠骑将军之职，掌管卫队。
English: Yang Jun died, Wang Yan was bedridden for several days and was so thin that only one bone was left. Upon hearing this, Emperor Wen took pity on him, gave him royal medicine, awarded him the post of general of cavalry, and put him in charge of the guards.

古文：冀见帝，为司宫者所遏，竟不得闻。
现代文：杨俊下葬那天，王延悲痛恸哭而死。
English: On the day of Yang Jun's funeral, Wang Yan wept bitterly and died.

古文：俄而难作，遇害，时年十六。越王侗，字仁谨，美姿容，性宽厚。
现代文：文帝十分感动，命令通事舍人前往吊唁，诏令将王延安葬在杨俊墓的一侧。越王杨侗字仁谨，姿仪俊美，性格宽厚。
English: Emperor Wen was very moved and ordered the courtiers to go to the condolences, and ordered Wang Yan to be buried on one side of Yang Jun's tomb.

古文：大业三年，立为越王。帝每巡幸，侗常留守东都。
现代文：大业三年，立为越王，炀帝每次外出巡幸，杨侗常留守东都洛阳。
English: After three years of great achievements, he was crowned the king of Yue. Emperor Zou went on a tour every time he went out, while Yang Mi often stayed in Luoyang, the eastern capital.

古文：杨玄感反，与户部尚书樊子盖拒之。
现代文：杨玄感造反，杨侗与户部尚书樊子盖共同率兵抵抗。
English: Yang Xuanxuan rebelled, and Yang Hui and the head of the household, Shang Shuzi Zizigai, jointly led the resistance.

古文：事平，朝于高阳，拜高阳太守。
现代文：叛乱平息后，在高阳朝见炀帝，官拜高阳太守。
English: After the rebellion had subsided, Emperor Gaoyang met Emperor Qian in Gaoyang, and paid official homage to Emperor Gaoyang.

古文：俄以本官留守东都。
现代文：很快就以原任官职留守东都。
English: He soon remained in the eastern capital in his former official position.

古文：十三年，帝幸江都，复令侗与金紫光禄大夫段达、太府卿元文都、摄户部尚书韦津、右武卫将军皇甫无逸等总留台事。
现代文：十三年，炀帝巡幸江都，又令杨侗与金紫光禄大夫段达、太府卿元文都、摄户部尚书韦津、右武卫将军皇甫无逸等人总管内阁之事。
English: In the thirteenth year, Emperor Gong toured the Yangtze River capital, and appointed Yang Xuan and Dr. Jin Zi Guanglu Danda, Grand Mufu Yuanwen, the Returning Officer Shang Shuxu Weijin, and the General of the Right Division of the Imperial Guards Wang Fu Mu Yat, and others to be in charge of the cabinet.

古文：宇文化及之弑逆，文都等议尊立侗，大赦，改元曰皇泰。
现代文：宇文化及弑主造反，元文都等人议立杨侗为帝，大赦天下，改元为皇泰。
English: After the rebellion of Emperor Wu and Emperor Xizong, the Yuanmingdu and others decided to make Yang Jie emperor, grant him a general amnesty, and rename the Yuan Dynasty to Emperor Tai.

古文：谥帝曰明，庙号世祖，追尊元德太子为孝成皇帝，庙号世宗，尊其母刘良娣为皇太后。
现代文：谥帝号为明，庙号世祖，追尊元德太子为孝成皇帝，庙号世宗，尊其母刘良娣为皇太后。
English: The emperor's name is Ming, the temple's name is Shizu, the prince's name is Emperor Xiaocheng, the temple's name is Shizong, and his mother Liu Liangyao is the empress dowager.

古文：以段达为纳言、右翊卫大将军、摄礼部尚书，王世充为纳言、左翊卫大将军、摄吏部尚书，元文都为内史令、左骁卫大将军，卢楚亦内史令，皇甫无逸为兵部尚书、右武卫大将军，郭文懿为内史侍郎，赵长文为黄门侍郎，委以机务，为金书铁券，藏之宫掖。
现代文：任命段达为纳言、右翊卫大将军、兼任礼部尚书，王世充为纳言、左翊卫大将军、兼任吏部尚书，元文都为内史令、左骁卫大将军，卢楚亦任内史令，皇甫无逸任兵部尚书、右武卫大将军，郭文懿为内史侍郎，越长文为黄门侍郎，任以机密大事，打造金书铁券，藏于宫中。
English: He appointed Duan Da as Nagan, Right Division of the Imperial Guard, and concurrently as the Secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies; Wang Shichong as Nagan, Left Division of the Imperial Guard, and concurrently as the Secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs; Yuanwen as the Secretary of the Ministry of Internal Affairs, and General of the Left Division of the Ministry of Internal Affairs; Lu Chu as the Secretary of the Ministry of Internal Affairs; Guo Wenyi as the Secretary of the Ministry of Military Affairs, and General of the Right Division of the Imperial Guard; Guo Wenyi as the Secretary of the Ministry of Internal Affairs; Yue Changwen as the Secretary of the Yellow Gate, and

古文：于时洛阳称段达等为 七贵 。
现代文：这时，洛阳称段达等人为 七贵 。
English: At this time, Luoyang said that Duanda and others were the seven treasures.

古文：未几，宇文化及以秦王浩为天子，来次彭城，所经城邑，多从逆党。
现代文：不久，宇文化及奉秦王杨浩为天子，进军彭城，所经过的城邑，多有人顺从。
English: Not long after, Yu Wenjun and Feng Qin King Yang Hao marched into Pengcheng as the Son of Heaven, and many people in the towns they passed through obeyed.

古文：枭戮元凶，策勋饮至，四海交泰，称朕意焉。
现代文：杨侗恐惧了，派遣使者盖琮、马公政招抚李密。李密请求投降，杨侗非常高兴，厚赏其使者。
English: Yang Xuan was afraid, so he sent his emissaries, Gaige and Ma Gongzheng, to entice Li Mi. Li Mi requested to surrender, Yang Xuan was very happy and rewarded his emissaries.

古文：兵卫军机，并受魏公节度。
现代文：当即委任李密为太尉、尚书令、魏国公，令其抗御宇文化及。
English: Li Mi was immediately appointed as Tai Lai, Shang Shuling, and Wei Guogong, and ordered to resist imperial culture.

古文：密见使者，大悦，北面拜伏，臣礼甚恭，遂东拒化及。
现代文：于是颁布诏书。令李密总戎军事，讨伐宇文化及。李密见到朝廷使者，十分高兴，北面拜伏，非常恭敬地行臣子之礼，于是就率兵东拒宇文化及。
English: Li Mi was very happy to see the imperial envoy, bowed to the north, and very respectfully performed the courtier's salute, so he led his soldiers to the east to reject the imperial culture.

古文：七贵颇不协。
现代文：七贵颇为不和。
English: The Shichigis are at odds with each other.

古文：未几，元文都、卢楚、郭文懿、赵长文等为世充所杀，皇甫无逸遁归京师。
现代文：不久，元文都、卢楚、郭文懿、赵长文等被王世充杀害，皇甫无逸逃回西京长安。
English: Soon after, Wang Shichong killed Yuan Wendu, Lu Chu, Guo Wenyi, Zhao Changwen and others, and Emperor Fu fled back to West Beijing Chang'an.

古文：世充诣侗所陈谢，辞情哀苦。
现代文：王世充到杨侗住所陈述理由，言辞表情都很哀伤。
English: Wang Shichong went to Yang Hui's residence to explain the reason, and his words and facial expressions were very sad.

古文：侗以为至诚，命之上殿，被发为盟，誓无贰志。
现代文：杨侗认为王世充特别真诚，命他上殿说话。王世充披发盟誓，表示绝无不忠之意。
English: Yang Xuan thought Wang Shicheng was very sincere and ordered him to go to the palace to speak. Wang Shicheng swore an oath, saying that he had no intention of being disloyal.

古文：自是侗无所关预。
现代文：从此，杨侗不再参预朝政了。
English: From then on, Yang Mi no longer participated in pre-imperial politics.

古文：及世充破李密，众望益归之，遂自为郑王，总百揆，加九锡，备法物，侗不能禁。
现代文：王世充大破李密军，众望更加归附，就自封为郑王，加九锡，准备帝王用的仪仗，杨侗不能禁止。
English: After Wang Shichong defeated Li Mi's army, the public expected him to be more subservient, so he proclaimed himself King Zheng, Jiuxi, and prepared a ceremonial battle for the emperor. Yang Hui could not forbid it.

古文：段达、云定兴等十人入见侗曰： 天命不常，郑王功德甚盛，愿陛下遵唐、虞之迹。 
现代文：段达、云定兴等十人入见杨侗说 ：天命无常，郑王功德盛大，希望陛下能遵从唐、虞之例，禅位于郑王。 
English: Danda, Yun Dingxing and other ten people came to see Yang Xuan and said, "Fate is fickle, King Zheng's merits are great, I hope His Majesty can follow the example of Tang and Yu, Zen is in King Zheng."

古文：侗怒曰： 天下者，高祖之天下，东都者，世祖之东都。
现代文：杨侗愤怒道： 天下是高祖的天下，东都是我的东都。
English: Yang Wei angrily said, "The world is Gaozu's world, and the East is my East.

古文：若隋德未衰，此言不可而发。
现代文：若隋朝德业未衰，这些话就不必说了。
English: If the Sui Dynasty's virtue had not declined, these words would not need to be said.

古文：必天命有改，亦何论于禅让！
现代文：如果天命定有变化，何必说禅让！
English: If there is a change in God's will, why should we give up Zen?

古文：公等或先朝旧臣，或勤王立节，忽有斯言，朕亦何望！ 
现代文：你们这些人，有的是先朝旧臣，有的为拯救王朝出力守节，忽然说出这样的话，朕还有什么希望！ 
English: You people, some of you are former ministers, some of you have worked hard to save the dynasty, suddenly say such words, what hope do I have!

古文：神色凛然，侍卫者莫不流汗。
现代文：神色凛然，侍卫见到后都紧张得浑身流汗。
English: He had a dazzling appearance, and when the guards saw him, they were so nervous that they were sweating all over.

古文：既而退朝，对良娣而泣。
现代文：接着就退朝，面对良娣哭泣。
English: Then he retreated to the palace and wept in front of his wife.

古文：世充更使谓曰： 今海内未定，须得长君，待四方乂安，复子明辟。
现代文：王世充又派人对杨侗说： 如今天下没有安定，须有年长之君主。等天下安定后，让你复位。
English: Wang Shichong also sent someone to tell Yang Xuanlu: If there is no stability today, there must be an older monarch. After the world is stable, let you resume your position.

古文：必若前盟，义不违负。 
现代文：一定要像以前盟誓的那样，决不违背。 
English: As you have sworn before, you shall not go back on it.

古文：侗不得已，逊位于世充，遂被幽于含凉殿。
现代文：杨侗不得已，禅位给王世充，就被幽禁于含凉殿。
English: Yang Xuan had no choice but to give the position of Zen master to Wang Shichong, and he was banished to the Hall of Coolness.

古文：世充僭伪号，封潞国公。
现代文：王世充僭越称帝，封杨侗为潞国公。
English: Wang Shizhong proclaimed himself emperor and made Yang Jie the prince of the State of Qi.

古文：有宇文儒童、裴仁基等谋诛世充，复尊立侗。
现代文：宇文儒童、裴弘基等谋诛王世充，复立杨侗。
English: Uwen Rudeong, Pei Hongji and others plotted to overthrow Wang Shichong and reinstate Yang Hui.

古文：事泄，并见害。
现代文：事情泄露了出去，都被王世充杀害。
English: The affair leaked out and they were all killed by Wang Shichong.

古文：世充兄世恽因劝世充害侗。世充遣其侄行本赍鸠诣侗曰： 愿皇帝饮此酒。 
现代文：世充的哥哥世恽于是劝世充害杨侗，世充派遣侄子行本带着毒酒到杨侗那里说 ：希望皇帝饮下这杯酒。 
English: Shizhong's brother Shihong then persuaded Shizhong to harm Yang Hui. Shizhong sent his nephew Xingben with poisoned wine to Yang Hui, saying, "I hope the emperor will drink this wine."

古文：侗知不免，请与母相见，不许。
现代文：杨侗知道不能幸免，请求和母亲见上一面，没有得到允许。
English: Knowing that she could not be spared, Yang Hui asked to see her mother, but was not allowed.

古文：遂布席焚香礼佛，祝曰： 从今以去，不生帝王尊贵家。 
现代文：于是就铺席焚香拜佛，祈祷说 ：从今以后，但愿不再生于帝王尊贵之家。 
English: So he set up a table, burned incense, worshipped the Buddha, and prayed, "From now on, may I never again be born into the royal family."

古文：及仰药，不能时绝，更以帛缢之。
现代文：喝下毒酒后，不能立刻死去，行本又用布带把杨侗勒死。
English: After drinking the poisoned wine, he couldn't die immediately, so he strangled Yang Qi with a piece of cloth.

古文：世充伪谥曰恭皇帝。
现代文：王世允伪谥杨侗为恭皇帝。
English: Wang Shiyun pretended to be Yang Jie and became Emperor Gong.

