古文：贞观初，太宗谓监修国史房玄龄曰： 比见前、后《汉史》载录扬雄《甘泉》、《羽猎》，司马相如《子虚》、《上林》，班固《两都》等赋，此既文体浮华，无益劝诫，何假书之史策？
现代文：贞观初年，唐太宗对监修国史的官员房玄龄说： 我发现《汉书》、《后汉书》记录有扬雄的《甘泉赋》、《羽猎赋》，司马相如的《子虚赋》、《上林赋》，班固的《两都赋》，这些文章文辞浮华，无益于对帝王的劝诫，为什么还要收录在史书上呢？
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to Fang Xuanling, an official supervising the study of national history: I found that the "Chinese Book" and "Post-Chinese Book" recorded Yang Xiong's "Fountain Fu" and "Hunting Fu," Sima Xianglu's "Son Fu" and "Shanglin Fu," and Bangu's "Two Capital Fu." These articles are pompous and useless for exhorting the emperor. Why should they be included in the history book?

古文：其有上书论事，词理切直，可裨于政理者，朕从与不从皆须备载。 
现代文：今后，如果有人上书议政，只要言辞直率，道理中肯，有利于治国，不管我采纳与否，都必须记载在史书上。 
English: In the future, if someone submits a letter to discuss politics, as long as the words are straightforward, the reason is pertinent, and it is conducive to governing the country, whether I adopt it or not, it must be recorded in the history books.

古文：贞观十一年，著作佐郎邓隆表请编次太宗文章为集。
现代文：贞观十一年，著作佐郎邓隆上书请求把唐太宗的文章编成文集。
English: In the eleventh year of Zhenguan, the writer Saro Denglong petitioned to compile Tang Taizong's articles into a collection.

古文：太宗谓曰： 朕若制事出令，有益于人者，史则书之，足为不朽。
现代文：唐太宗说： 我的诏书和命令，如果有益于百姓的，史书都已经记载了，足以流传千古了。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang said, "If my edicts and orders are beneficial to the people, they have already been recorded in the history books and have been passed down for thousands of years.

古文：若事不师古，乱政害物，虽有词藻，终贻后代笑，非所须也。
现代文：如果我的命令不遵循古训，扰乱了政务，即使辞藻华丽，也终将贻笑后人，这不是我所需要的。
English: If my order does not follow the ancient teachings and disturbs government affairs, even if the words are magnificent, it will eventually be ridiculed by future generations. This is not what I need.

古文：只如梁武帝父子及陈后主、隋炀帝，亦大有文集，而所为多不法，宗社皆须臾倾覆。
现代文：像梁武帝父子、陈后主、隋炀帝，他们都有文集传世，可是他们的行为大都不可取，最后，社稷江山统统断送在他们手中。
English: Like Emperor Liangwu and his son, Empress Chen and Emperor Sui, they all had literary collections passed down to the next generation, but most of their actions were not desirable. In the end, all of society, the country and the mountains were handed over to them.

古文：凡人主惟在德行，何必要事文章耶？ 
现代文：君主圣明与否，关键在于他的品性和行为，何必一定要有文章流传后世呢？ 
English: Whether the monarch is saintly or not, the key lies in his character and behavior. Why must there be an article passed down to posterity?

古文：竟不许。
现代文：太宗最终不许编文集。
English: In the end, Taizong was not allowed to compile the anthology.

古文：贞观十三年，褚遂良为谏议大夫，兼知起居注。
现代文：贞观十三年，褚遂良担任谏议大夫，兼任撰写帝王言行的起居注的史官。
English: In the thirteenth year of Zhenguan, Zou Suiliang served as a doctor of the imperial court, and also served as a historian who wrote a commentary on the emperor's words and deeds.

古文：太宗问曰： 卿比知起居，书何等事？
现代文：一次，唐太宗问他： 你的起居注，都写些什么呢？
English: On one occasion, Emperor Taizong asked him: What do you write in your diary?

古文：大抵于人君得观见否？
现代文：可不可以让君王自己看一看？
English: But can't the king have a look for himself?

古文：朕欲见此注记者，将却观所为得失以自警戒耳。 
现代文：我想看看起居注，用帝王的得失来警戒自己。 
English: I want to see the living conditions note, and use the emperor's gains and losses to guard myself.

古文：遂良曰： 今之起居，古之左、右史，以记人君言行，善恶毕书，庶几人主不为非法，不闻帝王躬自观史。 
现代文：褚遂良劝阻说： 现在的起居注，就是古代记录帝王言语的左史，和记录帝王行为的右史。无论好坏全部记录下来，以期望帝王不做对国家不利的事情。可是，我却没听说过帝王自己要看关于自己的史书。 
English: Zou Suiliang dissuaded him, saying, "The current residence notes are the left history of ancient records of the emperor's words, and the right history of records of the emperor's actions. Whether good or bad, they are all recorded in the hope that the emperor will not do things that are unfavorable to the country. However, I have never heard of the emperor himself wanting to read a history book about himself.

古文：太宗曰： 朕有不善，卿必记耶？ 
现代文：唐太宗说： 我有不好的言行，你们都记录下来了吗？ 
English: Tang Taizong said: I have bad words and deeds, have you all recorded them?

古文：遂良曰： 臣闻守道不如守官，臣职当载笔，何不书之？ 
现代文：褚遂良说： 常言道，坚守道义不如尽忠职守。我的职责是记录历史，怎么可以不把一切都记录下来呢？ 
English: Zou Suiliang said: As the saying goes, sticking to morality is not as good as doing one's duty. My duty is to record history, how can I not record everything?

古文：黄门侍郎刘洎进曰： 人君有过失，如日月之蚀，人皆见之。
现代文：黄门侍郎刘洎说： 帝王有过失，就像日月有日食、月食一样，人人都看得见。
English: Huangmen waiter Liu Wei said: "The emperor is at fault, just like the sun and moon have eclipses, everyone can see it.

古文：设令遂良不记，天下之人皆记之矣。 
现代文：即使褚遂良不记录，天下老百姓都会记住的。 
English: Even if you don't record it, people around the world will remember it.

古文：贞观十四年，太宗谓房玄龄曰： 朕每观前代史书，彰善瘅恶，足为将来规诫。
现代文：贞观十四年，唐太宗对房玄龄说： 我每看前朝的史书，惩恶扬善，足以规劝警戒后人。
English: In the 14th year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to Fang Xuanling: Every time I read the history books of the previous dynasty, I punish the evil and promote the good, which is enough to exhort and warn future generations.

古文：不知自古当代国史，何因不令帝王亲见之？ 
现代文：但我不知道，自古以来当朝的国史，为什么不让帝王亲自看到呢？ 
English: But I don't know, why not let the emperor see the history of the country since ancient times?

古文：对曰： 国史既善恶必书，庶几人主不为非法。
现代文：房玄龄回答说： 国史既然善恶必书，可以警戒帝王不做非法的事情。
English: Fang Xuanling replied, "Since national history is a must-read for good and evil, we can warn the emperor not to do illegal things.

古文：止应畏有忤旨，故不得见也。 太宗曰： 朕意殊不同古人。
现代文：只是担心有与君主意见相抵触的地方，所以不让君主本人看到。 太宗说： 我的想法不同于古人。
English: However, he did not let the monarch see it himself, fearing that there was something that contradicted the monarch's opinion.Taizong said: My thoughts are different from the ancients.

古文：今欲自看国史者，盖有善事，固不须论；若有不善，亦欲以为鉴诫，使得自修改耳。
现代文：现在要亲自看国史，如果记有好事，自不必说；如记有不好的事，我可以引为鉴戒，并加以改正。
English: Now I want to look at the national history myself. If there are good things, I don't have to say anything. If there are bad things, I can use them as a warning and correct them.

古文：卿可撰录进来。 
现代文：你们把撰写抄录好的国史送过来吧。 
English: You should send us your written and transcribed national history.

古文：玄龄等遂删略国史为编年体，撰高祖、太宗实录各二十卷，表上之。
现代文：于是，房玄龄等人就把国史加以删减整理，成为按照年月顺序记事的编年体，撰写成高祖和太宗的《实录》各二十卷，上表呈献。
English: As a result, Fang Xuanling and others edited and abridged the national history to become a chronicle of events recorded in chronological order, and composed 20 volumes each of Gaozhu and Taizong's "Real Record," which is presented above.

古文：太宗见六月四日事，语多微文，乃谓玄龄曰： 昔周公诛管、蔡而周室安，季友鸩叔牙而鲁国宁。
现代文：太宗看到六月四日所记玄武门之变说得很含蓄，就对房玄龄说： 从前，周公东征诛杀管叔、蔡叔，从而使周室得以安定。季友用毒药杀死叔牙，而使鲁国得以安宁。
English: When Emperor Taizong saw that the change of the Genbumen Gate recorded on June 4 was very vague, he said to Fang Xuanling: In the past, Zhou Gong marched east to fight and kill Uncle Guan and Uncle Cai, thus stabilizing the Zhou dynasty. Ji You used poison to kill Uncle Fang, thus bringing peace to Lu.

古文：朕之所为，义同此类，盖所以安社稷，利万民耳。
现代文：我的所作所为，和古人的道理相同，都是为了安定社稷，以利万民。
English: My actions and deeds are based on the same principles as those of the ancients. They are all aimed at stabilizing society and benefiting all people.

古文：史官执笔，何烦有隐？
现代文：史官执笔，何须隐晦？
English: Historian's handwriting, what is there to hide?

古文：宜即改削浮词，直书其事。 
现代文：你们应当立即改删虚饰之词，把这件事的原委写清楚。 
English: You should immediately correct and delete the false and embellished words, and clarify the original commission of this matter.

古文：侍中魏征奏曰： 臣闻人主位居尊极，无所忌惮。惟有国史，用为惩恶劝善，书不以实，后嗣何观？
现代文：事后，侍中魏徵上奏说： 我听说，君主身居至尊之位，无所顾忌惧怕，只有国史，足以惩恶劝善，如果写得不真实，那么让后世看什么呢？
English: Afterwards, Wei Zheng, an aide-de-camp, said: I have heard that the monarch is in the supreme position and has nothing to fear. Only national history is enough to punish evil and persuade good. If it is not true, then what will future generations see?

古文：陛下今遣史官正其辞，雅合至公之道。 
现代文：陛下如今叫史官修正《实录》，很符合公正的道理。 
English: His Majesty has now asked the historian to revise the "Real Record," which is in line with the principle of fairness.

