古文：真君曰：孝自性具，教为后起，世多不孝，皆因习移。
现代文：真君说：孝是人性中本来自有的，教育尽孝则是后来出现的。世人多半不孝，都是因为习俗使其改变。
English: Zhenjun said: Filial piety is inherent in human nature, and education to fulfill filial piety is something that comes later. Most people are not filial, and it is because of customs that they have changed.

古文：意既罔觉，智又误用，圣人在上，惟教为急，教之之责，重在师傅，尤当重择。
现代文：愚笨之人不明道理，聪明的人又错用心思。圣人在上，唯独对于孝道而着急。教习孝道的责任，重要的是在师傅，尤其应当慎重选择。
English: Stupid people do not know the truth, and clever people think with the wrong heart. The saints are above, but they are anxious about filial piety. The responsibility of teaching filial piety is important in the master, especially should be carefully selected.

古文：贤良之师，化恶为善，不贤之师，变善为恶。
现代文：贤良的师傅，能将恶人化导成善人；不贤明的师傅，却能将善人变成恶人。
English: A good teacher can turn a bad person into a good person, but a bad teacher can turn a good person into a bad person.

古文：师而不教，过且有归，教之不善，其罪尤大。
现代文：作为师傅而不教导学生，师傅有过错，并对过错负有责任；而如果教导不好的东西，其罪过就更加重大了。
English: If, as a teacher, he does not instruct his pupil, he is at fault, and is responsible for the fault; and if he does not instruct well, his fault is still greater.

古文：不贤之师，导之匪僻，引之邪佞，养成不肖，流为凶顽，越礼犯纪，妄作无忌，虽欲救之，急难格化，如是为教，罪实非轻。
现代文：不贤明的师傅，会教导人行为邪恶，引到奸邪的道路上，教成品行不端之人，流变为凶狂顽劣之人，毁越礼法，违犯法纪，胡作非为而没有忌惮。虽然想拯救这样的人，但急切间也难以改正变化。如果像这样为师教人，罪过实在是不轻。
English: An unwise teacher will teach people to do evil, lead them to the path of evil, teach people who have done bad things, turn them into vicious people, destroy etiquette, violate laws and regulations, and do wrong without fear. Although they want to save such people, it is difficult to correct the changes in a hurry. If you are a teacher like this, the sin is really not light.

古文：药石之师，惟贤是与，行己端庄，导人忠信，教不他设，孝无畸行，因其本然，还所固有，朝敦夕诲，幼育长循，惟兹孝弟，化行是先，虽至愚氓，无不晓习。
现代文：能够导人向善的师傅，只教人以贤良的品德。立身行事端正庄重，以忠信引导人，其他不合乎孝道的事情，不敢教人。孝道更没有畸巧，不过依于人的自然本性，复归人的固有善性。朝夕不断地敦促教导，长幼都依循而行，总要用此孝悌之道，先行教育化导。虽是愚笨之平民百姓，也没有不熟悉的。
English: A teacher who can lead people to goodness can only teach people to be virtuous. They should be upright and dignified, and guide people with loyalty. They should not teach people other things that are not consistent with filial piety. Moreover, filial piety is not devious, but it depends on people's natural nature and returns to people's inherent goodness. They constantly urge teaching in the morning and evening, and the elders and children follow it. They must always use this way of filial piety to educate and guide. Although the common people are stupid, there is nothing unfamiliar to them.

古文：如是为教，功实不少，为功为罪，职岂易任，惟名尊严，其实如何？孝弟是宗，能孚孝者，弟亦本诸。
现代文：像这样教育学生，功德实在是不少。既能立功也能获罪，师傅一职不是那么容易胜任的。师傅的名称甚是尊贵威严，其实质又是什么呢？就是以 孝  悌 为根本。
English: There are a lot of merits in educating students in this way. It is not easy to be a master who can both make merits and receive faults. The name of a master is very dignified, but what is its essence? It is based on filial piety.

古文：助君为理，转移风俗，全在师儒。
现代文：如果能够以孝服人， 悌 的品质也就本于此而立了。帮助国君治理国家，移风易俗，完全在于以儒为师。
English: If you can be a filial piety person, then the quality of your character will also be based on this. To help the sovereign govern the country and change customs, it is entirely to take Confucius as a teacher.

古文：教不可误，师不可违，自重在师，率教在弟。
现代文：师傅不可误人子弟，子弟不可以违背师傅。师傅应当自重自爱，弟子应当遵从教导。
English: A teacher should not mislead a disciple, and a disciple should not disobey a teacher. A teacher should have self-respect and self-love, and a disciple should follow the teachings.

古文：偈曰：孝弟虽天性，良师当时省，一或千不孝，何能全弟行，罪愆有攸归，师实难卸任，能作如是观，训之方有定。
现代文：孝本来都是自性具备的，但有了师傅的提醒，孝心才得以兴起。偈说：孝悌虽然都是源自天性，但也有赖良师的时时警省。一干不孝的事情，怎么能使 悌 行圆满。罪愆有所源自，师傅实在难于推卸责任。能够有这样的认识，训导弟子才能有确定的准则。
English: Filial piety is inherent in everyone, but with the teacher's reminder, filial piety can arise. The verse says: Although filial piety comes from nature, it also depends on a good teacher's supervision. How can a filial act be made perfect? Sin has its origin, and it is really difficult for a teacher to shirk responsibility. Only with this understanding can a disciple be disciplined with a certain standard.

