古文：十四日早雨。
现代文：十四日早晨下雨。
English: It rained in the morning of the 14th.

古文：命顾仆觅潘秀才家，投吴方生书。
现代文：命令顾仆去找潘秀才的家，投递了吴方生的信。
English: He ordered his servant to go to Pan Xiucai's home and delivered Wu Fangsheng's letter.

古文：上午雨止，潘来顾。
现代文：上午雨停，潘秀才来拜访。
English: The rain stopped in the morning, and Pan Xiucai came to visit.

古文：下午，余往顾而潘出，乃返作记寓中。
现代文：下午，我前去拜访他但姓潘的出了，只好返回到寓所中作日记。
English: In the afternoon, I went to visit him, but his surname was Pan, so I had to go back to the apartment to write a diary.

古文：月上而返，冰轮皎然。
现代文：傍晚，同行的崔君拉我到市中饮酒，用竹实供餐，投壶畅饮。
English: In the evening, my companion, Cui Jun, took me to the city center to drink alcohol, use bamboo shoots to serve meals, and throw pots to drink.

古文：十五日晨往晤潘。
现代文：月上中天才返回来，明月皎洁。十五日早晨前去会晤潘秀才。
English: He only came back in the middle of the month, the moon was bright and clear. On the morning of the 15th, he went to meet Pan Xiucai.

古文：潘劝无出关。
现代文：姓潘的劝我不要出关。
English: Pan advised me not to go out.

古文：上午，潘馈酒餚。
现代文：上午，潘秀才馈赠了酒肴。
English: In the morning, Pan Xiucai presented wine and food.

古文：午，店中老人亦来劝余无行。
现代文：下午，店中的老人也来劝我不要前行。
English: In the afternoon, the old man in the shop also came to persuade me not to go ahead.

古文：先是余以阮玉湾书畀杨主人，托其觅同行者，主人唯唯。
现代文：这之前我把阮玉湾的信交给姓杨的主人，托他寻找同行的人，主人口中是是是的。
English: Prior to this, I handed a letter from Nguyen Ngoc Van to the owner surnamed Yang, and asked him to find a companion. The main population was Yes and Yes.

古文：至暮，以潘酒招之共酌。
现代文：到天黑，拿出潘秀才馈赠的酒莱招呼他一同饮。
English: By nightfall, take out Pan Xiucai's gift of wine and invite him to drink together.

古文：兄弟俱劝余毋即行，谓炎瘴正毒，奈何以不赀轻掷也。
现代文：兄弟二人都劝我不要马上动身，说是天气炎热瘴气正毒，怎能把无价的身躯轻易抛掷呢！
English: Both brothers advised me not to set out immediately, saying that the weather was hot and the air was poisonous, how could I easily throw away my priceless body!

古文：屈指八月，王君将复来，且入内，同之入关最便。
现代文：屈指算已出来八个月，王君将重新回来，况且进入内地时，与他一同入关最为方便。
English: According to some calculations, it has been eight months and Wang Jun will be back again. Moreover, when entering the mainland, it is most convenient to enter the customs together with him.

古文：余姑诺之，是夜月甚皎，而邸舍不便凭眺，竟郁郁卧。
现代文：我姑且答应了他们。这天夜里月光十分皎洁，可官邸的客舍中不便凭眺，最终郁郁不快地躺下了。
English: On this night, the moonlight was very bright, but it was inconvenient to look at it in the guest house of the official residence, and eventually I lay down sadly and unhappily.

古文：十六日晨起，候主人饭，欲为尖山之行。
现代文：十六日早晨起床，等候主人开饭，打算出行去尖山。
English: On the morning of the 16th, he got up, waited for his host to start dinner, and planned to travel to Jianshan.

古文：其山在州城西北百里。
现代文：此山在州城西北百里处。
English: The mountain is about a hundred miles northwest of the state capital.

古文：先是主人言其灵异，怂恿余行，故谋先及之。
现代文：这以前主人谈起它的灵异之处，怂恿我前去，所以计划先到那里。
English: The previous owner had talked about its mystical place and urged me to go, so I planned to go there first.

古文：乃以竹箱、衫、毡寄杨主家，挈轻囊与顾仆行。
现代文：于是把竹箱、衣衫、毡子寄放在杨主人家中，带上轻装与顾仆上路。
English: So he left his bamboo box, shirt, and socks at Yang's home, and set out with his servant.

古文：从南门外循城西行，半里，过新桥，巨石梁也。
现代文：从南门外沿城墙往西行，半里，走过新桥，是座巨大的石桥。
English: From outside the south gate along the city wall to the west, half a mile, walking across the new bridge, is a huge stone bridge.

古文：桥下水自北合三流，襟城西而南，过此南流去，即所谓大盈江矣。
现代文：桥下的水从北边会合三条水流，绕过城西往南流，经过此桥向南流去，这就是所谓的大盈江了。
English: The water under the bridge joins three streams from the north, flows south around the west of the city, and flows south through this bridge. This is the so-called Great Ying River.

古文：余既过桥，四望山势回环，先按方面定之。
现代文：我过桥后，四面望去山势回绕，先按方位来认定群山。
English: After I crossed the bridge, I looked around and circled the mountains. First, I identified the mountains by their direction.

古文：当城之正东而顶平者，为球瓓山，乱箭哨之来道逾其南脊；当城之正西而尖耸者，为擂鼓山，南为龙光台，为缅箐道，为水口西夹；直北者，为上干峨山，乱箭哨之脉，从之东度南起，去城北二十里；直南者，为来凤山，州治之脉，从之北度，又西突保禄阁，为水口东夹。
现代文：位于州城的正东而山顶平平的，是球玲山，从乱箭哨来的路越过它南边的山脊；位于州城正西而尖耸的，是擂鼓山，南边是龙光台，是去缅著的路，是江口西面相夹的山；正北的，是上干峨山，乱箭哨的山脉，从那里往东延伸后向南突起，距城北二十里；正南的，是来凤山，州城所在的山脉，从这里往北延伸，又向西突起为保禄阁，是江口东面相夹的山。
English: Located just to the east of the state capital and with a flat top, it is Ku Ling Mountain, the road from the Arrow Whistle passes over the ridge on its south side; located just to the west of the state capital and towering, it is Gonggu Mountain, to the south is Longguangdai, it is the road to Ming, it is the mountain sandwiched on the west side of the estuary; just to the north is Shangganga Mountain, the mountains of the Arrow Whistle, from where it extends to the east and protrudes to the south, twenty miles north of the city; just to the south is Laifeng Mountain, the mountains where the state capital is located

古文：城西南为水口，束峡极紧，坠空而下，为跌水崖。
现代文：城西南是江口，束拢的峡谷极为接近，江水从空中坠下去，成为跌水崖。
English: Southwest of the city is the mouth of the river, the canyon is extremely close, and the river water falls from the sky and becomes a waterfall cliff.

古文：城东南、东北俱有回坞，乃来凤山自北环度之脉。
现代文：城东南、东北都有回绕的山坞，是来凤山从北面环绕延伸的山脉。
English: In the southeast and northeast of the city, there are circling docks, which are the mountains that extend from Fengshan to the north.

古文：而东北独伏，有高山穹其外，即龙川江东高黎贡山北来之脉也。
现代文：而唯独东北一面低伏，有高山隆起在山坞以外，那就是龙川江东边高黎贡山往北延来的山脉。
English: However, only the northeastern side is low-lying, and there are high mountain ridges outside the dock, that is, the mountains extending northward from Mount Gaoligong on the east side of the Longchuan River.

古文：城西北一峰独耸，高出众峰，为巃嵸山，乃北来分脉之统会。
现代文：城西北一座山峰独自耸立，高出群峰，是宠岌山，是向北分支延来的山脉会总之处。
English: Northwest of the city, a mountain peak stands alone, high above the group of peaks, it is a favorite mountain, and it is the meeting place of the mountains extending to the north.

古文：从此直南，为笔峰，为宝峰，为擂鼓，而尽于龙光台。
现代文：从此一直往南，是笔峰，是宝峰，是擂鼓山，而后在龙光台到尽头。
English: Since then, it has been going south, it is Pen Peak, it is Baofeng, it is Gonggu Mountain, and then it ends in Longguangdai.

古文：从此西度南转，为猛蚌。
现代文：从此向西延伸后往南转，是猛蚌。
English: Extending westward from here and turning southward, it is the mammoth.

古文：从此东度，为上干峨；低伏而东度南起，为赤土山乱箭岭；南下西转，为罗生山；支分直北者，为球瓓，峙州东而北尽马邑村；支分由西而南者，为来凤，峙州南而西夹水口，北与龙光对。
现代文：从此往东延伸，是上干峨山；低伏往东延伸后向南突起，是赤土山乱箭哨所在的山岭；向南下延后往西转，是罗生山；向正北分出的支脉，是球玲山，矗立在州城东面而后在北边的马邑村到头；分出支脉由西延向南的，是来凤山，矗立在州城南面而后往西夹住江口，北边与龙光台相对。
English: Extending eastward from here is Shanggangga Mountain; extending eastward at a low angle and then protruding to the south is the mountain range where the Red Earth Mountain is located; extending southward and then turning westward is Luosheng Mountain; branching off to the due north is Quling Mountain, which stands to the east of Zhouzhuang and then to the north of Mayi Village; branching off from the west to the south is Laifeng Mountain, which stands to the south of Zhouzhuang and then to the west of Jiangkou, opposite Longguangdai to the north.

古文：此州四面之山也。
现代文：这是州城四面的山。
English: It's the mountains on all sides of the state capital.

古文：其水，一东南出罗生山，北流经雷打田，至城东北；一东出乱箭哨，北流西出马邑村西南，至城东北；一出巃嵸山，滀贮水为海子，流为高河，南至城东北。
现代文：这里的水流一条在东南出自罗生山，往北流经雷打田，流到城东北；一条在东方出自乱箭哨，向北流后往西流出马邑村一西南，流到城东北；一条出自宠岌山，蓄为海子，流为高河，往南流到城东北。
English: Here, a stream of water originates in the southeast from Mount Rason and flows northward through Lei Datian to the northeast of the city; a stream originates in the east from Chaoyang Arrow Post and flows northward to the west and then flows out of Maiyi Village to the southwest and flows to the northeast of the city; a stream originates in Zhaozhu Mountain, accumulates into the sea and flows into Gaohe River, and flows southward to the northeast of the city.

古文：三水合为一，是为大盈江，由城西而南，过二桥，坠峡下捣，其深十丈，阔三丈余，下为深潭，破峡西南去，经和尚屯，又名大车江。
现代文：三条水流合而为一，这就是大盈江，由城西往南流，流过两座桥，冲捣下坠入峡中，峡深十丈，宽三丈多，下边是深潭，冲破峡谷向西南流去，流经和尚屯，又叫大车江。
English: Three streams of water merge into one. This is the Daying River. It flows from the west of the city to the south, passes through two bridges, rushes down and falls into a gorge. The gorge is ten meters deep and three meters wide. Below is a deep pool. It breaks through the canyon and flows to the southwest, passing through Monzhaotun. It is also called the Dacha River.

古文：此州四面之水也。
现代文：这是州城四面的水流。
English: This is the flow of water on all sides of the state capital.

古文：其北二日抵界头，与上江对；其南一日抵南甸，与陇川、缅甸对；其西一日半至古勇，与茶山对；其东一日半至分水关，与永昌对。
现代文：州城北面两天路程抵达界头，与上江相对；州城南面一天路程到达南甸，与陇川、缅甸相对；州城西边一天半路程到古勇，与茶山相对；州城东面一天半路程到分水关，与永昌相对。
English: To the north of the state capital, it takes two days to reach the boundary, opposite to Shangjiang River; to the south of the state capital, it takes one day to reach Nandian, opposite to Luochuan and Myanmar; to the west of the state capital, it takes one and a half days to reach Guoyong, opposite to Chashan; to the east of the state capital, it takes one and a half days to reach Wenshuiguan, opposite to Yongchang.

古文：八关自其西北斜抵东南，西四关属蛮哈守备，自西北而东南：一曰神护，二曰万仞，三曰巨石，四曰铜壁。
现代文：八关自它的西北部斜向抵达东南部，洒边的四关隶属蛮哈守备，自西北往东南：第一叫神护关，第二叫方初关，第三叫巨石关，第四叫铜壁关。
English: The eight passes from its northwest obliquely reach the southeast, and the four passes on the edge of the ridge belong to the barbarian defense, and from the northwest to the southeast: the first is called the god protection pass, the second is called the square first pass, the third is called the huge stone pass, and the fourth is called the copper wall pass.

古文：东四关属陇把守备，自西南而东南：一曰铁壁，二曰虎踞，三曰天马，四曰汉龙。
现代文：东面的四关隶属陇把守备，自西南往东南：第一叫铁壁关，第二叫虎踞关，第三叫天马关，第四叫汉龙关。
English: The four passes in the east are subordinate to the fortifications, from the southwest to the southeast: the first is called the Iron Wall Pass, the second is called the Tiger Pass, the third is called the Heavenly Horse Pass, and the fourth is called the Han Long Pass.

古文：八关之外，自神护而出，为西路，通迤西，出琥珀碧玉：自天马而出，为南路，通孟密，有宝井；自汉龙而出，为东南路，通木邦，出邦洋布：自铁壁而出，亦为南路，通蛮莫，为缅甸阿瓦正道。
现代文：八关之外，自神护关出去，是西路，通迩西，出产唬拍、碧玉；自天马关出去，是南路，通孟密，有宝井；自汉龙关出去，是东南路，通木邦，出产邦洋布；自铁壁关出去，也是南路，通蛮莫，是去缅甸阿瓦的正道。
English: Beyond Baguan, from Shenguoguan, it is the West Road, leading westward, producing bauhinia and jasper; from Tianmaoguan, it is the South Road, leading through Mengmi, where there are treasure wells; from Hanlongguan, it is the Southeast Road, leading through Mubang, producing state cloth; from Tiewanguan, it is also the South Road, leading westward, producing bauhinia and jasper; it is the right way to go to Myanmar Awa.

古文：昔蛮莫、孟密俱中国地，自万历三十三年金腾威道立此八关，于是关外诸彝，俱为阿瓦所有矣。
现代文：从前蛮莫、孟密都是中国的土地，自从万历二十二年金腾戚主张设立此八关后，于是关外众多的少数民族，全被阿瓦所拥有了。
English: Once upon a time, Mengmi and Mengmo were Chinese lands. Since the 22nd year of Wanli, when the eight gates were established, the numerous ethnic minorities outside the gates were all owned by the Awa.

古文：由州南抵南甸分路：西向干崖，至蛮哈诸关，南向陇川，至陇把诸关。
现代文：由州城往南抵达南甸后分路走：西面通向干崖，到蛮哈诸关；南边通向陇川，到陇把诸关。
English: From the state capital to the south, after arriving at Nandian, take a separate route: the west side leads to the dry cliff, to the barbarian Hachiguan; the south side leads to the Yingchuan River, to the Yingchuan.

古文：由州西抵缅箐分路：西出神护，通迤西；西北逾岭，至古勇。
现代文：由州城向西抵达缅著后分路走：西面出了神护关，通到逝西；往西北越过山岭，到古勇。
English: From the state capital to the west, after arriving at Myeongdong, take a different route: from the west, out of Shennongguan, to the west; to the northwest, over the mountains, to Goyong.

古文：大概 三宣 犹属关内，而 六慰 所属，俱置关外矣。
现代文：大概三个宣抚司仍属于关内，但六宣慰司所属之地，全设置在关外了。
English: About three relief offices still belong to Guan, but the six relief offices no longer belong to Guan. They are all located outside Guan.

古文：遂分华、彝之界。
现代文：便是华夏与少数民族的分界。
English: It is the dividing line between China and the ethnic minorities.

古文：此其四鄙之望也。
现代文：这是它四周的边远地区。
English: This is the remote area around it.

古文：大盈江过河上屯合缅箐之水，南入南甸为小梁河；经南牙山，又称为南牙江；西南入干崖云笼山下，名云笼江；沿至干崖北，为安乐河；折而西一百五十里，为槟榔江，至比苏蛮界即傈傈族地区，注金沙江入于缅。
现代文：大盈江流过河上屯会合缅警的水流，往南流入南甸是小梁河；流经南牙山，又称为南牙江；向西南流入干崖的云笼山下，名叫云笼江；顺势流到干崖北面，是安乐河；折向西流一百五十里，是槟榔江，流到比苏蛮境内，注入金沙江后流到缅甸。
English: The Tai Ying River flows through the water flow of the Upper Tunhe of the Myanmar Police. The Xiaoliang River flows southward into Nandian; it flows through the Nan Ya Mountain, also known as the Nan Ya River; it flows southwestward into the dry cliff of Yungang Mountain, called the Yungang River; it flows to the north of the dry cliff, is the Anle River; it flows westward for one hundred and fifty miles, is the Penang River, flows into the territory of Bisu, and flows into the Jinsha River and then flows into Myanmar.

古文：一曰合于太公城，此城乃缅甸界。按缅甸金沙江，不注源流，《志》但称其阔五里，然言孟养之界者，东至金沙江，南至缅甸，北至干崖，则其江在干崖南、缅甸北、孟养东矣。
现代文：据考，缅甸的金沙江，没有注明源流，志书只称说它宽有五里，不过说到孟养的界限，东边到金沙江，南面到缅甸，北方到干崖，那么此江在干崖南面、缅甸以北、孟养的东边了。
English: According to the research, the source of the Jinsha River in Myanmar is not indicated, and the history book only says that it is five miles wide. However, when it comes to the boundary of Mengyang, the east side is the Jinsha River, the south side is Myanmar, and the north side is the dry cliff, so this river is south of the dry cliff, north of Myanmar, and east of Mengyang.

古文：又按芒市长官司西南有青石山，《志》言金沙江源出之，而流入大盈江，又言大车江自腾冲流经青石山下。
现代文：又考察，芒市长官司西南有座青石山，志书说金沙江的源头出自于这里，而后流入大盈江，又说大车江自腾冲流经青石山下。
English: It was also investigated that there is a Qingshi Mountain in the southwest of the Mang Mayor's Office. The book of records said that the source of the Jinsha River originated here, and then flowed into the Daying River. It was also said that the Dacha River flowed through the Qingshi Mountain.

古文：岂大盈经青石之北，金沙经青石之南耶？
现代文：难道是大盈江流经青石山的北面，金沙江流经青石山的南面么？
English: Is it true that the Daying River flows through the north side of Mount Qingshi and the Jinsha River flows through the south side of Mount Qingshi?

古文：其言源出者，当亦流经而非发轫最初之发源地，若发轫，岂能即此大耶？
现代文：志书所说的源出之地，应当也是流经而不是发源，如果是发源，哪里能马上就有此等大的水流呢？
English: The place of the source mentioned in the biography should also be a flow, not a source. If it is a source, where can there be such a large flow of water immediately?

古文：又按芒市西有麓川江，源出峨昌蛮地，流过缅地，合大盈江；南甸东南一百七十里有孟乃河，源出龙川江。
现代文：又考察，芒市西边有条麓川江，源出于峨昌蛮的地区，流过缅甸的辖地，会合大盈江；南甸东南一百七十里处有条孟乃河，源出于龙川江。
English: It was also investigated that on the west side of Mang City, there is a section of the Lukugawa River, which originates from the Echanmabaru region, flows through the jurisdiction of Myanmar, and meets the Daying River; 170 miles southeast of Nandian, there is a section of the Mengnai River, which originates from the Longchuan River.

古文：而龙川江在腾越东，实出峨昌蛮地，南流至缅太公城，合大盈江。
现代文：而龙川江在腾越州东面，实际出自于峨昌蛮的地区，往南流到缅甸太公城，会合大盈江。
English: On the other hand, the Longchuan River in the east of Tengwe prefecture, which actually originates in the area of Echangman, flows south to Myanmar's Taigong City, where it meets the Yangtze River.

古文：是麓川江与龙川江，同出峨昌，同流南甸南干崖西，同入缅地，同合大盈。
现代文：这样麓川江与龙川江，一同源出于峨昌蛮的地区，一同流到南甸南边干崖西面，一同流人缅甸的辖地，同是会合大盈江。
English: In this way, the two rivers, the Fuchuan River and the Longchuan River, both originated in the Echangmangan region, both flowed to the west of the dry cliff on the southern edge of Nantian, both flowed to the jurisdiction of Myanmar, and both joined the Daying River.

古文：然二地实无二水，岂麓川即龙川，龙川即金沙，一江而三名耶？
现代文：但是两地实际上并无这两条水流，莫非麓川江就是龙川江，龙川江就是金沙江，一条江却有三个名字吗？
English: However, the two places do not actually have these two streams. Is it possible that the Fuchuan River is the Longchuan River, the Longchuan River is the Jinsha River, but one river has three names?

古文：盖麓川又名陇川， 龙 与 陇 实相近，必即其一无疑；盖峨昌蛮之水，流至腾越东为龙川江，至芒市西为麓川江，以与麓川为界也，其在司境，实出青石山下，以其下流为金沙江，遂指为金沙之源，而非源于山下可知。
现代文：原来麓川又叫陇川， 龙 与 陇 音实际相近，必定就是其中之一无疑；大概是峨昌蛮境内的水流，流到腾越州东面称为龙川江，到芒市西边称为麓川江，以与麓川交界罢了。它在长官司境内，实际上流经青石山下，由于它的下游是金沙江，便指认为是金沙江的源头，而不是源出于山下可知了。
English: Originally, the Luchuan River was also called the Longchuan River, and the sound of 龙 and  is actually similar, so it must be one of them without a doubt; it is probably the water flow in the territory of Echang. It flows to the east of Tengyue Prefecture and is called the Longchuan River, and to the west of Meng City it is called the Luchuan River, which is just the border with the Luchuan River. It is in the territory of Changguanzi and actually flows under the Qingshi Mountain. Since its downstream is the Jinsha River, it is considered to be the source of the Jinsha River, rather than the source

古文：又至干崖西南、缅甸之北，大盈江自北来合，同而南流，其势始阔，于是独名金沙江。
现代文：又流到干崖西南、缅甸以北，大盈江从北面流来会合，一同往南流，水势开始变宽，于是独自名叫金沙江。
English: It also flowed to the southwest of the dry cliff, north of Myanmar. The Yangtze River flowed from the north to meet and flow south together, and the water potential began to widen, so it was named the Jinsha River.

古文：而至太公城、孟养之界，实当其南流之西，故指以为界，非孟养之东又有一金沙南流，干崖之西又有一金沙出青石山西流；亦非大盈江既合金沙而入缅，龙川江又入缅而合大盈。
现代文：而后流到太公城、孟养的交界处：实际上正当它向南流的江流的西边，所以指认为边界；不是孟养的东边又有一条金沙江往南流，干崖的西面又有一条金沙江源出青石山往西流；也不是大盈江会合金沙江后流入缅甸，龙川江又流入缅甸后会合大盈江。
English: It then flows to the junction of Tai Gongcheng and Mengyang: in fact, it is just west of the south-flowing river, so it is referred to as the border; it is not east of Mengyang that there is another Jinsha River flowing south, and west of the dry cliff there is another Jinsha River flowing from Qingshi Mountain to the west; it is not that the Yangtze River will flow into Myanmar after the Yangtze River, and the Longchuan River will flow into Myanmar and join the Yangtze River.

古文：大盈所入之金沙，即龙川下流，龙川所合之大盈，即其名金沙者也。
现代文：大盈江流入的金沙江，就是龙川江的下游，龙川江会合的大盈江，就是那名叫金沙江的江流了。
English: The Jinsha River that flows into the Daying River is the downstream of the Longchuan River, and the Daying River that joins the Longchuan River is the river called the Jinsha River.

古文：分而岐之名愈紊，会而贯之脉自见矣。
现代文：把它们分别岔开来名称愈加紊乱，把它们会集贯通起来脉络自然显现出来了。
English: When they were separated, the names became more and more confused, and when they were put together, the context naturally emerged.

古文：此其二水所经也。
现代文：这是这两条江流流经的地方。
English: This is where the two rivers meet.

古文：于是益知高黎贡之脉，南下芒市、木邦而尽于海，潞江之独下海西可知矣。
现代文：到此时益加了解到高黎贡山的主脉，往南下延到芒市、木邦而后到大海到了头，潞江单独下流到大海西边可以知道了。
English: At this time, I learned more and more about the main vein of Gaoligong Mountain, extending southward to Mangshi, Mubang and then to the sea to the end, and the Lijiang River alone flowing down to the west of the sea.

古文：按《志》又有大车湖在州南，甚广，中有山，如琼浪中一点青。
现代文：据志书，又有个大车湖在州城南边，十分宽广，湖中有山，如琼玉绿浪中的一点青色。
English: According to the diary, there is also a big car lake in the south of the state capital, very wide, with mountains in the lake, like a bit of blue in the jade green waves.

古文：今惟城北上干峨巃嵸山下有二海子，城南并无潴水，岂洪流尽扬尘耶？
现代文：今天唯有城北上干峨宠岌山下有两个海子，城南并无积水，莫非洪流全部变为飞扬的尘土了吗？
English: Today, only in the north of the city, there are two seas, and in the south of the city there is no standing water. Could it be that all the torrents have turned into flying dust?

古文：过新桥，西行半里，有岐：西北行者，为乌沙、尖山道；南下者，为跌水河道。
现代文：走过新桥，往西行半里，有岔路：往西北走的，是去乌沙尖山的路；向南下走的，是去跌水河的路。
English: After walking across the new bridge, half a mile to the west, there is a fork in the road: if you go northwest, it is the road to Wusha Jianshan; if you go south, it is the road to Dingshuihe.

古文：余闻其胜甚，乃先南趋。
现代文：我听说那里非常优美，就先向南赶去。
English: I heard it was very beautiful there, so I headed south first.

古文：出竹坞中一里，涉一东流小涧，南上坡，折而东约半里，有大石梁架大盈江上，其桥东西跨新桥下流。
现代文：到满是竹丛的山坞中走一里，涉过一条往东流的小涧，向南上坡，折向东约走半里，有座大石桥架在大盈江上，此桥呈东西向跨在新桥的下游。
English: After walking one mile to a dock full of bamboo thickets, wading through a small stream flowing eastward, walking uphill to the south, turning east for about half a mile, there is a large stone bridge on the Daying River. This bridge spans the lower reaches of the new bridge in an east-west direction.

古文：从桥西稍南上坡，不半里，其水从左峡中透空平坠而下，崖深十余丈，三面环壁。
现代文：从桥西稍往南上坡，不到半里，江水从左边峡中穿过空中平缓下坠，山崖深十多丈，三面环绕着石壁。
English: From the west of the bridge a little to the south uphill, less than half a mile, the river water from the left canyon through the air gently falling, cliffs more than ten feet deep, surrounded on three sides by stone walls.

古文：水分三派飞腾，中阔丈五，左骈崖齐涌者，阔四尺，右嵌崖分趋者，阔尺五，盖中如帘，左如布，右如柱，势极雄壮，与安庄白水河齐观，但此崖更近而逼。
现代文：江水分为三条支流飞腾而下，中间的宽一丈五，左边与山崖并排一齐腾涌的，宽四尺，右边嵌入山崖分流的，宽一尺五，大略中间的如门帘，左边的如布匹，右边的如圆柱，气势极其雄壮，与安庄的白水河同样壮观，但此处的山崖更加迫近而狭窄。
English: The river is divided into three tributaries flying down, the middle one is five meters wide, the one on the left side of the cliff is four feet wide, and the one on the right side is embedded in the cliff. The width is one foot five, roughly the middle one is like a door curtain, the left one is like a cloth, and the right one is like a cylinder. It is extremely majestic. It is as spectacular as the Baishui River in Anzhuang, but the cliff here is closer and narrower.

古文：从西崖绕南崖，平对而立，飞沫倒卷，屑玉腾珠，遥洒人衣面，白日间真如雨花雪片。
现代文：从西边的山崖绕到南面的山崖，水平面对站着，飞溅的水沫倒卷而下，似玉屑珍珠飞腾，远远洒在人的衣服上和脸上，白昼之间真如雨花雪片。
English: From the western cliff to the southern cliff, standing horizontally, the splashing water droplets roll down, flying like jade pearls, far on people's clothes and faces, like raindrops and snowflakes in the daytime.

古文：土人所称久雨不晴者以此，但 雨 字当易 旱 为是，用 雨 字则叠床架屋矣意即用字重复，不精当。
现代文：当地人所称的久雨不晴的原因是因为这个，但是 雨 字应该改为 旱 为好，用 雨 字那就重复累赘了。
English: This is the reason why the locals say that it has been rainy for a long time, but it would be better to change the word "rain" to "drought." Using the word "rain" would be too repetitive.

古文：其水下坠成潭，嵌流峡底甚深，因下蹈之，有屋两重在夹壑中，乃王氏水舂也。
现代文：江水下坠成深潭，水流下嵌在峡底非常深，于是下去踏着江边走。有两层房屋在狭窄的壑谷中，是王家的水雄。
English: The river falls into a deep pool under the water, and the current is embedded very deep in the bottom of the canyon, so go down and walk along the river. There are two-story houses in the narrow valley, which is the water hero of the Wang family.

古文：复上西崖。
现代文：重又上到西边的山崖上。
English: He went up again to the cliff on the west side.

古文：其南一峰高耸，凭空揖瀑，是为龙光台，上建关帝殿。
现代文：它南面一座山峰高耸，如凭临高空向瀑布拱手作揖，这是龙光台，上边建有关帝殿。
English: To the south of it, a mountain peak soars high, as if reaching high into the sky to create a waterfall. This is Longguangdai, with the imperial palace built on top.

古文：回盼久之，复下西崖。
现代文：回头顾盼了许久，再走下西边的山崖。
English: I looked back for a long time, and then walked down the western cliff.

古文：其崖甚狭，东即瀑流坠空，西亦夹坑环屋。
现代文：此处山崖非常狭窄，东边就是飞流的瀑布坠下高空，西边也是夹谷深坑环绕着房屋。
English: The cliff here is very narrow. On the east side, there is a flying waterfall falling high into the sky. On the west side, there is also a deep pit surrounded by houses.

古文：俯视屋下坑底，有流泉叠碓，亦水舂也，而当环坡间，其西即南下缅箐大道，不知水所从出。
现代文：俯视屋子下边的坑底，有流动的泉水重叠的水稚，也是水稚房，但正当环形的山坡间，它西边就往南下通缅警的大道，不知水从哪里流出去。
English: Looking down at the bottom of the pit below the house, there are flowing springs overlapping the water-springs. It is also a water-springs room, but due to the ring-shaped hillside, it goes south to the west of the Burmese police road. I don't know where the water flows out from.

古文：细瞰之，水从脚下透穴出，南分为二，一随大道南注，一复入巨石下，入夹坑之屋为舂。
现代文：仔细俯瞰地形，水从山脚下穿过洞穴流出去，在南边分为两道，一条顺大道往南流注，一条重又流入巨石下，流进坐落在夹谷深坑上的屋中成为水雄。
English: Looking carefully over the terrain, the water flows from the foot of the mountain through the cave, and is divided into two on the south side. One flows southward along the avenue, and the other flows under the boulder and flows into the house located on the deep pit of the valley to become the water hero.

古文：回眺崖北有峡一线，深下五六丈，骈峙北来，阔仅一尺，而高不啻三丈余，水从其底透入前崖之腹而出其南。
现代文：回头眺望山崖北边有一线峡谷，深下去有五六丈，往北对峙而来，宽处仅一尺，可高处不止三丈多，水从峡底穿入前边山崖的山腹后流出它的南边。
English: Looking back, there is a line of canyon on the north side of the cliff, five or six meters deep, facing north, only one foot wide, but more than three meters high, water from the bottom of the canyon penetrates into the hillside of the front cliff and flows out of its south side.

古文：计崖穴之上，高亦三丈余，南至出水之穴，上连三四丈，不识其下透之穴与上骈之峡，从何而成，天巧人工，两疑不能至此矣。
现代文：估计山崖洞穴之上，高处也有三丈多，南边到出水的洞穴，上边相连之处有三四丈，不知它下边穿透的洞穴与上边并峙的峡谷，是怎样形成的，天然之巧与人力之工，怀疑两样都不能达到此等地步了。
English: It is estimated that above the mountain cliff cave, there are also more than three heights, south to the outflowing cave, the upper side is connected with three or four heights, I do not know how the cave it penetrates below and the canyon that is parallel to the upper side were formed, natural skill and human work, I suspect that neither of them can reach such levels.

古文：从崖上蹑西峰，一里，有寺踞峰之东，门东向，为毗卢寺。
现代文：从山崖上登上西峰，一里，有寺院坐落在山峰的东面，寺门向东，是昆卢寺。
English: From the cliff on the west peak, one mile, there is a temple located on the east side of the peak, the temple gate to the east is Kunlu Temple.

古文：由其西二里，直抵擂鼓尖峰下，见有路直蹑峰西上，而路有二生儒生或书生指宝峰大道尚在北，乃横涉田间。
现代文：由寺西行二里，直达擂鼓尖峰下，见有路直登山峰往西下走，但路上有二位书生指点去宝峰的大道还在北边，于是横着跋涉过田间。
English: From the west of the temple for two miles, straight to the bottom of the gong drum peak, I saw a road straight down the mountain to the west, but there were two students on the road pointing out the road to Baofeng is still in the north, so I walked across the fields.

古文：半里，得大道，随而西上坡。二里，西抵擂鼓之北。
现代文：半里，找到大道，顺大道往西上坡 二里，向西抵达擂鼓尖峰的北麓。
English: Half a mile, find the avenue, follow the avenue westward uphill for two miles, westward to the northern foot of the Drum Peak.

古文：当西北从岐上，而余误从西南，一里，蹑峻，一里，渐转南陟，复向擂鼓行。
现代文：应当往西北从岔路上山，我却错从西南走，一里，踏上高峻之处，一里，渐转向南上登，再向着擂鼓尖峰走。
English: I should have gone northwest from the mountain path, but I mistakenly walked from the southwest, one mile, stepped on a high place, one mile, gradually turned southward, and then walked toward the peaks of the gongs.

古文：又一里，心知其误，遂西逾岭脊，则望见宝峰殿阁，在西北岭半，与此脊齐等，而隔箐两重，其下甚深，皆从西南岭脊坠下。
现代文：又一里，心知路走错了，便向西越过岭脊，就望见宝峰的殿堂楼阁，在西北山岭半腰上，与此处岭脊同样高，但隔着两重山著，山下非常深，都是从岭脊向西南下坠。
English: After another mile, I knew I was on the wrong path, so I crossed the ridge to the west. I could see the palace of Baofeng, halfway up the northwest ridge. It was as high as the ridge here, but separated by two mountains. The mountain was very deep, and it all fell down from the ridge to the southwest.

古文：计随坡东下，就大道复上，与蹑坡西上，从峰脊转下，其路相比，不若上之得以兼陟其顶也。
现代文：估计顺山坡往东下走，走上大道再上走，与登坡往西上走，从峰脊上转下去，它们的路程相等，不如上走得以兼而上登峰顶了。
English: It is estimated that walking down the mountain slope to the east, walking up the avenue and then walking up, and walking up the slope to the west and turning down from the ridge of the peak, their distances are equal. It is better to walk up and be able to climb the peak.

古文：遂西南上，甚峻，一里，直出擂鼓尖之西，有路自尖南向来合，同之西北度脊。
现代文：于是向西南上山，十分陡峻，一里，径直出到擂鼓尖峰的西面，有路自尖峰向南前来会合，同这条路向西北越过山脊。
English: So I went up the mountain to the southwest, very steep, one mile, straight out to the west of the Drum Peak, there is a road from the peak to the south to meet, and the same road to the northwest over the ridge.

古文：脊北路分为二，一西北沿峰去，一东北攀岭行。
现代文：山脊北面路分为两条，一条往西北沿着山峰而去，一条向东北登岭走。
English: The road north of the ridge is divided into two, one going northwest along the peak, and one going northeast to Dengling.

古文：一里，再逾岭陟脊，其脊两旁皆东西下，乃饭于脊。
现代文：一里，两次越岭登脊，此处山脊两旁都是向东、西下陷，于是在山脊上吃饭。
English: One mile, two times over the ridge to the ridge, where both sides of the ridge are sinking to the east and west, so I had lunch on the ridge.

古文：过北，路复分为二如前，然东北者犹非宝峰路，尚隔一箐也。
现代文：走过北边，路又如前边一样分为两条，不过往东北去的仍然不是去宝峰的路，还隔着一个山著。
English: After passing the north side, the road is divided into two like the previous side, but going to the northeast is still not the way to Baofeng, it is still separated by a mountain.

古文：乃复西北上顶，一里，蹑其最高处，东俯州城东坞，西俯峨陇南坞，皆近夹此脊下，而峨陇之西，又有高峰一重，自北而南，夹峨陇之坞，南出缅箐，而与大盈之江合而南去焉。
现代文：于是再往西北登上山顶，一里，踏上山顶的最高处，往东俯视州城东面的山坞，向西俯瞰峨陇南边的山坞，都在近处夹在此脊之下，而峨陇的西面，又有一重高峰，自北往南，夹住峨陇的山坞，往南延到缅警，而后与大盈江会合后往南延去。
English: So I went further northwest to the top of the mountain, one mile, stepped on the highest point of the top of the mountain, looked down to the east at the dock on the east side of the state capital, and looked down to the west at the dock on the south side of Emei, all of which were sandwiched under this ridge, and on the west side of Emei, there was another set of peaks, from north to south, sandwiching the dock of Emei, extending south to Myanmar Police, and then extending south after meeting the Yangtze River.

古文：顶东南深树密翳，乃从西北下，甚峻，半里就夷平地。
现代文：山顶东南一面深树密蔽，只好从西北方下山，十分陡峻，半里路走上坦途。
English: The southeastern side of the summit was densely covered with deep trees, so I had to descend the mountain from the northwest. It was very steep, and I had to walk half a mile on a flat road.

古文：随东箐北行岭脊，又半里，路交 十 字：一从南直北者，俱行其脊；一从东箐中上，横过西北者，出山腰。
现代文：顺东边的山著向北行走在岭脊上，又行半里，路相交成 十 字形：一条从南向正北的，全是行走在岭脊上；一条从东边山臀中横过西北，通到山腰。
English: Walking north along the east side of the mountain, walking on the ridge, and then walking half a mile, the roads intersect into a zigzag: one from the south to the due north, all walking on the ridge; one from the east side of the mountain rump across the northwest, leading to the mountainside.

古文：知宝峰之寺在箐翳矣，乃折而东下。
现代文：心知宝峰的寺庙在山警密蔽之中了，于是折向东下走。
English: He knew that the temple at Baofeng had been covered up by the mountain police, so he turned around and headed east.

古文：木叶覆丛条间，甚峻而滑，非攀枝，足无粘步。
现代文：树叶下覆枝条成丛之间，十分陡峻滑溜，不抓住枝条脚无法站定。
English: Between the clumps of branches under the leaves, it is very steep and slippery, and it is impossible to stand without grasping the branches.

古文：下一里，转殿角之右，则三清殿也。
现代文：下行一里，转到殿角的右边，就是三清殿了。
English: Go down one mile, turn to the right of the corner of the hall, and there is the Sansei-den.

古文：道分为二，一从右下危坡，一从左转深箐。
现代文：路分为两条，一条从右边走下险坡，一条从左边转入深臀。
English: The road is divided into two, one going down the steep slope from the right, one turning into the deep rump from the left.

古文：余先随箐下，半里，右顾崖间，一亭飞缀，八角重棂，高倚悬崖之上，乃参府吴君蜀人，名荩臣。新建以祀纯阳者。
现代文：我先顺山臀下走，半里，见右边的山崖间，一座亭子飞缀，八个亭角重重窗权，高高依傍在悬崖之上，是参将府吴君新建成以祭祀纯阳祖师的地方。
English: I first walked down the mountain, half a mile, and saw between the mountains and cliffs on the right, a pavilion flying, eight pavilion corners with windows, high above the cliff, is the newly built place to worship the Pure Yang Ancestor.

古文：由亭左再下，缘箐半里，南转，仰见亭下之石，一削千仞，如莲一瓣，高穹向空，其南又竖一瓣骈附之，皆纯石无纤纹，惟交附处中垂一线，阔仅尺余，凿级其中，仰之直若天梯倒挂也。
现代文：由亭子左边再下走，沿山警走半里，往南转，抬头望见亭子下的石崖，一如刀削有千初高，如一瓣莲花，高大弯隆朝向空中，它南侧又竖立着一个莲瓣并排依附着它，全是纯石无丝毫裂纹，唯有互相附着处中间垂着一线宽的裂缝，宽仅一尺多，在其中凿了石阶，仰面望它简直像倒挂的天梯。
English: Walk down from the left side of the pavilion, walk half a mile along the ridge, turn south, and look up to see the stone cliff under the pavilion. It is as high as a thousand years old, like a lotus petal, tall and curved into the air. On the south side of it, another lotus petal stands side by side and clings to it. It is all pure stone without the slightest crack. Only in the middle of the attachment point, there is a line-wide crack, just over a foot wide, in which stone steps have been cut. Looking up at it, it is almost like an upside-down ladder.

古文：北瓣之上，大书 奠高山大川 五字，亦吴参府笔，其下新构建造一轩跨路，貌灵官于中。
现代文：北边莲瓣之上，大写着 奠高山大川 五个字，也是吴参将的手笔；它下方新建了一处轩廊跨在路中，绘了灵官像在其中。
English: Above the lotus leaf on the north side, the five characters "奠高山川" are written in capital letters, also in the handwriting of General Wu Sang; below it, a new gallery has been built across the road, with a portrait of a spiritual official in it.

古文：南瓣侧有尖特耸，夹级为门，其下玉皇阁倚之。
现代文：南边的莲瓣侧边有尖石独耸，夹住石阶成为门户，尖石下玉皇阁紧靠着它。
English: On the south side of the lotus petal, there is a pinnacle on the side, the stone steps become the portal, and the Jade Emperor's Pavilion under the pinnacle is close to it.

古文：环腾多土山，独是崖纯石，危穹夹箐之间，觉耳目顿异。
现代文：环绕着腾越有许多土山，独有这座山崖是纯一色的岩石，高高隆起在相夹的山著之间，耳目顿时觉得不同。
English: Tengyue is surrounded by many earthen hills, but this cliff is unique in that it is made of pure, uniform rock. It rises high and is sandwiched between the mountains, and it feels different when you look at it.

古文：玉皇阁南亦悬箐无路，灵官轩北又凿崖为梯，嵌夹石间。
现代文：玉皇阁南边也是高悬的山著，无路可走，灵官轩北面又在山崖上凿成石梯，深嵌在夹立的岩石间。
English: The south side of the Jade Emperor Pavilion is also a high-hanging mountain, with no way to go. On the north side of the Lingguan Xuan, a stone staircase is hewn on the cliff, deeply embedded in the pinned rock.

古文：北下数丈，有石坊当其前，大书曰： 太极悬崖。 
现代文：向北下走数丈，有石牌坊挡在石梯前，大大写着： 太极悬崖。 
English: Walking a few meters to the north, there is a stone plaque in front of the stone staircase, which reads: Taiji cliff.

古文：从此北度东下之箐，再上北坡，共里余，则宝峰寺当峰而踞，高与玉皇阁等。
现代文：从此向北越过往东下延的山著，再上登北面的山坡，共一里多，就见宝峰寺在峰头盘踞着，高处与玉皇阁相等。
English: From then on, we went north over the mountain path that extended eastward, and then climbed the northern slope, a total of more than one kilometer. We saw the Baofeng Temple at the top of the peak, and the height was equal to that of the Jade Emperor Pavilion.

古文：而玉皇阁东向。此寺南向，寺东龙砂最微，固不若玉皇阁当环箐中央，得一山之正也。
现代文：但玉皇阁向东，此寺向南，寺东的龙砂最小，当然不如玉皇阁在环形山警的中央，在整座山的正中。
English: However, the Jade Emperor Pagoda faces east, while this temple faces south, and the dragon sand at the east of the temple is the smallest. Of course, it is not as good as the Jade Emperor Pagoda in the center of the ring-shaped mountain guard, in the middle of the whole mountain.

古文：寺颇寥落，有尼尼姑居之，此昔之摩伽陀指印度僧人修道处。
现代文：寺中相当冷落，有尼姑住在寺中，此处是从前摩伽陀僧人修道之处。
English: The temple is rather deserted, there are nuns living in the temple, this is where the former Mogadha monks used to practice.

古文：他处皆释盛于道佛教比道教昌盛，而此独反之。
现代文：其他地方都是佛教比道教兴盛，可此处唯独反过来。
English: In other places, Buddhism is more popular than Taoism, but here it is the other way around.

古文：已复下箐中，蹑太极崖，过北瓣下，从一线之级上。
现代文：不久又下到著中，登上太极崖，走过北边的莲瓣之下，从石缝中一线宽的石阶上走。
English: Soon after, I went down to the middle, climbed the Taiji cliff, walked under the lotus petals on the north side, and walked up the stone steps with a wide line in the stone gap.

古文：其级峻甚，几不能留趾，幸两崖逼束，手撑之以登。
现代文：这石阶非常陡峻，几乎不能停住脚掌，幸好两侧石崖紧逼束拢，手撑着两侧上登。
English: The stone steps are very steep, and it is almost impossible to stop your feet. Fortunately, the cliffs on both sides are tightly bunched, and you have to hold your hands up on both sides to climb up.

古文：一上者八十级，当纯阳亭之南，峡始曲折为梯，又三十余级而抵虚亭间。
现代文：一口气上登了八十级，正当纯阳亭之南，峡谷这才变为曲折的石梯，又走三十多级才到达空亭子中。
English: I climbed eighty steps in one breath, just south of Chunyang Pavilion, before the canyon turned into a winding stone staircase, and took more than thirty steps to reach the empty pavilion.

古文：余拟打算眺月于此，以扩未舒之观，因拭桌作记。
现代文：我准备在此亭中眺望明月，以便扩展未能舒展的景观，于是擦拭桌子写日记。
English: I am going to look at the bright moon in this pavilion in order to expand the landscape that has not been extended, so I wipe the table and write a diary.

古文：令顾奴汲水太极下箐东以爂，二黄冠道士止之，以饭饭余。
现代文：命令顾奴汲水到太极崖下山著东边去烧火做饭，两个道士止住了他，拿饭来给我吃。
English: He ordered Gu Nong to draw water from the Taiji cliff and go down the east side of the mountain to light a fire to cook. Two Taoists stopped him and brought rice for me to eat.

古文：仍坐虚亭，忽狂飚大风布云，迨暮而月色全翳。
现代文：仍坐在空亭中，忽然狂腾突起浓云密布，到天黑时月光便全被遮住了。
English: While still sitting in the empty pavilion, thick clouds suddenly appeared, covering all the moonlight by nightfall.

古文：邵道谓虚亭风急，邀余卧其榻。
现代文：邵道人认为空亭中风急，邀请我睡到他的床上。
English: Shao Daoren thought that Kueting had a stroke and invited me to sleep in his bed.

古文：十七日余起，见日丽山幽，拟暂停憩其间，以囊中存米作粥，令顾奴入州寓取贵州所买蓝纱，将鬻以供杖头此处泛指路费。
现代文：十七日我起床后，见日丽山幽，打算暂时停歇在山中，用口袋中存留的米作成稀粥，命令顾奴进州城的寓所去取在贵州买的蓝纱，将它卖了以供作路费。
English: After I got up on the 17th day, I saw the beautiful sunlit mountains, and I planned to stay in the mountains for a while, using the rice left in my pocket to make gruel. I ordered Gu Nu to go to the apartment in Suzhou to get the blue yarn I bought in Guizhou, and sold it to cover the travel expenses.

古文：而此地离州仅八里，顾奴去不返。
现代文：此地离州城仅有八里，顾奴一去不返。
English: This place is only eight miles from the state capital, and Gu Nu will never return.

古文：抵下午，馁甚，胡道饭余。
现代文：到下午，饿极了，胡道士给我吃了饭。
English: By the afternoon, I was starving, and the voodoo priest gave me some rice.

古文：既而顾奴至，纱仍不携来也。
现代文：随即顾奴来到，蓝纱仍不见带来。
English: Gu Nong came immediately, but he still hadn't brought the blue yarn.

古文：十八日录记于虚亭。
现代文：十八日在空亭子中记日记。
English: On the 18th, I wrote in my diary in the empty pavilion.

古文：先夜有虎从山下啮参戎马，参戎命军士搜山觅虎。
现代文：头天夜里有老虎在山下咬了参将的马，参将命令军士搜山找虎。
English: The night before yesterday, a tiger bit the general's horse at the foot of the mountain. The general ordered the sergeant to search the mountain for the tiger.

古文：四峰瞭视者，呐声相应，两箐搜觅者，上下不一，竟不得虎。
现代文：四面山峰全无看得见的人，但呐喊声相应，两边山警中搜寻的人，上下不一，始终找不到虎。
English: There were no visible people on the peaks on all four sides, but the cries were corresponding. The people searching in the mountain police on both sides were not the same, and the tiger could not be found.

古文：巅塘关南越大山，西南绕古勇关北。
现代文：巅塘关南面经过的大山，往西南绕到古勇关北边。
English: The mountains that pass through the south of Pingtang Pass go southwest to the north of Guyong Pass.

古文：分支东突者。为尖山；东南突者，为马鞍山；又分支南下者，为宝峰，又南为打鼓尖，又南尽于龙光台。
现代文：分出支脉向东突起的，是尖山；在东南突起的，是马鞍山；又分支往南下延的，是宝峰，又向南是打鼓尖，又往南在龙光台到了头。
English: The protruding branch to the east is Tseng Shan; the protruding branch to the southeast is Ma'anshan; the branch to the south is Baofeng; the branch to the south is Drumming Tip; and the branch to the south is Longguangdai.

古文：其马鞍山正支东度者，一起为笔峰，又起为巃嵸，于是南环为赤土，为乱箭哨过脊，又南为半个山，而西北环来凤而结州治。
现代文：那马鞍山的正脉往东延伸的，第一处耸起的成为笔峰，又耸起成为宠岌山，于是往南环绕成赤土山，成为乱箭哨延过的山脊，又向南成为半个山，往西北环绕成来凤山后盘结为州城。
English: The main vein of Ma'anshan stretches to the east, the first place to rise up becomes the pen peak, and then rises up to become the pet peak, so it is surrounded to the south into the red soil mountain, becomes the ridge of the arrowhead, and becomes half a mountain to the south, and is surrounded to the northwest into the Fengshan, and then coiled into the state capital.

古文：此所谓回龙顾祖也。
现代文：这就是所谓的回龙顾祖了。
English: This is the so-called Huilong Guzu.

古文：巅塘之外为茶山长官司，旧属中国，今属阿瓦。巅塘东北、阿幸广北为姊妹山，出斑竹，其外即野人。
现代文：从古勇关北面分支南下的，成为鬼甸的西山，又向南成为鹅笼的西山，又往南抵达缅著；正脉向西南下延的，成为古勇西关，而后往南连接到神护关。
English: From the north branch of Guyongguan to the south, it becomes the west mountain of ghostland, and to the south it becomes the west mountain of goose cage, and to the south it reaches Myanmar; the straight line extending to the southwest becomes Guyongguan to the west, and then connects to Shennongguan.

古文：宝峰山东向屏立其前，下分为二箐，中垂石崖高穹，两旁倒插箐底。
现代文：八关之外，它们的北边又有此古勇、巅塘二关，是古关。宝峰山面向东方屏风样立在它的前方，下边分为两个山著，中间垂直立着高大弯隆的石崖，两旁倒插进著底。
English: In addition to the eight passes, there is also this ancient Yong Pass and Pingtang Second Pass on their north side, which are ancient passes. Baofeng Mountain faces the east and stands in front of it like a screen. The lower side is divided into two mountains, with a tall, curved cliff standing vertically in the middle, and both sides are inverted into the bottom.

古文：北箐之上，环冈一支，前绕如堵墙，石崖中裂，凿级悬其间，名猢狲梯。
现代文：北面的山著之上，环立着一支山冈，向前环绕如同一堵墙，石崖中央裂开，凿有石阶悬在其间，名叫瑚孙梯。
English: On top of the mountain to the north, there is a mountain ridge, surrounded like a wall, with a cleft in the middle of the cliff, and stone steps carved into it. They are called Hu Sun Ladder.

古文：梯南玉皇阁倚其下，梯北纯阳阁踞其上，旧有额名为 太极悬崖 ，而吴参戎又大书镌其上，曰 奠高山大川 。
现代文：石梯南边玉皇阁紧靠在它下方，石梯北面纯阳阁盘踞在它上方，旧时有匾额题名叫 太极悬崖 ，而吴参将又写大字刻在它上面，叫 奠高山大川 。
English: The Jade Emperor's Pavilion on the southern side of the stone staircase is close to it, and the Chunyang Pavilion on the northern side of the stone staircase is above it. In the old days, there was a plaque named Taiji Cliff, and Wu Sang Zhe wrote big characters on it, called Diangao Mountain River.

古文：目界甚爽。其后为三清殿，则邵道所栖也。三清殿去西顶不遥，余前从之下。
现代文：面向东北，近处是环绕的山冈低伏在前方，平川围绕在山下，远处则见东山之外，高黎贡山的北尖峰独自高出群山之顶，正对着它的中央，眼界十分开阔。它后边是三清殿，是邵道士居住的地方。三清殿距西边的山顶不远，我先前从那里下来。
English: Facing the northeast, the surrounding mountains and hills in the near distance are low-lying in front, the Hirakawa River is around the bottom of the mountain, and the east mountain is seen in the distance. The north peak of Mount Gaoligong alone rises above the top of the mountains, facing its center, and the horizon is very wide. Behind it is the Sanqing Hall, where the Shao Taoists lived. The Sanqing Hall is not far from the top of the mountain in the west, where I came down earlier.

古文：盖是山之最高者，为三清殿，东北向；当石壁而居一山之中者，为玉皇阁，东向；居北箐之北，倚环冈腋间者，为宝峰寺，南向。
现代文：大体上此山最高之处，是三清殿，面向东北；正当石壁下而居全山正中的，是玉皇阁，向东；居于北边山臀的北面，紧靠环形山冈侧旁之间的，是宝峰寺，向南。
English: Generally speaking, the highest point on this mountain is the Sanqing Hall, facing northeast; right under the stone wall and in the middle of the mountain is the Jade Emperor Pavilion, facing east; north of the rump of the mountain on the north side, close to the side of the ring-shaped mountain, is the Baofeng Temple, facing south.

古文：玉皇阁当石壁下，两箐夹之，得地脉之正；而纯阳阁孤悬崖间，从莲花尖上现神奇，是奇，正相生之妙也正表现出生动的妙趣。
现代文：玉皇阁正当石壁之下，两面山警夹住它，得地脉的正位；而纯阳阁孤悬在山崖间，从莲花尖上现出神奇，这是偏正相生的妙处。
English: The Jade Emperor Pavilion is right under the stone wall, and the mountain guards on both sides clamped it to get the positive position of the earth vein; while the Pure Sun Pavilion hangs alone between the mountains and cliffs, appearing magically from the tip of the lotus flower. This is the beauty of the unbalanced relationship.

古文：盖腾阳多土山，而此山又以土山独裹石崖于中，如颖跃于囊即出类拔萃，且两箐中怪树奇株，郁葱蒙密。
现代文：腾越北面土山很多，而此山又是以土山独自围裹着石崖在中央，如锥尖刺出囊中，而且两条山著中怪树奇株，郁郁葱葱，蒙蒙密密。
English: There are many earthen hills to the north of Tengyue, and this mountain is surrounded by earthen hills alone, with a rock cliff in the center, like a cone spike sticking out of a bag, and two mountains with strange trees in the middle, lush and dense.

古文：竹之大者，如吾地之猫竹，中者如吾地之筋竹，小者如吾地之淡竹，无所不有，又非迤东西所有也。
现代文：竹子大的，如我们地方的猫竹，中等的如我们地方的筋竹，小的如我们地方的淡竹，无所不有，又不是迄东迄西所能有的了。
English: Large bamboo, such as our local cat bamboo, medium-sized bamboo, such as our local string bamboo, and small bamboo, such as our local light bamboo, are ubiquitous and cannot be found all the way from east to west.

古文：二十一日饭后别邵道，下纯阳阁，东经太极崖。
现代文：二十一日饭后告别邵道士，走下纯阳阁，往东经过太极崖。
English: On the twenty-first day, after dinner, bid farewell to Shao Daoshi, walk down Chunyangge, and go east past the Taiji cliff.

古文：其处若横北箐而上，半里而达宝峰寺；余以南箐悬峭，昨所未经，乃从大路循玉皇阁下悬崖。
现代文：此处如果横过北边的山警上走，半里就能到达宝峰寺；我因为南边的山鲁高悬陡峭，昨天未经过，就从大路沿玉皇阁走下悬崖。
English: At this point, if you walk across the mountain guard on the north side, you can reach the Baofeng Temple in half a mile; because the mountain on the south side is steep, I did not pass it yesterday, I walked down the cliff from the main road along the Jade Emperor Pavilion.

古文：曲折下半里，又度北箐之下峡，从环冈大道复半里，北上宝峰寺。
现代文：曲折下走半里，又越过北边山著下的峡谷，从环形山冈上的大道再走半里，向北登上宝峰寺。
English: Walk half a mile under the twists and turns, and then cross the canyon below the mountain on the north side, walk another half mile from the road on the circular mountain, and climb north to Baofeng Temple.

古文：问道于尼。
现代文：向尼姑问路。
English: Ask the nun for directions.

古文：尼引出殿左峰头，指山下核桃园，直北为尖山道，西北登岭为打鹰山道。
现代文：尼姑指引走出殿左的峰头，指示山下的核桃园，正北是去尖山的路，往西北登岭是去打鹰山的路。
English: The nun led the way out of the peak on the left of the hall, indicating the walnut orchard at the bottom of the mountain, the road to the cusp of the mountain to the north, and the road to Eagle Mountain to the northwest.

古文：闻打鹰山有北直指由京师南京直接管辖的北方地区，北京、天津等地僧新开其地，颇异，乃先趋打鹰。
现代文：听说打鹰山有北直隶的僧人新近在那地方开山，相当奇异，于是先赶去打鹰山。从这里往东北下坡，一里，抵达山坡北边。
English: I heard that there was a monk from North Zhili who had recently built a mountain in that place, which was very strange, so I rushed to the Eagle Mountain first. From here, I went downhill to the northeast, one mile, and arrived at the north side of the mountain slope.

古文：于是东北下坡，一里，抵坡北。又北一里余，有数家倚西山麓，是为核桃园。
现代文：又向北走一里多，有数家人背靠西山山麓，这是核桃园。
English: A mile further north, a few families have their backs to the foothills of the West Mountain. This is the Walnut Orchard.

古文：其西北有坳颇低，乃宝峰之从北度脊者，有大道西向之，有小溪东注。
现代文：村西北有山坳很低，是宝峰的山脊从北面延伸之处，有大道往西通向那里，有小溪向东流注。
English: In the northwest of the village, there is a very low ridge, which is where the ridge of Baofeng extends from the north. There is an avenue leading west to there, and a stream flowing east.

古文：逾之，直北一里余，乃西北登坡。
现代文：越过小溪，一直往北一里多，就向西北登坡。
English: After crossing the creek and going north for more than a mile, I climbed the slope to the northwest.

古文：四里，逾坡脊而西，是名长坡。
现代文：四里，越过坡上的山脊往西，这里名叫长坡。
English: Four miles, over the ridge on the slope to the west, here is called the long slope.

古文：又西半里。乃转而北，挟西峰而循其北，仍西行脊上。
现代文：又向西半里，就转向北，傍着西峰而沿着它的北面走，仍向西行走在山脊上。
English: After another half-mile to the west, I turned to the north and walked along the north side of the west peak, still walking west on the ridge.

古文：其脊北下，即酒店岭之东度为笔峰、巃嵸者，南下，即野猪坡之南出为鹅笼、缅箐者，盖俱从分支之脊行也。
现代文：此脊往北下去，就是酒店岭的东面延伸为笔峰、宠欢山之处，南面下走，就是野猪坡的南边出去称为鹅笼、缅警的地方，大概都是从分支的山脊上走。
English: If you go down this ridge to the north, the eastern side of the hotel ridge extends to Penghu, the place of Zhaohuan Mountain, and if you go down to the south, the southern side of the wild boar slope is called the goose cage, the place of the Burmese police, and they are probably all from the branch ridge.

古文：西五里，岭坳间路交 十 字，乃西北横陟之。
现代文：往西五里，岭坳间道路交叉成 十 字，于是向西北横向越过路口。
English: Five miles to the west, the road between the ridges intersected into ten characters, so I crossed the intersection horizontally to the northwest.

古文：当从西北蹑坡，误从西行岭之南。
现代文：应当从西北方登坡，却误从西方行走在岭南。
English: You should climb the slope from the northwest, but you mistakenly walk from the west to the south of Lingnan.

古文：二里，遇樵者，知为鬼甸道，打鹰开寺处已在直北双峰下。
现代文：二里，遇上一个樵夫，了解到这是去鬼甸的路，打鹰山新建寺庙之处已在正北的双峰之下。
English: Two miles away, he met a woodcutter and learned that this was the road to ghostland, and that the new temple on Eagle Mountain was already under the twin peaks directly to the north.

古文：然此时已不见双峰，亦不见路影，乃蹑棘披砾。直上者三里，雾气袭峰，或合或开。
现代文：但是此时已看不见双双耸起的山峰，也看不见路的踪迹，只得踩着砾石分开荆棘，一直上登了三里路，雾气侵袭着山峰，时开时合。
English: However, at this time, I could no longer see the twin towering peaks, nor could I see the trail of the road. I had to step on the gravel to separate the thorns, and I climbed up the three-mile road. The mist invaded the peaks, and it was either open or closed.

古文：又上二里，乃得乱坪，小峰环合之，中多回壑，竹丛杂布。
现代文：又上走二里，就遇上一块杂乱的平地，小山峰环绕着它，中间有许多回绕的壑谷，竹丛杂布。
English: After walking another two miles, I came across a cluttered plain, surrounded by small peaks, with many winding valleys and bamboo thickets in the middle.

古文：见有撑架数柱于北峰下者，从壑中趋之，仍无路。
现代文：见在北峰之下有数根梁柱撑住屋架的地方，从壑谷中向它赶过去，仍然无路。
English: See the place where several beams and columns support the roof frame under the north peak. From the middle of the valley, there is still no way to get to it.

古文：柱左有篷一龛，僧宝藏见余，迎入其中，始知即开山之人也。
现代文：柱子左边有一个竹篷搭成的佛完，僧人宝藏见到我，迎入完中，才知道这就是开山的人了。
English: On the left side of the pillar, there was a bamboo canopy made of Buddha statues. When the monk Treasure saw me, he welcomed me into the middle of the column, only to find out that this was the person who started the mountain.

古文：因与余遍观形势。
现代文：于是与我遍观地形。
English: So I took a look at the terrain.

古文：饭后雾稍开，余欲行，宝藏固留止一宵。
现代文：饭后雾气稍散开，我想要上路，宝藏坚决留我住一宵。
English: After the meal, the fog slightly dispersed, I wanted to go on the road, the treasure resolutely kept me overnight.

古文：余乃从其后山中垂处上。
现代文：我就从这里的后山中央下垂之处上登。
English: I climbed up from the middle of the back mountain here.

古文：其山乃中起之泡也，其后复下，大山自后回环之，上起两峰而中坳中间部分下凹，遥望之状如马鞍，故又名马鞍山。
现代文：此山是中央凸起的水泡样山，山后又低下去，大山在后面环绕着它，上部突起两座山峰可中间是山坳，远望的形状如同马鞍，所以又叫马鞍山。
English: This mountain is a bubble-like mountain with a bulge in the center, and then it sinks lower and lower. Mountains surround it in the back. The upper part has two peaks, but in the middle is a ridge. The shape of the distant view is like a saddle, so it is also called Ma'anshan.

古文：据土人言，其上多鹰，旧《志》名为集鹰山，而土音又讹为打鹰云。
现代文：据当地人说，山上鹰很多，旧志书名为集鹰山，但土音又错读为打鹰。
English: According to local people, there are a lot of eagles on the mountain. The old book is called the Eagle Mountain, but the sound of the earth is misread as the eagle.

古文：其山脉北自冠子坪南耸，从顶上分二岐，一峙西南，一峙东北，二峰之支，如抱臂前环。
现代文：它的山脉起自北面的冠子坪往南耸起，从顶上分为两岔，一座屹立在西南，一座屹立在东北，两座山峰的支脉，如手臂合抱样向前环绕。
English: Its mountains rise from Guanziping in the north to the south, and are divided into two ridges from the top, one standing in the southwest, one standing in the northeast, and the branches of the two peaks encircle forward like arms.

古文：西南下者，当壑右而伏，过中复起小阜而为中案，南坠而下，复起一峰为前案。
现代文：住西南下延的，正当壑谷右方低伏着，延过中央重又突起为小土阜成为中央的案山，往南下坠，再突起一座山峰成为前边的案山。
English: If you live in the southwestern part of the country, the right side of the valley will be low-lying. If you live in the southwestern part of the country, the right side will be low-lying. If you live in the southwestern part of the country, the right side of the valley will be low-lying. If you live in the southwestern part of the country, the right side of the valley will be low-lying. If you live in the southwestern part of the country, the right side of the valley will be low-lying.

古文：东北下者，当壑左而伏，结为东洼之钥。
现代文：往东北下延的，正当壑谷左方低伏着，扭结为东面洼地的门户。
English: Stretching down to the northeast, it lies low just to the left of Shibuya, twisted into a gateway to the eastern depression.

古文：两峰坳处正其环窝处，前蹲一峰当窝中，其脉复自东北峰降而中度，宛如一珠之托盘中。
现代文：两峰间的山坳处正当那环状的山窝处，前方蹲着一座山峰正当山窝之中，山脉又自东北的山峰下降往中央延伸，宛如一颗明珠托在盘中。
English: The ridge between the two peaks is just like the ring-shaped mountain hollow. In front of it, a mountain crouches in the middle of the mountain hollow. The mountains descend from the peak in the northeast and extend to the center, like a pearl in a dish.

古文：其前复起两小阜，如二乳之列于胸。
现代文：它前边又突起两座小土阜，如两个乳房排列在胸部。
English: In front of it, two small mounds protrude, like two breasts arranged on the chest.

古文：其脉即自中蹲之峰，从左度右，又从右前度，而复起一阜于中，与双乳又成鼎足，前列为中峰近案，即南与中案并峙。
现代文：它的脉理就是起自蹲在中央的山峰，从左延向右，又从右边往前延伸，而后又在中央突起一座土阜，与双乳峰又形成鼎足之势，排列在前方成为中峰近处的案山，就在南面与中央的案山并峙。
English: Its sequence is to rise from the peak squatting in the center, extend from the left to the right, and extend forward from the right, and then a soil mound protrudes in the center, forming a peak with the twin peaks, and arranged in front to become the mountain near the middle peak, just south of the central mountain.

古文：稍度而东，又起一阜，即北与东洼之钥对夹。
现代文：稍往东延伸，又突起一座土阜，就在北面与东面洼地的门户相对夹立。
English: A little further to the east, another earthen embankment protrudes, which is located on the north side opposite the entrance to the eastern depression.

古文：故两乳之前，左右俱有洼中坳，中峰之后，左右亦有峡中扃，其脉若甚平，而一起一伏，隐然可寻。
现代文：所以双乳峰之前，左右都有中间下洼的山坳，中峰之后，左右也有峡谷锁闭着中峰，它的脉理好似非常平缓，但一起一伏的，隐约可以探寻。
English: Therefore, before the twin peaks, there are mountains on both sides with depressions in the middle, and after the middle peak, there are canyons on both sides with the middle peak locked. Its phylogeny seems to be very smooth, but it is uneven and can be explored vaguely.

古文：其两峰之高者，左右皆环而止，唯中之伏而起者，一线前度，其东为笔峰、巃嵸，南为宝峰、龙光者，皆是脉也。
现代文：那两座高的山峰，左右都成环状便到了头，唯有中间低伏隆起的山峰，有一线往前延伸，它东面称为笔峰、笼岌山的，南面称为宝峰、龙光台的，都是此山的山脉。
English: The two high peaks, both ringed on the left and right, come to a head. Only the low-lying, uplifted peak in the middle has a line extending forward. To the east, it is called Pen Peak, Caged Peak, and to the south, it is called Baofeng and Longguangdai, all of which are mountains of this mountain.

古文：土人言， 三十年前，其上皆大木巨竹，蒙蔽无隙，中有龙潭四，深莫能测，足声至则涌波而起，人莫敢近；后有牧羊者，一雷而震毙羊五六百及牧者数人，连日夜火，大树深篁，燎无孑遗，而潭亦成陆，今山下有出水之穴，俱从山根分逗云。 
现代文：本地人讲起，三十年前，山上都是大树巨竹，密蔽得没有空隙，中央有四个龙潭，深不可测，有脚步声传到波浪就腾涌而起，人不敢走近；后来有牧羊的，一声惊雷便震死了五六百只羊及几个牧羊人，连日连夜大火，大树深竹，被烧得了无孑遗，而龙潭也变成了陆地，今天山下有出水的洞穴，全是从山脚分引流出的。
English: The local people said that thirty years ago, the mountains were covered with large trees and giant bamboo, so dense that there was no gap. In the center, there were four dragon pools, unfathomable. When the sound of footsteps reached the waves, they surged up, and people dared not go near. Later, there were shepherds who were shocked by a thunderbolt and killed five or six hundred sheep and several shepherds. The fire raged day and night, the trees were deep and the bamboo was burned to nothing, and the dragon pools also turned into land. Today, there are caves under the mountain from which water flows, all of which flow from the foot of the mountain.

古文：山顶之石，色赭赤而质轻浮，状如蜂房，为浮沫结成者，虽大至合抱，而两指可携，然其质仍坚，真劫灰之余也。
现代文：山顶的岩石，色褚红而质地轻浮，形状如蜂房，是漂浮的泡沫凝结成的，即使大到合抱，用两个手指就可提起来，不过石质仍很坚硬，真是劫后余下的灰烬。
English: The rocks at the top of the mountain, reddish in color and light in texture, shaped like a beehive, are made of floating foam condensation. Even if they are too big to hold, they can be picked up with two fingers, but the stone is still very hard. It is really the ashes left after the disaster.

古文：宝藏架庐在中峰之下，前临两乳，日后有扩而大者，后可累峰而上，前可跨乳为钟鼓之楼云。
现代文：宝藏在中峰之下建了房屋，前方面临双乳峰，日后有人扩大寺庙，后面可依山峰叠累而上，前边可横跨乳峰建为钟鼓楼。
English: Treasure built a house under the middle peak, the front side is adjacent to Shuangyu Peak, and in the future someone will expand the temple, the back can follow the peaks piled up, and the front side can be built across the peaks as a bell and drum tower.

古文：今诸洼虽中坳，而不受滴水，东洼之上，依石为窞小水沟，有潴水一方，岂龙去而沧桑倏易，独留此一勺以为开山之供者耶！
现代文：如今各洼地虽然中间下凹，但不容纳一滴水，东面洼地之上，紧靠岩石形成深坑，有积水一池，难道是神龙离去后沧海桑田倏忽间变换，仅留下此一勺水供开山者饮用吗！
English: Today, although the depressions are concave in the middle, they do not hold a drop of water. Above the eastern depression, a deep pit forms close to the rock, with a pool of standing water. Is it possible that after the divine dragon left, the vicissitudes of the sea of mulberry fields were suddenly transformed, leaving only this spoonful of water for the mountaineers to drink!

古文：宝藏本北直人，自鸡足宝台来，见尖山虽中悬而无重裹，与其徒径空觅山至此，遂龛坐篷处者二年。
现代文：宝藏本来是北直隶人，从鸡足山、宝台山来，见尖山虽然中央高悬但无重重裹护之山，与他徒弟径空找山来到此处，便在竹篷中置佛完坐禅二年。
English: The treasure was originally from North Zhili. He came from Mt. Gyejoksan and Mt. Baotai and saw that although the central peak of the mountain was high, it was surrounded by mountains. He and his apprentice searched for mountains in the sky and came here. They placed a Buddha in a bamboo canopy and completed two years of meditation.

古文：今州人皆为感动，争负木运竹，先为结此一楹，而尚未大就云。
现代文：如今州里人全被感动，争相扛树运竹，先为他建起这一间，但尚未全部建成。
English: Now all the people in the prefecture are moved, scrambling to carry trees and carry bamboo to build this room for him first, but it has not yet been fully built.

古文：径空，四川人，向从戎为选锋先从军进入先锋部队，复重庆，援辽援黔，所向有功，后为腾越参府旗牌即王命旗牌，此代表王命，薙发薙，薙发即是剃发为僧于甘露寺，从师觅山。师独坐空山，径空募化山下，为然一指，开创此山，俱异人也。
现代文：径空，是四川人，以前从军担任选锋，收复重庆，救援辽东，救援贵州，所向之处建有功勋，后来担任腾越参将府的旗牌官，在甘露寺剃发出家，跟随师傅找山。师傅独自坐在空寂的山中，径空到山下去募化，用一个手指捆上香烧，开创了此山，都是不同寻常的人。
English: Jiankuang is a Sichuanese. He used to be a front-line soldier in the army. He helped to recover Chongqing, rescue Liaodong, and rescue Guizhou. He has made great achievements in his career. Later, he served as the flag officer of the Tengyue General Staff Headquarters. He made his home in Kanlu Temple and followed his master to look for the mountain. The master sat alone in the empty mountain, went to the mountain to collect and burn incense with one finger, and created this mountain. They are all unusual people.

古文：是晚宿龛中。
现代文：这天晚上住在佛完中。
English: That night, I stayed at Buddha's End Middle School.

古文：有一行脚僧亦留为僧薙地者，乃余乡张泾桥人，萧姓，号无念，名道明。
现代文：有一个云游僧人也留下为和尚铲地，是我家乡张径桥的人，见到他如同见到了老朋友。
English: There was also a wandering monk who stayed behind to shovel the ground for the monk. He was from my hometown, Zhangjiakou. Seeing him was like seeing an old friend.

