古文：帝谓之曰： 天下者，太祖之天下，吾嗣守鸿基，常恐失坠。冢宰无君凌上，将图不轨，吾所以诛之，以安社稷。
现代文： 天下是太祖的天下，我继承大业，常常担心国家败亡。大冢宰目无君王欺凌主上，将要图谋不轨，我之所以诛杀他，是为了安定社稷。
English: The world is the world of my ancestors. I have inherited a great cause, and I often worry about the country's downfall. Dajiezame, no king, bullies the Lord, and will plot evil. The reason why I killed him was to stabilize the society.

古文：汝亲则同气，休戚共之，事不相涉，何烦致谢。 乃诏宪往护第，收兵符及诸簿书等。
现代文：你是我的同胞兄弟，和我休戚与共，这件事与你没有关系，何须谢罪。 于是命宇文宪前往宇文护家中，收缴兵符和各种文书。
English: You are my compatriot and brother, you share the same blood with me, this matter has nothing to do with you, why should you feel guilty. Therefore, he ordered Uwen Xian to go to Uwen Ke's home and collect the military insignia and all kinds of documents.

古文：寻以宪为大冢宰。
现代文：不久任命宇文宪为大冢宰。
English: Not long after, Emperor Wu ordered him to be the grand vizier.

古文：时高祖既诛宰臣，亲览朝政，方欲导之以政，齐之以刑，爰及亲亲，亦为刻薄。
现代文：当时高祖诛杀了辅臣，亲自总揽朝政，正想以政事为先导，以刑法来整治朝政，涉及到自己的亲属，也很冷酷。
English: At that time, Gao Zu killed his aide-de-camp and personally took over the government of the dynasty. He wanted to take the government as a guide and use criminal law to rectify the government of the dynasty. This involved his own relatives and was also very cruel.

古文：宪既为护所委任，自天和之后，威势渐隆。
现代文：字文宪既然为宇文护所信任，所以自从天和年间之后，威望和权势逐渐隆厚。
English: Since the word "Wen Xian" is trusted by the Uwen Nursing Home, its prestige and power have gradually increased since the days and years.

古文：护欲有所陈，多令宪闻奏。
现代文：宇文护想要向皇上陈述事情，大都让宇文宪代为陈奏。
English: If Umenomori wanted to report something to the emperor, he usually asked Umenokuni to act as his deputy.

古文：其间或有可不，宪虑主相嫌隙，每曲而畅之。
现代文：其中有些事不妥，宇文宪恐怕受到皇上猜忌，常常婉转地表达。
English: Some of these things were not appropriate, and Uwen Hsien, perhaps suspecting the Emperor's motives, often expressed them in a roundabout way.

古文：高祖亦悉其心，故得无患。
现代文：高祖也完全了解他的心意，所以他才能没有祸患。
English: Gaozu also fully understands his mind, so he can be free from evil.

古文：然犹以威名过重，终不能平，虽遥授冢宰，寔夺其权也。
现代文：但是仍然因为他的威名太大，最终不能平安，虽然遥任冢宰，其实是剥夺了他的权力。
English: But still, because his prestige was too great, he could not be safe in the end. Although he was a distant ruler, he was actually deprived of his power.

古文：开府裴文举，宪之侍读，高祖常御内殿，引见之。
现代文：开府裴文举，是宇文宪的侍读，高祖经常到内殿，接见他。
English: The keeper of the palace, Pei Wenqiu, was an attendant of Wu Wenxian, and Gaozu often went to the inner hall to meet him.

古文：谓曰： 晋公不臣之迹，朝野所知，朕所以泣而诛者，安国家，利百姓耳。
现代文：对他说： 晋公反叛的迹象，朝野上下都知道，朕之所以含泪诛杀他，是为了安定国家，有利于百姓而已。
English: He said to him, "The signs of Jingu's rebellion are known throughout the court and the country. The reason why I killed him in tears was to stabilize the country and benefit the people.

古文：昔魏末不纲，太祖匡辅元氏；有周受命，晋公复执威权。
现代文：过去在西魏末年失去纲纪，太祖才辅佐元氏；北周建立后，晋公又执掌大权。
English: In the past, in the late years of the Western Wei Dynasty, when the Gangxi was lost, the great-grandfather Cai assisted the Sogen clan; after the establishment of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, Jingu once again held great power.

古文：积习生常，便谓法应须尔。
现代文：长期形成的习惯竞成为常规，人们还以为法度就该如此。
English: Accustomed as we are, we think that this is how the imperial court passes laws.

古文：岂有三十岁天子而可为人所制乎。
现代文：哪有三十岁的天子而被他人控制的。
English: How can a thirty-year-old heavenly son be controlled by others?

古文：且近代以来，又有一弊，暂经隶属，便即礼若君臣。
现代文：而且从近代以来，还有一个弊端，一旦有过隶属关系，双方就以君臣的礼节相待。
English: Moreover, since modern times, there has been a drawback, once there is a subordinate relationship, both sides treat each other with the etiquette of a monarch.

古文：此乃乱代之权宜，非经国之治术。
现代文：这是乱世通变的措施，并不是经略国家的治理方法。
English: This is a measure of chaotic change, not a method of governing the country.

古文：诗云： 夙夜匪解，以事一人。 
现代文：《诗经》说： 从早到晚都不要懈怠，以奉事一人。
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "Do not slack off from morning to night, but serve one person."

古文：一人者，止据天子耳。
现代文：一人，就是衹依托天子而已。
English: One person is just relying on God.

古文：虽陪侍齐公，不得即同臣主。
现代文：你虽然陪侍齐公，但不能像君臣那样。
English: Although you are accompanying Qi Gong, you can't act like a monarch.

古文：且太祖十儿，宁可悉为天子。
现代文：况且太祖有十个儿子，怎么能够都成为天子。
English: Besides, if the great-grandfather had ten sons, how could they all become heavenly sons?

古文：卿宜规以正道，劝以义方，辑睦我君臣，协和我骨肉。
现代文：你应当用正道来规谏他，以应该遵循的规范和道理劝诫他，使我们君臣亲睦，使我们骨肉和洽。
English: You should discipline him with the right way, and admonish him with the norms and principles that should be followed, so that our princes and ministers can be friendly, and our flesh and blood can be at peace.

古文：无令兄弟，自致嫌疑。 文举拜谢而出，归以白宪。
现代文：不要让我们兄弟间产生嫌疑。 裴文举拜首致谢出殿，回来后告诉了宇文宪。
English: Don't let suspicions arise between us brothers. Pei Wen bowed his head and went out of the palace to express his thanks. After returning, he told Yu Wenxian.

古文：宪指心抚几曰： 吾之夙心，公宁不悉，但当尽忠竭节耳，知复何言。 建德年，进爵为王。
现代文：宇文宪指着胸口抚着案几说： 我平素的志愿，你还不了解吗，我衹是竭尽忠节而已，你知道了还有什么可说的。 建德三年，升爵位为王爵。
English: Pointing to his chest and stroking his desk, Yu Wenxian said, "Don't you understand my plain will, I'm just trying my best to be loyal, you know what else there is to say.

古文：宪友刘休征献王箴一首，宪美之。
现代文：宇文宪的朋友刘休征献给他《王箴》一首，宇文宪很欣赏。
English: Wu Wenxian's friend Liu Xuezhen dedicated to him the song "Wang Zhen," which Wu Wenxian appreciated very much.

古文：休征后又以此箴上高祖。
现代文：刘休征后来又将这首《王箴》献给高祖。
English: Liu Xiuzheng later dedicated this "Wang Zhen" to Gao Zu.

古文：高祖方剪削诸弟，甚悦其文。
现代文：高祖正在削弱各位皇弟的权势，非常喜欢这首箴文。
English: Gaozu is weakening the power of the princes, and he likes this proverb very much.

古文：宪常以兵书繁广，难求指要，乃自刊定为要略五篇，至是表陈之。
现代文：宇文宪经常认为兵书繁多，很难找到要旨，就亲自裁定为《要略》五篇，到这时上表陈奏给皇上。
English: Uwen Xian often thought that there were so many military manuals that it was difficult to find the gist, so he personally decided that there should be five "Outlines," and at this time he presented it to the emperor.

古文：高祖览而称善。
现代文：高祖看后说好。
English: Gao Zu said yes after watching it.

古文：其秋，高祖幸云阳宫，遂寝疾。
现代文：这年秋天，高祖前往云阳宫，就病倒了。
English: In the autumn of that year, Gao Zu went to Yunyang Palace and fell ill.

古文：卫王直于京师举兵反。
现代文：卫王宇文直在京师起兵反叛。
English: The king of Wei, Yu Wenzhong, raised an army and rebelled in the capital.

古文：高祖召宪谓曰： 卫王构逆，汝知之乎？ 
现代文：高祖召入宇文宪对他说： 卫王叛逆，你知道吗? 
English: Gao Zu called in Yu Wen Xian and said to him: Wei Wang is a rebel, do you know that?

古文：宪曰： 臣初不知，今始奉诏。
现代文：宇文宪说： 我开始不知道，现在才接到诏命。
English: Uwen Xian said, "I didn't know at first, but now I have received the imperial edict."

古文：直若逆天犯顺，此则自取灭亡。 高祖： 汝即为前军，吾亦续发。 直寻败走。
现代文：宇文直如果犯上作乱，这就是自取灭亡。 高祖说： 你即刻作为前锋，我也随后出发。 字文直不久败逃。
English: If Uwen Zhi commits a riot, it will be his own ruin. Gao Zu said, "You immediately take the front, and I will set out after you." Ximen Zhi soon fled in defeat.

古文：高祖至京师，宪与赵王招俱入拜谢。
现代文：高祖抵达京师，宇文宪和赵王宇文招都入朝拜谢。
English: Gaozu arrived in Beijing, and Uwen Xian and Zhao Wang Uwen Zhao both went to the imperial court to offer thanks.

古文：高祖曰： 管蔡为戮，周公作辅，人心不同，有如其面。
现代文：高祖说： 管叔、蔡叔被杀，周公为宰辅，人心不同，就如同他们的外表。
English: Gao Zu said, "Uncle Guan and Uncle Cai were killed, and Zhou Gong was the second-in-command. People's hearts are different, just like their appearances.

古文：但愧兄弟亲寻干戈，于我为不足耳。 初，直内深忌宪，宪隐而容之。
现代文：感到惭愧的衹是兄弟亲自动干戈，对于我有些不满足而已。 当初，宇文直心中非常忌恨宇文宪，宇文宪克制住容忍了他。
English: At first, Uwen Zhi hated Uwen Xian very much in his heart, but Uwen Xian restrained himself and tolerated him.

古文：且以帝之母弟，每加友敬。
现代文：而且因为他是高祖的同母弟弟，常常对他更加友爱尊敬。
English: And because he was Gaozu's younger brother by the same mother, he was often treated with even more affection and respect.

古文：晋公护之诛也，直固请及宪。
现代文：晋公宇文护被诛杀时，宇文直再三请求杀掉宇文宪。
English: After Jin Gong Uwen Guo was killed, Uwen Zhi asked Emperor Wu to get rid of Uwen Xian altogether.

古文：高祖曰： 齐公心迹，吾自悉之，不得更有所疑也。 及文宣皇后崩，直又密启云： 宪饮酒食肉，与平日不异。 高祖曰： 吾与齐王异生，俱非正嫡，特为吾意，今袒括是同。
现代文：高祖说： 齐公的心意，我自己很了解，不要再有什么猜疑。 到文宣皇后去世时，宇文直又密奏说： 宇文宪饮酒吃肉，和平时没有两样。 高祖说： 我和齐王不是一母所生，都不是嫡子，他祇是为我着想，现在也同样露臂束发。
English: Gao Zu said, "I understand King Qi's intentions very well, so don't have any suspicions." When Empress Wensun passed away, Yu Wenzhong also secretly said, "Uwen Xian drinks alcohol and eats meat, which is no different from other times." Gao Zu said, "King Qi and I were not born from the same mother, nor are we legitimate children, he only thought about me, and now he is also bare-armed and hairless.

古文：汝当愧之，何论得失。
现代文：你应该感到惭愧才对，怎么可以谈论他的是非。
English: Now, I'm as protective of him as I am of you. You should be ashamed of yourself.

古文：汝亲太后之子，偏荷慈爱。
现代文：你是太后的亲生儿子，受到了她特别的慈爱。
English: You are the natural son of the Empress Dowager, and you have received her special love.

古文：今但须自勖，无假说人。 直乃止。
现代文：你衹应当勉励自己，不要评论别人。 字文直这才不再说什么。
English: You should encourage yourself and not comment on others. That's why you should stop saying anything.

古文：四年，高祖将欲东讨，独与内史王谊谋之，余人莫得知也。
现代文：建德四年，高祖打算束伐齐国，单独和内史王谊谋划，其他的人都不知道。
English: During the four years of Jiande, Gaozu planned to conquer the whole country, alone and with the Inner History King, and no one else knew about it.

古文：后以诸弟才略，无出于宪右，遂告之。
现代文：后来因为各位皇弟的才略，没有超过宇文宪的，就告诉了他。
English: Later, because the talents of the imperial brothers did not exceed that of Uwen Xian, he told him.

古文：宪即赞成其事。
现代文：宇文宪当即赞同此事。
English: He was immediately in favour of it.

古文：及大军将出，宪表上私财以助军费曰： 臣闻抚机适运，理藉时来，兼弱攻昧，事资权道。
现代文：到大军将要出发时，宇文宪上表献出自己的财产以赞助军费说： 我听说把握机会适应气运，理应藉助时机的到来，兼并弱小攻击愚昧，要凭藉随机应变的谋略。
English: When the great army was about to set out, Yu Wenxian presented his property to sponsor the military expenses and said: I heard that seizing the opportunity to adapt to the weather should be based on the arrival of the time, merging with the weak and attacking the stupid should be based on the strategy of random contingency.

古文：伏惟陛下继明作圣，阐业弘风，思顺天心，用恢武略。
现代文：希望陛下保持和振兴圣明，开创大业弘扬教化，顺从天意，恢弘武略。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will maintain and revitalize the holy light, create a great cause to promote enlightenment, obey the will of heaven, and expand the military strategy.

古文：方使长蛇外翦，宇宙大同，军民内向，车书混一。
现代文：才能使凶恶被剪除，天下大同，军民人心归附，车轨文字统一。
English: Only then can the evil be eliminated, the whole world be the same, the hearts of the military and the people be attached, and the words on the train tracks be unified.

古文：窃以龙旗雷动，天网云布，刍粟粮饩，或须周给。
现代文：我私下以为龙旗飘动，天网密布，粮草物资，也许需要供给。
English: Privately, I thought that the dragon flag was fluttering, the sky net was dense, and grain and grass materials might need to be supplied.

古文：昔边隅未静，卜式愿上家财；江海不澄，卫兹请献私粟。
现代文：从前边境没有平静，卜式自愿献出家中财产；天下混乱，卫兹请求献出自己的粟米。
English: In the past, when there was no peace on the border, Pu voluntarily gave up his family's property; when there was chaos, Wei Zi requested to give up his corn.

古文：臣虽不敏，敢忘景行。
现代文：我虽然愚笨，但怎敢忘记效仿他们。
English: Fool that I am, how dare I forget to emulate them.

古文：谨上金宝等一十六件，少助军资。 诏不纳，而以宪表示公卿曰： 人臣当如此，朕贵其心耳，宁须物乎。 乃诏宪率众二万为前军，趣黎阳。
现代文：恭敬地献上金银财宝等十六件，稍稍资助军需。 高祖下诏不接受，而将宇文宪的奏表展示给公卿说： 作为人臣就应该这样，朕衹不过是认为他的心意可贵，难道需要他的财物吗。 于是命宇文宪率军两万人为前锋，前往黎阳。
English: He respectfully offered 16 items including gold, silver and treasure, and even a little money to support the war effort. Gao Zu did not accept the edict, but showed the report form of Uwen Xian to the nobles and said, "As a courtier, this is how it should be. I just think his intentions are valuable. Do I really need his belongings?" So he ordered Uwen Xian to lead an army of 20,000 people as the vanguard and go to Liyang.

古文：高祖亲围河阴，未克。
现代文：高祖亲自围攻河阴，没有攻克。
English: Gaozu personally besieged Heyin, but failed to conquer it.

古文：宪攻拔武济，进围洛口，收其东西二城。
现代文：宇文宪攻陷武济，进兵围攻洛口，攻下了洛的东西二城。
English: Uwen Hsien captured Wuji, marched into and besieged Lokou, and captured the eastern and western parts of Lokou.

古文：以高祖疾，班师。
现代文：因为高祖生病，撤军返回。
English: Because Gaozu was ill, the withdrawing troops returned.

古文：是岁，初置上柱国官，以宪为之。
现代文：在这一年，开始设置上柱国官职，命宇文宪担任这一职位。
English: In this year, the establishment of the post of the highest-ranking state official began, and Yu Wenxian was appointed to this position.

古文：五年，大举东讨，宪率精骑二万，复为前锋，守雀鼠谷。
现代文：建德五年，北周大规模地向东讨伐齐国，宇文宪率精锐骑兵两万，再次作为前锋，驻守雀鼠谷。
English: In the fifth year of Jiande, North Zhou launched a large-scale eastward crusade against Qi, and Uwen Xian led 20,000 elite cavalry, once again as a striker, stationed in Sparrow Mouse Valley.

古文：高祖亲围晋州。
现代文：高祖亲自围攻晋州。
English: Gaozu personally besieged Jinzhou.

古文：宪进兵克洪同、永安二城，更图进取。
现代文：字文宪进兵攻克洪同、永塞二城，打算进一步进攻。
English: Zibun gendarmerie marched into the two cities of Hongtong and Yongsa, intending to further attack.

古文：齐人焚桥守险，军不得进，遂屯于永安。
现代文：齐军烧毁桥梁扼守险要，北周军队无法前进，于是屯兵在永安。
English: The Qi army burned the bridges to hold the key, and the North Zhou army could not advance, so the garrison was in Yong'an.

古文：齐主闻晋州见围，乃将兵十万，自来援之。
现代文：齐国皇帝得知晋州被围，就率兵十万，亲自前来救援。
English: When the Emperor of Qi learned that Jinzhou was besieged, he personally came to the rescue with a hundred thousand soldiers.

古文：时柱国、陈王纯顿军千里径，大将军、永昌公椿屯鸡栖原，大将军宇文盛守汾水关，并受宪节度。
现代文：当时柱国、陈王宇文纯驻军在千里径，大将军、永吕公宇文椿屯兵鸡栖原，大将军宇文盛驻守汾水关，都受宇文宪的指挥。
English: At that time, the pillar country, Chen Wang Uwenchun garrisoned in Qianli, the general, Yong Lukong Uwenchun garrisoned in Qixiuyuan, and the general Uwen Sheng garrisoned in Xishuiguan, all under the command of Uwen Xian.

古文：宪密谓椿曰： 兵者诡道，去留不定，见机而作，不得遵常。
现代文：宇文宪暗中对宇文椿说： 战争，是诡诈之道，去留没有一定，要见机行事，不能遵循常规。
English: Yu Wenxian said to Yu Wenqin in secret: War is a way of deception, there is no certainty of going or staying, you must act according to the opportunity, you cannot follow the routine.

古文：汝今为营，不须张幕，可伐柏为庵，示有形势。
现代文：你现在建立军营，不要搭建营幕，可以砍伐柏树建成圆形的篷帐，表示有营幕的样子。
English: If you are building a camp, don't put up a tent. You can cut down a cypress tree to make a round tent, which looks like a tent.

古文：令兵去之后，贼犹致疑也。 时齐主分军万人向千里径，又令其众出汾水关，自率大兵与椿对阵。
现代文：使得军队撤走后，贼兵仍怀疑我军在那裹。 当时齐国皇帝分拨一万人前往千里径，又命军队出兵汾水关，自己亲率大军和宇文椿对阵。
English: At that time, the Emperor of Qi assigned ten thousand people to travel thousands of miles, and ordered the army to go to Shuiguan, and he led his own army against Uwenqin.

古文：宇文盛驰骑告急，宪自以千骑救之。
现代文：字文盛派人飞奔大营求救，宇文宪亲自率领一千骑兵援救。
English: Zi Wensheng sent people to rush to the camp for help, and Wu Wenxian personally led a thousand cavalry to the rescue.

古文：齐人望谷中尘起，相率遽退。
现代文：齐军望见山谷中尘土飞扬，都各自急忙后退。
English: When the Qi army saw the dust flying in the valley, they all hurriedly retreated.

古文：盛与柱国侯莫陈芮涉汾逐之，多有斩获。
现代文：宇文盛和柱国侯莫陈芮渡过汾水追击，斩杀俘获齐军很多。
English: Wu Wensheng and Zhu Guohou Mo Chenyi crossed the Surabaya River to pursue, killing and capturing many Qi troops.

古文：俄而椿告齐众稍逼，宪又回军赴之。
现代文：不久宇文椿报告齐军已逐渐逼近，字文宪又回师赴援。
English: Soon after, Uwenqin reported that the Qi army was gradually approaching, and Zhiwenxian returned to the division to help.

古文：会椿被敕追还，率兵夜返。
现代文：正好遇上宇文椿被高祖诏命追回，于是率军连夜返回。
English: It just so happened that Uwen Tsubaki was ordered by Emperor Gaozao to return, so he led the army back overnight.

古文：齐人果谓柏庵为帐幕也，不疑军退，翌日始悟。
现代文：齐军果然以为柏树圆形篷帐是周军营帐，没有怀疑周军已经撤退，到第二天才发觉。
English: The Qi army really thought that the cypress round tent was the camp tent of the Zhou army. They did not suspect that the Zhou army had retreated, and only found out the next day.

古文：时高祖已去晋州，留宪为后拒。
现代文：当时高祖已经离开晋州，留下宇文宪在后面抵御齐军。
English: At that time, Gaozu had already left Jinzhou, leaving Yu Wenxian behind to fend off the Qi army.

古文：齐主自率众来追，至于高梁桥。
现代文：齐主亲自率军前来追击，抵达高梁桥。
English: Qi himself led the army to pursue and arrived at Gaoliang Bridge.

古文：宪以精骑二千，阻水为阵。
现代文：宇文宪派两千精锐骑兵，隔水结阵。
English: Uwen Xian sent two thousand elite cavalry to form a line across the water.

古文：齐领军段畅直进至桥。
现代文：齐领军段畅径直前进到桥边。
English: Qi led the army to march straight to the bridge.

古文：宪隔水招畅与语，语毕，宪问畅曰： 若何姓名？ 畅曰： 领军段畅也。
现代文：字文宪在汾水对岸招唤段畅和他对话，谈完话，宇文宪问段畅说： 你的姓名是什么? 段畅说： 是领军段畅。
English: On the opposite bank of the Surabaya River, Zi Wenxian invited Duan Chang to have a dialogue with him. After the conversation, Yu Wenxian asked Duan Chang: What is your name? Duan Chang said: It is Duan Chang, the leader of the army.

古文：公复为谁？ 宪曰： 我虞大都督耳。 
现代文：你又是谁? 宇文宪说： 我衹不过是虞候大都督罢了。 
English: Who are you? Uwen Xian said, "I'm just the governor of the county."

古文：畅曰： 观公言语，不是凡人，今日相见，何用隐其名位？ 陈王纯、梁公侯莫陈芮、内史王谊等并在宪侧。
现代文：段畅说： 看你的言谈，不是一般的人，今天相见，为何要隐瞒姓名官位? 陈王宇文纯、梁公侯莫陈芮、内史王谊等都在宇文宪的身旁。
English: Duan Chang said, "Looking at your words, you are not an ordinary person. When we meet today, why do you want to hide your name and official position? Chen Wang Yuwenchun, Liang Gonghou Mo Chenqi, Neishi Wang Yi, etc. are all around Yuwen Xian.

古文：畅固问不已。
现代文：段畅一再不停地询问。
English: Duan Chang kept asking again and again.

古文：宪乃曰： 我天子太弟齐王也。 指陈王以下，并以名位告之。
现代文：宇文宪才说： 我是天子的太弟齐王。 指着陈王以下的人，都将他们的姓名官位告诉他。
English: Uwen Xincai said, "I am King Qi, the eldest brother of the Son of Heaven. Pointing to the people below King Chen, I told him their names and positions.

古文：畅鞭马而去，宪即命旋军，而齐人遽追之，戈甲甚锐。
现代文：段畅策马离去，宇文宪就马上下令撤军，而齐军疾速追赶，装备非常精锐。
English: As soon as Duan Chang Zema left, Yu Wenxian immediately ordered the withdrawal of troops, while the Qi army quickly caught up and was very well-equipped.

古文：宪与开府宇文忻各统精卒百骑为殿以拒之，斩其骁将贺兰豹子、山褥瑰等百余人，齐众乃退。
现代文：宇文宪和开府宇文忻各率一百名精锐骑兵作为后卫抵御，斩杀北齐勇将贺兰豹子、山褥瓖等一百多人，齐军才退。
English: Uwen Xian and Kaifu Uwen Yao each led a hundred elite cavalrymen as guards to resist, and killed more than a hundred people such as the Northern Qi Yong, the Helan Leopard, and the Mountain Dragonfly, and the Qi army retreated.

古文：宪渡汾而及高祖于玉壁。
现代文：宇文宪渡过汾水在玉壁追上高祖。
English: Uwen Xian crossed Surabaya and caught up with Gao Zu in Yubi.

古文：高祖又令宪率兵六万，还援晋州。
现代文：高祖又命宇文宪率兵六万，回师援救晋州。
English: Gaozu also ordered Uwen to lead 60,000 gendarmes and return to the division to rescue Jinzhou.

古文：宪遂进军，营于涑水。
现代文：宇文宪于是进兵，驻扎在涑水。
English: As a result, Umenken enlisted in the army and was stationed in Surabaya.

古文：齐主攻围晋州，昼夜不息。
现代文：齐主围攻晋州，日夜不停。
English: The whole army besieged Jinzhou, day and night.

古文：间谍还者，或云已陷。
现代文：派出去侦察的人回来，有的说晋州已经失陷。
English: sent out reconnaissance people to come back, some said that Jinzhou has fallen.

古文：宪乃遣柱国越王盛、大将军尉迟迥、开府宇文神举等轻骑一万夜至晋州。
现代文：宇文宪就派柱国越王宇文盛、大将军尉迟迥、开府宇文神举等人率轻装骑兵一万在夜里抵达晋州。
English: Uwen Xian then sent Zhu Guo Yue Wang Uwen Sheng, General Lieutenant Chi Xuan, Kaifu Uwen Shenge and others to arrive in Jinzhou at night with ten thousand light cavalry.

古文：宪进军据蒙坑，为其后援，知城未陷，乃归涑川。
现代文：宇文宪进兵占据蒙坑，作为他们的后援，得知晋州城没有失陷，就回到涑川。
English: Uwen's gendarmes occupied Mengken as their backup, and when they learned that Jinzhou City had not fallen, they returned to Longchuan.

古文：寻而高祖东辕，次于高显，宪率所部，先向晋州。
现代文：不久高祖束征，停驻在高显，宇文宪率领他的部队，先向置州推进。
English: Not long after, Gaozu Zuzheng was stationed in Gaoxian, and Uwen Xian led his troops to advance first to Jizhou.

古文：明日，诸军总集，稍逼城下。
现代文：第二天，各军会集，逐渐进逼到晋州城下。
English: The next day, the armies gathered and gradually advanced to the outskirts of Jinzhou.

古文：齐人亦大出兵，阵于营南。
现代文：齐军也大举出动，在营南结阵。
English: The Qi army also made a large-scale move, forming a line of battle in the south of the camp.

古文：高祖召宪驰往观之。
现代文：高祖命宇文宪飞奔前往侦察。
English: Gao Zu's successor, Yu Wenxian, rushed to investigate.

古文：宪返命曰： 是易与耳，请破之而后食。 
现代文：宇文宪回来报告说： 这很容易对付，请等我击败他们后再进餐。 
English: Yu Wenxian came back and reported: This is easy to deal with, please wait until I defeat them before eating.

古文：帝悦曰： 如汝所言，吾无忧矣。 宪退，内史柳虬私谓宪曰： 贼亦不少，王安得轻之？ 
现代文：高担高兴地说： 果真像你所说的那样，我就没有忧虑了。 宇文宪退回营中，内史柳纠私下对宇塞塞说： 贼兵也不少，你怎么可以轻视他们? 
English: Gaotan said happily, "If it's as you say, I won't be worried." When Uwen Xian returned to the camp, Neishi Liu privately said to Usa Xie, "There are also many robber soldiers, how can you despise them?"

古文：宪曰： 宪受委前锋，情兼家国，扫此逋寇，事等摧枯。
现代文：字文宪说： 我受任为前锋，兼有家族国家双重责任，扫除这些流寇，就如同摧折一根枯木。
English: Zi Wen Xian said: I was appointed as a striker, and I have the dual responsibility of the family and the country. To sweep away these roving bandits is like breaking a dead tree.

古文：商周之事，公所知也，贼兵虽众，其如我何。 既而诸军俱进，应时大溃。
现代文：商厘的事，你是知道的，贼兵虽多，又能把我怎么样。 不久北周各军一齐推进，齐军立刻大败。
English: As for Shangli, you know that although there are many bandits, they can do anything to me. Soon, the Northern Zhou armies advanced together, and the Qi army was immediately defeated.

古文：其夜，齐主遁走，宪轻骑追之。
现代文：当晚，齐主逃走，宇文宪率精锐骑兵追击。
English: That night, Qi fled, and Uwen Xian led the elite cavalry in pursuit.

古文：既及永安，高祖续至。
现代文：到达丞室时，直担跟着抵达。
English: When they arrived at the chancellor's office, they were followed by the chancellors.

古文：齐人收其余众，复据高壁及洛女砦。
现代文：变军收集残兵，又占据了高壁和洛女寨。
English: The changing army collected the remnants of the soldiers and occupied the high wall and the Luo women's village.

古文：高祖命宪攻洛女，破之。
现代文：高祖命宇文宪攻打洛女寨，攻克。
English: Gao Zu ordered Yu Wen Xian to attack Luo Mianzhai and conquer it.

古文：明日，与大军会于介休。
现代文：第二天，和大军在介休会师。
English: The next day, with the great army intervening, the division disbanded.

古文：时齐主已走邺，留其从兄安德王延宗据并州。
现代文：当时齐主高纬已经逃到邺城，留下他的堂兄安德王高延宗据守并州。
English: At that time, the lord of Qi, Gao Wei, had already fled to Shicheng, leaving his cousin, Ando Wang Gao Yanzong, to hold down and annex the state.

古文：延宗因僭伪号，出兵拒战。
现代文：高延宗趁机自立为帝，出兵迎战。
English: Gao Yanzong took advantage of the opportunity to establish himself as emperor and sent troops to fight.

古文：高祖进围其城，宪攻其西面，克之。
现代文：高祖进兵围攻并州城，宇文宪攻击并州城西面，攻下了并州城。
English: Gaozhu marched in and besieged and annexed Zhouzhuang, while Uwen Xian attacked and annexed the west side of Zhouzhuang, and captured and annexed Zhouzhuang.

古文：延宗遁走，追而获之。
现代文：高延宗逃走，宇塞壶追击并抓获了他。
English: Gao Yanzong fled, Zhou's army chased and caught him.

古文：以功进封第二子安城公质为河间王，拜第三子賨为大将军。
现代文：宇文宪因功进封第二个儿子室城公宇文质为河间王，拜任第三个儿子字塞董为大将军。
English: Uwen Xian's second son, Murochong Uwen Chih, was crowned King of Kawama for his achievements, and his third son, Jie Dong, was appointed Grand General.

古文：仍诏宪先驱趣邺。明年，进克邺城。
现代文：产担仍命室塞产作为前锋进兵邺城。第二年，进兵攻克邺城。
English: The progenitor still lives in the room, and the progenitor enters the city as a striker. The next year, the soldiers enter the city and conquer the city.

古文：齐任城王湝、广宁王孝珩等据守信都，有众数万。
现代文：查任越王直擅、广宁王壶塑!等据守值都，有军队几万人。
English: There are tens of thousands of troops in the capital city, including those appointed by the king of Yue, Zhaoshan, and the king of Guangning, Jugsu!

古文：高祖复诏宪讨之。
现代文：高祖又命宇文宪征讨他们。
English: Gaozu also ordered Uwenshin to collect them.

古文：仍令齐主手书与湝曰： 朝廷遇纬甚厚，诸王无恙。
现代文：并命蛮主亲手写诏书给高浩说： 朝廷待我很优厚，各位王公也很好。
English: He also ordered the barbarian lord to write an edict in his own hand to Gao Hao, saying: "The Imperial Court has treated me very generously, and the princes are also very good.

古文：叔若释甲，则无不优待。 湝不纳，乃大开赏募，多出金帛，沙门求为战士者，亦数千人。
现代文：叔叔如果放下武器，则没有不优待的。 直遣不接受，于是大规模地进行悬赏招募兵士，拿出大量金银布帛，僧人请求当战士的，也有几千人。
English: If the uncle laid down his arms, he would not be treated less favourably; if he did not accept direct payment, he would offer a large-scale reward to recruit soldiers, taking out a large amount of gold and silver cloth, and there were also several thousand monks who asked to be soldiers.

古文：宪军过赵州，湝令间谍二人觇窥形势，候骑执以白宪。
现代文：宇文宪的军队经过趟州，高浩派两名间谍刺探军情，北周斥候抓住二人报告宇塞童。
English: Uwen Xian's army passed through Wanzhou, Gao Hao sent two spies to spy on the military situation, and the North Zhou scouts caught the two and reported to Usaidong.

古文：宪乃集齐之旧将，遍示之。
现代文：室塞童就集合寸坛投降的将领，一一指示给二人观看。
English: Murosado gathered the generals who had surrendered and instructed them to watch the two of them one by one.

古文：又谓之曰： 吾所争者大，不在汝等。
现代文：又对他们说： 我要争夺的曰标很大，不是你们二人。
English: And he said unto them, My wrestling is not with you two, but with the great dragon.

古文：今放汝还，可即充我使。 乃与湝书曰：山川有间，每深劳伫，仲春戒节，纳履惟宜。
现代文：现在放你们回去，可以充任我的使节。 于是写信给高滑说：山川阻隔，常常为此深深忧劳，仲春当令，实应纳履求教。
English: Now that you have been allowed to return, you can act as my envoys. So I wrote to Gao Nide, saying: Mountains and rivers block the way, and I am often deeply worried about this. Zhong Chun is in charge, and I really should heed his advice.

古文：承始届两河，仍图三，二者交战，想无亏德。
现代文：刚刚到达两河，就图取三魏，两军交战，想必并不亏损德行。
English: As soon as he arrived at the two rivers, he tried to take the three Wei, and the two armies fought, presumably without losing virtue.

古文：昔魏历云季，海内横流，我太祖抚运乘时，大庇黔首。
现代文：从前在酉毯末年，天下大乱，我太祖顺应时运乘藉时势，庇护百姓。
English: Once upon a time, at the end of the Heian period, when the world was in turmoil, my great-grandfather took advantage of the situation to protect the people.

古文：皇上嗣膺下武，式隆景业，兴稽山之会，总盟津之师。
现代文：皇上以圣德继承先王功业，弘扬大业，兴稽山之会，集盟津之师。
English: The emperor inherits the merits of his predecessor with holiness, promotes the great cause, the Xingqishan Association, and the teacher of gathering allies.

古文：雷骇唐郊，则野无横阵；云腾晋水，则地靡严城。
现代文：军威震骇唐的郊野，则原野没有横列的军阵；硝烟密布晋水两岸，则大地没有严固的城池。
English: In the countryside of the Tang Dynasty, where military might was formidable, there were no military lines lined up across the plain; on both sides of the Jinshui River, where gunpowder smoke was thick, there was no fortified city.

古文：袭伪之酋，既奔窜于草泽；窃号之长，亦委命于旌门。
现代文：篡夺皇位的首领，已经奔窜在草泽之中；窃取帝位的元凶，也在旌门投降。
English: The leader who usurped the imperial throne has already run into the weeds; the culprit who stole the imperial throne has also surrendered at the gate.

古文：德义振于无垠，威风被于有截。
现代文：道德仁义震荡在无垠的大地，威严的声势覆盖天下。
English: Morality, benevolence and righteousness vibrate in the boundless earth, and the majestic sound covers the whole world.

古文：彼朝宿将旧臣，良家戚里，俱升荣宠，皆縻好爵。
现代文：你们朝中的宿将旧臣，世家外戚，都受到了恩荣宠幸，也都得到了高官厚禄。
English: Your former vassals and relatives who have stayed with you during your reign have all received honors and favors, and have also received high-ranking officials and generous rewards.

古文：是使临漳之下，效死争驱；营丘之前，奋身毕命。
现代文：使得临漳城下，人人誓死争先；营丘前面，个个奋勇效命。
English: Under the city of Linyi, everyone vows to fight to the death; in front of the camp hill, everyone is fighting for their lives.

古文：此岂唯人事，抑亦天时。
现代文：这难道仅仅是人为的事情吗，这也是天命呀。
English: Isn't this just a man-made thing? It's also fate.

古文：宜访之道路，无俟傍说。
现代文：你应当去随便询问一下路人，不需要等待多方探求。
English: You should go and ask random passers-by, don't wait for a multi-party inquiry.

古文：吾以不武，任总元戎，受命安边，路指幽、冀。
现代文：我以不足以示人威武的能力，担任三军统帅，受命安定边境，进兵幽州、冀州。
English: I took the position of commander-in-chief of the three armies, was ordered to stabilize the border, and marched into Yuzhou and Jizhou.

古文：列邑名藩，莫不屈膝，宣风导礼，皆荷来苏。
现代文：沿途的城邑藩邦，没有不降服的，宣扬教化开导礼义，都蒙受恩德于困苦中获得休养生息。
English: The cities, towns, and provinces along the route have no non-surrenderers who preach the principles of enlightenment and enlightenment, and have all received grace in hardship to obtain rest and recuperation.

古文：足下高氏令王，英风夙着，古今成败，备诸怀抱，岂不知一木不维大厦，三谏可以逃身哉！
现代文：足下是高氏的藩王，英俊的风姿早就闻名，古今成败之事，都很清楚，难道不知道独木不能维持大厦，多次劝谏不采纳后就可以逃命吗!
English: At his feet is the king of the Gao clan, his handsome appearance has long been famous, the success and failure of the past and present are very clear, don't you know that a single tree can't maintain the building, you can escape after many times of persuasion!

古文：且殷微去商，侯服周代；项伯背楚，赐姓汉朝。
现代文：况且微子离开殷商，在周代被封为王；项伯背弃楚，在汉朝被赐刘姓。
English: Moreover, Muizi left Yin Shang and was crowned king in the Zhou Dynasty; Xiang Bo abandoned Chu and was given the surname Liu in the Han Dynasty.

古文：去此弗图，苟徇亡辙，家破身殒，为天下笑。
现代文：不按照这样去做，却不审慎地沿着覆亡的道路走下去，就会家破身亡，被天下人讥笑。
English: If you don't do it according to this, but go down the road of ruin without prudence, you will be ruined and ridiculed by the world.

古文：又足下谍者为候骑所拘，军中情实，具诸执事。
现代文：又足下的间谍被我的斥候拘捕，我们军中的实际情况，两位间谍当会全部告诉你。
English: And the spy under my feet was arrested by my scouts, the actual situation in our army, the two spies will tell you everything.

古文：知以弱卒琐甲，欲抗堂堂之师；萦带污城，冀保区区之命。
现代文：你也会知道你是在以残弱的士卒和细小的兵甲，抗拒强大的军队；凭藉垣环水抱，形势险要来护卫城池，希望保全小小的性命。
English: You will also know that you are resisting a powerful army with weak soldiers and small armor; with the help of a wall surrounded by water, the situation is about to come to guard the castle, hoping to preserve a small life.

古文：战非上计，无待卜疑；守乃下策，或未相许。
现代文：战斗并不是最好的计策，造用不着卜间；据守更是低下的策略，因为我们不答应。
English: Fighting is not the best strategy, it's useless; defending is a bad strategy, because we don't agree.

古文：已勒诸军，分道并进，相望非远，凭轼有期。
现代文：我已下令各军，分道并进，相见的时间并不遥远，驾车出征指日可待。
English: I have ordered the armies to go their separate ways. The time to meet is not far off, and the departure by car is just around the corner.

古文：兵交命使，古今通典，不俟终日，所望知几也。
现代文：在交战前派出使者，这是从古至今通行的典制，不必等到落日，希望你能预知事情的几微。
English: Sending an emissary before a battle is a custom that has been in use since ancient times. You don't have to wait until the sun goes down. I hope you can anticipate a few things.

古文：宪至信都，湝阵于城南，宪登张耳冢以望之。
现代文：宇文宪抵达信都，高?皆在城南列阵，宇文宪登上张耳的坟丘观望。
English: When Uwen Xian arrived in Xindu, the high-ranking officials were all lined up in the south of the city, and Uwen Xian climbed onto Zhang Er's grave mound to watch.

古文：俄而湝所署领军尉相愿伪出略阵，遂以众降。
现代文：不久高清所任命的领军尉相愿假装外出视察阵地，于是率众投降。
English: Not long after, the leading lieutenant appointed by the HDC agreed to pretend to go out and inspect the position, so he led the crowd to surrender.

古文：相愿，湝心腹也，众甚骇惧。
现代文：尉相愿，是高消的心腹，众人十分震恐。
English: It was Gao Xie's heart's desire, and everyone was very shocked.

古文：湝大怒，杀其妻子。
现代文：高浩大怒，杀死了尉相愿的妻子儿女。
English: Gao Hao flew into a rage and killed his wife and children.

古文：明日复战，遂破之，俘斩三万人，擒湝及孝珩等。
现代文：第二天再战，宇文宪大败查军，俘虏斩杀三万人，擒获了高谐和高孝蛮等人。
English: On the second day of the battle, Uwen Hsien defeated the army, killed 30,000 captives, and captured Gao Jing and Gao Xiaoban.

古文：宪谓湝曰： 任城王何苦至此？ 湝曰： 下官神武帝子，兄弟十五人，幸而独存。
现代文：圭塞塞对直揩说： 任越王何苦落到这种地步? 高潸说： 下官是神武帝的儿子，兄弟十五人，侥幸地衹剩下我还在人世。
English: Gui Xesei said to Naosuke, "How did Ren Yue Wang fall to this level?" Gaosuke said, "The lower-ranking official is the son of Emperor Jinmu, with fifteen brothers, and I am lucky to still be alive."

古文：逢宗社颠覆，今日得死，无愧坟陵。 宪壮之，命归其妻子，厚加资给。
现代文：偏偏遇到国家倾覆，今天死去，不会愧对祖先的坟陵。 宇文宪敬佩他的壮志，下令归还他的妻子儿女，给予丰厚的资用。
English: On the other hand, if the country is overthrown and he dies today, he will not be ashamed of the graves of his ancestors.Uwen Hsien admired his ambition, ordered the return of his wife and children, and gave him a generous allowance.

古文：又问孝珩。
现代文：宇文宪又问高孝珩。
English: Yu Wenxian asked Gao Xiaojun again.

古文：孝珩布陈国难，辞泪俱下，俯仰有节，宪亦为之改容。
现代文：高孝珩陈述国难，边说边流泪，一举一动都有节度，宇文宪也因此感动。
English: Gao Xiaojuan's speech on the national tragedy, he shed tears as he spoke, every move was measured, and Yu Wenxian was also moved by this.

古文：宪素善谋，多算略，尤长于抚御，达于任使，摧锋陷阵，为士卒先，群下感悦，咸为之用。
现代文：宇文宪一向善谋，富于算略，尤其擅长抚慰统御部众，善于用人，冲锋陷阵，身先士卒，部下对他心悦诚服，都愿为他效力。
English: Yu Wenxian has always been a good strategist, rich in strategies, especially good at soothing the general staff, good at employing people, storming into battle, leading the way, and his subordinates are pleased with him and are willing to serve him.

古文：齐人夙闻威声，无不惮其勇略。
现代文：齐军早就听说他的威名，没有人不畏惧他的勇猛和才略。
English: The Qi army had long heard of his prestige, and no one was unafraid of his bravery and talent.

古文：及并州之捷，长驱敌境，刍牧不扰，军无私焉。
现代文：到并州大捷时，宇文宪的军队长驱直入齐国境内，连樵夫牧童都不惊扰，军队从不私自夺取百姓的财物。
English: At the time of the great victory of the annexation of the state, the commander of the army of Uwen Xian drove straight into the territory of Qi, even the woodcutter and the herd boy were not alarmed, and the army never seized the property of the people.

古文：先是，稽胡刘没铎自称皇帝，又诏宪督赵王招等讨平之。
现代文：此前，稽胡人刘没铎自称皇帝，高祖又命字文宪督率趟王宇文招等人讨伐平定了他。
English: Previously, Liu Mianzhu, who was in charge of collecting taxes, claimed to be the emperor, and Gao Zu also ordered Wang Yuwenzhao and others to fight and subdue him.

古文：语在稽胡传。
现代文：这件事叙述在《稽胡传》中。
English: This incident is recounted in "Jihu Chuan."

古文：宪自以威名日重，潜思屏退。
现代文：宇文宪自认为自己的威望名声一天天加大，暗中打算隐退。
English: He knew that his prestige and reputation were growing, and he secretly wanted to beat a hasty retreat.

古文：及高祖欲亲征北蕃，乃辞以疾。
现代文：到高祖想要亲自征讨北方异族时，就藉口生病推辞。
English: When Gaozu wanted to personally recruit the northern alien race, he refused on the pretext of illness.

古文：高祖变色曰： 汝若惮行，谁为吾使？ 宪惧曰： 臣陪奉銮舆，诚为本愿，但身婴疹疾，不堪领兵。 
现代文：高祖不高兴地说： 你如果害怕去，有谁为我出征? 宇文宪恐惧地说： 我奉陪皇上出征，实在是我本来的心愿，但是我身患疾病，不能胜任带兵作战。 高祖答应了他。
English: Gaozu said with displeasure, "If you are afraid to go, who will go to war for me?"Uwen Xian said with fear, "It is my original wish that I accompany the emperor to war, but I am ill and not competent to lead soldiers into battle."Gaozu agreed.

古文：帝许之。寻而高祖崩，宣帝嗣位，以宪属尊望重，深忌惮之。
现代文：不久高祖去世，宣帝继位，宣帝因为宇文宪辈分高声望重，心中十分忌畏他。
English: Gaozu died soon after, and Emperor Xuan succeeded to the throne. Emperor Xuan was held in high esteem by the Uwen family, and they were very afraid of him.

古文：时高祖未葬，诸王在内治服。司卫长孙览总兵辅政，而诸王有异志，奏令开府于智察其动静。
现代文：当时高祖还没有下葬，各位亲王都在宫中守丧，司卫长孙览统领军事辅佐朝政，亲王们怀有异心，长孙览上奏让开府于智观察亲王们的动静。
English: At that time, Gao Zu had not yet been buried, and all the princes were in the palace to observe the funeral. Sifu (Chief of the Imperial Guards) Sun Zhan was in charge of the military aide to the government, and the princes were of a different mind, so Sun Zhan asked Kaifu Yuchi to observe the movements of the princes.

古文：及高祖山陵还，诸王归第。
现代文：到高祖下葬后，亲王们各自回到家中。
English: After attending Gao Zu's funeral, the princes went home separately.

古文：帝又命智就宅候宪，因是告宪有谋。
现代文：宣帝又命于智到宇文宪家中问候，利用这次会面指控宇文宪准备造反。
English: Emperor Xuan also ordered Yu Zhi to go to Uwen Xian's home to greet him, using this meeting to accuse Uwen Xian of preparing to rebel.

古文：帝乃遣小冢宰宇文孝伯谓宪曰： 三公之位，宜属亲贤，今欲以叔为太师，九叔为太傅，十一叔为太保，叔以为何如？ 宪曰： 臣才轻位重，满盈是惧。
现代文：宣帝就派小冢宰宇文孝伯对宇文宪说： 三公的职位，应当交给亲属中的贤人，我想任命叔叔为太师，九叔为太傅，十一叔为太保，叔叔认为怎样? 宇文宪说： 我才能浅薄地位崇高，我对过于崇高的地位感到恐惧。
English: Emperor Xuan then sent a minor vassal, Uwen Xiao Bo, to say to Uwen Xian: The position of the three princes should be given to a wise man among the relatives. I want to appoint my uncle as the Grand Master, my ninth uncle as the Grand Master, and my eleventh uncle as the Grand Protector. What does my uncle think? Uwen Xian said: My talent is shallow and my status is lofty. I am afraid of my status being too lofty.

古文：三师之任，非所敢当。
现代文：三师的职位，我不敢担任。
English: I wouldn't dare to hold a position in the Third Division.

古文：且太祖勋臣，宜膺此举。
现代文：而且太祖的功臣，适合担当此任。
English: Moreover, he is a meritorious vassal of the great-grandfather, so he is suitable for this post.

古文：若专用臣兄弟，恐乖物议。 孝伯反命，寻而复来曰： 诏王晚共诸王俱至殿门。 宪独被引进，帝先伏壮士于别室，至即执之。
现代文：如果衹是任用我们兄弟，恐怕会招致众人的议论。 宇文孝伯回去报告宣帝，不久又前来说： 命你晚上和其他亲王一起进宫。 宇文宪被单独引进宫中，宣帝预先在其他房间埋伏勇士，宇文宪到后立即被捕。
English: If Emperor Gong were to appoint our brothers, I'm afraid it would cause a lot of discussion.Uwen Xiao Bo went back to report to Emperor Xuan, and soon came forward to say: I order you to enter the palace with the other princes in the evening.Uwen Xian was brought into the palace alone, Emperor Xuan ambushed the warriors in other rooms in advance, and Uwen Xian was arrested immediately upon arrival.

古文：宪辞色不挠，固自陈说。
现代文：宇文宪面不改色，一再申辩。
English: Yu Wenqin does not change his face, speaks unyieldingly, and insists on speaking.

古文：帝使于智对宪。
现代文：宣帝命于智面对宇文宪。
English: Emperor Xuan ordered Yu Zhizhi to confront Yu Wenxian.

古文：宪目光如炬，与智相质。
现代文：宇文宪目光如同火炬，与于智对质。
English: Uwen Xian's gaze is like a torch, confronting Yu Zhi.

古文：或谓宪曰： 以王今日事势，何用多言？ 宪曰： 我位重属尊，一旦至此，死生有命，宁复图存。
现代文：有人对宇文宪说： 以大王今天的情势来看，多说有什么用! 宇文宪说： 我位高辈尊，一旦到这种地步，生死都是命运的安排，岂是为了存活。
English: Someone said to Uwen Hsien, "Given the situation of the great king today, what is the use of saying more?" Uwen Hsien said, "My senior, once you get to this stage, life and death are all arranged by fate. Is it for the sake of survival?

古文：但以老母在堂，恐留兹恨耳。 因掷笏于地。
现代文：祇因为老母亲还在，恐怕留下遗憾而已。 说完将笏板丢到地上。
English: Just because my old mother is still here, I'm afraid I'll only have regrets.

古文：乃缢之。
现代文：于是被绞死。
English: He was then hanged.

古文：时年三十五。以于智为柱国，封齐国公。
现代文：当时三十五岁宣帝任命于智为柱国，封齐国公。
English: At that time, the thirty-five-year-old Emperor Xuan designated Yuchi as a pillar state and named him the Prince of Qi.

古文：又杀上大将军安邑公王兴、上开府独孤熊、开府豆卢绍等，皆以昵于宪也。
现代文：宣帝又杀死上大将军安邑公王兴、卜开府独孤熊、开府豆卢绍等人，都是因为他们亲近宇文宪的缘故。
English: Emperor Xuan also gave orders to kill the general An'yip Gongwangxing, Shang Kaifu Duolong Xiong, Kaifu Doushiao and others, because these people were close to Uwen Xian.

古文：帝既诛宪，无以为辞，故托兴等与宪结谋，遂加其戮。
现代文：宣帝既已诛杀了宇文宪，而没有什么藉口，所以宣称王兴等人和字文宪共同策划谋逆，于是处死他们。
English: Since Emperor Xuanzong had already killed Yuwen Xian, and there was no excuse, he declared that Wang Xing and others had plotted a rebellion with him, and then executed them.

古文：时人知其冤酷，咸云伴宪死也。
现代文：当时的人知道他们受到冤屈，都说他们是陪伴宇文宪而死的。
English: People all know that they were extremely wrong. They all say that Wang Xing and the others died with Yu Wenxian.

古文：宪所生母达步干氏，茹茹人也。
现代文：宇文宪的生母达步干氏，是茹茹族人。
English: Uwen Xian's birth mother, Ms. Dabugang, was a Ru Ru ethnic.

古文：建德三年，册为齐国太妃。
现代文：建德三年，被册封为齐国太妃。
English: Jiande three years, was canonized as the Queen of Qi.

古文：宪有至性，事母以孝闻。
现代文：宇文宪有纯厚的性情，事奉母亲以孝顺闻名。
English: Uwen Xian has a generous character and is known for his filial piety while serving his mother.

古文：太妃旧患风热，屡经发动，宪衣不解带，扶侍左右。
现代文：太妃早年患有风热病，多次发作，宇文宪衣不解带，在她身边侍奉。
English: In her early years, Tohei suffered from rheumatic fever and had several attacks. Unable to take off her gown, Uwen served at her side.

古文：宪或东西从役，每心惊，其母必有疾，乃驰使参问，果如所虑。
现代文：宇文宪有时在外地办事，每当心中惊慌的时候，他的母亲必定生病，就急忙派使者问候，果真像他担心的那样。
English: Yu Wenxian sometimes works in other places. Whenever his heart panics, his mother must be ill, so he hurriedly sends a messenger to say hello. It really is as he feared.

古文：宪六子，贵、质、賨、贡、干禧、干洽。
现代文：宇文宪有六个儿子，他们是字文贵、字文质、宇文卖、宇文贡、宇文干禧、宇文干洽。
English: Uwen Xian had six sons, namely, Zhiwen Gui, Zhiwen Quan, Uwen Xie, Uwen Gong, Uwen Can Xi, and Uwen Can Cha.

古文：贵字干福，少聪敏，涉猎经史，尤便骑射。
现代文：宇文贵字干福，年少时聪慧敏捷，广泛阅读了经史书籍，尤其擅长骑马射箭。
English: Uwen Gui, also known as Ganfu, was intelligent and quick when he was young. He read a wide range of history books and was particularly good at riding and archery.

古文：始读孝经，便谓人曰： 读此一经，足为立身之本。 天和四年，始十岁，封安定郡公，邑一千五百户。
现代文：他开始读《孝经》，就对人说： 读了这一种经书，就完全可以作为立身的根本。 天和四年，衹有十岁，就被封为安定郡公，食邑一千五百户。
English: He began to read the "Filial Piety Sutra" and said to people, "When you read this kind of scripture, you can completely use it as the foundation for your life.At the age of four and four years old, and when he was ten years old, he was appointed as the governor of Anding County, which had 1,500 households.

古文：太祖之初为丞相也，始封此郡，未尝假人，至是封贵焉。
现代文：太祖刚担任丞相时，开始封立这个郡，但从未赐给别人，到这时才封给宇文贵。
English: When Taizu was newly appointed as chancellor, he began to seal this county, but it was never given to anyone else. It was only then that it was sealed to Umengui.

古文：年十一，从宪猎于盐州，一围之中，手射野马及鹿十有五头。建德二年，册拜齐国世子。
现代文：十一岁时，他跟随宇文宪在盐州狩猎，在一次围猎中，他亲手射死了十五头野马和鹿。建德二年，册拜为齐国世子。
English: When he was eleven years old, he went hunting with Yuwen Xian in Yanzhou. During a hunt, he shot fifteen wild horses and deer with his own hands. In the second year of Jiande, he was hailed as the heir of Qi.

古文：四年，授车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：建德四年，任车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: Jiande four years, served as the general of chariot and cavalry, and the third division of ceremony.

古文：寻出为豳州刺史。
现代文：不久出任豳州刺史。
English: He soon became the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：贵虽出自深宫，而留心庶政。
现代文：室塞童虽然在深宫长大，但注意政事。
English: Although Muroseto grew up in Fukamiya, he paid attention to politics.

古文：性聪敏，过目辄记。
现代文：他天性聪慧灵敏，看过的东西他很快就能记住。
English: He is naturally bright and quick-witted, and he quickly remembers what he has seen.

古文：尝道逢二人，谓其左右曰： 此人是县党，何因辄行？ 左右不识，贵便说其姓名，莫不嗟伏。
现代文：曾经有一次在路上遇到两个人，他对身边的人说： 他们是老乡，为什么走得这样匆忙? 身边的人不认识他们，宇文贵就说出了他们的姓名，在场的人没有不叹服的。
English: Once upon a time, he met two people on the road, and he said to the people around him: They are fellow villagers, why are they walking in such a hurry? The people around him did not know them, and Yu Wengui said their names. The people present were not unconvinced.

古文：白兽烽经为商人所烧，烽帅纳货，不言其罪。他日，此帅随例来参，贵乃问云： 商人烧烽，何因私放？ 烽帅愕然，遂即首服。
现代文：白兽烽被商人烧毁，烽帅接受了贿赂，没有对他们治罪有一天，这个烽帅按例前来参见，宇文贵就问他说： 商人烧掉了烽火台，你为什么私自将他们释放? 烽帅很惊讶，于是当即认罪。
English: The white beasts were burned by the merchants, and the captain accepted the bribe and did not punish them. One day, the captain came to see him as usual, and Wu Wengui asked him: The merchants burned the bonfire, why did you release them? The captain was surprised and immediately confessed.

古文：其明察如此。
现代文：他就是这样明察。
English: That's how he sees it.

古文：五年四月卒，年十七。
现代文：建德五年四月去世，当时他十七岁。
English: Jian De died in April of the fifth year, when he was seventeen years old.

古文：高祖甚痛惜之。
现代文：高祖十分痛惜。
English: Gaozu was very sorry.

古文：质字干佑，初封安城公。
现代文：字文质字干佑，开始时被封为安城公。
English: He was given the title of Ancheng Gong at the beginning.

古文：后以宪勋，进封河间郡王。
现代文：后来因为宇文宪的功勋，进封为河间郡王。
English: Later, because of the merits of Uwenshin, he was crowned the king of Kawama County.

古文：賨字干礼，大将军、中垻公。
现代文：宇文卖字整体，任大将军、中垠公。
English: Uwen sold the characters as a whole, and was appointed as a general and chugoku shogun.

古文：贡出后莒庄公。干禧，安城公。
现代文：主塞重过继为苴蓝公后嗣。宇文干禧，任室越公。
English: Lord Sejong succeeds as the heir of Lord Indigo. Uwen Ganjie succeeds as the wife of Lord Yue.

古文：干洽，龙涸公。
现代文：宇文干洽，任龃公。
English: Yuwen Ganchao, Ren Yingguo.

古文：并与宪俱被诛。
现代文：他们和圭塞童一起都被诛杀。
English: They were all killed together with Guise Tong.

古文：史臣曰：自两汉逮乎魏、晋，其帝弟帝子众矣，唯楚元、河间、东平、陈思之徒以文儒播美，任城、琅邪以武功驰誉。
现代文：史臣曰：从两汉到魏、晋，皇弟皇子很多，衹有楚元王刘交、河间王刘德、柬平王刘苍、陈思王曹植等人以文藻儒雅留传美名，任城王曹彰、琅邪王司马睿以战功名声远扬。
English: The historian said: From the Han Dynasty to the Wei and Jin Dynasties, there were many princes who were the younger brothers of emperors. For example, Chu Yuan Wang Liu Jia, Kawama Wang Liu De, Kamping King Liu Cang, Chen Si Wang Cao Zhi and others were famous for their literary style, while Rencheng Wang Cao Zhang and Shijiang Wang Sima Rui were famous for their military exploits.

古文：何则？
现代文：这是为什么呢?
English: Why is that?

古文：体自尊极，长于宫闱，佚乐侈其心，骄贵荡其志，故使奇才高行，终鲜于天下之士焉。
现代文：因为他们身处极为尊贵的地位，生长在深宫之中，安逸享乐放纵了他们的心性，骄侈尊贵荡佚了他们的意志，所以使得在他们中有奇特才能和高尚操行的人，最终少于天下的仁人志士。
English: Because they are in an extremely honorable position, growing up in the depths of the palace, the ease and pleasure have indulged their temperament, the pride and dignity have rippled their will, so that among them there are people with strange talents and noble behavior, ultimately less than the world's benevolent aspirants.

古文：齐王奇姿杰出，独牢笼于前载。
现代文：齐王宇文宪奇特的才能不同凡俗。
English: Qi Wang Yuwenxian's extraordinary talent is different from the ordinary.

古文：以介弟之地，居上将之重，智勇冠世，攻战如神，敌国系以存亡，鼎命由其轻重。
现代文：受到前世君王的特殊笼络。他以皇弟的身份，身居上将的高位，智勇盖世，攻战如神，敌国的存亡维系在他身上，国家的命运由他决定。
English: He was specially courted by the monarchs of the previous generation. As the younger brother of the emperor, he held the high rank of general. He was the epitome of wisdom and courage, and fought battles like a god. The survival of the enemy country depended on him, and the fate of the country was decided by him.

古文：比之异姓，则方、召、韩、白，何以加兹。
现代文：同异姓相比，则方叔、召虎、韩信、白起等人，又怎么能超过他。
English: Compared with those with different surnames, how can Fang Xiu, Zhaohu, Han Xin, Bai Qi and others surpass him?

古文：挟震主之威，属道消之日，斯人而婴斯戮，君子是以知周祚之不永也。
现代文：拥有使君主畏忌的威势，处在道德沦丧的时期，这样的人却遭受到如此的杀戮，君子因此知道周政权不会长久。
English: The fact that such a person, who had the power to intimidate a monarch and was in a period of moral decline, was killed in such a way, made the gentleman know that Zhou's regime would not last long.

古文：昔张耳、陈余宾客冢役，所居皆取卿相。
现代文：从前张耳、陈余出身宾客奴仆，所到之处都拜他们为卿相。
English: Formerly, Zhang Er and Chen Yu were guest servants. People everywhere worshipped them as high-ranking officials.

古文：而齐之文武僚吏，其后亦多至台牧。
现代文：齐国的文武官吏，后来也大多官至三公宰相。
English: He was a civil and military official of the State of Qi, and later he rose through the ranks of government officials to become the third prime minister.

古文：异世同符，可谓贤矣。
现代文：不同时代事情相合，可以称得上是贤能了。
English: Different contemporaneous things coincide, it can be said to be virtuous.

