古文：建信君贵于赵。
现代文：建信君在赵国非常显贵。
English: Jianxin was very prominent in Zhao.

古文：公子魏牟过赵，赵王迎之，顾反至坐，前有尺帛，且令工以为冠。
现代文：魏国公子牟经过赵国，赵孝成王迎接他，回来以后，坐到自己位置上，面前摆着一小块丝织物，准备让工匠用它做帽子。
English: Wei Guozhimou passed through Zhao Guo and was greeted by Zhao Xiaocheng Wang. When he returned, he sat down in his place, with a small piece of silk fabric in front of him, ready for the craftsman to make a hat with it.

古文：工见客来也，因辟。
现代文：工匠看见客人到来，因此回避了。
English: The craftsman saw the guests arriving, so he ducked.

古文：赵王曰： 公子乃驱后车，幸以临寡人，愿闻所以为天下。 
现代文：赵孝成王说： 公子竟然驱赶侍从者的车子，有幸光临寡人的国家，希望能够听到治理天下的道理。 
English: Zhao Xiaocheng Wang said: The prince actually drove the attendant's car, and was fortunate to visit a country with few people, hoping to hear the reason for governing the world.

古文：魏牟曰： 王能重王之国若此尺帛，则王之国大治矣。 
现代文：魏国公子牟说， 君王重视国家如果能像重视这块小小的丝织物一样，那么君王的国家就会大治了。 
English: Wei Guozhimou said that if the king valued the country as much as he valued this small piece of silk fabric, then the king's country would be great.

古文：赵王不说，形于颜色，曰： 先王不知寡人不肖，使奉社稷，岂敢轻国若此？ 
现代文：赵孝成王很不高兴，不满的情绪已经表现在了脸上，说： 先王不知道寡人不成器，让我继承国家基业，怎么敢像您说的这样轻视国家！ 
English: Zhao Xiaocheng Wang was very unhappy, and his dissatisfaction was already showing on his face. He said, "The previous king didn't know that no one is perfect, and let me inherit the national inheritance. How dare you despise the country like you said!

古文：魏牟曰： 王无怒，请为王说之。 
现代文：魏国公子牟说： 大王不要动怒，请让我给您解释。 
English: Wei Guozhimou said: Great King, don't get angry, please let me explain to you.

古文：曰： 王有此尺帛，何不令前郎中以为冠？ 
现代文：又接着说： 君王有这么一块小小丝织物，为什么不让伺侯在面前的郎中将它做成帽子？ 
English: He went on to say: If the king has such a small piece of silk fabric, why not have his attendant make it into a hat?

古文：王曰： 郎中不知为冠。 
现代文：赵孝戚王说： 郎中不知道怎么做帽子。 
English: Zhao Xiaoqi Wang said, "My son-in-law doesn't know how to make a hat.

古文：魏牟曰： 为冠而败之，奚亏于王之国？
现代文：魏国公子牟说： 做帽子做坏了，对于君王的国家会有什么损害？
English: Wei Guozhimou said: If you make a bad hat, what harm will it do to the king's country?

古文：而王必待工而后乃使之。
现代文：可是君王必定等工匠来了以后才让他们做。
English: But the king must wait for the craftsmen to arrive before letting them do it.

古文：今为天下之工，或非也，社稷为虚戾，先王不血食，而王不以予工，乃与幼艾。
现代文：如今治理天下的工匠，也许不是这样，国家成为国空人绝的废墟，先王得不到祭祀，然而君王不把它交给工匠，竟然交给年轻漂亮的人。
English: Today, craftsmen rule the world, but perhaps this is not the case. The country has become the ruin of the Ku Klux Klan. The first king did not get a sacrifice, but the king did not give it to the craftsmen, but to the young and beautiful.

古文：且王之先帝，驾犀首而骖马服，以与秦角逐。
现代文：再说先帝，用犀首驾御马车，让马服君做车右，而与秦国争相取胜。
English: Furthermore, the former emperor, with the head of a rhinoceros driving a carriage, let Ma Fu Jun do the right of the car, and compete with Qin to win.

古文：秦当时适其锋。
现代文：秦国当时也要躲避其的锋芒。
English: At that time, Qin also had to evade its sharp edge.

古文：今王憧憧，乃辇建信以与强秦角逐，臣恐秦折王之椅也。 
现代文：现在大王犹豫不决，竟然让建信君坐着辇车与强大的秦国争夺胜负，臣下担心秦国折断大王车上的依靠。 
English: Now the great king hesitates to let Jianxin ride in the chariot to compete for victory with the powerful Qin state. His vassals are worried that Qin will break the great king's reliance on the chariot.

