古文：臧质、鲁爽、沈攸之
现代文：臧质，字含文，东莞郡莒县人。
English: He is fluent in English and Chinese, and a native of Dongguan County.

古文：臧质，字含文，东莞莒人。父熹，字义和，武敬皇后弟也。
现代文：他父亲臧熹字义和，是武敬皇后的弟弟。
English: His father, Shanzi Yoshikazu, was the younger brother of Empress Wu.

古文：与兄焘并好经籍。
现代文：臧熹和他哥哥臧焘都喜欢读经书。
English: Zou and his brother Zou both like to read the Bible.

古文：隆安初，兵革屡起，熹乃习骑射，志在立功。
现代文：晋朝隆安初年，战争不断，臧熹于是学习骑马射箭的技术，希望建立一番功业。
English: In the first year of the Longan reign of the Jin Dynasty, the war continued, so he learned the technique of riding and archery, hoping to build a career.

古文：尝至溧阳，溧阳令阮崇与熹共猎，值虎突围，猎徒并奔散，熹直前射之，应弦而倒。
现代文：一次到溧阳县，县令阮崇和臧熹一起去打猎，恰遇老虎冲出猎圈，其他人都纷纷逃跑，臧熹却奔上去射了一箭，箭一射出老虎便倒地不动了。
English: Once in Puyang County, the county magistrate Ruan Chong went hunting with a baboon. Just as the tiger rushed out of the hunting ring and everyone else fled, the baboon ran up and shot an arrow. As soon as the arrow shot the tiger, it fell to the ground and did not move.

古文：高祖入京城，熹族子穆斩桓修。
现代文：宋高祖刘裕打进京口城，臧熹的族弟臧穆杀掉桓修。
English: Liu Yu, the ancestor of Song Gao, entered Jingkou City, and Yan Mu, the younger brother of Yan, killed Huan Xiu.

古文：进至京邑，桓玄奔走，高祖使熹入宫收图书器物，封闭府库。
现代文：高祖进军建康，桓玄仓惶出逃，刘裕指派臧熹到皇宫接受图书和各种器物，看管皇宫的财产。
English: Gao Zu marched into Jiankang, Huan Xuan panicked and fled, and Liu Yu assigned him to go to the imperial palace to receive books and various utensils and take care of the property of the imperial palace.

古文：有金饰乐器，高祖问熹： 卿得无欲此乎？ 
现代文：其中有一件黄金装璜的乐器，刘裕向臧熹说： 你也许想得到这东西吧？ 
English: Among them was a gold-plated musical instrument. Liu Yu said to Zou: "Perhaps you want to get this thing?

古文：熹正色曰： 皇上幽逼，播越非所。将军首建大义，劬劳王家。
现代文：臧熹严肃地说： 皇上被软禁和逼迫，流落于四方，将军最先勤王，为皇家建立大功。
English: Zou said solemnly: The emperor was under house arrest and persecution, and was exiled to the four directions. The general was the first to serve the king, and established great achievements for the royal family.

古文：虽复不肖，无情于乐。 
现代文：我虽然不很贤明，但并不在意于听音乐。 
English: I'm not very bright, but I don't mind listening to music.

古文：高祖笑曰： 聊以戏卿尔。 
现代文：刘裕连忙笑着说： 这只是和你开玩笑罢了。 
English: Liu Yulian quickly smiled and said: This is just a joke with you.

古文：行参高祖镇军事，员外散骑侍郎，重参镇军军事，领东海太守。以建义功封始兴县五等侯。又参高祖车骑、中军军事。
现代文：之后当刘裕的行镇军事职务，又当员外散骑常侍。之后又做刘裕镇军军事职务，兼职东海太守，因为和刘裕一起起义，封爵始兴县五等侯，又任刘裕的车骑将军，中军军事职务。
English: After that, he served as Liu Yu's township military post, and also as a non-commissioned officer riding horseback. After that, he served as Liu Yu's township military post, part-time governor of the East China Sea, because he and Liu Yu revolted together, he was knighted as the fifth-ranked marquis of Shixing County, and also served as Liu Yu's carriage and cavalry general, and served in the Chinese military.

古文：高祖将征广固，议者多不同。
现代文：刘裕将要攻打南燕慕容超，当时谋划的人很多都反对。
English: Liu Yu was going to attack Nanyan Murong Chao, but many people who were involved in the planning objected.

古文：熹从容言曰： 公若凌威北境，拯其涂炭，宁一六合，未为无期。 
现代文：臧熹却从容不迫地说： 主公如果征伐南燕，拯救人民于水深火热之中，统一天下，并不是遥遥无期的事。 
English: However, Yao calmly said: "If the Lord conquers Nanyan, saves the people in the midst of great difficulties, and unifies the country, it is not a matter of a distant future.

古文：高祖曰： 卿言是也。 
现代文：刘裕回答说： 你说得对。 
English: Liu Yu replied: You are right.

古文：及行，熹求从，不许，以为建威将军、临海太守。
现代文：等到北伐时，臧熹要求随从刘裕，没有被允许，而让他当了建威将军、临海太守。
English: When it came to the Northern Expedition, Zhai asked Liu Yu to accompany him. However, he was not allowed to do so, and he became General Jian Wei and the governor of Linhai.

古文：郡经兵寇，百不存一，熹绥缉纲纪，招聚流散，归之者千余家。
现代文：临海郡多次经受战火，人民死亡众多，臧熹用心安抚和整顿，招揽流民，奔赴临海的人有上千家。
English: Linhai County has suffered from war many times, and many people have died. To appease and rectify the situation, the county has invited displaced people, and there are thousands of people who have rushed to Linhai.

古文：孙季高海道袭广州，路由临海，熹资给发遣，得以无乏。
现代文：孙季高从海上袭击广州，中间经过临海，臧熹帮助他运送物质，使孙季高后勤供应没有顾虑。
English: Sun Jigao attacked Guangzhou from the sea, passing through the sea in the middle, and helped him transport materials, so that Sun Jigao had no concerns about logistics supply.

古文：征拜散骑常侍，母忧去职。
现代文：他又被推举当散骑常侍官职，因母亲去世离职，此后又随同刘裕讨伐刘毅。
English: He was also promoted to the position of strolling attendant, left office due to his mother's death, and then followed Liu Yu to fight against Liu Yi.

古文：顷之，讨刘毅，起为宁朔将军，从征。
现代文：任职宁朔将军，刘毅平定后，刘裕派遣朱龄石统率大军攻讨四川的谯纵。
English: After Liu Yi was appointed as the general of Ningshuo, Liu Yu dispatched Zhu Lingshi to lead a large army to fight against the Sichuan Uprising.

古文：事平，高祖遣硃龄石统大众伐蜀，命熹奇兵出中水，以本号领建平、巴东二郡太守。蜀主谯纵遣大将谯抚之万余人屯牛脾，又遣谯小苟重兵塞打鼻。熹至牛脾，抚之战败退走，追斩之。
现代文：命令臧熹率领奇兵从中水出击，以宁朔将军并建平巴东二郡太守的职务从军。蜀王谯纵派大将谯抚之率领一万多人驻守牛脾城，又派谯小苟防卫打鼻城，臧熹攻到牛脾城，谯抚之大败而逃。臧熹追击并杀掉了他。
English: He ordered Zou to lead the "miracle soldiers" to attack from Zhongshui, and he joined the army as the general of Ningshuo and the governor of the two counties of Jianping and Badong. Shu Wang Zhigong sent more than ten thousand people to garrison the Bull's Spleen City led by the general Zougu, and also sent Zou Xiaogu to defend the Nose City, Zougu attacked the Bull's Spleen City, and Zougu was defeated and fled. Zou chased and killed him.

古文：小苟闻抚之死，即便奔散。
现代文：谯小苟听说谯抚之死了，马上逃跑。
English: When Gong Xiaoguo heard that Gong Fuzhi was dead, he immediately ran away.

古文：成都既平，熹遇疾。
现代文：成都被攻下。臧熹突发疾病。
English: All of Chengdu was captured, and there was an outbreak of disease.

古文：义熙九年，卒于蜀郡牛脾县，时年三十九。追赠光禄勋。
现代文：晋安帝义熙九年死于蜀郡牛脾县。当时仅三十九岁，死后被追认为光禄勋。
English: In the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Jinnan, Emperor Yixi died in Niuye County, Shu County. At that time, he was only 39 years old. After his death, he was posthumously awarded the Guanglu Medal.

古文：质少好鹰犬，善蒱博意钱之戏。长六尺七寸，出面露口，秃顶拳发。
现代文：臧质少年时代喜欢追鹰走狗，特别会赌博，身长六尺七寸，额部前倾，牙齿外露，头顶没有毛发，四周有一圈卷发。
English: When he was a young boy, he liked to chase eagle's running dogs, and was particularly fond of gambling. He was six feet seven inches tall, with a forward-slanting forehead, exposed teeth, no hair on the top of his head, and a ring of curly hair around him.

古文：年未二十，高祖以为世子中军行参军。永初元年，为员外散骑侍郎，从班例也。
现代文：当他不满二十岁时，刘裕让他当世子中军参军，永初元年臧质当员外散骑侍郎，是因为跟刘义隆曾在一起的缘故。
English: When he was less than twenty years old, Liu Yu asked him to join the army as the son of the army. In the early 1900s, he was appointed as a non-commissioned officer, because he had been together with Liu Yilong.

古文：母忧去职。
现代文：母亲去世时他离职。
English: Resigned after his mother's death.

古文：服阕，为江夏王义恭抚军，以轻薄无检，为太祖所知，徙为给事中。
现代文：服孝三年后，又当江夏王刘义恭的抚军参军。因为轻佻放纵，被文帝知道，降为给事中。
English: After three years of filial piety, he also joined the army as the tutor of Liu Yigong, the king of Jiangxia. Because of his frivolous indulgence, he was known by Emperor Wen and was reduced to the middle of things.

古文：会稽宣长公主每为之言，乃出为建平太守，甚得蛮楚心。
现代文：他表姐会稽宣长公主每每在文帝前为臧质说话，于是又让他外出当建平太守。很能得蛮楚地区百姓的拥护。
English: His cousin would tell him that the eldest princess would always speak up for him in front of Emperor Wen, so he let her go out to be Jianping's regent. He was able to win the support of the people in the Banchu region.

古文：南蛮校尉刘湛还朝，称为良守。迁宁远将军、历阳太守。
现代文：南蛮校尉刘湛回到朝廷，称他是一个好太守，因此他迁官宁远将军，历阳太守。
English: Captain Liu Zhan returned to the imperial court and said that he was a good governor, so he transferred his post to General Ningyuan and made Liyang governor.

古文：仍迁竟陵、江夏内史，复为建武将军、巴东、建平二郡太守，吏民便之。
现代文：他接着升竟陵江夏太守，再当建武将军，巴东、建平两郡太守。官吏和百姓都很爱戴他。
English: He then rose to the position of the governor of Xia County of Lingjiang Province, and then became the general of Jianwu and the governor of Badong County and Jianping County. He was loved by both officials and common people.

古文：质年始出三十，屡居名郡，涉猎史籍，尺牍便敏，既有气干，好言兵权。
现代文：臧质刚刚三十岁，多次当名郡太守，又博览史书，处理文书案件快捷而简便，既有气魄又喜欢谈论打仗的事。
English: He was just thirty years old. He had been a famous county governor many times. He was also well-versed in history books. He handled paperwork cases quickly and easily. He was spirited and liked to talk about the war.

古文：太祖谓可大任，欲以为益州事，未行，征为使持节、都督徐兗二州诸军事、宁远将军、徐兗二州刺史。在镇奢费，爵命无章，为有司所纠，遇赦。
现代文：文帝认为他可以办大事，想让他当益州刺史。还未实行，又调他为使持节，都督徐兖二州诸军事，宁远将军，徐兖二州刺史，在任期内奢侈过分，赏罚无常，被有关官吏弹劾，文帝宽容了他。
English: Emperor Wen thought that he could do great things and wanted him to be the prefect of Yizhou. Before the implementation, he was transferred to be the prefect of the military of the two prefectures, Ningyuan General, and Xu Xi, the prefect of the two prefectures. During his term of office, he was too extravagant, his rewards and punishments were fickle, and he was impeached by the relevant officials. Emperor Wen tolerated him.

古文：与范晔、徐湛之等厚善，晔谋反，量质必与之同，会事发，复为建威将军、义兴太守。元嘉二十六年，太祖谒京陵，质朝丹徒，与何勖、檀和之并功臣子，时共上礼。
现代文：他和范晔，徐湛之很友好，范晔谋反，估计臧质定会响应他，谁知范晔的阴谋迅速暴露，臧质又被选为建威将军，义兴太守，文帝元嘉二十六年，文帝拜谒京陵，臧质来到丹徒朝见皇帝，与何勋、擅和之都因是有功之臣，同时被待以上宾的礼节，文帝设宴款待了他们。
English: He was very friendly with Fan Xuan and Xu Zhanzhi. Fan Xuan plotted a rebellion, and it was estimated that Zheng would certainly respond to him. Who knows, Fan Xuan's plot was quickly exposed. Zheng was also elected as General Jian Wei, Yixing Governor, Emperor Wen in the 26th year of Yuan Jia, Emperor Wen visited the Beijing Mausoleum, Zheng came to the Dantu Court to see the emperor, and he and He Xun, master of harmony, because they were meritorious vassals, were also treated with the etiquette of guests. Emperor Wen set up a banquet to entertain them.

古文：太祖设燕尽欢，赐布千匹。
现代文：在酒席上非常融洽。文帝赐给他们每人一千匹布。
English: They got along very well at the banquet. Emperor Wen gave each of them a thousand horses.

古文：二十七年春，迁南谯王义宣司马、宁朔将军、南平内史。
现代文：元嘉二十七年臧质升任南谯王刘义宣司空的司马，宁朔将军，南平内史。
English: In the 27th year of Yuan Jia, he was promoted to the Sima of Liu Yixuan, the King of Southern Wei, and the General of Ningshuo, the history of Nanping.

古文：未之职，会索虏大帅拓跋焘围汝南，汝南戍主陈宪固守告急。
现代文：还未就任，恰遇北魏皇帝拓跋焘围攻汝南郡，汝南城防司令陈宪坚定防守并向朝廷告急。
English: He had not yet taken office, when the Northern Wei Emperor Tuobao besieged Runan County, the commander of Runan City Defense, Chen Xian, firmly defended and expressed his concern to the imperial court.

古文：太祖遣质轻往寿阳，即统彼军，与安蛮司马刘康祖等救宪。
现代文：文帝派臧质率轻兵进入寿阳城，立即统率寿阳军队。和安蛮司马刘康祖共同救护陈宪。
English: Emperor Wen sent a low-ranking soldier into Shouyang City and immediately led the Shouyang army. Together with Anwar Sima and Liu Kangzu, they rescued Chen Xian.

古文：虏退走，因使质伐汝南西境刀壁等山蛮，大破之，获万余口，迁太子左卫率。坐前伐蛮，枉杀队主严祖，又纳面首生口，不以送台，免官。
现代文：魏军退走。便命令臧质进攻汝南西边的刀壁等山蛮。大败山蛮，俘获一万多人，因此他升官太子右卫帅，又因为之前攻击山蛮时误杀手下队长严祖和接受一些俘虏，不把他们送交朝廷，被免去官职。
English: The Wei army retreated. He then ordered Xingye to attack the mountain barbarians such as the Sword Wall on the southwestern side of the Yangtze River. He defeated the mountain barbarians and captured more than 10,000 people, so he was promoted to the prince of the right guard, and because he mistakenly killed the captain Yan Zu and accepted some prisoners when attacking the mountain barbarians, he did not send them to the imperial court, and was dismissed from his official position.

古文：是时上大举北讨，质白衣与骠骑司马王方回等率军出许、洛，安北司马王玄谟攻滑台，不拔，质请乘驿代将，太祖不许。
现代文：此时文帝正大举北伐，臧质以士兵身份和骠骑司马王方四等率领军队攻击许昌，洛阳，安北司马王玄谟进攻滑台受挫，臧质请求乘此机会代替王玄谟，文帝不允许。
English: At this time, Emperor Wen was making a big push in the Northern Expedition. Gongye, as a soldier and riding on Sima Wangfang's four horses, led the army to attack Xu Chang, Luoyang, and Anbei. Sima Wang Xuanmu's attack on the slide was frustrated. Gongye requested to take this opportunity to replace Wang Xuanmu, but Emperor Wen did not allow it.

古文：虏侵徐、豫，拓跋焘率大众数十万遂向彭城，以质为辅国将军、假节、置佐，率万人北救。始至盱眙，焘已过淮，冗从仆射胡崇之领质府司马，崇之副太子积弩将军毛熙祚亦受统于质。
现代文：魏军侵略徐州、豫州，拓跋焘率大军数十万向彭城进发，文帝命令臧质做辅国将军，假节设置部佐，率一万多人向北增援，刚到盱眙城，拓跋焘已过淮河，冗从仆射胡崇之任臧质部下司马，胡崇之的副官与太子积弩将军臧澄之，建威将军毛熙祚也被臧质统率。
English: When the Wei army invaded Xuzhou and Yuzhou, Tuoba and his army of hundreds of thousands marched to Pengcheng. Emperor Wen ordered him to be the general of the auxiliary country. On the day of the festival, he set up subordinates and led more than 10,000 people to the north for reinforcement. As soon as he arrived in Lucheng, Tuoba and his army had already crossed the Huaihe River. He was a subordinate of Hu Chong's subordinate, Sima, who was a subordinate of Hu Chong's aide-de-camp, Hu Chong's aide-de-camp and the prince's son, General Zengcheng,

古文：盱眙城东有高山，质虑虏据之，使崇之、澄之二军营于山上，质营城南。虏攻崇之、澄之二营，崇之等力战不敌，众散，并为虏所杀。虏又攻熙祚，熙祚所领悉北府精兵，幢主李灌率厉将士，杀贼甚多。队主周胤之、外监杨方生又率射贼，贼垂退，会熙祚被创死，军遂散乱。其日质案兵不敢救，故二营一时覆没。
现代文：盱眙城东边有座高山，臧质担心敌人占据它们，命令胡崇之、臧澄之两路人马驻扎山上，臧质驻扎南城，敌人先进攻胡崇之、臧澄之等两支部队，胡崇之苦战不已，但寡不敌众，两支军队逃窜，结果全被敌人杀死，敌人又进攻毛熙祚的部队，毛熙祚的部下全部是北府精兵，他的部将李灌率领官兵拼命反击，杀死很多敌人，队长周胤之，监军杨文生又率兵射击敌人，敌人快撤退时，恰巧毛熙祚因伤势过重而死去，这支军队也突然崩溃，这天臧质按兵不救，所以三支军队全军覆没。
English: There is a high mountain on the east side of Handan City. Gongye was worried that the enemy would occupy it. He ordered Hu Chongzhi and Handan Cheng to station their troops on the mountain. Gongye stationed his troops in Nancheng. The enemy advanced to attack two troops, including Hu Chongzhi and Handan Cheng. The bitter battle of Hu Chongzhi continued, but they were outnumbered. The two armies fled. As a result, they were all killed by the enemy. The enemy also attacked Mao Xizhen's troops. Mao Xizhen's subordinates were all elite soldiers of Beifu. His subordinate Li Guan led the officers and soldiers to fight back

古文：初，仇池之平也，以崇之为龙骧将军、北秦州刺史，宋百顷，行至浊水，为索虏所克，举军败散；崇之及将佐以下，皆为虏所执，后得叛还，至是又为虏所败焉。熙祚，司州刺史修之兄子也。崇之、熙祚并赠正员郎；澄之事在祖父焘传。
现代文：这以前，仇池被攻下时，胡崇之当时是龙骧将军，北秦川刺史，坐镇百顷城，行军到浊水时，被魏军打败，全军覆没，胡崇之和他的部下都被敌人俘虏，以后又找机会窜逃而回，到这次又被敌人打败，毛熙祚是司州刺史朱修之的侄儿，胡崇之、毛熙祚都被赠官正员郎，臧澄之的事参见他祖父臧焘传。
English: Previously, when Qiuchi was conquered, Hu Chongzhi was then the general of Longjing, the Northern Qinchuan, and was stationed in the hundred-hectare city. When he marched to Surabaya, he was defeated by the Wei army, and the whole army was destroyed. Hu Chongzhi and his subordinates were captured by the enemy, and later they found an opportunity to escape and return. This time they were defeated by the enemy. Mao Xizhi was the nephew of the Szhou assassin Zhu Xiuzhi. Both Hu Chongzhi and Mao Xizhi were given official positions. See his grandfather's biography.

古文：三营既败，其夕质军亦奔散，弃辎重器甲，单七百人投盱眙。
现代文：前面三支部队溃败之后，当日晚上臧质的部队也溃逃了。他们丢掉所有军需物质和盔甲武器，丢下一百多人空手跑到盱眙城，盱眙太守沈璞已完整地作好了攻守准备。
English: After the defeat of the three troops in front, the troops of Yanqing also fled in the evening of the same day. They threw away all military supplies and armor weapons, leaving more than a hundred people to run empty-handed to the city of Yancheng. The governor of Yancheng, Shen Yi, had fully prepared for the attack and defense.

古文：盱眙太守沈璞完为守战之备，城内有实力三千，质大喜，因共守。虏初南出，后无资粮，唯以百姓为命。
现代文：城内有战士三千人，臧质见了大喜，便和沈璞共同防守。敌人开始向南进攻时，并未带随军粮弹，只向当地百姓筹措军粮。
English: There were three thousand soldiers in the city, and when Gongye saw Daxi, he and Shen Qi jointly defended it. When the enemy began to attack to the south, they did not bring military grain bombs with them, but only collected military grain from the local people.

古文：及过淮，食平越、石鳖二屯谷，至是抄掠无所，人马饥困，闻盱眙有积粟，欲以为归路之资。
现代文：等过了淮河吃光了平越、石鳖两个军营的粮食，这时已无处掠取物资，士兵与战马饥饿得很，听说盱眙城有储藏好的谷粟，希望把它当成回家的干粮仓库。
English: After waiting for the Huaihe River to run out of grain for the two military camps of Pingyue and Shijiazhuang, there was nowhere to loot supplies. The soldiers and horses were very hungry. They heard that there was stored corn poppy in Lucheng, and hoped to use it as a dry grain warehouse for returning home.

古文：既破崇之等，一攻城不拔，便引众南向。
现代文：魏人自攻破胡崇之等之后，攻盱眙城不下，便率军南下。
English: After the Wei people defeated Hu Chongzhi and others, they could not attack the city, so they led the army to the south.

古文：城内增修守备，莫不完严。
现代文：因此盱眙城得以加固防城的守备，无不做得十分严密。
English: Therefore, Shicheng was able to strengthen the defense of the city, and everything was done very strictly.

古文：二十八年正月初，焘自广陵北返，便悉力攻盱眙，就质求酒，质封溲便与之。
现代文：文帝元嘉二十八年正月初旬，拓跋焘从广陵北返，便全力攻击盱眙，并向臧质要酒喝，臧质装了一壶尿送给拓跋焘。
English: In the early part of the first month of the 28th year of the reign of Emperor Wen of the Yuan Dynasty, when Tuobao returned from Guangling to the north, he attacked Tuobao with all his might, and asked Tuobao for a drink. Tuobao loaded a pot of urine and gave it to Tuobao.

古文：焘怒甚，筑长围，一夜便合，开攻道，趣城东北，运东山土石填之。虏又恐城内水路遁走，乃引大船，欲于君山作浮桥，以绝淮道。城内乘舰逆战，大破之。
现代文：拓跋焘非常愤怒，便修起长长的包围壕沟，一个晚上便选出了进攻方向，从东北向城内猛攻，挖城东山上的土和石头填满了护城河，拓跋焘又怕城内宋军从水路逃跑，于是又造出大船，想在君山建浮桥，以便断绝从淮河逃跑的退路，城内宋军乘坐军船出来迎战，大败魏军。
English: Tuobao was very angry, so he built a long encircling trench. One night, he chose the direction of attack, storming into the city from the northeast. The soil and stones on the mountain east of the city filled the moat. Tuobao was also afraid that the Song army in the city would escape from the waterway, so he made a big boat and wanted to build a floating bridge in Junshan to cut off the escape route from the Huai River. The Song army in the city came out to fight on a warship and defeated the Wei army.

古文：明旦，贼更方舫为桁，桁上各严兵自卫。城内更击不能禁，遂于军山立桁，水陆路并断。
现代文：第二天早晨，敌人改大船为浮船，桥上都布置士兵防守，城内出战，不能打败敌兵，于是敌人的浮桥成功，宋军水陆之路断绝了。
English: The next morning, the enemy changed the big ship into a pontoon, soldiers were placed on the bridge to defend it, and the city went to war. They could not defeat the enemy soldiers, so the enemy's pontoon bridge was successful, and the Song Army's water and land routes were cut off.

古文：焘与质书曰： 吾今所遣斗兵，尽非我国人，城东北是丁零与胡，南是三秦氐、羌。
现代文：拓跋焘给臧质写了一封信说： 我军现在派的战士，都不是我们鲜卑族人，城的东北是丁零人和东胡人，城南是陕西的氐族和羌族人。
English: Tuoba Yao wrote a letter to Yan Quan, saying: The soldiers currently sent by our army are not our Xianbei people, the northeast of the city is the Ding Zi people and the Donghu people, and the south of the city is the Yao people and the Yao people in Shaanxi.

古文：设使丁零死者，正可减常山、赵郡贼；胡死，正减并州贼；氐、羌死，正减关中贼。卿若杀丁零、胡，无不利。 
现代文：假如丁零族人死的话，正好可以消灭常山郡和赵郡的反贼；东城人死的话，正好消灭并州的反贼；氐族和羌族死的话，正可以消灭关中的反贼；你如果杀死丁零人，胡人，没有什么不好的。 
English: If the Ding Zi people die, the anti-thieves in Changshan County and Zhao County can be eliminated; if the Dongcheng people die, the anti-thieves in the annexed counties can be eliminated; if the Yao and Yao people die, the anti-thieves in Guanzhong can be eliminated; if you kill the Ding Zi people, the Hu people, there is nothing bad.

古文：质答书曰： 省示，具悉奸怀。
现代文：臧质的回信说： 你的信已经看了，知道你的险恶用心。
English: The enigmatic reply said: I have read your letter and know your sinister intentions.

古文：尔自恃四脚，屡犯国疆，诸如此事，不可具说。
现代文：你倚仗强兵，多次侵略我国，这方面的事，不用多说。
English: You rely on strong soldiers and have repeatedly invaded our country. There is no need to say more about this.

古文：王玄谟退于东，梁坦散于西，尔谓何以不闻童谣言邪： 虏马饮江水，佛狸死卯年。 
现代文：虽然王玄谟从东边撤退，梁坦在西边兵败，但你怎么不知道童谣里的话： 敌人饮马长江水，拓跋佛狸死卯年。 
English: Although Wang Xuanmu retreated from the east and Liang Tan was defeated in the west, how could you not know the words of the nursery rhyme: The enemy drinks the water of the Yangtze River, and the Buddha dies in the year of the horse.

古文：此期未至，以二军开饮江之径尔，冥期使然，非复人事。
现代文：这个期限还没有到，这不过是开启你饮马长江的途径罢了，冥冥之中，你的性命难逃，不是人力能管得了的。
English: This deadline has not yet arrived, this is just a way to open the Yangtze River for you to drink. In the midst of it, your life is inescapable, it is not humanly possible.

古文：寡人受命相灭，期之白登，师行未远，尔自送死，岂容复令生全，飨有桑乾哉！
现代文：我接受皇上的命令，要消灭你们，准备打到你们的都城，还未等到那时，你竟然自动上门送死，怎么能让你活着跑回去，在你的桑乾宫喝酒吃肉呢！
English: I accept the emperor's order to exterminate you and prepare to strike at your capital, but before that time comes, how can you send me to my death, how can you let me run back alive to drink wine and eat meat in your Mulberry Palace!

古文：但尔往攻此城，假令寡人不能杀尔，尔由我而死。
现代文：只要你停下来攻击我的城市，即使我不能杀死你你也必须因此而死。
English: As long as you stop attacking my city, even if I can't kill you, you have to die because of it.

古文：尔若有幸，得为乱兵所杀。尔若不幸，则生相剿缚，载以一驴，直送都市。
现代文：如果你幸运的话，也许是被乱兵杀死；如果你的运气坏，那么一定要把你生擒归案，用一驴车拖你到刑场去斩首。
English: If you are lucky, you may be killed by the ruffians; if you are unlucky, then you must be captured alive and dragged to the place of execution with a donkey cart to be beheaded.

古文：我本不图全，若天地无灵，力屈于尔，齑之粉之，屠之裂之，如此未足谢本朝。
现代文：我本来不打算保全性命。如老天爷瞎了眼，被你打败，你碎尸万段也好，车裂锅煮也好。如果这样，也不足以向我们皇上谢罪。
English: Originally, I did not intend to save my life. If God were blinded and defeated by you, you might as well chop up my corpse and boil it in a cauldron. If that were the case, it would not be enough to atone for our emperor's sins.

古文：尔识智及众力，岂能胜苻坚邪！
现代文：你的见识谋略力量，难道可以超过苻坚吗？
English: Can your power of insight and strategy surpass that of a warrior?

古文：顷年展尔陆梁者，是尔未饮江，太岁未卯年故尔。
现代文：这几年老天让你得逞；只是你们的步兵骑兵还没有喝长江水，太岁卯未年还未到罢了。
English: Over the past few years, God has allowed you to succeed; however, your infantry and cavalry have yet to drink water from the Yangtze River, and the Year of the Rabbit has not yet arrived.

古文：斛兰昔深入彭城，值少日雨，只马不返，尔岂忆邪？
现代文：斛兰氏当年深入彭城，遇到几天雨水，没有一个人活着回去，怎么你不记得了？
English: You went deep into Pengcheng that year, encountered several days of rain, and not a single person returned alive. Why don't you remember?

古文：即时春雨已降，四方大众，始就云集，尔但安意攻城莫走。
现代文：马上春雨将到，我们的援军将要四面会集，你尽管安心攻城，不要走好了。
English: The spring rain will arrive soon, and our reinforcements will gather on all sides. You can attack the city with peace of mind, just don't go.

古文：粮食阙乏者告之，当出廪相饴。
现代文：如果你们的粮食不够的话，尽量告诉我，我们马上就会送给你粮食。
English: If you do not have enough food, please let us know and we will send you food immediately.

古文：得所送剑刀，欲令我挥之尔身邪！
现代文：现在你送我一把战刀，难道是想叫我砍在你身上吗？
English: Now that you have given me a sword, do you want me to use it on you?

古文：甚苦，人附反，各自努力，无烦多云。 
现代文：辛苦了，把这封信和你的使者一同带回去，大家各自努力，不需多说。 
English: Well done, take this letter back with your emissary, we all did our best, no need to say more.

古文：是时虏中童谣曰： 轺车北来如穿雉，不意虏马饮江水。虏主北归石济死，虏欲渡江天不徙。 
现代文：这时魏国童谣中说： 兵车北来如穿梭，未料胡马饮江水，胡主归北死石济，苦想渡江天不从。 
English: At this time, the children's rhyme of the Wei Dynasty said: The soldiers came north as if they were shuttling, but unexpectedly Huma drank river water, Hu Lord returned to the north to die, and he was reluctant to cross the river.

古文：故质答引之。
现代文：所以臧质在信中这样回答拓跋焘。
English: That's why I replied in the letter.

古文：焘大怒，乃作铁床，于其上施铁镵，云破城得质，当坐之此上。
现代文：拓跋焘见信大怒，于是做一个铁床，在床上放一些铁钎，说要攻破城池捉到臧质，一定要让他坐在这上面。
English: Seeing that Xin was very angry, Tuobao made an iron bed, put some shovels on the bed, and said that if he wanted to break through the city and catch the dragonfly, he must let him sit on it.

古文：质又与虏众书曰： 示诏虏中诸士庶：狸伐见与书如别，等正朔之民，何为力自取如此。大丈夫岂可不知转祸为福邪！
现代文：臧质又给敌人各军队少数民族送出书信说： 给你们这些官兵看一些东西；拓跋佛狸给我的信如下：你们都是中国的百姓，何必为敌人如此出力，男子汉大丈夫怎么不知道转祸为福呢！
English: Xingye also sent letters to the enemy's armies and ethnic minorities, saying, "Let me show you officers and soldiers something. Tuoba Buttu's letter to me is as follows: You are all Chinese people, why do you have to work so hard for the enemy? How can a man not know how to turn misfortune into good fortune?

古文：今写台格如别书，自思之。 
现代文：现在写给你们的信如下，你们细细思量！ 
English: And now I write this letter to you, that you may consider it carefully.

古文：时购斩焘封开国县侯，食邑一万户，赐布绢各万匹。
现代文：同时下令如果有能杀掉拓跋焘的，封开国县侯，食邑一万户，另加各种布帛一万匹。
English: At the same time, he ordered that if there is anyone who can kill Tuoba centipedes, 10,000 households in counties, prefectures and townships should be closed, and another 10,000 animals of all kinds should be culled.

古文：虏以钩车钩垣楼，城内系以驱絙，数百人叫唤引之，车不能退。
现代文：魏军用钩车钩城楼，宋军在城内用粗麻绳系住敌人的钩车，几百人共同拉着，钩子不能退回去。
English: The Wei army used a hooked cart to hook the city tower, the Song army used coarse twine to tie the enemy's hooked cart in the city. Several hundred people pulled it together, and the hook could not be pulled back.

古文：既夜，以木桶盛人，悬出城外，截其钩获之。
现代文：到了夜晚，用木桶装着士兵，吊出城外，斩断钩子把它们拉进城来。
English: At night, soldiers were hoisted out of the city in wooden barrels and pulled into the city by cutting off the hooks.

古文：明日，又以冲车攻城，城土坚密，每至，颓落不过数升。
现代文：第二天，敌人又用冲车来攻城，但城墙坚固，冲车每一次斫撞的地方也不过掉几升墙土。
English: The next day, the enemy attacked the city again with rushing vehicles, but the city walls were strong, and each time the rushing vehicles collided, several liters of wall soil fell.

古文：虏乃肉薄登城，分番相代，坠而复升，莫有退者，杀伤万计，虏死者与城平。又射杀高梁王。
现代文：于是魏军又赤膊登城一批接一批，前面的掉下去，后面跟着上，没有一个退却的，被杀伤的几达一万多人，死尸堆积几乎和城墙一样高，守军还射死了魏军的高阳王。
English: As a result, the naked Wei army went up to the city in batches one after another, the front fell down, followed by the rear, no one retreated, and more than ten thousand people were killed and injured. The dead bodies were piled up almost as high as the city wall. The defenders also shot dead the Wei army's Gaoyang Wang.

古文：如此三旬，死者过半。
现代文：这样鏖战达一个多月，敌人死掉近一半。
English: The battle lasted for more than a month, with nearly half of the enemy killed.

古文：焘闻彭城断其归路，京邑遣水军自海入淮，且疾疫死者甚众。二月二日，乃解围遁走。
现代文：此时拓跋焘又听说彭城王刘义康，准备截断他的退路，宋朝正派水军从海上进入淮河，加上因病而死的很多，二月二日，拓跋焘解除对盱眙的包围逃走了。
English: At this time, Tuobao also heard that Liu Yikang, the king of Pengcheng, was preparing to cut off his escape route. The Song Dynasty sent naval forces from the sea into the Huai River, and many people died of illness. On February 2, Tuobao lifted the siege on Lu and fled.

古文：上嘉质功，以为使持节、监雍、梁、南北秦四州诸军事、冠军将军、宁蛮校尉、雍州刺史，封开国子，食邑五百户。
现代文：文帝认为臧质立了大功，让他当使持节，监护雍州、梁州、南秦州、北秦州四州诸军事，冠军将军、宁蛮校尉、雍州刺史，封他为开国子，食邑五百户。
English: Emperor Wen believed that Gongye had made a great contribution, and made him an envoy to celebrate the festival, supervise the military in the four states of Yongzhou, Liangzhou, South Qinzhou, and North Qinzhou, champion general, Ningban lieutenant, and Yongzhou stabbing history, and named him the founding son of the country, with 500 households.

古文：明年，太祖又北伐，使质率所统见力向潼关，质顿兵近郊，不肯时发，独遣司马柳元景屯兵境上，不时进军。
现代文：第二年，文帝又北伐，命令臧质率领他的所有部队向潼关发动攻击，但臧质在城郊停军不动，只派他的司马柳元景驻兵边境之上，仍然不按时进军。
English: The following year, Emperor Wen again marched north and ordered Yan Quan to lead all his troops to launch an attack on Shaoguan. However, Yan Quan halted his troops on the outskirts of the city and only sent his general, Sima Liu Yuanqing, to garrison the border. He still did not march on time.

古文：质又顾恋嬖妾，弃营单马还城，散用台库见钱六七百万，为有司所纠，上不问也。
现代文：后来臧质又留恋宠姬爱妾，丢下军队，一个人回到襄阳，把雍州府仓库的现钱用了六七百万，被有关部门弹劾，文帝没有追究这些。
English: Later, he fell in love with his favorite concubine again, left the army, returned to Yangyang alone, and spent 67 million yuan of the current money in the warehouse of Yongzhou Prefecture. He was impeached by the relevant departments. Emperor Wen did not pursue these.

古文：元凶弑立，以质为丹阳尹，加征虏将军。质家遣门生师顗报质，具太祖崩问。
现代文：太子刘邵杀文帝即位时，让臧质做丹阳尹兼任征虏将军，臧质家里人派门人师凯给臧质报讯，把文帝被杀的经过全部告诉给臧质。
English: When the crown prince Liu Shao killed Emperor Wen and ascended to the throne, he asked Yan to be Danyang Yin and also serve as a conscript general. Yan's family members sent the gatekeeper Shi Kai to report to Yan, and told him everything about the killing of Emperor Wen.

古文：质疏顗所言，驰告司空义宣，又遣州祭酒从事田颖起衔命报世祖，率众五千，驰下讨逆，自阳口进江陵义宣。质诸子在都邑，闻质举义，并逃亡。
现代文：臧质把师凯说的写成奏疏，派人告诉谯郡王刘义宣，又派雍州祭酒从事田颖起，带着他的意思报告给武陵王刘骏，他本人则率军五千，飞驰东下讨伐刘邵，他从阳口到江陵会见刘义宣，臧质的几个在首都的儿子，听说臧质起兵逃出京城。
English: He wrote down the words of his teacher Kai as a recitation, sent someone to tell Liu Yixuan, the king of Qin County. He also sent the Yongzhou sacrificial wine to engage in Tian Yingqi, and reported his intention to Liu Xuan, the king of Wuling. He himself led an army of five thousand and raced to the east to fight Liu Shao. He met Liu Yixuan from Yangkou to Jiangling. Several of his sons in the capital heard that he had escaped from Beijing.

古文：劭欲相慰悦，乃下书曰： 臧敦等无因自骇，急便窜逸，迷昧过甚，良可怪叹。
现代文：刘邵想安慰取悦他们，下了一道诏书说： 臧敦等无故恐吓自己，慌忙逃走，太糊涂了，确实令人大惑不解。
English: Liu Shao wanted to comfort and please them, so he issued an edict saying: "Hadong and others intimidated themselves for no reason and fled in a hurry, they are too confused, which is really puzzling.

古文：质国戚勋臣，忠诚笃亮，方当显位，赞翼京辇，而子弟波迸，伤其乃怀。可遣宣譬令还，咸复本位。 
现代文：臧质是皇家的亲戚，有功的大臣，忠诚皇室，诚实刚正，正要让他到一个更重要的位置上，辅佐朝廷，但他的子弟都逃离京城，这不利于他们的利益，现在派人告诉他们朝廷的意思，让他们各自恢复本职。 
English: Gongye was a relative of the imperial family, a meritorious minister, loyal to the imperial family, honest and upright, and he was about to let him into a more important position, assisting the court, but his children all fled the capital, which was not conducive to their interests. Now send someone to tell them the meaning of the court, and let them each resume their duties.

古文：劭寻录得敦，使大将军义恭行训杖三十，厚给赐之。
现代文：不久刘邵找到臧敦，叫大将军刘义恭代理打了臧敦三十棍子。
English: Soon after, Liu Shao found Yu Dong and ordered General Liu Yigong to beat him with 30 sticks.

古文：义宣得质报，即日举兵，驰信报世祖，板进质号征北将军。
现代文：之后又赏了一大堆东西。刘义宣得到臧质的报告，当天便宣布起兵，迅速派人告诉武陵王刘骏，并且顺便任命臧质当征北将军。
English: After that, he was rewarded with a lot of things. Liu Yixuan got a report from Gongye and announced a military uprising on the same day. He quickly sent someone to tell Liu Ye, the King of Wuling, and appointed Gongye as a general of the Northern Expedition.

古文：质径赴寻阳，与世祖同下。
现代文：臧质直接进兵寻阳，和武陵王刘骏同时东下。
English: Xingye marched directly into the army to seek the sun, and went to the east at the same time as the king of Wuling, Liu Bei.

古文：世祖至新亭即位，以质为都督江州诸军事、车骑将军、开府仪同三司、江州刺史，加散骑常侍，持节如故。使质率所领自白下步上，直至广莫门，门者不守。
现代文：武陵王刘骏到了新亭，正式登皇帝位，让臧质做都督江州诸军事、车骑将军、开府仪同三司、江州刺史，另加散骑常侍，使持节和过去一样，派臧质率他的部队从白下城步行而上，直接进攻广莫门，守门的士兵都逃跑了。
English: Wuling King Liu Bei arrived at Xinting and officially ascended to the imperial throne. He made him the military governor of Jiangzhou, the general of cavalry and cavalry, the governor of the three departments, the governor of Jiangzhou, and the governor of Jiangzhou. In addition, there was a knight-errant. On the same day as in the past, he sent his troops from Baixia Town on foot to directly attack Guangmo Gate. The soldiers guarding the gate fled.

古文：薛安都、程天祚等亦自南掖门入，与质同会太极殿，生禽元凶。
现代文：薛安都、程天祚等人也从南掖门攻入，和臧质会师太极殿，生擒刘邵。
English: Xue Andu, Cheng Tianyao and others also broke into the hall from the South Gate, and Liu Shao was born in the hall.

古文：仍使质留守朝堂，甲仗百人自防。
现代文：此后又派臧质留下防守朝廷宫殿，另外百人警卫保护臧质。
English: After that, he sent his retainers to defend the imperial palace, and another hundred guards protected him.

古文：封始兴郡公，食邑三千户。
现代文：封他为始兴郡公，食邑三千户。
English: He was given the title of Shixing County Governor, and served 3,000 households in the county.

古文：之镇，舫千余乘，部伍前后百余里，六平乘并施龙子幡。
现代文：他回到江州时，大小船只达千余艘。所统部队前后长达百余里。和臧质一起六艘船都刻有龙形印纹。
English: When he returned to Jiangzhou, there were more than a thousand large and small ships. The front and back of the unified forces were more than a hundred miles long. Together with the anchor, all six ships were engraved with dragon-shaped imprints.

古文：时世祖自揽威柄，而质以少主遇之，是事专行，多所求欲。
现代文：此时宋武帝正收集权力，但臧质却把他当小皇帝看待，专横独断，贪得无厌。
English: At this time, Emperor Songwu was gathering power, but Xi Jinping regarded him as a petty emperor, domineering and greedy.

古文：及至寻阳，刑政庆赏，不复谘禀朝廷。
现代文：到了寻阳，赏罚奖惩，不再向朝廷请示。
English: When it comes to the search for the sun, rewards and punishments will be given, and there will be no more requests for instructions from the imperial court.

古文：盆口、钩圻米，辄散用之，台符屡加检诘，质渐猜惧。
现代文：盆口、钩圻两戍的米都挪用了，朝廷多次派人来检查质问，臧质渐渐怀疑起来，心中恐惧。
English: The rice in both the bowl and the ladle had been misappropriated, and the imperial court repeatedly sent people to check and question them. The quality of the rice was gradually doubted, and fear was in their hearts.

古文：自谓人才足为一世英杰，始闻国祸，便有异图，以义宣凡暗，易可制勒，欲外相推奉，以成其志。
现代文：又心想自己的才略，在当时确实没有第二个人赶得上，先前听说刘邵杀掉文帝，便顿生野心，因为刘义宣能力平庸，容易挟制，想表面上推戴他，暗中则自己掌权。
English: He also thought about his own talent. At that time, there was really no second person who could catch up. He had previously heard that Liu Shao had killed Emperor Wen, and he suddenly became ambitious. Because Liu Yixuan had mediocre ability and was easy to control, he wanted to promote him on the surface, but secretly he was in power.

古文：及至江陵，便致拜称名。
现代文：到了江陵，以非常之礼拜见义宣。
English: When he arrived in Gangneung, he received the proclamation of righteousness with great reverence.

古文：质于义宣虽为兄弟，而年大近十岁，义宣惊曰： 君何意拜弟？ 
现代文：臧质和刘义宣是表兄弟，但他比义宣大十岁，义宣当时大惊说： 兄长为什么事拜老弟呢！ 
English: Yan and Liu Yixuan are cousins, but he is ten years older than Yixuan. At that time, Yixuan was shocked and said: Why does the elder brother have to bow to the younger brother?

古文：质曰： 事中宜然。 
现代文：臧质说： 在这样的时候就该这样。 
English: "It's the right thing to do at a time like this," Ms. Yan said.

古文：时义宣已推崇世祖，故其计不行。质每虑事泄，及至新亭，又拜江夏王义恭，义恭愕然，问质所以。质曰： 天下屯危，礼异常日，前在荆州，亦拜司空。 
现代文：只因当时刘义宣已推奉孝武帝刘骏，所以他的企图没有得逞，臧质经常担心这件事泄露出去，但到了新亭，又以非常之礼拜见江夏王刘义恭，义恭大吃一惊，问臧质为什么这样，臧质说： 天下动荡时期，礼节和平常不同，先前在荆州，我也是这样见义宣的。 
English: It was only because Liu Yixuan had already promoted Liu Xuan, the Emperor Xiaowu, at that time, that his attempt did not succeed. He was often worried that the matter would leak out. However, when he arrived at Xinting, he paid a very respectful visit to Liu Yikong, the King of Jiangxia. Yikong was taken aback and asked him why. He said: In turbulent times, etiquette is different from usual. Previously, in Jingzhou, I also saw Yixuan in this way.

古文：会义宣有憾于世祖，事在《义宣传》。质因此密信说诱，陈朝廷得失。
现代文：恰巧义宣和孝武帝有矛盾，臧质因此暗地派人引诱刘义宣，议论朝廷的措施的好坏。
English: It just so happened that Yixuan and Emperor Xiaowu had a conflict, so Yan Chie secretly sent someone to lure Liu Yixuan and discuss the quality of the imperial court's measures.

古文：又谓： 震主之威，不可持久，主相势均，事不两立。今专据阃外，地胜兵强，持疑不决，则后机致祸。 
现代文：他对义宣说： 挟有震动皇帝的权威是不能长久地保持官位的，皇帝和丞相势均力敌，一山不容二虎，今日你独立掌握封疆大权，荆州地形险固，兵强马壮，犹豫未决，必定被别人抢先，招致祸害。 
English: He said to Yixuan: The authority of the emperor cannot hold the official position for a long time if it is shaken. The emperor and the prime minister are equal in strength. Two tigers cannot occupy the same mountain. Today, you independently hold the power to seal the empire. The terrain of Jingzhou is dangerous, the army is strong, and the army is hesitant. You will be overtaken by others, which will bring disaster.

古文：质女为义宣子采妻，谓质无复异同，纳其说。
现代文：臧质的女儿是义宣的儿子刘采的妻子，刘义宣以为臧质不会有二心，便接受他的劝说。
English: Gongye's daughter is the wife of Liu Cai, Yixuan's son. Liu Yixuan thought Gongye would have no second thoughts and accepted his persuasion.

古文：且义宣腹心将佐蔡超民之徒，咸有富贵之情，愿义宣得，欲倚质威名，以成其业，又劝奖义宣。
现代文：更加上义宣的心腹将吏蔡超、竺超民等人，都有很大的野心，希望义宣做皇帝，都想凭据臧质的威名，成就他们的大事，也怂恿刘义宣。
English: Moreover, the top Yixuan's henchmen, such as the generals Cai Chao and Zou Chao Min, had great ambitions, hoping that Yixuan would become emperor. They all wanted to achieve their great things based on the prestige of the emperor, and also wanted Liu Yixuan.

古文：义宣时未受丞相，质子敦为黄门侍郎，奉诏敦劝，道经寻阳，质令敦具更譬说，并言世祖短长，义宣乃意定。
现代文：此时义宣还未接受丞相的职位，臧质的儿子臧敦做黄门侍郎，带着朝廷诏书劝说刘义宣当丞相，路经寻阳，臧质叫臧敦重新劝说义宣造反，而且说到孝武帝的种种罪过。
English: At this time, Yixuan had not yet accepted the post of chancellor, and Gongye's son, Jotun, who was a Yellow Gate attendant, took the imperial edict to persuade Liu Yixuan to become chancellor. On the way, Gongye asked Jotun to re-persuade Yixuan to rebel, and talked about the various sins of Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：驰报豫州刺史鲁爽，期孝建元年秋同举。
现代文：刘义宣于是坚定造反的决心。臧质又派人告诉豫州刺史鲁爽，约定在孝建元年秋同时起兵。
English: Liu Yixuan then firmly determined to rebel. He also sent someone to tell the governor of Henan Province, Lu Shuang, that it was agreed to raise an army at the same time in the autumn of the first year of Xiao Jian's reign.

古文：爽失旨，即便起兵。遣人至京邑报弟瑜，瑜席卷奔叛。
现代文：鲁爽听错了话，当时便宣布起兵，并且派人到京城告诉他弟弟鲁瑜，鲁瑜连忙带家人一起逃出城，奔赴鲁爽。
English: Lu Shuang misheard the words, announced the start of the war at that time, and sent someone to Beijing to tell his brother Lu Yu. Lu Yu quickly fled the city with his family and rushed to Lu Shuang.

古文：瑜弟弘为质府佐，世祖遣报质，质于是执台使，狼狈举兵。
现代文：鲁瑜弟弟鲁弘当臧质的州府官吏，孝武帝派人叫臧质抓住鲁弘，臧质于是扣住朝廷使者，慌忙宣布军队起事，并且写了一道奏疏说：
English: Lu Yu's younger brother, Lu Hong, was a high-ranking official in the state government. Emperor Xiaowu sent someone to ask Lu Hong to arrest Lu Hong. Lu Hong then seized the imperial envoy, hurriedly declared a military uprising, and wrote a report saying:

古文：上表曰：臣闻执药随亲，非情谬于甘苦；挥斤斩毒，岂忘痛于肌肤。
现代文： 臣下听说拿着药伺候双亲的病，并非他喜欢吃苦的东西，提起斧头砍去毒块，怎么会忘记肌肤的疼痛！
English: The vassal heard that taking medicine to treat his parents' illness was not something he liked to suffer, and how could he forget the pain of his skin when he lifted the axe to cut away the poisonous lump!

古文：盖以先疑后顺，忠焉必往；忍小存大，虽爱必从。
现代文：又听说先有猜疑，后来纵然和好，忠诚必定不再像当初那样，小地方隐忍，大地方宽容，即使是心腹也必须顺从。
English: I also heard that there was suspicion at first, but later, even if there was a reconciliation, loyalty must no longer be the same as it was at the beginning, tolerance in small places, tolerance in large places, and even confidants must obey.

古文：丞相臣义宣，育哲台铉，拊声联服，定主勤王之业，勋越乎齐、晋；宗戚懿亲之寄，望崇于鲁、卫。而恶直丑正，实繁有党，或染凶作伪，疾害元功；或藉劳挟宠，乘威纵戾。
现代文：丞相刘义宣安定皇家的功业，比齐桓公晋文公还要大，作为皇亲国戚的资格，比周公卫康叔还正当，但邪恶的人嫉妒善良的人，确实有那么一群人，他们隐藏凶狠的恶意，表面装得很好，嫉妒立了大功的人，或者借助一点小功劳和皇帝的恩宠作威作福，制造罪恶的勾当。
English: Premier Liu Yixuan's achievements in stabilizing the imperial family are even greater than those of Prince Qi Huan, Prince Jin and Prince Wen, and his qualifications as a relative of the emperor are more legitimate than those of Prince Zhou and Uncle Kang. But evil people are jealous of good people. Indeed, there is a group of people who hide their vicious malice and put on a good face. They are jealous of people who have made great achievements, or use a little merit and the emperor's grace to do good and create evil activities.

古文：自知愆深衅重，必贻剿戮，乃成紫毁硃，交间忠辅。
现代文：知道自己罪恶深重，必定要被斩首。于是反而推卸责任毁谤无辜的好人，进谗言诬陷忠诚的丞相，到处结纳私党，招集众多小人。
English: He knew that his crimes were so serious that he would surely be beheaded. Instead, he shirked his responsibility to defame innocent good people, slandered and slandered loyal prime ministers, bribed his cronies everywhere, and recruited many villains.

古文：崇树私徒，招聚群恶，念旧爱老，无一而存，岂不由凶丑相扇，志肆谗惑。
现代文：勋臣故友，现在没有一个健在，难道不是因为那帮小人从中煽动，用谗言诬陷所致吗？
English: Venerable friends, there is not a single one alive now, is it not because of the gang of villains who instigated them and framed them with slander?

古文：陛下垂慈狎达，不稍惟疑，遂令负扆席图，蔽于流议，投杼市虎，成于十夫。
现代文：皇上您和他们关系亲近，一点也不怀疑他们，于是朝廷中的密谋，被流言蜚语所左右。
English: Your Majesty has a close relationship with them and does not doubt them at all, so the conspiracies in the imperial court are swayed by gossip.

古文：鉴古揆今，实怀危逼，故投袂樊、叶，立节于本朝；挥戈晋阳，务清于君侧。
现代文：猜疑之心已被这些人煽起，我们从过去现在的经验看，确实非常害怕，所以在寻阳一带起兵，为的是效忠国家，从晋阳拿起武器，一定要铲除皇上身边的奸臣。
English: Suspicion has been stirred up by these people, and from our past and present experience, we are indeed very afraid, so we have raised an army in the area of Huanyang, in order to be loyal to the country and take up arms from Jinyang, we must eradicate the treacherous ministers around the emperor.

古文：臣诚庸懦，奉教前朝，虽恧《缁衣》好贤之美，敢希《巷伯》恶恶之情，固已藉风听而宵愤，抚短策而驰念。
现代文：我诚然平庸而懦弱，但曾受先帝的教诲，虽然惭愧不能选进贤人，但却有除掉恶人的心愿，先前听到你们那些不好的风声而愤怒，现在更是勃然大怒，况且义宣刚刚接受天降使命。
English: It is true that I am mediocre and weak, but I was taught by the former emperor. Although I am ashamed that I could not be elected as a wise man, I have the desire to get rid of the wicked. I was angry when I heard your bad rumors before, and now I am even more angry. Moreover, Yixuan has just accepted the mission of descending to heaven.

古文：况乃宏命爰格，诚系宗社，今奉旨前迈，星言启行。
现代文：这次确实关系到国家的存亡。现在接受丞相的指挥先期挺进，马上抵达京城。
English: This time, it really is a matter of the country's survival. Now, under the command of the prime minister, advance ahead of time and immediately arrive in the capital.

古文：臣本凡琐，少无远概，因缘际会，遂班槐鼎，素望既盈，惬心实足，岂应徼功非冀，更希异宠，直以蔓草难除，去恶宜速，是以无顾夷险，虑不及身。
现代文： 我本来是一介小人，少年时代没有大的志向，因为某些机会，竟然当了封疆大吏，本来愿望早已实现，心满意足，怎能再希望建立意外之功，获得意外的恩宠呢？只是因为除去蔓草要迅速，驱逐恶人也要迅速。所以不顾安危，更不考虑家人的安全。
English: I was originally a villain, and I had no great ambition when I was young. Because of certain opportunities, I even became a high official of the Qing Dynasty. My original wish had already been fulfilled, and my heart was satisfied. How could I hope to establish unexpected merits and gain unexpected grace? Just because it is necessary to quickly remove weeds and expel evil people. So I did not care about safety, let alone consider the safety of my family.

古文：仰恃天眷，察亮丹款，苟血诚不照，甘心罪戮。
现代文：还希望凭着皇上的英明，了解我的一片赤心，如果我不真诚，我情愿被杀。
English: I also hope that with the Emperor's wisdom, he will understand that I have a pure heart, and if I am not sincere, I would rather be killed.

古文：伏愿陛下先鉴元辅匪躬茂节，末录庸琐奉国微诚，不遂淟涊之情，以失四海之望，昭戮马剑，显肆市朝，则结旌向国，全锋凯归，九流凝序，三光并耀，斯则仰说宗庙，俯惬兆民。裁表感慨，涕言无已。
现代文：臣下还希望陛下体会丞相对皇上忠诚的品格；第二记住我们曾经为国家所作的一点贡献，不要顾虑你身边的那些小人，反而失去全国人民的拥护，而应拿出尚方宝剑，将这些奸人斩首，那么我们指向朝廷的旌旗，便迅速地掉头。那样国家的秩序便可恢复正常，伦理纲常重复旧貌，这样的话可以上让祖宗高兴，下让百姓快乐，我们说这些话的时候，仍然流泪不已。 
English: Second, remember that we once made a little contribution to the country. Don't worry about those villains around you, but instead lose the support of the people of the whole country. Instead, you should take out the Shangfang sword and behead these traitors. Then we will point to the imperial banner and quickly turn around. Then the order of the country can be restored to normal. Ethics often repeat the old appearance. In this way, you can make your ancestors happy and make the people happy. When we say these words, we still shed tears.

古文：加鲁弘辅国将军，下戍大雷。驰报义宣，义宣遣谘议参军刘谌之万人就弘。
现代文：臧质用鲁弘当辅国将军，东下戍夺大雷城，并且派人报告刘义宣，刘义宣派咨议参军刘湛之率领一万士兵会合鲁弘。
English: He appointed Lu Hong as the general of the auxiliary state, marched eastward to seize the city of Dalai, and sent someone to report to Liu Yixuan. Liu Yixuan sent Liu Zhan to join the army to lead 10,000 soldiers to join Lu Hong.

古文：世祖遣抚军将军柳元景统豫州刺史王玄谟等水军，屯梁山洲内，两岸筑偃月垒，水陆待之。殿中将军沈灵赐领百舸，破其前军于南陵，生禽军主徐庆安、军副王僧，质至梁山，亦夹阵两岸。
现代文：宋孝武帝派抚军将军柳元景率领豫州刺史王玄谟等水军，驻扎于梁山洲上，在长江西岸建起弯月形的堡垒，水陆两路等待臧质的军队的到来，殿中将军沈灵赐率领一百艘小舰在南陵击破臧质先锋部队，生擒臧质的将领徐庆安、副将王僧，臧质到梁山，也在西岸修筑堡垒与官军对阵。
English: Emperor Song Xiaowu dispatched General Liu Yuanjing of the Fuxi Army, led by Yu Zizhi Wang Xuanmu and other naval forces, stationed on Liangshanzhou, and built a crescent-shaped fortress on the west bank of the Yangtze River. Both land and water awaited the arrival of the Qing army. General Shen Lingzhi led a hundred small ships to break the Qing vanguard troops in Nanling. General Xu Qing'an and Vice-General Wang Zeng of the Qing army went to Liangshan, and also built a fortress on the west bank to oppose the official army.

古文：元景檄书宣告曰：夫革道应运，基命之洪符；嗣业兴邦，绍历之明算。自非瑞积神衷，德充民极，孰能升临宝位，景属天居。大宋启期，理高中世，皇根帝叶，永流无疆。夷陂递来，遘兹凶难，国祸冤深，人纲郁灭。主上圣略聪武，孝感通神，义变草木，哀动精纬，躬幸南郢，亲扫大逆，道援横流，德模灵造，三光重照，七庙载兴。
现代文：柳元景草拟了一幅檄文告示诸军说： 应天承命，是新朝接受上天的指示，继承先帝是我们的正确选择，若不是种种吉祥的征兆，神明的支持，崇高的道德得到人民的拥护，怎能登临皇位，安然地坐上皇天给予的位置，大宋的创业，比中古时的王朝更加伟大，皇室的事业一定会永远流传下去，种种麻烦的降临，终于招致今日的祸乱，目前的动荡非常危险，伦理纲常几乎快要崩溃，皇上神武超人，孝感神灵，仁心滋助草木生长，善心激发天道，他亲自巡视荆楚之地，扫除叛乱的凶徒，四方援军前后相继。他崇高的品德巍巍矗立，日月星辰重见光明，祖宗大业再度繁荣。
English: Liu Yuanjing drafted an obituary notice to the troops, saying: In response to Heaven's command, the new dynasty accepted Heaven's instructions. It is our right choice to succeed the former emperor. If it were not for various auspicious signs, the support of the gods, and the lofty morality supported by the people, how could we ascend the throne and safely sit in the position given by Heaven? The entrepreneurship of the Great Song Dynasty is even greater than that of the Middle Ages. The cause of the royal family will surely be passed down forever. The advent of various troubles has finally led to today's calamity. The current turmoil is very dangerous. Ethics are often almost about to collapse.

古文：臧质少负疵衅，衣冠不齿，昧利诬天，著于触事。
现代文： 臧质少年时代犯下许多罪行，被体面的人们讥笑沉溺物欲，悖乱无常。
English: He committed many crimes in his youth and was ridiculed by respectable people for his materialism and instability.

古文：受任述职，不以宣效为心；专方莅民，惟以侵剥为务。官自贿至，族以货倾。
现代文：处处与人为敌，在他的官任上，一点也不努力效忠，位临人民之上，只知搜刮百姓，他升官全靠行贿，因为索贿竟然能灭人之族，所以康周昕全族被杀，冤枉几乎通到上天。
English: He was an enemy of the people everywhere. In his official position, he did not make any effort to be loyal. He was above the people and only knew how to rob the people. His promotion depended entirely on bribery. Because the demand for bribes could actually destroy the human race, Kang Zhou and his entire family were killed. The injustice almost reached heaven.

古文：是以康周陀覆命屠宗，冤达苍昊；郭伯、西门遗出自皁隶，宠越州朝。往莅东守，鬻爵三千。
现代文：郭伯，西门遗是下贱出身，臧质却让他们做到州级官吏，往年当东郡太守，卖官粮几达三千万余石。
English: Guo Bo and Ximen Zi were born in a low-class family, but their hard work allowed them to become state-level officials. In previous years, when they were the governor of Dong County, they sold official grain worth more than 30 million koku.

古文：率卒西讨，窃俘取黜。荷恩彭、泗，贪虐以逞，坑戮边氓，忽若草芥，倾渴仓庾，割没军粮。
现代文：率兵西讨群蛮，把俘虏和战利品放进自己腰包，在徐兖二州任上贪得无厌，杀害边疆人民，视同草木一般，耗费州府的储蓄，挪用军队的粮食。
English: He led the troops to fight the barbarians in the west, put the captives and spoils of war into his own pocket, was insatiably greedy when he was in charge of the two states, killed the people on the frontier, regarded them as nothing more than plants, spent the state capital's savings, and misappropriated the army's grain.

古文：作牧汉南，公盗府蓄，矫易文簿，专行欺妄。及受命北伐，惮役缓期，师出有辰，顾怀私爱，匹马弃众，宵行独返，遂复携嫔拥姬，淫宴军幕。
现代文：在雍州任上，公开盗窃州府的积蓄，随便改动账簿，专门搞欺骗勾当，接受朝廷命令北伐时，害怕敌人不敢赴援友军，出师很长时间，仍想着宠姬爱妾，单人回州，拥着嫔妃搂着妖女，在军营之中喝酒调情。
English: When he was in charge of Yongzhou, he openly stole the state capital's savings, changed the account books at will, and specialized in deception. When he received the order from the imperial court to go to the North, he was afraid that the enemy would not dare to go to the aid of the friendly army. He was out of school for a long time, still thinking about his pet and his concubine. He returned to Yongzhou alone, hugged his concubine and seduced his concubine, and drank and flirted in the military camp.

古文：孔、范之变，显于逆辞。
现代文：孔熙先、范晔那样的谋反活动，他公开地谈论。
English: He openly talks about the counter-insurgency activities like those of Kong Xixian and Fan Ye.

古文：凡此诸衅，皆彰著于宪简，振曝于观听。去岁义举，虽豫诚款，而淹留西楚，私相崇戴，奉书致命，形于心迹。新亭之捷，大难已夷，凶命假存，悬在晷刻，广莫之军，曾无遗矢，重关自开，伪众已溃，质犹复盘桓衢巷，后骑陈师。劳不足甄，定于朝议，而虚张功伐，扇动怨辞，自谓斯举，勋莫己若。初践殿守，忘犬马之情，奔趣帑藏，顿倾天府。山海弘量，苞荒藏疾，录其一介之心，掩其不逞之衅。
现代文：他的诸如此类的罪行，都在文件中记得很清楚，他在荆州停留时候，竟然安排别人做皇帝，并且写信派人联系，公然的进行；新亭之战的胜利、大乱已平，元凶刘邵苟延残喘命在顷刻，广莫门的臧军一箭不发，此门自动打开，敌人奔逃，臧质仍然徘徊在街巷之中，在那里布阵陈兵，他的功劳不值一提，满朝人士都同意这个观点，但臧质却虚张声势，称说自己的功劳，造出谣言，说这次起义，他的功劳没有第二个人赶上，开始叫他守卫宫殿，他忘掉了自己的臣子身份，直奔朝廷府库，一下子便把里面的东西抢个一干二净，皇上宽容大量，原谅他的这些罪过，记住他的一点功劳，掩盖他不老实的罪行。
English: His crimes, such as they are, are all clearly remembered in the documents. When he was staying in Jingzhou, he even arranged for someone else to become emperor, and sent a letter to contact someone, openly carried out; the victory of the Battle of Xinting, the great chaos has been leveled, the culprit Liu Shao Guoyan was left gasping for his life in an instant, Guangmo Gate's Wei army did not fire a single arrow, this gate opened automatically, the enemy fled, and Luo Jie still lingered in the streets and lanes, where he arrayed soldiers. His merit is not worth mentioning. People throughout the dynasty agree with this view, but Luo J

古文：遂爵首元等，职班盛级，优荣溢宠，莫与为畴。自恣丑薄，罔知涯涘，干谒陈闻，曾无纪极，请乐穷太子之英，求器尽官府之选。
现代文：于是评定他的功劳为第一等，让他当了大官，给他的荣誉非常之高，简直没有第二个人赶上，但他因此肆无忌禅，贪得无厌，不断的要求更多的赏赐，而且一点也不知休止，他要的乐器简直使大予府的好东西都不存在了。
English: So he rated his merit as the first class, made him a high-ranking official, and gave him a very high honor, almost no second person could catch up, but he was therefore reckless, insatiable, constantly demanding more rewards, and he did not stop at all. The musical instrument he wanted almost made the good things of the palace nonexistent.

古文：徐司空匪躬王室，遭罹凶祸，质与之少长，亲交兼常，曾无抚孤之仁，惟闻陵侮之酷，尺田寸宝，靡有孑遗。
现代文：他获得的宝贝几乎占去了官府的一半，徐司空为王室立了不少功勋，不幸被刘邵所杀，臧质青年时代时和他友好，而且和一般朋友不同，竟然一点也不同情。
English: The treasures he obtained accounted for almost half of the government offices. Xu Sikuang did a lot of meritorious work for the royal family, but was unfortunately killed by Liu Shao. He was friendly with him when he was young, and unlike ordinary friends, he did not sympathize at all.

古文：及受命南徂，临路滋甚，逼夺妻嫔，略市金帛，怨动京邑，丑闻都鄙。弃逐旧故，委蔑忠勤，鲁尚期、尹周之徒，心腹所倚，泣诉于御筵；袁同、连子敬之畴，爪牙所杖，一逝而不反。
现代文：徐司空的子弟，只听说他残酷地抢掠人家，徐家里的每一块土地，每一寸的珍宝都被他掠夺一空，到了接受皇上命令南归江州时，在路上骄横无忌，逼人妻子，夺人子女，抢劫市场上的金银布匹，他的罪行几乎让京城人愤怒填胸，他丑恶的名声人人皆知：不认故人朋友，敌视忠诚贤明的人士。鲁尚期、尹周等人曾做过他的心腹，之后在朝廷诉说臧质的无情。袁同、边子畴等人，曾任他的部属，离开他再也没回头。
English: The son of Xu Sikyong, we only heard that he cruelly plundered others. Every piece of land and every inch of treasure in the Xu family were plundered by him. When he received the emperor's order to return south to Jiangzhou, he was arrogant and ruthless on the road, forcing people's wives, robbing people's children, and robbing gold and silver cloths in the market. His crimes almost made the people of Beijing angry. His ugly reputation is well known to everyone: he did not recognize the deceased's friends, and was hostile to loyal and wise people. During the Lushan period, Yin Zhou and others had been his confidants, and

古文：虽上旨频烦，屡求劳牒，质但称伐在己，不逮僚隶，托咎朝廷，归罪有司，国士解心，有识莫附。
现代文：而且他不断上书朝廷，多次要求荣誉，臧质只是吹嘘他的功劳，从不承认部下的成绩，有错便是朝廷所致，或者便说是有关部门的失误。国人因此对他失去信任，有识之士谁也不附从。
English: Moreover, he constantly wrote to the imperial court, repeatedly demanded honors, and only bragged about his merits. He never acknowledged the achievements of his subordinates. If there was a mistake, it was caused by the imperial court, or it was said to be a mistake of the relevant departments. As a result, the Chinese people lost trust in him, and no one with insight would follow him.

古文：何文敬趋走厮养，天性愚狡，质迷其奸谄，寘怀委仗，遂外擅威刑，内游房室。
现代文：何文敬只不过是一个做小事的仆人，为人狡诈。臧质被他的谄媚所迷惑，让他当他的主要委托人，使他在外面握有大权，内则常常在臧质的屋子里横行。
English: He Wenjing was nothing more than a servant who did menial tasks. He was a cunning man. Yan Quan was bewitched by his flattery and made him his main client. This enabled him to wield great power on the outside, but on the inside he often ran amok in Yan Quan's house.

古文：质生与衅俱，不可详究，擢发数罪，曾何足言！
现代文：臧质天生是一个制造灾难的人，诸如此类的事不胜枚举，用尽南山的竹子，也不能写尽他的罪行。
English: He was born to be a calamity-maker, and the list of his misdeeds is too long to exhaust all the bamboo in Nanshan.

古文：丞相威重位尊，任居分陕，宗国倚赖，实兼恆情，而不及谦冲之涂，弗见逆顺之训，蔽同郤至，理乖范燮。
现代文： 丞相义宣权大官高，手下官员占据国家的一半，很被朝廷依靠和信任。这确实超过常情，但他不知道谦虚谨慎，不明白驯服和反叛的差别。像谷阝至一样地犯错误，像范文子一样悖乱不忠。
English: The chancellor, the minister of justice, the high-ranking official, and the officials under him occupy half of the country, and are very much relied on and trusted by the court. This is indeed more than usual, but he does not know modesty and prudence, does not understand the difference between taming and rebellion. He makes mistakes like Gu Xizhi, and disobeys and is disloyal like Fan Wenzi.

古文：遂乃远忽世祀，近受欺构，杖纳奸疏，还谋社稷。
现代文：于是忘掉了祖宗的祭祀，却接受奸贼的欺骗，同意反贼的计谋，想篡位做皇帝。
English: So he forgot the sacrifices of his ancestors, but accepted the deceit of the traitors, agreed to the anti-thieves' stratagems, and wanted to usurp the throne and become emperor.

古文：日者宴安上流，坐观成败，示遣疲卒，众裁三千，戎马不供，军粮靡献。
现代文：去年在荆州留恋不动，坐山观虎斗，表面上派一些疲老的士兵，不过只三千人，骑兵一个不出来，军粮半点不供应。
English: Last year, he lingered in Jingzhou, sat on a mountain to watch a tiger fight, and ostensibly sent some tired soldiers, but only three thousand, not a single cavalryman came out, and half a point of military food was not supplied.

古文：皇朝直以亲秩之重，酬宠兼极，近渐别子，礼越常均，苟识无所守，功弗由己，必为义不全，终于败德。
现代文：朝廷只因他亲近官高，给他以很重的赏赐，甚至惠及他的儿子们，看待他确实超过了平常。假如一个人没有见识，被人支配，必然作出坏事。现在他的行为，正是如此。
English: Just because he was close to high-ranking officials, the court gave him a very heavy reward, even benefiting his sons, and regarded him more than usual. If a person has no insight and is controlled by others, he is bound to do bad things. This is how he is behaving now.

古文：今兹放命，恨心于本，推诸昔岁，迹是诚非矣。
现代文：回想他过去表面的忠诚，实际上则是不老实的伪装。
English: Thinking back to his past, his apparent loyalty was actually a dishonest disguise.

古文：且家国夷险，情事异常，豫是臣子，孰不星赴，而玩寇忘哀，曾无奔拽。
现代文：况且国家遇到困难时期，不比平常时候，作为臣子的职责，哪一个不迅速勤王？而他却纵容敌人忘掉仇寇，竟不亲自赴会。
English: Moreover, when the country is in a difficult period, it is no more than a normal time. As a vassal's duty, which one is not quick to be loyal to the king? And he has indulged the enemy to forget the enemy, but did not attend the meeting in person.

古文：面蕃十稔，惠政蔑闻，重赃深掠，纵欲已甚，姬妾百房，尼僧千计，败道伤俗，悖乱人神，民怨盈涂，国谤弥岁。
现代文：当了十年刺史，没听说一件成绩，多次接受贿赂，掠夺人民，纵欲过度，宠爱姬妾几达数千人，养着和尚尼姑有上千人，败坏道德，污染风俗。
English: After ten years of history, he did not hear of a single achievement, repeatedly accepted bribes, plundered the people, indulged in excessive indulgence, pampered thousands of concubines, raised thousands of monks and nuns, corrupted morals, and polluted customs.

古文：又贼劭未禽，凶威犹强，将毁其私坟，戮其诸子，图成骇机，垂赖义举，捷期云速，不日告平，释怨毒之心，解倒悬之急，论恩叙德，造育为重。
现代文：对抗人民和神明，人民对他的怨恨满路都是，国人的批评每年成堆，最后在刘邵未被消灭时，气势仍很强大，刘邵将要毁掉义宣母亲私坟，杀掉他的儿子，为的是制造恐怖的气氛，可喜依赖起义的大部队，迅速打败了元凶刘邵，很快平定了祸乱，让人们丢掉怨恨的心情，解除了难忍的痛苦，奖励功劳，选择高尚的人到朝廷。
English: Against the people and gods, the people's resentment of him is all over the road, the criticism of the people is piled up every year, and finally, when Liu Shao was not eliminated, the momentum was still very strong. Liu Shao was going to destroy the private grave of Yixuan's mother and kill his son in order to create an atmosphere of terror. It was a pleasure to rely on the great army of the uprising, quickly defeated the culprit Liu Shao, and quickly calmed the calamity, let people lose their resentment, relieved the unbearable pain, rewarded merit, and selected noble people to go to the imperial court.

古文：援人自助，弃人快谗，怙乱疑功，未闻其比。
现代文：而义宣则借别人力量帮助自己，忘记友人的思想，让坏蛋快乐，他总是制造混乱，怀疑别人的成功，听说没有第二个人赶得上。
English: Yixuan, on the other hand, uses the strength of others to help himself, forgets the thoughts of his friends, and makes the villain happy. He always creates chaos, doubts the success of others, and hears that no second person can catch up.

古文：仆以不肖，过蒙荣私，荷佩升越，光绝伦伍。家本北边，志存慷慨，常甘投生，以殉艰棘，惟恩思难，激气冲襟，故以眺三湘而永慨，望九江而遐愤。若使身死国康，誓在殒命，况仰禀圣略，俯鞠义徒，万全之形，愚夫所照。
现代文： 我才低能浅，承蒙皇上的看重，做到很大的官职，远远超过了平常军人，驻守北方边疆抱着一腔热血，常希望捐躯为国，报效皇上的知遇之恩，有时候觉得心潮澎湃，所以看到荆州人的行动非常恼火，看到江州刺史的叛乱，万分气愤，如果我死了国家安宁，我一定要捐躯疆场，况且有皇上英明的指挥，统率众多义军，一定会有胜利的把握，这是众人看得很清楚的。
English: I am a low-level talent, I have been valued by the emperor, I have achieved a great official position, far exceeding ordinary soldiers, stationed in the northern frontier with a warm heart, I often hope to sacrifice my body for the country, repay the grace of the emperor's wisdom, sometimes I feel that my heart is surging, so I am very annoyed to see the actions of Jingzhou people, and I am furious to see the rebellion of Jiangzhou stabbing history. If I die of national tranquility, I must sacrifice my body on the battlefield. Moreover, with the emperor's wise command, leading many rebels, there will certainly be a grasp of victory, which is very clear to everyone.

古文：夫薛竟陵控率突骑，陆道步驰。檀右卫、申右率、垣游击整勒锐师，飞轮构路。王豫州方舟缮甲，久已前驱。
现代文：至于薛安都所率领的骑兵，从陆地进攻檀右卫、申右帅、垣游击等将领们正统率精锐的部队，飞快地在路上奔驰，王玄谟则正统率水军，早已长驱西进，我则统率主力部队，迅疾前行。
English: As for the cavalry led by Xue Andu, attacking from the land, the generals such as Dang Yu Wei, Shen Yu Shuai, and Qi Guerrilla, led the elite troops in an orthodox way and galloped on the road. Wang Xuanmu led the navy in an orthodox way and had long been driving westward. I led the main force and advanced rapidly.

古文：仆训卒利兵，凌波电进。沈镇军、萧安南接舳连旌，首尾风合。骠骑竟陵王懿亲令誉，问望攸归，大司马江夏王道略明远，徽猷茂世，并旄钺临涂，云驱齐引。群兵竞迈，秘驾徐启。
现代文：骁骑将军竟陵王义恭则是皇亲国戚，威名盖世，众望所归；大司马江夏王义恭深谋远虑，他们都汇聚在这支大军，齐头并进；皇上在后面坐镇指挥，军车发出悦耳的响声，五彩金牛牵引红旗，成千上万的骑兵，摇天震地，万艘兵舰如彩云齐飞。
English: The cavalry general, Wang Yigong, is a relative of the emperor, famous all over the world, and revered by the people; the commander of the Ma Jiangxia, Wang Yigong, is far-sighted, and they are all gathered in this large army, marching side by side; the emperor sits in the back and commands, the military vehicles emit a pleasant sound, the multi-colored golden bull pulls the red flag, thousands of cavalry, shake the earth, and thousands of warships fly like clouds.

古文：履安奉顺，声泰事全，孰与附逆居危，身害名丑，慈亲垂白受戮，弱子婴孩就诛。
现代文：我们的威名号令，能使银河转动，以正义之师攻击叛乱敌军，如摧枯拉朽，加上天下同心，七星同庆，神鬼保佑，胜利更是不言而喻。 你们附从的将士们有的几代蒙受皇恩，有的心怀道义，应该知道君臣上下的秩序，下不犯上，帽子和鞋袜，不能颠倒，顺从秩序，必享成功。
English: Our grand and famous order can turn the Milky Way and attack the rebel enemy army with a righteous division, such as destroying the withering and decaying, coupled with the world's unanimity, the seven stars celebrate together, and the gods and ghosts bless, the victory is even more self-evident. Your subordinate soldiers, some of whom have received royal grace for several generations, and some with a moral conscience, should know the order of the monarchs and ministers, and do not violate it, and the hats and shoes and socks cannot be reversed, and obey the order and enjoy success.

古文：所以有诏迟回，未震雷霆者，正为诸君身拘寇手，或怀乃心。吉凶由人，无谓为远，今而不变，后悔何及。
现代文：怎能附从逆贼而招致声败名裂的下场，而愿意父母被杀，幼子被斩呢？所以皇上下诏希望能幡然悔悟，目前只是被叛军所制，但心中却站在皇上一边，是祸是福马上就会兑现，现在不行动，后悔不及。
English: How can one follow a traitor and incur disgrace, and be willing to have one's parents killed and one's young son beheaded? Therefore, the emperor issued an edict hoping for repentance. At present, he is only being controlled by the rebels, but in his heart he is on the emperor's side. Whether it is misfortune or good fortune, it will soon be realized. If he does not act now, he will regret it.

古文：授檄之日，心驰贼庭。
现代文：看到檄文时，赶快挣脱叛贼的牢笼。 
English: When you see the warning, quickly break free from the traitor's cage.

古文：义宣亦相次系至。江夏王与义宣书曰： 昔桓玄借兵于仲堪，有似今日。 
现代文：刘义宣也接着东进，江夏王刘义恭给刘义宣的信说： 当年桓玄借用殷仲堪的军队和今日一样，最终还是谋害了仲堪。 
English: Liu Yixuan also went eastward, and the letter from Liu Yigong, the king of Jiangxia, to Liu Yixuan said: In those days, Huan Xuan borrowed Yin Zhongkan's army, just like today, but in the end, he plotted to kill Zhongkan.

古文：义宣由此与质相疑。
现代文：刘义宣于是和臧质互相猜疑。
English: Liu Yixuan and Gongye became suspicious of each other.

古文：质进计曰： 今以万人取南州，则梁山中绝，万人缀玄谟，必不敢动。质浮舟外江，直向石头，此上略也。 
现代文：臧质献计给刘义宣说： 现在派一万攻取南洲，那么梁山的敌兵使兵分两路，用一万人牵制王玄谟，他一定不敢动，我便在江中连结水军，直攻石头城，这是上策。 
English: Liu Yixuan said: Now send ten thousand men to invade Nanzhou, then the enemy soldiers of Liangshan will divide the soldiers into two ways, and use ten thousand men to restrain Wang Xuanmu. He must not dare to move. I will connect the navy in the river and directly attack Stone City. This is the best strategy.

古文：义宣将从之，腹心刘谌之曰： 质求前驰，此志难测。不如尽锐攻梁山，事克然后长驱，万安之计也。 
现代文：刘义宣准备听从他的计策，他的心腹刘湛之说： 臧质想当先峰，这个心思不可靠，还不如集中精兵攻占梁山，攻克之后长驱东下，这是万全之策。 
English: Liu Yixuan was ready to listen to his strategy, and his confidant Liu Zhan said: "If you want to be a pioneer, this idea is not reliable. It is better to concentrate the best soldiers to capture Liangshan, and drive eastward after the conquest. This is a perfect plan."

古文：质遣将尹周之攻胡子反、柳叔政于西垒，时子反渡东岸就玄谟计事，闻贼至，驰归。周之攻垒甚急，刘季之水军殊死战，贼势盛，求救于玄谟。玄谟不遣，崔勋之固争，乃遣勋之救之。比至，城已陷，勋之战死，季之收众而退。
现代文：臧质派将领尹周之攻击胡子反、柳叔政的江西堡垒，当时胡子反东渡长江和王玄谟商讨军情，听说敌人到了，慌忙回到西岸，尹周之进攻正紧急，刘季之率领水军与臧质的军队展开激烈的搏斗，但敌人力量太大，于是又求救于王玄谟，玄谟没有派增援人马，部将崔勋之坚决反对、于是派崔劭之增援西岸军队，崔到后，西岸堡垒已被臧军攻克，崔勋之也不幸战死，刘季之率领残兵退了回去。
English: Liu Jizhi led the navy and fought fiercely with Liu Jizhi's army, but the enemy was too strong, so he turned to Wang Xuanmu for help. Xuanmu did not send reinforcements, but his subordinate, General Cui Xun, strongly objected, so he sent Cui Jizhi to reinforce the west coast army. After Cui arrived, the west coast fortress had been conquered by the Wei army, Cui Xun also died in the battle, and Liu Jizhi led the remnants of the army back.

古文：子反、叔政奔还东岸，玄谟斩子反军副李文仲。
现代文：胡子反、柳叔政也奔回东岸，王玄谟将胡子反的副将李文仲斩首，臧质想继续攻击东岸城池。
English: Hu Zixuan and Liu Shuzheng also ran back to the east bank, and Wang Xuanmu beheaded the vice-commander Li Wenzhong of Hu Zixuan, who wanted to continue attacking the east bank.

古文：质欲仍攻东城，义宣党颜乐之说义宣曰： 质若复拔东城，则大功尽归之矣。宜遣麾下自行。 
现代文：刘义宣的部下颜乐之劝刘义宣说： 臧质如果再攻下东城，那么所有的功劳便都是他的了，应该派遣你的部队自己行动。 
English: Liu Yixuan's subordinate Yan Le's advice to Liu Yixuan: "If you attack Dongcheng again, then all the credit will be his, you should send your troops to act on their own.

古文：义宣遣刘谌之就质，陈军城南。玄谟留羸弱守城，悉精兵出战，薛安都骑军前出，垣护之督诸将继之。战良久，贼阵小拔，骑得入。刘季之、宗越又陷其西北，众军乘之，乃大溃。
现代文：刘义宣于是派刘湛之率兵靠近臧质，在东城南边布阵，王玄谟让老弱士兵守卫城池，把他的精兵全部摆出攻击臧军，薛安都的骑兵最先攻击，垣护之指挥各将领相继冲过去，打了很长时间，臧军的军阵稍稍有点移动，于是薛安都的骑兵趁势冲过去，此时刘季之，宗越又击溃了臧军的西北阵脚，王玄谟等众多军队一齐猛攻。
English: Liu Yixuan then sent Liu Zhan and his soldiers close to Jiaojie and set up a line of battle on the south side of Dongcheng. Wang Xuanmu let the old and weak soldiers guard the city pool and put all his elite soldiers to attack the Jiaojie army. Xue Andu's cavalry attacked first. The commanders of the garrison rushed over one after another and fought for a long time. The military line of the Jiaojie army moved slightly, so Xue Andu's cavalry took advantage of the situation and rushed over. At this time, Liu Jizhi and Zong Yue defeated the northwest line of the Jiaojie army.

古文：因风放火，船舰悉见焚烧，延及西岸。质求义宣欲一计事，密已出走矣。质不知所为，亦走，众悉降散。
现代文：臧军大败，江上的朝廷军队趁着东风放火焚毁臧军的全部船只并漫延到西岸，臧质找刘义宣想讨论军事，但义宣早已逃走了，臧质手足无措，也逃跑了，他的军士全部投降或逃走。
English: The Xiongnu army was heavily defeated. The imperial army on the river took advantage of the easterly wind to set fire to all the ships of the Xiongnu army and spread to the west coast. Yan Xie went to Liu Yixuan to discuss military affairs, but Yixuan had already fled. Yan Xie was helpless and also fled. All of his sergeants surrendered or fled.

古文：质至寻阳，焚烧府舍，载妓妾西奔。使所宠何文敬领兵居前，至西阳。
现代文：臧质到了浔阳，将州府的屋子全部烧毁，用船装着妓妾向西方逃去，叫他宠爱的部下何文敬率兵在前面开路。
English: Xingye arrived in Fenyang, burned down all the houses of the state capital, fled to the west with a boat carrying prostitutes, and ordered his favorite subordinate He Wenjing to lead the soldiers to open the way in front.

古文：西阳太守鲁方平，质之党也，至是怀贰，诳文敬曰： 传诏宣敕，唯捕元恶一人，余并无所问。 
现代文：到了西阳，西阳太守鲁方平是臧质的私党，这时候有了二心，骗何文敬说： 诏书宣布，只需缉拿元凶一人，其余的不问。 
English: When he arrived at Xiyang, the Xiyang governor Lu Fangping was a ruthless private party. At this time, he had second thoughts, and deceived He Wenjing and said: The imperial edict announced that it was only necessary to arrest one of the culprits, and the rest would not be questioned.

古文：文敬弃众而走。
现代文：文敬丢下他的部下逃跑了。
English: Wenying fled, leaving his men behind.

古文：质先以妹夫羊冲为武昌郡，质往投之。既至，冲已为郡丞胡庇之所杀。
现代文：臧质先前叫他妹夫羊冲当武昌郡太守，臧质前往投靠他，到了武昌得知羊冲已被郡丞胡庇之杀了。
English: Gongye had previously asked his brother-in-law Yangchong to be the governor of Wuchang County. Gongye went to him to seek his help. When he arrived in Wuchang, he learned that Yangchong had been killed by the county magistrate Hu Bi.

古文：无所归，乃入南湖逃窜，无食，摘莲啖之。追兵至，窘急，以荷覆头，自沈于水，出鼻。军主郑俱兒望见，射之中心，兵刃乱至，肠胃缠萦水草，队主裘应斩质首，传京都，时年五十五。
现代文：臧质走投无路，于是跑到南湖，肚子饿了，摘莲子吃，追兵赶到，臧质非常窘迫潜到水下，用荷叶遮住头，只让鼻子出气，小队长俱儿望见，射了一箭，正好击在他的心坎上，接着兵刀齐下，臧质的五脏六腑都流出来了，几乎把周围的水草挽住，队长裘应砍下臧质的脑袋，送他的脑袋到京城。当时他五十五岁。
English: He was desperate, so he ran to the South Lake. He was hungry, picked lotus seeds to eat, and chased the soldiers. He was so embarrassed that he dived under the water, covered his head with lotus leaves, and only allowed his nose to breathe. The little captain saw him and shot an arrow, which hit him right in the heart. Then the soldiers cut him down with their swords, and all of his organs and glands came out, almost holding back the surrounding water plants. Captain Qiu Ying chopped off his head and sent it to Beijing. He was 55 years old at the time.

古文：录尚书江夏王臣义恭、左仆射臣宏等奏曰： 臧质底弃下才，而藉遇深重，穷愚悖常，构煽凶逆，变至滔天，志图泯夏，违恩叛德，罪过恆科。
现代文：录尚书江夏王刘义恭、左仆射刘宏等上了一道奏疏说： 臧质本来是低能庸才，但借助了种种机会。他愚蠢至极，反背天常，进行造反，使天下动乱不已，想当皇帝，忘恩负义，罪行滔天。
English: Recorded in the Shang Shu, Liu Yigong, the king of Jiangxia, and Liu Hong, the second-in-command of Liu Xiaobo, said in a playful way: "He was originally a low-energy mediocrity, but he took advantage of various opportunities. He was extremely stupid, went against nature, rebelled, caused the world to be in turmoil, wanted to be an emperor, was ungrateful, and committed heinous crimes.

古文：枭首之宪，有国通典，惩戾思永，去恶宜深。臣等参议，须辜日限意，使依汉王莽事例，漆其头首，藏于武库。庶为鉴戒，昭示将来。 
现代文：国家的法律对这样的人应该杀头，为惩诫后世当臣子不忠诚的，去掉坏的东西应该果断，我们臣子们讨论，根据他罪行，又根据汉朝王莽的先例，应把他的头用油漆涂一遍，留在军事博物馆内，为的是成为将来人的鉴戒，告诉后人不要向他学习。 
English: The laws of the country should kill the head of such a person. In order to discipline future generations, when a vassal is disloyal, it should be decisive to remove the bad things. We courtiers discussed that according to his crime, and according to the precedent of the Han Dynasty king's recklessness, his head should be painted again and left in the military museum, in order to become a warning to future generations and tell future generations not to learn from him.

古文：诏可。
现代文：孝武下诏书同意了。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：质初下，义宣以质子敦为征虏将军、雍州刺史。
现代文：臧质开始东下时，刘义宣用臧质儿子臧敦做征虏将军、雍州刺史，臧质留儿子臧敞做监军，让臧敦随从自己。
English: When Gongye began to move eastward, Liu Yi promoted Gongye's son, Gongdong, to be the general of the conscript army and the historian of Yongzhou, and Gongye's son, Gaochang, to be the supervisor of the army, so that Gongye would follow him.

古文：质留子敞为监军，将敦自随，至是并为武昌郡所执送。敦官至黄门郎。敦弟敷，司徒属。敷弟敞，太子洗马。敞弟斁，敦子仲璋，质之二子二孙未有名，同诛。
现代文：这时都被武昌郡抓住送给朝廷，臧敦官至黄门郎，臧敦的弟弟臧敷官至司徒部属，臧敷的弟弟臧敞，官至太子洗马，臧敞弟弟臧鉩，臧敦的儿子仲璋，臧质的另外两子两孙没有名声的，同时被杀。
English: At this time, all of them were caught by Wuchang County and sent to the imperial court, including the officials from Zhengtong to Huangmenlang, the younger brother of Zhengtong from Xizhi official to Shitou subordinate, the younger brother of Xizhi from Xizhi, the official from Xizhi to Prince Zama, the younger brother of Zhengtong from Xizhi, the son of Zhengtong, and the other two sons and two grandsons of Xixi, who had no reputation, were killed at the same time.

古文：质之起兵也，豫章太守任荟之、临川内史刘怀之、鄱阳太守杜仲儒并为尽力，发遣郡丁，并送粮运，伏诛。
现代文：臧质起兵时，豫章太守任荟之，临川内史刘怀之，鄱阳太守杜仲儒都为臧质卖力，派遣本郡的人来送粮食，都被杀掉。
English: When Gongye raised an army, Yuzhang Dazhong, Linchuan Inner Historian Liu Huai, and Shenyang Dazhong sent people from their counties to bring grain to Gongye. They were all killed.

古文：任荟之，字处茂，乐安人也。历世祖、南平王铄抚军右军司马、长史行事。太祖称之曰： 望虽不足，才能有余。 
现代文：任荟之字处茂，乐安人，官至孝武帝和南平王刘铄抚军右军司马，长史行事，文帝曾评价他们说： 威望虽不够，但才能有余。 
English: Emperor Wen once said of them, "Their prestige is not enough, but their talent is more than enough."

古文：杜仲儒，杜骥兄子也。
现代文：杜仲儒，是杜骥的哥哥的儿子。
English: Du Zhongru is the son of Du Yao's elder brother.

古文：豫章望蔡子相孙冲之起义拒质，质遣将郭会肤、史山夫讨之，为冲之所破。
现代文：豫章望蔡子的国相孙冲之起义抵抗臧质。臧质派部将郭会肤，史山夫讨伐他，被孙冲之打败。
English: Yuzhang hoped that Cai Zi's minister of state, Sun Chongzhi, would lead an uprising to resist Gongye. The Gongye faction would defeat Guo, and Shishanfu would fight him and be defeated by Sun Chongzhi.

古文：世祖发诏，以为尚书都官曹郎中。
现代文：孝武帝下诏用他当尚书都官曹郎中。
English: Emperor Xiaowu decreed that he should be the official secretary of the capital.

古文：冲之，太原中都人，晋秘书监盛曾孙也。
现代文：孙冲之，太原中都人氏，晋朝秘书监孙盛的曾孙。
English: Sun Chongzhi, a great-grandson of Sun Sheng, Taiyuan Zhongtou's secretary and supervisor during the Jin Dynasty.

古文：爽初南归，秀以爽武人，不闲吏职，白太祖请处穆为长史以辅爽，太祖以补司马，后转长史云。
现代文：最后官至右军将军，巴东太守，后来的事见邓琬传。沈灵赐因为在南陵打败臧质先锋的功劳，封爵南平县男，食邑三百户；赐给崔勋之官通直郎；大司马参军刘天赐在梁山牺牲以后被追认为给事中。
English: The last official to the right army general, Padong Taishu, later saw the story of Deng Xuan. Shen Ling gave a knighthood to the man of Nanping County, who had 300 households, for the merit of defeating the enamel pioneer in Nanling; he gave a knighthood to the official of Cui Xun, Tong Naorong; Liu Tian Zi, the chief of the horse army, was considered to be in the middle of things after the sacrifice of Liang Shan.

古文：沈攸之，字仲达，吴兴武康人，司空庆之从父兄子也。
现代文：沈攸之，字仲达，吴兴郡武康县人，是司空沈庆之的叔伯哥哥的儿子。
English: Shen Youzhi, alias Zhongda, a native of Wu Kang County, Wuxing County, is the son of the uncle of Siku Shen Qingzhi.

古文：父叔仁，为衡阳王义季征西长史，兼行参军，领队，又随义季镇彭城，度征北府。
现代文：他父亲沈叔仁，做过衡阳王刘义季的征西长史，兼任行参军，当警卫队长，之后又跟着刘义季镇守彭城，一直在征北府做事。
English: His father, Shen Shuren, had been a member of Hengyang King Liu Yizi's Long March to the West, and had also joined the army as a guard captain. Later, he followed Liu Yizi to guard Pengcheng, and had been working in the Northern Expedition.

古文：攸之少孤贫，元嘉二十七年，索虏南寇，发三吴民丁，攸之亦被发。既至京都，诣领军将军刘遵考，求补白丁队主。遵考谓之曰： 君形陋，不堪队主。 
现代文：沈攸之少年丧父，家境贫穷。元嘉二十七年，魏军侵略南方，宋文帝征集三吴的壮丁，沈攸之也被选入，到了京城，他拜访领军将军刘遵考，请求补任壮丁的队长，刘遵考对他说： 你相貌丑陋，做不了队长。 
English: In the 27th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Wei army invaded the south, and Emperor Song Wendi recruited the young men of Sanwu. Shen Youyou was also selected. When he arrived in Beijing, he visited Liu Zunkao, the leading general of the army, and asked him to fill in as the captain of the young men. Liu Zunkao said to him: You are ugly, you can't be the captain.

古文：因随庆之征讨。二十九年，征西阳蛮，始补队主。
现代文：于是他只好跟着沈庆之打仗，元嘉二十九年，征讨西阳蛮人，才开始补任为队长。
English: As a result, he had to follow Shen Qingzhi's war, and in the 29th year of Yuan Jia, he began to recruit Xiyang barbarians before he began to fill in as captain.

古文：巴口建义，南中郎府板长史，兼行参军。
现代文：西阳起义时，南中郎刘骏任命他为队长，兼行参军。
English: During the Xiyang Uprising, Liu Bei, the Southern Middle Lord, appointed him as captain, and he also joined the army.

古文：新亭之战，身被重创，事宁，为太尉行参军，封平洛县五等侯。
现代文：新亭之战的时候他受了重伤，胜利后，当了太尉行参军。晋朝时候京都的两岸，扬州府在那里一直设置都部从事，分管二县的刑事。
English: He was seriously injured during the Battle of Xinting, and after the victory, he became a captain and joined the army. During the reign of Emperor Jin, the capital of Yangzhou was located on both sides of Kyoto, where it was in charge of two counties of detectives.

古文：攸之迁员外散骑侍郎。又随庆之征广陵，屡有功，被箭破骨。世祖以其善战，配以仇池步槊。
现代文：永初以后罢去了。孝建三年，又设置这个官职，沈攸之管北岸的事，会稽人孔靑管南岸的事，以后中央又罢去这个职务，沈攸之于是升任为员外散骑侍郎，又跟着沈庆之讨伐广陵王刘诞，多次立功，也受过伤，骨头里面还有残余箭头。孝武因为他很会打仗，便给他配上仇池产的步矛肖。
English: After Yongchun, he was dismissed. After three years of Xiao Jian, this official position was set up again, with Shen Youyou in charge of the north bank, and the auditor Kong Xi in charge of the south bank. After that, the central government dismissed this position, and Shen Youyou was promoted to the position of non-commissioned officer, and followed Shen Qing's crusade against the Guangling King Liu Xizhi. He made many meritorious deeds, and was also injured, and there were residual arrows in his bones. Because Xiao Wu was very good at fighting, he was equipped with a walking spear made in Quchi.

古文：事平，当加厚赏，为庆之所抑，迁太子旅贲中郎，攸之甚恨之。七年，遭母忧，葬毕，起为龙骧将军、武康令。
现代文：叛乱平息之后，他应该受到重重的奖励，被沈庆之掩盖了，只升到太子旅贲中郎，沈攸之非常恨沈庆之，大明元年，遇到母亲去世，安葬母亲之后，又起任龙骧将军、武康县令。
English: After the rebellion was quelled, he should have received heavy rewards. He was covered up by Shen Qingzhu, and was only promoted to the prince's brigadier general. Shen Youzhu hated Shen Qingzhu very much. In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, he met his mother's death, and after burying his mother, he was appointed as the general of Longjing and the governor of Wu Kang County.

古文：前废帝景和元年，除豫章王子尚车骑中兵参军，直阁，与宗越、谭金等并为废帝所宠，诛戮群公，攸之等皆为之用命。封东兴县侯，食邑五百户。寻迁右军将军，增邑百户。太宗即位，以例削封。
现代文：前废帝景和元年，他迁官豫章王刘子尚车骑中兵参军，在皇宫值班，和宗越、谭金等同受废帝的宠爱，在杀戮众功臣中，沈攸之等人都为废帝尽力，因此封爵乐兴县侯，食邑五百户，不久又升迁右军将军，再增加食邑一百户，明帝登位，按众人的例子又削去封爵。
English: In the year of the former Emperor Jing and the first year of the year, he was transferred to the officer Yu Zhang Wang Liu Zi Shangcha to join the army as a cavalry soldier, and he was on duty at the imperial palace. He and Zong Yue and Tan Jin were equally favored by the former emperor. In the killing of all meritorious subjects, Shen Youzhi and others were all doing their best for the former emperor. Therefore, he was knighted as the lord of Lexing County, with five hundred households, and soon he was promoted to the general of the right army, with another hundred households, and the Ming Emperor ascended to the throne. According to the example of many

古文：宗越、谭金等谋反，攸之复召入直阁，除东海太守。未拜，会四方反叛，南贼已次近道，以攸之为宁朔将军、寻阳太守，率军据虎槛。
现代文：不久又向明帝告密，说宗越、谭金等想造反，沈攸之又被召进去在宫门值班，再任官东海太守，还未就职，恰遇四方反叛，南方的判乱军队已驻扎京城附近，于是明帝任沈攸之为宁朔将军、寻阳太守，率领军队占据虎槛。
English: Not long after, he reported to the Ming Emperor that Zong Yue, Tan Jin and others wanted to rebel, and Shen Youzhi was called in to be on duty at the palace gate. He was reappointed as the official East China Sea governor, but had not yet taken office. It happened that there was a four-way rebellion, and the south's rebel army was stationed near the capital. Therefore, the Ming Emperor appointed Shen Youzhi as the general of Ningshuo and the governor of Huanyang, and he led the army to occupy the Tiger Threshold.

古文：时王玄谟为大统，未发。
现代文：当时王玄谟为统帅，还未出发。
English: At that time, Wang Xuanmu was the commander-in-chief and had not yet set out.

古文：前锋有五军在虎槛，五军后又络驿继至，每夜各立姓号，不相禀受。
现代文：前锋有五支军队在虎槛，后面又有五支军队接踵而来，他们每天晚上各自标明姓名军号，互不相属。
English: At the front, there are five armies at the Tiger's Threshold, and behind them, there are another five armies coming one after another. Every night, they each indicate their names and ranks, and they do not belong to each other.

古文：攸之谓军吏曰： 今众军姓号不同，若有耕夫渔父，夜相呵叱，便致骇乱，取败之道也。 
现代文：沈攸之对军官们说： 现在部队号令不一，如果有几个种田的农民、打鱼的渔民大喊一声，便能导致混乱，这是导致失败的根子。 
English: Shen Youzhi said to the officers: At present, the orders of the troops are different. If several farmers and fishermen shout at once, it can lead to chaos. This is the root cause of failure.

古文：乃就一军请号，众咸从之。
现代文：于是请求统一各路军队号令，其余各支部队都照办了。
English: He then requested that the orders of the various armies be unified, and the remaining units complied.

古文：殷孝祖为前锋都督，而大失人情，攸之内抚将士，外谐群帅，众并倚赖之。
现代文：殷孝祖当前锋都督，不被将士们拥戴。沈攸之则安抚士兵，外面则和合众多将领。
English: Yin Xiaozhu, the former vanguard governor, was not supported by the generals. Shen Youzhi, on the other hand, pacified the soldiers, while many generals were reconciled outside.

古文：时南贼前锋钟冲之、薛常宝等屯据赭圻，殷孝祖率众军攻之，为流矢所中死，军主范潜率五百人投贼，人情震骇，并谓攸之宜代孝祖为统。
现代文：众人都依靠他。当时南方反叛部队的前锋孙冲之、薛常宝等人占据赭圻，殷孝祖率领各路先锋攻击孙冲之，被乱箭射死。一个小将领范潜率领五百人向敌人投降，人情不安，都说应该让沈攸之代替殷孝祖做前锋都督。
English: Everyone relied on him. At that time, Sun Chongzhi and Xue Changbao, the forwards of the southern rebel forces, occupied the capital. Yin Xiaozu led the vanguard to attack Sun Chongzhi and was shot dead by random arrows. A small general, Fan Qian, led five hundred people to surrender to the enemy. People were uneasy and said that Shen Youzhi should be allowed to replace Yin Xiaozu as the vanguard governor.

古文：时建安王休仁屯虎槛，总统众军，闻孝祖死，遣宁朔将军江方兴、龙骧将军刘灵遗各率三千人赴赭圻。
现代文：当时建安王刘休仁也驻兵虎槛，统率各路部队，听说殷孝祖死了，便派遣宁朔将军江方兴、龙骧将军刘灵遗两人分别率领三千人到赭圻。
English: At that time, Liu Xuren, the king of Jian'an, was also stationed in the Tiger's Threshold, leading all the troops. When he heard that Yin Xiaozu had died, he sent two people, Ningshuo General Jiang Fangxing and Longyan General Liu Lingyi, respectively, to lead three thousand people to Handan.

古文：攸之以为孝祖既死，贼有乘胜之心，明日若不更攻，则示之以弱。方兴名位相亚，必不为己下，军政不一，致败之由。乃率诸军主诣方兴，谓之曰： 四方并反，国家所保，无复百里之地。唯有殷孝祖为朝廷所委赖，锋镝裁交，舆尸而反，文武丧气，朝野危心。
现代文：沈攸之认为殷孝祖既然死了，敌人很可能乘机进行新攻击，如果明天再不向敌人进攻，那么便会让敌人看出问题，江方兴的声望和自己相差不远，必定不甘心当自己的下属，军队的统领不统一，必将导致溃败，于是他带各军主将拜见江方兴，并对他说： 四方藩镇同时反叛，朝廷控制的地方，还不够方圆百里的土地，只有殷孝祖被朝廷所信赖，两军刚刚交锋，他便被收尸而回。将士们的气势受挫，朝廷忧心不已。
English: Shen Youzhi thought that since Yin Xiaozhu was dead, the enemy was likely to take the opportunity to launch a new attack. If he did not attack the enemy again tomorrow, then he would let the enemy see the problem. Jiang Fangxing's reputation was not far from his own, and he would not be willing to be his subordinate. If the commanders of the army were not unified, it would inevitably lead to a rout. So he and the commanders of the army met with Jiang Fangxing and said to him: Four provinces and towns rebelled at the same time. The area controlled by the court was not enough to cover a hundred miles. Only Yin Xiaozhu was trusted by the court.

古文：事之济否，唯在明旦一战，战若不捷，则大事去矣。
现代文：胜利与否，只在明天的决战。如果明天不能打胜，那么大事便去了。
English: Whether we win or not depends on tomorrow's decisive game. If we don't win tomorrow, then it's all over.

古文：诘朝之事，诸人咸谓吾应统之，自卜懦薄，干略不办及卿，今辄相推为统。但当相与戮力尔。 
现代文：今天早上，大家都认为我应该当统帅，但我自己比较胆小，本领不如你，现在便推选你当统帅，我们只应该相互合作努力奋斗而已。 
English: This morning, everyone thought that I should be the commander, but I myself am more timid and my ability is not as good as yours, so now I choose you to be the commander. We should only cooperate and work hard.

古文：方兴甚悦。
现代文：江方兴听到这些话非常高兴。
English: Jiang Fangxing was very happy to hear these words.

古文：攸之既出，诸军主并尤之，攸之曰： 卿忘廉、蔺、寇、贾之事邪？
现代文：沈攸之从江营出来，各个将领都责备他，沈攸之说： 你们难道忘了廉颇蔺相如相互忍让，寇恂贾复相互宽容的故事吗？
English: Shen Youzhi came out of the river camp, and all the generals rebuked him. Shen Youzhi said, "Have you forgotten the story of how the corrupt and the virtuous tolerate each other, and how the corrupt and the virtuous tolerate each other?

古文：吾本以济国活家，岂计彼此之升降。
现代文：我本来为了拯救国家，怎么能计较我和他的官职的高低？
English: In order to save the country, how could I care about the level of my and his official position?

古文：且我能下彼，彼必不能下我，共济艰难，岂可自厝同异！ 
现代文：况且只有我能向他让步，他必定不能向我让步，为的是共同解救当前的危机，怎么能自己树立异端呢？ 
English: Moreover, only I can make concessions to him, he must not make concessions to me, in order to jointly solve the current crisis, how can he set up a heresy?

古文：明旦进战，自寅讫午，大破贼于赭圻城外，追奔至姥山，分遣水军乘势进讨；又破其水军，拔胡白二城。
现代文：于是官军第二天重新展开进攻，从五点到十二点，官军在城外大败敌军，追讨敌人到姥山，再另派水军乘胜前进，又打败敌人的水军，攻下胡白二城。
English: As a result, the government army resumed the attack the next day. From 5:00 to 12:00, the government army defeated the enemy army outside the city, pursued the enemy to Ubayama, and then sent another navy to advance with victory, and defeated the enemy's navy, and captured the two cities of Hubai.

古文：寻假攸之节，进号辅国将军，代孝祖督前锋诸军事。薛常宝在赭圻食尽，南贼大帅刘胡屯浓湖，以囊盛米系流查及船腹，阳覆船，顺风流下，以饷赭圻。
现代文：不久朝廷又暂时给沈攸之节制各军的大权，给他晋位辅国将军，代替殷孝祖总统前锋的军事大权，薛常宝在赭圻的军粮吃完了，南方叛军大将刘胡屯兵浓湖，用麻袋装满大米系在流动小船或大船的中央，再把木船翻过来，顺风流下，为的是供应赭圻。
English: Soon, the imperial court also temporarily gave Shen You the power to control the armies, promoted him to the rank of vice-governor general, and gave him the military power to replace the front of President Yin Xiaozhu. Xue Changbao finished eating the military grain in the raft, and Liu Hu, the general of the southern rebel army, was in the middle of the floating small boat or large boat with a sack full of rice, and then turned the wooden boat over and flowed down with the wind to supply the raft.

古文：攸之疑其有异，遣人取船及流查，大得囊米。
现代文：沈攸之怀疑这些船有问题，叫人捞起覆船和流动小舰，获得很多整袋子的大米。
English: Suspecting that there was something wrong with the boats, Shen Youzhi ordered people to salvage the covered boats and floating small boats, and obtained many whole bags of rice.

古文：攸之从子怀宝，为贼将帅，在赭圻，遣亲人杨公赞赍密书招诱攸之，攸之斩公赞，封怀宝书呈太宗。
现代文：沈攸之的族侄沈怀宝，做叛军将领，也在赭圻这里，派亲信杨公赞藏着密信招诱沈攸之，沈攸之将杨公赞斩首，把沈怀宝写的书信呈给明帝。
English: Shen Youzhi's nephew Shen Huai Bao, a rebel general, also sent his close friend Yang Gongzan to seduce Shen Youzhi with a secret letter. Shen Youzhi beheaded Yang Gongzan and presented the letter written by Shen Huai Bao to the Ming Emperor.

古文：寻克赭圻，迁使持节、督雍、梁、南北秦四州郢州之竟陵诸军事、冠军将军、领宁蛮校尉、雍州刺史。
现代文：不久便攻克了赭圻，他因此升官使持节，都督雍梁南北秦四州郢州的竟陵诸军事，冠军将军，兼任宁蛮校尉、雍州刺史。
English: Soon after, he conquered Yunnan. As a result, he was promoted to the post of commander-in-chief, the governor of Yongliang, the north and south of Qin, the four states of Ganzhou, the military, the champion general, and the captain of Ningban, and the historian of Yongzhou.

古文：袁顗复率大众来入鹊尾，相持既久，军主张兴世越鹊尾上据钱溪，刘胡自攻之。攸之率诸将攻浓湖，顗遣人传唱钱溪已平，众并惧。
现代文：袁靑再率领大军进驻鹊尾城，两军相持很长时间，沈攸之手下将领张兴世越过鹊尾，占据它上面的钱溪，刘胡亲自率兵攻击钱溪的时候，沈攸之率领其他将领进攻浓湖城牵制刘胡留下的兵马。
English: Yuan Shao again led a large army into Shanwei City, and the two armies held each other for a long time. Zhang Xingshi, a general under Shen You, crossed Shanwei and occupied Qianxi above it. When Liu Hu personally led an army to attack Qianxi, Shen You led other generals to attack Yunhu City to hold back the soldiers and horses left by Liu Hu.

古文：攸之曰： 不然。
现代文：袁靑派兵告诉沈攸之说钱溪已被攻下了。
English: Yuan Shao sent soldiers to tell Shen Youzhi that Qianxi had been captured.

古文：若钱溪实败，万人中应有逃亡得还者。必是彼战失利，唱空声以惑众耳。 
现代文：大家听了都很恐惧，沈攸之说： 一定不是这样，如果钱溪已被攻下，一万多人中应该有几个逃回来，一定是他们进攻不利，传报假消息而恐吓我们。 
English: Everyone was horrified when they heard this. Shen Youzhi said, "This must not be true. If Qianxi has been captured, a few of the more than ten thousand people should have fled back. They must have been unfavorable to the attack, spreading false news and intimidating us."

古文：勒军中不得妄动。
现代文：勒令大军不得乱动。
English: The army was ordered not to move.

古文：钱溪信寻至，果大破贼。
现代文：不久钱溪派人回来报讯，说大败敌军。
English: Soon after, Qianxi sent someone back to report that the enemy troops had been soundly defeated.

古文：攸之悉以钱溪所送胡军耳鼻示之，顗骇惧，急追胡还。
现代文：沈攸之将钱溪那边杀掉的敌军耳朵和鼻子送给袁靑。袁靑非常害怕，马上追回刘胡。
English: Shen Youzhi gave the ears and noses of the enemy soldiers killed on the other side of Qianxi to Yuan Qi. Yuan Qi was very scared and immediately chased Liu Hu.

古文：攸之诸军悉力进攻，多所斩获，日暮引归。
现代文：沈攸之又率各个部队倾全力攻击袁靑。杀掉了很多敌人，到了天黑又退了回来。
English: Shen Youzhi again led all the troops to attack Yuan Shao with all their strength. They killed a lot of enemies and retreated back in the dark.

古文：鹊尾食尽，遣千人往南陵迎米，为台军所破，烧其资实，胡于是弃众而奔，顗亦叛走。
现代文：鹊尾的敌军粮食吃完了，他们派一千多人到南陵接回运米，被朝廷军队打败，并烧掉他们的运输工具。刘胡见势不妙，率先逃跑，袁靑也逃跑了。
English: When the enemy army in Shanwei ran out of grain, they sent more than a thousand people to Nanling to pick up and return the rice. They were defeated by the imperial army and their transport vehicles were burned. Liu Hu, seeing that the situation was not good, was the first to flee, and Yuan Qi also fled.

古文：赭圻、浓湖之平也，贼军委弃资财，珍货殷积，诸军各竞收敛，以强弱为少多。
现代文：当赭圻，浓湖被拿下后，敌军丢下大量物资，堆积如山。朝廷各路军队纷纷抢夺，按照各部队的大小进行竞赛。
English: When Yancheng and the Great Lake were taken, the enemy army left behind a large amount of materials, piled up like a mountain. The various armies of the imperial court snatched them one after another, and competed according to the size of each army.

古文：唯攸之、张兴世约勒所部，不犯秋毫，诸将以此多之。
现代文：只有沈攸之、张兴世约束自己的部队，一点也不抢夺，众将领因此称赞他。
English: Only Shen Youzhi and Zhang Xingzhu restrained their troops and did not rob at all, and the generals praised him for this.

古文：攸之进平寻阳，徙临郢州诸军事、前将军、郢州刺史，持节如故。
现代文：沈攸之再前进攻克浔阳，升官都督郢州军事、前将军、郢州刺史。使持节照旧。
English: Shen Youzhi then advanced to conquer Fenyang, and was promoted to the post of Fuzhou Military Governor, former general, and Fuzhou Historian.

古文：不拜，迁中领军，封贞阳县公，食邑二千户。
现代文：他推辞了，只升官中领军，封爵贞阳县公，食邑二千户。
English: He refused, and was only promoted to be the leader of the army, knighted as the ruler of Zhengyang County, and became the ruler of 2,000 households.

古文：时四方皆已平定，徐州刺史薛安都据彭城请降，上虽相酬许，而辞旨简略。
现代文：这时四方叛军都已平定，徐州刺史薛安都在彭城请求投降。明帝虽然同意了，但回话很简单。
English: At this time, the four rebel armies had been subdued, and Xuzhou, Zhishi, and Xue'an all requested surrender in Pengcheng. Although Emperor Ming agreed, the reply was simple.

古文：攸之前将军，置佐吏，假节，与镇军将军张永以重兵征安都。安都惧，要引索虏；索虏引大众援之。
现代文：沈攸之率领大军上前方，部下设置文官，手握皇帝的节杖，和镇军将军张永率重兵，迎接薛安都，薛安都十分恐惧，私通魏人，魏国派大军增援他。
English: Shen Youzhi led a large army to the front, his subordinates set up civil officers, holding the emperor's scepter, and the town army general Zhang Yong led a heavy army to meet Xue Andu. Xue Andu was very afraid, he was a Wei man, and Wei sent a large army to reinforce him.

古文：攸之等米船在吕梁，又遣军主王穆之上民口；穆之为虏攻覆米船，又破运车于武原，攸之等引退，为虏所乘，又值寒雪，士众堕指十二三。
现代文：王穆之部被魏人打败；装米的船只被击沉。运米的车又在武原被攻破，沈攸之等因此退军，被敌人找到机会打败，加上碰上了天寒下雪，宋军的士卒掉了指头的有十分之二三。
English: Wang Mu's army was defeated by the Wei; the ships loaded with rice were sunk; the cars carrying rice were broken in Wuyuan; Shen Youzhi and others withdrew from the army as a result; the enemy found an opportunity to defeat them; in addition to encountering cold weather and snow, the Song Army's soldiers lost two-thirds of their fingers.

古文：留长水校尉王玄载守下邳，积射将军沈韶守宿豫，睢陵、淮阳亦置戍，攸之还淮阴。
现代文：他留下长水校尉王玄载防守下邳，积弩将军沈韶防守宿豫，睢陵、淮阳也设置守兵，沈攸之回到了淮阴。
English: He left the Changshui lieutenant Wang Xuanjie to defend the lower Ying, the Ying general Shen Ying to defend the southern Ying, Fuling and Huaiyang also set up guards, and Shen Youzhi returned to Huaiyin.

古文：免官，以公领职。
现代文：他被免掉了官职，只以普通官员的身份兼领了一些职务。
English: He was removed from his official position and only received some positions as an ordinary official.

古文：复求进讨，上不听，入朝面陈，又不许，复归淮阴。
现代文：他又请求北伐，明帝没有允许。回到朝廷当面陈述意见，又不被允许，只好再回到淮阴。
English: He also requested the Northern Expedition, but Emperor Ming did not allow it. He was not allowed to return to the imperial court to present his views in person, so he had to return to Huaiyin.

古文：三年六月，自率运送米下邳，并凿四周深堑，遣龙骧将军垣护之领民口还淮阴。
现代文：泰始三年二月，他亲自率领军队送米给下邳守城，并在城的周围挖了一道深深的壕沟。又派龙骧将军垣扬之率领下邳百姓回到淮阴。
English: In February of the third year of Taizhi, he personally led the army to send rice to Huaiyin, the city of Huaiyin, and dug a deep trench around the city. He also sent the people of Huaiyin back to Huaiyin under the leadership of the dragon general Qi Yang.

古文：时军主陈显达当领千兵守下邳，攸之留待显达至，虏遣清泗间人诈告攸之云： 安都欲降，求军迎接。 
现代文：当时一个将领陈显达应该率一千七百兵守下邳，沈攸之留在下邳等陈显达的到来。魏人派清泗一带的一个人骗沈攸之说： 薛安都想投降，请求派军队迎接。 
English: At that time, Chen Xianda, a general, was supposed to lead 1,700 soldiers to guard the Lower Yangtze River. Shen Youzhi stayed in the Lower Yangtze River to wait for Chen Xianda's arrival. The Wei people sent a person from the Qing Dynasty to deceive Shen Youzhi and say: Xue An wanted to surrender and asked to send an army to meet him.

古文：攸之副吴喜纳其说，咸谓宜遣千人参之，既而来者转多，喜所执弥固。
现代文：沈攸之的副将听信了这话，认为应该派一千人完成任务，不久又来同样的一些报讯的人，吴喜对此更加相信。
English: Shen Youzhi's vice-commander believed this and thought that a thousand people should be sent to complete the task. Soon, the same reporters came, and Wu Xi was even more convinced of this.

古文：攸之乃集来者告之，语曰： 薛徐州早宜还朝，今能尔，深副本望。但遣子弟一人来，便当遣大军相接。
现代文：沈攸之召集那来报讯的人说： 薛安都应该早早地回到朝廷，现在想回来，也还来得及，他的亲子弟只要派一个人来，我们一定就会派大军迎接。
English: Shen Youzhi called together those who had come to report the news and said: "Xue An should have returned to the imperial court early. If he wants to return now, he still has time. As long as his relatives and children send one person, we will certainly send a large army to meet him."

古文：君诸人既有志心，若能与薛子弟俱来者，皆即假君以本乡县，唯意所欲；如其不尔，无为空劳往还。 
现代文：你们各人既然有这个好的心愿，如果能和薛家子弟一同来的话，能让你们回到本乡本县当长官。这都由你们决定，如果不能这样，不需要徒劳地来来去去的。 
English: Since each of you has this good wish, if you can come with the sons and daughters of the Xue family, we can let you return to your hometowns and counties to serve as governors. This is all up to you to decide. If this is not possible, there is no need to come and go in vain.

古文：自此一去不反。
现代文：从此这些人一去不复返。
English: From then on, these people never returned.

古文：其年秋，太宗复令攸之进围彭城。攸之以清泗既干，粮运不继，固执以为非宜，往反者七。
现代文：当年秋天，太宗再叫沈攸之进围彭城，沈攸之认为清水和泗水已经干涸了，军粮的运输跟不上，坚持认为这样不适宜。
English: In the autumn of that year, Emperor Taizong again called Shen Youzhi to enter the siege of Pengcheng. Shen Youzhi thought that the clear water and salty water had dried up, and the transportation of military grain could not keep up, insisting that this was not appropriate.

古文：上大怒，诏攸之曰： 卿春中求伐彭城，吾恐军士疲劳，且去冬奔散，人心未宜复用，不许卿所启。
现代文：如此反复七次，明帝大怒，下一道给沈攸之的诏书说： 你今年春天请求攻讨彭城，我怕士兵疲劳，况且去年刚溃败，士气还不适宜运用，不许你这样做。
English: This was repeated seven times, Emperor Ming was furious, and the next imperial edict to Shen Youzhi said: You requested to attack Pengcheng this spring, I am afraid of soldiers' fatigue, moreover, it was just defeated last year, morale is not suitable for use, you are not allowed to do so.

古文：今便不肯为吾行邪？
现代文：现在有机会为什么不肯帮我干一下呢？
English: Now that I have a chance, why don't you help me out?

古文：卿若不行，便可使吴喜独去。 
现代文：如果不做，只叫吴喜去打好了。 
English: If not, just tell Wu Xi to go and play.

古文：攸之惧，乃奉旨进军。
现代文：沈攸之害怕了，于是接受命令进军。
English: Shen Youzhi was afraid, so he accepted the order to march.

古文：行至迟墟，上悔，追军令反。
现代文：行军到迟墟，明帝后悔了，让人追回军队。
English: When the march reached the ruins, Emperor Ming regretted it and ordered the troops to be brought back.

古文：攸之还至下邳，而陈显达于睢口为虏所破，龙骧将军姜产之、司徒参军高遵世战没。
现代文：沈攸之回到下邳。而陈显达却在睢水上被敌人打败，龙骧将军姜产之、司徒参军高遵也战死了。
English: Shen Youzhi returned to Jiaozuo. Chen Xianda, however, was defeated by the enemy on the Surabaya River. Longyu's general, Jiang Sanzhi, and Szeto's general, Gaozun, also died in the battle.

古文：虏追攸之甚急，因交战，被槊创，会暮，引军入显达垒，夕众散，八月十八日也。
现代文：敌人紧追沈攸之，于是又接战，他被敌人的长矛刺伤，恰好天黑了，率军队钻进陈显达的堡垒，当天晚上，全军逃窜，时间是八月十八日。
English: The enemy was in hot pursuit of Shen Youyou, so they engaged in battle again. He was stabbed by the enemy's spear, just as it got dark, he led the army into Chen Xianda's fortress. That evening, the whole army fled. The time was August 18th.

古文：攸之弃众南奔。初，吴兴丘幼弼、丘隆先、沈诞、沈荣守、吴陆道量，并以文记之才随攸之，及张永北讨，永一奔，攸之再败，幼弼等并皆陷没。
现代文：沈攸之则丢掉他的军队，逃回南方，开始，吴兴丘幼弼、丘隆先、沈诞、沈荣守，吴县陆道量，都因能力出众随同沈攸之。在张永北讨的时候，张永一逃跑，沈攸之再崩溃，丘幼弼等都被魏人俘虏。
English: Shen Youzhi, on the other hand, abandoned his army and fled back to the south. At first, Wu Xingqiu Cubs, Qiu Longxian, Shen Xing, Shen Rongshu, and Wuxian Land Route were all accompanied by Shen Youzhi due to their superior ability. During Zhang Yong's Northern Expedition, Zhang Yongyi fled, Shen Youzhi collapsed again, and the Cubs were all captured by the Wei people.

古文：攸之之还淮阴，以为持节、假冠军将军、行南兗州刺史。追赠姜产之左军将军，高遵世屯骑校尉。
现代文：沈攸之回到淮阴时，朝廷用他为使持节，暂代冠军将军，代理为南兖州刺史，追认姜产之左军将军，高遵世屯骑校尉。
English: When Shen Youzhi returned to Huaiyin, the imperial court used him as an envoy to hold the festival, a provisional champion general, acting as a deputy to the south of Luzhou, a general of the left army, and a lieutenant of Gao Zun Shitun cavalry.

古文：四年，征攸之为吴兴太守，辞不拜。乃除左卫将军，领太子中庶子。
现代文：明帝四年，调沈攸之当吴兴太守，他推辞不受，于是任左卫将军，兼领太子中庶子。
English: In the fourth year of the Ming Dynasty, when Wu Xing became the governor-general, Shen Youzhi was transferred to Wu Xing, but he did not accept the resignation, so he was appointed the general of the Left Division, and concurrently the prince's illegitimate son.

古文：五年，出为持节、监郢州诸军、郢州刺史。
现代文：明帝五年当持节，都督郢州诸军事郢州刺史。
English: In the fifth year of Emperor Ming's reign, there was a festival to celebrate the military history of Bozhou, the capital of Bozhou.

古文：为政刻暴，或鞭士大夫，上佐以下有忤意，辄面加詈辱。
现代文：他的管理很严酷，有时还鞭打士大夫，手下官吏如果有违背他的意思的，便当面痛骂。
English: His administration was very harsh. Sometimes he would whip the shidafu, and if any of his subordinate officials went against his wishes, he would scold them to their faces.

古文：将吏一人亡叛，同籍符伍充代者十余人。
现代文：将领或官吏中有一个逃跑的，那么他手下士兵中有十个人都必须抄没家产。
English: If one of the generals or officials escapes, then ten of his soldiers must be expropriated.

古文：而晓达吏事，自强不息，士民畏惮，人莫敢欺。
现代文：但是他明晓政事，严格要求自己，军吏士卒都害怕他，没有哪一个敢欺骗他。
English: But he knew politics and was strict with himself. The military officials were afraid of him, and no one dared to deceive him.

古文：闻有虎，辄自围捕，往无不得，一日或得两三。
现代文：听说某个地方有老虎，他便亲自追捕，而每次总能捕获，有时一天能抓到两三只。
English: When he hears that there is a tiger somewhere, he chases it down himself and catches it every time, sometimes two or three a day.

古文：若逼暮不获禽，则宿昔围守，须晓自出。
现代文：如果到了天黑还捉不到野兽，则整夜包围它们，等到天亮自然会出来。
English: If the animals are not caught by nightfall, they will be surrounded all night and will naturally come out in the morning.

古文：赋敛严苦，征发无度，缮治船舸，营造器甲。
现代文：他收税极重，征发民力，没有限制，修船冶舰，打造武器，天天干事。
English: He levies heavy taxes, collects and distributes people's power without restriction, repairs ships, builds weapons, and is an officer every day.

古文：自至夏口，便有异图。六年，进监豫州之西阳、司州之义阳二郡军事，进号镇军将军。
现代文：自从到夏口，便有野心，明帝六年，他升任督豫州的西阳、司州的义阳二郡军事，晋号镇军将军。
English: Since he came to Xiakou, he has had ambitions. In the sixth year of the Ming Dynasty, he was promoted to the military commander of Xiyang in Yuzhou and Yiyang in Shizhou, and the general of the Jin Town Army.

古文：泰豫元年，太宗崩，攸之与蔡兴宗在外蕃，同豫顾命，进号安西将军，加散骑常侍，给鼓吹一部。
现代文：泰豫元年，太宗死了。沈攸之和蔡兴宗在外省任职，同时被明帝委托后事，晋号安西将军，加官敬骑常侍，赐给鼓吹一部。
English: In the first year of the Taiyuan era, Emperor Taizong died. Shen Youzhi and Cai Xingzong served in the provinces. At the same time, they were entrusted by the Ming Emperor with the post-event, the Jin name Anxi General, and the additional officers and horsemen, and were given a part of the propaganda.

古文：未拜，会巴西民李承明反，执太守张澹，蜀土骚扰。
现代文：还未拜官，恰遇巴西百姓李承明造反，抓住太守张澹。四川发生了骚乱。
English: Before he became an official, he happened to meet a Brazilian citizen, Li Chengming, who rebelled and seized the governor Zhang Ye. Riots broke out in Sichuan.

古文：时荆州刺史建平王景素被征，新除荆州刺史蔡兴宗未之镇，乃遣攸之权行荆州事。
现代文：当时荆州刺史建平王刘景素被调任，所调的刺史蔡兴宗还未到任，于是朝廷派沈攸之暂且代理荆州刺史的职务。
English: At that time, Liu Jingsu, the king of Jingzhou Jianping, was conscripted, and the newly appointed Jingzhou Jianping Cai Xingzong had not yet arrived in the town, so he sent Shen Yu's power and also managed Jingzhou affairs.

古文：攸之既至，会承明已平，乃以攸之都督荆、湘、雍、益、梁、宁、南北秦八州诸军事、镇西将军、荆州刺史，持节、常侍如故。至荆州，政治如在夏口，营造舟甲，常如敌至。
现代文：沈攸之到了，恰遇李承明已被消灭，于是朝廷用沈攸之为都督荆湘雍益梁宁南北秦八州军事，镇西将军、荆州刺史、持节，常侍官职照旧，他到了荆州，办事仍跟在夏口一样，不断地制造船舰武器，常常像敌人便要打过来一样。
English: When Shen Youzhi arrived, it happened that Li Chengming had already been eliminated. Therefore, the imperial court used Shen Youzhi as the military governor of the Eight Provinces of Jing, Hunan, Yunnan, Qin, North and South, the general of Zhenxi, the general of Jing, and the permanent attendant. When he arrived in Jingzhou, he continued to work as he did in Xiakou, constantly manufacturing ship weapons, often as if the enemy were about to attack.

古文：时幼主在位，群公当朝，攸之渐怀不臣之迹，朝廷制度，无所遵奉。
现代文：当时幼主在位，朝廷掌权的人有好几个，沈攸之渐渐的想不服从朝廷的管辖。朝廷下达的命令，一点也不遵从。
English: At that time, the young lord was on the throne, and there were several people in power in the imperial court. Shen Yuezhi gradually wanted to disobey the jurisdiction of the imperial court. The orders issued by the imperial court were not obeyed at all.

古文：后废帝元徽二年，休范举兵袭京邑，攸之谓僚佐曰： 桂阳今反朝廷，必声云与攸之同。若不颠沛勤王，必增朝野之惑。 
现代文：江州刺史桂阳王刘休范内心有篡位当皇帝的野心，用含蓄的话引诱沈攸之，叫道士陈公昭写天公信一封，上面注着 沈丞相 ，送给沈攸之的看门人，沈攸之没有拆信，推问门人抓到了陈公昭，把他交给了朝廷，后废帝元徽二年，刘休范起兵袭击京城。沈攸之对部下说： 桂阳王现在反叛朝廷，必定声称说和我同时造反。如果不迅速的勤王，一定会增加朝廷和民间的怀疑。 
English: In the heart of Liu Xiufan, King of Guiyang, the ruler of Jiangsu Province, there was an ambition to usurp the throne and become emperor. He used subtle words to seduce Shen Youzhi and asked the Taoist Chen Gongzhao to write a heavenly letter, which was sent to Shen Youzhi's gatekeeper, with Shen Youzhi's signature on it. Shen Youzhi did not open the letter. The gatekeeper caught Chen Gongzhao and handed him over to the court. Two years after Emperor Yuanhui was deposed, Liu Xiufan led an army to attack Beijing. Shen Youzhi said to his subordinates: King Guiyang is

古文：于是遣军主孙同、沈怀奥兴军驰下，受郢州刺史晋熙王燮节度。
现代文：于是派部将孙同、沈怀奥起兵东下，接受郢州刺史晋熙王刘燮的指挥。
English: Therefore, he sent Sun Tong and Shen Huai'ao to the east to accept the command of Liu Xi, the king of Jinxi in Zhangzhou.

古文：同等始过夏口，会休范平，还。
现代文：孙同等刚过夏口，碰到休范被平定，又回来。
English: Just after the summer vacation, Sun Pei met Hui Fan, who was pacified, and came back.

古文：进攸之号征西大将军、开府仪同三司，固让开府。
现代文：朝廷升任沈攸之号为征西大将军，开府仪同三司，他坚决地辞掉开府职务。
English: The imperial court promoted Shen Yu to the title of General of the Western Expedition, and he resolutely resigned from the post of Kaifu.

古文：攸之自擅阃外，朝廷疑惮之，累欲征入，虑不受命，乃止。
现代文：沈攸之自己专权于外省，朝廷对他又怀疑又害怕。多次想调回来，担心他不接受命令，只好作罢。
English: Shen Youzhi was out alone with soldiers. The imperial court had doubts and fears about him. They wanted to transfer him to the imperial court several times, and they were worried that he would not accept orders, so they stopped.

古文：群公称皇太后令，遣中使问攸之曰： 久劳于外，宜还京辇，然任寄之重，换代殊为未易，还止之宜，一以相委。 
现代文：众大臣借称皇太后的命令，派太后仆人向沈攸之说： 你一直在外面辛苦，应该回到京城，然而你的职位特别地重要，换人非常困难，是回去还是留下，都由你做主。 
English: On the orders of the empress dowager, the ministers sent the empress dowager's servants to tell Shen Youzhi: You have been working hard outside and should return to Beijing. However, your position is particularly important and it is very difficult to replace you. Whether you go back or stay is up to you.

古文：欲以观察其意。
现代文：想看他的回答。
English: I want to see his answer.

古文：攸之答曰： 荷国重恩，名器至此，自惟凡陋，本无廊庙之姿。
现代文：沈攸之回答说： 我蒙受国家的大恩，做到这么大的官职，想到自己的平庸，本来不配当朝廷大官。
English: Shen Youzhi replied: I have been greatly blessed by the state to achieve such a great official position. Considering my mediocrity, I did not deserve to be a high-ranking official of the imperial court.

古文：至如戍防一蕃，扑讨蛮、蜒，可强充斯任。
现代文：至如今防守一片边疆，讨伐反叛的蛮人、蜒人，还能勉强胜任。
English: Up to now, it has been able to defend a piece of borderland and fight against rebellious barbarians and meanderers, but only just.

古文：虽自上如此，岂敢厝心去留，归还之事，伏听朝旨。 
现代文：虽然皇太后想我回去，我怎么敢自定去留，这事情我完全听从朝廷的旨意。 
English: Although the Empress Dowager wanted me to go back, how dare I decide to stay, I completely obeyed the will of the Imperial Court.

古文：朝廷逾慑惮，征议遂息。
现代文：朝廷更害怕了，调他官的事便作罢了。
English: The court was even more afraid, and the matter of transferring him to another post was simply carried out.

古文：四年，建平王景素据京城反，攸之复应朝廷；景素寻平。
现代文：元徽四年，建平王刘景素占据京口造反，攸之再次响应朝廷，刘景素不久被消灭。
English: In the fourth year of the Yuan Dynasty, Jianping King Liu Jingsu occupied the capital and rebelled. The imperial court once again responded to the rebellion, and Liu Jingsu was soon eliminated.

古文：初元嘉中，巴东、建平二郡，军府富实，与江夏、竟陵、武陵并为名郡。
现代文：先前元嘉年间，巴东建平二郡，军府里的丰富的物资和江夏竟陵武陵一样的多。
English: During the previous Yuan Jia, two counties in Jianping, Badong, the rich materials in the military government were as much as those in Wuling Mausoleum in Jiangxia.

古文：世祖于江夏置郢州，郡罢军府，竟陵、武陵亦并残坏，巴东、建平为峡中蛮所破，至是民人流散，存者无几。其年春，攸之遣军入峡讨蛮帅田五郡等。
现代文：孝武帝在江夏设置郢州，每郡里设军府，竟陵、武陵军府也慢慢地毁坏，巴东、建平二郡军府也被三峡中蛮人破坏，到了这时，人民流散四方，活下来的不多，当年的春天，沈攸之派军队到巫峡一带讨伐蛮帅田五郡等。
English: Emperor Xiaowu set up Bozhou in Jiangxia and set up military headquarters in each county. The military headquarters of Jingling and Wuling were also slowly destroyed. The military headquarters of the two counties of Badong and Jianping were also destroyed by the barbarians in the Three Gorges. At this time, the people were scattered in all directions, and there were not many survivors. In the spring of that year, Shen Youzhi sent troops to the Wuxia area to fight the barbarians in five counties.

古文：及景素反，攸之急追峡中军，巴东太守刘攘兵、建平太守刘道欣并疑攸之自有异志，阻兵断峡，不听军下。时攘兵元子天赐为荆州西曹，攸之遣天赐譬说之，令其解甲，一无所问。
现代文：在刘景素造反的时候，沈攸之马上追回峡中讨伐的各军，巴东太守刘攘兵、建平太守刘道欣都怀疑沈攸之有野心，便拦截讨伐的军队，截断巫峡的归路，不允许那些军队回去，当时刘攘兵兄长的儿子刘天赐当荆州西曹，沈攸之派刘天赐劝说刘攘兵，叫他解除武装，不要管他的事。
English: At the time of Liu Jingsu's rebellion, Shen You immediately chased back the armies that were fighting in the gorge. Both the Padong governor Liu Jiaohe and the Jianping governor Liu Daoxin suspected that Shen You had ambitions, so they intercepted the crusading army, cut off the return route of Wuxia Gorge, and did not allow those armies to go back. At that time, Liu Tianzai, the son of Liu Jiaohe's elder brother, was appointed as the Jingzhou Western Cao. Shen You sent Liu Tianzai to persuade Liu Jiaohe to disarm and leave his affairs alone.

古文：攘兵见天赐，知景素实反，乃释甲谢愆，攸之待之如故，后以攘兵为府司马。
现代文：刘攘兵见刘天赐，知道刘景素确实反了，于是解除武装谢罪。沈攸之待他和过去一样好。以后又用刘攘兵当荆州司马。
English: Liu Jiao Bing saw Liu Tian Zi and knew that Liu Jingsu had indeed rebelled, so he disarmed and repented. Shen You treated him as well as before. Later, he used Liu Jiao Bing as Jingzhou Sima.

古文：刘道欣坚守建平，攘兵譬说不回，乃与伐蛮军攻之，破建平，斩道欣。
现代文：刘道欣坚守建平，刘攘兵劝说没用，于是和讨伐蛮人的军队进攻刘道欣，拿下建平，杀掉了刘道欣。
English: Liu Daoxin held fast to Jianping, and it was of no use for Liu Yohei to persuade him, so he attacked Liu Daoxin with the army of crusading barbarians, took Jianping, and killed Liu Daoxin.

古文：台直阁高道庆家在江陵，攸之初至州，道庆时在家，牒其亲戚十余人，求州从事西曹，攸之为用三人。
现代文：台城直阁将军高道庆家在江陵，攸之刚到江陵，高道庆当时一直在家闲居，写出他的亲戚十多人的名字，请求让他们做西曹从事。沈攸之用了其中三人。
English: Gao Daoqing, the general of Taicheng Zhougu, lived in Gangneung at the time. He had just arrived in Gangneung. Gao Daoqing had been idling at home. He wrote down the names of more than ten of his relatives and asked them to serve as high-ranking officials. Shen Youzhi used three of them.

古文：道庆大怒，自入州取教，毁之而去。
现代文：高道庆大怒，亲自到州府取回任命书，撕毁它们，然后扬长而去。
English: Gao Daoqing was so angry that he went to the state capital to retrieve the appointment letter in person, tore it up, and then left.

古文：及还都，不诣攸之别。道庆至都，云： 攸之聚众缮甲，奸逆不久。 
现代文：等回京师时，又不到沈攸之那里作别，高道庆到了京城，对朝廷说： 沈攸之招揽匪徒修造兵甲，反叛将在不久的将来发生。 
English: When returning to Beijing, Gao Daoqing did not go to Shen Youyou's place to say goodbye. Gao Daoqing arrived in Beijing and said to the imperial court: Shen Youyou has recruited bandits to build armor, and a rebellion will occur in the near future.

古文：杨运长等常相疑畏，乃与道庆密遣刺客，赍废帝手诏，以金饼赐攸之州府佐吏，进其阶级。
现代文：杨运长等人经常怀疑和畏惧沈攸之，于是与高道庆设谋派遣刺客、带着废帝的手令，用金饼赐沈攸之一些部属将吏叫他们刺杀沈攸之，答应让他们升官。
English: Yang Yunchang and others often suspected and feared Shen Youzhi, so they plotted with Gao Daoqing to send assassins, with the order to depose the emperor, and some of Shen Youzhi's subordinates gave them golden cakes to tell them to assassinate Shen Youzhi, and promised them promotion.

古文：时有象三头至江陵城北数里，攸之自出格杀之，忽有流矢集攸之马障泥，其后刺客事发。
现代文：当时正好有三只大象到江陵城北几里处游走，沈攸之亲自去格杀它们，忽然有乱箭飞到沈攸之的马前的泥中，于是刺杀沈攸之的事便暴露了。
English: At that time, three elephants happened to wander a few miles north of Gangneung City. Shen Youyou personally went to kill them. Suddenly, a random arrow flew into the mud in front of Shen Youyou's horse, and the assassination of Shen Youyou was exposed.

古文：废帝既殒，顺帝即位，进攸之号东骑大将军、开府仪同三司，加班剑二十人。
现代文：废帝被杀，顺帝即位，晋升沈攸之位号为车骑大将军，开府仪同三司，另加班剑二十人。
English: The deposed emperor was killed, Emperor Shun ascended to the throne, and Shen Yue was promoted to the rank of general of cavalry and cavalry, Kaifu Yi and three divisions, and another 20 people worked overtime.

古文：遣攸之长子司徒左长史元琰赍废帝刳剒之具以示攸之。
现代文：又派沈攸之的长子司徒左长史沈元琰带着废帝剖人斩人的工具给沈攸之看。
English: He also sent Shen Yuanzhi, the eldest son of Shen Yuanzhi, to show Shen Yuanzhi the tools used to dissect and behead the emperor.

古文：元琰既至江陵，攸之便有异志，腹心议有不同，故其事不果。
现代文：沈元琰到了江陵，沈攸之造反的心思更加强烈，只因他的亲信有不同的意见，所以这时还不能执行计划。
English: When Shen Yuanxuan arrived in Jiangling, Shen Youyou's rebellious thoughts were even stronger. However, because his close friends had different opinions, he was not able to carry out the plan at that time.

古文：其年十一月，乃发兵反叛。
现代文：当年十月，发兵正式造反。
English: In October of that year, the rebellion was officially launched.

古文：攸之素蓄士马，资用丰积，至是战士十万，铁马二千。遣使要雍州刺史张敬兒、梁州刺史范伯年、司州刺史姚道和、湘州行事庾佩玉、巴陵内史王文和等。
现代文：沈攸之一直积蓄兵力，军资充足，此时有战士十万，铁骑二千，又派人到襄阳邀请雍州刺史张敬儿，司州刺史姚道和，湘州代理刺史庾佩玉，巴陵内史王文和等参加他的造反。
English: Shen Youjun accumulated troops and sufficient military resources. At this time, there were 100,000 soldiers and 2,000 cavalry. He also sent people to Yangyang to invite Zhang Jing'er, the governor of Yongzhou, Yao Dao, the deputy governor of Hunan, Zou Peiyu, and Wang Wenhe, the governor of Baling, to participate in his rebellion.

古文：攸之自率辅国将军录事参军兼司马武茂宗、辅国将军中兵参军沈韶、宁朔将军中兵参军皇甫贤、宁朔将军中兵参军胡钦之、龙骧将军中兵参军东门道顺，闰十二月四日至夏口。攸之将发江陵，使沙门释僧桀筮之，曰： 不至京邑，当自郢州回还。 
现代文：张敬儿、王文和将他的使节斩首。上表朝廷告知消息，范柏年、姚道和、庾佩玉首鼠两端，但暗中配合。十二月十二日，沈攸之派他的辅国将军，中兵参军，都督前锋军事孙同，率领宁朔将军中兵参军武宝，龙骧将军中兵参军王道起，又派司马，冠军将军刘攘兵，率领宁朔将军中兵参军王珍之，宁朔将军外参军杨景穆，相继东下。沈攸之亲自率领辅国将军录事参军兼司马武茂宗，辅国将军中兵参军沈韶，宁朔将军中兵参军皇甫赞，宁朔将军中兵参军胡钦之，龙骧将军中兵参军东门道顺，在闰十二月四日到夏口，沈攸之刚出发时，叫沙门和尚僧粲卜了一卦，说： 这次行动到不了京城，一定从郢州返回。 
English: Zhang Jing'er and Wang Wenhe beheaded his envoys. The above table informed the imperial court of the news that Fan Paknian, Yao Daohe, and Zou Pei were the two ends of the jade-headed rat, but secretly cooperated. On December 12, Shen Youzhi sent his auxiliary general, the middle soldier to join the army, the vanguard military Sun Tong, led by the Ningshuo general, the middle soldier to join the army Wu Bao, the Longjing general, the middle soldier to join the army Wang Daoqi, and also sent Sima, the champion general Liu Yohe, led by the Ningshuo general, the middle soldier

古文：意甚不悦。
现代文：沈攸之看了很不快乐。
English: He was not happy in his heart.

古文：初，江津有云气，状如尘雾，从西北来，正盖军上。
现代文：先前，江津的上空有一团黑云，好像灰尘般的大雾，从西北方来，正好笼照在沈攸之的军队上空。
English: Earlier, there was a dark cloud over Jiangjin, like a dusty fog, coming from the northwest, just shining over Shen Youzhi's army.

古文：至沌口，云： 当问讯安西，暂泊黄金浦。 
现代文：攸之到了渡口，声称： 我们要向安西将军问讯，暂时停泊在黄金浦。 
English: Yuanzhi arrived at the ferry port and said, "We want to ask General Anxi for information, so we will temporarily moor at Jinshanpu."

古文：既登岸，郢城出军击之。攸之闻齐王世子据盆口，震慑不敢下，因攻郢城。
现代文：沈军一登江岸，郢城便出兵攻打他们，沈攸之听说萧道成世子萧赜正驻守盆口，非常害怕，不敢东下，因此便进攻郢城。
English: As soon as the Shen army landed on the riverbank, Lucheng sent troops to attack them. Shen Yuanzhi heard that Xiao Daoxing's son Xiao Yao was stationed at the mouth of the basin. He was very afraid and did not dare to go east, so he attacked Lucheng.

古文：时齐王辅政，遣众军西讨。尚书符征西府曰：
现代文：当时萧道成掌握大权，派各路大军西向攻击，尚书台写了篇文告给荆州府，里面说：
English: At that time, Xiao Daocheng seized power and sent large armies to attack the west. Shang Shidai wrote a message to the Jingzhou government, saying:

古文：今遣新除使持节督郢州之义阳诸军事平西将军郢州刺史闻喜县开国侯黄回、员外散骑常侍冠军骁骑将军南临淮太守重安县开国子军主王敬则、辅国将军屯骑校尉长寿县开国男王宜与、辅国将军南高平太守军主陈承叔、辅国将军左军将军南濮阳太守葛阳县开国男军主彭文之、龙骧将军骠骑行参军军主召宰，精甲二万，前锋云腾。
现代文： 帽子戴在头上，鞋穿在脚上，君臣间的位置，要求抑臣尊君，反对尊臣抑君，沈攸之倒行逆施，他的失败已昭然可见，从未有侵犯朝廷权威霸占朝廷的管辖的土地，而不最后遭至彻底失败的。沈攸之出身贫贱，从普通士兵提升到高位，凭着久经沙场的运气，凭着几次成功胜利，给他封侯，让他腰悬玉带，做到我朝最大的官职，家有万钟谷粟的富足。又让他管理整个荆州大权，可是他便不再尊敬朝廷，专有一方征伐大权，制造与朝廷的矛盾，钱物一点也不上献，珍宝半点也不贡入。收税于百姓，没有限度，罪恶笼盖住了郢州大地，违法乱纪，荼毒荆州的人民。他的心贪得无厌，他的欲望山海难填，从青年到中年，从中年到老年，以至现在纠集叛军，聚集反党，联络其他的藩镇，到朝廷附近送死，这是可以忍受的，还是不可忍受的？ 现在派刚上任的使持节都督郢州司州的义阳诸军事平西将军郢州刺史闻喜县开国侯黄回，员外散骑常侍冠军骁骑将军南临淮太守重安县开国子军主王敬则，辅国将军屯骑校尉长薮县开国男王宜与，辅国将军南濮阳太守葛阳县开国男军主彭文云，龙骧将军骠骑行参军军主召宰，精兵二万，作为前锋挺进。
English: Hat on his head, shoes on his feet, the position between the sovereigns and the subjects, demanding respect from the subjects, opposing respect from the subjects, Shen Youyou's perversion, his failure is obvious, he has never violated the authority of the imperial court to occupy the land under the jurisdiction of the imperial court, and finally suffered a complete failure. Shen Youyou was born poor, promoted from an ordinary soldier to a high position, with the luck of the battlefield, with several successful victories, give him the title of marquis, let him wear a jade belt around his waist, achieve the largest official position in my dynasty, his family is rich in millet. And let him manage the entire Jingzhou

古文：又遣散骑常侍领游击将军湘南县开国男新除使持节督湘州诸军事征虏将军湘州刺史军主吕安国、屯骑校尉宁朔将军崔慧景、辅国将军军主任候伯、辅国将军骁骑将军军主萧顺之、辅国将军游击将军军主垣崇祖、宁朔将军虎贲中郎将军主尹略、屯骑校尉南城令曹虎头，舳舻二万，骆驿继迈。
现代文：又派散骑常侍兼任游击将军湘南县开国男新任使持节都督湘州诸军事征虏将军湘州刺史军主吕安国，屯骑权尉兼宁朔将军崔慧景，辅国将军军主任侯伯，辅国将军骁骑将军主萧顺之，辅国将军游击将军军主垣崇祖，宁朔将军虎贲中朗将军主尹略，屯骑校尉南城令曹虎头，水军二万，接着前进。
English: He also dispatched several cavalry constables who also served as the guerrilla general of Shonan County, the founder of the country, the newly appointed envoy, the governor of Shonan Province, the military conscripts, the general of Shonan Province, the commander of the army of Lu'an Province, the commander of the army of Ningshuo, the commander of the army of Ningshuo, Choi Huijing, the commander of the army of the auxiliary country, Hou Bo, the commander of the army of the auxiliary country, the commander of the cavalry of the auxiliary country, Xiao Shunzhi, the commander of the army of the auxiliary country, the commander

古文：又遣辅国将军后军将军右军中兵参军事军主苟元宾、宁朔将军抚军中兵参军事军主郭文孝、龙骧将军抚军中兵参军事军主程隐隽，轻艓一万，截其津要。
现代文：又派辅国将军后军将军右军主郭文孝，龙骧将军抚军中兵参军事军主程隐隽，轻舟一万，截断敌人的联系。
English: He also sent the general of the Auxiliary State, the rear army general, the right army commander Guo Wenxiao, the general of the Long March to lead the army, the soldiers to participate in the military army, and the main course of the military army, the light boat of ten thousand, to cut off the enemy's contact.

古文：新除持节督广交越宁湘州之广兴诸军事领平越中郎将征虏将军广州刺史统马军主沌阳县开国子周盘龙、辅国将军后军统马军主张文憘、龙骧将军军主薛道渊、冠军将军游击将军并州刺史南清河太守太原公军主王敕勤、龙骧将军射声校尉王洪范、龙骧将军冗从仆射军主成置等，铁马五千，龙骧后陈。
现代文：新任使节都督广交越宁湘州的广兴诸军事，兼领平越，中郎将、征虏将军、广州刺史、骑兵将军、沌阳县开国子周盘龙，辅国将军后军骑兵将军张文忄喜，龙骧将军射声校尉王洪范，龙骧将军冗从仆射将军并州刺史南清河太守太原公将军王革攵勒，率骑兵五千，镇守后卫。所有这些将领，无不勇气冲天，壮志凌云，他们瞪一眼则风起云涌，吼一声地动山摇，用他们攻城，哪一个城不可以攻克？
English: The newly-appointed envoy, the governor of Guangxing in Ningxia, Guangxing in Honshu, the military, the concurrent leader of Pingyue, the middle-ranking general, the conscript general, the history of Guangzhou, the cavalry general, the founding father of Guoyang County, Zhou Panlong, the cavalry general of the auxiliary country, the rear-arm cavalry general Zhang Wen Rongxi, the general of Longyuan, the lieutenant Wang Hongfan, the general of Longyuan, the subordinate general of the subordinate general and the governor of the South Qinghe River, the general of Taiyuan, the general Wang Gejule,

古文：然后銮戎薄临，龙虎百万，六军齐轨，五辂舒旆，丹槛发照，素甲生波，楼烦白羽，投鞍成岳，渔阳墨骑，浴铁为群，芝艾同焚，悔将何及。
现代文：用他们进攻敌人，哪个敌人不被打倒？然后皇上亲临，百万大军，同时共进，骏马齐唱，红光照临，盔甲耀目，锋利的刀箭，放在地上可成高山可成森林，渔阳铁骑的铁蹄加在一起能堆成小山。
English: Use them to attack the enemy, which enemy will not be defeated? Then the emperor himself comes, a million-strong army, marching together at the same time, horses sing, red light shines, armor shines, sharp knives and arrows, placed on the ground can become a mountain can become a forest, and the iron hooves of Yuyang can be added together to form a hill.

古文：符到之日，幸加三省。
现代文：你们附从叛军，将要同时被消灭，到时候后悔也来不及了。
English: If you join the rebels, you will be destroyed at the same time, and there will be no time to regret it.

古文：其锋陈营壁之主，驱逼寇手之人，若有投命军门，一无所问。
现代文： 朝廷文书所到的时候，请诸君多加考虑，其中冲锋陷阵驻兵后卫的将领，以及被胁从叛乱的士兵们，如果有向我军投降的，既往不咎。
English: When the imperial edict arrives, I ask you all to give it a lot of thought. The generals of the garrison guards who were caught in the charge, as well as the soldiers who were coerced into the rebellion, if they surrendered to our army, will not be held responsible.

古文：或能因罪立绩，终不尔欺，斩裾射玦，唯功是与。
现代文：如果能戴罪立功，功劳以后也不会被忘记，反叛叛军的，必定给予重赏。
English: If you can bear the crime and make merit, the merit will not be forgotten in the future. If you are a rebel, you will surely be rewarded.

古文：能斩送攸之首，封三千户县公，赐布绢各五千匹。信如河海，皎然无贰。
现代文：有人能将沈攸之脑袋砍下来的，将封他三千户县公，赐给各样布帛五千匹，我们的建议像长河一样可信，皓然如白日照天。
English: If someone could cut off Shen You's head, they would make him the ruler of three thousand counties and give him five thousand animals of all kinds. Our proposal is as credible as a long river and as bright as the day.

古文：飞火军摄文书，千里驿行。
现代文：我们最快地颁布文告，送到千里之外。 
English: We are the quickest to issue a proclamation and send it thousands of miles away.

古文：齐王出顿新亭，驰檄数攸之罪恶，曰：
现代文：齐王萧道成出兵驻扎新亭、又下了一道檄文列举沈攸之的罪恶。檄文说：
English: King Xiao Daocheng of Qi dispatched troops to garrison Xinting, and issued an imperial edict enumerating the crimes of Shen Yuanzhi. The imperial edict said:

古文：夫弯弓射天，未见能至；挥戈击地，多力安施。
现代文：如果有人想弯弓射天，从未有到达的；举刀斩击大地，力气再大也无能为力，为什么？
English: If someone wants to bend a bow and shoot into the sky, which has never been reached; raise a sword and slash the earth, no matter how strong it is, it can't be done, why?

古文：何则？逆顺之势定殊，祸福之验易原也。
现代文：反叛和顺从的形势绝然不同，是害是利一目了然。
English: The situation of rebellion and obedience is completely different, and the harm and benefit are obvious at a glance.

古文：是以违乎天者，鬼神不能使其成；会乎人者，圣哲不能令其毁。
现代文：所以明白天道的人，鬼神不能让他迷惑。
English: Therefore, those who understand the way of heaven should not be confused by ghosts and gods.

古文：故刘濞赖七国连兵之势，隗嚣恃跨河据陇之资，毋丘俭伐其逾海越岛之功，诸葛诞矜其待士爱民之德，彼四子者，皆当世雄杰，以犯顺取祸，覆窟倾巢，为竖子笑。
现代文：明白人道的，即使圣贤叫他们干也不能让他诽谤别人，所以刘濞借助七国联兵的形势，隗嚣倚仗黄河占据陇右的地利，毋丘俭吹嘘渡海败敌的功劳，诸葛诞得意他礼待士人宽待人民的功德；这四个人，都是当时的英雄，因为反叛招致祸害，害家亡亲，被世人耻笑。
English: Clearly humane, even if the sages told them to do it, they could not let him slander others. Therefore, Liu Bei took advantage of the situation of the Seven-Nation Alliance, arrogantly relied on the Yellow River to occupy the rightful position, and boasted of the merits of crossing the sea and defeating the enemy. Zhuge Zheng was proud of his courtesy to the people. These four people were the heroes of the time, because the rebellion caused harm, harmed the family, and was laughed at by the world.

古文：况乎行陈凡才，斗筲小器，而怀问鼎之志，敢构无君之逆哉！
现代文：况且你们叛乱军队中的无能小丑、斗筲小器，而想问鼎京师，公然发动反对皇上叛乱呢？
English: What's more, the incompetent clowns and petty thugs in your rebel army want to ask the Beijing Division to openly launch a rebellion against the emperor?

古文：逆贼沈攸之，出自莱亩，寂寥累世，故司空沈公以从父宗廕，爱之若子，卵翼吹嘘，得升官秩。
现代文：反贼沈攸之，出身农家，世代无名，前司空沈庆之因为他是族侄，把他当成儿子看待，万般爱护，得以升官。
English: Shen Youzhi, the anti-thief, came from a family of farmers and was unknown for generations. Because he was the nephew of the former Air Vice Marshal Shen Qingzhi, he was treated as a son, loved and promoted.

古文：废帝昏悖，猜畏柱臣，攸之贪竞乘机，凶忍趋利，躬行反噬，请衔诛旨。又攸之与谭金、童太壹等并受宠任，朝为牙爪，同功共体，世号三侯，当时亲昵，情过管、鲍。遭仰革运，凶党惧戮，攸之狡猾用数，图全卖祸，既杀从父，又害良朋。虽吕布贩君，郦寄卖友，方之斯人，未足为酷。此其不信不义，言诈翻覆，诸夏之所未有，夷狄之所不为也。泰始开辟，网漏吞舟，略其凶险，取其搏噬，故得阶乱获全，因祸保福。
现代文：废帝昏乱，猜疑功臣，沈攸之贪婪地抓住这机会，残忍地捕获猎物，亲自做出反咬一口的勾当，请求自己屠杀功臣，另外沈攸之和谭金童太壹等人同时受到废帝的宠爱，沈攸之和他们早晨还是废帝的爪牙，同功一体之人，当世合称为三侯，他们的关系亲密，比管仲和鲍叔牙的关系有过之而无不及，恰遇新皇帝即位，他们三人害怕被杀，而沈攸之诡计多端，图谋自保消除祸患，前面杀了沈庆之，又谗杀了自己的这三个好朋友，纵然吕布出卖他的上司，郦寄出卖了好朋友，和这人相比，还不算毒辣，可见此人不讲信用不守道义，言语虚伪，翻覆无常，中国还没有第二人，异族没有听说有这样的人，明帝登基宽容大度，原谅沈攸之的凶狠，记取他的一点勇敢精神，所以他能乘机保全性命，因祸得福。
English: The deposed emperor was in a daze, suspicious of the heroes and heroines. Shen Youyou greedily seized this opportunity, cruelly captured the prey, personally made a counter-bite, and asked himself to slaughter the heroes and heroines. In addition, Shen Youyou and Tan Jindong Taichi and others were also favored by the deposed emperor. Shen Youyou and they were still the deposed emperor's minions in the morning, people of the same merit, together known as the three princes, their relationship was close, more than the relationship between Guanzhong and Bao Shuya. Just as the new emperor was enthroned, the three of them were afraid of being killed,

古文：攸之空浅，躁而无谋，浓湖崩挫，本非己力；及北伐彭泗，望贼宵奔；重讨下邳，一鼓而遁；再鄙王师，又应肆法。先帝英圣，量深河海，宥其回溪之败，冀收曲崤之捷，故得推迁幸会，顿升崇显，内端戎禁，外临方牧。
现代文：但沈攸之依然浅薄、浮躁，至于浓湖的大捷，并不是他的功劳，在北伐彭城泗水一带的时候，看见敌人便半夜逃跑，攻击下邳，刚一交战便奔走，又招致我军的重大损失，应该受到法律的惩处，侥幸的是先帝的英明，肚量宽宏，原谅他回溪的失败，指望他重新夺得崤山之战般的大捷，所以他得以升官，得到了一个很高的职位，在朝廷则享有军事大权，在外地则总督大州名郡。
English: However, Shen Youzhi was still shallow and impetuous. As for the great victory of the thick lake, it was not his merit. When he was in the area of Pengcheng and Lushui in the Northern Expedition, he saw the enemy run away in the middle of the night, attacked the Lower Yangtze, ran away as soon as the battle was fought, and caused heavy losses to our army. He should be punished by law. Fortunately, the first emperor's wisdom and magnanimity forgave his failure to return to the creek and hoped that he would regain the great victory of the Battle of Shaoshan. So he was promoted and got a high position. He enjoyed military power

古文：圣灵鼎湖，远颁顾命，托寄崇深，义感金石。
现代文：先帝去世，让他参与身后大事寄托他巨大的希望，这种感情可以感动苍天，连金子和石头都能被感动。
English: The death of the former emperor made him participate in the events behind him and placed great hopes on him. This kind of emotion can move the heavens, and even gold and stones can be moved.

古文：而攸之始奉国讳，喜见于容，普天同哀，己以为庆。
现代文：但沈攸之刚接到皇上逝世的消息，却高兴无比，全国人民感到悲痛，但沈攸之却独自庆贺。
English: However, Shen Youzhi, who had just received the news of the Emperor's death, was overjoyed. The whole nation was saddened, but Shen Youzhi was the only one to celebrate.

古文：此其乐祸幸灾，大逆之罪一也。
现代文：这是他幸灾乐祸，大逆不道的第一大罪行。
English: This was his first major crime of mischief and rebellion.

古文：又攸之累登蕃兵，自郢迁荆，晋熙殿下以皇弟代镇，地尊望重，攸之肆情陵侮，断割候迎，料择士马，简算器甲，精器锐士，并取自随，郢城所留，十不遗一，专擅略虏，罔顾国典。此其苞藏祸志，不恭不虔，大逆之罪二也。
现代文：另外沈攸之多次当方面大官、从郢州到荆州，晋熙王殿下以亲王身份代替他上任、尽管晋熙王官高位重，但沈攸之却肆意侮辱，不让人迎接，选择好的兵马，挑出锐利的武器，都搜括起来跟他自己一起运走，郢城留下的连十分之一都不到，擅自夺掠，不顾国法，这是他包藏祸心、不恭不敬的第二大罪行。
English: In addition, Shen Youzhi repeatedly became a high-ranking official in the field, from Bozhou to Jingzhou, and His Royal Highness Prince Jinxi replaced him as a prince. Although Prince Jinxi was a high-ranking official, Shen Youzhi was wantonly insulted, refused to be greeted, selected good soldiers and horses, and selected sharp weapons, all of which were collected and transported with himself. Less than one-tenth of Bozhou was left, and he plundered without authorization, regardless of the national law. This was his second major crime of harboring malice and disrespect.

古文：又攸之践荆以来，恆用奸数，既欲发兵，宜有因假，遂乃蹙迫群蛮，骚扰山谷，扬声讨伐，尽户发上，蚁聚郭邑，伺国盛衰，从来积年，永不解甲。遂使四野百县，路无男人；耕田载租，皆驱女弱。自古酷虐，未闻有此。其侮蔑朝廷，大逆之罪三也。
现代文：另外沈攸之到荆州以来，常用奸诈的方法。他要发兵，应该请示朝廷，他却逼迫蛮人，骚挠山区人民，声称要讨伐反叛的百姓，征调所有壮丁，聚集城中等待新乱子有好几年了，而且他一直没有解除武装，于是使荆州百县地区，路上没有男人行走，耕田送租的，都是妇女老人小孩，从古到今的暴虐的故事，从未听说如此残酷的，这是他侮辱和轻视朝廷，大逆不道的第三罪行。
English: In addition, since Shen Youzhi arrived in Jingzhou, he has often used treacherous methods. He wanted to send troops and should have asked the court, but he persecuted the barbarians, agitated the people in the mountainous areas, claimed to fight the rebellious people, conscripted all the young men, gathered in the city to wait for the new disorder for several years, and he has not disarmed, so that in the hundred counties of Jingzhou, there are no men walking on the road, and the farmland is rented by women, the elderly and children. The story of tyranny from ancient times to the present has never been so cruel. This is his third crime of insulting and despising

古文：去昔桂阳奇兵囗起，京师内，宗庙阽危。攸之任居上流，兵强地广，救援颠沛，实宜悉力。
现代文：去年桂阳王刘休范造反，京师官民恐惧，国家危险，沈攸之统率西方各军，兵强马壮，地域广阔，他应迅速全力勤王。
English: Last year, King Liu Xuan of Guiyang rebelled, Beijing instilled fear in officials and citizens, the country was in danger, Shen Youzhi led the Western armies, the army was strong, and the region was vast. He should quickly devote himself to the king.

古文：国家倒悬，方思身虑，威遣弱卒三千，并皆羸老，使就郢州，禀受节度，欲令判否之日，委罪晋熙。何其平日辀张，实轻周、邵，尔时恭谨，虚重皇戚。
现代文：在国家这样危险的时刻，他却替自己考虑，只派三千弱兵，而且都很衰老，叫他们到郢城，接受晋熙王的指挥，想叫事平之后，推卸责任给晋熙王，为什么他平时猖狂无忌，轻视亲王，这时又如此恭敬，假装孝敬皇帝亲戚呢？
English: In such a dangerous time for the country, he thought about himself and sent only three thousand weak soldiers, and they were all very old. He called them to Lucheng to accept the command of King Jinxi. After he wanted to smooth things over, he shifted the responsibility to King Jinxi. Why was he usually reckless and despised the prince, but at that time he was so respectful and pretended to show filial piety to the emperor's relatives?

古文：此其伏慝藏诈，持疑两端，大逆之罪四也。
现代文：这是他心藏奸诈，首鼠两端大逆不道的第四罪行。
English: This is his fourth crime of treachery and double-crossing.

古文：又攸之累据方州，跋扈滋甚，招诱轻狡，往者咸纳；羁绊行侣，过境必留。仕子穷困，不得归其乡；商人毕命，无由还其土。叛亡入境，辄加拥护；逋逃出界，必遣穷追。此其大逆之罪五也。
现代文：再便是沈攸之多次官临藩镇，非常专横跋扈，招纳诱惑轻薄狡猾的人，凡到他那里去的一律接纳，过路旅客一律留下，穷困的读书人不能让他们回到故乡，商人丢命，无法回到故土，叛贼和亡命徒到了他的地域，便加以保护，逃跑的奴隶，一定派人加以纠集，这是大逆不道的第五罪行。
English: And then there are the many times that Shen Youzhi's officials came to the towns of his domain. He was very domineering, recruiting tempting, light and cunning people. Everyone who went to him was accepted, and all passing travelers were left behind. Poor readers could not be allowed to return to their hometowns. Merchants lost their lives and could not return to their homeland. When traitors and fugitives came to his region, he protected them. When slaves ran away, he would send someone to round them up. This is the fifth crime of high treason.

古文：又攸之自任专恣，恃行惨酷，视吏若仇，遇民如草。峻太半之赋，暴参夷之刑。鞭捶国士，全用虏法；一人逃亡，阖宗补代。毒遍婴孩，虐加斑白。
现代文：另外沈攸之刚愎自用，残忍不道，把官吏看成仇人，把人民当成小草，榨取人民收入的大半，施行残暴的惩罚，鞭打国家的人才，全部用对待敌人的方法。一个人逃跑了，全族替代受罚，他制造的灾难祸及婴儿，遍及世人。
English: In addition, Shen Yuanzhong's obstinacy is self-serving, cruel and immoral, regards officials as enemies, regards the people as grass, squeezes out most of the people's income, imposes cruel punishments, and whips the country's talent, all using the method of treating the enemy. One person fled, the whole nation was punished instead, and the disaster he created, including babies, spread all over the world.

古文：狱囚恆满，市血常流。男不得耕，女不得织。奔驰道路，号哭动天。
现代文：监狱里的犯人总是装得满满的，集市上总是流着被判死刑的人的血液，男人不能耕种，女人不能纺织，以致人民奔走道路，让痛哭声感动上天。
English: The jails are always full of prisoners, the blood of those condemned to death flows in the bazaars, the men cannot farm, the women cannot weave, so that the people run along the roads, their cries of anguish touching the heavens.

古文：皇朝赦令，初不遵奉，欲杀欲击，故旷荡之泽，长隔彼州。此其无君陵上，大逆之罪六也。
现代文：朝廷下的赦令，他不遵行，想任意滥杀。所以皇上深广的恩泽，西边人民一点也不能沾边，这是他目中没有皇上，以下犯上，大逆不道的第六种罪行。
English: He did not follow the pardon order of the imperial court and wanted to kill indiscriminately. Therefore, the people of the west side could not touch the emperor's deep and wide grace at all. This was the sixth crime of high treason in his eyes without the emperor.

古文：苍梧狂凶，衅深桀、纣，猜贰外蕃，鸮目西顾。留其长息元琰，以为交质；父子分张，弥积年稔。赖社稷灵长，独夫遄戮，攸之豫禀心灵，宜同欢幸。遂迷惑颠倒，深相嗟惜。举言哀桀，扬声吠尧。
现代文：苍梧王凶残疯狂，罪恶比桀纣还多，猜疑四方大臣，沈攸之只顾自身，却留下他的长子沈元琰作为人质，父子分离有几年了，依靠国家的神灵保佑，独夫民贼最近被杀，沈攸之也享受到好处，应该高兴，但他颠倒黑白，深深痛惜，为夏桀举声哀悼，对着尧帝狂吠，实则是代恶人报仇。
English: King Cangwu is savagely mad, his sins are more numerous than those of his father, he is suspicious of the four ministers, Shen Youzhi only cares about himself, but he has left his eldest son Shen Yuanxuan as a hostage. The father and son have been separated for several years, relying on the blessing of the gods of the country. The one-man bandit was recently killed. Shen Youzhi also enjoyed the benefits and should be happy, but he reversed the black and white, deeply regretted, mourned for Xia Yao, and barked at Emperor Zou. In fact, he was avenging the wicked.

古文：此其不辨是非，罔识善恶，违情背理，大逆之罪七也。
现代文：这是他不分是非，不分善恶，逆理背情，大逆不道的第七罪行。
English: This is his seventh crime of not distinguishing between right and wrong, not distinguishing between good and evil, going against reason, and being a great rebel.

古文：废昏立明，先代盛典，交、广先到，梁、秦蚤及，而攸之密迩内畿，川涂弗远，驿书至止，晏若不闻，末遣章表，奄积旬朔。
现代文：废除昏庸的暴君，树立圣贤的皇帝，是自古以来的大好事，交州刺史，广州刺史都先来祝贺，梁州刺史也来了，但沈攸之距离京城不远，路程不长，用驿马送信马上就到了，但他充耳不闻，最后才上书祝贺已迟一个多月了。
English: The abolition of a mediocre tyrant and the establishment of a saintly emperor has been a great thing since ancient times. Jiaozhou, Guangzhou and Liangzhou all came to congratulate him first, but Shen You is not far from Beijing, the journey is not long, and the horse-drawn messenger arrived immediately, but he did not listen, and finally the congratulation was more than a month late.

古文：防风后至，夏典所诛，此其大逆之罪八也。
现代文：防风最后一个到达，夏禹便将他斩首，这是他大逆不道的第八个罪行。
English: When the last windbreak arrived, Xia Yu beheaded him, which was his eighth crime of high treason.

古文：升明肇历，恩深泽远，申其父子之情，矜其骨肉之恩，驰遣元琰，衔使西归，并加崇授，宠贵重叠。
现代文：顺帝即位，恩惠遍及边远的地方，皇上让他家人团圆，可怜他骨肉分离，送他的儿子带信回到他身旁。
English: When Emperor Shun ascended the throne, his benevolence spread to far-flung places. The emperor reunited his family, took pity on his separated flesh and blood, and sent his son back to him with a letter.

古文：元琰达西，便应反命，攸之得此集聚，蒙谁之恩？不荷盛德，反生仇衅，此其大逆之罪九也。
现代文：他们都受朝廷尊宠，多次给他们援助，沈元琰一到荆州，便附从反叛的父亲沈攸之得到这样的团圆，到底是蒙受了谁的恩惠，不感恩戴德，反而憎恨朝廷，这是他大逆不道的第九罪行。
English: All of them were favored by the imperial court and provided them with assistance many times. As soon as Shen Yuanjun arrived in Jingzhou, he followed his rebel father Shen Youzhi to get such a reunion. Who did he receive the favor from? Instead of being grateful, he hated the imperial court. This was his ninth crime of high treason.

古文：攸之以溪壑之性，含枭鸩之肠，直置天壤，已称丑秽。况乃举兵内侮，逞肆奸回，斯实恶熟罪成之辰，决痈溃疽之日。幕府过荷朝寄，义百常愤，董司元戎，龚行天罚。
现代文：沈攸之贪得无厌，欲壑难填，心肠如毒蛇，直到天涯海角，他的罪恶也不能消除，况且他起兵造反，发泄他奸险的坏心，这确实是罪恶性剧增的时候，也是脓疮溃乱的日子，齐王蒙朝廷的信任，愤怒填膺，统率大军，亲行讨伐。
English: Shen Youzhi's insatiable greed, insatiable desire, heart like a viper, to the ends of the earth, his evil can not be eliminated, moreover, he rebelled, venting his treacherous bad heart, this is indeed a time of crime surge, but also a day of scabies, King Qi was trusted by the court, filled with anger, led a large army, and personally led the crusade.

古文：今皇上圣明，将相仁厚，约法三章，轻刑缓赋，年登岁阜，家给人足，上有惠和之泽，下无乐乱之心。
现代文：现今皇上圣贤英明，将相仁厚，法条简洁，轻刑薄赋，五谷丰登，家给人足，上有仁惠的恩德，人民无从乱的心愿。
English: Nowadays, the emperor is wise and benevolent, the laws are concise, the punishments are light and the rewards are meager, the wealth is plentiful, the family is full of people, there is benevolence and grace, and the people have no desire for chaos.

古文：攸之不识天时，妄图奸逆，举无名之师，驱怨仇之党。
现代文：沈攸之不知天命，狂乱反叛，起兵没有借口，徒然驱使仇恨的人民。
English: Shen Youzhi did not know the fate of the world, rebelled wildly, raised an army without any excuse, and drove the people of hatred in vain.

古文：是以朝野审其易取，含识判其成禽。
现代文：所以朝廷民间知道他将被打败；有识之士认为他一定会被捉拿归案。
English: So the court folk knew he was going to be defeated; the cognoscenti thought he was going to be caught.

古文：熊罴厉爪，蓄攫裂之心；虎豹摩牙，起吞噬之愤。
现代文：加上我军熊虎般的部队，时刻准备出击利爪，像虎豹一样有锋利的牙齿，时刻准备吞掉反叛的部队。
English: In addition, our army bears tiger-like troops, always ready to attack sharp claws, like tigers and leopards with sharp teeth, always ready to swallow rebel troops.

古文：鼓怒则冰原激电，奋发则霜野奔雷，以此定乱，岂移晷刻。虽复众徒梗陆，举郡阻川，何足以抗沸海之涛，当烧山之焰。
现代文：鼓声擂动则如霹雷奋击，用他们来平定祸乱，怎么会用好长时间，虽然叛军人多势众，全郡同反，怎么能抵得住沸腾大海般的波涛，挡得住如高山般威严的我军。
English: The beating of the drums is like a thunderbolt. How can it take a long time to use them to quell the calamity? Although there are many rebels and the whole county is against them, how can they resist the waves of the boiling sea and block our army, which is as majestic as a mountain.

古文：彼土士民，罹毒日久，逃窜无路，常所悯然。今复相逼，起接锋刃，交战之日，兰艾难分。
现代文：荆州的广大官员百姓们，长时间遭受苦难，逃跑又没有机会。我们很同情你们，今日两军相对，战火一烧，攻击时刻便玉石俱焚。
English: Officials and people of Jingzhou, you have suffered for a long time and have no chance to escape. We sympathize with you very much. Today, the two armies are on the opposite sides, the war is in full swing, and the time of attack will be very hot.

古文：土崩倒戈，宜为蚤计，无使一人迷昧，而九族就祸也。
现代文：趁机倒戈反击，赶快另作准备，你们千万别执迷不悟，而遭九族株连。
English: Take advantage of the opportunity to fight back, and quickly make other preparations. You must not be stubborn and be defeated by the nine tribes.

古文：弘宥之典，有如皎日。
现代文：朝廷宽容的条例，如太阳一样明白。
English: The tolerance of the court is as clear as the sun.

古文：攸之尽锐攻郢州，行事柳世隆随宜距应，屡摧破之。
现代文：沈攸之集中他精锐的兵力猛攻郢城，代理郢州刺史柳世隆灵活地抵抗，多次打退他的进攻。
English: Shen Youyou's concentration of his elite troops led to a fierce attack on Zhangcheng, and the deputy governor of Zhangzhou, Liu Shilong, flexibly resisted and repeatedly repulsed his attack.

古文：攸之与武陵王赞笺曰： 江陵一总八州，地居形胜，镇抚之重，宜以上归。本欲仰移节盖，改临荆部，所以未具上闻者，欲待至止，面自咨申。不图重关击柝，觐接莫由。若使匡朝之诚，终蔽于圣察，袭远之举，近拥于郢都，则无以谢烈士之心，何用塞义夫之志，便不犯关陵汉，期一接奉。
现代文：沈攸之给武陵王刘讠赞写了一封信说： 江陵总管的土地，地势优越，镇抚此地的大权，应该送给朝廷，本来想希望阁下移官此地，督抚荆州，之所以一直没有通知你，只想等待您的到达，当面商讨，没想到关口重叠、想和你见面也没有机会，致使我效忠本朝的忠心还是被朝廷误会，袭击奸臣的暴动，近在郢城发生，这样便不能表明我的真实心愿。一旦攻击，也许惊动阁下左右的人，确实是不得已，这里先通知阁下。 
English: Shen Youzhi wrote a letter to Liu Yuzan, the king of Wuling, saying: "The land of the governor-general of Gangneung is in a superior location, and the power to govern this place should be given to the imperial court. Originally, I wanted your excellency to be transferred to this place to supervise Jingzhou. The reason why I did not inform you all along, I just wanted to wait for your arrival and discuss it in person. I did not expect the checkpoints to overlap, and there was no opportunity to meet with you. As a result, my loyalty to this dynasty was still misunderstood by the imperial court. The riot that attacked the traitorous minister

古文：若夫斩蛟陷石之卒，裂骼卷铁之将，烟腾飙迅，容或惊动左右，苟不获已，敢不先布下情。 又曰： 下官位重分陕，富兼金穴，子弟胜衣，爵命已及，亲党辨菽，抽序便加，耳倦弦歌，口厌粱肉，布衣若此，复欲何求？岂不知俯眉苟安，保养余齿，何为不计百口，甘冒危难。诚感历朝之遇，欲报之于皇家尔。
现代文：又说： 下官官高位显，几乎据有国家的一半，家里的富裕可比金窝，婴孩在摇篮之中，便获得朝廷的封赏，亲戚几岁，便加官位，听厌了音乐歌声，吃厌了鱼肉，一个普通平民达到这个地位，愿望早已满足了，谁不想安定地过日子，保养余年，为什么不为全家谋算，而愿冒目前危险，确实是深深地记着朝廷的恩德，想报皇恩。
English: He also said: The lower-ranking officials are high-ranking, almost half of the country is rich, the wealth of the family is comparable to a golden nest, the baby is in the cradle, then it will be rewarded by the court, the relatives are a few years old, then they will be promoted to official positions, they are tired of listening to music and singing, and they are tired of eating fish and meat. An ordinary commoner has reached this position, and his wish has already been satisfied. Who does not want to live a stable life and maintain the remaining years, why not plan for the whole family, but is willing to take the current danger. It is indeed a deep memory of the court's

古文：昧理之徒，谓下官怀无厌之愿，既贯诚于白日，不复明心于殿下。
现代文：伤天害理的人以为我贪得无厌，然而我的忠心可表天日，却不能再在阁下面前表明心迹。
English: Wicked people think I'm greedy, but I'm loyal as the day is long, but I can't show it in front of you.

古文：若使天必丧道，忠节不立，政复阖门碎灭，百死无恨。
现代文：如果老天爷瞎了眼，我的忠诚不能实现，只有满门被杀，死一百次也不遗憾。
English: If God is blind, my loyalty can not be realized, only the door was killed, die a hundred times do not regret.

古文：但高祖王业艰难，太祖劬劳日昃，卜世不尽七百之期，宗社已成他人之有。家国之事，未审于圣心何如？ 
现代文：但是高祖武皇帝开创的基业却陷入危机之中，太祖文帝每天勤劳带来的基业再也不能达到七百年的时间了。国家落入他人之手，对于国家的事情不知你想法如何。 
English: However, the foundation created by Emperor Gao Zuwu has fallen into a crisis, and the foundation that was diligently brought about by the great ancestor Emperor Wen can no longer reach seven hundred years. The country has fallen into the hands of others, and I don't know what you think about the country's affairs.

古文：攸之遣中兵参军公孙方平马步三千向武昌，太守臧涣弃郡投西阳太守王毓，奔于盆口，方平因据西阳。建宁太守张谟率二守千人攻之，方平破走。
现代文：沈攸之派中兵参军公孙方平率骑兵和步兵进军武昌，太守臧焕丢下郡务投奔西阳太守王毓，他们共同逃到盆口，公孙方平得以占领西阳，建宁太守张谟率臧太守丢下的一千人进攻公孙方平，公孙方平被打败逃走。
English: Shen Yuanzhi sent soldiers to join Gongsun Fangping's army and led cavalry and infantry to march into Wuchang. Grand Duke Gonghuan left the county government to go to Xiyang and Grand Duke Wang Yao. They fled together to the basin mouth. Gongsun Fangping was able to occupy Xiyang. Jianning Grand Duke Zhang Muxuan led a thousand people left behind by the Grand Duke to attack Gongsun Fangping. Gongsun Fangping was defeated and fled.

古文：攸之攻郢城久不决，众心离沮。升明二年正月十九日夜，刘攘兵烧营入降郢城，众于是离散，不可复制。
现代文：沈攸之攻打郢城一直不下，使手下将士们的信心动摇，升明二年正月十九日夜，刘攘兵烧毁军营投降，跑到郢城里面，其他各路部队纷纷动摇，沈攸之再也控制不住了。
English: Shen Youyou's attack on Lucheng was relentless, causing the confidence of his subordinates to waver. On the evening of January 19th, Liu Yo's soldiers burned down the military camp, surrendered, and ran into Lucheng. Other troops were shaken, and Shen Youyou could no longer control them.

古文：将晓，攸之斩刘天赐，率大众过江，至鲁山，诸军因此散走。
现代文：到了天明时，沈攸之将刘天赐斩首，率领残余过江，到鲁山，残兵纷纷逃散。
English: At dawn, Shen Youzhi beheaded Liu Tianzhu and led the remnants across the river to Lushan. The remaining soldiers fled.

古文：还向江陵，未百余里，闻城已为雍州刺史张敬兒所据，无所归，乃与第三子中书侍郎文和至华容界，为封人所斩送。
现代文：沈攸之回到江陵，大约在距江陵百余里的地方，听说城池已被雍州刺史张敬儿占据，无路可走，只好与第二子中书侍郎沈文和跑到华容境内，被看山的人斩首，送往江陵。
English: Shen Youzhi returned to Gangneung, about a hundred miles away from Gangneung, when he heard that the city had been occupied by Zhang Jing'er, the famous poet of Yongzhou. He had no choice but to run with his second son, Shen Wenhe, a junior secretary, to Huarong. They were beheaded by the people watching the mountains and sent to Gangneung.

古文：攸之初下，留元琰守江陵，张敬兒克城，元琰逃走。
现代文：沈攸之开始东下时，留沈元琰守江陵，张敬儿攻克江陵，沈元琰逃跑。
English: When Shen Yuanzhi started to go east, he left Shen Yuan to guard Jiangling, Zhang Jing'er conquered Jiangling, and Shen Yuan'er fled.

古文：第五子幼和、幼和弟灵和、元琰子法先、懿子囗囗、文和子法征、幼和子法茂，并为敬兒所禽，伏诛。初，文和尚齐王女义兴宪公主，公主早薨，有二女，至是齐王迎还第内。
现代文：沈攸之第五个儿子沈幼和，幼和弟弟灵和沈元琰的儿子沈法先，沈文和的儿子沈法征，沈幼和儿子沈法茂，都被张敬儿抓获，同时被杀掉，当初，沈文和娶齐王萧道成的女儿义兴宪公主，公主早死，留下两个儿子，到这时候齐王萧道成接回两个外甥女。
English: Shen Youyou's fifth son Shen Youhe, Youhe's younger brother Ling, and Shen Yuanjun's sons Shen Faxian, Shen Wenhe's son Shen Fa Zheng, and Shen Youhe's son Shen Fa Mao, were all captured by Zhang Jing'er and killed at the same time. At the beginning, Shen Wenhe married Qi Wang Xiao Ducheng's daughter Princess Yixing Xian. The princess died early, leaving behind two sons. At this time, Qi Wang Xiao Ducheng took back two nieces.

古文：今皇帝即位，听攸之及诸子丧还葬墓。
现代文：齐武帝即位，允许沈攸之和他的几个儿子的灵柩还葬故乡的祖墓。
English: When Emperor Qiwu ascended the throne, he allowed the coffins of Shen Youzhi and several of his sons to be buried in the ancestral tombs of his hometown.

古文：攸之第二子懿，太子洗马，先攸之卒。
现代文：沈攸之第二子沈懿，官至太子洗马，比沈攸之先死。
English: Shen You's second son, Shen Yao, who rose to the rank of crown prince, died before Shen You.

古文：攸之弟登之，新安太守，去职在家，为吴兴太守沈文季所收斩。登之弟雍之，鄱阳太守，先攸之卒。
现代文：沈攸之弟弟沈登之，官至新安太守，离职在家，被吴兴太守沈文季逮捕斩首，沈登之弟弟沈雍之，官至鄱阳太守，比沈攸之先死。
English: Shen Yu's younger brother, Shen Dengzhi, who served as the new governor of An, left his post at home and was arrested and beheaded by Wu Xing governor Shen Wenzhi. Shen Dengzhi's younger brother, Shen Yongzhi, who served as the governor of Shenyang, died before Shen Yu.

古文：诏以雍之孙僧照为义兴公主后。
现代文：梁武帝萧衍下诏让沈雍之的孙子沈僧照当义兴公主继承人。
English: Liangwu Emperor Xiao Yan issued an edict to let Shen Yongzhi's grandson Shen Zangzhao be the heir to Princess Yixing.

古文：雍之与攸之异生，诸弟中最和谨，尤见亲爱。
现代文：沈雍之和沈攸之不是一母所生，是攸之众多弟弟中最和气谨慎的，沈攸之很喜欢他。
English: Shen Yongzhi and Shen Youzhi were not born from the same mother. He was the most gentle and cautious of Youzhi's many younger brothers. Shen Youzhi liked him very much.

古文：攸之性俭吝，子弟不得妄用财物，唯恣雍之所须，辄取斋中服饰，分与亲旧，以此为常。雍之弟荣之，尚书库部郎，亦先攸之卒。
现代文：沈攸之性格俭朴吝啬，儿子兄弟不经允许不能乱用财物，只让沈雍之任意使用，但雍之总是拿做斋时的衣服，分给亲朋好友，并且常常这样，沈雍之弟弟沈荣之，尚书库部郎，也在沈攸之之前死。
English: Shen Yau's character was frugal and miserly. His sons and brothers were not allowed to misuse property without permission. They only allowed Shen Yau to use it as he wished. However, Yong Zhi always took the clothes that were used for fasting and distributed them to his relatives and friends, and often did so. Shen Yau's younger brother, Shen Rong Zhi, the head of the Shang Library, also died before Shen Yau.

古文：攸之晚好读书，手不释卷，《史》、《汉》事多所谙忆，常叹曰： 早知穷达有命，恨不十年读书。 
现代文：沈攸之晚年喜欢读书，手不释《史记》、《汉书》。上面的故事他记得很多，常常叹息说： 早知贵贱贫富命中注定，恨不得读它十年书。 
English: In his later years, Shen Yuanzhi liked to read. He was obsessed with "History" and "Chinese Classics." He remembered many of the above stories and often said with a sigh, "I knew early on that the rich and the poor were predestined, and I couldn't wait to read it for ten years."

古文：及攻郢城，夜遇风浪，米船沉没，仓曹参军崔灵凤女幼适柳世隆子，攸之正色谓曰： 当今军粮要急，而卿不以在意，将由与城内婚姻邪？ 
现代文：直攻打郢城的时候，晚上遇到风浪，运米的船被风打沉，参军崔灵凤的女儿嫁给了柳世隆的儿子，沈攸之严肃地对崔灵凤说： 现在军粮要紧，但你不以为意，难道是因为城内有婚姻吗？ 
English: When directly attacking the city of Diao, in the evening they encountered wind and waves, the ship carrying rice was sunk by the wind, and the daughter of Cui Lingfeng, who joined the army, married the son of Liu Shilong. Shen Yuanzhi said seriously to Cui Lingfeng: Now military grain is important, but you don't think it's important, is it because there are marriages in the city?

古文：灵凤答曰： 乐广有言，下官岂以五男易一女。 
现代文：灵凤回答说： 乐广有这样的话，我怎么能用五个儿子换一个女儿呢！ 
English: Cui Lingfeng said, "Le Guang said, how can a subordinate officer exchange five sons for one daughter!

古文：攸之欢然意解。
现代文：沈攸之高兴地去掉了怀疑。
English: Shen Youyou was glad to get rid of the resentment in his heart.

古文：初，攸之招集才力之士，随郡人双泰真有干力，召不肯来。后泰真至江陵卖买，有以告攸之者，攸之因留之，补队副，厚加料理。泰真无停志，少日叛走，攸之遣二十人被甲追之，逐讨甚急。泰真杀数人，余者不敢近。
现代文：当初沈攸之招集勇敢能干的人，随郡人双泰真有很大本事，被沈召请但不愿意来，以后双泰真到江陵做生意，有人告诉沈攸之，沈攸之乘机留下他，补任副队长，照顾他非常好，泰真无心留下，过几天就跑走了，沈攸之派二十人带着武器追他，赶他赶得很急，泰真杀了几个，其余的人不敢靠近。
English: At first, Shen Youzhi called for brave and capable people. Shuang Taizhen, a county resident, was invited but did not want to come. Later, Shuang Taizhen went to Gangneung to do business. Someone told Shen Youzhi that Shen Youzhi took the opportunity to leave him as a vice captain and took very good care of him. Tai Zhen had no intention of staying and ran away after a few days. Shen Youzhi sent twenty people with weapons to chase him. They were in a hurry to catch him. Tai Zhen killed several, and the rest of the people did not dare to approach.

古文：欲过家将母去，事迫不获，单身走入蛮；追者既失之，录其母而去。
现代文：泰真想经过家门带母亲离去，因为太紧急而没能成功，只好单身潜入蛮人中。追的人既然没抓住他，带他母亲回去。
English: Taizhen wanted to leave with his mother through the front door of the house, but it was too urgent to succeed, so he had to sneak into the barbarians alone. Since the pursuers did not catch him, he took his mother back.

古文：泰真既失母，乃出自归，攸之不罪，曰： 此孝子也。 
现代文：泰真既然丢了母亲，于是主动出来到江陵，沈攸之并不追究他的责任说： 这是孝子。 
English: Since Taizhen had lost his mother, he came out to Gangneung on his own initiative. Shen Youzhi did not hold him responsible and said: This is a filial son.

古文：赐钱一万，转补队主，其矫情任算皆如此。
现代文：并赏赐一万钱，升任他任队长，沈攸之能矫情到这地步。
English: He also rewarded him with ten thousand yuan and promoted him to captain. Shen Youyou's ability to be impertinent has reached this level.

古文：初，攸之贱时，与吴郡孙超之、全景文共乘小船出京都，三人共上引埭，有一人止而相之曰： 君三人皆当至方伯。 
现代文：早年沈攸之贫贱时候，和吴郡孙超之、全景文共乘小船从京城出游，三人一同上堤，有一个人拦住他们给他们看相，对他们说： 你们三个将来都会做封疆大吏。 
English: In the early years, when Shen Yuezhi was poor, he and Sun Chaorong of Wu County and Panorama Wen took a small boat to travel from Beijing. The three of them went up the embankment together. A man stopped them to show them his face and said to them, "You three will all be great officials in the future."

古文：攸之曰： 岂有三人俱有此相？ 
现代文：沈攸之说： 怎么会三个人都是这样的骨相。 
English: Shen Youzhi said, "How can three people have the same bone structure?"

古文：相者曰： 骨法如此，若有不验，便是相书误耳。 
现代文：相士说： 骨法注定如此，如果将来不实现，一定是相书的错误。 
English: He said, "The bone method is destined to be like this. If it doesn't come to fruition in the future, it must be the fault of the photo book."

古文：其后攸之为郢、荆二州，超之广州，景文豫州刺史。
现代文：此后沈攸之当郢荆二州刺史，孙超之当广州刺史，全景文当南豫州刺史。
English: After that, Shen Youyou became the historian of the two states, Sun Chaozhi became the historian of Guangzhou, and Panjingwen became the historian of South Yuzhou.

古文：攸之初至郢州，有顺流之志。府主簿宗俨之劝攻郢城，功曹臧寅以为： 攻守势异，非旬日所拔，若不时举，挫锐损威。今顺流长驱，计日可捷，既倾根本，则郢城岂能自固。 
现代文：沈攸之刚到郢州，准备顺流东进，荆州府主簿宗俨之劝他进攻郢城，功曹臧寅认为： 攻和防守形势相反，进攻不是十来天可以拿下的，如果不迅速拿下此城，必然损伤士气，降低威望，今日如果顺流长驱，几天便可以成功，即可打下敌人的根据地，那么郢城敌人岂会顽抗？ 
English: Shen Youzhi had just arrived in Ganzhou and was preparing to sail east along the river. Zong Youzhi, the chief bookkeeper of the Jingzhou government, advised him to attack Ganzhou. Gong Cao Yuyin thought: Contrary to the situation of attack and defense, the attack cannot be won in ten days. If this city is not quickly won, it will inevitably damage morale and reduce prestige. Today, if the river is long, it can be successful in a few days, and the enemy's base can be defeated. Then will the enemy of Ganzhou resist?

古文：攸之不从，既败，诸将帅皆奔散，惟寅曰： 我委质事人，岂可苟免。我之不负公，犹公之不负朝廷也。 
现代文：沈攸之不听，失败后各将领都逃窜了。只有臧寅说： 我托命伺候人家，怎能苟且偷生，我不辜负沈公，好比沈公不背负朝廷。 
English: Shen Youzhi did not listen, and after the defeat, all the generals fled. Only Yu Yin said: "I have been ordered to serve others, how can I live a secret life, I can live up to Shen Gong, just as Shen Gong does not carry the imperial court."

古文：乃投水死。寅，字士若，东莞莒人也。
现代文：于是跳水自杀，臧寅字士若，东莞莒县人。
English: As a result, he committed suicide by jumping into the water. He was a Dongguan County resident.

古文：先是，攸之在郢州，州从事辄与府录事鞭，攸之免从事官，而更鞭录事五十。
现代文：开始时，沈攸之在郢城，郢州从事总是鞭打郢府录事，沈攸之免去从事的官职，而重新鞭打录事五十下。
English: At the beginning, Shen Youzhi was in Handan City, Handan Province, and was always engaged in flogging the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record.

古文：谓人曰： 州官鞭府职，诚非体要，由小人凌侮士大夫。 
现代文：对人说： 州官打府官，确实不成体统，这是小人侮辱士大夫。 
English: He said to the man: It is indeed unseemly for a prefectural official to fight a prefectural official. This is a villain insulting a shidafu.

古文：仓曹参军事边荣为府录事所辱，攸之自为荣鞭杀录事。
现代文：仓曹参军事边荣被郢州府录事侮辱，沈攸之亲自替边荣鞭杀录事。
English: Cang Cao, a member of the military, was insulted by Bian Rong in the records of the Zhangzhou government, and Shen Youzhi personally whipped Bian Rong in the records.

古文：攸之自江陵下，以荣为留府司马，守城。张敬兒将至，人或说之使诣敬兒降，荣曰： 受沈公厚恩，共如此大事，一朝缓急，便改易本心，不能行也。 
现代文：沈攸之从江陵东下，以边荣做留府司马，防守江陵城，张敬儿将到荆州城下，有人劝说边荣拜见张敬儿请求允许自己投降，边荣说： 我蒙受沈公的大恩德，首创如此大事，一旦出了问题，便变心改节，这是办不到的。 
English: Shen Youzhi went from Jiangling to the east, with Bian Rong as his deputy, to defend Jiangling City. Zhang Jing'er was going to Jingzhou City. Someone persuaded Bian Rong to meet Zhang Jing'er and ask for permission to surrender. Bian Rong said: I have received great kindness from Shen Gong. I am the first to create such a big thing. If something goes wrong, I will change my mind. This is impossible.

古文：城败，见敬兒，敬兒问曰： 边公何不早来？ 
现代文：城池被攻破，他见到张敬儿，张敬儿问他： 边公怎么不早点来。 
English: When the castle was breached, he saw Zhang Jing'er coming out. Zhang Jing'er asked him, "Why didn't Prince Bian come earlier?"

古文：荣曰： 沈公见留守城，而委城求活，所不忍也。本不蕲生，何须见问。 
现代文：边荣说： 沈公留我守城。如果丢掉城池要求活命，我是不忍心这样做的，本来我是不吝啬性命的，何必如此质问。 
English: Bian Rong said, "Shen Gong left me to defend the city. If I were to throw away the city and ask for my life, I would not have the heart to do so. Originally, I was not stingy with my life, so why would I ask such a question?"

古文：敬兒曰： 死何难得。 
现代文：张敬儿说： 死有什么难。 
English: Zhang Jing'er said, "What's so difficult about dying?

古文：命斩之，欢笑而去，容无异色。泰山程邕之者，素依随荣，至是抱持荣曰： 与边公周游，不忍见边公前死，乞见杀。 
现代文：命令拖出斩首，边荣欢笑而去，面无惧色，泰山人程邕之一贯跟着边荣，此时抱着边荣说： 我和边公相处多年，不忍心见边公先死，我请求先杀掉我。 
English: The order was given to drag out the decapitated head. Bian Rong laughed and walked away, his face fearless. Cheng Yao, one of the Taishan people, followed Bian Rong. At this time, he hugged Bian Rong and said: I have been with Bian Gong for many years. I can't bear to see Bian Gong die first. I beg you to kill me first.

古文：兵不得行戮，以告敬兒，敬兒曰： 求死甚易，何为不许。 
现代文：刽子手不能行刑，把这告诉张敬儿，张敬儿说： 找死容易，为什么不同意。 
English: The executioner couldn't carry out the sentence, so he told Zhang Jing'er about this. Zhang Jing'er said, "It's easy to seek death. Why don't you agree?"

古文：先杀邕之，然后及荣。
现代文：先杀程邕之，然后杀边荣。
English: First kill Cheng Xizhi, then kill Biancong Rong.

古文：三军莫不垂泣，曰： 奈何一日杀二义士。 
现代文：全军莫不为他们流泪，都说： 怎么一日间杀两个义士。 
English: The whole army shed tears for them and said, "How can you kill two righteous men in one day?"

古文：比之臧洪及陈容。
现代文：把他们比成臧洪和陈宫。
English: Compare them to Zhai Hong and Chen Rong.

古文：荣，金城人也。
现代文：边荣，金城人。
English: Bian Rong, from Jincheng.

古文：废帝之殒也，攸之欲起兵，问其知星人葛珂之。珂之曰： 自古起兵，皆候太白。
现代文：废帝被杀时，沈攸之便想起兵勤王，问他手下的懂天文的人葛珂之，葛珂之说： 从古以来起兵的人，都必须等待太白星的出现。
English: When the deposed emperor was killed, Shen Youzhi thought of the warrior King and asked Ge Kezhi, an astronomer under his command. Ge Kezhi said, "Since ancient times, those who raise an army must wait for the appearance of the white star.

古文：太白见则成，伏则败。
现代文：太白星出现便成功，不见便要失败。
English: If it's too white, it's a success, if it's not, it's a failure.

古文：昔桂阳以太白伏时举兵，一战授首，此近世明验。
现代文：当年桂阳王休范在太白星不见时起义，一交战便被杀，这是近来的明证。
English: In that year, King Xuan of Guiyang revolted when he did not see Tai Baixing, and was killed in a battle, which is a recent clear evidence.

古文：今萧公废昏立明，政值太白伏时，此与天合也。
现代文：现在萧道成废除昏君，树立贤主，正遇太白星隐藏的时候，这说明他们是合乎天道的。
English: Now that Xiao Daocheng has abolished the dim prince and established the wise lord, it is the time when the white star is hidden, which shows that they are in line with the heavenly way.

古文：且太白寻出东方，东方利用兵，西方不利。 
现代文：况且太白星又在东方出现，东方人用兵便有利，西方却不利。 
English: Moreover, the white star appeared in the East, and the use of troops by the East was advantageous, while the West was unfavorable.

古文：故攸之止不反。
现代文：所以沈攸之停止没有起事。
English: Therefore, the suspension of Shen You did not cause any problems.

古文：及后举兵，珂之又曰： 今岁星守南斗，其国不可伐。 
现代文：到这次起兵造反，葛珂之又说： 今年岁星在南斗星，中央政权不能被讨伐。 
English: When the troops were raised later, Ge Kezhi also said, "Now that the Star Guard is in Nantou, it is not possible to attack that fiefdom.

古文：攸之不从。
现代文：沈攸之仍不听从。
English: Shen Youzhi still did not listen.

古文：凡同逆丁珍东、孙同、裴茂仲、武、宗俨之并伏诛。攸之表檄文疏，皆俨之词也。臧涣诣盆城自归，今皇帝命斩之。余同恶或为乱军所杀，或遇赦得原。
现代文：和沈攸之同时造反的丁珍东、孙同、裴茂仲、裴茂武、宗俨之同时被杀，沈攸之的檄文奏表文书都是宗俨之作的，臧焕到盆城投降，齐武帝命令将他斩首，其余同党或被乱军所杀或遇赦得到原谅。
English: Ding Zhendong, Sun Tong, Pei Maozhong, Pei Maowu, and Zong Hui, who rebelled at the same time as Shen You, were killed at the same time. Zong Hui's documents were all written by Zong Hui. Zong Hui surrendered to Boncheng, and Emperor Qiwu ordered him to be beheaded. The rest of his party members were either killed by the rebels or were pardoned.

