古文：符载破山剑扬州贡郑云逵张存百合花浙右渔人元祯李德裕甘露僧令狐绹裴岳苟讽红沫铁头虔州刺史周邯真阳观陴湖渔者文谷
现代文：符载破山剑扬州贡郑云逵张存百合花浙右渔人元祯李德裕甘露僧令狐绹裴岳苟讽红沫铁头虔州刺史周邯真阳观陴湖渔者文谷
English: Yangzhou, Gong, Zheng, Yun, Zhang, Cun, Lily, Zhejiang, Right, Fisherman, Yuan, Gong, Li, Deyu, Ganlu, Monk, Fox, Pei, Yue, Gourd, Red Foam, Iron Head, Kenzhou, History, Zhou, Zhengyang, Guan, Wuhu, Fisherman, Wen Valley

古文：符载
现代文：符载
English: Signed and dated

古文：唐符载文学武艺双绝，常畜一剑，神光照夜为昼。
现代文：唐朝人符载文武双全，曾经有一把宝剑，会发光，将夜间照成白昼。
English: The people of the Tang Dynasty possessed both literature and military prowess. Once upon a time, there was a sword that could emit light and illuminate the night into day.

古文：客游至淮浙，遇巨商舟艦，遭蛟作梗，不克前进。
现代文：一次，符载出游到淮浙一带，遇到一只大商人的货船遭到水中巨蛟的拦阻，不能继续航行。
English: On one occasion, when sailing to the Huai Zhe area with a cargo, a large merchant's cargo ship was blocked by a giant dragonfly in the water and could not continue sailing.

古文：掷剑一挥，血洒如雨，舟舸安流而逝。
现代文：他拔出这把宝剑向巨蛟刺去，血水像下雨一样从巨蛟身上喷洒出来。
English: He pulled out the sword and stabbed the giant centipede, and blood sprayed from the giant centipede like rain.

古文：后遇寒食，于人家裹柜粽，粗如桶，食刀不可用，以此剑断之讫。
现代文：于是，这只商船安然无恙的驶走了。后来，有一年寒食节，符载暂时借宿的这家用秬黍包裹粽子，有桶那么粗，用菜刀切割不了。符载用他随身带着的这把宝剑去割。
English: As a result, the merchant ship sailed away unharmed. Later, one year, during the Cold Food Festival, Fu Rong, who was temporarily staying at the house, wrapped a pair of tongs around the tongs. The tongs were as thick as a bucket and could not be cut with a kitchen knife. Fu Rong used the sword he had with him to cut them.

古文：其剑无光，若顽铁，无所用矣。
现代文：切完后，宝剑再也不发光了，变成了一块顽铁，没什么大用了。
English: After it was cut, the sword no longer glowed and turned into a piece of hard iron, which was of little use.

古文：古人云：千钩之弩，不为鼷鼠发机。
现代文：古人说：有千钧之力的箭弩，不能用它去射鼷这样的小鼠。
English: The ancients said: the arrowhead, which has tremendous power, cannot be used to shoot mice such as quail.

古文：其此剑之谓乎。破山剑
现代文：这话完全适合符载的这把宝剑啊。破山剑
English: These words are perfectly suited to this sword.

古文：近世有士人耕地得剑，磨洗诣市。
现代文：近年有个男人在耕地时拣到一把剑，磨洗之后，拿到集市上去卖。
English: In recent years, a man picked up a sword while ploughing, sharpened it and took it to the market to sell it.

古文：有胡人求买，初还一千，累上至百贯，士人不可。
现代文：有位北方的外族人要买这把剑。最初出一千文钱，后来涨到一百贯，这个男人还是不卖。
English: There was a foreigner from the north who wanted to buy this sword. At first, he offered 1,000 yuan, but later raised it to 100 yuan, but the man still wouldn't sell.

古文：胡随至其家，爱玩不舍，遂至百万。
现代文：买者跟随卖剑的男人到家中，最后出一百万贯买这把剑。
English: The buyer followed the man selling the sword to his home and ended up paying a million for the sword.

古文：已克明日持直取剑。
现代文：双方说定了，明天这位外族人拿钱来取剑。
English: The two sides agreed that the foreigner would take the money to get the sword tomorrow.

古文：会夜佳月，士人与其妻持剑共视。
现代文：这天夜晚，月色很好。
English: On this night, the moon was very bright.

古文：笑云：此亦何堪，至是贵价。庭中有捣帛石，以剑指之，石即中断。
现代文：男人跟他妻子在院中月光下，一块儿观看这把剑，笑着说：这把剑有什么出奇的地方，值得那个胡佬出那么高的价钱？他家庭院中有一块捣衣石，说话间，这个男人随意用剑向这块捣衣石一指，捣衣石立时断为两截。
English: A man and his wife were watching the sword together under the moonlight in the courtyard. He smiled and said: "What is so amazing about this sword that it is worth the high price paid by the rogue? There is a clothes-knitting stone in his courtyard. While we were talking, the man casually pointed his sword at the stone, and the stone broke into two pieces.

古文：及明，胡载钱至。
现代文：夫妻俩也没有在意。
English: The couple didn't care either.

古文：取剑视之，叹曰：剑光已尽，何得如此。
现代文：第二天，买剑的胡人载着钱来到男人家，拿起宝剑一看，惊讶地说：剑光已经没有了，你们是怎么弄的？
English: The next day, the man who bought the sword came to the man's house with the money. He picked up the sword, looked at it, and said in surprise, "The light of the sword is gone. How did you get it?"

古文：不复买。
现代文：于是，不买这把剑了。
English: So I didn't buy the sword.

古文：士人诘之，胡曰：此是破山剑，唯可一用。
现代文：得剑的男人责问他为什么不买了？这位胡人说：这是把破山剑，只可用一次，我想用这把剑刺破宝山。
English: The man who won the sword scolded him and asked why he didn't buy it. The goose said, "This is a mountain-breaking sword. It can only be used once. I want to use this sword to pierce the mountain."

古文：吾欲持之以破宝山，今光芒顿尽，疑有所触。
现代文：现在，剑的光芒已经消失了。我怀疑你们用它触指什么东西了。
English: Now that the sword's light has faded, I doubt you've touched anything with it.

古文：士人夫妻悔恨，向胡说其事，胡以十千买之而去。
现代文：夫妻俩听了后异常悔恨，将昨天晚上用剑指断捣衣石的事情告诉了这位胡人。胡人最后用十千钱买走了这把剑。
English: After listening to this, the couple felt extremely remorseful and told the fox about the incident of using a sword to break the clothes stone last night. The fox finally bought the sword for ten thousand dollars.

古文：扬州贡
现代文：扬州贡
English: Yangzhou Gong

古文：扬州旧贡江心镜，五月五日，扬子江所铸也。
现代文：扬州旧日向朝廷进贡的江心镜，是在五月五日这天，在扬子江上铸造的。
English: The Jiangxin Mirror, which Yangzhou used to pay tribute to the imperial court, was cast on the Yangtze River on May 5.

古文：或言无百炼者，六七十炼则止。
现代文：有人说铸镜时没有铸一百次，也有六七十次六七十次。
English: Some people say that when a mirror is cast, it is not cast a hundred times, but sixty or seventy times.

古文：易破难成，往往有鸣者。
现代文：这面镜子非常容易铸不好，有破损，极难铸成。铸成后，它常常自己发生鸣声。
English: This mirror is very easy to cast bad, damaged, extremely difficult to cast. After casting, it often self-sound.

古文：郑云逵
现代文：郑云逵
English: Zheng Yunyao

古文：唐郑云逵少时得一剑，鳞铁星錍，有时而吼。常庄居，横膝玩之。
现代文：唐朝人郑云逵小时候得到一柄剑，剑鞘上布有鳞片，剑很薄，像星星一样泛着亮光，而且时常自己发出鸣叫声。
English: When Zheng Yunyao, a Tang Dynasty citizen, was a child, he was given a sword. The scabbard was covered with scales. The sword was very thin, shone like a star, and often chirped.

古文：忽有一人从庭树窣然而下，紫衣朱帻，被发露剑而立。
现代文：一次，郑云逵在家盘腿坐着把玩这把剑。忽然，从院里树上跳下一个人，身穿紫色衣服，戴朱红色的头巾，头发披散着，手中持剑站在那儿。
English: Once, Zheng Yunyao was sitting cross-legged at home and playing with this sword. Suddenly, a person jumped down from a tree in the courtyard. He was wearing purple clothes, a scarlet headscarf, and his hair was loose. He was standing there with a sword in his hand.

古文：黑气周身，状如重雾。
现代文：他周身围有一团黑气，像一团浓雾。
English: There was a blackness around him, like a thick fog.

古文：郑素有胆气，佯若不见。
现代文：郑云逵素来胆气过人，假装没看见，继续把玩怀中宝剑。
English: Zheng Yunyao has always been very brave, pretending not to see, continuing to play with the sword in his arms.

古文：其人因言：我上界人，知公有异剑，愿借一观。
现代文：紫衣人说：我是上界人，得知你有一柄奇异的宝剑，希望能借我看看。
English: The man in purple said, "I am a member of the upper world. I have learned that you have a strange sword, and I would like to borrow it.

古文：郑谓曰：此凡铁耳。
现代文：郑云逵说：这是一块凡铁啊。
English: Zheng Yunyao said: This is a piece of mortal iron.

古文：君居上界，岂藉此乎？
现代文：你既然住在天上，难道还顾念这么一块凡铁吗？
English: Since you live in heaven, do you still care about such a piece of earthly iron?

古文：其人求之不已。
现代文：紫衣人一再请求郑云逵借他看看。
English: The man in purple repeatedly asked Zheng Yunyao to let him take a look.

古文：郑伺更良久，疾斫之，不中。
现代文：郑云逵盯视他好长时间，突然挥剑疾砍过去，没有砍中。
English: Zheng Yunyao stared at him for a long time, and suddenly swung his sword and slashed at him, but missed.

古文：刜坠黑气著地，数日方散。
现代文：只削下来一团黑气落在地上，好几天后才散去。
English: All that was scraped off was a dark mass that fell to the ground and took several days to dissipate.

古文：张存
现代文：张存
English: Zhang Cun

古文：唐段成式，其友人温介云：大历中，高邮百姓张存以踏藕为业。
现代文：唐朝人段成式，他有个朋友叫温介，曾讲过这样一件事：唐代宗大历年间，高邮有个叫张存的平民，以踏藕为业。
English: He had a friend named Wen Jie, who once told this story: During the Tang Dynasty, there was a commoner named Zhang Cun in Gaoyou, who made a living pedaling donkeys.

古文：尝于陂中见旱藕稍大如臂，遂尽力掘之，深二丈，大至合抱。以不可穷，乃断之。
现代文：一次，他在池塘中发现一只旱藕，藕稍像胳臂那么粗。他用尽全力挖掘，掘到两丈深时，这只旱藕已有双手合抱那么粗，可是还没有挖到根。
English: Once, he found a marmot in the pond, the beak slightly as thick as an arm. He dug with all his might, and when he reached a depth of two feet, the marmot was already as thick as a pair of hands, but it had not yet dug to the root.

古文：中得一剑长二尺，色青无刃，存不之宝。
现代文：没办法，张存用刀将旱藕砍断，在藕中得到一柄剑，长二尺，呈青色，没有剑刃。
English: There was no way, Zhang Cun used a knife to cut off the stem of the dry reed and got a sword in the reed, two feet long, blue in color, without a blade.

古文：邑人有知者，以十束薪获焉。
现代文：张存不想保存这把剑，城里有个人得知这事后，用十捆柴薪将这柄剑买了去。
English: Zhang Cun didn't want to keep the sword. A man in the city heard about this and bought the sword with ten bundles of firewood.

古文：其藕无丝。
现代文：这只旱藕，里面没有藕丝。
English: There's no silk in this marmot.

古文：百合花
现代文：百合花
English: Lilies are blooming

古文：唐元和末，海陵夏侯一庭前生百合花，大如常数倍，异之。
现代文：唐宪宗元和末年，海陵夏侯一院里房前生出一株百合花，比一般的百合花大好几倍，觉得奇怪。
English: At the end of the first and second years of the Tang Dynasty, a lily flower, several times larger than ordinary lilies, was born in front of Hailing Xia Hou's courtyard. I found it strange.

古文：因发其下，得臂匣十三重，各匣一镜。
现代文：因此，挖掘这株花，得到一只臂匣有十三隔，每隔里放有一面镜子。
English: Therefore, digging up this flower, we get an armband with thirteen compartments, each compartment containing a mirror.

古文：至第七者，光不触，照日光环一丈。
现代文：第七只隔里放的镜子，光面没有被腐蚀，对着太阳照映出的光环有一丈。
English: The mirror in the seventh compartment has not been corroded, and the halo reflected by the sun is longer.

古文：其余规铜而已。
现代文：余下的十二面，都只能说是铜而已。
English: The remaining twelve sides can only be described as copper.

古文：浙右渔人
现代文：浙右渔人
English: Zhejiang Right Fisherman

古文：唐李德裕，长庆中，廉问浙右。
现代文：唐穆宗长庆年间，宰相李德裕查访浙右。
English: During the reign of Tang Mu Zong Changqing, Prime Minister Li Deyu visited Zhejiang.

古文：会有渔人于秦淮垂机网下深处，忽觉力重，异于常时。
现代文：当时有渔人在秦淮下机网到深水处捕鱼，起网时觉得特别沉，跟往常不一样。
English: At that time, some fishermen in Qinhuai lowered the machine net to the deep water to catch fish. When they lifted the net, they felt particularly heavy, which was different from usual.

古文：及敛就水次，卒不获一鳞，但得古铜镜可尺余，光浮于波际。
现代文：等到将网起到临近水面时，发现没有网到一条鱼，里面只有一面古铜镜，一尺多那么大，镜面泛光照耀水波间。
English: When the net was raised close to the water surface, it was found that there was no net to catch a fish, there was only a bronze mirror inside, more than a foot in size, and the mirror floodlight shined between the water waves.

古文：渔人取视之，历历尽见五脏六腑，血萦脉动，竦骇气魄。
现代文：打鱼人将它拿在手中照看，自己的五脏六腑清清楚楚地映现在镜子里面。
English: The fisherman holds it in his hands and looks after it, his own internal organs are clearly reflected in the mirror.

古文：因腕战而坠。
现代文：血管跳动、血在血管里流动，都能看到。
English: You can see the blood vessels beating and the blood flowing in them.

古文：渔人偶话于旁舍，遂闻之于德裕。
现代文：让人感到有一种摄人神魄的恐惧，手腕一抖，镜子又坠入水中。一次，打鱼人偶然在别的地方谈到这件事，让李德裕听到了。
English: There was a palpable sense of dread as the mirror fell back into the water with a flick of the wrist. Once, the fisherman happened to mention the incident in another place, and Li Deyu overheard.

古文：尽周岁，万计穷索水底，终不复得。
现代文：用了一年的工夫，想出各种办法，也没有打捞着这面古镜。
English: It took a year of work to come up with various methods, but they did not salvage this ancient mirror.

古文：元祯
现代文：元祯
English: Yuanxuan

古文：唐丞相元祯之镇江夏也，常秋夕登黄鹤楼。
现代文：唐朝丞相元祯在镇守江夏时，一个秋天的夜晚，登黄鹤楼观赏夜景。
English: One autumn night, when the Tang Dynasty's prime minister, Yuan Shao, was in the town of Jiangxia, he climbed the Yellow Crane Tower to enjoy the night view.

古文：遥望其江之湄，有光若残星焉，遂令亲信一人往视之。
现代文：他遥望长江岸边有一处亮光象星光，就派手下的一个亲信去察看。
English: He saw a bright light like a star on the bank of the Yangtze River in the distance, and sent one of his trusted men to investigate.

古文：其人棹小舟，直诣光所，乃钓船中也。
现代文：这位亲信划着一只小船直奔亮光处，发现亮光是从一只钓鱼船上发出来的。
English: The confidant paddled a small boat straight to the bright light and found that the light came from a fishing boat.

古文：询彼渔者，云：适获一鲤，光则无之。
现代文：问那个钓鱼的人，那人说：刚才钓到一条鲤鱼，也没有看到什么亮光啊。
English: When I asked the fisherman about it, he said, "I just caught an eel, and I didn't see any lights.

古文：其人乃携鲤而来。
现代文：这位亲信提着这条鲤鱼返回黄鹤楼。
English: The confidant carried the eel back to the Yellow Crane Tower.

古文：既登楼，公命庖人剖之。腹中得镜二，如钱大，而面相合。
现代文：元祯让厨师剖开鱼腹，见里面有二只小镜，铜钱那么大，镜面相合在一起。
English: Yuan Qi asked the chef to cut open the belly of the fish. Inside, there were two small mirrors, the size of a copper coin, with the mirrors facing each other.

古文：背则隐起双龙，虽小而鳞鬣爪角悉具。
现代文：镜的背面隐约凸起两条龙，虽然小却鳞鬣爪角都有。
English: On the back of the mirror, two dragons loom up, small but with scaly claws.

古文：精巧且泽，常有光耀。
现代文：两面小镜制作的非常精巧而有光泽，常常发出光来。
English: The rim of the two-sided small mirror is very delicate and shiny, and often emits light.

古文：公宝之，置卧内巾箱之中。
现代文：元祯将它们珍藏起来，放在卧室里的一只盛巾饰的箱子里。
English: Yuan Li treasured them and kept them in a box decorated with scarves in his bedroom.

古文：及相国甍，镜亦亡去。
现代文：待到元祯死去，这两面宝镜也不知去向了。
English: By the time Yuan Shao died, these two precious mirrors had disappeared.

古文：李德裕
现代文：李德裕
English: Li Deyu

古文：唐太尉卫公李德裕，尝有老叟诣门。
现代文：唐朝李德裕任太尉时，曾经有一个老翁来到府门前，要求拜见他。
English: When Li Deyu was a captain in the Tang Dynasty, an old man came to the front gate of the palace and asked to see him.

古文：引五六辈舁巨桑木请谒焉，阍者不能拒之。
现代文：这老翁让人抬着一段在他家生长了五六代的巨大桑木，守门人没法拒绝就通报进去。
English: The old man had someone carry a huge mulberry tree that had grown in his family for five or six generations. The gatekeeper couldn't refuse and let them in.

古文：德裕异而出见，叟曰：此木某家宝之三世矣。
现代文：李德裕觉得不寻常，出来接见了这位老翁。老翁说：这段桑木我家已经珍藏三代了。
English: Li Deyu thought it was unusual and came out to meet the old man. The old man said: My family has treasured this piece of mulberry wood for three generations.

古文：某今年耄，感公之仁德，且好奇异，是以献耳。
现代文：我现在已到耄耋之年，很是敬佩您的仁德，也听说太尉非常喜好稀奇古怪的东西，因此将它奉送给您。
English: Now that I am an old man, I really admire your kindness, and I have heard that the captain is very fond of strange and eccentric things, so I will give it to you.

古文：木中有奇宝，若能者断之，必有所得。
现代文：这段桑木中有奇宝，如果让一个技术非常高的匠人调理它，就能得到这奇宝。
English: There is a treasure in this part of the mulberry tree, and if you let a very skilled craftsman condition it, you can get this treasure.

古文：洛邑有匠，计其年齿已老，或身已殁。
现代文：洛阳城里有一名匠人能调理它，但是算算他的年岁已经老了，或者已经死了。
English: There is an artisan in Luoyang City who can adjust it, but he is old or dead.

古文：子孙亦当得其旨。
现代文：可是他大概还有子孙后代，也一定能承继下他的技艺的。
English: But he probably still has descendants, and they will certainly be able to inherit his skills.

古文：设非洛匠，无能有断之者。
现代文：如果不是洛阳这家工匠，没有人能调理好这段桑木的。
English: If it wasn't for the craftsmen in Luoyang, no one would have been able to trim this section of mulberry tree.

古文：公如其言，访于洛下，匠已殂矣。
现代文：李德裕按照老翁告诉的话，派人到洛阳去查找那位老匠人，果然已经死去了。
English: Li Deyu, according to the old man's words, sent someone to Luoyang to look for the old craftsman, but he was already dead.

古文：子随使而至。
现代文：于是，将老匠人的儿子召到府上。
English: So he summoned the old craftsman's son to the house.

古文：玩视良久曰：可徐而断之。
现代文：这位老匠人的儿子，将桑木反复地把玩、察看了许久，说：可以慢慢地调理。
English: The son of the old craftsman played and examined the mulberry tree repeatedly for a long time and said: it can be slowly conditioned.

古文：因解为二琵琶槽，自然有白鸽，羽翼嘴足，巨细毕备。
现代文：后来剔解出二枚琵琶槽，每枚槽上都有一只木纹理自然生成的白鸽，羽翼足嘴，凡是鸽子身上有的都具备。
English: Later, two pipa troughs were found. On each trough, there was a naturally occurring wood-grained white pigeon with a winged foot, which all pigeons have.

古文：匠料之微失，原薄不中，一鸽少其翼。
现代文：由于技艺不到家，在剔解中小有差误，做出来的琵琶槽薄厚有些不均匀，其中的一枚鸽身上少了翅膀。
English: Due to the lack of skill, there are small and medium errors in the culling, the thickness of the pipa trough is somewhat uneven, and one of the pigeons is missing wings.

古文：公以形全者进之，自留其一。
现代文：李德裕将其中有全形鸽身的琵琶槽进献给皇上，少鸽翅膀的那枚自己留下。
English: Li Deyu dedicated the pipa trough, which included a full-shaped pigeon body, to the emperor, while he kept the one with the wings of a small pigeon for himself.

古文：今犹在民间。
现代文：这枚琵琶槽现在还在民间。
English: This lute box is still used by folk musicians.

古文：水部员外卢延让，见太尉之孙，道其事。
现代文：水部员外卢延让见过李太尉的孙子，他们曾经说起过这件事。
English: Ou Luyan, a member of the Ministry of Water Resources, had met Lieutenant Li's grandson, and they had talked about the incident.

古文：甘露僧
现代文：甘露僧
English: The Manna Monk

古文：唐润州甘露寺僧某者道行孤高，名重江左。
现代文：唐朝时润州甘露寺有一位僧人道行很高，为人孤僻，在江左一带非常有名望。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was a monk at Runchu Kanro-ji Temple in Runchu who had a high level of morality and was a solitary person. He was very famous in the Jiangzuo area.

古文：李卫公德裕廉问日，常与之游。
现代文：宰相李德裕查访江左期间，经常结伴同游。
English: During Prime Minister Li Deyu's visit to Jiangzuo, he often accompanied by his entourage.

古文：及罢任，以方竹杖一枝留赠焉。
现代文：到卸任返回京城时，李德裕将一根方竹杖留赠给这位高僧作纪念。
English: When Li Deyu retired and returned to Beijing, he bequeathed a square bamboo cane to the high priest as a souvenir.

古文：方竹出大宛国，坚实而正方，节眼须牙，四面对出，实卫公之所宝也。
现代文：这种方竹产自大宛国，坚实而正方，节眼须牙，四面相对着生长，是李太尉的一件珍爱之物。
English: This kind of square bamboo is produced in Dawan Province. It is solid and square, with a pointed tip, and grows on all four sides. It is a cherished item of Lieutenant Li.

古文：及再镇浙右，其僧尚在。
现代文：李德裕再来浙右时，这位高僧还健在。
English: When Li Deyu returned to Zhejiang, the high priest was still alive.

古文：公问曰：前所奉竹杖无恙否。
现代文：李德裕问他：从前我送给你的那根方竹杖还在不在啦？
English: Li Deyu asked him: Is the square bamboo cane I gave you before still missing?

古文：僧对曰：已规圆而漆之矣。
现代文：僧人回答说：还在。贫僧已将它弄圆了，并且涂上一层油漆。
English: The monk replied, "It's still there. The poor monk has rounded it off and painted it."

古文：公嗟惋弥日。
现代文：李德裕听了后感叹惋惜了一整天。
English: After listening to Li Deyu, he lamented and regretted the whole day.

古文：令狐绹
现代文：令狐绹
English: Ling Foxtrot

古文：唐丞相令狐绹因话奇异之物，自出铁筒，径不及寸，长四寸，内取小卷书于日中视之，乃九经并足。
现代文：唐朝丞相令狐绹，一次说到世间奇异的东西时，他自己拿出一只铁管，直径不到一寸，长四寸，从中取出一小卷书，对着太阳光观看，乃是一部完整的《九经》。
English: Once, when the prime minister of the Tang Dynasty ordered the fox to tell the fox about the strange things in the world, he himself took out an iron tube with a diameter of less than one inch and a length of four inches, took out a small book from it, and looked at the sunlight. It was a complete "Nine Classics."

古文：其纸即蜡浦团，其文匀小。首尾相似，其精妙难以言述。
现代文：这部书所用的纸就是蜡浦团，上面的经文均面小，头尾相似，它的精致奥妙是用语言所表达不出来的。
English: The paper used in this book is waxed paper, the above verses are small in size, similar at the beginning and end, and its exquisite mystery cannot be expressed in words.

古文：又倾其中，复展看轻绢一匹。
现代文：令狐绹将小铁筒倒着顿了几下，又倾出一件东西，展开一看是一匹轻绢。
English: The vixen paused a few times to turn the small iron cylinder upside down, and then poured out something, which, when unfolded, looked like a light horse.

古文：度之四丈无少，秤之才及半两，视之似非人世所。
现代文：量一下，整四丈，一点也不少；称一下，只有半两重。看它织的那精巧劲儿，不象是人世间的东西。
English: Measured, it's a full four feet, not a bit less; weighed, it's only half a foot and a half. Look at the delicate thread it weaves, it doesn't look like something from the human world.

古文：返报，太守惧。
现代文：返回来报告，太守恐惧，追查老翁，并想给他加罪。
English: He returned to report that he was too scared to pursue the old man and wanted to incriminate him.

古文：追叟欲加刑，叟曰：乞使君不草草，某知书，褚辈只须此笔。
现代文：老翁说：希望大人不要随随便便地就给我加罪。我也懂得书法，褚遂良只要这样的笔。
English: The old man said, "I hope the adults don't punish me arbitrarily. I also know calligraphy, so I just need a pen like this."

古文：乞先见相公书迹，然后创制。
现代文：恳求您先让我看看褚相公的书法真迹，然而我才能制作笔。
English: I implore you to first let me see the real calligraphy of Juxianggong, but I can only make a pen.

古文：太守示之，叟笑曰：若如此，不消使君破三十钱者，且更寄五十管。
现代文：太守取出褚遂良的书法真迹给老翁看。老翁看完后笑着说：就象这样，不消太守你破费三十钱，我还可以给你五十管笔。
English: The old man smiled and said, "Just like this, if you don't spend thirty dollars, I can still give you fifty pens."

古文：如不称，甘鼎镬之罪。
现代文：如果不称褚相公的意，我甘受放在鼎镬中油炸水烹的刑罪。
English: If it is not the wish of the emperor, I am willing to accept the criminal offense of deep-frying cooked fish in a large pot.

古文：仍乞械击，俟使回期。
现代文：说完，仍旧恳求为他戴上刑枷，让他等待回信再作决定。
English: Having said that, he still pleaded for him to be put in shackles and for him to wait for a reply before making a decision.

古文：太守怒稍解，且述叟事。云：睹相公神翰，宜此等笔。
现代文：太守的怒气消了些，并且写封书信给褚遂良，讲述了老翁的事情，说：看了相公的宝贵墨迹，认为适于用这样的笔。
English: The anger of the daimyō subsided somewhat, and he wrote a letter to Zou Suiliang, recounting the old man's story, saying, "I saw the precious ink of my soul mate, and thought it appropriate to use such a pen.

古文：相府得之，试染翰甚佳。复书云：笔大可意，宜优赐匠人也。
现代文：褚遂良得到这种笔后，试着书写一下，觉得非常好，又写一封回信说：这种笔非常让我满意，应该更优厚地赏赐制笔的匠人。
English: After Zou Suiliang got this pen, he tried to write with it and thought it was very good. He wrote a letter back saying, "This pen is very satisfying to me. The craftsman who made the pen should be rewarded more generously."

古文：太守喜，以束帛赠叟而遣之。
现代文：太守见到回信后非常高兴，赠送老翁五匹束帛让他回去了。
English: After seeing the reply to the letter, the abbot was very happy and gave the old man five yakitori to let him go back.

古文：周邯
现代文：周邯
English: Zhou Ying

古文：唐周邯自蜀沿流，尝市得一奴，名曰水精，善于探水，乃昆仑白水之属也。
现代文：唐朝人周邯从蜀乘船顺长江而下，曾经在途中买到一个奴仆，名叫水精，擅长潜水，是昆仑白水地方的人。
English: Zhou Er, a Tang dynasty person, took a boat from Shu down the Yangtze River. On the way, he once bought a servant, named Shui Jing, who was good at diving and was from the Kunlun White Water Region.

古文：邯疑瞿塘之深，命水精探之。移时方出，云：其下有关，不可越渡，但得金珠而已。
现代文：周邯怀疑瞿塘峡有那么深，命令水精潜水探测，过了一个时辰才浮出水面，说：峡底下有一座关，不能够渡过去，只得到一些金珠而已。
English: Zhou Yu suspected that the Qutang Gorge was so deep, and ordered the water sprite to dive and explore. After an hour, he surfaced and said: There is a pass under the gorge, I can't cross it, I only got some gold beads.

古文：每遇深水潭洞，皆命奴探之，多得宝物。
现代文：从此，每次遇到深水潭洞都让水精潜下去探察，得到无数的珍宝。
English: Since then, every time they encounter a deep water pool cave, they let the water spirits dive down to explore and get countless treasures.

古文：闻汴州八角井多有龙神，时有异手出于井面。欲使水精探之，而犹豫未果。
现代文：后来，听说汴州八角井多数里面都有神龙，经常有一只怪异的大手伸出井面来，便想让水精潜入井底探察一下。
English: Later, I heard that most of the octagonal wells in Luzhou have divine dragons inside, and often a strange big hand reaches out to the well surface, and they want to let the water spirit dive into the bottom of the well to explore it.

古文：其友邵泽有利剑，常自神之。
现代文：正在犹豫的时候，周邯的友人邵泽将自己非常喜爱的一柄宝剑借给水精。
English: While hesitating, Zhou Yao's friend Shao Ze lent a sword he loved very much to Shui Jing.

古文：解剑授奴，遣之入井。
现代文：于是，周邯就让水精潜下井底，自己与友人即泽在井边等候。
English: As a result, Zhou Qi let the water spirit dive down to the bottom of the well, and he and his friend Xu Ze waited at the edge of the well.

古文：邯与泽于外以俟之，悄然经久，忽见水精高跃出井，未及投岸，有大金手拿之复入，剑与奴自此并失。
现代文：等了很长时间，井底下一点动静也没有。正在疑惑间，突然水精从井中高高地跃出井外，还没来得及跳到地上，从井内伸出一只金黄色的大手，一把将他拽入井中。水精与友人的宝剑，再也没有从井中出来。
English: After waiting for a long time, there was no movement at all at the bottom of the well. While in doubt, suddenly the water sprite jumped out of the well, high up in the middle of the well. Before he could jump to the ground, a big golden hand reached out from the well and pulled him into the well. The water sprite and his friend's sword never came out of the well again.

古文：邯悲其水精，泽恨其宝剑，终莫穷其事。
现代文：周邯为失去水精而悲伤，他的友人邵泽非常惋惜失去的宝剑。然而，始终不知道这是怎么一回事。
English: Zhou Yu was saddened by the loss of the water spirit, and his friend Shao Ze was very sorry for the loss of the sword. However, they still did not know what had happened.

古文：他日，有人谓邯曰：此井乃龙神所处，水府灵司。
现代文：后来，有人对周邯说：这口井是神龙居住的地方，水府里的官署，怎么能够触犯呢？
English: Later, someone said to Zhou Qi: This well is the place where the divine dragon lives, the government office in Suifu, how can I offend it?

古文：岂得辄犯，可祭而谢之。
现代文：你赶快祭祀谢罪吧。于是，周邯祭祀了这口井，向水府表示谢罪后，离开了汴州。
English: You should quickly make a sacrifice to express your gratitude. Therefore, Zhou Yi sacrificed this well, expressed his gratitude to Suifu, and left Zhangzhou.

古文：邯乃祭谢而去。真阳观
现代文：真阳观新泽县境内有一座真阳观。
English: Zhengyangyuan There is a zhengyangyuan in Xinze County.

古文：新浙县有真阳观者，即许真君弟子曾真人得道之所。
现代文：这座真阳观，乃是晋朝仙人许逊真君的弟子曾真人得道成仙的地方。
English: This Zhengyang Temple is the place where Zeng Zhenren, a disciple of the Jin Dynasty hermit Xu Xunzheng, attained immortality.

古文：其常住有庄田，颇为邑民侵据。
现代文：道观的庄田，受到附近住户的严重侵占。
English: The village of Shoda, which is associated with Taoism, has been severely encroached upon by nearby residents.

古文：唐僖宗朝，南平王钟传据江西八州之地。
现代文：唐僖宗在位期间，南平王钟传镇守江西八州。
English: During the reign of Tang Xizong, the Nanping King Zhong Chuan Zhengu guarded eight provinces in Jiangxi Province.

古文：时观内因修元斋，忽有一香炉自天而下。
现代文：当时，观里修缮房屋，忽从天上降落下来一只香炉。
English: At the time, Guan Li was renovating a house when an incense burner suddenly descended from the sky.

古文：其炉高三尺，下有一盘。盘内出莲花一枝，花有十二叶。叶间隐出一物，即十二属也。
现代文：香炉高三尺，下面有一只托盘，盘里长着一枝莲花，上面长着十二片莲叶，每片莲叶上隐约浮现一种动物，是十二生肖。
English: The incense burner is three feet high, and there is a tray below. A lotus flower grows in the tray, and twelve lotus leaves grow above it. Each lotus leaf has an animal looming on it, which are the twelve signs of the zodiac.

古文：炉顶上有一仙人，戴远游之冠，着云霞之衣，相仪端妙。
现代文：炉顶上有一位仙人，头戴远游的帽子，身穿云霞一样的衣裳。
English: On the top of the stove there is a fairy, wearing a travelling hat, dressed in the same clothes as Yunxia.

古文：左手搘颐，右手垂膝，坐一小盘石。
现代文：相貌端庄神妙，左手撑着脸胓，右手垂扶在膝盖上，下面坐着一只小盘石。
English: His appearance is dignified and miraculous. His left hand supports his cheek, his right hand rests on his knee, and below him sits a small stone.

古文：石上有花竹流水松桧之状，雕刊奇怪，非人工所及也。
现代文：石上有花竹、滚水、松、桧等图形，雕刻的非常奇怪，不是人工能刻出来的。
English: On the stone there are figures such as flowers and bamboo, rushing water, pines and thistles. The carvings are very strange and cannot have been made by human hands.

古文：其初降时，凡有邑民侵据本观庄田，即蜚于田所，放大光明。
现代文：这位仙人一降落到地上，凡是被附近住户侵占的庄田，他就在那里出现，大放光明。
English: As soon as the hermit landed on the ground, he appeared in every village that had been occupied by nearby residents, shining brightly.

古文：邑民惊惧，即以其田还观，莫敢逗留。
现代文：住户们惊恐害怕，当即将侵占的庄田都退还给道观，一刻也不敢延误。
English: Terrified and scared, the residents did not dare to delay a moment when all the stolen land was returned to the Taoist Temple.

古文：南平王闻其灵异，遣使取炉，至江西供养。
现代文：南平王钟传听说这件事后，派使臣来到真阳观，将这只仙炉取回江西供养。
English: After Zhong Chuan, the king of Nanping, heard about the incident, he sent an envoy to Zhenyang to retrieve the stove and bring it back to Jiangxi to be cared for.

古文：忽一日失炉，寻之却至旧观。
现代文：忽然有一天晚上，仙炉不胫而走。
English: All of a sudden, one evening, the Fairy Stove was gone.

古文：道俗目之为瑞炉。
现代文：南平王派人寻找，结果这只仙炉远从江西又回到真阳观内。
English: Nanping Wang sent someone to look for it, and as a result, this celestial furnace came back to Zhengyang County from as far away as Jiangxi Province.

古文：故丞相乐安公孙偓南迁，路经此观。留题。
现代文：观里的道士和附近的乡民，都将它看成能给人带来祥瑞的仙炉。丞相公孙偓全家南迁时，途中经过真阳观，为这只仙炉题留一首诗。
English: Taoists in Guanli and nearby villagers regard it as a celestial furnace that can bring good fortune. When the whole family of the Prime Minister, Sun Yat-sen, moved to the south, they passed through Zhengyang on the way and left a poem for this celestial furnace.

古文：末句云：好是步虚明月夜，瑞炉蜚下醮坛前。
现代文：这首诗的结尾两句，大意是这样的：正是月色清朗正好漫步观赏夜景的时候，祥瑞的仙炉飞降在醮坛前！
English: The poem ends with two sentences, to the effect of: It was precisely when the moonlight was clear and it was time to take a stroll to enjoy the night view, that the auspicious celestial furnace flew down in front of the altar!

古文：其瑞炉比如金色，轻重不定。
现代文：这只香炉金黄色，时轻时重。
English: This incense burner is golden yellow in color, and it goes from light to heavy.

古文：寻常举之，只可及六七斤。
现代文：平常里人们用手举它，也就六七斤重。
English: Normally, people lift it by hand, and it weighs six or seven pounds.

古文：曾有一盗者窃之，虽数人亦不能举。
现代文：一次窃贼来偷它，虽然来了好几个人也搬不动它。
English: One time a thief came to steal it, and even though several people came, they couldn't move it.

古文：至今犹在本观，而不能复蜚矣。
现代文：这座香炉至今还在真阳观里，但是却再没飞走过。
English: This incense burner is still in Zhanyangyuan, but it has never flown away.

古文：陴湖渔者
现代文：陴湖渔者
English: Wuhu fisherman grows up

古文：徐宿之界有陴湖周数百里。
现代文：在徐、宿两州临界的地方有湖泊叫陴湖，湖围几百里。
English: In the critical place of the border between the two states of Xu and Shuku, there is a lake called Wuhu, with a circumference of several hundred miles.

古文：两州之莞葪萑苇，迨芰荷之类，赖以资之。
现代文：两州临湖而居的乡民们，都靠着湖里生长的莞、葪萑、苇、芰、荷等物生活。
English: Villagers in the two prefectures who live near the lake rely on the guan, shuang, shuang, shuang, shuang and other things that grow in the lake.

古文：唐天佑中，有渔者于网中获铁镜，亦不甚涩，光犹可鉴面，阔六五寸，携以归家。
现代文：唐昭宗天佑年间，有个打鱼人网到一枚铁镜，五六寸大，还不是那么太不光滑，光亮的程度还可以照人。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhaozong of the Tang Dynasty, a fisherman came across an iron mirror, five or six inches in size, which was not too slippery and still shined brightly enough to illuminate people.

古文：忽有一僧及门，谓渔者曰：君有异物，可相示乎。
现代文：这个打鱼人将铁镜带回家中，忽然来一位僧人，在门口跟这个打鱼人说：你有一件特殊的东西，可以拿出来让贫僧看看吗？
English: The fisherman brought the iron mirror home. Suddenly, a monk came to the door and said to the fisherman, "Do you have something special that you can show the poor monk?"

古文：答曰：无之。
现代文：打鱼人回答说：我家没有什么特殊的东西啊！
English: The fisherman replied, "There is nothing special about my family!"

古文：僧曰：闻君获铁镜，即其物也。
现代文：僧人说：听说你打鱼时得到一面铁镜。就是这件东西，贫僧想看看。
English: The monk said, "I heard that you got an iron mirror when you were fishing. That's what the poor monk wants to see."

古文：遂出之。
现代文：打鱼人取出铁镜给僧人看。
English: The fisherman takes out the iron mirror to show it to the monk.

古文：僧曰：君但却将往所得之处照之，看有何睹。
现代文：僧人看罢对打鱼人说：你拿着这面铁镜再到你网到它的地方去照一照，看看都看到了什么？
English: After looking at it, the monk said to the fisherman: "Take this iron mirror and then go to the place where you cast the net and look at it. See what you see?"

古文：如其言而往照，见湖中无数甲兵。
现代文：打鱼人按这僧人告诉的去湖上一照，立即看见湖中有无数甲兵。
English: The fisherman followed the monk's instructions to go to the lake to take a picture, and immediately saw countless armored soldiers in the lake.

古文：渔者大骇，复沉于水。
现代文：打鱼人大惊失色，又将这面铁镜扔入湖水中。
English: The fisherman was shocked and threw the iron mirror into the lake.

古文：僧亦失之。
现代文：那位僧人，从此也不知去向。
English: The monk has not been heard from since.

古文：耆老相传，湖本陴州沦陷所致，图籍亦无载焉。文谷
现代文：老人们相传说：这个湖是陴州塌陷后形成的。但是地图、典籍上，都没有这方面的记载。文谷
English: The old people have a legend: this lake was formed after the collapse of Luzhou. However, there is no record of this on maps or books.

古文：伪蜀词人文谷，好古之士也。
现代文：五代时，蜀王建王朝有位词人叫文谷，是个古玩收藏观赏家。
English: In the fifth generation, there was a poet in the Shu Wang Jian Dynasty named Wen Gu, who was an antique collector.

古文：尝诣中书舍人刘光祚，喜曰：今日方与二客为约，看予桃核杯。
现代文：一次，文谷到中书舍人刘光禄家作客，刘光禄欣喜地告诉他：今天刚刚跟两位客人约好了，来看我的桃核杯。
English: Once, Wen Gu was a guest at the home of Liu Guanglu, a Chinese calligrapher. Liu Guanglu told him happily, "I just made an appointment with two guests today to come and see my peach pit mug."

古文：文方欲问其由，客至。
现代文：文谷正想问刘光禄什么缘由，二位客人来了。
English: Wen Gu was about to ask Liu Guanglu what the reason was, when the two guests arrived.

古文：乃青城山道士刘云，次乃升宫客沈默也。
现代文：其中一位是城山道士刘云，另一位是升宫客沈默。
English: One of them is the Chengshan Taoist Liu Yun, and the other is the ascending palace guest Zhu Miao.

古文：刘谓之曰：文员外亦奇士。
现代文：刘光禄对两位客人介绍说：这位文谷员外也是一位奇士。
English: Liu Guanglu introduced to the two guests: "In addition to being a writer, this man is also a miracle worker.

古文：因令取桃核杯出视之。
现代文：说着，让家人取出桃核杯给他们观赏。
English: Saying this, he asked his family members to take out the peach pit cup and show it to them.

古文：杯阔尺余，纹彩燦然，真蟠桃之实也。
现代文：这只杯子阔有一尺多，上面纹彩灿烂光亮，是真蟠桃的果实。
English: This cup is more than a foot wide, with a brightly colored pattern on top. It is the fruit of a real peach.

古文：刘云：予少年时，常游华岳。逢一道士，以此核取瀑泉盥洗，予睹之惊骇。
现代文：刘光禄说：我少年时，一次游华山，遇到一位道士，用这枚蟠桃核汲取山泉水洗脸，我看到后非常惊异，恐慌。
English: Liu Guanglu said, "When I was a boy, I once visited Huashan Mountain and met a Taoist monk. He used this peach pit to draw mountain spring water to wash his face. I was very surprised and panicked when I saw it.

古文：道士笑曰：尔意欲之耶。
现代文：道士笑着说： 你想要它吗？ 
English: The priest smiled and said, "Do you want it?"

古文：即以半片见授。
现代文：之后，将半片蟠桃核送给了我。
English: After that, he gave me half a peach pit.

古文：予宝之有年矣。
现代文：我珍藏它有年头啦！
English: I've had it for years!

古文：道士刘云出一白石，圆如鸡子。
现代文：看过蟠桃核杯后，道士刘云从杯中拿出一颗白石，圆如鸡蛋。
English: After looking at the peach pit cup, Taoist priest Liu Yun took out a white stone from the cup, round like an egg.

古文：其上有文彩，隐出如画，乃是二童子，持节引仙人，眉目毛发，冠履衣帔，纤悉皆具。
现代文：石上有纹彩，隐约如画。细看，是二位童子手持符节为一位仙人引路。他们的眉眼毛发、帽子、鞋、衣裳、斗披，都清清楚楚的。
English: On the stone there is a pattern, vaguely like a picture. Look closely, it is two boys holding a rune to lead the way for a fairy. Their eyebrows, hair, hats, shoes, clothes, and ponchos are all clear.

古文：云：于麻姑洞石穴中得之。
现代文：刘道士说，这颗白石是在麻姑洞石穴中得到的。
English: Liu Taoist said that this white stone was obtained in the Magu Cave.

古文：沈默亦出一石，阔一寸余，长二寸五分。
现代文：另一位客人沈默也取出一颗石头，宽一寸多，长约二寸五分。
English: Another guest silently removed a stone, more than an inch wide and about two-and-a-half inches long.

古文：上隐出盘龙，鳞角爪鬣，无不周备。
现代文：石上隐约可见一条盘龙，鳞、角、爪、鬣，无不具备。
English: A dragon can be seen looming over the stone, with scales, horns, claws and fins.

古文：云：于巫峡山中得之。
现代文：沈默说他这颗石头是在巫峡山中得到的。
English: He said quietly that he got the stone from the Wuxia Mountains.

古文：文谷一日尽睹此奇物，幸矣。
现代文：文谷一天之内能够观赏这么多的稀奇珍物，感到非常荣幸。
English: It is a great honor to be able to see so many rare and precious things in Bunka in one day.

