古文：曹翰，大名人。少为郡小吏，好使气陵人，不为乡里所誉。
现代文：曹翰，大名人。年轻时任郡小吏，喜欢盛气凌人，不被乡里人赞誉。
English: Cao Han, a great celebrity. When he was young, he was a county magistrate. He liked to be arrogant and was not praised by the villagers.

古文：乾祐初，周太祖镇邺，与语，奇之，以隶世宗帐下。
现代文：乾初年，周太祖镇守邺地，与他谈话认为他是个奇才，让他隶属世宗军中。
English: In the first year of Qian, Zhou Taizu, who was in charge of Shantian, talked to him and thought he was a genius, and made him a member of Shizong's army.

古文：世宗镇澶渊，署为牙校，入尹开封，留翰在镇。
现代文：世宗镇守澶渊，署任他为牙校，入京任开封府尹时，留曹翰在澶渊节度府。
English: Shizong Zhengu Shanyuan, the deputy appointed him as the dental school, when he entered Beijing as the Kaifeng Prefecture Yin, he left Caohan in the Shanyuan Jiedu Prefecture.

古文：会太祖寝疾，翰不俟召，归见世宗，密谓曰： 主上不豫，王为冢嗣，不侍医药而决事于外廷，失天下望。 世宗悟，即入侍，以府事属翰总决。
现代文：遇太祖卧病不起，曹翰不等到召见，就回京来见世宗，秘密地对他说： 皇上有病，你作为储君，不在宫中侍奉皇上的医药而在外廷处理政事，失去天下人的希望。 世宗醒悟，立即入宫侍奉太祖，把府事托付给曹翰处理。
English: When the great-grandfather lay ill, Cao Han did not wait to be summoned, but returned to Beijing to see Sejong and secretly said to him: The emperor is ill. As the crown prince, you do not serve the emperor's medicine in the palace, but deal with political affairs outside the court, losing the hope of the world. Sejong woke up and immediately entered the palace to serve the great-grandfather, entrusting the affairs of the palace to Cao Han.

古文：及世宗即位，补供奉官，从征高平，参豫谋画。
现代文：世宗即帝位后，补任他为供奉官，跟从世宗征伐高平，参与谋划军务。
English: After the enthronement of King Sejong, he was appointed as a tributary officer, followed King Sejong to conquer Gapyeong, and participated in military planning.

古文：寻迁枢密承旨，护塞决河。
现代文：不久升任枢密承旨，负责堵塞黄河决口。
English: He was soon promoted to Privy Councillor, responsible for blocking the Yellow River.

古文：世宗征淮南，留铠甲千数在正阳，既而得降卒八百，部送归京师。
现代文：世宗攻打南唐，留有一千多副铠甲在正阳，不久俘得降卒八百人，编送回京师。
English: Sejong attacked southern Tang, leaving more than a thousand pairs of armor in Zhengyang. Soon, he captured 800 soldiers and sent them back to the Beijing division.

古文：时翰适从京师来诣，过正阳十数里许遇之，虑劫兵器为叛，矫杀之。
现代文：当时曹翰正好从京师来朝见，经过正阳十几里处遇到他们，考虑到降卒会抢劫兵器叛乱，就假称诏令杀掉他们。
English: At that time, Cao Han happened to come from Beijing Division to see the emperor, and after passing more than ten miles from Zhengyang, he met them. Considering that the surrendering soldiers would rob weapons and rebel, he pretended to kill them.

古文：及见世宗，具言其事，世宗不悦。
现代文：见到世宗时，曹翰把事情详细汇报，世宗不高兴。
English: When he saw Sejong, Cao Han reported the matter in detail. Sejong was not happy.

古文：翰曰： 贼以困归我，非心服也，所得器甲，尽在正阳，苟为所劫，是复生一淮南矣。 因不之罪。
现代文：曹翰说： 敌人因受困才归降我军，并不是心服，我军所得兵器都在正阳，如果被他们劫走，这样又生出一个淮南来。 因此世宗没有责怪他。
English: Cao Han said, "The enemy only surrendered to our army because they were trapped, and they were not satisfied. The weapons our army received were all in Zhengyang. If they were taken away, another Huainan would be born. Therefore, Shizong did not blame him.

古文：从征瓦桥关，会班师，留知雄州。
现代文：跟从世宗征伐瓦桥关，班师时留他任知雄州。
English: He followed Shizong's campaign to cut down the shingle bridge, and was assigned to Chixiong Prefecture as a class instructor.

古文：世宗大渐，谕范质等以王著为相，翰为宣徽使。
现代文：世宗病重，谕令宰相范质等人任命王著为宰相，任命曹翰为宣徽使。
English: As Shizong was seriously ill, he issued an order to the prime minister and others to appoint Wang He as the prime minister and Cao Han as the heraldic envoy.

古文：质以著嗜酒，翰饰诈而专，并寝之。
现代文：范质因为王著嗜酒，曹翰狡诈而专断，一并扣住不发任命令。
English: Because of Wang He's drunkenness and Cao Han's cunning and arbitrariness, Guan Jia restrained him from issuing the order.

古文：改德州刺史。
现代文：改任曹翰为德州刺史。
English: Cao Han was appointed as the Texas State Historian.

古文：宋初，从征泽、潞，还，改济州刺史。
现代文：宋朝初年，跟从太祖征伐泽、潞二地，回朝后改任济州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Song Dynasty, he followed his great-grandfather in conquering and cutting down forests in Zhejiang and Fujian provinces. After returning to the imperial court, he was appointed as the governor of Jeju Province.

古文：乾德二年，太祖亲征西蜀，移刺均州，涧谷深险，翰令凿石通道，师旋以济；诏兼西南诸州转运使，自石门径趋归州，饷运不乏，由夔、万入会王全斌军，成都以平。
现代文：乾德二年，太祖亲自征伐西蜀，曹翰改任均州刺史，涧谷深险，曹翰下令开凿山石通道，部队不久得以经过；诏令曹翰兼任西南诸州转运使，从石门直接到归州，粮草运转不绝，由夔、万前进与王全斌会师，成都得以攻克。
English: In the second year of the Qiande Emperor, Emperor Taizu personally conquered West Shuxu, and Cao Han was appointed as the commander of the attack on Junzhou and the attack on Shibuya. Cao Han ordered the excavation of a mountain and rock passage, and the troops were soon able to pass through. He also ordered Cao Han to serve as the transit envoy of the southwestern states. From Shimen directly to Guizhou, the grain and grass continued to flow, and Chengdu was able to be conquered by Yu, Wan Qian and Wang Quanbin.

古文：时全师雄拥众十万余据郫县叛，谋窥成都，翰率兵会刘光毅、曹彬等讨平之。
现代文：当时全师雄拥聚十万兵马占据郫县叛乱，打算窥伺成都，曹翰率兵与刘光毅、曹彬等会师讨平他们。
English: At that time, the entire division gathered 100,000 soldiers and horses to occupy the rebellion in Jixian County, intending to spy on Chengdu. Cao Han led the soldiers and Liu Guangyi, Cao Bin and other divisions to settle them.

古文：未几，军校吕翰杀武怀节，据嘉州以叛，翰及诸将夺其城。
现代文：不久，军校吕翰杀死武怀节，占据嘉州叛乱，曹翰及诸将攻夺嘉州。
English: Soon, the military school Lü Han killed Wu Huai Jie, occupied Jiazhou rebellion, Cao Han and other generals conquered Jiazhou.

古文：谍知贼约三鼓复来攻，翰戒知更使缓，向晨犹二鼓，贼众不集而溃，因而破之，剑南遂平。
现代文：侦知敌兵大约三鼓时回来攻城，曹翰诫令知更慢些报更，到天明时还是二鼓，敌军不集而溃，趁机打败敌军，剑南于是被平定。
English: When the enemy soldiers were detected, they came back to attack the city at about the time of the third drum. Cao Han ordered them to report more slowly. By dawn, there were still two drums. The enemy army did not gather, but took advantage of the opportunity to defeat the enemy army. Jianan was then pacified.

古文：师还，迁蔡州团练使。
现代文：部队回师后，升任曹翰为蔡州团练使。
English: After the troops returned to the division, Cao Han was promoted to the training envoy of the Caizhou Regiment.

古文：开宝二年，从征太原，复为行营都壕砦使。
现代文：开宝二年，跟从太祖征伐太原，又任行营都壕砦使。
English: In the second year of the Kaibao era, he followed his great-grandfather to conquer Taiyuan, and was also appointed as an envoy to the trench fort.

古文：既班师，会河决澶州，令翰董其役，翰出银器助役，沉所乘白马以祭；复决阳武，再护役，皆有成绩。
现代文：班师时，遇到黄河在澶州决口，诏令曹翰管理堵塞工役，曹翰拿出银器来赞助工役费用，把自己所乘的白马沉到黄河来祭祀。黄河又在阳武决口，曹翰再次督办堵塞，都有成绩。
English: When he was a class teacher, he encountered the Yellow River at the Yangwu Junction in Zhangzhou and ordered Cao Han to supervise the blockage of the labor service. Cao Han took out silverware to sponsor the labor service costs and sank the white horse he was riding into the Yellow River to make a sacrifice. The Yellow River was also blocked at the Yangwu Junction and Cao Han once again supervised the blockage, with good results.

古文：将征江南，命翰率兵先赴荆南，改行营先锋使，进克池州。
现代文：朝廷准备征伐南唐，命令曹翰率兵先到荆南，改任行营先锋使，接着攻克池州。
English: The imperial court was preparing to invade Southern Tang, and ordered Cao Han and his army to go to Jingnan first, and then conquer Chizhou.

古文：金陵平，江州军校胡德、牙将宋德明据城拒命。
现代文：金陵被平定后，江州军校胡德、牙将宋德明据城抵抗。
English: After Jinling was subdued, Jiangzhou Military Academy Hood and Fang general Song Deming resisted.

古文：翰率兵攻之，凡五月而陷，屠城无噍类，杀兵八百。
现代文：曹翰率兵攻城，攻了五个月才攻陷，进城后屠城，杀敌兵八百人。
English: Cao Han led an army to attack the city. It took five months to attack and fall. After entering the city, he slaughtered 800 enemy soldiers.

古文：所略金帛以亿万计，伪言欲致庐山东林寺铁罗汉像五百头于京师，因调巨舰百艘，载所得以归。
现代文：所抢掠的金帛上亿元，假称打算把庐山东林寺铁罗汉像五百头送到京城，趁机调动巨舰数百艘，装载抢掠到的东西回朝。
English: The looted gold ingots of hundreds of millions of yuan, supposedly intending to send five hundred heads of the Lushan Donglin Temple Tie Rohan statue to the capital, taking the opportunity to mobilize hundreds of huge ships and load the looted things back to the North.

古文：录功迁桂州观察使、判颍州。
现代文：因功升任桂州观察使、判颍州。
English: He was promoted to the post of Guizhou Observation Envoy for his merits, and was awarded the title of Guizhou Hero.

古文：太平兴国四年，从征太原，为攻城南面都部署。
现代文：太平兴国四年，跟从太宗征伐太原，任攻城南面都部署。
English: In the four years of Taiping Xingguo, he followed Taizong's conquest of Taiyuan and was deployed to the south of the city.

古文：与崔彦进、李汉琼、刘遇三节度分部攻城，翰攻东北，而刘遇攻西北，与刘继元直，城尤险固，遇欲与翰易处，翰言： 观察使班次下，当部东北。 遇坚欲易之，数日不决。
现代文：曹翰与崔彦进、李汉琼、刘遇三位节度分部攻城，曹翰攻东北，而刘遇攻西北，与刘继元对敌，城墙尤其坚固，刘遇想与曹翰换地方，曹翰说： 观察使班次居下，应当在东北。 刘遇坚决要与他调换，几天不能决定下来。
English: Cao Han and Cui Yanjin, Li Han Qiong, and Liu Rong attacked the city in three sections, Cao Han attacked the northeast, and Liu Rong attacked the northwest, with Liu Jiyuan as the enemy, the city wall was particularly strong. When Liu Rong wanted to change places with Cao Han, Cao Han said: "If you want to observe the shift, you should stay in the northeast. Liu Rong firmly wants to switch with him, and you can't decide for a few days.

古文：上虑诸将不协，遣谕翰曰： 卿智勇无双，西北面非卿不能当也。 翰乃奉诏，筑土山瞰城中，数日而就，继元甚恐。
现代文：太宗怕诸将不和，派人对曹翰说 ：你智勇无双，西北面非你不能进攻。 曹翰于是奉诏，筑起一座土山鸟瞰城中，几天筑成，刘继元非常害怕。
English: Taizong was afraid that the generals would not get along, so he sent a messenger to Cao Han saying, "Your wisdom and courage are unparalleled, you cannot attack the northwest." Cao Han then issued an edict to build a mound of earth with a bird's-eye view of the city, which was completed in a few days. Liu Jiyuan was very afraid.

古文：军中乏水，城西十余里谷中有娘子庙，翰往祷之，穿渠得水，人马以给。
现代文：军中缺水，城西十多里山谷中有座娘子庙，曹翰前往祭祀，挖渠得水，人马得到供水。
English: The army was short of water, and there was a nunnery in a valley more than ten miles to the west of the city. Cao Han went to a religious service, dug a canal to get water, and supplied water to the men and horses.

古文：又从征幽州，率所部攻城东南隅，卒掘土得蟹以献。
现代文：又跟从太宗征讨幽州，率领所部兵马进攻城东南角，士兵们挖地时挖到一只蟹献给他。
English: He also followed Emperor Taizong's campaign to conquer Yuzhou, leading his troops and horses to attack the southeast corner of the city. When the soldiers were digging, they dug up a crab and dedicated it to him.

古文：翰谓诸将曰： 蟹水物而陆居，失所也。
现代文：曹翰对诸将说 ：蟹本是水中物却住在陆地上，是失所。
English: Cao Han said to the generals, "Crabs are originally aquatic creatures, but they live on land. They are lost.

古文：且多足，彼援将至，不可进拔之象，况蟹者解也，其班师乎？ 已而果验。
现代文：而且蟹多脚，敌人的援兵将到，此城不可进拔的征兆，况且蟹者解也，难道要班师吗？ 后来果然应验。
English: Moreover, crabs have many legs, enemy reinforcements will arrive, a sign that the city cannot be advanced, and moreover, the crabs are also solved, do they need a teacher? Later, it really came true.

古文：五年，从幸大名，拜威塞军节度，仍判颍州，复命为幽州行营都部署。
现代文：太平兴国五年，跟从太宗到大名，被任命为威塞军节度，仍判颍州，又任命为幽州行营都部署。
English: In the fifth year of Taiping Xingguo, following from Taizong to Daimyo, he was appointed to the Weisei Army Festival, still sentenced to Bozhou, and appointed to Yuzhou Camp.

古文：诏督役开南河，自雄达莫，以通漕运，议筑大堤以捍之。
现代文：诏令他监督开凿南河，从雄州到莫州，以便疏通漕运，打算筑大堤来保固河运。
English: The emperor ordered him to supervise the excavation of the South River, from Xiongzhou to Mozhou, in order to smooth out the paddle transport, intending to build a large dike to secure the river transport.

古文：翰遣徒数万，伐巨木于汉境，遣骑五，授五色旗为斥候，前遇丘陵、水泽、寇贼、烟火，则各举其旗以为应，又起烽燧于境上，敌疑不敢近塞，得巨木数万以济用，讫事归镇。
现代文：曹翰调遣徒役几万人，在汉境内砍伐巨木，派出五个骑兵，给他们五色旗各一为侦察兵，前面如果遇到丘陵、水泽、寇贼、烟火，就举起旗子作为回应，又在边境建立烽火台，敌人疑惑不敢接近边塞，得到几万根巨木来用，事情办完后回到节度府。
English: Cao Han dispatched tens of thousands of foot soldiers, cut down huge trees in Han territory, sent five cavalrymen, gave them one five-color flag each as a scout, and raised the flag in response if they encountered hills, marshes, bandits, and fireworks in front, and set up a campfire on the border. The enemy did not dare to approach the border fort, and got tens of thousands of huge trees to use. After the matter was completed, he returned to the Jiedu Palace.

古文：翰在郡岁久，征敛苛酷，政因以弛。
现代文：曹翰在地方任官时间长，横征暴敛，政事因此废弛。
English: Cao Han has been a local official for a long time, and he has been violent in collecting taxes. As a result, government affairs have been wasted.

古文：上以其有功，每优容之。
现代文：太宗因为他有功于国家，每次都宽容了他。
English: Emperor Taizong indulged him every time because of his service to the country.

古文：会汝阴令孙崇望诣阙，诉翰私市兵器，所为多不法。
现代文：遇到汝阴令孙崇望到朝廷，告曹翰私卖兵器，所作所为大多违法。
English: Encountering Ru Yin, Sun Chongwang went to the imperial court and accused Cao Han of illegally selling weapons. Most of what he did was illegal.

古文：诏遣御史滕中正乘传鞫之，狱具，当弃市，上贷其罪，削官爵，流锢登州。
现代文：诏令派遣御史滕中正乘驿马前去审问，案结后，应当杀头，太宗宽宥他的罪过，只削去他的官爵，把他流放禁锢在登州。
English: The Emperor issued an edict to send Gosen Chuzo on a steed to interrogate him, and after the case was over, he should be beheaded. The Emperor forgave his sins, only stripped him of his title, and exiled him to Danzhou.

古文：雍熙二年，起为右千牛卫大将军、分司西京。
现代文：雍熙二年，起用任命为右千牛卫大将军、分司两京。
English: In the second year of the Yongxi Dynasty, he was appointed as the general of the Right Qian Niu Wei and the branch of the two capitals.

古文：四年，召入为左千牛卫上将军，赐钱五百万，白金五千两。
现代文：雍熙四年，召他入朝任左千牛卫大将军，赐给他钱五百万，白金五千两。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Yongxi, he was called to the imperial court to serve as General Zu Chenyu Wei, and was given five million yuan and five thousand taels of platinum.

古文：淳化三年，卒，年六十九，赠太尉。上命迁其四子守谦、守能、守节、守贵官，其六子守让、守贽、守澄、守恩、守英、守吉皆补殿直。
现代文：淳化三年，去世，终年六十九岁，追赠太尉，太宗命令提升他的四个儿子守谦、守能、守节、守贵的官职，他的另六个儿子守让、守贽、守澄、守思、守英、守吉都补任殿直官。
English: Three years after Junhua's death at the age of sixty-nine, he was posthumously awarded the rank of captain. Taizong ordered that his four sons, Shouqian, Shouneng, Shoujie, and Shougui, be promoted to official posts, and that his other six sons, Shoujan, Shouyu, Shoucheng, Shoushi, Shouying, and Shouji, all be appointed as court officials.

古文：翰阴狡多智数，好夸诞，贪冒货赂，饮酒至数斗不乱。
现代文：曹翰为人阴险狡诈又多智谋，喜欢夸诞、贪污货财，饮酒几斗能不醉。
English: Cao Han is insidious, cunning and resourceful. He likes to exaggerate, embezzle goods and money, and can drink several glasses of wine without getting drunk.

古文：每奏事上前，虽数十条，皆默识不少差。
现代文：每次在皇帝前奏事，虽然事有数十条，都默记不错。
English: Although there are dozens of matters to be discussed in front of the emperor, they are all memorized well.

古文：明年卒，年八十一。录其子承宪为侍禁。
现代文：曾经写过《退将诗》说 ：曾因国难披金甲，耻为家贫卖宝刀。 曹翰值班禁卫时，谈到此话。
English: He once wrote "Retiring Poem" and said, "I once wore a golden armor because of the national tragedy, and I was ashamed to sell a precious sword because of my family's poverty." Cao Han talked about this when he was on duty as a guard.

古文：赞稍知书，无异能，以兄故得掌禁旅，累资朝著至牧守焉。
现代文：皇帝可怜他的用意，所以后来赐钱给他。咸平元年，赐谥号为 武毅 。
English: The emperor felt sorry for his intention, so he later gave him money. In the first year of Xianping, he was given the nickname Wuyi.

古文：党进，朔州马邑人。
现代文：党进，朔州马邑人。
English: Dangjin, from Ma'e, Shuozhou.

古文：幼给事魏帅杜重威，重威爱其淳谨，及壮，犹令与姬妾杂侍。
现代文：年幼时奉事魏博节度杜重威，重威喜欢他淳朴严谨，年长后，仍让他与姬妾一起伺候自己。
English: When he was young, he served the Wei Bo festival to Du Chongwei. Chongwei liked his simplicity and rigor. When he was older, he still let him serve himself with his concubine.

古文：重威败，进以膂力隶军伍。
现代文：重威失败，党进因臂力编在军中。
English: The strong-arm tactics failed, and Dangjin was forced to join the army.

古文：周广顺初，补散指挥使，累迁铁骑都虞候。
现代文：后周广顺初期，补任散指挥使，历升至铁骑都虞候。
English: Later, in the early days of Zhou Guangshun, he was appointed as the second commander and rose to the position of the iron cavalry commander.

古文：宋初，转本军都校、领钦州刺史，迁马步军副都军头、领虔州团练使，改虎捷右厢都指挥使、领睦州防御使。
现代文：宋朝初期，转任本军都校、兼任钦州刺史，升任马步军副都军头、兼任虔州团练使，改任虎捷右厢都指挥使、兼任睦州防御使。
English: At the beginning of the Song Dynasty, he was transferred to the capital school of his own army, concurrently serving as the scribe of Qinzhou, promoted to the deputy capital commander of the Horse Guards Army, concurrently serving as the Gyeongju regimental training envoy, reassigned as the commander of the right compartment of the Tiger Army, and concurrently serving as the defense envoy of Mutsu Province.

古文：建隆二年，改领阆州。
现代文：建隆二年，改为兼任阆州防御使。
English: In the second year of Jianlong, it was changed to concurrently serve as the defense envoy of Zhangzhou.

古文：乾德初，改龙捷左厢都虞候、领利州观察使。
现代文：乾德初年，改任龙捷左厢都虞候、兼任利州观察使。
English: In the first year of Qiande, he was transferred to the position of Longjie Zuoyang Duyu and concurrently served as Lizhou observation envoy.

古文：后四年，权步军。
现代文：四年后，暂代步军主管。
English: Four years later, he became the interim head of the infantry.

古文：杜审琼卒，命进代领其务。
现代文：杜审琼去世，朝廷任命党进代任他的职务。
English: When Du Xizhong died, the imperial court appointed Dangjin to take his place.

古文：五年，领彰信军节度兼侍卫步军都指挥使。
现代文：乾德五年，任彰信军节度兼任侍卫步军都指挥使。
English: In Qiande's fifth year, he was appointed as the commander of the Zhangxin Army and the commander of the Guards and Foot Troops.

古文：开宝元年，将征太原，以进将河东行营前军。
现代文：开宝元年，准备进攻太原，任命党进统率行营前军。
English: In the first year of Kaibao, when preparing to attack Taiyuan, he appointed the Party to lead the advance troops.

古文：开宝二年，太祖师临晋阳、置砦四面，命进主其东偏。
现代文：开宝二年，太祖率兵到晋阳，设置四面营寨，任命党进主管偏东面营寨。
English: In the second year of Kaibao, Taizu led the troops to Jinyang, set up camps on all four sides, and appointed the party leader to head the camp on the east side.

古文：师未成列，太原骁将杨业领突骑数百来犯，进奋身从数人逐业；业急入隍中，会援兵至，缘缒入城获免。
现代文：部队还未列阵，太原骁将杨业率领数百骑兵突击来攻，党进奋身率领几个人追逐杨业；杨业急忙跑到护城河，正遇太原援兵到了，拉着绳子入城才免死。
English: The troops had not yet lined up, when Taiyuan Shao led Yangye and hundreds of cavalry in a surprise attack, and the Party advanced and led several people to chase Yangye; Yangye hurried to the moat, just as Taiyuan's reinforcements arrived, and pulled the rope into the city to avoid death.

古文：上激赏之。
现代文：太祖重重地奖赏了他。
English: His great-grandfather rewarded him handsomely.

古文：六年，改侍卫马军都指挥使、领镇安军节度。
现代文：开宝六年，改任侍卫马军都指挥使、兼任镇安军节度。
English: Six years after the founding of Kaibao, he was appointed as the commander of the Horse Guards and the Horse Army, and also served as the commander of the Zhen'an Army.

古文：九年，又命将河东行营兵征太原，入其境，败太原军于城北。太祖崩，召还。
现代文：开宝九年，又命令他统率河东行营部队征讨太原，攻入太原境内，在太原城北打败太原的部队。
English: In the ninth year of Kaibao, he also ordered him to lead the troops marching to the east of the river to conquer Taiyuan, enter the territory of Taiyuan, and defeat the troops of Taiyuan in the north of Taiyuan.

古文：太平兴国二年，出为忠武军节度。
现代文：太祖去世，太宗召他回朝。太平兴国二年，出京任忠武军节度。
English: When his great-grandfather died, Emperor Taizong called him back to the imperial court. In the second year of the Taiping Restoration, he went to Beijing to serve as the commander of the Loyalist Army.

古文：在镇岁余，一日自外归，有大蛇卧榻上寝衣中，进怒，烹食之。
现代文：在镇守忠武军一年多后，一天从外面回来，有一条大蛇睡在他床上的睡衣中，党进大怒，把它烹熟吃了。
English: After more than a year in the town of Zhongwu Army, one day he came back from outside, there was a big snake sleeping in his pajamas on his bed, the party went into a rage, cooked it and ate it.

古文：遇疾卒，年五十一，赠侍中。
现代文：因病去世，终年五十一岁，追赠侍中。
English: He died of illness at the age of fifty-one and was posthumously awarded the title of chamberlain.

古文：进出戎行，形貌魁岸，居常恂恂，每擐甲胄，毛发皆竖。
现代文：党进出身军伍，相貌魁伟，平常总是恭敬谨慎，每次穿甲胄时，毛发都竖了起来。
English: He was a member of the Communist Party and a former soldier. He was handsome and usually always respectful and cautious. Every time he put on his armor, his hair stood on end.

古文：进名进，自称曰晖，人问之，则曰： 吾欲从吾便耳。 先是，禁中军校，自都虞候已上，悉书所掌兵数于梃上，如笏记焉。
现代文：党进名字是进，自称为晖，有人问他为什么，他就回答说： 我是就我自己的方便。 从前，禁军中的军校，从都虞候以上，把自己掌握的兵数都写在梃上，像笏记那样。
English: Dangjin's name is Jin, and he calls himself Miao. When someone asked him why, he replied, "I did it for my own convenience. In the past, in the military school of the Imperial Army, from the time of Zhuge and above, he wrote the number of soldiers he had on the tablet, just like Miao Ji.

古文：太祖一日问进所掌几何，进不识字，但举梃以示于上曰： 尽在是矣。 上以其朴直，益厚之。
现代文：太宗曾经让亲吏拿着幼鹰从闹市走过，党进想放掉幼鹰，亲吏说 ：这是晋王的鹰！ 党进于是训诫他说 ：你要谨慎养护。 
English: Emperor Taizong once had a relative walk through the city with a young eagle. When Dangjin wanted to release the young eagle, the relative said, "This is Jin Wang's eagle!" Dangjin then admonished him, "You should take care of it."

古文：尝受诏巡京师，闻里间有畜养禽兽者，见必取而纵之，骂曰： 买肉不将供父母，反以饲禽兽乎。 太宗尝令亲吏臂鹰雏于市，进亟欲放之，吏曰： 此晋王鹰也。 进乃戒之曰： 汝谨养视。 小民传以为笑，其变诈又如此。杜重威子孙有贫困者，进分月俸给之，士大夫或有愧焉。子崇义闲厩使，崇贵阁门祗候。
现代文：百姓传为笑话，他的变诈又像这个样子。杜重威的子孙有人生活贫困，党进把月俸分给他们，士大夫有人感到惭愧。
English: Some of Du Chunwei's descendants live in poverty, the Party cadre gives them a monthly salary, and some senior officials feel ashamed.

古文：李汉琼，河南洛阳人。
现代文：李汉琼，河南洛阳人。
English: Li Hanqiong, from Luoyang, Henan Province.

古文：曾祖裕，祁州刺史。
现代文：其曾祖父李裕，任过祁州刺史。
English: His great-grandfather, Li Yu, was once the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：汉琼体质魁岸，有膂力。
现代文：汉琼体质魁伟，有臂力。
English: Han Qiong has a strong physique and arm strength.

古文：晋末，补西班卫士，迁内殿直。
现代文：后晋末期，补任西班卫士，升为内殿直。
English: At the end of the Later Jin Dynasty, he was appointed as the West Pan Guardian and promoted to the Inner Palace Guard.

古文：周显德中，从征淮南，先登，迁龙旗直副都知，改左射指挥使。
现代文：后周显德年间，跟从皇帝进攻南唐，率先登城，升任龙旗直副都知，改任左射指挥使。
English: Later, during the Zhou Xiande era, he followed the emperor to attack Southern Tang, took the lead in climbing the city, was promoted to the dragon banner direct deputy, and was reassigned to the left arrow commander.

古文：宋初，再迁铁骑第二军都校、领饶州刺史，迁控鹤左厢都校、领泸州刺史，改澄州团练使，转虎捷左厢都指挥使、领融州防御使，迁侍卫马军都虞候、领洮州观察使。
现代文：宋朝初期，再升至铁骑第二军都校、兼任饶州刺史，升任控鹤左厢都校、兼任泸州刺史，改任澄州团练使，转任虎捷左厢都指挥使、兼任融州防御使，升任侍卫马军都虞候，兼任洮州观察使。
English: At the beginning of the Song Dynasty, he was promoted to the Second Army Capital School of the Iron Cavalry, concurrently held the post of Raozhou stabbing history, promoted to the Control Crane Left Wing Capital School, concurrently held the post of Zhangzhou stabbing history, reassigned to the Chengzhou Regiment Training Envoy, reassigned to the Left Wing Commander of the Tiger Cavalry, concurrently held the post of Rongzhou Defense Envoy, promoted to the bodyguard of the Horse Army, concurrently held the post of Zhangzhou Observation Envoy.

古文：王师征江南，命领行营骑军兼战棹左厢都指挥使，自蕲春攻岐口砦，斩首数千级，获楼船数百艘，沿流拔池州，破铜陵，取当涂，作浮梁于牛渚以济大军。
现代文：宋军征伐江南时，朝廷任命他统率行营骑军兼战左厢都指挥使，从蕲春进攻峡口砦，斩敌数千人，俘获敌人楼船数百艘，沿江攻拔池州、铜陵、当涂，在牛渚造浮桥让大军通过。
English: When the Song army was conquering the south of the Yangtze River, the imperial court appointed him as the commander of the cavalry and the commander of the left flank of the battle. He attacked the gorge fort from Hunchun, killed thousands of enemies, captured hundreds of enemy ships, attacked Chizhou, Tongling and Dangtu along the river, and built a pontoon bridge in Niuzhu to allow the large army to pass.

古文：分围金陵，率所部度秦淮，取巨舰实苇其中，纵火攻其水砦，拔之。
现代文：包围金陵时，率领所部渡过秦淮河，调来巨舰在里面填满芦苇，放火焚烧敌人水寨，攻了下来。
English: When besieging Jinling, he led his troops across the Qinhuai River, brought in a huge ship to fill it with reeds, set fire to the enemy's water castle, and attacked it.

古文：江南平，以功领振武军节度。
现代文：江南被平定，因战功兼任振武军节度。
English: The south of the Yangtze River was pacified, and because of his war service, he also served as the commander of the Zhenwu Army.

古文：太平兴国二年，出为彰德军节度。
现代文：太平兴国二年，出京任彰德军节度。
English: In the second year of Taiping Xingguo, he went to Beijing to serve as the commander of the German army.

古文：四年，太宗亲征太原，改攻城都部署。
现代文：太平兴国四年，太宗亲自征伐太原，改任他为攻城都部署。
English: In the fourth year of Taiping Xingguo, Taizong personally went to conquer Taiyuan, and was assigned to attack the city.

古文：汉琼与牛思进主攻城南偏，汉琼先登，矢集其脑，并中指，伤甚犹力疾战。
现代文：汉琼与牛思进主攻城偏南面，汉琼先登上城墙，敌人的箭都射在他的头部，中指被砍掉，伤势很重仍拼死力战。
English: Han Qiong and Niu Sijin mainly attacked the southern part of the city. Han Qiong climbed the city wall first. The enemy's arrows were shot at his head. His middle finger was cut off. He was seriously injured and still fought desperately.

古文：上召至幄殿，赐良药以慰劳之。
现代文：皇上召他到幄殿，赐给他良药慰劳他。
English: The emperor summoned him to the imperial palace and gave him good medicine to comfort him.

古文：先是，攻城者以牛革冒木上，士卒蒙之而进，谓之洞子。
现代文：在此之前，攻城者用牛皮蒙在木片上，士卒蒙上它攻城，称为洞子。
English: Prior to this, the besiegers used cowhide to cover a piece of wood, and the soldiers used it to attack the city, which was called "dongzi" (洞子).

古文：上欲幸其中，以劳士卒，汉琼极谏，以为矢石之下，非万乘之尊所宜轻往，上乃止。
现代文：太宗打算亲自到攻城队伍中，来慰劳士卒，汉琼极力谏阻，认为箭石之下，不是万乘之尊能亲自去的地方，太宗才停止。
English: Emperor Taizong planned to personally go to the siege team to comfort the laborers, but Han Qiong strongly opposed it, believing that under the arrow stone was not a place where Emperor Wanxiang could personally go. Only then did Emperor Taizong stop.

古文：太原平，改镇州兵马钤辖。
现代文：太原被平定，改任他为镇州兵马钤辖。
English: Taiyuan was pacified, and he was appointed as the commander of the Zhenzhou Terracotta Warriors and Horses.

古文：契丹数万骑寇中山，汉琼与战于蒲城，大败之，逐至遂城，俘斩万计，加检校太尉。
现代文：契丹数万骑兵进攻中山，汉琼在满城与敌人大战，大败敌军，追逐敌军到遂城，俘获杀死上万敌人，朝廷加任他为检校太尉。
English: Khitan's tens of thousands of cavalry attacked Zhongshan, Han Qiong fought with the enemy in Mancheng, defeated the enemy army, chased the enemy army to Suicheng, captured and killed tens of thousands of enemies, and the court appointed him as a school inspector.

古文：车驾幸大名，汉琼上谒，陈边事称旨，命为沧州都部署，加赐战马、金甲、宝剑、戎具以宠之。
现代文：太宗到大名，汉琼朝见，陈述边事符合皇上心意，任命他为沧州都部署，加赐战马、金甲、宝剑、戎具来表示对他的宠爱。
English: Emperor Taizong went to the daimyo, Han Qiong went to see the emperor, and stated that the incident was in line with the emperor's intention, appointed him to be deployed in Cangzhou, and gave him horses, gold armor, swords, and military equipment to show his favor.

古文：六年，以病还京，赐白金万两，月余卒，年五十五，赠中书令。
现代文：太平兴国六年，因病回到京城，太宗赐给他白金万两，一个多月后去世，终年五十五岁，追赠中书令。
English: In the sixth year of Taiping Xingguo, he returned to Beijing due to illness, and Emperor Taizong gave him platinum and ten thousand taels of silver. He died more than a month later, at the age of fifty-five, with the posthumous award of the Chinese Book Order.

古文：汉琼性木强，使酒难近，然善战有功。
现代文：汉琼性格木讷，使起酒性难以近身，但善于作战，立有大功。
English: Han Qiong has a dull personality, which makes it difficult to get close to him when he is drunk, but he is good at fighting and has made great achievements.

古文：无子，弟汉赟、汉彬。
现代文：没有儿子，他的弟弟名汉斌贝、汉彬。
English: He had no son, but his younger brothers were named Han Binbei and Han Binzhou.

古文：大中祥符三年，又录其子德钧为借职。
现代文：太平兴国初年，汉斌贝补任供奉官，曾经监督高阳关、平戎军，乘驿车巡视衢、婺二州，捕捉剧贼程白眉数十人，全部诛杀。
English: In the first year of the Taiping Xingguo, Han Binbei was appointed as a supply officer. He once supervised Gaoyang Pass and Pingjun Army, and took a stagecoach to inspect Shandong and Fujian provinces. He caught dozens of drama thief Cheng Baimei, and killed them all.

古文：米信，旧名海进，本奚族，少勇悍，以善射闻。
现代文：历任崇仪使、知宁州，大中祥符七年去世。汉彬官至礼宾副使。米信原名海进，本来是奚族人，年轻时勇悍，以擅射闻名。
English: Successive Chongyi envoy, Chining State, high school Xiangfu died seven years ago. Han Bin official to protocol deputy envoy. Yixin Yuan was originally named Haijin, originally a Yi people, brave when young, famous for unauthorized shooting.

古文：周祖即位，隶护圣军。
现代文：周太祖即皇帝位后，把他编在护圣军。
English: After Zhou Taizu became emperor, he was enlisted in the Holy Protection Army.

古文：从世宗征高平，以功迁龙捷散都头。
现代文：跟从周世宗征讨高平，因战功升任龙捷散都头。
English: He followed Zhou Zongzheng to fight against Gaoping, and was promoted to the head of Long Jie Sanzhong due to his war service.

古文：太祖总禁兵，以信隶麾下，得给使左右，遂委心焉，改名信，署牙校。
现代文：宋太祖统领禁兵时，把米信收用在军中，得以追随左右，于是成为太祖心腹，改名信，署任为牙校。
English: When Emperor Taizu of the Song Dynasty banned soldiers, he conscripted Yixin into the army so that he could follow him around. As a result, Yixin became a confidant of Emperor Taizu, changed his name to Xin, and was appointed as a dentist.

古文：及即位，补殿前指挥使，迁直长。
现代文：宋太祖即皇帝位后，补任他为殿前指挥使，升任直长。
English: After Emperor Song Taizu ascended to the throne, he was appointed as the commander-in-chief of the imperial court and was promoted to the post of the immediate chief.

古文：平扬州日，信执弓矢侍上侧，有游骑将迫乘舆，射之，一发而毙。
现代文：平定扬州时，米信执弓箭侍奉在太祖身边，有一个散骑兵将接近皇帝车驾，米信一箭射去，一发而射中。
English: When Yangzhou was pacified, Yixin, who was in charge of bows and arrows, served at the side of Emperor Taizu. A cavalryman was about to approach the emperor's chariot, and Yixin shot an arrow and hit it.

古文：迁内殿直指挥使。
现代文：升任殿直指挥使。
English: Promoted to the post of direct commander of the palace.

古文：开宝元年，改殿前指挥使、领郴州刺史。
现代文：开宝元年，改任殿前指挥使、兼任郴州刺史。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Gaobao, he was reassigned to the post of commander in front of the palace and concurrently served as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：太宗即位，转散都头指挥使，继领高州团练使。
现代文：太宗即皇帝位，转任散都头指挥使，接着兼任高州团练使。
English: Taizong became the emperor, transferred to the post of commander-in-chief of the capital, and then concurrently served as Gaozhou regimental training envoy.

古文：太平兴国三年，迁领洮州观察使。
现代文：太平兴国三年，升为兼任洮州观察使。
English: In the third year of Taiping Xingguo, he was promoted to concurrently serve as Zhangzhou observation envoy.

古文：四年，征太原，命为行营马步军指挥使，与田重进分督行营诸军。
现代文：太平兴国四年，征伐太原时，被任命为行营马步军指挥使，与田重进分别督率行营诸军。
English: In the fourth year of Taiping Xingguo, when conquering Taiyuan, he was appointed as the commanding officer of the marching horse army, and supervised the marching army with Tian Chongjin.

古文：并人潜师来犯，信击败之，杀其将裴正。
现代文：并人军队秘密地来进攻，米信打败了他们，杀死敌将裴正。
English: Yixin defeated them and killed the enemy general Pei Zheng.

古文：并州平，遂移兵攻范阳。
现代文：并州平定后，于是移兵进攻范阳。
English: And after the state was pacified, the soldiers moved to attack Fanyang.

古文：师还，以功擢保顺军节度使。
现代文：部队回师后，因战功提升为保顺军节度使。
English: After the troops returned to the division, he was promoted to the commander of the Bo Shun Army due to his war service.

古文：时信族属多在塞外，会其兄子全自朔州奋身来归，召见，俾乘传诣代州，伺间迎致其亲属，发劲卒护送之。
现代文：当时米信的宗族亲属们都在塞外，他哥哥的儿子米全从朔州跑来投归，接见他后，让他乘驿马到代州，伺机把亲属们迎接来，派劲卒护送他。
English: At that time, the clan relatives of Mi Xin were all out of the country. His brother's son, Mi Quan, ran from Shuozhou to return home. After receiving him, he asked him to take a pack horse to Daizhou to wait for the relatives to come and escort him.

古文：既而全宿留逾年，边境斥候严，竟不能致。
现代文：后来米全住了一年，边境侦察兵很严格，竟然不能迎其亲属。
English: Later, Mi Quan lived there for a year, and the border scouts were so strict that they couldn't even greet his relatives.

古文：信慷慨叹曰： 吾闻忠孝不两立，方思以身徇国，安能复顾亲戚哉。 北望号恸，戒子侄勿复言。
现代文：米信慨叹说： 我听说忠孝不两立，现在正想以身殉国，怎能顾及亲戚呢？ 向北面痛哭，诫令子侄们不要再提这件事。
English: Yixin sighed and said, "I have heard that loyalty and filial piety are incompatible, and now I am thinking of martyring myself for the country. How can I take care of my relatives? I cried bitterly to the north and told my sons and nephews not to mention this matter again.

古文：五年，命与郭守赟等同护定州屯兵。
现代文：太平兴国五年，太宗命他与郭守斌贝等人一起统辖定州屯兵。
English: In the fifth year of Taiping Xingguo, Taizong ordered him, together with Guo Shubinbei and others, to supervise the Denzhou garrison.

古文：六年秋，迁定州驻泊部署。
现代文：太平兴国六年秋天，升任定州驻泊部署。
English: In the autumn of the sixth year of Taiping Xingguo, it was promoted to the Dingzhou stationing deployment.

古文：八年，改领彰化军节度使。
现代文：太平兴国八年，改任彰化军节度使。
English: In the eighth year of the Taiping Restoration, he was appointed as the Changhua Army's envoy to the Qing Dynasty.

古文：雍熙三年，征幽蓟，命信为幽州西北道行营马步军都部署，败契丹于新城。
现代文：雍熙三年，征伐幽蓟时，任命米信为幽州西北道行营马步军都部署，在新城打败契丹军队。
English: In the third year of the reign of Yongxi, during the conquest of Yuzhou, Yixin was appointed as the commander of the Yuzhou Northwest Road, and the horse-mounted troops were deployed to defeat the Khitan army in Xincheng.

古文：契丹率众复来战，王师稍却，信独以麾下龙卫卒三百御敌，敌围之数重，矢下如雨，信射中数人，麾下士多死。
现代文：契丹率领部队又来进攻，宋军稍微退却，米信独以部下龙卫卒三百人抗御敌军，敌军把他们重重包围起来，箭如雨下，米信射中几名敌兵，部下士卒大多战死。
English: Khitan led the troops to attack again, the Song army retreated slightly, and the U.S.S.R. alone resisted the enemy army with three hundred subordinate dragoon guards. The enemy army encircled them, and it was raining arrows. The U.S.S.R. shot several enemy soldiers, and most of the subordinate officers and men died in the battle.

古文：会暮，信持大刀，率从骑大呼，杀数十人，敌遂小却，信以百余骑突围得免。
现代文：到天黑，米信手持大刀，率领跟从的骑兵大声呐喊，杀死几十名敌人，敌军才略微退却，米信指挥百余骑兵突围得以免死。
English: By nightfall, Yixin, holding a large sword, led his cavalry in a loud shout, killing dozens of enemies. The enemy army only retreated slightly, and Yixin, commanding more than a hundred cavalry, was able to break out of the encirclement and avoid death.

古文：坐失律，议当死，诏特原之，责授右屯卫大将军。
现代文：因犯失律之罪，议罪应当杀头，诏令特地原谅他，贬任右屯卫大将军。
English: For the crime of violating the law, he was sentenced to be beheaded, and the imperial edict specifically pardoned him and demoted him to the position of General of the Right Division of Guards.

古文：明年，复授彰武军节度。
现代文：第二天，仍然授任彰武军节度使。
English: The next day, he was still awarded the post of military attaché to the Spring Festival of the Zhangwu Army.

古文：端拱初，诏置方田，以信为邢州兵马都部署以监之。
现代文：端拱初年，诏令设置方田，任命米信为邢州兵马都部署来监督这件事。
English: In the first year of the end of the arch, the imperial decree set up a square field, and appointed Yixin to be the commander of the Bozhou Terracotta Army to supervise the matter.

古文：二年，改镇横海军。
现代文：端拱二年，改任横海军节度使。
English: Two years later, he was transferred to the position of Vice Admiral of the Navy.

古文：信不知书，所为多暴横，上命何承矩为之副，以决州事。
现代文：米信不识字，所作所为多暴横，皇上命令何承矩给他做副手，处理州中政事。
English: Yixin was illiterate and often behaved violently. The emperor ordered He Xingmeng to be his deputy and handle the state affairs.

古文：及承矩领护屯田，信遂专恣不法，军人宴犒甚薄，尝私市绢附上计吏，称官物以免关征，上廉知之。
现代文：承矩兼管屯田时，米信就专断放肆不遵法度，宴请犒劳军人时非常刻薄，曾经私人买绢时，向主管计税的官吏谎称是官府购买逃避关税，皇上查访得知这些情况。
English: When he was concurrently in charge of the military cantonments, Yixin was arbitrarily presumptuous and did not comply with the law. He was very mean when he held a banquet for servicemen. Once, when he bought rice privately, he falsely claimed to the official in charge of tax collection that it was purchased by the government to evade tariffs. The emperor's visit learned these circumstances.

古文：四年，召为右武卫上将军。
现代文：端拱四年，召他入朝任右武卫上将军。
English: At the age of four, he was called to the imperial court to serve as a general of the Right Division of Inner Palace Guards.

古文：明年，判左右金吾街仗事。
现代文：第二年，任判左右金吾街仗事。
English: In the second year, he was appointed to be in charge of military affairs in and around Kingu Street.

古文：未逾月，吏卒以无罪被捶挞者甚众。
现代文：不满一月，吏卒无罪被他鞭打的很多。
English: In less than a month, he whipped many officials who were found not guilty.

古文：强市人物，妻死买地营葬，妄发居民冢墓。
现代文：强行购买人口和货物，他的妻子死后买地埋葬，妄自挖掉居民的坟墓。
English: He forcibly bought people and goods, bought land to bury his wife after her death, and dug up the graves of residents.

古文：家奴陈赞老病，箠之致死，为其家人所告。
现代文：家奴陈赞又老又病，被米信鞭打致死，此事被他的家人告发。
English: Chen Zan, an old and sick family slave, was whipped to death by Yixin, and his family reported the matter.

古文：下御史鞫之，信具伏。
现代文：把他送给御史审讯，米信供认。
English: He was sent to the imperial court for trial, and confessed.

古文：狱未上而卒，年六十七。
现代文：案情还未上报就去世，终年六十七岁。
English: He died before the case was reported, at the age of sixty-seven.

古文：赠横海军节度。子继丰，内殿崇班、阁门祗候。
现代文：追赠横海军节度，他的儿子米继丰，任内殿崇班、门合门祗候。
English: His son, Yonjiho, was posthumously awarded the rank of Admiral of the Navy.

古文：田重进，幽州人。
现代文：田重进，幽州人。
English: Tian Shigeharu, from Yuzhou.

古文：形质奇伟，有武力。
现代文：形貌奇伟，力气很大。
English: The shape is amazing, the strength is great.

古文：周显德中，应募为卒，隶太祖麾下。
现代文：后周显德年间，应募为卒，编在太祖军中。
English: Later, during Zhou Xiande's reign, he was recruited as a pawn and became a member of Taizu's army.

古文：从征契丹，至陈桥还，迁御马军使，积功至瀼州刺史。
现代文：跟从太祖征讨契丹，到陈桥回来，升任御马军使，积战功升至氵襄州刺史。
English: After returning from the Great Ancestor's conquest of Khitan and Chenqiao, he was promoted to the envoy of the Imperial Horse Army, and his accumulated war achievements rose to the highest level in the history of Xiangzhou.

古文：太平兴国四年，从征太原还，录功擢为天德军节度使。
现代文：太平兴国四年，跟从太宗征伐太原回朝，因战功被提升为天德军节度使。
English: In the fourth year of Taiping Xingguo, he followed Emperor Taizong to invade Taiyuan and returned to the North, and was promoted to the commander of the German army due to his war service.

古文：六年，改侍卫步军指挥使。
现代文：太平兴国六年，改任侍卫步军指挥使。
English: In the sixth year of Taiping Xingguo, he was reassigned as the commanding officer of the Foot Guards.

古文：八年，改领静难军节度使。
现代文：太平兴国八年，改任静难军节度使。
English: In the eighth year of Taiping Xingguo, he was reappointed as the chief envoy of the Jingnan Army.

古文：九年，河决滑州韩、房村，重进总护其役，以刘吉为之副，河遂塞。
现代文：太平兴国九年，黄河在滑州的韩、房村等地决口，重进统管修理工程，任命刘吉为他的副手，黄河决口于是被堵塞。
English: In the ninth year of the Taiping Xingguo, the Yellow River was blocked at Han, Fangcun and other places in Luzhou. He re-entered to supervise the repair project and appointed Liu Ji as his deputy.

古文：雍熙中，出师北征，重进率兵傅飞狐城下，用袁继忠计，伏兵飞狐南口，擒契丹骁将大鹏翼及其监军马赟、副将何万通并渤海军三千余人，斩首数千级，俘获以万计，逐北四十里，连下飞狐、灵州等城。
现代文：雍熙年间，出师北征，田重进率领军队逼进飞狐城下，采用袁继忠的计策，在飞狐城南口设下伏兵，擒俘契丹猛将大鹏翼及其监军马斌贝、副将何万通以及渤海军队三千多人，杀敌数千人，俘获数以万计的敌人，追逐敌军四十里，接连攻下飞狐、灵丘等城。
English: During the reign of the Yongxi Emperor, Tian Chongjin led an army to force his way under the Flying Fox Castle during the Northern Expedition. Using Yuan Jizhong's strategy, he set up an ambush at the southern entrance of the Flying Fox Castle. He captured Qidan, the fierce general Dapeng Ying and his supervising army Ma Binbei, vice-general Tens of thousands of Tongs and more than 3,000 people of the Bohai Army, killed thousands of enemies, captured tens of thousands of enemies, chased the enemy army for forty miles, and successively captured the Flying Fox, Lingqiu and other cities.

古文：进攻蔚州，其牙校李存璋等杀酋帅萧啜理、执耿绍忠，率吏民来附。
现代文：进攻蔚州时，蔚州牙校李存璋等人杀死蔚州主将萧啜理，拘捕耿绍忠，率领官吏百姓来归附。
English: During the attack on Ulshu, Ulshu dental school Li Cunxu and others killed Ulshu commander Xiao Suri, arrested Geng Shao Zhong, and led officials and commoners to annexation.

古文：会曹彬之师不利，乃命重进董师驻定州，迁定州驻泊兵马都部署。
现代文：当时正遇曹彬的部队战斗失利，于是命令重进督率部队驻扎在定州，升任定州驻泊兵马都部署。
English: At that time, Cao Bin's troops were on the verge of losing the battle, so he ordered the commander-in-chief to lead the troops stationed in Dingzhou, and was promoted to the position of the commander of the garrisoned soldiers and horses in Dingzhou.

古文：三年，率师入辽境，攻下岐沟关，杀守城兵千余及获牛马辎重以还。
现代文：雍熙三年，率领部队进入辽国境内，攻下岐沟关，杀死守军兵卒一千多人，俘获大批牛马辎重回来。
English: In the third year of the reign of Yongxi, he led his troops into the territory of Liao, captured the key pass, killed more than a thousand soldiers and officers of the defending army, captured a large number of cattle and horses, and returned.

古文：四年春，改彰信军节度。
现代文：雍熙四年，改任彰信军节度。
English: In the fourth year of Yongxi, he was appointed as the head of the Zhangxin Army Festival.

古文：淳化三年，改真定尹、成德军节度。
现代文：淳化三年，改任真定尹、成德军节度。
English: In the third year of Chunhua, he was reassigned to the posts of Zhending Yin and Chengde Military Commander.

古文：未几，移京兆尹、永兴军节度。
现代文：不久，改任京兆尹、永兴军节度。
English: Soon, he was reassigned to be the Keizhoin and Yongxing Army commander.

古文：五年，改知延州，复还镇。
现代文：淳化五年，改任知延州，仍然任节度使。
English: In the fifth year of Junhua, he was reassigned to Chiyan Prefecture, and still served as the chief of the imperial guards.

古文：至道三年，卒，年六十九，赠侍中。
现代文：至道三年，去世，终年六十九岁，追赠侍中。
English: He died three years later, at the age of 69, and was posthumously awarded the title of samurai.

古文：重进不事学，太宗居藩邸时，爱其忠勇，尝遗以酒炙不受，使者曰： 此晋王赐也，何为不受？ 重进曰： 为我谢晋王，我知有天子尔。 卒不受。
现代文：重进不从事学习，太宗居藩王官邸时，爱惜他的忠勇，曾经送酒给他，他不接受，使者说： 这是晋王的赏赐，为什么不接受呢？ 重进说： 替我谢谢晋王，我只知道有天子而已。 最终未接受。
English: Shigenori did not engage in study, but when the emperor lived in the residence of the king of the domain, he cherished his loyalty and bravery. He once gave him wine, but he did not accept it. The messenger said: This is the reward of the king of Jin, why not accept it? Shigenori said: Thank the king of Jin for me, I only know that there is a heavenly son. Ultimately, it was not accepted.

古文：上知其忠朴，故终始委遇焉。
现代文：皇上知道他忠厚朴实，所以始终委用他。
English: The emperor knew that he was loyal and unpretentious, so he always appointed him.

古文：子守信六宅使，守吉阁门祗候。
现代文：他的儿子守信任六宅使，守吉任门合门祗候。
English: His son Shou trusted Rokyakushi, and Shouji served as a gatekeeper.

