古文：崔蠡卢肇丁棱顾非熊李德裕张濆宣宗卢渥刘蜕苗台符张读许道敏崔殷梦颜摽温庭筠卢彖翁彦枢刘虚白封定卿冯藻赵琮
现代文：崔蠡卢肇丁棱顾非熊李德裕张濆宣宗卢渥刘蜕苗台符张读许道敏崔殷梦颜摽温庭筠卢彖翁彦枢刘虚白封定卿冯藻赵琮
English: Cui Wei Lu Zhao Ding Ren Gu Non Xiong Li Deyu Zhang Ye Xuan Zong Lu Wo Liu Ye Miao Tai Fu Zhang Read Xu Dao Min Cui Yin Meng Yan Yan Wu Ting Wei Lu Ye Weng Yan Zu Liu Xubai Feng Ding Jian Feng Mo Zhao Wei

古文：崔蠡
现代文：崔蠡
English: Choi Min-soo

古文：唐崔蠡知制诰日，丁太夫人忧，居东都里第。
现代文：唐朝崔蠡被任命为知制诰，死了母亲。旧时，母丧期间要离任守孝。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Cui Yao was appointed to the position of Zhizhi Yao when his mother died. In the old days, the position of filial piety had to be vacated during the period of the mother's death.

古文：时尚清苦俭啬，四方寄遗，茶药而已，不纳金帛。
现代文：崔蠡回到洛阳家里。时风俭朴，探望病人，茶和药而已，不送钱也不送布。
English: Cui Wei returned to her home in Luoyang. She lived a frugal life, visiting the sick and giving them only tea and medicine. She did not give them money or cloth.

古文：故朝贤家不异寒素。
现代文：所以，即使是高级官员家，也较贫苦。
English: Therefore, even the families of high-ranking officials are relatively poor.

古文：虽名姬爱子，服无轻细。
现代文：他们的宠姬爱子，也得穿粗布衣服。
English: Even their beloved children have to wear coarse clothes.

古文：崔公卜兆有期，居一日，宗门士人有谒请于蠡者，阍吏拒之，告曰：公居丧，未尝见他客。
现代文：崔蠡占卜了母亲的下葬日子。一天，他的本家中有学子来谒见，被把门人阻止，说主人居丧期间，不会见客人。
English: One day, a student from his own family came to see him, but was stopped by the doorman, who said that during the time of the master's funeral, he would not see guests.

古文：乃曰：某崔家宗门子弟，又知尊夫人有卜远之日，愿一见公。
现代文：那人说：我是崔氏家族的人，知道太夫人下葬的日了不远，所以来见他。
English: The man said, "I am a member of the Cui family. I came to see him because I knew that the day of my great-grandmother's burial was not far off.

古文：公闻之，延入与语。
现代文：被崔蠡听到，请到屋里，同他说话。
English: If you hear from Choi Min, please go to his room and talk to him.

古文：直云：知公居缙绅间，清且约，太夫人丧事所须，不能无费。
现代文：那人直接就说：我知道你的官职很高，但是很清廉。太夫人故去，办丧事不能没钱。
English: The man said directly: "I know that you have a high official position, but you are very corrupt. My great-grandmother passed away, and I can't afford to pay for the funeral.

古文：某以辱孙侄之行，又且背用稍给，愿以钱三百万济公大事。
现代文：我是太夫人的孙子是你的子侄辈，家里又有钱，愿意拿出三百万来资助。
English: I am the grandchild of the lady-in-waiting and your son and nephew. My family has money and is willing to give three million to help.

古文：蠡见其慷慨，深奇之。
现代文：崔蠡感动于他的慷慨，心中称奇。
English: Choi Min was moved by his generosity and was amazed.

古文：但嘉纳其意，终却而不受。
现代文：但是仅表示谢意，拒收他的钱财。
English: But she only thanked him and refused to take his money.

古文：此人调举久不第，亦颇有屈声。
现代文：这个人多次考试，都没有中第，也确实屈才。
English: This person has taken many exams, but has never gotten a passing grade. He is truly a genius.

古文：蠡未几服阙，拜尚书右丞，知礼部贡举。
现代文：崔蠡丧假期满，做了尚书右丞，并担任主考。
English: At the end of the mourning holiday, Cui Shuxuan became the chief examiner.

古文：此人就试，蠡第之为状元。
现代文：这个人去应试，取中状元。
English: This person went to take the exam and got a B.

古文：众颇惊异。
现代文：人们觉得奇怪，说崔蠡做主考，应该公正。
English: People find it strange to say that Cui Wei, as the chief examiner, should be fair.

古文：谓蠡之主文，以公道取士，崔之献艺，由善价成名。
现代文：那个人的文章主要论述经济，中第可以，中状元就不够。
English: That person's article mainly discusses the economy, the middle paragraph can be, the middle element is not enough.

古文：一第则可矣，首冠未为得。
现代文：有人用这件事来责问崔蠡，崔蠡说：他本来就中了进士，不过做状元是我为了私恩。
English: Some people used this incident to reproach Choi Min. Choi Min said, "He originally won the prize, but I did it for my own benefit."

古文：于是中外始服。
现代文：就把先前的事如实相告，大家才佩服。
English: It was only when he told the truth about the previous incident that everyone was impressed.

古文：名益重焉。
现代文：崔蠡的名望也因此越高。
English: As a result, Choe Son's reputation has grown even higher.

古文：卢肇
现代文：卢肇
English: Lu Zhaozhou

古文：李德裕抑退浮薄，奖拔孤寒。
现代文：李德裕做宰相，把一些华而不实的人淘汰掉，起用一些贫寒之士。
English: When Li Deyu became prime minister, he eliminated some flashy people and appointed some poor people.

古文：于时朝贵朋党，德裕破之，由是结怨，而绝于附会，门无宾客。
现代文：对于朝贵的党羽，李德裕毫不客气，因此同他们结怨。因为这样，权贵们不同他往来，门下也没有什么宾客。
English: Li Deyu was not at all polite to the courtiers of the imperial court, so he had a grudge against them. Because of this, the dignitaries did not interact with him, and there were no guests at his door.

古文：唯进士卢肇，宜春人，有奇才，德裕尝左宦宜阳。肇投以文卷，由此见知。
现代文：学子卢肇是宜春人，有才华。李德裕曾在宜阳任官，卢肇把自己的文章拿给他看过，所以彼此了解，并且跟随他到了长安。
English: The scholar Lu Zhao was from Yichun and was talented. Li Deyu had served as an official in Yiyang, and Lu Zhao had shown him his own articles, so they understood each other and followed him to Chang'an.

古文：后随计京师，每谒见，待以优礼。旧例：礼部放榜，先呈宰相。
现代文：每次见面，李德裕对他很客气。旧时的惯例，礼部放榜，要提前请示宰相。
English: Every time we met, Li Deyu was very polite to him. The old practice of asking the prime minister in advance is no longer the case.

古文：会昌三年，王起知举，问德裕所欲，答曰：安用问所欲为，如卢肇、丁棱、姚鹄。岂可不与及第邪？
现代文：会昌三年，王起做主考官，问李德裕有什么打算。李德裕说：我没有什么要求，但是象卢肇、丁棱、姚鹄这样的人，能不让他们中进士吗？
English: Three years after Huichang, when Wang Qi was the chief examiner, he asked Li Deyu what plans he had for Zhuang. Li Deyu said, "I don't have any requirements, but people like Lu Zhao, Ding Ren, and Yao Qi, can I prevent them from becoming junior high school graduates?"

古文：起于是依其次而放。
现代文：于是，王起取中他们。
English: As a result, Wang Qitong caught up with them.

古文：丁棱
现代文：丁棱
English: Ding Ren

古文：卢肇、丁棱之及第也，先是放榜讫，则须谒宰相。
现代文：卢肇、丁棱中了进士。放了榜，需要过堂，参谒宰相。
English: Lu Zhaozhou and Ding Ren were promoted to vice-premiers. After they were promoted, they needed to pass through the hall to be promoted to vice-premiers.

古文：棱口吃，又形体小陋。
现代文：要由榜首表示敬意，需要谨慎。
English: Showing respect from the top requires discretion.

古文：迨引见，即俛而致词。
现代文：当时卢肇为状元，因故不能出席。第二名是丁棱，该由他来致辞。
English: At that time, Lu Zhao was the winner, but could not attend for some reason. The second winner was Ding Ren, who should have delivered the speech.

古文：意本言棱等登科，而棱颕然发汗，鞠躬移时，乃曰：棱等登，棱等登。竟不能发其后语而罢。
现代文：但是他有口吃病，而且其貌不扬。见了宰相，本应表示我等得中进士，应当感谢宰相栽培。可是，他累得满面流汗，一门说棱等登、棱等登，说不出后面的话来，只好作罢。
English: But he has a stammer, and his appearance is unimpressive. When I saw the prime minister, I should have said that I was waiting for a junior high school graduate and that I should thank the prime minister for his cultivation. However, he was so tired that he was sweating profusely. He kept saying, "I'm so tall," and "I'm so tall," but he couldn't say the rest, so he had to stop.

古文：左右皆笑。
现代文：左右的人都发笑。
English: People on both sides burst out laughing.

古文：翌日，有人戏之曰：闻君善筝，可得闻乎？
现代文：次日，有人取笑他，说：听说你擅长弹筝，能给我们弹一曲吗？
English: The next day, someone made fun of him and said, "I heard that you are good at playing the kite, can you play us a song?"

古文：棱曰：无之。
现代文：丁棱说：哪有这事？
English: Ding Ren said, "Where did this come from?"

古文：友人曰：昨日闻棱等登、棱等登，非筝声邪？
现代文：那人说：你昨天说棱等登、棱等登，不是弹筝的曲音吗？
English: The man said, "Yesterday you said, 'Rim to rim, rim to rim,' isn't that the melody of a kite?"

古文：顾非熊
现代文：顾非熊
English: Gu Fixiong

古文：顾非熊，况之子，滑稽好辩，凌轹气焰子弟，为众所怒。
现代文：顾况的儿子顾非熊为人滑稽，口才甚好。由于讥讽那些权贵家的公子哥儿，惹恼了这些人。
English: Ku Ku's son, Gu Feixiong, was a witty and eloquent man, and he annoyed these powerful nobles by mocking them.

古文：非熊既为所排，在举场垂三十年，屈声聒人耳。
现代文：在他们的排挤下，顾非熊在科场考了三十年，也没被取中。
English: Owing to their exclusion, Gu Fuxiong took the entrance examination in the science field for thirty years, but was not selected.

古文：会昌中，陈商放榜，上怪无非熊名。
现代文：为他叫屈的人很多。唐武宗会昌中期，陈商做主考，放榜时仍然没他的名字。
English: There are a lot of people cheering for him. In the middle of the Tang Wuzong Huichang, Chen Shang was the main examiner, but his name was still missing when the list was released.

古文：召有司追榜，放及第。
现代文：武宗怪罪没有顾非熊的名字，让礼部收回原榜，重新放榜，取中了顾非熊。
English: Wu Zong blamed the crime on not having the name of Gu Feixiong, and asked the etiquette department to take back the original list, re-release the list, and chose Gu Feixiong.

古文：时天下寒进，皆知劝矣。
现代文：这样以来，天下穷苦的读书人，都能自勉自励。
English: Since then, the world's poor readers have been able to motivate themselves.

古文：诗人刘得仁贺诗曰：愚为童稚时，已解念君诗。及得高科晚，须逢圣主知。
现代文：诗人刘得仁作了一首贺诗。大意是，我小的时候，已经开始读你的诗了，虽然你很晚才高中，但这是皇上的知遇。
English: The poet Liu Deren wrote a congratulatory poem, to the effect that when I was a child, I had already begun to read your poems, and although you came to high school very late, this was the Emperor's good fortune.

古文：李德裕
现代文：李德裕
English: Li Deyu

古文：李德裕以己非由科第，恒嫉进士举者。
现代文：李德裕不是进士出身，很妒嫉进士出身的人。
English: Li Deyu is not a scholar by birth, but he is very jealous of those who are.

古文：及居相位，贵要束子。
现代文：做了宰相之后，经常以权势侮谩他们。
English: After he became prime minister, he often used his power to abuse them.

古文：德裕尝为藩府从事日，同院李评事以词科进，适与德裕官同。
现代文：李德裕早先做藩府从事时，同住一院的李评事是宏词科的进士，跟李德裕做一样的官。
English: When Li Deyu was engaged in the domain government earlier, Li Hanji, who lived in the same hospital as Li Deyu, was a junior scholar of the Chinese language and literature, the same official as Li Deyu.

古文：时有举子投文轴，误与德裕。
现代文：当时有一读书人打算把自己的文章送给李评事，但错送了李德裕。
English: At that time, a reader intended to send his article to Li Shanzhi, but sent it to Li Deyu by mistake.

古文：举子既误，复请之曰：某文轴当与及第李评事，非与公也。
现代文：那人请求讨回，说我的文章是送给进士李评事的，不是给你的。
English: The man asked for it back, saying that my article was sent to the writer, not to you.

古文：由是德裕志在排斥。
现代文：所以李德裕竭力排斥进士出身的人。
English: Therefore, Li Deyu tried his best to exclude people who were born in Jin.

古文：张濆
现代文：张濆
English: Zhang Ye

古文：张濆会昌五年陈商下状元及第。
现代文：会昌五年，陈商做主考，取张濆为状元。
English: In the fifth year of Huichang, Chen Shang was the main examiner, and Zhang Ye was the judge.

古文：翰林覆，落濆等八人。赵胃南贻濆诗曰：莫向春风诉酒杯，谪仙真个是仙才。犹堪与世为祥瑞，曾到蓬山顶上来。
现代文：赵胃南赠其一诗，大意是：不必有什么尤怨，李白那样的才华谁都得认同，堪称世间的光彩，照耀蓬莱山顶。
English: Zhao Gangnan presented him with a poem, the meaning of which is: there is no need to have any particular grudge, everyone has to agree with Li Bai's talent, which can be called the glory of the world, shining on the top of Penglai Mountain.

古文：宣宗
现代文：宣宗
English: Xuan Zong

古文：宣宗酷好进士及第，每对朝臣问及第。
现代文：唐宣宗极为喜爱谈论科举。经常问及朝臣们的出身，其中如有声明自己是哪科的进士，一定非常高兴。
English: Tang Xuan Zong was very fond of talking about the imperial examinations. He often asked his courtiers about their backgrounds, and if any of them declared which subject they were advanced in, he must have been very pleased.

古文：苟有科名对者，必大喜，便问所试诗赋题目，拜主司姓名。或有人物稍好者，偶不中第，叹惜移时。常于内自题乡贡进士李道龙。
现代文：会问及中试时诗、赋考的什么题目，主考是哪一位。假如有文章和名声好的人偶然没有考中，他一定会表示惋惜。曾经亲自题写：李道龙为乡贡进士。卢渥
English: He would ask what questions were on the poetry and prose exam during the mid-term exam, and who the examiner was. If someone with a reputation for writing and a good reputation happened to fail the exam, he would certainly express regret. He once wrote: Li Daolong is a township tribute recipient. Luwoo

古文：卢渥唐陕州廉使卢渥，在举场甚有时称。
现代文：唐朝陕州廉访使卢渥，在参加科举时很有名声。
English: Luwo, the unscrupulous envoy of the Tang Dynasty to Shaanxi Province, was very famous when he participated in the imperial examinations.

古文：曾于浐水逆旅，遇宣宗皇帝微行，意其贵人，敛身回避。
现代文：曾经在浐水地方留居，碰到微服出访的唐宣宗。他感觉出宣宗是一个大贵人，礼貌地回避。
English: He once stayed in Surabaya and met Tang Xuan Zong, who was on a micro-tour. He sensed that Xuan Zong was a great nobleman and politely avoided him.

古文：帝揖与相见。
现代文：唐宣宗却跟他作揖见面。
English: Tang Xuan Zong, however, met him half-heartedly.

古文：乃自称进士卢渥。
现代文：问及，自称是进士卢渥。
English: When asked, he claimed to be Luwo.

古文：帝请诗卷，袖之，乘骡而去。
现代文：宣宗请他赠诗，并把诗放在袖子里，骑着骡子走了。
English: Xuanzong asked him to give him a poem, and he put the poem in his sleeve and rode away on a mule.

古文：他日对宰臣，语及卢渥，令主司擢第。
现代文：过后唐宣宗跟宰相谈到卢渥，让他告诉礼部取中他。
English: Afterward, Tang Xuan Zong talked to the prime minister about Luwo, and asked him to tell the Ministry of Ceremonies to pick him up.

古文：渥不自安，恐僭冒之辱。
现代文：卢渥很不安，担心受到冒称进士的羞辱。
English: Luwo is uneasy, worried about being humiliated by the impostor.

古文：宰相问渥与主上有何阶缘？
现代文：宰相问卢渥：你跟皇上有什么来往？
English: The prime minister asked Louvois: What dealings have you had with the emperor?

古文：渥乃具陈因由，时亦不以为忝。
现代文：卢渥如实相告，并没有人认为他耻辱。
English: Luwo told the truth, and no one thought he was a disgrace.

古文：盖事业亦得之矣。
现代文：原因是当时卢渥已成名。
English: The reason was that Luwo had become famous at that time.

古文：渥后自廉察入朝，知举，遇黄寇犯阙，不及终场。
现代文：后来卢渥由廉访使被征召入朝，做主考官。正值黄巢兵犯长安，考试没有终场。
English: Later, Luwo was conscripted into the imperial court by an unlicensed envoy to serve as the chief examiner. It was the time when the Yellow Nest soldiers attacked Chang'an, and there was no end to the examination.

古文：赵崇大夫戏之曰：出腹不生养主司也。
现代文：大夫赵崇开他的玩笑，说你是个大肚子生不出进士的主考。
English: Doctor Zhao Chong opened his joke, saying that you are the main examiner who can't enter the student with a big belly.

古文：然卢家未尝知举，卢相携耻之，拔为主文章，不果也。
现代文：姓卢的没有做过主考官，宰相卢携以为耻辱，所以提拔卢渥做主考，竟然没有做成。
English: Lu Wo, surnamed Lu, had never been a chief examiner. Prime Minister Lu Tiao thought it was a disgrace, so he promoted Lu Wo to be a chief examiner, but it did not work out.

古文：刘蜕
现代文：刘蜕
English: Liu Xuan

古文：荆南解比号天荒。
现代文：荆南一带读书人少，在贡举上被称为天荒。
English: There are few readers in the Jingnan area, and it is called Tianara in the tribute.

古文：大中四年，刘蜕以是府解及第。
现代文：大中四年，刘蜕以荆南府解中进士。
English: In his fourth year of high school, Liu Wei entered Jingnan Middle School as a freshman.

古文：时崔铉作镇，以破天荒钱七十万资蜕。
现代文：当时崔铉镇守荆南，以钱七十万资助刘蜕，称为破天荒钱。
English: At that time, Cui Gan, the town guard of Jingnan, used 700,000 yuan to subsidize Liu Gan, which was known as an unprecedented waste of money.

古文：蜕谢书略曰：五十年来，自是人废；一千里外，岂曰天荒？
现代文：刘蜕回信致谢，大意说几十年来不出人才是因为没有好的教化，现在一千里外，再不能称为天荒了。
English: Liu Wei wrote back a letter of thanks, to the effect that for decades there had been no talent because there was no good education. Now, a thousand miles away, it can no longer be called a wasteland.

古文：苗台符张读
现代文：苗台符张读
English: Miao Tai Fu is read aloud

古文：苗台符六岁能属文，聪悟无比。
现代文：苗台符六岁能作文章，聪明无比。
English: Miao Tai Fu is six years old and can write an article. She is very clever.

古文：十余岁博览群籍，著皇心三十卷。
现代文：十几岁博览群书，著《皇心》三十卷。
English: He was an avid reader in his teens and wrote "Imperial Heart," a thirty-volume work.

古文：年十六及第。
现代文：十六岁考中进士。
English: At the age of sixteen, he passed the junior high school entrance examination.

古文：张读亦幼擅词赋，年十八及第。
现代文：张读也是很小就擅长吟诗作赋。十八岁中进士。
English: Zhang Yue was also very good at chanting poems at an early age. He entered the middle school at the age of eighteen.

古文：同年进士，又同佐郑薰少师宣州幕。
现代文：跟苗台符是同年。两人又一起在少师郑薰那里作佐官。
English: It was the same year as Miao Tai Fu. The two of them also worked together as adjutants under the young master Zheng Kuang.

古文：二人常列题于西明寺东廊。
现代文：两人经常在宣州西明寺的东廓下，张贴他们的诗作。
English: The two often post their poems under the east porch of Ximing Temple in Xuanzhou.

古文：或窃注之曰：一双前进士，两个阿孩儿。
现代文：有人暗中批注说：两个前进士，一对小孩子。
English: Someone made a surreptitious comment: "Two forwards, a couple of kids."

古文：台符十七不禄，读位至礼部侍郎。
现代文：苗台符十七岁死去，张读做到礼部侍郎。
English: Miao Tai Fu died at the age of seventeen, and Zhang Yue became a ceremonial attendant.

古文：许道敏
现代文：许道敏
English: Xu Daomin singing

古文：许道敏随乡荐之初，获知于时相。
现代文：许道敏被乡荐入京，宰相很了解他。
English: Xu Daomin was recommended to go to Beijing by his hometown. The prime minister knows him very well.

古文：是冬，主文者将莅事于贡院，谒于相门。
现代文：那年冬天，主考官到贡院开始筹备工作之前，谒见宰相。
English: That winter, before the chief examiner arrived at the Tribute House to begin the preparatory work, he met with the Prime Minister.

古文：相大称其卓苦艺学，宜在公选。
现代文：宰相对主考官盛赞许道敏，让取中他。
English: The chairman praised Daomin highly to the chief examiner and let him pass.

古文：主文受命而去。
现代文：考官授命而去。
English: The examiner was ordered to leave.

古文：许潜知其旨，则磨砺以须，屈指试期，大挂人口。
现代文：许道敏知道这个情况，更加刻苦用功，准备应考。
English: Knowing this, Xu Daomin studied harder to prepare for the exam.

古文：俄有张希复员外结婚于丞相奇章公之门。
现代文：将近考期，员外郎张希复娶牛宰相的女儿。结婚那天，请许道敏给他做傧相。
English: As the examination period was approaching, Zhang Xi, a member of the Foreign Affairs Committee, remarried the daughter of the prime minister of Niu. On the day of the wedding, he asked Xu Daomin to be his bridegroom.

古文：亲迎之夕，辟道敏为傧。
现代文：许道敏籍着这个喜庆的机会，饮酒赋诗，洋洋洒洒，高谈阔论，婚礼非常圆满。
English: Xu Daomin took advantage of this festive opportunity to drink, drink, drink, talk, and the wedding was very successful.

古文：继丁家故，乖二十载。
现代文：没过几大，宰相因为处理事务复奏时不合皇上的意，被罢，去做地方官。
English: Not many years later, the prime minister was dismissed from his post and became a local official because he did not meet the emperor's wishes when dealing with the resumption of affairs.

古文：至大中六年崔玙知举，方擢于上科。
现代文：人们担心牵连，主考不敢取中许道敏。许道敏深受打击，接着又死了老人。
English: People were worried about being implicated, and the main examiner did not dare to take Xu Daomin. Xu Daomin was deeply affected, and then the old man died.

古文：时有同年张读一举成事，年十有九。
现代文：二十年没好运气。到大中六年崔玙主考，才高高得中。他的同年张读仅十九岁。
English: Twenty years of bad luck. In the sixth year of junior high school, Cui Yao took the main exam, only to get a high score. He was only nineteen years old in the same year.

古文：乃道敏败于垂成之冬，傧导张希复之子，牛夫人所生也。
现代文：就是张希复和牛夫人的儿子。
English: He is the son of Zhang Xifu and Lady Niu.

古文：崔殷梦
现代文：崔殷梦
English: Cui Yinmeng

古文：崔殷梦，宗人瑶门生也。
现代文：礼部侍郎宗室李瑶主考，崔殷梦中进士。
English: Li Yao, the head examiner of the etiquette department, and Cui Yinmeng, the junior examiner.

古文：夷门节度使龟从之子，同年首冠於壤。
现代文：崔殷梦是夷门节度使崔龟从的儿子。第一名进士名於壤。
English: Cui Yinmeng was the son of Cui Jue, who was a disciple of Yimen Jiedu. The name of the first disciple is unknown.

古文：壤白瑶曰：夫一名男子，饰身世以为美，他不可以等将也。
现代文：於壤对李瑶进言，说堂堂男子汉以自己出身显贵来夸耀，高人一等是不足取的。
English: He told Li Yao that it was not enough for a man to boast of his noble birth, and that it was not enough to be the best.

古文：近岁关试内，多以假为名，求适他处，甚无谓也。
现代文：关试时借出身高贵为名，求任好的地方或好的官职很没意思。
English: It's boring to ask for a good place or a good official position in the name of noble birth.

古文：今乞侍郎，不可循其旧辙。
现代文：请侍郎不要循规蹈距。李瑶说很对。
English: Ask the waiter not to follow the rules. Li Yao is right.

古文：瑶大以为然。一日，壤等率集同年诣瑶起居。既坐，瑶笑谓壤等曰：昨得大梁相公书，且欲崔先辈一到。
现代文：一天，於壤等同年进士到李瑶那里去问安，坐下之后，李瑶笑着对於壤等人说：昨天大梁相公来信，请你们和崔殷梦一起到他那里去做客。
English: One day, in the same year, Yuzong and Jin Shi went to Li Yao to say hello. After they sat down, Li Yao smiled and said to Yuzong and the others: "Yesterday, Liang Xianggong sent a letter, inviting you and Cui Yinmeng to visit him.

古文：壤以坐主之命，无如之何。
现代文：马匹和人役都准备好了，很快会回来，请各位做好准备。於壤等人因为是李瑶的意思，只好服从。
English: The horses and attendants are ready and will be back soon, so please get ready. Yu Ye and the others have to obey because it is Li Yao's order.

古文：颜摽
现代文：颜摽
English: Yan Xuan

古文：郑侍郎薰主文，举人中有颜摽者，薰误谓是鲁公之后。
现代文：侍郎郑薰做主考官。举人中有一人名叫颜摽。郑薰误认为他是颜真卿的后代。
English: Chamberlain Zheng Kao was the chief examiner. One of the candidates was named Yan Qi. Zheng Kao mistakenly believed that he was a descendant of Yan Zhenlu.

古文：时徐方未宁，志在激劝忠烈，即以摽为状元。
现代文：当时徐淮一带还有战乱，为了激励忠烈之士，便取颜摽为状元。
English: At that time, there was still war in the Xuhuai area. In order to encourage the loyal soldiers, they took Yan Xuan as the source.

古文：及谢恩日，从容问及庙院，摽曰：摽寒进也，未尝有庙院。
现代文：关试谢恩的日子，郑薰问颜摽家世。颜摽回答说：我是一介寒士，没有什么庙院，不是世家。
English: On the day of the test of gratitude, Zheng Huan asked Yan Xuan about his family history. Yan Xuan replied: I am a cold person, there is no temple, not a family tree.

古文：薰始大悟，塞默而已。
现代文：郑薰才知道自己弄错了，低头无语。
English: Only then did Zheng Ao know that he had made a mistake. He bowed his head, speechless.

古文：寻为无名子所嘲曰：主司头脑太冬烘，错认颜摽作鲁公。
现代文：后来被无名者嘲笑说：主司头脑太冬烘，错认颜摽作鲁公。
English: Later, he was ridiculed by a nameless person, who said: "The head of the department is too dull-witted, and he misidentifies Yan Xuan as Lu Gong."

古文：温庭筠温庭筠灯烛下未尝起草，但笼袖凭几，每赋一韵，一吟而已。
现代文：意思说，胡涂的主考官好没头脑，把颜摽当成了颜鲁公的后代。温庭筠温庭灯下写诗没有草稿，袖着手，一吟而就。
English: In other words, Hu Tuo's chief examiner was so brainless that he considered Yan Kui to be a descendant of Yan Rukong. When writing a poem under a garden lamp, there is no draft, just start and finish with a single chant.

古文：故场中号为温八吟。
现代文：旧时唐诗多八句为一首，故此考场里的举子们称他为温八吟。
English: In the old days, there were more than eight lines in a Tang poem, so the students in the examination hall called him "Wen Baqin."

古文：卢彖
现代文：卢彖
English: Lu Wei

古文：崔沆及第年，为主罚录事。
现代文：崔沆中进士，授官为主罚录事。
English: Cui Wei, a junior high school student, received the award as the main punishment.

古文：同年卢彖俯近关宴，坚请假，往洛下拜庆。
现代文：同年卢彖请假，到洛阳去参加邻居为他举行的庆宴。
English: In the same year, Lu Wei took a leave of absence and went to Luoyang to attend a banquet held for him by his neighbors.

古文：既而淹缓久之，及同年宴于曲江亭子，彖以雕幰载妓，微服亸鞚，纵观于侧。
现代文：住了很多日子。同年们到曲江亭子宴会。卢彖用轿车载着歌妓，穿着普通的衣服，牵着马笼头，引来许多人围观，被教坊头目告发。
English: They lived there for many days. In the same year, they went to a banquet at Qujiang Pavilion. Lu Yao drove a geisha in a sedan, dressed in ordinary clothes, led a horse and cage, attracted many onlookers, and was reported by the head teacher.

古文：遽为团司所发，沆判之，略曰：深搀席帽，密映毡车。
现代文：崔沆的判词大略是，戴着普通人的帽子，跟在毡车的旁边。
English: Cui Yao's verdict is roughly, wearing an ordinary person's hat, following next to the car.

古文：紫陌寻春，便隔同年之面；青云得路，可知异日之心。
现代文：寻花问柳之期，就断了同年的情谊。现在刚刚得到了地位就这样胡闹，可知后来所为了。
English: During their courtship, they broke off their friendship of the same year. Now that they have just gained status, they are fooling around like this. We can see what they are up to.

古文：翁彦枢
现代文：翁彦枢
English: Weng Hanzhu

古文：翁彦枢，苏州人，应进士举。
现代文：翁彦枢是苏州人。去参加进士考试。
English: Weng Yanzhu is from Suzhou. He is going to take the entrance examination.

古文：有僧与彦枢同乡里，出入故相国裴公垣门下。以其年耄优惜之，虽中门内，亦不禁其出入。
现代文：有一苏州和尚，是侍郎裴垣家的常客。和尚年老，裴家很优待他，即使中门以内，也可以进出。
English: There was a Suzhou monk who was a frequent guest of the Baigaki family. The monk was old, and the Baigaki family treated him very well, even allowing him to enter and leave through the middle gate.

古文：手持贯珠，闭目以诵佛经，非寝食，未尝辍也。
现代文：和尚手持捻珠，闭目诵经。不是吃饭、睡觉，从不停止。
English: Monks hold beads in their hands and chant sutras with their eyes closed. They do not eat, they do not sleep, they never stop.

古文：垣主文柄，入贡院。
现代文：裴垣被任命做主考。
English: Baigaki was appointed chief examiner.

古文：子勋、质，日议榜于私室，僧多处其间，二子不之虞也。
现代文：他的儿子裴勋、裴质在家中议论考试情况，和尚在场，也不避讳。
English: His sons, Baishun and Baisei, were discussing the examination situation at home, and the monk was present and did not shy away from it.

古文：其拟议名氏，迨与夺进退，僧悉熟之矣。
现代文：准备中谁、落谁，都被和尚听得明明白白。
English: The monk could clearly hear who was preparing and who was falling.

古文：归寺而彦枢访焉，僧问彦枢将来得失之耗。
现代文：和尚回到寺里，翁彦枢去拜访他。和尚问翁彦枢：你对考试前途有什么想法？
English: When the monk returned to the temple, Weng Hanzhu went to visit him. The monk asked Weng Hanzhu: What do you think about the future of the examination?

古文：彦枢具对以无有成遂状。
现代文：翁彦枢说心里没底。和尚说：你想中第几名？
English: Weng Yanzhu said that his heart was not in the right place. The monk said: How many people do you want?

古文：僧曰：公成名须第几人。
现代文：翁彦枢以为和尚开他的玩笑，顺口答第八名就行。
English: Weng Yanzhu thought that the monk was playing a joke on him, so he just answered the eighth place.

古文：彦枢谓僧戏己，答曰：第八人足矣。
现代文：和尚又到裴家去，裴勋、裴质还在那里议论。
English: The monk went to Pei's home again, where Pei Xun and Pei Quan were still arguing.

古文：即复往裴氏之家，二子所议如初，僧忽张目谓之曰：侍郎知举邪？
现代文：和尚忽然把眼珠一瞪，说：是你父亲做主考还是你们做主考？科考进士是国家的大事，朝廷委派侍郎做主考，本意是让他革除以往的弊端，让贫苦的读书人有个奔头。当今科举，由你父亲主持，难道他是木偶吗？
English: The monk suddenly opened his eyes wide and said, "Is it your father who will be the examiner or will you be the examiners?" Admission to the entrance examination is an important matter for the country. The imperial court appointed a chamberlain to be the examiner, with the intention that he would eliminate the drawbacks of the past and allow poor readers to have a head start. Today's entrance examination, presided over by your father, is he a puppet?

古文：郎君知举邪？夫科第国家重事，朝廷委之侍郎，意者欲侍郎铲偶人邪？且郎君所与者，不过权豪子弟，未尝以一贫人艺士议之，郎君可乎？
现代文：你们弟兄想选中的人都是些权贵的公子哥儿，连一个有才学的贫苦学子也没提过。我说的你们认可不？板着手指从头数到尾，不差一个。把其中的曲曲折折，揭露无遗。
English: The people your brothers want to select are all powerful and noble noblemen, and they have not even mentioned a talented poor scholar. Do you agree with what I said? Count with your fingers from the beginning to the end, not one. Expose the twists and turns of it.

古文：即屈其指，自首及末，不差一人，其豪族私雠曲折，毕中二子所讳，勋等大惧。即问僧所欲，且以金帛啗之。
现代文：裴勋、裴质很害怕。问和尚有什么要求，并且以钱财利诱。
English: Pei Xun and Pei Jie were very scared. They asked the monk what he wanted, and tried to entice him with money.

古文：僧曰：贫僧老矣，何用金帛为？
现代文：和尚说：我老了，要钱财做什么用？
English: The monk said, "I'm old. What's the use of asking for money?

古文：有乡人翁彦枢者，徒要及第耳。
现代文：我的同乡翁彦枢，一定要中的。
English: My countryman, Weng Yanzhu, must be in the middle.

古文：勋等曰：即列在丙科。
现代文：裴勋、裴质立即答应列在末等里。
English: Pei Xun and Pei Jie immediately agreed to be listed in the bottom.

古文：僧曰：非第八人不可也。勋不得已许之。
现代文：和尚说，非第八不可。裴勋、裴质不得已，只好答应。
English: The monk said that it had to be the eighth. Pei Xun and Pei Quan had no choice but to agree.

古文：僧曰：与贫僧一文书来。彦枢其年及第，意如其言。刘虚白
现代文：和尚说给我立个字据。翁彦枢考中，按和尚的要求，中了第八名。刘虚白
English: The monk said to give me a certificate. In the Weng Yanzhu examination, according to the monk's request, I won the eighth place. Liu Xubao

古文：刘虚白与裴垣早同砚席，垣主文，虚白犹是举子。
现代文：刘虚白跟裴垣同学。裴垣做了主考，刘虚白还是个考生。
English: Liu Xubai was a classmate of Baigaki. Baigaki was the main examiner, while Liu Xubai was still a candidate.

古文：试杂文日：帘前献一绝句云：二十年前此夜中，一般灯烛一般风。
现代文：考试那天，刘虚白向裴垣献了一首诗，大意说，二十年前这样的夜晚，也是这样的灯烛，这样的风。
English: On the day of the exam, Liu Xubai presented a poem to Baigaki, to the effect that such a night twenty years ago was also such a candle, such a wind.

古文：不知岁月能多少，犹著麻衣侍至公。
现代文：能有几个二十年呢？我还在穿着麻布的衣服侍候你啊。
English: How many twenty years can there be? I'm still serving you in my linen clothes.

古文：孟棨年长于魏公，放榜日，棨出行曲谢，沆泣曰：先辈吾师也。
现代文：孟棨比崔沆年长。放榜那天，孟棨向主考崔沆表示谢意。崔沆流泪，说：你的父亲是我的老师。两人都流泪。
English: Meng Rong is older than Cui Rong. On the day of releasing the list, Meng Rong expressed his gratitude to the examiner Cui Rong. Cui Rong shed tears and said, "Your father is my teacher." Both of them shed tears.

古文：沆泣，棨亦注。
现代文：孟棨考了三十多年。
English: Meng Yu has been studying for the exam for more than 30 years.

古文：棨出入场籍三十年。
现代文：长孙藉跟张公是好朋友，张公称藉为兄长。
English: The eldest grandson, Yu, is a good friend of Zhang Gong, and Zhang Gong calls Yu his elder brother.

古文：长孙藉与张公旧交，公兄呼藉。
现代文：张公曾经劝过长孙藉做点别的。藉说：朝闻道，夕死可矣。
English: Zhang Gong once advised his eldest grandson to do something else, saying, "If you listen to the Tao in the morning, you can die in the evening."

古文：公尝讽其改图。藉曰：朝闻道，夕死可矣。封定卿
现代文：这句话在这里借用，意思说早上考中，晚上死了也可。封定卿
English: This sentence is borrowed here, meaning that it is possible to pass an exam in the morning and die in the evening.

古文：大中后，进士尤盛。
现代文：大中后期，进士风很盛。
English: In the late years of middle and high school, the trend of entering the university is very popular.

古文：封定卿、丁茂珪，举子与其交者，必先登第，而二公各二十举方成名。
现代文：举子们只要能跟封定卿、丁茂珪交往，就能得中进士。但是他们两个人却都是考了二十年才考中的。
English: As long as they can associate with Huadingqing and Ding Maojuan, they can get the junior high school entrance examination. However, both of them took 20 years to pass the examination.

古文：藻文彩不高，酷爱名第，已十五举。
现代文：为什么他们这样慢而人家这样快呢？先前，李都、崔雍、孙瑝郑嵎被称四君子，他们看中和交往的，才有了中第和晋升的机会。
English: Why are they so slow while others are so fast? Previously, Li Du, Cui Yong and Sun Yat-sen were known as the four gentlemen. Those who were favored by and associated with them only had the opportunity to be favored and promoted.

古文：有相识道士谓曰： 某曾 入静 观之，此生无名第，但有官职也。 
现代文：所以有人说，要想运气好，四君子就是榜样。冯藻唐冯藻，常侍宿之子，涓之叔父，世有科名。藻文彩不高，酷爱名第，已十五举。有相识道士谓曰：某曾 入静 观之，此生无名第，但有官职也。
English: Therefore, some people say that if you want to have good luck, the four gentlemen are a good example. Fengmao Tang Fengmao, the son of the regular attendant, the uncle of the dragonfly, has a scientific name in the world. The painting of the dragonfly is not high, and it loves the name of the first, which has been raised fifteen times. An acquaintance of the Taoist said: A certain person once entered the contemplation, this life is nameless, but there is also a government post.

古文：亦未之信。
现代文：亦未之信。
English: There was no letter either.

古文：更应十举，已二十五举矣。
现代文：更应十举，已二十五举矣。
English: In fact, it should be raised to ten, but it has already been raised to twenty-five.

古文：姻亲劝令罢举，且谋官。
现代文：姻亲劝令罢举，且谋官。
English: He persuaded his in-laws to dismiss him, and he was appointed to the post.

古文：藻曰：譬如一生无成，更誓五举。
现代文：藻曰：譬如一生无成，更誓五举。
English: Algae said: for example, if there is no success in life, it is better to swear five times.

古文：无成，遂三十举，方就仕宦。
现代文：无成，遂三十举，方就仕宦。
English: It was not successful, so after 30 moves, Fang resigned.

古文：历卿监峡牧，终于骑省。
现代文：历卿监峡牧，终于骑省。
English: Lixing oversaw the pastoral management of the gorges, and finally the riding ministry.

古文：赵琮
现代文：赵琮
English: Zhao Wei

古文：赵琮妻父为钟陵大将。
现代文：赵琮的岳父是一位将军。
English: Zhao Yao's father-in-law is a general.

古文：琮以久随计不第，穷悴甚，妻族益相薄，虽妻父母不能不然也。
现代文：赵琮久试不中，很穷困，妻族的人都瞧不起。岳父、岳母也是一样。
English: Zhao Qijiu failed the test, was very poor, and was looked down upon by his wife's family. His father-in-law and mother-in-law were the same.

古文：一日，军中高会，州郡谓之春设者，大将家相率列棚以观之。
现代文：一天，地方官犒劳军队。岳父家搭了棚子，一家人坐在棚上看。
English: One day, a local official praised the work of the army. My father-in-law's family built a shed, and the whole family sat on it to watch.

古文：其妻虽贫，不能无往。
现代文：他的妻子虽然跟他受穷，也不能不去。
English: His wife, though she suffers with him, cannot leave.

古文：然所服故弊，众以帷隔绝之。
现代文：但是，她的衣服很破，将军家的人嫌弃，就用布帘子把她隔开。
English: However, her clothes were very worn, and the people of the general's family disliked her, so they separated her with a cloth curtain.

古文：设方酣，廉使忽驰吏呼将，将惊且惧。
现代文：宴会高潮，廉访使忽然差人传呼将军。将军又惊又惧，马上前往。
English: At the climax of the banquet, an unscrupulous visitor suddenly sent someone to summon the general. The general was shocked and afraid, and immediately left.

古文：既至，廉使临轩，手持一书笑曰：赵琮得非君子婿乎？
现代文：廉访使在大厅里接见他，手里拿着一封信，笑问：赵琮是你的女婿吗？
English: The corrupt envoy met him in the hall, holding a letter in his hand, and asked with a smile: Is Zhao Wei your son-in-law?

古文：曰：然。
现代文：将军说是。
English: The general said yes.

古文：乃告之：适报至，已及第矣。
现代文：廉访使说：刚才来了关报，他中了进士。
English: The unlicensed envoy said: "The customs report just came in, and he was awarded a promotion.

古文：即授所持书，乃榜也。
现代文：就把信交给将军，那封信就是抄的榜文。
English: He handed the letter to the general, and that letter is the transcript.

古文：将遽以榜奔归，呼曰：赵郎及第矣！
现代文：将军拿着榜文就跑。跑回之后就喊：赵琮中进士了！
English: The general took the list and ran. After he ran back, he shouted: "Zhao Yao has been promoted to middle school!"

古文：妻之族即撤去帷障，相与同席，竞以簪服而庆遗焉。
现代文：妻族立即把布帘子撤掉，跟她同席，并且给她换了华丽的衣服，送她回去，表示庆贺。
English: Her in-laws immediately took down the blinds, sat with her, changed her into a gorgeous dress, and sent her home to celebrate.

