古文：夏鲧
现代文：夏鲧
English: Xia Yao

古文：尧命夏鲧治水，九载无绩。鲧自沉于羽渊，化为玄鱼。时植伷振鳞横游波上，见者谓为河精，羽渊与河海通源也。
现代文：尧派夏鲧治水，治了九年没有成绩，鲧就自己淹死在羽渊里，变成一条黑鱼，经常地竖起鱼脊晃动着鳞甲自由地在水面上游着，看见的人把它叫做河精。羽渊与河、海的源头都相通。
English: A dragonfly sent a dragonfly to cure the water. After nine years of unsuccessful treatment, the dragonfly drowned itself in the abyss and turned into a black fish. It swam freely on the surface of the water, often raising its spine and shaking its scales. People who saw it called it a river spirit. The abyss is connected to the source of the river and the sea.

古文：上古之人于羽山之下修立鲧庙，四时以致祭祀。
现代文：上古的百姓在羽山下修建了鲧庙，一年四季都来祭祀鲧。
English: In ancient times, the people built a dragonfly temple at the foot of Mt. Hasan, and they come to offer sacrifices to the dragonfly all year round.

古文：常见此黑鱼与蛟龙瀺灂而出，观者惊而畏之。
现代文：常常看见这条黑鱼和蛟龙一起在水中出没，观看的人惊奇而且畏惧它们。
English: The blackfish is often seen in the water with dragonfish, surprising and scaring onlookers.

古文：至舜命禹，疏川奠岳，行遍日月之下，唯不践羽山之地。
现代文：等到舜派大禹疏导江河，祭祀大山的时候，大禹走遍了天下，唯独不到羽山一带。
English: By the time the Qiang faction sent Dayu to guide rivers and offer sacrifices to mountains, Dayu had traveled all over the world, except for the area around Mount Hasan.

古文：济巨海则鼋龟为梁，逾峻山则神龙为负，皆圣德之感也。
现代文：渡大海时，大鳖和大龟就是渡海的桥梁，攀登崇山峻岭时，神龙背着他过去，都是圣德的感召呀。
English: When crossing the sea, the giant clam and the big turtle are the bridges to cross the sea, and when climbing the high mountains, the divine dragon carries him over, all of which are the inspiration of holiness.

古文：鲧之化，其事互说，神变犹一，而色状不同。玄鱼黄熊，四音相乱，传写流误，并略记焉。
现代文：鲧的变化，传说不一，他变成神的说法是一致的，变化的具体情形却各有不同的说法，玄鱼黄熊，这四个字的字音容易互相混淆，传写中的错误，在这里略加记录。
English: The change of the dragonfly, the legends are different, the saying that he became a god is consistent, but the specific circumstances of the change have different sayings, the blackfish yellow bear, the phonetic sounds of these four words are easily confused with each other, and the mistakes in the biography are recorded here.

古文：东海人
现代文：东海人
English: People from Tokaido

古文：昔人有游东海者，既而风恶舡破，补治不能制，随风浪，莫知所之。
现代文：从前有个东海航行的人，不久刮大风船漏水了，修补也无济于事，随着风浪，不知漂到哪里。
English: Once upon a time, there was a man sailing in the East China Sea. Soon, a gale blew and the ship started leaking water. It was no use mending it. With the wind and waves, he drifted to I don't know where.

古文：一日一夜，得一孤洲，共侣欢然。下石植缆，登洲煮食，食未熟而洲没。
现代文：漂了一天一夜，漂到一个孤岛上，一起坐船的伙伴都很高兴，走下船把缆绳拴在石头上，登上孤岛煮吃的，吃的还未煮熟孤岛就沉没了。
English: Floated for a day and a night, drifted to an isolated island, the partners who sailed together were very happy, got off the boat, tied the cable to the stone, boarded the isolated island to cook food, and the island sank before the food was cooked.

古文：在船者砍断其缆，舡复漂荡，向者孤洲，乃大鱼也。吸波吐浪，去疾如风，在洲上死者十余人。
现代文：在船上的人砍断缆绳，船又漂荡起来。刚才的小孤岛，是一条大鱼，吞吐着波浪，游去时像风一样快，在这孤岛上死的有十多个人。
English: The people on the boat cut the rope and the boat drifted again. The small island just now was a big fish, swallowing waves and swimming as fast as the wind. More than ten people died on this isolated island.

古文：昆明池
现代文：昆明池
English: Kunming Pond

古文：昆明池，刻石为鲸鱼，每至雷雨，鱼常鸣吼，伷尾皆动。
现代文：昆明池，在石头上刻了一条鲸鱼，每当要打雷下雨时，鲸鱼常常吼叫，伷和尾都动起来。
English: In Kunming Lake, there is a whale carved into the stone. Whenever there is thunder or rain, the whale often roars, and its fin and tail move.

古文：汉世祭之以祈雨，往往有验。
现代文：汉代的时候祭鲸鱼来祈求下雨，往往有灵验。
English: During the Han Dynasty, sacrificing whales to pray for rain was often effective.

古文：徐景山
现代文：徐景山
English: Xu Jingshan

古文：魏明帝游洛水，水中有白獭数头，美净可怜，见人辄去。
现代文：魏明帝游洛水时，洛水中有几只白獭，干净得又美又可爱，看见人就离开。
English: When Wei Mingdi swam in Luoshui, there were several egrets in Luoshui. They were so clean, beautiful and lovely that they left when they saw people.

古文：帝欲取之，终不可得。
现代文：明帝想捉到白獭，始终捉不到。
English: Emperor Ming wanted to catch the egret, but he couldn't.

古文：侍中徐景山奏云： 臣闻獭嗜鲻鱼，乃不避死，可以此诳之。 乃画板作两鲻鱼，悬置岸上，于是群獭竞逐，一时执得。帝甚嘉之，谓曰： 闻卿能画，何以妙也？ 答曰： 臣未尝执笔，然人之所作，自可庶几耳！ 帝曰： 是善用所长也。 
现代文：接着在木板上画了两条鲻鱼，悬挂在岸上，于是群獭竞争着追到木板画边上，一下子就都捉住了。明帝十分夸奖他，对他说： 听说你善于画画，怎么画得这么好呢？ 徐景山回答说： 我不曾拿笔画过画，可是别人画的画，我也能照着画下来。 明帝说： 你很善于运用自己的长处呀。 
English: Then he drew two eels on the board and hung them on the bank, so the eels raced to the edge of the board and caught them all at once. Emperor Ming praised him very much and said to him: I heard that you are good at drawing, how did you draw so well? Xu Jingshan replied: I have never drawn a picture with a pen, but I can follow the pictures drawn by others. Emperor Ming said: You are very good at using your own strengths.

古文：潘惠延
现代文：潘惠延
English: Pan Huiyan

古文：平原高苑城东有鱼津，传云，魏末，平原潘府君字惠延，自白马登舟之部，手中算囊，遂坠于水，囊中本有钟乳一两。
现代文：平原郡高苑城的东面有个卖鱼的渡口。传说，魏末的时候，平原郡的潘府君字惠延，从白马津上船到官任上去，手里拿的装着计算工具的口袋掉到水里去，口袋里还有一两石钟乳。
English: There is a ferry selling fish on the east side of Gaoyuan City, Pingyuan County. Legend has it that at the end of the Wei Dynasty, Huiyan, the ruler of Panfu in Pingyuan County, boarded a ship from Baimajin to Guanzhentang, and his pocket containing a calculation tool fell into the water. He still had a stone or two of stalactites in his pocket.

古文：在郡三年，济水泛溢，得一鱼，长三丈，广五尺，刳其腹中，得顷时坠水之囊，金针尚在，钟乳消尽。
现代文：在平原郡的第三年，济河水泛滥漫过江堤，捉了一条鱼，三丈长，五尺宽，剖开鱼的肚子，得到了那时掉到水里的口袋，金针还在，石钟乳却消化光了。
English: In the third year in Pingyuan County, the flooding of the Jie River overflowed the river bank, caught a fish, three feet long and five feet wide, cut open the belly of the fish, got the pocket that fell into the water at that time, the gold needle was still there, but the stone bell milk was digested.

古文：其鱼得脂数十斛，时人异之。葛玄
现代文：那条鱼一共熬了几十斛油脂，当时的人认为这事很奇异。葛玄
English: People at the time thought it was very strange that the fish had been cooked in dozens of layers of fat.

古文：葛玄见遗大鱼者，玄云： 暂烦此鱼到河伯处。 
现代文：葛玄遇见有一个人送给他一条大鱼，葛玄说： 暂时请这条鱼到河伯那里去吧。 
English: Ge Xuan met a man who gave him a big fish. Ge Xuan said, "Let this fish go to Hebe for the time being."

古文：乃以丹书纸内鱼口，掷水中。
现代文：就用红水写到纸上放到鱼的嘴里、把鱼扔到水里。
English: Just write it on a piece of paper in red water, put it in the fish's mouth, and throw the fish into the water.

古文：有顷，鱼还跃上岸，吐墨书，青墨色，如木叶而飞。
现代文：不一会，鱼回来又跳到岸上，吐出一张墨书，青黑色，象树叶一样地飘着飞了。
English: After a while, the fish came back and jumped onto the shore, spitting out a piece of ink, blue-black, floating and flying like a leaf.

古文：又玄与吴主坐楼上，见作请雨土人，玄曰： 雨易得耳。 
现代文：又有一次葛玄与吴国的国君坐在楼上，看见土人在作法求雨，葛玄说： 雨很容易得到呀。 
English: On another occasion, Ge Xuan was sitting upstairs with the sovereign of the State of Wu, and he saw the natives practising for rain. Ge Xuan said, "It is easy to get rain."

古文：即书符著社中，一时之间，大雨流淹。
现代文：立即写了一张符放在祭坛里，一时之间，下了场大雨，流得到处都是。
English: He immediately wrote a sign and placed it in the altar, and all of a sudden, there was a downpour of rain, and it was pouring everywhere.

古文：帝曰： 水中有鱼乎？ 
现代文：吴帝说： 水中有鱼吗 ？
English: Emperor Wu said: Are there fish in the water?

古文：玄复书符掷水中，须臾，有大鱼数百头，使人取食之。
现代文：葛玄又写一张符扔到水中，不一会，就出现了几百条大鱼。让人们捉来吃。
English: Ge Xuan also wrote a symbol and threw it into the water. After a while, hundreds of big fish appeared. Let people catch and eat them.

古文：介象
现代文：介象
English: Media Appearances

古文：介象与吴主共论鲻鱼之美，乃于殿庭作坎，汲水满之，并求钓。象起饵之，须臾，得鲻鱼。
现代文：介象与吴国皇帝一起谈论鲻鱼的美味，就在殿前的院里挖了个坑，打来水把坑灌满，一块钓鱼，介象用鱼饵垂钓，一会，钓到一条鲻鱼。
English: Yie Xiang and the Emperor of Wu talked about the deliciousness of eels. They dug a hole in the courtyard in front of the palace, filled the hole with water, fished together, Yie Xiang fished with a fishing rod, and caught an eel for a while.

古文：帝惊喜，乃使厨人切食之。
现代文：吴帝又惊又喜，就让厨子切好了拿来吃。
English: Emperor Wu was both surprised and pleased, so he asked the cook to cut it up and serve it to him.

古文：龙门
现代文：龙门
English: Longmen

古文：龙门山在河东界，禹凿山断门，阔一里余，黄河自中流下。两岸不通车马。
现代文：龙门在河东的界内。大禹凿平龙门山，又开辟龙门，有一里多长，黄河从中间流下去，两岸不能通车马。
English: Longmen is within the boundaries of Hedong. Dayu chiseled Longmen Mountain and opened Longmen, which is more than a mile long. The Yellow River flows down from the middle, and there is no traffic on both sides.

古文：每暮春之际，有黄鲤鱼逆流而上，得者便化为龙。
现代文：每到晚春时，就有黄色鲤鱼逆流而上，过了龙门的就变成龙。
English: Every late spring, there are yellow perch swimming upstream, and those that make it past the gantry turn into dragons.

古文：又林登云，龙门之下，每岁季春有黄鲤鱼，自海及诸川争来赴之。
现代文：又有一次林登说，龙门之下，每年的晚春有黄色鲤鱼，从大海及各条大河争着来到龙门。
English: On another occasion, Linden said that under the gantry, there are yellow eels in late spring every year. They come to the gantry from the sea and various rivers.

古文：一岁中，登龙门者，不过七十二。
现代文：一年之中，登上龙门的鲤鱼，不超过七十二条。
English: In the course of a year, no more than seventy-two carp are landed on the gantry.

古文：初登龙门，即有云雨随之，天火自后烧其尾，乃化为龙矣。
现代文：刚一登上龙门，就有云雨跟随着它，天降大火从后面烧它的尾巴，就变化成龙了。
English: As soon as he stepped onto the gantry, the clouds and rain followed him, and the fire from the sky burned his tail from behind, and he turned into a dragon.

古文：其龙门水浚箭涌，下流七里，深三里。
现代文：那个龙门的水流速极快象箭一样地射出，往下流七里，龙门的下面水有三里深。
English: The water from the gantry shoots out like an arrow at great speed, flowing seven miles down, and the water below the gantry is three miles deep.

古文：池中鱼
现代文：池中鱼
English: Fish swimming in the pond

古文：《风俗通》曰： 城门失火，祸及池鱼。 
现代文：《风俗通》里说： 城门失火，祸及池鱼 。
English: "Folklore" says: The city gate is on fire, and the fish in the pond are in trouble.

古文：旧说： 池仲鱼人姓字也，居宋城门，城门失火，延及其家，仲鱼烧死。 
现代文：旧的传说中，池仲鱼是人的姓名，居住在宋国的城门附近，城门被火烧了，火一直烧到他家，仲鱼也被火烧死。
English: According to the old legend, Chizhongyu is the name of a person who lived near the city gate of Song. The city gate was burned by fire, the fire burned all the way to his home, and Chizhongyu was also burned to death.

古文：又云，宋城门失火，人汲取池中水，以沃灌之，池中空竭，鱼悉露死。
现代文：又说，宋国的城门被火烧了，人们提取护城河里的水，用来浇灭大火，护城河里的水被提取空了，河里的鱼离开了水全都死了。
English: He also said that the city gate of Song was burned by fire, and people extracted water from the moat to extinguish the fire. The water in the moat was extracted empty, and the fish in the river left the water and all died.

古文：喻恶之滋，并伤良谨也。
现代文：这个说法是比喻坏事滋长，连带伤害了好人。
English: This saying is a metaphor for how bad things grow and hurt good people.

古文：通川河
现代文：通川河
English: Tongchuan River

古文：通川界内多獭，各有主养之，并在河侧岸间。
现代文：通川河里有很多水獭，都各有主人饲养他们，都居住在河边。
English: There are many otters in the Tongchuan River. All of them have owners who raise them, and all of them live along the river.

古文：獭若入穴，插雉尾于獭孔前，獭即不敢出去。
现代文：水獭如果进入洞穴中去，就在洞口前面插一根雉鸡的尾毛，水獭就不敢出洞。
English: If the otter goes into a cave, it sticks a cockerel's tail hair in front of the opening, and the otter does not dare to leave the cave.

古文：却尾即出，取得鱼，必须上岸，人便夺之。取得多，然后自吃。吃饱，即鸣板以驱之，还插雉尾，更不敢出。
现代文：拿开雉鸡毛就跑出去，捉了鱼，必须上岸去，主人就夺下来，捉得多了才能自己吃，吃饱了，主人就敲木板驱赶着水獭进洞，又插上雉鸡毛，就不敢出来了。
English: Take the chicken feather and run out, catch a fish, must go ashore, the owner will take it, catch more to eat it himself, eat enough, the owner will knock the board to drive the otter into the hole, and plug the chicken feather, and dare not come out.

古文：行海人
现代文：行海人
English: Seafarers from

古文：昔有人行海得洲，木甚茂，乃维舟登岸。爨于水傍，半炊而林没于水，遽断其揽，乃得去。
现代文：从前有个人坐船在海上行走，遇上一块陆地，树木长得很茂盛，于是拴好船登上岸，在靠水边的地方点火做饭，饭做到一半，树林就沉没到水里，赶快砍断了揽绳，才能离开。
English: Once upon a time, a man was sailing on the sea. He came across a piece of land where trees were growing very luxuriantly. So he anchored the boat on the shore and lit a fire near the water's edge to cook. Halfway through the meal, the trees sank into the water. He quickly cut the rope to get away.

古文：详视之，大蟹也。阴火
现代文：仔细地看，陆地原来是只大螃蟹。阴火
English: Look closely, the land turns out to be just a big crab.

古文：海中所生鱼蜄，置阴处有光。初见之，以为怪异。
现代文：海中生长的鱼类和蛤类，放在阴暗处就发光，刚看见的时候，认为是奇怪的事，海边的人常常推究其中的道理，大概因为是咸水中生长的。
English: Fish and molluscs growing in the sea glow when placed in a dark place. When they are first seen, they are thought to be strange, and people on the seashore often speculate about the reason for this, probably because they grow in salty water.

古文：土人常推其义，盖咸水所生，海中水遇阴晦，波如然火满海，以物击之，迸散如星火，有月即不复见。木玄虚《海赋》云： 阴火退然。 
现代文：海水遇上阴晦天气，满海的水波象着火一样，用东西击打海水，海水飞溅散开象火星，有月亮的时候就看不见这样的情景。木玄虚的《海赋》上说： 阴火的光亮是柔和的。 
English: When the sea water encounters cloudy weather, the waves of the sea full of water are like a fire, hitting the sea water with something, the sea water splashes and spreads like Mars, and when there is a moon, you can't see such a scene.

古文：岂谓此乎？
现代文：难道就是说的这件事吗？
English: Is that what this is all about?

古文：裴伷
现代文：裴伷
English: Baekhyun

古文：唐裴伷，开元七年，都督广州。
现代文：唐代的裴伷，在唐玄宗开元七年时，总管广州。
English: Pei Xuan of the Tang Dynasty was the governor of Guangzhou in the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Xuanzong.

古文：仲秋，夜漏未艾，忽然天晓，星月皆没，而禽鸟飞鸣矣。
现代文：仲秋这天，正在夜间时，忽然天明亮了，星星和月亮都看不见了，飞鸟也又飞又叫。
English: On the day of the Mid-Autumn Festival, when it was night, the sky suddenly became bright, the stars and the moon could not be seen, and the birds were flying and calling.

古文：举郡惊异之，未能谕。
现代文：全郡的人对此都很惊奇，不明白是怎么回事，可是已经是大白天了。
English: People all over the county are wondering what's going on, but it's broad daylight.

古文：然已昼矣，裴公于是衣冠而出，军州将吏，则已集门矣。
现代文：裴公因此穿上衣服，戴上帽子出来了。这时，广州军队的将官们却已经集中在门前了。
English: As a result, Baigong put on his clothes and hat and came out. At this time, the generals of the Guangzhou army had already gathered in front of the door.

古文：遽召参佐洎宾客至，则皆异之，但谓众惑，固非中夜而晓。
现代文：他立即找来部下和宾客们，都感到此事很奇异，大家都迷惑不解，以为不是半夜而是天快亮了。
English: He immediately summoned his subordinates and guests, all of whom found the event very strange, and all of whom were puzzled, thinking that it was not the middle of the night, but that it was almost dawn.

古文：即询挈壶氏，乃曰： 常夜三更尚未也。 
现代文：于是去询问挚壶氏，却说，平时的夜间三更天还不到。
English: So I went to ask Mr. Zhijun, but he said that the usual night time was less than three days.

古文：裴公罔测其倪，因留宾客于厅事，共须日之升。
现代文：裴公不明白此事的根由，于是把宾客留在厅堂，共同等待太阳升起来。
English: Pei Gong did not understand the root of the matter, so he left the guests in the hall and waited for the sun to rise.

古文：良久，天色昏暗，夜景如初，官吏则执烛而归矣。
现代文：很久以后，天色变得昏暗，夜里的景色又象原来一样了，官吏们就拿着蜡烛回家去了。
English: After a long time, when the sky became dark and the night scene was the same as before, the officials went home with candles.

古文：诘旦，裴公大集军府，询访其说，而无能辨者。
现代文：第二天早晨，裴公把将帅们全召集起来，询问他们的看法，却没有能说清楚的人。
English: The next morning, Bae called all the generals together and asked them for their opinions, but no one was able to give a clear answer.

古文：裴因命使四访，阖界皆然。即令北访湘岭，湘岭之北，则无斯事。
现代文：裴公于是派人四出访问，全广州的人都一样，就派人往北走去湘岭一带，湘岭的北部，就没有那种事。
English: Pei Gong then sent people to visit everywhere, and all the people in Guangzhou are the same. They sent people to go north to the Xiangling area. In the northern part of Xiangling, there is no such thing.

古文：数月之后，有商舶自远南至，因谓郡人云： 我八月十一日夜，舟行，忽遇巨鳌出海，举首北向，而双目若日，照燿千里，毫末皆见，久之复没，夜色依然。 
现代文：几个月之后，有个商人坐船从遥远的南方来到这里，对广州郡的人说，八月十一日的夜里，船正在行走，我忽然遇上一只大鳌露出海面，抬起头向着北方，一对眼睛象太阳似的，一直能照出千里之外去，一根毫毛都能看得清楚，很久之后才又沉没到海里去，夜间景色又与原先一样了。
English: A few months later, a merchant came here by ship from the far south, and told the people of Guangzhou County that on the night of August 11, the ship was sailing, and I suddenly encountered a giant clam that was exposed to the sea and raised its head to the north. A pair of eyes like the sun could shine from thousands of miles away, and a single hair could be seen clearly. After a long time, it sank into the sea, and the night view was the same as before.

古文：征其时，则裴公集宾寮之夕也。
现代文：对照一下时间，就是裴公召集宾客官吏的那天晚上。
English: If we compare the time, it was the evening when Pei Gong gathered the guests and officials.

古文：王旻之
现代文：王旻之
English: Wang Xizhi

古文：唐王旻之在牢山，使人告琅琊太守许诫言曰： 贵部临沂县其沙村，有逆鳞鱼，要之调药物，愿与太守会于此。 
现代文：唐代的王旻之在牢山，派人告诉琅琊太守许诫言说： 你所管辖的临沂县其沙村，有一种倒着长鳞的鱼，我需要它调制药物，愿意与太守在这个村见面。 
English: Wang Xizhi of the Tang Dynasty was in Luoshan. He sent someone to tell the Empress Dowager Guo to keep the precepts and said: "In the village of Qisha in Linyi County, which you govern, there is a fish with long scales upside down. I need it to prepare medicine. I am willing to meet the Empress Dowager in this village."

古文：诫言许之，则令其沙村设储峙，以待太和先生。
现代文：许诫言答应了他，就命令其沙村准备好器物等待使用，来等候王太和先生。
English: He ordered his village to prepare the utensils for use and wait for Wang Taifeng and his master.

古文：先生既见诫言，诫言命渔者捕所求。
现代文：王太和先生来了之后，许诫言就命令打渔的人去捕捉逆鳞鱼。
English: After Mr. Wang and Mrs. Wang came, he gave the commandment and ordered the fishermen to catch the fish.

古文：其沙村西有水焉，南北数百步，东西十丈，色黑至深，岸有神祠。
现代文：其沙村的西面有一个池，南北长几百步，东西长十丈，颜色是深黑色，岸边有座神庙。
English: There is a pool on the west side of the sand village. It is several hundred paces long from north to south, and ten meters long from east to west. The color is deep black, and there is a temple on the shore.

古文：乡老言于诫言曰： 十年前，村中少年于水钓得一物，状甚大。引之不出，于是下钓数十道，方引其首出。状如猛兽，闭目，其大如车轮。
现代文：村里的老人对许诫言说： 十年前，村里的一个少年人从水里钓到一个东西，形状很大，拖也拖不出来，于是下了几十道钓钩，才拖着头露出水面，样子象猛兽一样，闭着眼睛，大小象一个车轮。
English: Ten years ago, a young man in the village fished something out of the water. It was so big that he couldn't drag it out. So he cast dozens of fishing hooks before he dragged his head out of the water, looking like a beast of prey, with his eyes closed. It was the size of a car wheel.

古文：村人谓其死也，以绳束缚，绕之树，十人同引之。
现代文：村里人说它死了，就用绳子捆好，绕到树上，十多个人一起拉它。
English: The villagers said that it was dead, so they tied it with a rope, looped it around a tree, and more than ten people pulled it together.

古文：猛兽忽张目大震，声若霹雳。近之震死者十余人，因怖丧去精魂为患者二十人，猛兽还归于水。
现代文：猛兽忽然睁开眼睛大叫，声音象霹雳一样，靠它近的被声音震死的有十多个人，因为害怕而吓掉灵魂成为病人的有二十人，猛兽又回到水里。
English: The beast suddenly opened its eyes and screamed, its voice like a cricket. More than ten people who were close to it were killed by the sound, and twenty people were scared out of their wits and became ill. The beast then returned to the water.

古文：乃建祠庙祈祷之，水旱必有应。
现代文：于是建造了祠庙向它祈祷，无论水灾还是旱灾都有灵验。
English: As a result, a temple was built to pray to it, regardless of whether it was a flood or a drought.

古文：若逆鳞鱼，未之有也。 
现代文：如果说到逆鳞鱼，没有这种鱼。
English: When it comes to the scaly anteater, there is no such fish.

古文：诫言乃止。
现代文：许诫言才停止下来。
English: The chanting stopped.

古文：韩愈
现代文：韩愈
English: Han Yu

古文：唐吏部侍郎韩文公愈，自刑部侍郎贬潮阳守。
现代文：唐代的吏部侍郎韩文公韩愈，从刑部侍郎贬为潮州刺史。
English: Han Wenkong Han Yu, the attendant of the Tang Dynasty, was demoted from the attendant of the criminal department to the Chaozhou sashimi.

古文：先是郡西有大湫，湫有鳄鱼，约百余尺。每一怒则湫水腾荡，林岭如震。
现代文：他来之前，郡的西面有个大水潭，潭里有鳄鱼，长约一百多尺，每发一次怒，就弄得潭水翻腾动荡，山岭上的大树也象地震一样。
English: Before he came, there was a large pool in the west of the county. There was a crocodile in the pool, about a hundred feet long. Every time he was angry, he made the pool water churn and shake, and the big trees on the mountains were like an earthquake.

古文：民之马牛有滨其水者，辄吸而噬之，不瞬而尽为所害者，莫可胜计，民患之有年矣。
现代文：百姓养的马和牛，有的走近潭水，就被鳄鱼吸去吃掉了，转眼之间被鳄鱼吃掉的牛马，多得数不过来，老百姓多年来就认为这是灾难。
English: Some of the horses and cattle raised by the people were sucked up and eaten by crocodiles when they approached the pond. The number of cattle and horses eaten by crocodiles in the blink of an eye is too many to count. For many years, the people thought this was a disaster.

古文：及愈刺郡，既至之三日，问民不便事，俱曰： 郡西湫中之鳄鱼也。 
现代文：等到韩愈到了潮阳郡三天之后，访问老百姓有什么不方便的事，全都说，郡西面水潭里的鳄鱼是灾害。
English: When Han Yu arrived in Chaoyang County three days later, there was nothing inconvenient about visiting the people, they all said that the crocodile in the pond on the west side of the county was a disaster.

古文：愈曰： 吾闻至诚感神，昔鲁恭宰中牟，雉驯而蝗避；黄霸治九江，虎皆遁去。是知政之所感，故能化禽兽矣。 
现代文：韩愈说： 我听说至诚能感动神仙，从前鲁恭主管中牟的时候，雉鸡驯服而且蝗虫也躲避起来，黄霸治九江的时候，老虎都悄悄地离开了九江，这是因为，执政者有良好的政绩，禽兽也能被感化。 
English: Han Yu said: I have heard that sincerity can move the gods. In the past, when Lu Qiong was in charge of Zhong Mu, the pheasants were tamed and the locusts also evaded. When Huang Ba ruled Jiujiang, the tigers quietly left Jiujiang. This is because the ruler has a good political record, and animals can also be influenced.

古文：即命庭掾，以牢醴陈于湫之旁，且祝曰： 汝水族也，无为生人患。 
现代文：就派副官，把祭祀用的物品陈列在潭水边上，并且祷告说： 你们都是水族一类，不要成为老百姓的祸害。 
English: He sent his adjutant to display the sacrificial objects on the edge of the pool, and prayed: "You are all like aquarians, do not become the scourge of the common people.

古文：既而沃以酒。
现代文：接着把酒浇到地上。
English: He then pours the wine onto the ground.

古文：是夕，郡西有风雷，声动山野，迨夜分霁焉。
现代文：这天晚上，郡的西面有风雷的声音，声音震动了山野，到了半夜才晴天。
English: That evening, the west side of the county was shaken by the sound of wind and thunder. The sound shook the mountains and fields, and it didn't clear up until midnight.

古文：明日，里民视其湫，水已竭，公命使穷其迹，至湫西六十里，易地为湫，巨鳄亦随而徙焉。自是郡民获免其患。
现代文：第二天，乡里的百姓看那水潭，水已经枯竭了，韩公派人去考察鳄鱼的踪迹，到了潭的西面六十里外，换了个地方又造出一个水潭，大鳄也跟随着换了地方，从此潮阳郡的百姓就免去了鳄鱼的祸害。
English: The next day, the villagers looked at the pool and saw that the water had dried up. Han Gong sent someone to investigate the crocodile's tracks. Sixty miles to the west of the pool, they changed the location and created another pool. The crocodile also changed the location. From then on, the people of Chaoyang County were spared the crocodile's scourge.

古文：故工部郎中皇甫湜撰愈《神道碑叙》曰： 刑部为潮阳守，云洞僚海彝，陶然皆化；鳄鱼稻蟹，不暴民物。 
现代文：所以工部郎中皇甫湜为韩愈撰写《神道碑叙》一文中说： 刑部侍郎韩愈做了潮阳太守，云中的神仙，洞府里的隐士，同一官署的官吏们，海里的动物，偏远地区的少数民族，全都高兴地被感化了，连鳄鱼和稻蟹，也不残害百姓的东西。 
English: Therefore, Emperor Fushun, the head of the Ministry of Works, wrote "Shinto Monuments" for Han Yu, saying: Han Yu, the head of the Ministry of Justice, made Chaoyang Dazhu, the immortal in the clouds, the hermit in the cave, the officials of the same government department, the animals in the sea, and the ethnic minorities in remote areas, all of which were happily influenced, even the crocodiles and rice crabs, which do not harm the people.

古文：盖谓此矣。
现代文：大概说的就是这件事吧。
English: That's about it.

古文：郧乡民
现代文：郧乡民
English: villagers

古文：唐元和末，均州郧乡县有百姓，年七十，养獭十余头，捕鱼为业。
现代文：唐宪宗元和末年，均州的郧乡县有个百姓，七十岁了，养了十多只水獭，靠打鱼维持生活。
English: In the last years of the Tang Dynasty, there was a seventy-year-old villager in Minxiang County, Chenzhou, who raised more than ten otters and made a living by catching fish.

古文：隔日一放，将放时，先闭于深沟斗门内，令饥，然后放之。无网罟之劳，而获利甚厚。
现代文：隔一天放出去一次，快要放出去的时候，先把水獭关在深沟的闸门里，让它们挨饿，然后才放它们出来，不受撒网收网的劳累，可是却得到很多的收入。
English: They are let out once every other day, and when they are about to be let out, the otters are first shut in the sluice gate of the deep ditch, let them starve, and then let them out. They are not subjected to the fatigue of casting and collecting nets, but they get a lot of income.

古文：令人抵掌呼之，群獭皆至。缘衿藉膝，驯若守狗。
现代文：主人如果拍巴掌招呼它们，所有的水獭全都到来，在主人的身边和膝前呆着，驯顺得象守门的狗。
English: If the master claps his hands to welcome them, all the otters come and stay at the master's side and knees, as docile as a watchdog.

古文：户部郎中李福，亲见之。
现代文：户部郎中李福，亲眼看见过这件事。
English: Li Fu, a retainer of the household department, has seen this with his own eyes.

古文：赤岭溪
现代文：赤岭溪
English: Red Ridge Creek

