古文：天有恒干，地有恒常，与民共事，与神同光。
现代文：天地都有永恒不变的法则，与民同声息。与神共光宠。
English: Heaven and earth have eternal and unchanging laws, which resonate with the people and are favored by God.

古文：骄洫好争，阴谋不祥，刑于雄节，危于死亡。
现代文：骄横凌人、逞强斗勇、好弄阴谋的国家必定会有祸灾，取法于 雄节 的国家，必定有灭亡的危险。
English: A country that is arrogant and domineering, bold and daring, and prone to conspiracies is bound to have disasters. A country that takes the law of the jungle as its guide is bound to be in danger of perishing.

古文：夺之而无予，其国乃不遂亡。
现代文：攻夺了他国的领土而据己有不分封给贤者，那么这个被攻占的国家就不会最终灭亡。
English: If a country conquers the territory of another country and gives it to a wise man without dividing it, then the conquered country will not finally perish.

古文：近则将之，远则行之。
现代文：邻近 雄节 之国的小国会顺从它，而远离它的国家会离弃它。
English: The little kingdoms of the nations that are near to Yosef will obey him, but the nations that are far from him will forsake him.

古文：逆节萌生，其谁肯当之。
现代文：悖逆天道的恶行正在势头上的时候，有谁肯去正面的抵敌它呢？
English: When the evil act of disobeying the heavenly way is gaining momentum, who is willing to oppose it in a positive way?

古文：天恶高，地恶广，人恶苛。
现代文：天道厌弃高傲，地道厌弃自大，人道厌弃暴虐。
English: The heavenly way abhors pride, the earthly way abhors arrogance, and the humane way abhors tyranny.

古文：高而不已，天将阙上；广而不已，地将绝之；苛而不已，人将杀之。
现代文：高傲不止，天道自然会倾覆它；自大无休，地道必然会灭绝它；暴虐到极点，人道自然会惩办它。
English: If arrogance does not stop, the heavenly way will naturally overthrow it; if arrogance does not stop, the earthly way will inevitably exterminate it; if tyranny goes to the extreme, humanity will naturally punish it.

古文：有人将来，唯目瞻之。
现代文：在接触一个人的时候，首先要用眼睛去观察他。
English: When you come into contact with a person, the first thing you should do is observe him with your eyes.

古文：言之壹，行之壹，得而勿失。言之采，行之枲，得而勿以。
现代文：如果这个人是言行一致的，就不应该失去他而要重用他；如果他说得很好却没有任何的实际行动，就不宜任用他。
English: If he is a man of his word, he should not be lost but reused; if he speaks well but does nothing, he should not be employed.

古文：是故言者心之符也，色者心之华也，气者心之浮也。
现代文：所以说语言是人内心的标志，表情是人心理的外化，气质是人心灵的表露。
English: Therefore, language is a sign of a person's heart, expression is an externalization of a person's psychology, and temperament is an expression of a person's soul.

古文：有一言，无一行，谓之诬。
现代文：言行如果不一致，就是一种欺骗行为。因此有一言在先，就应该有一行继之于后。
English: If words and deeds are not consistent, it is a kind of deception. Therefore, if there is a word first, there should be a line following.

古文：故言寺首，行志卒。直木伐，直人杀。无形无名，先天地生，至今未成。
现代文：笔直的树木因为太过显眼而容易被砍伐，刚直的人因为遭人忌恨而容易惹来杀身之祸。 道 是没有名状的，它产生于天地开辟之前，它的化生妙合的过程至今还未完成。
English: Straight trees are easy to cut down because they are too conspicuous, and straight people are easy to kill because they are hated by others.The road is nameless, it originated before the world was opened up, and the process of its metamorphosis has not yet been completed.

