古文：大维商纣暴虐，脯鬼侯以享诸侯，天下患之，四海兆民欣戴文武，是以周公相武王以伐纣，夷定天下，既克纣六年，而武王崩，成王嗣，幼弱，未能践天子之位。
现代文：主要是因为商纣王暴虐，杀了鬼侯做成肉干以宴享诸侯，天下诸侯都很忧虑。四海万民百姓欢欣拥戴文王、武王，因此周公辅助武王讨伐商纣，平定了天下。已战胜商纣二年，武王去世，成王继位。成王年幼，没有登天子之位。
English: Mainly because of the mercantile king's tyranny, he killed ghost lords and made them into meat to feast the lords, and the lords of the world were very worried. All over the world, the people rejoiced and supported King Daewon and King Wu, so Zhou Gong assisted King Wu to fight the mercantile war and pacified the world. He had defeated the mercantile war for two years, King Wu died, and Chengwang succeeded to the throne. Chengwang was young and did not ascend to the throne of heaven.

古文：周公摄政君天下，弭乱六年，而天下大治，乃会方国诸侯于宗周，大朝诸侯明堂之位。
现代文：周公代理政务而君临天下，他平息叛乱用了六年才使天下太平，就在宗周朝会方国诸侯。在大朝诸侯之时，明确明堂的位置。
English: It took Zhou Gong six years to quell the rebellion before he brought peace to the world. Zhou Gong was in charge of government affairs when he came to power, and he was able to pacify the world when he became the prince of the Zhou Dynasty. At the time of the Great Dynasties, the position of the Ming Dynasty was clear.

古文：天子之位，负斧依，南面立。率公卿士，侍于左右。三公之位，中阶之前。北面东上，诸侯之位。西阶之西，东面北上，诸子之位。门内之东，北面东上，诸男之位。门内之西，北面东上，九夷之国。
现代文：天子的位置：背靠绘有斧纹的屏风，面朝南站立，众公卿陪待在左右；三公的位置：在堂上中阶之前，面朝北以东为上；众侯爵诸侯的位置：在堂上东边台阶以东，面朝西以北为上；众伯爵诸侯的位置：在堂上西阶的西边，面朝东以北为上；众子爵诸侯的位置：在内门东边，面朝北以东为上；众男爵诸侯的位置：在内门西边，面朝北以东为上。
English: Position of the Son of God: standing with his back to the axe-patterned screen, facing south, accompanied by the nobles to the right and left; Position of the Three Sovereigns: in front of the middle steps of the upper nave, facing north to east; Position of the Marquisates: on the east steps of the upper nave, facing north to west; Position of the Counts: on the west steps of the upper nave, facing north to east; Position of the Viscounts: on the east side of the inner door, facing north to east; Position of the Barons: on the west side of the inner door, facing north to east.

古文：东门之外，西面北上，八蛮之国。南门之外，北面东上，六戎之国。西门之外，难免南上，五狄之国。北门之外，难免东上，四塞九采之国。世告至者，应门之外，北而东上，宗周明堂之位也。
现代文：东方各部族，在东门外边，面朝西以北为上；南方各部族，在南门外边，面朝北以东为上；西方各部族，在西门外边，面朝东以南为上；北方各部族，在北门外边，面南以东为上；塞外荒远的方国以及一世来见一次的方国，都在正门外边，面朝北以东为上。这就是宗周明堂的位置安排。
English: The eastern tribes, outside the east gate, face north to west and up; the southern tribes, outside the south gate, face north to east and up; the western tribes, outside the west gate, face south to east and up; the northern tribes, outside the north gate, face south to east and up; the desolate foreign countries and the once-in-a-lifetime foreign countries are all outside the main gate, facing north to east and up. This is the location arrangement of Zong Zhouming Hall.

古文：明堂，明诸侯之尊卑也，故周公建焉，而朝诸侯于明堂之位。
现代文：这个明堂，是标明诸侯尊卑的地方，所以周公建造了它，并依明堂的位置安排朝会诸侯。
English: This Myeongdong was the place where the nobility and gentry were marked, so Zhou Gong built it and arranged the imperial court according to the Myeongdong's location.

古文：制礼作乐，颁度量，而天下大服，万国各致其方贿。
现代文：又制定礼仪，创作礼乐，颁布度制量制，从而天下大服，万国各自献上他们的土特产。
English: They also formulated etiquette, created ceremonial music, and promulgated the system of measurement, so that all countries could present their local specialties.

古文：七年，致政于成王。
现代文：七年后，把政务交给成王。
English: Seven years later, he handed over the government to Cheng Wang.

