古文：朱亮祖，六安人。
现代文：朱亮祖，六安人。
English: Zhu Liangzu, a resident of Lu'an.

古文：元授义兵元帅。
现代文：元朝授予义兵元帅。
English: He was awarded the title of Marshal of Volunteers by the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：太祖克宁国，擒亮祖，喜其勇悍，赐金币，仍旧官。
现代文：太祖攻克宁国，活捉了朱亮祖。太祖十分赏识他的勇悍，赐给金币，命他仍担任原职。
English: The great-grandfather invaded Kening Province and captured Zhu Liangzu alive. The great-grandfather fully appreciated his bravery, gave him gold coins, and ordered him to still hold his original post.

古文：居数月，叛归于元，数与我兵战，为所获者六千余人，遂入宣城据之。
现代文：数月后，又叛归元朝，多次和明军作战，俘去士兵六千多人，于是进入宣城据守。
English: A few months later, he rebelled and returned to the Yuan Dynasty, fought against the Ming Army many times, captured more than six thousand soldiers, and then entered Xuancheng to defend it.

古文：太祖方取建康，未暇讨也。
现代文：太祖刚刚攻取了建康，还无暇攻打他。
English: The great-grandfather had just captured Jiankang and did not have time to attack him.

古文：已，遣徐达等围之。
现代文：过了一段时间，派徐达等人围攻。
English: After a period of time, Xu Da and others were sent to besiege.

古文：亮祖突围战，常遇春被创而还，诸将莫敢前。
现代文：朱亮祖突围，常遇春负伤而归，诸将无人敢向前冲。
English: Zhu Liangzu broke through the encirclement, and often suffered injuries in the spring, and no one dared to rush forward.

古文：太祖亲往督战，获之，缚以见。
现代文：太祖亲自督战，终于大获全胜，捆绑朱亮祖前来面见太祖。
English: Grandfather personally supervised the battle, and finally won a complete victory. He tied up Zhu Liangzu and came to see Grandfather.

古文：问曰： 尔将何如？ 
现代文：太祖问道： 你将如何打算？ 
English: The grandfather asked, "What are you going to do?"

古文：对曰： 生则尽力，死则死耳！ 
现代文：朱亮祖回答 ：活着就尽力，死就死了吧。 
English: Zhu Liangzu replied, "Do your best while you are alive, and die when you die."

古文：太祖壮而释之。
现代文：太祖释放了他。
English: The great-grandfather released him.

古文：累功授枢密院判。
现代文：积功授予枢密院判。
English: Awarded the Order of the Privy Council.

古文：从下南昌、九江，战鄱阳湖，下武昌。进广信卫指挥使。
现代文：从大军攻下南昌、九江，攻占鄱阳湖，下武昌，晋升为广信卫指挥使。
English: He conquered Nanchang and Jiujiang, captured Poyang Lake, and Wuchang from the large army, and was promoted to the commander of Guangxinwei.

古文：李文忠破李伯升于新城，亮祖乘胜燔其营落数十，获同佥元帅等六百余人、军士三千、马八百匹，辎重铠甲无算。伯升仅以数骑遁。
现代文：李文忠在新城打败了李伯升，朱亮祖乘胜捣毁了敌军营数十个，俘虏同佥元帅等六百余人、军士三千人、战马八百匹，辎重铠甲不计其数，李伯升仅率几个骑兵逃跑了。
English: Li Wenzhong defeated Li Bosheng in Xincheng, and Zhu Liangzu took advantage of the victory to destroy dozens of enemy camps, capturing more than six hundred people, including fellow marshals, three thousand sergeants, eight hundred horses, and countless heavy armor. Li Bosheng only led a few cavalrymen to escape.

古文：太祖嘉其功，赐赉甚厚。
现代文：太祖嘉奖他的战功，赏赐十分丰厚。
English: The great-grandfather praised his war service and rewarded him very richly.

古文：胡深请会兵攻陈友定，亮祖由铅山进取浦城，克崇安、建阳，功最多。
现代文：胡深请求合兵攻打陈友定，朱亮祖由铅山进攻浦城，攻克崇安、建阳，功劳显赫。
English: Hu Sheng requested the joint forces to attack Chen Youding, Zhu Liangzu attacked Pucheng from Lead Mountain, conquered Chong'an and Jianyang, and made outstanding achievements.

古文：会攻桐庐，围余杭。迁浙江行省参政，副李文忠守杭州。
现代文：大军会合攻打桐庐，围攻余杭，晋升为浙江行省参政，协助李文忠镇守杭州。
English: The great army gathered to attack Tonglu, besieged Yuhang, promoted to participate in the politics of Zhejiang Province, and assisted Li Wenzhong to defend Hangzhou.

古文：帅马步舟师数万讨方国瑛。下天台，进攻台州。
现代文：统率马步舟师数万人讨伐方国瑛，下天台，攻台州。
English: Led by Ma Buzhou, tens of thousands of people fought against Guoying, descended from the rooftop, and attacked Taizhou.

古文：国瑛出走，追至黄岩，降其守将哈儿鲁，徇下仙居诸县。
现代文：方国瑛逃走，追击到黄岩，降服了敌守将哈儿鲁，攻下仙居诸县。
English: Fang Guoying fled, pursued to Huangyan, subdued the enemy commander Harlu, and captured Xianju County.

古文：进兵温州。方明善拒战，击败之，克其城。
现代文：进攻温州，方明善拒战，被打败，温州被攻克。
English: Attacking Wenzhou, Fang Mingshan refused to fight, was defeated, and Wenzhou was conquered.

古文：徇下瑞安，复败明善于盘屿，追至楚门。
现代文：攻战于瑞安，再次在盘屿打败方明善，追击到楚门。
English: Attacked at Ruian, defeated at Panyu again, pursued to Truman.

古文：国瑛及明善诣军降。
现代文：方国瑛和方明善率部投降。
English: Fang Guoying and Fang Meizan led their troops to surrender.

古文：洪武元年，副征南将军廖永忠由海道取广东。何真降，悉定其地。进取广西，克梧州。
现代文：洪武元年，协助征南将军廖永忠从海道攻取广东，何真投降，于是平定该地，进而攻取广西，攻克梧州。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, he assisted the Southern Expeditionary General Liao Yongzhong to conquer Guangdong from the sea route. He Zhen surrendered, so he pacified the place, and then conquered Guangxi and conquered Wuzhou.

古文：元尚书普贤帖木儿战死，遂定郁林、浔、贵诸郡。
现代文：元尚书普贤帖木儿战死，于是郁林、浔、贵诸郡均下。
English: Yuan Shangshu Fuxian Timur died in battle, so Yu Lin, Yao, Guizhou counties were all down.

古文：与平章杨璟会师，攻克靖江。同廖永忠克南宁、象州。
现代文：和平章杨瞡会师攻克了靖江，同廖永忠攻克南宁、象州。
English: Heping Zhang Yang Junhui's division conquered the Jingjiang River, and together with Liao Yongzhong conquered Nanning and Xiangzhou.

古文：广西平。
现代文：平定广西。
English: Guangxi was pacified.

古文：班师，太子帅百官迎劳龙湾。
现代文：班师回朝，太子率百官于龙湾迎接慰劳。
English: When the team returned to China, the crown prince led hundreds of officials to Longwan to receive the consolation prize.

古文：三年封永嘉侯，食禄千五百石，予世券。
现代文：三年，封为永嘉侯，食禄一千五百石，给予世袭的凭证。
English: Three years later, he was given the title of Yongjia Hou, a stipend of 1,500 koku, and a certificate of inheritance.

古文：四年伐蜀。
现代文：四年讨伐蜀地。
English: Four years later, the campaign against Shunde began.

古文：帝以诸将久无功，命亮祖为征虏右副将军。济师至蜀，而明升已降。
现代文：太祖认为诸将久无战功，任命朱亮祖为征虏右副将军，率领军队开赴蜀地，明升已经投降。
English: The great-grandfather thought that the generals would not have any war achievements for a long time, and appointed Zhu Liangzu as the right vice-general of conscription, and led the army to go to Shu. Ming Sheng had already surrendered.

古文：徇下未附州县。
现代文：攻下未归附州县。
English: Non-attached prefectures were captured.

古文：师还，以擅杀军校，不预赏。
现代文：班师回朝，因擅杀军校而不予奖赏。
English: The class teacher returned to the imperial court and was not rewarded for killing the military school.

古文：八年同傅友德镇北平。
现代文：八年，同傅友德镇守北平。
English: Eight years later, Tong Fu You Dezhen became the governor of Beiping.

古文：还，又同李善长督理屯田，巡海道。
现代文：回师后，又同李善长督促屯田，巡视海道。
English: After returning to the division, he and Li Shanchang urged Tonden to inspect the seaway.

古文：十二年出镇广东。
现代文：十二年，镇守广东。
English: In 1912, he became the town guard of Guangdong.

古文：亮祖勇悍善战而不知学，所为多不法，番遇知县道同以闻。
现代文：朱亮祖虽勇悍善战，但不爱好学习，他的所作所为多不符合规范，番禺知县道同知道了这些情况。
English: Although Zhu Liangzu was brave and good at fighting, he did not like to study. Most of his actions did not meet the standards. Panyu Zhixian County Road Association knew these circumstances.

古文：亮祖诬奏同，同死，事见同传。
现代文：朱亮祖诬陷道同，道同被杀，详情见《道同传》。
English: Zhu Liangzu slandered the Taoists, and the Taoists were killed. For details, see "The Taoist Tradition."

古文：帝寻悟，明年九月召亮祖至，与其子府军卫指挥使暹俱鞭死。
现代文：太祖不久后醒悟了，第二年九月召朱亮祖，和他的儿子府军卫指挥使朱暹一同鞭打而死。
English: The great-grandfather soon came to his senses. In September of the following year, he summoned Zhu Liangzu, and together with his son, the commander of the palace guards, he had Zhu Siam whipped to death.

古文：御制圹志，仍以侯礼葬。
现代文：御制墓志铭，仍以侯的礼节埋葬。
English: Imperial epitaphs are still buried with the etiquette of the court.

古文：二十三年追论亮祖胡惟庸党，次子昱亦坐诛。
现代文：二十三年，追论朱亮祖是胡惟庸党，次子朱昱被杀。
English: In 233, Zhu Liangzu was accused of being a member of Hu Wei Yong's party, and his second son Zhu Xi was killed.

古文：周德兴，濠人。
现代文：周德兴，濠州人。
English: Zhou Dexing, from Zhangzhou.

古文：与太祖同里，少相得。
现代文：和太祖同乡，少年时就相知。
English: He and his great-grandfather were from the same village and knew each other since they were boys.

古文：从定滁、和。渡江，累战皆有功，迁左翼大元帅。
现代文：从定滁、和，渡长江，屡次战斗都立有战功，晋升为左翼大元帅。
English: He was promoted to the rank of grand marshal of the left wing after crossing the Yangtze River from Dingbai, He, and repeatedly distinguished himself in battle.

古文：从取金华、安庆、高邮。援安丰，征庐州，进指挥使。
现代文：随大军取金华、安庆、高邮，援助安丰，征讨庐州，晋升为指挥使。
English: He took Jinhua, Anqing and Gaoyou with a large army, assisted Anfeng, conquered Zhangzhou, and was promoted to commander.

古文：从讨赣州、安福、永新，拔吉安。再进湖广行省左丞。
现代文：从大军讨伐赣州、安福、永新，攻占吉安，又晋升为湖广行省左丞。
English: From the great army, he fought against Bozhou, Anfu, Yongxin, and conquered Ji'an, and was promoted to the left jongleur of Hunan Province.

古文：同杨璟讨广西，攻永州。元平章阿思兰及周文贵自全州来援，德兴再击败之，斩朱院判。追奔至全州，遂克之。
现代文：同杨瞡征讨广西，进攻永州，元平章阿思兰和周文贵从全州前来增援，被周德兴打败，杀了朱院判，追敌至全州，于是又攻克了全州。
English: Together with Yang Hui, he conquered Guangxi and attacked Yongzhou. Yuan Pingzhang, Aslan and Zhou Wengui came from Quanzhou to reinforce. They were defeated by Zhou Dexing, killed Zhu Yingan, chased the enemy to Quanzhou, and then conquered Quanzhou.

古文：道州、宁州、蓝山皆下。
现代文：道州、宁州、蓝山都被攻下。
English: Daozhou, Ningzhou, and the Blue Mountains were all conquered.

古文：进克武冈州，分兵据险，绝靖江声援。
现代文：进而攻克武冈州，分兵据守险要位置，断绝靖江的增援。
English: In addition, they conquered WuGang Province, and the detachment of soldiers defended the critical position and cut off the reinforcement of the Jingjiang River.

古文：广西平，功多。
现代文：平定了广西，功劳显赫。
English: He has leveled Guangxi, and his achievements are outstanding.

古文：洪武三年封江夏侯，岁禄千五百石，予世券。
现代文：洪武三年，封为江夏侯，年食禄一千五百石，给予世袭的凭证。
English: In the third year of Hongwu, he was given the title of Jiangxia Hou, with an annual stipend of 1,500 koku, and was given a certificate of inheritance.

古文：是岁，慈利土酋覃垕连茅冈诸寨为乱，长沙洞苗俱煽动。
现代文：当年，慈利土酋覃篨联合茅冈诸寨作乱，长沙洞苗都被煽动。
English: In that year, the chiefs of Tsili and Maogang villages joined forces to create a disturbance, and the Changsha Cave Seedlings were incited.

古文：太祖命德兴为征南将军，帅师讨平之。
现代文：太祖任命周德兴为征南将军，率领部队讨伐平定。
English: The great-grandfather appointed Zhou Dexing as a general to conquer the south and led the troops to fight and pacify.

古文：明年伐蜀，副汤和为征西左将军，克保宁。
现代文：第二年征讨蜀地，协助汤和为征西左将军，攻克保宁。
English: In the second year, he conquered Shudi, assisted Tang He in the conquest of Xizhe, and conquered Boryeong.

古文：先是，傅友德已克阶、文，而和所帅舟师未进。
现代文：当初，傅友德攻克了阶、文，但汤和所率领的舟师没有前进。
English: At first, Fu Youde conquered Chu and Wen, but Tang He and the boatmen he led did not advance.

古文：及保宁下，两路军始合。
现代文：到了保宁被攻下后，两路军才汇合。
English: It was not until after Boryeong was taken that the two armies met.

古文：蜀平，论功，帝以和功由德兴，赏德兴而面责和。
现代文：平蜀后，论功行赏，太祖认为汤和的功劳都是因为周德兴所为，所以，奖赏了周德兴，而当面斥责了汤和。
English: After Ping Shu, on the merits and rewards, Taizu believed that the merits of Tang He were all due to Zhou Dexing, so he rewarded Zhou Dexing and rebuked Tang He in person.

古文：且追数征蛮事，谓覃垕之役，杨璟不能克，赵庸中道返，功无与德兴比者。
现代文：又追溯几次征蛮战争，说覃篨战役，杨王景不能攻克，赵庸中途返回，他们的功劳又怎能和周德兴相比。
English: He also traced back several wars of conquest and barbarism, saying that in the Battle of Jiuyuan, Yang Wangjing could not be defeated, and Zhao Yong returned halfway. How can their merits be compared with Zhou Dexing?

古文：复副邓愈为征南左将军，帅赵庸、左君弼出南宁，平婪凤、安田诸州蛮，克泗城州，功复出诸将上。
现代文：又协助邓愈为征南左将军，率赵庸、左君弼出师南宁，平定婪凤、安田诸州蛮，攻克泗城州，功在其他诸将之上。
English: He also assisted Deng Yu to be the general to conquer Nan Zu, and led Zhao Yong and Zu Jun to conquer Nanning, subdue Qi Feng and Yasuda Zhuzhou, and conquer Shichengzhou, and his achievements are superior to other generals.

古文：赏倍于大将，命署中立府，行大都督府事。
现代文：他得到的奖赏是其他大将的几倍，任命为署中立府，行使大都督府事的职权。
English: He was rewarded several times more than other generals, was appointed to the Central Government, and exercised the powers of the Grand Governor's Office.

古文：德兴功既盛，且恃帝故人，营第宅逾制。有司列其罪，诏特宥之。
现代文：周德兴的功绩已达到鼎盛，又倚恃是太祖的同乡人，所以他的官邸都超出了规格，有关部门罗列他的罪状上告，太祖诏告宽宥了他。
English: Zhou Dexing's achievements had reached their peak, and he was a fellow villager of the great-grandfather, so his official residence exceeded the specifications. The relevant departments listed his charges and appealed, and the great-grandfather pardoned him.

古文：十三年命理福建军务，旋召还。
现代文：十三年，受命治理福建的军务，不久被召回。
English: Thirteen years old, he was ordered to manage Fujian's military affairs, and was soon recalled.

古文：明年，五溪蛮乱。
现代文：第二年，五溪蛮作乱，周德兴已经年老了，但也请求前往。
English: The following year, Wuxi was in turmoil. Zhou Dexing was already old, but he also asked to go.

古文：德兴已老，力请行，帝壮而遣之，赐手书曰： 赵充国图征西羌，马援请讨交址，朕常嘉其事，谓今人所难。
现代文：太祖欣然答应，赐手书说： 赵充国希望征讨西羌，马援请求征讨交趾，我常常赞扬这些事，我认为这是当今的人难以做到的。
English: The great-grandfather readily agreed, saying in a handwritten letter: "Zhao Chongguo hopes to collect Xidi, Ma Yuan requests to collect Kote. I often praise these things, I think it is difficult for people today to do.

古文：卿忠勤不怠，何忝前贤，靖乱安民，在此行也。 
现代文：你忠勤而不懈怠，怎能辱居于前贤之下呢？平定战乱，安定百姓，就在此行了。 
English: If you are diligent and do not slack off, how can you be humiliated and live under the former sages? This is the way to settle the war and stabilize the people.

古文：至五溪，蛮悉散走。
现代文：到了五溪，蛮人全部散开逃去。
English: When they reached Wuxi, all the savages scattered and fled.

古文：会四川水尽源、通塔平诸洞作乱，仍命德兴讨平之。
现代文：会合四川水尽源、通塔平诸洞作乱，仍命周德兴讨伐平定。
English: When the Sichuan water ran out, Tongtaping and other dungeons made trouble, but Zhou Dexing was still alive to fight and pacify.

古文：十八年，楚王桢讨思州五开蛮，复以德兴为副将军。
现代文：十八年，楚王桢讨伐思州五开蛮，又任命周德兴为副将军。
English: In the 18th year, King Chu sent troops to suppress the Wukai Rebellion in Shizhou, and appointed Zhou Dexing as vice-general.

古文：德兴在楚久，所用皆楚卒，威震蛮中。
现代文：周德兴在楚的时间较长，所用都是楚的士兵，威震蛮中。
English: Zhou Dexing stayed in Chu for a long time. All the soldiers he used were from Chu.

古文：定武昌等十五卫，岁练军士四万四千八百人。
现代文：平定武昌等十五卫，年练兵四万四千八百人。
English: Wuchang and other 15 military bases were pacified, and 44,800 soldiers were trained annually.

古文：决荆州岳山坝以溉田，岁增官租四千三百石。楚人德之。
现代文：开决荆州岳山坝用以灌溉农田，年增官租四千三百石，楚人歌颂他的功德。
English: Jingzhou Yue Mountain Dam was used to irrigate farmland at the beginning of the 19th century, with an annual increase of 4,300 stone, and the people of Chu praised his merits.

古文：还乡，赐黄金二百两，白金二千两，文绮百匹。
现代文：还乡时，赐给黄金二百两，白金二千两，文绮百匹。
English: When he returned to his hometown, he was given two hundred taels of gold, two thousand taels of platinum, and one hundred buns.

古文：居无何，帝谓德兴： 福建功未竟，卿虽老，尚勉为朕行。 
现代文：过了没多久，太祖对周德兴说： 福建的功业没有完成，你虽然老了，尚可勉强为我前往。 
English: Not long after, the great-grandfather said to Zhou Dexing: "Fujian's work is not complete. Although you are old, you can still go there for me.

古文：德兴至闽，按籍佥练，得民兵十万余人。
现代文：周德兴到了闽地，按照户籍征兵操练，得到民兵十万余人。
English: Zhou Dexing arrived in Handan, according to the household registration conscription drill, received more than 100,000 militiamen.

古文：相视要害，筑城一十六，置巡司四十有五，防海之策始备。
现代文：在要害地区，筑城十六座，设置巡司四十五个，防御海上的措施也已完备。
English: In critical areas, 16 cities have been built, 45 patrol stations have been set up, and defensive measures at sea have been completed.

古文：逾三年，归第，复令节制凤阳留守司，并训练属卫军士。
现代文：过了三年，回归故里，又受命节制凤阳留守司，并训练属卫军士。
English: After three years, he returned to his hometown, and was ordered to restrain the Fengyang Remaining Division, and train the guards.

古文：诸勋臣存者，德兴年最高。岁时入朝，赐予不绝。
现代文：诸勋臣活着时，周德兴的年龄最大，每年入朝，赏赐不绝。
English: When the honored guests were alive, Zhou Dexing was the oldest. He entered the imperial court every year and was rewarded endlessly.

古文：二十五年八月，以其子骥乱宫，并坐诛死。
现代文：二十五年八月，因他儿子周骥扰乱宫中，受株连被杀。
English: In August 25th, because his son Zhou Qi disturbed the palace, Zhu Zhu Lian was killed.

古文：王弼，其先定远人，后徙临淮。
现代文：王弼，原是定远人，后迁徙到临淮。
English: Wang Yao was originally from Dingyuan, but later migrated to Linhuai.

古文：善用双刀，号 双刀王 。
现代文：擅长使用双刀，有 双刀王 之称。
English: He is good at using two swords, and is known as the king of two swords.

古文：初结乡里，依三台山树栅自保。
现代文：最初结交乡里豪杰，倚仗三台山树栅自保。
English: At first, he befriended local heroes and relied on the mountains and trees of Sandai for self-protection.

古文：逾年，帅所部来归。
现代文：过了一年，率领部属归附太祖。
English: A year later, the leadership of the clan was transferred to the great-grandfather.

古文：太祖知其才，使备宿卫。
现代文：太祖了解他的才华，命他率部宿卫。
English: The great-grandfather understood his talent and ordered him to lead the club's night watchmen.

古文：破张士诚兵于湖州，取池州石埭，攻婺源州，斩守将铁木儿不花，拔其城，获甲三千。
现代文：他率部在湖州攻破了张士诚的部队，攻取了池州石埭，攻占婺源州，杀了敌守将铁木儿不花，占领敌城，缴获兵甲三千。
English: He led his troops to defeat Zhang Shicheng's troops in Huzhou, captured Shizhou and Shiyuan in Chizhou, killed the enemy commander Tiemu'er, occupied the enemy city, and captured 3,000 soldiers.

古文：擢元帅。
现代文：提升为元帅。
English: Promoted to field marshal.

古文：下兰溪、金华、诸暨。援池州，复太平，下龙兴、吉安。
现代文：挥师下兰溪、金华、诸暨，驰援池州，收复太平，挥师下龙兴、吉安。
English: Lanxi, Jinhua and Zhuji were sent to aid Chizhou, and Taiping was recovered. Longxing and Ji'an were sent to help.

古文：大战鄱阳，邀击陈友谅于泾江口。
现代文：大战鄱阳，在泾江口拦击陈友谅。
English: During the great battle of Poyang, Chen Youzong was stopped at the mouth of the Li River.

古文：从平武昌，还克庐州。拔安丰，破襄阳、安陆。
现代文：随大军平武昌，回师攻克庐州，占领安丰，攻破襄阳、安陆。
English: With the large army of Pyeongwuchang, the return division conquered Bozhou, occupied Anfeng, and defeated Xiangyang and Anlu.

古文：取淮东，克旧馆，降士诚将朱暹，遂取湖州。
现代文：攻取淮东，攻克旧馆，迫使张士诚的将领朱暹投降，于是占领湖州。
English: They captured Huaidong, conquered the Old Pavilion, forced Zhang Shicheng's general Zhu Siam to surrender, and then occupied Huzhou.

古文：迁骁骑右卫亲军指挥使。
现代文：晋升为骁骑右卫亲军指挥使。
English: He was promoted to the commanding officer of the right wing of the cavalry.

古文：进围平江，弼军盘门。
现代文：进而围攻平江，王弼在盘门驻军。
English: He then besieged Pingjiang, and Wang Xi garrisoned troops at Panmen.

古文：士诚亲帅锐士突围，出西门搏战，将奔常遇春军。
现代文：张士诚亲自率领精锐部队突围，出西门展开搏战，欲从常遇春的防卫处突破。
English: Zhang Shicheng personally led the elite troops to break through the encirclement, went out of the West Gate to fight, and wanted to break through from the springtime defense.

古文：遇春分兵北濠，截其后，而别遣兵与战。
现代文：常遇春分兵北濠截断了他的后卫部队，而另派兵与张士诚战斗。
English: The often-encountered vernal equinox soldier Bei Yao cut off his rearguard, while another soldier was sent to fight Zhang Shicheng.

古文：士诚军殊死斗。遇春拊弼臂曰： 军中皆称尔健将，能为我取此乎？ 
现代文：张士诚的军队拼死搏斗，常遇春拊着王弼的手臂说： 军中都称你为健将，能为我击败强敌吗？ 
English: Zhang Shicheng's army fought to the death, and often Chun Rong pinched Wang Yao's arm and said, "Everyone in the army calls you a strong general. Can you defeat a strong enemy for me?"

古文：弼应曰： 诺。 
现代文：王弼回答说 ：行。 
English: Wang Yao replied, "That's fine.

古文：驰骑，挥双刀奋击。敌小却。
现代文：他策马挥舞双刀奋击，敌人退却。
English: He swung his horse and fought with his two swords, and the enemy retreated.

古文：遇春帅众乘之，吴兵大败，人马溺死沙盆潭者甚众。
现代文：常遇春率兵乘胜前进，吴兵大败，人马多溺死在沙盆潭。
English: It often happens that the Chun Lih soldiers advance with victory, the Wu soldiers are defeated, and many of them drown in the Sand Basin.

古文：士诚马逸堕水，几不救，肩舆入城，自是不敢复出。
现代文：张士诚的战马也落水，几乎无救，仓惶逃入城中，从此不敢再出战。
English: Zhang Shicheng's horse also fell into the water, almost helpless, he fled into the city in a panic, and since then he has not dared to fight again.

古文：吴平，赏赉甚厚。
现代文：吴地平定后，王弼得到的奖赏十分丰厚。
English: After the settlement of Wu Jiading, Wang Yao received a very rich reward.

古文：从大军征中原，下山东，略定河南北，遂取元都。
现代文：王弼跟从大军征讨中原，下山东，平定黄河南北，攻占元都城。
English: Wang Qian followed the great army to conquer the Central Plains, descend to the east of Shandong, pacify the north and south of the Yellow River, and capture the former capital city.

古文：克山西，走扩廓。
现代文：攻克山西，赶跑扩廓。
English: Conquer Shanxi Province, and expand into the outlying areas.

古文：自河中渡河，克陕西，进征察罕脑儿，师还。
现代文：从河中渡黄河，攻克陕西，进而征讨察罕脑儿，回师。
English: Cross the Yellow River from the middle of the river, conquer Shaanxi, and then enlist the brains of Chahan and return to the division.

古文：洪武三年，授大都督府佥事，世袭指挥使。
现代文：洪武三年，授予大都督府佥事，世袭指挥使。
English: In the third year of Hongwu, he was awarded the title of grand governor and hereditary commander.

古文：十一年副西平侯沐英征西番，降朵甘诸酋及洮州十八族，杀获甚众。
现代文：十一年，协助西平侯沐英征讨西番，降服了朵甘诸酋和洮州十八族，杀敌很多。
English: In the eleventh year, he assisted Xiping Marquis Mu Ying in the conquest of Xifan, subdued the Dokan chiefs and eighteen ethnic groups in Zhangzhou, and killed many enemies.

古文：论功，封定远侯，食禄二千石。
现代文：评定战功，封为定远侯，食禄二千石。
English: He was awarded the title of Dingyuanhou for his distinguished war service, and his stipend was increased to 2,000 koku.

古文：十四年从傅友德征云南，至大理，土酋段世扼龙尾关。
现代文：十四年，跟从傅友德征讨云南，到了大理，土酋段世扼守龙尾关。
English: Fourteen years later, he followed Fu Youde to conquer Yunnan, and arrived in Dali.

古文：弼以兵由洱水趋上关，与沐英兵夹击之，拔其城，擒段世，鹤庆、丽江诸郡以次悉平。
现代文：王弼带领部队从洱海向上关进军，和沐英的部队夹击，攻占敌城，活捉段世，鹤庆、丽江诸郡依次得以全部平定。
English: Wang Qian led the troops to march from the Bohai Sea to Shangguan, and clashed with the troops of Mu Ying, captured the enemy city, captured Duanzhe alive, and the counties of Heqing and Lijiang were all pacified in turn.

古文：加禄五百石，予世券。
现代文：增加俸禄五百石，给予世袭的凭证。
English: The salary was increased by 500 koku, and hereditary certificates were issued.

古文：二十年，以副将军从冯胜北伐，降纳哈出。
现代文：二十年任副将军，跟从冯胜北伐，降服了纳哈出。
English: A vice-general for 20 years, he followed Feng Sheng in the Northern Expedition and subdued Naha.

古文：明年复以副将军从蓝玉出塞。
现代文：第二年，又任副将军跟从蓝玉出塞。
English: The following year, he was appointed vice-general and left the Blue and White.

古文：深入不见敌，玉欲引还。
现代文：深入边塞，但不见敌人踪迹。
English: We went deep into the border fortress, but there was no sign of the enemy.

古文：弼持不可，玉从之。
现代文：蓝玉打算回师，但王弼坚持不可，蓝玉听从他的意见。
English: Blue Jade planned to return to her teacher, but Wang Yao insisted that she could not, and Blue Jade followed his advice.

古文：进至捕鱼儿海，以弼为前锋，直薄敌营。走元嗣主脱古思帖木儿，尽获其辎重，语在玉传。
现代文：到了捕鱼儿海，以王弼为前锋，直捣敌营，赶走了元嗣主脱古思帖木儿，全部缴获了敌军辎重，这件事记载在《蓝玉传》中。
English: When he arrived at the Fishing Children's Sea, with Wang Yao as the forward, he directly attacked the enemy camp, drove away the original heir, Degu Si Timur, and captured all the enemy troops, which was recorded in "Blue Jade."

古文：二十三年奉诏还乡。
现代文：二十三年，奉诏还乡。
English: Twenty-three years later, he returned to his hometown.

古文：二十五年从冯胜、傅友德练军山西、河南。
现代文：二十五年，跟从冯胜、傅友德在山西、河南练兵。
English: For 25 years, he followed Feng Sheng and Fu Youde to train soldiers in Shanxi and Henan.

古文：明年同召还，先后赐死。
现代文：第二年一同被召回，先后被赐死。
English: They were recalled together the following year and were successively sentenced to death.

古文：爵除。
现代文：削去爵位。
English: Peerages abolished.

古文：弼子六人，女为楚王妃。
现代文：王弼有儿子六人，女儿为楚王妃。
English: Wang Yao has six sons and one daughter, Princess Chu.

古文：蓝玉，定远人。开平王常遇春妇弟也。
现代文：蓝玉，定远人，开平王常遇春的内弟。
English: Blue Jade, a distant relative, is the younger brother of Kaiping Wang Changchun.

古文：初隶遇春帐下，临敌勇敢，所向皆捷。
现代文：开始在常遇春帐下效力，临敌勇敢，所战皆捷。
English: He began to work under the frequent spring account, he was brave in the face of enemies, and all his battles were successful.

古文：遇春数称于太祖，由管军镇抚积功至大都督府佥事。
现代文：常遇春多次在朱元璋面前夸奖蓝玉，蓝玉因屡战积功，由管军镇抚升任大都督府佥事。
English: He often praised Blue Jade in front of Zhu Yuanzhang in the spring, and Blue Jade was promoted to the grand governor's office by the commander-in-chief because of his many war achievements.

古文：洪武四年，从傅友德伐蜀，克绵州。
现代文：洪武四年，蓝玉随傅友德伐蜀，攻克绵州。
English: In the fourth year of Hongwu, Blue Jade followed Fu You Deva Shu and conquered Mianzhou.

古文：五年从徐达北征，先出雁门，败元兵于乱山，再败之于土剌河。
现代文：五年，又随徐达北征，率先出雁门，在乱山、土剌河大败元兵。
English: Five years later, he followed Xu to the Northern Expedition, took the lead in going out of the Wild Goose Gate, and defeated the Yuan soldiers in the disorderly mountains and the Tuyun River.

古文：七年帅兵拔兴和，获其国公帖里密赤等五十九人。
现代文：七年，蓝玉率兵攻克兴和，俘获其国公帖里密赤等五十九人。
English: In the seventh year, Blue Jade led the troops to conquer Kexinghe and captured fifty-nine people such as his country's Kote Ri Mi Chak.

古文：十一年同西平侯沐英讨西番，擒其酋三副使，斩获千计。
现代文：十一年，蓝玉会同西平侯沐英征讨西番，擒获其首领三副使，斩俘数以千计。
English: In the eleventh year, the Blue Jade Association, together with Xiping Hou Mu Ying, went to fight against the Western Pan, captured its leader and three deputy envoys, and killed and captured thousands.

古文：明年，师还。封永昌侯，食禄二千五百石，予世券。
现代文：第二年，班师还朝，封为永昌侯，食禄二千五百石，给予世袭的凭证。
English: In the second year, Banshi returned to the court and was given the title of Yongchang Hou, a stipend of 2,500 koku, and a certificate of inheritance.

古文：十四年，以征南左副将军从颍川侯傅友德征云南，擒元平章达里麻于曲靖，梁王走死，滇地悉平。
现代文：十四年，以征南左副将军的身份跟随颍川侯傅友德征伐云南，在曲靖擒获元平章达里麻，梁王在逃亡途中死去，滇地全部平定，蓝玉功劳尤大。
English: In the 14th year, as the vice-general of the Southern Expedition, he followed Shichuan Hou Fu Youde to invade Yunnan. He was awarded the Yuanping Medal and the Dalima Medal in Qujing, and Liang Wang died on the way to escape. The whole of Loudi was pacified, and Blue Jade was particularly meritorious.

古文：玉功为多，益禄五百石。册其女为蜀王妃。
现代文：太祖加封食禄五百石，册封其女为蜀王妃。
English: The great-grandfather added a stipend of five hundred koku and had his daughter crowned the Queen of Shu.

古文：二十年，以征虏左副将军从大将军冯胜征纳哈出，次通州。
现代文：二十年，蓝玉又以征虏左副将的身份随大将军冯胜出征纳哈出，临时驻扎通州。
English: Twenty years later, Blue Jade followed General Feng Sheng in his capacity as the vice-commander of the Left Division of the Conscript Army, and was temporarily stationed in Tongzhou.

古文：闻元兵有屯庆州者，玉乘大雪，帅轻骑袭破之，杀平章果来，擒其子不兰溪还。
现代文：当得知庆州有元兵驻屯后，蓝玉冒着大雪，率轻骑突袭，大败元军，杀元平章果来，擒获其子不兰溪而归。
English: After learning that there were Yuan soldiers stationed in Gyeongju, Blue Jade braved the heavy snow, led a light cavalry raid, defeated the Yuan army, killed Yuan Pingzhang, and captured his son Bu Lanxi.

古文：会大军进至金山，纳哈出遣使诣大将军营纳欸，玉往受降。
现代文：然后会合大军进至金山，纳哈出派使者到大将军营表示其投降的诚意，蓝玉前往受降。
English: Then, the great army marched to Jinshan, Naha sent an envoy to the general camp to express his sincerity of surrender, and Blue Jade went to the top to accept the surrender.

古文：纳哈出以数百骑至，玉大喜，饮以酒。
现代文：纳哈出率数百骑前来，蓝玉大喜，以酒招待。
English: Hundreds of Naha riders came, and Blue Jade was overjoyed and invited them to drink.

古文：纳哈出酌酒酬玉，玉解衣衣之，曰： 请服此而饮。 
现代文：纳哈出酌酒以答谢蓝玉，蓝玉便脱下衣服给纳哈出穿上，并说 ：请穿上这件衣服再喝吧。 
English: Naha poured out wine to thank Blue Bead, and Blue Bead took off her clothes to dress Naha and said, "Please put on this dress before you drink."

古文：纳哈出不肯服，玉亦不饮。
现代文：纳哈出不肯穿，蓝玉也不饮酒，双方争让良久。
English: Naha didn't want to wear it, and Blue Jade didn't drink alcohol. Both sides fought for a long time.

古文：争让久之，纳哈出覆酒于地，顾其下咄咄语，将脱去。
现代文：纳哈出便将酒洒在地上，并对其部下发出咄咄之语，想要脱身离去。
English: Naha then spilled the wine on the ground and shouted at his men to get away.

古文：郑国公常茂在坐，直前砍伤之，都督耿忠拥以见胜。
现代文：郑国公常茂当时在座，便直接上前，将纳哈出砍伤，都督耿忠将其捉拿，押去见冯胜。
English: Zheng Guogong Changmao was present at the time, he went directly to the front, cut Naha out, the governor Geng Zhong caught him and sent him to Feng Sheng.

古文：其众惊溃，遣降将观童谕降之。
现代文：纳哈出部下惊恐溃散，冯胜派降将观童招降溃众。
English: Naha's subordinates panicked and dispersed, and Feng Sheng's troops led the crowd in a rout.

古文：还至亦迷河，悉降其余众。
现代文：还军至亦迷河时，将纳哈出的余部全部降服。
English: When he returned to the army and also lost the river, he subjugated all the remaining parts of Naha.

古文：会冯胜有罪，收大将军印，命玉行总兵官事，寻即军中拜玉为大将军，移屯蓟州。
现代文：这时正遇冯胜获罪，太祖没收其大将军印，命蓝玉暂以总兵管事，随即又在军中拜蓝玉为大将军，移驻蓟州。
English: At this time, Feng Sheng was facing a crime, the great-grandfather confiscated his general seal, ordered Blue Jade to temporarily take charge of the chief soldier, and then worshiped Blue Jade as a general in the army, and moved to Zhangzhou.

古文：时顺帝孙脱古思帖木儿嗣立，扰塞上。
现代文：当时顺帝之孙脱古思帖木儿即位，经常骚扰塞上。
English: At that time, Emperor Shun's grandson, De Gu Si Timur, ascended the throne, and he was often harassed.

古文：二十一年三月，命玉帅师十五万征之。出大宁，至庆州，谍知元主在捕鱼儿海，间道兼程进至百眼井。去海四十里，不见敌，欲引还。
现代文：二十一年三月，太祖命蓝玉率军十五万出兵征讨，大军出大宁，进至庆州，探知元主在捕鱼儿海，蓝玉便抄近路星夜兼程赶到百眼井，此地离捕鱼儿海四十里，仍不见敌兵，蓝玉想引兵返回。
English: In March of the twenty-first year, the great-grandfather ordered Blue Jade to lead an army of one hundred and fifty thousand soldiers to recruit soldiers. The army went from Taining to Gyeongju, and detected that the founder was fishing in the sea. Blue Jade then took the short road and drove to Hyakgyeongi at night. This place is forty miles away from the fishing sea, but still no enemy soldiers were seen. Blue Jade wanted to lead the soldiers back.

古文：定远侯王弼曰： 吾辈提十余万众，深入漠北，无所得，遽班师，何以复命？ 
现代文：定远侯王弼说 ：我们率军十多万人，深入漠北，毫无所获，就这样班师回朝的话，我们怎么去向皇上复命呢？ 
English: Dingyuan marquess Wang Yao said, "We led an army of more than one hundred thousand people, went deep into the desert north, and gained nothing. If we return to the imperial court in this way, how can we return to the emperor?"

古文：玉曰： 然。 
现代文：蓝玉说 ：对呀。 
English: Blue Bead said, "That's right."

古文：令军士穴地而爨，毋见烟火。
现代文：便下令军队穴地而居，不见烟火，乘夜赶到捕鱼儿海南边。
English: He then ordered the army to live in caves, not to see the fireworks, and to travel by night to the southern coast of the fishing sea.

古文：乘夜至海南，敌营尚在海东北八十余里。玉令弼为前锋，疾驰薄其营。
现代文：当时敌营还在海东北八十余里处，蓝玉命王弼为前锋，率骑兵迅速逼近敌营。
English: At that time, the enemy battalion was still more than eighty miles to the northeast of the sea, and the Blue Jade King was the forward, and the cavalry was rapidly approaching the enemy battalion.

古文：敌谓我军乏水草，不能深入，不设备。又大风扬沙，昼晦。
现代文：敌人以为明军缺乏水草，不能深入，故未加防备，加上大风扬起沙尘，白天都看不见什么。
English: The enemy thought that the Ming army lacked aquatic plants and could not go deep, so they did not take precautions. In addition, the high winds raised sand and dust, and nothing could be seen during the day.

古文：军行，敌无所觉。
现代文：所以，明军的行动，敌军毫无察觉。
English: Therefore, the enemy was completely unaware of the Ming army's actions.

古文：猝至前，大惊。迎战，败之。杀太尉蛮子等，降其众。元主与太子天保奴数十骑遁去。
现代文：王弼率军突然冲至敌营前，元军大惊，仓促迎战，大败，太尉蛮子等被杀，其部众皆降，仅元主与太子天保奴等数十骑逃走。
English: Wang Xi suddenly led the army to rush to the front of the enemy camp. The Yuan army was shocked, rushed to meet the battle, and suffered a great defeat. Lieutenant Barbaro and others were killed, and all his subordinates were defeated. Only the former lord and Prince Tianbao and dozens of others fled on horseback.

古文：玉以精骑追之，不及。获其次子地保奴、妃、公主以下百余人。又追获吴王朵儿只、代王达里麻及平章以下官属三千人，男女七万七千余人，并宝玺、符敕金牌、金银印诸物，马驼牛羊十五万余。焚其甲仗蓄积无算。
现代文：蓝玉派精锐骑兵追击，但未追上，仅俘获其次子地保奴、妃嫔、公主以下百余人，后又追获吴王朵儿只、代王达里麻及平章以下官属三千人、男女七万七千余人，以及宝玺、符敕、金银印信等物品，马、驼、牛、羊十五万余头，并焚毁其甲仗蓄积无数。
English: The elite cavalrymen of the Blue Jade faction pursued, but did not catch up. They only captured more than 100 people from the second son to the second son, including slaves, concubines, and princesses. Later, they also captured 3,000 people, more than 77,000 men and women, and more than 150,000 horses, camels, cattle, and sheep, and burned countless armors.

古文：奏捷京师，帝大喜，赐敕褒劳，比之卫青、李靖。
现代文：捷报奏传至京，皇帝大喜，赐诏奖励慰劳，将蓝玉比作卫青、李靖。
English: The news of the victory spread to Beijing, and the emperor was overjoyed, bestowing rewards and consolation, and comparing Blue Jade to Wei Qing and Li Jing.

古文：又破哈剌章营，获人畜六万。
现代文：蓝玉又攻占哈剌章营，获人、畜六万。
English: Blue Jade also captured the Haruzhang Camp, gaining sixty thousand people and animals.

古文：师还，进凉国公。
现代文：班师回朝，晋升为凉国公。
English: The class teacher returned to the imperial court and was promoted to the title of Prince of Liang.

古文：明年命督修四川城池。
现代文：第二年，蓝玉受命督修四川城池。
English: The following year, Lan Yu was ordered to supervise the construction of Sichuan Castle.

古文：二十三年，施南、忠建二宣抚司蛮叛，命玉讨平之。
现代文：二十三年，施南、忠建二宣抚司南蛮反叛，蓝玉奉命前往讨平。
English: In 233, Shi Nan and Zhong Jian II led the proclamation of the Southern Barbarian Rebellion, and Blue Jade was ordered to go and quell the rebellion.

古文：又平都匀，安抚司散毛诸洞，益禄五百石，诏还乡。
现代文：接着又平定都匀安抚司散毛诸洞，被加禄五百石，奉诏还乡。
English: He then went on to pacify and pacify the provinces of Shan Mao and Zhu Dong, and was rewarded with a stipend of five hundred koku, after which he returned to his hometown.

古文：二十四年命玉理兰州、庄浪等七卫兵，以追逃寇祁者孙，遂略西番罕东之地。土酋哈昝等遁去。
现代文：二十四年，朝廷再命蓝玉统领兰州、庄浪等七卫兵，追讨逃寇祁者孙，于是攻取西番罕东之地，当地首领哈昝等逃遁。
English: In the 24th year, the imperial court ordered the Blue Jade to lead seven guards, including Lanzhou and Zhuanglang, to track down the son of the fugitive bandit, and then capture the land east of West Panhandle, where the local leader, Harun, had fled.

古文：会建昌指挥使月鲁帖木儿叛，诏移兵讨之。至则都指挥瞿能等已大破其众，月鲁走柏兴州。
现代文：时逢建昌指挥使月鲁帖木儿反叛，蓝玉又奉命率军征讨，当蓝玉率军赶到时，都指挥瞿能等已大破其众，月鲁逃往柏兴州。
English: At that time, Feng Jianchang commanded Yue Lu to rebel against Timur, and Blue Jade was ordered to lead the army to collect. When Blue Jade led the army to arrive, both commanders, including Xuneng, had already broken through the crowd, and Yue Lu fled to Baoxing.

古文：玉遣百户毛海诱缚其父子，送京师诛之，而尽降其众，因请增置屯卫。报可。
现代文：蓝玉乃派百户毛海诱捕月鲁父子，送往京城处死，又尽降其众。因此请求增设屯卫，太祖下诏许可。
English: Lan Yunnan sent a hundred families of Maohai to trap the father and son of Yue Lu and sent them to the capital to be executed, and also tried to subjugate their people. Therefore, he requested the establishment of additional guards and the permission of the great-grandfather.

古文：复请籍民为兵，讨朵甘、百夷。诏不许，遂班师。
现代文：蓝玉复请征当地百姓为兵，讨伐朵甘、百夷，太祖下诏不许，蓝玉便班师回朝。
English: When Blue Jade was restored to power, he enlisted the local people as soldiers to fight against Dokan and Baiyi, which was forbidden by Emperor Taizu. Blue Jade then returned to the imperial court.

古文：玉长身赪面，饶勇略，有大将才。
现代文：蓝玉身长面赤，有勇有谋，有大将之才。
English: Blue Jade is tall, red-faced, brave and resourceful, and has the talent of a general.

古文：中山、开平既没，数总大军，多立功。
现代文：中山、开平二王死后，蓝玉多次统领大军，也多次立功，朱元璋对其优礼有加。
English: After the death of the two kings Zhongshan and Kaiping, Blue Jade led the army many times, and also made meritorious contributions many times. Zhu Yuanzhang was very courteous to him.

古文：太祖遇之厚。浸骄蹇自恣，多蓄庄奴、假子，乘势暴横。
现代文：蓝玉便日渐恣意骄横，蓄养了许多庄奴、义子，乘势横行霸道。
English: Blue Jade became increasingly arrogant and self-willed. He cultivated many vassals and sons-in-law, and took advantage of the situation to behave in a domineering manner.

古文：尝佔东昌民田，御史按问，玉怒，逐御史。
现代文：蓝玉曾强占东昌民田，被御史查问，蓝玉大怒，将御史赶走。
English: Once upon a time, Blue Jade occupied a lot of private land in Dongchang and was interrogated by Imperial History. Blue Jade was furious and drove Imperial History away.

古文：北征还，夜扣喜峰关。关吏不时纳，纵兵毁关入。帝闻之不乐。
现代文：蓝玉北征南返时，夜抵喜峰关，守关官吏没能及时开门接纳，蓝玉便纵兵毁关，破门而入，皇帝闻知，很不高兴。
English: When Blue Jade returned from the Northern Expedition to the south, he arrived at Xifeng Pass at night. The officials guarding the gate did not open the gate in time to accept him. Blue Jade then destroyed the gate with his soldiers and broke through the gate. The emperor heard about this and was very unhappy.

古文：又人言其私元主妃，妃惭自经死，帝切责玉。
现代文：又有人说他与元主的妃子有私，致使元妃羞愧自杀，皇帝为此切责蓝玉。
English: Another person said that he had an affair with the consort of the former emperor, causing the former empress to commit suicide out of shame. The emperor blamed Blue Jade for this.

古文：初，帝欲封玉梁国公，以过改为凉，仍镌其过于券。
现代文：当初，朱元璋本欲封蓝玉为梁国公，因蓝玉有这些过失，便将梁字改为凉，并命人将这些过失刻在世袭的凭证上。
English: At first, Zhu Yuanxuan originally wanted to seal Blue Jade as Liang Guogong. Because Blue Jade had these faults, he changed the character Liang to Liang, and ordered people to engrave these faults on the hereditary certificate.

古文：玉犹不悛，侍宴语傲慢。在军擅黜陟将校，进止自专，帝数谯让。
现代文：蓝玉犹不改过，侍奉皇上酒宴时口出傲语，军中将校升降进退，大权操于他一人，朱元璋多次责备他。
English: Blue Jade has never changed. When he served the emperor's wine banquet, he spoke haughtily. He was promoted and demoted from lieutenant general to general. He alone wielded great power. Zhu Yuanzhang reprimanded him many times.

古文：西征还，命为太子太傅。玉不乐居宋、颍两公下，曰： 我不堪太师耶！ 
现代文：蓝玉西征返回后，被封为太子太傅，蓝玉不愿位居宋、颍两公之下，说： 我难道不能做太师吗！ 
English: After Blue Jade returned from the Western Expedition, he was named the Crown Prince Taifu. Blue Jade did not want to be under the Song and Han dynasties. He said, "Can't I be the Grand Master?"

古文：比奏事多不听，益怏怏。
现代文：此后上奏言事，朱元璋大多不采纳他的建议，蓝玉越发怏怏不乐。
English: After that, Zhu Yuanzhang made a speech, but most of his suggestions were not accepted by Zhu Yuanzhang, and Blue Jade became more and more unhappy.

古文：二十六年二月，锦衣卫指挥蒋瓛告玉谋反，下吏鞫讯。
现代文：二十六年二月，锦衣卫指挥蒋王献告发蓝玉谋反，蓝玉被交吏部审讯。
English: In February of the 26th year, the commander of the Jin Yi Wei, Jiang Wang, reported the rebellion of the Blue Jade, and the Blue Jade was interrogated by the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：狱辞云： 玉同景川侯曹震、鹤庆侯张翼、舳舻侯朱寿、东莞伯何荣及吏部尚书詹徽、户部侍郎傅友文等谋为变，将伺帝出耤田举事。 
现代文：狱辞上说： 蓝玉伙同景川侯曹震、鹤庆侯张翼、舳舻侯朱寿、东莞伯何荣及吏部尚书詹徽、户部侍郎傅友文等合谋，将借皇上举行田礼之机举事谋反。 
English: The prison notice said: "The Blue Jade Gang conspired with Jingchuan Hou Cao Zhen, Zheqing Hou Zhang Ying, Zou Hou Zhu Shou, Dongguan Bo He Rong, and officials Shangshu Zhan Hui, and household attendant Fu Youwen, and will use the opportunity of the emperor's rice ceremony to stage a rebellion.

古文：狱具，族诛之。
现代文：证据确凿，被族诛。
English: The evidence was conclusive, and the family was outraged.

古文：列侯以下坐党夷灭者不可胜数。
现代文：列侯以下被牵连处死者不可胜数。
English: Countless people below the rank of vassal were implicated in the deaths.

古文：手诏布告天下，条列爰书为《逆臣录》。
现代文：皇上亲自下诏布告天下，然后将所列罪状编写成《逆臣录》。
English: The emperor personally issued an edict to announce to the world, and then compiled the listed charges into the "Record of Rebellious Subjects."

古文：至九月，乃下诏曰： 蓝贼为乱，谋泄，族诛者万五千人。
现代文：到了九月，皇上才下诏说道： 蓝贼为乱，阴谋败露，被族诛者达一万五千人。
English: It was not until September that the emperor issued an edict, saying: "The Blue Thieves have caused chaos, the conspiracy has been exposed, and the number of those who have been ousted by the clan has reached 15,000."

古文：自今胡党、蓝党概赦不问。 
现代文：自今日起，胡党、蓝党之徒一概赦免，不再追究。 
English: As of today, all the Hu faction and the Blue faction have been pardoned and will no longer be investigated.

古文：胡谓丞相惟庸也。
现代文：胡即指丞相胡惟庸。
English: Hu refers to Premier Hu Wei Rong.

古文：于是元功宿将相继尽矣。
现代文：这样一来，明朝开国元勋、名臣宿将相继死去。
English: In this way, the founding father of the Ming Dynasty and the famous vassal will die one after another.

古文：凡列名《逆臣录》者，一公、十三侯、二伯。
现代文：被列入《逆臣录》者，共有一公、十三侯、二伯。
English: Those who were included in the "Record of Rebellious Subjects" included one prince, thirteen princes, and two nobles.

古文：叶升前坐事诛，胡玉等诸小侯皆别见。
现代文：叶升在此之前已获罪被诛，胡玉等小侯都载在他处。
English: Before this, Ye Sheng had already been arrested for a crime, and Hu Yu and other minor lords were detained elsewhere.

古文：其曹震、张翼、张温、陈桓、朱寿、曹兴六侯，附著左方。
现代文：而曹震、张翼、张温、陈桓、朱寿、曹兴等六侯，则附于下面。
English: And Cao Zhen, Zhang Ying, Zhang Wen, Chen Huan, Zhu Shou, Cao Xing and other six princes are attached below.

古文：曹震，濠人。
现代文：曹震，濠州人。
English: Cao Zhen, from Zhangzhou.

古文：从太祖起兵，累官指挥使。
现代文：跟从太祖起兵，累积功劳被任命为指挥使。
English: Following in the footsteps of his great-grandfather who raised an army, he was appointed to the post of commander-in-chief.

古文：洪武十二年，以征西番功封景川侯，禄二千石。
现代文：洪武十二年，因征讨西番有功封为景川侯，食禄二千石。
English: In the 12th year of Hongwu, he was awarded the title of Jingchuan marquis for conquering the western part of the country, and received a stipend of 2,000 koku.

古文：从蓝玉征云南，分道取临安诸路，至威楚，降元平章阎乃马歹等。
现代文：跟从蓝玉征讨云南，分道攻取临安诸路，至威楚，降服元平章阎乃马歹等人。
English: Followed by the Blue and White Expedition to Yunnan, split off to capture the Lin'an Road, to power, surrender to Yuan Pingzhang, Yan Nai Ma Ganga and others.

古文：云南平，因请讨容美、散毛诸洞蛮及西番朵甘、思曩日诸族。
现代文：云南平定后，请求征讨容美、散毛诸洞蛮及西番朵甘、思曩日诸族。
English: After Yunnan was pacified, he requested that the Yung Mei, the Sanmao, the Dongbaru, the Xipan, the Gan, and the Shunri tribes be subjugated.

古文：诏不许。
现代文：朝廷诏令不可。
English: The edict does not allow it.

古文：又请以贵州、四川二都司所易番马，分给陕西、河南将士。
现代文：又请求将贵州、四川二都司所买番马分给陕西、河南将士。
English: He also requested that the horses bought by the Guizhou and Sichuan Second Capital Division be distributed to soldiers from Shaanxi and Henan.

古文：又言： 四川至建昌驿，道经大渡河，往来者多死瘴疠。
现代文：又说： 四川至建昌驿道，途经大渡河，来往者多半死于瘴毒。
English: He also said: From Sichuan to Jianchang Pass, passing through the Dadu River, most of the travelers died of poisoning.

古文：询父老，自眉州峨眉至建昌，有古驿道，平易无瘴毒，已令军民修治。
现代文：询问父老，得知从眉州峨眉至建昌，有古驿道，平坦且无瘴毒，已经命令军民加以修治。
English: After asking the elders, it was learned that from Emei in Meizhou to Jianchang, there is an ancient road, flat and non-poisonous, and the military and civilians have been ordered to repair it.

古文：请以泸州至建昌驿马，移置峨眉新驿。 
现代文：请求把泸州至建昌的驿马，移到峨眉新驿站。 
English: The request is to move the train from Zhangzhou to Jianchang to Emei Xinyi Station.

古文：从之。
现代文：得到许可。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：二十一年，与靖宁侯叶升分道讨平东川叛蛮，俘获五千余人。
现代文：二十一年与靖宁侯叶升分兵讨伐平定了东川叛蛮，俘虏五千余人。
English: In the twenty-first year of his reign, he fought against the troops of Jingning Houye Shengbun and put down the Dongchuan Rebellion, taking more than five thousand prisoners.

古文：寻复命理四川军务，同蓝玉核征南军士。
现代文：不久任命统领四川军务，同蓝玉核实征南军士。
English: He was soon appointed commander of the Sichuan military affairs, and verified with the Blue and White that he was a South Korean conscript.

古文：会永宁宣慰司言，所辖地有百九十滩，其八十余滩道梗不利。
现代文：永宁宣慰司说，所辖之地有一百九十个滩，其中有八十多个滩堵塞不便利。
English: Yongning Xuanliao Division said that there are one hundred and ninety beaches under its jurisdiction, of which more than eighty beaches are not convenient to be blocked.

古文：诏震疏治之。
现代文：诏令曹震治理疏通。
English: The edict ordered Cao Zhen's governance to be smoothed out.

古文：震至泸州按视，有支河通永宁，乃凿石削崖，令深广以通漕运。
现代文：曹震到泸州视察，看到了有条河直通永宁，于是凿石削崖，加深、扩广河道，达到通漕运的目的。
English: Cao Zhen inspected Zhangzhou and saw that there was a river running directly to Yongning, so he chiseled the rock cliff, deepened and widened the river channel, and achieved the purpose of paddling.

古文：又辟陆路，作驿舍、邮亭，驾桥立栈。自茂州，一道至松潘，一道至贵州，以达保宁。
现代文：又开辟陆路，兴建驿舍邮亭，架桥立栈，自茂州，一条道路直通松潘，一条道路到贵州，最后通达保宁。
English: It also opened up a land route, built a post office and a bridge, and from Maozhou, a road led directly to Songpan, a road to Guizhou, and finally to Boryeong.

古文：先是行人许穆言： 松州地硗瘠，不宜屯种。戍卒三千，粮运不给，请移戍茂州，俾就近屯田。 
现代文：最初行人许穆说： 松州土地贫瘠，不适宜屯种，戍守士卒三千人，粮运不能供给，请求移守茂州，可就近屯田。 
English: At first, the passer-by Xu Mu said: Songzhou's land is barren, it is not suitable for farming, there are only three thousand guards, grain transportation cannot be supplied, request to move to Maozhou, can be near the farm.

古文：帝以松州控制西番，不可动。
现代文：太祖认为松州控制着西番，不能动摇。
English: Taizu believed that Songzhou controlled the West Bank and could not be shaken.

古文：至是运道既通，松潘遂为重镇。帝嘉其劳。
现代文：至此运道已经畅道，松潘于是成为重镇，太祖嘉奖曹震的功劳。
English: At this point, the path of fortune has been smooth, and Songpan has become an important town, the merit of the great ancestor Cao Zhen.

古文：逾年复奏四事：一，请于云南大宁境就井煮盐，募商输粟以赡边。一，令商入粟云南建昌，给以重庆、綦江市马之引。一，请蠲马湖逋租。一，施州卫军储仰给湖广，溯江险远，请以重庆粟顺流输之。
现代文：过了一年，他又上奏了四件事：一、请求在云南大宁境内掘井煮盐，招募商人运输粮食以巩固边防；二、命令商人输送粮食到云南建昌，给予重庆、綦江的市马钱引；三、请求免除马湖拖欠的租子；四、施州卫的军储物资，依赖于湖广，逆江而上十分险远，请求从重庆顺江而下输送粮食。
English: A year later, he reported four more things: First, he requested that wells be dug in the territory of Yunnan's Daning to boil salt and that merchants be recruited to transport grain to strengthen the border defense; second, he ordered merchants to transport grain to Yunnan's Jianchang and give the city of Chongqing and the Minjiang River Maqian; third, he requested that the tenant of Mahu be exempted from arrears; fourth, the military supplies of Shizhouwei depended on Hukang and were very far upstream, and he requested that grain be transported down the river from Chongqing.

古文：皆报可。
现代文：他的奏请得到了允准。
English: All replied in the affirmative.

古文：震在蜀久，诸所规画，并极周详。蜀人德之。
现代文：曹震在蜀的时间较久，诸所的规划都十分周详，得到了蜀人的赞颂。
English: Cao Zhen has been in Shu for a long time, and his plans are very detailed and have been praised by Shu people.

古文：蓝玉败，谓与震及朱寿诱指挥庄成等谋不轨，论逆党，以震为首，并其子炳诛之。
现代文：蓝玉败露，有人告蓝玉曾与曹震和朱寿诱使指挥庄成等图谋不轨。追论逆党，以曹震为首，连同他的儿子曹炳一同被杀。
English: It was revealed that Blue Jade had been accused of conspiring with Cao Zhen and Zhu Shou to seduce the commander Zhuang Cheng. Cao Zhen, together with his son Cao Yao, was killed in pursuit of the traitorous party.

古文：张翼，临淮人。
现代文：张翼，临淮人。
English: Zhang Ying, Lin Huai Ren.

古文：父聚，以前翼元帅从平江南、淮东，积功为大同卫指挥同知，致仕。
现代文：父亲张聚，任前翼元帅，随大军平定江南、淮东，累积功劳任大同卫同知。
English: His father, Zhang Ju, served as the former wing marshal, and with the great army, he pacified the south of the Yangtze River and the east of the Huai River. He was awarded the title of Datongwei Tongzhi for his accumulated merits.

古文：翼随父军中，骁勇善战，以副千户嗣父职。
现代文：张翼跟随其父，骁勇善战，以副千户继承父亲职位。
English: Zhang Ying followed his father, Zhai Yongzheng, and succeeded his father's position as vice-chief of a thousand households.

古文：从征陕西，擒叛寇。
现代文：从征陕西，擒拿叛寇。
English: From the conquest of Shaanxi to the capture of traitors.

古文：擢都指挥佥事，进佥都督府事。
现代文：担任都指挥佥事，晋升为佥都督府事。
English: He served as a prefectural commander and was promoted to the post of deputy prefectural governor.

古文：从蓝玉征云南，克普定、曲靖。取鹤庆、丽江，剿七百房山寨。捣剑川，击石门。
现代文：跟从蓝玉征讨云南，攻克普定、曲靖，攻取鹤庆、丽江，剿平七百房山寨，直捣剑川，攻击石门。
English: Follow the Blue and White Expedition to invade Yunnan, conquer Puding, Qujing, capture Heqing, Lijiang, and the Seven Hundred Villages of Fenping, directly attack Jianchuan, and attack Shimen.

古文：十七年论功封鹤庆侯，禄二千五百石，予世券。
现代文：十七年，论功封为鹤庆侯，食禄二千五百石，给予世袭凭证。
English: In the seventeenth year, he was awarded the title of Zheqing Hou, with a stipend of 2,500 koku, and was given a certificate of inheritance.

古文：二十六年坐玉党死。
现代文：二十六年，受蓝玉党案的株连而被杀。
English: In 1926, he was killed by the Blue Jade Party case.

古文：张温，不详何许人。
现代文：张温，不知何许人。
English: Zhang Wen, I don't know how many people.

古文：从太祖渡江，授千户。积功至天策卫指挥佥事。
现代文：跟从太祖渡江，授予千户，积功被授予天策卫指挥佥事。
English: Following in the footsteps of the great-great-grandfather, Wujiang, awarded to thousands of households, the accumulated merit was awarded to the commander of Tiancewei Anecdote.

古文：从大军收中原，克陕西，攻下兰州，守之。
现代文：跟从大军收复中原，攻克陕西，攻下兰州并在此镇守。
English: He followed the great army to recover the Central Plains, conquer Shaanxi, conquer Lanzhou and defend this town.

古文：元将扩廓侦大将军南还，自甘肃帅步骑奄至。
现代文：元将领扩廓侦知大将军南还，从甘肃率步骑蜂拥而至。
English: The former generals scouted and scouted the great general Nan Yao, and they swarmed from Gansu on horseback.

古文：诸将请固守以待援。温曰： 彼远来，未知我虚实，乘幕击之，可挫其锐。
现代文：诸将请求固守以待增援，张温说： 敌人从远方而来，不知我军虚实，乘黑夜攻击敌人，可以挫败其锐气。
English: Zhang Wen said: "The enemy comes from far away, and does not know the truth of our army. If we attack the enemy at night, we can defeat their sharpness."

古文：倘彼不退，固守未为晚也。 
现代文：倘若敌人不撤退，那时再固守也不晚啊。 
English: If the enemy does not retreat, then it is not too late to hold on.

古文：于是整兵出战，元兵少却。
现代文：于是整兵出战，元兵稍后退。
English: As a result, the whole army went out to fight, and the veterans retreated a little.

古文：已而围城数重，温敛兵固守，敌攻不能下，乃引去。
现代文：继而重重围城，张温收兵固守，敌人进攻而不能攻下，不得不撤退。
English: Subsequently, the city was besieged again and again, Zhang Wen withdrew his troops and held fast, the enemy attacked but could not attack, and had to retreat.

古文：太祖称为奇功，擢大都督府佥事。
现代文：太祖称之为奇功，提升为大都督府佥事。
English: The great-grandfather called it a miraculous achievement, and it was promoted to the grand governor's office.

古文：已，又命兼陕西行都督府佥事。
现代文：不久，又任命兼任陕西行省都督府佥事。
English: Soon, he was also appointed to concurrently serve as the governor of Shaanxi Province.

古文：当兰州之受围也，元兵乘夜梯城而登。
现代文：当兰州受围困时，元兵趁黑夜用梯登城。
English: When Lanzhou was under siege, the former soldiers took advantage of the darkness to climb the city with ladders.

古文：千户郭佑被酒卧，他将巡城者击退之。
现代文：千户郭佑醉倒了，其他巡城将领击退了来犯之敌。
English: Qianhu Guoyu fell down drunk, other patrol generals repelled the invading enemy.

古文：围既解，温将斩佑，天策卫知事朱有闻争曰： 当贼犯城时，将军斩佑以令众，军法也。
现代文：围解后，张温准备杀了郭佑，天策卫知事朱有闻却说： 当敌人进犯城时，将军杀郭佑以示众，这是军法所从。
English: After the round-up, Zhang Wen prepared to kill Guo You, but Zhu Youwen, the governor of Tianzewei, said: When the enemy attacked the city, the general killed Guo You to show the public, which was in accordance with military law.

古文：贼既退，始追戮之，无及于事，且有擅杀名。 
现代文：敌人已经撤退，才杀他，于事无益，且落下擅杀之名。 
English: The enemy had already retreated when he was killed, which did not help matters and earned him the reputation of a wanton killer.

古文：温谢曰： 非君，不闻是言。 
现代文：张温称谢说： 不是你我是听不到这种话的。 
English: Zhang Wen said gratefully, "It's not you, I can't hear such words.

古文：遂杖佑释之。
现代文：于是杖打郭佑后释放。
English: As a result, he was released after being beaten with a cane.

古文：帝闻而两善焉，并赏有闻绮帛。
现代文：太祖听说此事认为做得好，并奖赏朱有闻绮帛。
English: When the great-grandfather heard about this, he thought it was a good deed and rewarded Zhu Youwen.

古文：其明年，以参将从傅友德伐蜀，功多。
现代文：第二年，张温任参将跟从傅友德征讨蜀地，功劳较大。
English: In the second year, Zhang Wen was appointed as a delegate to follow Fu Youde to conquer Shu, which was a great achievement.

古文：十一年，以副将会王弼等讨西羌。
现代文：十一年，任副将会同王弼等征讨西羌。
English: In the eleventh year, the vice-president will go to the West together with Wang Xi.

古文：明年论功封会宁侯，禄二千石。
现代文：第二年论功封为会宁侯，食禄二千石。
English: In the second year, he was awarded a stipend of 2,000 koku (approx.

古文：又明年命往理河南军务。
现代文：十三年，受命统领河南军务。
English: Thirteen years later, he was ordered to lead the military affairs of Henan Province.

古文：十四年从傅友德征云南。
现代文：十四年跟从傅友德征讨云南。
English: He followed Fu Youde to Yunnan for 14 years.

古文：二十年秋帅师讨纳哈出余众，从北伐，皆有功。
现代文：二十年秋，率部队讨伐纳哈出余部，从北伐，都立有战功。
English: In the autumn of the 20th year, he led the troops to fight against the remnants of Naha, and from the Northern Expedition, he made great achievements.

古文：后以居室器用僣上，获罪，遂坐玉党死。
现代文：后因居室器用犯制，有罪，于是牵涉蓝玉党案而被杀。
English: Later, he was found guilty of breaking the law with a room implement, and was implicated in the Blue Jade Party case and killed.

古文：陈桓，濠人。
现代文：陈桓，濠州人。
English: Chen Huan, from Zhangzhou.

古文：从克滁、和。
现代文：随大军克滁州、和州。
English: With the great army, Kechengzhou and Hezhou emerged.

古文：渡江，克集庆先登。
现代文：渡长江，身先士卒，攻克集庆。
English: Crossing the Yangtze River, leading the way, conquering Jieqing.

古文：从取宁国、金华。战龙江、彭蠡。收淮东、浙西。平中原。
现代文：从大军取宁国、金华，攻战龙江、彭蠡，收复淮东、浙西，平定中原。
English: Take Ningguo and Jinhua from the big army, attack Longjiang and Penghu, recover Huaidong and West Zhejiang, and pacify the Central Plains.

古文：累功授都督佥事。
现代文：累积功劳被授予都督佥事。
English: Accumulated merit was awarded the title of Tudor Anecdote.

古文：洪武四年从伐蜀。
现代文：洪武四年，从大军伐蜀。
English: In the fourth year of Hongwu's reign, he led an army to attack Shu.

古文：十四年从征云南，与胡海、郭英帅兵五万，由永宁趋乌撒。
现代文：十四年，从大军征云南，和胡海、郭英率兵五万，自永宁趋奔乌撒。
English: In the 14th year, from the great army to conquer Yunnan, with Hu Hai and Guo Ying leading 50,000 soldiers, from Yongning to Usa.

古文：道险隘，自赤河进师，与乌撒诸蛮大战，败走之。
现代文：道路十分险恶，从赤河进兵，和乌撒诸蛮展开激战，打败了敌人。
English: The road was very treacherous. The soldiers marched from the Chaka River and fought a fierce battle with the Usa barbarians, defeating the enemy.

古文：再破芒部士酋，走元右丞实卜，遂城乌撒。降东川乌蒙诸蛮，进克大理。略定汝宁、靖宁诸州邑。
现代文：又打败了芒部土酋，赶跑了元右丞实卜，于是修建乌撒城池，降服了东川乌蒙诸蛮，进而攻克大理，平定汝宁、靖宁诸州邑。
English: He also defeated Mangbe Tuchi and chased away Yuan Yujo Shibu, and then built Usa Castle, subdued the Dongchuan Umong barbarians, and then conquered Dali, and pacified Yuning and Jingning counties.

古文：十七年封普定侯，禄二千五百石，予世券。
现代文：十七年，封为普定侯，食禄二千五百石，给予世袭的凭证。
English: In the seventeenth year, he was given the title of Pu Ding Hou, with a stipend of 2,500 koku, and was given a certificate of inheritance.

古文：二十年同靖宁侯叶升征东川，俘获甚众。
现代文：二十年同靖宁侯叶升征讨东川，俘敌很多。
English: For twenty years, together with Jing Ning Hou Ye Sheng, he conquered Dongchuan and captured many enemies.

古文：就令总制云南诸军。
现代文：任命总制云南诸军。
English: The appointment of a commander-in-chief of the Yunnan troops.

古文：再平九溪洞蛮，立营堡，屯田。
现代文：平定九溪洞蛮，建立营堡，开展屯田。
English: He pacified Jiuxi Cave, established a camp, and set up a military garrison.

古文：还，坐玉党死。
现代文：回师后，受蓝玉党案牵连被杀。
English: After returning to his division, he was implicated in the Blue Jade Party case and killed.

古文：朱寿，未详何许人。
现代文：朱寿，不知是何许人。
English: Zhu Shou, I don't know who he is.

古文：以万户从渡江，下江东郡邑，进总管。
现代文：任万户从大军渡江，攻下江东郡邑，晋升为总官。
English: Ren Wanyu crossed the river from the large army, conquered Jiangdong County, and was promoted to the general officer.

古文：收常、婺，克武昌。平苏、湖，转战南北。积功为横海卫指挥，进都督佥事。
现代文：收复常州、婺州，攻克武昌，平定苏州、湖州，转战南北，积功封为横海卫指挥，晋升为都督佥事。
English: He recovered Changzhou and Zhangzhou, conquered Wuchang, pacified Suzhou and Huzhou, and turned to the north-south war. He was awarded the title of Commander of the Coast Guard and promoted to the governor of Anji.

古文：与张赫督漕运，有功。
现代文：与张赫督促漕运，立功。
English: With Zhang He, he urged rowing and achieved great success.

古文：洪武二十年封舳舻侯，禄二千石，予世券。
现代文：洪武二十年，封为舳舟户侯，食禄二千石，给予世袭凭证。
English: Twenty years of Hongwu, he was given the title of Shanzhou Hou, a stipend of two thousand koku, and a hereditary certificate.

古文：坐玉党死。
现代文：受蓝玉党案牵连而被杀。
English: He was implicated in the Blue Jade Party case and killed.

古文：曹兴，一名兴才，未详何许人。
现代文：曹兴，另一名叫兴才，不知是何许人。
English: Cao Xing, also known as Xingcai, I don't know who he is.

古文：从平武昌，授指挥佥事。
现代文：从大军平武昌，授予指挥佥事。
English: From the great army of Pingwuchang, awarded the command anecdote.

古文：取平江，进指挥使。
现代文：攻取平江，晋升为指挥使。
English: He captured Pingjiang and was promoted to commander.

古文：克苏九畴炭山寨。进都督佥事，兼太原卫指挥。
现代文：攻克苏九畴炭山寨，晋升为都督佥事，兼太原卫指挥。
English: He conquered the Su Jiuzhong Coal Township, was promoted to the post of governor, and was also the commander of Taiyuan Wei.

古文：进山西行省参政，领卫事，为晋王相。
现代文：又晋升为山西行省参政，统领卫事，担任晋王相。
English: He was also promoted to participate in the politics of Shanxi Province, lead the guards, and serve as the king's minister.

古文：洪武十一年，从沐英讨洮州羌，降朵甘酋，擒三副使等。
现代文：洪武十一年，跟从沐英征讨洮州羌，降服朵甘的首领，生擒三副使等。
English: In the eleventh year of Hongwu's reign, he followed Mu Yingzong to subjugate Shanzhou, subdued the leader of Donggan, and made three deputy envoys.

古文：师还，封怀远侯，世袭指挥使。
现代文：班师回朝后，封为怀远侯，世袭指挥使。
English: After the division returned to the imperial court, he was given the title of Huaiyuanhou, a hereditary commander.

古文：理军务山西，从北征有功。
现代文：统领山西军务，从大军北征立功。
English: He presided over the military affairs of Shanxi Province and made great contributions to the Northern Expedition.

古文：后数年，坐玉党死。
现代文：数年后，受蓝玉党案牵连而被杀。
English: A few years later, he was implicated in the Blue Jade Party case and killed.

古文：同时以党连坐者，都督则有黄辂、汤泉、马俊、王诚、聂纬、王铭、许亮、谢熊、汪信、萧用、杨春、张政、祝哲、陶文、茆鼎凡十余人，多玉部下偏裨。
现代文：同时受牵连的，都督则有黄辂、汤泉、马俊、王诚、聂纬、王铭、许亮、谢熊、汪信、萧用、杨春、张政、祝哲、陶文、茆鼎等十余人，他们大多是蓝玉的部下。
English: At the same time, more than ten people, including Huang Qi, Tang Quan, Ma Jun, Wang Cheng, Zou Wei, Wang Ming, Xu Liang, Xie Xiong, Wang Xin, Xiao Ying, Yang Chun, Zhang Zheng, Zhu Zhe, Tao Wen, and Zou Ding, were implicated by the governor. Most of them were subordinates of Blue Jade.

古文：于是勇力武健之士芟夷略尽，罕有存者。
现代文：于是勇力武健之士被杀得差不多了，幸存者罕见。
English: As a result, the bravest and most able-bodied men were almost all killed, and survivors were rare.

古文：谢成，濠人。从克滁、和。
现代文：谢成，濠州人，从大军克滁州、和州。
English: Xie Cheng, a native of Ganzhou, came from Ganzhou and Hezhou.

古文：渡江，定集庆，授总管。
现代文：渡长江，平定集庆，授予总管。
English: Crossing the Yangtze River, calming the gathering, awarding the general manager.

古文：克宁国、婺州，进管军千户。
现代文：攻克宁国、婺州，晋升为管军千户。
English: He conquered Ningguo Province and Zhangzhou, and was promoted to be in charge of a thousand households.

古文：战鄱阳，平武昌，下苏、湖，进指挥佥事。
现代文：激战鄱阳，平定武昌，攻下苏州、湖州，晋升为指挥佥事。
English: He fought fiercely in Poyang, pacified Wuchang, conquered Suzhou and Huzhou, and was promoted to commander of the Andean Division.

古文：从大军征中原，克元都，攻庆阳，捣定西。为都督佥事、晋王府相。
现代文：跟从大军征讨中原，攻克元都，攻占庆阳，直捣定西，任都督佥事、晋王府相。
English: He followed the great army to conquer the Central Plains, conquered the Yuan capital, conquered Qingyang, and went straight to the west, and was appointed as the governor of Anji and the prime minister of Jin.

古文：从沐英征朵甘，降乞失迦，平洮州十八族。
现代文：跟从沐英征讨朵甘，降服乞失迦，平定了洮州十八族。
English: He followed Mu Yingzheng in seeking good fortune, surrendering and begging for bad luck, and pacified eighteen ethnic groups in Zhangzhou.

古文：洪武十二年封永平侯，禄二千石，世指挥使。
现代文：洪武十二年，赐封为永平侯，食禄二千石，世袭指挥使。
English: In the 12th year of Hongwu, he was given the title of Yongping Hou, a stipend of 2,000 koku, and the title of hereditary commander.

古文：二十年同张温追讨纳哈出余众，召还。
现代文：二十年，同张温追讨纳哈出余部，召回。
English: Twenty years, the same Zhang Wen pursued Naha out of the rest, recalled.

古文：二十七年坐事死，没其田宅。
现代文：二十七年，受株连被杀，没收田宅。
English: In 1927, Zhu Zhu was killed and his farmhouse was confiscated.

古文：李新，濠州人。
现代文：李新，濠州人。
English: Li Xin, from Zhangzhou.

古文：从渡江，数立功。
现代文：从太祖渡江，多次立功。
English: From the time of Emperor Taizu's crossing of the Yangtze River, he has made many contributions.

古文：战龙湾，授管军副千户。
现代文：攻战龙湾，授予管军副千户。
English: Attacked Longwan, and was awarded the title of deputy commander of a thousand households.

古文：取江陵，进龙骧卫正千户。
现代文：攻取江陵，晋升为龙骧卫正千户。
English: He conquered Gangneung and was promoted to the highest rank of Longjing Weizheng Qianhu.

古文：克平江，迁神武卫指挥佥事，调守茶陵卫，屡迁至中军都督府佥事。
现代文：攻克平江，晋升为神武卫指挥佥事，调守茶陵卫，多次晋升到中军都督府佥事。
English: He conquered the Pingjiang River, was promoted to the command of Shenwuwei, transferred to the command of Chalingwei, and was promoted to the Chinese military governor's office many times.

古文：十五年，以营孝陵，封崇山侯，岁禄千五百石。
现代文：十五年，在孝陵驻扎，赐封为崇山侯，年食禄一千五百石。
English: For fifteen years, he was stationed in Xiaoling, and was given the title of Chongshan Hou, with an annual stipend of fifteen hundred koku.

古文：二十二年命改建帝王庙于鸡鸣山。
现代文：二十二年，受命在鸡鸣山改建帝王庙。
English: In 1922, he was ordered to rebuild the Imperial Temple in Jining Mountain.

古文：新有心计，将作官吏视成画而已。
现代文：李新颇有心计，将作官吏视成画而已。
English: Li Xin is quite cunning, and regards the officials as mere scenery.

古文：明年遣还乡，颁赐金帛田宅。
现代文：第二年被遣还乡，赏赐金帛田宅。
English: He was sent back to his hometown the following year and was rewarded with the Kinpeita residence.

古文：时诸勋贵稍僣肆，帝颇嫉之，以党事缘坐者众。
现代文：当时诸勋臣富贵稍有僭肆，太祖十分恼怒，因党事缘故受株连者甚多。
English: At that time, all the honored ministers, the rich and the noble were a little arrogant, the great-grandfather was very angry, and there were many people who were affected by the party because of the party.

古文：新首建言：公、侯家人及仪从户各有常数，余者宜归有司。
现代文：李新首先建议，公、侯家人及仪从户应规定一个常数，多余的应交归有关部门。
English: First of all, Li Xin suggested that a constant number should be set for the official, family members and household servants, and the surplus should be transferred to the relevant departments.

古文：帝是之，悉发凤阳隶籍为民，命礼部纂《稽制录》，严公侯奢侈逾越之禁。
现代文：太祖按此办理，全部释放了凤阳隶籍为民，命令礼部修纂《稽制录》，严禁公侯奢侈逾越禁令。
English: The great-grandfather handled it accordingly, released all the Fengyang subordinates as citizens, ordered the Ministry of Ceremonies to revise the "Record of Performance," and strictly prohibited the prince from extravagantly exceeding the ban.

古文：于是武定侯英还佃户输税，信国公和还仪从户，曹国公景隆还庄田，皆自新发之。
现代文：于是武宁侯沐英退还佃户，开始纳税，信国公汤和归还仪从户，曹国公景隆归还庄田，都是因为李新的建议。
English: As a result, Wu Ning Hou Mu Ying returned Seto and began to pay taxes, Xin Guo Gong Tang and Guo Guo Yi returned to Seto, and Cao Guo Gong Jing Long returned to Shoda, all because of Li Xin's suggestion.

古文：二十六年，督有司开胭脂河于溧水，西达大江，东通两浙，以济漕运。
现代文：二十六年，以年督有司于溧水开掘胭脂河，西达大江，东通两浙，以利漕运。
English: In the 26th year of the 19th century, the governor Yushi went to Surabaya to excavate the Surabaya River, the Sida Dajiang River, and the east passage of the two Zhejiang Rivers, in order to facilitate the transportation of goods.

古文：河成，民甚便之。
现代文：河修成后，老百姓深感十分便利。
English: After the river was repaired, the local people found it very convenient.

古文：二十八年以事诛。
现代文：二十八年，因株连而被杀。
English: Twenty-eight years later, he was killed because of the stock company.

