古文：魏文侯时，西门豹为邺令，会长老问民疾苦。
现代文：原文战国魏文侯时，西门豹任邺县的长官，他会见地方上的长者，询问民间的疾苦。
English: In the Warring States period, when Wei Wenhou was the warlord, Ximen Bao served as the governor of Jixian County. He met with local elders and inquired about the hardships of the people.

古文：长老曰： 苦为河伯娶妇。 
现代文：长老说： 最头痛的是为河伯娶亲。 
English: The elder said: The biggest headache is to marry Hebe.

古文：豹问其故，对曰： 邺三老、廷掾常岁赋民钱数百万，用二三十万为河伯娶妇，与祝巫共分其余。
现代文：西门豹问他们是何缘故，长老说： 邺县的三老、廷掾每年向人民收取几百万钱，用二三十万为河伯娶亲，再和巫婆分享其余的钱。
English: Ximen Leopard asked them why, and the elders said: "The three elders of Handan County, Tingyu, collect millions of money from the people every year, use two or three hundred thousand to marry Hebe, and then share the rest of the money with the witch.

古文：当其时，巫行视人家女好者，云 是当为河伯妇 ，即令洗沐，易新衣。治斋宫于河上，设绛帷床席，居女其中。
现代文：娶亲时，巫师到每户人家去查看，看到美女就说她应当做河伯的妻子，立即命令她沐浴，更换新衣，在河边搭建斋宫，布置红色的帐幕和床席，把美女安置在里面。
English: When it was time for the wedding, the sorcerer went to every house to check. When he saw the beautiful woman, he said that she should be Hebe's wife. He immediately ordered her to take a bath, change her clothes, build a temple by the river, set up a red tent and a bed, and put the beautiful woman inside.

古文：卜日，浮之西门豹河。行数十里乃灭。
现代文：选好日子，将床及床上的美女一起漂浮于河中，漂流几十里就沉没了。
English: Choose a good day, float the bed and the beautiful woman on the bed together in the river, drift for dozens of miles and sink.

古文：俗语曰： 即不为河伯娶妇，水来漂溺。 
现代文：地方上传言： 如果不为河伯娶亲，河水就会泛滥成灾。 
English: Local rumor: If Hebe doesn't marry someone, the river will flood.

古文：人家多持女远窜，故城中益空。 
现代文：很多人家都带着女儿逃到远处去，所以城里越来越空。 
English: Many families have fled far away with their daughters, so the city is becoming increasingly empty.

古文：豹曰： 及此时幸来告，吾亦欲往送。 
现代文：西门豹说： 到河伯娶亲的日子，希望你来告诉我，我也要去送亲。 
English: Simon Leopard said, "On the day of Hebe's wedding, I hope you will come and tell me that I am also going to see my relatives off."

古文：至期，豹往会之河上，三老、官属、豪长者、里长、父老皆会，聚观者数千人。
现代文：娶亲的日子当天，西门豹到河边去，三老、官吏、地方领袖、里长、父老都到了，围观的有几千人。
English: On the day of the wedding, Simon the Leopard went to the river. The three elders, government officials, local leaders, village chiefs, and patriarchs all arrived, surrounded by several thousand people.

古文：其大巫，老女子也，女弟子十人从其后。
现代文：主持的是个老巫婆，她有女弟子十人，跟随在后面。
English: It was presided over by an old witch, who was followed by ten of her female disciples.

古文：豹曰： 呼河伯妇来。 
现代文：西门豹说： 叫河伯的新娘子过来。 
English: Simeon the Leopard said: Call Hebe's bridegroom to come.

古文：既见，顾谓三老、巫祝、父老曰： 是女不佳，烦大巫妪为入报河伯：更求好女，后日送之。 
现代文：看过以后，西门豹回头对三老、巫婆及父老说： 这个女子不漂亮，麻烦大巫婆去河里报告河伯，我们要再找更美的女子，后天送来。 
English: After reading it, Simon the Leopard turned to the three old men, the witch, and his father and said, "This woman is not beautiful. Please ask the great witch to go to the river and tell Hebe. We will look for a more beautiful woman and bring her back the day after tomorrow."

古文：即使吏卒共抱大巫妪投之河。
现代文：就派吏卒抱起大巫婆投入河里。
English: They sent an officer to pick up the witch and throw her into the river.

古文：有顷，曰： 妪何久也？弟子趣之。 
现代文：不久，西门豹说： 老太婆为什么去这么久不回来，派个弟子去催她。 
English: Soon, Ximen Leopard said, "Why did the old woman go away for so long and not come back? Send a disciple to hurry her up."

古文：复投弟子一人于河中。有顷，曰： 弟子何久也？ 
现代文：又投一个弟子入河。不久又说： 怎么这个弟子也一去这么久？ 
English: He also threw another disciple into the river. Soon he said, "How come this disciple has been gone for so long?"

古文：复使一人趣之。凡投三弟子。
现代文：于是西门豹又下令再派一名弟子去催她。前后总共投了三个弟子。
English: So Ximenbao ordered another disciple to hurry her up. A total of three disciples cast their votes.

古文：豹曰： 是皆女子，不能白事。
现代文：西门豹说： 这些人都是女子。一定是事情说不清楚。
English: West Panther said, "These people are all women. I'm sure things aren't clear."

古文：烦三老为入白之。 
现代文：麻烦三老前去说明。 
English: Please go ahead and explain.

古文：复投三老。
现代文：又把三老投下河。
English: He also threw the three old men into the river.

古文：豹簪笔磬折，向河立待，良久，旁观者皆惊恐。
现代文：西门豹假装恭恭敬敬的站在河边等候。过了很久，旁观的人愈来愈害怕。
English: After a long time, the onlookers became more and more frightened.

古文：豹顾曰： 巫妪、三老不还报，奈何？ 
现代文：西门豹回头说： 巫婆、三老都不回报。怎么办？ 
English: The West Gate Leopard looked back and said, "The witch and the three old men do not reciprocate. What should I do?"

古文：复欲使廷掾与豪长者一人入趣之。
现代文：正要派廷掾和另一个豪富前去催促。
English: He was about to send Ting Tao and another rich man to urge them on.

古文：皆叩头流血，色如死灰。
现代文：两人却立刻跪下叩头，叩得头破血流，脸色一片灰白。
English: The two, however, immediately knelt down and bowed their heads, and their faces turned white from beating their heads so hard that they bled.

古文：豹曰： 且俟须臾。 
现代文：西门豹说： 好吧好吧，那就再等一会儿。 
English: The western leopard said, "Okay, okay, just wait a little longer."

古文：须臾，豹曰： 廷掾起矣。河伯不娶妇也。 
现代文：不久，西门豹才说： 廷掾起来吧，河伯不娶亲了。 
English: It wasn't long before Ximen Leopard said, "Ting Yao, get up, Hebe isn't getting married."

古文：邺吏民大惊恐，自是不敢复言河伯娶妇。
现代文：邺县官民都非常害怕，从此不敢再提河伯娶亲的事。
English: The officials and people of Handan County were very afraid, and they dared not mention Hebe's marriage any more.

古文：娶妇以免溺，题目甚大。
现代文：为了避免淹水而替河伯娶亲，实在是很大的一个题目。
English: In order to avoid flooding, it is really a big problem to marry for Hebe.

古文：愚民相安于惑也久矣，直斥其妄，人必不信。
现代文：无知的百姓相信这样的谣言而苟且偷安时日已久。如果直接驳斥此事是虚妄的，人民一定不相信。
English: Ignorant people have believed such rumours for a long time. If the matter is directly refuted as false, the people will not believe it.

古文：唯身自往会，簪笔磬折，使众著于河伯之无灵，而向之行诈者计穷于畏死，虽驱之娶妇，犹不为也，然后弊可永革。
现代文：只有亲自去参加娶亲盛会，又装出一副恭敬的模样，使众人明白根本不是什么河伯作祟，先前的行为都是骗人的，终于在怕死的情况下无计可施。这时就算有人赶他们去替河伯娶亲，也绝不敢再做，如此弊病才可以永久消除。
English: Only by attending the wedding ceremony in person, and putting on a respectful appearance, so that everyone understands that it is not Hebe's fault at all, the previous actions are deceptive, and finally, in the case of fear of death, there is nothing to be done. At this time, even if someone drives them to marry for Hebe, they will never dare to do it again, so the disease can be eliminated forever.

