古文：少帝讳义符，小字车兵，武帝长子也，母曰张夫人。
现代文：少帝号义符，字东兵，武帝长子。生母是张夫人。
English: His birth mother was Lady Zhang. He was the eldest son of Emperor Wu.

古文：晋义熙二年，生于京口。
现代文：晋义熙二年，出生在京口。
English: He was born in Kyoguchi in the second year of the reign of Emperor Jin Yixi.

古文：武帝晚无男，及帝生，甚悦。
现代文：武帝一直没有男孩，少帝出生，他很高兴。
English: Emperor Wu had never had a boy, and he was delighted when the young emperor was born.

古文：年十岁，拜豫章公世子。
现代文：少帝十岁，被封为豫章公嫡长子。
English: At the age of ten, the young emperor was named the eldest legitimate son of Emperor Yuanzhang.

古文：帝有旅力，善骑射，解音律。
现代文：少帝有臂力，擅长骑射，懂得音律。
English: The young emperor has arm strength, is good at horseback archery, and understands musical notation.

古文：宋台建，拜宋世子。
现代文：宋建国，封为宋王嫡长子。
English: Song Jianguo, the eldest legitimate son of King Song.

古文：元熙元年，进为宋太子。
现代文：元熙元年，晋升为宋国太子。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was promoted to the Crown Prince of Song.

古文：武帝受禅，立为皇太子。
现代文：武帝接受禅让后，被立为皇太子。
English: After Emperor Wu accepted Zen's concession, he was made crown prince.

古文：永初三年五月癸亥，武帝崩，是日，太子即皇帝位。
现代文：永初三年五月二十一日，武帝驾崩，当天，太子即位，大赦天下。
English: On May 21st, the third year of the Yongzheng era, Emperor Wu passed away, and on the same day, the crown prince ascended the throne, pardoning the whole world.

古文：大赦；尊皇太后曰太皇太后。
现代文：尊皇太后为太皇太后。
English: The revered empress dowager is the great empress dowager.

古文：六月壬申，以尚书仆射傅亮为中书监，司空徐羡之、领军将军谢晦及亮辅政。
现代文：六月一日，委任尚书仆射傅亮为中书监，司空徐羡之、领军将军谢晦和傅亮辅佐朝政。
English: On June 1, he appointed Shang Shufu's servant, Sha Fu Liang, as the Central Supervisor of Books, and appointed Siku Xu Enzhi, the leading general, Xie Yu and Fu Liang as assistants to the imperial government.

古文：戊子，太尉长沙王道怜薨。
现代文：十七日，太尉长沙王刘道怜去世。
English: On the seventeenth day, Lieutenant Changsha King Liu Daorei passed away.

古文：秋九月丁未，有司奏武皇帝配南郊，武敬皇后配北郊。
现代文：秋九月十七日，有官员上书建议在南郊祭祀武帝，在北郊祭祀武敬皇后。
English: On the 17th day of the 9th month of the autumn, an official submitted a letter suggesting that Emperor Wu should be sacrificed in the southern suburbs and Empress Wu should be sacrificed in the northern suburbs.

古文：冬十一月戊午，有星孛于营室。
现代文：冬十一月十九日，星犯营室。
English: Winter, November 19th, Star Prisoner Camp Room.

古文：十二月庚戌，魏军克滑台。
现代文：十二月六日，北魏军队攻下了滑台。
English: On December 6th, the Northern Wei army captured the ramp.

古文：明年春正月己亥朔，大赦，改元为景平元年。文武进位二等。
现代文：次年春正月初一，大赦天下，改年号为景平元年，文臣武将各晋爵二等。
English: On the first day of the first month of the following spring, the emperor pardoned the whole country, the year was changed to the first year of Jingping, and the civil servants and military commanders were promoted to second class.

古文：辛巳，祀南郊。
现代文：三日，在南郊祭祀列祖列宗。
English: On the third day, in the southern suburbs, the ancestors were worshipped.

古文：虏将达奚仰破金墉，进围虎牢。
现代文：北魏将达奚攻克金墉，围攻虎牢。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty conquered Dadu and Jinbei, and besieged the Tiger's Stronghold.

古文：毛德祖击虏败之，虏退而复合。
现代文：毛德祖击败北魏军，北魏军败退后又重新包围虎牢。
English: Mao Zedong defeated the Northern Wei Army, and after the Northern Wei Army was defeated and retreated, it again encircled the Tiger's Lair.

古文：拓跋木末又遣安平公涉归寇青州。
现代文：拓跋木末又派遣安平公涉归侵犯青州。
English: At the end of Tuoba, Anping was sent to invade Qingzhou.

古文：癸卯，河南郡失守。
现代文：五日，河南郡失守。
English: On the 5th, Henan County lost.

古文：乙卯，有星孛于东壁。二月丁丑，太皇太后崩。
现代文：十七日，星犯东壁。二月十日，太皇太后驾崩。
English: On the 17th, the star broke through the east wall. On February 10th, the great empress dowager passed away.

古文：沮渠蒙逊、吐谷浑阿豺并遣使朝贡。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊、吐谷浑阿材遣使者来朝贡。
English: Despondent, Mengsong and Tuya Hunazai sent emissaries to pay tribute.

古文：庚辰，爵蒙逊为大将军，封河西王。
现代文：十三日，授蒙逊为骠骑大将军，封为河西王。
English: On the 13th, Mengsong was given the title of General of the Horse Cavalry and crowned King of Hexi.

古文：以阿豺为安西将军、沙州刺史，封浇河公。
现代文：任命阿材为安西将军、沙州刺史，封为浇河公。
English: Azai was appointed as the general of Anxi, the governor of Shazhou, and the governor of Gehe.

古文：辛未，富阳人孙法光反，寇山阴，会稽太守褚淡之遣山阴令陆劭讨败之。
现代文：四日，富阳孙法光谋反，进犯山阴，会稽太守褚淡之派遣山阴县令陆劭讨伐，陆劭击败孙法光。
English: On the fourth day, Fuyang Sun Faguang plotted a rebellion and attacked Shanyin. He dispatched Shanyin County's inspector general, Shantan, to order Lu Yao to fight, and Lu Yao defeated Sun Faguang.

古文：三月壬寅，孝懿皇后祔葬于兴宁陵。
现代文：三月五日，孝懿皇后附葬在兴宁陵。
English: On March 5, Empress Xiaojun was buried in Xingning Mausoleum.

古文：是月，高丽国遣使朝贡。
现代文：同月高丽国遣使者来朝贡。
English: In the same month, envoys from Korea came to pay tribute.

古文：甲子，豫州刺史刘粹遣军袭许昌，杀虏颍川太守庾龙。
现代文：二十七日，豫州刺史刘粹派兵袭击许昌，杀北魏颍川太守庾龙。
English: On the 27th, Liu Zi, the statesman of Yuzhou, sent troops to attack Xu Chang and killed the Northern Wei governor of the Li River, Yao Long.

古文：乙丑，虏骑寇高平。
现代文：二十八日，北魏骑兵侵犯高平。
English: On the 28th, the Northern Wei cavalry invaded Gaoping.

古文：初，虏自河北之败，请修和亲；及闻高祖崩，因复侵扰，河、洛之地骚然矣。
现代文：当初北魏军在河北战败后，请求和亲修好；听到高祖驾崩后，又趁机侵扰，河、洛之地骚乱。
English: At the beginning, after the Northern Wei Army was defeated in Hebei, it asked for reconciliation; after hearing that Gao Zu passed away, it took the opportunity to intrude, and there were riots in He and Luo.

古文：夏四月，檀道济北征，次临朐，焚虏攻具。
现代文：夏四月，檀道济领兵出征，到临朐，焚烧了北魏军队的攻城器具。
English: In the summer of April, Dangdoji led the troops to Linyi and burned the siege equipment of the Northern Wei army.

古文：乙未，魏军克虎牢，执司州刺史毛德祖以归。
现代文：二十九日，北魏军攻克虎牢，捉司州刺史毛德祖而归。
English: On the 29th, the Northern Wei Army conquered the Tiger's Stronghold and captured the Shizhou assassin Mao Dezu.

古文：秋七月癸酉，尊所生张夫人为皇太后。丁丑，以旱，诏赦五岁刑以下罪人。
现代文：秋七月八日，皇上尊生母张夫人为皇太后，十二日，因为旱灾，下诏赦免被判五年以下徒刑的犯人。
English: On the 8th day of the 7th month of autumn, the Empress Dowager Zhang, the Emperor's biological mother, issued a decree to pardon prisoners sentenced to less than five years of imprisonment on the 12th day of the month due to the drought.

古文：冬十月己未，有星孛于氐，指尾，贯摄提，向大角，仲月在危，季月扫天仓而后灭。
现代文：冬十月二十六日，星犯于氐，指尾，贯摄提，向大角。冬季的第二个月在危，最后一个月扫天仓座而后消失。
English: On the 26th day of October in winter, the star was in the sign of Cancer, the sign of Virgo, the sign of Virgo, and the sign of Capricorn. The second month of winter was in danger, and the last month swept the sky and disappeared.

古文：是岁，魏主拓跋嗣薨，子焘立。
现代文：这年，魏主拓跋嗣死，儿子拓跋焘继任。
English: In the same year, the Wei ruler Tuoba Zi died, and his son Tuoba Zong succeeded him.

古文：十二月丙寅，省宁州之江阳、犍为、安上三郡，合为宋昌郡。
现代文：十二月十一日，将宁州的江阳、犍为、安上三郡，合并为宋昌郡。
English: On December 11, the three counties of Jiangyang, Fenwei and Anshan in Ningzhou were merged into Songchang County.

古文：二年春正月癸巳朔，日有蚀之。废南豫州刺史庐陵王义真为庶人，徙新安郡。
现代文：景平二年春二月九日，日蚀。废南豫州刺史庐陵王义真为平民，流放到新安郡。
English: On the 9th day of the 2nd month of the 2nd year of the Spring of Jingping, a solar eclipse occurred. King Yizhen, who was a commoner, was exiled to Xin'an County.

古文：乙未，以皇弟义恭为冠军将军，南豫州刺史。
现代文：十一日，任命皇弟义恭为冠军将军、南豫州刺史。
English: On the 11th day of the month, he appointed the emperor's younger brother, Yixiong, as the champion general and the leader of Southern Yu Prefecture.

古文：乙巳，大风，天有五色云，占者以为有兵。
现代文：二十一日，刮大风，天上出现五彩云，占卜者以为有兵祸。
English: On the twenty-first day, a strong wind blew, and multicolored clouds appeared in the sky. The soothsayers thought there would be a military disaster.

古文：高丽国遣使贡献。
现代文：高丽国派使臣来朝贡。
English: Goryeo sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：执政使使者诛义真于新安。
现代文：执政使者在新安杀了义真。
English: The government envoy killed Yoshizane in Shinan.

古文：夏五月，江州刺史檀道济、扬州刺史王弘入朝。
现代文：夏五月，江州刺史王弘、南兖州刺史檀道济入朝。
English: In the summer of May, Wang Hong from Jiangzhou Province and Dang Dao Zhi from Southern Luzhou Province entered the imperial court.

古文：帝居处所为多过失。乙酉，皇太后令曰：
现代文：皇帝过失很多。二十五日，皇太后下诏说：
English: On the 25th, the Empress Dowager issued an edict saying:

古文：王室不造，天祸未悔，先帝创业弗永，弃世登遐。
现代文： 王室命运不济，天降灾祸却不知悔改，先帝创业不久，就离世升天。
English: The fate of the royal family was not good, but they did not know how to repent of the natural disaster. The former emperor died and ascended to heaven soon after starting his business.

古文：义符长嗣，属当天位，不谓穷凶极悖，一至于此。
现代文：义符作为长子，理当继承帝位，想不到穷凶极恶倒行逆施，到达如此地步。
English: As the eldest son, Gyofu was supposed to inherit the imperial throne. It was unimaginable that he would go so far as to commit a heinous act.

古文：大行在殡，宇内哀惶，幸灾肆于悖词，喜容表于在戚。
现代文：先帝停灵期间，举国悲哀，义符却幸灾乐祸溢于言词，表面悲伤内心欢喜。
English: During the period of the late emperor's death, the whole country was sad, but the auspicious symbols were overflowing with words of gloating and rejoicing.

古文：加复日夜媟狎，群小慢戏，兴造千计，费用万端，帑藏空虚，人力殚尽。
现代文：甚至征召乐队，召集乐人，拨弄管弦，尽情玩乐。每餐美味佳肴，比平日更严重。奸污婢女，生下了私生子，却毫无愧色，坏名声传得很远。
English: He even called for a band, gathered musicians, played with the orchestra, and had a good time. Each meal was delicious and more serious than usual. He raped his maid and gave birth to an illegitimate child, but he was not ashamed, and his bad reputation spread far and wide.

古文：刑罚苛虐，幽囚日增。居帝王之位，好阜隶之役；处万乘之尊，悦厮养之事。
现代文：懿后仙逝，义符又犯了不可饶恕的罪过，拿着丝带与左右欢歌，送葬时，击掌嘻戏，大兴土木，耗费巨大，造成国库空虚，百姓力竭。刑罚苛严，囚徒日增。身为帝王，却好做差役之事。
English: After the death of Empress Dowager Cixi, Yifu committed the unpardonable sin of holding a ribbon and singing a song, clapping his hands and playing a musical instrument during the funeral procession, building a large number of buildings at great expense, emptying the treasury, and exhausting the people. The punishment was severe, and the number of prisoners increased day by day. As an emperor, he was good at doing errands.

古文：亲执鞭扑，殴击无辜，以为笑乐。穿池筑观，朝成暮毁；征发工匠，疲极兆民。
现代文：亲自执鞭，殴打无辜，以此为乐，挖池塘建庙观，朝成暮毁，征发大批工匠，百姓疲惫不堪。
English: He personally wielded the whip, beat innocent people for fun, dug a pond to build a temple, destroyed it in the morning and in the evening, conscripted a large number of craftsmen, and the people were exhausted.

古文：远近叹嗟，人神怨怒。社稷将坠，岂可复嗣守洪业，君临万邦。
现代文：远近哀叹，人神怒怨，社稷将毁，岂能再守祖业，君临天下。
English: People near and far will lament, gods and mortals will be enraged, society will be destroyed. Will we ever be able to preserve our ancestral heritage and rule the world?

古文：今废为营阳王，一依汉昌邑、晋海西故事。
现代文：现废为营阳王，依照汉昌邑、晋海西旧例。
English: It is now abolished as Yingyangwang, in accordance with the old cases of Hanchang-eup and Jinhai West.

古文：奉迎镇西将军宜都王义隆入纂皇统。
现代文：镇西将军宜都王，自幼仁义孝悌，道德高尚功业卓著，心地善良明达公允。
English: Zhenxi General Yi Du Wang, from childhood benevolence, righteousness and filial piety, high morals and outstanding achievements, kind-hearted and fair-minded.

古文：始徐羡之、傅亮将废帝，讽王弘、檀道济求赴国讣。
现代文：宜即帝位，君临天下。主事人要认真依照旧例，及时迎接宜都王回京。 当初徐羡之、傅亮图谋废少帝，委婉劝说王弘，檀道济回京奔丧。
English: According to the old custom, the person in charge should conscientiously and timely welcome the Yidu King back to Beijing. At first, Xu Enzhi and Fu Liang plotted to depose the young emperor, and gently persuaded Wang Hong to go back to Beijing to mourn.

古文：弘等来朝，使中书舍人邢安泰、潘盛为内应。
现代文：王弘等回朝。派中书舍人刑安泰、潘盛做内应。
English: Wang Hong and others returned to the imperial court, and the chancellors of the Central Academy of Sciences, Guan Tai and Pan Sheng, were dispatched to handle the internal affairs.

古文：是旦，道济、谢晦领兵居前，羡之等随后，因东掖门开，入自云龙门。
现代文：这天早晨，檀道济、谢晦领兵打先锋，徐羡之等随后，乘东掖门开着，从云龙门入皇宫。
English: In the morning of that day, Dang Daoji and Xie Yao led the troops in the vanguard, followed by Xu Enzhi and others. They opened the East Gate and entered the imperial palace from the Cloud Dragon Gate.

古文：盛等先戒宿卫，莫有御者。
现代文：潘盛等先告诉了侍卫，因此没遇到抵抗。
English: Pan Sheng and others told the guards first, so there was no resistance.

古文：时帝于华林园为列肆，亲自酤卖。
现代文：当时少帝正在华林园做买卖，亲自卖酒。
English: At that time, the young emperor was doing business in the Hualing Garden and selling wine in person.

古文：又开渎聚土，以象破冈埭，与左右引船唱呼，以为欢乐。夕游天泉池，即龙舟而寝。
现代文：又开沟垒土，以象征破冈棣，与左右乘船歌唱作乐。傍晚游天渊池，在龙舟上就寝。
English: They also dug a ditch to symbolize the breaking of the mountain ridge, and sang and played music with the boats on the left and right. In the evening, they swam in the Tianyuan Lake and slept on the dragon boat.

古文：其朝未兴，兵士进，杀二侍者于帝侧，伤帝指。
现代文：次日早晨少帝还未起床，士兵进来了，杀了少帝身旁的两个侍者，伤了少帝的手指。
English: The next morning, before the young emperor got up, the soldiers came in, killed the two waiters next to the young emperor, and injured the young emperor's fingers.

古文：扶出东皞，就收玺绂，群臣拜辞，送于东宫，遂幽于吴郡。
现代文：扶少帝出东阁，收了玉玺丝带，群臣与少帝辞白，送少帝到东宫，遂被幽禁在吴都。
English: He helped the young emperor out of the East Pavilion, received the jade-enameled ribbon, and the courtiers parted ways with the young emperor and sent him to the East Palace, whereupon he was imprisoned in Wudu.

古文：是日，赦死罪以下。
现代文：这天，赦免除死罪以外的犯人。
English: On this day, prisoners convicted of crimes other than the death penalty are pardoned.

古文：太后令奉还玺绂，檀道济入守朝堂。
现代文：太后下令奉还玉玺丝带。檀道济入主朝政。
English: The empress dowager ordered the return of the jade embroidered ribbon. Tandooji entered the imperial court.

古文：六月癸丑，徐羡之等使中书舍人邢安泰弑帝于金昌亭。
现代文：六月二十四日，徐羡之等派中书舍人刑安泰在金昌刺杀少帝。
English: On June 24th, Xu Enzhi and others dispatched the Chinese scholar An Tai to assassinate the young emperor in Jinchang.

古文：帝有勇力，不即受制，突走出昌门，追以门关踣之，致殒。
现代文：少帝有力气，不甘心受制，从昌门逃跑，邢安泰追赶，用门闩使他仆倒，少帝毙命。
English: The young emperor was strong-willed and unwilling to be restrained. He ran away from the Changmen Gate, and Yan Antao chased after him. He knocked him down with the latch of the gate, and the young emperor died.

古文：时年十九。
现代文：时年十九岁。
English: He was 19 years old at the time.

