古文：王敬则，晋陵南沙人也。
现代文：王敬则，是晋陵南沙人。
English: Wang Jing is from Nansha, Jinling.

古文：母为女巫，生敬则而胞衣紫色，谓人曰： 此儿有鼓角相。 
现代文：母亲是女巫，生敬则时胞衣是紫色的，对人说： 这孩子有将军的相。 
English: His mother was a witch, and when he was born his pajamas were purple, and she said to people, "This child has the face of a general."

古文：敬则年长，两腋下生乳各长数寸。
现代文：敬则长大了，两腋下长出奶来，各有几寸长。
English: Kei, on the other hand, has grown up, and milk is coming out from under his armpits, each of which is a few inches long.

古文：梦骑五色师子。
现代文：梦见骑着五彩的狮子。
English: I once dreamed that I was riding a five-colored lion.

古文：年二十余，善拍张。
现代文：二十多岁时，会玩杂技。
English: In his twenties, he learned to do acrobatics.

古文：补刀戟左右。
现代文：补充为皇上的刀戟近卫。
English: Supplemented by the Emperor's Sword Guard.

古文：景和使敬则跳刀，高与白虎幢等，如此五六，接无不中。
现代文：景和帝叫敬则玩刀，抛得和白虎幢那样高，像这样的有五六把，没有接不着的。
English: Jing and Di called Jing to play with swords, and they threw them as high as the White Tiger Tower. There were five or six swords like this, but none of them could be caught.

古文：补侠毂队主，领细铠左右。
现代文：补充到侠毂卫队任队主，带细鉴近卫。
English: In addition, he was appointed as the team leader of the Chivalry Guard Team, leading the guards with detailed knowledge.

古文：与寿寂之同毙景和。
现代文：和寿寂之一起杀死景和帝。
English: He killed Emperor Jing together with Shoujia.

古文：明帝即位，以为直阁将军。
现代文：明帝即位，任他为直合将军。
English: When Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, he appointed him as the general of Zhouga.

古文：坐捉刀入殿启事，击尚方十余日，乃复直阁。
现代文：因为带刀进殿奏事，拘禁在尚方十来天，才又到合中轮值。
English: He was detained in Shangfang for ten days for bringing a knife into the palace to make a report, and only then did he go back to the middle school.

古文：除奋武将军，封重安县子，邑三百五十户。
现代文：拜为奋武将军，封为重安县子，食邑三百五十户。
English: He was worshipped as General Tengwu and given the title of the son of Chong'an County, with 350 households in the food village.

古文：敬则少时于草中射猎，有虫如鸟豆集其身，摘去乃脱，其处接流血。
现代文：敬则年轻时在草中射猎，有些像乌豆一样的虫聚集在他身上，用手摘才脱开，那些地方都出了血。
English: When Jing was young, he was shooting in the grass. Some worms like black beans gathered on his body, and he had to pick them off with his hands. There was blood everywhere.

古文：敬则恶之，诣道士卜，道士曰： 不须忧，此封侯之瑞也。 
现代文：敬则认为那不是好事，到道士那儿卜了一挂，道士说： 不要担心，这是封侯的好征兆。 
English: Kei, on the other hand, thought that it was not a good thing. He went to a Taoist and asked him about it. The Taoist said, "Don't worry, this is a good sign for the enthronement."

古文：敬则闻之喜，故出闻自喜，故出都自效，至是如言。
现代文：敬则听了高兴，所以出都城去寻求效应，到这时应验。
English: Kei, on the other hand, was pleased to hear that, so he went out of the capital to seek the effect, and it was fulfilled at that time.

古文：泰始初，以敬则为龙骧将军、军主，随宁朔将军刘怀珍征寿春，殷琰遣将刘从筑四垒于死虎，怀珍遣敬则以千人绕后。直出横塘，贼众惊退。
现代文：泰始初年，任敬则为龙骧将军、军主，跟着宁朔将军刘怀珍征讨寿春。殷琰派将领刘从在死虎修筑四座堡垒，怀珍派敬则带着一千人绕到后方，从搓塘直接杀出，贼军惊退了。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizhi, Ren Jing was the general and commander of the Longyu, followed by the Ningshuo general Liu Huizhen to recruit Shuchun. The Yinhu general Liu Zeng built four fortresses in the Dead Tiger, and the Huizhen general Jing took a thousand people around to the rear and killed directly from Shantang, and the thief army retreated in shock.

古文：除奉朝请，出补东武暨阳令。
现代文：拜为奉朝请，出京补暨阳县令。
English: If you wish to serve the Emperor, please go to Beijing to make up the Yangxian County.

古文：敬则初出都，至陆主山下，宗侣十余船同发，敬则船独不进，乃令弟入水推之，见一乌漆棺。
现代文：敬则刚出都城，到陆主山下，宗族同行十来只船一齐开船，敬则的船独独不能走，就让弟弟到水裹推船，看到一黑漆棺材。
English: As soon as he left the capital and arrived at the foot of the main mountain, about ten boats belonging to his family started out together. As he couldn't go alone, he asked his younger brother to push the boat and saw a black-painted coffin.

古文：敬则曰： 尔非凡器。
现代文：敬则说： 你不是平凡的人物。
English: Kei said, "You are not an ordinary person.

古文：若是吉善，使船速进。
现代文：如果是吉利的，就让船快走。
English: If it is auspicious, let the boat go fast.

古文：吾富贵，当改葬尔。 
现代文：我富贵了，会改葬你。 
English: Now that I'm rich, I'll give you a proper burial.

古文：船须臾去。
现代文：船一会儿就离开了。
English: The boat left soon after.

古文：敬则既入县，收此棺葬之。
现代文：敬则到了县府，把这棺材埋葬了。
English: Kei went to the prefectural government and buried the coffin.

古文：军荒之后，县有一部劫逃紫山中为民患，敬则遣人致意劫帅，可悉出首，当相申论。
现代文：兵灾以后，县裹有一支逃到紫山中的人马成了百姓的祸患，敬则派人问候乱军的首领，说明可都来自首，会为他们辩解。
English: After the war, there was a group of people in the county who fled to the middle of the Purple Mountain and became the scourge of the people. Jing sent greetings to the leaders of the rebel army, explaining that they could all surrender and would justify them.

古文：治下庙神甚酷烈，百姓信之，敬则引神为誓，必不相负。
现代文：县裹庙神很厉害，老百姓相信庙神，敬则指着庙神蜒誓，说定不食言。
English: The county-wrapped temple god is very powerful. The common people believe in the temple god, and respectfully point to the temple god and swear, saying that they will not break their word.

古文：劫帅既出，敬则于庙中设会，于座收缚，曰： 吾先启神，若负誓，还神十牛。
现代文：乱军首领便出来了，敬则在庙中设置会见，在座位上拘捕了他，说： 我先就祷告了神，如果背负誓言，就送十头牛给庙神。
English: The leader of the rebel army then came out, and Kei set up a meeting in the temple and arrested him on the seat, saying: I prayed to God first, and if I take an oath, I will send ten cows to the temple god.

古文：今不违誓。 
现代文：现在我不违背誓言。 
English: Now I'm not breaking my oath.

古文：即杀十牛解神，并斩诸劫，百姓悦之。
现代文：就杀了十头牛来祭神，同时斩了众劫军，百姓高兴。
English: So he killed ten cows to give to the temple god, and killed those robbers, and the people were very happy.

古文：迁员外郎。
现代文：升员外郎。
English: It's time for promotion, Sotaro.

古文：元徽二年，随太祖拒桂阳贼于新亭，敬则与羽林监陈显达、宁朔将军高道庆乘舸于江中迎战，大破贼水军，焚其舟舰。
现代文：元徽二年，跟着太祖在新亭抵抗桂阳的贼军，敬则和羽林监陈显达、宁朔将军高道庆乘船在长江中迎战，大破贼寇水军，烧了他们的战船。
English: In the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, following the great-grandfather in Xingting to resist the Guiyang thief army, Jing Zetian, Chen Xianda, the overseer of the Hualin, and Gao Daoqing, the general of Ningshuo, took the boat to fight in the Yangtze River, smashed the thieves and pirates, and burned their warships.

古文：事宁，带南泰山太守，右侠毂主，转越骑校尉，安成王车骑参军。
现代文：乱事平定后，兼任南泰山太守，右侠毂主，转任越骑校尉，安成王车骑参军。
English: After the turmoil was settled, he also served as the governor of South Taishan, the right-hand knight, the right-hand knight, the right-hand knight, the right-hand knight, the right-hand knight, the right-hand knight, the right-hand knight, the right-hand knight, the right-hand knight, the right-hand knight, the right-hand knight, the right-hand knight, the right-hand knight, the right-hand knight, the right-hand knight, the right-hand knight, the right-hand knight, the right-hand knight, the right-

古文：苍梧王狂虐，左右不自保，敬则以太祖有威名，归诚奉事。
现代文：苍梧王狂暴残酷，近侍都无法保全自己，敬则因为看到太祖很有威望，归附他。
English: King Cangwu was violent and cruel, and even his closest attendants were unable to protect themselves. However, because he saw that his great-grandfather was very prestigious, Kei followed him.

古文：每下直，辄领府。
现代文：每次轮值回来，就到领军府去。
English: Every time they come back from duty, they go to the army headquarters.

古文：夜著青衣，扶匐道路。为太祖听察苍梧去来。
现代文：夜裹穿着黑衣，趴在路边，替太祖探测苍梧王的往来行踪。
English: Wrapped in black at night, lying on the side of the road, detecting the comings and goings of Cangwu Wang for his grandfather.

古文：太祖命敬则于殿内伺机，未有定日。
现代文：太祖命敬则在殿内等待机会，没有期限。
English: Taizu Myoken is waiting for an opportunity in the hall, there is no time limit.

古文：既而杨玉夫等危急殒帝，敬则时在家，玉夫将首投敬则，敬则驰诣太祖。
现代文：后来杨玉夫等人在紧急状态下杀了皇帝，敬则当时在家裹，玉夫提着首级投奔敬则，敬则跑去见太祖。
English: Later, Yang Yufu and others killed the emperor in a state of emergency, while Jing was wrapped up at home at the time. Yufu took the head and ran to Jing, while Jing ran to see Taizu.

古文：太祖虑苍梧所诳，不开门。
现代文：太祖怕是苍梧王的骗局，不开门。
English: The great-grandfather is afraid that this is a trick of King Cangwu, so he does not open the door.

古文：敬则于门外大呼曰： 是敬则耳。 门犹不开。
现代文：敬则在门外大喊： 是敬则呀。 门还没开。
English: Kei then shouted outside the door: "It's Kei, the door hasn't opened yet."

古文：乃于墙投进其首，太祖萦水洗视，视竟，乃戎服出。
现代文：他就从墙上把首级抛进去，太祖找水来洗后一看，看完，就穿军装出门来。
English: He threw the severed heads into the well from the wall, and the great-grandfather looked for water to wash them with. When he had finished, he put on his military uniform and went out.

古文：敬则从入宫，至承明门，门郎疑非苍梧还，敬则虑人觇见，以刀环塞洼孔，呼开门甚急。
现代文：敬则跟随着进宫，到承明门，守门官怀疑不是苍梧手回宫，敬则怕别人偷看到，用刀环堵住窥视孔，叫开门叫得很急。
English: Kei follows him into the palace and arrives at the Chengming Gate. The gatekeeper suspects that it is not Goro who is returning to the palace. Kei, afraid of being seen by others, blocks the peephole with a knife ring and shouts urgently for the door to be opened.

古文：卫尉丞颜灵宝窥见太祖乘马在外，窃谓亲人曰： 今若不开内领军，天下会是乱耳。 
现代文：卫尉瘪颜灵宝偷看到太祖骑着马在门外，就悄悄地对亲信说： 现在如果不开门放进领军，天下会从此大乱了。 
English: Guard lieutenant Yan Yanling Bao secretly saw the great-grandfather riding a horse outside the gate, and quietly said to his relatives: If you don't open the door and let the leader in now, the world will be in chaos from now on.

古文：门开，敬则随太祖入殿。
现代文：就打开了门，敬则跟着太祖进殿。
English: He opened the door, and Kei followed his grandfather into the hall.

古文：明旦，四贵集议，敬则拔白刃在床侧跳跃曰： 官应处分，谁敢作同异者！ 
现代文：第二天，四位显贵在一起商议，敬则拔出刀在床旁边跳着说： 关于皇帝的安排，谁敢提出不同意见! 
English: The next day, the four dignitaries discussed together, and Jing pulled out a knife and danced next to the bed, saying: "Who dares to raise a different opinion about the emperor's arrangement!

古文：升明元年，迁员外散骑常侍、辅国将军、骁骑将军、领临淮太守，增封为千三百户，知殿内宿卫兵事。
现代文：升明元年，升为员外散骑常侍、辅国将军、骁骑将军、领临淮太守，增加封地到一千三百户，管理殿内宿卫兵事。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, he was promoted to the rank of non-commissioned officer, cavalryman, auxiliary general, cavalry general, and led by Lin Huai, increased the fiefs to 1300 households, and managed the guards in the palace.

古文：沈攸之事起，进敬则号冠军将军。
现代文：沈攸之作乱时，敬则进号为冠军将军。
English: When Shen Youzhi caused a disturbance, Kei was promoted to champion general.

古文：太祖入守朝堂，袁粲起兵夕，领军刘韫、直阁将军卜伯兴等于宫内相应，戒严将发。敬则开关掩袭，皆杀之。
现代文：太祖进京守卫朝廷，袁粲起兵的那晚，领军刘韫、直合将军卜伯兴等人在宫内作内应，戒严令将要发出时，敬则冲开门掩杀过去，将叛贼都杀了。
English: The great-grandfather entered Beijing to guard the imperial court. On the night that Yuan Shikai raised an army, the leaders Liu Shun and Zhihe General Bu Bo Xing and others were in the palace for internal correspondence. When martial law was about to be issued, Jing opened the door to hide and kill the traitors.

古文：殿内窃发尽平，敬则之力也。
现代文：宫内暗地变乱的能全部扫灭，是得敬则的力。
English: The events that had been secretly instigated within the palace were all quelled, and this was truly due to Wang Jingzhe's strength.

古文：迁右卫将军，常侍如故。
现代文：升为右卫将军，常侍一职不变。
English: He was promoted to General of the Right Division, and his position as a regular attendant remained unchanged.

古文：增封为二千五百户，寻又加五百户。
现代文：增加封邑一一千五百户，接着又增加五百户。
English: The number of counties and townships was increased by 1,500, followed by an additional 500 households.

古文：又封敬则予元迁为东乡侯，邑三百七十户。
现代文：又封敬则的儿子元迁为束乡侯。食邑三百七十户。
English: In addition, the son of Keijo, Mototsuki, was made the lord of a fief. 370 households in Shokui were uprooted.

古文：齐台建，为中领军。
现代文：齐王建台合时任中领军。
English: Qi Wang Jiantai became the leader of the middle army at the same time.

古文：太祖受禅，材官荐易太极殿柱，从帝欲避土，不肯出宫逊位。
现代文：太祖将即位，材官进言要改换太极殿的柱子，顺帝想避开，不肯出宫来行退位仪式。
English: Emperor Taizu was about to be enthroned, and officials suggested changing the pillars of the Taiji Hall. Emperor Shun wanted to avoid this and refused to leave the palace for the abdication ceremony.

古文：明日，当临轩，帝又逃宫内。
现代文：第二天，正走到轩阁时，皇帝又逃回宫襄。
English: The next day, when he was walking to Xuange, the emperor fled back to the palace.

古文：敬则将举人迎帝，启譬令出。
现代文：敬则带着肩舆进去迎顺帝，让他出宫。
English: Kei, however, went in with a shoulder fan to greet Emperor Shun and let him leave the palace.

古文：帝拍敬则手曰： 必无过虑，当饷辅国十万钱。 
现代文：顺帝拍着敬则的手说： 你不必过分担心，会赏给你十万钱酬劳辅国的功勋。 
English: Emperor Shun patted Wang Jingze's hand and said, "If there is no accident, I will give you one hundred thousand yuan."

古文：建元元年，出为使持节、散骑常侍、都督南兖兖徐青冀五州军事、平北将军、南兖州剌史，封寻阳郡公，邑三千户。
现代文：建元元年，出京任使持节、散骑常侍、管辖南兖兖徐青冀五州的军事、平北将军、南兖州刺史等职，封为寻阳郡公，食邑三千户。
English: In the first year of Jianyuan, he went to Beijing and was appointed as the envoy of Ji Jie, the horseback riding attendant, the military in charge of the five prefectures of Nanxi, Xuqing and Hebei, the general of Pingbei, and the historian of Nanxi, and was appointed as the governor of Xiangyang County, with 3,000 households.

古文：加敬则妻怀氏爵为寻阳国夫人。
现代文：加封敬型的妻子!麸为寻阳国夫人的爵衔。
English: An honorary wife with an additional seal! The title of Lady of the Country of the Rising Sun.

古文：二年，进号安北将军。
现代文：二年，进号为安北将军。
English: Two years later, he was promoted to General Anbei.

古文：虏寇淮、泗，敬则恐，委镇还都，百姓皆惊散奔走，上以其功臣，不问，以为都官尚书、抚军。
现代文：北虏侵犯淮、泗地区，敬则害怕，放弃守地回京都，百姓都惊慌逃散，皇上因为他是有功的大臣，没追究，任他为都官尚书、抚军。
English: The North Korean invaders invaded the regions of Huai and Handan, but Kei was afraid and gave up his defense to return to Kyoto. The people panicked and fled. The emperor, because he was a meritorious minister, did not investigate, and left him as the official of the capital to write and lead the army.

古文：寻迁使持节、散骑常侍、安东将军、吴兴太守。
现代文：不久升任使持节、散骑常侍、安束将军、吴兴太守。
English: He was soon promoted to the posts of envoy, horseback riding attendant, Anzaku general, and Wu Xing governor.

古文：郡旧多剽掠，有十数岁小儿于路取遗物，杀之以徇，自此道不拾遗，郡无劫盗。
现代文：郡中原来很多偷盗，有十几岁的小孩在路上拿了人家遣失的东西，就杀了示众，从此路不拾遣，郡裹没有劫匪盗贼。
English: There used to be a lot of theft in the county. There was a teenager who took something that was lost on the road and killed a demonstrator. From then on, there was no way to recover the stolen goods. There were no robbers and thieves in the county.

古文：又录得一偷，召其亲属于前鞭之，令偷身长扫街路，久之乃令偷举旧偷自代，诸偷恐为其所识，皆逃走，境内以清。
现代文：还有一次抓到一个贼，把贼人的亲属叫来当面鞭打贼人，命贼人长期去打扫街道，时间久了就命他揭发原来的贼伙代替他，众贼人怕被他认出来，都逃走了，郡治以内因而清平安宁了。
English: Another time, he caught a thief, called the thief's relatives to come and whip the thief in person, ordered the thief to clean the streets for a long time, and after a long time, ordered him to expose the original gang of thieves to replace him. The thieves were afraid of being recognized by him, and they all fled. As a result, there was peace and tranquility within the county.

古文：出行，从市过，见屠肉杆，欢曰： 呈兴昔无此杆，是我少时在此所作也。 
现代文：出衙巡视时，从集市经过，看到屠户的肉栴，感慨地说： 吴兴以前没有这个栴，这是我年轻时在这裹搞起来的。 
English: When inspecting the meat market, he passed by the bazaar and saw the butcher's meat stew, and said with emotion: Wu Xing did not have this stew before, I made it here when I was young.

古文：迁护军将军，常侍如故，以家为府。
现代文：升为护军将军，常侍之职未变，把家辟为官署。
English: He was promoted to General of the Guard, but his position as a regular attendant remained unchanged, and his family was turned into a government office.

古文：三年，以改葬去职，诏赠敬则母寻阳公国太夫人。
现代文：三年，因改葬母亲辞职，皇上下韶追赠敬则的母亲为寻阳公国太夫人。
English: Three years later, because his mother's funeral was rescheduled and she resigned, the Emperor posthumously bestowed the title of Empress Dowager on his mother.

古文：改授侍中、抚军将军。
现代文：改授他为侍中、抚军将军。
English: He was reclassified as a chamberlain and general of the army.

古文：太祖遗诏敬则以本官领丹阳尹。
现代文：左担在遣诏中要堑型以原职兼任丹阳府尹。
English: In the dispatch of the edict, the left-hand officer wanted to return to his original position and serve as the Yin of Danyang Prefecture.

古文：寻迁为使持节、散骑常侍、都督会稽东阳临海永嘉五郡军事、镇东将军、会稽太守。
现代文：接着又升他为使持节、散骑常侍、都督会稽塞体面安堕逛丞台五郡军事、镇柬将军、会稽太守。
English: Next, he was promoted to envoy, horseback riding attendant, military officer of the five counties of Taiwan, general of the town of Cambodia, and grand steward of the party.

古文：永明二年，给鼓吹一部。
现代文：永明二年，赐给鼓吹一部。
English: In the second year of the Yongming era, a portion of the proceeds was given to the orchestra.

古文：会土边带湖海，发丁无士庶皆保塘投，敬则以功力有余，悉评敛为钱，送台库以为便宜，上许之。
现代文：盒稽那地方毗连湖海，老百姓无论士族还是一般平民都有塘役，敬则认为保塘力量有余，全都折合成钱收缴，送到台库中作为见机使用，皇上批准了。
English: In that place, which is adjacent to the lake and the sea, the common people, whether they were from the warrior class or ordinary civilians, had the duty of guarding the pond, but the emperor thought that they had more than enough power to guard the pond. All of them were converted into money, collected, and sent to the bank for use at the right time. The emperor approved.

古文：竟陵王子良启曰：
现代文：竟陵王子良启奏：
English: Goryo Oji Ryokai:

古文：伏寻三吴内地，国这关辅，百度所资。
现代文：我私下考虑，三吴内地，是国家的关辅，各种用度的出产处。
English: I privately consider that the Sanwu inland is the country's gateway, the production site of all kinds of rice.

古文：发庶凋流，日有困殆，蚕家罕获，饥寒尤甚，富者稍增其饶，贫者转钟其弊，可为痛心，难以辞尽。
现代文：百姓流散，日益困窘，蚕桑和农业收获极少，饥寒更加严重，富的人渐渐更富，穷的人反而髓着更穷，可说是痛心的事，很难说得尽。
English: The people are dispersed and increasingly distressed, the harvest of silkworms and agriculture is extremely small, hunger and cold are more serious, the rich are getting richer, and the poor are getting poorer. It can be said that it is a painful thing, it is difficult to say.

古文：顷钱贵物贱，殆欲兼倍，凡在触类，莫不如兹。
现代文：前不久钱币贵重东西价贱，几乎要相差两倍，衹要是这一类的，没有不是如此。
English: Not long ago, the difference between the price of something valuable and something cheap was almost twice as much, and if it was in this category, it wouldn't be different.

古文：稼穑难劬，斛直数十，机杼勤苦，匹裁三百。
现代文：种庄稼十分艰难，一斛衹值数十钱，纺织劳苦，一匹布才三百钱。
English: It is very difficult to grow crops, a stalk is worth tens of money, textile labor, a piece of cloth is only three hundred dollars.

古文：所以然者，实亦有由。
现代文：之所以这样，实在是有原因的。
English: There is a reason for this.

古文：年常岁调，既有定期，僮恤所上，威是风陡，东间钱多剪凿，鲜复完者，公家所受，必须员大，以两代一，困于所贸，鞭捶质击，益致无聊。
现代文：每年的通常岁赋，已有一定期限，奴仆租户上缴的，都要折合成钱。束边一带出钱很多被剪凿了，很少有完整的，官府收纳的，一定要完整的，用两个折算为一个，人们被这种换算法搞得很困顿，又是鞭打又是拘留人质，更使他们生活无依靠。
English: Each year's ordinary year's endowment has a certain period of time, and all the money handed over by the slaves and tenants must be converted into money. A lot of the money paid in the Sokubei area has been cut off, and few are complete. The money received by the government must be complete, with two converted into one. People are very troubled by this conversion algorithm, and they are whipped and detained as hostages. What's more, they have no means of support.

古文：臣昔忝会稽，粗闲物俗，塘古所上，本不入官。
现代文：我往年曾忝任会稽太守，略知当地风俗，塘丁上交的，原本不交给官府。
English: In previous years, I had been appointed as the auditor-general of the association, and I knew a little about local customs. What Tondin handed over was originally not handed over to the government.

古文：良由陂湖宜壅，桥路须通，均夫订直，民自为用。
现代文：全是根据要修筑陂坝，要疏通的桥和路，按民夫人数平均定下数量，百姓自己使用。
English: It is all based on the need to build dams, bridges and roads that need to be dredged, and the number is set according to the average number of people, and the people use it themselves.

古文：若甲分毁坏，则年一修改；若乙限坚完，则终岁无役。
现代文：如该甲组轮值的那年毁坏了，就在这年修筑；如果在乙组轮值的期限内堤陂桥路坚固完好，就整年没有劳役。
English: If the year of the rotation of group A is destroyed, it will be rebuilt in this year; if the embankment bridge road is solid and intact within the period of the rotation of group B, there will be no labor service for the whole year.

古文：今郡通课此直，悉以还台，租赋之外，更生一调。
现代文：现在郡裹统统折算成钱上交，全都交到府库，那就是在租赋以外，又增加了一种新的赋调了。
English: Now the county allotment is converted into money and handed over to the prefectural treasury, that is, in addition to the rent, a new transfer has been added.

古文：致今塘路崩芜，湖源泄散，害民损政，实此为剧。
现代文：会导致塘陂道路崩塌荒毁，湖水流失，损害百姓损害官府，这种事算是最厉害的。
English: It will lead to the collapse of the Tanggu road, the destruction of the lake, the loss of lake water, the damage to the people and the damage to the government, which is the most serious thing.

古文：建元初，狡虏游魂，军用殷广。
现代文：建五初年，虏寇侵犯，军费增多。
English: In the first year of the fifth year of Jian, the Mongolian invaders invaded the country, and military expenditure increased.

古文：浙东五郡，丁税一千，乃有质卖妻儿，以充此限，道路愁穷，不可闻见，所逋尚多，收上事绝，臣登具启闻，即蒙蠲原。
现代文：浙东五郡中，收缴丁税一千，竟然有卖妻子儿女来完成这个税的，道路上愁苦穷困的，不忍耳闻目睹。拖欠的赋税还很多，收缴的事也行不通，我当时把情况全奏告朝廷，就得到免缴的恩准。
English: Among the five counties in eastern Zhejiang, a thousand ding taxes were collected, and there were even people who sold their wives and children to complete this tax. I couldn't bear to hear and witness the misery and poverty on the road. There was still a lot of tax arrears, and the collection was not effective. I reported the whole situation to the imperial court at the time, and was granted exemption from payment.

古文：而此年租课，三分逋一，明知徒足扰民，实自弊国。
现代文：这年的租税，有三分之一的拖欠，表面看来衹是完全扰乱百姓，实际上是使国家凋敝。
English: This year's tax arrears, one-third of the arrears, on the face of it, completely disrupt the people, in fact, make the country wither away.

古文：愚谓塘丁一条，宜还复旧，在所逋恤，优量原除。
现代文：我看塘丁这件事，应该按老办法实行，当地拖欠的钱酌情免除。
English: In my opinion, the Tangdian matter should be implemented according to the old method, and the local arrears should be exempted as appropriate.

古文：凡应受钱，不限大小，仍令在所，折市布帛，若民有杂物，是军国所须者，听随价准直，不必一应送钱，于分不亏其用，在私实荷其渥。
现代文：凡是应该交钱的，不分大小，令在当地折合布匹计算。如果百姓中有别的东西上交，是国家或军事上所需要的，让他按市价折算钱，不一定全都要交钱。这样对于朝廷没有减损用度，对于百姓方面实在又承受到恩泽。
English: If there is anything else among the people to be handed over that is needed by the state or the military, let him convert the money according to the market price, and not necessarily all of it must be handed over. In this way, there is no loss to the imperial court, and it is really a blessing for the people.

古文：昔晋氏初迁，江左草创，绢布所直，十倍于今，赋调多少，因时增减。
现代文：以前晋朝刚迁都，江左刚创基业时，绢布所值的钱，比现在多十倍，赋调的多少，根据当时的情况增减。
English: In the past, when the capital of the Jin Dynasty was just moved and Jiang Zuo just founded the foundation, the value of the cloth was ten times more than it is now, and the amount of transfer was increased or decreased according to the situation at that time.

古文：永初中，官布一匹，直钱一千，而民间所输，必为降落。
现代文：永初年间，官布一匹值一千钱，但民间上交的，算作九百。
English: At the beginning of the 19th century, a piece of official cloth was worth 1,000 yuan, but if it was handed in by the public, it was worth 900 yuan.

古文：今入官好布，匹堪百余，其四民所送、犹依旧制。
现代文：慢慢到了元嘉年间，物价变贱了，私人买卖一匹就合六百钱，官府所收一匹衹合五百，每每想要体恤百姓时，定是减少赋税。
English: Slowly, during the Yuan and Jia dynasties, prices became cheaper. A horse bought and sold by a private individual was worth 600 yuan, while a mule bought and sold by the government was worth 500 yuan. Whenever you wanted to show compassion to the people, you had to reduce taxes.

古文：昔为刻上，今为刻下，氓庶空俭，岂不由之。
现代文：现在送到官府的好布，一匹仅值一百多，要求百姓缴的赋，还是依照老规定。从前是减削上级，今天是刻薄下民，百姓穷苦，怎能不由此而生呢。
English: Now, a good cloth sent to the government office is only worth more than one hundred camels, and the tax demanded from the people is still in accordance with the old regulations. In the past, it was the superiors who were cut down, but today it is the people who are cut down, and the people are poor. How can this not be the result?

古文：救民拯弊，莫过减赋。
现代文：救助百姓挽救衰敝的国家，没有什么比减赋的措施更好。
English: There is no better way to help the people and save the ailing country than to reduce subsidies.

古文：时和岁稔，尚尔虚乏，傥值水旱，宁可熟念。
现代文：时节顺遂年成丰收，还有欠缺，如果遇到水旱灾害，怎能富足呢?
English: The seasons go smoothly, the harvest is plentiful every year, but there are still shortages. If there are floods and droughts, how can there be abundance?

古文：且西京炽强，实基三辅，东都全固，实赖三河，历代所同，古今一揆。
现代文：应该深思。再说，西京势盛时，其实是以三辅为根基的，东都能保全牢固，实际要依靠三河一带，历代情况相同，古今道理一样。
English: We should think deeply. Moreover, when the West flourished, it was actually based on the three ancillaries, and the East could maintain a solid foundation. In fact, we should rely on the Three Rivers area. The situation is the same throughout the ages, and the principle is the same from ancient times to the present.

古文：石头以外，裁足自供府州，方山以东，深关朝廷根本。
现代文：石头以外的地方衹够供养府州本身，方山以东的地方，特别关系到朝廷的根本。
English: Other than stone, there is not enough to support Fuzhou itself. The area east of Fangshan is particularly important to the foundation of the imperial court.

古文：夫股肱要重，不可不恤。
现代文：像胳膊大腿一样重要的地方，不能不顾及。
English: You can't ignore something as important as your arms and thighs.

古文：宜蒙宽政，少加优养。
现代文：应该放宽政策，稍加优抚。
English: The policy should be relaxed, with a little more preferential treatment.

古文：略其目前小利，取其长久大益，无患民赀不股，国财不皂也。
现代文：损失一些眼前的小利益，得到长久的大利益，就不担心百姓不富国家不富了。
English: If we lose some immediate small benefits and gain long-term big benefits, we will not worry about the people not being rich and the country not being rich.

古文：宗臣重寄，咸云利国，窃如愚管，未见可安。上不纳。
现代文：宗室大臣和重要大臣都说使国家得利益，我私下想到像我这样的看法，不知是否妥当。皇上不采纳。
English: The Minister of the Imperial Household and important ministers have all said that it is in the interests of the country, and I have privately thought about whether it is appropriate for me to have such an opinion. The Emperor does not accept it.

古文：三年，进号征东将军。
现代文：三年，进号征束将军。
English: In the third year of Yongming, he was promoted and given the title of General of the Expedition to the East.

古文：宋广州剌史王翼之子妾路氏，刚暴，数杀婢，翼之子法明告敬则，敬则付山阴狱杀之，路氏家诉，为有司所奏，山阴令刘岱坐弃市刑。
现代文：宋时的广州刺史王翼之的儿子的小妾路氏，性情暴躁，屡次杀死婢女，翼之的儿子法明告到敬则那裹，敬则把路氏交给山阴县令杀了她。路氏的娘家告状，被官员奏报朝廷，山阴县令刘岱当判弃市刑。
English: The concubine of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son

古文：敬则入朝，上谓敬则曰： 人命至重，是谁杀之？都不启闻？ 
现代文：敬则入朝，皇上对敬则说： 人命是最重大的事，这是谁属意杀死她，而不奏到朝廷? 
English: When Kei entered the imperial court, the emperor said to Kei, "Human life is the most important thing. Who was it that wanted to kill her without informing the imperial court?"

古文：敬则曰： 是臣愚意。
现代文：敬则说： 是我的意思。
English: Wang Jing said, "It means minister."

古文：臣知何物科法，见背后有节，便言应得杀人。 
现代文：我哪裹知道什么情况该定哪条罪，衹看到情节严重，就说应该杀。 
English: A minister who knows what criminal law is, and sees that there is an ulterior motive, says that people should be killed.

古文：刘岱亦引罪，上乃赦之。
现代文：刘岱也把罪归咎自己，皇上就赦免了他。
English: Liu Ye also blamed himself for the crime, and the emperor pardoned him.

古文：敬则免官，以公领郡。
现代文：敬则免职，凭公爵资格领太守职。
English: If he does, he will be relieved of his duties and given the title of grand duke.

古文：明年，迁侍中、中军将军。
现代文：第二年，升为侍中、中军将军。
English: The following year, he was promoted to Samurai Middle Rank and General of the Chinese Army.

古文：寻与王俭俱即本号开府仪同三司，俭既固让，敬则亦不即受。
现代文：不久和王俭一起凭原职号开府仪同三司，王俭坚决推让，敬则也不马上接受。
English: Not long after, Wang Jian and Wang Jian were appointed to the same three posts with the same title. Wang Jian firmly refused, but Jing did not immediately accept.

古文：七年，出为使持节、散骑常侍、都督豫州郢州之西阳司州之汝南二郡军事、征西大将军、豫州剌史，开府如故。
现代文：七年，出京任使持节、散骑常侍、都督豫州郢州的西阳和司州的汝南两郡军事、征西大将军、豫州刺史，开府的资格不变。
English: In the seventh year, he went to Beijing to be appointed as the envoy of the Jixi Festival, the horseback riding attendant, the military governor of Xiyang and the two southern counties of Yunnan, the general of the Western Expedition, and the historian of Yuzhou, and the qualification of the capital remained unchanged.

古文：进号骠骑。
现代文：又进号为骠骑将军。
English: He was also promoted to the rank of general.

古文：十一年，迁司空，常侍如故。
现代文：十一年，升为司空，常侍职不变。
English: Eleven years later, he was promoted to Siku, and his position as a regular attendant remained unchanged.

古文：世祖崩，遗诏改加侍中。
现代文：世祖驾崩，在遣韶中改加侍中。
English: After the death of his ancestor, he was made an attendant in the imperial edict.

古文：高宗辅政，密有废立意，隆昌元年，出敬则为使持节、都督会稽东阳临海永嘉新安五郡军事、会稽太守，本官如故。
现代文：高宗辅政时，暗地有废旧君立新君的意思，隆昌元年，把敬则派出京城任使持节、都督会稽、柬阳、临海、永嘉、新安五郡军事、会稽太守，原职不变。
English: When Gao Zong assisted the government, he secretly had the intention of abolishing the old monarchy and establishing a new one. In the first year of the Longchang era, he sent Jing to Beijing to be the envoy to hold the festival, the governor of the association, the military and the association of five counties in Jiayang, Linhai, Yongjia and Xin'an, and the original position remained unchanged.

古文：海陵王立，进位尉。
现代文：海陵王即位，晋升他为太尉。
English: King Hailing ascended to the throne and was promoted to the rank of first lieutenant.

古文：敬则名位虽达，不以富贵自遇，危拱傍遑，略不尝坐，接士庶皆吴语，而殷勤周悉。
现代文：敬则名望地位虽然显达，但是不恃富贵而自负，恭恭敬敬，忙得不曾稍坐一会儿，舆士族平民交往时，都说吴地方言，殷勤周到。
English: For respect, although the status of fame is obvious, but it is not rich and arrogant, respectful and respectful, it is too busy to sit for a while, when the public relations of the common people, they all speak the local dialect of Wuxi, and they are diligent and thoughtful.

古文：初为散骑使虏，于北馆种扬柳，后员外郎虞长耀北使还，敬则问： 我昔种杨柳树，今若大小？ 
现代文：当初作为散骑常侍出使北方，在北地宾馆裹种了杨柳，以后员外郎虞长耀出使北方回来时，敬则问： 我过去种的杨柳，现在有多高? 
English: At first, as a strolling horseman, he often served the envoy to the north, and wrapped the willow in the north hotel. Later, when the foreign envoy Yu Chang Yao came back from the north, he asked: How high is the willow I planted in the past?

古文：长耀曰： 虏中以为甘棠。 
现代文：长耀说： 北地人以为是甘棠树。 
English: Changyao said, "Northerners thought it was a sweet orange tree.

古文：敬则笑而不答。
现代文：敬则笑着不回答。
English: Kei laughs and doesn't answer.

古文：世祖御座赋诗，敬则执纸曰： 臣几落此奴度内。 
现代文：世祖在座上作诗，敬则拿着纸说： 我差点儿被这东西困住了。 
English: "I almost got trapped by this thing," he said, holding a piece of paper as he composed a poem.

古文：世祖问： 此何言？ 
现代文：世祖问： 逭话是什么意思? 
English: The ancestor asked, "What does that mean?"

古文：敬则曰： 臣若知书，不过作尚书书都令史耳，那得今日？ 
现代文：敬则说： 我如果会写字，不过做一个尚书都令史罢了，哪裹有今天? 
English: Kei said: If I can write, but it's all history to make a book, where is today?

古文：敬则虽不大识书，而性甚警黠，临州郡，令省事读辞，下教判决，皆不失理。
现代文：敬则虽然不大识字，但心性灵敏狡猾，在管理州郡时，让管事的人读文件，自己口述决断后的意思，都不违背道理。
English: On the other hand, although Jing is not very literate, he is mentally sensitive and cunning. In the management of the state and county, it is reasonable to let the person in charge read the documents and dictate the meaning after the decision.

古文：明帝即位，进大司马，增邑千户。
现代文：明帝即位，进号为大司马，增加封邑千户。
English: Emperor Ming ascended the throne and was given the title of Daishima, increasing the number of fiefs by a thousand.

古文：台使拜授日，雨大洪注，敬则文武皆失色，一客在傍曰： 公由来如此，昔拜丹阳吴兴时亦然。 
现代文：登台授职时，下着很大的雨，敬则和文武大臣都惊惶失色，一个人在身边说： 你从来是这样，过去授予丹阳吴兴职务时也是迢样。 
English: During the investiture ceremony, it was raining heavily. Both Jing Zexu and the Minister of Education and Culture were panic-stricken. A person nearby said, "You have always been like this. It was the same when Danyang Wuxing was appointed in the past."

古文：敬则大悦，曰： 我宿命应得雨。 
现代文：敬则大喜，说： 我命中该得雨。 
English: Kei was overjoyed and said, "It's my destiny to get rain."

古文：乃列羽仪，备朝服，道引出听事拜受，意犹不自得，吐舌久之，至事竟。
现代文：就摆列羽仪，穿朝服，由引导引到大堂拜受，心裹想到不当有这么高的封赏，舌头吐出外很久，直到仪式完毕。
English: They put on the feathers, put on the court dress, and were led by the guide to the lobby to worship. Their hearts were filled with the thought that it was inappropriate to have such a high award, and their tongues spit out for a long time until the ceremony was over.

古文：帝既多杀害，敬则自以高、武旧臣，心怀忧恐。
现代文：皇帝已杀了很多大臣，敬则诲为自己是高、武时的旧臣，心裹很担忧恐惧。
English: The emperor had killed many ministers, and he was very worried and afraid, because he was a high-ranking official and a former minister of Wuchang.

古文：帝虽外厚其礼，而内相疑备，数访问敬则饮食体干堪宜，闻其衰老，且以居内地，故得少安。
现代文：皇帝虽然表面上很礼遇他，但内心裹对他怀疑戒备乙多次探问敬则的饮食和身体情况，听说他衰老了，又在内地住着，所以稍稍安心。
English: Although the emperor treated him very politely on the surface, he was suspicious of him in his heart and repeatedly inquired about his diet and physical condition. He was a little relieved to hear that he was old and lived in the inland.

古文：三年中，遣萧坦之将齐伏五百人，行武进陵。
现代文：三年间，派萧坦之带着斋礼和仪仗五百人，到武进陵去。
English: Over a period of three years, Xiao Tan Zhi sent 500 people to Wujin Mausoleum, bringing with them the rituals and ceremonials.

古文：敬则诸子在都，忧怖无计。
现代文：敬则的几个儿子都在京城，担忧惶恐束手无策。
English: Several of Keiji's sons are in the capital, worried and helpless.

古文：上知之，遣敬则世子仲雄入东安慰之。
现代文：皇上知道了，派敬则的世子仲雄到束边去安抚慰问他。
English: When the emperor learned of this, he sent the heir of Jingze, Nakao, to Sokube to comfort and console him.

古文：仲雄善弹琴，当时新绝。
现代文：仲雄会弹琴，在当时是一绝。
English: Nakao could play the piano, which was unheard of at the time.

古文：江左有蔡邕焦尾琴，在主衣库，上敕五日一给仲雄。
现代文：江左流传有蔡邕的焦尾琴，在君王的衣库裹保存着，皇上吩咐每五天让仲雄弹一次。
English: According to legend, Cai Xuan's jiaozuo harp was kept in the emperor's wardrobe. The emperor ordered Zhongxiong to play it once every five days.

古文：仲雄于御前鼓琴作懊家曲歌曰： 常欢负情侬，郎今果行许！ 
现代文：仲雄在皇帝座前弹《懊侬曲歌》，唱着： 常常叹息负情的事，郎君现在真的也这样啊! 
English: In front of the Emperor's throne, Zhongxiong played "Song of Regret" and sang: "Often sighing and bearing a grudge, my brother-in-law is really like that now!

古文：帝愈猜愧。
现代文：皇帝更加羞愧猜忌。
English: Emperor Ming was even more suspicious and ashamed.

古文：永泰元年，帝疾，屡经危殆。
现代文：永泰元年，皇帝病，多次经历危险期。
English: In the first year of Yongtai, the emperor was ill and experienced many dangerous periods.

古文：以张环为平东将军、吴郡太守，置兵佐，密防敬则。
现代文：任张瓖为平束将军、吴郡太守，设置辅佐卫兵，暗暗防备敬则。
English: Zhang Ye was appointed as the general of Pingzhu and the governor of Wu County, and auxiliary guards were set up.

古文：内外传言当有异处分。
现代文：宫内外都传说会有不同安排。
English: Both inside and outside the Imperial Palace, it is rumored that there will be different arrangements.

古文：敬则闻之，窃曰： 东今有谁？
现代文：敬则听到，私下想道： 束边现在还有谁呢?
English: Kei, on the other hand, heard this and privately thought: Who is left of Sokobe now?

古文：祗是欲平我耳！ 
现代文：祇是要平掉我罢了! 
English: They just want to flatten me!

古文：诸子怖惧，第五子幼隆遣正员将军徐岳密以情告徐州行事谢眺为计，若同者，当往报敬则。
现代文：众儿子惧怕，第五个儿子幼隆派正员将军徐岳偷偷地把这情形告诉徐州行事谢跳要他想办法，如果同心，就去报告敬则。
English: All the sons were afraid. The fifth son, Yu Long, secretly sent a regular officer, General Xu Yue, to tell Xuzhou about the situation. He asked Xie Jian to find a way, and if they were of the same mind, they would go to report to Jing Zi.

古文：眺执岳驰启之。
现代文：谢跳抓住了徐岳驰报朝廷。
English: Xie Jie caught Xu Yueqi reporting to the imperial court.

古文：敬则城局参军徐庶家在京口，其子密以报庶，庶以告敬则五官王公林。
现代文：敬则的城局参军徐庶家在京，他的儿子秘密地把这情况报告了徐庶，徐庶告诉了敬则的五官王公林。
English: The home of Wang Jingze's city bureau member Xu Shiao was in Jingkou. His son secretly reported this to Xu Shiao, and Xu Shiao told Wang Jingze's five officials Wang Gonglin.

古文：公林，敬则族子，常所委信。
现代文：公林，是敬则的宗族子侄，平时很受信任。
English: Gonglin is a nephew of the Jingzhe clan, and is usually very trusted.

古文：公林权敬则急送启赐儿死，单舟星夜还都。
现代文：公林劝敬则赶快奏明朝廷赐他儿子死，单船连夜到京都。
English: For his part, Gonglin exhorted his son to hurry and report to the Ming court that his son had died, and set off on a single boat to Kyoto overnight.

古文：敬则令司马张思祖草启，既而曰： 若尔，诸郎在都，要应有信，且忍一夕。 
现代文：敬则命司马张思祖起草奏章，写完后说： 如果遣样，几个儿子都在京城，应该给他们一个信息，暂且放一夜。 
English: Wang Jing ordered Sima Zhang Sizu to draft an introduction to Emperor Ming, but a moment later he said: "If the situation is really like this, then several of my sons are in Beijing, they will certainly come to report to me, so don't rush, wait another night for the time being."

古文：其夜，呼僚佐文武樗蒲赌钱，谓众曰： 卿诸人欲令我作何计？ 
现代文：那天夜裹，叫来文武僚属用樗蒲赌钱，对大家说： 你们想要我怎样办? 
English: That night, he told his generals to gamble with the calabash and said to them, "What do you want me to do?

古文：莫敢先答。
现代文：没有谁敢带头回答。
English: No one dares to answer first.

古文：防阁丁兴怀曰： 安祗应作耳。 
现代文：防合丁兴怀说： 主公衹管做罢了。 
English: Donghe Ding Xinghuai said, "The main character is just doing his job."

古文：敬则不作声。
现代文：敬则不作声。
English: Wang Jing remained silent.

古文：明旦，召山阴令王询、台传御史钟离祖愿，敬则横刀坐，问询等 发丁可得几人？
现代文：第二天，又召来山阴县令王询、台传御史钟离祖愿，敬则横刀直着身子坐，阎王询等人说： 起兵能有多少人?
English: On the second day, Wang Zhen, who was summoned from Shanyin County, and Zhong Shih, who was summoned from Taiwan, left the ancestral wish, and Kei sat upright with a straight sword, and Yan Wang Zhen and others said: How many people can raise an army?

古文：傅库见有几钱物？ 
现代文：库藏现在有钱物? 
English: The treasury is flush with cash now?

古文：询答 县丁卒不可上。 
现代文：王询回答说 县裹的兵卒不能上 。
English: Wang En replied that soldiers from counties could not go up.

古文：祖愿称 传物多未输入。 
现代文：祖愿说 库裹的东西以前很多没有存进去 。
English: The ancestor wished to say that a lot of things in the treasury had not been stored before.

古文：敬则怒，将出斩之。
现代文：敬则发怒，要推出斩了他们。
English: Kei was furious and wanted to push them out and kill them.

古文：王公林又谏敬则曰： 官是事皆可悔，惟此事不可悔！
现代文：王公林又劝阻敬则说： 主公凡事都可悔，衹有这件事是不能后悔的!
English: Wang Gonglin also dissuaded and discouraged him, saying: "The Lord can repent of anything, but this is something that cannot be regretted!"

古文：官讵不更思！ 
现代文：主公怎能不再想想! 
English: How can the hero stop thinking about it!

古文：敬则唾其面曰： 小子！
现代文：敬则对着他的脸吐唾沫说： 小子!
English: Kei spits in his face and says, "Kid!

古文：我作事，何关汝小子！ 乃起兵。
现代文：我做事，与你小于有何关系! 于是起兵。
English: What has it to do with you that I do less than you? So raise an army.

古文：上诏曰： 谢眺启事腾徐岳列如右。
现代文：皇上下诏说：谢跳启奏又有徐岳在此为证。
English: The imperial edict said: Xie jumped to open the concert and Xu Yue is here to prove it.

古文：五敬则禀质凶猾，本谢人网。
现代文：王敬则禀性凶恶狡猾，本来没有纲常的思想。
English: Wang Jing, on the other hand, was stubborn, vicious and cunning, and had no normal thoughts.

古文：直以宁季多艰，颇有力之用，驱奖所至，遂升荣显。
现代文：不过因为宋末年多忧患，在使用武力上有些作用，给以封赏，于是升至荣耀显赫的地位。
English: However, because the Song Dynasty was plagued by many troubles in the late years, it played a role in the use of force, and was rewarded, so it rose to a glorious and prominent position.

古文：皇运肇基，预闻末议，功非匡国，赏实震主。
现代文：国家开基时，跟随人后起些作用，没有匡扶的功劳，封赏实际上使君主不安。
English: When the foundation of the country was laid, following people played some role, there was no merit of support, and the reward actually made the monarch uneasy.

古文：爵冠执珪，身登衣衮，固以风、雅作刺，缙绅侧目。
现代文：爵位高居群臣之首，身登公爵，顽固地用《风》《雅》来进行讽刺，大臣怒视。
English: The minister scowled as the highest-ranking peer, a duke, stubbornly used "Wind" and "Magnificence" to make satirical comments.

古文：而溪谷易盈，鸱枭难改，猜心内骇，丑辞外布。
现代文：溪谷容易满溢，鸱枭难改本性，心怀猜忌，散布诺言。
English: The valley is easy to overflow, and it is difficult to change one's nature, harboring suspicions and spreading promises.

古文：永明之朝，履霜有渐，隆昌之世，坚冰将著，从容附会，朕有力焉。
现代文：永明时候，慢慢地结霜，隆昌年间，便成了坚冰了，暂时附和顺从，是因为我力量强大。
English: During the Yongming period, it gradually froze, and during the Longchang period, it became hard ice. I temporarily obeyed because I was strong.

古文：及景历惟新，推诚尽礼，中使相望，轩冕成阴。
现代文：等到国家气象更新时，朝廷推心置腹全按礼节待人，朝廷派去的使者多得都互相看得见，车盖帽子都成荫。
English: By the time the national meteorology was updated, the imperial court put its heart and soul into treating everyone according to etiquette. The number of emissaries sent by the imperial court was so large that they could all see each other, and their caps were shaded.

古文：乃嫌迹愈兴，祸图兹构，收合亡命，结党聚群，外候边警，内伺国隙。
现代文：于是他叛乱的迹象更明显，设计阴谋，收纳亡命之徒，结伙成群，对外等待边境有战事，对内等待国家疏忽的时机。
English: So the signs of his rebellion were more obvious, devising plots, taking in outlaws, gathering in groups, waiting for war on the border, and waiting for the country to be negligent.

古文：元迁兄弟，中萃渊薮，奸契潜通，将谋窃发。
现代文：元迁兄弟，久蓄阴谋。暗通默契，计划将暗地叛乱。
English: The Yuanqian brothers have been plotting for a long time. By tacit agreement, they plan to secretly rebel.

古文：眺即姻家，岳又邑子，取据匪他，昭然以信。
现代文：谢朋就是他姻亲，徐岳又是邑子，获取证据没有别的，衹是揭露阴谋更能取信于人。
English: Xie Peng is his in-law, and Xu Yue is his son-in-law. There is no other way to obtain evidence, but exposing the conspiracy is more likely to gain people's trust.

古文：方、邵之美未闻，韩、彭之畔已积。
现代文：没有听说过有方、邵一样的美德，韩、彭一样的叛心却已经积蓄。
English: I have not heard of virtues like Fang and Shao, but rebelliousness like Han and Peng has already accumulated.

古文：此而可空，孰寄刑典！
现代文：这种人能容忍，又有谁可用刑典!
English: If this kind of person can be tolerated, then who can use the criminal code!

古文：便可即遣收掩，肃明国宪，大辟所加，其父子而已；凡诸诖误，一人荡涤。 
现代文：就可立刻派人拘捕，使国法整肃。施以大辟极刑的，衹是他们父子罢了；对那些受到蒙蔽的，一并洗清罪名。
English: They can immediately send people to arrest and rectify the national law. Those who impose the most extreme punishment are only their fathers and sons; those who are deceived are cleared of the charges together.

古文：收敬则子员久郎世雄、记室参军季哲、太子洗马幼隆、太子舍人少安等，于宅杀之。
现代文：收捕敬则的儿子员外郎世雄、记室参军季哲、太子洗马幼隆、太子舍人少安等人，在家裹杀了。
English: They arrested and killed, at their homes, the son of Emperor Keijo, Kan Sutero Shio, the recorder of the palace, the army officer, Ki Tetsuro, the crown prince, Saima Yutaka, and the crown prince, Shonin Shoan.

古文：长子黄门郎元迁，为宁朔将军，领千人于徐州击虏，敕徐州刺史徐玄庆杀之。
现代文：长子黄门郎元迁，任宁朔将军，领了一千人马在徐州与北虏作战，朝廷命令徐州刺史徐玄庆杀了他。
English: Huangmen Langyuanqian, the eldest son of Huangmen Langyuanqian, the general of Ningshuo, led a thousand horses to fight against the Northern Ruins in Xuzhou, and the imperial court ordered the Xuzhou magistrate Xu Xuanqing to kill him.

古文：敬则招集配衣，二三日便发，欲动前中书令何胤还为尚书令，长史王弄璋、司马张思祖止之。
现代文：敬则招集人马发给军装，两三天内就出发，想劫持原来的中书令何胤当尚书令，长史王弄壁、司马张思祖劝阻了他。
English: Jing, on the other hand, summoned people and horses to be sent to the military uniform, and set out within two or three days. He wanted to hijack the original Chinese calligraphy He Yan as the official calligraphy, but Chang Shi Wang put up a wall and Sima Zhang Sizu dissuaded him.

古文：乃率实甲尤人过浙江。谓思祖曰： 应须作檄。 
现代文：于是带领军队万人过逝辽，对墨担说： 应当要写篇檄文。 
English: So he led an army of ten thousand men past Liao, and said to the inkstand: You should write a memorial.

古文：思祖曰： 公今自还朝，何用作此。 
现代文：墨担说： 你现在回朝，写这个有什么用。 
English: "What's the use of writing this now that you're back in the morning?" the inkstand said.

古文：敬则乃止。
现代文：敬则就没写。
English: As a result, Wang Jing stopped this idea.

古文：朝廷遣辅国将军司马左兴盛、后军将军直阁将军崔恭祖、辅国将军刘山阳、龙骧将军直阁将军马军主胡松三千余人，筑垒于曲阿长冈，右仆射沈文季为持节都督，屯湖头，备京口路。
现代文：朝廷派辅国将军前军司马左璺瘗、后军将军直合将军崔茎狙、辅国将军型业匿、龙骥将军直合将军马军主塑拴等三千多人，在迪厘垦翅构筑工事，右仆射沈文季任持节都督，驻扎在翅题，防守直旦路。
English: The imperial court sent more than three thousand people, including the general of the auxiliary state, the former military secretary Ma Zuoqi, the general of the rear army Zhihe, the general Cui Zhisai, the general of the auxiliary state, the general of the type of industry, the general of the dragon, the general of the Zhihe, the general of the horse army, and so on, to build the construction in the wings of Dili, and the right-hand man, Shen Wenzhi, was appointed as the governor of the festival, stationed in the wings, and defended the straight road.

古文：钷则以旧将举事，百姓檐篙荷锸随逐之，十余万众。
现代文：敬则用旧部下起事，百姓举着竹篙扛着农具跟随其后，有十多万人。
English: Kei, on the other hand, used his former subordinates to rise up, and the people followed him, carrying bamboo rafts and agricultural tools. There were more than one hundred thousand people.

古文：至晋陵，南沙人范修化杀县令公上延孙以应之。
现代文：到晋陵时，南沙人范脩化杀了县令公上延孙来响应他们。
English: When they arrived at Jinling, the Nansha people, Fan Yuhua, killed the county magistrate, Shang Shang Yansun, to respond to them.

古文：敬则至武进陵口，恸哭乘肩举而前。遇兴盛、山旭二砦，尽力攻之。
现代文：敬则到了武进陵口，痛哭着坐着轿子向前，遇到兴盛、山阳两人的营寨，全力进攻他们。
English: Jing, on the other hand, arrived at the Wujin Mausoleum, wept bitterly and sat forward on a palanquin. When he encountered the encampment of Xing Sheng and Sanyang, he attacked them with all his might.

古文：兴盛使军人遥告敬则曰： 公儿死已尽，公持许底作？ 
现代文：兴盛让兵士向远处高声告诉敬则说： 你儿子已死尽了，你这样做干什么? 
English: Xing Sheng asked the soldier to tell Jing Zetian in a loud voice in the distance: Your son is dead, what are you doing?

古文：官军不敌欲退，而围不开，各死战。
现代文：官军抵挡不住要退却，但包围不撤，各自死战。
English: The government army could not resist and had to retreat, but they were surrounded and did not retreat, and they fought to the death.

古文：胡松领马军突其后，白丁无器杖，皆惊散，敬则军大败。
现代文：胡松带着骑兵从他们后面冲击，没有武器临时微调的壮丁，都惊散了，敬则的军队大败。
English: Husong charged from behind them with his cavalry, and the men, who had no weapons but were temporarily fine-tuned, were startled and dispersed, and Keizetsu's army suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：敬则索马，再上不得上，兴盛军容袁文旷斩之，傅首。
现代文：敬则找了匹马，两次都跨不上去，兴盛的军容袁文旷杀了他，传示首级。
English: Jing, on the other hand, found a horse and was unable to mount it both times. Yuan Wenyan, a prosperous military man, killed him and beheaded him.

古文：是时上疾已笃，敬则仓卒东起，朝廷震惧。
现代文：这时皇上的病已很重，敬则突然从束边起兵，朝廷震惊。
English: At this time, the emperor's illness was already very dangerous, and Wang Jing hastily raised an army in the east. The imperial court was shocked and afraid.

古文：东昏候在东宫，议欲叛，使人上屋望，见征虏亭失火，谓敬则至，急装欲走。
现代文：东昏侯在束宫，商量要叛乱，派人到屋顶上看，看到征虏台失火，认为是敬则杀到了，连忙打点行装要跑。
English: In Sokgong, Dongwu Hou discussed insurrection and sent someone to look on the roof. When he saw that the recruiting station was on fire, he thought that Jing had been killed. He hurriedly packed his things and ran.

古文：有告敬则者，敬则曰： 檀公三十六策，走上上计。
现代文：有人告诉敬则，敬则说： 檀公三十六计，逃走是上计。
English: Someone told Jingzhe, Jingzhe said: Dangong thirty-six plans, escape is the top plan.

古文：汝父子唯应急走耳。 
现代文：你们父子衹有快跑了。 
English: Your father and son have run away.

古文：敬则之来，声势甚盛，裁少日而败，时年七十余。
现代文：敬则杀来时，声势很大，仅几天就败了，遣一年七十多岁。
English: When Jing Zetian came to kill him, he was very powerful, and he was defeated in just a few days. He was more than seventy years old.

古文：封左兴盛新吴县男，崔恭祖遂兴县男，刘山阳湘阴县男，胡松沙阳县男，各四百户，赏平敬则也。
现代文：封左玺壁为新吴县男，崔茎坦为遂兴县男，刘山阳为湘阴睡里，圭噬为沙阳县男，各封食邑四百户，奖赏他们平定了敬则。
English: Fong Zuojianbi was a man from Xinwu County, Cui Zhitan was a man from Suixing County, Liu Shanyang was a man from Xiangyin County, and Gui Zhao was a man from Shayang County. There were 400 households in each Fongshui County, and they were rewarded with a prize.

古文：又赠公上延孙为射声校尉。
现代文：又追赠公上延孙为射声校尉。
English: He also posthumously promoted his grandson to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：陈显达，南彭城人也。
现代文：陈显达是南彭城人。
English: Chen Xanda is from Nanpeng City.

古文：宋孝武世，为张永前军幢主。
现代文：宋孝武世期，任张丞的前军幢主。
English: During the reign of Song Xiaowu, he served as the former military commander of Zhangzheng.

古文：景和中，以劳历驱使。
现代文：景和年间，因劳顿历经襄使。
English: During the Kengo era, he was forced to work overtime.

古文：泰始初，以军主隶徐州刺史刘怀珍北征，累至东海王板行参军，员外郎。
现代文：泰始初年，以军主的职务隶属于徐州刺史割怀珍一起北征，多次升职到东海王板行参军，员外郎。
English: In the first year of Taizhi, with the post of military commander, he was subordinated to Xuzhou Zhishi Kui Huizhen and joined the Northern Expedition. He was promoted several times to the East China Sea Wangban Army and became a member of the Foreign Affairs Office.

古文：泰始四年，封彭泽县子，邑三百户。
现代文：泰始四年时，封为彭泽县子，食邑三百户。
English: When he was four years old, he was assigned to Pengze County, with 300 households in the food village.

古文：历马头、义阳二郡太守，羽林监，濮阳太守。
现代文：历任马头、义阳两郡的太守，羽林监，濮隅太守等职。
English: He was successively appointed as the governor of Ma Tau and Yiyang counties, as well as the supervisor of forests and the governor of Shaoshu.

古文：隶太祖讨桂阳贼于新亭垒，刘勉大桁败，贼进杜姥宅，及休范死，太祖欲还卫宫城，或谏太祖曰： 桂阳虽死，贼党犹炽，人情难固，不可轻动。 
现代文：跟着太祖在新亭垒讨伐桂阳贼军，刘勉去拉失败，贼寇进了杜姥宅，等到休范死，太祖想回京保卫宫城，有人劝太祖说： 桂阳王虽然死了，贼众势力还大，人心难稳定，不能轻率行动。 
English: Following the great-grandfather in the new pavilion to fight the Guiyang thief army, Liu Yan went to pull the failure, the thief broke into the Du grandma's house, until the death of Hugh Fan, the great-grandfather wanted to return to Beijing to defend the palace city, someone advised the great-grandfather said: Although King Guiyang is dead, the thieves still have great power, the people's hearts are difficult to stabilize, and they cannot act rashly.

古文：太祖乃止。
现代文：左担才没去。
English: It was only then that the great-grandfather gave up the idea of uniting with Yuan Shao.

古文：遣显达率司空参军高敬祖自查浦渡淮缘石头北道入承明门，屯东堂。
现代文：派显达带领司空参军高敬祖从查迩渡过进丞沿着亘头北边的路遣承明门，驻在塞堂。
English: Pa Xianda led the Jiaotong Air Force Gao Jingzu from Jiaxuan to Jinzhen along the road north of Wutao to Chengming Gate and stationed in Jiedang.

古文：宫中恐动，得显达乃至，乃稍定。
现代文：宫中恐惧不安，听到显达到了，才渐渐安定下来。
English: The fear and anxiety in the palace gradually calmed down after the rumours became public.

古文：显达出杜姥宅，大战破贼。
现代文：题达从拄缝出战，与贼人大战打败了贼军。
English: Zhida went to war from Jixie and defeated the bandit army in the great war with the bandits.

古文：矢中左眼，拔箭而镞不出，地黄村潘妪善禁，先以钉钉柱，妪禹步作气，钉即时出，乃禁显达目中镞出之。
现代文：箭射中了左眼，拔箭时箭头还没拔出来，地黄村潘婆会念咒语，曾鳄把钉子钉在柱子上，老妇人走动着行气，钉子缸时就出来了，就请她念咒语把显达眼裹的箭头弄出来丫。
English: The arrow hit the left eye, the arrow was not yet pulled out when the arrow was pulled out, the Huangcun Panba would recite a spell, the crocodile nailed the nail to the post, the old woman walked around, the nail bowl came out, and she was asked to recite a spell to get the arrow wrapped around the eye.

古文：封丰城县候，邑千户。
现代文：朝廷封显达为丰城县侯，食邑千户。
English: The imperial seal showed that he was the lord of Fengcheng County, with a thousand households in the county.

古文：转游击将军。
现代文：后转任游击将军。
English: He was soon transferred to the post of guerrilla general.

古文：寻为使持节、督广交越三州湘州之广兴军事、辅国将军、平越中郎将、广州刺史，进号冠军。
现代文：不久任使持节、都督广交越三州和湘州的广兴等地军事、辅国将军、平越中郎将、广州刺史，进号为冠军。
English: He was soon appointed as the envoy of Ji Jie, the military governor of Guangxiao Yue Sanzhou and Guangxing in Hunan Province, the general of the auxiliary state, the general of Pingyue, the general of Guangzhou, and the champion.

古文：沈攸之事起，显达遣军援台，长史到遁、司马诸葛道谓显达曰： 沈攸之拥众百万，胜负之势未可知，如保境蓄众，分遣信驿，密通彼此。 
现代文：沈攸之作乱，颤达派兵支援朝廷，长史到遁、司马诸葛导对显达说： 沈攸之拥有百万人马，胜负的情况不明，不如保卫境土聚集人马，分派送信的人，暗地裹交往。 
English: Shen Youzhi started the turmoil, and Tingda sent troops to support the imperial court. Changshi came to Shun, and Sima Zhuge said to Xanda: Shen Youzhi has a million people, and the situation of victory and defeat is unknown. It is better to gather people to defend the territory, assign people to send messages, and secretly communicate.

古文：显达于座手斩之，遣表疏归心太祖。
现代文：显达在座前亲手斩了他们，送表章说明心向太祖。
English: In front of the audience, Henda personally cut them, and sent a watch badge to show his heart to his great-grandfather.

古文：进使持节、左将军。
现代文：晋升为使持节、左将军。
English: He was promoted to the position of General of the Left.

古文：军至巴丘，而沈攸之平。
现代文：军队走到巴丘，沈攸之的叛乱就平定了。
English: When the army reached Bachu, Shen Youzhi's rebellion was put down.

古文：除散骑常侍、左卫将军，转前将军、太祖太尉左司马。
现代文：拜为散骑常侍、左卫将军，转任前将军、太祖的太尉左司马。
English: He served as a cavalryman and left-wing general, and was transferred to the former general, the great-grandfather's first lieutenant, Zuo Sima.

古文：齐台建，为散骑常侍，左卫将军，领卫尉。
现代文：齐王建台阁时，他任散骑常侍，左卫将军，领卫尉。
English: When King Qi built the pavilion, he served as straggler, general of the left guard, and captain of the guard.

古文：太祖即位，迁中护军，增邑千六百户，转护军将军。
现代文：太祖即位时，升为中护军，增加食邑到一千六百户，转任护军将军。
English: When the great-grandfather ascended the throne, he was promoted to the middle guard, increased the food village to 1600 households, and was transferred to the guard general.

古文：显达启让，上答曰： 朝廷爵人以序。
现代文：显达启奏推让，皇上回覆： 朝廷要按功勋等级封爵。
English: The Emperor replied that the Imperial Court should bestow a knighthood according to the order of merit.

古文：卿忠发万里，信誓如期，虽屠城殄国之勋，无以相加。
现代文：你在万里外都忠心耿耿，坚守信约，即使是攻打敌人有屠城灭国的功勋，也比不上这样强。
English: You have been loyal all over the world, and you have kept your promise. Even if you have the merit of killing the enemy and destroying the country, it is not as strong as this.

古文：此而不赏，典章何在。
现代文：这样的人不赏赐，要法律制度做什么?
English: What is the legal system to do if it does not reward such people?

古文：若必未宜尔，吾终不妄授。
现代文：如果不是这样，我到底不会轰授爵的。
English: If it wasn't for that, I wouldn't have been knighted in the first place.

古文：于卿数士，意同家人，岂止于群臣邪？
现代文：像你这几个人，就和我家裹人一样，哪裹衹是君臣的关系呢?
English: Like you, just like my family, what is the relationship between the sovereign and the vassal?

古文：过明，与王、李俱祗召也。 
现代文：到明天，和王、李一起召用。 
English: Until tomorrow, together with Wang and Li.

古文：上即位后，御膳不宰牲，显达上熊丞一盘，上即以充饭。
现代文：皇上即位后，御家厨房不屠宰牲口，显遂献上一盘蒸熟的熊肉，皇上就用来下饭。
English: After the Emperor's accession to the throne, the imperial kitchen did not slaughter animals, but presented a plate of steamed bear meat, which the Emperor used for dinner.

古文：建元二年，虏寇寿阳，淮南江北百姓搔动。
现代文：建元二年，北虏侵犯寿阳，淮南和江北的百姓不安。
English: In the second year of Jianyuan, the North intruded into Shouyang, and the people of Huainan and Jiangbei were uneasy.

古文：上以显达为使侍节、散骑常侍、都督南兖兖徐青冀五州诸军事、平北将军、南兖州刺史。
现代文：皇上用显达为使持节、散骑常侍、都督醢查途直冀五州诸军事、平北将军、南兖州刺史。
English: The emperor used Xanda to celebrate the Festival of Envoys, to ride around on horseback with his attendants, to inspect the military of the five states, the general of the North, and the history of the South.

古文：之镇，虏退。
现代文：到了防地，敌人退了。
English: On reaching the fort, the enemy retreated.

古文：上敕显达曰： 虏经破散后，当无复犯关理。
现代文：皇上命显达说： 敌人失败逃散后，按理应不会再侵犯边关。
English: Emperor Mingxianda said: After the enemy's defeat and dispersal, it is natural that they will not invade the border again.

古文：但国家边防，自应过存备豫。
现代文：衹不过国家的边防，应当早做些预防戒备。
English: However, the country's border defense should have done some prevention and preparedness earlier.

古文：宋元嘉二十七年后，江夏王作南兖，处镇盱眙，沈司空亦以孝建初镇彼，政当以淮上要于广陵耳。
现代文：宋元塞二十七年后，江夏王镇守直兖时，把镇府迁到贬睃，沈司空也在圣建初年镇守那地方，办事的地方应当是在进丞上比卢壁重要。
English: Twenty-seven years after the Song and Yuan dynasties, when the king of Jiangxia transferred the township to Dajian, he moved the town hall to Dajian. Shen Siku also held the township in the first year of Shengjian. The place of business should be in Jinzheng, which is more important than Luqiao.

古文：卿谓前代此处分云何？
现代文：你认为前代这样处理是什么用意呢?
English: What do you think was the intention of the previous generation to deal with this?

古文：今佥议皆云卿应据彼地，吾未能决。
现代文：现在众臣议论时都说你应该以那个地方为根据，我没能决断。
English: Now, when discussing it, all the ministers said that you should base it on that place, but I couldn't decide.

古文：乃当以扰动文武为劳。
现代文：你应该迁动僚属。如果是你的打算，就不要怕。 
English: You should relocate your colleagues. If this is your intention, don't be afraid.

古文：若是公计，不得惮之。 
现代文：这个措施到底没有实行。
English: This measure has not been implemented at all.

古文：事竟不行。迁都督益宁二州军事、安西将军、益州刺史，领宋宁太守，持节、常侍如故。世祖即位，进号镇西。
现代文：升任都督益宁二州军事、安西将军、益州刺史，领宋宁太守，持节和常侍职不变。世祖即位，进号为镇西。
English: He was promoted to the position of the military governor of the two states of Yining and Anxi, the general of Anxi, the chief historian of Yingzhou, and the governor of Songning, holding the title and the position of the regular attendant. He was enthroned as the founder of the dynasty, and his regnal name was Zhenxi.

古文：益部山险，多不宾服。
现代文：益州山地形势险要，人们大多不服从朝廷。
English: The situation in the mountainous areas of Yizhou was critical, and most people did not obey the imperial court.

古文：大度村獠，前后刺史不能制，显达遣使责其租赕，獠帅曰： 两眼刺史尚不敢调我！ 
现代文：大度村僚，前前后后的几任刺史都不能制服他们，显达派人收缴他的租赋，僚地头子说： 两只眼睛的刺史都不敢指挥我们! 
English: The village chief, several chiefs before and after him could not subdue them. Xanda sent someone to collect his rent. The chief said, "The two-eyed chief would not dare to command us!"

古文：遂杀其使。
现代文：于是杀了使者。
English: So he killed the official sent by Chen Xianda.

古文：显达分部将吏，声将出猎，夜往袭之，男女无少长皆斩之。
现代文：显达分派将吏，说是要出去打猎，夜裹袭击他们，不论男女老少都杀了。
English: Hsenda dispatched generals, saying he was going out hunting, and attacked them at night, killing both men and women.

古文：自此由夷震服。
现代文：从此山地少数民族震惊服从。
English: Since then, the mountainous ethnic minorities have been shocked into submission.

古文：广汉贼马龙驹据郡反，显达又讨平之。
现代文：广汉贼寇司马笼驹占据州郡造反，显达又讨伐平定了。
English: The Guanghan bandit Kossima took over the state and county to rebel, and the Hsien Tsao was defeated.

古文：永明二年，徵为侍中、护军将军。
现代文：建元二年，召为侍中、护军将军。
English: In the second year of the first century, he was called to be a chamberlain and escort general.

古文：显达累任在外，经太祖之忧，及见世祖，流涕悲咽，上亦泣，心甚嘉之。
现代文：显达总是在外地任职，经过太祖驾崩，到他见到世祖时，流泪痛哭，皇上也哭，心裹很赞许他。
English: Hende always served in other places. After the death of his great-grandfather, when he saw his grandfather, he shed tears and cried. The emperor also cried, and his heart was full of praise for him.

古文：五年，荒人桓天生自称桓玄宗族，与雍、司二州界蛮虏相扇动，据南阳故城。
现代文：五年，南荒人桓天生自称是桓玄的宗族，和壅、两州边界上的蛮族互相鼓动，占领南阳老城。
English: In the fifth year, the Nanba people, Huan Tianwen, claimed to be the clan of Huan Xuan, and the barbarians on the border of the two states and the barbarians on the border of the two states encouraged each other to occupy the old city of Nanyang.

古文：上遣显达假节，率征虏将军戴僧静等水军向宛、叶，雍、司众军受显达节度。
现代文：皇上派题达暂持节，率领征虏将军越僧趋等水军向宛、墓，壅、司等路的众部接受题达指挥。
English: The emperor sent Zhida to temporarily hold the festival, and led the general who conscripted the captives, Yue Zengcheng, and other naval forces to accept Zhida's command.

古文：天生率虏众万余入攻舞阴，舞阴戍主辅国将军殷公愍击杀其副张麒麟，天生被疮退走。
现代文：玉生带领一万多人进攻舞阴，舞阴的戍主辅国将军殷壬邀杀了丢生的副将亟腿毖，丢生受伤败退。
English: Tamasho led more than ten thousand people to attack Wuyin. The leader of Wuyin, General Yinren, was invited to kill the vice-commander who lost his life. He lost his life and was wounded and retreated.

古文：仍以显达为使持节、散骑常侍、都督雍梁南北秦郢州之竟陵司州之随郡军事、镇北将军，领宁蛮校尉、雍州刺史。
现代文：又任显达为使持节、散骑常侍、都督雍銮蛮韭画旦幽的直堕和旦业的堕亚军事、镇北将军，领宁蛮校尉、雍州刺史。
English: He also appointed Xanda as the envoy of the festival, the horseback riding attendant, the governor of Yongzheng, the military general of Subiaco, the general of Zhenbei, the lieutenant of the territory of Ningbo, and the historian of Yongzhou.

古文：显达进据舞阳城，遣僧静等先进，与天生及虏再战，大破之，官军还。
现代文：显达进据舞阳球，派僵盏等人为前锋，和丢生蛮军再次激战，大败他们，官军撤回。
English: Xanda marched into Wanyang, sent Shizhuan and others as forwards, and again fought fiercely with the barbarians, defeated them, and the government army withdrew.

古文：数月，天生复出攻舞阴，殷公愍破之，天生还窜荒中，遂城、平氏、白土三城贼稍稍降散。
现代文：过了几个月，玉生又出来攻打舞渣，殷公愍打败了他，丢生逃窜到南荒内地，王区、皇王三座城裹的贼军慢慢地投降的投降。
English: After a few months, Yuxuan came out again to attack the dancing dregs. Yin Gonglu defeated him and fled to the southern wasteland. The rebel army encircling the royal region and the three royal cities slowly surrendered.

古文：八年，进号征北将军。
现代文：逃散的逃散了。八年，进号为征北将军。
English: In eight years, he was promoted to General of the Northern Expedition.

古文：其年，仍迁侍中、镇军将军，寻加中领军。
现代文：那年，又升为侍中、镇军将军，不久又加中领军。
English: That year, he was promoted to the rank of chamberlain and general of the town army, and soon he became the leader of the middle army.

古文：出为使持节、散骑常侍、都督江州诸军事、征南大将军、江州刺史，给鼓吹一部。
现代文：出京任使持节、散骑常侍、都督江州诸军事、征南大将军、逗州刺史，赐给鼓吹一部。
English: He was sent to Beijing as an envoy to hold festivals, rode horseback as a regular attendant, was the military governor of Jiangzhou, the general of the Southern Expedition, and the historian of Zhouzhou, and was given a part of the propaganda.

古文：显达廉厚有智计，自以人微位重，每迁官，常有愧惧之色。
现代文：显达谦逊厚道有计谋，自以为自己出身寒微而地位高，每次升官。常常有惭愧惶恐的表情。
English: He is humble, kind, and resourceful. He thinks that he is from a humble background but has a high status. He is promoted every time. He often has a look of shame and fear.

古文：有子十余人，诫之曰： 我本志不及此，汝等勿以富贵陵人！ 
现代文：有十多个儿子，他告诫儿子们说： 我原本没有这个志向，你们不能凭着富贵来欺人! 
English: Having more than ten sons, he admonished his sons saying, "I didn't originally have this ambition. You can't deceive people with your wealth!

古文：家既豪富，诸子与王敬则诸儿，并精车牛，丽服饰。
现代文：家裹豪富后，众儿子和王敬则的众儿子，都驾着精美的牛车，穿着漂亮的衣服装饰。
English: After the family was rich, the sons and the sons of Wang Jingzhe all drove exquisite ox carts and dressed in beautiful clothes.

古文：当世快年称陈世子青，王三郎乌，吕文显折角，江瞿昙白鼻。
现代文：在当时称快牛为陈世子的青牛，王三郎的黑牛，吕文显的弯角牛，江瞿昙的白鼻子牛。
English: At that time, the fast cow was known as the young cow of Chen Shizi, the black cow of Wang Saburo, the crooked cow of Lü Wenxian, and the white-nosed cow of Jiang Chen.

古文：显达谓其子曰： 尘尾扇是五谢家物，汝不须捉此自逐。 
现代文：显达对他的儿子说： 尘尾扇之类的东西是王谢家的东西，你们不要追求这些。 
English: Xanda said to his son: "Dust tail fan and the like are things of Wang Xie's family, you should not pursue these.

古文：十一年秋，虏动，诏屯樊城。
现代文：十一年的秋季，北虏骚动，他受韶驻扎樊城。
English: In the autumn of the eleventh year, Beikru was in turmoil, and he was ordered to stay in Yeongseong.

古文：世祖遗诏，即本号开府仪同三司。
现代文：世祖在遣诏中，命他就原职开府仪同三司。
English: In the imperial edict, the founder of the dynasty ordered him to resume his original position as the head of the prefectural government and the three departments.

古文：隆昌元年，迁侍中、车骑将军，开府如故，置兵佐。
现代文：隆昌元年，升为侍中、车骑将军，开府的资格照旧，设置辅佐军队。
English: In the first year of the Longchang era, he was promoted to the rank of chamberlain and general of chariots and cavalry. His qualification to be the head of the government remained the same, and he was assigned to assist the army.

古文：豫废郁林之勋，延兴元年，为司空，进爵公，增邑千户，甲仗五十人入殿。
现代文：参加了废黜郁林并立下功勋，延兴元年，任司空，晋升公爵，增加封邑干户，可带五十人的卫兵仪仗进殿。
English: He took part in the dethronement of Yulin and made meritorious service, and in the first year of Yanxing, he was appointed as Sikuo, promoted to Duke, increased the number of fiefs and households, and could bring fifty guards into the hall of honor.

古文：高宗即位，进太尉，侍中如故，改封鄱阳郡公，邑三千户，加兵二百人，给油络车。
现代文：高宗即位，升太尉，侍中职未变，改封为鄱阳郡公，食邑三千产，加卫兵二百人，赐给油络车。
English: Gao Zong ascended the throne, was promoted to the rank of captain, and his position as an attendant did not change. He was given the title of the governor of Shuyang County, 3,000 crops of food, and 200 guards. He was given an oil tanker.

古文：建武二年，虏攻徐、司，诏显达出顿，往来新亭白下，以为声势。
现代文：建武二年，北虏进攻徐州、司州，皇上下诏命显达出京去驻守，在新亭和白下之间往来，以张扬声势。
English: In the second year of the Jianwu era, the Hokuriku attacked Xuzhou and Shizhou. The emperor issued an imperial edict to the emperor to go to Beijing to garrison, and he went back and forth between Xinting and Baisha to make a splash.

古文：上欲悉除高、武诸孙，微言问显达，答曰： 此等岂足介虑。 
现代文：皇上想全部除掉高、武的众孙子，暗示着问题达，他回答说： 这些人怎么值得担忧? 
English: The emperor wanted to get rid of all of Gao and Wu's grandchildren, hinting at a problem, he replied: "How are these people worth worrying about?

古文：上乃止。
现代文：皇上才不实行。
English: The Emperor finally stopped.

古文：显达建武世心怀不安，深自贬匿，车乘朽故，导从卤薄，皆用羸小，不过十数人。
现代文：显达在建武时期心裹感到不安，自己深深收敛行迹，乘着破旧的车子，引路的仪仗，都用弱小的人，不过十来个。
English: During the Jianwu period, Xanda felt uneasy in his heart and deeply retreated. He rode a dilapidated car and used weak people to lead the way, but only a dozen or so.

古文：侍宴，酒后启上曰： 臣年已老，富贵已足，唯少枕枕死，特就陛下乞之。 
现代文：陪皇上宴席时，在酒后奏告皇上说： 我年纪已经老了，富贵也够了，衹想安享天年，特地向陛下请求。 
English: When he was accompanying the emperor to a banquet, he wrote a message to the emperor after drinking, saying, "I am already old and rich enough, and I would like to enjoy the rest of my life, so I would like to make a special request to His Majesty."

古文：上失色曰： 公醉矣。 
现代文：皇上变了脸色说： 你喝醉了。 
English: The Emperor turned pale and said: You are drunk.

古文：以年礼告退，不许。
现代文：凭着年纪大告请辞职，没得到批准。
English: He asked to resign because of his age, but his resignation was not approved.

古文：是时虏频寇雍州，众军不捷，失沔北五郡。
现代文：造时北虏常侵犯雍州，众军都没取胜，失陷了迺韭五郡。
English: At the time of construction, the Northern Huns often invaded Yongzhou. All the armies did not win, and the Five Counties were lost.

古文：永泰元年，乃遣显达北讨。
现代文：丞台元年，就派题达到北方讨伐。
English: In the first year of the Joseon Dynasty, the Northern Crusade was launched.

古文：诏曰： 晋氏中微，宋德将谢，蕃臣外叛，要荒内侮，天未悔祸，左衽乱华，巢穴神州，逆移年载。
现代文：皇上下诏说： 晋代中期衰落，宋时君德将尽，藩国叛离，国家内乱，天降祸患，外族骚乱华夏，在神州营建巢穴，这样多年。
English: The imperial edict said: the decline in the middle of the Jin Dynasty, the Song Dynasty's decline, the Han Dynasty's defection, the country's civil strife, the natural disasters, the foreign riots in China, the construction of nests in China, and so on.

古文：朕嗣膺景业，踵武前王，静言隆替，思又区夏。
现代文：我继承大业，效法前王，想使国家兴盛，恢复华夏。
English: I inherit the great cause, follow the example of the former king, and want to make the country prosperous and restore Huaxia.

古文：但多难甫夷，恩化肇治，兴师扰众，非政所先，用远图，权缓北略，冀戎夷知义，怀我好音。
现代文：因此作长远的考虑，暂缓征讨北方，衹希望戎夷理解大义，感怀我们的好意。但是他们凶险刚暴狡猾，多次侵犯劫掠，驱赶鼓动着外族，像蚂蚁一样聚集西境。
English: Therefore, we made a long-term consideration to postpone the conquest of the north, hoping that the army and the people would understand the great justice and feel our goodwill. However, they were dangerous, violent and cunning, invaded and plundered many times, drove and encouraged the foreign tribes, and gathered in the west like ants.

古文：而凶丑剽狡，专事侵掠，驱扇异类，蚁聚西偏，乘彼自来之资，抚其天亡之会，军无再驾，民不重劳，传檄以定三秦，一麾而臣禹迹，在此举矣。
现代文：你要趁着那自有的条件，抓住天道使他们灭亡的机会。军队不宜两次驰驱，百姓不宜再次劳顿，传出檄文平定三秦，巨手一挥就使他们臣服中原，在此一举了。
English: You should take advantage of your own conditions and seize the opportunity of the heavenly way to make them perish. The army should not be driven twice, the people should not be forced to work hard again, the imperial edict should be issued to pacify the three Qin states, and the mighty hand should make them submit to the Central Plains, in this one fell swoop.

古文：且中原士庶，久望皇威，乞师请援，结轨驰道。
现代文：再说中原的士族和百姓，久久盼望皇家威风，请军队帮助他们，沿路不绝。
English: Furthermore, the warrior clans and people of the Central Plains have long been looking forward to the royal pomp, and have asked the army to help them along the way.

古文：信不可失，时岂终朝。
现代文：信义不能失却，怎能终日等待。
English: Loyalty can not be lost, how can we wait all day.

古文：宜分命方岳，因兹大号。
现代文：应分派部署，趁此大量号召。
English: Should be assigned deployment, take advantage of this mass call-up.

古文：侍中太尉显达，可暂辍槐阴，指授群帅。 中外纂严。
现代文：侍中太尉显达可暂停居家，指挥众帅。 朝廷内外一时间整肃。
English: Samurai Lieutenant-Commander Shinda can suspend his stay-at-home order and command the commanders-in-chief. There will be a period of purification both inside and outside the Imperial Court.

古文：加显达使持节，向襄阳。
现代文：加封显达为使持节，向襄阳进发。
English: With the seal sealed, they set off for Xiangyang for the festival.

古文：永元元年，显达督平北将军崔慧景众军四万，围南乡界马圈城，去襄阳三百里，攻之四十日，虏食尽，啖死人肉及树皮，外围既急，虏突走，斩获千计。
现代文：永元元年，显达领平北将军崔慧景等四万人马，包围南乡境内的马圈城，距离襄阳三百里，攻打四十天，敌人粮食尽，吃死人肉和树皮，外面攻打又急，敌人突围逃跑，斩首活捉的以千来计算。
English: In the first year of the Yongyuan era, Xanda led 40,000 horsemen led by General Cui Huijing of Pingbei and others to encircle the horse circle city in the territory of Nanxiang, three hundred miles away from Xiangyang, attacked for forty days, the enemy ran out of food, ate dead human flesh and tree bark, attacked outside and rushed, the enemy broke through the siege and fled, and the number of beheadings caught alive was counted in thousands.

古文：官军竞取城中绢，不复穷追。
现代文：官军争着抢城裹的绢绸，不再尽力追杀。
English: The government troops scrambled to grab the silk wrapped around the city, and no longer made every effort to pursue and kill.

古文：显达入据其城，遣军主庄丘黑进取南乡县故从阳郡治也。
现代文：显达进入那座城，派军主庄丘黑攻打南乡县，也就是原来的顺阳郡郡治。
English: Hende entered the city and sent the commander Zhuang Qiuhei to attack Nanxiang County, which was originally Shunyang County.

古文：虏主元宏自领十余万骑奄至，显达引军渡水西据鹰子山筑城，人情沮败。
现代文：北虏首领元宏亲自带领十多万骑兵突然杀到，显达带着军队渡水到西边占据鹰子山筑城，人心沮丧。
English: Motohiro, the leader of the Northern Ruthenians, personally led more than a hundred thousand cavalrymen to suddenly arrive, and Xianda took the army across the water to the west to occupy Yingzi Mountain to build a city. People were frustrated.

古文：虏兵甚急，军主崔恭祖、胡松以鸟布幔盛显达，数人檐之，迳道从分碛山均水口，台军缘道奔退，死者三万余人。
现代文：敌人攻打激烈，军主崔恭祖、胡松用黑布幔包着显达，几个人抬着，顺小路从分碛山出均水口，中军沿路逃跑，死了三万多人。
English: The enemy attacked fiercely. The army's leaders, Cui Gongzu and Hu Song, wrapped Hsenda in a black cloth and carried him and several others along the path from the fork of the mountain to the junction of the two rivers. The Chinese army fled along the road, and more than 30,000 people died.

古文：左军将张千虎死，追赠游击将军。
现代文：左军将军张千战死，被迫赠为游击将军。
English: Zhang Qian, the general of the Left Army, died in battle and was forced to become a guerrilla general.

古文：显达素有威名，著于蛮虏，至是大损丧焉。
现代文：显达一向有威武名声，在蛮族和北虏中都有名，到这时大损声望。
English: Hende had always had a reputation for bravery, both among the barbarians and the Northmen, but by this time his reputation was in tatters.

古文：御史中丞范岫奏免显达官，朝议优诏答曰： 昔卫、霍出塞，往往无功，冯、邓入关，有时亏丧。
现代文：御史中丞范岫弹劾要免了显达的官，朝臣议论当安抚，皇上下韶回覆说： 从前卫、霍到塞外作战，也常常无功，冯、邓入关作战，有时也有损失。
English: The impeachment of the Imperial Historian, the middle-ranking official Fan Ye, was to free prominent officials, the courtiers were to be appeased, and the emperors replied: From the avant-garde and Ho to fight outside of Serbia, there is often no benefit, and from Feng and Deng to fight in Guanzhong, there are sometimes losses.

古文：况公规谟肃举，期寄兼深、见可知难，无损威略，方振远图，廓清朔土，虽执宪有常，非所得议。 
现代文：何况他计谋敏捷，朝廷对他的期望很深，明白可行和艰难，不减损他的威名。正要想图谋长远，澄清北方。虽然执法有常规，不能按这个结论处理。 
English: What's more, he is quick at scheming, and the imperial court has high expectations of him, which are clear, feasible and difficult, without detracting from his prestige. He is trying to make long-term plans and clarify the north. Although there is a routine for law enforcement, it cannot be handled according to this conclusion.

古文：显达表解职，不许，求降号，又不许。
现代文：显达上表请求辞职，不批准，请求降低封号，又不准。
English: The above request for resignation was not approved, and the request to lower the seal number was not allowed.

古文：以显达为都督江州军事、江州刺史，镇盆城，持节本官如故。
现代文：任显达为都督江州军事、江州刺史，镇守盆球，持节和原官职不变。
English: Ren Xanda is the military governor of Jiangzhou, the history of Jiangzhou, the town guard of the basin ball, and the festival and the original official position remain unchanged.

古文：初，王敬则事起，始安王遥光启明帝虑显达为变，欲追究军还，事寻平，乃寝。
现代文：当初，王堑则的事情发生，始安王遥光奏告明帝怕显达变乱，想追赶军队回来，事情不久就平息了，才作罢。
English: At first, when the incident of Wang Xizhe happened, Shi'an Wang Yaoguang reported to the Ming Emperor that he was afraid of disorder and wanted to chase the army back. The incident soon calmed down before it was resolved.

古文：显达亦怀危怖。
现代文：显达也心怀恐怖。
English: Hsien Da was also filled with fear.

古文：及东昏立，弥不乐还京师，得此授，甚喜。
现代文：等到束昏侯即位，更不想回京城，得到这个职务，很高兴。
English: I didn't want to go back to Kyoto when I became emperor in my twilight years, so I'm very happy to have this position.

古文：寻加领片南大将军，给三望车。
现代文：不久加封领征南大将军，赐给二望车。
English: Soon after, he was given the title of General of the Southern Expeditionary Army, and was given an armored car.

古文：显达闻京师大相杀戳，又知徐孝嗣等皆死，传闻当遣兵袭江州，显达惧祸，十一月十五日，举兵。
现代文：显达听说京师大臣大量被杀戮，又了解到徐芝图等人都死了，又谣传会派兵攻打江州，显达怕遭祸，在十一月十五日起兵。
English: Hsenda heard that the minister of the Beijing division had been killed in large numbers, and learned that Xu Zhitu and others had died, and that there were rumors that troops would be sent to attack Jiangzhou. Fearing disaster, Hsenda raised an army on November 15.

古文：令长史庚弘远、司马虎龙与朝贵书曰：
现代文：命长史庾弘远、司马徐虎龙给朝廷显贵写信说：
English: Commanders Shih Chun Hongyuan and Sima Xu Hulong wrote to the court dignitaries, saying:

古文：诸君足下：我太祖高皇帝睿哲自天，超人作圣，属彼宋季，网纪自顿，应禅从民，构此基业。
现代文：诸位：我们太祖高皇帝天赐智慧明哲，圣明过人，在那塞伐末年，整顿纲纪，顺从民心禅位，建立基业。
English: Ladies and gentlemen: In the last years of the reign of Emperor Gao, our great-great-great-grandfather, who was endowed by heaven with wisdom, wisdom, and sanctity, we rectified the discipline, followed the people's meditation, and established the foundation.

古文：世祖武皇帝昭略通远，克纂洪嗣，四关罢险，三河静尘。
现代文：世祖武皇帝宏略远大，能继承大位，四境安宁，三周平静。
English: Emperor Wu, the ancestor of all emperors, was magnanimous and far-sighted. He was able to succeed to the throne, and there was peace in the four provinces and tranquility in the three regions.

古文：郁林海陵，顿孤负荷。
现代文：郁林海陵，一时失政。
English: Yulin and Hailing, momentary loss of power.

古文：明帝英圣，绍建中兴。
现代文：明帝英明，中途兴盛。
English: Emperor Ming was wise and prospered.

古文：至乎后主，行悖三才，琴横由席，绣积麻筵，淫犯先宫，秽兴闺闼，皇陛为市之所，雕房起征战之门。
现代文：到了后主，行为违天地人之理，美琴在地席中演奏，锦绣混迹在下等人缝席中，邪恶侵犯了先帝的宫廷，宫闺禁地畏满了杂草。皇家齐座成了集市，雕梁画栋的宫殿兴起战事。
English: When it came to the heir, he acted contrary to the laws of heaven and earth, the beautiful harp played in the ground seat, the embroidery mingled in the seams of the lower class, evil invaded the former emperor's court, and the palace was full of weeds. The royal palace became a bazaar, and wars broke out in the palace of carved beams and paintings.

古文：任非华尚，宠必寒厮。
现代文：所任用的不是高尚的，所宠爱的定是低等的东西。
English: What is appointed is not noble, but what is loved is base.

古文：江仆射兄弟，忠言属荐，正谏繁兴，覆族之诛，于斯而至。
现代文：江仆射兄弟，说的是忠诚的言语，正直的劝阻，但是全族被诛杀的灾祸，由此而来。
English: He spoke words of loyalty and honest dissuasion, but the calamity of the whole nation being slaughtered came from this.

古文：故乃犴噬之刑，四剽于海路，家门之衅，一起于中都。
现代文：所以杀头的刑罚，四处出现在道路上，家门遭祸，从京都开始了。
English: As a result, the punishment of beheading began to appear everywhere on the roads and in homes, starting in Kyoto.

古文：萧、刘二领军，并升御座，共禀遗诏，宗戚之苦，谅不足谈，渭阳之悲，何辜至此。
现代文：萧、刘两个领军，一起登上御座，共遵遣诏，宗室皇亲的苦难，都不值得一说，《渭阳》裹的悲伤，为什么到了这种程度。
English: Xiao and Liu, the two leaders of the army, ascended the throne together, and both obeyed the imperial edict. The suffering of the imperial family is not worth mentioning. Why is the sadness of "Fuyang" to such an extent?

古文：徐司空历叶忠荣，清简流世，匡翼之功示著，倾宗之罚已彰。
现代文：徐司空历代忠诚荣耀，清正流播世间，匡扶的功勋未赏，全族性的惩罚已现。
English: Xu Si-kuo has won the loyalty and glory of all generations, the world has been swept by Qingzheng, the merits of Kuangpu have not been rewarded, and the punishment of the whole nation has emerged.

古文：沈仆射年在悬车，将念机杖，欢歌园薮，绝影朝门，忽招陵上之罚，何万古之伤哉。
现代文：沈仆射年岁七十，将要扶着几杖，在家园欢度晚年，在朝廷绝了身影，突然招致凌辱皇上的罪名，真是万古未有的悲伤呀。
English: At the age of seventy, he will hold a few canes and spend his old age in his home garden. He will not be seen at the imperial court, and he will suddenly be accused of insulting the emperor. This is a sorrow that has never been seen before.

古文：遂使紫台之路，绝缙绅之俦；缨组之阁，罢金、张之胤。
现代文：于足使得登上台合的路上，没有大臣行走；首脑机关，断绝了金、张后继。
English: On the way to the podium, there was no minister walking; the head office cut off the succession of Jin and Zhang.

古文：悲哉!
现代文：可悲呀!
English: How sad!

古文：蝉冕为贱宠之服。
现代文：蝉冠被卑贱宠幸的人佩戴。唉!
English: The cicada crown is worn by the lowly and favored. Alas!

古文：呜呼!!皇陛列劫竖之坐。
现代文：皇宫中排列着劫贼小人的座位。
English: The seats of robber villains are lined up in the royal palace.

古文：且天人同怨，乾象变错，往岁三州流血，今者五地自动。
现代文：而且上天与人间同怀怨恨，天地运行规律错乱，去年三州流血，现在五方地震。
English: Moreover, heaven and earth hold grudges together, the laws of heaven and earth are out of order, the bloodshed in the three states last year, and now the earthquake in the five directions.

古文：昔汉池异色，胥王因之见废；吴郡暂震，步生以为奸倖。
现代文：从前违池水色变异，置王因而被废；县登地震，步生成为奸邪。
English: In the past, the water color of the lake was changed, and the king was abolished; the county was hit by an earthquake, and it gradually became an evil.

古文：况事隆于往怪，衅倍于前虐，此而未废，孰不可兴？
现代文：何况现在怪事比以往更显著，征兆比以前加倍的厉害，这样的昏君不废，还有谁不能兴呢?
English: What's more, strange things are now more conspicuous than ever, and the symptoms are twice as severe as before. Such a weak ruler is not useless, and who can't be happy?

古文：王仆射、王领军、崔护军，中维简正，逆念剖心。
现代文：王仆射、王领军、崔谨玺，是朝廷的支柱，忠诚可以剖开心来验证。
English: Wang Fuxia, Wang Lijun, and Cui Jianzhong are the pillars of the imperial court, and their loyalty can be verified by dissecting them.

古文：萧卫尉、蔡詹事、沈左卫，各负良家，共伤时哈。
现代文：萧卫尉、蔡詹台、沈左卫，各自不顾家里，同为时势操心。
English: Xiao Wei, Cai Jantai, and Shen Zuwei are all worried about the current situation, regardless of their families.

古文：先朝遗旧，志在名节，同列丹书，要同义举。
现代文：前朝老臣，重视名节，都一起用红字列名，互约共同起义。
English: The old ministers of the former dynasties attached great importance to the name day, and they all listed their names together in red letters and mutually agreed on a common uprising.

古文：建安殿下季德冲远，实允神器。
现代文：建安殿下德行秀美冲远，确实应登国家大位。
English: His Imperial Highness Prince Jian'an is a virtuous and beautiful person who has traveled far and wide. He truly deserves to ascend to the highest position in the country.

古文：昏明之举，往圣流言。
现代文：去昏君立明主，前代圣贤就说过。
English: The previous generation of sages said, "Go to the dizzy monarch and establish a clear master."

古文：今忝役戎驱，丞请乞路。
现代文：现在我忝居军队前驱，恳请让路。
English: Now that I am in the vanguard of the army, please move out of the way.

古文：须京尘一静，西迎大驾，歌舞太平，不亦隹哉!
现代文：等待京都祸乱平静，便向西迎接殿下，歌舞太平，岂不是很好吗!
English: While waiting for the calamity in Kyoto to calm down, I headed west to meet His Imperial Highness. Isn't it great that the songs and dances are peaceful!

古文：裴豫州宿遣诚言，久怀慷慨，计其劲兵，已登淮路；申司州志节坚明，分见迎合，总勒偏率，殿我而进；萧雍州、房僧寄并已纂迈，旌鼓将及；南兖州司马恭祖壮烈超群，嘉驿屡至，伫听烽谍，共成唇齿；荆郢行事萧、张二贤，莫不案剑餐风，横戈待节；关几蕃守之俦，孰非义侣。
现代文：裴豫州曾经诚心表示，很早就心怀激愤估计他的劲旅，已到进路；申司州志坚节明，料想迎候我，带领所部，随我跟进；萧雍州、房僧寄都已聚集行动，旗鼓即将到达；南兖州司马崔恭祖威壮过人，信使多次到来，说是静听烽烟谍报，结成唇齿互依的联盟；荆郢行事萧、张二位贤士，无不是按剑餐风，横着戈矛等着调度；边关和京都近郊的守卫等，哪个不是正义的同伴。
English: Pei Yuzhou once sincerely said that he had long been enraged and estimated that his strenuous journey had reached the road; Shen Shizhou Zhijian Jieming, expected to welcome me, led the headquarters, followed me; Xiao Yongzhou, the house of monks and nuns, had gathered for action, and the drums were about to arrive; Nan Xizhou Sima Cui Gong Zu was very dignified, and the messenger came many times, saying that he had quietly listened to the spy report and formed an alliance of mutual dependence; Xiao and Zhang, two sages, all acted according to the sword and dinner style, waiting for dispatch; guards at the border and in the suburbs

古文：我太尉公礼道合圣，杖德修文，神武横于七伐，雄略震于九网。
现代文：我太尉公遵循大道和圣贤的教诲，依赖德行整修教化，神威武勇称雄七伐，英雄韬略震慑九纲。
English: I, the captain, follow the teachings of the Great Way and the sages, rely on the rectification and enlightenment of virtue, and praise the seven feats of power and valor, and the nine virtues of the hero.

古文：是乃从彼英序，还抗社稷。
现代文：这就要按照好的序次。还京卫护国家。
English: This must be done in the right order. Beijing is also the guardian of the country.

古文：本欲鸣笳细锡，无劳戈刃。
现代文：本想捆锡呜笳，不劳烦众军。
English: He wanted to tie up the pewter so that he would not trouble the army.

古文：但忠党有心，节义难遣。信次之间，森然十万。
现代文：衹因大家有忠国之心，守节义不推辞一时间，聚集十万人马。
English: Because everyone has a loyal heart to the country, the festival will not be delayed for a while, and 100,000 people will gather.

古文：飞咽于九派，列舰迷于三川，此盖捧海浇萤，烈火消冻耳。
现代文：战旗飘飞掩盖九派水域，排列战船占满三川江河，这大概算是用大海来浇灭萤火，用烈火来消除冰冻罢了。
English: The battle flags fluttering to cover the waters of the nine factions, the warships lining up to occupy the rivers of the three rivers, this is probably just using the sea to extinguish fireflies, and using fire to eliminate freezing.

古文：吾子其择善而从之，无令竹帛空为后人笑也。
现代文：希望你们选择有利于自己的行动，不要让史书记载着被后人嘲笑。
English: I hope you will choose actions that are beneficial to you, and not let history record you as a laughingstock.

古文：朝廷遣后军将军胡松、骁骑将军李叔献水军据梁山；左卫将军左兴盛假节，加征虏将军，督前锋军事，屯新亭；辅国将军骁骑将军徐世标领兵屯杜姥宅。
现代文：朝廷派后军将军胡松、骁骑将军李叔献等水军占据梁山；左卫将军左兴盛假节，加封为征虏将军，指挥前锋军事，驻扎在新亭；辅国将军骁骑将军徐世蝗带兵驻扎丝室茎圭。
English: The imperial court sent the rear army general Hu Song, the cavalry general Li Shuxian and other naval forces to occupy Liangshan; the left guard general Zuo Xing Sheng Lijie, sealed as a conscript general, commanded the forward military, stationed in Xinting; the auxiliary country general cavalry general Xu Shilang led the troops stationed in Shimo Zhuge.

古文：显达率众数千人发寻阳，与胡松战于采石，大破之，京邑震恐。
现代文：题崖率领几千人马从曼厘出发，与蛆松在拯五交战，大败官军，京城震撼惊恐。
English: Titian led several thousand horses from Manli and fought with Song Song at Zhengwu, defeating the government army, shocking and frightening the capital.

古文：十二月十三日，显达至新林筑城垒，左兴盛率众军为拒战之计。
现代文：十二月十三日，显达到新林构筑城堡，左兴盛带众军设计拒敌。
English: On December 13th, Hsien reached Xinlin to build a castle, and Zuo Xingsheng led the army to design and repel the enemy.

古文：其夜，显达多置屯火于岩侧，潜军渡取石头北上袭宫城，遇风失晓，十四日平旦，数千人登落星岗，新亭军望火，谓显达犹在，既而奔归赴救，屯城南。
现代文：那夜，显达放很多火堆在岸边，悄悄领兵渡过攻取石头向北袭击宫城，正逢刮大风大家不知道，十四日天亮时，几千人登上落星岗。新亭的守军看到火光，以为题达还在那裹，得知确实消息后才跑回来救援，驻守在城南。
English: That night, Xinda set many fires on the shore, and quietly led the soldiers to cross and capture the stones to attack Miyagi to the north. Everyone did not know that it was a windy day. At dawn on the 14th, several thousand people boarded the fallen star post. The defenders of Xinting saw the fire and thought that Xinda was still there. After learning the true news, they ran back to rescue and stationed in the south of the city.

古文：宫掖大骇，闭门守备。
现代文：宫廷裹的人十分害怕。关门守卫。
English: The courtiers are terrified. The guards are closing the gates.

古文：显达马从步军数百人，于西州前与台军战，再合，大胜，手杀数人，折，官军继至，显达不能抗，退走至西州后鸟榜村，为骑官赵潭注刺落马，斩之于离侧，身涌湔离，似淳于伯之被刑也。
现代文：题达骑马执捎带领几百步兵，在西州上前与禁卫军作战，两次冲锋，大胜，亲手杀死了几人，稍折断了，官军后援到了，显达不能抵抗，退走到酉业后的乌榜村，被骑官趋潭用长矛刺落马下，在篱笆旁斩了，血涌出溅上篱笆，就像淳于伯被杀头一样。
English: Xinda rode on horseback and led several hundred infantrymen to fight against the Imperial Guards in Xizhou. He charged twice and won a great victory. He killed several people with his own hands. He was slightly broken. The official army came to his aid. Xinda could not resist. He retreated to Wupang Village after Xinye. He was stabbed under his horse with a spear by the cavalry officer Xiantan. He was beheaded next to the fence. Blood gushed out and splattered on the fence, just like Chunyu Bo was killed.

古文：时年七十二。
现代文：这年他七十二岁。
English: He was seventy-two years old.

古文：显达在江州，遇疾不治，寻而自差，意甚不悦。
现代文：显达在江州时得了病没有去治疗，不久自己好了，他心裹很不高兴。
English: When Xanda fell ill in Jiangzhou, he didn't go for treatment, but he soon got better. He was very unhappy.

古文：是冬连大雪，枭首于朱雀，百雪不集之。
现代文：这年冬天连日大雪，在朱雀门悬挂他的首级，雪不落在头上。
English: This winter, it snowed heavily for days on end. His head was hung on the Suzaku Gate, and the snow did not fall on his head.

古文：诸子皆伏诛。
现代文：几个儿子都被杀。
English: Several sons were killed.

古文：史臣曰：光武功臣所以能终其身名者，非唯不任职事，亦以继奉明、章，心尊正嫡，君安乎上，臣习乎下。
现代文：史臣曰：光武帝时功臣能一生保持身名的原因，不仅是不任职，也因为侍奉着明、章，心裹尊崇正宗嫡子，君在上位安稳，大臣在下习惯。
English: Shichen said, "When Emperor Guangwu was alive, the reason why meritorious ministers were able to retain their titles throughout their lives was not only because they did not hold office, but also because they served the emperor with honor and distinction, and they held the legitimate son of the founder in high esteem. The emperor was secure in his position, and the ministers were accustomed to it.

古文：王、陈拔迹奋飞，则建元、永明之运；身极鼎将，则建武、永元之朝。
现代文：王、陈发迹民间青云直上，那就是建元、永明年间的时运，身为公侯将相，那是建武、永元时的事。
English: The king, Chen Fang, and the people rose to the top of the clouds. That was the time between Jianyuan and Yongyuan. As a grand marshal, it was the time between Jianwu and Yongyuan.

古文：勋非往时，位逾昔等，礼授虽重，情分不交。
现代文：勋劳不如以往，地位却与过去相同，礼遇和封赐虽然很重，但没有感情。
English: The rewards are not as good as in the past, but the status is the same as in the past. Although the courtesy and the conferment are very heavy, there is no emotion.

古文：加以主猜政乱，危亡虑及，举手捍头，人思自免。
现代文：加上因为君主猜忌，政治紊乱，危亡忧患一来，举手抱头，人人想自己免祸。
English: In addition, because of the monarch's suspicion, political disorder, danger and distress, everyone raised their hands and hugged their heads, everyone wanted to avoid disaster.

古文：干戈既用，诚沦犯上之迹，敌国起于同舟，况又疏于此者也？赞曰：纠纠敬则，临难不惑。
现代文：战事一起，的确陷进犯上的罪名裹，同一条船上都能变成敌国，何况还是比这更疏远的呢?赞曰：威武的敬则，面对灾难而不惶惑。
English: In the midst of war, and indeed in the midst of the crime of aggression, one and the same ship can become an enemy country, and what is more, an estranged one at that?

古文：功成殿寝，诛我蝥贼。
现代文：在殿堂建立大功，诛杀盗贼。
English: Build a great achievement in the hall of fame, fight and kill thieves.

古文：显达孤根，应义南蕃。
现代文：显达根底弱，在南边藩国兴起。
English: Xanda had a weak foundation and emerged as a southern domain.

古文：威扬宠盛，鼎食高门。
现代文：能在宠幸的重臣中扬威，晋升为公爵高位成为鼎食贵族。
English: He was able to gain prestige among the favored vassals, and was promoted to the high rank of duke to become a top food aristocrat.

古文：王亏河、兖、陈挫襄、樊。
现代文：王敬则受损于河、兖，陈显达受挫在襄、樊。
English: Wang Jing was damaged in He and Zou, while Chen Xianda suffered setbacks in Xiang and Zou.

