古文：起柔兆阉茂四月，尽强圉大渊献六月，凡一年有奇。
现代文：起柔兆阉茂四月，尽强圉大渊献六月，凡一年有奇。
English: The year is full of surprises, from the softness of April to the strength of June.

古文：明宗圣德和武钦孝皇帝上之下天成元年夏，四月，丁亥朔，严办将发，骑兵陈于宣仁门外，步兵陈于五凤门外。
现代文：后唐明宗天成元年夏季，四月，丁亥朔，后唐帝出行前的戒严等都己办好准备出发，骑兵陈列在宣仁门外，步兵陈列在五凤门外。
English: In the summer of the first year of Emperor Tiancheng of the Ming Dynasty of the Later Tang Dynasty, in April, in Dinghai Shuo, the martial law before the travel of the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty, etc. have been prepared for departure. The cavalry is displayed outside the Xuanren Gate, and the infantry is displayed outside the Wufeng Gate.

古文：从马直指挥使郭从谦不知睦王存乂已死，欲奉之以作乱，帅所部兵自营中露刃大呼，与黄甲两军攻兴教门。
现代文：从马直指挥使郭从不知道睦王李存己经死去，打算辅助他一起叛乱，于是率部队从军营中亮出刀刃大声疾呼，和黄甲两军攻打兴教门。
English: From the direct command of Ma, Guo never knew that the King of Mutsu, Li Cunxu, had died, and planned to assist him with the rebellion. Therefore, he led the troops to shout loudly from the military camp, and attacked the Xingjia Gate with the two Yellow Armies.

古文：帝方食，闻变，帅诸王及近卫骑兵击之，逐乱兵出门，时蕃汉马步使硃守殷将骑兵在外，帝遣中使急召之，欲与同击贼；守殷不至，引兵憩于北邙茂林之下。
现代文：这时后唐帝正在吃饭，听说兵变就率领诸王和近卫骑兵进击，把乱军赶出兴教门。当时，蕃汉马步使朱守殷率骑兵在外面，后唐帝派中使急召他，打算和他一起攻打乱兵。朱守殷不来，领兵在北邙茂密的树林中休息。
English: At this time, Emperor Hou Tang was having dinner, and when he heard of the mutiny, he led the kings and guards cavalry to attack and drive the rebels out of the Xingjia Gate. At that time, Shih Hanzhong ordered Zhu Shouyin to lead the cavalry outside, and the Emperor Hou Tang sent an envoy to summon him, intending to attack the rebels with him. Zhu Shouyin did not come, and led the soldiers to rest in the dense woods of Beilun.

古文：乱兵焚兴教门，缘城而入，近臣宿将皆释甲潜遁，独散员都指挥使李彦卿及宿卫军校何福进、王全斌等十馀人力战。
现代文：乱兵焚烧了兴教门。沿着城墙进入，后唐帝身边的大臣和禁卫兵都丢盔弃甲偷偷逃跑了，只有散员都指挥使李彦卿以及宿卫军校何福进、王全斌等十余人奋力作战。
English: The disorderly soldiers burned the gate of Xingjia. They entered along the city wall, and the ministers and imperial guards around the late Tang Emperor all abandoned their armor and secretly fled. Only the non-commissioned officers commanded Li Yanqing, and more than ten people such as He Fuxin and Wang Quanbin, the guards of the military school, fought hard.

古文：俄而帝为流矢所中，鹰坊人善友扶帝自门楼下，至绛霄庑下，抽矢，渴懑求水，皇后不自省视，遣宦者进酪，须臾，帝殂。
现代文：不一会儿，后唐帝被流箭射中，鹰坊人善友扶着后唐帝从门楼上走下来，到了绛霄殿的屋檐下把箭拔出来。后唐帝口渴烦闷想喝水，皇后没有亲自看望，只是派宦官送去些乳浆。
English: After a short while, Emperor Go-Tang was shot by a stray arrow. Yingfang's good friends helped Emperor Go-Tang down from the gate tower and pulled the arrow out from under the eaves of the Summer Palace. Emperor Go-Tang was thirsty and wanted to drink water. The empress did not visit him in person, but sent an eunuch to bring him some milk.

古文：李彦卿等恸哭而去，左右皆散，善友敛庑下乐器覆帝尸而焚之。
现代文：很快后唐帝就死了。李彦卿等痛哭而去，左右大臣也都离去，善友收拾了屋檐下的乐器。盖住后唐帝的尸体，把他焚烧了。
English: Emperor Go-Tang died soon after. Lord Li Yanqing cried bitterly and left, the ministers left and right also left, good friends packed up the musical instruments under the eaves. They covered Emperor Go-Tang's body and burned him.

古文：彦卿，存审之子；福进、全斌放皆太原人也。
现代文：李彦卿是李存审的儿子。何福进、王全斌都是太原人。
English: Li Yanqing is the son of Li Cunxin. He Fuxin and Wang Quanbin are both from Taiyuan.

古文：刘后囊金宝系马鞍，与申王存屋及李绍荣引七百骑，焚喜庆殿，自师子门出走。
现代文：刘皇后装好金玉珠宝，系上马鞍，和申王李存渥、李绍荣领着七百骑兵焚烧了嘉庆殿以后，从师子门出逃。
English: Empress Liu put on her gold and jade jewelry, saddled her horse, and led seven hundred cavalrymen to burn the Jiaqing Palace together with the Shen kings Li Cunwu and Li Shaorong, and then fled from the Shizi Gate.

古文：通王存确、雅王存纪奔南山。
现代文：通王李存确、雅王李存纪逃奔到南山。
English: King Tong Li Cunji and King Ya King Li Cunji fled to Nanshan.

古文：宫人多逃散，硃守殷入宫，选宫人三十馀人，各令自取乐器珍玩，内于其家。于是诸军大掠都城。
现代文：宫里的人大多数都逃跑了，朱守殷进入宫内，挑选了三十多个宫女，让她们各自拿了些乐器和珍贵的玩物，放在他家，此时各路军队把都城洗劫一空。
English: Most of the people in the palace fled. Zhu Shouyin entered the palace and selected more than thirty maids of honor. He asked each of them to take some musical instruments and precious playthings and put them in his house. At this time, the various armies looted the capital city.

古文：是日，李嗣源至罂子谷，闻之，恸哭，谓诸将曰： 主上素得士心，正为群小蔽惑至此，今吾将安归乎！ 
现代文：这一天，李嗣源到达子谷，听说后唐皇帝庄宗己死，痛哭一场，并对诸位将领说： 主上平时很得人心，正是被这一群小人蒙蔽迷惑才到了这种地步，现在我将到哪里去呢？ 
English: On this day, when Li Siyuan arrived in Zidang and heard that Emperor Zhuangzong of the Later Tang Dynasty had died, he wept bitterly and said to the generals, "The Lord is very popular in peacetime. It is precisely because I have been deceived and confused by this group of villains that I have reached this point. Where will I go now?

古文：戊子，硃守殷遣使驰白嗣源，以 京城大乱，诸军焚掠不已，愿亟来救之！ 
现代文：戊子，朱守殷派使者飞速报告李嗣源，说： 京城大乱，诸军烧杀抢掠不己，希望赶快来解救京城。 
English: Wuzi, Zhu Shouyin sent an envoy to report Li Siyuan, saying: The capital city is in turmoil, the armies are burning, looting and pillaging. I hope to come quickly to rescue the capital city.

古文：乙丑，嗣源入洛阳，止于私第，禁焚掠，拾庄宗骨于灰烬之中而殡之。
现代文：乙丑，李嗣源进入洛阳，住在自己的宅里，禁止焚烧抢掠，在灰烬中拾了一些庄宗的遗骨，然后把他安葬了。
English: Second ugly, Li Siyuan entered Luoyang, lived in his own house, forbade burning and looting, picked up some of Zhuangzong's remains in the ashes, and then buried him.

古文：嗣源之入鄴也，前直指挥使平遥侯益脱身归洛阳，庄宗抚之流涕。
现代文：李嗣源进入邺都的时侯，前直指挥使平遥人侯益摆脱了李嗣源回到洛阳，计宗抚摩着他痛哭流涕。
English: When Li Siyuan entered the capital of Shandong, the commander of the front line ordered the Pingyao people to get rid of Hou Yi. Li Siyuan returned to Luoyang, and Kezong stroked him and cried bitterly.

古文：至是，益自缚请罪；嗣源曰： 乐为臣尽节，又何罪也！ 
现代文：到了现在，侯益自缚来请罪。李嗣源说： 你作为一个大臣，尽忠尽节，有什么罪呢？ 
English: Now, Hou Yik has come to plead guilty. Li Siyuan said: As a minister, you have been loyal to the end. What is your crime?

古文：使复其职。
现代文：又使他官复原职。
English: He was reinstated in his position.

古文：嗣源谓硃守殷曰： 公善巡徼，以待魏王。
现代文：李嗣源对朱守殷说： 你好好地巡回检查，以待魏王到来。
English: Li Siyuan said to Zhu Shouyin: You should make a good inspection tour to wait for the arrival of the Wei King.

古文：淑妃、德妃在宫，供给尤宜丰备。
现代文：淑妃、德妃都在宫中，她们的供给应当格外丰富齐备。
English: Both Shuxi and Defei are in the palace, and their provisions should be extraordinarily rich and complete.

古文：吾俟山陵毕，社稷有奉，则归籓为国家扞御北方耳。 
现代文：等皇上的陵墓修好，国家有了继承人，我就回到我的藩镇真定去为国家保卫北方领土。 
English: When the emperor's mausoleum is repaired and the country has a successor, I will return to my hometown to defend the northern territory for the country.

古文：是日，豆卢革帅百官上笺劝进，嗣源面谕之曰： 吾奉诏讨贼，不幸部曲叛散；欲入朝自诉，又为绍荣所隔，披猖至此。
现代文：这一天，豆卢革率领百官送上书札劝李嗣源即皇帝位，李嗣源当面告诉他们说： 我奉皇上的命令去讨伐乱贼，不幸部队叛背逃散。本想入朝亲自诉说情况，但被李绍荣所阻隔，分裂到如此地步。
English: On this day, the leaders of the Doulu Ge and hundreds of officials sent a letter to Li Shiyuan to persuade him to become the emperor. Li Shiyuan told them in person: "I was ordered by the emperor to fight against the bandits, but unfortunately the troops defected and fled. I wanted to go to the North to personally tell the situation, but I was blocked by Li Shaorong and divided to such an extent.

古文：吾本无他心，诸群遽尔见推，殊非相悉，愿勿言也！ 
现代文：我本来没有其他想法，诸君突然来推举我，是根本不了解我，希望不要说了。 
English: I didn't have any other idea. You all suddenly came to nominate me, you don't know me at all. I hope you don't say anything.

古文：革等固请，嗣源不许。
现代文：豆卢革等坚决请求，李嗣源还是没有答应。
English: However, Li Siyuan did not agree to the firm request of Zhu Ruge and others.

古文：李绍荣欲奔河中就永王存霸，从兵稍散；庚寅，至平陆，止馀数骑，为人所执，折足送洛阳。
现代文：李绍荣想投奔河中去靠拢永王李存霸，跟从他的部队渐渐逃散了。庚寅，到了平陆，只剩下几个骑兵，被人抓获，打断了脚送到了洛阳。
English: Li Shaorong wanted to rush into the river to get closer to the Yong Wang Li Cunha, and the troops following him gradually dispersed. When Geng Yin arrived at Pinglu, only a few cavalrymen were left, and they were captured and sent to Luoyang with broken legs.

古文：存霸亦帅众千人弃镇奔晋阳。
现代文：李存霸也率领一千多人弃镇逃奔到晋阳。
English: Li Cunha also led more than a thousand people to abandon the town and flee to Jinyang.

古文：辛卯，魏王继岌至兴平，闻洛阳乱，复引兵而西，谋保据凤翔。
现代文：辛卯，魏王李继岌到兴平，听说洛阳叛乱，又率兵回到西边，计划据守凤翔。
English: Xinwu, the Wei king, Li Ji, went to Xingping, heard about the Luoyang rebellion, and led his troops back to the west, planning to defend Fengxiang.

古文：向延嗣至凤翔，以庄宗之命诛李绍琛。
现代文：向延嗣到了凤翔，以庄宗的命令杀死李绍琛。
English: Xiang Yanji went to Fengxiang and killed Li Shaoqi on the orders of Zhuangzong.

古文：初，庄宗命吕、郑二内养在晋阳，一监兵，一监仓库，自留守张宪以以下皆承应不暇。
现代文：当初，庄宗命令吕、郑两个内养留在晋阳，一个监管军队，一个监管仓库，自留守张宪以下都承应不暇。
English: At first, Zhuangzong ordered Lu and Zheng to stay in Jinyang, supervising the army and the warehouse. Zhang Xian and the others were left behind to take care of everything.

古文：及鄴都有变，又命汾州刺史李彦超为北都巡检。
现代文：等到邺都发生兵变，又令汾州刺史李彦超为北都巡检。
English: Wait until there is a mutiny in Shantou, and then order the Shantou chief historian, Li Yanchao, to make a tour of inspection of the northern capital.

古文：彦超，彦卿之兄也。
现代文：李彦超是李彦卿的哥哥。
English: Li Yanchao is the elder brother of Sir Li Yanrou.

古文：庄宗既殂，推官河间张昭远劝张宪奉表劝进，宪曰： 吾一书生，自布衣至服金紫，皆出先帝之恩，岂可偷生而不自愧乎！ 
现代文：庄宗死后，推官河间人张昭远劝张宪奉表拥李嗣源为帝，张宪说： 我是一个书生，从一个普通百姓到做大官，都是找先帝的恩情，怎以能够苟且偷生而不感到惭愧呢？ 
English: After the death of Zhuangzong, Zhang Zhaoyuan, the magistrate of Kawama, advised Zhang Xian to hold Li Siyuan as the emperor. Zhang Xian said: I am a scholar, from an ordinary citizen to a high official, I am looking for the grace of the former emperor. How can I be honest and not feel ashamed?

古文：昭远泣曰： 此古人所行，公能行之，忠义不朽矣。 
现代文：张昭远边哭边说： 这是古人的事情，你能实行，忠义不朽。 
English: Zhang Zhao cried in the distance and said, "This is a matter of the ancients. You can carry it out. Loyalty is immortal."

古文：有李存沼者，庄宗之近属，自洛阳奔晋阳，矫传庄宗之命，阴与二内养谋杀宪及彦超，据晋阳拒守。
现代文：有一个叫李存沼的人，是庄宗的近亲，他从洛阳跑到晋阳，假传庄宗的命令，偷偷和两个内养阴谋杀死张宪和李彦超，占据晋阳而坚守。
English: There was a man named Li Cunuma, a close relative of Zhuangzong, who ran from Luoyang to Jinyang, falsely passed on Zhuangzong's order, secretly murdered Zhang Xian and Li Yanchao with two inner-circle conspirators, occupied Jinyang and held fast.

古文：彦超知之，密告宪，欲先图之。
现代文：李彦超知道这一情况后，悄悄地告诉了张宪，打算先图谋起事。
English: After Li Yanchao knew this situation, he quietly told Zhang Xian that he planned to start a riot.

古文：宪曰： 仆受先帝厚恩，不忍为此。
现代文：张宪说： 先帝对我有深厚的恩情，我不忍心这样做。
English: Zhang Xian said, "The late emperor was deeply grateful to me. I can't bear to do this.

古文：徇义而不免于祸，乃天也。 
现代文：坚守道义而至死不变却免不了祸端，这是天命啊！ 
English: Adhering to moral principles and remaining unchanged until death, however, cannot avoid misfortune. This is the destiny of heaven!

古文：彦超谋未决，壬辰夜，军士共杀二内养及存沼于牙城，因大掠达旦。
现代文：李彦超的计划还没有决定，壬辰夜晚，士卒们就在牙城里杀死了两个内养和李存沼，于是在城内抢掠到天亮。
English: Li Yanchao's plan had not yet been decided, and in the evening of the same day, the soldiers killed two domestic animals and Li Cunma in Fangcheng, and then looted the city until dawn.

古文：宪闻变，出奔忻州。
现代文：张宪听说发生兵变，出逃到忻州。
English: Zhang Xian heard that there was a mutiny and fled to Zhangzhou.

古文：会嗣源移书至，彦超号令士卒，城中始安，遂权知太原军府。
现代文：正好这时李嗣源的信送到这里，李彦超给士卒下了命令，城里才开始安定下来，于是他就代理太原军府。
English: Just at this time, Li Siyuan's letter was sent here, and Li Yanchao gave an order to his subordinates, and the city began to settle down, so he came to represent the Taiyuan Military Government.

古文：百官三笺请嗣源监国，嗣源乃许之。
现代文：百官第三次送上书札请求李嗣源监国，李嗣源答应了他们的请求。
English: For the third time, the hundred officials sent a card requesting Li Siyuan to supervise the country, and Li Siyuan agreed to their request.

古文：甲午，入居兴圣宫，始受百官班见。
现代文：甲午，进入兴圣宫居住，开始接受百官按次序的拜见。
English: In the afternoon of the first day, he entered the Xing Sheng Palace to live, and began to receive visits from hundreds of officials in order.

古文：下令称教，百官称之曰殿下。
现代文：他下发的命令称作教，百官称他为殿下。
English: The orders he issued were called "teachings," and the officials called him "His Highness."

古文：庄宗后宫存者犹千馀人，宣徽使选其美少者数百献于监国，监国曰： 奚用此为！ 
现代文：庄宗的后宫里还有一千多人，宣徽使从中选择了几百名年轻漂亮的送给了监国李嗣源，监国说： 用这些人干什么？ 
English: There were still more than a thousand people in Zhuangzong's harem. Xuanzong selected several hundred young and beautiful people from them and gave them to the supervisor, Li Siyuan. The supervisor said, "What are we going to do with these people?

古文：对曰： 宫中职掌不可阙也。 
现代文：宣徽使回答说： 宫中的主管不可缺。 
English: Xuan Hui replied: The head of the palace is indispensable.

古文：监国曰： 宫中职掌宜谙故事，此辈安知！ 
现代文：监国说： 宫中主管应当熟悉过去的典章制度，这些人怎么会知道？ 
English: The procuratorate said: Palace supervisors should be familiar with the past award system, how would these people know?

古文：乃悉用老旧之人补之，其少年者皆出归其亲戚，无亲戚者任其所适。
现代文：于是全部用过去的老人代替，让那些年轻人都出宫回亲戚家，没肖亲戚的任凭他们随便去哪里。
English: As a result, all of them were replaced with the old people of the past, and the young people were allowed to leave the palace and return to their relatives' homes. The relatives were not allowed to go anywhere.

古文：蜀中所送宫人亦准此。
现代文：蜀中所送来的宫人也照此办理。
English: The courtiers sent from Shu also followed this procedure.

古文：乙未，以中门使安重诲为枢密使，镇州别驾张延朗为副使。
现代文：乙未，任命中门使安重诲为枢密使，镇州别驾张延朗为副使。
English: Second, he appointed the Middle Gate Envoy An Chongyuan as the Privy Envoy, and Zhang Yanlang, the Zhenzhou Deputy Envoy, as the Deputy Envoy.

古文：延朗，开封人也，仕梁为租庸吏，性纤巧，善事权要，以女妻重诲之子，故重诲引之。
现代文：张延朗是开封人，在后梁时任租庸吏。他工于心计，善事权贵。把他的女儿嫁给了安重诲的儿子，所以安重诲引荐了他。
English: Zhang Yanlang was from Kaifeng and served as a tax collector in Houliang's time. He worked hard, was kind and powerful. He married his daughter to the son of An Chongyu, so An Chongyu recommended him.

古文：监国令所在访求诸王。
现代文：监国李嗣源命令访求还活着的各王。
English: The procurator of the state, Li Siyuan, ordered to visit all the kings who were still alive.

古文：通王存确、雅王存纪匿民间，或密告安重诲，重诲与李绍真谋曰： 今殿下既监国典丧，诸王宜早为之所，以壹人心。
现代文：通王李存确、雅王李存纪藏匿在民间，有人秘密告诉安重诲，安重诲和李绍真谋划说： 现在殿下己经摄政，主持办理丧事，各王应当及早安排处置，以此来统一人心。
English: Tongwang Li Cunzheng and Yawang Li Cunji were hiding among the common people. Someone secretly told An Chongzheng that An Chongzheng and Li Shaozhen were plotting and said, "Now that Your Royal Highness has passed through the regent and presided over the funeral, all kings should arrange the disposition as early as possible in order to unify the people."

古文：殿下性慈，不可以闻。 乃密遣人就田舍杀之。
现代文：殿下性情慈善，不能告诉他。 于是秘密派人到农舍杀了他们。
English: His Royal Highness, being charitable, could not tell him, so he secretly sent someone to the farmhouse to kill them.

古文：后月馀，监国乃闻之，切责重诲，伤惜久之。
现代文：一个多月以后监国才听说这件事，严厉地谴责了安重诲，伤心婉惜了很久。
English: It was more than a month before the State Supervision Commission heard about the incident, severely condemned An Chongyuan, and mourned for a long time.

古文：刘皇后与申王存渥奔晋阳，在道与存渥私通。
现代文：刘皇后和申王李存渥逃到晋阳，在路上和李存渥通奸。
English: Empress Liu and King Shen fled to Jinyang and committed adultery with Li Cunwu on the way.

古文：存渥至晋阳，李彦超不纳，走至凤谷，为其下所杀。
现代文：李存渥到了晋阳，李彦超不接纳，他又跑到谷，被部下杀死。
English: Li Cunwu went to Jinyang, but Li Yanchao did not accept him. He ran to the valley and was killed by his subordinates.

古文：明日，永王存霸亦至晋阳，从兵逃散俱尽，存霸削发、僧服谒李彦超， 愿为山僧，幸垂庇护。 
现代文：第二天，永王李存霸也到达晋阳，跟随他的士卒全都逃跑了。李存霸剃掉头发，穿上僧服去拜见李彦超，说： 愿意成为山上的僧人，希望能得到庇护。 
English: The next day, Yong Wang Li Cunpah also arrived in Jinyang, and all the soldiers who followed him fled. Li Cunpah shaved his hair and put on a monk's robe to meet Li Yancha, saying: "I am willing to become a monk on the mountain, I hope to be sheltered."

古文：军士争欲杀之，彦超曰： 六相公来，当奏取进止。 
现代文：军士们争着想杀掉他，李彦超说： 六相公李存霸既然来了，应当奏请，然后决定去留。 
English: The sergeants fought to kill him, and Li Yanchao said, "Since Li Cunpah, the six-faced lord, has come, he should make a request and then decide to stay.

古文：军士不听，杀之于府门碑下。
现代文：军士们没有听从他的话，在府门的石碑下把他杀死。
English: The sergeants did not listen to him and killed him under the stone monument at the entrance to the house.

古文：刘皇后为尼于晋阳，监国使人就杀之。
现代文：刘皇后在晋阳当了尼姑，监国派人到晋阳杀了她。
English: Empress Liu became a nun in Jinyang, and the State Supervisor sent someone to Jinyang to kill her.

古文：薛王存礼及庄宗幼子继嵩、继潼、继蟾继峣，遭乱皆不知所终。
现代文：薛王李存礼以及庄宗幼小的儿子李继嵩、李继潼、李继蟾、李继在国家遭受兵乱后都不知所终。
English: Xue Wang Li Cunli and Zhuangzong's young sons Li Jisong, Li Jisong, Li Jisong, Li Jisong and Li Jisong all died after the country was hit by military turmoil.

古文：惟邕王存美以病风偏枯得免，居于晋阳。
现代文：只有邕王李存美中风得病，半身不遂，才免于一死，住在晋阳。
English: Li Cunmei, the king of Xing, was the only one to be spared from death after suffering a stroke that left her partially paralyzed. She lives in Jinyang.

古文：徐温、高季兴闻庄宗遇弑，益重严可求、梁震。
现代文：徐温、高季兴听说庄宗被杀，更加器重严可求、梁震。
English: Xu Wen and Gao Jixing heard that Zhuang Zong had been killed. They should have been more strict with Liang Zhen.

古文：梁震荐前陵州判官贵平孙光宪于季兴，使掌书记。
现代文：梁震把原来的陵州判官贵平人孙光宪推荐给高季兴，掌管书牍记录。
English: Liang Zhen recommended the original judge of Lingzhou, Sun Guangxian, a nobleman, to Gao Jixing, who was in charge of the records.

古文：季兴大治战舰，欲攻楚，光宪谏曰： 荆南乱离之后，赖公休息士民，始有生意。若又与楚国交恶，他国乘吾之弊，良可忧也。 
现代文：高季兴大治战船，准备攻打楚国。孙光宪劝说： 荆南政治混乱之后，靠你使士民休养生息，现在刚有点生机，如果又和楚国成为仇敌，其他国家乘机钻我们空子，是非常令人担心的。 
English: Sun Guangxian advised: After the political turmoil in Jingnan, you helped the people to rest and recuperate, and now there is just a little bit of vitality. If we become enemies with Chu again, and other countries take the opportunity to take advantage of us, it is very worrying.

古文：季兴乃止。
现代文：高季兴于是停止与楚国交战的准备。
English: Gao Jixing then stopped preparations for war with the State of Chu.

古文：戊戌，李绍荣至洛阳，监国责之曰： 吾何负于尔，而杀吾儿！ 
现代文：戊戌，李绍荣到达洛阳，监国李嗣源责备他说： 我什么地方对不起你，你杀死我的儿子？ 
English: After Li Shao Rong arrived in Luoyang, the State Supervisor Li Siyuan reproached him, saying: "What am I sorry for? You killed my son?

古文：绍荣瞋目直视曰： 先帝何负于尔？ 
现代文：李绍荣睁大眼睛瞪着监国说： 先帝什么地方对不起你？ 
English: Li Shaorong opened his eyes wide, stared at the supervisor of the country and said: Where did the former emperor apologize to you?

古文：遂斩之，复其姓名曰元行钦。
现代文：于是杀死了李绍荣，并恢复了他原来的姓名元行钦。
English: So he killed Li Shaorong and restored his original name, Yuan Xingqin.

古文：监国恐征蜀军还为变，以石敬瑭为陕州留后；己亥，以李从珂为河中留后。
现代文：监国怕征讨前蜀国的军队回来发生变故，任命石敬瑭为陕州留后。己亥，任命李从珂为河中留后。
English: The supervising state was afraid that the army of the former Shu State would come back after the conscription and that there would be a change, so it appointed Shi Jingyao to stay behind in Shaanxi, and Ji Hai appointed Li Congke to stay behind in Hechu.

古文：枢密使张居翰乞归田里，许之。
现代文：枢密使张居翰请求回家乡，监国答应了他的请求。
English: Zhang Juhan, the envoy, requested to return to his hometown, and the supervising state agreed to his request.

古文：李绍真屡荐孔循之才，庚子，以循为枢密副使。
现代文：李绍真曾多次推荐孔循的才能，庚子，任命孔循为枢密副使。
English: Li Shaozhen had repeatedly recommended Kong Xuan's talent, Geng Zi, and appointed Kong Xuan as a vice-envoy.

古文：李强宏请复姓马。
现代文：李绍宏请求恢复他姓马。
English: Li Shaohong requests to restore his surname Ma.

古文：监国下教，数租庸使孔谦奸佞侵刻穷困军民之罪而斩之，凡谦所立苛敛之法皆罢之，因废租庸使及内勾司，依旧为盐铁、户部、度支三司，委宰相一人专判。
现代文：监国下发教令，谴责租庸使孔谦奸巧谄谀、侵占剥夺，使军民贫困的罪行，并将他处死。凡是孔谦制定的苛敛之法，全部废除，同时撤消了租庸使和内勾司，依照旧例设盐铁、户部、度支三司，委托宰相一人专门管理。
English: The procuratorate issued an edict, condemning Confucius to the crimes of treachery, usurpation and deprivation, and impoverishment of the military and civilians, and put him to death. All the harsh laws enacted by Confucius were abolished. At the same time, the procuratorate revoked the procuratorate and the Inner Courier, and set up the Salt and Iron, the Household Department, and the Three Departments of the Ministry of Finance in accordance with the old practice, and entrusted the special management to the Prime Minister.

古文：又罢诸道监军使；以庄宗由宦官亡国，命诸道尽杀之。
现代文：又取消了各道的监军使。因为庄宗是任用宦官才导致亡国的，所以命令各道把宦官全部杀掉。
English: He also abolished the overseers of each province. Since it was the appointment of eunuchs by Zhuangzong that led to the downfall of the country, he ordered each province to kill all eunuchs.

古文：魏王继岌自兴平退至武功，宦者李从袭曰： 祸福未可知，退不如进，请王亟东行以救内难。 
现代文：魏王李继岌从兴平退到武功，宦官李从袭说： 是祸是福不可预测，但后退不如前进，请王赶快东进来解救内难。 
English: Wei King Li Jian retreated from Xingping to Wugong, and eunuch Li Congyi said: "Whether it is misfortune or good fortune is unpredictable, but it is better to retreat than to advance. I ask Wang to come east quickly to relieve the internal difficulties."

古文：继岌从之。
现代文：李继岌听从了他的意见。
English: Li Jizhe followed his advice.

古文：还，至渭水，权西都留守张篯已断浮梁；循水浮渡，是日至渭南，腹心吕知柔等皆已窜匿。
现代文：于是前进到达渭水，代理西都留守的张己经把浮桥拆毁。他们顺流渡过渭水，当日到达渭南，李继岌的心腹之人吕知柔等都己逃跑躲藏起来。
English: They then proceeded to Surabaya, where Zhang Zi Jing, who was left behind to represent the western capital, tore down the pontoon bridge. They crossed Surabaya along the river and arrived in southern Laos on the same day. Li Jizhe's confidant, Lv Zhirong, and others had already fled and gone into hiding.

古文：从袭谓继岌曰： 时事已去，王宜自图。 
现代文：李从袭对李继岌说： 大势己去，王应自图。 
English: Li Conghai said to Li Jizhe: The great power has gone, and the king should chart his own course.

古文：继岌徘徊流涕，乃自伏于床，命仆夫李环缢杀之。
现代文：李继岌边哭边来回走动，后来就趴伏在床上，命令仆夫李环用绳子把他勒死。
English: Li Jie walked back and forth while crying, and then lay down on the bed and ordered the servant Li Huan to strangle him with a rope.

古文：任圜代将其众而东。
现代文：任圜代替他率领部队向东前进。
English: In his place, Ren Xuan led the troops to advance eastward.

古文：监国命石敬瑭慰抚之，军士皆无异言。
现代文：监国命令石敬瑭去安抚他们，士卒们没有不同意见都归顺了李嗣源。
English: The procurator ordered Shi Jingyao to appease them, and the soldiers all submitted to Li Sigen without any dissenting opinions.

古文：先是，监国命所亲李氵中为华州都监，应接西师。
现代文：在此之前，监国命令他的亲信李冲为华州都监，来应接魏王李继岌的部队。
English: Prior to this, the overseer of the state ordered his close friend Li Chong to be the overseer of Huazhou, to meet the troops of Wei King Li Jizhe.

古文：氵中擅逼华州节度使史彦镕入朝；同州节度使李存敬过华州，氵中杀之，并屠其家；又杀西川行营都监李从袭。
现代文：李冲擅自逼迫华州节度使史彦熔入朝。同州节度使李存敬路过华州时，李冲杀死了他，并把他的家属也全部杀掉。他还杀死了西川行营都监李从袭。
English: Without authorization, Li Chong forced the Huazhou Festival to melt Shi Yan into the dynasty. When the Huazhou Festival made Li Cunjing pass through Huazhou, Li Chong killed him, and killed all his family members. He also killed the Xichuan Yingying Metropolitan Prisoner Li Congyi.

古文：彦镕泣诉于安重诲，重诲遣彦镕还镇，召氵中归朝。
现代文：史彦熔哭着向安重诲诉说了李冲逼他的事，安重诲派史彦熔回到华州，召李冲回朝。
English: Shi Yan melted into tears and told An Chong Li that Li Chong had forced him. An Chong Li sent Shi Yan melt back to Huazhou and called Li Chong back to the North.

古文：自监国入洛，内外机事皆决于李绍真。
现代文：自从监国进入洛阳以来，内外重要的事情都由李绍真决定。
English: Since the Supervisor of the State entered Luoyang, important matters at home and abroad have been decided by Li Shaozhen.

古文：绍真擅收威胜节度使李绍钦、太子少保李绍氵中下狱，欲杀之。
现代文：李绍真擅自拘捕了威胜节度使李绍钦、太子少保李绍冲，并把他们投入监狱，打算把他们杀掉。
English: Li Shaozhen arbitrarily arrested Li Shaoqin, the grand marshal of the Great Victory, and Li Shao Chong, the prince's younger brother, and put them in prison, intending to kill them.

古文：安重诲谓绍真曰： 温、段罪恶皆在梁朝，今殿下新平内难，冀安万国，岂专为公报仇邪！ 
现代文：安重诲对李绍真说： 温韬、段凝的罪恶都在梁朝，现在殿下刚刚平息了内乱，希望安定万国，难道只为你报仇吗？ 
English: An Chongzhen said to Li Shaozhen, "The crimes of appeasement and appeasement were all committed during the Liang Dynasty. Now that Your Highness has just quelled the civil strife and hopes for the stability of all nations, is it just for you that he is taking revenge?

古文：绍真由是稍沮。
现代文：李绍真因此才稍稍收敛。
English: That's why Li Shaozhen has been able to calm down a bit.

古文：辛丑，监国教，李绍氵中、绍钦复姓名为温韬、段凝，并放归田里。
现代文：辛丑，监国下令，恢复了李绍冲、李绍钦的姓名叫温韬、段凝，并放他回归家乡。
English: Xin Ug, ordered by the supervising state, restored the names of Li Shao Chong and Li Shaoqin to Wen Wei and Duan Jeng, and allowed him to return to his hometown.

古文：壬寅，以孔循为枢密使。
现代文：壬寅，任命孔循为枢密使。
English: Jinyin, appointed Kongxun as a Privy Councilor.

古文：有司议即位礼。
现代文：主管官吏商议监国即皇帝位的仪礼。
English: The officials in charge discussed the ceremonial of supervising the country, that is, the emperor's throne.

古文：李绍真、孔循以为唐运已尽，宜自建国号。
现代文：李绍真、孔循认为唐朝的世运己经完了，应当自己建立国号。
English: Li Shaozhen and Kong Xuan believed that the Tang Dynasty's world movement was over and that they should establish their own country name.

古文：监国问左右： 何谓国号？ 
现代文：监国问左右大臣说： 什么叫做国号？ 
English: The Supervisor of the State asked the Minister of the Left and Right: What is the name of the country?

古文：对曰： 先帝赐姓于唐，为唐复仇，继昭宗后，故称唐。
现代文：回答说： 先帝接受唐朝赐给的姓，为唐朝报仇，继唐昭宗之后，所以称唐。
English: He replied, "The former emperor accepted the surname given by the Tang Dynasty to take revenge for the Tang Dynasty, following Tang Zhaozong, so he was called Tang.

古文：今梁朝之人不欲殿下称唐耳。 
现代文：现在梁朝的人们不想让殿下的国号称作唐。 
English: Now the people of the Liang Dynasty don't want to call their country Tang.

古文：监国曰： 吾年十三事献祖，献祖以吾宗属，视吾犹子。
现代文：监国说： 我十三岁时侍奉献祖来国昌，献祖把我看作同一宗族，对我就象对待儿子一样。
English: The overseer said, "When I was thirteen years old, I came to Kunisho to serve and dedicate my ancestor. The ancestor regarded me as a member of the same clan and treated me like a son.

古文：又事武皇垂三十年，先帝垂二十年，经纶攻战，未尝不预；武皇之基业则吾之基业也，先帝之天下则吾之天下也，安有同家而异国乎！ 
现代文：后来又侍奉武皇李克用近三十年，侍奉先帝李存勖近二十年，每次筹划治理国家的大事和攻伐征战，我未尝不参预。武皇的基业就是我的基业，先帝的天下就是我的天下，哪有同家而异国的道理！ 
English: Later, I served Emperor Wu Li Ke for nearly thirty years, and the former Emperor Wu Li Cunxu for nearly twenty years. I did not hesitate to participate in every major event of national governance and campaign. Emperor Wu's inheritance is my inheritance, the world of the former emperor is my world, there is no reason to be from the same family but from a different country!

古文：令执政更议。
现代文：于是命令主持政务的人们重新商议一下。
English: So he ordered the people running the government to renegotiate.

古文：吏部尚书李琪曰： 若改国号，则先帝遂为路人，梓宫安所托乎！
现代文：吏部尚书李琪说： 如果改变国号，那先帝就成了与国家没有关系的人，他的棺材往哪里安放呢？
English: Shangshu Liqi, a clerk, said: If the country name is changed, then the former emperor will become a person who has nothing to do with the country. Where will his coffin be placed?

古文：不惟殿下忘三世旧君，吾曹为人臣者能自安乎！
现代文：这不仅仅是殿下忘记了三世旧的君主，我们这些做大臣的心里能够自安吗？
English: It's not just that His Royal Highness has forgotten the three-generation-old monarch. Can we, as ministers, find peace of mind?

古文：前代以旁支入继多矣，宜用嗣子柩前即位之礼。 
现代文：过去的朝代以旁支继承王位的有很多，应当用嗣子在棺材前面即位的礼仪即位。 
English: There have been many dynasties in the past that have used collateral heirs to inherit the throne. The heir should be enthroned in front of the coffin.

古文：众从之。
现代文：大家听从了他的意见。
English: As a result, the entire city fell to the Mongols.

古文：丙午，监国自兴圣宫赴西宫，服斩衰，于柩前即皇帝位，百官缟素。
现代文：丙午，监国从兴圣宫到西宫，穿着用粗麻布做的重丧服，在棺材前面即皇帝位，百官们都穿着白丧服。
English: On the afternoon of the 3rd, the supervisors of the state from the Xing Sheng Palace to the West Palace wore heavy mourning clothes made of coarse linen. In front of the coffin was the emperor, and the officials were all wearing white mourning clothes.

古文：既而御衮冕受册，百官吉服称贺。
现代文：不一会儿，监国穿上皇帝的礼服和礼帽，接受册书，百官们穿着吉祥的服装祝贺。
English: In a short time, the supervisors put on the emperor's ceremonial dress and ceremonial hat, accepted the record book, and the dignitaries wore auspicious clothing to congratulate.

古文：戊申，敕中外之臣毋得献鹰犬奇玩之类。
现代文：戊申，命令朝廷内外大臣不得贡献鹰犬珍玩之类的东西。
English: Boshin, ordered the Minister of the Interior and the Minister of the Interior of the Imperial Court not to contribute things such as eagle dogs and rare toys.

古文：有司劾奏太原尹张宪委城之罪；庚戌，赐宪死。
现代文：有关部门检举弹劾太原尹张宪弃城之罪，庚戌，后唐皇帝李嗣源赐张宪死。
English: Relevant departments reported the impeachment of Taiyuan Yin Zhang Xian for the crime of abandoning the city, and after the Tang Emperor Li Siyuan gave Zhang Xian death.

古文：任圜将征蜀兵二万六千人至洛阳，明宗慰抚之，各令还营。
现代文：任圜率领着出征前蜀的二万六千多士卒到了洛阳，后唐帝慰劳安抚他们，命令他们各自回到军营去。
English: Ren Rong led more than 26,000 soldiers from Shu to Luoyang before the expedition. Later, Emperor Tang comforted them and ordered them to return to their respective military camps.

古文：甲寅，大赦，改元。
现代文：甲寅，大赦天下，更改年号。
English: On the 28th, there was an amnesty and the era was changed.

古文：量留后宫百人，宦官三十人，教坊百人，鹰坊二十人，御厨五十人，自馀任从所适。
现代文：酌情留下后宫一百人，宦官三十人，教坊一百人，鹰坊二十人，御厨五十人，其余的人自己愿到哪里就到哪里。
English: At his discretion, he left behind a harem of 100 people, 30 eunuchs, 100 teachers, 20 eagles, 50 cooks, and the rest of the people could go wherever they wanted.

古文：诸司使务有名无实者皆废之。
现代文：各司、使、务有名无实的都废除了。
English: Departments, envoys, and agencies, all of which had no real existence, were abolished.

古文：分遣诸军就食近畿，以省馈运。
现代文：分派各军在附近的地方供给粮食，以节省运送的费用。
English: To save on transportation costs, each army was assigned to supply grain in nearby areas.

古文：除夏、秋税省耗。
现代文：免除了夏、秋两季税赋的省耗税。
English: The provincial consumption tax, which is levied in the summer and autumn, has been exempted.

古文：节度、防御等使，正、至、端午、降诞四节听贡奉，毋得敛百姓；刺史以下不得贡奉。
现代文：节度、防御等使，元旦、冬至、端午、皇帝生日四个节日听任贡奉，但不得聚敛百姓。刺史以下不得贡奉。
English: The four festivals of New Year's Day, Winter Solstice, Dragon Boat Festival and the emperor's birthday are allowed to pay tribute, but the people are not allowed to gather.

古文：选入先遭涂毁文书者，令三铨止除诈伪，馀复旧规。
现代文：选拔人才时，如果有先涂改文书的人，命令三铨制止他们欺诈伪造，其余按旧的规定办理。
English: When selecting talents, if there are people who first alter documents, order the three magistrates to stop their fraud and forgery, and the rest will be handled according to the old regulations.

古文：五月，丙辰朔，以太子宾客郑珏、工部尚书任圜并为中书侍郎、同平章事；圜仍判三司。
现代文：五月，丙辰朔，任命太子宾客郑珏、工部尚书任圜都为中书侍郎、同平章事。任圜仍判管三司。
English: In May, the Prince's guest, Zheng Yao, and the Minister of Works, Shang Shu, Ren Yao, were both appointed as the Secretary of the Central Office and the Secretary of the same level. Ren Yao was still in charge of the three departments.

古文：圜忧公如家，简拔贤俊，杜绝侥幸，期年之间，府库充实，军民皆足，朝纲粗立。
现代文：任圜忧公如家，他选拔贤良有才能的人，杜绝侥幸，一年之间，府库充实，军民满足，朝廷的大纲要领也初具规模。
English: Ren Zhezheng was like a family. He selected virtuous and talented people and eliminated luck. Within a year, the government treasury was enriched, the military and the people were satisfied, and the grand plan of the imperial court was beginning to take shape.

古文：圜每以天下为己任，由是安重诲忌之。
现代文：任圜干事，常以天下为己任，因此，安重诲很忌恨他。
English: As an appointed magistrate, he often takes the whole world as his responsibility. Therefore, An Chongzhen hated him very much.

古文：武宁节度使李绍真、忠武节度使李绍琼、贝州剌吏李绍英、齐州防御使李绍虔、河阳节度使李绍奇、洺州刺史李绍能，各请复旧姓名为霍彦威、苌从简、房知温、王晏球、夏鲁奇、米君立，许之。
现代文：武宁节度使李绍真、忠武节度使李绍琼、贝州刺史李绍英、齐州防御使李绍虔、河阳节度使李绍奇、州刺史李绍能，各自请求恢复他们的姓名为霍彦威、从简、房知温、王晏球、夏鲁奇、米君立，后唐帝答应了他们的请求。
English: The Wu-Ning Festival asked Li Shaozhen, the Zhongwu Festival asked Li Shaojiong, the Bei-Zhou Festival asked Li Shaoying, the Qi-Zhou Defense Festival asked Li Shaojian, the Heyang Festival asked Li Shaochi, and the State Festival asked Li Shaoneng. Each of them requested to restore their surnames as Huo Yanwei, Congjian, Fang Zhiwen, Wang Yingqiu, Xialuqi, and Mi Junli. Later, Emperor Tang granted their requests.

古文：从简，陈州人也。
现代文：从简是陈州人。
English: Jane is from Chenzhou.

古文：晏球本王氏子，畜于杜氏，故请复姓王。
现代文：王晏球本来是姓王的儿子，寄养在姓杜的家，所以请求恢复姓王。
English: Wang Yingqiu was originally the son of Wang, fostered in the family of Du, so he asked to restore the surname Wang.

古文：丁已，初令百官正衙常朝外，五日一赴内殿起居。
现代文：丁巳，命令百官正衙除正常朝拜外，每隔五天进内殿问一次安。
English: Ding Si ordered the centurion Zheng Yao to go to the inner hall every five days to ask for greetings, in addition to the normal worship.

古文：宦官数百人窜匿山林，或落发为僧，至晋阳者七十馀人，诏北都指挥使李从温悉诛之。
现代文：数百名宦官逃窜到山林里面隐藏起来，有的剃发为僧，有七十多人到了晋阳，后唐帝下诏北都指挥使李从温，把他们全部杀掉。
English: Hundreds of eunuchs fled and hid in the mountains and forests. Some of them shaved their heads and became monks. More than seventy of them came to Jinyang. Later, Emperor Tang sent Li Congwen to command the Northern Capital and killed them all.

古文：从温，帝之侄也。
现代文：李从温是后唐帝的侄儿。
English: Li Congwen was the nephew of the late Tang Emperor.

古文：帝以前相州刺史安金全有功于晋阳，壬戌，以金全为振武节度使、同平章事。
现代文：后唐帝认为前相州刺史安金全对晋阳有功，壬戌，任命安金全为振武节度使、同平章事。
English: Later, the Tang Emperor thought that Anjin Quan, the former governor of Xiangzhou, had made a great contribution to Jinyang, and appointed Anjin Quan as Zhenwu's special envoy.

古文：丙寅，赵在礼请帝幸鄴都。
现代文：丙寅，赵在礼请求后唐帝巡幸邺都。
English: Cui Yin, Zhao after the ceremonial request, the Tang Emperor went on a tour of the capital.

古文：戊辰，以在礼为义成节度使；辞以军情未听，不赴镇。
现代文：戊辰，任命赵在礼为义成节度使。赵在礼以军情未安定为理由，没有到义成节度使镇所去。
English: Wu Chen, appointed Zhao Zaili as Yicheng Festival envoy. Zhao Zaili did not go to Yicheng Festival envoy town on the grounds that the military situation was not stable.

古文：李彦超入朝，帝曰： 河东无虞，尔之力也。 
现代文：李彦超入朝，后唐帝说： 河东没有出问题，是你的功劳。 
English: After Li Yan Chao entered the imperial court, the Emperor of Tang Dynasty said: "Hadong did not have any problems, it is your merit."

古文：庚午，以为建雄留后。
现代文：庚午，任命李彦起为建雄留后。
English: At noon, Li Yanqi was appointed as Jianxiong's successor.

古文：甲戌，加王延翰同平章事。
现代文：甲戌，加封福建王延翰为同平章事。
English: Armor, and the addition of Fujian Wang Yanhan as a matter of equal importance.

古文：帝目不知书，四方奏事皆令安重诲读之，重诲亦不能尽通，乃奏称： 臣徒以忠实之心事陛下，得典枢机，今事粗能晓知，至于古事，非臣所及。
现代文：后唐帝不识字，四面八方的奏书都让安重诲读给他听，安重诲也不能全部通晓，于是上奏说： 臣只以忠诚的心来侍奉陛下，得以掌管朝内机密，现在的事情还粗粗能够知道一些，至于过去的事情，非我所及。
English: Since Emperor Tang was illiterate, he had all kinds of documents read to him, and he could not understand all of them. Therefore, he said in his report: "I have only served Your Majesty with a loyal heart, and I have been able to manage the secrets of the Imperial Court. I am still able to know a little about current affairs, but as for the past, it is beyond my reach."

古文：愿仿前朝侍讲、侍读、近代直崇政、枢密院，选文学之臣与之共事，以备应对。 
现代文：希望效仿前朝的侍讲、侍读，近代的直崇政、枢密院，选择一些有文化的大臣来共同处理这些事情，以备应对。 
English: It is hoped that some cultured ministers will be selected to jointly deal with these matters in preparation, following the example of the previous government's attendant lectures and attendant readings, and the modern government's direct suzerainty and Privy Council.

古文：乃置端明殿学士，乙亥，以翰林学士冯道、赵凤为之。
现代文：于是设置了端明殿学士。乙亥，任命翰林学士冯道、赵凤为端明殿学士。
English: As a result, Duanming Palace's academician, Yi Hai, was set up, and Hanlin's academician, Feng Dao, and Zhao Feng were appointed as Duanming Palace's academicians.

古文：丙子，听郭崇韬归葬，复硃友谦宫爵；两家货财田宅，前籍没者皆归之。
现代文：丙子，允许归葬郭崇韬，恢复了朱友谦的官爵。两家的货财田宅，以前没收了的全部归还给他们。
English: He allowed Guo Chongtao to be buried, and restored Zhu Youqian's title of nobility. The goods and wealth of the two families, all of which had been confiscated, were returned to them.

古文：戊寅，以安重诲领山南东道节度使。
现代文：戊寅，任命安重诲兼领山南东道节度使。
English: Wu Yin, appointed as the envoy of peace and reconciliation and the leader of the Shannan host festival.

古文：重诲以襄阳要地，不可乏帅，无宜兼领，固辞；许之。
现代文：安重诲认为襄阳是个重要的地方，不可以没有统帅，不应当兼领，所以他坚决推辞。
English: An Chongyuan thought that Xiangyang is an important place, it is not allowed to have a commander, it should not be concurrently, so he firmly refused.

古文：诏发汴州控鹤指挥使张谏等三千人戍瓦桥。
现代文：后唐帝答应了他的请求。后唐帝下诏调汴州控鹤指挥使张谏等三千人去戍守瓦桥。
English: The Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty agreed to his request. The Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty issued an edict to transfer the command of the Bozhou Control Cranes and ordered Zhang Jun and three thousand others to guard the tile bridge.

古文：六月，丁酉，出城，复还，作乱，焚掠坊市，杀权知州、推官高逖。
现代文：六月，丁酉，军队出了城，后又返回发动叛乱，焚烧抢掠街市，杀死权知州、推官高逖。
English: In June, Dingwu, the army left the city, and then returned to launch a rebellion, burning and looting the streets, killing Quanzhizhou and the magistrate Gao Jun.

古文：逼马步都指挥使、曹州刺史李彦饶为帅，彦饶曰： 汝欲吾为帅，当用吾命，禁止焚掠。 
现代文：逼迫马步都指挥使、曹州刺史李彦饶为统帅，李彦饶说： 你们想让我当统帅，就应当听我的命令，禁止焚烧抢掠。 
English: Persecuted the commander of Ma Bodu and the commander of Caozhou, Li Yanrao, Li Yanrao said: If you want me to be the commander, you should listen to my orders and prohibit burning, looting and pillaging.

古文：众从之。
现代文：大家听从了他。
English: As a result, the entire city fell to the Mongols.

古文：己亥旦，彦饶伏甲于室，诸将入贺，彦饶曰： 前日唱乱者数人而已。 
现代文：己亥的早晨，李彦饶在家里暗藏了一些武士，诸位将领进来祝贺，李彦饶说： 前日鼓动叛乱的只有几个人而已。 
English: On the morning of Ji Hai, Li Yanrao hid some samurai in his home. The generals came to congratulate him. Li Yanrao said, "Only a few people instigated the rebellion the day before.

古文：遂执张谏等四人，斩之。
现代文：于是把张谏等四人抓起来斩杀。
English: As a result, four people, including Zhang Jun, were arrested and killed.

古文：其党张审琼帅众大噪于建国门，彦饶勒兵击之，尽诛其众四百人，军、州始定。
现代文：张谏的同党张审琼率领好多人在建国门大声吵嚷，李彦饶率兵攻打他们，全部杀死了这伙四百人。然后军、州才开始安定下来。
English: Zhang Xuan's fellow party member Zhang Xunqiong led a lot of people to make a lot of noise at Jianguomen. Li Yanrao led the soldiers to attack them and killed all four hundred of them. Then the army and the state began to settle down.

古文：即日，以军、州事牒节度推官韦俨权知，具以状闻。
现代文：当天，把军、州的事情写成公文报节度推官韦俨知道，详细写在书札里报告后唐帝。
English: On the same day, the military and state affairs were written down as a public document and reported to Wei Wei, the commander of the imperial court, who wrote down the report in detail in the book.

古文：庚子，诏以枢密使孔循知汴州，收为乱者三千家，悉诛之。
现代文：庚子，后唐帝下诏命令枢密使孔循掌管汴州，拘捕了三千家作乱的人，全部处死。
English: After the death of Emperor Geng Zi, Emperor Tang issued an edict ordering the Privy Council to put Kong Xuan in charge of Zhangzhou, arresting three thousand troublemakers, all of whom were executed.

古文：彦饶，彦超之弟也。
现代文：李彦饶是李彦超的弟弟。
English: Li Yanrao is the younger brother of Li Yanchao.

古文：蜀百官至洛阳，永平节度使兼侍中马全曰： 国亡至此，生不如死！ 
现代文：前蜀的百官到达洛阳，蜀永平节度使兼侍中马全说： 国家灭亡了，来到这里，活着不如死了！ 
English: The former shu centurion arrived in luoyang, shu yongping festival envoy and attendant ma quan said: the country has perished, came here, alive is better than dead!

古文：不食而卒。
现代文：绝食而死。
English: He died of starvation.

古文：以平章事王锴等为诸州府刺史、少尹、判官、司马，亦有复归蜀者。
现代文：任命平章事王锴等为诸州府刺史、少尹、判官、司马，也有些人又回到了蜀中。
English: He appointed Ping Zhangji Wang Qi and others as Zhouzhou prefectural magistrate, Shao Yin, judge, Sima, and some people returned to Shu.

古文：辛丑，滑州都指挥使于可洪等纵火作乱，攻魏博戍兵三指挥，逐出之。
现代文：辛丑，滑州都指挥使于可洪等放火作乱，攻打驻守在魏博部队的三个指挥，并把他们赶了出去。
English: Xinxiu, the commander of the city of Leshou, ordered Yu Kehong and others to set fire to create a disturbance, attack the three commanders stationed in the Weibo unit, and drive them out.

古文：乙巳，敕： 朕二名，但不连称，皆无所避。 
现代文：乙巳，后唐帝敕命： 朕的名字有两个字，但只要不连称，都不需避讳。 
English: Once upon a time, after the death of Emperor Tang, he said, "My name has two characters, but as long as I don't say it all at once, I don't have to be shy.

古文：戊申，加西川节度使孟知祥兼侍中。
现代文：戊申，加封西川节度使孟知祥兼任侍中。
English: Boshin, and the addition of the West River Festival made Meng Zhixiang concurrently serve as a chamberlain.

古文：李继严至华州，闻洛中乱，复归凤翔；帝为之诛柴重厚。
现代文：李继到达华州，听说洛中叛乱，又回到凤翔。后唐帝为他诛杀了柴重厚。
English: Li Ji arrived in Huazhou, heard about the rebellion in Luozhong, and returned to Fengxiang. Later, Emperor Tang killed Chai Chonghou for him.

古文：高季兴表求夔、忠、万三州为属郡，诏许之。
现代文：高季兴上表请求夔、忠、万三州为自己属郡，后唐答应了他的请求。
English: Gao Jixing made a request on the table for the counties of Zou, Zhong and Wanzanzhou to belong to him, and the Later Tang Dynasty agreed to his request.

古文：安重诲恃恩骄横，殿直马延误冲前导，斩之于马前，御史大夫李琪以闻。
现代文：安重诲依仗后唐帝的恩宠，十分骄横，殿直马延误冲了他的前列仪仗，在马前斩了马延，御史大夫李琪把这件事告诉了后唐帝。
English: Relying on the grace of Emperor Tang, An Chongyuan was very arrogant. He rushed to the front of the ceremonial battle, and killed Ma Yan in front of the horse. Li Qi, the imperial historian, told Emperor Tang about this.

古文：秋，七月，重诲白帝下诏，称延陵突重臣，戒谕中外。
现代文：秋季，七月，安重诲告知后唐帝，下诏说，马延侵侮冲撞身居要职的大臣，要告诫全国。
English: In the autumn, in July, Emperor Anzong issued the following edict, saying that Ma Yan had insulted and collided with high-ranking ministers, and that the whole country should be warned.

古文：于可洪与魏博戍将互相奏云作乱，帝遣使按验得实，辛酉，斩可洪于都市，其首谋滑州左崇牙全营族诛，助乱者右崇牙两长剑建平将校百人亦族诛。
现代文：于可洪和戍守在魏博的将领互相上奏说对方作乱，后唐帝派遣使者去查验落实，辛酉，在都市里斩杀了于可洪。叛乱的首谋滑州左崇牙全营全部灭族，帮助作乱的右崇牙两长剑建平将校一百人也全部灭族。
English: After the Tang Emperor sent an envoy to investigate and implement the plan, Xin Yao killed Yu Kehong in the city. The leader of the rebellion, the whole battalion of Zuo Chongya of Luzhou, and the two-long sword of Jian Ping, an officer of Zuo Chongya, who helped to create the disturbance, were also killed.

古文：壬申，初令百官每五日起居，转对奏事。
现代文：壬申，开始命令百官每隔五天入朝问一次安，并依次上奏本部门公事。
English: Jinshin, began to order officials to come to the Imperial Court every five days to ask for a greeting, and in turn to report to this department's business.

古文：契丹主攻勃海，拔其夫馀城，更命曰东丹国。
现代文：契丹主向勃海发动进动，攻下了扶馀城，下令改名叫东丹国。
English: The Khitan lord launched an advance to the Bohai Sea, captured the city of Buyeo, and ordered it to be renamed Dongdan.

古文：命其长子突欲镇东丹，号人皇王，以次子德光守西楼，号元帅太子。
现代文：命令他的长子突欲镇守东丹，号人皇王。他的次子德光镇守西楼，号元帅太子。
English: He ordered his eldest son, Tu Youzhen, to guard East Dan, and his second son, De Guangzhen, to guard West Lou, and his third son was named Marshal Prince.

古文：帝遣供奉官姚坤告哀于契丹。
现代文：后唐帝派遣供奉官姚坤告诉契丹主庄宗去世。
English: Later, the Tang Emperor dispatched the offering officer Yao Kun to tell the Khitan that the lord Zhuang Zong had died.

古文：契丹主闻庄宗为乱兵所害，恸哭曰： 我朝定儿也。
现代文：契丹主听说庄宗被乱兵所害，痛哭地说： 世宗是我 朝定 儿。
English: When the Khitan lord heard that Zhuangzong had been victimized by the soldiers, he cried bitterly and said: "I am the son of the founder of the dynasty.

古文：吾方欲救之，以勃海未下，不果往，致吾儿及此。 
现代文：我正准备去援救他，因为勃海没有攻下来，所以没有去成，致使我儿到了如此地步。 
English: I was getting ready to go and rescue him, but because the sea lion didn't attack, I didn't make it, and my son ended up like this.

古文：哭不已。
现代文：痛哭不已。
English: She was crying uncontrollably.

古文：虏言 朝定 ，犹华言朋友也。
现代文：契丹人说 朝定 ，就是汉语里 朋友 的意思。
English: The Khitan people say "Chosading," which means "friends" in Chinese.

古文：又谓坤曰： 今天子闻洛阳有急，何不救？ 
现代文：他又对姚坤说： 现在的天子听说洛阳有急事，为什么不去援救？ 
English: He also said to Yao Kun, "Nowadays, Heaven's Son has heard that there is an emergency in Luoyang, why not go to the rescue?

古文：对曰： 地远不能及。 
现代文：姚坤回答说： 因为道路太远去不了。 
English: Yao Kun replied: Because the road is too far away.

古文：曰： 何故自立？ 
现代文：契丹主说： 那么为什么自立为皇帝？ 
English: The Khitan lord said: Then why do you set yourself up as emperor?

古文：坤为言帝所以即位之由，契丹主曰： 汉儿喜饰说，毋多谈！ 
现代文：姚坤给他讲了皇帝之所以即位的原因。契丹主说： 汉族人喜欢粉饰言辞，不必多谈了。 
English: Yao Kun told him the reason why the emperor ascended the throne. The Khitan lord said: Han people like to whitewash words, there is no need to talk more.

古文：突欲侍侧，曰： 牵牛以蹊人之田，而夺之牛，可乎？ 
现代文：突欲陪从在契丹主的身旁，说： 牵牛践踏了别人的田地，田主就把他的牛夺过来，这样做可以吗？ 
English: Suddenly, he wanted to accompany the Khitan lord, saying: If a cowherd tramples someone else's field, will the owner take his cow away? Is this acceptable?

古文：坤曰： 中国无主，唐天子不得已而立；亦由天皇王初有国，岂强取之乎！ 
现代文：姚坤说： 中原没有君主，唐朝天子是不得已才即位的。也就好象天皇王刚刚有了封国一样，难道是强行夺取的吗？ 
English: Yao Kun said: There is no monarch in the Central Plains, and the emperor of the Tang Dynasty ascended to the throne only as a last resort. It is as if the emperor and king had just sealed the country. Was it forcibly seized?

古文：契丹主曰： 理当然。 
现代文：契丹主说： 道理应当是这样。 
English: The Khitan lord said: This is how it should be.

古文：又曰： 闻吾儿专好声色游畋，不恤军民，宜其及此。
现代文：他又说： 听说我儿专门喜欢声色游猎，不爱惜兵民，他到这种地步也是应该的。
English: He also said, "I heard that my son is especially fond of hunting and does not spare soldiers and civilians. He should have reached this level.

古文：我自闻之，举家不饮酒，散遣伶人，解纵鹰犬。
现代文：我自从听到这件事后，全家不喝酒，把伶人们都遣散了，释放了鹰犬。
English: Since I heard about it, my whole family has stopped drinking alcohol, we have dismissed all the badgers and released the hawks.

古文：若亦效吾儿所为，行自亡矣。 
现代文：如果我也效仿我儿的所作所为，将会自取灭亡。 
English: If I emulate what my son has done, I will destroy myself.

古文：又曰： 吾儿与我虽世旧，然屡与我战急，于今天子则无怨，足以修好。
现代文：他又说： 我儿和我虽然是世代交谊，然而曾多次和我战争。我和现在的天子没有什么怨恨，足以和好。
English: He also said, "Although my son and I have been friends for generations, we have been at war with each other many times. I have no grudge against my current son-in-law, which is enough for us to be reconciled.

古文：若与我大河之北，吾不复南侵矣。 
现代文：如果能够给了我黄河以北的地方，我就不再会向南侵犯了。 
English: If you can give me a place north of the Yellow River, I will no longer invade the south.

古文：坤曰： 此非使臣之所得专也。 
现代文：姚坤说： 这些事情不是使臣我说了就算数的。 
English: Yao Kun said: These things are not what the envoy said.

古文：契丹主怒，囚之，旬馀，复召之，曰： 河北恐难得，得镇、定、幽州亦可也。 
现代文：契丹主听了非常生气，于是把他关起他来，十几天后，又召见他说： 黄河以北恐怕难以得到，得到镇、定、幽州也可以。 
English: The Khitan lord was very angry when he heard this, so he locked him up. A dozen days later, he summoned him again and said, "I'm afraid it's difficult to get north of the Yellow River, but you can get to Zhen, Ding, and Yuzhou."

古文：给纸笔趣令为状，坤不可，欲杀之，韩延徽谏，乃复囚之。
现代文：于是拿上纸和笔催他写下来，姚坤不肯写，契丹主想把他杀掉，韩延徽劝说，才又把姚坤关了起来。
English: So he took a pen and paper and urged him to write it down. Yao Kun refused to write it down. The Khitan wanted to kill him. Han Yanhui persuaded him, and then Yao Kun was locked up again.

古文：丙子，葬光圣神闵孝皇帝于雍陵，庙号庄宗。
现代文：丙子，在雍陵安葬了光圣神闵孝皇帝，庙号为庄宗。
English: Bong Zi, in Yongling, buried the Holy Light of the Holy Spirit, Emperor Gong Xiao, the temple name is Zhuangzong.

古文：丁丑，镇州留后王建立奏涿州剌史刘殷肇不受代，谋作乱，已讨擒之。
现代文：丁丑，镇州留后王建立上奏说涿州刺史刘殷肇不接受替代命令，企图作乱，已经讨伐抓获了他。
English: Ding Yuxiu, Zhenzhou's Queen of Lingering Retainers, issued a report saying that Liu Yin Zhao, the governor of Zhangzhou, did not accept the replacement order and attempted to make a disturbance. He has been arrested.

古文：己卯，置彰国军于应州。
现代文：己卯，在应州设置了彰国军。
English: At the same time, the Zhangguo Army was set up in Yingzhou.

古文：门下侍郎、同平章事豆卢革、韦说奏事帝前，或时礼貌不尽恭；百官俸钱皆折估，而革父子独受实钱；百官自五月给，而革父子自正月给；由是众论沸腾。
现代文：门下侍郎、同平章事豆卢革、韦说在后唐帝面前奏请事情时，有时礼貌很不恭敬。百官的奉禄都折价放发，只有豆卢革父子的奉禄拿实际钱数。百官的奉禄从五月开始给，而豆卢革父子的俸禄从正月给。因此大家议论纷纷。
English: His servant, Tongping Zhang on the subject of Doulu Ge, Wei said that when he made a request in front of the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty, he was sometimes very disrespectful. The vouchers of the hundred officials were all discounted, and only the vouchers of Doulu Ge's father and son were given actual money. The vouchers of the hundred officials were given from May, and the vouchers of Doulu Ge's father and son were given from the first month. Therefore, everyone was talking about it.

古文：说以孙为子，奏官；受选人王傪赂，除近官。
现代文：韦说把孙子当作儿子，上奏求官。候选官员王行贿赂，被任命为京畿附近的州县官。
English: Wei said that he regarded his grandson as his son, and submitted a report to seek an official position. Candidate official Wang bribed and was appointed as a prefectural and county official near Gyeonggi.

古文：中旨以库部郎中萧希甫为谏议大夫，革、说覆奏。
现代文：按照后唐帝的旨意，任命库部郎中萧希甫为谏议大夫，豆卢革、韦说令重新上奏。
English: According to the will of the later Tang Dynasty, Xiao Xifu, the son of the treasurer, was appointed as the doctor of consultation, and the order of Zhu Ruge and Wei Wei was re-enacted.

古文：希甫恨之，上疏言 革、说不忠前朝，阿庚取容 ；因诬 革强夺民田，纵田客杀人；说夺邻家井，取宿藏物。 
现代文：萧希甫很恨他们，于是给后唐帝上疏说 豆卢革、韦说不忠于前朝，看脸色阿谀奉承 ，因此又诬陷他们说： 豆卢革强夺民田，指使佃农杀人；韦说强夺邻家的水井，抢取别人窖藏的东西。 
English: Xiao Xifu hated them very much, so he slandered them to the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty, saying that Zhu Ruge and Wei were not loyal to the former dynasty, and flattered them with flattery. Therefore, he also slandered them: Zhu Ruge forcibly seized people's fields and ordered tenant farmers to kill people; Wei said that he forcibly seized his neighbor's wells and robbed other people's things.

古文：制贬革辰州刺史，说溆州剌史。
现代文：皇帝下令贬豆卢革为辰州刺史，贬韦说为溆州刺史。
English: The emperor ordered that Zhu Ruge be demoted to Chenzhou, and Wei be demoted to Zhangzhou.

古文：庚辰，赐希甫金帛，擢为散骑常侍。
现代文：庚辰，后唐帝赏赐萧希甫金帛，提拔他为散骑常侍。
English: Geng Chen, Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty, awarded Xiao Xifu the Golden Sash and promoted him to the post of strolling equerry.

古文：辛巳，契丹主阿保机卒于夫馀城，述律后召诸将及酋长难制者之妻，谓曰： 我今寡居，汝不可不效我。 
现代文：辛巳，契丹主阿保机在扶馀城去世。述律后召见诸将以及酋长中难以制服的人的妻子，然后对他们说： 我现在一人独居，你们不可不效法我。 
English: Soon after, the Khitan lord, Abokhi, died in the city of Buyeo. After the reading of the law, he summoned the generals and the wives of those chiefs who were difficult to subdue, and then said to them: I now live alone. You must not fail to follow my example.

古文：又集其夫泣问曰： 汝思先帝乎？ 
现代文：又召集她们的丈夫边哭边问他们说： 你们思念先帝吗？ 
English: And they called their husbands to them, weeping and wailing, and said to them, "Do you mourn for the king?

古文：对曰： 受先帝恩，岂得不思！ 
现代文：这些人回答说： 先帝对我们有很大恩情，怎么能不思念他呢？ 
English: These people answered: The late emperor was very kind to us, how can we not miss him?

古文：曰： 果思之，宜往见之。 
现代文：述律后说： 果然思念他，就应该去见他。 
English: After reciting the precepts, he said, "If you really miss him, you should go and see him."

古文：遂杀之。
现代文：于是就把他们都杀死了。
English: The man then killed Yasuko.

古文：癸未，再贬豆卢革费州司户，韦说夷州司户。
现代文：癸未，再次贬豆卢革为费州司户，贬韦说为夷州司户。
English: Recently, Zhu Ruge was once again demoted to Feizhou Sifu, and Wei was demoted to Yishu Sifu.

古文：甲申，革流陵州，说流合州。
现代文：甲申，将豆卢革流放到陵州，把韦说流放到合州。
English: Jiaxun exiled Zhu Ruge to Lingzhou and Wei Wei to Hezhou.

古文：孟知祥阴有据蜀之志，阅库中，得铠甲二十万，置左右牙等兵十六营，凡万六千人，营于牙城内外。
现代文：孟知祥暗中有占据蜀中的心思，在检阅军库时，得到铠甲二十万，设置了左右牙等兵十六个营，一共有一万六千人，驻扎在牙城内外。
English: Meng Zhixiang secretly had the idea of occupying Shuzhong. When inspecting the military depot, he obtained 200,000 pieces of armor and set up 16 battalions of left and right Fang soldiers, a total of 16,000 people, stationed inside and outside Fangcheng.

古文：八月，乙酉朔，日有食之。
现代文：八月，乙酉朔，出现日食。
English: August, the new moon, a solar eclipse.

古文：丁亥，契丹述律后使少子安端少君守东丹，与长子突欲奉契丹主之丧，将其众发夫馀城。
现代文：丁亥，契丹述律后派少子安端少君镇守东丹，她和长子突欲奉侍着契丹主的丧事，并率领大家从扶馀城出发。
English: After Dinghai and Qidan passed the law, they sent their younger son, Anduan and his younger son, Jun, to guard Dongdan. She and her eldest son suddenly wanted to serve the funeral of the Qidan lord, and led everyone from Buyeo City.

古文：初，郭崇韬以蜀骑兵分左、右骁卫等六营，凡三千人；步兵分左、右宁远等二十营，凡二万四千人。
现代文：当初郭崇韬把前蜀的骑兵分为左、右骁卫等六个营，共有三千人；步兵分为左、右宁远等二十个营，共有二万四千人。
English: At first, Guo Chongzhen divided the cavalry of the former Shu into six battalions including the left and right guards, with a total of three thousand; the infantry was divided into twenty battalions including the left and right Ningyuan, with a total of twenty-four thousand.

古文：庚寅，孟知祥增置左、右冲山等六营，凡六千人，营于罗城内外；又置义宁等二十营，凡万六千人，分戍管内州县就食；又置左、右牢城四营，凡四千人，分戍成都境内。
现代文：庚寅，孟知祥又增设了左、右冲山等六个营，共有六千人，驻扎在外城内外；还设置了义宁等二十个营，共有一万六人，分别戍守在管辖内的州县，并由这些州县就近供给。又设置了左、右牢城四个营，共有四千人，分虽戍守在成都境内。
English: Geng Yin and Meng Zhixiang also set up six additional battalions such as Zuo and Zuo Chongshan, with a total of six thousand people, stationed inside and outside the city; they also set up twenty battalions such as Yining, with a total of sixteen thousand people, respectively, to guard the states and counties under their jurisdiction, and to be supplied by these states and counties. They also set up four battalions of Zuo and Zuo Chongcheng, with a total of four thousand people, although they were stationed in Chengdu.

古文：王公俨既杀杨希望，欲邀节钺，扬言符习为治严急，军府众情不愿其还。
现代文：王公俨杀死了杨希望后，打算求得后唐帝颁给他节，并扬言说符习管理军队非常严苛，军府里的人不愿让他回来。
English: After Wang Gongyao killed Yang Hope, he planned to ask the Tang Emperor to grant him a knighthood, and threatened that the military was very strict in its management of the army, and the people in the military government were unwilling to let him return.

古文：习还，至齐州，公俨拒之，习不改前。
现代文：符习回来时到达齐州，王公俨阻挡住他，符习不敢前进。
English: When Fu Xi returned, he arrived in Qizhou. Wang Gongyi blocked him, and Fu Xi did not dare to advance.

古文：公俨又令将士上表请己为帅，诏除登州剌史。
现代文：王公俨又让将士们上表后唐帝，请求自己为统帅，后唐帝下诏，任命他为登州刺史。
English: Wang Gongya also asked his generals to present themselves to the Emperor of Tang Dynasty to ask him to be the commander-in-chief, and the Emperor of Tang Dynasty issued an edict to appoint him as the governor-general.

古文：公俨不时之官，托云军情所留，帝乃徙天平节度使霍彦威为平卢节度使，聚兵淄州，以图攻取，公俨惧，乙未，始之官。
现代文：王公俨不按时去上任，推托说因为军情留了下来。后唐帝于是调天平节度使霍彦威为平卢节度使，把军队集中在淄州，计划攻取青州。王公俨感到害怕，乙未，才开始去上任。
English: Wang Gongyao did not go to take office on time, but said that he stayed because of the military situation. Later, the Tang Emperor then adjusted the balance of power to make Huo Yanwei the commander of Pinglu, concentrated the army in Zhangzhou, and planned to capture Qingzhou. Wang Gongyao was afraid, but he did not start to take office.

古文：丁酉，彦威至青州，追擒之，并其族党悉斩之，支使北海韩叔嗣预焉。
现代文：丁酉，霍彦威到达青州，追踪王公俨，把他抓获，于是将他的家族和同党全部斩杀，支使北海人韩叔嗣也参预了这件事情。
English: Ding Xi, Huo Yanwei arrived in Qingzhou, tracked Wang Gongyi, captured him, and then killed his family and party members, and the North Sea Han Shushi also participated in this matter.

古文：其子熙载将奔吴，密告其友汝阴进士李谷，谷送至正阳，痛饮而别。
现代文：韩叔嗣的儿子韩熙载将要投奔吴国，偷偷告诉他的朋友汝阴进士李，李送他到正阳，痛饮一番然后告别。
English: Han Xizai, the son of Han Shushi, was going to go to the State of Wu. He secretly told his friend Ru Yin Jin Shi Li that Li would take him to Zhengyang, have a drink and say goodbye.

古文：熙载谓谷曰： 吴若用吾为相，当长驱以定中原。 
现代文：韩熙载对李说： 吴国如果起用我为宰相，我就长驱直入平定中原。 
English: Han Xizai said to Li: If the State of Wu appoints me as prime minister, I will drive straight into the Central Plains of Pingding.

古文：谷笑曰： 中原若用吾为相，取吴如囊中物耳。 
现代文：李笑着说： 中原如果用我为宰相，夺取吴国如同取囊中之物。 
English: Li said with a smile: "If Nakahara uses me as prime minister, seizing Wu will be like taking something out of a bag.

古文：庚子，幽州言契丹寇边，命齐州防御使安审通将兵御之。
现代文：庚子，幽州方面报告说契丹人侵犯边境，后唐帝命令齐州防御使安审通率兵抵御。
English: Geng Zi, the Yuzhou side reported that the Khitan invaded the border, after which the Tang Emperor ordered the defense of Qizhou to resist the soldiers led by An Ji Tong.

古文：九月，壬戌，孟知祥置左、右飞棹兵六营，凡六千人，分戍滨江诸州，习水战以备夔、峡。
现代文：九月，壬戌，孟知祥设置了左、右飞棹兵六个营，共有六千人，分别戍守在沿江诸州，熟习水上作战，来防备夔、峡。
English: In September, Meng Zhixiang set up six battalions of left and right flying eagle soldiers, with a total of six thousand people, respectively, in the states along the river, familiar with water combat, to guard the estuary and canyon.

古文：癸酉，卢龙节度使李绍斌请复姓赵，从之，仍赐名德钧。
现代文：癸酉，卢龙节度使李绍斌请求恢复姓赵，后唐帝答应了他的请求，并且赐他名字叫德钧。
English: Later, the Lulong Festival made Li Shaobin request to restore the surname Zhao. Later, the Tang Dynasty agreed to his request and gave him the name Dezhong.

古文：德钧养子延寿尚帝女兴平公主，故德钧成蒙亲任。
现代文：赵德钧的养子延寿娶了皇帝的女儿兴平公主，所以赵德钧更加蒙受宠任。
English: Zhao Deyu's adopted son Yan Shou married the emperor's daughter Xingping Princess, so Zhao Deyu was more favored.

古文：延寿本蓚令刘邟之子也。
现代文：延寿本来是县县令刘的儿子。
English: Yan Shou was originally the son of the county magistrate Liu Wu.

古文：加楚王殷守尚书令。
现代文：加封楚王马殷守尚书令。
English: King of Chu, Ma Yin, was also ordered to keep a low profile.

古文：契丹述律后爱中子德光，欲立之，至西楼，命与突欲俱乘马立帐前，谓诸奠长曰： 二子吾皆爱之，莫知所立，汝曹择可立者执其辔。 
现代文：契丹述律后喜欢中子德光，想立他为契丹主。到了西楼，让他和突欲一起骑着马立在帐前，然后她对各位酋长说： 这两个儿子我都很喜欢，不知道该立那个为契丹主，你们选择一个可以立为契丹主的，然后拉住他的马缰绳。 
English: After the Khitan had recited the rites, she liked Nakatso Deguang and wanted to make him the Khitan lord. When she arrived at the west tower, she asked him to stand in front of the accounts on horseback with Tuwang, and then she said to all the chiefs: I like both of these sons very much, I don't know which one to make the Khitan lord, you choose one who can be made the Khitan lord, and then pull his horse's reins.

古文：酋长知其意，争执德光辔欢跃曰： 愿事元帅太子。 
现代文：酋长们知道她的心思，都争着去拉德光的马缰绳，并高兴跳着说： 愿意侍奉元帅太子。 
English: The chiefs, who knew what she was thinking, all jostled for the reins of the horse that was to go to the Radiant, and jumped for joy, saying, "I am willing to serve the Marshal-Prince."

古文：后曰： 众之所欲，吾安敢违？ 
现代文：述律后说： 大家的愿望，我怎么敢违背。 
English: After reciting the precepts, he said: How dare I go against everyone's wishes.

古文：遂立之为天皇王，突欲愠，帅数百骑欲奔唐，为逻者所遏；述律后不罪，遣归东丹。
现代文：于是立德光为天皇天。突破心中不平，率几百骑兵想投奔后唐，被巡逻的人所阻止。述律后没有治他罪，只是把他遣送回东丹。
English: As a result, he set his sights on becoming emperor. To break through his inner turmoil, he led several hundred cavalrymen in an attempt to flee to the Later Tang, but was stopped by patrollers. After he was sentenced, he was not punished, but simply sent back to the Eastern Tang.

古文：天皇王尊述律后为太后，国事皆决焉。
现代文：天皇王尊述律后为太后，国家大事都由她来决定。
English: Emperor Wang Rong is the empress dowager after the dictation of the law, and national affairs are decided by her.

古文：太后复纳其侄为天皇王后。
现代文：太后又接纳她的侄女为天皇王后。
English: The Empress Dowager also accepted her niece as the Empress Dowager.

古文：天皇王性孝谨，母病不食亦不食，侍于母前应对或不称旨，母扬眉视之，辄惧而趋避，非复召不敢见也。
现代文：天皇王的性情谨慎孝顺，他的母亲得病后不能吃饮，他也不吃饮，天天侍奉在母亲的身边，应对母亲有时不符合她的意思，母亲睁大眼睛看他时，就害怕得快步避开，不再叫他回来他就不敢再进来见太后。
English: Emperor Wang's disposition is cautious and filial. His mother cannot eat or drink after falling ill, and he does not eat or drink either. He serves at his mother's side every day, responding to his mother when she sometimes does not meet her intentions. When his mother opened her eyes to look at him, she was so afraid that she quickly moved away. If she did not call him back, he would not dare to come in to see the empress dowager again.

古文：以韩延徽为政事令。听姚坤归复命，遣其臣阿思没骨馁来告哀。
现代文：任命韩延徽为政事令，同意姚坤回归后唐国复命，并派遣他的大臣阿思没骨馁来后唐国告诉契丹主去世的消息。
English: He appointed Han Yanhui as his regent, agreed to restore the throne of Tang after Yao Kun's return, and sent his minister, Athi the Boneless, to Tang to tell the news of the Qidan Lord's death.

古文：壬午，赐李继严名从严。冬，十月，甲申朔，初赐文武官春冬衣。
现代文：壬午，后唐帝赐李继名从。冬季十月，甲申朔，开始赏赐文武官员春天和冬天穿的衣服。
English: In the winter of October, Jia Sheng Shuo began to reward civil and military officials with clothes to wear in spring and winter.

古文：昭武节度使、同平章事王延翰，骄淫残暴，己丑，自称大闽国王。
现代文：昭武节度使、同平章事王延翰骄淫残暴，己丑，自称大闽国王。
English: Zhaowu Jiedu envoy, Tongping Zhangjiu Wang Yanhan arrogance, brutality, self-loathing, claiming to be the king of Dazhao.

古文：立宫殿，置百官，威仪文物皆仿天子之制，群下称之曰殿下。
现代文：修建宫殿，设置百官，礼仪细节以及礼乐典章制度都效仿天子，臣下称他为殿下。
English: The construction of palaces, the establishment of a hundred officials, the details of etiquette and the system of ceremonial music all follow the example of the heavenly son, and his subjects call him His Royal Highness.

古文：赦境内，追尊其父审知曰昭武王。
现代文：赦免境内的罪犯，追尊其父亲王审知为昭武王。
English: He pardoned criminals in the territory and posthumously honored his father, Wang Jianzhi, as King Zhaowu.

古文：静难节度使毛璋，骄僭不法，训卒缮兵，有跋扈之志，诏以颍州团练使李承约为节度副使以察之。
现代文：静难节度使毛璋骄横不遵守法度，他训练士卒，修缮武器，专横暴，欺上压下。后唐帝下诏，任命颍州团练使李承约为节度副使去监察他。
English: The difficult situation caused Mao Kun to be arrogant and disobey the law. He trained soldiers, repaired weapons, was tyrannical and violent, and cheated his subordinates. Later, Emperor Tang issued an edict, appointing Zhangzhou regimental drill master Li Chengyou as vice-minister of discipline to supervise him.

古文：壬辰，徙璋为昭义节度使。
现代文：壬辰，调毛璋任昭义节度使。
English: Imjin, Shigefusa, and others were appointed as Akiyoshi's regents.

古文：璋欲不奉诏，承约与观察判官长安边蔚从容说谕，久之，乃肯受代。
现代文：毛璋想不执行后唐帝的命令，李承业和观察判官长安人边蔚从容劝说，很长时间，他才肯接受替代去任昭义节度使。
English: When Mao Kun wanted to refuse to carry out Emperor Tang's order, Li Chengye and the observing magistrate Chang'an were able to calmly persuade him. It took a long time before he was willing to accept being replaced as the envoy of Zhao Yi.

古文：庚子，幽州奏契丹卢龙节度使卢文时来奔。
现代文：庚子，幽州奏告契丹卢龙节度使卢文进来投奔。
English: Geng Zi, Yuzhou appealed to Khitan Lulong Jiedu to make Lu Wen come in and run away.

古文：初，文进为契丹守平州，帝即位，遣间使说之，以易代之后，无复嫌怨。
现代文：当初，卢文进为契丹镇守平州，后唐帝即位以后，派遣密使去劝说他，因为是换代以后，所以也就没有什么疑忌和怨恨。
English: At first, Lu Wenjin guarded Pingzhou as a Khitan town. After Emperor Tang ascended the throne, he sent a secret envoy to persuade him, because it was after the change of generation, so there was no suspicion and resentment.

古文：文进所部皆华人，思归，乃杀契丹戍平州者，帅其众十馀万、车帐八千乘来奔。
现代文：卢文进的军队都是汉族人，想回家乡，于是杀死了契丹派往戍守平州的人，并率领他的十多万士卒、八千多辆车帐投奔来。
English: Lu Wenjin's troops were all Han Chinese, and he wanted to return to his hometown, so he killed the people sent by Khitan to defend Pingzhou, and led his more than one hundred thousand soldiers and more than eight thousand vehicles.

古文：初，魏王继岌、郭崇韬率蜀中富民输犒赏钱五百万缗，听以金银缯帛充，昼夜督责，有自杀者，给军之馀，犹二百万缗。
现代文：当初，魏王李继岌、郭崇韬计算蜀中富裕的百姓们应当交纳犒赏钱五百万缗，任凭他们用金银缯帛来充当，昼夜督促他们上交，有的人被逼自杀。除供给军队需要外还剩下两万缗。
English: At first, the Wei king Li Jizhe and Guo Chongyi calculated that the rich people in Shu should pay a reward of five million baht. They were allowed to use gold and silver to serve as a reward. They urged them to hand it over day and night, and some people were forced to commit suicide. In addition to supplying the needs of the army, there were still twenty thousand baht left.

古文：至是，任圜判三司，知成都富饶，遣盐铁判官、太仆卿赵季良为孟知祥官告国信兼三川都制置转运使。
现代文：到这个时候，任圜判官三司，知道成都富饶，派遣盐铁判官、太仆卿赵季良入蜀给孟知祥送去加封侍中的符节文书，并使季良兼任三川都制置转运使。
English: At this time, the Third Division of the Appointment of Judges, knowing that Chengdu was rich, sent Zhao Jiliang, the Salt and Iron Judge and the Great Servant of the Emperor, to Meng Zhixiang in Shu to send him the document of attaching the seal of the attendant, and made Qiliang also serve as the envoy for the establishment and transportation of the three rivers.

古文：甲辰，季良至成都。
现代文：甲辰，赵季良到达成都。
English: Jia Chen and Zhao Jiliang reached the capital.

古文：蜀人欲皆不与，知祥曰： 府库他人所聚，输之可也。
现代文：蜀人打算什么都不给，孟知祥说： 府库的钱财是别人收集来的，交出去是可以的。
English: Shu people plan to give nothing, Meng Zhixiang said: The money and wealth of the prefectural treasury is collected by others, and it is possible to hand it over.

古文：州县租税，以赡镇兵十万，决不可得。 
现代文：州县收上来的租税，是用来赡养十万镇兵的，决不可给。 
English: The taxes collected by the prefectures and counties are used to support 100,000 soldiers, and must not be given away.

古文：季良但发库物，不敢复言制置转运职事矣。
现代文：因此赵季良只拿走府库里的东西，不敢再说制置转运的事。
English: Therefore, Zhao Jiliang only took what was in the prefectural treasury, and did not dare to say anything about the transfer.

古文：安重诲以知祥及东川节度使董璋皆据险要，拥强兵，恐久而难制；又知祥乃庄宗近姻，阴欲图之。
现代文：安重诲认为孟知祥和东川节度使董璋都占据了险要的地方，并且拥有强大的军队，恐怕时间长了就难以控制。况且孟知祥又是庄宗较近的姻亲，因此想偷偷把他杀死。
English: An Chongyun thought that both Meng Zhixiang and Dongchuan Jiedu had caused Dong Xuan to occupy a critical place, and had a strong army, which would be difficult to control over a long period of time. Moreover, Meng Zhixiang was a close relative of Zhuang Zong, so he wanted to secretly kill him.

古文：客省使、泗州防御使李严自请为西川监军，必能制知祥；己酉，以严为西川都监，文思使太原硃弘昭为东川副使。
现代文：客省使、泗州防御使李严自己请求出任西川监军，一定能够控制孟知祥。己酉，后唐帝任命李严为西川都监，任命文思使太原人朱弘昭为东川节度副使。
English: As a guest provincial envoy, the defense of Zhangzhou made Li Yan himself request to serve as the inspector of the West River, and he must be able to control Meng Zhixiang. After the Tang Dynasty, Li Yan was appointed as the inspector of the West River, and Zhu Hongzhao, who was from Taiyuan, was appointed as the deputy envoy of the East River.

古文：李严母贤明，谓严曰： 汝前启灭蜀之谋，今日再往，必以死报蜀人矣。 
现代文：李严的母亲很贤明，她对李严说： 你先前出谋划策消灭蜀国，今日再去那里，一定会以死来报答蜀国人民的。 
English: Li Yan's mother was very wise. She said to Li Yan: You have previously made plans to destroy Shu, and if you go there again today, you will surely repay the people of Shu with death.

古文：旧制，吏部给告身，先责其人输硃胶绫轴钱。
现代文：按旧的规定：吏部发委任官职的凭证时，先要求任职人交朱胶绫轴钱。
English: According to the old regulations: when the Personnel Department issues a certificate of appointment to an official position, it first requires the official to pay Zhu Jiaxuan money.

古文：丧乱以来，贫者但受敕牒，多不取告身。
现代文：丧乱以来，贫穷的人只接受皇帝发的任职命令，多数人不拿吏部发的任职凭证。
English: Since the turmoil, poor people only accept the appointment order issued by the emperor, and most of them do not take the appointment certificate issued by the cadre department.

古文：十一月，甲戌，吏部侍郎刘岳上言： 告身有褒贬训戒之辞，岂可使其人初不之睹！ 
现代文：十一月，甲戌，吏部侍郎刘岳上书说： 任职凭证上有褒贬训诫的话，哪里能让人初任职就不看呢？ 
English: In November, Liu Yue, a clerk in the personnel department of Jiaotong University, said in a letter: If there is a commendation or reprimand on the certificate of appointment, where can people not look at the first appointment?

古文：敕文班丞、郎、给、谏，武班大将军以上，宜赐告身。
现代文：于是后唐帝下命令文官尚书左右丞及二十四曹郎、给事中、谏议大夫，武官大将军以上，应当赐给他们任职凭证。
English: As a result, the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty ordered that the civil officers Shangshu Zhouzhuang and the twenty-four sergeants, officers in charge of affairs, advisers, generals and above, should be given their credentials.

古文：其后执政议，以为硃胶绫轴，厥费无多，朝廷受以官禄，何惜小费！
现代文：在这以后，主管这一事务的人们又议论，认为朱胶绫轴费用不多，朝廷既然已经授予他们官禄，为什么还吝惜这些小费呢？
English: After that, the people in charge of this matter also argued that the cost of the Zhu Jiaxing was not much, and since the court had granted them an official salary, why did they begrudge these tips?

古文：乃奏： 凡除官者更不输钱，皆赐告身。 
现代文：于是上奏后唐帝： 凡是拜官授职的人改为不交钱，都赐给任职凭证。 
English: Therefore, after the performance, Emperor Tang said, "All those who do not pay for the conferment of official duties will be given a certificate of service."

古文：当是时，所除正员官之外，其馀试衔、帖号止以宠激军中将校而已，及长兴以后，所除浸多，乃至军中卒伍，使、州、镇、戍胥史，皆得银青阶及宪官，岁赐告身以万数矣。
现代文：在这个时候，除了赐给新任的正员官之外，其余如试衔、帖号只赐给特别宠爱的军中将校而已。到了长兴以后，所授予的官越来越多，甚至军中卒伍，使、州、镇、戍中的小吏，都得到了银印青绶，级别接近了御史台官，每年赐给的任职凭证数以万计。
English: At this time, in addition to the newly appointed official, the rest, such as the trial title and the post number, were only given to the special favorite lieutenant general. After Changxing, more and more officials were awarded, and even the junior officers in the army, the envoy, the state, the town, and the middle school all received the silver seal youth, the level was close to the historical official, and tens of thousands of certificates were given every year.

古文：闽王延翰蔑弃兄弟，袭位才逾月，出其弟延钧为泉州刺史。
现代文：闽王王延翰轻视欺侮他的兄弟，继承王位才一个多月，让他的弟弟王延钧以出任泉州刺史。
English: King Yanhan despised the bullying of his brother, he had only been heir to the throne for a little more than a month, and let his younger brother, Wang Yanxuan, become the ruler of Quanzhou.

古文：延翰多取民女以充后庭，采择不已。
现代文：王延翰选取了很多民女来充实他的后宫，无止境地到处选取。
English: Wang Yanhan selected many common women to enrich his harem, endlessly selecting everywhere.

古文：延钧上书极谏，延翰怒，由是有隙。
现代文：王延钧上书极言相劝，王延翰非常生气，因此两个人有了嫌隙。
English: Wang Yanxuan wrote a strongly worded letter of advice, Wang Yanhan was very angry, so the two had a rift.

古文：父审知养子延禀为建州刺史，延翰与书使之采择，延禀复书不逊，亦有隙。
现代文：他的父亲王审知的养子王延禀任建州刺史，王延翰给他写信让他帮助选取宫女，王延禀回信很不客气，因此他们之间也有了矛盾。
English: Wang Yanhan, the adopted son of his father, Wang Xuancheng, was appointed as the prince of Jianzhou. Wang Yanhan wrote to him to ask him to help him choose a princess. Wang Yanhan's reply was very rude, so there was a conflict between them.

古文：十二月，延禀、延钧合兵袭福州。
现代文：十二月，王延禀、王延钧联合袭击福州。
English: In December, Wang Yanyuan and Wang Yanyuan jointly attacked Fuzhou.

古文：延禀顺流先至，福州指挥使陈陶帅众拒之，兵败，陶自杀。
现代文：王延禀顺流而下先到福州，福州指挥使陈陶率兵抵抗，陈陶战败自杀。
English: Wang Yanqi went down the river to Fuzhou first. The Fuzhou commander ordered Chen Tao to lead the soldiers to resist. Chen Tao was defeated and committed suicide.

古文：是夜，延禀帅壮士百馀人趣西门，梯城而入，执守门者，发库取兵仗。
现代文：这天黑夜，王延禀率领一百多壮士直奔福州西门，踩着梯子进入城内，把看守大门的人抓了起来，打开兵库，取出武器。
English: On this dark night, Wang Yanqi led more than a hundred strong men straight to the West Gate of Fuzhou, stepped on a ladder to enter the city, grabbed the person guarding the gate, opened the warehouse, and took out weapons.

古文：及寝门，延翰惊匿别室；辛卯旦，延禀执之，暴其罪恶，且称延翰与妻崔氏共弑先王，告谕吏民，斩于紫宸门外。
现代文：到了寝门时，王延翰吓得藏匿在别的房间里。辛卯晨，王延禀抓获了王延翰，把他的罪恶公布于众，而且说王延翰和他的妻子崔氏共同杀害了先王，并把这些告诉了官吏百姓们，然后在紫宸门外斩杀了他。
English: In the morning, Wang Yanxuan caught Wang Yanxuan, made his crimes public, and said that Wang Yanxuan and his wife Cui jointly killed the former king, and told this to the officials and the people, and then killed him outside the Purple Gate.

古文：是日，延钧至成南，延禀开门纳之，推延钧为威武留后。
现代文：这一天，王延钧到达城南，王延禀打开城门让他进去，并胜尊崇王延钧为威武留后。
English: On this day, Wang Yanyuan arrived in the south of the city. Wang Yanyuan opened the city gate for him to enter, and highly respected Wang Yanyuan as a mighty warrior.

古文：癸已，以卢文进为义成节度使、同平章事。
现代文：癸巳，后唐帝任命卢文进为义成节度使、同平章事。
English: Soon after, Emperor Tang appointed Lu Wenjin as the chief envoy of the Yicheng Festival, and the matter was settled.

古文：庚子，以皇子从荣为天雄节度使、同平章事。
现代文：庚子，任命皇子李从荣为天雄节度使、同平章事。
English: Geng Zi, appointed the prince Li Cong Rong as Tianxiong's envoy to the festival.

古文：赵季良等运蜀金帛十亿至洛阳，时朝迁方匮乏，赖此以济。
现代文：赵季良等从蜀中运回十亿金帛到达洛阳，当时朝廷正钱财匮乏，全靠这些金帛接济。
English: Zhao Jiliang and others transported one billion gold ingots from Shuzhong back to Luoyang. At that time, the imperial court was short of money and relied entirely on these gold ingots for financial support.

古文：是岁，吴越王镠以中国丧乱，朝命不通，改元宝正；其后复通中国，乃讳而不称。
现代文：这一年，吴越王钱认为中原丧乱，朝廷的命令也通不下去，于是改年号为宝正。其后又和中原来往，也就避讳而不用这个年号了。
English: In that year, King Qian of Wu Yue thought that the Central Plains were in turmoil and that the order of the imperial court could not be carried out, so he changed the year name to Baozheng. Later, he went back to the Central Plains and avoided using this year name.

古文：春，正月，癸丑朔，帝更名亶。
现代文：天成二年春季正月，癸丑朔，后唐帝更改名字叫。
English: In the first month of the spring of the second year of Tiancheng, it was ugly, and the name was changed after the Tang Dynasty.

古文：孟知祥闻李严来监其军，恶之；或请奏止之，知祥曰： 何必然，吾有以待之。 
现代文：孟知祥听说李严来监督他的军队，因此很憎恨他。有人请求上奏后唐帝阻止他来，孟知祥说： 何必这样呢，我有对付他的办法。 
English: Meng Zhixiang heard that Li Yan was coming to supervise his army, so he hated him very much. When someone asked Emperor Tang to stop him from coming, Meng Zhixiang said: "Why should I do this? I have a way to deal with him."

古文：遣吏至绵、剑迎候。
现代文：于是派遣官吏到绵州、剑州去迎候他。
English: Therefore, officials were sent to Mianzhou and Jianzhou to welcome him.

古文：会武信节度使李绍文卒，知祥自言尝受密诏许便宜从事，壬戌，以西川节度副使、内外马步军都指挥使李敬周为遂州留后，趣之上道，然后表闻。
现代文：正好遇上武信节度使李绍文去世，孟知祥自称他曾接受过庄宗皇帝的秘密诏令，允许他见机行事。壬戌，任命西川节度副使、内外马步军都指挥使李敬周为遂州留后，并催促他上路赴任，然后才上表告诉后唐帝。
English: Just as Li Shaowen passed away at the time of the Wu Xin Festival, Meng Zhixiang claimed that he had received a secret imperial edict from Emperor Zhuangzong, allowing him to act as he saw fit. Therefore, he appointed Xi Chuan as the deputy envoy of the festival, and ordered Li Jing Zhou to stay in Suizhou, and urged him to go to the post, and only then did he inform the Emperor of Tang.

古文：严先遣使至成都，知祥自以于严有旧恩，冀其惧而自回，乃盛陈甲兵以示之，严不以为意。
现代文：李严事先派遣使者到达成都，孟知祥自认为对李严有旧恩，希望他惧怕而自己返回，于是阵列重兵给李严看，李严却不介意。
English: In advance, Li Yan sent an envoy to Chengdu. Meng Zhixiang thought that he had an old favor for Li Yan and hoped that he would be afraid and return on his own. Therefore, Li Yan was shown an array of heavy soldiers, but Li Yan did not mind.

古文：安重诲以孔循少侍宫禁，谓其谙练故事，知朝士行能，多听其言。
现代文：安重诲认为孔循从小在宫廷里侍奉，明白熟习朝廷里过去的典章制度，也知道朝廷官员的品行才能，所以好多事情都听他的话。
English: An Chongyuan thought that Kong Xun had served in the court since childhood, and he was familiar with the past award system in the court, and he also knew the moral qualities of the court officials, so he listened to him in many things.

古文：豆卢革、韦说既得罪，朝延议置相，循意不欲用河北人，先已荐郑珏，又荐太常卿崔协。
现代文：豆卢革、韦说获罪以后，朝廷商议设立宰相，孔循的意见是不想起用河北人，一开始推荐郑珏，后又推荐太常卿崔协。
English: After Zhu Ruge and Wei Gang were convicted, the imperial court deliberated on the establishment of a prime minister. Confucius's opinion was that he did not want to use a person from Hebei. At first, he recommended Zheng Qi, and later he recommended Cui Xie, the First Secretary of the CPC Central Committee.

古文：任圜欲用御史大夫李琪；郑珏素恶琪，故循力沮之，谓重诲曰： 李琪非无文学，但不廉耳。
现代文：任圜想起用御史大夫李琪。郑珏平素就恨李琪，所以孔循极力阻止他，于是对安重诲说： 李琪不是没有文才，只是有点不廉洁。
English: Zheng Rong always hated Li Qi, so Kong Xun tried his best to stop him, so he said to An Rong: Li Qi is not without literary talent, but he is a bit dishonest.

古文：宰相但得端重有器度者，足以仪刑多士矣。 
现代文：宰相只能用端重有器度的人，这样才足以成为朝廷百官的典范。 
English: The prime minister can only use a person with a lot of ability, so that it is enough to become a model for the imperial officials.

古文：它日议于上前，上问谁可相者，重诲以协对。
现代文：有一天在后唐帝面议论这件事，后唐帝问谁可以任宰相，安重诲回答说是崔协。
English: One day, discussing this matter in front of Emperor Hou Tang, Emperor Hou Tang asked who could be appointed prime minister, and An Chongyuan replied that it was Cui Xie.

古文：圜曰： 重诲未悉朝中人物，为人所卖。
现代文：任圜说： 安重诲不熟习朝中人员，被人所收买。
English: Ren Zheng said: An Chongyuan is not familiar with the personnel of the DPRK and China, and has been bribed by others.

古文：协虽名家，识字甚少。
现代文：崔协虽然是名家，但认识的字很少。
English: Although Cui Xie is from a famous family, he knows very few Chinese characters.

古文：臣既以不学忝相位，奈何更益以协，为天下笑乎！ 
现代文：我已经是因为没有学问而忝列相位，怎么可以再增加一个崔协而被天下人笑话呢？ 
English: I am already in the queue because of my lack of knowledge, how can I add another Cui Jie and be ridiculed by the world?

古文：上曰： 宰相重任，卿辈更审议之。
现代文：后唐帝说： 宰相是个重要的职位，你们再重新商议一下。
English: Later, Emperor Tang said, "Prime minister is an important position, you should discuss it again."

古文：吾在河东时见冯书记多才博学，与物无竞，此可相矣。 
现代文：我在河东时见书记冯道多才博学，与世无争，这个人可以任宰相。 
English: When I was in Hedong, I saw that Secretary Feng Daodu was very talented and erudite, and had no quarrel with the world. This person can be appointed as prime minister.

古文：既退，孔循不揖，拂衣径去，曰： 天下事一则任圜，二则任圜，圜何者！
现代文：退堂时，孔循没给后唐帝行礼，一甩衣服就走了，还说： 天下的事情一也是任圜，二也是任圜，任圜是个什么人！
English: When leaving the classroom, Kong Xun did not salute the late Tang Emperor, but threw off his clothes and left. He also said, "The things of the world are Ren Xuan first, Ren Xuan second, and what kind of person is Ren Xuan!

古文：使崔协暴死则已，不死会须相之。 
现代文：假使崔协突然死去那也就算了，如果死不了必须让他当宰相。 
English: If Cui Xie suddenly dies, that's it. If he doesn't die, he must be made prime minister.

古文：因称疾不朝者数日，上使重诲谕之，方入。重诲私谓圜曰： 今方乏人，协且备员，可乎？ 
现代文：因此他好几天称病不上朝，后唐帝派安重诲去给他说明情况，他才上了朝，安生诲私下对任圜说： 现在正缺人，崔协暂且作备选人员，可以吗？ 
English: Therefore, he said for several days that he would not go to the imperial court due to illness. Later, Emperor Tang sent An Chongyuan to explain the situation to him. It was not until he went to the imperial court that An Chongyuan privately said to Ren Hui: There is a shortage of personnel at the moment, can Cui Xie temporarily serve as an alternate?

古文：圜曰： 明公舍李琪而相崔协，是犹弃苏合之丸，取蛣蜣之转也。 
现代文：任圜说： 您抛弃李琪而使崔协为宰相，这就好像抛弃了苏合香丸，选取屎壳螂推的粪球。 
English: Ren Wei said: You abandoned Li Qi and made Cui Xie the prime minister, which is like abandoning Suaixiang pill and choosing the dung ball pushed by the cockroach.

古文：循与重诲共事，日短琪而誉协，癸亥，竟以端明殿学士冯道及崔协并为中书议郎、同平章事。
现代文：孔循和安重诲在一起处理政事，每天都说李琪的坏话而说崔协的好话。癸亥，终于任命端明殿学士冯道和崔协一起为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: Kong Cun and An Chongyun handled political affairs together, and every day they spoke ill of Li Qi and spoke well of Cui Xie. In the end, they appointed Feng Dao, a scholar of the Duanming Palace, and Cui Xie as the attendants of Chinese books and the same rank.

古文：协，邠之曾孙也。
现代文：崔协是崔的曾孙子。
English: Cui Xie is Cui's great-grandson.

古文：戊辰，王延禀还建州，王延钧送之，将别，谓延钧曰： 善守先人基业，勿烦老兄再下！ 
现代文：戊辰，王延禀准备回建州，王延钧给他送行，将要分别的时候。王延禀对王延钧说： 要好好地守住先人事业的根基，不要麻烦我再来！ 
English: At that time, Wang Yanyuan was preparing to return to Jianzhou, and Wang Yanyuan was seeing him off. It was time to part. Wang Yanyuan said to Wang Yanyuan: "You should keep the foundation of the ancestors' cause well. Don't bother me to come again!"

古文：延钧逊谢甚恭而色变。
现代文：王延钧十分恭敬谦逊地谢过王延禀，脸色都变了。
English: Wang Yanqi very respectfully and humbly thanked Wang Yanqi, and his face changed.

古文：庚午，初令天下长吏每旬亲引虑系囚。
现代文：庚午，开始命令天下长吏每隔十天要亲自讯视记录囚徒的罪状。
English: In the afternoon of the same day, he began to order the governors of the country to personally inform and record the criminal status of prisoners every ten days.

古文：孟知祥礼遇李严甚厚，一日谒知祥，知祥谓曰： 公前奉使王衍，归而请兵伐蜀，庄宗用公言，遂致两国俱亡。
现代文：孟知祥对李严的礼节待遇都十分优厚，有一天，李严去拜见孟知祥，孟知祥对他说： 你从前奉诏出使见了王衍，回去以后又请求出兵讨伐蜀国，庄宗听了你的话，致使两国都灭亡。
English: Meng Zhixiang treated Li Yan with very good etiquette. One day, Li Yan went to see Meng Zhixiang. Meng Zhixiang said to him: You once sent an envoy to see Wang Yan, and after returning, you requested to send troops to fight against Shu. Zhuangzong listened to your words, resulting in the destruction of both countries.

古文：今公复来，蜀人惧矣。
现代文：今天你又来到这里，蜀中的人感到十分害怕。
English: Today, when you came here again, the people in Shu are very scared.

古文：且天下皆废监军，公独来监吾军，何也？ 
现代文：况且天下都已经废掉了监军，你单独来监督我军，这是为什么呢？ 
English: Moreover, the whole world has abolished the supervision of the army, you alone to supervise our army, why is this?

古文：严惶怖求哀，知祥曰： 众怒不可遏也。 
现代文：李严听后十分恐惧，苦苦哀求。孟知祥说： 大家怒不可遏。 
English: After listening to Li Yan, he was very afraid and pleaded with him. Meng Zhixiang said: Everyone was furious.

古文：遂揖下，斩之。
现代文：于是把他斩杀了。
English: So they killed him.

古文：又召左厢马步都虞候丁知俊，知俊大惧，知祥指严尸谓曰： 昔严奉使，汝为之副，然则故人也，为我瘗之。 
现代文：孟知祥又召见左厢马步都虞候丁知俊，丁知俊感到十分恐惧，孟知祥指着李严的尸体对他说： 过去李严出使蜀国，你是他的副手，你们是故旧，你替我把他埋葬了。 
English: Meng Zhixiang also summoned Ding Zhijun, who was waiting for him in the left compartment. Ding Zhijun felt very afraid. Meng Zhijang pointed to Li Yan's corpse and said to him: In the past, Li Yan sent an envoy to Shu, you were his deputy, you are old-fashioned, you buried him for me.

古文：因诬奏： 严诈宣口敕，云代臣赴阙，又擅许将士优赏，臣辄已诛之。 
现代文：因此向后唐帝诬奏说： 李严假宣陛下的口头敕令，说是代替我，让我到陛下那里。他又擅自允许将士优待奖赏，我已经把他诛杀了。 
English: Therefore, the Tang Emperor falsely said: "Li Yan falsely announced His Majesty's verbal order, saying that he would replace me and let me go to His Majesty. He also arbitrarily allowed his soldiers to receive rewards. I have killed him."

古文：内八作使杨令芝以事入蜀，至鹿头关，闻严死，奔还。
现代文：内八作使杨令芝因事去蜀中，到鹿头关，听说李严已被杀死，就逃奔回来。
English: Yang Lingzhi was ordered to go to Shuzhong and then to Deer Head Pass. When he heard that Li Yan had been killed, he fled back.

古文：硃弘昭在东川，闻之，亦惧，谋归洛；会有军事，董璋使之入奏，弘照伪辞然后行，由是得免。
现代文：东川副使朱弘昭听到李严被杀也很害怕，谋划回洛阳。正好这时有军事行动，董璋派他回去奏告后唐帝，朱弘昭说了些假意推辞的话然后启程，因此得以免死。
English: The deputy envoy of the East River, Zhu Hongzhao, was also very scared when he heard that Li Yan had been killed, and planned to return to Luoyang. It was just at this time that there was a military operation, and Dong Xi sent him back to report to the Tang Emperor. Zhu Hongzhao said some false words of refusal and then left, so he was able to avoid death.

古文：癸酉，以皇子从厚同平章事，充河南尹，判六军诸卫事。
现代文：癸酉，任命皇子李从厚为同平章事，充任河南尹，判管六军诸卫事。
English: , appointed the prince Li Conghou as Tongping Zhengji, served as Henan Yin, and was in charge of the six military guards.

古文：从厚，从荣之母弟也。
现代文：李从荣听说后很不高兴。
English: After hearing this, Li Congrong was very unhappy.

古文：从荣闻之，不悦。己卯，加枢密使安重诲兼侍中，孔循同平章事。
现代文：己卯，加封枢密使安重诲兼任侍中，孔循为同平章事。
English: In addition, he was given the title of Privy Councilor and concurrently served as an attendant, and Kongxun was made a peer.

古文：吴马军都指挥使柴再用戎服入朝，御史弹之，再用恃功不服。
现代文：吴国马军都指挥使柴再用全副武装进入朝廷，御史弹劾他，柴再用依仗有战功而不服气。
English: The Wu and Ma armies all commanded Chai Zhe to enter the imperial court in full armament, and the emperor impeached him. Chai Zhe was not convinced, relying on his war exploits.

古文：侍中徐知诰阳于便殿误通起居，退而自劾，吴王优诏不问。知诰固请夺一月俸；由是中外肃然。
现代文：侍中徐知诰故意在吴王休息的别殿请安，退下去以后他自己弹劾自己，吴王下优待诏书，不予追问，徐知诰坚决请求扣去一个月的奉禄。因此朝廷内外得到整肃。
English: The chamberlain Xu Zhisheng purposely asked for peace in the hall where the king of Wu was resting. After he retired, he impeached himself. The king of Wu gave preferential treatment to the imperial edict and did not ask questions. Xu Zhisheng resolutely requested to deduct one month's stipend. Therefore, both inside and outside the imperial court were rectified.

古文：契丹改元天显，葬其主阿保机于木叶山。
现代文：契丹改年号为天显，在木叶山安葬了契丹主阿保机。
English: Khitan changed the year name to Tianxian, and buried the head of Khitan, Ah Bao Ji, in Mubei Mountain.

古文：述律太后左右有桀黠者，后辄谓曰： 为我达语于先帝！ 
现代文：述律太后的左右人中有凶暴狡诈的人，太后对他们说： 替我向先帝传话。 
English: Among the people on the right and left of the Dowager Empress Dowager Su-ritsu, there were fierce and cunning people. The Dowager Empress said to them, "Take a message to the former emperor for me."

古文：至墓所则杀之，前后所杀以百数。
现代文：到了先帝的墓地就把他杀了，先后共杀死一百多人。
English: When they arrived at the former emperor's grave, they killed him, killing more than a hundred people in total.

古文：最后，平州人赵思温当往，思温不行，后曰： 汝事先帝尝亲近，何为不行？ 
现代文：最后平州人赵思温也当前往，赵思温不去。太后说： 你侍奉先帝时非常亲近，为什么现在不去呢？ 
English: In the end, Pingzhou resident Zhao Siwen also went, but Zhao Siwen did not go. The empress dowager said: You were very close to the former emperor when you served him, so why not go now?

古文：对曰： 亲近莫如后，后行，臣则继之。 
现代文：赵思温回答说： 我亲近不如太后，太后去，我就跟着你。 
English: Zhao Siwen replied: I am not as close as the Empress Dowager. If the Empress Dowager goes, I will follow you.

古文：后曰： 吾非不欲从先帝于地下也，顾嗣子幼弱，国家无主，不得往耳。 
现代文：太后说： 我不是不想跟随先帝到地下，只是看到儿子幼弱，国家又没有君主，所以不能前往。 
English: The Empress Dowager said, "I don't mean that I don't want to follow the former emperor underground, but I can't go because I see that my son is young and weak, and the country doesn't have a monarch.

古文：乃断一腕，令置墓中。
现代文：于是砍下一只手腕，命令他放在墓中。
English: So they cut off one of his wrists and ordered him to be placed in a grave.

古文：思温亦得免。
现代文：赵思温也因此免于一死。
English: Zhao Siwen was also spared from death.

古文：帝以冀州刺史乌震三将兵运粮入幽州，二月，戊子，以震为河北道副招讨，领宁国节度使，屯卢台军。
现代文：后唐帝派冀州刺史乌震三次率兵护运粮食到幽州。二月，戊子，任命乌震为河北道招讨，兼领宁国节度使，驻扎在卢台军。
English: Later, the Tang Emperor sent Jizhou Jishi Wuzhen three times to escort grain to Yuzhou. In February, Wu Zi appointed Wuzhen as the chief envoy of Hebei Province and the chief envoy of Ningguo, stationed in the Lutetian Army.

古文：代泰宁节度使、同平章事房知温归兗州。
现代文：代理泰宁节度使、同平章事房知温回兖州。
English: Acting Taining Jie Du Envoy, Tong Ping Zhang Zhifang returned to Zhangzhou.

古文：庚寅，以保义节度使石敬瑭兼六军诸卫副使。
现代文：庚寅，任命保义节度使石敬瑭兼任六军诸卫副使。
English: Gao Yin appointed Baoyi Jiedu to make Shi Jingyao concurrently serve as the deputy envoy of the six armed forces.

古文：丙申，以从马直指挥使郭从谦为景州刺史，既至，遣使族诛之。
现代文：丙申，任命从马直指挥使郭从谦为景州刺史，等他到任，派遣使者把他全家诛杀了。
English: Bishin appointed Guo Congxian as commander from Ma Zhi to write the history of Jingzhou. When he arrived, he sent an envoy to kill his entire family.

古文：高季兴既得三州，请朝廷不除刺史，自以子弟为之，不许。
现代文：高季兴得到三州，请求朝廷不要任命刺史，自己派子弟去充当，后唐帝没有答应。
English: Gao Jixing obtained the Three Provinces and asked the imperial court not to appoint a crown prince, but to send his own son to act as crown prince. Emperor Hou Tang did not agree.

古文：及夔州刺史潘炕罢官，季兴辄遣兵突入州城，杀戍兵而据之。
现代文：夔州刺史潘炕罢官时，高季兴派兵突然进入夔州城，杀死戍守的士兵，并占据了这个地方。
English: When Pan Zheng, the governor of Zhangzhou, resigned, Gao Jixing suddenly sent soldiers into Zhangzhou City, killed the soldiers who were guarding, and occupied the place.

古文：朝廷除奉圣指挥使西方鄴为刺史，不受；又遣兵袭涪州，不克。
现代文：后唐任命原奉圣指挥使西方邺为夔州刺史，高季兴不接受。高季兴又派兵袭击涪州，没有攻下来。
English: After the Tang Dynasty, Gao Jixing did not accept the appointment of the former commander Feng Sheng to make the western part of Luzhou into Luzhou. Gao Jixing also sent troops to attack Luzhou, but did not attack it.

古文：魏王继岌遣押牙韩珙等部送蜀珍货金帛四十万，浮江而下，季兴杀珙等于峡口，尽掠取之。
现代文：魏王李继岌派遣押牙韩珙等部给朝廷送蜀中的珍宝货物金帛四十万，顺江而下，高季兴在峡口杀死韩珙等，全部强夺了这些珍宝货物。
English: The Wei king, Li Jizhe, sent the treasure goods of 400,000 gold ingots from Shuzhong to the imperial court, and Gao Jixing killed the treasure goods of 400,000 gold ingots at the mouth of the gorge.

古文：朝廷诘之，对曰： 珙等舟行下峡，涉数千里，欲知覆溺之故，自宜按问水神。 
现代文：后唐责问高季兴，高季兴回答说： 韩珙等率领的船队下行到峡口时，已经在水上行走了数千里，要想知道翻船淹死的原故，应该自己去询问水神。 
English: After the Tang Dynasty, Gao Jixing was interrogated by Gao Jixing. Gao Jixing replied: When the fleet led by Han Yu and others went down to the mouth of the canyon, they had already traveled thousands of miles on the water. If you want to know the cause of the capsizing and drowning, you should ask the water god yourself.

古文：帝怒，壬寅，制削夺季兴官爵，以山南东道节度使刘训为南面招讨使、知荆南行府事，忠武节度使夏鲁奇为副招讨使，将步骑四万讨之。
现代文：后唐帝听了非常生气，壬寅，下令剥夺了高季兴的官爵，任命山南东道节度使刘训为南面招讨使、知荆南行府事。任命忠武节度使夏鲁奇为副招讨使，率领四万步兵骑兵去讨伐。
English: After listening to this, the Tang Emperor was very angry, Ren Yin, ordered to deprive Gao Jixing of his official title, appointed Shannan Host Festival to make Liu Xun the southern recruitment envoy and Zhijing the southern government affairs. Appointed Zhongwu Festival to make Xialuqi the deputy recruitment envoy and led 40,000 infantry and cavalry to the crusade.

古文：东川节度使董璋充东南面招讨使，新夔州刺史西方鄴副之，将蜀兵下峡，仍会湖南军三面进攻。
现代文：东川节度使董璋充任东南面招讨使，新任夔州刺史西方邺为东南面副招讨使，率领蜀中的部队下行到三峡，并且会合湖南军队，三面向高季兴发起进攻。
English: Dongchuan Jiedu appointed Dong Qian as the southeastern recruiting envoy, and the newly appointed Zhangzhou Jishi Xichang Qian as the southeastern deputy recruiting envoy, led the troops from Shuzhong to go down to the Three Gorges, and joined the Hunan army to launch an attack on Gaojixing from three directions.

古文：三月，甲寅，以李敬周为武信留后。
现代文：三月，甲寅，任命李敬周为武信留后。
English: In March, after the appointment of Li Jing Zhou as Wu Xin's successor.

古文：丙辰，初置监牧，蕃息国马。
现代文：丙辰，后唐开始设置监牧，伺养繁殖马匹。
English: In the late Tang Dynasty, Gunchen began to set up overseers to look after breeding horses.

古文：初，庄宗之克梁也，以魏州牙兵之力；及其亡也，皇甫晖、张破败之乱亦由之。
现代文：当初，庄宗攻克后梁时，依靠的是魏州牙兵之力。等到他灭亡时，皇甫晖、张破败叛乱也是依靠魏州兵力。
English: At first, when Zhuangzong conquered Houliang, he relied on the strength of the Wei soldiers. When he died, the rebellion of Emperor Fuxi and Zhang was also dependent on the strength of the Wei soldiers.

古文：赵在礼之徙滑州，不之官，亦实为其下所制。
现代文：赵在礼被调到滑州，他没有到任，实际上也是为魏兵所劫制。
English: Zhao Zaili was transferred to Slate. He did not arrive at his post, but was actually kidnapped by Wei soldiers.

古文：在礼欲自谋脱祸，阴遣腹心诣阙求移镇，帝乃为之除皇甫晖陈州刺史，赵进贝州刺史，赵在礼为横海节度使；以皇子从荣镇鄴都，命宣徽北院使范延光将兵送之，且制置鄴都军事。
现代文：赵在礼想摆脱祸患，秘密派遣心腹到后唐帝那里去请求改换个地方，后唐帝于是为他任命皇甫晖为陈州刺史、赵进为贝州刺史，调赵在礼为横海节度使。任命皇子李从荣去镇守邺都，命令宣徽北院使范延光率兵护送他去，并负责制置邺都军事。
English: Zhao Zaili wanted to get rid of the scourge and secretly sent his confidant to Emperor Wu of the Later Tang Dynasty to request a change of location. Emperor Wu of the Later Tang Dynasty then appointed Wang Fuxi as the governor of Chen Prefecture, Zhao Jin as the governor of Bei Province, and appointed Zhao Zaili as the envoy of the Henghai Festival. He appointed the prince Li Congrong to go to the town to guard the capital of Fengtu, and ordered the envoy of the Northern Court of Xuanhui, Fan Yanguang, to escort him with soldiers, and was responsible for setting up the military of Fengtu.

古文：乃出奉节等九指挥三千五百人，使军校龙晊部之，戍卢台军以备契丹，不给铠仗，但系帜于长竿以别队伍，由是皆俛首而去。
现代文：于是调出奉节等九指挥三千五百人，派军校龙率领他们，戍守在卢台军，以防备契丹人的侵略。但不给他们铠甲和武器，只是在长竿子上挂个旗帜以别于其他队伍，因此都俯首贴耳地离开这里。
English: So they called out 3,500 men under the command of nine commanders, including Feng Jie, and sent a military school dragon to lead them to stay in the Loutai army to guard against the invasion of the Khitan. However, they did not give them armor and weapons, but only hung a flag on a long pole to distinguish them from the other teams, so they all left here with their heads bowed.

古文：中涂闻孟知祥杀李严，军中籍籍，已有讹言；既至，会朝延不次擢乌震为副招讨使，讹言益甚。
现代文：到了途中听说孟知祥杀死了李严，军中不安，已有谣言传开。到了卢台之后，正好朝廷不按寻常的顺序提拔乌震为副招讨使，军中的谣言更加厉害。
English: On the way, it was heard that Meng Zhixiang had killed Li Yan. The army was uneasy, and rumors had already spread. After arriving in Lutetia, it just so happened that the imperial court promoted Wu Zhen to deputy recruiting envoy in an unusual order, and the rumors in the army were even more severe.

古文：房知温怨震骤来代己，震至，未交印。
现代文：房知温怨恨乌震突然来代替自己。乌震来到以后，房知温没有交出印信符节。
English: Fang Zhiyuan resented that Wu Zhen suddenly came to replace him. After Wu Zhen came, Fang Zhiyuan did not hand over the seal.

古文：壬申，震召知温及诸道先锋马军都指挥使、齐州防御使安神博于东寨，知温诱龙晊所部兵杀震于席上，其众噪于营外，安审通脱身走，夺舟济河，将骑兵按甲不动。
现代文：壬申，乌震在东面的营寨里召集房知温以及诸先锋马军都指挥使、齐州防御使安审通来下棋，房知温引诱龙所属部下在席上杀死乌震，乌震的部下在营外大吵大闹，安审通脱身逃跑，抢夺了一些船只度过黄河，率领着骑兵按兵不动。
English: In Jinshin, Wu Zhen called up Fang Zhiwen and all the vanguard horse army commanders in the camp to the east, and the defense of Qizhou made An Zhiwen come to play chess. Fang Zhiwen lured the subordinates belonging to Long to kill Wu Zhen at the table, and the subordinates of Wu Zhen made a lot of noise outside the camp. An Zhiwen escaped and ran away, robbed some ships to cross the Yellow River, and led the cavalry to stand still.

古文：知温恐事不济，亦上马出门，军士揽其辔曰： 公当为士卒主，去欲何之？ 
现代文：房知温害怕事情不能成功，上马跑出门外，士卒们拉住他的马疆绳说： 你应当成为我们的主帅，离开这里想到哪里呢？ 
English: Afraid that things would not work out, Fang Zhiyuan got on his horse and ran out of the door. The officers pulled on his horse's bridle and said, "You should be our coach. Where do you want to go from here?"

古文：知温给之曰： 骑兵皆在河西，不收取之，独有步兵，何能集事！ 
现代文：房知温欺骗他们说： 骑兵们都在黄河以西，不去收取他们，只靠步兵，怎么能成就事业。 
English: Fang Zhiwen deceived them and said, "The cavalry are all west of the Yellow River. If we don't capture them, how can we achieve our cause with only infantry?"

古文：遂跃马登舟济河，与审通合谋击乱兵，乱兵遂南行。
现代文：于是快马加鞭登舟过河，和安审通一起谋划攻打乱兵，乱兵于是就向南去了。
English: As a result, he quickly boarded a boat to cross the river, and together with An Xitong, he planned to attack and defeat the rebels. The rebels then went south.

古文：骑兵徐踵其后，部伍甚整。
现代文：骑兵们慢慢地跟在他们的后面，队伍也很整齐。
English: The cavalry followed slowly behind them, in good order.

古文：乱者相顾失色，列炬宵行，疲于荒泽，诘朝，骑兵四合击之，乱兵殆尽，馀众复趣故寨，审通已焚之，乱兵进退失据，遂溃。
现代文：乱兵互相看着吓得脸色都变了，他们排好队，手持火炬在夜里前进，在荒滩水泽中走得很疲乏，第二天早晨，骑兵们从四面一起进攻，乱兵几乎被全部消灭，剩下的人又想返回营寨，但营寨已被安审通焚烧，乱兵们进退无靠，被打得大败。
English: The mutineers looked at each other with frightened faces. They lined up, marched with torches in the night, and walked wearily through the wasteland. The next morning, the cavalry attacked from all sides. The mutineers were almost completely wiped out. The rest of the people wanted to return to the camp, but the camp had been burned by the security inspection. The mutineers had no way to advance or retreat, and were defeated.

古文：其匿于丛薄沟塍得免者什无一二。
现代文：他们当中藏匿在丛林山谷里得免于一死的约有十分之一二。
English: About two-tenths of them managed to avoid death by hiding in the jungle valley.

古文：范延光还至淇门，闻卢台乱，发滑州兵复如鄴都，以备奔逸。
现代文：范延光回到淇门时，听说卢台兵乱，就派滑州部队又回到邺都，准备逃跑。
English: When Fan Yanguang returned to Qimen, he heard about the Ludai Rebellion, so he sent the troops from Nanzhou back to Fengtu and prepared to escape.

古文：帝遣客省使李仁矩如西川，传诏安谕孟知祥及吏民；甲戌，至成都。
现代文：后唐帝派遣客省使李仁矩去西川传达诏令，安抚孟知祥以及那里的官民，甲戌，到达成都。
English: Later, the Tang Emperor sent the guest province to send Li Ren Rong to Xichuan to convey the edict, to appease Meng Zhixiang and the officials and citizens there, and to reach the capital.

古文：刘训兵至荆南，楚王殷遣都指挥使许德勋等将水军屯岳州。
现代文：刘训的部队到达荆南，楚王马殷派遣都指挥使许德勋率领水军驻扎在岳州。
English: Liu Huning's troops arrived in Jingnan, and Chu King Ma Yin dispatched Du Du to command Xu Deshun to lead the naval forces stationed in Yuezhou.

古文：高秀兴坚壁不战，求救于吴，吴人遣水军援之。
现代文：高季兴坚守在营寨里不出来应战，同时请求吴国援救，吴国派出水军来援助他。
English: Gao Jixing insisted that he would not come out to fight in the camp, and at the same time asked for help from the State of Wu. The State of Wu sent a naval force to help him.

古文：夏，四月，庚寅，敕卢台乱兵在营家属并全门处斩。
现代文：夏季四月，庚寅，后唐帝下令，凡是卢台乱兵在营寨里的家属一并满门处斩。
English: In the summer of April, Emperor Go-Yin of the Later Tang Dynasty ordered that all the family members of the rebels in the camp should be executed together.

古文：敕至鄴都，阖九指挥之门，驱三千五百家凡万馀人于石灰窑，悉斩之，永济渠为之变赤。
现代文：命令到达邺都，把九指挥的门关起来，驱赶三千五百家共一万多人到石灰窑，全部斩杀，永济渠的水都被染成了红色的。
English: The order reached the capital city of Handan, closed the doors of the nine commanders, and drove more than 10,000 people from 3,500 households to the lime kiln, all of whom were killed. The water of the Yongji Canal was dyed red.

古文：朝廷虽知房知温首乱，欲安反仄，癸巳，加知温兼侍中。
现代文：朝廷虽然知道房知温是首乱分子，为了暂时安定局面，癸巳，加封房知温兼任侍中。
English: Although the imperial court knew that Fong Chiu-Wen was the instigator of the rebellion, in order to temporarily stabilize the situation, it was decided to add Fong Chiu-Wen as an aide-de-camp.

古文：先是，孟知祥遣牙内指挥使文水武漳迎其妻琼华长公主及子仁赞于晋阳，及凤翔，李从严闻知祥杀李严，止之，以闻，帝听其归蜀；丙申，至成都。
现代文：在此以前，孟知祥派遣牙内指挥使文水人武漳到晋阳迎接他的妻子琼华公主和儿子仁赞，走到凤翔，李从听说孟知祥杀死了李严，就把他们扣下，然后报告后唐帝，后唐帝同意他们回蜀中。丙申，到达成都。
English: Prior to this, Meng Zhixiang had dispatched the commander of the Inner Court to send the literati Wu Xuan to Jinyang to welcome his wife, Princess Qionghua, and his son, Ren Zan, to Fengxiang. When Li heard that Meng Zhixiang had killed Li Yan, he arrested them, and then reported to the Emperor of Later Tang. The Emperor of Later Tang agreed to let them return to Shuzhong. Xian, to Chengdu.

古文：盐铁判官赵季良与孟知祥有旧，知祥奏留季良为副使。
现代文：盐铁判官赵季良和孟知祥有旧交，因此孟知祥就上奏后唐帝请求留下赵季良为副使。
English: Salt and Iron Judge Zhao Jiliang and Meng Zhixiang had an old friendship, so Meng Zhixiang requested Tang Emperor to keep Zhao Jiliang as a deputy envoy after the report.

古文：朝廷不得已，丁酉，以季良为西川节度副使。
现代文：朝廷不得已，丁酉，任命赵季良为西川节度副使。
English: As a last resort, the imperial court appointed Zhao Jiliang as the deputy envoy to the Nishikawa festival.

古文：李昊归蜀，知祥以为观察推官。
现代文：李昊回到蜀中，孟知祥任命他为观察推官。
English: When Li Hao returned to Shuzhong, Meng Zhixiang appointed him as an observer.

古文：江陵卑湿，复值久雨，粮道不继，将士疾疫，刘训亦寝疾；癸卯，帝遣枢密使孔循往视之，且审攻战之宜。
现代文：江陵地区本来就低下潮湿，又值长时间下雨，运粮的道路不能行走，粮食不能连续不断地运来，将士们都生了病，刘训也生病卧床不起。癸卯，后唐帝派遣枢密使孔循前往观察，并察看进攻作战的事宜。
English: The Gangneung area was already low and humid, and it rained for a long time. The road for transporting grain could not be walked, and the grain could not be continuously transported. The generals were all sick, and Liu Xun was also sick and bedridden. However, Emperor Tang sent the Privy Council to send Kongxu to observe and inspect the offensive operations.

古文：五月，癸丑，以威武留后王延钧为本道节度使、守中书令、琅邪王。
现代文：五月，癸丑，任命福建威武留后王延钧为本道节度使、琅邪王。
English: In May, Emperor Qianwu appointed Yan Kun, the powerful warrior and queen of Fujian, as the envoy of the festival and the king of evil.

古文：孔循至江陵，攻之不克，遣人入城说高季兴；季兴不逊。
现代文：孔循到达江陵，进攻没有攻下，派人进城去劝说高季兴，高季兴不退让。
English: Confucius arrived in Gangneung, but the attack was not successful. He sent someone into the city to persuade Gao Jixing not to back down.

古文：丙寅，遣使赐湖南行营夏衣万袭；丁卯，又遣使赐楚王殷鞍马玉带，督馈粮于行营，竟不能得。
现代文：丙寅，后唐帝派遣使者去湖南赏赐在那里的士卒夏季衣服一万套。丁卯，又派遣使者去赏赐给楚王马殷鞍马玉带，并督促把粮食送到军营，但马殷竟不服从命令。
English: Later, Emperor Tang sent an envoy to Hunan to reward the soldiers there with ten thousand sets of summer clothes. Ding Wu also sent an envoy to reward King Ma Yin of Chu with a horse saddle and a jade belt, and urged him to send grain to the military camp, but Ma Yin did not obey the order.

古文：庚午，诏刘训等引兵还。
现代文：庚午，后唐帝下令刘训率兵返回。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Emperor Hou Tang ordered Liu Xun and his soldiers to return.

古文：楚王殷遣中军使史光宪入贡，帝赐之骏马十，美女二。
现代文：楚王马殷派遣中军使史光进朝入贡，后唐帝赏赐给他骏马十匹，美女两人。
English: King Ma Yin of Chu dispatched the Chinese army to send Shiguang to the Tang Dynasty to pay tribute, after which the Tang Emperor rewarded him with ten fine horses and two beautiful women.

古文：过江陵，高季兴执光宪而夺之，且请举镇自附于吴。
现代文：史光宪回去路过江陵时，高季兴把史光宪抓起来，并抢去了他的马匹美女。
English: When Shi Guangxian was passing through Jiangling on his way back, Gao Jixing caught him and stole his horse, Beauty.

古文：徐温曰： 为国者当务实效而去虚名。
现代文：高季兴请求率领全镇归附吴国，吴国徐温说： 为了国家应当务求实效而抛弃虚名。
English: Gao Jixing requested to lead the whole town to be annexed to the State of Wu. Xu Wen of the State of Wu said: In order for the state to be effective, it should abandon its false reputation.

古文：高氏事唐久矣，洛阳去江陵不远，唐人步骑袭之甚易，我以舟师溯流救之甚难。
现代文：高氏侍奉唐朝时间已很长，洛阳离江陵也不太远，唐人的步兵和骑兵袭击这里非常容易，我用水军逆流而上援救也很困难。
English: Gao has served the Tang Dynasty for a long time. Luoyang is not far from Jiangling. It is very easy for the Tang infantry and cavalry to attack here. It is also very difficult for me to rescue the water army against the current.

古文：夫臣人而弗能救，使之危亡，能无愧乎！ 
现代文：纳人为臣而又不能去援救，使他处于危亡地步，能不感到惭愧吗？ 
English: Can one not feel ashamed of being a vassal and not being able to come to the rescue, leaving him in a state of peril?

古文：乃受其贡物，辞其称臣，听其自附于唐。
现代文：于是接受了高氏的贡物，推辞他向吴称臣，听他归附后唐。
English: So he accepted Gao's tribute, rejected his claim to be Wu's vassal, and listened to him as a vassal of the Later Tang.

古文：任圜性刚直，且恃与帝有旧，勇于敢为，权幸多疾之。
现代文：任圜情性刚直，而且依仗自己和后唐帝有旧交，作事敢作敢当，有权势而又得后唐帝宠幸的人们都嫉妒他。
English: He had an upright nature, and relied on his old friendship with the late Emperor Tang. He dared to do things boldly. The powerful people who were favored by the late Emperor Tang envied him.

古文：旧制，馆券出于户部，安重诲请从内出，与圜争于上前，往复数四，声色俱厉。
现代文：按旧的规定，使臣外出的费用由户部发给，安重诲请求从枢密院发给，他和任圜在后唐帝面前争论了好几次，声色俱厉。
English: According to the old regulations, the expenses of the envoy's outing were paid by the Household Department, and the request for reassurance was sent by the Privy Council. He and Ren Hui argued several times in front of Emperor Hou Tang, and their voices were harsh.

古文：上退朝，宫人问上： 适与重诲论事为谁？ 
现代文：后唐帝退朝后，宫人问后唐帝： 刚才和安重诲争论事情的是谁？ 
English: After Emperor Go-Tang's abdication, the courtiers asked Emperor Go-Tang: Who was it that was arguing with An Chongzhen just now?

古文：上曰： 宰相。 
现代文：后唐帝说： 宰相。 
English: Later, Emperor Tang said: Prime Minister.

古文：宫人曰： 妾在长安宫中，未尝见宰相、枢密奏事敢如是者，盖轻大家耳。 
现代文：宫人说： 妾在长安宫中，从来没有见宰相、枢密奏请事情时敢象这个样子，大概是轻视皇上吧！ 
English: The courtier said, "In the Chang'an Palace, the concubine has never seen the prime minister and the privy council play things out like this. She is probably despising the emperor!"

古文：上愈不悦，卒从重诲议。
现代文：后唐帝听后更加不高兴，最后听从了安重诲的建议。
English: After listening to this, Emperor Tang was even more displeased, and finally heeded An Chongyong's advice.

古文：圜因求罢三司，诏以枢密承旨孟鹄充三司副使权判。
现代文：任圜因此请求罢去三司之职，后唐帝下诏，命枢密承旨孟鹄暂判三司副使。
English: As a result, Ren Zheng requested to be removed from the post of the Third Division, after which the Tang Emperor issued an edict ordering Meng Zheng to be temporarily appointed as the Deputy Envoy of the Third Division.

古文：鹄，魏州人也。
现代文：孟鹄是魏州人。
English: Meng Rong is a native of Weizhou.

古文：六月，庚辰，太子詹事温辇请立太子。
现代文：六月，庚辰，太子詹事温辇请求立太子。
English: In June, Geng Chen, Prince Zhan's son, requested the crown prince.

古文：丙戌，门下侍郎、同平章事任圜罢守太子少保。
现代文：丙戌，门下侍郎、同平章事任圜被罢守太子少保。
English: Hei Min, a subordinate attendant, and Tongping Zhang Jizhong were removed from their posts as the prince's junior guards.

古文：己丑，以宣徽北院使张延朗判三司。
现代文：己丑，任命宣徽北院使张延朗兼判三司。
English: As a result, Zhang Yanlang, the chief envoy of the Northern Court of Xuanhui, was also appointed as the third secretary.

古文：壬辰，贬刘训为檀州刺史。
现代文：壬辰，贬刘训为檀州刺史。
English: In Imjin, Liu Xun was relegated to the history of Danzhou.

古文：丙申，封楚王殷为楚国王。
现代文：丙申，封楚王马殷为楚国王。
English: Bishen, the king of Chu, Ma Yin, became the king of Chu.

