古文：李钧高骈钜鹿守陕师严遵美成汭刘知俊田頵桑维翰钟傅顿金湖南马氏王慎辞安守范
现代文：李钧高骈钜鹿守陕师严遵美成汭刘知俊田頵桑维翰钟傅顿金湖南马氏王慎辞安守范
English: Li Qigao, Gao Erlu, Shenshan Shi, Yan Zun, Mei Cheng, Liu Zhijun, Tian Qi, Sang Wei, Han Zhong, Fu Tong, Jinhu Nan, Ma Shi, Wang Shengjie, Anshu Fan

古文：李钧
现代文：李钧
English: Lee Min Ho

古文：唐李钧之莅临汝也，郡当王仙芝大兵之后。
现代文：唐朝李钧来到临汝，临汝郡正处在王仙芝的大军到来之后。
English: Li Xi of the Tang Dynasty came to Lin Ryu. Lin Ryu County was just after the arrival of Wang Xianzhi's army.

古文：民间多警。
现代文：百姓很警惕。
English: People are very wary.

古文：李钧以兵力单寡，抗疏闻奏。
现代文：李钧因为兵力太少，上疏奏闻皇上。
English: Because the number of troops was too small, Emperor Li Hongzhi was forced to make a last-minute decision.

古文：诏以昭义军三千五百人镇焉。
现代文：皇上下诏让他凭昭义的军队三千五百人镇守。
English: The Emperor's edict ordered him to send 3,500 troops to defend the town with the help of Akiyoshi.

古文：乾符戊戌岁也，兵至，营于郡西郭。
现代文：是乾符戊戌年，昭义兵到，驻扎在郡西城外。
English: It was in the year of the Chinese zodiac, the Year of the Horse, that the Shouyi soldiers arrived and were stationed outside the west town of the county.

古文：明年春，钧节制上党杂报到，于是镇兵部将，排队于州前通衢，率其属入衙，展君臣之礼。
现代文：第二年春天，李钧要求上党的人都来报到，于是上党的军队各将领，在州府前面的大道上排队，率领他们的属下进入州衙门，行君臣的礼节。
English: In the spring of the following year, Li Qiye asked all those who had joined the party to report to him, so the generals of the army who had joined the party lined up on the avenue in front of the prefectural capital and led their subordinates into the prefectural gate, performing the etiquette of a prince and a minister.

古文：忽有暴风扬尘，起自军门而南，蟠折行伍，拔大旆十余以登。州人愕眙而顾，没于天际。
现代文：忽然有一阵大风扬起尘土，是从军营南门刮起的，盘旋在军营中，拔起十多面大旗直上天空，州里的人都惊愕地瞪着眼看着，直到天边没影了。
English: Suddenly, a gust of wind kicked up dust from the south gate of the military camp, swirled around the camp, and pulled up more than a dozen large flags straight into the sky. The people in the state stared in amazement until there was no shadow in the sky.

古文：明日，州北二十里大牛谷野人，得旆以献，帛无完幅，枝干皆摺拉矣。
现代文：第二天，州北二十里大牛谷的村人，找到大旗来献上，那些旗的布没有完好的了，都被树枝拉扯坏得不成样子。
English: The next day, the villagers of Dahu Valley, 20 miles north of the state, found large flags to present. The cloth of those flags was not intact, and they were all pulled and torn by branches.

古文：钧至上党，统众出雁门，兵既不戢，暴残居民，遂为猛虎军所杀矣。
现代文：李钧到上党，统率大兵出了雁门，但兵卒不能严格约束自己，军纪不严，残害百姓。于是很快就被猛虎军所杀了。
English: When Li Xuan was promoted to the top party, he led the soldiers out of the Wild Goose Gate, but the soldiers could not strictly restrain themselves, the military discipline was not strict, and they mutilated the people. Therefore, they were soon killed by the Tiger Army.

古文：高骈
现代文：高骈
English: Takatsuki

古文：唐光启三年，中书令高骈，镇淮海。有蝗行而不飞，自郭西浮濠，缘城入子城，聚于道院，驱除不止。
现代文：唐朝光启三年，中书令高骈镇守淮海时，发现蝗虫只爬不飞，从城西浮过护城河，攀缘着城墙进入内城。聚集在道路上和庭院中，驱除也不停止爬行。
English: At the beginning of the third year of the Tang Dynasty, when the Chinese government ordered the town of Gaocheng to guard the Huaihai Sea, it was found that the locusts only crawled but did not fly. They floated from the west of the city across the moat, climbed the city wall and entered the inner city. They gathered on the roads and in the courtyards, and they did not stop crawling when they were driven away.

古文：松竹之属，一宿如剪。幡帧画像，皆啗去其头。
现代文：松竹之类的树木，一宿之间象用剪子剪过一样，布幅上的画像，都被它们咬去了头。
English: Trees such as pine and bamboo, as if they had been cut with scissors between one night and the next, and the images on the cloth were all bitten off by them.

古文：数日之后，又相啖食。
现代文：几天以后，它们又互相咬食。
English: A few days later, they were biting each other again.

古文：九月中，暴雨方霁，沟渎间忽有小鱼，其大如指，盖雨鱼也。
现代文：九月中旬，暴雨则晴，沟渠里忽然发现小鱼，大小如手指，都是下的雨鱼。
English: In mid-September, when the rainstorm was over, small fish, the size of a finger, were suddenly found in the ditch. They were all rain fish.

古文：占有兵丧。
现代文：经卜算说有兵丧。
English: It is said that there will be a military funeral.

古文：至十月，有大星夜堕于延和阁前，声若奔雷，迸光碎响，洞照一庭。
现代文：到十月，有颗大星在晚上坠落在延和阁前面，声音好象滚雷，迸发出光亮和破碎的响声，光亮照满庭院。
English: By October, a large star fell in front of Yanhe Pavilion in the evening, sounding like thunder, emitting a bright and shattering sound, and illuminating the courtyard.

古文：自十一月至明年二月，昏雾不解。
现代文：自从十一月到第二年二月，大雾昏沉，长期不散。
English: From November to February of the following year, the fog was thick and long-lasting.

古文：或曰： 下谋上之兆。 
现代文：有人说：这是以下犯上的征兆。
English: Some people say: This is a sign of the following crime.

古文：是时粒食腾贵，殆逾十倍。寒僵雨仆，日辇数十口，弃之郭外。
现代文：当时米价昂贵，是过去的十多倍，因寒冷和大雨而僵卧倒地的人，每天用车拉出几千口，都扔到城墙外。
English: At that time, the price of rice was expensive, more than ten times that of the past. People who had fallen to the ground due to the cold and heavy rain pulled out thousands of mouths every day by car and threw them outside the city walls.

古文：及霁而达坊静巷，为之一空。
现代文：等到天晴再到里巷和街道里看，全部都空了。
English: Wait until the weather clears and then take a look at the alleys and streets. They are all empty.

古文：是时浙西军变，周宝奔毗陵。
现代文：这时浙西军队叛变，周宝逃奔毗陵去了。
English: At this time, the western Zhejiang army mutinied, and Zhou Bao fled to Binling.

古文：骈闻之大喜，遽遣使致书于周曰： 伏承走马，已及奔牛。今附齑一瓶，葛粉十斤，以充道途所要。 
现代文：高骈听说后非常高兴，立刻派使者送给周宝一封信，信上说： 你依靠着走马将要到达奔牛，现在附带送上一瓶齑粉和十斤葛粉，用来解决路途上的需要 。
English: After hearing this, Gao Gan was very happy and immediately sent an envoy to Zhou Bao to deliver a letter, which said: You rely on your horse to get to Bengiu, and now you are sending a bottle of wolfberry powder and ten kilos of arrowroot powder to solve the needs on the way.

古文：盖讽其齑粉也。
现代文：这是讽刺他将要成为齑粉。三月。
English: It's a travesty that he's going to be dust in March.

古文：三月，使院致看花宴，骈有与诸从事诗。其末句云： 人间无限伤心事，不得樽前折一枝。 
现代文：使院请他看花赴宴，并列着有一首给诸从事的诗，诗的末句是： 人世间有无限伤心的事，不能在酒樽前折去一枝。 
English: The palace asked him to go to the banquet to look at the flowers, and there was a poem for everyone. The last line of the poem was: There are infinite sad things in the world, and you can't break off a branch in front of a wine barrel.

古文：盖亡灭之谶也。
现代文：大概是灭亡的预言吧。
English: Probably a prophecy of doom.

古文：及为秦彦幽辱，计口给食。
现代文：到了被秦彦幽禁羞辱，算计人口供给食物。
English: When he was imprisoned and humiliated by Qin Yan, he decided to provide food for the population.

古文：自五月至八月，外围益急，遂及于难。
现代文：从五月到八月，外面围兵围困更加紧急。
English: From May to August, the external siege became more urgent.

古文：钜鹿守
现代文：接着就遭到死难。钜鹿守
English: And then he was killed.

古文：唐文德戊申岁，钜鹿郡南和县街北有纸坊，长垣悉曝纸。
现代文：唐朝文德戊申年，钜鹿郡南和县街北有个造纸作坊。长长的围墙上都晒着纸。
English: In the year of Emperor Wendewoshen of the Tang Dynasty, there was a paper-making workshop in the south of Elk County and the north of County Street. Paper was exposed on the long walls.

古文：忽有旋风自西来，卷壁纸略尽，直上穿云，望之如飞雪焉。
现代文：忽然有股从西面来的旋风，几乎把墙上的纸都卷走了，那股旋风直上云霄，远望那被卷的纸象飞雪一样。
English: Suddenly, a whirlwind from the west swept away almost all the paper on the wall. The whirlwind went straight up into the sky, and the rolled paper looked like snow in the distance.

古文：此兵家大忌也。
现代文：这是军事上最忌讳的事啊。
English: This is the most taboo thing in the military.

古文：夏五月，郡守死。
现代文：到了五月，郡守就死了。
English: By May, the governor was dead.

古文：陕师
现代文：陕师
English: Shaanxi Division

古文：唐乾宁末，分陕有蛇鼠斗于南门之内，观者如堵。
现代文：唐朝乾宁末年。分陕地区有蛇和鼠在南门内决斗。
English: In the late Qianling period of the Tang Dynasty, there was a duel between a snake and a rat inside the South Gate in the Fengtian area.

古文：蛇死而鼠亡去。
现代文：观看的人很多，象围墙一样。最后蛇死了鼠也逃奔而去。
English: There were a lot of people watching, like a wall. Finally, the snake died and the rat ran away.

古文：未旬而陕师遇祸。
现代文：还没过十天陕军便遭遇灾祸。
English: In less than ten days, the Shaanxi army encountered a disaster.

古文：则知内蛇死而郑厉入，群鼠奔向蒲山亡。
现代文：这时人们才知道城内蛇死郑厉进来，群鼠奔逃造成蒲山灭亡的道理。
English: At this time, people only knew that the snakes in the city died violently, and the rats ran away, causing the death of Busan.

古文：妖由人兴，可为戒惧。
现代文：妖魔是人兴起的，应当作以后的警戒和担心的事了。
English: Demons are created by people, and should be a cause for vigilance and concern in the future.

古文：严遵美
现代文：严遵美
English: Yan Zunmei

古文：唐左军容使严遵美，阉官中仁人也。
现代文：唐朝的左军容使严遵美。是宦官中仁爱端方正直的人。
English: Yan Zunmei was a left-wing military commander of the Tang Dynasty. He was a benevolent and honest person among eunuchs.

古文：尝言北司为供奉官，胯衫给事，无秉简之仪。
现代文：曾说北司作供奉官时，衣帽不整，没有待人处事的礼仪。
English: He once said that when Hokusai was an offering official, his clothes and hat were not in order, and he had no etiquette for dealing with others.

古文：又云： 枢密使廨署，三间屋书柜而已，亦无视事之厅。堂状后帖黄，指挥公事，乃杨复泰。夺宰相权也。
现代文：又说： 枢密使廨署，三间屋只是书柜而已，也没有办公的大厅，堂屋后帖黄布，办理公事，是杨复泰夺取宰相权位的意向。
English: He also said: "Privy Envoy Office, the three rooms are just bookcases, and there is no office hall, and the yellow cloth hanging behind the hall is for official business, which is Yang Futai's intention to seize the power of the prime minister.

古文：遵美尝发狂，手足舞蹈之。
现代文：遵美曾经发疯，手舞足蹈。
English: Zunmei once went mad and danced around.

古文：旁有一猫一犬，猫谓犬曰： 军容改常也。 
现代文：这时旁边有一只猫和一只狗，猫对狗说： 严军容改变常态了。 
English: At this time, there was a cat and a dog next to him. The cat said to the dog, "Your stern demeanor has changed.

古文：犬曰： 何用管。 
现代文：狗说： 不用管。 
English: The dog said, "Never mind.

古文：俄而舞定，且异猫犬之言。
现代文：不一会儿停止发狂，对猫狗的话很惊异。
English: After a while, I stopped freaking out and was surprised by what the cat and dog said.

古文：遇昭宗播迁凤翔，乃求致仕汉中，寻徙于剑南青城山下，卜别墅以居之。年过八十而终。
现代文：正好昭宗要迁到凤翔宫去，严遵美就要求到汉中作个官，然后搬到剑南青城山下，选择一个别墅住下了，年纪到了八十岁才死。
English: Just as Akimune was about to move to Fengxiang Palace, Yan Zunmei requested to become an official in the Han Dynasty, and then moved to Qingshan Mountain in South Jianan Province, chose a villa to live in, and died at the age of eighty.

古文：其忠正谦约，与西门李玄为季孟。
现代文：他忠正谦和约束自己，与西门李玄结为兄弟。
English: He is loyal, modest and self-disciplined. He is a brother of Simon Lee Hyun Joo.

古文：于时诛宦官，唯西川不奉诏，由是脱祸。
现代文：当时追捕诛杀宦官，只有西川不执行宫庭的命令，因此免除了灾祸。
English: At that time, eunuchs were hunted down and killed, but Nishikawa did not carry out the order of the imperial court, and was thus spared the disaster.

古文：家有北司治乱记八卷，备载阉官忠侫好恶，盖巷伯之流也，未必俱为邪僻。
现代文：他家里有北司治乱记八卷，详细记载了官员中的忠奸好恶之人，所以说太监那一类人，也未必都是奸邪怪僻的人。
English: His family had eight volumes of the "Beijing Diaries," which recorded in detail the likes and dislikes of loyal and traitorous officials, so people like the eunuch were not necessarily traitors and eccentrics.

古文：良由南班轻忌大过，以致怨怒，盖邦国不幸也。
现代文：良由南班二人轻率忌恨这是他的大过错，造成怨怒加深，都是国家的不幸啊。
English: It was his great fault that the two people in the south class thoughtlessly hated each other, which caused the resentment to deepen, and it was all the misfortune of the country.

古文：先是路岩自成都移镇渚宫，所乘马忽作人语，且曰： 芦荻花，此花开后路无家。 
现代文：这以前路岩从成都改镇渚宫，他乘坐的马忽然说了人话，说： 芦荻花，此花开路无家。 
English: Before this, Lu Yan had changed from Chengdu to the town of Nagisa Palace. The horse he was riding suddenly spoke human words, saying: Reed flower, this flower has no home.

古文：不久及祸。
现代文：不久便遭到灾祸。
English: Disaster soon struck.

古文：然畜类之语，岂有物凭之乎？
现代文：然而畜类的话，难道有什么凭证吗？
English: But in the case of animals, is there any evidence?

古文：石言于晋，殆斯比也。
现代文：石头可在晋说话，这也是一样的。
English: Stones can talk in Jin, and it's the same thing.

古文：成汭
现代文：成汭
English: Succeeded by

古文：荆州成汭，唐天复中准诏统军救援江夏，帅次公安县。
现代文：荆州的成汭，在唐朝天复年间皇帝下诏批准他统帅军队去救援江夏。他帅军到达公安县。
English: During the reign of Emperor Tianfu of the Tang Dynasty, Cheng Yao of Jing Province was authorized by the emperor to lead an army to rescue Jiangxia. He led the army to arrive at the public security county.

古文：寺有二金刚神，土人号曰二圣，颇有灵验。
现代文：寺中有二个金刚神，当地百姓称他们为二圣，很灵验。
English: There are two vajra deities in the temple, and the local people call them the two saints, which is very effective.

古文：舣舟而谒之，且以胜负为褥。汭兆皆不吉。
现代文：成汭停舟靠岸去拜谒二神，并且祷告希望此次出兵得胜而归，但求得的征兆都是不吉利的。
English: Chengyu stopped the boat to go ashore to worship the two gods, and prayed that this time the troops would return victorious, but the signs were not auspicious.

古文：汭惑之，孔目官杨师厚曰： 公业已行，安可疑阻？ 
现代文：成汭感到很疑惑。孔目官杨师厚说： 您已经来了，怎么能因疑而受阻碍呢？ 
English: Cheng Yao felt very doubtful. Yang Shihou, an official of the Confucius Institute, said: You have already come, how can you be hindered by doubt?

古文：于是不得已而进。
现代文：于是，在没有办法的情况下勉强进军了。
English: So, in the absence of a solution, they reluctantly marched in.

古文：竟有覆军之败，身死家亡，非偶然也。
现代文：最后还是全军覆没，自身死了家也灭亡了。这并不是偶然的事。
English: In the end, the whole army perished, and when he died, his family also perished. This was no accident.

古文：刘知俊
现代文：刘知俊
English: Liu Zhijun

古文：梁彭城王刘知俊镇同州日，因筑营墙，掘得一物，重八十余斤，状若油囊。
现代文：梁彭城王刘知俊镇守同州的时候，因为修筑营墙，挖出一件东西，重有八十多斤，形状很象装油的口袋。
English: When Liu Zhijun, the king of Liang Peng City, was guarding Tongzhou, because of the construction of the camp wall, he dug out a thing weighing more than eighty pounds, shaped like a bag of oil.

古文：召宾幕将校问之。
现代文：刘知俊就召集宾客幕僚和将校们问，哪个知道这种东西。
English: Liu Zhijun called together the guests, staff and officers, and asked which one knew this kind of thing.

古文：或曰地囊，或曰飞廉，或曰金神七杀。
现代文：有人说是地囊，有人说是天外飞来的廉石，有人说是金神的七杀袋。
English: Some say it's the earth's crust, some say it's a meteorite from outer space, some say it's the seven deadly bags of the golden god.

古文：独留源曰： 此是冤气所结也。古来囹圄之地或有焉，昔王充据洛阳。
现代文：只有留源说： 这是冤气凝结成的，自古以来作监狱的地方或许有这种东西。
English: Only Ruyuan said, "This is the result of a congealed sense of grievance. A place that has been used as a prison since ancient times might have something like this."

古文：修河南府狱，亦获此物，而远祖记之。
现代文：过去王充据守洛阳，修建河南府的监狱，也曾得到过这样的东西，我的太祖记得这件事。
English: In the past, Wang Chongzhu was stationed in Luoyang and built a prison in Henan Province. He also received something like this. My great-grandfather remembers this.

古文：乃冤死囚人，精爽入地，聚为此物。
现代文：这是含冤而死的囚犯，他们的冤魂不散进入地下，凝聚在一起变成这种东西。
English: These are prisoners who died unjustly, and their souls went underground and coalesced into this thing.

古文：经百千年，凝结不散。
现代文：经历百千多年，仍然凝结不散。
English: After more than a hundred thousand years, it is still frozen.

古文：源闻酒能忘忧，请奠以醇醪，或可消释耳。
现代文：我听说酒能使人忘掉忧愁，请用好酒来祭奠一下，或许可以使它解散消失。
English: I have heard that wine can make people forget sadness. Please use good wine to make a sacrifice, and perhaps it can dissolve and disappear.

古文：然此物之出，亦非吉征也。 
现代文：然而出现这种东西，也并不是吉祥的征兆。 
English: However, the appearance of such a thing is not an auspicious sign.

古文：知俊命具酒馔视酹，复瘗之。
现代文：知俊听说得有道理，就命人准备酒菜祝祷，并把酒洒在地上表示祭奠。
English: When Chijun heard that there was a reason, he ordered people to prepare food and wine to pray, and to sprinkle the wine on the ground to pay tribute.

古文：寻有扳城背主奔秦之事，乃验之矣。
现代文：以后又把那东西埋了。不久，就发生了攀城背主跑到秦国的事。这就是验证啊。
English: Later, they buried the thing. Soon, the incident of the scrambler running away to Qin happened. This is the proof.

古文：田頵
现代文：田頵
English: Tianluo

古文：宣州节度田頵，将作乱。
现代文：宣州节度使田頵，将要发动叛乱。
English: The Xuanzhou Festival will make Tian Xuan angry, and he will launch a rebellion.

古文：一日向暮，有鸟赤色，如雉而大，尾有火光，如散星之状，自外飞入，止戟门而不见。
现代文：一天傍晚，有一只红色的鸟，象雉鸡而比雉鸡大。鸟尾有火光，象无数零散的星星，从外面飞进来，落在兵器库门上就不见踪影了。
English: One evening, a red bird, like a pheasant and larger than a pheasant, with a tail of fire, like countless scattered stars, flew in from outside, landed on the armory door and disappeared.

古文：翌日，府中大火，曹局皆尽，唯甲兵存焉。頵资以起事，明年遂败。
现代文：第二天，田府里燃起大火，马匹武器等都烧光了，只有甲兵保存下来，田頵凭着这些铁甲兵发动叛乱，第二年就被打败了。
English: The next day, a fire broke out in Tianfu, horses, weapons, etc. were all burned, only the armored soldiers were preserved. Tian Yu used these armored soldiers to launch a rebellion, and was defeated the next year.

古文：桑维翰
现代文：桑维翰
English: Sandvicham

古文：魏公桑维翰，尹开封。
现代文：魏公桑维翰，任开封府尹。
English: Wei Gong Sang Weihan, appointed to open the Fufu Yin.

古文：一日，尝中夜于正寝独坐，忽大惊悸，如有所见，向空厉声云： 汝焉敢此来！ 
现代文：有一天，曾经在正房寝室里一个人坐着，突然间很惊慌恐惧的样子，好象看见了什么。他向空中大声喊： 你怎么敢到这里来？ 
English: One day, I was sitting alone in the master bedroom, and suddenly I was very panicked and frightened, as if I saw something. He shouted into the air: How dare you come here?

古文：如是者数四。旬日愤懑不已，虽齐体亦不敢有所发问。
现代文：象这样发生了多次，十多天内愤懑不停，即使是最亲近的人也不敢问他是怎么回事。
English: This happened several times, and for more than ten days there was so much anger that even those closest to him did not dare to ask what had happened to him.

古文：未几，梦己整衣冠。严车骑，将有所诣。就乘之次，忽所乘马亡去，追寻莫之所在。
现代文：不多时，他梦到自己穿好衣服，戴好帽子，车骑严整，好象将要到什么地方去，就上车坐上去，忽然间所乘车的马又不见了。到处寻找也不知在什么地方。
English: Not infrequently, he dreamed that he had dressed himself, put on his bonnets, and was riding in a carriage, as if he were going somewhere, when he got into the carriage and sat down, and suddenly the horse he was riding in disappeared again.

古文：既寤，甚恶之，不数日及难。
现代文：醒了以后，很讨厌这个梦。不到几天的时间就遭到灾祸。
English: When he woke up, he hated the dream. Within a few days, disaster struck.

古文：钟傅
现代文：钟傅
English: Zhong Fu

古文：南平王钟傅，在江西，有衙门吏孔知让，新治第。
现代文：南平王钟傅在江西。他的部下衙门吏有个叫孔知让的，新建了一座宅院。
English: Nanping Wang Zhongfu was in Jiangxi. One of his subordinates, a gatekeeper named Kong Chizhang, built a new mansion.

古文：昼有一星陨于庭中。
现代文：白天有一颗星坠落在庭院里。
English: During the day, a star fell in the courtyard.

古文：知让甚恶之，求典外戎，以空其地。岁余，御史中丞薛绍纬，贬官至豫章，傅取此地第以居之，遂卒于此。
现代文：一年多以后，御史中丞薛绍纬被贬官到豫章，钟傅就搬到孔知让新建的宅院住下来了。然后就死在这里。
English: More than a year later, the imperial historian Xue Shaowei was demoted to Yuzhang, and Zhong Fu moved to live in the newly built house of Kong Zhi Yuan. Then he died here.

古文：顿金
现代文：顿金
English: Tonkin

古文：袁州刺史顿金，罢郡还都。有人以紫袱包一物，诣门遗之。开视，则白烂衫也。
现代文：袁州刺史顿金，解除郡中职务回京城去，有人用紫包袱皮包一件东西，到了门前扔下，打开一看，原来是白色的烂衫。
English: Yuanzhou stabbed Stongjin, was relieved of his duties in the county and went back to Beijing. Someone used a purple luggage bag to throw something down in front of the door. When he opened it, it turned out to be a rotten white shirt.

古文：遽追其人，则亡矣。
现代文：马上就追那个人，已经不见了。
English: I immediately ran after the man and he was gone.

古文：其年金卒。
现代文：这一年顿金就死了。
English: That was the year that Donkin died.

古文：湖南马氏
现代文：湖南马氏
English: Hunan Ma family

古文：湖南武穆王巡边，回舟至洞庭宜春江口，暴风忽至，波如连山，乃见波中，恢诡谲怪，蛟螭出没，云雾昏蒙，有如武夫执戈戟者，有文吏具襕简者，有如捧盘盂者，或绯或绿，倏闪睢盱，莫知何物。
现代文：湖南武穆王巡视边境，回船行到洞庭湖宜春江口。忽然刮起暴风，波涛象相连的山峰，只见波涛中发出奸诈嘲笑的怪声，蛟龙鬼妖相继出没，云遮雾罩，天空昏濛一片，有的象武士拿刀持枪，有的象文官穿官衣抱着公文，还有的好象捧盘端盂。有红有绿。只一眨眼的工夫。
English: King Wu Mu of Hunan inspected the border and returned to the mouth of the Yichun River in Dongting Lake. Suddenly, a storm blew up. The waves were like connected peaks, and strange sounds of treachery and ridicule were heard in the waves. Dragons and demons appeared one after another. Clouds obscured the fog, and the sky was dark. Some were like warriors holding swords and guns, some were like civil servants wearing official clothes and holding official documents, and some were like holding plates and bowls. There were reds and greens. All in the blink of an eye.

古文：左右大骇，衣服器皿悉投之。
现代文：就变化了，不知道是什么东西。
English: It just changed, I don't know what it is.

古文：舟人欲以姬妾为请，王不听。
现代文：穆王左右的人都很害怕，把衣服器皿都投到江里，船上有人提议把姬妾也投到江里请求安定。武穆王没采纳。
English: The people around King Mu were very scared and threw all their clothes and utensils into the river. Someone on the boat proposed to throw his concubine into the river to ask for stability. King Mu did not accept.

古文：移时风定，仅获存焉。
现代文：过了些时候风停了，仅获得生存。
English: After a while, the wind died down, and all they could do was survive.

古文：后数年，武穆王薨于位。
现代文：以后过了几年，武穆王还在位时死了。
English: A few years later, King Wumu died while still on the throne.

古文：王慎辞
现代文：王慎辞
English: Wang Shengjie

古文：江南通事舍人王慎辞，有别墅在广陵城西，慎辞常与亲友游其上。
现代文：江南通事舍人王慎辞，在广陵城西有座别墅。慎辞经常同亲友在这里游玩。
English: Wang Shengjie, a well-known politician in the south of the Yangtze River, has a villa in the west of Guangling City. He often visits the villa with his relatives and friends.

古文：一日，忽自爱其冈阜之势，叹曰： 我死必葬于此。 
现代文：有一天，忽然看到并爱这隆起小冈的地势，就长叹说： 我死后一定要埋葬在这里。 
English: One day, he suddenly saw and fell in love with the shape of this small uplifted hill and said with a long sigh: I must be buried here when I die.

古文：是夜，村中间太吠。或起视之，见慎辞独骑徘徊于此。
现代文：当天晚上，村里听到狗叫，有人起来看，看见慎辞独自骑马在这里徘徊。
English: In the evening of the same day, the village heard a dog barking, someone got up to look, and saw Shenji wandering alone on horseback.

古文：逼之，遂不见。
现代文：走近去就看不见了。
English: You can't see it when you get close.

古文：自是夜夜恒至。
现代文：从这以后天天晚上都来。
English: From then on, he came every evening.

古文：月余，慎辞卒，竟葬其地。
现代文：一个多月以后，王慎辞就死了，终于埋葬在这里。
English: After more than a month, Wang Shenji died and was finally buried here.

古文：安守范
现代文：安守范
English: An Shoufan

古文：伪蜀彭州刺史安思谦，男守范，尝与宾客游天台禅院，作联句诗。
现代文：伪蜀的彭州刺史安思谦，儿子叫守范。曾同宾客到天台禅院游览。作一首五律诗。
English: An Si Qian, a pseudo-Shu poet from Pengzhou, whose son is named Shou Fan, once went on a tour of the Tiantai Zen Temple with guests. He composed a poem on the Five Precepts.

古文：守范云： 偶到天台院，因逢物外僧。 
现代文：守范说： 偶到天台院，因逢物外僧。 
English: The abbot said, "I occasionally go to Tendai-in, but I am a foreign monk.

古文：定戎军推官杨鼎夫云： 忘机同一祖，出语离三乘。 
现代文：定戎军推官杨鼎夫说： 忘机同一组，出语离三乘。 
English: Yang Dingfu, the commander of the Dingren Army, said: "If you forget the plane, you will be in the same group.

古文：前怀远军巡官周述云： 树老中庭寂，窗虚外境澄。 
现代文：前怀远军巡官周述说： 树老中庭寂，窗虚外境澄。 
English: Former Huaiyuan army inspector Zhou said: The old tree is silent in the courtyard, and the window is clear outside.

古文：前眉州判官李仁肇云： 片时松柏下，联续百千灯。 
现代文：前眉州判官李仁肇说： 片时松柏下，联续百千灯。 
English: Former Meizhou magistrate Li Renzhao said: Under the pine and cypress, a hundred thousand lights are connected.

古文：因记于僧壁而去。
现代文：三人吟完就记在僧院的墙上走了。
English: After the trio finished chanting, they walked along the wall of the monastery.

古文：翌日，有贫子乞食见之，朗言曰： 人道有初无尾，此则有尾无初。却后五年，首颔俱碎，洎不如尾句者。 
现代文：第二天，有个穷孩子讨饭见到墙上诗，大声说： 人们都说有开始没有结尾，这里却有结尾没有开始，往后五年，首颔两联全碎，反到不如尾句。 
English: The next day, a poor child begging for food saw the poem on the wall and said aloud: People say that there is a beginning without an end, but here there is an end without a beginning. In the next five years, the first two lines will be completely broken, but the last sentence will be better.

古文：抚掌大笑。院僧驱迩之。贫子走且告曰： 此后主人，不远千里，即欲到来。 
现代文：说完拍着手大笑，院里的僧人赶他走，那穷孩子边走边告诉僧人说： 这里以后的主人，不远千里，马上就要到来了。 
English: When he had said this, he clapped his hands and laughed loudly. The monks in the monastery chased him away. As the poor boy walked along, he told the monks: "The master who is coming from here is not a thousand miles away, but will be here soon."

古文：众以为狂，莫测其由。
现代文：众人都认为他发疯了，没有人猜测出有什么缘由。
English: Everyone thought he had gone mad, no one could figure out why.

古文：后数年，守范伏法，鼎夫暴亡，此首领俱碎之义。
现代文：后过了几年，守范被法办，鼎夫暴病身亡。这就是 首颔两联全碎 的意义。
English: A few years later, Shou Fan was prosecuted, and her husband died of a violent illness. This is the meaning of the complete breakup of the first couple.

古文：周与李，累授官资，此不如尾句之义也。
现代文：周述与李仁肇，多次升官。这就是 不如尾句 的意思。
English: Zhou Du and Li Renzhao were promoted many times. This is the meaning of "not as good as the last sentence."

古文：相承住持者，来自兴元，则主不远千里也。
现代文：寺院的住持不久也死了，继承住持的来自兴元。这就是 不远千里也 的含义。
English: The abbot of the temple also died soon after, and the successor of the abbot came from Xingyuan. This is the meaning of "not far away."

古文：贫子之说，一无谬焉。
现代文：穷孩子的说法，没有一点错误。
English: There's nothing wrong with saying poor kid.

