古文：◎世祖十二二十五年春正月，日烜复走入海，镇南王以诸军追之，不及，引兵还交趾城。
现代文：至元二十五年春，正月，陈日火亘再次逃入海中，镇南王派军队追赶他，没有追上，率军返回交趾城。
English: In the first month of the spring of the 25th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Chen Ronghuang once again fled into the sea. The King of Zhenan sent an army to chase him, but they did not catch him, and he led the army back to Jiaozuo.

古文：命乌马儿将水兵迎张文虎等粮船，又发兵攻其诸寨，破之。
现代文：命令乌马儿率领水军迎接张文虎等人的粮船，又派兵进攻安南各堡寨，攻破了它们。
English: He ordered Umar to lead the navy to meet the grain ships of Zhang Wenhu and others, and sent troops to attack Annan's fortresses and break them.

古文：己丑，诏江淮省管内并听忙兀带节制。
现代文：初四，诏令江淮行省辖区内均听从忙兀带的节制。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Jianghuai issued an edict that the provinces and regions under the jurisdiction of Jianghuai should follow the rules of moderation.

古文：庚寅，祭日于司天台。
现代文：初五，在司天台祭祀太阳。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the sun is worshipped on the main platform.

古文：赐诸王火你赤银五百两、珠一索、锦衣一袭，玉都银千两、珠一索、锦衣一袭。
现代文：赐予诸侯王火你赤白银五百两、珍珠一串、锦衣一件，赐予玉都白银一千两、珍珠一串、锦衣一件。
English: I bestow upon you, vassal king Tu, five hundred taels of silver, a string of pearls, and a piece of brocade. I bestow upon you a thousand taels of silver, a string of pearls, and a piece of brocade.

古文：辛卯，尚书省臣言： 初以行省置丞相与内省无别，罢之。
现代文：初六，尚书省大臣上奏说 ：当初在行中书省设置丞相，和中书省没有区别，将其撤销。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the Minister of the Ministry of Education and Culture delivered a report, saying: At first, there was no difference between the Minister of Education and Culture and the Ministry of Education and Culture, and it was revoked.

古文：今江淮平章政事忙兀带所统，地广事繁，乞依前为丞相。 
现代文：现在江淮行省平章政事忙兀带所统辖的地方，地域辽阔，事情繁杂，请求让他依旧担任丞相。 
English: At present, the area under the jurisdiction of Jianghuaihang Province Pingzhang Political Affairs Busy Belt is vast and complicated, and it is requested that he still serve as the prime minister.

古文：诏以忙兀带为右丞相。
现代文：下诏任命忙兀带担任行省左丞相。
English: The following edict appointed him to serve as acting provincial minister of the left.

古文：以蕲、黄二州、寿昌军隶湖广省。
现代文：把蕲州、黄州两州和寿昌军隶属于湖广行省。
English: The two states of Luzhou and Huangzhou and the Shouchang Army were subordinated to Hubei Province.

古文：毁中统钞板。
现代文：毁掉中统交钞的印版。
English: Destroy the printing plate of the Zhongtongzheng banknote.

古文：乙未，赏征东功：从乘舆，将吏升散官二阶，军士钞人三锭；从皇孙，将吏升散官一阶，军士钞人二锭；死者给其家十锭。凡为钞四万一千四百二十五锭。
现代文：初十，赏赐征东的功劳：跟随皇帝的，将吏升迁散官二级，军士每人赏钱钞二锭；死于王事的，赐给其家属钱钞十锭，一共用去钱钞四万一千四百二十五锭。
English: On the tenth day of the first lunar month, the merits of the Eastern Expedition were awarded: those who followed the emperor, promoted officials, and dismissed officials of the second level, and military officers were each awarded two money banknotes; those who died in the service of the king were awarded ten money banknotes to their families, with a total of forty-one thousand four hundred and twenty-five money banknotes.

古文：丁酉，遣使代祀岳渎、东海、后土。
现代文：十二日，派遣使臣代表皇帝祭祀五大山、四大水、东海、后土大神。
English: On the 12th, envoys were dispatched on behalf of the emperor to offer sacrifices to the Five Great Mountains, the Four Great Waters, the East Sea, and the Great Gods of the East.

古文：戊戌，大赦。
现代文：十三日，大赦天下。
English: On the 23rd, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：敕弛辽阳渔猎之禁，惟毋杀孕兽。
现代文：敕令放宽辽阳对于捕鱼、狩猎的禁令，只是不准杀害怀孕的野兽。
English: The edict relaxes Liaoyang's ban on fishing and hunting, but does not allow the killing of pregnant animals.

古文：壬寅，高丽遣使来贡方物。
现代文：十七日，高丽派遣使臣来进贡地方特产。
English: On the 17th, Korea sent envoys to collect tribute from local special products.

古文：贺州贼七百余人焚掠封州诸郡，循州贼万余人掠梅州。
现代文：贺州贼寇七百多人焚烧、抢劫封州各郡县。循州贼寇一万多人劫掠海州。
English: More than 700 Hezhou bandits burned and looted counties and counties in Fuzhou, and more than 10,000 Xuzhou bandits looted Haizhou.

古文：癸卯，海都犯边。
现代文：十八日，海都进犯边境。
English: On the 18th, Haidu invaded the border.

古文：敕驸马昌吉，诸王也只烈，察乞儿、合丹两千户，皆发兵从诸王术伯北征。
现代文：敕命驸马吉昌、诸侯王也只烈，以及察乞儿、合丹两名千户，均发兵随从诸侯王术伯北征。
English: Majichang, the warlord, was the only one to die, and two thousand households, Chagyer and Hattan, all sent troops to follow the warlord, Shubo, on his northern expedition.

古文：赐诸王亦怜真部曲钞三万锭。
现代文：赐给诸侯王亦怜真的部属三万锭钱钞。
English: He gave 30,000 baht in banknotes to the vassals of the vassal lord Wang Yiren.

古文：掌吉举兵叛，诸王拜答罕遣将追之，至八立浑，不及而还。
现代文：掌吉起兵叛乱，诸侯王拜答罕派遣部将追赶他，追到八立浑，没有追上而返回。
English: When Shokichi raised an army to rebel, the dispatching department of the vassal king Baidakhan chased him to Hachilihun, but did not catch up with him and returned.

古文：甲辰，也速不花谋叛，逮捕至京师，诛之。
现代文：十九日，也速不花图谋叛乱，将其逮捕到京师处死。
English: On the 19th day of the month, he also hastily plotted a rebellion and was arrested and sent to the capital to be executed.

古文：乙巳，太阴犯角。
现代文：二十日，太阴星干犯角宿天区。
English: On the 20th day, the great yin and yang of the planets collided in the sky.

古文：蛮洞十八族饥饿，死者二百余人，以钞千五百锭有奇市米赈之。
现代文：蛮洞十八个部族发生饥馑，饿死二百多人，用一千五百多锭钱钞买米粮赈济他们。
English: There was a famine in the eighteen tribes in Barbar Cave, and more than two hundred people starved to death. More than fifteen hundred baht was used to buy rice to feed them.

古文：丙午，畋于近郊。
现代文：二十一日，皇帝在京师的近郊狩猎。
English: On the 21st, the emperor went hunting in the suburbs of Beijing.

古文：以平江盐兵屯田于淮东、西。
现代文：派平江盐户组成的军队在淮东、淮西屯田。
English: An army composed of Pingjiang salt farmers was sent to Donghuai and Xixi Tunden.

古文：杭、苏二州连岁大水，赈其尤贫者。
现代文：杭州、苏州二州连年发生大水，赈济那些特别贫困的百姓。
English: In Hangzhou and Suzhou, floods have occurred year after year to help the extremely poor people.

古文：戊申，太阴犯房。
现代文：二十三日，太阴星干犯房宿天区。
English: On the 23rd, the great Yin star committed the crime of lodging in the heavenly quarter.

古文：己酉，诏中兴、西凉无得沮坏河渠，两淮、两浙无得沮坏岁课。
现代文：二十四日，下诏令中兴、西凉不得堵塞、破坏河道，两淮、两浙不得妨碍、破坏每年的赋税。
English: On the 24th, it was decreed that Zhongxing and Xiliang should not block or damage the river, and the two Huaihe and two Zhejiang should not interfere with or damage the annual tax.

古文：发海运米十万石，赈辽阳省军民之饥者。
现代文：发放十万石海运的米粮赈济辽阳行省遭到饥馑的军民。
English: Issued 100,000 koku of rice grain shipped by sea to help starving soldiers and civilians in Liaoyang Province.

古文：辛亥，省器盒局入诸路金玉人匠总管府。
现代文：二十六日，裁撤器盒局，并入诸路金玉人匠总管府。
English: On the 26th, the Abolition Box Bureau was merged into the ZhuLu JinYuRenCraftsman General Administration Office.

古文：癸丑，诏： 行大司农司、各道劝农屯田司，巡行劝课，举察勤惰，岁具府、州、县劝农官实迹，以为殿最，路经历官、县尹以下并听裁决。
现代文：二十八日，诏令： 行大司农司、各道劝农营田司，巡视各地以劝勉课税，举荐勤劳并监督懒惰的人，每年列具各府、州、县劝农官的举措实绩，以考核其治绩的好坏。各路的经历官、县尹以下的官员均听从他们的裁决。
English: On the 28th, he issued the following edict: to set up a director-general of the Department of Agriculture and a director-general of the Department of Farming and Farming in each province, to visit various regions to encourage taxation, to recommend hard-working people and supervise lazy people, and to list the measures and achievements of agricultural officials in each province, prefecture and county every year to assess their performance. Experienced officials in all regions and officials below the county level obey their rulings.

古文：或怙势作威侵官害农者，从提刑按察司究治。 
现代文：有人仗势作威作福侵夺官府扰害农耕的，由提刑按察司追究惩治。 
English: If anyone abuses the power of the government to interfere with farming, he or she shall be investigated and punished by the procuratorate.

古文：募民能耕江南旷土及公田者，免其差役三年，其输租免三分之一。
现代文：招募能够耕种江南的荒地以及官府公田的百姓，免征他们三年差役，其交纳的租税免除三分之一。
English: Recruit people who can cultivate wasteland in the south of the Yangtze River and government-owned fields, exempt them from three years of forced labor, and exempt one-third of the taxes they pay.

古文：江淮行省言： 两淮土旷民寡，兼并之家皆不输税。
现代文：江淮行省上奏说 ：两淮土地开阔，人口稀少，兼并土地的民户都不交纳赋税。
English: Jianghuai-Hangzhou Province said in its report: the land of Jianghuai-Hangzhou is vast, the population is sparse, and the private households that have annexed land do not pay taxes.

古文：又，管内七十余城，止屯田两所，宜增置淮东、西两道劝农营田司，督使耕之。 
现代文：又，辖区内七十多座城市，屯田的地方只有两处，应当增设淮东、淮西两道劝农营田司，督使百姓耕种。 
English: In addition, there are more than 70 cities in the jurisdiction area, but only two places where there are farmlands. It is necessary to add two provinces, East Huai and West Huai, to persuade the farmland department to supervise the farming of the people.

古文：制曰： 可。 
现代文：皇帝裁决说 ：可以。 
English: The Emperor's order said: Let's play.

古文：二月丁巳，改济州漕运司为都漕运司，并领济之南北漕，京畿都漕运司惟治京畿。
现代文：二月初二，把济州漕运司改为都漕运司，兼管济州南北的漕运。京畿都漕运司只辖治京畿地区。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, the Jeju Rowing Transport Division was changed to the Metropolitan Rowing Transport Division, which is also in charge of the north-south rowing transport in Jeju. The Gyeonggi Metropolitan Rowing Transport Division only governs the Gyeonggi region.

古文：镇南王引兵还万劫。
现代文：镇南王领兵追回万劫。
English: Zhenan Wang led the soldiers to recover the disaster.

古文：乌马儿迎张文虎等粮船不至，诸将以粮尽师老，宜全师而还，镇南王从之。
现代文：乌马儿等待张文虎等人的运粮船没有等到，诸将认为口粮完了，军队疲惫，应当保全军队回去，镇南王依从了他们。
English: Umar did not wait for Zhang Wenhu's and other people's grain transport ship to leave, and the generals thought that the rations were over, the army was tired, and the army should be kept back. Zhenan Wang obeyed them.

古文：戊午，命李庭整汉兵五千东征。
现代文：初三，命令李庭整治五千名汉军东征。
English: On the third day of the first month, Li Ting ordered the rectification of five thousand Chinese troops marching eastward.

古文：赐叶李平江、嘉兴田四顷。
现代文：赐给叶李平江、嘉兴的田四顷。
English: He gave Ye Li Pingjiang and Jia Xing four hectares of farmland.

古文：庚申，司徒撒里蛮等进读《祖宗实录》，帝曰： 太宗事则然，睿宗少有可易者，定宗固日不暇给，宪宗汝独不能忆之耶？
现代文：初五，司徒撒里蛮等进献《祖宗实录》，皇帝说 ：太宗的事迹倒是这样，睿宗有些稍微可以修改的，定宗固然是事情多，时间少，宪宗难道你不能回忆么？
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the Emperor said, "The deeds of Emperor Taizong are as follows. The deeds of Emperor Ruizong can be slightly modified. The deeds of Emperor Dingzong are many and the time is short. Can you not recall the deeds of Emperor Jianzong?"

古文：犹当询诸知者。 
现代文：还应当询问那些知道的人。 
English: Questions should also be asked of those in the know.

古文：征大都南诸路所放扈从马赴京，官给刍粟价，令自籴之，无扰诸县民。
现代文：征收大都以南各路所放牧的侍卫军马匹前来京师，由官府付给粮草钱，令他们自己购买粮草，不得扰害各县的百姓。
English: The horses of the guards, which had been grazing on the roads south of the capital, were requisitioned and brought to Beijing for training, and the government paid them grain and grass money so that they could buy their own grain and grass and not disturb the people in the counties.

古文：辽阳、武平等处饥，除今年租税及岁课貂皮。
现代文：辽阳、武平等处发生饥馑，免除今年的租税以及每年交纳的貂皮。
English: Liaoyang and Wuxi have been exempted from this year's tax and the annual payment of bran.

古文：浚沧州盐运渠。
现代文：疏浚沧州运盐的河道。
English: Dredging the river channel for transporting salt in Cangzhou.

古文：辛酉，忙兀带、忽都忽言其军三年荐饥，赐米五百石。
现代文：初六，忙兀带、忽都忽上奏说他们的军队连续三年发生饥馑，赐给五百石米。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, he hurriedly and suddenly reported that their army had suffered from famine for three consecutive years and was given five hundred koku of rice.

古文：壬戌，省辽东海西道提刑按察司入北京，江南湖北道提刑按察司入荆南。
现代文：初七，裁撤辽东海西道提刑按察司并入北京，江南湖北道提刑按察司并入荆南。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the Criminal Investigation Department of Liaodonghai West Road was abolished and merged into Beijing, and the Criminal Investigation Department of Jiangnan Hubei Road was merged into Jingnan.

古文：敕江淮勿捕天鹅，弛鱼泺禁。
现代文：敕令江淮不要捕捉天鹅。放宽对于鱼泊的禁令。
English: Jianghuai was ordered not to catch swans. The ban on fish camping was relaxed.

古文：丙寅，赐云南王涂金驼钮印。
现代文：十一日，赐给云南王涂金带骆驼钮的印信。
English: On the 11th day, the king of Yunnan was given a seal with a gold-painted camel with a camel button.

古文：改南京路为汴梁路，北京路为武平路，西京路为大同路，东京路为辽阳路，中兴路为宁夏府路。
现代文：把南京路改为汴梁路，北京路改为武平路，西京路改为大同路，东京路改为辽阳路，中兴路改为宁夏府路。
English: Nanjing Road will be changed to Qilian Road, Beijing Road will be changed to Wuping Road, Xijing Road will be changed to Datong Road, Tokyo Road will be changed to Liaoyang Road, and Zhongxing Road will be changed to Ningxiafu Road.

古文：改江西茶运司为都转运使司，并榷酒醋税。
现代文：把江西茶运司改为都转运司，合并酒醋专卖的赋税。
English: The Jiangxi Tea Transportation Division was changed to the Metropolitan Transportation Division, and the taxes on the exclusive sale of wine vinegar were merged.

古文：改河渠提举司为转运司。
现代文：把河渠提举司改为转运司。
English: Change the name of the Department of Canal Elevation to the Department of Transportation.

古文：江淮总摄杨琏真加言以宋宫室为塔一，为寺五，已成，诏以水陆地百五十顷养之。
现代文：江淮总管杨琏真加上奏说 ：把亡宋的宫室改建成佛塔一座，寺庙五座，已经完成。 下诏令以一百五十顷水面和陆地奉养他们。
English: Yang Yuzhen, the general manager of the Jianghuai River, added: "The transformation of the imperial palace of the late Song Dynasty into a pagoda and five temples has been completed, and a decree was issued to support them with 150 hectares of water and land.

古文：诏征葛洪山隐士刘彦深。
现代文：下诏征召葛洪山的隐士刘彦深。
English: Liu Yanshen, a hermit from Mount Ge Hong, was summoned by imperial edict.

古文：甲戌，盖州旱，民饥，蠲其租四千七百石。
现代文：十九日，盖州发生旱灾，百姓饥馑，免除他们的租粮四千七百石。
English: On the 19th, drought occurred in Gezhou, the people were starving, and they were exempted from renting 4,700 koku of grain.

古文：己卯，以高丽国王王睶复为征东行尚书省左丞相。
现代文：二十四日，任命高丽国王王贝春再次担任征东行尚书省左丞相。
English: On the 24th, King Baechun of Goryeo was reappointed as the Minister of the Left for the Eastern Expedition.

古文：豪、懿州饥，以米十五万石赈之。
现代文：豪州、懿州发生饥荒，以十五万石米赈济该地区。
English: Famine occurred in Australia and Luzhou, and 150,000 koku of rice was used to help the region.

古文：禁辽阳酒。
现代文：禁止辽阳酿酒。
English: Prohibition of Liaoyang brewing.

古文：京师水，发官米，下其价粜贫民。
现代文：京师发生水灾，发放官米，降低价格卖给贫苦百姓。
English: When floods occurred in Beijing, government rice was distributed and sold at a reduced price to poor people.

古文：以江南站户贫富不均，命有司料简，合户税至七十石当马一匹，并免杂徭；独户税逾七十石愿入站者听。
现代文：因为江南的站户贫富不均，命官府进行甄别，合户税达到七十石抵马一匹，并免征杂役；独户税超过七十石愿意入驿站的听便。
English: Because the station households in the south of the Yangtze River are unevenly rich and poor, the government ordered the government to carry out the screening. The combined household tax reached 70 koku per horse, and the miscellaneous service was exempted. The single household tax exceeded 70 koku, and they were willing to enter the station at their convenience.

古文：合户税不得过十户，独户税无上百石。
现代文：合户税不得超过十户，独户税不能达到一百石。
English: The consolidated tax shall not exceed ten households, and the single-household tax shall not exceed one hundred koku.

古文：辛巳，以杭州西湖为放生池。
现代文：二十六日，把杭州西湖作为放生池。
English: On the 26th, Hangzhou West Lake was used as a release pool.

古文：壬午，镇南王命乌马儿、樊楫将水兵先还，程鹏飞、塔出将兵护送之。
现代文：二十七日，镇南王命令乌马儿、樊楫率领水军率先返回，程鹏飞、塔出率军护送他们。
English: On the 27th, the king of Zhenan ordered Umar and Zhai to lead the navy to return first, and Cheng Pengfei and Ta led the army to escort them.

古文：以御史台监察御史、提刑按察司多不举职，降诏申饬之。
现代文：因为御史台监察御史、提刑按察司大多不履行职责，皇帝下诏对他们申斥警告。
English: Because most of the inspectors of the Imperial Historical Records Office and the Criminal Law and Investigation Department did not perform their duties, the emperor issued a reprimand warning to them.

古文：命皇孙云南王也先铁木儿帅兵镇大理等处。
现代文：命令皇孙云南王也先铁木儿率兵镇守大理等地。
English: He ordered the grandson of the king of Yunnan, Tiemu Er, to lead soldiers to defend Dali and other places.

古文：三月丙戌，诸王昌童部曲饥，给粮三月。
现代文：三月初二，诸侯王昌童的部属发生饥馑，供给他三个月粮食。
English: On the second day of March, Prince Wang Changdong's subordinates were starving, and he was provided with three months of grain.

古文：丁亥，荧惑犯太微东垣上相。
现代文：初三，荧惑星干犯太微东垣上相星。
English: On the third day of the first month, the fluorescent planet interfered with the too-faint East Wall phase star.

古文：戊子，太阴犯毕。
现代文：初四，太阴星干犯毕宿天区。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the school year, the criminal was punished by the Great Yin Star.

古文：车驾还宫。
现代文：皇上的车驾返回皇宫。
English: The Emperor's car drove back to the Imperial Palace.

古文：淞江民曹梦炎愿岁以米万石输官，乞免他徭，且求官职。
现代文：淞江百姓曹梦炎愿意每年向官府交纳一万石米，请求免除其他的徭役，而且求取官职。
English: Cao Mengyan, a citizen of Minjiang, is willing to pay 10,000 koku of rice to the government every year, request to be exempted from other labor service, and seek a government post.

古文：桑哥以为请，遥授浙东道宣慰副使。
现代文：桑哥以此向皇帝请求，皇帝遥授曹梦炎为浙东道宣慰副使。
English: Sango asked the emperor for this, and the emperor gave Cao Mengyan as the vice-envoy of the Zhejiang host.

古文：改曲靖路总管府为宣抚司。
现代文：把曲靖路总管府改为宣抚司。
English: To change the General Administration Office of Qujing Road to the Publicity Department.

古文：庚寅，大驾幸上都。
现代文：初六，圣驾临幸上都。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the new year, the saint arrived in the capital.

古文：改阑遗所为阑遗监，升正四品。
现代文：把阑遗所改为阑遗监，秩禄升格为正四品。
English: His posthumous name was changed to 遗监 (遗监), and his rank was raised to Shoshihon (正四品).

古文：敕辽阳省亦乞列思、吾鲁兀、札剌儿探马赤自懿州东征。
现代文：敕命辽阳行省的亦乞列思、吾鲁兀、札剌儿率领探马赤军从懿州出发东征。
English: In order to save Liaoyang Province, Yijie Lisi, Wu Luqi, and Zha Jun'er led the Red Army from Zhangzhou to the east.

古文：李庭遥授尚书左丞，食其禄，将汉兵以行。
现代文：李庭被遥授为尚书省左丞，享受其秩禄，率领汉军出征。
English: Li Ting was awarded the title of Shangshu Zojo from afar, enjoyed his rank and led the Chinese army to go to war.

古文：江淮行省忙兀带言： 宜除军官更调法，死事者增散官，病故者降一等。 
现代文：江淮行省忙兀带上奏说 ：应该制定军官更调法，死于国事的追赠散官，病故的降一级追赠。 
English: Jianghuai Provincial Government issued a report saying: It is necessary to formulate a higher promotion method for officers, and the posthumous promotion of officers who die of national affairs, and the posthumous promotion of those who die of illness.

古文：帝曰： 父兄虽死事，子弟不胜任者，安可用之？
现代文：皇帝说： 父兄虽然死于国事，如果子弟不能够胜任，又怎么可以任用呢？
English: The emperor said: Although the father and brother died in the service of the state, if the younger son is not competent, how can he be appointed?

古文：苟贤矣，则病故者亦不可降也。 
现代文：假使是贤者，即使病故的也不可以降级。 
English: Even if he is a wise man, he cannot be demoted even if he dies of illness.

古文：辛卯，以六卫汉兵千二百、新附军四百、屯田兵四百造尚书省。
现代文：初七，派六卫汉军士卒一千二百人、新附军士卒四百人、屯田的士兵四百人建造尚书省衙署。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, 1,200 soldiers from the Sixth Division of the Han Dynasty, 400 soldiers from the Second Division of the Han Dynasty, and 400 soldiers from Tonden were dispatched to build the Shaoshu County Government Office.

古文：镇南王以诸军还。
现代文：镇南王率领诸军返回。
English: Zhenan Wang led the troops back.

古文：张文虎粮船遇贼兵船三十艘，文虎击之，所杀略相当。
现代文：张文虎的粮船遇见贼寇的兵船三十艘，张文虎攻击贼军，所杀贼兵与自己阵亡的士兵大体上相当。
English: Zhang Wenhu's grain ship encountered thirty warships of the robber bandits, Zhang Wenhu attacked the robber army, and the robber soldiers killed were roughly equivalent to his own soldiers killed in battle.

古文：费拱辰、徐庆以风不得进，皆至琼州。
现代文：费拱辰、徐庆因为风大不能前进，都去了琼州。
English: Fei Gongchen and Xu Qing both went to Qiongzhou because they could not move forward due to the strong wind.

古文：凡亡士卒二百二十人、船十一艘、粮万四千三百石有奇。
现代文：一共损失士卒二百二十人，船十一艘，粮食一万四千三百石有余。
English: A total of 220 soldiers and sailors were lost, as well as 11 ships and more than 14,300 koku of grain.

古文：癸巳，赐诸王术伯银五万两、币帛各一万匹，兀鲁台、爪忽儿银五千两、币帛各一百。
现代文：初九，赐给诸侯王术伯白银五万两、绢帛各一万匹，兀鲁台、爪忽儿白银五千两、绢帛各一百匹。
English: On the ninth day of the first lunar month, the princes were given fifty thousand taels of silver for Shubo and ten thousand taels of silver for each of them, and five thousand taels of silver for Peludai and five thousand taels of silver for Nagakure, and one hundred taels of silver for each of them.

古文：甲午，禁捕鹿羔。
现代文：初十，禁止捕捉幼鹿。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the capture of young deer is prohibited.

古文：镇南王次内傍关，贼兵大集以遏归师，镇南王遂由单巳县趣盝州，间道以出。
现代文：镇南王屯驻在内傍关，贼军大规模集结以阻遏返回的王师，镇南王便由单已县前往衊州，从小路出关。
English: The king of the south of the town was stationed in the inner side of the pass, and the thief army massed to stop the returning king. The king of the south of the town then went from Shanhe County to Luzhou, and went out of the pass by a small road.

古文：乙未，以往岁北边大风雪，拔突古伦所部牛马多死，赐米千石。
现代文：十一日，因为去年北边大风雪，勇士古伦所部的牛马大多死亡，赐予粮米一千石。
English: On the 11th day, because of the blizzard in the north last year, most of the cattle and horses belonging to the warrior Gulen died, and he was given a thousand kilos of grain and rice.

古文：丁酉，驻跸野狐岭，命阿束、塔不带总京师城守诸军。
现代文：十三日，皇帝驻跸在野狐岭，命令阿束、塔不带统管京师城防各军。
English: On the thirteenth day, the emperor stationed his troops in Yuxiling and ordered Azuka and Taizu to take charge of the troops of the Beijing division of the city defense.

古文：己亥，太阴掩角。
现代文：十五日，太阴星掩蔽角宿。
English: On the 15th, a very cloudy star occluded Kakunodate.

古文：壬寅，礼部言： 会同馆蕃夷使者时至，宜令有司仿古《职贡图》，绘而为图，及询其风俗、土产、去国里程，籍而录之，实一代之盛事。 
现代文：十八日，礼部上奏说： 会同馆藩夷国家的使节有时来到，应该令有关府衙仿效古代的《职贡图》，画成图画，并询问他们的风俗、土产、距离京师的路程，记录到册籍中，这实在是一代的盛事。 
English: On the 18th, the head of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies said, "When envoys from various countries come to the same hall, the relevant prefectures and counties should be ordered to imitate the ancient "Duty and Tribute Map," draw pictures, and inquire about their customs, local products, and distance from Beijing, and record them in the register. This is truly a great event for a generation."

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：镇南王次思明州，命爱鲁引兵还云南，奥鲁赤以诸军北还。
现代文：镇南王屯驻在思明州，命爱鲁率军返回云南，奥鲁赤领兵返回北边。
English: Zhennan Wang Tun stationed in Siming Prefecture, ordered Ai Lu to lead the army back to Yunnan, and Olu Red led the army back to the north.

古文：日烜遣使来谢，进金人代己罪。
现代文：陈日火亘派遣使臣前来谢罪，进献金人以代替自己请罪。
English: Chen Riguowo sent an envoy to apologize, and a donor came to apologize on his behalf.

古文：乙巳，诏江西管内并听行尚书省节制。
现代文：二十一日，诏令江西辖区内均听从行尚书省节制。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Jiangxi Province issued an edict ordering all areas under its jurisdiction to abide by the provincial book control.

古文：戊申，改山东转运使司为都转运使司，兼济南路酒税醋课。
现代文：二十四日，把山东转运使司改为都转运使司，兼管济南路酒税和醋税。
English: On the 24th, the Shandong transshipment envoy department was changed to the capital transshipment envoy department, and it was also in charge of Jinan Road wine tax and vinegar tax.

古文：己酉，徐、邳屯田及灵壁、睢宁二屯雨雹如鸡卵，害麦。
现代文：二十五日，徐州、邳州屯田以及灵壁、睢宁二处屯田降下的雨雹如鸡卵大，伤害麦子。
English: On the 25th, the raindrops that fell on the Xuzhou and Zhangzhou townships, as well as Lingbi and Huning two townships, were as big as chicken eggs, damaging the wheat.

古文：甲寅，循州贼万余人寇漳浦，泉州贼二千人寇长泰、汀、赣，畲贼千余人寇龙溪，皆讨平之。
现代文：三十日，循州贼寇一万多人进犯漳浦，泉州贼寇二千人进犯长泰、汀州、赣州，畲族贼寇一千多人进犯龙溪，全部将他们讨平。
English: On the 30th, more than 10,000 Xuzhou bandits invaded Zhangpu, 2,000 Quanzhou bandits invaded Changtai, Tingzhou and Zhangzhou, and more than 1,000 Qiang bandits invaded Longxi, all of which were leveled.

古文：夏四月丙辰，莱县、蒲台旱饥，出米下其直赈之。
现代文：夏季，四月初二，莱县、蒲台发生旱灾、饥馑，调出粮米降低价钱赈济他们。
English: In the summer, on the second day of April, droughts and famines occurred in Lai County and Putai, and grain and rice were brought out to reduce prices to help them.

古文：戊午，太阴犯井。
现代文：初四，太阴星干犯井宿天区。
English: On the 4th day of the first month, the star of the sun is too gloomy to commit a crime.

古文：庚申，以武冈、宝庆二路荐经寇乱，免今年酒税课及前岁逋租。
现代文：初六，因为武冈、宝庆二路连续遭受贼寇的祸乱，免征今年的酒税和前年拖欠未交的租赋。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, because the second roads of Wookang and Baoqing were continuously plagued by bandits, this year's liquor tax and the rent arrears of the previous year were exempted.

古文：辛酉，从行泉府司沙不丁、乌马儿请，置镇抚司、海船千户所、市舶提举司。
现代文：初七，按照行泉府司的沙不丁、乌马儿的请求，设置镇抚司、海船千户所、市舶提举司。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, in accordance with the request of Sha Beding and Umar, the governors of Xingquan Prefecture, the Zhen Fuzhi, the Shipyard of a Thousand Households, and the Shipyard of the City were set up.

古文：省平阳投下总管府入平阳路，杂造提举司入杂造总管府。
现代文：裁撤平阳投下总管府，合并平阳路；裁撤杂造提举司，合并入杂造总管府。
English: The General Administration Office of Pingyang Casting was abolished and merged with Pingyang Road; the General Administration Office of Handicrafts was abolished and merged with the General Administration Office of Handicrafts.

古文：桑哥言： 自至元丙子置应昌和籴所，其间必多盗诈，宜加钩考。
现代文：桑哥上奏说： 自从至元丙子年设置应昌和籴所，其中必定会有许多偷盗诈伪的事，应当加以调查考核。
English: Sango said: Since the establishment of the Yingchang Reconciliation Center in the year of Yuan Cixi, there are bound to be many cases of theft and fraud, which should be investigated and evaluated.

古文：扈从之臣，种地极多，宜依军站例，除四顷之外，验亩征租。 
现代文：随侍皇上的官员，占有的土地极多，应当依照军队驿站的成例，除四顷以内的之外，其余的都查实田亩的数量征收租赋。 
English: The officials who accompany the emperor occupy a great deal of land, and they should follow the example of the military post, except for those within four hectares, the rest should check the number of mu and collect rent.

古文：并从之。
现代文：皇帝全部允从。
English: The late emperor agreed.

古文：癸亥，浑河决，发军筑堤捍之。
现代文：初九，浑河决口，派军队筑堤以保卫河防。
English: At the beginning of the 9th month, at the mouth of the Hun River, the army was sent to build a dike to protect the river.

古文：乙丑，广东贼董贤举等七人皆称大老，聚众反，剽掠吉、赣、瑞、抚、龙兴、南安、韶、雄、汀诸郡，连岁击之不能平，江西行枢密院副使月的米失请益兵，江西行省平章忽都铁木儿亦以地广兵寡为言，诏江淮省分万户一军诣江西，俟贼平还翼。
现代文：十一日，广东贼寇董贤举等七人都自称 大老 ，聚众造反，劫掠吉州、赣州、瑞州、抚州、龙兴、南安、韶州、雄州、汀州诸郡，连年打击他们都不能平定，江西行枢密院副使月的迷失请求增派军队，江西行省平章忽都铁木儿也以地广兵少为理由要求增兵，诏令江淮行省分遣万户率领一支军队前往江西，待贼寇平定之后再回归本营。
English: On the 11th day of the month, seven people including the Guangdong thief and robber, Dong Xianju, all claimed to be the elders, gathered a crowd to rebel, and looted the counties of Jizhou, Zhangzhou, Ruizhou, Fuzhou, Longxing, Nan'an, Zhangzhou, Xiongzhou, and Tingzhou. They could not be subdued after years of attacks. The deputy envoy of the Privy Council to Jiangxi Province, Zhu Yue, requested to send more troops. The governor of Jiangxi Province, Pingzhang, also requested to increase the number of troops on the grounds that there were few soldiers in the area. He ordered

古文：戊辰，浚怯烈河以溉口温脑儿黄土山民田。
现代文：十四日，疏浚怯烈河以灌溉口温脑儿黄土山的民田。
English: On the 14th, people's fields in the Loess Mountains were dredged from the Qiu Lie River and irrigated.

古文：庚午，立弘吉剌站。
现代文：十六日，设立弘吉剌驿站。
English: On the 16th, the Hongji Railway Station was established.

古文：癸酉，尚书省臣言： 近以江淮饥，命行省赈之，吏与富民因结为奸，多不及于贫者。
现代文：十九日，尚书省大臣上奏说： 近来因为江淮饥馑，命令行省赈济饥民，官吏和富豪便乘机狼狈为奸，赈灾粮大多不能到贫民头上。
English: On the 19th, Shang Shuxu, the minister of the province, said in his report: Recently, because of the famine in Jianghuai Province, officials and rich people have taken advantage of the situation to help the hungry. Most of the disaster relief grain cannot reach the poor.

古文：今杭、苏、湖、秀四州复大水，民鬻妻女易食，请辍上供米二十万石，审其贫者赈之。 
现代文：现在杭州、苏州、湖州、秀州四州又发大水，百姓卖妻女以换取食物，请停止交纳上供米二十万石，审核那些贫穷的以赈济他们。 
English: Now that Hangzhou, Suzhou, Huzhou and Xiuzhou have been hit by floods again, and people are selling their wives and daughters in exchange for food, please stop paying 200,000 koku of rice and check those who are poor to help them.

古文：帝是其言。
现代文：皇帝认为这意见很对。
English: The emperor thought this was a very good idea.

古文：甲戌，万安寺成，佛像及窗壁皆金饰之，凡费金五百四十两有奇、水银二百四十斤。
现代文：二十日，万安寺建成，佛像及窗户、墙壁都用黄金装饰，共用去黄金五百四十余两、水银二百四十斤。
English: On the 20th, Wan'an Temple was completed. The Buddha statue, windows and walls were all decorated with gold. The total amount of gold and mercury used was 540 kg and 240 kg respectively.

古文：辽阳省新附军逃还各卫者，令助造尚书省，仍命分道招集之。
现代文：辽阳行省逃回各卫的新附军，令他们帮助建造尚书省衙署，并命令分道招聚他们。
English: Liaoyang Province fled back to the new attached troops of each Wei, ordered them to help build the Shanshu Provincial Office, and ordered them to be recruited separately.

古文：增立直沽海运米仓。
现代文：增建直沽海运米仓库。
English: An additional rice warehouse will be built in Zhouzhuang.

古文：命征交趾诸军还家休息一岁。
现代文：命令征伐交趾的各军回家休息一年。
English: He ordered the armies, which had been at loggerheads, to go home and rest for a year.

古文：敕缅中行省，比到缅中，一禀云南王节制。
现代文：敕命缅中行省，待抵达缅中时，完全受云南王节制。
English: He risked his life to go to Yunnan Province, but when he arrived in Yunnan Province, he was completely restrained by the king of Yunnan.

古文：庚辰，安南国王陈日烜遣中大夫陈克用来贡方物。
现代文：二十六日，安南国王陈日火亘派遣中大夫陈克用前来进贡当地特产。
English: On the 26th, the king of Annan, Chen Riguo, sent the middle doctor, Chen Kegui, to pay tribute with local special products.

古文：赐诸王小薛金百两、银万两、钞千锭及币帛有差。
现代文：赐给诸侯王小薛黄金一百两、白银一万两、钱钞一千锭，以及不同数量的绢帛。
English: Xiao Xue was given one hundred taels of gold, ten thousand taels of silver, one thousand taels of banknotes, and varying amounts of taels.

古文：辛巳，赐诸王阿赤吉金二百两、银二万二千五百两、钞九千锭及纱罗绢布有差。
现代文：二十七日，赐给诸侯王阿赤吉黄金二百两、白银二万二千五百两、钱钞九千锭，以及数量不等的纱罗绢布。
English: On the twenty-seventh day, he gave the vassal king, Achikit, two hundred taels of gold, twenty-two thousand five hundred taels of silver, nine thousand taels of banknotes, and varying quantities of saris.

古文：命甘肃行省发新附军三百人屯田亦集乃，陕西省督巩昌兵五千人屯田六盘山。
现代文：命令甘肃行省派遣三百名新附军到亦集乃屯田，命陕西行省催督巩昌兵五千人到六盘山屯田。
English: He ordered the governor of Gansu Province to dispatch three hundred newly-added troops to Yizhu Township, and the governor of Shaanxi Province to send five thousand Gongchang soldiers to Liupanshan Township.

古文：癸未，云南省右丞爱鲁上言： 自发中庆，经罗罗、白衣入交趾，往返三十八战，斩首不可胜计，将士自都元帅以下获功者四百七十四人。 
现代文：二十九日，云南行省右丞爱鲁上奏说 ：自从发兵于中庆，经过罗罗、白衣而进入安南，前后经过三十八次战役，斩获敌首不计其数，自都元帅以下建立战功的将士共四百七十四人。 
English: On the 29th, Yunnan Provincial U.S. Marshal Elu Shangso said: Since the dispatch of troops in Zhongqing, through Luo Luo, Baiyi and into Annan, after thirty-eight battles, countless enemy heads have been captured, and there are a total of four hundred and seventy-four soldiers from the Marshal of the Capital and below who have established their war exploits.

古文：甲申，诏皇孙抚诸军讨叛王火鲁火孙、合丹秃鲁干。
现代文：三十日，诏令皇孙率领诸军讨伐叛王火鲁火孙、合丹秃鲁干。
English: On the 30th, the emperor ordered the emperor's son to lead the army to fight against the traitors, including Furu Furu and Hatan Baldur.

古文：五月丙戌，敕武平路括马千匹。
现代文：五月初二，敕命武平路收聚一千匹马。
English: On the second day of May, Wu Ping Road collected a thousand horses.

古文：戊子，诸王察合子阔阔带叛，床兀儿执之以来。
现代文：初四，诸侯王察合的儿子阔阔带叛变，床兀儿把他捉了来。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, the son of the vassal king, Chahat, rebelled and was captured by the Bedouins.

古文：己丑，汴梁大霖雨，河决襄邑，漂麦禾。
现代文：初五，汴梁连降大雨，黄河在襄邑决口，淹没麦禾。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, continuous heavy rain fell in Qiliang, and the Yellow River flooded the wheat crop at the mouth of Xiangyi.

古文：以左右怯薛卫士及汉军五千三百人从皇孙北征。
现代文：命左右护卫军士兵以及五千三百人随同皇孙北征。
English: He ordered the soldiers of the left and right escort army and 5,300 people to accompany the Emperor Sun to the Northern Expedition.

古文：甲午，发五卫汉兵五千人北征。
现代文：初十，调遣五卫的汉军五千人北征。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, five thousand Chinese troops of the Five Guards were dispatched to the Northern Expedition.

古文：乙未，桑哥言： 中统钞行垂三十年，省官皆不知其数，今已更用至元钞，宜差官分道置局钩考中统钞本。 
现代文：十一日，桑哥上奏说： 中统交钞通行将近三十年，中书省官员都不知道其数目，现在已经换用至元钱钞，应当派遣官员分路设置机构、核实中统交钞的基本数目。 
English: On the 11th day of the month, Sango said in his report: It has been nearly 30 years since the payment of banknotes by the China-U.S. Consensus has been in circulation, and the officials of the People's Bank of China and the People's Bank of China have not known their number. Now they have been changed to yuan banknotes. Officials should be dispatched to set up a branching organization to verify the basic number of banknotes paid by the China-U.S. Consensus.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：丙申，赐诸王八八金百两、银万两、金素段五百、纱罗绢布等四千五百。
现代文：十二日，赐给诸侯王八八黄金一百两、白银一万两、彩色素色绸缎五百匹、纱罗绢布等四千五百匹。
English: On the twelfth day, the princes were given one hundred and two ounces of gold, ten thousand two ounces of silver, five hundred coats of colored plain silk, and four thousand five hundred coats of embroidered cloth.

古文：兀马儿来献璞玉。
现代文：兀马儿前来奉献璞玉。
English: The horses came to offer the orbs.

古文：丁酉，平江水，免所负酒课。
现代文：十三日，平江发生水灾，免征所承担的酒税。
English: On the 13th, the Pingjiang River was flooded, and the liquor tax was exempted.

古文：减米价，赈京师。
现代文：降低米价，以赈济京师。
English: Lower the price of rice to help Beijing.

古文：改云南乌撒宣抚司为宣慰司，兼管军万户府。
现代文：把云南乌撒宣抚司改为宣慰司，兼领管军万户府。
English: The Yunnan Usa Relief Division was changed to the Relief Division, and the Wanyu Prefecture, which was in charge of the army, was established.

古文：戊戌，复芦台、越支、三叉沽三盐使司。
现代文：十四日，恢复芦台、越支、三叉沽三地的盐使司。
English: On the 14th, the Salt Envoys of Loudai, Yuezhi and Trident were restored.

古文：王家奴、火鲁忽带、察罕复举兵反。
现代文：王家奴、火鲁忽带、察罕再次起兵谋反。
English: Wang Jia Nu, Hu Lu, Qutai, and Cahan once again raised an army to rebel.

古文：己亥，云南行省言： 金沙江西通安等五城，宜依旧隶察罕章宣抚司，金沙江东永宁等处五城宜废，以北胜施州为北胜府。 
现代文：十五日，云南行省上奏说： 金沙江以西的通安等五城，应当依旧隶属于察罕章宣抚司，金沙江以东的永宁等五城应当废除，把北胜、施州合为北胜府。 
English: On the fifteenth day of the Yunnan trip, the provincial envoy said: Tong'an and other five cities west of the Jinsha River should still be subordinated to the Qahanzhang Prefecture, and Yongning and other five cities east of the Jinsha River should be abolished, and Beisheng and Shizhou should be merged into Beisheng Prefecture.

古文：从之。壬寅，浑天仪成。
现代文：皇上允从，十八日，浑天仪造成。
English: With the Emperor's consent, on the 18th, the Huntengi was created.

古文：运米十五万石诣懿州饷军及赈饥民。
现代文：运送十五万石米前去懿州供应军饷并赈济饥民。
English: and transported 150,000 koku of rice to Luzhou to supply soldiers and feed the hungry.

古文：乙巳，罢兴州采蜜提举司。
现代文：二十一日，撤销兴州采蜜提举司。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the promotion of the Xingzhou honey harvest was revoked.

古文：营上都城内仓。
现代文：营建上都城的内仓。
English: Construction of the inner warehouse of Shangdu City.

古文：丁未，奉安神主于太庙。戊申，太白犯毕。
现代文：二十三日，在太庙安放先帝的神位。二十四日，太白金星干犯毕宿天区。
English: On the 23rd, the divine throne of the former emperor was placed in the Great Temple. On the 24th, the Great White Throne was enshrined in the Heavenly Realm.

古文：赐拔都不伦金百五十两、银万五千两及币帛纱罗等万匹。
现代文：赐给勇士不伦黄金一百五十两、白银一万五千两以及绢帛纱罗等一万匹。
English: To the warriors of Buren he gave one hundred and fifty-two talents of gold, fifteen thousand two talents of silver, and ten thousand horses and mules.

古文：辛亥，盂州乌河川雨雹五寸，大者如拳。
现代文：二十七日，盂州乌河川降下冰雹五寸深，大者如拳头。
English: On the 27th, hailstones five inches deep fell on the Wuhe River in Zhangzhou. The hailstones were as big as fists.

古文：癸丑，诏湖广省管内并听平章政事秃满、要束木节制。
现代文：二十九日，诏令湖广行省管辖内均听由平章政事秃满、要束木节制。
English: On the 29th, it was decreed that the provinces under the jurisdiction of Hunan and Guangxi would all be subject to the governance of Pingzhang.

古文：迁四川省治重庆，复迁宣慰司于成都。
现代文：把四川行省治所迁移到重庆，又将宣慰司迁移到成都。
English: The Sichuan Provincial Administration Office will be relocated to Chongqing, and the Xuan Tong Division will be relocated to Chengdu.

古文：高丽遣使来贡方物。
现代文：高丽派遣使臣前来进贡当地特产。
English: Goryeo sends envoys to pay tribute with local specialties.

古文：诏四川管内并听行尚书省节制。
现代文：诏令四川辖区内均听由行尚书省节制。
English: According to the edict, all areas under the jurisdiction of Sichuan are subject to the control of the Ministry of Education.

古文：河决汴梁，太康、通许、杞三县，陈、颍二州皆被害。
现代文：黄河在汴梁决口，太康、通许、杞县三县以及陈州、颍州二州均受害。
English: The Yellow River was breached at the Jiaoliang River, and the three counties of Taikang, Tongxu and Jiaxian, as well as the two counties of Chenzhou and Zhangzhou, were all affected.

古文：六月甲寅，以新府军修尚食局。
现代文：六月初一，派新附军修建尚食局衙署。
English: On the first day of June, the New Annexed Army was sent to rebuild the Shang Cuisine Bureau.

古文：庚申，赈诸王答儿伯部曲之饥者及桂阳路饥民。
现代文：初七，赈济诸侯王答儿伯部属饥饿乏食的人以及桂阳路的饥民。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Wang De'er, the prince of the princes of Guizhou, gave alms to the starving people and the starving people of Guiyang Road.

古文：辛酉，禁上都、桓州、应昌、隆兴酒。
现代文：初八，禁止上都、桓州、应昌、隆兴酿酒。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the brewing of wine in Shangdu, Hanzhou, Yingchang and Longxing was prohibited.

古文：壬戌，赐诸王术伯金银皆二百五十两、币帛纱罗万匹。
现代文：初九，赐给诸侯王术伯黄金、白银，均为二百五十两，绢帛纱罗共一万匹。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, he gave the princes, the kings of Shubo, gold and silver, two hundred and fifty-two talents, and a total of ten thousand quails.

古文：乙丑，诏蒙古人总汉军，阅习水战。
现代文：十二日，诏令蒙古人统领汉军见习水战。
English: On the 12th, the Mongolians were ordered to lead the Chinese army to train for naval warfare.

古文：丁卯，又赐诸王术伯银二万五千两、币帛纱罗万匹。
现代文：十四日，再赐诸侯王术伯白银二万五千两，绢帛纱罗一万匹。
English: On the fourteenth day, he again gave the vassal king Shubo twenty-five thousand taels of silver and ten thousand yakitori.

古文：复立咸平至建州四驿。
现代文：重新设立咸平到建州的四处驿站。
English: The four stations from Hamping to Jianzhou will be re-established.

古文：以延安屯田总管府复隶安西省。
现代文：把延安屯田总管府重新隶属于安西行省。
English: Yan'an Tunden General Administration Office was re-subordinated to Anxi Province.

古文：戊辰，海都将暗伯、著暖以兵犯业里干脑儿，管军元帅阿里带战却之。
现代文：十五日，海都的将领暗伯、著暖率兵进犯业里干脑儿，管军元帅阿里带将他们击退。
English: On the fifteenth day, the generals of the sea capital, Anbo and Fong, led the soldiers to attack, and the marshal Ali, who was in charge of the army, drove them back.

古文：壬申，睢阳霖雨，河溢害稼，免其租千六十石有奇。
现代文：十九日，睢阳连降大雨，黄河泛滥伤害庄稼，减免当地的田租一千六百多石。
English: On the 19th, continuous heavy rain fell in Shenyang, the Yellow River flooded and damaged crops, and the local land rent was reduced by more than 1,600 koku.

古文：命诸王怯怜口及扈从臣，转米以馈将士之从皇孙者。
现代文：命令诸侯王的护卫军以及侍从官员，运送米粮馈赠给随从皇孙的将士。
English: He ordered the prince's bodyguards and attendant officials to deliver rice grain as a gift to the soldiers accompanying the grandson of the emperor.

古文：太医院、光禄寺、仪凤寺、侍仪司、拱卫司，皆毋隶宣徽院，罢教坊司入拱卫司。
现代文：太医院、光禄寺、仪凤司、侍仪司、拱卫司，都不隶属于宣徽院。裁撤教坊司，归并入拱卫司。
English: The Tai Hospital, the Guanglu Temple, the Ceremonial Phoenix Division, the Attendant Ceremonial Division, and the Arch Guards Division are not affiliated with the Xuanhuiyuan. The Education Division was abolished and merged into the Arch Guards Division.

古文：癸酉，诏加封南海明著天妃为广祐明著天妃。
现代文：二十日，诏命加封南海的明著天妃为广明著天妃。
English: On the 20th, the imperial edict ordered to add the title of Guangming Tianfei to the title of Mingcheng Tianfei in Nanhai.

古文：甲戌，太白犯井。
现代文：二十一日，太白金星干犯井宿天区。
English: On the twenty-first day, the too-white Venus is in the dry criminal well.

古文：改西南番总管府为永宁路。
现代文：把西南番总管府改为永宁路。
English: The southwestern section of the General Administration Building will be renamed Yongning Road.

古文：乙亥，以考城、陈留、通许、杞、太康五县大水及河溢没民田，蠲其租万五千二百石。
现代文：二十二日，因为考城、陈留、通许、杞县、太康五县发生水灾，以及黄河淹没民田，免除租粮一万五千三百石。
English: On the 22nd, due to the floods that occurred in five counties including Kaocheng, Chenliu, Tongxu, Zhixian and Taikang, as well as the Yellow River flooding people's fields, the rent grain of 15,300 koku was exempted.

古文：丙子，给兵五十人卫浙西宣慰使史弼，使任治盗之责。
现代文：二十三日，供五十名士兵护卫浙西宣慰使史弼，令他担当治理盗寇的职责。
English: On the 23rd, Xuancheng sent Shi Xuan for fifty soldiers to escort West Zhejiang, and ordered him to take on the responsibility of controlling the bandits.

古文：丁丑，太阴犯岁星。
现代文：二十四日，太阴星干犯木星。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the planet of the great yin and yang interfered with Jupiter.

古文：发兵千五百人诣汉北浚井。
现代文：派遣士卒一千五百人前往漠北疏浚水井。
English: Dispatching 1500 officers and men to the north of the country to dredge wells.

古文：癸未，处州贼柳世英寇青田、丽水等县，浙东道宣慰副使史耀讨平之。
现代文：三十日，处州贼寇柳世英进犯青田、丽水等县，浙东道宣慰副使史耀将其讨平。
English: On the 30th, the thief Liu Shiying invaded Qingdao, Lishui and other counties, and the vice-envoy Shi Yao came from Zhejiang to appease him.

古文：资国、富昌等一十六屯雨水、蝗害稼。
现代文：资国、富昌等十六屯的庄稼受到雨水、蝗虫的伤害。
English: The crops of Shikoku, Fuchang and other sixteen townships were damaged by rainwater and locusts.

古文：秋七月甲申朔，复葺兴、灵二州仓，始命昔宝赤、合剌赤、贵由赤、左右卫士转米输之，委省官督运，以备赈给。
现代文：秋季，七月初一，重新修葺兴州、灵州二州的粮仓，开始命令昔宝赤、合剌赤、贵由赤以及左右卫的士兵将米转运入仓，委派行省的官员督运，以备供给赈灾之用。
English: In the autumn, on the first day of July, the grain silos of Xingzhou and Lingzhou were repaired, and the soldiers of Baoqi, Hapuqi, Guiyuqi and the left and right guards were ordered to transfer the rice into the silos, and the officials of the provinces were appointed to supervise the transportation to prepare for the supply of disaster relief.

古文：丙戌，真定、汴梁路蝗。运大同、太原诸仓米至新城，为边地之储。
现代文：初三，真定、汴梁路发生蝗灾，把大同、太原各粮仓的米运到新城，作为边境地区的储备粮。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, locusts occurred in Zhending and Qiliang Road, and rice from grain silos in Datong and Taiyuan was transported to Xincheng as reserve grain for border areas.

古文：以南安、瑞、赣三路连岁盗起，民多失业，免逋税万二千六百石有奇。
现代文：由于南安、瑞州、赣州三路连年盗贼兴起，百姓大多失去生计，减免拖欠的赋税一万二千六百多石。
English: As a result of the rise of thieves in Nan'an, Ruizhou and Zhangzhou for years, most of the people lost their livelihoods, and the tax arrears were reduced by more than 12,600 kilos.

古文：弛宁夏酒禁。
现代文：放开宁夏酿酒的禁令。
English: Lift the ban on Ningxia brewing.

古文：发大同路粟赈流民。
现代文：发放大同路的粮食赈济流亡的百姓。
English: Distributing grain from Datong Road to help the exiled people.

古文：保定路霖雨害稼，蠲今岁田租。
现代文：保定路连降大雨伤害庄稼，免征今年的田租。
English: This year's rice field rent will be exempted due to the continuous heavy rain on Baoding Road, which has damaged crops.

古文：改储偫所为提举司。
现代文：把储备所改为提举司。
English: Change the reserve to the promotion division.

古文：敕征交趾兵官还家休息一岁。
现代文：敕令征伐安南的官兵回家休息一年。
English: The imperial command ordered the officers and soldiers who had taken part in the conquest of Annan to go home and rest for one year.

古文：壬辰，遣必阇赤以钞五千锭往应昌和籴军储。
现代文：初九，派遣书记官携带五千锭钱钞前往应昌平价购买军用储备粮。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, the registrar was dispatched to Yingchang with 5,000 baht banknotes to purchase military reserve grain at the same price.

古文：改会同馆为四宾库。
现代文：把会同馆改为四宾库。
English: The guesthouse will be converted into four guest houses.

古文：戊戌，驻跸许泥百牙之地。
现代文：十五日，皇上驻跸在许泥百牙地方。
English: On the fifteenth day, the emperor was stationed in the land of mud and teeth.

古文：同知江西行枢密院事月的迷失上言： 近以盗起广东，分江西、江淮、福建三省兵万人令臣将之讨贼。
现代文：江西行枢密院同知月的迷失上奏说 ：近年因为盗贼兴起于广东，分遣江西、江淮、福建三个行省的士兵一万人，命我率领他们讨伐贼寇。
English: Jiangxi-bound Privy Councilor Tong Zhizhong's lost report said: In recent years, because thieves have arisen in Guangdong, 10,000 soldiers were sent to Jiangxi, Jianghuai and Fujian provinces, and I was ordered to lead them to fight thieves.

古文：臣愿万人内得蒙古军三百，并臣所籍降户万人，置万户府，以撒木合儿为达鲁花赤，佩虎符。 
现代文：我希望一万人中有蒙古士兵三百，连我所登记入籍的降户一万人，设置万户府，命撒木合儿为监印官，佩戴虎符。 
English: I hope that there will be three hundred Mongolian soldiers among the ten thousand people, including the ten thousand people I registered for naturalization, set up a million-households government, appoint Mujiaer as a censor, and wear a tiger emblem.

古文：诏许之。
现代文：皇上下诏允准。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict approving it.

古文：以沐川等五寨割隶嘉定者，还隶马湖蛮部总管府。
现代文：把先前割属于嘉定的沐川等五寨，重新隶属于马湖蛮部落总管府。
English: The five villages previously belonging to Jiading, such as Mu River, will be re-affiliated to the Mahu barbarian tribe headquarters.

古文：己亥，荧惑犯氐。
现代文：十六日，荧惑星干犯氐宿天区。
English: On the 16th, the fluorescent planet entered the Pleiades.

古文：庚子，太白犯鬼。
现代文：十七日，太白金星干犯鬼宿天区。
English: On the seventeenth day, the too-white Venus committed a crime.

古文：胶州连岁大水，民采橡而食，命减价粜米以赈之。
现代文：胶州连年发生大水，百姓采集橡实而食，命令减价卖米以赈济饥民。
English: In Jiaozhou, floods have occurred year after year. People collect acorns to eat, and are ordered to sell rice at a reduced price to feed the hungry.

古文：霸、漷二州霖雨害稼，免其今年田租。
现代文：霸州、氵郭州二州连降大雨损害庄稼，免除该地今年的田租。
English: Two provinces, Bazhou and Ziguozhou, were exempted from this year's field rent after consecutive heavy rains damaged crops.

古文：乙巳，太阴掩毕。
现代文：二十二日，太阴星遮蔽毕宿天区。
English: On the 22nd, the eclipsing star covered the sky.

古文：诸王也真部曲饥，分五千户就食济南。
现代文：诸侯王也真的部属发生饥馑，分遣五千户到济南就食。
English: A famine occurred among the vassals of the prince, and he sent five thousand households to eat in Jinan.

古文：保定路唐县野蚕茧丝可为帛。
现代文：保定路唐县野蚕的茧丝可以制帛。
English: The cocoon silk of wild silkworms in Baoding Road, Tang County, can be made into cocoons.

古文：壬子，命斡端戍兵三百一十人屯田。
现代文：二十九日，命令斡端的三百一十名戍兵屯田。
English: On the 29th, he ordered 310 soldiers from the Imperial General Headquarters to move to Tonden.

古文：命六卫造军器。
现代文：命令六卫制造兵器。
English: He ordered the Sixth Division to manufacture weapons.

古文：八月癸丑，诸王也真言： 臣近将济宁投下蒙古军东征，其家皆乏食，愿赐济南路岁赋银，使易米而食。 
现代文：八月初一，诸侯王也真上奏说： 臣近日率领济宁投下州的蒙古军东征，他们的家里都缺少粮食，希望赏赐济南路一年的税赋钱，让他们换米吃。 
English: On the first day of August, Princes Wang Yazhong made a report, saying: "Our minister recently led the Mongolian army eastward from Jining to Zhouzhou, and their families are short of grain. I hope to reward Jinan Road with a year's tax money, and let them eat rice instead."

古文：诏辽阳省给米万石赈之。
现代文：皇上诏令辽阳行省供给一万石米赈济他们。
English: The emperor ordered Liaoyang Province to supply 10,000 koku of rice to help them.

古文：丙辰，荧惑犯房。
现代文：初四，荧惑星干犯房宿天区。
English: On the 4th day of the first month, a fluorescent planet intruded into the house and settled in the sky.

古文：袁之萍乡县进嘉禾。
现代文：袁州的萍乡县进献嘉禾。
English: Pingxiang County of Yuanzhou is the first to donate Jiahe.

古文：诏安童以本部怯薛蒙古军三百人北征。
现代文：诏令安童率领本部蒙古护卫军三百人北征。
English: He ordered Ando to lead the headquarters of the Mongolian escort army of three hundred men to march north.

古文：己未，太白犯轩辕大星。
现代文：初七，太白金星干犯轩辕座大星。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Venus is too white to be a Capricorn star.

古文：辛酉，免江州学田租。
现代文：初九，免征江州学田的田租。
English: On the ninth day of the new year, the rice field rent of Jiangzhou Gakudan is exempted.

古文：癸亥，尚书省成。
现代文：十一日，尚书省衙署建成。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the Office of the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs was established.

古文：壬申，安西省管内大饥，蠲其田租二万一千五百石有奇，仍贷粟赈之。
现代文：二十日，安西行省辖境内发生大饥荒，减免该地区田租二万一千五百多石，并借贷粮食给他们赈济饥民。
English: On the 20th, a great famine occurred in the territory under the jurisdiction of Anxi Province, and the land rent of more than 21,500 kilos in the region was reduced and waived, and grain was loaned to them to feed the hungry.

古文：癸酉，以河间等路盐运司兼管顺德、广平、綦阳三铁冶。
现代文：二十一日，以河间等路的盐运司兼管顺德、广平、綦阳三地的铁冶。
English: On the twenty-first day, the Salt Transportation Division of the Kawama and other roads was also in charge of the iron and steel industry in Shunde, Guangping, and Shenyang.

古文：丙子，发米三千石赈灭吉儿带所部饥民。
现代文：二十四日，发放三千石米赈济灭吉儿带所部的饥民。
English: On the 24th, 3,000 koku of rice was distributed to help starving people in Jilin Province.

古文：赵、晋、冀三州蝗。
现代文：赵州、晋州、冀州三州发生蝗灾。
English: Locust plagues occurred in the three prefectures of Zhao, Jin and Jizhou.

古文：丁丑，嘉祥、鱼台、金乡三县霖雨害稼，蠲其租五千石。
现代文：二十五日，嘉祥、鱼台、金乡三县连降大雨伤害庄稼，减免其田租五千石。
English: On the 25th, the three counties of Jiaxiang, Yutai, and Jinxiang suffered from consecutive heavy rains that damaged crops, and their field rent was reduced by 5,000 koku.

古文：庚辰，车驾次孛罗海脑儿。
现代文：二十八日，皇上的车驾驻跸于孛罗海脑儿。
English: On the 28th, the emperor's chariot arrived at Palo Haimeng'er.

古文：以咸平荐经兵乱，发沈州仓赈之。
现代文：因为咸平连遭兵乱，发放沈州粮仓的粮米赈济该地。
English: Because Xianpinglian was hit by military turmoil, grain and rice from Shenzhou grain silos were distributed to help the area.

古文：分万亿库为宝源、赋源、绮源、广源四库。
现代文：把万亿库分为宝源库、赋源库、绮源库、广源库四库。
English: The Trillion Library is divided into four libraries: the Treasure Library, the Source Library, the Source Library, and the Source Library.

古文：九月癸未朔，荧惑犯天江。
现代文：九月初一，荧惑星干犯天江星。
English: On the first day of September, the fluorescent planet interfered with Tianjiang star.

古文：大驾次野狐岭。
现代文：圣驾驻跸于野狐岭。
English: The shrine is located at the foot of the Wild Fox Ridge.

古文：甘州旱饥，免逋税四千四百石。
现代文：甘州因旱灾而发生饥馑，免征拖欠的税粮四千四百石。
English: Due to drought and famine in Ganzhou, the tax arrears of grain were exempted from levying 4,400 koku.

古文：丙戌，置汀、梅二州驿。
现代文：初四，设置汀州、梅州二州的驿站。
English: On the 4th day of the first month, two stations were set up in Tingzhou and Meizhou.

古文：己丑，献、莫二州霖雨害稼，免田租八百余石。
现代文：初七，献州、莫州二州连降大雨伤害庄稼，减免其田租八百多石。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, heavy rain fell in two states, Jianzhou and Mozhou, damaging crops, and more than 800 kilos of farmland rent was reduced and exempted.

古文：壬辰，大驾至大都。
现代文：初十，圣驾抵达大都。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the saint arrived in the capital.

古文：乙未，罢檀州淘金户。
现代文：十三日，撤销檀州的淘金户。
English: On the 13th, the cancellation of the gold rush in Danzhou.

古文：都哇犯边。
现代文：都哇进犯边境。
English: Dowa invades the border.

古文：庚子，太阴犯毕。
现代文：十八日，太阴星干犯毕宿天区。
English: On the 18th day of the month, the Great Yin Star committed a crime and was banished to the Heaven Realm.

古文：鬼国、建都皆遣使来贡方物。
现代文：鬼国、建都均派遣使臣前来进贡当地特产。
English: Both the ghost country and the capital city sent envoys to pay tribute with local specialties.

古文：从桑哥请，营五库禁中以贮币帛。
现代文：依从桑哥的请求，在皇宫里营建五所库房以贮藏绢帛。
English: At Sango's request, five warehouses were built in the palace to store the money.

古文：癸卯，荧惑犯南斗。
现代文：二十一日，荧惑星干犯斗宿天区。
English: On the twenty-first day, the fluorescent planet interfered with the celestial region.

古文：命忽都忽民户履地输税。
现代文：命忽都忽的民户测实田亩按数交纳租税。
English: Households with a life expectancy of less than one year pay tax according to the number of measured acres.

古文：尚书省臣言： 自立尚书省，凡仓库诸司无不钩考，宜置征理司，秩正三品，专治合追财谷，以甘肃等处行尚书省参政秃烈羊呵、签省吴诚并为征理使。 
现代文：尚书省大臣上奏说： 自从设立尚书省以来，所有的仓库诸司，没有不调查核实的，应当设置征理司，职俸定为正三品，专门治理应当追究的钱粮事宜，命甘肃等地行尚书省参政秃烈羊呵、行省佥事吴诚共同担任征理使。 
English: The minister of Shangshu Province said in his report: Since the establishment of Shangshu Province, all warehouses and departments, if there is no investigation and verification, should set up a collection management department, the salary should be set as the official third grade, the special governance should be investigated the money and grain matters, the life of Gansu and other places should be carried out in Shangshu Province to participate in politics, and Wu Cheng should jointly serve as a collection manager.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：升宝钞总库、永盈库并为从五品。
现代文：把宝钞总库、永盈库均升格为从五品。
English: The treasure banknote head warehouse and the Yongying warehouse were both upgraded to five-star.

古文：改八作司为提举八作司，秩正六品。
现代文：把八作司改为提举八作司，职俸为正六品。
English: The title of Hachizakushi was changed to Toshihito Hachizakushi, and the salary was raised to Shorokubon.

古文：增元宝、永丰及八作司官吏俸。
现代文：增加元宝司、永丰司及八作司官员的俸禄。
English: Increase the salary of the former treasure secretary, Yongfeng secretary and eight secretary officials.

古文：庚戌，太医院新编《本草》成。
现代文：二十八日，太医院新编纂的《本草》完成。
English: On the 28th, the newly compiled "Hengcao" was completed.

古文：冬十月己未，享于太庙。
现代文：冬季，十月初七，向太庙敬献祭品。
English: In winter, on the 7th day of the 10th month, offerings are made to the Great Temple.

古文：庚申，从桑哥请，以省、院、台官十二人理算江淮、江西、福建、四川、甘肃、安西六省钱谷，给兵使以为卫。
现代文：初八，依从桑哥的请求，以中书省、枢密院、御史台的十二名官员清理、核算江淮、江西、福建、四川、甘肃、安西六个行省的钱粮，派兵作为他们的侍卫。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, in accordance with the request of Sanguo, twelve officials from the Ministry of Chinese Literature, the Privy Council, and the Imperial Historian's Office cleaned up and calculated the money and grain in six provinces of Jianghuai, Jiangxi, Fujian, Sichuan, Gansu, and Anxi, and sent soldiers as their bodyguards.

古文：乌思藏宣慰使软奴汪术尝赈其管内兵站饥户，桑哥请赏之，赐银二千五百两。
现代文：乌斯藏宣慰使软奴汪术曾经赈济其辖区内兵站的饥民，桑哥请求给他奖赏，赠给白银二千五百两。
English: Usuzang Xuancheng had made the weak slave Wang Shu once help the starving people in the military base under his jurisdiction. Sango asked for a reward and gave him 2,500 taels of silver.

古文：甲子，置虎贲司，复改为武卫司。
现代文：十二日，设置虎贲司，后来又改为武卫司。
English: On the 12th, the Department of Tiger and Rooster was set up, and later it was changed to the Department of National Defense.

古文：丙寅，赐瀛国公赵鳷钞百锭。
现代文：十四日，赐给瀛国公赵钱钞一百锭。
English: On the 14th, he gave a hundred baht banknote to Zhao Qiangguo.

古文：以甘州转运司隶都省。
现代文：把甘州转运司隶属于中书省。
English: The Ganzhou Transportation Division will be subordinated to the Ministry of Literature.

古文：湖广省言： 左、右江口溪洞蛮獠，置四总管府，统州、县，洞百六十，而所调官畏惮瘴疠，多不敢赴，请以汉人为达鲁花赤，军官为民职，杂土人用之。 
现代文：湖广行省上奏说： 左江、右江口溪洞蛮族地区，设置了四个总管府，统领州、县、溪洞共一百六十处，而所迁调的官员因为害怕瘴疠之气，大多不敢赴任，请任用汉人为镇守官，军官担任民职，参杂任用当地人。 
English: Hougang Xingguo Shangsuo said: In the barbarian areas of Zuojiang and Zuojiangkou Xidong, four general administrative offices have been set up, controlling a total of 160 prefectures, counties and Xidong. However, most of the transferred officials are afraid to take up their posts for fear of repercussions. Please appoint Han people as town guards, military officers as civil servants, and appoint local people.

古文：就拟夹谷三合等七十四人以闻，从之。
现代文：同时拟具夹谷三合等七十四人的名单上奏，皇帝依从。
English: At the same time, the list of seventy-four people, including the Jigokudani triad, was proposed, and the emperor complied.

古文：大同民李伯祥、苏永福八人，以谋逆伏诛。
现代文：大同的百姓李伯祥、苏永福等八人，因为谋反被处死。
English: Eight Datong citizens, including Li Boxiang and Su Yongfu, were executed for plotting rebellion.

古文：庚午，海都犯边。
现代文：十八日，海都进犯边境。
English: On the 18th, Haidu invaded the border.

古文：桑哥请明年海道漕运江南米须及百万石。
现代文：桑哥请求明年从海路漕运江南的米粮必须达到一百万石。
English: Sango requested that the rice grain transported from the south of the Yangtze River by sea next year must reach one million kilos.

古文：又言： 安山至临清，为渠二百六十五里。
现代文：又奏说： 从安山到临清，共有河渠二百六十五里。
English: He also said: From Ansan to Linqing, there are a total of 265 miles of canals.

古文：若开浚之，为工三百万，当用钞三万锭、米四万石、盐五万斤。
现代文：如果开发疏浚，费工三百万个，需用钱钞三万锭、米四万石、盐五万斤。
English: If dredging were to be developed, it would require 3 million man-hours, 30,000 baht in banknotes, 40,000 kilos of rice, and 50,000 catties of salt.

古文：其陆运夫万三千户复罢为民，其赋入及刍粟之估为钞二万八千锭，费略相当，然渠成亦万世之利。
现代文：完工之后，那些从事陆路运输的民夫一万三千户可以重新恢复为民户，他们交纳的赋税和粮草估计值钱钞二万八千锭，收支的费用大体相当，然而河渠完成之后还有永久的利益。
English: After completion, up to 13,000 households engaged in land transport can be reinstated as private households. The taxes and grain and grass they paid are estimated to be worth 28,000 baht, and the cost of income and expenditure is roughly equivalent. However, there will be permanent benefits after the canal is completed.

古文：请以今冬备粮费，来春浚之。 
现代文：请在今年冬天准备粮食和经费，明年春天疏浚河道。 
English: Please prepare food and money this winter and dredge the river next spring.

古文：制可。
现代文：皇上决定可行。
English: The post-Bukou system can work.

古文：丙子，始造铁罗圈甲。
现代文：二十四日，开始制造铁罗圈甲。
English: On the 24th, the production of iron coils began.

古文：瀛国公赵鳷学佛法于土番。
现代文：瀛国公赵去土蕃学习佛法。
English: Zhao, the prince of the State of Qi, went to Tuyun to study Buddhism.

古文：己卯，也不干入寇，不都马失引兵奋击之。
现代文：二十七日，也不干入侵，不都马失领兵奋力还击。
English: On the 27th, they did not invade, and the soldiers fought back.

古文：塔不带反，忽剌忽、阿塔海等战却之。
现代文：塔不带反叛，忽剌忽、阿塔海等人将其击退。
English: The pagoda did not rebel, but it was repulsed by Hukou Hukou, Atahai and others.

古文：诏免儒户杂徭。
现代文：皇上下诏免征儒户的杂税、徭役。
English: The Emperor's edict exempted Confucian households from miscellaneous taxes and taxes.

古文：尚书省臣请令集贤院诸司，分道钩考江南郡学田所入羡余，贮之集贤院，以给多才艺者，从之。
现代文：尚书省大臣请求令集贤院诸司，分道调查核实江南各郡学田所收入的羡余钱，将其储存在集贤院，以奖给多才多能的学子，皇上允从。
English: At the request of the Minister of the Ministry of Education and Culture, the departments of Jixian Academy were ordered to conduct a separate investigation to verify the surplus income of the schools in the counties south of the Yangtze River, store it in Jixian Academy, and award it to the multi-talented students. The emperor agreed.

古文：给仓官俸。
现代文：给予仓官俸禄。
English: A salary was given to the warehouse clerk.

古文：高丽遣使来贡方物。
现代文：高丽派遣使臣前来进贡地方特产。
English: Goryeo sends envoys to pay tribute with local specialties.

古文：十一月壬午，巩昌路荐饥，免田租之半，仍以钞三千锭赈其贫者。
现代文：十一月初一，巩昌路连续发生饥馑，免除其田租的一半，并以三千锭钱钞赈济其中的贫穷者。
English: On the first day of November, Gongchang Road suffered consecutive famines, exempted half of its field rent, and used three thousand baht banknotes to help the poor.

古文：以忽撒马丁为管领甘肃陕西等处屯田等户达鲁花赤，督斡端、可失合儿工匠千五十户屯田。
现代文：任命忽撒马丁为管领甘肃、陕西等处屯田等民户的镇守官，督使斡端、可失合儿的一千零五十户工匠屯田。
English: Ku Sa Martin was appointed as the town guard officer in charge of the tunden and other private households in Gansu, Shaanxi and other places, supervising the 1,050 craftsmen's tunden.

古文：丁亥，金齿遣使贡方物。
现代文：初六，金齿国派遣使臣进贡当地特产。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, Jinzu dispatched envoys to pay tribute to local special products.

古文：以山东东西道提刑按察使何荣祖为中书省参知政事。
现代文：任命山东东道、山东西道提刑按察使何荣祖为中书省参知政事。
English: He Rongzu was appointed as the governor of Shandong Province and the inspector of Shandong East and West Provinces.

古文：修国子监以居胄子。
现代文：修建国子监以让贵族子弟居住。
English: The Kokushi-ken was built to house the children of the nobility.

古文：禁有分地臣私役富室为柴米户及赋外杂徭。
现代文：禁止有分地的大臣私自役使富裕的民家为柴米户，以及为其承担赋税之外的各种徭役。
English: It is forbidden for ministers with land allotments to use their private services to make wealthy private households into chai-mai households, as well as to perform various duties for them in addition to paying taxes.

古文：柳州民黄德清叛，潮州民蔡猛等拒杀官军，并伏诛。
现代文：柳州百姓黄德清反叛，潮州百姓蔡猛等抗拒并杀死官军，均被处死。
English: Liuzhou people Huang Deqing rebelled, Chaozhou people Cai Meng and others resisted and killed the government army, and were all executed.

古文：庚寅，床哥里合引兵犯建州，杀三百余人，咸平大震。
现代文：初九，床哥里合领兵进犯建州，杀死三百余人，咸平大为震恐。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month of the lunar calendar, the soldiers led by Bedfellow invaded Jianzhou and killed more than 300 people. Hamping was greatly shocked and frightened.

古文：辛卯，兀良合饥民多殍死，给三月粮。
现代文：初十，兀良合的饥民大多饿死，供给他们三个月粮食。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, most of the starving people in Aira were starving to death. They were provided with food for three months.

古文：壬辰，罢建昌路屯田总管府。
现代文：十一日，撤销建昌路屯田总管府。
English: On the 11th, the Tonden General Administration Office on Jianchang Road was abolished.

古文：癸巳，赐诸王也里干金五十两、银五千两、钞千锭、币帛纱罗等二千匹。
现代文：十二日，赐给诸侯王也里干黄金五十两、白银五千两、钱钞一千锭、绢帛纱罗等二千匹。
English: On the twelfth day, he gave the princes of Yerikan fifty taels of gold, five thousand taels of silver, one thousand taels of banknotes, and two thousand yakitori.

古文：也速带儿、牙林海剌孙执捏坤、忽都答儿两叛王以归。
现代文：也速带儿、牙林海剌孙抓获捏坤、忽都答儿两个叛王而回。
English: Also quickly, the grandson of Yalin Haijun captured Nian Kun, and suddenly the two traitors returned.

古文：甲午，北兵犯边。
现代文：十三日，北方的敌军进犯边境。
English: On the 13th, enemy troops from the north invaded the border.

古文：诏福建省管内并听行尚书省节制。
现代文：下诏令福建行省辖区内均听从行尚书省节制。
English: issued a decree ordering Fujian to implement the provincial book control in all areas under its jurisdiction.

古文：丙申，合迷里民饥，种不入土，命爱牙赤以屯田余粮给之。
现代文：十五日，合迷里的百姓饥馑，种子不能入土，命令爱牙赤以屯田多余的粮食供给他们。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the people in Hemei were starving, and the seeds could not grow into the soil. Ai Yaga ordered the Red Army to provide them with surplus grain from the occupied fields.

古文：己亥，命李思衍为礼部侍郎，充国信使，以万奴为兵部郎中副之，同使安南，诏谕陈日烜亲身入朝，否则必再加兵。
现代文：十八日，任命李思衍为礼部侍郎，充任国信使，任命万奴为兵部郎中担任其副手，共同出使安南，诏令陈日火亘亲自入朝觐见皇上。否则一定再次派兵征讨。
English: On the 18th, he appointed Li Siyan as the attendant of the ceremonial department to serve as the messenger of the country, appointed Wan Nong as the assistant of the secretary of the military department to serve as his deputy, sent Annan together, and ordered Chen Riguowat to personally enter the imperial court to see the emperor. Otherwise, he would definitely send troops again.

古文：大都民史吉等请立桑哥德政碑，从之。
现代文：大都百姓史吉等请求树立桑哥的德政碑，皇上依从。
English: Most of the people in the capital, including Shiji, requested the erection of a monument to Sango's virtue, and the emperor complied.

古文：辛丑，马八儿国遣使来朝。
现代文：二十日，马八儿国派遣使臣入朝。
English: On the 20th, Mahbala's country sent an envoy to the DPRK.

古文：帖列灭入寇。
现代文：帖列灭入侵。
English: Thérèse put down the invasion.

古文：甲辰，以巩昌便宜都总帅府统五十余城兵民事繁，改为宣慰使司，兼便宜都总帅府。
现代文：二十三日，因为巩昌便宜都总帅府统辖五十余城的军队和百姓，事务繁杂，改为宣慰司，兼便宜行事都总帅府。
English: On the 23rd, because of the complicated affairs of the army and the people of more than 50 cities under the jurisdiction of the Gongchang General Headquarters, it was changed to the Consolation Division and the General Headquarters.

古文：改释教总制院为宣政院，秩从一品，印用三台，以尚书右丞相桑哥兼宣政使。
现代文：把释教总制院改为宣政院，秩禄为从一品，用中书省、尚书省、御史台三台的印信，任命尚书右丞相桑哥兼任宣政使。
English: He changed the name of the General System Institute of the Shogunate to the Xuanzheng Institute of the State Council, made the rank of the rank of the rank of the rank of the rank of the rank of the rank of the rank of the rank of the rank of the rank of the rank of the rank of the rank of the rank of the rank of the rank of the rank of the rank of the rank of the rank.

古文：庚戌，益咸平府戍兵三百。
现代文：二十九日，增加咸平府的守军三百人。
English: On the 29th, the number of defenders of Hamping Prefecture was increased by 300.

古文：十二月乙卯，赐按答儿秃等金千二百五十两、银十二万五千两、钞二万五千锭、币帛布氎布二万三千六百六十六匹。
现代文：十二月初四，赐给按答儿秃等黄金一千二百五十两，白银十二万五千两，钱钞二万五千锭，绢帛、布匹、细棉布共二万三千六百六十六匹。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of December, he gave to the son of his father-in-law, Balda, twelve hundred and fifty-two talents of gold, one hundred and twenty-five thousand two talents of silver, twenty-five thousand five hundred denarii, and twenty-three thousand six hundred and sixty-six asses of linen, cloth, and fine cotton.

古文：命上都募人运米万石赴和林，应昌府运米三万石给弘吉剌军。
现代文：命令上都募集民夫运送一万石米前往和林，应昌府运送三万石米给弘吉剌部的军队。
English: According to the order, commoners were recruited to transport 10,000 koku of rice to Warim, and 30,000 koku of rice was to be transported from Changfu to the troops in Hiroki Shibu.

古文：丁巳，海都兵犯边，拔都也孙脱迎击，死之。
现代文：初六，海都的军队进犯边境，勇士也孙脱迎战敌军，死于此役。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, the capital's army invaded the border, and the warrior Yasunto fought against the enemy army and died in this battle.

古文：先是，安童将兵临边，为失里吉所执，一军皆没。
现代文：原先，安童率军抵达边境，被失里吉所俘获，全军覆没。
English: Originally, the Ando-led army reached the border, was captured by the Shuri-ji, and the entire army was wiped out.

古文：至是八邻来归，从者凡三百九十人，赐钞万二千五百一十三锭。
现代文：至此八邻前来归附，随从他来的共三百九十人，赐给钱钞一万二千五百一十三锭。
English: So far, eight neighbors have come to join him, and a total of 390 people have followed him, giving 12,513 baht in money.

古文：辛酉，太阴犯毕。
现代文：初十，太阴星干犯毕宿天区。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the great yin star committed a crime and was banished to the heavenly region.

古文：癸亥，置大都等路打捕民匠等户总管府。
现代文：十二日，设置大都等路打捕民匠等户的总管府。
English: On the 12th, the General Administration of the People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs was set up.

古文：甲子，太阴犯井。
现代文：十三日，太阴星干犯井宿天区。
English: On the 13th day of the lunar month, the star of the Great Yin appeared in the Jianjing and Suqian District.

古文：辛未，桑哥言： 有分地之臣，例以贫乏为辞，希觊赐与。
现代文：二十日，桑哥上奏说 ：有分地的大臣，照例以贫穷困乏作为借口，希望得到赏赐。
English: On the 20th, Sango reported, "Ministers who have land, as usual, use poverty and hardship as an excuse, hoping to be rewarded.

古文：财非天坠地出，皆取于民，苟不慎其出入，恐国用不足。 
现代文：财富不是从天上掉下来地下冒出来的，都是取之于民的，如果不谨慎钱财的出入，恐怕国家的经费会不够。 
English: Wealth does not fall from the sky and emerge from the ground. It is all taken from the people. If we are not careful about the inflow and outflow of money and wealth, I am afraid that the state's funds will be insufficient.

古文：帝曰： 自今不当给者汝即画之，当给者宜覆奏，朕自处之。 
现代文：皇帝说： 从今以后，不应当给的你即刻谋划考虑，应当给的应当回奏，我自己做决定。 
English: The emperor said: From now on, you should immediately plan and consider what should not be given, what should be given should be played back, and I will make my own decision.

古文：甲戌，太阴犯亢，荧惑犯垒壁阵。
现代文：二十三日，太阴星干犯亢宿天区，荧惑星干犯垒壁阵星。
English: On the 23rd, the eclipsing planet will invade the Pleiades, and the fluorescent planet will invade the Bastion.

古文：安西王阿难答来告兵士饥，且阙橐驼，诏给米六千石及橐驼百。
现代文：安西王阿难答前来陈告兵士饥馑，而且缺少骆驼，下诏赐给六千石米、一百头骆驼。
English: Ananda, the king of Ansi, came to report that the soldiers were starving and that there was a shortage of camels. He issued a decree to give them six thousand stone meters and one hundred camels.

古文：乙亥，湖头贼张治囝掠泉州，免泉州今岁田租。
现代文：二十四日，湖头的贼寇张治囝抢掠泉州，免征泉州今年的田租。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the thief Zhang Zhiqin of the lake robbed Quanzhou, exempting Quanzhou from this year's field rent.

古文：丙子，也速不花以昔列门叛。甘肃行省官约诸王八八、拜答罕、驸马昌吉，合兵讨之，皆自缚请罪。
现代文：二十五日，也速不花依仗昔列门举行叛乱，甘肃行省官员约集诸侯王八八、拜答罕、驸马吉昌，合兵讨伐也速不花，叛逆者均自己绑缚着请罪。
English: On the 25th, a rebellion was held against the old order, and the provincial officials of Gansu Province gathered the princes Wangpachi, Baidahun, and Zouma Jichang. It was a joint military campaign, and the rebels all tied themselves up and pleaded guilty.

古文：独昔列门以其属西走，追至朵郎不带之地，邀而获之，以归于京师。
现代文：唯独昔列门率领他的部属向西逃走，追击他到朵郎不带地方，拦击而俘获了他，将其押回京师。
English: However, the old line led his subordinates to flee to the west, pursued him to Dorang without taking any place, intercepted and captured him, and drove him back to the Beijing Division.

古文：庚辰，六卫屯田饥，给更休三千人六十日粮。
现代文：二十九日，六卫的屯田发生饥馑，供给轮休的三千人六十天口粮。
English: On the 29th, there was a famine in the military canton of Liuhe, and food rations of 60 days were provided to 3,000 people who were on leave.

古文：高丽国王遣使来贡方物。
现代文：高丽国王派遣使臣来进贡地方特产。
English: The King of Goryeo sent envoys to collect tribute from local specialties.

古文：赐诸王爱牙合赤等金千两、银一万八千三百六十两、丝万两、绵八万三千二百两、金素币一千二百匹、绢五千九十八匹。
现代文：赐给诸侯王爱牙合赤等人，总计黄金一千两、白银一万八千三百六十两、丝一万两、绵八万三千二百两、金色素色帛一千二百匹、绢五千零九十八匹。
English: He gave a total of one thousand and two ounces of gold, eighteen thousand three hundred and sixty-two ounces of silver, ten thousand two ounces of silk, eighty-three thousand two hundred and two ounces of linen, one thousand two hundred gold pigments, and fifty-nine hundred and ninety-eight ounces of pigments.

古文：赐皇子爱牙赤部曲等羊马钞二十九万百四十七锭、马二万六千九百一十四、羊十万二百一十、驼八、牛九百。
现代文：赐给皇子爱牙赤等人的部属，总计羊马钱二十九万零一百四十七锭、马二万六千九百一十四头、羊十万零二百一十头、骆驼八头、牛九百头。
English: A total of 2,901,147 sheep and horse money, 26,914 horses, 100,210 sheep, eight camels and 900 cattle were given to the subordinates of Prince Aigaakko and others.

古文：赒诸王贫乏者，钞二十一万六百锭、马六千七百二十五、羊一万二千八百五十七、牛四十。
现代文：周济贫困的诸侯王，总计钱钞二十一万零六百锭、马六千七百二十五匹、羊一万二千八百五十七头、牛四十头。
English: The poor princes were given a total of 210,600 baht in banknotes, 6,725 horses, 12,857 sheep and 40 cattle.

古文：赐妻子家赀没于寇者，钞三万二千八百八十锭、马牛百，偿以羊马诸物供军者，钞千六百七十四锭、马四千三百二十五、羊三万四千百九十九、驼七十二、牛三十。
现代文：赐给妻儿财产都陷没在贼寇中的官员，总计钱钞三万二千八百八十锭、马羊一百头。偿还用羊马等物供给军用的人，总计钱钞一千六百七十四锭、马四千三百二十五匹、羊三万四千一百九十九头、骆驼七十二头、牛三十头。
English: To the officials whose wives and children had lost all their property to the bandits, he gave a total of 32,880 mu of money and 100 horses and sheep; and to those who supplied the military with sheep and horses, he gave a total of 1,674 mu of money and 4,325 horses, 34,199 sheep, 72 camels, and 30 cattle.

古文：赏自寇中拔归者，钞四千七十八锭。
现代文：奖赏从贼寇中脱身归来的官员，总计钱钞四千零七十八锭。
English: The reward for the officials who escaped and returned from the bandits totalled 4,078 baht.

古文：因雨雹、河溢害稼，除民租二万二千八百石。
现代文：因为下冰雹、河水泛滥而伤害庄稼，免除百姓的田租二万二千八百石。
English: Due to hailstorms and river flooding, which damaged crops, farmers were exempted from paying land rent of 22,800 koku.

古文：命亦思麻等七百余人作佛事坐静于玉塔殿、寝殿、万寿山、护国仁王等寺凡五十四会，天师张宗演设醮三日。
现代文：命令亦思麻等七百多人在玉塔殿、寝殿、万寿山、护国仁王等寺庙入定做佛事，一共五十四次法会。命令天师张宗演设坛打醮三日。
English: He also ordered more than seven hundred people, including Shima, to perform Buddhist rites in temples such as the Jade Pagoda, the Dormition Hall, Mount Mansu, and the Protector of the Nation, making a total of fifty-four pujas. He ordered the heavenly teacher Zhang Zongyuan to set up the altar and close it for three days.

古文：以光禄寺直隶都省。
现代文：把光禄寺直接隶属于中书省。
English: directly subordinate Guanglu Temple to the Ministry of Chinese Literature.

古文：置醴源仓，分太仓之麹米药物隶焉。
现代文：设置醴源仓，分出太仓的麴米药物隶属于此。
English: Set up the glutinous rice source warehouse, and the glutinous rice drug extracted from the warehouse belongs to this warehouse.

古文：以沧州之军营城为沧溟县，以施州之清江县隶夔路总管府。
现代文：把沧州的军营城作为沧溟县，把施州的清江县隶属于夔州路总管府。
English: The military camp in Cangzhou is Cangzhou County, and the Qingjiang County in Shizhou is subordinate to the General Administration of Quzhou Road.

古文：罢安和署。
现代文：撤销安和署。
English: Abolish the Department of Peace and Security.

古文：大司农言耕旷地三千五百七十顷，立学校二万四千四百余所，积义粮三十一万五千五百余石。
现代文：大司农上奏说耕种荒田三千五百七十顷。建立学校二万四千四百余所。积累义粮三十一万五千五百余石。
English: The Chief Secretary of the Supreme People's Procuratorate for Agriculture said that 3,570 hectares of wasteland have been cultivated, more than 24,400 schools have been established, and more than 315,500 koku of donated grain have been accumulated.

古文：断死罪九十五人。
现代文：判处死刑的罪犯九十五人。
English: Ninety-five convicts were sentenced to death.

古文：二十六年春正月丙戌，地震。
现代文：至元二十六年春，正月初六，发生地震。
English: An earthquake occurred on the sixth day of the first month of the year, in the spring of the 26th year of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：诏江淮省忙兀带与不鲁迷失海牙及月的迷失合兵进讨群盗之未平者。
现代文：诏令江淮行省的忙兀带与不鲁迷失海牙，以及月的迷失合兵进讨尚未平定的群盗。
English: The emperor ordered Jianghuai to march to the province, and the busy Belt and Bru lost The Hague, as well as the lost of the moon, and the soldiers advanced to fight the bandits who had not yet been pacified.

古文：己丑，发兵塞沙陀间铁烈儿河。
现代文：初九，派兵堵塞沙陀族地区的铁烈儿河。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, soldiers were sent to block the Tieler River in the Shado area.

古文：辛卯，拔都不伦言其民千一百五十八户贫乏，赐银十万五千一百五十两。
现代文：十一日，勇士不伦上奏说他的百姓一千一百五十八户很贫穷，赐给银子十万零五千一百五十两。
English: On the eleventh day, the valiant Buren reported that his people, one thousand one hundred and fifty-eight families, were very poor, and he gave them one hundred and fifty-five thousand one hundred and fifty-two pieces of silver.

古文：徙江州都转运使司治龙兴。
现代文：把江州都转运使司的治所迁移到龙兴。
English: The transfer of the capital of Jiangzhou to Longxing.

古文：沙不丁上市舶司岁输珠四百斤、金三千四百两，诏贮之以待贫乏者。
现代文：沙不丁的上市舶司每年交纳珍珠四百斤、黄金三千四百两，诏令贮存起来以待赏赐给贫穷的人。
English: Every year, the listed shipping company of Shabudin paid four hundred catties of pearls and 3,400 taels of gold, which were ordered to be stored to be given to the poor.

古文：合丹入寇。
现代文：合丹入侵。
English: It's an invasion.

古文：戊戌，以荆湖占城省左丞唐兀带副按的忽都合为蒙古都万户，统兵会江淮、福建二省及月的迷失兵，讨盗于江西。
现代文：十八日，任命荆湖占城行省左丞唐兀带的副手按的忽都合担任蒙古万户，统兵和江淮、福建二行省以及月的迷失的军队会合，在江西讨伐盗寇。
English: On the 18th, the vice-chairman of Jinghu Zhancheng Xingguo Zuo, Tang Xizhe, was suddenly appointed to serve as the vice-chairman of Mongolia Wanhu, and the unified army met with the lost armies of Jianghuai, Fujian Xingguo and Guizhou, and fought against the robbers in Jiangxi.

古文：蠲漳、汀二州田租。
现代文：免除漳州、汀州二州的田租。
English: Exemption from rice field rent in the two prefectures of Zhangzhou and Tingzhou.

古文：辛丑，遣使代祀岳渎、后土、东南海。
现代文：二十一日，派遣使臣代表皇帝祭祀五岳、四渎、后土神、东海和南海。
English: On the twenty-first day, envoys were dispatched on behalf of the emperor to offer sacrifices to the Five Mountains, the Four Forsaken Mountains, the Gods of the Hinterland, the East Sea and the South Sea.

古文：立武卫亲军都指挥使司，以侍卫军六千、屯田军三千、江南镇守军一千，合兵一万隶焉。
现代文：设立武卫亲军都指挥使司，以六千名侍卫军、三千名屯田军、一千名江南镇守军，合兵一万名隶属于它。
English: An envoy office was set up under the command of the pro-military Wuwei, with six thousand bodyguards, three thousand garrison troops, one thousand Jiangnan town guards, and ten thousand soldiers subordinated to it.

古文：太阴犯氐。
现代文：太阴星干犯氐宿天区。
English: Too much yin and yang is the fault of the Pleiades.

古文：壬寅，海船万户府言： 山东宣慰使乐实所运江南米，陆负至淮安，易闸者七，然后入海，岁止二十万石。
现代文：二十二日，海船万户府上奏说： 山东宣慰使乐实所运送的江南粮米，由陆路背负到淮安，经过了七道关口，然后入海，一年只能运米二十万石。
English: On the 22nd, the seagoing ship Wanyu made a report to the prefectural government, saying: The grain and rice from the southern part of the Yangtze River transported by the Shandong Xuancheng to the Leshi was carried by land to Huai'an, passed through seven checkpoints, and then entered the sea. It can only transport 200,000 kilos of rice a year.

古文：若由江阴入江至直沽仓，民无陆负之苦，且米石省运估八贯有奇。
现代文：如果由江阴进入长江直接由水路运到直沽仓，百姓既没有陆路负粮之苦，而且每石米节省运费八贯多钱。
English: If it is transported directly from Jiangyin into the Yangtze River by water to Zhaohuiangcang, the people will not suffer from the burden of grain by land, and each stone of rice will save more than eight times the cost of transportation.

古文：乞罢胶莱海道运粮万户府，而以漕事责臣，当岁运三十万石。 
现代文：请撤销胶莱海运粮万户府，而把漕运的事交给我，每年必当运粮三十万石。 
English: Please revoke Jiaolai's sea transportation of grain for all households, and give me the business of rowing, which will transport 300,000 koku of grain every year.

古文：诏许之。
现代文：皇上下诏同意。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict approving it.

古文：癸卯，高丽遣使来贡方物。
现代文：二十三日，高丽派遣使臣前来进贡当地特产。
English: On the 23rd, Korea sent envoys to pay tribute with local specialties.

古文：贼钟明亮寇赣州，掠宁都，据秀岭，诏发江淮省及邻郡戍兵五千，迁江西省参政管如德为左丞，使将兵往讨。
现代文：贼寇钟明亮进犯赣州，劫掠宁都，占据秀岭，诏令调遣江淮行省以及邻郡的守兵五千人，提拔江西行省参政管如德为左丞，命他领兵前往讨伐钟明亮。
English: Thief and robber Zhong Mingliang invaded Zhangzhou, plundered Ningdu, and occupied Xiuling. The imperial edict dispatched five thousand guards from Jianghuai Province and neighboring counties, promoted Jiangxi Province's political commissar Rude to the rank of midshipman, and ordered him to lead the troops to fight against Zhong Mingliang.

古文：畲民丘大老集众千人寇长泰县，福州达鲁花赤脱欢同漳州路总管高杰讨平之。
现代文：畲民丘大老聚集部众一千人进犯长泰县，福州镇守官脱欢会同漳州路总管高杰将其讨平。
English: A thousand people from the gathering of the elders of Minqiu attacked Changtai County, and the Fuzhou town warden's debauchery meeting with Gao Jie, the general manager of Luzhou Road, leveled it.

古文：甲辰，复立光禄寺。
现代文：二十四日，重新设立光禄寺。
English: On the 24th, Koroku-ji Temple was re-established.

古文：戊申，徙广州按察司于韶州。
现代文：二十八日，把广州按察司迁到韶州。
English: On the 28th, the Guangzhou Investigating Division was moved to Ganzhou.

古文：以荆南按察司所统辽远，割三路入淮西，二路入江西。
现代文：因为荆南按察司所统辖的地区辽阔，分出三个路到淮西行省，两个路到江西行省。
English: Because the area under the jurisdiction of the Jingnan Investigating Division is vast, there are three roads to Huaxi Province and two roads to Jiangxi Province.

古文：立咸平至聂延驿十五所。
现代文：设立咸平到聂延的驿站十五所。
English: Fifteen stations will be set up from Hamping to Louyan.

古文：废甘州路宣课提举司入宁夏都转运使司。
现代文：废除甘州路宣课提举司，并入宁夏都转运使司。
English: The Ganzhou Road Class Announcement and Raising Division was abolished, and merged into the Ningxia Capital Transportation Division.

古文：遣参知政事张守智、翰林直学士李天英使高丽，督助征日本粮。
现代文：派遣参知政事张守智、翰林直学士李天英出使高丽，督运助征日本的粮食。
English: Zhang Shouzhi, a political advisor to the prefectural governor, and Li Tianying, an associate professor of Hanlin University, were dispatched to Korea to supervise the transportation of Japanese grain.

古文：二月辛亥朔，诏籍江南户口，凡北方诸色人寓居者亦就籍之。
现代文：二月初一，下诏登记江南的户口，凡是北方寓居于江南的各族人也就近登记入册。
English: On the first day of February, all the people of all ethnic groups in the north who lived in the south of the Yangtze River were registered.

古文：浚沧州御河。
现代文：疏浚沧州的御河。
English: Dredging the Okawa River in Cangzhou.

古文：癸丑，爱牙合赤请以所部军屯田咸平、懿州，以省粮饷。
现代文：初三，爱牙合赤请求以所部军队到咸平、懿州屯田，以节省粮饷。
English: On the third day of the junior high school, Ai Yaga and Aka requested the army of the headquarters to go to Hampyong and Bozhou Tunden to save grain.

古文：己未，发和林粮千石赈诸王火你赤部曲。
现代文：初九，调发和林的粮食一千石赈济诸侯王火你赤的部属。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, you should transfer 1,000 koku of grain from the forests to the vassals of the feudal lords.

古文：置延禧司，秩正三品。
现代文：设置延禧司，秩禄为正三品。
English: Yonsei Division was established, and Chichiroku was raised to Shosanbon.

古文：壬戌，合木里饥，命甘肃省发米千石赈之。
现代文：十二日，合木里发生饥馑，命令甘肃行省发放一千石米赈济他们。
English: On the 12th, a famine occurred in Hegu, and the governor of Gansu Province was ordered to distribute one thousand koku of rice to help them.

古文：癸亥，诏立崇福司，为从二品。
现代文：十三日，下诏设立崇福司，秩禄为从二品。
English: On the 13th, the next imperial edict established the Office of the Reverend Sun Yat-sen, and the rank was raised to the second class.

古文：徙江淮省治杭州，改浙西道宣慰司为淮东道宣慰司，治扬州。
现代文：把江淮行省的治所迁移到杭州。把浙西道宣慰司改为淮东道宣慰司，治所在扬州。
English: The administrative center of Jianghuai Xing Province was moved to Hangzhou, and the Zhejiang West Road Publicity and Consolation Division was changed to Huai Dadu Publicity and Consolation Division, with the administrative center in Yangzhou.

古文：丙寅，尚书省臣言： 行泉府所统海船万五千艘，以新附人驾之，缓急殊不可用。
现代文：十六日，尚书省大臣上奏说： 行泉府所统辖的海船一万五千艘，用新归附的人驾船，形势急迫时完全不可信用。
English: On the 16th, the minister of Shangshu Province made a report, saying, "There are 15,000 seagoing vessels under the jurisdiction of the Quan Prefecture, and they are steered by the newly annexed people. When the situation is urgent, they are completely untrustworthy.

古文：宜招集乃颜及胜纳合儿流散户为军，自泉州至杭州立海站十五，站置船五艘、水军二百，专运番夷贡物及商贩奇货，且防御海道为便。 
现代文：应当招聚乃颜和胜纳合儿旧部流落、失散的民户为军，从泉州到杭州建立十五处海上驿站，每站设置五艘船、二百名水军，专事运送番夷外族的贡品和商贾贩运的奇货，而且可以防守海路，较为有利。 
English: It is necessary to recruit the displaced and dispersed households of the former Naian and Shengnahe children as an army, and establish 15 maritime stations from Quanzhou to Hangzhou, each station setting up five ships and 200 sailors, specializing in transporting the tributes of the Panyi foreign ethnic group and the strange goods trafficked by merchants, and can defend the sea route, which is more advantageous.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：命福建行省拜降、江西行院月的迷失、江淮行省忙兀带，合兵击贼江西。
现代文：命令福建行省的拜降、江西行枢密院的月的迷失、江淮行省的忙兀带，合兵在江西打击贼兵。
English: He ordered Fujian Province to surrender, Jiangxi Province to surrender, the Privy Council to surrender, and Jianghuai Province to surrender.

古文：大都路总管府判官萧仪尝为桑哥掾，坐受赃事觉，帝贷其死，欲徙为淘金。
现代文：大都路总管府判官萧仪曾经担任桑哥的掾吏，因受贿的事被发觉而犯罪，皇帝免了他的死罪，想要调遣他去淘金。
English: Xiao Yi, a magistrate of the General Administration of Capital Highway, once served as a bailiff of Sango, and was found guilty of accepting bribes. The emperor exempted him from the death penalty and wanted to send him to pan for gold.

古文：桑哥以仪尝钩考万亿库，有追钱之能，足赎其死，宜解职杖遣之，帝曲从之。
现代文：桑哥认为萧仪曾经核实万亿库，有追回钱财的功劳，足以赎买他的死罪，应当免职处以杖刑而遣送他离开，皇帝曲从了他。
English: Sango thought that Xiao Yi had verified the trillion yuan bank and had the merit of recovering money and property, which was enough to atone for his capital crime. He should be dismissed from his post and sent away with a cane punishment. Emperor Qu disobeyed him.

古文：丁卯，幸上都。以中书右丞相伯颜知枢密院事，将北边诸军。
现代文：十七日，皇帝临幸上都，命令中书右丞相伯颜掌管枢密院事务，率领北部边境各军。
English: On the 17th day of the month, the emperor went to the Shang capital and ordered the Chinese Minister of the Right, Bo Yan, to take charge of the affairs of the Privy Council and lead the armies along the northern border.

古文：成都管军万户刘德禄上言，愿以兵五千人招降八番蛮夷，因以进取交趾。
现代文：成都管军万户刘德禄上奏说，愿意率领五千名士卒招降八番蛮夷，借以进占交趾。
English: Liu Deru, the commander of the Chengdu army, said in his report that he was willing to lead five thousand dignitaries to recruit and demote eight barbarians, in order to advance the occupation.

古文：枢密院请立元帅府，以药剌罕及德禄并为都元帅，分四川军万人隶之，帝从之。
现代文：枢密院请求设立元帅府，任命药剌罕和刘德禄共同担任都元帅，分调四川的一万名士卒隶属于他们，皇帝允从。
English: The Privy Council requested the establishment of a marshal's office, appointed Yuchuan Han and Liu Delu to jointly serve as the capital marshal, and dispatched ten thousand soldiers from Sichuan to be subordinate to them, and the emperor agreed.

古文：以伯答儿为中书平章政事。
现代文：任命伯答儿为中书平章政事。
English: He appointed Botaer as the political affairs chief of Pingzhang.

古文：绍兴大水，免未输田租。
现代文：绍兴发生大水，免除尚未交纳的田租。
English: Floods in Shaoxing exempted the unpaid farm rents.

古文：合丹兵寇胡鲁口，开元路治中兀颜牙兀格战连日，破之。
现代文：合丹的军队进犯胡鲁口，开元路治中兀颜牙兀连日作战，击败了他。
English: Hetan's army invaded Hulukou and defeated him in a day-long battle during the reign of Emperor Kaiyuan.

古文：己巳，立左右翼屯田万户府，秩从三品。
现代文：十九日，设立左右翼屯田万户府，秩禄为从三品。
English: On the 19th, the left and right wing of Tonden Mandokufu was established, and the rank was reduced to three ranks.

古文：玉吕鲁奏，江南盗贼凡四百余处，宜选将讨之。
现代文：玉吕鲁上奏说 ：江南的盗贼共有四百多处，应当选择良将讨伐他们。 
English: "There are more than four hundred thieves in the south of the Yangtze River, and we should choose a good general to fight them," said Yu Lulu.

古文：帝曰： 月的迷失屡以捷闻，忙兀带已往，卿无以为虑。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：月的迷失多次以捷报上奏，忙兀带已经前往，你不要忧虑这件事。 
English: The emperor said, "The loss of the moon has been heralded as a victory many times. You should not worry about it.

古文：皇孙甘不剌所部军乏食，发大同路榷场粮赈之。
现代文：皇孙甘不剌所部的军队缺粮，调发大同路榷场的粮食赈济他。
English: Emperor Sun Yat-sen's army was short of food, so he sent grain from Datong Road to supply it.

古文：甲戌，命巩昌便宜都总帅汪惟和将所部军万人北征，令过阙受命。
现代文：二十四日，命令巩昌便宜行事都总帅汪惟和率领所部一万名士卒北征，命他前往朝廷接受任命。
English: On the 24th, Gongchang ordered the Generalissimo Wang Weihe, who had acted cheaply, to lead the 10,000 soldiers of the headquarters to the North, and ordered him to go to the imperial court to accept the appointment.

古文：乙亥，省屯田六署为营田提举司。
现代文：二十五日，合并屯田的六个署衙为营田提举司。
English: On the 25th, the six sub-departments of Tonden were merged to form Yingtian Dechouji.

古文：三月庚辰朔，日有食之。
现代文：三月初一，发生日食。
English: On the first day of March, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：台州贼杨镇龙聚众宁海，僣称大兴国，寇东阳、义乌，浙东大震。
现代文：台州贼寇杨镇龙在宁海聚集部众，建伪号称大兴国，进犯东阳、义乌，浙东大为震恐。
English: The Taizhou bandit Yang Zhenlong gathered his followers in Ninghai, built a fake country called Daxing, and attacked Dongyang, Yiwu, and East Zhejiang University.

古文：诸王瓮吉带时谪婺州，帅兵讨之。
现代文：诸侯王瓮吉带当时正贬谪到婺州，率军将贼寇讨平。
English: At that time, the prince Wang Bingjitai was on his way to Zhangzhou to lead an army to defeat the bandits.

古文：立云南屯田，以供军储。
现代文：建立云南屯田，以供应军队的储备粮。
English: Yunnan Tun Tian was established to supply reserve grain to the army.

古文：桑哥言： 省部成案皆财谷事，当令监察御史即省部稽照，书姓名于卷末，仍命侍御史坚童视之，失则连坐。 
现代文：桑哥上奏说 ：中书省六部所发生的罪案，都是钱财方面的事，应当令监察御史就在省部查看究竟，把姓名写在卷末，并命令侍御史安童视察，如有错误则连坐。 
English: Sango said, "The crimes that occurred in the six departments of the Ministry of Education and Culture were all related to money and property. The inspector of history should be ordered to check the details at the provincial department, write his name at the end of the volume, and order the attendant inspector of history, Ando, to inspect, and if there is a mistake, to sit together.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：安西饥，减估粜米二万石。
现代文：安西发生饥馑，减价出售二万石米。
English: A famine occurred in Anxi, and 20,000 koku of rice were sold at a reduced price.

古文：甘州饥，发钞万锭赈之。
现代文：甘州发生饥馑，发放一万锭钱钞进行赈济。
English: Famine occurred in Ganzhou, and 10,000 baht banknotes were issued for relief.

古文：己丑，赐陕西屯田总管府农器种粒。
现代文：初十，赐给陕西屯田总管府农具、种子。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, agricultural tools and seeds were given to the Shaanxi Tunden General Administration Office.

古文：癸巳，东流县献芝。
现代文：十四日，东流县敬献灵芝草。
English: On the 14th, Lingzhi grass was dedicated in Dongliu County.

古文：甲午，太阴犯亢。
现代文：十五日，太阴星干犯亢宿天区。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the great yin and yang star committed the crime of encroaching on the heavenly region.

古文：乙未，铸浑天仪成。
现代文：十六日，铸成浑天仪。
English: On the 16th, the Hun Tian Yi was cast.

古文：癸巳，金齿人塞完以其民二十万一千户有奇来归，仍进象三。
现代文：二十四日，金齿人塞完率领他的百姓二十万零一千多户前来归附，并献上驯象三头。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the gold-toothed man led his people, more than two hundred thousand and one thousand households, to annex, and presented three tame elephants.

古文：夏四月己酉，复立营田司于宁夏府。
现代文：夏季，四月初一，重新在宁夏府设立营田司。
English: In the summer, on the first day of April, the Yingtan Division was re-established in Ningxia Prefecture.

古文：辽阳省管内饥，贷高丽米六万石以赈之。
现代文：辽阳行省辖区内发生饥馑，借贷高丽米六万石赈济饥民。
English: Famine occurred in the province of Liaoyang, and 60,000 koku of rice was borrowed to feed the starving people.

古文：壬子，孛罗带上别十八里招集户数，令甘肃省赈之。
现代文：初四，孛罗带呈上在别十八里所招的流民的户数，命甘肃行省赈济他们。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, Zhao Luo presented the number of households of the displaced people recruited in Beixiaoli, and ordered Gansu Province to assist them.

古文：癸丑，命塔海发忽都不花等所部军，屯狗站北以御寇。
现代文：初五，命令塔海派遣忽都不花等人所部的军队屯驻在狗驿以北防御贼寇。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, he ordered Taha to dispatch an army of soldiers stationed north of Kunlun to defend against the bandits.

古文：宝庆路饥，下其估粜米万一千石。
现代文：宝庆路发生饥馑，降低价钱卖售一千石米。
English: A famine occurred in Baoqing Road, and a thousand stone meters were sold at a reduced price.

古文：丙辰，命甘肃行省给合的所部饥者粟。
现代文：初八，命令甘肃行省供给合的部下饥饿乏食的人粮食。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, he ordered the government of Gansu Province to supply his starving and malnourished subordinates with grain.

古文：丁巳，遣宫验视诸王按灰贫民，给以粮。
现代文：初九，派官员视察诸侯王按灰部属的贫民，供给他们粮食。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, officials were sent to inspect the poor people of the vassal states and provide them with grain.

古文：戊午，禁江南民挟弓矢，犯者籍而为兵。
现代文：初十，禁止江南的百姓携带弓箭，违犯者登记入籍当兵。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the people in the south of the Yangtze River were prohibited from carrying bows and arrows, and violators were forced to register as soldiers.

古文：置江西福建打捕鹰坊总管府，福建转运司及管军总管言其非宜，诏罢之。
现代文：设置江西福建打捕鹰坊总管府，福建转运司及管军总管认为不妥，皇帝下诏撤销。
English: The establishment of the Jiangxi Fujian Yingfang General Administration Office was considered inappropriate by the Fujian Transportation Division and the General Administration of the Armed Forces, and was revoked by imperial edict.

古文：省江淮屯田打捕提举司七所，存者徐邳、海州、扬州、两淮、淮安、高邮、昭信、安丰、镇巢、蕲黄、鱼网、石湫，犹十二所。
现代文：裁撤江淮屯田打捕提举司七所，保存的有徐邳、海州、扬州、两淮、淮安、高邮、昭信、安丰、镇巢、蕲黄、鱼网、石湫，还有十二所。
English: Seven stations of the Jianghuai-Tuntian Anti-Trafficking and Raising Division were abolished, and twelve stations were preserved, including Xuhui, Haizhou, Yangzhou, Liahuai, Huai'an, Gaoyou, Zhaoxin, Anfeng, Zhenchao, Zhouhuang, Fishnet, and Shijiazhuang.

古文：甲子，池州贵池县民王勉进紫芝十二本。
现代文：十六日，池州贵池县百姓王勉进献紫色灵芝十二株。
English: On the 16th, Wang Mianjin, a villager from Guiqi County, Chizhou, donated 12 purple reishi mushrooms.

古文：戊辰，安南国王陈日烜遣其中大夫陈克用等来贡方物。
现代文：二十日，安南国王陈日火亘派遣其中大夫陈克用等前来进贡地方特产。
English: On the 20th, the King of Annan, Chen Riguo, sent one of them, Dr. Chen Kegui, to come to pay tribute with local special products.

古文：己巳，乞儿乞思户居和林，验其贫者赈之。
现代文：二十一日，乞儿乞思部的民户居住在和林，查实其中的穷困者赈济他们。
English: On the twenty-first day, the residents of the beggar's begging department lived in Warin, and verified that the poor among them would help them.

古文：庚午，沙河决，发民筑堤以障之。
现代文：二十二日，沙河决口，调发百姓筑堤以堵塞决口。
English: On the 22nd, people were sent to build a dike to block the estuary of the Shahe River.

古文：癸酉，以高丽国多产银，遣工即其地，发旁近民冶以输官。
现代文：二十五日，因为高丽国产银多，派遣工匠到该地，调发附近的百姓炼银交纳给官府。
English: On the 25th, because of the large amount of domestically produced silver in Korea, craftsmen were dispatched to the area, and the people in the vicinity were sent to make silver and pay it to the government.

古文：以莱芜铁冶提举司隶山东盐运司。
现代文：把莱芜铁冶提举司隶属于山东盐运司。
English: The Laiwu Iron and Steel Corporation is subordinate to the Shandong Salt Transportation Company.

古文：甲戌，以御史大夫玉吕鲁为太傅，加开府仪同三司，签江西等处行尚书省事。
现代文：二十六日，任命御史大夫玉吕鲁为太傅，加授开府仪同三司，充任江西等地行尚书省佥事。
English: On the 26th, Yu Lulu, the Imperial Historian, was appointed as the Taifu, and was also awarded the title of Kaifu Yi Tong San Sisi, and served as the representative of Jiangxi Province.

古文：召江淮行省参知政事忻都赴阙，以户部尚书王巨济专理算江淮省，左丞相忙兀带总之。
现代文：征召江淮行省参知政事忻都前来朝廷，任命户部尚书王巨济专主清算江淮行省钱粮的事务，由左丞相忙兀带统领。
English: He summoned all the political and administrative leaders of Jianghuai Province to come to the imperial court, and appointed the head of the household department, Shangshu Wang Guoji, to liquidate the affairs of saving money and grain in Jianghuai Province, which was led by the left-handed minister Busy.

古文：置浙东、江东、江西、湖广、福建木绵提举司，责民岁输木绵十万匹，以都提举司总之。
现代文：设置浙东、江东、江西、湖广、福建木棉提举司，要求百姓每年交纳木棉十万匹，由都提举司统管。
English: Set up the East Zhejiang, East Jiangsu, West Jiangsu, Hubei, Fujian Cotton Raising Division, requiring the people to pay 100,000 cottons each year, and the general management of the Raising Division.

古文：罢皇孙按摊不花所设断事官也先，仍收其印。
现代文：将皇孙按摊不花所设置的断事官也先革职，并收回其印信。
English: The adjudicator who set up the Emperor's grandson's stall without spending was also dismissed first, and his seal letter was withdrawn.

古文：尚书省臣言： 巩昌便宜都总帅府已升为宣慰使司，乞以旧兼府事别立散府，调官分治。 
现代文：尚书省大臣上奏说 ：巩昌便宜行事都总帅府已经升格为宣慰使司，请把原先兼管的府事另立散府，调遣官员另行治理。 
English: Shang Shuxu, the Minister of the Ministry of Education and Culture, said in his report: Gongchang's cheap action has promoted the General Superintendent's Office to the Consolation Envoy's Office. Please separate the prefectural affairs that were originally concurrently managed, and dispatch officials to manage them separately.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：立诸王爱牙赤投下人匠提举司于益都。
现代文：在益都设立诸侯王爱牙赤投下人匠户提举司。
English: In Yidu, the Princes Wang Aiga set up a red-throwing craftsmen and artisans promotion office.

古文：并省云南大理、中庆等路州县。
现代文：合并、裁撤云南行省的大理、中庆等路的州县。
English: The states and counties of Dali, Zhongqing and other roads in Yunnan Province will be merged and abolished.

古文：丁丑，升市令司为从五品。
现代文：二十九日，将市令司的秩禄升格为从五品。
English: On the 29th, the ranking of the city magistrate was upgraded to five stars.

古文：改大都路甲匠总管府为军器人匠都总管府。
现代文：把大都路甲匠总管府改为军器人匠都总管府。
English: The Dadu Road Armourer General Administration Office was changed to the Military Armourer General Administration Office.

古文：尚书省臣言： 乃颜以反诛，其人户月给米万七千五百二十三石，父母妻子俱在北方，恐生它志，请徙置江南，充沙不丁所请海船水军。 
现代文：尚书省大臣上奏说： 乃颜因为谋反被处死，他属下的民户每月供给一万七千五百二十三石米，他们的父母妻儿都在北方，恐怕会发生别的想法，请把他们迁移到江南，充任沙不丁所请求派去的海船水军。 
English: Shang Shuxu, the minister of the province, reported: Naoyan was executed for plotting a rebellion, and the households under him provided 17,523 koku of rice per month. Their parents, wives and children are in the north, and I am afraid that they will have other ideas. Please relocate them to the south of the Yangtze River to serve as the naval ships and sailors requested by Sabutin.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：五月庚辰，发武卫亲军千人浚河西务至通州漕渠。
现代文：五月初二，派遣武卫亲军一千人疏浚河西务到通州的漕运河渠。
English: On the second day of the first month of May, 1,000 soldiers from the People's Armed Police Force were dispatched to dredge the canal from Hexi to Tongzhou.

古文：癸未，移诸王小薛饥民就食汴梁，发大同、宣德等路民筑仓于昴兀剌。
现代文：初五，把诸侯王小薛部的饥民转移到汴梁就食。派遣大同、宣德等路的百姓在昴兀剌修建粮仓。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, he transferred the starving people of the Prince Wang Xiao Xue's Department to Jialiang to eat. He sent the people of Datong, Xuande and other roads to build grain silos in Handan.

古文：壬辰，太白犯鬼。
现代文：十四日，太白金星干犯鬼宿天区。
English: On the 14th, too much white gold caused the crime.

古文：软奴王术私以金银器皿给诸王出伯、合班等，且供馈有劳，命有司如数偿之，复赏银五万两、币帛各二千匹。
现代文：软奴王术私自把金银器皿赐给诸侯王出伯、合班等，而且供奉粮食有功，皇帝命令官府如数偿还他，另赏银五万两、绢帛各二千匹。
English: The emperor ordered the government to reimburse him for the number of gold and silver utensils and dishes he had given to the princes and princes, and to award him 50,000 taels of silver and 2,000 cormorants.

古文：丙申，诏： 季阳、益都、淄莱三万户军久戍广东，疫死者众，其令二年一更。 
现代文：十八日，诏令： 季阳、益都、淄莱的三万军户长期驻守广东，死于疫病的很多，命他们两年换防一次。 
English: On the 18th, the imperial edict stated that 30,000 military families from Jiyang, Yidu, and Palai had been stationed in Guangdong for a long time, and many of them had died of epidemics. They were ordered to change their fortifications once every two years.

古文：贼钟明亮率众万八千五百七十三人来降，江淮、福建、江西三省所抽军各还本翼。
现代文：贼首钟明亮率领部众一万八千五百七十三人来投降。江淮、福建、江西三省所抽调的军队各自返回本营。
English: The leader of the bandits, Zhong Mingliang, led a total of 18,573 troops to surrender. The troops dispatched from Jianghuai, Fujian and Jiangxi provinces each returned to their home base.

古文：行御史台复徙于扬州，浙西提刑按察司徙苏州。
现代文：行御史台重新迁到扬州，浙西提刑按察司迁到苏州。
English: The History Department was relocated to Yangzhou, and the Criminal Investigation Department was moved to Suzhou.

古文：以参知政事忻都为尚书左丞，中书参知政事何荣祖为参知政事，参议尚书省事张天祐为中书参知政事。
现代文：任命参知政事忻都为尚书左丞，中书省参知政事何荣祖为参知政事，参议尚书省事张天为中书省参知政事。
English: The appointed councillor and political affairs officer is Shang Shuxu Zu Rong Rong, the councillor and political affairs officer of Zhongshu is He Rong Zu, the councillor and political affairs officer of Zhongshu is Zhang Tian, the councillor and political affairs officer of Zhongshu.

古文：己亥，设回回国子学。
现代文：二十一日，设立回回族国子学。
English: On the 21st, the Hui-Hui Nationality Education Center was established.

古文：升利用监为从三品。
现代文：把利用监的秩禄升格为从三品。
English: Raising the rank of the Utilization Supervisor to the rank of Junior Third Rank.

古文：辽阳路饥，免往岁未输田租。
现代文：辽阳路发生饥馑，免除往年没有交纳的田租。
English: Famine occurred in Liaoyang Road, exempting farmers who did not pay farm rents in previous years.

古文：尚书省臣言： 括大同、平阳、太原无籍民及人奴为良户，略见成效。
现代文：尚书省大臣上奏说 ：收聚大同、平阳、太原没有户籍的百姓和与人为奴的人为良家民户略见成效。
English: Shang Shuxu, Minister of the Ministry of Education and Culture, said in his report: There has been some success in collecting people without household registration from Datong, Pingyang, and Taiyuan, as well as people from good families who have been enslaved.

古文：益都、济南诸道，亦宜如之。 
现代文：益都、济南各道也应当如此办理。 
English: Yidu and all the provinces of Jinan should also do the same.

古文：诏以农时民不可扰，俟秋冬行之。
现代文：皇上下诏说，因为农忙时百姓不可干扰，待秋冬季节再执行。
English: The imperial edict said that because the people should not be disturbed during the busy farming season, it would be implemented in the autumn and winter.

古文：罢永盈库，以所贮上供币帛入太府监及万亿库。
现代文：撤销永盈库，把所贮藏供作奉上的绢帛纳入太府监和万亿库。
English: The Yongying Library will be abolished, and the money stored for offerings will be included in the Taifu Supervision and Trillion Library.

古文：辛丑，御河溢入会通渠，漂东昌民庐舍。
现代文：二十三日，御河水上涨溢入会通渠，漂没东昌百姓的屋舍。
English: On the 23rd, the rising water of the river overflowed into the canal of the association, drowning the houses of the people of Dongchang.

古文：以庄浪路去甘肃省远，改隶安西省。
现代文：因庄浪路离甘肃省较远，将其改属于安西省。
English: Because Zhuanglang Road is far away from Gansu Province, it was changed to Anxi Province.

古文：省流江县入渠州。
现代文：裁撤流江县，并入渠州。
English: Liujiang County was abolished and merged into Zhouzhou County.

古文：泰安寺屯田大水，免今岁租。
现代文：泰安寺的屯田发生大水，免除今年的田租。
English: Tai'an Temple's tonden was flooded, so this year's field rent was waived.

古文：青山猫蛮以不莫台、卑包等三十三寨相继内附。
现代文：青山的猫蛮率不莫台、卑包等三十三寨相继归附朝廷。
English: Thirty-three villages in Aoyama, including Neomodai and Hebo, were successively annexed by the imperial court.

古文：六月戊申朔，发侍卫军二千人浚口温脑儿河渠。
现代文：六月初一，调遣二千名侍卫军疏浚口温脑儿河渠。
English: On the first day of June, 2,000 members of the Imperial Guard were dispatched to dredge the mouth of the Wenneung River.

古文：己酉，巩昌汪惟和言： 近括汉人兵器，臣管内已禁绝，自今臣凡用兵器，乞取之安西官库。 
现代文：初二，巩昌汪惟和上奏说 ：近来收缴汉人的兵器，臣的管区内已经完全禁绝，从今以后臣所用的全部兵器，请求从安西官库中领取。 
English: On the second day of the junior high school, Gong Chang Wang Wei and Shang Suo said: Recently, the weapons of the Han people have been confiscated, and they have been completely banned in the minister's jurisdiction. From now on, all weapons used by the minister are requested to be collected from the Anxi government warehouse.

古文：帝曰： 汝家不与它汉人比，弓矢不汝禁也，任汝执之。 
现代文：皇帝说： 你家与其他汉人不同，不禁止你携带弓箭，任由你执取。 
English: The emperor said, "Unlike other Han people, your family doesn't forbid you from carrying a bow and arrow.

古文：辛亥，诏以云南行省地远，州县官多阙，六品以下，许本省选辟以闻。
现代文：初四，诏令：因云南行省地处边远，州县官大多缺位，六品以下的官员，允许本省选择任命上奏朝廷。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the imperial edict was issued: because Yunnan was a remote province, most of the prefectural and county officials were absent, and officials below the sixth grade were allowed to choose to be appointed to the imperial court.

古文：桂阳路寇乱水旱，下其估粜米八千七百二十石以赈之。
现代文：桂阳路贼寇叛乱，水旱成灾，降低价格出售粮米八千七百二十石，以赈济百姓。
English: In Guiyang, there was a bandit rebellion, and the drought turned into a disaster. Grain and rice were sold at a reduced price of 8,720 koku to help the people.

古文：己未，西番进黑豹。
现代文：十二日，西番进贡黑豹。
English: On the 12th, the West Band paid tribute to the Black Panther.

古文：庚申，诸王乃蛮带败合丹兵于托吾儿河。丙寅，要忽儿犯边。
现代文：十三日，诸侯王乃蛮带在托吾儿河击败合丹的军队。十九日，要忽儿进犯边境。
English: On the thirteenth day, the princes of the princes of the princes of the princes of the princes of the princes of the princes of the princes of the princes of the princes of the princes of the princes of the princes of the princes of the princes of the princes of the princes of the princes of the princes

古文：辛巳，诏遣尚书省断事官秃烈羊呵理算云南，复立云南提刑按察司。
现代文：二十二日，下诏派尚书省断事官秃烈羊呵清理核算云南的钱粮。重新设立云南提刑按察司。
English: On the 22nd, the decision-making official of Shangshu Province, Balding Yang, was sent to clean up the accounting of Yunnan's money and grain. The Yunnan Criminal Investigation Department was re-established.

古文：月的迷失请以降贼钟明亮为循州知州，宋士贤为梅州判官，丘应祥等十八人为县尹、巡尉，帝不允，令明亮、应祥并赴都。
现代文：月的迷失请求任命降贼钟明亮为循州知州，宋士贤为梅州判官，丘应祥等十八人为县尹、巡尉，皇帝不准许，令钟明亮、宋士贤、丘应祥均前来京师。
English: At the request of the lost moon, the emperor did not allow the appointment of eighteen people, including the thief Zhong Mingliang as the judge of Xuzhou Zhizhou, Song Shixian as the judge of Meizhou, and Yue Yingxiang as the county Yin and captain, and ordered Zhong Mingliang, Song Shixian, and Yue Yingxiang to come to Beijing.

古文：大都增设倒钞库三所。
现代文：大都增设倒钞库三所。
English: Most of them have added three reverse banknote vaults.

古文：辽阳等路饥，免今岁差赋。
现代文：辽阳等处发生饥馑，免除今年的差役、赋税。
English: Famine occurred in Liaoyang and other places, and they were exempted from this year's forced labor and taxes.

古文：移八八部曲饥者就食甘州。
现代文：把八八部属的饥民转移到甘州就食。
English: The starving people of the 88 clans were transferred to Ganzhou to eat.

古文：海都犯边，和林宣慰使怯伯、同知乃满带、副使八黑铁儿皆反应之。
现代文：海都进犯边境，和林宣慰使怯伯、同知乃满带、副使八黑铁儿都反叛以策应他。
English: Haidu attacked the border, and Lin Xuancheng persuaded Shubo, his friend Naomangtai, and the deputy envoy Yahei Tie'er to rebel in response to him.

古文：合剌赤饥，出粟四千三百二十八石有奇以赈之。
现代文：合剌赤部发生饥馑，发放四千三百二十八石多粮食赈济饥民。
English: Famine occurred in the red part of Hefei, and 4,328 kilos of grain were distributed to feed the hungry.

古文：甲戌，西南夷中下烂土等处洞长忽带等以洞三百、寨百一十来归，得户三千余。
现代文：二十七日，西南夷中下烂土等处的洞长忽带等，率领三百个溪洞、一百一十处堡寨前来归附，共得二千多民户。
English: On the 27th, the leaders of the three hundred caves and one hundred and ten fortresses came to Southwest Yiwu to annex, and a total of more than two thousand households were acquired.

古文：乙亥，金刚奴寇折连怯儿。
现代文：二十八日，金刚奴进犯折连怯儿。
English: On the twenty-eighth day, King Kong attacked, but was repulsed.

古文：立江淮等处财赋总管府，掌所籍宋谢太后赀产，隶中宫。
现代文：设立江淮等处财赋总管府，掌管所登记在册的亡宋谢太后资产，隶属于中宫。
English: The General Administration of the Jianghuai and Other Provinces was established to administer the assets of the late Empress Song Xie, which were registered in the office, and was subordinate to the Middle Court.

古文：丁丑，汲县民朱良进紫芝。
现代文：三十日，汲县的百姓朱良进献紫灵芝。
English: On the 30th, Zhu Liang, a villager from Qiu County, donated purple reishi mushrooms.

古文：济宁、东平、汴梁、济南、棣州、顺德、平滦、真定霖雨害稼，免田租十万五千七百四十九石。
现代文：济宁、东平、汴梁、济南、棣州、顺德、平滦、真定连降大雨伤害庄稼，减免田租十万零五千七百四十九石。
English: Jining, Dongping, Qiliang, Jinan, Zhangzhou, Shunde, Pingyao, and Shingding suffered from continuous heavy rains that damaged crops, and the land rent was reduced and exempted by 105,749 koku.

古文：秋七月戊寅朔，海都兵犯边，帝亲征。
现代文：秋季，七月初一，海都的军队进犯边境，皇帝亲自出征。
English: In autumn, on the first day of July, the army of the sea capital attacked the border, and the emperor himself went to war.

古文：尚珍署屯田大水，从征者给其家。
现代文：尚珍署屯田发生大水，随从出征的，供给其家属粮食。
English: Shang Zhen Department's Tonden was flooded. Those who went to the front were supplied with grain for their families.

古文：己卯，驸马爪忽儿部曲饥，赈之。
现代文：初二，驸马爪忽儿的部属发生饥馑，给予赈济。
English: On the second day of the junior high school year, the subordinates of Hema Jaw Kureh experienced a famine and were given relief.

古文：辛巳，两淮屯田雨雹害稼，蠲今岁田租。
现代文：初四，两淮的屯田降下冰雹伤害庄稼，免除今年的田租。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, hailstorms that fell on two large farmlands damaged crops, exempting this year's field rent.

古文：雨坏都城，发兵、民各万人完之。
现代文：大雨毁坏都城的城墙，调遣兵卒、百姓各一万人修复。
English: Heavy rain destroyed the walls of the capital, and ten thousand soldiers and civilians were dispatched to repair them.

古文：开安山渠成，河渠官礼部尚书张孔孙、兵部郎中李处选、员外郎马之贞言： 开魏博之渠，通江淮之运，古所未有。 
现代文：安山渠开凿完成，河渠官礼部尚书张孔孙、兵部郎中李处选、员外郎马元贞上奏说： 开凿魏博的河渠，通达江淮的运输，这是自古以来所没有的。 
English: After the construction of the Ansan Canal was completed, Zhang Kongsun, member of the ceremonial department of the canal official, Li Shanzhuan, member of the military department, and Ma Yuanzhen, member of the foreign affairs department, said: "The construction of the canal in Weibo and the transportation to the Huai River is unprecedented since ancient times.

古文：诏赐名会通河，置提举司，职河渠事。
现代文：下诏赐名为会通河，设置提举司，管理河渠的事务。
English: In the following edict, the river was given the name Keitonghe, and a directorate was set up to manage the affairs of the canal.

古文：甲申，四川山齐蛮民四寨五百五十户内附。
现代文：初七，四川山齐的蛮民四寨共五百五十户归附朝廷。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, a total of 550 households in four villages of the barbarians in the mountains of Sichuan were annexed to the imperial court.

古文：丙戌，命百官市马助边。
现代文：初九，命令百官购买马匹援助边境。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, he ordered 100 officials to buy horses to help the border troops.

古文：敕以秃鲁花及侍卫兵百人为桑哥导从。
现代文：敕命以秃鲁花及侍卫军一百人作为桑哥的先导侍从。
English: He was accompanied by Baldur's Flower and a hundred guards as Sango's escort.

古文：丁亥，发至元钞万锭，市马于燕南、山东、河南、太原、平阳、保定、河间、平滦。
现代文：初十，发放至元的钱钞一万锭在燕南、山东、河南、太原、平阳、保定、河间、平滦购买马匹。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, 10,000 baht of banknotes of up to one yuan were issued to purchase horses in Yannan, Shandong, Henan, Taiyuan, Pingyang, Baoding, Hema, and Pingyao.

古文：戊子，太白经天四十五日。
现代文：十一日，太白金星行经天宇共四十五日。
English: On the 11th day, the great white planet Venus passed through the sky for a total of 45 days.

古文：庚寅，黄兀儿月良等驿乏食，以钞赈之。
现代文：十三日，黄兀儿月良等驿站缺少粮食，以钱钞赈济他们。
English: On the 13th, Huang Qi'er Yue Liang and other stations were short of grain, so he gave them money.

古文：辛卯，太阴犯牛。
现代文：十四日，太阴星干犯牛宿天区。
English: On the 14th day, the yin and yang of the stars caused the cow to enter the heaven.

古文：诏遣牙牙住僧诣江南搜访术艺之士。
现代文：下诏派遣牙牙住僧前往江南搜求、寻访儒生中有才能的人。
English: The following edict dispatched the resident priest Fang Fang to the south of the Yangtze River to search for and interview talented Confucian students.

古文：发和林所屯乞儿乞思等军北征。
现代文：调遣驻扎在和林的乞儿乞思等军队北征。
English: and dispatched troops stationed in Warim to join the Northern Expedition.

古文：癸巳，平滦屯田霖雨损稼。
现代文：十六日，平滦的屯田因降大雨损害庄稼。
English: On the 16th, the heavy rain caused damage to crops in the flat fields.

古文：甲午，御河溢。东平、济宁、东昌、益都、真定、广平、归德、汴梁、怀孟蝗。
现代文：十七日，御河泛滥，东平、济宁、东昌、益都、真定、广平、归德、汴梁、怀孟发生蝗灾。
English: On the 17th, the Yihe River flooded, and locust plagues occurred in Dongping, Jining, Dongchang, Yidu, Zhending, Guangping, Guide, Qiliang, and Huaimen.

古文：乙未，太阴犯岁星。
现代文：十八日，太阴星干犯木星。
English: On the 18th, the Great Yin star interfered with Jupiter.

古文：丁酉，命辽阳行省益兵戍咸平、懿州。
现代文：二十日，命令辽阳行省增兵戍守咸平、懿州。
English: On the 20th, he ordered Liaoyang Province to increase the number of troops to defend Xianping and Zhangzhou.

古文：戊戌，诛信州叛贼鲍惠日等三十三人。
现代文：二十一日，将信州叛贼鲍惠日等三十三人处死。
English: On the twenty-first, thirty-three people, including the Shinshu traitor Bao Huirong, were executed.

古文：左丞李庭等北征。
现代文：左丞李庭等人北征。
English: Zuocheng Li Ting and others left for the North.

古文：辛丑，发侍卫亲军万人赴上都。
现代文：二十四日，调遣侍卫亲军一万人前往上都。
English: On the 24th, 10,000 soldiers of the Imperial Guards were dispatched to Shangdu.

古文：河间大水害稼。
现代文：河间发生大水伤害庄稼。
English: Flooding in the river has damaged crops.

古文：壬寅，赋百官家，制战袄。
现代文：二十五日，向百官家征收赋税，制作战袄。
English: On the 25th, they collected taxes from hundreds of officials and made war banners.

古文：癸卯，沙河溢。
现代文：二十六日，沙河泛滥。
English: On the 26th, the Sand River overflowed.

古文：铁灯扞堤决。
现代文：铁灯杆堤防决口。
English: An iron light pole guards a breach in the dike.

古文：八月壬子，霸州大水，民乏食，下其估粜直沽仓米五千石。
现代文：八月初六，霸州发生水灾，百姓缺乏粮食，降低价格出售直沽仓的米五千石。
English: At the beginning of August 6, floods occurred in Bazhou, the people lacked food, and the price of rice from Zhoushangang was reduced to 5,000 koku.

古文：乙卯，郴之宜章县为广东寇所掠，免今岁田租。
现代文：初九，郴州的宜章县被广东的贼寇所劫掠，免交今年的田租。
English: At the beginning of the ninth month, Yizhang County in Luzhou was plundered by bandits from Guangdong and was exempt from paying this year's field rent.

古文：辛酉，大都路霖雨害稼，免今岁租赋，仍减价粜诸路仓粮。
现代文：十五日，大都路连日大雨伤害庄稼，免除今年的田租赋税，并减价发售各路粮仓的粮食。
English: On the 15th, Datu Road suffered from heavy rain for several days and damaged crops, exempted from this year's land rent tax, and sold grain from grain silos along the road at a reduced price.

古文：壬戌，漷州饥，发河西务米二千石，减其价赈粜之。
现代文：十六日，氵郭州发生饥馑，发放河西务的二千石米，降低价格出售以赈济饥民。
English: On the 16th, there was a famine in Zhangguozhou, and 2,000 koku of rice from Hexi Province was distributed and sold at a reduced price to help the hungry.

古文：癸亥，诸王铁失、孛罗带所部皆饥，敕上都留守司、辽阳省发粟赈之。
现代文：十七日，诸侯王铁失、孛罗带的部属全部饥饿乏食，敕令上都留守司、辽阳行省发放粮食赈济他们。
English: On the seventeenth day, the princes lost their iron, and all the subordinates in the Luo and Luo belts were starving and malnourished. The imperial command left the division and went to Liaoyang Province to distribute grain to help them.

古文：甲子，月的迷失以钟明亮贡物来献。
现代文：十八日，月的迷失把钟明亮的进贡之物送来献上。
English: On the 18th day of the month, the moon was lost and the bright bell was sent as a tribute.

古文：辛未，岁星昼见。
现代文：二十五日，木星白昼出现。
English: On the 25th, Jupiter appeared in the daytime.

古文：癸酉，以八番罗甸宣慰使司隶四川省。
现代文：二十七日，把八番罗甸宣慰使司隶属于四川省。
English: On the 27th, he subordinated the Eighth Division to Sichuan Province.

古文：台、婺二州饥，免今岁田租。
现代文：台州、婺州二州饥馑，免征今年的田租。
English: Taizhou and Zhangzhou, the two starving provinces, are exempt from this year's field rent.

古文：甲戌，诏两淮、两浙都转运使司及江西榷茶都转运司诸人，毋得沮办课。
现代文：二十八日，诏令两淮、两浙都转运使司，以及江西榷茶都转运使司的官员们，不得阻挠办理税赋事宜。
English: On the 28th, it was decreed that the officials of the two Huaihe and two Zhejiang transshipment offices, as well as the Jiangxi and Sichuan transshipment offices, must not obstruct the handling of tax matters.

古文：改四川金竹寨为金竹府。
现代文：把四川金竹寨改为金竹府。
English: Change Sichuan Jinzhuzhai to Jinzhufu.

古文：徙浙东道提刑按察司治婺州，河东山西道提刑按察司治太原，宣慰司治大同。
现代文：把浙东道提刑按察司的治所迁到婺州，河东山西道提刑按察司的治所迁到太原，宣慰司治所迁到大同。
English: The Zhejiang Zhuodu Detention Center was moved to Ganzhou, the Hedong Shanxi Road Detention Center was moved to Taiyuan, and the Xuanjie Detention Center was moved to Datong.

古文：九月戊寅，岁星犯井。
现代文：九月初二，木星干犯井宿天区。
English: On the 2nd day of the 9th month, Jupiter is in the zodiac.

古文：己卯，置高丽国儒学提举司，从五品。
现代文：初三，设置高丽国儒学提举司，秩禄为从五品。
English: In the third year of junior high school, the Confucianism Promotion Division of the Republic of Korea was established, and the rank was raised to the fifth grade.

古文：丙戌，罢济州泗汶漕运使司。
现代文：初十，撤销济州泗汶漕运使司。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, the Jeju-Gamdo Canal Transportation Office was abolished.

古文：丁亥，罢斡端宣慰使元帅府。
现代文：十一日，撤销斡端宣慰使元帅府。
English: On the eleventh day, the marshal's office revoked the good offices.

古文：癸巳，以京师籴贵，禁有司拘顾商车。
现代文：十七日，因为京师购米昂贵，禁止官府拘留、雇佣商贾的车辆。
English: On the 17th, because of the high cost of buying rice in Beijing, the authorities were prohibited from detaining and employing the vehicles of merchants.

古文：乙未，太阴犯毕。
现代文：十九日，太阴星干犯毕宿天区。
English: On the 19th, the great Yin star committed a crime and went to heaven.

古文：丙申，荧惑犯太微西垣上将。
现代文：二十日，荧惑星干犯太微西垣上将星官。
English: On the 20th, the fluorescent planet interfered with Admiral Nishigaki.

古文：增浙东道宣慰使一员。
现代文：增设浙东道宣慰使一员。
English: An additional member from Zhejiang Province was appointed as a consoling envoy.

古文：江淮省平章沙不丁言： 提调钱谷，积怨于众，乞如要束木例，拨戍兵三百人为卫。 
现代文：江淮行省沙不丁上奏说： 向上提调钱粮，积怨于众人，请按照要束木的成例，调拨三百名守军作为护卫。 
English: Jianghuai Province, Shabudin's report said: "If you want to raise and transfer money and grain, please follow the example of the bundles of wood and assign three hundred defenders as guards.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：平滦、昌国等屯田霖雨害稼。
现代文：平滦、昌国等地屯田连降大雨伤害庄稼。
English: Torrential downpours have hit farmlands in Pingyao, Changguo and other places, damaging crops.

古文：甲辰，以保定、新城、定兴屯田粮赈其户饥贫者。
现代文：二十八日，用保定、新城、定兴等地的屯田粮赈济这些地区饥饿贫困的民户。
English: On the 28th, tons of grain from the occupied fields in Baoding, Xincheng, Dingxing and other places were used to help the hungry and poor households in these areas.

古文：乙巳，诏福建省及诸司毋沮扰魏天祐银课。
现代文：二十九日，诏令福建行省以及各司衙，不得阻挠、干扰魏天交纳银税。
English: On the 29th, the imperial edict ordered the Fujian Provincial Government and all officials not to obstruct or interfere with Wei Tian's payment of silver tax.

古文：冬十月癸丑，营田提举司水害稼。
现代文：冬季，十月初七，营田提举司大水伤害庄稼。
English: In the winter, on the 7th day of the 10th month, the Yingtian River floods, damaging crops.

古文：太阴犯牛宿距星。
现代文：太阴星干犯牛宿的距星。
English: The too-shadowy star is the farthest star from the cow's abode.

古文：甲寅，荧惑犯右执法。
现代文：初八，荧惑星干犯右执法星。
English: Hatsuhachi, the fluorescent planet, is the star of right-wing law enforcement.

古文：以驼运大都米五百石有奇给皇子北安王等部曲。
现代文：用骆驼运送大都的五百多石米给皇子北安王等人的部属。
English: Camels were used to transport most of the capital's more than five hundred kilos of rice to the prince's subordinates, such as the king of North An.

古文：乙卯，以八番、罗甸隶湖广省。
现代文：初九，把八番、罗甸隶属于湖广行省。
English: At the beginning of the 9th century, the 8th and Rhodian were subordinated to the province of Hunan.

古文：丙辰，禁内外百官受人馈酒食者，没其家赀之半。
现代文：初十，朝内外百官凡接受他人馈赠酒食的，抄没其家产的一半。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, all the officials in and out of the imperial court who accepted gifts of wine and food from others had half of their family property confiscated.

古文：甲子，享于太庙。
现代文：十八日，向太庙奉献祭品。
English: On the 18th, offerings were made to the Imperial Temple.

古文：己巳，赤那主里合花山城置站一所。
现代文：二十三日，在赤那主里合花山城设置驿站一所。
English: On the 23rd, a station was set up in the main village of Akanazuchi, in the town of Akaasan.

古文：癸酉，尚书省臣言： 沙不丁以便宜增置浙东二盐司，合浙东、西旧所立者为七，乞官知盐法者五十六人。 
现代文：二十七日，尚书省大臣上奏说 ：沙不丁为方便起见增设浙东两处盐司，合浙东、浙西原来所设立的共七处，请任命懂得盐法的五十六个人为官。 
English: On the 27th, the Minister of Shangshu Province made a report, saying, "For the sake of convenience, Shabudin has added two salt departments in eastern Zhejiang. Together with the seven departments originally established in eastern Zhejiang and western Zhejiang, please appoint fifty-six people who understand the salt method as officials."

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：平滦水害稼。
现代文：平滦水灾伤害庄稼。
English: Flooding damages crops in Pingyao.

古文：以平滦、河间、保定等路饥，弛河泊之禁。
现代文：平滦、河间、保定等路发生饥荒，开放对于河流、湖泊的禁令。
English: Famine occurred in Pinglu, Hema, Baoding and other areas, and the opening of rivers and lakes was prohibited.

古文：闰十月戊寅，车驾还大都。
现代文：闰十月初二，皇上的车驾返回大都。
English: On the second day of the second month of October, the emperor's car drove back to the capital.

古文：尚书省臣言： 南北盐均以四百斤为引，今权豪家多取至七百斤，莫若先贮盐于席，来则授之为便。 
现代文：尚书省大臣上奏说 ：南方和北方的盐均以四百斤为一引，现在有权势的豪族大多用一张盐引取到七百斤，不如先把盐存在席包里，来领取就发给他，较为妥当。 
English: Shang Shuxu, the Minister of the Ministry of Education and Culture, said in his report: The salt in the south and the north is drawn by four hundred catties. Nowadays, most of the powerful powerful families use a piece of salt to draw seven hundred catties. It is better to put the salt in the seat bag first, and then give it to him when he comes to collect it.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：庚辰，桑哥言： 初改至元钞，欲尽收中统钞，故令天下盐课以中统、至元钞相半输官。
现代文：初四，桑哥上奏说： 刚开始改用至元钱钞的时候，想把中统钱钞尽数收回，所以令天下的盐税用中统、至元钱钞各半交纳给官府。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, Sango said, "When we first switched to yuan banknotes, we wanted to recover as many central banknotes as possible, so we ordered that half of the world's salt tax be paid to the government with central banknotes and half with yuan banknotes.

古文：今中统钞尚未可急敛，宜令税赋并输至元钞，商贩有中统料钞，听易至元钞以行，然后中统钞可尽。 
现代文：现在中统钱钞还不能收敛太急，应当令交纳赋税都用至元钞，商贩手中有中统钱钞的，听任其交换至元钞通行于市，然后中统钞就可以全部收回了。 
English: Now, the central government money bill cannot be reduced too quickly. It should be made that all taxes paid are used for yuan bills. If merchants have central government money bills in their hands, they should be allowed to exchange them for yuan bills to circulate in the city, and then all central government money bills can be recovered.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：月的迷失以首贼丘应祥、董贤举归于京师。
现代文：月的迷失把贼首丘应祥、董贤举带回京师。
English: The loss of the moon brought the thieves Yingxiang and Dongxian back to Beijing.

古文：癸未，命辽阳行省给诸王乃蛮带民户乏食者。
现代文：初七，命辽阳行省向诸侯王乃蛮带缺食的民户供应粮米。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Liaoyang Province was ordered to supply grain and rice to households suffering from food shortages.

古文：乙酉，命自今所授宣敕并付尚书省。
现代文：初九，命令从今以后所授予的宣命全部交给尚书省。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, it was ordered that all proclamations issued from now on should be handed over to the Ministry of Education.

古文：通州河西务饥，民有鬻子、去之他州者，发米赈之。
现代文：通州河西务发生饥馑，百姓中有出卖儿子的、前往其他州县的，发放粮米赈济他们。
English: There was a famine in the western region of Tongzhouhe. Some people sold their sons and went to other provinces and counties. Grain and rice were distributed to help them.

古文：丙戌，西南夷生番心嵒等八族计千二百六十户内附。
现代文：十一日，西南夷的生番心等八个部族，总计一千二百六十户归附朝廷。
English: On the 11th, eight tribes, including the Shobanshin of the Southwest Yi, and a total of 1,260 households were annexed to the imperial court.

古文：广东贼钟明亮复反，以众万人寇梅州，江罗等以八千人寇漳州，又韶、雄诸贼二十余处皆举兵应之，声势张甚。
现代文：广东贼寇钟明亮再次反叛，率领部众一万人进犯梅州，江罗等率领八千人进犯漳州，又有韶州、雄州各贼寇二十多处均起兵响应他们，声势非常嚣张。
English: The Guangdong bandit Zhong Mingliang rebelled again, leading 10,000 people to invade Meizhou, Jiang Luo and others led 8,000 people to invade Zhangzhou, and more than 20 bandits in Zhangzhou and Xiongzhou all raised troops to respond to them, the situation was very arrogant.

古文：诏月的迷失复与福建、江西省合兵讨之，且谕旨月的迷失： 钟明亮既降，朕令汝遣之赴阙，而汝玩常不发，致有是变。
现代文：诏令月的迷失和福建、江西行省再次合兵讨贼，并且向月的迷失下谕旨说： 钟明亮投降之后，我命你遣发他前来京师，而你视为儿戏不予遣发，以致有这个变故。
English: The emperor ordered the loss of the moon and the provinces of Fujian and Jiangxi to join forces again to hunt down the thieves, and issued an order to the loss of the moon, saying: After the bright surrender of the bell, I ordered you to send him to the capital, and you regarded it as a child's play not to send him, resulting in this change.

古文：自今降贼，其即遣之。 
现代文：从今以后投降的盗贼立即遣发他们前来京师。 
English: Thieves who surrender from now on will be immediately sent to the capital.

古文：丁亥，安南国王陈日烜遣使来贡方物。
现代文：十二日，安南国王陈日火亘派遣使臣来进贡地方特产。
English: On the 12th, the king of Annan, Chen Riguo, sent envoys to pay tribute to local special products.

古文：左、右卫屯田新附军以大水伤稼乏食，发米万四百石赈之。
现代文：左、右卫屯田的新附军因为大水伤害了庄稼，缺乏粮食，发放一万零四百石米赈济他们。
English: Left and right, the newly-annexed troops in Tonden were given 10,400 koku of rice to help them because the floods had damaged crops and there was a shortage of grain.

古文：辰星犯房。
现代文：水星干犯房宿天区。
English: Mercury is transiting your sign.

古文：己丑，太阴犯毕，荧惑犯进贤。
现代文：十四日，太阴星干犯毕宿天区，荧惑星干犯进贤星。
English: On the 14th, the eclipsing star entered the heavenly quarter, and the planet of light entered the celestial sphere.

古文：庚寅，江西宣慰使胡颐孙援沙不丁例，请至元钞千锭为行泉府司，岁输珍异物为息，从之，以胡颐孙遥授行尚书省参政、泉府太卿、行泉府司事。
现代文：十五日，江西宣慰使胡颐孙援引沙不丁的先例，请求借贷至元钱钞一千锭在泉府司进行周转，每年交纳珍异物品作为利息，皇上允从。向胡颐孙遥授行尚书省参政、泉府司大卿，掌管泉府司事务。
English: On the 15th, Jiangxi Xuan comforted Hu Qishan to invoke the precedent of Shabudin to request a loan of up to 1,000 yuan banknotes to carry out turnover in Quanfushi, and to pay rare items as interest every year. The emperor agreed. He awarded Hu Qishan to participate in the politics of Shangshu Province, and to be the grand secretary of Quanfushi, in charge of the affairs of Quanfushi.

古文：诏籍江南及四川户口。
现代文：诏令登记江南及四川的户口。
English: It is not enough to register the hukou in the south of the Yangtze River and Sichuan.

古文：丙申，宝坻屯田大水害稼。
现代文：二十一日，宝坻屯田发生水灾伤害庄稼。
English: On the 21st, floods occurred in Baodi Tunden, causing damage to crops.

古文：河南宣慰司请给管内河间、真定等路流民六十日粮，遣还其土，从之。
现代文：河南宣慰司请求发给辖区内河间、真定等路的流民六十天口粮，遣送他们返回本乡，皇上允从。
English: The Henan Propaganda and Consolation Department requested that 60 days of food rations be distributed to the displaced people in the areas under its jurisdiction, such as Hema and Zhending, and that they be sent back to their hometowns. The emperor agreed.

古文：婺州贼叶万五以众万人寇武义县，杀千户一人，江淮省平章不邻吉带将兵讨之。
现代文：婺州贼寇叶万五率领部众一万人进犯武义县，杀死一个千户，江淮行省平章不邻吉带率军讨伐他。
English: The Zhangzhou bandit, Guo Yewangu, led ten thousand people to invade Wuyi County, killing one thousand households, and Pingzhang Wujin Ji of Jianghuai Province led the army to fight him.

古文：遣使钩考大同钱谷及区别给粮人户。
现代文：派遣使臣考察核算大同的钱粮，并有区别地供给民户粮食。
English: Send envoys to investigate and calculate the money grain from Datong, and supply grain to private households in a differentiated manner.

古文：庚子，取石泗滨为磬，以补宫县之乐。
现代文：二十五日，在泗水之滨取石制成磬，以补充宫悬的乐器。
English: On the 25th, a cymbal made of stone was taken from the coast of Surabaya to supplement the musical instruments hanging in the palace.

古文：辛丑，罗斛、女人二国遣使来贡方物。
现代文：二十六日，罗斛、女人二国派遣使臣来进贡当地特产。
English: On the 26th, Luo Yu and the woman sent envoys from the two countries to pay tribute to local special products.

古文：癸卯，禁杀羔羊。
现代文：二十八日，禁止宰杀羔羊。
English: On the 28th, the slaughter of lambs was banned.

古文：浙西宣慰使史弼请讨浙东贼，以为浙东道宣慰使，位合剌带上。
现代文：浙西宣慰使史弼请求讨伐浙东的贼寇，任命史弼为浙东道宣慰使，职位在合剌带之上。
English: West Zhejiang Xuancheng sent Shi Yan to request a crackdown on the bandits in East Zhejiang, and appointed Shi Yan as the host Xuancheng in Zhejiang, a post above the concubine belt.

古文：甲辰，武平路饥，发常平仓米万五千石。
现代文：二十九日，武平路发生饥馑，发放常平仓的米一万五千石赈济饥民。
English: On the 29th, a famine occurred in Wuping Road, and 15,000 kilos of rice from the rice silos were distributed to help the hungry.

古文：赈保定等屯田户饥，给九十日粮。
现代文：赈济保定等地屯田户的饥民，供给他们九十天口粮。
English: To provide assistance to the starving people living in squatter households in Baoding and other places, and to provide them with food rations for 90 days.

古文：檀州饥民刘德成犯猎禁，诏释之。
现代文：檀州的饥民刘德成违犯禁止狩猎的命令，诏命释放他。
English: Liu Decheng, a starving man in Danzhou, violated the ban on hunting and was ordered to be released.

古文：湖广省臣言： 近招降赣州贼胡海等，令将其众屯田自给，今过耕时，不恤之，恐生变。 
现代文：湖广行省上奏说 ：近日招降赣州贼寇胡海等人，命令他率领自己的部下屯田以自给自足，如今已经过了农耕的时令，如果不抚恤他们，恐怕会发生变故。 
English: Hu Guangxing said in his report to the provincial government: Recently, Hu Hai, the bandit of Zhangzhou, was recruited and ordered to lead his subordinates to make self-sufficiency. Now that the season of farming has passed, if they are not taken care of, I am afraid that things will change.

古文：命赣州路发米千八百九十石赈之。
现代文：命赣州路发放粮米一千八百九十石赈济他们。
English: He ordered the Bozhou Road to distribute 1,890 kilos of grain and rice to help them.

古文：丙午，缅国遣委马剌菩提班的等来贡方物。
现代文：丙午日，缅国派遣委马剌菩提班的等人前来进贡地方特产。
English: On the afternoon of the third day, the members of the Myanmar National Dispatching Committee's Mahatma Bodhi class and others came to pay tribute with local specialties.

古文：十一月丙午朔，回回、昔宝赤百八十六户居汴梁者，申命宣慰司给其田。
现代文：十一月初一，申令供给居住在汴梁的一百八十六户回回人、昔宝赤人田地。
English: On the first day of November, a decree was issued to provide one hundred and eighty-six Hui-Hai households living in Qilian with rice fields that were once the property of the Akahito.

古文：丁未，禁江南、北权要之家毋沮盐法。
现代文：初二，发布禁令：江南、江北的权豪势要之家不得阻碍实行盐法。
English: On the second day of the first month, a ban was issued: the powerful and influential families in the south and north of the Yangtze River must not obstruct the implementation of the Salt Law.

古文：戊申，敕尚书省发仓赈大都饥民。
现代文：初三，敕令尚书省开仓赈济大都的饥民。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the emperor ordered Shang Shushu to open a warehouse to help the starving people in the capital.

古文：壬子，漳州贼陈机察等八千人寇龙岩，执千户张武义，与枫林贼合。
现代文：初七，漳州贼寇陈机察等八千人进犯龙岩，捕获千户张武义，与枫林的贼军会合。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, eight thousand people including Chen Jizha, a thief and robber from Zhangzhou, invaded Longyan, captured Zhang Wuyi from Qianhu, and rallied with the thief army from Maple Forest.

古文：福建行省兵大破之，陈机察、丘大老、张顺等以其党降。行省请斩之以警众，事下枢密院议。
现代文：福建行省的军队将贼军打得大败。陈机察、丘大老、张顺等率领他们的党羽投降，福建行省请求将他们斩首以警告众人，事情上达给枢密院讨论。
English: The troops of Fujian Province defeated the bandits. Chen Jizha, Qiu Da Lao, Zhang Shun and others led their followers to surrender. Fujian Province requested that they be beheaded as a warning to the people, and the matter was reported to the Privy Council for discussion.

古文：范文虎曰： 贼固当斩，然既降乃杀之，何以示信？
现代文：范文虎说 ：贼寇固然应当斩首，但既已投降又杀他们，用什么来表示信用呢？
English: Fan Wenhu said: Of course, the bandits should be beheaded, but since they have already surrendered and killed them, what can they use to show their trust?

古文：宜并遣赴阙。 
现代文：应当把他们都遣送来朝廷。 
English: They should all be sent to the imperial court.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：癸丑，建宁贼黄华弟福，结陆广、马胜复谋乱，事觉，皆论诛。
现代文：初八，建宁贼寇黄华的弟弟黄福，勾结陆广、马胜再次图谋作乱，事情觉察后都判处死刑。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Huang Fu, the younger brother of the Jianning thief, Huang Hua, colluded with Lu Guang and Ma Sheng to once again attempt to create a disturbance. After the matter was discovered, they were all sentenced to death.

古文：甲寅，瓜、沙二州城坏，诏发军民修完之。
现代文：初九，瓜州、沙州二州的城墙朽坏，诏令派遣军民修好。
English: At the beginning of the 9th month, the walls of Guazhou and Shazhou in the two states were rotten, and the military and civilians were dispatched to repair them.

古文：丙辰，罢阿你哥所领采石提举司。
现代文：十一日，撤销阿尔哥所掌管的采石提举司。
English: On the eleventh day of the month, the quarrying promotion division, which Argo was in charge of, was revoked.

古文：发米五百八十七石给昔宝赤五百七十八人之乏食者。
现代文：发放粮米五百八十七石给昔宝赤的五百七十八个饥饿乏食的人。
English: distributing 587 kilos of grain and rice to 578 starving and malnourished people in Baoji.

古文：丁巳，平滦、昌国屯户饥，赈米千六百五十六石。
现代文：十二日，平滦、昌国屯田的民户饥馑，赈济粮米一千六百五十六石。
English: On the 12th, the households in Pingyao and Changguotunten were starving, and the grain and rice ration was 1,656 koku.

古文：改播州为播南路。
现代文：把播州改为播南路。
English: Change Banzhou to Banzhou South Road.

古文：丁卯，诏山东东路毋得沮淘金。
现代文：二十二日，诏令山东东路不得阻挠淘金。
English: On the 22nd, Shandong East Road was ordered not to obstruct gold panning.

古文：赈文安县饥民。
现代文：赈济文安县的饥民。
English: Helping the hungry in Wen'an County.

古文：陕西凤翔屯田大水。
现代文：陕西凤翔的屯田发生大水。
English: Heavy water has occurred in Tongtian, Fengxiang, Shaanxi.

古文：戊辰，太阴犯亢。
现代文：二十三日，太阴星干犯亢宿天区。
English: On the 23rd, the great Yin star committed the crime of entering the heaven zone.

古文：己巳，发米千石赈平滦饥民。
现代文：二十四日，发放粮米一千石赈济平滦的饥民。
English: On the 24th, grain and rice worth 1,000 koku were distributed to help the starving people in Pingyao.

古文：改平恩镇为丘县。
现代文：把平恩镇改为丘县。
English: Change Ping'an Town to Qiu County.

古文：武平路饥，免今岁田租。
现代文：武平路发生饥馑，免除今年的田租。
English: Wuping Road is exempt from this year's field rent due to famine.

古文：桓州等驿饥，以钞给之。
现代文：桓州等地的驿站饥馑，发给他们钱钞。
English: Post stations in Hanzhou and other places are starving, and money is being given to them.

古文：十二月丁丑，蠡州饥，发义仓粮赈之。
现代文：十二月初二，蠡州发生饥馑，发放义仓粮赈济他们。
English: On the second day of December, famine occurred in Zhangzhou, and the distribution of granaries to help them began.

古文：戊寅，罢平州望都、榛子二驿，放其户为民。
现代文：初三，撤销平州的望都、榛子两处驿站，遣放其站户为民。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the two post stations of Bodu and Choshi in Pingzhou were revoked, and the residents of the stations were deported.

古文：辛巳，诏括天下马，一品、二品官许乘五匹，三品三匹，四品、五品二匹，六品以下皆一匹。
现代文：初六，下诏收聚全国的马匹。一品、二品官允许乘五匹马，三品官乘三匹，四品、五品官乘二匹，六品以下官均乘一匹。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, officials of the 1st and 2nd grade were allowed to ride five horses, officials of the 3rd grade were allowed to ride three horses, officials of the 4th grade and 5th grade were allowed to ride two horses, and officials of the 6th grade and below were allowed to ride one horse.

古文：平滦大水伤稼，免其租。
现代文：平滦发生大水伤害庄稼，免征其田租。
English: Those whose crops were damaged by the flood in Pingyao were exempted from paying field rent.

古文：小薛坐与合丹秃鲁干通谋叛，伏诛。
现代文：小薛因为和合丹秃鲁干通同谋叛而获罪，被处死。
English: Xiao Xue was found guilty of conspiring to commit treason with Haddan Baldur and was executed.

古文：绍兴路总管府判官白絜矩言： 宋赵氏族人散居江南，百姓敬之不衰，久而非便，宜悉徙京师。 
现代文：绍兴路总管府判官白薭矩上奏说 ：亡宋的赵氏族人散居在江南，百姓崇敬他们不衰，时间久了不利，应当把他们全部迁往京师。 
English: The judge of the Shaoxing Road General Administration of the People's Republic of China, Bai Xuanqin, said in his report: The Zhao clansmen of the late Song Dynasty lived in the south of the Yangtze River, and the people revered them. However, the time has passed, and it is not good. They should all be moved to Beijing.

古文：桑哥以闻，请擢絜矩为尚书省舍人，从之。
现代文：桑哥听说之后，请求提拔白薭矩为尚书省舍人，皇上允从。
English: After hearing this, Sango asked for the promotion of Baekhyun Choe to the post of provincial secretary, and the emperor agreed.

古文：给玉吕鲁所招集户五百人九十日粮。
现代文：供给玉吕鲁所招聚的民户五百人九十日口粮。
English: To provide 90 days of food rations to 500 people from private households recruited by Yululu.

古文：徙瓮吉剌民户贫乏者就食六盘。
现代文：把瓮吉剌部贫困的民户迁移到六盘去就食。
English: The poverty-stricken households in the lower part of Yanji were relocated to Liupan to eat.

古文：乙酉，命四川蒙古都万户也速带选所部军万人西征。
现代文：初九，命令四川的蒙古都万户也速带挑选所部一万名士兵西征。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, he ordered 10,000 households in the Mongol capital of Sichuan to hastily select 10,000 soldiers to go to the West.

古文：太白犯南斗。
现代文：太白金星干犯斗宿天区。
English: Too white Venus is in the heaven zone.

古文：丁亥，封皇子阔阔出为宁远王。
现代文：十一日，封皇子阔阔出为宁远王。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Fong Wukang became King Ningyuan.

古文：河间、保定二路饥，发义仓粮赈之，仍免今岁田租。
现代文：河间、保定二路发生饥馑，发放义仓的粮食赈济该地，并免征今年的田租。
English: Famine occurred in Kawama and Baoding 2nd Road. Grain from the granary was distributed to help the area, and this year's field rent was exempted.

古文：木邻站经乱乏食，给九十日粮。
现代文：木邻站经过兵乱后缺乏粮食，供给九十天口粮。
English: After the mutiny, the station next to the tree was short of grain and was supplied with rations for ninety days.

古文：命回回司天台祭荧惑。
现代文：命令回回司天台祭祀荧惑星。
English: Order to return to the Tiantai Temple to worship the fluorescent planet.

古文：庚寅，秃木合之地霜杀稼，秃鲁花之地饥，给九十日粮。
现代文：十四日，秃木合地方严霜冻死庄稼，秃鲁花地方发生饥馑，供给九十天口粮。
English: On the 14th, severe frosts froze crops to death in the bald tree region, and famine occurred in the bald rhododendron region, which was supplied with 90 days of rations.

古文：甲午，以官军万户汪惟能为征西都元帅，将所部军入漠，其先戍漠兵无令还翼。
现代文：十八日，任命管军万户汪惟能担任征西都元帅，率领所部军队进入沙漠，在他之前戍守沙漠的军队不让他们返回本营。
English: On the 18th, he appointed the commander of the army, Wang Weiwen, to serve as the marshal of the conquest of the Western Capital, and led the army of the headquarters into the desert. The army that guarded the desert before him did not allow them to return to their home camp.

古文：乙未，蠲大名、清丰逋租八百四十石，命甘肃行省赈千户也先所部人户之饥者，给钞赈黄兀儿月良站人户。
现代文：十九日，免除大名、清丰拖欠的田租八百四十石。命令甘肃行省赈济千户也先部属中饥饿乏食的民户。赐给钱钞赈济黄兀儿月良驿站的民户。
English: On the 19th, he exempted the daimyo and Qingfeng from the arrears of land rent of eight hundred and forty koku. He ordered to go to Gansu Province to give money to thousands of households who were starving and malnourished. He gave money to the households of Huangqiao and Yueliang Railway Station.

古文：庚子，武平饥，以粮二万三千六百石赈之。
现代文：二十四日，武平发生饥馑，以二万三千六百石粮食赈济他们。
English: On the 24th, famine broke out in Wuping, and they were fed with 23,600 kilos of grain.

古文：伯颜遣使来言边民乏食，诏赐网罟，使取鱼自给。
现代文：伯颜派遣使者前来上奏说边民缺粮，诏令赐给他们网罟，让他们打鱼自给自足。
English: Bo Yan sent an envoy to report that the people on the border were short of food, and the imperial edict gave them net baits so that they could catch fish and become self-sufficient.

古文：拔都昔剌所部阿速户饥，出粟七千四百七十石赈之。
现代文：勇士昔剌部属阿速的民户饥馑，拿出七千四百七十石粮食赈济他们。
English: The brave warriors of the former Yabu, who belonged to the people of Ahau, were starving, and took out seven thousand four hundred and seventy stones of grain to feed them.

古文：癸卯，发麦赈广济署饥民。
现代文：二十七日，发放麦子赈济广济署的饥民。
English: On the 27th, wheat was distributed to the starving people of the Guangxi Relief Department.

古文：是岁，马八儿国进花驴二，宁州民张世安进嘉禾一本。
现代文：这一年，马八儿国进贡花驴二头。宁州百姓张世安进献嘉禾二株。
English: In this year, two donkeys were brought in as a tribute from the Republic of China. Zhang Shian, a citizen of Ningzhou, brought in two stocks of Jiahe.

古文：诏天下梵寺所贮《藏经》，集僧看诵，仍给所费，俾为岁例。
现代文：诏令天下佛寺所保存的《藏经》，集合僧侣们阅览诵读，并赐给所需费用，使之成为每年的定例。
English: The emperor ordered the monks to gather to read and recite the "Zangjing" preserved by Buddhist temples around the world, and gave them the required fees, making it an annual regular event.

古文：幸大圣寿万安寺，置旃檀佛像，命帝师及西僧作佛事坐静二十会。
现代文：皇帝临幸大圣寿万安寺，安置檀香木佛像，命帝师和西僧入定做佛事，共二十次法会。
English: The Emperor Rinchen Dorjee Rinpoche built a sandalwood Buddha statue in the Ban'an Temple, and ordered the Emperor and the Western Monk to enter the temple to perform Buddhist rites. There were a total of twenty pujas.

古文：免灾伤田租：真定三万五千石，济宁二千一百五十四石，东平一百四十七石，大名九百二十五石，汴梁万三千九十七石，冠州二十七石。
现代文：免征因灾害而损伤庄稼的田租：真定三万五千石，济宁二千一百五十四石，东平一百四十七石，大名九百二十二石，汴梁一万三千零九十七石，冠州二十七石。
English: The field rents of crops damaged by disasters are exempted: 35,000 koku in Jinding, 2,154 koku in Jining, 147 koku in Dongping, 922 koku in Daming, 13,097 koku in Qiliang, and 27 koku in Guanzhou.

古文：赐诸王、公主、驸马如岁例，为金二千两、银二十五万二千六百三十两、钞一十一万二百九十锭、币十二万二千八百匹。
现代文：按照每年的惯例赏赐诸侯王、公主、驸马，总计黄金二千两、白银二十五万二千六百三十两、钱钞十一万零二百九十锭、绢十二万二千八百匹。
English: In accordance with the annual practice, princes, princesses, and horses were awarded a total of 2,002 pieces of gold, 252,632 pieces of silver, 102,290 pieces of money, and 122,800 horses.

古文：断死罪五十九人。
现代文：全年判处死刑的罪犯五十九人。
English: Fifty-nine criminals were sentenced to death throughout the year.

