古文：凡与敌战，军中有畏怯者，鼓之不进，未闻金先退，须择而杀之，以戒其众。若三军之士，人人皆惧，则不可加诛戮。
现代文：凡是对敌作战，如果军队中有畏敌怯战的人，听到击鼓进军的号令不前进，还未听到鸣锣收兵的号令就撤退，对于这种人一定要军法处死，用来警戒其他人，如果全军上下都惧怕敌人，就不能使用杀戮震慑全军的方法了，因为这样做会严重挫伤军队士气。
English: When fighting against the enemy, if there are people in the army who are afraid of the enemy and afraid of war, if they do not advance when they hear the drumming of the marching orders, and retreat before they hear the sounding of the rallying call, such people must be executed according to military law to warn others. If the whole army is afraid of the enemy, it is impossible to use the method of killing and shocking the whole army, because doing so will seriously undermine the morale of the army.

古文：须假之以颜色，示以不畏；说之以利害，喻以不死，则众心自安。
现代文：将帅必须以勇武必胜的神色，告诉士兵敌人并不是强大到不可战胜，讲清勇与怯在对敌作战中的利害关系，告诉他们敢于战斗才能避免死亡。这样，军心士气自然就会稳定高昂。
English: The commander-in-chief must put on a brave and victorious appearance, tell the soldiers that the enemy is not too strong to be invincible, clarify the relationship between courage and cowardice in the battle against the enemy, and tell them that they must dare to fight in order to avoid death. In this way, the morale of the army will naturally be stable and high.

古文：法曰： 执戮禁畏。太畏则勿杀戮，示之以颜色，告之以所生。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 在对敌作战中要用杀戮的办法来制止畏敌怯战的问题发生，但当全军普遍存在畏敌怯战情绪时，就不能单靠杀戮的办法了；将帅应向部队展现自己英勇无畏的精神面貌，告诉他们以敢战而求得生存之策。 
English: As it is said in the Art of War: In the battle against the enemy, it is necessary to use the method of killing to stop the problem of fear of the enemy and fear of war, but when the whole army has a general feeling of fear of the enemy and fear of war, it is not possible to rely on the method of killing alone; the commander should show his heroic and fearless spirit to the troops, and tell them how to survive by daring to fight.

古文：《南史》：陈武帝讨王僧辩，先召文育与谋。
现代文：据《南史》记载：南朝梁敬帝时期，陈霸先率兵讨伐王僧辩，事先召集他的侄子陈蒨共同谋划作战方略。
English: According to the "Southern History," during the Southern Dynasty of Emperor Liang Jing, Chen Ba first led the troops to fight against Wang Sangfei, and summoned his nephew Chen Qi in advance to jointly plan the battle strategy.

古文：时僧辩婿杜龛据吴兴，兵甚众。武帝密令陈倩速还长城，立栅备之。
现代文：当时，王僧辩的女婿杜龛率兵拒守吴兴，其部队人数很多，陈霸先密令陈蒨率兵迅速回到长城，构筑营栅工事以防备杜龛来攻。
English: At that time, Du Xuan, the son-in-law of Wang Sangyan, refused to defend Wu Xing with a large number of soldiers. Chen Baishi secretly ordered Chen Xuan and his soldiers to quickly return to the Great Wall and build a camp fence to prevent Du Xuan from attacking.

古文：龛遣将杜泰乘虚掩至。将士相视失色，倩言笑自若，部分益明，于是众心乃定。
现代文：杜龛派遣部将杜泰率兵乘虚前来袭击长城，陈蒨所属部队将士在敌人的突然袭击之下，都面面相觑，惊惧失色，但陈蒨却异常镇静，谈笑自若，对兵力的部署安排，更加周密明确，故使部队情绪很快安定下来。
English: Du Tai and his soldiers from the Duyun dispatching department took advantage of the situation to attack the Great Wall. Chen Yu's troops, under the sudden attack of the enemy, all looked at each other and lost their color, but Chen Yu was extremely calm, talked and laughed freely, and made the deployment of troops more detailed and clear, so that the mood of the troops quickly settled down.

