古文：张玄素，蒲州虞乡人。
现代文：张玄素，蒲州虞乡县人。
English: Zhang Xuan Su, a resident of Yuxiang County, Puzhou.

古文：仕隋，为景城县户曹。
现代文：出仕隋朝，任景城县户曹。
English: He served in the Sui Dynasty and was appointed as the Household Cao of Jingcheng County.

古文：窦建德陷景城，执将杀之，邑人千余号泣请代，曰： 此清吏，杀之是无天也。
现代文：窦建德攻陷景城后，捉住他准备杀掉，城里一千多人哭喊着要求代替他死，说： 这是位清官，杀他就没有天理了。
English: After Dou Jiande captured Jingcheng, he was caught and prepared to be killed. More than a thousand people in the city cried and shouted, asking to die in his place, saying: This is a Qing official, there is no reason to kill him.

古文：大王即定天下，无使善人解体。 
现代文：大王您要夺取天下，就别让好人灰心失望。 
English: Great King, if you want to conquer the world, don't let good people be discouraged and disappointed.

古文：建德命释缚，署治书侍御史，不拜。
现代文：窦建德命令松绑，任命他为代理治书侍御史，他不接受。
English: Dou Jiande ordered him to loosen the tie and appointed him as the acting secretary of the history, but he did not accept.

古文：闻江都已弑，始为建德黄门侍郎。
现代文：听见炀帝在江都被杀后，才替窦建德任黄门侍郎。
English: After hearing that Emperor Qian was killed in the Yangtze River, he replaced Dou Jiande as the Yellow Gate attendant.

古文：贼平，授景州录事参军。
现代文：窦建德灭亡后，唐朝任命他为景州录事参军。
English: After Dou Jiande's death, the Tang Dynasty appointed him to join the Jingzhou Record Army.

古文：太宗即位，问以政，对曰： 自古未有如隋乱者，得非君自专、法日乱乎？
现代文：太宗李世民登位，向他询问朝政大事，他回答说： 自古以来还没有像隋朝那样动乱的原因，怕是君主专制独裁、法纪日益混乱吧？
English: Emperor Taizong Li Shimin ascended the throne and asked him about the political events of the dynasty. He replied: Since ancient times, there has been no reason for turmoil like that of the Sui Dynasty. Perhaps it is the increasingly chaotic monarchical dictatorship and legal discipline?

古文：且万乘之尊，身决庶务，日断十事，五不中，中者信善，有如不中者何？
现代文：再说一个大国的君主，亲自处理日常事务，一天处理十件，其中五件不恰当，就算另外五件确实妥善，跟处理不恰当的综合起来评价又怎样呢？
English: Furthermore, the monarch of a large country, who personally deals with everyday affairs, deals with ten things a day, five of which are inappropriate, even if the other five are indeed proper, what about the evaluation combined with the improper handling?

古文：一日万机，积其失，不亡何待？
现代文：日理万机，问题成堆，不亡国还等什么？
English: With all the problems piling up, what are we waiting for if we don't lose our country?

古文：若上贤右能，使百司善职，则高居深拱，畴敢犯之？
现代文：如果国君圣明臣子得力，使各主管官吏尽职尽责，那么在朝廷无为而治，谁敢冒犯？
English: If the sovereign Saint Ming, the minister's son, has the power to make the responsible officials perform their duties, then who would dare to offend the imperial court?

古文：隋末盗起，争天下者不十数，余皆保城邑以须有道听命，是欲背上怙乱者果鲜，特人君不能安之而挻之乱也。
现代文：隋朝末年叛乱四起，真正要争夺天下的不到十人，其他的都是要保全自己等有道君主出现再听命令，这说明要背叛君主乘机牟利的人到底是少数，只是国君不能使他们安居乐业才被裹挟叛乱。
English: At the end of the Sui Dynasty, there were four rebellions. Less than ten people really wanted to fight for the world. The others wanted to protect themselves and wait for a virtuous monarch to appear before listening to orders. This shows that those who wanted to betray the monarch and take advantage of the opportunity to make a profit were actually a minority. However, the sovereign could not let them live in peace and contentment, so they were forced to rebel.

古文：以陛下圣神，迹所以危，鉴所以亡，日慎一日，虽尧、舜何以加！ 
现代文：凭着陛下的圣明，对隋朝危难的原因做番研究，把它灭亡的教训作为鉴戒，一天比一天谨慎从事，即使是唐尧虞舜又凭什么超过？ 太宗说 ：好。 
English: Relying on His Majesty's wisdom, he made a thorough study of the causes of the Sui Dynasty's peril, took the lesson of its downfall as a warning, and became more and more cautious day by day. How could he surpass even the Tang Dynasty's Gu Yao? Taizong said, "Good."

古文：帝曰： 善。 拜侍御史，迁给事中。
现代文：任命他为侍御史，后来改任给事中。
English: He was appointed as an attendant of the Imperial Household Agency, and later he was reassigned to the Ministry of Justice.

古文：贞观四年，诏发卒治洛阳宫乾阳殿，且东幸。
现代文：贞观四年，诏令征调兵众劳役修建洛阳行宫乾阳殿，准备游幸东都。
English: In the fourth year of Zhenguan, the imperial edict ordered the recruitment and transfer of soldiers to build the Luoyang Xinggu Qianyang Hall, and prepare to tour the eastern capital.

古文：玄素上书曰：臣惟秦始皇帝藉周之余，夷六国，统壹尊，将贻之万世，及子而亡者，殚嗜奔欲，以逆天害人也。
现代文：张玄素上书说： 我想秦始皇凭借周朝的衰微，消灭六国，统一天下，准备传给子孙万代，却到他儿子的手里就灭亡了的原因，是满足嗜好追求欲望，以致违背天理伤害人民。
English: Zhang Xuansu wrote: I think the reason why Emperor Qin Shihuang, relying on the decline of the Zhou Dynasty, eliminated six countries, unified the country, and prepared to pass it on to his descendants for generations, but died at the hands of his son, was to satisfy his hobbies and pursue his desires, so that he violated the laws of nature and harmed the people.

古文：天下不可以力胜，唯当务俭约，薄赋敛，以身先之，乃能大安。
现代文：百姓承受不了，只应厉行节约，减轻赋税，以身作则，才能天下太平。
English: If the people can't bear it, they should only carry out austerity, reduce taxes, and lead by example in order to achieve world peace.

古文：今东都未有幸期，前事土木，戚王出籓，又当营构，科调繁仍，失疲人望，一不可也。
现代文： 如今游幸东都的时间还没确定，就提前大兴土木，外戚亲王到封地去，也会修建官府宅第，派收捐税征调劳役接连不断，就会使百姓疲惫失望，这是不行的原因之一。
English: Nowadays, the time for visiting Dongdu is not yet determined, so the construction of civil engineering is carried out in advance, the prince's relative will go to the fiefdom, and the official residence will be built, and the collection of taxes, the collection of taxes, and the transfer of laborers will continue one after another, which will make the people tired and disappointed. This is one of the reasons why it is not possible.

古文：陛下向平东都，曾观广殿，皆撤毁之，天下翕然，一口颂歌。
现代文：陛下从前平定东都时，曾把宽广的宫殿当作警戒都拆毁了，天下人心归向，齐声颂扬。
English: When His Majesty conquered Dongdu in the past, he demolished the vast palace as a warning, and the hearts of the people all over the world turned to him, praising him in unison.

古文：岂有初恶侈靡而后好雕丽哉？
现代文：怎能开始厌恶奢侈浪费后来又爱好雕饰华丽呢？
English: How is it possible to begin with an aversion to extravagance and waste and end up with a love of ornate carvings?

古文：二不可也。
现代文：这是不行的原因之二。
English: This is the second imperative.

古文：陛下每言巡幸者不急之务，徒焉虚费。
现代文：陛下常说游幸不是当务之急，是白白耗费资财。
English: His Majesty has often said that the tour is not an urgent matter, it is a waste of resources.

古文：今国储无兼年，又兴别都之役，以产怨讟，三不可也。
现代文：现在国库的存粮不够两年食用，又要兴建陪都的工程来招致怨恨，这是不行的原因之三。
English: One of the three reasons why this is not possible is that the grain stored in the treasury is not enough to feed the population for two years, and the project to build a new capital city is causing resentment.

古文：百姓承乱离之后，财赋殚空，虽蒙更生，意未完定，奈何营未幸之都，重耗其力，四不可也。
现代文：百姓在遭受战乱流离以后，财物已经耗尽，虽然蒙恩再生，情绪还没有稳定，怎能营建还没有游幸的陪都，重新耗费他们的物力人力，这是不行的原因之四。
English: After the people have been displaced by the war, their property has been depleted. Although they have been reborn with grace, their emotions have not yet stabilized. How can they build a capital that has not yet been visited, and re-expend their material and human resources? This is the fourth reason why it is not possible.

古文：汉祖将都洛阳，娄敬一言，即日西驾。
现代文：汉高祖准备建都洛阳，娄敬一番劝谏，当天就动身到长安去。
English: Han Gao Zu was preparing to build a capital in Luoyang, and after some persuasion, he left for Chang'an on the same day.

古文：非不知地土中，道里所均，但形胜不及关内，弗敢康也。
现代文：并不是不明白洛阳地处中原，交通方便人口集中，但是地势赶不上关中有利，就不敢追求安乐。
English: It is not that people do not understand that Luoyang is located in the Central Plains, with convenient transportation and a concentrated population, but if the terrain is not favorable to Guanzhong, they will not dare to pursue happiness.

古文：伏惟陛下化凋弊之俗，为日尚浅，讵可东巡以摇人心？
现代文：我想陛下消除隋朝的陋习，时间还不长，怎能巡幸东都让民心动荡不安？
English: I think that His Majesty has not had long to eliminate the bad habits of the Sui Dynasty. How can the inspection of happiness in the East make the people's hearts restless?

古文：五不可也。
现代文：这是不行的原因之五。
English: This is the fifth reason why it is not possible.

古文：臣尝见隋家造殿，伐木于豫章，二千人挽一材，以铁为毂，行不数里，毂辄坏，别数百人赍毂自随，终日行不三十里。
现代文： 我曾亲眼见过隋朝建造宫殿，到豫章县采伐木材，两千人拖一根木头，用铁做车毂，走不到几里路，车毂就损坏了，另外有几百人带上车毂跟着，一天走不了三十里路。
English: I once saw with my own eyes the Sui Dynasty building a palace. I went to Yuanzhang County to harvest timber. Two thousand people dragged a piece of wood and used iron to make a cart. Within a few miles, the cart was damaged. In addition, several hundred people followed with the cart, and they could not walk thirty miles a day.

古文：一材之费，已数十万工，揆其余可知已。
现代文：一根木头的耗费，已达几十万个日工，推算一下其他各项就可知耗费何等巨大了。
English: The cost of one piece of wood has reached hundreds of thousands of day laborers, and if you calculate the other items, you can see how huge the cost is.

古文：昔阿房成，秦人散；章华就，楚众离；乾阳毕功，隋人解体。
现代文：从前阿房宫建成了，秦朝就垮台了；章华台建成了，楚灵王的称霸企图也破产了；乾阳殿完工了，隋朝也分崩离析了。
English: Once the Afang Palace was built, the Qin Dynasty collapsed; Zhang Huatai was built, and King Chuling's attempt to dominate was bankrupt; the Qianyang Palace was completed, and the Sui Dynasty fell apart.

古文：今民力未及隋日，而役残创之人，袭亡国弊，臣恐陛下之过，甚于炀帝。
现代文：如今百姓的物力人力还没有赶上隋朝，却驱使伤残的百姓，沿袭隋朝的弊端，我怕陛下的过失，比炀帝更为严重。 
English: Nowadays, the material and human resources of the people have not yet caught up with the Sui Dynasty, but they have driven the disabled people to follow the drawbacks of the Sui Dynasty. I am afraid that Your Majesty's fault is more serious than Emperor Qian.

古文：帝曰： 卿谓我不如炀帝，何如桀、纣？ 
现代文：太宗说： 你说我不如隋炀帝，比起夏桀、纣王怎么样？ 
English: Taizong said, "You say I am not as good as the Sui and Qian emperors, but how am I compared to the Xia and Qian emperors?

古文：对曰： 若此殿卒兴，同归于乱。
现代文：张玄素回答说： 如果乾阳殿真的动工，都一样会天下大乱。
English: Zhang Xuansu replied: "If the construction of the Qianyang Palace really starts, there will be chaos all over the world.

古文：臣闻东都始平，太上皇诏宫室过度者焚之，陛下谓瓦木可用，请赐贫人，事虽不从，天下称为盛德，今复度而宫之，是隋役又兴。
现代文：我听说东都刚平定时，太上皇诏令将不合制度的宫殿烧掉，陛下说砖瓦木料可以利用，要求送给贫寒人家，事情虽然没有如愿，天下百姓称为大德。现在又要在那里测地修建宫殿，这表明又要兴修隋朝一样的工程。
English: I heard that when the Eastern Capital was just pacified, the Emperor's edict ordered the burning of the palace that did not conform to the system. His Majesty said that the bricks and timber could be used and requested that they be given to the poor. Although things did not go as hoped, the people of the world called it a great virtue. Now they want to measure the ground and build a palace there, which indicates that they want to build the same project as the Sui Dynasty.

古文：不五六年间，一舍一取，天下谓何？ 
现代文：不到六年时间，一会儿毁掉，一会儿修建，百姓会怎样议论呢？ 
English: In less than six years, what will the people say about the destruction and construction?

古文：帝顾房玄龄曰： 洛阳朝贡天下中，朕营之，意欲便四方百姓。
现代文：太宗回头对房玄龄说 ：让各地到洛阳朝拜进贡比较适中，我建乾阳殿，是想方便天下臣民。
English: Taizong turned back to Fang Xuanling and said, "Allowing people from all over the country to pay tribute to Luoyang is relatively moderate. I built Qianyang Palace to make it convenient for the subjects of the world."

古文：今玄素言如此，使后必往，虽露坐，庸何苦？ 
现代文：现在张玄素的意见是这样，假使以后一定要去，即便坐在露天，怎能感到辛苦？ 
English: Now Zhang Xuansu's opinion is this, if you must go in the future, even if you sit in the open air, how can you feel hard?

古文：即诏罢役，赐彩二百匹。
现代文：立即停止了这项工程，赏给张玄素彩色绢帛两百匹。
English: The project was immediately halted, and Zhang Xuansu was awarded 200 colorful dragonflies.

古文：魏征名梗挺，闻玄秦言，叹曰： 张公论事，有回天之力，可谓仁人之言哉。 
现代文：魏征以刚直闻名，听到张玄素的话，赞叹说 ：张公评论朝政，具有谏止皇上的力量，可以说是真诚正直人的话啊。 
English: Wei Zheng was famous for his straightforwardness. When he heard Zhang Xuansu's words, he said with admiration: Zhang Gong commented on the government of the dynasty and had the power to stop the emperor. It can be said to be the words of a sincere and honest person.

古文：历太子少詹事，迁右庶子。
现代文：张玄素任太子詹事，改任太子右庶子。
English: Zhang Xuansu was appointed as Prince Zhanji, and later as Prince Right's illegitimate son.

古文：时太子承乾事游畋，不悦学。玄素上书曰：天道无亲，惟德是辅。
现代文：当时太子李承乾老是出游打猎，不爱读书，张玄素上书说： 天意不讲关系亲疏，只是帮助有德的人。
English: At that time, Prince Li Chengqian was always out hunting and did not like to read. Zhang Xuansu wrote a letter saying, "God's will is not to have a close relationship, but to help virtuous people."

古文：苟违天道，人神弃之。
现代文：如果违背天意，百姓神灵都会抛弃他。
English: If he goes against the will of heaven, the people and gods will abandon him.

古文：古者田三驱，非以教杀，除民害也。
现代文：古人在三种情况下打猎，并不是倡导杀生，而是为民除去兽害。
English: The ancients hunted in three situations, not to advocate killing, but to remove animal damage for the people.

古文：今反以猎为娱，行之无常，不损盛德哉？
现代文：如今却把打猎当作娱乐，毫无节制，不是有损大德吗？
English: Today, however, hunting is treated as entertainment, without restraint. Isn't that a detriment to virtue?

古文：《传》曰： 事不师古，匪说攸闻。 
现代文：《左传》说： 办事不效法古人，不是我听到过的。 
English: "Zo Zhuan" said: It is not like the ancients who did not follow the law, it is not what I have heard.

古文：然则探道在学古，学古在师训。
现代文：那么探求真理在于向古人学习，学习古人在于听老师教导。
English: To seek truth, then, is to learn from the ancients, and to learn from the ancients is to listen to the teacher.

古文：孔颍达奉诏讲劝，宜数逮问，裨万分。
现代文：孔颖达秉承诏令讲学劝勉，应当经常找他请教，多少是有帮助的。
English: Kong Yingda adhered to the edict of the emperor to give lectures and exhortations, and should often seek his advice, which was somewhat helpful.

古文：博选贤杰，朝夕侍左右，与相规摩。
现代文：广泛挑选德才兼备的优秀人物，早晚在身边侍候，一起研讨。
English: A wide selection of outstanding people with both merit and talent will be waiting around in the morning and evening to discuss together.

古文：日知所亡，月无忘所能，此则善美矣。
现代文：每天学到不懂的知识，每月不忘已学到的东西，这才是美事了。
English: It's a beautiful thing to learn new things every day, and not to forget what you've learned every month.

古文：夫在人上者常求为善也，然性不胜情，耽惑成乱，下有谀言，君道乃亏。
现代文： 治理百姓的人总是希望替百姓做好事，但是习性不能达到这种愿望，沉迷玩乐造成祸患，下边的人再一阿谀奉承，君子的德行就会招致损害。
English: Those who govern the people always hope to do good things for the people, but the habit cannot achieve this desire, the addiction to play causes disaster, the people below flatter again, and the gentleman's virtue will cause damage.

古文：古人有云： 勿以恶小不去，善小不为。 
现代文：古人说过： 别认为错误微小而不改，好事微小而不做。 
English: The ancients said: Do not think that mistakes are small and do not change, and good deeds are small and do not do.

古文：祸福之来，皆根于初，护终若始，犹惧其替，始不护焉，终将安归？
现代文：祸福的形成，都在开始埋下根源，始终如一地坚守正道，还怕丢失了，开始就不守正道，最后怎么安身立命？ 
English: The formation of calamities and blessings are all beginning to bury the root causes, consistently adhere to the right path, and are afraid of being lost, do not adhere to the right path at the beginning, and finally how to survive?

古文：太子不纳。
现代文：承乾太子不听。
English: Prince Chengxian did not listen.

古文：又上书曰：周公资圣人，而握沐吐飧，下白屋，况下周公之人哉？
现代文：又上书说： 周公姬旦具有圣人的资质，却在洗回头发吃餐饭时，多次停下去接待来客，谦恭地对待平民，何况我们这些秉赋不如周公的人呢？
English: The petition also said: Zhou Gong Hidan has the qualifications of a saint, but when he washed his hair and ate dinner, he stopped many times to receive guests and treated the commoners humbly, let alone those of us who are not as talented as Zhou Gong?

古文：殿下睿质天就，尚须学以表饰之。
现代文：殿下的颖睿资质天然生成，还必须靠学习来发扬光大。
English: His Royal Highness's brilliance is innate and must be nurtured by study.

古文：孔颖达、赵弘智皆宿德钜髦，兼识政机，望数召见，述古今，增懿明德。
现代文：孔颖达、赵弘智都是德高望重才能杰出的老人，并且懂得政治谋略，希望经常召见他们，讲述古今事理，完善陛下的美德。
English: Kong Yingda and Zhao Hongzhi are both elderly people of great virtue and talent, and they understand political strategy. I hope to see them often, to tell the truth about the past and present, and to perfect His Majesty's virtues.

古文：雕虫小技，正可间召，代博弈，不宜屡也。
现代文：诗辞歌赋，只能偶尔为之，交替下棋，不应经常地干。
English: Poetry and poetry can only be done occasionally, alternately playing chess, should not be done frequently.

古文：骑射畋游，亵戏酣歌，悦耳目，移情灵，不可以御。
现代文：骑马射箭打猎游玩，轻浮嬉戏沉溺歌乐，好听好看，搅乱性情，不能接受。
English: Horse riding, archery, hunting and playing, frivolous play, indulging in singing, good to hear and see, disturbing disposition, unacceptable.

古文：夫心为万事主，动而无节则乱，败德之原，实在于此。
现代文：人的思想是一切行为的主宰，行为不受思想节制就会混乱，败坏道德的根源，实质上就在这里。 
English: Human thought is the master of all actions. If actions are not restrained by thought, there will be chaos. This is the root cause of the corruption of morality.

古文：帝知数财正太子，频擢至银青光禄大夫，行左庶子。
现代文：太宗知道张玄素多次节制校正太子的过失，接连提升他为银青光禄大夫，兼任太子左庶子。
English: Emperor Taizong knew that Zhang Xuansu had repeatedly restrained and corrected the prince's faults, and successively promoted him to the position of silver Qingguanglu doctor, concurrently serving as the prince's left illegitimate son.

古文：太子久不见宾友，玄素曰： 宫中所见止妇人，不知如樊姬等可与益圣德者几何？
现代文：太子长时间不愿会见宾客朋友，张玄素说 ：东宫里接触的只是妇女，不知道像春秋时楚庄王的夫人樊姬一样能够帮助光大聪明道德的有几人？
English: For a long time, the prince did not want to meet with guests and friends, Zhang Xuansu said, "Only women are in contact with the East Palace. I don't know how many people can help Guangda, who is smart and moral, like the wife of King Chu Zhuang in the Spring and Autumn Period.

古文：若无之，即便诐艳嬖，何足顾哉！
现代文：如果没有，就是些巧言逢迎行为不正容貌妖冶受到宠幸的人，哪里值得看一眼啊？
English: If not, it's just some clever words that meet the behavior of dishonest appearance fairies who have been favored, where is it worth taking a look?

古文：上惟东宫之重，高署贤才为寮佐，今乃不得进见，将何以朝纳诲、夕补遗哉？
现代文：皇上考虑到太子的重要，提高规格安排德才兼备的担任辅佐的下属，如今他们却不能进宫拜见，将怎样早晚进献谏诲，弥补遗漏呢？ 
English: Considering the importance of the prince, the emperor raised the specifications and arranged for subordinates who are both talented and qualified to serve as assistants. But now they can't visit the palace. How will they make offerings sooner or later to make up for the omission?

古文：太子讳其切，夜遣户奴以骑楇狙击，危脱死。
现代文：太子忌讳他的严厉，派看门的奴仆在夜间用马鞭猝不及防地抽打他，危险得只是逃了一命。
English: The prince rebuked him for his harshness, and sent a servant to the gate to whip him suddenly in the night. He barely escaped with his life.

古文：尝闻宫中击鼓，叩閤正言，太子出鼓，对玄素破之。
现代文：有一次听到东宫里敲鼓，张玄素叩门规劝，太子搬出鼓来，当着他的面摔破了。
English: On one occasion, he heard drums being beaten in the East Palace, and Zhang Xuansu knocked on the door to persuade him. The crown prince brought out a drum and it broke in front of him.

古文：既不悛，丑德日闻。
现代文：太子不愿改正，丑恶的行为天天传出。
English: The crown prince is unwilling to make amends, and the ugly behavior is being reported on a daily basis.

古文：玄素不能已，上书曰：孔子曰： 能近取譬，可谓仁之方也。 
现代文：张玄素不得已，上书说： 孔子说： 能够就近找到事例，可以说是仁人的办法。 
English: As a last resort, Zhang Xuansu wrote: Confucius said: "If you can find a case nearby, it can be said to be a humane method."

古文：书传所载或过，臣请以近事喻之。
现代文：历史书籍资料上记载的事例，有的显得遥远，请让我用近代的事例来说明道理。
English: Some of the examples recorded in historical books and materials seem far away, so let me use modern examples to illustrate the point.

古文：周武帝平山东，庳宫陋食以安海内，而太子赟有秽德，乌丸轨以闻，帝慈仁不忍废。
现代文：北周武帝宇文邕平定山东后，住房低矮、饮食粗劣来使天下安宁，但太子宇文斌贝有污秽行为，乌丸轨报告了武帝，武帝慈爱不忍心废除他。
English: After Emperor Wu of Northern Zhou conquered Shandong, low-rise housing and poor diet were introduced to bring peace to the world. However, Prince Wu Wenbin Bei had filthy behavior and reported Emperor Wu to the Emperor Wu. Emperor Wu could not bear to abolish him.

古文：及践祚，狂暴日炽，宗祀以亡，隋文帝所代是也。
现代文：他即位后，放荡暴虐愈演愈烈，帝位因此丢失，隋文帝取代的就是他。
English: After he ascended to the throne, his debauchery and tyranny intensified. As a result, the imperial throne was lost, and he was replaced by Emperor Sui Wen.

古文：文帝因周衰，藉女资，虽无大功于人，然布德行惠，上下安赖。
现代文：隋文帝吸取北周灭亡的教训，凭借微弱的资质，虽然对老百姓没做大好事，但是布施恩惠，上下臣民安定有靠。
English: Sui Emperor Wen learned the lesson of the Northern Zhou Dynasty's downfall, and with his weak qualifications, although he did not do much good to the people, he gave out favors, and the subjects were stable and reliable.

古文：勇为太子，骄肆败度，今宫中山池，殿下所亲见者也。
现代文：杨勇立为太子，骄奢放纵败坏法度，如今宫里的假山水池是殿下亲眼看到的。
English: Yang Yong was installed as the crown prince, and his arrogance and indulgence corrupted the law. Today, the rockery pond in the palace is seen by His Imperial Highness himself.

古文：当是时，自谓有太山之安，讵知壬臣敢进其说哉？
现代文：在这时，自己以为天下稳如泰山，哪知奸臣们不敢说出真实情况呢？
English: At this time, they thought that the world was as stable as Mount Tai. Who knew that the treacherous ministers would not dare to tell the truth?

古文：向使动静有常，进止有度，亲君子，疏小人，黜浮华，守恭俭，虽有离间，乌能致慈父之隙哉？
现代文：如果行为遵守规则，举止按照法度，亲近君子，疏远小人，废除虚浮奢华，坚持谨慎节俭，即使有人挑拨离间，怎会招致慈父的怨恨呢？
English: If one acts according to the rules, behaves in accordance with the law, is close to the gentleman, keeps away from the villain, abolishes vanity and luxury, and adheres to prudence and frugality, even if someone provokes discord, how can he incur the resentment of a loving father?

古文：盖积德弗纯，令问不著，一遭谗，遂成其祸。
现代文：这是因为积久的行为不干净，美好的名声不明显，一遭受谗言攻击，就造成自己的祸患。
English: This is because the accumulated behavior is not clean, the good reputation is not obvious, and as soon as it is attacked by gossip, it will cause its own disaster.

古文：今上以殿下父子亲，故所资用不为限节，然诏未六旬，而用逾七万，骄奢亡艺，孰有过此？
现代文： 如今的皇上因和殿下有父子的亲情，所以东宫的费用不予限制，但是颁布这个诏令还不满六十天，费用却超过了七万，骄纵奢侈没有限制，谁超过了这种程度？
English: Today's emperor has a father-son relationship with His Imperial Highness, so there is no limit to the cost of the East Palace, but it has been less than sixty days since the decree was issued, but the cost has exceeded seventy thousand. There is no limit to the arrogance and luxury. Who has exceeded this level?

古文：龙楼、望苑，为工匠之肆，既阙视膳问安之宜，又无悦学好道之实。
现代文：龙楼、望苑，是工匠们的集市，既不便于伺候父皇母后，又不利于勤奋学习知识。
English: Longlou and Wangyuan are craftsmen's bazaars, which is not only inconvenient to wait for the father and mother of the emperor, but also detrimental to the diligent study of knowledge.

古文：上违君父慈训之方，下有因缘戮辱之罪。
现代文：对上违背父皇母后教训的原则，在下会出招致刑罚侮辱的罪错。
English: Contrary to the principle of violating the teachings of the father and mother of the emperor and empress, there will be a crime of incurring punishment and insult.

古文：所施与者，不游手杂色，则图画雕镂之人。
现代文：殿下布施接济的，不是乌七八糟的游荡汉，就是绘画雕刻的手艺人。
English: His Royal Highness does not give to beggars, but to artisans of painting and sculpture.

古文：外所瞻仰，此失已暴，内隐密者，尚可胜计哉？
现代文：表面看到的，这些过失已很明显，里头隐藏的，还能说得完吗？
English: Seen on the surface, these faults are already obvious, but what is hidden inside, can it be said?

古文：右庶子赵弘智经明行脩，臣谓宜数进召，以广徽美；今反猜嫌，谓妄相推引。
现代文：太子右庶子赵弘智通晓经术，修养德行，我认为应当经常召见，以便扩大好的声誉；现在反而猜忌，说是推荐得不恰当。
English: Zhao Hongzhi, the prince's son-in-law, is well-versed in scripture and cultivates virtue. I believe that he should be frequently summoned in order to expand his good reputation; now, on the contrary, he is suspicious, saying that it is inappropriate to recommend him.

古文：从善若流，尚恐不逮，饰非拒谏，祸可既乎？
现代文：随时听取忠言，还担心来不及，掩饰错误拒绝劝谏，灾祸能避免吗？ 
English: Listen to good advice at any time, still worry about being too late, cover up mistakes, refuse to be persuaded, can the disaster be avoided?

古文：书入，太子怒，遣刺客伺之。
现代文：谏札呈进东宫，太子发怒了，派刺客伺机暗杀他。
English: When the forged document was presented to the East Palace, the prince became angry and sent an assassin to kill him.

古文：会宫废，玄素坐除名为民。
现代文：碰上李承乾的太子身份被废除，张玄素牵连获罪罢官成为平民。
English: When Li Chengqian's status as crown prince was abolished, Zhang Xuansu was implicated and dismissed as a commoner.

古文：顷之，召授潮州刺史，徙邓州，讫不复亲近。
现代文：过了不久，招回任命为潮州刺史，又迁移到邓州，直到最后不再受到太宗亲近。
English: After a short time, he was called back to be appointed as a historian of Chaozhou and moved to Denzhou, until he was finally no longer close to Taizong.

古文：高宗时，以老致仕。
现代文：高宗李治时期，告老辞职。
English: During Gaozong Li Zhi's reign, Gaozong retired and resigned.

古文：麟德初卒。
现代文：麟德初年去世。
English: Lin De passed away the first year.

古文：始，玄素与孙伏伽在隋皆为令史，太宗尝问玄素宦立所来，深自羞汗。
现代文：当初，张玄素和孙伏伽在隋朝都任令史，太宗有一次问张玄素当官的履历，羞愧得他满头大汗。
English: At the beginning, Zhang Xuan Su and Sun Fu Jia were both appointed to the posts of prefectural governor in the Sui Dynasty. On one occasion, Emperor Taizong asked Zhang Xuan Su about his official resume, and he was so ashamed that he was sweating profusely.

古文：褚遂良见帝曰： 君子不失言于人，明主不失言于戏。
现代文：褚遂良拜见太宗说 ：君子不对别人妄加评论，明君不对臣子乱开玩笑。
English: Zou Suiliang paid a visit to Emperor Taizong and said, "A gentleman does not comment on others, and a gentleman does not make fun of a vassal."

古文：故言则史书之，礼成之，乐歌之。
现代文：所以他们的话就载入史册，完善礼仪，受到颂扬。
English: So their words went down in history, perfected etiquette, and were celebrated.

古文：居上能礼其臣，乃尽力以奉其上。
现代文：国君能够尊重他的臣子，臣子就会竭尽全力侍奉国君。
English: If the sovereign can respect his vassal, the vassal will do his best to serve the sovereign.

古文：近世宋武帝侮靳朝臣，攻其门户，至耻惧狼狈，前史以为非。
现代文：南朝的宋武帝刘裕侮辱嘲弄朝臣，攻击他的门第出身，直到人家羞愧恐惧狼狈不堪，前代的史官认为不对。
English: The Southern Dynasty's Song Emperor Liu Yu insulted and mocked courtiers, attacking his lineage, until people were so ashamed, afraid and confused that the previous generation of historians thought it was wrong.

古文：陛下昨问玄素在隋任何官，对曰： 县尉。 
现代文：陛下昨天问张玄素在隋朝担任什么官职，他回答说 ：县尉。 
English: Yesterday, His Majesty asked Zhang Xuansu what official position he held in the Sui Dynasty, and he replied: County Lieutenant.

古文：又问未为尉时，曰： 流外。 
现代文：陛下又问他没任县尉之前当的什么，回答说： 九品之外。 
English: His Majesty also asked him what he did before he became a county lieutenant, to which he replied: "Beyond the ninth grade."

古文：又问何曹司，玄素出不能徙步，颜若此灰，精爽顿尽，见者咸共惊怪。
现代文：还问他在哪儿当差，张玄素出殿时脚都挪不动，脸色死人般地灰白，神情痴呆，看到他的人都一样惊讶奇怪。
English: They also asked him where he was on duty. When Zhang Xuansu came out of the palace, his feet could not move, his face was as white as death, and he looked demented. Everyone who saw him was equally surprised and strange.

古文：唐家创业，任官以才，卜祝庸保，量能并用。
现代文：唐朝开创帝业，任用官吏只讲才干，巫师雇工，都按专长一并使用。
English: The Tang Dynasty pioneered the imperial profession, appointing officials only on the basis of talent, and employing sorcerers, all of which were used according to their expertise.

古文：陛下以玄素擢任三品，佐皇储，岂宜复对群臣使辞穷负耻，欲责其伏节死义，安可得乎？ 
现代文：陛下把张玄素提升为三品朝臣，辅佐太子，怎能又当着众位朝臣的面使他无话可答，受到屈辱，想要他以死坚守节义，怎能办得到呢？ 
English: How could His Majesty promote Zhang Xuansu to the rank of third-ranked courtier and assistant to the crown prince, and humiliate him in front of all the courtiers, leaving him speechless and humiliated, and want him to die to uphold the Constitution?

古文：帝曰： 朕亦悔之。 
现代文：太宗说： 对这事我也后悔。 
English: Emperor Taizong said, "I also regret this.

古文：伏伽虽广坐，陈说往事，无少隐焉。
现代文：孙伏伽即使是在大众场合，陈述已往的经历，没有一点儿隐讳。
English: Sun Fuga, even in a public setting, stated his past experience, without any concealment.

