古文：长孙肥尉古真
现代文：长孙肥，是代郡人。
English: His eldest grandson, Hii, is a representative of the county.

古文：长孙肥，代人也。
现代文：昭成帝时，他十三岁，被挑选入宫侍奉。
English: At the age of thirteen, he was chosen to enter the palace to serve Emperor Shōnen.

古文：昭成时，年十三，以选内侍。
现代文：年轻有风度，果断刚毅少言语。
English: Young and personable, resolute and strong-willed with few words.

古文：少有雅度，果毅少言。太祖之在独孤及贺兰部，肥常侍从，御侮左右，太祖深信仗之。
现代文：太祖在独孤部和贺兰部时，长孙肥时常侍奉跟从，在左右抵御欺侮太祖的人，太祖很信赖依仗他。
English: When the great-grandfather was in Doko and Horan, his eldest grandson, Hii, often served and followed him. He resisted those who bullied the great-grandfather on both sides. The great-grandfather trusted and relied on him.

古文：登国初，与莫题等俱为大将，从征刘显，自濡源击库莫奚，讨贺兰部，并有战功。
现代文：登国初年，长孙肥和莫题等人都做大将，跟随太祖征伐刘显，从濡源攻打库莫奚，讨伐贺兰部，都立有战功。
English: In the first year of the landing, the eldest grandson Fei and Moji and others were all generals. They followed the great-grandfather to conquer Liu Xian, attacked Kumo from the source of water, and fought against Helanbe, all of which had war exploits.

古文：太祖征蠕蠕，大破之，肥降其主匹候跋，事具《蠕蠕传》。
现代文：太祖征伐蠕蠕，大败他们，长孙肥降伏他们的头领匹候跋，事情记载在《蠕蠕传》。
English: The great-great-grandfather conquered the Cormorants, defeated them, and the eldest grandson, Fei, surrendered to them, leading the way. The story is recorded in the "Cormorant Biography."

古文：又从征卫辰及薛干部，破灭之。
现代文：又跟随征伐卫辰和薛干部，打败消灭他们。
English: He also followed the conquest of Wei Chen and Xue cadres, defeated and eliminated them.

古文：蠕蠕别主缊纥提子曷多汗等率部落弃父西走，肥以轻骑追至上郡，斩之。
现代文：蠕蠕的别部头领组纥提的儿子曷多汗等人率领部落抛弃父亲向西逃跑，长孙肥率领轻装的骑兵追赶到上郡，杀了他。
English: The other leaders of the Demu-Demu tribe, including the son of Kunti and others, led the tribe to abandon their father and flee to the west. The eldest grandson, Fei, led a lightly armed cavalry to the upper county and killed him.

古文：后从征中山，拜中领军将军。
现代文：后来跟随太祖征伐中山，被任命为中领军将军。
English: Later, he followed the great ancestor to conquer Zhongshan and was appointed as the general leading the army.

古文：车驾次晋阳，慕容宝并州刺史、辽西王农弃城宵遁，肥追之至蒲泉，获其妻子。
现代文：太祖停驻在晋阳，慕容宝的并州刺史、辽西王慕容农放弃城池夜晚逃跑，长孙肥追赶他到蒲泉，擒获他的妻子儿女。
English: The great-grandfather was stationed in Jinyang, Murong Bao's annexation of the state of Zhiguo, Liaoxi King Murong Nong abandoned the city and fled at night, the eldest grandson Hui chased him to Puquan and captured his wife and children.

古文：太祖将围中山，慕容宝弃城奔和龙。
现代文：太祖将包围中山，慕容宝放弃城池奔向和龙。
English: The great ancestor will encircle Zhongshan, and Murongbao will abandon the city and rush to the dragon.

古文：肥与左将军李栗三千骑追之，至范阳，不及而还。
现代文：长孙肥和左将军李栗率三千骑兵追赶他，到达范阳，没赶上而返回。
English: The eldest grandson of Fei He and the left general Li Li led three thousand cavalry to chase him, reached Fanyang, did not catch up and returned.

古文：遂破其研城戍，俘千余人。
现代文：于是攻下研城戍，俘获一千多人。
English: As a result, they captured Yancheng and captured more than a thousand people.

古文：中山城内人立慕容普邻为主，太祖围之。
现代文：中山城内的人立慕容普邻为君主，左狙包围他。
English: The people in Zhongshan City declared Murong Pu's neighbor to be the monarch, and encircled him on the left.

古文：普邻及出步卒千余人，欲伺间犯围。
现代文：萱整于是派出步兵一千多人，想伺机冲击包围圈。
English: Yan Zheng then sent more than a thousand infantrymen to wait for an opportunity to storm the encirclement.

古文：太祖命肥挑战，伪退，普邻众追肥，太祖截其后，尽擒斩之。
现代文：太祖命令长孙胆挑战，假装退却，普邻的军队追击长孙肥，太担截断他们的后路，全部擒获斩杀了他们。
English: The great-grandfather ordered the eldest grandson to challenge, pretend to retreat, the neighboring army chased the eldest grandson, cut off their back way, captured and killed them all.

古文：时以士马少粮，遂罢中山之围，就谷河间。
现代文：这时因兵马缺少粮草，就解除对中山的包围，到河间谋食。
English: At this time, due to the lack of grain and grass, the soldiers and horses lifted the siege of Zhongshan and went to the river to find food.

古文：慕容贺邻杀普邻而自立。
现代文：慕容贺邻杀死萱邻而自己登位。
English: Murong He neighbor killed his neighbor and ascended to the throne.

古文：车驾次鲁口，遣肥帅七千骑袭中山，入其郛而还。
现代文：塞担停驻在鲁旦，派遣垦噩胆率领七千骑兵偷袭中山，进入外城后返回。
English: The garrison was stationed in Ludan, dispatched the commander of the 7th Cavalry, Zou Youguang, to mount a surprise attack on Zhongshan, entered the outer city, and then returned.

古文：贺邻以步骑四千追肥至泒水，肥自魏昌击之，获铠骑二百。
现代文：贺邻率领步兵骑兵四千人追赶长孙肥到弧水，长孙肥从魏吕攻打他，缴获鳢甲马匹二百套。
English: He Neighbor led four thousand infantry and cavalry to chase the eldest grandson to Arc Water, and the eldest grandson attacked him from Wei Lu and captured two hundred armored horses.

古文：肥中流矢，疮重，乃还。
现代文：长孙肥中流箭，疮伤严重，于是返回。
English: The eldest grandson, Hizhong Liuyan, was seriously wounded, so he returned.

古文：中山平，以功赐爵琅邪公。
现代文：中山平定，因功劳赐爵为琅邪公。
English: He subdued Zhongshan and was awarded a knighthood for his services.

古文：迁卫尉卿，改爵卢乡。
现代文：调任卫尉卿，改爵位为卢乡公。
English: He was transferred to the position of Captain of the Guards, and his title was changed to Lu Xianggong.

古文：时中山太守仇儒不乐内徙，亡匿赵郡，推群盗赵准为主。
现代文：当时中山太守仇儒不想向内地迁徙，躲藏在趟郡，推举盗贼趟准为头领。
English: At that time, Zhongshan Taishou, an enemy of Confucianism, did not want to migrate to the mainland, so he hid in Watarigun and promoted the thief Watarigun as the leader.

古文：妄造妖言云： 燕东倾，赵当续，欲知其名，准水不足。 
现代文：荒诞地编造诳惑人心的话说： 燕地向东倾，趟地当继续，要知他的名，淮河水不足。 
English: Absurdly fabricated and demagogic words said: Yan's land leans to the east, the journey should continue, to know his name, the Huai River is short of water.

古文：准喜而从之，自号使持节、征西大将军、青冀二州牧、钜鹿公。儒为长史。聚党二千余人，据关城，连引丁零，杀害长吏，扇动常山、钜鹿、广平诸郡。
现代文：赵准高兴地听从他的意见，自称使持节、征西大将军、青冀二州牧、钜鹿公，仇儒任长史，聚集党羽二千多人，占据关城，勾结丁零，杀害官吏，煽动常山、钜鹿、广平各郡。
English: Zhao Jun gladly followed his advice, claiming to be the envoy of the festival, the general of the Western Expedition, the herdsman of the two states of Qinghai and Hebei, and the ruler of Yangtze River, and the long-term enemy of Confucius. He gathered more than 2,000 party members, occupied Guancheng, colluded with Ding and Zi, killed officials, and incited the counties of Changshan, Yangtze River, and Guangping.

古文：遣肥率三千骑讨之，破准于九门，斩仇儒，生擒准。
现代文：太祖派遣长孙肥率领三千骑兵讨伐他们，在九门打败赵准，斩杀仇儒，生擒趟准。
English: The great-grandfather sent the eldest grandson Fei to lead three thousand cavalrymen to fight against them, defeat Zhao Jun in Jiumen, kill the enemy Zhu, and kill Zheng Jun.

古文：诏以儒肉食，准传送京师，轘之于市，夷其族。
现代文：诏令把仇儒的肉当食物，把趟准传送到京城，在街市车裂，夷减他的宗族。
English: The imperial edict decreed that the flesh of the enemy should be used as food, that the travel permit should be sent to the capital, that the car should be broken in the city, and that his clan should be reduced.

古文：除肥镇远将军、兗州刺史，给步骑二万，南徇许昌，略地至彭城。
现代文：太祖委任长孙肥为镇远将军、兖州刺史，给予步兵骑兵二万人，向南攻取许昌，攻到彭城。
English: The great-grandfather appointed his eldest grandson Fei as the general of Zhenyuan and the historian of Zhangzhou, and gave him 20,000 infantry and cavalry to conquer Xu Chang in the south and attack Pengcheng.

古文：司马德宗将刘该遣使诣肥请降，贡其方物。
现代文：司马德宗的将领刘该派遣使者前往长孙肥那裹请求投降，贡奉地方产品。
English: Liu Gai, the general of Sima Dezong, sent an envoy to his eldest grandson, Hina Wai, to request his surrender and offer tribute in the form of local products.

古文：姚平之寇平阳，太祖将讨之，选诸将无如肥者，乃徵还京师，遣肥与毗陵王顺等六万骑为前锋。
现代文：姚平侵犯平阳，太祖将要讨伐他，选拔众将领没有比得上长孙肥的，于是征召他回京城，派遣长孙肥和毗陵王元顺等率领六万骑兵充任前锋。
English: Yao Ping invaded Pingyang, the great-grandfather was going to fight him, and the selection of generals could not be compared to the eldest son of Hui, so he summoned him back to Beijing and dispatched the eldest son of Hui and Viling Wang Yuan Shun to lead sixty thousand cavalry to serve as a striker.

古文：车驾次永安，平募遣勇将，率精骑二百窥军，肥逆击擒之，匹马不返。
现代文：太祖停驻永安，姚平招募派遣勇将，率领精锐的骑兵二百人窥伺军队，长孙肥迎击擒获他，一匹马都没返回。
English: The great-grandfather was stationed in Yong'an, Yao Ping recruited and dispatched brave generals, led 200 elite cavalry to spy on the army, the eldest grandson Hui captured him, and not a single horse returned.

古文：平退保柴壁，太祖进攻屠之。
现代文：姚平后撤据守柴壁，太祖进军攻打屠减了他们。
English: After Yao Ping withdrew to defend Zhabei, Taizu marched in to attack and slaughter them.

古文：遣肥还镇兗州。
现代文：派遣长孙肥返回镇守兖州。
English: He sent his eldest son, Sunfei, back to the town of Bozhou.

古文：肥抚尉河南，得吏民心，威信著于淮泗。
现代文：长孙肥安抚慰问黄河以南，得到官吏百姓的欢心，威望信义闻名于淮水泅水。
English: South of the Yellow River, the eldest grandson Fei Anfu's condolences and condolences have won the favor of officials and the people, and the prestige and credibility are famous in Huai Shui and Surabaya.

古文：善策谋，勇冠诸将，每战常为士卒先，前后征讨，未尝失败，故每有大难，令肥当之。
现代文：他善于策划，勇气为众将之首，每次交战常在士卒前面，前后征讨，不曾失败，所以每当有重大困难时，都命令长孙肥去面对。
English: He was good at planning, courage was at the head of the generals, and every time he fought, he was often in front of the soldiers and fought back and forth. He never failed, so whenever there was a major difficulty, he ordered his eldest grandson, Fei, to face it.

古文：南平中原，西摧羌寇，肥功居多，赏赐奴婢数百口，畜物以千计。
现代文：向南平定中原，向西摧破羌族贼寇，长孙肥的功劳为多，赏赐给他奴婢几百人，牲畜财物以千计数。
English: To the south, he pacified the Central Plains, and to the west, he defeated the Qiang bandits. His eldest grandson Hui was credited with a great deal of work, and he was rewarded with several hundred slaves and maidservants, and thousands of livestock and property.

古文：后降爵为蓝田侯。
现代文：后来降爵为蓝田侯。
English: He was later demoted to Lord of Lantian.

古文：天赐五年卒，谥曰武，陪葬金陵。
现代文：天赐五年去世，谧号为武，在金陵陪葬。
English: He died five years ago, and was given the posthumous name Wu. He was buried in Jinling.

古文：子翰袭爵。
现代文：儿子长孙翰继承爵位。
English: His son Nagasunhan succeeded to the title.

古文：翰，少有父风。
现代文：长孙翰，年轻时有父亲的风采。
English: The eldest grandson, John, had his father's demeanor when he was young.

古文：太祖时，以善骑射，为猎郎。
现代文：太祖时，他因善于骑马射箭，做猎郎。
English: When he was the great-grandfather, he was a hunter because he was good at horseback riding and archery.

古文：太宗之在外，翰与元磨浑等潜谋奉迎。
现代文：太宗在外地，长孙翰和元磨运等人暗中谋划拥戴他。
English: While Taizong was out of the country, his eldest grandson Han and Yuan Moyun secretly plotted to win him over.

古文：太宗即位，迁散骑常侍，与磨浑等拾遗左右。
现代文：太宗即位，长孙翰升散骑常侍，和元磨等人在左右纠正过失。
English: Emperor Taizong ascended the throne, the eldest grandson Han Sheng rode as an equerry, and Yuanma and others corrected mistakes on the right and left.

古文：以功迁平南将军。
现代文：以功劳升任平南将军。
English: Promoted to the rank of General Pingnan with merit.

古文：率众镇北境，威名甚著，蠕蠕惮之。
现代文：率领军队镇守北方边境，威名十分显赫，蠕蠕畏惧他。
English: He is famous for leading troops to guard the northern border, and everyone is afraid of him.

古文：后为都督北部诸军事、平北将军、真定侯，给殿中细拾队，加旌旗鼓吹。
现代文：后来担任都督北部诸军事、平北将军、真定侯，赐给殿中细拾队，加授旌旗鼓吹。
English: Later, he served as the military governor of the northern provinces, the general of Pingbei, and the mayor of Zhending, and was given a detailed pick-up team in the palace, as well as the award for the propaganda of the banner.

古文：蠕蠕每犯塞，翰拒击有功，进爵为公。
现代文：蠕蠕时常侵犯边塞，长孙翰抗击有功劳，晋爵位为公。
English: Cormorants often encroach on the border fortress, and the eldest son, Sun Han, is credited with fighting against them, and his promotion to the peerage is public.

古文：世祖即位，徵还京师，进封平阳王，加安集将军。
现代文：世祖即位，征召他返回京城，进封爵位为平阳王，加授安集将军。
English: When the founder ascended the throne, he was summoned to return to the capital and was given the title of the King of Pingyang and the additional title of General of Anji.

古文：蠕蠕大檀之入寇云中，世祖亲征之，遣翰率北部诸将尉眷，自参合以北，击大檀别帅阿伏干于柞山，斩首数千级，获马万余匹。
现代文：蠕蠕太檀进犯云生，世祖亲自征讨他，派遣长孙翰率领北部各将领、苏鲞等人，从参合以北，向柞山攻打大檀的别部头领阿伏干，斩首几千级，缴获马一万多匹。
English: Demigod Taitan invaded Yunsheng, the ancestor personally recruited him, dispatched the eldest Sun Han, led by the northern generals, Su Shi and others, from the north of Sanhe to Lushan to attack the other head of Daitan, Avogan, beheading thousands of levels and capturing more than ten thousand horses.

古文：又与东平公娥清出长川以讨大檀。
现代文：又和东平公娥青出兵长川去讨伐大檀。
English: In addition, he and Dongping Gong'e sent soldiers to Nagakawa to fight against sandalwood.

古文：大檀众北遁，追击，克获而还。
现代文：大檀的军队向北逃跑，长孙翰追击，取胜后返回。
English: Datan's army fled to the north, Chosunhan chased them and returned after winning.

古文：寻迁司徒。
现代文：不久升为司徒。
English: He was soon promoted to the position of assistant coach.

古文：袭赫连昌，破之。
现代文：袭击赫连昌，打败了他。
English: Attacked Herenchang and defeated him.

古文：世祖复征昌，翰与廷尉道生、宗正娥清率骑三万为前驱。
现代文：世祖又征伐赫连昌，长孙翰和廷尉道生、宗正娥遣率领骑兵三万充当前锋。
English: The founder of the dynasty also conquered Herengchang, with the eldest son, Sun Han, and the court lieutenants, Tao Sheng and Zong Zheng'e, leading 30,000 cavalrymen as the vanguard.

古文：昌战败，奔上邽，翰以八千骑追之，至高平，不及而还。
现代文：赫连昌战败，逃奔上邽，长孙翰用八千骑兵追赶他，追到高平，没赶上而返回。
English: Herenchang was defeated and fled to Shangyu, Chosun Han chased him with eight thousand cavalry, chased him to Gaoping, but did not catch up and returned.

古文：从袭蠕蠕，车驾度漠，大檀奔走。
现代文：随从袭击蠕蠕，车驾越过大漠，左擅逃跑。
English: He followed the attacking creep, drove across the desert, and fled.

古文：其弟匹黎率众赴之，遇翰交战，匹黎众溃走，斩其渠帅数百人。
现代文：他的弟弟匹黎率领军队赶往那裹，遇到垦至恋发生战斗，匹黎的军队溃散逃跑，杀死他的魁首几百人。
English: His brother, Piri, led an army there, and when a battle broke out, Piri's army scattered and fled, killing hundreds of his leaders.

古文：翰清正严明，善抚将士，太祖甚重之。
现代文：长孙翰清高正直严厉精明，善于安抚将领士兵，太祖十分器重他。
English: The eldest grandson, Han Qinggao, was honest, stern and shrewd, and good at appeasing generals and soldiers. The great-grandfather held him in high esteem.

古文：神三年薨，深见悼惜，为之流涕，亲临其丧，礼依安城王叔孙俊故事，赙赐有加。
现代文：神三年逝世，太祖深深地哀悼痛惜，为他流泪，亲自前往他的丧葬地，礼仪依照窒球王叔孙俊的旧例，追赠赏赐很多。
English: Three years after the death of Shen Yao, the great-grandfather deeply mourned and lamented, shed tears for him, and personally went to his burial place. The etiquette was in accordance with the old example of the king of the ball, Sun Jun, and there were many gifts and rewards.

古文：谥曰威，陪葬金陵。
现代文：谧号为威，在金陵陪葬。
English: His posthumous name was Wei and he was buried in Jinling.

古文：子平成，袭爵，降为公。
现代文：儿子平成，继承爵位，降为公。
English: His son, Heisei, inherits the title of nobility and is demoted to the rank of commoner.

古文：平成，少以父任为中散，累迁南部尚书。
现代文：平成，年轻时因父亲的功绩担任中散大夫，屡经升迁到南部尚书。
English: In the Heisei era, when he was young, he served as a doctor in Zhongshan due to his father's achievements, and was repeatedly promoted to Southern Shangshu.

古文：卒，陪葬金陵。
现代文：去世，在金陵陪葬。
English: After his death, he was buried with Jinling.

古文：子浑，袭爵。
现代文：儿子长孙浑，继承爵位。
English: His son, Mukhun, succeeded to the title.

古文：浑，初为中散，久之为彭城镇将。
现代文：长孙浑，起初任中散大夫，很久后任彭城镇将。
English: His eldest grandson, Hun, was at first a doctor in Zhongshan, and much later a general in Pengcheng.

古文：大和中卒。
现代文：大和年间去世。
English: He died during the Yamato era.

古文：子盛袭爵。
现代文：儿子长孙盛继承爵位。
English: His son, the eldest grandson, succeeded to the title.

古文：翰弟受兴。
现代文：长孙翰的弟弟受兴。
English: The younger brother of John's eldest grandchild is in the spotlight.

古文：世祖时，从征平凉，以功赐爵长进子，除河间太守。
现代文：世祖时，他随从征伐平凉，因功劳赐爵位为长进子，授任河间太守。
English: At the time of the founder, he followed the conquest of Pingliang, and was given a peerage for his meritorious service as the eldest son, and was appointed the governor of Kawama.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

古文：子安都，袭爵。
现代文：儿子安都，继承爵位。
English: His son, Ando, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：显祖时，为典马令。
现代文：显祖时，担任典马令。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xianzu, he served as a horse-riding official.

古文：受兴弟陈，世祖时为羽林郎。
现代文：受兴的弟弟长陈，世祖时担任羽林郎。
English: His younger brother, Cho Chen, served as Uebayashi at the time of the founder.

古文：征和龙，贼自西门出，将犯外围，陈击退之，追斩至长城下。
现代文：征讨和龙，贼寇从西门出来，将要冲击外面的包围圈，长孙陈打退了他们，追击到城墙下面。
English: Conquest and dragons, thieves and robbers came out from the west gate and were about to attack the encirclement outside. Chen's eldest grandson beat them back and chased them under the city wall.

古文：以功赐爵五等男。
现代文：因功劳赐爵位为五等男。
English: He was given a peerage for his services as the fifth highest ranking male.

古文：又从征凉州，为都将领。
现代文：又随从征讨凉州，担任都将领。
English: He also followed the conquest of Liangzhou and served as the commander-in-chief.

古文：入宫，迁殿中给事中，进爵为子，迁驾部尚书。
现代文：进入宫廷，调任殿中给事中，升爵位为子，调任驾部尚书。
English: Entered the court, transferred to the middle of the palace, promoted to the peerage as a son, transferred to the driver's office.

古文：复出为北镇都将。
现代文：又外出任北镇都将。
English: They will also go to Renbei Town.

古文：陈性宽厚，好学爱士，所历辄为人追思之。
现代文：长孙陈性格宽容厚道，喜好学习爱护士人，所到之处为人追念。
English: The eldest grandson Chen has a tolerant and kind personality, likes to study and loves nurses, and is fondly remembered everywhere he goes.

古文：高宗即位，进爵吴郡公，加安东将军。
现代文：高宗即位，升爵位为吴郡公，加授安束将军。
English: Gao Zong ascended the throne, and was raised to the peerage of Wu County, and promoted to General Anzuka.

古文：兴光二年卒。
现代文：兴光二年去世。
English: Xingguang died two years later.

古文：赠散骑常侍、吴郡王，谥曰恭，陪葬金陵。
现代文：追赠散骑常侍、吴郡王，谧号为恭，在金陵陪葬。
English: His posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous

古文：子头，袭爵。
现代文：儿子长孙头，继承爵位。
English: His son, the eldest grandson, will inherit the title.

古文：高宗时，为中散，迁内行长，典龙牧曹。
现代文：高宗时，担任中散大夫，调任内行长，掌管龙牧曹。
English: At the time of Gao Zong, he served as Zhongshan doctor, transferred to the post of governor, and was in charge of Longmu Cao.

古文：天安初卒。
现代文：天安初年去世。
English: He died in the first year of Tiananmen.

古文：子拔袭爵。
现代文：儿子长孙拔继承爵位。
English: His son succeeded to the peerage.

古文：陈弟兰。
现代文：长孙陈的弟弟长孙兰。
English: Eldest grandchild Chen's younger brother, Eldest grandchild Lan.

古文：世祖初，为中散。
现代文：世祖初年，担任中散大夫。
English: In the first year of the founder, he served as a middle-ranking doctor.

古文：常从征伐，典御兵器，赏赐甚厚。
现代文：时常随从征伐，掌管皇帝所用兵器，赏赐十分优厚。
English: He often accompanied the emperor on campaigns, was in charge of the weapons used by the emperor, and was rewarded very generously.

古文：后以破平凉功，赐爵睢阳子，加奋武将军。
现代文：后来因为打败平凉的功劳，赐爵位为睢阳子，加授奋武将军。
English: Later, because of his achievement in defeating Ping Liang, he was given the title of Shanyangzi and the additional award of General Tengwu.

古文：迁散骑常侍、北部尚书。
现代文：调任散骑常侍、北部尚书。
English: He was transferred to the position of straggler, and became the Northern Courtier.

古文：后除豫州刺史。
现代文：后来任豫州刺史。
English: Later, he was appointed as the chief historian of Yuzhou.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

古文：子乌孤，袭爵。
现代文：儿子乌孤，继承爵位。
English: His son, Wu Guo, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：高祖初，出为武都镇将，入为散令。
现代文：高祖初年，外出任武都镇将，召入任闲散官员。
English: In Gaozu's first year, he went out to serve as the mayor of Wudu Town and summoned idle officials.

古文：子乐，孝静时，金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：儿子长孙乐，孝静帝时，担任金紫光禄大夫。
English: When his son, the eldest grandson of Le, was the Emperor Xiao Jing, he served as the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu.

古文：肥弟亦干，太祖初，为羽林郎。
现代文：长孙肥的弟弟亦干，太祖初年，担任羽林郎。
English: The younger brother of the eldest grandson, Hii, also served as Uebayashi-ro in the first year of the great-grandfather.

古文：从平中原，除广平太守。
现代文：随从平定中原，授任广平太守。
English: Following the pacification of the Central Plains, he was given the title of Guangping Taishu.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

古文：子石洛，世祖初，为羽林郎，稍迁散骑常侍。
现代文：儿子石洛，世祖初年，担任羽林郎，逐渐升任散骑常侍。
English: His son Shiloh, the first year of the founder's reign, served as Uebayashi-ro, and gradually rose to the position of sanshaku (free-riding) samurai.

古文：从征赫连昌，为都将，以功拜乐部尚书，赐爵临淮公，加宁西将军。
现代文：随从征讨赫连昌，任都将，因功劳被任命为乐部尚书，赠爵位为临淮公，加授宁西将军。
English: Following the conscription of Herenchang, Ren will be appointed to the Ministry of Culture and Literature for his merits, and will be given a knighthood for Lin Huai Gong, and will be awarded the title of Ningxi General.

古文：神中卒，谥曰简。
现代文：神厅年间去世，谧号为简。
English: He died in the same year as Shinnohara, and his nickname was Jane.

古文：子真，少以父任为中散。
现代文：儿子长孙真，年轻时因父亲的功劳而担任中散大夫。
English: His son, Chosun Zhen, became a doctor in Zhongshan due to his father's merits when he was young.

古文：从征平凉，以功赐爵临城子，拜员外散骑侍郎、广武将军。
现代文：随从征讨平凉，因功劳赐爵位为临城王，被任命为员外散骑侍郎、广武将军。
English: He followed the conquest of Pingliang, and was given the title of King of Lincheng for his service. He was appointed as a non-commissioned cavalryman and general of Guangwu.

古文：袭父爵，降为建义将军、临淮侯。
现代文：继承父亲的爵位，降为建义将军、临淮侯。
English: He inherited his father's title and was demoted to General Jianyi and Prince Linhuai.

古文：迁司卫监。
现代文：调任司卫监。
English: He was transferred to the post of health inspector.

古文：征盖吴。
现代文：征讨盖吴。
English: The conquest of Gaiw.

古文：迁殿中尚书，加散骑常侍。
现代文：调任殿中尚书，加授散骑常侍。
English: He was transferred to be a courtier in the palace, and given the additional title of a samurai.

古文：从驾征刘义隆，至江。
现代文：随从皇帝征讨刘义隆，到达长江。
English: Accompanied by the emperor to enlist Liu Yilong and reached the Yangtze River.

古文：进爵南康公，加冠军将军，卒于军。
现代文：升爵位为南康公，加授冠军将军，在军中去世。
English: He was promoted to the peerage of Nankangong and awarded the title of champion general. He died in the army.

古文：子吴兒，袭爵。
现代文：儿子吴儿，继承爵位。
English: His son, Wu Er, will inherit the title.

古文：高祖初，为中散、武川镇将。
现代文：高祖初年，担任中散、武川镇将。
English: In Gaozu's first year, he served as a middle-ranking samurai and the commander of the town of Takekawa.

古文：太和初，卒，赠恆州刺史。
现代文：太和初年，去世，追赠为恒州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Taihe era, he passed away, and was posthumously awarded the title of "Hengzhou Sashimi Master."

古文：子长乐，袭。
现代文：儿子长乐，继承爵位。
English: His son, Changle, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：坐事爵除。
现代文：因事获罪被除去爵位。
English: He was stripped of his knighthood as a result of his conviction.

古文：后历陵江将军、羽林监。
现代文：后来历任陵江将军、羽林监。
English: Later, successively served as the General of the Neijiang and the Warden of the Forest.

古文：子荣族，武定中，征西将军、繁昌男。
现代文：儿子荣族，武定年间，担任征西将军、繁昌男。
English: His son Rong Zong, during the Wuding era, served as the general of the Western Expedition, and became a prosperous man.

古文：吴兒弟突，朔州长史。
现代文：吴儿的弟弟长孙突，担任朔州长史。
English: Wu Er's younger brother and eldest grandson, Zhu, served as the new governor.

古文：子元庆，平州仓曹参军。
现代文：儿子元庆，担任平州仓曹参军。
English: His son, Yuan Qing, joined the army as a Pingzhou Cang Cao.

古文：尉古真，代人也。
现代文：尉古真，是代郡人。
English: Lt. Gusin is a representative of the county.

古文：太祖之在贺兰部，贺染干遣侯引乙突等诣行宫，将肆逆。
现代文：太祖在贺兰部时，贺染干派遣侯引乙突等人前往行宫，将要杀死太祖。
English: When Taizu was in the Horan Club, Heizenghan sent Houyin Yutu and others to the Imperial Palace to kill Taizu.

古文：古真知之，密以驰告，侯引等不敢发。
现代文：古真知道这个消息，秘密奔驰相告，侯引等人不敢动手。
English: Gu Zhen knew this news, the secret was announced by Benz, and Hou Bing and others dared not do anything.

古文：染干疑古真泄其谋，乃执栲之，以两车轴押其头，伤一目，不伏，乃免之。
现代文：染干怀疑是古真泄露他的计谋，就抓住拷问他，用两个车轴押他的头，戳伤了一只眼睛，古真不承认，才放了他。
English: Suspecting that Gu Zhen was the one who had leaked his plan, he seized and tortured him. He pushed his head with two axles, injuring one of his eyes. Gu Zhen did not admit it, and then released him.

古文：登国初，从征库莫奚及叱突邻，并有功。
现代文：登国初年，随从征伐库莫奚和叱突邻，都有功劳。
English: In the first year after landing in China, he was a follower of the conquest of Kumo Province and a supporter of neighboring provinces, both of which were meritorious.

古文：又从救贺兰，破卫辰子直力鞮，复击慕容宝于参合陂。
现代文：又随从救助贺兰，打败卫辰的儿子直力鞑，又在参合陂攻打慕容宝。
English: He also came to the rescue of Horan, defeated Wei Chen's son, Zhi Lijun, and attacked Murong Bao in Shenghe.

古文：又从平中原，以功赐爵束州侯，加建节将军。
现代文：又跟随乎定中原，因功劳赐爵位为束州侯，加授建节将军。
English: He also followed Kading Nakahara, and was given the title of Lord of Sokcho for his services, as well as the title of General of Jianjie.

古文：太宗初，为鸿飞将军，率众五千，镇大洛城。
现代文：太宗初年，担任鸿飞将军，率领部众五千人，镇守大洛城。
English: In the first year of Emperor Taizong, he served as General Hongfei, leading 5,000 people and guarding the Greater Los Angeles.

古文：太宗西巡，古真与奚斤等率前军讨越勒部，大破之，获马五万匹，牛羊二十万头，掠二万余家西还。
现代文：太宗向西巡视，古真和奚斤等人率领先头部队讨伐越勒部，大败他们，缴获马五万匹，牛羊二十万头，掠取二万多家后从西方返回。
English: Taizong made an inspection tour to the west, Guzhen and Xingjin led the leading troops to fight against Yuelu, defeated them, captured fifty thousand horses, two hundred thousand cattle and sheep, and returned from the west after plundering more than twenty thousand.

古文：泰常三年，除定州刺史。
现代文：泰常三年，授任定州刺史。
English: Three years later, he was awarded the title of Dingzhou stabbing history.

古文：卒，子亿万袭。
现代文：去世，儿子亿万继承爵位。
English: He died and his son inherited the peerage.

古文：卒，子盛袭。
现代文：去世，儿子尉盛继承爵位。
English: He died, and his son, Joong Seong, inherited the title.

古文：古真弟太真，太宗初，为平南将军、相州刺史。
现代文：古真的弟弟太真，太宗初年，担任平南将军、相州刺史。
English: Guzheng's younger brother Taizhen, Taizong's first year, served as the general of Pingnan and the governor of Xiangzhou.

古文：太真弟诺，少侍太祖，以忠谨著称。
现代文：太真的弟弟尉诺，年轻时侍奉太祖，以忠诚谨慎闻名。
English: Taishin's younger brother, Ikuno, served his grandfather when he was young, and was known for his loyalty and caution.

古文：从围中山，诺先登，伤一目。
现代文：随从包围中山，尉诺在前面登城，伤了一只眼睛。
English: Zhongshan was surrounded by his followers, and Yi Nuo entered the city ahead of them, injuring one of his eyes.

古文：太祖叹曰： 诺兄弟并毁其目，以建功效，诚可嘉也。 
现代文：太祖叹息说： 尉诺兄弟都毁掉了他们的眼睛，来建立功勋，实在值得嘉奖。 
English: The great-grandfather sighed and said, "The Yi Nuo brothers all destroyed their eyes to establish merit, which is really worthy of commendation.

古文：宠待遂隆。
现代文：宠幸待遇更加隆盛。
English: The favored treatment is even more prosperous.

古文：除平东将军，赐爵安乐子。
现代文：授任干东将军，赐爵位为安乐王。
English: He was awarded the title of General Gan Dong and given the title of King of Peace and Happiness.

古文：从讨姚平，还，拜国部大人。
现代文：随从征讨型旺，返回，被任命为国部大人。
English: He returned from the conquest of Kata-wang and was appointed as the head of the provincial government.

古文：太宗初，为幽州刺史，加东统将军，进爵为侯。
现代文：叁塞初年，担任幽业刺史，加授东统将军，晋爵位为侯。
English: In the first year of Yu Xie, he served as the history of Yu Ye, was awarded the Dongtong General, and was promoted to the peerage as a marquis.

古文：长孙道生之讨冯跋也，诺与骁骑将军延普率师次辽西。
现代文：长孙道生讨伐遇毖时，慰遥和骁骑将军至匡萱率领军队停驻在辽酉。
English: When the eldest grandson, Tao Sheng, was killed in a battle, the army led by the general of comfort and cavalry, Zhi Kuangyu, was stationed in Liaocheng.

古文：转宁东将军，进爵武陵公。
现代文：改任宁束将军，晋爵位为武陵公。
English: He was reappointed as General Ningzoku and given the title of Wuling.

古文：诺之在州，有惠政，民吏追思之。
现代文：尉诸在州中，有仁政，民众官吏思念他。
English: In the state, there is a benevolent government, and the people and officials miss him.

古文：世祖时，蓟人张广达等二百余人诣阙请之，复除安东将军、幽州刺史，改邑辽西公。
现代文：世祖时，蓟城人张广达等二百多人前往朝廷请求，又授任尉诺为安束将军、幽州刺史，改爵位为辽西公。
English: At the time of the founder, more than 200 people, including Zhang Guangda from Liaocheng, went to the imperial court to make a request, and they were also appointed as General Anzuka, Yuzhou Sashi, and knighted as Liaoxi Gong.

古文：兄弟并为方伯，当世荣之。
现代文：兄弟都为一州长官，当代人认为他们很荣耀。
English: The brothers were both governors, and their success was considered a great honor by their contemporaries.

古文：燕土乱久，民户凋散，诺在州前后十数年，还业者万余家。
现代文：燕地动乱已久，民户凋零四散，尉诺在州中前后十几年，延和年间去世。
English: Yanzhi has been in turmoil for a long time, and the private households have been scattered. Yi Nuo was in the middle of the state for more than ten years, and passed away in the Yanhe year.

古文：延和中卒。第八子观，袭爵。
现代文：第八个儿子尉观，继承爵位。
English: The eighth son, Ye Guan, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：卒，子崘袭。
现代文：返回故乡去世，儿子崘,继承爵位。
English: He died after returning to his hometown, and his son,, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：诺长子眷，忠谨有父风。
现代文：尉诺的长子尉眷，忠诚谨慎有其父亲的风范。
English: Ikuno's eldest son, Ikuno, is loyal and cautious, following his father's example.

古文：太宗时，执事左右，为大官令。
现代文：太宗时，在左右管事，做太官令。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizong, he was in charge of affairs on the left and right, and issued official orders.

古文：时侍臣受斤亡入蠕蠕，诏眷追之，遂至虏庭。
现代文：当时侍奉的臣子受斤逃入蠕蠕，韶令尉眷追赶他，于是到了蠕蠕治所。
English: The vassal who was serving at the time escaped into the wormhole, and the lieutenant chased him as soon as possible, so he arrived at the wormhole treatment center.

古文：大檀问其故，眷曰： 受斤负罪天子，逃刑在此，不时执送，是以来取。 
现代文：大檀询问缘故，尉眷说： 受斤得罪了天子，逃避刑罚到了这裹，你不及时捉住押送，所以前来捉他。 
English: Asking Datan about the reason, the lieutenant said, "Heaven's son was offended by the cradle, and evaded punishment to this extent. You did not catch the escort in time, so come and catch him."

古文：眷遂擒受斤于大檀前。左右救之，乃免。
现代文：尉眷于是在大檀面前擒住受斤。大檀左右的人救受斤，受斤才免死。
English: As soon as possible, the soldier held on to the cradle in front of the large sandal. The people around the large sandal were saved by the cradle, and the cradle saved them from death.

古文：由是，以骁烈闻。
现代文：因为这件事，尉眷以骁勇闻名。
English: Because of this, the lieutenant became famous for his bravery.

古文：迁司卫监。
现代文：调任司卫监。
English: He was transferred to the post of health inspector.

古文：太宗幸幽州，诏眷辅世祖居守。
现代文：太宗前往幽州，诏令尉眷辅佐世祖留守。
English: Emperor Taizong went to Yuzhou, but Emperor Zhaozong's second-in-command and aide, Emperor Sasetsu, stayed behind.

古文：后征河南，督高车骑，临阵冲突，所向无前，贼惮之。
现代文：后来征伐黄河以南，尉眷督促高车的骑兵，在阵前冲击，所向无敌，贼寇畏惧他。
English: Later, he went to conquer the south of the Yellow River. His attendants urged the cavalry of the high-wheeled vehicle to charge ahead of the battle. He was invincible, and the bandits were afraid of him.

古文：世祖即位，命眷与散骑常侍刘库仁等八人分典四部，绾奏机要。
现代文：世祖即位，命令尉眷和散骑常侍刘库仁等八人分别掌管四部，同奏机要事务。
English: When the founder ascended the throne, he ordered eight people, including his retainers and his equestrian attendant Liu Kuren, to take charge of the four sections separately, and to take care of important matters.

古文：赐爵山桑侯，加陈兵将军。
现代文：赐爵位为山桑侯，加授陈兵将军。
English: He was given the title of Prince of Shanxang and promoted to General Chen Bing.

古文：又为安北将军，出镇北境。
现代文：又担任安北将军，外出镇守北方边境。
English: He also served as the general of Anbei and went out to guard the northern border.

古文：与平阳王长孙翰击蠕蠕别帅阿伏干于祚山，率师至歌删山，击蠕蠕别帅便度弟库仁直，引师而北。
现代文：和平阳王长孙翰在祚山攻打蠕蠕的别部头领阿伏干，率领军队到歌删山，攻打蠕蠕的别部头领便度的弟弟库仁直，率领军队北进。
English: In Lushan, King of the Peaceful Yang Dynasty, Sun Han, led the army to Guozhishan to fight against the leader of the other faction, Avokan, who was the leader of the other faction, and his younger brother, Ku Renzhi, who was the leader of the other faction, led the army to the north.

古文：蠕蠕部帅莫孤率高车骑五千乘来逆，眷击破之，斩首千余级。
现代文：蠕蠕的别部头领莫孤率领高车骑兵五千人前来迎战，尉眷打败他们，斩首一千多级。
English: Mo Kuo, the leader of the other division of the Creeping Creeps, led five thousand high cavalry to meet the battle, defeated them as soon as possible, and beheaded more than a thousand.

古文：又从征蠕蠕。
现代文：又随从征伐蠕蠕。
English: He also accompanied the conquest of Cm Cm.

古文：眷出白、黑两漠之间，击其东部，大获而还。
现代文：尉眷出兵白、黑沙漠之间，攻打蠕蠕的柬部，大量俘获而返回。
English: As soon as possible, the lieutenant sent out troops between the white and black deserts to attack the Cambodian side, which was in disarray, and returned with a large number of prisoners.

古文：又从征赫连昌，眷出南道，击昌于上邽。
现代文：又随从征伐赫连昌，尉眷从南路出兵，在上邦攻打赫连昌。
English: He also followed the conquest of Herengchang, and his lieutenant sent troops from the south to attack Herengchang in Shangguan.

古文：士众乏粮，临淮公丘堆等督租于郡县，为昌所败。
现代文：兵士缺乏粮食，临淮公丘堆等人在郡县督运租谷，被赫连昌打败。
English: The soldiers were short of food, and Lin Huai Gongqiu and others were defeated by Herenchang in Duyun Rent Valley.

古文：昌乘胜抄掠，诸将患之。
现代文：赫连昌乘胜抄掠，各将领忧虑他。
English: He Lianchang took advantage of the victory to plunder, and the generals were worried about him.

古文：眷与侍御史安颉阴谋设伏，邀击擒昌。
现代文：尉眷和侍御史安颉密谋设下埋伏，截击擒获赫连昌。
English: His retainers and attendants conspired to set up an ambush, which was intercepted by He Lianchang.

古文：以功拜宁北将军，加散骑常侍，进爵渔阳公。
现代文：因有功劳被任命为宁北将军，加授散骑常侍，晋爵位为渔阳公。
English: For his meritorious service, he was appointed General of Ningbei, awarded the Distinguished Cavalryman, and promoted to the peerage as Yuyang Gong.

古文：后从征和龙，眷督万骑前驱，慰喻降二千余户。
现代文：后来随从征伐和龙，尉眷统领一万骑兵充当前锋，慰问晓谕降服二千多户。
English: Later, following the conquest of Hailong, his retainers and retainers led ten thousand cavalry to act as the front line, and consoled and ordered more than two thousand households to surrender.

古文：寻为假节、加侍中、都督豫洛二州及河内诸军事、安南将军、开府，镇虎牢。
现代文：不久担任假节、加授侍中、都督豫洛二州及河内诸军事、安南将军、开府，镇守虎牢。
English: Soon, he served as a military officer, General Annan, the head of the provincial government, the governor of the two provinces of Yunnan, Laos, and Hanoi, and the keeper of the Tiger Fortress.

古文：张掖王秃发保周之反也，徵眷与永昌王健等率师讨之，破保周于番禾。
现代文：张掖王秃发保周反叛，世祖征召慰鲞和永昌王亘健等人率领军队讨伐他，在番禾打败保周。
English: Zhangye King Bald Baozhou rebelled, the ancestor conscripted Consolation and Yongchang King Wujian and others to lead the army to fight him and defeat Baozhou in Panghe.

古文：保周遁走，眷率骑追之，保周穷迫自杀。
现代文：保周逃跑，尉眷率领骑兵追击他，保周陷于穷途末路而自杀。
English: Baozhou fled, his aides led the cavalry to chase him, and Baozhou was trapped in a dead end and committed suicide.

古文：诏眷留镇凉州，加都督凉沙河三州诸军事、安西将军，领护羌戎校尉。
现代文：诏令尉眷留下镇守速业，加授都督凉沙河三州诸军事、安西将军，兼护羌戎校尉。
English: Zhaolingjun left behind the township of Shuxiaoye, and was awarded the title of the military governor of Liangshahe and the three states, the Anxi general, and the Shuirong school lieutenant.

古文：转敦煌镇将。
现代文：改任敦煌镇将。
English: Reassigned to Dunhuang Town.

古文：又击破吐谷浑，俘三千余口。
现代文：又打败吐谷浑，俘获三千多人。
English: He also defeated Tugu Hun and captured more than three thousand people.

古文：眷历镇四蕃，威名并著。
现代文：尉眷遍镇四方边境，都留下威名。
English: His descendants spread across the town's four-sided borders, all leaving behind a prestigious name.

古文：高宗时，率师北击伊吾，克其城，大获而还。
现代文：高宗时，率领军队向北攻打伊吾，攻下城池，大量俘获而返回。
English: Gao Zongji led the army to the north to attack Igu, captured the city, and returned with a large number of prisoners.

古文：寻拜侍中、太尉，进爵为王。
现代文：不久被任命为侍中、太尉，晋爵位为王。
English: He was soon appointed to the ranks of chamberlain, captain, and promoted to the rank of knight.

古文：与太宰常英等评尚书事。
现代文：和太宰常英等人评定尚书奏事。
English: And Dazai Changying and others rated Shang Shuxu as the best.

古文：高宗北巡狩，以寒雪方降，议还。
现代文：高宗向北巡视，以天寒将下雪，商议返回。
English: Gao Zong went on a tour to the north, expecting snow due to the cold weather, and returned after discussion.

古文：眷谏曰： 今动大众，以威北敌，去都不远，而便旋驾，虏必疑我有内难。
现代文：尉眷规劝说： 现在发动大军，来向北方的敌人显示威力，离他们的都城不远，却倒转车头，敌人必定怀疑我们有内乱。
English: The lieutenant said, "Now, let's mobilize a large army to show our power to the enemy in the north. We are not far from their capital, but we are turning back. The enemy must suspect that we are in a civil war."

古文：虽方寒雪，兵人劳苦，以经略大体，宜便前进。 
现代文：虽然正天寒下雪，兵士辛苦，按筹划的大方针，应该向前进。 
English: Although it was a cold and snowy day and the soldiers were working hard, they should advance according to the general plan.

古文：高宗从之，遂渡漠而还。
现代文：高宗听从了他的意见，于是越过沙漠后返回。
English: Gaozong followed his advice and returned after crossing the desert.

古文：以眷元老，赐杖履上殿。
现代文：因尉眷是老臣，赐他拄杖穿鞋上殿。
English: Since the second-in-command was a senior minister, he was given a cane to walk up to the palace.

古文：和平四年薨。
现代文：和平四年逝世。
English: He died four years later.

古文：高宗悼惜之，赠大将军，谥曰庄。
现代文：高宗哀悼怜惜他，追赠大将军，谧号为庄。
English: Gaozong mourned and pitied him, posthumously awarded him the title of general, and gave him the nickname Zhuang.

古文：子多侯，袭爵。
现代文：儿子多侯，继承爵位。
English: His son, Tohō, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：多侯少有武干，显祖时，为假节、征西将军、领护羌戎校尉、敦煌镇将。
现代文：多侯年轻时有武艺才干，题担时，担任假节、征西将军、兼护羌戎校尉、塾煌镇将。
English: When he was young, Dohou had a talent for martial arts, and when he was in charge, he served as a false festival, a general of the Western Conquest, a school lieutenant of the Imperial Guard, and a general of the Jukuhuang Town.

古文：至镇，上表求率轻骑五千，西入于阗，兼平诸国，因敌取资，平定为效。弗许。
现代文：到镇所，上奏疏请求率领轻装的骑兵五千人，向西进入于阗，兼并各国，利用敌人取得物资，直至全部平定。显祖不准许。
English: When he arrived at the town hall, he sent a message to So requesting him to lead five thousand lightly armed cavalry to the west into Yunnan, annex various countries, and use the enemy to obtain materials until everything was pacified. Xianzu did not allow it.

古文：高祖初，蠕蠕部帅无卢真率三万骑入塞围镇，多侯击之走，以功进号征西大将军。
现代文：高祖初年，蠕蠕部落首领无卢真率领三万骑兵进入边境包围军镇，叁堡击退了他，因功劳升军号为征西大将军。
English: In the first year of Gaozu, Wuluzhen, the leader of the Wuluzhen tribe, led 30,000 cavalry into the border to encircle the military town. The blockhouse repelled him, and he was promoted to General of the Western Expedition for his merits.

古文：后多侯猎于南山，蠕蠕遣部帅度拔入围敦煌，断其还路。
现代文：后来多侯在南山狩猎，蠕蠕派遣部落首领庐远进军包围敦煌，截断垄堡的退路。
English: Later, Dohong went hunting in the Nanshan Mountains, and Cree Cree dispatched tribal leaders to march far and wide to encircle Dunhuang and cut off the retreat of the fort.

古文：多侯且前且战，遂冲围而入。
现代文：垄堡一边前进一边作战，于是冲出包围而进城。
English: The ridge fort advanced while fighting, so it broke out of the encirclement and entered the city.

古文：率众出战，大破之，追北数十里，斩首千余级。
现代文：率领军队出城交战，大败度拔，追击几十里，斩首一千多级。
English: He led the army out of the city to engage in battle, was soundly defeated, pursued for dozens of miles, and beheaded more than a thousand people.

古文：因上疏求北取伊吾，断蠕蠕通西域之路。
现代文：于是上疏请求攻取伊吾，断绝蠕蠕通向西域的道路。
English: As a result, Shangsu requested to capture Igu and cut off the road leading to the west.

古文：高祖善其计，以东作方兴，难之。太和元年，为妻元氏所害。
现代文：产担认为他的计策好，因春耕正进行，感到为难。太和元年，被妻子元氏害死。
English: The overseer thought his plan was a good one, but was troubled by the fact that spring plowing was in progress. He was killed by his wife, Genji, in the first year of the Taiwa era.

古文：子建，袭爵。
现代文：儿子盥建，继承爵位。
English: His son, Yu Jian, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：历位给事中。
现代文：历任给事中。
English: Successive ministers are under investigation.

古文：卒，无子。
现代文：去世，没有儿子。
English: He died without a son.

古文：建弟那，袭爵。
现代文：尉建的弟弟尉邵，继承爵位。
English: Fei Jian's younger brother, Fei Shao, inherited the title.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

古文：子范，袭。
现代文：儿子尉范，继承爵位。
English: His son, Lieutenant Fan, succeeded to the title.

古文：范弟显业，散骑常侍。
现代文：尉范的弟弟显业，担任散骑常侍。
English: Lieutenant Fan's younger brother, Xianye, served as a straggler.

古文：与太原公主奸通，生子彦。
现代文：和太原公圭通奸，生下儿子尉彦。
English: She had an adulterous affair with Taihara Kinkei and gave birth to a son, Fuchihiko.

古文：武定中，卫将军、南营州刺史。
现代文：武定年间，担任卫将军、南营州刺史。
English: During the Wuding era, he served as Wei general and Nanying prefectural governor.

古文：多侯弟子庆宾，善骑射，有将略。
现代文：多侯的弟弟的儿子庆宾，善于骑马射箭，有军事谋略。
English: Qingbin, the son of Du Hou's younger brother, was good at horseback archery and military strategy.

古文：高祖时，释褐员外散骑侍郎，稍迁左将军、太中大夫。
现代文：高祖时，初为员外散骑侍郎，逐渐升迁到左将军、太中大夫。
English: At the time of Gaozu, he was at first a non-commissioned officer riding horseback, and was gradually promoted to the left general and the middle doctor.

古文：肃宗时，议欲送蠕蠕主阿那瑰还国，庆宾上表固争，不从。
现代文：蛊塞时，议论要送鳄叠主阿那坏回国，庆宾上奏疏坚决劝阻，不被听从。
English: At the time of prevarication, there was talk of sending the crocodile-stacked main Anas back to China, but this was resolutely discouraged by the guests at the banquet and was not heeded.

古文：后蠕蠕遂执行台元孚，大掠北境。
现代文：后来蠕蠕就捉住行台元孚，大肆掳掠北方边境。
English: Later, Cree Cree captured Xing Tai Yuan Fu and plundered the northern border.

古文：诏尚书令李崇讨之，庆宾别将隶崇，出塞而返。
现代文：诏令尚书令李崇讨伐蠕蠕，庆宾以别部将领隶属李崇，出边塞后返回。
English: The imperial edict still ordered Li Chong to fight against Cormorant Cormorant, and Qingbin sent other generals subordinate to Li Chong out of the frontier fortress and returned.

古文：元法僧之外叛，萧衍遣其豫章王萧综镇徐州，又诏庆宾为别将隶安丰王延明讨之。
现代文：元法僧向外叛变，萧衍派遣他的豫章王萧综镇守徐州，肃宗又韶令庆宾为别部将领隶属安丰王延明讨伐他。
English: The ex-monk turned traitor to the outside world, and Xiao Yan sent his Yu Zhang Wang Xiao Siming to guard Xuzhou, and Su Zong also ordered Qing Bin to fight him as another general subordinate to Anfeng Wang Yanming.

古文：寻除后将军、肆州刺史。
现代文：不久授任后将军、肆州刺史。
English: Soon after being appointed, he became a general and made history in Wuzhou.

古文：时尔朱荣兵威渐盛，曾经肆州，庆宾畏恶之，据城不出。
现代文：遣时尔朱荣的军威逐渐强盛，曾经过肆州，庆宾畏惧厌恶他，据守城中不出来。
English: When Zhu Rong was sent, his military prestige gradually became strong. He had been to Zhouzhou, and the Qingbin feared and loathed him, and could not come out of the fortress.

古文：荣恨庆宾，举兵袭之。
现代文：尔朱荣怨恨庆宾，出兵袭击他。
English: Er Zhu Rong resented Qingbin and sent troops to attack him.

古文：庆宾别驾姚和内应，荣遂害庆宾僚属，拘庆宾还秀容，呼为假父。
现代文：庆宾的别驾姚和做内应，尔朱荣于是杀害庆宾的僚属，拘捕庆宾回秀容，称为义父。
English: Qingbin's brother-in-law Yao and his brother-in-law did not know each other, so Er Zhu Rong killed Qingbin's colleague, arrested Qingbin, and called him his father-in-law.

古文：后以母忧还都，寻起为平东将军、光禄大夫、都督，镇汝阴。
现代文：后来因母亲去世回都城，不久起用为平东将军、光禄大夫、都督，镇守汝阴。
English: Later, he returned to the capital due to his mother's death, and was soon appointed as the general of Pingdong, the doctor of Guanglu, the governor of the capital, and the town guard of Ruyin.

古文：还朝，永安二年卒。
现代文：回到朝廷，永安二年去世。
English: He returned to the imperial court and died two years later.

古文：赠车骑将军、雍州刺史，又追加侍中、司空公。
现代文：追赠车骑将军、雍州刺史，又追加侍中、司空公。
English: Afterward, the car-riding general, Yongzhou Jishi, and the additional chamberlain, Sikuo, were presented.

古文：庆宾子豹，起家员外郎。
现代文：庆宾的儿子尉豹，出仕为员外郎。
English: Qingbin's son, Fei Pao, served as a member of the outer circle.

古文：肃宗时，行颍州事，与萧衍将裴之礼战殁。
现代文：肃宗时，代行颍州事务，同萧衍的将领裴之礼作战而死。
English: During the reign of Emperor Suzong, he was in charge of Bozhou affairs, and died in battle with General Pei Zhuli of Xiao Yan.

古文：豹弟瑾，武定中，东平太守。
现代文：尉豹的弟弟尉瑾，武定年间，担任东平太守。
English: The younger brother of 尉豹, 尉, served as the governor of Dongping during the reign of Emperor Wuding.

古文：眷弟地干，机悟有才艺，驰马立射五的，时人莫能及。
现代文：尉眷的弟弟地干，机智敏捷有才华技艺，骑马奔驰急速射中五个目标，当时人没有谁比得上。
English: The younger brother of the second-in-command was very hard-working, quick-witted, talented and skilled, riding a horse and rapidly shooting five targets. At that time, no one could match him.

古文：太宗时，为左机令。
现代文：太宗时，任左机令。
English: At the time of Emperor Taizong, Ren Zuo was in charge of the machine.

古文：世祖少而善之，即位，擢为库部尚书，加散骑常侍、左光禄大夫，领侍辇郎。
现代文：世祖年轻时喜爱他，即位，提拔他为库部尚书，加授散骑常侍、左光禄大夫，兼侍辇郎。
English: The patriarch loved him when he was young, and when he ascended the throne, he promoted him to the position of treasury secretary, and gave him the additional titles of errand-riding attendant, doctor of the left halo, and attendant.

古文：地干奉上忠谨，尤善嘲笑。
现代文：地干侍奉皇上忠诚谨慎，尤其善于调笑。
English: He served the emperor faithfully and discreetly, and was particularly good at making jokes.

古文：世祖见其效人举措，忻悦不能自胜。
现代文：世祖看到他仿效别人的动作，高兴得忍不住笑。
English: The patriarch couldn't help but smile with joy when he saw him imitating someone else's movements.

古文：甚见亲爱，参军国大谋。
现代文：十分受亲近喜爱，参与军队国家大事的谋议。
English: He is very close to and loved by the people, and participates in the army's deliberation on national affairs.

古文：世祖将征平凉，试冲车以攻冢，地干为索所罥，折胁而卒。
现代文：世祖将征伐乎凉，试验冲锋车攻击山顶，地干被粗绳所缠绕，折伤胁部而去世。
English: The ancestor of the world will conquer the cold, test the assault vehicle to attack the top of the mountain, the trunk is entangled by a thick rope, and he died of a stress fracture.

古文：世祖亲往临抚，哭之甚恸。
现代文：世祖亲自前往安抚，哭得十分悲恸。
English: The patriarch himself went to appease them, weeping bitterly.

古文：赠中领军将军、燕郡公，谥曰惠，赠赐丰厚。
现代文：追赠中领军将军、燕郡公，谧号为惠，赠送赏赐丰厚。
English: As a follow-up gift, the leader of the Central Army, General Yan County, was given a posthumous name as a benefit, and the gift was richly rewarded.

古文：子长寿，幼拜散骑常侍，迁殿中右曹尚书，仍加散骑常侍。
现代文：儿子长寿，幼年被任命为散骑常侍，升殿中右曹尚书，又加授散骑常侍。
English: His son lived a long life. When he was a child, he was appointed as a strolling equerry. He was raised to the middle right of Cao Shangshu, and was also awarded the title of strolling equerry.

古文：从征刘义隆，至江。
现代文：随从征伐刘义隆，到长江边。
English: He followed Liu Yilong to the Yangtze River.

古文：赐爵会稽公，加冠军将军。
现代文：赐爵位为会稽公，加授冠军将军。
English: He was given a knighthood for being the auditor of the association, and was also awarded the title of champion general.

古文：高宗时，附泾州刺史。
现代文：高宗时，授任泾州刺史。
English: At the time of Gao Zong, he was awarded the title of Bozhou sashimi.

古文：和平五年卒。
现代文：和平五年去世。
English: He died five years later.

古文：子弥真，袭爵。
现代文：儿子弥真，继承爵位。
English: His son, Yasuchika, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：弥真卒，无子，弟状德，袭爵。
现代文：弥真去世，没有儿子。弟弟状德，继承爵位。
English: Yazhen died without a son, and his younger brother, Zhengde, inherited the peerage.

古文：地干弟侯头，袭地干职，为库部尚书。
现代文：地干的弟弟侯头，继地干王的职位，任库部尚书。
English: Ji Gan's younger brother, Hou Tou, succeeded to the position of Ji Gan Wang and was appointed as treasurer of Shang Shu.

古文：侯头弟力斤，亦以忠谨闻。
现代文：侯头的弟弟力斤，也以忠诚谨慎闻名。
English: Hou Tou's younger brother, Lijin, is also known for his loyalty and prudence.

古文：历位御史中尉、并州刺史，有政绩。
现代文：历任御史中尉、并州刺史，有政绩。
English: Successive lt. of imperial history, as well as state secretary of history, have political achievements.

古文：加冠军将军，赐爵晋阳侯。
现代文：加授冠军将军，赐爵位为晋阳侯。
English: He was additionally awarded the title of Champion General and given the title of Lord of Jinyang.

古文：卒，赠平南将军。
现代文：去世，追赠平南将军。
English: Passed away, posthumously presented to General Pingnan.

古文：力斤弟焉陈，尚书、安乐侯。
现代文：力斤的弟弟焉陈，担任过尚书、安乐侯。
English: Lijin's younger brother, Yan Chen, served as Shangshu and Anle Hou.

古文：古真族玄孙聿，字成兴，性耿介。
现代文：古真同族的玄孙尉聿，字成兴，性格耿直。
English: The great-great-grandson of Gu Zhen's compatriot, the character Cheng Xing, has a straightforward personality.

古文：萧宗时，为武卫将军。
现代文：肃宗时，担任武卫将军。
English: During the reign of Emperor Suzong, he served as General Wuwei.

古文：是时，领军元叉秉权，百僚莫不致敬，而聿独长揖不拜。
现代文：当时，领军元叉掌权，百官无不向他表示礼敬，而尉聿独自作长揖不叩拜。
English: At that time, the leader of the army, Yuan Zha, was in power, and all the officials bowed to him, but the lieutenant did not bow to him.

古文：寻出为平西将军、东凉州刺史。
现代文：不久外任乎西将军、东凉州刺史。
English: He was soon appointed as the general of the west and the governor of the eastern Liangzhou.

古文：凉州绯色，天下之最，叉送白绫二千匹，令聿染，拒而不许。
现代文：凉州的红色，是天下最贵重的，元叉送白绫二千匹，让尉聿染红，尉聿拒绝而不答应。
English: The red color of Liangzhou is the most valuable in the world. Yuan Zhao sent two thousand egrets, and asked Ye Xuan to dye them red. Ye Xuan refused to do so.

古文：叉讽御史劾之，驿徵至京。
现代文：元叉暗示御史弹劾他，用驿马征召到京城。
English: Yuan Zha hinted at impeaching him and summoned him to the capital on horseback.

古文：覆验无状，还复任。
现代文：复查没有证据，尉聿返回恢复职位。
English: The re-examination found no evidence, and the lieutenant returned to resume his post.

古文：寻卒于州，时年五十。
现代文：不久在州中去世，造年五十岁。
English: He died shortly after in the middle of the state, at the age of fifty.

古文：赠安北将军、朔州刺史。
现代文：追赠安北将军、朔州刺史。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of Anbei General and Shuozhou Historian.

古文：子俭。
现代文：儿子尉俭。
English: His son, Fei Jian, was born.

古文：武定中，开府祭酒。
现代文：武定年间，担任开府祭酒。
English: During the Wuding period, it served as the Kaifu festival liquor.

古文：史臣曰：长孙肥结发内侍，雄烈知名，军锋所指，罔不奔散，关张万人之敌，未足多也。
现代文：史臣曰：长孙肥年轻时入宫侍奉，以英勇壮烈而闻名，锋芒所指，无不逃散，关羽张飞抵挡万人，不比他更强。
English: Shichen said: the eldest grandson of Fei, who entered the palace when he was young, is famous for his bravery and strength. As for the sharpness, all of them escape and disperse. Guan Yu Zhang Fei is no stronger than him.

古文：翰有父风，不陨先构，临丧加礼，抑有由哉！
现代文：长孙翰有父亲的风采，不毁废先代基业，皇帝亲临丧事施以礼敬，是有原由的吧!
English: There is a reason why the eldest grandson, Han, has his father's grace, does not destroy the previous generation's heritage, and the emperor pays his respects at the funeral in person!

古文：尉真兄弟，忠勇奋发，义以忘生。
现代文：昼远兄弟，忠诚勇敢奋发而起，为道义而忘记性命。
English: Brothers far away in the daytime, loyalty and bravery rise up and forget their lives for the sake of morality.

古文：眷威略著时，增隆家业，青紫麾旄，亦其宜矣！
现代文：尉眷声威谋略闻名当时，增添家族业绩，尊贵显赫，也是应该的!
English: At that time, it was famous for its strong-willed strategy, adding to the family's performance, dignified and prominent, and it should be!

