古文：二十五日候夫龙英，因往游飘岩。
现代文：二十五日在龙英等派夫，因而前去游飘岩。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, Long Ying waited for Pai Fu, so he went to swim in the floating rock.

古文：州治北向前数里外，有土山环绕，内有一小石峰如笔架，乃州之案山也。
现代文：从州城向北前走数里外，有土山环绕，当中有一座小石峰如笔架，是州境内的案山。
English: A few miles north of the state capital, surrounded by dirt hills, there is a small stone peak like a pen holder, which is the mountain of cases in the state.

古文：土人名曰飘峭所之 峭 者，即山之称也。其前即平畴一坞，自西而东，中有大溪横于前，为州之带水。水之东有山当坞而立，即飘岩山也。为州之水口山，特耸州东，甚峭拔，其东崩崖之上，有岩东南向，高倚层云，下临绝壁，望之岈然。
现代文：山前就是一个有广平田野的山坞，自西延向东，坞中有大溪横在前方，是州境内衣带样的水流，就是向东流入养利州，是通利江的江源，下流到太平州会合逻水的水流。溪水的东面有山正对山坞而立，就是飘岩山了，是州内河口所在的山，独自耸立在州城东面，非常陡峭挺拔，就是先前牛角山西北方独立的山峰了。它东面崩裂的山崖之上，有岩洞朝向东南，高傍着层层云天，下临绝壁，望过去十分深邃。
English: In front of the mountain is a dock with wide flat fields. It stretches from west to east. There is a large stream in front of the dock. It is a belt-like water flow in the state. It is the source of the Tongli River, which flows eastward into Yaoli, and flows down to Taiping, where it meets the Luoshui River. On the east side of the stream, there is a mountain that stands directly opposite the dock. It is the Floating Rock Mountain. It is the mountain where the estuary of the river in the state is located. It stands alone on the east side of the state capital. It is very steep and erect. It is the previously independent peak

古文：余闻此州被寇时，州人俱避悬崖，交人环守其下，终不能上，心知即为此岩。
现代文：我听说此州被入侵时，州里人都躲避在悬崖上，交趾人环绕着守在悬崖下，始终不能上去，心知就是指这个岩洞。
English: I heard that when the state was invaded, the people of the state took refuge on the cliff, and the people around them guarded under the cliff, and they could not go up, and they knew that this was the cave.

古文：但仰望路绝，非得百丈梯不可，乃怏怏去。
现代文：但仰面望去道路断绝，非得有百丈高的梯子不可，只得快快不乐地离开了。
English: But when I looked up, the road was cut off, and I had to climb a hundred-feet-high ladder. I had to leave quickly and reluctantly.

古文：循东南大路，有数家在焉。
现代文：沿大路往东南走，有几家人在那里。
English: Follow the main road south-east and you'll find several families there.

古文：询之，曰： 此飘岩也，又谓之山岩。
现代文：向他们打听，说： 这是飘岩了，又把它称为山岩。
English: And he asked them, and said, This is the mountain of which ye said, It is craggy:

古文：几番交寇，赖此得存。 
现代文：几次交趾入寇，靠此洞得以存活下来。 
English: The cave has been used several times by intruders to survive.

古文：问： 其中大几何？
现代文：问道： 洞有多大？ 
English: He asked, "How big is the hole?"

古文：曰： 此州遗黎幸存的老百姓，皆其所容。 问： 无水奈何？ 曰： 中有小穴，蛇透而入，有水可供数十人。 问： 今有路可登乎？ 或曰： 可： 或曰： 难之 。
现代文：答： 此州劫后残遗下来的百姓，都是它容纳下来的。 问： 没有水喝怎么办？ 
English: A: This prefecture absorbed all the people who were left after the earthquake.Q: What if there is no water to drink?

古文：因拉一人导至其下，攀登崖间，辄有竹梯层层悬缀，或空倚飞崖，或斜插石隙，宛转而上。长短不一，凡十四层而抵岩口。
现代文：答： 洞中有个小穴，像蛇一样钻进去，有水源可供给数十人喝。 问： 现在有路可以登上去吗？  有人说： 可以。 有人说： 很难。 于是拉住一个人领路来到洞下，攀登在山崖间，总有竹梯一层层地悬挂着，或者靠着高空的飞崖，或者斜插在石缝中，弯弯折折地上去，长短不一，共十四架才到达洞口。
English: A: There is a small hole in the cave, which the crane entered like a snake, and there is a source of water for dozens of people to drink.Q: Is there a way to climb up now?Some people said: Yes.Some people said: It's difficult.So they pulled a person to lead the way to the bottom of the cave, climbing between the cliffs, there are always bamboo ladders hanging one layer at a time, or leaning against the high-altitude cliff, or inserted diagonally into the stone crevice, bending and twisting on the ground, varying in length, a total of fourteen to reach the cave mouth.

古文：其两旁俱危壁下嵌，惟岩口之下，崩崖翻痕，故梯得宛转依之。
现代文：洞口两旁全是下嵌的危壁，唯有岩洞口之下，崩裂开的石崖上连缀着石痕，所以梯子得以弯弯曲曲地靠着崖壁。
English: On both sides of the mouth of the cave, there are embedded dangerous walls. However, below the mouth of the cave, there are stone marks on the cracked cliff, so the ladder can bend and lean against the cliff wall.

古文：岩口上覆甚出，多有横木架板，庋虚分窦，以为蜂房燕垒者。
现代文：洞口上方下覆的部分十分突出，有很多横架着的木板，分架成空穴，以为是蜂房燕窝的样子。
English: The part of the lower covering above the mouth of the cave is very prominent. There are many wooden boards standing horizontally, separated into holes, thought to be the appearance of a beehive bird's nest.

古文：由中窦入，其门甚隘，已而渐高，其中悬石拱把，翠碧如玉柱树之，其声铿然。
现代文：由中间的洞穴进去，那洞口十分狭窄，不久渐渐变高，洞中悬垂的石柱有双手合围粗，翠绿如玉柱竖立在那里，石声铿锵悦耳。
English: Entering from the cave in the middle, the mouth of the cave is very narrow, and soon it gradually becomes high. The overhanging stone pillars in the cave have two thick hands, and they stand there like a green jade pillar. The sound of the stones is pleasant to the ear.

古文：旁又有两柱，上垂下挺，中断不接，而相对如天平之针焉。
现代文：旁边又有两根石柱，上边下垂下边挺立，中间断开不相连接，而互相对着如天平上的指针一样。
English: Next to it are two more stone pillars, the upper one drooping and the lower one standing upright, disconnected in the middle and not connected, but facing each other like pointers on a balance.

古文：柱边亦有分藩界榻，盖皆土人为趋避计者也。
现代文：柱边也有篱笆分隔着的卧床，大概都是当地人为了避难而做的准备。
English: There are also beds separated by a fence on the side of the pillar, probably prepared by the local people in order to take refuge.

古文：由柱左北入，其穴渐暗，既得透光一缕，土人复编竹断其隘处。
现代文：由石柱左边进去，那洞穴渐渐暗下来，不久见到一缕透射进来的亮光，当地人又编了竹篱隔断了那狭窄之处。
English: Entering from the left side of the stone pillar, the cave gradually darkened, and soon a ray of transmitted light was seen, and the locals wove a bamboo fence to cut off the narrow place.

古文：披而窥之，其光亦自东入，下亦有编竹架木，知有别窦可入。
现代文：分开篱笆窥视里面，那亮光也从东面射入，下面也有编成的竹篱架起的木板，心知有别的洞穴可以进去。
English: Peeking through the fence, the bright light shines in from the east. Below, there is also a board made of bamboo fence, knowing that there are other caves to enter.

古文：复出，而由柱右东透低窍，其门亦隘，与中窦并列为两。
现代文：再出来，转而由石柱右侧向东钻进低矮的洞穴，洞口也很狭窄，与中洞并列成为两个洞穴。
English: Coming out again, he drilled eastwards from the right side of the stone pillar into a low cave. The cave entrance is also narrow, and it is side by side with the middle cave to form two caves.

古文：西入暗隘，其中复穹然，暗中摸索，亦不甚深。
现代文：向西进去又暗又窄，其中重又弯然隆起，在黑暗中摸索，也不怎么深。
English: It is dark and narrow to go into the west, where it is heavy and curved, groping in the dark, and not very deep.

古文：仍山中窦出外岩，其左悬石中有架木庋板，若飞阁中悬者，其中笱篚之属尚遍置焉。
现代文：仍由中洞出到外面的岩洞，它左侧高悬的岩石中有木架铺了木板，好似飞阁悬在空中的样子，其中鱼笼筐子类的东西还四处放着。
English: Still from the middle hole to the outside of the cave, on the left side of the high-hanging rock, there are wooden shelves with wooden planks, like a pavilion hanging in the air, in which fish cages and baskets are still lying around.

古文：又北杙ｙì木桩一木，透石隙间，复开一洞西入，其门亦东向，中有石片竖起如碑状。
现代文：又在北面插进一个小木桩，钻入石缝中，又张开一个洞向西进去，洞口也是向东，洞中有石片竖起如石碑的样子。
English: On the north side, a small wooden stake was inserted, drilled into a stone crevice, and a hole was opened to the west. The hole also opened to the east, and there were pieces of stone in the hole that stood up like stone tablets.

古文：其高三尺，阔尺五，厚二寸，两面平削，如磨砺而成者，岂亦泰山天宇之遗碑？
现代文：石片高三尺，宽一尺五，厚二寸，两面平削，如像打磨而成的样子，莫非也是泰山无字碑之类的遗迹？
English: The stone piece is three feet high, one foot five wide, and two inches thick. It is flat-cut on both sides, as if it were polished. Is it not also a relic of Mount Tai's wordless monument?

古文：但大小异制。
现代文：但大小形制不同。
English: But the size and shape are different.

古文：平其内，复逾隘而稍宽。
现代文：平行在洞内，再次穿越过狭窄之处才稍稍宽起来。
English: Walk parallel in the cave, again passing through a narrow place before widening slightly.

古文：尽处乳柱悬楞，细若柯节。
现代文：尽头之处钟乳石柱和悬着的石棱条，细得好似斧柄竹节。
English: At the end of the stalactite column and hanging stone edge strips, thin like axe handle bamboo shoots.

古文：其右有窦潜通中窦之后，即土人编竹断隘处也；其左稍下，有穴空悬，土人以芭覆之。
现代文：它右侧有个洞穴暗通到中洞后方，就是当地人编竹篱隔断的狭窄之处了；它左侧稍稍下去，有个洞穴空悬着，当地人用篱笆盖着它。
English: To the right of it, there is a cave that leads to the back of the middle cave, which is a narrow place separated by a bamboo fence made by the locals; a little further down to the left, there is a cave hanging empty, and the locals cover it with a fence.

古文：窥其下，亦有竹编木架之属，第不知入自何所。
现代文：窥视洞穴下边，也有竹子编成的木头架成的东西，只是不知从哪里进去。
English: Peeking under the cave, there are also things made of bamboo made of wood, but I don't know where to go.

古文：仍度架木飞阁，历梯以下。
现代文：仍然越过木板架成的飞阁，经由梯子下走。
English: You still have to walk over a boarded-up pavilion and down a ladder.

古文：下三梯，梯左悬崖间，复见一梯，亟援之上，遂循崖端横度而北，其狭径尺，而长三丈余，土人横木为栏，就柯为援，始得无恐。
现代文：下了三架梯子，梯子左边的悬崖间，又见有一架梯子，急忙攀着梯子上去，便沿着悬崖外沿向北横越过去，那狭窄之处宽一尺，可长有三丈多，当地人横放了树干作为栏杆，就着树枝作为拉手，这才得以不害怕。
English: He descended three ladders, and between the cliffs to the left of the ladders, he saw another ladder. He hurriedly climbed up the ladder and crossed the cliff to the north along the outside of the cliff. The narrow place is one foot wide and can grow more than three feet high. The locals placed the trunk as a railing and the branches as handles, so they could not be afraid.

古文：崖穷又开一洞，其门亦东向。
现代文：悬崖到头后又张开一个洞，洞口也是向东。
English: After the cliff comes to an end, another hole opens up, this time to the east.

古文：前有一石，自门左下垂数丈，真若垂天之翼。
现代文：洞前有一块岩石，自洞口左边下垂几丈，真像垂在空中的翅膀。
English: In front of the cave, there is a rock that hangs several feet from the left side of the cave mouth, really like wings hanging in the air.

古文：其端复悬一小石，长三尺，圆径尺，极似雁宕之龙鼻水，但时当冬涸，端无滴沥耳。
现代文：岩石的下端又悬着一块小石头，长三尺，圆处的直径有一尺，极似雁宕山的龙鼻水，但此时正当冬季枯水时节，顶端没有水滴下滴而已。
English: At the lower end of the rock, there is also a small stone hanging, three feet long, with a diameter of one foot at the round point, very similar to the dragon's nose of the Wild Goose Mountain, but at this time, during the winter dry season, there are no drops of water at the top.

古文：其中高敞，不似中窦之低其口而暗其腹。
现代文：洞中高大宽敞，不像中洞那样洞口低矮而中段黑暗。
English: The middle of the cave is tall and spacious, unlike the middle cave, where the entrance is low and the middle section is dark.

古文：后壁有石中悬，复环一隙，更觉宛转，土人架木横芭于其内，即上层悬穴所窥之处也。
现代文：后面石壁上有岩石悬在中央，又环绕成一道缝隙，更觉到弯弯曲曲的，当地人架了木架用篱笆横隔在里面，就是从上层空悬着的洞穴中所窥见之处了。
English: Behind the stone wall there is a rock hanging in the middle, surrounded by a gap, and even more crooked, the locals have erected a wooden frame with a fence across the inside, which is what you can see from the upper level of the cave.

古文：徘徊各洞既久，乃复历十一梯而下，则岩下仰而伺者数十人，皆慰劳登岩劳苦，且曰： 余辈遗黎，皆藉此岩再免交人之难。
现代文：在各洞中徘徊了很久之后，才又经过十一级梯子下来，就见岩洞下抬头守候着的有几十人，都来慰劳登岩洞的劳苦，并且说： 我们这些残存下来的百姓，都是靠这个岩洞两度免于交趾人的灾难。
English: After wandering around in the caves for a long time, it was only after going down the eleven-step ladder that I saw dozens of people waiting under the cave, all of whom came to comfort the toil of the Loudon Cave and said: We, the remaining people, have been saved from the disaster of the toe-suckers twice by this cave.

古文：但止能存身，而室庐不能免焉。 余观此洞洵悬绝，而以此为长城，似非保土者万全之策。
现代文：但只是仅能存身，而居室房屋不能幸免了。 我看此洞确实是高悬陡绝，但把此洞作为长城，似乎不是保守疆土的万全之策。
English: I think this cave is really high and steep, but using this cave as a Great Wall does not seem to be the best way to preserve the territory.

古文：况所云水穴，当兹冬月，必无余滴。余遍觅之不得，使坐困日久，能无涸辙之虑乎？
现代文：那些人 是是 地辞谢而去。这个洞高高张开在路旁，远近都看得见它，唯有州城背对着，反而看不见。
English: The men politely declined. The hole stretched high above the road, visible from near and far, except for the state capital, which was in the opposite direction.

古文：余谓土人： 守险出奇，当以并力创御为上着；若仅仅避此，乃计之下也。 其人 唯、唯 谢去。
现代文：我西游所登的岩洞，险峻之势应当以这个岩洞为第一。贵溪的仙岩，虽然悬在空中俯瞰溪流，然而洞中非常狭窄，赶不上这个岩洞空阔，可是有水却是以仙岩为上。
English: The steepness of the rock cave I climbed on my westward journey should be the steepest in this rock cave. The fairy rock of Guixi, although suspended in the air overlooking the stream, is very narrow in the cave, not as wide as this rock cave, but there is water, but it is based on the fairy rock.

古文：余返饭于馆，馆人才取牌聚夫，复不成行。
现代文：我返回到客馆吃饭，客馆里的人这才取出马牌来招集差夫，又不能成行。
English: I returned to the guest house for dinner, and the people in the guest house took out their horse-drawn carriages to summon the police, but they couldn't go.

古文：二十六日晨餐后，得两肩舆，十夫。由州治前西行。
现代文：二十六日早餐后，得到两乘轿子，由州衙前向西行。
English: After breakfast on the 26th, they got two sedan chairs and rode westward from Shuzhou to Qianmen.

古文：半里，有小水自州后山腋出，北注大溪，涉之。
现代文：半里，有小溪自州城后山侧旁流出，往北注入大溪，涉过小溪。
English: Half a mile away, a small stream flows out from the side of the mountain behind the city of Suzhou, flows north into the large stream, and wades through the small stream.

古文：又西半里，大溪亦自西南山谷来，复涉之。
现代文：又向西走半里，大溪也从西南方的山谷中流来，又涉过大溪。
English: Another half-mile to the west, the creek also flows from the valley in the southwest, and wades through the creek.

古文：遂溯溪四南行一里，于是石山复攒绕成峡，又一小水自南来入。
现代文：于是溯溪流向西南行一里，到这里石山重又攒聚回绕成峡谷，又有一条小溪自南边来注人。
English: So I followed the stream to the southwest for a mile, and here the stone hills gathered again and gathered back into a canyon, and there was another stream coming from the south.

古文：仍溯大溪，屡左右涉，七里，逾一冈。
现代文：仍溯大溪行，屡次涉过左岸涉到右岸，有七里路，越过一座山冈。
English: He still followed the stream, repeatedly wading across the left bank to the right bank, a seven-mile path, and crossing a mountain.

古文：冈南阻溪，北傍峭崖，叠石为垒，设隘门焉。
现代文：山冈南面有溪流阻住，北面依傍着陡峭的山崖，用石块垒成营垒，设立了隘门。
English: On the south side of the mountain, there is a stream, and on the north side, there is a steep cliff. Stone blocks were used to build a camp, and a narrow gate was set up.

古文：过此则溪南始见土山，与西北石山夹持而西。
现代文：过了此地就在溪南开始见到土山，与西北面的石山对峙往西延去。
English: After passing this place, we began to see earthen hills in South China, and the confrontation with the stone hills in the northwest continued to the west.

古文：四里，乃涉溪南登土岭，一里，跻其上。
现代文：四里，于是涉过溪水向南登土岭，一里，登到岭上。
English: Four miles, then waded across the stream to the south to climb the ridge, one mile, climbed to the ridge.

古文：又西南下一里，旋转而东南一里，复转西南，仍入石山攒合中。
现代文：又往西南下行一里，旋即转向东南走一里，又转向西南，仍走入石山聚合之中。
English: Another mile down to the southwest, then immediately turn to the southeast, walk one mile, then turn to the southwest, and still walk into the aggregation of stone mountains.

古文：一里，山回坞辟，畦塍弥望，数十家倚南山，是曰东村。
现代文：一里，山峦回绕山坞开阔，田地一望无际，数十家紧靠南山，这里叫东村。
English: For a mile, the mountain ridges around the dockyard are wide open, the fields are endless, and dozens of houses are close to Nanshan. This is called the East Village.

古文：乃西南行田塍间，三里，遂西过石峡。
现代文：于是向西南行走在田野间，三里，便向西穿过石山山峡。
English: So I walked southwest, through fields, for three miles, and then west across the Ishiyama Gorge.

古文：所跻不多，但石骨嶙峋，两崖骈合，共一里，连陟二石脊，始下。
现代文：上登的路不多，但石骨嶙峋，两侧石崖双双合拢过来，共走一里，连登两道石脊，这才下走。
English: There are not many ways to climb up, but the stone skeleton and the stone cliffs on both sides are close together, and it takes a total of one mile to climb two stone ridges in a row before you can go down.

古文：上少下多，共一里，仍穿石山坞中，至是有小水皆南流矣。
现代文：上少下多，共一里，仍穿越在石山山坞中，到了这里有小溪，都往南流去了。
English: Less up, more down, a total of one mile, still crossing in the stone mountain dock, to here there is a stream, all went south.

古文：东村之水已向南流，似犹仍北转入州西大溪者。
现代文：东村的水流已向南流去，似乎还仍是向北转流进州城西边的大溪中。
English: The water flow in the East Village has gone south, but it still seems to be diverted north into the creek on the west side of the city.

古文：自二石脊西，其水俱南入安平西江，所云逻水矣。
现代文：从那两道石脊的西面，那里的水流全部往南流入安平州的西江，就是所说的逻水了。
English: From the west side of the two ridges, all the water flows south into the Xijiang River in Anping Prefecture, which is the so-called Luoshui.

古文：山脉自此脊南去，攒峰突崿，纠丛甚固，东南尽于安平东北通利、逻水二江合处。
现代文：山脉从此处山脊向南延去，山峰攒聚山崖高突，缠绕成丛十分坚实，往东南在安平州东北境通利江、逻水两江会合处到了尽头。
English: From here, the ridge of the mountain range extends to the south, the peaks are piled up, the cliffs are high, and the tangled clumps are very solid. To the southeast, it ends at the meeting point of the Tongli River and Luoshui River in the northeastern border of Anping Prefecture.

古文：由安平西北抵下雷，止二日程；由安平东北自龙英抵下雷，且四日程，皆以此支岘丛沓，故迂曲至此也。
现代文：由安平往西北到达下雷州，只有两天的路程；由安平向东北从龙英州到达下雷州，将近四天的路程，共绕了几百里路，都是由于这支山脉山峰成丛杂沓，所以迂回到此地。
English: From Anping in the northwest to lower Leizhou is only two days away; from Anping in the northeast from Longyingzhou to lower Leizhou is nearly four days away, a total of several hundred miles. It is all due to the fact that the peaks of this mountain range are a jumble, so I detour back to this place.

古文：西行一里，复登山峡、陟石磴半里，平行峡中半里，始直坠峡而下。
现代文：又往西南行四里，在骚村吃饭。四面群山环绕，中间有三间架高的茅草屋。登上茅屋饮酒，吃完饭已是下午了。向西行一里，再登山峡、爬石瞪半里，平缓地在峡中行半里，这才一直坠峡而下。
English: Another four miles to the southwest, to eat in Sau village. Surrounded by mountains on all sides, with three tall thatched huts in the middle. After drinking alcohol on the hut, it was already afternoon after eating. One mile to the west, then half a mile of mountain climbing gorge, half a mile of rock climbing, half a mile of smooth walking in the gorge, and then all the way down the gorge.

古文：上少下多，共一磴道与涧水争石。
现代文：上少下多，共走一路上的石瞪与涧水争夺山石。
English: Less up, more down, and all along the way, stone and water compete for the top of the mountain.

古文：下抵坞中，又西南一里，复与土山值相逢。
现代文：下到山坞中，又向西南一里，再与土山相遇。
English: Down to the dockyard, and one mile to the southwest, and then meet the earthen mounds.

古文：遂西向循土山而上，已转西南，共二里，逾山之冈。
现代文：于是向西沿土山而上，不久转向西南，共走二里，越过山冈。
English: So he walked west up the hill, and soon turned to the southwest, walking a total of two miles and crossing the mountain.

古文：其东南隔坞皆石峰攒合，如翠浪万叠；其西北则土山高拥，有石峰踞其顶焉。
现代文：山冈东南隔着山坞处都是石峰攒聚，如像碧绿的波浪千万层；山冈西北面却是土山高高围着，有石峰盘踞在土山顶上。
English: To the southeast of the hill, across from the dock, are piles of stone peaks, like millions of layers of turquoise waves; to the northwest of the hill, however, are high-altitude earthen mounds, with stone peaks perched on the tops of the earthen mounds.

古文：循石顶之西崖北向稍下，复上土山之后重，共一里，随土山之南平行岭半。
现代文：沿石山顶西面的山崖向北稍稍下走，又上登后面一重土山，共一里，顺土山的南侧平行在山腰。
English: Walk along the cliff on the west side of the top of the stone mountain to the north and go down a little, and then climb up the back of a heavy earthen hill, a total of one mile, along the south side of the earthen hill parallel to the mountainside.

古文：又西南一虽，遂逾岭上而越其北。
现代文：又向西南一里，便越到岭上翻过山北面。
English: Another mile to the southwest, then over to the ridge and over the north face of the mountain.

古文：于是西北行土山峡中，其东北皆土山高盘纡合，而西南隙中复见石峰耸削焉。
现代文：于是向西北行走在土山峡谷中，峡谷东北都是土山高高地盘绕回合，而西南的缺口中再次见到石峰陡削耸立。
English: As a result, walking northwest in the Tsuchiyama Canyon, the northeast of the canyon is a high-altitude winding round of the Tsuchiyama, and in the southwest gap, the steep-cut stone peaks can be seen again.

古文：一里，复转西南，下至峡底，其水皆自北山流向西南去，此逻水之上流也。
现代文：一里，再转向西南，下到峡底，这里的水流都是从北山流向西南去，这是逻水的上游。
English: One mile, then turn to the southwest, down to the bottom of the canyon. The water flow here is from the North Mountain to the southwest, which is the upper reaches of the Luo Water.

古文：过水，有岐北上山冈，其内为三家村。
现代文：过了河水，有条岔路向北上登山冈，山内是三家村。
English: After crossing the river, there is a winding road heading north up the mountain. There are three villages in the mountain.

古文：时日色已暮，村人自冈头望见，俱来助舆夫而代之。
现代文：此时天色已晚，村里人在冈头上望见我们，都来帮助轿夫替换他们。
English: By this time it was late in the day, and the villagers saw us at Okagami and all came to help the sedan replace them.

古文：又西南一里，直抵所望石峰下，涉一小溪上岭，得郎头壮族头人之巢，是为安村，为炊饭煮蛋以供焉。
现代文：又向西南走一里，直达远处望见的石峰下，涉过一条小溪上岭，找到郎头的茅屋，这是安村，为我烧饭煮蛋供餐。
English: I walked another mile to the southwest, straight to the foot of the stone peak I could see in the distance, waded through a stream on the ridge, and found the farmer's hut, this was Ancun, who cooked rice and boiled eggs for me.

古文：是日行三十余里，山路长而艰也。
现代文：这一天走了三十多里路，山路又长又艰辛。
English: On this day, I walked more than thirty miles. The mountain road was long and arduous.

古文：连日晴朗殊甚，日中可夹衫，而五更寒威彻骨，不减吾地，始知冬、夏寒暑之候，南北不分，而两广之燠，皆以近日故也。
现代文：连日来特别晴朗，中午可穿夹衫，可五更的寒气酷冷彻骨，不亚于我们地方，这才知道冬、夏寒暑的气候，南方北方不分，而且两广的温暖，都是因为离太阳近的缘故。
English: It is particularly sunny for several days in a row, you can wear a jacket at noon, but the cold of the five days is extremely cold and bone-chilling, no less than our place. This is how we know the weather in winter and summer, regardless of the south and north, and the warmth of the two regions is due to the proximity of the sun.

古文：试观一雨即寒，深夜即寒，岂非以无日耶？
现代文：试着观察，一下雨就冷，深夜便寒，难道不是由于没有太阳吗？
English: Try to observe, the rain is cold, the night is cold, is it not because there is no sun?

古文：其非关地气可知。
现代文：天气冷热与地气无关可想而知。
English: It is conceivable that hot and cold weather has nothing to do with the earth's atmosphere.

古文：余乡食冬瓜，每不解其命名之意，谓瓜皆夏熟而独以 冬 称，何也？
现代文：我家乡吃冬瓜，常常不理解它命名的含义，以为瓜都是在夏天成熟而它唯独用 冬 来称呼，为什么呢？
English: People in my hometown eat winter melon and often do not understand the meaning of its name. They think that melons ripen in the summer, but it is only called winter melon. Why?

古文：至此地而食者、收者，皆以为时物，始知余地之种，当从此去，故仍其名耳。
现代文：来此地便是吃的瓜、收获的瓜，都是合季节的物产，这才明白我们地方种的冬瓜，应当是从此地传去的，故而仍旧沿用它的名字罢了。
English: To come here is to eat melons and harvest melons, both of which are seasonal products. This makes it clear that the winter melons grown in our region must have been passed down from here, which is why we still use its name.

古文：二十七日昧爽，饭而行。
现代文：二十七日黎明，吃过饭动身。
English: At dawn on the 27th, after eating, we set off.

古文：仍东下岭，由溪西循岭北坞西行。
现代文：仍向东下岭，由溪水西岸沿岭北的山坞向西行。
English: Still heading east to the lower ridge, from the west bank of the stream along the dock north of the ridge to the west.

古文：其处旧塍盘旋山谷，甚富，而村落散倚崖坞间，为龙英西界沃壤。
现代文：此处多年耕种的田地盘绕在山谷中，十分富庶，而村落散布在山坞之间，依傍在山崖之下，是龙英州西境的富饶区域。
English: Here, the fields that have been cultivated for many years are coiled in the valley and are very rich, while the villages are scattered between the docks and under the cliffs. It is a rich area on the western border of Long Yingzhou.

古文：一里，路北皆土岭，坞南多石峰。
现代文：一里，路北都是土岭，山坞南面石峰很多。
English: One mile north of the road is all dirt ridge, and there are many stone peaks south of the dock.

古文：循土岭南麓渐上一里，逾土岭之西隅，岭旁即有石峰三四夹岭而起，路出其间。
现代文：沿土岭南麓慢慢上走一里，越过土岭的西隅，岭旁马上有三四座石峰夹住土岭突起，路经过石峰之间。
English: Walk slowly uphill for one mile along the southern foot of the mound, cross the western corner of the mound, there are three or four stone peaks clamping the mound protrusion next to the mound, and the road passes between the stone peaks.

古文：转北半里，复西下半里，于是四顾俱土山盘绕矣。
现代文：转向北行半里，又向西下行半里，在这里四面环顾都是回绕的土山了。
English: Turning half a mile to the north and half a mile to the west, I looked around and saw nothing but rolling hills.

古文：西涉小涧一里，又西登一冈，有数茅龛在冈头，想汛守时所栖者。
现代文：向西涉过小涧走一里，又往西登上一座山冈，有数间茅屋在冈头，推测是军队戌守时居住的地方。
English: He waded one mile westward past a small stream and climbed a mountain to the west. There were several huts at the top of the hill, presumably where the troops lived when they were garrisoned.

古文：又盘旋西南下一里，涉一涧，其水自北而南。
现代文：又盘绕着向西南下走一里，涉过一条山涧，涧水自北往南流。
English: He also walked one mile in a circle to the southwest, wading through a mountain stream. The stream flowed from north to south.

古文：逾涧西行，渐循路北土山西上，二里，逾岭而北，循路西土山西北行山半，一里，逾支岭北下过，逾涧，即前所涉之上流，西自土山涯半来，夹坞田塍高下皆藉之。
现代文：越过山涧西行，渐渐沿路北的土山向西上山，二里，越到岭北，沿路西的土山向西北行走在山腰，一里，越过支岭向北下山走过去，越过山涧，就是先前涉过的山涧的上游，自西面土山边半腰上流来，山坞两旁上上下下的田地都靠它灌溉。
English: Cross the mountains to the west, gradually follow the earthen hill to the north of the road to the west up the mountain, two miles, cross to the north of the ridge, walk along the earthen hill to the northwest on the mountainside, one mile, cross the branch ridge to the north down the mountain, cross the ridge, that is, the upstream of the ridge previously touched, flow from the west side of the earthen hillside half a waist up, and the fields up and down on both sides of the dock are irrigated by it.

古文：登涧北冈，见三四家西倚土山，已为下雷属矣。
现代文：登上涧北的山冈，见三四家人在西边背靠土山，已是下雷州的属地了。
English: Climbing the mountains and hills in the north of Luzhou, I saw three or four families with their backs to the earth and mountains in the west, which was the territory of Lower Leizhou.

古文：一里，西北登岭，半里，攀其巅。
现代文：一里，向西北登岭，半里，登上岭头。
English: One mile, climb the ridge to the northwest, half a mile, climb the ridge.

古文：又西向平行半里，逾其北，始遥见东北千峰万岫，攒簇无余隙，而土峰近夹，水始西向流矣。
现代文：又向西平缓地走了半里，越到岭北，这才远远望见东北方千峰万岭，攒聚簇拥着没有空余的缝隙，而近处的土峰相夹，水开始向西流去了。
English: I walked another half-mile to the west, crossing over to the north of the ridge, and it was only then that I could see the thousands of peaks and ridges in the northeast far away, clustering around the gaps with no room to spare, while the nearby peaks clamped together, and the water began to flow westward.

古文：于是稍下，循路南土峰西向连逾二岭，共一里，望见西南石峰甚薄，北向横插如屏，而路则平行土山之上。
现代文：从此略下走，沿路南的土峰向西一连越过两座岭，共一里，望见西南方的石峰非常薄，向北横插着如像屏风，而路却平平地延伸在土山之上。
English: From here, walk slightly down, along the earth peak south of the road to the west, crossing two ridges in a row, a total of one mile. You can see the stone peak in the southwest is very thin, and it is inserted horizontally to the north like a screen, while the road extends flatly above the earth mountain.

古文：又西二里，有路自东北来合者，为英村之道。
现代文：又向西二里，有条路从东北方前来会合，是去英村的路。
English: Another two miles west, there is a road from the northeast to the rendezvous, which is the road to Yingcun.

古文：亦下雷属。其道甚辟，合之遂循路西土山南向行。
现代文：那条路十分宽阔，路会合后便沿着路西的土山向南行。
English: The road was very wide, and after the junction, we drove south along the hills to the west.

古文：一里，又逾一土岭，直转横插石峰之西。
现代文：一里，又越过一座土岭，直接转到横插石峰的西边。
English: After one mile, we crossed another mound and went directly to the west side of the cross-cut stone peak.

古文：复循路西土山之南，折而西，始西向直下一里，又迤逦坦下者一里，始及西坞，则复穿石山间矣。
现代文：再沿着路西土山的南面，折向西，开始向西一直下走一里，又弯弯曲曲平坦地下走了一里，这才走到西边的山坞，就又穿越在石山之间了。
English: Then I walked along the south side of the hill on the west side of the road, turned westward, and began to walk westward downhill for one mile, and then walked a mile in a curvy, flat underground, until I reached the dock on the west side, and then I crossed between the stone hills.

古文：又西北平行一里，始有村落。
现代文：又往西北平缓地走一里，开始有村落。
English: Another mile to the northwest, there are villages.

古文：是日行约十八里。州官许光祖。
现代文：又向西北一里，就见大溪自北流向南，架了桥在溪上，溪流的西面就是下雷州了。
English: Another mile to the northwest, you can see the big stream flowing from north to south. A bridge has been built over the stream, and the west side of the stream is Lower Leizhou.

古文：下雷州治在大溪西岸，即安平西江之上流，所云逻水也。
现代文：走入东隘门，出了北隘门，到达客馆后便解下行装。这一天走了约十八里。下雷州治所在大溪西岸，就是安平州西江的上游，所说的逻水了。
English: Entering the East Pass, exiting the North Pass, and unpacking after arriving at the guest house. This day I walked about eighteen miles. The Lower Leizhou Province is located on the west coast of Dashi, which is the upper reaches of the West River in Anping Province.

古文：其源发于归顺西北，自胡润寨而来，经州治南流而下。
现代文：它发源于归顺西北，自胡润寨流来，流经州城往南下流而去。
English: It originates in the northwest of Guishun, flows from Hurunzhai, and flows southward through Shucheng.

古文：州南三十里，州北三十里，皆与高平接界。
现代文：州城南三十里，州城北三十里，都与高平交界。
English: Thirty miles south of the state capital, thirty miles north of the state capital, all border with Gaoping.

古文：州治西大山外，向亦本州地，为莫彝所踞已十余年；西之为界者，今止一山，其外皆莫境矣。
现代文：州城西面的大山外，从前也是本州的土地，被莫夷盘踞已有十多年；西面作为边界的地方，今天只有一座山，州衙就紧靠着它，那以外都是莫夷境内了。
English: The land outside the large mountain west of the state capital, which was once the state's own land, has been occupied by the Moi for more than ten years; the western border is only one mountain today, and the state capital is right next to it. Everything else is within the territory of the Moi.

古文：州宅东向，后倚大山即与莫彝为界者。
现代文：州衙门向东，后面紧靠的大山就是与莫夷作为疆界的山。
English: The state gate is to the east, and the mountain behind it is the mountain that is the border with Moi.

古文：垒乱石为州垣，甚低，州治前民居被焚，今方结庐，内间有以瓦覆者。
现代文：用乱石垒砌成州城城墙，十分低矮，州衙前的民房被焚毁了，现在正在建房，内中间或有用瓦盖顶的。
English: The walls of the city of Chengdu are built with random stone walls. They are very low. The houses in front of the city gate were burned down, and now they are being built. They may have a tile roof in the middle.

古文：其地南连安平，北抵胡润寨，东为龙英，西界交趾。
现代文：它的辖地南面连接着安平州，北边抵达胡润寨，东面是龙英州，西部与交趾毗连。
English: Its jurisdiction connects Anping Prefecture in the south, Hurun Village in the north, Longying Prefecture in the east, and Jiaozuo in the west.

古文：时交趾以十八日过胡润寨，抵镇安，结营其间。
现代文：交趾人在十八日这天经过胡润寨，到达镇安府，在那一带扎营。
English: On the 18th day of the month, the Kojin people passed through Hurun Village and arrived at Zhen'an Town, where they set up camp.

古文：据州人言： 乃田州纠来以胁镇安者，非归顺也。 
现代文：据州里人说： 是田州纠集来威胁镇安府的，不是归顺州。 
English: According to people in Shoushu: It was the Tianzhou rally that threatened Zhen'an Prefecture, not the return to Shonshu.

古文：盖镇安人欲以归顺第三弟为嗣，而田州争之，故纠莫彝以胁之。
现代文：大概是镇安人想要用归顺州的第三个弟弟作为继位人，而田州为争夺继承权，所以纠集莫夷来威胁镇安。
English: It was probably the Zhen'an people who wanted to use the third brother of the surrendered state as the successor, and Tianzhou was competing for the right of succession, so they gathered Mo Yi to threaten Zhen'an.

古文：归顺第二弟即镇安赎以任本州者。
现代文：归顺州的第二个弟弟就是镇安府赎回来出任本州官的人。
English: The second brother who returned to Shunzhou was the one who was redeemed by Zhen'an Prefecture and became a local official.

古文：其第三弟初亦欲争立，本州有土目李园助之，后不得立。
现代文：他的三弟起初也想争着继位，本州有个土司头目李园协助他，后来不能继位。
English: At first, his third brother also wanted to compete for the succession, and there was a head of the local government in Honshu, Li Yuan, who assisted him, but later he was not able to succeed.

古文：李园为州人所捕，窜栖高平界，出入胡润、鹅槽隘抄掠，行道苦之。
现代文：李园被州里人追捕，逃窜栖身于高平境内，出入胡润寨、鹅槽隘掳掠，行路的人被他害苦了。
English: Li Yuan was hunted down by the people of Shuzhou, and the fugitive was hiding in the territory of Gaoping, entering and leaving Hurun Village, and being abducted by the Goose Gully, and the travelers were harmed by him.

古文：二十八日阴霾浊天四塞。
现代文：二十八日天空布满阴霆。
English: The sky was overcast on the 28th.

古文：中夜余梦墙倾覆身，心恶之。
现代文：半夜我梦见墙倒下埋在身上，心里感到很厌烦。
English: In the middle of the night, I dreamt that a wall fell down and buried me. I felt very bored.

古文：且闻归顺以南有莫彝之入寇，归顺以北有归朝之中阻，意欲返辕，惶惑未定焉。
现代文：而且听说归顺州以南有莫夷入侵，归顺州以北有归朝从中阻碍，心里想要返回去，惶惑不定。
English: Moreover, I heard that south of Gushonju there was an invasion by the Moi, and north of Gushonju there was an obstruction from the Qing Dynasty, and I was confused and uncertain in my heart as I wanted to go back.

古文：归朝在富州、归顺之间，与二州为难，时掠行人，道路为梗。
现代文：归朝在富州、归顺州之间，与这两州作对，时常抢劫行人，道路为此阻塞。
English: Between Fuzhou and Shunzhou, the Hui Dynasty fought against these two states, often robbing pedestrians and blocking roads.

古文：考之《一统志》无其名。
现代文：据《一统志》来考察它，没有这个名字。
English: According to the "Isshun Zhi" to examine it, there is no such name.

古文：或曰： 乃富州之旧主，富州本其头目，后得沾朝命，归朝无由得达，反受辖焉，故互相齮齕 未知然否？
现代文：有人说： 是富州旧时的州主，富州本来是他的头目，后来受恩得到朝廷的任命，归朝无从得以上达，反而受他管辖，所以互相倾轧。 不知对不对？
English: Some people say: He was the former governor of Fuzhou, Fuzhou was originally his leader, later he was appointed by the imperial court, he could not return to the imperial court, but he was governed by him, so they fought with each other. I don't know, right?

古文：下雷北隘门第二重上，有耸石一圆，高五丈，无所附丽，孤悬江湄。
现代文：下雷州北隘门的第二层上，有块圆石耸起，高五丈，无所依附，孤零零地悬在江岸上。
English: On the second floor of the Lower Leizhou North Gap Gate, a boulder rises, five meters high, without attachment, hanging alone on the riverbank.

古文：叠石累级而上，顶大丈五，平整如台，结一亭奉观音大士像于中，下瞰澄流，旁揽攒翠，有南海张运题诗，莆田吴文光作记，字翰俱佳。
现代文：垒砌了石阶逐级而上，顶上大一丈五尺，平整如台，建了一间亭子供奉观音菩萨像在当中，下瞰澄澈的江流，翠色四旁围抱着攒聚在一起，有南海人张运的题诗，莆田人吴文光作了记文，字和文章都是佳作。
English: The stone steps were built up step by step, and the top was five feet tall and flat like a platform. A pavilion was built to worship the statue of Guanyin Bodhisattva in the middle, overlooking the clear river below. The emerald-colored people gathered around and hugged each other. There was a poem by Zhang Yun from the South China Sea, and Wu Wenguang from Putian wrote a memoir. The words and articles were excellent.

古文：余以前途艰阻，求大士决签为行止，而无从得签诗。叨筊，占卜用的器具先与约，若通达无难，三笑俱阳、圣而无阴；有小阻而无性命之忧，三筊中以一阴为兆；有大害不可前，以二阴为兆。
现代文：我因为前途险阻，抽签求观音菩萨来决定走还是不走，可无法得到写着徽诗的竹签，叨念着用竹管帚作为杯笠占卜，事先与菩萨约定：如果通行畅达没有灾难，三卦都是阳卦、圣卦而没有阴卦；稍有险阻却无性命之忧，三卦中以一个阴卦作为预兆；有大灾难不能前进，以两个阴卦作为预兆。
English: Because of the obstacles in my future, I drew lots to ask Guanyin Bodhisattva to decide whether to go or not to go, but I could not get a bamboo stick with a poem written on it. I thought about using a bamboo tube as a divination cup, and made an agreement with the Bodhisattva in advance: If there is no disaster, the three gospels are all yang gospels, sacred gospels and no gospels; if there is a slight obstacle, there is no fear of life, and one gospel is used as an omen in the three gospels; if there is a great disaster, two gospels are used as an o

古文：初得一阴并圣、阳各一。
现代文：起初得到一个阴封及圣卦、阳卦各一个。
English: At first, he received a yin envelope, a shenga and a yangga.

古文：又请决，得一圣二阳焉。
现代文：又请菩萨决定，得到一个圣卦两个阳卦。
English: He also asked the Bodhisattva to decide to get one saga and two yangas.

古文：归馆，使顾仆再以前约往恳，初得圣、阳、阴，又徼得圣一，阳与先所祈者大约相同，似有中阻，不识可免大难否？
现代文：归回客馆，派顾仆再按先前约定的前去恳求，起初得到圣卦、阳卦、阴卦各一个，又求得圣卦、一个阳卦，与先前所求的卦象大约相同，似乎中途有险阻，不知可否免除大难？
English: Returning to the guesthouse, he sent his servant to go and plead again according to the previous agreement. At first, he got a sage, a yang and a yang, and then he asked for a sage and a yang, which were about the same as the previously requested ones. It seemed that there was a dangerous obstacle in the middle of the way. I don't know if I can get rid of the great difficulty.

古文：上午，雾开日霁，候夫与饭俱不得。
现代文：上午，雾开日丽，等候差夫与饭都没有得到。
English: In the morning, when the fog lifted, neither the waiting waiter nor the meal arrived.

古文：久之得饭，散步州前，登门楼，有钟焉，乃万历十九年辛卯土官许应珪所铸者。
现代文：很久才吃了饭，在州衙前散步，登上门楼，有铜钟在楼上，是万历十九年辛卯土司许应硅铸造的。
English: It was a long time before I ate dinner. I took a walk in front of the state seal and climbed the gate tower. There was a bronze bell on the upper floor, which was cast in silicon by the 19th year of Wanli.

古文：考其文曰： 下雷乃宋、元古州，国初为妒府指镇安也。匿印不缴，未蒙钦赐，沦于土峒者二百年。
现代文：考察钟上的铭文，说： 下雷是宋代、元代以来的古州，国朝初年被妒忌的府官藏匿了官印不缴纳出来，未受到皇帝钦赐，沦为土炯的时间有二百年。
English: Examining the inscription on the bell, he said: "Henglei is an ancient prefecture since the Song Dynasty and the Yuan Dynasty. In the first year of the Qing Dynasty, the jealous government officials hid the official seal and did not pay it out. They did not receive the emperor's blessing and were reduced to a mound for two hundred years.

古文：应珪之父宗荫奉檄征讨，屡建厥勋，应珪乃上疏复请立为州治。 
现代文：应硅的父亲宗荫尊奉檄文征讨，屡建功勋，应硅于是呈上奏章请求重新设立为州一级政区。 
English: At the request of Si's father, Zongyin Zongjun, who had repeatedly made great achievements, Si requested to be re-established as a state-level political district.

古文：始知此州开于万历间，宜《一统志》不载也。
现代文：这才了解到此州开创于万历年间，因此《一统志》未记载。
English: It was only then that it was learned that the state was founded in the Wanli period, and therefore there is no record of it in the Unified Chronicle.

古文：州南城外即崇峰攒立，一路西南转山峡，即三十里接高平界者；东南转山峡，即随水下安平者，为十九峺故道。
现代文：州城外南边就是高大的山峰攒聚矗立，一条路向西南转过山峡，就是走三十里连接高平边界的路；向东南转入山峡，就是沿江水下行安平州的路，是去十九硬的老路。
English: The south side of the state outside the city is where the tall peaks gather and stand. A road to the southwest turns through the mountain gorge, which is the road that connects the highland border for thirty miles; turning to the southeast into the mountain gorge is the road to Anping Prefecture along the river, which is the old road to the nineteen hard.

古文：今安平虑通交彝，俱倒树塞断。
现代文：现在安平州担忧与交夷交往，砍倒树木全部塞断了此路。
English: Now Anping County is worried about cross-strait exchanges, and all the trees have been cut down to block the road.

古文：此州隶南宁，其道必东出龙英抵驮朴焉。
现代文：此州隶属南宁府，去南宁的路必定要向东出龙英州抵达驮朴。
English: This prefecture belongs to Nanning Prefecture. The road to Nanning must go east from Longying Prefecture to arrive at Zibo.

古文：若东北走田州，则迂而艰矣。
现代文：如果向东北走田州，那么又绕道又艰险了。
English: If you go to the northeast of Tianzhou, then it is a difficult and dangerous detour.

古文：是日为州墟期，始见有被发之民。
现代文：这天是州城的赶集日，这才见到有披发的百姓。
English: It was market day in the state capital when I saw people with their hair in plaits.

古文：讯交彝往镇安消息，犹无动静。
现代文：打听交夷前往镇安府的消息，仍没有动静。
English: After inquiring about the news that Jia Yi went to Zhen'an Prefecture, there was still no movement.

古文：盖其为田州争镇安，以子女马币赂而至者，其言是的ｄí肯定确定。
现代文：原来他们为田州争夺镇安府，是用女子、马匹、金钱贿赂才来的，这话肯定确实。
English: It turned out that they were fighting for the town of Zhen'anfu on behalf of Tianzhou, and that they had been bribed with women, horses, and money, which is definitely true.

古文：先是，镇安与归顺王达合而拒田州，田州伤者数十人，故赂交彝至，而彝亦狡甚，止结营镇安，索饷受馈，坐观两家成败，以收渔人之利，故不即动云。
现代文：这之前，镇安府与归顺州的王达联合抵御田州，田州伤了数十人，所以贿赂交夷前来，而交夷也非常狡猾，只在镇安府扎营，索取粮响接受馈赠，坐观两家的胜败，以收渔翁之利，所以不马上行动。
English: Prior to this, Zhen'anfu and Wang Da, who had surrendered to Shunzhou, had jointly resisted Tianzhou. Tianzhou had injured dozens of people, so they bribed Caiyi to come, and Caiyi was also very cunning. They only camped in Zhen'anfu, solicited grain, received gifts, and watched the victory and defeat of the two families in order to gain fishing profits, so they did not act immediately.

古文：夫至起行，已近午矣。
现代文：差夫到了就起身出发，已接近中午了。
English: When the policeman arrived, he got up and set off. It was close to noon.

古文：出北隘门，循石山东麓溯溪西北行。
现代文：走出北隘门，沿石山的东麓溯溪流往西北行。
English: Go out of the north narrow gate and follow the east foot of the stone mountain to trace the stream to the northwest.

古文：四里，跌左石山忽断，与北面土山亦相对成峡，西去甚深。
现代文：四里，路左的石山忽然断了，与北面的土山也是相对成峡，向西进去十分探邃。
English: Four miles later, the stone mountain on the left of the road suddenly broke off, and the earthen mountain to the north was also a relative gorge, and it was very difficult to explore to the west.

古文：有小水自峡中出，横堤峡口，内汇为塘，浸两崖间，余波出注于大溪。
现代文：有条小溪从峡中流出，峡口横筑了堤坝，里面积水成塘，浸泡在两面山崖之间，溢出的塘水流出来注进大溪。
English: A small stream flows out of the gorge. A dam has been built across the mouth of the gorge. The accumulated water forms a pond, soaking between the cliffs on both sides. The overflowing pond water flows out into the large stream.

古文：逾堤西转，路始舍大溪。
现代文：越过堤坝向西转，路开始离开大溪。
English: After crossing the dam, turn west and the road begins to leave the creek.

古文：已复北转，逾北面土山之西腋，复见溪自西北来，路亦西北溯之。
现代文：不久又向北转，越过北面土山的西侧，又见大溪水自西北流来，路也向西北逆流而行。
English: Soon I turned to the north, crossed the west side of the dirt mountain to the north, and saw the big stream water flowing from the northwest, and the road also went against the northwest current.

古文：已北径大峡，共四里，有木桥横跨大溪上，遂渡溪北，复溯大溪左岸，依北界石山行。
现代文：不久往北经过大峡谷，共四里，有座木桥横跨在溪上，于是过到溪北，再溯大溪左岸走，靠着北面一列石山行。
English: Soon I passed the Grand Canyon to the north, a total of four miles, there was a wooden bridge across the creek, so I crossed to the north of the creek, then walked along the left bank of the creek, and walked along a row of stone mountains to the north.

古文：回望溪之西南始有土山，与溪北石山相对成大峡焉。
现代文：回头望溪流的西南开始有土山，与溪北的石山相对形成大峡谷。
English: Looking back, the southwest of the stream begins to have earthen hills, forming a grand canyon opposite the stone hills to the north of the stream.

古文：东北石山中，屡有水从山峡流出，西注大溪，路屡涉之。
现代文：东北的石山中，常常有水流从山峡中流出，向西注入大溪，道路多次涉过溪流。
English: In the stone mountains of the northeast, water often flows out of mountain gorges and flows into large streams to the west. Roads often cross streams.

古文：共西北五里，东北界石山下，亦有土山盘突而西，与西南界土山相凑合，大峡遂穷。
现代文：共往西北行五里，东北一列石山下，也有土山盘绕着突向西去，与西南一列土山相会合，大峡谷便到了头。
English: A total of five miles to the northwest, a line of stone mountains to the northeast, there are also earthen mounds coiled around and protruding to the west, meeting with a line of earthen mounds to the southwest, and the Grand Canyon comes to an end.

古文：大溪亦曲而西南来，路始舍溪西北逾土山峡，于是升陟俱土山间矣。
现代文：大溪也弯向西南流来，道路这才离开溪流向西北越过土山山峡，从这里起上登跋涉全是在土山之间了。
English: The big stream also bends to the southwest, and the road only leaves the stream to the northwest and crosses the Tsuchiyama mountain gorge. From here, the trek is all between the mountains.

古文：又三里，西下土山，复望见大溪从西北来。
现代文：又走三里，往西下了土山，又望见大溪从西北流来。
English: After walking another three miles, I went down the hill to the west and saw a large stream flowing from the northwest.

古文：循土山西麓渐转西行，二里，直抵大溪上。
现代文：沿土山的西麓渐渐转向西行，二里，直达大溪之上。
English: Along the western foot of the hill gradually turned westward, two miles, straight up the creek.

古文：北岸土山中，复有一小水南注于溪。
现代文：北岸的土山中，又有一条小溪向南注入溪中。
English: On the north bank, in the middle of the hills and dirt, there is another small stream flowing south into the stream.

古文：涉溪升阜，复溯大溪西北行，三里，抵胡润寨即今之湖润。
现代文：涉过溪流登上土山，再次溯大溪往西北行，三里，抵达胡润寨。
English: I waded through the stream and climbed up the hill, and then retraced the stream to the northwest for three miles, arriving at Hurun Village.

古文：其地西南有大峡与交趾通界，西北有长峡，入十五里，两峰凑合处为鹅槽隘；正西大山之阴即归顺地，直北鹅槽岭之北为镇安地，而鹅槽隘则归顺之东境也；东北重山之内，为上英峒即今之上映，又东北为向武地。
现代文：这地方西南面有大峡谷与交趾边界相通，到达高平府约有三天路程；西北面有条长峡谷，进去十五里，两列山峰会合处是鹅槽隘；正西大山的北面就是归顺州的辖地，一天半到归顺州；正北鹅槽岭的北面是镇安府的属地，到镇安府也有两天半路程，而鹅槽隘便是归顺州的东境了；东北的重重山峦之中，是上英炯，再往东北是向武州的辖地。
English: In the southwest of this place, there is a large canyon that connects to the border of Khotan, and it takes about three days to reach Gaoping Prefecture; in the northwest, there is a long canyon, and it takes fifteen miles to enter, and the intersection of the two mountain peaks is the Goose Groove; in the northwest, the north side of the large mountain is the jurisdiction of Guishun Prefecture, and it takes one and a half days to get to Guishun Prefecture; in the northwest, the north side of the Goose Groove Ridge is the territory of Zhen'an Prefecture, and it takes two and a half days to get to Zhen'an Prefecture, and the

古文：是日下午抵胡润，闻交彝犹陆续行道上，馆人戒弗行。
现代文：这天下午抵达胡润寨，所说交夷仍陆陆续续行走在路上，客馆里的人劝告不要上路。
English: Arriving at Hurunzhai in the afternoon of this day, the said Jiaoyi was still walking on the road one after another, and the people in the guest house advised him not to go on the road.

古文：余恐妖梦是践，遂决意返辕，
现代文：我害怕怪梦应验，于是决定返回去，向东北取道去向武州。
English: I was afraid of the strange dream coming true, so I decided to go back and take the road to the northeast to Wuzhou.

古文：二十九日早雾颇重，旋明，霁ｊì转晴甚。
现代文：二十九日早晨雾气很浓，不久明亮起来，雾散开更加晴朗。
English: On the morning of the 29th, the fog was very thick, and soon it brightened up, and the fog dispersed and became clearer.

古文：候夫不至，余散步寨宅前后，始见大溪之水，一西北自鹅槽隘来者，发源归顺南境。经寨前南下下雷；一北自寨后土山峡中来者，发源镇安南境，抵寨后汇而分二口：一由寨宅北泻石堰，西坠前溪；一由寨宅东环绕其后，南流与前溪合。
现代文：等候差夫不来，我在寨子宅第前后散步，这才见大溪的水流，一条从西北自鹅槽隘流来的，发源于归顺州南境，流经寨前向南下流到下雷州；一条从北边自寨后的土山峡中流来的，发源于镇安府南境，流到寨后汇积成塘而后分为两个水口：一个水口的水由寨子宅第北边泻入石坝中，向西坠入寨前的溪中；一个水口的水由寨子宅第东面环绕到寨后，往南流去与寨前的溪流会合。
English: Waiting for the policeman not to come, I took a walk in front of and behind Zhaizi's house. It was only then that I saw the water flow of the large stream. A stream flowing from the northwest from the Goose Trough originated in the southern border of Guishu and flowed southward through Zhaizi's front to lower Leizhou. A stream flowing from the north from the middle of Tsuchiyama Gorge originated in the southern border of Zhen'an Prefecture and flowed to Zhaizi's back to accumulate into a pond and then divided into two water outlets. The water of one water outlet poured into the stone dam from the northern side of Zhaizi'

古文：盖寨宅乃溪中一碛，前横归顺之溪，后则镇安之水分夹其左右，于是合而其流始大，左江西北之源，与龙州、高平之水合于旧崇善县之驮绵埠者也。
现代文：原来寨子的宅第乃是溪中的一片沙石浅滩，前边横着发源于归顺州的溪流，后面就是镇安府流来的溪水分别夹在它的左右，到这里会合后水流才开始变大，就是志书所称的逻水，是左江在西北方的源头，与龙州、高平流来的水流在旧崇善县的驮绵埠会合。
English: Originally, the site of Zhaizi's residence was a sand and stone shoal in the stream. The stream that originated in Guishuo ran along the front, and the stream that flowed from Zhen'an was on either side of it in the back. It was only after they met here that the flow of water began to increase. This is the so-called Luoshui, which is the source of the Zuo River in the northwest, and the flow of water from Longzhou and Gaoping met in the former Zongshan County.

古文：胡润寨有巡检，其魁岑姓，亦曰土官，与下雷俱隶南宁府，为左江属；过鹅槽隘为即右江属。
现代文：胡润寨设有巡检司，它的头目姓岑，也是土官，与下雷州一同隶属于南宁府，是左江道的属地；过了鹅槽隘是就是右江道的属地。
English: Hurunzhai has a patrol and inspection division. Its leader, surnamed Zang, is also a local official. Together with Lower Leizhou, it belongs to Nanning Prefecture and is a part of Zuojiang Road; after passing the Goose Channel, it is a part of Zuojiang Road.

古文：而右江诸土司如田州、归顺、镇安又俱隶思恩府。
现代文：而右江道的诸土司如田州、归顺州、镇安府又都隶属于思恩府。
English: On the other hand, all the provincial governors of Ugang Province, such as Tianzhou, Guishunzhou and Zhen'an Prefecture, are subordinate to Sion Prefecture.

古文：是下雷、胡润虽属南宁，而东隔太平府龙英、养利之地，北隔思恩府镇安、田州之境，其界迥不相接者也。
现代文：这样下雷州、胡润寨虽归属于南宁府，但东面隔着太平府的龙英州、养利州的辖地，北面隔着思恩府的镇安府、田州的地域，它们的边界距离很远不相连接。
English: Thus, although Lower Leizhou and Hurunzhai belong to Nanning Prefecture, they are separated to the east by Longying Prefecture of Taiping Prefecture and the jurisdiction of Yaili Prefecture, and to the north by Zhen'an Prefecture and Tianzhou of Si'an Prefecture. Their border distances are far from being connected.

古文：左、右二江之分，以鹅槽岭为界，其水始分为南北流。
现代文：左、右二江的划分，以鹅槽岭为界，这里的水流开始分为南北两个流域。
English: The division of the left and right two rivers is bounded by the Goose Trough Ridge, and the water flow here begins to be divided into two basins, north and south.

古文：盖山脊西北自富州来，径归顺、镇安而东过都康。
现代文：大体上山脊自西北的富州延伸而来，经过归顺州、镇安府而后往东延过都康州。
English: In general, the upper ridge extends from Fuzhou in the northwest, through Guishun and Zhen'an, and then eastward through Dukang.

古文：过龙英之天灯墟，分支南下者为青莲山，而南结为壶关太平府；由龙英之天灯墟直东而去者，尽于合江镇，则左、右二江合处矣。
现代文：经过龙英州的天灯墟，分出的支脉向南下延的是青莲山，而后在南面盘结为壶关太平府；由龙英州的天灯墟一直向东而去的，尽头在合江镇，就是左、右二江的会合处了。
English: After passing through the sky lantern market of Long Yingzhou, the branching branch extends southward to Qinglian Mountain, and then coils in the south to form Kuguan Taiping Prefecture. From the sky lantern market of Long Yingzhou, it continues eastward, ending in Hejiang Town, which is the meeting place of the left and right two rivers.

古文：田州与归顺争镇安，既借交彝为重；而云南之归朝与富州争，复来纠助之。
现代文：田州与归顺州争夺镇安府，既已借助交夷来增强自己；而云南的归朝与富州相争，又纠集交夷来帮助。
English: Tianzhou and Guizhong competed for Zhen'anfu with Guizhong, which had already strengthened itself with the help of foreign countries; while Guizhong of Yunnan competed with Fuzhou, and gathered foreign countries to help.

古文：是诸土司只知有莫彝，而不知为有中国矣。
现代文：这是诸土司只知道有莫夷，却不知道有中国了。
English: This means that local officials only know of Moi, but not of China.

