古文：孔子曰 受业身通者七十有七人 ，皆异能之士也。
现代文：孔子说： 跟着我学习而精通六艺的弟子有七十七人 ，他们都是具有奇异才能的人。
English: Confucius said: There are seventy-seven disciples who follow me and are proficient in the six arts. They are all people with extraordinary talents.

古文：德行：颜渊，闵子骞，冉伯牛，仲弓。
现代文：德行方面突出的：颜渊，闵子骞，冉伯牛，仲弓。
English: Prominent in terms of virtue: Yan Yuan, Zang Zi Quan, Zhan Bo Niu, Zhong Yue.

古文：政事：冉有，季路。
现代文：擅长处理政事的：冉有，季路。
English: Good at handling political affairs: Ran Yu, Ji Lu.

古文：言语：宰我，子贡。
现代文：语言方面的：宰我，子贡。
English: In terms of language: kill me, my tribute.

古文：文学：子游，子夏。
现代文：文章博学方面的：子游，子夏。
English: In terms of the erudition of the article: Ziyu, Zixia.

古文：师也辟，参也鲁，柴也愚，由也喭，回也屡空。
现代文：颛孙师偏激，曾参迟钝，高柴愚笨，仲由粗鲁，颜回经常贫穷无所有。
English: Zeng Zeng's grandson was violent, Zeng Zeng was dull, Gao Zhai was stupid, Zhong Yu was rude, and Yan Hui was often poor and destitute.

古文：赐不受命而货殖焉，亿则屡中。
现代文：端木赐不接受命运的摆布而去经营商业，不过他推测的行情经常是准确的。
English: As a result, he does not accept the control of fate to run a business, but his guesses are often accurate.

古文：孔子之所严事：於周则老子；於卫，蘧伯玉；於齐，晏平仲；於楚，老莱子；於郑，子产；於鲁，孟公绰。
现代文：孔子所礼敬的人：在周朝是老子；在卫国是蘧伯玉；在齐国是晏仲平；在楚国是老莱子；在郑国是子产；在鲁国是孟公绰。
English: The people whom Confucius revered: in the Zhou Dynasty, it was Lao Zi; in the Qing Dynasty, it was Zibo Yu; in the Qi Dynasty, it was Zou Zhongping; in the Chu Dynasty, it was Laozi; in the Zheng Dynasty, it was Zibo; in the Lu Dynasty, it was Meng Gongqiao.

古文：数称臧文仲、柳下惠、铜鞮伯华、介山子然，孔子皆後之，不并世。
现代文：他也经常称颂臧文仲、柳下惠、铜鞮伯华、介山子然，孔子出生的时间比他们都晚，不是同一时代的人。
English: He also often praised Yu Wenzhong, Liu Shih-hui, Tonglu Bo-hua, and Kaeyama Ziran. Confucius was born later than all of them, and was not from the same era.

古文：颜回者，鲁人也，字子渊。
现代文：颜回，是鲁国人，字子渊。
English: Yan Hui, a native of Lu, is also known as Zi Yuan.

古文：少孔子三十岁。
现代文：比孔子小三十岁。
English: Thirty years younger than Confucius.

古文：颜渊问仁，孔子曰： 克己复礼，天下归仁焉。 
现代文：颜渊问什么是仁，孔子说： 约束自己，使你的言行符合于礼，天下的人就会称许你是有仁德的人了。 
English: Yan Yuan asked what is benevolence, Confucius said: "Constrain yourself, so that your words and deeds conform to etiquette, and the world will praise you for being a benevolent person."

古文：孔子曰： 贤哉回也！
现代文：孔子说： 颜回！多么德的人啊！
English: Confucius said: Yan Hui! What a virtuous person!

古文：一箪食，一瓢饮，在陋巷，人不堪其忧，回也不改其乐。 
现代文：吃的是一小竹筐饭，喝的是一瓢水，住在简陋的胡同里，一般人忍受不了这种困苦，颜回却也不改变自己的乐趣。
English: They eat rice from a small bamboo basket, drink a bowl of water, and live in a humble hutong. The average person can't bear this kind of hardship, but it doesn't change their enjoyment.

古文： 回也如愚；退而省其私，亦足以发，回也不愚。 
现代文：听我授业时，颜回象个蠢笨的人，下课后考察他私下的言谈，也能够刻意发挥，颜回实在不笨。 
English: When listening to my lectures, Yan Hui sounded like a stupid person. After class, I examined his private conversations, and I was able to deliberately play, Yan Hui is really not stupid.

古文： 用之则行，舍之则藏，唯我与尔有是夫！ 
现代文： 任用你的时候，就匡时救世，不被任用的时候，就藏道在身，只有我和你才有这样的处世态度吧！ 
English: When you are appointed, you should save the world, and when you are not appointed, you should hide the truth. Only you and I can have such an attitude towards life!

古文：回年二十九，发尽白，蚤死。
现代文：颜回才二十九岁，头发就全白了，过早的死去。
English: Yan Hui was only twenty-nine years old, her hair turned completely white, and she died prematurely.

古文：孔子哭之恸，曰： 自吾有回，门人益亲。 
现代文：孔子哭得特别伤心，说： 自从我有了颜回，学生们越来越和我亲近。 
English: Confucius wept bitterly and said, "Since I have been reinstated, my students have become more and more close to me.

古文：鲁哀公问： 弟子孰为好学？ 
现代文：鲁哀公问： 学生中谁是最好学习的？ 
English: Lu Aigong asked: Who is the best learner among students?

古文：孔子对曰： 有颜回者好学，不迁怒，不贰过。
现代文：孔子回答说： 有个叫颜回的人最好学习，从不把怒火转移到别人身上，不再犯同样的过失。
English: Confucius replied, "It is best for a person with anger to learn not to transfer his anger to others and not to commit the same mistake again."

古文：不幸短命死矣，今也则亡。 
现代文：不幸的是寿命很短，死了，现在就没有这样的人了。 
English: Unfortunately, life is very short, he died, and now there is no such person.

古文：闵损字子骞。少孔子十五岁。
现代文：闵损，字子骞，比孔子小十五岁。
English: He was fifteen years younger than Confucius.

古文：孔子曰： 孝哉闵子骞！
现代文：孔子说： 闵子骞太孝顺啦！
English: Confucius said, "You are too filial!

古文：人不间於其父母昆弟之言。 
现代文：他侍奉父母，顺从兄弟，别人对他的父母兄弟夸赞他都没有非议的闲话。 
English: He served his parents and obeyed his brothers. He was praised by others for his parents and brothers, and there was no objectionable gossip about him.

古文：不仕大夫，不食汙君之禄。 如有复我者，必在汶上矣。 
现代文：他不做大夫的家臣，不要昏君的俸禄。所以他说： 如果有人再来召我，我一定逃到汶水以北了。 
English: He didn't want to be a vassal of the doctor and miss out on his salary, so he said, "If anyone calls me again, I'll definitely have fled to the north of Wenshui."

古文：冉耕字伯牛。
现代文：冉耕，字伯牛。
English: "Ran ko" means to cultivate, "zhaobiu" means to grow.

古文：孔子以为有德行。
现代文：孔子认为他有德行。
English: Confucius thought he was virtuous.

古文：伯牛有恶疾，孔子往问之，自牖执其手，曰： 命也夫！
现代文：伯牛得了难治的病，孔子前去问候他，从窗户里握手住他的手，说： 这是命啊！
English: Uncle Niu fell ill with an incurable disease. Confucius went to greet him, shook his hand from the window and said, "This is life!"

古文：斯人也而有斯疾，命也夫！ 冉雍字仲弓。
现代文：这样好的人却得了这样的病，这是命啊！ 冉雍，字仲弓。
English: Such a good person has such a disease, this is life! Zhan Yong, Zhaozhongyu.

古文：仲弓问政，孔子曰： 出门如见大宾，使民如承大祭。
现代文：仲弓问如何处理政事，孔子说： 出门做事如同接待贵宾一样谦恭有礼，使用百姓如同承办隆重的祭典一样虔诚谨慎。
English: When Zhongyun asked how to handle political affairs, Confucius said: Going out to do things is as courteous and respectful as receiving dignitaries, and using the people is as pious and prudent as hosting a grand festival.

古文：在邦无怨，在家无怨。 
现代文：这样，在诸侯的封国里任职，就没人怨恨你，在卿大夫的家邑里任职也不会有人怨恨你。 
English: In this way, no one will resent you for serving in the feudal country of the princes, and no one will resent you for serving in the hometown of the noble doctor.

古文：孔子以仲弓为有德行，曰： 雍也可使南面。 
现代文：孔子认为仲弓在德行方面有成就，说： 冉雍啊，可以让他作个卿大夫一样的大官。 
English: Confucius thought that Zhongyun had achieved a lot in terms of virtue, and said, "Ran Yong, you can make him a high-ranking official like a doctor."

古文：仲弓父，贱人。
现代文：仲弓的父亲，是个地位卑微的人。
English: Chukyu's father was a lowly man.

古文：孔子曰： 犁牛之子骍且角，虽欲勿用，山川其舍诸？ 
现代文：孔子打比方说： 杂色牛生出红色的小牛，两角长得周正，即便你不想用它作祭品，山川的神灵难道会舍弃它吗？ 
English: Confucius said by way of analogy: "A variegated cow gives birth to a red calf, and its horns grow straight. Even if you do not want to use it as a sacrifice, will the gods of the mountains and rivers abandon it?

古文：冉求字子有，少孔子二十九岁。
现代文：冉求，字子有，比孔子小二十九岁。
English: Ran Qiu, who is twenty-nine years younger than Confucius.

古文：为季氏宰。
现代文：作李氏家臣之长。
English: He was the chief retainer of the Li clan.

古文：季康子问孔子曰： 冉求仁乎？ 
现代文：季康子问孔子说： 冉求有仁德吗？ 
English: Ji Kangzi asked Confucius, "Is there any virtue in seeking benevolence?

古文：曰： 千室之邑，百乘之家，求也可使治其赋。
现代文：孔子回答说： 有千户人家的城邑，有百辆兵车的采邑，冉求能够把那里的军政事物管理好。
English: Confucius replied, "In a city of a thousand households and a garrison of a hundred chariots, one must be able to manage military and political affairs well.

古文：仁则吾不知也。 
现代文：至于他仁德不仁德，我就不知道了。 
English: As for whether he is benevolent or not, I don't know.

古文：复问： 子路仁乎？ 
现代文：季康子又问： 子路有仁德吗？ 
English: Ji Kangzi also asked: Does Zilu have benevolence?

古文：孔子对曰： 如求。 
现代文：孔子回答说： 象冉求一样。 
English: Confucius replied, "It's just like asking for something.

古文：求问曰： 闻斯行诸？ 
现代文：冉求问孔子说： 听到应做的事情就立刻行动吗？ 
English: Ran Qiu asked Confucius: When you hear what should be done, do you immediately act?

古文：子曰： 行之。 
现代文：孔子回答说： 立刻行动。 
English: Confucius replied, "Act at once.

古文：子路问： 闻斯行诸？ 
现代文：子路问孔子说： 听到应做的事就应该立刻行动吗？ 
English: Zi Lu asked Confucius, "When you hear what should be done, should you act immediately?"

古文：子曰： 有父兄在，如之何其闻斯行之！ 
现代文：孔子回答说： 有父亲兄长在，怎么听到就能立刻行动呢？ 
English: Confucius replied, "If one's father and elder brother are present, how can one act immediately upon hearing them?

古文：子华怪之， 敢问问同而答异？ 
现代文：子华感到这件事很奇怪，不解地说： 我大胆地问问，为什么问同样的问题而回答却不一样呢？ 
English: Zihua felt that this was very strange and said puzzledly: I boldly asked, why ask the same question but answer differently?

古文：孔子曰： 求也退，故进之。
现代文：孔子回答说： 冉求做事畏缩多虑，所以我激励他。
English: Confucius replied, "Ran was too timid to do anything, so I encouraged him.

古文：由也兼人，故退之。 
现代文：仲由做事有两个人的胆量，所以我要抑制他。 
English: Zhong Rong has the courage of two people to do things, so I have to restrain him.

古文：仲由字子路，卞人也。
现代文：仲由，字子路，卞地人。
English: Zhongyu, Zizi Road, and the people of Yunnan.

古文：少孔子九岁。
现代文：比孔子小九岁。
English: He is nine years younger than Confucius.

古文：子路性鄙，好勇力，志伉直，冠雄鸡，佩豭豚，陵暴孔子。
现代文：子路性情粗朴，喜欢逞勇斗力，志气刚强，性格直爽，头戴雄鸡式的帽子，佩戴着公猪皮装饰的宝剑，曾经欺凌孔子。
English: Zi Lu has a coarse temperament, likes to be brave and combative, strong-minded, straightforward, wears a rooster-style hat, wears a boar skin decorated sword, and once bullied Confucius.

古文：孔子设礼稍诱子路，子路後儒服委质，因门人请为弟子。
现代文：孔子用礼乐慢慢地诱导他，后来，子路穿着儒服，带着拜师的礼物，通过孔子学生的引荐，请求作孔子的学生。
English: Confucius slowly induced him with ceremonial music. Later, Zilu, wearing a Confucian robe and carrying a gift from his teacher, asked to be a student of Confucius through the introduction of Confucius's students.

古文：子路问政，孔子曰： 先之，劳之。 
现代文：子路问如何处理政事，孔子说： 自己先给百姓作出榜样，然后才能使百姓辛勤地劳作。 
English: Zi Lu asked how to deal with political affairs. Confucius said, "You must first set an example for the people, and then you can make the people work hard."

古文：请益。
现代文：子路请求进一步讲讲。
English: Zi Lu asked to speak further.

古文：曰： 无倦。 
现代文：孔子说： 持久不懈。 
English: Confucius said: Persevere.

古文：子路问： 君子尚勇乎？ 
现代文：子路问： 君子崇尚勇敢吗？ 
English: Zi Lu asked: Does the gentleman advocate bravery?

古文：孔子曰： 义之为上。
现代文：孔子说： 君子最崇尚的是义。
English: Confucius said, "What a gentleman most reveres is righteousness."

古文：君子好勇而无义则乱，小人好勇而无义则盗。 
现代文：君子只好勇而不崇尚义，就会叛逆作乱。小人只好勇而不崇尚义，就会做强盗。 
English: If a gentleman has to be brave without advocating righteousness, he will rebel and make trouble. If a villain has to be brave without advocating righteousness, he will be a robber.

古文：子路有闻，未之能行，唯恐有闻。
现代文：子路要听到什么道理，没有马上行动，只怕又听到别的道理。
English: If you don't act immediately when you hear one thing, you'll hear something else.

古文：孔子曰： 片言可以折狱者，其由也与！ 
现代文：孔子说： 只听单方面言辞就可以决断案子的，恐怕只有仲由吧！ 
English: Confucius said: You can decide a case just by listening to one-sided words. I'm afraid there is only a middle ground!

古文： 由也好勇过我，无所取材。 
现代文： 仲由崇尚勇敢超过我之所用，就不适用了。 
English: It is no longer appropriate to use the phrase "Nakazu advocated bravery more than I did."

古文： 若由也，不得其死然。 
现代文：象仲由这种性情，不会得到善终。 
English: With this kind of disposition, Xiang Zhong will not have a happy ending.

古文： 衣敝缊袍与衣狐貉者立而不耻者，其由也与！ 
现代文： 穿着用乱麻絮做的破旧袍子和穿着裘皮大衣的人站在一起而不认为羞愧的，恐怕只有仲由吧！ 
English: If you are not ashamed to stand next to a man in a fur coat and a shabby robe made of tinsel, there must be a reason.

古文： 由也升堂矣，未入於室也。 
现代文： 仲由的学问好象登上了正厅，可是还没能进入内室呢。 
English: Nakayuki's knowledge seems to have reached the main hall, but he hasn't been able to enter the inner room yet.

古文：季康子问： 仲由仁乎？ 
现代文：季康子问道： 仲由有仁德吗？ 
English: Ji Kangzi asked: Does Nakayu have benevolence?

古文：孔子曰： 千乘之国可使治其赋，不知其仁。 
现代文：孔子答说： 拥有一千辆兵车的国家，可以让他管理军政事务，至于他有没有仁德，我就不知道了。 
English: Confucius replied, "A country with a thousand chariots can let him manage its military and political affairs. As for whether he has benevolence, I don't know."

古文：子路喜从游，遇长沮、桀溺、荷丈人。
现代文：子路喜欢跟随孔子出游，曾遇到过长沮、桀溺、扛着农具的老人等隐士。
English: Zilu likes to travel with Confucius, and has encountered hermits such as long-suffering, drunkards, and old men carrying farm tools.

古文：子路为季氏宰，季孙问曰： 子路可谓大臣与？ 
现代文：子路出任季氏的家臣，季孙问孔子说： 子路可以说是人臣了吗？ 
English: Qishun asked Confucius, "Can Zilu be said to be a vassal?

古文：孔子曰： 可谓具臣矣。 
现代文：孔子回答说： 可以说是备位充数的臣子了。 
English: Confucius replied: It can be said that there are enough vassals.

古文：子路为蒲大夫，辞孔子。
现代文：子路出任蒲邑的大夫，向孔子辞行。
English: Zi Lu served as a doctor in Puyi and resigned to Confucius.

古文：孔子曰： 蒲多壮士，又难治。
现代文：孔子说： 蒲邑勇武之士很多，又难治理。
English: Confucius said: There are many brave warriors in Pu'er, and it is difficult to govern.

古文：然吾语汝：恭以敬，可以执勇；宽以正，可以比众；恭正以静，可以报上。 
现代文：可是，我告诉你：恭谨谦敬，就可以驾驭勇武的人；宽厚清正，就可以使大家亲近；恭谨清正而社会安静，就可以用来报效上司了。 
English: However, I will tell you: if you are respectful and humble, you can control those who are brave; if you are generous and upright, you can make everyone close; if you are respectful and upright and the society is quiet, you can be used to repay your superiors.

古文：初，卫灵公有宠姬曰南子。
现代文：当初，卫灵公有位宠姬叫作南子。
English: At the beginning, Wei Ling Gong had a favorite princess called Nan Zi.

古文：灵公太子蒉聩得过南子，惧诛出奔。
现代文：灵公的太子蒉聩曾得罪过她，害怕被谋杀就逃往国外。
English: The prince of the spiritual master, Zou, had offended her and fled abroad, fearing that he would be murdered.

古文：及灵公卒而夫人欲立公子郢。
现代文：等到灵公去世，夫人南子想让公子郢继承王位。
English: When Prince Ling died, Lady Nanzi wanted Prince Zou to succeed to the throne.

古文：郢不肯，曰： 亡人太子之子辄在。 
现代文：公子郢不肯接受，说： 太子虽然逃亡了，太子的儿辄还在。 
English: He refused to accept, saying, "Although the prince has fled, the prince's children are still there.

古文：於是卫立辄为君，是为出公。
现代文：于是卫国立了辄为国君，这就是卫出公。
English: As a result, the Emperor of Wei became the ruler of the country, which is called "Wei Dechu."

古文：出公立十二年，其父蒉聩居外，不得入。
现代文：出公继位十二年，他的父亲蒉聩一直留在国外，不能够回来。
English: Twelve years after he ascended to the throne, his father Zou has remained abroad, unable to return.

古文：子路为卫大夫孔悝之邑宰。
现代文：这时子路担任卫国大夫孔悝采邑的长官。
English: At this time, Zi Lu served as the head of the provincial doctor Kong Ying Cai.

古文：蒉聩乃与孔悝作乱，谋入孔悝家，遂与其徒袭攻出公。
现代文：蒉聩就和孔悝一同作乱，想办法带人潜入孔悝家，就和他的党徒去袭击卫出公。
English: He and Kong Rong started a riot, and tried to sneak someone into Kong Rong's house. He and his followers attacked Wei Decheng.

古文：出公奔鲁，而蒉聩入立，是为庄公。
现代文：出公逃往鲁国，蒉聩进宫继位，这就卫庄公。
English: He fled to the State of Lu after entering the imperial court and succeeded to the throne. This was the Weizhuang Emperor.

古文：方孔悝作乱，子路在外，闻之而驰往。
现代文：当孔悝作乱时，子路还有事在外，听到这个消息就立刻赶回来。
English: When Kong Yao made a mess, Zi Lu still had something to do, and when he heard the news, he immediately rushed back.

古文：遇子羔出卫城门，谓子路曰： 出公去矣，而门已闭，子可还矣，毋空受其祸。 
现代文：子羔从卫国城门出来，正好相遇，对子路说： 卫出公逃走了，城门已经关闭，您可以回去了，不要为他遭受祸殃。 
English: The lamb came out from the gate of the patriotic city, and just happened to meet him. He said to the lamb, "Weidegong has fled, the gate is closed, you can go back, don't suffer misfortune because of him."

古文：子路曰： 食其食者不避其难。 
现代文：子路说： 吃着人家的粮食就不能回避人家的灾难。 
English: Zilu said, "You can't avoid disaster by eating other people's grain."

古文：子羔卒去。
现代文：子羔终于离去了。
English: The lamb finally left.

古文：有使者入城，城门开，子路随而入。
现代文：正赶上有使者要进城，城门开了，子路就跟了进去。
English: Just as the messenger was about to enter the city, the gates were opened, and Zerubbabel followed him in.

古文：造蒉聩，蒉聩与孔悝登台。
现代文：找到蒉聩，蒉聩和孔悝都在台上。
English: Find the,  and  are on the stage.

古文：子路曰： 君焉用孔悝？
现代文：子路说： 大王为什么要任用孔悝呢？
English: Zilu said, "Why would the great king appoint Kong Yao?

古文：请得而杀之。 
现代文：请让我捉住他杀了。 
English: Please let me catch him and kill him.

古文：蒉聩弗听。
现代文：蒉聩不听从他的劝说。
English: She did not listen to his persuasion.

古文：於是子路欲燔台，蒉聩惧，乃下石乞、壶黡攻子路，击断子路之缨。
现代文：于是子路要放火烧台，蒉聩害怕了，于是叫石乞、壶黡到台下去攻打子路，斩断了子路的帽带。
English: As a result, Zilu wanted to set fire to the platform. Zou was afraid, so he called Shijie and Jujie to go down to the platform to attack Zilu and cut off Zilu's headband.

古文：子路曰： 君子死而冠不免。 
现代文：子路说： 君子可以死，帽子不能掉下来。 
English: Zilu said: A gentleman can die, but his hat cannot fall off.

古文：遂结缨而死。
现代文：说完系好帽子就死了。
English: He finished tying his hat and died.

古文：孔子闻卫乱，曰： 嗟乎，由死矣！ 
现代文：孔子听到卫国发生暴乱的消息，说： 唉呀，仲由死了！ 
English: When Confucius heard the news of a riot in the motherland, he said: Alas, Zhongyu is dead!

古文：已而果死。
现代文：不久，果真传来了他的死讯。
English: Soon after, the news of his death came true.

古文：故孔子曰： 自吾得由，恶言不闻於耳。 
现代文：所以孔子说： 自从我有子仲由，恶言恶语的话再也听不到了。 
English: So Confucius said, "Since I have Zhongyu, I can no longer hear the evil words.

古文：是时子贡为鲁使於齐。
现代文：这时，子贡正为鲁国出使到了齐国。
English: At this time, Zigong was being sent to Qi for Lu.

古文：宰予字子我。
现代文：宰予，字子我。
English: I'll do it, I'll do it.

古文：利口辩辞。
现代文：他口齿伶俐，擅长辞辩。
English: He is articulate and a good debater.

古文：既受业，问： 三年之丧不已久乎？
现代文：拜在孔子门下以后，问道： 一个人的父母死了，守孝三年，时间不是太长了吗？
English: After worshiping at the door of Confucius, he asked, "A person's parents have died. Three years of filial piety, isn't that too long?

古文：君子三年不为礼，礼必坏；三年不为乐，乐必崩。
现代文：君子三年不习礼，礼义必定会毁坏；三年不演奏音乐，音乐一定会败环。
English: If a gentleman does not practice etiquette for three years, etiquette will surely be destroyed; if he does not play music for three years, music will surely fail.

古文：旧穀既没，新穀既升，钻燧改火，期可已矣。 
现代文：一年间，陈旧的谷子吃完了，新的谷子又成熟了，钻木取火的木材换遍了，守丧一年也就可以了。 
English: In the course of a year, the old corn is eaten up, the new corn matures again, the wood for the fire is replaced, and it is enough to observe the mourning for a year.

古文：子曰： 於汝安乎？ 
现代文：孔子说： 只守丧一年，你内心安不安呢？ 
English: Confucius said, "If you have only been dead for a year, how can you be at peace?

古文：曰： 安。 
现代文：宰我回答说： 心安。 
English: I replied, "Peace of mind."

古文： 汝安则为之。
现代文：孔子说： 你既然感到心安理得，你就这样做吧。
English: Confucius said: Since you feel at ease, you should do so.

古文：君子居丧，食旨不甘，闻乐不乐，故弗为也。 
现代文：君子守孝期间，即使吃美味的食品，也感觉不到甜美，听到动听的音乐也感觉不到高兴，所以君子才不这样做呀。 
English: During the period of filial piety, even if you eat delicious food, you will not feel sweet, and you will not feel happy to hear beautiful music, so gentlemen do not do this.

古文：宰我出，子曰： 予之不仁也！
现代文：宰我退了出去，孔子说： 宰予不是个仁人君子啊！
English: When Zaiya retreated, Confucius said, "Isn't Zaiya a gentleman?

古文：子生三年然後免於父母之怀。
现代文：孩子生下来三年，才能脱离母亲的怀抱。
English: It takes three years for a child to be born before it can leave its mother's arms.

古文：夫三年之丧，天下之通义也。 
现代文：为父母守孝三年，是天下共同遵行的礼仪啊。 
English: To show filial piety to one's parents for three years is a common etiquette.

古文：宰予昼寝。
现代文：宰予白天睡大觉。
English: Zayo takes a nap during the day.

古文：子曰： 朽木不可雕也，粪土之墙不可圬也。 
现代文：孔子说： 腐朽了的木头是不能雕刻器物的，腐秽的墙壁是不能够粉刷的。 
English: Confucius said, "Rotten wood cannot be used for carving utensils, and rotten walls cannot be painted."

古文：宰我问五帝之德，子曰： 予非其人也。 
现代文：宰我询问五帝的德行，孔子回答说： 你不是问这种问题的人。 
English: When I inquired about the virtue of the Five Immortals, Confucius replied, "You are not the one to ask such a question.

古文：宰我为临菑大夫，与田常作乱，以夷其族，孔子耻之。
现代文：宰我做齐国临菑的大夫，和田常一起同谋作乱，因此被灭族，孔子为他感到羞耻。
English: Confucius was ashamed of him for killing me as a doctor in Linyi, Qi Province, and conspiring together with Wada Jang to create a disturbance, for which he was exterminated.

古文：端沐赐，卫人，字子贡。
现代文：端木赐，是卫国人，字子贡。
English: As a gift from Tadaki, he is a guardian of the country, a tribute to the emperor.

古文：少孔子三十一岁。
现代文：比孔子小三十一岁。
English: Thirty-one years younger than Confucius.

古文：子贡利口巧辞，孔子常黜其辩。
现代文：子贡口齿伶俐，巧于辞令，孔子常常驳斥他的言辞。
English: Zigong was articulate and eloquent, and Confucius often refuted his words.

古文：问曰： 汝与回也孰愈？ 
现代文：孔子问子贡说： 你和颜回比，谁更加出色？ 
English: Confucius asked Zigong, "Compared to you, who is more outstanding?"

古文：对曰： 赐也何敢望回！
现代文：子贡回答说： 我怎么敢指望跟颜回相比呢？
English: Zigong replied, "How dare I expect to be compared to Yan Hui?

古文：回也闻一以知十，赐也闻一以知二。 
现代文：颜回听知一个道理，能够推知十个道理，我听说一个道理，也不过推导出两个道理。 
English: Yan Hui heard one truth and was able to deduce ten truths. I heard one truth and was able to deduce two truths.

古文：子贡既已受业，问曰： 赐何人也？ 孔子曰： 汝器也。 
现代文：子贡拜在孔子门下求学以后，问道： 我是什么样的人？ 孔子说： 你象个有用器物。 
English: After studying under Confucius, Gongbei asked, "What kind of person am I?" Confucius said, "You are like a useful tool."

古文：曰： 何器也？ 
现代文：子贡说： 什么样的器物呀？ 
English: Zigong said: What kind of ware is it?

古文：曰： 瑚琏也。 
现代文：孔子说： 宗庙里的瑚琏呀。 
English: Confucius said, "The fireflies in the ancestral temple are beautiful.

古文：陈子禽问子贡曰： 仲尼焉学？ 
现代文：陈子禽问子贡说： 仲尼在哪里得来这么广博的学问啊？ 
English: Chen Ziying asked Zi Gong, "Where did Zhong Ni get such a broad knowledge?"

古文：子贡曰： 文武之道未坠於地，在人，贤者识其大者，不贤者识其小者，莫不有文武之道。
现代文：子贡说： 文王、武王的治国思想并没有完全丢掉，还在人间流传，贤能人记住它重要的部分，不贤的人只记住了它细枝末节，无处不有文王、武王的思想存在着。
English: Zigong said: King Wen and King Wu's thoughts on governing the country have not been completely discarded. They are still circulating among the people. Wise people remember its important parts, while unwise people only remember its minutiae. King Wen and King Wu's thoughts exist everywhere.

古文：夫子焉不学，而亦何常师之有！ 
现代文：先生在哪里不能学习，又何必要有固定的老师！ 
English: Where is a teacher not able to learn, and why is it necessary to have a fixed teacher?

古文：又问曰： 孔子適是国必闻其政。
现代文：陈子禽又问道： 孔子每到一个国家，一定了解到这个国家的政事。
English: Chen Ziying also asked: Whenever Confucius went to a country, he must have learned about the political affairs of that country.

古文：求之与？抑与之与？ 
现代文：这是请求人家告诉他的呢，还是人家主动告诉他的呢？ 
English: Did he ask to be told, or was he told of his own accord?

古文：子贡曰： 夫子温良恭俭让以得之。
现代文：子贡说： 先生凭借着温和、善良、恭谨、俭朴、谦让的美德得来的。
English: Zigong said, "I have earned this by virtue of being gentle, kind, respectful, frugal, and humble.

古文：夫子之求之也，其诸异乎人之求之也。 
现代文：先生这种求得的方式，或许与别人求得的方式不同吧。 
English: Sir, this way of seeking may be different from the way others seek.

古文：子贡问曰： 富而无骄，贫而无谄，何如？ 
现代文：子贡问孔子说： 富有而不骄纵，贫穷而不谄媚，这样的人怎么样？ 
English: Zigong asked Confucius, "What about those who are rich but not arrogant, and poor but not charming?

古文：孔子曰： 可也；不如贫而乐道，富而好礼。 
现代文：孔子说： 可以了；不过，不如即使贫穷乐于恪守圣贤之道，虽然富有却能处事谦恭守礼。 
English: Confucius said, "That's all right; however, it would be better if even the poor were willing to abide by the way of the sages, and even if they were rich, they would be able to act with modesty and respect."

古文：田常欲作乱於齐，惮高、国、鲍、晏，故移其兵欲以伐鲁。
现代文：田常想要在齐国叛乱，却害怕高昭子，国惠子，鲍牧，晏圉的势力，所以想转移他们的军队去攻打鲁国。
English: Tian Chang wanted to rebel in Qi, but he was afraid of the forces of Gao Zhao Zi, Guo Huizi, Bao Mu, and Zou, so he wanted to divert their army to attack Lu.

古文：孔子闻之，谓门弟子曰： 夫鲁，坟墓所处，父母之国，国危如此，二三子何为莫出？ 
现代文：孔子听说这件事，对门下弟子们说： 鲁国，是祖宗坟墓所在的地方，是我们出生的国家，我们的祖国危险到这种地步，诸位为什么不挺身而出呢？ 
English: When Confucius heard about this, he said to his disciples: Lu, the country where our ancestors' tombs are located, is the country where we were born. Our motherland is in such danger. Why don't you all come forward?

古文：子路请出，孔子止之。
现代文：子路请求前去，孔子制止了他。
English: Confucius stopped him when Zi Lu asked him to go.

古文：子张、子石请行，孔子弗许。
现代文：子张、子石请求前去救鲁，孔子也不答应。
English: Zi Zhang and Zi Shi asked him to go and rescue Lu, but Confucius did not agree.

古文：子贡请行，孔子许之。
现代文：子贡请求前去救鲁，孔子答应他。
English: Zigong asked Confucius to go and rescue Lu, and Confucius agreed.

古文：遂行，至齐，说田常曰： 君之伐鲁过矣。
现代文：子贡就出发了，来到齐国，游说田常说： 您攻打鲁国是错误的。
English: Zigong set off, came to Qi, and lobbied Tian Chang, saying: You are wrong to attack Lu.

古文：夫鲁，难伐之国，其城薄以卑，其地狭以泄，其君愚而不仁，大臣伪而无用，其士民又恶甲兵之事，此不可与战。
现代文：鲁国，是难攻打的国家，它的城墙单薄而矮小，它的护城河狭窄而水浅，它的国君愚昧而不仁慈，大臣们虚伪而中用，它的士兵百姓又厌恶打仗的事，这样的国家不可以和它交战。
English: Russia is a country that is difficult to attack, its walls are thin and short, its moat is narrow and shallow, its sovereigns are stupid and uncharitable, its ministers are hypocritical and self-serving, and its soldiers and people abhor war. Such a country should not be engaged in war.

古文：君不如伐吴。
现代文：您不如去攻打吴国。
English: You might as well go and attack Wu.

古文：夫吴，城高以厚，地广以深，甲坚以新，士选以饱，重器精兵尽在其中，又使明大夫守之，此易伐也。 
现代文：吴国，它的城墙高大而厚实，护城河宽阔而水深，铠甲坚固而崭新，士卒经过挑选而精神饱满，可贵的人才、精锐的部队都在那里，又派英明的大臣守卫着它，这样的国家是容易攻打的。 
English: Wu, with its high and thick walls, wide and deep moat, strong and new armor, selected and spirited soldiers, valuable talents, elite troops, and wise ministers to guard it, is an easy country to attack.

古文：田常忿然作色曰： 子之所难，人之所易；子之所易，人之所难：而以教常，何也？ 
现代文：田常顿时忿怒了，脸色一变说： 你认为难，人家认为容易；你认为容易的，人家认为是难的。用这些话来指教我，是什么用心？ 
English: Tian Chang was suddenly angry, his face changed and he said: You think it is difficult, others think it is easy; you think it is easy, others think it is difficult. What is the intention of using these words to teach me?

古文：子贡曰： 臣闻之，忧在内者攻彊，忧在外者攻弱。
现代文：子贡说： 我听说，忧患在国内的，要去攻打强大的国家；忧患在国外的，要去攻打弱小的国家。
English: Zigong said, "I have heard that a man who is unhappy at home will attack a strong country, and a man who is unhappy abroad will attack a weak country.

古文：今君忧在内。
现代文：如今，您的忧患在国内。
English: Now your worries are at home.

古文：吾闻君三封而三不成者，大臣有不听者也。
现代文：我听说您多次被授予封号而多次未能封成，是因为朝中大臣的有反对你的呀。
English: I have heard that you have been awarded the title many times, but have not been able to seal it many times, because the ministers of the DPRK and China have opposed you.

古文：今君破鲁以广齐，战胜以骄主，破国以尊臣，而君之功不与焉，则交日疏於主。
现代文：现在，你要攻占鲁国来扩充齐国的疆域，若是打胜了，你的国君就更骄纵，占领了鲁国土地，你国的大臣就会更尊贵，而您的攻劳都不在其中，这样，您和国君的关系会一天天地疏远。
English: Now, you want to conquer Lu to expand the territory of Qi. If you win, your sovereign will be more arrogant. If you occupy the land of Lu, your ministers will be more honorable, and your efforts will not be included. In this way, the relationship between you and the sovereign will become more distant day by day.

古文：是君上骄主心，下恣群臣，求以成大事，难矣。
现代文：这是您对上使国君产生骄纵的心理，对下使大臣们放纵无羁，想要因此成就大业，太困难啦。
English: This is your way of making the sovereign arrogant on the one hand, and ministers unrestrained on the other. If you want to achieve great things with this, it's too difficult.

古文：夫上骄则恣，臣骄则争，是君上与主有卻，下与大臣交争也。
现代文：国君骄纵就要无所顾忌，大臣骄纵就要争权夺利，这样，对上您与国君感情上产生裂痕，对下您和大臣们相互争夺。
English: If the sovereign is arrogant, he will have no scruples, if the minister is arrogant, he will compete for power and profit. In this way, there will be a rift between you and the sovereign emotionally, and you and the ministers will compete with each other.

古文：如此，则君之立於齐危矣。
现代文：象这样，那您在齐国的处境就危险了。
English: As such, your position in Qi is precarious.

古文：故曰不如伐吴。
现代文：所以说不如攻打吴国。
English: Therefore, it is better to attack Wu.

古文：伐吴不胜，民人外死，大臣内空，是君上无彊臣之敌，下无民人之过，孤主制齐者唯君也。 田常曰： 善。
现代文：假如攻打吴国不能取得胜利，百姓死在国外，大臣率兵作战朝廷势力空虚，这样，在上没有强臣对抗，在下没有百姓的非难，孤立国君专制齐国的只有您了。 田常说： 好。
English: If the attack on the State of Wu fails to achieve victory, the people die abroad, the ministers lead the troops to fight, and the power of the imperial court is empty, then there will be no confrontation between powerful ministers at the top and no reproach from the people at the bottom, and you will be the only one to isolate the sovereign and the autocracy. Tian Chang said: Good.

古文：虽然，吾兵业已加鲁矣，去而之吴，大臣疑我，柰何？ 
现代文：虽然如此，可是我的军队已经开赴鲁国了，现在从鲁国撤军转而进兵吴国。大臣们怀疑我，怎么办？ 
English: Nevertheless, my army has already left for Lu, and now it is withdrawing from Lu and entering Wu. What should the ministers do if they suspect me?

古文：子贡曰： 君按兵无伐，臣请往使吴王，令之救鲁而伐齐，君因以兵迎之。 
现代文：子贡说： 您按兵不动，不要进攻，请让我为您出使去见吴王，让他出兵援助鲁国而攻打齐国，您就趁机出兵迎击它。 
English: Zigong said, "You should hold your position and not attack. Please let me send an envoy to King Wu for you, and ask him to send troops to aid Lu and attack Qi. Then you can take advantage of the opportunity to send troops to meet it."

古文：田常许之，使子贡南见吴王。
现代文：田常采纳了子贡的意见，就派他南下去见吴王。
English: Tian Chang accepted Zigong's suggestion and sent him south to meet King Wu.

古文：说曰： 臣闻之，王者不绝世，霸者无彊敌，千钧之重加铢两而移。
现代文：子贡游说吴王说： 我听说，施行王道的不能让诸侯属国灭绝，施行霸道的不能让另外的强敌出现，在千钧重的物体上，再加上一铢一两的分量也可能产生移位。
English: Zigong lobbied King Wu and said, "I have heard that the implementation of the royal road cannot make the vassal states extinct, and the implementation of the domineering road cannot make another strong enemy appear. On a thousand-ton object, the addition of one or two weight may also cause displacement.

古文：今以万乘之齐而私千乘之鲁，与吴争彊，窃为王危之。
现代文：如今，拥有万辆战车的齐国再独自占有千辆战车的鲁国，和吴国来争高低，我私下替大王感到危险。
English: Now that Qi, which has ten thousand chariots, is competing with Lu, which alone has a thousand chariots, and Wu for supremacy, I privately feel a sense of danger for the great king.

古文：且夫救鲁，显名也；伐齐，大利也。
现代文：况且去援救鲁国，是显扬名声的事情；攻打齐国，是能获大利的事情。
English: Moreover, to save Lu is a matter of fame; to attack Qi is a matter of gain.

古文：以抚泗上诸侯，诛暴齐以服彊晋，利莫大焉。
现代文：安抚泗水以北的各国诸侯，讨伐强暴的齐国，用来镇服强大的晋国，没有比这样做获利更大的了。
English: There is no greater gain than to pacify the princes of the countries north of Surabaya, to fight against the violent Qi, and to subdue the powerful Jin.

古文：名存亡鲁，实困彊齐。智者不疑也。 吴王曰： 善。
现代文：名上保存危亡的鲁国，实际上阻阨了强齐的扩张，这道理，聪明人是不会疑的。 吴王说： 好。
English: A wise man would not doubt that the preservation of the nominally perilous state of Lu has actually hindered the expansion of Qiangqi.Wu Wang said: Good.

古文：虽然，吾尝与越战，栖之会稽。越王苦身养士，有报我心。
现代文：虽然如此，可是我曾经和越国作战，越王退守在会稽山上栖身，越王自我刻苦，优待士兵，有报复我的决心。
English: Nevertheless, I once fought against Yue Guo. Yue Wang retreated and took refuge on Hui Ji Mountain. Yue Wang worked hard, treated soldiers well, and was determined to take revenge on me.

古文：子待我伐越而听子。 
现代文：您等我攻打越国后再按您的话做罢。 
English: Wait for me to attack Vietnam and then do as you say.

古文：子贡曰： 越之劲不过鲁，吴之彊不过齐，王置齐而伐越，则齐已平鲁矣。且王方以存亡继绝为名，夫伐小越而畏彊齐，非勇也。
现代文：子贡说： 越国的力量超不过鲁国，吴国的强大超不过齐国，大王把齐国搁置在一边，去攻打越国，那么，齐国早已平定鲁国了，况且大王正借着 使灭亡之国复存，使断绝之嗣得续 的名义，却攻打弱小的越国而害怕强大的齐国，这不是勇敢的表现。
English: Zigong said, "The strength of Yue cannot surpass that of Lu, and the strength of Wu cannot surpass that of Qi. If the great king sets aside Qi and attacks Yue, then Qi has already subdued Lu. Moreover, the great king is attacking the weak Yue in the name of reviving the ruined country and continuing the lineage of the severed heirs, but is afraid of the powerful Qi. This is not a courageous act.

古文：夫勇者不避难，仁者不穷约，智者不失时，王者不绝世，以立其义。
现代文：勇敢的人不回避艰难，仁慈的人不让别人陷入困境。聪明的人失掉时机，施行王道的人不会让一个国家灭绝，凭借这些来树立你们的道义。
English: The brave do not avoid hardships, the merciful do not let others fall into difficulties, the wise do not lose opportunities, and those who practice the royal way do not let a country die out. Use these to establish your morality.

古文：今存越示诸侯以仁，救鲁伐齐，威加晋国，诸侯必相率而朝吴，霸业成矣。
现代文：现在，保存越国向各国诸侯显示您的仁德，援助鲁国攻打齐国，施加晋国以威力，各国诸侯一定会竞相来吴国朝见，称霸天下的大业就成功了。
English: Now, save Yue to show your benevolence to the princes of all countries, help Lu to attack Qi, and impose Jin with power. The princes of all countries will surely compete to come to the court of Wu, and the great cause of dominating the world will be successful.

古文：且王必恶越，臣请东见越王，令出兵以从，此实空越，名从诸侯以伐也。 
现代文：大王果真畏忌越国，我请求东去会见越王，让他派出军队追随您，这实际上使越国空虚，名义上追随诸侯讨伐齐国。 
English: If the great king is really afraid of Yue, I request you to go east to meet the king of Yue and let him send an army to follow you, which will actually make Yue empty and nominally follow the princes to fight Qi.

古文：吴王大说，乃使子贡之越。
现代文：吴王特别高兴，于是派子贡到越国去。
English: King Wu was very pleased, so he sent tribute to Yue.

古文：越王除道郊迎，身御至舍而问曰： 此蛮夷之国，大夫何以俨然辱而临之？ 
现代文：越王清扫道路，到郊外迎接子贡，亲自驾驭着车子到子贡下榻的馆舍致问说： 这是个偏远落后的国家，大夫怎么屈辱自己庄重的身份光临到这里来了！ 
English: Yue Wang swept the road, went to the suburbs to meet Zigong, and personally drove the car to the residence where Zigong was staying and asked: This is a remote and backward country, how could the doctor humiliate his solemn identity by coming here!

古文：子贡曰： 今者吾说吴王以救鲁伐齐，其志欲之而畏越，曰 待我伐越乃可 。
现代文：子贡回答说： 现在我已劝说吴王援救鲁国攻打齐国，他心里想要这么做却害怕越国，说： 等我攻下越国才可以 。
English: Zigong replied, "Now that I have persuaded King Wu to help Lu and attack Qi, he wants to do it but is afraid of Yue. He says, 'I can't do it until I conquer Yue.'

古文：如此，破越必矣。
现代文：像这样，攻破越国是必然的了。
English: As such, the invasion of Yue is inevitable.

古文：且夫无报人之志而令人疑之，拙也；有报人之志，使人知之，殆也；事未发而先闻，危也。
现代文：况且要没有报复人的心志而使人怀疑他，太拙劣了；要有报复人的心志又让人知道他，就不安全了；事情还没有发动先叫人知道，就太危险了。
English: Besides, it is too bad to suspect a man without the intention of avenging him; it is not safe to know a man without the intention of avenging him; it is too dangerous to find out before the deed is done.

古文：三者举事之大患。 
现代文：这三种情况是办事的最大祸患。 
English: These three situations are the biggest scourge of doing business.

古文：句践顿首再拜曰： 孤尝不料力，乃与吴战，困於会稽，痛入於骨髓，日夜焦脣乾舌，徒欲与吴王接踵而死，孤之原也。 
现代文：勾践听罢叩头到地再拜说： 我曾不自量力，才和吴国交战，被围困在会稽，恨入骨髓，日夜唇焦舌燥，只打算和吴王一块儿拼死，这就是我的愿望。 
English: He bowed his head to the ground and said, "I did not try my best to fight against the State of Wu. I was besieged in the siege, I hated it to the marrow of my bones, my lips were parched day and night, and I only intended to fight and die with the King of Wu. This is my wish."

古文：遂问子贡。
现代文：于是问子贡怎么办。
English: So he asked Tsigong what to do.

古文：子贡曰： 吴王为人猛暴，群臣不堪；国家敝以数战，士卒弗忍；百姓怨上，大臣内变；子胥以谏死，太宰嚭用事，顺君之过以安其私：是残国之治也。
现代文：子贡说： 吴王为人凶猛残暴，大臣们难以忍受；国家多次打仗，弄得疲惫衰败，士兵不能忍耐；百姓怨恨国君，大臣内部发生变乱；伍子胥因谏诤被杀死，太宰嚭执政当权，顺应着国君的过失，用来保全自己的私利：这是残害国家的政治表现啊。
English: Zigong said, "Wu Wang is a ferocious and cruel person, and his ministers are unbearable; the country has fought many wars, making it tired and weak, and the soldiers can't bear it; the people resent the sovereign, and there is turmoil within the ministers; Wu Zixuan was killed because of his arrogance, and the Dazai Emperor is in power, obeying the mistakes of the sovereign and using it to preserve his own selfish interests: This is a political manifestation of the destruction of the country.

古文：今王诚发士卒佐之徼其志，重宝以说其心，卑辞以尊其礼，其伐齐必也。
现代文：现在大王果真能出兵辅佐吴王，以投合他的心志，用重金宝物来获取他的欢心，用谦卑的言辞尊他，以表示对他的礼敬，他一定会攻打齐国。
English: Now, if the great king can really send troops to assist King Wu, in order to meet his aspirations, use heavy gold and treasures to gain his favor, and respect him with humble words to show his respect, he will certainly attack Qi.

古文：彼战不胜，王之福矣。
现代文：如果那场战争不能取胜，就是大王您的福气了。
English: If that war cannot be won, it will be your great good fortune.

古文：战胜，必以兵临晋，臣请北见晋君，令共攻之，弱吴必矣。
现代文：如果打胜了，他一定会带兵逼近晋国，请让我北上会见晋国国君，让他共同攻打它，一定会削弱吴国的势力。
English: If he wins, he will surely lead his troops to approach Jin. Please let me go north to meet the ruler of Jin, and let him attack it together. This will surely weaken the power of Wu.

古文：其锐兵尽於齐，重甲困於晋，而王制其敝，此灭吴必矣。 
现代文：等他们的精锐部队全部消耗在齐国，重兵又被晋国牵制住，而大王趁它疲惫不堪的时候攻打它，这样一定能灭掉吴国。 
English: When all their elite troops were exhausted in Qi, the heavy troops were held back by Jin, and the great king took advantage of it to attack it when it was exhausted, so he could definitely destroy Wu.

古文：越王大说，许诺。
现代文：越王非常高兴，答应照计行动。
English: Yue Wang was very pleased and promised to act accordingly.

古文：送子贡金百镒，剑一，良矛二。
现代文：送给子贡黄金百镒，宝剑一把，良矛二支。
English: He gave Zigong a hundred pieces of gold, a sword, and two spears.

古文：子贡不受，遂行。
现代文：子贡没有接受，就走了。
English: He did not accept the tribute and left.

古文：报吴王曰： 臣敬以大王之言告越王，越王大恐，曰： 孤不幸，少失先人，内不自量，抵罪於吴，军败身辱，栖于会稽，国为虚莽，赖大王之赐，使得奉俎豆而修祭祀，死不敢忘，何谋之敢虑！  
现代文：子贡回报吴王说： 我郑重地把大王的话告诉了越王，越王非常惶恐，说： 我很不走运，从小就失去了父亲，又不自量力，触犯吴国而获罪，军队被打败，自身受屈辱，栖居在会稽山上，国家成了荒凉的废墟，仰赖大王的恩赐，使我能够捧着祭品而祭祀祖宗，我至死也不敢忘怀，怎么另有其他的打算！  
English: Zigong replied to the king of Wu, saying, "I solemnly told the words of the great king to the king of Yue. The king of Yue was very frightened and said, "I am very unlucky. I lost my father when I was a child, and I did not measure up. I was punished for offending the state of Wu. The army was defeated, I was humiliated, I lived on the Huiqi Mountain, and the country became a desolate ruin. Relying on the gift of the great king, I was able to hold offerings and sacrifice my ancestors. I dare not forget it until I die. How could I have any other plans!"

古文：後五日，越使大夫种顿首言於吴王曰： 东海役臣孤句践使者臣种，敢修下吏问於左右。
现代文：过了五天，越国派大夫文种以头叩地对吴王说： 东海役使之臣勾践谨派使者文种，来修好您的属下近臣，托他们向大王问候。
English: Five days later, Yue Guo sent the doctor Wen Zhuang to the king of Wu with a pat on the head and said: "The East Sea Service has sent its envoy Wen Zhuang, to fix your subordinates and courtiers, and ask them to greet the great king.

古文：今窃闻大王将兴大义，诛彊救弱，困暴齐而抚周室，请悉起境内士卒三千人，孤请自被坚执锐，以先受矢石。
现代文：如今我私下听说大王将要发动正义之师，讨伐强暴，扶持弱小，困扼残暴的齐国而安抚周朝王室，请求出动越国境内全部军队三千人，勾践请求亲自披挂铠甲、拿着锐利的武器，甘愿在前面去冒箭石的危险。
English: Now I have heard in private that the great king is going to launch the Justice Division to fight against violence, support the weak, oppressed and cruel Qi country and appease the Zhou Dynasty royal family, request the dispatch of 3,000 troops from all over the country, and request the practice of personally wearing armor and holding sharp weapons, and is willing to risk the danger of arrows in front.

古文：因越贱臣种奉先人藏器，甲二十领，鈇屈卢之矛，步光之剑，以贺军吏。 
现代文：因此派越国卑贱的臣子文种进献祖先珍藏的宝器，铠甲十二件，斧头、屈卢矛、步光剑、用来作贵军吏的贺礼。 
English: Therefore, he sent the lowly vassal of Yue State, Wen Zhuang, to present the treasured treasures of his ancestors, including twelve armors, an axe, a Qulu spear, and a Bu Guang sword, which were used to make the greetings of the dignified military officials.

古文：吴王大说，以告子贡曰： 越王欲身从寡人伐齐，可乎？ 
现代文：吴王听了非常高兴，把文种的话告诉子贡说： 越王想亲自跟随我攻打齐国，可以吗？ 
English: King Wu was very happy to hear this, and told Zigong about Wenzhu's words, saying, "King Yue wants to personally follow me to attack Qi, is that okay?

古文：子贡曰： 不可。
现代文：子贡回答说： 不可以。
English: Zigong replied, "No.

古文：夫空人之国，悉人之众，又从其君，不义。
现代文：使人家国内空虚，调动人家所有的人马，还要人家的国君跟着出征，这是不道义的。
English: It is immoral to make someone's country empty, to mobilize all their men and horses, and to ask their sovereign to go to war with them.

古文：君受其币，许其师，而辞其君。 
现代文：你可接受他的礼物，允许他派出军队，辞却他的国君随行。 
English: You can accept his gift, allow him to send an army, and refuse to accompany his sovereign.

古文：吴王许诺，乃谢越王。
现代文：吴王同意了，就辞谢越王。
English: The king of Wu agreed, and he resigned to the king of Yue.

古文：於是吴王乃遂发九郡兵伐齐。
现代文：于是吴王就是调动了九个郡的兵力去攻打齐国。
English: As a result, King Wu mobilized the forces of nine counties to attack Qi.

古文：子贡因去之晋，谓晋君曰： 臣闻之，虑不先定不可以应卒，兵不先辨不可以胜敌。
现代文：子贡因而离开吴国前往晋国，对晋国国君说： 我听说，不事先谋划好计策，就不能应付突然来的变化，不事先治理好军队，就不能战胜敌人。
English: As a result, Zigong left the State of Wu and went to the State of Jin. He said to the sovereign of the State of Jin: I have heard that if you do not plan well in advance, you will not be able to cope with sudden changes. If you do not manage the army well in advance, you will not be able to defeat the enemy.

古文：今夫齐与吴将战，彼战而不胜，越乱之必矣；与齐战而胜，必以其兵临晋。 晋君大恐，曰： 为之柰何？ 
现代文：现在齐国和吴国即将开战，如果那场战争吴国不能取得胜利，越国必定会趁机扰乱它；和齐国一战取得了胜利，吴王一定会带他的军队逼近晋国。 晋非常恐慌，说： 那该怎么办呢？ 
English: Now Qi and Wu are about to go to war. If Wu does not win that war, Yue will surely take the opportunity to disturb it. If Qi wins the First World War, King Wu will surely bring his army close to Jin. Jin was very panicked and said, "Then what should I do?"

古文：子贡曰： 修兵休卒以待之。 
现代文：子贡说： 整治好武器，休养士卒，等着吴军的到来。 
English: Zigong said, "Ready the weapons, rest the soldiers, and wait for the arrival of the Wu army."

古文：晋君许诺。
现代文：晋君依照他的话做了。
English: Jinjun did as he was told.

古文：子贡去而之鲁。
现代文：子贡离开晋国前往鲁国。
English: Zigong left Jin to go to Lu.

古文：吴王果与齐人战於艾陵，大破齐师，获七将军之兵而不归，果以兵临晋，与晋人相遇黄池之上。
现代文：吴王果然和齐国人在艾陵打了一仗，把齐军打得大败，俘虏了七个将军的士兵而不肯班师回国，果然带兵逼近晋国，和晋国人在黄池相遇。
English: King Wu indeed fought a battle with the Qi people in Ailing, defeated the Qi army, captured seven soldiers of the general and refused to return to the country, and indeed led the troops to approach Jin Province, and met the Jin people in Huangchi.

古文：吴晋争彊。晋人击之，大败吴师。
现代文：吴晋两国争雄，晋国人攻击吴国，大败吴军。
English: The two states of Wu and Jin fought for supremacy. The people of Jin attacked Wu and were soundly defeated by the Wu army.

古文：越王闻之，涉江袭吴，去城七里而军。
现代文：越王听到吴军惨败的消息，就渡过江去袭击吴国，直打到离吴国都城七里的路程才安营扎寨。
English: When King Yue heard the news of the disastrous defeat of the Wu army, he crossed the river to attack the State of Wu. He did not set up camp until he was seven miles away from the capital of the State of Wu.

古文：吴王闻之，去晋而归，与越战於五湖。
现代文：吴王听到这个消息，离开晋国返回吴国，和越国军队在五湖一带作战。
English: Upon hearing this news, King Wu left Jin and returned to Wu to fight the Vietnamese army around the Five Lakes.

古文：三战不胜，城门不守，越遂围王宫，杀夫差而戮其相。
现代文：多次战斗都失败了，连城门都守不住了，于是越军包围了王宫，杀死了吴王夫差和他的国相。
English: Many battles were lost, and even the city gates could not be defended, so the Vietnamese army surrounded the royal palace and killed Wu Wangfuchang and his minister.

古文：破吴三年，东向而霸。
现代文：灭掉吴国三年后，越国称霸东。
English: Three years after eliminating Wu, Yue claimed hegemony over the East.

古文：故子贡一出，存鲁，乱齐，破吴，彊晋而霸越。
现代文：所以，子贡这一出行，保全了鲁国，扰乱了齐国，灭掉了吴国，使晋国强大而使越国称霸。
English: Therefore, Zigong's journey preserved the State of Lu, disturbed the State of Qi, eliminated the State of Wu, made the State of Jin strong, and made the State of Yue dominate.

古文：子贡一使，使势相破，十年之中，五国各有变。
现代文：子贡一次出使，使各国形势发生了相应变化，十年当中，齐、鲁、吴、晋、越五国的形势各自有了变化。
English: Zigong once sent an envoy, so that the situation of each country has undergone corresponding changes. In the past ten years, the situation of Qi, Lu, Wu, Jin and Yue has each changed.

古文：子贡好废举，与时转货赀。
现代文：子贡擅长囤积居奇，贱买贵卖，随着供需情况转手谋取利润。
English: Zigong is good at hoarding, buying cheap and selling expensive, and changing hands with the supply and demand situation to seek profits.

古文：喜扬人之美，不能匿人之过。
现代文：他喜欢宣扬别人的长处，也不隐瞒别人的过失。
English: He likes to promote the strengths of others, and does not hide the faults of others.

古文：常相鲁卫，家累千金，卒终于齐。
现代文：曾出任过鲁国和卫国的国相，家产积累千金，最终死在齐国。
English: He once served as the minister of state of the Kingdom of Lu and the defense of the country, accumulated a lot of money, and eventually died in Qi.

古文：言偃，吴人，字子游。
现代文：言偃，是吴国人，字子游。
English: He is a native of Wuxi.

古文：少孔子四十五岁。
现代文：比孔子小四十五岁。
English: He is 45 years younger than Confucius.

古文：子游既已受业，为武城宰。
现代文：子游受业以后，出任武城的长官。
English: After Ziyu started his career, he became the governor of Wucheng.

古文：孔子过，闻弦歌之声。
现代文：孔子路过武城，听到弹琴唱歌的声音。
English: Confucius passed through Wucheng and heard the sound of playing the piano and singing.

古文：孔子莞尔而笑曰： 割鸡焉用牛刀？ 
现代文：孔子微微地笑了，说： 杀鸡何必用宰牛刀呢？ 
English: Confucius smiled faintly and said, "Why do you need a butcher's knife to kill a chicken?

古文：子游曰： 昔者偃闻诸夫子曰，君子学道则爱人，小人学道则易使。 
现代文：子游说： 从前我听先生说过： 有才德的人学了礼乐，就会涵养仁心，爱护人民；普通人学了礼乐，就会谨守法规，容易使唤。  
English: Zi Luo said: I once heard my teacher say: When a talented person learns etiquette, he will cultivate benevolence and love the people; when an ordinary person learns etiquette, he will abide by laws and regulations and be easy to use.

古文：孔子曰： 二三子，偃之言是也。
现代文：孔子对随行的学生们说： 诸位，言偃的话是对的。
English: Confucius said to the students who accompanied him, "Gentlemen, what you say is right.

古文：前言戏之耳。 
现代文：我刚才说的那句话不过是开玩笑罢了。 
English: What I just said was just a joke.

古文：孔子以为子游习於文学。
现代文：孔子认为子游熟习文章博学。
English: Confucius thought that Ziyu's familiarity with the text was erudite.

古文：卜商字子夏。
现代文：卜商，字子夏。
English: Busshang, Aza Zi Xia.

古文：少孔子四十四岁。
现代文：比孔子小四十四岁。
English: He was forty-four years younger than Confucius.

古文：子夏问：  巧笑倩兮，美目盼兮，素以为绚兮 ，何谓也？ 
现代文：子夏问道：  姣美的笑容妩媚动人啊，明沏的眼珠流动生辉啊，信佛洁白的生绡染上了绚烂的文彩 ，这三句是什么意思？ 
English: Zixia asked, "What do these three sentences mean? The beautiful smile is charming and moving, the alum's eyes are flowing and radiant, and the pure white ginger of believing in Buddha is dyed with gorgeous colors?"

古文：子曰： 绘事後素。 
现代文：孔子回答说： 绘画要先有洁白的底子，然后再彩饰图画。 
English: Confucius replied, "A painting should first have a clean white base, and then the picture should be decorated with colors.

古文：曰： 礼後乎？ 
现代文：子夏说： 是不是礼乐的产生在仁义之后呢？ 
English: Zixia said, "Isn't the creation of ceremonial music after benevolence and righteousness?

古文：孔子曰： 商始可与言诗已矣。 
现代文：孔子说： 卜商啊，现在可以和你讨论《诗经》了。 
English: Confucius said, "Wang Shang, I can now discuss the "Book of Songs" with you.

古文：子贡问： 师与商孰贤？ 
现代文：子贡问道： 颛孙师和卜商那一位更强些？ 
English: Zigong asked, "Which one is stronger, the magus or the fortuneteller?"

古文：子曰： 师也过，商也不及。 
现代文：孔子说： 师么，有些过分，商么，有些赶不上。 
English: Confucius said: Teacher, some things are too much; merchant, some things are too little.

古文： 然则师愈与？ 
现代文：子贡说： 那么颛孙师好一些吗？ 
English: Zigong said: So, is the grandson better?

古文：曰： 过犹不及。 
现代文：孔子说： 过分和赶不上同样是不完美的。 
English: Confucius said, "It is imperfect to do too much and too little.

古文：子谓子夏曰： 汝为君子儒，无为小人儒。 
现代文：孔子对子夏说： 你要立志作个有才德的读书人，不要作浅薄不正派的读书人。
English: Confucius said to Zixia: You should aspire to be a talented reader, not a shallow and dishonest one.

古文：孔子既没，子夏居西河教授，为魏文侯师。
现代文：孔子逝世后，子夏定居河西教授学生，成了魏文侯的教师。
English: After the death of Confucius, Zixia settled in Hexi to teach students and became a teacher of Wei Wenhou.

古文：其子死，哭之失明。颛孙师，陈人，字子张。
现代文：子夏的儿子死了，把眼睛都哭瞎了。颛孙师，是陈国人，字子张。
English: Zixia's son died, crying his eyes out. Zixia's grandson, a native of Chen, was named Zhang.

古文：少孔子四十八岁。
现代文：比孔子小四十八岁。
English: He is 48 years younger than Confucius.

古文：子张问干禄，孔子曰： 多闻阙疑，慎言其馀，则寡尤；多见阙殆，慎行其馀，则寡悔。
现代文：子张向孔子学习求取官职俸禄的方法。孔子说： 多听人家说，对疑难未解的，不要妄加评论，其余有把屋的要谨慎地说出，能少犯错误；多看人家行事，对疑难未解的，不要妄加行动，其余有把握的要谨慎地行动，能减少懊悔。
English: Zi Zhang learned from Confucius the method of seeking official salary. Confucius said: Listen more to others, do not comment on the unsolved problems, and the rest of the bosses should speak cautiously, so that they can make fewer mistakes; watch others more, do not act on the unsolved problems, and the rest of the confident should act cautiously, which can reduce remorse.

古文：言寡尤，行寡悔，禄在其中矣。 
现代文：说话的错误少、行动的懊悔少，你要求取的官职俸禄就在里面了。 
English: Fewer mistakes in speech, less remorse in action, and the official salary you asked for is right there.

古文：他日从在陈蔡间，困，问行。
现代文：有一天子张跟随孔子在陈国和蔡国之间的被围困，子张问怎样才能处处行得通。
English: One day, Zi Zhang followed Confucius to the besieged area between Chen and Cai Provinces. Zi Zhang asked how to be able to communicate everywhere.

古文：孔子曰： 言忠信，行笃敬，虽蛮貊之国行也；言不忠信，行不笃敬，虽州里行乎哉！
现代文：孔子说： 说话要忠诚信实，行为要真诚恭敬，即使在南蛮北狄也行得通；说话不忠诚信实，行为不真诚恭敬，即使是在本乡本土，能行得通吗？
English: Confucius said, "If you speak truthfully and act with sincerity and reverence, it will work even if you are in the south or the north; if you do not speak truthfully and act with sincerity and reverence, will it work even if you are in your hometown?"

古文：立则见其参於前也，在舆则见其倚於衡，夫然後行。 
现代文：站着的时候，就象 忠信笃敬 几个字呈现在眼前；坐在车上，就象 忠信笃敬 几个字挂在车前的横木上，做到这种地步之后，就到处行得通了。 
English: When standing, it's like the words "loyalty and devotion" appear in front of your eyes; when sitting in a car, it's like the words "loyalty and devotion" hang on the crossbar in front of the car. Once you've reached this stage, you can go anywhere.

古文：子张书诸绅。
现代文：子张就把这些话写在束腰的大带子上。
English: Zi Zhang wrote these words on a large belt around his waist.

古文：子张问： 士何如斯可谓之达矣？ 
现代文：子张问： 读书人怎样做才可以叫通达了呢？ 
English: Zi Zhang asked: What should readers do before they can be called "tongda"?

古文：孔子曰： 何哉，尔所谓达者？ 
现代文：孔子说： 你所说的通达，是指的什么呢？ 
English: Confucius said, "What do you mean by 'understanding'?

古文：子张对曰： 在国必闻，在家必闻。 
现代文：子张回答说： 在诸侯的邦国中一定要有声望，在卿大夫家里也一定要有声誉。 
English: Zi Zhang replied, "He must have a reputation among the princes of the state, and he must also have a reputation in the doctor's family.

古文：孔子曰： 是闻也，非达也。
现代文：孔子说： 这是声望，不是通达。
English: Confucius said, "This is fame, not attainment."

古文：夫达者，质直而好义，察言而观色，虑以下人，在国及家必达。
现代文：所谓通达，应当是立身正直而好义，审度别人的言论，观察别人的表情，时常想着谦恭退让，这样，在诸侯的邦国和卿大夫的封地一定能够通达。
English: The so-called access should be based on honesty and righteousness, judging the speech of others, observing the facial expressions of others, and always thinking of being humble and yielding. In this way, the country of princes and the fiefdom of doctors must be able to access.

古文：夫闻也者，色取仁而行违，居之不疑，在国及家必闻。 
现代文：所说的声望，外表上好象追求仁德的样子，而实际行动上却违背仁德，自己要安然处之，毫不怀疑，这样的人在诸侯的邦国和卿大夫的封地一定能取得名望。 
English: The so-called reputation, on the surface, seems to be the appearance of pursuing benevolence, but the actual action is contrary to benevolence. I want to be at ease. I have no doubt that such a person will certainly be able to gain fame in the state of the princes and the fiefdom of the doctor.

古文：曾参，南武城人，字子舆。少孔子四十六岁。
现代文：曾参，是南武城人，字了舆，比孔子小四十六岁。
English: Zeng Zan, a native of Nanwucheng, was 46 years younger than Confucius.

古文：孔子以为能通孝道，故授之业。
现代文：孔子认为他能通达孝道，所以传授他学业。
English: Confucius thought that he could attain filial piety, so he taught him his studies.

古文：作孝经。
现代文：他撰写了一部《孝经》。
English: He wrote a "filial piety."

古文：死於鲁。
现代文：他死在鲁国。
English: He died in Russia.

古文：澹台灭明，武城人，字子羽。
现代文：澹台灭明，是武城人，字子羽。
English: Xingtai Zhiming, is a Wucheng people, character Zi Yu.

古文：少孔子三十九岁。
现代文：比孔子小三十九岁。
English: Thirty-nine years younger than Confucius.

古文：状貌甚恶。
现代文：他的体态相貌很丑陋。
English: His physical appearance is very ugly.

古文：欲事孔子，孔子以为材薄。
现代文：想要事奉孔子，孔子认为他资质低下。
English: He wanted to serve Confucius, but Confucius thought he was inferior.

古文：既已受业，退而修行，行不由径，非公事不见卿大夫。
现代文：从师学习以后，回去就致力于修身实践，处事光明正大，不走邪路，不是为了公事，从来不去会见公卿大夫。
English: After learning from the teacher, I will devote myself to cultivation and practice when I go back. I will deal with things fairly, not take the wrong path, not for business, and never go to meet the noble doctor.

古文：南游至江，从弟子三百人，设取予去就，名施乎诸侯。
现代文：他往南游历到长江，追随他的学生有三百人，他获取、给予离弃、趋就都完美无缺，他的声誉传遍了四方诸侯。
English: He traveled south to the Yangtze River. Three hundred students followed him. His acquisition, abandonment, and aspiration were all perfect. His reputation spread to the four directions.

古文：孔子闻之，曰： 吾以言取人，失之宰予；以貌取人，失之子羽。 
现代文：孔子听到这些事，说： 我只凭言辞判断人，对宰予的判断就错了；单从相貌上判断人，对子羽的判断就错了。 
English: When Confucius heard these things, he said, "I judge people only by words, and I am wrong in my judgment of Zhaoyu; I judge people only by their appearance, and I am wrong in my judgment of Zi Yu.

古文：宓不齐字子贱。
现代文：宓不齐，字子贱。
English: It's not even, it's cheap.

古文：少孔子三十岁。
现代文：比孔子小三十岁。
English: Thirty years younger than Confucius.

古文：孔子谓 子贱君子哉！
现代文：孔子谈论宓子贱，说： 子贱真是个君子啊！
English: Confucius said of Zou Zihian: "What a gentleman Zihian is!

古文：鲁无君子，斯焉取斯？ 
现代文：假如鲁国没有君子，这个人又从哪儿学到这种好品德呢？ 
English: If there are no gentlemen in Russia, where did this man learn this virtue?

古文：子贱为单父宰，反命於孔子，曰： 此国有贤不齐者五人，教不齐所以治者。 
现代文：子贱出任单父地方长官，回来向孔子报告，说： 这个地方有五个人比我贤能，他们教给我施政治民的方法。 
English: After serving as a single-father local governor, Zichian returned to report to Confucius, saying, "There are five people in this place who are wiser than I am. They taught me how to govern the people.

古文：孔子曰： 惜哉不齐所治者小，所治者大则庶几矣。 
现代文：孔子说： 可惜呀！不齐治理的地方太小了，要是治理的地方大就差不多了。 
English: Confucius said: What a pity! The place of uneven governance is too small. If the place of governance were large, it would be almost the same.

古文：原宪字子思。
现代文：原宪，字子思。
English: The original constitution, the letter Zi Si.

古文：子思问耻。
现代文：子思问什么是耻辱。
English: The child wonders what shame is.

古文：孔子曰： 国有道，穀。
现代文：孔子说： 国家政治清明，可以做官领取俸禄，却不能有所见树。
English: Confucius said: The country's politics are clear, you can be an official and receive a salary, but you can't see the tree.

古文：国无道，穀，耻也。 
现代文：国家政治黑暗，做官领取俸禄，却不能独善其身，就是耻辱。
English: The country's politics are dark, and it is a disgrace to receive a salary as an official without being able to do something good for oneself.

古文：子思曰： 克伐怨欲不行焉，可以为仁乎？ 
现代文：子思说： 好胜、自我夸耀、怨恨、贪欲都没有显现出来，可以算是做到了仁了吗？ 
English: Zisi said, "Victory, self-aggrandizement, resentment, and greed have not appeared. Can we say that we have achieved benevolence?"

古文：孔子曰： 可以为难矣，仁则吾弗知也。 
现代文：孔子说： 可以说是难能可贵了，是否算是做到仁，那我就不知道了。 
English: Confucius said: It can be said that it is difficult to be valuable. Whether it is to achieve benevolence, then I do not know.

古文：孔子卒，原宪遂亡在草泽中。
现代文：孔子逝世以后，原宪就跑到低洼积水、野草丛生的地方隐居起来。
English: After the death of Confucius, Yuan Xian went to live in seclusion in a low-lying area with stagnant water and overgrown weeds.

古文：子贡相卫，而结驷连骑，排藜藿入穷阎，过谢原宪。
现代文：子贡做了卫国的国相，出门车马接连不断，排开丛生的野草，来到偏远简陋破败的小屋，前去看望原宪。
English: When Zigong became the Minister of National Defense, he went out in carriages and horses one after another, lined up the thick weeds, came to a remote, simple and dilapidated hut, and went to see the original Constitution.

古文：宪摄敝衣冠见子贡。
现代文：原宪整理好破旧的衣帽，会见子贡。
English: Yuan Xian tidied up his shabby clothes and hat, and met with Zigong.

古文：子贡耻之，曰： 夫子岂病乎？ 
现代文：子贡见状替他感到羞耻，说： 难道你很困窘吗？ 
English: Zigong felt ashamed on his behalf and said, "Are you embarrassed?

古文：原宪曰： 吾闻之，无财者谓之贫，学道而不能行者谓之病。
现代文：原宪回答说： 我听说，没有财产的叫做贫穷，学习了道理而不能施行的叫做困窘。
English: Yuan Xian replied, "I have heard that a person who has no property is called poor, and a person who has learned the truth but cannot practice it is called impoverished.

古文：若宪，贫也，非病也。 
现代文：像我，贫穷，不是困窘啊。 
English: Like me, poverty is not an embarrassment.

古文：子贡惭，不怿而去，终身耻其言之过也。公冶长，齐人，字子长。
现代文：子贡感到很惭愧，不高兴地离去了，一辈子都为这次说错了话感到羞耻。公冶长，是齐国人，字子长。
English: Zigong felt very ashamed and left unhappily, feeling ashamed of having said the wrong thing for the rest of his life. Gongye Chang, a native of Qi, had a long name.

古文：孔子曰： 长可妻也，虽在累绁之中，非其罪也。 
现代文：孔子说： 公冶长，可以把女儿嫁给他，即使他在囚禁之中，并不是他的罪过。 
English: Confucius said: Even if he is in prison, it is not his fault.

古文：以其子妻之。南宫括字子容。
现代文：就把自己的女儿嫁给了他。南宫括，字子容。
English: She married her daughter to him. Nan Gong Bang, the characters are beautiful.

古文：问孔子曰： 羿善射，奡荡舟，俱不得其死然；禹稷躬稼而有天下？ 
现代文：南宫括问孔子说： 羿擅长射箭，奡擅长荡舟，他们都不能够善终；禹、稷亲自耕种而为什么能得到天下呢？ 
English: Nan Gong asked Confucius: "You are good at archery, and I am good at rowing, but they can't both live happily ever after. Yu and Zou cultivate the land themselves, so how did they get the kingdom?

古文：孔子弗答。
现代文：孔子不回答。
English: Confucius did not answer.

古文：容出，孔子曰： 君子哉若人！
现代文：南子容退出后，孔子说： 这个人真是个君子啊！这个人崇尚道德啊！ 
English: After Nan Zirong withdrew, Confucius said, "This man is really a gentleman! This man advocates morality!

古文：上德哉若人！  国有道，不废；国无道，免於刑戮。 
现代文：孔子评论他说： 国家政治清明，他会被任用；国家政治黑暗，他也不会遭受刑罚 。
English: Confucius commented on him, "If the national politics is clear, he will be appointed; if the national politics is dark, he will not be punished."

古文：三复 白珪之玷 ，以其兄之子妻之。
现代文：他把 白珪之玷 的几句诗再三吟诵，孔子就把自己的侄女嫁给了他。
English: He repeatedly recited a few lines from the poem "The White Stork" and Confucius married his niece to him.

古文：公皙哀字季次。
现代文：公皙哀，字季次。
English: Public mourning, word quarterly.

古文：孔子曰： 天下无行，多为家臣，仕於都；唯季次未尝仕。 
现代文：孔子说： 天下的读书人没有善行，大多数作了卿大夫们的家臣，在都邑作官，只有季次不曾出来作官。 
English: Confucius said, "All the scholars in the world are not virtuous. Most of them became the vassals of nobles and doctors, and served as officials in the capital. Only Qiji did not become an official.

古文：曾字皙。
现代文：曾蒧，字皙。
English: Zeng Yao, Zi Yao.

古文：侍孔子，孔子曰： 言尔志。 
现代文：他陪着孔子，孔子说： 谈谈你的志趣。 
English: He accompanied Confucius, and Confucius said, "Tell me about your hobbies."

古文：曰： 春服既成，冠者五六人，童子六七人，浴乎沂，风乎舞雩，咏而归。 
现代文：曾蒧说： 穿着刚做好的春装，和五六个成年人，六七个小孩子，在沂水里洗个澡，在祈雨台上吹吹风，唱着歌回来。 
English: Zeng Yao said: Wearing a freshly made spring dress, with five or six adults and six or seven children, I took a bath in the rainwater, blew the wind on the prayer table, and came back singing a song.

古文：孔子喟尔叹曰： 吾与点也！ 
现代文：孔子听了，长长地叹息说： 我赞成曾蒧的志趣啊！ 
English: Confucius listened and said with a long sigh: I approve of Zeng Yao's ambition!

古文：颜无繇字路。
现代文：颜无繇，字路。
English: It's all in the name.

古文：路者，颜回父，父子尝各异时事孔子。
现代文：颜路，是颜回的父亲，父子俩曾先后在孔子门下求学。
English: Yan Lu is Yan Hui's father. Both father and son studied under Confucius.

古文：颜回死，颜路贫，请孔子车以葬。
现代文：颜回死了，颜路贫穷，请求孔子把车子卖掉安葬颜回。
English: Yan Hui died, Yan Lu was poor, he asked Confucius to sell his car and bury Yan Hui.

古文：孔子曰： 材不材，亦各言其子也。
现代文：孔子说： 孔鲤不论是有才华或没有才华，但对我们来说都是自己的儿子。
English: Confucius said, "Whether Confucius is talented or not, he is our own son.

古文：鲤也死，有棺而无椁，吾不徒行以为之椁，以吾从大夫之後，不可以徒行。 
现代文：孔鲤死了，只有内棺，没有外椁，我不能卖掉车子徒步走路给他买椁，因为我曾经位居大夫行列，那是不可以徒步行走的。 
English: Confucius died, only the inner coffin, no outer coffin, I can not sell the car to walk on foot to buy him a coffin, because I was once a doctor, it is not allowed to walk on foot.

古文：商瞿，鲁人，字子木。少孔子二十九岁。
现代文：商瞿，是鲁国人。字子木，比孔子小二十九。
English: Shang Di, a native of Lu, was twenty-nine years younger than Confucius.

古文：孔子传易於瞿，瞿传楚人馯臂子弘，弘传江东人矫子庸疵，疵传燕人周子家竖，竖传淳于人光子乘羽，羽传齐人田子庄何，何传东武人王子中同，同传菑川人杨何。
现代文：孔子把《易经》传授给商瞿，商瞿传给楚国人臂子弘，子弘传给江东人矫子庸疵，庸疵传给燕国人周子家竖，周竖传给淳于人光子乘羽，光羽传给齐国人田子庄何，田何传给东武人王子中同，中同传给菑川人杨何。
English: Confucius passed on the "I Ching" to Shang Zi, Shang Zi passed it on to the Chu people's Arm Zihong, Zihong passed it on to the Jiangdong people's Jiaozi Yigai, Yigai passed it on to the Yan people's Zhou Zi Jia Zhi, Zhou Zi passed it on to the Junyu people's Guang Zi Yi Yu, Guang Yu passed it on to the Qi people's Tian Zi Zhuo He, Tian He passed it on to the Dongwu people's Prince Zhong Tong, and Zhong Tong passed it on to the Shichuan people's Yang He.

古文：何元朔中以治易为汉中大夫。
现代文：杨何在汉武元朔年间，因为研究《易经》出任子当朝的中大夫。
English: During the Han Dynasty, Yang He was promoted to the position of the Middle Doctor because of his study of the I Ching.

古文：高柴字子羔。
现代文：高柴，字子羔。
English: Takaaki, character lamb.

古文：少孔子三十岁。
现代文：比孔子小三十岁。
English: Thirty years younger than Confucius.

古文：子羔长不盈五尺，受业孔子，孔子以为愚。
现代文：子羔的身长不足五尺，在孔子门下学习，孔子认为他很愚笨。
English: The lamb, less than five feet tall, studied under Confucius, who thought he was stupid.

古文：子路使子羔为费郈宰，孔子曰： 贼夫人之子！ 
现代文：子路派子羔担任费邑的长官。孔子说： 这是残害人家的子弟！ 
English: Confucius said, "This is the son of a murderer!

古文：子路曰： 有民人焉，有社稷焉，何必读书然後为学！ 
现代文：子路说： 那里有人民百姓。有祭祀土神和谷神的庙宇，为什么一定要读书才叫做学问呢？ 
English: Zilu said: There are people there. There are temples that worship the earth god and the valley god. Why do you have to study before you can call it learning?

古文：孔子曰： 是故恶夫佞者。 
现代文：孔子说： 所以我厌恶用花言巧语谄媚的人 。
English: Confucius said, "That's why I detest people who use flattery.

古文：漆彫开字子开。
现代文：漆雕开，字子开。
English: The lacquer carving is open, the characters are open.

古文：孔子使开仕，对曰： 吾斯之未能信。 
现代文：孔子叫子开去做官，子开回答说： 我对作官还没有信心。 
English: Confucius asked Zi Kai to become an official, and Zi Kai replied, "I don't have the confidence to become an official."

古文：孔子说。
现代文：孔子听了很高兴。
English: Confucius was very pleased to hear this.

古文：公伯缭字子周。
现代文：公伯缭，字子周。
English: His official title is His Imperial Highness and his nickname is Zhou.

古文：周愬子路於季孙，子服景伯以告孔子，曰： 夫子固有惑志，缭也，吾力犹能肆诸市朝。 
现代文：子周在季孙面前说子路的坏话，子服景伯把这件事告诉了孔子并且说： 季孙本来就有了疑心，可是我还有力量杀死公伯缭，把他的尸体陈放在街头示众。 
English: Zi Zhou spoke ill of Zi Lu in front of Ji Sun. Zifu Jingbo told this to Confucius and said: Ji Sun was already suspicious, but I still had the power to kill my father-in-law and display his corpse in the street.

古文：孔子曰： 道之将行，命也；道之将废，命也。公伯缭其如命何！ 
现代文：孔子说： 正道能够行得通，那是天意，正道废弃不能施得，也是天意，公伯缭对天意又能怎么样呢？ 
English: Confucius said: It is the will of Heaven that the righteous path should be practicable. It is also the will of Heaven that the righteous path should not be abandoned. What can the emperor do against the will of Heaven?

古文：司马耕字子牛。
现代文：司马耕，字子牛。
English: Sima Gong, Zhi Niu.

古文：牛多言而躁。
现代文：子牛话多而性情急躁。
English: The calf talks a lot and has a quick temper.

古文：问仁於孔子，孔子曰： 仁者其言也讱。 
现代文：他向孔子问仁德，孔子说： 有仁德的人，说话很谨慎。 
English: He asked Confucius about benevolence. Confucius said, "He who has benevolence speaks with caution."

古文：曰： 其言也讱，斯可谓之仁乎？ 
现代文：子牛又问： 说话很谨慎，这就可以算是仁德吗？ 
English: The calf asked again, "Speaking very carefully, can this be considered benevolence?"

古文：子曰： 为之难，言之得无讱乎！ 
现代文：孔子说： 做起来很困难，说起来能不谨慎吗！ 
English: Confucius said, "It is difficult to do, but it is prudent to say."

古文：问君子，子曰： 君子不忧不惧。 
现代文：子牛问怎样才算是君子，孔子说： 一个君子既不忧愁，也不畏惧。 
English: When the calf asked how to be a gentleman, Confucius said, "A gentleman is neither sad nor afraid.

古文：曰： 不忧不惧，斯可谓之君子乎？ 
现代文：他接着问： 不忧愁，不畏惧，这就可以算是君子吗？ 
English: He went on to ask, "Can a gentleman be without sorrow or fear?

古文：子曰： 内省不疚，夫何忧何惧！ 
现代文：孔子说： 自我反省，内心无愧，有什么忧愁，有什么畏惧的呢！ 
English: Confucius said, "Self-examination is the beginning of inner dignity. There is nothing to be sad about, and nothing to be afraid of."

古文：樊须字子迟。
现代文：樊须，字子迟。
English: It's a bit late for that.

古文：少孔子三十六岁。
现代文：比孔子小三十六岁。
English: Thirty-six years younger than Confucius.

古文：樊迟请学稼，孔子曰： 吾不如老农。 
现代文：樊须向孔子请求学种庄稼，孔子说： 我不如老农民。 
English: He asked Confucius to learn how to grow crops. Confucius said, "I am not as good as an old farmer.

古文：请学圃，曰： 吾不如老圃。 
现代文：又请求学种疏菜，孔子说： 我不如老菜农。 
English: He also asked him to learn to grow vegetables. Confucius said, "I am not as good as an old vegetable farmer.

古文：樊迟出，孔子曰： 小人哉樊须也！
现代文：樊迟退出后，孔子说： 樊须，是个志向浅薄的小人啊！
English: After his belated withdrawal, Confucius said: "Shishu, you are a small man with shallow aspirations!

古文：上好礼，则民莫敢不敬；上好义，则民莫敢不服；上好信，则民莫敢不用情。
现代文：统治者提倡礼义，百姓就没有人敢不敬；统治者诚恳信实，百姓就没有人敢不说真情实话。
English: When the ruler advocates propriety and righteousness, no one dares to disrespect the people; when the ruler is sincere and faithful, no one dares not to speak the truth.

古文：夫如是，则四方之民襁负其子而至矣，焉用稼！ 
现代文：如果能这样，那么四方的百姓就会背负着包裹着的孩子前来投奔，哪里用得着自己种庄稼。
English: If this can be done, then the people of the four directions will come running with wrapped children on their backs, and grow their own crops wherever necessary.

古文：樊迟问仁，子曰： 爱人。 
现代文：樊迟问什么是仁德，孔子说： 爱所有的人！ 
English: When asked what is benevolence, Confucius said: Love all people!

古文：问智，曰： 知人。 
现代文：又问什么智慧，孔子说： 了解人。 
English: When asked what wisdom is, Confucius said, "Understanding people."

古文：有若少孔子四十三岁。
现代文：有若，比孔子小四十三岁。
English: He was forty-three years younger than Confucius.

古文：有若曰： 礼之用，和为贵，先王之道斯为美。
现代文：有若说： 礼的应用，以恰到好处为可贵。
English: There is a saying: The application of etiquette should be just right.

古文：小大由之，有所不行；知和而和，不以礼节之，亦不可行也。 
现代文：过去圣明的君王治理国家的办法，最高明的地方就在这里；小事大事都按照这一条原则去理，有时就行不通；但是只知道和的重要而一味地追求和，而不用礼去节制它，也是不可行的。 
English: The method of governing the country by the wise monarchs of the past is most clear here. If all small and big things are dealt with according to this principle, sometimes it will not work. But if you only know the importance of harmony and blindly pursue harmony without using etiquette to control it, it is also not feasible.

古文： 信近於义，言可复也；恭近於礼，远耻辱也；因不失其亲，亦可宗也。 
现代文：有若又说： 所守的信约要符合于义，这约言就能经得起实践的检验。恭敬要符合礼，就能避免耻辱；依傍那些不失为亲近的人，也就可靠了。 
English: And again, If a covenant be confirmed with righteousness, it is sure to stand the test of time; if it be kept with decency, it will not bring reproach; if it be kept with sincerity, it will stand the test of time; if it be kept with reverence, it will not bring reproach; and if it be kept with sincerity, it will stand the test of time.

古文：孔子既没，弟子思慕，有若状似孔子，弟子相与共立为师，师之如夫子时也。
现代文：孔子逝世以后，学生们都很怀念他。有若长得很象孔子，学生们共同拥戴他当教师，就象当年侍奉孔子一样对待他。
English: After the death of Confucius, the students missed him very much. Arora looked very much like Confucius, and the students all admired him as a teacher and treated him as if he had served Confucius.

古文：他日，弟子进问曰： 昔夫子当行，使弟子持雨具，已而果雨。
现代文：有一天，学生进来问他说： 从前先生正要出行，就叫同学们带好雨具，不久果真下起雨来。
English: One day, a student came in and asked him, "Once upon a time, when you were about to go on a trip, you told your classmates to bring rain gear, and soon it really started to rain.

古文：弟子问曰： 夫子何以知之？ 
现代文：同学们请教说： 先生怎么知道要下雨呢？ 
English: The students asked: How does the teacher know that it is going to rain?

古文：夫子曰： 诗不云乎？ 月离于毕，俾滂沱矣。 
现代文：先生回答说： 《诗经》里不是说了吗：月亮依附于毕星的位子上，接着就会下大雨。
English: The teacher replied, "Doesn't it say in the Book of Psalms, 'The moon adheres to the place of the bright star, and then there is a heavy rain'?

古文：昨暮月不宿毕乎？ 
现代文：昨天夜里月亮不是宿在毕星的位子上吗？ 
English: Last night, didn't the moon stay in the same place as the stars?

古文：他日，月宿毕，竟不雨。
现代文：有一天，月亮又宿在毕星的位了上，却没有下雨。
English: One day, the moon was again in the same position as the stars, but there was no rain.

古文：商瞿年长无子，其母为取室。
现代文：商瞿年纪大了还没有儿子，他的母亲要替他另外娶妻。
English: The merchant is old and has no son, and his mother wants to take another wife for him.

古文：孔子使之齐，瞿母请之。
现代文：孔子派他到齐国去，商瞿的母亲请求不要派他。
English: Confucius sent him to Qi, but Shangyu's mother begged him not to.

古文：孔子曰： 无忧，瞿年四十後当有五丈夫子。 
现代文：孔子说： 不要担忧，商瞿四十岁以后会有五个男孩子。 
English: Confucius said, "Don't worry. After the age of forty, a merchant will have five sons.

古文：已而果然。
现代文：过后，果真是这样的。
English: Afterward, it really was like that.

古文：问夫子何以知此？ 
现代文：请问先生当年怎么能够预先知道是这样的呢？ 
English: Excuse me, how was it possible for you to know in advance that this would happen?

古文：有若默然无以应。
现代文：有若沉默无以回答。
English: If there is silence, there is no answer.

古文：弟子起曰： 有子避之，此非子之座也！ 
现代文：学生们站起来说： 有先生，你躲开这儿吧，这个位子不是您能坐的啊！ 
English: The students stood up and said: "Sir, you should get out of here, this seat is not for you!"

古文：公西赤字子华。
现代文：公西赤，字子华。
English: Gongxi red, Zihua blue.

古文：少孔子四十二岁。
现代文：比孔子小四十二岁。
English: He is 42 years younger than Confucius.

古文：子华使於齐，冉有为其母请粟。孔子曰： 与之釜。 
现代文：子华出使去齐国，冉有为他的母亲向孔子请求粮食。
English: Zihua sent an envoy to Qi, and Ran asked Confucius for food for his mother.

古文：请益，曰： 与之庾。 
现代文：孔子说： 给他一釜。 
English: Confucius said: Give him a kettle.

古文：冉子与之粟五秉。孔子曰： 赤之適齐也，乘肥马，衣轻裘。
现代文：冉有请求增加，孔子说： 那就给他一庾。 ，冉有给了她五秉粮食。孔子说： 公西赤到齐国去，坐的是肥马拉的车子，穿的是又轻又暖的裘皮衣裳。
English: When Ran asked for more, Confucius said, "Then give him a bowl.", Ran gave her five bing of grain. Confucius said, "Guan Xiaka went to Qi Province, riding in a horse-drawn carriage and wearing light and warm fur clothes.

古文：吾闻君子周急不继富。 
现代文：我听说，君子救济紧急需要的穷人而不是为他增加财富。
English: I have heard it said that a gentleman gives to the poor in need, not to increase his wealth.

古文：巫马施字子旗。少孔子三十岁。
现代文：巫马施，字子旗，比孔子小三十岁。
English: Wu Ma Shi, the flag bearer, is thirty years younger than Confucius.

古文：陈司败问孔子曰： 鲁昭公知礼乎？ 
现代文：陈司败问孔子说： 鲁昭公懂礼吗？ 
English: Chen Sibei asked Confucius, "Does Lu Zhaogong know etiquette?

古文：孔子曰： 知礼。 
现代文：孔子说： 懂礼。 
English: Confucius said, "Be polite."

古文：退而揖巫马旗曰： 吾闻君子不党，君子亦党乎？
现代文：孔子出去后，陈司败向巫马旗作了个揖说： 我听说君子是不偏私袒护的，莫非君子也会偏私袒护？
English: After Confucius left, Chen Sibei made a joke to Wu Maqi, saying, "I have heard that a gentleman does not favor his own interests. Could it be that a gentleman also favors his own interests?

古文：鲁君娶吴女为夫人，命之为孟子。
现代文：鲁昭公娶来吴女作夫人，给她起名叫她孟子。
English: Lu Zhaogong married Wu Nianzhao and called her Ta Mengzi.

古文：孟子姓姬，讳称同姓，故谓之孟子。
现代文：孟子本姓姬，避忌称呼同姓，所以叫她吴孟子。
English: Mencius's original surname was Ji, and it was taboo to call her by the same surname, so he called her Wu Mencius.

古文：鲁君而知礼，孰不知礼！ 
现代文：鲁君要是懂得礼仪，那还有谁不懂得礼节呢？ 
English: If Lu Jun understands etiquette, then who else does not understand etiquette?

古文：施以告孔子，孔子曰： 丘也幸，苟有过，人必知之。
现代文：巫马施把这些话转告给孔子，孔子说： 我真幸运，如果有了过失，人家一定会知道。
English: Wumasch relayed these words to Confucius, who said, "I am so lucky. If there is any fault, people will certainly know about it."

古文：臣不可言君亲之恶，为讳者，礼也。 
现代文：作臣子的不能说国君的过错的，替他避忌的人，就是懂礼啊。 
English: A courtier cannot say that the sovereign is at fault, and the person who avoids him is polite.

古文：梁鱣字叔鱼。少孔子二十九岁。
现代文：梁鳣，字叔鱼，比孔子小二十九岁。
English: Liang Kun, nicknamed "Uncle Fish," is 29 years younger than Confucius.

古文：颜幸字子柳。少孔子四十六岁。
现代文：颜幸，字子柳，比孔子小四十六岁。
English: Yan Xing, also known as Zi Liu, is 46 years younger than Confucius.

古文：冉孺字子鲁，少孔子五十岁。
现代文：冉儒，字子鲁，比孔子小五十岁。
English: Ran Ju, also known as Zi Lu, was fifty years younger than Confucius.

古文：曹恤字子循。少孔子五十岁。
现代文：曹，字子循，比孔子小五十岁。
English: Cao Zizhong is fifty years younger than Confucius.

古文：伯虔字子析，少孔子五十岁。
现代文：伯虔，字子析，比孔子小五十岁。
English: Bo Qian is fifty years younger than Confucius.

古文：公孙龙字子石。少孔子五十三岁。
现代文：公孙龙，字子石，比孔子小五十三岁。
English: Gongsun Long, also known as Zi Shi, was fifty-three years younger than Confucius.

古文：自子石已右三十五人，显有年名及受业见于书传。
现代文：从子石以上三十五人，他们的年龄、姓名和受业经过、事迹都能明显地见么文字记载。
English: Thirty-five people from Zi Shi and above, their ages, names, employment history, and deeds can be clearly seen in the written records.

古文：其四十有二人，无年及不见书传者纪于左：
现代文：其余的四十二人，没有年龄可考，也没有文字记载的记在下面：
English: The remaining forty-two persons, whose ages are unknown and for whom there is no written record, are as follows:

古文：冉季字子产。
现代文：冉季，字子产。
English: The season is in full swing.

古文：公祖句兹字子之。
现代文：公祖名兹，字子之。
English: The name of his ancestor, Zi, is written in Chinese characters.

古文：秦祖字子南。
现代文：秦祖，字子南。
English: Qin Zu, south of the characters.

古文：漆雕哆字子敛。
现代文：漆雕哆，字子敛。
English: Lacquer-engraved, characters restrained.

古文：颜高字子骄。
现代文：颜高，这字骄。
English: Yan Gao, this character arrogant.

古文：漆雕徒父。
现代文：漆雕徒父。
English: The lacquer carving apprentice.

古文：壤驷赤字子徒。
现代文：壤驷赤，字子徒。
English: The soil is red, the characters are blue.

古文：商泽。
现代文：商泽。
English: Shozawa.

古文：石作蜀字子明。
现代文：石作蜀，字子明。
English: Stone work Shu, characters Zi Ming.

古文：任不齐字选。
现代文：任不齐，字选。
English: It's all up to you, chooser.

古文：公良孺字子正。
现代文：公良儒，字子正。
English: He was a public-spirited Confucianist, and his writing was correct.

古文：后处字子里。
现代文：后处，字子里。
English: In the back, in the font.

古文：秦冉字开。
现代文：秦冉，字开。
English: Qin Ran, open your mouth.

古文：公夏首字乘。
现代文：公夏首，字乘。
English: The first letter of the name of the prince, the first letter of the word.

古文：奚容箴字子皙。
现代文：奚容箴，字子皙。
English: If you're not careful, you'll end up like this.

古文：公肩定字子中。
现代文：公肩定，字子中。
English: Shoulder to shoulder, middle of the word.

古文：颜祖字襄。
现代文：颜祖，字襄。
English: Yan Zu, Zhe Xiang.

古文：鄡单字子家。
现代文：鄡单，字子家。
English: 单,字子家.

古文：句井疆。
现代文：句井疆。
English: Kujuijiang said.

古文：罕父黑字子索。
现代文：罕父黑，字子索。
English: The father is black, the son is blue.

古文：秦商字子丕。
现代文：秦商，字子丕。
English: Qin merchants, the characters are cresting.

古文：申党字周。
现代文：申党，字周。
English: Shen Dang, Zhou Zi.

古文：颜之仆字叔。
现代文：颜之仆，字叔。
English: Yan's servant, word uncle.

古文：荣旂字子祈。
现代文：荣旗，字子祈。
English: Honor the flag, pray for the children.

古文：县成字子祺。
现代文：县成，字子祺。
English: The prefectural capital is Kuncheng, and the Chinese character for it is wu.

古文：左人郢字行。
现代文：左人郢，字行。
English: Left-handers, line up.

古文：燕伋字思。
现代文：燕伋，字思。
English: Terns chirp, words think.

古文：郑国字子徒。
现代文：郑国，字子徒。
English: Zheng Guo, a disciple of Zhu Xi.

古文：秦非字子之。
现代文：秦非，字子之。
English: Qin Fei, one of the characters.

古文：施之常字子恆。
现代文：施之常，字子恒。
English: Shi zhi zhang, zhang zhi zhang.

古文：颜哙字子声。
现代文：颜哙，字子声。
English: Facial expressions, syllables.

古文：步叔乘字子车。
现代文：步叔乘，字子车。
English: Step-uncle ride, character ride.

古文：原亢籍。
现代文：原亢，字籍。
English: Original ink, calligraphy.

古文：乐欬字子声。
现代文：乐欬，字子声。
English: The music swells, the characters sing.

古文：廉絜字庸。
现代文：廉絜，字庸。
English: Honest, honest, honest.

古文：叔仲会字子期。
现代文：叔仲会，字子期。
English: Uncle's meeting, letter period.

古文：颜何字冉。
现代文：颜何，字冉。
English: What's in a face, what's in a word.

古文：狄黑字皙。
现代文：狄黑，字皙。
English: Dihei, the character.

古文：邦巽字子敛。
现代文：邦巽，字子敛。
English: The country is divided, but the characters are united.

古文：孔忠。
现代文：孔忠。
English: Kong Zhong.

古文：公西舆如字子上。
现代文：公西舆如，字子上。
English: Gong Xi Myu Ru, in Chinese characters.

古文：公西葴字子上。
现代文：公西葳，字子上。
English: On the word, "Kosei" (公西).

古文：太史公曰：学者多称七十子之徒，誉者或过其实，毁者或损其真，钧之未睹厥容貌，则论言弟子籍，出孔氏古文近是。
现代文：太史公说： 后世学者们都称述孔子门下七十位门徒，赞誉他们的人，有的超过了他们的实际，诋毁他们的人，有的损害了他们的真实形象。 总之，谁都没有看到他们的真实相貌，而议论品评。
English: Taishigong said: Later generations of scholars have all described the seventy disciples under Confucius, and those who praised them, some exceeded their actuality, those who slandered them, and some damaged their true image. In short, no one saw their true appearance, but discussed and commented.

古文：余以弟子名姓文字悉取论语弟子问并次为篇，疑者阙焉。
现代文：孔门弟子的生平事迹还是孔氏古文接近真相，关于孔子门下弟子们的名字、姓氏、言行等情况，我全部取自《论语》的弟子问答，编次成篇，有疑问的地方就空缺着。
English: The life and deeds of the disciples of Confucius are still close to the truth according to the ancient text of Confucius. Regarding the names, surnames, words and deeds of the disciples under Confucius, I have taken them all from the disciples' questions and answers in "The Analects" and compiled them into one article. If there is any doubt, it is left blank.

