古文：宰我问于孔子曰： 昔者吾闻诸荣伊曰： 黄帝三百年。 请问：黄帝者，人也？抑非人也？
现代文：宰我问孔子说： 以前我听荣伊说过 黄帝统治了三百年 ，请问黄帝是人抑或不是人？
English: Finally, I asked Confucius, "I heard Rong Yi say that the Yellow Emperor ruled for three hundred years. Is the Yellow Emperor a man or not?"

古文：何以能至三百年乎？ 
现代文：其统治的时间怎么能达到三百年呢？ 
English: How could he have ruled for three hundred years?

古文：孔子曰： 禹、汤、文、武、周公，不可胜以观也。而上世黄帝之问，将谓先生难言之故乎？ 
现代文：孔子说： 大禹、汤、周文王、周武王、周公，尚且无法说得尽，道得清，而你关于上古之世的黄帝的问题，是老前辈也难以说得清的问题吧。 
English: Confucius said: Dayu, Tang, King Zhouwen, King Zhouwu, and King Zhou are still inexhaustible and incomprehensible, and your question about the Yellow Emperor in the ancient world is a question that is difficult for the older generation to answer.

古文：宰我曰： 上世之传，隐微之说，卒采之辩，暗忽之意，非君子之道者，则子之问也固矣。 
现代文：宰我说： 先代的传言，隐晦的说法，已经过去的事还争论，晦涩飘忽的含义，这些都是君子不谴或不为的，所以我一定要问个清楚明白。 
English: Zhai said to me, "The rumors of the previous generation, the obscure sayings, the things that have already passed and are still being debated, the obscure meaning, these are all things that a gentleman does not condemn or do, so I must ask clearly and clearly."

古文：孔子曰： 可也。
现代文：孔子说： 好吧，我略略听说过这种说法。
English: Confucius said, "Well, I have heard a little about it.

古文：吾略闻其说，黄帝者，少皞之子，曰轩辕。
现代文：黄帝，是少昊的儿子，名叫轩辕，出生时就非常神奇、精灵，很小就能说话。
English: The Yellow Emperor, the son of Shao Hao, named Xuan Zheng, was born very magical, a genie, and was able to speak at a very young age.

古文：生而神灵，弱而能言，幼齐睿庄，敦敏诚信。
现代文：童年的时候，他伶俐、机敏、诚实、厚道。
English: As a child, he was shy, quick-witted, honest and kind.

古文：长聪明，治五气，设五量，抚万民，度四方，服牛乘马，扰驯猛兽，以与炎帝战于阪泉之野，三战而后克之。
现代文：长大成人时，就更加聪明，能治理五行之气，设置了五种量器，而且还游历全国各地，安抚民众。他骑着牛坐着马，驯服了猛兽，跟炎帝在阪泉之野大战，三战后打败了炎帝。
English: When he became an adult, he became more intelligent, was able to govern the five elements, set up five kinds of measuring instruments, and also traveled all over the country to appease the people. He rode a cow and a horse, tamed wild beasts, and fought with the Emperor of Flame in the field of Hanquan, and defeated the Emperor of Flame after three battles.

古文：始垂衣裳，作为黼黻，治民，以顺天地之纪，知幽明之故，达死生存亡之说。
现代文：从此，天下民众个个穿着绣有花纹的礼服，天下太平，无为而治。他遵循天地的纲纪统治着人民，既明白昼夜阴阳之道，又通晓生死存亡之理。
English: From then on, the people all over the world wore embroidered ceremonial dresses. The world was peaceful and ruled by nothing. He ruled the people according to the principles of heaven and earth. He understood the way of day and night, yin and yang, as well as the principles of life and death.

古文：播时百谷，尝味草木，仁厚及于鸟兽昆虫。
现代文：按季节播种百谷，栽培花草树木，他的仁德遍及鸟兽昆虫。
English: According to the season, he sows a hundred grains, cultivates flowers and trees, and his benevolence extends to birds, animals and insects.

古文：考日月星辰，劳耳目，勤心力，用水火财物以生民。
现代文：他观察日月星辰，费尽心思和劳力，用水火财物养育百姓。
English: He observed the sun, the moon, and the stars, exerted his mind and labor, and nurtured the people with water, fire, and wealth.

古文：民赖其利，百年而死；民畏其神，百年而亡；民用其教，百年而移。
现代文：他活着的时候，人民受其恩惠利益一百年；他死了以后，人民敬服他的精灵一百年；之后，人民还运用他的教导一百年。
English: When he was alive, the people enjoyed his favor for a hundred years; after his death, the people worshiped his spirit for a hundred years; after that, the people also used his teachings for a hundred years.

古文：故曰：黄帝三百年。 
现代文：所以说黄帝统治了三百年。 
English: That is why the Yellow Emperor ruled for three hundred years.

古文：宰我曰： 请问帝颛顼。 
现代文：宰我请教孔子说： 请老师讲一讲帝顓頊的事。 
English: So I asked Confucius, "Teacher, please tell me about the emperor."

古文：孔子曰： 五帝用说，三王有度。
现代文：孔子说： 五帝已经非常久远了，所以用说；三王呢，比较近还留有法度。
English: Confucius said, "The Five Emperors have been gone for a very long time, so it's no use talking about them. As for the Three Kings, they are relatively recent and still have their laws.

古文：汝欲一日徧闻远古之说，躁哉予也！ 
现代文：你想要在一天时间内把远古的事都听完吗，你太性急了吧！ 
English: Do you want to hear all about ancient times in one day? You're too impatient!

古文：宰我曰： 昔予也闻诸夫子曰： 小子毋或宿。 故敢问。 
现代文：宰我说： 我曾经听先生您说过： 你们学生们有要问的尽管问，不要等一等或者隔天再问 ，所以我就大胆请教了。 
English: I said, "I once heard you, sir, say, 'If you students have something to ask, ask anyway, don't wait until later or the next day to ask,' so I boldly asked for advice."

古文：孔子曰： 颛顼，黄帝之孙，昌意之子，曰高阳。
现代文：孔子说： 颛顼是黄帝的孙子，昌意的儿子，叫高阳。
English: Confucius said: Yu is the grandson of the Yellow Emperor, the son of Changyi, called Gaoyang.

古文：渊而有谋，疏通以知远，养财以任地，履时以象天，依鬼神而制义，治气性以教众，洁诚以祭祀，巡四海以宁民。
现代文：他的思想深邃而富有谋略。博古通今而富有远见，因地制宜创造财富，取法天道、顺应时令地开展各项活动，依顺鬼和神的意志裁定适宜与否，陶冶性情以教化民众，心灵纯洁、虔诚地祭祀。他经常巡查四方来安定百姓，往北到过幽陵，往南到过交阯，往西到过流沙，往东到过蟠木。
English: His thought is profound and full of strategy. He is forward-looking and visionary, creating wealth according to local conditions, adopting the heavenly way, carrying out various activities in accordance with the times, deciding whether it is appropriate or not according to the will of the ghosts and gods, cultivating the disposition to enlighten the people, and worshiping with a pure and pious heart. He often patrols the four directions to stabilize the people, going north to Yuling, going south to Jiaojing, going west to Lingsha, and going east to Shanyu.

古文：北至幽陵，南暨交趾，西扺流沙，东极蟠木，动静之类，小大之物，日月所照，莫不底属。 
现代文：各种动物植物，大大小小的物件，凡是日月照临的地方，全都平定了，没有不归服的。 
English: All kinds of animals and plants, large and small objects, and all places where the sun and moon shine, have all been pacified, and there is no one who will not submit.

古文：宰我曰： 请问帝喾。 
现代文：宰我说： 请问帝喾是怎样的一个人？ 
English: Zai said to me, "What kind of person is Dizeng is?

古文：孔子曰： 玄枵之孙，乔极之子，曰高辛。
现代文：孔子说： 他是玄枵的孙子，乔极的儿子，名叫高辛。
English: Confucius said, "He is the grandson of Xuanzang and the son of Qiao Ji, whose name is Gao Xin.

古文：生而神异，自言其名。
现代文：他生下来就很神异，能说出自己的名字。
English: He was born with the extraordinary ability to say his own name.

古文：博施厚利，不于其身。
现代文：他广泛地施行厚利，不考虑自身的利益。
English: He has been widely making fat profits without considering his own interests.

古文：聪以知远，明以察微。
现代文：他聪明而有远见，明敏而能体察细微的事物。
English: He is intelligent and wise, can understand the long-term situation, and can understand the subtleties.

古文：仁而威，惠而信，以顺天地之义。
现代文：仁慈而有威望，恩惠而又诚信，以顺应天地的规律。
English: Benevolence and prestige, grace and integrity, to comply with the laws of heaven and earth.

古文：知民所急，修身而天下服，取地之财而节用之，抚教万民而诲利之，历日月之生朔而迎送之，明鬼神而敬事之。
现代文：他知道民众急需什么，修养自身而令天下人信服。从土地中获取财物而节俭使用，安抚教育民众而使他们受益。观察日月的出没来加以迎送，明白冬神的存在来加以恭敬侍奉。
English: He knows what the people urgently need, cultivates himself to convince the world, obtains wealth from the land and uses it sparingly, pacifies and educates the people to benefit them, observes the appearance and disappearance of the sun and moon to welcome them, and understands the existence of the god of winter to serve them respectfully.

古文：其色也和，其德也重，其动也时，其服也衷。
现代文：他神情和悦，品德高尚，使民有时，用民怜爱。
English: He has a pleasant countenance, high moral character, and is kind and compassionate to the people.

古文：春夏秋冬，育护天下，日月所照，风雨所至，莫不从化。 
现代文：春夏秋冬，培育护卫着天下万物。日月照耀的地方，风雨所及的地方，没有不被感化的。 
English: In spring, summer, autumn and winter, cultivation protects all things in the world. Where the sun and moon shine, where the wind and rain fall, there is nothing that is not affected.

古文：宰我曰： 请问帝尧。 
现代文：宰我说： 请问帝尧是怎样的人？ 
English: Zai said to me, "May I ask what kind of person Dizhao is?

古文：孔子曰： 高辛氏之子，曰陶唐。
现代文：孔子说： 他是高辛氏的儿子，名叫陶唐。
English: Confucius said, "He is the son of Gao Xin, and his name is Tao Tang.

古文：其仁如天，其智如神，就之如日，望之如云。
现代文：他仁慈如天，智慧如神。靠近他如太阳般温暖，望着他如云彩般柔和。
English: He is benevolent as the sky, wise as a god. He is as warm as the sun when you are close to him, and as soft as a cloud when you look at him.

古文：富而不骄，贵而能降。
现代文：他富而不骄，贵而能谦。
English: He is rich but not arrogant, noble but humble.

古文：伯夷典礼，龙夔典乐，舜时而仕，趋视四时，务先民始之，流四凶而天下服。
现代文：他让伯夷主管礼仪，让夔、龙执掌舞乐。推举舜来做官，到各地巡视四季农作物生长情况，把民众的事放在首位。他流放了共工、驩兜、三苗，诛杀了鲧，天下的人都信服。
English: He put Bo Yi in charge of the etiquette, and let the dragon and dragon take charge of the dance. He promoted the dragon to be an official, went to various places to inspect the growth of crops in the four seasons, and put the people's affairs in the first place. He exiled the co-worker, the donkey, and the three seedlings, and killed the donkey. People all over the world were convinced.

古文：其言不忒，其德不回，四海之内，舟舆所及，莫不夷说。 
现代文：他的话从不出错，他的德行从不违背常理。四海之内，车船所到之处，人们没有不喜爱他的。 
English: His words are never wrong, his actions never go against common sense, and people love him in every corner of the world.

古文：宰我曰： 请问帝舜。 
现代文：宰我说： 请问帝舜是怎样的人？ 
English: Zai said to me, "May I ask what kind of person Dizhao is?

古文：孔子曰： 乔牛之孙，瞽瞍之子也，曰有虞。
现代文：孔子说： 他是乔牛的孙子，瞽瞍的儿子，名叫有虞。
English: Confucius said, "He is the grandson of Qiao Niu and the son of Yao. His name is Yu.

古文：舜孝友闻于四方，陶魰事亲，宽裕而温良，敦敏而知时，畏天而爱民，恤远而亲近。
现代文：舜因孝顺父母、善待兄弟而闻名四方，用制陶和捕鱼来奉养双亲。他宽容而温和，机敏而知时，敬天而爱民，抚恤远方的人又亲近身边的人。
English: He was famous in all directions for his filial piety and kindness to his brothers. He supported his parents by making pottery and fishing. He was tolerant and gentle, quick-witted and punctual, respected the heavens and loved the people, and cared for those far away as well as those close to him.

古文：承受大命，依于二女。
现代文：他承受重任，依靠两位妻子的帮助。
English: He carries a heavy load and relies on the help of his two wives.

古文：睿明智通，为天下帝。
现代文：圣明睿智，成为天下帝王。
English: Shengming Rui Zhi became the emperor of the world.

古文：命二十二臣，率尧旧职，躬己而已。
现代文：任命二十二位大臣，都是帝尧原有的旧职，他只是身体力行而已。
English: The appointment of twenty-two ministers, all of which are the old positions of the emperor, he just did it himself.

古文：天平地成，巡狩四海，五载一始。
现代文：天下太平，地有收成，巡狩四海，五年一次。
English: The world is at peace, the land has a harvest, the hunting patrols the four seas, once every five years.

古文：三十年在位，嗣帝五十载。
现代文：他三十岁被任用，接续帝位五十年。
English: He was appointed at the age of thirty and succeeded to the throne for fifty years.

古文：陟方岳，死于苍梧之野而葬焉。 
现代文：登临四岳，死在苍梧之野并安葬在那里。 
English: He climbed Mount Shidake, died in the field of Goshawk and was buried there.

古文：宰我曰： 请问禹。 
现代文：宰我说： 请问禹是怎样一个人？ 
English: Zai said to me: Excuse me, how is Yu a person?

古文：孔子曰： 高阳之孙，鲧之子也，曰夏后。
现代文：孔子说： 他是高阳的孙子，鲧的儿子，名叫夏后。
English: Confucius said, "He is the grandson of Goyang and the son of Yao. His name is Xiao.

古文：敏给克齐，其德不爽，其仁可亲，其言可信。
现代文：他机敏能成就事业，行为没有差失，仁德可亲，言语可信。
English: He is quick-witted and able to achieve a career, his behavior is impeccable, he is kind and affable, and his words are trustworthy.

古文：声为律，身为度。
现代文：发声合乎音律，行为举止合乎度数。
English: The vocalization is in accordance with the rhythm, the behavior is in accordance with the frequency.

古文：亹亹穆穆，为纪为纲。
现代文：勤勉不倦，容止庄重，成为人们的榜样。
English: Diligence and tirelessness, tolerance and dignity, become a role model for people.

古文：其功为百神主，其惠为民父母。
现代文：他的功德使他成为百神之主，他的恩惠使他成为百姓父母。
English: His merits made him the lord of a hundred gods, and his grace made him the people's father and mother.

古文：左准绳，右规矩，履四时，据四海，任皋繇、伯益以赞其治，兴六师以征不序。四极，民莫敢不服。 
现代文：日常行动都有准则和规矩，不违背四时，安定了四海。任命皋繇、伯益帮助他治理百姓，率领军队征伐不服从者，四方的民众没有不服从的。 
English: There are guidelines and rules for daily actions. He did not violate the four o'clock, and stabilized the four seas. He appointed Zou and Bo Yi to help him govern the people, and led the army to conquer those who did not obey. The people in the four directions did not disobey.

古文：孔子曰： 予！大者如天，小者如言，民悦至矣。
现代文：孔子说： 宰予啊，禹的功德大的方面像天一样广阔，小的方面即使是一句话，民众都非常喜欢。
English: Confucius said: Zaiyu, the great aspects of Yu's merits are as vast as the sky, and the small aspects, even if it is a sentence, are very popular with the public.

古文：予也非其人也。 
现代文：我也不能完全说清他的功德啊。 
English: I can't fully explain his merits either.

古文：宰我曰： 予也不足以戒。
现代文：宰我说： 我也不足以敬肃地接受您这样的教导。 
English: "I am not dignified enough to accept such an instruction from you," he said.

