古文：郭翰杨敬真封陟
现代文：郭翰杨敬真封陟
English: Guo Han as Yang Jingzhen

古文：郭翰
现代文：郭翰
English: Guo Han

古文：太原郭翰，少简贵，有清标。姿度美秀，善谈论，工草隶。
现代文：太原郭翰，年轻时傲视权贵，有清正的名声，仪表气度秀美，极善言谈，擅长草书隶书。
English: Taiyuan Guo Han, when he was young, was proud of his power and prestige, had a reputation for being clean and upright, had a beautiful appearance, was very good at talking, and was good at cursive writing.

古文：早孤独处，当盛暑，乘月卧庭中。
现代文：他早年失去双亲，自己独自居住。时当盛暑，他乘着月色在庭院中高卧。
English: He lost his parents at an early age and lives alone. When the heat is on, he takes advantage of the moonlight to lie high in the courtyard.

古文：时有清风，稍闻香气渐浓。
现代文：这时，有一股清风袭来，稍稍闻到香气，这香气越来越浓郁。
English: At this time, there is a breeze hit, a slight smell of cinnamon, the aroma is more and more rich.

古文：翰甚怪之，仰视空中，见有人冉冉而下，直至翰前，乃一少女也。
现代文：郭翰觉得这事很奇怪，就仰视空中，看见有人冉冉而下，一直到郭翰面前，原来是一个年轻女子。
English: Guo Han thought this was very strange. He looked up into the sky and saw someone running down, right in front of Guo Han. It turned out to be a young woman.

古文：明艳绝代，光彩溢目，衣玄绡之衣，曳霜罗之帔，戴翠翘凤凰之冠，蹑琼文九章之履。
现代文：这女子生得明艳绝代，光彩溢目。她穿着黑色薄绸衣服，拖着白色的罗纱帔肩，戴着翠翘凤凰的帽子，足登琼文九章之鞋。
English: This woman was born bright and dazzling. She wore black silk clothes, white embroidered shawls, a green phoenix hat, and shoes from the Nine Chapters of the Qiongwen.

古文：侍女二人，皆有殊色，感荡心神。
现代文：随行两名侍女，都有超凡的姿色。
English: Accompanying her are two maids of honour, both of extraordinary beauty.

古文：翰整衣巾，下床拜谒曰： 不意尊灵迥降，愿垂德音。 
现代文：郭翰心神感荡，整理衣巾，下床跪拜参见，说： 没料到尊贵的灵仙突然降临，愿您赐下恩德之音。 
English: Guo Han's heart swelled with emotion, he tidied up his clothes and towel, got out of bed, knelt down and said, "I did not expect the sudden arrival of the noble immortal, may you bestow the sound of grace."

古文：女微笑曰： 吾天上织女也。
现代文：女子微微一笑，说： 我是天上的织女呀。
English: The woman smiled and said, "I am the heavenly weaver.

古文：久无主对，而佳期阻旷，幽态盈怀。
现代文：很久没有夫主相对，佳期阻绝，幽幽闺愁充满了胸怀，上天恩赐，命我到人间一游。
English: It's been a long time since I've had a husband, I've missed the best time of the year, my heart is full of nostalgic memories, and by the grace of God, I've been given a chance to travel the world.

古文：上帝赐命游人间，仰慕清风，愿托神契。 翰曰： 非敢望也，益深所感。 
现代文：我仰慕你清高的风度，愿托身于你。 郭翰说： 我不敢指望这样，这使我感怀更深了。 
English: Guo Han said, "I didn't dare to expect this, which made me feel even more deeply.

古文：女为敕侍婢净扫室中，张霜雾丹縠之帏，施水晶玉华之簟，转会风之扇，宛若清秋。
现代文：织女命令侍婢净扫房间，展开霜雾丹縠的帏帐，放下水晶玉华的垫席，转动会生风的扇子，宛如清爽的秋天。
English: The weaver ordered the maids to sweep the room, unfold the frosty curtain, put down the crystal cushion, and turn the fan, which would create a fresh breeze, like a crisp autumn.

古文：乃携手登堂，解衣共卧。
现代文：他们就手拉手地进了内室，解衣共卧。
English: Hand in hand, they went into the inner room, undressed and lay down together.

古文：其衬体轻红绡衣，似小香囊，气盈一室。
现代文：织女贴身的轻红薄绸内衣，像个小香囊，香气散满整个卧室。
English: Weaver's close-fitting light red silk underwear, like a small incense burner, spreads the aroma throughout the bedroom.

古文：有同心龙脑之枕，覆双缕鸳文之衾。
现代文：床上有同心龙脑的枕头，盖着双缕线带有鸳鸯图案的被子。
English: The bed has concentric dragon's head pillows and is covered with a double-threaded, satin-patterned quilt.

古文：柔肌腻体，深情密态，妍艳无匹。
现代文：女郎柔嫩的肌肤、滑腻的身体、深切的情意、亲切的娇态，容貌俏丽无人能够匹敌。
English: A girl's soft skin, smooth body, deep feelings, kind demeanor, and pretty looks are second to none.

古文：欲晓辞去，面粉如故。
现代文：天快亮了，女郎告辞离去的时候，脸上的脂粉如故。
English: It was almost dawn, and when the girl left, the powder on her face was still there.

古文：为试拭之，乃本质也。
现代文：郭翰给她试着擦拭一下，原来就是她的本色。
English: Guo Han gave her a wipe to try, and it turned out to be her true color.

古文：翰送出户，凌云而去。
现代文：郭翰把她送出门，女郎凌云而去。
English: Guo Han sent her out the door, and the girl left in a huff.

古文：自后夜夜皆来，情好转切。
现代文：自此以后，女郎夜夜都来，感情更加密切。
English: Since then, the girl has been coming every night, and their feelings have become even closer.

古文：翰戏之曰： 牵郎何在？
现代文：郭翰与她开玩笑说： 牵牛郎在哪里？
English: Guo Han joked with her, "Where is the cowherd?

古文：那敢独行？ 
现代文：你怎么敢独自出门。 
English: How dare you go out alone.

古文：对曰： 阴阳变化，关渠何事？
现代文：女郎回答说： 阴阳变化，与他有什么关系？
English: The girl replied, "What does the yin and yang change have to do with him?

古文：且河汉隔绝，无可复知；纵复知之；不足为虑。 
现代文：而且银河隔绝，没有可能知道。纵然他知道了这件事，也不值得为此忧虑。 
English: And with the galaxy cut off, there's no way of knowing, and even if he did, it wouldn't be worth worrying about.

古文：因抚翰心前曰： 世人不明瞻瞩耳。 
现代文：于是她抚摸着郭翰的胸前，说： 世人看得不明白而已。 
English: So she stroked Guo Han's chest and said, "The world only sees, but does not understand.

古文：翰又曰： 卿已托灵辰象，辰象之门，可得闻乎？ 
现代文：郭翰又说： 您已经托灵于星象，星象的门路，可以说给我听听吗？ 
English: Guo Han also said: You have been listening to the stars, the doorway of the stars, can you tell me?

古文：对曰： 人间观之，只见是星，其中自有宫室居处，群仙皆游观焉。
现代文：女郎回答说： 人家观看星象，只见到它们是星，其中自有宫室住处，群仙在那里也都游览观看。
English: The girl replied, "People look at the stars, but they only see them as stars. They have their own palace to live in, and the fairies also visit there to watch.

古文：万物之精，各有象在天，成形在地。
现代文：万物之精，各有星象在天上，而成形在地上。
English: The essence of all things, each has a star in the sky, and is formed on the ground.

古文：下人之变，必形于上也。
现代文：下界人的变化，必然在天上表现出来。
English: The changes in people in the lower realms will inevitably manifest themselves in the heavens.

古文：吾今观之，皆了了自识。 
现代文：我现在观看星象，都清清楚楚地认识。 
English: When I look at the stars now, I can see them clearly.

古文：因为翰指列宿分位，尽详纪度。时人不悟者，翰遂洞知之。
现代文：于是就给郭翰指点众星宿的分布方位，把天上的法纪制度详尽地介绍给郭翰，因此，当时人们不明白的事情，郭翰竟然透彻地了解它们。
English: He then pointed out to Guo Han the distribution of the stars, and introduced the heavenly legal system to Guo Han in detail. As a result, people did not understand things at that time, but Guo Han understood them thoroughly.

古文：后将至七夕，忽不复来，经数夕方至。
现代文：后来将要到七月七日的晚上了，女郎忽然不再来了，经过几个晚上才来。
English: Then, towards the evening of the 7th of July, the girl suddenly stopped coming, after a few nights.

古文：翰问曰： 相见乐乎？ 
现代文：郭翰问她说： 相见欢乐吗？ 
English: Guo Han asked her: Are you happy to see each other?

古文：笑而对曰： 天上那比人间？
现代文：女郎笑着回答说： 天上哪能比上人间？
English: Laughing, the girl replied, "How can heaven be better than earth?

古文：正以感运当尔，非有他故也，君无相忌。 
现代文：正因为感运应当这样，没有别的缘故啊，您不要忌妒。 
English: You should not be envious just because this is the way it should be, and for no other reason.

古文：问曰： 卿来何迟？ 
现代文：郭翰向她说： 您来得怎么这么晚呢？ 
English: Guo Han said to her, "How did you come so late?

古文：答曰： 人中五日，彼一夕也。 
现代文：女郎回答说： 人世中的五天，是那里的一夜呀。 
English: The girl replied, "Five days in the world is one night there."

古文：又为翰致天厨，悉非世物。
现代文：女郎又为郭翰招来了天厨，全不是人世上的东西。
English: The girl also invited a cook for Guo Han. It was not something out of this world.

古文：徐视其衣，并无缝。
现代文：郭翰慢慢地看出她的衣服全都没有缝。
English: Guo Han slowly realized that there were no seams in her clothes.

古文：翰问之，谓翰曰： 天衣本非针线为也。 
现代文：郭翰问她这件事的原因，女郎就对郭翰说： 天上的衣服本来就不是用针线做的呀。 
English: Guo Han asked her the reason for this, and the girl said to Guo Han: The clothes in the sky are not made of needle and thread.

古文：每去，辄以衣服自随。
现代文：女郎每次都自己随身带着衣服。
English: The girl always takes her clothes with her.

古文：经一年，忽于一夕，颜色凄恻，涕流交下，执翰手曰： 帝命有程，便可永诀。 
现代文：经过一年，忽然在一天夜里，女郎脸色凄惨悲痛，涕泪交下，握住郭翰的手说： 上天的命令有定限，现在就该永别了！ 
English: After a year, suddenly one night, the girl's face was sad and sorrowful, she shed tears, held Guo Han's hand and said: God's order has a limit, now it's time to say goodbye forever!

古文：遂呜咽不自胜。
现代文：说完就呜咽，不能自胜。
English: After saying that, he whimpered, unable to help himself.

古文：翰惊惋曰： 尚余几日在？ 
现代文：郭翰惊讶而又惋惜地说： 还剩几天？ 
English: Guo Han said in surprise and regret: How many days are left?

古文：对曰： 只今夕耳。 
现代文：女郎回答说： 只剩今天晚上了。 
English: The girl replied, "It's only tonight.

古文：遂悲泣，彻晓不眠。
现代文：他们就悲伤得落泪，一直到天亮也没有睡觉。
English: They were so sad that they shed tears and did not sleep until dawn.

古文：及旦，抚抱为别，以七宝碗一留赠，言明年某日，当有书相问。
现代文：等到天亮时，女郎爱抚拥抱着郭翰告别，拿七宝碗一只留下赠给他，说是明年的某日，当有信问候。
English: When it was dawn, the girl caressed and hugged Guo Han to say goodbye, took a cloisonné bowl and left it for him, saying that one day next year, when there is a letter of greetings.

古文：翰答以玉环一双，便履空而去，回顾招手，良久方灭。
现代文：郭翰用一双玉环作为赠答，女郎就踏空而去，回头招手，很久才消逝。
English: Guo Han replied with a pair of jade rings as a gift, and the girl left empty-handed, waving back, before disappearing for a long time.

古文：翰思之成疾，未尝暂忘。
现代文：郭翰想她想得生了病，一刻也不曾忘记。
English: Guo Han thought she was sick, but she never forgot a moment.

古文：明年至期，果使前者侍女。将书函致。
现代文：第二年到了约定的日期，女郎果然派以前来过的侍女，带着书函而来。
English: The second year, when the agreed date arrived, the girl sent the maid who had come before, with a letter.

古文：翰遂开封，以青缣为纸，铅丹为字，言词清丽，情念重叠。
现代文：郭翰打开函封，信里用青色双线生绢作纸，用铅丹写的字，言词清丽，情意缠绵。
English: Guo Han opened the envelope. The letter was made of blue double-lined ginger paper, and the words were written in red lead. The words were beautiful, and the sentiments were entangled.

古文：书末有诗二首，诗曰： 河汉虽云阔，三秋尚有期。
现代文：信的末尾有诗二首，诗写的是： 河汉虽云阔，三秋尚有期。
English: At the end of the letter, there are two poems. The poem is written: Although the river Han is cloudy, there is still a period in the third autumn.

古文：情人终已矣，良会更何时？ 
现代文：情人终已矣，良会更何时？ 
English: After all, the lover is gone. When will the good times return?

古文：又曰： 朱阁临清汉，琼宫御紫房。
现代文：又一首写的是： 朱阁临清汉，琼宫御紫房。
English: Another poem was written: Zhu Ge Lin Qinghan, Qiong Gong Mi Zi Fang Zheng.

古文：佳期情在此，只是断人肠。 
现代文：佳期情在此，只是断人肠。 
English: It's a great time to be here, it's just gut-wrenching.

古文：翰以香笺答书，意甚慊切。
现代文：谁知一回顾，交作两相思。 
English: Who knows, in retrospect, it was love at first sight.

古文：并有酬赠诗二首，诗曰： 人世将天上，由来不可期。
现代文：另一首写道： 赠枕犹香泽，啼衣尚泪痕。玉颜霄汉里，空有往来痕。 
English: Another one reads: The pillow is fragrant, the clothes are tear-stained, and the sky is streaked with tears.

古文：谁知一 自此而绝。
现代文：从此就断绝了音讯。
English: There has been no contact since.

古文：是年，太史奏织女星无光。
现代文：这一年，太史奏报皇上说织女星无光。
English: That year, the Taishisho reported to the emperor that the Vega star had no light.

古文：翰思不已，凡人间丽色，不复措意。
现代文：郭翰思念不已，所有人间丽色，他全都不再留意。
English: Guo Han pined away, and he no longer paid attention to all the beauty in the world.

古文：复以继嗣，大义须婚，强娶程氏女，所不称意，复以无嗣，遂成反目。
现代文：后来因为必须继承宗嗣，勉强娶了程家的女儿，很不称心，又因为没有儿子，就反目成仇。
English: Later, because he had to succeed his father, he reluctantly married the daughter of the Cheng family, which was very unsatisfactory, and because he did not have a son, they became enemies.

古文：翰后官至侍御史而卒。
现代文：郭翰后来做官做到侍御史才去世。
English: Guo Han later worked as an official to become an attendant of history before he passed away.

古文：杨敬真
现代文：杨敬真
English: Yang Jingzhen

古文：杨敬真，虢州阌乡县长寿乡天仙村田家女也。
现代文：杨敬真，是虢州阌乡县长寿乡天仙村种田人家的女儿。
English: Yang Jingzhen is the daughter of a farmer from Tianxian Village, Changshou Township, Minxiang County, Luzhou.

古文：年十八，嫁同村王清。
现代文：十八岁那年，嫁给同村的王清。
English: At the age of eighteen, she married Wang Qing from the same village.

古文：其夫家贫力田，杨氏妇道甚谨，夫族目之勤力新妇。
现代文：她的丈夫家里贫穷而努力种田，杨氏也很严守妇道，丈夫家族的人都把她看作勤劳尽力的新媳妇。
English: Her husband's family is poor and struggles to farm, and Ms. Yang is also a strict feminist. Everyone in her husband's family sees her as a hard-working new daughter-in-law.

古文：性沉静，不好戏笑，有暇必洒扫静室，闭门闲居，虽邻妇狎之，终不相往来。
现代文：她性格沉静，不喜欢与人说笑戏耍，有闲暇一定洒扫，把住宅收拾得干干净净，然后在静室中闭门闲居，虽然邻妇亲近她，她始终不与她们往来。
English: She is a quiet person, does not like to play with people, and when she has free time, she sweeps, cleans the house, and then sits in a quiet room. Although she is close to her neighbors, she never interacts with them.

古文：生三男一女，年二十四岁。
现代文：她一共生了三个儿子一个女儿，时年二十四岁。
English: She gave birth to three sons and a daughter at the age of twenty-four.

古文：元和十二年五月十二日夜，告其夫曰：妾神识颇不安，恶闻人言，当于静室宁之，君宜与儿女暂居异室。 
现代文：元和十二年五月二十二日晚上，她告诉她的丈夫说： 我的神智很不安，不喜欢听到别人说话，应当在静室使自己平静一下，您应当和儿女暂时到别的屋里去住。 
English: On the evening of May 22nd, 1812, she told her husband: "My mind is very uneasy, I don't like to hear other people talking, you should calm yourself in the quiet room, you and your children should temporarily move to another room.

古文：夫许之。
现代文：丈夫答应了她。
English: Her husband agreed.

古文：杨氏遂沐浴，著新衣，焚香闭户而坐。
现代文：杨氏就洗了澡，穿上新衣服，烧上香关上门坐着。
English: Mr. Yang took a shower, put on new clothes, burned incense and sat with the door closed.

古文：及明，讶其起迟，开门视之，衣服委地床上，若蝉蜕然，身已去矣，但觉异香满屋。
现代文：等到天亮的时候，家人因她起得晚而惊讶，就打开门去看她，只见衣服掉在地上，像蝉蜕皮似的，人已经离去了，只觉得满室异香。
English: When it was dawn, her family was surprised that she was up so late. They opened the door to see her, only to see that her clothes had fallen to the ground, like the skin of a cicada. People had already left, but the room was filled with a strange smell.

古文：其夫惊以告其父母，共叹之。
现代文：她的丈夫惊慌地把这事告诉了她的父母，大家都为这事叹息。
English: Her husband panicked and told her parents, who were all heartbroken.

古文：数人来曰： 昨夜方半，有天乐从西而来，似若云中。
现代文：这时，有几个人来说： 昨天晚上刚到半夜，有天上的音乐从西边过来，好像在云中。
English: At this time, several people said: Last night, just after midnight, there was heavenly music coming from the west, as if in the clouds.

古文：下于君家，奏乐久之，稍稍上去。
现代文：下到您家，奏乐很久，才渐渐上去了。
English: When we arrived at your house, the music had been playing for a long time before it gradually picked up.

古文：合村皆听之，君家闻否？ 
现代文：全村人都听到了天乐，您家没有听到吗？ 
English: The whole village heard the heavenly music. Did your family not hear it?

古文：而异香酷烈，遍数十里。
现代文：又因为异香太浓烈，遍布几十里，村中小吏就把这事报告给县令李邯。
English: In addition, because the strange fragrance was too strong and spread over dozens of miles, the village middle and junior officials reported the matter to the county magistrate Li Jun.

古文：村吏以告县令李邯，遣吏民远近寻逐，皆无踪迹。
现代文：李邯派官吏、百姓远近各处去追寻，都没有发现踪迹。
English: Li Gan sent officials and commoners to search far and wide, but no trace was found.

古文：因令不动其衣，闭其户，以棘环之，冀其或来也，至十八日夜五更，村人复闻云中仙乐异香从东来，复下王家宅，作乐久之而去。
现代文：县令就下令不准动她的衣裳，把她的房门紧闭，用刺棘围上，希望她能回来。到十八日夜里五更天，村子里的人又听到云中仙乐，闻到异香从东边过来，又下到王家宅院里，奏乐很久而去。
English: The county magistrate ordered not to touch her clothes, closed her door tightly and surrounded it with thorns in the hope that she would come back. On the night of the 18th, five days later, the people in the village again heard the heavenly music in the clouds, smelled the strange fragrance coming from the east, went down to the royal courtyard, and the music went away for a long time.

古文：王氏亦无闻者。
现代文：王家又没有人听到。
English: No one in the royal family heard it either.

古文：及明来视，其门棘封如故，房中仿佛若有人声。
现代文：等到天亮时来看，那房门用刺棘封闭如故，而房中仿佛好像有人声。
English: When I looked at it at dawn, the door of the room was still closed with thorns, and there seemed to be a voice in the room.

古文：遽走告县令李邯，亲率僧道官吏，共开其门，则妇宛在床矣。但觉面目光芒，有非常之色。
现代文：村民立刻跑去报告县令，县令亲自率领和尚道士和官吏，一起打开她的房门，发现杨氏仍然在床上，只是觉得她面目光芒，有不同寻常的脸色。
English: The villagers immediately ran to report to the county magistrate. The county magistrate personally led the monks, Taoists and officials to open her door and found that Ms. Yang was still in bed, but felt that her face was bright and had an unusual complexion.

古文：邯问曰： 向何所去？
现代文：李邯问她说： 先前到哪里去了？
English: Li Yao asked her, "Where did you go before?"

古文：今何所来？ 
现代文：今天又从哪里来？ 
English: Where did today come from?

古文：对曰： 昨十五日夜初，有仙骑来曰： 夫人当上仙，云鹤即到，宜静室以伺之。 
现代文：杨氏回答说： 昨天十五日夜初，有仙人骑马来说： 夫人该成上仙，云鹤立刻就到。应该在静室等候。 
English: Mr. Yang replied, "At the beginning of the night of the 15th yesterday, a fairy on horseback said, 'Your wife should become a fairy, and the crane will come immediately. You should wait in the quiet room.'

古文：至三更，有仙乐彩仗，霓旌绛节，鸾鹤纷纭，五云来降，入于房中。
现代文：到了三更，有仙乐和色彩鲜明的仪仗，五色缤纷的旗子，大红色的符节，鸾鹤纷纭，乘着五色祥云降下，进到房中。
English: When it came to the third watchman, there were fairy music and brightly colored ceremonial cranes, five-colored flags, big red symbols, and cranes, descending on five-colored auspicious clouds and entering the room.

古文：报者前曰 夫人准籍合仙，仙师使使者来迎，将会于西岳。 
现代文：报信的那个人上前说： 夫人准籍应当成仙，仙师派使者来迎接，将到西岳聚会。 
English: The person who reported the letter came forward and said: "Your wife should be registered as a Immortal. The Immortal Master has sent an emissary to meet you, and you will gather at Seigaku.

古文：于是彩童二人捧玉箱，箱中有奇服，非绮非罗，制若道衣之衣，珍华香洁，不可名状。
现代文：于是两个彩衣童子捧着玉箱，箱子中有奇异的服装，不是绮也不是罗，制作得像道人的衣服，珍贵华丽而又香又洁净，说不清楚它的样子。
English: So the two colored boys held the jade box, and in the box there was a strange dress, neither fine nor coarse, made like Taoist clothing, precious and gorgeous, but fragrant and clean, and it was not clear what it looked like.

古文：遂衣之毕，乐作三阙。青衣引白鹤曰： 宜乘此。 
现代文：等把衣服穿完了，仙乐奏了三曲，青衣人牵来白鹤说： 你应该骑这只鹤。 
English: When they had finished putting on their clothes, the celestial music played three pieces. The man in blue brought a white crane and said, "You should ride this crane."

古文：初尚惧其危，试乘之，稳不可言。
现代文：刚开始害怕骑它危险，试着骑它，稳当得没法说。
English: At first, I was afraid of riding it dangerously, but after trying it, I couldn't say it was stable.

古文：飞起而五云捧出，彩仗前引，至于华山玉台峰。
现代文：飞起来就有五色云涌出去，彩仗在前面引路，到了华山云台峰。
English: As soon as it takes flight, the five-colored clouds pour out, and the colorful battle leads the way in front, to Huashan Yuntai Peak.

古文：峰上有磐石，已有四女先在被焉。
现代文：峰上有磐石，已经有四个女子先在那里了。
English: There is a rock on the peak, and four women have already climbed there.

古文：一人云姓马，宋州人；一人姓徐，幽州人；一人姓郭，荆州人；一人姓夏，青州人。皆其夜成仙，同会于此。
现代文：一个人说姓马，是宋州人，一个人姓徐是幽州人，一个人姓郭是荆州人，一个姓夏是青州人，都在那天夜里成仙，一同在这里聚会。
English: A person with the surname Ma is from Songzhou, a person with the surname Xu is from Yuzhou, a person with the surname Guo is from Jingzhou, and a person with the surname Xia is from Qingzhou. They all became immortals that night and gathered together here.

古文：旁一小仙曰： 并舍虚幻，得证真仙，今当定名，宜有真字。 
现代文：旁有一位小仙说： 并舍虚幻，得证真仙，如今应当定名，名中应有个 真 字。
English: Beside him, a little fairy said, "I gave up my illusions and became a real fairy. Now I should have a name, and I should have a real word in my name."

古文：于是马曰信真，徐曰湛真，郭曰修真，夏曰守真。
现代文：于是姓马的叫信真，姓徐的叫湛真，姓郭的叫修真，姓夏的叫守真。
English: As a result, the surname Ma is called Xin Zhen, the surname Xu is called Zhan Zhen, the surname Guo is called Xiuzhen, and the surname Xia is called Shou Zhen.

古文：其时五云参差，遍覆崖谷，妙乐罗列，间作于前。
现代文：那时五云参差，遮蔽了整个山崖和沟谷，奇妙的乐器排列出来，一一在面前演奏。
English: At that time, the clouds were so thick that they covered the entire cliff and ravine, and the wonderful musical instruments were lined up and played one by one in front of them.

古文：五人相庆曰： 同生浊界，并是凡身，一旦修然，遂与尘隔。
现代文：五个人互相祝贺说： 我们同生在污浊的下界，都是凡身，一旦自由自在地成了仙，就与世隔绝了。
English: The five people congratulated each other, saying, "We were all born in the filthy underworld, and we are all mortal. Once we became immortals freely, we were cut off from the world.

古文：今夕何夕，欢会于斯，宜各赋诗，以道其意。 
现代文：今夕何夕，欢会在此，应该各自赋诗，以表达此刻的心意 。
English: Tonight and every evening, the party is here, and we should each write a poem to express the spirit of the moment.

古文：信真诗曰： 几劫澄烦虑，思今身仅成。
现代文：信真的诗是： 几劫澄烦虑，思今身仅成。
English: The poem of truthfulness is: I have been troubled for a long time, but now I have come to my senses.

古文：誓将云外隐，不向世间存。 
现代文：誓将云外隐，不向世间存。 
English: He vowed to live a secluded life, away from the world.

古文：湛真诗曰： 绰约离尘世，从容上太清。
现代文：湛真的诗是： 绰约离尘世，从容上太清。
English: Zhan Zhen's poem is: Slightly detached from the world, calmly too clear.

古文：云衣无绽日，鹤驾没遥程。 
现代文：云衣无绽日，鹤驾没遥程。 
English: There is no sun without clouds, and no distance without a crane.

古文：修真诗曰： 华岳无三尺，东瀛仅一杯。
现代文：修真的诗是： 华岳无三尺，东瀛仅一杯。
English: Shu's real poem is: Huatake has no three shaku, Donglu has only one cup.

古文：入云骑彩凤，歌舞上蓬莱。 
现代文：入云骑彩凤，歌舞上蓬莱。 
English: Into the clouds to ride the colorful phoenix, song and dance on the Penglai.

古文：守真诗曰： 共作云山侣，俱辞世界尘。
现代文：守真的诗是： 共作云山侣，俱辞世界尘。
English: The poem of truthfulness is: Let's make clouds and mountains together, and shake off the dust of the world.

古文：静思前日事，抛却几年身。 
现代文：静思前日事，抛却几年身。 
English: Meditating on the previous day's events, throwing away a few years.

古文：敬真亦诗曰： 人世徒纷扰，其生似梦华。
现代文：敬真也作诗说： 人世徒纷扰，其生似梦华。
English: Keizhen also wrote a poem, saying: The world is full of turmoil, its birth is like a dream.

古文：谁言今夕里，俯首视云霞。 
现代文：谁言今夕里，俛首视云霞。 
English: Who said that this evening, the dagger will see the clouds.

古文：既而雕盘珍果，名不可知。妙乐铿锽，响动崖谷。
现代文：接着就端来了雕盘珍果，都不知道名字，美妙的音乐悠扬钟鼓铿锵，响亮的声音震动了山崖幽谷。
English: Next came the carved plates of rare fruits, no one knew their names, the beautiful music played by the bells and drums, and the loud sounds shook the mountains, cliffs and valleys.

古文：俄而执节者曰： 宜往蓬莱，谒大仙伯。 
现代文：不一会儿，持符节的人说： 应该前往蓬莱，参拜大仙伯。 
English: After a while, the people holding the festival said, "We should go to Penglai to worship the Great Sage."

古文：五真曰： 大仙伯为谁？ 
现代文：五真问他： 大仙伯是谁？ 
English: Wuzhen asked him, "Who is the Great Sage Bo?"

古文：曰： 茅君也。 
现代文：他说： 是茅君。 
English: He said, "It's Mao Jun."

古文：妓乐鸾鹤，复前引东去。
现代文：于是妓乐鸾鹤又在前引路向东而去，转眼间已经到了蓬莱。
English: As a result, the prostitute cranes are leading the way to the east, and in no time they have reached Penglai.

古文：倏然间已到蓬莱，其宫皆金银，花木楼殿，皆非人间之制作。
现代文：那里的宫殿全是金银造的，花木楼台都不是人间所能制作的。
English: The palaces there are all made of gold and silver, and the flower and wooden balconies cannot be made by human beings.

古文：大仙伯居金阙玉堂中，侍卫甚严。
现代文：大仙伯住在金阙玉堂中，侍卫很严。
English: The Great Immortal lives in the Golden Pavilion. The guards are very strict.

古文：见五真喜曰： 来何晚耶？ 
现代文：见到五真，大仙伯高兴地说： 来得怎么这么晚啊？ 
English: Seeing Wuzhen, the Great Fairy Godmother said happily, "How come you're so late?"

古文：饮以玉杯，赐以金简、凤文之衣、玉华之冠，配居蓬莱华院。
现代文：让她们用玉杯饮酒，赏赐她们金简、凤纹衣服、玉华冠，分配她们住在蓬莱华院。
English: Let them drink with jade cups, reward them with gold brooches, phoenix-patterned clothes, jade crowns, and assign them to live in Penglai Hua Yuan.

古文：四人者出，敬真独前曰： 王父年高，无人侍养，请回侍其残年。
现代文：那四个女子出去了，敬真独自上前说： 我公公年龄已高，没有人侍奉赡养，请让我回去侍奉他的残年，公公去世以后，然后从命。
English: The four women went out, and Keizhen came forward alone and said, "My father-in-law is very old, and there is no one to serve and support him. Please let me go back and serve him for the rest of his life. After my father-in-law's death, then I will do my duty."

古文：王父去世，然后从命，诚不忍得乐而忘王父也。惟仙伯哀之。 
现代文：我实在不忍心得到欢乐而忘记王家公公啊。只请仙伯可怜他。 
English: I really can't bear to be happy and forget about Grandpa Wang. I just ask Xianbo to take pity on him.

古文：仙伯曰： 汝村一千年方出一仙人，汝当其会，无自坠其道。 
现代文：仙伯说： 你们村子一千年才出一个仙人，你正赶上这个机会，不要自坠其道。 
English: The hermit said, "It has taken a thousand years to produce a hermit in your village. You are just seizing this opportunity. Don't fall into the same trap."

古文：因敕四真送至其家，故得还也。 
现代文：就下令四真把我送到家，所以我能回来。 
English: He ordered the four real men to take me home, so I could come back.

古文：邯问昔何修习，曰： 村妇何以知？
现代文：李邯问她： 你从前修习什么？ 她说： 村妇哪里知道？
English: Li Yao asked her: What did you study before? She said: How did the village woman know?

古文：但性本虚静，闲即凝神而坐，不复俗虑得入胸中耳。
现代文：只是性格本来喜欢虚静，闲着的时候就是凝神而坐，不再有俗念能入胸中而已。
English: It's just that my personality likes to be empty and quiet. When I'm idle, I just sit with my mind absorbed, and I can't get any more mundane thoughts into my mind.

古文：此性也，非学也。 
现代文：这是性情呀，不是学来的。 
English: It's a personality thing, it's not learned.

古文：又问要去可否，曰： 本无道术，何以能去？
现代文：李邯又问她： 你如果再要离去，能办到吗？ 她说： 我本来没有道术，靠什么能离去？
English: Li Qiye asked her again: "If you want to leave again, can you do it?" She said: "I don't have any Taoism, how can I leave?

古文：云鹤乘迎即去，不来亦无术可召。 
现代文：云鹤来迎接就能去，不来我也没有法术把它招来。 
English: If the crane comes to meet me, I can go. If it doesn't come, I don't have any magic to attract it.

古文：于是遂谢绝其夫，服黄冠。
现代文：从此，她就和她的丈夫分居，戴上了道冠。
English: Since then, she has separated from her husband and put on the crown.

古文：邯以状闻州，州闻廉使。
现代文：李邯把这些情况报告了州里，州里又报告给廉使。
English: Li Qian reported these circumstances to the prefectural government, which in turn reported them to the Lian Envoy.

古文：时崔从按察陕辅，延之，舍于陕州紫极宫，请王父于别室，人不得升其阶，惟廉使从事及夫人得之，瞻拜者才及阶而已，亦不得升。
现代文：当时崔从按察陕辅，把杨敬真请了去，安排她到陕州紫极宫住，请王家之父到别的住室，别人不得登上她住处的台阶，只有廉使从事和夫人能够进入，瞻仰拜见的人才到台阶而已，也不能登堂入室。
English: At that time, Cui invited Yang Jingzhen from the Shaanxi Provincial People's Procuratorate, arranged for her to live in the Shaanxi Zijiu Palace, and invited the father of the royal family to another living room. No one else was allowed to climb the steps of her residence. Only the minister and his wife could enter, and only those who visited could reach the steps, and could not enter the room.

古文：廉使以闻，唐宪宗召见，舍于内殿。
现代文：廉使把这件事奏闻皇上，唐宪宗就召见了杨敬真，让她住在内殿。
English: The envoy reported the matter to the emperor, and Tang Xianzong summoned Yang Jingzhen and let her live in the inner hall.

古文：或道而无以对，罢之。
现代文：试与她论道，而杨敬真不懂，没有话回答，唐宪宗就放她回去了。
English: He tried to discuss the Tao with her, but Yang Jing really didn't understand, and he didn't have the words to answer, so Tang Xianzong let her go.

古文：今在陕州，终岁不食，食时啗果实，试饮酒二三杯，绝无所食，但容色转芳嫩耳。
现代文：如今还在陕州，常年不吃饭，吃东西时也就吃点果实，或饮二三杯酒，根本不吃粮食，容颜反而变得芳嫩了。
English: Now, still in Shaanxi Province, she skips meals all year round, and when she does eat, she also eats some fruit, or drinks two or three glasses of wine. She doesn't eat any grain at all, and her face has become fragrant.

古文：封陟
现代文：封陟
English: 封

古文：宝历中，有封陟孝廉者，居于少室。
现代文：他生得仪表堂堂，性格操守很坚定端方。
English: He was born with a fine appearance and a strong character.

古文：貌态洁朗，性颇贞端。
现代文：他立志研究古籍，在林泉之处寻找僻幽之所。
English: He was determined to study ancient books and look for secluded spots in the forest.

古文：志在典坟，僻于林薮，探义而星归腐草，阅经而月坠幽窗，兀兀孜孜，俾夜作昼，无非搜索隐奥，未尝暂纵揭时日也。
现代文：探究文义，直到星落于腐草；阅读经书，不顾月坠幽窗。孜孜不倦，夜以继日，无不搜求隐奥，不曾放松片刻时间。
English: Exploring the meaning of the text until the stars fall into the rotten grass; reading the scriptures, regardless of the setting of the moon. Tirelessly, day and night, all without searching for recesses, without relaxing for a moment.

古文：书堂之畔，景象可窥，泉石清寒，桂兰雅淡，戏猱每窃其庭果，唳鹤频栖于涧松。虚籁时吟，纤埃昼閴。
现代文：书堂附近，景象可观，泉清石寒，桂淡兰雅，淘气的猴子常窃其庭院之果，鸣叫的野鹤频频栖息于山涧松间，时时发出吟啸之声。
English: Near the library, the scenery is spectacular, the spring is clear and cold, Gui is light and elegant, the mischievous monkey often steals the fruits of his yard, and the singing wild cranes frequently inhabit between the hawthorn pines, issuing the sound of chanting.

古文：烟锁筜篁之翠节，露滋踯躅之红葩。
现代文：纤埃昼阒，烟雾锁住丛竹的翠节，露珠滋润缓缓开放的红花。
English: The sun is setting, the smoke is locking in the green of the bamboo, and the dewdrops are moisturizing the slowly opening saffron.

古文：薜蔓衣垣，苔茸毯砌。
现代文：薜荔的枝蔓遮蔽了墙垣，苔藓柔密丛生，像毯子似的铺在地上。
English: The branches of the lilies of the valley overshadow the walls, and the mosses are densely clustered and spread out on the ground like a blanket.

古文：时夜将午，忽飘异香酷烈，渐布于庭际。俄有辎軿自空而降，画轮轧轧，直湊檐楹。
现代文：这时将到午夜，忽然飘来极其浓烈的异香，渐渐布满了庭院，突然有一辆妇女乘坐的带帷的车子从空中降落下来，画轮轧轧作响，一直接近到檐柱。
English: At this time, just before midnight, a very strong incense wafted in and gradually filled the courtyard. Suddenly, a woman in a draped chariot descended from the sky, the wheels of the chariot rumbling as it approached the pillar.

古文：见一仙姝，侍从华丽，玉珮敲磬，罗裙曳云，体欺皓雪之容光，脸夺芙蕖之艳冶，正容敛衽而揖陟曰： 某籍本上仙，谪居下界，或游人间五岳，或止海面三峰。
现代文：她的肌体胜过皓雪那么洁白，她的容颜胜过荷花那么娇艳。仙女正容敛衽给封陟作了一揖，对封陟说： 我的名籍本来是上仙，贬居到下界，有时到人间五岳云游，有时到海面三峰歇息。
English: Her body was whiter than snow, and her face was more beautiful than lotus flowers. Fairy Zhengyuan gave Fong Yao a kiss, and said to him: My name is originally Shangxian, and I live in the lower world, and sometimes I travel to the world of the five mountains, and sometimes I rest on the three peaks of the sea.

古文：月到瑶阶，愁莫听其凤管；虫吟粉壁，恨不寐于鸯衾。
现代文：月光照到瑶宫的台阶，愁得没有心思听那风箫之管；听虫吟于粉墙，恨不能在鸳鸯被中成眠。
English: The moonlight shines on the steps of the Toad Palace, and I'm too sad to listen to the wind howling; listening to the insects singing on the powder wall, I wish I could fall asleep in the quilt.

古文：燕浪语而徘徊，鸾虚歌而缥缈。宝瑟休泛，虬觥懒斟。
现代文：闻燕子的浪语而徘徊，听鸾鸟的歌声而缥渺，使我宝瑟停奏，美酒懒斟。
English: Wandering while listening to the swallow's wandering, listening to the ostrich's singing while it is faint, I pause the music and sip the wine.

古文：红杏艳枝，激含嚬于绮殿；碧桃芳萼，引凝睇于琼楼。
现代文：红杏在枝头艳丽绽放，激起我绮殿含颦；碧桃绽出芳香的花蕾，引起我琼楼凝眸。
English: The red apricot blossoms brightly on the branches, stirring up my palate; the peach blossoms with fragrant buds, causing me to gaze longingly.

古文：既厌晓妆，渐融春思。
现代文：已经厌倦了晓妆，又渐渐萌动了春情。
English: Already tired of makeup, and gradually sprouted spring fever.

古文：伏见郎君坤仪浚洁，襟量端明，学聚流萤，文含隐豹。所以慕其真朴，爱以孤标，特谒光容，愿持箕帚。又不知郎君雅旨如何？ 
现代文：再看看郎君您，仪容俊秀、气度不凡，刻苦治学，才华四溢，所以仰慕您的纯真朴实，爱您的不随流俗的风格，特来拜见您的尊容，愿托身侍奉，不知郎君雅意如何？ 
English: Let's take a look at your husband. He has a handsome appearance, an extraordinary temperament, studies hard, and is full of talent. Therefore, I admire your innocence and simplicity, love your unconventional style, and have come to pay your respects. I would like to serve you. I don't know what your husband's intentions are.

古文：陟摄衣朗烛，正色而坐，言曰： 某家本贞廉，性唯孤介。贪古人之糟粕，究前圣之指归，编柳苦辛，燃粕幽暗，布被粝食，烧蒿茹藜。但自固穷，终不斯滥，必不敢当神仙降顾。
现代文：封陟整理一下衣服把灯烛弄亮，正色而坐，说： 我家本来清正廉洁，我的性情耿直方正，贪恋古人的糟粕，探究前辈圣人的宗旨，苦读经书，燃粕幽间。盖布被吃粗粮，烧野蒿吃野菜，只是自己守贫，终不为滥，实在不敢当神仙的眷顾。
English: After sealing and tidying his clothes, he lit the candle and sat upright, saying: My family is originally pure and honest, my temperament is upright and upright, I am greedy for the dross of the ancients, I explore the purpose of the saints of my predecessors, I study the scriptures hard, and I burn the darkness. Gaby is eating coarse grains, and the wild donkey is eating vegetables, but he is keeping himself poor, he is not extravagant, and he really does not dare to be patronized by the gods.

古文：断意如此，幸早回车。 
现代文：决意如此，希望您及早回车。 
English: I hope you will return to the car as soon as possible.

古文：姝曰： 某乍造门墙，未申恳迫，辄有一诗奉留，后七日更来。 
现代文：仙女说： 我初到您的家里，未能申明恳切之意，这里有诗一首奉留，七日后我再来。 
English: The fairy said, "This is the first time I have come to your home, and I have not been able to express my sincerity. I have left a poem here, and I will return in seven days."

古文：诗曰： 谪居蓬岛别瑶池，春媚烟花有所思。
现代文：诗中写道： 谪居蓬岛别瑶池，春媚烟花有所思。
English: He wrote in the poem: "I live on Ponjima Beppu Pond, and I'm thinking about the spring fireworks.

古文：为爱君心能洁白，愿操箕帚奉屏帏。 
现代文：为爱君心能洁白，愿操箕帚奉屏帏。 
English: For the sake of my beloved, may my heart be cleansed.

古文：陟览之若不闻。
现代文：封陟看完之后像没看一样。
English: After watching the closing credits, it was as if I hadn't watched it.

古文：云軿既去，窗户遗芳，然陟心中不可转也。
现代文：云车去后，门窗留下芳香，然而封陟心意不可转变。
English: After the cloud car left, the doors and windows left a fragrance, but the seal's intention could not be changed.

古文：后七日夜，姝又至，骑从如前时，丽容洁服，艳媚巧言。
现代文：七天后的夜里，仙女又来了，车骑随从如上次来时一样。仙女容颜艳丽，服饰整洁，姿态艳媚，言语巧妙。
English: Seven days later, at night, the fairy came again, accompanied by a chariot and horse, just like the last time. The fairy's face was beautiful, her clothes were neat, her posture was beautiful, and her words were clever.

古文：入白陟曰： 某以业缘遽萦，魔障剡起。
现代文：她进入房中告诉封陟说： 我因为孽缘突然缠绕，魔障锐起，在蓬莱山，在东瀛岛。
English: She went into the room and told Feng Rong, "I am suddenly entangled because of my sinful relationship, and a magic barrier has risen sharply, in Penglai Mountain, in Dongluo Island.

古文：蓬山瀛岛，绣帐锦宫，恨起红茵，愁生翠被。
现代文：绣帐锦宫，红茵生恨，翠被生愁。
English: Embroidered brocade palace, crimson hate, cedar sorrow.

古文：难窥舞蝶于芳草，每妒流莺于绮丛，靡不双飞，俱能对跱，自矜孤寝，转懵空闺。
现代文：见双蝶在芳草之中飞舞而难过，看流莺在树丛啼叫而每生妒意。鸟虫都无不双飞，全能成对，自怜孤寝，空闺中茫然辗转。
English: It is sad to see a pair of butterflies flying in the lush grass, and it is always jealous to see a dragonfly howling in the bushes. Birds and insects all fly in pairs, all-powerful in pairs, self-pitying and sleeping alone, wandering around in a daze.

古文：秋却银缸，但凝眸于片月；春寻琼圃；空抒思于残花。
现代文：秋回银缸，只对明月而凝眸；春到琼圃，空对残花而抒怀。
English: Autumn returns to the silver bowl, gazing only at the bright moon; spring arrives at the Qiongpu garden, and the sky reflects on the remaining flowers.

古文：所以激切前时，布露丹恳，幸垂采纳，无阻精诚，又不知郎君意竟如何？ 
现代文：所以前次来时心情激切，流露至诚之意，希望您能接纳，不拒绝我的精诚之心。又不知郎君的心意终究如何？ 
English: So the last time I came, I was so excited and sincere. I hope you can accept and not reject my sincerity. And I don't know what my husband's intentions are after all.

古文：陟又正色而言曰： 某身居山薮，志已颛蒙，不识铅华，岂知女色？
现代文：封陟又现出严肃的面孔，说： 我身居山林，心志已经愚昧，不识铅粉银华，哪里懂得女色？
English: Fong Yao appeared again with a serious face, saying: I live in the mountains and forests, my mind is already stupid, I don't know lead, powder and silver, where do I know women?

古文：幸垂速去，无相见尤。 
现代文：希望您赶快回去，不要打扰我。 
English: I hope you will hurry back and leave me alone.

古文：姝曰： 愿不贮其深疑，幸望容其陋质，辄更有诗一章，后七日复来。 
现代文：仙女说： 愿您不要心存疑虑，希望容留我丑陋之质。这里还有诗一章，七天后我再来。 
English: The fairy said, "Don't have any doubts in your heart, and hope that you can tolerate my ugly qualities. There is also a poem chapter here, and I will come again in seven days."

古文：诗曰： 弄玉有夫皆得道，刘刚兼室尽登仙。
现代文：诗中写的是： 弄玉有夫皆得道，刘刚兼室尽登仙。
English: What is written in the poem is: Anyone who plays the tambourine and has a husband can attain enlightenment, and Liu Gang and his wife can attain immortality.

古文：君能仔细窥朝露，须逐云车拜洞天。 
现代文：君能仔细窥朝露，须逐云车拜洞天。 
English: If you can carefully watch the morning dew, you must follow the clouds to worship the sky.

古文：陟览又不回意。
现代文：封陟看完后还没回心转意。
English: I haven't changed my mind after watching the closing credits.

古文：后七日夜，姝又至，态柔容冶，靓衣明眸。又言曰： 逝波难驻，西日易颓，花木不停，薤露非久，轻沤泛水，只得逡巡，微烛当风，莫过瞬息，虚争意气，能得几时？
现代文：七天后的夜里，仙女又来了，态度温柔，姿容俏丽，穿着精心打扮的衣服，明眸蕴含深情，又对封陟说： 逝去的流水难以停驻，偏西的太阳容易坠落，花草树木不会停止生长，草薤上的露水也不会留得很久，轻沤的浮水，也只能停留片刻，微弱的灯烛迎风，不过瞬息即灭，虚争意气，能得几时？
English: Seven days later, in the night, the fairy came again, gentle in manner, beautiful in appearance, dressed in well-groomed clothes, with deep affection in her bright eyes, and said to the seal: The flowing water that has passed is difficult to stop, the westward sun is easy to fall, the flowers and trees will not stop growing, the dew on the blades of grass will not remain for a long time, the light floating water can only stay for a moment, the weak candle faces the wind, but it will be extinguished in an instant, the spirit of vain contention, how long can it last?

古文：恃顽韶颜，须臾槁木。
现代文：依仗完美的容颜，不久就变得槁木一般。
English: With a flawless face, she soon became plain Jane.

古文：所以君夸容鬓，尚未凋零，固止绮罗，贪穷典籍。及其衰老，何以任持？
现代文：所以您夸耀容鬓尚未凋零，坚决拒绝少女之爱，迷恋研究典籍，等到您衰老的时候，靠什么坚持下去呢？
English: So you boast that your beauty has not faded, you resolutely refuse the love of a girl, you are obsessed with studying classics, and when you grow old, what will you rely on to keep going?

古文：我有还丹，颇能驻命，许其依托，必写襟怀。
现代文：我有还春丹，颇能使人青春常驻，答应让我依托，必能使您满足心愿。
English: I have also Chun Dan, quite able to make people stay young, promised to let me rely on, will be able to satisfy your heart's desire.

古文：能遣君寿例三松，瞳方两目，仙山灵府，任意追游。
现代文：我能让您寿列三松，瞳方两目，仙山灵府任意追游。
English: I can let you travel to Shurei Sanmatsu, Hitomikata Futame, and Senzan Lingfu.

古文：莫种槿花，使朝晨而骋艳；休敲石火，尚昏黑而流光。 
现代文：不要去种槿花，它只在早晨才呈现自己的艳丽；不必敲石火，它不过是昏黑中的一线流光。 
English: Do not go to plant thistles, it only shows its beauty in the morning; do not knock stone fire, it is just a ray of light in the dark.

古文：陟乃怒目而言曰： 我居书斋，不欺暗室。下惠学证，叔子为师。
现代文：封陟于是怒目而说： 我住在书斋，又没做亏心事，柳下惠可以作证，叔子可以为师。
English: Fong Yao glared angrily and said: I live in a dormitory, and I haven't done anything wrong. Liu Xiao Hui can be a witness, and my uncle can be a teacher.

古文：是何妖精，苦相凌遍？
现代文：你是什么妖精，苦苦欺凌逼迫我？
English: What kind of fairy are you, bullying and persecuting me?

古文：心如铁石，无更多言。倘若迟回，必当窘辱。 
现代文：我心如铁石，你不用再多说，倘若迟回，必当窘辱。 
English: My heart is as hard as stone. You don't have to say anything more. If you come back late, you'll be embarrassed.

古文：侍卫谏曰： 小娘子回车。此木偶人，不足与语；况穷薄当为下鬼，岂神仙配偶耶？ 
现代文：侍卫劝仙女说： 小娘子坐车回去吧，这是个木偶人，不值得跟他说；何况他穷困刻薄只能当作下等鬼了，哪里是神仙的配偶呢？ 
English: The attendant advised the fairy: "Little girl, take the car and go home. This is a puppet, it's not worth talking to him. Besides, his poverty and meanness can only be considered as a low-level ghost. Where is the fairy's spouse?

古文：姝长吁曰： 我所以恳恳者，为是青牛道士的苗裔；况此时一失，又须旷居六百年，不是细事。
现代文：仙女长叹说： 我所以诚恳待他的原因，是因为他是青牛道士的后裔；况且这个时机一旦失去，又须旷居六百年，不是小事。
English: The fairy sighed and said, "The reason why I treat him sincerely is because he is the descendant of a young bull Taoist; moreover, once this opportunity is lost, it will take six hundred years, which is no small matter."

古文：于戏此子，大是忍人。 
现代文：呜呼！这个人是个心太狠的人。 
English: Alas! this man is too hard-hearted.

古文：又留诗曰： 萧郎不顾凤楼人，云涩回车泪脸新。
现代文：又留下一首诗，诗中写道： 萧郎不顾凤楼人，云涩回车泪脸新。
English: He also left behind a poem, in which he wrote: Xiao Lang disregarded the people of Fenglou, and returned home with a tearful face.

古文：愁想蓬瀛归去路，难窥旧苑碧桃春。 
现代文：愁想蓬瀛归去路，难窥旧苑碧桃春。 
English: It's hard to look back at the old garden when I'm feeling sad.

古文：辎軿出户，珠翠响空，泠泠箫笙，杳杳云露。
现代文：带帷幕的车子出了门，珠翠在空中作响，箫笙轻妙，云路杳杳。
English: The car with the curtain went out of the door, the pearls were ringing in the air, the breeze was light, and the road was clouded.

古文：然陟意不易。
现代文：然而封陟的心意还是不改。
English: However, Fong Yao's heart has not changed.

古文：后三年，陟染疾而终，为太山所追，束以大锁，使者驱之，欲至幽府。忽遇神仙骑从，清道甚严。
现代文：三年后，封陟得病而死。被太山之神所追，用大锁束缚住，使者驱赶着他，欲到地府中去，忽然遇到神仙的骑马随从，清道开路很严格。
English: Three years later, Fong Yao fell ill and died. He was chased by the god of Taishan and bound with a big lock. The messenger chased him and wanted to go to the center of the underworld. Suddenly, he encountered the god's horse-riding followers. The clear road was very strict.

古文：使者躬身于路左曰： 上元夫人游太山耳。 
现代文：使者躬身到路旁说： 上元夫人游太山了。 
English: The messenger stooped down to the roadside and said, "Lady Shangyuan, you've gone too far.

古文：俄有仙骑，召使者与囚俱来。
现代文：不一会儿，有个仙人的骑从，来招使者与囚犯一起过来。
English: Soon, a rider of a fairy came to invite the messenger to come with the prisoner.

古文：陟至彼仰窥，乃昔日求偶仙姝也，但左右弹指悲嗟。
现代文：封陟到那里仰面偷看，原来上元夫人就是昔日求婚的仙女，于是不禁左右弹指悲叹。
English: When Fong Yao peeked over his shoulder there, it turned out that Lady Shangyuan was the fairy who had proposed marriage in the past, so he couldn't help but shake his head in sorrow.

古文：仙姝遂索追状曰： 不能于此人无情。 
现代文：仙女就把追状要来，说： 不能对这个人无情。 
English: The fairy asked for a warrant and said, "You can't be cruel to this man.

古文：遂索大笔判曰： 封陟往虽执迷，操惟坚洁，实由朴戆，难责风情。
现代文：又要来大笔判道： 封陟往昔虽然执迷不悟，但操守坚定高洁，实在由于朴实厚道，难用风情责备他。
English: He also had to come up with a large sum of money to judge: Although Fong Yao was stubborn in the past, his conduct was firm and noble. In fact, due to his simple and good manners, it was difficult to reproach him with customs.

古文：宜更延一纪。 
现代文：应该再延长寿命十二年。 
English: Life expectancy should be extended by another 12 years.

古文：左右令陟跪谢，使者遂解去铁锁也。
现代文：仙女左右的人令封陟跪下道谢，使者就解开绳索。
English: The people around the fairy ordered the seal to kneel down and thank her, and the messenger untied the rope.

古文：仙官已释，则幽府无敢追摄。
现代文：仙官既然已经放了他，地府也就没敢再来追捕。
English: Since the immortals had already released him, the underworld government did not dare to pursue him again.

古文：使者却引归，良久苏息。
现代文：使者又把他送回家，过了很久，封陟苏醒过来。
English: The messenger sent him home again, and after a long time, he woke up.

古文：后追悔昔日之事，恸哭自咎而已。
现代文：后来追悔从前的事情，只有痛哭自责而已。
English: Later, he regretted the past, but only with tears and self-reproach.

