古文：二十有二年春，王正月，肆大眚。
现代文：二十二年春，周历正月，大肆赦免有罪之人。
English: In the spring of the 22nd year, in the first month of the lunar calendar, he pardoned a large number of guilty people.

古文：癸丑，葬我小君文姜。
现代文：癸丑日，安葬鲁桓公夫人文姜。
English: On April Fool's Day, Lu Huan's wife, Wen Jiang, was buried.

古文：陈人杀其公子御寇。
现代文：陈国人杀了他们的太子御寇。
English: The people of Chen killed their prince, Miko.

古文：夏五月。
现代文：夏季五月，无事。
English: Summer in May, nothing.

古文：秋七月丙申，及齐高傒盟于防。
现代文：秋季七月丙申日，鲁庄公与齐高傒在防地盟会。
English: In the autumn of July, on the seventh day of the month, Lu Zhuanggong and Qi Gaojun met at the Defense League.

古文：冬，公如齐纳币。
现代文：冬季，鲁庄公到齐国去献礼。
English: In winter, the Duke of Luzhuang went to Qi Province to make a gift.

古文：二十二年春，陈人杀其大子御寇，陈公子完与颛孙奔齐。
现代文：二十二年春季，陈国人杀了他们的太子御寇。陈国的敬仲和颛孙逃亡到齐国。
English: In the spring of 222, the people of Chen killed their prince, Miko, and Chen's son-in-law and grandson fled to Qi.

古文：颛孙自齐来奔。
现代文：颛孙又从齐国逃亡到鲁国来。
English: His grandson also fled from Qi to Lu.

古文：齐侯使敬仲为卿。辞曰： 羇旅之臣，幸若获宥，及于宽政，赦其不闲于教训而免于罪戾，弛于负担，君之惠也，所获多矣。
现代文：齐桓公想任命敬仲做卿，他辞谢说： 寄居在外的小臣如果有幸获得宽恕，能在宽厚的政治之下，赦免我的缺乏教训，而得以免除罪过，放下恐惧，这是君王的恩惠。
English: Prince Qi Huan wanted to appoint Jing Zhong as a lord, and he declined, saying, "If a minister living abroad is fortunate enough to receive forgiveness, he can, under a lenient policy, pardon my lack of discipline, and be able to absolve my sins and let go of my fear. This is the king's favor."

古文：敢辱高位，以速官谤？
现代文：我所得的已经很多了，哪里敢接受这样的高位而很快地招来官员们的指责？
English: I have already earned a lot, how dare I accept such a high position and quickly attract the criticism of officials?

古文：请以死告。
现代文：谨昧死上告。
English: I'll appeal to the death.

古文：《诗》云： 翘翘车乘，招我以弓。
现代文：《诗》说： 高高的车子，招呼我用的是弓。
English: "Poetry" says: "A lofty chariot calls to me with a bow.

古文：岂不欲往，畏我友朋。  
现代文：难道我不想前去？怕的是我的友朋。  
English: Don't I want to go? It's my friends I'm afraid of.

古文：使为工正。
现代文：齐桓公就让他担任了工正官。
English: Lord Qi Kuan made him the chief engineer.

古文：饮桓公酒，乐。
现代文：敬仲招待齐桓公饮酒，桓公很高兴。
English: Jingzhong invited Qi Kuan to drink alcohol, and Kuan was very happy.

古文：公曰： 以火继之。 
现代文：天晚了，桓公说： 点上烛继续喝酒。 
English: It was late in the day, and Kanko said, "Light a candle and keep drinking."

古文：辞曰： 臣卜其昼，未卜其夜，不敢。 
现代文：敬仲辞谢说： 臣只知道白天招待君主，不知道晚上陪饮。不敢遵命。 
English: Jing Zhong declined, saying, "A vassal only knows how to invite the sovereign during the day, but does not know how to drink with him in the evening. He does not dare to follow orders."

古文：君子曰： 酒以成礼，不继以淫，义也。以君成礼，弗纳于淫，仁也。 
现代文：君子说： 酒用来完成礼仪，不能没有节制，这是义；由于和国君饮酒完成了礼仪，不使他过度，这是仁。 
English: The gentleman said, "Since wine is used to complete the etiquette, it cannot be drunk without moderation, which is righteousness; since drinking with the sovereign completes the etiquette, it is benevolence not to let him overdo it.

古文：初，懿氏卜妻敬仲，其妻占之，曰： 吉。
现代文：当初，懿氏要把女儿嫁给敬仲而占卜吉凶。他的妻子占卜，说： 吉利。
English: At first, Mr. Zou wanted to marry his daughter to Ms. Jing, so he divined good and bad. His wife divined and said, "Good luck."

古文：是谓 凤皇于飞，和鸣锵锵。
现代文：这叫做 凤凰飞翔，唱和的声音嘹亮。
English: It's called the phoenix flies, and the chorus is loud.

古文：有妫之后，将育于姜。
现代文：妫氏的后代，养育于齐姜。
English: Descendants with the surname of Jiang will bring prosperity to the country with the surname of Jiang.

古文：五世其昌，并于正卿。
现代文：第五代就要昌盛，官位和正卿一样。
English: After five generations, it will be prosperous, the same as the status of Zhengqing.

古文：八世之后，莫之与京。  
现代文：第八代以后，没有人可以和他争强。  
English: After eight generations, no one can be higher than him.

古文：陈厉公，蔡出也，故蔡人杀五父而立之，生敬仲。
现代文：陈厉公是蔡国女人所生，所以蔡国人杀了五父而立他为君，生了敬仲。
English: Chen Li Gong was born to a woman from Cai Guo, so Cai Guo killed his five fathers and raised him as his son, giving birth to Jing Zhong.

古文：其少也，周史有以《周易》见陈侯者，陈侯使筮之，遇《观》之《否》。
现代文：在敬仲年幼的时候，有一个成周的太史用《周易》去见陈厉公，陈厉公让他占筮，占得的《观》卦变成《否》卦。
English: When Jingzhong was young, one of Cheng Zhou's magistrates used "Zhou Yi" to see Chen Liguo. Chen Liguo asked him to occupy the throne, and the occupied "Kun" Gua became "No" Gua.

古文：曰： 是谓 观国之光，利用宾于王 。
现代文：周太史说： 这就叫做 有体察国情的能力，利于作上宾于君王 。
English: Zhou Taishi said: This is called having the ability to understand the national situation, which is conducive to being a guest of the king.

古文：此其代陈有国乎？
现代文：这个人恐怕要代替陈而享有国家了吧！
English: Does this mean that he will take the throne of Chen Guojun and own the country?

古文：不在此，其在异国；非此其身，在其子孙。
现代文：但不在这里，而在别国，不在这个人身上，而在他的子孙。
English: But not here, but in another country, and not in this man, but in his seed.

古文：光远而自他有耀者也。《坤》，土也。《巽》，风也。
现代文：光，是从另外地方照耀而来的。《坤》是土，《巽》是风，《乾》是天。
English: The light shines from somewhere else. "Kun" is the earth, "Bang" is the wind, and "Dry" is the sky.

古文：《乾》，天也。
现代文：风起于天而行于土上，这就是山。
English: The wind rises from the sky and travels over the earth. This is a mountain.

古文：风为天于土上，山也。有山之材而照之以天光，于是乎居土上。故曰： 观国之光，利用宾于王。 庭实旅百，奉之以玉帛，天地之美具焉，故曰： 利用宾于王。 
现代文：有了山上的物产，又有天光照射，这就居于地土上，所以说 有体察国情的能力，利于作上宾于君王 ，陈列于朝堂的供奉众多，另外进奉束帛玉璧，天上地下美好的东西都具备了，所以说 利于作上宾于君王 。
English: With the products of the mountain and the illumination of the sky, they live on the earth, so they have the ability to understand the national conditions, which is conducive to being the chief guest of the king. There are many offerings displayed in the imperial hall, and there are also bundles of jade and jade. There are beautiful things in heaven and earth, so it is conducive to being the chief guest of the king.

古文：犹有观焉，故曰： 其在后乎。 
现代文：还有等着观看，所以说他的昌盛在于后代吧！
English: It remains to be seen, so let's say that his prosperity lies in future generations!

古文：风行而著于土，故曰： 其在异国乎。 
现代文：风行走最后落在土地上，所以说他的昌盛在于别国吧！
English: Walking on the wind finally lands on the land, so his prosperity lies in another country!

古文：若在异国，必姜姓也。
现代文：如果在别国，必定是姜姓之国。
English: If in another country, it must be the country of the surname Jiang.

古文：姜，大嶽之后也。
现代文：姜是太岳的后代。
English: Jiang is a descendant of Tai Yue.

古文：山岳则配天，物莫能两大。陈衰，此其昌乎。 
现代文：山岳高大可以与天相配。但事物不可能两者一样大，陈国衰亡，这个氏族就要昌盛吧！ 
English: Mountains can be as tall as the sky, but things cannot be the same size. If Chen's country falls, this clan will prosper.

古文：及陈之初亡也，陈桓子始大于齐。其后亡也，成子得政。
现代文：等到陈国第一次灭亡，陈桓子才在齐国有强大的势力，后来楚国再次灭亡陈国，陈成子取得了齐国政权。
English: It was not until the first demise of the State of Chen that Chen Huan Zi became a powerful force in the State of Qi. Later, the State of Chu again overthrew the State of Chen, and Chen Cheng Zi gained power in the State of Qi.

