古文：蜮射化蝉揖怒蛙怪哉小虫蒋虫园客乌衣人朱诞给使
现代文：蜮射化蝉揖怒蛙怪哉小虫蒋虫园客乌衣人朱诞给使
English: Laser beam turns cicadas into angry frogs, strange little insects, Chiang Kai-shek's insect garden, guests from Wuyi, and the birth of Zhu to the envoy

古文：葛辉夫蜓肉芝千岁蝙蝠蝇触帐苍梧虫蚱蜢施子然
现代文：葛辉夫蜓肉芝千岁蝙蝠蝇触帐苍梧虫蚱蜢施子然
English: Ge Huifu's meat-eating wasps, centenarians, bats, flies, tentacled caterpillars, caterpillars, cicadas

古文：庞企蟾蜍蝇赦发妖桓谦青蜓朱诞白蚓王双
现代文：庞企蟾蜍蝇赦发妖桓谦青蜓朱诞白蚓王双
English: The giant pheasants, the flies are forgiven, the devils are released, the swans are humbled, the pheasants are born, and the king and queen are crowned.

古文：蜮射
现代文：蜮射
English: Laser cutter

古文：《玄中记》： 蜮以气射人，去人三十步，即射中其影。
现代文：据《玄中记》记载，蜮可以气息射人，距离人三十步远，就能射中人的影子。
English: According to the records of "The Tale of Genji," the dragonfly can shoot people with its breath, and if it is thirty paces away from a person, it can shoot a person's shadow.

古文：中人，死十六七。 
现代文：凡被射中的人，十有六七会死去。
English: Six out of seven people who are shot will die.

古文：《纪年》云： 晋献公二年春，周惠王居于郑，郑人入王府取玉马，玉化为蜮，以射人也。 
现代文：又据《纪年》上说，晋献公二年春，周惠王住在郑国，郑国的一个人进王府去取玉马，玉马已变为蜮，开始用气射人。
English: According to the "Chronicle," in the spring of the second year of Jinkang, King Zhou Hui lived in Zheng. A man from Zheng went to the king's palace to get a golden horse. The horse had turned into a donkey and began to shoot people with gas.

古文：化蝉
现代文：化蝉
English: Turning cicadas

古文：齐王后怨王怒死，尸化为蝉，遂登庭树，嘒唳而鸣。
现代文：齐王王后因怨恨君王生气而死，尸体变为蝉，便落在院里树上， 嘒嘒 地鸣叫不停。
English: Queen Qi died out of resentment of the king's anger, and her body turned into a cicada, which landed on a tree in the courtyard and chirped incessantly.

古文：后王悔恨，闻蝉鸣，即悲叹。
现代文：后来齐王很悔恨自己，每次听到蝉鸣，都悲叹不已。
English: Later, King Qi felt very sorry for himself. Every time he heard the cicadas chirping, he was overwhelmed with grief.

古文：揖怒蛙
现代文：揖怒蛙
English: The angry frog

古文：越王勾践既为吴辱，常尽礼接士，思以平吴。
现代文：越王勾践被吴国侮辱后，经常是以最大的礼节接待士人，一心想以这些人消灭吴国。
English: After being insulted by the State of Wu, Yue Wang Guochun often received scholars with the greatest courtesy, and he was determined to use these people to destroy the State of Wu.

古文：一日出游，见蛙怒，勾践揖之，左右曰： 王揖怒蛙何也？ 
现代文：有一天出去游玩，看见一只蛤蟆在发怒，勾践便向它作揖。左右问道： 大王为何向一只发怒的蛤蟆作揖？ 
English: One day, when he went out to play, he saw a baboon in a rage, and he made fun of it. He asked around: Why did the great king make fun of a baboon in a rage?

古文：答曰： 蛙如是怒，何敢不揖？ 
现代文：勾践回答道： 这只蛤蟆对我如此发怒，我哪里敢不作揖。 
English: Gochan replied, "This dragonfly is so angry with me, how dare I not be a dragonfly."

古文：于是勇士闻之，皆归越，而平吴。
现代文：于是勇士们听说了此事，他们都纷纷投奔到越国，因而消灭了吴国。
English: When the warriors heard of this, they all rushed to Yue and destroyed Wu.

古文：怪哉
现代文：怪哉
English: It's weird

古文：汉武帝幸甘泉，驰道中有虫，赤色，头、牙、齿、耳、鼻尽具，观者莫识。
现代文：汉武帝到甘泉去，在行走的路上遇上一条虫子，红色，脑袋上牙齿耳朵鼻子全都有，看到的人没有能认识的。
English: Emperor Hanwu went to Ganquan, and on the way he met a red worm. It had teeth, ears and a nose on its head, and no one could recognize it.

古文：帝乃使东方朔视之，还对曰： 此虫名怪哉，昔时拘系无辜，众庶愁怨，咸仰首叹曰：怪哉怪哉。
现代文：于是汉武帝派东方朔去察看。东方朔回来后禀告说： 此虫名叫怪哉。从前经常捕捉无辜百姓，人们都很忧愁怨恨，仰首叹息道： 怪哉怪哉！ 
English: So Emperor Hanwu sent Dongfang Shuo to investigate. After Dongfang Shuo returned, he reported: This worm is called strange. In the past, it often caught innocent people. People were very sad and resentful. They raised their heads and sighed: Strange, strange!

古文：盖感动上天，愤所生也，故名怪哉。
现代文：大概是感动了上天，由这怨愤之气凝聚而生成的，所以起名叫怪哉。
English: It was probably moved by the heavens, generated by the condensation of this resentment, so the name is strange.

古文：此地必秦之狱处。 
现代文：此地一定是秦朝当年的监狱旧址。 
English: This must be the former site of the prison during the Qin Dynasty.

古文：即按地图，信如其言。
现代文：于是立即查找地图，果然象东方朔所说。
English: So I immediately looked up a map, and sure enough, it was just as Dongfang Shuo had said.

古文：上又曰： 何以去虫？ 
现代文：汉武帝又问： 怎么可以去掉此虫？ 
English: Emperor Hanwu asked again: How can I get rid of this worm?

古文：朔曰： 凡忧者，得酒而解，以酒灌之当消。 
现代文：东方朔道： 凡是忧愁的人，喝了酒就解除了，因而用酒浸泡它即可消灭。 
English: Dongfang Shuo said: Anyone who is sad will be relieved after drinking wine, so soaking it with wine can eliminate it.

古文：于是使人取虫置酒中，须臾糜散。
现代文：于是汉武帝派人将虫子捉来放在酒中，不一会就化解分散了。
English: So Emperor Hanwu sent someone to catch the insects and put them in wine, and they soon dispersed.

古文：小虫
现代文：小虫
English: Small insects

古文：汉光武建武六年，山阳有小虫皆类人形，甚众。
现代文：汉光武帝建武六年，山阳有小虫全都像人的样子，很多很多。
English: During the six years of Emperor Jianwu of the Han Dynasty, there were many insects in the mountains that looked like humans.

古文：明日，皆悬于树枝死。
现代文：第二天，全部悬吊在树枝上死去。
English: The next day, they all died hanging from the branches.

古文：蒋虫
现代文：蒋虫
English: Jiang Zhou

古文：蒋子文者，广阳人也。
现代文：蒋子文，广阳人，喜好酒色，放纵无度。
English: Jiang Ziwen, Guangyang people, like to drink, indulge in excess.

古文：嗜酒好色，挑达无度。
现代文：常常自言道： 我死后将成为神仙。 
English: He often said to himself: "When I die, I will become a god."

古文：每自言： 我死当为神也。 
现代文：汉朝末年，任秣陵县尉。
English: In the last years of the Han Dynasty, he served as the commander of Fuling County.

古文：汉末，为秣陵尉，逐贼至山下，被贼击伤额，因解印绶缚之，有倾而卒。
现代文：有一次他追击强盗到山下时，被强盗击伤了前额，于是他解下来拴印的丝带把伤口缠绑上，可是过了不久便死去了。
English: Once, when he chased a robber down the mountain, the robber wounded his forehead, so he untied the imprinted ribbon to bind the wound, but he died soon after.

古文：及吴先主之初，其故吏见子文于路间，乘白马，执白羽扇，侍从如平生。
现代文：然而到三国时的吴先主初期，与他当年一起共事的老官吏竟在路上又遇见了他。他骑着白马，手拿白色羽毛扇，随从们也如当年在世时的一样。
English: However, in the early days of Emperor Wu of the Three Kingdoms, the old officials who had worked with him that year actually met him again on the road. He was riding a white horse, holding a white feather fan, and his followers were the same as when he was alive.

古文：见者惊走，子文追之，谓曰： 我当为此地神，福尔下民。
现代文：遇见他的人惊慌而逃，蒋子文便紧追上去，对那人说： 我是这里的神仙，要造福于这里的百姓。
English: When the man who met him panicked and fled, Jiang Ziwen ran after him and said to the man: "I am the fairy godmother here, and I want to benefit the people here.

古文：可宣告百姓，为我立祠，不尔，将有大咎。 
现代文：你可告诉百姓们，为我修建祠庙，不然的话，将会有大灾降临。 
English: You can tell the people to build a temple for me, otherwise, there will be a catastrophe.

古文：是岁夏，大疾疫，百姓辄恐动，颇窃祀之者。
现代文：这年的夏天，果然发了大瘟疫。百姓当时都很恐惧，很多人都偷偷地祭祀他。
English: In the summer of that year, a great plague broke out. The people were very afraid at that time, and many secretly worshipped him.

古文：未几，乃下巫祝曰： 吾将大启福孙氏，官宜为我立祠，不尔，将使虫入人耳为灾也。 
现代文：不久，就对巫师下令道： 我将为吴主孙氏带来很大的福气，而官府必须为我修筑神庙。不这样，我将会让虫子钻入人的耳朵，而造成灾难。 
English: Soon, he ordered the sorcerer: "I will bring great blessings to the Wu Shusun clan, and the government must build a temple for me. Otherwise, I will let worms get into people's ears and cause a disaster."

古文：俄而果有虫虻，入人耳即死，医所不治，百姓愈恐。
现代文：不久，果然就有虻虫钻进人耳朵而死人的事发生，医生也治不好，百姓更加害怕，而吴主孙氏还不相信。
English: Soon, indeed, there was a case of a dead person with a tapeworm getting into a person's ear, the doctor could not cure it, the people were even more afraid, and Wu Shusun still did not believe it.

古文：孙主尚未之信，既而又下巫祝曰： 若不祀我，将以大火为灾。 
现代文：接着又对巫师下令道： 如果再不祭祀我，将会发生大火灾。 
English: Then he ordered the sorcerer, "If you don't sacrifice me again, there will be a great fire."

古文：是岁，火灾大发百数，火渐延及公宫，孙主患之，时议者以神有所归，乃不为厉，宜告飨之。
现代文：这一年，火灾发生了一百多次，火势渐渐蔓延到吴主的宫殿，吴主十分忧患。当时议事的臣僚们认为神必须有所归宿，才不会成为祸患。
English: This year, more than a hundred fires occurred, and the fire gradually spread to the palace of the Lord of Wu. The Lord of Wu was very worried. At that time, the ministers who were discussing the matter thought that the god must have a home, so that it would not become a disaster.

古文：于是使使者封子文为中都侯，其子绪为长水校尉，皆加印绶，为立祠宇以表其灵，今建康东北蒋山是也。
现代文：应该敬告他我们将祭祀供奉他。于是派使者去敬告，加封蒋子文为中都侯，提拔他的儿子蒋绪为长水校尉，全都加佩印绶，并为他立庙宇以显扬他的神灵。现在建康东北蒋山上的庙就是当年为他修造的。
English: It was necessary to tell him that we would offer sacrifices to him. Therefore, an envoy was sent to tell him that Jiang Ziwen would be given the title of Zhongduhou, that his son Jiang Xu would be promoted to the rank of Changshui school captain, that they would all add their seals, and that a temple would be built for him to glorify his spirit. The temple on Mount Jiang in the northeast of Jiankang was built for him that year.

古文：自是疾厉皆息，百姓遂大事之，《幽明录》亦载焉。园客
现代文：从此各种疾病祸患再也没有了。于是百姓便一直隆重地祭祀他，此事《幽明录》也有记载。园客园客，济阴人。
English: Since then, all kinds of diseases and calamities have ceased to exist. So the people have been ceremoniously sacrificing to him, which is also recorded in the "Yuming Record." Garden guests, garden guests, Jiyin people.

古文：园客者，济阴人也，姿貌好而良，邑人多愿以女妻之，终不娶。
现代文：相貌好而又善良，城中人很多想把女儿许配给他，园客始终也没娶妻。
English: Good-looking and kind, many people in the city wanted to marry their daughters to him, but the gardener never married.

古文：常种五色香草，积数十年，服其实。
现代文：他经常种一种五色香草，积攒了几十年，吃那草的果实。
English: He often grows a five-coloured herb, which he has saved up for decades, and eats the fruit of that herb.

古文：一旦有五色蛾止其旁，客收而荐之。
现代文：有一天一只五色蛾落在他身旁，园客把蛾收藏在家并放草席上。
English: One day, a five-coloured moth landed next to him. The gardener collected the moth at home and placed it on the lawn.

古文：至蚕时，有女夜半至，自称客妻，道蚕之状。
现代文：到了要变蚕蛹时，有一女子忽然在半夜时来到他家，自称是他的妻子，并向他讲述了如何变成蚕的样子。
English: When it came time to become a silkworm, a woman suddenly came to his house in the middle of the night, claiming to be his wife, and told him how to become a silkworm.

古文：客与具蚕，得百二十头茧，皆如瓮。
现代文：于是园客与她一起变成了蚕，做了一百二十只蚕茧，都像瓮那么大。
English: So the gardener turned into a silkworm together with her and made one hundred and twenty silkworm cocoons, all the size of cocoons.

古文：缲一头，六十日乃尽。
现代文：从一头抽丝，要抽六十天才能抽完。
English: It takes sixty days to draw a thread from one end to the other.

古文：讫则俱去，莫知所如。
现代文：做完茧后就一起走了，谁也不知到哪里去了。
English: After making the cocoon, they left together, and no one knows where they went.

古文：济阴人设祠祀焉。
现代文：济阴人立祠庙为他们祭祀。
English: The people of Jilin set up an ancestral temple to worship them.

古文：乌衣人
现代文：乌衣人
English: The people of Ui

古文：吴富阳县有董昭之者，曾乘船过钱塘江。江中见一蚁著一短芦，遑遽畏死，因以绳系芦著舡。
现代文：吴地富阳县有个叫董昭之的人，有一次乘船过钱塘江，看见江中有一只蚂蚁附着在一根短芦苇上，惶恐失措，害怕死去，于是他用绳子牵引着芦苇带到船上来。
English: A man named Dong Zhaozhi from Fuyang County, Wudi, once sailed across the Qiantang River and saw an ant attached to a short reed in the river. Panicked and scared to death, he dragged the reed with a rope and brought it to the boat.

古文：船至岸，蚁得出。
现代文：船到了对岸，蚂蚁得救。
English: The ship reached the opposite shore, and the ants were saved.

古文：其夜，梦一乌衣人谢云： 仆是蚁中之王也，感君见济之恩，君后有急难，当相告语。 
现代文：那天夜里，他梦见一个黑衣人向他道谢道： 我是蚂蚁王，感谢你救我过江之恩。你以后如有急难之事，请告诉我。 
English: That night, he dreamt of a man in black thanking him, saying: "I am the Ant King, thank you for saving me from drowning. If you have any emergency in the future, please let me know."

古文：历十余年，时所在劫盗，昭之被横录为劫主，系余姚。
现代文：过了十几年，当时他住的地方有盗贼，董昭之则被蛮横地指责为强盗头子，被关押在余姚县。
English: A dozen years later, when there were thieves in the area where he lived, Dong Zhaozhi was rudely accused of being the leader of the robbers and was imprisoned in Yuyao County.

古文：昭之忽思蚁王之梦。结念之际，同被禁者问之，昭之具以实告，其人曰： 但取三两蚁著掌中语之。 
现代文：董昭之忽然想起蚁王托梦之事，正当他思念此事时，有一个一起被关押的人便问他在想什么，董昭之如实相告。那个人说： 你只要捉两三只蚂蚁放在手上对它一说你想要问的事就可以。 
English: Dong Zhaozhi suddenly thought of the ant king's dream. Just as he was thinking about it, a fellow prisoner asked him what he was thinking, and Dong Zhaozhi told him the truth. The man said: You just need to catch two or three ants, put them in your hand and say what you want to ask.

古文：昭之如其言，夜果梦乌衣云： 可急投余杭山中。
现代文：董昭之像他所说的做了，夜里果然梦见黑衣人对他说： 你可立即投奔余杭山中。
English: Dong Zhaozhi did as he said. In the night, he dreamed that the man in black said to him: You can immediately rush into the mountains of Yuhang.

古文：天下既乱，赦令不久也。 
现代文：天下已经大乱，赦令不久就会下来。 
English: The country is in turmoil, and the pardon order will be issued soon.

古文：既寤，蚁啮械已尽，因得出狱，过江，投余杭山。
现代文：等他醒了时，蚂蚁已经咬断了他的刑械。因而他能够逃出监狱，过了江，逃进余杭山。
English: By the time he woke up, the ants had bitten off his torture device, so he was able to escape from the prison, cross the river, and escape to Yuhang Mountain.

古文：旋遇赦，遂得无他。
现代文：接着遇到大赦，这才没有别的事。
English: Then came the amnesty, and that was it.

古文：朱诞给使
现代文：朱诞给使
English: Zhu Xizhe to the envoy

古文：淮南内史朱诞字永长，吴孙皓世，为建安太守。
现代文：淮南王内史朱诞，字永长。到东吴孙皓执政时期，任建安太守。
English: Zhu Xizhi, the king of Huainan, was named Yongchang. During the reign of Eastern Wu Sun Yat, he was appointed as the governor of Jian'an.

古文：诞给使妻有鬼病，其夫疑之为奸。
现代文：朱诞给事的妻子本来有鬼病，而丈夫却怀疑她有奸情。
English: Zhu Xuan's wife had a mental illness, but her husband suspected her of having an affair.

古文：后出行，密穿壁窥之，正见妻在机中织，遥瞻桑树上，向之言笑。
现代文：后来他假说要出门，其实他秘密地在墙壁上凿了个洞偷偷地观察她。他看见妻子正在机上织布，远远地望着桑树，并向着那里说笑。
English: Later, when he thought he was going out, he secretly dug a hole in the wall to spy on her. He saw his wife weaving on the loom, looking at the mulberry tree in the distance and laughing at it.

古文：给使仰视，树上有年少人，可十四五，衣青衿袖，青幧头。
现代文：给事向上一看，只见桑树上有少年，年纪在十四，五岁。穿着青色衣裳，戴着青色头巾。
English: Looking up, I saw a boy in the mulberry tree, aged fourteen or fifteen, wearing blue clothes and a blue headscarf.

古文：给使以为信人也，张弩射之，化为鸣蝉，其大如箕，翔然飞去。
现代文：给使以为是来传递消息的人，便张弓射他。那少年立即变成了一只鸣叫的蝉，大如簸箕，飘然飞去。
English: He shot him with a bow and arrow, thinking he was a messenger, and the boy immediately turned into a cicada, as big as a cricket, and flew away.

古文：妻亦应声惊曰： 噫！人射汝！ 
现代文：妻子也同时惊叫道： 噫，有人射你！ 
English: At the same time, his wife exclaimed, "Oh, someone is shooting at you!"

古文：给使怪其故。
现代文：给使很奇怪其中的缘故。
English: For some strange reason.

古文：役久时，给使见二小儿在陌上共语，曰： 何以不复见汝？ 
现代文：有一次出门办事很长时间，给使看见两个小孩在田埂上说话。有一个问： 怎么再没见到你？ 
English: Once, when I was out of the office for a long time, I saw two children talking in the meadow. One asked: How come I haven't seen you again?

古文：其一即树上小儿也，答曰： 前不谨，为人所射，病疮积时。 
现代文：其中的一个就是树上的那个小孩，他回答说： 前些日子因不小心，被人用箭射中了，养伤养了好长时间。 
English: One of them was the little boy in the tree. He answered, "The other day, I was accidentally shot with an arrow. It took me a long time to recover.

古文：彼儿曰： 今何如？ 
现代文：那个小孩又问道： 现在怎么样了？ 
English: The little boy asked again, "What's the matter now?"

古文：曰： 赖朱府君梁上膏以傅之，得愈。 
现代文：他回答说： 多亏用了朱府房梁上的膏药敷伤口，才治好了。 
English: He replied: Thanks to the use of plaster on the joist of Zhu Fu's house to cover the wound, it was healed.

古文：给使白诞曰： 人盗君膏药，颇知之否？ 
现代文：给使告诉朱诞说： 有人偷了你的膏药，你知道吗？ 
English: The messenger told Zhu Xatong, "Someone stole your plasters, do you know?

古文：诞曰： 吾膏久致梁上。人安得盗之？ 
现代文：朱诞说； 我的膏药一直放在房梁上，别人怎么能偷到它？ 
English: Zhu Xue said; My plaster has been placed on the beam of the house, how can others steal it?

古文：给使曰： 不然，府君视之。 
现代文：给使说： 不对，请府君看看吧。 
English: He said to the envoy: "No, that's not right. Please ask the governor to take a look."

古文：诞殊不信，为试视之，封题如故。
现代文：朱诞很不相信，便上去察看，结果密封如故。
English: Zhu Xizhao did not believe it, so he went up to inspect it, and the result was that the seal was still in place.

古文：诞曰： 小人故妄作，膏自如故。 
现代文：朱诞道： 真是小人故作妄言！膏药明明完好如故。 
English: Zhu Xizhao said: What a villain! The plaster is still intact.

古文：给使曰： 试开之。 
现代文：给事道： 你再打开看看。 
English: Presenter: Open it again and take a look.

古文：则膏去半焉，所掊刮见有趾迹。
现代文：打开一看，膏药已丢去一半，在被刮取的地方还能见着脚趾的痕迹。
English: When opened, half of the sticking plaster is gone, and the marks of the toe can still be seen where it was scraped off.

古文：诞自惊，乃详问之，给使具道其本末。
现代文：朱诞自然很惊奇，于是详细地询问他。给事全部叙述了事情的始末。
English: Zhu Xue was naturally very surprised, so he asked him in detail. He gave a full account of the beginning and end of the matter.

古文：葛辉夫
现代文：葛辉夫
English: Ge Huifu

古文：晋乌伤葛辉夫，义熙中，在妇家宿，三更，有两人把火至阶前。
现代文：晋朝乌伤人葛辉夫，义熙年间，有一次住在妻家，三更时分，有两个人手持火把来到台阶前。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yixi, Ge Huifu, the dark horse of the Jin Dynasty, once stayed at his wife's house. At three o'clock, two people came to the steps holding torches.

古文：疑是凶人，往打之，欲下杖，悉变成蝴蝶，缤纷飞散。有冲辉夫腋下，便倒地，少时死。
现代文：葛辉夫怀疑是坏人，就去打这两个人，刚想要下棒子，只见他俩都变成了蝴蝶，乱纷纷地飞舞，有一只撞到葛辉夫的腋下，他便倒在地上。不一会儿就死去了。
English: As soon as he was about to strike, he saw that both of them had turned into butterflies and were fluttering around wildly. One of them hit him under the armpit and he fell to the ground. He died soon after.

古文：蜓
现代文：蜓
English: 

古文：《博物志》： 蜓以器养之，食以朱砂，体尽赤，称满七斤，治捣万杵，以点女子肢体，终不灭。 
现代文：《博物志》上说： 蜓，用器皿饲养它，给它朱砂吃，全身通红。够七斤重时，用杵捣上万次，用来点抹在女子的肢体上，一直不会消失。 
English: "Natural History" said: "Dragonfly, raise it with utensils, give it cinnabar to eat, the whole body turns red. When it weighs seven pounds, it is pounded with a pestle tens of thousands of times, used to dot on the woman's limbs, and will not disappear.

古文：淮南万毕术云： 取守宫，新合阴阳，以牝牡各藏之瓮中。阴干百日，以点女臂，则生文章，与男子合，辄灭去也。 
现代文：淮南的万毕术说： 用守宫，刚赐交配之后，把公母分别收藏在瓮中，阴干一百天，用来点在女子的手臂上，就会生出花纹。如果与男子合房，花纹就会消失。 
English: Wan Bi Shu of Huainan said: "If you keep the palace, after the newly given mating, store the female separately in the cocoon, dry in the shade for a hundred days, and use it to dot on the woman's arm, it will produce patterns. If you share a room with a man, the patterns will disappear.

古文：肉芝
现代文：肉芝
English: Beef shin

古文：肉芝者，谓万岁蟾蜍，头上有角，领下有丹书八字再重。
现代文：肉芝，就是人们所说的万岁蟾蜍。头上长角，脖子下似红笔写出的双重 八 字。
English: "Nutmeg" is what people call a long-lived dragonfly. It has long horns on its head, and the double "eight" written under its neck like a red pen.

古文：以五月五日中时取之，阴干百日，以其足画地，即为流水。
现代文：在五月五日中午将它捉住，阴干一百天，用它的足画地，立刻就能流出水来。
English: Catch it at noon on May 5th, let it dry for a hundred days, and use its feet to paint the ground, and the water will flow out immediately.

古文：带其左手于身，辟五兵。
现代文：把它的左手带在身上，能躲避五种兵器。
English: With its left hand on its body, it can evade five types of weapons.

古文：若敌人射己者，弓弩失皆反还自向也。
现代文：如果敌人用弓箭射你时，那箭头便会反过去向他自己射去。
English: If your enemy shoots at you with a bow and arrow, the arrow will go back and hit him.

古文：千岁蝙蝠
现代文：千岁蝙蝠
English: Thousand-year-old bat

古文：千岁蝙蝠，色如白雪，集则倒悬，脑重故也。
现代文：千岁蝙蝠，颜色如白雪。落脚停留时则倒悬身子，这是因为头太重的缘故。
English: A thousand-year-old bat, snow-white in color, hangs upside down when it lands and stays, because its head is too heavy.

古文：此物得而阴干，末服之，令人寿四万岁。
现代文：如能捉到此物而把它阴干，研成粉末喝下去就能叫人长寿四万年。
English: If you can catch this thing and dry it in the shade, grind it into a powder and drink it, you can make people live longer than forty thousand years.

古文：蝇触帐
现代文：蝇触帐
English: The fly touches the string

古文：晋明帝常欲肆胜，秘而不泄，乃屏曲室，去左右，下帷草诏。
现代文：晋明帝常常想宽赦有罪的人，却又秘而不宣。于是遮挡住深邃的密室，屏退左右，落下帷帐而草拟诏书。
English: Emperor Jinming often wanted to pardon the guilty, but he did it secretly. So he blocked the deep secret room, the screen retreated left and right, the curtain fell and the edict was drafted.

古文：有大苍蝇触帐而入，萃于笔端，须臾亡出，帝异焉。
现代文：突然有只大苍蝇冲开帷帐闯进来，落在笔尖上，一会儿又逃出去。
English: Suddenly, a large fly burst through the curtain, landed on the nib, and then fled.

古文：令人看蝇所集处，辄传有赦，喧然已遍矣。苍梧虫
现代文：明帝十分惊异便派人去观察这只大苍蝇的落脚之处，而它停留的地方立即传出将有赦令，而且这消息到处都在喧嚷。苍梧虫
English: Emperor Ming was very surprised and sent someone to observe the landing place of this big fly, and the place where it stayed immediately announced that there would be a pardon, and the news was noisy everywhere.

古文：《博物志》云： 苍梧人卒，便有飞虫，大如麦，有甲，或一石余，或三五斗，而来食之，如风雨之至，斯须而尽。
现代文：《博物志》上说： 苍梧地方有人死后，便有飞虫聚来，飞虫像麦粒那么大，长着甲壳。有时飞来一石多，有时飞来三五斗来吃人的尸体。每次都像风雨一般说来就来，不一会儿便将尸体吃光。
English: "Natural History" said: In the vast land, after a person dies, flying insects gather. The flying insects are as big as wheat grains and have carapaces. Sometimes they fly more than a stone, sometimes they fly three or five feet to eat the human body. Each time, they come like wind and rain, and soon they will eat the body.

古文：人以为患，不可除。
现代文：人们已把它们作为忧患，然而无法除掉。
English: They have been recognized as a nuisance, but they cannot be eliminated.

古文：唯畏梓木，自后因以梓木为棺，更不复来。 
现代文：只是这些虫子很怕梓木，后来由于用梓木做棺材，虫子就再也不来了。
English: However, these insects were very afraid of azuki wood, and later, because azuki wood was used to make coffins, the insects would no longer come.

古文：蚱蜢
现代文：蚱蜢
English: 

古文：徐邈，晋孝武帝时，为中书侍郎。
现代文：徐邈，晋孝武帝时，为中书侍郎。
English: Xu Xi, when he was the Emperor Jin Xiaowu, was the attendant of Chinese calligraphy.

古文：在省直，左右人恒觉邈独在帐内，以与人共语。
现代文：当他在官署值班时，下属们虽然都觉着他是单独在帐内，可又时常与人说话。
English: When he was on duty at the government office, his subordinates often talked to him even though they thought he was alone in his office.

古文：有旧门生，一夕伺之，无所见。
现代文：有一个他过去的学生，在一天晚上便去偷偷地观察他，可什么也没看到。
English: One of his former students went to spy on him one night and saw nothing.

古文：天时微有光，始开窗户，瞥观一物，从屏风里飞出，直入前铁镬中。
现代文：当天色微有光亮时，便开开窗户。他忽然看到一物，从屏风后面飞出来，一直飞进前面的大铁锅中，于是他便追着去看，没见别的东西，只见大锅里堆放的菖莆根子下，有一只很大的青蚱蜢。
English: When the day dawned, he opened the window. Suddenly, he saw something fly out from behind the screen and into the large iron pot in front of him. He followed it and saw nothing but a large green toad under the roots of the lettuces in the pot.

古文：仍逐视之，无余物，唯见镬中聚菖蒲根下，有大青蚱蜢，虽疑此为魅，而古来未闻，但摘除其两翼。至夜，遂入邈梦云： 为君门生所困，往来道绝，相去虽近，有若山河。 
现代文：他虽怀疑是此物作怪，可是自古以来从未听说过，他只是摘掉了它的两个翅膀。到了夜晚，那蚱蜢便给徐邈托梦说： 我被你的门生困住了，往来之路已经断绝。我们相距虽然很近，然而有如山河相隔。 
English: Although he suspected that this thing was a trick, he had never heard of it since ancient times, he just removed its two wings. In the evening, the dragon gave Xu Yan a dream and said: I am trapped by your protégé, the road has been cut off. Although we are very close, we are separated by mountains and rivers.

古文：邈得梦，甚凄惨。
现代文：徐邈得了此梦，十分悲凄。
English: It is very sad that Xu Jun had this dream.

古文：门生知其意，乃微发其端。
现代文：门生知道他的意思何在，便稍微地提了个头。
English: The protégé knew what he meant and raised his head slightly.

古文：邈初时疑不即道，语之曰： 我始来直者，便见一青衣女子从前度，犹作两髻，姿色甚美。
现代文：徐邈起初怀疑门生是不是知晓此事而没有立即告诉他，后来对他说： 我刚来值班时，就看见一个青衣女子从前面往过走，头上还挽着两个发髻，姿色很美。
English: At first, Xu Yao doubted whether his protégé knew about this and did not tell him immediately. Later, he said to him: "When I first came on duty, I saw a woman in a blue dress walk past in front of me, with two hairpins tied around her head. She was very beautiful.

古文：聊试挑谑，即来就己，且爱之，仍溺情。亦不知其从何而至此。 
现代文：姑且对她试探挑逗，她立即便来就我。我很喜爱她，一直沉溺在情爱之中，也不知道她是从何处来到这里的。 
English: Let me try to tease her, she immediately comes to me. I love her very much, have been indulging in love, and I don't know where she came from.

古文：兼告梦。门生因具以状白，亦不复追杀蚱蜢。
现代文：并把托梦的事也告诉了他，于是门生也把自己看到的事全都告诉了徐邈，从此也不再追杀蚱蜢了。
English: He also told him about the dream, so the disciple also told Xu Yao everything he saw, and from then on, he no longer chased and killed Yao.

古文：施子然
现代文：施子然
English: Shiziran

古文：晋义熙中，零陵施子然虽出自单门，而神情辨悟。
现代文：晋朝义熙年间，零陵人施子然虽出于孤寒门第，而他的头脑很有识别能力和悟性。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yixi of the Jin Dynasty, although Shizi Ran, a man from Luling, was a loner, his mind was very discerning and understanding.

古文：家大作田，至棱时，作蜗牛庐于田侧守视，恒宿在中。
现代文：家里农作大忙季节，到田地去的时候，便在地边盖了个小屋以便看庄稼，施子然经常住在小屋里。
English: During the busy season of farming at home, when they went to the fields, they built a hut on the edge of the land to see the crops. Shiziran often lived in the hut.

古文：其夜，独自未眠之顷，见一丈夫来，长短是中形人，著黄练单衣袷，直造席。
现代文：有一天夜里，他独自一人还没睡觉时，看见一个男子走来，从个子高矮上看可算个中等人，身穿黄色丝质单衣，直奔炕席而来，并握住施子然的手说话。
English: One night, when he was alone and had not yet gone to bed, he saw a middle-aged man in a yellow silk singlet walk up to the banquet table, hold Shiziran's hand and speak to him.

古文：捧手与子然语，子然问其姓名，即答云： 仆姓卢名钩，家在粽溪边，临水。 
现代文：施子然问他的姓名，他便答道： 我姓卢名钩，家在粽溪边，紧靠水。 
English: Shiziran asked his name, and he replied, "My surname is Lu Minghu, and my home is on the edge of the Li River, close to the water.

古文：复经半旬中，其作人掘田塍西沟边蚁垤，忽见大坎，满中蝼蛄，将近斗许。而有数头极壮，一个弥大。
现代文：又过了半旬，有个庄稼人在田埂的西沟掘蚂蚁窝口的小土堆，忽然掘出一个大洞穴。里边满满的全是蝼蛄，将近一斗多，而有好几只极雄壮，其中一个特别大。
English: Halfway through the season, a farmer was digging a small mound at the mouth of an ant's nest in the western ditch of the rice field, and suddenly dug out a large cave. It was full of earthworms, almost a dozen, and there were several very strong ones, one of which was particularly large.

古文：子然自是始悟曰： 近日客卢钩，反音则蝼蛄也；家在粽溪，即西坎也。 
现代文：施子然从这里才悟出了那个男子的话，便说： 近来有个客人自称叫卢钩。反切其音则叫蝼蛄；他说家在粽溪，其实就是西沟。 
English: Shiziran only realized the man's words from here, and said: Recently, there was a guest who claimed to be called Lukhu. On the contrary, he was called Zou; he said that his home was in Zouxi, but it was actually Xigou.

古文：悉灌以沸汤，于是遂绝。
现代文：于是就用滚开的水灌进洞。从此蝼蛄绝迹了。
English: So they poured boiling water into the hole, and the toad disappeared.

古文：庞企
现代文：庞企
English: Huge enterprises

古文：晋庐陵太守庞企自云，其祖坐系狱，忽见蝼蛄行其左右，因谓曰： 尔有神，能活我死否？ 
现代文：晋朝的庐陵太守庞企自己曾说，他的祖父因罪被关押在狱中，忽然看见只蝼蛄在他身旁爬行，于是他对蝼蛄说： 你有神灵，能免我死救我活命吗？ 
English: Pang Qui, the governor of Fuling in the Jin Dynasty, once said that his grandfather was imprisoned for a crime, and suddenly saw a toad crawling beside him. So he said to the toad, "You have a god, can you spare my life and save my life?"

古文：因投食与之，蝼蛄食饭尽而去。
现代文：便投食给蝼蛄吃，蝼蛄把饭食吃光而去。
English: They threw food to the baboons to eat, and the baboons ate it all up and left.

古文：有顷复来，形体稍大，意异之，复投食与之。
现代文：过了一会儿蝼蛄又来，形体就长大了些。他心里很奇怪，就再投食给它吃。
English: After a while, the toad came back, and its body grew a little. He felt very strange, so he fed it again.

古文：数日间，其大如豚，及将刑之夜，蝼蛄夜掘壁为大穴，破械，得从之出亡。
现代文：几天时间，那蝼蛄长得个头如猪大。到了将要行刑的前一天夜晚，蝼蛄在夜间把墙壁掘出一个大洞，并给他破掉刑具，这样才能随着它从狱中逃出来。
English: For a few days, the toad grows as big as a pig. On the night before the execution, the toad digs a big hole in the wall at night and breaks the torture device for him, so that he can escape from prison with it.

古文：后遇赦免，故企世祀蝼蛄焉。蟾蜍
现代文：后来遇上大赦。因此庞企家世代都祭祀蝼蛄。蟾蜍
English: Later, there was a general amnesty. As a result, the generation of giant entrepreneurs all worshipped the dragon.

古文：晋孝武太元八年，义兴人周客有一女年十八九，端丽洁白，尤辨惠，性嗜脍，啖之恒苦不足。
现代文：晋朝孝武帝太元八年，义兴县人周客有个女儿十八九岁，生得端庄美丽而又洁白，特别明察事理而又贤惠。
English: In the eighth year of the reign of Emperor Xiaowu of the Jin Dynasty, Zhou Ke, a native of Yixing County, had a daughter who was eighteen or nineteen years old. She was born dignified, beautiful, and pure white. She was especially prudent and virtuous.

古文：有许纂者，小好学，聘之为妻。
现代文：生来喜欢吃肉片鱼片，吃起来常常为吃不饱而苦恼。有个叫许纂的青年，从小好学，娶她做了妻子。
English: She was born with a penchant for eating meat and fish, and often struggled to eat enough. A young man named Xu Zang, who was eager to learn from an early age, married her.

古文：到婿家，食脍如故，家为之贫。
现代文：到了丈夫家，大吃肉片的习惯依然如故，把家都吃穷了。
English: When she arrived at her husband's house, her habit of eating large pieces of meat was still the same, and she ate the whole house.

古文：于是门内博议，恐此妇非人，命归家。乘车至桥南，见罟家取鱼作鲊著案上，可有十许斛。便于车中下一千钱，以与鱼主，令捣齑。
现代文：于是家族内的人都议论说，恐怕这个女子不是人，于是打发她回娘家，当她乘车走到桥南时，看见渔家正在拿鱼制做成熟食放在案子上，大约有十几斛，便从车中取出一千钱，交给鱼主，并叫他把鱼捣碎。
English: When she got to the south of the bridge by car, she saw that the fisherman was preparing a fish dish and putting it on the table. There were about a dozen fish, so she took a thousand dollars from the car and gave it to the fisherman and asked him to mash the fish.

古文：乃下车，熟食五斗，生食五斗。
现代文：于是她下了车，熟鱼吃了五斗，生鱼吃了五斗。
English: So she got out of the car and ate five buckets of cooked fish and five buckets of raw fish.

古文：当啖五斛许，便极闷卧。
现代文：当吃了五斛多一点时，便觉得十分烦闷而躺下。
English: When I had eaten a little more than five clams, I felt very bored and lay down.

古文：须臾，据地大吐水，忽有一蟾蜍，从吐而出。
现代文：不一会儿，伏地大口地吐水，忽然有一只蟾蜍，随着一起被吐出来。
English: After a while, Voldemort spat water with a big mouth, and suddenly a dragonfly was spat out along with him.

古文：遂绝不复啖，病亦愈。
现代文：于是不再吃肉，病也痊愈。
English: As a result, he stopped eating meat and recovered from his illness.

古文：时天下大兵。
现代文：当时天下正大战。
English: At the time, the world was at war.

古文：蝇赦
现代文：蝇赦
English: Fly repellent

古文：前秦苻坚欲放赦。与王猛、苻融，密议甘露堂，悉屏左右。
现代文：前秦世祖苻坚想颁布大赦令，便与王猛、苻融密议于甘露堂。
English: Former Qin ancestor Jian Jian wanted to issue an amnesty order, so he held secret talks with Wang Meng and Zou Rong at Kanlu Hall.

古文：坚亲为赦文，有一大苍蝇集于笔端，听而复出。
现代文：他们屏退了左右，由苻坚亲自执笔起草赦文。有一只大苍蝇突然落于笔尖，听到他们的议论后又飞出去。
English: They backed away from the screen, and Hao Jian himself wrote out the pardon. A large fly suddenly landed on the tip of the pen, and flew out after hearing their discussion.

古文：俄而长安街巷，人相告曰： 官今大赦。 
现代文：顷刻间长安城的大街小巷上，人们奔走相告说： 官府今天要大赦了！ 
English: All of a sudden, on the streets and alleys of Chang'an City, people rushed to tell each other: The government is going to grant amnesty today!

古文：有司以闻。坚惊曰： 禁中无耳属之理，事何从泄也？ 
现代文：有关部门把此事禀奏皇帝，苻坚奇怪道： 宫中不可能有被窃听的道理呀，事情是从什么地方泄露出去的呢？ 
English: The relevant departments played the matter back to the emperor, and Zou Jian said strangely: There can be no reason for the palace to be bugged. Where did the matter leak out from?

古文：敕穷之。咸曰： 有小人青衣，大呼于市曰：  官今大赦。 
现代文：苻坚下令追究此事，人们都说： 有穿青衣服的小孩，在街市上大喊道： 官府今天要大赦了！ 
English: Yu Jian ordered an investigation into the matter, and people all said: There is a child dressed in blue, shouting in the street market: The government wants an amnesty today!

古文：须臾不见。 
现代文：很快便不见了。 
English: It soon disappeared.

古文：叹曰： 其向苍蝇也。 
现代文：苻坚感叹道： 他就是先前那只大苍蝇啊！ 
English: Hao Jian sighed, "He is the same big fly from before!"

古文：发妖
现代文：发妖
English: The hair demon

古文：晋安帝义熙年，琅玡费县王家恒失物，谓是人偷，每以扃钥为意，而零落不已。
现代文：晋安帝义熙年间，琅玡郡费县有个姓王的家里经常丢东西，他以为是人来偷的，因此每次出入都对门闩锁钥十分留意。然而仍然不断丢失东西。
English: During the reign of Emperor An of Jin and Emperor Yixi, there was a family with the surname of Wang in Fei County, Jixian County, who often lost things. He thought that people were stealing, so he paid close attention to the door latch key every time he went in and out. However, he still kept losing things.

古文：见宅后篱一孔穿，可容人臂，滑泽，试作绳罝，施于穴口。
现代文：后来他发现房后的篱笆墙上穿了一个洞，有人的胳膊那么粗，并且已经磨得光滑发亮。他试着用绳子做了个网套，下在洞口，夜间便听到那里有摇动扑腾声。
English: Then he found a hole in the back fence, about the size of a man's arm, and it had been sanded smooth and shiny, and he tried to make a net with a rope, and he went down to the hole, and in the night he heard shaking and fluttering there.

古文：夜中闻有摆扑声，往掩得大发，长三尺许，而变为蟮。
现代文：他去捕捉而得一根大头发，长三尺多，一会儿又变成了蚯蚓。
English: He went to catch and got a big hair, more than three feet long, and in a moment it turned into a cocoon.

古文：从此无虑。
现代文：从此也就无忧无虑了。
English: From then on, there were no worries.

古文：桓谦
现代文：桓谦
English: Kanen

古文：桓谦字敬祖。
现代文：桓谦，字敬祖。
English: Kanen, the word "Kenzo" (敬祖) is used.

古文：部阵指麾，更相撞刺，马既轻快，人亦便能。缘几登灶，寻饮食之所。
现代文：晋孝武帝太元年间，忽然有些人都长得一寸多高，全都身披铠甲手持长矛，骑着装饰的战马，从洞穴中出来，阳光一照金光闪耀，行走于住宅之中，以数百个为一群，指挥布阵，互相冲杀。马很轻快，人也轻捷，顺着小桌登上灶台，找存放吃喝的地方。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jin Xiaowu, some people suddenly grew more than an inch tall, all dressed in armor, holding spears, riding decorated war horses, came out of the cave, the sun shone golden, walking in the middle of the house, in a group of hundreds, commanding the formation, and killing each other. The horse was very brisk, and the people were light, walking along the small table to the stove, looking for a place to store food and drink.

古文：或有切肉，辄来丛聚，力所能胜者，以槊刺取，迳入穴中，寂不复出，出还入穴。
现代文：有的遇上切好的肉，便一起聚集过来。对于那些能搬动的，便用长矛去刺取，便径直运进洞穴中。以后便静悄悄地不再出来，即使出来也很快回到洞穴中。
English: For those that could be moved, they were stabbed with spears and carried straight into the cave. After that, they quietly did not come out again, and even if they did, they quickly returned to the cave.

古文：蒋山道士朱应子令作沸汤，浇所入处。
现代文：蒋山道士朱应子叫人烧滚开的水，向入口浇灌。
English: Jiangshan Taoist Zhu Yingzi asked someone to boil boiling water and pour it into the entrance.

古文：因掘之，有斛许大蚁死在穴中。
现代文：于是把洞穴掘开，有大约一斛那么多的大蚂蚁死在里面。
English: So they dug the cave open, and about a whole bunch of ants died inside.

古文：谦后诛灭。
现代文：桓谦后被杀死。
English: Kanenogo was killed.

古文：青蜓
现代文：青蜓
English: Qingyuan

古文：司马彪《庄子注》，言童子埋青蜓之头，不食而舞曰，此将为珠，人笑之。
现代文：在司马彪的《庄子注》中，说有个儿童埋下青蜓头后，不吃而手舞足蹈地说： 这个青蜓头将会变成珍珠！ 人们都讥笑他。
English: In Sima Biao's "Zhuang Zi Zhuang," it is said that after a child buried a green bean stew, he did not eat it, but danced around and said: This green bean stew will turn into pearls! People laughed at him.

古文：《博物志》云，埋青蜓头于西向户下，则化成青色之珠。
现代文：《博物志》中说： 把青蜓头埋在向西的门下，就能变成青色的珍珠。 
English: "Natural History" says: "If you bury a green bean under a west-facing door, it will turn into a blue pearl."

古文：朱诞
现代文：朱诞
English: Zhu Xing

古文：宋初，淮南郡有物取人头髻。
现代文：南朝刘宋初期，淮南郡有个东西专门取人的发髻。
English: In the early days of the Southern Dynasty of Liu Song, there was something in Huainan County that specialized in taking people's hair braids.

古文：太守朱诞曰： 吾知之矣。 
现代文：太守朱诞说： 我知道它是什么了，我知道它是什么了。 
English: "I know what it is, I know what it is," Zhu Xizhao said.

古文：多买黐以涂壁。夕有一蝙蝠大如鸡，集其上，不得去，杀之乃绝。
现代文：他买了很多木胶把它涂在墙壁上，夜间有一只蝙蝠像鸡那么大，落在墙上，便不能离去。把它杀死之后，就再也没有这种事发生了。
English: He bought a lot of wood glue and painted it on the walls. One night, a bat the size of a chicken landed on the wall and couldn't get away. After he killed it, it never happened again.

古文：观之，钩帘下已有数百人头髻。
现代文：观察那只蝙蝠，钩帘下已有数百个人的头髻。
English: Look at that bat. It's got hundreds of people's heads under its hook.

古文：白蚓
现代文：白蚓
English: White stork

古文：刘德愿兄子，太宰从事中郎道存，景和元年，忽有白蚓数十登其斋前砌上，通身白色，人所未尝见也。
现代文：刘德愿哥哥的儿子，太宰从事中郎刘道存，在南北朝宋前废帝景和元年，忽然看见有几十条白蚯蚓爬到书斋前的台阶上，那蚯蚓通身白色，人们从未见过。
English: Liu Deyan's brother's son, Dazai engaged in middle-man Liu Daocun, in the Northern and Southern Dynasties and Song Dynasty before the abolition of Emperor Jing and the first year, suddenly saw dozens of egrets climb to the steps in front of the study, the egrets are white, people have never seen.

古文：蚓并张口吐舌，大赤色。
现代文：蚯蚓张口吐舌，大红色。
English: The dragonfly opens its mouth, sticks out its tongue, and turns bright red.

古文：其年八月，与德愿并诛。
现代文：这年八月，刘道存和刘德愿一起被杀。
English: In August of that year, Liu Daocun and Liu Deyan were killed together.

古文：王双
现代文：王双
English: Wang Shuang

古文：孟州王双，宋文帝元嘉初，忽不欲见明。常取水沃地，以菰蒋覆上，眠息饮食，悉入其中。
现代文：孟州人王双，南北朝宋文帝元嘉初年，他忽然不愿见光亮，经常打水浇湿了地，再用菰蒋盖在上面，不论是睡眠饮食，他都在里边进行。
English: Mengzhou Wang Shuang, the first year of the Southern and Northern Dynasties Song Emperor Wen Yuan Jia, he suddenly did not want to see the light, often watered the wet ground, and then covered it with bamboo shoots. Whether he was sleeping or eating, he was inside.

古文：云，恒有女，著青裙白巾，来就其寝。
现代文：据他说，常有一个女子，穿着青色裙子系白色发巾，来与他同床共枕。
English: According to him, a woman in a blue dress with a white headscarf often came to share his bed.

古文：每听闻荐下，历历有声。发之，见一青色白颈蚯蚓，长二尺许。
现代文：可是每次都听到在草垫下边，历历有声，扒开一看，发现有一条青色白颈的蚯蚓，二尺多长。
English: However, every time I heard a buzzing sound under the straw mat, I opened it and found a blue-white-necked dragonfly, more than two feet long.

古文：云，此女常以一奁香见遗，气甚精芬。
现代文：他又说，这女子常以一匣香赠送与他，那气味十分芳香。
English: He added that the woman used to give him a box of incense, which was very fragrant.

古文：奁乃螺壳，香则草莆根。
现代文：那匣其实是个螺壳，而香则是菖莆根须。
English: The box is actually a nutshell, and the incense is the stem of a camphor tree.

古文：于时咸以双暂同阜螽矣。
现代文：当时都以为王双暂且和幼蝗虫同居。
English: At the time, everyone thought that the king and queen were temporarily living together with the young locusts.

