古文：襄阳围急，将破，立信遗似道书，云： 沿江之守，不过七千里，而内郡见兵尚可七十余万，宜尽出之江干，以实外御。
现代文：原文南宋时襄阳城被蒙古军围攻，情势急迫时，汪立信写信给贾似道说： 沿长江的防线不过七千里，而内郡现有的士兵还有七十多万，应该都派到江边，充实对外防御的兵力。
English: During the Southern Song Dynasty, the city of Xiangyang was besieged by the Mongolian army. When the situation was urgent, Wang Lixin wrote to Jia Xiandao, saying: The defense line along the Yangtze River is only seven thousand miles, but there are more than seven hundred thousand soldiers in the county. They should all be sent to the riverside to strengthen the external defense force.

古文：汰其老弱，可得精锐五十万，于七千里中，距百里为屯，屯有守将；十屯为府，府有总督。
现代文：七十多万兵力中，淘汰掉老弱不堪作战者，还有五十万精锐。在七千里之间，每距一百里设一屯，每屯有守将，十屯为一府，每府有总督。
English: Of the more than seven hundred thousand troops, there are five hundred thousand elites who have eliminated the old, weak and unable to fight. Between seven thousand miles, there is a township every hundred miles, each township has a commander, ten townships are a prefecture, and each prefecture has a governor.

古文：其尤要害处，则参倍其兵。
现代文：地势特别重要的地方，兵力则增加三倍。
English: Where the terrain is particularly important, the number of troops is tripled.

古文：无事则泛舟江、淮，往来游徼，有事则东西互援，联络不断，以成率然之势，此上策也!
现代文：平时在江淮之间泛舟来往保持联系，战时东西彼此支援，联络不断，以造成足以应付蒙古人忽然攻击的防御力量，这是上策。
English: In peacetime, it is best to keep in touch with each other by rafting between the Huai River, and in wartime, the east and west should support each other and keep in touch, so as to create a defense force that is sufficient to cope with the sudden attack of the Mongols.

古文：久拘聘使，无益于我，徒使敌得以为辞，莫若礼而归之，请输岁币以缓目前之急。俟边患稍休，徐图战守，此中策也! 
现代文：扣留蒙古人的使臣，对我们完全没有好处，只会给敌人更多攻击的借口。不如礼遇他们，放他们回去，并想办法以每年输送财帛的方式，和蒙古人达成暂时的和议，以缓和目前急迫的形势，等边境的压力稍微缓和下来，再从长计议战守的策略，这是中策。 
English: Detaining Mongolian envoys is of no benefit to us at all, and will only give the enemy more excuses to attack. It would be better to treat them with courtesy, let them go back, and find a way to reach a temporary peace with the Mongols by sending money every year to ease the current urgent situation, wait for the pressure on the border to ease slightly, and then discuss the strategy of defense from a long-term perspective. This is the middle way.

古文：后伯颜入建康，闻其策，叹曰： 使宋果用之，吾安得至此？ 
现代文：后来蒙古伯颜攻入建康，听说汪立信这番策略，叹息道： 假使宋室真的采用，今天我们怎么可能在这里呢？ 
English: Later, Mongolian Boyan invaded Jiankang. Hearing of Wang Lixin's strategy, she sighed: If the Song Dynasty really adopted it, how could we be here today?

古文：北人南侵，文天祥上疏，言： 朝廷姑息牵制之意多，奋发刚断之意少，乞斩师孟衅鼓，以作将士之气。 
现代文：蒙古人南侵，文天祥上疏，大略是说： 朝廷只求一时偏安，牵制前方将帅作战的气息太浓，而奋发进取、决心作战的意志太弱。并要求立刻斩杀师孟，以他的鲜血涂于鼓，来激励士气。 
English: When the Mongols invaded the south, Wen Tianxiang was absent, roughly saying: The imperial court only seeks temporary peace, the atmosphere of restraining the front commander is too strong, and the will to forge ahead and resolve to fight is too weak. He demanded that Meng, his teacher, be killed immediately and his blood be smeared on the drum to stimulate morale.

古文：且言： 宋惩五季之乱，削藩镇，建邑郡，一时虽足以矫尾大之弊，然国以变弱，故敌至一州则一州破，至一县则一县残，中原陆沉，痛悔何及？
现代文：又说， 宋朝受五代之乱的伤害，虽然削弱拥兵的藩镇，建立邑郡，一时可以矫正军人拥兵作乱的弊病，然而也付出国力衰弱的代价。所以敌人每到一州，一州就残破，每到一县，一县也残破，最后弄得整个中原沦陷，如今后悔也来不及。
English: He also said that although the Song Dynasty was hurt by the Five Dynasties' Rebellion, and although it weakened the townships that supported the soldiers and established counties and townships, it could temporarily correct the ills of the soldiers supporting the soldiers and causing disturbances, but it also paid the price of weakening the national strength. Therefore, every time the enemy came to a state, a state was destroyed, and every time they came to a county, a county was also destroyed, and finally the entire Central Plains fell, and now it is too late to regret.

古文：今宜分天下为四镇，建都督统御于其中，以广西益湖广，而建阃于长沙；以广东益江西，而建阃于隆兴；以福建益江东，而建阃于番阳；以淮西益淮东，而建阃于扬州。
现代文：如今应将天下分为四镇，每镇设立都督一人负责统领；将广西并入两湖为一镇，军府建于长沙；将广东并入江西为一镇，军府建于隆兴；将福建并入江东，军府建于鄱阳；将淮西并入淮东，军府建于扬州。
English: At present, the country should be divided into four towns, with a governor in charge of each town; Guangxi should be merged into the two lakes as a town, and a military base should be built in Changsha; Guangdong should be merged into Jiangxi as a town, and a military base should be built in Longxing; Fujian should be merged into Jiangdong, and a military base should be built in Shenyang; Huaixi should be merged into Huaidong, and a military base should be built in Yangzhou.

古文：责长沙取鄂，隆兴取蕲、黄，番阳取江东，扬州取两淮。
现代文：要求长沙负责收复鄂地一带，隆兴负责蕲黄一带，鄱阳负责江东一带，扬州负责收复两淮一带。
English: It was requested that Changsha be responsible for recovering the area around Hudi, Longxing be responsible for recovering the area around Shihhuang, Shenyang be responsible for recovering the area around Jiangdong, and Yangzhou be responsible for recovering the area around Liahuai.

古文：靖康有李纲不用，而用黄潜善、汪伯彦；咸淳有汪立信不用，而用贾似道；德祐有文天祥不用，而用陈宜中。
现代文：靖康年间有李纲不用，而用黄潜善、汪伯彦；咸淳年间有汪立信不用，而用贾似道；德祐年间有文天祥不用，而用陈宜中。
English: During the Jing and Kang dynasties, Li Gang was not used, but Huang Kuanzhen and Wang Boyan were used; during the Han and Chun dynasties, Wang Lixin was not used, but Jia Li Dao was used; during the Deyu dynasties, Wen Tianxiang was not used, but Chen Yizhong was used.

古文：然则宋不衰于金，自衰也；不亡于元，自亡也!
现代文：可见宋朝不是因金人强大而衰弱，而是自己衰弱；不是被元灭亡，而是自己灭亡。
English: It can be seen that the Song Dynasty was not weakened by the strong Jin people, but weakened itself; it was not destroyed by Yuan, but destroyed itself.

