古文：王义王义，字宜之，真定宁晋人，家世业农。
现代文：王义，字宜之，真定宁晋人，其家世代务农。
English: Wang Yi, whose family has been farming for generations, is a descendant of Jin Ding Ning Jin.

古文：义有胆智，沉默寡言，读书知大义。
现代文：义有胆有智，沉默寡言，读书知义。
English: Righteousness has courage and wisdom, taciturn, reading wisdom and righteousness.

古文：金人迁汴，河朔盗起，县人聚而谋曰： 时事如此，吾侪欲保全家室，宜有所统属。 
现代文：金朝迁都汴京，河北人民掀起反金斗争，宁晋县人为保全家室也组织起来，推王义为首，代行县衙政务，称为都统。
English: The Kim dynasty moved the capital to Beijing, the people of Hebei launched an anti-Kim struggle, and Ningjin County also organized to artificially protect the family, pushing Wang Yi as the head and acting on behalf of the county government, known as Tongtong.

古文：乃相与推义为长，摄行县事，寻号为都统。太师、国王木华黎兵至城下，义率众，以宁晋归焉。
现代文：太师、国王木华黎兵至城下，义率众归顺蒙古。
English: The Grand Master and King Mu Huali led his soldiers to the outskirts of the city, where they surrendered to the Mongols.

古文：岁乙亥，金将李伯祥据赵州，木华黎遣义捣其城。
现代文：太祖十年，金将李伯祥占据赵州，木华黎遣王义去攻打。
English: In the tenth year of Taizu, Jin occupied Li Buxiang in Zhaozhou, and Mu Hua Li sent Wang Yi to attack.

古文：会天大风雨，义帅壮士，挟长梯，疾趋，夜四鼓，四面齐登，杀守埤者。
现代文：逢大风大雨，王义率勇士于夜间四更时分，用长梯登城，杀守军，城破，李伯祥逃往天坛寨。
English: Whenever there was a strong wind and heavy rain, Wang Yi and his warriors would climb the city with long ladders at four o'clock in the morning, kill the defenders, break the city, and Li Boxiang would flee to the Temple of Heaven.

古文：城中乱，伯祥挺身走天坛寨，一州遂定。木华黎承制授义赵州太守、赵冀二州招抚使。
现代文：木华黎授王义为赵州太守、赵冀二州招抚使。
English: Wang Yi, a pupil of Hua Liju, was the governor of Zhao Province and the envoy of Zhao Jie to the two provinces.

古文：丁丑，大军南取钜鹿、洺州二城，还军至唐阳西九门，遇金监军纳兰率冀州节度使柴茂等，将兵万余北行。
现代文：十二年，大军南取钜鹿、氵名州二城，又回师至唐阳以西之九门，遇金监军纳兰率冀州节度使柴茂等领兵万余北行。
English: In the 12th year, the great army went south to take two cities of Menglu and Renmeizhou, and then returned to Nine Gates west of Tangyang. In the event of the Jizhou Festival, Nalan led the Jizhou Festival and made Chai Mao lead more than 10,000 soldiers north.

古文：义伏兵桑林，先以百骑挑之，纳兰趋来迎战，因稍却，诱之近桑林，伏起，金兵大乱，奔还，获纳兰二弟及万户李虎。
现代文：义设伏兵于桑林中，先以百骑挑战，待金军至桑林附近，伏兵发动突然袭击，金军大乱，俘纳兰二弟及万户李虎，金军退回。
English: He deliberately set up an ambush in the mulberry grove, first challenging with a hundred horsemen, waiting for the Chinese army to arrive near the mulberry grove, the ambush launched a surprise attack, the Chinese army rioted, captured Nalan's second brother and Wanhu Lihu, and the Chinese army retreated.

古文：戊寅，拔束鹿，进攻深州，守帅以城降。
现代文：十三年，蒙古大军克束鹿，进攻深州，守将开城投降。
English: In the thirteenth year, the Mongolian army of Ketsuka attacked Shinshu, and the defenders of Kaesong surrendered.

古文：顺天都元帅张柔上其功，升深州节度使、深冀赵三州招抚使。
现代文：顺天都元帅张柔上报其功，升义为深州节度使，及深、冀、赵三州招抚使。
English: Shuntiandu Marshal Zhang Rong reported on his achievements, and Shengyi became the envoy of the Shenzhou Festival, and the envoy of Shenzhou, Hebei and Zhao.

古文：金将武仙以兵四万来攻束鹿，仙谕军士曰： 束鹿兵少无粮，城无楼橹，一日可拔也。 
现代文：金将武仙率四万大军攻夺束鹿，并告谕将士 ：束鹿兵少无粮，也无望台，一天即可攻下。 
English: Kim dispatched a 40,000-strong army led by Busen to conquer Sokcho, and told the soldiers: Sokcho's soldiers have little food and no watchtower, and they can be conquered in one day.

古文：尽锐来攻，义随机应拒，积三十日不能下，大小数十战皆捷。
现代文：于是调集精锐进攻。王义随机应变，多方抗击，大小数十战皆捷，金军攻三十日不能下。
English: As a result, the elite attack was mobilized. Wang Yi made random contingency, multi-party resistance, dozens of large and small battles were successful, and the Chinese army could not attack for 30 days.

古文：一夕，义召将佐曰： 今城守虽有余，然外无援兵，粮食将尽，岂可坐而待毙。 
现代文：王义召集将校，对他们说： 如今城还是守得住的，但外无援兵，内缺粮食，我们岂可坐以待毙。 
English: Wang Yi called together his officers and said to them: "Today the city can still be defended, but there are no reinforcements from outside, and there is a shortage of food inside.

古文：椎牛飨士，率精锐三千，衔枚夜出，直捣仙营。仙军乱，乘暗攻之，杀数千人。
现代文：当时杀牛犒劳士卒，夜间亲率精锐三千直捣敌营，武仙军大乱，损失数千人，退回真定，王义缴获其军械。
English: At that time, he killed Niu Yao and Lao Shi, and at night, he led the elite three thousand to directly attack the enemy camp. The Wuxian Army was in chaos, losing thousands of people. He returned to Zhending, and Wang Yi seized his military equipment.

古文：仙率余众遁还真定，悉获其军资器仗。木华黎闻之，遣使送银牌十，命义赐有功者。
现代文：木华黎闻捷，遣使送银牌十个，命义分赐有功将士。
English: Wood warms, water cools, we hear of victory, the envoy sends ten silver medals, and meritorious soldiers are given a share of the bounty.

古文：庚辰，拔冀州，获柴茂，械送军前，木华黎、张柔复上其功，授龙虎卫上将军、安武军节度使，行深冀二州元帅府事，赐金虎符。
现代文：十五年，王义又攻占冀州，俘节度使柴茂。木华黎、张柔上报其功，授义为龙虎卫上将军、安武军节度使，行深、冀二州元帅府事，赐金虎符。
English: In the fifteenth year, Wang Yi conquered Jizhou again, captured the festival and sent it to Chai Mao. Mu Huali and Zhang Rong reported their services, awarded the general of the Dragon and Tiger Guards, the festival envoy of the Anwu Army, went to Shenshen, the marshal of the two states of Jizhou, and gave gold and tiger charms.

古文：辛巳，仙复遣其将卢秀、李伯祥，率兵谋袭赵州，并取沥城，率战舰数百艘，沿江而下。
现代文：太祖十六年，武仙又遣其将卢秀、李伯祥意图袭击赵州，攻取沥城，率战船百艘沿江而上。
English: In the 16th year of Taizu, Emperor Wuxian sent Lu Xiu and Li Boxiang to attack Zhaozhou, capture Bitcheng, and lead a hundred warships up the river.

古文：义具舟楫于纪家庄，截其下流，邀击之，义士卒皆水乡人，善水战，回旋开阖，往来如风雨，船接，则跃登彼船，奋戈疾击，敌莫能当，杀千余人，擒秀。
现代文：王义准备了舟船在纪家庄截击，其士卒皆善于水战，或进或退，或左或右，往来如风雨。接近敌船，则跳入敌船上挥戈奋击，敌无招架之力，杀金兵千余人，擒卢秀。
English: Wang Yi prepared a boat to intercept the attack in Jijiazhuang. His men were all good at water combat, either advancing or retreating, or to the left or right, coming and going like the wind and rain. When approaching the enemy ship, they jumped into the enemy ship and waved their swords. The enemy was helpless, killing more than a thousand soldiers and killing Lu Xiu.

古文：伯祥退保沥城，义引兵拔之，伯祥西走，二子死焉。
现代文：伯祥退保沥城，又为义军攻克，伯祥二子战死，自己率余军西走。
English: Bozhang withdrew from the defense of Licheng, and was again conquered by the rebels. Bozhang's second son died in battle, and he led the rest of the army westward.

古文：邢州盗号赵大王，聚众数千，据任县固城水寨，真定史天泽集诸道兵攻之不能下。
现代文：邢州的赵大王，聚众数千人，占据任县固城水寨，真定史天泽集各路兵未能攻下，王义领兵进逼邢州城下，一鼓作气攻下邢州，擒杀赵大王、侯县令。
English: Zhao Da Wang of Bozhou gathered thousands of people and occupied the Gucheng Water Town of Ren County. However, Wang Yi led his army to the city of Bozhou and captured Bozhou, killing Zhao Da Wang and the governor of Hou County.

古文：太师、国王木华黎下中原，玉率众来附，领本部军，从攻邢、洺、磁三州，济南诸郡，号长汉万户。
现代文：王义颁布政令，招集逃亡民众，督劝他们安心农业。所以深州、冀州一带成为乐土。王玉，赵州宁晋人，金末为万户，镇守赵州。太师、国王木华黎南下中原，王玉率所部归附，命他仍领本部人马，随大军攻邢、氵名、磁三州及济南诸郡。因其体长，人称他为 长汉万户 。
English: Wang Yi issued a decree to summon the fugitive people and urge them to have peace of mind in agriculture. Therefore, the areas around Shenzhou and Jizhou became a happy land. Wang Yu, a Zhaozhou Ningjin person, was a million households at the end of the month and the town guard of Zhaozhou. Taishi, the king of the South Central Plains, Wang Yu led the headquarters to attach, and he was still ordered to lead the headquarters' personnel and horses, and followed the army to attack the Shandong, Yunnan, Zhejiang and Jinan counties. Because of his long body, he was called the Changhan million households.

古文：从攻泽、潞诸州，独潞州坚壁不下，玉力战，流矢中左目，竟拔其城。
现代文：又随大军攻泽、潞诸州。唯潞州久攻不下，王玉奋力死战，箭中左目，终克该城。
English: With a large army, Wang Yu attacked Zhe and conquered Zhuzhou. However, he could not conquer Zhuzhou for a long time. Wang Yu fought to the death, and finally conquered the city.

古文：又破平阳，下太原、汾、代等州。
现代文：又连攻克平阳、太原、汾州、代州。
English: It also conquered Pingyang, Taiyuan, Zhangzhou and Daizhou.

古文：师还，署元帅府监军，以赵州四十寨隶焉。
现代文：回师，木华黎任命玉为元帅府监军，管辖赵州四十寨。
English: After the return of the division, Mu Huali appointed Yu as the Marshal's Supervisor of the Army, governing the Forty Villages of Zhao Prefecture.

古文：先是，金将武仙既降复叛，杀元帅史天倪。
现代文：金将武仙降而复叛，杀元帅史天倪。
English: Kim overthrew Emperor Wuxian and rebelled, killing Marshal Shi Tianni.

古文：宋将彭义斌在大名，阴与仙合，玉从笑乃带、史天泽，攻败武仙，生擒义斌，驻军宁晋东里寨。
现代文：宋将彭义斌在大名与武仙暗中勾结。王玉随笑乃带、史天泽打败武仙，生擒彭义斌，驻军于宁晋之东里寨。
English: Song made Peng Yibin secretly collude with Daimyo and Wuxian. Wang Yu followed suit, Shi Tianze defeated Wuxian, Peng Yibin was born, and the army was stationed in the East Village of Ningjin.

古文：仙围之数匝，杀其子宁寿。
现代文：武仙遣人拿着朝廷封官授爵的诰命去引诱王玉的妻子，王玉妻严辞拒绝。武仙杀王玉的儿子宁寿。
English: Wuxian sent a man to seduce Wang Yu's wife with the help of a knighthood conferred by the imperial court. Wang Yu's wife refused. Wuxian killed Wang Yu's son, Ning Shou.

古文：玉闻之，领数骑突其围，斩获数百人而还。
现代文：王玉闻讯，领数骑杀散包围他妻子住宅的金兵，斩俘数百人而还。
English: When Wang Yu heard the news, he led several horsemen to kill and scatter the golden soldiers who surrounded his wife's house, killing and capturing hundreds of people.

古文：仙遣人追之，不敢进，皆曰： 王将军胆气骁雄，我辈非敌也。 
现代文：武仙派人追赶，追赶者不敢进，都说 ：王将军胆壮骁勇，我辈不能敌。 
English: Wuxian sent men to chase him, but the pursuers did not dare to enter, and they all said, "General Wang is brave and courageous, and we are no match for him."

古文：仙乃尽发玉先世二十七冢，弃骸满道。
现代文：武仙又派人去挖掘王玉祖先坟墓二十七座，尸骨满道。
English: Wuxian also sent people to excavate the 27 ancestral tombs of Wang Yu, and the road was full of bones.

古文：玉从史天泽诸将击仙于赵州，仙粮绝，走双门寨，围之。
现代文：王玉又随史天泽诸将攻打武仙所盘踞的赵州。武仙粮绝，逃往双门寨。
English: Wang Yu also followed Shi Tianze and other generals to attack Zhaozhou, which was besieged by Wuxian. Wuxian ran out of food and fled to Shuangmenzhai.

古文：会大风，仙独脱走，斩其将四十三人，真定遂平。
现代文：王玉等进军包围，斩敌将四十三人，武仙逃走。
English: Wang Yu and others encircled the advancing troops, killed forty-three enemy soldiers, and the warriors fled.

古文：加定远将军，权真定五路万户，假赵州庆源军节度副使。
现代文：蒙军平定了真定，加王玉为定远将军，暂任真定五路万户及赵州庆源军节度副使。
English: The Mongolian army subdued Zhending, and Wang Yu was appointed as the general of Zhenyuan, and was temporarily appointed as the deputy envoy of the Zhending Five-Way Million Households and Zhaozhou Qingyuan Army.

古文：有民负西域贾人银，倍其母，不能偿，玉出银五千两代偿之。又出家奴二百余口为良民。
现代文：有百姓借西域商人的银两，因成倍利息，不能偿还。王玉用自己的银五千两代还，又释放家奴二百余口为良民。
English: Some people borrowed two pieces of silver from a merchant in the western region, but could not repay it because of the compound interest. Wang Yu used five thousand two generations of his own silver, and released more than two hundred slaves as good citizens.

古文：中统元年二月卒，年七十。
现代文：中统元年二月卒，年七十岁。
English: He was 70 years old when he passed away in February of the first year of the Middle Kingdom.

古文：子忱。忱字允中，幼读书，明敏有才识。
现代文：王忱字允中，王玉之子，天性聪敏，有才有识。
English: Wang Zhenzhiyong, the son of Wang Yu, is naturally intelligent and intelligent.

古文：平章赵璧引见裕宗潜邸，语称旨，命宿卫，掌钱谷计簿。授山北辽东道提刑按察司副使。驸马伯忽里数驰猎蹂民田，忱以法绳之。
现代文：平章赵璧把他引见裕宗，命入近卫亲军掌管钱谷。后授山北辽东道提刑按察司副使。驸马伯忽里打猎损害民田，王忱将他绳之以法。
English: Pingzhang Zhao Bi introduced him to Yu Zong, and he was assigned to Qianyuan, which was under the control of the Imperial Guards. Later, he was given the title of vice-envoy of the Inspector General of Shanbei Liao Host and punished. Wang Zhen brought him to justice after he damaged people's fields while hunting.

古文：宪吏耿熙言征北京宣慰司积年逋负，计可得钞二十万锭。
现代文：大臣耿熙陈奏说，如果征收北京宣慰司历年来所欠赋税，计可得钞二十万锭。
English: Minister Geng Xi Chen Soo said that if the taxes owed by Beijing Xuan You Si over the years were collected, a total of 200,000 baht could be obtained.

古文：帝遣使核实，熙惧事露，擅增制语，有 并打算大小一切诸衙门等事 凡十二字，追系官吏至数百人。
现代文：皇帝遣人去核实，耿熙怕事情败露在诏令中擅自增加 并打算大小一切诸衙门等事 十二字，并追捕官吏数百人。
English: The emperor sent someone to verify the matter, and Geng Xi, fearing that the matter would be exposed, arbitrarily increased the number in the imperial edict and planned to make all matters of state, large and small, into twelve characters, and hunted down hundreds of officials.

古文：忱验问，知其诈，熙乃款伏。
现代文：王忱查实，北京宣慰司并不欠赋税，耿熙承认所陈奏纯系谎言，甘心服罪。
English: Wang Zhen ascertained that the Beijing Propaganda and Consolation Department did not owe taxes. Geng Xi admitted that what he had said was a pure lie and was willing to accept his guilt.

古文：又省部以正军余田出调发，忱言： 士卒冲冒寒暑，远涉江海，宜加优恤。 皆从之。
现代文：裕宗去世，王忱建议朝廷早立皇太子。平章不忽木转奏皇帝，世祖采纳了这个建议。
English: After the death of Emperor Yuzong, Wang Zhen suggested that the Imperial Court establish a crown prince as early as possible. Emperor Pingzhang accepted the suggestion.

古文：颍州朱喜，尝俘于兵，既自赎，主家利其赀，复欲以为奴。
现代文：王忱任河北河南道提刑按察副使时，见江南人卖子于北方，名为养子，实为奴隶，他奏请朝廷下令禁止。颍州朱喜曾为蒙古军士所俘为奴，他自己赎身之后，主人家贪他的钱财，又要将他抑为奴隶。
English: When Wang Zhen served as the deputy envoy of Henan Province of Hebei Province, he saw that people from the south of the Yangtze River sold their sons in the north, calling them adopted sons, but they were actually slaves. He petitioned the imperial court to order a ban. Zhangzhou Zhu Xi had been captured as a slave by Mongolian soldiers. After he redeemed himself, his master's family coveted his money and wanted to keep him as a slave.

古文：又有诬息州汪清为奴，杀而夺其妻子及田宅者。
现代文：又有人诬告息州汪清为奴，并杀害了汪清，夺其妻子和田地房屋。
English: Another person falsely accused Wang Qing of Xizhou of being a slave, and killed Wang Qing, taking his wife and fields and houses.

古文：狱久不决，忱皆正之。
现代文：这些案情久久不能定案，忱予以公正判决。
English: These cases have been pending for a long time, and we are determined to make a fair judgment.

古文：劾罢镇南帅唐兀台，唐兀台结援大臣，诬奏于帝，系忱至京师，得面陈其事，世祖大悟，抵唐兀台罪。
现代文：王忱弹劾镇南元帅唐兀台，罢了他的官。唐兀台联络大臣向世祖诬告王忱，忱被捕至京，得以向皇帝面陈其事，世祖大悟，将唐兀台治罪。
English: Wang Zhen impeached the Zhenan marshal Tang Xingtai and dismissed his official. Tang Xingtai's liaison minister falsely accused Wang Zhen to the patriarch. Zhen was arrested in Beijing and was able to present his case to the emperor. The patriarch came to his senses and punished Tang Xingtai.

古文：按察司改廉访司，起忱为燕南河北道肃政廉访副使，累迁岭南广西、河东山西两道肃政廉访使，江陵、汴梁两路总管。
现代文：按察司改为廉访司，任忱为燕南河北道肃政廉访副使，后历任岭南广西、河东山西两道肃政廉访使，江陵、汴梁两路总管。
English: According to the inspection department, it was changed to the corruption investigation department, and he was appointed as the deputy envoy of Yan'an, Hebei Province to investigate corruption, and later successively as the envoy of Lingnan, Guangxi Province, and Hedong, Shanxi Province to investigate corruption, and the general manager of Jiangling and Qiliang.

古文：至大元年，拜中奉大夫、云南行省参知政事，未行，卒。
现代文：至大元年，拜中奉大夫、云南行省参知政事。尚未及赴任即逝世。
English: In the first year of the Taisho era, Dr. Baizhong Bong, the governor of Yunnan Province, died before taking office.

古文：赵迪赵迪，真定藁城人也。
现代文：赵迪，真定藁城人。
English: Zhao Di, from the city of Zhending.

古文：幼孤，事母孝，多力善骑射。
现代文：年幼丧父，孝敬母亲。
English: He lost his father at a young age, but he cherished his mother.

古文：金未为义军万户。郡将出六钧强弩，立赏募能挽者，迪能之，即署真定尉，迁藁城尉，升为丞。
现代文：金末为义军万户，因力大能拉强弓，又善骑射，被任命为真定尉，后调为藁城县尉，又升为县丞。
English: Kinmatsu was a member of the rebel army, and because of his great ability to draw a strong bow, and his good riding and shooting, he was appointed as a shinjo lieutenant, later he was transferred to a Shicheng county lieutenant, and then he was promoted to a county chancellor.

古文：太祖兵至藁城，迪率众迎降。
现代文：太祖大军至藁城，赵迪率众投降。
English: The great ancestor's army arrived at Lucheng, and Zhao Di led the crowd to surrender.

古文：岁壬午，改藁城为永安州，以迪同知节度使事。
现代文：太祖十七年，改藁城为永安州，任命赵迪为该州同知节度使事。
English: In the seventeenth year of Taizu, Zhaozhen was changed to Yong'an, and Zhao Di was appointed as the state's Tongzhi Jiedu envoy.

古文：尝从帝西征，他将校豪横俘掠，独迪治军严，所过无犯。
现代文：曾随从太祖西征，其他将校肆意掳掠，只有赵迪治军严明，所过秋毫无犯。
English: He had followed the western expedition of the great ancestor. Other officers looted and plundered at will. Only Zhao Di ruled the army strictly, so he did not commit any crimes.

古文：先是，真定既破，迪亟入索藁城人在城中者，得男女千余人。诸将欲分取之，迪曰： 是皆我所掠，当以归我。 
现代文：蒙古大军攻下真定后，赵迪忙入藁城搜索城里的百姓，得男女千余人，诸将要分为己有，赵迪说： 是我掠得的，应当都归我所有。 
English: After the Mongolian army captured Zhending, Zhao Di hurriedly entered the city to search for the people in the city. He got more than a thousand men and women, all of whom were going to be divided into their own. Zhao Di said: I stole it, it should all belong to me.

古文：诸将许诺。
现代文：诸将同意了。
English: The generals agreed.

古文：迪乃召其人谓曰： 吾惧若属为他将所得，则分奴之矣，故索以归之我。
现代文：迪把这些男女召来，对他们说： 我是怕你们属诸将所有，则必然会分别把你们抑为奴婢，所以才将你们索取以归我。
English: He called the men and women together and said to them, "I feared that if you belonged to everyone, you would be kept separately as male and female slaves. That is why I wanted you to belong to me."

古文：今纵汝往，宜各遂生产，为良民。 
现代文：今放你们走，各自去从事生产为良民。 
English: Now let you go, each of you to engage in production for the good of the people.

古文：邸顺，保定行唐人，占籍于曲阳县。
现代文：被俘者都感激泪下。当时，兵乱之后，尸骨遍野，迪令人做大墓安葬。赵迪于宪宗二年卒，年七十岁。
English: The captives were all in tears of gratitude. At that time, after the war, the corpses and bones were all over the field, and Di was made to make a large grave and buried. Zhao Di died two years after Xianzong, at the age of seventy.

古文：金末盗起，顺会诸族，集乡人豪壮数百人，与其弟常筑两寨于石城、玄保，分据以守。
现代文：邸顺，保定行唐人，居于曲阳县。金末，人民起义反金，顺与同族召集乡里壮丁数百人，与其弟邸常筑石城、玄保两寨，分别据守。
English: Shun's residence, Baoding Xing Tang people, lived in Quyang County. At the end of the Jin Dynasty, when the people revolted against the Jin Dynasty, Shun and his compatriots gathered hundreds of townspeople, and with his brother's residence, they often built Shicheng and Xuanbao, respectively.

古文：岁甲戌，率众来归，太祖授行唐令。
现代文：太祖九年，顺率众归附于蒙古，授为行唐县令。
English: In the ninth year of Taizu's reign, it was annexed to Mongolia and given the title of Xingtang County.

古文：丙子，真定饥，群盗据城叛，民皆穴地以避之，盗发地而啖其人，顺擒数百人杀之。
现代文：十一年，真定发生饥荒，有人乘机据城反叛，民皆避乱于地窖之中，反叛者掘地而吃藏于地窖中的百姓，邸顺将他们擒杀数百。
English: In the eleventh year, there must have been a famine, and someone took the opportunity to rebel against the city. The people all took refuge in the cellars. The rebels dug up the ground and ate the people hiding in the cellars. Teshun killed hundreds of them.

古文：朝廷升曲阳为恒州，以顺为安抚使。
现代文：朝廷升曲阳为恒州，任邸顺为安抚使。
English: The imperial court promoted Quyang to Hengzhou, and appointed Shun as a pacifying envoy.

古文：金将武仙据真定，帅众来攻，顺与战，大败之，赐金虎符，加镇国上将军、恒州等处都元帅。
现代文：金将武仙占据真定，率兵进攻恒州，为邸顺大败，顺因功而赐金虎符，加镇国上将军、恒州等处都元帅。
English: Jin occupied Wuxian in Zhending, led his troops to attack Hengzhou, suffered a crushing defeat at the hands of Shun, and Shun was awarded the Golden Tiger Badge for his service. He was promoted to the position of general of the county and marshal of the whole of Hengzhou.

古文：庚辰，武仙屯兵于黄、尧两山，顺及弟常又击败之。
现代文：太祖十五年，武仙屯兵于黄、尧两山，又为邸顺及其弟邸常所击败。
English: In the fifteenth year of Taizu's reign, the troops of Emperor Wuxian were stationed in the mountains of Huang and Shun, and were defeated by Teishun and his younger brother, Teizhang.

古文：时西京郝道章，阴结武仙，抄掠州县，顺擒道章杀之，仙退真定以自保。
现代文：这时，西京的郝道章，暗中勾结武仙抢劫州县。顺擒斩郝道章，武仙退守真定。
English: At this time, Shun Daozhang of West Beijing secretly colluded with Wuxian to rob Shuzhou County. Shun Shun beheaded Shun Daozhang, and Wuxian retreated to Zhending.

古文：顺从木华黎攻之，败之于王柳口，仙遂弃真定南走。
现代文：在木华黎指挥下，邸顺进攻真定，于王柳口击败金军，武仙弃真定南逃。
English: Under the command of Mu Huali, Teishun attacked Zhending, defeated the Jin army at Wang Liugou, and Wu Xian abandoned Zhending and fled south.

古文：以功，赐顺名察纳合儿，升骠骑卫上将军，充山前都元帅；弟常，赐名金那合儿。
现代文：因功赐顺名察纳合儿，升为骠骑卫上将军、山前都元帅，赐邸常名金那合儿。
English: For his service, he was given the posthumous name of Chanaheer, promoted to Colonel-in-Chief of the Horse Guards and Marshal of Yamazaki Province, and given the permanent name of Kinnagare.

古文：辛卯春，从太宗攻河南诸郡，招降民十余万，以顺知中山府。
现代文：太宗三年春，随大军攻河南诸郡，招降民十余万，以邸顺为中山府知府。
English: In the spring of the third year of Taizong's reign, he invaded the counties of Henan with a large army, recruited more than 100,000 people, and made Tieshun the prefectural capital of Zhongshan Prefecture.

古文：己亥，佩金符，为行军万户，管领诸路元差军五千人。
现代文：太宗十一年，佩金符，为行军万户，管领诸路元差军五千人。
English: In the eleventh year of Taizong, Baijinfu, for the march of ten thousand households, led the army of five thousand people.

古文：从大军破归德府，留顺戍之。
现代文：大军攻破归德府，留邸顺戍守。
English: The large army was defeated and returned to the German government, leaving the residence to Shunsuke.

古文：丁未，驻师五河口，宋兵夜袭营，顺掩杀其众，生获十五人。
现代文：定宗二年，屯驻五河口，夜间宋军来偷袭，为顺杀退，生擒十五人。
English: In the second year of Dingzong, he was stationed in Wuhekou. At night, the Song Army came to make a sneak attack, and he was forced to retreat. Fifteen people were killed.

古文：癸丑，攻涟水。甲寅，举部属肖撤八、耨邻之功以奏，上赐肖撤八、耨邻金银符，仍隶麾下。
现代文：宪宗三年，邸顺攻涟水，四年，上报其部属肖撤八、耨邻之功，朝廷赐肖辙八、耨邻金银符，仍使他们隶属于邸顺。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, Teishun attacked Surabaya. In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, Teishun reported to the emperor that his subordinates, Xiao Zi Ba and his neighbors, had performed great feats. The imperial court awarded gold and silver medals to Xiao Zi Ba and his neighbors, still making them subordinate to Teishun.

古文：丙辰春，顺卒，年七十四。
现代文：宪宗六年，邸顺年七十四岁而卒。
English: He has been a member of the Kenzong for six years and passed away at the age of seventy-four.

古文：子浃，袭职。
现代文：邸浃，邸顺之子，承袭父亲官职。
English: The son of Teisho and Teishun, he inherited his father's official position.

古文：己未，从世祖渡江，围鄂州，有战功。
现代文：宪宗九年，随从世祖渡江，在围攻鄂州中建有战功。
English: In the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, he followed his ancestor to cross the Yangtze River, and made great achievements in the siege of Ezhou.

古文：中统元年，世祖即位，浃以所部张宣等十二人奏闻于朝，遂以金银符赐之。
现代文：中统元年世祖即位。
English: The founder ascended the throne in the first year of the unified China.

古文：三年，围李璮，还守息州。
现代文：三年，邸浃奉命围攻李王，又回军守息州。
English: In the third year, the residence was ordered to besiege King Li, and the army returned to defend the interest state.

古文：至元十一年，赐虎符，授金州招讨副使，后又迁怀远大将军、金州万户。
现代文：至元十一年，赐虎符，授金州招讨副使，后又升怀远大将军、金州万户。
English: In the eleventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, he bestowed the Tiger Emblem, conferred the Vice-Envoy for Invitation and Solicitation to Jinzhou, and later was promoted to General Huaiyuan and became the leader of all households in Jinzhou.

古文：十三年，改襄阳管军万户。三月，以枢密院奏，行淮西总管万户府事，守庐州。
现代文：十三年，改任襄阳管军万户，三月，经枢密院奏荐，行淮西总管万户府事，戍守庐州。
English: In the thirteenth year, he was transferred to the post of Xiangyang Military Governor of Wanzhou, and in March, upon the recommendation of the Privy Council, he was appointed to the post of the General Manager of Wanzhou of Huaixi Province, and he stayed in Wanzhou.

古文：十四年，移龙兴，仍管领本翼军人。
现代文：至元十四年，邸浃移镇龙兴，仍管领本部兵马。
English: In the 14th year of the Yuan Dynasty, he moved his residence to the town of Longxing and still led the headquarters soldiers and horses.

古文：十五年，复为管军万户，攻赣州崖石寨、太平岩贼有功。
现代文：十五年再度任管军万户，平定赣州崖石寨、太平岩的抗元势力而有功。
English: Fifteen years later, he was appointed as the governor of Wanyu again, and was credited with suppressing the antigenic forces of Zhangzhou Cliff Stone Village and Taiping Rock.

古文：十七年，升镇国上将军、都元帅，镇龙兴诸路，兼管本万户府事，赐银印。
现代文：十七年，升邸浃为镇国上将军、都元帅，镇守龙兴诸路，兼管本万户府事，赐银印。
English: In the seventeenth year, he was promoted to the post of the town's commander-in-chief, the town marshal, the town guard of Longxing Road, and was also in charge of the main household affairs, and was awarded the silver seal.

古文：二十一年，元帅府罢，复为万户。二十三年，佩元降虎符，为归德万户，镇守吉安。
现代文：同年，镇压吉、赣一带的反元力量。二十三年，佩原降虎符，为归德万户，镇守吉安。
English: In the same year, the anti-Yuan forces in the areas of Ji and Handan were suppressed. In the 23rd year, Peyuan was awarded the Tiger Emblem, thousands of households were returned to Germany, and Ji'an became the town guard.

古文：未几，统领江西各万户，集兵七千戍广东，凡二载。
现代文：不久，受命统领江西各万户，集兵七千人戍守广东，历时二年。
English: Soon after, he was ordered to govern all 10,000 households in Jiangxi Province and gather 7,000 soldiers to defend Guangdong, which lasted for two years.

古文：大德三年卒，年七十七。
现代文：大德三年卒，年七十七岁。
English: Dade is a three-year graduate and 77 years old.

古文：善资仪雄伟，其音若钟，多智略，尤精骑射。
现代文：赠辅国上将军、北庭元帅府都元帅、护军，追封高阳郡公，谥襄敏。王善，字子善，真定藁城人。容貌雄伟，声如洪钟，足智多谋，尤精于骑射。
English: Awarded to the adjutant general of the country, the marshal of the North Court, the marshal of the capital, the escort, and the governor of Goyang County, Zou Xiangmin. Wang Zhen, Zizi Zhen, and Zhen Ding were from Lucheng. His appearance was majestic, his voice was like Hong Zhong, he was resourceful, and he was especially good at riding and shooting.

古文：金贞祐播迁，田畴荒芜，人无所得食，善求食以奉母。
现代文：金贞年间，国家多事，人民颠沛流离，田地荒芜，衣食艰难，王善讨饭奉养母亲。
English: During the years of Jinzhen, the country was eventful, the people were displaced, the fields were desolate, food and clothing were difficult, and Wang Shan begged for food to support his mother.

古文：乙亥，群盗蜂起，众推善为长。
现代文：金贞三年，反金斗争风起云涌，有些人为保家卫族，也组织起来，推王善为首。
English: In the third year of Jin Zhen, the anti-gold struggle was in full swing. Some people who were defenders of the family also organized to push Wang Shan to the top.

古文：善约束有法，备御有方，盗不能犯，擢本县主簿。
现代文：善约束有法，防御有方，被升为本县主簿。
English: Good restraint has a law, defense has a way, was promoted to the main book of the county.

古文：戊寅，权中山府治中。
现代文：金兴定二年，委任善为中山府治中。
English: In the second year of Jin Xingding, Zhen was appointed as Zhongshan prefectural governor.

古文：时武仙镇真定，阴蓄异志，忌善威名，密令知府李济、府判郭安图之。
现代文：当时武仙镇守真定，暗中有所图谋，而忌恨王善的威名，密令知府李济、府判郭安暗害王善。
English: At that time, Wuxian, the town guard of Zhending, secretly plotted to assassinate Wang Zhen by secretly ordering the prefect Li Jie and the magistrate Guo An.

古文：己卯秋，济、安张宴伏兵，召善计事。
现代文：兴定三年秋，李济、郭安设宴请王善来议事，埋设伏兵，准备伺机谋杀。
English: In the autumn of the third year of Xingding, Li Zi and Guo An held a banquet to invite Wang Zhen to discuss, set up an ambush, and prepared to wait for the opportunity to murder.

古文：善觉，即还治众，仓卒得八十人，慷慨与盟，人争自奋，遂诛济、安。
现代文：善发觉，忙回去召集部下，仓卒间得八十人。善与他们慷慨盟誓，个个奋勇争先，诛杀济、安。
English: Upon discovering this, Zen hurried back to gather his subordinates, and in a moment of haste, he had eighty men. Zen generously swore with them, and they all fought bravely to be the first to arrive at safety.

古文：乃谕其党曰： 造衅者，李、郭耳，余无所问。 
现代文：王善对此二人部下说 ：挑衅的只李、郭二人，与其他人无关。 
English: Wang Shan said to his two subordinates: Li and Guo are the only two who are provocative, and they have nothing to do with the others.

古文：善夜卧北城上，戒麾下曰： 勿以我累汝家，当取吾首献帅府。 
现代文：夜间，善睡在北城上，对部下说： 不要因我而连累了你们的家小，可取我的头去献给帅府！ 
English: At night, Zenno slept on the north wall of the castle and said to his men: "Don't burden your families because of me. You can take my head and offer it to the court!"

古文：众曰： 公何为出此言，我辈惟有效死而已。 
现代文：大家忙道 ：公为何这样说，我们只有效死力而已。 
English: Everyone was busy saying: Why does the public say this, we only have to do our best.

古文：遂率众来归，授金符，同知中山府事。
现代文：于是王善带领他们投顺蒙古大军，授他金符，委为同知中山府事。
English: Therefore, Wang Zhen led them to surrender to the Mongolian army, awarded him a gold medal, and appointed him to the Zhongshan prefectural government.

古文：是年冬，以兵三百攻武仙，仙遣将率精锐二千拒战，善擒斩之。
现代文：是年冬，善率三百人攻武仙，仙遣将率二千人迎战，被王善击溃。
English: In the winter of the year, three hundred soldiers led by Shan attacked Wuxian, and two thousand soldiers led by Shanyuan fought against them, and were defeated by Wang Shan.

古文：仙走获鹿，委其佐段琛城守，复战拔之，入据其城，军势大振，自中山以南，降州郡四十二。
现代文：武仙逃往获鹿，令副将段佐守城。王善攻克真定，军势大振，自中山府以南的四十二州郡皆降蒙古。
English: Wuxian fled to Zhucheng and ordered Vice-General Duanzas to defend the city. Wang Zhen defeated Zhending, the army was greatly shaken, and the forty-two counties south of Zhongshan Prefecture all fell to Mongolia.

古文：庚辰，迁中山真定等路招讨使，寻加右副元帅、骠骑大将军，屯藁城。
现代文：太祖十五年，升王善为中山真定等路招讨使，不久又加右副元帅、骠骑大将军之职，屯驻藁城。
English: In the fifteenth year of King Taizu's reign, Sheng Wang Zhen became the envoy of Zhongshan Zhending, and was soon promoted to the post of Vice Marshal of the Right and General of the Cavalry, stationed in Fucheng.

古文：壬午，升藁城为匡国军，以善行帅府事。
现代文：十七年，升藁城为永安州匡国军，命王善行帅府事。
English: In the seventeenth year, Shengkun City was taken over by the Yongan County Kuangguo Army, and it was ordered by the king to do good deeds for the government.

古文：癸未，进金吾卫大将军、左副元帅。
现代文：十八年，进升为金吾卫大将军、左副元帅。
English: In 18 years, he was promoted to General Kim Woo Wee and Deputy Marshal of the Left.

古文：仙穷迫请降，诏命复旧镇。
现代文：武仙走投无路，请求投降蒙古，太祖命他仍镇守真定。
English: Wu Xian was cornered and requested to surrender to Mongolia, but he remained loyal to Zhending for the rest of his life.

古文：善奏： 仙狼子野心，终必反覆，请修城隍备之。 
现代文：王善奏称 ：仙狼子野心，终究必反，请修城防御。 
English: Wang Shanshuo said: the ambition of the fairy wolf, after all, must be reversed, please build a city defense.

古文：未几，仙果叛，率众来攻。
现代文：不久，武仙果然反叛，率军来攻藁城，火烧西门。
English: Soon after, Emperor Wuxian rebelled and led his army to attack the city, setting fire to the West Gate.

古文：火及西门，善出战，却之。
现代文：王善出战击退。
English: Wang Shan went out to fight and beat back.

古文：仙使其部下宋元俘老幼四千人南奔，善追夺之，俾复故业。
现代文：武仙又使其部下宋元，俘老幼四千人南逃，善追击夺回被俘人口，让他们恢复原来职业。
English: Emperor Wuxian also ordered his subordinate Song Yuan to pursue and recapture 4,000 prisoners of war, young and old, who had escaped to the south, so that they could resume their original occupations.

古文：仙自是不敢复入真定，其部曲多来降。
现代文：从此以后，武仙再也不敢回到真定来，其部属多投降蒙古。
English: From then on, Wuxian no longer dared to return to Zhending, and most of his subordinates surrendered to Mongolia.

古文：丙戌，以功赐金虎符，仍行帅府事。
现代文：太祖二十一年，王善因功赐金虎符，仍行帅府事。
English: In the twenty-first year of his great-grandfather's life, Wang Shan was awarded the Golden Tiger Badge for his meritorious service.

古文：壬辰，从征河南，至郑州。
现代文：太宗四年，王善随从大军征河南，进至郑州。
English: In the fourth year of Emperor Taizong's reign, Wang Shan followed the great army to conquer Henan and went to Zhengzhou.

古文：州将马伯坚素闻善名，登陴大呼曰： 藁城王元帅在军中否？愿以城降之。 
现代文：守将马伯坚素闻王善威名，登高大呼： 藁城王元帅在军中否，我愿开城投降。 
English: Guard commander Ma Boqen heard Wang Shanwei's name and shouted loudly: "If Marshal Wang Qicheng is not in the army, I am willing to surrender Kaesong."

古文：善直前，免胄与语，伯坚果率众出降。
现代文：善至城下，解下甲胄与伯坚答话，伯坚果率众出降。
English: Benevolent to the bottom of the city, he took off his armor and answered questions with Bo Jian, and Bo Jian led the crowd to surrender.

古文：善令军中秋毫无犯，民皆按堵，愿从善北渡者以万计，授之土田，以安集之。
现代文：善严令军士秋毫勿犯，民皆安居，愿随善北过黄河者，数以万计。善分授田地以安置他们。
English: Zhengyan ordered the soldiers not to commit any crimes in the autumn, and the people all lived in peace. Tens of thousands of people were willing to follow Zhengyan north across the Yellow River. Zhengyan awarded them fields to settle them.

古文：丙申，兼河北西路兵马副都总管。
现代文：太宗八年，王善兼任河北西路兵马副都总管。
English: In the eighth year of Emperor Taizong's reign, Wang Shan also served as the deputy commander of the Western Military Command of Hebei Province.

古文：辛丑，授知中山府事。
现代文：十三年，授知中山府事。
English: Thirteen years later, he became the governor of Zhongshan Prefecture.

古文：属县新乐，地居冲要，迎送供给，倍于他县，皆取于民。
现代文：该府所属之新乐县，地处要冲，迎送供给比他县多一倍，皆取之于民。
English: Xinle County, which belongs to the prefecture, is located in Chongqing, and the welcome supplies are more than double that of other counties, all of which are taken from the people.

古文：善均其劳逸，所征或未给，辄出家赀代输，民德之。
现代文：王善为均其劳逸，凡所征未交纳者，他用自己的家财代纳，受到人民的歌颂。
English: Wang Zhen was known for his hard work. He used his family's wealth to pay off those who had not paid their taxes. He was praised by the people.

古文：又放家僮五百人为民，咸怀其恩。
现代文：又释放家中僮仆五百人为民，他们深感王善的恩德。
English: He also released 500 domestic servants, who were deeply grateful to Wang Shan.

古文：丰少有大志，倜傥不群，通兵法。
现代文：太宗皇后二年卒，终年六十一岁。皇庆元年，赠银青荣禄大夫、司徒，追封冀国公，谥武靖。
English: Empress Taizong died two years later, at the age of sixty-one. In the first year of the Emperor's reign, she presented the Silver Youth Award to Dr. Ronglu and Souto, and posthumously conferred the title of Prince of Hebei Province to Gongwu Jing.

古文：仕金，为平遥义军谋克，佩银符。
现代文：杜丰，字唐臣，汾州西河人，幼有大志，精通兵法，为人洒脱不羁，不与人往来。曾任金平遥义军谋克，佩银符。
English: Du Feng, also known as Tang Chen, was born in Xihe, Zhangzhou. As a child, he had great ambitions and was well versed in the art of war. He was a free-spirited person and did not socialize with others. He once served as a strategist for the Jin Pingyao Revolutionary Army and wore a silver badge.

古文：太祖取太原，丰率所部来降。皇舅按赤那延授兵马都提控。
现代文：太祖攻取太原时，杜丰率所部归降，皇舅按赤那延授他兵马都提控之职。
English: When the great-grandfather conquered Taiyuan, Du Feng led the troops to surrender, and the emperor's uncle An Chakna gave him the post of military commander.

古文：从国王按察儿攻平阳，先登。克绛州、解州诸堡，招集流民三万余家。以功赐金虎符，升征行元帅左监军。
现代文：随从国王按察儿攻克平阳、绛州及解州诸堡，招集流民三万余家，因功赐佩金虎符，升征行元帅左监军。
English: Accompanied by the king, he conquered the fortresses of Pingyang, Zhangzhou and Liaozhou, recruited more than 30,000 exiles, was awarded the Golden Tiger Badge for his service, and was promoted to marshal of the Left Supervision Army.

古文：金人南遁，遂以丰守河北。
现代文：金人南逃后，命杜丰戍守河北。
English: After the goldsmith fled south, Du Feng was ordered to guard Hebei.

古文：庚辰，上党公张开以万众寇汾州，丰率精骑五千败之。
现代文：太祖十五年，上党公张开率军万人攻打汾州，杜丰以精骑五千击败。
English: In the fifteenth year of Taizu, Shang Dang Gong Zhang led an army of ten thousand men to attack Zhangzhou, and Du Feng defeated him with five thousand horsemen.

古文：从国王阿察儿，下怀孟，破温谷、木涧等寨，辄先登。
现代文：随国王阿察儿攻克怀、孟，破温谷、木涧等寨，杜丰都是身先士卒。
English: Accompanying King Achar in conquering Huai, Meng, Wen Valley, Muxu and other villages, Dufeng was one of the pioneers.

古文：壬午，授丰龙虎卫上将军、河东南北路兵马都元帅，便宜行事。遂破玉女、割渠等寨，俘获千余人。
现代文：攻洪洞西山，斩首六百余级。攻破松平山，俘获大量人口。十七年，授丰为龙虎卫上将军、河东南北路兵马都元帅，有权自行决定和处理事务。破玉女、割渠等寨，俘虏千余人。
English: He attacked the West Mountain of Hongdong and beheaded more than 600 people. He broke through the Songpyeong Mountain and captured a large number of people. In the 17th year, he awarded Feng as the general of Longhuwei and the marshal of the North-South Road of Hedong, with the right to decide and deal with affairs. He broke the jade girl, cut the canal and other villages, and captured more than a thousand people.

古文：丙戌，从按赤那延攻益都，金守将突围出。丰战扼之，斩首千级，捕虏二十人，益都下，遂略地登、莱，降岛民万余。
现代文：太祖二十一年，随按赤那延攻益都，金守将突围，丰截堵，斩首千级，俘二十人，攻下益都，接着占领登州、莱州，沿海岛上居民归顺者万余人。
English: In the twenty-first year of the ancestor, with the attack on Yiwu by Zhang Chena Yan, Jin Shou will break through the encirclement, cut off a thousand heads, capture twenty people, capture Yiwu, and then occupy Dengzhou and Laizhou. There are more than ten thousand residents of the coastal islands who have surrendered.

古文：己丑，以本部取沁州，由是铜鞮、武乡、襄垣、绵上、沁源诸县皆下。
现代文：太宗元年，杜丰率本部人马攻取沁州，接着铜、武乡、襄垣、绵上、沁源诸县皆为蒙军所有。
English: In the first year of Taizong, Du Feng led the headquarters to conquer Bozhou, followed by the counties of Tong, Wuxiang, Xiangyuan, Mianzhong and Luyuan.

古文：辛卯，命丰抚定平阳、太原、真定及辽、沁未降山寨，皆平之。
现代文：三年，丰奉命平定平阳、太原、真定及辽、沁未降山寨。
English: In three years, Feng was ordered to subdue Pingyang, Taiyuan, Zhending and Liao, and he did not reduce the villages.

古文：未几，拜参知政事，改四川行省左丞，不赴，升中书左丞。致仕，年八十六卒，谥文定。
现代文：七年，升杜丰为沁州长官，长官在蒙古建国初年是高级爵位。杜丰在沁州十年，宽徭薄赋，鼓励农桑，致使百姓富足。定宗二年告老还乡。
English: In the seventh year, Dufeng was promoted to the governor of Luzhou. The first year of the founding of Mongolia, the governor was a high rank. Dufeng was in Luzhou for ten years, encouraging farmers and making the people rich. Dingzong returned to his hometown in the second year.

古文：石抹孛迭儿
现代文：宪宗六年病逝于家中，享年六十七岁。
English: Gensong died of illness at his home six years later, at the age of 67.

古文：石抹孛迭儿，契丹人。
现代文：沁州人立祠，每年祭祀。石抹孛迭儿，契丹人。
English: Ancestral shrine founded by the people of Zhangzhou, with an annual religious service. It was built by the Qidan people.

古文：父桃叶儿，徙霸州。
现代文：父桃叶儿将全家迁居霸州。
English: Her father, Taobao, moved the whole family to Bazhou.

古文：孛迭儿仕金，为霸州平曲水寨管民官。
现代文：孛迭儿在金朝任霸州平曲水寨管民官。
English: Zou Delier served as a civil servant in charge of Baizhou Pingqu Water Town during the Kim dynasty.

古文：太师、国王木华黎率师至霸州，孛迭儿迎降，木华黎察其智勇，奇之，擢为千户。
现代文：太师、国王木华黎率军至霸州，孛迭儿投降蒙古，木华黎见他智勇双全，擢升他为千户。
English: Grand Master and King Mu Huali led the army to Bozhou, and then surrendered to Mongolia. Mu Huali saw that he was both wise and courageous, and promoted him to chihou.

古文：岁甲戌，从木华黎觐太祖于雄州，佩以银符，充汉军都统。
现代文：太祖九年，孛迭儿随木华黎至雄州朝见太祖，授佩银符，任汉军都统。
English: In the ninth year of Taizu's reign, Zou Di'er followed Mu Huali to Xiongzhou to meet with Taizu, receive a silver badge, and serve as the commander of the Han army.

古文：帝次牛阑山，欲尽戮汉军，木华黎以孛迭儿可用，奏释之，因请隶麾下，从平高州。
现代文：太祖至牛阑山，要杀尽汉军，木华黎认为孛迭儿可用，奏请释放，并隶于木华黎麾下，随征平高州。
English: The great-grandfather went to Niuhuashan to kill all the Han troops. Mu Huali thought that Xun Di'er was available and asked for his release. He was subordinate to Mu Huali and followed the enlistment of Ping Gaozhou.

古文：乙亥，授左监军，佩金符，与北京都元帅吾也儿，分领锦州红罗山、北京东路汉军二万。
现代文：太祖十年，授孛迭儿左监军之职，佩金符，与北京都元帅吾也儿，分领锦州红罗山、北京东路汉军二万人。
English: Ten years after the great-grandfather's death, he was awarded the position of the left supervisor of the army, the Peking gold medal, and the Beijing capital marshal, and he led 20,000 Han troops from the Red Luoshan of Jinzhou and the East Road of Beijing.

古文：又从夺忽阑阇里必徇地山东、大名。
现代文：又随夺忽阑里必征服山东、大名。
English: With the capture of Kunming, Shandong and Daimyo will also be conquered.

古文：比至洺州，城守甚坚，师不得进，孛迭儿不避矢石，率众先登，遂拔之。
现代文：攻氵名州，金军坚守不下，致大军不能继续前进。孛迭儿冒飞箭率众先登城，一举攻克氵名州。
English: In the attack on Yunnan-Mingzhou, the gold army could not hold out, so that the large army could not continue to advance. Xie Di'er took the lead in flying arrows and went to the city first, conquering Yunnan-Mingzhou in one fell swoop.

古文：丁丑，从平益都、沂、密、莱、淄。
现代文：十二年，随大军平定益都、沂州、密州、莱州、淄川诸地。
English: In the twelfth year, with a large army, he conquered the cities of Dingyiddu, Zhangzhou, Mishu, Laizhou, and Beichuan.

古文：戊寅，从定太原、忻、代、平阳、吉、隰、岢岚、汾、石、绛州、河中、潞、泽、辽、沁。
现代文：十三年，又随大军平定太原、忻、代、平阳、吉、隰、岢岚、汾、石、绛州、河中、潞、泽、辽、沁诸郡。
English: In the thirteenth year, he also followed the great army to subdue Taiyuan, Qu, Dai, Pingyang, Ji, Qu, Qu, Qu, Shi, Quzhou, Hechu, Qu, Ze, Liao, and Qu counties.

古文：辛巳，木华黎承制升孛迭儿为龙虎卫上将军、霸州等路元帅，佩金虎符，以黑军镇守固安水寨。
现代文：十六年，木华黎升孛迭儿为龙虎卫上将军、霸州等路元帅，佩金虎符，以黑军镇守固安水寨。
English: In the 16th year, Mu Huali Shengzhe became the general of Longhuwei, the marshal of Bazhou and other roads, and the keeper of Gu'an Water Town with the Black Army.

古文：既至，令兵士屯田，且耕且战，披荆棘，立庐舍，数年之间，城市悉完，为燕京外蔽。
现代文：孛迭儿到任后，令兵士屯田，且耕且战，斩荆棘，建庐舍，数年之间，建成为城市，成了燕京的外围。
English: After Zhu Di'er took office, he ordered the soldiers to occupy the fields, cultivate and fight, cut thorns and build houses. In a few years, it was built into a city and became the periphery of Yanjing.

古文：幼孤，能树立，以骁勇善骑射知名，金末署军都统。
现代文：孛迭儿从开始征伐，到后来为将，大小百战，战功累累，年七十而卒。田雄，字毅英，北京人。年幼丧父，以骁勇善骑射而知名，金末任军都统。
English: From the beginning of the campaign, Xing Di'er was a general in hundreds of battles, large and small, and he died at the age of 70. Tian Xiong, also known as Yi Ying, was from Beijing. He lost his father at a young age and was known for his bravery and skill in riding and shooting. He was the last general of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：岁辛未，太祖军至北京，雄率众出降。太祖以雄隶太师、国王木华黎麾下，从征兴中、广宁诸郡，定府州县二十有九，平锦州张鲸兄弟之乱，从攻柏乡、邢、相。
现代文：太祖六年，蒙古军进至北京，雄率众出降，太祖将他隶属于太师、国王木华黎的麾下，随大军征兴中、广宁诸郡，平定府州县共二十有九，又平定锦州张鲸兄弟之乱，随大军攻柏乡、邢州、相州。
English: In the sixth year of Taizu's reign, the Mongolian army marched into Beijing, and he led the troops to surrender. Taizu subordinated him to Taishi and King Mu Huali. With the army, he conquered the counties of Xingzhong and Guangning, and a total of nine out of twenty counties in Fuzhou. He also conquered the Zhangjiakou Brothers' Rebellion in Jinzhou, and conquered Baixiang, Zhangzhou and Xiangzhou with the army.

古文：辛巳，从攻鄜、坊、绥、葭诸州有功，木华黎承制授雄隰、吉州刺史，兼镇戎军节度使，行都元帅府事，平汾西霍山诸栅。
现代文：太祖十六年，攻、坊、绥、葭诸州有功，木华黎奉命授田雄为隰州、吉州刺史，兼镇戎军节度使，行都元帅府事，平定汾西霍山诸栅寨。
English: In the 16th year of Taizu's reign, he made great contributions in attacking the provinces of Zhouzhou, Fang, Shandong and Yunnan. Mihuali was ordered to appoint Tianxiong as the historian of Zhouzhou and Jizhou, as well as the commander of the Zhenwu army, and he went to the capital as the marshal of the capital to pacify the Hushan Mountains in the west of Yunnan.

古文：壬午，以木华黎命，授河中帅，听石天应节制。
现代文：十七年，据木华黎命令，授雄为河中帅，听石天应调度指挥。
English: In the seventeenth year, according to the order of Mu Huali, Zhu Xiong was the commander of the river, listening to Shi Tian should dispatch command.

古文：太宗时，从攻西和、兴元诸州；又从攻夔、万诸州。
现代文：太宗时，随蒙古大军攻西和、兴元诸州，又攻夔、万诸州。
English: At the time of Emperor Taizong, he led the Mongolian army to invade Xizhe and Xingyuan Provinces, and also invaded Yunnan and Wanzhou.

古文：论功尤最，赐金符，授行军千户，召为御前先锋。
现代文：在这些战役中，田雄功最突出，赐他金符，授行军千户，召为御前先锋。
English: In these battles, Tian Xiong's contribution was the most outstanding. He was given a gold medal, awarded a thousand marching troops, and called to be the vanguard.

古文：顷之，使攻破桢州雷家堡。
现代文：不久，命他攻破桢州雷家堡。
English: Soon, he ordered him to break through the Luzhou Leijia Fort.

古文：奉旨招纳河南降附，得户十三万七千有奇，民皆按堵。
现代文：他奉旨招降河南百姓十三万七千余户，民皆安居。
English: He issued an order to recruit more than 137,000 households of Henan people, and the people all lived safely.

古文：而别部将校纵兵虏掠，民惶惧悔降，雄力为救护，至出己财与之，民得免于害。
现代文：别部的将校则纵兵掳掠，民惶恐不安，悔不该降，雄竭力救护，把自己的钱财给与掠夺者，才使民免于受害。
English: On the other hand, the officers of other departments plotted to kidnap and plunder the soldiers, and the people were panicked and anxious, regretting that they should not surrender, and tried their best to save the people from suffering by giving their money and property to the looters.

古文：癸巳，授镇抚陕西总管京兆等路事。
现代文：太宗五年，授田雄镇抚陕西，总管京兆等路事。
English: In Taizong's fifth year, he was given the title of Tianxiong, the governor of Shaanxi Province, and the governor of Beijing and Shandong Province.

古文：时关中苦于兵革，郡县萧然。
现代文：当时关中苦于战争，郡县萧条。
English: At that time, Guanzhong was suffering from the war and the county was in a depression.

古文：雄披荆棘，立官府，开陈祸福，招徕四山堡寨之未降者，获其人，皆慰遣之，由是来附者日众。雄乃教民力田，京兆大治。
现代文：雄披荆斩棘，设立官府，向百姓说明祸福。招四山堡寨之未降者，来归附的人日多。雄鼓励百姓致力于农业，京兆大治。
English: Xiong cut through the thorns, set up a government office, and explained the misfortune and good fortune to the people. Those who did not descend from the four mountain fortresses were more people. Xiong encouraged the people to devote themselves to agriculture, and the Beijing Zhao Dynasty.

古文：事闻，赐金符。
现代文：朝廷闻知，赐他金符。
English: The imperial court heard about it and gave him a gold medal.

古文：定宗时，入觐于和林。
现代文：定宗时，雄至和林觐见皇帝。
English: At the time of Emperor Jianzong's enthronement, Xiong Zi and Lin Zhen met the emperor.

古文：岁辛巳春，归行台东平严实。
现代文：病逝，年五十八岁，后追封西秦王。赵天锡，字受之，冠氏人。
English: He died of illness at the age of fifty-eight, and was later crowned the King of Western Qin. Zhao Tianxi, also known as Guanzhong, was a member of the Guan family.

古文：实素知天锡名，遂擢隶帐下，从征上党，以功授冠氏令，俄迁元帅左都监，兼令如故。
现代文：金卫绍王大安末年，天锡因以其粮食助军而补修武校尉，又任氵名水县监酒。太祖遣兵南下，防御史苏政任天锡为冠氏县令，天锡引本县百姓避难于桃源、天平诸山中。
English: In the last years of the reign of King Taian of Jinwei and Shao, Tianxi was promoted to the rank of captain of the military school because he helped the army with his grain, and he was also appointed as the overseer of wine in Yanming County. The great-grandfather sent soldiers to the south to defend Shisu County, appointed Tianxi as the county magistrate of Guanxi County, and Tianxi led the people of this county to take refuge in Taoyuan and the mountains of Tianping.

古文：甲申，宋将彭义斌据大名，冠氏元帅李全降之，人心颇摇。
现代文：太祖十六年春，天锡归属于行台东平严实帐下，随征上党，因功授冠氏县令。不久升为元帅左都监，同时兼任冠氏县令。太祖十九年，宋将彭义斌占据大名，冠氏县元帅李全投降彭义斌，致使人心动摇。
English: In the spring of the 16th year of Taizu, Tianxi belonged to the account of Gongtai Dongping Yanshi, and he was enlisted into the party and awarded the order of Guanxi County for his merits. He was soon promoted to Marshal Zuo, and also served as the order of Guanxi County. In the 19th year of Taizu, Song occupied Peng Yibin as daimyo, and Guanxi County Marshal Li Quan surrendered to Peng Yibin, causing people's hearts to be shaken.

古文：天锡令众姑少避其锋，以图后举，乃率将佐往依大将孛里海军。
现代文：天锡令大家暂且回避以图将来，他自己率将佐去投靠大将孛里海。
English: Tian Xi ordered everyone to stay away for the time being in the hope that in the future, he himself would lead Zhao Zuo to the general of the Balinese.

古文：未几，破义斌于真定，授左副元帅、同知大名路兵马都总管事。
现代文：不久，赵天锡破彭义斌于真定，因功授左副元帅、同知大名路兵马都总管事。
English: Soon after, Zhao Tianxi defeated Peng Yibin in Zhending, and was awarded the title of Vice-Marshal of the Left and the chief steward of the Terracotta Warriors and Horses.

古文：李全在大名，结其帅苏椿，纳金河南从宜郑倜，日以取冠氏为事。
现代文：李全在大名，联结大名统帅苏椿，收纳金河南的郑倜，一心想夺取冠氏县。
English: Li Quan was a daimyo, allied with the daimyo commander Su Tsubaki, received Zheng Qi from the south of the Jin River, and single-mindedly wanted to capture Guanxi County.

古文：天锡每战辄胜。
现代文：天锡多次与他们交战，每战必胜。
English: Tianxi fought with them many times and won every battle.

古文：一日，倜自将万人来攻，天锡率死士乘城，力战三昼夜，倜度不能下，乘风霾遁去。
现代文：有一天，郑倜亲自率兵万人来攻，天锡坚守，力战三日三夜，倜估计攻不下，便迅速退走了。
English: One day, Zheng He personally led ten thousand soldiers to attack, Tianxi stood firm and fought for three days and three nights. He estimated that he could not attack, and quickly retreated.

古文：己丑，朝行在所，上便民事，优诏从之。
现代文：太宗元年，赵天锡朝见皇帝，陈奏有利于民的政治措施，太宗采纳。
English: In the first year of Taizong's reign, Zhao Tianxi met with the emperor and proposed political measures that would benefit the people, which were adopted by Taizong.

古文：戊戌，征宋，驻兵蕲、黄间，被病还，卒于冠氏，年五十。
现代文：十年，随大军征宋，驻兵于蕲州、黄州之间，因病还乡，卒于冠氏县，年五十岁。
English: Ten years later, he went to the Song Dynasty with a large army, stationed between Bozhou and Huangzhou, and returned to his hometown due to illness. He died in Guanzhi County at the age of fifty.

古文：子六人，贲亨嗣。贲亨字文甫，袭行军千户。
现代文：赵贲亨，字文甫，赵天锡之子，继承父职为行军千户。
English: Zhao Shunheng, Zi Wenfu, the son of Zhao Tianxi, inherited his father's position as the march of a thousand households.

古文：己未，从国兵渡江攻鄂，有功。
现代文：宪宗九年，从蒙古大军渡长江攻鄂州，有功。
English: In the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, the Mongolian army crossed the Yangtze River to attack Ezhou, which was a great achievement.

古文：至元五年，总管山东诸翼军，征宋，攻襄樊。
现代文：至元五年，总管山东各路兵马，随大军征宋，攻襄樊。
English: In the fifth year of the Yuan Dynasty, the commander-in-chief of all the armies and horses in Shandong marched with a large army to conquer Song and attack Xiangfan.

古文：贲亨出抄蕲、黄，以五百人拔野人原写山寨，修白河新城。
现代文：贲亨出兵攻取蕲、黄二州，派五百人攻破野人原写山寨，修白河新城。
English: Gao Heng dispatched troops to conquer the two states of Yao and Huang, and sent five hundred men to break through the wild man's original writing cottage and build a new city in Baihe.

古文：七年，偕元帅刘整朝京师，命为征行千户，赐金符及衣带鞍马。
现代文：七年，同元帅刘整回京师朝见皇帝。世祖命他为征行千户，赐金符及衣带鞍马。
English: In the seventh year, the same marshal Liu Jing returned to Beijing to see the emperor. The ancestor ordered him to march thousands of households, give gold charms and saddle horses.

古文：攻樊城，冒矢石，拥盾先登，破之。
现代文：在攻樊城的战斗中，贲亨冒着雨一般的流矢，首先登上城墙，攻破樊城。
English: In the battle to conquer Lucheng, Yao Heng braved the rain of arrows and first climbed the city wall to conquer Lucheng.

古文：十一年，修东、西正阳城。
现代文：十一年，修建东、西正阳城。
English: In the eleventh year, the East and West Zhengyang Towns were built.

古文：三月，败夏贵于淮，益以济南、汴梁二路新军。
现代文：三月，在淮上败宋国夏贵军，其部队增补从济南、汴梁二路招来的新兵。
English: In March, Song's Xia Gui Army was defeated in Huai Shang, and its troops were supplemented by new soldiers from Jinan and Qiliang.

古文：十二年正月，从攻镇江，与宋将孙虎臣、张世杰大战于焦山，杀掠甚众。
现代文：十二年正月，随大军攻镇江时，与宋将孙虎臣、张世杰大战于焦山，杀敌甚众。
English: In the first month of the 12th year, when attacking Zhenjiang with a large army, he fought with Song generals Sun Huchen and Zhang Shijie in Jiaoshan, killing many enemies.

古文：十三年，江南平，以功升宣武将军。
现代文：十三年，江南平，贲亨因功升宣武将军。
English: In the thirteenth year of Jiangnanping, Yao Heng was promoted to General Xuanwu for his merits.

古文：十四年，授虎符、怀远大将军、处州路总管府达鲁花赤。未行，适盗发澉浦，行省檄为招讨使，率兵平之。
现代文：至元十四年，授贲亨虎符、怀远大将军、处州路总管府达鲁花赤，尚未动身赴任，逢澉浦地方反元，行省命他为招讨使，率兵平定反抗。
English: In the 14th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Henghuafu, Huaiyuan the Great General, and Daruhua the Red, the head of the General Administration of State Roads, had not yet taken office, but when there was a local rebellion in Lianpu, the provincial government ordered him to recruit envoys and lead troops to quell the rebellion.

古文：贼出战，以精骑蹂之，遂弃城突围散走，斩首三级。
现代文：不久，处州青田县季文龙、章焱等，杀赵知府反叛元朝，同时七县俱反，季文龙自命为两浙安抚使，占据处州天庆观。贲亨率军围攻，大战于下河门，季文龙军败，弃城突围而走。
English: Soon after, Ji Wenlong and Zhang Ye of Quanzhou's Qingtian County killed Zhao Zhifu, who was rebelling against the Yuan Dynasty, and at the same time, seven counties rebelled. Ji Wenlong appointed himself as the two Zhejiang pacification envoys and occupied Quanzhou's Tianqingyuan. Zou Heng led the army to besiege, and the big battle was at the lower river gate. Ji Wenlong's army was defeated and abandoned the city to break through the siege.

古文：贲亨入城，乃招散亡，立官府。
现代文：贲亨入处州城，招抚逃散居民，设立官府。
English: Yan Heng entered the state capital, attracted residents who had fled and dispersed, and established a government office.

古文：章焱复合二万众来攻，阵恶溪南。
现代文：章焱又率二万兵卒来攻，陈兵于恶溪之南。
English: Zhang Xuan led another 20,000 soldiers to attack, and Chen's army was in the south of the Bad Creek.

古文：贲亨分兵拒守，自将精锐乱流冲击，属万户忽都台以援兵至，自巳至亥，贼方退，文龙溺死。
现代文：贲亨一面分兵把守各处，一面自率精兵出战，嘱咐万户忽都台接应。战斗从巳时进行到亥时，叛军方退，季文龙溺死。
English: On the one hand, Shunheng sent detachments of soldiers to guard various places, on the other hand, he led his own elite soldiers into battle and ordered all households to attack the capital. The battle went on from dusk to dawn, the rebel army retreated, and Ji Wenlong drowned.

古文：忽都台以处即乱山为州，无城壁可恃，且反侧，欲屠之，贲亨曰： 我受命来监此郡，贼固可杀，良民何辜！ 
现代文：忽都台认为处州在群山之中，难于坚守，且处州人降叛无常，要把他们杀尽，贲亨制止道： 我们受命来管理此郡，反叛者固可杀，而良民是无罪的。 
English: Kudu-tai thought that Zhanzhou was in the mountains, difficult to hold on to, and that the people of Zhanzhou were capricious and rebellious, and wanted to kill them all. He Heng said: We are ordered to administer this county, the rebels can be killed, but the good people are innocent.

古文：不从。将士虏掠子女金帛，贲亨捕得倡率者杖之，仍各求所失还之，州民悦服。
现代文：忽都台不听，纵将士掳掠子女金帛。贲亨将为首者逮捕施以杖刑，所掠的一切归还原主，州民心悦诚服。
English: Kudu-Tai did not listen, even though he abducted and plundered the children of Jin-Hao. Hao-Hao will arrest the leader and punish him with a cane. Everything that was plundered will be returned to the original owner, and the people of the state will be pleased.

古文：既而衢州贼陈千二聚二万人，遂昌叶丙六亦聚三千人助之，贲亨前后斩首三千余级，悉平之。
现代文：其后，衢州陈千二聚众二万人，遂昌叶丙六亦聚三千人，抗击元军，均为贲亨所平息，前后斩杀三千余人。
English: After that, 20,000 people gathered in Chenchun 2 in Zhangzhou, and 3,000 people gathered in Yiping 6 in Changchun to fight against the Yuan army, both of which were quelled by Yan Heng, and more than 3,000 people were killed.

古文：十七年，改处州路管军万户。
现代文：十七年，改任处州路管军万户。
English: Seventeen years later, he was reassigned to the State Highway Administration.

古文：二十二年，还冠氏，卒，年五十七。
现代文：二十二年回到冠氏县而卒，终年五十七岁。
English: In 1922, he returned to Kwan's County and died at the age of fifty-seven.

