古文：永嘉之乱，海内分崩，伶官乐器，皆没于刘、石。
现代文：永嘉之乱，海内分崩离析，伶官乐器，全都毁于刘渊、石勒之乱。
English: During the Yongjia Rebellion, the country fell apart, and the eunuchs' musical instruments were all destroyed during the Liuyuan Rebellion and the Shihle Rebellion.

古文：江左初立宗庙，尚书下太常祭祀所用乐名。
现代文：在江东初立宗庙时，尚书命太常呈上祭祀所用乐名。
English: When the temple was first established in the eastern part of the Yangtze River, the name of the music used in the rituals was often given by the priest.

古文：太常贺循答云： 魏氏增损汉乐，以为一代之礼，未审大晋乐名所以为异。
现代文：太常贺循回答说： 魏氏增删修订汉乐，因而成为一代之礼乐，但不知大晋乐名为何与以前不同。
English: Too often, He Xun replied: Wei added, deleted and revised Han music, thus becoming a generation of ceremonial music, but I don't know why the name of Dajin music is different from before.

古文：遭离丧乱，旧典不存。
现代文：遭此祸乱以后，旧典已不复存在。
English: After this calamity, the old script ceased to exist.

古文：然此诸乐皆和之以钟律，文之以五声，咏之于歌辞，陈之于舞列。
现代文：然而此诸乐都能以钟律和之，以五声表之于文，加歌辞用于咏唱，伴舞陈之于庭。
English: However, all these pieces of music can be combined with the bell rhythm, with the five-voice table in the text, with the lyrics for the chorus, and with the dance in the court.

古文：宫悬在庭，琴瑟在堂，八音迭奏，雅乐并作，登歌下管，各有常咏，周人之旧也。
现代文：宫悬列于堂阶之前，琴瑟置于堂上，八音诸乐器迭次演奏，合奏雅乐之声，登歌下管，各有其常咏之乐曲，这些都符合周人的旧制。
English: The palace hangs in front of the steps of the hall, the harp is placed on the hall, the eight-note musical instruments are played repeatedly, the ensemble is the voice of classical music, the song is sung under the pipe, and each has its own well-known music, all of which are in line with Zhou's old system.

古文：自汉氏以来，依仿此礼，自造新诗而已。
现代文：自漠代以来，祇是依照此乐，自作新词而已。
English: Since the age of the desert, it has only been possible to create new words in accordance with this music.

古文：旧京荒废，今既散亡，音韵曲折，又无识者，则于今难以意言。 
现代文：旧京荒废，于今乐曲早已散佚，音韵宛转曲折，又无人能识，所以现在很难说清楚。 
English: The old Beijing is deserted, and now the music has long been scattered, the rhyme twists and turns, and no one can understand it, so it is difficult to say clearly now.

古文：于时以无雅乐器及伶人，省太乐并鼓吹令。
现代文：当时因为缺少雅乐乐器和伶人，所以不设太乐及鼓吹令。
English: At that time, due to the lack of elegant musical instruments and musicians, there were no taile and trumpet orders.

古文：是后颇得登歌，食举之乐，犹有未备。
现代文：以后搜集到很多登歌，但食举之乐，尚不完备。
English: Since then, I have collected a lot of songs, but the music of the food drive is not yet complete.

古文：太宁末，明帝又访阮孚等增益之。
现代文：太宁末年，明帝又令阮孚等人加以补充。
English: In the last years of Taining, Emperor Ming also ordered Ruan Fu and others to supplement it.

古文：咸和中，成帝乃复置太乐官，鸠集遗逸，而尚未有金石也。
现代文：咸和年间，成帝才复设太乐官，搜集散佚乐章，但仍缺少金石之乐。
English: During the Haman and Heian periods, Emperor Chengdi re-established the Imperial Music Office and collected scattered musical pieces, but there was still a lack of precious stone music.

古文：庾亮为荆州，与谢尚修复雅乐，未具而亮薨。
现代文：庾亮治荆州时，与谢尚整理雅乐，未完而庾亮死。
English: When Luo Liang governed Jingzhou, he and Xie Shang arranged elegant music, but Luo Liang died before it was finished.

古文：庾翼、桓温专事军旅，乐器在库，遂至朽坏焉。
现代文：庾翼、桓温专事争战，乐器闲置库中，以致全都朽坏在库裹。
English: The harpsichord, the koto, and the koto are all busy fighting, and the musical instruments are idle in the library, so that they are all rotting in the library.

古文：及慕容亻隽平冉闵，兵戈之际，而鄴下乐人亦颇有来者。
现代文：及至慕容俊平定冉闵，双方交战之际，邺下乐人有不少来投奔。
English: By the time Murong Jun had subdued Ran, and the two sides were at war, many of the musicians under his command had defected.

古文：永和十一年，谢尚镇寿阳，于是采拾乐人，以备太乐，并制石磬，雅乐始颇具。
现代文：永和十一年，谢尚镇守寿阳，于是搜求乐人，以充太乐府，并制作石磬，雅乐才稍微完备。
English: In the eleventh year of the Yonghe era, Xie Shang's town became Shouyang, so he searched for musicians to fill the music hall, and made stone cymbals. The elegant music was only slightly complete.

古文：面王猛平鄴，慕容氏所得乐声又入关右。
现代文：然而王猛子邺，慕容氏所得乐声又流入关西。
English: However, Wang Mengzixi did not succeed, and the music obtained by the Murong clan flowed into Kansai.

古文：太元中，破苻坚，又获其乐工杨蜀等，闲习旧乐，于是四厢金石始备焉。
现代文：太元年间，击破苻坚，又俘获其乐工杨蜀等人，娴熟旧乐，于是四厢金石之乐方始完备。
English: In the first year of the Taiyuan era, they defeated the Jiaojian and captured its musicians, Yang Shu and others, who were familiar with the old music. As a result, the Four Quarters of the Jinshi Music Square was completed.

古文：乃使曹毗、王珣等增造宗庙歌诗，然郊祀遂不设乐。
现代文：于是令曹毗、王殉等人增作宗庙歌词，然而四郊祭祀即不再设乐。
English: As a result, Cao Pi, Wang Jie and others were ordered to write more lyrics for the ancestral temple, but the music was no longer set up for the four suburbs.

古文：今列其词于后云。歌宣帝曹毗
现代文：今列其词于后。歌宣帝：曹毗
English: His words are listed below. Emperor Gao Xuan: Cao Pi

古文：于赫高祖，德协灵符。
现代文：呜乎赫哉我高祖，圣德协和与灵符。
English: Woe to my great-grandfather, the embodiment of virtue and the symbol of the spirit.

古文：应运拨乱，厘整天衢。
现代文：顺应期运拨乱世，厘整朝政定天都。
English: Corresponding to the timing of the operation of the chaotic world, the rectification of the political capital of the morning.

古文：勋格宇宙，化动八区。
现代文：勋业巍巍震宇宙，教化洽洽动八区。
English: Distinguished service shakes the universe, and enlightenment moves the eight districts.

古文：肃以典刑，陶以玄珠。
现代文：纲纪整肃以常刑，大道教化以玄珠。
English: For the rectification of discipline, capital punishment is used, and for the enlightenment of the people, the Gem is used.

古文：神石吐瑞，灵芝自敷。
现代文：神石头灵吐祥瑞，灵芝有知自陈敷。
English: The spirit of God stone spits out auspiciousness, and the knowledge of Ganoderma lucidum comes from Chenji.

古文：肇基天命，道均唐虞。
现代文：开创基业应天命，至仁至德齐唐虞。
English: The founding of the foundation was in accordance with the will of heaven, and was from the benevolent to the virtuous Tang Dynasty.

古文：歌景帝曹毗
现代文：歌景帝：曹毗
English: Emperor of Song: Cao Pi

古文：景皇承运，纂隆洪绪。
现代文：景帝承时运，继业兴帝基。
English: Emperor Jing inherited the fortune of the times and was succeeded by Emperor Xing.

古文：皇罗重抗，天晖再举。
现代文：皇纲复重振，天晖再高举。
English: The imperial system was restored and reinvigorated, and the mantle of heaven was once again held high.

古文：蠢矣二寇，扰我扬楚。
现代文：愚蠢二贼寇，扰我扬舆楚。
English: Stupid two thieves, bother me to raise public opinion.

古文：乃整元戎，以膏齐斧。
现代文：平乱整兵车，杀敌膏伐斧。
English: Crush the vehicle and kill the enemy with an axe.

古文：亹亹神算，赫赫王旅。
现代文：用兵如神算，战功振王旅。
English: The use of soldiers is like a divine calculation, and the war is a great success.

古文：鲸鲵既平，功冠帝宇。
现代文：凶逆既已平，功勋冠天宇。
English: The ferocious rebellion has already been quelled, and the meritorious service has been crowned.

古文：歌文帝曹毗
现代文：歌文帝：曹毗
English: Emperor of Song and Literature: Cao Pi

古文：太祖齐圣，王猷诞融。
现代文：太祖庄敬圣明，王圆远大光明。
English: Taizhuang respected Shengming, and Wang Yuan Yuan was very bright.

古文：仁教四塞，天基累崇。
现代文：仁教布于四藩，帝基累积愈崇。
English: Benevolent teachings spread to the four domains, and the imperial foundation gained more and more respect.

古文：皇室多难，严清紫宫。
现代文：皇室命蹇多难，严威澄清紫宫。
English: The imperial family's life is full of difficulties, and the Purple Palace has been sternly clarified.

古文：威厉秋霜，惠过春风。
现代文：威仪烈过秋霜，恩泽惠胜春风。
English: Dignity prevails over the autumn frost, grace and benefit prevail over the spring breeze.

古文：平蜀夷楚，以文以戎。
现代文：平定蜀楚两地，经纬以文以戎。
English: The two regions of Shu and Chu were pacified, and the longitude and latitude were improved.

古文：奄有参墟，声流无穷。
现代文：功高乃有三墟，声名流芳无穷。
English: He was highly regarded in the Three Kingdoms, and his fame spread far and wide.

古文：歌武帝曹毗
现代文：歌武帝：曹毗
English: Emperor of Song: Cao Pi

古文：于穆武皇，允龚钦明。
现代文：穆穆我武皇，承继祖钦明。
English: Mu Mu I am the Emperor Wu, the successor of the ancestor Qin Ming.

古文：应期登禅，龙飞紫庭。
现代文：应期登帝位，龙飞在紫庭。
English: Long Fei ascended to the throne at the right time.

古文：百揆时序，听断以情。
现代文：百事理有序，听讼断以情。
English: The hearing was orderly, and the case was dismissed with prejudice.

古文：殊域既宾，伪吴亦平。
现代文：异域既宾服，伪吴亦扫平。
English: Exotic guest clothes and pseudo-Wu Sweeping.

古文：晨流甘露，宵映朗星。
现代文：晨明流甘露，宵夜映朗星。
English: In the morning, the stream of nectar flows, and in the evening, the stars shine.

古文：野有击壤，路垂颂声。
现代文：野有击壤歌，路垂颂德声。
English: There are songs about hitting the ground, and songs about the road.

古文：歌元帝曹毗
现代文：歌元帝：曹毗
English: Song originator: Cao Pi

古文：运屯百六，天罗解贯。
现代文：时运多艰难，天网欲解贯。
English: Times are tough, and Skynet is trying to figure it out.

古文：元皇勃兴，网笼江汉。
现代文：丞皇振朝纲，纲罗罩辽坠。
English: Emperor Zhen Zhaozhong, Zhan Luo Guo Liao Jiao.

古文：仰齐七政，俯平祸乱。
现代文：仰而齐七政，俯则平祸乱。
English: Uprightness brings about the seven political systems, while downrightness brings about chaos.

古文：化若风行，泽犹雨散。
现代文：教化如风行，泽惠犹雨散。
English: Indoctrination is all the rage, and the benefits of education are few and far between.

古文：沦光更曜，金辉复焕。
现代文：碧波更光耀，金辉复焕然。
English: The green wave shines brighter, and the golden glow is rejuvenated.

古文：德冠千载，蔚有余粲。
现代文：圣德冠千载，文蔚有余灿。
English: A thousand years of sacred virtue crowned, the text is still brilliant.

古文：歌明帝曹毗
现代文：歌明帝：曹毗
English: Emperor Ming's Poetry: Cao Pi

古文：明明肃祖，阐弘帝祚。
现代文：睿智明察卢担，光大弘扬帝图。
English: The wise see through the deception, and glorify the emperor.

古文：英风夙发，清晖载路。
现代文：俊姿英风早发，清明光辉载途。
English: He was handsome and dashing at an early age, with a bright and shining future.

古文：奸逆纵忒，罔式皇度。
现代文：奸贼逆臣恣纵，无视我皇法度。
English: Treacherous traitors act arbitrarily, ignoring the Emperor's edicts.

古文：躬振硃旗，遂豁天步。
现代文：躬身亲摇朱旗，豁然开朗天步。
English: Bowing down and waving the red flag, he suddenly became cheerful.

古文：宏猷允塞，高罗云布。
现代文：大业宏圃充实，天罗如云密布。
English: The macro-field of Daye is rich, and the sky is full of clouds.

古文：品物咸宁，洪基永固。
现代文：万物均得安宁，洪基从此永固。
English: All things were peaceful, and Hongji was secure forever.

古文：歌成帝曹毗
现代文：歌成帝：曹毗
English: Song Emperor: Cao Pi

古文：于休显宗，道泽玄播。
现代文：呜乎美哉我题塞，道如泽深自远播。
English: I'm so beautiful I can't write, I'm so deep I can't see.

古文：式宣德音，暢物以和。
现代文：法度和协宣德音，畅茂万物惠风和。
English: The sound of the law and the joint proclamation will bring prosperity to all things.

古文：迈德蹈仁，匪礼不过。
现代文：肃敬勉力行仁德，非礼之事不越过。
English: Respectfully and diligently practice benevolence, and do not overstep the bounds of propriety.

古文：敷以纯风，濯以清波。
现代文：树德犹如布纯风，行仁恰似浊清波。
English: The virtue of trees is like the pure wind of cloth, and the practice of benevolence is just like the clear wave of ripples.

古文：连理映阜，鸣凤栖柯。
现代文：连理仁木映大地，祥鸟鸣凤栖树柯。
English: LianRenMoku reflects the earth, and the auspicious bird sings FengSuiShuKe.

古文：同规放勋，义盖山河。
现代文：教化四布遵帝尧，仁义施行盖山河。
English: The four aspects of edification and reform are in accordance with the emperor's edict, and benevolence and righteousness are implemented to cover mountains and rivers.

古文：歌康帝曹毗
现代文：歌康帝：曹毗
English: Emperor Kangxi's Song: Cao Pi

古文：康皇穆穆，仰嗣洪德。
现代文：穆穆我康皇，仰其嗣洪德。
English: Mu Mu, I am Emperor Kang, calling his heir Hong De.

古文：为而不宰，雅音四塞。
现代文：有为而不宰，雅音传四塞。
English: If you don't kill, you don't kill.

古文：闲邪以诚，镇物以默。
现代文：防邪自以诚，镇物以玄默。
English: The prevention of evil depends on sincerity, and the suppression of evil depends on secrecy.

古文：威静区宇，道宣邦国。
现代文：威仪静宇内，道宣布邦国。
English: In the grandeur of Jingyunai, the province declared itself a state.

古文：歌穆帝曹毗孝宗夙哲，休音久臧。
现代文：歌穆帝：曹毗孝宗夙睿哲，美名堪称扬。
English: Emperor Qomolangma: Cao Pi Xiaozong was a scholar and a wise man, and his name is worthy of praise.

古文：如彼晨离，耀景扶桑。
现代文：德如彼晨明，日耀拂扶桑。
English: Virtue is like the morning light, the sun shines on the morning dew.

古文：垂训华幄，流润八荒。
现代文：垂训在华帐，流润至八方。
English: The drills were held in Huazhu, and the drills flowed to Happo.

古文：幽赞玄妙，爰该典章。
现代文：幽深赞玄妙，渊博合典章。
English: Profound praise, profound ceremony.

古文：西平僭蜀，北静旧疆。
现代文：西以平伪蜀，北而静旧疆。
English: Pinghu and Shuxu in the west, and the old territory of Jing in the north.

古文：高猷远暢，朝有遗芳。
现代文：高谋达悠远，代代有遣芳。
English: Gao Miao reaches far and wide, generation after generation, there are envoys.

古文：歌哀帝曹毗于穆哀皇，圣心虚远。
现代文：歌哀童：曹毗大哉我哀皇，至圣心虚远。
English: Song mourner: Cao Pi is great, I mourn for the emperor, but the Sacred Heart is far away.

古文：雅好玄古，大庭是践。
现代文：风雅好玄古，履践则控农。
English: The style favors the ancient, while the practice is controlled by the modern.

古文：道尚无为，治存易简。
现代文：道德尚无为，施政存易简。
English: Morality is not yet effective, and it is easier to keep politics simple.

古文：化若风行，时犹草偃。
现代文：教化若风行，民从犹草偃。
English: If indoctrination becomes popular, people will turn away from Judaism.

古文：虽曰登遐，徽音弥阐。
现代文：虽说帝已崩，德音愈彰颢。
English: Although the emperor has passed away, the virtue of the emperor has become more and more prominent.

古文：愔愔《云》《韶》，尽美尽善。
现代文：《云》《韶》静情情，颂德尽美善。
English: "Clouds," "Clouds," "Clouds," "Clouds," "Clouds," "Clouds," "Clouds," "Clouds," "Clouds,"

古文：歌简文帝王珣
现代文：歌简文帝：王殉
English: Song of Emperor Jianwen: "Wang Jie"

古文：皇矣简文，于昭于天。
现代文：皇皇简文帝，其光照于天。
English: Emperor Jianwen, whose light shines in the sky.

古文：灵明若神，周淡如川。
现代文：灵明如神助，恬淡若大渊。
English: Clever as a genie, but dull as a puddle.

古文：冲应其来，实与其迁。
现代文：虚静应其来，实与其同迁。
English: Falsehood follows it, and truth goes with it.

古文：亹亹心化，日用不言。
现代文：心意娓娓化，日用从不言。
English: The mind is calcified, the daily routine is never mentioned.

古文：易而有亲，简而可传。
现代文：心易而有亲，行简而可传。
English: Easy and familiar, simple and transferable.

古文：观流弥远，求本逾玄。
现代文：流布观弥远，求本固愈玄。
English: The spread of the view is far and wide, and the pursuit of the root is more and more profound.

古文：歌孝武帝王珣天监有晋，钦哉烈宗。
现代文：歌孝武帝：王殉上天监我大晋，钦哉穆穆烈宗。
English: Emperor Gao Xiaowu: Wang Zhisheng Tianjun I Dajin, Qianya Mu Mulezong.

古文：同规文考，玄默允恭。
现代文：圣德齐同文考，深沉语默貌恭。
English: Sanctity and morality go hand in hand in the examination of the same text.

古文：威而不猛，约而能通。
现代文：有威行而不猛，简约政和令通。
English: Dictatorship rather than violence, simplicity and order prevail.

古文：神钲一震，九域来同。
现代文：神釭声震海内，九域莫不来同。
English: The sound of God's shofar shakes the sea, and there is no place in the nine regions where it is not heard.

古文：道积淮海，雅颂自东。
现代文：圣道积于淮海，雅颂之声自束。
English: The sacred road is located in the Huaihai Sea, and the voice of the elegy is self-contained.

古文：气陶醇露，化协时雍。
现代文：气韵陶如醇露，教化协若和风。
English: The qi rhyme of pottery is like alcohol dew, and enlightenment and harmonization are like the wind.

古文：四时祠祀曹毗
现代文：四时祠祀：曹毗
English: Four o'clock shrine: Cao Pi

古文：肃肃清庙，巍巍圣功。
现代文：肃肃祖宗清庙，巍巍诸神圣功。
English: The solemn ancestor Qing Temple, the sacred merit.

古文：万国来宾，礼仪有容。
现代文：万国诸侯来朝，礼仪行止有容。
English: Princes from all over the world come to the DPRK, and they behave with proper etiquette.

古文：钟鼓振，金石熙。
现代文：钟鼓声声，金石熙熙。
English: The sound of the bells and drums, Kim Seok Hee.

古文：宣兆祚，武开基。
现代文：宣帝兆祚，武皇开基。
English: Emperor Xuan Zhaohui and Emperor Wu laid the foundation stone.

古文：神斯乐兮！
现代文：诸神其乐兮!
English: The gods are amused!

古文：理管弦，有来斯和。
现代文：理我管弦，有来即和。
English: Manage my orchestra, and it will come and go.

古文：说功德，吐清歌。
现代文：述说功德，以吐清歌。
English: Describe the merits, to spit out a clear song.

古文：神斯乐兮！
现代文：诸神其乐兮!
English: The gods are amused!

古文：洋洋玄化，润被九壤。
现代文：洋洋玄化之乐，仁德泽及九壤。
English: The music of Westernization, starring Ren Deze and Jiuzhaigou.

古文：民无不悦，道无不往。
现代文：万民无有不悦，政通无有不往。
English: There is no discontent among the people, and there is no reluctance on the part of the politicians.

古文：礼有仪，乐有式。
现代文：礼仪有节，乐奏有式。
English: The etiquette has festivals, the music has rhythms.

古文：咏九功，永无极。
现代文：咏唱九功，永享无极。
English: There is no end to the enjoyment of singing the nine meritorious deeds.

古文：神斯乐兮！
现代文：诸神其乐兮!
English: The gods are amused!

古文：汉时有《短箫铙歌》之乐，其曲有《硃鹭》、《思悲翁》、《艾如张》、《上之回》、《雍离》、《战城南》、《巫山高》、《上陵》、《将进酒》、《君马黄》、《芳树》、《有所思》、《雉子班》、《圣人出》、《上邪》、《临高台》、《远如期》、《石留》、《务成》、《玄云》、《黄爵行》《钓竿》等曲，列于鼓吹，多序战阵之事。
现代文：汉时有《短箫铙歌》之乐，其曲有《朱鹭》、《思悲翁》、《艾如张》、《上之回》、《雍离》、《战城南》、《巫山高》、《上陵》、《将进酒》、《君马黄》、《芳树》、《有所思》、《雉子班》、《圣人出》、壮邪》、《临高台》、《远如期》、《石留》、《务成》、《玄云》、《黄爵行》、《钓竿》等曲，列于鼓吹乐，多叙战阵之事。
English: In the Han Dynasty, there was the music of the "Short Elegy," whose songs included "Zhu Xi," "Sadman," "Ai Ruzhang," "Upper Return," "Yong Li," "Sengcheng South," "Wushan High," "Upper Mausoleum," "Will go into the wine," "Junma Huang," "Fang Shu," "Thoughtful," "Dice Class," "Sage Out," "Fierce Evil," "Lin Gaodai," "Far as the Wind," "Stone Stay," "Success," "Dark Cloud," "Yellow Knight," "Fishing Rod" and other songs, which were listed in the

古文：改《艾如张》为《获吕布》，言曹公东围临淮，擒吕布也。
现代文：及魏代汉，改其十二曲名，使缪袭作词，叙述魏代漠的功德。改《朱鹭》为《楚之平》，述魏。改《思悲翁》为《战荣阳》，述曹公。改《艾如张》为获吕布》，述曹公东围临淮，擒吕布。
English: and the Wei Dynasty and Han Dynasty, changed the names of its twelve pieces, made Miao Miao the author of the lyrics, and described the merits of the Wei Dynasty. Changed "Zhu Xi" to "Chu Zhiping" and described Wei. Changed "Sidebar" to "War Rongyang" and described Cao Gong. Changed "Ai Ruzhang" to "Got Lvbu" and described Cao Gong's eastward encirclement of Linhuai and the capture of Lvbu.

古文：改《上之回》为《克官渡》，言曹公与袁绍战，破之于官渡也。
现代文：改《上之回》为《克官渡》，述曹公与袁绍之战，破袁绍于官渡。
English: "Upper Return" was changed to "Overcoming Guandu," which described the battle between Cao Gong and Yuan Shao, defeating Yuan Shao at Guandu.

古文：改《雍离》为《旧邦》，言曹公胜袁绍于官渡，还谯收藏死亡士卒也。
现代文：改《雍离》为《旧邦》，述曹公战胜袁绍于官渡，回谯收埋死亡士卒。
English: "Yong Liang" was changed to "Old State," which described Cao Gong's victory over Yuan Shao at Guandu and the burial of dead soldiers at Hui Xuan.

古文：改《战城南》为《定武功》，言曹公初破鄴，武功之定始乎此也。
现代文：改《战城南》为《定武功》，述曹公初破邺，武功始定于此。
English: "Shencheng South" was changed to "Fixed Martial Arts," describing Cao Gong's first breakthrough, and the beginning of martial arts.

古文：改《巫山高》为《屠柳城》，言曹公越北塞，历白檀，破三郡乌桓于柳城也。
现代文：改《巫山高》为《屠柳城》，述曹公越过北部边塞，经白檀，击破三郡乌桓于柳城。
English: "Wushan High School" was changed to "Tu Liucheng," describing Cao Gong crossing the northern border fortress, passing through Bai Dan, and breaking through the three counties of Wu Huan in Liucheng.

古文：改《上陵》为《平南荆》，言曹公平荆州也。
现代文：改《上陵》为《平南荆》，述曹公平定荆州。
English: "Shangling" was changed to "Pingnanjing" to describe Cao Jingjing.

古文：改《将进酒》为《平关中》，言曹公征马超，定关中也。
现代文：改《将进酒》为《平关中》，述曹公征马超，平定关中。
English: Change "Will into wine" to "Pingguanzhong," describing Cao Gong's enlistment of Ma Chao and the pacification of Guanzhong.

古文：改《有所思》为《应帝期》，言文帝以圣德受命，应运期也。
现代文：改《有所思》为《应帝期》，述文帝以圣德称帝，应天期运。
English: He changed "Having Thoughts" to "Becoming the Emperor," and described Emperor Wen as the emperor with sacred virtue, who was destined for the heavenly kingdom.

古文：改《芳树》为《邕熙》，言魏氏临其国，君臣邕穆，庶绩咸熙也。
现代文：改《芳树》为《邕熙》，述魏氏君临其国，君臣和睦，众多政绩都很显著。
English: "Fangshu" was changed to "Jingxi," which described the Wei dynasty's reign in his country, the harmony between the emperor and his subjects, and many remarkable political achievements.

古文：改《上邪》为《太和》，言明帝继体承统，太和改元，德泽流布也。
现代文：改《上邪》为《太和》，述明帝继体制承传统，改元太和，德泽流布。
English: He changed "Supreme Evil" to "Taihe," describing the Ming Dynasty's succession system to carry on the tradition, changing the original to Taihe, and popularizing Dezhe.

古文：其余并同旧名。
现代文：其余并同旧名。
English: The rest will keep their old names.

古文：是时吴亦使韦昭制十二曲名，以述功德受命。
现代文：此时呈也令韦昭制十二曲名，以述功德受命。
English: At this time, he also ordered Wei Zhaozhe to prepare twelve pieces of names to describe his merits.

古文：改《硃鹭》为《炎精缺》，言汉室衰，孙坚奋迅猛志，念在匡救，王迹始乎此也。
现代文：改《朱鹭》为《炎精缺》，述漠室衰微，孙坚奋志迅猛，意在匡救，王迹始于此。
English: "Zhu Xi" was changed to "Flame and Essence Deficiency," which described the decline of the desert room, and Sun Jianfeng's rapid ambition, which was intended to be a rescue. The king's trail began here.

古文：改《思悲翁》为《汉之季》，言坚悼汉之微，痛董卓之乱，兴兵奋击，功盖海内也。
现代文：改《思悲翁》为《汉之季》，述孙坚哀伤漠之衰微，痛恨茎皇之乱，兴兵奋击，功盖海内。
English: He changed "Pathetic Man" to "Season of Han," telling of Sun Jian's sorrow at the decline of his family, his hatred of the Stem Emperor's Rebellion, his efforts to raise an army, and his exploits at sea.

古文：改《艾如张》为《摅武师》，言权卒父之业而征伐也。
现代文：改《艾如张》为《摅武师》，述孙挞完成父业而行征伐。
English: "Ai Ruzhang" was changed to "Xing Wuxi," which described how Sun Yat-sen completed his father's work and went on a campaign.

古文：改《上之回》为《乌林》，言魏武既破荆州，顺流东下，欲来争锋，权命将周瑜逆击之于乌林而破走也。
现代文：改《上之回》为《乌林》，述魏武攻克荆州以后，顺流东下，欲来争锋，孙权命将领周瑜于乌林迎击而破之使其败逃。
English: "Upstream" was changed to "Ulin." It described how, after Wei and Wu conquered Jingzhou, they sailed down the East River and wanted to fight. Sun Quan's general Zhou Yu met them at Ulin and defeated them, causing them to flee.

古文：改《雍离》为《秋风》，言权悦以使人，人忘其死也。
现代文：改《雍离》为《秋风》，述孙权用人而使其悦服，人忘其死。
English: He changed "Yong Liang" to "Autumn Breeze" and said that Sun Quan used people to make him happy, and people forgot his death.

古文：改《战城南》为《克皖城》，言魏武志图并兼，而权亲征，破之于皖也。
现代文：改《战城南》为《克皖城》，述魏武志在兼并，而孙权亲征，于皖城击破曹军。
English: "Sengcheng South" was changed to "Kuncheng," describing Wei Wuzhi's annexation, while Sun Quan personally defeated Cao's army in Kuncheng.

古文：改《巫山高》为《关背德》，言蜀将关羽背弃吴德，权引师浮江而擒之也。
现代文：改《巫山高》为《关背德》，述蜀将关羽背弃吴国恩德，孙权发兵浮江而擒关羽。
English: "Wushan High School" was changed to "Guanbei De" to describe Shu's turning his back on Wu Guo Ende, and Sun Quan's sending troops to attack Guanbei.

古文：改《上陵曲》为通荆州，言权与蜀交好齐盟，中有关羽自失之愆，终复初好也。
现代文：改《上陵曲》为《通荆州》，述孙权舆蜀交好结成同盟，其间虽有关羽自失之罪，终于修复初好。
English: He changed "Shanglinqu" to "Tongjingzhou" and described the alliance between Sun Quan and Shushou, during which, although there was a sin of self-deception, the original good was finally restored.

古文：改《将进酒》为《章洪德》，言权章其大德，而远方来附也。
现代文：改《将进酒》为《章洪德》，述孙权彰明其大德，远方齐来归附。
English: He changed "Will into wine" to "Chang Hongde" and described Sun Quan's great virtue. People from far and wide came to follow him.

古文：改《有所思》为《顺历数》，言权顺箓图之符，而建大号也。
现代文：改《有所思》为《顺历数》，述孙权顺应圃录符命，而建大号。
English: He changed "Wondering" to "Number of Successions," describing Sun Quan's compliance with the life of the record, and building a large number.

古文：改《芳树》为《承天命》，言其时主圣德践位，道化至盛也。
现代文：改《芳树》为《承天命》，述吴国当时君主以圣德登帝位，教化盛行。
English: "Fangshu" was changed to "Heir to the Mandate of Heaven," which described the reign of the Emperor of the State of Wu, who ascended to the throne as a saint, and the spread of enlightenment.

古文：改《上邪曲》为《玄化》，言其时主修文武，则天而行，仁泽流洽，天下喜乐也。
现代文：改《上邪曲》为《玄化》，述其时主修文修武，顺天而行，仁泽流布和洽，天下喜乐。
English: He changed "Supreme Evil" to "Hypocrisy" and said that at that time, he was majoring in literature and martial arts, walking along the sky, spreading benevolence and harmony, and bringing joy to the world.

古文：其余亦用旧名不改。
现代文：其余同样用旧名不改。
English: The rest will keep their old names.

古文：及武帝受禅，乃令傅玄制为二十二篇，亦述以功德代魏。
现代文：及武帝受命登帝位，即令傅玄作歌二十二篇，亦述晋以功德代魏。
English: And Emperor Wu was ordered to ascend to the throne, and Fu Xuan was ordered to write 22 poems, and it is also described that he ascended to the throne of Wei with merit.

古文：改《硃鹭》为《灵之祥》，言宣帝之佐魏，犹虞舜之事尧，既有石瑞之徵，又能用武以诛孟达之逆命也。
现代文：改《朱鹭》为《灵之祥》，述宣帝佐魏，就像虞舜事尧，既有石瑞祥兆，又能用武力诛除抗命的孟达。
English: Change "Zhu Xi" to "Ling Zhi Xiang" and describe Emperor Xuanzang Zi Wei, just like the story of Ying Zi, who has both the stone Rui Xiang Zhao and can use force to eliminate the Meng Da who resists orders.

古文：改《思悲翁》为《宣受命》，言宣帝御诸葛亮，养威重，运神兵，亮震怖而死也。
现代文：改《思悲翁》为《宣受命》，述宣帝抵御诸葛亮，积威重，运神兵，诸葛亮震恐而死。
English: Change "The Tragedian" to "The Mandate of Xuan," which describes Emperor Xuan resisting Zhuge Liang, who is very powerful, and dispatching divine soldiers. Zhuge Liang dies of shock and fear.

古文：改《艾如张》为《征辽东》，言宣帝陵大海之表，讨灭公孙氏而枭其首也。
现代文：改《艾如张》为《征辽东》，述宣帝越过大海之外，讨灭公孙氏而枭其首。
English: He changed "Ai Ruzhang" to "Conquest of Liaodong," describing Emperor Xuan as crossing the sea to exterminate the Gongsun clan and beheading them.

古文：改《上之回》为《宣辅政》，言宣帝圣道深远，拨乱反正，网罗文武之才，以定二仪之序也。
现代文：改《上之回》为《宣辅政》，述宣帝圣德深远，拨乱反正，纲罗文武人才，以定天地之秩序。
English: He changed "Upper Return" to "Announcement and Subsidiary Government," describing the far-reaching virtue of Emperor Xuanwu, the rectification of chaos, and the establishment of the order of heaven and earth by enlisting literary and military talents.

古文：改《雍离》为《时运多难》，言宣帝致讨吴方，有征无战也。
现代文：改《雍离》为《时运多难》，述宣帝出征讨伐吴国，有征无战。
English: "Yong Liang" was changed to "Difficult Times," which described Emperor Xuan's expedition to subjugate the State of Wu. There was no expedition and no war.

古文：改《战城南》为《景龙飞》，言景帝克明威教，赏顺夷逆，隆无疆，崇洪基也。
现代文：改《战城南》为《景龙飞》，述景帝彰显威教，赏顺平逆，兴盛无疆，使帝基更加高大。
English: "South of the Warring States" was changed to "The Flight of the Dragon," which described Emperor Jing as a tyrant, praising peace and prosperity, and making the imperial family even greater.

古文：改《巫山高》为《平玉衡》，言景帝一万国之殊风，齐四海之乖心，礼贤养士，而纂洪业也。
现代文：改《巫山高》为《平玉衡》，述景帝统一万国殊风异俗，齐同四海乖离之心，礼贤养士，以继承洪业。
English: "Wushan High School" was changed to "Pingyuheng," which described the unification of the Emperor Jing, the unique customs of all countries, the heart of separation from the four seas, and the virtuous nurses to inherit Hongye.

古文：改《上陵》为《文皇统百揆》，言文帝始统百揆，用人有序，以敷太平之化也。
现代文：改《上陵》为《文皇统百揆》，述文帝始统百政，用人有序，以施布太平之教化。
English: "Jangling Tombs" was changed to "Wen Wang Dui Bao" (Wen Wang Dui Bao), which described the emperor's first 100 policies, the order in which they were carried out, and the pacifist enlightenment.

古文：改《将进酒》为《因时运》，言因时运变，圣谋潜施，解长蛇之交，离群桀之党，以武济文，以迈其德也。
现代文：改《将进酒》为《因时运》，述根据时运变化，暗施圣谋，解脱长蛇交蟠，离散群桀党徒，以武济文，勉行其德。
English: "Will drink wine" was changed to "Due to time," describing the changes in time, secretly plotting, getting rid of the long snake, dispersing the party members, and using martial arts to practice their virtue.

古文：改《有所思》为《惟庸蜀》，言文帝既平万乘之蜀，封建万国，复五等之爵也。
现代文：改《有所思》为《惟庸蜀》，述文帝平定万乘蜀国以后，分封万国诸侯，恢复五等爵号。
English: He changed "somewhat thoughtful" to "sincere," and after Emperor Wenzong conquered Manchukuo, he was given the title of "Prince of All Nations" and the title of "Fifth Rank" was restored.

古文：改《芳树》为《天序》，言圣皇应历受禅，弘济大化，用人各尽其才也。
现代文：改《芳树》为《天序》，述圣皇应历敷登帝位，大济天下生灵，用人各尽其才。
English: He changed "Fang Shu" to "Heavenly Order," describing that the Holy Emperor should ascend to the throne in accordance with the chronology, greatly benefit the world's living beings, and employ people to the best of their abilities.

古文：改《上邪》为《大晋承运期》，言圣皇应箓受图，化象神明也。
现代文：改《上邪》为《大晋承运期》，述圣皇应录受图，教化像神明。
English: He changed "Supreme Evil" to "Dajin Carrying Period" and described the Holy Emperor's acceptance of the picture and his transformation into a god.

古文：改《君马黄》为《金灵运》，言圣皇践阼，致敬宗庙，而孝道行于天下也。
现代文：改《君马黄》为《金灵运》，述圣皇即位，致祭礼敬宗庙，因而孝道行于天下。
English: He changed "Junma Huang" to "Jin Lingyun," which described the enthronement of the Holy Emperor and the offering of sacrifices to the ancestral temple, thus promoting the practice of filial piety throughout the world.

古文：改《雉子班》为《于穆我皇》，言圣皇受禅，德合神明也。
现代文：改《雉子班》为《于穆我皇》，述圣皇受禅，其德合于神明。
English: He changed "The Dice Game" to "In the presence of the Emperor Mu," which describes the Holy Emperor receiving Zen, whose virtues are in accordance with the gods.

古文：改《圣人出》为《仲春振旅》，言大晋申文武之教，畋猎以时也。
现代文：改《圣人出》为《仲春振旅》，述大晋宣扬文武之教，以时行畋猎之事。
English: He changed "The Sage's Departure" to "Jung Chun Zhen Liang," which describes Dajin's preaching of the teachings of literature and martial arts, and his hunting expeditions.

古文：改《临高台》为《夏苗田》，言大晋畋狩顺时，为苗除害也。
现代文：改《临高台》为《夏苗田》，述大晋行畋猎顺应时令，为禾苗除害。
English: "Linggaodai" was changed to "Summer Seedling Field" to describe Dajin's hunting according to the season to eliminate the harm to the seedlings.

古文：改《远如期》为《仲秋狝田》，言大晋虽有文德，不废武事，顺时以杀伐也。
现代文：改《远如期》为《仲秋猬田》，述大晋虽有文德，但不废武事，顺时以行杀伐。
English: "Far as it is" was changed to "Mid-Autumn Ploughing," which said that although Dajin had culture and virtue, he did not waste martial arts, and killed in accordance with the time.

古文：改《石留》为《顺天道》，言仲冬大阅，用武修文，大晋之德配天也。
现代文：改《石留》为《顺天道》，述仲冬大阅军旅，用武修文，大卖之德配天。
English: He changed "Shi Liu" to "Shun Tian Dao," describing the mid-winter grand military parade, using martial arts to revise the text, and selling the virtues to match the heavens.

古文：改《务成》为《唐尧》，言圣皇陟帝位，德化光四表也。
现代文：改《务成》为《唐尧》，述圣皇登帝位，道德教化光照四海之外。
English: He changed "Rongcheng" to "Tang Zi," describing the Holy Emperor's ascension to the throne, and the moral enlightenment shining beyond the four seas.

古文：《玄云》依旧名，言圣皇用人，各尽其材也。
现代文：《玄云》仍依旧名，述圣皇用人，各尽其才。
English: "Xuan Yun" is still famous, telling the story of the Holy Emperor using people, each to the best of their ability.

古文：改《黄爵行》为《伯益》，言赤乌衔书，有周以兴，今圣皇受命，神雀来也。
现代文：改《黄爵行》为《伯益》，述赤乌衔书，周朝兴起，今圣皇受天命，神雀飞至。
English: "Huang Jue Xing" was changed to "Bo Yi," the story of the Red Emperor Wuyi, the Zhou Dynasty arose, and now the Holy Emperor received the mandate of heaven, and the Divine Sparrow flew to him.

古文：《钓竿》依旧名，言圣皇德配尧舜，又有吕望之佐，济大功，致太平也。
现代文：《钓竿》仍依旧名，述圣皇德配尧舜，又有如吕望之贤才辅佐，成就大功，达致太平。
English: "Fishing Rod" is still famous, describing the holy emperor's moral compass, with the assistance of such sages as Lü Wangzhi, achieving great success and achieving peace.

古文：其辞并列之于后云。灵之祥
现代文：其辞均列之于后。《灵之祥》
English: His words are listed below. 《靈之祥》

古文：灵之祥，石瑞章。
现代文：神灵呈祥，石瑞显彰。
English: The deity is auspicious, and the stone is auspicious.

古文：旌金德，出西方。
现代文：旌扬金德，出自西方。
English: Yang Jinde, from the west.

古文：天降命，授宣皇。
现代文：天降大命，授我宣皇。
English: God willing, I will be proclaimed emperor.

古文：应期运，时龙骧。
现代文：应乱世之期运，成一代之龙骧。
English: Due to the timing of the turbulent world, the dragon flies in one generation.

古文：继大舜，佐陶唐。
现代文：圣德继承大舜，如舜辅佐陶唐。
English: Sanctity inherits great power, such as Gong Fu Suo Tao Tang.

古文：赞武文，建帝纲。
现代文：辅助魏武魏文，建立朝纪帝纲。
English: Auxiliary WeiWuWeiWen, the establishment of the imperial discipline system.

古文：孟氏叛，据南疆。
现代文：孟氏逆命叛乱，雄据我之南疆。
English: The Meng family rebelled against fate, and our southern Xinjiang became the epicenter.

古文：追有扈，乱五常。
现代文：追随古之有扈，淆乱人伦五常。
English: Following the ancients, there is confusion, confusion, confusion, confusion, confusion.

古文：吴寇叛，蜀虏强。
现代文：东呈贼寇作乱，酉堡强虏猖狂。
English: In the east, there was a riot caused by thieves, and strong-arm robbery of bunkers was rampant.

古文：交誓盟，连遐荒。
现代文：相互交好结盟，连接东西远荒。
English: Mutual friendship and alliance, connecting the East and the West.

古文：宣赫怒，奋鹰扬。
现代文：宣皇赫然震怒，威武如鹰奋扬。
English: Emperor Xuan Rong was furious, and his power was like that of an eagle.

古文：震乾威，曜电光。陵九天，陷石城。
现代文：势犹雷震天威，迅如闪耀电光，上凌九天，下陷石城。
English: The powerful thunder and lightning shook the heavens, and the lightning speed was so fast that it took nine days to go up and nine days to go down in Shicheng.

古文：枭逆命，拯有生。
现代文：枭逆首级，拯救苍生。
English: Don't cut off the head, save the life.

古文：万国安，四海宁。
现代文：万国安定，四海宁静。
English: All countries are stable and the four seas are tranquil.

古文：宣受命
现代文：《宣受命》
English: "The Mandate"

古文：宣受命，应天机，风云时动神龙飞。
现代文：宣帝受大命，顺天应时运。风云时变幻，神龙终飞天。
English: Emperor Xuan was given a great mission, and he followed the heavens according to the time. When the wind and clouds changed, the divine dragon finally flew into the sky.

古文：御葛亮，镇雍梁。
现代文：抵御诸葛亮，镇守在雍梁。
English: Defend against Zhuge Liang, the town guard in Yongliang.

古文：边境安，夷夏康。
现代文：边境得安定，夷夏复乐康。
English: The border has been stabilized, and the people of Yixia have returned to a happy and healthy life.

古文：务节事，勤定倾。
现代文：专心务节制，勤勉定倾侧。
English: Concentrate on moderation, diligently lean to the side.

古文：揽英雄，保持盈。
现代文：招揽众英雄，保守业既成。
English: Invite all the heroes, and the maintenance industry is complete.

古文：深穆穆，赫明明。
现代文：威仪深穆穆，光焰赫明明。
English: The majesty is deep and profound, the glory is bright and clear.

古文：冲而泰，天之经。
现代文：谦虚则泰安，此为天之经。
English: Modesty brings peace, this is the law of nature.

古文：养威重，运神兵。
现代文：平日积威重，适时运神兵。
English: The ordinary day is dignified, and the divine soldiers are sent at the right time.

古文：亮乃震毙，天下安宁。
现代文：震恐亮毙命，天下得安宁。
English: The earthquake scared everyone to death, and the world was at peace.

古文：征辽东
现代文：《征辽东》
English: "The Conquest of Liaodong"

古文：征辽东，敌失据，威灵迈日域。公孙既授首，群逆破胆，咸震怖。
现代文：远征至辽东，敌军失所守。声威如神向东土，公孙逆命既授首，群逆吓破胆，畏威咸震怖。
English: Expedition to the east of Liaodong, the enemy army lost their way. Sounding like a god to the east, Gongsun gave his head against his will, the crowd was scared, and the awe and tremors were scary.

古文：朔北响应，海表景附。
现代文：朔北起以应，海表如影附。
English: The north of the country is responding, and the sea level is rising like a shadow.

古文：武功赫赫，德云布。
现代文：武功光赫赫，德泽如云布。
English: Wu gong shines brightly, and virtue shines like a cloud.

古文：宣辅政
现代文：《宣辅政》
English: "Announcement and Subsidiary Government"

古文：宣皇辅政，圣烈深。
现代文：宣皇虽辅政，圣德烈且深。
English: Although the proclamation of the emperor is an auxiliary policy, it is deeply rooted in the Holy Spirit.

古文：拨乱反正，顺天心。
现代文：拨乱以反正，顺天应民心。
English: Whatever the reason for the turmoil, the will of the people will prevail.

古文：网罗文武才，慎厥所生。
现代文：纲罗文武才，孝敬其双亲。
English: He was a scholar and a warrior, and he respected his parents.

古文：所生贤，遗教施。
现代文：双亲有才德，仰赖遣教施。
English: Both parents are talented and rely on the generosity of others.

古文：安上治民，化风移。
现代文：安上以治民，教化世风移。
English: To be peaceful is to govern the people, and to be enlightened is to change with the times.

古文：肇创帝基，洪业垂。
现代文：功在创帝基，洪业永世垂。
English: Hongye will be remembered forever for his contribution to the founding of the Imperial Foundation.

古文：于铄明明，时赫戏。
现代文：光辉亮闪闪，时时放光明。
English: Shine bright, shine bright, shine bright.

古文：功济万世，定二仪。
现代文：功可济万世，业足定天地。
English: Meritorious deeds can save the world forever, and sufficient deeds determine the world.

古文：定二仪，云行雨施，海外风驰。
现代文：定天地，云行雨施布德泽，远播海外似风驰。
English: The heavens and the earth are fixed. The clouds move, the rain falls, and the thunder rumbles. Far away, overseas, the wind blows.

古文：时运多难
现代文：《时运多难》
English: "Time is of the essence"

古文：时运多难，道教痡。
现代文：时运多艰难，教令复壅阻。
English: The times are hard, and the teachings are resisted.

古文：天地变化，有盈虚。
现代文：天地多变化，有盈又有虚。
English: The heavens and the earth are subject to many changes, and there are both positive and negative aspects.

古文：蠢尔吴蛮，武视江湖。
现代文：愚蠢彼吴蛮，虎视我江湖。
English: Stupid he Wu Man, the tiger regards me as the king.

古文：我皇赫斯，致天诛。
现代文：我皇赫然怒，奉命行天诛。
English: My emperor was furious, and I was ordered to carry out the divine command.

古文：有征无战，弭其图。
现代文：有征而无战，平乱灭其图。
English: If there is conscription but no war, the plan is to quell the unrest and put an end to it.

古文：天威横被，廓东隅。
现代文：天威布东西，廓清我束隅。
English: The sky is full of things, the sky is full of things, I am full of things.

古文：景龙飞
现代文：《景龙飞》
English: "Jinglongfei"

古文：景龙飞，御天威。
现代文：景龙升飞，以驭天威。
English: The dragon soars to harness the power of heaven.

古文：聪鉴玄察，动与神明协机。
现代文：聪明洞察微细，动舆神明合机。
English: Clever insight into the subtleties, moving the divine machine.

古文：从之者显，逆之者灭夷。
现代文：从之者显达，逆之者灭夷。
English: Those who follow it will be rewarded, and those who go against it will be destroyed.

古文：文教敷，武功巍。
现代文：礼乐教化敷陈，武功显赫巍巍。
English: The teaching of ceremonial music has become commonplace, and martial arts have become prominent.

古文：普被四海，万邦望风，莫不来绥。
现代文：文德布及四海，万邦望风影从，莫不归附来随。
English: Wendebu and the four seas, all countries look forward to the wind and shadow, and there is no turning back to follow.

古文：圣德潜断，先天弗违。
现代文：圣德潜断合天意，先天为之天弗违。
English: Sanctity is contrary to God's will.

古文：弗违祥，享世永长。
现代文：弗违则吉祥，享世而永长。
English: It is auspicious to break the rules, and you will live a long life.

古文：猛以致宽，道化光。
现代文：威猛以致宽和，造化至大至光。
English: His greatness is so great that it fills the heavens, and his creation is so vast that it outshines the light.

古文：赫明明，祚隆无疆。
现代文：我皇赫赫明明，皇基兴隆无疆。
English: I am Emperor He He Mingming, Emperor Ke Xinglong without borders.

古文：帝绩惟期，有命既集，崇此洪基。
现代文：帝业显明有期，上天之命既集，光崇洪业帝基。
English: There is clearly a time for the imperial cause, and God's will has already been set, and it is time to glorify the imperial cause.

古文：平玉衡
现代文：《平玉衡》
English: "Taira Gyokuhira"

古文：平玉衡，纠奸回。
现代文：基童平玉衡，齐政纠奸逆。
English: The foundation of the child is flat and balanced, and Qi Zheng rectifies and reverses.

古文：万国殊风，四海乖。
现代文：万国异风殊俗，四海多乖离。
English: All countries have different customs, and the four seas are more divergent.

古文：礼贤养士，羁御英雄，思心齐。
现代文：仁厚礼贤养士，至圣驾驭英雄，万众心思齐。
English: The benevolent, the virtuous, the nurturing, the saintly, the heroic, all are of the same mind.

古文：纂戎洪业，崇皇阶。
现代文：继而扩充洪业，光大崇皇阶。
English: Subsequently, Hongye was expanded, and the glory of the emperor was highly revered.

古文：品物咸亨，圣敬日跻。
现代文：万民咸享安宁，圣明恭敬日升。
English: May all the people enjoy peace and tranquility, and may the sacred light of the rising sun be respected.

古文：聪鉴尽下情，明明综天机。
现代文：聪敏睿智知下情，明细察微综天机。
English: He is astute and intelligent, knows the situation, and carefully observes the subtleties of the universe.

古文：文皇统百揆
现代文：《文皇统百揆》
English: "Wenhuangtong Baoji"

古文：文皇统百揆，继天理万方。
现代文：文皇总政统百揆，继天应命理万方。
English: The Emperor's general policy is one hundred and one, and it will be carried out in all directions in accordance with Heaven's order.

古文：武将镇四隅，英佐盈朝堂，谋言协秋兰，清风发其芳。
现代文：武将威武守四隅，贤臣辅佐盈朝堂。嘉谋诤言协秋兰，朝政清明发其芳。
English: Generals and warriors hold sway in the four corners of the country, and wise men and women support and enrich the imperial court. Good counsel and wise words are the hallmarks of the imperial court, and the imperial government is known for its clarity.

古文：洪泽所渐润，砾石为珪璋。
现代文：雨水渐汇成洪泽，砾石磨砺为珪璋。
English: Rainwater gradually gathers into a torrent, and gravel grinds into chaff.

古文：大道侔五帝，盛德逾三王。
现代文：大道为政齐五帝，盛德施布逾三皇。
English: The avenue has been used by five emperors and more than three emperors.

古文：咸光大，上参天与地，至化无内外。
现代文：咸光大，光上参天大同地，教化普及无内外。
English: The salty light is great, the light is so bright that it can be seen from all over the world, and there is no popularization of enlightenment inside or outside.

古文：无内外，六合并康乂。
现代文：无内外，天地六合并安治。
English: There is no inside or outside, and the six heavens and six earths are unified and stable.

古文：并康乂，遘兹嘉会。
现代文：并安治，满朝文武遇嘉会。
English: And Anzhi, Manchurian Literature and Martial Arts met with accolades.

古文：在昔羲与农，大晋德斯迈。
现代文：昔有伏羲与神农，大晋盛德并越逾。
English: In the past, there were Fuxi and Shennong, and Dajin Shengde and Yue Yue.

古文：镇征及诸州，为籓卫。
现代文：镇守征伐及诸州，诸州成藩卫。
English: The town guards conquered and conquered the states, and the states became the defenders of the country.

古文：功济四海，洪烈流万世。
现代文：丰功伟业济四海，洪德光烈流万世。
English: Great achievements and great deeds benefit the four seas, and virtuous deeds and glorious deeds will flow for all eternity.

古文：因时运
现代文：《因时运》
English: "Due to bad luck"

古文：因时运，圣策施。
现代文：因时运变，圣谋潜施。
English: Due to the change of time, the conspiracy was carried out secretly.

古文：长蛇交解，群桀离。
现代文：力解长蛇之交，勇离群桀之党。
English: The party that resolves long-standing friendships by force and breaks away from the crowd.

古文：势穷奔吴，兽骑厉。
现代文：势穷奔吴，秣马厉兵。
English: Wu rushes with all his might, and the horses gallop with all their might.

古文：惟武进，审大计。
现代文：惟武方能进，帏幄审大计。
English: However, as long as the military side can advance, the grand scheme of the trial will be successful.

古文：时迈其德，清一世。
现代文：时时勉其德，清明享一世。
English: Strive to be virtuous at all times, and live a life of purity.

古文：惟庸蜀
现代文：《惟庸蜀》
English: "Buyeongshu"

古文：惟庸蜀，僭号天一隅。
现代文：犹古代庸国之蜀，僭越称帝天一隅。
English: Shu, the ancient kingdom of the Yangtze River in ancient times, was called "the corner of heaven" in Yunnan.

古文：刘备逆帝命，禅亮承其余。
现代文：刘备无道逆天命，刘惮诸葛承其余。
English: Liu Bei had no choice but to go against the will of heaven, while Liu Shu and Zhuge Cheng led the rest.

古文：拥众数十万，窥隙乘我虚。
现代文：拥兵一方数十万，窥伺间隙乘我虚。
English: On the one hand, there are hundreds of thousands of supporters, and they take advantage of the gap to spy on me.

古文：驿骑进羽檄，天下不遑居。
现代文：驿马如飞传羽檄，天下百姓不安居。
English: A good horse is like a flying feather, the people of the world are restless.

古文：姜维屡寇边，陇上为荒芜。
现代文：姜维屡屡寇我边，陇上田亩皆荒芜。
English: Jiang Wei repeatedly encroached on my side, and all the upstream fields were deserted.

古文：文皇愍斯民，历世受罪辜。
现代文：文皇悲心悯生民，历经干戈受罪辜。
English: Emperor Wen showed his compassion to the people and suffered the consequences of his actions.

古文：外谟籓屏臣，内谟众士夫。
现代文：藩卫屏臣谋于外，朝内献策众士夫。
English: The guards of the domain and the retainers of the palace plotted outside, and all the officials within the court made their plans.

古文：爪牙应指受，腹心献良图。
现代文：禁卫爪牙应指受，心腹近臣献良圃。
English: The guards' minions should show their gratitude, and the close vassals should offer good plants.

古文：良图协成文，大兴百万军。
现代文：嘉谋良图协成文，文皇大兴百万军。
English: Jia Mu Liangtu co-authored the document, and Emperor Wen greatly promoted the million-man army.

古文：雷鼓震地起，猛势陵浮云。
现代文：雷鼓声声震地起，威猛如虎凌浮云。
English: The sound of thunder and drums shook the earth. It was as powerful as the swirling clouds.

古文：逋虏畏天诛，面缚造垒门。
现代文：蜀虏逃亡畏天诛，束手就擒于营门。
English: The Shurukus fled in fear of Heaven, and the Shurukus were chained at the camp gate.

古文：万里同风教，逆命称妾臣。
现代文：万里晴空同风教，逆命枭桀咸称臣。
English: Thousands of miles of clear sky are the same as the teaching of customs.

古文：光建五等，纪纲天人。天序
现代文：广建侯爵成五等，典章制度应天人。《天序》
English: The marquis of Guangjian was raised to the fifth rank, and the system of awards was changed to the order of Heaven.

古文：天序，应历受禅，承灵祜。
现代文：天有序，应天受命登皇极，承灵赐福祉。
English: The heavens are orderly, the emperor ascends to the throne as ordered by the heavens, and prosperity is bestowed by the spirit.

古文：御群龙，勒螭武。
现代文：极尊驭群龙，天威勒乱螭。
English: With the utmost respect to harness the dragons, Tianweiler ran amok.

古文：弘济大化，英隽作辅。
现代文：弘济群生普教化，广招英才作辅佐。
English: The education of students in Hongji will be universalized, and talents will be widely recruited to serve as assistants.

古文：明明统万机，赫赫镇四方，咎繇稷契之畴，协兰芳。
现代文：明察秋毫统万机，赫赫威仪镇四方。贤臣皆皋陶稷契之属，佐政协兰芳。
English: Mingzha, Qiu, Zhao, Wanji, Hehe, Wei, Zhen, Shifang. The wise men all belong to Tao and Qi, and Sasa and Lanfang belong to the political alliance.

古文：礼王臣，覆兆民。
现代文：圣德礼王臣，仁厚覆兆民。
English: The prince of virtue, the benevolent ruler of a billion people.

古文：化之如天与地，谁敢爱其身？
现代文：教化施布如天地，谁敢忘德爱其身?
English: Enlightenment and benevolence are like heaven and earth. Who would dare to forget the virtue of loving oneself?

古文：大晋承运期
现代文：《大晋承运期》
English: "Dajin Shipping Period"

古文：大晋承运期，德隆圣皇。
现代文：大晋承天运期，我皇圣明德隆。
English: During the period of the Great Jin Dynasty inheriting the heavenly fortune, My Emperor Saint Ming Delong was born.

古文：时清晏，白日垂光。
现代文：四时天清无云，晴空白曰垂光。
English: At four o'clock, the sky is clear and cloudless, and the sky is said to be overcast.

古文：应箓图，陟帝位，继天正玉衡。
现代文：应圃受录，荣登帝位，继有天命正玉衡。
English: He was admitted to the Academy, was enthroned as emperor, and was succeeded by Zheng Yu Heng.

古文：化行象神明，至哉道隆虞与唐。元首敷洪化，百僚股肱并忠良。
现代文：教化布行像神明，至哉道隆虞与唐，元首布洪化，百僚股肱并忠良。
English: The enlightened ones are like gods. The most exalted are the Daolongyu and the Tang, the head of state is Bu Honghua, and the centurions are Guan Yu and Zhong Liang.

古文：时太康，隆隆赫赫，福祚盈无疆。
现代文：四时太康，隆隆赫赫，天赐福祚盈无疆。
English: At four o'clock, Taikang, Longlonghehe, Heaven-sent blessings are boundless.

古文：金灵运
现代文：《金灵运》
English: "Golden Spirit"

古文：金灵运，天符发。
现代文：吉兆金灵运，天符发祥瑞。
English: Good luck, good fortune, good fortune.

古文：圣徵见，参日月。
现代文：应命显圣征，光明参日月。
English: As commanded, he performed the sacred signs, and the light of the sun and moon shone forth.

古文：惟我皇，体神圣。
现代文：惟我大晋皇，生而体神圣。
English: However, I, the Great Emperor Jin, was born with a sacred body.

古文：受魏禅，应天命。
现代文：应历受魏禅，承天受大命。
English: We should learn from the experience of the Wei and Zen dynasties, and carry forward the great mission of Heaven.

古文：皇之兴，灵有徵。
现代文：我皇洪业兴，神灵有兆征。
English: My Emperor Hongyexing, there is a sign from the gods.

古文：登大麓，御万乘。
现代文：极尊登帝位，号令驭万乘。
English: His Eminence ascended to the throne, and gave the order to harness all things.

古文：皇之辅，若阚武。
现代文：我皇之辅臣，威武皆若虎。
English: My emperor's aides-de-camp, mighty warriors are all young tigers.

古文：爪牙奋，莫之御。
现代文：爪牙齐奋进，无人能抵御。
English: The minions advance in unison, and no one can resist.

古文：皇之佐，赞清化。
现代文：我皇之佐臣，襄赞谋清化。
English: My emperor's vassal, Xiang Zan, is plotting to purify the country.

古文：百事理，万邦贺。
现代文：夙夜理百事，万邦咸称贺。
English: The overnight success of Pepsi is a cause for universal celebration.

古文：神祗应，嘉瑞章。
现代文：承天神灵应，受命嘉瑞章。
English: In response, he was given the title of Jia Rui Zang.

古文：恭享礼，荐先皇。
现代文：恭敬享以礼，祭祀献先皇。
English: The ceremony was respectfully enjoyed, and a ritual offering was made to the former emperor.

古文：乐时奏，磬管锵。
现代文：雅乐时时奏，磬管鸣锵锵。
English: Aristocratic music is played from time to time, and the cymbals chime.

古文：鼓殷殷，钟锽锽。
现代文：鼓兮美殷殷，钟兮盛钟鳇。
English: The drums are beautiful and serene, the bells are grand and ringing.

古文：奠樽俎，实玉觞。
现代文：至诚奠尊俎，鬯酒满玉觞。
English: Sincerely pay tribute to the emperor, the wine is full of jade.

古文：神歆飨，咸悦康。
现代文：神兮来歆飨，美兮咸悦康。
English: God-given talent, beauty, harmony and well-being.

古文：宴孙子，祐无疆。
现代文：赐福安子孙，保佑永无疆。
English: Bestow blessings on Ahn's children and grandchildren, and bless them forever.

古文：大孝蒸蒸，德教被万方。
现代文：大孝盛蒸蒸，德教布万方。
English: Da Xiao Sheng steamed steamed, moral cloth everywhere.

古文：于穆我皇
现代文：《于穆我皇》
English: "Yu Mu Yao"

古文：于穆我皇，盛德圣且明。
现代文：赫哉穆穆我皇，布行盛德圣且明。
English: How glorious is our emperor, how great is his virtue, how great is his wisdom.

古文：受禅君世，光济群生。
现代文：受禅君临天下，仁德光济群生。
English: With the advent of Zen, benevolence will benefit the world.

古文：普天率土，莫不来庭。
现代文：普天率土，莫不来庭。
English: Futenchizuchi soil, mo not come to the court.

古文：颙颙六合内，望风仰泰清。
现代文：天下万民颐颐，望德若仰泰清。
English: There are millions of people in the world, and if you look for virtue, you will find it.

古文：万国雍雍，兴颂声。
现代文：万国和熙雍雍，谌歌兴起颂声。
English: With the rise of the world and the rise of Xi'an, the eulogy of the eulogy arose.

古文：大化洽，地平而天成。
现代文：阴阳大化协洽，天地安宁和平。
English: Yin and yang are in harmony, and the world is peaceful.

古文：七政齐，玉衡惟平。
现代文：清明以齐七政，惟平以执玉衡。
English: Qingming was the most powerful of the seven dynasties, but Ping was the most powerful.

古文：峨峨佐命，济济群英。
现代文：辅臣庄严峨峨，群英济济盈庭。
English: The vassal was solemn and dignified.

古文：夙夜乾乾，万机是经。
现代文：夙夜干干不息，日理万机是经。
English: Day and night, they work incessantly. The day-to-day management of all machines is a matter of course.

古文：虽治兴，匪荒宁。
现代文：虽然治平国兴，天下却非太平。
English: Although the national rejuvenation has been achieved, the world is far from peaceful.

古文：谦道乐，冲不盈。
现代文：谦抑之道光明，虚心而不满盈。
English: The way of modesty is bright, but the way of the meek is not prosperous.

古文：天地合德，日月同荣。
现代文：盛德合于天地，光辉日月同荣。
English: Great virtue is compatible with heaven and earth, and the glory of the sun and the moon are the same.

古文：赫赫煌煌，曜幽冥。
现代文：功绩赫赫煌煌，光耀幽冥神灵。
English: Glorious achievements, shining dark deities.

古文：三光克从，于显天，垂景星。
现代文：天上三光克从，于显天，有道之国垂景星。
English: From the three points of light in the sky, to the clear sky, the country of the Tao has a hanging star.

古文：龙凤臻，甘露宵零。
现代文：神龙灵凤咸至，夜降甘露飘零。
English: The divine dragon Lingfeng is salty, and the night-falling nectar drifts.

古文：肃神祗，祗上灵。
现代文：肃然恭敬神祇，庄严祗仰上灵。
English: Reverently respect the gods, solemnly pay homage to the upper spirit.

古文：万物欣戴，自天效其成。
现代文：万物欣欣戴天，白天共效其成。
English: All things are pleasing to Heaven, and they work together during the day.

古文：仲春振旅
现代文：《仲春振旅》
English: "The Journey of the Mid-Autumn Festival"

古文：仲春振旅，大致人，武教于时日新。
现代文：仲春振军旅，休整致教命，武教于是日日新。
English: Zhong Chun Zhen's military expedition, rest and order to teach, martial arts then became more and more new.

古文：师执提，工执鼓。坐作从，节有序。
现代文：师帅执提，乐工执鼓，坐起从鼓声，有节又有序。
English: The instructor leads the way, the musician leads the drum, sits up from the sound of the drum, there is a section and an order.

古文：盛矣允文允武！
现代文：盛兮行文修武!
English: Actively practice martial arts!

古文：搜田表祃，申法誓。
现代文：春猎出师致祭，申明法纪以誓师。
English: Spring hunts out teachers to offer sacrifice, affirms discipline with oath of teachers.

古文：遂围禁，献社祭。
现代文：禁止合围而猎，祭献后土之神。
English: It is forbidden to hunt in a group, and it is forbidden to sacrifice to the god of the soil.

古文：允以时，明国制。
现代文：畋猎以时，以明国制。
English: When hunting, the Ming Dynasty system prevailed.

古文：文武并用，礼之经。
现代文：文武并用，为礼之常。
English: It is proper to use both literature and martial arts.

古文：列车如战，大教明，古今谁能去兵？
现代文：列兵车如战，教令严明，古今谁能去兵?
English: The armored car is like a war, the edict is clear, who can go to the army now and then?

古文：大晋继天，济群生。
现代文：大晋继天命，济我群生。
English: Great Jin, following the destiny of heaven, will help our students.

古文：夏苗田
现代文：《夏苗田》
English: "Summer Field"

古文：夏苗田，运将徂。
现代文：夏苗田猎，时运将暑。
English: If you go hunting in summer, you will have good luck in the summer.

古文：军国异容，文武殊。
现代文：军务国政变异容，文教武功殊。
English: The military coup d'état is a rare case, and the military and cultural achievements are outstanding.

古文：乃命群吏，撰车徒，辩其号名，赞契书。
现代文：乃命群吏，选择兵车与步卒，辨其号名，题之以契书。
English: He ordered the group of officers to choose a chariot and a foot soldier, find out their names, and write them down in a deed.

古文：王军启八门，行同上帝居。
现代文：王军士兵开八门，我皇巡行如上帝。
English: The soldiers of the king's army opened the eight gates, and my emperor marched like a god.

古文：时路建大麾，云旗翳紫虚。
现代文：路上设大旗，大旗如云蔽紫虚。
English: A large flag is set up on the road, and the large flag is like a cloud covering the purple void.

古文：百官象其事，疾则疾，徐则徐。
现代文：百官称职行其事，该疾则疾，该徐则徐。
English: A hundred officials are competent to perform their duties, the disease is the disease, the disease is the disease.

古文：回衡旋轸，罢阵弊车。
现代文：车马旋回，车敝军疲。
English: The chariot and horse are circling, the chariot and horse army is exhausted.

古文：献禽享祀，蒸蒸配有虞。
现代文：献禽以享祀，热气蒸蒸飨有虞。
English: Donated poultry to enjoy worship, hot steam distillation risk.

古文：惟大晋，德参两仪，化云敷。
现代文：惟我大晋，德配天地，教化如云布。
English: However, I, Dajin, am worthy of heaven and earth, and my enlightenment is like a cloud.

古文：仲秋狝田
现代文：《仲秋弥田》
English: "Mid-Autumn Festival in Yata"

古文：仲秋狝田，金德常纲。
现代文：仲秋行猬田，应金德以为常纲。
English: In mid-autumn, I went to Putian. I thought it would be a good idea to go there.

古文：凉风清且厉，凝露结为霜。
现代文：秋风清且凉，凝露结为霜。
English: The autumn wind is clear and cool, and the dew condenses into frost.

古文：白藏司辰，金隼时鹰扬。
现代文：秋季初晓时，晴空苍隼时鹰扬。
English: At dawn in autumn, when the sky is clear and there are herons, the eagle soars.

古文：鹰扬犹尚父，顺天以杀伐，春秋时序。
现代文：鹰扬犹如尚父，顺天时以行杀伐，春秋时相序。
English: The eagle is just like his father, killing and hunting according to the time of the day, the spring and autumn time sequence.

古文：雷霆震威曜，进退由钲鼓。
现代文：如雷霆震我军威，兵士进退听钮鼓。
English: As thunder shakes our military might, soldiers march and retreat to the beat of drums.

古文：致禽祀祊，羽毛之用充军府。
现代文：致禽兽以祀皇灵，羽毛之用充军府。
English: Animals and birds are sacrificed to worship the imperial spirit, and feathers are used as military equipment.

古文：赫赫大晋德，芬烈陵三五。
现代文：赫赫大晋之德，其芬之烈超三五。
English: The virtue of Hehe Dajin, the strength of his magic is more than thirty-five.

古文：敷化以文，虽安不废武。
现代文：施教化以文，国虽安宁不废武。
English: The country is peaceful, but it does not abandon its weapons.

古文：光宅四海，永享天之祜。
现代文：光明驻四海，永享天之福。
English: Brightly stationed in the four seas, forever enjoying the blessings of heaven.

古文：顺天道
现代文：《顺天道》
English: "Shun Tian Dao"

古文：顺天道，握神契，三时示，讲武事。
现代文：顺应天道，掌握神契，春夏秋三时已示，讲武事不害农时。
English: Adhering to the heavenly way, mastering the divine contract, spring, summer and autumn three o'clock has shown that talking about martial arts does not harm the agricultural time.

古文：冬大阅，鸣镯振鼓铎，旌旗象虹霓。
现代文：冬日大板车卒，鸣镯振鼓铎，旌旗像虹霓。
English: In the winter, the big-wheeled carriage will sound, the gongs will vibrate, the drums will beat, and the flags will wave like rainbow.

古文：文制其中，武不穷武。
现代文：修文制其内，讲武不黩武。
English: In the revision of the text system, it is better to talk about martial arts than to practice them.

古文：动军誓众，礼成而义举。
现代文：动军先以誓兵卒，礼仪已成再举义。
English: When the army is mobilized, the soldiers take the oath first, and the etiquette has become a re-enactment.

古文：三驱以崇仁，进止不失其序。
现代文：再三驱兽以崇仁，进止有节不失序。
English: To drive away the beast three times is to be noble, and to advance and stop is to have discipline and not be disorderly.

古文：兵卒练，将如阚武。
现代文：兵卒训练有素，军将威武如猛虎。
English: The soldiers are well-trained, and the generals are as powerful as tigers.

古文：惟阚武，气陵青云。
现代文：惟猛虎，豪气冲天凌青云。
English: However, the fierce tigers, with their mighty spirit, soar high into the sky.

古文：解围三面，杀不殄群。
现代文：解围开其三面，虽杀而不减其群。
English: Unwrap its three sides and kill it without reducing its herd.

古文：偃旌麾，班六军。
现代文：军疲息鼓偃旌麾，猎罢回师班六军。
English: The army was exhausted and exhausted, and the sixth army returned to the division.

古文：献享蒸，修典文。
现代文：冬祭献牲飨神灵，典章礼乐以修文。
English: The winter festival offers sacrifices to the gods, and the ceremonial music begins with the recitation of scriptures.

古文：嘉大晋，德配天。
现代文：美兮善兮我大晋，盛德足以配天地。
English: Beautiful and virtuous, I am Da Jin, and my virtue is enough to match heaven and earth.

古文：禄报功，爵俟贤。
现代文：福禄待报功，封爵俟才贤。
English: He will be rewarded for his meritorious service with a knighthood.

古文：飨燕乐，受兹百禄，寿万年。
现代文：享此安乐，受此百福，福寿享万年。
English: Enjoy this happiness, receive this great fortune, and live a long life.

古文：唐尧
现代文：《唐尧》
English: "Tang Xuan"

古文：唐尧谘务成，谦谦德其兴。
现代文：唐尧咨问务盛王，卑逊谦谦德所兴。
English: Tang Xizhe was a prosperous king, but he was humble and modest.

古文：积渐终光大，履霜致坚冰。
现代文：积微成着终光大，履霜方知致坚冰。
English: The accumulation is large at the end, and the frost is known to cause hard ice.

古文：神明道自成，河海犹可凝。
现代文：神明之道法自然，河海之水犹可凝。
English: The way of the gods is natural, and the water of rivers and seas can be condensed.

古文：舜禹统百揆，元凯以次升。
现代文：舜禹总政统百揆，功勋元凯以次升。
English: General Xu Yu was awarded 100 medals, and his meritorious service award was raised to the next level.

古文：禅让应大历，睿圣世相承。
现代文：受禅揖让应天历，睿智圣哲世相承。
English: To be inspired by Zen is to be guided by the heavenly calendar, and wisdom is inherited from the sages of all ages.

古文：我皇陟帝位，平衡正准绳。
现代文：我皇极尊登帝位，永执平衡正准绳。
English: I, the Emperor, enthroned on the throne of supreme dignity, forever hold the line of balance and rectitude.

古文：德化飞四表，祥气见其徵。
现代文：德化飞布四海外，吉瑞祥气现兆征。
English: Dehua flying cloth four overseas, auspicious auspicious signs.

古文：兴王坐俟旦，亡主恬自矜。
现代文：兴王理事坐待旦，亡主恬安且自矜。
English: Director Heung-Wang sits and waits, while his deceased master rests in peace and commits suicide.

古文：致远由近始，覆篑成山陵。
现代文：将欲致远由近始，覆簧功到成山陵。
English: From the recent beginning to the distant future, it has been covered with reeds and turned into a mountain.

古文：披图案先籍，有其证灵液。玄云
现代文：披图考查前人籍，有其灵雨是为证。《玄云》
English: A quick look at a map will reveal the previous nationality of a person, as evidenced by raindrops.

古文：玄云起丘山，祥气万里会。
现代文：玄云暧暧起丘山，祥气悠悠万里会。
English: The clouds will lift up the hills and mountains, and the auspicious atmosphere will last for thousands of years.

古文：龙飞何蜿蜿，凤翔何翙翙。
现代文：龙飞其状何蜿蜿，凤翔其声何翩翩。
English: The dragon flies in its shape, the phoenix soars in its voice.

古文：昔在唐虞朝，时见青云际。
现代文：昔有唐尧虞舜朝，时时现于青云际。
English: Once upon a time, there was the Tang Dynasty and the Yu Dynasty, both of which have been around since ancient times.

古文：今亲游万国，流兴溢天外。
现代文：今日亲游历万国，流光异彩溢天外。
English: Today, I have personally traveled all over the world, and the brilliance is beyond compare.

古文：鹤鸣在后园，清音随风迈。
现代文：凤呜鹤唳在后园，清音悠扬随风遇。
English: The phoenix crane flies in the backyard, the clear sound is melodious with the wind.

古文：成汤隆显命，伊挚来如飞。
现代文：成汤盛德隆显命，贤臣来如飞。
English: Cheng Tang Sheng Delong issued a command, and the wise men came flying.

古文：周文猎渭滨，遂载吕望归。
现代文：且玄田猎沮丞滨，相遇吕望遂载归。
English: In addition, Genda hunted and hunted, and finally met Lü Wang.

古文：符合如影响，先天天不违。
现代文：君臣符合如影响，先天而为天不违。
English: If you are influenced by your superiors and subordinates, you will naturally rise to the top.

古文：辍耕综地纲，解褐衿天维。
现代文：辍耕为相综地纲，解褐百揆结天维。
English: Throw away the ploughing for the comprehensive layout, solve the brown and hundred knots of the sky.

古文：元功配二王，芬馨世所稀。
现代文：佐兴帝业相二王，其德芬芳世所稀。
English: Its fragrance is rare in the world.

古文：我皇叙群才，洪烈何巍巍。
现代文：我皇仁德聚贤才，王业洪烈何巍巍。
English: The Emperor's benevolence and virtue gathers the talents, and the King's career is booming.

古文：桓桓征四表，济济理万机。
现代文：威武桓桓征四表，庄敬济济理万机。
English: Great military might conquers the four directions, and great wealth brings about great economic opportunities.

古文：神化感无方，髦才盈帝畿。
现代文：教化如神无方域，俊臣茂才盈帝畿。
English: Enlightenment is like a god, there is no square, and only a good disciple can enter the kingdom of heaven.

古文：丕显惟昧旦，日新孔所谘。
现代文：丕显之时思黎明，日曰自新孑所咨。
English: Think of the dawn at the time of dawn, and think of a new beginning every day.

古文：茂哉明圣德，日月同光辉。
现代文：茂兮盛兮明圣德，德如曰月同光辉。
English: Morality is bright and flourishing, just as the moon is bright and shining.

古文：伯益
现代文：《伯益》
English: "Bo Yi"

古文：伯益佐舜禹，职掌山与川。
现代文：伯益辅佐舜与禹，职掌山林和川泽。
English: Bo Yixu assisted Zou and Yu, and was in charge of Shanlin and Kawazawa.

古文：德侔十六相，思心入无间。
现代文：其德齐侔十六相，令人思之无间断。
English: Its morality is in line with the Sixteen Aspects, and it is thought-provoking and uninterrupted.

古文：智理周万物，下知众鸟言。
现代文：智无不知遍万物，聪慧下知众鸟言。
English: Wisdom does not know all things, but wisdom knows the language of all birds.

古文：黄雀应清化，翔习何翩翩。
现代文：黄雀应其清化德，翔习飞来何翩翩。
English: The yellow finch should purify its virtue, and how gracefully it flies.

古文：和鸣栖庭树，徘徊云日间。
现代文：和鸣栖止庭树巅，高飞徘徊云日间。
English: And the warblers perch on the top of the trees in the garden, and the storks soar high above the clouds.

古文：夏桀为无道，密网施山河。
现代文：夏桀残暴行无道，密网设置于山河。
English: There is no way out of the atrocities committed by Xia Yao's remnants. A secret network has been set up in the mountains and rivers.

古文：酷祝振纤网，当柰黄雀何。
现代文：残酷祝史收纤网，弱小黄雀当奈何。
English: Cruel congratulation history collection fiber network, weak little yellow sparrow what.

古文：殷汤崇天德，去其三面罗。
现代文：殷汤仁慈崇天德，悲悯去其三面罗。
English: Benevolence exalts virtue, and compassion is the best of the three.

古文：逍遥群飞来，鸣声乃复和。
现代文：逍遥成群飞去来，呜声如初乃复和。
English: Loose flocks of birds fly in, and the sound of their chirping is like the beginning of a new year.

古文：硃雀作南宿，凤皇统羽群。
现代文：南宫列宿飞朱雀，凤凰统领众羽群。
English: In the south wing of the palace, there is a flight of red phoenixes, with the phoenixes leading the flocks.

古文：赤乌衔书至，天命瑞周文。
现代文：赤乌衔书飞送至，瑞兆天命归周文。
English: The Red Dragonfly Book has arrived, and Ruizhao's destiny is Zhouwen.

古文：神雀今来游，为我受命君。
现代文：今日神雀飞来游，飞来为我受命君。
English: Today, the divine sparrow flies here and there, flying to do my bidding.

古文：嘉祥致天和，膏泽隆青云。
现代文：嘉兆祥瑞致天和，德泽万民降青云。
English: Jiazhao Xiangrui brings peace to the world, and the people of Dezhe descend into the clouds.

古文：兰风发芳气，盖世同其芬。
现代文：兰蕙之风发芳气，普天盖世同其芬。
English: The wind of the orchid is fragrant, and the whole world is enchanted.

古文：钓竿
现代文：《钓竿》
English: "Fishing Rod"

古文：钓竿何冉冉，甘饵芳且鲜。
现代文：钓竿轻柔何苒苒，饵食甘甜芳且鲜。
English: The fishing rod is light and soft, and the bait is sweet and fresh.

古文：临川运思心，微纶沈九泉。
现代文：临川垂钓运思心，捆细钓丝沉九泉。
English: Fishing in Linchuan is a strenuous activity, and it is difficult to catch fish with a string.

古文：太公宝此术，乃在《灵秘》篇。
现代文：渭滨太公宝此术，此术乃在《灵秘》篇。
English: This technique, which is a treasure of Shinran Taiko, is described in the "Secrets" chapter.

古文：机变随物移，精妙贯未然。
现代文：随机应变从物移，用心精妙贯未然。
English: Stochastic strain from the material shift, with the intention of fine-tuning throughout.

古文：游鱼惊著钓，潜龙飞戾天。
现代文：游鱼惊散触钓钩，潜龙时至终飞天。
English: The swimming fish scatters at the touch of the hook, and the diving dragon flies up to the sky.

古文：戾天安所至？
现代文：龙飞于天何所至?
English: Where does the dragon fly in the sky?

古文：抚翼翔太清。
现代文：拍翼击风翔太清。
English: Flapping its wings and beating the wind, it soars too high.

古文：太清一何异，两仪出浑成。
现代文：太清一何异，两仪始分出浑成。
English: Too much clarity makes no difference, the two instruments begin to separate and become one.

古文：玉衡正三辰，造化赋群形。
现代文：璇玑玉衡正三辰，天地造化赋群形。
English: Zhai Yu Heng Zheng Sanchen, the heavens and the earth create a group shape.

古文：退愿辅圣君，与神合其灵。
现代文：逊让愿辅明圣君，进退与神合其灵。
English: Submission will strengthen the saint, and advance and retreat will be in harmony with the spirit of God.

古文：我君弘远略，天人不足并。
现代文：大晋我君弘远略，天人不足与并名。
English: Daishin Ikunohiro is a distant relative, but he is also a common name.

古文：天人初并时，昧昧何芒芒。
现代文：天象人事初并时，浑沌昧昧何茫茫。
English: At the time of the merger of Tianxiang and Renren, the chaos and confusion were overwhelming.

古文：日月有徵兆，文象兴二皇。
现代文：人事日月有征兆，天理文象兴二皇。
English: There are signs of personnel changes every day, and Emperor Tenrimen is like Emperor Heung II.

古文：蚩尤乱生灵，黄帝用兵征万方。
现代文：蚩尤作乱屠生灵，黄帝用兵征万方。
English: Zhou Yu made chaos and slaughtered living beings, and the Yellow Emperor used troops to recruit soldiers from all directions.

古文：逮夏禹而德衰，三代不及虞与唐。
现代文：及至夏禹圣德衰，三代不及虞与唐。
English: As far as Xia Yu Sheng, the three generations are less than Yu and Tang.

古文：我皇盛德配尧舜，受禅即阼享天祥。
现代文：我皇盛德配尧舜，受禅即位享天祥。
English: I, Emperor Shengde, received the imperial edict and was enthroned in Zen, enjoying the blessings of heaven.

古文：率土蒙祐，靡不肃，庶事康。
现代文：率土之滨蒙天佑，无不肃，众事康。
English: Led by the god of the soil, the coastal area is blessed with prosperity and prosperity.

古文：庶事康，穆穆明明。
现代文：众事康，穆穆明明是我皇。
English: All is well. Mumu is clearly my emperor.

古文：荷百禄，保无极，永太平。
现代文：承百禄，保无疆，太平盛世永安康。
English: Cheng Baoluo, Bao Wujiang, Taiping Shengxing Yong An Kang.

古文：鼙舞，未详所起，然汉代已施于燕享矣。
现代文：鼙舞，不知起于何时，不过荡伐已经用于宴享礼乐了。
English: Breakdancing, I don't know when it started, but breakdancing has been used for feasting and entertainment.

古文：傅毅、张衡所赋，皆其事也。
现代文：仅堑、退蛮所作之赋，都说过此事。
English: Only  and 退蛮 said this.

古文：旧曲有五篇，一、《关东有贤女》，二、《章和二年中》，三、《乐久长》，四、《四方皇》，五、《殿前生桂树》，其辞并亡。
现代文：旧曲共有五篇，一、《关东有贤女》，二、《章和二年中》，三、《乐久长》，四、《四方皇》，五、《殿前生桂树》，其辞均已亡失。
English: There are a total of five pieces of old songs, one, "Kanto has a virtuous woman," two, "Chapter and two years," three, "Music for a long time," four, "Sifang Emperor," and five, "Kaiseki, born before the palace," all of which have been lost.

古文：曹植《鼙舞诗序》云： 故汉灵帝西园鼓吹有李坚者，能鼙舞，遭世荒乱，坚播越关西，随将军段煨。
现代文：曹植《鼙舞诗序》说： 过去漠灵帝西园有名李坚者善鼓吹曲，能舞鼙舞，遭世荒乱，李坚流亡关西，跟随将军段煨。
English: Cao Zhi's "Gong Dance Poetic Sequence" says: In the past, Li Jian, who was famous for being good at preaching and playing music and being able to dance the gong dance, was exiled to Kansai and followed the general Duan Qi.

古文：先帝闻其旧伎，下书召坚。
现代文：先帝听说他有旧伎，下书召李坚。
English: The former emperor heard that he had an old trick and summoned Li Jian.

古文：坚年逾七十，中间废而不为，又古曲甚多谬误，异代之文，未必相袭，故依前曲作新歌五篇。 
现代文：李坚已年逾七十，其间长期荒废而不为，又加古曲谬误甚多，异代之文，未必相同，因此依前曲作新歌五篇。 
English: Li Jian is over seventy years old, during which he has long been wasted and unable to perform, and there are many fallacies in adding ancient songs. Different generations of texts may not be the same. Therefore, he composed five new songs according to the previous song.

古文：及泰始中，又制其辞焉。
现代文：及至泰始中，又作其辞。
English: And in the middle of the beginning of the year, he resigned again.

古文：其舞故常二八，桓玄将僭位，尚书殿中郎袁明子启增满八佾。
现代文：其舞过去常用二佾，桓玄欲僭位，尚书殿中郎袁明子奏明皇上增满八佾。
English: In the past, two gongs were commonly used for the dance, but Emperor Kanzen wanted to have three, and Yuan Mingzi, the middle son of Emperor Shangshu, asked Emperor Ming to increase the number of gongs to eight.

古文：泰始中歌辞今列之后云。
现代文：泰始中歌辞今列之于后。
English: The words of the poem at the beginning of the poem are now listed last.

古文：鼙舞歌诗五篇
现代文：鼙舞歌诗五篇：
English: Five breakdancing poems:

古文：洪业篇当魏曲《明明魏皇帝》，古曲《关东有贤女》。
现代文：《洪业篇》相当于魏曲明明魏皇帝》，古曲的关东有贤女》。
English: "Hongye Hen" is equivalent to Wei Qu Ming Ming Wei Emperor, and Guandong of the ancient song has a virtuous woman.

古文：宣文创洪业，盛德在泰始。
现代文：宣文艰难创洪业，大晋盛德在泰始。
English: Xuanwen created Hongye with great difficulty, and Dajin Shengde began in Tai.

古文：圣皇应灵符，受命君四海。
现代文：赫赫圣皇应灵符，应天受命君四海。
English: The holy emperor He He responded to the spirit charm and received the order from heaven to reign over the four seas.

古文：万国何所乐？
现代文：万国群生何所乐?
English: What is the joy of all nations?

古文：上有明天子。
现代文：是为上有明天子。
English: It's for the sake of having children.

古文：唐尧禅帝位，虞舜惟恭己。
现代文：唐尧至德禅帝位，虞舜肃敬惟恭己。
English: From the Tang Dynasty to the German Zen Empire, the Eastern Han Dynasty was revered but self-respecting.

古文：恭己正南面，道化与时移。
现代文：恭己终致南面坐，德行道化舆时移。
English: Self-respect eventually leads to sitting on the south side. Virtue becomes virtue.

古文：大赦荡萌渐，文教被黄支。
现代文：大赦荡涤德始渐，文教远布达黄支。
English: The amnesty of polyester began gradually, and literature and education were far ahead of the yellow branch.

古文：象天则地，体无为。
现代文：象天则地，无为而治。
English: Like heaven and earth, nothing is done and nothing is done.

古文：聪明配日月，神圣参两仪。
现代文：聪敏明察齐日月，圣哲神明参两仪。
English: The sun and the moon are clearly seen by the astute, and the two deities are seen by the sages.

古文：虽有三凶类，静言无所施。
现代文：虽有逆命三凶类，静而思之无所施。
English: Although there are three types of bad luck, there is nothing to be done.

古文：象天则地，体无为。
现代文：象天则地，无为而治。
English: Like heaven and earth, nothing is done and nothing is done.

古文：稷契并佐命，伊吕升王臣。
现代文：后稷与契并佐命，伊尹吕望升王臣。
English: Later, he was appointed to the same position as Ji, and became a vassal of Wang Zhen.

古文：兰芷登朝肆，下无失宿人。
现代文：兰芷香草列于朝，天下夜无失宿人。
English: The orchid vanilla is listed in the morning, and there is no lost lodger at night.

古文：声发响自应，表立景来附。
现代文：圣主声发响自应，竿立自有影来附。
English: The holy voice of the Lord echoes spontaneously, the rod stands upright, and the shadow follows.

古文：哮阚顺羁制，潜龙升天路。
现代文：咆哮猛虎顺羁制，潜龙自有升天路。
English: The roaring tiger obeys the system of restraint, and the hidden dragon has its own way of ascending to heaven.

古文：备物立成器，变通极其数。
现代文：备物立时能成器，变通行事极其术。
English: Preparedness can instantly become a tool, and it is extremely skillful to act flexibly.

古文：百事以时叙，万机有常度。
现代文：百事莫不以时序，万机虽变有常度。
English: There is no chronological order to everything, although everything changes, there is a constant.

古文：训之以克让，纳之以忠恕。
现代文：群臣训之以克让，百僚纳之以忠恕。
English: The vassals are disciplined with forbearance, and the hundred lieutenants are rewarded with loyalty.

古文：群下仰清风，海外同欢慕。
现代文：群下莫不仰清风，四海之外同欢慕。
English: There is no one in the group who does not admire the clear wind, and the four seas all admire it.

古文：象天则地，化云布。
现代文：象天则地，教化云布。
English: Like heaven and earth, enlightenment is like a cloud.

古文：昔日贵雕饰，今尚俭与素。
现代文：昔日帝王贵雕饰，今日圣皇尚俭素。
English: In the past, emperors were highly decorated, but today emperors are frugal.

古文：昔日多纤介，今去情与故。
现代文：昔日纠缠多纤芥，今日不留情典故。
English: In the past, tangled polysilicon mustard, today merciless allusion.

古文：象天则地，化云布。
现代文：象天则地，教化云布。
English: Like heaven and earth, enlightenment is like a cloud.

古文：济济大朝士，夙夜综万机。
现代文：京都朝士多济济，夙夜勤勉理万机。
English: Kyoto is a busy city in the morning, and there are many opportunities to work diligently both day and night.

古文：万机无废理，明明降训谘。
现代文：万事机微无废理，明察秋毫降训咨。
English: There is no nonsense in all things, and it is wise to learn from experience.

古文：臣譬列星景，君配朝日辉。
现代文：群臣犹如列星明，圣君可比朝日辉。
English: The ministers are like the stars, and the saints are like the morning sun.

古文：事业并通济，功烈何巍巍。
现代文：万事大业并通济，功烈崇高何巍巍。
English: In all things, the great cause and the great benefit are the same, and the noble achievement is the same.

古文：五帝继三皇，三皇世所归。
现代文：五帝为德继三皇，三皇圣德世所归。
English: The Five Emperors were the successors of the Three Emperors in virtue, and the Three Emperors were the successors of the Holy Virtue.

古文：圣德应期运，天天地不能违。
现代文：圣德会当应期运，天地期运不能违。
English: The Holy Virtue Association should respond to the movement of time, and the movement of heaven and earth cannot go against it.

古文：仰之弥已高，犹天不可阶。
现代文：仰而视之愈高大，其高犹天不可阶。
English: The higher you look up, the higher you are.

古文：将复御龙氏，凤皇在庭栖。
现代文：将欲恢复御龙氏，凤凰和鸣在庭栖。
English: He wants to restore the Goryu clan, and Fenghuang and Ming are living in the courtyard.

古文：天命篇当魏曲《太和有圣帝》，古曲《章和二年中》。
现代文：《天命篇》相当墓曲太和有圣帝》，古曲的章和二年中》。
English: "The Mandate of Heaven" is quite a tomb song and has a saint, the chapter of ancient music and two years.

古文：圣祖受天命，应期辅魏皇。
现代文：圣祖宣皇受天命，承天应期辅魏皇。
English: The Holy Ancestor Emperor Xuan was commanded by Heaven to assist the Emperor of Wei.

古文：入则综万机，出则征四方。
现代文：入则综政理万机，出则征讨在四方。
English: There is a comprehensive political and administrative mechanism for entering, and there is a four-way discussion for leaving.

古文：朝廷无遗理，方表宁且康。
现代文：朝廷万事无遗理，方域海表宁且康。
English: The imperial court never misses a trick, and the waters around the country are clear and healthy.

古文：道隆舜臣尧，积德逾太王。
现代文：道隆犹如舜臣尧，行仁积德逾太王。
English: Duolong is like a great vassal, and he is more virtuous than the great king.

古文：孟度阻穷险，造乱天一隅。
现代文：孟度凭险阻王师，逆命作乱天一隅。
English: Meng Du took advantage of the danger to obstruct Wang Shi, and made a mess of everything against his will.

古文：神兵出不意，奉命致天诛。
现代文：神兵天降出不意，奉命讨逆致天诛。
English: The divine soldier was unexpectedly sent down from heaven, and he was ordered to fight against the forces of evil, which led to the downfall of heaven.

古文：赦善罚有罪，元恶宗为虚。
现代文：赦免无罪罚有罪，首恶宗族成空虚。
English: Pardoning the guilty without punishing the guilty, the head of the evil clan becomes empty.

古文：威风震劲蜀，武烈慑强吴。
现代文：威风震动西劲蜀，武烈慑服东强吴。
English: The mighty wind shakes the western stronghold of Shu, and the military deterrence suits the eastern stronghold of Wu.

古文：诸葛不知命，肆逆乱天常。
现代文：诸葛不知天之命，肆虐逆命乱天常。
English: Zhuge did not know the fate of heaven, raging against life and nature.

古文：拥徒十余万，数来寇边疆。
现代文：拥兵一方十余万，屡屡来寇我边疆。
English: One side has more than 100,000 soldiers and has repeatedly invaded our borders.

古文：我皇迈神武，执钺镇雍凉。
现代文：我皇赫赫奋神武，执钹镇守在雍凉。
English: I, the emperor, am fighting with all my might to hold the town in Yongliang.

古文：亮乃畏天威，未战先仆僵。
现代文：诸葛畏惧我天威，未战震恐先仆僵。
English: Zhuge feared the might of heaven, and was afraid to move before the earthquake.

古文：盈虚自然运，时变故多艰。
现代文：盈虚乃是自然运，时事变易故多艰。
English: Prosperity and poverty is a natural fate. It is difficult because of the change of the times.

古文：东征陵海表，万里克朝鲜。
现代文：柬征辽东陵海表，诛减逆贼公孙渊。
English: The Cambodians conquered the Liaodong Tombs and reduced the number of traitors to Sun Yuan.

古文：受遗齐七政，曹爽又滔天。
现代文：魏皇遣命齐七政，曹爽之势又滔天。
English: The Wei Emperor issued orders for a total of seven policies, and Cao Shuang's momentum was tremendous.

古文：群凶受诛殛，百禄咸来臻。
现代文：群凶逆命终受诛，天赐百禄咸来至。
English: The group of thugs who defied the law were finally arrested, and by the grace of God, Baolu Xian came to us.

古文：黄华应福始，王凌为祸先。
现代文：菊有黄花应福始，王浚作乱为祸先。
English: The chrysanthemum with yellow flowers is the beginning of good fortune, and the chaos caused by the king's dredging is the beginning of misfortune.

古文：景皇篇当魏曲《魏历长》，古曲《乐久长》。
现代文：《景皇篇》相当魏曲魏厝长》，古曲的乐久长》。
English: "King's Scenes" is quite long compared to "Wei Qu" and "Wei Xuan Chang," while "Ancient Music" is long compared to "Ancient Music."

古文：景皇帝，聪明命世生，盛德参天地。
现代文：圣祖景皇帝，聪明生而名于世，圣明仁德参天地。
English: The Holy Ancestor Emperor Jing was born with great wisdom and became famous in the world.

古文：帝王道大，创基既已难，继世亦未易。
现代文：帝王之道固宏大，开创基业既已难，继世弘业亦非易。
English: The emperor's way is firm and grand, it is difficult to create a foundation, and it is not easy to carry on the business from generation to generation.

古文：外则夏侯玄，内则张与李，三凶构逆，乱帝纪。
现代文：当时外有夏侯玄，内有逆臣张与李，三凶内外同构逆，乱我帝纪。
English: At that time, there was Xia Houxuan on the outside, and the rebellious vassals Zhang and Li on the inside. The three evildoers were the same inside and outside, and they disrupted the imperial discipline.

古文：顺天行诛，穷其奸宄。
现代文：我皇顺天行诛伐，尽除三凶之奸逆。
English: I, the emperor, am marching in the direction of heaven to eliminate the three evils.

古文：边将御其渐，潜谋不得起。
现代文：边将防其尾渐大，图谋不轨不得起。
English: The border guard will prevent the tail from getting bigger, and the plot will not be able to start.

古文：罪人咸伏辜，威风振万里。
现代文：有罪之人咸伏罪，威风八面振万里。
English: Guilty people are guilty of cowardice, and they are full of bravado.

古文：平衡综万机，万机无不理。
现代文：永持平衡总万机，万机几微无不理。
English: Maintain a balance of a total of ten thousand machines, ten thousand machines are negligible.

古文：召陵桓不君，内外何纷纷。
现代文：召陵失道君不君，内忧外乱何纷纷。
English: There is a lot of internal and external turmoil.

古文：众小便成群，蒙昧恣心，治乱不分。
现代文：众小便辟结成群，蒙昧君主逞恣心，何为治乱犹不分。
English: People defecate in droves, obscure monarchs act arbitrarily, and it is still unclear what is meant by "control of chaos."

古文：睿圣独断，济武常以文。
现代文：我皇睿圣独决断，济武还须经以文。
English: I, the wise and saintly emperor, have decided that the imperial edict must be written.

古文：顺天惟废立，扫霓披浮云。
现代文：顺应天命行废立，扫除虹霓开浮云。
English: Comply with the fate of the waste, sweep away the rainbow and open the floating clouds.

古文：云霓既已辟，清和未几间，羽檄首尾至，变起东南籓。
现代文：云霓已除天既开，清明和平未几间，羽檄首尾接连至，变乱又起东南藩。
English: The sky has been cleared and the clouds have parted, peace and clarity are just a few days away, feather duster heads and tails are coming one after another, and turmoil has once again arisen in the Southeastern Domain.

古文：俭钦为长蛇，外则凭吴蛮。
现代文：俭钦为逆成长蛇，外有凭依为吴蛮。
English: Jianqin is a snake that grows backwards, and Po Ye is Wu Man.

古文：万国纷骚扰，戚戚天下惧不安。
现代文：万国骚扰乱纷纷，戚戚天下惧不安。
English: All nations are in turmoil, and the whole world is worried.

古文：神武御六军，我皇执钺征。
现代文：威武如神驭六军，我皇亲执斧铁征。
English: Mighty as a god, he controls the six armies, and my imperial relative wields the iron axe.

古文：俭钦起寿春，前锋据项城。
现代文：俭钦之乱起寿春，前锋已达据项城。
English: The Jianqin Rebellion began in Shouchun, and the vanguard has reached the stronghold of Xiangcheng.

古文：出其不意，并纵奇兵。
现代文：天降神兵出不意，我皇神武纵奇兵。
English: Heaven's fallen soldiers come out of the blue, and I, Emperor Shenwu, am leading the miraculous soldiers.

古文：奇兵诚难御，庙胜实难支。
现代文：奇兵如神诚难御，庙算为胜实难支。
English: Strange soldiers such as gods are difficult to control, and temples are difficult to win.

古文：两军不期遇，敌退计无施。
现代文：两军不期突遭遇，敌军溃退计无施。
English: The two armies unexpectedly encountered each other, and the enemy army retreated helplessly.

古文：豹骑惟武进，大战沙阳陂。
现代文：如豹车骑衹猛进，与敌大战沙阳陂。
English: Such as the leopard car riding furiously forward, and the great war with the enemy.

古文：钦乃亡魂走，奔虏若云披。
现代文：丧魂落魄钦逃走，溃逃奔虏如云披。
English: Despondent, he ran away, leaving his captors in the lurch.

古文：天因赦有罪，东土放鲸鲵。
现代文：天恩宽大赦有罪，束土元恶效鲸鲵。
English: By the grace of heaven, the guilty are pardoned and the wicked are punished.

古文：大晋篇当魏曲《天生蒸民》，古曲《四方皇》。
现代文：《大晋篇》相当魏曲天生蒸民》，古曲的《四方皇》。
English: "Dajin Hen" is quite similar to the Chinese folk song "Tian Sheng Steaming People" and the ancient Chinese song "Four-Sided Emperor."

古文：赫赫大晋，于穆文王。
现代文：赫赫大晋，圣哉文王。
English: He He Dajin, King Sheng Yaowen.

古文：荡荡巍巍，道迈陶唐。
现代文：盛德荡荡巍巍，其道逾越陶唐。
English: Shengde swings and sways, and its road crosses the Tao and Tang Dynasties.

古文：世称三皇五帝，及今重其光。
现代文：世称三皇五帝，于今重现其光。
English: Known as the Three Emperors and Five Emperors, it is now re-emerging.

古文：九德克明，文既显，武又彰。
现代文：克明行九德。文韬既着明，武略又显彰。
English: He practiced the nine virtues diligently. He was a brilliant writer and a brilliant strategist.

古文：思弘六合，兼济万方。
现代文：恩泽弘大六合，兼济群生万方。
English: Enze Hongda Rokkoh, and help students everywhere.

古文：内举元凯，朝政以纲。
现代文：内举勋臣元凯，朝政清明有纲。
English: Inner promotion of the honored vassal, Yuan Kai, and a clear and systematic approach to imperial politics.

古文：外简武臣，时惟鹰扬。
现代文：外则检选武臣，威武时而鹰扬。
English: On the other hand, samurai were selected, and the military might of the samurai was at times eagle-like.

古文：靡顺不怀，逆命斯亡。
现代文：顺者无不安宁，逆命难逃灭亡。
English: Those who are obedient have no anxiety and tranquility, and those who go against their will cannot escape and perish.

古文：仁配春日，威逾秋霜。
现代文：仁德合于春日，威严胜过秋霜。
English: Benevolence is compatible with spring, and majesty is superior to autumn frost.

古文：济济多士，同兹兰芳。
现代文：朝廷济济多士，同此蕙草兰芳。
English: The imperial court was very generous, and so was Lanfang.

古文：唐虞至治，四凶滔天。
现代文：唐尧虞舜至治，仍有四凶滔天。
English: Tang Dynasty still had four fierce dynasties.

古文：致讨俭钦，罔不肃虔。
现代文：征讨俭钦逆贼，无不恭肃敬虔。
English: To solicit thrift, to admire traitors, and to be respectful and pious.

古文：化感海内，海外来宾。
现代文：教化感动海内，海外莫不来宾。
English: Indoctrination has touched the hearts of people at home and abroad.

古文：献其声乐，并称妾臣。
现代文：进贡献其声乐，俱皆宾服称臣。
English: He contributed his vocal music, and everyone in the club was in awe of him.

古文：西蜀猾夏，僭号方域。
现代文：西蜀扰我华夏，僭号方域称帝。
English: West Shuxu disturbs my Huaxia, and the No. 2 quadrant is the emperor.

古文：命将致讨，委国稽服。
现代文：命将率兵征讨，弃国稽首称服。
English: The commander-in-chief led the conscription of soldiers, and the head of the National Audit Office praised it.

古文：吴人放命，冯海阻江。
现代文：吴人恣肆抗命，凭依大海阻江。
English: Wu people wantonly disobeyed orders, relying on the sea to block the river.

古文：飞书告喻，响应来同。
现代文：我皇飞书告谕，吴人响应来降。
English: I, the emperor, have issued a proclamation, and the people of Wu have responded by coming down.

古文：先王建万国，九服为籓卫。
现代文：先王分封建万国，九服之地成藩卫。
English: The previous king divided the whole country into feudal domains, and nine provinces were made into hanbei.

古文：亡秦坏诸侯，序祚不二世。
现代文：秦行郡县破封建，始皇续祚不二世。
English: Qin Xingxing broke the feudal system, and the first emperor was succeeded by the second emperor.

古文：历代不能复，忽逾五百岁。
现代文：历代不能复诸侯，倏忽已逾五百岁。
English: Historically, lordship cannot be restored, but it has been more than five hundred years old.

古文：我皇迈圣德，应期创典制。
现代文：我皇勉力行圣德，应期封侯创典制。
English: My emperor tried his best to live a holy life, and created a system of temporary vassalage.

古文：分土五等，籓国正封界。
现代文：分土列爵为五等，藩国大小正封界。
English: The land allotted to the feudal lords was ranked fifth, and the size of the domain was determined by the boundaries.

古文：莘莘文武佐，千秋遘嘉会。
现代文：莘莘文武佐大政，千秋始遇此嘉会。
English: It is the first time in thousands of years that a grand marshal has been awarded this honor.

古文：洪泽溢区内，仁风翔海外。
现代文：恩如洪泽溢区内，仁似和风翔海外。
English: Grace abounds in the region, benevolence prevails overseas.

古文：明君篇当魏曲《为君既不易》，古曲《殿前生桂树》。
现代文：《明君篇》相当魏曲为君既不易》，古曲的《殿前生桂树》。
English: "Ming Jun Hen" is quite a Wei song, "It is not easy for you," and the ancient song "The Guilin Tree in front of the Palace."

古文：明君御四海，听鉴尽物情。
现代文：圣皇明君御四海，听从鉴戒尽物情。
English: The holy Emperor Mingjun reigns over the four seas, obeying the precepts to the best of his ability.

古文：顾望有谴罚，谒忠身必荣。
现代文：徘徊观望有谴责，竭智尽忠身必荣。
English: To linger and watch is to be condemned, but to be faithful is to be glorified.

古文：兰芷出荒野，万里升紫庭。
现代文：兰芏本自荒野出，一朝万里升紫庭。
English: The lily of the valley rose from the wilderness to the purple garden.

古文：茨草秽堂阶，扫截不得生。
现代文：蒺藜芜秽堂前阶，清扫断除不得生。
English: The front steps of the Desecration Hall cannot be removed by sweeping.

古文：能否莫相蒙，百官正其名。
现代文：能与不能莫相蒙，百宫职守正其名。
English: Able and unable are not the same, and Hyakugo-noshu is just as its name suggests.

古文：恭己慎有为，有为无不成。
现代文：肃然恭己慎有为，有为诸事无不成。
English: If you respect yourself and act prudently, you will succeed in all things.

古文：暗君不自信，群下执异端。
现代文：暗君昏庸不自信，群下纷纷执异端。
English: The dark lord is dull and lacks self-confidence, and his followers cling to heresy in droves.

古文：正直罗浸润，奸臣夺其权。
现代文：正直之士遭谗言，奸佞之辈夺其权。
English: Honest men are slandered, and treacherous men seize power.

古文：虽欲尽忠诚，结舌不敢言。
现代文：静臣虽欲尽忠诚，张口结舌不敢言。
English: Although Shizuomi wanted to be loyal, he was too scared to say anything.

古文：结舌亦何惮，尽忠为身患。
现代文：张口结舌亦何惮，静言尽忠身为患。
English: Don't be afraid to speak your mind, but don't be afraid to be honest.

古文：清流岂不洁，飞尘浊其源。
现代文：明澈清流岂不洁，无端飞尘浊其源。
English: Is not a clear stream unclean? Is not its source full of flying dust?

古文：岐路令人迷，未远胜不还。
现代文：行至歧路令人迷，歧路未远胜不还。
English: It is confusing to go to the wrong road, and the wrong road is not far away.

古文：忠臣立君朝，正色不顾身。
现代文：忠臣无畏立君朝，一脸正色不顾身。
English: A loyal and fearless vassal, he established the Jun Dynasty, with a straight face and no regard for his own life.

古文：邪正不并存，譬若胡与秦。
现代文：奸邪正直不并存，譬若胡虏与大秦。
English: Treachery and evil do not co-exist, for example, the Huns and the Great Qin Dynasty.

古文：胡秦有合时，邪正各异津。
现代文：胡秦尚有相合时，奸邪正直各异津。
English: When the Hu and Qin Dynasties were still in harmony, their treachery and evil were completely different.

古文：忠臣遇明君，乾乾惟日新。
现代文：今日忠臣遇明君，干干不息。
English: Today, loyal vassals meet Mingjun and work tirelessly.

古文：群目统在纲，众星共北辰。
现代文：纲目虽密统在纲，犹如众星拱北辰。
English: Although the program is closely unified in the program, it is like the stars arching north.

古文：设令遭暗主，斥退为凡人。
现代文：设令忠臣遭暗主，无端斥退为凡人。
English: A loyal vassal is ordered by the dark lord to become a mortal for no reason.

古文：虽薄供时用，白茅犹为珍。
现代文：虽薄虫草供时用，荒野白茅犹为珍。
English: Although caterpillar fungus is used for a time, the wilderness white maple is still rare.

古文：冰霜昼夜结，兰桂摧为薪。
现代文：雨露昼夜凝为霜，兰草桂树摧为薪。
English: Rain and dew condense into frost day and night, and the cinnamon tree grows into firewood.

古文：邪臣多端变，用心何委曲。
现代文：邪臣善变计多端，用心顺上何委曲。
English: The evil minister is mercurial and multi-faceted, and will follow any order with all his heart.

古文：便辟顺情指，动随君所欲。
现代文：阿谀奉承顺情指，动辄随顺君所欲。
English: Flattery and flattery mean that you can do whatever you want.

古文：偷安乐目前，不问清与浊。
现代文：苟且偷安乐眼前，不问政治清与浊。
English: They are determined to steal the present peace and tranquility, regardless of political clarity and discipline.

古文：积伪罔时主，养交以持禄。
现代文：积伪欺罔当时主，结党营私以持禄。
English: Accumulating falsehoods and bullying the then-master, he formed a party and started his own business.

古文：言行恆相违，难餍甚谿谷。
现代文：言行不一恒相违，贪得无厌甚溪谷。
English: Words and deeds do not always contradict each other, and greed is insatiable.

古文：昧死射乾没，觉露则灭族。
现代文：昧死侥幸以取利，事发败露则灭族。
English: If you are lucky enough to die, you will make a profit. If you are unlucky enough to die, you will destroy the nation.

古文：拂舞，出自江左。
现代文：拂舞，出自丝束。
English: Whisk dance, from a bunch of silk.

古文：旧云吴舞，检其歌，非吴辞也。
现代文：旧名呈舞，查其歌诗，并非县辞。
English: The old name is a dance, a song and a poem, not a prefectural motto.

古文：亦陈于殿庭。
现代文：亦陈列殿庭。
English: It is also displayed in the palace garden.

古文：杨泓序云： 自到江南见《白符舞》，或言《白凫鸠舞》，云有此来数十年矣。
现代文：扰塑序云： 自到辽南就见过《白符舞》，或叫《白亮鸠舞》，据说有此舞以来已有数十年了。
English: Spoiler alert: Ever since I came to Liaoning Province, I have seen the "White Rune Dance," also known as the "White Bright Dragon Dance." It is said that this dance has existed for decades.

古文：察其辞旨，乃是吴人患孙皓虐政，思属晋也。 
现代文：察看其辞的旨意，是说星人患还壁虐政，思归属于置。 
English: Looking at the intention of his words, it is said that the star people suffer from the tyranny of the wall and think of belonging.

古文：今列之于后云。
现代文：今列其辞于后。
English: His resignation is set out below.

古文：拂舞歌诗五篇
现代文：拂舞歌诗五篇：
English: Five Whip Dance Poems:

古文：白鸠篇
现代文：《白鸠篇》
English: "The Egret"

古文：翩翩白鸠，再飞再鸣。
现代文：翩翩白鸠兮，一边飞翔一边鸣。
English: It is a graceful egret, singing as it flies.

古文：怀我君德，来集君庭。
现代文：怀我君之德兮，飞来集于君庭。
English: With my husband's virtue in mind, I flew to gather in your court.

古文：白雀呈瑞，素羽明鲜。
现代文：白雀呈瑞兮，素羽何鲜明。
English: The white finches are fresh, and their feathers are bright.

古文：翔庭舞翼，以应仁乾。
现代文：舞翼翔于君庭兮，是为应我仁君。
English: The dance wings fly in your court, it is in response to my benevolence.

古文：皎皎鸣鸠，或丹或黄。
现代文：皎皎鸣鸠兮，或为浅赤或为黄。
English: The beak is hoarse, either pale red or yellow.

古文：乐我君惠，振羽来翔。
现代文：乐我君之恩惠兮，千里振羽来翔。
English: Thanks to my husband's kindness, I was able to fly thousands of miles.

古文：东壁余光，鱼在江湖。
现代文：壁宿有余光兮，鱼乐其光在江湖。
English: The lodging on the wall has some light, and the fish are enjoying their time in the lake.

古文：惠而不费，敬我微躯。
现代文：君其惠而不费兮，敬事君以我微躯。
English: You benefit from it without any effort, and I am honored to serve you with my tiny body.

古文：策我良驷，习我驱驰。
现代文：驱策我之良驷兮，习练我之驰驱。
English: I will drive my car well, and practice my driving.

古文：与君周旋，乐道忘饥。
现代文：我愿从君周旋兮，乐君德而忘饥。
English: I would like to take care of you, make you happy and forget about hunger.

古文：我心虚静，我志沾濡。
现代文：我心虚静兮，我愿受君沾濡。
English: My heart is empty and quiet, I am willing to be drenched by you.

古文：弹琴鼓瑟，聊以自娱。
现代文：弹我琴兮鼓我瑟，暂且以之自娱。
English: Play my harp and my drums, and amuse yourself with them for a while.

古文：陵云登台，浮游太清。
现代文：时凌云兮时登台，我愿浮游在太清。
English: When I go on stage, I would like to float in the sky.

古文：攀龙附凤，自望身轻。
现代文：攀龙而附凤兮，我愿我之身轻。
English: Climbing the dragon and attaching the phoenix, I wish my body to be light.

古文：济济篇
现代文：《济济篇》
English: "Jiji version"

古文：暢暢飞舞气流芳，追念三五大绮黄。
现代文：畅飞畅舞气流芳，追念四皓大绮黄。
English: The air flowed smoothly, recalling the memory of the four great egrets.

古文：去失有，时可行，去来时同此未央。
现代文：去其得失，时来可行，去时来时同未央。
English: To get rid of one's gains and losses is feasible from time to time, and to get rid of one's gains and losses is possible from time to time.

古文：时冉冉，近桑榆，但当饮酒为欢娱。
现代文：时光荏苒，年近桑榆，但当饮酒为欢娱。
English: The time is short, the years are short, but when drinking is fun.

古文：衰老逝，有何期，多忧耿耿内怀思，深池旷，鱼独希，愿得黄浦众所依。
现代文：衰老时逝，复有何期，多忧耿耿心怀思。深池广阔，游鱼独稀，愿得黄浦众所依。
English: Aging, passing away, returning to what period, anxious thoughts. The deep pool is vast, the swimming fish are rare, and the people of Huangpu are willing to rely on it.

古文：恩感人，世无比，悲歌且舞无极已。
现代文：恩德感人，旷世无比，悲歌且舞无巳时。
English: Ende is moving, unparalleled in history, a tragic song and dance without a trace.

古文：独禄篇
现代文：《独禄篇》
English: "Dolomites"

古文：独独禄禄，水深泥浊。
现代文：独禄独禄，水深泥污。
English: Muddy, muddy, muddy.

古文：泥浊尚可，水深杀我。
现代文：泥污犹尚可，水深必杀我。
English: The mud is fine, but the deep water will kill me.

古文：雍雍双雁，游戏田畔。
现代文：雍雍和乐双雁，游戏在我田畔。
English: Yong Yong and Le Shuangyan, the game begins on the edge of my field.

古文：我欲射雁，念子孤散。
现代文：我欲弯弓射雁，念子失亲孤散。
English: I want to shoot geese with a bow and arrow. My adopted son has lost his family and I am all alone.

古文：翩翩浮萍，得风摇轻。
现代文：翩翩水上浮萍，风来轻轻摇动。
English: Duckweed fluttering on the water, gently shaken by the wind.

古文：我心何合，与之同并。
现代文：我心思欲谁合，与彼浮萍同并。
English: I'm thinking about who I want to be with, and I want to be with him.

古文：空床低帏，谁知无人。
现代文：空床垂下幛幕，谁知其中无人。
English: An empty bed hangs down the curtain, but no one is there.

古文：夜衣锦绣，谁别伪真。
现代文：夜穿锦绣之衣，认辨其人伪真。
English: If you wear an embroidered dress at night, you will be able to tell whether it is real or fake.

古文：刀鸣鞘中，倚床无施。
现代文：刀不平兮鸣鞘中，身倚床兮竟无施。
English: In the sheath, leaning on the bed, there was nothing to be done.

古文：父冤不报，欲活何为。
现代文：亲父冤仇不得报，活在世上欲何为。
English: My father's wrongdoing cannot be avenged, so what do I want to do in this world?

古文：猛兽班班，游戏山间。
现代文：猛兽班班可见，游戏在此山间。
English: Packs of ferocious beasts can be seen, the game takes place in the mountains.

古文：兽欲啮人，不避豪贤。
现代文：猛兽欲吃人，不问豪与贤。
English: If a ferocious beast wants to eat a human, it doesn't care about bravery or virtue.

古文：碣石篇
现代文：《碣石篇》
English: "The Flintstones"

古文：东临碣石，以观沧海。
现代文：束征临碣石，得以观沧海。
English: After a long journey to Lintongshi, we were able to see the Canghai Sea.

古文：水何淡淡，山岛竦峙。
现代文：海水平阔何淡淡，山岛竦峙何巍巍。
English: The sea is as wide as it is shallow, and the mountains and islands are as far apart as they can be.

古文：树木丛生，百草丰茂。
现代文：岛上树木丛生，百草丰密茂盛。
English: The island is covered with trees, and the grass is thick and luxuriant.

古文：秋风萧瑟，洪波涌起。
现代文：秋风萧瑟木摇落，大海汹涌起洪波。
English: The autumn wind is blowing, the trees are swaying, and the sea is surging.

古文：日月之行，若出其中。
现代文：天上日月之行，映照若出其中。
English: When the sun and moon move across the sky, the reflection appears in the middle.

古文：星汉灿烂，若出其里。
现代文：河汉繁星灿烂，看似出于其裹。
English: The stars of the river Han are brilliant, seemingly out of their wrapping.

古文：幸甚至哉，歌以咏志。
现代文：幸甚至哉，作歌以咏我志。
English: I'm even lucky enough to be able to write a song about it.

古文：《观沧海》
现代文：《观沧海》
English: "Viewing the Sea of the East and West"

古文：孟冬十月，北风徘徊。
现代文：时值孟冬十月，北风徐徐吹来。
English: It was mid-winter in October, and the north wind was blowing.

古文：天气肃清，繁霜霏霏。
现代文：天气肃肃清爽，繁霜霏霏茫茫。
English: The weather was clear and crisp, with no sign of frost.

古文：鹍鸡晨鸣，雁过南飞。
现代文：鸥鸡啁哳晨鸣，大雁翩翩南翔。
English: Chickens chirp in the morning, and geese fly south.

古文：鸷鸟潜藏，熊罴窟栖。
现代文：惊鸟猛禽潜栖，熊照早已窟藏。
English: Scared birds and raptors roost underground, and bears have long been hiding in caves.

古文：耨鑮停置，农收积场。
现代文：耨锄农具闲置，农收稼禾积场。
English: Farming tools are idle, and the harvest is over.

古文：逆旅整设，以通贾商。
现代文：客舍整治一新，以宿来往客商。
English: The guesthouse was renovated and became a lodging for visiting merchants.

古文：幸甚至哉，歌以咏志。
现代文：幸甚至哉，作歌以咏我志。
English: I'm even lucky enough to be able to write a song about it.

古文：《冬十月》
现代文：《冬十月》
English: "Winter October"

古文：乡土不同，河朔隆塞。
现代文：地域乡土不同，隆冬河朔寒冷。
English: Depending on the region and locality, midwinter is very cold.

古文：流澌浮漂，舟船行难。
现代文：河上飘浮流冰，舟船难以通行。
English: Ice floats on the river, making it difficult for boats to pass.

古文：锥不之地，丰籁深奥。
现代文：天寒锥不入地，北风众籁嘶鸣。
English: The sky cold cone does not penetrate the ground, and the north wind hisses.

古文：水竭不流，冰坚可蹈。
现代文：水冻结而不流，坚冰硬可踏行。
English: Water freezes but does not flow, and ice is hard enough to walk on.

古文：士隐者贫，勇侠轻非。
现代文：士之隐者多贫寒，勇侠义士疾非行。
English: The hermits are mostly poor and cold, while the valiant knights are often delinquent.

古文：心常叹怨，戚戚多悲。
现代文：我心常叹怨，戚戚多悲痛。
English: My heart often laments, relatives often grieve.

古文：幸甚至哉，歌以咏志。
现代文：幸甚至哉，作歌以咏我志。
English: I'm even lucky enough to be able to write a song about it.

古文：《土不同》
现代文：《土不同》
English: "Different Soil"

古文：神龟虽寿，犹有竟时。
现代文：神龟虽然长寿，犹有寿终之时。
English: Although the divine turtle lives a long life, it still has the time to die.

古文：腾蛇乘雾，终为土灰。
现代文：腾蛇乘云驾雾，最终化为土灰。
English: The snake climbs through the clouds and eventually turns to dust.

古文：骥老伏枥，志在千里。
现代文：老骥伏于马极，志在驰骋千里。
English: The old man crouches at the horse's bridle, aspiring to gallop thousands of miles.

古文：烈士暮年，壮心不已。
现代文：烈士虽到暮年，壮志雄心不已。
English: Even though the martyrs are in their twilight years, their ambitions remain unfulfilled.

古文：盈缩之期，不但在天。
现代文：盈缩祸福之期，不全在于上天。
English: The period of prosperity and contraction is not entirely up to the heavens.

古文：养怡之福，可得永年。
现代文：养性怡情之福，可得而享永年。
English: The blessing of cultivating a pleasant disposition can be obtained and enjoyed for years to come.

古文：幸甚至哉，歌以咏志。
现代文：幸甚至哉，作歌以咏我志。
English: I'm even lucky enough to be able to write a song about it.

古文：《龟虽寿》
现代文：《龟虽寿》
English: "Turtle's Life"

古文：淮南王篇
现代文：《淮南王篇》
English: "King of Huainan"

古文：淮南王，自言尊，百尺高楼与天连。
现代文：淮南王，自崇尊，百尺高楼舆天连。
English: Huainan King, self-reverence, a hundred-foot high-rise skyscraper.

古文：后园凿井银作床，金瓶素绠汲寒浆。
现代文：后园凿井银作架，金瓶素绳汲寒浆。
English: The back garden is made of chiseled silver, and the gold bottle is made of cold milk.

古文：汲寒浆，饮少年，少年窈窕何能贤。
现代文：汲寒浆，饮少年，少年窈窕多才贤。
English: Drink cold milk, drink young people, young people are more talented.

古文：扬声悲歌音绝天。
现代文：扬声悲歌音绝天。
English: The wailing of the mourners is deafening.

古文：我欲渡河河无梁，愿作双黄鹄，还故乡。
现代文：我欲渡河河无桥，愿作双双黄鹄鸟，伴君还故乡。
English: I want to cross the river without a bridge, I would like to be a double-double yellow ostrich, and my companion is still my hometown.

古文：还故乡，入故里，徘徊故乡，若身不已。
现代文：还故乡，归故里，徘徊故乡身不止。
English: Also hometown, return to hometown, wandering around hometown.

古文：繁舞奇歌无不泰，徘徊桑梓游天外。
现代文：故乡繁舞奇歌无不泰，为何不止桑梓游天外。
English: There is no shortage of folk dance songs in my hometown, so why not travel to other places?

古文：鼓角横吹曲。
现代文：鼓角横吹曲。
English: The horns of the drums play a melody.

古文：鼓，案《周礼》 以鼓鼓军事 。
现代文：所谓鼓，即《周礼》说的 以轰鼓鼓军事 。
English: The so-called drum, that is, "Zhou Li" said that the military marches to the beat of the drum.

古文：角，说者云，蚩尤氏帅魑魅与黄帝战于涿鹿，帝乃始命吹角为龙鸣以御之。
现代文：所谓角，据说者云，蚩尤氏率魑魅舆茎童战于士蓖之野，帝乃命吹角作龙鸣之声以御蚩立。
English: The so-called horn is said to have originated from the legend that Emperor You, led by Emperor You, fought a battle in the field of Shizuku, and Emperor Mei blew the horn to make the sound of a dragon.

古文：其后魏武北征乌丸，越沙漠而军士思归，于是减为中鸣，而尤更悲矣。
现代文：其后馥迭北征昼叁，越沙漠而军士思归，于是减为中鸣，而其声更加悲凉。
English: After that, it became the Northern Expedition Day Song, and the desert became the desert, and the sergeants thought of returning, so it was reduced to the middle melody, and its sound was more sad.

古文：胡角者，本以应胡笳之声，后渐用之横吹，有双角，即胡乐也。
现代文：所谓胡角，本来是应和胡笳之声的，后来渐渐用于横吹，有双角，亦即胡乐。
English: The so-called horns originally corresponded to the sound of the horn, but later they were gradually used for cross-blowing, with double horns, i.e. horns.

古文：张博望入西域，传其法于西京，惟得《摩诃兜勒》一曲。
现代文：张博望入西域，传其吹奏之法于西京，仅得《摩诃兜勒》一曲。
English: Zhang Bohang entered the western region and passed on his blowing method to the western capital. He only got one piece, "The Capuchin."

古文：李延年因胡曲更造新声二十八解，乘舆以为武乐。
现代文：李延年按照胡曲另作新歌二十八章，皇帝以此为武乐。
English: Li Yannian composed a new song of 28 chapters according to the Huqu, and the emperor used it as martial music.

古文：后汉以给边将，和帝时，万人将军得用之。
现代文：后漠时以此乐供边将之用，和帝时，辖万人之将军始得用之。
English: In the post-desert period, this music was used by generals, and in the imperial period, it was used by generals who ruled over tens of thousands of people.

古文：魏晋以来，二十八解不复具存，用者有《黄鹄》、《陇头》、《出关》、《入关》、《出塞》、《入塞》、《折杨柳》、《黄覃子》、《赤之杨》、《望行人》十曲。
现代文：魏晋以来，二十八章不复完备，所用者仅有《黄鹄》、《陇头》、出关》、《入关》、《出塞》、《入塞》、《折杨柳》、《黄覃子》、《赤之杨》、《望行人》十曲。
English: Since the Wei and Jin Dynasties, the 28 chapters have never been completed, and the only ones used are "Huangpi," "Shantou," "Out of the Customs," "Into the Customs," "Out of the Jams," "Into the Jams," "Folding Poplars," "Huangzizi," "Red Poplars" and "Watching Pedestrians."

古文：案魏晋之世，有孙氏善弘旧曲，宋识善击节唱和，陈左善清歌，列和善吹笛，郝索善弹筝，硃生善琵琶，尤发新声。
现代文：考魏晋之世，有孙氏善引旧曲，宋识善击节唱和，陈左善清歌，列和善吹笛，郝素善弹筝，朱生善琵琶，尤善发新声。
English: During the Wei and Jin dynasties, Sun Zhi was good at quoting old songs, Song Zhi was good at singing and chanting, Chen Zuo was good at singing and chanting, Li He was good at playing the flute, Yao Su was good at playing the kite, Zhu Sheng was good at playing the lute, and You Sheng was good at making new sounds.

古文：故傅玄著书曰： 人若钦所闻而忽所见，不亦惑乎？
现代文：所以傅玄著书说： 人如果衹重视所闻而忽视所见，不也会感到疑惑吗!
English: Therefore, Fu Xuan said in his book: If people don't pay attention to what they hear and ignore what they see, won't they also feel confused!

古文：设此六人生于上世，越今古而无俪，何但夔牙同契哉！ 
现代文：假设此六人生于上世，超越今古而无人匹敌，为何祇有夔牙为同契呢! 
English: Assuming that these six were born in the previous life, surpassing the present age and having no equal, why are there only teeth for the same contract?

古文：案此说，则自兹以后，皆孙硃等之遗则也。
现代文：按照傅玄的说法，那么自此以后，都是孙朱等人的遣则。
English: According to Fu Xuan, from then on, it was Sun Zhu and others who had the final say.

古文：相和，汉旧歌也，丝竹更相和，执节者歌。
现代文：相和歌，是漠代旧歌，丝竹迭相应和，执节者唱歌。
English: The phase and song is the old song of the desert era, the silk and bamboo overlapping correspondingly, and the performer singing.

古文：本一部，魏明帝分为二，更递夜宿。
现代文：本为一部，魏明帝分为二部，轮流夜宿。
English: This is one part, Wei Mingdi is divided into two parts, and they take turns to stay overnight.

古文：本十七曲，硃生、宋职、列和等复合之为十三曲。
现代文：本为十七曲，朱生、宋识、列和等人把一部分曲子合在一起而成十三曲。
English: Originally, there were seventeen pieces, but Zhu Sheng, Song Xian, Li He and others combined some of the pieces into thirteen pieces.

古文：但歌，四曲，出自汉世。
现代文：但歌，有四首，出自汉世。
English: However, there are four songs from the Han Dynasty.

古文：无弦节，作伎最先唱，一人唱，三人和。
现代文：无琴弦伴奏，领唱最先唱，一人唱，三人和。
English: There is no string accompaniment, the leader sings first, one person sings, and three people.

古文：魏武帝尤好之。
现代文：魏武帝对此尤为喜好。
English: Emperor Wu of Wei was particularly fond of this.

古文：时有宋容华者，清彻好声，善唱此曲，当时之特妙。
现代文：当时有名叫宋容华的，嗓音清彻喜唱歌，善唱此曲，为当时最局出色的歌者。
English: Song Ronghua, who was famous at that time, had a clear voice and liked to sing. He was good at singing this song and was the most outstanding singer at that time.

古文：自晋以来不复传，遂绝。
现代文：自晋以后不复传，遂绝。
English: Since the Jin Dynasty, it has not been passed down, and it is now extinct.

古文：凡乐章古辞，今之存者，并汉世街陌谣讴，《江南可采莲》、《乌生十五子》、《白头吟》之属也。
现代文：凡乐章古辞，保留到今天的，连同汉代街巷歌谣，都是江南可采莲》、《乌生十五子》、《白头吟》之类。
English: All of the ancient musical phrases that have been preserved to this day, along with the songs of the streets and lanes of the Han Dynasty, are such as "South of the Yangtze," "Wu Sheng Jiu Zi," and "Bai Tou Ying."

古文：吴歌杂曲并出江南，东晋以来，稍有增广。
现代文：吴歌杂曲均出自江南，束晋以来，稍有增广。
English: All of Wu's folk songs and melodies originated in the south of the Yangtze River, and their popularity has increased slightly since the Song Dynasty.

古文：《子夜歌》者，女子名子夜，造此声。
现代文：《子夜歌》，相传有女子名子夜，作此歌。
English: "Ziyang Song" is said to have been composed by a woman named Ziyang.

古文：孝武太元中，琅邪王轲之家有鬼歌《子夜》，则子夜是此时以前人也。
现代文：孝武左五年间，堕塑王塑旦家有鬼唱《子夜歌》，可见子夜是此时以前的人。
English: During the five years after Xiaowu's death, there was a ghost singing "Ziyang Song" in the house of the fallen king of the Shuotan family. It can be seen that Ziyang was a person before this time.

古文：《凤将雏歌》者，旧曲也。
现代文：《凤将雏歌》，是旧曲。
English: "Phoenix will sing a nursery rhyme" is an old song.

古文：应璩《百一诗》云 言是《凤将雏》 ，然则其来久矣。
现代文：《百一诗》有 言是《凤将雏》 的句子，这样说来其来已经很久远了。
English: "Hundred and One Poems" has a saying that is a sentence from "Phoenix Will Brood," so it has been a long time coming.

古文：《前溪歌》者，车骑将军沈充所制。
现代文：《前溪歌》，为车骑将军这立所作。
English: "The Song of Qianxi" was composed for the carriage and cavalry general.

古文：《阿子》及《欢闻歌》者，穆帝升平初，歌毕辄呼 阿子，汝闻不？ 
现代文：至于《阿子》及《惧闻歌》，在捏童乏陉初年，歌毕常呼 阿子，你听见了没有? 
English: As for "A Zi" and "Fearful Song," in the first year of his childhood, Song Bi often called "A Zi," did you hear it?

古文：语在《五行志》。
现代文：此语在《五行志》。
English: This phrase appears in the "Five Elements."

古文：后人衍其声，以为此二曲。
现代文：后人衍绎其声，因而作此二曲。
English: Later generations derived his voice, and thus composed these two songs.

古文：《团扇歌》者，中书令王珉与嫂婢有情，爱好甚笃，嫂捶挞婢过苦，婢素善歌，而珉好捉白团扇，故制此歌。
现代文：说到《团扇歌》，本为中书令王堡与嫂之婢女有情，相爱甚笃，嫂捶打婢女甚苦，婢女素好唱歌，而王珉又好拿白团扇，因而作此歌。
English: When it comes to "The Fan Song," it was originally written in Chinese as Wang Bo and his sister-in-law's maidservant had feelings for each other and loved each other very much. The sister-in-law beat the maidservant very hard. The maidservant was good at singing, while Wang Yao was good at holding a white fan, which is why this song was written.

古文：《懊憹歌》者，隆安初俗闻讹谣之曲，语在《五行志》。
现代文：《懊侬歌》，为初年民间讹谣之曲，语在《五行志》。
English: "Kenon no Uta" is a folk ballad from the first year, and its words are in the "Five Elements."

古文：《长史变》者，司徒左长史王廞临败所制。
现代文：《长史变》，为司徒左长史王毖临败时所作。
English: "Changing the Long History" was written for the imminent defeat of Stutthof's left-wing chancellor, Wang Xi.

古文：凡此诸曲，始皆徒歌，即而被之管弦。
现代文：凡以上诸曲，开始时都是清唱，后来才加上管弦伴奏。
English: All of the above pieces are a cappella at the beginning, with orchestral accompaniment added later.

古文：又有因丝竹金石，造歌以被之，魏世三调歌辞之类是也。
现代文：也有的是根据丝竹金石之曲，作歌词填到乐曲裹面，魏世的三调歌辞就是这样来的。
English: Some are also based on the songs of silk, bamboo and stone, and the lyrics are filled with music. This is how the three-tone lyrics of the Wei Dynasty came about.

古文：《杯柈舞》，案太康中天下为《晋世宁舞》，务手以接杯柈反覆之。
现代文：杯袢舞，考塞尘年间天下皆为《晋世宁舞》，专以手接杯盘而反覆之。
English: The cup and saucer dance, known throughout the world as the "Jin Shining Dance," is performed repeatedly with the cup and saucer connected by hand.

古文：此则汉世惟有柈舞，而晋加之以杯，反覆之也。
现代文：此舞莲世衹有盘舞，而晋时又加上杯，双手反覆以接杯盘。
English: In this dance, there is a plate dance, and in Jin, a cup is added, and the hands are repeated to connect the cup to the plate.

古文：《公莫舞》，今之《巾舞》也。
现代文：《公莫舞》，就是今天的巾舞。
English: "Gongmo Dance" is today's purse dance.

古文：相传云项庄剑舞，项伯以袖隔之，使不得害汉高祖，且语项庄云 公莫 ！
现代文：相传说是项庄舞剑，项伯以袖阻隔项庄之剑，使他不得加害于汉高祖，并对他说 公莫 !
English: According to legend, it was the sword dance of Xiangzhuang. Xiangbo blocked the sword of Xiangzhuang with his sleeve, so that he would not harm Han Gaozu, and told him, "Don't do it!"

古文：古人相呼曰公，言公莫害汉王也。
现代文：古人相互称呼为公，是说公莫害汉王。
English: The ancients called each other "Kong," meaning "don't harm the Han king."

古文：今之用巾盖像项伯衣袖之遗式。
现代文：今天用巾盖以象征项伯衣袖的遣式。
English: Today, the cloth cap is used to symbolize the collar of the sleeve.

古文：然案《琴操》有《公莫渡河曲》，然则其声所从来已久，俗云项伯，非也。
现代文：然而根据《琴操》有《公莫渡河曲》，说明其歌由来已久，俗说成项伯，是不对的。
English: However, according to "Qinqiu," there is a "Gongmo River Crossing Song," which indicates that its song has a long history, and it is wrong to say that it is a folk song.

古文：《白纟宁舞》，案舞辞有巾袍之言。
现代文：白纡舞，查舞辞有巾袍之言。
English: The egret dance, the chador dance has the words of the shawl.

古文：纟宁本吴地所出，宜是吴舞也。
现代文：纡本为昱地所产，应该是昱舞。
English: Koto is a product of the Koto region, and it should be a dance.

古文：晋《俳歌》又云： 皎皎白绪，节节为双。 
现代文：置《俳歌》又说： 皎皎白绪，节节为双。 
English: In "Haiku" he also said: 白绪,節節为双.

古文：吴音呼绪为纟宁，疑白纟宁即白绪也。《铎舞歌》一篇，《幡舞歌》一篇，《鼓舞伎》六曲，并陈于元会。
现代文：呈音称绪为纡，可能白贮就是白绪。铎舞歌一篇，幡舞歌一篇，《鼓舞伎》六曲，一并陈于元旦朝会。
English: The pronunciation is, and it is possible that 白贮 is 白绪. A dance song, a flag dance song, and six pieces of "Bokugi" were all presented at the New Year's Day Imperial Court Reception.

古文：后汉正旦，天子临德阳殿受朝贺，舍利从西方来，戏于殿前，激水化成比目鱼，跳跃嗽水，作雾翳日。
现代文：后汉元旦，天子驾临德阳殿接受群臣朝贺，有舍利从西方来，戏于殿前，激水化成比目鱼，跳跃吸水，啧水作雾而蔽日。
English: After the Han New Year's Day, Tianzi drove to the Deyang Palace to receive the morning greetings from the courtiers. There was a shepherd from the west, who played in front of the palace, heated water into flounder, jumped to absorb water, and made water into fog to cover the sun.

古文：毕，又化成龙，长八九丈，出水游戏，炫耀日光。
现代文：然后，又化而成龙，长八九丈，出水游戏，在日光照耀下光彩夺目。
English: Then, it turned into a dragon, eight or nine feet long, playing in the water, dazzling in the sunlight.

古文：以两大丝绳系两柱头，相去数丈，两倡女对舞，行于绳上，相逢切肩而不倾。
现代文：用两条大丝绳系在两根柱子的顶端，相距数丈，两女子相对而舞，行于丝绳上，两人相逢擦肩而过却不倒。
English: With two large silk ropes tied at the top of two pillars, a few feet apart, the two women dance opposite each other, walk on the silk ropes, and pass each other without falling.

古文：魏晋讫江左，犹有《夏育扛鼎》、《巨象行乳》、《神龟抃舞》、《背负灵岳》、《桂树白雪》、《画地成川》之乐。
现代文：自魏晋讫于江左，依然有《夏育扛鼎》、《巨象行乳》、《神龟扑舞》、《背负灵岳》、《桂树白雪》、《画地成川》之乐。
English: Since the Wei and Jin Dynasties, there are still the music of "Summer Education," "Giant Elephant Breeding," "God Turtle Fluttering," "Backed by Lingyue," "White Snow of Guizhu" and "Painted River."

古文：成帝咸康七年，尚书蔡谟奏： 八年正会仪注，惟作鼓吹钟鼓，其余伎乐尽不作。 
现代文：成帝咸康七年，尚书蔡谟上奏： 八年元旦朝会礼节，衹奏钟鼓鼓吹之乐，其余伎乐一律不奏。 
English: In the seventh year of Emperor Chengxiankang, Shangshu Cai Mue played the following music: On the eighth year of the New Year's Day, the court etiquette, the music of the bell and the drum were played, and the rest of the music was not played.

古文：侍中张澄、给事黄门侍郎陈逵驳，以为 王者观时设教，至于吉凶殊断，不易之道也。
现代文：侍中张澄、给事黄门侍郎陈逵则加以反驳，认为 王者视时设教，至于吉凶异断，那是不变的道理。
English: Zhang Cheng, a chamberlain, and Chen Xi, a steward of the Yellow Gate, refuted it, saying that the king sets the teaching according to the time, and as for the difference between good luck and bad luck, that is an unchanging principle.

古文：今四方观礼，陵有傧吊之位，庭奏宫悬之乐，二礼兼用，哀乐不分，体国经制，莫大于此 。
现代文：今四方各国都来观礼，陵园设有敬悼祖宗之位，庭奏宫悬礼乐，二礼兼用，哀乐不分，建国设制，莫大于此 。
English: Nowadays, people from all four corners of the world come to watch the ceremony. The cemetery has a mausoleum to pay tribute to the ancestors, a courtyard to play the music of the ceremony, the two ceremonies can be used at the same time, the mourning music is not divided, and the founding of the country is set up. There is nothing greater than this.

古文：诏曰： 今既以天下体大，礼从权宜，三正之飨，宜尽用吉礼也。
现代文：皇帝韶曰： 今既以天下为大，礼仪当从权宜，三正合祭宜都用祭祀之礼。
English: Emperor Xuan said: Now that the world is great, the etiquette should be expedient, and the three-day festival should be a ritual.

古文：至娱耳目之乐，所不忍闻，故阙之耳。
现代文：至于娱乐耳目之乐，有所不忍听，所以缺少了也无妨。
English: As for the entertainment of the eyes and ears, there is something unbearable to listen to, so there is no harm in missing it.

古文：事之大者，不过上寿酒，称万岁，已许其大，不足复阙钟鼓鼓吹也。 
现代文：事之大者，不过上寿酒，称万岁，既然承认此事为大，不可再缺少钟鼓鼓吹。 
English: It's a big deal, but long live the New Year's Eve celebration. Since this is recognized as a big deal, there is no longer a need for bells and drums.

古文：澄、逵又启： 今大礼虽降，事吉于朝。
现代文：张澄、陈逵又上奏说： 今大礼虽毕，事亦有吉于朝。
English: Zhang Cheng and Chen Wei also reported: Although the grand ceremony is over, things are looking good for the morning.

古文：然傧吊显于园陵，则未灭有哀；礼服定于典文，义无尽吉。
现代文：然而敬吊显于园陵，则未灭其为哀；礼服定于典籍，其义并非尽为吉庆。
English: However, if the hanging scroll appears in the garden, it is not extinguished; the dress is set in the classic, and its meaning is not entirely auspicious.

古文：是以咸宁之会，有撤乐之典，实先朝稽古宪章，垂式万世者也。 
现代文：所以咸宁朝会，有撤乐之典，实为先朝考核古代典章制度，垂范于万世的典礼。 
English: Therefore, the Xianning Dynasty meeting, with the withdrawal of music, is actually a ceremony of the previous dynasty to examine the ancient ceremony system and follow the world.

古文：诏曰： 若元日大飨，万国朝宗，庭废钟鼓之奏，遂阙起居之节，朝无磬制之音，宾无蹈履之度，其于事义，不亦阙乎！
现代文：皇帝诏曰： 如果元旦举行夹祭之礼，万国诸侯朝见天子，庭废钟鼓之乐，就缺少了出入起居的礼节，朝无石磬之音，来宾的步履就失去了节度，其于事义，不也是有欠缺吗!
English: Emperor Zhao said: If the New Year's Day holds the ceremony of the festival, the princes of all countries will see the heavenly son, and the music of the bells and drums in the courtyard will be wasted, there will be a lack of etiquette for entering and leaving the house, there will be no sound of the bell in the morning, and the guests' steps will lose their moderation. In the meaning of things, isn't there also a lack?

古文：惟可量轻重，以制事中。 
现代文：衹有衡量事之轻重，才能做到恰到好处。 
English: You have to weigh things up to get it just right.

古文：散骑侍郎顾臻表曰： 臣闻圣王制乐，赞扬政道，养以仁义，防其淫佚，上享宗庙，下训黎元，体五行之正音，协八风以陶物。
现代文：散骑侍郎顾臻上奏说： 我听说圣王制定礼乐制度，是为赞扬正道，教民以仁义，防其怠惰淫佚，上可享祭宗庙，下可训导黎民，含五行之正音，协八方之风以陶冶物情。
English: "I heard that the holy king established the ritual music system in order to praise the righteous path, to teach the people with benevolence and righteousness, to prevent their laziness and lasciviousness, to enjoy the festival of the ancestral temple, to instruct the Li people, to contain the positive tone of the five elements, and to cultivate the material conditions with the wind of the eight directions.

古文：宫声正方而好义，角声坚齐而率礼，弦歌钟鼓金石之作备矣。
现代文：宫声正方而好义，角声坚定齐整而循礼，弦歌钟鼓金石之乐是很齐备的。
English: The palace voice is square and righteous, the horn voice is firm and orderly and follows the rite, and the music of the strings, bells and drums is very complete.

古文：故通神至化，有率舞之感，移风易俗，致和乐之极。
现代文：因此能深入人心而潜移默化，使人有循礼舞蹈之感，能移风易俗，以达到极和乐的境地。
English: Therefore, it can penetrate deeply into people's hearts and subtly transform them, make people have a sense of ritual dance, and can change customs and habits to achieve a state of extreme harmony.

古文：末世之伎，设礼外之观，逆行连倒，头足入筥之属，皮肤外剥，肝心内摧，敦彼行苇，犹谓勿践，矧伊生灵，而不侧怆。
现代文：末世的歌舞杂技，多有不符合礼法的表演，如逆行而接连翻倒，头足同入竹筐之类，外则剥损皮肤，内则摧残肝心，拢彼行苇，犹教牛羊勿践，何况生灵，怎能不凄怆悲痛。
English: The song and dance acrobatics of the last days often include performances that do not conform to the etiquette, such as walking backwards and falling over one after another, putting one's head and feet into a bamboo basket, stripping the skin on the outside, destroying the heart on the inside, walking in a circle, not practicing the Jewish teachings on cattle and sheep, not to mention living beings, how can there not be great sorrow.

古文：加四海朝觐，言观帝庭，耳聆《雅》《颂》之声，目睹威仪之序，足以蹋天，头以履地，反天地之至顺，伤彝伦之大方。
现代文：再说四海诸侯来朝见天子，说要观看帝庭，耳听《雅》《颂》之声，目睹威仪之序，却看到以足踏天，以头行地，逆天地之顺序，有伤人伦常理之大法。
English: Moreover, the princes of the four seas came to see the heavenly son in the morning, saying that they wanted to watch the imperial court, listen to the voices of "Ya" and "Ode," and witness the order of majesty, but they saw that the order of treading the sky with the feet and walking on the earth with the head was against heaven and earth, which was a great law that hurt people's morals and common sense.

古文：今夷狄对岸，外御为急，兵食七升，忘身赴难，过泰之戏，日廪五斗。
现代文：今夷狄与我隔岸相对，外御强敌最为急迫，兵食七升，犹忘死以赴国难，而遇甚之戏，却日给五斗。
English: Now I am on the opposite side of the river, facing a powerful foreign enemy, and the situation is most urgent. The soldiers have only seven liters of rations, and they have not yet forgotten that they died in the national tragedy. However, when they are faced with a very serious situation, they are given five bucks a day.

古文：方扫神州，经略中甸，若此之事，不可示远。
现代文：方今正扫荡神州，经略中原，像此类事情，不可以示四海。
English: The Founder is now sweeping the Divine Land and the Central Plains, and things like this cannot be allowed to spread to the four seas.

古文：宜下太常，纂备雅乐，箫《韶》九成，惟新于盛运，功德颂声，永著于来叶，此乃所以 燕及皇天，克昌厥后 者也。
现代文：应令太常，纂集雅乐，如箫《韶》九成之属，以维新于盛世国运，歌功颂德，永远昌明于后世，这才是用以 燕及皇天，克昌厥后，的大事。
English: It is very common to compile elegant music, such as the ninety-nine percent of the  "" chorus, in order to maintain the new era in the prosperous national movement, sing the praises of virtue, and forever flourish in the future. This is the great event of using "Yan" and "Kingtian" and "Kechang."

古文：诸伎而伤人者，皆宜除之。
现代文：诸歌舞杂技而又伤人者，应该一律废除。
English: All singing, dancing and acrobatic acts that injure people should be abolished.

古文：流简俭之德，迈康哉之咏，清风既行，下应如草，此之谓也。
现代文：传扬崇尚俭约的道德，勉励安国康民的咏唱，清风既行，下应如草，说的就是这个道理。
English: To propagate the morality of advocating frugality, to encourage the singing of the anthem of a safe country and a prosperous people, the wind is already blowing, and it should be like grass. This is the truth.

古文：愚管之诚，惟垂采察！ 
现代文：愚臣管见之诚，惟望明察采纳。 
English: Fools may see the sincerity, but wise men see the folly.

古文：于是除《高絙》、《紫鹿》、《跂行》、《鳖食》及《齐王卷衣》、《笮兒》等乐，又减其廪。
现代文：于是废除《高垣》、《紫鹿》、《肢行》、《瞳食》以及《齐王卷衣》、《笮儿》等乐，并减其廪食。
English: As a result, music such as "Takagaki," "Purple Deer," "Limbing," "Pupil Food" as well as "King Qi's Rolled Garment" and "Piglet" were abolished, and their consumption was reduced.

古文：其后复《高絙》、《紫鹿》焉。
现代文：其后又恢复《高桓》、《紫鹿》。
English: After that, the performances of "High Crane" and "Purple Deer" were resumed.

