古文：母曰太穆皇后窦氏。
现代文：太宗，名世民，是高祖的次子。母亲是太穆皇后窦氏。
English: Emperor Taizong, a renowned man of the world, was the second son of Emperor Gaozu. His mother was Empress Taimu Dou.

古文：生而不惊。方四岁，有书生谒高祖曰： 公在相法，贵人也，然必有贵子。 
现代文：太宗刚四岁时，有一书生拜见高祖说： 明公的容貌在相法上是贵人，就必有贵子。 
English: When Taizong was just four years old, a student came to visit Gaozu and said, "Minggong's appearance is noble in terms of physiognomy, so he must have a noble son."

古文：及见太宗，曰： 龙凤之姿，天日之表，其年几冠，必能济世安民。 
现代文：到见了太宗，说： 他有龙凤的姿质，日月的仪表，也许年近二十岁，即能济世安民。 
English: When he met Taizong, he said, "He has the stature of a dragon and phoenix, the appearance of the sun and the moon, and is perhaps nearly twenty years old, so he can help the world and the people.

古文：书生巳辞去，高祖惧其语泄，使人追杀之，而不知其所往，因以为神。
现代文：书生离去后，高祖怕他讲的话泄露出去，派人追杀他，却不知其去向，因而以为他是神。
English: After the scholar left, Gaozu, fearing that what he had said would leak out, sent people to hunt him down, but they did not know where he had gone, so they thought he was a god.

古文：乃采其语，名之曰世民。
现代文：于是用他的话，给太宗取名叫世民。
English: So, using his words, he named Taizong Shimen.

古文：大业中，突厥围炀帝雁门，炀帝从围中以木系诏书，投汾水而下，募兵赴援。
现代文：隋朝大业年间，突厥军在雁门包围了炀帝，炀帝从围城中用木块系上诏书，放进汾水让它顺流而下，诏令招兵奔赴救援。
English: During the years of the Sui Dynasty, the Turkish army encircled Emperor Gao at the Wild Goose Gate. Emperor Gao issued an edict from the besieged city with a piece of wood, put it in the water and let it flow down the river, and ordered the army to rush to the rescue.

古文：太宗时年十六，往应募，隶将军云定兴，谓定兴曰： 虏敢围吾天子者，以为无援故也。
现代文：太宗这时十六岁，前往应募，隶属于将军云定兴，他对云定兴说： 敌寇胆敢围困我朝天子，是以为没有援军的缘故。
English: At that time, Taizong was 16 years old. He went to enlist and was subordinate to General Yun Dingxing. He said to Yun Dingxing, "The reason why the enemy dared to besiege me, Emperor Tianzi, was because they thought there were no reinforcements.

古文：今宜先后吾军为数十里，使其昼见旌旗，夜闻钲鼓，以为大至，则可不击而走之。
现代文：眼下我们应先撤军几十里地，让敌寇白天看到我军旗，夜间听见我军指挥进退的钲鼓声，以为援军大批涌至，即可不攻打而让它跑掉。
English: Right now, we should first withdraw our troops tens of miles away, so that the enemy bandits can see our army's flag during the day and hear the beating of drums by our army's commander at night, and think that reinforcements are coming in large numbers, so that they can run away without attacking.

古文：不然，知我虚实，则胜败未可知也。 
现代文：如不这样，让它知道了我方虚实，那就胜负难料了。 
English: Otherwise, if we let them know the truth about us, it will be difficult to predict the outcome.

古文：定兴从之。
现代文：云定兴听从了这一计策。
English: Yun Dingxing obeyed this stratagem.

古文：军至崞县，突厥候骑见其军来不绝，果驰告始毕可汗曰： 救兵大至矣！ 
现代文：军队行至崞县，突厥侦察兵见隋军不断开来，果然飞马报告始毕可汗说： 隋军救兵大批到了！ 
English: When the army marched to Jixian County, the Turkish scouts saw the Sui army constantly advancing. Sure enough, the Pegasus Report began with Bi Khan saying: A large number of Sui army rescuers have arrived!

古文：遂引去。
现代文：便撤军离去。
English: They withdrew and left.

古文：高祖击历山飞，陷其围中，太宗轻骑取之而出，遂奋击，大破之。
现代文：高祖攻打历山飞一带的盗贼，陷入包围之中，太宗轻骑疾驰去攻取而引出贼军，趁势奋力攻打，大败寇军。
English: Gaozhu attacked the bandits in the area of Lishanfei and was surrounded by them. Taizong rode swiftly to attack and led the bandits out. He took advantage of the situation to attack and defeated the bandits.

古文：太宗为人聪明英武，有大志，而能屈节下士。
现代文：太宗为人聪明英武，胸怀大志，并能屈己礼贤下士。
English: Taizong was a clever and brave man, with great aspirations, and he was able to humble himself and be a good corporal.

古文：时天下已乱，盗贼起，知隋必亡，乃推财养士，结纳豪杰。
现代文：这时天下已乱，盗贼蜂起，太宗料知隋朝必亡，于是施舍钱财蓄养能士，交结豪杰。
English: At this time, the world was in turmoil, thieves were rising up, and Emperor Taizong knew that the Sui Dynasty was doomed, so he gave alms to save money and energy, and became a hero.

古文：长孙顺德、刘弘基等，皆因事亡命，匿之。
现代文：长孙顺德、刘弘基等，都因犯事逃亡，太宗把他们隐藏起来。
English: The eldest grandson Shunde, Liu Hongji, etc. all fled because of the crime, and Taizong hid them.

古文：又与晋阳令刘文静尤善，文静坐李密事系狱，太宗夜就狱中见之，与图大事。
现代文：他又和晋阳县令刘文静特别要好，刘文静因李密案坐牢，太宗夜间去狱中见他，和他商议夺取天下的大事。
English: He was also particularly friendly with Liu Wenzhing, the governor of Jinyang County. Liu Wenzhing was in prison for the Li Mi case. Taizong went to see him in prison at night and discussed with him the important matter of conquering the world.

古文：时百姓避贼多入城，城中几万人，文静为令久，知其豪杰，因共部署。
现代文：当时百姓为躲避盗寇大批进入县城，城中将近万人，刘文静做县令时间久，知道他是豪杰，因而一同策划。
English: At that time, in order to evade robbers, a large number of people entered the county seat. There were nearly 10,000 people in the city. Liu Wenzhing had been the county magistrate for a long time and knew that he was a hero, so they planned together.

古文：计已定，乃因裴寂告高祖。
现代文：计谋已定，就通过裴寂告诉高祖。
English: When the plan was decided, he told Gaozu through Pei Jia.

古文：高祖初不许，已而许之。
现代文：高祖起初不同意，过后同意了。
English: Gaozu initially disagreed, but later agreed.

古文：高祖已起兵，建大将军府。
现代文：高祖起兵后，设立大将军府。
English: After Gao Zu raised an army, he established the General Staff Headquarters.

古文：太宗率兵徇西河，斩其郡丞高德儒。
现代文：太宗领兵夺取西河，杀了郡丞高德儒。
English: Taizong led the troops to seize the West River and killed the county magistrate Gao Deju.

古文：拜右领军大都督，封敦煌郡公。
现代文：担任右领军大都督，被封为敦煌郡公。
English: He served as the right-hand leader of the grand governor and was named the Dunhuang county magistrate.

古文：唐兵西，将至霍邑，会天久雨，粮且尽，高祖谋欲还兵太原。太宗谏曰： 义师为天下起也，宜直入咸阳，号令天下。
现代文：唐军西进，快到霍邑时，适逢久雨不住，即将断粮，高祖打算回师太原，太宗劝谏说： 义军为天下而起兵，应该直入咸阳，号召、指挥天下。
English: When the Tang army advanced westward and was about to reach Huoyu, it was a time of persistent rain and about to run out of grain. Gao Zu planned to return to his division in Taiyuan. Taizong advised him, "The rebel army has raised an army for the sake of the world, and should go straight to Xianyang to call and command the world.

古文：今还守一城，是为贼尔。 
现代文：现在退守一城，这是贼寇而已。 
English: Now retreating to one city, this is nothing but banditry.

古文：高祖不纳。
现代文：高祖不采纳。
English: Gaozu did not adopt it.

古文：太宗哭于军门，高祖惊，召问之，对曰： 还则众散于前，而敌乘于后，死亡须臾，所以悲尔。 
现代文：太宗在军营门前痛哭，高祖感到惊诧，叫来太宗询问，太宗回答说： 返回太原，军众当前就会离散，敌军趁机在后追赶，转眼即被灭亡，所以感到悲伤。 
English: Emperor Taizong cried bitterly in front of the gate of the military camp. Gaozu was surprised and called Emperor Taizong to inquire. Emperor Taizong replied, "If you return to Taiyuan, the troops will immediately disperse, and the enemy troops will take the opportunity to chase after you. They will be destroyed in the blink of an eye, so I feel sad."

古文：高祖寤，曰： 起事者汝也，成败惟汝。 
现代文：高祖省悟过来，说： 举兵首事的是你，成败也在你。 
English: Gao Zu came to his senses and said: You are the first to raise an army, and the success or failure is also up to you.

古文：时左军已先返，即与陇西公建成分追之。
现代文：这时左军已先行返往太原，太宗立即与陇西公李建成分头去追回他们。
English: At this time, the left army had already returned to Taiyuan in advance, and Taizong immediately set out with the Shaanxi Gong Li Jian to recapture them.

古文：夜半，太宗失道入山谷，弃其马，步而及其兵，与俱还。
现代文：半夜，太宗迷失道路进入山谷，便舍弃坐骑，步行追上左军，与他们一道返回。
English: In the middle of the night, Taizong lost his way and entered the valley. He abandoned his horse and ran on foot to catch up with the Left Army and returned with them.

古文：高祖乃将而前，迟明至霍邑。
现代文：高祖继续率军前进，黎明到达霍邑。
English: Gaozu continued to lead the army forward, reaching Ho Eup at dawn.

古文：宋老生不出，太宗从数骑傅其城，举鞭指麾，若将围之者。
现代文：宋老生闭城不出，太宗带领几名骑兵随从自己，靠近城根，举鞭指挥，好像将要围城的样子。
English: Song Laosheng did not close the city, Taizong led several cavalry to follow him, close to the city root, raised the whip and commanded, as if the city would be besieged.

古文：老生怒，出，背城阵。
现代文：宋老生恼怒而出，背城布阵。
English: Song Laosheng flew into a rage and stormed out.

古文：高祖率建成居其东，太宗及柴绍居其南。
现代文：高祖率领李建成在他东侧，太宗与柴绍在他南面。
English: Gaozu led Li Jiancheng on his east side, and Taizong and Chai Shao on his south side.

古文：老生兵薄东阵，建成坠马，老生乘之，高祖军却。
现代文：宋老生率军迫近东侧，李建成从马上坠落，宋老生趁机追赶，高祖带兵撤退。
English: Song Laosheng's army approached the east side, Li Jiancheng fell from the horse, Song Laosheng took the opportunity to catch up, Gao Zu led the troops to retreat.

古文：太宗自南原驰下坂，分兵断其军为二，而出其阵后，老生兵败走，遂斩之。
现代文：太宗从南边飞马冲下山坡，分兵将宋老生的军队截成两段，并从宋老生的阵后出击，宋老生兵败逃跑，趁势将宋老生斩了。
English: Taizong rushed down the hill from the south side of Pegasus, and the detachment of soldiers cut Song Laosheng's army into two sections, and attacked from the rear of Song Laosheng's line. Song Laosheng's soldiers were defeated and fled, taking advantage of the situation to behead Song Laosheng.

古文：进次泾阳，击胡贼刘鹞子，破之。
现代文：唐军进驻洛阳，攻打胡人贼寇刘鹞子，打败了他。
English: The Tang army entered Luoyang, attacked the Hu people's thief Liu Xunzi, and defeated him.

古文：唐兵攻长安，太宗屯金城坊，攻其西北，遂克之。
现代文：唐军进攻长安，太宗驻扎金城坊，攻城的西北，克敌破城。
English: The Tang army attacked Chang'an, Taizong was stationed in Jinchengfang, attacked the northwest of the city, and defeated the enemy.

古文：义宁元年，为光禄大夫、唐国内史，徙封秦国公，食邑万户。
现代文：隋恭帝义宁元年，太宗任光禄大夫、唐国内史，被改封为秦国公，食邑一万户。
English: In the first year of the Sui Dynasty, Emperor Yining, Taizong was appointed as the doctor of Guanglu, the history of Tang Dynasty, and was changed to Qin Guogong, with 10,000 households.

古文：薛举攻扶风，太宗击败之，斩首万余级，遂略地至陇右。
现代文：薛举进攻扶风，太宗将他击败，斩下敌军首级一万多，于是攻占的地盘扩展到陇右。
English: Xue raised the offensive wind, Taizong defeated him, cut off more than ten thousand enemy heads, so the occupied territory expanded to the right.

古文：二年，为右元帅，徙封赵国公，率兵十万攻东都，不克而还，设三伏于三王陵，败隋将段达兵万人。
现代文：义宁二年，太宗任右元帅，改封为赵国公，率十万大军攻打东都洛阳，没有成功而返回；在三王陵设下伏兵多处，打败隋将段达上万人。
English: In the second year of Yining, Taizong served as the right field marshal, changed his title to Zhao Guogong, led 100,000 troops to attack the eastern capital Luoyang, but returned without success; set up ambushes at the Three Kings' Mausoleum, and defeated tens of thousands of Sui generals.

古文：武德元年，为尚书令、右翊卫大将军，进封秦王。
现代文：唐武德元年，太宗任尚书令、右翊卫大将军，晋升封爵为秦王。
English: In the first year of Tang Wude, Emperor Taizong was appointed as Shang Shuling (尚書令) and General of the Right Division of Inner Palace Guards (右卫大将军), and was promoted to the peerage as the King of Qin.

古文：薛举寇泾州，太宗为西讨元帅，进位雍州牧。
现代文：薛举进犯泾州，太宗担任西讨元帅，职位提升为雍州牧。
English: Xue Jiu invaded Bozhou, while Taizong served as the Marshal of the Western Expedition and was promoted to the position of Yongzhou herdsman.

古文：七月，太宗有疾，诸将为举所败。
现代文：七月，太宗有病，他属下的各将领被薛举打败。
English: In July, Emperor Taizong was ill, and the generals under him were defeated by Xue Jiu.

古文：八月，太宗疾间，复屯于高坑城，相持六十馀日。
现代文：八月，太宗病稍愈，再度驻扎高土庶城，与薛举相持不下六十多天。
English: In August, when Taizong's illness had somewhat subsided, he was once again stationed in Gaozu Suburban, where he and Xue held out for more than sixty days.

古文：已而举死，其子仁杲率其众求战，太宗按军不动。
现代文：不久薛举死去，他的儿子薛仁杲率军求战，太宗按兵不动。
English: Soon after Xue Jiu died, his son Xue Renyu led the army to fight, but Taizong did not move.

古文：久之，仁杲粮尽，众稍离叛，太宗曰： 可矣！ 
现代文：时间久了，薛仁杲断了军粮，军众渐渐叛离，太宗说： 可以反击了！ 
English: After a long time, Xue Renju cut off the army's rations, and the army gradually defected. Taizong said, "It's time to fight back!"

古文：乃遣行军总管梁实栅浅水原。
现代文：便派行军总管梁实在浅水原筑起栅栏。
English: They then sent the head of the marching troops, Liang Cheng, to the shallow water to build a fence.

古文：仁杲将宗罗睺击实，太宗遣将军庞玉救实，玉军几败，太宗率兵出其后，罗睺败走，太宗追之，至其城下，仁杲乃出降。
现代文：薛仁杲的将领宗罗目侯攻打梁实，太宗派将军庞玉救援梁实，庞玉的军队几乎失败。太宗率军从宗罗目侯的背后出击，宗罗目侯败逃，太宗追击，直抵敌军城下，薛仁杲才出城投降。
English: Emperor Taizong led the army to attack from the back of Emperor Zonglom, Emperor Zonglom fled in defeat, Emperor Taizong pursued and reached the foot of the enemy army, and Emperor Xue only left the city to surrender.

古文：师还，高祖遣李密驰传劳之于豳州。
现代文：太宗率军返回，高祖派李密快马赶往豳州传告慰劳。
English: Taizong returned with his army, and Gaozhu sent Li Mi on a fast horse to send a message of consolation to Zhangzhou.

古文：密见太宗，不敢仰视，退而叹曰： 真英主也！ 
现代文：李密见到太宗，不敢抬头仰视，事后他赞叹说： 他是真正杰出的君主！ 
English: When Li Mi saw Emperor Taizong, he did not dare to look up at him. Afterwards, he said with admiration, "He is a truly outstanding monarch!"

古文：献捷太庙，拜右武候大将军、太尉、使持节、陕东道大行台尚书令，诏蒲、陕、河北诸总管兵皆受其节度。
现代文：太宗到祖庙进献战果后，任右武侯大将军、太尉、使持节、陕东道大行台尚书令；高祖还诏令蒲、陕、河北诸总管的军队统受太宗调度指挥。
English: After Taizong went to the ancestral temple to present the results of the battle, he was appointed as the grand general of Uwuhou, the first lieutenant, the envoy of the festival, and the host of the grand march of Shaanxi; Gaozu also decreed that the armies of Pu, Shaanxi, and Hebei were all under the command of Taizong.

古文：二年正月，镇长春宫，进拜左武候大将军、凉州总管。
现代文：武德二年正月，太宗镇守长春宫，晋升为左武侯大将军、凉州总管。
English: In the first month of the second year of Wu De, Taizong, the town guard of Changchun Palace, was promoted to the General of the Left Wu Hou and the General Manager of Liangzhou.

古文：是时，刘武周据并州，宋金刚陷沧州，王行本据蒲州，而夏县人吕崇茂杀县令以应武周。
现代文：这时，刘武周占据并州，宋金刚攻破浍州，王行本占据蒲州，同时夏县人吕崇茂杀了县令，以此响应刘武周。
English: At this time, Liu Wuzhou occupied Bianzhou, Song Jinguang defeated Zhangzhou, Wang Xingben occupied Puzhou, and Lu Chongmao, a person from Xia County, killed the county magistrate in response to Liu Wuzhou.

古文：高祖惧，诏诸将弃河东以守关中。
现代文：高祖惧怕，诏令各将领放弃河东以固守关中。
English: Gaozu was afraid, so he ordered his generals to abandon the eastern part of the river and hold on to Guanzhong.

古文：太宗以为不可弃，愿得兵三万可以破贼。
现代文：太宗认为不可放弃，希望得到三万兵力，凭他们打败贼军。
English: Taizong believed that he should not give up and hoped to get thirty thousand troops to defeat the bandits.

古文：高祖于是悉发关中兵益之。
现代文：于是高祖将关中的全部兵力调来增补太宗。
English: As a result, Gaozu transferred all of Guanzhong's forces to reinforce Taizong.

古文：十一月，出龙门关，屯于柏壁。
现代文：十一月，太宗出龙门关，驻扎柏壁。
English: In November, Taizong left Longmenguan and stationed at Baiji.

古文：三年四月，击败宋金刚于柏壁。
现代文：武德三年四月，太宗在柏壁击败宋金刚。
English: In April of the 3rd year of Wude, Taizong defeated Song Jingang in Baiji.

古文：金刚走介州，太宗追之，一日夜驰二百里，宿于雀鼠谷之西原。
现代文：宋金刚逃往介州，太宗追击，一天一夜快马急驰二百里，在雀鼠谷西北宿营。
English: Song King Kong fled to Jiezhou, Taizong chased, one day and one night fast horse galloped two hundred miles, camped in the northwest of Sparrow Mouse Valley.

古文：军士皆饥，太宗不食者二日，行至浩州乃得食，而金刚将尉迟敬德、寻相等皆来降。
现代文：军士全部受饥，太宗两天没吃，赶到浩州才进餐，而宋金刚的将领尉迟敬德、寻相等都来归降。
English: All the sergeants were starving. Taizong hadn't eaten for two days and only had dinner when he arrived in Huzhou. Meanwhile, Song King Kong's generals and lieutenants Chi Jingde and Huan Rong had all come to surrender.

古文：刘武周惧，奔于突厥，其将杨伏念举并州降。
现代文：刘武周恐惧，逃奔突厥；他的部将杨伏念占领并州归降。
English: Liu Wu Zhou was afraid and fled to Turkey; his troops occupied Yang Funei and the state surrendered.

古文：高祖遣萧瑀即军中拜太宗益州道行台尚书令。
现代文：高祖派萧蠫到军中委任太宗为益州道行台尚书令。
English: Gao Zu sent Xiao Wei to the army to appoint Taizong as the commander of Yizhou Road.

古文：七月，讨王世充，败之于北邙。
现代文：七月，讨伐王世充，在北邙打败了他。
English: In July, he fought against Wang Shichong and defeated him in Beilun.

古文：四年二月，窦建德率兵十万以援世充，太宗败建德于虎牢，执之，世充乃降。
现代文：武德四年二月，窦建德率领十万兵马援助王世充，太宗在虎牢关打败并生擒窦建德，王世充才投降。
English: In February of the 4th year of Wude, Dou Jiande led 100,000 soldiers and horses to aid Wang Shicheng. Taizong defeated and killed Dou Jiande at the Tiger's Lair before Wang Shicheng surrendered.

古文：六月，凯旋，太宗被金甲，陈铁骑一万、介士三万，前后鼓吹，献俘于太庙。
现代文：六月，凯旋归来，太宗身披金甲，列队铁甲骑兵万名、武士三万，队伍前后吹奏军乐，到祖庙进献敌俘。
English: In June, after his triumphant return, Taizong dressed in gold armor, lined up 10,000 cavalrymen in iron armor and 30,000 warriors, played military music before and after the procession, and went to the ancestral temple to offer sacrifices to the enemy prisoners.

古文：高祖以谓太宗功高，古官号不足以称，乃加号天策上将，领司徒、陕东道大行台尚书令，位在王公上，增邑户至三万，赐衮冕、金辂、双璧、黄金六千斤，前后鼓吹九部之乐，班剑四十人。
现代文：高祖认为太宗功高，旧有官号不能与他的功劳相称，于是给他加号为天策上将，兼任司徒、陕东道大行台尚书令，职位在王公之上，增赐食邑至三万户，赏给他卷龙衣和王冠、金辂车、双璧玉及黄金六千斤，出行队列前后的九部乐队和持木剑的仪仗队四十人。
English: Gao Zu believed that Taizong was highly meritorious, and that the old official title could not be commensurate with his merits, so he gave him the additional title of General of the Heavenly Policy, concurrently serving as the commander of the army, the commander of the army of Shaanxi Province, and the commander of the army of Taiwan, the position is above the prince, the food village is increased to 30,000 households, the dragon coat and crown, the golden chariot, the double jade and six thousand pounds of gold are awarded to him, the nine bands before and after the travel queue and the honor guard of forty people holding wooden swords.

古文：五年正月，讨刘黑闼于洺州，败之。
现代文：武德五年正月，太宗在氵名州讨伐、打败刘黑闼。
English: In the first month of Wu De's fifth year, Taizong fought and defeated Liu Heyao in Renmei County.

古文：黑闼既降，已而复反。
现代文：刘黑闼投降后不久又反叛。
English: Shortly after Liu Heyao's surrender, he rebelled again.

古文：高祖怒，命太子建成取山东男子十五以上悉坑之，驱其小弱妇女以实关中。
现代文：高祖极恼怒，命令太子李建成将山东十五岁以上的男子全部抓来活埋，年幼体弱者和妇女赶去充实关中。
English: Gao Zu was extremely angry and ordered Prince Li Jiancheng to capture all the men in Shandong over the age of fifteen and bury them alive, and to send the young, infirm and women to Qushizhong.

古文：太宗切谏，以为不可，遂已。
现代文：太宗直言极谏，认为不可以这样做，这才作罢。
English: Taizong was very outspoken and said that it was not acceptable to do so, so it had to be stopped.

古文：加拜左右十二卫大将军。
现代文：又给太宗加官为左右十二卫大将军。
English: Taizong was also given the additional post of General of the Left and Right Twelve Guards.

古文：七年，突厥寇边，太宗与遇于豳州，从百骑与其可汗语，乃盟而去。
现代文：武德七年，突厥侵犯边境，太宗与突厥军在豳州相遇，带领一百骑士随从与突厥首领会谈，结盟后突厥军撤离。
English: In the seventh year of Wude, the Turks invaded the border. Taizong met with the Turkish army in Zhangzhou, and led a hundred knights to attend the talks with the Turkish leaders. After the alliance, the Turkish army withdrew.

古文：八年，进位中书令。
现代文：武德八年，太宗晋升为中书令。
English: In the 8th year of Wude, Taizong was promoted to Chushirei.

古文：初，高祖起太原，非其本意，而事出太宗。
现代文：起初，高祖起兵太原，并非其本意，而首事者出于太宗。
English: At first, it was not Gao Zu's intention to take up arms against Taiyuan, but it was Taizong who took the initiative.

古文：及取天下，破宋金刚、王世充、窦建德等，太宗功益高，而高祖屡许以为太子。
现代文：及至夺取了天下，打败宋金刚、王世充、窦建德等人，太宗功劳更高，因此高祖屡屡许诺以太宗为皇太子。
English: He conquered the whole country, defeating Song King Kong, Wang Shichong, Dou Jiande and others. Taizong's merit was higher, so Gaozhu repeatedly promised that Taizong would be crown prince.

古文：太子建成惧废，与齐王元吉谋害太宗，未发。
现代文：太子李建成害怕被废黜，与齐王李元吉密谋杀害太宗，但未行动。
English: Prince Li Jiancheng, afraid of being deposed, conspired with the king of Qi, Li Yuanji, to kill Taizong, but did not act.

古文：九年六月，太宗以兵入玄武门，杀太子建成及齐王元吉。
现代文：武德九年六月，太宗带兵闯入玄武门，杀了太子李建成和齐王李元吉。
English: In June of the ninth year of Wude, Emperor Taizong led an army to break into the Xuanwu Gate and killed Prince Li Jiancheng and King of Qi Li Yuanji.

古文：高祖大惊，乃以太宗为皇太子。
现代文：高祖大惊，便立太宗为皇太子。
English: Gaozu was so shocked that he made Taizong the crown prince.

古文：八月甲子，即皇帝位于东宫显德殿。
现代文：同年八月初九，太宗在东宫显德殿登皇帝位。
English: On the 9th day of the 8th month of the same year, Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne at the Eastern Palace of Hende.

古文：遣裴寂告于南郊。
现代文：派裴寂在都城南郊祭告上天。
English: In the southern suburbs of the capital, the death of Pai Pei was announced to the world.

古文：大赦，武德流人还之。
现代文：施行大赦，放回武德年间被流放的人员。
English: An amnesty was implemented, and those who had been exiled during the Wu De era were allowed to return.

古文：赐文武官勋、爵。
现代文：赐给文武官员勋号、爵位。
English: The civil and military officials were given honorary titles and peerages.

古文：免关内及蒲、芮、虞、泰、陕、鼎六州二岁租，给复天下一年。
现代文：免除关内和蒲、芮、虞、泰、陕、鼎六个州的两年租税，全国免除徭役一年。
English: Six prefectures of Guanai, Wapu, Handan, Yu, Tai, Shaanxi and Ding were exempted from two years of taxes, and the whole country was exempted from labor service for one year.

古文：民八十以上赐粟帛，百岁加版授。
现代文：百姓中八十岁以上的老人赐给粮食、布帛，百岁以上老人加授荣衔。
English: Among the people, the elderly over the age of eighty were given grain and cloth, and the elderly over the age of one hundred were awarded honorary titles.

古文：废潼关以东濒河诸关。
现代文：废止潼关以东靠近黄河的各关塞。
English: Abolish the checkpoints east of Shaoguan near the Yellow River.

古文：癸酉，放宫女三千余人。
现代文：十八日，放出宫女三千余人。
English: On the 18th, more than 3,000 maids of honor were released.

古文：丙子，立妃长孙氏为皇后。
现代文：二十一日，立王妃长孙氏为皇后。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the eldest grandson became the queen.

古文：癸未，突厥寇便桥。
现代文：二十八日，突厥军进犯便桥。
English: On the 28th, the Turkish army attacked the bridge.

古文：乙酉，及突厥颉利盟于便桥。
现代文：三十日，太宗在便桥与突厥颉利可汗结盟。
English: On the 30th, Taizong made an alliance with the Turkic Qili Khan at Benqiao.

古文：九月壬子，禁私家妖神淫祀、占卜非龟易五兆者。
现代文：九月二十七日，禁止供奉非正统的神礻氏、不合礼制规定的祭祀、不是龟易五兆的占卜。
English: On September 27th, it was forbidden to offer sacrifices to the unorthodox Shinshaku clan, rituals that do not conform to the rules of the ritual system, and divination that is not easy.

古文：十月丙辰朔，日有食之。
现代文：十月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀现象。
English: On the first day of October, the sun and the moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：癸亥，立中山郡王承乾为皇太子。
现代文：初八，太宗立中山郡王李承乾为皇太子。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, King Taizong of Zhongshan County, Li Chengqian, became crown prince.

古文：庚辰，萧瑀、陈叔达罢。
现代文：二十五日，萧蠫、陈叔达被免职。
English: On the 25th, Xiao Yu and Chen Shuda were dismissed.

古文：十一月庚寅，降宗室郡王非有功者爵为县公。
现代文：十一月初五，将没有建立功勋的皇族中的郡王降级为县公。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of November, the county king of the royal family who did not establish merit was downgraded to the county official.

古文：十二月癸酉，虑囚。
现代文：十二月十九日，太宗讯察记录囚犯的罪状。
English: On December 19, the Taizong Interrogation recorded the prisoner's charges.

古文：是岁，进封子长沙郡王恪为汉王，宜阳郡王祐楚王。
现代文：这年，太宗将其子长沙郡王李恪晋封为汉王，宜阳郡王李晋封为楚王。
English: In this year, Emperor Taizong appointed his son, Wang Li Jianfu of Changsha County, as the King of Han, and King Li Jianfu of Yiyang County as the King of Chu.

古文：贞观元年正月乙酉，改元。
现代文：太宗贞观元年正月初一，更改年号。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of Taizong Zhenguan, the year number was changed.

古文：辛丑，燕郡王李艺反于泾州，伏诛。
现代文：十七日，燕郡王李艺在泾州反叛，被处死。
English: On the 17th, Yan County King Li Yi rebelled in Zhangzhou and was executed.

古文：二月丁巳，诏民男二十、女十五以上无夫家者，州县以礼聘娶；贫不能自行者，乡里富人及亲戚资送之；鳏夫六十、寡妇五十、妇人有子若守节者勿强。
现代文：二月初四，下诏：庶民男子二十岁、女子十五岁以上没有夫婿的，州县官府安排按礼节仪式订婚、迎娶；家穷不能自行聘娶的，由同乡的富家与亲戚资助送亲；鳏夫六十岁、寡妇五十岁和已有子而能守节的孤孀，不强求。
English: On the 4th day of the 2nd month of the year, the following edict was issued: If a common man of 20 years of age or a woman of 15 years of age or older does not have a husband, the state and county government shall arrange for the engagement and wedding ceremony according to the etiquette; if the poor family cannot arrange the marriage by themselves, the rich family and relatives in the same town shall sponsor the sending of relatives; the widower of 60 years of age, the widow of 50 years of age and the orphan who has a son and can keep the festival shall not ask for it.

古文：三月癸巳，皇后亲蚕。
现代文：三月初十，长孙皇后举行躬亲蚕事的典礼。
English: On the 10th day of the 3rd month, the eldest grandchild of the Empress held a ceremony to commemorate the silkworm.

古文：丙午，诏： 齐仆射崔季舒、黄门侍郎郭遵、尚书右丞封孝琰以极言蒙难，季舒子刚、遵子云、孝琰子君遵并及淫刑，宜免内侍，褒叙以官。 
现代文：二十三日，下诏： 齐朝仆射崔季舒、黄门侍郎郭遵、尚书右丞封孝琰因尽情直言而蒙受灾难，季舒之子崔刚、郭遵之子郭云、孝琰之子封君遵一并遭受淫刑滥罚连累，应免去在宫内执役，按官位给予褒奖。 
English: On the 23rd, the following edict was issued: Ji Shu's son Cui Gang, Guo Zun's son Guo Yun, and Xiaojun's son Fu Jun, all of whom were subjected to lascivious punishments, should be exempted from performing duties in the palace and given awards according to their official positions.

古文：闰月癸丑朔，日有食之。
现代文：闰三月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of leap March, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：四月癸巳，凉州都督、长乐郡王幼良有罪，伏诛。
现代文：四月十二日，凉州都督、长乐郡王李幼良有罪，被处死。
English: On April 12, Li Youliang, the governor of Liangzhou and the king of Changle County, was found guilty and executed.

古文：五月癸丑，敕中书令、侍中朝堂受讼辞，有陈事者悉上封。
现代文：五月初二，敕令中书令、侍中在朝堂接受讼状，有陈述政事的一律加封上呈。
English: On the second day of the first month of May, the scribe and chamberlain in the imperial edict accepted the pleadings in the imperial court, and all the political affairs that had been stated were sealed and submitted.

古文：六月辛丑，封德彝薨。
现代文：六月二十一日，封德彝逝世。
English: On June 21, Feng Dejun passed away.

古文：甲辰，太子少师萧瑀为尚书左仆射。
现代文：二十四日，太子少师萧蠫任尚书左仆射。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the prince's apprentice, Xiao Yu, was assigned to the left of Shang Shuxu.

古文：是夏，山东旱，免今岁租。
现代文：这年夏季，山东遭受干旱，免除本年租税。
English: This summer, Shandong suffered from drought and was exempt from this year's tax.

古文：七月壬子，吏部尚书长孙无忌为尚书右仆射。
现代文：七月初二，吏部尚书长孙无忌任尚书右仆射。
English: On the second day of the seventh month, the eldest grandson of the head clerk, Shang Shu, was appointed as his right-hand man.

古文：八月河南、陇右边州霜。
现代文：八月，河南、陇右的边缘各州遭霜。
English: In August, frost hit Henan and the outlying provinces of Shandong and Shandong.

古文：宇文士及检校凉州都督。
现代文：宇文士及任检校凉州都督。
English: He was appointed as the inspector of schools and the governor of Liangzhou.

古文：戊戌，贬高士廉为安州大都督。
现代文：十九日，将高士廉贬为安州大都督。
English: On the 19th, Gao Shiliang was demoted to the position of Anzhou grand governor.

古文：九月庚戌朔，日有食之。
现代文：九月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of September, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：辛酉，遣使诸州行损田，赈问下户。
现代文：十二日，派遣使臣巡视各州遭害的农田，救济、慰问贫民。
English: On the 12th, envoys were dispatched to inspect the affected farmland in each prefecture to provide relief and comfort to the poor.

古文：御史大夫杜淹检校吏部尚书，参议朝政。
现代文：御史大夫杜淹任检校吏部尚书，参与谋议朝政。
English: Goshidafu Duyun was appointed inspector of schools, and he participated in the deliberation of the imperial government.

古文：宇文士及罢。
现代文：宇文士及被免职。
English: He was dismissed from his post.

古文：辛未，幽州都督王君廓奔于突厥。
现代文：二十二日，幽州都督王君廓逃亡突厥。
English: On the 22nd, the governor of Yuzhou, Wang Junku, fled to Turkey.

古文：十月丁酉，以岁饥减膳。
现代文：十月十八日，太宗因灾荒克俭膳食。
English: On October 18th, Taizong was forced to ration food due to the drought.

古文：十一月己未，许子弟年十九以下随父兄之官所。
现代文：十一月十一日，准许十九岁以下的子弟随父兄去就任官职的处所。
English: On November 11, children under the age of 19 were allowed to accompany their fathers and brothers to take up official positions.

古文：十二月壬午，萧瑀罢。
现代文：十二月初四，萧蠫被免职。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of December, Xiao Wei was removed from his post.

古文：戊申，利州都督李孝常、右武卫将军刘德裕谋反，伏诛。
现代文：三十日，利州都督李孝常、右武卫将军刘德裕谋反，被处死。
English: On the 30th, the governor of Lizhou, Li Xiaochang, and the right guard general, Liu Deyu, plotted a rebellion and were executed.

古文：二年正月辛亥，长孙元忌罢。
现代文：贞观二年正月初三，长孙无忌被免职。
English: On the third day of the first month of the second year of Zhenguan, the eldest grandson was dismissed.

古文：兵部尚书杜如晦检校侍中，总监东宫兵马事。
现代文：兵部尚书杜如晦任检校侍中，总监东宫的兵马事务。
English: Shang Shudu of the Ministry of Military Affairs served as a school inspector and superintendent of the East Palace's military affairs.

古文：癸丑，吐谷浑寇岷州，都督李道彦败之。
现代文：初五，吐谷浑侵犯岷州，都督李道彦打败了他。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Tu Guhun invaded Bozhou, and the governor Li Daohan defeated him.

古文：丁巳，徙封恪为蜀王，泰越王，祐燕王。
现代文：初九，改封李恪为蜀王，李泰为越王，李为燕王。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, Li Kao was changed to Shu Wang, Li Tai to Yue Wang, and Li to Yan Wang.

古文：庚午，刑部尚书李靖检校中书令。
现代文：二十二日，刑部尚书李靖任检校中书令。
English: On the 22nd, Li Jing, the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, was appointed as the inspector of the school.

古文：二月戊戌，外官上考者给禄。
现代文：二月二十一日，地方官员考核成绩为上等的，朝廷给予俸禄。
English: On February 21st, the local officials' assessment results were superior, and the Imperial Court gave them a salary.

古文：三月戊申朔，日有食之。
现代文：三月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of March, the sun and the moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：壬子，命中书门下五品以上及尚书议决死罪。
现代文：初五，命令中书门下的五品以上官员和尚书议定死罪犯人。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, more than five officials and monks under the gate of the book in the order agreed to kill the criminal.

古文：壬戌，李靖为关内道行军大总管，以备薛延陀。
现代文：十五日，李靖任关内道行军大总管，以防御薛延陀部族进犯。
English: On the 15th, Li Jing was appointed as the commander-in-chief of the marching troops of Guanzhong Road to defend against the invasion of the Xueyantuo tribe.

古文：己巳，遣使巡关内，出金宝赎饥民鬻子者还之。
现代文：二十二日，派遣使臣巡视关内各地，拿出钱财珍宝帮助饥民赎回卖掉的孩子。
English: On the 22nd, envoys were dispatched to inspect all parts of Guan, and they brought out money, treasure, and other valuables to help the starving people redeem the children who had been sold.

古文：庚午，以旱蝗责躬，大赦。
现代文：二十三日，因旱蝗灾害，太宗自陈己过，施行大赦。
English: On the 23rd, due to the drought and locust plagues, Taizong made an amnesty.

古文：癸酉，雨。
现代文：二十六日，降雨。
English: On the 26th, it rained.

古文：四月己卯，瘗隋人暴骸。
现代文：四月初三，掩埋隋朝人暴露的尸骸。
English: On the third day of the fourth lunar month, the exposed corpses of the Sui Dynasty were buried.

古文：壬寅，朔方人梁洛仁杀梁师都以降。
现代文：二十六日，朔方人梁洛仁杀了梁师都降顺朝廷。
English: On the 26th, Liang Luo Ren, a member of the Shuo faction, killed Liang Shidu, and they all surrendered to the imperial court.

古文：六月甲申，诏出使官禀食其家。
现代文：六月初九，下诏：出使官员由官府供给其家庭粮食。
English: On the 9th day of the 6th month of the year, the following edict was issued: officials on mission would no longer be provided with food for their families by the government.

古文：庚寅，以子治生，赐是日生子者粟。
现代文：十五日，太宗因其子李治出生，赐粮给这一天生儿子的家庭。
English: On the fifteenth day, Emperor Taizong gave grain to the family of this natural-born son after the birth of his son Li Zhi.

古文：辛卯，辰州刺史裴虔通以弑隋炀帝削爵，流驩州。
现代文：十六日，辰州刺史裴虔通因杀了隋炀帝被削除爵位，流放州。
English: On the 16th, Pei Qiantong, the prince of Chenzhou, was stripped of his title and exiled from the state for killing Emperor Sui.

古文：七月戊申，莱州刺史牛方裕、绛州刺史薛世良、广州长史唐奉义、虎牙郎将高元礼，以宇文化及之党，皆除名，徙于边。
现代文：七月初四，莱州刺史牛方裕、绛州刺史薛世良、广州长史唐奉义、虎牙郎将高元礼，因系宇文化及的党羽，都被革职，流放边远地区。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month, Niu Fangyu, the governor of Laizhou, Xue Shiliang, the governor of Zhangzhou, Shi Tang Bongyi, the governor of Guangxi, and Hoga Lang, the governor of Gao Yuanli, were all dismissed from their posts and exiled to remote areas because they were Uygur culture and party members.

古文：八月甲戌，省冤狱于朝堂。
现代文：八月初一，太宗在朝堂检查冤狱情况。
English: On the first day of August, Emperor Taizong inspected the unjust imprisonment situation in the imperial court.

古文：辛丑，立二王后庙，置国官。
现代文：二十八日，封北周隋朝王族的后裔为诸侯国君，设置该封地的官吏。
English: On the 28th, the descendants of the royal family of the Northern Zhou and Sui Dynasties were appointed as princes and officials of the fief.

古文：九月壬子，以有年，赐酺三日。
现代文：九月初九，因丰收，特赐百姓聚饮三天。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, because of the bumper harvest, the people were given three days to gather and drink.

古文：十月庚辰，杜淹薨。
现代文：十月初七，杜淹逝世。
English: On October 7th, Du Wenzong passed away.

古文：戊子，杀瀛州刺史卢祖尚。
现代文：十五日，杀了瀛州刺史卢祖尚。
English: On the 15th, he killed Zhangzhou thorn Slu Zushang.

古文：十一月辛酉，有事于南郊。
现代文：十一月十九日，在京城南郊举行祭天大典。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, a grand festival was held in the southern suburbs of Beijing.

古文：十二月壬辰，黄门侍郎王珪守侍中。
现代文：十二月二十日，黄门侍郎王王圭代理侍中。
English: On December 20th, Huangmen waiter Wang Wang Gui acted as a waiter.

古文：癸巳，禁五品以上过市。
现代文：二十一日，禁止五品以上官员去往集市。
English: On the twenty-first day, officials with more than five products were prohibited from going to the market.

古文：三年正月丙午，以旱避正殿。
现代文：贞观三年正月初四，太宗因旱灾避离正殿。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the third year of Zhenguan, Taizong fled the main hall due to drought.

古文：癸丑，官得上下考者，给禄一年。
现代文：十一日，官员年终考核成绩得上之下等的，给予一年俸禄。
English: On the 11th day of the year, if an official's year-end appraisal results are above or below, he or she will be given a one-year salary.

古文：戊午，享于太庙。
现代文：十六日，太宗到太庙祭祀。
English: On the 16th, Emperor Taizong went to the Grand Temple for a religious service.

古文：癸亥，耕藉田。辛未，裴寂罢。
现代文：二十一日，太宗在籍田上亲耕行 籍礼 ，以奉祀宗庙、兼力倡农耕之事。二十九日，裴寂被免职。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Taizong personally cultivated the fields of his birth and performed the birth ceremony, in order to worship the ancestral temple and also to promote farming. On the twenty-ninth day, Peizhang was dismissed.

古文：二月戊寅，房玄龄为尚书左仆射，杜如晦为右仆射，尚书右丞魏徵为秘书监，参预朝政。
现代文：二月初六，房玄龄任尚书左仆射，杜如晦任尚书右仆射，尚书右丞魏征任秘书监，参预朝政。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month, Fang Xuanling was appointed as Shangshu's right-hand man, Du Rugao was appointed as Shangshu's right-hand man, Shangshu Yu Rong Wei was appointed as secretary supervisor, and he participated in the pre-imperial government.

古文：三月己酉，虑囚。
现代文：三月初八，讯察记录囚犯的罪状。
English: On March 8th, the investigation recorded the prisoner's charges.

古文：四月乙亥，太上皇徙居于大安宫。
现代文：四月初四，太上皇李渊移居大安宫。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 6th month of the 6

古文：甲午，始御太极殿。
现代文：二十三日，太宗初用太极殿。
English: On the 23rd, Emperor Taizong used the Taiji Hall for the first time.

古文：戊戌，赐孝义之家粟五斛，八十以上二斛，九十以上三斛，百岁加绢二匹，妇人正月以来产子者粟一斛。
现代文：二十七日，赏赐孝义之家每户粟米五斛，八十岁以上老人粟二斛，九十岁以上的老人粟三斛，百岁以上老人另加绢二匹，妇女自正月以来生儿子的赐粟一斛。
English: On the 27th, five ears of corn were given to each family of the House of Filial Piety, two ears of corn were given to the elderly over 80 years old, three ears of corn were given to the elderly over 90 years old, two more ears of corn were given to the elderly over 100 years old, and one ear of corn was given to women who gave birth to a son since the first month of the year.

古文：五月乙丑，周王元方薨。
现代文：五月二十五日，周王李元方逝世。
English: On May 25, Zhou Wang Li Yuanfang passed away.

古文：六月戊寅，以旱虑囚。
现代文：七月初八，因旱灾讯察记录囚犯的罪状。
English: On the eighth day of the seventh month, due to the drought, the inspection and recording of prisoners' criminal records was suspended.

古文：己卯，大风拔木。
现代文：初九，大风拔起树木。
English: On the morning of the 9th, a strong wind uprooted trees.

古文：壬午，诏文武官言事。
现代文：十二日，下诏文武官员议政。
English: On the 12th, military and civilian officials convened to discuss politics.

古文：八月己巳朔，日有食之。
现代文：八月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of August, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：丁亥，李靖为定襄道行军大总管，以伐突厥。
现代文：十九日，李靖任定襄道行军大总管，率军讨伐突厥。
English: On the 19th, Li Jing was appointed as the commander-in-chief of the Xiangdao Marching Army and led the army to fight the Turks.

古文：九月丁巳，华州刺史柴绍为胜州道行军总管，以伐突厥。
现代文：九月二十日，华州刺史柴绍任胜州道行军总管，率军讨伐突厥。
English: On September 20th, Chai Shao, the governor of Huazhou, was appointed as the general manager of the march of Shengzhou Road, and led the army to fight the Turks.

古文：十一月庚申，并州都督李世勣为通漠道行军总管，华州刺史柴绍为金河道行军总管，任城郡王道宗为大同道行军总管，幽州都督卫孝节为恒安道行军总管，营州都督薛万淑为畅武道行军总管，以伐突厥。
现代文：十一月二十三日，并州都督李世责力任通漠道行军总管，华州刺史柴绍任金河道行军总管，任城郡王李道宗任大同道行军总管，幽州都督卫孝节任恒安道行军总管，营州都督薛万淑任畅武道行军总管，以讨伐突厥。
English: On November 23rd, the governor of Hebei Province, Li Shili, was appointed as the general manager of the Tongmo Road March, the governor of Huazhou Province, Shishi Chai Shao, was appointed as the general manager of the Jinhe Road March, the governor of Chenggong County, Li Daozong, was appointed as the general manager of the Datong Road March, the governor of Yuzhou Province, Wei Xiaojie, was appointed as the general manager of the Heng'an Road March, and the governor of Yingzhou Province, Xue Wanshu, was appointed as the general manager of the Changwu Road March, in order to fight against the Turks.

古文：十二月癸末，杜如晦罢。
现代文：十二月十七日，杜如晦被免职。
English: On December 17th, Du Rugao was removed from his post.

古文：闰月癸丑，为死丘者立浮屠祠。
现代文：闰十二月十七日，给为国战死的人建立佛祠。
English: On December 17th, a Buddhist shrine was built for those who died fighting for their country.

古文：辛酉，虑囚。
现代文：二十五日，讯察记录囚犯的罪状。
English: On the 25th, the investigation recorded the prisoner's charges.

古文：是岁，中国人归自塞外及开四夷为州县者百二十余万人。
现代文：这年，从塞外回归的中国人和将周边少数民族地区开发为唐朝州县的人达一百二十余万。
English: In that year, the number of Chinese who returned from abroad and those who developed the surrounding ethnic minority areas into Tang Dynasty prefectures reached more than 1.2 million.

古文：四年正月丁卯朔，日有食之。
现代文：贞观四年正月初一，日月合朔，有日食。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year of Zhenguan, the sun and the moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：癸巳，武德殿北院火。
现代文：二十七日，武德殿北院起火。
English: On the 27th, a fire broke out in the northern courtyard of Wude Hall.

古文：二月己亥，幸温汤。
现代文：二月初三，太宗亲临温泉。
English: On the third day of February, Taizong visited the hot spring.

古文：甲辰，李靖及突厥战于阴山，败之。
现代文：初八，李靖与突厥军在阴山交战，打败对方。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Li Jing fought with the Turkic army in Yinshan and defeated the other side.

古文：丙午，至自温汤。
现代文：初十，太宗从温泉回到京城。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Taizong returned to the capital from the hot springs.

古文：甲寅，大赦，赐酺五日。
现代文：十八日，施行大赦，赐许百姓聚饮五天。
English: On the 18th, an amnesty was implemented, allowing the people to gather and drink for five days.

古文：御史大夫温彦博为中书令，王珪为侍中；民部尚书戴胄检校吏部尚书，参豫朝政；太常卿萧瑀为御史大夫，与宰臣参议朝政。
现代文：御史大夫温彦博任中书令；王王圭任侍中；民部尚书戴胄兼检校吏部尚书，参预朝政；太常卿萧蠫任御史大夫，与宰相一同参预谋议朝政。
English: Grand Historian Wen Yanbo was appointed as the middle secretary; Wang Wang Gui was appointed as the chamberlain; the Minister of the People's Department was appointed as the chief secretary and the Inspector of Schools was appointed as the chief secretary, and participated in the pre-imperial government; and the Grand Secretary Xiao Yu was appointed as the grand historian, and participated in the pre-imperial government with the prime minister.

古文：丁巳，以旱诏公卿言事。
现代文：二十一日，因旱灾太宗诏令公卿大臣谋议政事。
English: On the twenty-first day of the year, due to drought, Emperor Taizong issued an edict ordering the ministers to discuss political affairs.

古文：三月甲午，李靖俘突厥颉利可汗以献。
现代文：三月二十九，李靖俘虏突厥首领颉利可汗进献宗庙。
English: On March 29, Li Jing led the captive Turkic leader, Meli Khan, to the dedication of the family temple.

古文：四月戊戌，西北君长请上号为 天可汗 。
现代文：四月初三，西北各族的君长请求给太宗加号为 天可汗 。
English: On the third day of the fourth month, the monarchs of all the tribes in the northwest requested that Taizong be given the additional title of Tiankhan.

古文：六月乙卯，发卒治洛阳宫。
现代文：六月二十二日，派士卒修理洛阳宫。
English: On June 22, officials were sent to repair Luoyang Palace.

古文：七月甲子朔，日有食之。
现代文：七月初一，日月合朔，有日食。
English: On the first day of July, the sun and the moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：癸酉，萧瑀罢。
现代文：初十，萧蠫被免职。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Xiao Yao was dismissed.

古文：甲戌，太上皇不豫，废朝。
现代文：十一日，太上皇李渊身体不适，太宗停止上朝。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Emperor Taizong abdicated due to Emperor Li Yuan's illness.

古文：辛卯，疾愈，赐都督刺史文武官及民年八十以上、教子表门闾者有差。
现代文：二十八日，李渊病愈，太宗给予都督、刺史、文武官员以及百姓中八十岁以上的老人、家门里巷受表彰的孝子以不同的赏赐。
English: On the 28th, after Li Yuan had recovered from his illness, Emperor Taizong gave various awards to the governor of the capital, the chief historian, and the civil and military officials, as well as to the elderly people over the age of 80, and to the honored sons and daughters in his family.

古文：八月甲寅，李靖为尚书右仆射。
现代文：八月二十二日，李靖任尚书右仆射。
English: On August 22nd, Li Jing was appointed as Shang Shu's right-hand man.

古文：九月庚午，瘗长城南隋人暴骨。
现代文：九月初八，埋葬长城南边隋朝人暴露的尸骸。
English: On the eighth day of the ninth month, the exposed corpses of the Sui Dynasty were buried on the south side of the Great Wall.

古文：己卯，如陇州。
现代文：十七日，太宗去陇州。
English: On the 17th, Taizong went to Zhangzhou.

古文：壬午，禁刍牧于古明君、贤臣、烈士之墓者。
现代文：二十日，下令禁止在古代的圣明君主、贤良大臣和忠义之士的墓地放牧。
English: On the 20th, it was ordered to prohibit grazing in the cemeteries of ancient holy monarchs, virtuous ministers and loyal people.

古文：十月壬辰，赦岐、陇二州，免今岁租赋，降咸阳、始平、武功死罪以下。
现代文：十月初一，对岐、陇二州施行赦免：免除其本年租税；对咸阳、始平、武功三地的死罪以下罪犯减刑。
English: On the first day of October, amnesty was implemented in two prefectures of Qi and Handan: they were exempted from this year's tax; and the death penalty was reduced for criminals in three prefectures of Xianyang, Shiheping and Wugong.

古文：辛卯，猎于贵泉谷。
现代文：初十，太宗在贵泉谷打猎。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Taizong went hunting in Guizhen Valley.

古文：甲辰，猎于鱼龙川，献获于大安宫。
现代文：十三日，到鱼龙川打猎，将所获得的猎物在大安宫献祭。
English: On the 13th, he went hunting in the Yulong River and offered the prey he obtained to the Da'an Palace.

古文：乙卯，免武功今岁租赋。
现代文：二十五日，免除武功县的本年租赋。
English: On the 25th, WuGong County was exempted from this year's rent.

古文：十一月壬戌，右卫大将军侯君集为兵部尚书，参议朝政。
现代文：十一月初一，右卫大将军侯君集任兵部尚书，参预谋议朝政。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, Hou Jun, the general of the Right Division of the Imperial Guards, was appointed as the secretary of the military department, and became a member of the pre-planning committee to discuss the imperial government.

古文：甲子，至自陇州。
现代文：初三，太宗从陇州回到京城。
English: On his third day of junior high school, Taizong returned to Beijing from Zhangzhou.

古文：戊寅，除鞭背刑。
现代文：十七日，废除鞭背肉刑。
English: On the 17th, corporal punishment was abolished.

古文：十二月甲辰，猎于鹿苑。乙巳，至自鹿苑。
现代文：十二月十四日，太宗在鹿苑打猎；十五日，从鹿苑回到京城。
English: On December 14th, Taizong went hunting in Luyuan; on the 15th, he returned to Beijing from Luyuan.

古文：是岁，天下断死罪者二十九人。
现代文：这年，全国判为死罪的二十九人。
English: This year, 29 people were sentenced to death across the country.

古文：五年正月癸酉，猎于昆明池。
现代文：贞观五年正月十三日，太宗到昆明池打猎。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the fifth year of Zhenguan, Taizong went hunting in Kunming Lake.

古文：丙子，至自昆明池，献获于大安宫。
现代文：十六日，从昆明池回到京城，将猎物献祭于大安宫。
English: On the 16th, he returned to Beijing from Kunming Lake and sacrificed the prey to the Da'an Palace.

古文：二月己酉，封弟元裕为郐王，元名谯王，灵夔魏王，元祥许王，元晓密王。
现代文：二月十九日，太宗封其弟李元裕为郐王，李元名为谯王，李灵夔为魏王，李元祥为许王，李元晓为密王。
English: On February 19, Emperor Taizong appointed his younger brother Li Yuanyu as the King of Wei, Li Yuan as the King of Wei, Li Lingyao as the King of Wei, Li Yuanxiang as the King of Xu, and Li Yuanxiao as the King of Mi.

古文：庚戌，封子愔为梁王，贞汉王，恽郯王，治晋王，慎申王，嚣江王，简代王。
现代文：二十日，封其子李忄音为梁王，李贞为汉王，李恽为郯王，李治为晋王，李慎为申王，李嚣为江王，李简为代王。
English: On the 20th, he appointed his son Li Qianyin as the King of Liang, Li Zhen as the King of Han, Li Xi as the King of Qi, Li Zhi as the King of Jin, Li Shen as the King of Shen, Li Han as the King of Jiang, and Li Jian as the Acting King.

古文：四月壬辰，代王简薨。
现代文：四月初三，代王李简去世。
English: On the third day of the fourth month, the acting king, Li Jian, passed away.

古文：五月乙丑，以金帛购隋人没于突厥者，以还其家。
现代文：五月初七，用黄金、丝织品赎回沦落在突厥的隋朝遗民，使他们归返家园。
English: On the seventh day of the fifth lunar month, the remaining people of the Sui Dynasty who had fallen into the hands of the Turks were ransomed with gold and silk goods, so that they could return to their homeland.

古文：八月甲辰，遣使高丽，祭隋人战亡者。
现代文：八月十七日，派使臣赴高丽国，祭祀原隋朝的阵亡者。
English: On August 17th, he sent envoys to Korea to offer sacrifices to the war dead of the former Sui Dynasty.

古文：戊申，杀大理丞张蕴古。
现代文：二十一日，杀了大理丞张蕴古。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, he killed Darijo Zhang Yungu.

古文：十一月丙子，有事于南郊。
现代文：十一月二十一日，在京城南郊举行祭天大典。
English: On November 21st, a grand festival was held in the southern suburbs of Beijing.

古文：十二月丁亥，诏： 决死刑，京师五覆奏，诸州三覆奏，其日尚食毋进酒肉。 
现代文：十二月初二，太宗下诏令： 判决死刑，京城内的要详审、重行上奏五次；各州的死刑判决要详审、上奏三次。复奏的日子里，尚食官不要进奉酒肉。 
English: On the 2nd day of the 12th month, Emperor Taizong issued an edict: In the capital, death sentences should be re-examined in detail and re-issued five times; in each prefecture, death sentences should be re-examined in detail and re-issued three times. On the day of re-issuance, officials should not serve meat and wine.

古文：壬寅，幸温汤。
现代文：十七日，太宗到温泉。
English: On the 27th, I visited the hot springs.

古文：癸卯，猎于骊山，赐新丰高年帛。
现代文：十八日，到骊山打猎，赐给新丰的高龄人丝织品。
English: On the 18th, he went hunting in Lushan and gave silk products to the elderly people in Xinfeng.

古文：戊申，至自温汤。
现代文：二十三日，从温泉回到京城。
English: On the 27th, Taizong returned to Beijing from the hot springs.

古文：癸丑，赦关内。
现代文：二十八日，对关内施行赦免。
English: On the 28th, Guanai was pardoned.

古文：六年正月乙卯朔，日有食之。
现代文：贞观六年正月初一，日月合朔，有日食。
English: On the first day of the first month of the sixth year of Zhenguan, the sun and the moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：癸西，静州山獠反，右武卫将军李子和败之。
现代文：十九日，静州的山獠族人反叛，被右武卫将军李子和打败。
English: On the 19th, the Yamato people of Jingzhou rebelled and were defeated by the Right Guard General Li Zi.

古文：三月，侯君集罢。
现代文：三月，侯君集被免职。
English: In March, Hou Junxi was removed from office.

古文：戊辰，如九成宫。
现代文：十五日，太宗去九成宫。
English: On the 15th, Emperor Taizong went to Jiu Chenggong.

古文：丁丑，降雍、岐、豳三州死罪以下，赐民八十以上粟帛。
现代文：二十四日，对雍、岐、豳三个州的死罪以下的犯人减刑，赐给百姓中八十岁以上老人粮食、布帛。
English: On the 24th, the sentences of prisoners with less than the death penalty in the three states of Yong, Qi, and Handan were commuted, and grain and cloth were given to the elderly people over 80 years old.

古文：五月，魏徵检校侍中。
现代文：五月，魏征任检校侍中。
English: In May, Wei was conscripted as a middle school inspector.

古文：六月己亥，丰王元亨薨。
现代文：六月十七日，酆王李元亨去世。
English: On June 17th, the Dragon King Li Yuanhen passed away.

古文：辛亥，江王嚣薨。
现代文：二十九日，江王李嚣去世。
English: On the 29th, Jiang Wang Li Ren passed away.

古文：七月己巳，诏天下行乡饮酒。
现代文：七月十七日，太宗诏令全国实行地方长官为被举荐贡士以酒食送行的 乡饮酒 制度。
English: On July 17th, Emperor Taizong issued an edict to implement the "township drinking" system nationwide, in which local governors were recommended to be sent away with food and drink.

古文：九月己酉，幸庆善宫。
现代文：九月二十九日，太宗亲临庆善宫。
English: On September 29, Emperor Taizong personally visited the Qingzheng Palace.

古文：十月，侯君集起复。
现代文：十月，侯君集重被起用。
English: In October, Hou Junji was appointed to the post.

古文：卯，至自庆善宫。
现代文：初五，太宗从庆善宫返回。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Emperor Taizong returned from Keizan Palace.

古文：十二月辛未，虑囚，纵死罪者归其家。
现代文：十二月二十二日，太宗讯察记录囚犯的罪状，放死刑罪犯回家探视。
English: On December 22nd, the Taizong Interrogation recorded the prisoners' crimes and allowed the death-row prisoners to visit them at home.

古文：是岁，诸羌内属者三十万人。
现代文：这年，羌族各部归附中国的有三十万人。
English: In that year, there were 300,000 members of the Yi people in the provinces annexed to China.

古文：七年正月戊子，斥宇文化及党人之子孙勿齿。
现代文：贞观七年正月初十，太宗指示：宇文化及党羽的子孙不得录用。
English: On the 10th day of the 1st month of the 7th year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong ordered that the children and grandchildren of U Culture and Party members were not allowed to be recruited.

古文：辛丑，赐京城酺三日。
现代文：二十三日，赐准京城百姓聚饮三天。
English: On the 23rd, the people of Beijing were given permission to gather and drink for three days.

古文：三月丁卯，雨土。
现代文：二月十九日，像降雨般落下泥土。
English: On February 19th, mud fell like rain.

古文：三月戊子，王珪罢。
现代文：三月十一日，王王圭被免职。
English: On March 11, Wang Wanggui was removed from his post.

古文：庚寅，魏徵为侍中。
现代文：十三日，魏征任侍中。
English: On the 13th, Wei was conscripted as a chamberlain.

古文：五月癸未，如九成宫。
现代文：五月初七，太宗去往九成宫。
English: On the seventh day of the fifth month, Emperor Taizong went to Jiu Chenggong Palace.

古文：六月辛亥，戴胄薨。
现代文：六月初五，戴胄去世。
English: On June 5th, Dai Yong passed away.

古文：八月辛未，东酉洞獠寇边，右屯卫大将军张士贵为龚州道行军总管以讨之。
现代文：八月二十六日，东、西洞僚族人侵犯边界，右屯卫大将军张士贵任龚州道行军总管率军讨伐。
English: On August 26th, Dong and Xidongli tribesmen violated the border, and Zhang Shigui, the right-tun guard general, was appointed as the general manager of the march on Luzhou Road and led the army to fight.

古文：九月，纵囚来归，皆赦之。
现代文：九月，上年放回探家的死罪囚犯返回监狱，全部被赦免死刑。
English: In September, all death row prisoners who were released last year returned to prison and were pardoned from the death penalty.

古文：十月庚申，至自九成宫。
现代文：十月十六日，太宗从九成宫返回。
English: On October 16, Emperor Taizong returned from the Jiu Chenggong Palace.

古文：乙丑，京师地震。
现代文：二十一日，京城发生地震。
English: On the 21st, there was an earthquake in Kyoto.

古文：十一月壬辰，开府仪同三司长孙无忌为司空。
现代文：十一月十八日，开府仪同三司长孙无忌任司空。
English: On November 18th, after the ceremony of opening the prefecture and the appointment of the three chiefs, Sun Wuyi was appointed as the first secretary.

古文：十二月甲寅，幸芙蓉园。
现代文：十二月十一日，太宗亲临芙蓉园。
English: On December 11, Emperor Taizong visited Hibiscus Garden in person.

古文：丙辰，猎于少陵原。
现代文：十三日，到少陵原打猎。
English: On the 13th, I went to Shoryobara to go hunting.

古文：戊午，至自少陵原。
现代文：十五日，从少陵原返京。
English: On the 15th, he returned to Beijing from Shoryobara.

古文：八年正月辛丑，张士贵及獠战，败之。
现代文：贞观八年正月二十八日，张士贵与僚人交战，打败僚人。
English: On the 28th day of the first month of the eighth year of Zhenguan, Zhang Shigui fought with his colleagues and defeated them.

古文：壬寅，遣使循省天下。
现代文：二十九日，派使臣巡察全国。
English: On the 29th, the emperor sent an envoy to inspect the whole country.

古文：二月乙巳，皇太子加元服。
现代文：二月初三，皇太子行加冠礼。
English: On the third day of the second month, the crown prince performed the coronation ceremony.

古文：丙午，降死罪以下，赐五品以上子为父后者爵一级，民酺三日。
现代文：初四，对判死罪以下的罪犯减刑，赐给五品以上官员的儿子中爵级不及其父的晋爵一级，百姓聚饮三天。
English: On the fourth day of the New Year, the sentence of criminals sentenced to death or less was commuted, the sons of officials with five or more pins were given the middle peerage instead of the peerage of their father, and the people gathered for three days.

古文：三月庚辰，如九成宫。
现代文：三月初八，太宗去往九成宫。
English: On the eighth day of the third month, Emperor Taizong went to Jiu Chenggong Palace.

古文：五月辛未朔，日有食之。
现代文：五月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of May, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：是夏，吐谷浑寇凉州，左骁卫大将军段志玄为酉海道行军总管，左骁卫将军樊兴为赤水道行军总管，以伐之。
现代文：这年夏天，吐谷浑侵犯凉州，左骁卫大将军段志玄任西海道行军总管，左骁卫将军樊兴任赤水道行军总管，率军讨伐吐谷浑。
English: In the summer of that year, the Tuyuhun invaded Liangzhou. General of the Left Division of the National Guard, Duan Zhixuan, was appointed as the general manager of the march on the West Road, and General of the Left Division of the National Guard, Zou Xing, was appointed as the general manager of the march on the Equator, and led the army to fight the Tuyuhun.

古文：七月，陇右山崩。
现代文：七月，陇右地区发生山崩。
English: In July, a landslide occurred in the Shizhu area.

古文：八月甲子，有星孛于虚、危。十月，作永安宫。
现代文：八月二十五日，在虚、危两宿的天区有彗星。十月，兴建永安宫。
English: On August 25th, there was a comet in the celestial region of both virtual and dangerous. In October, the construction of Yongan Palace began.

古文：甲子，至自九成宫。
现代文：二十五日，太宗从九成宫返京。
English: On the 23rd, Emperor Taizong returned to Beijing from Jiu Chenggong.

古文：十一月辛未，李靖罢。
现代文：十一月初三，李靖被免职。
English: On early November 3, Li Jing was removed from office.

古文：己丑，吐谷浑寇凉州，执行人鸿胪丞赵德楷。
现代文：二十一日，吐谷浑军队侵犯凉州，俘虏了朝廷使臣、鸿胪丞赵德楷。
English: On the twenty-first day, the army of Tuyuhun invaded Liangzhou and captured the imperial court envoy, Hongxun Zhao Dekai.

古文：十二月辛丑，特进李靖为西海道行军大总管，侯君集为积石道行军总管，任城郡王道宗为鄯善道行军总管，胶东郡公道彦为赤水道行军总管，凉州都督李大亮为且末道行军总管，利州刺史高甑生为盐泽道行军总管，以伐吐谷浑。
现代文：十二月初三，加 特进 勋号的李靖任西海道行军大总管，侯君集任积石道行军总管，任城郡王李道宗任鄯善道行军总管，胶东郡公李道彦任赤水道行军总管，凉州都督李大亮任且末道行军总管，利州刺史高甑生任盐泽道行军总管，率军征讨吐谷浑。
English: On the 3rd day of December, Li Jing of the Order of the Garter was appointed as the grand marshal of the West Road March, Hou Junji was appointed as the grand marshal of the Zhishi Road March, Wang Li Daozong of Chenggong County was appointed as the grand marshal of the Yuxian Road March, Li Daohan of Jiaodong County was appointed as the grand marshal of the Equatorial Waterway March, Li Daliang, the governor of Liangzhou, was appointed as the grand marshal of the Qianmen Road March, and Lishu Zhishi Gao Zhisheng was appointed as the grand marshal of the Yanche Road March,

古文：丁卯，从太上皇阅武于城西。
现代文：二十九日，太宗随太上皇李渊在京城西检阅武备。
English: On the 29th, Emperor Taizong, accompanied by Empress Dowager Li Yuan, inspected military equipment in the west of the capital.

古文：九年正月，党项羌叛。
现代文：贞观九年正月，党项羌族反叛。
English: In the first month of the ninth year of Zhenguan, the Yi people rebelled against the party.

古文：二月，长孙无忌罢。
现代文：二月，长孙无忌被免职。
English: In February, the eldest grandson was dismissed.

古文：三月庚辰，洮州羌杀刺史孔长秀，附于吐谷浑。
现代文：三月十四日，洮州羌人杀了刺史孔长秀，依附吐谷浑。
English: On March 14th, the people of Zhangzhou killed the assassin Kong Changxiu and attached him to Tugu Hun.

古文：壬午，大赦。
现代文：十六日，施行大赦。
English: On the 16th, a general amnesty was implemented.

古文：乙酉，高甑生及羌人战，败之。
现代文：十九日，高甑生与羌人作战，打败羌军。
English: On the 19th, high school students fought against the Xiongnu people and defeated the Xiongnu army.

古文：闰四月丙寅朔，日有食之。
现代文：闰四月初一，日月合朔，有日食。
English: On the first day of leap April, the sun and the moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：五月，长孙无忌起复。
现代文：五月，长孙无忌重被起用。
English: In May, the eldest grandson was reappointed.

古文：庚子，太上皇崩，皇太子听政。
现代文：初六，太上皇李渊逝世，皇太子李承乾处理政务。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the 1st year of the 6th month of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 14th year of the 13th year of the 14th year of the 14th year of the 15th year of the 14th year of the 15th year of the 16th year of the 15th year of the 16th year of the 15th year of the 16th year of the 17

古文：壬子，李靖及吐谷浑战，败之。
现代文：十八日，李靖与吐谷浑交战，打败吐军。
English: On the 18th, Li Jing fought with Tuyagun and defeated the Tuyagun army.

古文：七月庚子，盐泽道行军副总管刘德敏及羌人战，败之。
现代文：七月初七，盐泽道行军副总管刘德敏与羌人交战，打败羌军。
English: On the seventh day of the seventh month of July, Liu Demin, the deputy general manager of the march of Yanze Road, fought with the Yan people and defeated the Yan army.

古文：十月庚寅，葬太武皇帝于献陵。
现代文：十月二十七日，在献陵安葬太武皇帝李渊。
English: On October 27th, Emperor Li Yuan of the Taiwu Dynasty was buried in the mausoleum.

古文：十一月壬戌，特进萧瑀参豫朝政。
现代文：十一月三十日，加 特进 勋号的萧蠫参预朝政。
English: On November 30th, Xiao Jian, who was awarded the Order of the Garter, took part in the pre-imperial government.

古文：十年正月甲午，复听政。
现代文：贞观十年正月初三，太宗重又亲理政事。
English: On the third day of the first month of the 10th year of Zhenguan, he was too religious and too close to the government.

古文：癸丑，徙封元景为荆王，元昌汉王，元礼徐王，元嘉韩王，元则彭王，元懿郑王，元轨霍王，元凤虢王，元庆道王，灵夔燕王，恪吴王，泰魏王，祐齐王，愔蜀王，恽蒋王，贞越王，慎纪王。
现代文：二十二日，改封李元景为荆王，李元昌为汉王，李元礼为徐王，李元嘉为韩王，李元则为彭王，李元懿为郑王，李元轨为霍王，李元凤为虢王，李元庆为道王，李灵夔为燕王，李恪为吴王，李泰为魏王，李为齐王，李忄音为蜀王，李恽为蒋王，李贞为越王，李慎为纪王。
English: On the 22nd, Li Yuanjing was renamed as the King of Jing, Li Yuanchang as the King of Han, Li Yuanli as the King of Xu, Li Yuanjia as the King of Han, Li Yuan as the King of Peng, Li Yuanlu as the King of Zheng, Li Yuanlu as the King of Huo, Li Yuanfeng as the King of Zhai, Li Yuanqing as the King of Tao, Li Lingyu as the King of Yan, Li Ke as the King of Wu, Li Tai as the King of Wei, Li as the King of Qi, Li Suyin as the King of Shu, Li Jie as the King of Jiang, Li Zhen as the King

古文：三月癸丑，出诸王为都督。
现代文：三月二十三日，太宗委派各藩王出任都督。
English: On March 23rd, Emperor Taizong appointed the kings of the domains as governors of the capital.

古文：六月壬申，温彦博为尚书右仆射，太常卿杨师道为侍中。
现代文：六月十四日，温彦博任尚书右仆射，太常卿杨师道任侍中。
English: On June 14th, Wen Yanbo was appointed as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, and Yang Shidao was appointed as a chamberlain.

古文：魏徵罢为特进，知门下省事，参议朝章国典。
现代文：魏征免去原职，加 特进 勋号，主持门下省政务，参预谋议朝廷章奏国家制度。
English: Wei Zheng was relieved of his original post, promoted to the title of "Honorary General," presided over the provincial government under his disciple, and participated in the preliminary deliberation of the imperial court on the national system.

古文：己卯，皇后崩。
现代文：二十一日，太宗皇后长孙氏逝世。
English: On the 21st, the eldest grandchild of Empress Taizong passed away.

古文：十一月庚寅，葬文德皇后于昭陵。
现代文：十一月初四，在昭陵安葬文德皇后长孙氏。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of November, the eldest grandson of Empress Wende was buried in Zhaoling.

古文：十二月，萧瑀罢。
现代文：十二月，萧蠫被免职。
English: In December, Xiao Wei was removed from his post.

古文：庚辰，虑囚。
现代文：二十四日，太宗讯察记录囚犯的罪状。
English: On the 24th, the Taizong Interrogation recorded the prisoner's charges.

古文：十一年正月丁亥，徙封元裕为邓王，元名舒王。
现代文：贞观十一年正月初一，改封李元裕为邓王，李元名为舒王。
English: On the first day of the first month of the eleventh year of Zhenguan, Li Yuanyu was renamed Deng Wang, and Li Yuan was named Shu Wang.

古文：庚子，作飞仙宫。
现代文：十四日，建造飞山宫。
English: On the 14th, the construction of the Flying Mountain Palace began.

古文：乙卯，免雍州今岁租赋。
现代文：二十九日，下令免征雍州本年租税。
English: On the 29th, it was ordered to exempt Yongzhou from this year's tax.

古文：二月丁巳，营九摐山为陵，赐功臣、密戚陪茔地及秘器。
现代文：二月初二，将九萯山营建为帝王墓地，赏赐功臣、近戚随葬墓地和棺木。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, Jiulong Mountain Camp was built as an imperial cemetery, and meritorious soldiers and relatives were rewarded with burial cemeteries and coffins.

古文：甲子，如洛阳宫。
现代文：初九，太宗去往洛阳宫。
English: On the ninth day of the ninth month, Taizong went to Luoyang Palace.

古文：乙丑，给民百岁以上侍五人。
现代文：初十，供给百岁以上老人侍者五人。
English: At the beginning of the decade, there were only five waiters to serve elderly people over 100 years old.

古文：壬午，猎于鹿台岭。
现代文：二十七日，太宗在鹿台岭打猎。
English: On the 27th, Taizong went hunting in the Lutetia Mountains.

古文：三月丙戌朔，日有食之。
现代文：三月初一，日月合朔，有日食。
English: On the first day of March, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：癸卯，降洛州囚见徒，免一岁租、调。
现代文：十八日，减少洛州囚禁的现有服刑的犯人，免除一年的租税和随乡所产应征的赋税、力役。
English: On the 18th, the existing prisoners serving sentences in Lozhou Prison were reduced, exempted from one year of tax and tax levied on the production of the township, and forced labor.

古文：辛亥，猎于广成泽。
现代文：二十六日，太宗到广成泽打猎。
English: On the 26th, Taizong went to Guangcheng Lake to go hunting.

古文：癸丑，如洛阳宫。 
现代文：二十八日，去往洛阳宫。
English: On the 28th, he went to Luoyang Palace.

古文：六月甲寅，温彦博薨。
现代文：六月初一，温彦博逝世。
English: On the first day of June, Atsuhiko passed away.

古文：丁巳，幸明德宫。
现代文：初四，太宗亲临明德宫。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, Emperor Taizong personally visited the Mingde Palace.

古文：己未，以诸王为世封刺史。
现代文：初六，将诸藩王定为世袭的刺史。
English: In the sixth year of his junior high school, he decided to make the kings of the domains hereditary.

古文：戊辰，以功臣为世封刺史。
现代文：十五日，将功臣定为世袭的刺史。
English: On the fifteenth day, the meritorious vassal was designated as the hereditary crown prince.

古文：己巳，徙封元祥为江王。
现代文：十六日，改封许王李元祥为江王。
English: On the 16th, Xu Wang and Li Yuanxiang were renamed Jiang Wang.

古文：七月癸未，大雨，水，谷、洛溢。
现代文：七月初一，大雨，水灾，谷水、洛川洪水泛滥。
English: On the first day of July, heavy rain, flooding, valley water and Luo River flooding began.

古文：乙未，诏百官言事。
现代文：十三日，太宗下诏百官议政。
English: On the 13th, Emperor Taizong ordered 100 officials to discuss politics.

古文：壬寅，废明德宫之玄圃院，赐遭水家。
现代文：二十日，废止明德宫的玄圃院，赏赐遭受水灾人家。
English: On the 20th, the garden of the Mingde Palace was abolished, and the homes of the flood victims were rewarded.

古文：丙午，给亳州老子庙、兗州孔子庙户各二十以奉享，复凉武昭王近墓户二十以守卫。
现代文：二十四日，给亳州老子庙、兖州孔子庙各二十户以专事祭祀，恢复靠近北凉武昭王陵墓的二十户以做守卫。
English: On the 24th, special offerings were made to 20 households each of the Bozhou Laozi Temple and the Bozhou Confucius Temple, and 20 households near the Beiliang Wuzhao King Mausoleum were restored to serve as guards.

古文：九月丁亥，河溢，坏陕州河北县，毁河阳中潭，幸白司马坂观之，赐濒河遭水家粟帛。
现代文：九月初六，黄河泛滥，冲坏了陕州河北县，冲毁了河阳的中氵单，太宗亲临白司马坂察看，赐给黄河附近水灾户粮食布匹。
English: On the 6th day of early September, when the Yellow River overflowed and washed away much of Hebei County, Shaanxi Province, as well as the Zhongyuan County in Hebei Province, Emperor Taizong personally went to Baishima Slope to inspect the situation and gave grain cloths to the flood-stricken households near the Yellow River.

古文：十月癸丑，赐先朝谋臣武将及亲戚亡者茔陪献陵。
现代文：十月初三，赏赐前朝谋臣武将及亲戚的死者墓地在献陵陪葬。
English: On the third day of the first month of October, the deceased warriors and relatives of the former imperial advisors were given the opportunity to be buried with their loved ones in the cemetery.

古文：十一月辛卯，如怀州。
现代文：十一月十一日，太宗去怀州。
English: On November 11, Taizong went to Huizhou.

古文：乙未，猎于济源麦山。
现代文：十五日，到济源的麦山打猎。
English: On the fifteenth day, I went to Jiyuan's Wheat Mountain to hunt.

古文：丙午，如洛阳宫。
现代文：二十六日，去洛阳宫。
English: On the 26th, I went to Luoyang Palace.

古文：十二年正月乙未，丛州地震。
现代文：贞观十二年正月十五，丛州地震。
English: On the fifteenth day of the first month of the twelfth year of Zhenguan, the Congzhou earthquake occurred.

古文：癸卯，松州地震。
现代文：二十三日，松州地震。
English: On the 23rd, the Songzhou earthquake occurred.

古文：二月癸亥，如河北县，观底柱。
现代文：二月十三日，太宗到河北县，察看砥柱山。
English: On February 13, Taizong went to Hebei County to inspect Mount Tianzhu.

古文：甲子，巫州獠反，夔州都督齐善行败之。
现代文：十四日，巫州的僚族人反叛，被夔州都督齐善行打败。
English: On the 14th, the fellow tribesmen of Wuzhou rebelled and were defeated by the governor of Zhangzhou, Qi Shanzhong.

古文：乙丑，如陕州。
现代文：十五日，太宗去陕州。
English: On the 15th, Taizong went to Shaanxi.

古文：丁卯，观盐池。
现代文：十七日，察看盐池。
English: On the 17th, inspect the salt pond.

古文：庚午，如蒲州。
现代文：二十日，去蒲州。
English: On the 20th, I went to Bushu.

古文：甲戌，如长春宫。
现代文：二十四日，去长春宫。
English: On the 24th, I went to Changchun Palace.

古文：免朝邑今岁租赋，降囚罪。
现代文：免去朝邑本年的租税，减轻囚犯的判罪。
English: This year's tax was exempted from the morning village, and the prisoner's sentence was reduced.

古文：乙亥，猎于河滨。
现代文：二十五日，到黄河边打猎。
English: On the 25th, I went to the Yellow River to go hunting.

古文：闰月庚辰朔，日有食之。
现代文：闰二月初一，日月合朔，有日食。
English: On the first day of leap February, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：丙戌，至自长春宫。
现代文：初七，太宗从长春宫返京。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Emperor Taizong returned to Beijing from Changchun Palace.

古文：七月癸酉，吏部尚书高士廉为尚书右仆射。
现代文：七月二十七日，吏部尚书高士廉任尚书右仆射。
English: On July 27th, the high-ranking official of the Ministry of Personnel, Shang Shuxu, and the high-ranking official of the Ministry of Public Security, Ren Ren, were shot.

古文：八月壬寅，吐蕃寇松州，侯君集为当弥道行军大总管，率三总管兵以伐之。
现代文：八月二十七日，吐蕃侵犯松州，侯君集任当弥道行军大总管，率领三支总管兵力前去讨伐。
English: On August 27th, when Tubo invaded Songzhou, Hou Junji was appointed as the grand commander of the army marching along Dangya Road, and led the three troops of the commander to go to fight.

古文：九月辛亥，阔水道行军总管牛进达及吐蕃战于松州，败之。
现代文：九月初六，阔水道行军总管牛进达与吐蕃军在松州交战，打败吐蕃军。
English: On the 6th day of the 9th month, Niu Jinda, the general manager of the march of the broad waterway, fought with the Tubo army in Songzhou and defeated the Tubo army.

古文：十月己卯，猎于给平，赐高年粟帛。
现代文：十月初五，太宗到始平打猎，赐给高龄老人粮食布帛。
English: On the 5th day of October, Emperor Taizong went hunting in Shihping and gave the old man a sack of grain.

古文：乙未，至自始平。
现代文：二十一日，从始平返京。
English: On the 21st, he returned to Kyoto from Shihei.

古文：钧州山獠反，桂州都督张宝德败之。
现代文：钧州的山僚人反叛，桂州都督张宝德打败叛军。
English: Shanli people in Zhangzhou rebelled, and Zhang Baode, the governor of Guizhou, defeated the rebels.

古文：十一月己巳，明州山獠反，交州都督李道彦败之。
现代文：十一月二十五日，明州的山僚人反叛，交州都督李道彦打败叛军。
English: On November 25, the mountaineers of Mingzhou rebelled, and the governor of Jiaozhou, Li Daohan, defeated the rebels.

古文：十二月辛巳，壁州山獠反，右武候将军上官怀仁讨之。
现代文：十二月初七，壁州的山僚人反叛，右武侯将军上官怀仁讨伐叛军。
English: On the 7th day of the 12th month, the mountaineers of Bishu rebelled, and the Right Buxu General, Shangguan Huairin, went to fight the rebels.

古文：是岁，滁、豪二州野蚕成茧。
现代文：这年，滁、豪两州野蚕结成茧。
English: In this year, the two states' wild silkworms, Gou and Gao, formed a cocoon.

古文：十三年正月乙巳，拜献陵，赦三原及行从，免县人今岁租赋，赐宿卫陵邑郎将、三原令爵一级。
现代文：贞观十三年正月初一，太宗祭拜献陵，宽免三原的囚犯并赏赐随从人员，免除县民本年租赋，赐给宿卫陵邑郎将、三原县令爵位一级。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 13th year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong offered sacrifices and dedicated the mausoleum, pardoned the prisoners of Mihara and rewarded the attendants, exempted the county people from this year's rent, and awarded the general of the mausoleum and the first class of Mihara County.

古文：丁未，至自献陵。
现代文：初三，太宗从献陵返京。
English: On the third day of the first month, Taizong returned to Beijing from the dedication of the mausoleum.

古文：二月庚子，停世封刺史。
现代文：二月二十七日，停止封赐世袭刺史。
English: On February 27th, the conferment of the hereditary title of Jishi was suspended.

古文：三月乙丑，有星孛于毕、昴。
现代文：三月二十二日，有彗星出现在毕、昴二星宿之间的天区。
English: On March 22nd, a comet appeared in the sky between the stars Bi and Er.

古文：四月戊寅，如九成宫。
现代文：四月初五，太宗去九成宫。
English: On the fifth day of the fourth month, Emperor Taizong went to Jiu Chenggong.

古文：甲申，中郎将阿史那结社率反，伏诛。
现代文：十一日，中郎将阿史那结社率反叛，被处死。
English: On the eleventh day, Nakahiro rebelled against Ashina's leadership of the association and was executed.

古文：壬寅，云阳石然。
现代文：三十日，云阳有石块燃烧。
English: On the 30th, there was a rock fire in Yunyang.

古文：五月甲寅，以旱避正殿，诏五品以上言事，减膳，罢役，理囚，赈乏，乃雨。
现代文：五月十二日，太宗因旱灾避离正殿，诏令五品以上官员议政，减少膳食，免除劳役，清理囚犯，救济贫民，这才下雨。
English: On May 12th, Emperor Taizong had to evacuate the main hall due to drought. He ordered officials above the fifth rank to discuss politics, reduce meals, exempt labor, clean up prisoners, and relieve the poor. Then it rained.

古文：六月丙申，封弟元婴为滕王。
现代文：六月二十五日，封其弟李元婴为滕王。
English: On June 25th, his younger brother Li Yuan Rong was named the King of Teng.

古文：八月辛未朔，日有食之。
现代文：八月初一，日月合朔，有日食。
English: On the first day of August, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：十月甲申，至自九成宫。
现代文：十月十五日，太宗从九成宫返京。
English: On October 15, Emperor Taizong returned to Beijing from Jiu Chenggong Palace.

古文：十一月辛亥，杨师道为中书令。
现代文：十一月十三日，杨师道任中书令。
English: On November 13th, Yang Shidao was removed from his post.

古文：戊辰，尚书左丞刘洎为黄门侍郎，参知政事。
现代文：三十日，尚书左丞刘洎任黄门侍郎，参与执掌政事。
English: On the 30th, Shangshu Zuorong Liu Xuan was appointed as the Yellow Gate Chamberlain and participated in the administration of state affairs.

古文：十二月壬申，侯君集为交河道行军大总管，以伐高昌。
现代文：十二月初四，侯君集任交河道行军大总管，率军讨伐高昌。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of December, Hou Junji was appointed as the general manager of the march of the Jiaohe Road and led the army to fight Gaochang.

古文：乙亥，封子福为赵王。
现代文：初七，太宗封其子李福为赵王。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Emperor Taizong appointed his son Li Fu as King Zhao.

古文：壬辰，猎于咸阳。
现代文：二十四日，到咸阳打猎。
English: On the 24th, I went hunting in Xianyang.

古文：癸巳，至自咸阳。
现代文：二十五日，从咸阳返京。
English: On the 25th, he returned to Beijing from Xianyang.

古文：是岁，滁州野蚕成茧。
现代文：这年，滁州野蚕结茧。
English: This year, the Luzhou wild silkworms have begun to pupate.

古文：十四年正月庚子，有司读时令。
现代文：贞观十四年正月初二，官吏读月令。
English: On the second day of the first month of the 14th year of Zhenguan, officials read the lunar calendar.

古文：甲寅，幸魏王泰第，赦雍州长安县，免延康里今岁租赋。
现代文：十六日，亲临魏王李泰府，对雍州长安县施行赦免，免除延康里本年租赋。
English: On the 16th, Wei King Li Taifu personally visited Yong Chaoan County to grant amnesty and exempt Yan Kangli from this year's rent.

古文：二月丁丑，观释奠于国学，赦大理、万年县，赐学官高第生帛。
现代文：二月初十，太宗到国学府观看以酒食祭奠先圣先师的活动，宽免大理寺、万年县的囚犯，赐给学官中优等生布帛。
English: On the 10th day of the 2nd month of the year, Emperor Taizong went to the National Academy of Sciences to watch the activities of the wine and food festival to commemorate the founding of the holy forerunner. He pardoned prisoners from Dali Temple and Mannen County, and gave cloth coats to middle and high school students.

古文：壬午，幸温汤。
现代文：十五日，去温泉。
English: On the 15th, I went to a hot spring.

古文：辛卯，至自温汤。
现代文：二十四日，从温泉返京。
English: On the 24th, I returned to Kyoto from the hot springs.

古文：乙未，求梁皇偘褚仲都、周熊安生沈重、陈沈文阿周弘正张讥、隋何妥刘焯刘炫之后。
现代文：二十八日，寻找梁朝皇侃、褚仲都，北周熊安生、沈重，陈朝沈文阿、周弘正、张讥，隋朝何妥、刘焯、刘炫的后人。
English: On the 28th, they searched for the descendants of Emperor Kan in the Liang Dynasty, Zhou Zhongdu in the Zhou Dynasty, Xiong An Sheng and Shen Chong in the Northern Dynasty, Shen Wenya, Zhou Hongzheng and Zhang Qian in the Chen Dynasty, and He Tuo, Liu Yu and Liu Xuan in the Sui Dynasty.

古文：三月，罗、窦二州獠反，广州总管党仁弘败之。
现代文：三月，罗、窦二州的僚人反叛，广州总管党仁弘将其打败。
English: In March, Luo and Dou's colleagues in the two prefectures rebelled, and were defeated by the Guangzhou Party chief, Yan Hong.

古文：五月壬寅，徙封灵夔为鲁王。
现代文：五月初六，改封李灵夔为鲁王。
English: On the sixth day of the fifth lunar month, Li Lingyao was renamed King of Lu.

古文：六月，滁州野蚕成茧。
现代文：六月，滁州野蚕结茧。
English: In June, the Luzhou wild silkworms began to pupate.

古文：乙酉，大风拔木。
现代文：十九日，大风拔起树木。
English: On the 19th, high winds uprooted trees.

古文：八月庚午，作襄城宫。
现代文：八月初五，建造襄城宫。
English: On August 5th, the construction of the Xiangcheng Palace was completed.

古文：癸酉，侯君集克高昌。
现代文：初八，侯君集攻克高昌国。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Hou Jun set out to conquer Gaochang.

古文：九月癸卯，赦高昌部及士卒父子犯死、期犯流、大功犯徒、小功缌麻犯杖，皆原之。
现代文：九月初九，赦免高昌军队以及士卒中父子均犯死罪、须守丧一年判流放罪、须守丧九个月判服劳役罪、须守丧五个月和守丧三个月而已判处杖刑的犯人，全部赦免。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month of the month, the Gaochang army and the soldiers, including father and son, were pardoned. The prisoners who had been sentenced to death, sentenced to exile for one year, sentenced to labor service for nine months, sentenced to five months, and sentenced to cane for three months were all pardoned.

古文：闰十月乙未，如同州。
现代文：闰十月初二，太宗去同州。
English: On the second day of October, Taizong went to Tongzhou.

古文：甲辰，猎于尧山。
现代文：十一日，到尧山打猎。
English: On the 11th day, they went hunting in Lushan Mountain.

古文：庚戌，至自同州。
现代文：十七日，从同州返京。
English: On the 17th, he returned to Beijing from the same state.

古文：十一月甲子，有事于南郊。
现代文：十一月初一，在京城南郊举行祭天大典。
English: On the first day of November, a grand festival was held in the southern suburbs of Beijing.

古文：十二月丁酉，侯君集俘高昌王以献，赐酺三日。
现代文：十二月初五，侯君集俘虏高昌国王进献祖庙，太宗赐给百姓聚饮三天。
English: On the 5th day of the 12th month, the princes gathered the captives of the Gaochang King to present the ancestral temple, and Emperor Taizong gave the people three days to gather and drink.

古文：癸卯，猎于樊川。
现代文：十一日，太宗到樊川打猎。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Taizong went hunting in the Beichuan River.

古文：乙巳，至自樊川。
现代文：十三日，从樊川返京。
English: On the 13th, he returned to Kyoto from Ayukawa.

古文：十五年正月辛巳，如洛阳宫，次温汤。
现代文：贞观十五年正月十九日，太宗去洛阳宫，在温泉停留。
English: On the 19th day of the first month of the 15th year of Zhenguan, Taizong went to Luoyang Palace and stayed at the hot spring.

古文：卫士崔卿、刁文懿谋反，伏诛。
现代文：卫士崔卿、刁文懿谋反，被处死。
English: Guards Cui Xing and Yan Wenqin conspired to rebel and were executed.

古文：三月戊辰，如襄城宫。
现代文：三月初七，太宗去襄城宫。
English: On the seventh day of the third month, Emperor Taizong went to the Xiangcheng Palace.

古文：四月辛卯，诏以来岁二月有事于泰山。
现代文：四月初一，下诏书：来年二月在泰山设坛祭祀天地。
English: On the first day of April, the following edict was issued: An altar will be set up on Mount Tai in February next year to worship heaven and earth.

古文：乙未，免洛州今岁租，还户故给复者加给一年，赐民八十以上物，惸独鳏寡疾病不能自存者米二斛。
现代文：初五，免除洛州本年的田赋，迁入户原已免除劳役的再免服劳役一年，赐给百姓中八旬以上老人以杂帛，鳏寡孤独及有病不能自理生活的人赐给米二斛。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, this year's rice allotment in Lozhou was exempted, those who had been exempted from labor service when they moved into their homes were then exempted from labor service for one year, the elderly over the age of eighty were given chowder, and those who were widowed, lonely, and sick and unable to live independently were given two bags of rice.

古文：虑囚。
现代文：讯察记录囚犯的罪状。
English: The investigation records the prisoner's charges.

古文：六月己酉，有星孛于太微。
现代文：六月十九，在太微垣天区出现彗星。
English: On June 19th, a comet appeared in the southern sky.

古文：丙辰，停封泰山，避正殿，减膳。
现代文：二十六日，太宗宣布停止来年的泰山祭祀天地活动。避离正殿、减少膳食。
English: On the 26th, Emperor Taizong announced the suspension of the upcoming year's Taishan ritual activities, avoiding the main hall and reducing meals.

古文：七月丙寅，宥周、隋名臣及忠列子孙贞观以后流配者。
现代文：七月初七，赦免北周和隋朝的名臣及忠烈之士的子孙在贞观纪元以后被流放的人。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7

古文：十月辛卯，猎于伊阙。
现代文：十月初三，太宗到伊阙打猎。
English: At the beginning of October, Taizong went to Ili to go hunting.

古文：壬辰，如洛阳宫。
现代文：初四，去洛阳宫。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, I went to Luoyang Palace.

古文：十一癸酉，薛延陀寇边，兵部尚书李世勣为朔州道行军总管，右卫大将军李大亮为灵州道行军总管，凉州都督李袭誉为凉州道行军总管，以伐之。
现代文：十一月十六日，薛延陀部落侵犯边境，兵部尚书李世责力任朔州道行军总管，右卫大将军李大亮任灵州道行军总管，凉州都督李袭誉任凉州道行军总管，率军讨伐薛延陀。
English: On November 16th, the Xueyantuo tribe invaded the border. Shangshu Li Shirenli of the Military Department was appointed as the general manager of the march of Shuozhou Road, the right guard general Li Dailiang was appointed as the general manager of the march of Lingzhou Road, and the governor of Liangzhou Li Heiyuan was appointed as the general manager of the march of Liangzhou Road, and led the army to fight against Xueyantuo.

古文：十二月戊子，至自洛阳宫。
现代文：十二月初一，太宗从洛阳宫返京。
English: On the first day of December, Emperor Taizong returned to Beijing from Luoyang Palace.

古文：庚子，命三品以上嫡子事东宫。
现代文：十三日，命令三品以上的皇嫡子到东宫听差使。
English: On the 13th, he ordered the legitimate sons of emperors with three or more court ranks to go to the East Palace to listen to the messenger.

古文：辛丑，虑囚。
现代文：十四日，讯察记录囚犯的罪状。
English: On the 14th, the investigation recorded the prisoner's charges.

古文：甲辰，李世勣及薛延陀战于诺真水，败之。
现代文：十七日，李世责力与薛延陀军队在诺真水交战，打败薛延陀军。
English: On the 17th, Li Shili and Xue Yanta's army fought in Nozhenshui and defeated Xue Yanta's army.

古文：乙巳，赠战亡将士官三转。
现代文：十八日，追封阵亡将士三级官衔。
English: On the 18th, he was posthumously awarded the rank of third-class officer.

古文：十六年正月乙丑，遣使安抚西州。
现代文：贞观十六年正月初九，派使臣安抚西州。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the 16th year of Zhenguan, he sent an envoy to pacify Xizhou.

古文：戊辰，募戍西州者，前犯流死亡匿，听自首以应募。
现代文：十二日，招募驻防西州的士卒，原犯有流放罪、死罪而逃亡躲藏的人，听任其自首应募。
English: On the 12th, the soldiers stationed in Xizhou were recruited, and those who had committed the crime of banishment and the crime of death and fled to hide were allowed to submit themselves for recruitment.

古文：辛未，徙天下死罪囚实西州。
现代文：十五日，迁移全国的死罪囚犯充实西州。
English: On the 15th, the transfer of death-row prisoners from all over the country was completed in Xizhou.

古文：中书舍人岑文本为中书侍郎，专典机密。
现代文：中书舍人岑文本任中书侍郎，专掌朝廷机密。
English: He was appointed to the position of the secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters. He was in charge of the secrets of the imperial court.

古文：六月戊戌，太白昼见。
现代文：六月十四日，白天出现太白星。
English: On June 14, a very white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：七月戊午，长孙无忌为司徒，房玄龄为司空。
现代文：七月初五，长孙无忌任司徒，房玄龄任司空。
English: On the 5th day of the 7th month, the eldest grandson was appointed as a disciple, and Fong Xuanling was appointed as a disciple.

古文：十一月丙辰，猎于武功。
现代文：十一月初四，太宗到武功打猎。
English: On the 4th day of the 11th month, Emperor Taizong went hunting.

古文：壬戌，猎于岐山之阳。
现代文：初十，到岐山南边打猎。
English: At the age of ten, he went hunting on the south side of the Qishan Mountains.

古文：甲子，赐所过六县高年孤疾氈衾粟帛，遂幸庆善宫。
现代文：十二日，赐给所经过六个县的高龄孤寡、有病者毡被、粮食、布帛，顺道亲临庆善宫。
English: On the 12th, he gave quilts, grain, and cloth to the elderly, widows, and the sick in the six counties he passed through, and stopped by the Qingzheng Palace on the way.

古文：庚午，至自庆善宫。
现代文：十八日，从庆善宫返京。
English: On the 18th, it returned to Beijing from the Qing Son Palace.

古文：十二月癸卯，幸温汤。
现代文：十二月二十二日，太宗到温泉。
English: On December 22, Taizong went to a hot spring.

古文：甲辰，猎于骊山。
现代文：二十三日，到骊山打猎。
English: On the 23rd, I went to Lushan to go hunting.

古文：乙己，至自温汤。
现代文：二十四日，从温泉返京。
English: On the 24th, I returned to Kyoto from the hot springs.

古文：十七年正月戊辰，魏徵薨。
现代文：贞观十七年正月十七日，魏征逝世。
English: On the 17th day of the first month of the 17th year of Zhenguan, Wei Zheng passed away.

古文：代州都督刘兰谋反，伏诛。
现代文：代州都督刘兰谋反，被处死。
English: The acting governor of the state, Liu Lan, plotted a rebellion and was executed.

古文：二月己亥，虑囚。
现代文：二月十九日，讯察记录囚犯的罪状。
English: On February 19th, the investigation recorded the prisoner's charges.

古文：戊申，图功臣于凌烟阁。
现代文：二十八日，将功臣的图像绘画在凌烟阁上。
English: On the 28th, the image of the hero was painted on the Lingyakou.

古文：三月壬子，禁送终违令式者。
现代文：三月初二，禁止丧葬违反规范的仪式。
English: On the second day of March, funerals and ceremonies that violate norms are prohibited.

古文：丙辰，齐王祐反，李世勣讨之。
现代文：初六，齐王李反叛，李世责力前去讨伐。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, King Li of Qi rebelled, and Li Shiji was ordered to go and fight.

古文：甲子，以旱遣使覆囚决狱。
现代文：十四日，因旱灾，太宗派使臣复审囚犯的判罪情况。
English: On the 14th, due to the drought, envoys from the Tai Sect reviewed the sentencing of prisoners.

古文：乙丑，齐王祐伏诛，纵复齐州一年。
现代文：十五日，齐王李被处死，下令免除齐州的劳役一年。
English: On the fifteenth day, Qi Wang Li was executed and ordered to be exempted from labor service in Qi for one year.

古文：四月乙酉，废皇太子为庶人，汉王元昌、侯君集等伏诛丙。
现代文：四月初六，太宗废黜皇太子李承乾为平民，汉王李元昌、侯君集等人被处死。
English: On the 6th day of the 4th month, Taizong deposed the crown prince Li Chengqian and made him a commoner, and Han kings Li Yuanchang, Hou Junji and others were executed.

古文：戌，立晋王治为皇太子，大赦，赐文武官及五品以上子为父后者爵一级，民八十以上粟帛，酺三日。
现代文：初七，立晋王李治为皇太子，施行大赦，赐给文武官员及五品以上官员爵位在其父之下的晋爵一级、百姓中八十岁以上的老人赐给粮食布帛，聚饮三天。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the king of the Jin Dynasty, Li Zhi, was appointed crown prince, and an amnesty was carried out, granting civil and military officials and officials above the fifth grade a peerage of the first level of the peerage under their father, and the elderly over the age of eighty among the people were given grain cloth and gathered for three days.

古文：丁亥，杨师道罢。
现代文：初八，杨师道被免职。
English: At the beginning of eighth grade, Yang Shidao was dismissed.

古文：己丑，特进萧瑀为太子太保，李世勣为太子詹事：同中书门下三品。
现代文：初十， 特进 萧蠫任太子太保，李世责力任太子詹事、同中书门下三品。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Xiao Jian, a special student, was appointed as the prince's eunuch, Li Shili, a special student, was appointed as the prince's eunuch, and he was awarded the third prize in the same school.

古文：庚寅，谢承乾之过于太庙。癸巳，降封魏王泰为东莱郡王。
现代文：十一日，太宗到祖庙自认错立李承乾的过失。十四日，将魏王李泰降等封为东莱郡王。
English: On the 11th day, Emperor Taizong went to the ancestral temple to confess his fault of wrongly appointing Li Chengqian. On the 14th day, he demoted Wei King Li Tai to be the king of Donglai County.

古文：六月己卯朔，日有食之。
现代文：六月初一，日月合朔，有日食。
English: On the first day of June, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：壬辰，葬隋恭帝。
现代文：十四日，安葬隋恭帝。
English: On the 14th, Emperor Sui was buried.

古文：甲午，以旱避正殿，减膳，诏京官五品以上言事。
现代文：十六日，太宗因旱灾避离正殿，减少膳食，诏令京官五品以上的官员议政。
English: On the 16th, Emperor Taizong evacuated the main hall due to drought, reduced meals, and ordered the officials of the Beijing government to discuss politics.

古文：丁酉，高士廉同中书门下三品，平章政事。
现代文：十九日，授予高士廉同中书门下三品，平章政事。
English: On the 19th, Gao Shixian was awarded the Third Class of the Chinese Academy of Letters and the Second Class of the Chinese Academy of Political Science.

古文：闰月丁巳，诏皇太子典左右屯营兵。
现代文：闰六月初十，诏令皇太子李治掌管左、右屯营兵。
English: On the 10th day of the 6th month, the emperor ordered the crown prince Li Zhi to take charge of the left and right camp soldiers.

古文：丙子，徙封泰为顺阳郡王。
现代文：二十九日，将李泰改封为顺阳郡王。
English: On the 29th, Li Tai was renamed the King of Shunyang County.

古文：七月丁酉，房玄龄罢。
现代文：七月二十日，房玄龄被免职。
English: On July 20, Fang Xuanling was removed from his post.

古文：八月庚戌，工部尚书张亮为刑部尚书，参豫朝政。
现代文：八月初三，工部尚书张亮任刑部尚书，参预朝政。
English: On the third day of the eighth month, Zhang Liang, an official of the Ministry of Industry, was appointed as an official of the Ministry of Justice, and participated in the pre-imperial government.

古文：十月丁未，建诸州邸于京城。
现代文：十月初一，建立各州在京的官署。
English: On the first day of October, the government offices of each prefecture in Beijing will be established.

古文：丁巳，房玄龄起复。
现代文：十一日，房玄龄重被起用。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Fang Xuanlingjui was appointed.

古文：十一月己卯，有事于南郊。
现代文：十一月初三，在京城南郊举行祭天大典。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, a grand festival was held in the southern suburbs of Beijing.

古文：壬午，赐酺三日，以凉州获瑞石，赦凉州。
现代文：初六，赐予聚饮三天；因凉州获得象征祥瑞的玉石，对凉州施行赦免。
English: On the sixth day of the new year, three days of drinking were granted; because Liangzhou obtained the jade symbolizing auspiciousness, Liangzhou was pardoned.

古文：十二月庚申，幸温汤。
现代文：十二月十四日，太宗到温泉。
English: On December 14, Taizong went to a hot spring.

古文：庚午，至自温汤。
现代文：二十四日，从温泉返京。
English: On the 24th, I returned to Kyoto from the hot springs.

古文：十八年正月乙未，如钟官城。
现代文：贞观十八年正月二十日，太宗去钟官城。
English: On the 20th day of the first month of the 18th year of Zhenguan, Taizong went to Zhongguan City.

古文：庚子，如鄠。
现代文：二十五日，去。
English: On the 25th, go.

古文：壬寅，幸温汤。
现代文：二十七日，亲临温泉。
English: On the 27th, I visited the hot springs.

古文：二月己酉，如零口。
现代文：二月初五，去零口。
English: On the fifth day of the second month of the year, go to the branch.

古文：乙卯，至自零口。
现代文：十一日，从零口返京。
English: On the eleventh day, he returned to Beijing from a different location.

古文：丁巳，给复突厥、高昌部人隶诸州者二年。
现代文：十三日，免除隶属各州的突厥、高昌部落的百姓徭役二年。
English: On the 13th, the people of the Turkic and Gaochang tribes belonging to each state were exempted from forced labor for two years.

古文：四月辛亥，如九成宫。
现代文：四月初八，去九成宫。
English: On the eighth day of the fourth month, I went to the Jiu Cheng Palace.

古文：七月甲午，营州都督张俭率幽、营兵及契丹、奚以伐高丽。
现代文：七月初三，营州都督张俭率领幽州、营州的兵力和契丹、奚的军队讨伐高丽国。
English: On the third day of the first month of July, Zhang Jian, the governor of Yingzhou, led the forces of Yuzhou and Yingzhou and the armies of Khitan and Han to fight in Korea.

古文：八月壬子，安酉都护郭孝恪为西州道行军总管，以伐焉耆。
现代文：八月十一日，安西都护郭孝恪任西州道行军总管，率军讨伐焉耆国。
English: On August 11th, Guo Xiao, the governor of Anxi Province, was appointed as the general manager of the march of the Xizhou Road, and led the army to fight against Yanzhong.

古文：甲子，至自九成宫。
现代文：二十三日，太宗从九成宫返京。
English: On the 23rd, Emperor Taizong returned to Beijing from Jiu Chenggong.

古文：丁卯，刘洎为侍中，岑文本为中书令，中书侍郎马周守中书令。
现代文：二十六日，刘洎任侍中，岑文本任中书令，中书侍郎马周代理中书令。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, Liu Ye was appointed as an attendant, Zibo Text was appointed as a middle secretary, and the middle secretary Langma Zhou was acting as a middle secretary.

古文：九月，黄门侍郎褚遂良参豫朝政。
现代文：九月，黄门侍郎褚遂良参预朝政。
English: In September, Huangmen's chamberlain Zou Suiliang took part in the pre-imperial government.

古文：辛卯，郭孝恪及焉耆战，败之。
现代文：郭孝恪与焉耆交战，打败焉耆军。
English: Guo Xiaoqi fought with Yan Xuan and defeated Yan Xuan's army.

古文：十月辛丑朔，日有食之。
现代文：十月初一，日月合朔，有日食。
English: On the first day of October, the sun and the moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：癸卯，宴雍州父老于上林苑，赐粟帛。
现代文：初三，太宗在上林苑宴请雍州父老，赐给他们粮食布帛。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Emperor Taizong held a banquet for the Yongzhou patriarchs in Shanglin Garden and gave them grain cloth.

古文：甲寅，如洛阳宫。
现代文：十四日，去洛阳宫。
English: On the 14th, I went to Luoyang Palace.

古文：己巳，猎于天池。
现代文：二十九日，到天池打猎。
English: On the 29th, I went to Tianchi to hunt for cormorants.

古文：十一月戊寅，虑囚。
现代文：十一月初八，讯察记录囚犯的罪状。
English: On the 8th day of the 11th month, the investigation recorded the prisoner's charges.

古文：庚辰，遣使巡问郑、汝、怀、泽四州高年，宴赐之。
现代文：初十，派使臣巡视、慰问郑、汝、怀、泽四个州的高龄老人，并宴请、给予赏赐。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the envoys were sent to inspect and console the elderly people of Zheng, Ru, Huai and Ze in four provinces, and to have a banquet and give rewards.

古文：甲午，张亮为平壤道行军大总管，李世勣、马周为辽东道行军大总管，率十六总管兵以伐高丽。
现代文：二十四日，张亮任平壤道行军大总管，李世责力、马周任辽东道行军大总管，统率十六个总管的兵力讨伐高丽。
English: On the 24th, Zhang Liang was appointed as the commander-in-chief of marching troops in Pyongyang Province, Li Shili and Ma Zhou as the commanders-in-chief of marching troops in Liaodong Province, and led the troops of 16 commanders-in-chief to fight against Goryeo.

古文：十二月壬寅，庶人承乾卒。
现代文：十二月初二，被废黜为平民的李承乾去世。
English: On the second day of December, Li Chengqian, who was deposed and became a commoner, passed away.

古文：戊午，李思摩部落叛。
现代文：十八日，李思摩部落反叛。
English: On the 18th, the Li Sima tribe rebelled.

古文：十九年二月庚戌，如洛阳宫，以伐高丽。
现代文：贞观十九年二月十二日，太宗去洛阳宫，借以征讨高丽。
English: On the 12th day of the 2nd month of the 19th year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong went to Luoyang Palace to enlist the help of Goryeo.

古文：癸丑，射虎于武德北山。
现代文：十五日，到武德北山射虎。
English: On the 15th, he went to Wude Beishan to shoot tigers.

古文：乙卯，皇太子监国于定州。
现代文：十七日，皇太子李治留守定州，代行处理国政。
English: On the 17th, the crown prince, Li Zhi, stayed in Dingzhou to take charge of state affairs.

古文：丁巳，赐所过高年鳏寡粟帛，赠比干太师，谥忠烈。
现代文：十九日，太宗赐给所经过地方的高龄鳏寡老人粮食布帛，封赠周朝名臣比干为太师，谥号忠烈。
English: On the 19th, Emperor Taizong gave grain cloth to the elderly widows and widowers of the places he passed through, and bestowed the title of Taishi (Grand Master) on the famous Zhou Dynasty minister Bi Gan.

古文：三月壬辰，长孙无忌摄侍中，吏部尚书杨师道摄中书令。
现代文：三月二十日，长孙无忌代理侍中，吏部尚书杨师道代理中书令。
English: On March 20th, the eldest grandson of Wu Bo acted as an attendant, and Yang Shidao, the secretary of the personnel department, acted as the middle secretary.

古文：四月癸卯，誓师于幽州，大飨军。
现代文：四月初六，在幽州誓师，大举犒劳将士。
English: On the 6th day of the 4th month of the year, in Yuzhou, the swearing-in ceremony was held.

古文：丁未，岑文本薨。
现代文：初十，岑文本逝世。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, 文本 passed away.

古文：癸亥，李世勣克盖牟城。
现代文：二十六日，李世责力攻克盖牟城。
English: On the 26th, Li Shili took the initiative to conquer the city of Kegamu.

古文：五月己巳，平壤道行军总管程名振克沙卑城。
现代文：五月初二，平壤道行军总管程名振攻克沙卑城。
English: On the second day of the first month of May, the general direction of the march of Pyongyang Road was named Zhen to conquer Kesapei City.

古文：庚午，次辽泽，瘗隋人战亡者。
现代文：初三，行军途中在辽泽驻歇二日，为隋朝征讨高丽的阵亡者造墓。
English: On the third day of the first month, the march stopped for two days in Liaoze to build a tomb for those who died in the Sui Dynasty's conquest of Korea.

古文：乙亥，辽东道行军总管张君乂有罪，伏诛。
现代文：初八，辽东道行军总管张君耣有罪，被处死。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Zhang Junyao, the head of the march in Liaodong, was found guilty and executed.

古文：丁丑，军于马首山。
现代文：初十，唐军驻扎马首山。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the Tang army was stationed on Mount Mashu.

古文：甲申，克辽东城。
现代文：十七日，唐军攻克辽东城。
English: On the 17th, the Tang army conquered Liaodong City.

古文：六月丁酉，克白岩城。
现代文：六月初一，攻克白岩城。
English: On the first day of June, Baiyan City was conquered.

古文：已未，大败高丽于安市城东南山，左武卫将军王君愕死之。
现代文：二十三日，在安市城东南山地大败高丽军，左武卫将军王君愕殉难。
English: On the 23rd, in the mountains southeast of the city of An, the Koryo army was soundly defeated, and Zuo Wei's general Wang Jun was martyred.

古文：辛酉，赐酺三日。
现代文：二十五日，赐予聚饮三天。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, they were given three days to drink together.

古文：七月壬申，葬死事官，加爵四级，以一子袭。
现代文：七月初六，安葬为效忠国事而牺牲的官吏，给他们加爵位四级，由其一个儿子承袭。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month, the officials who sacrificed themselves for the loyalty of the country were buried, and they were given a four-level title, which was inherited by one of their sons.

古文：九月癸未，班师。
现代文：九月十八日，凯旋而归。
English: On September 18th, he made a triumphant return.

古文：十月丙午，次营州，以太牢祭死事者。
现代文：十月十一日，凯旋回军途中停驻营州，用牛羊猪三牲祭奠为国事牺牲的人们。
English: On October 11th, on the way back from the victory tour, the army stopped at Yingzhou to pay tribute to the people who sacrificed their lives for the national cause with a cattle, sheep and pig sacrifice.

古文：丙辰，皇太子迎谒于临渝关。
现代文：二十一日，皇太子李治到临渝关拜迎太宗。
English: On the twenty-first day, the crown prince Li Zhi went to Linyu Guan to pay homage to the emperor.

古文：戊午，次汉武台，刻石纪功。
现代文：二十三日，停驻汉武台，刻石碑纪功。
English: On the 23rd, he stopped at Hanwutai to carve a stone monument to commemorate his achievements.

古文：十一月癸酉，大飨军于幽州。
现代文：十一月初九，在幽州大行犒劳将士。
English: On the 9th day of the 11th month, a large number of laborers marched in Yuzhou.

古文：庚辰，次易州。
现代文：十六日，停驻易州。
English: On the 16th, it stopped at Ezhou.

古文：癸未，平壤道行军总管张文干有罪，伏诛。
现代文：十九日，平壤道行军总管张文干获罪，被处死。
English: On the 19th, Zhang Wengan, the general manager of the Pyongyang march, was convicted and executed.

古文：丙戌，次定州。
现代文：二十二日，行军停驻定州。
English: On the 22nd, the march stopped at Dingzhou.

古文：丁亥，贬杨师道为工部尚书。
现代文：二十三日，将杨师道贬官为工部尚书。
English: On the 23rd, Yang Shidao was demoted to the Ministry of Industry.

古文：十二月戊申，次并州。
现代文：十二月十四日，行军停驻并州。
English: On December 14th, the march stopped in the annexed province.

古文：己未，薛延陀寇夏州，左领军大将军执失思力败之。
现代文：二十五日，薛延陀部落侵犯夏州，左领军大将军执失思力打败薛延陀军。
English: On the 25th, the Xueyantuo tribe invaded Xia Prefecture, and the general of the left-wing army lost his nerve and defeated the Xueyantuo army.

古文：庚申，杀刘洎。
现代文：二十六日，杀了侍中刘洎。
English: On the 26th, he killed Liu Xuan, a chamberlain.

古文：二十年正月辛未，夏州都督乔师望及薛延陀战，败之。
现代文：贞观二十年正月初八，夏州都督乔师望与薛延陀交战，打败了他。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the 20th year of Zhenguan, Qiao Shifang, the governor of Xiazhou, fought with Xue Yantuo and defeated him.

古文：丁丑，遣使二十二人，以六条黜陟于天下。
现代文：十四日，太宗派使臣二十二人，赴全国各地，按六条规定考核、升降官吏。
English: On the 14th, twenty-two envoys of the Tai Sect went to all parts of the country to assess and promote officials in accordance with six regulations.

古文：庚辰，赦并州，起义时编户给复三年，后附者一年。
现代文：十七日，对并州施行赦免，起义时的编户免除徭役三年，后来归附的免劳役一年。
English: On the 17th, an amnesty was granted to the annexed prefectures, exempting those who were editors at the time of the uprising from forced labor for three years, and those who joined later from forced labor for one year.

古文：二月甲午，从伐高丽无功者，皆赐勋一转。
现代文：二月初一，随从征讨高丽国没有立功的官员，全部赐予晋升勋官一级。
English: On the first day of February, all officials who did not do any meritorious service in the Korean War were promoted to the first rank of officers.

古文：庚申，赐所过高年鳏寡粟。
现代文：二十七日，太宗赐给所经过地方的高龄鳏寡老人粮食。
English: On the 27th, Emperor Taizong gave food to the elderly widows and widowers in the places he passed through.

古文：三月己巳，至自高丽。
现代文：三月初七，太宗从高丽国返回京城。
English: On the 7th day of the 3rd month, Taejong returned to the capital from Korea.

古文：庚午，不豫，皇太子听政。
现代文：初八，太宗身体不适，皇太子李治代行处理政事。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Emperor Taizong was unwell, and Crown Prince Li Zhi took over the government affairs.

古文：己丑，张亮谋反，伏诛。
现代文：二十七日，张亮谋反，被处死。
English: On the 27th, Zhang Liang plotted a rebellion and was executed.

古文：闰月癸巳朔，日有食之。
现代文：闰三月初一，日月合朔，有日食。
English: On the first day of leap March, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：六月乙亥，江夏郡王道宗、李世勣伐薛延陀。
现代文：六月十五日，江夏郡王李道宗、李世责力讨伐薛延陀。
English: On June 15th, the kings of Jiangxia County, Li Daozong and Li Shili, went to fight against Xueyantuo.

古文：七月辛亥，疾愈。
现代文：七月二十一日，太宗病愈。
English: On July 21, Taizong recovered from his illness.

古文：李世勣及薛延陀战，败之。
现代文：李世责力与薛延陀军交战，将其打败。
English: Li Shiliang fought with Xue Yanta's army and defeated it.

古文：八月甲子，封孙忠为陈王。
现代文：八月初五，太宗封其孙李忠为陈王。
English: On the 5th day of the 8th month, Emperor Taizong made his grandson Li Zhong the King of Chen.

古文：己巳，如灵州。
现代文：初十，去灵州。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, I went to Lingzhou.

古文：庚辰，次泾州，赐高年鳏寡粟帛。
现代文：二十一日，歇住泾州，赐给该州高龄鳏寡老人粮食布帛。
English: On the 21st, he stopped in Zhangzhou and gave grain cloth to the elderly widows and widowers in the province.

古文：丙戌，逾陇山关，次瓦亭，观牧马。
现代文：二十七日，越过陇山关，在瓦亭歇住，察看放马牧场。
English: On the 27th, they crossed the Lushan Pass and stopped at the watchtower to inspect the horse ranch.

古文：丁亥，许陪陵者子孙从葬。
现代文：二十八日，准许死后安葬在皇陵附近的公卿大臣的子孙随其先人的墓地就葬。
English: On the 28th, the descendants of the nobles and ministers who were allowed to be buried near the imperial mausoleum after death were buried in the cemetery of their ancestors.

古文：九月辛卯，遣使巡察岭南。
现代文：九月初二，太宗派使臣巡察岭南。
English: On the second day of September, envoys from the Tai Sect visited Lingnan.

古文：甲辰，铁勒诸部请上号为 可汗 。
现代文：十五日，铁勒各部族请求给太宗加号为 可汗 。
English: On the fifteenth day, the tribes of Tiele requested that Taizong be given the title of Khan.

古文：辛亥，灵州地震。
现代文：二十二日，灵州地震。
English: On the 22nd, the Lingzhou earthquake occurred.

古文：十月，贬萧瑀为商州刺史。
现代文：十月，将萧蠫贬为商州刺史。
English: In October, Xiao Wei was relegated to the annals of Shangzhou history.

古文：丙戌，至自灵州。
现代文：二十七日，太宗从灵州返京。
English: On the 27th, Taizong returned to Beijing from Lingzhou.

古文：十一月己丑，诏： 祭祀、表疏，籓客、兵马、宿卫行鱼契给驿，授五品以上官及除解，决死罪，皆以闻，余委皇太子。 
现代文：十一月初一，太宗下诏书： 凡举行祭祀，表章奏疏、藩国来宾、调动兵马、宫中值宿警卫人员用鱼符要求供给驿马，授予五品以上官职及其任命、解职、判处死罪，均须奏明朕外，其他事务托付皇太子处置。 
English: On the first day of the first month of November, Emperor Taizong issued an edict: All sacrificial rites, the presentation of medals and ribbons, the guests of the domain, the mobilization of soldiers and horses, the use of fish charms by the guards of the palace duty station to request the provision of horses, the award of more than five official positions and their appointment, dismissal, and sentencing to death must be reported to us, and other matters should be entrusted to the Crown Prince.

古文：二十一年正月壬辰，高士廉薨。
现代文：贞观二十一年正月初五，高士廉逝世。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the twenty-first year of Zhenguan, Gao Shilian died.

古文：丁酉，诏以来岁二月有事于泰山。
现代文：初十，下诏书：于来年二月，在泰山祭祀天地。
English: On the tenth day of the first lunar month, the following edict was issued: In February of the coming year, the heavens and the earth will be sacrificed on Mount Tai.

古文：甲寅，以铁勒诸部为州县，赐京师酺三日。虑囚，降死罪以下。
现代文：二十七日，将铁勒各部族列为唐朝州县，赐予京城百姓聚饮三天；讯察记录囚犯的罪状，对死罪以下的囚犯减刑。
English: On the 27th, the tribes of Tiele were listed as the top counties of the Tang Dynasty, and the people of Beijing were given three days to gather and drink; the crimes of prisoners were recorded, and the sentences of prisoners with less than capital crimes were reduced.

古文：二月丁丑，皇太子释菜于太学。
现代文：二月二十日，皇太子李治在太学的入学典礼上以芹、藻一类供品祭祀先圣先师。
English: On February 20th, Crown Prince Riji made an offering of celery and algae at the entrance ceremony of Taigaku to worship the first saint pioneer.

古文：三月戊子，左武卫大将军牛进达为青丘道行军大总管，李世勣为辽东道行军大总管，率三总管兵以伐高丽。
现代文：三月初二，左武卫大将军牛进达任青丘道行军大总管，李世责力任辽东道行军大总管，统率三个总管的兵力去讨伐高丽。
English: On the second day of March, Zuo Wuwei's general Niu Jinda was appointed as the general manager of the Qingqiu Road march, and Li Shili was appointed as the general manager of the Liaodong Road march, and led the troops of the three general managers to fight against Goryeo.

古文：四月乙丑，作翠微宫。
现代文：四月初九，营造翠微宫。
English: On the ninth day of the fourth lunar month, the Jade and Micro Palace was built.

古文：五月戊子，幸翠微宫。
现代文：五月初三，太宗亲临翠微宫。
English: On the third day of the fifth lunar month, Emperor Taizong personally visited Tsuiweigu.

古文：壬辰，命百司决事于皇太子。
现代文：初七，告谕百官由皇太子决定政事。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, all officials were told that the crown prince would decide political affairs.

古文：庚戌，李世勣克南苏、木底城。
现代文：二十五日，李世责力攻克南苏、木底城。
English: On the 25th, Li Shiliang made a determined effort to conquer Nansu and Muxidi.

古文：六月丁丑，遣使铁勒诸部购中国人陷没者。七月乙未，牛进达克石城。
现代文：六月二十二日，派使臣到铁勒各族赎回陷落在那里的中国人。七月十一日，牛进达攻克石城。
English: On June 22nd, he sent envoys to all the tribes in Tilao to redeem the Chinese who had fallen there. On July 11th, Niu Jin reached and conquered Shicheng.

古文：丙申，作玉华宫。
现代文：十二日，兴建玉华宫。
English: On the 12th, the construction of the Jade Palace began.

古文：庚戌，至自翠微宫。
现代文：二十六日，太宗从翠微宫返京。
English: On the 26th, Emperor Taizong returned to Beijing from the Suiwe Palace.

古文：八月，泉州海溢。
现代文：八月，泉州海潮漫溢。
English: In August, the Quanzhou tides overflow.

古文：壬戌，停封泰山。
现代文：初八，决定停止到泰山筑坛祭天。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, it was decided to stop at Mount Tai to build an altar and hold a festival.

古文：九月丁酉，封子明为曹王。
现代文：九月十四日，太宗封其子李明为曹王。
English: On September 14, Emperor Taizong appointed his son Li Ming as Cao Wang.

古文：十月癸丑，褚遂良罢。
现代文：十月癸丑，褚遂良被免职。
English: In October, Yan Suiliang was removed from his post.

古文：十一月癸卯，进封泰为濮王。
现代文：十一月二十一日，晋封李泰为濮王。
English: On November 21st, Li Tai was promoted to the position of the King of Gong.

古文：十二月戊寅，左骁卫大将军契苾何力为昆丘道行军大总管，率三总管兵以伐龟兹。
现代文：十二月二十六日，左骁卫大将军契絆何力任昆丘道行军大总管，率领三个总管的军队去征讨龟兹。
English: On December 26th, General Zuo Jianwei appointed General Qizong He Li as the general manager of the march of Kunqiu Road, and led the three general managers of the army to collect turtle eggs.

古文：二十二年正月庚寅，马周薨。
现代文：贞观二十二年正月初九，马周逝世。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the 22nd year of Zhenguan, Ma Zhou passed away.

古文：戊戌，幸温汤。
现代文：十七日，太宗亲临温泉。
English: On the 17th, Taizong personally visited the hot spring.

古文：己亥，中书舍人崔仁师为中书侍郎，参知机务。
现代文：十八日，中书舍人崔仁师任中书侍郎，参与掌管朝廷军国机密要务。
English: On the 18th, Cui Renshi, the keeper of the Chinese books, was appointed as the attendant of the Chinese books, and participated in the management of the military and state secrets of the imperial court.

古文：丙午，左武卫大将军薛万彻为青丘道行军大总管，以伐高丽。
现代文：二十五日，左武卫大将军薛万彻任青丘道行军大总管，前往讨伐高丽。
English: On the 25th, General Xue Wanche, commander of the Qingqiu Campaign, left for the Korean Peninsula.

古文：长孙无忌检校中书令，知尚书、门下省事。
现代文：长孙无忌被任命为检校中书令，掌管尚书省、门下省的政事。
English: The eldest grandson was appointed as the inspector of the school, in charge of the political affairs of Shangshu Province and the provinces under his control.

古文：戊申，至自温汤。
现代文：二十七日，太宗从温泉返京。
English: On the 27th, Taizong returned to Beijing from the hot springs.

古文：二月褚遂良起复。
现代文：二月，褚遂良重被起用。
English: In February, Zou Suiliangzhe was appointed to the post.

古文：乙卯，见京城父老，劳之，蠲今岁半租，畿县三之一。
现代文：初四，太宗接见京城长安的父老乡亲，慰劳他们，免去京城本年的一半田租，京城附近辖区免去三分之一。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, Taizong met with the fathers and fellow countrymen of Beijing Chang'an, consoled them, and exempted half of this year's field rent in Beijing and one-third in the jurisdiction area near Beijing.

古文：丁卯，诏度辽水有功未酬勋而犯罪者与成官同。
现代文：十六日，下诏：随征高丽渡过辽水立了功而未给予封赏的人员，其犯罪者与已封授官职的人犯罪同等对待。
English: On the 16th, the following edict was issued: the offenders of those who did not give rewards to those who made contributions to the crossing of the Liao Shui River with the expedition to Korea, shall be treated in the same way as those who have been awarded official positions.

古文：乙亥，幸玉华宫。
现代文：二十四日，太宗亲临玉华宫。
English: On the 24th, Emperor Taizong personally visited the Jade Palace.

古文：己卯，猎于华原。
现代文：二十八日，到华原打猎。
English: On the 28th, I went to Hua Yuan to go hunting.

古文：流崔仁师于连州。
现代文：将崔仁师流放到连州。
English: He exiled Choe Ryong Il to Lianzhou.

古文：三月丁亥，赦宜君给复县人自玉华宫苑中迁者三年。
现代文：三月初七，对宜君县施行赦免，从玉华宫林苑中迁入宜君的县民免除劳役三年。
English: On the 7th day of the 3rd month, an amnesty was implemented for Yijun County, and the county residents who moved into Yijun from the Yuhua Palace Forest Garden were exempted from labor service for three years.

古文：四月丁巳，松州蛮叛，右武候将军梁建方败之。
现代文：四月初七，松州的羌族等部落反叛，右武侯将军梁建方将其击败。
English: On the 7th day of the 4th month of the year, the Yi people and other tribes in Songzhou rebelled and were defeated by the Wuhu general Liang Jianfang.

古文：六月丙寅，张行成存问河北从军者家，令州县为营农。
现代文：六月十七日，张行成慰问河北从军人员的家属，命令州县官府为他们营建农田。
English: On June 17th, Zhang Xingcheng consoled the families of Hebei military personnel and ordered the state and county governments to build farmland for them.

古文：丙子，薛万彻及高丽战于泊灼城，败之。
现代文：二十七日，薛万彻在泊灼城与高丽军交战，打败高丽军。
English: On the 27th, Xue Wanche fought with the Korean People's Army (KPA) in Poyang City and defeated the Korean People's Army.

古文：七月甲申，太白昼见。
现代文：七月初五，白天出现太白星。
English: On the fifth day of the seventh month, a very white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：壬辰，杀华州刺史李君羡。
现代文：十三日，杀了华州刺史李君羡。
English: On the 13th, Li Junen, a member of the Huazhou Sting, was killed.

古文：癸卯，房玄龄薨。
现代文：二十四日，房玄龄逝世。
English: On the 24th, Fang Xuanling passed away.

古文：八月己酉朔，日有食之。
现代文：八月初一，日月合朔，有日食。
English: On the first day of August, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：辛未，执失思力伐薛延陀余部于金山。
现代文：二十三日，执失思力在金山讨伐薛延陀族的残余部队。
English: On the 23rd, the remaining troops of the Xueyantuo tribe lost their will to fight in Jinshan.

古文：九月庚辰，昆丘道行军总管阿史那社尔及薛延陀余部处月、处蜜战，败之。
现代文：九月初二，昆丘道行军总管阿史那社尔在处月、处密一带与薛延陀残部交战，将其打败。
English: On the second day of the first month of September, the general manager of the march of Kunqiu Road, Ashinashal, fought with the remnants of Xueyantuo in the areas of Zhanzhong and Zhenshim, and defeated them.

古文：己亥，褚遂良为中书令。
现代文：二十一日，褚遂良任中书令。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Zou Suiliang was appointed as a middle-ranking official.

古文：壬寅，眉、邛、雅三州獠反，茂州都督张士贵讨之。
现代文：二十四日，眉、邛、雅等三个州的僚族人反叛，茂州都督张士贵讨伐他们。
English: On the 24th, the fellow tribesmen of three prefectures such as Meizhou, Handan and Ya rebelled, and the governor of Maozhou, Zhang Shigui, led a crusade against them.

古文：十月癸丑，至自玉华宫。
现代文：十月初六，太宗从玉华宫返京。
English: At the beginning of October, Emperor Taizong returned to Beijing from the Jade Palace.

古文：己巳，阿史那社尔及龟兹战，败之。
现代文：二十日，阿史那社尔与龟兹交战，打败龟兹军。
English: On the 20th, Ashina Saleh fought with Kuez and defeated the Kuez army.

古文：十二月辛未，降长安、万年徒罪以下。
现代文：十二月二十五日，对长安、万年判服劳役罪以下的犯人减刑。
English: On December 25th, Chang'an commuted the sentences of prisoners sentenced to less than 10,000 years for the crime of forced labor.

古文：闰月癸巳，虑囚。
现代文：闰十二月十七日，讯察记录囚犯的罪状。
English: On the 17th day of the 12th lunar month, the investigation and recording of the prisoner's charges began.

古文：二十三年正月辛亥，阿史那社尔俘龟兹王以献。
现代文：贞观二十三年正月初六，阿史那社尔俘虏龟兹王进献太庙。
English: On the 6th day of the 1st month of the 23rd year of Zhenguan, the captive Kamezi Wang of Ashinashal entered the Great Temple.

古文：三月己未，自冬旱，至是雨。
现代文：三月十五日，自去冬干旱，直至此日始降雨。
English: On the 15th of March, after a dry winter, it started to rain.

古文：辛酉，大赦。
现代文：十七日，施行大赦。
English: On the 17th, a general amnesty was implemented.

古文：丁卯，不豫，命皇太子听政于金液门。
现代文：二十三日，太宗身体不适，命令皇太子李治在金液门处理朝政。
English: On the 23rd, Emperor Taizong became unwell and ordered Crown Prince Riji to deal with the affairs of the court at Jinzhu Gate.

古文：四月巳亥，幸翠微宫。
现代文：四月二十五日，太宗亲临翠微宫。
English: On the 25th of April, Emperor Taizong personally visited the Tsuiwei Palace.

古文：五月戊午，贬李世勣为叠州都督。
现代文：五月十五日，将李世责力贬为叠州都督。
English: On the 15th of May, Li Shili was demoted to the position of the governor of Yamengzhou.

古文：己巳，皇帝崩于含风殿，年五十三。
现代文：二十六日，太宗李世民在含风殿逝世，终年五十三岁。
English: On the 26th, Emperor Taizong Li Shimin passed away in the Hall of the Winds at the age of 53.

古文：庚午，奉大行御马舆还京师。
现代文：二十七日，将太宗遗体用皇家马车运回京城。
English: On the 27th, Taizong's body was transported back to Beijing by royal carriage.

古文：礼部尚书于志宁为侍中，太子少詹事张行成兼侍中，高季辅兼中书令。
现代文：礼部尚书于志宁任侍中，太子少詹事张行成兼任侍中，高季辅兼任中书令。
English: Shang Shu of the etiquette department served as an attendant in Zhining, the young prince Zhan Zhi Zhang Xicheng also served as an attendant, and Gao Ji Fu also served as a middle secretary.

古文：壬申，发丧，谥曰文。
现代文：二十九日，发布太宗逝世讣告，谥号文。
English: On the 29th, the obituary notice of Taizong's death was issued.

古文：上元元年，改谥文武圣皇帝；天宝八载，谥文武大圣皇帝；十三载，增谥文武大圣大广孝皇帝。
现代文：高宗上元元年改赠太宗谥号为文武圣皇帝；玄宗天宝八载，改封太宗谥号为文武大圣皇帝；天宝十三载，增封太宗谥号为文武大圣大广孝皇帝。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Gao Zong changed the title of Taizong I to Emperor Wenshu; eight years after the establishment of the Xuanzong Heavenly Treasure, he changed the title of Taizong I to Emperor Wenshu; and thirteen years after the Heavenly Treasure, he added the title of Taizong I to Emperor Wenshu.

古文：赞曰：甚矣，至治之君不世出也！
现代文：赞语：政治最完美的盛世君主不出现，已经很久了！
English: Praise: It's been a long time since the most politically perfect reigning monarch appeared!

古文：禹有天下，传十有六王，而少康有中兴之业。
现代文：夏禹据有天下，传了十六代君王，仅只少康有复兴王朝的功业。
English: Xia Yu is said to have ruled the world and passed down 16 generations of emperors, and only Kang is credited with reviving the dynasty.

古文：汤有天下，传二十八王，而其甚盛者，号称三宗。
现代文：商汤拥有天下，下传二十八个君王，其中最兴盛的，仅号称 三宗 的三人。
English: Shangtang owns the world. Twenty-eight kings have been passed down, of which the most prosperous are only the three who are known as Sanzong.

古文：武王有天下，传三十六王，而成、康之治与宣之功，其余无所称焉。
现代文：周武王拥有天下，传位三十六任君王，只有成王、康王的文治与宣王的武功，其他的君主均无可称道。
English: King Zhou Wu owned the whole country. Thirty-six monarchs passed on the throne. Only King Cheng and King Kang were known for their civil administration and King Xuan for his military prowess. The other monarchs were not worthy of praise.

古文：虽《诗》、《书》所载，时有阙略，然三代千有七百余年，传七十余君，其卓然著见于后世者，此六七君而已。
现代文：尽管《诗经》、《尚书》的记载，不时有缺略之处，但夏、商、周三代占有天下一千七百余年，传承七十多位君主，其中卓绝显见于后世的，也就这六、七位君王罢了。
English: Although the records of the "Book of Songs" and "Song of Songs" are sometimes incomplete, the Xia, Shang and San dynasties occupied the world for more than 1,700 years, inheriting more than 70 monarchs, of which only six or seven kings were outstandingly prominent in later generations.

古文：呜呼，可谓难得也！
现代文：呵，盛世君主可谓难得呀！
English: Oh, it's rare to see a reigning monarch!

古文：唐有天下，传世二十，其可称者三君，玄宗、宪宗皆不克其终，盛哉，太宗之烈也！
现代文：唐朝拥有天下，传位二十人，其中值得称许的三个君主，玄宗、宪宗都不能善始善终；太宗的功业，显赫呵！
English: The Tang Dynasty owned the whole world, and twenty people were enthroned, including three monarchs worthy of praise. Neither Xuanzong nor Kenzong could have a good beginning and a good end; the work of Taizong was outstanding!

古文：其除隋之乱，比迹汤、武；致治之美，庶几成、康。
现代文：他消除隋朝的乱世，业绩可与商汤王、周武王并列；达到太平盛世的伟业，与西周的成王、康王相近。
English: He eliminated the chaotic era of the Sui Dynasty, and his performance was on a par with Shang Tang Wang and Zhou Wu Wang; he achieved the great cause of a peaceful prosperous era, and was similar to Cheng Wang and Kang Wang of West Zhou.

古文：自古功德兼隆，由汉以来未之有也。
现代文：自古以来功高德厚的君主，至少从汉朝以后未曾有过。
English: Since ancient times, there has never been a highly meritorious monarch, at least not since the Han Dynasty.

古文：至其牵于多爱，复立浮图，好大喜功，勤兵于远，此中材庸主之所常为。
现代文：至于他受制于爱欲失度，再兴佛徒，好大喜功，勤于出兵远方，这是中等材质、平庸君主常干的事。
English: As for him, he was constrained by love, lost his temper, rejuvenated the Buddhists, greatly appreciated the merits, and was diligent in sending troops to distant places. This is something that a mediocre monarch of average material would often do.

古文：然《春秋》之法，常责备于贤者，是以后世君子之欲成人之美者，莫不叹息于斯焉。
现代文：但《春秋》褒贬的准则，每每求全责备贤明有才的人，因此后世想成人之美的有德之士，没有不对此叹息的。
English: However, the standard of praise and blame in "Spring and Autumn" is to blame every wise and talented person, so there are no virtuous people who want to be beautiful in the future.

