古文：秦攻赵，苏子为谓秦王曰： 臣闻明王之于其民也，博论而技艺之，是故官无乏事而力不困；于其言也，多听而时用之，是故事无败业而恶不章。
现代文：秦国攻打赵国，苏秦对秦王说， 臣下听说贤明的君王对待他的臣民，普遍地进行教导并教给他们各种本领，因此官吏不耽误国家大事，民力不困乏；对于他们的言论，广泛听取随时采用，因此国家的事业就不会衰败，丑恶的东西就不会显露出来。
English: When Qin attacked Zhao, Su Qin said to the Qin king, "Our subjects have heard that the wise king treats his subjects well, teaches and teaches them all kinds of skills, so the officials do not delay the national affairs, and the people's strength is not exhausted; their words are widely listened to and adopted at any time, so the national cause will not decline, and the ugly things will not be revealed.

古文：臣愿王察臣之所谒，而效之于一时之用也。
现代文：臣下希望大王详察我所陈述的主张，而实现它在一定时机的效用。
English: It is the hope of my subjects that his Majesty will examine the proposition which I have set forth, and realize its utility at the proper time.

古文：臣闻怀重宝者，不以夜行；任大功者，不以轻敌。
现代文：臣下听说握有贵重宝器的人，不在夜间走路；承担大事的人，不会轻视敌人。
English: His subjects had heard that those who held precious treasures did not walk at night, and that those who undertook great tasks did not despise their enemies.

古文：是以贤者任重而行恭，知者功大则辞顺。
现代文：因此贤明的人责任重大而行为恭谨，聪明的人功劳很大而言辞和顺。
English: Therefore, a wise person has great responsibility and acts respectfully, and a clever person has great merit and speaks well.

古文：故民不恶其尊，而世不妬其业。
现代文：所以民众不憎恨他们的尊贵，世人不嫉妒他们的功她。
English: Therefore the people do not hate their princes, nor is the world jealous of their splendor.

古文：臣闻之：百倍之国者，民不乐后也；功业高世者，人主不再行也；力尽之民，仁者不用也；求得而反静，圣主之制也；功大而息民，用兵之道也。
现代文：臣下还听说：土地广大的国家，民众争先归附；功业盖世的人，国君不再重用他；力量耗尽的民众，仁义的人不使用他们；想要得到什么反而不去硬求，这是圣明君主一贯的做法；建立大的功业以后，使百姓休养生息，这是用兵的法则。
English: Subjects also heard: a country with vast land, the people are rushing to join; those who have made great achievements, the sovereign will no longer reuse them; the people who have exhausted their strength, the people who are benevolent and righteous do not use them; if you want to get something, do not ask for it, this is the consistent practice of the holy monarch; after establishing a great achievement, let the people rest and recuperate, this is the law of using soldiers.

古文：今用兵终身不休，力尽不罢，赵怒必于其己邑，赵仅存哉!然而四轮之国也，今虽得邯郸，非国之长利也。
现代文：如今长久用兵不知停止，民众力量用尽也不罢手，激怒赵国，一定要战服它，使它成为自己的一个邑，赵国的领土就会所存无凡呀然而赵国是个四面输泻通达的国家，如今即使得到邯郸，也不是国家的长远利益。
English: Nowadays, the use of soldiers for a long time does not know how to stop, the people's strength is exhausted and they will not stop, they will provoke Zhao Guo, they must fight it, make it their own town, and the territory of Zhao Guo will be extraordinary. However, Zhao Guo is a country that can be reached in all directions. Nowadays, even if it is won, it is not the long-term interest of the country.

古文：意者地广而不耕，民羸不休，又严之以刑罚，则虽从而不止矣。
现代文：料想，土地广大而不耕种，民众疲弱而不使他们休息，又用刑罚严格地约束他们，那么虽然服从了也不会长久地居住在这里。
English: For behold, the land is great and there is no cultivation in it, and the people are weak and there is no rest for the people, and it is strait for them with whips, and they will not dwell in it for long, though they obey.

古文：语曰： 战胜而国危者，物不断也。
现代文：俗话说： 打了胜仗而使国家处于危险境地，战事就会不断。
English: As the saying goes: If you win the war and put the country in danger, the war will continue.

古文：功大而权轻者，地不入也。 
现代文：功劳大而权力小，就不会取得土地。 
English: If you have great merit but little power, you won't get the land.

古文：故过任之事，父不得于子；无已之求，君不得于臣。
现代文：所以超过承担能力的事情，父亲不会从儿子那里得到什么；不停止地索取，君王也不会从臣子那里得到什么。
English: Therefore, a father will not take more than he can afford from his son, nor will a prince take more than he can afford from his vassal, nor will a prince take more than he can afford from his vassal.

古文：故微之为著者强，察乎息民之为用者伯，明乎轻之为重者王。 
现代文：因此使微小变为显着的人力量强大，了解使民休养生息是为了更好使用他们的人可以做霸主，明白使小权变为重权的人可以称王。 
English: Therefore, the person who makes the small become conspicuous is powerful, the person who understands that the people's recreation and livelihood are for the better use of them can be the overlord, and the person who understands that the small power becomes a heavy power can be called a king.

古文：秦王曰： 寡人案兵息民，则天下必为从，将以逆秦。 
现代文：秦王说： 如果寡人按兵不动，使民众休养生息，那么天下各国一定推行合纵之策，将用来对付秦国。 
English: The King of Qin said: If a few people do not move, so that the people can rest and recuperate, then all countries in the world will certainly implement the policy of cooperation, which will be used to deal with Qin.

古文：苏子曰： 臣有以知天下之不能为从以逆秦也。
现代文：苏秦说： 臣下有根据知道天下各国不能实观合纵来对付秦国。
English: Su Qin said, "Our vassals have reason to know that the countries of the world cannot deal with the Qin state in a pragmatic and conciliatory manner.

古文：臣以田单、如耳为大过也。
现代文：臣下认为田单、如耳的作为是特别错误的。
English: The vassal thought that Tanana's actions were particularly wrong.

古文：岂独田单、如耳大为过哉?
现代文：难道唯独田单、如耳的作为是特别错误的吗？
English: Is it only the actions of Tian Shan and Ru Ru Ru that are particularly wrong?

古文：天下之主亦尽过矣!夫虑收亡齐、罢楚、敝魏与不可知之赵，欲以穷秦折韩，臣以为至愚也。
现代文：天下各国的君主也完全错了他们谋划收罗破亡的齐国、疲惫的楚国、破败的魏国与存亡不可知的赵国，想用他们的力量使秦国处境困难、折服韩国，臣下认为他们已经愚蠢到极点了。
English: The monarchs of all the countries under heaven were also completely wrong. They planned to take over the ruined state of Qi, the exhausted state of Chu, the ruined state of Wei, and the unknown state of Zhao. They wanted to use their power to put Qin in a difficult situation and conquer Korea. Their subjects thought they were stupid to the extreme.

古文：夫齐威、宣，世之贤主也，德博而地广，国富而用民，将武而兵强。
现代文：齐国的威玉、宣王，是当代的贤明的君主，他们德高地广，国家富强而民众乐于被使用，将军勇武军队强大。
English: The majesties of Qi and Xuan Wang are contemporary wise monarchs. They are virtuous and broad-minded, the country is rich and strong and the people are happy to be used, the generals are brave and the army is strong.

古文：宣王用之，后富韩威魏，以南伐楚，西攻秦，为齐兵困于殽塞之上，十年攘地，秦人远迹不服，而齐为虚戾。
现代文：齐宣王使用他们，后来逼近韩国威胁魏国，向南讨伐楚国，向西进攻秦国，秦兵被齐兵围困在壳山、函谷关之上，十年间经常侵夺秦国土地，秦国人畏惧远避而始终不服，然而齐国却弄得国空人绝。
English: King Qi Xuan used them. Later, he approached Korea to threaten Wei, attacked Chu to the south, and attacked Qin to the west. Qin soldiers were besieged by Qi soldiers on top of Shell Mountain and Hanzhouguan. For ten years, they often invaded the land of Qin. The people of Qin were afraid of being far away and remained unconvinced. However, Qi had made the country empty of people.

古文：夫齐兵之所以破，韩、魏之所以仅存者，何也?
现代文：齐兵之所以被打败，韩国、魏国之所以所存无几，为什么？
English: Why were the Qi soldiers defeated, and why are there so few remains of Korea and Wei?

古文：是则伐楚攻秦，而后受其殃也。今富非有齐威、宣之余也，精兵非有富韩劲魏之库也，而将非有田单、司马之虑也。
现代文：这都是因为讨伐楚国进攻秦国，然后自己遭受了战争的祸殃，当今各国没有齐威王、宣王富有，军队也没有齐国逼近韩国、威胁魏国时精锐强大，并且将军也没有飕单、司马穰苴的谋略。
English: This is all because of the crusade of Chu to attack Qin, and then they themselves suffered the scourge of war. Today's countries do not have the wealth of King Qiwei and King Xuan, nor do they have the elite and powerful army when Qi approached Korea and threatened Wei, and the generals do not have the strategy of Xidan and Sima Yi.

古文：收破齐、罢楚、敝魏、不可知之赵，欲以穷秦折韩、臣以为至误。
现代文：所以收罗破亡的齐国、疲惫的楚国、破败的魏国、存亡不可知的赵国，想用他们的力量使秦国处于困境、折服韩国，臣下认为是最大的失误。
English: Therefore, his vassals considered it to be the biggest blunder that he wanted to use the power of Qi, exhausted Chu, ruined Wei, and Zhao, whose survival was uncertain, to put Qin in a difficult situation and subdue Korea.

古文：臣以从一不可成也。
现代文：臣下认为合纵为一是不能成功的。
English: The vassals thought that the merger could not succeed.

古文：客有难者，今臣有患于世。夫刑名之家，皆曰 白马非马 也。
现代文：有人责难我的看法，这是臣下如今最忧虑的。形名家们，都说 白马不是马。 
English: Someone is criticizing my opinion, which is what my subjects are most worried about these days. The masters of form are all saying that the white horse is not a horse.

古文：已如白马实马，乃使有白马之为也。此臣之所患也。
现代文：不如说自马的确是马。假如有自马非马之说，这就是臣下所忧虑的事情。
English: It is better to say that the horse is indeed a horse. If there is a saying that the horse is not a horse, this is what the vassals are worried about.

古文： 昔者秦人下兵攻怀，服其人，三国从之。赵奢、鲍佞将，楚有四人起而从之。
现代文： 从前秦国人发兵攻占怀地，使那里的人屈服，赵国、齐国、楚国本应该迫近攻打秦军。可是由于赵奢、鲍佞为将，只有楚国四个人起而攻击秦军。
English: Previously, the Qin people had sent troops to occupy Huaiji and subjugate the people there. Zhao, Qi and Chu should have approached and attacked the Qin army. However, since Zhao Cao and Bao Wei were the generals, only four people from Chu attacked the Qin army.

古文：临怀而不救，秦人去而不从。
现代文：面临怀地陷落而不援救，秦人退兵而不迫近攻击。
English: Faced with the fall of Huaiji, they did not rescue, and the Qin people retreated without approaching the attack.

古文：不识三国之憎秦而爱怀邪?
现代文：不知道三国是憎恨秦国而爱借怀地呢？
English: Don't they know that the three countries hate Qin and love to take advantage of it?

古文：忘其憎怀而爱秦邪?
现代文：还是憎恨怀地而爱惜秦国呢？
English: Or do you hate the motherland and cherish Qin?

古文：夫攻而不救，去而不从，是以三国之兵因，而赵奢、鲍佞之能也。
现代文：敌国攻打而不援救，敌兵撤退而不追击，因此三国的军队处境困难，但也可见赵奢、鲍佞料敌的才能。
English: The enemy attacked but did not rescue, and the enemy soldiers retreated but did not pursue. As a result, the armies of the three countries were in a difficult situation. However, the ability of Zhao Xiao and Bao Jun to outwit the enemy could also be seen.

古文：故裂地以败于齐。
现代文：从前五国联合起来打败齐国，瓜分它的土地。
English: Once upon a time, five countries united to defeat Qi and divide its land.

古文：田单将齐之良，以兵横行于中十四年，终身不敢设兵以攻秦折韩也，而驰于封内，不识从之一成恶存也。 
现代文：田单率领齐国精良的军队，在国内横行，十四年不出战，始终不敢率兵攻打秦国折服韩国，而驰骋在国内，不知道合纵为一成功的希望哪里存在。 
English: Tian Shan led the excellent army of Qi, rampant in the country, fourteen years without war, always dared not lead troops to attack Qin and conquer South Korea, and gallop in the country, I do not know where the hope of a successful merger exists.

古文：于是秦王解兵不出于境，诸侯休，天下安，二十九年不相攻。
现代文：在这种情况下，秦王息兵，不出国境，诸侯休战，天下安定，二十九年没有互相攻战。
English: Under these circumstances, the Qin emperor calmed down the soldiers, did not cross the border, the warlords called a truce, the country was stable, and there was no war between each other for 29 years.

