古文：起强圉赤奋若，尽著雍摄提格，凡二年。
现代文：起，止，一共两年。
English: It lasted for a total of two years, starting in the 12th year of the Jin Dynasty and ending in the 1st year of Emperor Jianwu.

古文：高宗明皇帝下建武四年
现代文：齐明帝建武四年
English: Emperor Jianwu of the Qiming Dynasty

古文：春，正月，大赦。
现代文：春季正月，大赦天下。
English: In the first month of spring, there will be a general amnesty.

古文：丙申，魏立皇子恪为太子。
现代文：丙申，北魏立皇子元恪为太子。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, Prince Yuan Jia became the crown prince.

古文：魏主宴于清徽堂，语及太子恂，李冲谢曰： 臣忝师傅，不能辅导。 
现代文：孝文帝在清徽堂欢宴，说到太子元恂，李冲谢罪说： 我愧为太子师傅，没有能教导好他，实在有罪。 
English: During Emperor Xiaowen's banquet at Qinghui Hall, Li Chongxie said, "I am ashamed to be the prince's teacher. I am truly guilty for not being able to teach him well."

古文：帝曰： 朕尚不能化其恶，师傅何谢也！ 
现代文：孝文帝说： 朕尚且不能教化他的劣恶，你做师傅的何必谢罪呢？ 
English: Emperor Xiaowen said, "I am still unable to reform his vile behavior, so why should you, as his teacher, forgive his sins?

古文：乙巳，魏主北巡。
现代文：乙巳，北魏孝文帝去北方巡视。
English: At this time, Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty went on a tour of the north.

古文：初，尚书令王晏为世祖所宠任，及上谋废郁林王，晏即欣然推奉。
现代文：早先，南齐尚书令王晏深得武帝的宠信，到了明帝谋划废去郁林王之时，王晏又立即欣然赞同，帮助进行。
English: In the early days, Emperor Wu was deeply fond of Wang Qian, who had been ordered by Emperor Qizang of the Southern Qi Dynasty. When Emperor Ming planned to abolish King Yulin, Wang Qian immediately agreed and helped to carry out the plan.

古文：郁林王已废，上与晏宴于东府，语及时事，晏抵掌曰： 公常言晏怯，今定何如？ 
现代文：郁林王被废去之后，明帝与王晏在东府宴饮，谈到时事之时，王晏拍着手掌说道： 您经常说我王晏胆怯，今天又认定我如何呢？ 
English: After King Yulin was deposed, Emperor Ming and Wang Xi feasted in Dongfu. When talking about current affairs, Wang Xi clapped his hands and said: You often say that I, Wang Xi, am timid. How do you judge me today?

古文：上即位，晏自谓佐命新朝，常非薄世祖故事。
现代文：明帝即位，王晏自以为对新朝有佐命之功，经常菲薄讥刺武帝在世时候的事情。
English: When Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, Wang Xi believed that he had done a great service to the new dynasty, and often mocked Emperor Wu for things that happened when he was alive.

古文：既居朝端，事多专决，内外要职，并用所亲，每与上争用人。
现代文：他担任了尚书令，居于朝臣中的最高地位，处理事情非常专横独断，朝廷内外的重要职位，都任用自己的亲信之徒，经常与明帝在用人方面发生争执。
English: He served as Shang Shuling, occupying the highest position among the courtiers, handling things very arbitrarily and arbitrarily, appointing his close confidants to important positions both inside and outside the imperial court, and often quarreling with Emperor Ming over the employment of people.

古文：上虽以事际须晏，而心恶之。
现代文：明帝虽然因举事之际，不得不依赖、重用王晏，但是内心却十分厌恶他。
English: Although Emperor Ming had to rely on and make heavy use of Wang Qi due to the situation, he really disliked him in his heart.

古文：尝料简世祖中诏，得与晏手敕三百馀纸，皆论国家事，又得晏启谏世祖以上领选事，以此愈猜薄之。
现代文：明帝曾经整理检查武帝的诏书文告等材料，得到武帝写给王晏的手敕三百多张，都是谈论国家的事情，又获得王晏劝谏武帝不要让自己主管诠选之事的启奏，因此越发猜忌、冷淡王晏了。
English: Emperor Ming had collated and examined materials such as Emperor Wu's imperial edict and proclamation, and obtained more than three hundred handwritten notes from Emperor Wu to Wang Xi, all of which were about state affairs. He also obtained Wang Xi's advice to Emperor Wu not to let himself be in charge of the interpretation of the matter. As a result, Wang Xi became increasingly suspicious and cold.

古文：始安王遥光劝上诛晏，上曰： 晏于我有功，且未有罪。 
现代文：始安王萧遥光劝明帝杀掉王晏，明帝说： 王晏于我有功劳，况且没有罪过，所以不能杀他。 
English: Shi'an King Xiao Yaoguang advised Emperor Ming to kill Wang Xuan. Emperor Ming said, "Wang Xuan has done me a great service, and moreover, he has committed no crime, so I cannot kill him.

古文：遥光曰： 晏尚不能为武帝，安能为陛下乎！ 
现代文：萧遥光又说： 王晏对武帝都不能忠心耿耿，怎么能忠于陛下呢？ 
English: Xiao Yaoguang also said: Wang Yao can't be loyal to Emperor Wu, how can he be loyal to His Majesty?

古文：上默然。
现代文：明帝听了默然无言。
English: The Emperor was speechless.

古文：上遣心腹左右陈世范等出涂巷，采听异言。
现代文：明帝派遣心腹陈世范等人到街头小巷去采听关于王晏的传言异闻。
English: Emperor Ming dispatched his confidant Chen Shifan and others to the streets and alleys to listen to rumors about Wang Yao.

古文：晏轻浅无防，意望开府，数呼相工自视，云当大贵；与宾客语，好屏人清闲。
现代文：王晏这个人轻率浅薄而没有防范，他想为自己开辟府署，几次传叫方术之士来查看风水，说是会大富大贵。王晏与宾客谈话时，总是喜欢把手下的杂人支开，然后与客人在清静中交谈。
English: Wang Yao was a rash and shallow person who did not take precautions. He wanted to open a government office for himself, and several times he sent messengers to feng shui experts to check the feng shui, saying that he would be very rich and noble. When talking with guests, Wang Yao always liked to separate the sundry people from his guests, and then talk to the guests in a quiet manner.

古文：上闻之，疑晏欲反，遂有诛晏之意。
现代文：明帝知道了这些情况之后，怀疑王晏想谋反，于是产生了杀掉王晏的念头。
English: After the Emperor Ming learned of these circumstances, he suspected Wang Yao of plotting a rebellion, and thus had the idea of killing Wang Yao.

古文：奉朝请鲜于文粲密探上旨，告晏有异志。
现代文：奉朝请鲜于文粲密探到了明帝的心思，就奏告了王晏有异图。
English: Bong Chao asked Wen Jianmi to probe the thoughts of Emperor Ming, and he reported to Wang Xi that he had a different plan.

古文：世范又启上云： 晏谋因四年南郊，与世祖故主帅于道中窃发。 
现代文：陈世范又启奏明帝： 王晏密谋借建武四年南郊祭天之机，与武帝过去的主帅在道中起事。 
English: Chen Shifan also revealed to Emperor Ming: Wang Xi conspired to use the opportunity of the Southern Suburbs Festival in the fourth year of Jianwu to get into trouble with Emperor Wudi's former coach.

古文：会虎犯郊坛，上愈惧。
现代文：正好遇上老虎闯入南郊祭坛，明帝愈加惧怕了。
English: Just as the tiger broke into the southern suburb altar, Ming Di became more and more afraid.

古文：未郊一日，有敕停行，先报晏及徐孝嗣。
现代文：郊祭前一日，明帝敕令不去南郊祭祀，派人先告诉了王晏和徐孝嗣。
English: On the day before the suburb festival, Emperor Ming decreed not to go to the southern suburb to offer sacrifices, and sent someone to tell Wang Qian and Xu Xiaozhi first.

古文：孝嗣奉旨，而晏陈 郊祀事大，必宜自力。 
现代文：徐孝嗣奉旨不言，而王晏则不同意明帝不去，陈述了自己的理由： 郊祀事关重大，圣上一定要亲自前去。 
English: Xu Xiaozhi was ordered to remain silent, while Wang Xi disagreed with Emperor Ming's decision not to go, stating his reasons: the suburb's religious services are very important, and the emperor must go in person.

古文：上益信世范之言。
现代文：这样一来，明帝越加相信陈世范所说的了。
English: As a result, Emperor Ming increasingly believed what Chen Shifan said.

古文：丙辰，召晏于华林省，诛之，并北中郎司马萧毅、台队主刘明达，及晏子德元、德和。
现代文：丙辰，明帝在华林省召见王晏，杀了他，一同诛死的还有北中郎司马萧毅、台队主刘明达，以及王晏的儿子王德元、王德和。
English: Emperor Ming summoned Wang Xuan in Hualin Province and killed him, together with the Northern Middle Manager Ma Xiaoyi, the team leader Liu Mingda, and Wang Xuan's sons Wang Deyuan and Wang Dehe.

古文：下诏云： 晏与毅、明达以河东王铉识用微弱，谋奉以为主，使守虚器。 
现代文：明帝发出诏令： 王晏与萧毅、刘明达因为河东王萧崐铉识见低下、能力微弱，于是阴谋奉他为君主，让他守虚位，而他们自己操纵国政。 
English: Emperor Ming issued a decree: Wang Xi and Xiao Yi and Liu Mingda, because the king of Hedong, Xiao Xi, had low insight and weak ability, so they plotted to serve him as a monarch, let him hold a false position, and they themselves manipulated state affairs.

古文：晏弟诩为广州刺史，上遣南中郎司马萧季敞袭杀之。
现代文：王晏的弟弟王诩担任广州刺史，明帝派遣南中郎司马萧季敞去突然杀掉了他。
English: Wang Yao's younger brother, Wang Yao, served as the governor of Guangzhou. Emperor Ming dispatched the Southern Middle Elder, Ma Xiaoqi, to go and suddenly killed him.

古文：季敞，上之从祖弟也。
现代文：萧季敞是明帝的从祖弟。
English: Xiao Qichan is the paternal half-brother of Emperor Ming.

古文：萧毅奢豪，好弓马，为上所忌，故因事陷之。
现代文：萧毅奢侈豪华，特别喜好弓箭、骏马，使明帝忌妒，因此借这件事陷害、杀害了他。
English: Xiao Yi was extravagant and luxurious, especially fond of bows and arrows and horses, which made the Ming Emperor jealous, so he used this incident to frame and kill him.

古文：河东王铉先以少年才弱，故未为上所杀。
现代文：河东王萧铉在早先因年龄小、才力弱，所以没有被明帝杀掉。
English: Due to his young age and weak talent, the King of Hedong, Xiao Yao, was not killed by the Ming Emperor.

古文：铉朝见，常鞠躬俯偻，不敢平行直视。
现代文：萧铉在朝见明帝时总是保持鞠躬姿势，弯腰低头，不敢平行直视。
English: Xiao Yao always kept a bowing posture when he saw Emperor Ming in the morning, bending down and not daring to look straight ahead.

古文：至是，年稍长，遂坐晏事免官，禁不得与外人交通。
现代文：至此时，年龄稍大了些，于是连坐王晏之事而被免官，并且被禁止与外面的人来往交接。
English: By this time, he was a little older, so he was dismissed from his post for even sitting on the throne, and he was forbidden to have contact with people outside.

古文：郁林王之将废也，晏从弟御史中丞思远谓晏曰： 兄荷世祖厚恩，今一旦赞人如此事；彼或可以权计相须，未知兄将来何以自立！
现代文：郁林王将被废黜之前，王晏的堂弟御史中丞王思远对王晏说： 兄长你承受武帝的厚恩，现在一旦帮助别人进行此事，在那个人来说或许可以暂时利用兄长，但不知兄长这样做了，将来别人何以自立呢？
English: Before King Yulin was to be deposed, Wang Xi's cousin, Wang Xuan, said to Wang Xi: "Brother, you have inherited the benevolence of Emperor Wu. Now, once you help others to carry out this matter, that person may be able to temporarily use your brother, but I don't know if your brother has done this, how can others become independent in the future?

古文：若及此引决，犹可保全门户，不失后名。 
现代文：如果在现在能拿起刀子自刎而死，还可以保全门户，不失后世英名。 
English: If you can pick up a knife and stab yourself to death now, you can still preserve the portal and not lose your reputation in the future.

古文：晏曰： 方啖粥，未暇此事。 
现代文：王晏不予理会，回答说： 我正在喝粥，无暇顾及此事。 
English: Wang Yao ignored this and replied, "I am drinking porridge and have no time to think about it."

古文：及拜骠骑将军，集会子弟，谓思远兄思征曰： 隆昌之末，阿戎劝吾自裁；若从其语，岂有今日！ 
现代文：明帝即位之后，拜王晏为骠骑将军，王晏把弟弟和儿子们召集在一起，对王思远的哥哥王思徵说： 隆昌之末，思远劝我自裁，如果听从了他的话语，那里能有今天呢？ 
English: After Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, he made Wang Zhe the general of the cavalry. Wang Zhe gathered his younger brother and sons together and said to Wang Siyuan's older brother Wang Siyuan: At the end of the Longchang period, Siyuan advised me to be self-disciplined. If I had listened to his words, where would we be today?

古文：思远遽应曰： 如阿戎所见，今犹未晚也！ 
现代文：王思远随声应道： 如按照小弟所说的那样去做，现在尚未为晚。 
English: Wang Siyuan said in response: If you do as your younger brother said, it's not too late.

古文：思远知上外待晏厚而内已疑异，乘间谓晏曰： 时事稍异，兄亦觉不？
现代文：王思远知道明帝外表上对待王晏十分优厚而内心则已经开始怀疑他了，就乘机对王晏说： 眼下事情逐渐有异样，兄长觉察与否？
English: Wang Siyuan knew that the Ming Emperor treated Wang Xuan very generously on the outside, but inside he had begun to doubt him, so he took the opportunity to say to Wang Xuan: At the moment, things are gradually different, is the elder brother aware or not?

古文：凡人多拙于自谋，而巧于谋人。 
现代文：人们大多拙于自谋而巧于谋算别人。 
English: Most people are bad at thinking for themselves, but good at thinking for others.

古文：晏不应。
现代文：王晏听后没有吭声。
English: Wang Yao did not make a sound after listening.

古文：思远退，晏方叹曰： 世乃有劝人死者！ 
现代文：王思远走了之后，王晏才叹息着说： 世上竟有劝人死的人。 
English: After Wang Shiyuan left, Wang Yao sighed and said: There are people in the world who advise people to die.

古文：旬日而晏败。
现代文：十日之后，王晏被杀。
English: Ten days later, Wang Yao was killed.

古文：上闻思远言，故不之罪，仍迁侍中。
现代文：明帝听说了王思远对王晏说过的话，所以没有定他的罪，并且升任他为侍中。
English: Emperor Ming heard what Wang Siyuan said to Wang Yao, so he did not convict him, and promoted him to the position of chamberlain.

古文：晏外弟尉氏阮孝绪亦知晏必败，晏屡至其门，逃匿不见。
现代文：王晏的表弟尉氏人阮孝绪也知道王晏必定会败落，所以王晏屡次到他家去，他都躲着不见。
English: Wang Yao's cousin and lieutenant, Ruan Xiaoxu, also knew that Wang Yao would certainly be defeated, so Wang Yao repeatedly went to his house, but he did not see him.

古文：尝食酱美，问知得于晏家，吐而覆之。
现代文：一次，他吃酱觉得味道很香，一问才知道是从王晏家得来的，因此立即吐了出来，并且把其余的全部倒掉。
English: Once, when he tasted the sauce, he thought it was very fragrant, but when he asked, he learned that it was from Wang Xuan's family, so he immediately vomited it out and poured out all the rest.

古文：乃晏败，人为之惧，孝绪曰： 亲而不党，何惧之有！ 
现代文：到了王晏被杀之后，人们都为阮孝绪担心，他却不以为然，说： 虽然是亲戚，但是并不是同党，有什么害怕的呢？ 
English: After Wang Hui was killed, people were worried about Nguyn Ho Th, but he did not think so, saying: Although he is a relative, he is not a member of the same party. What is there to be afraid of?

古文：卒免于罪。
现代文：最后他被免于定罪。
English: He was eventually acquitted.

古文：二月，壬戌，魏主至太原。
现代文：二月壬戌，北魏孝文帝到达太原。
English: In February, Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty arrived in Taiyuan.

古文：甲子，以左仆射徐孝嗣为尚书令，征虏将军萧季敞为广州刺史。
现代文：甲子，齐明帝任命左仆射徐孝嗣为尚书令，任命征虏将军萧季敞为广州刺史，分别代替王晏及其弟生前的职位。
English: As the eldest son, Emperor Qiming appointed his left-hand man Shi Xu Xiaozhi as Shang Shuling, and appointed the conscript general Xiao Jichang as Guangzhou Shuling, respectively, to replace Wang Xi and his younger brother's positions.

古文：癸酉，魏主至平城，引见穆泰、陆睿之党问之，无一人称枉者；时人皆服任城王澄之明。
现代文：癸酉，北魏孝文帝到达平城，提审了穆泰、陆睿之党，没有一个人说自己冤枉。当时，人们都认为任城王元澄公正、明察。
English: At that time, the Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowen arrived in Pingcheng and arraigned the party of Mutai and Lu Rui, and no one said that he was wrong. At that time, people all thought that the king of the city, Yuancheng, was fair and clear-sighted.

古文：穆泰及其亲党皆伏诛；赐陆睿死于狱，宥其妻子，徙辽西为民。
现代文：穆泰及其亲信党徒都伏法，陆睿被赐死狱中，他的妻子得到宽宥，被流放到辽西，成为平民。
English: Mutai and his trusted party members all surrendered to the law, and Lu Rui was sentenced to death in prison. His wife was pardoned and exiled to western Liaoning Province, where she became a commoner.

古文：初，魏主迁都，变易旧俗，并州刺史新兴公丕皆所不乐；帝以其宗室耆旧，亦不之逼，但诱示大理，令其不生同异而已。
现代文：早先，北魏孝文帝迁都洛阳，改变旧的风俗习惯，但是并州刺史新兴公元丕一点也不高兴这样做，孝文帝因为他在家族中年辈较长，因此就不强行让他改换，但是用大道理加以诱导劝说，以便使他不公开反对。
English: Earlier, Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty moved the capital to Luoyang and changed the old customs and habits, but he was not at all happy to do so. Emperor Xiaowen, because he was older in the family, did not force him to change, but used the great principle to induce persuasion so that he would not openly oppose it.

古文：及朝臣皆变衣冠，硃衣满坐，而丕独胡服于其间，晚乃稍加冠带，而不能修饰容仪，帝亦不强也。
现代文：到了朝中大臣们都改换了衣服帽子，每天上朝殿内朱衣满坐，但是惟独元丕还穿着胡服侧身其间，后来他才慢慢加上了帽子和带子，可是仍旧不修饰外表仪容，孝文帝也不强崐迫他。
English: By that time, all the ministers of the dynasty had changed their clothes and hats. Every day, the chancellery was full of people wearing red clothes. However, only Yuan Xuan was still wearing a brown suit. Later, he slowly added a hat and a belt. However, he still did not decorate his appearance, and Emperor Xiaowen did not force him.

古文：太子恂自平城将迁洛阳，元隆与穆泰等密谋留恂，因举兵断关，规据陉北。
现代文：太子元恂将从平城迁往洛阳之时，元隆同穆泰等人密谋策划，要把元恂留在平城，因此出兵堵住雁门东陉、西陉二关，阴谋占据关北恒、朔二州。
English: When Prince Motohiro moved from Pingcheng to Luoyang, Mototaka plotted with Mutai and others to keep Motohiro in Pingcheng, so he sent troops to block the East Gate of the Wild Goose Gate and the West Gate of the Wild Goose Gate, and plotted to occupy the North Gate of the Wild Goose Gate, and the South Gate of the Wild Goose Gate.

古文：丕在并州，隆等以其谋告之。丕外虑不成，口虽折难，心颇然之。
现代文：当时，元丕在并州，元隆等人把自己的计划告诉了他，元丕表面上忧虑事情难以成功，口头上虽然反对，但是心里却颇为赞同。
English: At that time, when Yuan Shao was annexing the state, Yuan Long and others told him about their plans. On the surface, Yuan Shao was worried that things would not be successful. Although he was against it verbally, he was quite in favor of it in his heart.

古文：及事觉，丕从帝至平城，帝每推问秦等，常令丕坐观。
现代文：等到穆泰等人叛乱之事败露之后，元丕随从孝文帝到了平城，孝文帝每次审问穆泰等人时，常常让元丕坐在旁边观看。
English: After Mutai's and others' rebellion was exposed, Geng Yao followed Emperor Xiaowen to Pingcheng. Every time Emperor Xiaowen interrogated Mutai and others, he often let Geng Yao sit by and watch.

古文：有司奏元业、元隆、元超罪当族，丕应从坐。
现代文：有的官员奏告元业、元隆、元超罪该满门诛斩，元丕也应该连坐治罪。
English: Some officials reported that the crimes of Yuan Ye, Yuan Long and Yuan Chao should be punished by beheading, and that Yuan Ye should also be sentenced to consecutive imprisonment.

古文：帝以丕当受诏许以不死，所免死为民，留其后妻、二子，与居于太原，杀隆、超、同产乙升，馀子徙敦煌。
现代文：孝文帝以元丕曾经在诏令中被许以不死，就免他一死，黜为平民，让他的后妻和两个儿子陪伴他居住在太原，而杀了元隆、元超及其同胞兄弟元乙升，其他的儿子流放敦煌。
English: Emperor Xiaowen spared the life of Yuan Shao, who had been promised immortality in a royal edict, and made him a commoner, allowing his second wife and two sons to accompany him to live in Taiyuan. However, he killed Yuan Long, Yuan Chao, and their brother Yuan Yisheng, and exiled the other sons to Dunhuang.

古文：初，丕、睿与仆射李冲、领军于烈俱受不死之诏。
现代文：原先，元丕、陆睿以及仆射李冲、领军于烈等人都受过皇帝的不死之诏。
English: Originally, Yuan Shao, Lu Rui, as well as his attendant Li Chong and the leader Yu Lie, had all received the emperor's deathless edict.

古文：睿既诛，帝赐冲、烈诏曰： 睿反逆之志，自负幽冥；违誓在彼，不关朕也。
现代文：陆睿被杀之后，孝文帝在赐给李冲、于烈的诏书中说： 虽然朕曾经诏许陆睿在任何情况下都可以免于一死，可是他叛逆谋反的阴谋，自己有负于鬼神，是他违背了曾经发过的誓言，所以他的死与朕没有关系。
English: After Lu Rui was killed, Emperor Xiaowen said in the edict given to Li Chong and Yu Lie: Although I once decreed that Lu Rui could be spared from death under any circumstances, but his treasonous conspiracy, he is responsible for ghosts and gods, he violated the oath he once issued, so his death has nothing to do with me.

古文：反逆既异馀犯，虽欲矜恕，如何可得？
现代文：他叛乱谋反既不同于其他诸犯，即使想要宽恕他，又怎么可能呢？
English: How is it possible to forgive him even if one wants to, since his rebellion and rebellion are different from those of other criminals?

古文：然犹不忘前言，听自死别府，免其孥戮。
现代文：然而朕犹不忘先前说过的话，所以让他自己在狱中自尽，并且免去他儿子的死罪。
English: However, I did not forget what I had said earlier, so I let him kill himself in prison and waived the death penalty for his son.

古文：元丕二子、一弟，首为贼端，连坐应死，特恕为民。
现代文：元丕的两个儿子、一个弟弟，最早策划叛乱，最先参与叛乱，理应连坐处死，朕特加恕免，只是黜为平民而已。
English: Yuan Xuan's two sons and one younger brother, who were the first to plan the rebellion and the first to participate in the rebellion, should have been sentenced to death, but they were only civilians.

古文：朕本期始终而徙自弃绝，违心乖念，一何可悲！
现代文：朕本来期望与他们和衷共济，始终相善，但是他们自己弃绝情义，违背良心，产生不轨之念，这是多么令人感到可悲的啊！
English: I had expected to be on good terms with them and always be on good terms with them, but how sad it is that they themselves reject the truth, violate their conscience, and have evil thoughts!

古文：故此别示，想无致怪。
现代文：所以，特意告诉你们一下，想必不会令你们奇怪吧？
English: So, just to let you know, I don't think you'll be surprised, will you?

古文：谋反之外，皎如白日耳。 
现代文：除了谋反这件事情之外，朕对他们的一片真心皎如白月，在在可鉴。 
English: In addition to this matter of plotting a rebellion, my sincerity towards them is as bright as the moon.

古文：冲、烈皆上表谢。
现代文：李冲、于烈都上表致谢。
English: Li Chong and Yu Ledu both went up to the table to express their thanks.

古文：臣光曰：夫爵禄废置，杀生予夺，人君所以驭臣之大柄也。是故先王之制，虽有亲、故、贤、能、功、贵、勤、宾，苟有其罪，不直赦也，必议于槐棘之下，可赦则赦，可宥则宥，可刑则刑，可杀则杀。轻重视情，宽猛随时。
现代文：臣司马光曰：给予或剥夺爵位、俸禄，掌管生杀予夺之权力，这是做皇帝的人驾驭臣下们的重要手段，所以先王们裁定的制度，虽然有亲、故、贤、能、功、勤、宾等所谓 八议 ，但是如果臣下犯有罪行，并不直接赦免，而一定要通过刑法部门来商议，可以赦免则赦免，可以宽大则宽大，可以判刑则判刑，可以诛死则诛死，惩罚的轻与重根据实情而定，处理的宽与严随时机而有所不同。
English: Sima Guang, a vassal, said: "Giving or depriving a peerage, a salary, and controlling the power to kill and capture is an important means for the emperor to control his vassals. Therefore, the system decided by the ancients, although there are relatives, ancestors, sages, talents, merits, diligence, guests and other so-called eight resolutions, but if a vassal commits a crime, it is not directly pardoned, but must be discussed through the criminal law department. If it can be pardoned, it is pardoned. If it can be lenient, it is lenient. If it can be sentenced, it is sentenced. If it

古文：故君得以施恩而不失其威，臣得以免罪而不敢自恃。
现代文：因此，国君得以施行仁恩而又不是威严，臣子们既可以得到免罪而又不敢以此自恃。
English: Therefore, the sovereign can exercise benevolence but not majesty, and the courtiers can be exonerated but do not dare to commit suicide.

古文：及魏则不然，勋贵之臣，往往豫许之以不死；使彼骄而触罪，又从而杀之。
现代文：到了北魏却不是这样了，对于功勋显贵的大臣，往往预先许诺以终生不被处死，但是其人因此而自骄，触法犯罪，则又被处死。
English: By the time of the Northern Wei Dynasty, however, this was no longer the case. For ministers of great merit, it was often promised in advance that they would not be executed for the rest of their lives, but if they became arrogant and broke the law, they were executed.

古文：是以不信之令诱之使陷于死地也。
现代文：这正是以言而无信的允诺诱惑其人，使他陷于死地。
English: This is what happens when a man is lured to his death by an empty promise.

古文：刑政之失，无此为大焉！
现代文：刑法政治的失误过错，没有比这更大的了。
English: There can be no greater mistake in the politics of criminal law.

古文：是时，代乡旧族，多与泰等连谋，唯于烈一族无所染涉，帝由是益重之。
现代文：在这时候，平城的鲜卑族人，多数与穆泰等人一起策划，唯独于烈没有丝毫参涉，因此孝文帝对他更加器重了。
English: At this time, most of the Xianbei people in Pingcheng plotted with Mu Tai and others, but Yu Lie did not have the slightest involvement, so Emperor Xiaowen was more concerned about him.

古文：帝以北方酋长及侍子畏暑，听秋朝洛阳，春还部落，时人谓之 雁臣 。
现代文：孝文帝考虑到北方的酋长以及在身边侍奉自己的王子们害怕暑热，所以就任他们秋天来到洛阳，春天再返回各自的部落去，当时的人们称他们为 雁臣 。
English: Emperor Xiaowen took into account that the northern chiefs and the princes who served him around him were afraid of the heat, so they came to Luoyang in the autumn and returned to their respective tribes in the spring. At that time, people called them "Ganchen."

古文：三月，己酉，魏主南至离石。叛胡请降，诏宥之。
现代文：三月己酉，北魏孝文帝到达离石，反叛的胡人请求投降，孝文帝诏令宽恕了他们。
English: In March, Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty arrived in Liaoning. The rebellious Hu people asked for surrender, and Emperor Xiaowen pardoned them by imperial edict.

古文：夏，四月，庚申，至龙门，遣使祀夏禹。
现代文：夏季，四月，庚申，孝文帝到达龙门，派遣使者去祭祀夏禹。
English: In the summer, in April, Emperor Gaoshen and Emperor Xiaowen arrived at Longmen and sent an envoy to worship Xia Yu.

古文：癸亥，至蒲阪，祀虞舜。
现代文：癸亥，孝文帝到达蒲坂，祭祀虞舜。
English: In the year of the boar, Emperor Xiaowen arrived in the town of Pusan and offered a sacrifice to the gods.

古文：辛未，至长安。
现代文：辛未，孝文帝到达长安。
English: Soon after, Emperor Xiaowen arrived in Chang'an.

古文：魏太子恂既废，颇自悔过。
现代文：北魏太子元恂被废之后，颇为悔恨自己过去的过失。
English: After the dethronement of the Northern Wei princeling Yuan Shao, he was quite remorseful for his past mistakes.

古文：御史中尉李彪密表恂复与左右谋逆，魏主使中书侍郎邢蛮与咸阳王禧，奉诏赍椒酒诣河阳，赐恂死，敛以粗棺、常服，瘗于河阳。
现代文：御史中尉李彪秘密上表孝文帝，告发说元恂又与手下的人谋划叛逆，孝文帝派遣中书侍郎邢峦和咸阳王元禧奉着自己的圣旨，带着用椒子浸制的酒去河阳，赐元恂死，用粗劣的棺材和平常衣服装敛了他，埋葬在河阳。
English: Li Biao, the lieutenant of imperial history, secretly reported to Emperor Xiaowen that Yuan Shikai and his subordinates were plotting a rebellion. Emperor Xiaowen dispatched the Chinese scribe Langyi and the salty yang king Yuan Xiyi to carry out his sacred will, take the wine soaked in pepper to Heyang, grant Yuan Shikai's death, dress him in a shoddy coffin and ordinary clothes, and bury him in Heyang.

古文：癸未，魏大将军宋明王刘昶卒于彭城，追加九锡，葬以殊礼。
现代文：癸未，北魏的大将军宋明王刘昶死于彭城，以特别的礼仪安葬。
English: In the meantime, the Northern Wei general Song Ming Wang Liu Wei died in Pengcheng and was buried with special etiquette.

古文：五月，己丑，魏主东还，泛渭入河。
现代文：五月，己丑，北魏孝文帝东行返回，乘船从渭河进入黄河。
English: In May, Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty, returning from an eastward journey, entered the Yellow River from the Min River by boat.

古文：壬辰，遣使祀周文王于车，武王于镐。
现代文：壬辰，孝文帝派遣使者分别在丰、镐两处祭祀周文王和周武王。
English: In Imjin, Emperor Xiaowen sent emissaries to offer sacrifices to King Zhouwen and King Zhouwu in Feng and Handan, respectively.

古文：六月，庚申，还洛阳。
现代文：六月，庚申，孝文帝回到洛阳。
English: In June, Emperor Gaoshen and Emperor Xiaowen returned to Luoyang.

古文：壬戌，魏发冀、定、瀛、相、济五州兵马二十万，将入寇。
现代文：壬戌，北魏发动冀、定、瀛、相、济等五州的二十万大军，即将入侵南齐。
English: At that time, the Northern Wei Dynasty launched a 200,000-strong army from the five states of Ji, Ding, Han, Sang and Jie, and was about to invade Nanqi.

古文：魏穆泰之反也，中书监魏郡公穆罴与之通谋，赦后事发，削官爵为民。
现代文：北魏穆泰谋反时，中书监魏郡公穆罴曾与他一起策划，赦免之后事情被发现，从宽被削去官职和爵位，黜为平民。
English: When the Northern Wei Mutai plotted a rebellion, the Chinese book supervisor Wei County Gong Muxuan had planned with him. After the pardon, the matter was discovered, and he was stripped of his official position and peerage and reduced to a commoner.

古文：罴弟司空亮以府事付司马慕容契，上表自劾，魏主优诏不许；亮固请不已，癸亥，听亮逊位。
现代文：穆罴的弟弟担任司空的穆亮把府署中的事务全部交给了司马慕容契，上表孝文帝自行弹劾，孝文帝下诏抚慰，不许他辞职，但是穆亮再三请求，癸亥，孝文帝只好同意穆亮辞去官职。
English: Mu Liang, Muxun's younger brother, who served as Sikyong, handed over all the affairs of the prefectural office to Sima Murongqi. Emperor Xiaowen himself impeached Muxun, and Emperor Xiaowen issued an edict of consolation, forbidding him to resign. However, after Muxun's repeated requests, Emperor Xiaowen had to agree to Muxun's resignation.

古文：丁卯，魏分六师以定行留。
现代文：丁卯，北魏把军队分为六部分，以便决定哪些参加南征，哪些留守。
English: Dingwu, the Northern Wei divided the army into six parts in order to decide which would participate in the Southern Expedition and which would stay behind.

古文：秋，七月，甲午，魏立昭仪冯氏为皇后。
现代文：秋季七月，北魏册立昭仪冯氏为皇后。
English: In the autumn of July, the Northern Wei Dynasty inscribed Zhaoyi Feng as the empress.

古文：后欲母养太子恪；恪母高氏自代如洛阳，暴卒于共县。
现代文：冯皇后想做太子元恪的母亲，亲自来抚养他。元恪的生母高氏从代都来洛阳时，突然死于共县。
English: Empress Feng wanted to be the mother of Prince Yuan and raise him herself. Yuan's birth mother Gao died suddenly in Gongxian County when she was visiting Luoyang.

古文：戊辰，魏以穆亮为征北大将军、开府仪同三司、冀州刺史。
现代文：戊辰，北魏任命穆亮为征北大将军、开府仪同三司、冀州刺史。
English: Wu Chen, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Mu Liang as the general of the Northern Expeditionary Army, Kaifu ceremony with three divisions, and Jizhou engraving history.

古文：八月，丙辰，魏诏中外戒严。
现代文：八月，丙辰，北魏即将南伐，宣布内外戒严。
English: In August, when the Northern Wei Dynasty was about to march south, martial law was declared both at home and abroad.

古文：壬戌，魏立皇子愉为京兆王，怿为清河王，怀为广平王。
现代文：壬戌，北魏封立皇子元愉为京兆王，元怿为清河王，元怀为广平王。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, Yuan Yu, the prince of the Northern Wei Dynasty, was the King of Jingzhao, Yuan Yu was the King of Qinghe, and Yuan Huai was the King of Guangping.

古文：追尊景皇所生王氏为恭太后。
现代文：明帝追尊景皇生母王氏为恭太后。
English: Emperor Ming pursued Emperor Chongzong's birth mother Wang to become Empress Dowager Gong.

古文：甲戌，魏讲武于华林园；庚辰，军发洛阳。
现代文：甲戌，北魏孝文帝在华林园讲习武事。庚辰，北魏从洛阳发兵，进行南征。
English: Gao Jian, Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowen studied martial arts in Hualin Garden. Geng Chen, Northern Wei sent troops from Luoyang to march south.

古文：使吏部尚书任城王澄居守；以御史中丞李彪兼度支尚书，与仆射李冲参治留台事。
现代文：孝文帝使吏部尚书任城王元澄留守洛阳，让御史中丞李彪兼任度支尚书，并且让他与仆射李冲一道参与掌管留守事宜。
English: Emperor Xiaowen assigned the clerk, Shang Shu, to stay in Luoyang as the king of the city, Yuan Cheng; he also assigned the chief historian, Li Biao, to stay in Luoyang as the chief clerk; and he and his servant, Li Chong, participated in the management of the matters of staying in Luoyang.

古文：假彭城王勰中军大将军，勰辞曰： 亲疏并用，古之道也。
现代文：孝文帝又授与彭城王元勰中军大将军的官衔，元勰辞而不受，对孝文帝说： 亲疏崐远近一并用之，这是古代留下来的治国之道。
English: Emperor Xiaowen also awarded Pengcheng Wang Yuanjun the rank of general of the Chinese army. Yuanjun did not accept the resignation, and said to Emperor Xiaowen: "Be close and distant at the same time, this is the ancient way of governing the country."

古文：臣独何人。
现代文：我是何人呢？
English: How many am I?

古文：频烦宠授！
现代文：频繁地劳烦圣上施授恩宠，实在于心不安。
English: To frequently trouble the Lord to bestow grace is really a sign of uneasiness.

古文：昔陈思求而不允，愚臣不请而得，何否泰之相远也！ 
现代文：过去陈思王曹植上表魏文帝，自请攻打吴、蜀，魏文帝不答应。愚臣不请而自得，与陈思王相比较，为何命运的顺利和不顺利相差的如此远呢？ 
English: In the past, Chen Si Wang Cao Zhi went to Wei Wen Emperor and asked for permission to attack Wu and Shu, but Wei Wen Emperor did not agree. The foolish minister did not ask for permission and was pleased with himself. Compared with Chen Si Wang, why is the difference between the success and failure of fate so far away?

古文：魏主大笑，执勰手曰： 二曹以才名相忌，吾与汝以道德相亲。 
现代文：孝文帝听了之后大笑不已，拉着元勰的手说道： 曹丕、曹植兄弟二人以才气而互相忌妒，我与你则以道德而互相亲密。 
English: After listening, Emperor Xiaowen laughed uncontrollably, took Yuan Zheng by the hand and said: Cao Zheng and Cao Zhi are two brothers who are jealous of each other because of their talents, while you and I are close to each other because of our morality.

古文：上遣军主、直阁将军胡松助北襄城太守成公期戍赭阳，军主鲍举助西汝南、北义阳二郡太守黄瑶起戍舞阴。
现代文：齐明帝派遣军主、直阁将军胡松帮助北襄城太守成公期戍守赭阳，军主鲍举协助西汝南、北义阳二郡太守黄瑶起防守舞阴。
English: Emperor Qiming sent the military commander, General Zhogu Hu Song to help the Northern Xiangcheng Daju Cheng Gong to defend Fenyang, and the military commander Bao Jiu to assist the Southern Xiangcheng and Northern Yiyang Daju Huang Qi to defend Wuyin.

古文：魏以氐帅杨灵珍为南梁州刺史。
现代文：北魏任命氐族首领杨灵珍为南梁州刺史。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty appointed the leader of the Yi people, Yang Lingzhen, as the crown prince of Southern Liangzhou.

古文：灵珍举州来降，送其母及子于南郑以为质，遣其弟婆罗阿卜珍将步骑万馀袭魏武兴王杨集始，杀其二弟集同、集众；集始窘急，请降。
现代文：杨灵珍率全州之部来投降南齐，并且把他的母亲以及儿子送到南郑作为人质，又派遣他的弟弟杨婆罗阿卜珍带领步兵、骑兵一万余众袭击北魏武兴王杨集始，杀掉了杨集始的两个弟弟杨集同和杨集众，杨集始在危急无奈的情况之下请求投降。
English: Yang Lingzhen led the whole state to surrender to Nanqi, and sent his mother and son to Nanzheng as hostages. He also sent his younger brother Yang Bolo Abzhen to lead more than 10,000 infantry and cavalry to attack the Northern Wei Wuxing King Yang Jizhi. He killed Yang Jizhi's two younger brothers, Yang Jidong and Yang Jizhi. Yang Jizhi pleaded for surrender in a desperate situation.

古文：九月，丁酉，魏主以河南尹李崇为都督陇右诸军事，将兵数万讨之。
现代文：九月丁酉，北魏孝文帝任命河南尹李崇为都督陇右诸军事，命令他统领数万兵力讨伐杨灵珍。
English: In September, Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Yin Li Chong of Henan Province as the military governor of Guizhou, and ordered him to lead tens of thousands of troops to fight against Yang Lingzhen.

古文：初，魏迁洛阳，荆州刺史薛真度劝魏主先取樊、邓。
现代文：当初，北魏迁都洛阳，荆州刺史薛真度劝孝文帝首先占取樊、邓两地。
English: At the beginning, the Northern Wei Dynasty moved the capital to Luoyang, and the Jingzhou prince, Xue Zhendu, advised Emperor Xiaowen to first occupy the two places of Yu and Deng.

古文：真度引兵寇南阳，太守房伯玉击败之。
现代文：薛真度率兵攻打南阳，南齐的南阳太守房伯玉击败了他。
English: Xue Zhendu led his troops to attack Nanyang. Nanyang's grand vizier Bo Yu defeated him.

古文：魏主怒，以南阳小郡，志必灭之，遂引兵向襄阳；彭城王勰等三十六军前后相继，众号百万，吹脣沸地。
现代文：北魏孝文帝见薛真度战败，勃然生怒，以为南阳不过区区一小郡，所以立志要灭掉它，于是就率兵向襄阳进发，彭城王元勰等三十六路军马前后相继，号称百万大军，浩浩荡荡，吹气震动大地。
English: When Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty saw that Xue Zhendu had been defeated, he flew into a rage. He thought that Nanyang was just a small county, so he decided to exterminate it. So he led his army to Yangyang. Thirty-six army horses, including Wang Yuanqi of Pengcheng, followed one after another. It was known as a million-strong army. It was huge, and the wind shook the earth.

古文：辛丑，魏主留诸将攻赭阳，自引兵南下；癸卯，至宛，夜袭其郛，克之。
现代文：辛丑，孝文帝留下诸路将帅攻打赭阳，自己领兵南下，于癸卯，到达宛城，乘夜攻打宛城外城，一举而攻克。
English: In a cruel twist of fate, Emperor Xiaowen left his generals to attack Fenyang. He led his troops to the south and arrived at Wancheng in Shabu. He attacked the outer city of Wancheng at night and conquered it in one fell swoop.

古文：房伯玉婴内城拒守。魏主遣中书舍人孙延景谓伯玉曰： 我今荡壹六合，非如向时冬来春去。不有所克，终不还北。
现代文：房伯玉环守内城而顽抗拒守，孝文帝派遣中书舍人孙延景为使者去对房伯玉说： 我如今要荡平统一天下，不会再象上一次那样冬天来春天去，这次如果不能克敌取胜，誓死不率师北返。
English: Emperor Xiaowen sent Sun Yanjing, a scholar from the Chinese Academy of Sciences, as an emissary to Fang Bo-yu, who was guarding the inner city and stubbornly refused to defend it. He said to Fang Bo-yu: I am now going to unify the country, I will not come to the spring again in winter as I did last time. If I cannot defeat the enemy and win this time, I will return to the north.

古文：卿此城当我六龙之首，无容不先攻取；远期一年，近止一月。
现代文：你的这座城正在我的战车之前，不得不首先攻取，远则一年，近则只一月，一定要占领。
English: This city of yours is just ahead of my chariot, it must be captured first, if it is far away, it will take a year, if it is near, it will take only a month, it must be occupied.

古文：封侯、枭首，事在俯仰，宜善图之！
现代文：你是愿意归顺我朝以换得封侯加爵呢？还是执意顽抗到底，落个身首异处的下场呢？
English: Are you willing to submit to my reign in exchange for the title of Marquis and Count? Or are you determined to resist to the end and end up in a different place?

古文：且卿有三罪，今令卿知：卿先事武帝，蒙殊常之宠，不能建忠致命而尽节于其仇，罪一也；顷年薛真度来，卿伤我偏师，罪二也；今鸾辂亲临，不面缚麾下，罪三也。 
现代文：何去何从，俯仰之间即可决定，你应该好好地考虑一下。而且，你有三条罪状，现在说出来让你知道：你先前奉事武帝，得到了武帝特别的宠信，然而你却不能舍命尽忠而丧失节操，效力于他的仇人，这是罪状之一。近年薛真度奉我的旨令来讨伐，你给他们造成严重创伤，这是罪状之二。现在，我舆驾亲临，你不自缚投降，反而负隅顽抗，这是罪状之三。 
English: You can decide where to go from here, and you should think about it carefully. Moreover, you have three charges, now let it be known to you: You previously served Emperor Wu, and received the special favor of Emperor Wu. However, you cannot be loyal to his enemies without sacrificing your life. This is one of the charges. In recent years, Xue Zhendu has been crusading at my behest, and you have caused serious trauma to them. This is the second charge. Now, I am personally coming, you do not bind yourself to surrender, but instead you stubbornly resist. This is the third charge.

古文：伯玉遣军副乐稚柔对曰： 承欲攻围，期于必克。
现代文：房伯玉也派遣军副乐稚柔去对孝文帝说： 承蒙你们来围攻本城，并且期望一定攻克。
English: Fang Bo-yu also sent his deputy, Le Zhi Rong, to say to Emperor Xiaowen, "Thank you for besieging our city, and I hope you will conquer it."

古文：卑微常人，得抗大威，真可谓获其死所！
现代文：我是一个地位卑微的平常之人，能得以与威严的陛下抗衡，真可以说是获得了一个理想的死亡之所。
English: I am a humble, ordinary person, and to be able to compete with the majesty of His Majesty, I can truly say that I have obtained an ideal place to die.

古文：外臣蒙武帝采拔，岂敢忘恩！
现代文：外臣我承蒙武帝提拔重用，岂敢忘记大恩呢？
English: Foreign Minister, I have been promoted and put to good use by Emperor Wu. How dare I forget this great favor?

古文：但嗣君失德，主上光绍大宗，非哺副亿兆之深望，抑亦兼武皇之遗赦；是以区区尽节，不敢失坠。
现代文：但是继位的君主没有仁德，因而我主上作为高帝第三子而即位，不但符合百姓之厚望，而且也兼合武帝之遗愿。所以，我只能竭力尽忠，不敢有所失误。
English: However, there is no benevolence in the succeeding monarch, so my lord's ascension to the throne as the third son of Emperor Gao not only meets the high expectations of the people, but also fulfills the last wish of Emperor Wu. Therefore, I can only do my best to be loyal and dare not make any mistakes.

古文：往者北师深入，寇扰边民，辄厉将士以修职业。返己而言，不应垂责。 
现代文：上次你们的军队深入我边境，骚扰掠夺我边民，我只好命令将士们加以抵抗，这也是尽职尽责，如果你能反过来想一想，就不应该对我加以指责。 
English: The last time your troops entered our border and harassed and plundered our people, I had to order my soldiers to resist. This is also due diligence, and if you think about it, you should not blame me.

古文：宛城东南隅沟上有桥，魏主引兵过之。伯玉使勇士数人，衣斑衣，戴虎头帽，伏于窦下，突出击之，魏主人马俱惊；召善射者原灵度射之，应弦而毙，乃得免。
现代文：宛城东南角的河沟上有一座桥，北魏孝文帝率兵从桥上经过，房伯玉预先指使几个勇士，身穿带有斑纹的衣服，头戴虎头帽，埋伏在桥底下，这时突然袭击，使得孝文帝的人马大吃一惊，急忙叫射箭能手原灵度用箭射他们，箭无虚发，无不应弦而毙，方才免于一难。
English: There is a bridge over the river ditch in the southeast corner of Wancheng. The Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowen led his troops across the bridge. In advance, Fang Bo-yu ordered several warriors, dressed in striped clothes and wearing tiger hats, to lie in wait under the bridge. At this time, there was a sudden attack, which took Emperor Xiaowen's men by surprise. He hurriedly called an expert archer to shoot them with an arrow. The arrow did not miss, it did not miss the string, and they were saved from a difficult situation.

古文：李崇槎山分道，出氐不意，表里袭之；群氐皆弃杨灵珍散归。灵珍之众减太半，崇进据赤土。
现代文：孝文帝派李崇去征讨杨灵珍，李崇在山上砍斫树木，开道而行，里外夹击，打了个措手不及，使得那些氐人纷纷丢下杨灵珍而溃散逃命，杨灵珍的人马一下子减去了大半，于是李崇进而占领了赤土，杨灵珍派遣堂弟杨灵建驻守龙门，而自己则率领一万精锐兵力驻守鹫硖。
English: Emperor Xiaowen sent Li Chong to recruit Yang Lingzhen. Li Chong cut down the oak trees on the mountain, walked along the open road, pinched inside and outside, and was caught off guard, causing those eunuchs to abandon Yang Lingzhen and scatter to escape. Yang Lingzhen's manpower was suddenly reduced by half, so Li Chong further occupied the red soil. Yang Lingzhen sent his cousin Yang Lingjian to guard Longmen, while he himself led ten thousand elite troops to guard Yao.

古文：灵珍遣从弟建帅五千人屯龙门，自帅精勇一万屯鹫硖；龙门之北数十里中，伐树塞路；鹫硖之口，积大木，聚礌石，临崖下之，以拒魏兵。
现代文：杨灵建命部下砍伐大树，堵塞在路上，把龙门往北数十里之内的路全堵了，使得李崇的人马无法行动。而杨灵珍则在鹫硖口两边高崖上堆积了许多滚石，以防拒北魏军队通过。
English: Yang Lingjian ordered his subordinates to cut down large trees and block the roads, completely blocking the road within tens of miles north of Longmen, making Li Chong's men unable to move. Yang Lingzhen piled up many rolling stones on the cliffs on both sides of the pass to prevent the Northern Wei army from passing.

古文：崇命统军慕容拒帅众五千从它路夜袭龙门，破之。
现代文：李崇命令统军慕容拒带领五千人马从另外一条路进去，夜袭龙门，破敌成功。
English: Li Chong ordered the united army of Murong to lead five thousand horses from another road, attack the Dragon Gate at night, and successfully defeat the enemy.

古文：崇自攻鹫硖，灵珍连战败走；俘其妻子，遂克武兴。
现代文：李崇自己率众攻打鹫硖，杨灵珍连战而败，逃走活命，李崇俘获了他的妻儿，于是攻克了武兴。
English: Li Chong himself led the crowd to attack and beat Zhai, Yang Lingzhen was defeated in a series of battles and fled alive, Li Chong captured his wife and child, and then conquered Wu Xing.

古文：梁州刺史阴广宗、参军郑猷等将兵救灵珍；崇进击，大破之，斩杨婆罗阿卜珍，生擒猷等；灵珍奔还汉中。
现代文：南齐梁州刺史阴广宗、参军郑猷等人率兵来援救杨灵珍，李崇迎而击之，大获全胜，杀死了杨婆罗阿卜珍，活捉了郑猷等人，杨灵珍逃回汉中。
English: Southern Qi Liangzhou stabbed Shi Yin Guangzong, joined the army Zheng Yao and other soldiers to rescue Yang Lingzhen, Li Chong welcomed him and hit him, won a complete victory, killed Yang Bharo Abzhen, captured Zheng Yao and others alive, Yang Lingzhen fled back to Hanzhong.

古文：魏主闻之，喜曰： 使朕无西顾之忧者，李崇也。 
现代文：北魏孝文帝听到捷报，高兴地说： 使朕解除西顾之忧的是李崇。 
English: When Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty heard the good news, he said happily, "It was Li Chong who relieved my worries about the West."

古文：以崇为都督梁、秦二州诸军事、梁州刺史，以安集其地。
现代文：孝文帝任命李崇为都督梁秦二州诸军事、梁州刺史，以便安定这个地方。
English: Emperor Xiaowen appointed Li Chong as the military governor of Liang Qin Erzhou and the governor of Liangzhou in order to stabilize the region.

古文：丁未，魏主发南阳，留太尉咸阳王禧等攻之。
现代文：丁未，北魏孝文帝从南阳出发，留下太尉咸阳王元禧等人继续攻打该处。
English: Ding Wei, Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty, set out from Nanyang, leaving Lieutenant Xianyang Wang Yuanxi and others to continue to attack the place.

古文：己酉，魏主至新野，新野太守刘思忌拒守。
现代文：己酉，孝文帝到达新野，南齐新野太守刘思忌据城抵抗。
English: When Emperor Jizong and Emperor Xiaowen arrived in Nyno, Liu Siyi, the governor of Nyno, led the resistance.

古文：冬，十月，丁巳，魏军攻之，不克，筑长围守之，遣人谓城中曰： 房伯玉已降，汝何为独取糜碎！ 
现代文：冬季，十月，丁巳，北魏军队攻打新野，但是不能攻克，就修筑工事，加以围困，并且派人对城中守军说： 房伯玉已经投降了，你们为什么还不献城出降，欲想落个粉身碎骨的下场呢？ 
English: In winter, October, Ding Si, the Northern Wei army attacked Xinyo, but could not conquer it, so they built construction, besieged it, and sent people to the defenders in the city to say: Fangboyu has surrendered, why haven't you surrendered the city, do you want to end up crushed?

古文：思忌遣人对曰： 城中兵食犹多，未暇从汝小虏语也！ 
现代文：刘思忌派人回答说： 城中的兵力和粮食还很多，现在我们还忙得没有时间跟你们这些小小的胡虏们说话。 
English: Liu Siqi sent a man to reply: "There are still a lot of troops and grain in the city, and now we are too busy to have time to talk to you little hooligans.

古文：魏右军府长史韩显宗将别军屯赭阳，成公期遣胡松引蛮兵攻其营，显宗力战破之，斩其裨将高法援。
现代文：北魏右军府长史韩显宗率领另外一支军队驻守在赭阳，南齐北襄城太守成公期派遣胡松带领蛮兵去攻打韩显宗的营地，韩显宗率部力战，击败了胡松的进攻，杀了胡松的副将高法援。
English: Han Xianzong, the head of the Northern Wei right wing army, led another army stationed in Fenyang. In the Southern Qi Northern Xiangcheng Taishou Chenggong sent Hu Song to lead the barbarians to attack Han Xianzong's camp. Han Xianzong led the troops to fight hard, defeated Hu Song's attack, and killed Hu Song's deputy general Gao Fa Yuan.

古文：显宗至新野，魏主谓曰： 卿破贼斩将，殊益军势。
现代文：韩显宗到新野，孝文帝对他说： 你击败贼敌，斩其将领，大长了我军的威风气势。
English: When Han Xianzong arrived in Nyno, Emperor Xiaowen said to him, "You have defeated the enemy bandits and killed their generals, and our army has become more powerful.

古文：朕方攻坚城，何为不作露布？ 对曰： 顷闻镇南将军王肃获贼二、三人，驴马数匹，皆为露布；臣在东观，私常哂之。
现代文：朕正在攻打新野这座坚城，你为什么不把捷报写于帛布之上，以高竿树之，以增加我军的斗志，动摇城中守军的信心呢？ 韩显宗回答说： 过去听说镇南将军王肃才俘获敌贼二三人、驴马几匹，就书帛高挂，我当时正在宫中任著作郎，私下里常常讥笑王肃的这一做法。
English: I am attacking the strong city of Niiyo. Why don't you write the victory report on a piece of cloth and hang it on a tall tree to increase the fighting spirit of our army and shake the confidence of the defenders in the city? Han Xianzong replied: In the past, I heard that the Jinan general Wang Su only captured two or three enemy thieves and several donkeys and horses and hung them on the bookshelf. At that time, I was working as a writer in the palace, and I often ridiculed Wang Su's practice in private.

古文：近虽仰凭威灵，得摧丑虏，兵寡力弱，擒斩不多。
现代文：现在，我虽然凭借圣上的威灵，摧折敌虏，但是由于兵力寡少、力量不足，所以擒捉和斩杀敌贼不多。
English: Now, although I am able to defeat my enemies with the help of the holy spirit, due to the small number of soldiers and the lack of strength, I am not able to capture and kill many enemy thieves.

古文：脱复高曳长缣，虚张功烈，尤而效之，其罪弥大。
现代文：如果我也象王肃那样把本来不足道的小捷写于帛布之上，高竿挂起，以此虚张功劳，效法王肃，其罪则更大。
English: If, like Wang Su, I were to write a small, insignificant accomplishment on a piece of cloth and hang it up on a pole to falsely claim credit, like Wang Su, my crime would be even greater.

古文：臣所以不敢为之，解上而已。 
现代文：所以，我不能那样做，只是告捷于圣上就行了。 
English: So, I can't do that, I just have to get to the top.

古文：魏主益贤之。
现代文：由此，孝文帝更加认为韩显宗忠贤了。
English: As a result, Emperor Xiaowen thought that Han Xianzong was more loyal.

古文：上诏徐州刺史裴叔业引兵救雍州。叔业启称： 北人不乐远行，唯乐钞掠。若侵虏境，则司、雍之寇自然分矣。 
现代文：南齐明帝诏令徐州刺史裴叔业领兵去援救雍州，裴叔业启奏齐明帝： 北方人不乐意远道而行，而只乐意掠抢，所以如果入侵敌人境内，则司州、雍州的敌寇自然会撤退。 
English: Emperor Qiming of the Southern Qi Dynasty issued an edict ordering Xuzhou Zhishi Pei Shuye to lead an army to rescue Yongzhou, and Pei Shuye sent a message to Emperor Qiming: The northerners are not willing to travel far, but are only willing to plunder, so if they invade the enemy's territory, the enemy raiders in Sizhou and Yongzhou will naturally retreat.

古文：上从之。
现代文：明帝听从了这一建议。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：叔业引兵攻虹城，获男女四千馀人。
现代文：于是，裴叔业率兵攻打虹城，俘获男女四千多人。
English: As a result, Pei Shuhei led his troops to attack Hongcheng and captured more than four thousand men and women.

古文：甲戌，遣太子中庶子萧衍、右军司马张稷救雍州。
现代文：甲戌，明帝派遣太子中庶子萧衍、右司马张稷去援救雍州。
English: The Ming emperor sent the prince's middle son, Xiao Yan, and his right-hand man, Ma Zhangye, to rescue Yongzhou.

古文：十一月，甲午，前军将军韩秀方等十五将降于魏。
现代文：十一月，甲午，前军将军韩秀方等十五个将领投降北魏。
English: In the afternoon of November, 15 generals, including the former general Han Xiufang, surrendered to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：丁酉，魏败齐兵于沔北，将军王伏保等为魏所获。
现代文：丁酉，北魏军队在沔北打败了南齐兵，将军王伏保等人被北魏俘获。
English: Ding Jun, the Northern Wei army defeated the Southern Qi soldiers in northern Shandong, and General Wang Fubo and others were captured by the Northern Wei.

古文：丙辰，以杨灵珍为北秦州刺史、仇池公、武都王。
现代文：丙辰，南齐任命杨灵珍为北秦州刺史，并封他为仇池公、武都王。
English: At the same time, Yang Lingzhen was appointed as the governor of North Qin Province by the Southern Qi. He was also named as the Prince of Qi and the King of Wudang.

古文：新野人张者帅万馀家据栅拒魏。十二月，庚申，魏人攻拔之。
现代文：新野人张率领一万余户人家据守栅垒抵拒北魏军队，十二月庚申，北魏军队攻占栅垒。
English: Zhang, a native of Xinjiang, led more than 10,000 households to defend the fence against the Northern Wei army. In December, the Northern Wei army captured the fence.

古文：雍州刺史曹虎与房伯玉不协，故缓救之，顿军樊城。
现代文：南齐雍州刺史曹虎与房伯玉不合，所以迟迟不去援救他，驻扎在樊城按兵不动。
English: Cao Hu, the governor of South Ziyong Province, did not get along with Fang Boyu, so he did not go to rescue him. He was stationed in Shicheng and did not move.

古文：丁丑，诏遣度支尚书崔慧景救雍州，假慧景节，帅众二万、骑千匹向襄阳，雍州众军并受节度。
现代文：丁丑，明帝诏令度支尚书崔慧景去援救雍州，并且授与符节，雍州诸军全部受他指挥调度。
English: Ding Yuxiu, the Ming emperor issued a decree to dispatch Shang Shu Cui Huijing to rescue Yongzhou, and awarded him with a rune festival. All the armies in Yongzhou were commanded and dispatched by him.

古文：庚午，魏主南临沔水；戊寅，还新野。
现代文：于是崔慧景率领两万兵众、一千骑兵，直向襄阳奔去。庚午，北魏孝文帝南行到达沔水；戊寅，孝文帝回到新野。
English: So Cui Huiqing led 20,000 soldiers and 1,000 cavalrymen straight to Xiangyang. In the afternoon, the Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowen traveled south to Surabaya; in Wuyin, the Emperor Xiaowen returned to Xinye.

古文：将军王昙纷以万馀人攻魏南青州黄郭戍，魏戍主崔僧渊破之，举军皆没。
现代文：南齐将军王昙纷率领一万多兵众攻打北魏南青州黄郭戍，北魏的戍军首领崔僧渊率兵抵抗，大获全胜，王昙纷全军覆没。
English: Wang Ronghuan, the general of Nanqi, led more than ten thousand soldiers to attack Huang Guoqi, Qingzhou, Southern Wei, Northern Wei. Cui Sangyuan, the leader of the Wei army in Northern Wei, led the resistance and won a complete victory. Wang Ronghuan's entire army was destroyed.

古文：将军鲁康祚、赵公政将兵万人侵魏太仓口，魏豫州刺史王肃使长史清河傅永将甲士三千击之。
现代文：南齐将军鲁康祚、赵公政率兵一万人侵北魏太仓口，北魏豫州刺史王肃命令长史清河人傅永率甲兵三千去袭击。
English: Nanqi generals Lu Kangtao and Zhao Gongzheng led 10,000 soldiers to invade Taicangkou in the Northern Wei Dynasty, and Wang Su, the governor of Yuzhou in the Northern Wei Dynasty, ordered Fu Yong, the governor of Qinghe, to attack with 3,000 soldiers.

古文：康祚等军于淮南，永军于淮北，相去十馀里。
现代文：鲁康祚、赵公政驻扎在淮水之南，傅永驻扎在淮水之北，彼此相距十多里远。
English: Lu Kangtao and Zhao Gongzheng were stationed in the south of Huai Shui, and Fu Yong was stationed in the north of Huai Shui, more than ten miles away from each other.

古文：永曰： 南人好夜斫营，必于渡淮之所置火以记浅处。 
现代文：傅永对部下说： 南方人喜欢夜间闯营攻击，他们一定要在渡河的地方放置火把，以便指示何处水浅可以涉渡。 
English: Fu Yong said to his subordinates: Nanfang people like to break into the camp at night, they must place torches at the place of crossing the river in order to indicate where the water can be waded.

古文：乃夜分兵为二部，伏于营外；又以瓠贮火，密使人过淮南岸，于深处置之，戒曰： 见火起，则亦然之。 
现代文：于是，到了夜间，傅永把手下的兵力分成两部分，让他们埋伏在营盘外面，又在大瓢里装满易燃物，派人秘密地渡过淮河到达南岸，把大瓢放置于水深之处，并告诉说： 一见对岸火起，你们就点燃它。 
English: So, at night, Fu Yong divided the troops under his command into two parts, let them lie in wait outside the camp, and filled the rafts with flammable materials. He sent someone to secretly cross the Huai River to the south bank, placed the rafts in deep water, and told them: If you see a fire on the opposite bank, you should light it.

古文：是夜，康祚等果引兵斫永营；伏兵夹击之。康祚等走趣淮水，火既竞起，不知所从，溺死及斩首数千级，生擒公政，获康祚之尸以归。
现代文：这天夜里，鲁康祚等人果然率兵来破傅永的营盘，傅永的伏兵左右夹击，鲁康祚抵挡不住，慌忙回撤到淮河边上，这时傅永派往南岸的人点起了火，使得鲁康祚等不知何处水深、何处水浅，只好胡乱涉水而逃，结果被淹死和斩首好几千人。最后，傅永活捉了赵公政，并且获得了鲁康祚的尸体，胜利而归。
English: On this night, Lu Kangyao and others did indeed lead an army to break Fu Yong's camp. Fu Yong's ambushes clamped around and around. Lu Kangyao could not resist and hastily retreated to the edge of the Huai River. At this time, the people sent by Fu Yong to the south bank lit a fire, so that Lu Kangyao and others did not know where the water depth was and where the water was shallow, so they had to wade through the water and escape. As a result, several thousand people were drowned and beheaded. Finally, Fu Yong captured Zhao Gongzheng alive, and obtained Lu Kangyao's body and returned

古文：豫州刺史裴叔业侵魏楚王戍，肃复令永击之。
现代文：南齐豫州刺史裴叔业入侵北魏楚王戍，王肃再次命令傅永去袭击。
English: Southern Qi, Yuzhou, and Shishi, Pei and Shuye invaded Northern Wei, Chu and Wang, and Wang Su again ordered Fu Yong to attack.

古文：永将心腹一人驰诣楚王戍，令填外堑，夜伏战士千人于城外。
现代文：傅永带领心腹一人骑马疾奔楚王戍，命令他们填平戍所的外壕，夜里又在城外崐埋伏下战士千人。
English: Fu Yong led one of his confidants on horseback to rush to Chu Wangtao, ordered them to fill the outer ditch of the camp, and in the night they ambushed a thousand soldiers outside the city.

古文：晓而叔业等至城东，部分将置长围。
现代文：天亮之后，裴叔业率部到了城东边，安排部署兵力，准备围城攻打。
English: After dawn, Pei Shuhe and his troops arrived at the eastern edge of the city, arranged the deployment of troops, and prepared to besiege the city.

古文：永伏兵击其后军，破之。
现代文：傅永的伏兵对裴叔业的后军展开了袭击，败敌获胜。
English: Fu Yong's ambush launched an attack on Bae Shih Tien's rearguard, and the defeated enemy won.

古文：叔业留将佐守营，自将精兵数千救之。
现代文：裴叔业留下其他将领守护营盘，自己率领精兵数千去援救后军。
English: Pei Shuhei left other generals to guard the camp, and he led thousands of elite soldiers to rescue the rear army.

古文：永登门楼，望叔业南行数里，则开门奋击，大破之，获叔业伞扇、鼓幕、甲仗万馀。
现代文：这时，傅永登上城门楼，望见裴叔业已经率兵往南走去数里地了，就命令打开城门，奋力出击，结果大败敌兵，缴获了裴叔业的伞扇、鼓幕，以及盔甲兵器一万余件。
English: At this time, Fu Yong boarded the gate tower of the city and saw that Pei Shuhei had led his troops to the south for several miles. He ordered to open the gate and fought hard. As a result, he defeated the enemy soldiers and captured Pei Shuhei's umbrella fan, drum curtain, and more than 10,000 pieces of armor weapons.

古文：叔业进退失据，遂走。
现代文：裴叔业进退都失去凭借，只好逃跑。
English: Pei Shuhei lost his ability to advance or retreat, and had no choice but to flee.

古文：左右欲追之，永曰： 吾弱卒不满三千，彼精甲犹盛，非力屈而败，自坠吾计中耳。
现代文：傅永手下的人要去追击，但是傅永不许，他说： 我们的兵力弱，还不足三千，而他们的兵力还很强大，并不是因为力量不足而败逃，而是落入了我的计谋圈套。
English: Fu Yong's men wanted to pursue, but Fu would not let them. He said, "Our force is weak, less than three thousand, but their force is still strong. It is not because of lack of strength that they fled, but because they fell into my trap.

古文：既不测我之虚实，足使丧胆。俘此足矣，何更追之！ 
现代文：他们不知道我们的虚实，经这么一击，就足以使他们闻风丧胆了，我们已经俘获了他们这么多的人和物，就相当满足了，何必再追击呢？ 
English: They don't know what we are and what we are not. One blow like this is enough to discourage them. We have already captured so many of their people and things that we are quite satisfied. Why do we need to pursue them again?

古文：魏主遣谒者就拜永安远将军、汝南太守，封贝丘县男。
现代文：北魏孝文帝派遣谒者去任命傅永为安远将军、汝南太守，并封他为贝丘县男。
English: Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty sent an envoy to appoint Fu Yong as the general of Anyuan and the governor of Runan, and made him the man of Beqiu County.

古文：永有勇力，好学能文。魏主常叹曰： 上马能击贼，下马作露版，唯傅修期耳！ 
现代文：傅永勇武有力，并且好学能文，孝文帝常常赞叹说： 上马能击贼，下马作文章，只有傅期才能这样文武双全啊！ 
English: Fu Yong Yong was brave and powerful, and was good at learning literature. Emperor Xiaowen often praised him, saying, "He could defeat a thief on horseback, and write an article when dismounted. Only Fu Zi was able to be both a scholar and a warrior!

古文：曲江公遥欣好武事，上以诸子尚幼，内亲则仗遥欣兄弟，外亲则倚后弟西中郎长史彭城刘暄、内弟太子詹事江祏。
现代文：南齐曲江公萧遥欣爱好武事，明帝因为自己的儿子尚且年幼，所以在内亲中依靠萧遥欣兄弟俩，在外戚中则倚仗皇后之弟西中郎彭城人刘暄，以及表弟太子詹事江。
English: Xiao Yaoxin, the lord of the Qujiang River in southern Qi, was fond of martial arts. Because Emperor Ming's son Ran was still young, he relied on Xiao Yaoxin's two brothers among his relatives. Among his relatives, he relied on the Empress's younger brother, the West Middle Lord, the Pengcheng man Liu Ye, and his cousin, the Prince Zhan Shijiang.

古文：故以始安王遥光为扬州刺史，居中用事；遥欣为都督荆、雍等七州诸军事、荆州刺史，镇据西面。
现代文：于是，明帝任命始安王萧遥光为扬州刺史，让他在建康主事；任命萧遥欣为都督荆、雍等七州诸军事及荆州刺史，让他坐镇西面。
English: As a result, Emperor Ming appointed Xiao Yaoguang, the King of Shi'an, as the chief historian of Yangzhou, and put him in charge of building a healthy society; appointed Xiao Yaoxin as the military governor of Jing, Yong and other seven states and the chief historian of Jing, and let him sit on the west side of the town.

古文：而遥欣在江陵，多招才勇，厚自封殖，上甚恶之。
现代文：然而，萧遥欣却在江陵大量招收勇士，聚敛财物，使劲扩大自己的势力，明帝非常不满。
English: However, Xiao Yaoxin recruited a large number of warriors in Gangneung, accumulated wealth, and worked hard to expand his power. Emperor Ming was very dissatisfied.

古文：遥欣侮南郡太守刘季连，季连密表遥欣有异迹；上乃以季连为益州刺史，使据遥欣上流以制之。
现代文：萧遥欣又侮辱南郡太守刘季连，刘季连秘密上表明帝，说萧遥欣图谋不轨，并且有所举动。于是，明帝就任命刘季连为益州刺史，使刘季连据于萧遥欣的上方，以便牵制他。
English: Xiao Yaoxin also insulted Liu Jilian, the governor of Nan County. Liu Jilian secretly told the emperor that Xiao Yaoxin was scheming and doing something. Therefore, the Ming emperor appointed Liu Jilian as the governor of Yizhou, so that Liu Jilian was above Xiao Yaoxin in order to contain him.

古文：季连，思考之子也。
现代文：刘季连是刘思考的儿子。
English: Liu Jilian is the son of Liu Xianrong.

古文：是岁，高昌王马儒遣司马王体玄入贡于魏，请兵迎接，求举国内徙；魏主遣明威将军韩安保迎之，割伊吾之地五百里以居儒众。
现代文：这一年，高昌王马儒派遣司马王体玄来向北魏上贡，要求带领全国人内迁，并且请求北魏派兵迎接。孝文帝派遣明威将军韩安保前去迎接，并且割划伊吾方圆五百里地，以供马儒及其部属居住。
English: In that year, the king of Gaochang, Maru, sent Sima Wang Tiexuan to pay tribute to the Northern Wei Dynasty, asking him to lead the whole country to move inland, and asked the Northern Wei Dynasty to send soldiers to meet him. Emperor Xiaowen sent Mingwei General Han Bao to meet him, and allocated 500 miles around Yiwu for Maru and his subordinates to live.

古文：儒遣左长史顾礼、右长史金城麹嘉将步骑一千五百迎安保，而安保不至；礼、嘉还高昌，安保亦还伊吾。
现代文：马儒派遣左长史顾礼、右长史金城人嘉率领步、骑兵一千五百人去迎接韩安保，但是韩安保没有到达，顾礼、嘉只好返回高昌。顾、走后，韩安保才到，见没有人来接，也返回伊吾。
English: Maru dispatched the left-long history Gu Lei, the right-long history Jincheng Renjia leading the way, and 1,500 cavalry to meet Han Bao, but Han Bao did not arrive, Gu Lei and Jia had to return to Gaochang. After Gu and left, Han Bao arrived, saw no one to pick up, and also returned to Igu.

古文：安保遣其属朝兴安等使高昌，儒复遣顾礼将世子义舒迎安保，至白棘城，去高昌百六十里。
现代文：韩安保派遣属下朝兴安等人出使高昌国，马儒又派遣顾礼率领世子马义舒到离高昌一百六十里的白棘城去迎接韩安保。
English: Han Baoan dispatched subordinates such as Chao Xing'an and others to Gaochang, while Ma Rong sent Gu Li and his son Ma Yishu to meet Han Baoan in Baixian City, 160 miles away from Gaochang.

古文：高昌旧人恋土，不愿东迁，相与杀儒，立麹喜为王，复臣于柔然。
现代文：高昌国的本地居民留恋故土，不愿意往东迁，就一起商量杀死了马儒，拥立嘉为国王，仍旧称臣于柔然国。
English: The local residents of Gaochang, who yearned for their homeland and did not want to move to the east, discussed together and killed Ma Ju, supported Jia as king, and still claimed to be subjects of Juran.

古文：安保独与顾礼、马义舒还洛阳。
现代文：韩安保只与顾礼、马义舒回到洛阳。
English: Han Baoan only returned to Luoyang with Gu Li and Ma Yishu.

古文：高宗明皇帝下永泰元年
现代文：永泰元年
English: In the first year of Yongtai

古文：春，正月，癸未朔，大赦。
现代文：春季正月，癸未朔，南齐大赦天下。
English: In the first month of spring, before the new year, Nanqi was amnestied.

古文：加中军将军徐孝嗣开府仪同三司，孝嗣固辞。
现代文：明帝要授中军大将军徐孝嗣开府仪同三司，徐孝嗣再三辞而不受。
English: Emperor Ming wanted to confer the imperial investiture on the Chinese general Xu Xiaozhi, but Xu Xiaozhi repeatedly declined.

古文：魏军李佐攻新野，丁亥，拔之，缚刘思忌，问之曰： 今欲降未？ 
现代文：北魏统军李佐攻打新野，丁亥，攻破新野城，活捉了刘思忌，李佐问他： 如今你想不想投降？ 
English: Li Zuo of the Northern Wei United Army attacked Xinyang, Dinghai, broke through Xinyang City, and captured Liu Siyi alive. Li Zuo asked him: Do you want to surrender now?

古文：思忌曰： 宁为南鬼，不为北臣！ 
现代文：刘思忌回答： 宁可做南方的鬼，不愿当北方的臣子！ 
English: Liu Siqi replied: I would rather be a ghost in the south than a vassal in the north!

古文：乃杀之。
现代文：于是，李佐就杀了刘思忌。
English: Then he killed him.

古文：于是沔北大震。
现代文：刘思忌被杀之后，沔水之北的南齐守军大为震惊。
English: After Liu Siqi was killed, the Nanqi defenders north of Surabaya were shocked.

古文：戊子，湖阳戍主蔡道福，辛卯，赭阳戍主成公期，壬辰，舞阴戍主黄瑶起、南乡太守席谦，相继南遁。
现代文：戊子，湖阳守军首领蔡道福，辛卯，赭阳崐守军首领成公期；壬辰，舞阳守军首领黄瑶起、南乡太守席谦等相继南逃而去。
English: Wuzi, Cai Daofu, the leader of the Hoyang garrison, Xinwu, the leader of the Shiyang garrison, Chenggong, the leader of the Imjin, the leader of the Wuyang garrison, Huang Xingqi, the leader of the Nanxiang garrison, and so on successively fled south.

古文：瑶起为魏所获，魏主以赐王肃，肃脔而食之。
现代文：黄瑶起被北魏军队抓获，北魏孝文帝把黄瑶起赏赐王肃，王肃把他割成小片煮熟吃了。
English: Huang Xingqi was captured by the Northern Wei army, and the Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowen rewarded Huang Xingqi to Wang Su, who cut him into small pieces and cooked them.

古文：乙巳，命太尉陈显达救雍州。
现代文：乙巳，南齐命令太尉陈显达去援救雍州。
English: Suddenly, Nanqi ordered Lieutenant Chen Xianda to go to the rescue of Yongzhou.

古文：上有疾，以近亲寡弱，忌高、武子孙。
现代文：明帝患疾病，由于他自己的亲属人少力弱，所以特别防忌高帝和武帝的子孙。
English: Emperor Ming suffered from illness, and since his own relatives were weak and feeble, he took special precautions against the descendants of Emperor Gao and Emperor Wu.

古文：时高、武子孙犹有十王，每朔望入朝，上还后宫辄叹息曰： 我及司徒诸子皆不长，高、武子孙日益长大！ 
现代文：当时，高帝、武帝的子孙还有十个藩主，他们每月初一和十五都入朝拜见明帝，明帝见过他们回宫之后，常常叹息着说： 我和弟弟司徒的几个儿子都年龄幼小，而高帝和武帝的子孙却一天天地长大了。 
English: At that time, there were still ten lords of the domain who were sons and grandsons of Emperor Gao and Emperor Wu. They came to pay homage to Emperor Ming on the first day of the month and the fifteenth day of the month. After Emperor Ming saw them return to the palace, he often sighed and said, "I and several sons of my brother, Emperor Gao and Emperor Wu, are young, but the sons and grandsons of Emperor Gao and Emperor Wu are growing up day by day.

古文：上欲尽除高、武之族，以微言问陈显达，对曰： 此等岂足介虑！ 
现代文：明帝想把高帝和武帝的后代全部除掉，他以此事试探地问陈显达，陈显达回答说： 这些人何足以令圣上忧虑呢？ 
English: Emperor Ming wanted to get rid of all the descendants of Emperor Gao and Emperor Wu. He tentatively asked Chen Xianda about this. Chen Xianda replied, "What is it about these people that worries His Holiness?

古文：以问扬州刺史始安王遥光，遥光以为当以次施行。
现代文：明帝又问扬州刺史始安王萧遥光，萧遥光认为应当一个一个地逐步除杀。
English: Emperor Ming also asked Yangzhou's King of the First Ann Dynasty, Xiao Yaoguang, who believed that they should be gradually eliminated one by one.

古文：遥光有足疾，上常令乘舆自望贤门入。每与上屏人久语毕。
现代文：萧遥光有脚病，明帝经常让他乘车舆从望贤门进入华林园，每次进园后明帝就和他在无人处长久商谈。
English: Xiao Yaoguang has a foot disease. Emperor Ming often let him take a bus from the Wangxian Gate to enter the Hualin Garden. Every time after entering the garden, Emperor Ming would have a long discussion with him in no man's land.

古文：上索香火，呜咽流涕，明日必有所诛。
现代文：谈话毕，明帝要是焚烧香火，呜咽流涕，第二天必定有所诛杀。
English: After the conversation, if Emperor Ming burned incense and sobbed, there would definitely be a fight the next day.

古文：会上疾暴甚，绝而复苏，遥光遂行其策。丁未，杀河东王铉、临贺王子岳、西阳王子文、永阳王子峻、南康王子琳、衡阳王子珉、湘东王子建、南郡王子夏、桂阳王昭粲、巴陵王昭秀，于是太祖、世祖及世宗诸子皆尽矣。
现代文：正好明帝病情突然加重，气绝而后又复苏过来，萧遥光就开始执行预先合谋好的计策，丁未，杀害了河东王萧铉、临贺王萧子岳、西阳王萧子文、永阳王萧子峻、南康王萧子琳、衡阳王萧子珉、湘东王萧子建、南郡王萧子夏、桂阳王萧昭粲、巴陵王萧昭秀，于是齐高帝、武帝以及文惠太子的儿子们全被杀害。
English: Just as Emperor Ming's condition suddenly worsened, he was exhausted and then recovered, Xiao Yaoguang began to implement the pre-planned strategy. Ding Wei killed King Xiaoqi of Hedong, King Xiao Zi Yue of Linhe, King Xiao Zi Wen of Xiyang, King Xiao Zi Jun of Yongyang, King Xiao Zilin of Nankang, King Xiao Zi Jun of Hengyang, King Xiao Zi Jian of East Hunan, King Xiao Zi Xia of South County, King Xiao Zhaojie of Guiyang, and King Xiao Zhaoxiu of Baling. As a result, Emperor

古文：铉等已死，乃使公卿奏其罪状，请诛之，下诏不许；再奏，然后许之。
现代文：萧铉等人死后，明帝才让公卿们奏告他们的罪状，并请求诛杀他们，齐明帝假意下诏令不允许；公卿再次奏请，然后批准。
English: After the death of Xiao Yao and others, Emperor Ming only asked the nobles to report the charges against them and asked them to kill them. Emperor Qiming issued a decree not to allow it; the nobles asked again and then approved it.

古文：南康侍读济阳江泌哭子琳，泪尽，继之以血；亲视殡葬毕，乃去。
现代文：南康王的侍读济阳人江泌恸哭萧子琳，泪水哭干之后，又流出了血，亲自看得萧子琳被殡葬完毕，方才离去。
English: Xiao Zilin, the attendant of King Nankang of Jiyang, wept bitterly. After her tears dried up, she bled again. She saw Xiao Zilin's funeral in person before she left.

古文：庚戌，魏主如南阳。
现代文：庚戌，北魏孝文帝到达南阳。
English: Emperor Gaozong of the Northern Wei Dynasty and Emperor Xiaowen arrived in Nanyang.

古文：二月，癸丑，诏左卫将军萧惠休等救寿阳。甲子，魏人拔宛北城，房伯玉面缚出降。
现代文：二月癸丑，齐明帝诏令左卫将军萧惠休等人去援救寿阳，甲子，北魏军队攻破宛北城，房伯玉自缚出降。
English: In February, Emperor Qiming issued an edict ordering General of the Left Division Xiao Huixiu and others to go to the rescue of Shouyang and Jiazi. The Northern Wei army broke through Wanbei City, and Fangboyu was forced to surrender.

古文：伯玉从父弟思安为魏中统军，数为伯玉泣请，魏主乃赦之。
现代文：房伯玉的堂弟房恩安是北魏的中统军，房思安数次哭泣着向孝文帝请求不要杀死房伯玉，于是孝文帝就赦免了房伯玉。
English: Fang Bo-yul's cousin, Fang En-an, was a member of the Central United Army of the Northern Wei Dynasty. Fang Si-an repeatedly begged Emperor Xiaowen not to kill Fang Bo-yul, so Emperor Xiaowen pardoned Fang Bo-yul.

古文：庚午，魏主如新。
现代文：庚午，孝文帝到达新野。
English: In the late afternoon, Emperor Xiaowen arrived in Nianye.

古文：辛巳，以彭城王勰为使持节、都督南征诸军事、中军大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：辛巳，孝文帝任命彭城王元勰为使持节、都督南征诸军事、中军大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: Soon after, Emperor Xiaowen appointed Wang Yuanjun of Pengcheng as the envoy of the festival, the governor of the south, the military, the general of the Chinese army, and the three departments of the Kaifu ceremony.

古文：三月，壬午朔，崔慧景、萧衍大败于邓城。
现代文：三月，壬午朔，崔慧景和萧衍在邓城被北魏军队打得大败。
English: In March, at dawn, Cui Huijing and Xiao Yan were defeated by the Northern Wei army in Dengcheng.

古文：时慧景至襄阳，五郡已没，慧景与衍及军主刘山阳、傅法宪等帅五千馀人进行邓城，魏数万骑奄至，诸军登城拒守。
现代文：当崔慧景到达襄阳之时，南阳、新野等五郡已经陷落，崔慧景与萧衍以及军主刘山阳、傅法宪等人就率领五千多人马来到了邓城，北魏数万骑兵很快就追赶了上来，崔慧景等只好布署兵力，登城防守。
English: When Cui Huijing arrived at Xiangyang, five counties including Nanyang and Xinye had already fallen. Cui Huijing and Xiaoyan, as well as the military leaders Liu Shanyang and Fu Faxian, led more than five thousand horses to Dengcheng. Tens of thousands of Northern Wei cavalry soon caught up, and Cui Huijing and others had no choice but to deploy troops to defend the city.

古文：时将士蓐食轻行，皆有饥惧之色。
现代文：其时，南方的将士们由于早晨匆忙吃饭，再加上轻装快走，人人面呈饥饿、恐惧的神色。
English: At that time, due to the fact that the soldiers in the south rushed to eat in the morning, coupled with the fact that they dressed lightly and walked quickly, everyone looked hungry and frightened.

古文：衍欲出战，慧景曰： 虏不夜围人城，待日暮自当去。 
现代文：萧衍要出战，崔慧景不同意，说： 北魏军队从来不在夜间围城攻打，所以等天黑之后他们自然就会撤崐走的。 
English: Xiao Yan wanted to go to war, but Cui Huijing disagreed, saying: The Northern Wei army never besieged the city at night, so they would naturally withdraw after dark.

古文：既而魏众转至。慧景于南门拔军去，诸军不相知，相继皆遁。
现代文：一会儿，北魏的大批军队全部到了，崔慧景在城南门带着自己的队伍逃走了，其他的队伍不知道，也相继逃遁而去。
English: In a moment, a large number of Northern Wei troops all arrived. Cui Huijing fled with his team at the south gate of the city. The other teams did not know and fled one after another.

古文：魏兵自北门入，刘山阳与部曲数百人断后死战，且战且却行。
现代文：北魏军队从北门入城，刘山阳与部曲数百人断后死战，边战边退，以掩护前头的队伍撤逃。
English: The Northern Wei army entered the city from the North Gate. Liu Shanyang broke off the deadly battle with hundreds of troops and retreated from the battlefield to cover the front line.

古文：慧景过闹沟，军人相蹈藉，桥皆断坏。
现代文：崔慧景带领队伍过闹沟，军士们和人互相拥挤踩踏，把桥都压断了。
English: Cui Huijing led the team across the noisy ditch. The soldiers and people crowded and trampled on each other, and the bridge was broken.

古文：魏兵夹路射之，杀傅法宪，士卒赴沟死者相枕，山阳取袄仗填沟乘之，得免。
现代文：北魏军队乘势在路两旁发箭射杀，傅法宪中箭身亡，士卒们相继赴沟而死，尸体相枕，不计其数，刘山阳用衣袄和甲仗填在沟中乘势通过，方才得以幸免。
English: The Northern Wei army took advantage of the situation to shoot arrows on both sides of the road, Fu Faxian was killed in the middle of the arrow, the soldiers went to the ditch and died one after another, the bodies were lying side by side, there are countless numbers, Liu Shanyang filled the ditch with clothes and armor and took advantage of the situation to pass, only to be spared.

古文：魏主将大兵追之，晡时至沔。
现代文：北魏孝文帝率领大兵乘胜追击，午后申时追至沔水。
English: Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty led the soldiers to pursue the victory, and in the afternoon, they chased it to Surabaya.

古文：山阳据城苦战，至暮，魏兵乃退。
现代文：刘山阳依据樊城拼力苦战，到天黑之时，北魏军队才撤退走了。
English: Liu Shanyang fought hard in accordance with Lucheng, and by the time it was dark, the Northern Wei army had just retreated.

古文：诸军恐惧，是夕，皆下船还襄阳。
现代文：南齐各路队伍都害怕了，当天晚上，全部坐船返回襄阳去了。
English: All the teams in Nanqi were scared. That evening, they all took the boat back to Xiangyang.

古文：庚寅，魏主将十万众，羽仪华盖，以围樊城，曹虎闭门自守。
现代文：庚寅，北魏孝文帝率领十万大军，羽仪华盖，浩浩荡荡地开来围攻樊城，樊城守将曹虎闭门自守，不敢迎战。
English: Geng Yin, the Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowen, led a hundred thousand troops, feathered Huagai, and besieged Lucheng in a grand manner. Lucheng's commander, Cao Hu, closed the door to protect himself and did not dare to fight.

古文：魏主临沔水，望襄阳岸，乃去，如湖阳；辛亥，如悬瓠。
现代文：北魏孝文帝临近沔水，望了望对岸的襄阳，就离开了，然后到达湖阳。辛亥，孝文帝到了悬瓠。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, Emperor Xiaowen was close to Surabaya. He looked at Yangyang on the opposite bank and left, and then arrived at Hoyang. In the Xinhai Dynasty, Emperor Xiaowen arrived at Huanqian.

古文：魏镇南将军王肃攻义阳，裴叔业将兵五万围涡阳以救义阳。
现代文：北魏镇南将军王萧攻打义阳，裴叔业率兵五万围攻北魏涡阳以便援救义阳。
English: The Northern Wei Zhennan general Wang Xiao attacked Yiyang, and Pei Shuhei led fifty thousand soldiers to besiege the Northern Wei Vortex Yang in order to rescue Yiyang.

古文：魏南兗州刺史济北孟表守涡阳，粮尽，食草木皮叶。
现代文：北魏南兖州刺史济北人孟表固守涡阳，粮食吃尽之后，拿野草和树皮、树叶充饥。
English: In Northern Wei, the people of Mengbiao, who lived in southern Luzhou and northern Jishi, adhered to the vortex sun. After eating all the grain, they took wild grasses, tree bark and leaves to satisfy their hunger.

古文：叔业积所杀魏人高五丈以示城内；别遣军主萧璝等攻龙亢，魏广陵王羽救之。叔业引兵击羽，大破之，追获其节。
现代文：裴叔业把所杀死的北魏人堆积有五丈多高，让城中人观看，另外又派遣军主萧等人去攻打龙亢。北魏广陵王元羽前来救援，裴叔业领兵迎击，大败元羽，追击中缴获了元羽的符节。
English: Pei Xueye piled up the killed Northern Wei people as high as five stories for the people in the city to see, and also sent the commander Xiao and others to attack Longjing. Northern Wei Guangling King Yuan Yu came to the rescue, Pei Xueye led the troops to meet the attack, defeated Yuan Yu, and captured Yuan Yu's symbols during the pursuit.

古文：魏主使安远将军傅永、征虏将军刘藻、假辅国将军高聪等救涡阳，并受王肃节度。
现代文：北魏孝文帝又派遣安远将军傅永、征虏将军刘藻、代理辅国将军高聪等人援救涡阳，并且让他们接受王肃的指挥调动。
English: Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty also sent Anduan General Fu Yong, Conscript General Liu Mo, and Acting Auxiliary General Gao Cong to rescue Wuyang, and let them accept Wang Su's command and transfer.

古文：叔业进击，大破之，聪奔悬瓠，永收散卒徐还。
现代文：裴叔业迎头进击，大败前来的北魏援军，高聪撤逃到了悬瓠，傅永收容了失散的兵卒，徐徐而返。
English: Pei Shuhei attacked head-on and defeated the approaching Northern Wei reinforcements, Gao Cong retreated and fled to Hanging Rock, Fu Yong received the scattered soldiers and slowly returned.

古文：叔业再战，凡斩首万级，俘三千馀人，获器械杂畜财物以千万计。
现代文：裴叔业再次进击，斩敌一万人，俘虏三千多名，缴获器械、杂畜和各种财物以千万计数。
English: Pei Shuhei attacked again, killing ten thousand enemies, capturing more than three thousand prisoners, and seizing tens of millions of instruments, livestock, and all kinds of property.

古文：魏主命锁三将诣悬瓠。刘藻、高聪免死，徙平州；傅永夺官爵；黜王肃为平南将军。
现代文：北魏孝文帝命令把吃了败仗的三位将领锁起来押到悬瓠，刘藻、高聪免于处死，流放平州；傅永被夺去官职和爵位；王肃被降为平南将军。
English: Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty ordered the three generals who lost the battle to be locked up and pushed to the gallows. Liu Mo and Gao Cong were spared from execution and exiled to Pingzhou; Fu Yong was deprived of his official post and peerage; Wang Su was reduced to the rank of General of Pingnan.

古文：肃表请更遣军救涡阳，魏主报曰： 观卿意，必以藻等新败，故难于更往。
现代文：王肃上表孝文帝请求另外派遣军队去援救涡阳，孝文帝回答说： 看你的意思，一定认为刘藻等人刚刚打败，所以难以再去援救涡阳。
English: Wang Su went to Emperor Xiaowen to request that another army be sent to rescue Wuruyang, and Emperor Xiaowen replied: "I see what you mean. He must have thought that Liu Cao and the others had just been defeated, so it would be difficult to rescue Wuruyang.

古文：朕今少分兵则不足制敌，多分兵则禁旅有阙，卿审图之。
现代文：但是，朕如今若分少量兵力前去则不足以制敌取胜，若多分兵力前去则身边担任禁卫的兵力就出现了空缺，你仔细考虑一下。
English: However, nowadays, if we advance with a small number of troops, it will not be enough to defeat the enemy and win. If we advance with a large number of troops, there will be a vacancy in the troops serving as guards around us. Think about it carefully.

古文：义阳当止则止，当下则下；若失涡阳，卿之过也。 
现代文：义阳如果能攻下来就攻，如果攻不下来就停止围攻。如果失掉了涡阳，将是你的罪过。 
English: If you can attack Yiyang, attack it, if you can't attack it, stop the siege. If you lose Vortex Yang, it will be your fault.

古文：肃乃解义阳之围，与统军杨大眼、奚康生等步骑十馀万救涡阳。
现代文：于是，王肃就停止了攻打义阳，与统军杨大眼、奚康生等率步、骑兵十多万前去解救涡阳之危。
English: As a result, Wang Su stopped attacking Yiyang and marched with the unified army of Yang Dajian, Yao Kangsheng and more than one hundred thousand cavalry to relieve the danger of the vortex.

古文：叔业见魏兵盛，夜，引军退；明日，士众奔溃，魏人追之，杀伤不可胜数。
现代文：裴叔业见北魏军队来的人多势众，就在夜间领兵撤退，到了第二天，裴叔业手下的士卒们蜂拥逃溃，北魏军队追击而进，南齐士兵伤亡不可胜数。
English: Pei Shuhei saw a large number of people coming from the Northern Wei army and led the troops to retreat at night. By the next day, the soldiers under Pei Shuhei's command fled in droves, the Northern Wei army pursued and advanced, and the casualties of Nanqi soldiers were countless.

古文：叔业还保涡口。
现代文：裴叔业返回保卫涡口去了。
English: Pei Shuhei went back to defend the vortex.

古文：初，魏中尉李彪，家世孤微，朝无亲援；初游代都，以清渊文穆公李冲好士，倾心附之。
现代文：起先，北魏中尉李彪家世孤寒贫贱，在朝廷之中毫无亲援。李彪初次去代都，得知清渊人文穆公李冲喜好才能之士，就一心一意地去投靠他。
English: At first, Li Biao, a Northern Wei lieutenant, came from a poor family and had no family support in the imperial court. When Li Biao went to the capital for the first time, he learned that Li Chong was a talented person who liked the humanities of the Qing Dynasty, so he wholeheartedly went to rely on him.

古文：冲亦重其材学，礼遇甚厚，荐于魏主，且为之延誉于朝，公私汲引。
现代文：李冲也十分重视李彪的才学，对他礼遇甚厚，还把他推荐给孝文帝，并且又在朝廷同僚中广为宣传，为他树立声誉，从公私两方面引进他。
English: Li Chong also attached great importance to Li Biao's talent, treated him with great courtesy, recommended him to Emperor Xiaowen, and widely publicized him among his colleagues in the imperial court, establishing a reputation for him and introducing him from both public and private aspects.

古文：及为中尉，弹劾不避贵戚，魏主贤之，以比汲黯。
现代文：李彪担任中尉之后，弹劾时毫不避畏贵戚权臣，孝文帝认为他十分忠贤，把他比做汲黯。
English: After Li Biao served as a lieutenant, he did not shy away from impeachment as a noble and powerful vassal. Emperor Xiaowen considered him to be very loyal and virtuous, and compared him to a gourd.

古文：彪自以结知人主，不复藉冲，稍稍疏之，唯公坐敛袂而已，无复宗敬这意，冲浸衔之。
现代文：可是，李彪自以为得到了孝文帝的赏识，无需再凭借李冲了，所以就对李冲渐渐有所疏远，只是在公开场合遇见李冲时整理一下衣袖，以示礼节，不再有尊从敬服之意了。因此，李冲渐渐地对他产生了怨恨之情。
English: However, Li Biao thought that he had gained the appreciation of Emperor Xiaowen and no longer needed to rely on Li Chong, so he gradually distanced himself from Li Chong. He only tidied up his sleeves when meeting Li Chong in public to show courtesy, and no longer had the intention of respecting and obeying. Therefore, Li Chong gradually developed a grudge against him.

古文：及魏主南伐，彪与冲及任城王澄共掌留务。
现代文：到了孝文帝南伐之时，李彪与李冲以及任城王元澄共同掌管留守事务。
English: By the time of Emperor Xiaowen's southern campaign, Li Biao, Li Chong and the city's king, Yuancheng, were jointly in charge of the matters left behind.

古文：彪性刚豪，意议多所乖异，数与冲争辨，形于声色；自以身为法官，它人莫能纠劾，事多专恣。
现代文：李彪性情刚强豪直，商议事情时所见常常与别人不合，数次同李冲发生争辩，并且发展到翻脸相争。李彪自以为身为司法官员，他人不能举发、弹劾自己，所以行事非常专横。
English: Li Biao's temperament was strong and courageous, and he often disagreed with others when discussing matters. He argued with Li Chong several times, and it developed into a face-to-face conflict. Li Biao thought that as a judicial official, others could not raise their hair and impeach themselves, so he acted very arbitrarily.

古文：冲不胜忿，乃积其前作过恶，禁彪于尚书省，上表劾彪 违傲高亢，公行僭逸，坐舆禁省，私取官材，辄驾乘黄，无所惮慑。
现代文：李冲不胜其忿，于是总计李彪的前后错误、罪恶，把他囚禁在尚书省，上表孝文帝弹劾李彪 傲逆不顺，趾高气扬，贪图安逸，敷衍公事，乘坐轿舆而入禁省，私自拿取官家财物，动辄驾用厩中御马，为所欲为，无有惮慑。
English: Li Chong could not overcome his indignation, so he summed up Li Biao's past and future mistakes and sins, and imprisoned him in Shangshu Province. Emperor Xiaowen impeached Li Biao for arrogance, insubordination, arrogance, greed for comfort, perfunctory business, taking a limousine into the forbidden province, taking official property, and driving a horse in a stable. He did whatever he wanted without any fear.

古文：臣辄集尚书已下、令史已上于尚书都座，以彪所犯罪状告彪，讯其虚实，彪皆伏罪。
现代文：我召集尚书以下、令史以上的官员于尚书省，把李彪所犯罪行告诉了他本人，并且审讯其虚实，李彪供认不讳，一一认罪。
English: I gathered officials from Shangshu and below and from Lingshi and above in Shangshu Province, told Li Biao himself about the crimes he had committed, and interrogated him about the truth and falsehood. Li Biao confessed and pleaded guilty one by one.

古文：请以见事免彪所居职，付廷尉治罪。 
现代文：所以，请求圣上根据上述李彪所犯罪状免去其官职，并且交付廷尉治罪。 
English: Therefore, we request the Holy Father to remove Li Biao from his official position according to the above-mentioned crime and to hand him over to a court official for punishment.

古文：冲又表称： 臣与彪相识以来，垂二十载。
现代文：李冲在上表中还说： 我与李彪自相识以来，至今已二十年了。
English: Li Chong also said in the above table: It has been twenty years since I met Li Biao.

古文：见其才优学博。议论刚正，愚意诚谓拔萃公清之人。
现代文：起初，我见他才干出众，学识渊博，议论不凡，刚正不阿，一时就认为他是一个出类拔萃、公正清廉的人才。
English: At first, I saw him as a man of great ability, knowledge, eloquence, and integrity, and for a while I thought he was an outstanding, fair and honest person.

古文：后稍察其为人酷急，犹谓益多损少。
现代文：后来，渐渐发现他急躁严酷，但是还认为益处多，坏处少。
English: Later, he gradually found that his impatience was harsh, but he still thought that it was more beneficial and less harmful.

古文：自大驾南行以来，彪兼尚书，日夕共事，始知其专恣无忌，尊身忽物；听其言如振古忠恕之贤，校其行实天下佞暴之贼。
现代文：自从圣上大驾南行以来，李彪兼任尚书，我一天早晚与他在一起共事，方才知道他这人专断强横，无所忌惮，一昧尊大自己，目中无有他人。如果听他的言论，好象是古代忠恕之贤士，但是对照一下他的行为，却实实在在是一个佞暴之贼徒。
English: Since the time of the Great Pilgrimage, Li Biao has also served as Shangshu, and I worked with him one morning and evening. It was only then that I knew that he was arbitrary and domineering, unscrupulous, self-important, and had no regard for others. If you listen to his words, he seems to be an ancient sage of loyalty, but if you compare his actions, he is really a violent thief.

古文：臣与任城卑躬曲己，若顺弟之奉暴兄，其所欲者，事虽非理，无不屈从。
现代文：我与任城王卑躬曲己，对他就象温顺的弟弟奉事残暴的兄长一样。他所要干的事情，虽然不在理，我们也不敢不屈从。
English: I bow and scrape with Ren, like a meek younger brother serving a cruel older brother, and we dare not disobey what he wants to do, even if he does not care.

古文：依事求实，悉有成验。
现代文：以上所讲，事实确凿，无不可以得到验证。
English: Based on the facts, all of the above has been verified.

古文：如臣列得实，宜殛彪于北荒，以除乱政之奸；所引无证，宜投臣于四裔，以息青蝇之谮。 
现代文：如果我列举的事情属实，就应该把李彪杀死于北方荒野之地，以便清除掉他这个乱政之奸人。如果所列举的事情虚而无证，则可以把我流放于极远之地，以便惩处妄进谗言之佞人。 
English: If the things I have listed are true, then Li Biao should be killed in the northern wilderness in order to remove him as a traitor of political chaos. If the things I have listed are false and without evidence, then I can be exiled to a faraway place in order to punish those who are deluded.

古文：冲手自作表，家人不知。
现代文：李冲亲笔写了这一上表，家中人丝毫不知。
English: Li Chong wrote the above chart with his own pen, and no one in his family knew anything about it.

古文：帝览表，叹怅久之，曰： 不意留台乃至于此！ 
现代文：孝文帝看过李冲的上表之后，怅然叹息了很久，说道： 唉！没想到留守洛阳的几个人闹到如此地步。 
English: After Emperor Xiaowen saw Li Chong's watch, he sighed for a long time and said: Alas! I didn't expect the few people left in Luoyang to make such a fuss.

古文：既而曰： 道固可谓溢矣，而仆射亦为满也。 
现代文：接着又说道： 李彪可以说是骄傲了，然而李冲又何尝没有自满哪？ 
English: Then he said: Li Biao can be said to be proud, but Li Chong is not complacent.

古文：黄门侍郎宋弁素怨冲，而与彪同州相善，阴左右之。
现代文：黄门侍郎宋弁素来对李冲有怨气，而与李彪同是相州人，关系很好，因此就私下里对如何处分李彪加以操纵。
English: Song Ben, the Yellow Gate's steward, has always had a grudge against Li Chong, but he and Li Biao are from the same county and have a good relationship. Therefore, he secretly manipulated how to punish Li Biao.

古文：有司处彪大辟，帝宥之，除名而已。
现代文：有关部门建议处李彪以死刑，孝文帝宽宥了他，最后只对他作了除名的处理。
English: The relevant departments recommended that Li Biao be sentenced to death, Emperor Xiaowen pardoned him, and finally only removed him from the list.

古文：冲雅性温厚，及收彪之际，亲数彪前后过失，瞋目大呼，投折几案，御史皆泥首面缚。
现代文：李冲性情雅闲，温良敦厚，但是在拘押李彪之时，他却一反常态，亲自数落了李彪前前后后的过失；他怒不可遏，目而视，大喊大叫，扔出小桌子，敲碎大桌子，吓得御史们个个以泥涂面，反绑自己的双手，来向李冲谢罪。
English: Li Chong was amiable and good-natured, but when Li Biao was detained, he went against the norm and personally counted Li Biao's mistakes; he was furious, stared, shouted, threw out a small table, smashed a large table, and scared the officials to smear their faces with mud and tie their hands behind their backs to apologize to Li Chong.

古文：冲詈辱肆口，遂发病荒悸，言语错缪，时扼腕大骂，称 李彪小人 ，医药皆不能疗，或以为肝裂，旬馀而卒。
现代文：李冲骂不绝口，神经失常，言语错乱，颠三倒四，时不时地扼腕大骂 李彪小人 ，吃药扎针都不能治疗，有人认为他是因怨气太盛而导致肝裂，十多天后就死了。
English: Li was always swearing, suffering from nervous disorders, slurring his speech, acting erratically, cursing Li Biao from time to time. He was a villain, and could not be treated by taking medicine or injections. Some people thought that he had a ruptured liver due to his excessive grudge, and he died more than ten days later.

古文：帝哭之，悲不自胜，赠司空。
现代文：李冲死后，孝文帝落泪痛苦，悲不自胜，并追赠他为司空。
English: After Li Chong's death, Emperor Xiaowen shed tears of pain and grief, and posthumously awarded him the title of Siku.

古文：冲勤敏强力，久处要剧，文案盈积，终日视事，未尝厌倦，职业修举，才四十而发白。
现代文：李冲勤奋聪敏，性要强，肯用力。他长期处于重要职位，平时公文案卷总是盈积案头，只好一天到晚处理公务，然而从来不感到厌倦。他兢兢业业，克尽职守，才四十岁就白了头发。
English: Li Chong is diligent and intelligent, has a strong personality, and is willing to work hard. He has been in an important position for a long time. In normal times, official documents and files are always piling up on his desk, so he has to deal with official business all day and night, but he never feels tired. He is diligent and conscientious, and his hair turned white at the age of forty.

古文：兄弟六人，凡四母，少时颇多忿竞。
现代文：他兄弟六人，系四个母亲所生，所以小时候弟兄之间常常发生争吵打架。
English: His six brothers were born to four mothers, so as a child there were often quarrels and fights between the brothers.

古文：及冲贵，禄赐皆与共之，更成敦睦。
现代文：然而，李冲富贵之后，却能把自己所得的俸禄、赏赐与兄弟们共同享受，从而兄弟和睦，全家安宁。
English: However, after Li Chong became rich and famous, he was able to share his salary and rewards with his brothers, which led to brotherly harmony and peace for the whole family.

古文：然多授引族姻，私以官爵，一家岁禄万匹有馀，时人以此少之。
现代文：但是，他大量提携家人和亲戚，并不通过公开选拔授以官职、爵位，光他一家一年的食禄就超过了一万匹崐，当时的人们以此看不起他。
English: However, people at the time looked down on him because he had a large number of family members and relatives and did not give them official positions and titles through open selection. His family's annual income alone exceeded 10,000 horses.

古文：魏主以彭城王勰为宗师，诏使督察宗室，有不帅教者以闻。
现代文：北魏孝文帝任命彭城王元勰为宗师，命令他监督检查皇室成员，如有谁不听从教导，就向自己汇报。
English: Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Pengcheng Wang Yuanxuan as his mentor and ordered him to supervise and inspect members of the royal family, and report to him if anyone did not follow his instructions.

古文：夏，四月，甲寅，改元。
现代文：夏季四月，甲寅，南齐明帝改年号为永泰。
English: In the summer of April, Jia Yin and Nanqi Mingdi changed their names to Yongtai.

古文：大司马会稽太守王敬则，自以高、武旧将，必不自安。
现代文：大司马会稽太子守王敬则因为自己是高帝、武帝的旧将，所以心中非常不安。
English: On the other hand, the grand steward of the Horse Association, the inspector prince, Wang Jing, was very uneasy in his heart because he was a former general of Emperor Gao and Emperor Wu.

古文：上虽外礼甚厚，而内相疑备，数访问敬则饮食，体干堪宜。
现代文：明帝虽然表面上对王敬则礼遇优厚，但是内心却对他十分猜疑、提防，曾经数次打听询问他饮食情况如何，身体还能否胜任带兵打仗。
English: Although Emperor Ming treated Wang Jing with great courtesy on the surface, he was very suspicious and wary of him in his heart. He asked him several times about his diet and whether he was physically capable of leading soldiers into battle.

古文：闻其衰老，且以居内地，故得少宽。
现代文：听说王敬则衰老了，而且又呆在离建康不远的地方，这才稍稍觉得心宽了一些。
English: When I heard that Wang Jing had grown old and was staying not far from Jiankang, I felt a little more at ease.

古文：前二岁，上遣领军将军萧坦之将斋仗五百人行武进陵，敬则诸子在都，忧怖无计。
现代文：前两年，明帝派遣领军将军萧坦之率领斋阁侍卫武士五百人去武进武帝等皇上陵园，当时王敬则的儿子们都在京城，王敬则担心事情有变，儿子受累，所以心中忧恐万分，束手无措。
English: In the previous two years, Emperor Ming sent the leading general Xiao Tianzhi to lead 500 soldiers of the Zagat Guards to the imperial cemeteries of Emperor Wu and other emperors. At that time, Wang Jing's sons were all in Beijing. Wang Jing was worried that things would change and his son would be affected, so he was very worried and helpless.

古文：上知之，遣敬则世子仲雄入东安尉之。
现代文：明帝知道这一情况之后，立即派遣王敬则的大儿子王仲雄从建康去会稽安慰。
English: After the Emperor Ming learned of this situation, he immediately sent Wang Zhongxiong, the eldest son of Wang Jingzhe, from Jiankang to Heji to comfort him.

古文：仲雄善琴，上以蔡邕焦尾琴借之。
现代文：王仲雄擅长弹琴，明帝把蔡邕焦尾琴借他一用。
English: Wang Zhongxiong was good at playing the piano, and Emperor Ming lent him the Caiyu cedarwood harp.

古文：仲雄于御前鼓琴作《懊憹歌》，曰： 常叹负情侬，郎今果行许。 
现代文：于是，王仲雄就当着齐明帝的面弹琴唱了一首《懊歌》，歌中唱到： 常悲叹会辜负我的多情，如今郎君果然动身。 
English: As a result, Wang Zhongxiong played the piano in front of Emperor Qiming and sang a "sorrowful song," in which he sang: "Often lamentation would betray my passion, but now my lord has indeed set out."

古文：又曰： 君行不净心，那得晋人题！ 
现代文：又唱到： 您在外用情不专，哪能厌恶别人唠叨！ 
English: He also sang: If you are not good at using your emotions, how can you detest other people's nagging!

古文：上愈猜愧。
现代文：明帝愈加猜疑、羞愧。
English: Emperor Ming became more and more suspicious and ashamed.

古文：上疾屡危，乃以光禄大夫张瑰为平东将军、吴郡太守，置兵佐以密防敬则。
现代文：明帝屡次病危，于是就任命光禄大夫张为平东将军、吴郡太守，并且秘密布置兵力，以便提防王敬则。
English: Emperor Ming repeatedly fell seriously ill, so he appointed Guanglu doctor Zhang as the general of Pingdong and the governor of Wu County, and secretly deployed troops to guard against Wang Jingzhe.

古文：中外传言，当有异处分。
现代文：朝廷内外传说纷纷，说明帝一定又有非常的举动了。
English: Legends inside and outside the court abounded, suggesting that the emperor must have made another extraordinary move.

古文：敬则闻之，窃曰： 东今有谁，只是鹆平我耳；东亦何易可平！
现代文：王敬则听了传言之后，私下里说： 东边现在还有谁？只不过是要除掉我罢了。但是，我又何尝可以那么容易地除掉呢？
English: Wang Jing, on the other hand, after listening to the rumors, said privately: "Who else is there in the East now? They just want to get rid of me. But how can I be so easily eliminated?

古文：吾终不受金罂！ 
现代文：我终究不会接受他的金的！ 
English: I won't accept his money after all!

古文：金罂，谓鸩也。
现代文：金，即指鸩酒。
English: Gold, that is, refers to alcohol.

古文：敬则女为徐州行事谢朓妻，敬则子太子洗马幼隆遣正员将军徐岳以情告朓： 为计若同者，当往报敬则。 
现代文：王敬则的女儿是徐州行事谢的妻子，王敬则的儿子太子洗马王幼隆派遣正员将军徐岳把情况告诉了谢，邀他一起举事，并且对谢说： 你如果同意的话，我就去告诉王敬则。 
English: Wang Jingzhe's daughter was the wife of Xuzhou's acting Xie, and Wang Jingzhe's son, Prince Zima Wangyulong, dispatched the general officer Xu Yue to tell Xie about the situation, invited him to work together, and said to Xie: If you agree, I will go and tell Wang Jingzhe.

古文：朓执岳，驰启以闻。
现代文：谢非但不愿意，而且把徐岳抓起来，派人速向明帝报告。
English: Xie was reluctant to do so, but he arrested Xu Yue and sent someone to report to Emperor Ming.

古文：敬则城局参军徐庶，家在京口。其子密以报庶，庶以告敬则五官掾王公林。
现代文：王敬则手下的城局参军徐庶家住在京口，徐庶的儿子把王敬则儿子要举事、徐岳被抓之事秘密告诉了父亲，徐庶又马上转告了王敬则手下的五官掾王公林。
English: Wang Jing's subordinate, Xu Shizhe, a member of the city bureau and the army, lived in Jingkou. Xu Shizhe's son secretly told his father that Wang Jing's son wanted to take up a cause and that Xu Yue had been arrested. Xu Shizhe immediately told Wang Jing's subordinate, Wu Wang Gonglin, one of the five officials.

古文：公林，敬则族子也，常所委信。
现代文：王公林是王敬则的族侄，深得王敬则信任，常常委以事务。
English: Wang Gonglin is the son of Wang Jingze's brother from the same clan. He often entrusts him with affairs and trusts him very much.

古文：公林劝敬则急送启赐儿死，单舟星夜还都。
现代文：王公林去劝说王敬则火速启奏明帝，让明帝赐自己的儿子一死。劝说之后，王公林就独自乘舟连夜赶回京城去了。
English: Wang Gonglin went to persuade Wang Jing to immediately appeal to Emperor Ming to let Emperor Ming give his son a death. After persuasion, Wang Gonglin went back to Beijing alone by boat overnight.

古文：敬则令司马张思祖草启，既而曰： 若尔，诸郎在都，要应有信，且忍一夕。 
现代文：王敬则命令司马张思祖起草对明帝的启奏，但一会儿又说： 情况如果真的这样的话，那么我的几个儿子都在京城，他们一定会来向我报信的，所以先不急，暂且再等一晚上吧。 
English: Wang Jing ordered Sima Zhang Sizu to draft an introduction to Emperor Ming, but a moment later he said: "If the situation is really like this, then several of my sons are in Beijing, they will certainly come to report to me, so don't rush, wait another night for the time being."

古文：其夜，呼僚佐文武樗蒲，谓众曰： 卿诸人欲令我作何计？ 
现代文：当天夜里，王敬则把手下的文武僚属召集来一起博戏，对大伙说： 你们大家想让我作如何打算呢？ 
English: In the evening of the same day, Wang Jing called together his civilian and military subordinates for a play and said to everyone: What do you all want me to do?

古文：莫敢先答。
现代文：众人谁也不敢先说。
English: No one dares to answer first.

古文：防阁丁兴怀曰： 官祗应作尔！ 
现代文：这时，防阁丁兴怀突然说道崐： 长官您应该举事谋反，除此别无选择。 
English: At this time, the guard Ding Xinghuai suddenly said: Sir, you should rebel, there is no other choice.

古文：敬则不应。
现代文：王敬则听了之后，没有表态。
English: Wang Jing, on the other hand, did not make a statement after listening.

古文：明旦，召山阴令王询、台传御史钟离祖愿，敬则横刀跂坐，问询等： 发丁可得几人？
现代文：次日天刚亮，王敬则就把山阴令王询、台传御史钟离祖愿两人叫来，自己手横握刀，跪坐席上，向王询、祖愿两人发问： 如果要发兵可以有多少人？
English: The next day, just after dawn, Wang Jing called Wang Zhen and Zou Zheng from Shan Yin Zhen Wang Zhen and Taizhong Mishi Zhong. He held a knife in his hand, knelt down at the table, and asked Wang Zhen and Zou Zhen: If you want to send troops, how many people can you send?

古文：库见有几钱物？ 
现代文：库中还有多少钱物？ 
English: How much stuff is left in the vault?

古文：询称 县丁猝不可集 ；祖愿称 库物多未输入 。
现代文：王询言称 县里的壮丁一下子不能召集起来 ，祖愿则言称 该入库的则物大多还没有输入库中 。
English: Wang Qianyan said that the county's young men could not be called up all at once, while Zu Wei said that most of the things to be stored had not yet been entered into the warehouse.

古文：敬则怒，将出斩之，王公林又谏曰： 凡事皆可悔，唯此事不可悔；官讵不更思！ 
现代文：王敬则一听，勃然大怒，令人把他们二人推出斩首。这时，王公林又劝谏王敬则说： 所有的事情都可以反悔，唯独这种事不可以反悔，您为什么不再考虑一下呢？ 
English: On hearing this, Wang Jing flew into a rage and had the two of them beheaded. At this time, Wang Gonglin also advised Wang Jing to say: All things can be repented of, but this kind of thing cannot be repented of. Why don't you think about it?

古文：敬则唾其面曰： 我作事，何关汝小子！ 
现代文：王敬则听了非常生气，唾了王公林一脸口水，并且恶狠狠地对他说： 我作事情，与你小子有什么关系呢？ 
English: Wang Jing, on the other hand, was very angry when he heard this. He spat in Wang Guolin's face and said to him angrily, "What does my doing things have to do with you, boy?

古文：丁卯，敬则举兵反，招集，配衣，二三日便发。
现代文：于是，王敬则决定举兵造反，开始召集兵力，配给袍甲兵器，二三日之内便出发了。
English: As a result, Wang Jing decided to raise an army to rebel, began to gather troops, distributed armor and armor weapons, and set out within two or three days.

古文：前中书令何胤，弃官隐居若邪山，敬则欲劫以为尚书令。
现代文：先前的中书令何胤，弃官而隐居在若邪山之中，王敬则想挟持他出任尚书令。
English: The previous Clerk of the Privy Council, Ho Tan, had resigned and was living in seclusion in the middle of the Wakasa Mountains, but Wang Jing wanted to entice him to become Clerk of the Privy Council.

古文：长史王弄璋等谏曰： 何令高蹈，必不从；不从，便应杀之。
现代文：长史王弄璋等人劝谏王敬则说： 何大人隐居深山，必定不会依从；他如果不依从的话，就应该杀掉他。
English: Changshi Wang Rong and others advised Wang Jing to leave, saying, "How many adults live in seclusion deep in the mountains, they will certainly not obey; if he does not obey, they should kill him."

古文：举大事先杀名贤，事必不济。 
现代文：然而，做大事情先杀害名贤高士，事情一定不会成功。 
English: However, if you make a big deal out of killing a famous person, you will not succeed.

古文：敬则乃止。
现代文：于是，王敬则就停止了这一想法。
English: As a result, Wang Jing stopped this idea.

古文：胤，尚之之孙也。
现代文：何胤是何尚之的孙子。
English: He is the grandson of He Shangzhu.

古文：庚午，魏发州郡兵二十万人，期八月中旬集悬瓠。
现代文：庚午，北魏征召各州郡之兵二十万人，时间定于八月中旬，会集悬瓠，准备再行南伐。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, the Northern Wei Dynasty conscripted 200,000 soldiers from every prefecture and county. The time was set for mid-August, and they would gather at the Hanging Pagoda to prepare to march south again.

古文：魏赵郡灵王幹卒。
现代文：北魏赵郡灵王元去世。
English: Ling Wangyuan of Zhao County in the Northern Wei Dynasty died.

古文：上闻王敬则反，收王幼隆及其兄员外郎世雄、记室参军季哲、其弟太子舍人少安等，皆杀之。
现代文：明帝知道王敬则谋反了，就把王幼隆以及他的两个哥哥员外郎王世雄、江室参军王季哲、弟弟太子舍人王少安等人抓起来，全部杀掉了。
English: The Ming Emperor knew that Wang Jing was plotting a rebellion, so he arrested Wang Yulong and his two elder brothers Wang Shixiong, Wang Jizhe, and Wang Shao'an, and killed them all.

古文：长子黄门郎元迁将千人在徐州击魏，敕徐州刺史徐玄庆杀之。
现代文：王敬则的长子黄门郎王元迁率领一千兵马在徐州抗击北魏军队，明帝下令徐州刺史徐玄庆杀掉了他。
English: The eldest son of Wang Jingzhe, Huangmen Lang Wang Yuanqian, led a thousand soldiers and horses to fight against the Northern Wei army in Xuzhou. The Ming Emperor ordered the Xuzhou assassin, Xu Xuanqing, to kill him.

古文：前吴郡太守南康候子恪，嶷之子也，敬则起兵，以奉子恪为名；子恪亡走，未知所在。
现代文：前吴郡太守南康王萧子恪是萧嶷的儿子，王敬则以拥立萧子恪为名义而起兵造反，但是，萧子恪吓得逃跑了，不知逃到了什么地方。
English: The former governor of Wuxi County, Nankang Wang Xiao Zi Ke, was the son of Xiao Yao, and Wang Jing rebelled in the name of supporting Xiao Zi Ke. However, Xiao Zi Ke was so scared that he ran away and I don't know where he went.

古文：始安王遥光劝上尽诛高、武子孙，于是悉召诸王侯入宫。
现代文：始安王萧遥光劝说明帝把高帝、武帝的子孙全部杀掉，于是明帝把诸位王侯全部召入宫中。
English: Shi'an King Xiao Yaoguang persuaded the emperor to kill all the descendants of Emperor Gao and Emperor Wu, so Emperor Ming summoned all the princes to the palace.

古文：晋安王宝义江陵公宝览等处中书省，高、武诸孙处西省，敕人各从左右两人，过此依军法；孩幼者与乳母俱入。
现代文：晋安王萧宝义、江陵公萧宝览等人在中书省，高帝、武帝的孙子们在门下省，明帝命令他们每人只可以带随从两人，超过了以军法从事。
English: Xiao Baoyi, the King of Jin'an, Xiao Baojuan, the Prince of Jiangling, and others were in the Chinese Literature Province, and the grandchildren of Emperor Gao and Emperor Wu were in the provinces under their tutelage. Emperor Ming ordered that each of them could only bring two attendants, which was more than they could engage in military law.

古文：其夜，令太医煮椒二斛，都水办棺材数十具，须三更，当尽杀之。
现代文：诸位王侯中还是幼小的孩子，齐明帝命令由他们的乳母把他们带进宫来。这天夜里，明帝命令宫中的太医煮了两斛花椒水，又命令都水官备署办棺材数十具，准备到三更之时，就把诸王侯全部毒死。
English: The princes were still small children, and Emperor Qiming ordered their nannies to bring them to the palace. That night, Emperor Qiming ordered the palace physician to boil two jars of pepper water, and ordered the capital water conservator to prepare dozens of coffins. When it was time for the funeral, he poisoned all the princes to death.

古文：子恪徒跣自归，二更达建阳门，剌启。
现代文：萧子恪自己一个人赤脚步行赶回来了，二更时分到达建阳门，他把自己的姓名和所要启陈的事写于纸上，让人转达于齐明帝。
English: Xiao Ziqi rushed back on his own barefoot foot, and arrived at Jianyang Gate in two hours. He wrote his name and the things he wanted to reveal on a piece of paper, and had it conveyed to Emperor Qiming.

古文：时刻已至，而上眠不起，中书舍人沈徽孚与上所亲左右单景隽共谋少留其事。
现代文：三更时分已到，但明帝还睡眠未起，中书舍人沈徽孚就与明帝所信任的心腹单景隽一起商议，决定先不采取行动，等皇上起来之后再说。
English: The third hour of the night had arrived, but Emperor Ming was still asleep. Shen Huifu, the person in charge of the Chinese Library, discussed the matter with Emperor Ming's trusted confidant, Shan Jingyu, and decided not to take any action until the Emperor woke up.

古文：须臾，上觉，景隽启子恪已至。
现代文：一会儿，齐明帝醒来了，单景隽就告诉他萧子恪已经来了。
English: After a while, Emperor Qiming woke up and told him that Xiao Zikai had arrived.

古文：上惊问曰： 未邪？
现代文：明帝一听，惊奇地问道： 还没有动手吗？
English: After listening, Emperor Ming asked in surprise, "Haven't you started yet?"

古文：未邪？ 
现代文：还没有动手吗？ 
English: Haven't you done it yet?

古文：景隽具以事对。上抚床曰： 遥光几误人事！ 乃赐王侯供馔，明日，悉遣还第。
现代文：单景隽就把萧子恪要向明帝启陈的王敬则如何想以拥立他为名义而谋反，他如何逃而不见王敬则，以及如何自动前来的情况转述了一遍，明帝听了之后，明白了事情的真相，边用手拍床边说道： 萧遥光差点坏了大事，让我滥杀无辜。 于是，明帝马上改变了主意，设宴招待诸王侯。
English: On the other hand, the single scene recounts how Xiao Zi Jia wanted to rebel against Wang Jing in the name of supporting him, how he fled without seeing Wang Jia Jia, and how he came forward automatically. After listening, the Ming Emperor understood the truth of the matter and clapped his hands on the side of the bed and said: Xiao Yaoguang almost ruined the big event, let me indiscriminately kill the innocent. As a result, the Ming Emperor immediately changed his mind and set up a banquet to entertain the princes.

古文：以子恪为太子中庶子。
现代文：第二天，明帝让他们回到各自的府中去，并且还任命萧子恪为太子中庶子。
English: The next day, Emperor Ming let them go back to their respective provinces, and also appointed Xiao Zi Ke as the prince's illegitimate son.

古文：宝览，缅之子也。
现代文：萧宝览是萧缅的儿子。
English: Xiao Baochan is the son of Xiao Ming.

古文：敬则帅实甲万人过浙江。张瑰遣兵三千拒敬则于松江，闻敬则军鼓声，一时散走，瑰弃郡，逃民间。
现代文：王敬则率领一万甲兵渡过了浙江，张调遣三千兵力在松江岸上抵挡他，但是这些士兵们一听到王敬则部队的军鼓声音，马上四处逃散，张只好弃郡署于不顾，自己逃到民间躲起来了。
English: Wang Jing, on the other hand, led ten thousand soldiers across Zhejiang, and Zhang dispatched three thousand troops to resist him on the banks of the Songjiang River. However, as soon as these soldiers heard the sound of the military drums of Wang Jing's troops, they immediately fled in all directions. Zhang had no choice but to abandon the county office and fled to the countryside to hide.

古文：敬则以旧将举事，百姓担篙荷锸，随之者十馀万众；至晋陵，南沙人范修化杀县令公上延孙以应之。
现代文：王敬则以老将的身分起兵谋反，老百姓们纷纷扛着竹竿，拿着锄头，前来投奔，追随的人有十万多。他们到晋陵时，南沙人范化杀了县令公上延孙，起来响应。
English: Wang Jing, on the other hand, as a veteran, raised an army to rebel. The common people, carrying bamboo poles and hoes, rushed to join the rebellion, followed by more than one hundred thousand people. When they arrived at Jinling, the Nansha people killed the county magistrate, Guo Yangsun, and stood up to respond.

古文：敬则至武进陵口，恸哭而过。
现代文：经过武进高帝陵园所在地陵口之时，王敬则怀想起了高帝对自己的恩宠，不禁放声恸哭。
English: When passing through the Mausoleum of Emperor Gao, the location of the Wujin Gao Mausoleum, Wang Jing remembered Gao's grace to himself and could not help but wail loudly.

古文：乌程丘仲孚为曲阿令，敬则前锋奄至，仲孚谓吏民曰： 贼乘胜虽锐，而乌合易离。
现代文：乌程人丘仲孚是曲阿县令，王敬则的前锋部队刚到，丘仲孚就对治下的吏役、民众说： 反贼们虽然一路乘胜，气势嚣张，但是毕竟是乌合之众，一盘散沙。
English: Ucheng's man, Qiu Zhongfu, was the governor of Qu'a County. As soon as Wang Jingzhe's vanguard troops arrived, Qiu Zhongfu said to the officials and people under his reign: Although the anti-thieves are taking advantage of the victory all the way, they are arrogant, but after all, they are a rabble.

古文：今若收船舰，凿长冈埭，泻渎水以阻其路，得留数日，台军必至，如此，则大事济矣。 
现代文：眼下我们如果把船舰收起来，并且把长冈水坝挖开，放出大水挡住他们的去路，如果能让他们停留几天的话，朝廷军队一定可以到达，这样的话，大功必定告成。 
English: Right now, if we put the ships away, and dig up the Nagaoka Dam, releasing large amounts of water to block their path, if we can make them stay for a few days, the imperial army will surely arrive. In this case, the great work will surely be completed.

古文：敬则军至，值渎涸，果顿兵不得进。
现代文：王敬则军队到达之后，因河渠干涸，果然停止不能前行。
English: After the arrival of Wang Jing's army, due to the river channel drying up, it was indeed unable to move forward.

古文：五月，壬午，诏前军司马左兴盛、后军将军崔恭祖、辅国将军刘山阳、龙骧将军、马军主胡松筑垒于曲阿长冈；右仆射沈文季为持节都督，屯湖头，备京口路。
现代文：五月，明帝诏令前军司马左兴盛、后军将军崔恭祖、辅国将军刘山阳、龙骧将军马军主胡松在曲阿长冈修筑战垒工事。又委任右仆射沈文季为持节都督，屯驻湖头，以守备京口大路。
English: In May, Emperor Ming decreed that the former military commander Ma Zu Xingsheng, the later military general Cui Gongzu, the auxiliary general Liu Shanyang, and the Long March general Ma Junshu Hu Song should build fortifications in Qu'ao Nagaoka. He also appointed his right-hand man Sha Shen Wenzhi as the festival-holding governor, stationed in Houtou to guard the Keikou Highway.

古文：恭祖，慧景之旅也。
现代文：崔恭祖与崔慧景是同族。
English: Cui Gongzu and Cui Huijing are from the same family.

古文：敬则急攻兴盛、山阳二垒，台军不能敌，欲退，而围不开，各死战。
现代文：王敬则对左兴盛、刘山阳两处发起了猛烈攻击，朝廷军队不能敌挡，准备撤退，但是不能突围，只好死战。
English: Wang Jing, on the other hand, launched a fierce attack on Zuo Xingsheng and Liu Shanyang. The imperial army could not resist and prepared to retreat, but could not break through, and had to fight to the death.

古文：胡松引骑兵突其后，白丁无器仗，皆惊散。
现代文：胡松带领骑兵从背后对王敬则军队发起攻击，那些追随王敬则的民众手中无有武器，纷纷惊慌而逃。
English: Husong led the cavalry to attack Wang Jingzhe's army from behind. Those who followed Wang Jingzhe had no weapons in their hands and fled in panic.

古文：敬则军大败，索马再上，不能得，崔恭祖刺之仆地，兴盛军客袁文旷斩之。
现代文：王敬则的军队一败涂地，但是他还要找一匹马骑上再战，可是找不到，结果被崔恭祖一枪刺倒在地，刘兴盛部下武士袁文旷立即上前将其斩首。
English: Wang Jingzhe's army suffered a crushing defeat, but he still wanted to find a horse to ride into battle, but he couldn't find one. As a result, he was stabbed to the ground by Cui Gongzu, and Yuan Wenyuan, a samurai under Liu Xingsheng, immediately came forward to behead him.

古文：乙酉，传首建康。
现代文：乙酉，王敬则的脑袋被送到了建康。
English: Wang Jingze's head was sent to Jiankang.

古文：是时上疾已笃，敬则仓猝东起，朝廷震惧。
现代文：当时，明帝的病情已经非常沉重，而王敬则猝然在东边起兵举事，因此朝廷内部一片震惊，人人恐慌不已。
English: At that time, Emperor Ming's condition was already very serious, and Wang Jing suddenly raised an army in the east, so the imperial court was shocked and everyone was panicking.

古文：太子宝卷使人上屋，望见征虏亭失火，谓敬则至，急装欲走。
现代文：太子萧宝卷让人上屋顶，望见征虏亭失火，一片火光，以为是王敬则率领军队打过来了，就急忙穿上戎装，将要逃走。
English: Prince Xiao Baowan had people go up to the roof, and they saw a fire at the Conquest Pavilion. They thought it was Wang Jing leading the army, so they hurriedly put on their uniforms and were about to flee.

古文：敬则闻之，喜曰： 檀公三十六策，走为上策，计汝父子唯有走耳！ 
现代文：王敬则知道此事之后，高兴地说： 檀公三十六策，走为上策，我想你们父子也只有逃走这么一条路了。 
English: Wang Jing, on the other hand, after learning about this, said happily: "Dangong 36 measures, walking is the best strategy, I think your father and son have only one way to escape.

古文：盖时人讥檀道济避魏之语也。
现代文：所谓 檀公三十六策，走为上策 ，是当时人们讥刺檀道济见了北魏军队只会逃跑的话语。
English: The so-called "Dangong's thirty-six measures, walking as the best measure" was a term used by people at the time to ridicule the idea that the Northern Wei army would only run away when they saw the Dangong.

古文：敬则之来，声势甚盛，裁少日而败。
现代文：王敬则起兵，其来头凶猛，声势甚大，但是仅在很短的时间内就以失败而告终。
English: Wang Jing, on the other hand, raised an army, which was fierce and very loud, but ended in failure in a very short time.

古文：台军讨贼党，晋陵民以附敬则应死者甚众。太守王瞻上言： 愚民易动，不足穷法。 
现代文：朝廷军队讨伐王敬则及其同伙，晋陵的百姓因投附王敬则而应该被处死者特别多，太守王瞻上奏明帝说： 百姓愚蠢，易被煽动，所以没有必要严加追究。 
English: The imperial army fought against Wang Jianzhe and his associates, and the people of Jinling who should have been executed for their support of Wang Jianzhe were particularly numerous. The daimyō Wang Zhan wrote to Emperor Ming saying, "The people are stupid and easily incited, so there is no need to strictly investigate."

古文：上许之，所全活以万数。
现代文：明帝准许了这一建议，使数万人得以活命。
English: Emperor Ming approved this suggestion, allowing tens of thousands of people to survive.

古文：瞻，弘之从孙也。
现代文：王瞻是王弘之的侄孙。
English: Wang Zhan is the grandnephew of Wang Hongzhi.

古文：上赏谢朓之功，迁尚书吏部郎。
现代文：明帝奖赏谢的功劳，升任他为尚书吏部郎。
English: Emperor Ming rewarded Xie's merits and promoted him to the post of secretary.

古文：朓上表三让，上不许。
现代文：谢三次上表于齐明帝表示辞让，但是明帝不准许。
English: Xie submitted his resignation to Emperor Qiming three times, but Emperor Qiming did not allow it.

古文：中书疑朓官未及让，国子祭酒沈约曰： 近世小官不让，遂成恒俗。
现代文：中书怀疑谢的官位还够不上照例辞让，国子祭酒沈约却说： 近世以来低级官员不辞让，这已经成为一种常例。
English: The Chinese text suspected that Xie's official position was not enough for him to resign as usual, but Guozi sacrifice wine Shen Ying said: Since modern times, low-level officials have not resigned, which has become a common practice.

古文：谢吏部今授超阶，让别有意。
现代文：但是，如今越级给谢吏部授官。
English: However, now it is too late to give Xie Libu an official post.

古文：夫让出人情，岂关官之大小邪！ 
现代文：他辞让是为了避免别人说他告发岳父而得官。他的辞让是出于人情世故方面的考虑，岂与官职大小有关？ 
English: He resigned in order to prevent others from saying that he had denounced his father-in-law and won the post. His resignation was motivated by considerations of human decency, is it related to the size of the post?

古文：朓妻常怀刃欲杀朓，朓不敢相见。
现代文：谢的妻子经常怀中藏着刀子，要杀死谢，因此吓得谢不敢与妻子相见。
English: Xie's wife often hid a knife in her arms to kill Xie, so he was too scared to meet her.

古文：秋，七月，魏彭城王勰表以一岁国秩、职俸、亲恤裨军国之用。
现代文：秋季七月，北魏彭城王元勰上表孝文帝，提出献出自己一年的藩国食禄、朝职俸禄以及朝廷所给的恤亲财物，以助国家开支之用。
English: In the autumn of July, King Yuan of Pengcheng in Northern Wei, who was on the guest list of Emperor Xiaowen, offered to donate a year's worth of his salary, as well as the allowance given by the imperial court to his relatives, to help with the country's expenses.

古文：魏主诏曰： 割身存国，理为远矣。职俸便停，亲、国听三分受一。 
现代文：孝文帝为此而特发诏令，说： 彭城王能舍弃自身利益而为国家安危着想，其行动之意义是十分重大的。那么，他的朝职俸禄就全部接受，但藩国食禄和恤亲财物则只接受三分之一。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen issued a special edict for this purpose, saying: If King Pengcheng can give up his own interests and think about the safety of the country, the significance of his actions is very significant. Then, he will accept all of his imperial salary, but he will only accept one-third of the food allowance of the domain and the property of the relatives.

古文：壬午，又诏损皇后私府之半，六宫嫔御、五服男女供恤亦减半，在军者三分省一，以给军赏。
现代文：壬午，孝文帝又发诏令，命令减少皇后私人费用一半，六宫嫔妃、五服之内的男女的供给也减少一半，如果在军队中则减少三分之一，节约下来的全部用作给军队的赏赐。
English: At noon, Emperor Xiaowen issued another edict, ordering that the private expenses of the empress should be reduced by half, and the supply of men and women within the six palaces and five households should also be reduced by half, and if in the army, it should be reduced by one third, and all the savings should be used to reward the army.

古文：癸卯，以太子中庶子萧衍为雍州刺史。
现代文：癸卯，明帝任命太子中庶子萧衍为雍州刺史。
English: At the same time, Emperor Ming appointed the prince's illegitimate son, Xiao Yan, to be the crown prince of Yongzhou.

古文：己酉，上殂于正福殿。
现代文：己酉，明帝死于正福殿。
English: After his death, Emperor Ming died at Zhengfu Hall.

古文：遗诏： 徐令可重申前命。
现代文：明帝在遗诏中说： 前次曾授以尚书令徐孝嗣开府仪同三司，辞而不受，可以再次授之。
English: Emperor Ming said in his last will and testament: Xu Xiaozhi was awarded the Grand Cordon of the Order of the Grand Cordon of the Order of the Grand Cordon of the Order of the Grand Cordon of the Order of the Grand Cordon of the Order of the Star of the Star of the Star of the Star of the Star of the Star of the Star of the Star of the Star of the Star of the Star of the Star of the Star.

古文：沈文季可左仆射，江祏可右仆射，江祀可侍中，刘暄可卫尉。
现代文：沈文季可以担任左仆射，江可以担任右仆射，江祀可以担任侍中，刘暄可以担任卫尉。
English: Shen Wenji can serve as the left footman, Jiang can serve as the right footman, Jiang Shi can serve as a chamberlain, and Liu Ye can serve as a guard.

古文：军政可委陈太尉；内外众事，无大小委徐孝嗣、遥光、坦之、江祏，其大事与沈文季、江祀、刘暄参怀。
现代文：军政大事可以委托于太尉陈显达，而朝廷内外众多事务，无论大小一并委托于徐孝嗣、萧遥光、萧坦之、江，其中重大事情与沈文季、江祀、刘暄三人商量决定。
English: Military and political affairs could be entrusted to Lieutenant Chen Xianda, while many affairs both inside and outside the imperial court, no matter how big or small, were entrusted to Xu Xiaozhi, Xiao Yaoguang, Xiao Tanzhi, and Jiang, among which important matters were discussed and decided by Shen Wenzhi, Jiang Zixi, and Liu Bei.

古文：心膂之任可委刘悛、萧惠休、崔慧景。 
现代文：关键要害职务可以委托于刘悛、萧惠休、崔慧景三人。 
English: The key positions can be entrusted to Liu Wei, Xiao Huixiu and Cui Huijing.

古文：上性猜多虑，简于出入，竟不郊天。
现代文：明帝性格猜疑多虑，深居而简出，竟然没有去南郊祭祀过上天。
English: Emperor Ming's character was suspicious and hesitant, he lived a simple life, and he didn't even go to the southern suburbs to offer sacrifices to the heavens.

古文：又深信巫觋，每出先占利害。
现代文：他又对筮占深信不疑，每次出外都要先占卜吉凶利害。
English: He is also a firm believer in divination. Every time he goes out, he must first divine the omens.

古文：东出云西，南出云北。初有疾，甚秘之，听览不辍。
现代文：如果去东边，则告人说去西边；如果去南边，则告人说去北边，不让预先知道其行迹。
English: If you go to the east, you tell people to go to the west; if you go to the south, you tell people to go to the north, without letting them know your whereabouts in advance.

古文：久之，敕台省文簿中求白鱼以为药，外始知之。
现代文：刚有病之时，特别保密，害怕别人知道，所以照样听政、阅览公文不止。很久以后，他在下达给台省的文件中要白鱼来做药，外界这才知道他有病。
English: At the beginning of his illness, he was very secretive, afraid that others would find out, so he continued to listen to the government and read official documents. A long time later, he asked for white fish to make medicine in a document issued to Taiwan Province, and only then did the outside world know that he was ill.

古文：太子即位。
现代文：太子萧宝卷登皇帝位。
English: Prince Xiao Bao was enthroned as emperor.

古文：八月，辛亥，魏太子自洛阳朝于悬瓠。
现代文：八月，辛亥，北魏太子从洛阳到悬瓠朝见孝文帝。
English: In August, Xinhai, the Northern Wei Prince went from Luoyang to Jianye to see Emperor Xiaowen.

古文：壬子，奉朝请邓学以齐兴郡降魏。
现代文：壬子，南齐奉朝请邓学投降北魏，献出齐兴郡。
English: Jinzi, Nanqi asked Deng Xue to surrender to the Northern Wei Dynasty and offered Qi Xing County.

古文：魏主之入寇也，遣使发高车兵。高车惮远役，奉袁纥树者为主，相帅北叛。
现代文：北魏孝文帝入侵南齐时，派遣使者去向高车调兵，但是高车人害怕远途劳役，因此奉袁纥树者为头领，率众叛变向北。
English: When Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty invaded Southern Qi, he sent an envoy to Gaochu to transfer troops, but Gaochu people were afraid of long-distance labor, so they took Yuan Shuxu as the leader and led the mutiny to the north.

古文：魏主遣征北将军宇文福讨之，大败而还，福坐黜官。
现代文：孝文帝派遣征北将军宇文福去讨伐，但是大败而回，宇文福因此而被黜官。
English: Emperor Xiaowen sent the Northern Expeditionary General Uwenfu to fight, but he was defeated and returned home. As a result, Uwenfu was made a eunuch.

古文：更命平北将军江阳王继都督北讨诸军事以讨之，自怀朔以东悉禀节度，仍摄镇平城。
现代文：孝文帝又命令平北将军江阳王元继为都督北讨诸军事，去讨伐高车，自怀朔以东全部归他掌管调遣，并摄镇平城。
English: Emperor Xiaowen also ordered the Pingbei general, Jiangyang Wangyuan, to succeed him as the military governor of the North, to fight against the carts, to control and dispatch everything east of Waishuo, and to pacify the town.

古文：继，熙之曾孙也。
现代文：元继是拓跋熙的曾孙。
English: Yuan Jie is the great-grandson of Tuoba Xi.

古文：八月，葬明皇帝于兴安陵，庙号高宗。
现代文：八月，南齐安葬明帝于兴安陵，庙号为高宗。
English: In August, Emperor Ming was buried in Xing'an Mausoleum in Nanqian, and the temple was renamed Gaozong.

古文：东昏侯恶灵在太极殿，欲速葬。徐孝嗣固争，得逾月。
现代文：东昏侯萧宝卷不喜欢明帝的灵柩停放在太极殿里，想快速安葬了事，因徐孝嗣一再坚持，才得以停放超过一月。
English: Xiao Baowan, the Dongwu marquis, did not like the Ming Emperor's coffin being parked in the Taiji Hall. He wanted to bury him quickly, but Xu Xiaozhi insisted again and again, so he was able to park it for more than a month.

古文：帝每当哭，辄云喉痛。
现代文：新登基的皇帝萧宝卷每当该哭灵的时候，他就说自己喉咙痛。
English: Whenever the newly enthroned Emperor Xiao Baozhong felt like crying, he would say that he had a sore throat.

古文：太中大夫羊阐入临，无发，号恸俯仰，帻遂脱地。帝辍哭大笑，谓左右曰： 秃鹙啼来乎！ 
现代文：太中大夫羊阐进殿哭灵，他没有头发，号啕大哭，前仰后合，以致头巾都掉到了地上，这时萧宝卷停止哭泣而放声大笑，对左右的人说： 秃来啼叫了。 
English: He had no hair, he wailed loudly, he threw his head back and forth so that his turban fell to the ground. At this time, Xiao Baowu stopped crying and laughed loudly, saying to the people around him: "The bald man has howled."

古文：九月，己亥，魏主闻高宗殂，下诏称 礼不伐丧 ，引兵还。
现代文：九月己亥，北魏孝文帝知道明帝死去，就下诏令说： 按礼，他国有丧，不加讨伐。 于是率兵而还。
English: When Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty learned of Emperor Ming's death in September, he issued an edict saying, "According to the etiquette, other countries should be mourned, and there should be no crusade." So he led an army and returned.

古文：庚子，诏北伐高车。
现代文：庚子，孝文帝诏崐令北伐高车。
English: Geng Zi, Emperor Xiaowen issued an imperial edict ordering the Northern Expedition.

古文：魏主得疾甚笃，旬日不见侍臣，左右唯彭城王勰等数人而已。
现代文：北魏孝文帝得病非常严重，十来天不接见左右侍臣，只有彭城王元勰等几个人在身边照料。
English: Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty became very ill. He did not receive his attendants for more than ten days, and only Pengcheng Wangyuan and a few others took care of him.

古文：勰内侍医药，外总军国之务，远近肃然，人无异议。
现代文：元勰既侍奉孝文帝看病吃药，同时又总管国家事务，内外用心，处理的非常周全，使得远近肃然，人无异议。
English: Yuan Zheng not only served Emperor Xiaowen to see a doctor and take medicine, but also was in charge of state affairs. He was diligent both at home and abroad, and dealt with the matter very thoroughly. This made people both near and far stand in awe, and there was no objection.

古文：右军将军丹阳徐謇善医，时在洛阳，急召之。
现代文：右军将军丹阳人徐謇擅长医术，当时他正在洛阳，元勰就急忙把他召来。
English: Xu Yao, a Danyang man and general of the Right Army, was good at medicine. He was in Luoyang at the time, and Yuan Shao hurriedly summoned him.

古文：既至，勰涕泣执手谓曰： 君能已至尊之疾，当获意外之赏；不然，有不测之诛。
现代文：徐謇到了之后，元勰拉着他的手边哭边说道： 您如果能医治好圣上的病，就可以获得意外的赏赐；如果医治不好，就会有不测之死临降于你。
English: After Xu Yao arrived, Yuan Yao took him by the hand and wept as he said: If you can cure the illness of the saint, you can get an unexpected reward; if the cure is not good, there will be an unexpected death coming to you.

古文：非但荣辱，乃系存亡。 
现代文：这不但关系着你的荣辱，而且关系到了你的生死存亡。 
English: This is not only related to your honor and disgrace, but also related to your life and death.

古文：勰又密为坛于汝水之滨，依周公故事，告天地及显祖，乞以身代魏主。
现代文：元勰又秘密地让人在汝水之滨筑了一座祭坛，依照当年周公所行那样，亲自去祷告天地及献文帝在天之灵，乞请以自己的身体代替孝文帝，让他快快痊愈。
English: Yuan Shao also secretly had an altar built on the banks of the river, and, as Zhou Gong had done that year, he personally went to pray to heaven and earth and to offer gifts to Emperor Xiaowen in the spirit of heaven, begging to use his own body to replace Emperor Xiaowen, so that he would quickly recover.

古文：魏主疾有间，丙午，发悬瓠，舍于汝滨，集百官，坐徐謇于上席，称扬其功，除鸿胪卿，封金乡县伯，赐钱万缗；诸王别饷赉，各不减千匹。
现代文：孝文帝的病稍有好转，丙午，从悬瓠出发，下榻于汝水之滨，并召集百官群臣，使徐謇坐在上席，赞扬了他的功劳，任命他为鸿胪卿，并且封为金乡县伯，赏钱一万串。另外，对诸王侯们的赏赐，每个也不少于一千匹帛。
English: Emperor Xiaowen's illness had slightly improved. In the afternoon, he departed from the Hanging Palace and stayed at the Ruishui Seaside. He gathered hundreds of officials and courtiers, made Xu Xi sit in the upper seat, praised his merits, appointed him as the Lord of Hongyi, and made him the county magistrate of Jinxiang County with a reward of ten thousand bunches of money. In addition, the reward for the princes was no less than one thousand bunches each.

古文：冬，十一月，辛巳，魏主如鄴。
现代文：冬季，十一月，辛巳，孝文帝到达邺城。
English: In winter, in November, Emperor Xiaowen arrived in Handan.

古文：戊子，立妃褚氏为皇后。
现代文：戊子，南齐东昏侯萧宝卷立妃子褚氏为皇后。
English: Wuzi, Nanqi Dongming Hou Xiao Bao rolled up and made her the empress.

古文：魏江阳王继上言： 高车顽昧，避役遁逃，若悉追戮，恐遂扰乱。
现代文：北魏江阳王元继上书孝文帝说： 高车人冥顽不化，逃避差役，反叛远遁，但是如果把他们全部追究杀戮，恐怕要引起大的扰乱。
English: Jiangyang Wangyuan of the Northern Wei Dynasty, following Emperor Xiaowen in writing, said: Gaochuan people are tenacious, evade duty, rebel far and wide, but if they are all investigated for killing, I am afraid it will cause great disturbance.

古文：请遣使，镇别推检，斩魁首一人，自馀加以慰抚。若悔悟从役者，即令赴军。 
现代文：所以，请朝廷为每一镇派遣一个使者，令其对本镇加以整顿，只斩罪魁祸首一人，其余的加以抚慰，如果本人后悔而愿意服役，那么就立即令其赶赴南伐之军。 
English: Therefore, please ask the imperial court to send an envoy to each town to rectify the situation in the town, to kill only the culprit, and to comfort the rest. If the culprit regrets and is willing to serve, then immediately send him to the army of the Southern Expedition.

古文：诏从之。于是叛者往往自归。
现代文：孝文帝发下诏令，准许了元继的这一做法，于是反叛的高车人许多又自动回来了。
English: Emperor Xiaowen issued an imperial edict to allow the practice, and many of the rebellious Gaocheng people returned voluntarily.

古文：继先遣入慰谕树者。树者亡入柔然，寻自悔，相帅出降。
现代文：元继先派遣人去抚慰和劝谕树者，树者逃往柔然国，但是很快就后悔了，于是率众出降。
English: Yuan successively sent people to comfort and advise the tree people. The tree people fled to the land of Juran, but soon regretted it, so they led the people to surrender.

古文：魏主善之；曰： 江阳可大任也。 
现代文：孝文帝说： 江阳王可以委以大任呀。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen said: King Jiangyang can be entrusted with great responsibilities.

古文：十二月，甲寅，魏主自鄴班师。
现代文：十二月甲寅，孝文帝从邺城班师返京。
English: In December, Emperor Xiaowen returned to Beijing from Shicheng.

古文：林邑王诸农入朝，海中值风，溺死，以其子文款为林邑王。
现代文：南齐林邑王范诸农入朝晋见，在海上遇到风暴，溺水而死，南齐封其子范文款为林邑王。
English: Nanqi Linyi King Fan Zhu Nong entered the court of Jin, encountered a storm at sea, drowned and died, Nanqi designated his son Fanwen as Linyi King.

