古文：李珏，字待价，其先出赵郡，客居淮阴。
现代文：李珏的字叫待价，他的祖先来自赵郡，迁居淮阴。
English: Li Wei's character is Waiting for the Price. His ancestors came from Zhao County and moved to Huaiyin.

古文：幼孤，事母以孝闻。
现代文：他早年失去了父亲，侍奉母亲以行孝出名。
English: He lost his father at an early age and became famous for his filial piety while serving his mother.

古文：甫冠，举明经。
现代文：才二十岁，考中了明经科。
English: He was only 20 years old when he passed the entrance examination for the Ming Dynasty.

古文：李绛为华州刺史，见之，曰： 日角珠廷，非庸人相。明经碌碌，非子所宜。 
现代文：李绛任华州刺史，见了他，说 ：你额头饱满，不是一般人的相貌，明经太平常，不适合你。 
English: Li Qianren, a historian from Huazhou, met him and said: "Your forehead is full, not an ordinary person's appearance, too plain, not suitable for you."

古文：乃更举进士高第。
现代文：他就又考中了进士中的高等。
English: He also passed the entrance examination for junior high school.

古文：河阳乌重胤表置幕府。
现代文：河阳节度使乌重胤上表要他到府中任职。
English: The Heyang Festival made Wu Chung-yin ask him to take up a post in the government.

古文：以拔萃补渭南尉，擢右拾遗。
现代文：他又考中拔萃被任命为渭南县尉，后升任右拾遗。
English: He also excelled in the middle school examination and was appointed as the commander of Yinan County, and later he was promoted to the position of Right Reviewer.

古文：穆宗即位，荒酒色，景陵始复土，即召李光颜于邠宁，李愬于徐州，期九月九日大宴群臣。
现代文：唐穆宗登基，贪恋美酒女色，景陵才盖土，就把李光颜从宁、李訫从徐州召来，定于九月九日和百官大摆宴席。
English: When Emperor Mu Zong ascended to the throne, he was greedy for wine and women, and he wanted to build a magnificent mausoleum, so he summoned Li Guangyan from Ning and Li Yao from Xuzhou to hold a grand banquet for him and hundreds of officials on September 9.

古文：珏与宇文鼎、温畬、韦瓘、冯药同进曰： 道路皆言陛下追光颜等，将与百官高会。
现代文：李珏和宇文鼎、温余田、韦馞、冯约一起进谏说 ：朝外人都说皇上召唤李光颜等人，要和群臣聚会。
English: Li Qian, together with Yu Wenting, Wen Yutian, Wei Wei and Feng You, entered the hall and said, "People in and out of the imperial court say that the emperor has summoned Li Guangyan and others to gather with his retainers.

古文：且元朔未改，陵土新复，三年之制，天下通丧。
现代文：但年号没改，陵墓才盖土，三年心中悼念，全国都是一样。
English: However, the year did not change, the mausoleum was only covered with soil, three years of mourning in the heart, the whole country is the same.

古文：今同轨之会适去，远夷之使未还，遏密弛禁，本为齐人，钟鼓合飨，不施禁内。
现代文：现各地吊丧使者才走，去外国使臣没回，下禁令和解禁，本是为使人行动一致，奏乐宴会，丧期不能在宫内进行。
English: At present, the funeral messengers from all over the country have just left, and the foreign envoys have not returned. The ban and the lifting of the ban were originally intended to make people act in unison and play music banquets. The funeral period cannot be carried out in the palace.

古文：夫王者之举，为天下法，不可不慎。
现代文：天子的举动，被全国人效仿，不能不慎重。
English: The act of the Son of God, imitated by the whole nation, cannot be done without caution.

古文：且光颜、愬忠劳之臣，方盛秋屯边，如令访谋猷，付疆事，召之可也，岂以酒食之欢为厚邪？ 
现代文：李光颜、李訫是忠心有功的臣子，正因深秋在边境，防止异族入侵，如果下令征询意见，托付边疆事务，召他们来是可以的，难道把吃喝看得这么重要吗？ 
English: Li Guangyan and Li Qiye are loyal and meritorious courtiers. They are at the border to prevent the invasion of foreigners because of the late autumn. If they are ordered to solicit opinions, entrust the border affairs, and summon them, it is possible. Is eating and drinking so important?

古文：帝虽置其言，然厚加劳遣。
现代文：皇帝虽然搁置了他们的意见，但优厚地慰劳、打发了他们。
English: Although the emperor set aside their opinions, he graciously consoled and sent them away.

古文：盐铁使王播增茶税十之五以佐用度。
现代文：盐铁使王播增收十分之五的茶税来维持开销。
English: Yan Tie made Wang Bo increase the tea tax by five-tenths to maintain expenses.

古文：珏上疏谓： 榷率本济军兴，而税茶自贞元以来有之。
现代文：李珏上奏说 ：专卖本是为接济军需，而且收茶税从贞元年以后才有。
English: Li Hongzhang said: The monopoly was originally to help the military, and the tea tax was only collected after the first year of Zhen.

古文：方天下无事，忽厚敛以伤国体，一不可。
现代文：现全国没有战争，却突然增重税来伤害国家根本，这是不行的第一点。
English: There is currently no war in the country, but a sudden increase in taxes to hurt the country fundamentally is unacceptable.

古文：茗为人饮，与盐粟同资，若重税之，售必高，其敝先及贫下，二不可。
现代文：茶被人饮用，和盐、粮同为生活必需，如果收高茶税，售价一定高，受害的首先是穷苦人，这是不行的第二步。
English: Tea is drunk by people, and it is a necessity of life just like salt and grain. If the tea tax is raised, the selling price will be high, and the poor will be the first to suffer. This is the second step that cannot be taken.

古文：山泽之产无定数，程斤论税，以售多为利，若价腾踊，则市者稀，其税几何？
现代文：山野里产量没有一定，按斤收税，以出售多为有利，如价格激增，买的人就少，能收多少税呢？
English: In the mountains and fields, the output is not certain. The tax is collected according to the catty. It is advantageous to sell more. If the price surges, there will be fewer people to buy. How much tax can be collected?

古文：三不可。
现代文：这是不行的第三点。
English: This is the third point that does not work.

古文：陛下初即位，诏惩聚敛，今反增茶赋，必失人心。 
现代文：皇上刚登基，下诏惩罚横征暴敛。现反而增收茶税，一定使人民失望。 
English: The emperor had just ascended to the throne, and issued an edict to punish excessive taxation. Now, however, he has increased the tea tax, which is sure to disappoint the people.

古文：帝不纳。
现代文：皇帝没有采纳。
English: The emperor would not accept it.

古文：方是时，禁中造百尺楼，土木费钜万，故播亟敛，阴中帝欲。
现代文：那时候，宫中建造百尺高楼，建筑费很高，因此王播急于征收，私下满足皇帝的欲望。
English: At that time, the construction of a hundred-foot high building in the palace was very expensive, so Wang Bo was eager to collect and privately satisfy the emperor's desire.

古文：珏以数谏不得留，出为下邽令。
现代文：李珏因多次进谏不能留任，被贬出朝廷任下圭阝县令。
English: Due to his inability to remain in office due to repeated promotions, Li Qiye was dismissed from the imperial court and appointed as the governor of Guizhou County.

古文：武昌牛僧孺辟署掌书记，还为殿中侍御史。
现代文：武昌节度使牛僧孺任命他为掌书记官。后调回朝廷任殿中侍御史。
English: The Wuchang Festival made the Cow Monk Yao appoint him as the chief secretary. Later, he was transferred back to the imperial court to serve as the court historian.

古文：宰相韦处厚曰： 清庙之器，岂击搏才乎？ 
现代文：宰相韦处厚说： 他是治国的人才，哪里是掌监察的人才呢？ 
English: Prime Minister Wei Shuduo said: He is a talent for governing the country, where is the talent for supervision?

古文：除礼部员外郎。
现代文：任命他为礼部员外郎。
English: He was appointed as a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：僧孺还相，以司勋员外郎知制诰为翰林学士，加户部侍郎。
现代文：牛僧孺重任宰相，任命他以司勋员外郎、知制诰身份任翰林学士，后升任户部侍郎。
English: Niu Xiangyu was appointed as the prime minister, and he was appointed as a scholar of Hanlin with the status of a grand chamberlain and a courtier, and later he was promoted to the position of a household attendant.

古文：始，郑注以医进，文宗一日语珏曰： 卿亦知有郑注乎？
现代文：当初，郑注靠医术升官，唐文宗有天对李珏说： 你也知道有个叫郑注的吗？
English: At first, Zhengzhu was promoted by medical skill. One day, Tang Wenzong said to Li Xi: Do you also know someone named Zhengzhu?

古文：宜与之言。 
现代文：应和他谈谈。 
English: We should talk to him.

古文：珏曰： 臣知之，奸回人也。 
现代文：李珏说： 我知道他，是个邪恶的人。 
English: Li Wei said: I know him, he is an evil person.

古文：帝愕然曰： 朕疾愈，注力也。可不一见之？ 
现代文：皇帝吃惊地说： 我的病能好，是郑注的功劳，怎能不见一下他呢？ 
English: Surprised, the emperor said, "I owe my recovery to Zheng Zhu. How could I not see him for a while?

古文：注由是怨珏。
现代文：郑注从此恨李珏。
English: Zheng Zhu hated Li Yao from then on.

古文：及李宗闵以罪去，珏为申辨，贬江州刺史。
现代文：到李宗闵因判罪免相，李珏给他申辩，被贬为江州刺史。
English: After Li Zongyao was pardoned for his crime, Li Zongyao defended him and was relegated to the annals of Jiangsu history.

古文：徙河南尹，复为户部侍郎。
现代文：后调任河南府尹，又调任户部侍郎。
English: Later, he was transferred to Yin, Henan Province, and then to Tsuru, Household Attendant.

古文：开成中，杨嗣复得君，引珏同中书门下平章事，与李固言皆善。
现代文：开成年间，杨嗣复受皇帝宠信，推荐李珏任同中书门下平章事，和李固言又都要好。
English: At the beginning of adulthood, Yang Zi was once again favored by the emperor, recommending that Li Junren and Li Guanzhong should have a peaceful relationship, and that Li Guanzhong should be good.

古文：三人者居中秉权，乃与郑覃、陈夷行等更持议，一好恶，相影和，朋党益炽矣。
现代文：他们三个人在朝中掌权，和郑覃、陈夷行等人观点对立，双方都态度一致，互相呼应，宗派更严重了。
English: The three of them hold power in the DPRK and China, and their views are opposed to those of Zheng Hui, Chen Yigang and others. Both sides have the same attitude and echo each other. Sectarianism has become more serious.

古文：珏数辞位，不许。
现代文：李珏多次辞职，没有批准。
English: Li Gan resigned several times, and his resignation was not approved.

古文：帝尝自谓： 临天下十四年，虽未至治，然视今日承平亦希矣！ 
现代文：皇帝曾自言自语地说： 我治理国家十四年，虽然没能治理得极好，但像今天这样太平也少有了！ 
English: The emperor once said to himself: I have governed the country for fourteen years, and although I have not been able to govern it very well, it has rarely been as peaceful as it is today!

古文：珏曰： 为国者如治身，及身康宁，调适以自助，如恃安而忽，则疾生。
现代文：李珏说 ：治理国家像调养身体，趁身体健康，要调整好，使身体健康发展，如仗着健康就大意，疾病就产生了。
English: Li Wei said: Governing the country is like taking care of one's body. Taking advantage of one's health, it is necessary to adjust well and make the body develop healthily. If you rely on health, disease will occur.

古文：天下当无事，思所阙，祸乱可至哉？ 
现代文：在国家没有祸乱时，还想到欠缺之处，祸乱会产生吗？ 
English: When there is no calamity in the country, do you still think about the shortcomings? Will there be a calamity?

古文：杜悰领度支有劳，帝欲拜户部尚书，以问宰相。陈夷行答曰： 恩权予夺，愿陛下自断。 
现代文：杜掌管度支有功劳，皇帝想任命他为户部尚书，为这问宰相们，陈夷行回答说 ：衡量奖惩任官免职，希望皇上自己决断。 
English: The emperor wanted to appoint him as the head of the household, and asked the prime ministers about this, Chen Yigang replied, "I hope the emperor will decide for himself whether to reward, punish, or dismiss the appointed official."

古文：珏曰： 祖宗倚宰相，天下事皆先平章，故官曰平章事。
现代文：李珏说： 先帝倚重宰相，国家事务先让他们评价辨别，所以定官名叫平章事。
English: Li Wei said: The former emperor relied heavily on the prime minister, and let them evaluate and distinguish the national affairs first, so the appointment was called Pingzhangji.

古文：君臣相须，所以致太平也。
现代文：君臣互相依靠，才能使天下太平。
English: Sovereigns and subjects rely on each other to keep the world peaceful.

古文：苟用一吏、处一事皆决于上，将焉用彼相哉？
现代文：如果任命每位官员，处理每件事都由皇帝决定，还要宰相做什么？
English: If the appointment of every official and the handling of every matter were decided by the emperor, what would the prime minister have to do?

古文：隋文帝劳于小务，以疑待下，故二世而亡。
现代文：隋文帝为小事操劳，怀疑臣下，所以两代就亡了国。
English: Emperor Sui Wen labored over trifles and was suspicious of his vassals, so two generations of emperors perished.

古文：陛下尝谓臣曰： 窦易直劝我，凡宰相启拟，五取三，二取一。
现代文：皇上曾对我说： 窦易直劝告我，凡是宰相想任命官员，五个只批准三个，二个只批准一个。
English: The emperor once said to me: Dou Yizhong advised me that whenever the prime minister wanted to appoint an official, five would only approve three, and two would only approve one.

古文：彼宜劝我择宰相，不容劝我疑宰相。  
现代文：他应该劝我挑选宰相，不应劝我怀疑宰相。  
English: He should advise me to choose the prime minister, not advise me to doubt the prime minister.

古文：帝曰： 易直此言殊可鄙。 
现代文：皇帝说： 窦易直这话真浅薄。 
English: The emperor said: Dou Yizhong's words are really shallow.

古文：帝又语： 贞元初政事诚善。 
现代文：皇帝又说 ：贞元初年政务确实不错。 
English: The emperor also said, "The first year of the reign of Sadamoto was really good.

古文：珏曰： 德宗晚喜聚财，方镇以进奉市恩，吏得赋外求索，此其敝也。 
现代文：李珏说 ：德宗皇帝晚年喜欢聚敛钱财，藩镇用进贡来邀宠，官吏得以在赋税外勒索，这是他在位时的弊病。 
English: Li Wei said: Emperor Dezong liked to collect money in his later years, the towns used tribute to invite their favorites, and the officials were able to extort money in addition to taxes. This was the malady of his reign.

古文：帝曰： 人君轻所赋，节所用，可乎？ 
现代文：皇帝说 ：国君减轻赋税，节约用度，可以吗？ 
English: The emperor said, "Is it possible for the sovereign to reduce taxes and economize consumption?"

古文：珏曰： 贞观时，房、杜、王、魏为文皇帝谋，固此耳！ 
现代文：李珏说： 贞观年间，房玄龄、杜如晦、王王圭、魏征给太宗皇帝献计，也就是这！ 
English: Li Yan said: During the Zhenguan period, Fang Xuanling, Du Rugao, Wang Wanggui and Wei Zheng made offerings to Emperor Taizong. This is it!

古文：帝颇向纳。
现代文：皇帝很尊敬地采纳了。
English: The emperor respectfully accepted.

古文：进封赞皇县男。
现代文：提升封他为赞皇县男爵。
English: He was elevated to Baron Zhanwang County.

古文：始，庄恪太子薨，帝意属陈王。
现代文：当初，庄恪太子去世后，皇帝想立陈王为太子。
English: At first, after the death of Prince Zhuang, the emperor wanted to make Chen Wang the crown prince.

古文：既而帝崩，中人引宰相议所当立，珏曰： 帝既命陈王矣！ 
现代文：后来皇帝去世了，宦官召宰相商量该立谁，李珏说： 皇帝已命立陈王了！ 
English: Later, when the emperor died, the eunuch called the prime minister to discuss who should be appointed. Li Yan said, "The emperor has ordered the appointment of King Chen!"

古文：已而武宗即位，人皆为危之。
现代文：后来唐武宗登基，人们都替他担心。
English: Later, Tang Wuzong ascended to the throne, and people were worried about him.

古文：珏曰： 臣下知奉所言，安与禁中事？ 
现代文：他说 ：我只知报告皇帝说过的话，哪管宫中的事？ 
English: He said, "I only know what the emperor has said, so what does it matter what happens in the palace?"

古文：帝新听政，珏数称道《无逸篇》以劝。
现代文：皇帝管理朝政后，他多次称引《尚书·无逸篇》来勉励皇帝。
English: After the emperor managed the imperial government, he repeatedly quoted "Shang Shu·Mou Yat" to encourage the emperor.

古文：时潞州刘从谏献犬马，沧州刘约献白鹰，珏请却之以示四方。
现代文：当时潞州刘从谏献高头大马，沧州刘约献白色鹰，李珏请求退还掉向全国表示崇尚节俭。
English: At that time, Zhangzhou Liu Zong donated a tall horse, Cangzhou Liu Yu donated a white eagle, and Li Yu requested a refund to show the country that he advocated frugality.

古文：迁门下侍郎，为文宗山陵使。
现代文：后升任门下侍郎，又担任唐文宗山陵使。
English: Later, he was promoted to the position of a junior attendant, and also served as the Tang Wenzong's mountain envoy.

古文：会秋大雨，梓宫至安上门陷于泞，不前，罢为太常卿。
现代文：遇上秋天下大雨，灵车走到安上门陷到泥里，不能前进，被免职任太常卿。
English: When it rained heavily last autumn, the hearse got stuck in the mud on the way to Anzhangmen, and was unable to proceed. He was removed from his post as First Secretary of the Central Military Commission.

古文：终以议所立，贬江西观察使，再贬昭州刺史。
现代文：最终因立皇帝时的议论，被贬为江西观察使，后又贬为昭州刺史。
English: In the end, because of the discussion at the time of the emperor's enthronement, he was relegated to the position of Jiangxi observation envoy, and later he was relegated to the position of Zhaozhou historian.

古文：宣宗立，内徙郴、舒二州，以太子宾客分司东都。
现代文：唐宣宗即位，他调任郴、舒两州刺史，后任太子宾客掌管洛阳分署。
English: When Tang Xuan Zong ascended to the throne, he was transferred to be the chief historian of the two states of Qi and Shu. Later, he was put in charge of the Luoyang branch office of the Prince Guest.

古文：迁河阳节度使，罢横赋宿逋百余万。
现代文：又升任河阳节度使，免去额外赋税和过去欠债一百多万。
English: He was also promoted to the post of Heyang Festival Commissioner, exempted from additional taxes and debts of more than one million in the past.

古文：以吏部尚书召，珏去镇，而府库十倍于初。
现代文：后被召进朝廷任吏部尚书，他离开时，仓库储蓄是刚去时的十倍。
English: After that, he was called to the Imperial Court to serve as a clerk. When he left, the warehouse savings were ten times that of when he first arrived.

古文：俄检校尚书右仆射、淮南节度使。
现代文：不久任检校尚书右仆射、淮南节度使。
English: Soon after, he was appointed inspector of schools, minister of education, minister of education and minister of foreign affairs.

古文：珏顾己大臣，谊不以内外自异，表请立皇太子维天下心。
现代文：他认为自己是重臣，从道义上不应因在朝廷外任职而不管，上表请求立皇太子维系全国人的心。
English: He considered himself to be a senior vassal, and from a moral point of view, he should not be exempted from serving outside the imperial court. He requested the establishment of a crown prince to maintain the hearts of the people throughout the country.

古文：江淮旱，发仓廪赈流民，以军羡储杀半价与人。
现代文：江淮天旱，他开仓赈救逃荒的，用军队节余和储备的粮食按半价发给人民。
English: Jianghuai drought, he opened the warehouse to help escape the famine, with the army's savings and reserve grain at half price to the people.

古文：卒，年六十九，赠司空，谥曰贞穆。
现代文：后去世了，享年六十九岁，赠官司空，赐谥号叫贞穆。
English: Later, she passed away at the age of sixty-nine. She was given the title of Empress Dowager and the posthumous name of Zhenmu.

古文：始，淮南三节度皆卒于镇，人劝易署寝，珏曰： 上命我守扬州，是实正寝，若何去之？ 
现代文：当初，淮南三位节度使都在任去世，有人劝他换官署住处，他说： 皇帝令我镇守扬州，这就是居住治事处，怎能离开？ 
English: At the beginning, Huainan's three festival envoys all died in office. Someone advised him to change the residence of the government office. He said: The emperor ordered me to guard Yangzhou, which is the residence and administration office. How can I leave?

古文：及疾亟，官属见卧内，惟以州有税酒直而神策军常为豪商占利，方论奏，未见报为恨，一不及家事。
现代文：到他病重了，部下到卧室看他，他只遗憾州里有酒税钱但神策军却常被大商人盘剥，刚上奏，还没有答复，一句话没提家里的事。
English: When he was seriously ill, his subordinates came to his bedroom to see him. He only regretted that there was liquor tax money in the state, but the Shinsaka troops were often exploited by big businessmen. He had just started to play, and had not yet answered, and had not mentioned a word about his family.

古文：性寡欲，早丧妻，不置妾侍，门无馈饷。
现代文：他生性很少欲望，妻子早逝，他不买小妾和侍女，也没人上门送东西。
English: He was born with few desires, his wife died young, he did not buy a concubine or a maid, and no one came to the door to deliver anything.

古文：淮南之人德之，珏已殁，叩阙下，愿立碑刻其遗爱云。
现代文：据说淮南的人感激他的恩德，他死后，到皇宫请愿，要树碑刻上他的事迹。
English: It is said that the people of Huainan were grateful for his kindness. After his death, they went to the imperial palace to petition for a stele to be engraved with his deeds.

