古文：贞观七年，太宗谓太子左庶子于志宁、杜正伦曰： 卿等辅导太子，常须为说百姓间利害事。
现代文：贞观七年，唐太宗对太子左庶子于志宁、杜正伦说： 你们辅导太子，平常应该为他讲述百姓生活在民间的种种艰苦。
English: In the seventh year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to Yu Zhining and Du Zhenglun, the prince's second son: You tutor the prince, you should usually tell him about the hardships of the people living in the folk.

古文：朕年十八，犹在民间，百姓艰难，无不谙练。
现代文：我十八岁时还在民间，对百姓的艰难困苦非常清楚。
English: When I was 18 years old, I was still a commoner, and I was very aware of the hardships of the common people.

古文：及居帝位，每商量处置，或时有乖疏，得人谏诤，方始觉悟。
现代文：登上帝位后，每逢商议事情如何处理的时候，有时还会出现疏漏，由于得到他人的谏诤，才有所醒悟。
English: After ascending to the throne, whenever they discuss how to deal with things, sometimes there are omissions, and they only come to their senses when they receive encouragement from others.

古文：若无忠谏者为说，何由行得好事？
现代文：如果没有忠心的人对我直言进谏，我如何能做到为百姓办好事呢？
English: How can I do good things for the people if I don't have loyal people to tell me what to do?

古文：况太子生长深宫，百姓艰难，都不闻见乎！
现代文：何况太子长期生长在深宫之中，看不见、听不到百姓的艰难困苦。
English: What's more, the crown prince has long grown up in the depths of the palace, unable to see or hear the hardships of the people.

古文：且人主安危所系，不可辄为骄纵。
现代文：而且君主是关系到天下安危的人，更不能动辄就骄奢放纵。
English: Moreover, the monarch is a person who is related to the safety and security of the world, and even more so, he cannot indulge in extravagance at every turn.

古文：但出敕云，有谏者即斩，必知天下士庶无敢更发直言。
现代文：只要发个敕命，治罪大胆谏诤的人，那么天下官员百姓肯定没有人敢直言了。
English: As long as there is only one person who dares to speak out against crime, then no one in the world, official or ordinary, will dare to speak out.

古文：故克己励精，容纳谏诤，卿等常须以此意共其谈说。每见有不是事，宜极言切谏，令有所裨益也。 
现代文：所以要克制私欲，励精图治，容纳别人的忠言直谏。你们应该经常把这些道理讲给太子听，每当看到他有做得不对的地方，应该勇敢直谏，使他能有所获益。 
English: Therefore, you should restrain your selfish desires, work hard to govern, and accept the advice of others. You should always tell these truths to the prince, and whenever you see him doing something wrong, you should bravely confront him so that he can benefit.

古文：贞观十八年，太宗谓侍臣曰： 古有胎教世子，朕则不暇。
现代文：贞观十八年，唐太宗对侍从的大臣们说： 古时候有胎教世子的说法，我却没有时间考虑这事。
English: In the eighteenth year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong of Tang said to his attendant ministers: In ancient times, there was a saying that the unborn child would become the heir to the throne, but I didn't have time to think about it.

古文：但近自建立太子，遇物必有诲谕。
现代文：但最近自设立太子以来，遇到事情都要对他教诲晓谕。
English: But recently, since the establishment of the crown prince, he has to be told what to do when things come up.

古文：见其临食将饭，谓曰： 汝知饭乎？ 
现代文：见他准备吃饭时，便问他： 你知道饭是怎样来的吗？ 
English: When she saw him preparing to eat, she asked him, "Do you know how rice is made?

古文：对曰： 不知。 
现代文：太子回答说： 不知道。 
English: The prince replied, "I don't know."

古文：曰： 凡稼穑艰难，皆出人力，不夺其时，常有此饭。 
现代文：我说： 凡是播种、收获等农事都很艰难辛苦，这些活儿全靠农民努力耕种。只有不去占用他们劳作的时间，才会常有这样的饭吃。 
English: I said: All agricultural work, such as sowing and harvesting, is very difficult and hard. These tasks depend entirely on the efforts of farmers to cultivate. Such meals will only be eaten frequently if they do not occupy their working time.

古文：见其乘马，又谓曰： 汝知马乎？ 
现代文：看到他骑马，又问他： 你知道马是用来干什么的吗？ 
English: Seeing him riding a horse, he asked him: Do you know what a horse is used for?

古文：对曰： 不知。 
现代文：太子回答说： 不知道。 
English: The prince replied, "I don't know."

古文：曰： 能代人劳苦者也，以时消息，不尽其力，则可以常有马也。 
现代文：我说： 这是能够替人代劳的东西，要使它既劳作又得到休息，不耗尽它的气力，这样就可以常有马骑。 
English: And I said, This is a beast that may work for a man, that he may labor, and have rest, and not faint, so that he may ride on the horse often.

古文：见其乘舟，又谓曰： 汝知舟乎？ 
现代文：看到他乘船，又问他： 你知道船是怎样运行的吗？ 
English: When they saw him getting into the boat, they asked him, "Do you know how boats work?"

古文：对曰： 不知。 
现代文：太子回答说： 不知道。 
English: The prince replied, "I don't know."

古文：曰： 舟所以比人君，水所以比黎庶，水能载舟，亦能覆舟。尔方为人主，可不畏惧！ 
现代文：我说： 船好比君主，水好比是百姓，水能浮载船，也能推翻船，你不久将做君主了，能不畏惧嘛！ 
English: I said: The ship is like a monarch, the water is like the people, the water can float the ship, but it can also overturn the ship, you will soon be a monarch, can you not be afraid!

古文：见其休于曲木之下，又谓曰： 汝知此树乎？ 对曰： 不知。 
现代文：我看到他在弯曲的树下休息，又问他： 你知道这弯曲的树如何能正直吗？ 太子回答说： 不知道。 
English: I saw him resting under a crooked tree and asked him: Do you know how this crooked tree can be straight? The prince replied: I do not know.

古文：曰： 此木虽曲，得绳则正，为人君虽无道，受谏则圣。此傅说所言，可以自鉴。  
现代文：我说： 这树虽然弯曲，打上墨线就可以正直成材。做君主的虽然有时难免会做出一些荒唐的事，但是虚心接受谏诤就可以圣明，这是傅说讲的道理，可以对照自己的行为作为鉴戒。  
English: I said, "Although this tree is crooked, it can be made straight with an ink line. Although it is sometimes unavoidable for a monarch to do some absurd things, it is possible to be a saint by accepting the yoke with an open mind. This is the principle that Fu said, and it can be used as a warning against one's own behavior.

古文：贞观七年，太宗谓侍中魏征曰： 自古侯王能自保全者甚少，皆由生长富贵，好尚骄逸，多不解亲君子远小人故尔。
现代文：贞观七年，太宗对侍中魏徵说： 自古以来，君王能够自我保全的很少，这都是由于他们从小生长在富贵的环境中，骄傲懒惰，贪图个人享受，不了解亲近君子、疏远小人的道理。
English: In the seventh year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong said to the attendant Wei Xuan: Since ancient times, emperors have been able to preserve themselves very little. This is due to the fact that they grew up in a rich environment, are proud and lazy, covet personal enjoyment, and do not understand the principle of being close to gentlemen and alienating villains.

古文：朕所有子弟欲使见前言往行，冀其以为规范。 
现代文：我想让所有的子女都能够见识古人的言行，希望他们以此作为自己的行为规范。 
English: I want all my children to be able to see the words and deeds of the ancients, and I hope that they will use this as their own code of conduct.

古文：因命征录古来帝王子弟成败事，名为《自古诸侯王善恶录》，以赐诸王。
现代文：于是命令魏徵辑录古代帝王子弟成功与失败的事迹，编成《自古诸侯王善恶录》，把它赠送给各个王子。
English: He then ordered Wei Zhaozhi to record the successes and failures of the younger brothers of ancient emperors and princes, compile the "Record of the Virtues and Vices of Princes Since Ancient Times," and present it to each prince.

古文：其序曰：
现代文：序中写道：
English: The preamble says:

古文：观夫膺期受命，握图御宇，咸建懿亲，藩屏王室，布在方策，可得而言。
现代文：看那些接受天命、统治国家的君王，没有一个不是分封自己的宗亲，来守卫王室的。这些都记载于史册，可以拿来讨论探究。
English: Look at those kings who accepted the destiny of heaven and ruled the country, none of whom guarded the royal family without appointing their paternal relatives. These are all recorded in the history books and can be used for discussion and exploration.

古文：自轩分二十五子，舜举一十六族，爰历周、汉，以逮陈、隋，分裂山河，大启磐石者众矣。
现代文：自黄帝分封二十五子，舜帝任命八元、八凯，经过周朝、汉代，直到陈代、隋朝，分裂河山，大封宗室皇亲的非常多。
English: From the time of the Yellow Emperor's appointment of twenty-five sons, and Emperor Zhou's appointment of eight Yuan and eight Kai, through the Zhou Dynasty and the Han Dynasty, until the Chen Dynasty and the Sui Dynasty, there were many great-grandparents of the imperial family.

古文：或保乂王家，与时升降；或失其土宇，不祀忽诸。
现代文：这些被分封的诸侯有的得以保全，随时代沉浮；有的失去封地，瞬间衰亡。
English: Some of these vassals were preserved and rose and fell with the times; others lost their fiefs and fell into decline in an instant.

古文：然考其隆替，察其兴灭，功成名立，咸资始封之君，国丧身亡，多因继体之后。
现代文：然而考察他们的兴衰成败，那些功成名就的，都是开国时受封的王；国破家亡的，大都是后世继位的子孙。
English: However, if we examine their rise, fall, success and failure, those who achieved fame and success are all kings who were crowned at the time of the founding of the country; those who ruined the country and lost their families are mostly descendants who succeeded to the throne in later generations.

古文：其故何哉？
现代文：原因何在呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：始封之君，时逢草昧，见王业之艰阻，知父兄之忧勤，是以在上不骄，夙夜匪懈，或设醴以求贤，或吐飧而接士。
现代文：建国时封的王，经历乱世，知道王国创建的艰难，知道父兄为建立国家所付出的辛勤劳苦，所以即使在位时也不骄纵。不论白天夜晚，从不懈怠政务，礼贤下士，厚遇人才，有的像汉楚元王那样求贤，有的像周公那样纳士，即使忠心的话听起来刺耳，也能虚心接受。
English: The founding king experienced the chaos of the world, knew the difficulties of founding the kingdom, and knew the hard work of his father and brother to build the country, so he was not arrogant even when he was on the throne. No matter day or night, he never slacked off in government affairs, he was a courteous corporal, and he was generous with talents. Some sought for talents like Han Chuyuan Wang, and some sought for talents like Zhou Gong. Even if the words of loyalty sounded harsh, he could humbly accept them.

古文：故甘忠言之逆耳，得百姓之欢心，树至德于生前，流遗爱于身后。
现代文：这种做法得到了百姓的欢心。
English: This approach has won the favor of the people.

古文：暨夫子孙继体，多属隆平，生自深宫之中，长居妇人之手，不以高危为忧惧，岂知稼穑之艰难？
现代文：生前道德高尚，死后万古流芳。到了子孙继承王位的时候，天下太平兴盛，他们从小深居宫中，备受妇人呵护长大，顾虑不到处于高位的危险，哪里还能知道老百姓的苦乐呢？
English: When the time comes for their descendants to inherit the throne, the world will be peaceful and prosperous. From childhood, they will live in the palace, be cared for by women, and not worry about the danger of being in a high position. Where else can they know the bitterness and joy of the common people?

古文：昵近小人，疏远君子，绸缪哲妇，傲狠明德，犯义悖礼，淫荒无度，不遵曲宪，僭差越等。
现代文：亲近小人，疏远君子，宠爱美妾，轻视道德，违背礼法，胡作非为，藐视法令，不顾身份。
English: To get close to villains, to alienate gentlemen, to favor concubines, to despise morality, to violate etiquette, to act recklessly, to flout the law, and to disregard one's status.

古文：恃一顾之权宠，便怀匹嫡之心；矜一事之微劳，遂有无厌之望。
现代文：自恃皇帝的恩宠，萌生抗击嫡子的野心；倚仗一事的细微功劳，生出无穷的欲望。
English: The emperor's favour sprouted the ambition to resist his son-in-law; the slight merit of relying on the war gave birth to the endless desire to win.

古文：弃忠贞之正路，蹈奸宄之迷途。
现代文：他们不遵循忠贞的正道，误入为非作歹的歧途。
English: They have not followed the right path of loyalty, but have gone astray into the path of wrongdoing.

古文：愎谏违卜，往而不返。
现代文：武断专横，违背天命，迷而不返。
English: Arbitrary and domineering, going against God's will, wandering and not returning.

古文：虽梁孝、齐冏之勋庸，淮南、东阿之才俊，摧摩霄之逸翮，成穷辙之涸鳞，弃桓、文之大功，就梁、董之显戮。垂为炯戒，可不惜乎！
现代文：虽然有汉代梁孝王刘武、晋代齐王司马冏那样的功勋，有汉代淮南王刘安、曹魏东阿王曹植那样的才华，也不免摧折凌云之翅，沉入涸辙之鲋的尴尬。丢弃齐桓公、晋文公那样的丰功伟业，落得梁冀、董卓那样斩首示众的下场，成为后世的警戒，不可惜吗？
English: Although there are merits like Liang Xiao Wang Liu Wu in the Han Dynasty and Qi Wang Sima Yao in the Jin Dynasty, and talents like Huainan King Liu An and Cao Wei Donga King Cao Zhi in the Han Dynasty, it is inevitable to break the wings of the Lingyun and sink into the embarrassment of the dry ruts. Is it not a pity to discard the great achievements and great deeds like Qi Huan Gong and Jin Wen Gong, and end up with a public beheading like Liang Ji and Dong Zhuo, and become a warning for future generations?

古文：皇帝以圣哲之资，拯倾危之运，耀七德以清六合，总万国而朝百灵，怀柔四荒，亲睦九族，念华萼于《棠棣》，寄维城于宗子。
现代文：皇上以圣人般的天赋，挽救危亡，功耀千秋，廓清宇宙，统一中原，民众拥戴，安抚四方，亲睦九族。吟诵《棠棣》之诗来增进兄弟之情，把维系宗庙的责任系于子孙。
English: With his saint-like talent, the emperor saved the endangered, glorified, cleared the universe, unified the Central Plains, was embraced by the people, pacified the four directions, and reconciled the nine ethnic groups. He chanted the poem "Tanggu" to promote brotherly love, and put the responsibility of maintaining the ancestral temple on his children and grandchildren.

古文：心乎爱矣，靡日不思，爰命下臣，考览载籍，博求鉴镜，贻厥孙谋。
现代文：爱子之情，没有一天不充满胸怀。于是命令下臣，考证历代历史记载，用来作为行为处事的标准，交与子孙。
English: There was not a day when he was not filled with love for his son, so he ordered his vassals to study historical records and pass them on to their children and grandchildren as a standard of conduct.

古文：臣辄竭愚诚，稽诸前训。
现代文：我尽自己的愚忠，收集古代遗训。
English: I do my best to be loyal and collect ancient teachings.

古文：凡为藩为翰，有国有家者，其兴也必由于积善，其亡也皆在于积恶。
现代文：凡诸侯君王有国有家者，他们的兴盛是从不断做善事开始，他们的衰亡也是从不断作恶引起的。
English: All lords, princes, and statesmen, whose prosperity began with the continuous doing of good deeds, and whose decline was caused by the continuous doing of evil.

古文：故知善不积不足以成名，恶不积不足以灭身。
现代文：所以从中可以知道，不行善不足以成就一个人的声名，不作恶不至于让自己灭亡。
English: Therefore, we can know from this that not doing good is not enough to achieve a person's reputation, and not doing evil will not lead to one's own destruction.

古文：然则祸福无门，吉凶由己，惟人所召，岂徒言哉！
现代文：可是祸与福都没有定数，一个人吉凶的关键在于自己，是自己造成的，这仅仅是空话而已吗？
English: However, there is no fixed number of misfortune and good fortune. The key to a person's good fortune lies in himself, is self-inflicted. Is this just empty talk?

古文：今录自古诸王行事得失，分其善恶，各为一篇，名曰《诸王善恶录》，欲使见善思齐，足以扬名不朽；闻恶能改，庶得免乎大过。
现代文：现在我收录自古以来各个帝王做事的得失情况，根据善恶不同分类，一百家为一类，书名叫做《诸王善恶录》，目的是想使太子和诸王子看到好的地方就不断修正自己，可以扬名百代，永垂不朽；看到不好的地方就及时加以改正，免得造成更大的错误。
English: Now I have collected the gain and loss of each emperor's work since ancient times. According to the different categories of good and evil, a hundred families are in one category. The title of the book is "The Good and Evil Records of the Kings." The purpose is to make the prince and princes see the good places and constantly correct themselves, so that they can be famous for a hundred generations and immortalized; see the bad places and correct them in time, so as not to cause greater mistakes.

古文：从善则有誉，改过则无咎。
现代文：跟从好的东西就能获得好的名声，改正过错就没有什么危害。
English: A good name is gained by following good things, and there is no harm in correcting faults.

古文：兴亡是系，可不勉欤！
现代文：这些东西都关系着国家的兴亡，岂能不以此共勉呢？
English: These things are all related to the rise and fall of the country, can we not use this to our mutual benefit?

古文：太宗览而称善，谓诸王曰： 此宜置于座右，用为立身之本。 
现代文：太宗看了连声称好，对诸位王子说： 此书应放在你们书桌的座右，用作你们立身处世的根本。 
English: Emperor Taizong saw it and said, "This book should be placed on the right side of your desks as a foundation for your future lives."

古文：贞观十年，太宗谓荆王元景、汉王元昌、吴王恪、魏王泰等曰： 自汉已来，帝弟帝子，受茅土、居荣贵者甚众，惟东平及河间王最有令名，得保其禄位，如楚王玮之徒，覆亡非一，并为生长富贵，好自骄逸所致。
现代文：贞观十年，唐太宗对荆王元景、汉王元昌、吴王恪、魏王泰等王子说： 从汉代以来，帝王的兄弟儿子处于荣华富贵之中的很多，唯有东汉的东平和西汉的河间王最有名，他们能够保全自己的禄位。如西晋的楚王司马玮这等奸佞之人，死亡的不止一个，这是他们都生长于富贵之中，骄傲自大、好逸恶劳造成的。
English: In the tenth year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to princes such as Jing Wang Yuanjing, Han Wang Yuanchang, Wu Wang Ke, and Wei Wang Tai: Since the Han Dynasty, many brothers and sons of emperors have been in glory and wealth. Only the Eastern Han Dynasty's Dongping and the Western Han Dynasty's Kham King are most famous, and they are able to preserve their positions. For example, more than one of the traitors, such as West Jin's King of Chu Sima Qian, died. This is because they all grew up in wealth, pride, and hard work.

古文：汝等鉴诫，宜熟思之。
现代文：你等应引以为戒，深思熟虑。
English: You should be cautious and deliberate.

古文：拣择贤才，为汝师友，须受其谏诤，勿得自专。
现代文：我挑选有才能的人，作为你们的师友，你们必须听从他们的敬告规劝，不要擅作主张，自以为是。
English: I have chosen able men to be your teachers and companions, and you must listen to their advice and counsel, and not presume to speak for yourself.

古文：我闻以德服物，信非虚说。
现代文：我听说只有德行能使人信服，相信这都不是信口乱说。
English: I have heard that only virtue can convince people, and I believe that this is not just idle talk.

古文：比尝梦中见一人云虞舜，我不觉竦然敬异，岂不为仰其德也！
现代文：我不久前曾梦见一个人叫做虞舜，不禁肃然起敬，这不是因为我敬仰他品德的缘故吗？
English: Not long ago, I had a dream about a man named Yu Yao. I couldn't help but be awestruck. Wasn't it because I admired his character?

古文：向若梦见桀、纣，必应斫之。
现代文：要是梦见桀、纣，我一定会感到愤慨而砍死他。
English: If I were to dream of a dragonfly, I would certainly feel indignant and chop it to death.

古文：桀、纣虽是天子，今若相唤作桀、纣，人必大怒。
现代文：桀、纣虽然是天子，要是今天称别人为桀、纣，他一定会十分生气。
English: Although He is the Son of Heaven, if He were to call someone else "evil" today, He would certainly be very angry.

古文：颜回、闵子骞、郭林宗、黄叔度，虽是布衣，今若相称赞道类此四贤，必当大喜。
现代文：颜回、闵子骞、郭林宗、黄叔度等人，虽然是普通老百姓，今天要是大家称赞别人像这四个贤人，别人一定会大喜。
English: Yan Hui, Zhang Zixuan, Guo Linzong, Huang Shudu and others, although they are ordinary people, if today everyone praises others like these four wise men, others will certainly be overjoyed.

古文：故知人之立身，所贵者惟在德行，何必要论荣贵。
现代文：可见，一个人立身处世，可贵的是德行，哪用得着谈及富贵呢？
English: You see, when one lives in this world, what is valuable is one's virtue. Why should we talk about being rich?

古文：汝等位列藩王，家食实封，更能克修德行，岂不具美也？
现代文：你们位列王公，衣食丰足，更应能够加强德行修养，这岂不两全其美？
English: You are kings and queens, you have plenty of food and clothing, and you should be able to strengthen your moral cultivation. Isn't this the best of both worlds?

古文：且君子小人本无常，行善事则为君子，行恶事则为小人，当须自克励，使善事日闻，勿纵欲肆情，自陷刑戮。 
现代文：况且君子小人本来就不是永远固定不变的。做善事就是君子，做恶事就是小人。你们应当自我克制、自我勉励，使你们的善行一天天地递增，不要放纵自己的私欲，使自己陷入刑戮之中。 
English: Moreover, a gentleman and a villain are not always fixed and unchanging. To do good is to be a gentleman, and to do evil is to be a villain. You should exercise self-restraint and self-encouragement, so that your good deeds increase day by day, and do not indulge your selfish desires and plunge yourself into torture.

古文：贞观十年，太宗谓房玄龄曰： 朕历观前代拨乱创业之主，生长民间，皆识达情伪，罕至于败亡。
现代文：贞观十年，唐太宗对房玄龄说： 我看历代平乱创业的帝王，都生长在民间，都通情达理，能识别人情真假，少有导致败亡的。
English: In the tenth year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to Fang Xuanling: I think that the emperors of all ages who quelled chaos and started businesses all grew up among the people, are all reasonable, can recognize other people's true and false feelings, and rarely lead to defeat.

古文：逮乎继世守文之君，生而富贵，不知疾苦，动至夷灭。
现代文：到了后来继承王位的君主，生下来就享受荣华富贵，不知道人间疾苦，导致国家动乱灭亡。
English: When it came to the monarchs who later succeeded to the throne, they were born to enjoy prosperity and wealth, unaware of human suffering, which led to the country's turmoil and demise.

古文：朕少小以来，经营多难，备知天下之事，犹恐有所不逮。
现代文：我从小以来，经历了很多艰难险阻，知道天下很多的事情，但仍然害怕自己还有做得不够的地方。
English: Since I was a child, I have experienced a lot of hardships and obstacles, I know a lot of things in the world, but I am still afraid that I have not done enough.

古文：至于荆王诸弟，生自深宫，识不及远，安能念此哉？
现代文：至于像荆王他们这些人，从小在宫中长大，见识短浅，哪能想到这些问题呢？
English: As for people like King Jing, who grew up in a palace and are short-sighted, how can they think of these problems?

古文：朕每一食，便念稼穑之艰难；每一衣，则思纺绩之辛苦，诸弟何能学朕乎？
现代文：我每天一吃饭，就要想到耕种的艰难，每天一穿衣，就想到纺线的辛苦，我那些王子兄弟能学我吗？
English: Every day, as soon as I eat, I have to think about the hardships of farming, and every day, as soon as I get dressed, I think about the hard work of spinning. Can my prince brothers learn from me?

古文：选良佐以为藩弼，庶其习近善人，得免于愆过尔。 
现代文：选一些贤良的人作为他们的老师，使他们习惯与品德高尚的人接近，这样才能使他们少犯错误。 
English: Choose some good people as their teachers, and let them get used to being close to people of high moral character, so that they will make fewer mistakes.

古文：贞观十一年，太宗谓吴王恪曰： 父之爱子，人之常情，非待教训而知也。
现代文：贞观十一年，太宗对吴王恪说： 父亲疼爱子女，这是人之常情，是不通过教育就可以知道的。
English: In the eleventh year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong said to King Wu: A father loves his children, which is a common human feeling, and can be known without education.

古文：子能忠孝则善矣。
现代文：儿子能尽忠尽善就对了。
English: It's only right for a son to be loyal and good.

古文：若不遵诲诱，忘弃礼法，必自致刑戮，父虽爱之，将如之何？
现代文：若儿子不遵循教诲，废弃礼法，必然自取灭亡，父亲即使疼爱他，那又有什么办法呢？
English: If the son does not follow the teachings and abandons the etiquette, he will inevitably self-destruct. Even if the father loves him, what can he do?

古文：或汉武帝既崩，昭帝嗣立，燕王旦素骄纵，诪张不服，霍光遣一折简诛之，则身死国除。
现代文：从前汉武帝驾崩了以后，昭帝继位，燕王旦向来自高自大，不愿服人。霍光辅佐昭帝以御书诛杀了他，身亡国灭。
English: After the death of the former Han Emperor Wu, Emperor Zhao succeeded to the throne. Yan Wang Dan Xiang was arrogant and did not want to serve others. Emperor Zhao killed him with an imperial edict, and the country was destroyed.

古文：夫为臣子不得不慎。 
现代文：所以作为臣子的不得不谨慎。 
English: Therefore, as a courtier, he had to be cautious.

古文：贞观中，皇子年小者多授以都督、刺史，谏议大夫褚遂良上疏谏曰： 昔两汉以郡国治人，除郡以外，分立诸子，割土封疆，杂用周制。
现代文：贞观年间，年龄小的皇子都被授以都督、刺史的爵位。谏议大夫褚遂良上疏进谏道： 过去两汉都用郡国的方法治理国家，除郡国外，分封诸子，一个个割地封爵，原袭周代的做法。
English: During the Zhenguan era, the young princes were all awarded the title of the governor of the capital and the title of the prince of history.           : In the past, the two Han dynasties used the county method to govern the country. In addition to the county, they divided the sons, divided the land and knighted them one by one. This was the original practice of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：皇唐郡县，粗依秦法。
现代文：现在我们唐代采用郡县制，沿用的是秦的体制。
English: Now, we in the Tang Dynasty have adopted the county system, continuing the system of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：皇子幼年，或授刺史。
现代文：皇子年龄小，都授以刺史的爵位。
English: The young princes were all given the title of Sashihito.

古文：陛下岂不以王之骨肉，镇扞四方，圣人造制，道高前古？
现代文：陛下难道是想用骨肉亲情来安定四方，认为圣人创设的制度，都很高明吗？
English: Does His Majesty want to use flesh-and-blood kinship to stabilize the four quarters, and think that the system created by saints is very clever?

古文：臣愚见有小未尽。
现代文：但是我认为这种方法有一些不完善的地方。为什么呢？
English: But I think this method has some imperfections. Why?

古文：何者？刺史师帅，人仰以安。
现代文：刺史和都督，人们仰仗他得以安宁。
English: Tashi and the governor, people rely on him to be at peace.

古文：得一善人，部内苏息；遇一不善人，阖州劳弊。
现代文：这些职位若遇上好人担任，那么辖境之内就太平；如果遇到一个不好的人来管理，整个州县就民生凋敝。
English: If these posts are held by good people, then there will be peace within the jurisdiction; if they are managed by a bad person, the livelihood of the entire state and county will be ruined.

古文：是以人君爱恤百姓，常为择贤。
现代文：所以皇上爱抚体恤百姓，常常选择贤能的人。
English: Therefore, the emperor caresses and sympathizes with the people, and often chooses a virtuous person.

古文：或称河润九里，京师蒙福；或与人兴咏，生为立祠。
现代文：有的被称为如同河流一样泽被一方，使京城享受到他的好处；有的被百姓歌颂赞美，并且立下生祠纪念。
English: Some were called as if they were rivers, so that the capital city could enjoy their benefits; some were praised by the people, and memorial shrines were set up.

古文：汉宣帝云： 与我共理者，惟良二千石乎！ 
现代文：汉宣帝说： 与我一同治理国家的，是享受两千石俸禄的有才能的人。 
English: Emperor Han Xuan said: The talented people who govern the country with me are those who enjoy a stipend of two thousand koku.

古文：如臣愚见，陛下子内年齿尚幼，未堪临民者，请且留京师，教以经学。
现代文：按我的想法，陛下皇子中年龄尚小，还不能统领百姓的，请暂时留在京城，用经学教导他们。
English: According to my idea, if any of your majesty's princes are still too young to rule the people, please stay in the capital for a while and teach them the scriptures.

古文：一则畏天之威，不敢犯禁；二则观见朝仪，自然成立。
现代文：一则他们畏惧您的威严，不敢违法乱纪；二则出入观习朝堂仪式，自然地成长自立。
English: On the one hand, they are afraid of your majesty and dare not break the law; on the other hand, they go in and out to watch the ceremony of the imperial court, and naturally grow up and become independent.

古文：因此积习，自知为人，审堪临州，然后遣出。
现代文：时间长了，自然养成习惯，懂得为人处世的方法。能符合条件的，再派遣他们到州郡任职。
English: After a long time, they naturally develop habits and know how to behave. If they can meet the conditions, they will be sent to the state and county.

古文：臣谨按汉明、章、和三帝，能友爱子弟，自兹以降，以为准的。
现代文：我认为汉明帝、章帝和三个帝王，能够友爱子弟，此后，后世以它作为准则。
English: I think that Emperor Hanming, Emperor Zhang and the three emperors were able to love their children, and since then, future generations have used it as a guideline.

古文：讫三帝世，诸王数十百人，惟二王稍恶，自余皆冲和深粹。惟陛下详察。 
现代文：从帝王三代来看，诸王数百人当中，只有两个王稍微不好，其余的性格都正直谦和，希望陛下详察。 
English: From the perspective of the three generations of emperors, among the hundreds of kings, only two kings are slightly bad, and the rest of the characters are honest and humble. I hope Your Majesty will carefully observe.

古文：太宗嘉纳其言。
现代文：太宗赞扬并且采纳了褚遂良的言论。
English: Taizong praised and adopted Gong Suiliang's speech.

