古文：司马相如者，蜀郡成都人也，字长卿。
现代文：司马相如是蜀郡成都人，字长卿。
English: Sima Xiangru is a native of Chengdu, Shu County, and is known as "Changqing."

古文：少时好读书，学击剑，故其亲名之曰犬子。
现代文：他少年时喜欢读书，也学习剑术，所以他父母给他取名犬子。
English: When he was young, he liked to read and learn swordsmanship, so his parents gave him the name "Inuko."

古文：相如既学，慕蔺相如之为人，更名相如。
现代文：司马相如完成学业后，很仰慕蔺相如的为人，就改名相如。
English: After Sima Xiangru finished his studies, he admired Gong Xiangru so much that he changed his name to Xiangru.

古文：以赀为郎，事孝景帝，为武骑常侍，非其好也。
现代文：最初，他凭借家中富有的资财而被授予郎官之职，侍卫孝景帝，做了武骑常侍，但这并非他的爱好。
English: At first, with the help of his family's wealth, he was given the position of a steward, a bodyguard to Emperor Takakage, and became a warrior-horseman, but this was not his hobby.

古文：会景帝不好辞赋，是时梁孝王来朝，从游说之士齐人邹阳、淮阴枚乘、吴庄忌夫子之徒，相如见而说之，因病免，客游梁。
现代文：正赶上汉景帝不喜欢辞赋，这时粱孝王前来京城朝见景帝，跟他来的善于游说的人，有齐郡人邹阳、淮阴人枚乘、吴县人庄忌先生等。相如见到这些人就喜欢上了，因此就借生病为由辞掉官职，旅居粱国。
English: Just in time for Han Jingdi's dislike of renunciation, King Gong Xiao Wang came to the capital to see Jingdi, and the people who were good at lobbying came with him, such as the people from Qi County, Puyang, the people from Huaiyin, and the people from Wu County, Zhuangyi. He liked these people when he saw them, so he resigned his official position on the grounds of illness and lived in Shandong.

古文：梁孝王令与诸生同舍，相如得与诸生游士居数岁，乃著子虚之赋。
现代文：粱孝王让相如这些读书人一同居住，相如才有机会与读书人和游说之士相处了好几年，于是写了《子虚赋》。
English: Zou Xiao Wang allowed Zou Ru to live with these readers, and Zou Ru had the opportunity to get along with readers and lobbyists for several years, so he wrote "Zi Hu Fu."

古文：会梁孝王卒，相如归，而家贫，无以自业。
现代文：正赶上粱孝王去世，相如只好返回成都。然而家境贫寒，又没有可以维持自己生活的职业。
English: He had to return to Chengdu just in time for the death of King Gongxiao. However, his family was poor and he did not have a job that could sustain his life.

古文：素与临邛令王吉相善，吉曰： 长卿久宦游不遂，而来过我。 
现代文：相如一向同临邛县令王吉相处得很好，王吉说： 长卿，你长期离乡在外，求官任职，不太顺心，可以来我这里看看。 
English: As always, he got along well with Linyi County Governor Wang Ji. Wang Ji said, "Changqing, you have been away from your hometown for a long time, you are applying for a post, which is not very satisfactory, you can come and see me here.

古文：於是相如往，舍都亭。
现代文：于是，相如前往临邛，住在城内的都亭中。
English: As a result, he went to Linyi and lived in a pavilion in the city.

古文：临邛令缪为恭敬，日往朝相如。
现代文：临邛县令佯装恭敬，天天都来拜访相如。
English: Linyi County is very respectful, and they come to visit every day.

古文：相如初尚见之，後称病，使从者谢吉，吉愈益谨肃。
现代文：最初，相如还是以礼相见。后来，他就谎称有病，让随从去拒绝王吉的拜访。然而，王吉却更加谨慎恭敬。
English: At first, he treated Wang Ji with courtesy. Later, he lied that he was ill and asked his entourage to refuse Wang Ji's visit. However, Wang Ji was more cautious and respectful.

古文：临邛中多富人，而卓王孙家僮八百人，程郑亦数百人，二人乃相谓曰： 令有贵客，为具召之。 
现代文：临邛县里富人多，像卓王孙家就有家奴八百人，程郑家也有数百人。二人相互商量说： 县令有贵客，我们备准备酒食宴请他。 
English: There are many rich people in Linyi County. For example, there are 800 slaves in the Zhuo Wangsun family and hundreds in the Cheng Zheng family. The two discussed with each other and said, "The county magistrate has a distinguished guest, we are ready to prepare a banquet to invite him."

古文：并召令。
现代文：一并把县令也请来。
English: He also invited the county magistrate.

古文：令既至，卓氏客以百数。
现代文：当县令到了卓家后，卓家的客人已经上百了。
English: When the county magistrate arrived at Zhuo's house, there were already hundreds of guests.

古文：至日中，谒司马长卿，长卿谢病不能往，临邛令不敢尝食，自往迎相如。
现代文：到了中午，去请司马长卿，长卿却推托有病，不肯前来。临邛令见相如没来，不敢进食，还亲自前去迎接相如。
English: At noon, he went to invite Sima Changqing, but Changqing refused to come, saying that he was ill. Linyi did not dare to eat when he did not see him, and went to meet him in person.

古文：相如不得已，彊往，一坐尽倾。
现代文：相如不得已，勉强来到卓家，满座的客人无不惊羡他的风采。
English: As if he had no choice, he reluctantly came to Zhuo's home. The full house of guests couldn't help but admire his style.

古文：酒酣，临邛令前奏琴曰： 窃闻长卿好之，原以自娱。 
现代文：酒兴正浓时，临邛县令走上前去，把琴放到相如面前，说： 我听说长卿特别喜欢弹琴，希望聆听一曲，以助欢乐。 
English: When the wine was getting strong, the governor of Linyi County stepped forward, put the piano in front of him, and said, "I heard that Lord Chang particularly likes to play the piano, and would like to listen to a piece of music to help with the fun.

古文：相如辞谢，为鼓一再行。
现代文：相如辞谢一番，便弹奏了一两支曲子。
English: As if to say thank you, he played a tune or two.

古文：是时卓王孙有女文君新寡，好音，故相如缪与令相重，而以琴心挑之。
现代文：这时，卓王孙有个女儿叫文君，刚守寡不久，很喜欢音乐，所以相如佯装与县令相互敬重，而用琴声暗自诱发她的爱慕之情。
English: At this time, Zhuo Wangsun had a daughter named Wenjun, who had just been widowed for a short time and was very fond of music, so he pretended to respect her and the county magistrate, and secretly induced her love with the sound of the piano.

古文：相如之临邛，从车骑，雍容间雅甚都；及饮卓氏，弄琴，文君窃从户窥之，心悦而好之，恐不得当也。
现代文：相如来临邛时，车马跟随其后，仪表堂堂，文静典雅，甚为大方。待到卓王孙家喝酒、弹奏琴曲时，卓文君从门缝里偷偷看他，内心高兴，特别喜欢他，又怕他不了解自己的心意。
English: When he came to Zhuo Wangsun's house to drink wine and play the piano, Zhuo Wenjun peeked at him through the cracks in the door. He was happy, especially liked him, and was afraid that he did not know his own mind.

古文：既罢，相如乃使人重赐文君侍者通殷勤。
现代文：宴会结束后，相如托人以重金赏赐文君的侍者，以此向她转达自己的倾慕之情。
English: After the banquet, it was as if the trustee rewarded Wenjun's waiter with a large sum of money, as a way of conveying his admiration to her.

古文：文君夜亡奔相如，相如乃与驰归成都。
现代文：于是，卓文君乘夜逃出家门，私奔相如，相如便同文君急忙赶回成都。
English: As a result, Zhuo Wenzhong ran away from home in the night, eloping and rushing back to Chengdu.

古文：家居徒四壁立。
现代文：进家所见，空无一物，只有四面墙壁立在那里。
English: On entering the house, there was nothing but four walls standing there.

古文：卓王孙大怒曰： 女至不材，我不忍杀，不分一钱也。 
现代文：卓王孙得知女儿私奔之事，大怒道： 女儿极不成材，我不忍心伤害她，但也不分给她一个钱。 
English: When Zhuo Wangsun learned of his daughter's elopement, he flew into a rage and said, "My daughter is extremely unqualified. I can't bear to hurt her, but I won't give her any money.

古文：人或谓王孙，王孙终不听。
现代文：有的人劝说卓王孙，但他始终不肯听。
English: Some people tried to persuade Zhuo Wangsun, but he still refused to listen.

古文：文君久之不乐，曰： 长卿第俱如临邛，从昆弟假贷犹足为生，何至自苦如此！ 
现代文：过了好长一段时间，文君感到不快乐，说： 长卿，只要你同我一起去临邛，向兄弟们借贷也完全可以维持生活，何至于让自己困苦到这个样子！ 
English: After a long period of time, Wenjun felt unhappy and said, "Chang Sir, as long as you go to Linyi with me, borrowing from your brothers can completely sustain your life. How can you make yourself miserable like this!"

古文：相如与俱之临邛，尽卖其车骑，买一酒舍酤酒，而令文君当炉。
现代文：相如就同文君来到临邛，把自己的车马全部卖掉，买下一家酒店来卖酒。
English: Similarly, Mr. Tongwen came to Linyi, sold all his cars and horses, and bought a hotel to sell liquor.

古文：相如身自著犊鼻裈，与保庸杂作，涤器於市中。
现代文：并且让文君亲自主持垆前的酒铺买卖，而自己穿起犊鼻裤，与雇工们一起操作忙活，在闹市中洗涤酒器。
English: And let Wenjun personally hold the front of the liquor store, and put on a pair of trousers, and work with the employees to wash the liquor in the busy city.

古文：卓王孙闻而耻之，为杜门不出。
现代文：卓王孙听到这件事后，感到很耻辱，因此闭门不出。
English: When Zhuo Wangsun heard about this, he felt so ashamed that he couldn't leave the house.

古文：昆弟诸公更谓王孙曰： 有一男两女，所不足者非财也。
现代文：有些兄弟和长辈交相劝说卓王孙，说： 你有一个儿子两个女儿，家中所缺少的不是钱财。
English: Some brothers and elders tried to persuade Zhuo Wangsun, saying, "You have one son and two daughters. What your family lacks is not money.

古文：今文君已失身於司马长卿，长卿故倦游，虽贫，其人材足依也，且又令客，独柰何相辱如此！ 
现代文：如今，文君已经成了司马长卿的妻子，长卿本来也已厌倦了离家奔波的生涯，虽然贫穷，但他确实是个人才，完全可以依靠。况且他又是县令的贵客，为什么偏偏这样轻视他呢！ 
English: Nowadays, Wenjun has become the wife of Sima Changqing. Changqing was already tired of his life away from home. Although he is poor, he is indeed a talent and can be fully relied on. Moreover, he is a distinguished guest of the county magistrate. Why do they despise him so much?

古文：卓王孙不得已，分予文君僮百人，钱百万，及其嫁时衣被财物。
现代文：卓王孙不得已，只好分给文君家奴一百人，钱一百万，以及她出嫁时的衣服被褥和各种财物。
English: As a last resort, Zhuo Wangsun had no choice but to distribute one million yuan to one hundred members of Wenjun's family, as well as her wedding clothes, bedding and various belongings.

古文：文君乃与相如归成都，买田宅，为富人。
现代文：文君就同相如回到成都，买了田地房屋，成为富有的人家。
English: Wenjun returned to Chengdu in the same way, bought farmland and houses, and became a rich man.

古文：居久之，蜀人杨得意为狗监，侍上。
现代文：过了较长一段时间，蜀郡人杨得意担任狗监，侍奉皇上。
English: After a long period of time, Yang, a resident of Shu County, served the emperor as a dog warden.

古文：上读子虚赋而善之，曰： 朕独不得与此人同时哉！ 
现代文：有一天，武帝读《子虚赋》，认为写得好，说： 我偏偏不能与这个作者同时。 
English: One day, Emperor Wu read "Zi Hu Fu," thought it was well written, and said, "I just can't be with this author at the same time."

古文：得意曰： 臣邑人司马相如自言为此赋。 
现代文：杨得意说： 我的同乡人司马相如自称，是他写了这篇赋。 
English: Yang said proudly: My countryman Sima Xiangru claimed that he wrote this fu.

古文：上惊，乃召问相如。
现代文：武帝很惊喜，就召来相如询问。
English: Emperor Wu was very surprised and summoned Zong Rong to inquire.

古文：相如曰： 有是。
现代文：相如说： 有这件事。
English: As if to say: There's this thing.

古文：然此乃诸侯之事，未足观也。
现代文：但是，这赋只写诸侯之事，不值得看。
English: However, this Fu only writes about princes, so it is not worth watching.

古文：请为天子游猎赋，赋成奏之。 
现代文：请让我写篇天子游猎赋，赋写成后就进献皇上。 
English: Please let me write a tale of a son of heaven on a hunting trip, and present it to the emperor when it is complete.

古文：上许，令尚书给笔札。
现代文：武帝答应了，并命令尚书给他笔和木简。
English: Emperor Wu agreed, and ordered Shang Shu to give him a pen and a wooden tablet.

古文：相如以 子虚 ，虚言也，为楚称； 乌有先生 者，乌有此事也，为齐难； 无是公 者，无是人也，明天子之义。
现代文：相如用 子虚 这虚构的言辞，是为了陈述楚国之美； 乌有先生 就是哪有此事，以此为齐国驳难楚国； 无是公 就是没有此人，以阐明做天子的道理。
English: Similarly, the use of the fictitious words "son" and "virtue" is intended to present the beauty of Chu; "Mr. Wu" means that there is no such thing, and it is difficult to refute Chu as an equal country; "nobody" means that there is no such person, in order to clarify the principle of being a son of heaven.

古文：故空藉此三人为辞，以推天子诸侯之苑囿。
现代文：所以假借这三个人写成文章，用以推演天子和诸侯的苑囿美盛情景。
English: Therefore, under the pretext of these three people, an article was written, which was used to deduce the scene of the sons of heaven and the princes of the palace.

古文：其卒章归之於节俭，因以风谏。
现代文：赋的最后一章主旨归结到节俭上去，借以规劝皇帝。
English: Fu's last chapter boils down to frugality as a means of persuading the emperor.

古文：奏之天子，天子大说。
现代文：把赋进献天子后，天子特别高兴。
English: After presenting Fu Jin to Tian Zi, Tian Zi was particularly happy.

古文：其辞曰：
现代文：赋的文辞说道：
English: The text reads as follows:

古文：楚使子虚使於齐，齐王悉发境内之士，备车骑之众，与使者出田。
现代文：楚王派子虚出使齐国，齐王调遣境内所有的士卒，准备了众多的车马，与使者一同出外打猎。
English: The king of Qi dispatched all the soldiers in the territory, prepared numerous chariots and horses, and went hunting with the envoy.

古文：田罢，子虚过詑乌有先生，而无是公在焉。
现代文：打猎结束，子虚前去拜访乌有先生，并向他夸耀这件事，恰巧无是公也在场。
English: When the hunting was over, Zi Hua went to visit Mr. Wu You, and boasted to him about the matter. Coincidentally, Mr. Wu You was also present.

古文：坐定，乌有先生问曰： 今日田乐乎？ 
现代文：大家落座后，乌有先生向子虚问道： 今天打猎快乐吗？ 
English: After everyone was seated, Mr. Wu You asked Zi Hu: Are you happy hunting today?

古文：子虚曰： 乐。  获多乎？ 
现代文：子虚说： 快乐 。 猎物很多吧？ 
English: Zi Hu said, "Happy. There's a lot of prey, right?"

古文：曰： 少。 
现代文：子虚回答道： 很少。 
English: Zi Hu replied: Very few.

古文： 然则何乐？ 
现代文： 既然如此，那么乐从何来？ 
English: That being the case, where does joy come from?

古文：曰： 仆乐齐王之欲夸仆以车骑之众，而仆对以云梦之事也。 
现代文：子虚回答说： 我高兴的是齐王本想向我夸耀他的车马众多，而我却用楚王在云梦泽打猎的盛况来回答他。 
English: Zi Hu replied, "I am glad that King Qi wanted to boast to me about his numerous chariots and horses, but I answered him with the grandeur of King Chu's hunting in Yunmenze."

古文：曰： 可得闻乎？ 子虚曰： 可。
现代文：乌有先生说道： 可以说出来听听吗？ 子虚说： 可以。
English: Mr. Wu You said, "Can I speak out and be heard?" Zi Hu said, "Yes."

古文：王驾车千乘，选徒万骑，田於海滨。
现代文：齐王指挥千辆兵车，选拔上万名骑手，到东海之滨打猎。
English: King Qi commanded a thousand chariots and selected tens of thousands of horsemen to go hunting on the coast of the East China Sea.

古文：列卒满泽，罘罔弥山，揜兔辚鹿，射麋脚麟。
现代文：士卒排满草泽，捕兽的罗网布满山岗，兽网罩住野兔，车轮辗死大鹿，射中麋鹿，抓住麟的小腿。
English: The soldiers are lined up in the grass, the trapping nets are spread all over the hills, the hare is covered with animal nets, the deer is killed by the wheel, the elk is shot, and the calf of the uni is caught.

古文：鹜於盐浦，割鲜染轮。
现代文：车骑驰骋在海边的盐滩，宰杀禽兽的鲜血染红了车轮。
English: The car rides along the salt flats by the sea, the blood of the slaughtered animals staining the wheels red.

古文：射中获多，矜而自功。
现代文：射中禽兽，猎获物很多，齐王便骄傲地夸耀自己的功劳。
English: The king of Qi proudly boasted of his achievements in shooting many animals and game.

古文：顾谓仆曰： 楚亦有平原广泽游猎之地饶乐若此者乎？
现代文：他回头看着我说： 楚国也有供游玩打猎的平原广泽，可以使人这样富于乐趣吗？
English: He looked back at me and said, "Chu also has vast plains for playing and hunting. Is it possible for people to have so much fun?"

古文：楚王之猎何与寡人？ 
现代文：楚王游猎与我相比，谁更有乐趣呢？ 
English: Compared to me, who has more fun on the King of Chu safari?

古文：仆下车对曰： 臣，楚国之鄙人也，幸得宿卫十有馀年，时从出游，游於後园，览於有无，然犹未能遍睹也，又恶足以言其外泽者乎！ 
现代文：我下车回答说： 小臣我只不过是楚国一个见识鄙陋的人，但侥幸在楚宫中担任了十余年的侍卫，常随楚王出猎，猎场就在王宫的后苑，可以顺便观赏周围的景色，但还不能遍览全部盛况，又怎么够得上谈论那内苑之外的大泽盛景呢？ 
English: I got off the bus and replied, "Minister, I am just a person from the State of Chu who has seen the humbleness of horses, but fortunately, I have served as a bodyguard in the Palace of Chu for more than ten years. I often go hunting with the King of Chu. The hunting ground is in the backyard of the palace. You can see the surrounding scenery, but you can't see all the pomp and circumstance. How can you talk about the grand scenery of Osawa outside the inner courtyard?

古文：齐王曰： 虽然，略以子之所闻见而言之。 
现代文：齐王说： 虽然如此，还是请大略地谈谈你的所见所闻吧！  我回答说： 是，是。
English: King Qi said, "Nevertheless, please briefly describe what you saw and heard." I replied, "Yes, yes."

古文： 仆对曰： 唯唯。臣闻楚有七泽，尝见其一，未睹其馀也。
现代文：臣听说楚国有七个大泽，我曾经见过一个，其余的没见过。
English: The minister heard that there are seven Osawa in Chu. I have seen one, but I haven't seen the rest.

古文：臣之所见，盖特其小小者耳，名曰云梦。
现代文：我所看到的这个，只是七个大泽中最小的一个，名叫云梦。
English: The one I saw was the smallest of the seven, named Yunmen.

古文：云梦者，方九百里，其中有山焉。
现代文：云梦方圆九百里，其中有山。
English: Yunmeng has a circumference of nine hundred li, among which there are mountains.

古文：其山则盘纡岪郁，隆崇嵂崒；岑岩参差，日月蔽亏；交错纠纷，上干青云；罢池陂纮，下属江河。
现代文：山势盘旋，迂回曲折，高耸险要，山峰峭拔，参差不齐；日月或被完全遮蔽，或者遮掩一半；群山错落，重叠无序，直上青云；山坡倾斜连绵，下连江河。
English: The mountains are spiraling, twisting and turning, towering and dangerous, the peaks are steep and jagged; the sun and moon are either completely obscured or half obscured; the mountains are staggered, overlapping and disorderly, straight up to the blue clouds; the slopes are sloping and continuous, and the rivers are down.

古文：其土则丹青赭垩，雌黄白附，锡碧金银，众色炫燿，照烂龙鳞。
现代文：那土壤里有朱砂、石青、赤土、白垩、雌黄、石灰、锡矿、碧玉、黄金、白银、种种色彩，光辉夺目，像龙鳞般地灿烂照耀。
English: In that soil there is cinnabar, lapis lazuli, red earth, chalk, chalcedony, topaz, lime, tin ore, jasper, gold, silver, all kinds of colors, dazzling, shining brilliantly like dragon scales.

古文：其石则赤玉玫瑰，琳渼琨珸，瑊玏玄厉，萩石武夫。
现代文：那里的石料有赤色的玉石、玫瑰宝石、琳、珉、琨珸、瑊玏、磨刀的黑石、半白半赤的石头、红地白文的石头。
English: The stones there are red cobbles, rose jewels, rhodium, antimony, antimony, antimony, black stone for sharpening knives, half-white and half-red stone, and red and white stone.

古文：其东则有蕙圃衡兰，芷若射干，穹穷昌蒲，江离麋芜，诸蔗猼且。
现代文：东面有蕙草的花圃，其中生长着杜衡、兰草、白芷、杜若、射干、芎、菖蒲、茳蓠、蘼芜、甘蔗、芭蕉。
English: To the east there is a bed of eucalyptus, among which grow rhododendrons, orchids, egrets, azaleas, poppies, irises, thistles, sugar cane and plantains.

古文：其南则有平原广泽，登降纮靡，案衍坛曼，缘以大江，限以巫山。
现代文：南面有平原大泽，地势高低不平，倾斜绵延，低洼的土地，广阔平坦，沿着大江延伸，直到巫山为界。
English: To the south, there is the plain of Osawa. The terrain is uneven, sloping and long, the low-lying land is broad and flat, extending along the big river until Wushan is the boundary.

古文：其高燥则生葴蓇苞荔，薛莎青薠。
现代文：那高峻干燥的地方，生长着马蓝、形似燕麦的草、还有苞草、荔草、艾蒿、莎草及青薠。
English: In that high and dry place, there grows horseradish, oat-like grasses, as well as rushes, lychees, mugwort, sedges and verbena.

古文：其卑湿则生藏莨蒹葭，东蔷雕胡，莲藕菰芦，菴轩芋，物居之，不可胜图。
现代文：那低湿之地，生长着狗尾巴草、芦苇、东蔷、菰米、莲花、荷藕、葫芦、菴、莸草，众多麦木，生长在这里，数不胜数。
English: In that low-moisture area, dog-tail grass, reed grass, eastern reed grass, glutinous rice, lotus, lotus, gourd, reed, reed grass, numerous wheat trees grow here, countless.

古文：其西则有涌泉清池，激水推移；外发芙蓉菱华，内隐钜石白沙。
现代文：西面则有奔涌的泉水、清澈的水池、水波激荡，后浪冲击前浪，滚滚向前；水面上开放着荷花与菱花，水面下隐伏着巨石和白沙。
English: On the west side, there are rushing springs, clear pools, water waves, back waves crashing against the front waves, rolling forward; lotus and honeysuckle open on the water surface, and boulders and white sand lurk under the water surface.

古文：其中则有神龟蛟鼍，玳瑁鳖鼋。
现代文：水中有神龟、蛟蛇、猪婆龙、玳瑁、鳖和鼋。
English: Turtles, boa constrictors, boa constrictors, dragonflies, damselflies and dragonflies can be found in the water.

古文：其北则有阴林巨树，楩棻豫章，桂椒木兰，离硃杨，楂梸甹栗，橘柚芬芳。
现代文：北面则有山北的森林和巨大的树木：黄楩树、楠木、樟木、桂树、花椒树、木兰、黄蘗树、山梨树、赤茎柳、山楂树、黑枣树、桔树、柚子树、芳香远溢。
English: To the north, there are the forests of the northern part of the mountain and huge trees: yellow birch, camphor tree, elm tree, cinnamon tree, pepper tree, magnolia, yellow birch, sorrel tree, red-stemmed willow, hawthorn, black jujube tree, orange tree, yuzu tree, and the fragrance is overflowing.

古文：其上则有赤猿蠷蝚，鹓雏孔鸾，腾远射干。
现代文：那些树上有赤猿、猕猴、鹓、孔雀、鸾鸟、善跳的猴子和射干。
English: In those trees there are red monkeys, macaques, baboons, peacocks, ostriches, jumping monkeys and larks.

古文：其下则有白虎玄豹，蟃蜒貙豻，兕象野犀，穷奇獌狿。
现代文：树下则有白虎、黑豹、蟃蜒、、豻、雌犀牛、大象、野犀牛、穷奇、獌狿。
English: Under the tree, there are white tigers, black panthers, meandering, dragonflies, dragonflies, female rhinoceroses, elephants, wild rhinoceroses, beasts of prey, and dragonflies.

古文：  於是乃使专诸之伦，手格此兽。
现代文：  于是就派专诸之类的勇士，空手击杀这些野兽。
English: So they sent special warriors and the like to kill these beasts with their bare hands.

古文：楚王乃驾驯驳之驷，乘雕玉之舆，靡鱼须之桡旃，曳明月之珠旗，建干将之雄戟，左乌嗥之雕弓，右夏服之劲箭；阳子骖乘，纤阿为御；案节未舒，即陵狡兽，辚邛邛，槅距虚，轶野马而湜騊駼，乘遗风而射游骐；儵眒凄浰，雷动熛至，星流霆击，弓不虚发，中必决眦，洞胸达腋，绝乎心系，获若雨兽，揜草蔽地。
现代文：楚王就驾御起被驯服的杂毛之马，乘坐着美玉雕饰的车，挥动着用鱼须作旒穗的曲柄旌旗，摇动缀着明月珍珠的旗帜。
English: King Chu rode on a tamed horse, rode in a chariot carved with jewels, waved a cranked banner made of fish bones, and waved a flag decorated with bright moon pearls.

古文：於是楚王乃弭节裴回，翱翔容与，览乎阴林，观壮士之暴怒，与猛兽之恐惧，徼受诎，殚睹物之变态。
现代文：高举锋利的三刃戟，左手拿着雕有花纹的乌嗥名弓，右手拿着夏箙中的强劲之箭。伯乐做骖乘，纤阿当御者。
English: Holding high the sharp three-edged gong, in his left hand he holds the famous carved ebony bow, and in his right hand he holds the powerful arrow from the summer gong. Bo Le is the rider of the gong, and Zi A is the driver.

古文：  於是郑女曼姬，被阿锡，揄纻缟，櫜纤罗，垂雾縠；襞积褰绉，纡徐委曲，郁桡谿谷；衯衯裶裶，扬袘恤削，蜚纤垂髾；扶与猗靡，吸呷萃蔡，下摩兰蕙，上拂羽盖，错翡翠之威蕤，缪绕玉绥；缥乎忽忽，若神仙之仿佛。  於是乃相与獠於蕙圃，媻珊勃窣上金隄，揜翡翠，射鵕璘，微矰出，纤缴施，弋白鹄，连驾鹅，双鸧下，玄鹤加。怠而後发，游於清池；浮文鹢，扬桂枻，张翠帷，建羽盖，罔玳瑁，钓紫贝；摐金鼓，吹鸣籁，榜人歌，声流喝，水蟲骇，波鸿沸，涌泉起，奔扬会，礧石相击，硠硠潏潏，若雷霆之声，闻乎数百里之外。  将息獠者，击灵鼓，起烽燧，车案行，骑就队，纚乎淫淫，班乎裔裔。
现代文：战车按行列行走，骑兵归队而行。
English: The chariots are marching in line, the cavalry is marching back into formation.

古文：於是楚王乃登阳云之台，泊乎无为，澹乎自持，勺药之和具而後御之。
现代文：队伍接续不断，整整齐齐，缓慢前进。于是，楚王就登上阳云之台，显示出泰然自若安然无事的神态，保持着安静怡适的心境。
English: The procession continued, orderly and slowly moving forward. Therefore, King Chu climbed onto the platform of Yangyun, showing a calm and peaceful demeanor, maintaining a quiet and pleasant mood.

古文：不若大王终日驰骋而不下舆，脟割轮淬，自以为娱。
现代文：待用芍药调和的食物备齐之后，就献给楚王品尝。不像大王终日奔驰，不离车身，甚至切割肉块，也在轮间烤炙而吃，而自以为乐。
English: After preparing all the food to be mixed with medicinal herbs, it was presented to King Chu for tasting. Unlike the great king, who drove all day, he did not leave the car, even cutting pieces of meat, but also grilled and eaten between the wheels, and thought he was having fun.

古文：臣窃观之，齐殆不如。 
现代文：我以为齐国恐怕不如楚国吧。 
English: I thought that Qi might not be as good as Chu.

古文：於是王默然无以应仆也。 
现代文：于是，齐王默默无言，无话回答我。 
English: As a result, King Qi was speechless and had no words to answer me.

古文：乌有先生曰： 是何言之过也！
现代文：乌有先生说： 这话为什么说得如此过分呢？
English: Mr. Wu You said: Why is this statement so excessive?

古文：足下不远千里，来况齐国，王悉发境内之士，而备车骑之众，以出田，乃欲戮力致获，以娱左右也，何名为夸哉！
现代文：您不远千里前来赐惠齐国，齐王调遣境内的全部士卒，准备了众多的车马，同您外出打猎，是想同心协力猎获禽兽，使您感到快乐，怎能称作夸耀呢！
English: You have not come thousands of miles to benefit the country of Qi. The king of Qi has dispatched all the soldiers in the territory, prepared a large number of horses and chariots, and went out hunting with you. He wanted to work together to hunt animals and make you feel happy. How can it be called boasting?

古文：问楚地之有无者，原闻大国之风烈，先生之馀论也。
现代文：询问楚国有无游猎的平原广泽，是希望听听楚国的政治教化与光辉的功业，以及先生的美言高论。
English: To inquire about the plains of Guangze, where there is no hunting in Chuzhou, is to hope to hear about the political enlightenment and brilliant achievements of Chuzhou, as well as Mr. Gao's beautiful words.

古文：今足下不称楚王之德厚，而盛推云梦以为高，奢言淫乐而显侈靡，窃为足下不取也。
现代文：现在先生不称颂楚王丰厚的德政，却畅谈云梦泽以为高论，大谈淫游纵乐之事，而且炫耀奢侈靡费，我私下以为您不应当这样做。
English: Now, sir, instead of praising King Chu's plentiful virtue, you are talking about dreams and dreams, talking about erotic pleasure, and showing off extravagant spending. I privately think that you should not do this.

古文：必若所言，固非楚国之美也。
现代文：如果真像您所说的那样，那本来算不上是楚国的美好之事。
English: If it really is as you say, then it would not be a good thing for the state of Chu.

古文：有而言之，是章君之恶；无而言之，是害足下之信。章君之恶而伤私义，二者无一可，而先生行之，必且轻於齐而累於楚矣。
现代文：楚国若是有这些事，您把它说出来，这就是张扬国君的丑恶；如果楚国没有这些事，您却说有，这就有损于您的声誉，张扬国君的丑恶，损害自己的信誉，这两件事没有一样是可做的，而您却做了。这必将被齐国所轻视，而楚国的声誉也会受到牵累。
English: If the state of Chu has these things, and you say it, this is the ugliness of promoting the king; if the state of Chu does not have these things, but you say it does, this will damage your reputation, promote the king's ugliness, and damage your own credibility. There is not one of these two things that can be done, but you did it. This will certainly be despised by the state of Qi, and the reputation of the state of Chu will also be affected.

古文：且齐东陼巨海，南有琅邪，观乎成山，射乎之罘，浮勃澥，游孟诸，邪与肃慎为邻，右以汤谷为界，秋田乎青丘，傍徨乎海外，吞若云梦者八九，其於胸中曾不蒂芥。
现代文：况且齐国东临大海，南有琅琊山，在成山观赏美景，在之罘山狩猎，在渤海泛舟，在孟诸泽中游猎。东北与肃慎为邻，左边以汤谷为界限；秋天在青丘打猎，自由漫步在海外。像云梦这样的大泽，纵然吞下八九个，胸中也丝毫没有梗塞之感。
English: What's more, Qi Province faces the sea in the east, has Lushan Mountain in the south, enjoys beautiful scenery in Chengshan Mountain, hunts in Lushan Mountain, rafts in the Bohai Sea, and hunts in Mengzhu Lake. The northeast is adjacent to Sushen, with Tanggu as the boundary on the left; hunts in Qingqiu in autumn, and walks freely overseas. Even if a large lake like Yunmen swallows eighty-nine, there is no feeling of infarction in the chest.

古文：若乃俶傥瑰伟，异方殊类，珍怪鸟兽，万端鳞萃，充仞其中者，不可胜记，禹不能名，契不能计。
现代文：至于那超凡卓异之物，各地特产，珍奇怪异的鸟兽，万物聚集，好像鱼鳞荟萃，充满其中，不可胜记，就是大禹也辨不清它们的名字，契也不能计算它们的数目。
English: As for the extraordinary things, local specialties, rare and strange birds and beasts, all things are gathered, like fish scales, full of them, impossible to remember, even Dayu can't distinguish their names, and Che can't count their number.

古文：然在诸侯之位，不敢言游戏之乐，苑囿之大；先生又见客，是以王辞而不复，何为无用应哉！ 
现代文：但是，齐王处在诸侯的地位，不敢陈说游猎和嬉戏的欢乐，苑囿的广大。先生又是被以贵宾之礼接待的客人，所以齐王没有回答您任何言辞，怎能说他无言以对呢！ 
English: However, since King Qi was in the position of a prince, he did not dare to tell you about the joys of hunting and playing, and the vastness of his court. Sir was also a guest who was received as a guest of honor, so King Qi did not answer you with any words. How can he say that he was speechless?

古文：无是公听然而笑曰： 楚则失矣，齐亦未为得也。
现代文：无是公微笑着说： 楚国错了，齐国也未必正确。
English: Muzhegong smiled and said: Chu is wrong, Qi is not necessarily right.

古文：夫使诸侯纳贡者，非为财币，所以述职也；封疆画界者，非为守御，所以禁淫也。
现代文：天子所以让诸侯交纳贡品，并不是为了财物，而是为了让他们到朝廷陈述其履行职务的情况；所以要划分封国的疆界，并非为了守卫边境，而是为了杜绝诸侯的越规违法的行为。
English: The reason why the Son of Heaven asked the lords to pay tribute was not for the sake of wealth, but in order to allow them to report to the imperial court on the performance of their duties; therefore, the boundaries of the country should be divided, not to guard the border, but to prevent the lords from violating the law.

古文：今齐列为东籓，而外私肃慎，捐国逾限，越海而田，其於义故未可也。
现代文：如今，齐国位列东方的藩国，却与国外的肃慎私自交往，弃离封国，越过国界，漂洋过海，到青邱去游猎，这种作法就诸侯应遵守的道义来说，是不允许的。
English: Today, although Qi is one of the eastern feudal states, it engages in self-serving dealings with foreign countries, abandons its fiefdom, crosses national borders, drifts across the ocean, and goes hunting in Qingqiu. This practice is not allowed in terms of the morality that princes should abide by.

古文：且二君之论，不务明君臣之义而正诸侯之礼，徒事争游猎之乐，苑囿之大，欲以奢侈相胜，荒淫相越，此不可以扬名发誉，而適足以贬君自损也。
现代文：况且你们二位先生的言论，都不是竭力阐明君臣之间的正常关系，也不是端正诸侯的礼仪，而只是去争论游猎的欢乐，苑囿的广大，想以奢侈争胜负、以荒淫赛高低。这样做不但不能使你们的国君显扬名望，提高声誉，却恰恰能够贬低声望，自己蒙受损失。
English: Moreover, the remarks of your two gentlemen are not an effort to clarify the normal relationship between monarchs and subjects, nor the proper etiquette of princes, but only to argue about the joy of hunting, the vastness of the courtyards, to win with luxury, to be high and low with debauchery. Not only can this not make your sovereigns famous and enhance their reputation, but it can precisely degrade their reputation and suffer losses.

古文：且夫齐楚之事又焉足道邪！
现代文：况且那齐国和楚国的事物又哪里值得称道呢！
English: Besides, what are the things in Qi and Chu that are worthy of praise?

古文：君未睹夫巨丽也，独不闻天子之上林乎？
现代文：先生们没有亲眼看到那浩大壮丽的场面，难道没有听说过天子的上林苑吗？
English: Gentlemen, have you not seen with your own eyes the grandeur of the scene? Have you not heard of Shanglin Court?

古文： 左苍梧，右西极，丹水更其南，紫渊径其北；终始霸浐，出入泾渭；酆鄗潦潏，纡馀委蛇，经营乎其内。
现代文： 上林苑左边是苍梧，右边是西极，丹水流过它的南方，紫渊流经它的北方；霸水和浐水始终未流出上林，泾水和渭水流进来又流出去；酆水、鄗水、潦水、潏水，曲折宛转，在上林苑中回环盘旋。
English: On the left side of Shanglin Court is Cangwu, on the right side is the West Pole, Dan Water flows through its south, and Ziyuan flows through its north; Overtaking Water and Receding Water have never flowed out of Shanglin Court, Receding Water and Receding Water flow in and out; Receding Water, Receding Water, Receding Water, Receding Water, Receding Water, Receding Water, twists and turns, circling in the middle of Shanglin Court.

古文：荡荡兮八川分流，相背而异态。东西南北，驰骛往来，出乎椒丘之阙，行乎洲淤之浦，径乎桂林之中，过乎泱莽之野。
现代文：浩浩荡荡的八条河川，流向相背，姿态各异，东西南北，往来奔驰，从两山对峙的椒丘山谷流出，流经沙石堆积的小洲，穿过桂树之林，流过茫茫无垠的原野。
English: The vast and turbulent eight rivers, flowing in opposite directions, with different postures, east-west, north-south, rushing back and forth, flow out of the Peppered Hill Valley where two mountains face each other, flow through the sand and stone-piled small islands, through the katsura forest, and flow through the boundless wilderness.

古文：汨乎浑流，顺阿而下，赴隘陕之口。
现代文：水流迅疾盛大，沿着高丘奔腾而下，直赴狭隘的山口。
English: The water flowed swiftly and grandly, rushing down along the high hills, straight to the narrow mountain pass.

古文：触穹石，激堆埼，沸乎暴怒，汹涌滂晞，滭浡滵汩，湢测泌瀄，横流逆折，转腾潎洌，澎濞沆瀣，穹隆云挠，蜿胶戾，逾波趋浥，莅莅下濑，批壧旻壅，饹扬滞沛，临坻注壑，瀺灂霣坠，湛湛隐隐，砰磅訇潏，潏潏淈淈，湁潗鼎沸，驰波跳沫，汩槃漂疾，悠远长怀，寂漻无声，肆乎永归。
现代文：撞击着巨石，激荡着沙石形成的曲折河岸，水流涌起，暴怒异常，汹涌澎湃。河水盛涌，水流迅疾，波浪撞击，砰砰作响；横流回旋，转折奔腾，潎洌作响。
English: Hitting boulders, agitating the meandering riverbanks formed by sandstone, the water surges, rages abnormally, surges. The river is surging, the water is swift, the waves are crashing, banging; the cross-current swirls, turns, rushes, and bangs.

古文：然後灝溔潢漾，安翔徐徊，翯乎滈々，东注大湖，衍溢陂池。
现代文：急流冲击着不平的河岸，轰鸣震响，水势高耸，浪花回旋，卷曲如云，蜿蜒萦绕。
English: The rapids hit the uneven riverbanks, roar and shake, the water rises, the waves swirl, curl like clouds, and meander.

古文：於是乎蛟龙赤螭，靧亸螹离，鰅騄鰬魠，禺禺鱋魶，揵鳍擢尾，振鳞奋翼，潜处于深岩；鱼鳖讙声，万物众夥，明月珠子，玓瓅江靡，蜀石黄鶗，水玉磊砢，磷磷烂烂，采色霅旰，丛积乎其中。
现代文：然后，无边无际的大水，迂回徐缓，银光闪闪，奔向东方，注入太湖，湖水满溢，流进附近的池塘。于是，蛟龙、赤螭、、离、鰅、鳙、鰬、魠、禺禺、鱋、魶，都扬起背鳍，摇动着鱼尾，振抖着鱼鳞，奋扬起鱼翅，潜处于深渊岩谷之中。鱼鳖欢跃喧哗，万物成群结伙。明月、珠子，在江边光彩闪烁。蜀石、黄色的碝石、水晶石，层层堆积，灿烂夺目，光彩映照，聚积于水中。
English: Then, the boundless, boundless water, slowly circling, sparkling silver, rushed to the east, flowing into the Taihu Lake, the lake overflowed, and flowed into the nearby pond. So, the dragon, the red dragon, the dragonfly, the dragonfly, the dragonfly, the dragonfly, the dragonfly, the dragonfly, the dragonfly, the dragonfly, the dragonfly, the dragonfly, the dragonfly, the dragonfly, the dragonfly, the dragonfly, the dragonfly, the dragonfly, the dragonfly, the dragonfly, the dragonfly, the dragonfly, the dragonfly, the dragonfly, the dragonfly, the dragonfly

古文：鸿鹄鹔鸨，磻蟏鸀，鴂目，烦鹜鷛醁，澥昉鸕，群浮乎其上。
现代文：天鹅、鹔鷞、鸨鸟、鴐鹅、鸀、、鹮目、烦鹜、鷛鷞、、鸬，成群结队，浮游在水面上。
English: Swans, pelicans, ostriches, geese, cormorants, pelicans, cormorants, cormorants, cormorants, cormorants, swans, swans, swans, swans, swans, swans, swans, swans, swans, swans, swans, swans, swans, swans, swans, swans, swans, swans, swans, swans, swans, swans, swans, swans, swans, swans, swans, swans, swans, swans, swans, swans, swans, swans, swans, swans

古文：汎淫泛滥，随风澹淡，与波摇荡，掩薄草渚，唼喋菁藻，咀嚼菱藕。
现代文：任凭河水横流浮动，鸟儿随风漂流，乘着波涛，自由摇荡。有时，成群的鸟儿聚积在野草覆盖的沙洲上，口衔着菁、藻，唼喋作响，口含着菱、藕，咀嚼不已。
English: The birds drift with the wind, ride the waves, and swing freely. Sometimes, flocks of birds gather on the grass-covered sandbars, chattering with cicadas and algae, chattering with dragonflies and dragonflies, and chewing incessantly.

古文： 於是乎崇山巃嵸，崔巍嵯峨，深林钜木，崭岩嵾嵯，九嵏、嶻，南山峨峨，岩纮甗锜，嶊崣崛崎，振谿通谷，蹇产沟渎，谽呀豁閜，轗陵别岛，崴磈岧瘣，丘虚崛嶮，隐辚郁鹍，登降施靡，陂池貏豸，沇溶淫鬻，散涣夷陆，亭皋千里，靡不被筑。
现代文： 于是高山挺拔耸立，巍峨雄峻。广阔的山林中生长着高大的树木。山高险峻，高低不齐。
English: As a result, high mountains stand tall, towering and majestic. Tall trees grow in the vast mountain forests. Mountains are high and precipitous, uneven in height.

古文：掩以绿蕙，被以江离，糅以蘼芜，杂以流夷。尃结缕，欑戾莎，揭车衡兰，本射干，茈姜蘘荷，葴橙若荪，鲜枝黄砾，蒋芧青薠，布濩闳泽，延曼太原，丽靡广衍，应风披靡，吐芳扬烈，郁郁斐斐，众香发越，肸蚃布写，餔苾勃。 於是乎周览泛观，瞋盼轧沕，芒芒恍忽，视之无端，察之无崖。
现代文：地上长满菉草和蕙草，覆盖着江蓠，间杂着蘼芜和留夷，布满了结缕，深绿色的莎草丛生在一起，还有揭车与杜蘅、兰草、稿本、射干、茈姜、蘘荷、葴、橙、杜若、荪、鲜枝、黄、蒋、芧、青薠，遍布于广阔的大泽，蔓延在广大的平原之上。花草绵延不绝，广布繁衍，迎着微风倒伏，吐露芬芳，散发着浓烈的香味，郁郁菲菲，香气四溢，沁人心田，更令人感到芳香浓烈。于是浏览四周，广泛观赏，睁大眼睛也辨识不清，只见茫茫一片，恍恍忽忽，放眼望去，没有边际；仔细察看，宽广无涯。
English: The ground is covered with reeds and rushes, covered with river reeds, interspersed with reeds and rushes, covered with knots, dark green sedges clumped together, as well as poplars and rhododendrons, orchids, manuscripts, shoots, ginger, thistles, thistles, oranges, rhododendrons, thistles, fresh twigs, yellows, chiangs, thistles, and green thistles, all over the vast Osawa, spreading over the vast plains. Flowers and plants stretch endlessly, proliferate widely, face the breeze, exude fragrance, emit a strong fragrance,

古文：日出东沼，入於西陂。
现代文：早晨，太阳从苑东的池沼升起，傍晚，太阳由苑西的陂池落下。
English: In the morning, the sun rises from the pond in the east of the garden, and in the evening, the sun sets from the pond in the west of the garden.

古文：其南则隆冬生长，踊水跃波；兽则偁旄敠犛，沈牛麈麋，赤首圜题，穷奇象犀。
现代文：苑南则严冬也依然生长草木，河水奔踊翻腾；这里的野兽有，、旄、獏、犛、沈牛、麈、麋、赤首、圜题、穷奇、象、犀。
English: In the southern part of the garden, plants and trees are still growing in the severe winter, and the river is dancing and churning; the beasts here are, toad, toad, toad, toad, sunken cow, toad, toad, red-necked, ruffian, strange, elephant, rhinoceros.

古文：其北则盛夏含冻裂地，涉冰揭河；兽则麒麟角湲，騊駼橐扆，蛩蛩驒騱，駃騠驴骡。
现代文：苑北则盛夏季节也是河水结冰，大地冻裂，只要提起衣裳即可过河。这里的野兽有麒麟、角、騊駼、橐駞、蛩蛩、騨騱、駃騠、驴、骡。
English: In the north of Yuan Yuan, the river is frozen in the midsummer season, the ground is frozen and cracked, and you can cross the river just by lifting your clothes. The beasts here are unicorns, horned baboons, donkeys, mules, donkeys, donkeys, and donkeys.

古文： 於是乎离宫别馆，弥山跨谷，高廊四注，重坐曲阁，华榱璧珰，辇道纚属，步朓周流，长途中宿。
现代文： 于是离宫别馆，布满山坡，横跨溪谷。高大的回廊，四周相连，双重的楼房间，阁道曲折相连。绘花的屋椽子，璧玉装饰的瓦珰。辇道连绵不绝，在长廊之中周游，路程遥远，须在中途住宿。
English: So I left the Imperial Villa, which covered the hillside and spanned the valley. Tall corridors, connected on all sides, double-storey rooms, and winding attic paths connected. Flower-painted eaves, jade-decorated corrugated roofs. The path is continuous, traveling around the middle of the promenade, the journey is long, and I have to stay in the middle.

古文：夷颙筑堂，累台增成，岩穾洞房，俯杳眇而无见，仰攀橑而扪天，奔星更於闺闼，宛虹拖於楯轩。
现代文：把高山削平，构筑殿堂，修起层层台榭，山岩底部有幽深的房室与此相通。俯视山下，遥远而无所见，仰视天空，攀上屋椽可以摸天。流星闪过宫门，弯曲的彩虹横挂在窗板与栏杆之上。
English: They leveled the mountain, built a hall of fame, and erected layers upon layers of scaffolding, which is connected to a deep chamber at the bottom of the mountain rock. Looking down the mountain, far away and seeing nothing, looking up at the sky, climbing the eaves, you can touch the sky. A meteor flashed through the palace gate, and a curved rainbow hung horizontally above the window panels and railing.

古文：青虬蚴蟉於东箱，象舆婉蝉於西清，灵圉燕於间观，偓佺之伦暴於南荣，醴泉涌於清室，通川过乎中庭。
现代文：青虬蜿蜒在东厢，大象拉的车子行走在清静的西厢。众神休息在清闲的馆舍，偓佺类的仙人在南檐下沐浴阳光。甘甜的泉水从清室中涌出，流动的河水流过院中，用巨石修整河岸，高峻险要，参差不齐。
English: The blue meanders in the east wing, the chariot pulled by the elephant walks in the quiet west wing. The gods rest in the leisurely pavilion, the fern-like immortals bathe in the sun under the south gable. Sweet spring water gushes out of the clean room, flowing river water flows through the hospital, and the river banks are repaired with boulders, high and dangerous, uneven.

古文：槃石裖崖，嵚岩倚倾，嵯峨磼酺，刻削峥嵘，玫瑰碧琳，珊瑚丛生，渼玉旁唐，瑸斒文鳞，赤瑕驳荦，杂臿其间，垂绥琬琰，和氏出焉。
现代文：山岩巍峨高耸，峥嵘奇特，好像工匠雕刻而成。
English: The mountain rock is towering and peculiar, as if carved by craftsmen.

古文： 於是乎卢橘夏孰，黄甘橙楱，枇杷橪柿，楟柰厚朴，甹枣杨梅，樱桃蒲陶，隐夫郁棣，榙濛荔枝，罗乎後宫，列乎北园。
现代文： 于是卢桔在夏天成熟，黄柑、柚子、楱、枇杷、酸小枣、柿子、山梨、、厚朴、羊枣、杨梅、樱桃、葡萄、常棣、榙、荔枝等果树，罗生在后宫之中，列植于北园之内，绵延至丘陵之上，下至于平原之间。
English: As a result, mandarin oranges ripen in the summer, and fruit trees such as mandarin oranges, yuzu, citron, loquat, sour jujube, persimmon, sorrel, acacia, thick parsley, jujube, poplar, cherry, grape, evergreen, alfalfa, and lychee grow in the harem and are planted in rows in the north garden, stretching up to the hills and down to the plains.

古文：崒丘陵，下平原，扬翠叶，杌紫茎，发红华，秀硃荣，煌煌扈扈，照曜钜野。
现代文：摆动起翠绿的树叶，摇动着紫色的干茎，开放着红色的花朵，秀出了朱红的小花。光彩繁盛，照耀着广阔的原野。
English: The emerald green leaves are waving, the purple dry stems are shaking, the red flowers are opening, and the scarlet flowers are showing. The glory is flourishing, shining on the vast field.

古文：沙棠栎櫧，华氾弇栌，留落胥馀，仁频并闾，欃檀木兰，豫章女贞，长千仞，大连抱，夸条直暢，实叶葰茂，攒立丛倚，连卷累佹，崔错骫，阬衡閜砢，垂条扶於，落英幡纚，纷容萧蔘，旖旎从风，浏莅吸，盖象金石之声，管籥之音。
现代文：沙果、栎、槠、桦树、枫树、银杏树、黄栌树、石榴、椰子树、槟榔树、槟榈树、檀树、木兰、枕木、樟木、冬青树，有的树木高达千仞，粗得得要几个人才能合抱，花朵和枝条生长得畅达舒展，果实和叶子硕大茂密，有的聚立在一处，有的丛集相倚。树枝相连而蜷曲，交而重叠，繁茂交错，盘纡纠结，高举横出，相倚相扶，下垂的枝条四散伸展，落花飞扬；树木繁茂高大，随风摇荡，婀娜多姿；风吹草木，凄清作响，有如钟磬之声，好似管龠之音。
English: Sandalwood, alder, birch, eucalyptus, maple, ginkgo, sassafras, pomegranate, coconut, betel nut, palmetto, sandalwood, magnolia, sleepers, birch, and holly. Some trees are as tall as a thousand fathoms, so thick that it takes several people to hold them together. Flowers and branches grow smoothly and stretch out. Fruits and leaves are large and lush. Some are concentrated in one place, while others are clustered together. Branches are connected and curled, intersected and overlapped, lush and intertwined, coiled and tangled, held aloft, lean

古文：柴池茈虒，旋环後宫，杂遝累辑，被山缘谷，循阪下隰，视之无端，究之无穷。
现代文：树木高低不齐，环绕着后宫；众多草木重叠累积，覆盖着山野，沿着溪谷生长，顺着山坡，直下低湿之地，放眼望去，没有边际，仔细探究，又无穷无尽。
English: The trees are uneven in height, surrounding the harem; many plants overlap and accumulate, covering the mountains and fields, growing along the valley, along the mountain slope, straight down to the low wetland, looking around, there is no edge, carefully exploring, and endless.

古文： 於是玄猿素雌，蜼玃飞鸓，蛭蜩蠗蝚，螹胡蛫，栖息乎其间；长啸哀鸣，翩幡互经，夭蟜枝格，偃蹇杪颠。
现代文： 于是黑猿和白色的雌猴、仰鼻长尾猿、大母猴、小飞鼠、能飞的蛭、善爬树的蜩、猕猴、似猴的胡、似狗的豰、如猴的蛫，都栖息在林间，有的长啸，有的哀鸣，上下跳跃，轻捷如飞，交相往来，在树枝间共同戏耍，屈曲宛转，直上树梢。
English: So the black monkey and the white female monkey, the long-nosed proboscis monkey, the large female monkey, the small flying mouse, the flying baboon, the tree-climbing baboon, the macaque monkey, the monkey-like baboon, the dog-like baboon, the monkey-like baboon, all roosted in the woods, some chirping, some whining, jumping up and down, light as flying, communicating with each other, playing together between the branches, bending and turning, and going straight to the treetops.

古文：於是乎隃绝梁，腾殊榛，捷垂条，踔稀间，牢落陆离，烂曼远迁。
现代文：于是跳越断桥，跃过奇异的丛林，接持下垂的枝条，或分散奔走，或杂乱相聚，散乱远去。
English: So they jumped over the broken bridge, leapt over the strange jungle, picked up the drooping branches, or scattered and ran, or cluttered together and scattered far away.

古文： 若此辈者，数千百处。嬉游往来，宫宿馆舍，庖厨不徙，後宫不移，百官备具。
现代文： 像这样的地方有数千百处，可供往来嬉戏游乐，住宿在离宫，歇息在别馆，厨房不需要迁徙，后宫妃嫔也不必跟随，文武百官也已齐备。
English: There are thousands and hundreds of places like this, where people can come and go, play and have fun, stay in a separate palace, rest in another hall, the kitchen does not need to move, the harem concubines do not need to follow, and the civil and military officials are also ready.

古文： 於是乎背秋涉冬，天子校猎。
现代文： 于是从秋至冬，天子开始校猎，乘坐着象牙雕饰的车子，驾驭六条白色的虬龙，摇动着五彩旌旗，挥舞着云旗。
English: So from autumn to winter, Tianzi began the school hunt, riding in an ivory-carved chariot, driving six white dragons, shaking the multicolored banner and waving the cloud flag.

古文：乘镂象，六玉虬，拖蜺旌，靡云旗，前皮轩，後道游；孙叔奉辔，卫公骖乘，扈从横行，出乎四校之中。
现代文：前面有蒙着虎皮的车子开路，后边有导游之车护行。孙叔执辔驾车，卫公做骖乘，为天子护驾的侍卫不循正道而行，活动在四校之中。
English: In front of them, a car covered with a tiger skin is driving, and behind them, a tour guide's car is escorting. Sun Shou is driving, Wei Gong is riding, and the guards who are escorting the heavenly son are not following the right path, and the activities are among the four schools.

古文：鼓严簿，纵獠者，江河为阹，泰山为橹，车骑雷起，隐天动地，先後陆离，离散别追，淫淫裔裔，缘陵流泽，云布雨施。 
现代文：在森严的卤薄里敲起鼓来，猎手们便纵情出击；江河是校猎的围栅，大山是望楼。车马飞奔，如雷声忽起，震天动地。猎手们四散分离，各自追逐自己的目标。出猎者络绎行进，沿着山陵，顺着沼泽，像云雾密布，如大雨倾注。
English: Drums are beaten in the thick forest, and the hunters come out to attack; the rivers are the fences of the school hunt, and the mountains are the watchtowers. The chariots and horses are flying, like thunder suddenly rising, shaking the earth. The hunters are scattered, each chasing their own goal. The hunters are marching, along the mountains, along the marshes, like clouds, like heavy rain.

古文： 生貔豹，搏豺狼，手熊罴，足野羊，蒙鹖苏，绔白虎，被豳文，跨野马。
现代文： 活捉貔豹，搏击豺狼，徒手杀死熊罴，踏倒野羊。猎者头戴鹖尾装饰的帽子，穿着画有白虎的裤子，披服有斑纹的衣服，骑着野马。
English: They catch leopards alive, fight wolves, kill bear cubs with their bare hands, and trample wild sheep. The hunters wear caps decorated with irises, trousers with white tigers, striped clothes, and ride wild horses.

古文：陵三颙之危，下碛历之坻；俓鷟赴险，越壑厉水。
现代文：登上三山并峙的山头，走下崎岖不平的山坡，直奔高陡险要的山峰，越过谷沟，连衣涉水。
English: Climbing to the top of the mountain where three mountains stand side by side, walking down the rugged mountain slope, going straight to the high and steep peaks, crossing the valley, and wading in the water.

古文：推蜚廉，弄解豸，格瑕蛤，鋋猛氏，罥騕褭，射封豕。
现代文：排击蜚廉，摆布解豸、击杀瑕蛤，用矛刺杀猛氏，用绳索绊取騕褭，射杀大野猪。
English: Sorting out the badgers, manipulating the badgers, killing the badgers, stabbing Mr. Meng with a spear, tripping the badgers with a rope, shooting the wild boar.

古文：箭不苟害，解脰陷脑；弓不虚发，应声而倒。
现代文：箭不随意射杀野兽，一箭射出，则必破解颈项，穿裂头脑。弓不虚发，野兽皆应声而倒。
English: The arrow does not shoot at random to kill the beast, one arrow shot, it will crack the neck, pierce the head. The bow is not vain, the beast all fall down in response.

古文：於是乎乘舆弥节裴回，翱翔往来，睨部曲之进退，览将率之变态。
现代文：于是，天子便乘着车子，徐缓徘徊，自由自在地往来遨游，观看士卒队伍的进退，浏览将帅应变的神态。
English: As a result, Tianzi took a car and slowly wandered around, freely traveling back and forth, watching the advance and retreat of the troops, and observing the general's attitude.

古文：然後浸潭促节，儵夐远去，流离轻禽，槅履狡兽，轊白鹿，捷狡兔，轶赤电，遗光燿，追怪物，出宇宙，弯繁弱，满白羽，射游枭，栎蜚虡，择肉後发，先中命处，弦矢分，艺殪仆。
现代文：其速度之快，超越赤色的闪电，而把电光留在后边。追逐怪兽，逸出宇宙。拉弯繁弱良弓，张满白羽之箭，射击游动的枭羊，击倒蜚虡。选好肉肥的野兽然后发箭，命中之处正是预想的地方。
English: Its speed is so fast that it outruns red lightning, but leaves lightning behind. It chases monsters and escapes the universe. It bends weak bows, shoots arrows full of white feathers, shoots swimming sheep, and knocks down donkeys. It selects the fattest beast and then shoots arrows, hitting exactly where it is supposed to.

古文： 然後扬节而上浮，陵惊风，历骇梠，乘虚无，与神俱，辚玄鹤，乱昆鸡。遒孔鸾，促鵕璘，拂鹥鸟，捎凤皇，捷鸳雏，掩焦明。
现代文：弓箭分离，一箭射中的猎物就倒在地上。 然后，天子的车驾高举起旌节而上浮，驾御着疾风，越过狂飙，升上天空，与神灵同处。践踏黑鹤，扰乱鹍鸡，近捕孔雀和鸾鸟，捉取鵔，击落鹥鸟，用竹竿击打凤凰，疾取鸳雏，掩捕焦明。
English: The bow and arrow separated, and the prey fell to the ground with a single arrow shot. Then, the celestial chariot raised the hock high and floated up, drove against the gale, overcame the mad rush, ascended into the sky, and was with the gods. Trample the black crane, disturb the cockerel, catch the peacock and the ostrich, catch the cormorant, shoot down the ostrich, beat the phoenix with a bamboo pole, catch the chicks, and hide the cinder.

古文： 道尽涂殚，回车而还。
现代文： 直到道路的尽头，才掉转车头而回。
English: It was only at the end of the road that we turned around and headed back.

古文：招摇乎襄羊，降集乎北纮，率乎直指，闇乎反乡。
现代文：逍遥徜徉，降落在上林苑的极北之地。直道前行，忽然间返回帝乡。
English: He landed in the far north of Shanglinyuan. He went straight ahead and suddenly returned to the imperial village.

古文：蹶石，历封峦，过乂鹊，望露寒，下棠梨，息宜春，西驰宣曲，濯鹢牛首，登龙台，掩细柳，观士大夫之勤略，钧獠者之所得获。
现代文：踏上石阙，经过封峦，过了鳷鹊，望着露寒。下抵棠梨宫，休息在宜春宫，再奔驰到昆明池西边的宣曲宫，划起饰有鹢鸟的船，在牛首池中荡漾。然后登上龙台观，到细柳观休息。观察士大夫们的辛勤与收获，平均分配猎者所捕获的猎物。
English: After stepping on the stalagmites, passing through the seals and cocoons, looking at the cold dew, arriving at the Tang Dynasty Pear Palace, resting at the Yichun Palace, and then rushing to the Xuanqu Palace on the west side of Kunming Lake, paddling a boat decorated with ostriches and swinging in the Cow's Head Lake. Then climb to the Longtai View and rest at the Xiliu View. Observe the hard work and harvest of the scholars and doctors, and evenly distribute the prey caught by the hunters.

古文：徒车之所辚轹，乘骑之所蹂若，人民之所蹈騃，与其穷极倦，惊惮慴伏，不被创刃而死者，佗佗籍籍，填阬满谷，揜平弥泽。
现代文：至于步卒和车驾所践踏辗轧而死的、骑兵所踏死的，大臣与随从人员所踩死的，以及那走投无路、疲惫不堪、惊惧伏地、没受刀刃的创伤就死去的野兽，其尸体纵横交错，填满坑谷，覆盖平原，弥漫大泽，不计其数。
English: As for the dead trampled and rolled by footmen and drivers, the dead trampled by cavalry, the dead trampled by ministers and attendants, and the desperate, exhausted, frightened, and died without being wounded by the blade of the beast, their bodies crisscross, fill the valley, cover the plain, pervade the Dasawa, countless.

古文： 於是乎游戏懈怠，置酒乎昊天之台，张乐乎轇輵之宇；撞千石之钟，立万石之钜；建翠华之旗，树灵鼍之鼓。奏陶唐氏之舞，听葛天氏之歌，千人唱，万人和，山陵为之震动，川谷为之荡波。
现代文： 于是游乐嬉戏倦怠松懈，在上接云天的台榭摆下酒宴，在广阔无边的寰宇演奏音乐。撞击千石的大钟，竖起万石的钟架；高擎着翠羽为饰的旗帜，设置灵鼍皮制成的大鼓；奏起尧时的舞曲，聆听葛天氏的乐曲；千人同唱，万人相和；山陵被这歌声震动，河川之水被激起大波。
English: So they played and frolicked, languidly and languidly, laid out a banquet on the heavenly table, and played music in the vast and boundless world. They struck the great clock of a thousand stones, erected the clock stand of a thousand stones; raised the flag decorated with green feathers, and set up a large drum made of reed skin; played the dance music of the hour of the dragonfly, and listened to the music of Ge Tian; thousands of people sang together, and all people were in harmony; the mountains were shaken by this song, and the water of the rivers was stirred up by large waves.

古文：巴俞宋蔡，淮南于遮，文成颠歌，族举递奏，金鼓迭起，铿鎗铛剸，洞心骇耳。
现代文：巴渝的舞蹈，宋、蔡的歌曲，淮南的《于遮》，文成和云南的民歌，同时并举，轮番演奏。钟鼓之声此起彼伏，铿锵铛，惊心震耳。
English: The dance of Bayu, the songs of Song and Cai, the "Yu Zha" of Huainan, and the folk songs of Wencheng and Yunnan were simultaneously held and performed in turn. The sound of the bell and drum came one after another, and it was shocking and deafening.

古文：荆吴郑卫之声，韶濩武象之乐，阴淫案衍之音，鄢郢缤纷，激楚结风，俳优侏儒，狄鞮之倡，所以娱耳目而乐心意者，丽靡烂漫於前，靡曼美色於後。
现代文：荆、吴、郑、卫的歌声，《韶》、《濩》、《武》、《象》的音乐，靡放纵的乐曲，鄢、郢地区的飘逸舞姿，《激楚》之音高亢激越，可以掀起回风，俳优侏儒的表演，西戎的乐，用来使耳目欢愉、心情快乐的事物，应有尽有。
English: The songs of Jing, Wu, Zheng and Wei, the music of "," "," "武" and "象," the music of indulgence, the flowing dance of the  and  regions, the high-pitched excitement of the "激楚" can stir up the wind, the performance of the haiku dwarf, the music of Xi Rong, and everything that is used to make the ears and eyes happy and the mood happy.

古文： 若夫青琴宓妃之徒，绝殊离俗，姣冶嫺都，靓庄刻饬，便嬛绰约，柔桡嬛嬛，妩媚佺弱；抴独茧之褕袘，眇阎易以戌削，编姺徶蘋，与世殊服；芬香沤郁，酷烈淑郁；皓齿粲烂，宜笑旳皪；长眉连娟，微睇釂藐；色授魂与，心愉於侧。 於是酒中乐酣，天子芒然而思，似若有亡。曰： 嗟乎，此泰奢侈！
现代文：美妙悦耳的音乐在君王面前回荡，皮肤细腻的美女站立在君王身后。
English: Beautiful, melodious music reverberates in front of the king, and a beautiful woman with delicate skin stands behind him.

古文：朕以览听馀间，无事弃日，顺天道以杀伐，时休息於此，恐後世靡丽，遂往而不反，非所以为继嗣创业垂统也。 
现代文：我在理政的闲暇之时，不愿虚度时日，顺应天道，前来上林苑猎杀野兽，有时在此休息。生怕后代子孙奢侈靡，循此而行，不肯休止，这不是为后人创功立业发扬传统的行为。 
English: In my leisure time as an administrator, I didn't want to waste time, so I followed the heavenly path and came to Shanglinyuan to hunt and kill wild animals, and sometimes rested here. For fear that future generations would be too extravagant, I followed this path and refused to stop. This is not the behavior of making achievements and carrying forward traditions for future generations.

古文：於是乃解酒罢猎，而命有司曰： 地可以垦辟，悉为农郊，以赡萌隶；隤墙填堑，使山泽之民得至焉。
现代文：于是就撤去酒宴，不再打猎，而命令主管官员说： 凡是可以开垦的土地，都变为农田，用以供养黎民百姓。推倒围墙，填平壕沟，使乡野之民都可以来此谋生。
English: So he cancelled the banquet, stopped hunting, and ordered the officials in charge to say: "All the land that can be reclaimed will be turned into farmland to feed the people of Li; tear down the walls and fill in the trenches so that the people of the countryside can come here to make a living."

古文：实陂池而勿禁，虚宫观而勿仞。
现代文：陂池中满是捕捞者也不加禁止，宫馆空闲也不进住。
English: It is not forbidden to fish in the cormorant pond full of fishermen, and the palace hall is not free to enter.

古文：发仓廪以振贫穷，补不足，恤鳏寡，存孤独。
现代文：打开粮仓，赈济贫穷的百姓，补助不足，抚恤鳏寡，慰问孤儿和无子的老人。
English: Open the granary, help the poor people, insufficient subsidies, support widows and widowers, and comfort orphans and childless old people.

古文：出德号，省刑罚，改制度，易服色，更正朔，与天下为始。 
现代文：发布施恩德给百姓的政令，减轻刑罚，改变制度，变换服色，更改历法，同天下百姓一道从头做起。
English: He issued a decree to be kind to the people, reduce punishments, change the system, change the color of clothes, change the calendar, and start from scratch with the people of the world.

古文： 於是历吉日以齐戒，袭朝衣，乘法驾，建华旗，鸣玉鸾，游乎六艺之囿，骛乎仁义之涂，览观春秋之林，射貍首，兼驺虞，弋玄鹤，建干戚，载云鶒，揜群雅，悲伐檀，乐乐胥，修容乎礼园，翱翔乎书圃，述易道，放怪兽，登明堂，坐清庙，恣群臣，奏得失，四海之内，靡不受获。
现代文： 于是选择好日子来斋戒，穿上朝服，乘坐天子的车驾，高举翠华之旗，响起玉饰的鸾铃。游观于六艺的苑囿，奔驰在仁义的大道之上；观览《春秋》之林，演奏《貍首》，兼及《驺虞》的乐章，举行射礼；射中玄鹤，举起盾牌和大斧，尽情而舞。车载着高张云天的罗网，掩捕众多的文雅之士；为《伐檀》作者的慨叹而悲伤，替《桑扈》乐得才智之士而快乐，在《礼》园中修饰容仪，在《书》圃中徘徊游赏，阐释《周易》的道理，放走上林苑中各种珍禽怪兽。登上明堂，坐在祖庙之中，君王遍命群臣，尽奏朝政的得失之见，使天下黎民，无不受益。
English: So he chose a good day to fast. He put on the imperial robes, rode in the chariot of the son of heaven, held high the banner of the king of heaven, and rang the jade-decorated bell. He toured the courtyards of the six arts, and drove on the road of benevolence and righteousness; he observed the forest of "Spring and Autumn," played "Dagger," combined with the music of "Cloudy With a Chance of Rain," and held a shooting ceremony; he shot a crane, held up a shield and a large axe, and danced to his heart's content. The car was carrying a net stretching high into the sky

古文：於斯之时，天下大说，乡风而听，随流而化，喟然兴道而迁义，刑错而不用，德隆乎三皇，功羡於五帝。若此，故猎乃可喜也。
现代文：正当此时，天下百姓皆大喜悦。
English: Just at this time, people all over the world are very happy.

古文： 若夫终日暴露驰骋，劳神苦形，罢车马之用，抏士卒之精，费府库之财，而无德厚之恩，务在独乐，不顾众庶，忘国家之政，而贪雉兔之获，则仁者不由也。
现代文：他们顺应天子的风教，听从政令，顺应时代的潮流，接受教化。圣明之道勃然而振兴，人民都归向仁义，刑罚被废弃而不用。君王的恩德高于三皇，功业超越五帝。如果政绩达到这个地步，游猎才是可喜的事情。 如果整天暴露身躯驰骋在苑囿之中，精神劳累，身体辛苦，废弃车马的功用，损伤士卒的精力，浪费国库的钱财，而对百姓却没有厚德大恩，只是专心个人的欢乐，不考虑众多的百姓，忘掉国家大政，却贪图野鸡兔子的猎获，这是仁爱之君不肯做的事情。
English: They follow the teachings of the Son of Heaven, obey the decrees, conform to the trend of the times, and accept the edification. The way of the Holy Light has been revived, the people have all returned to benevolence and righteousness, and punishments have been abandoned and not used. The king's benevolence is higher than the three emperors, and his achievements surpass the five emperors. If the political achievements have reached this level, the hunting is a gratifying thing. If the body is exposed all day and gallops in the middle of the garden, the spirit is tired, the body is hard, the function of the chariot and horse is abandoned, the energy of the

古文：从此观之，齐楚之事，岂不哀哉！
现代文：由此看来，齐国和楚国的游猎之事，岂不是令人悲哀的吗？
English: From this point of view, isn't it sad that the hunting of Qi and Chu has come to an end?

古文：地方不过千里，而囿居九百，是草木不得垦辟，而民无所食也。
现代文：两国各有土地不过方圆千里，而苑囿却占据九百里。这样以来，草木之野不能开垦为耕田，百姓就没有粮食可吃。
English: Each of the two countries has land that is no more than a thousand miles in circumference, but the gardens occupy nine hundred miles. Since then, the fields of plants and trees cannot be cultivated, and the people have no food to eat.

古文：夫以诸侯之细，而乐万乘之所侈，仆恐百姓之被其尤也。 
现代文：他们凭借诸侯的微的地位，却去享受天子的奢侈之乐，我害怕百姓将遭受祸患。 
English: By virtue of their lowly position as lords, they enjoy the luxurious pleasures of the sons of heaven. I am afraid that the people will suffer calamity.

古文：於是二子愀然改容，超若自失，逡巡避席曰： 鄙人固陋，不知忌讳，乃今日见教，谨闻命矣。 
现代文：于是子虚和乌有两位先生都改变了脸色，怅然若失，徘徊后退，离开坐席，说道： 鄙人浅薄无知，不知顾忌，却在今天得到了教诲，我要认真领教。 
English: As a result, the two gentlemen, Zihu and Wu, both changed their faces, looked lost, wandered back, left the table, and said: I am a shallow and ignorant person, I do not know what to do, but today I have been taught, I want to seriously understand the teaching.

古文：赋奏，天子以为郎。
现代文：这篇赋写成后进献天子，皇帝即任命相如为郎官。
English: This article was written as a gift to the emperor, and the emperor appointed him as a vassal.

古文：无是公言天子上林广大，山谷水泉万物，乃子虚言楚云梦所有甚众，侈靡过其实，且非义理所尚，故删取其要，归正道而论之。
现代文：无是公称说上林苑的广大，山谷、水泉和万物，以及子虚称说云梦泽所有之物甚多，奢侈靡，言过其实，而且也不是礼仪所崇尚的，所以删取其中的要点，归之于正道，加以评论。
English: There is no such thing as the vastness of Shanglinyuan, valleys, springs and all things, as well as the many things that Yunmenze has, which are extravagant and exaggerated, and are not advocated by etiquette. Therefore, the main points are deleted, attributed to the right path, and commented on.

古文：相如为郎数岁，会唐蒙使略通夜郎西僰中，发巴蜀吏卒千人，郡又多为发转漕万馀人，用兴法诛其渠帅，巴蜀民大惊恐。
现代文：相如担任郎官数年，正逢唐蒙受命掠取和开通夜郎及其西面的僰中，征发巴、蜀二郡的官吏士卒上千人，西郡又多为他征调陆路及水上的运输人员一万多人。他又用战时法规杀了大帅，巴、蜀百姓大为震惊恐惧。
English: Similarly, when Tang Meng, who had served as a vassal for several years, was ordered to plunder and open up the Yelang and its west bank, he conscripted more than a thousand officials and officials from Ba and Shu counties, and more than ten thousand land and water transport personnel from the west county. He also used wartime regulations to kill the general, and the people of Ba and Shu were greatly shocked and frightened.

古文：上闻之，乃使相如责唐蒙，因喻告巴蜀民以非上意。
现代文：皇上听到这种情况，就派相如去责备唐蒙，趁机告知巴、蜀百姓，唐蒙所为并非皇上的本意。
English: When the emperor heard about this, he sent Xiangru to reprimand Tang Meng and take the opportunity to tell the people of Ba and Shu that what Tang Meng had done was not the emperor's intention.

古文：檄曰：
现代文：檄文说：
English: He said:

古文：告巴蜀太守：蛮夷自擅不讨之日久矣，时侵犯边境，劳士大夫。
现代文：告示巴、蜀太守：蛮夷自擅兵权，不服朝廷，久未讨伐，时常侵扰边境，使士大夫蒙受劳苦。
English: Ba and Shu Taizhou were notified: the barbarians had usurped the right to send troops, disobeyed the imperial court, had not fought for a long time, frequently invaded the border, and the envoy suffered hardships.

古文：陛下即位，存抚天下，辑安中国。
现代文：当今皇上即位，存恤安抚天下，使中国安宁和睦。
English: Now that the emperor has ascended the throne, he will spare no effort to pacify the world and bring peace and harmony to China.

古文：然後兴师出兵，北征匈奴，单于怖骇，交臂受事，诎膝请和。
现代文：然后调兵出征，北上讨伐匈奴，使其单于恐怖震惊，拱手称臣，屈膝求和。
English: Then the army was dispatched to the north to fight the Xiongnu, leaving them shocked with fear, bowing their heads and begging for peace.

古文：康居西域，重译请朝，稽首来享。
现代文：康居与西域诸国，也都辗转翻译，沟通语言，请求朝见武帝，虔敬地叩头，进献贡物。
English: Kangju and the countries of the Western Regions also translated and communicated with each other, requested an audience with Emperor Wu, reverently kowtowed, and offered tributes.

古文：移师东指，闽越相诛。
现代文：然后大军直指东方，闽越之君被其弟诛杀。
English: Then the great army headed straight east, and Hiyoshi no kimi was killed by his younger brother.

古文：右吊番禺，太子入朝。
现代文：接着军至番禺，南越王派太子婴齐入朝。
English: Then the army went to Panyu, and the South Vietnamese king sent the infant prince to the imperial court.

古文：南夷之君，西僰之长，常效贡职，不敢怠堕，延颈举踵，喁喁然皆争归义，欲为臣妾，道里辽远，山川阻深，不能自致。
现代文：南夷的君主，西僰的首领，都经常进献贡物和赋税，不敢怠慢，人人伸长脖颈，高抬脚跟，景仰朝廷，争归仁义，愿做汉朝的臣仆，只是道路遥远，山河阻隔，不能亲自来朝向汉君致意。
English: The monarchs of Nanyi and the leaders of Xidi both regularly brought in tributes and taxes and did not dare to neglect them. Everyone stretched their necks, raised their heels, admired the imperial court, fought for benevolence and righteousness, and wanted to be the vassals of the Han Dynasty. However, the roads were far away, and mountains and rivers blocked the way, so they could not come to pay their respects to the Han Emperor in person.

古文：夫不顺者已诛，而为善者未赏，故遣中郎将往宾之，发巴蜀士民各五百人，以奉币帛，卫使者不然，靡有兵革之事，战斗之患。
现代文：现在，不顺从者已被诛杀，而做好事者尚未奖赏，所以派遣中郎将前来以礼相待，使其归服。至于征发巴、蜀的士卒百姓各五百人，只是为了供奉礼品，保卫使者不发生意外，并没想到要进行战争，造成打仗的祸患。
English: Now that those who did not obey had been killed, and those who did good deeds had not been rewarded, the dispatched middlemen would come to treat them with courtesy and make them submit. As for the five hundred soldiers and five hundred people from Ba and Shudi, they were only to offer gifts and protect the envoys from accidents. They did not expect to go to war and cause the disaster of war.

古文：今闻其乃发军兴制，惊惧子弟，忧患长老，郡又擅为转粟运输，皆非陛下之意也。
现代文：如今，皇上听说中郎将竟然动用战时法令，使巴、蜀子弟担惊受怕，巴、蜀父老长者忧虑祸患。巴、蜀二郡又擅自为中郎将转运粮食，这都不是皇上的本意。
English: Now, the emperor heard that the middlemen would actually use the wartime laws to frighten the children of Ba and Shu, and the elders of Ba and Shu were worried about the disaster. Ba and Shu two counties also arbitrarily transported grain for the middlemen, which was not the original intention of the emperor.

古文：当行者或亡逃自贼杀，亦非人臣之节也。
现代文：至于被征当行的人，有的逃跑，有的自相残杀，这也不是为臣者的节操。
English: As for those who were conscripted, some ran away, and some killed each other. This was not the discipline of a vassal.

古文：夫边郡之士，闻烽举燧燔，皆摄弓而驰，荷兵而走，流汗相属，唯恐居後，触白刃，冒流矢，义不反顾，计不旋踵，人怀怒心，如报私雠。
现代文：那边疆郡县的士卒，听到烽火高举、燧烟点燃的消息，都张弓待射，驰马进击，扛着兵器，奔向战场，人人汗流夹背，唯恐落后；打起仗来，就是身触利刃，冒着流矢射中的危险，也义无反顾，从没想到掉转脚跟，向后逃跑。人人怀着愤怒的心情，如报私仇一般。
English: When the officers and men of the counties and counties of that frontier heard the news of the bonfires being held aloft and the smoke of the coals being kindled, they all stood ready with bows and arrows, galloping forward, carrying their weapons, and rushing to the battlefield. Everyone was drenched in sweat, for fear of being left behind. When the war began, they put their bodies on the line, braved the danger of being caught in the crossfire, and never looked back. They never thought of turning tail and running back. Everyone was in an angry mood, as if seeking personal revenge.

古文：彼岂乐死恶生，非编列之民，而与巴蜀异主哉？
现代文：他们难道乐意死去而讨厌生存，不是名在户籍的良民，而与巴、蜀不是同一个君主吗？
English: Are they willing to die but hate to live, are they not good people whose names are in the household register, and are they not the same monarchs as Ba and Shu?

古文：计深虑远，急国家之难，而乐尽人臣之道也。
现代文：只是他们思想深邃，虑事长远，一心想着国家的危难，而喜欢竭尽全力去履行臣民的义务罢了。
English: It's just that they are deep-thinking, have long-term considerations, are preoccupied with the country's peril, and like to do their best to fulfill their duties as subjects.

古文：故有剖符之封，析珪而爵，位为通侯，居列东第，终则遗显号於後世，传土地於子孙，行事甚忠敬，居位甚安佚，名声施於无穷，功烈著而不灭。
现代文：所以他们之中有的人得到剖符拜官的封赏，有的分珪受爵，位在列侯，住宅排列在东第。他们死后可将显贵的谥号流传后世，把封赏的土地传给后代子孙。他们做事非常忠诚严肃，当官也特别安逸，好的名声传播延续到久远的后世，功业卓著，永不泯灭。
English: Therefore, some of them were rewarded with the title of "Kaiseki," "Kaiseki," "Kaiseki," "Kaiseki," "Kaiseki," "Kaiseki," "Kaiseki," "Kaiseki," "Kaiseki," "Kaiseki," "Kaiseki," "Kaiseki," "Kaiseki," "Kaiseki," "Kaiseki," "Kaiseki," "Kaiseki," "Kaiseki," "Kaiseki," "Kaiseki," "Kaiseki," "Kaiseki," "Kaiseki

古文：是以贤人君子，肝脑涂中原，膏液润野草而不辞也。
现代文：因此有贤德的人们都能肝脑涂地，血液润泽野草而在所不辞。
English: Therefore, virtuous people are able to keep their heads above water and their blood flowing freely.

古文：今奉币役至南夷，即自贼杀，或亡逃抵诛，身死无名，谥为至愚，耻及父母，为天下笑。
现代文：现在仅仅是承担供奉币帛的差役去到南夷，就自相杀害，或者逃跑被诛杀，身死而无美名，其谥号应称为 至愚 ，其耻辱牵连到父母，被天下人所嘲笑。
English: Now, if a mere errand boy went to Nanyi to bear the burden of donating money, he would kill himself, or if he ran away, he would be beaten to death, and he would die without a good name. His nickname should be "The Fool," and his disgrace would implicate his parents, and he would be ridiculed by the whole world.

古文：人之度量相越，岂不远哉！
现代文：人的气度和才识的差距，难道不是很远么？
English: Isn't the gap between one's manners and one's talent very wide?

古文：然此非独行者之罪也，父兄之教不先，子弟之率不谨也；寡廉鲜耻，而俗不长厚也。
现代文：但这也不只是应征之人的罪过，父兄们平素没给他很严格的教育，也没有谨慎地给子弟做表率。人们缺少清廉的美德，不知羞耻，则世风也就不淳厚了。
English: But it's not just the conscript's fault. His parents never gave him a strict upbringing, nor did they carefully set an example for their children. People lack the virtue of integrity, they don't know shame, and the world is not honest.

古文：其被刑戮，不亦宜乎！
现代文：因而他们被判刑杀戮，也是理所当然的事。
English: So it was only natural that they were sentenced to death.

古文：陛下患使者有司之若彼，悼不肖愚民之如此，故遣信使晓喻百姓以发卒之事，因数之以不忠死亡之罪，让三老孝弟以不教诲之过。
现代文：皇上担心使者和官员们就像那个样子，又哀伤不贤的愚民象这个样子，所以派遣信使把征发士卒的事清清楚楚地告诉百姓，趁机责备他们不能忠于朝廷，不能为国事而死的罪过，斥责三老和孝弟没能很好履行教诲职责的过失。
English: The emperor was worried that the envoys and officials were like that, and grieved for the foolish people who were not virtuous like that, so he sent messengers to clearly tell the people about the recruitment of officers and men, and took the opportunity to reproach them for not being able to be loyal to the imperial court and not being able to die for national affairs, and reproached the three old men and the filial brothers for failing to perform their teaching duties well.

古文：方今田时，重烦百姓，已亲见近县，恐远所谿谷山泽之民不遍闻，檄到，亟下县道，使咸知陛下之意，唯毋忽也。
现代文：现在正是农忙时节，一再烦扰百姓，已经亲眼看到了附近县城的情况，担心偏远的溪谷山泽间的百姓不能全听到皇上的心声，待这篇檄文一到，赶忙下发到县道百姓那里，使他们全都知道当今皇上的心意，千万不要遗忘！
English: Now is the busy season for farmers. They have been bothering the people again and again. They have seen the situation in the nearby county seat with their own eyes. They are worried that the people in the remote valleys and mountains cannot all hear the emperor's voice. As soon as this obituary arrived, they hurriedly sent it to the people on the county road so that they all knew the emperor's thoughts today. Don't forget!

古文：相如还报。
现代文：相如出使完毕，回京向汉武帝汇报。
English: After completing his mission, he returned to Beijing to report to Emperor Han.

古文：唐蒙已略通夜郎，因通西南夷道，发巴、蜀、广汉卒，作者数万人。
现代文：唐蒙已掠取并开通了夜郎，趁机要开通西南夷的道路，征发巴、蜀、广汉的士卒，参加筑路的有数万人。
English: Tang and Meng had already plundered and opened the Yelang, and took the opportunity to open the road to the southwest of Yiwu, enlisting soldiers from Ba, Shu and Guanghan, with tens of thousands of people participating in road construction.

古文：治道二岁，道不成，士卒多物故，费以巨万计。
现代文：修路二年，没有修成，士卒多死亡，耗费的钱财要用亿来计算。
English: It has taken two years to build the road, but it has not been completed, and many soldiers have died. The amount of money and resources that have been spent can be calculated in the hundreds of millions.

古文：蜀民及汉用事者多言其不便。
现代文：蜀地民众和汉朝当权者多有反对者。
English: The people of Shu and those in power during the Han Dynasty had many opponents.

古文：是时邛筰之君长闻南夷与汉通，得赏赐多，多欲原为内臣妾，请吏，比南夷。
现代文：这时，邛、筰的君长听说南夷已与汉朝交往，得到很多赏赐，因而多半都想做汉朝的臣仆，希望比照南夷的待遇，请求汉朝委任他们以官职。
English: At this time, the kings and princes of Qi and Qi heard that the Nanyi had been in contact with the Han Dynasty and received many rewards, so most of them wanted to be the vassals of the Han Dynasty, hoping to request the Han Dynasty to appoint them to official positions according to the treatment of the Nanyi.

古文：天子问相如，相如曰： 邛、筰、厓、駹者近蜀，道亦易通，秦时尝通为郡县，至汉兴而罢。
现代文：皇上向相如询问此事，相如说： 邛筰、冉、駹等都离蜀很近，道路容易开通。秦朝时就已设置郡县，到汉朝建国时才废除。
English: The emperor asked Zongru about this, and Zongru said, "Wu, Ran, and Lu are all very close to Shu, and the roads are easy to open. Counties and counties were established during the Qin Dynasty, but were abolished during the founding of the Han Dynasty.

古文：今诚复通，为置郡县，愈於南夷。 
现代文：如今真要重新开通，设置为郡县，其价值超过南夷。 
English: Now it really needs to be reopened, set up as a county, and its value exceeds that of Nanyi.

古文：天子以为然，乃拜相如为中郎将，建节往使。
现代文：皇上以为相如说得对，就任命相如为中郎将，令持节出使。
English: The emperor thought that Rongru was right, so he appointed Rongru to be the vice-commander and ordered Jisai to send an envoy.

古文：副使王然于、壶充国、吕越人驰四乘之传，因巴蜀吏币物以赂西夷。
现代文：副使王然于、壶充国、吕越人等，乘坐四匹马驾驭的传车向前奔驰，凭借巴、蜀的官吏和财物去拢络西南夷。
English: Vice-envoys Wang Ran Yu, Kuching Guo, Lü Yue and others rode forward in a four-horse-drawn carriage, using officials and goods from Ba and Shou to win over Xuanxiayi.

古文：至蜀，蜀太守以下郊迎，县令负弩矢先驱，蜀人以为宠。
现代文：相如等到达蜀郡，蜀郡太守及其属官都到郊界上迎接相如，县令背负着弓箭在前面开路，蜀人都以此为荣。
English: He arrived in Shu County at the same time. The governor of Shu County and his subordinate officials all went to the suburbs to welcome him. The county magistrate carried a bow and arrow on his back to open the way in front. The people of Shu are proud of this.

古文：於是卓王孙、临邛诸公皆因门下献牛酒以交驩。
现代文：于是卓王孙、临邛诸位父老都凭借关系来到相如门下，献上牛和酒，与相如畅叙欢乐之情。
English: As a result, Zhuo Wangsun and Linyi's fathers and grandfathers all came to the door of Xiangru by virtue of their relationship, presented cattle and wine, and had a happy time with Xiangru.

古文：卓王孙喟然而叹，自以得使女尚司马长卿晚，而厚分与其女财，与男等同。
现代文：卓王孙喟然感叹，自以为把女儿嫁给司马相如的时间太晚，便把一份丰厚的财物给了文君，使与儿子所分均等。
English: Zhuo Wangsun suddenly lamented that he thought it was too late to marry his daughter to Sima Xiangmou, so he gave a rich property to Wenjun to make it equal to that of his son.

古文：司马长卿便略定西夷，邛、筰、厓、駹、斯榆之君皆请为内臣。
现代文：司马相如就便平定了西南夷。邛、筰、冉、駹、斯榆的君长都请求成为汉王朝的臣子。
English: Sima Xiangru then subdued the southwestern barbarians. The monarchs of Zhengzhou, Shandong, Ran, Jiangsu and Shandong all requested to become the vassals of the Han Dynasty.

古文：除边关，关益斥，西至沬、若水，南至牂柯为徼，通零关道，桥孙水以通邛都。
现代文：于是拆除了旧有的关隘，使边关扩大，西边到达沫水和若水，南边到达牂柯，以此为边界，开通了灵关道，在孙水上建桥，直通邛、筰。
English: As a result, the old pass was dismantled and the border gate was expanded, with the west side reaching Foam Water and Young Water, and the south side reaching Shun Ke. With this as the border, the Ling Pass Road was opened, and a bridge was built over the Sun Water, with direct access to Yunnan and Fujian.

古文：还报天子，天子大说。
现代文：相如还京报告皇上，皇上特别高兴。
English: As reported to the Emperor after returning to Beijing, the Emperor was particularly pleased.

古文：相如使时，蜀长老多言通西南夷不为用，唯大臣亦以为然。
现代文：相如出使西南夷时，蜀郡的年高长者多半都说开通西南夷没有用，纵然是朝廷大臣也有人以为是这样的。
English: Similarly, when Suansaiyi was dispatched, most of the old and elderly people in Shu County said that it was useless to open Suansaiyi, and even some ministers of the Imperial Court thought so.

古文：相如欲谏，业已建之，不敢，乃著书，籍以蜀父老为辞，而己诘难之，以风天子，且因宣其使指，令百姓知天子之意。
现代文：相如也想向皇上进谏，但建议业已由自己提出，因而不敢再进谏言了，于是就写文章，假借蜀郡父老的语气写成文词，而自己来诘难对方，以此讽谏皇上，并且借此宣扬自己出使的本意，让百姓了解天子的心意。
English: Similarly, he also wanted to make a suggestion to the emperor, but the suggestion had already been made by himself, so he did not dare to make any further suggestions. Therefore, he wrote an article, pretending to borrow the tone of Shu County's fathers and grandfathers to write a written word, and himself to make difficulties for the other party, in order to ridicule the emperor, and use this to promote his intention to send an envoy, so that the people could understand the will of the heavenly son.

古文：其辞曰：
现代文：那文章说：
English: The text reads as follows:

古文：汉兴七十有八载，德茂存乎六世，威武纷纭，湛恩汪濊，群生澍濡，洋溢乎方外。
现代文：汉朝建国已七十又八年，美德充盛，存在于六代君王的政事之中，国势威武盛大，历久相传的皇恩深远广大，不但国内万民受惠，就连方外也得到余恩。
English: It has been seventy-eight years since the founding of the Han Dynasty. Virtue abounds and exists in the political affairs of the six generations of emperors. The country is powerful and prosperous. The imperial grace that has been passed down over time is far-reaching and extensive. Not only do all the people in China benefit, but even those outside the country also receive grace.

古文：於是乃命使西征，随流而攘，风之所被，罔不披靡。
现代文：于是皇上才下令使者西征，阻挠者顺应形势而退让，德教之风所到之处，无不随风倒伏。
English: Therefore, the emperor ordered the emissaries to march to the west, and the obstructors yielded in accordance with the situation. Wherever the wind of moral teaching went, they all fell down with the wind.

古文：因朝厓从駹，定筰存邛，略斯榆，举苞满，结轶还辕，东乡将报，至于蜀都。
现代文：因而使冉夷臣服，駹夷顺从，平定了筰，保全了邛，占领了斯榆，攻取了苞满。然后使络绎不绝的车马掉转车辕，起程东来，将回京禀报天子，到达蜀郡成都。
English: Thus he subdued the Yan to the Yan, the Yan to the Yan, pacified the Shan, preserved the Shan, occupied the Sh, and captured the Shuman. Then he made the endless stream of chariots and horses turn around, start eastward, return to Beijing and report to the emperor, and arrive in Chengdu, Shu County.

古文：耆老大夫荐绅先生之徒二十有七人，俨然造焉。
现代文：这时耆老、大夫、荐绅、先生共有二十七人，严肃认真地前来拜访。
English: At this time, a total of twenty-seven elders, doctors, recommended gentlemen, and teachers came to visit seriously.

古文：辞毕，因进曰： 盖闻天子之於夷狄也，其义羁縻勿绝而已。
现代文：寒喧已毕，趁机进言道： 听说天子对于夷狄之人的态度，只是牵制他们不使断绝关系而已。
English: When the cold war was over, Zhuang took the opportunity to say: I heard that God's attitude towards the Yidi people was just to keep them from breaking off relations.

古文：今罢三郡之士，通夜郎之涂，三年於兹，而功不竟，士卒劳倦，万民不赡，今又接以西夷，百姓力屈，恐不能卒业，此亦使者之累也，窃为左右患之。
现代文：而现在却使三郡的士卒疲困不堪，去打通夜郎的道路，至今三年，修路之事尚未能最后完成，士卒已劳苦疲倦，万民已生活不富足。如今又要接着开通西夷，百姓劳力已经耗尽，恐怕不能最终完成此事，这也是使者的负担啊，我私下为您忧虑。
English: But now it has made the soldiers of the three counties tired and exhausted, to open the Yelang road, so far three years, the road construction has not been able to be finally completed, the soldiers have been tired and tired, and the people have not lived well. Now it is time to open Xiyi, the people's labor has been exhausted, I am afraid that this matter can not be finally completed, which is also the burden of the messenger, I am worried about you in private.

古文：且夫邛、筰、西僰之与中国并也，历年兹多，不可记已。
现代文：况且那邛、筰、西僰与中国并列，已经过许多年了，记都记不清了。
English: Moreover, Nagano, Shizuoka, and Saitama are on the same level as China. It has been many years, and I can't remember them all.

古文：仁者不以德来，彊者不以力并，意者其殆不可乎！
现代文：仁德之君不能全仁德招来，势强力大的国君也不能全武力兼并，想来恐怕这种做法是行不通的吧！
English: A benevolent ruler cannot attract all the benevolent, and a powerful ruler cannot annex by force. I'm afraid this approach will not work!

古文：今割齐民以附夷狄，弊所恃以事无用，鄙人固陋，不识所谓。 
现代文：如今割弃良民的财物去增加夷狄的财物，使汉朝依赖的人民遭受疲困，而去事奉无用的夷狄，鄙漏之人见识短浅，不知道所说的是否正确。 
English: Now they are cutting off the wealth of the good people to increase the wealth of the ruffians, causing the people who rely on the Han Dynasty to suffer from fatigue, and to serve the useless ruffians. Those who despise them are short-sighted and do not know whether what they say is correct.

古文：使者曰： 乌谓此邪？
现代文：使者说： 怎么说这样的话呢？
English: The messenger said, "How can you say such a thing?

古文：必若所云，则是蜀不变服而巴不化俗也。
现代文：一定象你说的那样，那么蜀郡人的衣著习惯永不改变，巴郡人的风俗也永远不会变化了。
English: It must be as you said, then the clothing habits of Shu County people will never change, and the customs of Ba County people will never change.

古文：余尚恶闻若说。
现代文：我常常讨厌听这种说法。
English: I often hate to hear that.

古文：然斯事体大，固非观者之所觏也。
现代文：但是这事情的重大意义，本来不是旁观者所能看出来的。
English: But the significance of the event was not immediately apparent to onlookers.

古文：余之行急，其详不可得闻已，请为大夫粗陈其略。
现代文：我行程急促，其详情不可能细说给你们听，请为大夫们粗略地陈说一番。
English: My journey is so urgent that it is impossible for me to give you all the details, so please outline it for the doctors.

古文： 盖世必有非常之人，然後有非常之事；有非常之事，然後有非常之功。
现代文： 大概社会上一定要有超越寻常的人，才会有超常的事情出现；有了超常的事情出现，才会创建异乎寻常的功业。
English: There must be extraordinary people in society for extraordinary things to happen, and extraordinary things to happen for extraordinary achievements to be made.

古文：非常者，固常之所异也。
现代文：异乎寻常，当然是常人感到奇异的。
English: Extraordinary, of course, is what ordinary people find extraordinary.

古文：故曰非常之原，黎民惧焉；及臻厥成，天下晏如也。
现代文：所以说超常的事情开始出现时，百姓会惊惧；待到事情成功了，天下之人也就安然太平了。
English: Therefore, when extraordinary things begin to appear, the people will be alarmed; when things succeed, the world will be safe and peaceful.

古文： 昔者鸿水浡出，氾滥衍溢，民人登降移徙，陭麕而不安。
现代文： 从前洪水涌出，四处泛溢，百姓上下迁移，崎岖而不安宁。
English: In the past, floods gushed out and overflowed everywhere, and the people migrated up and down, rugged and restless.

古文：夏后氏戚之，乃堙鸿水，决江疏河，漉沈赡菑，东归之於海，而天下永宁。
现代文：大禹为此忧虑，就阻塞洪水，挖掘河底，疏通河道，分散洪水，稳定灾情，使洪水东流大海，让天下百姓永保安宁。
English: Concerned about this, Dayu blocked the flood, excavated the river bottom, dredged the river channel, dispersed the flood, stabilized the disaster situation, made the flood flow eastward to the sea, and let the people of the world be safe and peaceful forever.

古文：当斯之勤，岂唯民哉。
现代文：承受这样的劳苦，难道只有百姓？
English: Is it only the common people who have to endure such hardships?

古文：心烦於虑而身亲其劳，躬胝无胈，肤不生毛。
现代文：大禹终日思虑而心神烦劳，却还要亲身参加劳作，累得手脚生出老茧，身上瘦得没有肉，皮肤磨得生不出汗毛。
English: Dayu thinks all day long and his mind is tired, but he still has to participate in the work in person. He is so tired that his hands and feet have calluses, his body is so thin that there is no flesh, and his skin is so worn out that no hair can grow.

古文：故休烈显乎无穷，声称浃乎于兹。
现代文：所以他的美好功业显赫于无穷的后世，名望传扬至今。
English: As a result, his good deeds have been renowned for countless generations to come, and his fame has been passed down to this day.

古文： 且夫贤君之践位也。岂特委琐握麀，拘文牵俗，循诵习传，当世取说云尔哉！
现代文： 况且贤明的君主即位后，难道只是委琐龌龊，被文法所拘束，为世俗所牵制，因循旧习，取悦当世而已吗？
English: Moreover, after a wise monarch ascends to the throne, is he just a petty tyrant, constrained by grammar, held back by the world, following old habits and pleasing the world?

古文：必将崇论闳议，创业垂统，为万世规。
现代文：应当有崇高宏伟的主张，开创业绩，传留法统，以此成为后世遵行的榜样。
English: They should have lofty and magnificent ideas, make great achievements, and pass down the legal system, so as to become an example for future generations to follow.

古文：故驰骛乎兼容并包，而勤思乎参天贰地。
现代文：所以要尽情努力地做到兼容包蓄，要勤勉思考着把自己变成可与天地比德的人。
English: Therefore, we must make every effort to be compatible and inclusive, and we must diligently think about turning ourselves into people who can compete with heaven and earth.

古文：且诗不云乎： 普天之下，莫非王土；率土之滨，莫非王臣。 
现代文：况且《诗经》里不是说过： 普天之下，没有哪个地方不是周王的领土；四海之内，没有哪个人不是周王的臣民。 
English: Moreover, it is said in the "Book of Songs": Under heaven, there is no place that is not the territory of King Zhou; within the four seas, there is no one who is not a subject of King Zhou.

古文：是以六合之内，八方之外，浸浔衍溢，怀生之物有不浸润於泽者，贤君耻之。
现代文：所以天地之内，八方之外，皆逐渐侵润漫衍，如果有哪个有生命的东西没受君恩的滋润，贤君将视为耻辱。
English: Therefore, within heaven and earth, and beyond the eight directions, all gradually invade and spread, and if there is any living thing that has not been nourished by Jun'en, the wise man will regard it as a disgrace.

古文：今封疆之内，冠带之伦，咸获嘉祉，靡有阙遗矣。
现代文：如今疆界以内，文武官员，都获得了欢乐幸福，没有缺漏。
English: Nowadays, within the borders, civil and military officials have all gained joy and happiness, and there is no shortage.

古文：而夷狄殊俗之国，辽绝异党之地，舟舆不通，人迹罕至，政教未加，流风犹微。
现代文：而夷狄是风俗不相同的国家，是与我们遥远隔绝，族类不同的地域，那里车船不通，人迹罕至，因而政治教化还未达到那里，社会风气还很低下。
English: On the other hand, Yidi is a country with different customs. It is far away and isolated from us, a region with different ethnic groups, where cars and ships do not pass, and people rarely visit. Therefore, political enlightenment has not yet reached there, and the social morale is still very low.

古文：内之则犯义侵礼於边境，外之则邪行横作，放弑其上。君臣易位，尊卑失序，父兄不辜，幼孤为奴，系累号泣，内乡而怨，曰 盖闻中国有至仁焉，德洋而恩普，物靡不得其所，今独曷为遗己 。
现代文：如果接纳他们，他们将在边境做些违犯礼仪的事情；把他们排斥于外，他们就会在自己国内为非作歹，逐杀其君，颠倒君臣关系，改变尊卑次序，父兄无罪被杀，幼儿与孤儿被当做奴隶，被捆绑者哭喊着，一心向往汉朝，抱怨说： 听说中国有最仁爱的国君，美德盛大，恩泽普及，万物皆得其所，现在为什么只是遗弃了我们？ 
English: If they are admitted, they will do some things that violate etiquette at the border; if they are excluded, they will do evil in their own country, expel their princes, reverse the relationship between monarchs and subjects, change the order of superiority and inferiority, parents and brothers are killed without guilt, children and orphans are treated as slaves, the tied ones cry and cry, yearn for the Han Dynasty, and complain: I heard that China has the most benevolent monarch, virtue is grand, grace is widespread, everything has its place, now why did they just abandon us?

古文：举踵思慕，若枯旱之望雨。
现代文：抬起脚跟，思慕不已，就象大旱之时，人们盼望雨水一样。
English: Lift up your heel and dream, just like people hope for rain in times of drought.

古文：盭夫为之垂涕，况乎上圣，又恶能已？
现代文：就是凶暴之人也要为之感动流泪，更何况当今皇上贤明，又怎么可以就此作罢？
English: Even a ferocious person would be moved to tears by it, not to mention that today's emperor is wise, so how can it be stopped?

古文：故北出师以讨彊胡，南驰使以诮劲越。
现代文：所以出师北方，讨伐强大的匈奴，派使者急驰南方，责备强劲的越国。
English: Therefore, he sent an army to the north to fight the powerful Xiongnu, and sent an envoy to the south to rebuke the powerful Yue.

古文：四面风德，二方之君鳞集仰流，原得受号者以亿计。
现代文：四方邻国都受仁德的教化，南夷与西夷的君长象游鱼聚集，仰面迎向水流，愿意得到汉朝封号的以亿计。
English: Neighbors in all four directions have been enlightened by benevolence. The monarchs of the Southern Yi and Western Yi gather like migratory fish, face up to the current, and are willing to receive hundreds of millions of Han Dynasty seal names.

古文：故乃关沬、若，徼牂柯，镂零山，梁孙原。
现代文：所以才以沫水和若水为关塞，以牂柯为边界，凿通灵山道，在孙水源头架起桥梁。
English: Therefore, it was necessary to use the foam and young water as a barrier, and the Shinko as a boundary, to cut the Tongling Mountain Road, and to build a bridge at the source of the sun water.

古文：创道德之涂，垂仁义之统。
现代文：开创了通向道德的坦途，传留下热爱仁义的传统。
English: He created a smooth path to morality and passed down a tradition of love for benevolence.

古文：将博恩广施，远抚长驾，使疏逖不闭，阻深闇昧得耀乎光明，以偃甲兵於此，而息诛伐於彼。
现代文：将要广施恩德，安抚和控制边远地区的人民，使疏远者不被隔闭，使居住偏僻不开化地区的人民得到光明，在这里消除战争，在那里消除杀伐。
English: It will be necessary to provide extensive benevolence, pacify and control the people in remote areas, so that the alienated will not be isolated, so that the people living in remote and undeveloped areas will receive light, and eliminate war here and slaughter there.

古文：遐迩一体，中外提福，不亦康乎？
现代文：使远近一体，内外安宁幸福，不是康乐之事吗？
English: Is it not a matter of recreation to make far and near one, inner and outer peace and happiness?

古文：夫拯民於沈溺，奉至尊之休德，反衰世之陵迟，继周氏之绝业，斯乃天子之急务也。
现代文：把人民从水深火热中拯救出来，尊奉皇上的美德，挽救衰败的社会，继承周代已经断绝的业绩，这是天子的当务之急。
English: It is the urgent task of the Son of Heaven to save the people from the abyss, to honor the virtue of the emperor, to save the decaying society, and to inherit the achievements that have been cut off for generations.

古文：百姓虽劳，又恶可以已哉？
现代文：百姓纵然有些劳苦，又怎么可以停止呢？
English: Even if the people have to work a little, how can they stop?

古文： 且夫王事固未有不始於忧勤，而终於佚乐者也。
现代文： 况且帝王之事本来没有不从忧劳开始，而以逸乐结束的。
English: Moreover, the emperor's affairs did not begin with sorrow and end with pleasure.

古文：然则受命之符，合在於此矣。
现代文：这样说来，那么承受天命的祥瑞，正在通西夷这件事上。
English: In this way, Xiang Rui, who bears the fate of heaven, is in the matter of Tongxiyi.

古文：方将增泰山之封，加梁父之事，鸣和鸾，扬乐颂，上咸五，下登三。
现代文：如今皇上将要封禅泰山，祭祀粱父山，使车上的鸾铃鸣响，音乐和颂歌之声高扬，汉君之德上同五帝，下越三王。
English: Now the emperor is going to seal Mount Tai for meditation, make a sacrifice to Mount Xizang, make the bells on the carriage ring, and make music and carols soar. The virtue of Han Jun is the same as that of the Five Emperors and the Three Emperors.

古文：观者未睹指，听者未闻音，犹鹪明已翔乎寥廓，而罗者犹视乎薮泽。悲夫！ 
现代文：旁观者没看到事情的主旨，如同鹪明已在空廓的天空飞翔，而捕鸟者还眼盯着薮泽，真是可悲啊！ 
English: The onlookers did not see the main point of the event, as if the kite was already flying in the empty sky, while the bird catcher was still staring at the kite, it was really pathetic!

古文：於是诸大夫芒然丧其所怀来而失厥所以进，喟然并称曰： 允哉汉德，此鄙人之所原闻也。
现代文：于是诸位大夫心情茫然，忘却了来意，也忘记了他们原来要想进谏的话，深有感慨地一同说道： 令人信服啊，汉朝的美德！这是鄙陋之人愿意听到的。
English: So all the doctors were at a loss, forgot what they had come for, and also forgot what they had originally wanted to say, and said together with deep emotion: It is convincing, the virtue of the Han Dynasty! This is what the despicable people want to hear.

古文：百姓虽怠，请以身先之。 
现代文：百姓虽然有些怠惰，请允许我们给他们做个表率。 
English: Although the people are a bit lazy, please allow us to set an example for them.

古文：敞罔靡徙，因迁延而辞避。
现代文：大夫们惆怅不已，自动后退，拖延一会儿，辞别而去。
English: The doctors were puzzled, they retreated, delayed for a while, said goodbye and left.

古文：其後人有上书言相如使时受金，失官。
现代文：从那以后，有人上书告相如出使时接受了别人的贿赂，因而，他失掉了官职。
English: Since then, he has lost his post after a complaint that he had accepted a bribe when he was sent on a diplomatic mission.

古文：居岁馀，复召为郎。
现代文：他在家呆了一年多，又被召到朝廷当了郎官。
English: He stayed at home for more than a year, and was called to the imperial court to become a steward.

古文：相如口吃而善著书。
现代文：相如口吃，但却善于写文章。
English: Same as stuttering, but good at writing articles.

古文：常有消渴疾。
现代文：他经常患糖尿病。
English: He often suffers from diabetes.

古文：与卓氏婚，饶於财。
现代文：他同卓文君结婚后，很有钱。
English: After he married Zhuo Wenjun, he became very rich.

古文：其进仕宦，未尝肯与公卿国家之事，称病间居，不慕官爵。
现代文：他担任官职，不曾愿意同公卿们一起商讨国家大事，而借病在家闲呆着，不追慕官爵。
English: He held an official position, and was not willing to discuss national affairs with the nobles, but stayed at home due to illness, and did not pursue the peerage.

古文：常从上至长杨猎，是时天子方好自击熊彘，驰逐野兽，相如上疏谏之。其辞曰：臣闻物有同类而殊能者，故力称乌获，捷言庆忌，勇期贲、育。
现代文：他曾经跟随皇上到长杨宫去打猎。这时，天子正喜欢亲自击杀熊和猪，驰马追逐野兽，相如上疏加以劝谏，疏上写道：臣子听说，万物中有的虽是同类而能力却不同，所以说到力大就称赞乌获，谈到轻捷善射就推崇庆忌，说到勇猛必称孟赍和夏育。
English: He once followed the emperor to Changyang Palace to go hunting. At that time, the heavenly son was fond of personally killing bears and pigs, and chasing wild beasts on horseback. He was advised as above. It was written: The courtier heard that although some things are of the same kind, their abilities are different. Therefore, when it comes to strength, they praise Wu Guo, when it comes to lightness and good shooting, they promote Qing Bo, and when it comes to bravery, they must praise Meng Qian and Xia Yu.

古文：臣之愚，窃以为人诚有之，兽亦宜然。
现代文：我愚昧，私下以为人有这种情况，兽也应该有这种情况。
English: Foolishly, I privately thought that if this was the case for humans, it should also be the case for animals.

古文：今陛下好陵阻险，射猛兽，卒然遇轶材之兽，骇不存之地，犯属车之清尘，舆不及还辕，人不暇施巧，虽有乌获、逢蒙之伎，力不得用，枯木朽株尽为害矣。
现代文：现在陛下喜欢登上险阻的地方，射击猛兽，突然遇到轻捷超群的野兽，在你毫无戒备之时，它狂暴进犯，向着你的车驾和随从冲来，车驾来不及旋转车辕，人们也没机会施展技巧，纵然有乌获和逢蒙的技巧，才力发挥不出来，枯萎的树木和腐朽的树桩全都可以变成祸害。
English: Now your majesty is fond of climbing into dangerous places, shooting wild beasts, suddenly encountering a very light beast, when you are unsuspecting, it attacks furiously, rushing at your chariot and entourage, the chariot can't turn the wheel, people don't have the opportunity to perform skills, even if there are tricks and tricks, talent can't be exerted, withered trees and rotten stumps can all become a scourge.

古文：是胡越起於毂下，而羌夷接轸也，岂不殆哉！
现代文：这就象胡人、越人出现在车轮下，羌人和夷人紧跟在车后，岂不是很危险吗！
English: This is like the Hu people and the Yue people appearing under the wheels of a car, and the Xiong people and the Yi people following closely behind the car. Isn't it very dangerous?

古文：虽万全无患，然本非天子之所宜近也。
现代文：虽然是绝对安全而无一点害处，但这本不是天子应该接近的地方。
English: Although it is completely safe and harmless, it is not a place that should be approached.

古文：且夫清道而後行，中路而後驰，犹时有衔橛之变，而况涉乎蓬蒿，驰乎丘坟，前有利兽之乐而内无存变之意，其为祸也不亦难矣！
现代文：况且清除道路然后行走，选择道路中央驱马奔驰，有时还会出现马口中的衔铁断裂、车轴钩心脱落的事故，更何况在蓬蒿中跋涉，在荒丘废墟上奔驰，前面有猎获野兽的快乐，而内心里却没有应付突然事故的准备，大概出现祸患是很容易的了。
English: Moreover, clear the road and then walk, choose the center of the road to drive the horse, and sometimes there will be accidents such as the tie rod breaking in the horse's mouth and the axle hook center falling off, not to mention trekking in the foothills and running on the ruins of the barren hills. There is the joy of hunting the beast in front, but there is no preparation in the heart to cope with the sudden accident, and it is easy for the disaster to occur.

古文：夫轻万乘之重不以为安，而乐出於万有一危之涂以为娱，臣窃为陛下不取也。
现代文：至于看轻君王的高贵地位，不以此为安乐，却乐意出现在虽有万全准备而仍有一丝危险的地方，我私自以为陛下不应该这样做。
English: As for despising the high station of a king, and not taking it for his ease, and being pleased to appear in a place where, though well prepared, there is still a touch of danger, I do not think it proper for your majesty to do so.

古文：盖明者远见於未萌而智者避危於无形，祸固多藏於隐微而发於人之所忽者也。故鄙谚曰 家累千金，坐不垂堂 。
现代文：大概明察之人能远在事情发生之前，就予见到它的出现，智慧之人能在祸害还未形成之前就避开它。祸患本来多半都隐藏在暗蔽之处，发生在人们疏忽之时。所以谚语说： 家中积累千金，不坐在堂屋檐底下。 
English: An observant person can foresee the occurrence of an event long before it happens, and a wise person can avoid a disaster before it occurs. Most of the time, disasters are hidden in the shadows and occur when people are negligent. Therefore, the proverb says: "If you accumulate a lot of money at home, don't sit under the eaves."

古文：此言虽小，可以喻大。
现代文：这句话虽然说的是小事，但却可以用来说明大事。
English: Although this sentence is about a small thing, it can be used to illustrate a big thing.

古文：臣原陛下之留意幸察。
现代文：我希望陛下留意明察。
English: I hope His Majesty will take note.

古文：上善之。
现代文：皇上认为司马相如说得很好。
English: The emperor thought Sima Xiangru spoke very well.

古文：还过宜春宫，相如奏赋以哀二世行失也。
现代文：回来路过宜春宫时，相如向皇上献赋，哀悼秦二世行事的过失。
English: When he came back and passed by the Yichun Palace, he seemed to offer gifts to the emperor and mourn the mistakes of Qin II.

古文：其辞曰：
现代文：赋的言辞是：
English: The text reads as follows:

古文：登陂阤之长阪兮，坌入曾宫之嵯峨。
现代文：登上倾斜不平的漫长山坡，一同走进高峻的层层宫殿。
English: They ascended a long, uneven hillside and walked together into the lofty palace.

古文：临曲江之隑州兮，望南山之参差。
现代文：俯视曲江池弯曲的岸边和小洲，望着高低不齐的南山。
English: Looking down on the curved shore and shoals of Qujiang Lake, looking at the uneven Nanshan.

古文：岩岩深山之谾々兮，通谷魌兮谽。
现代文：山岩高耸而空深，通畅的溪谷豁然开朗而空阔。
English: The mountain rocks are high and the sky is deep, and the smooth valleys are suddenly open and wide.

古文：汩淢噏习以永逝兮，注平皋之广衍。
现代文：溪水急速地远远流去，注入宽广低平的水边高地。
English: The water of the stream rushes far away, and pours into the broad, low-lying waterside highlands.

古文：观众树之塕兮，览之榛榛。
现代文：欣赏各种树木繁茂荫蔽的美景，浏览茂密的竹林。
English: Enjoy the beautiful scenery of various wooded and shady areas, and browse through the dense bamboo forest.

古文：东驰土山兮，北揭石濑。
现代文：向东边的土山奔驰，提衣走过沙石上的急流。
English: To the east, the earthy mountains gallop, and the jackets walk through the rapids on the sand and rocks.

古文：弥节容与兮，历吊二世。
现代文：缓步徘徊，路过二世坟墓，把他凭吊。
English: Wandering slowly, he passed the grave of the second son and hanged him.

古文：持身不谨兮，亡国失埶。
现代文：他自身行事不谨慎，使国家灭亡，权势丧尽。
English: He himself acted imprudently, bringing about the ruin of the country and the loss of power.

古文：信谗不寤兮，宗庙灭绝。
现代文：他听信谗言，不肯醒悟，使得宗庙被灭绝。
English: He listened to the insults and refused to wake up, resulting in the extinction of the ancestral temple.

古文：呜呼哀哉！
现代文：呜呼哀哉！
English: Alas, alas!

古文：操行之不得兮，坟墓芜秽而不脩兮，魂无归而不食。夐邈绝而不齐兮，弥久远而愈鬐。
现代文：他的操守品行不端正，坟墓荒芜而无人修整，魂魄无处可归，也无人向他祭祀；飘逝到极远无边的地方，逾是久远逾暗昧。
English: His morals are not upright, his grave is desolate and untended, his soul has nowhere to return, and no one worships him; he has drifted to a place far away and boundless, beyond time and beyond obscurity.

古文：精罔阆而飞扬兮，拾九天而永逝。
现代文：象魍魉似的精魄升空飞扬，经历广大的九天远远逝去。
English: The dragonfly-like spirit soars into the sky, and the nine days that have passed are long gone.

古文：呜呼哀哉！
现代文：呜呼哀哉！
English: Alas, alas!

古文：相如拜为孝文园令。
现代文：相如被授官为汉文帝的陵园令。
English: It is similar to the order to build a mausoleum for Emperor Hanwen.

古文：天子既美子虚之事，相如见上好仙道，因曰： 上林之事未足美也，尚有靡者。
现代文：武帝既赞美子虚之事，相如又看出皇上喜爱仙道，趁机说： 上林之事算不得最美好，还有更美丽的。
English: Emperor Wu not only praised Zi Hui's deed, but also saw that the emperor liked the fairy tale, and took the opportunity to say: Going to the forest is not the most beautiful thing, there are more beautiful things.

古文：臣尝为大人赋，未就，请具而奏之。 
现代文：臣曾经写过《大人赋》，未完稿，请允许我写完后献给皇上。 
English: A vassal once wrote "Adult Fu," an unfinished draft, please allow me to write it and dedicate it to the emperor.

古文：其辞曰：世有大人兮，在于中州。宅弥万里兮，曾不足以少留。
现代文：相如认为传说中的众仙人居住在山林沼泽间，形体容貌特别清瘦，这不是帝王心意中的仙人，于是就写成《大人赋》，赋中写道：世上有位大人啊，居住在中国。住宅满布万里啊，竟不足以使他稍微停留。
English: Similarly, he thought that the mythical fairies who lived in the mountains, forests and swamps were not the fairies that the emperor had in mind, so he wrote "Adult Fu." Fu wrote: "There is an adult in the world who lives in China. There are thousands of houses, but it is not enough for him to stay for a while.

古文：悲世俗之迫隘兮，朅轻举而远游。
现代文：哀伤世俗的胁迫困厄，便离世轻飞，向着远方漫游。
English: Saddened by the worldly coercion and distress, he left the world lightly and roamed far and wide.

古文：垂绛幡之素蜺兮，载云气而上浮。
现代文：乘着赤幡为饰的副虹，载着云气而上浮。
English: Riding on the second rainbow, adorned with the red flag, it floats up carrying the clouds.

古文：建格泽之长竿兮，总光耀之采旄。
现代文：竖起状如烟火的云气长竿，拴结起光炎闪耀的五彩旌旗。
English: A cloud-like firework-shaped pole was erected, and the multicolored national flag was tied up to sparkle.

古文：垂旬始以为幓兮，抴彗星而为髾。
现代文：垂挂着旬始星做为旌旗的飘带，拖着彗星做为旌旗垂羽。
English: Hanging from the seasonal star as a banner of streamers, dragging the comet as a banner of feathers.

古文：掉指桥以偃蹇兮，又旖旎以招摇。
现代文：旌旗随风披靡，逶迤婉转，婀娜多姿地摇摆着。
English: The national flag was carried by the wind and swayed gracefully.

古文：揽欃枪以为旌兮，靡屈虹而为绸。
现代文：揽取欃枪做旌旗，旗竿上缠绕着弯曲的彩虹做为绸。
English: A captured crossbow was used to make the flag, and a curved rainbow was wrapped around the flagpole to make the silk.

古文：红杳渺以眩湣兮，猋风涌而云浮。
现代文：天空赤红深远而又暗淡无光，狂飙奔涌，云气飘浮。
English: The sky is deep red and dark without light, rushing furiously, clouds floating.

古文：驾应龙象舆之蠖略逶丽兮，骖赤螭青虬之鞮蟉蜿蜒。
现代文：驾着应龙、象车屈曲有度地前行，以赤螭、青虬为骖马蜿蜒行进。
English: Driven by Yinglong, the elephant carriage bends and moves forward steadily, with the red donkey and the blue donkey as the horses.

古文：低卬夭蟜据以骄骜兮，诎折隆穷蠼以连卷沛艾赳螑仡以佁儗兮，放散畔岸骧以孱颜。
现代文：有时龙身屈曲起伏，昂首腾飞，恣意奔驰，有时又屈折隆起，盘绕蜷曲。时而摇头伸颈，起伏前进，时而举首不前；时而放任散慢，自我放纵，时而昂首不齐。
English: Sometimes the dragon's body bends and undulates, takes off with head held high, gallops at will, sometimes it bends and rises, coils and curls. Sometimes it shakes its head and stretches its neck, undulates and advances, sometimes it raises its head and does not advance; sometimes it is allowed to be sluggish, self-indulgent, and sometimes it does not hold its head high.

古文：跮踱輵辖容以委丽兮，绸缪偃蹇怵鞨以梁倚。
现代文：有时忽进忽退、摇目吐舌，如趋走飞翔之鸟，左右相随；有时龙头摇动，屈曲婉转，象惊兔奔跑，如屋粱相互依。
English: Sometimes, it suddenly advances and retreats, making the eyes dizzy, like a bird flying, following the left and right; sometimes, the faucet shakes, bends and turns gently, running like a frightened rabbit, like the eaves of a house leaning against each other.

古文：纠蓼叫奡蹋以艐路兮，蔑蒙踊跃腾而狂趡。
现代文：或缠绕喧嚣踏到路上，或飞扬跳跃，奔腾狂进。
English: Or step onto the road, wrapped up in the hustle and bustle, or fly, jump, and gallop madly.

古文：莅飒卉翕熛至电过兮，焕然雾除，霍然云消。
现代文：或迅捷飞翔，相互追逐，疾如闪电，突然明亮，雾气消除，云气散尽。
English: Or flying swiftly, chasing each other, swift as lightning, suddenly bright, fog clearing, clouds dispersing.

古文：邪绝少阳而登太阴兮，与真人乎相求。
现代文：斜渡东极而登上北极啊，与仙人们相互交游。
English: Cross the East Pole diagonally and ascend to the North Pole, and mingle with the immortals.

古文：互折窈窕以右转兮，横厉飞泉以正东。
现代文：走过错综曲折深远广大之处再向右转啊，横渡飞泉向着正东。
English: After going through the intricate twists and turns of the vast expanse, turn right again, and cross the flying spring to the east.

古文：悉徵灵圉而选之兮，部乘众神於瑶光。使五帝先导兮，反太一而从陵阳。
现代文：把众仙全都召来加以挑选啊，在瑶光之上布署众神。让五帝做向导啊，使太一返回，让陵阳子明做侍从。
English: Call all the immortals to come and select them, and place the gods above the beacon. Let the five emperors be the guides, let Taichi return, and let Lingyang Ziming be the attendant.

古文：左玄冥而右含雷兮，前陆离而後潏湟。
现代文：左边是玄冥右边是含雷啊，前有陆离后有潏湟。
English: The left side is dark and gloomy, the right side is thunder, and there is land in front and clouds behind.

古文：厮征伯侨而役羡门兮，属岐伯使尚方。
现代文：让王子侨当小厮，令羡门高做差役，使歧伯掌管药方。
English: Let the princes and overseas Chinese serve as minor officials, let the high-ranking officials serve as dispatchers, and let the mediocre officials be in charge of prescriptions.

古文：祝融惊而跸御兮，清雰气而後行。
现代文：火神祝融担任警戒，清道防卫啊，消除恶气，然后前进。
English: The fire god, Zhu Rong, acts as a warning, clears the way for defense, eliminates the evil gas, and then advances.

古文：屯余车其万乘兮，綷云盖而树华旗。
现代文：集合我的车子有万辆之多啊，混合彩云做成的车盖，树起华丽的旗帜。
English: There are as many as ten thousand cars in my collection, the covers made of mixed colored clouds, and gorgeous flags.

古文：使句芒其将行兮，吾欲往乎南嬉。
现代文：让句芒率领随从啊，我要前往南方去游戏。
English: Let Xuan Meng lead the entourage, I want to go to the south to play.

古文：历唐尧於崇山兮，过虞舜於九疑。
现代文：经过崇山见到唐尧啊，拜访虞舜在九嶷。
English: After passing through Chongshan, I saw Tang Xuan and visited Yu Xuan in Jiuyuan.

古文：纷湛湛其差错兮，杂遝胶葛以方驰。
现代文：车骑纷繁纵横交错啊，重累杂乱并驰向前。
English: Cars and cyclists criss-cross the city, piling up clutter and speeding ahead.

古文：骚扰冲苁其相纷挐兮，滂濞泱轧洒以林离。钻罗列聚丛以茏茸兮，衍曼流烂坛以陆离。
现代文：骚扰撞而混乱啊，大水无垠洒洒洋洋。群山簇聚罗列，万物丛集茂盛啊，到处散布，繁盛参差。
English: Disturbing and chaotic, the water is turbulent and turbulent. The mountains are clustered, everything is clustered and lush, scattered everywhere, and the prosperity is uneven.

古文：径入雷室之砰磷郁律兮，洞出鬼谷之嚬礨嵬靺。
现代文：径直驰入雷声隆隆的雷室啊，穿过崎岖不平的鬼谷。
English: Drive straight into the thunderous thunder room, through the rugged valley of ghosts.

古文：遍览八纮而观四荒兮，朅渡九江而越五河。
现代文：遍览八纮而远望四荒啊，渡过九江又越过五河。
English: Surveying the eight ridges and looking at the four deserts from afar, crossing the Jiujiang River and crossing the Five Rivers.

古文：经营炎火而浮弱水兮，杭绝浮渚而涉流沙。
现代文：往来于炎火之山，浮过弱水河啊，方舟横渡浮渚，涉过流沙河。
English: They went to and from the Flaming Mountain, floated across the Weak Water River, crossed the floating shoals in the ark, and waded through the Sand River.

古文：奄息总极氾滥水嬉兮，使灵娲鼓瑟而舞冯夷。
现代文：忽然休息在葱岭山，在泛滥的河水中游戏啊，使女娲奏瑟，让冯夷跳起舞来。
English: Suddenly rested in the green hills, playing in the overflowing river water, the maidservants danced, and Feng Yi danced.

古文：时若々将混浊兮，召屏翳诛风伯而刑雨师。
现代文：天色昏暗不明啊，召来雷师屏翳，诛责风神而刑罚雨师。
English: The sky is dark and unclear, summoning the thunder god Pingyao, blaming the wind god and punishing the rain god.

古文：西望昆仑之轧沕洸忽兮，直径驰乎三危。
现代文：西望昆仑恍恍惚惚啊，径直奔驰三危山。
English: Westward view of Kunlun in a trance, straight to the Three Dangers Mountains.

古文：排阊阖而入帝宫兮，载玉女而与之归。
现代文：推开天门闯进帝宫啊，载着玉女与她同归。
English: Push open the gates of heaven and break into the imperial palace, carrying the princess back with her.

古文：舒阆风而摇集兮，亢乌腾而一止。
现代文：登上阆风山而高兴地停下歇息啊，就象乌鸟高飞而稍事休息。
English: It is like a blackbird flying high and taking a short rest when it stops to rest happily on Mount Qufeng.

古文：低回阴山翔以纡曲兮，吾乃今目睹西王母鱇然白首。
现代文：在阴山上徘徊，婉曲飞翔啊，到今天我才目睹满头白发的西王母。
English: Wandering on the gloomy mountain, euphemism flying, to this day I have only witnessed the white-haired Western Queen.

古文：载胜而穴处兮，亦幸有三足乌为之使。
现代文：她头戴玉胜住在洞穴中啊，幸而有三足鸟供她驱使。
English: She lives in a cave with a crown on her head, and is lucky enough to have a three-legged bird to drive her around.

古文：必长生若此而不死兮，虽济万世不足以喜。
现代文：一定要象这样的长生不死啊，纵然能活万世也不值得高兴。
English: You must be immortal like this. Even if you can live forever, it's not worth being happy.

古文：回车朅来兮，绝道不周，会食幽都。
现代文：回转车头归来啊，走到不周路断绝，会餐在幽都。
English: Turn the car around and head back, and when you reach the end of the road, have dinner in the quiet city.

古文：呼吸沆瀣餐朝霞，噍咀芝英兮叽琼华。
现代文：呼吸沆瀣而餐食朝霞啊，咀嚼灵芝花，稍食玉树花朵。
English: Breathe deeply while eating morning glory, chew Ganoderma lucidum flowers, and nibble on jade flowers.

古文：嬐侵浔而高纵兮，纷鸿涌而上厉。
现代文：抬头仰望而身体渐渐高纵啊，纷然腾跃疾飞上天。
English: Looking up, the body gradually becomes taller and taller, leaping and soaring into the sky.

古文：贯列缺之倒景兮，涉丰隆之滂沛。
现代文：穿过闪电的倒影啊，涉过丰隆兴云制作的滂沛雨水。
English: Through the reflection of lightning, through the abundant rain produced by Fenglong Xingyun.

古文：驰游道而脩降兮，骛遗雾而远逝。
现代文：驰骋游车和导车自长空而降啊，抛开云雾而疾驰远去。
English: The tour bus and the tour guide descend from the sky, leaving the clouds behind and speeding away.

古文：迫区中之隘陕兮，舒节出乎北垠。
现代文：迫于人世社会的狭隘啊，缓缓走出北极的边际。
English: Forced by the narrowness of human society, we are slowly emerging from the margins of the Arctic.

古文：遗屯骑於玄阙兮，轶先驱於寒门。
现代文：把屯骑遗留在北极之山啊，在天北门超越先驱。
English: Leave the cavalrymen behind in the mountains of the Arctic, and surpass the pioneers at Tianbei Gate.

古文：下峥嵘而无地兮，上寥廓而无天。
现代文：下界深远而不见大地啊，上方空阔而看不到天边。
English: The lower world is far away and you can't see the earth, the upper world is vast and you can't see the edge of the sky.

古文：视眩眠而无见兮，听惝恍而无闻。
现代文：视线模糊看不清，听觉恍惚无所闻。
English: The line of sight is blurred, the vision is unclear, and the sense of hearing is trance-like.

古文：乘虚无而上假兮，超无友而独存。
现代文：腾空而上到达远处啊，超越无有而独自长存。
English: Soar into the sky and reach far away, transcend nothingness and exist alone.

古文：相如既奏大人之颂，天子大说，飘飘有凌云之气，似游天地之间意。
现代文：相如既已献上《大人之颂》，天子特别高兴，飘飘然有凌驾云天的气概，心情好似遨游天地之间那样爽快。
English: Just as he had already presented "Ode to Adults," Tianzi was particularly happy, with a buoyant air of dominating heaven and earth, and his mood was as exhilarated as if he were traveling between heaven and earth.

古文：相如既病免，家居茂陵。
现代文：相如已因病免官，家住茂陵。
English: He has been relieved of his duties due to illness, and lives in Moguryo.

古文：天子曰： 司马相如病甚，可往从悉取其书；若不然，後失之矣。 
现代文：天子说： 司马相如病得很厉害，可派人去把他的书全部取回来；如果不这样做，以后就散失了。 
English: Tianzi said: Sima Xiangru is very ill, you can send someone to get all his books back; if you don't, they will be lost in the future.

古文：使所忠往，而相如已死，家无书。
现代文：派所忠前往茂陵，而相如已经死去，家中没有书。
English: Paisozhong went to Muryeong, but Xiangru had already died, and there were no books at home.

古文：问其妻，对曰： 长卿固未尝有书也。
现代文：询问相如之妻，她回答说： 长卿本来不曾有书。
English: When his wife was questioned, she replied: "Chang Sir never had a book.

古文：时时著书，人又取去，即空居。
现代文：他时时写书，别人就时时取走，因而家中总是空空的。
English: He was always writing books, and people were always taking them away, so the house was always empty.

古文：长卿未死时，为一卷书，曰有使者来求书，奏之。
现代文：长卿还没死的时候，写过一卷书，他说如有使者来取书，就把它献上。
English: Before he died, he wrote a book and said that if a messenger came to take the book, he would give it to him.

古文：无他书。 
现代文：再没有别的书了。 
English: There is no other book.

古文：其遗札书言封禅事，奏所忠。
现代文：他留下来的书上写的是有关封禅的事，进献给所忠。
English: The book he left behind was dedicated to Shōtada, and it was about Hōzen.

古文：忠奏其书，天子异之。
现代文：所忠把书再进献给天子，天子惊异其书。
English: Sokotada dedicated the book to the Son of Heaven, and the Son of Heaven was astonished by the book.

古文：其书曰：伊上古之初肇，自昊穹兮生民，历撰列辟，以迄于秦。
现代文：那书上写道：上古开始之时，由天降生万民，经历各代君王，一直到秦。
English: The book reads: "At the beginning of ancient times, all people were born from the sky, experiencing all generations of kings, all the way to Qin.

古文：率迩者踵武，逖听者风声。纷纶葳蕤，堙灭而不称者，不可胜数也。
现代文：沿着近代君王的足迹加以考察，聆听远古君王的遗风美名，繁多而纷乱，名声和事迹被、没而不称道者，数也数不尽。
English: Following the footprints of modern monarchs to investigate, listen to the legacy of ancient monarchs, numerous and chaotic, fame and deeds by, but not without praise, the number is endless.

古文：续昭夏，崇号谥，略可道者七十有二君。
现代文：能够继承舜、禹，崇尚尊号美谥的，封禅秦山而稍可称道者只有七十二君。
English: There are only seventy-two princes who can succeed Zhou and Yu, and who worship the goddess of beauty, and who can be praised for their dedication to Mount Qin.

古文：罔若淑而不昌，畴逆失而能存？
现代文：顺从善道行事，没有谁不昌盛；违逆常理，失德行事，谁能生存？
English: If one follows the virtuous path, no one will fail to prosper; if one defies common sense and acts immorally, who can survive?

古文：轩辕之前，遐哉邈乎，其详不可得闻也。
现代文：轩辕以前，时间久远，事物邈茫，其详细情况不得而知。
English: Before the uproar, it was a long time ago, things were vague, and its details were unknown.

古文：五三六经载籍之传，维见可观也。书曰 元首明哉，股肱良哉 。
现代文：五帝三王的一些事迹，都记载在六经典籍和传说之中，可以看到大概的情况。《尚书》上说： 君王贤明啊，大臣杰出。 
English: Some of the deeds of the five emperors and three kings are recorded in the six classic books and legends, and you can see the general situation. "Shangshu" said: The king is wise, and the minister is outstanding.

古文：因斯以谈，君莫盛於唐尧，臣莫贤於后稷。
现代文：根据这一记载可以说，君王的圣明没有超过唐尧的，大臣的贤良没有比得上后稷的。
English: According to this record, it can be said that the emperor's wisdom did not exceed that of Tang Xuan, and the minister's virtue did not match that of Hou Xuan.

古文：后稷创业於唐，公刘发迹於西戎，文王改制，爰周郅隆，大行越成，而後陵夷衰微，千载无声，岂不善始善终哉。
现代文：后稷在唐尧时创建了业绩，公刘在西戎之地发迹，文王改革制度，使周隆盛，太平之道于是形成。其后子孙虽政绩衰微，但千年以来并无怨恶之声，这难道不是善始善终吗？
English: Hou Yi created achievements at the time of Tang Xuan, Gong Liu made his fortune in the land of Xi Rong, King Wen's reform system made Zhou prosperous, and the way of peace was thus formed. Although the political achievements of his descendants have declined, there has been no resentment since the millennium. Isn't this a good beginning and a good ending?

古文：然无异端，慎所由於前，谨遗教於後耳。
现代文：但是周王朝所以能这样，没有别的原因，只是前代先王能谨慎地从事他们所考虑和规划的事情，又能够严谨地垂教于后世子孙罢了。
English: However, there is no other reason for the Zhou Dynasty to be able to do so, except that the previous generation of emperors were able to prudently engage in the things they considered and planned, and were able to rigorously teach future generations.

古文：故轨迹夷易，易遵也；湛恩濛涌，易丰也；宪度著明，易则也；垂统理顺，易继也。
现代文：所以前人开拓的道路平坦，容易沿路走去；深恩广大，容易丰足；法度显明，容易效法；传续法统顺乎情理，容易继承。
English: Therefore, the path pioneered by our predecessors is smooth and easy to follow; the depth of gratitude is broad and easy to enrich; the laws are clear and easy to follow; the transmission of laws is reasonable and easy to inherit.

古文：是以业隆於繦褓而崇冠于二后。
现代文：所以周公的业绩隆盛于成王时代，而其功德之高超越文王和武王。
English: Therefore, Zhou Gong's performance flourished in the era of King Cheng, and his high merit surpassed that of King Wen and King Wu.

古文：揆厥所元，终都攸卒，未有殊尤绝迹可考于今者也。
现代文：揆度其所始，考察其所终，并无特别优异超凡的业绩，可与当今汉朝相比。
English: In terms of its beginning and its end, there is no particularly outstanding performance that can be compared with today's Han Dynasty.

古文：然犹蹑梁父，登泰山，建显号，施尊名。
现代文：然而，周人尚且走上粱父山，登上泰山，建立显贵的封号，施加尊崇的美名。
English: However, Zhou people still walked up the Shifu Mountain, ascended Mount Tai, established a distinguished seal, and imposed a revered reputation.

古文：大汉之德，逢涌原泉，沕潏漫衍，旁魄四塞，云尃雾散，上暢九垓，下溯八埏。
现代文：伟大汉朝的恩德，象源泉奔涌而出，盛大扩散，广布四方。如云雾散布，上通九天，下至八方极远之地。
English: The benevolence of the great Han Dynasty, like a spring, gushed out, spread widely, and spread in all directions. Like clouds and fog, it took nine days to go up, and eight days to go down to the farthest place.

古文：怀生之类霑濡浸润，协气横流，武节飘逝，迩陕游原，迥阔泳沫，首恶湮没，闇昧昭晢，昆蟲凯泽，回首面内。
现代文：一切生灵，皆受恩德，和畅之气，广泛散布，威武之节，飘然远去。近者如同畅游于恩泽的源头，远者好似泳浮在恩惠的末流。
English: All sentient beings are spread far and wide by the benevolence and benevolence of all beings. The near ones are like swimming in the source of benevolence, and the far ones are like swimming in the tailstream of benevolence.

古文：然後囿驺虞之珍群，徼麋鹿之怪兽，鳒一茎六穗於庖，牺双共抵之兽，获周馀珍收龟于岐，招翠黄乘龙於沼。鬼神接灵圉，宾於间馆。奇物谲诡，俶傥穷变。钦哉，符瑞臻兹，犹以为薄，不敢道封禅。
现代文：领头作恶的被湮没，暗昧之人得到光明。连各种动物都欢畅喜悦，掉转头来，面向中土朝廷。然后，驺虞之类的珍贵之兽聚于苑囿，白麟一类的怪兽进入栅栏之中，在庖厨中选择出一茎六穗的嘉禾以供祭祀，用角分枝的白麟做牺牲，在歧山获得了周朝遗留的宝鼎和蓄养的神龟，从沼泽里招来了神马乘黄。鬼神迎接神仙灵圉，在闲馆中待以宾客之礼。珍奇之物，奇异超凡，变化无穷。令人钦敬啊，祥瑞的征兆都显现在此，还认为自己的功德微薄，不敢称道封禅之事。
English: The ringleader of the evil-doers was annihilated, and the dark-hearted were enlightened. Even all kinds of animals were happy and joyful, and turned their heads to face the Middle-earth court. Then, precious beasts such as the yakitori gathered in the courtyard, and monsters such as the white unicorn entered the fence. In the kitchen, they selected one stem and six ears of rice for sacrifice, and used the horn-branched white unicorn as a sacrifice. In the mountains, they obtained the treasure left by the Zhou Dynasty and the breeding of the divine turtle. From the marshes, they invited the divine horse to ride the yellow horse. The

古文：盖周跃鱼陨杭，休之以燎，微夫斯之为符也，以登介丘，不亦恧乎！
现代文：从前周武王渡河时，有条白鱼跳到船中，武王认为是美好的祥瑞，就用这白鱼燎祭上天。其实这种符兆十分微小，但却因此登上泰山，不是太惭愧了吗？
English: When King Wu was crossing the river last week, a white fish jumped into the boat. King Wu thought it was a good omen, so he used this white fish to make a sacrificial offering to heaven. In fact, this sign is very small, but isn't it too ashamed to climb Mount Tai because of it?

古文：进让之道，其何爽与？
现代文：周朝不该封禅而封禅，汉朝应该封禅却不封禅，进让的原则，相差何其遥远呢？
English: The Zhou Dynasty should not seal Zen, but did seal Zen. The Han Dynasty should seal Zen, but did not seal Zen. How far apart are the principles of compromise?

古文：於是大司马进曰： 陛下仁育群生，义征不憓，诸夏乐贡，百蛮执贽，德侔往初，功无与二，休烈浃洽，符瑞众变，期应绍至，不特创见。
现代文：于是大司马进谏说： 陛下以仁德抚育天下百姓，凭借道义征伐不肯顺服者，华夏诸侯愿意进贡，蛮夷皆手持礼物朝拜天子，美德与往初的圣君相等，功业也无二致，美好的功德政绩普遍融洽，符瑞的征兆变化众多，应验的时期将相继而来，不仅仅是初次呈现。
English: Therefore, the Grand Master Ma Jinjun said: His Majesty nurtures the people of the world with benevolence, conquers those who refuse to obey by virtue of morality, the princes of China are willing to pay tribute, the barbarians are all holding gifts to worship the Son of God, the virtues are equal to the saints in the past, the achievements are no different, the beautiful merits and political achievements are generally harmonious, and there are many changes in the signs of Fu Rui. The period of fulfillment will come one after another, not just for the first time.

古文：意者泰山、梁父设坛场望幸，盖号以况荣，上帝垂恩储祉，将以荐成，陛下谦让而弗发也。挈三神之驩，缺王道之仪，群臣恧焉。
现代文：我想大概在泰山、粱父山设立祭坛，是希望天子到来，加封尊号，以此与前代圣君比光荣，上帝降恩和福，是准备用成功荐告上天，陛下谦让而不封禅，是断绝了上帝、泰山、粱父山的欢心，使王道的礼仪缺失不全，群臣对此感到惭愧。
English: I think that setting up altars on Mount Tai and Mount Shichifu was probably done in the hope that the Son of Heaven would come and add the title of honor, so that he would be more glorious than the previous generation of saints. God's grace and blessing were intended to be used as a successful recommendation to heaven. Your majesty was too modest to seal Zen. It broke the goodwill of God, Mount Tai and Mount Shichifu, and made the royal etiquette incomplete. The courtiers were ashamed of this.

古文：或谓且天为质闇，珍符固不可辞；若然辞之，是泰山靡记而梁父靡几也。
现代文：有人说那天道是质朴暗昧的，因此珍奇的符兆本来是不能拒绝的。如果这样推让它，这是使泰山没有作表记的机会，而粱父山也没有祭祀的希望了。
English: Some people said that the Tao of that day was simple and obscure, so the rare signs could not have been rejected. If it was pushed in this way, it would mean that Mount Tai would not have the opportunity to make a mark, and Mount Xizhi would not have the hope of a sacrifice.

古文：亦各并时而荣，咸济世而屈，说者尚何称於後，而云七十二君乎？
现代文：如果古代帝王都是一时荣耀，毕世而绝灭，那么叙说者还有什么可以向后世陈述的呢，而且还能有七十二君封禅的说法吗？
English: If the emperors of ancient times were all glory for a time, and vanished forever, then what else can the narrator present to future generations, and can there still be talk of the seventy-two emperors?

古文：夫修德以锡符，奉符以行事，不为进越。
现代文：若修明道德则天赐祥瑞，顺应祥瑞来做封禅之事，不能算做越礼。
English: If you cultivate clear morality, you will be blessed with auspiciousness, and if you follow auspiciousness to do the work of sealing Zen, you cannot be considered to have done yoserei.

古文：故圣王弗替，而修礼地祇，谒款天神，勒功中岳，以彰至尊，舒盛德，发号荣，受厚福，以浸黎民也。
现代文：所以圣明的君王不废除封禅之礼，而是修行礼仪，尊奉土地神，诚恳地竭告天神，在嵩山刻石记功，以表彰最尊贵的地位，宣扬盛明的德行，显示尊号与荣耀，授与厚福，以使百姓沾光。
English: Therefore, the kings of the holy Ming Dynasty did not abolish the ceremony of sealing Zen, but practiced etiquette, honored the land gods, sincerely confessed to the gods, carved a stone in the Songshan Mountain to commend the most honorable status, preached the virtues of Shengming, showed the honor and glory, and awarded blessings to make the people shine.

古文：皇皇哉斯事！天下之壮观，王者之丕业，不可贬也。
现代文：封禅之事堂皇伟大啊，是天下的壮观，称王者的大业，不能贬低。
English: The matter of fusing Zen is grand and great, it is spectacular in the world, it is the great cause of the king, it cannot be belittled.

古文：原陛下全之。
现代文：希望陛下保全它。
English: I hope His Majesty will preserve it.

古文：而後因杂荐绅先生之略术，使获燿日月之末光绝炎，以展采错事，犹兼正列其义，校饬厥文，作春秋一艺，将袭旧六为七，摅之无穷，俾万世得激清流，扬微波，蜚英声，腾茂实。
现代文：然后综合荐绅先生们的道术，使他们获得日月余光远炎的照耀，以施展当官的才能，专心办好政事。还要兼正天时、叙列人事，阐述大义，校订润色其文，作成象《春秋》一样的经书，将沿袭旧有的六经，增为七经，并传布无穷，使万世之后仍能激发忠义之士，扬起微波，飞扬英明之声，传送茂盛的果实。
English: Then, he will comprehensively recommend the gentlemen's Taoist techniques, so that they can obtain the light of the sun, moon and stars, so as to exert the talent of officials and concentrate on doing a good job of government affairs. It is also necessary to be in the right place at the right time, set forth the personnel, expound the great righteousness, proofread and polish the text, and create a scripture like "Spring and Autumn," which will follow the old six scriptures, increase to seven scriptures, and spread to infinity, so that after all eternity, it can still inspire loyal people, raise microwaves, fly wise voices, and transmit lush fruits.

古文：前圣之所以永保鸿名而常为称首者用此，宜命掌故悉奏其义而览焉。 
现代文：前代圣贤所以能永远保持伟大名声而常常被称赞的原因，就在于行封禅之礼，应当命令掌故把封禅的大义全都奏报陛下，以备观览。 
English: The reason why the previous generation of sages can always maintain a great reputation and are often praised is that they performed the ceremony of sealing Zen, and should order the palms and feet to report all the great justice of sealing Zen to His Majesty for observation.

古文：於是天子沛然改容，曰： 愉乎，朕其试哉！ 
现代文：于是天子有所感悟似地改变了神色，说： 好啊，我就试试看吧！ 
English: Then the son of heaven changed his expression, as if he were impressed, and said: Okay, I'll give it a try!

古文：乃迁思回虑，总公卿之议，询封禅之事，诗大泽之博，广符瑞之富。
现代文：天子思来想去，归纳了公卿们的议论，询问了封禅的具体情况，记述恩泽的博大，推衍符瑞的富饶。
English: Tianzi thought about it, summarized the discussion of the nobles, inquired about the specific situation of the Fuzan, described the generosity of the grace, and deduced the richness of the Fu Rui.

古文：乃作颂曰：
现代文：于是写了颂歌，说：
English: And he wrote a hymn, saying:

古文：自我天覆，云之油油。
现代文： 覆盖我的苍天，云朵油然飘荡。
English: The sky that covers me, the clouds are drifting.

古文：甘露时雨，厥壤可游。
现代文：普降甘露和及时雨，其地可以遨游。
English: The general fall of nectar and timely rain, its place can travel.

古文：万物熙熙，怀而慕思。名山非唯雨之，又润泽之；非唯濡之，氾尃濩之。
现代文：滋润万物的水液渗透土壤，一切生物无不受到滋养。好谷物一茎生出六穗，我收获的谷物何不蓄积？不但降下雨水，又把大地润泽；不但霑濡我一人，而且广泛散布。
English: The water that moistens all things penetrates the soil, and all living things are nourished. A stalk of good grain produces six ears, so why shouldn't the grain I harvest accumulate? Not only does it rain, but it also moistens the earth; not only does it wet me alone, but it is also widely distributed.

古文：万物熙熙，怀而慕思。
现代文：万物熙熙和乐，既怀恋又思慕。
English: Everything is boisterous and peaceful, both nostalgic and yearning.

古文：名山显位，望君之来。
现代文：名山应当有显赫的地位，盼望圣君到来。
English: Famous mountains should have a prominent position, and it is hoped that the saint will come.

古文：君乎君乎，侯不迈哉！
现代文：君王啊，君王！为何不行封禅之礼！
English: Monarch, monarch! Why don't you seal the gift of Zen!

古文：兹亦於舜，虞氏以兴。濯濯之麟，游彼灵畤。孟冬十月，君俎郊祀。
现代文：文彩斑烂的驺虞，喜欢我君的苑囿；白色的质地，黑色的花纹，它的仪表令人喜爱。和睦恭敬，宛如君子之态。从前只听到它的名声，如今目睹它的降临。那路上没留下足迹，这是天降祥瑞的征兆。
English: A garden gnome that likes my husband; a white texture, a black pattern, its appearance is adorable. Harmony and respect, like a gentleman's state. Once only heard its reputation, now witnessing its arrival. There are no footprints left on the road, which is a sign of heaven's blessing.

古文：驰我君舆，帝以享祉。
现代文：此兽也曾在虞舜时出现，虞舜因此而兴旺。
English: Bai Lin galloped to the king's chariot, and the king used it to sacrifice to the heavens, and the heavens fell down with happiness.

古文：三濯濯之麟，游彼灵畤。
现代文：肥壮的白麟啊，曾在五畤戏游。
English: Ah, the fat white unicorn, who once starred in a five-act play.

古文：孟冬十月，君俎郊祀。
现代文：正是孟冬十月，皇上前往郊祀。
English: It was in Mengdong in October that the emperor went to the countryside to worship.

古文：驰我君舆，帝以享祉。
现代文：白麟奔驰到君王车前，君王用它燎祭苍天，天降幸福。
English: Bai Lin galloped to the king's chariot, and the king used it to sacrifice to the heavens, and the heavens fell down with happiness.

古文：三代之前，盖未尝有。
现代文：夏商周三代以前，大概不曾有此奇事。
English: Before the third generation of Xia merchants, there was probably no such miracle.

古文：宛宛黄龙，兴德而升；采色炫燿，熿炳煇煌。
现代文：宛屈伸展的黄龙，因遇圣德而升天。色彩闪耀夺目，光辉灿烂。
English: The yellow dragon, stretched out and stretched out, ascended to heaven because of the encounter of sanctity. The color shines dazzlingly, and the radiance is brilliant.

古文：正阳显见，觉寤黎烝。
现代文：龙体显现，必能使众民觉悟。
English: The appearance of the dragon's body will surely enlighten the people.

古文：於传载之，云受命所乘。
现代文：在《易经·彖传》中曾有记载，这正是所谓授命天子所乘之车。
English: There is a record in the "Book of Changes" that this is exactly the car in which the so-called man of destiny rode.

古文：厥之有章，不必谆谆。
现代文：天的符瑞已经明白显示，不必再谆谆告诫。
English: The evidence of heaven has clearly shown that there is no need for further admonition.

古文：披艺观之，天人之际已交，上下相发允答。
现代文：应当依类寄托，告诉君王举行封禅大典。翻开典籍可以看到，自然界和人类社会已经发生关系，两者相互启发而和谐。
English: It should be entrusted according to the class, and the monarch should be told to hold a grand ceremony of fuzen.Opening the classics, we can see that the natural world and human society have already had a relationship, and the two inspire each other and are in harmony.

古文：圣王之德，兢兢翼翼也。
现代文：圣明君王的美德，就是行事兢兢业业，小心翼翼。
English: The virtue of the Sage Monarch is to act diligently and carefully.

古文：故曰 兴必虑衰，安必思危 。
现代文：所以说 在兴旺时要考虑到衰微，在太平安乐之时要想到危难 。
English: Therefore, it is said that we should consider decline when we are prosperous, and think of danger when we are at peace.

古文：是以汤武至尊严，不失肃祗；舜在假典，顾省厥遗：此之谓也。
现代文：因此，商汤、周武王虽然位居至尊，却仍然保持严肃恭敬的美德。虞舜在大典之中，仍然观察反省缺点和失误。
English: Therefore, Shang Tang and Zhou Wu Wang, although they are at the highest level, still maintain the virtue of seriousness and respect. In the great classics, Gudang still observes and reflects on shortcomings and mistakes.

古文：司马相如既卒五岁，天子始祭后土。
现代文：说的就是这个道理。司马相如已死五年，天子才开始祭祀土地神。
English: Sima Xiangru has been dead for five years, and it is only now that the heavenly son has begun to offer sacrifices to the land god.

古文：八年而遂先礼中岳，封于太山，至梁父禅肃然。
现代文：他死后八年，天子终于首先祭祀中岳嵩山，然后又封泰山，再到粱父山，禅肃然山。
English: Eight years after his death, the Son of Heaven finally first offered sacrifices to Zhongyue Songshan, and then to Mount Tai, and then to Mount Xizhoushan, Mount Zenshu.

古文：相如他所著，若遗平陵侯书、与五公子相难、草木书篇不采，采其尤著公卿者云。
现代文：相如其他著作，如《遗平陵侯书》《与五公子相难》《草木书》篇没有收录，收录了他在公卿中尤其著名的作品。
English: As with other works, such as "The Book of the Ruins of Heping Mausoleum," "The Trouble with the Five Noblemen" and "The Book of Herbs and Trees," which are not included, his works, which are particularly famous among the nobles, are included.

古文：太史公曰：春秋推见至隐，易本隐之以显，大雅言王公大人而德逮黎庶，小雅讥小己之得失，其流及上。
现代文：太史公说：《春秋》能推究到事物的极隐微处，《易经》原本隐微却能阐释得浅显，《大雅》说的是王公大人却德及黎民百姓，《小雅》讥刺卑微作者的得失，其流言却能影响朝廷政治。
English: Taishigong said: "Spring and Autumn" can deduce the most subtle things, "I Ching" was originally subtle but can be explained clearly, "Daya" said that the prince was a good man and the people were good, "Xiaoya" ridiculed the gains and losses of the humble author, but its rumors could affect the imperial politics.

古文：所以言虽外殊，其合德一也。
现代文：所以言辞的外在表现虽然不同，但是其和柔的教化作用却是一致的。
English: Therefore, although the external expression of rhetoric is different, its gentle edifying effect is consistent.

古文：相如虽多虚辞滥说，然其要归引之节俭，此与诗之风谏何异。
现代文：相如的文章虽然多假托的言词和夸张的说法，但其主旨却归于节俭，这同《诗经》讽谏之旨有何不同？
English: Although similar articles are full of false words and exaggerated claims, their main theme is attributed to frugality. How is this different from the ironic theme of the Book of Songs?

古文：杨雄以为靡丽之赋，劝百风一，犹驰骋郑卫之声，曲终而奏雅，不已亏乎？
现代文：扬雄认为相如的华丽辞赋，鼓励奢侈的言词与倡言节俭的言词是一百比一的关系，这就如同尽情演奏郑、卫之音，而在曲终之时演奏一点雅乐一样。
English: Yang Xiong believes that the relationship between the words that encourage extravagance and the words that advocate frugality is a hundred to one. This is like playing Zheng and Wei's music to the fullest and playing a bit of classical music at the end of the song.

古文：余采其语可论者著于篇。
现代文：这不是减损了相如的辞赋价值吗？我采录了他的一些可以论述的文字，写在这篇文章中。
English: Isn't that detracting from the value of his words? I've taken some of what he had to say and put it in this article.

