古文：起旃蒙赤奋若八月，尽强圉单阏七月，凡二年。
现代文：起旃蒙赤奋若八月，尽强圉单阏七月，凡二年。
English: It takes two years for a new moon to rise in August and for a new moon to set in July.

古文：德宗神武圣文皇帝七
现代文：德宗神武圣文皇帝七
English: Emperor Dezong Shenwu Shenwen VII

古文：贞元元年乙丑，公元七八五年八月，甲子，诏凡不急之费及人冗食者皆罢之。
现代文：唐德宗贞元元年八月，甲子，德宗颁诏将一切不急的开销以及因事由官府供给饮食的多余人员一律裁撤。
English: In August of the first year of the reign of Emperor Dezong of Tang Dynasty, Emperor Dezong issued an edict abolishing all non-urgent expenses and redundant personnel who were provided with meals by the government.

古文：马燧至行营，与诸将谋曰： 长春宫不下，则怀光不可得。
现代文：马燧来到行营，与各将领计议说： 不将长春宫攻打下来，便不能捉住李怀光。
English: Ma Jun came to the encampment and discussed the plan with the generals, saying, "If we don't attack Changchun Palace, we won't be able to capture Li Huaiguang."

古文：长春宫守备甚严，攻之旷日持久，我当身往谕之。 
现代文：长春宫的防守戒备甚为严密，若是攻打它，势必空费时日，相持很久，我应当亲自前去开导他们。 
English: The defense of Changchun Palace is very tight. If we attack it, it is bound to take a long time. I should personally go and enlighten them.

古文：遂径造城下，呼怀光守将徐庭光，庭光帅将士罗拜城上。燧知其心屈，徐谓之曰： 我自朝廷来，可西向受命。 
现代文：于是，马燧径直来到城下，呼喊李怀光的守城将领徐庭光，徐庭光率领将士在城上列队向马燧下拜，马燧看出徐庭光内心已经屈服，便和缓地对他说： 我是从朝廷来的，你们应该向着西面接受朝命。 
English: As a result, Ma Jun came straight to the castle and called out to Li Huai Guang's garrison commander Xu Tingguang. Xu Tingguang led the soldiers to line up on the castle and bow down to Ma Jun. Ma Jun saw that Xu Tingguang had already surrendered, so he gently said to him: I came from the imperial court, you should accept the imperial command to the west.

古文：庭光等复西向拜。
现代文：徐庭光等便又向西面下拜。
English: Xu Tingguang and others bowed to the west again.

古文：燧曰： 汝曹自禄山已来，徇国立功四十馀年，何忽为灭族之计！
现代文：马燧说： 自从安禄山以来，你们献身国家，建立功勋，已有四十余年，为什么忽然做这种诛灭家族的打算！
English: Ma Wei said: Since Anlu Mountain, you have devoted yourselves to the country and built up merits for more than forty years. Why did you suddenly make such a plan to annihilate the family?

古文：从吾言，非止免祸，富贵可图也。 
现代文：听我的话，你们不仅可以免去灾祸，而且还可以谋求富贵呢。 
English: Hearken unto me, that ye may not only be delivered from evil, but that ye may also obtain riches.

古文：众不对。
现代文：众人都不肯回答。
English: They all refused to answer.

古文：燧披襟曰： 汝不信吾言，何不射我！ 
现代文：马燧敞开衣襟说： 既然你们不相信我的话，为什么不用箭射我！ 
English: The horse stallion opened his coat and said: Since you don't believe me, why don't you shoot me with an arrow!

古文：将士皆伏泣。
现代文：城上将士都伏在地上哭泣。
English: The commanders of the city fell to the ground and wept.

古文：燧曰： 此皆怀光所为，汝曹无罪。
现代文：马燧说： 这些罪过都是李怀光犯下的，你们是没有罪的。
English: Ma Yu said: These crimes were all committed by Li Huai Guang, you are not guilty.

古文：第坚守勿出。 
现代文：你们只管坚守这座城不出来就是了。 众人回答： 是。 
English: And they said unto him, Ye shall not go out of the city.

古文：皆曰： 诺。 壬申，燧与浑瑊、韩游瑰军逼河中，至焦篱堡。
现代文：壬申，马燧与浑、韩游进军迫近河中，抵达焦篱堡，守卫的将领尉率七百人归降。
English: Jinshin, Ma Jun and Hun, and Han Yu marched into the middle of the river and arrived at the Jiaozhen Fort. The guarding general and lieutenant led seven hundred people to surrender.

古文：守将尉珪以七百人降。是夕，怀光举火，诸营不应。
现代文：这天傍晚，李怀光举火报警，各军营没有响应的。
English: In the evening of the same day, Li Huaiguang raised the fire alarm, but there was no response from the military camps.

古文：骆元光在长春宫下，使人招徐庭光。庭光素轻元光，遣卒骂之，又为优胡于城上以侮之，且曰： 我降汉将耳！ 
现代文：骆元光在长春宫下面，让人招呼徐庭光，徐庭光平素看不起骆元光，派士兵骂他，又扮成胡人在城上侮辱他，而且说： 我们向汉族将领投降！ 
English: Luo Yuanguang was below the Changchun Palace, and people called for Xu Tingguang. Xu Tingguang looked down on Luo Yuanguang, sent soldiers to curse him, and insulted him on the city dressed as Hu people, and said: We surrender to the Han generals!

古文：元光使白燧，燧还至城下，庭光开门降。
现代文：骆元光让人禀告马燧，马燧来到城下，徐庭光打开城门归降。
English: Luo Yuanguang told people to inform Ma Jun, Ma Jun came to the city, Xu Tingguang opened the city gate and surrendered.

古文：燧以数骑入城慰抚，其众大呼曰： 吾辈复为王人矣！ 
现代文：马燧带着数人骑马入城，慰问安抚众人。徐庭光的部众大声呼喊着说： 我们又成了圣上的子民啦！ 
English: Ma Wei rode into the city with several people on horseback, offering condolences and appeasing everyone. Xu Tingguang's followers shouted loudly, "We have become the holy people again!"

古文：浑瑊谓僚佐曰： 始吾谓马公用兵不吾远也，今乃知吾不逮多矣！ 
现代文：浑对佐助自己的官吏说： 开始我自以为马公用兵与我不会相差太多，现在才知道我是远远赶不上他的。 
English: To Sasuke's own officials, Hun said: At first, I thought that Ma Gongye and I wouldn't be too different, but now I know that I can't keep up with him.

古文：诏以庭光试殿中监兼御史大夫。
现代文：德宗颁诏任命徐庭光为试殿中监，兼任御史大夫。
English: Emperor Dezong issued an edict appointing Xu Tingguang as the middle overseer of the examination hall and concurrently as the chief historian.

古文：甲戌，燧帅诸军至河西，河中军士自相惊曰： 西城擐甲矣！ 
现代文：甲戌，马燧率领诸军来到河西县，河中将士自相惊扰地说： 西城将士已经穿上铠甲啦！ 
English: Gao Jian and Ma Jun led their armies to Hexi County, and the generals in Hexi said to each other in surprise, "The generals in Xicheng have already put on their armor!"

古文：又曰： 东城娖队矣！ 
现代文：又说： 东城将士已经排好列啦！ 
English: He also said, "Dongcheng soldiers have already lined up!"

古文：须臾，军中皆易其号为 太平 字。
现代文：一会儿，将士们全将旗号改成了 太平 二字。
English: After a while, the soldiers all changed their banners to the word "Taiping."

古文：怀光不知所为，乃缢而死。
现代文：李怀光不知所措，于是自缢而死。
English: Li Huaguang was at a loss, so he hanged himself and died.

古文：初，怀光之解奉天围也，上以其子璀为监察御史，宠待甚厚。
现代文：当初，李怀光解除奉天围困时，德宗任命他的儿子李璀为监察御史，对他恩宠很厚。
English: At first, when Li Huaiguang lifted the siege of Fengtian, Emperor Dezong appointed his son Li Xi as the inspector of imperial history, and he was highly favored by Emperor Dezong.

古文：及怀光屯咸阳不进，璀密言于上曰： 臣父必负陛下，愿早为之备。
现代文：到李怀光驻扎咸阳，不肯进兵时，李璀暗中对德宗说： 我父亲肯定会辜负陛下，希望陛下早作准备。
English: When Li Huai Guang was stationed in Xianyang and refused to join the army, Li Yizhong secretly said to Dezong: My father will surely fail His Majesty, I hope His Majesty will make preparations early.

古文：臣闻君、父一也，但今日之势，陛下未能诛臣父，而臣父足以危陛下。
现代文：我听说君主和父亲是一回事，但是如今的形势是，陛下未能诛除我的父亲，而我的父亲却足以危及陛下。
English: I have heard that the sovereign and the father are one and the same, but the situation now is that His Majesty has not been able to get rid of my father, but my father is enough to endanger His Majesty.

古文：陛下待臣厚，臣胡人，性直，故不忍不言耳。 
现代文：陛下对待我这么好，胡人性情直率，所以我不忍心不说啊。 
English: Your Majesty treats me so well, and Hu's personality is straightforward, so I can't help but say it.

古文：上惊曰： 知卿大臣爱子，当为朕委曲弥缝，而密奏之！ 
现代文：德宗惊讶地说： 朕知道你是大臣李怀光所疼爱的儿子，你应该为朕婉转曲折地在其中弥补裂痕，而你地秘密上奏！ 
English: Surprised, Dezong said, "I know that you are the beloved son of Minister Li Huai Quang. You should work for me to make up for the rift, and you should play secretly!"

古文：对曰： 臣父非不爱臣，臣非不爱其父与宗族也；顾臣力竭，不能回耳。 
现代文：李璀回答说： 我的父亲并不是不疼爱我，我也并不是不爱我的父亲和宗族。但我已用尽心力，不能拘回。 
English: Li Yan replied: My father didn't not love me, and I didn't not love my father and my family, but I've exhausted my strength and can't hold back.

古文：上曰： 然则卿以何策自免？ 
现代文：德宗说： 这样说来，你用什么办法使自己免除一死呢？ 
English: Dezong said, "So, what can you do to save yourself from death?"

古文：对曰： 臣之进言，非苟求生，臣父败，则臣与之俱死矣，复有何策哉！
现代文：李璀回答说： 我进上此言，不是要苟且求活。我父亲一旦败亡，那我就和他一同死去，还会有什么办法呢！
English: Li Yao replied: "I am not saying this to earn a living. If my father is defeated, I will die with him. What else can I do?

古文：使臣卖父求生，陛下亦安用之！ 
现代文：假如我出卖父亲以求生存，陛下又怎么能用我这种人呢！ 
English: If I betray my father in order to survive, how can His Majesty use someone like me?

古文：上曰： 卿勿死，为朕更至咸阳谕卿父，使君臣父子俱全，不亦善乎！ 
现代文：德宗说： 你别死，为朕再到咸阳开导你的父亲，使君主与臣下、父亲与儿子的伦常都得以保全，不也是很好的吗！ 
English: Dezong said, "Don't die, for my sake, go to Xianyang again to enlighten your father, so that the morals of the monarch and his subjects, father and son, can be preserved. Isn't that also good!

古文：璀至咸阳而还，曰： 无益也，愿陛下备之，勿信人言。
现代文：李璀前往咸阳，回来以后说： 没有效果啊，希望陛下防备我父亲，不要听信别人所说的。
English: After returning from his trip to Xianyang, Li Yao said, "It didn't work. I hope Your Majesty will beware of my father and not listen to what others say."

古文：臣今往，说谕万方，臣父言： 汝小子何知！
现代文：如今我前往劝导，用尽了千方百计，我父亲说： 你小子知道什么！
English: Now I've gone to counseling, exhausted every avenue, and my father says, "What do you know, kid!"

古文：主上无信，吾非贪宝贵也，直畏死耳，汝岂可陷吾入死地邪！  
现代文：圣上不讲信用。我并不贪图富贵但我也怕死啊，你怎么可以把我陷于死地呢！  
English: I am not greedy for wealth, but I am also afraid of death. How could you let me die?

古文：及李泌赴陕，上谓之曰： 朕所以再三欲全怀光者，诚惜璀也。
现代文：到李泌前往陕州时，德宗对他说： 我再三想要保全李怀光的原因，实在是怜惜李璀啊。
English: When Li Xiu was on his way to Shaanxi, Dezong said to him, "The reason why I repeatedly want to preserve Li Huaguang is because I really pity Li Xuan.

古文：卿至，试为朕招之。 
现代文：你到陕州后，试着为朕招抚他吧。 
English: When you get to Shaanxi, try to seduce him for me.

古文：对曰： 陛下未幸梁、洋，怀光犹可降也。
现代文：李泌回答说： 在陛下没有出走梁州、洋州时，还是可以使李怀光投降的，现在却不行了。
English: Li Xiu replied: When His Majesty had not fled to Liangzhou and Yangzhou, it was still possible to make Li Huaguang surrender, but not now.

古文：今则不然，岂有人臣迫逐其君，而可复立于其朝乎！
现代文：哪有臣下逼走了他的君主，还可以再站在朝堂之上的呢！
English: Which of his vassals, having driven away his sovereign, can ever again stand on top of the imperial hall?

古文：纵彼颜厚无惭，陛下每视朝，何心见之！
现代文：即使他脸皮厚，不惭愧，每当陛下上朝之时，看到他会是什么心情呢！
English: Even if he has a thick skin and is not ashamed, what kind of mood will he be in when he sees His Majesty ascending the throne?

古文：臣得入陕，借使怀光请降，臣不敢受，况招之乎！
现代文：我进入陕州后，假如李怀光请求投降，我也不敢接受，何况让我去招抚他呢！
English: After I entered Shaanxi, if Li Huaiguang asked for surrender, I would not dare to accept it, let alone let me go and caress him!

古文：李璀固贤者，必与父俱死矣，若其不死，则亦无足贵也。 
现代文：李璀固然是贤明的人，他一定会与他父亲一起去死了。如果他不肯死，那也没有可贵之处了。 
English: Although Li Yan was a wise man, he would surely die with his father. If he did not want to die, there would be nothing precious about it.

古文：及怀光死，璀先刃其二弟，乃自杀。
现代文：及至李怀光死后，李璀事先杀了他的两个弟弟。然后便自杀了。
English: After Li Huaguang's death, Li Yao killed his two younger brothers before committing suicide.

古文：朔方将牛名俊断怀光首出降。
现代文：朔方将领牛名俊割下李怀光的头颅出城投降。
English: The Shuo side cut off the head of Li Huaiqing, the leader of Niu Mingjun, and went out of the city to surrender.

古文：河中兵犹万六千人，燧斩其将阎晏等七人，馀皆不问。
现代文：河中兵还有一万六千人，马燧将他们的将领阎晏等七人斩杀，对剩下的人都不予追究。
English: There were still 16,000 soldiers in the river, and Ma Xuan killed seven of them, including their general, Yan Xuan, and did not pursue the rest of them.

古文：燧自辞行至河中平，凡二十七日。
现代文：马燧从告别德宗到平定河中，共用了二十七天。
English: It took 27 days for Ma Wei to go from bidding farewell to Dezong to Pingdinghe.

古文：燧出高郢、李鄘于狱，皆奏置幕下。
现代文：马燧将高郢、李放出监狱，奏请将他们都安置在自己的幕府之中。
English: Ma Jun released Gao Jun and Li from prison, and requested that they all be placed in his own bakufu.

古文：韩游瑰之攻怀光也，杨怀宾战甚力，上命特原其子朝晟，游环遂以朝晟为都虞侯。
现代文：韩游攻打李怀光时，杨怀宾作战甚为出力，德宗命令特别宽恕了他的儿子杨朝晟。于是，韩游任命杨朝晟为都虞候。
English: When Han Yu attacked Li Huai Quang, Yang Huai Bin was very active in the battle, and the Dezong order specially pardoned his son Yang Zhaohui. Therefore, Han Yu appointed Yang Zhaohui as the prefectural governor.

古文：上使问陆贽： 河中既平，复有何事所宜区处？ 
现代文：德守让人询问陆贽说： 河中已经平定，还有什么事情该当处理的？ 
English: "The river has been pacified, what else needs to be dealt with?

古文：令悉条奏。
现代文：让陆贽全部条列出来上奏。
English: Let Lu Qian list all the articles and play them.

古文：贽以河中既平，虑必有希旨生事之人，以为王师所向无敌，请乘胜讨淮西者。
现代文：陆贽认为，河中平定以后，可虑的是必然会有迎合意旨、无端生事的人，认为皇上的军队所向无敌，请求乘胜讨伐淮西。
English: Lu Yao believed that after the river was pacified, it was a matter of concern that there would inevitably be people who would meet the will of the emperor and cause trouble for no reason, think that the emperor's army was invincible, and request to take advantage of the victory to fight against Huaixi.

古文：李希烈必诱谕其所部及新附诸帅曰： 奏天息兵之旨，乃因窘急而言，朝廷稍安，必复诛伐。 
现代文：李希烈也必然会诱导他的军队以及新近归附的各节帅说： 在奉天所颁布的停止用兵的诏旨，是因处境窘困而讲的，只要朝廷稍微安定下来，是一定会再事讨伐的。 
English: Li Xilai was also bound to induce his army and the newly-annexed marshals to say: The edict to stop the use of troops, which was issued by Emperor Mungtian, was due to the difficult situation. As long as the imperial court is somewhat stabilized, it will certainly fight again.

古文：如此，则四方负罪者孰不自疑，河朔、青齐固当响应，兵连祸结，赋役繁兴，建中之忧，行将复起。
现代文：河朔、青齐肯定是要响应他的。战事连绵，灾祸不断，赋税纷繁，力役频兴，建中年间的忧患便将再次发生了。
English: The rivers Shuo and Qingqi are sure to respond to him. The wars are continuous, the disasters are continuous, the taxes are numerous, the forced laborers are frequent, and the troubles during the construction period will happen again.

古文：乃上奏，其略曰： 福不可以屡徼，幸不可以常觊。 
现代文：陆贽于是进上奏章，大致说： 福缘是不能够屡次侥幸取得的，而侥幸也不是能够经常妄自希图的。
English: Lu Wei then went on to recite the stanzas, saying roughly: Fortune cannot be repeatedly achieved by chance, and luck cannot be constantly hoped for.

古文：又曰： 臣姑以生祸为忧，而未敢以获福为贺。 
现代文：我姑且认为今后会发生祸患而为陛下担忧，不敢认为今后会获得福缘而向陛下庆贺。 
English: Let me say that I am worried about His Majesty because I think that there will be disasters in the future, and I dare not celebrate His Majesty because I think that there will be blessings in the future.

古文：又曰： 陛下怀悔过之深诚，降非常之大号，所在宣扬之际，闻者莫不涕流。
现代文：他又说： 陛下怀着深切悔过的诚意，贬抑非常式的尊号，当诏书在各处宣布时，听到的人没有不流下眼泪的。
English: He added: "His majesty, with deeply repentant sincerity, abjures the unseemly honorific. When the edict is proclaimed everywhere, there is no one who hears it without shedding tears.

古文：假王叛换之夫，削伪号以请罪。观衅首鼠之次，一纯诚以效勤。 
现代文：自署王号的横蛮跋扈之人，削去伪号，请求治罪；伺机而动迟疑不定的将领，全都诚心诚意地效力勤王。 
English: Those who arrogantly assumed the title of king, stripped off their fake titles and asked to be punished; the hesitant generals who waited for an opportunity to act, all sincerely served the king.

古文：又曰： 曩讨之而愈叛，今释之而毕来。曩以百万之师而力殚，今以咫尺之诏而化洽。
现代文：他又说： 以往讨伐叛乱，叛乱反而更加严重，如今释赦他们，他们反而都来归顺；以往调遣了百万之师而终于兵力穷尽，如今只是颁布了不满一尺的诏书反而德化周遍。
English: He also said: "In the past, we fought against rebellions, but the rebellions became more serious; now, we pardon them, but they all submit; in the past, we dispatched a million divisions and finally exhausted our forces; now, we have only issued a decree of less than one foot, but moralization is everywhere.

古文：是则圣王之敷理道，服暴人，任德而不任兵，明矣；群帅之悖臣礼，拒天诛，图活而不图王，又明矣。
现代文：可见圣明的君王推行促使政治修明的治国之道，使强暴之人心悦诚服，应当运用恩德感召别人，而不是运用兵力征服别人，这是显而易见的了。各镇的节帅违背人臣应有的礼典，抗拒朝廷的诛讨，为的是谋求存活，而不是谋求称王，也是显而易见的了。
English: It is clear that a saintly king should pursue a way of governing the country that promotes political moderation and makes violent people happy. He should use grace to inspire others, rather than using military force to conquer others. It is also clear that the marshals of the towns violated the etiquette due to courtiers and resisted the court's criticism, in order to seek survival, rather than to seek glory.

古文：是则好生以及物者，乃自生之方；施安以及物者，乃自安之术。
现代文：可见希望生存，并将此心普及万物，乃是使自己生存的良方；喜欢安宁，并将此心普及万物，乃是使自己安宁的嘉术。
English: It can be seen that hoping to survive and spreading this mind to all things is a good way to make oneself survive; liking peace and spreading this mind to all things is a good way to make oneself peaceful.

古文：挤彼于死地而求此之久生也，措彼于危地而求此之久安也，从古及今，未之有焉。 
现代文：将那些人推到必死之地，而想让这些人长久生存；将那些人丢到危殆之地，而想让这些人长久安宁，从古至今，没有过这样的事情。 
English: From ancient times to the present, there has never been such a thing as pushing those people to the land of death, but wanting to let these people live for a long time; throwing those people to the dangerous land, but wanting to let these people live in peace for a long time.

古文：又曰： 一夫不率，阖境罹殃；一境不宁，普天致扰。 
现代文：他又说： 一个人不遵循皇上的教令，整个地区都遭受祸殃；一个地区不得安宁，普天下都招致骚扰。 
English: He also said: "If one person does not follow the emperor's edict, the whole region will suffer calamity; if one region does not have peace, the whole world will be harassed."

古文：又曰： 亿兆污人，四三叛帅，感陛下自新之旨，悦陛下盛德之言，革面易辞，且修臣礼，其于深言密议固亦未尽坦然，必当聚心而谋，倾耳而听，观陛下所行之事，考陛下所誓之言。
现代文：他又说： 众多的昏昧无知的人们，以及三四个背叛朝廷的节帅，为陛下容许重新作人的宗旨而感动，为陛下含蕴着盛美德行的话语而喜悦，洗心革面，改易不敬之辞，并且奉行人臣之礼。然而，他们对陛下深切坦诚的谈话和体贴周到的议论，肯定还没有完全明白理解，他们必然要专心谋划，侧耳细听，观察陛下所做的事情，考究陛下所发的誓言。
English: He also said, "A large number of dim and ignorant people, as well as three or four generals who have betrayed the imperial court, are moved by the purpose of allowing His Majesty to become a man again, rejoice in His Majesty's words of great virtue, change their hearts, change their disrespectful words, and practice the courtesy of a courtier. However, they certainly have not fully understood His Majesty's deep and candid conversation and thoughtful discussion, and they must concentrate on planning, listen carefully, observe what His Majesty has done, and study the oaths issued by His Majesty.

古文：若言与事符，则迁善之心渐固；傥事与言背，则虑祸之态复兴。 
现代文：如果陛下所说的话与所做的事相符合，他们改恶从善的心意就会逐渐牢固；倘若陛下所做的事与所说的话相违背，他们顾虑招致祸患的态度就会重新抬头。 
English: If what His Majesty says is consistent with what they do, their good intentions will gradually strengthen; if what His Majesty does is inconsistent with what they say, their fear of causing harm will re-emerge.

古文：又 硃泚灭而怀光戮，怀光戮而希烈征，希烈傥平，祸将次及，则彼之蓄素疑而怀宿负者，能不为之动心哉！ 
现代文：他又说： 朱灭亡后李怀光受戮，李怀光受戮后李希烈被征讨，倘若李希烈被平定了，祸患又将依次连及别人，那么，那些素积疑虑而久怀野心的人们，能不意志动摇吗！ 
English: He also said, "After Zhu's death, Li Huaguang was slaughtered, and after Li Huaguang was slaughtered, Li Xilai was expropriated. If Li Xilai was pacified, the calamity would spread to others in turn. So, those who have accumulated doubts and have long harbored ambitions, can they not be shaken?

古文：又曰： 今皇运中兴，天祸将悔，以逆泚之偷居上国，以怀光之窃保中畿，岁未再周，相次枭殄，实众慝惊心之日，群生改观之时。
现代文：他又说： 如今国家的气运重新兴盛起来，上天降下的祸患将要成为过去。就朱窃居京城，李怀光私占中都而言，在不到两年里，便相继使他们主帅伏诛，全军覆灭，这实在是邪恶之徒震动心魄的日子，是所有生灵改变面貌的时候。
English: He also said: "Nowadays, the country's fortunes are flourishing again, and the calamities brought down by the heavens will become a thing of the past. As far as Zhu Xi lived in Beijing and Li Huai Guang occupied the capital, in less than two years, they successively made their commander surrender and the whole army was destroyed. This is truly the day when the evil doers shook their souls, and it is the time for all beings to change their appearance.

古文：威则已行，惠犹未洽。
现代文：陛下的威严已经显示出来了，但陛下的恩惠还没有普及开来。
English: His Majesty's majesty has been shown, but His grace has not been spread.

古文：诚宜上副天眷，下收物情，布恤人之惠以济威，乘灭贼之威以行惠。 
现代文：陛下诚然应当对上顺应上天的眷顾，对下集合人们的愿望，播散体恤民心的恩惠来增益威严，乘着消灭贼寇的威严来施加恩惠。 
English: It is true that His Majesty should increase his majesty by obeying the providence of heaven above, and gather the wishes of the people below, and spread the grace of compassion for the people to gain majesty, and take advantage of the majesty of eliminating the bandits to impose grace.

古文：又曰： 臣所未敢保其必从，唯希烈一人而已。
现代文：他又说： 我所不敢担保其人一定会顺从朝廷的，只有李希烈一个人罢了。
English: He also said: I dare not guarantee that someone will obey the imperial court, only Li Xilai is the only one.

古文：揆其私心，非不愿从也；想其潜虑，非不追悔也。
现代文：推测他私下的意图，不是不愿顺从朝廷；料想他暗中的考虑，也还不是不打算悔改前非。
English: To surmise his private intentions is not to disobey the court; to anticipate his secret thoughts is not to fail to repent.

古文：但以猖狂失计，已窃大号，虽荷陛下全宥之恩，然不能不自面见于天地之间耳。
现代文：但是，他因考虑不周，肆意妄行，已经窃称帝号，即使他承受陛下保全宽宥他的恩典，但他却不能不自觉无颜生活在天地之间。
English: However, due to his ill-considered and reckless behavior, he has already stolen the imperial title. Even if he receives the grace of His Majesty to preserve and forgive him, he cannot but consciously live between heaven and earth without shame.

古文：纵未顺命，斯为独夫，内则无辞以起兵，外则无类以求助，其计不过厚抚部曲，偷容岁时，心虽陆梁，势必不致。
现代文：即使他不肯顺从朝命，却已成了独夫民贼，对内则没有发兵起事的理由，对外则没有寻求援助的同伙，他的办法不过是对部下多加抚慰，苟且偷生，拖延时间，虽然心想任意横行，无奈形势必定使他难以办到。
English: Even if he does not want to obey the orders of the government, he has already become a one-man bandit. There is no reason for him to send troops to the country, and there is no ally to seek assistance from the outside. His way is just to comfort his subordinates more, steal their lives, and delay time. Although he wants to do whatever he wants, the helpless situation will certainly make it difficult for him to do it.

古文：陛下但敕诸镇各守封疆，彼既气夺算穷，是乃狴牢之类，不有人祸，则当鬼诛。
现代文：陛下只要敕令诸镇各自守卫本镇的疆界，他既然胆气已去，计谋算尽，就只是个等待收押的囚徒，不是遭受人祸，便会应着鬼报。
English: As long as His Majesty commands the towns to guard their own borders, he is a prisoner waiting to be taken into custody, since his courage has gone and his plans have been exhausted. If he does not suffer a man-made disaster, he will have to answer to the devil.

古文：古之不战而屈人之兵者，斯之谓欤！
现代文：古人所说不用接战而能使敌兵屈服，就是这个意思吧！ 
English: That's what the ancients meant when they said that they could subdue the enemy without engaging in battle!

古文：丁卯，诏以 李怀光尝有功，宥其一男，使续其后，赐之田宅，归其首及尸使葬。
现代文：丁卯，德宗颁诏说： 李怀光曾经立下功劳，现宽宥他的一个儿子，使此子承续他，赐给此子田地住宅，将李怀光的头颅和尸身送回，让此子殡葬。
English: Dingwu, Dezong issued an edict saying: Li Huaiguang once made a great achievement, now pardon one of his sons, make this son succeed him, give this son a field residence, send Li Huaiguang's head and body back, and let this son be buried.

古文：加马燧兼侍中，浑瑊检校司空，馀将卒赏赉各有差。
现代文：加封马燧兼任侍中，加封浑为检校司空，其余将士的赏赐各分等级不同。
English: In addition, Gaofen Ma Jun also served as a chamberlain, Gaofen Hun was a school inspector, and the rest of the soldiers were awarded different grades.

古文：诸道与淮西连接者，宜各守封疆，非彼侵轶，不须进讨。
现代文：与淮西疆界连接的各道，应该守卫本境疆土，只要不是他们突然袭击，就不必要进兵讨伐。
English: The provinces connected with the Huaixi border should guard their own territory. As long as they do not suddenly attack, there is no need to march in.

古文：李希烈若降，当待以不死，自馀将士百姓，一无所问。 
现代文：假如李希烈投降，应该让他留条活命，其余将士与百姓，一概不予追究。
English: If Li Xilai surrenders, he should be allowed to live, and the rest of the soldiers and people will not be investigated.

古文：初，李晟尝将神策军戍成都，及还，以营妓高洪自随。
现代文：当初，李晟曾经带领神策军戍守成都，等到回去时，他便让营中的妓女高洪跟随着自己。
English: At first, Li Yao used to lead the Shen Zhe army to defend Chengdu. When he returned, he let the prostitute Gao Hong in the camp follow him.

古文：西川节度使张延赏怒，追而还之，由是有隙。
现代文：西川节度使张延赏很生气，追上李晟，将高洪索回，由此二人有了嫌隙。
English: Zhang Yanbo was very angry because of the Nishikawa festival. He caught up with Li Yao and brought Gao Hong back. As a result, the two had a rift.

古文：至是，刘从一有疾，上召延赏入相。晟表陈其过恶，上重违其意，以延赏为左仆射。
现代文：及至此时，刘从一得了疾病，德宗传召张延赏出任宰相，李晟上表陈述张延赏的过失与缺点，德宗不愿意违背他的意愿，便任命张延赏为左仆射。
English: By this time, Liu had fallen ill, and Dezong summoned Zhang Yanbo to serve as prime minister. Li Xi stated Zhang Yanbo's faults and shortcomings on the table, and Dezong did not want to go against his wishes, so he appointed Zhang Yanbo as his left-hand man.

古文：骆元光将杀徐庭光，谋于韩游瑰曰： 庭光辱吾祖考，吾欲杀之，马公必怒，公能救其死乎！ 
现代文：骆元光准备杀掉徐庭光，便与韩游计议说： 徐庭光侮辱我的祖先，我想杀他，马公必然大怒，你能救我一命吗？ 
English: Luo Yuanguang was preparing to kill Xu Tingguang, so he discussed with Han You: Xu Tingguang insulted my ancestor, I want to kill him, Magong is bound to be furious, can you save my life?

古文：游瑰曰： 诺。 
现代文：韩游说： 好吧。 
English: Han You said, "Okay."

古文：壬午，遇庭光于军门之外，揖而数其罪，命左右碎斩之。
现代文：壬午，骆元光在军营大门外遇到徐庭光，拱手相见后，便数说他的罪过，命令随从人员零刀碎剐地杀死了他。
English: At noon, Luo Yuanguang met Xu Tingguang outside the gate of the military camp. After a brief meeting, he confessed his sins and ordered his attendants to kill him in pieces.

古文：入见马燧，顿首请罪，燧大怒曰： 庭光已降，受朝廷官爵，公不告辄杀之，是无统帅也 欲斩之。
现代文：骆元光入营见马燧，伏地叩头，请求治罪，马燧非常气愤地说： 徐庭光已经归降，接受了朝廷封拜的官爵，你不告诉我一声就将他杀死，这是目无统帅！ 
English: Luo Yuanguang entered the camp to see Ma Jun, bowed down and begged for punishment. Ma Jun said angrily, "Xu Tingguang has surrendered and accepted the official title of the imperial court. If you don't tell me, I will kill him. This is a blind leader!"

古文：游瑰曰： 元光杀裨将，公犹怒如此。
现代文：马燧准备斩杀骆元光，韩游说： 骆元光杀了一个副将，你尚且愤怒成这个样子。
English: Ma Yu is preparing to kill Luo Yuan Guang, Han Yu said: Luo Yuan Guang killed a vice-general, and you are still angry like this.

古文：公杀节度使，天子其谓何！ 
现代文：你杀了节度使，圣上将说你些什么！ 
English: You killed the ambassador, what will the Holy Admiral say about you?

古文：燧默然。浑瑊亦为之请，乃舍之。
现代文：马燧没有说话，浑也为骆元光求情，于是马燧舍弃了骆元光。
English: Ma Qian did not speak, and Hun also pleaded for Luo Yuanguang, so Ma Qian abandoned Luo Yuanguang.

古文：浑瑊镇河中，尽得李怀光之众，朔方军自是分居邠、蒲矣。
现代文：浑镇守河中，得到了李怀光所有的部众，朔方军自此分别屯驻州与蒲州了。
English: Hun Zhen, guarding the middle of the river, got all of Li Huai Guang's subordinates, and the Shuo army was stationed in Zhoushou and Puzhou respectively.

古文：卢龙节度使刘怦疾病，九月，己亥，诏以其子行军司马济权知节度事。
现代文：卢龙节度使刘怦得了重病，九月，己亥，德宗颁诏命令他的儿子行军司马刘济权且代理节度使事务。
English: The Lulong Festival caused Liu Xuan to fall seriously ill. In September, Ji Hai, Emperor Dezong issued an edict ordering his son to march to Sima Liu to raise funds and act as the festival's representative.

古文：怦寻薨。
现代文：不久，刘怦去世。
English: Soon after, Liu Yao passed away.

古文：己未，中书侍郎、同平章事刘从一罢为户部尚书；庚申，薨。
现代文：己未，中书侍郎、同平章事刘从一被罢免为户部尚书。庚申，刘从一去世。
English: In the past, Liu Zongping, the secretary of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office

古文：冬，十月，上祀圜丘，赦天下。
现代文：冬季十月，癸卯，德宗祭祀圜丘，大赦天下。
English: In the winter of October, Yu Yu, the founder of the German Sect, held a religious ceremony at Yu Yu Hill, and was pardoned by the emperor.

古文：十二月，甲戌，户部奏今岁入贡者凡百五十州。
现代文：十二月，甲戌，户部奏，本年共有一百五十州入朝进贡。
English: In December, a total of one hundred and fifty states paid tribute to the emperor.

古文：于阗王曜上言： 兄胜让国于臣，今请复立胜子锐。 
现代文：于阗王尉迟曜上奏说： 我哥哥尉迟胜将于阗国让给了我，现在请朝廷再册立尉迟胜的儿子尉迟锐。 
English: "My brother, Lt. Hibikatsu, will cede my country to me. Now, please ask the Imperial Court to re-enlist Lt. Hibikatsu's son, Lt. Hibikatsu.

古文：上以锐检校光禄卿，还其国。
现代文：德宗任命尉迟锐为检校光禄卿，让他返回于阗国。
English: Emperor Dezong appointed Lieutenant Chi Rui as the inspector of Guanglu County, and let him return to Shan State.

古文：胜固辞曰： 曜久行国事，国人悦服。
现代文：尉迟胜一再推辞说： 尉迟曜长时间办理国家事务，国中百姓心悦诚服。
English: He repeatedly declined to do so, saying: "I have been handling state affairs for a long time, and the people of the country are sincerely satisfied.

古文：锐生长京华，不习其俗，不可往。 
现代文：尉迟锐生长在京城，不熟悉于阗风俗，不能前往。 
English: He grew up in Beijing and is not familiar with the eunuch customs, so he can't go.

古文：上嘉之，以锐为韶王咨议。
现代文：德宗嘉许尉迟胜，任命尉迟锐为韶王李暹的咨议。
English: Dezong Jiaxu won the battle and appointed Jia Rui as the adviser to King Li Si.

古文：贞元二年丙寅，公元七八六年
现代文：贞元二年
English: In the second year of the Jōgen era

古文：春，正月，壬寅，以吏部侍郎刘滋为左散骑常侍，与给事中崔造、中书舍人齐映并同平章事。
现代文：春季，正月，壬寅，德宗任命吏部侍郎刘滋为左散骑常侍，与给事中崔造、中书舍人齐映一并任同平章事。
English: In the spring, in the first month of the year, in Ren'in, Emperor Dezong appointed Liu Zhi, the attendant of the cadre department, as the left riding attendant, and together with Cui Zou and Qi Ying, the attendant of the middle school, he was appointed to the same rank.

古文：滋，子玄之孙也。
现代文：刘滋是刘子玄的孙子。
English: Liu Zhi is the grandson of Liu Zixuan.

古文：造少居上元，与韩会、卢东美、张正则为友，以王佐自许，时人谓之 四夔 。
现代文：崔造早年住在上元县，与韩会、卢东美、张正则结为朋友，自认为是帝王的辅佐，当时的人们将他们四人比作虞舜的四位贤臣，称为 四夔 。
English: In his early years, Cui Zuo lived in Shangyuan County. He made friends with Han Hui, Lu Dongmei, and Zhang Zhengsheng, and considered himself to be the emperor's assistant. At that time, people compared the four of them to the four wise men of Gu Yao, and called them the Four Wise Men.

古文：上以造在朝廷敢言，故不次用之。滋、映多让事于造。
现代文：德宗因崔造在朝廷中敢于言事，所以不拘等次地任用了他，刘滋、齐映往往将事情推给崔造办理。
English: Because Cui Zuo dared to speak his mind in the imperial court, Emperor Dezong appointed him regardless of the situation. Liu Zi and Qi Ying often pushed things to Cui Zuo to handle.

古文：造久在江外，疾钱谷诸使罔上之弊，奏罢水陆运使、度支巡院、江、淮转运使等，诸道租赋悉委观察使、刺史遣官部送诣京师。
现代文：崔造长期生活在长江以南，憎恨执掌钱谷诸使欺瞒上级的弊端，上奏罢除了水陆运使、度支巡院、江淮转运使等，各道的赋税全委托观察使、刺史派遣官吏送至京城。
English: Cui Zuo lived in the south of the Yangtze River for a long time. He hated the malpractice of those in charge of the Qiantu to deceive their superiors. He dismissed the Water and Land Transport Envoy, the Water Supply and Sewerage Inspection Office, and the River Huai Transfer Envoy, and sent the tax inspectors and historians to the capital.

古文：令宰相分判尚书六曹：齐映判兵部，李勉判刑部，刘滋判吏部、礼部，造判户部、工部，又以户部侍郎元琇判诸道盐铁、榷酒，吉中孚判度支两税。
现代文：德宗命令宰相分别兼管尚书省六曹：齐映兼管兵部，李勉兼管刑部，刘滋兼管吏部和礼部，崔造兼管户部和工部。还让户部侍郎元兼管诸道盐铁和酒类专营，让吉中孚兼管度支两税。
English: Dezong ordered the chancellor to supervise the six departments of Shangshu separately: Qi Ying supervise the military department, Li Tsuen supervise the criminal department, Liu Zhi supervise the administrative department and the ceremonial department, and Cui Zuo supervise the household department and the engineering department. He also asked the head of the household department to supervise the salt, iron and liquor franchises of various provinces, and let Jizhongfu supervise the two taxes.

古文：李希烈将杜文朝寇襄州，二月，癸亥，山南东道节度使樊泽击擒之。
现代文：李希烈的将领杜文朝侵犯襄州。二月，癸亥，山南东道节度使樊泽进击并擒获了他。
English: Du Wen, Li Xilai's general, invaded Xiangzhou. In February, at the time of the Year of the Pig, the Shannan Host Festival made Heze attack and capture him.

古文：崔造与元琇善，故使判盐铁。
现代文：崔造与元友好，所以让他兼管盐铁。
English: Cui Zuo was friendly with Yuan, so he let him be in charge of salt and iron.

古文：韩滉奏论盐铁过失；甲戌，以琇为尚书右丞。
现代文：韩上奏议论盐铁事务中的过失。甲戌，德宗任命元为尚书右丞。
English: Han Shangso discussed the fault in the salt and iron affairs. Armor, Dezong appointed Yuan as Shang Shujie.

古文：陕州水陆运使李泌奏： 自集津至三门，凿山开车道十八里，以避底柱之险。 
现代文：陕州水陆运使李泌上奏说： 请准许由集津到三门，凿穿山石，开辟车道十八里，以便避开底柱天险。 
English: Li Xiu, the commander of the Shaanxi Water and Land Transport Company, said in his report: Please allow us to cut through the rock from Jijin to Sanmen, and open up a lane of eighteen miles, so as to avoid the danger of the pillar.

古文：是月道成。
现代文：就在本月内，车道告竣。
English: Just this month, the driveway was completed.

古文：三月，李希烈别将寇郑州，义成节度使李澄击破之。
现代文：三月，李希烈的别将侵犯郑州，义成节度使李澄击败了他。
English: In March, Li Xilai's vanguard invaded Zhengzhou, and the Yicheng Festival made Li Cheng defeat him.

古文：希烈兵势日蹙，会有疾。夏，四月，丙寅，大将陈仙奇使医陈山甫毒杀之。
现代文：李希烈军的形势日益紧迫，恰好他生了病，夏季，四月，丙寅，大将陈仙奇指使医生陈山甫将他毒死。
English: The situation of Li Xilai's army became more and more urgent. He happened to be ill. In the summer, in April, General Chen Xianqi ordered the doctor Chen Shanfu to poison him.

古文：因以兵悉诛其兄弟妻子，举众来降。
现代文：陈仙奇于是派兵将李希烈的兄弟、妻子、儿女全部诛杀，率众前来投降。
English: Chen Xianqi then sent soldiers to kill all of Li Xilai's brothers, wife, and children, and led the crowd to surrender.

古文：甲申，以仙奇为淮西节度使。
现代文：甲申，德宗任命陈仙奇为淮西节度使。
English: Jiashen, Dezong appointed Chen Xianqi as the Huaixi Festival envoy.

古文：关中仓廪竭，禁军或自脱巾呼于道曰： 拘吾于军而不给粮，吾罪人也！ 
现代文：关中粮食库存已经用光，禁军中有人摘下头巾，在道上大喊： 把我拘束在军中，但不给粮食，我简直成罪人了！ 
English: Guanzhong's grain reserves have been exhausted, and some members of the Forbidden Army have taken off their headscarves and shouted on the road: "If you keep me in the army but don't give me grain, I'll become a criminal!"

古文：上忧之甚，会韩滉运米三万斛至陕，李泌即奏之。
现代文：德宗甚为忧虑，适逢韩将三万斛米运到陕州。李泌当即奏报朝廷。
English: Emperor Dezong was very worried when Han transported thirty thousand mu of rice to Shaanxi Province. Li Xiu immediately reported this to the imperial court.

古文：上喜，遽至东宫，谓太子曰： 米已至陕，吾父子得生矣！ 
现代文：德宗大喜，匆忙来到东宫，对太子说： 米已运到陕州，我父子能够活下去了！ 
English: Dezong Daxi hurried to the East Palace and said to the prince: The rice has been shipped to Shaanxi, my father and son can live!

古文：时禁中不酿，命于坊市取酒为乐。
现代文：当时，宫廷中不造酒，德宗让人上街取酒回来作乐。
English: At that time, the court did not make wine, and Emperor Dezong had people go to the streets to get wine and then come back to make music.

古文：又遣中使谕神策六军，军士皆呼万岁。
现代文：德宗又派遣中使告诉神策六军，军中将士都高呼万岁。
English: Emperor Dezong also sent an envoy to tell the six armies of the divine policy, and the lieutenant generals of the army shouted "long live."

古文：时比岁饥馑，兵民率皆瘦黑，至是麦始熟，市有醉人，当时以为嘉瑞。
现代文：当时，由于连年饥荒，将士、百姓全都又瘦又黑。至此，麦子开始成熟，街市中有了醉酒之人，当时认为这是嘉兆瑞象。
English: At that time, due to years of famine, the soldiers and the people were all thin and dark. At this time, the wheat began to ripen, and there were drunk people in the market. At that time, it was thought that this was Jia Zha Rui Xiang.

古文：人乍饱食，死者复伍之一。
现代文：人们骤然吃得很饱，因此而致死的人又有五分之一。
English: A fifth of deaths were caused by people eating too much too quickly.

古文：数月，有肤色乃复故。
现代文：过了几个月，人们皮肤的颜色才恢复原状。
English: It took months for people's skin color to return to normal.

古文：以横海军使程日华为节度使。
现代文：德宗任命横海军使程日华为节度使。
English: Emperor Dezong appointed the envoy of the Chinese Navy to visit Japan and the envoy of the Chinese Navy to visit Japan.

古文：秋，七月，淮西兵马使吴少诚杀陈仙奇，自为留后。
现代文：秋季七月，淮西兵马使吴少诚杀死陈仙奇，自任留后。
English: In the autumn of July, Wu Shao-cheng was ordered by Huaxi soldiers and horses to kill Chen Xianqi, but he remained in his post.

古文：少诚素狡险，为李希烈所宠任，故为之报仇。
现代文：吴少诚素来狡猾阴险，被李希烈所眷宠信任，所以吴少诚为他报仇。
English: Wu Shaocheng has always been cunning and insidious. He was favored and trusted by Li Xilai, so Wu Shaocheng took revenge for him.

古文：己酉，以虔王谅为申、光、随、蔡节度大使，以少诚为留后。
现代文：己酉，德宗任命虔王李谅为申、光、随、蔡节度大使，任命吴少诚为留后。
English: In addition, De Zong appointed Qian Wang Lijun as the ambassador of Shen, Guang, Su and Cai to the festival, and appointed Wu Shao Cheng as the successor.

古文：以陇右行营节度使曲环为陈许节度使。
现代文：德宗任命陇右行营节度使曲环为陈许节度使。
English: Emperor Dezong appointed Zou Zuoying as the festival envoy and Qu Huan as the Chen Xu festival envoy.

古文：陈许荒乱之馀，户口流散。
现代文：在兵荒马乱之后，陈许地区户口流亡散失。
English: After the War Horse Disturbance, the Hukou in Chenxu District were dispersed.

古文：曲环以勤俭率下，政令宽简，赋役平均，数年之间，流亡复业，兵食皆足。
现代文：曲环以勤俭的作风约束部下，行政措施与法令都很宽和简明，赋税劳役平均，在几年时间里，流离亡散的人们又重操旧业，兵马与粮食都充足起来。
English: Qu Huan disciplined his subordinates with a diligent and frugal work style, administrative measures and laws were very broad and concise, taxes and labor were average, and in a few years, the displaced people resumed their old occupations, and soldiers and horses and grain were sufficient.

古文：八月，癸未，义成节度使李澄薨，其子克宁谋总军务，秘不发丧。
现代文：八月，癸未，义成节度使李澄去世，他的儿子李克宁图谋总揽军中事务，隐秘死讯，暂不公告于众。
English: In August, shortly before the Yicheng Festival, Li Cheng died. His son, Li Kening, plotted to take over the military affairs, and kept the news of his death secret, not announcing it to the public.

古文：丙戌，吐蕃尚结赞大举寇泾、陇、邠、宁，掠人畜，芟禾稼，西鄙骚然，州县各城守，诏浑将万人，骆元光将八千人屯咸阳以备之。
现代文：丙戌，吐蕃尚结赞大规模地侵犯泾州、陇州、州、宁州，掳掠人口与牲畜，收割庄稼，西部边境骚动不安，州县各自据城防守。德宗颁诏命令浑带领一万人，骆元光带领八千人在咸阳驻扎，以防御吐蕃。
English: On a large scale, Emperor Goryeo, Emperor Taizong, Emperor Shangjizan of Tibet invaded Bozhou, Bozhou, Shanzhou and Ningzhou, plundered people and livestock, harvested crops, the western border was restless, and each prefecture defended its city. Emperor Dezong issued an edict to lead ten thousand people, and Emperor Luo Yuanguang led eight thousand people stationed in Xianyang to defend Tibet.

古文：初，上与常侍李泌议复府兵，泌因为上历叙府兵自西魏以来兴废之由，且言： 府兵平日皆安居田亩，每府有折冲领之，折冲以农隙教习战陈。
现代文：当初，德宗与李泌计议恢复府兵，李泌因而为德宗依次叙述自西魏以来府兵兴起与废弃的原由，还说： 在平时，府兵都安心耕种田地，每府设置折冲府统领府兵，折冲府利用农闲时节教给府兵演练战阵。
English: At first, Dezong and Li Xiu planned to restore the prefectural soldiers. Li Xiu thus described for Dezong in turn the reasons for the rise and abandonment of the prefectural soldiers since the Western Wei Dynasty, and said: In peacetime, the prefectural soldiers are safe to cultivate the fields, each prefecture is set up to lead the prefectural soldiers, and the prefectural soldiers are taught to practice the battle lines during the off-season.

古文：国家有事征发，则以符契下其州及府，参验发之，至所期处。
现代文：当国家有事，需要征调府兵时，便将调动兵马的符节下达府兵所在的州与府，经过参验，发出府兵。
English: When there is an emergency in the country and it is necessary to conscript prefectural soldiers, the troops and horses will be mobilized and issued to the prefectures and prefectures where the prefectural soldiers are located. After participation, the prefectural soldiers will be sent out.

古文：将帅按阅，有教习不精者，罪其折冲，甚者罪及刺史。
现代文：府兵来到指定地点，经过将帅的审查和检阅，凡有教练演习不合标准的，要制裁府兵所在的折冲府长官，严重不合标准的，制裁还要牵连到该州刺史。
English: The soldiers came to the designated place, after the review and inspection of the general, if there is a coach exercise that is not up to standard, it is necessary to sanction the governor of the province where the soldiers are located, and if it is seriously substandard, the sanctions will also be implicated in the history of the state.

古文：军还，则赐勋加赏，便道罢之。
现代文：罢兵以后，赐给勋官名号，颁发奖赏，由罢兵处各取方便路径，回到本地。
English: After the parade, the names of the officers were given, awards were given, and everyone took a convenient route from the parade office to return to the local area.

古文：行者近不逾时，远不经岁。
现代文：凡是应征的人，时间短的，不超过三个月，时间长的，不超过一年。
English: All those who apply for enlistment shall serve for a short period of not more than three months, and for a long period of not more than one year.

古文：高宗以刘仁轨为洮河镇守使以图吐蕃，于是始有久戍之役。
现代文：高宗任命刘仁轨为洮河镇守使，以便经营吐蕃，由此才有长期屯戍的兵役。
English: Gao Zong appointed Liu Renluo as the town marshal of Luohe in order to manage Tuyi, which led to the long-term military service.

古文：武后以来，承平日久，府兵浸堕，为人所贱，百姓耻之，至蒸熨手足以避其役。
现代文：武后在位以来，天下太平的日子长了，府兵逐渐没落，被人们看得轻贱了，百姓以当府兵为耻辱，以至于有为了逃避兵役而烫伤手足的。
English: Since Empress Wu has been on the throne, the days of peace and tranquility in the world have become longer. The Imperial Guard has gradually declined and is now looked down upon by the people. The people consider it a disgrace to be an Imperial Guard, so much so that there are people who burn their hands and feet in order to avoid military service.

古文：又，牛仙客以积财得宰相，边将效之。
现代文：再者，牛仙客因积聚财货而得以出任宰相，边疆的将领都学着他的样子去做。
English: Furthermore, Niu Xianke was able to serve as prime minister due to his accumulation of wealth and goods, and the generals on the frontier learned from his example.

古文：山东戍卒多赍缯帛自随，边将诱之寄于府库，昼则若役，夜絷地牢，利其死而没入其财。
现代文：山东戍边的士兵常常随身带着丝帛，边地的将领诱骗他们把丝帛寄存到仓库中，白天让他们服苦役，晚上将他们拘囚在地牢中，希望他们死亡以没收他们的财物。
English: Shandong soldiers often carry silk cocoons with them. Local generals trick them into storing the cocoons in warehouses, make them do hard labor during the day, and imprison them in dungeons at night, hoping they will die so that they can confiscate their property.

古文：故自天宝以后，山东戍卒还者什无二三，其残虐如此。
现代文：所以，自从天宝年间以后山东戍守边境的士兵能够回来的人十个没有二三，那残酷暴虐的程度就是这样。
English: Therefore, since the time of Tianbao, the number of soldiers from Shandong who have guarded the border who have been able to return is less than two or three out of ten. That is the extent of the cruelty and tyranny.

古文：然未尝有外叛内侮，杀帅自擅者，诚以顾恋田园，恐累宗族故也。
现代文：然而，当时还不曾有外部的叛变和内部的侮乱以及谋杀镇帅、自专旌节的人，这诚然是因为眷恋田地家园，惟恐连累本宗本族的原故啊。
English: However, at that time, there were no external rebellions and internal insults, as well as the murder of town marshals and self-appointed people, which is certainly because of the attachment to the fields and homesteads, but the fear of being implicated in the cause of the clan.

古文：自开元之末，张说始募长征兵，谓之弓广骑，其后益为六军。
现代文：自从开元末年以来，张说开始募集长期征戍的士兵，把他们称作骑，后来将骑增加到六军。
English: Since the end of the first year of the year, Zhang said that he began to recruit soldiers who had been conscripted for a long time, calling them cavalry. Later, the cavalry was increased to six armies.

古文：及李林甫为相，奏诸军皆募人为之。
现代文：到了李林甫出任宰相进，他奏请各军都由募集来的人员组建。
English: When Li Linfu assumed the post of prime minister, he requested that all armies be formed from recruited personnel.

古文：兵不土著，又无宗族，不自重惜，忘身徇利，祸乱遂生，至今为梗。
现代文：士兵们已经不再是本地人在本地当兵，又没有宗族，他们不再自重自异惜，宁可为财利而死，于是灾祸变乱发生了，至今还作梗不止。
English: The soldiers were no longer natives fighting in their own land, they had no kinship, they no longer had any self-respect, they preferred to die for the sake of money, and so the disaster and turmoil occurred and continues to this day.

古文：曏使府兵之法常存不废，安有如此下陵上替之患哉！
现代文：假使府兵制度永远存在而未被废弃，哪里会有纲纪废弛，上下失序的祸患呢！
English: If the system of prefectural troops had existed forever and had not been abolished, where would the scourge of lax discipline and disorder have come from?

古文：陛下思复府兵，此乃社稷之福，太平有日矣。 
现代文：陛下打算恢复府兵，这乃是国家的福气，太平盛世指日可待了。 
English: His Majesty's intention to restore the army is a blessing for the country, and peace and prosperity are just around the corner.

古文：上曰： 俟平河中，当与卿议之。 
现代文：德宗说： 等到将河中平定后，朕自当与你计议此事。 
English: Dezong said, "I will discuss this matter with you after we have pacified the river."

古文：九月，丁亥，诏十六卫各置上将军，以宠功臣。
现代文：九月，丁亥，德宗颁诏命令十六卫各自设置上将军，以表示对功臣的恩宠。
English: In September, Emperor Dinghai and Emperor Dezong issued an edict ordering the 16 emperors to each appoint a high-ranking general to show their favor to the meritorious subject.

古文：改神策左、右厢为左、右神策军，殿前射生左、右厢为殿前左、右射生军，各置大将军二人、将军二人。
现代文：将神策左、右厢改为左、右神策军，将殿前射生左、右厢改为殿前左、右射生军，各自设置大将军两人、将军两人。
English: The left and right compartments of the Shinsaku were changed to the left and right compartments of the Shinsaku, and the left and right compartments of the Shosei in front of the hall were changed to the left and right compartments of the Shosei in front of the hall, with two generals and two generals respectively.

古文：庚寅，李克宁始发父澄之丧，杀行军司马马铉，墨缞出视事，增兵城门。
现代文：庚寅，李克宁开始将父亲李澄的死讯公布于众。他杀掉行军司马马铉，穿着黑色的麻布丧服出来办理事务，在各城门都增加了兵员。
English: In Geng'in, Li Kening began to announce the death of his father, Li Cheng, to the public. He killed the marching sergeant Ma Ma Jun, dressed in a black sackcloth mourning dress to go out to do business, and increased the number of soldiers at each gate.

古文：刘玄佐出师屯境上以制之，且使告谕切至，克宁乃不敢袭位。
现代文：刘玄佐派出军队，在州境上屯扎，以便遏制李克宁，同时让人极为严厉地告诫他，李克宁这才没敢承袭节度使的职位。
English: Liu Xuanzuo sent troops to camp on the state border in order to contain Li Kening, and at the same time had people sternly warn him that Li Kening did not dare to inherit the post of the Minister of State Security.

古文：丁酉，以东都留守贾耽为义成节度使，克宁悉取府库之财夜出，军士从而剽之，比明殆尽。
现代文：丁酉，德宗任命东都留守贾耽为义成节度使。李克宁将库存的资财悉数取出，连夜出走，将士们跟在后面抢劫财物，到天亮时，将他要带走的资物几乎抢劫完了。
English: Ding Xuan and De Zong appointed Jia Tan, who remained in Dongdu, as the envoy to the Yicheng Festival. Li Kening took out all the inventory of assets and fled overnight. The soldiers followed behind and robbed the property. By dawn, he had almost finished robbing the assets he wanted to take away.

古文：淄青兵数千自行营归，过滑州，将佐皆曰： 李纳虽外奉朝命，内畜兼并之志，请馆其兵于城外。 
现代文：淄青兵数千人从行营回来，经过滑州，贾耽的将佐们都说： 虽然李纳表面上遵奉朝廷的命令，骨子里却包藏着吞并土地的意图，请将他的人马安排在城外。 
English: Thousands of soldiers of the Qing Dynasty returned from the camp and passed through the city of Slanting. The generals of Jia Tan all said: Although Li Na obeys the orders of the imperial court on the surface, he conceals the intention of annexing land in his bones. Please arrange his men and horses outside the city.

古文：贾耽曰： 奈何与人邻道而野处其将士乎！ 
现代文：贾耽说： 我们与人家州道相邻，怎么能够让人家的将士住在野外呢！ 
English: Jia Tan said: We are adjacent to other people's state roads, how can we let other people's soldiers live in the open!

古文：命馆于城中。
现代文：他让淄青兵住在城中。
English: He let the indentured servants live in the city.

古文：耽时引百骑猎于纳境，纳闻之，大喜，服其度量，不敢犯也。
现代文：贾耽时常带领一百人骑马到李纳的境内打猎，李纳听说后，大为喜欢。他佩服贾耽的襟怀，不敢侵犯义成。
English: Jia Tan often led a hundred people on horseback to hunt in the territory of Li Na. When Li Na heard about it, he liked it very much. He admired Jia Tan's generosity and did not dare to encroach on Yicheng.

古文：吐蕃游骑及好畤。
现代文：吐蕃游动作战的骑兵已经到达好。
English: The cavalry for the parade has arrived.

古文：乙巳，京城戒严，复遣左金吾将军张献甫屯咸阳。
现代文：乙巳，京城采取了严密的防备措施，还派遣左金吾将军张献甫在咸阳屯驻。
English: At this time, Beijing took strict preventive measures, and also dispatched Zhang Xianfu, the general of Zuo Kingu, to be stationed in Xianyang.

古文：民间传言复欲出幸以避吐蕃，齐映见上言曰： 外间皆言陛下已理装，具糗粮，人情忄凶惧。
现代文：民间传说皇上准备再次出走，以便躲避吐蕃。齐映进见德宗说： 外面都说陛下已经整顿行装，备办干粮，人们的情绪既震惊，又恐惧。
English: Folklore has it that the emperor was preparing to flee again in order to avoid the spitting locusts. Qi Ying Jin met with Dezong and said, "It is said that His Majesty has already packed and prepared dry rations. People's emotions are both shocked and fearful.

古文：夫大福不再，陛下奈何不与臣等熟计之！ 
现代文：一般说来，巨大的福气是不会再出现的，怎么陛下就不肯与我等详细计议一下呢！ 
English: Generally speaking, great blessings do not reappear, so why does His Majesty not want to discuss it with me in detail!

古文：因伏地流涕，上亦为之动容。
现代文：他说着便跪伏于地，流下了眼泪。德宗也被他感动得改变了脸色。
English: As he spoke, he knelt down on the ground and shed tears. Dezong was also moved by him and changed his face.

古文：李晟遣其将王佖将骁勇三千伏于汧城，戒之曰： 虏过城下，勿击其首；首虽败，彼全军而至，汝弗能当也。
现代文：李晟派遣他的将领王带领勇敢善战的士兵三千人在城埋伏下来，告诫他说： 吐蕃军经过城下时，不要向他们的先头部队发起进击。
English: Li Qiye sent his general Wang to lead 3,000 brave and skillful soldiers to lie in ambush in the city and warned him: "When the Tubo army passes under the city, don't attack their vanguard.

古文：不若俟前军已过，见五方旗，虎豹衣，乃其中军也，出其不意击之，必大捷。 
现代文：因为尽管他们被打败了，但他们整个部队开来后，你还是难以抵挡的。不如等他们的先头部队开过去后，当看到军中竖着五方旗，将士穿着虎豹衣时，这便是他们的中军了，这时你出其不意地进击他们，一定能够大获全胜。 
English: Because even though they have been defeated, when their entire army arrives, you will still find it difficult to resist. It is better to wait until their vanguard has passed, and when you see the pentagonal flag standing up in the army and the soldiers wearing tiger and leopard coats, this is their middle army. Then you will attack them unexpectedly and you will surely be able to win a complete victory.

古文：佖用其言，尚结赞败走。
现代文：王采用了李晟所讲的打法，尚结赞战败逃走。
English: Wang adopted the style of play described by Li Xi, but was defeated and fled.

古文：军士不识尚结赞，仅而获免。
现代文：将士们不认识尚结赞，所以他才得以幸免。
English: The generals did not know Shang Qizan, so he was spared.

古文：尚结赞谓其徒曰： 唐之良将，李晟、马燧、浑瑊而已，当以计去之。 
现代文：尚结赞对他的徒众说： 唐朝的良将，只有李晟、马燧、浑三人罢了，我们应当用计策去掉他们。 
English: Shang Jie Zhan said to his disciples: The only good generals of the Tang Dynasty are Li Qian, Ma Qian and Hun San. We should use strategies to get rid of them.

古文：入凤翔境内，无所俘掠，以兵二万直抵城下曰： 李令公召我来，何不出犒我！ 
现代文：他进入凤翔境内，并不掳掠，带着士兵两万人一直开到凤翔城下说： 李令公叫我们到这里来的，为什么不出来犒劳我们！ 
English: He entered the territory of Fengxiang, but did not plunder and pillage. He drove with twenty thousand soldiers all the way to the town of Fengxiang and said: Li Lingong called us here, why not come out and reward us!

古文：经宿，乃引退。
现代文：过了一夜，尚结赞才领着人马退去。
English: After one night, Shang Jie Zan led the troops to retreat.

古文：冬，十月，癸亥，李晟遣蕃落使野诗良辅与王佖将步骑五千袭吐蕃摧砂堡。
现代文：冬季，十月，癸亥，李晟派遣蕃落使野诗良辅与王带领步兵、骑兵五千人袭击吐蕃的摧砂堡。
English: In the winter, in October, in the middle of the year of the pig, Li Qiye dispatched his troops to attack the sand-blasted fort of Tubo with the king leading 5,000 infantry and cavalry.

古文：壬申，遇吐蕃众二万，与战，破之，乘胜逐北，至堡下，攻拔之，斩其将扈屈律悉蒙，焚其蓄积而还。
现代文：壬申，野诗良辅与王军遇到吐蕃军二万人，与他们交战，打败了他们，于是乘胜追击，一直追到摧砂堡下，并攻克了摧砂堡，斩杀了堡中守将扈屈律悉蒙，烧掉了堡中的储备，才收兵回去。
English: In Jinshin, Ye Shi Liang Fu and the king's army encountered the 20,000-strong Tubo army, fought with them, defeated them, and then took advantage of the victory to pursue them all the way to the sand-blasted castle, and conquered the sand-blasted castle, killed the castle's middle guard, Zou Qu Ruxi Meng, burned the reserves in the castle, and then withdrew the troops.

古文：尚结赞引兵自宁、庆北去，癸酉，军于合水之北。
现代文：尚结赞领兵由宁州、庆州向北而去，癸酉，在合水北岸驻扎下来。
English: Shang Jie Zan led the soldiers from Ningzhou and Gyeongju to the north, and stationed them on the north bank of He Shui.

古文：邠宁节度使韩游瑰遣其将史履程夜袭其营，杀数百人。
现代文：宁节度使韩游派遣他的将领史履程在夜间袭击吐蕃的营地，杀了数百人。
English: Ning Jiedu caused Han Yu to send his general Shih Quan to attack the camp in Tubo at night, killing hundreds.

古文：吐蕃追之，游瑰陈于平川，潜使人鼓于西山。虏惊，弃所掠而去。
现代文：吐蕃追击史履程，韩游在平川结下阵列，暗中让人在西山擂起鼓来，吐蕃军大惊，丢掉了虏掠的物品，便离去了。
English: In the course of the history of the pursuit of the Tuobao, Han You formed an array in Pingchuan and secretly made people get excited in the West Mountain. The Tuobao army was shocked, lost the plundered items, and left.

古文：十一月，甲午，立淑妃王氏为皇后。
现代文：十一月，甲午，德宗册立淑妃王氏为皇后。
English: In November, in the afternoon of the 1st day of the 1st month, Emperor Dezong made Princess Su the empress.

古文：乙未，韩滉入朝。
现代文：乙未，韩进京朝见。
English: Biyi, I'll see you in the morning when Han comes to Beijing.

古文：丁酉，皇后崩。
现代文：丁酉，皇后去世。
English: On the 12th, Empress Wang passed away.

古文：辛丑，吐蕃寇盐州，谓刺史杜彦光曰： 我欲得城，听尔率人去。 
现代文：辛丑，吐蕃侵犯盐州，对盐州刺史杜彦光说： 我们只打算得到盐州城，听凭你带着人们离开。 
English: Xin Ug, Tubo invaded Yanzhou, and said to Du Yanguang, the governor of Yanzhou, "We only intend to take Yanzhou City. You can take the people and leave."

古文：彦光悉众奔鄜州，吐蕃入据之。
现代文：杜彦光带领全部人众逃奔州，吐蕃军占领了盐州。
English: Du Yanguang led all the people to flee the state, and the Tubo army occupied Yanzhou.

古文：刘玄佐在汴，习邻道故事，久未入朝。
现代文：刘玄佐在汴州，习惯了邻道不尊朝廷的先例，很长时间没有入京朝见。
English: In Zhangzhou, Liu Xuanzuo got used to the precedent of his neighbors not respecting the imperial court, and did not visit the imperial court in Beijing for a long time.

古文：韩滉过汴，玄佐重其才望，以属吏礼谒之。
现代文：韩经过汴州，刘玄佐器重他的才能与声望，以属吏的礼节谒见韩。
English: When Han passed through Bozhou, Liu Xuanjie, valuing his talent and prestige, greeted Han with the courtesy of an official.

古文：滉相约为兄弟，请拜玄佐母。其母喜，置酒见之。
现代文：韩与刘玄佐相互约定结成兄弟，他请求拜望刘玄佐的母亲，刘玄佐的母亲很高兴，备办了酒席会见他。
English: Han and Liu Xuan Cao mutually agreed to become brothers. He asked to visit Liu Xuan Cao's mother. Liu Xuan Cao's mother was very happy and prepared a banquet to meet him.

古文：酒半，滉曰： 弟何时入朝？ 
现代文：在酒至半酣时，韩说： 兄弟什么时候入京朝见呀？ 
English: When the wine was half gone, Han said: When will my brother come to see me in the morning?

古文：玄佐曰： 久欲入朝，但力未办耳。 
现代文：刘玄佐说： 我早就打算入京朝见了，只是物力还不具备罢了。 
English: Liu Xuanzu said: I have long planned to visit Beijing in the morning, but I just don't have the material resources.

古文：滉曰： 滉力可及，弟宜早入朝。
现代文：韩说： 我那里的物力够你用的，兄弟应该及早入京朝见。
English: Han said, "I have enough material resources there for you. My brother should come to Beijing early to see you."

古文：丈母垂白，不可使更帅诸妇女往填宫也！ 
现代文：伯母年事已高，不能让她再带着家中的各位女眷去做没入后宫的执役人啊。 
English: My aunt is getting on in years, and she can no longer be allowed to take the female members of her family with her to work as an executive officer in the harem.

古文：母悲泣不自胜。
现代文：刘玄佐的母亲禁不住悲哀地哭泣起来。
English: Liu Xuanzuo's mother could not help but weep with sorrow.

古文：滉乃遗玄佐钱二十万缗，备行装。
现代文：于是，韩赠给刘玄佐钱二十万缗，让他置办行装。
English: As a result, Han presented Liu Xuanza with a gift of 200,000 baht so that he could purchase the equipment.

古文：滉留大梁三日，大出金帛赏劳，一军为之倾动。
现代文：韩在汴州停留了三天，拿出大量的钱帛奖赏和犒劳将士，全军将士都被他打动了，刘玄佐更是既惊叹，又佩服。
English: Han stayed in Zhangzhou for three days, and brought out a large amount of money, rewards and rewards for soldiers. All soldiers were impressed by him, and Liu Xuanzuo was both amazed and impressed.

古文：玄佐惊服，既而遣人密听之，滉问孔目吏， 今日所费几何？ 
现代文：不久，刘玄佐派人暗中探听韩的情况，听到韩问孔目官说： 今天的费用有多少？ 
English: Soon after, Liu Xuanzuo sent someone to secretly listen to Han's situation. Han was heard asking the official: "How much is today's fee?"

古文：诘责甚细。
现代文：对孔目官的查问和督责都非常详细。
English: The investigation and supervision of the borehole inspector are very detailed.

古文：玄佐笑曰： 吾知之矣！ 
现代文：刘玄佐笑着说： 我明白他的用意啦！ 
English: Liu Xuanza said with a smile: I understand what he's up to!

古文：壬寅，玄佐与陈许节度使曲环俱入朝。
现代文：壬寅，刘玄佐与陈许节度使曲环一起入京朝见。
English: Ren Yin, Liu Xuan Cao and Chen Xu Jiedu accompanied by Qu Huan went to Beijing to meet the emperor.

古文：崔造改钱谷法，事多不集。
现代文：崔造更改钱谷的管理办法，所做的事情多数没有成功。
English: Cui Zuo changed the management method of Qianya, and most of the things he did were not successful.

古文：诸使之职，行之已久，中外安之。
现代文：各使的职务，已经实行了很长时间，朝廷内外都习惯于这种做法。
English: The position of envoys has been in place for a long time, and both inside and outside the court are accustomed to this practice.

古文：元琇既失职，造忧惧成疾，不视事。
现代文：在元被解除了兼管盐铁的职务后，崔造因忧虑和恐惧而病，不能任职治事。
English: After Yuan was relieved of his duties as concurrently in charge of salt and iron, Cui Zuo became ill due to anxiety and fear, and was unable to serve and manage affairs.

古文：既而江、淮运米大至，上嘉韩滉之功。十二月，丁巳，以滉兼度支、诸道盐铁，转运等使，造所条奏皆改之。
现代文：不久，江淮的粮食大批运到，德宗嘉许韩的功劳，十二月，丁巳，让韩兼任度支、诸道盐铁、转运等使，把崔造所条列奏上的办法完全改变了。
English: Soon, large quantities of grain from the Jianghuai River arrived, and Dezong praised Han for his efforts. In December, Ding Si asked Han to also serve as the envoy for the transportation of grain, salt and iron, and transportation of goods, and completely changed the method of Cui Zuo.

古文：吐蕃又寇夏州，亦令刺史托跋乾晖帅众去，遂据其城。
现代文：吐蕃又侵犯夏州，也是让夏州刺史托跋乾晖带领众人离去，于是占领了夏州城。
English: Tubo invaded Xiazhou again, and also let Xiazhou's Zhang Sisto lead the people to leave, and then occupied Xiazhou City.

古文：又寇银州，州素无城，吏民皆溃。
现代文：吐蕃又侵犯银州，银州素来没有城墙，官吏和百姓都逃散了。
English: Tubo invaded Yinzhou again. Yinzhou had never had a city wall, and the officials and people had all fled.

古文：吐蕃亦弃之，又陷麟州。
现代文：吐蕃也丢下了银州，又攻陷麟州。
English: Tubo also abandoned Yinzhou and invaded Linzhou.

古文：韩滉屡短元琇于上。庚申，崔造罢为右庶子，琇贬雷州司户。以吏部侍郎班宏为户部侍郎、度支副使。
现代文：韩屡次向德宗指责元的短处，庚申，崔造被罢黜为右庶子，元被贬为雷州司户，德宗任命吏部侍郎班宏为户部侍郎、度支副使。
English: Han repeatedly pointed out Yuan's shortcomings to Dezong. Goshun and Cui Zuo were ousted as his right illegitimate son, Yuan was demoted to Leizhou governor, and Dezong appointed Banhong, the attendant of the cadre department, as the attendant of the household department and the deputy envoy of the provincial government.

古文：韩游瑰奏请发兵攻盐州，吐蕃救之，则使河东袭其背。
现代文：韩游上奏请求派出兵马攻打盐州，如果吐蕃前去援救盐州，便让河东军从背后袭击他们。
English: Han Yu made a request to send soldiers and horses to attack Yanzhou, and if Tubo went to rescue Yanzhou, he would let the Hedong Army attack them from behind.

古文：丙寅，诏骆元光及陈许兵马使韩全义将步骑万二千人会邠宁军，趣盐州，又使马燧以河东军击吐蕃。
现代文：丙寅，德宗颁诏命令骆元光以及陈许兵马使韩全义带领步兵、骑兵一万二千人，会合宁军，奔赴盐州，同时命令马燧率河东军进击吐蕃。
English: In the imperial edict, Emperor Dezong ordered Luo Yuan Guang and Chen Xu to send Han Quan Yi to lead 12,000 infantry and cavalry to gather the Ning Army and rush to Yanzhou, and ordered Ma Jun to lead the East Hedong Army to attack Tubo.

古文：燧至右州，河曲六胡州皆降，迁于云、朔之间。
现代文：马燧来到石州后，河曲六胡州全部投降，将该处各部落迁徙到云州、朔州一带。
English: After Ma Xuan came to Shizhou, all the tribes in Hexi and Liuzhou surrendered and moved to Yunnan and Shuozhou.

古文：工部侍郎张彧，李晟之婿也。
现代文：工部侍郎张是李晟的女婿。
English: Zhang, the foreman of the engineering department, is Li Yao's son-in-law.

古文：晟在凤翔，以女嫁慕客崔枢，礼重枢过于彧。
现代文：李晟在凤翔时，把女儿嫁给幕府听宾客崔枢，对崔枢的礼遇和器重超过了张。
English: When Li Lan was in Fengxiang, he married his daughter to the shogun to listen to the guest Cui Zu, and the courtesy and weight of Cui Zu exceeded Zhang.

古文：彧怒，遂附于张延赏；给事中郑云逵尝为晟行军司马，失晟意，亦附延赏。
现代文：张恼怒，于是依附了张延赏。给事中郑云逵曾经担任李晟的行军司马，失去李晟的欢心，也依附了张延赏。
English: Zhang was annoyed, so he clung to Zhang Yanbo. During the incident, Zheng Yunyao, who had once served as Li Yan's marching steed, lost Li Yan's favor and also clung to Zhang Yanbo.

古文：上亦忌晟功名。
现代文：德宗对李晟的功劳与声名也心怀顾忌。
English: Dezong also harbored misgivings about Li Yao's achievements and reputation.

古文：会吐蕃有离间之言，延赏等腾谤于朝，无所不至。
现代文：适逢吐蕃人散布离间的流言，张延赏等人便在朝廷中腾起谤言，对李晟的攻击无所不至。
English: When rumors of discord were being spread by the people of Tubo, Zhang Yanbo and others began to make slanderous remarks in the imperial court, attacking Li Xi from all sides.

古文：晟闻之，昼夜泣，目为之肿，悉遣子弟诣长安，表请削发为僧，上慰谕，不许。
现代文：李晟听说后，日夜哭泣，眼睛都哭肿了。他打发子弟全都前往长安，上表请求削发当和尚，德宗劝慰了一悉，没有答应他的请求。
English: After hearing this, Li Lan cried day and night, and his eyes were swollen with tears. He sent all of his sons to Chang'an, and asked to be sent as a monk. De Zong consoled him, but did not agree to his request.

古文：辛未，于朝，见上，自陈足疾，恳辞方镇，上不许。
现代文：辛未，李晟进京朝见，见到德宗，说自己得了脚病，恳切地要求辞去节度使职务，德宗又没有答应。
English: Soon after, Li Xi went to Beijing to see the emperor, and when he saw Dezong, he said that he had a foot ailment and earnestly asked to resign from the post of the regent, but Dezong did not agree.

古文：韩滉素与晟善，上命滉与刘玄佐谕旨于晟，使与延赏释怨。
现代文：韩素来与李晟友好，德宗命令韩与刘玄佐向李晟传达圣旨，让他与张延赏消除嫌怨，李晟接受了诏旨。
English: Han had always been friendly with Li Qiye. Emperor Dezong ordered Han and Liu Xuanzuo to convey the imperial decree to Li Qiye so that he and Zhang Yanbo could eliminate their grudge. Li Qiye accepted the imperial decree.

古文：晟奉诏，滉等引延赏诣晟第谢，结为兄弟，因宴饮尽欢。
现代文：韩等人带着张延赏到李晟的府第中来陪罪，二人结成兄弟，因而设宴饮酒，以尽欢言。
English: Han and others took Zhang Yanbo to Li Yao's middle school to accompany the crime, and the two became brothers, so they set up a banquet and drank alcohol to make merry.

古文：又宴于滉、玄佐之第，亦如之。滉因使晟表荐延赏为相。
现代文：他们又在韩、刘玄佐的宅第中宴饮，情况也和在李晟家中宴饮一样。于是韩让李晟上表荐举张延赏出任宰相。
English: They also had a banquet at Han and Liu Xuanzuo's mansion, and the situation was the same as the banquet at Li Xi's home. Therefore, Han asked Li Xi to nominate Zhang Yanbo as prime minister.

古文：贞元三年丁卯，公元七八七年春，正月，壬寅，以左仆射张延赏同平章事。李晟为其子请婚于延赏，延赏不许。
现代文：贞元三年春季，正月，壬寅，德宗任命左仆射张延赏为同平章事。李晟为他的儿子向张延赏求婚，张延赏没有答应。
English: In the spring of the third year of the Zhengyuan era, in the first month of the year, in Ren'in, Emperor Dezong appointed his left-hand man, Zhang Yanbo, to be the co-emperor. Li Xi proposed marriage to Zhang Yanbo for his son, but Zhang Yanbo did not accept.

古文：晟谓人曰： 武夫性快，释也于杯酒间，则不复贮胸中矣。非如文士难犯，外虽和解，内蓄憾如故，吾得无惧哉！ 
现代文：李晟对人说： 武人性情爽快，在杯酒之间消除了嫌怨，便不再把嫌怨存在心中了，不象文人那样难于冒犯，虽然表面上和解了，内心里包藏的怨恨却仍然如故。我能不心怀畏惧吗？ 
English: Li Yao said to the man: "A warrior's disposition is refreshing. After eliminating the grudge between glasses of wine, the grudge is no longer stored in the heart. It is not as difficult to offend as a literati. Although reconciled on the surface, the grudge hidden in the heart is still the same. Can I not be afraid?

古文：初，李希烈据淮西，选骑兵尤精者为左、右门枪、奉国四将，步兵尤精者为左、右克平十将。
现代文：当初，李希烈占据着淮西时，他选拔特别精锐的骑兵担任左右门枪、奉国四将，选拔特别精锐的步兵担任左右克平十将。
English: At the beginning, when Li Xilai occupied Huaxi, he selected particularly elite cavalrymen to serve as the four generals of the left and right gate guns and to serve the country, and selected particularly elite infantrymen to serve as the ten generals of the left and right Keping.

古文：淮西少马，精兵皆乘骡，谓之骡军。
现代文：淮西缺少马匹，精兵全骑骡子，人们把他们称作骡军。
English: Huaxi was short of horses, and the elite soldiers all rode mules. People called them the Yunnan army.

古文：陈仙奇举淮西降，才数月，诏发其兵于京西防秋。仙奇遣都知兵马使苏浦悉将淮西精兵五千人以行。
现代文：陈仙骑率淮西归降才过了几个月，有诏征调他的人马到京城西边防御吐蕃，陈仙奇派遣都知兵马使苏浦带领着淮西的全部精锐兵马五千人前往。
English: It took only a few months for Chen Xian to ride to Huaxi to surrender. An imperial edict called for his men and horses to go to the west of the capital to defend Tubo. Chen Xianqi dispatched Tochi soldiers and horses to make Su Pu lead all five thousand elite soldiers and horses of Huaxi to go there.

古文：会仙奇为吴少诚所杀，少诚密遣人召门枪兵马使吴法超等使引兵归。浦不之知。
现代文：适逢陈仙奇被吴少诚杀害，吴少诚暗中派人征召门枪兵马使吴法超等人领兵回来，苏浦对发生的事情还不知道。
English: When Chen Xianqi was killed by Wu Shaocheng, Wu Shaocheng secretly sent someone to recruit the gate guards to make Wu Fachao and others lead the troops back. Su Pu still does not know what happened.

古文：法超等引步骑四千自鄜州叛归，浑瑊使其将白娑勒追之，反为所败。
现代文：吴法超等人带领步兵、骑兵四千人由州发起叛乱，返回淮西，浑让他的将领白娑勒追赶吴法超，反而被吴法超打败。
English: Wu Fa Chao and others led four thousand infantry and cavalry to launch a rebellion from the state and returned to Huaxi. He allowed his general Bai Xule to chase Wu Fa Chao, but was defeated by Wu Fa Chao.

古文：丙午，上急遣中使敕陕虢观察使李泌发兵防遏，勿令济河。
现代文：丙午，德宗急忙派遣中使敕令陕虢观察使李泌派兵阻止吴法超，不让他渡过黄河。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd day of the 4th month, Emperor Dezong hurriedly dispatched Gao Ling to Shaanxi to observe Li Xiu and sent soldiers to prevent Wu Fa Chao from crossing the Yellow River.

古文：泌遣押牙唐英岸将兵趣灵宝，淮西兵已陈于河南矣。
现代文：李泌派遣押牙唐英岸领兵奔赴灵宝，这时淮西兵已经在黄河南岸结成阵列了。
English: Li Xiu dispatched the leader of Oshi Tang Yingan to rush to Lingbao. At this time, the Huaixi soldiers had already formed an array on the south bank of the Yellow River.

古文：泌乃命灵宝给其食，淮西兵亦不敢剽掠。
现代文：于是李泌命令灵宝供给他们食物，淮西兵也就不敢到处抢劫。
English: So Li Xiu ordered Lingbao to provide them with food, and the Huai Xi soldiers did not dare to rob everywhere.

古文：明日，宿陕西七里。泌不给其食，遣将将选士四百人分为二队，伏于太原仓之隘道，令之曰： 贼十队过，东伏则大呼击之，西伏亦大呼应之，勿遮道，勿留行，常让以半道，随而击之。 
现代文：第二天，淮西军在陕州城西七里处宿营，李泌不再向他们供给食品，而派遣将领率领精选出来的士兵四百人，分成两队，在太原仓的狭窄通道上埋伏起来，并命令他说： 待淮西军过去十队后，东边的伏兵大声呼喊着进击淮西军，西边的伏兵也大声呼喊着响应东边的伏兵。不要拦遮道路，不要让他们停止不前，要经常让出半边道路，尾随着打击他们。 
English: The next day, the Huaixi army set up camp seven miles west of the city of Shaanxi. Li Xiu no longer supplied them with food, but sent a general to lead four hundred carefully selected soldiers, divided into two teams, to ambush the narrow passage of Taiyuan Cang, and ordered him to say: After the Huaixi army has passed ten teams, the ambushers on the east shouted loudly to attack the Huaixi army, and the ambushers on the west also shouted loudly to respond to the ambushers on the east. Don't block the road, don't let them stop, always give up half the road, and follow them to fight them

古文：又遣虞侯集近村少年各持弓、刀、瓦石蹑贼后，闻呼亦应而追之。
现代文：李泌又派遣虞候集合附近村落中的年轻人，各自拿着弓箭、兵器和瓦砾、石块等跟踪在贼兵的后面，听到呼喊声后，也要大声响应着追击他们。
English: Li Xiu also dispatched the magistrate to gather the young people in the nearby villages, each holding a bow and arrow, weapons and rubble, stones, etc. to follow behind the robbers. After hearing the shouts, they should also loudly respond to chase them.

古文：又遣唐英岸将千五百人夜出南门，陈于涧北。
现代文：李泌又派遣唐英岸带领一千五百人在夜间开出南门，在涧北结下阵列。
English: Li Jie also sent Tang Yingan to lead 1,500 people to open the south gate at night and set up an array in the north of Gan.

古文：明日四鼓，淮西兵起行入隘，两伏发。贼众惊乱，且战且走，死者四之一。
现代文：第二天的四更时分，淮西兵起身行进，进入狭窄的通道，两边伏兵齐发，淮西兵惊惶散乱，边战边逃，死去的人有四分之一。
English: At four o'clock on the second day, the Huaixi soldiers got up and marched into the narrow passage. The soldiers on both sides set an ambush, the Huaixi soldiers panicked and scattered, fleeing while fighting, and a quarter of the people died.

古文：进遇唐英岸，邀而击之，贼众大败，擒其骡军兵马使张崇献。
现代文：接着，他们遇到唐英岸的拦截阻击，淮西兵大败，唐英岸擒获了淮西军的骡军兵马使张崇献。
English: Next, they encountered Tang Yingan's interception and blocking, and the Huaixi soldiers were defeated. Tang Yingan captured Zhang Chongxian, the military envoy of the Huaixi Army.

古文：泌以贼必分兵自山路南遁，又遣都将燕子楚将兵四百自炭窦谷趣长水。
现代文：李泌因淮西军肯定要分兵从山路向南而逃，又派遣都将燕子楚领兵四百人由炭窦谷奔赴长水县。
English: Li Xiu, because the West Huai army was sure to send a detachment of soldiers to escape from the mountain road to the south, also sent four hundred soldiers led by Yan Zi Chu from the Coal Valley to Changshui County.

古文：贼二日不食，屡战皆败，英岸追至永宁东，贼皆溃入山谷。
现代文：淮西军两天没有吃饭，屡战屡败。唐英岸追击到永宁东面时，淮西军全部溃退到山谷中去了。
English: The Western Huai army did not eat for two days and suffered repeated defeats. When Tang Yingan chased them to the east of Yongning, the Western Huai army all retreated into the valley.

古文：吴法超果帅其众太半趣长水，燕子楚击之，斩法超，杀其士卒三分之二。
现代文：吴法超果然率领他一多半人马逃往长水，燕子楚进击淮西军，斩杀吴法超，杀掉他的士兵三分之二。
English: Wu Fa Chao did indeed lead more than half of his men and horses to flee to Changshui. Yan Zi Chu attacked the Huaixi army, killed Wu Fa Chao, and killed two-thirds of his soldiers.

古文：上以陕兵少，发神策军步骑五千往助泌，至赤水，闻贼已破而还。
现代文：德宗因陕州兵马太少，派出神策军步兵、骑兵五千人前去援助李泌，来到赤水时，听说淮西军已经被打败，便返回去了。
English: Because there were too few soldiers and horses in Shaanxi, Dezong sent five thousand infantrymen and cavalrymen of the Shen Cai Army to help Li Xiu. When he came to Chishui, he heard that the Huaixi Army had been defeated, so he returned.

古文：上命刘玄佐乘驿归汴，以诏书缘道诱之，得百三十馀人，至汴州，尽杀之。
现代文：德宗命令刘玄佐乘着驿车返回汴州，沿途以诏书劝诱淮西兵，收得一百三十余人，到汴州后，便将他们全部杀掉。
English: Dezong ordered Liu Xuan Cao to return to Ganzhou by train, and along the way he persuaded the Huaixi soldiers with an edict, collected more than one hundred and thirty people, and killed them all after arriving in Ganzhou.

古文：其溃兵在道，复为村民所杀，得至蔡者，才四十七人。
现代文：淮西军溃散在途中的士兵，又被村落百姓杀死，得以回到蔡州的只有四十七人。
English: The soldiers of the Huaixi Army who were scattered on the way were killed by the villagers, and only forty-seven people were able to return to Caizhou.

古文：吴少诚以其少，悉斩之以闻。且遣使以币谢李泌，为其破叛卒也。
现代文：吴少诚因逃回的人数太少，便将他们全部斩杀，上报朝廷闻知，并且派遣使者送去礼物，感谢李泌，说这是由于李泌诛杀叛乱士卒的原故。
English: As the number of those who fled back was too small, Wu Shao Cheng slaughtered them all, reported it to the imperial court, and sent an envoy to send a gift to thank Li Xiu, saying that this was because Li Xiu had killed the rebel soldiers.

古文：泌执张崇献等六十馀人送京师，诏悉腰斩于鄜州军门，以令防秋之众。
现代文：李泌捉住张崇献等六十余人，将他们送往京城，德宗颁诏命令在州军营门前将他们全部腰斩，借以号令防御吐蕃的将士们。
English: Lixuan captured more than sixty people, including Zhang Chongxian, and sent them to the capital. De Zong issued an edict ordering that they all be beheaded in front of the State Military Camp, as a signal to defend the soldiers of Tubo.

古文：初，云南王閤罗凤陷巂州，获西泸令郑回。
现代文：当初，云南王罗凤攻陷州时，捉获了西泸县令郑回。
English: At first, when Luo Feng, the king of Yunnan, attacked and occupied the state, he captured Zheng Wei, the governor of Xidi County.

古文：回，相州人，通经术，閤罗凤爱重之。
现代文：郑回是相州人，通晓经学，罗凤对他又赏识，又器重。
English: Zheng Hui is a native of Xiangzhou and a scholar of classics. Luo Feng appreciates and respects him.

古文：其子凤迦异及孙异牟寻、曾孙寻梦凑皆师事之，每授学，回得挞之。
现代文：罗凤的儿子凤迦异和孙子异牟寻、曾孙寻梦凑都以事奉老师的礼节对待他，每当教授学识时，郑回可以鞭打学生。
English: Luo Feng's son Feng Jia Yi, grandson Yi Mu Xing, and great-grandson Xing Mengpin all treated him with the etiquette of serving as a teacher. Whenever he taught knowledge, Zheng Hui could whip his students.

古文：及异牟寻为王，以回为清平官。
现代文：及至异牟寻即位为王时，任命郑回为清平官。
English: When Yimuhang ascended the throne as king, he appointed Zheng Hui as Qingping official.

古文：清平官者，蛮相也，凡有六人，而国事专决于回。
现代文：清平官这一职位，便是南诏的国相，当时设置的清平官共有六人，但国家大事只由郑回一人决断。
English: The post of Qingping official was the minister of state of Nanzhao. At that time, there were a total of six Qingping officials, but national affairs were only decided by Zheng Hui.

古文：五人者事回甚卑谨，有过，则回挞之。
现代文：其余五人事奉郑回甚为谦卑谨慎，如果他们犯了过错，郑回便抽打他们。
English: The remaining five were very humble and cautious, and if they made a mistake, Zheng Hui would beat them.

古文：云南有众数十万，吐蕃每入寇，常以云南为前锋，赋敛重数，又夺其险要立城堡，岁征兵助防，云南苦之。
现代文：云南拥有人众几十万，每当吐蕃侵犯内地时，经常以云南为先锋，对他们征收赋税相当繁重，还强占云南的险要之地，建立城邑堡垒，每年都要征发兵员帮助吐蕃防守，云南受尽了苦头。
English: Yunnan has hundreds of thousands of people. Whenever Tibet invades the mainland, it often takes Yunnan as the vanguard. They are taxed quite heavily. They also occupy Yunnan's critical areas, build fortresses, and conscript soldiers every year to help Tibet defend itself. Yunnan has suffered a lot.

古文：回因说异牟寻复自归于唐，曰： 中国尚礼义，有惠泽，无赋役。 
现代文：于是郑回劝说异牟寻再次主动归附唐朝，他说： 大唐崇尚礼义，对我们只会施以恩惠，不会征发赋税劳役。 
English: Therefore, Zheng Hui persuaded Yimuhang to voluntarily return to the Tang Dynasty. He said, "The Great Tang Dynasty advocates courtesy and righteousness, and will only grant us favors, and will not collect and issue tax labor.

古文：异牟寻以为然，而无路自致，凡十馀年。
现代文：异牟寻认为所言有理，但是没有门路向朝廷自行传送诚意，共有十余年之久。
English: Isamuho thought that what he said was reasonable, but there was no way for him to convey his sincerity to the Imperial Court on his own for more than ten years.

古文：及西川节度使韦皋至镇，招抚境上群蛮，异牟寻潜遣人因诸蛮求内附。
现代文：及至西川节度使韦皋来到镇所后，他招徕并抚慰西川边境上的各蛮族人，异牟寻暗中派人随着各蛮族人请求归附朝廷。
English: After the West River Festival brought Wei Wei to the town hall, he invited and comforted the barbarians on the West River border, and secretly sent people along with the barbarians to request to return to the imperial court.

古文：皋奏： 今吐蕃弃好，暴乱盐、夏，宜因云南及八国生羌有归化之心招纳之，以离吐蕃之党，分其势。 
现代文：韦皋上奏说： 如今吐蕃背弃盟好，残暴地扰乱盐州、夏州，自当顺乎云南和八国生羌归向王化的愿望，招徕他们，以分化吐蕃的同党，削弱吐蕃的势力。 
English: Wei Wei said, "Nowadays, the Tibetans have reneged on the alliance, brutally disturbed Yanzhou and Xiazhou, and voluntarily complied with the desire of Yunnan and the Eight Kingdoms to become kings. They invited them to divide the Tibetans and weaken the power of the Tibetans.

古文：上命皋先作边将书以谕之，微观其趣。
现代文：德宗命令韦皋先以边境将领的名义发布文书开导各蛮族人，暗中观察事态发展的动向。
English: Dezong ordered Wei Xuan to first issue a document in the name of the border general to enlighten the barbarians and secretly observe the development of the situation.

古文：张延赏与齐映有隙，映在诸相中颇称敢言，上浸不悦。延赏言映非宰相器。
现代文：张延赏与齐映结有嫌隙，齐映在各位宰相中号称颇敢直言，德宗渐渐地不喜欢他了，张延赏上言齐映不具有宰相的才具。
English: Zhang Yanbo had a grudge against Qi Yingjie. Qi Yingjie was known to be quite outspoken among the prime ministers. Dezong gradually disliked him. Zhang Yanbo said that Qi Yingjie did not have the ability of a prime minister.

古文：壬子，映贬夔州刺史。刘滋罗为左散骑常侍，以兵部侍郎柳浑同平章事。
现代文：壬子，齐映被贬为州刺史，刘滋被罢黜为左散骑常侍，德宗任命兵部侍郎柳浑为同平章事。
English: Ren Zi, Qi Ying were demoted to the status of provincial magistrates, Liu Zhi was demoted to the rank of left cavalryman, and Dezong appointed the military officer Liu Hun to the rank of peer.

古文：韩滉性苛暴，方为上所任，言无不从，他相充位而已，百官群吏救过不赡。
现代文：韩性情严苛暴躁，他正被德宗重用，他所说的，德宗无不听从，其他宰相只不过是在相位上充数罢了，而朝中百官总是有弥补不完的过错。
English: Han's temperament was harsh and irascible. He was being used by the Emperor Dezong. As he said, the Emperor Dezong always obeyed, the other prime ministers were just filling in the blanks, and the hundreds of officials in the DPRK always had mistakes that could not be made up for.

古文：浑另为滉所引荐，正色让之曰： 先相公以褊察为相，不满岁而罢，今公又甚焉。
现代文：虽然柳浑是被韩推荐上来的，但他还是严肃地责备韩说： 先相公因气量狭窄，苛察细事，出任宰相不满一年便被罢免，如今你更是变本加厉了。
English: Although Liu Hun was recommended by Han, he still seriously rebuked Han, saying: "The former prime minister was ousted less than a year after he became prime minister because he was narrow-minded and meticulous. Now you have become even tougher.

古文：奈何榜吏于省中，至有死者！
现代文：你怎么能够在听政之地拷打官吏，以至出了人命呢！
English: How can you, in a place where you are supposed to be listening to the government, torture officials to death?

古文：且作福作威，岂人臣所宜！ 
现代文：妄自尊大，滥用权势，这哪里是人臣所应做的事情呢！ 
English: Arrogance and abuse of power, what is a vassal supposed to do?

古文：滉愧，为之少霁威严。
现代文：韩惭愧了，因此将威严稍微收敛了一些。
English: Han is ashamed, so he's toned down the grandeur a bit.

古文：二月，壬戌，以检校左庶子崔浣充入吐蕃使。
现代文：二月，壬戌，德宗让检校左庶子崔充任入吐蕃使。
English: In February, Dezong sent his illegitimate son, Cui Zong, who was a school inspector, to serve as the envoy to Tubo.

古文：戊寅，镇海节度使、同平章事、充江、淮转运使韩滉薨。
现代文：戊寅，镇海节度使、同平章事、充江淮转运使韩去世。
English: Wu Yin, Zhenhai Jiedu Envoy, Tongping Zhangji, and Zhenjiang Huai Transportation Envoy Han passed away.

古文：滉久在二浙，所辟僚佐，各随其长，无不得人。
现代文：韩长期在浙江东西道任职，他所任用的下属官吏，都是分别按照他们的长处来先拔委任，没有任人不当的事情。
English: Han has been working in East and West Zhejiang Province for a long time. The subordinate officials appointed by him are all appointed according to their strengths, and there is no improper appointment.

古文：尝有故人子谒之，考其能，一无所长，滉与之宴，竟席，未尝左右视及与并坐交言。
现代文：曾经有位老朋友的儿子来谒见韩，经过考察他的能力，发现没有长处。韩与他一同赴宴，直至宴席终了，他都不曾向周围看上一眼，也不曾与坐在一起的人交谈。
English: Once, the son of an old friend came to see Han. After examining his ability, he found that there was no strength. Han went to the banquet with him, and until the banquet was over, he never looked around or talked to the people sitting together.

古文：后数日，署为随军，使监库门。
现代文：几天以后，韩委任他为随军，让他看管库房门。
English: A few days later, Han appointed him as a military escort and let him guard the door of the warehouse.

古文：其人终日危坐，吏卒无敢妄出入者。
现代文：这人整天端坐在那儿，官吏、士卒没有敢妄自出入的。
English: The man sat there all day, and no officials or soldiers dared to venture out.

古文：分浙江东、西道为三：浙西，治润州；浙东，治越州；宣、歙、池，治宣州；各置观察使以领之。
现代文：韩廷将浙江东西道划分成三部分：浙西以润州为治所，浙东以越州为治所，宣、歙、池以宣州为治所，三处分别设置观察使，以便统领其地。
English: Hanting divided the eastern and western parts of Zhejiang into three parts: the western part of Zhejiang with Runzhou as its capital, the eastern part of Zhejiang with Yuezhou as its capital, and Xuanzhou with Xuanzhou as its capital. Observing envoys were set up in each of the three places in order to dominate the area.

古文：上以果州刺史白志贞为浙西观察使，柳浑曰： 志贞，憸人，不可复用。 
现代文：德宗任命果州刺史白志贞为浙西观察使，柳浑说： 白志贞是个奸佞之人，不应该再加任用。 
English: Dezong appointed Bai Zhizhen, an official from Guozhou, as the Western Zhejiang Observer. Liu Hun said: Bai Zhizhen is a traitor and should not be reappointed.

古文：会浑疾，不视事，辛巳，诏下，用之。
现代文：恰逢柳浑得了疾病，不能处理事务，辛巳，诏书发下，任用白志贞。
English: Just as Liu Hun fell ill and was unable to handle affairs, Emperor Xin issued an edict appointing Bai Zhizhen.

古文：浑疾间，遂乞骸骨，不许。
现代文：柳浑的疾情好转手，请求退职，德宗没有答应。
English: As Liu Hun's illness improved, he asked to be relieved of his duties, but Dezong did not agree.

古文：甲申，葬昭德皇后于靖陵。
现代文：甲申，将昭德皇后安葬在靖陵。
English: On the 29th, Empress Zhao De was buried in the Jingling Mausoleum.

古文：三月，丁酉，以左庶子李銛充入吐蕃使。
现代文：三月，丁酉，德宗让左庶子李充任入吐蕃使。
English: In March, Ding Xuan and De Zong had their left illegitimate son, Li Chong, appointed as the envoy to Tubo.

古文：初，吐蕃尚结赞得盐、夏州，各留千馀人戍之，退屯鸣沙。
现代文：当初，吐蕃尚结赞在得到盐州、夏州后，各自留下一千余人戍守其地，自己退至鸣沙县屯驻。
English: At first, after gaining Yanzhou and Xiazhou, Tubo Shangjizan left more than a thousand people to stay in each place and withdrew to Mingsha County.

古文：自冬入春，羊马多死。粮运不继，又闻李晟克摧沙，马燧、浑瑊等各举兵临之，大惧，屡遣使求和，上未之许。
现代文：由冬天转入春天后，羊马多数死去，粮食运输供给不上，又听说李晟攻克摧沙堡，马燧、浑等人各自起兵亲临鸣沙，尚结赞大为恐惧屡次派遣使者请求和好，德宗没有答应他。
English: After the transition from winter to spring, most of the sheep and horses died, grain transportation could not be supplied, and it was heard that Li Qian conquered the sand castle, and Ma Qian, Hun and others each raised an army to personally visit Ming Sha. Shang Jizan was very afraid and repeatedly sent envoys to request reconciliation. Dezong did not agree to him.

古文：乃遣使卑辞厚礼求和于马燧，且请修清水之盟而归侵地，使者相继于路。
现代文：于是尚结赞派遣使者以谦卑的辞令和丰厚的礼物向马燧求和，而且请求遵守清水会盟的约定，归还他们所侵夺的土地，派出的使者在道路上前后相继。
English: As a result, Shang Kie Zhan sent emissaries with humble words and rich gifts to beg for peace from Ma Yu, and also requested that they abide by the agreement of the Clear Water League and return the land they had invaded. The emissaries sent were one after another on the road.

古文：燧信其言，留屯石州，不复济河，为之请于朝。
现代文：马燧相信了尚结赞的说法，留在石州屯扎，不再渡过黄河，还替尚结赞向朝廷请求。
English: Ma Jun believed Shang Jizan's words, stayed in Shizhou Tunza, and did not cross the Yellow River again. He also petitioned the imperial court on behalf of Shang Jizan.

古文：李晟曰： 戎狄无信，不如击之。 
现代文：李晟说： 吐蕃不讲信用，不如向他们发起进攻。 
English: Li Wei said: "Tu Wei is not trustworthy, it is better to launch an attack on them.

古文：韩游瑰曰： 吐蕃弱则求盟，强则入寇，今深入塞内而求盟，此必诈也！ 
现代文：韩游说： 吐蕃削弱的时候才请求会盟，强盛的时候便侵犯内地。现在，吐蕃深入到边界之内，反而请求盟会，这一定是在骗人！ 
English: Han Yu said, "When the Tuvaluans were weak, they asked for a confederation, but when they were strong, they invaded the mainland. Now, when the Tuvaluans have penetrated deep into the border, they ask for a confederation. This must be a lie!

古文：韩滉曰： 今两河无虞，若城原、鄯、洮、渭四州，使李晟、刘玄佐之徒将十万众戍之，河、湟二十馀州可复也。
现代文：韩说： 如今两河一带没有祸患，假如在原州、鄯州、洮州、渭州四处筑城，让李晟、刘玄佐之些人带领十万人马戍守在那里，河湟地区的二十多个州是可以收复的。
English: Han said: Today, there is no disaster in the area of the two rivers. If we build cities in four places, including Wonju, Yeonju, Yeonju and Yeonju, and let Li Ye, Liu Xuan and others lead 100,000 people to stay there, more than 20 states in the Hebei region can be recovered.

古文：其资粮之费，臣请主办。 
现代文：他们所需物资粮食的费用，请让我来主持办理。 
English: Please let me be in charge of the cost of the materials and food they need.

古文：上由是不听燧计，趣使进兵。
现代文：因此，德宗没有听从马燧的意见，还敦促他进军。
English: Therefore, Dezong did not listen to Ma Jun's advice and urged him to march.

古文：燧请与吐蕃使论颊热俱入朝论之，会滉薨，燧、延赏皆与晟有隙，欲反其谋，争言和亲便。
现代文：马燧请求与吐蕃使者论颊热一同入朝辩论和亲之事，适逢韩去世，马燧、张延赏都与李晟有嫌隙，打算反对李晟的谋略，便争着称道和亲有利。
English: At the time of Han's death, Ma Jun and Zhang Yan Rong both had a grudge against Li Jun and planned to oppose Li Jun's strategy, so they fought to praise the benefits of reconciliation.

古文：上亦恨回纥，欲与吐蕃和，共击之，得二人言，正会己意，计遂定。
现代文：德宗也因心恨回纥，准备与吐蕃和好，以便共同进击回纥，听到马、张二人的主张，正符合自己的意愿，于是便拿定了主意。
English: Because of his hatred for Huizhou, Dezong also prepared to make peace with Tubo so that they could jointly attack Huizhou. When he heard the proposal of Ma and Zhang, it was in line with his own wishes, so he made up his mind.

古文：延赏数言 晟不宜久典兵，请以郑云逵代之。 
现代文：张延赏屡次说： 李晟不适合长期执掌军事，请让郑云逵代替他。 
English: Zhang Yanbo repeatedly said: Li Qian is not suitable for long-term military leadership, please let Zheng Yunqian replace him.

古文：上曰： 当令自择代者。 
现代文：德宗说： 应该让他自己选择替代他的人选。 
English: Dezong said: He should be allowed to choose his own replacement.

古文：乃谓晟曰： 朕以百姓之故，与吐蕃和亲决矣。
现代文：于是德宗对李晟说： 为了百姓的原故，朕已经决定与吐蕃和亲了。
English: Then Dezong said to Li Lan: "For the sake of the people, I have decided to make peace with Tu Lan.

古文：大臣既与吐蕃有怨，不可复之凤翔，宜留朝廷，朝夕辅朕，自择一人可代凤翔者。
现代文：既然你与吐蕃结有怨仇，所以不能再到凤翔去了，最好是留在朝廷，时时辅佐朕。你自己选择一个可以替代你出任凤翔的人选吧。 
English: Since you have a grudge against Tu Youyou, you can't go to Fengxiang again. It's best to stay at the imperial court and assist me from time to time. You should choose someone who can replace you as Fengxiang.

古文：晟荐都虞候邢君牙。
现代文：李晟推荐都虞候邢君牙。
English: Li Wei recommended that Dugou wait for Jun Jun's tooth to grow.

古文：君牙，乐寿人也。
现代文：邢君牙是乐寿人。
English: Hao Junya is a happy birthday person.

古文：丙午，以君牙为凤翔尹团练使。
现代文：丙午，德宗任命邢君牙为凤翔尹兼团练使。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd day of the 3rd month, Emperor Dezong appointed Zou Junya as Fengxiang Yin Kan's regimental training envoy.

古文：丁未，加晟太尉、中书令，勋、封如故；馀悉罢之。
现代文：丁未，加封李晟为太尉、中书令，他的勋位、爵号仍然一如往昔，对封拜给他的其余官职，则一概罢除了。
English: After Ding Wei's death, Li Xi was awarded the titles of First Lieutenant and General Secretary of the Communist Party of China. His rank and title of nobility remained the same as before, but all the other official positions given to him were abolished.

古文：晟在凤翔，尝谓僚佐曰： 魏征好直谏，余窃慕之。 
现代文：李晟出任凤翔时，曾对属下官吏说： 魏徵喜欢直言谏诤，我私下里很卯慕他。 
English: When Li Qian served as Fengxiang, he once said to his subordinate officials: Wei Zheng likes to be outspoken, I secretly admire him very much.

古文：行军司马李叔度曰： 此乃儒者所为，非勋德所宜。 
现代文：行军司马李叔度说： 谏诤是读书人的作为，不是勋业、德望素著的人所应该做的。 
English: Marching Sima Li Shudu said: "It is the act of a reader, not what a person with a distinguished career and respected works should do.

古文：晟敛容曰： 司马失言。
现代文：李晟面色变得严肃起来，他说： 司马这话可说错了。
English: Li Lan's face became serious. He said, "Sima was wrong to say that.

古文：晟任兼将相，知朝廷得失不言，何以为臣！ 
现代文：我兼有将领与宰相的职任，如果知道朝廷哪里做得对、哪里做得不对，但不肯讲出来，那怎样去做一个人臣呢！ 
English: I hold the position of both general and prime minister. If I know what the imperial court is doing right and what it is doing wrong, but I refuse to speak out, then how can I be a minister?

古文：叔度惭而退。
现代文：李叔度惭愧地退去。
English: Li Shudu bowed out in shame.

古文：及在朝廷，上有所顾问，极言无隐。性沉密，未尝泄于人。
现代文：及至李晟供职朝廷时，只要德宗向他征询意见，他总是极为坦率地陈说，无所隐瞒，但他生性沉着慎密，从来不曾向别人泄露。
English: As far back as Li Xi served in the imperial court, whenever Dezong asked him for advice, he was always very frank and had nothing to hide, but he was calm and prudent by nature and never leaked to others.

古文：辛亥，马燧入朝。
现代文：辛亥，马燧入京朝见。
English: Xinhai, horse flies into Beijing, see you later.

古文：燧既来，诸军皆闭壁不战，尚结赞遽自鸣沙引归，其众乏马，多徒行者。
现代文：马燧来到朝廷以后，各军都关闭营门，不再出战。尚结赞急忙从鸣沙带领军队退回，他的军队缺少马匹，有许多人只好徒步而行。
English: After Ma Xuan came to the imperial court, all the armies closed their camp gates and no longer went to war. Shang Jizan hurriedly led the army back from the Ming Sha. His army lacked horses, and many had to walk.

古文：崔浣见尚结赞，责以负约。
现代文：崔浣见到尚结赞，责备他背弃盟约。
English: When Cui Gan saw Shang Jizhong, he accused him of reneging on the treaty.

古文：尚结赞曰： 吐蕃破硃泚，未获赏，是以来，而诸州各城守，无由自达。
现代文：尚结赞说： 吐蕃打败朱，没有得到赏赐，所以便前来了，然而诸州各自据城防守，还是无法传达我们的要求。
English: Shang Jiezhan said: "Tu Wei defeated Zhu and was not rewarded, so he came forward. However, the states each defended their city, but still could not convey our demands.

古文：盐、夏守者以城授我而遁，非我取之也。
现代文：盐州、夏州的守城将领把城池交给我们以后便逃走了，这可不是我们攻取下来的。
English: The garrison generals of Yanzhou and Xiazhou surrendered the city to us and then fled. This is not what we conquered.

古文：今明公来，欲践修旧好，固吐蕃之愿也。
现代文：现在您来了，打算履行前言，重新恢复原来的盟好，这正是吐蕃的愿望啊。
English: Now you have come, intending to fulfill the preamble and restore the original alliance, which is exactly the wish of the Tibetan people.

古文：今吐蕃将相以下来者二十一人，浑侍中尝与之共事，知其忠信。
现代文：如今吐蕃将相以下官员前来的有二十一人，浑侍中曾经与他们一起讨伐朱，知道他们是讲究忠信的。
English: Now, there are twenty-one officials from the mayor of Tubo to the prime minister, and the attendants have fought Zhu with them and know that they are loyal.

古文：灵州节度使杜希全、泾原节度使李观皆信厚闻于异域，请使之主盟。 
现代文：灵州节度使杜希全、泾原节度使李观信义用事，厚道待人，都闻名于异国，请让他们主持会盟吧。 
English: The Lingshou Festival made Du Xiquan famous, and the Xingyuan Festival made Li Guan Xinyi famous, both are famous in foreign countries, please let them preside over the alliance.

古文：夏，四月，丙寅，浣至长安。
现代文：夏季四月，丙寅，崔浣来到长安。
English: In the summer of April, Cui Yin and Cui Yao came to Chang'an.

古文：辛未，以浣为鸿胪卿，复使入吐蕃语尚结赞曰： 希全守灵，不可出境，李观已改官，今遣浑瑊盟于清水。 
现代文：辛未，德宗任命崔浣为鸿胪卿，让他再次前往吐蕃对尚结赞说： 杜希全防守灵州，不能够离开本州疆境，李观已经改任官职。现在派遣浑到清水会盟。 
English: In Xinwei, Dezong appointed Cui Qian as Hongyuqing, and sent him to Tubo again to praise Shang Jizan, saying: Du Xi fully defends Lingshou, and cannot leave the borders of this state. Li Qian has been reassigned to an official post. Now he is dispatching him to the Qingshui League.

古文：且令先归盐、夏二州。
现代文：并且让吐蕃先归还盐州、夏州两地。
English: In addition, the two regions of Yanzhou and Xiazhou should be returned to Tibet first.

古文：五月，甲申，浑自咸阳入朝，以为清水会盟使。
现代文：五月，甲申，浑从咸阳入京朝见，德宗任命他为清水会盟使。
English: In May, Jia Sheng went from Xianyang to Beijing to see the emperor, and Emperor Dezong appointed him as the envoy of the Clear Water Association.

古文：戊子，以兵部尚书崔汉衡为副使，司封员外郎郑叔矩为判官，特进宋奉朝为都监。
现代文：戊子，德宗任命兵部尚书崔汉衡为清水会盟副使，司封员外郎郑叔矩为判官，特进宋奉朝为都监。
English: Wuzi and Dezong appointed Cui Hanheng from the Military Department to be the vice-envoy of the Clear Water Association, Zheng Shucheng from the General Staff to be the adjudicator, and Song Bongchao to be the inspector of the capital.

古文：己丑，瑊将二万馀人赴盟所。
现代文：己丑，浑带领二万余人前往会盟地点。
English: Humiliated, he led more than twenty thousand people to the location of the alliance.

古文：乙巳，尚结赞遣其属论泣赞来言： 清水非吉地，请盟于原州之土梨树，既盟而归盐、夏二州。 
现代文：乙巳，尚结赞派遣他的下属论泣赞前来说： 清水不是吉祥的地方，请在原州的土梨树会盟。会盟以后，便归还盐、夏二州。 
English: At this time, Shang Jizan sent his subordinates to cry and say: Shimizu is not an auspicious place, please join the earthen pear tree association in the original state. After the association, they will return salt and summer to the second state.

古文：上皆许之。
现代文：德宗一概答应下来。
English: The emperor agreed to all of Duan Yu's demands.

古文：神策将马有麟奏： 土梨树多阻险，恐吐蕃设伏兵，不如平凉川坦夷。 
现代文：神策军将领马有麟上奏说： 土梨树多半是险阻之地，恐怕吐蕃会设下埋伏的兵马，不如在平凉川会盟，那里地势平坦。 
English: The general of the Shinsaku army, Ma Youlin, said in his report: The soil pear tree is mostly a place of danger, I'm afraid that Tubo will set up an ambush of soldiers and horses, it is better to be in the Pingliang River Association, where the terrain is flat.

古文：时论泣赞已还，丁未，遣使追告之。
现代文：当时，论泣赞已经回去，丁未，德宗派遣使者追赶论泣赞，告诉他这一决定。
English: At that time, Ong Weizan had already returned, and Ding Wei, Emperor Dezong sent an envoy to catch up with Ong Weizan to tell him of this decision.

古文：申蔡留后吴少诚，缮兵完城，欲拒朝命，判官郑常、大将杨冀谋逐之，诈为手诏赐诸将申州刺史张伯元等。
现代文：申蔡留后吴少诚整治兵器，修葺城邑，准备抗拒朝廷的命令。判官郑常大将杨冀打算驱逐他，便假造德宗的手诏，赐给申州刺史张伯元等诸将领。
English: After Shen Cai left, Wu Shao Cheng rectified the weapons, repaired the towns, and prepared to resist the order of the imperial court. The judge, General Zheng Chang Yang Jie, intended to expel him, so he forged Dezong's handwritten edict and gave it to the generals such as Shen Zhou Jishi and Zhang Boyuan.

古文：事泄，少诚杀常、冀、伯元。大将宋旻、曹济奔长安。
现代文：事情泄露后，吴少诚将郑常、杨冀、张伯元杀掉，大将宋、曹济逃奔长安。
English: After the matter was leaked, Wu Shao Cheng killed Zheng Chang, Yang Jie, and Zhang Boyuan, and Generals Song and Cao Jie fled to Chang'an.

古文：闰月，己未，韦皋复与东蛮和义王苴那时书，使诇伺导达云南。
现代文：闰五月，己未，韦皋再次写信给东蛮和义王苴那时，让他探听云南的情况，引导云南归附。
English: In late May, Wei Wei again wrote to Dongman and Yi Wang, asking him to investigate the situation in Yunnan and guide Yunnan to annexation.

古文：庚申，大省州、县官员，收其禄以给战士，张延赏之谋也。
现代文：庚申，朝廷大规模地削减州县官员，收回他们的薪俸，以便维持战士的供给。这是张延赏谋划的。
English: Goshun, the imperial court massively cut state and county officials and took back their salaries in order to maintain the supply of soldiers. This was planned by Zhang Yanbo.

古文：时新除官千五百人，而当减者千馀人，怨嗟盈路。
现代文：当时，新任命的官员有一千五百人，而应当裁减有一千多人，人们怨声载道。
English: At that time, there were 1,500 newly appointed officials, but more than 1,000 should be cut, people complained.

古文：初，韩滉荐刘玄佐可使将兵复河、湟，上以问玄佐，玄佐亦赞成之。
现代文：当初，韩推荐刘玄佐，认为可以让他领兵收复河湟地区，德宗以此征求刘玄佐的意见，刘玄佐也表示赞成。
English: At first, Han recommended Liu Xuanzuo, believing that he could lead the troops to recover the Hebei region. Dezong used this to solicit Liu Xuanzuo's opinion, and Liu Xuanzuo also expressed his approval.

古文：滉薨，玄佐奏言： 吐蕃方强，未可与争。 
现代文：韩去世后，刘玄佐上奏说： 吐蕃正强盛，不能与他们争锋。 
English: After Han's death, Liu Xuanzu said in his report: "Tuwei is strong and can't compete with them.

古文：上遣中使劳问玄佐，玄佐卧而受命。
现代文：德宗派遣中使慰劳刘玄佐，刘玄佐却躺在床上接受诏旨。
English: Emperor Dezong sent Liu Xuan Cao as a consolation, but Liu Xuan Cao was lying in bed when he received the imperial edict.

古文：张延赏知玄佐不可用，奏以河、湟事委李抱真，抱真亦固辞。
现代文：张延赏知道刘玄佐难以任用，便上奏将河湟事宜交托李抱真，李抱真也坚决推辞。
English: Zhang Yanbo knew that it would be difficult to appoint Liu Xuan Zuo, so he sent the matter of Hebei to Li Bangzhen. Li Bangzhen also firmly refused.

古文：皆由延赏罢李晟兵柄，故武臣皆愤怒解体，不肯为用故也。
现代文：这完全是由于张延赏免除了李晟兵权，而使武将都愤怨不平，心灰意冷，不愿意为朝廷效力的原故。
English: This was entirely due to the fact that Zhang Yanbo exempted Li Xi from military power, which made the generals resentful, disheartened, and unwilling to work for the imperial court.

古文：上以襄、邓扼淮西冲要，癸亥，以荆南节度使曹王皋为山南东道节度使，以襄、邓、复、郢、安、随、唐七州隶之。
现代文：由于襄州和邓州扼制着淮西的交通要道，癸亥，德宗任命荆南节度使曹王李皋为山南东道节度使，将襄、邓、复、郢、安、随、唐共七州归属他管辖。
English: As Xiangzhou and Dengzhou controlled the important transportation routes of Huaxi, Emperor Taizong of Wei and Hai appointed Cao Wang Lijun as the host of the Jingnan Festival and placed the seven provinces of Xiangzhou, Dengzhou, Fuzhou, Handan, Anzhu, Suizhou and Tang under his jurisdiction.

古文：浑瑊之发长安也，李晟深戒之，以盟所为备不可不严。
现代文：浑从长安出发时，李晟深切地告诫他在会盟地点的防备不可不严密。
English: When Hun set off from Chang'an, Li Yao earnestly cautioned him to be on high alert at the alliance's location.

古文：张延赏言于上曰： 晟不欲盟好之成，故戒瑊以严备。
现代文：张延赏对德宗说： 李晟不希望会盟交好获得成功，所以他才告诫浑严加防备。
English: Zhang Yanhong said to Dezong: Li Qiye did not want the friendship between the alliance to succeed, so he warned him to be on high alert.

古文：我有疑彼之形，则彼亦疑我矣，盟何由成！ 
现代文：我们有了怀疑吐蕃的形迹，吐蕃就也要怀疑我们了，会盟还怎么能够成功呢！ 
English: Now that we have shown signs of doubting the Tibetans, the Tibetans will also doubt us. How can the alliance still succeed?

古文：上乃召瑊，切戒以推诚待虏，勿自为猜贰以阻虏情。
现代文：于是德宗传召浑，极力告诫他对待吐蕃要有诚意，不要自怀疑忌而拒绝了吐蕃的真情。
English: Therefore, Dezong summoned Hun and strongly admonished him to be sincere in his treatment of Tubo, and not to reject Tubo's true feelings out of suspicion.

古文：瑊奏吐蕃决以辛未盟，延赏集百官，以瑊表称诏示之曰： 李太尉谓吐蕃和好必不成，此浑侍中表也，盟日定矣。 
现代文：浑上奏，吐蕃决定在辛未这一天会盟。张延赏招集百官，把浑的表章拿给大家看，他说： 李太尉认为与吐蕃和好必定不能成功，这就是浑侍中的表章，会盟的日期已经确定了。 
English: Zhang Yanbo summoned a hundred officials and showed the seal of the Hun to everyone. He said, "Lieutenant Li believes that peace with the Hun cannot succeed. This is the seal of the Hun. The date of the alliance has been determined."

古文：晟闻之，泣谓所亲曰： 吾生长西陲，备谙虏情，所以论奏，但耻朝廷为犬戎所侮耳！ 
现代文：李晟听说此事后，哭泣着对亲近的人说： 我生长在西部边疆，完全熟悉吐蕃的情况，我上奏论说此事的本意，只是不愿意让朝廷遭受吐蕃的侮辱罢了！ 
English: After hearing about this, Li Qiye wept and said to those close to him: I grew up in the western frontier and am fully familiar with the situation in Tibet. I had intended to report this matter, but I did not want the imperial court to be insulted by Tibetans!

古文：上始命骆元光屯潘原，韩游瑰屯洛口，以为瑊援。
现代文：一开始，德宗命令骆元光驻扎在潘原，韩游驻扎在洛口，以此来应援浑。
English: At the beginning, Dezong ordered Luo Yuanguang to be stationed in Panyuan and Han You to be stationed in Lokou in order to support the Huns.

古文：元光谓瑊曰： 潘原距盟所且七十里，公有急，元光何从知之！
现代文：骆元光对浑说： 潘原距离会盟地点将近七十里，倘若你发生了紧急情况，我哪里能够得到你的消息呢！
English: Luo Yuanguang said to him, "Pan Yuan is nearly seventy miles away from the location of the alliance. If you have an emergency, where can I get your information?"

古文：请与公俱。 
现代文：请让我与你一同前往吧。 
English: Please let me go with you.

古文：瑊以诏指固止之。
现代文：浑根据诏书的意旨坚决阻止了他。
English: In accordance with the intention of the edict, he resolutely stopped him.

古文：元光不从，与瑊连营相次，距明所三十馀里。
现代文：骆元光不肯听命，与浑的营地连接着驻扎下来，距离会盟地点有三十多里。
English: Luo Yuanguang did not want to obey orders, so he stayed in a camp connected to Hun's, more than thirty miles away from the location of the alliance.

古文：元光壕栅深固，瑊壕栅皆可逾也。
现代文：骆元光的壕堑挖得很深，栅栏扎得很牢固，浑的壕堑和栅栏却完全可以轻易跳过去。
English: Luo Yuanguang's trenches are very deep and the fences are very strong, but muddy trenches and fences can be easily jumped over.

古文：元光伏兵于营西，韩游瑰亦遣五百骑伏于其侧，曰： 若有变，则汝曹西趣柏泉以分其势。 
现代文：骆元光在营地西边设下伏兵。韩游也派遣骑兵五百人，在骆元光的旁边埋伏下来，他说： 如果发生变故，你们这班人便向西直奔柏泉，以便分散吐蕃的声势。 
English: Luo Yuanguang set up an ambush on the west side of the camp. Han Yu also sent five hundred cavalrymen to lie in wait next to Luo Yuanguang. He said, "In the event of a disaster, your group will head straight west to Baiquan in order to disperse the sound of the Tuyu."

古文：尚结赞与瑊约，各以甲士三千人列于坛之东西，常服者四百人从至坛下，辛未，将盟，尚结赞又请各遣游骑数十更相觇索，瑊皆许之。
现代文：尚结赞与浑约定，双方各自派出身著铠甲的将士三千人，排列在坛场的东西两侧，再派出身着平时服装的将士四百人随着来到坛场下面。辛未，将要会盟时，尚结赞又要求双方各自派出流动巡逻的骑兵数十人，互相檫察对方的行动，浑完全答应了他的要求。
English: Shang Jizan and Hun agreed that each side would send three thousand soldiers from the armored corps to line up on the east and west sides of the altar, and then send four hundred soldiers from the ordinary clothing to come to the bottom of the altar. Soon, when the alliance was to be formed, Shang Jizan also asked both sides to send dozens of mobile patrol cavalry to observe each other's actions, and Hun fully agreed to his request.

古文：吐蕃伏精骑数万于坛西，游骑贯穿唐军，出入无禁。
现代文：吐蕃将精锐的骑兵数万人埋伏在坛场西边，流动巡逻的骑兵在唐朝军队中穿来穿去，进进出出，不受禁止。
English: Tuxi sent tens of thousands of elite cavalry to ambush the west side of the altar, and the mobile patrol cavalry went through and through the Tang Dynasty army, entering and exiting, and was not prohibited.

古文：唐骑入虏军，悉为所擒，瑊等皆不知，入幕，易礼服。
现代文：唐朝的骑兵进入吐蕃军后，全部被吐蕃擒获。浑等人一概没有觉察，走入帐幕，去换礼服。
English: After the Tang Dynasty cavalry entered the Tubo army, they were all captured by Tubo. Hun and others did not notice at all, they went into the tent to change their dresses.

古文：虏伐鼓三声，大噪而至，杀宋奉朝等于幕中。
现代文：吐蕃擂鼓三声，大声呼喊着赶上前来，在帐幕中杀掉了宋奉朝等人。
English: He beat the gong three times and shouted loudly to catch up, and killed Song Bongcho and others in the tent.

古文：瑊自幕后出，偶得它马乘之，伏鬣入其衔，驰十馀里，衔方及马口，故矢过其背而不伤。
现代文：浑从帐幕后边逃出来，偶然得到一匹别人的马骑了上去，伏在马背上，往马口中戴嚼子，奔驰了十余里地，嚼子才戴到马口上，所以乱箭从他背上掠过去，但他并没有受伤。
English: He escaped from the back of the tent, and by chance got a horse of someone else, rode up, lay down on the horse's back, and put a bit in the horse's mouth. He rode for more than ten miles before the bit was put on the horse's mouth, so the arrow flew over his back, but he was not injured.

古文：唐将卒皆东走，虏纵兵追击，或杀或擒之，死者数百人，擒者千馀人，崔汉衡为虏骑所擒。
现代文：唐朝的将士都向东逃跑，吐蕃放纵士兵追击，将唐军杀的杀，捉的捉，总计被杀的有数百人，被捉的有一千余人，崔汉衡也被吐蕃骑兵擒获了。
English: The soldiers of the Tang Dynasty all fled to the east, and the Tuyn soldiers pursued and killed the Tang soldiers and captured them. In total, hundreds of people were killed and more than a thousand people were captured. Cui Hanheng was also captured by the Tuyn cavalry.

古文：浑瑊至其营，则将卒皆遁去，营空矣。
现代文：浑赶到他的营地时，将士们都已逃跑，营中已空了。
English: When Hun arrived at his camp, the soldiers had all fled and the camp was empty.

古文：骆元光发伏成陈以待之，虏追骑愕眙。
现代文：骆元光发动伏兵，结成阵列，等待着他，吐蕃追赶而来的骑兵只好瞠目而视。
English: Luo Yuanguang launched an ambush, formed an array, waited for him, and the cavalrymen who chased him had no choice but to stare.

古文：瑊入元光营，追骑顾见邠宁军西驰，乃还。
现代文：浑进入骆元光的营地，吐蕃追击的骑兵回头看见宁军向西奔驰而去，于是回去了。
English: After entering Luo Yuanguang's camp, the pursuing cavalrymen looked back and saw the Ning Army galloping away to the west, so they went back.

古文：元光以辎重资瑊，与瑊收散卒，勒兵整陈而还。
现代文：骆元光以本军的辎重资助浑，与浑一起招集逃散的士兵，统率着军队，整顿好阵列，也向回开去。
English: Luo Yuanguang supported Hun with the heavy burden of his own army, and together with Hun, he summoned the soldiers who had fled and dispersed, led the army, reorganized the array, and also drove back.

古文：是日上临朝，谓诸相曰： 今日和戎息兵，社稷之福。 马燧曰： 然。 
现代文：就在这一天，德宗上朝，对各位宰相说： 今天与吐蕃讲和，停止战争，这是国家的福气啊！ 马燧说： 对呀。 
English: On this very day, when Emperor Dezong ascended to the throne, he said to the prime ministers, "Today, we have made peace with the Tuyn and stopped the war. This is a blessing for the country!" Ma said, "That's right."

古文：柳浑曰： 戎狄，豺狼也，非盟誓可结。
现代文：柳浑说： 吐蕃豺狼成性，不是会盟立誓便可以约束得住的。
English: Liu Hun said: It is not necessary to take an oath to be able to restrain oneself.

古文：今日之事，臣窃忧之！ 
现代文：今天的事情，我私下里总在为它担心！ 
English: Today's event, I'm always worried about it in private!

古文：李晟曰： 诚如浑言。 
现代文：李晟说： 正如柳浑所说的那样。 
English: Li Wei said: Just as Liu Hun said.

古文：上变色曰： 柳浑书生，不知边计；大臣亦为此言邪！ 
现代文：德宗脸色一变，说： 柳浑是一个书生，不晓得边疆大计。你也说这种话吗！ 
English: Dezong's face changed and he said, "Liu Hun is a scholar, he doesn't know about the frontier. Do you also say such things?"

古文：皆伏地顿首谢，因罢朝。
现代文：大家都伏地叩头谢罪，于是便结束了朝会。
English: Everyone prostrated themselves and bowed their heads in thanksgiving, and so the imperial meeting came to an end.

古文：是夕，韩游瑰表言： 虏劫盟者，兵临近镇。 
现代文：当天傍晚，韩游上表说： 吐蕃劫持了会盟的人们，他们的兵马已经来到临近的州镇。 
English: In the evening of the same day, Han You said on the table: "Tu Wei has kidnapped the people of the League, and their soldiers have come to the nearby town of Zhouzhou.

古文：上大惊，街递其表以示浑。
现代文：德宗大为震惊，让街使将韩游的表章传示柳浑。
English: Deeply shocked, Dezong asked the town clerk to pass on the badge of Han You to Liu Hun.

古文：明旦，谓浑曰： 卿书生，乃能料敌如此其审乎！ 
现代文：第二天早晨，德宗对柳浑说： 你是一个书生，预料敌情竟然能够这般确切啊！ 
English: The next morning, Dezong said to Liu Hun, "You are a scholar, how can you predict the enemy's position so accurately?"

古文：上欲出幸，以避吐蕃，大臣谏而止。
现代文：德宗准备出走，以躲避吐蕃人，大臣们规劝他打消了念头。
English: The ministers tried to dissuade him from running away to avoid the Tujia people.

古文：李晟大安园多竹，复有为飞语者，云 晟伏兵大安亭，谋因仓猝为变。 
现代文：李晟的大安园内有许多竹子，便又有人制造流言说： 李晟在大安亭设下了伏兵，图谋乘着国家发生突然变故时发动变乱。 
English: There was a lot of bamboo in Li Gan's Da'an Garden, and some people started to spread the rumor that Li Gan had set up an ambush in Da'an Pavilion in an attempt to take advantage of the sudden changes in the country to start a revolution.

古文：晟遂伐其竹。
现代文：于是，李晟将园内的竹子砍掉了。
English: As a result, Li Yao chopped down the bamboo in the garden.

古文：癸酉，上遣中使王子恒赍诏遗尚结赞，至吐蕃境，不纳而还。
现代文：癸酉，德宗派遣中使王子恒带着诏书给尚结赞送去，中使来到吐蕃疆境，没有受到接待，只好返回。
English: However, when Emperor Dezong sent Prince Heng to Shang Jizan with an imperial edict, the envoy came to the border of Tubo and was not received, so he had to return.

古文：浑瑊留屯奉天。
现代文：浑留在奉天驻扎下来。
English: He stayed in Mukden and settled down.

古文：甲戌，尚结至故原州，引见崔汉衡等曰： 吾饰金械，欲械瑊以献赞普。
现代文：甲戌，尚结赞来到原州故地，接见崔汉衡等人说： 我治办了金枷锁，准备用它囚禁浑，以便献给赞普。
English: Kuching, Shang Jie Zan came to the hometown of Wonju, met Cui Hanheng and others and said: I have made a golden yoke, ready to use it to imprison him, in order to dedicate it to Zampu.

古文：今失瑊，虚致公辈。 
现代文：现在，浑跑掉了，却空自捉住你们这些人。 
English: Now, he's run away, but he hasn't caught up with you people.

古文：又谓马燧之侄弇曰： 胡以马为命，吾在河曲，春草未生，马不能举足，当是时，侍中渡河掩之，吾全军覆没矣！
现代文：尚结赞又对马燧的侄子马说： 胡人把马匹视为性命。我在河曲时，春天的草木还未萌生，马匹饿得抬不起脚来。当此时，如果马侍中渡过黄河袭击我们，我们便会全军覆没了！
English: Shang Kie Zhan also said to Ma Xuan's nephew, Ma: "The Hu people regard horses as their lives. When I was at the River Song, the spring plants had not yet sprouted, and the horses were too hungry to lift their feet. At this time, if the horse attendants crossed the Yellow River to attack us, our entire army would be destroyed!

古文：所以求和，蒙侍中力。
现代文：我们请求和好能够成功，全赖马侍中从中出力。
English: We hope that the reconciliation will be successful, and we rely on the efforts of all parties.

古文：今全军得归，奈何拘其子孙！ 
现代文：如今我们全军得以回去了，怎么能够扣留他的子孙呢！ 
English: Now that our entire army has been able to return, how can we detain his descendants?

古文：命弇与宦官俱文珍、浑瑊将马宁俱归。分囚崔汉衡等于河、廓、鄯州。
现代文：他让马与宦官俱文珍、浑的将领马宁一起回国，而将崔汉衡等人分别囚禁在河州、廓州和鄯州。
English: He allowed Ma to return to China together with eunuch Qu Wenzhen and eunuch general Maning, but imprisoned Cui Hanheng and others separately in Hezhou, Guozhou and Zhangzhou.

古文：上闻尚结赞之言，由是恶马燧。
现代文：德宗听以尚结赞的说法，由此便嫌恶马燧了。
English: Dezong listened to the praise of Shang Jie, and thus he hated Ma Xuan.

古文：六月，丙戌，以马燧为司徒兼侍中，罢其副元帅、节度使。
现代文：六月，丙戌，德宗侍命马燧为司徒兼侍中，免除了他副元帅、节度使的职务。
English: In June, he removed Ma Jun from his post as deputy marshal and festival envoy, as Ma Jun, the attendant of Emperor Dezong, was appointed as an attendant and chamberlain.

古文：初，吐蕃尚结赞恶李晟、马燧、浑瑊，曰： 去三人，则唐可图也。 
现代文：当初，吐蕃尚结赞憎恶李晟、马燧、浑，他说： 除去这三个人，唐朝便可以图谋了。 
English: At the beginning, Tu Yu Shang Jie praised and detested Li Yu, Ma Yu and Hun. He said: "If these three people are removed, the Tang Dynasty can plot."

古文：于是离间李晟，因马燧以求和，欲执浑瑊以卖燧，使并获罪，因纵兵直犯长安，会失浑瑊而止。
现代文：于是，他离间朝廷对李晟的信任，通过马燧向朝廷求和，打算借着捉拿浑来出卖马燧，使二人一起受到惩罚，而他能够趁机放纵兵马直接侵犯长安。适逢浑走脱，只好作罢。
English: As a result, he alienated the imperial court's trust in Li Yan, and through Ma Yan, he sued for peace with the imperial court. He planned to betray Ma Yan by capturing Nahun, so that the two would be punished together, and he could take advantage of the opportunity to allow soldiers and horses to directly invade Chang'an. When it was time for him to escape, he had to give up.

古文：张延赏惭惧，谢病不视事。
现代文：张延赏又惭愧，又恐惧，推托有病，不再处理朝中事务。
English: Zhang Yanbo was both ashamed and afraid, but he pretended to be ill and no longer dealt with the affairs of the DPRK and China.

古文：以陕虢观察使李泌为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：德宗任命陕虢观察使李泌为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: Emperor Dezong appointed Shaanxi Emperor Gaozong to observe and made Li Xiu the secretary of the Central Committee, and Tongping was appointed to the post.

古文：河东都虞候李自良从马燧入朝，上欲以为河东节度使，自良固辞曰： 臣事燧日久，不欲代之为帅。 
现代文：河东都虞候李自良跟随马燧人京朝见，德宗打算任命他为河东节度使，李自良再三推辞说： 我长期事奏马燧，不想代替他担任主帅。 
English: Li Ziliang, the prefect of Hedong, followed Ma Xuan to the imperial court in Beijing. Emperor Dezong planned to appoint him as the envoy to the Hedong Festival. Li Ziliang repeatedly declined, saying, "I have been playing Ma Xuan for a long time, and I don't want to replace him as the coach."

古文：乃以为右龙武大将军。
现代文：于是德宗任命他右龙武大将军。
English: As a result, Emperor Dezong appointed him as the Grand General of the Right Dragon Army.

古文：明日，自良入谢，上谓之曰： 卿于马燧，存军中事分，诚为得礼。
现代文：第二天，李自良入朝谢恩，德宗对他说： 对于马燧来说，你的做法照顾到军中事由的体统，诚然合乎礼数。
English: The next day, when Li Ziliang entered the imperial court to offer thanks, Dezong said to him, "For Ma Jun, your way of taking care of matters in the army is indeed in line with etiquette.

古文：然北门之任，非卿不可。 
现代文：但是，出镇河东这一有屈大才的任命，还是非你莫属的。 
English: However, the appointment of this great talent from the town of Hedong still belongs to you.

古文：卒以自良为河东节度使。
现代文：德宗终于任命李自良为河东节度使。
English: Finally, Emperor Dezong appointed Li Ziliang as the envoy of the Eastern Han Dynasty.

古文：吐蕃之戍盐、夏者，馈运不继，人多病疫思归，尚结赞遣三千骑逆之，悉焚其庐舍，毁其城，驱其民而去。
现代文：戍守盐州和夏州的吐蕃将士，因给养运送接济不上，多数患瘟疫，希望回国，尚结赞派出三千骑兵迎接他们。他们将当地的房舍全部烧掉，将城墙拆毁并驱散百姓，便离开了。
English: The Tujia soldiers, who were guarding Yanzhou and Xiazhou, were unable to receive supplies due to lack of transportation. Most of them were suffering from the plague and hoped to return home. Shang Jizan sent three thousand cavalry to meet them. They burned all the local houses, demolished the city walls and dispersed the people, and then left.

古文：灵盐节度使杜希全遣兵分守之。
现代文：灵盐节度使杜希全派兵分别防守二州。
English: Du Xi sent his entire army to defend the two states separately.

古文：韦皋以云南颇知书，壬辰，自以书招谕之，令趣遣使入见。
现代文：韦皋认为云南人颇为知书识理，壬辰，他亲自写信劝导他们，敦促他们派遣使者入朝晋见。
English: Wei Wei believed that the Yunnan people were quite literate and rational, and he personally wrote to them to persuade them and urge them to send an envoy to the DPRK.

古文：李泌初视事，壬寅，与李晟、马燧、柳浑俱入见，上谓泌曰： 卿昔在灵武，已应为此官，卿自退让。
现代文：李泌开始处理朝中事务。壬寅，他与李晟、马燧、柳浑一起入朝晋见，德宗对李泌说： 过去你在灵武时，已经应该担任这一官职，但你主动谦让了。
English: Renshin, who went to the court of Emperor Jin along with Ryo, Ma, and Ryuhun, said to Ryo: In the past, when you were Lingwu, you should have assumed this official position, but you voluntarily conceded.

古文：朕今用卿，欲与卿有约，卿慎勿报仇，有恩者朕当为卿报之。 
现代文：现在，朕起用了你，打算与你有个约定，你千万不要报复仇人。对有恩于你的人，朕自当替你报偿。 
English: Now, I've hired you, and I'm going to make a deal with you. You must not take revenge on your enemies. For those who are grateful to you, I shall repay you.

古文：对曰： 臣素奉道，不与人为仇。
现代文：李泌回答说： 我平素遵奉道教，是不与人们结仇的。
English: Li Xiu replied: I have always followed Taoism, and I do not make enemies with people.

古文：李辅国、元载皆害臣者，今自毙矣。
现代文：李辅国、元载都加害于我，如今他们自行倒台了。
English: Li Fuguo and Yuan Zai both harmed me, and now they have fallen on their own.

古文：素所善及有恩者，率已显达，或多零落，臣无可报也。 
现代文：我平时所交好的和对我有恩惠的人，有的已经荣显闻达了，有的已经衰微没落了，我对他们是没有什么可报答的了。 
English: Some of my friends and benefactors have already achieved fame and glory, while others have faded away. I have nothing to repay them with.

古文：上曰： 虽然，有小恩者，亦当报之。 
现代文：德宗说： 即使如此，对有小恩于你的人，也是应当报答的。 
English: Dezong said, "Even so, it is proper to repay those who have been less than grateful to you."

古文：对曰： 臣今日亦愿与陛下为约，可乎？ 
现代文：李泌回答说： 今天我也希望与陛下有个约定，可以吗？ 
English: Li Ke replied, "Today, I also hope to have an appointment with Your Majesty, is that OK?"

古文：上曰： 何不可！ 
现代文：德宗说： 有什么不可以的！ 
English: Desong said: What is not allowed!

古文：泌曰： 愿陛下勿害功臣。
现代文：李泌说： 希望陛下不要加害功臣。
English: Li Zuo said, "I hope that His Majesty will not harm the meritorious vassal."

古文：臣受陛下厚恩，固无形迹。
现代文：我蒙受陛下深厚的恩典，当然没有受害的迹象。
English: I am deeply indebted to Your Majesty's grace, and of course there is no sign of injury.

古文：李晟、马燧有大功于国，闻有谗之者，虽陛下必不听，然臣今日对二人言之，欲其不自疑耳。
现代文：李晟、马燧为国家建树了巨大的功劳，听说有人说他们的坏话，尽管陛下肯定不会听信，但今天我当着他们二人的面讲这些话，是希望他们不要自起疑心而已。
English: Li Qian and Ma Qian have made great contributions to the country. I have heard that some people say bad things about them. Although His Majesty will certainly not listen, I am telling these words in front of the two of them today in the hope that they will not be suspicious.

古文：陛下万一害之，则宿卫之士，方镇之臣，无不愤惋而反仄，恐中外之变不日复生也！
现代文：万一陛下要加害他们，那么，值宿警卫的将士，方镇的将帅，便都会愤怨叹息，辗转不安，恐怕过不了多少日子，朝廷内外的变故就要再次发生了！
English: In the unlikely event that His Majesty were to harm them, then the soldiers on duty as guards, and the generals of Fangzhen, would all be resentful, sighing, and restless. I'm afraid it won't be many days before there are changes inside and outside the imperial court again!

古文：人臣苛蒙人主爱信则幸矣，官于何有！
现代文：如果臣下能够蒙受君主的赏识与信任，那便够幸运的了，还谈什么官职不官职的！
English: If a subject can earn the appreciation and trust of the monarch, then that is fortunate enough, and there is no need to talk about official or unofficial!

古文：臣在灵武之日，未尝有官，而将相皆受臣指画；陛下以李怀光为太尉而怀光愈惧，遂至于叛。
现代文：我在灵武时，不曾担任官职，但大将、宰相都接受我的指点。陛下任命李怀光为太尉，但李怀光愈加恐惧，终至背叛了朝廷。
English: When I was Lingwu, I did not hold an official position, but the general and the prime minister all accepted my guidance. His Majesty appointed Li Huaiguang as the first lieutenant, but Li Huaiguang became more and more afraid and eventually betrayed the imperial court.

古文：此皆陛下所亲见也。
现代文：这都是陛下亲眼所见的事情啊。
English: Your Majesty saw all of this with your own eyes.

古文：今晟、燧富贵已足，苟陛下坦然待之，使其自保无虞，国家有事则出从征伐，无事则入奉朝请，何乐如之！
现代文：如今李晟、马燧已经足够富贵的了，如果陛下能够坦诚地对待他们，让他们自保官爵，没有疑虑，在国家发生变故时便出朝随从征伐，在国家无事时便入朝参加朝会，有什么快乐能够与此相比呢！
English: Nowadays, Li Qian and Ma Qian are already rich enough. If His Majesty can treat them honestly, let them be self-protecting officials, and have no doubts, if there is a change in the country, they will go to the imperial court to follow the expedition, and if there is nothing wrong with the country, they will go to the imperial court to participate in the imperial court meeting. What joy can compare with this!

古文：故臣愿陛下勿以二臣功大而忌之，二臣勿以位高而自疑，则天下永无事矣。 
现代文：所以，我希望陛下不要因为他们二人的功劳太大便猜忌他们，他们二人也不要因为职位太高便自生疑心，那么，天下便永远不会发生危险了。 
English: Therefore, I hope that His Majesty will not be suspicious of the two of them because their merits are too great, and that the two of them will not be suspicious of themselves because their positions are too high. Then, there will never be any danger in the world.

古文：上曰： 朕始闻卿言，耸然不知所谓。
现代文：德宗说： 朕乍一听你的话，觉着突兀，不知道你讲的是什么。
English: Dezong said, "When I first heard your words, I felt confused and didn't know what you were talking about.

古文：及听卿剖析，乃知社稷之至计也！
现代文：待到听了你的分析后，才知道这是国家的根本大计啊！
English: It wasn't until I heard your analysis that I knew this was the country's fundamental plan!

古文：朕谨当书绅，二大臣亦当共保之。 
现代文：朕自会牢牢记住你的话，对于李、马两位大臣，朕也自当与你共同保全他们。 
English: I will keep your words firmly in mind. As for the two ministers Li and Ma, I will also work with you to protect them.

古文：晟、燧皆起，泣谢。
现代文：李晟和马燧都站了起来，哭泣着表示感谢。
English: Li Yao and Ma Yao both stood up, crying and expressing their thanks.

古文：上因谓泌曰： 自今凡军旅粮储事，卿主之。吏、礼委延赏，刑法委浑。 
现代文：于是德宗对李泌说： 从今天起，凡是有关军队和粮食储备的事情，都由你来主持，吏部和礼部交给张延赏主持，刑部交给柳浑主持。 
English: Then Dezong said to Li Xiu, "From today on, you will preside over all matters related to the army and grain reserves. The personnel and ceremonial departments will be presided over by Zhang Yanbo, and the criminal department will be presided over by Liu Hun.

古文：泌曰： 不可。
现代文：李泌说： 这不妥当。
English: Li Zuo said: This is not appropriate.

古文：陛下不以臣不才，使待罪宰相。
现代文：陛下不嫌我没有才能，才让我出任宰相。
English: Your Majesty does not mind that I have no talent, but you have made me the Prime Minister.

古文：宰相之职，不可分也。非如给事则有吏过、兵过，舍人则有六押，至于宰相，天下之事咸共平章。
现代文：宰相的职责，是不可分割的，不象在给事中那里要分辨出哪些是吏部的过失，哪此是兵部的过失，在中书舍人那里有六人签署划押。至于宰相的职责，对天下的事情都应当共同商酌处理。
English: The responsibilities of the Prime Minister are indivisible. Unlike in the case of war, where it is necessary to distinguish which is the fault of the Ministry of Personnel and which is the fault of the Ministry of War, in the case of the People's Commissariat of Education, there are six people who sign the assignment. As for the duties of the Prime Minister, all matters of the world should be dealt with jointly.

古文：若各有所主，是乃有司，非宰相也。 
现代文：如果宰相各自主持某方面的事情，这便成了专司一面的职能部门了，不是宰相的职责啊。 
English: If the prime ministers each preside over a certain aspect of things, this will become a functional department of the special department, not the prime minister's responsibility.

古文：上笑曰： 朕适失辞，卿言是也。 
现代文：德宗笑着说： 适才是朕讲得不够妥当，你的话是对的。 
English: With a smile, Dezong said, "What I say is appropriate, but what I say is not appropriate enough. Your words are right.

古文：泌请复所减州、县官。上曰： 置吏以为人也，今户口减于承平之时三分之二，而吏员更增，可乎！ 
现代文：李泌请求恢复被削减的州县官员，德宗说： 官吏应当是为百姓而设置的，现在户口比太平时期减少了三分之二，但官吏反而增加了，这能行吗？ 
English: Li Xiu requested the reinstatement of state and county officials who had been reduced. Dezong said, "Officials should be set up for the people. Nowadays, the number of hukou has decreased by two-thirds compared to the Taiping period, but the number of officials has increased. Can this work?

古文：对曰： 户口虽减，而事多于承平且十倍，吏得无增乎！
现代文：李泌回答说： 虽然户口是减少了，但是现在的事务比太平时期多出将近十倍，官吏怎么会不增加呢！
English: Li Xiu replied: Although the number of hukou has been reduced, there are now nearly ten times more affairs than during the Taiping era. How can there not be an increase in the number of officials?

古文：且所减皆有职事而冗官不减，此所以为未当也。
现代文：而且，削减的都是有职任的官员，反而没有削减没有专职的闲散官员。
English: Moreover, the cuts were made to officials with official duties, but no cuts were made to idle officials without a full-time job.

古文：至德以来置额外官，敌正官三分之一，若听使计日得资然后停，加两选授同类正员官。如此，则不惟不怨，兼使之喜矣。 
现代文：这就是此次削减官员并不妥当的道理啊。至德年间以来，设置名额外的官员，相当于正式官员的三分之一，如果听凭他们按照在官的日期核定资历，然后停罢他们的官职，再增加文武官两选，授给他们同一类中的正额官职，这样，不仅不会遭到埋怨，还会使他们高兴了。 
English: This is the reason why this reduction of officials is not appropriate. Since the 1950s, if additional officials were appointed, equivalent to one-third of the official officials, if they were allowed to certify their qualifications according to the date of service, and then suspend their official position, and then add two civil and military officers and grant them a full-fledged official position in the same category, this would not only not be complained about, but would also make them happy.

古文：又请诸王未出阁者不除府官，上皆从之。
现代文：李泌又请求对没有到封地去的诸王不授给府官，德宗一概答应下来。
English: Li Xiu also requested that the kings who did not go to their fiefdoms not be given to government officials, and Dezong agreed to all of this.

古文：乙卯，诏先所减官，并复故。
现代文：乙卯，德宗颁诏命令对先前削减的官员，一律恢复原有官职。
English: Second, Emperor Dezong issued an edict to reinstate all officials who had previously been reduced to their original positions.

古文：初，张延赏在西川，与东川节度使李叔明有隙。
现代文：当初，在张延赏任职西川时，与东川节度使李叔明结下了嫌隙。
English: At first, when Zhang Yanbo was in charge of the West River, he and Dongchuan Jiedu caused Li Shuming to close the rift.

古文：上入骆谷，值霖雨，道涂队伍滑，卫士多亡归硃泚，叔明之子升及郭子仪之子曙，令狐彰之子建等六人，恐有奸人危乘舆，相与啮臂为盟，着行滕、钉革奚，更鞚上马以至梁州，他人皆不得近。
现代文：德宗进入骆谷后，正值大雨连绵，路险道滑，有许多卫士逃归朱。李叔明的儿子李升和郭子仪的儿子郭曙、令孤彰的儿子令孤建等六人，惟恐有邪恶的人危及德宗，便在一块儿咬破手臂，立下盟誓。他们裹着绑腿，穿着底上钉有铁钉的皮鞋，轮流为德宗牵马，直到梁州，一概不让其他的人接近德宗。
English: After Dezong entered Luogu, it was the time of continuous heavy rain, and the road was dangerous and slippery. Many guards fled to Zhu. Li Sheng, the son of Li Shuming, Guo Shuhe, the son of Guo Ziyi, and Ling Kuo Jian, the son of Ling Kuo Chang, were six people. In order to prevent evil people from endangering Dezong, they all bit their arms and swore an oath. Wrapped in gaiters and wearing leather shoes with iron nails on the bottom, they took turns leading Dezong's horse until Liangzhou, and did not allow other people to approach Dezong.

古文：及还长安，上皆以为禁卫将军，宠遇甚厚。
现代文：及至回到长安后，德宗将他们全任命为禁卫将军，甚是宠爱优待。
English: After returning to Chang'an, Dezong appointed them all as guards, and they were treated very well.

古文：张延赏知升私出入郜国大长公主第，密以白上。
现代文：张延赏了解到李升私自在郜国大长公主的府第中出入往来，便暗中向德宗禀告了。
English: Zhang Yanbo learned that Li Shengzhi freely entered and left the capital of the Grand Princess of the Grand Duke of Guizhou, and secretly reported to the German Emperor.

古文：上谓李泌曰： 郜国已老，升年少，何为如是！
现代文：德宗对李泌说： 郜国大长公主已经老了，李升却很年轻，怎么能够这样做呢！
English: Dezong said to Li Xiu, "The eldest princess of Shandong Province is already old, but Li Sheng is very young, how can you do this!

古文：殆必有故，卿宜察之。 
现代文：大概其中必有原故，你最好查明此事。 
English: There's probably a reason for this, and you'd better find out.

古文：泌曰： 此必有欲动摇东宫者。
现代文：李泌说： 这一定是有人打算动摇太子的地位。
English: "Someone must be trying to shake the position of the crown prince," Mr. Li said.

古文：谁为陛下言之？ 
现代文：是谁对陛下说的？ 
English: Who told Your Majesty?

古文：上曰： 卿勿问，第为朕察之。 
现代文：德宗说： 你不用问了，往后你慢慢为朕清查此事就是了。 
English: Dezong said, "You don't have to ask, you just need to slowly investigate the matter for me."

古文：泌曰： 必延赏也。 
现代文：李泌说： 讲此事的人一定是张延赏吧。 
English: Li Zuo said: The person who talked about this must be Zhang Yanbo.

古文：上曰： 何以知之？ 
现代文：德宗说： 你怎么知道的？ 
English: Desong said: How did you know?

古文：泌具为上言二人之隙，且曰： 升承恩顾，典禁兵，延赏无以中伤，而郜国乃太子萧妃之母也，故欲以此陷之耳。 上笑曰： 是也。 
现代文：李泌毫不保留地对德宗讲出张延赏与李叔明有嫌隙，而且说： 李升承蒙陛下的恩宠眷顾，掌管着禁卫亲兵，张延赏无法中伤他。然而，郜国大长公主是太子妃萧氏的生母，所以他打算用这件事来陷害他罢了。 德宗笑着说： 是的。 
English: Li Xiu unreservedly told Dezong that Zhang Yanbo had a grudge against Li Shu Ming, and said: Li Sheng was favored by His Majesty and was in charge of the Imperial Guards, so Zhang Yanbo could not slander him. However, the Grand Princess of Shan State was the birth mother of Princess Xiao, so he only intended to use this incident to frame him. Dezong smiled and said: Yes.

古文：泌因请除升它官，勿令宿卫以远嫌。
现代文：于是李泌请求授给李升别的官职，不再让他值宿警卫，以便避嫌。
English: As a result, Li Xuan requested that Li Sheng be given a different official position, and that he no longer be a guard on duty, in order to avoid suspicion.

古文：秋，七月，以升为詹事。
现代文：秋季七月，德宗任命李升为詹事。
English: In the autumn of July, Emperor Dezong appointed Li Sheng as Zhanji.

古文：郜国，肃宗之女也。
现代文：郜国大长公主是肃宗的女儿。
English: She is the daughter of Su Zong.

古文：甲子，割振武之绥、银二州，以右羽林将军韩潭为夏、绥、银节度使，帅神策之士五千、朔方、河东之士三千镇夏州。
现代文：甲子，朝廷从振武分割出绥、银二州，任命右羽林将军韩潭为夏、绥、银节度使，让他率领神策军将士五千人和朔方、河东将士三千人，镇守夏州。
English: In the year of Jia Zi, the imperial court divided the two states of Jia and Yin from Zhenwu, and appointed Han Tan, the general of the Right Feather Forest, as the special envoy of Xia, Jia and Yin, and let him lead the five thousand soldiers of the Shen Zhe Army and the three thousand soldiers of Shuo Fang and Hedong to guard Jia Zhou.

古文：时关东防秋兵大集，国用不充。李泌奏： 自变两税法以来，籓镇、州、县多违法聚敛。
现代文：当时，关东防御吐蕃的兵马大量集结，国家的用度不够充足，李泌上奏说： 自从改行两税法以来，藩镇与州县往往违背规定，搜刮钱财。
English: At that time, a large number of soldiers and horses were amassed for the defense of Kanto and Tubo, and the state's expenditure was not sufficient, Li Xuan said in his report: Since the implementation of the two tax laws, the towns and counties often violated the regulations and scrounged money.

古文：继以硃泚之乱，争榷率、征罚以为军资，点募自防。
现代文：接着发生了朱作乱，地方上争着通过专买和征收获罪吏民用以赎罪的钱谷来获取钱财，用以充当军事费用，以便检选和募集将士，自行防卫。
English: Next came the Zhouzhuang Disturbance, in which localities competed to obtain money and resources through the special purchase and collection of money used by criminals to atone for their sins, to be used as military expenses, in order to select and recruit soldiers, and to defend themselves.

古文：泚既平，自惧违法，匿不敢言。
现代文：朱之乱被平定后，地方上因违犯规定而感到畏惧，故隐瞒着实情而不敢讲出来。
English: After the Zhu Rebellion was quelled, local officials were afraid of violating regulations, so they concealed the truth and did not dare to speak out.

古文：请遣使以诏旨赦其罪，但令革正，自非于法应留使、留州之外，悉输京师。
现代文：请陛下派遣使者，颁布诏旨，赦免他们的罪过，只让他们改正以往的做法，除了按照规定应当留给诸使、留给州府的钱粮以外，其余的一律要输送到京城。
English: I ask Your Majesty to send an envoy, issue an edict, absolve them of their sins, and only let them correct their past practices. In addition to the provisions that should be left to the envoys and the state capital, all the rest should be transported to the capital.

古文：其官典逋负，可征者征之，难征者释之，以示宽大。
现代文：各地方官要处理好拖欠的赋税，对能够征缴的，要征缴上来，对难以征缴的，可以免除征缴，以显示宽大。
English: All local officials should handle tax arrears well. For those that can be collected, they should be collected, and for those that are difficult to collect, they can be exempted from collection to show leniency.

古文：敢有隐没者，重设告赏之科而罪之。 
现代文：对于胆敢隐瞒实情的，要重新颁布奖赏告发者的条令，以便惩处他们。 
English: An order to reward whistleblowers will be reissued to punish those who dare to hide the truth.

古文：上喜曰： 卿策甚长，然立法太宽，恐所得无几！ 
现代文：德宗高兴地说： 你的策谋很好，但是采用的办法过于宽大，恐怕朝廷能够得到的赋税就没有多少了。 
English: Dezong said happily, "Your scheme is good, but the method you have adopted is too lenient. I'm afraid there is not much tax that the imperial court can collect."

古文：对曰： 兹事臣固熟思之，宽则获多而速，急则获少而迟。
现代文：李泌因答说： 对于这件事情，我当然已经想好了。实行宽大的办法，能够得到的数量多而时间短。
English: Li Jiuyin replied: Of course, I have already thought about this matter. The implementation of a lenient method can obtain a large number and a short time.

古文：盖以宽则人喜于免罪而乐输，急则竞为蔽匿，非推鞫不能得其实，财不足济今日之急而皆入于奸吏矣。 
现代文：实行严厉的办法，能够得到的数量少而时间长。这大概是因为实行宽大的办法，人们为免除惩处而欣喜，因而乐于交纳赋税；实行严厉的办法，人们争着隐藏赋税，不经过审讯便不能够查出实情，因而得到的钱财不够接济当前的迫切需要，反而都让邪恶的官吏得去了。 德宗说： 讲得好！ 
English: This is probably due to the fact that in the case of the lenient method, people are happy to pay taxes because they are happy to be exempt from punishment; in the case of the harsh method, people are fighting to hide taxes, they cannot find out the truth without a trial, so the money they get is not enough to meet the current urgent needs, but they let the evil officials have it. Dezong said: Well said!

古文：上曰： 善！ 以度支员外郎元友直为河南、江、淮南句勘两税钱帛使。
现代文：任命度支员外郎元友直为河南、江、淮南句勘两税钱帛使。
English: Appointment of branch member Wai Lang Yuan You Zi as the Henan, Jiangsu and Huainan Jukan two-tax money envoy.

古文：初，河、陇既没于吐蕃，自天宝以来，安西、北庭奏事及西域使人在长安者，归路既绝，人马皆仰给于鸿胪。礼宾委府、县供之，于度支受直。
现代文：当初，河陇地区被吐蕃攻陷。自天宝年间以来，安西、北庭的奏事人员和西域的使者来到长安，由于回去的道路已经断绝，他们的人员马匹都依赖鸿胪寺供给，礼宾院又委托京兆府及所属赤县畿县供应他们，而到度支领受钱财。
English: At the beginning, the Hebei region was invaded by the Tujia. Since the Tianbao era, envoys from Anxi and Beiting and envoys from the western region came to Chang'an. Since the road back had been cut off, their personnel and horses were all dependent on the supply of Hongye Temple. The Protocol House also commissioned the Beijing Zhao Prefecture and its affiliated Qi County of Qi County to supply them, and received money and money in return.

古文：度支不时付直，长安市肆不胜其弊。
现代文：度支不能按时支付钱财，使得长安的商市店辅负担沉得。
English: cannot pay their bills on time, making Chang'an's shops and stores heavily burdened.

古文：李泌知胡客留长安久者，或四十馀年，皆有妻子，买田宅，举质取利，安居不欲归，命检括胡客有田宅者停其给。
现代文：李泌了解到胡人客使在长安居留时间很长，有的已达四十余年，都有了妻子儿女，他们买下了田地和住宅，放高利贷谋取钱财，安心定居下来，不准备回去了。他命令检核胡人客使，凡是拥有田地和住宅的人，停止对他们的给养。
English: Li Zuo learned that the Hu people's envoys had stayed in Chang'an for a long time, some for more than forty years, and had wives and children. They bought fields and houses, used usury to obtain money, settled down safely, and were not ready to go back. He ordered the inspection of the Hu people's envoys, and those who owned fields and houses to stop supporting them.

古文：凡得四千人，将停其给。
现代文：一共查得四千人，准备停止对他们的给养。
English: A total of four thousand people have been identified, and we are preparing to stop feeding them.

古文：胡客皆诣政府诉之，泌曰： 此皆从来宰相之过，岂有外国朝贡使者留京师数十年不听归乎！
现代文：胡人的客使都到相府来申诉此事，李泌说： 这都是历任宰相的过错。哪有让外国前来朝贡的使者在京城留居好几十年而不听凭使者回国的呢！
English: Hu's envoys all came to the prime minister's residence to complain about the matter. Li Xiu said, "This is all the fault of the successive prime ministers. Who has ever allowed foreign envoys who came to pay tribute to stay in Beijing for decades without allowing the envoys to return home!

古文：今当假道于回纥，或自海道各遣归国，有不愿归者，当于鸿胪自陈，授以职位，给俸禄为唐臣。
现代文：如今应该向回纥借道，或者从海道上分别打发使者回国。如果有不愿意回去的，应当前往鸿胪寺自行说明，授给一定的职位，发给薪奉，充当唐朝的臣子。
English: Now it is time to send emissaries to return to China by way of Huiyang or separately from the sea route. If someone does not want to return, he should go to Hongye Temple to explain himself, be given a certain position, be paid a salary, and serve as a vassal of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：人生当乘时展用，岂可终身客死邪！ 
现代文：人生应当顺应时务，施展才力，怎么能够一辈子作客而死呢！ 
English: Life should be in accordance with the times, exerting talent, how can you be a guest for a lifetime and die!

古文：于是胡客无一人愿归者，泌皆分隶神策两军，王子、使者为散兵马使或押牙，馀皆为卒，禁旅益壮。
现代文：于是，胡人客使没有一个人愿意回国，李泌让他们一律分别隶属于神策两军，让胡人中的王子、使者担任无职事的兵马使，或者担任押牙，其余的人都当士兵，禁卫亲军愈发壮大了。
English: As a result, not a single Hu guest envoy was willing to return to the country. Li Xiu made them all subordinate to the two armies of Shen Zhe separately, and let the princes and envoys among the Hu people serve as soldiers without duties, or as escorts, and the rest of them were soldiers. The pro-guarding army grew stronger and stronger.

古文：鸿胪所给胡客才十馀人，岁省度支钱五十万缗，市人皆喜。
现代文：鸿胪寺所供应的胡人客使才有十余人，每年为度支节省钱五十万缗，市肆的商人也都高兴。
English: Only a dozen or so Hu people have been served by Hongyu Temple, saving half a million baht a year in expenses. Merchants in the city are also happy.

古文：上复问泌以复府兵之策。
现代文：德宗又向李泌询问恢复府兵的策略。
English: Dezong also asked Li Jie about the strategy for restoring the troops.

古文：对曰： 今岁征关东卒戍京西者十七万人，计岁食粟二百四万斛。
现代文：李泌回答说： 今年征发关东士兵戍守京西的有十七万人，算来全年食用粮食二百零四万斛。
English: Li Xiu replied: This year, 170,000 soldiers from Guandong have been conscripted to defend West Beijing, and the annual grain consumption is 2.04 million mu.

古文：今粟斗直钱百五十，为钱三百六万缗。
现代文：现在粮食每斗值一百五十钱，合计需钱三百零六万缗。
English: At present, grain is worth 150 yuan per bucket, with a total cost of 3.06 million baht.

古文：国家比遭饥乱，经费不充，就使有钱，亦无粟可籴，未暇议复府兵也。 
现代文：近来国家遭逢饥荒战乱，经费不足，即使有钱，也没有粮食可供买入，所以无暇计议恢复府兵啊。 
English: Recently, the country has suffered from famine and war, funds are insufficient, and even if there is money, there is no grain to buy, so there is no time to discuss the restoration of the army.

古文：上曰： 然将奈何？
现代文：德宗说： 这又如何是好？
English: Dezong said, "How is this good?

古文：亟减戍卒归之，何如？ 
现代文：赶快削减戍守的士兵，让他们回去，你看行吗？ 
English: Quickly reduce the number of soldiers on duty and let them go back, do you see?

古文：对曰： 陛下诚能用臣之言，可以不减戍卒，不扰百姓，粮食皆足，粟麦日贱，府兵亦成。 
现代文：李泌回答说： 如果陛下采用我的建议，可以不用削减戍守的士兵，不用打扰百姓，而使粮食充足，谷子和麦子的价钱逐渐下降，府兵也能够成就起来。 
English: Li Xiu replied, "If Your Majesty adopts my suggestion, you will not have to reduce the number of soldiers on duty, and you will not have to disturb the people, but you will have enough grain, the price of grain and wheat will gradually decrease, and the national army will also be able to achieve.

古文：上曰： 果能如是，何为不用！ 
现代文：德宗说： 果真能够如此，朕怎么会不采用呢！ 
English: Dezong said, "If this is really possible, how could I not adopt it!"

古文：对曰： 此须急为之，过旬日则不及矣。
现代文：李泌回答说： 这必须赶紧去做，再过十天，就来不及了。
English: Li Xiu replied, "This must be done quickly. In another ten days, it will be too late.

古文：今吐蕃久居原、兰之间，以牛运粮，粮尽，占无所用，请发左藏恶缯染为彩缬，因党项以市之，每头不过二三匹，计十八万匹，可致六万馀头。
现代文：如今吐蕃人长期居住在原州和会州一带，用牛运输粮食，粮食吃光后，牛没有用了。请调出左藏中质地变坏的丝帛，染成花色斑烂的丝帛，通过党项人将它们卖给吐蕃人，每换一头牛，不过需要二三匹丝帛，算来拿出十八万匹丝帛，可以换来六万多头牛。
English: Nowadays, the Tujue people have been living in Yuanzhou and Huizhou for a long time, using cattle to transport grain. After the grain is eaten up, the cattle are no use. Please bring out the silk cocoons that have deteriorated in texture and the silk cocoons that have been dyed and mottled, and sell them to the Tujue people through the party members. For each cow, however, two or three silk cocoons are needed. If we take out one hundred and eighty thousand silk cocoons, we can exchange more than sixty thousand cows.

古文：又命诸冶铸农器籴麦种，分赐沿边军镇，募戍卒，耕荒田而种之，约明年麦熟倍偿其种，其馀据时价五分增一，官为籴之。
现代文：再命令各冶炼场铸造农用器具，买进麦种，分别赐给边疆一带的军镇，募集戍守的士兵，让他们耕种荒田，与他们约定明年麦子成熟后加倍偿还所用的种子，对剩下的粮食，按照当时的价钱增加五分之一，由官府收买。
English: He also ordered the smelters to cast agricultural implements, buy in wheat seeds and give them separately to the military towns along the border, recruit soldiers to stay behind and let them cultivate wasteland, and agreed with them to double the repayment of the seeds used after the wheat ripened next year, and to increase the remaining grain by one-fifth according to the price at that time and buy it from the government.

古文：来春种禾亦如之。
现代文：来年春天种庄稼还用这种办法。
English: This method will also be used to grow crops next spring.

古文：关中土沃而久荒，所收必厚。戍卒获利，耕者浸多。
现代文：关中土地肥沃，荒废已久，初种必然会有丰厚的收获，戍卒从中得到好处，耕种的人们便会逐渐多起来了。
English: The land in Guanzhong is fertile and has been abandoned for a long time. The first seed will inevitably have a rich harvest. If farmers benefit from this, the number of people engaged in farming will gradually increase.

古文：边地居人至少，军士月食官粮，粟麦无所售，其价必贱，名为增价，实比今岁所减多矣。 
现代文：边疆地区的居民极为稀少，将士们每月吃官府供应的粮食，他们所收获的谷子、麦子无处去卖，粮食的价钱必然就贱了。所以，名义上是官府增价收买，实际上却比今年粮食的价钱低得多。 德宗说： 好！ 
English: There are very few residents in the frontier areas. The soldiers eat the grain supplied by the government every month. The grain and wheat they harvest have nowhere to be sold, and the price of grain will inevitably be low. Therefore, in name, the government will increase the price, but in reality, it will be much lower than the price of grain this year. Dezong said: Good!

古文：上曰： 善！ 
现代文：当即命令实行这一办法。
English: Emperor Wu said: You said it well!

古文：即命行之。泌又言： 边地官多阙，请募人入粟以补之，可足今岁之粮。 
现代文：李泌又说： 边疆地区的官员有许多空阙，请募集人们交纳粮食，将他们补为边官，便可使今年粮食足够用了。 
English: Li Xiu also said: The officials in the border areas have many vacancies. Please recruit people to pay grain and supplement them as border officials, so that the grain can be used enough this year.

古文：上亦从之，因问曰： 卿言府兵亦集，如何？ 
现代文：德宗又听从了他的建议，接着问道： 你说府兵也可以成就起来，此话怎样？ 
English: Dezong listened to his suggestion and then asked, "You said that a national army can also be formed. What do you mean by that?

古文：对曰： 戍卒因屯田致富，则安于其土，不复思归。
现代文：李泌回答说： 戍守的士兵靠着屯田富裕起来，便会安心留在他们的土地上，不再想回去了。
English: Li Xiu replied, "If the soldiers of the garrison become rich from the farmlands, they will feel safe to stay on their land and no longer want to go back.

古文：旧制，戍卒三年而代，及其将满，下令有愿留者，即以所开田为永业。
现代文：根据原有的制度，戍守的士兵三年轮换一次，到三年将满时，下令凡有愿意留下来的人，将他们所开垦的田地作为永业田。
English: According to the original system, the soldiers stationed there rotated every three years, and when the three years were up, they ordered anyone who wanted to stay to use the fields they had reclaimed as permanent fields.

古文：家人原来来者，本贯给长牒续食而遣之。
现代文：他们家人愿意前来，原籍所在官府便发给沿途提供食品的文书来遣送他们。
English: Their families were willing to come, and the government office where they were originally from sent them with a document to provide food along the way.

古文：据应募之数，移报本道，虽河朔诸帅得免更代之烦，亦喜闻矣。
现代文：当地官府要根据应募的人数，以公文报告本道。即使是河朔地区的各节帅也能够免除替换戍卒的烦劳，也是乐于听命的。
English: According to the number of applicants, the local government should officially report the way. Even the marshals in the Hexuo region can be relieved of the burden of replacing the pawns, and they are willing to obey.

古文：不过数番，则戍卒皆土著，乃悉以府兵之法理之，是变关中之疲弊为富强也。 
现代文：用不了几次轮番替代，戍守边地的士兵便成了定居边疆的本地人，于是一律采用有关府兵的办法来管理他们，这就可以使关中变困苦穷乏为富庶强盛了。 
English: It only takes a few times of rotation, and the soldiers guarding the frontier will become the local people who settle in the frontier. Therefore, the relevant methods of the prefectural army will be used to manage them. This will make Guanzhong become poor and poor and rich and strong.

古文：上喜曰： 如此，天下无复事矣。 
现代文：德宗欢喜地说： 果真如此，天下便不会再发生变故了。 
English: Dezong said happily, "If this is true, there will be no more changes in the world."

古文：泌曰： 未也。
现代文：李泌说： 不是这样。
English: Li Jing said, "That's not true.

古文：臣能不用中国之兵使吐蕃自困。 
现代文：我能够不用兵打仗，便使吐蕃自行困窘。 
English: If I can fight without soldiers, then I will embarrass myself.

古文：上曰： 计将安出？ 
现代文：德宗说： 你有什么计策？ 
English: Desong said: What is your strategy?

古文：对曰： 臣未敢言之，俟麦禾有效，然后可议也。 
现代文：李泌回答说： 我还不敢讲出来。等到麦子和谷子发挥效用了，然后才可以计议此事。 
English: Li Xuan replied, "I dare not say it yet. We will wait for the wheat and the grain to bear fruit, and then we can discuss the matter."

古文：上固问，不对。
现代文：德宗再三询问，都没有得到回答。
English: Repeated inquiries from Dezong went unanswered.

古文：泌意欲结回纥、大食、云南与共图吐蕃，令吐蕃所备者多。知上素恨回纥，恐闻之不悦，并屯田之议不行，故不肯言。
现代文：李泌本意打算联合回纥、大食、云南，与他们共同图谋吐蕃，使吐蕃需要防备的敌手增多，但他知道德宗平素憎恨回纥，惟恐听到他的建议会不高兴，会连同屯田的计议也不实施了，所以他不肯讲出来。
English: Li Xiu originally intended to unite Uighur, Taekwondo, and Yunnan, and work with them to plot against Tibet, increasing the number of enemies that Tibet needed to guard against. However, he knew that Emperor Dezong always hated Uighur, and he was afraid that his suggestion would not be well received and would not be implemented along with the plan for Tunden, so he refused to speak out.

古文：既而戍卒应募，愿耕屯田者什五六。
现代文：不久，屯戍的士兵响应招募了，愿意留下来耕种屯田的人有十分之五六。
English: Soon, the soldiers of the garrison were recruited in response, and five out of ten of them were willing to stay and cultivate the garrison.

古文：壬申，赐骆元光姓名李元谅。
现代文：壬申，德宗赐给骆元光姓氏与名字，叫李元谅。
English: In Jinshin, Emperor Dezong gave Luo Yuanguang the surname and first name of Li Yuan Rong.

古文：左仆射、同平章事张延赏薨。
现代文：左仆射、同平章事张延赏去世。
English: Zuo Fuxia, Tongping Zhang and Zhang Yanbo passed away.

