古文：王淮，字季海，婺州金华人。
现代文：王淮字季海，婺州金华人。
English: Wang Huai, surnamed Ji Hai, is a native of Jinhua, Zhangzhou.

古文：幼颖悟，力学属文。
现代文：他幼年聪颖，理解力强，刻苦学习写作。
English: He was bright and intelligent at a young age, and he worked hard to learn how to write.

古文：登绍兴十五年进士第，为台州临海尉。
现代文：绍兴十五年考中进士，出任台州临海县尉。
English: Shaoxing 15th year of junior high school entrance examination, served as Taizhou Linhai County lieutenant.

古文：郡守萧振一见奇之，许以公辅器。振帅蜀，辟置幕府。
现代文：郡守萧振一见到王淮就认定他是一位奇才，声言王淮日后必成大器，萧振调任蜀帅后，将王淮辟为幕僚。
English: As soon as the county governor Xiao Zhen saw Wang Huai, he recognized that he was a prodigy. He said that Wang Huai would become a great instrument in the future. After Xiao Zhen was transferred to the position of Shu Shu, he appointed Wang Huai as a staff member.

古文：振出，众欲留，淮曰： 万里将母，岂为利禄计。 皆服其器识，迁校书郎。
现代文：萧振要离职，大家都想挽留，王淮说： 万里送母，难道会计较功名利禄。 众人都很佩服王淮学识与气度，王淮晋升为校书郎。
English: When Xiao Zhen was about to leave the company, everyone wanted to retain him. Wang Huai said, "Isn't it better to be an accountant than to be a famous person?" Everyone admired Wang Huai's knowledge and demeanor, and Wang Huai was promoted to school librarian.

古文：高宗命中丞举可为御史者，朱倬举淮，除监察御史，寻迁右正言。
现代文：宋高宗下令中丞举荐可以充任御史的人，朱倬推荐了王淮，王淮因此被任命为监察御史，不久后升为右正言。
English: Song Gaozong ordered Zhongzheng to recommend a person who could serve as imperial historian, and Zhu Xi recommended Wang Huai. Wang Huai was therefore appointed as an inspector of imperial history, and soon after he was promoted to the post of U Zhenggen.

古文：首论： 大臣养尊，小臣持禄，以括囊为智，以引去为高。
现代文：王淮在第一次上高宗书中指出 ：大臣养尊处优，下级官吏保持禄位，他们以搜刮为才智，以退出政坛相标榜。
English: Wang Huai pointed out in his first high school textbook: the ministers are well-off, and the lower-level officials maintain their positions. They are clever at scrounging for talent, and at withdrawing from the political arena.

古文：愿陛下正心以正朝廷，正朝廷以正百官。 宰相汤思退无物望，淮条其罪数十，于是策免。
现代文：臣请陛下正心以正朝廷，正朝廷以正百官。 宰相汤思退有负众望，王淮上书高宗，列举数十条罪过，汤思退因此被罢免。
English: The vassal asked his majesty to be righteous in his heart, to be righteous in the imperial court, and to be righteous in the imperial court. The prime minister, Tang Siyi, failed to live up to the public's expectations, and Wang Huai wrote to Gao Zong, listing dozens of offenses. As a result, Tang Siyi was dismissed.

古文：至于吏部侍郎沈介之欺世盗名，都司方师尹之狡险，大将刘宝掊克结权倖，皆劾罢之。
现代文：吏部侍郎沈介欺世盗名，都司方师尹阴险狡诈，大将刘宝搜刮民财，交结权贵，王淮都一一予以弹劾，使这些人都被罢职。
English: Shen Jie, the attendant of the cadre department, cheated the world and stole the name, the governor of the capital, Yin Yin, was insidious and cunning, the general Liu Bao scrounged the people's wealth and befriended the powerful, and Wang Huai was impeached one by one, so that these people were dismissed.

古文：又奏： 自治之策，治内有三：正心术，宝慈俭，去壅蔽。
现代文：他又上奏说 ：自治良策，朝廷上有三条：端正心术，孝敬父母，罢免使君主受蒙蔽而视听不明的小人。
English: He also wrote: "Self-governance is a good policy, and the Imperial Court has three rules: to have a sound mind, to show filial piety to one's parents, and to dismiss villains who mislead the monarch and whose views and opinions are unclear."

古文：治外有四：固封守，选将帅，明赏罚，储财用。 上深嘉叹。
现代文：治理外朝有四条：稳定地方官员，选择将帅，严明赏罚，储备财用。 高宗读后认为很对。
English: There are four rules for governing the Outer Court: stable local officials, selection of generals, strict rewards and punishments, and use of reserve funds.

古文：除秘书少监兼恭王府直讲。
现代文：王淮官拜秘书少监兼恭王府直讲。
English: Wang Huai, the official secretary of the Junior Supervisor and the direct speech of the King's Palace.

古文：时恭王生子挺，淮白于丞相，曰： 恭王夫人李氏生皇嫡长孙，乞讨论典礼。 钱端礼怒其名称，奏： 淮有年钧以长之说。 上曰： 是何言也，岂不启邪心？ 出淮知建宁府，改浙西提刑。
现代文：其时恭王生子赵挺，王淮告诉丞相说： 恭王夫人李氏生育了皇室嫡系长孙，恳请您讨论典章礼仪。 钱端礼对这种说法很气愤，上奏高宗： 王淮有年钧以长之说。 高宗说： 这是什么话，岂不是会开启邪心？ 王淮被罢职离京，出任建宁知府，改任浙江西路提点刑狱。
English: At that time, Gong Wang's son Zhao Ting was born, and Wang Huai told the chancellor: Gong Wang's wife Li gave birth to the eldest grandson of the royal family, and implored you to discuss the ceremonial etiquette. Qian Duanli was very angry at this statement, and played Gao Zong: Wang Huai has a long life. Gao Zong said: What is this word, will it not open the evil heart? Wang Huai was dismissed from Beijing, served as the governor of Jianning, and was transferred to the West Road Detention Center in Zhejiang.

古文：入见，陈闽中利病甚悉。
现代文：赴任之前，王淮至京师进见高宗，详些陈述福建地区的利病。
English: Before taking up the post, Wang Huai went to Beijing to meet Gao Zong and explain the advantages and disadvantages of Fujian in detail.

古文：帝褒嘉之，且令一至东宫，皇太子待以师儒，特施拜礼。
现代文：高宗嘉奖了王淮，并让他前往东宫，皇太子以师礼相待，特行跪拜之礼。
English: Gaozong commended Wang Huai and let him go to the East Palace. The crown prince treated him as a teacher and made a special kneeling ceremony.

古文：寻召，除太常少卿，除中书舍人兼直学士院。
现代文：不久王淮被召回朝廷，任太常少卿，官拜中书舍人兼直学士院。
English: Soon after, Wang Huai was recalled to the imperial court, and was appointed to the position of minor lord. He was also the official scholar of the Chinese Academy of Sciences.

古文：龙大渊赠太师，仍畀仪同三司恩数，张栻说除太尉、在京宫观，皆封还诏书。
现代文：龙大渊曾官为太师，同时仍给以仪同三司恩，张说官拜太尉，主管在京宫观，王淮认为不合成例，都封还诏书。
English: Long Dayuan was once an official for the grand master, and still gave the honor to the three departments. Zhang said that the official was a grand officer, and the supervisor was in the Beijing Palace. Wang Huai thought that it was not a case of composition, and returned the imperial rescript.

古文：除翰林学士、知制诰，训词深厚，得王言体。
现代文：王淮出任翰林学士、知制诰，所拟文字精微醇厚，符合帝王诏敕样式。
English: Wang Huai served as a scholar of Hanlin and a scholar of knowledge, and the drafted characters were refined and mellow, in line with the style of the imperial edict.

古文：上命择文学行谊之士，淮荐郑伯熊、李焘、程叔达，皆擢用。
现代文：高宗下令选拔有文学行义之士，王淮举荐郑伯熊、李焘、程叔达，这些人均被起用。
English: Gao Zong ordered the selection of people with literary deeds of righteousness, and Wang Huai recommended Zheng Bokum, Li Qian and Cheng Shuda, all of whom were appointed.

古文：淳熙二年，除端明殿学士、签书枢密院事。
现代文：淳熙二年，王淮被任命为端明殿学士、签书枢密院事。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Junxi, Wang Huai was appointed as an academician of the Duanming Palace and a member of the Privy Council.

古文：辛弃疾平茶寇，上功太滥。
现代文：辛弃疾平定茶寇，上书请功太滥。
English: It's hard to get rid of a disease, but it's hard to get rid of a tea thief, and it's hard to get a letter of recommendation.

古文：淮谓： 不核真伪，何以劝有功。 文州蕃部扰边，吴挺奏： 库彦威失利，靖州夷人扰边。 杨倓奏： 田淇失利。 淮谓： 二将战殁，若罪之，何以劝来者。 上尝谕曰： 枢密临事尽公，人无间言，差除能守法甚善。 荐军帅吴拱、郭田、张宣。
现代文：王淮以为： 不核实真假，怎么能勉励有功之人。 文州少数民族侵扰边地，吴挺上奏： 库彦威出师失利，靖州夷人侵扰边地。 杨亻炎上奏 ：田淇出战，遇敌溃败。 王淮对高宗说 ：库彦威、田淇出师不利，然二将均战死沙场，如若还要论二将之罪，怎么能劝慰后来之人。 孝宗曾告谕臣僚说 ：王淮处事公道，人无间言，任免选派官员都能很好地遵守规章制度。 王淮推荐军帅吴拱、郭田、张宣。
English: Wang Huai thought: "Without verifying the truth and falsehood, how can we encourage the meritorious." Wenzhou ethnic minorities invaded the borderland, Wu Ting played up: Ku Yanwei lost the battle, Jingzhou barbarians invaded the borderland. Yang Qianyan played up: Tian Qi went to war and was defeated by the enemy. Wang Huai said to Gao Zong: Ku Yanwei and Tian Qi were unfavorable, but both generals died in the battle, if we still want to talk about the sins of the two generals, how can we console the later people. Xiaozong once told his ministers: "Wang Huai does things fairly, there is no

古文：除同知枢密院事、参知政事。
现代文：王淮官拜同知枢密院事、参知政事。
English: Wang Huai's official titles included Privy Councillor and Councillor of State.

古文：时宰相久虚，淮与李彦颖同行相事。
现代文：当时宰相位空缺很久，王淮与李彦颍二人共同行使宰相职权。
English: At that time, the post of prime minister was vacant for a long time, and Wang Huai and Li Yanxuan jointly exercised the powers of the prime minister.

古文：淮谓： 授官当论贤否，不事形迹。
现代文：王淮说 ：选择官吏，当以是否贤达为标准，不要计较以前的形迹。
English: Wang Huai said: when selecting officials, the criterion should be whether they are talented, and they should not consider their previous records.

古文：诚贤，不敢以乡里故旧废之；非才，不敢以己私庇之。 上称善。
现代文：真是贤才，我亦不敢因为是同乡故旧而废弃；若无才能，我也不敢因与自己有私交而荫庇。 皇帝认为很对。
English: It is true that I am a man of talent, and I dare not discard it because I am an old countryman; if I have no talent, I dare not hide it because I have a personal relationship with myself. The emperor thought it was right.

古文：擢知院事、枢密使。上言武臣岳祠之员宜省，淮曰： 有战功者，壮用其力，老而弃之，可乎？ 赵雄言： 北人归附者，畀以员外置，宜令诣吏部。 上曰： 姑仍旧。 淮曰： 上意即天意也。 雄又奏言： 宗室岳祠八百员，宜罢。 淮曰： 尧亲睦九族，在平章百姓之先；骨肉之恩疏，可乎？ 时辛弃疾平江西寇，王佐平湖南寇，刘焞平广西寇，淮皆处置得宜，论功惟允。上深嘉之，谓： 陈康伯虽有人望，处事则不及卿。 
现代文：王淮表示反对，他说： 尧亲睦九族，在普遍百姓之先；疏远骨肉之恩，可以吗？ 其时辛弃疾平定了江西寇贼，王佐镇压了湖南寇贼，刘火享平息了广西寇贼，王淮均处置得当，论功行赏公正无私。孝宗表扬王淮，对他说： 陈康伯虽有声望，处事则不如爱卿。 
English: Wang Huai objected, saying, "It is better to keep the nine ethnic groups together than to alienate the common people. Is it okay to alienate the flesh-and-blood? At that time, Xin Qian Ji defeated the Jiangxi bandits, Wang Zuo suppressed the Hunan bandits, Liu Hui quelled the Guangxi bandits. Wang Huai dealt with all of them properly, and rewarded them fairly and selflessly. Xiaozong praised Wang Huai and said to him, "Although Chen Kangbo has a reputation, his performance is not as good as Ai Qing."

古文：八年，拜右丞相兼枢密事。
现代文：八年，王淮官拜右丞相兼管枢密院事务。
English: Eight years later, Wang Huai was appointed Minister of the Right and also in charge of the Privy Council.

古文：先是，自夏不雨至秋，是日甘雨如注，士大夫相贺，上亦喜命相而雨，乃命口算诸郡绢钱尽蠲一年，为缗八十万。
现代文：在此之前，自初夏至深秋，长时间干旱，拜相当天，大雨如注，士大夫竞相庆贺，皇帝也很高兴，认为任相得人，老天感知而下雨，于是下令免除各地绢钱、人头税一年，合计缗钱达八十余万。
English: Prior to this, from early summer to late autumn, there was a long period of drought, the weather was bad, and it rained heavily. The scholars competed in celebration, and the emperor was also very happy. He thought that no matter who won, God would sense the rain, so he ordered to exempt all regions from poll tax and head tax for one year, with a total of more than 800,000 yuan.

古文：赵雄罢相，蜀士之在朝者皆有去意。
现代文：赵雄被罢相，蜀地在朝廷任职的官员很不安，都打算离职。
English: Zhao Xiong was dismissed as a minister, and the officials in Shu who served in the imperial court were very uneasy and all planned to leave their posts.

古文：淮谓： 此唐季党祸之胎也，岂圣世所宜有。 皆以次进迁，蜀士乃安。
现代文：王淮对孝宗说： 这是唐末党祸胚胎，难道是太平盛世所应有。 蜀士都依次晋级，人心这才安定。
English: Wang Huai said to Xiaozong, "This is the embryo of the party's disaster at the end of the Tang Dynasty, is it something that should exist in a peaceful and prosperous world?

古文：枢密都承旨王抃怙宠为奸，淮极陈其罪，谓： 人主受谤，鲜不由此。 上即斥之，且曰： 丞相直谅无隐，君臣之间正宜如此。 章颖论事狂直，上将黜之，淮曰： 陛下乐闻直言，士大夫以言相高，此风可贺也。黜之适成其名。 上说，颖复留。时以荒政为急，淮言： 李椿老成练达，拟除长沙帅，朱熹学行笃实，拟除浙东提举，以倡郡国。 其后推赏，上曰： 朱熹职事留意。 淮言： 修举荒政，是行其所学，民被实惠，欲与进职。 上曰： 与升直徽猷阁。 成都阙帅，上加访问，淮以留正对。上曰： 非闽人乎？ 淮曰： 立贤无方，汤之执中也。
现代文：成都缺帅，皇帝物色人选，王淮举荐留正。皇帝问道 ：留正不是福建人吗？ 
English: Chengdu was short of a leader, the emperor was looking for a candidate, and Wang Huai recommended Ruzheng. The emperor asked: Wasn't Ruzheng from Fujian?

古文：必曰闽有章子厚、吕惠卿，不有曾公亮、苏颂、蔡襄乎？
现代文：王淮回答说： 立贤不论地域，商汤不偏不倚做得很公平。一定要说闽地出了章子厚、吕惠卿那样的奸臣，同一地区不也出了曾公亮、苏颂、蔡襄这样的贤臣吗？
English: Wang Huai replied, "Regardless of the region, Li Xian did a fair job, and Shang Tang did a fair job. It must be said that traitorous ministers such as Zhang Zi Hou and Lü Huixing emerged suddenly, but didn't the same region also produce wise ministers such as Zeng Gu Liang, Su Song and Cai Xiang?

古文：必曰江、浙多名臣，不有丁谓、王钦若乎？ 上称善。拜左丞相。
现代文：若说江浙多名臣，不也出了丁谓、王钦若吗？ 皇帝认为很对，王淮官拜左丞相。
English: If it is said that there are many ministers in Jiangsu and Zhejiang, isn't there also a Ding Zhe, Wang Qin Ruo? The emperor thought it was very right that Wang Huai should be the minister of the left.

古文：天长水害七十余家，或谓不必以闻，淮曰： 昔人谓人主不可一日不闻水旱盗贼，《记》曰： 四方有败，必先知之。
现代文：天长县遭水灾，七十多户人家受害，有人说不必上奏皇帝，王淮说： 前人曾说皇上不可一日不闻水旱盗贼，《论》曰： 天下欠收，一定要先让皇帝知道。 
English: Tianchang County was flooded, and more than 70 households were affected. Some people said that it was unnecessary to appeal to the emperor. Wang Huai said: The ancients once said that the emperor should not ignore the water thief for a day. "On" said: If there is a poor harvest in the world, we must first let the emperor know.

古文：岂可不以闻？ 镇江饥民强借菽粟，执政请痛惩之，淮曰： 令甲，饥民罪不至死。 进士八人求以免举恩为升等，淮曰： 八人得之，则百人援之。 龚颐以执政之客补官，求诣铨曹，淮以此门不可启，绝其请。
现代文：怎么可以不让皇帝知道呢？ 镇江饥饿百姓强行向政府借粮，执政大臣请求严厉惩罚百姓，王淮说： 法令规定，饥民犯罪不至被处死。 八名进士请求用免举恩数晋级，王淮回答说： 八人得到后，则会有百人援引为例。 龚颐以执政门客补官，请求去铨曹任职，王淮认为不可开此先例，予以拒绝。
English: The starving people of Zhenjiang River forcibly borrowed grain from the government, and the ruling minister requested that the people be severely punished, Wang Huai said: The law stipulates that the crimes of the starving people shall not be executed. Eight Jin soldiers requested to be promoted with the number of exemptions, and Wang Huai replied: After eight people get it, there will be a hundred people citing it as an example.

古文：尝言跅弛之士，缓急能出死力，乃以周极知安丰军，辛弃疾与祠。
现代文：王淮曾说，放荡不羁，不循规矩的人，危急时刻会全力以赴，不惜舍身，于是让周极出任安丰军知军，辛弃疾任祠禄官。
English: Wang Huai once said that people who are unruly and do not follow the rules will go all out in a critical moment and sacrifice themselves, so he let Zhou Ji serve as the commander of the Anfeng army and the official of the shrine.

古文：上章力求去，以观文殿大学士判衢州。
现代文：王淮上书皇帝，坚决请求离职，孝宗让王淮以观文殿大学士判衢州。
English: Wang Huai sent a letter to the emperor, firmly requesting to leave the post, and Xiaozong let Wang Huai be sentenced to Zhangzhou as a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism.

古文：淮力辞，改提举洞霄宫。
现代文：王淮拒不接受任命，改任提举洞霄宫。
English: Wang Huai refused to accept the appointment and was transferred to Tongxiao Palace.

古文：光宗嗣位，诏询初政，淮以尽孝进德，奉天敬民，用人立政，罔不在初。
现代文：光宗即位，下诏征求即位之初治国对策。王淮认为应以尽孝进德，奉天敬民，用人立政为本。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Guangzong, the following edict was issued to solicit the best countermeasures for governing the country at the beginning of the enthronement. Wang Huai believed that it should be based on filial piety, obeying heaven and respecting the people, and employing people to establish politics.

古文：母亡，居丧如礼。
现代文：生母去世，王淮以礼服丧。
English: After the death of his birth mother, Wang Huai mourned in ceremonial dress.

古文：得疾，忽语家人曰： 《易》卦六十四，吾年亦然。 淳熙十六年薨。
现代文：一天王淮生病，他对家人说： 《易》有六十四卦，我的寿命也是如此。 淳熙十六年王淮逝世。
English: One day when Wang Huai fell ill, he said to his family: "There are sixty-four stories in Yi, and so is my lifespan.

古文：讣闻，上哀悼，辍视朝，赠少师，谥文定。
现代文：噩耗传至京师，皇帝十分悲伤，停止临朝视事表示哀悼，赠王淮为少师，谥号 文定 。
English: The bad news spread to the Beijing division, the emperor was very sad, stopped the inspection of the imperial court to express his condolences, and presented Wang Huai as a junior division, and his nickname was Wending.

古文：初，朱熹为浙东提举，劾知台州唐仲友。
现代文：当初，朱熹任浙东提举，曾弹劾台州知州唐仲友。
English: At the beginning, Zhu Xi was appointed as the leader of East Zhejiang Province, and once impeached the leader of Taizhou Province, Chizhou Tang Zhongyou.

古文：淮素善仲友，不喜熹，乃擢陈贾为监察御史，俾上疏言： 近日道学假名济伪之弊，请诏痛革之。 郑丙为吏部尚书，相与叶力攻道学，熹由此得祠。
现代文：王淮一向与唐仲友关系很好，不喜欢朱熹，于是他提拔陈贾为监察御史，指使陈贾上书说： 近来道学假名济伪之弊盛行，请皇帝下诏革除这种恶行。 郑丙任吏部尚书，与陈贾合力攻击道学，朱熹因此改任祠禄官闲居。
English: Wang Huai had always had a good relationship with Tang Zhongyou and did not like Zhu Xi, so he promoted Chen Jia to the position of inspector of imperial history and ordered Chen Jia to write a letter saying: Recently, the evil of giving false names to Taoism has been prevalent, please ask the emperor to issue an edict to eliminate this evil practice.

古文：其后庆元伪学之禁始于此。
现代文：后来的庆元伪学之禁即源于此。
English: This was the origin of the later ban on pseudoscience in Qingyuan.

古文：赵雄字温叔，资州人。
现代文：赵雄字温叔，资州人。
English: Zhao Xiong Zi Wen Shu, from Zhizhou.

古文：为隆兴元年类省试第一。
现代文：隆兴元年类省试赵雄考取第一名。
English: In the first year of Longxing, Zhao Xiong won the first place in the provincial examination.

古文：虞允文宣抚四蜀，辟干办公事，入相，荐于朝。
现代文：虞允文任四川宣抚使，将赵雄辟为宣抚使司干办公事，虞允文被召回朝廷任宰相后，将赵雄举荐入朝。
English: Yu Yunwen was appointed as the Sichuan envoy, and Zhao Xiong was appointed as the envoy's secretary. After Yu Yunwen was recalled to the imperial court to serve as prime minister, he recommended Zhao Xiong to the imperial court.

古文：乾道五年，召见便殿，孝宗大奇之，即日手诏除正字。
现代文：乾道五年，孝宗在便殿召见赵雄，以为奇才，当日亲自手写诏书拜赵雄为秘书省正字。
English: After five years of dry road, Xiaozong summoned Zhao Xiong in the toilet hall, thinking that he was a wizard, and on the same day he personally hand-wrote an edict to worship Zhao Xiong as the secretary of the provincial government.

古文：范成大使金，将行，雄当登对，允文招与之语。
现代文：范成大出使金朝，快到启程的日子，轮到赵雄与孝宗对谈，虞允文将赵雄叫去与他谈话。
English: Fan Chengda sent an envoy to the Kim dynasty, and it was Zhao Xiong's turn to talk with Xiaozong on the day of departure. Yu Yunwen called Zhao Xiong to talk with him.

古文：既进见，雄极论恢复。
现代文：晋见孝宗时，赵雄力论恢复中原，正合皇帝心意。
English: When Emperor Jin met Emperor Xiaozong, Zhao Xiongli proposed to restore the Central Plains, which was in line with the Emperor's will.

古文：孝宗大喜曰： 功名与卿共之。 即除右史，两月除舍人。
现代文：孝宗很高兴地对赵雄说 ：功名当与你共享。 于是立即拜赵雄为右史，二个月后晋升为舍人。
English: Xiaozong happily said to Zhao Xiong, "Your achievements should be shared with you," and immediately appointed Zhao Xiong as his right-hand man, and two months later promoted him to the position of assistant.

古文：金使耶律子敬贺会庆节，雄馆伴。
现代文：金廷使节耶律子敬来到朝廷祝贺会庆节，赵雄任馆伴使。
English: The envoy of the Qing Dynasty, Ye Ruzi, respectfully came to the imperial court to congratulate the festival, and Zhao Xiong served as the accompanying envoy.

古文：子敬披露事情不敢隐，逻者以闻。
现代文：耶律子敬披露事情不敢隐瞒，巡逻士兵将此禀告上级。
English: Yeruttsi did not dare to conceal the disclosure, and the patrol soldiers reported this to their superiors.

古文：上夜召雄，雄具以子敬所言对，上喜。
现代文：孝宗连夜召见赵雄，赵雄将耶律子敬所讲原原本本告诉皇上，孝宗很高兴。
English: Xiaozong called Zhao Xiong in the middle of the night. Zhao Xiong told the emperor the original text of what Ye Ruzi Kei had said. Xiaozong was very pleased.

古文：金使入辞，故事当用乐，雄奏： 卜郊有日，天子方斋，乐不可用。 上难之，遣中使谕雄，雄奏： 金使必不敢不顺，即有他，臣得引与就馆。 上大喜。
现代文：金使返回前入廷辞行，按惯例应当奏乐，赵雄反对，上奏道： 占卜祭祀天地多日，天子正在斋戒，不可奏乐。 孝宗感到为难，派遣宦官告诉赵雄，不可不用乐。赵雄回奏 ：金使一定不敢不顺从，若有其他变故，我就将使者带回驿馆。 
English: According to the usual practice, the envoy should play music before returning to the court, but Zhao Xiong objected, saying that the music should not be played because the divination ritual would last for many days, and the emperor was fasting. Xiaozong felt embarrassed, and sent an eunuch to tell Zhao Xiong that he should not play music. Zhao Xiong replied: The envoy must not disobey, and if there are any other changes, I will bring the envoy back to the Summer Palace.

古文：雄请复置恢复局，日夜讲磨，条具合上意，除中书舍人。
现代文：孝宗很高兴。赵雄又上书孝宗，恳请设置恢复局，君臣日夜相互探讨恢复之计，所有论述都符合孝宗的心意，孝宗拜赵雄为中书舍人。
English: Xiaozong was very pleased. Zhao Xiong wrote to Xiaozong again, imploring him to set up a restoration bureau, and the monarch and his ministers discussed the restoration plan with each other day and night. All the discussions were in line with the intention of Xiaozong. Xiaozong worshipped Zhao Xiong as a scholar.

古文：自选人入馆至此，未满岁也。
现代文：这样，赵雄升迁很快，自选人升至馆职，还不满一年时间。
English: In this way, Zhao Xiong was promoted quickly, and it took less than a year for the self-selected person to be promoted to the post of librarian.

古文：时金将起河南之役，议尽以诸陵梓宫归于我。
现代文：其时金人将挑起河南之役，议定尽以诸陵梓宫归还宋廷。
English: At that time, the Jin people will provoke the Henan Campaign, and it was agreed to return all the mausoleums and palaces to the Song Dynasty.

古文：上命雄出使贺生辰，仍止奉迁陵寝及正受书仪。
现代文：孝宗令赵雄出使金国，前往祝贺生日，金人只同意迁回陵寝及确定国书仪式。
English: Xiaozong ordered Zhao Xiong to send an envoy to Jin to congratulate him on his birthday, but the Jin people only agreed to move back to the mausoleum and confirm the national book ceremony.

古文：雄既见金主，争辨数四。
现代文：赵雄拜见金主后，多次同他争辩。
English: After Zhao Xiong's meeting with the financier, he repeatedly argued with him.

古文：其臣屡喝起，雄辞益力，卒得请乃已，金人谓之 龙斗 。
现代文：金廷大臣多次站起喝骂赵雄，赵雄无所畏惧，辩词更加有力，最终使金主同意了他的请求，金人将这称为 龙斗 。
English: Minister Jin Ting repeatedly stood up and shouted at Zhao Xiong. Zhao Xiong was fearless, and his arguments were more powerful. In the end, the gold owner agreed to his request. The gold people called this "dragon fighting."

古文：尝上疏论恢复计，大略谓： 莫若由蜀以取陕西，得陕西以临中原，是秦制六国之势也。 八年，以母忧去。
现代文：赵雄曾上书论述恢复计策，大体以为： 恢复应由川蜀进取陕西，占领陕西，虎视中原，则成秦国控制六国大势。 八年，赵雄以母亲逝世，离职守丧。
English: Zhao Xiong once wrote a book to discuss the restoration strategy, and generally believed that: the restoration should be carried out by Sichuan Shu to enter Shaanxi, occupy Shaanxi, and control the six countries.In eight years, Zhao Xiong passed away with his mother, leaving office in mourning.

古文：淳熙二年，召为礼部侍郎，除端明殿学士，签书枢密院事。
现代文：淳熙二年，赵雄被召回朝廷任礼部侍郎，官拜端明殿学士、签书枢密院事。
English: In the second year of Aung Hee, Zhao Xiong was called back to the imperial court to serve as the attendant of the ceremonial department, the official worship of the Duan Myeongdong, and the signing of the Privy Council.

古文：一日奏事，上曰： 今夏蚕麦甚熟、丝米价平可喜。 雄奏： 孟子论王道始于不饥不寒。 上曰 近世士大夫好高论，耻言农事，微有西晋风。
现代文：一天，赵雄奏事，孝宗说 ：今年夏季蚕丝小麦成熟，丝、米价格稳定，形势喜人。 赵雄回奏道： 孟子以为，王道始于不饥不寒。 孝宗说 ：近世士大夫好发高论，耻谈农事，稍有西晋遗风。
English: One day, Zhao Xiong gave a speech, and Xiaozong said: This summer, silk and wheat are ripe, silk and rice prices are stable, and the situation is gratifying. Zhao Xiong echoed: Mencius thought that the royal road began with not being hungry and not being cold. Xiaozong said: Recent scholars like to talk about higher education, talk about agricultural affairs, and have a slight Western Jin style.

古文：岂知《周礼》与《易》言理财，周公、孔子曷尝不以理财为务？
现代文：岂知《周礼》与《易》谈理财，周公、孔子何尝不以理财为急务？
English: Don't you know that "Zhou Li" and "Yi" are talking about financial management, why don't Zhou Gong and Confucius take financial management as an urgent matter?

古文：且不独此，士夫讳言恢复，不知其家有田百亩，内五十亩为人所据，亦投牒理索否？ 雄曰： 陛下志在大有为，敢不布尧言，书之《时政记》。 十一月，同知枢密院事。
现代文：不仅如此，士大夫讳言恢复，不知家中有田百亩，其中五十亩为人占去，是否要投书官府，伸理索还？ 赵雄回答说： 陛下想大有作为，臣怎敢不宣传帝尧之言，载入时政记。 十一月，赵雄任同知枢密院事。
English: Not only that, but the scholar-bureaucrat kept quiet about the resumption, not knowing that there were 100 mu of farmland in the family, of which 50 mu were occupied by people, whether it was necessary to submit the book to the government and seek a solution? Zhao Xiong replied: Your Majesty wants to do a great deal, how dare the minister not publicize the words of the emperor and record them in the Political Record. In November, Zhao Xiong was appointed to the Tongzhi Privy Council.

古文：五年三月，参知政事。
现代文：五年三月，赵雄升任参知政事。
English: In March of the same year, Zhao Xiong was promoted to the post of vice-governor.

古文：十一月，拜右丞相。
现代文：十一月，官拜右丞相。
English: In November, he was also awarded the title of Minister of the Right.

古文：每进见，必曰 二帝在沙漠 ，未尝离诸口也。
现代文：每次拜见皇帝，赵雄一定说： 二帝在沙漠。 这句话未曾离口。
English: Every time he met the emperor, Zhao Xiong always said: "The Second Emperor is in the desert."

古文：朱熹累召不出，雄请处以外郡，命知南康军。
现代文：朝廷多次召用朱熹，朱熹拒不应诏，赵雄请求让朱熹到地方任职，孝宗命朱熹为南康军知军。
English: The imperial court repeatedly summoned Zhu Xi, but Zhu Xi refused to accept the invitation, Zhao Xiong requested that Zhu Xi serve in a local post, and Xiaozong ordered Zhu Xi to be the leader of the Nankang Army.

古文：熹极论时事，上怒，谕雄令分析。
现代文：朱熹上书论到时事，使孝宗很不高兴，孝宗令赵雄加以判别分析。
English: Zhu Xi mentioned the current affairs in his book, which made Xiaozong very unhappy. Xiaozong ordered Zhao Xiong to judge and analyze it.

古文：雄奏： 熹狂生，词穷理短，罪之适成其名。
现代文：赵雄奏道 ：朱熹是个狂妄无知的人，词穷理短，将其处罪正成就了他的名声。
English: Zhao Xiong said, "Zhu Xi is an arrogant and ignorant person, his words are short, and punishing him has made his reputation.

古文：若天涵地育，置而不问可也。 会周必大亦力言之，乃止。
现代文：若老天包涵大地保佑，可以置而不问。 碰巧周必大也极力劝阻，孝宗才停止处罚朱熹。
English: If the heavens contain the earth's blessing, it can be placed without asking. As it happens, Zhou Bida also strongly dissuaded, and only then did Xiaozong stop punishing Zhu Xi.

古文：绍兴帅张津献羡余四十万缗，雄乞降旨下绍兴，以其钱为民代输和买身丁折帛钱之半，使取诸民者，民复得之，足以见圣主之德。
现代文：绍兴帅张津献上多余杂税四十万缗，赵雄请求孝宗降旨绍兴府，用这笔钱替百姓代为交纳和买身丁钱、折帛钱半数，使其取之于百姓，又用之于民，足以体现圣主德泽。
English: Zhao Xiong requested Xiaozong to lower the order of the Shaoxing government, and use this money to pay and buy half of the money for the people, so that it could be taken from the people and used for the people, enough to reflect the Lord's virtue.

古文：自雄独相，蜀人在朝者仅十数。
现代文：自从赵雄任相，蜀地士人在朝廷任职者仅十多人。
English: Since Zhao Xiong assumed the post of minister, there have been only a dozen or so people from Shu who have held positions in the imperial court.

古文：及眷衰，有言其私里党者，上疑之。
现代文：等到皇帝对他的恩泽衰减，有人传言他偏袒乡人，引起孝宗疑心。
English: When the emperor's favor to him waned, there were rumors that he favored the villagers, which aroused the suspicions of Xiaozong.

古文：已而陈岘为四川制置，王渥为茶马，命从中出。
现代文：不久陈岘任四川制置使，王渥为提举茶马事，任免令从皇宫中降出。
English: Soon after, Chen Xi was appointed Sichuanese envoy, and Wang Wo was removed from the imperial palace for raising the tea and horse business.

古文：雄求去，诏勉留，曰： 丞相任事不避怨，选才无乡旧。 盖有所激也。
现代文：赵雄请求离职，孝宗下诏劝勉挽留，说 ：丞相处事不避怨仇，选择人才不偏乡党故旧。 盖有所激励。
English: Zhao Xiong requested to leave the post, and Xiaozong issued an edict to persuade him to stay, saying, "You should not avoid grudges when getting along with others, and you should not be biased towards your hometown when selecting talent, as is the custom of the Party.

古文：祖宗时蜀人未尝除蜀帅，雄请外，除观文殿大学士、四川制置使。
现代文：按宋廷祖宗之法，蜀帅不用蜀人充任，赵雄请求离开京地出外任职，除观文殿大学士、四川制置使。
English: According to the law of Song Ting Zu Zong, Shu Shuai does not need Shu people to fill the post, Zhao Xiong requested to leave Beijing to serve outside, in addition to Guanwendeng University and Sichuan system.

古文：王蔺为御史，以故事不可，上疏论之。
现代文：王蔺为御史，以为无先例，上书论谏。
English: Wang Yao was the imperial historian, and he thought that there was no precedent, so he wrote a book about Yao.

古文：雄乞免，改知泸南安抚使。
现代文：赵雄请求收回成命，改任泸南安抚使。
English: Zhao Xiong requested that his commission be revoked and that he be reassigned to the post of Peacemaker of Southern Fujian.

古文：上思雄不忘，改知江陵府。
现代文：孝宗不忘与赵雄旧情，改命赵雄为江陵府知府。
English: Not forgetting his past relationship with Zhao Xiong, Xiaozong changed Zhao Xiong's name to Jiangling prefectural governor.

古文：江陵无险可恃，雄请城江陵，城成，民不告扰。
现代文：江陵无险可以依靠，赵雄请求筑城，事成，百姓没有受到侵扰。
English: There is no danger in Gangneung that can be relied on. Zhao Xiong's request to build a city was successful, and the people were not disturbed.

古文：张栻再被召，论恢复固当，第其计非是，即奏疏。
现代文：张木式两次被孝宗召见，他以为恢复之议固然不错，只是计策不当，又草成奏疏。
English: Zhang Mu-shih was summoned twice by Xiaozong. He thought that although the restoration proposal was good, it was just an improper strategy, and the result was a poor performance.

古文：孝宗大喜，翌日以疏宣示，且手诏云： 恢复当如栻所陈方是。 即除侍讲，云： 且得直宿时与卿论事。 虞允文与雄之徒不乐，遂沮抑之。
现代文：孝宗很高兴，第二天将奏疏拿给大臣观看，并且亲自书写诏令： 恢复应当如张木式所陈述才对。 随后以张木式为侍讲官，说： 尚且得以在卿直班时与卿讨论政事。 虞允文与赵雄等人很不高兴，他们于是诋毁并抑制张木式。
English: Xiaozong was very pleased, and the next day he showed the transcript of the speech to the minister, and personally wrote the edict: The restoration should be as stated by Zhang Muxihong. Then, with Zhang Muxihong as the attendant lecturer, he said: I was able to discuss political affairs with you when you were on duty. Yu Yunwen and Zhao Xiong were very unhappy, so they slandered and restrained Zhang Muxihong.

古文：广西横山买马，诸蛮感悦，争以善马至。
现代文：朝廷于广西横山买马，当地各部族都很高兴，争相用好马与朝廷交易。
English: The imperial court bought horses in Hengshan, Guangxi, and the local tribes were very happy, competing to use good horses to trade with the imperial court.

古文：上知栻治行，甚向栻，众皆忌嫉。
现代文：孝宗知道张木式治理政务的成绩，偏向任用张木式，大臣都很嫉妒。
English: Knowing the achievements of Zhang Mu-style governance, Xiaozong was inclined to appoint Zhang Mu-style, and the ministers were jealous.

古文：洎栻复出荆南，雄事事沮之。
现代文：等到张木式再至荆南任职，赵雄就事事为难张木式。
English: When Zhang Mu-shih returned to Jingnan, Zhao Xiong found it difficult to deal with Zhang Mu-shih.

古文：时司天奏相星在楚地，上曰： 张栻当之。 人愈忌之。
现代文：当时司天上奏，相星在楚地，孝宗说 ：张木式当是。 人们愈加忌恨张木式。
English: At that time, the secretary played in the sky, and the star was in Chudi, and Xiaozong said: Zhangmu style should be. People hated Zhangmu style more and more.

古文：光宗将受禅，召雄，雄上万言书，陈修身齐家以正朝廷之道，言甚剀切。
现代文：光宗将受禅即帝位，召见赵雄，赵雄上万言书，陈述修身齐家以正朝廷之道，所论都很切合实际。
English: Guangzong will accept Zen as the imperial throne, summon Zhao Xiong, Zhao Xiong will write a thousand words, and state the way of self-cultivation and the way of the imperial court, all of which are very practical.

古文：诏授宁武军节度使、开府仪同三司，进卫国公，改帅湖北。
现代文：光宗下诏授予赵雄宁武军节度使、开府仪同三司，进封卫国公，改任湖北安抚使。
English: Under the edict of Emperor Guangzong, Zhao Xiongning was awarded the title of the military festival envoy, the title of the Kaifu ceremony and the title of the three departments, the title of the feudal defense minister, and the title of the Hubei pacification envoy.

古文：疾甚，改判资州，又除潼川府，改隆兴府。
现代文：赵雄患重病改判资州，又为潼川府知府，改任隆兴府知府。
English: Zhao Xiong was seriously ill and was sentenced to Zizhou, and was also the governor of Xichuan Prefecture and the governor of Longxing Prefecture.

古文：绍熙四年薨，年六十五，赠少师。
现代文：绍熙四年赵雄逝世，终年六十五岁，朝廷追赠为少师。
English: Zhao Xiong passed away in the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Shao Xi at the age of 65, and was posthumously awarded the title of Junior Teacher by the imperial court.

古文：嘉定二年，谥文定。
现代文：嘉定二年，定谥号为 文定 。
English: In the second year of Jiading, the official name was changed to Wending.

