古文：圣君任法而不任智，任数而不任说，任公而不任私，任大道而不任小物，然后身佚而天下治。
现代文：圣明君主依靠法度而不依靠智谋，依靠政策而不依靠议论，依靠公而不依靠私，依靠大道而不依靠小事，结果是自身安闲而天下太平。
English: The enlightened monarch relies on laws and regulations rather than on wisdom and strategy, on policies rather than on discussions, on the public rather than on himself, on the highway rather than on trifles. As a result, he is at ease and the world is at peace.

古文：失君则不然，合法而任智，故民舍事而好誉；舍数而任说，故民舍实而好言；舍公而好私，故民离法而妄行；舍大道而任小物，故上劳烦，百姓迷惑，而国家不治。
现代文：失国之君就不是如此，弃法度而依靠智谋，所以百姓也就丢开生产而追逐虚名；弃政策而依靠议论，所以百姓也就丢开实际而好说空话；弃公而依靠私，所以百姓也就背离法度而胡作妄为；弃大道而依靠小事，所以君主劳烦忙乱，人民迷惑不清，而国家不得安定。
English: This is not the case with a king who has lost his country. Abandoning the law and relying on wisdom and strategy, the people abandoned production and chased a false reputation; abandoning policy and relying on discussion, the people abandoned reality and talked nonsense; abandoning the public and relying on me, the people also deviated from the law and acted recklessly; abandoning the road and relying on trifles, so the monarch was busy, the people were confused, and the country was not stable.

古文：圣君则不然，守道要，处佚乐，驰骋弋猎，钟鼓竽瑟，宫中之乐，无禁圉也。
现代文：圣明的君主就不是这样，只掌握国家的主要原则，而过着安闲快乐的生活，跑马打猎，鸣钟击鼓，吹竿奏瑟，宫中的娱乐没有什么拘束。
English: This is not the case with the saintly monarch, who only grasps the main principles of the country, but lives a leisurely and happy life, running horses and hunting, ringing bells and playing drums, blowing rods and playing serpents, and there is no restraint in the entertainment of the palace.

古文：不思不虑，不忧不图，利身体，便形躯，养寿命，垂拱而天下治。
现代文：他不思不虑，不忧不谋，利其身体，适其形躯，保养其寿命，垂衣拱手安坐而天下太平。
English: He does not think about it, does not worry about it, takes care of his body, adapts his body, maintains his life, hangs his clothes, sits quietly, and the world is peaceful.

古文：是敌人主有能用其道者，不事心，不劳意，不动力，而土地自辟，囷仓自实，蓄积自多，甲兵自强，群臣无诈伪，百官无奸邪，奇术技艺之人莫敢高言孟行以过其情、以遇其主矣。
现代文：所以，君主能够运用这个原则的，就不操心，不劳神，不费力，而土地自然开辟了，仓廪自然充实了，积蓄自然丰富了，兵力自然强大了，群臣没有诈伪的，百官没有奸邪的，有特殊技艺的人也都不敢用浮夸的语言、粗莽的行为来夸大个人，欺骗君主了。
English: Therefore, if the monarch can apply this principle, he will not worry, not toil, not toil, and the land will naturally open up, the barns will naturally be filled, the savings will naturally be rich, the military will naturally be strong, the courtiers will not be fraudulent, the officials will not be treacherous, and people with special skills will not dare to use pompous language and rough behavior to exaggerate individuals and deceive the monarch.

古文：昔者尧之治天下也，犹埴之在埏也，唯陶之所以为；犹金之在垆；恣冶之所以铸。
现代文：从前尧治理天下，人民象是粘土在模具里一样，任凭陶工去随意制作；又象金属在炼炉里一样，任凭冶工去随意铸造。
English: In the past, the world was ruled by the emperor, and the people were like clay in a mold, left to the potter to make at will; and like metal in a furnace, left to the smith to cast at will.

古文：其民引之而来，推之而往，使之而成，禁之而止。
现代文：那人民真是招之就来，推之即去，使役他们就能够完成任务，禁戒他们就能够及时制止。
English: It is true that the people come when called and leave when pushed. They can accomplish their tasks when they are forced, and they can stop in time when they are forbidden.

古文：故尧之治也，善明法禁之令而已矣。
现代文：尧的治理方法，不过是善于明确地发布该怎么办和不要怎么办的法令罢了。
English: The government's method of governance is nothing more than being good at issuing clear decrees on what to do and what not to do.

古文：黄帝之治天下也，其民不引而来，不推而往，不使而成，不禁而止。
现代文：黄帝的治理天下，人民不用招引就来，不用推动就去，不用役使就能够自成其事，不用禁戒就能够自行停止。
English: Under the governance of the Yellow Emperor, the people do not need to be attracted to come, do not need to be pushed to go, do not need to be forced to do things, and do not need to be forbidden to stop on their own.

古文：故黄帝之治也，置法而不变，使民安其法者也。
现代文：黄帝的治理方法，那就是定了法就不改变，让人民习惯于依法行事。
English: The governance method of the Yellow Emperor was that the law would not be changed once it was established, so that the people would get used to acting according to the law.

古文：所谓仁义礼乐者，皆出于法。
现代文：所谓仁义礼乐，都是从法里产生的。
English: The so-called rites of benevolence and righteousness are all derived from the Dharma.

古文：此先圣之所以一民者也。
现代文：这法是先圣用来统一人民行动的。
English: This law was the first to be used to unify people's actions.

古文：《周书》曰： 国法，法不一，则有国者不祥；民不道法，则不祥；国更立法以典民，则不祥；群臣不用礼义教训，则不祥；百官服事者离法而治，则不祥。 
现代文：《周书》上说： 国法废弛不统一，国君不祥；人民不守法，不祥；国家擅改已立的法度来管理人民，不祥；大臣们不用礼节和法制来教育百姓，不祥；大小百官管理国事的人脱离法度办事，不祥。 
English: The "Weekly Bulletin" said: the national law is not unified, the ruler is ominous; the people do not abide by the law, ominous; the state arbitrarily changes the established laws to manage the people, ominous; the ministers do not use etiquette and the legal system to educate the people, ominous; the people who manage state affairs are ominous.

古文：故曰：法者不可不恒也，存亡治乱之所以出，圣君所以为天下大仪也。
现代文：所以说：法是不可不永远坚持的，它是存亡治乱的根源，是圣明君主用来作为天下最高标准的。
English: Therefore, it is said: the law must be upheld forever, it is the root of survival and chaos, and it is used by the Holy Emperor as the highest standard in the world.

古文：君臣上下贵贱皆发焉，故曰 法 。
现代文：无论君主或群臣、上层或下层、贵者或贱者，都必须一律遵守，所以叫 法 。
English: No matter whether it is the monarch or the ministers, the upper class or the lower class, the noble or the lowly, all must abide by it, so it is called the law.

古文：古之法也，世无请谒任举之人，无间识博学辩说之士，无伟服，无奇行，皆囊于法以事其主。
现代文：古时的法治，社会上没有私自请托保举的人，没有那种多识、博学和善辩的人，没有特异的服饰，没有奇怪的行动，所有的人都被包括到法的范围里为君主服务。
English: The rule of law in ancient times, there was no self-appointed person in the society, there was no kind of knowledgeable, erudite and eloquent person, there was no special dress, no strange action, all people were included in the scope of the law to serve the monarch.

古文：故明王之所恒者二：一曰明法而固守之，二曰禁民私而收使之，此二者主之所恒也，夫法者，上之所以一民使下也；私者，下之所以侵法乱主也。
现代文：所以圣明君主必须永远坚持的有两条：一是明确宣布法度而坚定地执行它，二是禁止人民行私而管束役使他们。这两条是君主应当永远坚持的。法，是君主用来统一人民行动使用属下的；私，是属下用来侵犯法度扰乱君主的。
English: Therefore, there are two rules that a saintly monarch must always adhere to: one is to clearly declare the law and firmly implement it, and the other is to prohibit the people from acting selfishly and control them. These two rules should always be adhered to by the monarch. The law is used by the monarch to unify the people's actions and use the subordinates; I am used by the subordinates to violate the law and disturb the monarch.

古文：故圣君置仪设法而固守之，然故谌杵习士闻识博学之人不可乱也，众强富贵私勇者不能侵也，信近亲爱者不能离也，珍怪奇物不能惑也，万物百事非在法之中者不能动也。
现代文：所以，圣明君主立下法度而坚定地执行着它，这样，那么所谓能干的人、懂法的人、多识博学的人们，就不可能扰乱法度了；人多势强、富贵而有私勇的人们，就不可能侵犯法度了；君主的亲信、近臣、亲属和宠爱的人们，就不可能违背法度了；珍奇宝物就不可能惑乱君主执法之心了；对任何事物的处理，不在法度之中，也都不可能行得通了。
English: Therefore, the Holy Monarch decrees laws and resolutely enforces them. In this way, it is impossible for the so-called competent people, people who understand the law, and knowledgeable people to disturb the laws; it is impossible for people who are powerful, rich, and selfish to violate the laws; it is impossible for the monarch's close friends, close servants, relatives, and favorites to violate the laws; it is impossible for the precious treasures to confuse the monarch's law enforcement heart; and it is impossible to deal with anything without the laws.

古文：故法者，天下之至道也，圣君之实用也。
现代文：所以，法是天下的最高准则，是圣明君主的法宝。
English: Therefore, the Fa is the highest standard in the world, and it is the magic weapon of the Holy Emperor.

古文：今天下则不然，皆有善法而不能守也。
现代文：现在天下的情况就不是如此，本来有良好的法度却不能坚持。
English: This is not the case in today's world. There are good laws, but they cannot be upheld.

古文：然故谌杵习士闻识博学之士能以其智乱法惑上，众强富贵私勇者能以其威犯法侵陵，邻国诸侯能以其权置子立相，大臣能以其私附百姓，剪公财以禄私士。
现代文：因此，所谓能干的、懂法律的和多识博学的人们，能够运用他们的智谋来扰乱法度，迷惑君主；人多势强、富贵而有私勇的人们，能够运用他们的威势来破坏法度，侵害君主；邻国诸侯能够运用他们的权力来废置太子，任用辅相；国内大臣能够运用他们的行私来拉拢百姓，并克扣公财豢养私党。
English: Therefore, the so-called competent, legal and knowledgeable people can use their wit to disrupt the law and confuse the monarch; the powerful, rich and selfish people can use their power to destroy the law and infringe on the monarch; the neighboring princes can use their power to abolish the crown prince and appoint the auxiliary; the Minister of the Interior can use their private business to attract the people and embezzle public funds to raise a private party.

古文：凡如是而求法之行，国之治，不可得也。
现代文：象这样的情况，要求法度通行，国家太平，那是不可能的。
English: In a situation like this, it is impossible to demand the rule of law and a peaceful country.

古文：圣君则不然，卿相不得剪其私，群臣不得辟其所亲爱，圣君亦明其法而固守之，群臣修通辐凑以事其主，百姓辑睦听令道法以从其事。
现代文：圣明君主就不是这样，不允许国家卿相克扣公财豢养私党，不允许群臣任用自己亲呢的人为官，君主自身也明确宣布制度而坚定地执行它。这样，群臣协力同心，围绕着君主来为他服务；百姓也团结和睦，听令守法，做他们应作的事情。
English: This is not the case with the Sage Monarch. The Secretary of State is not allowed to embezzle public funds to support a private party, and the courtiers are not allowed to appoint their relatives as officials. The monarch himself clearly announced the system and firmly implemented it. In this way, the courtiers work together to serve the monarch; the people are also united and harmonious, obey orders and abide by the law, and do what they should do.

古文：故曰：有生法，有守法，有法于法。
现代文：所以说，有创制法度的，有执行法度的，有遵照法度行事的。
English: Therefore, there are those who create laws, those who enforce laws, and those who follow laws.

古文：夫生法者，君也；守法者，臣也；法于法者，民也。
现代文：创制法度的是君主，执行法度的是大臣官吏，遵照法度行事的是人民。
English: It is the monarch who creates the laws, the ministers and officials who implement the laws, and the people who act in accordance with the laws.

古文：君臣上下贵贱皆从法，此谓为大治。
现代文：君臣、上下、贵贱皆从法，这就叫作大治。
English: All officials and subjects, high and low, high and low, all follow the Fa, and this is called the Great Rule.

古文：故主有三术：夫爱人不私赏也，恶人不私罚也，置仪设法以度量断者，上主也。
现代文：所以，君主有三种不同的做法：喜爱某人却不进行私赏，厌恶某人却不进行私罚，确立仪法制度，以法断事的，是上等的君主。
English: Therefore, the monarch has three different practices: loving someone but not carrying out private rewards, loathing someone but not carrying out private punishments, establishing a ritual and legal system, and judging things by law, is a superior monarch.

古文：爱人而私赏之，恶人而私罚之，倍大臣，离左右，专以其心断者，中主也。
现代文：喜爱某人就进行私赏，厌恶某人就进行私罚，既不听大臣忠言，又脱离左右属下，专凭个人之心断事的，是中等的君主。
English: If he likes someone, he will reward him privately; if he dislikes someone, he will punish him privately. If he does not listen to the minister's loyal advice, and if he is detached from his subordinates to the left and right, and makes decisions based solely on his personal feelings, he is a mediocre monarch.

古文：臣有所爱而为私赏之，有所恶而为私罚之，倍其公法，损其正心，专听其大臣者，危主也。
现代文：大臣喜爱某人，就替他进行私赏；大臣憎恶某人，就替他进行私罚；违背公法，丧失正心，一味听大臣摆布的，是危产的君主。
English: If a minister loves a man, he rewards him for himself; if a minister hates a man, he punishes him for himself; if he violates public law, loses his integrity, and is at the mercy of a minister, he is a monarch in peril.

古文：故为人主者，不重爱人，不重恶人；重爱曰失德，重恶曰失威。
现代文：所以作君主的，不可注重私爱于人，也不可注重私恶于人。注重私爱，叫作错用恩德，注重私恶，叫作错用刑威。
English: Therefore, as a monarch, you should not focus on selfish love for others, nor should you focus on selfish hatred for others. Focusing on selfish love is called the wrong use of grace, and focusing on selfish hatred is called the wrong use of punishment.

古文：威德皆失，则主危也。
现代文：刑威和恩德都用错，君主就危险了。
English: If both Ching Wei and Nder are used incorrectly, the monarch is in danger.

古文：故明王之所操者六：生之、杀之、富之、贫之、贵之、贱之。此六柄者，主之所操也。
现代文：因此，英明君主所要掌握的有六项：使人活，使人死，使人富，使人贫，使人贵，使人贱，这六种权柄，是君主所要掌握住的。
English: Therefore, there are six things that a wise ruler must have at his disposal: to make people live, to make people die, to make people rich, to make people poor, to make people noble, and to make people humble. These six powers are what a ruler must have at his disposal.

古文：主之所处者四：一曰文，二曰武，三曰威，四曰德。
现代文：君主所要占据的也有四方面：一是文治，二是武事，三是刑威，四是施德。
English: There are also four aspects that the monarch must occupy: one is literature, the second is martial arts, the third is discipline, and the fourth is virtue.

古文：此四位者，主之所处也。
现代文：这四个领域，是君主所要占据住的。
English: These are the four realms that the monarch must occupy.

古文：借人以其所操，命曰夺柄；借人以其所处，命曰失位。
现代文：把自己掌握的权力交给别人，叫作 失权 ，把自己占据的领域交给别人，叫作 失位 。
English: Handing over the power you hold to someone else is called losing power, and handing over the area you occupy to someone else is called losing your position.

古文：夺柄失位，而求令之行，不可得也。法不平，令不全，是亦夺柄失位之道也。
现代文：处在失权失位的状态，还希望法令能够推行，是办不到的。法度不公平，政令不完备，也是导致 失权 、 失位 的原因。
English: It is impossible to be in a state of losing power and position and still hope that laws and regulations can be implemented. Unfair laws and incomplete government decrees are also causes of loss of power and position.

古文：故有为枉法，有为毁令，此圣君之所以自禁也。
现代文：所以，有时歪曲法度，有时毁弃政令的事情，从来是圣明君主自己禁止自己去做的。
English: Therefore, sometimes distorting laws and regulations, and sometimes abrogating decrees, are things that the Holy Monarch himself has always forbidden himself to do.

古文：故贵不能威，富不能禄，贱不能事，近不能亲，美不能淫也。
现代文：因此，贵臣不能威胁他，富人不能贿赂他，贱者本能讨好他，近臣不能亲呢他，美色不能迷惑他。
English: Therefore, high-ranking officials cannot threaten him, rich people cannot bribe him, low-ranking people instinctively flatter him, close ministers cannot kiss him, and beauty cannot bewitch him.

古文：植固而不动，奇邪乃恐，奇革而邪化，令往而民移。
现代文：执法之心坚定而不动摇，乖异邪僻的人就自然恐惧，乖异邪僻的人们都有了改变，法令一颁布下去，民众就跟着行动了。
English: The spirit of enforcing the law is firm and unshakable, people who are deviant and perverse are naturally afraid, people who are deviant and perverse have changed, and as soon as the decree is promulgated, the people will follow the action.

古文：故圣君失度量，置仪法，如天地之坚，如列星之固，如日月之明，如四时之信，然故令往而民从之。
现代文：所以，圣明君主设立制度仪法，象天地那样的坚定，象列星那样的稳固，象日月那样的光明，象四时运行那样的准确，这样，那么法令一出人民就会听从。
English: Therefore, the Holy Emperor established the system and laws, which are as firm as heaven and earth, as stable as the stars, as bright as the sun and moon, and as accurate as the four o'clock run. In this way, the people will obey the law as soon as it is issued.

古文：而失君则不然，法立而还废之，令出而后反之，枉法而从私，毁令而不全。
现代文：失国之君就不是这样，法度立下以后又废除了，命令发出以后又收回了，歪曲公法而使之迁就私意，毁坏政令而使之残缺不全。
English: But this is not the case with the ex-emperor, who repealed laws after they were enacted, withdrew orders after they were issued, distorted public law to suit his own purposes, and destroyed government decrees, leaving them incomplete.

古文：是贵能威之，富能禄之，贱能事之，近能亲之，美能淫之也。
现代文：于是权贵就能威胁他了，富人就能贿赂他了，贱者就能讨好他了，近臣就能亲呢他了，美色也就能迷惑他了。
English: So the powerful can threaten him, the rich can bribe him, the lowly can flatter him, the courtiers can kiss him, and beauty can bewitch him.

古文：此五者不禁于身，是以群臣百姓人挟其私而幸其主，彼幸而得之，则主日侵。彼幸而不得，则怨日产。
现代文：这五方面，君主不能自己禁止自己，那么群臣百姓就人人怀着私意来讨好君主。他们讨好达到了目的，君主的权力就天天受到侵害；他们讨好达不到目的，就天天产生着怨恨。
English: In these five respects, if the monarch cannot prohibit himself, then the ministers and the people will all flatter the monarch with their own intentions. If their flattery achieves its goal, the monarch's power will be violated every day; if their flattery does not achieve its goal, resentment will arise every day.

古文：夫日侵而产怨，此失君之所慎也。
现代文：天天被侵害，又产生着怨恨，这就是失国之君所走的道路。
English: This is the path taken by the prince who lost his country, who is violated every day, and resentment arises.

古文：凡为主而不得用其法，不适其意，顾臣而行，离法而听贵臣，此所谓贵而威之也。
现代文：凡是身为君主而不能运用自己的法度，也不能适应自己的意愿，只是看着贵臣的颜色，离开法度而听从贵臣摆布，这就叫作贵臣能够威胁他。
English: Whenever, as a sovereign, one cannot use his own laws, nor can he adapt to his own wishes, but only looks at the color of the vassal, leaves the laws and obeys the vassal's mercy, this is called the vassal's ability to threaten him.

古文：富人用金玉事主而来焉，主离法而听之，此所谓富而禄之也。
现代文：富人用金珠宝玉事奉君主而提出要求，君主就背离法度而听从这些要求，这就叫作富人能够贿赂他。
English: When a rich man makes demands in the service of the sovereign with gold and jewels, and the sovereign disobeys the law and obeys these demands, it is said that the rich man is able to bribe him.

古文：贱人以服约卑敬悲色告诉其主，主因离法而听之，所谓贱而事之也。
现代文：贱者作出一副驯顺屈服、卑敬、可怜的样子哀告了君主，君主就背离法度听从了他们的哀告，这就叫作贱者能够讨好他。
English: The lowly made an appearance of meekness, subservience, lowliness, and wretchedness, and complained to the monarch. The monarch then disobeyed the law and listened to their complaints. This was so that the lowly could please him.

古文：近者以逼近亲爱有求其主，主因离法而听之，此谓近而亲之也。
现代文：近臣利用他和君主亲密的关系恳求于君主，君主就背离法度听从了他们的恳求，这就叫作近臣能够亲呢他。
English: The courtiers used his intimate relationship with the monarch to plead with the monarch, and the monarch disobeyed the law and listened to their pleas, which meant that the courtiers could kiss him.

古文：美者以巧言令色请其主，主因离法而听之，此所谓美而淫之也。
现代文：美人用花言巧语和诣媚之态请托于君主，君主就背离法度听从了她的请托，这就叫作美色能够迷惑他。
English: The beauty asked the monarch with rhetoric and flattery, and the monarch disobeyed the law and obeyed her request. This is called beauty can confuse him.

古文：治世则不然，不知亲疏、远近、贵贱、美恶，以度量断之。
现代文：治世的情况就不是这样，不分亲疏、远近、贵贱和美丑，一切都用法度来判断。
English: This is not the case in the governance of the world. Everything is judged by the standard, regardless of whether it is close or distant, high or low, beautiful or ugly.

古文：其杀戮人者不怨也，其赏赐人者不德也。
现代文：他定罪杀人，人不怨恨；按功行赏，人也不必感激。
English: He condemns and kills without rancor; he rewards and rewards without gratitude.

古文：以法制行之，如天地之无私也，是以官无私论，士无私议，民无私说，皆虚其匈以听于上。
现代文：全凭法制办事，好象天地对万物那样没有私心。所以官吏没有私人的政见，士人没有私人的议论，民间没有私人的主张，大家都虚心听从君主。
English: All actions are based on the rule of law, and there is no selfishness, just as heaven and earth have no selfishness for all things. Therefore, government officials have no private political opinions, politicians have no private discussions, and the people have no private opinions. Everyone listens to the monarch with an open mind.

古文：上以公正论，以法制断，故任天下而不重也。
现代文：君主凭公正原则来考论政事，凭法制来裁断是非，所以担负治理天下的大任而不感到沉重。
English: Monarchs judge political affairs based on the principle of fairness, and judge right and wrong based on the legal system. Therefore, they do not feel burdened by the responsibility of governing the world.

古文：今乱君则不然，有私视也，故有不见也；有私听也，故有不闻也；有私虑也，故有不知也。
现代文：现在的昏君就不是如此，用私心来看事物，所以就有看不见的地方；用私心来听情况，所以就有听不见的地方；用私心来考虑问题，所以就有认识不到的地方。
English: This is not the case with today's fainting emperors. If you look at things with a selfish heart, there will be places you cannot see; if you listen to situations with a selfish heart, there will be places you cannot hear; if you consider problems with a selfish heart, there will be places you cannot know.

古文：夫私者，壅蔽失位之道也。
现代文：这私心正是遭受蒙蔽、造成失位原因。
English: This selfishness is precisely the reason for being deceived and causing the loss of position.

古文：上舍公法而听私说，故群臣百姓皆设私立方以教于国，群党比周以立其私，请谒任举以乱公法，人用其心以幸于上。
现代文：君主离开了公法而去听信私说，那么，群臣和百姓都将创立自己的一套学说和主张，在国内到处宣扬；还将勾结徒党，来建立私人势力；还将请托保举，来扰乱国家公法；还将用尽心机，来骗取君主的宠信。
English: If the monarch abandons public law to listen to private opinion, then the ministers and the people will all create their own set of doctrines and propositions and promote them throughout the country; they will also collude with the clique to establish private power; they will also ask for trusteeship to disrupt the country's public law; they will also use every opportunity to deceive the monarch's favor.

古文：上无度量以禁之，是以私说日益，而公法日损，国之不冶，从此产矣。
现代文：君主若没有法度来禁止这些现象，于是私说一天比一天增多，公法一天比一天削弱，国家的不安定，就将从此产生了。
English: If the sovereign does not have the power to prohibit these phenomena, then I say that day by day they will increase, and day by day the public law will weaken, and the instability of the country will be born.

古文：夫君臣者，天地之位也；民者，众物之象也。各立其所职以待君令，群臣百姓安得各用其心而立私乎？
现代文：君和臣好比天和地的位置，老百姓好比万物并列的样子，各自按其职务听候君主的命令，群臣百姓怎么可以各自用心谋取私利呢？
English: The king and his ministers are like the position of heaven and earth, and the common people are like the juxtaposition of all things, each obeying the monarch's orders according to their duties. How can ministers and common people seek their own interests with their own hearts?

古文：故遵主令而行之，虽有伤败，无罚；非主令而行之，虽有功利，罪死。
现代文：所以，遵从君主的命令去办事，虽遭到挫折失败，也不应处罚；不遵从君主的命令办事，虽然取得功利，也要处死罪。
English: Therefore, to act in accordance with the monarch's order, even if it is frustrated and failed, should not be punished; not to act in accordance with the monarch's order, even if it is beneficial, should be punished by death.

古文：然故下之事上也，如响之应声也；臣之事主也，如影之从形也。
现代文：这样，那么下对上，就象回响反应声音一样；臣事君，就象影子跟着形体一样。
English: In this way, then, from bottom to top, it is like an echo reacting to a sound; a vassal, like a shadow following a shape.

古文：故上令而下应，主行而臣从，此治之道也。
现代文：所以上面发令，下面就贯彻；君主行事，臣民就遵从，这是天下太平的道路。
English: Therefore, if you issue an order above, it will be carried out below; if the monarch acts, the subjects will follow. This is the way to world peace.

古文：夫非主令而行，有功利，因赏之，是教妄举也；遵主令而行之，有伤败，而罚之，是使民虑利害而离法也。
现代文：如果不按君主命令行事，取得了功利便进行赏赐，这等于教导人妄自行事；按照君主命令行事，遭到了挫折失败，就加以处罚，这等于使人们考虑利害背离法度。
English: If you do not act according to the monarch's order, you will be rewarded if you have obtained benefits, which is tantamount to teaching people to act arbitrarily; if you act according to the monarch's order, you will be punished if you have suffered setbacks and failures, which is tantamount to making people consider interests and deviate from the law.

古文：群臣百姓人虑利害，而以其私心举措，则法制毁而令不行矣。
现代文：群臣百姓若是人人都考虑利害而按其私意行事，法制也就归于毁灭，命令也就不能推行了。
English: If the ministers and the people all consider their own interests and act according to their own wills, the legal system will be destroyed, and orders will not be implemented.

