古文：起昭阳赤奋若，尽阏逢摄提格，凡二年。
现代文：起，止，一共两年。
English: From start to finish, a total of two years.

古文：高祖武皇帝十二中大通五年
现代文：梁武帝中大通五年
English: Emperor Liangwu's five years at the Middle School

古文：春，正月，辛卯，上祀南郊，大赦。
现代文：春季正月，辛卯，梁武帝在南郊祭天，大赦天下。
English: In the spring, the first month of Xinwu, Emperor Liangwu went to the southern suburb to worship Heaven and forgive the world.

古文：魏窦泰奄至尔硃兆庭，军人因宴休惰，忽见泰军，惊走；追破之于赤谼岭，众并降散。
现代文：北魏窦泰率领军队突然攻到尔朱兆大本营的厅堂，军中的人因为正在摆宴而疏于防守，忽然看见窦泰的军队，连忙惊慌地逃跑，后来在赤岭被窦泰追上击溃，不是投降就是逃散了。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, Dou Tai led the army to suddenly attack the hall of the Erzhuzhao base camp. The people in the army were lax in defense because they were having a banquet. Suddenly, they saw Dou Tai's army and hurriedly fled in panic. Later, they were caught and defeated by Dou Tai in Akamine. They either surrendered or fled.

古文：兆逃于穷山，命左右西河张亮及苍头陈山提斩己首以降，皆不忍；兆乃杀所乘白马，自缢于树。
现代文：尔朱兆逃到荒山中，命令在身旁侍奉的西河人张亮以及仆隶陈山提砍下自己的头颅投降，张亮与陈山提都不忍心这么做。尔朱兆就杀掉自己所骑的白马，自己吊死在树上。
English: Er Zhuzhao fled to the barren mountains and ordered Zhang Liang and his servant Chen Shanti, who were serving alongside him, to cut off their heads and surrender. Neither Zhang Liang nor Chen Shanti had the heart to do so. Er Zhuzhao then killed the white horse he was riding and hanged himself from a tree.

古文：欢亲临，厚葬之。
现代文：高欢亲自来到尔朱兆自杀的地方，为他举行了隆重的葬礼。
English: Gao Huan personally came to the place where Er Zhu Zhao committed suicide and held a grand funeral for him.

古文：慕容绍宗携尔硃荣妻子及兆馀众诣欢降，欢以义故，待之甚厚。
现代文：慕容绍宗带着尔朱容的妻子、孩子以及尔朱兆剩余的人马向高欢投降，高欢看在过去的交情上，给予他们很优厚的待遇。
English: Murong Shaosong surrendered to Gao Huan with his wife, children and the remaining men and horses of Lzhu Rong. Gao Huan regarded them as his old friends and treated them very well.

古文：兆之在秀容，左右皆密通款于欢，唯张亮无启疏。
现代文：尔朱兆在秀容的时候，他的近臣们都悄悄地向高欢表示投靠之意，唯独张亮没有写信联系。
English: When Le Zhu Zhao was in his pomp, his close vassals all quietly expressed their willingness to support Gao Huan, but Zhang Liang did not write a letter.

古文：欢嘉之，以为丞相府参军。
现代文：高欢对他很赞许，任命他为丞相府的参军。
English: Gao Huan praised him very much and appointed him to join the army of the Prime Minister's Office.

古文：魏罢诸行台。
现代文：北魏罢免了各位行台。
English: The Northern Wei deposed the Gangdai.

古文：辛亥，上祀明堂。
现代文：辛亥，梁武帝在明堂举行祭祀典礼。
English: In Xinhai, Emperor Liangwu held a religious ceremony in the Ming Hall.

古文：丁巳，魏主追尊其父为武穆帝，太妃冯氏为武穆后，母李氏为皇太妃。
现代文：丁巳，北魏国主孝武帝分别追认他的父亲为武穆帝，太妃冯氏为武穆后，母亲李氏为皇太妃。
English: At that time, Emperor Xiaowu, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, identified his father as Emperor Wu Mu, his wife as Empress Dowager Feng, and his mother as Empress Dowager Li.

古文：营州刺史曹凤、东荆州刺史雷能胜等举城降魏。
现代文：营州刺史曹凤、东荆州刺史雷能胜等人率领全城投降北魏。
English: Yingzhou assassin Cao Feng and East Jingzhou assassin Lei Nengsheng led the whole city to surrender to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：魏侍中斛斯椿闻乔宁、张子期之死，内不自安，与南阳王宝炬、武卫将军元毘、王思政密劝魏主图丞相欢。
现代文：北魏侍中斛斯椿听到乔宁、张子期的死讯，心里无法安宁，他与南阳王元宝炬、武卫将军元毗、王思政一道秘密劝说孝武帝除掉丞相高欢。
English: Upon hearing the news of the death of Qioning and Zhang Ziqi, the Northern Wei courtier Gong Shiqin could not find peace in his heart. Together with Nanyang Wang Yuan Baoqin, Wuwei General Yuan Bei, and Wang Sizheng, he secretly persuaded Emperor Xiaowu to get rid of the prime minister Gao Huan.

古文：毘，遵之玄孙也。
现代文：元毗是元遵的玄孙。
English: Yuan Bei is the great-great-grandson of Yuan Zun.

古文：舍人元士弼又言欢受诏不敬，帝由是不悦。
现代文：舍人元士弼又告诉孝武帝，说高欢对皇帝颁下的诏书不恭不敬，孝武帝因此不大愉快。
English: He also told Emperor Xiaowu that Gao Huan was disrespectful to the imperial edict issued by the emperor, which made Emperor Xiaowu unhappy.

古文：椿劝帝置阁内都督部曲，又增武直人数，自直阁已下，员别数百，皆选四方骁勇者充之。
现代文：斛斯椿劝说孝武帝设置了负责皇宫守卫的内都督部曲，又在皇帝居住的朱华阁里增添了值勤侍卫的人数，在这些侍卫下面，还有定额以外的侍卫几百人。
English: He persuaded Emperor Xiaowu to set up the Inner Governor's Department, which was responsible for guarding the imperial palace, and to increase the number of guards on duty in Zhuhua Pavilion, where the emperor lived. Below these guards, there were hundreds of guards outside the quota.

古文：帝数出游幸，椿自部勒，别为行陈，由是朝政、军谋，帝专与椿决之。
现代文：充当卫士的都是从各地精选出的骁勇善战的人。孝文帝几次外出巡游，斛斯椿亲自部署，在卫士以外另外排列队伍。因此，有关朝政、军机方面的大事，孝武帝只与斛斯椿商议决定。
English: The guards were selected from all over the country and were brave and good at fighting. Emperor Xiaowen went on several cruises, and Emperor Gaozhuang personally deployed them and arranged the teams separately from the guards. Therefore, Emperor Xiaowu only discussed and decided important matters related to imperial politics and military aircraft with Emperor Gaozhuang.

古文：帝以关中大行台贺拔岳拥重兵，密与相结，又出侍中贺拔胜为都督三荆等七州诸军事、荆州刺史，欲倚胜兄弟以敌欢，欢益不悦。
现代文：由于关中大行台贺拔岳手中掌握重兵，孝武帝就与他秘密联系，又派遣侍中贺拔胜担任统管三荆等七州军事的都督，想倚仗贺拔胜兄弟的力量与高欢抗衡，高欢心里更加不高兴。
English: Since Guanzhong Dajangdai He Baxing held a heavy army in his hands, Emperor Xiaowu made secret contact with him, and also sent the attendant He Baxing to serve as the military governor of the seven states including Sanjing. He wanted to rely on the strength of He Baxing's brothers to compete with Gao Huan, and Gao Huan was even more unhappy.

古文：侍中、司空高乾之在信都也，遭父丧，不暇终服。
现代文：担任侍中、司空的高乾在信都的时候，正赶上父亲去世，没有来得及服丧期满。
English: Gao Qian, who served as an attendant and steward, was in Xindu when his father died, and he did not have time to complete the mourning period.

古文：及孝武帝即位，表请解职行丧，诏听解侍中，司空如故。
现代文：等到孝武帝登上皇位的时候，他上书请求解除自己的职务以便为父亲守孝。
English: When Emperor Xiaowu ascended the throne, he petitioned in writing to be relieved of his duties in order to show filial piety to his father.

古文：乾虽求退，不谓遽见许。
现代文：孝武帝颁下诏书免去他的侍中职务，但依旧让他担任司空。
English: Emperor Xiaowu issued an edict to relieve him of his position as an attendant, but still allowed him to serve as a steward.

古文：既去内侍，朝政多不关预，居常怏怏。
现代文：高乾虽然要求解除职务，但想不到孝武帝会立即批准，这一下既然丢掉了侍中的位置，就不能多插手朝中的事务，住在家里常常怏怏不乐。
English: Although Gao Qian requested to be relieved of his duties, he could not imagine that Emperor Xiaowu would immediately approve it. Now that he had lost his position as an aide-de-camp, he could not meddle in the affairs of the imperial court, and he was often unhappy living at home.

古文：帝既贰于欢，冀乾为己用，尝于华林园宴罢，独留乾，谓之曰： 司空奕世忠良，今日复建殊效，相与虽则君臣，义同兄弟，宜共立盟约，以敦情契。 
现代文：孝武帝对高欢有了二心，希望高乾能够为自己所用，他曾经在华林园的酒宴结束后单独留下高乾，对他说： 司空，你们一家世代都是忠良，现在你又建立了显赫的功业，我与你相处名义上是君臣关系，但在情义上就好象兄弟一样，我们应该一道订立盟约，使我们的情义更加深厚。 
English: Emperor Xiaowu had second thoughts about Gao Huan and hoped that Gao Qian could be used for his own purposes. He once left Gao Qian alone after the wine banquet in Hualing Garden and said to him: Siku, your family has been loyal for generations, and now you have established a distinguished career. I get along with you nominally as a monarch-subject relationship, but emotionally as if we were brothers. We should enter into a covenant together to make our relationship more profound.

古文：殷勤逼之。
现代文：说着，孝武帝很殷勤地催促高乾立约。
English: Saying this, Emperor Xiaowu very diligently urged Gao Qian to sign the contract.

古文：乾对曰： 臣以身许国，何敢有贰！ 
现代文：高乾回答说： 我把整个身体都给了国家，哪敢不一心一意呢？ 
English: Gao Qian replied: I have given my entire body to the country, how dare I not be single-minded?

古文：时事出仓猝，且不谓帝有异图，遂不固辞，亦不以启欢。
现代文：这件事情发生得很突然，再说也没有想到孝武帝这样做是别有意图的，因此高乾就没有坚决推辞，也没有把这一件事向高欢禀报。
English: This incident happened very suddenly, moreover, it did not occur to Emperor Xiaowu that there was any other intention in doing so, so Gao Qian did not firmly refuse, nor did he report this incident to Gao Huanqin.

古文：及帝置部曲，乾乃私谓所亲曰： 主上不亲勋贤，而招集群小，数遣元士弼、王思政往来关西与贺拔岳计议，又出贺拔胜为荆州，外示疏忌，实欲树党，令其兄弟相近，冀据有西方。
现代文：直到孝武帝设置部曲的时候，高乾才私下对他亲近的人说： 皇上不与有功的贤良的大臣亲近，而是纠集了一群小人，还多次派遣元士弼、王思政来往于关西之间，与贺拔岳密谋，又派出贺拔胜掌管荆州，表面上显示出疏远贺拔胜的样子，实质上是在拉帮结派，使贺拔胜兄弟靠得近些，希望这样来占据西方。
English: It was not until Emperor Xiaowu was setting up the capital that Gao Qian began to say privately to those close to him: "The emperor is not close to the meritorious and virtuous ministers, but has gathered a group of villains. He has also repeatedly sent Yuan Shizhen and Wang Sizheng to and from Kansai to conspire with He Baxian, and has also sent He Baxian to take charge of Jingzhou. On the surface, this shows that He Baxian is being alienated, but in essence, it is to pull the gang together and make the He Baxian brothers closer, hoping to occupy the West in this way.

古文：祸难将作，必及于我。 
现代文：现在灾难将要降临了，而且必定要殃及到我的身上。 
English: Now disaster is about to strike, and it's bound to be me.

古文：乃密启欢。
现代文：这才把孝武帝拉拢他的事秘密告诉了高欢。
English: It was only then that he told Gao Huan the secret of how Emperor Xiaowu had wooed him.

古文：欢召乾诣并州，面论时事，乾因劝欢受魏禅。欢以袖掩其口曰： 勿妄言！
现代文：高欢把高乾叫到并州，同他当面讨论时事。高乾劝说高欢迫使孝武帝禅让帝位，高欢用袖子掩住高乾的嘴巴说道： 不要瞎说！
English: Gao Huan called Gao Qian to Nianzhou to discuss current affairs with him face to face. Gao Qian persuaded Gao Huan to force Emperor Xiaowu to abdicate the throne. Gao Huan covered Gao Qian's mouth with his sleeve and said, "Don't talk nonsense!"

古文：今令司空复为侍中，门下之事一以相委。 
现代文：现在就让司空你重新担任侍中，门下省的事全部委托给你了。 
English: Now let Siku re-assign you as an attendant, and all the affairs of the subordinate province have been entrusted to you.

古文：欢屡启请，帝不许。
现代文：高欢屡次上书，请求让高乾复职，孝武帝都不允许。
English: Gao Huan repeatedly submitted letters, requesting that Gao Qian be reinstated, but Emperor Xiaowu did not allow it.

古文：乾知变难将起，密启欢求为徐州；二月，辛酉，以乾为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、徐州刺史，以咸阳王坦为司空。
现代文：高乾知道灾难将要发生，就悄悄地请高欢给自己谋求徐州刺史的官职。二月，辛酉，孝武帝任命高乾为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、徐州刺史，另外任命咸阳王元坦为司空。
English: Gao Qian knew that the disaster was about to happen, so he quietly invited Gao Huan to seek the official position of Xuzhou historian for himself. In February, Xinwu, Emperor Xiaowu appointed Gao Qian as the General of the Horse Cavalry, Kefu Yidong of the Third Division, and Xuzhou historian, and also appointed Xianyang Wangyuan Tan as the Secretary of the Air Force.

古文：癸未，上幸同泰寺，讲《般若经》，七日而罢，会者数万人。
现代文：癸未，梁武帝驾临同泰寺，讲解《般若经》，持续了七天才结束，到会的多达几万人。
English: Not long ago, Emperor Liangwu came to Tongtai Temple to give a lecture on "The Prajnaparamita Sutra," which lasted for seven days and was attended by tens of thousands of people.

古文：魏正光以前，阿至罗常附于魏。
现代文：在北魏正光年间以前，阿至罗国经常依附于北魏。
English: Before the era of the Northern Wei Zhengguang, the Ajiro State often adhered to the Northern Wei.

古文：及中原多事，阿至罗亦叛，丞相欢招抚之，阿至罗复降，凡十万户。
现代文：等到中原一带战事纷繁的时候，阿至罗国也反叛了。北魏的丞相高欢进行招抚后，阿至罗国又投降了，一共带了十万户人家。
English: By the time the Central Plains region was engulfed in war, Ajiro Province had also rebelled. After being coaxed by the Northern Wei chancellor Gao Huan, Ajiro Province surrendered, taking a total of 100,000 households with it.

古文：三月，辛卯，诏复以欢为大行台，使随宜裁处。
现代文：三月，辛卯，北魏孝武帝颁下诏书，重新任命高欢为大行台，授权他可以随机裁决处理有关事务。
English: In March, Emperor Xiaowu of the Northern Wei Dynasty issued an edict to reappoint Gao Huan as the Grand Magistrate, authorizing him to make random rulings to deal with relevant affairs.

古文：欢与之粟帛，议者以为徒费无益，欢不从；及经略河西，大收其用。
现代文：高欢要给予阿至罗国一批粮食和绢帛，参与讨论此事的人都认为这是白费财物，不可能有什么收益，高欢没有听他们的话。等到高欢征伐河西地区的时候，得到了阿至罗人的大力支持。
English: Gao Huan wanted to give a batch of grain and straw to Ajiro country. The people who participated in the discussion of this matter thought that this was a waste of money and that there could not be any gain. Gao Huan did not listen to them. When Gao Huan conquered the west of the river, he received strong support from the Ajiro people.

古文：高乾将之徐州，魏主闻其漏泄机事，乃诏丞相欢曰： 乾邕与朕私有盟约，今乃反复两端。 
现代文：高乾将要去徐州上任，北魏孝武帝听说了他泄漏机密的事情，就写了诏书对丞相高欢说： 高乾跟我私下有过盟约，如今他在你和我两边翻来覆去。 
English: Gao Qian will go to Xuzhou to take office. When the Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowu heard about his leaking of secrets, he wrote a decree to the Prime Minister Gao Huan saying: Gao Qian had a private agreement with me, and now he is flipping between you and me.

古文：欢闻其与帝盟，亦恶之，即取乾前后数启论时事者遣使封上。
现代文：高欢一听高乾与孝武帝曾经订过盟约，也对他产生了恶感，于是立即找来高乾以前给他的几件评论时事的文书，加以密封，派遣使者送给孝武帝。
English: When Gao Huan heard that Gao Qian had signed a covenant with Emperor Xiaowu, he also had a bad feeling about him, so he immediately found several documents that Gao Qian had previously given him to comment on current affairs, sealed them, and sent an envoy to Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：帝召乾，对欢使责之，乾曰： 陛下自立异图，乃谓臣为反复，人主加罪，其可辞乎！ 
现代文：孝武帝召见高乾，当着高欢使者的面斥责高乾，高乾回答说： 陛下您自己有别的企图，才说我反复无常，做帝王的要将罪行硬加到一个人头上，难道还可以推卸得了吗！ 
English: Emperor Xiaowu summoned Gao Qian and reprimanded him in front of the emissaries of Gao Huan. Gao Qian replied, "Your Majesty, you yourself have other intentions than to say that I am capricious. As an emperor, if you want to impose a crime on a person, can you get away with it?"

古文：遂赐死。
现代文：于是，孝武帝赐高乾死。
English: As a result, Emperor Xiaowu gave Gao Qian a death sentence.

古文：帝又密敕东徐州刺史潘绍业杀其弟敖曹，敖曹先闻乾死，伏壮士于路，执绍业，得敕书于袍领，遂将十馀骑奔晋阳。
现代文：孝武帝又写密信给东徐州刺史潘绍业，命令他杀掉高乾的弟弟高敖曹，高敖曹已经提前得到了高乾的死讯，因此在路旁埋伏了精壮的士卒，捉住了潘绍业，从他衣袍的领子里搜到了孝武帝的诏书。于是，高敖曹就带着十几个人骑马直奔晋阳。
English: Emperor Xiaowu also wrote a secret letter to the East Xuzhou spy Pan Shaoye, ordering him to kill Gao Qian's brother Gao Bing Cao. Gao Bing Cao had already received Gao Qian's death notice in advance, so he ambushed the strong soldiers on the roadside, captured Pan Shaoye, and found Emperor Xiaowu's edict in the collar of his robe. Therefore, Gao Bing Cao rode straight to Jinyang with a dozen people.

古文：欢抱其首哭曰： 天子枉害司空！ 
现代文：高敖曹到达晋阳之后，高欢抱崐住他的头痛哭道： 皇上屈杀了高司空。 
English: After Gao Xizhao arrived in Jinyang, Gao Huan hugged him and cried with a headache: The emperor killed Gao Xikuo.

古文：敖曹兄仲密为光州刺史，帝敕青州断其归路，仲密亦间行奔晋阳。
现代文：高敖曹的哥哥高仲密是光州刺史，孝武帝命令青州的兵马切断他回去的道路，高仲密也从小路跑到了晋阳。
English: Gao Zhao Cao's older brother Gao Zhong Mi was the ruler of Gwangju, and Emperor Xiaowu ordered the soldiers and horses of Qingzhou to cut off his way back. Gao Zhong Mi also ran from the path to Jinyang.

古文：仲密名慎，以字行。
现代文：高仲密名叫高慎，通常用表字。
English: Gao Zhongmi's name is Gao Sheng, and he usually uses his first name.

古文：魏太师鲁郡王肃卒。
现代文：北魏的太师鲁郡王元肃去世。
English: Wang Yuan Su, Grand Master of the Northern Wei Dynasty, passed away.

古文：丙辰，南平元襄王伟卒。
现代文：丙辰，梁朝的南平元襄王萧伟去世。
English: Xiao Wei, the king of Nanping Yuanxiang of the Qin and Liang dynasties, died.

古文：丁巳，魏以赵郡王谌为太尉，南阳王宝炬为太保。
现代文：丁巳，北魏任命赵郡王元谌为太尉，南阳王元宝炬为太保。
English: Meanwhile, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Zhao County's Wang Yuanzhang as the first lieutenant, and Nanyang's Wang Yuanzhang as the second lieutenant.

古文：魏尔硃兆之入洛也，焚太常乐库，钟磬俱尽。
现代文：北魏的尔朱兆在进入洛阳之后，焚烧了太常府的乐器库房，钟磬等等都给烧得一干二净。
English: After the Northern Wei ruler Zhu Zhao entered Luoyang, he burned the musical instrument warehouse of the Tai Changfu, and the bell and gong were all burned to a crisp.

古文：节闵帝诏录尚书事长孙稚、太常卿祖莹等更造之，至是始成，命曰大成乐。
现代文：节闵帝元恭颁下诏书，命令录尚书事长孙稚、太常卿祖莹等人重新制造，到这个时候才完成，它们被命名为《大成乐》。
English: Emperor Xuanzong issued an imperial edict, ordering the recorders to be remade by the chief record keeper, Sun Zhiqi, and the grand secretary, Zu Ying. It was not completed until this time, and they were named "Dachengle."

古文：魏青州民耿翔聚众寇掠三齐，胶州刺史裴粲，专事高谈，不为防御；夏，四月，翔掩袭州城。
现代文：北魏青州的百姓耿翔聚集了一帮盗匪在三齐大肆掠夺，胶州刺史裴粲只会高谈阔论，不设防御。夏季，四月，耿翔带着人马突然袭击了胶州州城。
English: The people of Qingzhou in the Northern Wei Dynasty, Geng Xiang, gathered a gang of robbers to plunder in Sanqi. Jiaozhou's ruler, Shi Pei, only talked and did not set up defenses. In the summer, in April, Geng Xiang suddenly attacked Jiaozhou with men and horses.

古文：左右白贼至，粲曰： 岂有此理！ 
现代文：裴粲身旁的部下向他禀告说贼兵冲过来了，他却回答： 岂有此理！ 
English: Pei's subordinates next to him reported to him that the bandits had rushed over, but he replied: "That's not true!

古文：左右又言已入州门，粲乃徐曰： 耿王来，可引之听事，自馀部众，且付城民。 
现代文：部下们又过来报告说贼兵已经进入城门了，裴粲才慢慢地说道： 耿王来了，你们可以带到厅堂来，他下面的那些人马，都交给城中的百姓。 
English: His subordinates came again to report that the robber soldiers had entered the city gate, and it was only then that Pei Yao slowly said: King Geng has arrived, you can bring him to the hall, and the men and horses under him are to be handed over to the people in the city.

古文：翔斩之，送首来降。
现代文：耿翔杀了裴粲，带着他的脑袋来向梁朝投降。
English: Geng Xiang killed Pei Yao and brought his head to Liang Dynasty to surrender.

古文：五月，魏东徐州民王早等杀刺史崔痒，以下邳来降。
现代文：五月，北魏东徐州的百姓王早等人杀了刺史崔庠，献出下邳向梁朝投降。
English: In May, Wang Yao, a citizen of Xuzhou in the eastern part of the Northern Wei Dynasty, and others killed Zhang Strei Yao and surrendered to the Liang Dynasty.

古文：六月，壬申，魏以骠骑大将军樊子鹄为青、胶大使，督济州刺史蔡俊等讨耿翔。
现代文：六月，壬申，北魏任命骠骑大将军樊子鹄为赴青州、胶州的特别使节，督促济州刺史蔡俊等人讨伐耿翔。
English: In June, in Jinshin, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed the cavalry general Zou Ziqi as a special envoy to Qingzhou and Jiaozhou, urging the Jeju statesman Cai Jun and others to fight against Geng Xiang.

古文：秋，七月，魏师至青州，翔弃城来奔，诏以为兗州刺史。
现代文：秋季，七月，北魏的军队攻到了青州，耿翔放弃了青州城赶来投奔梁朝，梁武帝颁下诏书，任命他为兖州刺史。
English: In the autumn, in July, the army of the Northern Wei Dynasty invaded Qingzhou. Geng Xiang abandoned the city of Qingzhou and rushed to the Liang Dynasty. Emperor Liang Wudi issued an edict and appointed him as the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：壬辰，魏以广陵王欣为大司马，赵郡王谌为太师。
现代文：壬辰，北魏任命广陵王元欣为大司马，赵郡王元谌为太师。
English: In Imjin, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Guangling Wang Yuanxin as the grand steward and Zhao County Wang Yuanjun as the grand master.

古文：庚戌，以前司徒贺拔允为太尉。
现代文：庚戌，又任命前司徒贺拔允为太尉。
English: Geng Bing also appointed the former scholar He Baiyun as the first lieutenant.

古文：初，贺拔岳遣行台郎冯景诣晋阳，丞相欢闻岳使至，甚喜，曰： 贺拔公讵忆吾邪！ 
现代文：起初，贺拔岳派遣行台郎冯景到晋阳，丞相高欢听说贺拔岳的使者来了，非常高兴，说道： 贺拔公岂不是想念我了？ 
English: At first, He Batur sent his messenger Feng Jing to Jinyang. When the chancellor Gao Huan heard that He Batur's messenger had come, he was very happy and said, "Doesn't He Batur miss me?"

古文：与景歃血，约与岳为兄弟。
现代文：然后与冯景歃血为盟，约定与贺拔岳结为兄弟。
English: Then he made an alliance with Feng Jingyao and agreed to be brothers with He Batyue.

古文：景还，言于岳曰： 欢奸诈有馀，不可信也。 
现代文：冯景回去后，对贺拔岳说： 高欢奸诈有余，真诚不足，不可信任。 
English: After Feng Jing returned, he said to He Batyue: Gao Huan's treachery is more than enough, sincerity is not enough, and he cannot be trusted.

古文：府司马宇文泰自请使晋阳以观欢之为人，欢奇其状貌，曰： 此儿视瞻非常。 
现代文：府司马宇文泰自告奋勇，请求出使晋阳，以便观察高欢的为人到底如何。高欢见了宇文泰，对他的相貌感到惊奇，说道： 这个年轻人的仪表看起来不同寻常。 
English: The prefectural governor, Ma Yu Wentai, volunteered to be sent to Jinyang to observe Gao Huan's personality. Gao Huan was surprised by his appearance and said, "This young man's appearance is unusual.

古文：将留之，泰固求复命；欢既遣而悔之，发驿急追，至关，不及而返。
现代文：因此要留下宇文泰，宇文泰坚决要求回去复命；高欢让宇文泰走了之后又觉得后悔，急忙派人骑驿马追赶，一直追到潼关还没有追上，只好返回。
English: Therefore, he wanted to keep Uwentai, and Uwentai insisted on going back to get his life back; after Gao Huan let Uwentai go, he regretted it again, and hurriedly sent someone to chase him on a steed. He chased him all the way to Shaoguan, but couldn't catch up, so he had to return.

古文：泰至长安，谓岳曰： 高欢所以未篡者，正惮公兄弟耳；侯莫陈悦之徒，非所忌也。
现代文：宇文泰回到长安后，对贺拔岳说： 高欢之所以还没有篡夺帝位，正是因为忌惮你们兄弟，而侯莫陈悦等人，并不是他所猜忌的对象。
English: After returning to Chang'an, Yu Wentai said to He Baturu: The reason why Gao Huan has not usurped the imperial throne is precisely because he is afraid of your brothers, while Hou Mo, Chen Yue and others are not the object of his suspicion.

古文：公但潜为之备，图欢不难。
现代文：您只要悄悄地进行准备，算计高欢是不难的。
English: As long as you prepare quietly, it is not difficult to calculate the high happiness.

古文：今费也头控弦之骑不下一万，夏州刺史斛拔弥俄突胜兵三千馀人，灵州刺史曹泥、河西流民纥豆陵伊利等各拥部众，未有所属。
现代文：现在费也头部族善于射箭的骑兵不下一万人，夏州刺史斛拔弥俄突的精兵有三千多人，灵州刺史曹泥、河西流民纥豆陵伊利等人各自都拥有一帮人马，还不知道自己要归属哪一方。
English: At present, there are less than ten thousand cavalrymen who are good at archery in the Feiyatou tribe, more than three thousand elite soldiers in the Xiazhou Zhishizhong and Meiotong, Lingzhou Zhishizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizh, Lingzhou Zhishizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhiz

古文：公若移军近陇，抗其要害，震之以威，怀之以惠，可收其士马以资吾军。
现代文：您要是带着军队逼近陇地，扼守该地的要害之处，用威势来震慑他们，同时再用恩惠对他们进行安抚，就可以收伏他们的兵马来壮大我军的力量。
English: If you approach the Badlands with your army, hold the key points of the area, use your power to frighten them, and at the same time appease them with grace, you can capture their soldiers and horses to strengthen our army.

古文：西辑氐、羌，北抚沙塞，还军长安，匡辅魏室，此桓、文之功也。 
现代文：此外，西边亲睦氐、羌部落，北边抚慰沙漠塞外之民，然后挥师返回长安，辅助魏国皇室，这是足以跟齐桓公、晋文公的功业相比的举动呀。 
English: In addition, on the west side, he befriended the Xiongnu and Qiang tribes, on the north side, he comforted the people outside the desert, and then returned to Chang'an to assist the imperial family of Wei. This is a move that is enough to compare with the exploits of Qi Huan and Jin Wengong.

古文：岳大悦，复遣泰诣洛阳请事，密陈其状。
现代文：贺拔岳听了非常高兴，又派遣宇文泰到洛阳向孝武帝请示有关事宜，秘密陈述有关情况。
English: He Batyue was very pleased to hear this, and sent Uwentai to Luoyang to ask Emperor Xiaowu for instructions on the matter and to make a confidential report on the situation.

古文：魏主喜，加泰武卫将军，使还报。
现代文：孝文帝也很欢喜，加封宇文泰为武卫将军，叫他回去向贺拔岳汇报。
English: Emperor Xiaowen was also very pleased. He appointed Wu Wentei as the general of Wuwei, and told him to go back and report to He Batyue.

古文：八月，帝以岳为都督雍、华等二十州诸军事、雍州刺史，又割心前血，遣使者赍以赐之。
现代文：八月，孝武帝任命贺拔岳为都督雍、华等二十州诸军事及雍州刺史，又割破自己心口前的皮肉，取出一些鲜血，派遣使者赐送给贺拔岳。
English: In August, Emperor Xiaowu appointed He Badu as the military governor of twenty states including Yong and Hua, and the military governor of Yongzhou. He also cut the flesh in front of his heart, took out some blood, and sent an envoy to give it to He Badu.

古文：岳遂引兵西屯平凉，以牧马为名。
现代文：贺拔岳于是带领兵马向西挺进，以牧马的名义驻扎在平凉。
English: Therefore, He Batyue led the soldiers and horses to advance westward and stationed in Pingliang under the name of Wrangler.

古文：斛拔弥俄突、纥豆陵伊利及费也头万俟受洛干、铁勒斛律沙门等皆附于岳，唯曹泥附于欢。
现代文：斛拔弥俄突、纥豆陵伊利以及费也头的万俟受洛干、铁勒斛律沙门等人都依附于贺拔岳，只有曹泥还依附于高欢。
English: Mount Heba, Mount Peasling, Mount Eri, as well as Mount Feiyadu, Mount Wanju, Mount Lokan, and Mount Telechi are all attached to Mount Heba. Only Mount Cao Mu is still attached to Mount Gaohuan.

古文：秦、南秦、河、渭四州刺史同会平凉，受岳节度。
现代文：秦、南秦、河、渭四州的刺史一同汇集在平凉，接受贺拔岳的指挥调度。
English: The four prefectures of Qin, Southern Qin, He and Min gathered together in Pingliang to accept the command and dispatch of He Badu.

古文：岳以夏州被边重要，欲求良刺史以镇之，众举宇文泰，岳曰： 宇文左丞，吾左右手，何可废也！ 
现代文：贺拔岳因为夏州地处边境，地形重要，想要寻找一位出色的刺史来镇守，大家都推举宇文泰，贺拔岳说道： 宇文左丞是我的左右手，怎么可以离开我！ 
English: Because Xiazhou is located on the border, the terrain is important, and He Batyue wants to find an outstanding stabbing history to guard the town, everyone recommends Uwentai, He Batyue said: Uwen Zuo is my right and left hand, how can you leave me!

古文：沉吟累日，卒表用之。
现代文：他反复考虑了好几天，最终还是上书孝武帝，请求任用宇文泰为夏州刺史。
English: He deliberated for several days, and finally wrote to Emperor Xiaowu to request the appointment of Uwentai to write the history of Xiazhou.

古文：九月，癸酉，魏丞相欢表让王爵，不许；请分封邑十万户颁授勋义，从之。
现代文：九月，癸酉，北魏的丞相高欢上书请求让掉自己的王爵，孝武帝没有允许；高欢又请求将自己封地里的十万户人家作为奖赏，分赏给从信都跟他起义讨伐尔朱氏有功勋的人，孝武帝答应了。
English: In September, Gao Huan, the chancellor of the Northern Wei Dynasty, sent a letter to Emperor Xiaowu requesting that he give up his title, but Emperor Xiaowu did not allow it. Gao Huan also requested that the 100,000 households in his fiefdom be used as a reward, and that the reward be distributed to those who fought against the Zhu clan with him in the uprising. Emperor Xiaowu agreed.

古文：冬，十月，庚申，以尚书右仆射何敬容为左仆射，吏部尚书谢举为右仆射。
现代文：冬季，十月，庚申，梁武帝任命尚书右仆射何敬容为左仆射，吏部尚书谢举为右仆射。
English: In winter, October, Goshun, Emperor Liangwu appointed Shangshu's right-hand man, He Jingrong, as his left-hand man, and Shangshu's right-hand man, Xie Jiu, as his right-hand man.

古文：十一月，癸巳，魏以殷州刺史中山邸珍为徐州大都督、东道行台、仆射，以讨下邳。
现代文：十一月，癸巳，北魏任命殷州刺史中山人邸珍为徐州大都督、东道行台、仆射，派他来讨伐下邳。
English: In November of the same year, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed the Yinzhou assassin Zhongshan Renjizhen as the Grand Governor of Xuzhou, the host of Xingtai and Hubei, and sent him to fight against the Lower Han.

古文：十二月，丁巳，魏主狩于嵩高；己巳，幸温汤；丁丑，还宫。
现代文：十二月，丁巳，北魏孝武帝在嵩高狩猎；己巳，又到温泉洗浴；丁丑，返回宫中。
English: In December, Ding Si, the Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowu, went hunting in Songgao; Gui Si, went to the hot springs to bathe; Ding Jiu, returned to the palace.

古文：魏荆州刺史贺拔胜寇雍州，拔下迮戍，扇动诸蛮；雍州刺史庐陵王续遣军击之，屡为所败，汉南震骇。
现代文：北魏荆州刺史贺拔胜进犯雍州，攻克了下迮戍所，煽动蛮民们归附北魏，梁朝雍州刺史庐陵王萧续派遣军队攻击贺拔胜，屡次被对方打败，汉水以南地区都震惊恐惧起来。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty invaded Yongzhou from Jingzhou and conquered the Lower Yangtze River, inciting the barbarians to join the Northern Wei Dynasty. The Liang Dynasty sent troops to attack He Baxing from Yongzhou and conquered the Lower Yangtze River. He Baxing was repeatedly defeated by the other side, and the areas south of the Han River were shocked and afraid.

古文：胜又遣军攻冯翊、安定、沔阳、酂城，皆拔之。
现代文：贺拔胜又派遣军队进攻冯翊、安定、沔阳、城四郡，都攻了下来。
English: He Baxian also sent troops to attack Fengye, Ding'an, Shenyang and Chengdu counties, which were all conquered.

古文：续遣电威将军柳仲礼屯谷城以拒之，胜攻之，不克，乃还。于是沔北荡为丘墟矣。
现代文：庐陵王萧续又派遣电威将军柳仲礼驻军谷城，以抵御贺拔胜，贺拔胜攻打谷城没有成功，就带着兵马返回；于是沔北地区都被扫荡成了一片土丘废墟。
English: The king of Fuling successively dispatched the telegraph general Liu Zhongli to garrison Valley City to resist He Bi Sheng. He Bi Sheng did not succeed in attacking Valley City and returned with soldiers and horses. As a result, the northern region of Fuling was swept away into a wasteland of mounds.

古文：仲礼，庆远之孙也。
现代文：柳仲礼是柳庆远的孙子。
English: Liu Zhongli is the grandson of Liu Qingyuan.

古文：魏丞相欢患贺拔岳、侯莫陈悦之强，右丞翟嵩曰： 嵩能间之，使其自相屠灭。 
现代文：北魏的丞相高欢对贺拔岳和侯莫陈悦的强大感到害怕，右丞翟嵩对高崐欢说： 我能够离间他们，使他们相互屠杀灭亡。 
English: The Northern Wei chancellor Gao Huan was afraid of the power of He Baturake and Hou Mo Chen Yue, and the right-hand man Yu Song said to Gao Huan: I can separate them and make them slaughter each other.

古文：欢遣之。
现代文：高欢就派他去办理此事。
English: Gao Huan sent him to handle the matter.

古文：欢又使长史侯景招抚纥豆陵伊利，伊利不从。
现代文：高欢又派遣长史侯景去招抚纥豆陵伊利，纥豆陵伊利没有听从。
English: Gao Huan also sent Long Shi Houjing to entice Peasling Yili, but Peasling Yili did not listen.

古文：高祖武皇帝十二中大通六年
现代文：大通六年
English: Six years at the top

古文：春，正月，壬辰，魏丞相欢击伊利于河西，擒之，迁其部落于河东。
现代文：春季，正月壬辰，北魏的丞相高欢在五原河西部地区袭击了纥豆陵伊利，抓住了他，并且将他的部落迁移到五原河以东地区。
English: In the spring, in the first month of the year, Gao Huan, the chancellor of the Northern Wei Dynasty, attacked Peasling Yili in the western region of the Wujiang River, captured him, and moved his tribe to the east of the Wujiang River.

古文：魏主让之曰： 伊利不侵不叛，为国纯臣。王忽伐之，讵有一介行人先请之乎！ 
现代文：北魏孝武帝责难高欢说道： 纥豆陵伊利既没有入侵，也没有叛变，是我们魏国忠贞的臣子，您突然讨伐他，难道有一个使者事先来请示过吗？ 
English: The Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowu chided Gao Huan and said: "Pea Ling Yili has neither invaded nor rebelled. He is a loyal vassal of our State of Wei. You have suddenly attacked him. Did a messenger come to ask for permission in advance?

古文：魏东梁州民夷作乱，二月，诏以行东雍州事丰阳泉企讨平之。
现代文：北魏东梁州的百姓夷人叛乱，二月，孝武帝颁下诏书，命令兼管东雍州事务的丰阳人泉企讨伐平定这场叛乱。
English: In February, Emperor Xiaowu issued an edict ordering Fengyang Quanqi, who was also in charge of the affairs of Dongyang, to fight and quell the rebellion.

古文：企世为商、洛豪族，魏世祖以其曾祖景言为本县令，封丹水侯，使其子孙袭之。
现代文：泉企一家世世代代是商、洛一带的豪门大族。太武帝曾经任命泉企的曾祖父泉景言为本县的县令，还封他为丹水侯，并让他的子孙世袭这个爵位。
English: For generations, the Quanqi family has been a wealthy family of merchants in the Luo area. Emperor Taibu once appointed Quanqi's great-grandfather Quan Jingyan as the county magistrate of this county, and also named him Tansuihou, and let his descendants inherit this title.

古文：壬戌，魏大赦。
现代文：壬戌，北魏大赦天下。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty granted amnesty to the whole country.

古文：癸亥，上耕藉田。大赦。
现代文：癸亥，梁武帝在籍田耕作，同时大赦天下。
English: In the year of the boar, Emperor Liang Wudi cultivated the fields of his birthplace, and at the same time, he granted amnesty to the whole world.

古文：魏永宁浮图灾，观者皆哭，声振城阙。
现代文：北魏永宁寺佛塔失火，看到灾情的人无不痛哭，哭声振动了城门两边的楼观。
English: The pagoda of the Northern Wei Yongning Temple caught fire. People who saw the disaster were all crying, and the cries shook the view of the buildings on both sides of the city gate.

古文：魏贺拔岳将讨曹泥，使都督武川赵贵至夏州与宇文泰谋之，泰曰： 曹泥孤城阻远，未足为忧。
现代文：北魏的贺拔岳将要讨伐曹泥，派了都督武川人赵贵到夏州先与宇文泰商量，宇文泰说： 曹泥掌握的是一座孤城，隔的距离又远，不足以成为我们忧虑的对象。
English: Northern Wei's He Baturakure was going to fight Cao Di, and sent the governor of the capital, Zhao Gui, a native of Wuchuan, to consult with Uwentai first in Xiazhou. Uwentai said: Cao Di controls a lonely city, the distance is far away, and it is not enough to be the object of our concern.

古文：侯莫陈悦贪而无信，宜先图之。 
现代文：侯莫陈悦贪心而又不讲信义，应该先收拾他。 
English: Hou Mo Chen Yue is greedy and dishonest, he should be dealt with first.

古文：岳不听，召悦会于高平，与共讨泥。
现代文：贺拔岳没有听从宇文泰的建议，而是召请侯莫陈悦在高平与自己会合，共同讨伐曹泥。
English: He Batyue did not listen to the advice of Yu Wentai, but called Hou Mo Chen Yue to meet with him in Gaoping to jointly fight Cao Di.

古文：悦既得翟嵩之言，乃谋取岳。
现代文：侯莫陈悦听了翟嵩的话以后，就图谋除掉贺拔岳。
English: After Hou Mo Chen Yue heard the words of Yu Song, he tried to get rid of He Baturake.

古文：岳数与悦宴语，长史武川雷绍谏，不听。
现代文：贺拔岳多次与侯莫陈悦随便聊天说话，担任长史的武川人雷绍劝告他，他听不进去。
English: He Batyue chatted and talked casually with Hou Mo Chen Yue many times. Reshao, a long-time resident of Wuchuan, advised him that he could not listen.

古文：岳使悦前行，至河曲，悦诱岳入营坐，论军事。悦阳称腹痛而起，其婿元洪景拔刀斩岳。岳左右皆散走，悦遣人谕之云： 我别受旨，止取一人，诸君勿怖。 
现代文：贺拔岳叫侯莫陈悦走在前面，到了河曲，侯莫陈悦引诱贺拔岳到他的军营去坐，一同谈论军事，谈着谈着，侯莫陈悦假装说自己肚子疼，站起身来，他的女婿元洪景拔出腰刀杀了贺拔岳，贺拔岳身边的人都纷纷逃散，侯莫陈悦派人告诉他们说： 我奉了朝廷密旨，只取贺拔岳一个人的性命，各位都不要害怕。 
English: He Batyue asked Hou Mo Chen Yue to walk in front of him. When they arrived at Hequ, Hou Mo Chen Yue lured He Batyue to his military camp to sit down and talk about the military together. While talking, Hou Mo Chen Yue pretended to have a stomachache and stood up. His son-in-law, Yuan Hongjing, pulled out his sword and killed He Batyue. The people around He Batyue fled in droves. Hou Mo Chen Yue sent someone to tell them: I have received a secret order from the imperial court to take the life of only one person, He Batyue. Don't be afraid.

古文：众以为然，皆不敢动。
现代文：大家都认为侯莫陈悦的话是真的，不敢轻举妄动。
English: Everyone thought that Hou Mo Chen Yue's words were true and dared not make any rash moves.

古文：而悦心犹豫，不即抚纳，乃还入陇，屯水洛城。
现代文：但是侯莫陈悦自己的心里还犹豫不决，不敢安抚招纳贺拔岳的部属，于是就回到陇地，驻扎在水洛城。
English: However, Hou Mo Chen Yue still hesitated in his heart and did not dare to appease the subordinates of He Batyue, so he returned to Handan and stationed in Shuiluo City.

古文：岳众散还平凉，赵贵诣悦请岳尸葬之，悦许之。
现代文：贺拔岳离散的部属回到平凉，赵贵来到侯莫陈悦处请求由他安葬贺拔岳的遗体，侯莫陈悦答应了他。
English: The scattered subordinates of He Baturake returned to Pingliang. Zhao Gui came to Hou Mo Chen Yue and asked him to bury the remains of He Baturake. Hou Mo Chen Yue agreed.

古文：岳既死，悦军中皆相贺，行台朗中薛憕私谓所亲曰： 悦才略素寡，辄害良将，吾属今为人虏矣，何贺之有！ 
现代文：贺拔岳死了之后，侯莫陈悦军队里的官兵都相互庆贺，行台郎中薛悄悄地对他亲近的人说： 侯莫陈悦向来缺乏才识谋略，总是杀害良将，我们这些人现在已注定被人俘虏了，有什么可以庆贺的！ 
English: After He Batyue's death, the officers and soldiers in Hou Mo Chen Yue's army all congratulated each other. Xue, a middle-ranking official, quietly said to those close to him: Hou Mo Chen Yue has always lacked talent and strategy, always killing good generals. We are now doomed to be captured, what is there to celebrate!

古文：憕，真度之从孙也。
现代文：薛是薛真度的侄孙子。
English: Xue is the great-nephew of Xue Zhendu.

古文：岳众未有所属，诸将以都督武川寇洛年最长，推使总诸军；洛素无威略，不能齐众，乃自请避位。赵贵曰： 宇文夏州英略冠世，远近归心，赏罚严明，士卒用命。若迎而奉之，大事济矣。 
现代文：贺拔岳的部下们都还没有归属，各位将领考虑到担任都督的武川人寇洛年崐龄最大，就推举他总管所有的军队，寇洛一向没有威望谋略，不能把大家管理好，就自己请求让位，赵贵说道： 夏州刺史宇文泰的才略天下第一，远近的人心都向着他，他赏罚严明，士兵们都愿意听从他的命令，如果将他迎接来，拥戴他作为我们的统帅，大事就可以成功了。 
English: None of He Batyue's subordinates had yet been assigned. The generals, taking into account the fact that Kolo, a man from Bukhawa, who served as the governor, was the oldest, elected him to be the head of all the troops. Kolo had never had any prestige or strategy, and could not manage everyone well, so he asked to give up his place. Zhao Gui said: Xia Zhou Shishi Yu Ventai's talent is the best in the world. People's hearts are close to him. He rewards and punishes severely. The soldiers are willing to follow his orders. If we welcome him and embrace him as our commander, great things can be successful.

古文：诸将或欲南召贺拔胜，或欲东告魏朝，犹豫未决。
现代文：各位将领中有的想去南方叫贺拔胜来收拾残局，有的想去东方把情况禀告北魏的朝廷，一时间犹豫不决。
English: Some of the generals wanted to go to the south to call He Baxing to clean up the mess, and some wanted to go to the east to report the situation to the Northern Wei court, but they hesitated for a while.

古文：都督盛乐杜朔周曰： 远水不救近火，今日之事，非宇文夏州无能济者，赵将军议是也。
现代文：担任都督的盛乐人杜朔周说道： 远水救不了近火，今天这样的事情，除了宇文泰外，没有任何人能够办成功，赵将军的一番议论是正确的。
English: Du Shuo Zhou, the merry man who served as the governor, said: "Far water cannot save near fire. Today, no one can do such a thing successfully except for Wu Wentai. General Zhao's argument is correct.

古文：朔周请轻骑告哀，且迎之。 
现代文：请允许我朔周骑上快马向宇文泰报告噩耗，并且迎接他到这儿来。 
English: Please allow me to ride a fast horse to report the bad news to Yu Wentai and welcome him here.

古文：众乃使朔周驰至夏州召泰。
现代文：大家就让杜朔周作为使者赶往夏州请宇文泰来。
English: Everyone asked Du Shuo Zhou to rush to Xiazhou as an envoy to invite Wu Wentai.

古文：泰与将佐宾客共议去留，前太中大夫颍川韩褒曰： 此天授也，又何疑乎！
现代文：宇文泰与他的将领、幕僚、宾客一同商议是去是留，前太中大夫、颍川人韩褒说道： 这是上天授命给您，还有什么可以疑虑的呀！
English: When discussing with his generals, staffs and guests whether to go or stay, the former First Vice-Admiral, Han Bo, a native of Beichuan, said, "This is a mandate given to you by Heaven. What else is there to worry about?"

古文：侯莫陈悦，井中蛙耳，使君往，必擒之。 
现代文：侯莫陈悦不过是只井中之蛙，如果您去的话，一定能够捉住他。 
English: Hou Mo Chen Yue is just a frog in the well, if you go, you will definitely be able to catch him.

古文：众以为： 悦在水洛，去平凉不远，若已有贺拔公之众，则图之实难，愿且留以观变。 
现代文：众人都认为： 侯莫陈悦所处的水洛距离平凉不远，如果他已经拥有贺拔岳留下的兵马，再算计他就非常困难了，希望暂且留下来观察时局的变化。 
English: Everyone thought: Hou Mo Chen Yue's Shuiluo is not far from Pingliang. If he already had the soldiers and horses left by He Batur, it would be very difficult to calculate him. I hope to stay and observe the changes in the current situation.

古文：泰曰： 悦既害元帅，自应乘势直据平凉，而退屯水洛，吾知其无能为也。
现代文：宇文泰说： 侯莫陈悦既然杀害了贺拔岳元帅，自然应该乘这个势头直接占据平凉，而他却退了一步占据了水洛，由此我知道他没有能耐再干什么了。
English: Wu Wentai said: Since Hou Mo Chen Yue killed Marshal He Batyue, it was natural that he should use this momentum to directly occupy Pingliang, but he took a step back and occupied Shuiluo, from which I knew that he did not have the ability to do anything else.

古文：夫难得易失者，时也。若不早赴，众心将离。 
现代文：难以得到而又容易失去的是时机，假如我不早点去的话，人心将会离散。 
English: Time is hard won and easily lost, and if I don't go soon, hearts will be divided.

古文：夏州首望都督弥姐元进阴谋应悦，泰知之，与帐下都督高平蔡祐谋执之，祐曰： 元进会当反噬，不如杀之。 
现代文：都督弥姐元进的家族是夏州首屈一指的名门望族，他阴谋策应侯莫陈悦，宇文泰知道了这一情况后，与担任帐下都督的高平人蔡谋划如何捉住他，蔡说道： 弥姐元进会反咬一口的，不如杀掉他。 
English: The family of the prefectural governor, Misa Motojin, was one of the most prestigious families in Xia Prefecture. He plotted to take advantage of Hou Mo Chen Yue. After Yu Wentai learned of this situation, he and Cai, a high-ranking person who served as the prefectural governor, planned how to catch him. Cai said: If Misa Motojin tries to bite back, it's better to kill him.

古文：泰曰： 汝有大决。 
现代文：宇文泰夸奖他说： 你有作重要决策的能力。 
English: "You have the ability to make important decisions," he said, praising Yu Wentai.

古文：乃召元进等入计事，泰曰： 陇贼逆乱，当与诸人戮力讨之，诸人似有不同者，何也？ 
现代文：于是就召请弥姐元进等人到府中商量事情，宇文泰说： 陇州的贼寇进行叛乱，我理所应当和各位一道齐心协力讨伐他们，可是你们之中好象有想法不同的人，这是为什么呀？ 
English: He then summoned Mi's sister, Motojin, and others to the government office to discuss the matter. Wu Wentai said: Thieves and robbers in Zhangzhou are carrying out a rebellion, I should naturally fight them together with you, but it seems that some of you have different ideas. Why is that?

古文：祐即被甲持刀直入，瞋目谓诸将曰： 朝谋夕异，何以为人！
现代文：话刚落音，身披铠甲手持钢刀的蔡一直走进来，瞪大眼睛对各位将领说： 早上想好的主意晚上就改变，还做人干什么？
English: As soon as the speech was over, Cai, clad in armor and holding a steel knife, kept walking in, staring wide-eyed at the generals and saying: If you have a good idea in the morning and change it in the evening, what else are you going to do?

古文：今日必断奸人首！ 
现代文：今天一定要砍掉奸贼的脑袋！ 
English: Today we must cut off the head of the traitor!

古文：举坐皆叩头曰： 愿有所择。 
现代文：在座的人都跪下叩头说： 希望将军区别忠奸。 
English: Everyone present fell to their knees, bowed their heads and said, "I hope the general will distinguish between the loyal and the traitors."

古文：祐乃叱元进，斩之，并诛其党，因与诸将同盟讨悦。
现代文：蔡就大声喝斥弥姐元进，接着杀掉了他，还诛灭了他的党羽，这样就与各位将领结成同盟一道讨伐侯莫陈悦。
English: Cai loudly rebuked Mi Jie Yuanjin, then killed him and wiped out his followers, thus forming an alliance with the generals to fight against Hou Mo Chen Yue.

古文：泰谓祐曰： 吾今以尔为子，尔其以我为父乎？ 
现代文：宇文泰对蔡说： 我从今以后把你当成我的儿子，你愿意认我作你的父亲吗？ 
English: From now on, I will treat you as my son. Are you willing to recognize me as your father?

古文：泰与帐下轻骑驰赴平凉，令杜朔周帅众先据弹筝峡。
现代文：宇文泰与手下的轻骑兵一起快速地赶赴平凉，命令杜朔周带领兵马先占领弹筝峡。
English: Together with his light cavalry, U Wentai quickly rushed to Pingliang and ordered Du Shuo Zhou to lead the troops to occupy Pingzhu Gorge.

古文：时民间惶惧，逃散者多，军士争欲掠之，朔周曰： 宇文公方伐罪吊民，奈何助贼为虐乎！ 
现代文：此时老百姓都很惊惶恐惧，逃散的人很多，士兵们争先恐后地要掠夺他们的财物，杜朔周对士兵们说： 宇文泰大人正在征伐罪人，使百姓安享太平，你们怎么还帮助奸贼做坏事呀？ 
English: At this time, the common people were very frightened, there were many people who had fled, and the soldiers were scrambling to plunder their belongings. Du Shuo Zhou said to the soldiers: Lord Uwentai is conquering sinners and making the people enjoy peace and tranquility. How can you still help traitors to do bad things?

古文：抚而遣之，远近悦附；泰闻而嘉之。
现代文：他对百姓进行安抚并把他们发送回去，远近的人因此都高兴地归附过来；宇文泰听到这一消息后嘉奖了他。
English: He reassured the people and sent them back, and people from far and near were happy to join him; Uwentai praised him after hearing the news.

古文：朔周本姓赫连，曾祖库多汗避难改焉。泰命复其旧姓，名之曰达。
现代文：杜朔周本姓赫连，他的曾祖父库多汗为了避难而改姓杜，宇文泰叫杜朔周恢复他的旧姓，给他起名为赫连达。
English: Du Shuo Zhou's original family name was Helian. His great-grandfather, Kudokhan, changed his family name to Du in order to take refuge. Wu Wentai asked Du Shuo Zhou to restore his old family name and named him Helian.

古文：丞相欢使侯景招抚岳众，泰至安定，遇之，谓曰： 贺拔公虽死，宇文泰尚存，卿何为者！ 
现代文：北魏的丞相高欢派侯景去招纳安抚贺拔岳的兵马，宇文泰走到安定的时候遇见了他，对他说： 贺拔岳虽然已经去世，但我宇文泰还活着，你想要干什么！ 
English: The Northern Wei chancellor Gao Huan sent Hou Jing to recruit soldiers and horses to pacify He Batur, and when Uwentai was stable, he met him and said to him: Although He Batur has passed away, I, Uwentai, am still alive, what do you want!

古文：景失色曰： 我犹箭耳，唯人所射。 
现代文：侯景大惊失色，回答说： 我不过是一枝箭，人家把我射到哪儿我就到崐哪儿。 
English: Shocked and disconsolate, Hou Jing replied, "I am just an arrow. I will go wherever I am shot."

古文：遂还。
现代文：于是便返回了。
English: I just came back.

古文：泰至平凉，哭岳甚恸，将士皆悲喜。
现代文：宇文泰到达平凉之后，非常悲痛地哭吊贺拔岳，将士们都又悲又喜。
English: After arriving at Pingliang, Uwentai cried and congratulated Baturake with great sorrow. The soldiers were both sad and happy.

古文：欢复使侯景与散骑常侍代郡张华原、义宁太守太安王基劳泰，泰不受，欲劫留之，曰： 留则共享富贵，不然，命在今日。 
现代文：高欢又派侯景与散骑常侍代郡人张华原、义宁太守太安人王基去慰劳宇文泰，宇文泰没有接受，还想把他们扣留下来，说： 你们留下来我们就一同享受富贵，不然的话，你们的性命就在今日完结。 
English: Gao Huan also sent Hou Jing and Zhang Hua Yuan, the county's representative, and Wang Ji, the governor of Yining and Ta'an, to console Lau Wentai. Lau Wentai did not accept, but still wanted to detain them, saying: "If you stay, we will enjoy wealth and riches together, otherwise, your life will end today."

古文：华原曰： 明公欲胁使者以死亡，此非华原所惧也。 
现代文：张华原回答说： 您用死亡来威胁使者，这可不是我张华原所惧怕的。 
English: Zhang Hua Yuan replied: You threaten the messenger with death, this is not what I, Zhang Hua Yuan, am afraid of.

古文：泰乃遣之。
现代文：宇文泰无奈，就让他们回去了。
English: Unable to do anything, he let them go.

古文：基还，言 泰雄杰，请及其未定击灭之。 
现代文：王基到晋阳后，对高欢说： 宇文泰是一位英雄杰出的人，请您趁他还没有稳定就攻击消灭他。 
English: After Wang Ji arrived in Jinyang, he said to Gao Huan: "Uwentai is a hero and an outstanding person. Please attack and eliminate him before he is stable.

古文：欢曰： 卿不见贺拔、侯莫陈乎！
现代文：高欢回答说： 你不是看见贺拔岳与侯莫陈悦之间的情况了嘛！
English: Gao Huan replied, "Didn't you see the situation between He Baturake and Hou Mo Chen Yue?"

古文：吾当以计拱手取之。 
现代文：我会使用计谋拱手取他的性命。 
English: I will use guile and cunning to take his life.

古文：魏主闻岳死，遣武卫将军元毘慰劳岳军，召还洛阳，并召侯莫陈悦。
现代文：北魏国主孝武帝听到贺拔岳的死讯，派遣武卫将军元毗去慰问贺拔岳的军队，把他们召回洛阳，并且宣召侯莫陈悦。
English: When Emperor Xiaowu of the Northern Wei Dynasty heard the news of He Baturake's death, he sent General Wuwei Yuanbai to console He Baturake's army, called them back to Luoyang, and proclaimed Hou Mo Chen Yue.

古文：毘至平凉，军中已奉宇文泰为主；悦既附丞相欢，不肯应召。
现代文：元毗到了平凉，部队里面已经拥戴宇文泰作为首领；侯莫陈悦已经归附了高欢，因此不愿意接受孝武帝的宣召。
English: By the time Yuan Pi reached Pingliang, the troops had already embraced Yu Wentai as their leader; Hou Mo Chen Yue had already joined Gao Huan, and was therefore unwilling to accept the proclamation of Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：泰因元毘上表称： 臣岳忽罹非命，都督寇洛等令臣权掌军事。
现代文：宇文泰通过元毗给孝武帝递送了表章，说： 大臣贺拔岳突然死于非命，都督寇洛等人要我暂且掌握这儿的军事权力。
English: Through Yuan Pi, Wu Wentai delivered the insignia to Emperor Xiaowu, saying: Minister He Batyue died suddenly, and Governor Kolo and others asked me to temporarily hold military power here.

古文：奉诏召岳军入京，今高欢之众已至河东，侯莫陈悦犹在水洛，士卒多是西人，顾恋乡邑，若逼令赴阙，悦蹑其后，欢邀其前，恐败国殄民，所损更甚。
现代文：我已经接到您宣召贺拔岳的军队进京城的诏书，但是现在高欢的兵马已经到了五原河以东地区，侯莫陈悦还在水洛，我手下的士兵大多数是西部人，留恋自己的家乡，如果硬逼着叫他们赶赴京城，侯莫陈悦在后面追击，高欢在前面拦截，恐怕会产生国家遭殃百姓被杀的后果，受到的损失更大。
English: I have already received your edict calling for He Baturake's army to enter Beijing, but now Gao Huan's soldiers and horses have reached the area east of the Wuhuan River, and Hou Mo Chen Yue is still in Shiloh. Most of the soldiers under my command are westerners who are nostalgic for their hometowns. If you force them to rush to Beijing, with Hou Mo Chen Yue chasing behind and Gao Huan intercepting in front, I am afraid that the country will suffer the consequences of people being killed, and suffer greater losses.

古文：乞少赐停缓，徐事诱导，渐就东引。 
现代文：请您允许我们稍微停一停缓一缓，慢慢地进行诱导，渐渐地将他们带到东部地区。 
English: Please allow us to stop and slow down a little, slowly induce, and gradually bring them to the eastern region.

古文：魏主乃以泰为大都督，即统岳军。
现代文：孝武帝就任命宇文泰为大都督，就统率贺拔岳的部队。
English: Emperor Xiaowu appointed Uwen Tai as the grand governor, and he led the troops of He Batur.

古文：初，岳以东雍州刺史李虎为左厢大都督，岳死，虎奔荆州，说贺拔胜使收岳众，胜不从。
现代文：当初，贺拔岳任用东雍州刺史李虎为左厢大都督，贺拔岳死后，李虎直奔荆州，劝说贺拔胜来接收贺拔岳手下的人马，贺拔胜没有接受他的意见。
English: At first, He Bajue appointed Li Hu, the governor of Dongyang Prefecture, as the left-hand governor. After He Bajue's death, Li Hu went straight to Jingzhou to persuade He Bajue to accept He Bajue's men. He Bajue did not accept his opinion.

古文：虎闻宇文泰代岳统众，乃自荆州还赴之。至阌乡，为丞相欢别将所获，送洛阳。
现代文：李虎听说宇文泰已经代替贺拔岳统率全体将士，便从荆州往回赶，路过阌乡的时候，被丞相高欢手下的将领俘虏，然后给送到了洛阳。
English: When Li Hu heard that Wu Wentai had replaced He Batyue as the leader of all the soldiers, he rushed back from Jingzhou. When he passed through Huanxiang, he was captured by the generals under the command of the prime minister Gaohuan, and then sent to Luoyang.

古文：魏主方谋取关中，得虎甚喜，拜卫将军，厚赐之，使就泰。
现代文：孝武帝正准备谋取关中地区，得到李虎欣喜万分，任命他为卫将军，赐给他一大笔财物，派他到宇文泰那里。
English: Emperor Xiaowu was preparing to conquer the Guanzhong region, and he was overjoyed to get Li Huxin, appointed him as Wei general, gave him a large amount of wealth, and sent him to Wu Wentai.

古文：虎，歆之玄孙也。
现代文：李虎是李歆的玄孙。
English: Li Hu is the great-great-grandson of Li Yao.

古文：泰与悦书，责以 贺拔公有大功于朝廷。
现代文：宇文泰写给侯莫陈悦一封书信，用这样的话谴责他： 贺拔公曾为朝廷立过大功。
English: Wu Wentai wrote a letter to Hou Mo Chen Yue, denouncing him with these words: He Baogong once did great service for the imperial court.

古文：君名微行薄，贺拔公荐君为陇右行台。
现代文：你声名微不足道并且品行低下，贺拔公却推荐你为陇右地区的行台。
English: Your reputation is negligible and your conduct is low, but He Bajong recommends you as a guidebook for the Shandong region.

古文：又高氏专权，君与贺拔公同受密旨，屡结盟约；而君党附国贼，共危宗庙，口血未干，匕首已发。
现代文：又赶上高欢独揽大权，你与贺拔公一同接受了皇上的秘密旨意，相互屡次缔结盟约；而你甘愿成为国贼的附庸，当他的同党，共同危害国家。
English: When Gao Huan seized power, you and He Bajong accepted the emperor's secret will and repeatedly signed an alliance agreement with each other. And you were willing to become a vassal of the traitor, to be his accomplice, and to jointly endanger the country.

古文：今吾与君皆受诏还阙，今日进退，唯君是视：君若下陇东迈，吾亦自北道同归；若首鼠两端，吾则指日相见！ 
现代文：你与贺拔公盟誓时口中含的血还没干，手中的匕首就已经刺向他。现在我与你都接到了命令我们返回京城的诏书，今天是进是退，就看你的了：你要是能从陇山撤下来而东还，我也就从北道出发与你一同回去；如果你瞻前顾后，迟疑不决，那我们就在不久之后以兵刃相见！ 
English: The blood in your mouth wasn't dry when you swore an oath to He Baogong, and the dagger in your hand was already stabbing him. Now you and I have both received the edict ordering us to return to the capital. Whether you go in or out today is up to you: if you can withdraw from Lushan and return to the east, I will also go back with you from the North Road; if you look back and hesitate, then we will soon see each other with a sword!

古文：魏主问泰以安秦、陇之策，泰表言： 宜召悦授以内官，或处以瓜、凉一籓；不然，终为后患。 
现代文：北魏孝武帝向宇文泰询问安定秦、陇地区的策略，宇文泰呈上奏折，说： 应该召回侯莫陈悦，授予他京城中的官职，或者将瓜、凉二州中的一个州分封给他，不然的话，他终究要成为一个后患。 
English: Emperor Xiaowu of the Northern Wei Dynasty asked Uwentai about the strategy of stabilizing Qin and Qi regions, and Uwentai submitted a report saying: Hou Mo Chen Yue should be recalled and given an official post in the capital, or one of the two states of Gua and Liang should be assigned to him, otherwise, he will eventually become a hindrance.

古文：原州刺史史归，素为贺拔岳所亲任，河曲之变，反为悦守。
现代文：原州刺史史归，向来是贺拔岳亲近信任的人，河曲事变之后，反而变成了侯莫陈悦的官员。
English: He has always been a close and trusted person of He Batyue, but after the Hequ Incident, he became an official of Hou Mo Chen Yue.

古文：悦遣其党王伯和、成次安将兵二千助归镇原州，泰遣都督侯莫陈崇帅轻骑一千袭之。
现代文：侯莫陈悦派遣他的同党王伯和、成次安率领两千人马帮助史归镇守原州，宇文泰派了都督侯莫陈崇统领一千名轻装骑兵去袭击他们。
English: Hou Mo Chen Yue dispatched his fellow party members Wang Bohe and Cheng Jian An to lead two thousand horses to help Shi return to the town to defend the original state, and Wu Wentai sent the governor Hou Mo Chen Chong to lead a thousand light cavalry to attack them.

古文：崇乘夜将十骑直抵城下，馀众皆伏于近路；归见骑少，不设备。
现代文：侯莫陈崇带了十名骑兵，乘着黑夜，一直抵达城下，其余的人马都埋伏在附近的道路上；史归看见来的骑兵人数少，没有进行防备。
English: Hou Mo Chen Chong took ten cavalrymen and rode through the night until they reached the foot of the city. The rest of the men and horses were lying in ambush on the nearby road. Historians saw only a small number of cavalrymen and did not take any precautions.

古文：崇即入，据城门，高平令陇西李贤及弟远穆在城中，为崇内应。
现代文：侯莫陈崇立即冲了进去，占据了城门，担任高平县令的陇西人李贤和他的弟弟李远穆在城里做侯莫陈崇的内应。
English: Hou Mo Chen Chong immediately rushed in and occupied the city gate. Li Xian and his brother Li Yuan Mu, both from Shaanxi, who served as Gaoping County magistrates, acted as Hou Mo Chen Chong's inner circle in the city.

古文：于是中外鼓噪，伏兵悉起，遂擒归及次安、伯和等归于平凉。
现代文：于是，城里城外同时擂鼓呐喊，埋伏的人马都一拥而起，就这样捉住了史归以及成次安、王伯和，并把他们带回了平凉。
English: As a result, both inside and outside the city, drums and shouts were beating at the same time, and the ambushed people and horses all gathered together. In this way, they captured Shi Gui, as well as Chengdi An, Wang Bo He, and brought them back to Pingliang.

古文：泰表崇行原州事。
现代文：宇文泰上书孝武帝，请求让侯莫陈崇兼管原州的事务。
English: U Wentai wrote to Emperor Xiaowu, requesting that Hou Mo Chen Chong also take charge of the affairs of Yuanzhou.

古文：三月，泰引兵击悦，至原州，众军毕集。
现代文：三月，宇文泰率领人马攻打侯莫陈悦，到了原州，各路的军队都集结在一起。
English: In March, Yu Wentai led the troops to attack Hou Mo Chen Yue, and when they arrived at Wonju, the troops from all directions were gathered together.

古文：夏，四月，癸丑朔，日有食之。
现代文：夏季，四月，癸丑朔，出现日食。
English: In the summer, in April, there is an eclipse of the sun.

古文：魏南秦州刺史陇西李弼说侯莫陈悦曰： 贺拔公无罪而公害之，又不抚纳其众，今奉宇文夏州以来，声言为主报仇，此其势不可敌也，宜解兵谢之！不然，必及祸。 
现代文：任北魏南秦州刺史的陇西人李弼劝侯莫陈悦道： 贺拔公无罪而您杀害了他，您又不安抚收纳他的部属，现在他们奉宇文泰为主将领兵而来，声言要为他们的主人报仇，看他们的势头是无法抵挡的，您应该放下武器向他们谢罪，不然的话，必定引来大祸。 
English: Li Yan, a native of Shaanxi Province, who was in charge of writing the history of Northern Wei and Southern Qin, advised Hou Mo Chen Yue: He Baogong was not guilty and you killed him, and you did not care to receive his subordinates. Now they have come with Yu Wentai as the main general to lead the army, claiming to avenge their master. Their momentum is irresistible. You should lay down your weapons and apologize to them. Otherwise, it will surely lead to a big disaster.

古文：悦不从。
现代文：侯莫陈悦没有按照他的意见去做。
English: Hou Mo Chen Yue did not follow his advice.

古文：宇文泰引兵上陇，留兄子导为都督，镇原州。
现代文：宇文泰率领军队向陇地进发，留下兄长的儿子宇文导以都督的身份镇守原州。
English: Uwentai led the army to advance to Handan, leaving his elder brother's son, Uwindu, to defend Wonju as the governor.

古文：泰军令严肃，秋毫无犯，百姓大悦。
现代文：宇文泰军令严肃，一路上部队秋毫无犯，老百姓都非常高兴。
English: Uven Thai's military orders were serious, and the troops did not commit any crimes along the way, and the people were very happy.

古文：军出木狭关，雪深二尺，泰倍道兼行，出其不意。
现代文：出了木狭关之后，大雪厚达二尺，宇文泰还是带着队伍日夜兼行，准备给侯莫陈悦来个出其不意。
English: After leaving Kisagaseki, the snow was two feet thick. Still, Uwentai and his team walked day and night, preparing to surprise Hou Mo Chen Yue.

古文：悦闻之，退保略阳，留万人守水洛。
现代文：侯莫陈悦得到消息后，退到略阳进行防守，只留下一万人留守水洛。
English: After Hou Mo Chen Yue received the news, he retreated to Liangyang to defend, leaving only ten thousand people to stay in Shuiluo.

古文：泰至，水洛即降。
现代文：宇文泰一到，水洛的人马就投降了。
English: As soon as Yu Wentai arrived, the people of Shuiluo surrendered.

古文：泰遣轻骑数百趣略阳，悦退保上邽，召李弼与之拒泰。
现代文：宇文泰派了几百名轻装骑兵赶往略阳，侯莫陈悦又撤退到上，要李弼来和他一道抵御宇文泰。
English: Uwentai sent several hundred light cavalry to Liangyang, Hou Mo and Chen Yue retreated to Shang, and asked Li Ying to join him in resisting Uwentai.

古文：弼知悦必败，阴遣使诣泰，请为内应。
现代文：李弼知道侯莫陈悦必定失败，暗中派遣使者到宇文泰那儿，请求做他的内应。
English: Li Yao knew that Hou Mo Chen Yue would certainly fail, and secretly sent an emissary to Yu Wentai to ask him to be his inside man.

古文：悦弃州城，南保山险，弼谓所部曰： 侯莫陈公欲还秦州，汝辈何不装束！ 
现代文：侯莫陈悦又放弃了州城，向南撤退，占据山中险要的地方而自保。李弼对侯莫陈悦的部属说： 侯莫陈公准备返回秦州，你们这些人为什么还不整理行装！ 
English: Hou Mo Chen Yue also abandoned the state capital and retreated to the south, occupying a place in the mountains to protect himself. Li Yan said to Hou Mo Chen Yue's subordinates: Hou Mo Chen Gong is preparing to return to Qinzhou, why don't you people pack up and go!

古文：弼妻，悦之姨也，众咸信之，争趣上邽。
现代文：李弼的妻子是侯莫陈悦的姨，大家都听信了李弼的话，争相赶往上。
English: Li Yao's wife is Hou Mo Chen Yue's aunt. Everyone believed Li Yao's words and scrambled to catch up.

古文：弼先据城门以安集之，遂举城降泰，泰即以弼为秦州刺史。
现代文：李弼抢先占据了城门来保证这一带的的安定，随后带着全城人马投降了宇文泰，宇文泰马上任命李弼为秦州刺史。
English: Li Qian first occupied the city gate to ensure the stability of this area, and then surrendered to Yu Wentai with the whole city. Yu Wentai immediately appointed Li Qian as the history of Qin State.

古文：其夜，悦出军将战，军自惊溃。
现代文：当天晚上，侯莫陈悦派出队伍准备迎战，但是兵士们无心作战，人人自危，因而自行溃散了。
English: In the evening of the same day, Hou Mo Chen Yue sent a team to prepare for battle, but the soldiers had no intention of fighting, everyone was at risk, so they broke up on their own.

古文：悦性猜忌，既败，不听左右近己，与其二弟并子及谋杀岳者七八人弃军迸走。数日之中，槃桓往来，不知所趣。
现代文：侯莫陈悦生性喜欢猜疑别人，吃了败仗之后，不敢再相信周围的人，不让他们靠近自己，就和两位弟弟，还有儿子以及谋杀贺拔岳的人，一共七八个人，抛弃大队人马飞奔而去，他们好几天盘旋往来，不知道应该去哪里。
English: Hou Mo Chen Yuesheng likes to be suspicious of others. After the defeat, he couldn't believe the people around him anymore. He didn't let them get close to him. He, his two younger brothers, his son, and the person who murdered He Batyue, a total of seven or eight people, abandoned the large group of people and sped away. They circled back and forth for several days, not knowing where to go.

古文：左右劝向灵州依曹泥，悦从之。自乘骡，令左右皆步从，欲自山中趣灵州。
现代文：旁边的人劝他到灵州去依附曹泥，侯莫陈悦答应了，他自己骑上骡子，命令手下的人都徒步跟随，准备穿过山路赶到灵州。
English: The people around him advised him to go to Lingzhou to cling to Cao Di. Hou Mo Chen Yue agreed. He himself mounted the mule and ordered his men to follow on foot, preparing to cross the mountain road to Lingzhou.

古文：宇文泰使原州都督贺拔颖追之，悦望见追骑，缢死于野。
现代文：宇文泰叫原州的都督崐贺拔颖在后面追赶。侯莫陈悦望见追上来的骑兵，便在荒野之中上吊自杀了。
English: When Hou Mo Chen Yue caught sight of the pursuing cavalry, he hanged himself in the wilderness.

古文：泰入上邽，引薛憕为记室参军。
现代文：宇文泰进入上，引荐薛为记室参军。
English: Yu Wentai entered the room and recommended Xue to join the army as a recorder.

古文：收悦府库，财物山积，泰秋毫不取，皆以赏士卒；左右窃一银甕以归，泰知而罪之，即剖赐将士。
现代文：没收侯莫陈悦府中的仓库，财物堆积如山，宇文泰自己一点也不要，全都用来犒赏士兵；身边的人偷偷地拿了一只银瓮回来，宇文泰知道后惩处了他，随即将银瓮剖开分给了将士。
English: They confiscated the storehouse in Hou Mo Chen Yue's mansion. There was a mountain of wealth piled up, which U Wentai himself did not want at all. It was all used to reward soldiers. A person close to him secretly took a silver ingot and returned it. When U Wentai found out, he punished him and then divided the silver ingot to the soldiers.

古文：悦党豳州刺史孙定儿据州不下，有众数万，泰遣都督中山刘亮袭之。
现代文：侯莫陈悦的同党豳州刺史孙定儿还占据着该州不投降，手下共有几万人马。宇文泰派出中山人都督刘亮去袭击豳州。
English: Hou Mo Chen Yue's fellow party member Zhang Shishi Sun Ding Er of Zhangzhou also occupied the state without surrender, with a total of tens of thousands of horses under his command. Yu Wentai sent the Zhongshan people's governor Liu Liang to attack Zhangzhou.

古文：定儿以大军远，不为备；亮先竖一纛于近城高岭，自将二十骑驰入城。
现代文：孙定儿以为敌人的军队离自己还远，没有进行准备。刘亮先在州城附近的山头竖起一杆大旗，自己带领二十名骑兵飞奔进城。
English: Sun Ding'er thought that the enemy's army was still far away from him and did not prepare. Liu Liang first erected a big flag on the hill near the state capital and led twenty cavalry into the city.

古文：定儿方置酒，众猝见亮至，骇愕，不知所为，亮麾兵斩定儿，遥指城外纛，命二骑曰： 出召大军！ 
现代文：孙定儿正在设置酒宴，突然看见刘亮赶到，又惊又怕，不知道应该做什么。刘亮指挥士兵砍死了孙定儿，然后遥指城外的大旗，命令两位骑兵道： 出去叫大部队进来。 
English: Sun Ding'er was setting up a wine banquet, when he suddenly saw Liu Liang arrive. He was shocked and afraid, and didn't know what to do. Liu Liang commanded the soldiers to cut down Sun Ding'er, and then, pointing to the large flag outside the city, ordered the two cavalrymen: "Go out and call the large army to come in."

古文：城中皆慑服，莫敢动。
现代文：城中的人都惧怕得服服贴贴，没有一个人敢动。
English: Everyone in the city was scared into submission, and no one dared to move.

古文：先是，故氐王杨绍先乘魏乱逃归武兴，复称王。
现代文：先前，过去的氐王杨绍先乘北魏混乱之机逃回了武兴，重新自立为王。
English: In the past, Yang Shao, the king of Zhou in the past, took advantage of the chaos of the Northern Wei Dynasty to escape back to Wuxing and became king again.

古文：凉州刺史李叔仁为其民所执，氐、羌、吐谷浑所在蜂起，自南岐至瓜、鄯，跨州据郡者不可胜数。
现代文：凉州刺史李叔仁被他管辖的百姓捉住后，氐、羌、吐谷浑各族所在的地方叛乱蜂拥而起，从南岐一直到瓜、鄯地区，跨州据郡的现象数不胜数。
English: After Li Shu-Ren, the chief historian of Liangzhou, was captured by the people under his jurisdiction, the local rebellions of various ethnic groups in Nankai, Gansu, and Tuyuhun surged. From Nanki to Gua and Gansu, there are countless cross-state phenomena.

古文：宇文泰令李弼镇原州，夏州刺史拔也恶蚝镇南秦州，渭州刺史可硃浑道元镇渭州，卫将军赵贵行秦州事，征豳、泾、东秦、岐四州之粟以给军。
现代文：宇文泰命令李弼镇守原州，夏州刺史拔也恶蚝镇守南秦州，渭州刺史可朱浑道元镇守渭州，卫将军赵贵兼管秦州的事务，征收豳、泾、东秦、岐四个州的粮食供给军队。
English: Wu Wentai ordered Li Qizhen to defend Yuanzhou, Xiazhou Zhishibai to defend Southern Qinzhou, Zhangzhou Zhishibai to defend Southern Qinzhou, Zhangzhou Zhishibai to defend Eastern Qinzhou, and Wei general Zhao Gui to take charge of the affairs of Qinzhou, and to collect grain from the four states of Yunnan, Fujian, East Qin and Qi to supply the army.

古文：杨绍先惧，称籓，送妻子为质。
现代文：杨绍先害怕了，自称是北魏的藩属，表示屈服，并送来妻子、儿子作为人质。
English: Yang Shaoxian was scared, claimed to be a member of the Northern Wei clan, expressed his submission, and sent his wife and son as hostages.

古文：夏州长史于谨言于泰曰： 明公据关中险固之地，将士骁勇，土地膏腴。
现代文：夏州长史于谨对宇文泰说： 您占据了关中险要而容易固守的地方，将士们骁勇善战，土地肥沃富饶。
English: Xia governor Shi Yu said respectfully to Yu Wentai: You have occupied a place in the middle of Guanzhong that is crucial and easy to defend, the soldiers are brave and good at fighting, and the land is fertile and rich.

古文：今天子在洛，迫于群凶，若陈明公之恳诚，算时事之利害，请都关右，挟天子以令诸侯，奉王命以讨暴乱，此桓、文之业，千载一时也！ 
现代文：现在皇上在洛阳，身受一群凶恶之徒的胁迫，如果对他陈述您的诚心诚意，讲明时事对他的利害关系，请他将都城迁到关西地区，这样您就可以挟天子而令诸侯，禀承皇帝的命令来讨伐叛乱，建立齐桓公、晋文公那样的大业，这可是千载难逢的好机会呀！ 
English: Now that the emperor is in Luoyang, under the duress of a group of vicious thugs, if you state your sincerity to him and explain the current situation to him, please ask him to move the capital to the Kansai region, so that you can order the princes to follow the emperor's order to fight the rebellion and establish a great cause like Qi Huan and Jinwen, this is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity!

古文：泰善之。
现代文：宇文泰认为他言之有理。
English: Mr. Uwentai thinks he has a point.

古文：轨曰： 宇文公文足经国，武能定乱。 椿曰： 诚如君言，真可恃也。 魏主命泰发二千骑镇东雍州，助为势援，仍命泰稍引军而东。泰以大都督武川梁御为雍州刺史，使将步骑五千前行。
现代文：丞相高欢听说宇文泰平定了秦、陇地区，就派遣使者用甜言蜜语和丰厚的礼品来结交宇文泰，宇文泰没有接受，而是封好高欢的书信，派担任都督的济北人张轨去献给孝武帝。斛斯椿问张轨： 高欢的叛逆之心路人皆知，众望所归，唯有西边的宇文泰了，不知道宇文泰的才能与贺拔岳相比如何？ 张轨回答说： 宇文公论文足以管理国家，论武能够平定叛乱。 斛斯椿说道： 果真象你说的那样，宇文泰真是可以依靠的对象。 北魏孝武帝命令宇文泰派出二千名骑兵镇守东雍州，作为增援力量，仍然命令宇文泰逐渐率领部队向东部进发。宇文泰委任原籍武川的大都督梁御为雍州刺史，派他带着五千名骑兵与步兵走在前面。
English: When the chancellor Gao Huan heard that Uwen Tai had conquered the Qin and Min regions, he sent an envoy with sweet words and rich gifts to make friends with Uwen Tai. Uwen Tai did not accept, but sealed Gao Huan's letter and sent Zhang Liao, a Jibei man who served as the governor, to present it to Emperor Xiaowu. Gao Shizhong asked Zhang Liao: Gao Huan's rebellious heart is well known to passers-by, and he is highly regarded. Only the western side of Uwen Tai is left, and I don't know how Uwen Tai's talent compares to that of He B

古文：先是，丞相欢遣其都督太安韩轨将兵一万据蒲坂以救侯莫陈悦，凝州刺史贾显度以舟迎之。
现代文：先前，丞相高欢派他的都督太安人韩轨率领一万人马占据蒲反地区来救侯莫陈悦，雍州刺史贾显度用船迎接了他。
English: Previously, the prime minister Gao Huan sent his governor, the Tai'anese Han Zhao, to rescue Hou Mo Chen Yue by leading ten thousand horses to occupy the Putang area, and Yangzhou Zishi Jia visibly greeted him by boat.

古文：梁御见显度，说使从泰，显度即出迎御，御入据长安。
现代文：梁御见到贾显度，便劝说他追随宇文泰，贾显度随即出城迎接梁御，梁崐御进入并占领了长安。
English: When Liang Gu saw Jia Xandu, he persuaded him to follow Yu Wentai. Jia Xandu immediately left the city to meet Liang Gu. Liang Xandu entered and occupied Chang'an.

古文：魏主以泰为侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、关西大都督、略阳县公，承制封拜。
现代文：魏主以泰为侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、关西大都督、略阳县公，承制封拜。
English: The Lord of Wei took Tai as a chamberlain, a cavalry general, Kaifu Yi and three departments, the governor of Kansai, and the governor of Liaoyang County, and undertook the siege.

古文：泰乃以寇洛为泾州刺史，李弼为秦州刺史，前略阳太守张献为南岐州刺史。
现代文：泰乃以寇洛为泾州刺史，李弼为秦州刺史，前略阳太守张献为南岐州刺史。
English: Yat-Nai took Koro as the scribe of Bozhou, Li Qian as the scribe of Qin, and the former Yang Dazhu Zhang Xuan as the scribe of South Qizhou.

古文：南岐州刺史卢待伯不受代，泰遣轻骑袭而擒之。
现代文：南岐州刺史卢待伯不受代，泰遣轻骑袭而擒之。
English: In southern Kishu Province, Sisulu waited for the emperor, but the emperor did not accept the request. The emperor sent a light cavalry to attack the emperor and killed him.

古文：侍中封隆之言于丞相欢曰： 斛斯椿等今在京师，必构祸乱。 
现代文：北魏孝武帝任用宇文泰为侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、关西大都督、略阳县公，可以按皇帝的旨意自行封官。宇文泰就任命寇洛为泾州刺史，李弼为秦州刺史，前略阳太守张献为南岐州刺史。
English: Emperor Xiaowu of the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Uwentai as a chamberlain, a cavalry general, the third secretary of Kaifu Yi Tong, the governor of Kansai, and the governor of Liaoyang County, and he could appoint officials according to the emperor's will. Uwentai appointed Kolo as the governor of Zhangzhou, Li Qian as the governor of Qin, and Zhang Xian, the former governor of Liaoyang, as the governor of Nanqi.

古文：隆之与仆射孙腾争尚魏主妹平原公主，公主归隆之，腾泄其言于椿，椿以白帝。
现代文：南岐州刺史卢待伯不接受由张献替代他职务的决定，宇文泰派了轻装骑兵偷袭捉住了他。侍中封隆之对丞相高欢说： 斛斯椿等人如今待在京城，必定构成灾祸混乱。 
English: The governor of South Kishu Province, Shuluchibo, did not accept the decision to replace him with Zhang Xian, and Uwentai sent light cavalry to attack and capture him. The chamberlain, Feng Longzhi, said to the prime minister, Gao Huan, "The fact that Gao Shizhu and others are now staying in Beijing must be a disaster and chaos.

古文：隆之惧，逃还乡里，欢召隆之诣晋阳。
现代文：由于封隆之与仆射孙腾曾争着做孝武帝的妹妹平原公主的驸马，公主跟了封隆之，孙腾便把他的话泄露给斛斯椿，斛斯椿又告诉了孝武帝。
English: As Feng Longzhi and his servant, Sun Teng, had been competing to be the groom of Emperor Xiaowu's sister, the Plain Princess, and the princess had followed Feng Longzhi, Sun Teng then leaked his words to Gong Shizhuan, and Gong Shizhuan then told Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：会腾带仗入省，擅杀御史，惧罪，亦逃就欢。
现代文：封隆之害怕了，逃回了家乡，高欢将他叫到了晋阳。恰好孙腾由于带着兵器闯入皇宫禁地，擅自杀死了御史，因而惧罪而逃，也跑到了高欢那里。
English: Feng Longzhi was afraid and fled back to his hometown, Gao Huan called him to Jinyang. It just so happened that Sun Teng broke into the restricted area of the imperial palace with weapons and killed Mi Shi without permission, so he fled in fear of crime and also ran to Gao Huan.

古文：领军娄昭辞疾归晋阳。
现代文：领军娄昭以生病作为托辞跑回了晋阳。
English: The leader, Zou Zhao, used illness as an excuse to run back to Jinyang.

古文：帝以斛斯椿兼领军，改置都督及河南、关西诸刺史。
现代文：孝武帝派斛斯椿兼任领军，另行安排都督以及河南、关西各地的刺史。
English: Emperor Xiaowu sent Jinszchun to be the leader of the army, and also arranged for the appointment of the governor and the history of Henan and Kansai regions.

古文：华山王鸷在徐州，欢使大都督邸珍夺其管钥。
现代文：华山王元鸷在徐州，高欢派大都督邸珍夺去了他的城门钥匙。
English: Huashan Wang Yuanjun in Xuzhou, the Gaohuan faction of the Grand Duchy of Zhen took away his gate key.

古文：建州刺史韩贤，济州刺史蔡俊，皆欢党也。
现代文：建州刺史韩贤，济州刺史蔡俊都是高欢的党羽。
English: Jianzhou's Han Xian and Jeju's Cai Jun are high-ranking party members.

古文：帝省建州以去贤，使御史举俊罪，以汝阳王叔昭代之。
现代文：孝武帝通过撤销建州的办法免去了韩贤的职务，叫御史列举蔡俊的罪状，让汝阳王元叔昭取代了他。
English: Emperor Xiaowu relieved Han Xian of his duties by revoking the establishment of the state, and ordered the imperial historian to enumerate Cai Jun's crimes, and let Ruyang Wang Yuan Shuzhao replace him.

古文：欢上言： 俊勋重，不可解夺；汝阳懿德，当受大籓；臣弟永宝，猥任定州，宜避贤路。 
现代文：高欢向孝武帝上书说： 蔡俊功勋卓著，决不可以解除他的职位剥夺他的权力；汝阳王有着美好的德行，应当封他为大藩国的国王；我的弟弟高永宝现任定州刺史，应该避让开，进用有才能的人。 
English: Gao Huan wrote to Emperor Xiaowu, "Cai Jun has made outstanding contributions, and he must not be relieved of his post and deprived of his power; King Ruyang has a fine virtue, and he should be made the king of a great domain; my brother Gao Yongbao, who is currently the governor of Dingzhou, should be avoided, and talented people should be used.

古文：帝不听。
现代文：孝武帝没有听他的话。
English: Emperor Xuan did not listen.

古文：五月，丙子，魏主增置勋府庶子，厢别六百人；又增骑官，厢别二百人。
现代文：五月，丙子，孝武帝增设了勋府庶子，每厢有六百人；又增设了骑官，每厢有二百人。
English: In May, Emperor Genshi and Emperor Xiaowu added the ranks of the Imperial Household Agency's illegitimate children, with 600 people per compartment, and cavalry officers, with 200 people per compartment.

古文：魏主欲伐晋阳，辛卯，下诏戒严，云欲自将伐梁。
现代文：孝武帝想要讨伐高欢所住的晋阳，辛卯，颁下诏书命令戒严，说 要亲自带兵讨伐梁 。
English: Emperor Xiaowu wanted to attack Jinyang, Xinwu, where Gao Huan lived, and issued an edict ordering martial law, saying that he would personally lead troops to attack Liang.

古文：发河南诸州兵，大阅于洛阳，南临洛水，北际邙山，帝戎服与斛斯椿临观之。
现代文：他征调河南各州的兵马，在洛阳进行大规模的检阅仪式，部队的南端挨着洛水，北端靠近邙山，孝武帝身穿盔甲与斛斯椿一道亲临视察。
English: He conscripted soldiers and horses from all the states of Henan, and conducted a large-scale review ceremony in Luoyang. The southern end of the troops was next to Luoshui, and the northern end was near Lushan. Emperor Xiaowu, wearing armor, came to inspect the troops together with Gong Shizhuan.

古文：六月，丁巳，魏主密诏丞相欢，称 宇文黑獭、贺拔胜颇有异志，故假称南伐，潜为之备；王亦宜共为形援。
现代文：六月，丁巳，孝武帝秘密写给丞相高欢一封诏书，假称： 宇文黑獭、贺拔胜颇有叛变篡位的意图，所以我假装说要讨伐南方，暗中进行准备；您也应该一同做出增援的样子。
English: In June, Emperor Xiaowu secretly wrote an imperial decree to the chancellor Gao Huan, saying, "Uwen Heixuan and He Baxian have quite a rebellious intention to usurp the throne, so I pretend to say that I want to invade the south and secretly make preparations; you should also make reinforcements together."

古文：读讫燔之。 
现代文：读后请将诏书烧掉。 
English: Please burn the edict after reading it.

古文：欢表以为 荆、雍将有逆谋，臣今潜勒兵马三万，自河东渡，又遣恒州刺史库狄干等将兵四万自来违津渡，领军将军娄昭等将兵五万以讨荆州，冀州刺史尉景等将山东兵五万、突骑五万以讨江左，皆勒所部，伏听处分。 
现代文：高欢上书给孝武帝，说： 荆州的贺拔胜、雍州的宇文泰将要实施叛逆的阴谋，我现在暗中带领三万兵马，从河东渡河，又派遣恒州刺史库狄干等人统领四万兵马从来违津渡河，领军将军娄昭等人统领五万兵马讨伐荆州，冀州刺史尉景等人统领七万山东兵、五万惯于冲锋陷阵的精锐骑兵讨伐江东地区，他们都已率领自己的部属，恭敬地聆听您的吩咐。 
English: Gao Huan sent a letter to Emperor Xiaowu, saying: He Baosheng of Jingzhou and Yu Wentai of Yongzhou are going to carry out a traitorous plot. I am now secretly leading 30,000 soldiers and horses to cross the river from the east of the river. I have also sent Hengzhou Zhishu Dikang and others to lead 40,000 soldiers and horses to cross the river from the east of the river. The leading general Zou Zhao and others to lead 50,000 soldiers and horses to fight in Jingzhou, and Jizhou Zhishu Lvjing and others to lead 70,000 Shandong soldiers and 50,000 elite cavalrymen who are accustomed to fighting in the east of the river

古文：帝知欢觉其变，乃出欢表，令群臣议之，欲止欢军。
现代文：孝武帝知道高欢已经觉察自己要制造事变，就亮出高欢的奏章，叫大臣们对它进行评议，想要制止高欢出兵。
English: Emperor Xiaowu knew that Gao Huan had already realized that he wanted to create an incident, so he showed Gao Huan's record and asked the ministers to review it in order to stop Gao Huan from sending troops.

古文：欢亦集并州僚佐共议，还以表闻，仍云： 臣为嬖佞所间，陛下一旦赐疑。
现代文：高欢也召集并州的官佐属吏共同商议，然后又一次递上奏章，仍然说： 我受到一群奸臣的挑拨离间，陛下因此一时对我产生了怀疑。
English: Gao Huan also convened the officials and subordinate officials of the unified state to discuss together, and then submitted the report again, still saying: I was provoked by a group of treacherous ministers, and therefore His Majesty had doubts about me for a while.

古文：臣若敢负陛下，使身受天殃，子孙殄绝。
现代文：我要是胆敢辜负陛下，就让上天将灾难降临到我的身上，断子绝孙。
English: If I dare to betray His Majesty, may the heavens bring disaster down on me, and may I lose my son and grandson.

古文：陛下若垂信赤心，使干戈不动，佞臣一二人愿斟量废出。 
现代文：陛下如果相信我的赤胆忠心，免动干戈，我就希崐望您能考虑把一两位奸臣从您的身边赶出去。 
English: Your Majesty, if you believe in my unswerving loyalty, I hope you will consider expelling one or two traitorous retainers from your entourage.

古文：丁卯，帝使大都督源子恭守阳胡，汝阳王暹守石济，又以仪同三司贾显智为济州刺史，帅豫州刺史斛斯元寿东趣济州。
现代文：丁卯，孝武帝派大都督源子恭镇守阳胡，汝阳王元暹镇守石济，又任命仪同三司贾显智为济州刺史。带领豫州刺史斛斯元寿赶往东部的济州。
English: In Dingwu, Emperor Xiaowu sent the grand governor Yuan Zi Gong Zhen to guard Yanghu, Ruyang Wang Yuan Sie Zhen to guard Shishi, and also appointed Yi Tong San Si Jia Xian Zhi as the governor of Jeju. He led the governor of Yuzhou, Shishi Yuan Shou, to the east of Jeju.

古文：元寿，椿之弟也。
现代文：斛斯元寿是斛斯椿的弟弟。
English: Yu Si Yuan Shou is Yu Si Tsubaki's younger brother.

古文：蔡俊不受代，帝愈怒，辛未，帝复录洛中文武议意以答欢，且使舍人温子升为敕赐欢曰： 朕不劳尺刃，坐为天子，所谓生我者父母，贵我者高王。今若无事背王，规相攻讨，则使身及子孙，还如王誓。
现代文：蔡俊不接受让别人替代他的职位，孝武帝更加恼怒。辛未，孝武帝再次采纳洛阳文武官员的建议答复高欢，并且派舍人温子升替自己撰写诏书送给高欢，说： 朕连短刀都不用动一下，就这么坐着成为了天子，说起来生我的是父母，而使我尊贵起来的却是高王您，现在如果我无缘无故背叛您，打算和您相互进攻讨伐，那么也让灾难降临到我和我的子孙身上，跟您的誓言中说的一样。
English: Cai Jun did not accept to let someone else take his place, and Emperor Xiaowu was even more angry. Soon after, Emperor Xiaowu once again took the advice of Luoyang's literary and military officials to reply to Gao Huan, and sent his subordinate Wen Zi to write an edict to Gao Huan, saying: "I don't even have to move my dagger, I just sit and become the son of heaven. In other words, it was my parents who gave birth to me, but it was you, the king of Gao, who made me noble. Now, if I betray you for no reason and plan to attack and fight with you, then let

古文：近虑宇文为乱，贺拔应之，故戒严，欲与王俱为声援。
现代文：近来由于担心宇文泰犯上作乱，以及贺拔岳响应他，所以采取了戒严措施，想和您相互声援。
English: Recently, fearing that Uwentai would start a riot and that He Baturake would respond to him, martial law measures were taken in order to show solidarity with you.

古文：今观其所为，更无异迹。
现代文：如今观察他们的所作所为，没有一点叛逆的迹象。
English: Watching them now, there is no hint of rebellion.

古文：东南不宾，为日已久，今天下户口减半，未宜穷兵极武。
现代文：东南方不服从我们的情况已经持续很久了，眼下天下的户口减了一半，所以不宜再穷尽兵力好战不厌了。
English: The southeast has been disobeying us for a long time, and now the world's population has been reduced by half, so it is no longer appropriate to exhaust our forces and get tired of war.

古文：朕既闇昧，不知佞人为谁。
现代文：朕既然昏暗不明，所以不知道奸臣是谁。
English: Since I am dim and unclear, I do not know who the traitor is.

古文：顷高乾之死，岂独朕意！
现代文：不久前高乾之死，难道仅仅是朕的意思吗！
English: The death of Gao Qian not long ago, is it just my imagination?

古文：王忽对昂言兄枉死，人之耳目何易可轻！
现代文：您突然对高昂说他的兄长死得冤枉，人的眼睛与耳朵哪能这样容易被欺骗？
English: You suddenly told Gao Ang that his brother died unjustly. How can human eyes and ears be deceived so easily?

古文：如闻库狄干语王云： 本欲取懦弱者为主，无事立此长君，使其不可驾御。
现代文：听说库狄干对您讲过： 本来想找一个懦弱无能的人当皇帝，可是却无缘无故立了一个年长的国君，弄得无法驾御。
English: I heard that Kudikan told you: I originally wanted to find a weak and incompetent person to be the emperor, but for no reason I set up an elderly ruler, making it impossible to control.

古文：今但作十五日行，自可废之，更立馀者。 
现代文：现在只需出兵十五日，自然就可以废掉他，从其他的人中另立一位。 
English: Now we only need to send troops for fifteen days, and naturally we can abolish him and appoint someone else from among the others.

古文：如此议论，自是王间勋人，岂出佞臣之口！
现代文：象这样的议论，自然出自于您处的亲近勋贵，难道是出自我身边的奸臣的口中！
English: This kind of talk naturally comes from your close nobles. Is it from the mouth of a traitor around me?

古文：去岁封隆之叛，今年孙腾逃去，不罪不送，谁不怪王！
现代文：去年封隆之叛变，今年孙腾逃去，您不惩处他们，不把他们送过来，有谁对您不感到奇怪。
English: Last year, Feng Long mutinied, and this year, Sun Teng fled. If you don't punish them, if you don't send them back, who wouldn't be surprised?

古文：王若事君尽诚，何不斩送二首！
现代文：您要是为君主做事尽心尽力，为什么不斩了他们的头颅送给我！
English: If you are doing your best for the sovereign, why don't you cut off their heads and give them to me!

古文：王虽启云 西去 ，而四道俱进，或欲南度洛阳，或欲东临江左，言之者犹应自怪，闻之者宁能不疑！
现代文：您虽然在奏折中声称 往西攻打宇文泰 ，而实际上却四路进发，有的想往南渡河到洛阳，有的想要到达江东地区，说这些话的人自己也应该感到奇怪，那么听的人怎么能够不怀疑？
English: Although you claimed in your report that you were going west to attack Uwentai, you actually went in four directions. Some wanted to go south across the river to Luoyang, and some wanted to reach the east of the river. The person who said these words should also feel strange, so how can the listener not be suspicious?

古文：王若晏然居北，在此虽有百万之众，终无图彼之心；王若举旗南指，纵无匹马只轮，犹欲奋空拳而争死。
现代文：您是要静静地呆在北方，我即使手中有百万大军，最终也不会有算计您的心思；您要是举起旗帜指向南方，我纵然没有一匹马一只车轮，也还要以赤手空拳斗争到死。
English: You want to stay quietly in the north, even if I have a million-man army in my hands, I will not have the heart to calculate you in the end; if you raise the flag to the south, even if I do not have a horse or a wheel, I will fight to the death with my bare hands.

古文：朕本寡德，王已立之。百姓无知，或谓实可。
现代文：我本来没有什么仁德，您已经立了我为皇帝，老百姓无知，有的人还说我完全可以。
English: Originally, I didn't have any benevolence. You've made me emperor, and the people are ignorant. Some people even say that I'm perfectly capable.

古文：若为他人所图，则彰朕之恶；假令还为王杀，幽辱齑粉，了无遗恨！
现代文：我要是受到别人的算计，那就显出了我的罪恶。假使我最终还是被您杀掉的话，那我就是受尽污辱，粉身碎骨，也没有一点遗恨！
English: If I am the victim of someone else's calculation, then my sin will be revealed. If I am eventually killed by you, then I will be humiliated, my body will be shattered, and there will be no hatred left!

古文：本望君臣一体，若合符契，不图今日分疏至此！ 
现代文：我本来希望我们君臣能成为一体，犹如合起来的符信契约一样，没想到如今相互之间分歧、疏远到这种程度！ 
English: I had hoped that we princes and courtiers could become one, like a united contract of fidelity, but I did not expect the differences and estrangement between us to reach such a degree!

古文：中军将军王思政言于魏主曰： 高欢之心，昭然可知。
现代文：中军将军王思政对孝武帝说： 高欢的心思昭然若揭，谁都知道。
English: The Chinese general Wang Sizheng said to Emperor Xiaowu: Gao Huan's thoughts are obvious, everyone knows.

古文：洛阳非用武之地，宇文泰乃心王室，今往就之，还复旧京，何虑不克？ 
现代文：洛阳不崐是英雄用武的地方，宇文泰的心是向着皇室的，现在朝廷迁到他那儿去，将来再光复旧的都城，还怕不成功吗？ 
English: Luoyang is not only a place where heroes use martial arts, but also the heart of Wu Wentai is towards the royal family. Now the imperial court has moved to his place, will the restoration of the old capital city in the future be successful?

古文：帝深然之，遣散骑侍郎河东柳庆见泰于高平，共论时事。
现代文：孝武帝觉得他的话很正确，便派遣河东人散骑侍郎柳庆到高平会见宇文泰，一同讨论时事。
English: Emperor Xiaowu felt that his words were very correct, so he sent Liu Qing, a horseback riding attendant from Hedong, to Gaoping to meet with Uwentai and discuss current affairs.

古文：泰请奉迎舆驾，庆复命。帝复私谓庆曰： 朕欲向荆州，何如？ 
现代文：宇文泰请求去迎接孝武帝的车驾，柳庆完成使命后回到京城报告了情况，孝武帝又悄悄地对柳庆说： 我想到荆州去，你看怎么样？ 
English: Yu Wentai requested to meet Emperor Xiaowu's chauffeur, Liu Qing returned to Beijing after completing his mission to report the situation, and Emperor Xiaowu quietly said to Liu Qing: I want to go to Jingzhou, what do you think?

古文：庆曰： 关中形胜，宇文泰才略可依。
现代文：柳庆回答说： 关中的地形占据优势，宇文泰的才能胆略可以依靠。
English: Liu Qing replied: Guanzhong's terrain has an advantage, and Yu Wentai's talent can be relied on.

古文：荆州地非要害，南迫梁寇，臣愚，未见其可。 
现代文：荆州所处不是要害之地，南面又接近强敌梁国，依我愚见，没有可以去的理由。 
English: The location of Jingzhou is not a critical place, and the south is close to the strong enemy Liangguo. In my humble opinion, there is no reason to go.

古文：帝又问阁内都督宇文显和，显和亦劝帝西幸。
现代文：孝武帝又征求内都督宇文显和的意见，宇文显和也劝孝武帝去西边。
English: Emperor Xiaowu also solicited the opinion of the Inner Governor, Uwen Xianhe, who also advised Emperor Xiaowu to go to the west.

古文：时帝广征州郡兵，东郡太守河东裴侠帅所部诣洛阳，王思政问曰： 今权臣擅命，王室日卑，奈何？ 
现代文：这时，孝武帝从各州、郡广泛征招兵马，河东人东郡太守裴侠率领他的部属到达洛阳，王思政问他： 如今大权在握的官员自作主张，皇室日趋卑微，应该怎么办？ 
English: At this time, Emperor Xiaowu extensively recruited soldiers and horses from every prefecture and county, and Baichang, the governor of Dong County, who was from the east of the river, led his subordinates to Luoyang. Wang Sizheng asked him, "Nowadays, officials with great power make their own proposals, and the royal family is becoming increasingly humble. What should we do?"

古文：侠曰： 宇文泰为三军所推，居百二之地，所谓己操戈矛，宁肯授人以柄！
现代文：裴侠回答说： 宇文泰被三军推崇，占据着以二万人就足以抵挡百万人的这块险固的地方。这正象人们所说的那样，自己手持着戈矛，哪肯将把柄授给别人？
English: Pei Xiang replied, "Uwentai is respected by the three armies and occupies this precarious place where 20,000 people are enough to resist a million people. This is just as people say, he is holding a spear, who will give the handle to others?

古文：虽欲投之，恐无异避汤入火也。 
现代文：所以，虽然想去投靠他，但是恐怕无异于避开了沸水又走进了火坑。 
English: Therefore, although I want to go to him, I am afraid it is tantamount to avoiding the boiling water and entering the fire pit.

古文：思政曰： 然则如何而可？ 
现代文：王思政又问道： 那么怎样做才好呢？ 
English: Wang Sizheng also asked: So what is the right thing to do?

古文：侠曰： 图欢有立至之忧，西巡有将来之虑。且至关右，徐思其宜耳。 
现代文：裴侠说道： 算计高欢则有近忧，到西部去则有远虑，比较之下，还是暂且先去关西地区，然后再慢慢想一个合适的方案吧。 
English: Pei Xiang said: Calculating high happiness has short-term worries, and going to the west has foresight. In comparison, it is better to go to the Kansai region first, and then slowly think about a suitable plan.

古文：思政然之，乃进侠于帝，授左中郎将。
现代文：王思政认为裴侠言之有理，于是把他推荐给孝武帝，孝武帝授予他左中郎将的职位。
English: Wang Sizheng agreed with his opinion and recommended Pei Xiang to Emperor Xiaowu, who awarded him the title of Zuochungro.

古文：初，丞相欢以为洛阳久经丧乱，欲迁都于鄴，帝曰： 高祖定鼎河、洛，为万世之基；王既功存社稷，宜遵太和旧事。 
现代文：当初，丞相高欢因为洛阳久经兵火战乱，想要把国都迁到邺城，孝武帝说： 孝文帝定都河、洛地区，开创了我们魏国流传万代的基业，高王您既然是国家的功臣，就应该遵照太和年间订立的旧制办事。 
English: At the beginning, the chancellor Gao Huan wanted to move the national capital to Fucheng because Luoyang had been ravaged by war for a long time. Emperor Xiaowu said: Emperor Xiaowen established the capital of Luo and Luo region, and created the heritage of Wei that has been passed down for generations. Since Emperor Gao is a national hero, he should follow the old system of government established during the Taewa era.

古文：欢乃止。
现代文：高欢这才放弃了这一念头。
English: So Gao Huan did not send him.

古文：至是复谋迁都，遣三千骑镇建兴，益河东及济州兵，拥诸州和籴粟，悉运入鄴城。
现代文：到了这时，他又一次谋划迁都的事，派遣了三千名骑兵镇守建兴，又增加河东以及济州的兵马，掌握了各州摊派购买的粮食，把它们全部运进邺城。
English: At this time, he once again planned the relocation of the capital, dispatched three thousand cavalrymen to guard Jianxing, increased the number of soldiers and horses from Hedong and Jeju, seized the grain allocated for purchase by each state, and transported them all to Lucheng.

古文：帝又敕欢曰： 王若厌伏人情，杜绝物议，唯有归河东之兵，罢建兴之戍，送相州之粟，追济州之军。使蔡俊受代，邸珍出徐，止戈散马，各事家业，脱须粮廪，别遣转输。则谗人结舌，疑悔不生，王高枕太原，朕垂拱京洛矣。
现代文：孝武帝又颁下诏书给高欢说： 高王您要是想平服人心，杜绝众人的非议，只有撤回河东的兵马，停止在建兴的军事行动，送走相州屯积的粮食，再追回济州的军队，让蔡俊同意由别人取代他的职务，让邸珍离开徐州，放下干戈，解散兵马，每人从事家庭生产，如果需要粮食，另外派人输送，做了这些事之后，说您坏话的人就会张口结舌，不再产生怀疑，高王您从此在太原可以高枕无忧，我在京城洛阳垂衣拱手不用操心了。
English: Emperor Xiaowu also issued an edict to Gao Huan, saying: Gao Wang, if you want to pacify the hearts of the people and put an end to the criticism of the people, you can only withdraw the soldiers and horses from Hedong, stop the military operations in Jianxing, send away the grain accumulated in Xiangzhou, and then recover the army in Jeju, let Cai Jun agree to be replaced by others, let Jizhen leave Xuzhou, put down the war, disband the soldiers and horses, and everyone engage in family production. If you need grain, send someone else to transport it. After doing these things, those who say bad things about you will

古文：王若马首南向，问鼎轻重，朕虽不武，为社稷宗庙之计，欲止不能。
现代文：您要是挥师南下，想篡夺皇位，朕虽然在干戈军旅方面没有什么才能，但是为国家、宗庙考虑，我就是想罢休也不能，决定权在您那里，而不是我。
English: If you want to go to the south and usurp the imperial throne, although I have no talent for military expeditions, for the sake of the country and the ancestral temple, I can't stop even if I want to. The decision-making power is yours, not mine.

古文：决在于王，非朕能定，为山止篑，相为惜之。 
现代文：缺了最后一筐土，还不成一座山，咱们都为此感到可惜。 
English: It is a pity for all of us that the last basket of soil is not enough to make a mountain.

古文：欢上表极言宇文泰、斛斯椿罪恶。
现代文：高欢又向孝武帝递送奏折，竭力数说宇文泰、斛斯椿的罪恶。
English: Gao Huan also delivered a recital to Emperor Xiaowu, trying his best to recount the crimes of Uwentai and Jiesqin.

古文：帝以广宁太守广宁任祥兼尚书左仆射，加开府仪同三司，祥弃官走，度河，据郡待欢。
现代文：孝武帝宣布让在原籍广宁担任太守的任祥兼任尚书左仆射加开府仪同三司，任祥弃官逃走，渡过黄河，占据了郡城等待高欢前来。
English: Emperor Xiaowu announced that Ren Xiang, who was originally from Guangning and served as the eunuch, would also serve as the left-hand servant of Shangshu, Shaka, Kaifu and the three departments. Ren Xiang abandoned his post and fled, crossed the Yellow River, occupied the county seat and waited for Gaohuan to come.

古文：帝乃敕文武官北来者任其去留，遂下制书数欢咎恶，召贺拔胜赴行在所。
现代文：孝武帝就颁下诏书规定文武百官中凡是来自北方的可以随意离开或者留下，另一份诏书中又数说了高欢的罪恶，征召贺拔胜赶赴京城。
English: Emperor Xiaowu issued an edict stipulating that any of the hundreds of civil and military officials from the north could leave or stay at will. In another edict, he spoke of the evils of high-spirits and called for people to rush to the capital to celebrate the victory.

古文：胜以问太保掾范阳卢柔，柔曰： 高欢悖逆，公席卷赴都，与决胜负，死生以之，上策也；北阻鲁阳，南并旧楚，东连兗、豫，西引关中，带甲百万，观衅而动，中策也；举三荆之地，庇身于梁，功名皆去，下策也。 
现代文：贺拔胜就此事询问范阳人太保掾卢柔，卢柔回答说： 高欢倒行逆施，您率领大军赶赴都城，与他决一胜负，不论生死都坚持，这是上策。您在北面阻隔鲁阳，在南面吞并从前的楚国土地，在东面连接兖、豫地区，在西面与关中之主结好，带着百万人马，相机而动，这是中策。以三荆的土地作为资本，投靠梁国，功业名誉都失去，这是下策。 
English: He Baisheng asked Fan Yang's bodyguard Lu Rong about this. Lu Rong replied, "It's high-spirited and counterproductive. You led the army to rush to the capital to fight with him, and insisted on it no matter whether you were alive or dead. This is the best strategy. You block Lu Yang in the north, absorb the former land of Chu in the south, connect the regions of Yunnan and Henan in the east, and make peace with the lord of Guanzhong in the west, and move with a million horses and cameras. This is the middle strategy. With the land of Sanjong as capital, relying on Liangguo, and losing

古文：胜笑而不应。
现代文：贺拔胜听后笑了起来，没作回答。
English: After listening, He Baxing laughed and did not answer.

古文：帝以宇文泰兼尚书仆射，为关西大行台，许妻以冯翊长公主，谓泰帐内都督秦郡杨荐曰： 卿归语行台，遣骑迎我。 
现代文：孝武帝让宇文泰兼任尚书仆射，出任关西大行台，还答应将冯翊长公主许配给他做妻子。他对宇文泰的帐内都督、秦郡人杨荐说： 你回去告诉你们行台，让他派骑兵来迎接我！ 
English: Emperor Xiaowu asked Uwentai to double as Shang Shu's footman and to serve as the Kansai Grand Cavalry, and also promised to marry Princess Feng Qi to him as his wife. He said to Yang Jinli, the governor of Uwentai's account and a Qin County resident: You go back and tell your cavalry to come, and let him send cavalry to meet me!

古文：以荐为直阁将军。
现代文：又任命杨荐为直将军。
English: He also appointed Yang Jianlin as the new General Secretary.

古文：泰以前秦州刺史骆超为大都督，将轻骑一千赴洛，又遣荐与长史宇文测出关候接。
现代文：宇文泰任命以前的秦州刺史骆超为大都督，率领一千名轻装骑兵前往洛阳，又派遣杨荐与长史宇文侧一道到关外迎候孝武帝。
English: Wu Wentai appointed the former Qin State Governor Luo Chao as the Grand Governor, led a thousand light cavalry to Luoyang, and sent Yang Recommend to meet Emperor Xiaowu outside Guan together with the Long Shi and Wu Wentai.

古文：丞相欢召其弟定州刺史琛使守晋阳，命长史崔暹佐之。
现代文：丞相高欢召来他的弟弟定州刺史高琛，让他镇守晋阳，命令长史崔暹辅佐他。
English: The chancellor Gao Huan summoned his younger brother Dingzhou Jishi Gao Yao, asked him to guard Jinyang, and ordered the governor Shi Cui Siem to assist him.

古文：暹，挺之族孙也。
现代文：崔暹是崔挺的儿子。
English: Choi Siam is Choi Ting's son.

古文：欢勒兵南出，告其众曰： 孤以尔硃擅命，建大义于海内，奉戴主上，诚贯幽明；横为斛斯椿谗构，以忠为逆，今者南迈，诛椿而已。 
现代文：高欢带领部队向南方进发，并告诉他的部属们： 因为尔朱氏自作主张不服从命令，所以我在海内伸张正义，拥戴皇上，真诚之心，贯通幽明，谁知由此而横遭斛斯椿的谗言谄害，我一片忠心，却被他们视为叛逆。现在我们向南方进军，不过是要杀掉斛斯椿而已。 
English: Gao Huan led the troops to march to the south and told his subordinates: Because the Lzhu clan disobeyed orders on their own initiative, I upheld justice at sea, supported the emperor, sincere heart, and penetrated the darkness. Who knows, because of this, I was slandered by the Jurchen, I was loyal, but they regarded me as a rebel. Now we are marching to the south, just to kill the Jurchen.

古文：以高敖曹为前锋。
现代文：他任命高敖曹为先锋官。
English: He appointed Gao Bing Cao as the vanguard officer.

古文：宇文泰亦移檄州郡，数欢罪恶，自将大军发高平，前军屯弘农。
现代文：宇文泰也在各州、郡传布声讨文书，列举高欢的罪恶，并且亲自带领大军前往高平，先头部队屯驻在弘农。
English: Uwentai also spread the word about the document in every prefecture and county, enumerating the evils of high jinks, and personally led a large army to Gaoping, with the vanguard stationed in Hongnong.

古文：贺拔胜军于汝水。
现代文：贺拔胜的军队驻扎在汝水。
English: He Baxing's army was stationed in Riushui.

古文：秋，七月，己丑，魏主亲勒兵十馀万屯河桥，以斛斯椿为前驱，陈于邙山之北。
现代文：秋天，七月，己丑，北魏孝武帝亲自带领十万兵马屯驻在河桥地区，以斛斯椿为先锋，陈兵在邙山的北面。
English: In the autumn, in July, the Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowu personally led 100,000 soldiers and horses to be stationed in the Hechiao area, with Jieshchun as the vanguard, and Chen Bing in the north of Lushan.

古文：椿请帅精骑二千夜度河掩其劳弊，帝始然之。黄门侍郎杨宽说帝曰： 高欢以臣伐君，何所不至！
现代文：斛斯椿请求率领两千名精锐骑兵渡过黄河，乘敌军疲劳困乏处于不利状态的时候发动突然袭击，孝武帝开始同意他的计划，但黄门侍郎杨宽劝告孝武帝说： 高欢以臣子的身份讨伐君王，还有什么做不出的！
English: Gong Shizhun requested to lead two thousand elite cavalry across the Yellow River and take advantage of the enemy's fatigue and exhaustion to launch a surprise attack when he was in an unfavorable state. Emperor Xiaowu began to agree with his plan, but the Yellow Gate attendant Yang Guang advised Emperor Xiaowu: Gaohuan to fight the king as a vassal, what else can not be done!

古文：今假兵于人，恐生它变。
现代文：现在把兵马借给别人，怕会发生其它的变故。
English: Lend the soldiers and horses to someone else now, for fear that something else will happen.

古文：椿若度河，万一有功，是灭一高欢，生一高欢矣。 
现代文：斛斯椿渡河之后，万一有功的话，那就成了灭除了一个高欢，又生出一个高欢。 
English: After crossing the river, if there is any merit, it will be the elimination of a high roller and the birth of a high roller.

古文：帝遂敕椿停行，椿叹曰： 顷荧惑入南斗，今上信左右间构，不用吾计，岂天道乎！ 
现代文：孝武帝于是颁下诏书，命令斛斯椿停止行动。斛斯椿叹息道： 近来火星进入南斗，现在皇上相信他身边的人的离间陷害，不采用我的计谋，岂不是天意呀！ 
English: Emperor Xiaowu then issued an edict, ordering Emperor Jingzhu to stop the action. Emperor Jingzhu sighed, "Recently, Mars has entered the Southern Cross, and now the emperor believes that he is being set up by the people around him, and does not use my strategy, isn't that the will of heaven!"

古文：北中郎将田怙为欢内应，欢潜军至野王，帝知之，斩怙。
现代文：宇文泰听了这话之后，对身边的部下说： 高欢几天之中行军八九百里路，这是兵家所忌讳的事情，应当乘这个机会袭击他。
English: After listening to this, Uwentai said to his subordinates around him: Gao Huan marched eight or nine hundred miles in a few days, which is a thing that is taboo for soldiers, and they should take this opportunity to attack him.

古文：欢至河北十馀里，再遣使口申诚款；帝不报。
现代文：而皇上以万乘之重，不能渡过河去与高欢决一死战，倒是靠着渡口一味防守。
English: But the emperor, with the weight of ten thousand chariots, could not cross the river to fight a battle to the death with Gao Huan, but relied on the ferry to defend himself.

古文：丙午，欢引军度河。魏主问计于群臣，或欲奔梁，或云南依贺拔胜，或云西就关中，或云守洛口死战，计未决。
现代文：而且长河足有万里，防御起来困难，如果有一个地方让高欢的军队渡过，总的局势就完了。 他立刻任命大都督赵贵为别道行台，从蒲反渡河，向并州进军，又派大都督李贤率领一千名精锐骑兵赶往洛阳。孝武帝向各位大臣询问计策，有人说投奔南方梁朝，有的人说到南方依靠贺拔胜，有的人说去西部的关中地区，有的人说坚守洛口死战一场，计划定不下来。
English: Moreover, the Yangtze River is thousands of miles long and difficult to defend. If there is a place for Gao Huan's army to cross, the general situation will be over. He immediately appointed the Grand Duke Zhao Gui as a parting platform, crossing the river from Putang and marching to Nianzhou, and sent the Grand Duke Li Xian led by a thousand elite cavalrymen to Luoyang. Emperor Xiaowu asked the ministers for strategies. Some said to go to the southern Liang Dynasty, some said to rely on the south to win, some said to go to the western Guanzhong region, and some said to hold on to Luokou in a deadly

古文：元斌之与斛斯椿争权，弃椿还，绐帝云： 高欢兵已至！ 
现代文：元斌之与斛斯椿争权夺利，他丢下斛斯椿回来，欺骗孝武帝说： 高欢的兵马已经到了！ 
English: Yuan Binzhi fought for power and profit with Gong Shizhuan. He left Gong Shizhuan and came back, deceiving Emperor Xiaowu and saying: The high-spirited soldiers have arrived!

古文：丁未，帝遣使召椿还，遂帅南阳王宝炬、清河王亶、广阳王湛以五千骑宿于瀍西，南阳王别舍沙门惠臻负玺持千牛刀以从。
现代文：丁未，孝武帝派遣使者召回斛斯椿，然后就率领南阳王元宝炬、清河王元、广阳王元湛带着五千名骑兵在水的西部宿营，寄居在南阳王舍下的出家人惠臻背着玉玺手持千牛刀跟随着。
English: At dusk, Emperor Xiaowu sent an envoy to call back Jushi, and then led Nanyang Wangyuan Baotong, Qinghe Wangyuan and Guangyang Wangyuan Tan with five thousand cavalrymen to camp in the west of the water. The monk Huizhen, who was living under the Nanyang King's house, followed behind with a jade scepter and a thousand-cattle knife.

古文：众知帝将西出，其夜，亡者过半，亶、湛亦逃归。
现代文：大家都知道孝武帝将要出发到西部去，这一天夜间，逃亡的人超过一半，清河王元、广阳王元湛也逃了回去。
English: Everyone knew that Emperor Xiaowu was about to leave for the west. That night, more than half of the fugitives, including Qinghe Wangyuan and Guangyang Wangyuan, fled back.

古文：湛，深之子也。
现代文：元湛是元深的儿子。
English: Mototan is the son of Motonobu.

古文：武卫将军云中独孤信单骑追帝，帝叹曰： 将军辞父母、捐妻子而来， 世乱识忠臣 ，岂虚言也！ 
现代文：武卫将军云中人独孤信单人匹马追赶孝武帝。孝武帝感叹地说道： 将军你辞别父母，舍弃妻子而来，有言道： 世道大乱的时候能够识别出忠臣 ，这可不是瞎话呀！ 
English: General Wuwei believed that he was alone in the clouds and pursued Emperor Xiaowu on horseback. Emperor Xiaowu said with regret: General, you have left your parents and abandoned your wife. There is a saying: When the world is in turmoil, you can recognize a loyal subject. This is not a lie!

古文：戊申，帝西奔长安，李贤遇帝于崤中。
现代文：戊申，孝武帝奔往西部的长安，李贤在崤县境内与孝武帝相遇。
English: Boshin, Emperor Xiaowu rushed to Chang'an in the west, and Li Xian met Emperor Xiaowu in the territory of Handan County.

古文：己酉，欢入洛阳，舍于永宁寺，遣领军娄昭等追帝，请帝东还。
现代文：己酉，高欢进入洛阳，住在永宁寺，派遣领军娄昭等人追赶孝武帝，请他东还。
English: Ji Yan, Gao Huan entered Luoyang, lived in Yongning Temple, sent the leader of the army Zou Zhao and others to catch up with Emperor Xiaowu, and asked him to return.

古文：长孙子彦不能守陕，弃城走。
现代文：长孙子彦不能守住陕城，弃城逃跑了。
English: The eldest grandson, Zihang, was unable to hold on to Shaanxi City and abandoned the city and fled.

古文：高敖曹帅劲骑追帝至陕西，不及。
现代文：高敖曹率领着精锐的骑兵追赶孝武帝一直到达陕城以西，终于没有赶上。
English: Gao Bing Cao led the elite cavalry to chase Emperor Xiaowu all the way to the west of Shaanxi City, and finally did not catch up.

古文：帝鞭马长鹜，糗浆乏绝，三二日间，从官唯饮涧水。至湖城，有王思村民以麦饭壶浆献帝，帝悦，复一村十年。
现代文：孝武帝鞭打着马长时间地奔驰，粮浆乏绝。两三天里面，跟随孝武帝的官员只能喝山涧的水充饥，到了湖城，当地王思村中的农民献给孝武帝麦饭与壶浆，孝武帝感到很高兴，免除了全村十年的徭役。
English: Emperor Xiaowu whipped his horse and galloped for a long time, and the grain was running out. For two or three days, the officials who followed Emperor Xiaowu could only drink water from the mountains to satisfy their hunger. When they arrived at Hucheng, the farmers in the local Wangsi village offered Emperor Xiaowu wheat and potting mix. Emperor Xiaowu was very pleased and exempted the whole village from ten years of corvee.

古文：至稠桑，潼关大都督毛鸿宾迎献酒食，从官始解饥渴。
现代文：到了稠桑，潼关大都督毛鸿宾迎接孝武帝，送上了酒与食物，跟随的官员才开始解除了饥渴。
English: When they arrived in Zhusang, the guests of Mao Hongbin, the governor of Shaoguan, greeted Emperor Xiaowu and presented him with wine and food. Only then did the officials begin to quench their thirst.

古文：八月，甲寅，丞相欢集百官谓曰： 为臣奉主，匡救危乱，若处不谏争，出不陪从，缓则耽宠争荣，急则委之逃窜，臣节安在！ 
现代文：八月，甲寅，丞相高欢召集文武百官，对他们说： 做臣子侍奉皇上，要解救危难，消除混乱，假如在朝中不进行诤谏，皇上出门时不陪同跟随，没有急事时一心争宠幸求荣耀，一旦遇上急事就自己抱头逃窜，你们做臣子的气节在哪里！ 
English: In August, Gao Yin, the chancellor Gao Huan, called together hundreds of civil and military officials and said to them: To be a vassal to serve the emperor, you must relieve danger and eliminate chaos. If you do not carry out vows in the court, if you do not accompany the emperor when he goes out, if you are not in a hurry, if you are only competing for favor and seeking glory, and if you are in a hurry, you will run away with your head held high. Where is your ambition to be a vassal?

古文：众莫能对，兼尚书左仆射辛雄曰： 主上与近习图事，雄等不得预闻。
现代文：大家都不能回答，兼任尚书左仆射的辛雄说道： 皇上与他宠信的近臣们谋划商量事情，我们这些人事先都不知道。
English: No one could answer, said Xin Xiong, who also served as Shangshu's right-hand man. "The emperor and his trusted courtiers plan and discuss things, and we people don't know about it in advance.

古文：及乘舆西幸，若即追随，恐迹同佞党；留待大王，又以不从蒙责，雄等进退无所逃罪。 
现代文：等到皇上的车子到西边去的时候，我们要是立即追随，恐怕行为就相同于奸党；而我们留下来等待大王您，您又以不追随皇上这一点责难我们，我们这些人进退都无法逃脱罪责了。 
English: When the emperor's carriage sets out for the west, if we follow it immediately, we will be acting like traitors; but if we wait for you, great king, and you reproach us for not following the emperor, we will not be able to escape the blame.

古文：欢曰： 卿等备位大臣，当以身报国。群佞用事，卿等尝有一言谏争乎！
现代文：高欢说道： 你们身为高级官员，本来应当用自己的身体来报效国家，但是在一群奸臣当权的时候，你们中间有人说过一句规劝抗争的话吗？
English: Gao Huan said: You, as high-ranking officials, should have used your bodies to serve the country, but when a group of traitors were in power, did any of you ever say a word to encourage resistance?

古文：使国家之事一朝至此，罪欲何归！ 
现代文：使国家大事一朝之间糟到这种地步，你们的罪责还能归到谁的身上！ 
English: Who else can you blame for making national affairs go from bad to worse overnight?

古文：乃收雄及开府仪同三司叱列延庆、兼吏部尚书崔孝芬、都官尚书刘廞、兼度支尚书天水杨机、散骑常侍元士弼，皆杀之。
现代文：说完，就下令收审辛雄以及开府仪同三司叱列延庆、兼任吏部尚书崔孝芬、都官尚书刘、兼任度支尚书天水人杨机、散骑常侍元士弼，将他们一个个都杀了。
English: Having said that, he ordered the trial of Hsin Xiong, as well as the Kaifu Rite and the three divisions of Yanqing, Cui Xiaofeng, who also served as the secretary of the administrative department, Liu, who also served as the secretary of the capital, Yang Jie, who also served as the secretary of the provincial government, and Yuan Shijie, who often rode around, and killed them one by one.

古文：孝芬子司徒从事中朗猷间行入关，魏主使以本官奏门下事。
现代文：崔孝芬的儿子司徒从事中郎崔猷抄小道进入关中地区，孝武帝授他以本官奏门下事。
English: Cui Xiaofeng's son, Szeto, was engaged by the middle brother, Cui Yao, to enter the Guanzhong region, and Emperor Xiaowu instructed him to serve as his own official.

古文：欢推司徒清河王亶为大司马，承制决事，居尚书省。
现代文：高欢推荐原任司徒的清河王元出任大司马，承接旨意，决断事务，主持尚书省政务。
English: Gao Huan recommended Qinghe Wang Yuan, who was originally a scholar, to serve as the chief secretary, undertake the will, make decisions, and preside over the government affairs of Shangshu Province.

古文：宇文泰使赵贵、梁御帅甲骑二千奉迎，帝循河西行，谓御曰： 此水东流，而朕西上。若得复见洛阳，亲诣陵庙，卿等功也。 
现代文：宇文泰派赵贵、梁御率领两千名戴盔披甲的骑兵前去恭迎孝武帝，孝武帝沿着黄河向西行进，对梁御说： 这条河的水向东流，而朕却往西去，如果有一天我能够重见洛阳，亲自到皇陵宗庙祭祀，那可都是你们的功劳呀。 
English: Emperor Wu marched westward along the Yellow River and said to Emperor Liang, "The water of this river flows eastward, but I go westward. If one day I can see Luoyang again and personally go to the imperial mausoleum to offer sacrifices, it will all be thanks to you."

古文：帝及左右皆流涕。
现代文：说着，孝武帝和他身旁的人都流下了眼泪。
English: As he spoke, Emperor Xiaowu and the people around him shed tears.

古文：泰备仪卫迎帝，谒见于东阳驿，免冠流涕曰： 臣不能式遏寇虐，使乘舆播迁，臣之罪也。 
现代文：宇文泰备好了仪仗与卫队迎接孝武帝，在东阳驿进行了参拜。宇文泰摘去帽子流着眼泪说道： 我没能遏制住贼寇的侵犯迫害，致使皇上颠簸迁徙，这都是我的罪过。 
English: Uwentai prepared a ceremonial battle and guards to welcome Emperor Xiaowu, and paid a visit to Dongyang. Uwentai took off his hat and said with tears: I failed to curb the encroachment and persecution of thieves and robbers, causing the emperor to migrate. This is all my fault.

古文：帝曰： 公之忠节，著于遐迩。
现代文：孝武帝说道： 你的忠心与气节，远近闻名。
English: Emperor Xiaowu said, "Your loyalty and devotion are well-known far and wide.

古文：朕以不德，负乘致寇，今日相见，深用厚颜。
现代文：朕因为缺乏足够的德行，而身居尊位，结果招致贼寇肆意横行，今天与你相见，实在是太惭愧了。
English: I am ashamed to meet you today, because I lack sufficient virtue and live in a dignified position. As a result, I invite bandits to run rampant.

古文：方以社稷委公，公其勉之！ 
现代文：我现在就把国家的重担托付给你，你好好勉力吧！ 
English: I am now entrusting the burden of the country to you, so do your best!

古文：将士皆呼万岁。
现代文：将士们都高呼万岁。
English: The soldiers all shouted "long live."

古文：遂入长安，以雍州廨舍为宫，大赦。以泰为大将军、雍州刺史，兼尚书令。军国之政，咸取决焉。
现代文：孝武帝于是进入长安，将雍州的官署作为宫殿，大赦天下，任命宇文泰为大将军、雍州刺史兼尚书令，国家军政大事的安排都取决于他。
English: Emperor Xiaowu then entered Chang'an, used the government office in Yongzhou as a palace, pardoned the world, and appointed Yu Wentai as a general, and Yongzhou as a military and political leader. The arrangement of national military and political events all depended on him.

古文：别置二尚书，分掌机事，以行台尚毛遐、周惠达为之。
现代文：孝武帝还另外设置了两名尚书，分别掌管军机大事，让行台尚书毛遐、周惠达担任了这两个职务。
English: Emperor Xiaowu also set up two other Shangshu, respectively in charge of military affairs, and let Gangtai Shangshu Mao Kun and Zhou Huida hold these two positions.

古文：时军国草创，二人积粮储，治器械，简士马，魏朝赖之。
现代文：此时，长安政权刚刚创立，两人积攒粮食储备起来，制造各种器械，精选士兵战马，整个魏朝都依靠他们。
English: At this time, the Chang'an regime had just been established. The two men accumulated grain reserves, manufactured all kinds of equipment, selected soldiers and war horses, and the entire Wei Dynasty relied on them.

古文：泰尚冯翊长公主，拜驸马都尉。
现代文：宇文泰与冯翊长公主成婚，被封为驸马都尉。
English: Uwentai married the eldest princess of Fengye, and was made the captain of the imperial horse.

古文：先是，荧惑入南斗，去而复还，留止六旬。
现代文：先前，火星进入南斗，离开了又回来共停留了六十天。
English: Previously, Mars entered the Southern Cross, left and returned for a total of sixty days.

古文：上以谚云 荧惑入南斗，天子下殿走 ，乃跣而下殿以禳之；及闻魏主西奔，惭曰： 虏亦应天象邪！ 
现代文：梁武帝根据谚语所说： 荧惑入南斗，皇帝下殿走 ，就赤着脚走下殿祈祷消灾。等到听说北魏孝武帝奔往西边了，梁武帝羞惭地说道： 这个胡人也能上应天象吗！ 
English: According to the proverb, Emperor Liangwu said: "If you wander into Nandou and the emperor leaves the palace, you should walk barefoot to the palace to pray for disaster relief." When he heard that Emperor Xiaowu of the Northern Wei Dynasty had fled to the west, Emperor Liangwu said with shame: "Can this Hu person also answer the heavenly elephant?"

古文：己未，武兴王杨绍先为秦、南秦二州刺史。
现代文：己未，武兴王杨绍先出任秦、南秦二州的刺史。
English: Previously, King Wuxing Yang Shao first served as the ruler of Qin and Southern Qin.

古文：辛酉，魏丞相欢自追迎魏主。
现代文：辛酉，北魏的丞相高欢亲自追赶孝武帝要迎他回来。
English: Xin Xin, the Northern Wei chancellor Gao Huan personally chased after Emperor Xiaowu to welcome him back.

古文：戊辰，清河王亶下制大赦。
现代文：戊辰，清河王元传下诏书大赦天下。
English: At that time, King Yuan of Qinghe issued an edict of amnesty to the world.

古文：欢至弘农，九月，癸巳，使行台仆射元子思帅侍官迎帝；己酉，攻潼关，克之，擒毛鸿宾，进屯华阴长城，龙门都督薛崇礼以城降欢。
现代文：高欢到了弘农，九月，癸已，他派了行台仆射元子思带领侍官迎接孝武帝；己酉，攻打潼关并拿下了它，捉住了毛鸿宾，部队进驻在华阴长城，龙门都督薛崇礼率领全城军民投降了高欢。
English: Gao Huan arrived in Hongnong. In September, he had already sent his traveling servant, Jie Yuan Zisi, to lead the attendants to meet Emperor Xiaowu; Ji Yan, attacked Shaoguan and took it, captured Mao Hongbin, the troops were stationed in Huayin Great Wall, Longmen Governor Xue Chongli led the whole city's army and people to surrender to Gao Huan.

古文：贺拔胜使长史元颖行荆州事，守南阳，自帅所部西赴关中。
现代文：贺拔胜派长史元颖兼管荆州事务，守卫南阳，自己率领所属部队向西赶赴关中地区。
English: He Baisheng sent his general Shi Yuanying to take charge of Jingzhou affairs, guard Nanyang, and lead his troops westward to Guanzhong area.

古文：至淅阳，闻欢已屯华阴，欲还，行台左丞崔谦曰： 今帝室颠覆，主上蒙尘，公宜倍道兼行，朝于行在，然后与宇文行台同心戮力，唱举大义，天下孰不望风响应！
现代文：他到了淅阳郡，听说高欢的军队已经驻扎在华阴，就准备回去，行台左丞崔谦对他说道： 如今皇室遭到颠覆，皇上流亡在外蒙受风尘，您应该日夜兼行，到皇上所在的地方进行朝拜，然后再和宇文行台一道同心协力，弘扬正义，天下的人有谁不望风而响应呢？
English: When he arrived in Fenyang County, he heard that Gao Huan's army had been stationed in Huayin, and he was ready to go back. Gangtai Zuocheng Cui Qian said to him, "Nowadays, the royal family has been subverted, and the emperor is suffering from the wind and dust in exile. You should travel day and night, go to the place where the emperor is, and then work together with Uwen Gangtai to promote justice. Who in the world does not hope for the wind and respond?

古文：今舍此而退，恐人人解体，一失事机，后悔何及！ 
现代文：现在您舍弃这义举而退却，恐怕人人都会离散而去，一旦失去了这样的好时机，就后悔莫及！ 
English: Now that you have abandoned this act of righteousness and retreated, I am afraid that everyone will disperse and leave. Once you lose such a good opportunity, you will regret it!

古文：胜不能用，遂还。
现代文：贺拔胜不采纳崔谦的意见而回去了。
English: He Baxing did not accept Cui Qian's opinion and went back.

古文：欢退屯河东，使行台尚书长史薛瑜守潼关，大都督库狄温守封陵，筑城于蒲津西岸，以薛绍宗为华州刺史，使守之，以高敖曹行豫州事。
现代文：高欢退到河东地区驻扎下来，派遣行台长史薛瑜镇守潼关，大都督库狄温镇守封陵，并在蒲津的西岸建筑一座新城，让薛绍宗出任华州刺史，守卫新城，又叫高敖曹兼管豫州的事务。
English: Gao Huan retreated to the east of the river and stationed himself there. He dispatched the governor Shi Xueyu to guard Shouguan, the grand governor Ku Diwen to guard the mausoleum, and built a new city on the west coast of Pudong. He appointed Xue Shaozong to be the governor of Huazhou and guard the new city. He was also known as Gaozhu Cao and was in charge of the affairs of Yuzhou.

古文：欢自发晋阳，至是凡四十启，魏主皆不报。
现代文：高欢从离开晋阳到这个时候，一共递交了四十份奏折，孝武帝都不作答复崐。
English: From the time Gao Huan left Jinyang to this time, he submitted a total of forty reports, but Emperor Xiaowu did not reply.

古文：欢乃东还，遣行台侯景等引兵向荆州，荆州民邓诞等执元颖以应景。
现代文：高欢就往东返回，他派遣行台侯景等人带领兵马开往荆州，荆州的百姓邓诞等人捉住了元颖来策应侯景。
English: Gao Huan then returned to the east. He dispatched Xingtai Houjing and others to lead the soldiers and horses to Jingzhou. The people of Jingzhou, such as Deng Xizhao, captured Yuan Ying to deal with Houjing.

古文：贺拔胜至，景逆击之，胜兵败，帅数百骑来奔。
现代文：贺拔胜也赶到了，侯景进行迎击，贺拔胜的兵马被打败，只好带领几百名骑兵来投奔南梁。
English: He Baxing also arrived, Houjing counterattacked, He Baxing's soldiers and horses were defeated, and he had to lead several hundred cavalry to rush to Nanliang.

古文：魏主之在洛阳也，密遣閤内都督河南赵刚召东荆州刺史冯景昭帅兵入援，兵未及发，魏主西入关。
现代文：北魏孝武帝在洛阳的时候，曾秘密派遣内都督河南人赵刚召东荆州刺史冯景昭率领部队到洛阳援助，冯景昭的兵马还没来得及出发，孝武帝就向西流亡进入关中地区。
English: When Emperor Xiaowu of the Northern Wei Dynasty was in Luoyang, he secretly dispatched the Inner Governor Zhao Gang, a native of Henan Province, to summon Feng Jingzhao, the governor of East Jingzhou, to lead troops to Luoyang to help. Feng Jingzhao's soldiers did not have time to leave, and Emperor Xiaowu went into exile to the west and entered the Guanzhong area.

古文：景昭集府中文武议所从，司马冯道和请据州待北方处分。
现代文：冯景昭召集府中的文武官员一同商议应该跟随哪一方，司马冯道和请求冯景昭据守东荆州，然后等待北方高欢作出处理。
English: Feng Jing Zhao called together the civil and military officials in the government to discuss which side to follow. Sima Feng Dao asked Feng Jing Zhao to defend East Jingzhou, and then waited for the northern Gaohuan to make a decision.

古文：刚曰： 公宜勒兵赴行在所。 
现代文：赵刚却对冯景昭说道： 您应该带领人马赶赴皇上所在的地方。 
English: Watanaga said, "You should lead an army to the place where the Son of Heaven is."

古文：久之，更无言者。
现代文：等了很久，再也没有一个人说话。
English: After a long wait, no one spoke again.

古文：刚抽刀投地曰： 公若欲为忠臣，请斩道和；如欲从贼，可速见杀！ 
现代文：赵刚将腰刀抽出来扔在地上对冯景昭说道： 您要是想做忠臣的话，请杀掉冯道和；如果想要跟随高欢这个奸贼的话，就可以马上杀掉我。 
English: Zhao Gang pulled out his waist knife and threw it on the ground, saying to Feng Jingzhao: If you want to be a loyal subject, please kill Feng Daohe; if you want to follow Gao Huan, the traitor, you can kill me immediately.

古文：景昭感悟，即帅众赴关中。
现代文：冯景昭被赵刚的话感动，觉悟过来，立即统率大队人马赶赴关中地区。
English: Feng Jingzhao was moved by Zhao Gang's words, came to his senses, and immediately led a large group of people to rush to the Guanzhong area.

古文：侯景引兵逼穰城，东荆州民杨祖欢等起兵应之，以其众邀景昭于路，景昭战败，刚没蛮中。
现代文：侯景带领部队逼近穰城，东荆州的百姓杨祖欢等人拉起了武装，在路上阻挡冯景昭，冯景昭吃了败仗，赵刚逃入本州蛮人地区。
English: Hou Jing led the troops to approach Lucheng, and the people of East Jing Province, such as Yang Zuhuan, took up arms to block Feng Jing Zhao on the road. Feng Jing Zhao was defeated, and Zhao Gang fled into the barbarian areas of Honshu.

古文：冬，十月，丞相欢至洛阳，又遣僧道荣奉表于孝武帝曰： 陛下若远赐一制，许还京洛，臣当帅勒文武，式清宫禁。
现代文：冬季，十月，丞相高欢到达洛阳，又派遣僧人道荣将一份奏折交给孝武帝，里面说道： 陛下如果在远方恩赐给我们一份诏书，答应返回京城洛阳，我将率领、约束文武百官，清扫干净您居住的宫殿，恭侯您的归来。
English: In the winter, in October, the chancellor Gao Huan arrived in Luoyang, and sent the monk Du Rong to deliver a report to Emperor Xiaowu, which said: If your majesty grants us a decree in the distance and promises to return to the capital Luoyang, I will lead and restrain the civil and military officials, clean the palace you live in, and congratulate you on your return.

古文：若返正无日，则七庙不可无主，万国须有所归，臣宁负陛下，不负社稷。 
现代文：如果您不定下一个返回的日子，那么七庙就不能没有主人，天下邦国必须有所归附。届时，我宁可辜负陛下，也不辜负国家。 
English: If you do not set a date for your return, then the Seven Temples cannot be without an owner, and the nations of the world must be annexed. At that time, I would rather live up to your majesty than live up to the country.

古文：帝亦不答。
现代文：孝武帝对此也不作答复。
English: Emperor Xiaowu did not reply to this either.

古文：欢乃集百官耆老，议所立。时清河王亶出入已称警跸，欢丑之，乃托以 孝昌以来，昭穆失序，永安以孝文为伯考，永熙迁孝明于夹室，业丧祚短，职此之由。 
现代文：高欢就召集文武百官和元老，商议立谁做皇帝合适，此时清河王元已经在自己进出时按皇帝的规格严加戒备，断绝行人，高欢对他感到厌恶，就借口说： 孝昌年间以来，宗庙的辈份次序开始混乱，永安年间孝武帝只把孝文帝尊为他的伯父，永熙年间孝武帝又将孝明帝的牌位移到了宗庙内的夹室之中，近来的皇帝基业丧失，在位的时间短，原因都在于继承帝位的人辈份不对。 
English: Gao Huan called together hundreds of officials and elders to discuss who was suitable to be the emperor. At this time, King Yuan of the Qing River had been strictly guarded according to the emperor's specifications when he entered and left, cutting off pedestrians. Gao Huan was disgusted with him and said on the pretext that: Since the Xiaochang years, the order of the generations in the ancestral temple began to be confused. During the Yongan years, Emperor Xiaowu only honored Emperor Xiaowen as his uncle. During the Yongxi years, Emperor Xiaowu moved the card of Emperor Xiaoming to a closet in the ancestral temple. The recent loss of the emperor's inheritance and the

古文：遂立清河王世子善见为帝，谓亶曰： 欲立王，不如立王之子。 
现代文：于是拥立清河王的嫡长子元善见为新的皇帝，并对元说道： 要拥立您的话，还不如拥立您的儿子。 
English: Therefore, Yuan Zenshin, the eldest legitimate son of King Qinghe, was enthroned as the new emperor, and he said to Yuan, "If you want to enthrone your words, it is better to enthrone your son."

古文：亶不自安，轻骑南走，欢追还之。
现代文：元为此而心中感到不安，骑上轻装的快马向南方出走，高欢追赶上去劝回了他。
English: For this reason, Yuan felt uneasy in his heart and rode a lightly loaded fast horse to the south. Gao Huan caught up with him and persuaded him to return.

古文：丙寅，孝静帝即位于城东北，时年十一。
现代文：丙寅，孝静帝在洛阳城的东北部登上了皇位，当时年龄才十一岁。
English: Emperor Xiaojing ascended the throne in the northeast of Luoyang City when he was only eleven years old.

古文：大赦，改元天平。
现代文：孝静帝下令大赦天下，改年号为天平。
English: Emperor Xiaojing ordered a general amnesty for the whole country, and the year was changed to Tianping.

古文：魏宇文泰进军攻潼关，斩薛瑜，虏其卒七千人，还长安，进位大丞相。
现代文：西魏宇文泰进军攻打潼关，杀掉了薛瑜，俘虏他手下的士兵共七千人，回到长安之后，进升为大丞相。
English: Western Wei Yu Wentai marched to attack Shouguan, killed Xue Yu, and captured a total of seven thousand soldiers under his command. After returning to Chang'an, he was promoted to minister of war.

古文：东魏行台薛修义等度河据杨氏壁；魏司空参军河东薛端纠帅村民击却东魏兵，复取杨氏，丞相泰遣南汾州刺史苏景恕镇之。
现代文：东魏行台薛义等人渡过黄河占领了杨氏壁。西魏的司空参军河东人薛端纠集了一帮村民击退了东魏的人马，重新占据了杨氏壁，丞相宇文泰派遣南汾州的刺史苏景恕前去镇守。
English: East Wei general Xue Yi and others crossed the Yellow River to occupy the Yang's Wall. West Wei general Xue Duan gathered a group of villagers to repel the East Wei troops and reoccupy the Yang's Wall. General Secretary Yu Wentai dispatched Su Jingmiao, a magistrate from South Luzhou, to defend the town.

古文：丁卯，以信武将军元庆和为镇北将军，帅众伐东魏。
现代文：丁卯，梁武帝任命信武将军元庆和为镇北将军，率领部队讨伐东魏。
English: At the same time, Emperor Liangwu appointed Gen. Yuan Qinghe, the general of Xinwu, as the general of Zhenbei and led the troops to fight against the Eastern Wei Dynasty.

古文：初，魏孝武帝既与丞相欢有隙，齐州刺史侯渊、兗州刺史樊子鹄、青州刺史东莱王贵平阴相连结，以观时变；渊亦遣使通于欢所。
现代文：在此以前，北魏孝武帝与丞相高欢产生隔阂之后，齐州刺史侯渊、兖州刺史樊子鹄、青州刺史东莱王元贵平，相互秘密地结成一派，共同观察形势的变化，侯渊也派遣使者到高欢住的地方进行联系。
English: Prior to this, after the estrangement between Emperor Xiaowu of the Northern Wei Dynasty and the chancellor Gao Huan, the chancellor of Qi Province, Hou Yuan, the chancellor of Bozhou Province, Zizixuan, and the chancellor of Qing Province, Donglai Wangyuan Guiping, secretly formed a faction to jointly observe the changes in the situation. Hou Yuan also sent an envoy to the place where Gao Huan lived to make contact.

古文：及孝武帝入关，清河王亶承制，以汝阳王暹为齐州刺史。
现代文：等到孝武帝流亡到关中地区之后，清河王元以皇帝的名义任命汝阳王元暹为齐州刺史。
English: After Emperor Xiaowu was exiled to the Guanzhong region, King Yuan of Qinghe, in the name of the emperor, appointed King Yuan of Ruyang to be the crown prince of Qizhou.

古文：暹至城西，渊不时纳。
现代文：元暹来到齐州城的西面，侯渊并不及时迎接他进去。
English: When Yuan Sie came to the west side of Qizhou City, Houyuan did not welcome him in time.

古文：城民刘桃符等潜引暹入城，渊帅骑出走，妻子部曲悉为暹所虏。
现代文：城中的百姓刘桃符等人悄悄地领着元暹进了城。侯渊率领骑兵连忙出走，他的妻子、儿子以及部下都被元暹俘虏了。
English: Liu Taofu and others in the city quietly led Yuan Siew into the city. Hou Yuan led the cavalry to leave in a hurry, and his wife, son, and subordinates were all captured by Yuan Siew.

古文：行及广里，会承制以渊行青州事。
现代文：侯渊走到了广里地区，刚好赶上清河王元以皇帝的名义让他兼管青州事务。
English: Houyuan went to Guangli area, just in time to catch Qinghe Wangyuan to let him concurrently manage Qingzhou affairs in the name of the emperor.

古文：欢遗渊书曰： 卿勿以部曲单少，惮于东行，齐人浇薄，唯利是从，齐州尚能迎汝阳王，青州岂不能开门待卿也！ 
现代文：高欢在给侯渊的书信中写道： 你不要因为自己手下的部曲势单力薄人少，不敢东进，齐地的人薄情寡义，只知追逐财利，齐州的人都还会迎接汝阳王，青州的人难道就不会打开城门等待你吗？ 
English: Gao Huan wrote in a letter to Hou Yuan: Don't you dare to go to the east because your subordinates are weak and have few people. The people of Qi are weak-hearted and mean-spirited, and only know how to pursue wealth and profit. The people of Qizhou will also welcome King Ryu Yang. Won't the people of Qingzhou open the city gate and wait for you?

古文：渊乃复东，暹归其妻子部曲。
现代文：于是，侯渊就重新东进，汝阳王元暹把他的妻子、儿子以及部曲都还给了他。
English: As a result, Houyuan marched east again, and Ruyang Wangyuan Siem gave him back his wife, his son, and his music.

古文：贵平亦不受代，渊袭高阳郡，克之。
现代文：东莱王元贵平也不接受由侯渊取代他的职务的命令，侯渊袭击了高阳郡并攻下了它。
English: The Donglai king, Yuan Guiping, also refused to accept the order to be replaced by Hou Yuan, who attacked and captured Goyang County.

古文：置累重于城中，自帅轻骑游掠于外。
现代文：侯渊把妨碍行动的东西放在城中，自己带领轻装骑兵在城外游掠。
English: Houyuan put the obstacles in the city and led the light cavalry to loot outside the city.

古文：贵平使其世子帅众攻高阳，渊夜趣东阳，见州民馈粮者，绐之曰： 台军已至，杀戮殆尽。
现代文：元贵平派他的嫡长子率领大队人马攻打高阳城，侯渊连夜赶到东阳城，看到该州送粮食的百姓，就欺骗他们说： 朝廷派遣的部队已经赶到了，把人都快杀光了。
English: Yuan Guiping sent his eldest son and eldest son to attack Gaoyang City. Houyuan rushed to Dongyang City overnight. When he saw the people of the state sending grain, he deceived them and said: The troops sent by the court have arrived, and they are about to kill everyone.

古文：我，世子之人也，脱走还城，汝何为复往！ 
现代文：我是东莱王嫡长子手下的人，从那里逃脱后回到城里，你们怎么还要再去送命呀！ 
English: I am a man under the command of the eldest son of the king of Donglai. After escaping from there, I returned to the city. How can you go back to your deaths?

古文：闻者皆弃粮走。
现代文：听到这些话的人都丢下粮食逃跑了。
English: All who heard these words left their provisions and fled.

古文：比晓，复谓行人曰： 台军昨夜已至高阳，我是前锋，今至此，不知侯公竟在何所！ 
现代文：到了拂晓，他又对路上的行人说道： 朝廷派来的军队昨晚上已经赶到高阳城，我是先锋官，现在来到这里，不知道侯公究竟在什么地方！ 
English: When dawn came, he said to the passers-by on the road: The troops sent by the court arrived in Goyang City last night. I am the vanguard officer, and now I am here, and I don't know where the prince is!

古文：城民恟惧，遂执贵平出降。
现代文：城里的百姓心里恐惧，于是便捉住了东莱王元贵平出来投降。
English: The people of the city were afraid, so they captured the Donglai king, Yuan Guiping, and came out to surrender.

古文：戊辰，渊斩贵平，传首洛阳。
现代文：戊辰，侯渊斩了元贵平，把他的脑袋送到了洛阳。
English: In Wu Chen, Hou Yuan beheaded Yuan Guiping and sent his head to Luoyang.

古文：庚午，东魏以赵郡王谌为大司马，咸阳王坦为太尉，开府仪同三司高盛为司徒，高敖曹为司空。
现代文：庚午，东魏任命赵郡王元谌为大司马，咸阳王元坦为太尉，开府仪同三司高盛为司徒，高敖曹为司空。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, the Eastern Wei Dynasty appointed Zhao Gu Wang Yuanluo as the chief secretary, Xianyang Wang Yuantan as the first lieutenant, Kaifu Yi and the three Goldman Sachs as the secretary, and Gao Yu Cao as the secretary.

古文：坦，树之弟也。
现代文：元坦是元树的弟弟。
English: Yuan Tan is the younger brother of Yuan Shu.

古文：丞相欢以洛阳西逼西魏，南近梁境，乃议迁鄴，书下三日即行。
现代文：丞相高欢认为洛阳的西面接近西魏、南面接近梁朝，就提议将国都迁往邺城，他的文书颁下刚刚三天迁都就开始进行了。
English: The chancellor Gao Huan thought that the west side of Luoyang was close to the Western Wei Dynasty and the south side was close to the Liang Dynasty, and proposed to move the national capital to Lucheng. His document was issued just three days after the capital was moved.

古文：丙子，东魏主发洛阳，四十万户狼狈就道。
现代文：丙子，东魏孝静帝从洛阳出发，四十万户人家狼狈地踏上了路途。
English: In the Eastern Wei Dynasty, Emperor Xiaozhing set out from Luoyang, and 400,000 households set out on the road.

古文：收百官马，尚书丞郎已上非陪从者，尽令乘驴。
现代文：朝廷征收了文武百官的马匹，尚书丞、郎以上不是陪同跟随孝静帝的，都被命令骑驴。
English: The imperial court requisitioned the horses of hundreds of civil and military officials. Shang Shujo and his vassals who were not accompanying Emperor Xiao Jing were ordered to ride donkeys.

古文：欢留后部分，事毕，还晋阳。
现代文：高欢留在后面布置安排，等到事情结束以后，回到了晋阳。
English: Gao Huan stayed behind to arrange the arrangements, and returned to Jinyang after the event was over.

古文：改司州为洛州，以尚书令元弼为洛州刺史，镇洛阳。
现代文：朝廷将司州改名为洛州，任命尚书令元弼为洛州刺史，镇守洛阳。
English: The imperial court changed the name of Sizhou to Luozhou, and appointed Shang Shuling as the founder of Luozhou and the governor of Luoyang.

古文：以行台尚书司马子如为尚书左仆射，与右仆射高隆之、侍中高岳、孙腾留鄴，共知朝政。
现代文：又任命行台尚书司马子如为尚书左仆射，与右仆射高隆之、侍中高岳、孙腾一道留在邺城，共同主持朝中的政务。
English: He also appointed Ma Zi Ru, who was the right-hand man of Shang Shuxu, as his left-hand man, and Gao Longzhi, who was the right-hand man of Shang Shuxu, and Gao Yue, who was the second-in-command, and Sun Teng, who was the third-in-command, to stay in Lucheng and jointly preside over the government affairs of the dynasty.

古文：诏以迁民赀产未立，出粟一百三十万石以赈之。
现代文：孝静帝颁下诏书表示考虑到移民因受搬迁的影响，家产不能马上建立，特地拿出一百三十万石粮食赈济他们。
English: Emperor Xiaojing issued an edict stating that considering the fact that the immigrants could not immediately establish their family assets due to the impact of relocation, he specially took out 1.3 million koku of grain to help them.

古文：十一月，兗州刺史樊子鹄据瑕丘以拒东魏，南青州刺史大野拔帅众就之。
现代文：十一月，兖州刺史樊子鹄占据了瑕丘来抗拒东魏，南青州刺史大野拔率领一帮人马投奔了他。
English: In November, Zizhou Zishi Zizi Zou occupied Kaechiu to resist the Eastern Wei Dynasty, and Nanqing Zishi Ohnobaru led a group of people and horses to join him.

古文：庚寅，东魏主至鄴，居北城相州之廨，改相州刺史为司州牧，魏郡太守为魏尹。
现代文：庚寅，东魏国主孝静帝到达了邺城，居住在相州的官府里面，把相州刺史改称为司州牧，魏郡太守改称为魏尹。
English: Emperor Gao Yin, the ruler of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, arrived in Shicheng and lived in the government office of Xiangzhou. He changed the name of the governor of Xiangzhou to Sizhou Mu and the governor of Wei County to Wei Yin.

古文：是时，六坊之众从孝武帝西行者不及万人，馀皆北徙，并给常廪，春秋赐帛以供衣服，乃于常调之外，随丰稔之处，折绢籴粟以供国用。
现代文：此时，分为六坊的皇城警卫部队中跟随孝武帝到西边去的不到一万人，其余的都迁徙到了北方，并常年供给他们俸禄，春秋两季皇帝还要送绸缎供给他们做衣服用，除了正常赋调崐之外，在庄稼丰收的地区，将绢帛折价买进粮食供国家使用。
English: At this time, less than ten thousand of the imperial city's guard troops, divided into six wards, followed Emperor Xiaowu to the west. The rest migrated to the north and provided them with a salary all year round. In spring and autumn, the emperor would also send silk cocoons to make clothes for them. In addition to the normal supply of silk cocoons, in areas with bumper crops, the cocoons would be bought at a discounted price for grain for use by the state.

古文：十二月，魏丞相泰遣仪同李虎、李弼、赵贵击曹泥于灵州。
现代文：十二月，西魏丞相宇文泰派遣仪同李虎、李弼、赵贵在灵州袭击了曹泥。
English: In December, Wu Wentai, the Western Wei chancellor, sent Li Hu, Li Yao, and Zhao Gui to attack Cao Di in Lingshou.

古文：闰月，元庆和克濑乡而据之。
现代文：闰月，元庆和攻克并占据了濑乡。
English: In the intercalary month, Yuan Qinghe conquered and occupied Xiangxiang.

古文：魏孝武帝闺门无礼，从妹不嫁者三人，皆封公主。
现代文：西魏孝武帝在宫中失礼伦，堂妹中不出嫁的就有三个人，都被封为公主。
English: Emperor Xiaowu of the Western Wei Dynasty was very impolite in the palace. Among his cousins, there were only three who did not marry, and they were all crowned princesses.

古文：平原公主明月，南阳王宝炬之同产也，从帝入关，丞相泰使元氏诸王取明月杀之。帝不悦，或时弯弓，或时椎案，由是复与泰有隙。
现代文：平原公主明月与南阳王元宝炬是同母兄妹，跟随孝武帝来到关中，丞相宇文泰叫元氏的各位亲王抓住并杀掉了明月；孝武帝对此感到不高兴，有时弯弓射箭，有时用铁椎锤击桌子，由此又和宇文泰产生了隔阂。
English: Plain Princess Mingyue and Nanyang King Yuan Baoqin are brothers and sisters of the same mother. They came to Guanzhong with Emperor Xiaowu. The prime minister, Uwen Tai, called on the princes of the Yuan Dynasty to capture and kill Mingyue. Emperor Xiaowu was not happy about this. He sometimes shot arrows with a bow and arrow, and sometimes hit the table with a hammer, which caused a rift with Uwen Tai.

古文：癸巳，帝饮酒，遇鸩而殂。
现代文：癸巳，孝武帝喝酒中毒身亡。
English: Soon after, Emperor Xiaowu died of alcohol poisoning.

古文：泰与群臣议所立，多举广平王赞。
现代文：宇文泰和大臣们一同商议应该拥立谁为新皇帝，大多数人推举广平王元赞。
English: Wu Wentai and his ministers discussed together who should be the new emperor, and the majority of people chose Guangping Wang Yuanzan.

古文：赞，孝武之兄子也。
现代文：元赞是孝武帝兄长的儿子。
English: Yuan Zang was the son of Emperor Xiaowu's elder brother.

古文：侍中濮阳王顺，于别室垂涕谓泰曰： 高欢逼逐先帝，立幼主以专权，明公宜反其所为。
现代文：兼任侍中的濮阳王元顺在另外一个房间流着眼泪对宇文泰说： 高欢逼走了已故的皇上，拥立一位年幼的皇帝以便大权独揽，您应该反其道而行之。
English: In another room, Wang Yuanshun of Shenyang, who also served as an aide-de-camp, said to Wu Wentai with tears streaming down his face: Gao Huan forced out the late emperor and set up a young emperor in order to monopolize power. You should do the opposite.

古文：广平冲幼，不如立长君而奉之。 
现代文：广平王还年幼，所以不如拥立一位年长的君王。 
English: King Guangping is still young, so it is better to support an older king.

古文：泰乃奉太宰南阳王宝炬而立之。
现代文：于是，宇文泰就拥立兼任太宰的南阳王元宝炬为皇帝。
English: As a result, King Yuan Baoqin of Nanyang, who also held the title of Dazai, was proclaimed emperor.

古文：顺，素之玄孙也。
现代文：元顺是常山王元素的曾孙子。
English: Genshun is the great-grandson of the king of the elements, Jangsan.

古文：殡孝武帝于草堂佛寺。谏议大夫宋球恸哭呕血，浆粒不入口者数日，泰以其名儒，不之罪也。
现代文：孝武帝的灵柩被安放在草堂佛寺，谏议大夫宋球放声痛哭呕出了鲜血，几天里不喝一口水不吃一粒饭，宇文泰因他是一位著名儒生，没有怪罪他。
English: Emperor Xiaowu's coffin was placed in the Thatched Hall of the Buddhist Temple. The doctor, Song Qiu, wept bitterly and vomited blood. He did not drink a sip of water or eat a grain of rice for several days. Because he was a famous Confucian scholar, he did not blame him.

古文：魏贺拔胜之在荆州也，表武卫将军独孤信为大都督。
现代文：北魏的贺拔胜在荆州的时候，曾上书请求任命武卫将军独孤信为大都督。
English: When He Baxian of the Northern Wei Dynasty was in Jingzhou, he sent a letter requesting the appointment of General Wuwei as the Grand Governor.

古文：东魏既取荆州，魏以信为都督三荆州诸军事、尚书右仆射、东南道行台、大都督、荆州刺史以招怀之。
现代文：东魏取得荆州后，西魏任命独孤信为掌管三荆州军政事务的都督、尚书右仆射、东南道行台、大都督、荆州刺史，以此来招抚独孤信。
English: After the Eastern Wei Dynasty acquired Jingzhou, the Western Wei Dynasty appointed Du Guoxin as the governor in charge of the military and political affairs of the Three Jingzhou Provinces, Shang Shuxu Rongfei, Dongnan Dao Xingtai, the grand governor, and Jingzhou Zhishi, in order to appease Du Guoxin.

古文：蛮酋樊五能攻破淅阳郡以应魏，东魏西荆州刺史辛纂欲讨之，行台郎中李广谏曰： 淅阳四面无民，唯一城之地，山路深险，表里群蛮。
现代文：蛮族的酋长樊五能攻破了淅阳郡来策应西魏，东魏西荆州刺史辛纂准备讨伐他们，行台郎中李广劝说道： 淅阳郡四面都没有百姓，只有一座城的地方，山上的路途深幽艰险，里外有为数不少的蛮人。
English: The barbarian chieftain Zou Wu Neng broke through the Poyang County in response to the Western Wei Dynasty, and the East Wei and Western Jingzhou statesman Zi Shi Xincao prepared to fight them. Li Guang, one of the merchants, said: There are no people in Poyang County on all sides, there is only one city, the road on the mountain is deep and difficult, and there are a large number of barbarians inside and outside.

古文：今少遣兵，则不能制贼；多遣，则根本虚弱。脱不如意，大挫威名，人情一去，州城难保。 
现代文：现在如果只派少量兵马的话，就不能制服贼兵，而派大部队去，那么我们的大本营就变得虚弱；倘若不能成功，就会大大影响威望名誉，而人心一旦失去，我们的州城就难以保住了。 
English: At present, if only a small number of soldiers and horses are sent, the bandits cannot be subdued, but if a large number of troops are sent, our base camp will become weak; if it is not successful, it will greatly affect the prestige and reputation, and once the people's hearts are lost, our state capital will be difficult to maintain.

古文：纂曰： 岂可纵贼不讨！ 
现代文：辛纂说道： 怎么可以纵容贼兵不去讨伐呀！ 
English: Xin Cao said, "How can you allow the bandits not to fight?"

古文：广曰： 今所忧在心腹，何暇治疥癣！
现代文：李广回答说： 眼下我们的担忧在心腹要害之处，哪有功夫去治疗疥癣小毛病呢？
English: Li Guang replied, "Right now, our worries are at the heart of the matter. Is there any effort to treat minor ailments?

古文：闻台军不久应至，公但约勒属城，使完垒抚民以待之。虽失淅阳，不足惜也。 
现代文：听说朝廷派遣的军队不久就要到达，您只要约束住东荆州所辖的各座城，使它们完好无损，同时安抚百姓进行等待，这样虽说失去了淅阳，也没有什么可惜的。 
English: I heard that the army dispatched by the imperial court will arrive soon. As long as you restrain the cities under the jurisdiction of East Jingzhou and keep them intact, and at the same time appease the people to wait, there is nothing to be sorry about, even if you lose Fenyang.

古文：纂不从，遣兵攻之，兵败，诸将因亡不返。
现代文：辛纂不听李广的劝告，派兵攻打淅阳，遭到了失败，各位将领因此而逃亡不回。
English: Xin Cao did not listen to Li Guang's advice and sent troops to attack Poyang, which was a failure. As a result, the generals fled and did not return.

古文：城民密召独孤信。
现代文：城中的百姓秘密地请独孤信过来。
English: The people of the city secretly invited Solon to come.

古文：信至武陶，东魏遣恒农太守田八能帅群蛮拒信于淅阳，又遣都督张齐民以步骑三千出信之后。
现代文：独孤信到达武陶的时候，东魏派遣恒农太守田八能率领一群蛮人将他挡在淅阳之外，又派遣都督张齐民带着三千名步兵与骑兵尾随在独孤信的后面。
English: When Du Guoxin arrived in Wutao, the Eastern Wei Dynasty dispatched a group of barbarians led by Tian Baineng, the governor of Hengnong, to block him from Shenyang, and dispatched the governor Zhang Qimin with three thousand infantry and cavalry to follow Du Guoxin.

古文：信谓其众曰： 今士卒不满千人，首尾受敌，若还击齐民，则土民谓我退走，必争来邀我；不如进击八能，破之，齐民自溃矣。 
现代文：独孤信对他的部下们说： 眼下我们的士兵还不满一千人，前后都受到敌人的威胁。如果回过头来攻打张齐民，那么当地的土著百姓就一定会认为我们要撤退，将争着来拦击我们，不如进攻前面的田八能，要是打垮了他，张齐民自己就会溃败了。 
English: Du Guoxin said to his subordinates: At the moment, our soldiers are still less than a thousand, and we are threatened by the enemy both before and after. If we turn back to attack Zhang Qimin, then the local indigenous people will certainly think that we are retreating and will fight to stop us. It is not as good as attacking the front of the Tianba Neng. If we defeat him, Zhang Qimin himself will be defeated.

古文：遂击破八能，乘胜袭穰城；辛纂勒兵出战，大败，还趣城。
现代文：于是他领兵击败了田八能，乘着胜利的势头袭击穰城；辛纂带领兵马出来迎战，被打得惨败后转身奔回了穰城。
English: Therefore, he led the troops to defeat Tianhacheng, and took advantage of the momentum of victory to attack Lucheng; Xin Cao led the soldiers and horses to fight, and after being defeated, he turned around and ran back to Lucheng.

古文：门未及阖，信令都督武川杨忠为前驱，忠叱门者曰： 大军已至，城中有应，尔等求生，何不避走！ 
现代文：城门还没来得及关上，独孤信命令都督武川人杨忠为先锋，杨忠对守卫城门的人大声喝道： 我们的大部队已经到了，城中还有人接应，你们要是想求一条生路的话，为什么还不避开逃跑！ 
English: Before the city gates could be closed, however, he ordered Yang Zhong, the governor of the city of Bukawa, to take the lead. Yang Zhong shouted to the people guarding the city gates: Our large army has arrived, there are still people in the city to meet us, if you want to find a way to survive, why don't you avoid fleeing!

古文：门者皆散。
现代文：守卫城门的人都逃散了。
English: The keepers of the city gate fled.

古文：忠帅众入城，斩纂以徇，城中慑服。
现代文：杨忠率领人马冲到城里，杀掉了辛纂，城里的军民都吓得服服贴贴。
English: Yang Zhong and his men rushed to the city and killed Xin Cao. The soldiers and civilians in the city were terrified.

古文：信分兵定三荆。居半岁，东魏高敖曹、侯景将兵奄至城下，信兵少不敌，与杨忠皆来奔。
现代文：独孤信分开兵马平定了三荆地区，半年之后，东魏的高敖曹、侯景带领人马突然攻到城下，独孤信手下的兵少打不过对方，便和杨忠一道都来投奔梁朝。
English: Du Guoxin separated the soldiers and horses and leveled the Sanjing area. Half a year later, Gao Bing Cao and Hou Jing of the Eastern Wei suddenly attacked the city. Du Guoxin's soldiers could not beat the other side, so he and Yang Zhong both came to the Liang Dynasty.

