古文：梅之焕，字彬父，麻城人，侍郎国桢从子也。年十四为诸生。
现代文：梅之焕，字彬父，湖广麻城人，是侍郎梅国桢的侄子。十四岁时成为生员。
English: Meizhihana, whose father was Zhibin and who was from Hukangama City, was the nephew of Mei Kuniyoshi, a retainer. He became a member of the Shinsengumi at the age of fourteen.

古文：御史行部阅武，之焕骑马突教场。
现代文：御史到部中检阅武备，梅之焕骑着马冲进教场。
English: Mishi went to the middle school to inspect the weapons, and Meizhihana rode a horse into the classroom.

古文：御史怒，命与材官角射，九发九中，长揖上马而去。
现代文：御史发火了，命令他跟材官比试射箭。梅之焕九发九中，长揖上马扬长而去。
English: The Emperor was furious and ordered him to test his archery with the archery officer. Meizohan hit nine arrows and nine times, Nagase hit Mayang and ran away.

古文：万历三十二年举进士，改庶吉士。
现代文：万历三十二年考中进士，改任庶吉士。
English: In the 32nd year of Wanli, he was promoted to junior high school exam, and was reappointed to junior high school exam.

古文：居七年，授吏科给事中。
现代文：七年之后，授职吏科给事中。
English: Seven years later, the awarding officer is now in the middle of the case.

古文：东厂太监李浚诬拷商人，之焕劾其罪。
现代文：东厂太监李浚陷害拷打商人，梅之焕弹劾他的罪行。
English: East Factory Eunuch Li Jun framed and tortured a merchant, and Mei Zhihuan impeached him for the crime.

古文：寻上言： 今天下民穷饷匮，寇横兵疲。
现代文：不久上疏说： 当今国家，百姓贫穷，国库匮乏，强盗横行，军队疲软。
English: Not long after, Shang Zuo said, "In today's country, the people are poor, the treasury is lacking, robbers are rampant, and the army is weak.

古文：言官舍国事争时局，部曹舍职掌建空言，天下尽为虚文所束缚。
现代文：言官不谈论国家大事，却做派系之争，官员们放弃本职工作，发表一些空洞的言论。国家的事情全部被虚假的文辞所束缚了。
English: Government officials do not talk about national affairs, but engage in factional disputes, officials abandon their duties and make some empty remarks. National affairs are all constrained by false rhetoric.

古文：有意振刷者，不曰生事，则曰苛求。
现代文：有人试图进行一些改革，不是说他多事，就是格外苛求他。
English: Some people tried to make some changes, either because he was busy or because they were particularly demanding of him.

古文：事未就而谤兴，法未伸而怨集，豪杰灰心，庸人养拙，国事将不可为矣。
现代文：改革没有成功而诽谤却随之而来，正义得不到伸张而仇人却结了一大堆。豪杰灰心，庸人得势，国家的事情没有办法做下去了。
English: Reform did not succeed, but slander followed. Justice was not served, but enemies made a lot of enemies. Heroes were disheartened, mediocrities gained power, and there was no way to continue the country's affairs.

古文：请陛下严综核以责实事，通言路以重纪纲，别臧否以惜人才，庶于国事有济。 
现代文：请求陛下严格考察，要求做到实事求是，疏通言路来加强组织纪律，区别褒贬来爱惜人才，只有这样国家才可能有希望。 
English: I would like to ask His Majesty to make a strict inspection, to require that we seek truth from facts, to clear up the language to strengthen organization and discipline, and to distinguish between praise and criticism to cherish talents. Only in this way can the country have hope.

古文：时朝臣部党角立，之焕廉觚自胜，尝言： 附小人者必小人，附君子者未必君子。
现代文：当时朝中大臣拉帮结派勾心斗角，梅之焕洁身自好，曾经说： 依附小人的一定是小人，依附君子的未必是君子。
English: At that time, the ministers of the two Koreas were involved in gangs and factions, and Mei Zhihuan was self-righteous. He once said: "If you are attached to a villain, you must be a villain. If you are attached to a gentleman, you may not be a gentleman."

古文：蝇之附骥，即千里犹蝇耳。 
现代文：附在马身上的苍蝇，即使走了千里路也还是苍蝇。 
English: A fly that clings to a horse is still a fly, even if it has traveled thousands of miles.

古文：时有追论故相张居正者，之焕曰： 使今日有综名实、振纪纲如江陵者，讠翕訿之徒敢若此耶？ 
现代文：当时有人追究原宰相张居正，梅之焕说： 假使今天有人像张居正那样考核名实，整顿纲纪，那些诽谤陷害别人的无耻小人还敢如此猖狂吗？ 
English: At that time, some people were investigating the former prime minister Zhang Jizheng. Meizhouhan said: "If someone were to examine the facts and rectify the discipline like Zhang Jizheng today, would those shameless villains who slander and frame others still dare to be so rampant?

古文：其持平不欲傅会人如此。
现代文：他就是像这样主持公道不附会别人的。
English: That's how he does justice and doesn't take sides.

古文：出为广东副使，擒诛豪民沈杀烈女者，民服其神。海寇袁进掠潮州，之焕扼海道，招散其党，卒降进。
现代文：派出任广东副使，当地有豪强把烈女投入河中杀死了，梅之焕捕杀了他，老百姓都敬佩他的英明。海盗袁进抢劫潮州，梅之焕控制了海上通道，招抚遣散他的同伙，最后降服了袁进。
English: He sent a deputy envoy to Guangdong, and a local strongman killed the heroine by throwing her into the river. Meizhihuan caught him and killed him, and the common people all admired his wisdom. The pirate Yuan Jin robbed Chaozhou, Meizhihuan controlled the sea route, enticed and dismissed his accomplices, and finally subdued Yuan Jin.

古文：改视山东学政。
现代文：后改派为山东学政。
English: Later, he was reassigned to Shandong Xuezheng.

古文：天启元年以通政参议召迁太常少卿，擢右佥都御史，巡抚南、赣。
现代文：天启元年，梅之焕以通政参议召回，任命为太常少卿，提拔右佥都御史，巡抚南昌、赣州。
English: In the first year of the Tenkai era, Meizhihana was recalled as a political councilor, appointed as a junior minister, promoted to the post of governor of Nanchang and Zhangzhou.

古文：丁内外艰，家居。
现代文：恰巧赶上父母去世，回家隐居。
English: Just in time for the death of his parents, he returned home to live in seclusion.

古文：当此之时，魏、客乱政，应山杨涟首发忠贤之奸。
现代文：正在这个时候，魏忠贤、客氏扰乱朝政，应山杨涟首先揭发魏忠贤的邪恶。
English: It was at this time that Wei Zhongxian and the Hakka were disrupting the imperial government, and Yang Xuan was the first to expose Wei Zhongxian's evil.

古文：忠贤恚甚，拷杀涟。
现代文：魏忠贤恨死了他，将杨涟打死了。
English: Wei Zhongxian hated him to death and beat Yang Xuan to death.

古文：由此悍然益诛锄善类，忄买慀楚人矣。
现代文：自此之后更加有恃无恐地赶杀好人，对楚人更心怀不平。
English: Since then, they have been more fearless in hunting down and killing good people, and they are even more dissatisfied with the Chu people.

古文：谓涟被逮时，过麻城，涟罪人也，之焕与盘桓流涕，当削籍，其实涟未尝过麻城也。
现代文：有人说杨涟被逮捕时，路过麻城，杨涟是有罪的人，梅之焕跟他盘桓数日，痛哭流泪，应当削去梅之焕的官籍，实际上杨涟并没有路过麻城。
English: Some people said that when Yang Hui was arrested, he passed by Macheng, Yang Hui is a guilty person, Meizhihwan lingered with him for several days, wept bitterly and shed tears, and Meizhihwan's official registration should be removed. In fact, Yang Hui did not pass by Macheng.

古文：无何，逆党梁克顺诬以赃私，诏征赃。
现代文：不久，逆党梁克顺诬告他窝藏赃款，下诏追究他的赃款。
English: Soon after, the traitor Liang Keshun falsely accused him of hiding stolen money and ordered that his stolen money be investigated.

古文：庄烈帝即位，乃免征，起故官，巡抚甘肃。
现代文：庄烈帝即位，于是免于追究，恢复官职起用他巡抚甘肃。
English: Zhuangde ascended the throne, so he was exempted from investigation and resumed his post as the governor of Gansu.

古文：大破套寇，斩首七百余级，生得部长三人，降六百余人。
现代文：大败河套的强盗，斩首七百多级，活捉一名部落酋长，招降六百多人。
English: The heavily defeated bandits in Hetao beheaded more than 700 people, captured a tribal chief alive, and recruited more than 600 people.

古文：明年春，寇复大入，患豌豆创，环大黄山而病。
现代文：第二年春天，敌人又一次大规模地侵入内地，大黄山一带感染了天花传染病。
English: In the spring of the following year, the enemy once again invaded the inland on a large scale, and the Greater Yellow Mountain area was infected with smallpox.

古文：诸将请掩之，之焕不可，曰： 幸灾不仁，乘危不武，不如舍之，因以为德焉。 
现代文：各将请求乘机歼灭他们，梅之焕不同意，说： 嘲笑别人的灾祸是不仁义的，乘别人的危难去攻击算不上勇猛，还不如放弃它们，来树立我们的恩德。 
English: Each of them pleaded to take the opportunity to annihilate them, but Meizhihana disagreed, saying, "It is unfair to laugh at the misfortunes of others, and it is not courageous to attack others at their peril. It is better to give them up and build up our benevolence."

古文：遂不战。
现代文：于是不进攻。
English: So no attack.

古文：逾月，群寇望边城搏颡涕泣而去。
现代文：过了一个月，群寇望着边城拍着额头哭着离去了。
English: After a month, the bandits looked at the border town, patted their foreheads and cried as they left.

古文：冬，京师戒严，有诏入卫。
现代文：冬天，京师戒严，有诏让他去保卫京师。
English: In winter, the capital was under martial law, and an edict was issued ordering him to defend the capital.

古文：且行，西部乘虚犯河西。
现代文：将要出发，西部敌人乘空虚进犯河西。
English: We are about to set out, and the western enemy is taking advantage of the void to invade Hexi.

古文：之焕止留，遣兵伏贺兰山后，邀其归路，大兵出水泉峡口，再战再败之，斩首八百四十有奇，引军东。
现代文：梅之焕留下来，派兵埋伏在贺兰山后面，在归路上迎击敌人，大部队出水泉峡口，二战二胜，斩首八百四十多级。率领部队向东前进。
English: Meizhihwan stayed behind, sent troops to ambush behind Mount Horan, and met the enemy on the way back. A large force went out of Shuiquan Gorge, won two victories in World War II, and beheaded more than 840 people. He led the troops to the east.

古文：俄悍卒王进才杀参将孙怀忠等以叛，走兰州。
现代文：不久凶悍的士兵王进才杀死参将孙怀忠等人叛乱，逃奔兰州。
English: Not long after, the fierce soldier Wang Jincai killed Sun Huaizhong and other rebels and fled Lanzhou.

古文：之焕遂西定其变，复整军东。
现代文：梅之焕于是向西进发平定了这次叛乱，又整顿军队向东出发。
English: Therefore, Meizhihana marched westward to quell the rebellion, and set out eastward to reorganize the army.

古文：明年五月抵京师，已后时矣，有诏之焕入朝。
现代文：第二年五月抵达京师，已经迟到了。有诏书让梅之焕上朝。
English: In May of the following year, he arrived in Kyoto, already late. There was an imperial decree to have Meizohwan become emperor.

古文：翌日又诏之焕落职候勘，温体仁已柄政矣。
现代文：第二天又下诏让梅之焕停职等候调查，这时温体仁已掌握大权。
English: The next day, he ordered Meizhouhan to be suspended pending an investigation, by which time Wen had assumed power.

古文：初，体仁讦钱谦益，之焕移书中朝，右谦益。
现代文：当初，温体仁攻击钱谦益，梅之焕上书保护他。
English: At first, Wen Tianzhen attacked Qian Qian and Meizhihuan wrote a letter to protect him.

古文：至是，体仁修隙，之焕遂得罪。
现代文：到这时，温体仁记起前仇，于是给梅之焕处分。
English: At this time, Wen Tiao Ren remembered his previous vendetta, so he punished Meizhou Huan.

古文：之焕虽文士，负材武，善射，既废，无所见。
现代文：梅之焕虽然是文士，却有武将的才干，善于射箭，被废职后，没有什么可以表现。
English: Although Meizhihana was a scribe, he had the talent of a warrior and was good at archery. After he was dismissed, he had nothing to show.

古文：所居县，阻山多盗。
现代文：他所在县里的深山里有很多强盗。
English: There are many bandits in the deep mountains of his county.

古文：之焕无事，辄率健儿助吏捕，无脱者。
现代文：梅之焕没事，常率领健壮的勇士协助当地官员捉拿，没有能逃脱的。
English: Meizohan is safe. He often leads strong warriors to help local officials capture him. No one can escape.

古文：先是，甘肃兵变，其溃卒畏捕诛，往往亡命山谷间，为群盗，贼势益张。
现代文：在这之前，甘肃发生兵变，逃跑的士兵害怕被捕杀死，往往逃至山谷中当强盗，强盗的势力更加嚣张了。
English: Before this, there was a mutiny in Gansu, and the soldiers who fled were afraid of being arrested and killed. They often fled to the valley to become robbers, and the power of the robbers became more arrogant.

古文：至是，贼数万来攻麻城，望见之焕部署，辄引去。
现代文：到这时，数万名强盗来攻打麻城，看到梅之焕的军事部署，就引兵离开了。
English: By this time, tens of thousands of bandits had come to attack Ma, and when they saw Meizhihana's military deployment, they withdrew.

古文：卒于家。李若星，字紫垣，息县人。万历三十二年进士。历知枣强、真定。
现代文：皇帝追叙甘肃前后的功劳，恢复了梅之焕的官职，荫封他的一个儿子，但最终还是没有召用他。第二年病死。李若星，字紫垣，河南息县人。万历三十二年进士，历任枣强、真定知县。
English: The emperor traced the merits before and after Gansu, restored Meizhiharu's official position, and eclipsed one of his sons, but ultimately did not call him. He died of illness the following year. Li Ruoxing, surnamed Ziqi, was from Xixian County, Henan Province. He entered the priesthood in the 32nd year of Wanli, and successively held the positions of Zaoqiang and Zhengjing County.

古文：擢御史，首劾南京兵部尚书黄克缵。
现代文：提拔御史，首先弹劾南京兵部尚书黄克缵。
English: Promotion of imperial history, first of all, impeachment of the Nanjing Military Department Shangshu Huang Kejun.

古文：巡视库藏，陈蠹国病商四弊，请得稽十库出纳，以杜侵渔，不报。
现代文：巡视国库，陈述祸国病商的四种弊端，请求核察十座国库的收入和支出情况，杜绝贪污浪费，没有批复。
English: He inspected the state treasury, stated the four drawbacks of the scourge of the country's disease merchants, and requested that the income and expenditure of ten state treasuries be verified to eliminate corruption and waste. There was no reply.

古文：巡按山西，请撤税使。
现代文：巡按山西，请求撤除税使。
English: patrols Shanxi, requesting the removal of the tax authorities.

古文：因再劾克缵为沈一贯私人、汤宾尹死友，宜罢，不从。
现代文：于是再次弹劾黄克缵是沈一贯的私党，汤宾尹的好友，应该罢免，皇帝不听。
English: As a result, Huang Kegui was impeached again. He was Shen's consistent private party and a good friend of Tang Binyin. He should have been dismissed. The emperor did not listen.

古文：还朝，出为福建右参议，移疾归。
现代文：回到朝廷，被派出担任福建右参议，称病回家。
English: Returning to the imperial court, he was sent to serve as Fujian Right Counselor, but he said he was ill and went home.

古文：天启初，起官陕西，召为尚宝少卿，再迁大理右少卿。
现代文：天启初年，他被起用到陕西当官，召回朝廷担任尚宝少卿，又提升他为大理右少卿。
English: In the first year of Tianqi, he was appointed to a position in Shaanxi, recalled to the imperial court as Shangbao Shaoqing, and promoted to Dali Yu Shaoqing.

古文：三年春，以右佥都御史巡抚甘肃。
现代文：天启三年春天，李若星以右佥都御史的身份巡抚甘肃。
English: In the spring of the third year of the Apocalypse, Li Ruoxing became the governor of Gansu as the right-hand man of the capital.

古文：陛辞，发魏忠贤、客氏之奸。
现代文：向皇帝辞行，揭发魏忠贤、客氏的邪恶。
English: He resigned from the emperor and exposed the evil of Wei Zhongxian and Hakka.

古文：明年，遣将丁孟科、官维贤击河套松山诸部镇番，斩首二百四十余级。
现代文：第二年派遣将领丁孟科、官维贤攻打河套松山各部镇的少数民族，斩首二百四十多级。
English: In the following year, generals Ding Mengke and Guan Weixian were dispatched to attack ethnic minorities in various towns in Matsuyama, Hetao, and beheaded more than 240 people.

古文：捷闻，未叙，有传若星将起义兵清君侧之恶者。
现代文：捷报传来，没有登记论功。有人传言李若星将要发动义兵清除皇帝身边的坏蛋。
English: There was a rumor that Li Ruoxing was going to mobilize volunteers to purge the emperor's entourage of evil-doers.

古文：忠贤闻之，即令许显纯入之汪文言狱词，诬其贿赵南星，得节钺。
现代文：魏忠贤听说了，就命令许显纯把他列入汪文言的供词中，诬陷他贿赂赵南星，窃取权力。
English: Upon hearing this, Wei Zhongxian ordered Xu Xianchun to include him in Wang Wenyan's confession, framing him for bribing Zhao Nansing and stealing power.

古文：五年三月遂除若星名，下河南抚按提问。
现代文：五年三月将李若星除名，交给河南抚按官审问。
English: In March of the same year, Li Ruoxing was removed from the list and sent to Henan Province for official interrogation.

古文：明年，狱上，杖之百，戍廉州。
现代文：第二年，官司交上来，打了一百棍，流放到廉州充边。
English: The following year, the lawsuit was filed, he was given a hundred lashes and exiled to Lianzhou.

古文：庄烈帝即位，赦还。
现代文：庄烈帝即位，赦免他回朝。
English: Emperor Zhuge Liang ascended the throne and pardoned him to return to China.

古文：崇祯元年，起工部右侍郎兼右佥都御史，总理河道。
现代文：崇祯元年起用李若星为工部右侍郎兼右佥都御史，总理河道。
English: Since the first year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, Li Ruoxing has been the right hand man of the Ministry of Industry and the right hand man of the Metropolitan Historian, Premier He Tao.

古文：追论甘肃功，进秩二品。
现代文：追论甘肃的功绩，加二品官级。
English: For his achievements in Gansu Province, he was awarded the second-class official rank.

古文：黄河大决，淹泗州，没睢宁城。
现代文：黄河大决口，流过泗州，淹没了睢宁城。
English: At the mouth of the Yellow River, it flowed through Luzhou and flooded Suining City.

古文：若星请修祖陵，移睢宁县治他所，从之。
现代文：李若星请求修复祖陵，将睢宁县治移到别处，皇帝同意了。
English: Li Ruoxing requested to repair the ancestral mausoleum and move the capital of Huning County to another place, and the emperor agreed.

古文：都城戒严，遣兵入卫。
现代文：京城戒严，派兵回京师保卫。
English: The capital was placed under martial law, and soldiers were sent back to defend it.

古文：病归，遭父忧。
现代文：他得病回家，碰上父亲去世。
English: He came home sick and found his father dead.

古文：久之，召为兵部右侍郎。
现代文：很久之后，召回任命为兵部右侍郎。
English: After a long time, he was recalled and appointed as the right hand man of the military department.

古文：十一年，以本官兼右佥都御史，代朱燮元总督川、湖、云、贵军务，兼巡抚贵州。
现代文：十一年以兵部右侍郎兼任右佥都御史，代替朱燮元总督川、湖、云、贵的军务，兼贵州巡抚。
English: In the eleventh year, he was appointed as the right-hand man of the military department and the right-hand man of the capital, replacing Zhu Xi, the former governor of the rivers, lakes, clouds and mountains, as well as the governor of Guizhou.

古文：讨安位余孽安陇璧及苗仲诸贼有功。
现代文：讨伐安位的余党安陇璧及苗仲各强盗，有功。
English: The rest of the party, An Zi Bi, and Miao Zhong, the bandits, have made great achievements in fighting for stability.

古文：畿辅被兵，成名、永图并以失机，十六年斩西市。
现代文：福王时，被解职。由于家乡城邑残破，寓居贵州。桂王迁武冈，召用他为吏部尚书。
English: At the time of King Fu, he was dismissed from his post. Due to the ruins of his hometown, he lived in Guizhou. King Gui moved to WuGang and appointed him as the secretary of the cadre.

古文：余自有传。
现代文：没有到任，碰上战乱，在战争中死去。
English: He did not take up the post, was caught up in the turmoil of war, and died in battle.

古文：李继贞，字征尹，太仓州人。
现代文：李继贞，字征尹，江苏太仓州人。
English: Li Jizhen, surnamed Zheng Yin, from Taicang, Jiangsu Province.

古文：万历四十一年进士。
现代文：万历四十一年进士。
English: Forty-one years of service.

古文：除大名推官，历迁兵部职方主事。
现代文：任命为大名推官，提升兵部职方主事。
English: He was appointed daimyo (feudal lord) and promoted to be in charge of the military department.

古文：天启四年秋，典试山东，坐试录刺魏忠贤，降级，已而削籍。
现代文：天启四年秋天，主持山东科举考试，因指责魏忠贤而被降低官级，不久剥夺他的官籍。
English: In the autumn of the fourth year of the Apocalypse, he presided over the Shandong Science Examination, and was reduced in rank for accusing Wei Zhongxian, and was soon stripped of his official registration.

古文：崇祯元年，起武选员外郎，进职方郎中。
现代文：崇祯元年起用为武选员外郎，提升为职方郎中。
English: Since the beginning of the year, he has been used as a samurai selector's assistant, and has been promoted to the position of junior assistant.

古文：时军书旁午，职方特增设郎中，协理司事。
现代文：这时军事文书普遍增多，职方特地增设郎中一职，协助管理有关事情。
English: At this time, there was a general increase in military documents, and the staff specially added a post to assist in the management of related matters.

古文：继贞干用精敏，尚书熊明遇深倚信之，曰： 副将以下若推择，我画诺而已。 
现代文：李继贞干练敏捷，尚书熊明遇很信任并倚重他，说： 副将以下你推举的，我画押签字就行了。 
English: Li Jizhen is capable and agile. Shang Shuxiong clearly trusts and relies on him. He said, "The vice-premiers are chosen by you. All I have to do is sign my name."

古文：四年，孔有德反山东，明遇主抚，继贞疏陈不可，且请调关外兵入剿。
现代文：崇祯四年，孔有德在山东造反，熊明遇主张招抚，李继贞上疏陈述不同意见，还请求调关外官兵到内地镇压。
English: In the fourth year of Chongzhen, Kong Youde rebelled in Shandong, Xiong Mingyun advocated appeasement, Li Jizhen went to Shanghai to present different opinions, and also requested the transfer of foreign officers and soldiers to the mainland for suppression.

古文：明遇不能从，后讫用其言灭贼。
现代文：熊明遇不能听从他的意见，最终还是用李继贞的计策消灭了贼人。
English: Xiong Mingyu couldn't follow his advice, but eventually used Li Jizhen's strategy to eliminate the thief.

古文：初，延绥盗起，继贞请发帑金，用董抟霄人运法，籴米输军前。
现代文：当初，延绥有人造反，李继贞请求拿国库的银子，用董抟霄的 人运法 ，买米运送到前线部队。
English: At the beginning, there was a rebellion in Yancheng, and Li Jizhen requested to take the silver from the national treasury and use the method of human transportation of Dong Bingxiao to buy rice and transport it to the front-line troops.

古文：且令四方赎鍰及捐纳事例者，输粟于边，以抚饥民。
现代文：并且命令四方要支付赎金和捐款的人，运送粮食到边境，用来安抚饥民。
English: It also ordered the quartet to pay ransoms and donors to send food to the border to feed the hungry.

古文：又言： 兵法抚、剿并用，非抚贼也，抚饥民之从贼者耳。
现代文：又说： 兵法招抚、围剿并用，所谓招抚并不是招抚贼人，而是招抚跟着贼人的饥民。
English: He also said: The art of war is to coax and encircle. The so-called coaxing is not coaxing the thief, but coaxing the hungry people who follow the thief.

古文：今斗米四钱，已从贼者犹少，未从贼而势必从贼者无穷。
现代文：现今一斗米要四钱，已经跟着贼人的还很少，没有跟随贼人但势必要跟随贼人的却有无数的人。
English: Nowadays, a bucket of rice costs four yuan, and only a few people have followed the thief. However, there are countless people who have not followed the thief but are bound to follow the thief.

古文：请如神庙特遣御史振济故事，赍三十万石以往，安辑饥民，使不为贼，以孤贼势。 
现代文：请求按照神宗特别派遣御史发放粮食赈救灾民的先例，运送三十万粮食，来安抚饥民，使他们不成为贼人，以此孤立贼人的势力。 
English: Request to follow the precedent of Shenzong's special dispatch of imperial history to distribute grain to help the victims of the disaster, to transport 300,000 grain to appease the hungry, so that they do not become thieves, and thus isolate the power of thieves.

古文：帝感其言，遣御史吴甡以十万金往。
现代文：皇帝被他的话感动了，派御史吴生生带着十万两银子前往。
English: The emperor was moved by his words and sent the imperial secretary Wu Sheng Sheng to take 100,000 taels of silver with him.

古文：继贞少之，帝不听，后贼果日炽。
现代文：李继贞认为太少，皇帝不听，后来贼寇果然一天天地强大起来。
English: Li Jizhen thought it was too little, the emperor did not listen, and later the bandits became stronger day by day.

古文：继贞为人强项，在事清执，请谒不得行。
现代文：李继贞为人性格刚强而不肯低首下人，处理事情公正，拒绝开后门。
English: Li Jizhen is a person with a strong personality who is not willing to lower his head, deal with things fairly, and refuse to open the back door.

古文：大学士周延儒，继贞同年生，属总兵官于继贞。
现代文：大学士周延儒，跟李继贞同一年考中进士，委托李继贞为总兵官。
English: Zhou Yanru, a college graduate, entered the middle school exam the same year as Li Jizhen, and commissioned Li Jizhen as the chief military officer.

古文：继贞瞠目谢曰： 我不奉命，必获罪。
现代文：李继贞瞪大眼睛推辞说： 我不接受命令，一定会受刑罚处分。
English: Li Jizhen stared wide-eyed and said: I do not accept orders, I will definitely be punished.

古文：刑部狱甚宽，可容继贞也。 
现代文：刑部监狱很宽敞，可以容纳李继贞。 
English: The prison of the Criminal Investigation Department is very spacious and can accommodate Li Jizhen.

古文：延儒衔之。
现代文：周延儒怀恨他。
English: Zhou Yanru held a grudge against him.

古文：已，加尚宝寺卿。当迁，帝辄令久任。
现代文：此后，加封尚宝寺卿，应当提升了，皇帝就命令他长期担任此职。
English: After that, the Emperor ordered him to hold this position for a long time.

古文：田贵妃父弘遇以坐门功求优叙不获，屡疏诋继贞，帝不听。中官曹化淳欲用私人为把总，继贞不可；乃嘱戎政尚书陆完学言于尚书张凤翼以命继贞，继贞亦不可，凤翼排继贞议而用之。
现代文：田贵妃的父亲田弘遇要以祖先的功勋请求破格提拔没获允许，多次上疏诋毁李继贞，皇帝不听，宦官曹化淳想任用自己的私党为把总，李继贞不同意，于是嘱咐戎政尚书陆完学跟尚书张凤翼说话，让张凤翼采纳李继贞的建议。
English: Tian Guifei's father, Tian Hong, was not allowed to use the merits of his ancestors to request an extraordinary promotion, and he repeatedly slandered Li Jizhen. The emperor did not listen, and the eunuch Cao Hua Chun wanted to appoint his own private party as the commander-in-chief. Li Jizhen did not agree, so he ordered the military governor Shang Shulun to talk to Shang Shulun Zhang Fengyi after graduation, and let Zhang Fengyi adopt Li Jizhen's suggestion.

古文：化淳怒，与弘遇日伺其隙，谗之帝，坐小误，贬三秩。
现代文：曹化淳很不高兴，跟田弘遇每天等待机会，向皇帝进谗言。因为小的失误，降了李继贞三级官。
English: Cao Huachun was very unhappy, and He Tianhong waited every day for an opportunity to criticize the emperor. Because of a small mistake, Li Jizhen was demoted to the third rank.

古文：会叙甘肃功，继贞请起用故巡抚梅之焕，帝遂发怒，削继贞籍。
现代文：正好记录甘肃的功劳，李继贞请求皇帝起用原巡抚梅之焕，皇帝于是发怒，剥夺李继贞的官籍。
English: Li Jizhen requested the emperor to appoint the former procurator Meizhuhan, and the emperor became angry and deprived Li Jizhen of his official status.

古文：已，论四川桃红坝功，复官，致仕。
现代文：此后，讨论四川桃红坝的功绩，恢复李继贞的官籍，致仕。
English: After that, the merits of the Sichuan Taohong Dam were discussed, Li Jizhen's official registration was restored, and he retired.

古文：十一年用荐起，历两京尚宝卿。
现代文：崇祯十一年他被推荐起用，担任两京尚宝卿。
English: In the eleventh year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, he was recommended to serve as the ruler of the two capitals.

古文：明年春召对，陈水利屯田甚悉，迁顺天府丞。寻超拜兵部右侍郎兼右佥都御史，巡抚天津，督蓟、辽军饷。
现代文：第二年春天皇上召对，李继贞陈奏水利屯田十分详细，提升为顺天府丞，不久破格提拔为兵部右侍郎兼右佥都御史，巡抚天津，监督蓟、辽军饷。
English: In the spring of the second year, the emperor summoned him, and Li Jizhen was promoted to Shun Tianfu Ju, and soon he was promoted to the right hand man of the military department and the right hand man of the capital, the governor of Tianjin, and the supervisor of the Liao and Liao armies.

古文：乃大兴屯田，列上经地、招佃、用水、任人、薄赋五议。
现代文：于是大兴屯田，向皇帝提出划分土地、招徕佃农、农田用水、选拔官员、轻徭薄赋五项建议。
English: As a result, Daxing Tun Tian proposed five suggestions to the emperor, including land division, recruiting farmers, farmland water use, selection of officials, and frivolous subsidies.

古文：白塘、葛沽数十里间，田大熟。
现代文：白塘、葛沽数十里之间，庄稼获得极大的丰收。
English: Between Baitang and Gejun dozens of miles, crops have achieved a great harvest.

古文：十四年冬，诏发水师援辽，坐战舰不具，除名。
现代文：崇祯十四年冬天，下诏派水军支援辽东，因准备战舰不足，被除名。
English: In the winter of the 14th year of the Chongzhen Emperor's reign, a naval force was dispatched to support Liaodong. However, due to insufficient preparation of warships, it was removed from the list.

古文：明年夏，召为兵部添注右侍郎。
现代文：第二年夏天，征召任命为兵部右侍郎。
English: In the summer of the following year, he was conscripted and appointed as the right hand man of the military department.

古文：得疾，卒于途。
现代文：患病，死在上任途中。
English: He fell ill and died on his way to office.

古文：是夕，星陨中庭。
现代文：当天傍晚，有一颗星星在院子中间陨落了。
English: That evening, a star fell in the middle of the courtyard.

古文：赠右都御史，官一子。
现代文：赠封为右都御史，荫封一个儿子做官。
English: He bestowed the title of Utsunomiya Imperial Historian, and one of his sons became an official.

古文：方震孺，字孩未，桐城人，移家寿州。
现代文：方震孺，字孩未，祖籍安徽桐城，后来迁到寿州。
English: Fang Zhenxuan, Zhaoyanwei, ancestral home Tongcheng, Anhui Province, later moved to Shoushou.

古文：万历四十一年进士。由沙县知县入为御史。
现代文：万历四十一年进士，由沙县知县进入朝廷担任御史。
English: In the 41st year of Wanli's reign, he entered the imperial court from Shaxian Zhixian and served as imperial historian.

古文：熹宗嗣位，逆珰魏忠贤内结客氏。
现代文：熹宗即位，叛逆太监魏忠贤勾结客氏。
English: Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne, and the rebellious eunuch Wei Zhongxian colluded with the Hakka clan.

古文：震孺疏陈三朝艰危，言： 宫妾近侍，嚬笑易假，窥瞷可虑。
现代文：方震孺上疏陈述三朝的危难，说： 宫女近侍，易于谄媚，窥探圣上情况让人担心。
English: Fang Zhenxuan Shangsuo described the perils of the Three Dynasties, saying: "A close attendant of the imperial concubine is easy to flatter, and it is worrisome to spy on the situation of the imperial concubine.

古文：中旨频宣，恐蹈斜封隐祸。 
现代文：宫中诏书频频颁发，恐怕会重蹈唐代 斜封官 的覆辙。 
English: Imperial edicts are frequently issued in the palace, and I am afraid that we will repeat the mistakes of the oblique sealing officials in the Tang Dynasty.

古文：元年陈《拔本塞源论》曰： 曩者梃击之案，王之寀、陆大受、张庭、李俸悉遭废斥，而东林如赵南星、高攀龙、刘宗周诸贤，废锢终身，亟宜召复。
现代文：天启元年陈奏《拔本塞源论》说： 先前的梃击案，王之肕、陆大受、张庭、李俸全都被排斥，而东林党人如赵南星、高攀龙、刘宗周各贤士，被终身禁锢，应该赶快召见任用他们。
English: In the first year of the 21st century, Chen Zou's "The Theory of the Origin of Pulling Out the Root" said: In the previous attack case, Wang Zhixuan, Lu Datu, Zhang Ting and Li Feng were all ostracized, while Donglin Party members such as Zhao Nansing, Gao Panglong and Liu Zongzhou were imprisoned for life. They should be summoned to see them appointed as soon as possible.

古文：至杨涟之争移宫，可幸无罪，不知何以有居功之说，又有交通之疑？
现代文：至于杨涟争取移官，侥幸没有罪过，不知道凭什么说他居功，还有勾结的嫌疑？
English: As for Yang Hui's struggle for a transfer, he fortunately did not commit any crime. I do not know on what basis he took credit, and there is a suspicion of collusion?

古文：将使天下后世谓尧、舜在上，而有交通矫旨之阉宦。 
现代文：将使得后代说我们有圣明的君主高高在上，却有相互勾结，假传圣旨的太监在下面为非作歹。 
English: It will make posterity say that we had holy princes on high, but in collusion with each other, and that the eunuchs who falsely transmitted the sacred edict did evil below.

古文：疏入，直声震朝廷。
现代文：报告呈上去，震动了整个朝廷。
English: When the report was presented, it shook the entire imperial court.

古文：其春巡视南城。
现代文：这年春天巡视南城。
English: This spring, I visited Nancheng.

古文：中官张晔、刘朝被讼，忠贤为请，震孺不从，卒上闻，忠贤益恚怨。
现代文：宦官张晔、刘朝被人告了，魏忠贤替他们说情。方震孺不听，最终报告了皇帝，魏忠贤更加怨恨他了。
English: The eunuchs Zhang Ye and Liu Chao were sued, and Wei Zhongxian interceded on their behalf. Fang Zhenyao did not listen, and finally reported to the emperor. Wei Zhongxian resented him even more.

古文：辽阳既破，震孺一日十三疏，请增巡抚，通海运，调边兵，易司马。
现代文：辽阳失陷后，方震孺一天上了十三道奏疏，请求增派巡抚、疏通海运、调集边兵、撤换司马。
English: After the fall of Liaoyang, Fang Zhengyi went to the 13 provinces and autonomous regions on the same day to appeal to them, requesting that they increase the number of inspectors, streamline maritime transportation, mobilize border troops, and remove and replace Sima.

古文：日五鼓挝公卿门，筹画痛哭，而自请犒师。
现代文：一天五次到公卿门前击鼓，一边筹划一边痛哭，而请求让自己去犒劳部队。
English: Five times a day he went to the door of the nobles to play the drums, weeping bitterly as he planned, and begged to be allowed to go and reward the troops.

古文：是时，三岔河以西四百里，人烟绝，军民尽窜，文武将吏无一骑东者。
现代文：这时，三岔河以西四百里，荒无人烟，军民都逃跑了，文武将官没有一人向东进发的。
English: At this time, four hundred miles west of the Samye River, the wasteland was deserted, the soldiers and civilians had all fled, and none of the generals and generals had left for the east.

古文：帝壮其言，发帑金二十万震孺犒师。
现代文：皇帝鼓励他，派国库银二十万两给方震孺犒劳部队。
English: The emperor encouraged him and sent two hundred thousand taels of silver from the treasury to Fang Zhenguo's labor force.

古文：六月，震孺出关，延见将士，吊死扶伤，军民大悦。
现代文：六月，方震孺出关，会见将士，吊唁死亡战士，救护伤病员，军民一片欢腾。
English: In June, Fang Zhengyu went out of the customs, met with the soldiers, condoled the dead soldiers, rescued the wounded and sick, and the military and the people were jubilant.

古文：因上言： 河广不七十步，一苇可航，非有惊涛怒浪之险，不足恃者一。
现代文：于是报告皇帝说： 河宽不到七十步，一叶小舟就可渡过，没有惊涛骇浪的危险，这是不足以倚恃的第一点。
English: Then he reported to the emperor: "The river is less than seventy paces wide, a small boat can cross it, and there is no danger of stormy waves. This is the first point that is not enough to rely on.

古文：兵来，斩木为排，浮以土，多人推之，如履平地，不足恃者二。
现代文：部队到来，砍木材做木排，上面堆上土，众人推它填河，就像走在平路上一样，这是不足以倚恃的第二点。
English: When the troops came, they cut wood to make wooden planks, piled earth on top, and pushed it to fill the river, just like walking on a flat road. This is the second point that is not enough to lean on.

古文：河去代子河不远，兵从代子径渡，守河之卒不满二万，能望其半渡而遏之乎？
现代文：三岔河离代子河不远，敌人从代子河直接渡河，防守三岔河的士兵不到二万人，能看着敌人渡到一半再阻止吗？
English: The Samye River is not far from the Daizi River. The enemy crosses the river directly from the Daizi River. There are less than 20,000 soldiers defending the Samye River. Can you watch the enemy cross halfway and then stop them?

古文：不足恃者三。
现代文：这是不足以倚恃的第三点。
English: This is the third point that is not enough to rely on.

古文：沿河百六十里，筑城则不能，列栅则无用，不足恃者四。
现代文：沿河一百六十里，筑城则不能够，布置栅栏又没有用处，这是不足以倚恃的第四点。
English: One hundred and sixty miles along the river, it is not possible to build a city, and there is no use in arranging fences. This is the fourth point that is not enough to rely on.

古文：黄泥洼、张叉站冲浅之处，可修守，今地非我有，不足恃者五。
现代文：黄泥洼、张叉站冲浅之处，可以修城防守，现在那地方又不在我军手里，这是不足以倚恃的第五点。
English: Huangdi Dawa and the shallow area of Zhang Fork Station can be used to build and defend the city, but now that place is not in the hands of our troops. This is the fifth point that is not enough to rely on.

古文：转眼冰合，遂成平地，间次置防，犹得五十万人，兵从何来？
现代文：转眼之间就要结冰了，三岔河就会成为平地，驻扎部队，布置防守，还得五十万人，这些兵从哪里来？
English: In a blink of an eye, it will freeze over, and the Samye River will become a flatland. Stationing troops, setting up defenses, and having half a million people, where will these soldiers come from?

古文：不足恃者六。 
现代文：这是不足以倚恃的第六点。 
English: This is the sixth point that is not enough to rely on.

古文：又言： 我以退为守，则守不足；我以进为守，则守有余。
现代文：又说： 我军以退为守，是不足以防守的，我军以进为守，则防守绰绰有余。
English: He also said: If our army retreats to defend, it is not enough to defend; if our army advances to defend, it is more than enough to defend.

古文：专倚三岔作家，万一时事偶非，榆关一线遂足锁蓟门哉？ 
现代文：专门依靠三岔河作为大本营，万一将来形势发生变化，榆关一线足以保卫蓟门吗？ 
English: Relying exclusively on the Samye River as a base camp, in the unlikely event that the situation changes in the future, will the Shaoguan line be enough to defend Shimen?

古文：疏入，帝命震孺巡按辽东，监纪军事。
现代文：奏疏呈上，皇帝命令方震孺巡按辽东，监察军事纪律。
English: According to the report, the emperor ordered Fang Zhengyu to patrol Liaodong and supervise military discipline.

古文：震孺按辽，居不庐、食不火者七月。
现代文：方震孺巡按辽东，有七个月没有住在房屋里，没有吃热熟食。
English: For seven months, Fang Zhenxuan did not live in a house and did not eat hot cooked food.

古文：议者欲弃三岔河，退守广宁，震孺请驻兵振武。
现代文：有人想要放弃三岔河，退守广宁。方震孺请求在镇武驻兵。
English: Some people want to give up Samye River and retreat to Guangning. Fang Zhengyi requested to station troops in Zhenwu.

古文：军法不严，震孺请敕宁前监军，专斩逃军逃将。并从其言。
现代文：军法不严，请求下令宁、前监军，专门斩杀逃兵逃将，皇帝都听从了他的意见。
English: The military law was not strict, so he asked Ning, the former supervisor of the army, to specifically kill the deserter, and the emperor listened to his opinion.

古文：然是时，经抚不和，疆事益坏。
现代文：然而这个时候，经略与巡抚不合，边防事务更加败坏了。
English: However, at this time, the governor and the governor did not get along, and the border affairs were even more corrupt.

古文：震孺再疏言山海无外卫，宜亟驻兵中前，以为眼目，不省。
现代文：方震孺再次上疏说山海关没有外卫，应赶快在中前所驻兵，作为山海关防卫的前哨，不听。
English: Fang Zhengyu once again went to Shangzo to say that the Shanhaiguan Customs had no external guards, and that troops should be stationed in Zhongzheng as soon as possible, as an outpost for the defense of the Shanhaiguan Customs, but he did not listen.

古文：明年正月，任满，候代前屯，而大清兵已再渡三岔河。
现代文：第二年正月，任期满，在前屯待命，而大清兵已第二次渡过三岔河。
English: In the first month of the second year, after the expiration of the term of office, they were on standby in the former camp, and the Great Qing soldiers had crossed the Samye River for the second time.

古文：先锋孙得功不战，而呼于振武曰 兵败矣 ，遂走。
现代文：先锋孙得功没有交战，却在镇武高喊： 军队失败了。 
English: Pioneer Sun Dergong did not fight, but shouted in Zhenwu: The army has failed.

古文：巡抚王化贞在广宁，亦仓皇走。列城闻之皆走，惟震孺前屯无动。
现代文：于是逃跑。巡抚王化贞在广宁，也仓惶逃跑，各城驻军也都闻风而逃，只有方震孺的前屯没有动摇。
English: The governor, Wang Huashen, who was in Guangning, also fled in panic, and the garrisons in all the cities also fled at the sound of the wind. Only the outpost of Fang Zhenxuan did not waver.

古文：当是时，西平守将罗一贯已战死，参将祖大寿拥残兵驻觉华岛上。
现代文：正在这个时候，西平守将罗一贯已经战死，参将祖大寿收拾残兵驻扎在觉华岛上。
English: Just at this time, the Xiping garrison commander Luo had already been killed in battle, and General Zu Dashou was stationed on Juehua Island to collect the remaining soldiers.

古文：于是震孺召水师帅张国卿相与谋曰： 今东师四外搜粮，闻祖将军在岛上有米豆二十余万，兵十余万，人民数万，战舰、器仗、马牛无数，东师即媾得岛兵，得岛兵以攻榆关，岂有幸哉？ 
现代文：于是方震孺召见水军头领张国卿商量说： 现在东路军到处找粮食，听说祖将军在岛上有二十多万米豆，十多万士兵，数万百姓，无数的战船、器械、牛马，东路军和岛上部队联合以攻榆关，不是很幸运的吗！ 
English: So Fang Zhenyao summoned Zhang Guoqing, the leader of the naval forces, for a discussion and said: "Nowadays, the Eastern Route Army is looking for food everywhere. I heard that General Zu has more than two hundred thousand beans, more than one hundred thousand soldiers, tens of thousands of civilians, countless warships, equipment, and horses on the island. Isn't it lucky that the Eastern Route Army and the island troops united to attack Shouguan?

古文：于是震孺、国卿航海见大寿，慷慨语曰： 将军归，相保以富贵；不归，震孺请以颈血溅将军。 
现代文：于是方震孺、张国卿航海去会见祖大寿，慷慨激昂地对他说： 将军归国，我们担保你荣华富贵，如不归国，我方震孺就死在将军面前。 
English: So Fang Zhenyao and Zhang Guoqing sailed to meet Zu Dashou and said to him impetuously: "When the general returns to the country, we will guarantee your glory and wealth. If you do not return to the country, our Zhenyao will die in front of the general."

古文：大寿泣，震孺亦泣，遂相携以归，获军民辎重无算。
现代文：祖大寿痛哭，方震孺也跟着流泪，于是一起回归，获得军民辎重无数。
English: Zu Dashou cried bitterly, and Fang Zhengyi also shed tears, so they returned together and won countless military and civilian awards.

古文：有主事徐大化者，忠贤党也，劾震孺曰 攘差 。
现代文：有一个名叫徐大化的主事，是魏忠贤的死党，弹劾方震孺为 赃官 。
English: There was a leading official named Xu Dahua, who was a staunch ally of Wei Zhongxian, and the eunuch of the impeachment, Fang Zhenxuan.

古文：都御史邹元标奋笔曰： 方御史保全山海，无过且有社稷功。 
现代文：都御史邹元标举笔说： 方御史保全山海关，不仅无过而且还是国家的功臣。 
English: The city's governor, Shi Yuan, raised his pen and said: Fang Youshi, who preserved the mountain customs, was not only innocent, but also a national hero.

古文：给事中郭兴治遂借道学以逐元标。
现代文：给事中郭兴治于是借道学之名赶走邹元标。
English: As a result, the person in charge, Guo Xingzhi, used the name of Taoism to drive away Xuan Yuanbiao.

古文：元标去，震孺亦即罢归。
现代文：邹元标离职，方震孺也随即被罢官回家。
English: Yu Yuanbiao left his post, and Fang Zhengyu was also dismissed and sent home.

古文：明年，忠贤、广微兴大狱，再募劾方御史者，兴治再论震孺河西赃私。
现代文：第二年，魏忠贤、魏广微大造冤案，再次招聘弹劾方震孺的人，郭兴治再次追论方震孺在河西贪污赃款。
English: In the second year, Wei Zhongxian and Wei Guangwu made a big case of injustice, and once again recruited people to impeach Fang Zhengyi. Guo Xingzhi once again pursued Fang Zhengyi for corruption and embezzlement in Hexi.

古文：逮问掠治，坐赃六千有奇，拟绞。
现代文：逮捕方震孺拷问，判处他藏赃款六千多两，准备处以绞刑。
English: The arresting party shuddered and tortured him, sentenced him to hide more than 6,000 taels of stolen money, and prepared to hang him.

古文：而扬州守刘铎咒诅之狱又起，遂诬震孺与交通，坐大辟，系狱。
现代文：扬州太守刘铎诅咒一案又被提起，于是诬赖方震孺与他交往、勾结，犯了杀头之罪，方震孺被逮捕下狱。
English: The case of Yangzhou Governor Liu Zhen's cursing was brought up again, so Fang Zhengyu was accused of associating and colluding with him, committing the crime of beheading, and Fang Zhengyu was arrested and sent to prison.

古文：有逻卒时时佐震孺饮啖，问之，则曰： 小人有妻，闻公精忠，手治以献者也。 
现代文：有一个巡逻的士卒常常帮助方震孺的饮食，方震孺问他，他说： 我的妻子，听说您精忠卫国，亲手做了献给您。 
English: An officer on patrol often helped Fang Zhenxuan with his meals. When Fang Zhenxuan asked him about it, he said, "My wife, I heard that you are a loyal defender of the country, and I made this for you with my own hands."

古文：辄报珰曰： 某病革，某濒死。 
现代文：就报告宦官说： 某人因病革职，某人将死了。 
English: Referring to the report, the eunuch said, "Someone will resign due to illness, someone will die.

古文：珰以是防益疏。
现代文：宦官的防备更松了。
English: The eunuch's defenses are looser.

古文：明年，庄烈帝嗣位，得释还。
现代文：第二年，庄烈帝继位，方震孺得到释放。
English: The next year, Emperor Zhuang was enthroned, and Fang Zhenxuan was released.

古文：八年春，流贼犯寿州，州长吏适迁秩去，震孺倡士民固守，贼自是不敢逼寿州。
现代文：八年春天，流贼进犯寿州，寿州的长吏刚好调走了，方震孺倡议士大夫、百姓固守，贼人从此不敢逼近寿州。
English: In the spring of the eighth year, the bandits invaded Shoushou. The governor of Shoushou was just transferred away, and Fang Zhengyi urged the scholars and doctors and the people to stick to it. From then on, the bandits dared not approach Shoushou.

古文：巡抚史可法上其功，用为广西参议。
现代文：巡抚史可法向上面汇报了他的功绩，将他用为广西参议。
English: Governor Shi Kefa reported his achievements to the above and used him as a Guangxi councilor.

古文：寻擢右佥都御史，巡抚广西。
现代文：不久，提拔为右佥都御史，巡抚广西。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the position of the Right Hand of the Capital, the Governor of Guangxi.

古文：京师陷，福王立南京，即日拜疏勤王。马士英、阮大铖惮之，敕还镇。
现代文：京师陷落，福王在南京登基，当天方震孺就上奏勤王，马士英、阮大铖很忌讳，命令他回到广西。
English: After the fall of Beijing, Fu Wang ascended to the throne in Nanjing. On the same day, the Party Central Committee sent a message to Qin Wang. Ma Shih-ying and Ruan Daju were very reluctant and ordered him to return to Guangxi.

古文：震孺竟郁郁忧愤而卒。
现代文：方震孺竟因此郁郁忧愤而死。
English: As a result, Fang Zhengyu died of depression and anger.

古文：徐从治，字仲华，海盐人。
现代文：徐从治，字仲华，浙江海盐人。
English: Xu Congzhi, Zhaozhonghua, Zhejiang Haiyan.

古文：母梦神人舞戈于庭，寤而生。
现代文：母亲梦见天神在庭院内挥舞兵戈，醒来时就生下了他。
English: His mother dreamed that Tenjin was waving his sword in the courtyard, and gave birth to him when she woke up.

古文：从治举万历三十五年进士，除桐城知县。
现代文：徐从治考中万历三十五年进士，任命为桐城知县。
English: Xu was promoted to a scholar in the 35th year of the Wanli era in the middle of the examination and was appointed to Tongcheng County.

古文：累官济南知府，以卓异迁兖东副使，驻沂州。
现代文：一直做到济南知府，因为政绩不同于常人而调任兖东副使，驻守沂州。
English: He has always been the governor of Jinan, and because his political achievements are different from ordinary people, he was transferred to the vice-envoy of Shandong and stationed in Zhangzhou.

古文：天启元年，妖贼徐鸿儒反郓城，连陷邹、滕、峄县。
现代文：天启元年，徐鸿儒在郓州造反，接连攻陷邹县、滕县、峰县。
English: In the first year of the 21st century, Xu Hongru rebelled in Zhangzhou, and successively conquered Zhangxian, Tengxian, and Fengxian.

古文：从治捕得其党之伏沂者杀之，请就家起故总兵杨肇基主兵事，而献捣贼中坚之策，遂灭鸿儒。事详《赵彦传》。从治警敏通变，其御贼类主剿不主抚，故往往灭贼。
现代文：起用原总兵杨肇基主持军事，自己进献攻击敌人主力的策略，于是消灭了徐鸿儒，详情参见《赵彦传》。徐从治机警敏捷善于应变，他对付强盗主张围剿而不主张招抚，所以往往能消灭他们。
English: He appointed the former general Yang Zhaoji to preside over the military, and he himself advanced the strategy of attacking the enemy's main force, thus eliminating Xu Hongru. For details, see "Zhao Yan Biography." Xu Zongji was a quick-witted policeman and was good at adapting. He advocated encirclement and suppression rather than appeasement when dealing with robbers, so he could often eliminate them.

古文：旋以右参政分守济南。
现代文：不久以右参政的职衔分派镇守济南。
English: Soon after, he was assigned as the town guard of Jinan with the title of right-wing politician.

古文：录功，从治最，进右布政使，督漕江南。
现代文：记载功劳，徐从治第一，提升右布政使，监督江南漕运。
English: According to the records, Xu Zongzhi was the first to be promoted to the post of the right cloth political envoy, and he supervised the south river transportation.

古文：妖贼再起，巡抚王惟俭奏留从治，仍守沂。
现代文：妖贼又一次兴起，巡抚王惟俭上奏挽留徐从治，仍让他防守沂州。
English: The bandits were on the rise again, and the governor, Wang Wei Jian, made a last-ditch effort to retain Xu Zongzhi, still allowing him to defend Zhangzhou.

古文：按臣主抚，从治议不合，遂告归。
现代文：巡按大臣主张招抚，跟徐从治意见不合，于是告假回家。
English: The Minister of Supervision and Inspection proposed to invite him, but he disagreed with Xu Congzhi, so he took a leave of absence and went home.

古文：中外计议调，崇祯初，以故秩饬蓟州兵备。
现代文：朝廷内外商量征调，崇祯初年，以原官阶整顿蓟州兵备。
English: The recruitment and transfer was discussed inside and outside the imperial court, and in the first year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, the military preparedness of Zhangzhou was rectified with the original ranks.

古文：蓟军久缺饷，围巡抚王应豸于遵化。
现代文：蓟州军队长时间发不出军饷，士兵们在遵化把巡抚王应豸给包围了。
English: The Zhangzhou army could not issue military pay for a long time, and the soldiers surrounded the governor Wang Yinglu in Zunhua.

古文：从治单骑驰入，阴部署夷丁、标兵，分营四门，按甲不动，登城而呼曰： 给三月粮，趣归守汛地，否将击汝！ 
现代文：徐从治一个人骑着马跑进来，暗中部署夷丁、标兵，分别把守四个大门，按兵不动，登上城门高喊道： 给你们三个月的粮食，赶快回归防地，否则将攻打你们！ 
English: Xu Congzhi, a man on horseback, ran in, secretly deployed the Yidintong and the pacesetters, guarded the four gates separately, kept the soldiers still, climbed the gate and shouted: Give you three months of grain, quickly return to the defense, otherwise you will be attacked!

古文：众应声而散。
现代文：众人应声而散。
English: The crowd dispersed in response.

古文：其应变多类此。
现代文：他应付事变的办法多跟上述情形类似。
English: His way of dealing with the situation is similar to the above.

古文：进秩左布政使，再请告归。
现代文：后提升官级为左布政使，第二次请求告假回家。
English: Later, he was promoted to the rank of Zuo Bu political envoy, and requested leave to go home for the second time.

古文：四年，起饬武德兵备。
现代文：天启四年起用他整顿武德军备。
English: Since the fourth year of the Apocalypse, he has been used to rectify martial arts armaments.

古文：孔有德反山东，巡抚余大成檄从治监军。
现代文：孔有德在山东造反，巡抚余大成传文征召徐从治监军。
English: Kong Youde rebelled in Shandong, and the procurator Yu Dacheng sent a letter to recruit Xu from the procuratorial army.

古文：明年正月驰赴莱州，而登州已陷。
现代文：第二年正月快马赶往莱州，而登州已经失陷了。
English: In the first month of the second year, the horses rushed to Laizhou, but Dengzhou had already fallen.

古文：大成削籍，遂擢从治右副都御史代之，与登莱巡抚谢琏并命。
现代文：剥夺了余大成的官籍，于是提拔徐从治为右副都御史代替他，跟登莱巡抚谢琏同时受命。
English: He deprived Yu Dacheng of his official status, and then promoted Xu Congzhi to the position of the right vice-governor of the capital to replace him. He received the order at the same time as Denglai's governor Xie Jun.

古文：诏琏驻莱州，从治驻青州，调度兵食。
现代文：下诏让谢琏驻守莱州，徐从治驻守青州，管理安排部队的军粮。
English: The following edict ordered Xie Jun to be stationed in Laizhou and Xu Congzhi to be stationed in Qingzhou to manage and arrange the army's military food.

古文：从治曰： 吾驻青，不足镇莱人心；驻莱，足系全齐命。 
现代文：徐从治说： 我驻守青州，不足以安定莱州的人心；驻守莱州，足以维持整个山东的命脉。 
English: Xu Congzhi said: I stationed in Qingzhou is not enough to stabilize the people's hearts in Laizhou; stationed in Laizhou is enough to maintain the lifeblood of the entire Shandong.

古文：乃与琏同受事于莱。
现代文：于是跟谢琏一起在莱州办公。
English: So he started working with Xie Yao in Laizhou.

古文：有德者，辽人。
现代文：孔有德是辽阳人。
English: Kong Youde is from Liaoyang.

古文：与耿仲明、李九成、毛承禄辈皆毛文龙帐下卒也。
现代文：跟耿仲明、李九成、毛承禄等人都是毛文龙手下的士兵。
English: Along with Geng Zhongming, Li Jucheng, Mao Chenglu and others, they were all soldiers under the command of Mao Wenlong.

古文：文龙死，走入登州。
现代文：毛文龙死后，他们就跑到登州。
English: After the death of Mao Wenlong, they ran away to Dengzhou.

古文：登莱巡抚孙元化官辽久，素言辽人可用，乃用承禄为副将，有德、仲明为游击，九成为偏裨，且多收辽人为牙兵。
现代文：登莱巡抚孙元化长期在辽阳做官，一向以为辽阳人可以任用，于是起用毛承禄为副将，孔有德、耿仲明担任游击，李九成为偏裨，而且大量接收辽人为帐前卫兵。
English: The governor of Denglai, Sun Yuanhua, had been an official in Liaoyang for a long time, and had always thought that Liaoyang people could be appointed, so he appointed Mao Chenglu as vice-general, Kong Youde and Geng Zhongming as guerrillas, and Li Jiu as a partisan, and received a large number of Liao people as front-line guards.

古文：是年，大凌河新城被围，部檄元化发劲卒泛海，趋耀州盐场，示牵制。有德诡言风逆，改从陆赴宁远。
现代文：这一年，大凌河新城被围困，兵部发布檄文征召孙元化派遣精锐出海，直奔耀州盐场，以示牵制敌人，孔有德谎称风向不对，改由陆路到宁远。
English: In the same year, Dalinghe New Town was besieged. The Ministry of Military issued a notice to Sun Yuanhua to send elite soldiers to the sea, straight to the Yaozhou salt field, to show restraint to the enemy. Kong Youde falsely claimed that the wind direction was wrong, and changed the land route to Ningyuan.

古文：十月晦，有德及九成子千总应元统千余人以行，经月抵吴桥，县人罢市，众无所得食。一卒与诸生角，有德抶之，众大哗。
现代文：十月的最后一天，孔有德跟李九成的儿子、千总李应元带领一千多人出发了，经过一个多月抵达吴桥，县里的人罢市，大伙找不到吃的，一个士兵跟生员发生争吵，孔有德鞭打那士兵，众士兵非常不满。
English: On the last day of October, Kong Youde and Li Yingyuan, the son of Li Jiucheng and the general of thousands, led more than a thousand people to set out. After more than a month, they arrived at Wuqiao. People in the county went on strike. They couldn't find food. A soldier quarreled with a student. Kong Youde whipped the soldier. The soldiers were very dissatisfied.

古文：九成先赍元化银市马塞上，用尽无以偿，适至吴桥。
现代文：李九成先携带着孙元化的银子买马满足上面的要求，资财用完了没有办法偿还，正好到了吴桥。
English: Li Jucheng first took Sun Yuanhua's silver to buy a horse to meet the above requirements. When the funds were used up, there was no way to repay them. It just happened to be Wu Qiao.

古文：闻众怨，遂与应元谋，劫有德，相与为乱，陷陵县、临邑、商河，残齐东，围德平。
现代文：听说众人都很怨恨，于是跟李应元密谋，劫持孔有德，相互之间发生了暴乱。攻陷陵县、临邑、商河，伤害齐东一带，包围了德平。
English: Hearing that everyone was very resentful, he plotted with Li Yingyuan to kidnap Kong Youde, and a riot broke out between them. They attacked Ling County, Lin Village, and Shanghe, damaged the area around Qidong, and surrounded Deping.

古文：既而舍去，陷青城、新城，整众东。
现代文：不久离开，攻陷青成、新城，整顿部队向东进发。
English: Shortly after leaving, the rectification troops advanced to the east, capturing and besieging Qingcheng and Xincheng.

古文：余大成者，江宁人也。
现代文：余大成是江宁人。
English: Yu Dacheng is from Jiangning.

古文：不知兵。初为职方，尝奏发大学士刘一燝私书，齮之去。
现代文：不懂军事，起初担任职方时，曾经上奏揭发大学士刘一火景的私信，被他赶跑了。
English: He doesn't understand military affairs. When he first took office, he leaked the private letter of Liu Yixing, a university scholar who had exposed the fire, and was chased away by him.

古文：后又以事忤魏忠贤，削籍归，有清执名。
现代文：后来又因为有事情得罪了魏忠贤，余大成被剥夺官籍回了家，有清正、廉洁的名声。
English: Later, because something offended Wei Zhongxian, Yu Dacheng was stripped of his official status and returned home. He had a reputation for being honest and incorruptible.

古文：而巡抚山东，则白莲妖贼方炽，又有逃兵之变，皆不能讨。
现代文：而当他巡抚山东时，白莲教妖贼势力正兴旺，又碰上逃兵的兵变，都不能讨伐。
English: However, when he was the governor of Shandong, the evil forces of the White Lotus Sect were flourishing, and when there was a mutiny of deserters, he was unable to fight them.

古文：及闻有德叛，即托疾数日不能出，不得已遣中军沈廷谕参将陶廷鑨往御，则皆败而走。
现代文：等到听说孔有德叛乱，就假装得病一连几天都不出门，万不得已时只得派遣中军沈廷告知参将陶廷钅龙前往抵抗，而他们都战败逃跑了。
English: When he heard of Kong Youde's rebellion, he pretended to be ill and did not leave the house for several days. As a last resort, he had to send the Chinese army Shen Ting to tell the general Tao Tingyao Long to go to the resistance, but they were defeated and fled.

古文：大成恐，遂定议抚，而元化军亦至。
现代文：余大成很慌张，于是决定招抚，而这时孙元化的部队也到来了。
English: Yu Dacheng panicked and decided to appease, at which time Sun Yuanhua's troops also arrived.

古文：元化者，故所号善西洋大炮者也，至是亦主抚，檄贼所过郡县无邀击。
现代文：孙元化这人，就是原来号称善长西洋大炮的那位，到此时也主张招抚，发布檄文告知贼人经过的地方不要半路截击他们。
English: Sun Yuanhua, the man who was originally known as a good Western cannon, also advocated appeasement at this time, issuing a warning to inform the thieves not to intercept them halfway through the place they passed.

古文：贼长驱，无敢一矢加者。
现代文：贼人长驱直入，没有人敢向他们放一支箭。
English: No one dared to shoot an arrow at the bandits as they drove straight in.

古文：贼佯许元化降。
现代文：贼人假装向孙元化投降。
English: The thieves pretended to surrender to Sun Yuanhua.

古文：元化师次黄山馆而返，贼遂抵登州。
现代文：孙元化的部队行经黄山馆就又返回了，贼人于是抵达登州。
English: Sun Yuanhua's troops passed through the Huangshan Pavilion and returned, and the thieves then arrived in Dengzhou.

古文：元化遣将张焘率辽兵驻城外，总兵张可大率南兵拒贼。
现代文：孙元化派部将张焘率领辽阳兵驻扎城外，总兵张可大率领南方兵抵抗敌人。
English: The Sun Yuanhua faction stationed the Liaoyang soldiers led by Zhang Xuan outside the city, and the general Zhang Keda led the Southern soldiers to resist the enemy.

古文：元化犹招降贼，贼不应。
现代文：孙元化还想招降贼人，贼人不答应。
English: Sun Yuanhua also wanted to recruit thieves, but the thieves did not agree.

古文：五年正月战城东，辽兵遽退，南兵遂败。
现代文：天启五年正月在城东发生战斗，辽阳兵急速撤退，南方兵于是被打败了。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of the Apocalypse, there was a battle in the east of the city. Liaoyang soldiers quickly retreated, and the southern soldiers were defeated.

古文：焘兵多降贼，贼遣之归，士民争请拒勿内，元化不从，贼遂入。
现代文：张焘的士兵很多投降了敌人，敌人把他们送回来了，老百姓纷纷请求拒绝让他们进城。孙元化不听，贼人于是进入城内。
English: Many of Zhangye's soldiers surrendered to the enemy, and the enemy sent them back. The people pleaded with Sun Yuanhua not to let them enter the city. Sun Yuanhua did not listen, and the thieves entered the city.

古文：日夕，城中火起，中军耿仲明、都司陈光福等导贼入自东门，城遂陷。
现代文：傍晚时分，城内发生大灾，中军耿仲明、都司陈光福等人引导敌人从东门进城，登州城于是被攻陷。
English: In the evening, a great disaster occurred in the city. The Chinese army led by Geng Zhongming, the governor Chen Guangfu, and others led the enemy into the city from the east gate. Thus, the city of Dengzhou was captured.

古文：可大死之。
现代文：张可大战死了。
English: Zhang Keda died in the battle.

古文：元化自刎不殊，与参议宋光兰、佥事王征及府县官悉被执。
现代文：孙元化自刎没有死成，跟参议宋光兰、合事王征以及政府官员全部被抓获了。
English: Sun Yuanhua's self-criticism did not succeed, and he, along with Sangye Song Guanglan, He Ji Wang Zheng, and government officials, were all arrested.

古文：大成驰入莱州。
现代文：余大成快马进入莱州。
English: Yu Dacheng quickly entered Laizhou.

古文：初，登州被围，朝廷镌大成、元化三级，令办贼。
现代文：当初，登州被包围时，朝廷降了余大成、孙元化三级官，命令他们惩办贼寇。
English: At first, when Dengzhou was besieged, the imperial court demoted Yu Dacheng and Sun Yuanhua to third-class officials and ordered them to punish the bandits.

古文：及登失守，革元化职，而以谢琏代。
现代文：等到登州失守，革了孙元化的职，而让谢琏代替他。
English: When Dengzhou was lost, Sun Yuanhua was sacked and replaced by Xie Jun.

古文：有德既破登州，推九成为主，己次之，仲明又次之。
现代文：孔有德占领登州后，推举李九成做首领，自己为老二，耿仲明为老三。
English: After Kong Youde occupied Dengzhou, he promoted Li Jucheng as the leader, himself as the second, and Geng Zhongming as the third.

古文：用巡抚印檄州县饷，趣元化移书求抚于大成曰： 畀以登州一郡，则解。 
现代文：使用巡抚的印章发布檄文征收州县的粮饷，催促孙元化给余大成写信要求招抚说： 给我登州一个郡，就和解。 
English: Using the seal of the overseer to issue a notice to collect grain in the state and county, urging Sun Yuanhua to write to Yu Dacheng to ask the overseer to say: Give me one county in Dengzhou, and we will reconcile.

古文：大成闻于朝。
现代文：余大成把这事报告给朝廷。
English: Yu Dacheng reported this to the imperial court.

古文：帝怒，命革大成职，而以从治代。
现代文：皇帝愤怒了，下令将余大成革职，而让徐从治代替他。
English: The emperor was furious and ordered that Yu Da Cheng be demoted and replaced by Xu Congzhi.

古文：先是，贼攻破黄县，知县吴世扬死之。
现代文：在这之前，敌人攻占黄县，知县吴世扬战死。
English: Prior to this, the enemy occupied Huang County, and Wu Shiyang of Zhixian County died in battle.

古文：至是，攻莱，从治、琏与总兵杨御蕃等分陴守。
现代文：到这时，敌人进攻莱州，徐从治、谢琏跟总兵杨御蕃等人分别防守各城墙。
English: By this time, the enemy had attacked Laizhou, and Xu Congzhi, Xie Qian and the general Yang Guan separately defended each city wall.

古文：御蕃，肇基子。
现代文：杨御蕃是杨肇基的儿子。
English: Yang Miyao is the son of Yang Zhaoji.

古文：肇基，从治所共剿灭妖贼邹、滕者也。
现代文：杨肇基，是与徐从治在邹县、滕县共同剿灭妖贼的人。
English: Yang Zhaoji is the person who is working with Xu Congzhi to exterminate the monsters and thieves in Min County and Teng County.

古文：御蕃积战功至通州副总兵。
现代文：杨御蕃累积战功一直做到通州副总兵。
English: Yang Yixuan's accumulated war exploits have made him the highest-ranking vice-commander of Tongzhou.

古文：会登州陷，兵部尚书熊明遇奏署总兵官，尽将山东兵，与保定总兵刘国柱、天津总兵王洪兼程进。
现代文：碰上登州失陷，兵部尚书熊明遇奏请让他代理总兵官，全部统领山东兵，跟保定总兵刘国柱、天津总兵王洪加倍急行军赶往莱州。
English: Faced with the fall of Danzhou, the military department Shang Shuxiong asked him to act as the chief military officer, lead all the Shandong soldiers, and rush to Laizhou with the Baoding general Liu Guozhu and the Tianjin general Wang Jiafei.

古文：遇贼新城，洪先走。
现代文：在新城碰到贼人，王洪先逃跑了。
English: Encountering a thief in Xincheng, Wang Hong first ran away.

古文：御蕃拒之二日，不胜，突围出，遂入莱城，从治、琏倚以剿贼。
现代文：杨御蕃抵抗了二天，不能获胜，突围出来，于是进入莱州，徐从治、谢琏依靠他围剿贼寇。
English: Yang Miqi resisted for two days, but could not win. He broke out of the encirclement and entered Laizhou. Xu Congzhi and Xie Jun relied on him to encircle the bandits.

古文：贼攻莱不下，分兵陷平度，知州陈所问自经。
现代文：敌人攻不下莱州，分派兵力攻占平度，知州陈所问自缢身死。
English: The enemy was unable to conquer Laizhou, and dispatched troops to conquer Pingdu. Chen Zuo of Zhizhou asked to commit suicide.

古文：贼益攻莱，辇元化所制西洋大炮，日穴城，城多颓。
现代文：匪徒加倍攻打莱州，发射孙元化制造的西洋大炮，每天在城墙下面打洞，很多城墙都倒塌了。
English: The bandits redoubled their attacks on Laizhou, firing Western cannons made by Sun Yuanhua, and making holes under the city walls every day. Many city walls have collapsed.

古文：从治等投火灌水，穴者死无算。
现代文：徐从治等人往地洞里投火灌水，挖地道的死亡无数。
English: Xu Congzhi and others threw fire and water into the underground cave, resulting in countless deaths.

古文：使死士时出掩击之，毁其炮台，斩获多。
现代文：派敢死队在部队的掩护下出击，摧毁敌人炮台，斩杀俘获颇丰。
English: He sent a death squad to attack under the cover of the troops, destroyed the enemy's battery, and killed and captured quite a lot.

古文：而明遇卒惑大成抚议也，命主事张国臣为赞画往抚之，曰 安辑辽人之在山东者 ，以国臣亦辽人也。
现代文：而熊明遇最终被余大成的招抚建议所迷惑，命主事张国臣为赞画前往安抚他们，说： 安抚在山东的辽阳人。 因为张国臣也是辽阳人的缘故。
English: However, Xiong Mingli was eventually confused by Yu Dacheng's suggestion to placate them, so he ordered the person in charge, Zhang Guosen, to go to appease them for the praise painting, saying: "Appease the Liaoyang people in Shandong, because Zhang Guosen is also from Liaoyang."

古文：国臣先遣废将金一鲸入贼营，已而国臣亦入，为贼移书，遣一鲸还报曰： 毋出兵坏抚局。 
现代文：张国臣先派被废黜的将领金一鲸进入敌营，不久张国臣也进去了，替贼寇传递信件，派金一鲸回来报告说： 不要出兵破坏安抚的局面。 
English: Zhang Guosen first sent the deposed general Jin Yiwu into the enemy camp, and soon Zhang Guosen also went in, delivered letters for the bandits, and sent Jin Yiwu back to report: Don't send troops to disrupt the pacification situation.

古文：从治等知其诈，叱退一鲸，遣间使三上疏，言贼不可抚。
现代文：徐从治等人知道他们是在欺骗，喝退金一鲸，派遣秘使三次上疏，说贼寇不能够招抚。
English: Xu Congzhi and others knew that they were cheating. They refused to give back the gold and the whale, and sent envoys to Shangzhu three times, saying that the bandits could not be appeased.

古文：最后言： 莱城被围五十日，危如累卵。日夜望援兵，卒不至，知必为抚议误矣。
现代文：最后说： 州城被围困已有五十天，形势异常危险，日日夜夜都在盼望援兵，终究没有盼来，知道一定是被安抚的意见耽误了。
English: Finally he said: The state capital has been besieged for fifty days, the situation is extremely dangerous, day and night they are hoping for reinforcements, but in the end there is no hope, knowing that they must have been pacified.

古文：国臣致书臣，内抄诏旨并兵部谕帖，乃知部臣已据国臣报，达圣听。
现代文：张国臣写信给我，里面抄录了皇帝的诏书圣旨和兵部的告示，这才知道兵部大臣已根据张国臣的报告，通报皇帝知道了。
English: Zhang Guochen wrote me a letter, in which he copied the emperor's imperial decree and the notice of the military department. It was only then that I knew that the minister of the military department had informed the emperor according to Zhang Guochen's report.

古文：夫国臣桑梓情重，忍欺圣明而陷封疆。
现代文：张国臣乡土观念浓厚，狠心欺骗皇上而丧失国土。
English: Zhang Guoteng had a strong sense of local culture, but he deceived the emperor and lost the country.

古文：其初遣一鲸入贼营，何尝有止兵不攻之事？
现代文：当初派遣金一鲸进敌营，何尝出现过停兵不攻城的事情？
English: When Kim Il-whale was initially sent into the enemy camp, did there ever occur a situation where the troops were halted without attacking the city?

古文：果止兵，或稍退舍，臣等何故不乐抚？
现代文：如果敌人真的停止攻击，或者稍稍退兵，我军有什么理由不乐意招抚呢。
English: If the enemy really stopped attacking, or retreated a little, our army would have no reason not to be pleased.

古文：特国臣以抚为贼解，而贼实借抚为缓兵计。
现代文：只不过张国臣借招抚为敌人解围，而敌人实际上是利用招抚作为缓兵之计。
English: However, Zhang Guo-Chen was able to relieve the siege for the enemy with the help of the invitation, while the enemy was actually using the invitation as a delaying tactic.

古文：一鲸受贼贿，对援师则诳言贼数万，不可轻进；对诸将则诳言贼用西洋炮攻，城将陷矣，赖我招抚，贼即止攻。
现代文：金一鲸接受敌人的贿赂，对增援部队就谎称敌人有数万人，不可轻易进兵；对各守城将领就谎称敌人用西洋大炮攻打，城将要失陷了，全靠他招抚，敌人才没有攻打。
English: Accepting bribes from the enemy, Kim Il-whale lied to the reinforcement troops that the enemy had tens of thousands of men and that they should not easily march in; he lied to the generals guarding the city that the enemy was attacking with Western artillery and that the city was about to fall. It was all thanks to his persuasion that the enemy did not attack.

古文：夫一鲸三入贼营，每入，贼攻益急。
现代文：那个金一鲸三次进入敌营，每次进入，敌人的攻击更加迅猛。
English: The golden whale entered the enemy camp three times, and each time it entered, the enemy's attack became more fierce.

古文：而国臣乃云贼嗔我缒城下击，致彼之攻。
现代文：而张国臣却说敌人是因我用绳索坠部队下城攻击，导致他们的进攻。
English: On the other hand, Zhang Guochen said that the enemy attacked because I used ropes to make the troops fall down and attack the city, which led to their attack.

古文：是使贼任意攻击，我不以一矢加遗，如元化断送登城，然后可成国臣之抚耶？
现代文：这是让敌人随心所欲地攻击我军，而我军不能向敌人放一支箭，就像孙元化断送登州城，然后才能够完成张国臣的招抚吗？
English: Does this mean that the enemy can attack our army at will, but our army can't shoot an arrow at the enemy, just like Sun Yuanhua sent Dengzhou City, and only then be able to complete the caress of Zhang Guotian?

古文：当贼过青州，大成拥兵三千，剿贼甚易。
现代文：当敌人经过青州时，余大成拥有士兵三千人，剿灭敌人是很容易的。
English: When the enemy passed through Qingzhou, Yu Dacheng had three thousand soldiers, and it was easy to annihilate the enemy.

古文：元化遗书谓 贼已就抚，尔兵毋东 ，大成遂止勿追，致贼延蔓。
现代文：孙元化写信给他说： 敌人已经投降了，你的部队不要向东进军了 ，余大成于是停止部队不再追击，使敌人蔓延开来。
English: Sun Yuanhua wrote to him: "The enemy has already surrendered. Your troops should not march eastward. Therefore, Yu Dacheng stopped his troops from pursuing and let the enemy spread.

古文：今贼视臣等犹元化，乃为贼解，曰吴桥激变有因也，一路封刀不杀也，闻天子诏遂止攻掠也。
现代文：现在贼寇把我等看作是孙元化，这才替敌人解释，说吴桥事变是有原因的，他们一路上不动用武力没有杀人，听到皇帝的诏书就停止了抢劫掠夺。
English: Now the bandits see me and others as Sun Yuan, and this explains for the enemy that there is a reason for the Wuxia Incident. They did not use force or kill anyone along the way. When they heard the emperor's edict, they stopped robbing and plundering.

古文：将谁欺！
现代文：想要欺骗谁？
English: Who are you trying to fool?

古文：盈庭中国臣妄报，必谓一纸书贤于十万兵，援师不来，职是故矣。
现代文：朝廷之中充斥着张国臣的谎言，一定要说一纸文书胜过了十万兵，增援部队不到来，我就知道是这个缘故了。
English: The imperial court was filled with the lies of Zhang Guochen. It must be said that a piece of paper was worth more than a hundred thousand soldiers. When reinforcements did not arrive, I knew it was because of this.

古文：臣死当为厉鬼以杀贼，断不敢以抚谩至尊，淆国是，误封疆，而戕生命也。 
现代文：我即使是死了也要变成厉鬼来杀贼，绝对不敢用招抚来欺骗皇上，混淆国家大事，使国土沦陷，而戕害无辜的生命啊。 
English: Even if I die, I want to become a fierce ghost to kill thieves. I will never dare to deceive the emperor with flattery, confuse national affairs, cause the country to fall, and harm innocent lives.

古文：疏入，未报。
现代文：奏疏递入，没有回报。
English: There was no reply.

古文：当是时，外围日急，国柱、洪及山东援军俱顿昌邑不敢进，两抚臣困围城中。
现代文：这个时候，外围的形势日益紧张，刘国柱、王洪和山东的增援部队都驻扎在昌邑不敢前进，两个抚臣都被围困在莱州城内。
English: At this time, the situation on the periphery was becoming increasingly tense. Liu Guozhu, Wang Hong and Shandong's reinforcement troops were stationed in Chang'e and did not dare to advance. Both governors were besieged in Laizhou.

古文：于是廷议更设总督一人，以兵部右侍郎刘宇烈任之。
现代文：于是朝廷决定另设总督一人，让兵部右侍郎刘宇烈兼任。
English: As a result, the imperial court decided to set up a separate governor-general and let Liu Yurei, the right-hand man of the military, also serve as governor-general.

古文：调蓟门、四川兵，统以总兵邓玘，调密云兵，统以副将牟文绶，以右布政使杨作楫监之，往援莱。
现代文：调集蓟门、四川的部队，让总兵邓王己统领，调集密云部队，让副将牟文绶统领，让右布政使杨作辑监军，前往增援莱州。
English: He mobilized the troops of Shimen and Sichuan, let the general soldier Deng Wangji lead, mobilized the Miyun troops, let the vice-general Mowen Yao lead, and let the right cloth political envoy Yang Zuoji supervise the troops, and went to reinforce Laizhou.

古文：三月，宇烈、作楫、国柱、洪、玘及监视中官吕直，巡按御史王道纯，义勇副将刘泽清，新兵参将刘永昌、朱廷禄，监纪推官汪惟效等并集昌邑。
现代文：三月，刘宇烈、杨作辑、刘国柱、王洪、邓王己以及来做监督的宦官吕直，巡按御史王道纯，义勇副将刘泽清，新兵参将刘永昌、朱廷禄，监纪推官汪惟效等人一起云集昌邑。
English: In March, Liu Yulei, Yang Zuojie, Liu Guozhu, Wang Hong, Deng Wangqi, and the eunuchs who came to supervise, Lv Zhi, Wang Daochun, Liu Zeching, Liu Yongchang, Zhu Tinglu, and Wang Wei Rong, gathered in Changyi.

古文：玘、国柱、洪、泽清等至莱州，马步军二万五千，气甚盛。
现代文：邓王己、刘国柱、王洪、刘泽清到莱州，骑兵二万五千人，士气非常旺盛。
English: Deng Wangji, Liu Guozhu, Wang Hong and Liu Zeching arrived in Laizhou with 25,000 cavalry, and morale was very high.

古文：而宇烈无筹略，诸师懦怯，抵沙河，日十辈往议抚，纵还所获贼陈文才。于是贼尽得我虚实，益以抚愚我，而潜兵绕其后，尽焚我辎重。
现代文：但刘宇烈没有谋略，各部队都很怯懦，抵达沙河，每天十来个人在一起商量招抚，放回了被抓获的匪徒陈文才，于是敌人完全知道了我军的虚实，更加利用招抚来愚弄我军，却偷偷地派部队绕到我军的后面，一举焚烧了我军的辎重。
English: However, Liu Yulei did not have a strategy, and all the troops were cowardly. When they arrived at the Shahe River, every day, more than ten people discussed and coaxed and released the captured bandit Chen Wencai. As a result, the enemy fully knew the truth of our army, and made more use of coaxing to fool our army, but secretly sent troops around the back of our army, and burned our army's baggage in one fell swoop.

古文：宇烈惧，遂走青州，撤三将兵就食。玘等夜半拔营散，贼乘之，大败。
现代文：刘宇烈害怕了，于是逃到青州，撤换三个将领让士兵找吃的，邓王己等人在半夜撤军，敌人乘虚而入，大败。
English: Liu Yulei was afraid, so he fled to Qingzhou, replaced three generals and let the soldiers look for food. Deng Wangji and others withdrew in the middle of the night. The enemy took advantage of the situation and suffered a great defeat.

古文：洪、国柱走青、濰，玘走昌邑，泽清接战于莱城，伤二指，亦败走平度，惟作楫能军。
现代文：王洪、刘国柱逃往青州、潍县，邓王己逃往昌邑，刘泽清在莱州城迎击敌人，打伤二个指头，也失败了，逃往平度，只有杨作揖还能保全部队。
English: Wang Hong and Liu Guozhu fled to Qingzhou and Min County, Deng Wangji fled to Changyi, Liu Zeching met the enemy in Laizhou City, injured two fingers, but also failed, fled to Pingdu, only Yang Zuojun could save the whole team.

古文：三将既败，举朝哗然，而明遇见官军不可用，抚议益坚。
现代文：这次失败，引起了整个朝廷的混乱，而熊明遇看到政府军不能作战，更加坚定了他招抚的决心。
English: This defeat caused chaos throughout the imperial court, and when Xiong Mingli saw that the government army could not fight, he strengthened his determination to appease.

古文：先是，登州总兵可大死，以副将吴安邦代之，安邦尤怯钝。
现代文：在这以前，登州总兵张可大死后，让副将吴安邦代替他，吴安邦尤其胆小愚笨。
English: Prior to this, after the death of Zhang Keda, the commander-in-chief of the soldiers who entered the state, he was replaced by Vice Admiral Wu Anbang, who was particularly timid and stupid.

古文：奉令屯宁海，规取登州。
现代文：奉命驻扎宁海，谋求收复登州。
English: He was ordered to stay in Ninghai and seek to recover Dengzhou.

古文：仲明扬言以城降，安邦信之，离城二十五里而军。
现代文：耿仲明扬言举城投降，吴安邦信以为真，把部队驻扎到离登州城二十五里的地方。
English: Geng Zhongming threatened to surrender the city, and Wu Anbang believed him and stationed his troops twenty-five miles away from Dengzhou.

古文：中军徐树声薄城被擒，安邦走还宁海。
现代文：中军徐树声攻城被俘虏了，吴安邦跑回宁海。
English: The Chinese army of Xu Shusheng attacked the city and was captured. Wu Anbang ran back to Ninghai.

古文：登既不能下，而贼困莱久，琏、从治、御蕃日坚守待救。
现代文：登州城既不能收复，而敌人围困莱州城已经很长时间了，谢琏、徐从治、杨御蕃日夜坚守等待救援。
English: Dengzhou City cannot be recovered, and the enemy has been besieging Laizhou City for a long time. Xie Qian, Xu Congzhi, and Yang Miqian have been waiting for rescue day and night.

古文：至四月十六日，从治中炮死，莱人大临，守陴者皆哭。
现代文：到了四月十六日，徐从治被炮火击中身亡，莱州人非常悲痛，守城将士都哭了。
English: On April 16th, Xu Congzhi was hit by gunfire and died. The people of Laizhou were very sad, and the defenders of the city were in tears.

古文：山东士官南京者，合疏攻宇烈，请益兵。
现代文：在南京做官的山东籍人士，联合上疏攻击刘宇烈，请求增派部队。
English: Officials from Shandong Province in Nanjing jointly attacked Liu Yulei in Shangxo and requested the dispatch of additional troops.

古文：于是调昌平兵三千，以总兵陈洪范统之，洪范亦辽人。明遇日跂望曰： 往哉，其可抚也。 
现代文：于是调集三千昌平兵，让总兵陈洪范统帅。陈洪范也是辽阳人，熊明遇每天踮起脚跟盼望，说： 去吧，他们是可以招抚的。 
English: Therefore, they mobilized three thousand Changping soldiers and made the commander-in-chief Chen Hongfan. Chen Hongfan was also from Liaoyang. Every day, Xiong Ming would stomp his foot and say, "Go, they can be petted."

古文：天津旧将孙应龙者，大言于众曰： 仲明兄弟与我善，我能令其缚有德、九成来。 
现代文：天津旧将孙应龙，大声对众人说： 仲明兄弟跟我很有交情，我能叫他把孔有德、李九成捆绑过来。 
English: Sun Yinglong, the former governor of Tianjin, shouted to the crowd, "The Zhongming brothers are very friendly with me. I can have him tie up Kong Youde and Li Jucheng."

古文：巡抚郑宗周予之兵二千，从海道往。
现代文：巡抚郑宗周给了他二千兵，从海上前往。
English: The governor Zheng Zong Zhou gave him two thousand soldiers to go from the sea.

古文：仲明闻之，伪函他死人头绐之曰： 此有德也。 
现代文：耿仲明听说这事，用匣子装了别人的头写信哄他说： 这是孔有德的头。 
English: When Geng Zhongming heard about this, he used a box containing someone else's head to write a letter coaxing him: "This is Kong Youde's head.

古文：应龙率舟师抵水城。延之入，猝缚斩之，无一人脱者。
现代文：孙应龙率领水军抵达水城，匪徒把他迎入城内，突然把他捆绑起来，杀了他，没有一个人能够逃脱。
English: Sun Yinglong led the navy to Shuicheng. The bandits welcomed him into the city, suddenly tied him up and killed him. No one could escape.

古文：贼得巨舰，势益张。
现代文：贼人得到巨舰，势力更加嚣张。
English: Thieves get a huge ship, and the forces become more arrogant.

古文：岛帅黄龙攻之不克而还。
现代文：岛帅黄帅进攻不利就返回了。
English: The island's captain, Huang Shuai, returned after the offensive was unsuccessful.

古文：遂破招远，围莱阳。
现代文：敌人于是攻占了招远，包围莱阳。
English: The enemy then captured Zhaoyuan and surrounded Laiyang.

古文：知县梁衡固守，贼败去。
现代文：莱阳知县梁衡坚守，敌人失败离开了。
English: Liang Heng of Laiyang County held out, and the enemy left in defeat.

古文：宇烈复至昌邑，洪范、文绶等亦至。
现代文：刘宇烈重新回到昌邑，陈洪范、牟文绶等人也到了。
English: Liu Yulei returned to Chang'e, and Chen Hongfan, Mou Wenyi and others also arrived.

古文：莱州推官屈宜阳请入贼营讲抚，贼佯礼之。
现代文：莱州推官屈宜阳请求进入敌营讲和，匪徒假装对他很礼貌，屈宜阳派人回来说贼人已俯首听命。
English: The governor of Laizhou, Qu Yiyang, requested to enter the enemy camp to make peace. The bandits pretended to be polite to him. Qu Yiyang sent someone back to say that the thieves had bowed to their orders.

古文：宜阳使言贼已受命，宇烈奏得请，乃手书谕贼令解围。
现代文：刘宇烈得到上面的同意后，于是写信告示贼人解围。
English: After Liu Yulei obtained the consent of the higher-ups, he wrote a letter to inform the thieves that the siege had been lifted.

古文：贼邀宇烈，宇烈惧不往。
现代文：贼人邀请刘宇烈，刘宇烈害怕不敢前往。
English: The thief invited Liu Yulei, but Liu Yulei was too scared to go.

古文：营将严正中舁龙亭及河，贼拥之去，而令宜阳还莱，文武官出城开读，围即解。
现代文：营将严正中抬他到河边，贼人把他接走了，而让屈宜阳回到莱州城，只要莱州城内的文武官员出城门宣读告示，包围就可以解除。
English: The battalion commander Yan Zhengzhong carried him to the river, and the thieves took him away, and let Qu Yiyang return to the city of Laizhou. As long as the civil and military officials in the city of Laizhou go out of the city gate to read the notice, the siege can be lifted.

古文：御蕃不可，琏曰： 围且六月，既已无可奈何，宜且从之。 
现代文：杨御蕃不同意。谢琏说： 包围已快六个月了，既然已经没有办法对付他们，还不如权且听他们的。 
English: Yang Yuxuan disagreed. Xie Yuxuan said: The siege has been going on for nearly six months. Since there is no way to deal with them, it is better for the authorities to listen to them.

古文：遂偕监视中官徐得时、翟升，知府朱万年出。
现代文：于是偕同监督军队的宦官徐得时、翟升，知府朱万年出城。
English: As a result, the eunuchs Xu Dershi and Xuan Sheng, who were also supervising the army, and the prefect Zhu Wannian left the city.

古文：有德等叩头扶伏，涕泣交颐，琏慰谕久之而还。明日复令宜阳入，请琏、御蕃同出。
现代文：孔有德等伏在地上叩头，泪流满面。谢琏劝慰了很久才回去，第二天又叫屈宜阳进城，请谢琏、杨御蕃一起出城。
English: Kong Youde prostrated himself on the ground and bowed his head, tears streaming down his face. Xie Yao consoled him for a long time before he went back. The next day, he told Qu Yiyang to enter the city, and asked Xie Yao and Yang Youyao to leave the city together.

古文：御蕃曰： 我将家子，知杀贼，何知抚事？ 
现代文：杨御蕃说： 我是将门的后代，只知道杀敌人，不知道招抚的事情。 
English: Yang Miyao said: I am the descendant of a general, I only know how to kill the enemy, I don't know how to cajole.

古文：琏等遂出。
现代文：谢琏等人于是出城。
English: Xie Yao and others then left the city.

古文：有德执之，猝攻城，却令万年呼降。
现代文：孔有德抓住他们，突然发动攻击，还叫朱万年呼喊城内的士兵投降。
English: Kong Youde caught them, suddenly launched an attack, and told Zhu Wannian to shout for the soldiers in the city to surrender.

古文：万年呼曰： 吾死矣，汝等宜固守。 
现代文：朱万年高喊道： 我就要死了，你们一定要固守。 
English: Zhu Wannian shouted: I am about to die, you must hold fast.

古文：骂不绝口而死。
现代文：对敌人骂不绝口然后死去。
English: Scream obscenities at the enemy and die.

古文：贼送琏及二中官至登囚之，正中、宜阳皆死。
现代文：敌人把谢琏和二名宦官送到登州囚禁，严正中、屈宜阳都死了。
English: The enemy sent Xie Jun and two eunuchs to Danzhou for imprisonment, and Yan Zhengzhong and Qu Yiyang both died.

古文：初，抚议兴，独从治持不可。
现代文：当初，招抚的意见兴盛，只有徐从治不同意。
English: At first, only Xu Congzhi disagreed.

古文：宇烈诸将信之，而尚书明遇主其议。
现代文：刘宇烈等各位将领相信了，而以尚书熊明遇为首。
English: Liu Yulei and other generals believed it, with Shang Shuxiong leading the way.

古文：从治死，琏遂被擒。
现代文：徐从治战死，谢琏也因而被俘。
English: Xu Congzhi was killed in the battle, and Xie Jun was also captured as a result.

古文：于是举朝恚愤，逮宇烈下狱，调关外劲卒剿之，罢总督及登莱巡抚不设，专任代从治者朱大典以行。
现代文：于是整个朝廷都愤怒了，逮捕刘宇烈下狱，调集关外的精锐部队围剿，废除总督和登莱巡抚的官职，专门任命徐从治的代理人朱大典带兵作战。
English: As a result, the entire imperial court was outraged, arrested Liu Yulei and sent him to prison, mobilized elite troops from outside Guanzhong to encircle and besiege the capital, abolished the official posts of the governor and the inspector of Denglai, and specially appointed Xu Congzhi's agent Zhu Dadian to lead the troops into battle.

古文：明遇坐主抚误国，罢归，遂绝抚议。
现代文：熊明遇被判处主张招抚误国罪，罢官回家，于是杜绝了招抚的议论。
English: Xiong Mingyu was sentenced to the crime of misleading the country by advocating solicitation, dismissed from his post and sent home, thus putting an end to the discussion of solicitation.

古文：八月，大典合兵救莱。
现代文：八月，朱大典联合各路兵救援莱州。
English: In August, Zhu Dadian and other soldiers came to the rescue of Laizhou.

古文：兵甫接，贼辄大败，围解。
现代文：刚一交战，敌人就被打得大败，包围解除了。
English: As soon as the battle began, the enemy was soundly defeated and the siege was lifted.

古文：有德走登州，九成杀琏及二中官。
现代文：孔有德逃往登州，李九成杀死谢琏和二个宦官。
English: Kong Youde fled to Dengzhou, and Li Jucheng killed Xie Jun and two eunuchs.

古文：大典围登，九成战死。
现代文：朱大典包围登州，李九成战死，攻破登州城，追击剿灭敌人。
English: Zhu Dadian encircled Danzhou, Li Jucheng died in battle, defeated Danzhou City, pursued and annihilated the enemy.

古文：城破，追剿，有德、仲明入海遁。生擒承禄等，斩应元，贼尽平。
现代文：孔有德、耿仲明从海上逃走了。活捉毛承禄等人，杀死李应元，贼人全部平定。
English: Kong Youde and Geng Zhongming escaped from the sea. They captured Mao Chenglu and others alive, killed Li Yingyuan, and subdued all the thieves.

古文：事详《大典传》。
现代文：详情见《朱大典传》。
English: For details, see "Zhu Da Dian Zhen."

古文：其戍也，人以为失刑。大成逮下狱，遣戍。
现代文：下诏追赠徐从治为兵部尚书，赐予祭奠下葬，封荫锦衣百户，建 忠烈祠 。
English: The following edict posthumously bestowed Xu Congzhi with the title of Military Commissar, bestowed him with a memorial service and burial, sealed hundreds of homes with brocade clothes, and built a loyal martyrs' shrine.

