古文：《刑统》载唐大和七年敕： 准令，国忌日唯禁饮酒举乐，至于科罚人吏，都无明文。
现代文：《刑统》记载唐文宗大和七年敕书： 标准法，国家的忌日，只禁止饮酒奏乐，至于处罚百姓和官吏，没有明文规定。
English: "Code of Criminal Procedure" records Tang Wenzong University and the seventh year of the imperial edict: the standard law, the country's death day, only prohibits drinking and playing music, as for the punishment of the people and officials, there is no explicit provision.

古文：但缘其日不合釐务，官曹即不得决断刑狱，其小小笞责，在礼律固无所妨，起今以后，纵有此类，台府更不要举奏。 
现代文：但由于这天不该处理事务，所以官府就不能判断案件，但小的责罚，在礼制和法律上都没有妨碍，从今以后，纵有此类事情，御史台府不要检举。 
English: However, since this day is not the day to deal with matters, the government office cannot judge the case. However, a small punishment is not a hindrance in terms of etiquette and law. From now on, even if there are such things, the government office should not report them.

古文：《旧唐书》载此事，因御史台奏均王傅王堪男国忌日于私第科决作人，故降此诏。
现代文：《旧唐书》记载这事，因为御史台检举均王师傅王堪的儿子，国忌日那天在私宅处罚工匠，所以才颂布这个诏书。
English: The "Old Tang Dynasty Book" recorded this event, because the official history channel reported that the son of the teacher Wang Kan punished craftsmen in a private house on the day of the country's death. That is why this edict was issued.

古文：盖唐世国忌休务，正与私忌义等，故虽刑狱亦不决断，谓之不合釐务者此也。
现代文：大概唐代国忌日不处理事务，正合私一样，所以虽是刑事案件也不判断，诏书说不该处理事务，就是指这个。
English: Presumably, the Tang Dynasty did not deal with affairs on the anniversary of the country's death, just like me, so they did not judge even if it was a criminal case. The edict said that they should not deal with affairs, which is what it meant.

古文：今在京百官，唯双忌作假，以其拜跪多，又昼漏已数刻，若单忌独三省归休耳，百司坐曹决狱与常日亡异，视古谊为不同。
现代文：现在在京城的众官，只有双忌日放假，因为跪拜太多，又时间过了几刻，如果是单忌日，就只有三省官员休休息了，其他百官上班断案，与平常日子没有两样，比古代制度有所不同。
English: At present, the officials in Beijing only have a holiday on the double death day, because there are too many prostrations and the time has passed a few moments. If it is a single death day, only the officials of the three provinces will have a rest. The other hundred officials will go to work to solve the case, which is no different from the usual day, and different from the ancient system.

古文：元微之诗云： 缚遣推囚名御史，狼藉囚徒满田地，明日不推缘国忌。 
现代文：元微之诗说： 抓人判案名为御史，囚徒狡狈满地都是，明天放假因为国忌日。 
English: The original poem said: "The arresting judge's name is Gu Shi, the prisoners' cunning is everywhere, and tomorrow is a holiday because it is the National Day of Mourning."

古文：又可证也。
现代文：可以为证。
English: I can prove it.

