古文：范如圭，字伯达，建州建阳人。
现代文：范如圭字伯达，建州建阳人。
English: Fan Rougui is called Boda, Jianzhou Jianyang people.

古文：少从舅氏胡安国受《春秋》。
现代文：少年时代跟随舅舅胡安国学习《春秋》。
English: As a boy, he studied "Spring and Autumn" with his uncle Juan Guo.

古文：登进士第，授左从事郎、武安军节度推官。
现代文：考中进士后，被任命为左从事郎、武安军节度推官。
English: After he passed the junior high school entrance examination, he was appointed as the left-hand retainer and the military governor of the Wu'an Army.

古文：始至，帅将斩人，如圭白其误，帅为已署不易也。
现代文：刚到武安军时，正碰上统帅准备杀人，范如圭指出统帅的失误，统帅认为已经签署命令不能轻易改变。
English: When he first arrived at the Wu'an Army, he ran into the commander who was preparing to kill. Fan Rougui pointed out the commander's mistake. The commander believed that he had already signed the order and could not easily change it.

古文：如圭正色曰： 节下奈何重易一字而轻数人之命？ 帅矍然从之。
现代文：范如圭严肃指出 ：你怎么能够如此看重改动一字而轻待部下数人的生命呢？ 统帅惭愧地接受了他的意见。
English: Fan Rougui seriously pointed out: How can you place so much importance on changing a single word and treat the lives of several of your subordinates so lightly? The commander shamefully accepted his opinion.

古文：自是府中事无大小悉以咨焉。
现代文：自此以后，官府中事无巨细均要向范如圭咨询、请教。
English: Since then, all matters in the government, no matter how big or small, should consult with Fan Rougui.

古文：居数月，以忧去。
现代文：在临安军任职数月后，范如圭因父母丧事而离职。
English: After serving in the Lin'an Army for several months, Fan Rougui left his post due to the death of his parents.

古文：辟江东安抚司书写机宜文字。
现代文：范如圭被征召为江东安抚司书写机宜文字。
English: Fan Rougui was conscripted to write for the pacification of the Jiangdong region.

古文：近臣交荐，召试秘书省正字，迁校书郎兼史馆校勘。
现代文：侍从大臣交替推荐，被召来参加秘书省正字的考试，被升任校书郎兼史馆校勘。
English: He was alternately recommended by ministers, summoned to attend the secretary's provincial orthography exam, and promoted to school scribe and history museum examiner.

古文：秦桧力建和议，金使来，无所于馆，将虚秘书省以处之。
现代文：秦桧竭力推行和议政策，金朝使者到达后，没有地方居住，秦桧准备腾出秘书府让金使居住。
English: After the arrival of the envoy of the Kim dynasty, there was no place to live, and Qin Hui was ready to vacate the secretary's office to let the envoy live.

古文：如圭亟见宰相赵鼎曰： 秘府，谟训所藏，可使仇敌居之乎？ 鼎竦然为改馆。
现代文：范如圭立即进见宰相赵鼎说 ：秘书省府，是收藏有关历朝谋略，经验教训的文书、典宪的重要部门，怎么能让仇敌在此居住呢？ 赵鼎面有惧色，很快为金使改换了住所。
English: Fan Rougui immediately went to see the Prime Minister Zhao Ding and said: Secretary of the provincial government, is an important department for collecting documents and constitutions related to the strategies of the past dynasties, lessons learned, how can the enemy live here? Zhao Ding was afraid and quickly changed his residence for the envoy.

古文：既而金使至悖傲，议多不可从，中外愤郁。
现代文：金使到达后态度倨傲，目中无人，许多意见使人难以接受，激起朝廷内外的一片愤怒。
English: After the arrival of the envoy, his arrogant attitude, no one in his eyes, and many opinions were difficult to accept, provoking a wave of anger inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：如圭与同省十余人合议，并疏争之，既具草，骇遽引却者众。
现代文：范如圭与秘书省十余人共同商议，准备联合上奏疏指出和议的弊端，奏疏草稿写好后，多数人因害怕退出了上疏行列。
English: Fan Rougui and more than ten people from the Ministry of the Secretary jointly discussed and prepared to jointly submit a report to the Supreme People's Court to point out the drawbacks of the peace talks. After the draft report was written, most people withdrew from the Supreme People's Court for fear.

古文：如圭独以书责桧以曲学倍师、忘仇辱国之罪，且曰： 公不丧心病狂，奈何为此，必遗臭万世矣！ 桧怒。
现代文：只有范如圭一人上书朝廷，揭露秦桧歪曲真理、违背师训、忘却世仇、丧权辱国的罪行，并指出： 秦桧不丧心病狂，怎么会如此做，这必将遗臭万年！ 秦桧极为愤怒。
English: Fan Rugui was the only one to submit a letter to the imperial court, exposing Qin Hui's crimes of distorting the truth, violating the teacher's training, forgetting the world's enmity, and humiliating the country, and pointed out: Qin Hui is not a heartless maniac, how could he do this, this will leave a bad smell for thousands of years! Qin Hui was extremely angry.

古文：草奏与史官六人上之。
现代文：这份奏疏是范如圭与六位史官一起呈上的。
English: The report was submitted by Fan Rougui together with six historians.

古文：金归河南地，桧方自以为功。
现代文：金人将河南大片土地归还南宋后，秦桧正自以为有功。
English: After the Jin people returned a large area of land in Henan to the Southern Song Dynasty, Qin Yu Zheng considered himself to have made a great contribution.

古文：如圭轮对，言： 两京之版图既入，则九庙、八陵瞻望咫尺，今朝修之使未遣，何以慰神灵、萃民志乎？ 帝泫然曰： 非卿不闻此言。 即日命宗室士〈亻褭〉及张焘以行。
现代文：轮到范如圭进宫与皇上对话时，他说： 两京土地已经收回，那么九庙、八陵距两京仅有咫尺之遥，今天朝廷屡次派遣使者仍未得到归还，拿什么来告慰神灵，安抚天下百姓呢？ 宋高宗流着眼泪说 ：我只有从你这里才能听到这样的肺腑之言。 
English: When it was Fan Rougui's turn to enter the palace for a dialogue with the emperor, he said: The land of the two capitals has been recovered, so the nine temples and eight mausoleums are only a stone's throw away from the two capitals. Today, the imperial court has repeatedly sent emissaries, but they have not been returned. What can be used to comfort the gods and pacify the people of the world? Song Gaozong shed tears and said: I can only hear such heartfelt words from you.

古文：桧以不先白己，益怒。
现代文：当天宋高宗就命令宗室赵士、大臣张焘前去处理此事。
English: On the same day, Song Gaozong ordered Zhao Shi, the patriarch's wife, and Zhang Ye, the minister, to go and deal with the matter.

古文：如圭谒告去，奉柩归葬故乡，既窆，差主管台州崇道观。
现代文：秦桧因未将这件事先通知他，对范如圭愈加愤怒。范如圭因父丧请假告归，护送父亲灵柩归葬故乡，安葬父亲后，被差使主管台州崇道观。
English: Qin Hui became increasingly angry with Fan Rougui for not informing him of the matter first. Fan Rougui took leave of absence due to his father's death and returned to escort his father's coffin to his hometown for burial. After burying his father, he was sent to supervise Taizhou Chong Dao Guan.

古文：杜门十余岁，起通判邵州，又通判荆南府。
现代文：在家乡隐居十多年后，被起用为邵州通判，不久又调任荆南府通判。
English: After living in seclusion in his hometown for more than ten years, he was appointed as the Shaozhou magistrate, and was soon transferred to the Jingnan prefectural magistrate.

古文：荆南旧户口数十万，寇乱后无复人迹，时蠲口钱以安集之，百未还一二也。
现代文：荆南府原有居民几十万户，金人入侵后荒无人烟，当时虽发布诏令免除百姓丁口钱，以召回他们安居乐业，但百人中还乡的还不到一、二。
English: There were hundreds of thousands of original residents in Jingnan Prefecture, but after the invasion of the Jin people, there was no one left. At that time, although an edict was issued to exempt the people from paying taxes in order to recall them to live and work in peace, less than one or two people out of a hundred returned to their hometowns.

古文：议者希桧意，遽谓流庸浸复而增之，积逋二十余万缗，他负亦数十万，版曹日下书责偿甚急。
现代文：议事者讨好秦桧的意见，就说流亡在外为人佣作的人渐渐回乡，人口不断增加，累积已经拖欠朝廷赋税二十余万缗，其他方面欠缺也有数十万，版曹每天下书责令他们偿还，很是急迫。
English: The councilors were pleased with Qin Hui's opinion, saying that the people who had been working as domestic servants in exile were gradually returning to their hometowns, the population was constantly increasing, the accumulated tax arrears owed to the imperial court were more than 200,000 baht, and there were also hundreds of thousands of deficiencies in other areas. It was very urgent for the printer to write to them every day and order them to repay.

古文：召圭白帅，悉奏蠲之。
现代文：范如圭将这些情况报告了地方统帅，并上奏宋高宗全数免除了这些积欠的赋税。
English: Fan Rougui reported these circumstances to the local commander, and appealed to Song Gaozong to completely exempt these tax arrears.

古文：桧死，被旨入对，言： 为治以知人为先，知人以清心寡欲为本。 语甚切。
现代文：秦桧死后，范如圭奉旨入宫与宋高宗对话，说： 治理国家应当以知人善任为先决条件，任命官员应当首先任命清心寡欲、没有野心的人。 言词甚为恳切。
English: After Qin Xuan's death, Fan Rougui entered the palace to have a dialogue with Song Gaozong, saying: "Governing the country should be a prerequisite for knowing people well, and appointing officials should first appoint people who are pure-hearted and have no ambition.

古文：又论： 东南不举子之俗，伤绝人理，请举汉《胎养令》以全活之，抑亦勾践生聚报吴之意也。 帝善其言。
现代文：又指出 ：东南地区不生育抚养孩子的风俗，是灭绝人性的，请求陛下推举出汉代《胎养令》以救治他们，也如越王勾践鼓励生育以向吴国报仇一样。 
English: He also pointed out that the custom of not giving birth and raising children in the southeastern region is the extinction of human nature, and asked His Majesty to recommend the Han Dynasty "Fetal Nurture Order" to cure them, just as King Yue practiced encouraging births to take revenge on the State of Wu.

古文：又奏： 今屯田之法，岁之所获，官尽征之。
现代文：宋高宗认为他的议论很有道理。
English: Song Gaozong believes that his argument is very reasonable.

古文：而田卒赐衣廪食如故，使力穑者绝赢余之望，惰农者无饥饿之忧，贪小利，失大计，谋近效，妨远图，故久无成功。
现代文：范如圭又说 ：现今实行的屯田法，每年所有的收获，都被官府全部征去，而官府每年发给种田士兵的服装和粮米仍和过去一样，使致力耕种的人断绝了赢余的念头，懒于农事的人也没有饥饿之忧，因贪图微小的利益，损害了国家的大政方针，因图谋眼前的利益，妨碍了政府的远景规划，这就是屯田法实行很久一直未获成功的症结所在。
English: Fan Rougui also said: According to the now-implemented Tunden Law, all the harvest every year is completely requisitioned by the government, and the clothing and grain and rice that the government gives to the farm soldiers every year are still the same as in the past, so that those who are committed to farming have cut off the idea of surplus, and those who are lazy in farming have no fear of starvation. Because of greed for small profits, it has damaged the country's major policy, and because of seeking immediate benefits, it has hindered the government's long-term planning. This is the crux of the implementation of the Tunden Law, which has not been successful for a long time

古文：宜籍荆、淮旷土，画为丘井，仿古助法，别为科条，令政役法，则农利修而武备饬矣。 
现代文：应该登记荆州、淮州一带空闲的土地，将土地规划成井字形状，仿照古代的自助法，建立严格的规章制度，做到有法可依，那么，农业就能迅速发展，农田利润得到提高，武装力量也能得到进一步加强。 
English: Idle land around Jingzhou and Huaizhou should be registered, the land should be planned into the shape of a well, and strict rules and regulations should be established according to the ancient self-help law. If there is a law to follow, then agriculture can develop rapidly, farmland profits can be increased, and the armed forces can be further strengthened.

古文：以直秘阁提举江西常平茶监移利州路提点刑狱，以病请祠。
现代文：范如圭以直秘阁提举江西常平茶盐，又改任利州提点刑狱，因病要求任祠观官。
English: Fan Rougui was promoted to Jiangxi Changping Tea Salt with the title of direct secretary, and was also transferred to Lishu to be promoted to the point of imprisonment. Due to illness, he requested to be appointed as an ancestral hall inspector.

古文：时宗藩并建，储位未定，道路窃有异言。
现代文：当时南宋宗室封地同时设立，太子的人选一直没有确定，朝野上下对此事议论纷纷。
English: At that time, the Southern Song Dynasty's ancestral fiefdom was established at the same time. The prince's candidate had not been determined, and there were many discussions about this matter at all levels.

古文：如圭在远外，独深忧之，掇至和、嘉佑间名臣奏章凡三十六篇，合为一书，囊封以献，请深考群言，仰师成宪，断以至公勿疑。
现代文：范如圭虽远离京城，仍对太子未立感到深深的忧虑。他收集整理北宋至和、嘉年间名臣奏议共三十六篇，合编为一本书，用口袋封好送给宋高宗，请求宋高宗认真考虑各位大臣的意见，参照前朝的现成做法，对立太子一事公正而果断地解决，不要总是疑虑重重。
English: Although he was far away from Beijing, Fan Rougui was still deeply worried that the crown prince would not be established. He collected and edited a total of thirty-six pieces of famous ministers' speeches from the Northern Song Dynasty to the Heian and Jia Dynasties. He compiled them into a book, sealed it with a pocket and sent it to Song Gaozong. He asked Song Gaozong to seriously consider the opinions of various ministers, refer to the ready-made practices of the previous dynasty, and resolve the issue of opposing the crown prince fairly and decisively. Don't always have doubts.

古文：或以越职危之，如圭曰： 以此获罪，奚憾！ 帝感悟，谓辅臣曰： 如圭可谓忠矣。 即日下诏以普安郡王为皇子，进封建王。
现代文：有人以越职的罪名威胁他，范如圭回答： 如果仅仅因为这件事而获罪，我感到极大的遗憾。 宋高宗终受感动而醒悟，对手下大臣说 ：范如圭真是一个忠臣啊。 当天，宋高宗即下诏立普安郡王为皇太子，又封他为建王。
English: Someone threatened him with the charge of exceeding his duties, and Fan Rougui replied, "I feel very sorry if I am found guilty just because of this matter." Song Gaozong was finally moved to wake up, and the opposing minister said, "Fan Rougui is really a loyal subject." On the same day, Song Gaozong immediately made the King of Pu'an County the crown prince, and also made him the founding king.

古文：复起如圭知泉州。
现代文：宋高宗再次起用范如圭，任命他为泉州知府。
English: Song Gaozong once again appointed Fan Rougui as the governor of Quanzhou.

古文：南外宗官寄治郡中，挟势为暴，占役禁兵以百数，如圭以法义正之，宗官大沮恨，密为浸润以去如圭，遂以中旨罢，领祠如故。
现代文：南宋皇室外戚宗官长期寄居在泉州郡中，他们仗势欺人，横行霸道，强行役使禁兵数以百计，范如圭到任后依法严惩了这些不法之徒，这些皇室亲属大为恼怒，写了一份极尽诬蔑、诽谤之言的密奏以赶走范如圭，不久范如圭因御旨革职罢官，仍像过去一样领祠禄。
English: In the Southern Song Dynasty, the imperial family's uncles and aunts lived in Quanzhou County for a long time. They cheated the people, behaved in a domineering manner, and forced hundreds of soldiers to serve in the army. After Fan Rougui took office, he severely punished these wrongdoers according to the law. These royal relatives were very angry and wrote a secret play full of slanderous and defamatory words to drive out Fan Rougui. Soon, Fan Rougui was dismissed from his post because of his will, but he still received a stipend as in the past.

古文：僦舍邵武以居，士大夫高之，学者多从之质疑。
现代文：范如圭就在邵武租了一间房屋居住，士大夫们都很尊敬他。许多学者都来向他请教一些学术问题。
English: Fan Rougui rented a house in Shaowu and lived there. The scholars respected him very much. Many scholars came to consult him on some academic issues.

古文：卒年五十九。
现代文：范如圭五十九岁逝世。
English: He was fifty-nine years old.

古文：如圭忠孝诚实，得之于天。
现代文：范如圭为人忠厚诚实，凛凛正气，这是他的天性如此。
English: Fan Rougui is a loyal, honest and upright person, which is his nature.

古文：其学根于经术，不为无用之文。
现代文：他治学以经术为本，不写浮华无用的文章。
English: His study is based on scripture, and he does not write flashy and useless articles.

古文：所草具屯田之目数千言，未及上，张浚视师日，奏下其家取之，浚罢，亦不果行。
现代文：他曾草拟有关屯田制度的文章数千言，还未来得及呈上就病逝了，张浚巡视地方军备时，奏请高宗同意他去范如圭家里将文章取出。
English: He had drafted thousands of words of articles about the military cantonment system, but died of illness before he could submit them. When Zhang Jun was inspecting local armaments, he asked Gao Zong to agree to him going to Fan Rugui's home to remove the articles.

古文：有集十卷，皆书疏议论之语，藏于家。
现代文：张浚罢官后，范如圭有关屯田方面的建议没有得到践行。范如圭著有文集十卷，都是一些奏疏和有关朝政方面的议论，收藏在他家中。
English: After Zhang Jun was dismissed from his post, Fan Rougui's proposals regarding the military cantonments were not implemented. Fan Rougui wrote ten volumes of essays, all of which are a collection of essays and discussions on the politics of the dynasty, and are kept in his home.

古文：有奏议六卷。
现代文：范如圭有三个儿子，名念祖、念德、念兹。
English: Fan Rougui has three sons, named Nian Zu, Nian De and Nian Zi.

古文：张阐字大猷，永嘉人。
现代文：张阐字大猷，永嘉人。
English: Zhang Yanzhong, Yongjia Ren.

古文：幼力学，博涉经史，善属文。
现代文：少年时勤奋好学，博览经史，写得一手好文章。
English: When he was a boy, he was diligent and eager to learn, well-versed in history, and wrote a good article.

古文：将命名，梦神人大书 阐 字曰： 以是名尔。 父异之，力勉其为学。
现代文：在其父为他取名时，梦见神仙写了个大大的 阐 字说 ：就以这个字命名。 张阐的父亲认为他非同一般，更加勉励他努力学习。
English: When his father was naming him, he dreamed that a fairy had written a large 阐 character saying: "Name him with this character." Zhang Yasi's father thought he was unusual and encouraged him to study harder.

古文：未冠，由舍选贡京师。
现代文：张阐未成年，就被乡里举荐到京深造。
English: As a minor, Zhang Ying was recommended by the township to go to Beijing for further studies.

古文：登宣和六年进士第，调严州兵曹掾兼治右狱。
现代文：宣和六年，张阐进士及第，授任严州兵曹兼治右狱之职。
English: Six years after the declaration of peace, Zhang Yingjin was promoted to the first and second rank, and was assigned to the post of Yanzhou petty officer and the post of the right prison.

古文：时方腊作乱，阐倡守御计。
现代文：时值方腊农民起义爆发，张阐主张以守为攻，抵御起义军。
English: At the time of the outbreak of the peasants' uprising in Fangla, Zhang Yan advocated the use of defense as an offensive to resist the insurgents.

古文：有义士请身督战，既战，稍却，州将怒，付阐治，将杀之，阐力争曰： 是士以义请战，官军却，势不得独前，非首奔者，杀之何罪？ 州将意解，士得免。
现代文：有一义士请求亲自督战，战斗开始后，义士率领官军向后退却了一些，严州守将大怒，将义士交给张阐处置，准备杀死他。张阐据理力争 ：这个义士舍身取义，主动请战，官军不断退却，战争的形势使义士不可能一个人向前冲，他不是第一个逃跑的人，用什么罪名杀死他呢？ 守将心中的怀疑解除，义士得以幸免一死。
English: There was a righteous man who asked to personally supervise the battle. After the battle began, the righteous man led the official army and retreated a little. The governor of Yanzhou was furious and handed the righteous man over to Zhang Yao to deal with, preparing to kill him. Zhang Yao reasoned: This righteous man gave up his righteousness and took the initiative to fight. The official army kept retreating. The war situation made it impossible for the righteous man to rush forward alone. He was not the first person to flee. What crime did he use to kill him? The governor removed the doubt in his heart, and the righteous man was spared death.

古文：李回帅江西，席益帅湖南，皆辟置幕下。
现代文：李回率军驻守江西，席益率军驻守湖南，都大量招募部众。
English: Li Hui led the army stationed in Jiangxi, and Si Yi led the army stationed in Hunan, both of which recruited a large number of followers.

古文：群盗据洞庭，官军多西北人，不闲水战。
现代文：众多盗寇集据在洞庭一带，而前去镇压的官军大多数是西北人，不善水战。
English: Many thieves and robbers were concentrated in the Dongting area, and most of the government troops who went to suppress them were from the Northwest, and were not good at water warfare.

古文：阐建策造战舰，以大舰为营，小舰出战，乘水涸直捣贼巢，贼势以衰。
现代文：张阐建议建造战船，以大船为营地，小船不断出击，趁着洞庭湖水干涸直捣盗寇老巢，盗寇势力自此逐渐衰落。
English: Zhang Yan proposed to build a warship, with a large ship as a camp, and small boats constantly attacking, taking advantage of the drying up of Dongting Lake to directly attack the robber's nest. The robber's forces have gradually declined since then.

古文：诸司交荐，改秩，吏部以微文沮之，阐弗辩，求岳祠归。
现代文：各个部门一致推荐张阐，吏部却暗地里呈文加以阻止，张阐对此没有辩解，而是请求辞官回乡。
English: All departments unanimously recommended Zhang Yansheng, but the personnel department secretly submitted a document to prevent it. Zhang Yansheng did not justify this, but requested the dictionary officer to return to his hometown.

古文：历鄂、台二州教授。
现代文：此后几年，张阐历任鄂、台二州教授。
English: In the following years, Zhang Yan served as a professor in E and Taizhou.

古文：绍兴十年，诏侍从各举所知，给事中林待聘以阐闻，召对。
现代文：绍兴十年，宋高宗下诏令侍从大臣举荐所知的人才，给事中林待聘推荐了张阐，张阐被召应对。
English: In the 10th year of Shaoxing, Song Gaozong issued an edict ordering the attendants to recommend talents known to the minister, to which Zhonglin recommended Zhang Ying, and Zhang Ying was called to respond.

古文：时金人议和，归关中地。
现代文：当时正与金人议和，金人将关中土地归还给我朝。
English: At that time, they were negotiating peace with the Jin people, and the Jin people returned the Guanzhong land to the Ming Dynasty.

古文：阐首言： 关中必争之地，古号天府，愿固守以蔽巴蜀，图中原。 次言监司、郡守荐举之弊。
现代文：张阐首先指出： 关中，历来是兵家必争之地，古代号称天府，希望陛下派兵固守关中以蔽护巴蜀，进而可以图谋中原。 接着又指出监司、郡守推荐人才的弊端。
English: Zhang Yan first pointed out: Guanzhong has always been a place for soldiers to compete, known as Tianfu in ancient times. I hope that His Majesty will send troops to guard Guanzhong to protect Bashu, and then you can plot the Central Plains. He then pointed out the drawbacks of supervisors and county governors recommending talents.

古文：又乞严禁遏籴，以济江、浙水患。
现代文：又要求严禁强行抑配征购粮食的行为，以赈济江、浙一带遭受水灾的百姓。
English: It is also required to strictly prohibit the act of forcibly suppressing the procurement of grain in order to help the people who have suffered from floods in the Jijiang River and Zhejiang region.

古文：召试馆职，除秘书省正字，迁校书郎兼吴、益王府教授。
现代文：张阐参加馆职的考试，拜官为秘书省正字，又升任校书郎兼吴王府、益王府教授。
English: Zhang Yan participated in the examination for the post of librarian, and was promoted to the secretary of the provincial government, and was also promoted to the school scribe and professor of Wu Wangfu and Yi Wangfu.

古文：时诸将恃功邀爵赏，有过则姑息，又兵布于外，禁卫单寡，阐上疏极论之。
现代文：当时，朝中许多大将都自恃有功而要求加官进爵，对错误则姑息不提，且将重兵大都驻扎在京城之外，禁卫军力量单薄，张阐上奏疏对此事进行了论述。
English: At that time, many generals in the imperial court claimed to be meritorious and demanded to be promoted to the peerage, but did not mention their mistakes, and most of the heavy troops were stationed outside the capital, and the strength of the Imperial Guard was thin. Zhang Yingjie elaborated on this matter.

古文：后稍进退诸将必当其实，且召诸道兵以益禁旅，皆如阐言。
现代文：此后诸将升降都必须根据他的功过事实，并招募各州士兵以增加禁卫军的力量，都如张阐所论。
English: From then on, the promotion and demotion of generals had to be based on his merits and achievements, and soldiers from various states were recruited to increase the strength of the Imperial Guard, as discussed by Zhang Yuling.

古文：十三年，迁秘书郎兼国史院检讨官。
现代文：绍兴十三年，张阐升任秘书郎兼国史院检讨官。
English: In the thirteenth year of Shaoxing, Zhang Yuling was promoted to secretary and inspector of the National Academy of History.

古文：秦桧每荐台谏，必先谕以己意，尝谓阐曰： 秘书久次，欲以台中相处何如？ 阐谢曰： 丞相见知，得老死秘书幸矣！ 桧默然，竟罢，主管台州崇道观，历泉、衢二州通判。
现代文：秦桧每次推荐台谏，必须先告知自己的意见，他曾经对张阐说 ：你居秘书郎之职，准备给你御史中丞一职如何？ 张阐婉言谢绝说 ：能得到丞相的青睐，我老死于秘书郎之职也是高兴的。 秦桧无言以对，竟罢免了张阐，让他主管台州崇道观，后又历任泉、衢二州通判。
English: Every time Qin Yu recommended Taishi, he must first inform his own opinion. He once said to Zhang Ye: You are in the position of secretary, are you ready to give you the position of secretary? Zhang Ye declined saying: I am glad to be able to get the favor of the prime minister, I have always died in the position of secretary. Qin Yu was speechless and dismissed Zhang Ye, putting him in charge of Taizhou Chong Dao Guan, and then successively Quan and Zou.

古文：二十五年冬，帝躬揽万机，起阐提举两浙路市舶，入为御史台检法官，升吏部员外郎。
现代文：绍兴二十五年冬，高宗日理万机，处理军政大事，起用张阐管理两浙路的对外贸易，不久又任御史台检法官，升吏部员外郎。
English: In the winter of the 25th year of Shaoxing, Gao Zongri was in charge of the military and political affairs, and appointed Zhang Xuan to manage the foreign trade of the two Zhejiang routes. Soon, he was appointed as the judge of the Supreme Historian of Taiwan, and promoted to the Foreign Minister.

古文：孝宗在王邸，帝妙选宫僚，谓 庄重老成无逾阐者 ，改命祠部兼建王府赞读。
现代文：孝宗为普安郡王时，高宗选报一些宫中大臣，孝宗说： 庄重老成没人能够超过张阐。 皇上于是改任张阐为祠部兼建王府赞读。
English: When Xiaozong was the king of Pu'an County, Gaozong selected a number of palace ministers, and Xiaozong said: "No one can surpass Zhang Xuan in solemn achievement." The emperor then appointed Zhang Xuan as the head of the ancestral hall and the construction of the royal palace.

古文：三十一年春，大雨，无麦苗，荆、浙盗起，诏侍从、台谏条陈弭灾、御盗之术。
现代文：绍兴三十一年春，天降大雨，麦苗被淹，荆、浙路盗贼四起，高宗命令侍从、台谏提出具体的消除灾害、防御盗贼的措施。
English: In the spring of the 31st year of Shaoxing, the sky rained heavily, the wheat seedlings were flooded, and the thieves on the Jing and Zhejiang roads were four. Gaozong ordered the attendants and the porters to put forward specific measures to eliminate disasters and prevent thieves.

古文：阐上疏曰： 和议以来，岁有聘币，民不堪命，臣愿陛下毋以金人困中国可乎？
现代文：张阐上奏疏说 ：宋金和议以来，每年将大量岁币送给金人，百姓苦不堪言，我恳求陛下不要由于金人让国中百姓受困，不知可否？
English: Zhang Ying said in his speech: Since the Song and Jin dynasties made peace, a large amount of money has been sent to the Jin people every year, and the people have suffered a lot. I implore Your Majesty not to let the people of the country be trapped because of the Jin people. I don't know if it is possible?

古文：归正人时有遣还之命，怨声闻道路，臣愿陛下毋使金人得以甘心可乎？
现代文：金朝归顺南宋的人常常因受命遣返而怨声载道，我恳求陛下不要让金人坐收渔人之利，不知可否？
English: People from the Jin Dynasty who returned to the Southern Song Dynasty often complained about being ordered to repatriate. I implore Your Majesty not to let the Jin people take advantage of the fishermen, I wonder if it is possible?

古文：州县吏职卑地远，渔夺之祸被于编籍，臣愿陛下严脏吏之诛可乎？
现代文：州县官吏职卑地远，在编入户口时对百姓巧取豪夺，我恳求陛下对贪官污吏严加惩罚，不知可否？
English: I implore Your Majesty to severely punish corrupt officials, I don't know if it's possible?

古文：蠲租之令，已赦复征，宽大之泽例为虚文，臣愿陛下申诏令之禁可乎？
现代文：免除百姓租税的法令，已经颁行了却又要复征，对百姓宽大之恩泽仍成为一纸空文，我恳求陛下重申诏令必须令行禁止，不知可否？
English: The decree exempting the people from taxes has already been issued but will be re-imposed, and the grace of generosity to the people has become a dead letter. I implore Your Majesty to reiterate that the edict must be banned. I don't know if it is possible?

古文：是数者能次第行之，则足以动天地，召和气，灾异、盗贼不足虑也。 又言： 金主亮将入侵，宜守要害，防海道，三边不可无良将，督视不可无大帅。 疏奏，帝嘉纳，面谕曰： 卿所言深中时病，但遣人北归，已载约书，朕不忍渝也。 迁将作监，进宗正少卿。
现代文：如果以上数条能够顺序执行，那就一定能够感动天地，召来祥和的气候，灾害、盗贼也就不足以忧虑了。 又说 ：金主完颜亮即将入侵，应派兵坚守要害，在海道设防，三边不可以没有良将，巡视边防不可以没有大帅。 奏疏呈上，高宗很高兴地采纳了他的建议，他当面告诉张阐说： 你所言切中时弊，但派人北归，此条已载入和约中，我不忍心改变。 张阐任将作监，又升任宗正少卿。
English: If the above-mentioned several articles could be implemented in sequence, it would surely move heaven and earth, bring a peaceful climate, and disasters and thieves would not be enough to worry about. He also said: The rich man is about to invade, it is necessary to send troops to hold the key, set up defenses on the highway, the three sides can not be without good generals, and the border patrol can not be without a general. On the report, Gaozong gladly accepted his suggestion, he told Zhang Ying in person: What you said is right and wrong, but send people to the north, this article has been included in the peace treaty, I can not bear to change. Zhang Ying was

古文：三十二年，孝宗即位，阐权工部侍郎兼侍讲，入谢，言： 诸将以败为捷，冒受爵秩，州厢禁军因覃霈鼓噪，希厚赏，不可不正其罪。 时悉为施行。
现代文：绍兴三十二年，孝宗即位，张阐暂代工部侍郎兼侍讲的职务，入宫面谢孝宗时说 ：许多将领打了败仗却谎称大捷，骗取高官厚禄，从各州招募来的禁军借口长时间的大雨而不断吵闹，以期得到很高的赏赐，对这些人不可以不定其罪。 这些事情一一得到了实施。
English: In the 32nd year of Shaoxing, when Xiaozong ascended to the throne, Zhang Ying assumed the position of the provisional Chamberlain of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, and when he entered the palace, he said to Xie Xiaozong, "Many generals led a defeated battle but falsely claimed great success, cheated high-ranking officials for rich rewards, and recruited forbidden soldiers from various states under the pretext of long-term heavy rain and constantly noisy, in order to get a high reward, these people should not be uncertain of their guilt.

古文：金主亮死，葛王褒复求和，再议遣使。
现代文：金主完颜亮死后，葛王完颜褒再次前来求和，朝廷商议再次派遣使者的问题。
English: After the death of Guan Yanliang, Ge Wang Guan Yanbo once again came to sue for peace, and the imperial court discussed the issue of sending an envoy again.

古文：阐言： 宜严遣使之命，正敌国之礼，彼或不从，则有战尔。
现代文：张阐说 ：应该对派遣使者的使命严加约束，纠正过去宋金两国的君臣之礼，假若他们不同意，两国之间就会爆发战争。
English: Zhang Yuelu said: It is necessary to strictly restrict the mission of sending envoys and correct the courtesy of the kings and ministers of Song and Kim in the past. If they do not agree, war will break out between the two countries.

古文：如是，则中国之威可以复振。 帝曰： 使者报聘，故事也，旧约不从，朕志定矣。 是冬，给札侍从、台谏条具时务，阐上十事皆切。
现代文：如果这样，我们中原大国的雄威就可以重新树立起来。 孝宗说 ：大宋派遣使者前去报告、问候，已成为过去的历史了，过去签订的条约是万万不能执行的，对此朕的决心已定。 这年冬天，孝宗分发信札给侍从、台谏，请他们具体提出当前的急务，对时事政务献计献策，张阐所陈十事都十分中肯，切中时弊。
English: If this is the case, the grandeur of our Central Plains great power can be re-established. Xiaozong said, "It is past history that the Great Song Dynasty sent emissaries to make reports and greetings. The treaties signed in the past can never be implemented, and my determination to this end has been made. This winter, Xiaozong distributed letters to attendants and courtiers, asking them to specifically propose current urgent matters, and to offer ideas and suggestions on current political affairs. The ten things Zhang elaborated were all very pertinent and relevant to the times.

古文：当时应诏数十人，惟阐与国子司业王十朋指陈时事，斥权幸，无所回隐。
现代文：当时响应孝宗诏令而上奏疏的有几十人，只有张阐和国子司业王十朋指出当前大事，怒斥玩弄权术的奸佞小人，没有任何躲闪回避。
English: At that time, there were dozens of people who responded to the edict of the Emperor Xiaozong, but only Zhang Ying and Wang Shih-peng, the Secretary of the Imperial Household, pointed out the current events, and scolded the treacherous villains who were playing power games, without any evasion.

古文：明日，召两人对内殿，帝大加称赏，赐酒及御书。
现代文：第二天，两人被召入内殿与皇上对话，孝宗对他们大加赞赏，并赐给他们美酒和皇帝御书。
English: The next day, the two were called into the inner hall for a dialogue with the emperor. Takamune praised them greatly and gave them fine wine and the imperial edict.

古文：时进太上皇帝、太上皇后册宝，工部例进官，阐辞。
现代文：当时正逢呈进太上皇帝、太上皇后对大臣封爵赏官的文书，按照惯例工部可以晋升一些官吏，张阐推辞了晋升。
English: At that time, a document was being submitted to the Emperor and Empress Dowager to confer a knighthood on the minister. According to the usual practice, the Ministry of Industry and Trade could promote some officials, but Zhang Ying declined the promotion.

古文：或曰： 公转一阶，则泽可以及子孙，奈保辞？ 阐笑曰： 宝册非吾功也，吾能为子孙冒无功赏乎？ 
现代文：有人问他 ：你晋升一级官阶，就可以使恩惠延及子孙后代，为什么还要推辞呢？ 张阐笑着回答 ：这种例行的封官进赏文书并不说明我的功绩，我怎么能为了子孙后代而无功受禄，无功领赏呢？ 
English: Someone asked him, "If you are promoted to the first-level official, you can extend the grace to future generations. Why should you refuse?" Zhang Yuling replied with a smile, "This kind of routine award document does not explain my merits. How can I receive the reward without merit for the sake of future generations?"

古文：隆兴元年，真拜工部侍郎。
现代文：隆兴元年，张阐正式拜为工部侍郎。
English: In the first year of the Long Xing, Zhang Ying was officially appointed as a chamberlain of the Ministry of Industry.

古文：阐奏： 臣去冬乞守御两淮，陛下谓春首行之，夏秋当毕，今其时矣。 帝曰： 江、淮事尽付张浚，朕倚浚为长城。 会督府请受萧琦降，诏问阐，阐请受其降。
现代文：张阐上奏疏说 ：去年冬天我就要求派兵守卫两淮地区，陛下说春天开始派兵前往，到夏秋季应结束此事，今天应该是时候了。 孝宗说 ：江淮地区的防卫我全部交付张浚，我将张浚作为朝廷的钢铁长城。 正值督府请求接受萧琦投降，孝宗下诏询问张阐，张阐请求接受萧琦投降。
English: Zhang Yansheng said: Last winter, I asked to send troops to guard the two Huai regions. His majesty said that the troops would be sent in the spring, and the matter should be over by the summer and autumn. Today should be the time. Xiaozong said: I have handed over the defense of the Jianghuai region to Zhang Jun, and I will use Zhang Jun as the Great Wall of Iron and Steel of the imperial court. The governor's office requested to accept Xiao Jun's surrender, and Xiaozong inquired Zhang Yansheng, Zhang Yansheng requested to accept Xiao Jun's surrender.

古文：俄报王师收复灵壁县，阐虑大将李显忠、邵宏渊深入无援，奏请益兵殿后。
现代文：很快又有探报南宋军队收复灵璧县，张阐考虑到大将李显忠、邵宏渊孤军深入，没有后援，奏请增加兵力紧随李显忠部之后。
English: Soon, there was also a report that the Southern Song Dynasty army had recovered Lingbi County. Zhang Yan took into account that the isolated army of Generals Li Hsien Chung and Shao Hongyuan was deeply entrenched and had no backup, and requested an increase in troop strength immediately after Li Hsien Chung.

古文：已而王师果失利，众论归罪于战。
现代文：不久南宋军队果然失利，大家的议论都将责任归罪于将士作战不力。
English: Soon after, the Southern Song Army was defeated, and everyone blamed the soldiers for their poor performance in battle.

古文：阐曰： 陛下出师受降是也。
现代文：张阐说 ：陛下派主力军队出去接受萧琦投降致使后无援军是主要原因。
English: Zhang Yanshi said: The main reason is that His Majesty sent the main army to accept Xiao Yu's surrender and there was no reinforcement.

古文：诸将违节度且无援而败，当矫前失，安可遽沮锐气。 帝壮其言，益出御前器甲付诸军，手诏劳浚，军声复振。
现代文：其他将领违抗节度使的命令而且后面没有增援部队，导致了战斗失败，应该纠正以前的过失，怎么能够就此打击军队的士气。 孝宗赞同张阐的意见，又拿出很多禁卫军使用的武器交给前线诸军，亲下手书犒赏慰劳张浚，前线抗金将士的士气再次高涨。
English: Other generals disobeyed the order of the commander-in-chief and there were no reinforcements behind, which led to the defeat of the battle. It was necessary to correct the previous mistakes, how could this hit the morale of the army. Xiaozong agreed with Zhang Xuan's opinion, and took out a lot of weapons used by the Imperial Guards and handed them to the front-line troops. He personally wrote a book to reward Zhang Jian for his hard work. The morale of the front-line gold-resistant soldiers was high again.

古文：时数易台谏，阐力言之，请增广谏员。
现代文：当时朝廷多次更换台谏，张阐对此事多次评论，请求大量增加谏员的数量。
English: At that time, the imperial court repeatedly changed the eunuchs, and Zhang Xuan commented on this matter many times, requesting a large increase in the number of eunuchs.

古文：帝曰： 台谏好名，如某人但欲得直声而去。 阐曰： 唐德宗疑姜公辅为卖直，陆贽切谏，愿陛下深以为鉴。 帝再三嘉奖。
现代文：孝宗说 ：台谏只是名声好听而已，就如某人只想得到正直的名声后离去。 张阐说 ：唐德宗就曾怀疑姜公辅仅仅是为了卖弄自己正直无私，陆贽言词恳切地劝说了唐德宗，希望陛下一定要以此为鉴。 孝宗深以为是，再三嘉奖他。
English: Xiaozong said: Taishan is just a good reputation, just like someone who only wants to get a reputation for honesty and then leave. Zhang Yiming said: Tang Dezong once suspected that Jiang Gongfu was just to show off his honesty and selflessness. Lu Xun's words earnestly persuaded Tang Dezong, hoping that His Majesty must take this as a model. Xiaozong deeply believed that he was right and repeatedly commended him.

古文：金人求和，帝与阐议，阐曰： 彼欲和，畏我耶？
现代文：金人前来求和，孝宗与张阐谈论这件事，张阐说： 金人想要求和，他们是怕我们吗？
English: The goldsmiths came to sue for peace. Xiaozong and Zhang Yanzhong discussed the matter. Zhang Yanzhong said: The goldsmiths want to sue for peace. Are they afraid of us?

古文：爱我耶？
现代文：还是尊重我们？
English: Or respect us?

古文：直款我耳。 力陈六害不可许。
现代文：完全是为了欺骗我们！ 着力陈述了议和的六种危害，希望孝宗不要答应。
English: It's all just to deceive us! He forcefully stated the six harms of the proposed peace, hoping that Xiaozong would not agree.

古文：帝曰： 朕意亦然，姑随宜应之。 帝记 卖直 之语，谓： 胡铨亦及此。
现代文：宋孝宗说 ：我的意见也是如此，暂且随机应变，随便应付一下金人吧。 宋孝宗又记起了 卖直 一语，说： 胡铨也谈到过这个问题。
English: Song Xiaozong said, "That's my opinion as well. Let's take a chance for the time being, and deal with the money man casually." Song Xiaozong also remembered the saying, "Sell directly," and said, "Hu Yao also talked about this problem."

古文：朕非拒谏者，辨是非耳。 阐曰： 圣度当如天，奈何与臣下争名。 帝曰： 卿言是也。 顷之，除工部尚书兼侍读。
现代文：我并非拒绝听从不同意见，而是为了辨别各种意见的正误。 张阐说 ：陛下的胸怀应像天一样广阔，怎么会与臣下一争高低。 孝宗说： 爱卿所言很有道理。 不久，张阐又升任工部尚书兼侍读。
English: I did not refuse to listen to different opinions, but in order to distinguish the rights and wrongs of various opinions. Zhang Ying said: His Majesty's mind should be as broad as the sky, how can it compete with the vassals. Xiaozong said: What Aiqing said is very reasonable. Soon, Zhang Ying was promoted to the work department of Shangshu and attendant.

古文：金副元帅纥石烈志宁以书谕通好，所请三事，国书、岁币之议已定，惟割唐、邓、海、泗未决，将遣王之望、龙大渊通问，而众言纷纷不已。
现代文：金国副元帅纥石烈志宁写信到南宋表示愿与南宋友好相处，所要求的三件事，其中国书、岁币二件已议定，只有割让唐、邓、海、泗四州土地一事仍未解决，朝廷准备派遣王之望、龙大渊作为使者前往商议，朝野上下议论纷纷。
English: Vice-Marshal of the Jin Dynasty, Zou Shi Leshi Ning, wrote a letter to the Southern Song Dynasty, expressing his willingness to have friendly relations with the Southern Song Dynasty. The three things he asked for, including the Chinese book and two years of currency, have been agreed upon. Only the issue of ceding the land of Tang, Deng, Hai and Min four states is still unresolved. The imperial court is preparing to send Wang Zhifang and Long Dayuan as envoys to negotiate, and there are many discussions between the court and the field.

古文：阐谓： 不与四州乃可通和，议论先定乃可遣使，今彼为客，我为主，我以仁义抚天下，彼以残酷虐吾民，观金势已衰，何必先示以弱。 朝论韪之。
现代文：张阐指出 ：南宋不割让四州才能与金人议和，应先讨论决定后再派遣使者，现在金人是客人，我们为主人，我们以仁义道德统治天下，金人以严刑酷法虐待我们的百姓，据观察金王朝国势已一天一天衰落，我们为什么要首先向他们示弱。 
English: Zhang Ye pointed out: the Southern Song Dynasty could only negotiate peace with the Kim people by not ceding the four states. The decision should be discussed first before sending an envoy. Now the Kim people are guests, we are the masters. We rule the world with benevolence, righteousness and morality. The Kim people abuse our people with harsh punishments and cruel laws. According to observation, the national strength of the Kim dynasty has been declining day by day. Why should we show weakness to them first?

古文：帝用真宗故事，命经筵官二员递宿学士院，以备顾问，阐入对尤数。
现代文：朝野上下一致认为张阐所言很有道理。孝宗根据真宗时的事例命令经筵官二人轮流留宿学士院，作为处理政务的参谋顾问，张阐入宫议政的次数更多。
English: The entire court unanimously agreed that what Zhang Ying said was very reasonable. According to the example of the time of the True Sect, Xiaozong ordered two eunuchs to take turns staying at the Academy, as a staff adviser to handle government affairs, Zhang Ying entered the palace to discuss politics more often.

古文：屡引疾乞骸骨，帝不忍其去。
现代文：张阐多次以疾病缠身为由要求辞官回乡，孝宗不舍得让他离开。
English: Zhang Yansheng repeatedly asked the official to return to his hometown on the grounds that he was suffering from illness. Xiaozong was not willing to let him leave.

古文：二年，阐请益力，乃除显谟直学士、提举太平兴国宫。
现代文：隆兴二年，张阐要求回乡的请求更加坚决，皇上于是让他任显谟阁直学士，提举太平兴国宫。
English: In the second year of the Longxing, Zhang Xuan's request to return to his hometown was more resolute, and the emperor then appointed him as a direct scholar of Mogao and promoted him to Taiping Xingguo Palace.

古文：陛辞，帝问所欲言，阐奏： 许和则忘祖宗之仇，弃四州则失中原之心，遣归正人则伤忠义之气。
现代文：张阐再次向孝宗请求辞官，孝宗问他有什么话说，张阐说： 与金人议和则忘记了祖宗几代对金的仇恨，割让四州土地则失去了中原人民的爱国之心，遣回归顺之人则伤害了忠义之士的一腔正气。
English: Zhang Yuxuan again asked Xiaozong for a dictation. Xiaozong asked him what he had to say. Zhang Yuxuan said: If you make peace with Kim, you will forget the hatred of your ancestors for Kim. If you cede the land of the four states, you will lose the patriotism of the Central Plains people. If you repatriate people to Shun, you will hurt the righteous spirit of the loyal people.

古文：惟陛下毋忘老臣平昔之言。 其指时事尤谆切，帝眷益笃。
现代文：我希望陛下不要忘了老臣过去所说的话。 张阐在评论时事时尤为中肯，孝宗对他也愈加依恋。
English: I hope that Your Majesty will not forget what the old minister said in the past. Zhang Ye is particularly pertinent when commenting on current affairs, and Xiaozong is increasingly attached to him.

古文：谕以秋凉复召，加赐金犀带，特许佩鱼。
现代文：孝宗告诉张阐，秋季天气凉爽后将再次召他入京为官，并赐给他金犀带，特别允许他佩带有鱼标志的饰物。
English: Xiaozong told Zhang Yanzhong that he would call him to Beijing again after the autumn weather was cool, and gave him a gold rhinoceros belt, especially allowing him to wear fish emblems.

古文：居家逾月卒，年七十四。
现代文：张阐回家几个月后逝世，终年七十四岁。
English: Zhang Ye passed away a few months after returning home, at the age of 74.

古文：特赠端明殿学士。
现代文：宋孝宗特别赠与他端明殿学士称号。
English: Song Xiaozong specially bestowed upon him the title of Duanmingden Scholar.

古文：朱熹尝言： 秦桧挟敌要君，力主和议，群言勃勃不平。
现代文：朱熹曾经说过 ：秦桧利用金人威胁挟制南宋君主，竭力主张向金求和，朝野上下议论纷纷、愤愤不平。
English: Zhu Xi once said: Qin Shi used the threat of the Jin people to coerce the Southern Song monarchs, and tried his best to sue for peace from the Jin. There were heated discussions between the court and the emperor.

古文：桧既摧折忠臣义士之气，遂使士大夫怀安成习。
现代文：秦桧既然已经摧毁了忠臣义士的豪情壮志，从而使得士大夫们苟且偷安已成为习惯。
English: Now that Qin Yu had destroyed the heroic spirit of loyal subjects and righteous men, it had become a habit for the officials to steal the peace.

古文：至癸未和议，则知其非者鲜矣。
现代文：到癸未和议，敢于挺身而出指责秦桧卖国行径的人更是越来越少。
English: Even fewer and fewer people dare to come forward and accuse Qin Yu of being a traitor.

古文：他贼又至，临以刃，拟指其母曰： 此吾母也，幸勿怖之。 贼又舍去。有《净智先生集》及《注杜甫诗》二十卷。
现代文：朝中议论间或有各种建议、汇报，大都是指出某事是否有利或有害，而谈到南宋与金人有世代深仇大恨不能议和的，只有左史胡铨、尚书张阐了。 张阐有一子，名叔椿。赵逵字庄叔。
English: During the discussions between North Korea and China, there were various suggestions and reports, most of which pointed out whether something was beneficial or harmful, but when it came to the Southern Song Dynasty and the Jin Dynasty, which had generations of deep hatred and could not be negotiated, only Zuo Shi Hu and Shang Shuxu Zhang expounded.

古文：赵逵，字庄叔，其先秦人，八世祖处荣徙蜀，家于资州。
现代文：他的祖先是秦国人，八世祖赵处荣时举家迁徙到四川，在资州定居。
English: His ancestors were from Qin, and his family migrated to Sichuan and settled in Zhizhou during the time of the eighth-generation ancestor Zhao Shuanrong.

古文：逵读书数行俱下，尤好聚古书，考历代兴衰治乱之迹，与当代名人钜公出处大节，根穷底究，尚友其人。
现代文：赵逵幼时领悟力强，读书一目十行，速度很快。他尤其喜欢搜集古书，研究历代王朝兴衰，统治者治理国家的经验教训，与当时的名人钜公一起谈论国家安危、存亡的大事，遇到问题喜欢盘根问底，与他们相处也非常友好、亲近。
English: When he was a child, Zhao Jun had strong comprehension and could read ten lines at a time at a fast speed. He especially liked to collect ancient books, study the rise and fall of dynasties throughout the ages, the experience and lessons of the rulers in governing the country, and talk about the important matters of the country's safety and survival with the celebrities of the time. When he encountered problems, he liked to inquire into the root cause, and he was also very friendly and close with them.

古文：绍兴二十年，类省奏名，明年对策，论君臣父子之情甚切，擢第一。
现代文：绍兴二十年，赵逵参加在四川举行的省试，一试中举。第二年直接赴京参加殿试，对答皇帝有关政治、经义的策问，对君臣、父子之情进行了深刻的论述，考中进士第一。
English: In the 20th year of Shaoxing, Zhao Wei took part in the provincial examination held in Sichuan, and passed the first examination. In the second year, he went directly to Beijing to take part in the palace examination. He answered the emperor's questions about politics and philosophy, and made a profound exposition of the feelings of monarchs and ministers, and father and son. He was the first to be promoted in the examination.

古文：时秦桧意有所属，而逵对独当帝意，桧不悦。
现代文：当时秦桧想将他收在自己门下，而赵逵的回答仅称皇上之意，秦桧因此很不高兴。
English: At that time, Qin Hui wanted to take him under his wing, and Zhao Hui's answer only said that it was the emperor's will, so Qin Hui was very unhappy.

古文：即罢知举王〈日严〉，授逵左承事郎、签书剑南东川。
现代文：秦桧立即罢免了知举王日严，仅给赵逵授官左从事郎、签书剑南东川。
English: Qin Yu immediately dismissed Zhiguo Wang Riyan, and only gave Zhao Yu the post of left-hand retainer, signing a letter to Nan Dongchuan.

古文：帝尝问桧，赵逵安在？
现代文：高宗曾经询问秦桧赵逵在哪里？
English: Gao Zong once asked Qin Zhe where Zhao Zhe was.

古文：桧以实对。
现代文：秦桧如实告诉了高宗。
English: Qin Yu told Gao Zong the truth.

古文：久之，帝又问，除校书郎。
现代文：过了很长时间，宋高宗又问起赵逵的情况，赵逵因此得以拜官校书郎。
English: After a long time, Song Gaozong also asked about Zhao Yao's situation, and Zhao Yao was able to become a scholar of the official school.

古文：逵单车赴阙，征税者希桧意，搜行橐皆书籍，才数金而已。
现代文：赵逵独自一人赴朝廷就职，赴京途中遇到讨好秦桧愿望的征税官，他们搜遍了赵逵的行李，发现全是书籍，仅有为数很少的一些钱币。
English: Zhao Wei went alone to the imperial court to take office. On the way to Beijing, he encountered tax officials who were trying to please Qin Wei. They searched Zhao Wei's luggage and found that it was full of books, with only a few coins.

古文：既就职，未尝私谒，桧意愈恨。
现代文：赵逵赴京任职后，没有私下悄悄地提着礼物去拜见秦桧，秦桧因此对他更加忌恨。
English: After Zhao Wei took office in Beijing, he did not secretly bring a gift to meet with Qin Yu. As a result, Qin Yu hated him even more.

古文：逵赓御制《芝草诗》，有 皇心未敢宴安图 之句，桧见之怒曰： 逵犹以为未太平耶？ 又谓逵曰： 馆中禄薄，能以家来乎？ 逵曰： 亲老不能涉险远。 桧徐曰： 当以百金为助。 逵唯唯而已。
现代文：赵逵写了一首《灵芝诗》献给高宗，其中有 皇心未敢宴安图 的诗句，秦桧见了勃然大怒说 ：赵逵竟还认为没有天下太平吗？ 又对赵逵说： 馆职薪俸很少，你能够将全家接到京城居住吗？ 赵逵婉言回答说： 父母亲年纪很大了，不适合做长途跋涉。 秦桧慢吞吞地说 ：送你一百金币帮助你。 
English: Zhao Yu wrote a "Lingzhi Poem" dedicated to Gao Zong, which included a verse about the emperor's heart not daring to feast on Antu. When Qin Yu saw it, he flew into a rage and said, "Does Zhao Yu actually still think that there is no peace in the world?" He also said to Zhao Yu, "The salary of a curator is very small, can you bring your whole family to live in Beijing?" Zhao Yu'an replied, "My parents are very old and are not suitable for long-distance trekking." Qin Yu slowly said, "I will give you one hundred gold coins to help you."

古文：又遣所亲申前言，讽逵往谢，逵不答，桧滋怒，欲挤之，未及而死。
现代文：赵逵只得假装谦卑地表示奉命遵谨。秦桧又派遣亲信再三重复自己的意思，用委婉的语言暗示赵逵去秦桧府上谢恩，赵逵对此置之不理，秦桧因此更加愤怒，准备将赵逵排挤出宫，还未及行动，秦桧就一命呜呼了。
English: Zhao Yu had to pretend to be humble to show that he was following orders. Qin Yu also sent a close confidant to repeatedly repeat his meaning, using euphemistic language to suggest that Zhao Yu go to Qin Yu's palace to thank him. Zhao Yu ignored this, which made Qin Yu even more angry and prepared to push Zhao Yu out of the palace. Before he could act, Qin Yu lost his life.

古文：帝临哭桧还，即迁逵著作佐郎兼权礼部员外郎。
现代文：高宗吊口言秦桧回来后，立即提升赵逵为著作佐郎兼权礼部员外郎。
English: After Gao Zong told Qin Hui to come back, he immediately promoted Zhao Hui to the position of "Writing Saro" and "Ceremonial Member."

古文：帝如景灵宫，秘省起居惟逵一人。
现代文：高宗来到景灵官，秘书省起居只有赵逵一人。
English: Gao Zong came to Jingling official, the secretary of the Ministry of Housing and Urban-Rural Development was only Zhao Wei.

古文：帝屡目逵，即日命引见上殿，帝迎谓曰： 卿知之乎？始终皆朕自擢。
现代文：宋高宗多次注视赵逵，当天就命人将赵逵召至上殿接见他，皇上亲自迎接并对他说 ：不知你是否知道，从始至终你都是我亲自提拔的。
English: Song Gaozong watched Zhao Jun several times. On the same day, he ordered someone to call Zhao Jun to the upper hall to meet him. The emperor personally greeted him and said to him: I don't know if you know, I personally promoted you from beginning to end.

古文：自卿登第后，为大臣沮格，久不见卿。
现代文：自从你考中进士后，被大臣等人阻拦，我很久都没有见到你。
English: I haven't seen you for a long time since you were blocked by the minister and others after you passed the junior high school entrance examination.

古文：秦桧日荐士，未尝一语及卿，以此知卿不附权贵，真天子门生也。 诏充普安郡王府教授。
现代文：秦桧每天推荐的士人中，我从未听到他有一个言词提到你，由此我可以推断你不附庸权贵、阿谀奉承，你才真正是天子的得意门生啊！ 皇上诏令赵逵为普安郡王府教授。
English: Among the scholars recommended by Qin Hui every day, I have never heard him say a word about you, from which I can deduce that you are not a vassal of power and flattery, you are truly a disciple of the Son of Heaven! The emperor decreed that Zhao Hui was a professor at Wangfu in Pu'an County.

古文：逵奏： 言路久不通，乞广赐开纳，勿以微贱为间，庶几养成敢言之气。 帝嘉纳之。
现代文：赵逵上奏疏说 ：朝廷进言之路已经很久没有畅通了，希望陛下广开言路，奖励那些直言纳谏的人，不要以地位尊卑为距离，不久就能够养成畅所欲言的开明风气。 
English: Zhao Wei said in his speech: The way for the imperial court to make comments has not been smooth for a long time. I hope that His Majesty will open up the way to speak, reward those who speak frankly, and do not take the status of superiority and inferiority as the distance, and will soon be able to develop an open-minded style of speaking freely.

古文：普安府劝讲至戾太子事，王曰： 于斯时也，斩江充自归于武帝，何如？ 逵曰： 此非臣子所能。 王意盖有所在也。
现代文：高宗愉快地接受了他的意见。赵逵在普安府谈到戾太子的事变时，普安郡王说： 戾太子在那个时候，应该杀死江充归顺汉武帝，你认为如何？ 赵逵回答 ：这不是臣子所能够做的。 普安郡王其意是有所指的。
English: Gao Zong happily accepted his opinion. When Zhao Zhe talked about the incident of the crown prince in Pu'an, the king of Pu'an County said: What do you think of the fact that the crown prince should kill Jiang Chonggui Shun Hanwu at that time? Zhao Zhe replied: This is not something a courtier can do. The king of Pu'an County had a point.

古文：二十六年，迁著作郎，寻除起居郎。
现代文：绍兴二十六年，赵逵升任著作郎，不久又官拜起居郎。
English: In the twenty-sixth year of Shaoxing, Zhao Wei was promoted to the post of a scholar, and soon became a courtier.

古文：入谢，帝又曰： 秦桧炎炎，不附者惟卿一人。 逵曰： 臣不能效古人抗折权奸，但不与之同尔，然所以事宰相礼亦不敢阙。 又曰： 受陛下爵禄而奔走权门，臣不惟不敢，亦且不忍。 明年同知贡举，尽公考阅，以革旧弊，遂得王十朋、阎安中。
现代文：赵逵说 ：我没有能够效仿古人与权奸之臣抗争，仅仅是不与他们同流合污而已，然而所有事奉宰相的各种礼节我也是不敢有所欠缺。 又说 ：我受陛下的恩宠得到官位和俸禄，而奔走于权门之间，我不仅仅是不敢，而且是不忍心违背陛下的美意。 第二年赵逵任同知贡举之职，所有考生的考卷均交给赵逵审阅，以便革除历年考试中的作弊现象，于是得到了王十朋、阎安中等一批才识过人的学者。
English: Zhao Wei said: I have not been able to follow the example of the ancients and fight against the treacherous vassals, I just do not mingle with them. However, I do not dare to lack all the various etiquettes of serving the prime minister. He also said: I was given an official position and salary by His Majesty's grace, and I run between the gates of power, I not only dare not, but also cannot bear to go against His Majesty's good intentions. In the second year, Zhao Wei was appointed to the position of Tongzhi Gongzhu, and all the examination papers were handed over to Zhao Wei for review in order to eliminate the

古文：始，逵未出贡闱，蒋璨除户部侍郎，给事中辛次膺以璨交结希进，还之。
现代文：当初，赵逵一直在举行殿试的贡院主持工作，蒋璨拜官户部侍郎，给事中辛次膺以蒋璨勾结权贵希求提升为由，将他退回。
English: At the beginning, Zhao Wei had been presiding over the work of the Tribute Academy, where the palace examinations were held, and Jiang Wei had been serving as an attendant of the official's household department. During the incident, Xin Cixi sent him back on the grounds that Jiang Wei was colluding with the power elite to seek promotion.

古文：帝怒，罢次膺，付逵书读，逵不可，璨以此出知苏州，次膺仍得次对，逵兼给事中。
现代文：高宗得知此事后大怒，罢免了辛次膺的官职，将他交付赵逵处置，赵逵认为不能这样处理，蒋璨因此出任苏州知府，辛次膺仍得以依序上殿面奏。
English: When Gaozong learned of this, he flew into a rage, dismissed Xin Jizhe from his official position, and handed him over to Zhao Jizhe. Zhao Jizhe thought that this could not be done, so Jiang Jizhe became the governor of Suzhou, and Xin Jizhe was still able to ascend to the throne.

古文：未几，除中书舍人，登第六年而当外制，南渡后所未有也。
现代文：赵逵兼任给事中一职，时间不长，赵逵又升任中书舍人。考中进士以后第六年就担任京官加知制诰官衔，负责起草制、诰、诏、令、敕书等文书，这是南渡以后所从未有过的先例。
English: Zhao Jun also served as a member of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC) for a short period of time. Zhao Jun was also promoted to the position of the Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC). Six years after passing the junior high school entrance examination, Zhao Jun assumed the position of the Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC) and the Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC), and was responsible for drafting documents such as constitutions, edicts, proclamations, decrees, and imperial edicts. This is a precedent that has never been seen since Zhao Jun went to

古文：帝语王纶曰： 赵逵纯正可用，朕于蜀士未见其比。
现代文：高宗曾对王伦说 ：赵逵正直淳朴，可以委以重任，从四川来的士人中我还从未见过有超过他的。
English: Gao Zong once said to Wang Lun: Zhao Wei is honest and simple, and can be entrusted with important tasks. I have never seen more than him among the scholars from Sichuan.

古文：朕所以甫二岁令至此，报其不附权贵也。 
现代文：我所以两年中几次给他加官，主要是为了回报他不趋炎附势、依附权贵啊。 
English: That's why I promoted him several times in two years, mainly to reward him for not clinging to power.

古文：先是，逵尝荐杜莘老、唐文若、孙道夫皆蜀名士，至是奉诏举士，又以冯方、刘仪凤、李石、郯次云应诏，宰执以闻。
现代文：以前赵逵曾经推荐杜莘老、唐文若、孙道夫，他们都是四川的名士，到这时他奉高宗的诏令推荐士人，又推荐了冯方、刘仪凤、李石、郯次云，宰相与参知政事、枢密使等人将这件事报告了宋高宗。
English: In the past, Zhao Wei had recommended Du Xuan Lao, Tang Wen Ruo, and Sun Daofu, all of whom were famous people in Sichuan. At that time, he followed Gao Zong's edict to recommend scholars, and also recommended Feng Fang, Liu Yifeng, Li Shi, and Hao Jiyun. The prime minister, political advisors, and confidential envoys reported the matter to Song Gao Zong.

古文：帝曰： 蜀人道远，其间文学行义有用者，不因论荐无由得知。
现代文：皇上说 ：蜀人道路遥远，他们当中许多才华横溢、有经世致国之志的学者，如果没有人推荐，我们就没有办法发现他们。
English: The emperor said, "Shu people have a long way to go, and many of them are brilliant scholars with a desire to serve the country. If no one recommends them, we will not be able to find them."

古文：前此蜀中宦游者多隔绝，不得一至朝廷，甚可惜也。 自桧颛权，深抑蜀士，故帝语及之。
现代文：过去那些蜀中有才识的人大多与世隔绝，朝廷几乎一个也不能得到，那是非常可惜的。 自从秦桧独揽大权，把持朝政以后，蜀中学士受到了极大的压制，所以高宗言谈中会提到这个问题。
English: In the past, most of the talented people in Shu were isolated from the world, and almost none of them could be obtained by the imperial court, which was a great pity.Since Qin Hui monopolized power and took control of the imperial government, Shu middle school students have been greatly suppressed, so this issue will be mentioned in Gaozong's speech.

古文：逵以疾求外，帝命国医王继先视疾，不可为矣。
现代文：赵逵以疾病缠身为由请求任朝外官职，宋高宗让自己的御医王继先为他治病，可惜病情太重，已经无法救治了。
English: Zhao Wei requested to be appointed as a foreign official on the grounds that he was suffering from illness. Song Gaozong asked his personal physician Wang to treat him first. Unfortunately, his illness was too severe and could no longer be treated.

古文：卒年四十一。
现代文：赵逵逝世时四十一岁。
English: Zhao Wei was forty-one years old when he died.

古文：帝为之抆泪叹息。
现代文：宋高宗因赵逵的早逝而不断流泪叹息，感到深深的遗憾。
English: Song Gaozong shed tears and sighed because of Zhao Yao's early death, and felt deep regret.

古文：逵尝自谓： 司马温公不近非色，不取非财，吾虽不肖，庶几慕之。 
现代文：赵逵曾说过： 司马温公不近非份女色，不拿不义之财，我虽然不能与他相提并论，还是非常仰慕他。 
English: Zhao Wei once said: Sima Wengong is not a womanizer, does not take ill-gotten gains. Although I cannot be compared with him, I still admire him very much.

古文：方桧权盛时，忤桧者固非止逵一人，而帝亟称逵不附丽，又谓逵文章似苏轼，故称为 小东坡 ，未及用而逵死，惜其论建不传于世。
现代文：当秦桧飞扬跋扈，权倾一世时，敢于反抗、抵触秦桧的虽然不仅仅是赵逵一人，但高宗多次称赞他不附庸权贵，又赞扬他的文章风格与苏轼相近，所以称他为 小东坡 ，但未等到重用赵逵就死去了，可惜他的许多有关朝政的议论、建议都未能流传后世。
English: When Qin Shi Huang ascended to power, it was not only Zhao Qi who dared to resist and contradict Qin Shi Huang. Gao Zong praised him many times for not being a vassal of the powerful. He also praised his writing style as being similar to that of Su Shi, so he called him Xiao Dongpo. However, he died before he could reuse Zhao Qi. Unfortunately, many of his discussions and suggestions about court politics were not passed on to future generations.

古文：有《栖云集》三十卷。
现代文：赵逵著有《栖云集》三十卷。
English: Zhao Wei is the author of the 30-volume "Shu Yun Shu."

