古文：海外自东北陬至西北陬者。
现代文：海外北经所记载的地方从东北角至西北角。
English: The places recorded in the Overseas Hokkien go from the northeast corner to the northwest corner.

古文：无䏿之国在长股东，为人无䏿。
现代文：无䏿国在长股国的东面，那里的人不生育子孙后代。
English: Muxing is to the east of Changqu, where people do not have children.

古文：钟山之神，名曰烛阴，视为昼，瞑为夜，吹为冬，呼为夏，不饮，不食，不息，息为风。身长千里。
现代文：钟山的山神，名叫烛阴，他睁开眼睛便是白昼，闭上眼睛便是黑夜，一吹气便是寒冬，一呼气便是炎夏，不喝水，不吃食物，不呼吸，一呼吸就生成风，身子有一千里长。
English: The mountain god of Zhongshan is called Candle Shade. When he opens his eyes, it's day, when he closes his eyes, it's night. When he breathes, it's cold winter, when he exhales, it's hot summer. He doesn't drink water, doesn't eat food, doesn't breathe, and when he breathes, he creates wind. His body is a thousand miles long.

古文：在无䏿之东。
现代文：这位烛阴神在无启国的东面。
English: This candle shade god is in the east of the country of no return.

古文：其为物，人面，蛇身，赤色，居钟山下。
现代文：他长着人一样的脸，蛇一样的身子，浑身红色，居住在钟山下。
English: He has a human-like face, a snake-like body, and is red all over. He lives at the foot of Bell Mountain.

古文：一目国在其东，一目中其面而居。
现代文：一目国在钟山的东面，那里的人只有一只眼睛，眼睛生在脸的正中间。
English: The Land of One Eye is in the eastern part of the Zhongshan Mountains. People there only have one eye, which is located in the middle of the face.

古文：一曰有手足。
现代文：另一种说法认为像普通的人有手有脚。
English: Another way of saying it is that they have hands and feet like ordinary people.

古文：柔利国在一目东，为人一手一足，反厀，曲足居上。
现代文：柔利国在一目国的东面，那里的人长着一只手一只脚，膝盖反长着，脚弯曲朝上。
English: In the country of Juri, east of the country of Ichimeki, people have one hand and one foot, their knees are backwards and their feet are bent upwards.

古文：一云留利之国，人足反折。
现代文：另一种说法认为柔利国叫做留利国，人的脚是反折着的。
English: Another theory says that the country of Juri is called the country of Ruri, and that the human foot is backwards.

古文：共工之臣曰相柳氏，九首，以食于九山。
现代文：天神共工的臣子叫相柳氏，有九个头，九个头分别在九座山上吃食物。
English: Tenjin's co-workers' vassals are called the Sangyu clan. They have nine heads, and each of the nine heads eats food on nine mountains.

古文：相柳之所抵，厥为泽溪。
现代文：相柳的身子所触的地方，都会变成池泽和溪流。
English: The place where the body of the willow tree touches will turn into ponds and streams.

古文：禹杀相柳，其血腥，不可以树五谷种。
现代文：禹杀了相柳，相柳身上流出的血腥臭不堪，凡是他的血浸泡过的地方都不能种植五谷。
English: Yu killed Xiang Liu. The bloody stench from Xiang Liu's body was unbearable. No grain could be grown where his blood had been soaked.

古文：禹厥之，三仞三沮，乃以为众帝之台。
现代文：禹掘土填埋这块地方，填满了三次，却塌陷了三次，于是禹在这块地方筑起了帝尧、帝喾、帝舜等众帝之台。
English: Yu dug the earth to fill this place, filled it three times, but it collapsed three times, so Yu built the throne of the emperors, the throne of the emperors and the throne of the emperors in this place.

古文：在昆仑之北，柔利之东。
现代文：这些帝台在昆仑山的北边，柔利国的东边。
English: These imperial platforms are located on the north side of Mount Kunlun, on the east side of the state of Jüri.

古文：相柳者，九首人面，蛇身面青。
现代文：相柳长着九个脑袋，人一样的脸，蛇一样的身子，浑身青色。
English: Soryu has nine heads, a human-like face, a snake-like body, and is blue all over.

古文：不敢北射，畏共工之台。台在其东。
现代文：这里的人因为敬畏位于北面的共工之台，都不敢向北射箭。共工之台在众帝之台的东边。
English: People here do not dare to shoot arrows to the north because they are afraid of the Co-Worker's Table, which is located to the north. The Co-Worker's Table is east of the Emperor's Table.

古文：台四方，隅有一蛇，虎色，首冲南方。
现代文：台呈四方形，台角有一条蛇，身上有虎一样的斑纹，头朝着南方。
English: The table is square, with a snake in the corner, with tiger-like stripes on its body, and its head facing south.

古文：深目国在其东，为人举一手一目。
现代文：深目国在相柳氏所在地的东面，那里的人总是举起一只手。
English: Fukame-no-kuni is to the east of the location of the Sagiyanagi clan, and the people there always raise a hand.

古文：无肠之国在深目东，其为人长而无肠。
现代文：无肠国在深目国的东面，那里的人身体高大，肚子里没有肠子。
English: The Gutless Country is to the east of the Deep Country. The people there are tall and have no intestines in their stomachs.

古文：聂耳之国在无肠国东，使两文虎，为人两手聂其耳。
现代文：聂耳国在无肠国的东面，那里的人使唤着两只花斑大虎，并且在行走时用手托着自己的耳朵。
English: The country of the ear is in the east of the country of the intestine. The people there call two large spotted tigers and hold their ears with their hands while walking.

古文：县居海水中，及水所出入奇物。
现代文：聂耳国在海水环绕的孤岛上，所以能看到出入海水的各种怪物。
English: Because Meng'er is an isolated island surrounded by the sea, you can see all kinds of monsters entering and leaving the sea.

古文：两虎在其东。
现代文：有两只老虎在它的东面。
English: There are two tigers to the east of it.

古文：夸父与日逐走，入日。
现代文：神人夸父要与太阳赛跑而追赶它，已追上了太阳。
English: The god-man Kwafu wants to race with the sun and chase it, and has already caught up with the sun.

古文：渴欲得饮，饮于河渭，河渭不足，北饮大泽。未至，道渴而死。
现代文：这时夸父很口渴，想要喝水，于是喝黄河和渭河中的水，喝完了两条河水还是不解渴，又要向北去喝大泽中的水，还没走到大泽，就渴死在半路上了。
English: At this time, Kuafu was very thirsty and wanted to drink water, so he drank water from the Yellow River and the Min River. After drinking the water from the two rivers, he still could not quench his thirst. He also wanted to go north to drink water from Osawa. Before he reached Osawa, he died of thirst halfway there.

古文：弃其杖。化为邓林。
现代文：他死时所抛掉的拐杖，变成了邓林。
English: The crutch he threw away when he died turned into Dunlin.

古文：博父国在聂耳东，其为人大，右手操青蛇，左手操黄蛇。
现代文：博父国在聂耳国的东面，那里的人身体高大，右手握着青色蛇，左手握着黄色蛇。
English: Bo's homeland is in the east of the country of Mule. The people there are tall and hold a blue snake in their right hand and a yellow snake in their left hand.

古文：邓林在其东，二树木。
现代文：邓林在它的东面，其实由两棵非常大的树木形成了树林。
English: Denglin, to its east, is actually a grove of two very large trees.

古文：一曰博父。禹所积石之山在其东，河水所入。
现代文：禹所积石山在博父国的东面，是黄河流入的地方。
English: Yu's Stone Mountain is located in the east of Bo's fatherland, where the Yellow River flows into.

古文：拘缨之国在其东，一手把缨。
现代文：拘瘿国在禹所积石山的东面，那里的人常用一只手托着脖颈上的大肉瘤。
English: The people of Guanzhong in the east of the Yuzho Mountains often hold a large sarcoma on their neck with one hand.

古文：一曰利缨之国。
现代文：另外一种说法是拘瘿国叫做利瘿国。
English: Another way of saying it is that the country of Guanzhong is called the country of Lisheng.

古文：寻木长千里，在拘缨南，生河上西北。
现代文：有种叫做寻木的树高大千里，生长在拘瘿国的南面，黄河上游的西北方。
English: There is a kind of tree called the seeking tree, which is thousands of kilometers tall and grows in the south of Guanzhang, northwest of the upper reaches of the Yellow River.

古文：跂踵国在拘缨东，其为人大，两足亦大。
现代文：跂踵国在拘瘿国的东面，那里的人都是身材高大，两只脚也非常大。
English: The country of the heel is to the east of the country of the heel. The people there are tall and have very large feet.

古文：一曰大踵。
现代文：另一种说法是跂踵国叫反踵国。
English: Another way of saying this is that a country that is on its heels is called a back-heel country.

古文：欧丝之野大踵东，一女子跪据树欧丝。
现代文：欧丝野在大踵国的东面，有一女子跪倚着桑树在吐丝。
English: In Osino, on the eastern side of the country of the Big Heel, there is a woman kneeling under a mulberry tree and spinning yarn.

古文：三桑无枝，在欧丝东，其木长百仞，无枝。
现代文：三棵没有枝干的桑树，生长在欧丝野的东面，这种树虽高达百仞，没有树枝。
English: Three branchless mulberry trees, growing in the east of the Oss field. Although this tree is as tall as a hundred cranes, it has no branches.

古文：范林方三百里，在三桑东，洲环其下。
现代文：范林方圆三百里，在长着三棵没有树枝的桑树之地的东边，它的下面被沙洲环绕着。
English: Three hundred miles in circumference, on the eastern edge of the land of the three branchless mulberry trees, Fanlin is surrounded by sandbanks below.

古文：务隅之山，帝颛顼葬于阳，九嫔葬于阴。
现代文：务隅山，帝颛顼埋葬在它的南面，他的九位妃嫔埋葬在山的北面。
English: Emperor Wu was buried on the south side of Mount Wuxu, and his nine concubines were buried on the north side of the mountain.

古文：一曰爰有熊、罴、文虎、离朱、鸱久、视肉。
现代文：另一种说法认为这里有熊、罴、花斑虎、离朱鸟、鹞鹰、视肉怪兽。
English: Another theory is that there are bears, baboons, spotted tigers, scarlet ibises, vultures, and carnivorous monsters.

古文：平丘在三桑东。
现代文：平丘在长着三棵没有树枝的桑树之地的东面。
English: The flat hill is to the east of a field of three branchless mulberry trees.

古文：爰有遗玉、青鸟、视肉、杨柳、甘柤、甘华，百果所生。
现代文：这里有遗玉、青马、视肉怪兽、杨柳树、甘柤树、甘华树，是各种果树生长的地方。
English: There are relics of jade, Qingma, meat-eating monsters, poplar trees, neem trees, camphor trees, and it is a place where all kinds of fruit trees grow.

古文：有两山夹上谷，二大丘居中，名曰平丘。
现代文：在两座山相夹的一道山谷上，有两个大丘处于其间，叫做平丘。
English: In a valley sandwiched between two mountains, there are two large hills in between, called flat hills.

古文：北海内有兽，其状如马，名曰騊駼。
现代文：北海内有一种野兽，外形像马，名称是騊駼。
English: There is a beast in the North Sea that looks like a horse and is called a cormorant.

古文：有兽焉，其名曰駮，状如白马，锯牙，食虎豹。
现代文：又有一种野兽，名称是駮，外形像白马，长着锯齿般的牙，能吃老虎和豹子。
English: There is also a beast called a stork, which looks like a white horse, has serrated teeth, and can eat tigers and leopards.

古文：有素兽焉，状如马，名曰蛩蛩。
现代文：又有一种白色的野兽，外形像马，名称是蛩蛩。
English: And the beast was white, and the appearance of the beast was like the appearance of a horse: and his name was called the Shrew.

古文：有青兽焉，状如虎，我曰罗罗。
现代文：还有一种青色的野兽，形状像老虎，名称是罗罗。
English: There is also a blue beast, shaped like a tiger, called Loro.

古文：北方禺强，人面鸟身，珥两青蛇。践两青蛇。
现代文：北方的禺强神，长着鸟的身子，人的面孔，耳朵上穿挂着两条青蛇，脚底下踩着两条青蛇。
English: The obstinate god of the north, with the body of a bird, the face of a man, with two blue snakes hanging over his ears, and two blue snakes under his feet.

