古文：汉宣帝诏群臣议武帝庙乐，夏候胜曰： 武帝竭民财力，奢泰亡度，天下虚耗，百姓流离，赤地数千里，亡德泽于民，不宜为立庙乐。 
现代文：汉宣帝下令让大臣们讨论汉武帝宗庙的祭乐，夏侯胜说： 汉武帝竭尽百姓的财力，挥霍浪费没有节制，国家空虚枯竭，百姓流离失所，土地荒芜数千里，对人民没有恩惠德泽，不应该为他设立庙乐。 
English: Emperor Han Xuan ordered the ministers to discuss the ritual music of Emperor Hanwu's ancestral temple. Xia Hosheng said: Emperor Hanwu exhausted the people's financial resources, squandered and wasted without restraint, the country was empty and exhausted, the people were displaced, the land was deserted for thousands of miles, there was no favor for the people, and temple music should not be set up for him.

古文：于是丞相、御史劾奏胜非议诏书，毁先帝，不道，遂下狱，系再更冬，会赦，乃得免。章帝时，孔僖、崔骃游太学，相与论武帝始为天子，崇信圣道，及后恣已，忘其前善。
现代文：于是宰相、御史们就上奏皇帝，揭发夏侯胜责难诏书，说毁先朝皇帝，不守臣道,于是打入监狱，监禁了两年，遇到大赦，才得到赦免汉章帝时，孔僖、崔骃在太学学习，互相讨论到汉武帝，说他刚当皇帝时，崇敬相信圣明之道，等到后来，放纵自己、忘记了他以前的善行。
English: As a result, the prime minister and imperial historians appealed to the emperor, exposing the imperial edict of Xia Hou Sheng Liang, saying that he destroyed the previous emperor and did not keep the vassal way, so he went to prison and was imprisoned for two years. When he encountered an amnesty, he was pardoned by Emperor Han Zang. Kong Yu and Cui Yu were studying at Taixue, and they discussed Emperor Han Wudi. He said that when he was just an emperor, he revered and believed in the sacred way. Later, he indulged himself and forgot his previous good deeds.

古文：为邻房生告其诽谤先帝，刺讥当世，下吏受讯。
现代文：被隔壁房里的太学生告了他们诽谤先朝皇帝，指责讥议现在的皇上，被交给狱吏接受审讯。
English: They were accused of slandering the former emperor, accused of mocking the current emperor, and were handed over to prison officials for interrogation by the students in the next room.

古文：僖以书自讼，乃勿问。
现代文：孔僖靠上书自我辩护，才没有问罪。
English: Confucius did not plead guilty because he relied on his written self-defense.

古文：元帝时，贾捐之论珠崖事曰： 武帝籍兵厉马，攘服夷狄，天下断狱万数，寇贼并起，军旅数发，父战死于前，子斗伤于后，女子乘亭障，孤儿号于道，老母寡妇饮泣巷哭，是皆廓也泰大、征伐不休之故也。 
现代文：汉元帝时，贾捐之谈论珠崖的事时说： 汉武帝征购马匹磨砺兵器，侵伐征服少数民族，全国被判决的人好几万，外寇内贼都出现了；军队多次出征，父亲先战死，儿子又战伤，女子也登上边塞的堡垒，孤儿在道旁号哭，年老的母亲、丧夫的妻子在街巷中流泪；这些都是过分地扩大地盘、征战没有休止的缘故。 
English: In the time of Emperor Han Yuan, Jia Dongzhi said about the Pearl Cliff incident: Emperor Hanwu requisitioned horses to sharpen weapons, invaded and conquered ethnic minorities, tens of thousands of people were sentenced across the country, foreign invaders appeared; the army went to war many times, the father died first, the son was wounded, the woman also boarded the fortress of the frontier fort, the orphan cried on the side of the road, the old mother and the wife of the deceased husband shed tears in the streets; these are the reasons for the excessive expansion of the territory and the war.

古文：考三人所指武帝之失，捐之言最切，而三帝或罪或否，岂非夏候非议诏书，僖、骃诽谤，皆汉法所禁，如捐之直指其事，则在所不问乎？
现代文：考查三个人所指责的汉武帝的过失，贾捐之的话最激切，而三个皇帝有的问罪有的不问罪，这难道不是夏侯胜责难诏书和孔僖、崔骃诽谤先朝皇帝，都是汉朝法律禁止的，而象贾捐之那样直接地指责事情，就在不问罪之列吗？
English: Examining the faults of Emperor Hanwu accused by the three people, Jia Dongzhi's words were the most vehement, while the three emperors either asked for punishment or did not ask for punishment. Isn't it true that the edict of Xia Hou's victory and condemnation, and the slander of the emperors of the previous dynasty by Kong Xi and Cui Wei, are all prohibited by the laws of the Han Dynasty, but to directly accuse things as Jia Dongzhi did, is it not a sin?

