古文：初十日雨虽止而泞甚。
现代文：初十日雨虽然停了但地上很泥泞。
English: Although the rain stopped on the first ten days, the ground was very muddy.

古文：自万岁桥北行十里，为新桥铺，有路自东南来合。想桂阳县之支道也。
现代文：从万岁桥往北行十里，为新桥铺，有条路从东南边来交合，我猜想它是通往桂阳县的支道。
English: From the Wan Lai Bridge, ten miles to the north, there is a new bridge, and there is a road coming from the southeast. I guess it is a branch road leading to Guiyang County.

古文：又北十里为郴州之南关。
现代文：又往北走十里，为郴州城的南关。
English: Another ten miles to the north is the South Gate of Zhangzhou City.

古文：郴水东自山峡，曲至城东南隅，折而北径城之东关外，则苏仙桥横亘其上。
现代文：郴水从东面的山峡中曲折地流到城东南隅，折往北流经城的东关外，那里苏仙桥横贯在水流上。
English: Surabaya's water meanders from the eastern mountain gorge to the southeastern corner of the city, and then flows north through the city's Dongguan District, where Suzan Bridge runs across the water.

古文：九洞，甚宏整。至是雨复大作，余不暇入城，姑饭于溪上肆中，乃持盖为苏仙之游。
现代文：到达城南关后雨又大下起来，我无暇进城，姑且在溪岸上的店中吃了饭，便撑着雨伞前往苏仙殿游览。
English: After arriving at Seongnam Pass, it rained heavily again, and I had no time to go into the city. I had a meal at a restaurant on the riverbank, and then took an umbrella to visit Su Seonjeong.

古文：随郴溪西岸行，一里，度苏仙桥，随郴溪东岸行，东北二里，溪折西北去，乃由水经东上山。
现代文：沿着郴溪西岸行，一里后，跨过苏仙桥，然后沿郴溪东岸行，朝东北走两里，溪折向西北去，于是从水中经溪东面上了山。
English: I walked along the west bank of the Lushan Creek, and after one mile, I crossed the Su Xian Bridge, and then walked along the east bank of the Lushan Creek. I walked two miles to the northeast, and turned to the northwest, so I went up the mountain from the water via the east side of the creek.

古文：入山即有穹碑，书 天下第十八福地 。
现代文：一进入山中，就有块高大的碑屹立着，碑上写着 天下第十八福地 几个字。
English: As soon as you enter the mountain, there is a tall monument standing. On the monument are written the words "the 18th place of happiness in the world."

古文：由此半里，即为乳仙宫。
现代文：从碑处走半里，就是乳仙宫。
English: Half a mile from the monument is the Milk Fairy Palace.

古文：丛桂荫门，清流界道，有僧乘宗出迎客。
现代文：茂密的桂树遮蔽了门户，清清的流水流淌在路边。有个叫乘宗的僧人出来迎接客人。
English: The gate is shaded by a thick laurel tree, and clear running water flows by the side of the road. A monk named Jianzong comes out to greet the guests.

古文：余以足袜淋漓，恐污宫内，欲乘势先登山顶，与僧为明日期。
现代文：我因为腿脚鞋袜都打湿了在滴水，担心弄脏宫内，便想乘势先登山顶，与那僧相约明日会面。
English: Because my feet, legs, shoes and socks were dripping wet and I was worried about getting the inside of my womb dirty, I wanted to take advantage of the opportunity to climb to the top of the mountain first and make an appointment with the monk for tomorrow.

古文：僧以茶笋出饷，且曰： 白鹿洞即在宫后，可先一探。 
现代文：僧人端出了茶和笋子款待我们，并且说： 白鹿洞就在宫后面，可以先去一探。 
English: The monk welcomed us with tea and hazelnuts and said, "Bai Degu cave is behind the palace, you can explore it first."

古文：余急从之。
现代文：我急忙按他所说的起身前往。
English: I hurriedly did as he said and got up to leave.

古文：由宫左至宫后，则新室三楹，掩门未启。
现代文：我由宫左到了宫后，那里有三间新屋子，都闭门未开。
English: I went from the left side of the palace to the back of the palace, where there were three new rooms, all closed and unopened.

古文：即排推开门以入，石洞正当楹后，崖高数丈，为楹掩，俱不可见，洞门高丈六，止从楹上透光入洞耳。
现代文：于是我便推开门进去，石洞正好在屋子后面、崖壁有几丈高，被屋子遮掩着，全都见不到，洞门高一丈六尺，仅从屋子上方透些光亮到洞中。
English: So I pushed open the door and went in. The cave was right behind the house. The cliff wall was several stories high and was hidden by the house, so I couldn't see it all. The cave door was six feet high, and only a little light shone into the cave from above the house.

古文：洞东向，皆青石迸裂，二丈之内，即成峡而入，已转东向，渐洼伏黑隘，无容匍伏矣。
现代文：洞朝向东面，里面到处是破裂开的青石，两丈以内，便形成一个峡朝里延伸，随后折向东边，洞渐渐向下凹陷而且黑暗狭窄，葡旬着身体都不可能进去了。
English: The cave faces east, and inside there is cracked bluestone everywhere. Within two meters, it forms a canyon extending in the morning, and then turns to the east. The cave gradually sinks down and is dark and narrow, so it is impossible to enter.

古文：成峡处其西石崖倒垂，不及地者尺五，有嵌裂透漏之状。正德五年，锡邑秦太保金时，以巡抚征龚福全，勒石于上。
现代文：形成峡处的西边，石崖倒垂，末端距地面一尺五，显出张口裂身透光泄物的形态，正德五年，无锡县人秦太保以巡抚身份剿龚福全，曾刻文在此石上。
English: On the west side of the gorge, the stone cliff is hanging down, the end is one and a half feet from the ground, showing the form of a gaping crack and translucent waste. In the fifth year of Zhengde, Qin Taibao, a person from Wuxi County, served as the governor of Fuquan. He once engraved a message on this stone.

古文：又西有一隙，侧身而进，已转南下，穿穴匍伏出岩前，则明窦也。复从楹内进洞少憩，仍至前宫别乘宗，由宫内右登岭，冒雨北上一里，即为中观。
现代文：又往西有一条石缝，我侧身走进去，随后折往南面朝下走，穿过孔穴甸甸着身体爬出岩前，这是个透亮的小孔 我又从屋内进到洞中休息了一小会，仍旧回到前宫辞别了乘宗，从宫内右边攀登山岭，冒雨往北朝上走一里，就是中观。
English: To the west, there was a stone crevice. I walked sideways into it, then turned to the south and walked down. I crawled out of the rock through the hole. It was a small hole with a lot of light. I went inside the house and rested in the hole for a while. I still went back to the former palace and said goodbye to my family. I climbed the mountain from the right side of the palace and walked a mile up to the north in the rain. That was the middle view.

古文：观门甚雅，中有书室，花竹翛á自由自在然，乃王氏者，亦以足污未入。
现代文：观门十分雅致，观中有书房，书房外鲜花翠竹悠然自在地生长着，这书房是个姓王的，我也因为脚上脏秽污浊而未进去。
English: The view of the door is very elegant. There is a study room in the view. Outside the study room, flowers and green bamboo are growing leisurely. This study room belongs to a man named Wang. I didn't go in because my feet were dirty.

古文：郴州为九仙二佛之地，若成武丁之骡冈在西城外，刘僭之刘仙岭在东城外，佛则无量，智俨廖师也，俱不及苏仙，故不暇及之。
现代文：从咋观右边攀登山岭，冒雨往东北朝上走一里半，便到达山顶。有一条从东面迎门进入苏仙殿的大路，那是殿前门的正路；有条小路往琳上到沉香石、飞升亭，那是殿后面的路。我从小路上去，带着一身淖湿拜渴了苏仙像，僧侣和世俗间的人拜渴苏仙像的有几十个，暄雌嚷嚷会集在殿中，我烤火烘衣，自顾安适，无暇打听什么。
English: Climbing the mountain ridge from the right side of the view, I walked a mile and a half up to the northeast in the rain and reached the top of the mountain. There is a large road from the east to the entrance of the Su Xian Hall, which is the main road of the front door of the hall; there is a small road to the Lin up to the agate stone and the soaring pavilion, which is the road behind the hall. I went from the small road, with a wet and thirsty Su Xian statue. There are dozens of monks and secular people who worship the thirsty Su Xian statue. Women and men will gather in the hall. I baked and baked, taking care of myself

古文：十一日与众旅饭后，乃独游殿外虚堂。堂三楹，上有诗扁环列，中有额，名不雅驯，不暇记也。
现代文：十一日和众人一起吃了饭后，便独自一人游览殿外的虚堂堂分三间，上有诗匾环列，中间有门额，名称不雅驯，无闲暇记录来。
English: On the 11th day, after eating with the others, he went alone to visit the hall outside the hall, which was divided into three rooms, with a row of poems and rings, a doorway in the middle, an indecent name, and no record of leisure time.

古文：其堂址高，前列楼环之，正与之等。
现代文：那堂的基址高，前面排列着楼房环绕着它，正好与它同样高。
English: The foundation of the hall is high, and the buildings in front of it and around it are just as high.

古文：楼亦轩敞，但未施丹垩è白，已就欹裂，其外即为前门，殿后有寝宫玉皇阁，其下即飞升亭矣。
现代文：长也是宽敞明亮，但未粉刷油漆，已经渐渐倾斜破裂。堂外就是苏血殿的前门，殿后面有寝宫玉皇阁，玉皇阁下边就是飞升亭了。
English: The long hall is also spacious and bright, but the unpainted paint has gradually tilted and cracked. Outside the hall is the front door of the Su Sangu Shrine, behind the hall is the sleeping palace, the Jade Emperor Pavilion, and next to the Jade Emperor Pavilion is the Flying Pavilion.

古文：是早微雨，至是微雨犹零，仍持盖下山。
现代文：这夕清早就下起了细雨，到现在小雨还在零星飘落，因而仍旧撑着雨闰下山。
English: This evening and early in the morning, it started to drizzle. Up to now, light rain is still falling sporadically, so it is still raining down the mountain.

古文：过中观，入谒仙，觅僧遍如，不在。入王氏书室，折蔷薇一枝，下至乳源宫，供仙案间。
现代文：经过中观，我进去拜渴了仙人的像，寻找僧人遍如，他不在又进入王氏书房，折了一枝蔷薇，带着下到乳源宫，供在仙案间。
English: After the mid-viewing, I went in to worship the image of the thirsty hermit, looking for the monk Henru. When he was not there, I went into Wang's study, folded a rose, and took it down to Yuyuan Palace to be kept in the hermit's office.

古文：乘宗仍留茶点，且以仙桃石馈余，余无以酬，惟劝其为吴游，冀他日备云水一供耳。
现代文：到宗仍然留我们喝茶吃点心，并且赠送我他桃石，我没有什么酬谢的，只有劝他作一次昊地的旅游，希望日后能为其云游备斋一供。
English: When he arrived, he still left us to drink tea and eat snacks, and gave me his peach stone. I have nothing to thank him for, except to advise him to make a trip to Haodi, hoping to provide a meal for his trip in the future.

古文：宫中有天启初邑人袁子训雷州二守。碑，言苏仙事甚详。
现代文：乳源宫中有块天启初年郴州城人袁子训立的碑，碑文对苏仙的事迹叙述得很详尽。
English: In Yuyuan Palace, there is a monument to Yuan Zi Xunli, a citizen of Zhangzhou City in the first year of the Apocalypse. The inscription describes the deeds of Su Xian in great detail.

古文：言仙之母便县人，便即今永兴。有浣于溪，有苔成团绕足者再四，感而成孕，生仙于汉惠帝五年即公元前年五月十五。母弃之后洞中，即白鹿洞。明日往视，则白鹤覆之，白鹿乳之，异而收归。
现代文：碑文说苏仙的母亲是便县人，有二天在溪中洗灌东西，一团青苔在她钓脚上缠绕了三四圈，于是有所感应而怀孕，在汉惠帝五年五月十五日生下苏仙，•她母亲将他丢在如今乳源宫后面的石洞中，第二天前去看时，却见白鹤用翅膀遮盖着他，白鹿给他哺乳，觉得奇异，便把他抱回家。
English: The inscription says that Su Xian's mother was from Bo County. On two days, she was washing something in the stream. A mass of moss wrapped around her fishing foot three or four times, so she felt something and became pregnant. She gave birth to Su Xian on the fifteenth day of the fifth month of the Han Dynasty. Her mother left him in the stone cave behind what is now Yuyuan Palace. When she went to check on him the next day, she saw a white crane covering him with its wings and a white deer suckling him. She thought it was strange and took him home.

古文：长就学，师欲命名而不知其姓，令出观所遇，遇担禾者以草贯鱼而过，遂以苏为姓，而名之曰耽。
现代文：长大后去上学，老师想替他取个名但不知道他的姓犷叫他到屋外去，看会碰到什么，结果遇到一个挑禾苗的人用草穿了鱼走过去，于是用薛作为姓，而名叫耽。
English: When he grew up and went to school, his teacher wanted to give him a name but didn't know his surname, so he was told to go outside and see what he would encounter. As a result, he encountered a person who was picking up grass seedlings and walked past with grass and fish, so he used Xue as his surname and was named Shan.

古文：尝同诸儿牧牛羊，不突不扰，因各群畀之，无乱群者，诸儿又称为牛师。
现代文：他曾和众儿童一起放牧牛羊，他的牛羊不会胡乱冲撞混杂，于是其他各儿童将他们的牛羊都交给他看管，而同样没有乱群的，所以众儿童又称他为牛师。
English: He used to herd cattle and sheep together with the children. His cattle and sheep would not run amok, so the other children entrusted their cattle and sheep to him, and there was no herd disorder either, so the children also called him a cowherd.

古文：事母至孝，母病思鱼脍细肉，仙行觅脍，不宿而至。母食之喜，问所从得，曰： 便。 
现代文：他侍奉母亲极为孝敬，他母亲生病想吃生鱼片，他去找寻，不到一夜就找回来 母亲吃了很欢喜，阿他从哪里找到的，他说： 便县城中。 
English: He served his mother with the utmost respect. When his mother fell ill and wanted to eat sashimi, he went looking for it and got it back in less than a night. His mother was very happy when she ate it. As for where he found it, he said, "In the middle of the county."

古文：便去所居远，非两日不能返，母以为欺。
现代文：便县城离他们居住的地方很远，没有两天时间不可能返回来，因而他母亲以为是欺哄她的。
English: The county seat was far away from where they lived, and it was impossible to return in less than two days, so his mother thought he was deceiving her.

古文：曰： 市脍时舅氏在旁，且询知母恙，不日且至，可验。 
现代文：他说道： 买这些鱼片时，我舅舅在旁边，并且他在问知母亲您身体不适后，说不久将会来看望您，到时候就可验证。 
English: He said: My uncle was with me when I bought these fillets, and he told my mother that he would come to see you soon, when he knew you were unwell.

古文：舅至，母始异之。
现代文：他舅舅来后证实了他所说的，他母亲这才觉得他不同寻常。
English: His uncle came and confirmed what he had said, which made his mother think he was unusual.

古文：后白日奉上帝命，随仙官上升于文帝三年七月十五日。
现代文：后来白日中奉上天的命令，在文帝三年七月十五日随仙官一道升了天。
English: Later, during the day, he received an order from heaven, and on July 15th, the third year of Emperor Wen's reign, he ascended to heaven together with the immortals.

古文：母言： 儿去，吾何以养？ 
现代文：他母亲说： 儿去了，我用什么养活自己呢？ 
English: His mother said, "Now that my son is gone, how can I feed myself?

古文：乃留一柜，封识甚固，曰： 凡所需，扣柜可得。
现代文：他便留下一个柜子，封闭得很牢固，在上面作了标记，对他母亲说： 凡是所需要东西，扣一下柜子就可以得到。
English: He left a strong-closed cupboard with a sign on it, saying to his mother: "Everything you need is just a click away."

古文：第必不可开。 
现代文：只是一定不可打开它。 
English: Just be sure not to open it.

古文：指庭间橘及井曰： 此中将大疫，以橘叶及井水愈之。 
现代文：并指着庭中的橘树和水井说： 这地方将会发生大瘟疫，到时用橘树叶和井水可以治愈。 
English: Pointing to the orange trees in the yard and the well, he said, "There will be a great plague in this place. At that time, the leaves of the orange trees and the water from the well can be used to cure it."

古文：后果大验。
现代文：后来果然大为灵验。
English: Later, it proved to be very effective.

古文：郡人益灵异之，欲开柜一视，母从之，有只鹤冲去，此后扣柜不灵矣。
现代文：郡中的人更加以为灵异乡想打开柜子看一下，他母亲依从了，等打开柜子，有只鹤直往上飞去，这以后扣柜子就不灵了。
English: People in the county are more likely to think that the spirit of a stranger wants to open the cabinet and take a look, his mother complied, and then opened the cabinet, and a crane flew straight up, after which the cabinet would not work.

古文：母逾百岁，既卒，乡人仿佛见仙在岭哀号不已。郡守张邈往送葬，求一见仙容，为示半面，光彩射人。
现代文：他母亲年纪活过百岁，死后，乡里的人仿佛看见苏仙在岭上悲伤地哭个不停 郡守张邀去送葬，祈求见二面苏仙的容貌，苏仙显现了一半面容给他看，光彩照人。
English: His mother lived to be over a hundred years old. After her death, the people in the village seemed to see Su Xian crying inconsolably on the ridge. The county governor invited Zhang to go to the funeral and prayed to see the appearance of Su Xian on two sides. Su Xian showed half of his face to him, shining brightly.

古文：又垂空出只手，绿毛巨掌，见者大异。
现代文：又悬空伸出一只手，绿毛巨掌，见到的人大为惊异。
English: Another hand, with a huge green-furred palm, was hanging in the air, surprising everyone who saw it.

古文：自后灵异甚多，俱不暇览。第所谓 沉香石 者，一石突山头，予初疑其无谓，而镌字甚古，字外有履迹痕，则仙人上升遗迹也。所谓 仙桃石 者，石小如桃形，在浅土中，可锄而得之，峰顶及乳仙洞俱有，磨而服之，可已治愈心疾，亦橘井之遗意也。
现代文：碑文中说自此以后灵异的事很多犷我都无暇观览、只是所说的 沉香石 ，是突立在山头上的一块石头，开初我怀疑它役什么特别的，然而它上面刻有很古的字，字外有鞋子踩踏过的印迹，是仙人升夭时的遗迹扩所谓的 仙桃石， ，石头，如桃形，埋在浅士中、可以用锄头挖刨到，峰顶和乳仙洞中都有，磨细后服下，可以止住心胸的病痛，这也是那橘树叶和井水的仙灵气的遗留。
English: The inscription says that since then, there have been many miraculous things that I have not had time to observe, but the said agate stone is a stone protruding from the top of the mountain. At first, I doubted that it served any special purpose. However, it is engraved with very ancient characters. There are footprints of shoes outside the words. It is a relic of the immortals' ascension. It is called the fairy peach stone. The stone, like a peach, is buried in the shallows and can be dug and scraped with a hoe. It can be found in the peak and the nymph cave. After grinding and taking it, it can stop the

古文：传文甚长，略识一二，以征本末云。
现代文：碑上的传文很长，我仅是略记下一二，以便征询查考事实的本末而已。
English: The epitaph on the monument is very long, and I have only jotted down one or two sentences in order to obtain the facts.

古文：还过苏仙桥，从溪上觅便舟，舟过午始发，乃过南关，入州前，复西过行台前，仍出南关。
现代文：往回跨过苏仙桥，从溪上找到一只轻便的小船，那船要过了午后才出发，于是经过城南关，进城到了州署前，又在西经过行合前，仍然出城到了南关。
English: I walked back across Su Xian Bridge and found a small, light boat on the creek. The boat would not leave until the afternoon, so I went through the south gate of the city, entered the city and arrived in front of the state office, and then went through the west gate and still left the city and arrived in the south gate before the line closed.

古文：盖南关外有十字口，市肆颇盛，而城中甚寥寂。
现代文：南关外有个十字口，集市店铺很繁盛，而城中却非常寂静冷落。
English: There is a crossroads outside Nankuan, the market shops are very prosperous, but the city is very quiet and deserted.

古文：城不大，而墙亦不甚高。
现代文：城不大，城墙也不很高。
English: The city is small and the walls are not very high.

古文：郴之水自东南北绕，其山则折岭横其南而不高，而高者皆非过龙之脊。
现代文：郴水自东南向北绕流，山则有折岭横在城南，但不高，高的都不是大山脉穿越过去的山脊。
English: Surabaya water circulates from the southeast to the north, and the mountains have a ridge across the south of the city, but they are not high. The ridges that cross the past are not high.

古文：午后，下小舟，东北由苏仙桥下，顺流西北去，六十里达郴口。
现代文：午后，上到小船中，船由东北的苏仙桥下，顺流向西北航去，行六十里达郴口。
English: In the afternoon, we boarded a small boat. The boat sailed from the Su Xian Bridge in the northeast to the northwest along the river, and sailed to the sixty-year-old estuary.

古文：时暮色已上，而雨复至，恐此北晚无便舟，而所附舟连夜往程口，遂随之行。
现代文：这时暮色已经降临，而雨又下了起来，担心从此处往北去因为天晚没有便利的船只，而所搭乘的小船连夜去程可，于是随船前行。
English: By this time dusk had fallen, and the rain had begun to fall again, and fearing to go north from here, because there were no convenient boats in the evening, and the small boat they were taking could travel overnight, they followed the boat.

古文：郴口则郴江自东南，耒水自正东，二水合而势始大。
现代文：郴口那里，郴江自东南流来，来水从正东流来，两水汇合后水势才变大。
English: At Hekou, the Lijiang River flows from the southeast, and the incoming water flows from the due east. The water potential only increases after the two waters converge.

古文：江口诸峰，俱石崖盘立，寸土无丽即附着。
现代文：来水源出桂阳县城南面五里的来山下，向西北流到兴宁县，便能航行小船；又流三十里到东江市，已能航行大船犷再流五十里便到此处。
English: The source of the water comes from five miles south of the city in Guiyang County, flows down the mountain, and flows northwest to Xingning County, where it can sail small boats; it flows another thirty miles to Dongjiang City, where it can sail large boats, and then flows another fifty miles to here.

古文：《志》称有曹王寨，山极险峻，暮不及登，亦无路登也。
现代文：江口处的众山峰上，都是石崖盘绕耸立，寸土未沾附。志书上说有座曹王寨山，极其险峻，因为天将黑来不及去攀登，而且也无路可登。
English: On the mountain peaks at the river's mouth, there are stone cliffs coiled around each other, not touching the soil. The book says that there is a Cao Wangzhai Mountain, extremely precipitous, because it is too late to climb when it gets dark, and there is no way to climb it.

古文：舟人夜鼓棹，三十里，抵黄泥铺，雨至而泊。
现代文：船夫连夜摇浆，行三十里，抵达黄泥铺，因为雨来临而停泊下来。
English: The boatman rocked the pulp overnight, traveled thirty miles, arrived at the yellow mud shop, and moored down because of the rain.

古文：余从篷底窥之，外若桥门，因起视，则一大石室下也。
现代文：我从船篷底下窥视，外边如桥门，心中觉得奇异，于是起来看，却原来是在一间大石室下边。
English: I peered under the canopy, the outside like a bridge gate, and felt strange in my heart, so I got up and looked, but it turned out to be under a large stone room.

古文：宽若数间屋，下汇为潭，外覆若环桥，四舟俱泊其内。岩外雨声潺潺，四鼓乃止。
现代文：它像几间屋子那样宽，下边汇成潭。外面遮掩而像环拱形的桥，有四只船停泊在里边 岩洞外面雨声潺潺，到四更时才停止。
English: It is as wide as several rooms, with a pool at the bottom, a covered arch-like bridge on the outside, and four boats moored inside. Outside the cave, the sound of rain is deafening, and it only stops at four o'clock.

古文：雨止而行，昧爽达程口矣。
现代文：雨停后就出发，拂晓抵达程口。
English: After the rain stopped, we set off and arrived at the starting point at dawn.

古文：乃登涯。
现代文：于是登上岸。
English: So they went ashore.

古文：十二日晨炊于程口肆中。
现代文：十二日清晨在程口的一家店铺中做饭吃。
English: On the morning of the 12th, they cooked and ate in a shop in Chengkou.

古文：程口者，《志》所称程乡水也，其地属兴宁，其水发源茶陵、酃县界。
现代文：程口就是志书上所称的程乡水所在地，地属于兴宁县，水发源茶陵州和鄙县交界处。
English: Chengkou is the location of Chengxiang water mentioned in the book. It belongs to Xingning County, and the water source is at the junction of Chaling Prefecture and Minian County.

古文：舟溯流入，皆兴宁西境。
现代文：船溯流航行一，所经都属兴宁县西境。
English: On the first voyage, the ship followed the current and passed through the western border of Xingning County.

古文：十五里为郴江，又进有中远山，又名钟源。为无量佛现生地，土人夸为名山。
现代文：行十五里为郴江，又溯流进去有座中远山，是无量寿佛显现生身的地方，当地人把它夸耀为名山。
English: Fifteen miles away is the Lijiang River, and downstream there is a middle-to-high mountain. It is the place where the Buddha of Immeasurable Life appeared in the flesh, and the locals boast of it as a famous mountain.

古文：又进，则小舟尚可溯流三日程，逾高脚岭则茶陵道矣。
现代文：再进去，小船还可溯流航行三日，然后翻过高脚岭就是通往茶陵州的路了。
English: Entering it again, the boat can still sail upstream for three days, and then the road to Chalingzhou is over the foothills.

古文：若兴宁县治，则自东江市而上三十里乃至也。
现代文：至于兴宁县城，从东江市往上游航行三十里就到。
English: As for Xingning County, it is only 30 miles upstream from Dongjiang City.

古文：程乡水西入郴江，其处煤炭大舟鳞次，以水浅尚不能发。
现代文：程乡水向西汇入郴江，汇流处运煤的大船像鱼鳞一样地排列着，这是因为水浅还不能开船。
English: Chengxiang water flows westward into the Minjiang River. At the confluence, large ships carrying coal are lined up like fish scales, because the water is too shallow to sail.

古文：上午，得小煤船，遂附之行。
现代文：上午，我们找到一只小煤船，于是便搭乘前行。
English: In the morning, we found a small coal ship, so we hitched a ride.

古文：程口西北，重岩若剖，夹立江之两涯，俱纯石盘亘，倏左倏右，环转一如武夷。
现代文：程口西北边，重叠的岩石若剖开似的，夹立在江的两边，尽都是清一色的石头盘绕亘贯在上面，一忽儿在江左，一忽儿在江右，颜色间杂有赤褐色，环绕回旋的形态完全如同武夷山的岩石。
English: On the northwest side of Chengkou, the overlapping rocks, as if cut open, stand on both sides of the river. They are all clear-colored stones coiled eternally on the top, sometimes on the left of the river, sometimes on the right of the river. The colors are mixed with reddish-brown. The shape of the circling is completely like the rock of Mount Wuyi.

古文：所附舟敝甚而无炊具，余揽山水之胜，过午不觉其馁饥饿。
现代文：我们所搭乘的船破旧不堪而且没有炊具，我只顾观览山水美景，过了中午都不觉得肚饿。
English: The boat we were on was dilapidated and had no cooking facilities. I just enjoyed the beautiful scenery and did not feel hungry after midday.

古文：又二十里，过永兴县。
现代文：又行二十里，经过永兴县城。
English: Another twenty miles, passing through Yongxing County.

古文：县在江北，南临江岸，以岸为城，舟过速不及停。
现代文：县城在江北，南临江岸，以岸作为城墙，船经过时速度快来不及停留。
English: The county seat is in the north of the river, south of the river bank, with the bank as the city wall. When the ship passes, the speed is too fast to stop.

古文：已而得一小舟，遂易之，就炊其间。
现代文：随后另外找到一只小船，于是换乘过去，到那只小船上烧火做饭吃。
English: Then they found another small boat, so they transferred to that one and cooked on the fire.

古文：饭毕，已十五里，为观音岩。
现代文：吃完饭，已行了十五里，到了观音岩。
English: After dinner, we have traveled fifteen miles and arrived at Guanyin Rock.

古文：岩在江北岸，西南下瞰江中，有石崖腾空，上覆下裂，直滨江流。
现代文：此岩位于江北岸，朝西南俯临江中，有座石崖腾空飞突，上面倾覆而下边裂开，直迫近江流。
English: This rock is located on the north bank of the river, facing southwest and overlooking the middle of the river. There is a rock cliff that soars into the sky, collapses from above and cracks from below, directly approaching the Omi River.

古文：初倚其足，叠阁两层，阁前有洞临流，中容数人。
现代文：先是背靠岩脚叠架了一座两层高的阁，阁前面有个洞临沂汀流洞中可容纳好几人。
English: First, a two-storey pavilion was stacked against the rock foot. In front of the pavilion, there was a cave that could accommodate several people.

古文：由阁右悬梯直上，袅空挂蝀ō即虹，上接崖顶，透隙而上，覆顶之下，中嵌一龛，观世音像在焉。
现代文：我由阁右边悬吊着的梯子直朝上爬，那情形犹如云烟缭绕的空中挂着的彩虹连接崖顶。穿过缝隙上去，看见崖顶下边，中央位置镶嵌着一个佛完，观世音的像就供在其中。
English: I climbed straight up from the ladder hanging on the right side of the pavilion, it was like a rainbow hanging in the smoky sky connected to the cliff top. Through the gap, I saw the bottom of the cliff top, the central position was inlaid with a Buddha, and the image of Guanyin was provided in it.

古文：岩下江心，又有石狮横卧中流，昂首向岩，种种绝异。
现代文：岩下江心中，又有石狮横卧在水流中间，昂首向着岩上，总之，每处每样都极其特异。
English: In the heart of the Iwashita River, there is also a stone lion lying in the middle of the current, raising its head towards the rock. In short, everything is very special.

古文：下舟又五里，有大溪自南来注，是为森口。
现代文：上船又行五里，有条大溪从南面流来交汇，这里是森口。
English: After boarding the boat, it is another five miles to the confluence of a large stream flowing from the south. This is Moriguchi.

古文：又北五里，泊于柳州滩，借邻舟拖楼以宿。
现代文：这条大溪是桂阳州龙渡以东的各条水流往东汇合白豹水而形成的，到此处汇入末江。又往北行五里，停泊在柳州滩，我借了邻船拖楼住宿。
English: This large stream was formed by the eastward confluence of various water flows east of Longdu in Guiyang State and the White Leopard Water, where it merged into the Mujiang River. It also went five miles north and anchored in Liuzhou Beach. I borrowed a neighboring boat to tow the building for accommodation.

古文：是晚素魄指月亮独莹，为三月所无，而江流山色，树影墟灯，远近映合，苏东坡承天寺夜景不是过也。
现代文：这晚月色独明，是三个月来所没有的，江流山色，树影村灯，远近辉映交合，苏东坡笔下的承天寺夜景不比这更优美。
English: This night, the moon has a unique color, which has not been seen for three months. The river has a mountain color, the trees have village lights, and the far and near reflections are intermingled. Su Dongpo's night view of Jotian Temple is no more beautiful than this.

古文：永兴以北，山始无回崖突石之观，第夹江逶迤耳。
现代文：永兴县城以北，山就开始没有崖壁回绕、石头飞突的景象了，只是夹江曲折延伸而已。 
English: To the north of Yongxing County, there are no cliff walls winding around or rocks flying out of the mountains, just the river meandering.

古文：十三日平明过舟，行六十五里，过上堡市。
现代文：十三日天亮回到所乘船中，行六十五里，经过生堡市。
English: On the morning of the 13th, I returned to the ship I was on, traveled sixty-five miles, and passed through the city of Shengbao.

古文：有山在江之南，岭上多翻砂转石，是为出锡之所。
现代文：有座山位于江的南边，山岭上有很多翻刨出来的矿砂和石头，这是一个出产锡的地方。
English: There is a mountain on the south side of the river. There is a lot of excavated ore and stone on the mountain ridge. This is a place where tin is produced.

古文：山下有市，煎炼成块，以发客焉。
现代文：山下有个市镇，在那里将矿砂煎炼成锡块，销售给购买的客户。
English: There is a town at the foot of the mountain, where the ore is refined into tin and sold to customers.

古文：其地已属耒阳，盖永兴、耒阳两邑之中道也。
现代文：这地方已经属于来阳县，大略处在永兴、来阳两县县城的中途。
English: This place already belongs to Laiyang County, roughly halfway between Yongxing and Laiyang.

古文：已过江之北，登直钓岩。
现代文：随后，过到江的北边，登上直钓岩。
English: Then, cross over to the north side of the river and climb onto the reef.

古文：岩前有真武殿、观音阁，东向迎江。
现代文：岩前面有真武殿和观音阁，它们朝向东面迎着江流。
English: In front of the rock, there are Zhenwu Hall and Guanyin Pavilion, which face the river to the east.

古文：而洞门瞰江南向，当门石柱中垂，界为二门，若连环然。
现代文：而岩洞洞门俯瞰江流，朝向南面，洞门当中垂着一根石柱，将洞门分隔成两个，若连环的一般。
English: The cave entrance overlooks the river and faces south. A stone pillar hangs in the middle of the entrance, dividing the entrance into two, like a continuous ring.

古文：其内空阔平整。
现代文：洞内空阔平整。
English: The hollow is wide and flat.

古文：其右隅裂一窍，历磴而上，别为邃幽深室。
现代文：洞的右角上裂开一个孔穴，经石瞪攀上去，另外形成一个深邃的洞穴。
English: In the right corner of the cave, a hole is cut, and climbers climb up through the rubble, creating another deep cave.

古文：其左隅由大洞深入，石窍忽盘空而起，东迸一隙，斜透天光；其内又盘空而起，若万石之钟，透顶直上，天光一围，圆若明镜，下堕其中，仰而望之，直是井底观天也。
现代文：洞的左角上，由大洞深入进去，有石孔忽然盘空而起，东边裂开一条缝隙，天空中的光亮从其中斜斜地透进来；它里边又有孔穴旋空而起，若如可么装万石粮食的大钟，那孔穴穿过洞顶直通向上，天空中的一圈光亮，圆若明镜，往下泻落在其中，仰头望去，简直就是井底观天。
English: In the left corner of the cave, from the large hole, there is a stone hole suddenly coiled up. A gap opens on the east side, from which the light in the sky penetrates obliquely. Inside it, there is also a hole coiled up. If it were a large clock containing stone grain, the hole would pass through the top of the cave straight up. A circle of light in the sky, round like a mirror, falls down into it. Looking up, it would be like looking up at the sky from the bottom of a well.

古文：是日风水俱利，下午又九十里，抵耒阳县南关。
现代文：这天风向水流都利于航行，下午又行了九十里，抵达来阳县城南关。
English: On this day, the wind and water currents were favorable for sailing. In the afternoon, we traveled another ninety miles and arrived at Laiyang County's Seongnam Pass.

古文：耒水经耒阳城东直北而去，群山至此尽开，绕江者惟残冈断陇而已。
现代文：来水经过未阳城东边直向北流去，群山到此处都向周围远去，盘绕在江边的只有些残冈断陇而已。
English: The incoming water flows through the eastern edge of Miyang City straight to the north, the mountains here are far away from the surroundings, and there are only a few remnants of hills around the river.

古文：耒阳虽有城，而居市荒寂，衙廨颓陋。
现代文：来阳虽然有城池，但居屋集市荒凉冷落，官署倒塌简陋。
English: Although there is a castle in Liyang, the HOSPITALITY PROPERTY MARKET is desolate and deserted, and the government office is dilapidated.

古文：由南门入，经县前，至东门登城，落日荒城，无堪极目。
现代文：我从南门进了城，经过县衙前，到东门边登上城墙，落日下荒城一座，不堪极目。
English: I entered the city from the south gate, passed in front of the county seat, and climbed up the city wall to the east gate. It was a desolate city under the setting sun. It was unbearable.

古文：下城，出小东门，循城外江流，南至南关入舟。
现代文：下了城墙，走出小东门，沿城外江流，往南到南关，回到船中。
English: Down the city wall, out of the small east gate, along the river outside the city, south to the south gate, back to the boat.

古文：是夜，色尤皎，假火贾舡中舱宿焉。
现代文：这天夜里，月色尤其皎洁，借生着火的商船的中舱住宿。
English: On this particular night, the moon was particularly bright, so we took the middle cabin of a merchant ship that was on fire.

古文：十四日五鼓起，乘月过小舟，顺流而北，晨餐时已至排前，行六十里矣。
现代文：十四日五更时起来，乘月回到所乘的小船中，顺流向北航去，早餐时已经到达排前，行了六十里了。
English: On the fourteenth day of the month, I got up at five o'clock, took the moon and returned to the boat I was on, sailed upstream to the north, and by breakfast I had reached the front of the queue and traveled sixty miles.

古文：小舟再前即止于新城市，新城去衡州陆路尚百里，水路尚二百余里，适有煤舟从后至，遂移入其中而炊焉。
现代文：小船再往前就将停在新城市，新城市距衡州城陆路有一百里，水路还有两百多里，当时正好有只煤船从后面来到，于是我们移到那只煤船中做饭吃。
English: The boat will stop in the new city further ahead. The new city is a hundred miles from Hengzhou City by land and more than two hundred miles by water. At that time, a coal ship came from behind, so we moved to the coal ship to cook and eat.

古文：又六十里，午至新城市，在江之北，阛堵甚盛，亦此中大市也，为耒阳、衡阳分界。
现代文：又行六十里，中午时到达新城市，它位于江的北岸，店铺很多人口密集，也是这地方中的一个大市镇，为来阳、衡阳两县的分界处。
English: After another sixty miles, at noon, they arrived at Xincheng. It is located on the north bank of the river, and is densely populated with many shops. It is also a large town in this area, and is the border between Laiyang and Hengyang counties.

古文：时南风甚利，舟过新城不泊，余私喜冣ù同 聚 日之力尚可兼程百五十里。
现代文：当时刮着南风很便利航行，船经过新城市时没有停泊，我私下欢喜，以为这天尽全力航行，还可以加倍的速度赶一百五十里的路。
English: At that time, sailing was very convenient with the south wind blowing, and the ship did not moor when passing the new city. I was secretly happy, thinking that I could sail as hard as I could on this day, and I could double the speed to catch a hundred and fifty miles.

古文：已而众舟俱止涯间，问之，则前湾风逆，恐有巨浪，欲候风止耳。
现代文：不久，众船只都停在了江边，一询问，原来前面江湾中风向倒逆，恐怕会起大浪，想等风停了再往前航行。
English: Soon, all the ships stopped at the river. Upon inquiry, it turned out that the wind was blowing in the opposite direction in the bay ahead, and I was afraid that there would be big waves. I wanted to wait until the wind stopped and then sail forward.

古文：时余蔬米俱尽，而囊无一文，每更一舟，辄欲速反迟，为之闷闷。
现代文：当时我的菜蔬粮米都已经吃完，而衣袋中没有一文钱，蓦更换一只船，总是想加快速度而反倒延迟，为此心中闷闷不乐。
English: At that time, my vegetables, grains and rice had all been eaten, and there was not a penny in my pocket to replace a boat. I always wanted to speed up but delayed, and I was unhappy about it.

古文：以刘君所惠一方，就村妇易米四筒。日下舂，舟始发。
现代文：我用刘君惠赐的一块绸布，到村中与一位妇女换了四筒米、太阳下山时，船才开。
English: Using a piece of silk cloth given to me by Liu Jun, I went to the village and exchanged four cans of rice with a woman. The boat didn't leave until the sun went down.

古文：乘月随流六十里，泊于相公滩，已中夜矣，盖随流而不棹也。
现代文：乘月顺流航行六十里，停泊在相公滩，这时已经半夜了，这是因为顺流而船夫没有摇船，速度不很快。
English: After sailing sixty miles down the moon current and anchoring at the public beach, it was already midnight. This was because the boatman did not rock the boat due to the current and the speed was not very fast.

古文：按，耒阳县四十里有相公山，为诸葛武侯驻兵地，今已在县西北，入衡阳境矣，滩亦以相公名，其亦武侯之遗否耶？
现代文：曝文献记载，距来阳县城四十里有个相公山，是诸葛武侯曾经驻过兵的地方，如今的这个相公山已经在县西北进人衡阳县境处了，这里的滩也以相公为名，它是否也是武侯的遗迹呢？
English: According to documentary records, there is a Sangong Mountain forty miles from the city of Laiyang County. It is the place where Zhuge Wuhou once stationed soldiers. Today, this Sangong Mountain has entered the territory of Hengyang County in the northwest of the county. The beach here is also named after Sangong. Is it also a relic of Wuhou?

古文：新城之西，江忽折而南流，十五、六里而始西转，故水路迂曲再倍于陆云。
现代文：到新城市的西面，江忽然折向南流，十五六里以后才折朝西去，所以水路比陆路绕两倍。
English: To the west of the new city, the river suddenly turns to the south, and only after fifteen or sixteen miles does it turn to the west, so the waterway is twice as long as the land route.

古文：十五日昧爽行，西风转逆，云亦油然。上午甫六十里，雷雨大至，舟泊不行。
现代文：十五日三拂晓开船，这时西风逆转，云也翻涌；上午才行了六十里，隆隆的雷声中雨大下起来，于是船停泊下来不再向前航行。
English: On the morning of the 15th, the ship set sail at dawn, when the westerly wind reversed and the clouds rolled in. It was only sixty miles in the morning, and it rained heavily amid the rumble of thunder, so the ship anchored and did not sail forward.

古文：既午，带雨行六十里，为前吉渡，舟人之家在焉，复止不行。
现代文：午后，冒雨航行六十里，为前吉渡，船夫的家在此地，因而又停下来不再航行。
English: In the afternoon, we sailed sixty miles in the rain to Maekichi-do, the boatman's home, and stopped again.

古文：时雨止，见日影尚高，问陆路抵府止三十里，而水倍之，遂度西岸登陆而行。
现代文：这时雨停了，我见日影还高，询问后得知从陆路抵达衡州府城只有三十里，而水路有两倍远，就跨上西岸登陆而行。
English: At this time, the rain stopped, I saw the shadow of the sun was still high, and after inquiring, I learned that it was only thirty miles from the land to the capital of Hengzhou, while the waterway was twice as far, so I stepped on the west coast to land.

古文：陂陀高下，沙土不泞。
现代文：山坡山冈高高低低，但沙土路不粘滑。
English: The mountain slope is high and low, but the sandy road is not slippery.

古文：十里至陡林辅，则泥淖不能行矣，遂止宿。
现代文：走十里到陡林铺，却是泥泞的洼地不能行走了，于是停下来投宿在此地。
English: Walk ten miles to the steep forest, but it is a muddy depression can not walk, so stop and stay in this place.

古文：郴东门外江滨有石攒耸，宋张舜民铭为窊樽。至窊樽之迹不见于道，而得之于此，聊以代渴。
现代文：郴州城东外江边石头丛集耸立，宋人张舜民的刻铭称之为宠蹲石，至于帘蹲石的遗迹我在道州没有见着步而在此地见到，姑且可以了却一卞我渴求寻到窄蹲石遗迹的心情。
English: There is a cluster of standing stones on the riverside east of the city of Ganzhou. The inscriptions of the Song people, Zhang Yimin, called them "favorite stones." As for the remains of the curtain stones, I did not see them in Doushou, but I saw them here. Although I could, I was eager to find the remains of the narrow stones.

古文：城东山下有泉，方圆十余里，其旁石壁峭立，泉深莫测，是为钴鉧泉。
现代文：城东边的山下有一眼泉，方圆有十多里，泉旁边石壁峭立，泉水深，不可测，这是钻拇泉。
English: There is a spring at the foot of the mountain on the east side of the city, with a circumference of more than ten miles. A stone wall stands next to the spring, and the spring water is deep and unfathomable. This is the Diamond Thumb Spring.

古文：永州之钴鉧潭不称大观，遂并此废食，然钴鉧实在于此，而柳州姑借名永州；窊樽实在于道，而舜民姑拟象于此耳。全州有钴鉧潭，亦子厚所命。
现代文：永州府的钻拇潭称不上壮观，于是连同此泉一起不被人们称道看重，然而钻姆实际上在此处，而柳柳州是姑且借这个名称命名永州府的那个潭；帘椿石实际上在道州，而张舜民是姑且将与此处石头形态相似的道州窄样石的名称仿用于此。
English: The Diamond Thumb Pool in Yongzhou is not spectacular, so it is not valued along with this spring. However, the Diamond Thumb Pool is actually here, and Liuzhou is the pool in Yongzhou that is named after this name; the Camellia stone is actually in Daozhou, and Zhang Bimin is the name of the narrow stone in Daozhou that is similar in shape to the stone here.

古文：永州三溪：浯溪为元次山所居，在祁阳。愚溪为柳子厚所谪贬居地，在永。濂溪为周元公所生，在道州。而浯溪最胜。
现代文：永州府有三条名溪：语溪是元次山的居住地，愚溪是柳子厚被贬滴的地方，镰溪为周元公出生的处所，在道州习而其中语溪的景致最优美。
English: There are three famous streams in Yongzhou Prefecture: Yu Xie is the residence of Yuan Zishan, Gu Xie is the place where Liu Zi Hou was dripped, Lu Xie is the place where Zhou Yuan Gong was born, and it is the most beautiful scenery in Daozhou.

古文：《吴都赋》： 飞轻觞而酌醽醁 。
现代文：颜鲁公书写的刻在崖壁上的文篇；千古不朽。
English: The text written by Yan Rukong and engraved on the cliff wall; immortal for thousands of years.

古文：程水甘美出美酒，刘香云： 程乡有千日酒，饮之至家而醉，昔尝置官酝于山下，名曰程酒，同醽醁酒献焉。 今酒品殊劣，而二泉之水，亦莫尚焉。
现代文：石镜高悬而映照远近景物，一丝不隐，有这两样奇观，谁还能与它鼎足并峙呢！厂郴州的兴宁县有菇酥泉和程乡水，它们都以出产酒而闻名，一县中有这样两条水便于古独享美名。如今酒品特别低劣，两条泉中的水，也不再被推崇了。
English: The stone mirror hangs high and reflects the scenery far and near, without a trace of concealment. With these two wonders, who can stand up to it! Xingning County in Zhangzhou has Mushroom Spring and Chengxiang Water, both of which are famous for producing wine. There are two such waters in one county, which made it easy to enjoy the fame in ancient times. Nowadays, the wine is particularly inferior, and the water in the two springs is no longer respected.

古文：浯溪之 吾 有三，愚溪之 愚 有八，濂溪之 濂 有二。
现代文：参语溪的 吾 字有三个地方的名称使用，愚溪的 愚 字有八处景物用它命名，镰溪的 滦 字有两条溪水同用。
English: The word "吾" in "Sangwu Creek" is used for the names of three places, the word "愚" in "Wu Creek" is used for the names of eight scenic spots, and the word "" in "Wu Creek" is used for the names of two streams.

古文：有三与八者，皆本地之山川亭岛也。 濂 则一其所生在道州，一其所寓在九江，相去二千里矣。
现代文：分别有三处和八处使用的 吾 、 愚 两字，各个名称所指代的都是本地方的山脉、河川、亭子、岛屿。用 镰 字命名的溪水却一条是他的出生地，在道州；一条是他为官时居住的地方，在九江府，两处相距两千里远。
English: The characters "吾" and "愚" are used in three and eight places respectively, and each name refers to the local mountains, rivers, pavilions, and islands. However, one stream named with the character "" is his birthplace, in Daozhou; one is where he lived when he was an official, in Jiujiang Prefecture, two places are two thousand miles away.

古文：元次山题朝阳岩诗： 朝阳岩下湘水深，朝阳洞口寒泉清。 其岩在永州南潇水上，其时尚未合于湘。
现代文：元次山题朝阳岩的诗中写道： 朝阳岩下湘水深，朝雨洞口寒泉清， 那岩在永州府南两潇水岸上，那里潇水尚未汇合到湘水中。
English: He wrote in a poem about the Chaoyang Rock on Mount Yuanji: The water under the Chaoyang Rock is deep, and the cold spring at the mouth of the Chaoyu Cave is clear. The rock is on the shore of two rivers in the south of Yongzhou Prefecture, where the rivers have not yet merged into the Hunan River.

古文：次山身履其上，岂不知之，而一时趁笔随意下笔，千古遂无正之者，不几令潇、湘易位耶？
现代文：元次山亲自到岩上游历，怎会不知道这呢？但他，时间不假思索地随意写下这样的诗句，千首年来便没有纠正这错误的人，这不是几乎叫潇、湘两水移位了吗？
English: Yuan Zishan personally traveled to Iwakami, how could he not know this? But he, who wrote such a poem at will without thinking about the time, did not correct this mistake for the first thousand years. Isn't this almost called Xiao and Hunan water displacement?

