古文：胡松年字茂老，海州怀仁人。
现代文：胡松年字茂老，海州怀仁人。
English: Husong is an old man, a native of Haizhou.

古文：幼孤贫，母粥机织，资给使学，读书过目不忘，尤邃于《易》。
现代文：幼年时孤苦贫寒，母亲织布卖钱，供养他上学。读书过目不忘，尤其精通《易经》。
English: When he was a child, he was lonely and poor. His mother wove cloth and sold it to support him in school. He never forgot to read, and was particularly proficient in the I Ching.

古文：政和二年，上舍释褐，补濰州教授。
现代文：政和二年，以上舍生任官，担任淮州教授。
English: In the second year of Zheng He, he was appointed as a professor of Huai Zhou.

古文：八年，赐对便殿，徽宗伟其状貌，改校书郎兼资善堂赞读。
现代文：政和八年，赐对便殿，徽宗因他像貌雄伟，改任他为校书郎兼资善堂赞读。
English: In the eighth year of the Meiji era, he was assigned to the hall of honor, and because of his majestic appearance, he was appointed as the school's librarian as well as the school's commended reader.

古文：为殿试参详官，以沈晦第一，徽宗大悦曰： 朕久闻晦名，今乃得之。 迁中书舍人。
现代文：任殿试参详官，以沈晦为第一名，徽宗大喜说： 我很早就听说了沈晦的名字，今天才得到他。 升迁胡松年为中书舍人。
English: Huizong Daxi said, "I have heard Shenkai's name for a long time, and I just got him today.

古文：时方有事燕云，松年累章谓边衅一开，有不胜言者。咈时相意，提举太平观。
现代文：当时正从事收复燕云地区，胡松年多次上奏说边恤一开，即有许多不能言说的事情发生，不符合当政者意思，被罢提举太平观。
English: At that time, he was engaged in the recovery of the Yanyun region. Hu Songnian repeatedly reported that many unspeakable things happened, which did not conform to the will of the current government, and he was removed and promoted to Taiping.

古文：建炎间，密奏中原利害，召赴行在，出知平江府。
现代文：建炎年间，秘密上奏论述中原利害，召到朝廷，出知平江府。
English: During the construction boom, he secretly submitted a report on the interests of the Central Plains, was summoned to the imperial court, and was sent to Pingjiang Prefecture.

古文：未入境，贪吏解印敛迹，以兴利除害十七事揭于都市，百姓便之。
现代文：尚未入境，贪吏解下官印隐藏起来，胡松年将兴利除弊的十七件事项张榜在都市上，百姓感到便利。
English: It is convenient for the people to see the list of seventeen items to be dealt with by Hu Songjun in the coming year posted in the city, while the corrupt officials have not yet entered the country and the official seal has been hidden.

古文：加徽猷阁待制。
现代文：加徽猷阁待制。
English: Zengge in Gahui is under construction.

古文：奏防江利害：一曰立国无藩篱之固，二曰遣将无首尾之援，三曰不攻敌技之所短。
现代文：上奏论述防卫长江的利害：一是说立国没有藩篱之固，二是派遣将领不能首尾相援，三是说不能进攻敌人技能的短处。
English: The report expounded on the advantages of defending the Yangtze River: on the one hand, it was said that the founding of the country was not fortified, on the other hand, it was said that it was not possible to send generals to help each other, and on the third hand, it was said that it was not possible to attack the enemy's technical shortcomings.

古文：召为中书舍人。
现代文：朝廷召胡松年为中书舍人。
English: The imperial court summoned Hu Song to be the person to give up Chinese calligraphy.

古文：言武昌、九江、建昌、京口、吴江、钱塘、明、越宜各屯水战士三千以为备。
现代文：他论述武昌、九江、建昌、京口、吴江、钱塘、明、越等地应各屯驻水军士兵三千人以为防备。
English: He elaborated that in Wuchang, Jiujiang, Jianchang, Jingkou, Wujiang, Qiantang, Ming, Yue and other places, there should be three thousand stationed naval soldiers in each garrison.

古文：唐恪追复观文殿学士，松年缴奏曰： 靖康之祸，何轻脱寡谋，宜为罪首。
现代文：唐恪被朝廷追复为观文殿学士，胡松年上奏说 ：靖康之祸，何轻率少谋，应该成为罪魁祸首。
English: Tang Ke was reinstated by the imperial court as a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism, and Hu Song said in his last year's report: "The calamity of Jingkang, how imprudent and unscrupulous, should be the main culprit."

古文：去年秦桧还朝，力称其抗义守正，遂被褒赠，已大咈士论。
现代文：去年秦桧返朝，极力称赞唐恪抗义守正，于是被褒扬追赠，已经引起公论不满。
English: Last year, when Qin Hui returned to the DPRK, he praised Tang Ke's resistance to righteousness and righteousness, and was praised and rewarded, which has caused public dissatisfaction.

古文：今恪子琢自陈其父不获伸迎请二帝之谋，饮药而死。
现代文：现在唐恪的儿子唐琢自己陈述其父亲因为迎请二帝的计谋没有得到实现，饮药而死。
English: Now, Tang Taku, the son of Tang Kaku, claims that his father died from drinking poison because his plan to invite the two emperors did not work out.

古文：此事凛然，追踪古人。
现代文：此事大义凛然，可以比美古人。
English: This matter is of great significance and can be compared to the ancient people.

古文：宜诏有司详考实状，庶不为虚美，以示激劝。 
现代文：应该诏令有关机构详细考查实际情况，这样才能不致虚假，以表示激劝。 
English: Relevant agencies should be ordered to examine the actual situation in detail, so as not to be false, in order to express encouragement.

古文：除给事中。
现代文：朝廷任命他为给事中。
English: The court appointed him to the case.

古文：会选将帅，松年奏： 富贵者易为善，贫贱者难为功，在上之人识擢何如尔。
现代文：恰逢朝廷选拔将帅，胡松年上奏说： 富贵的人容易行善，贫贱的人难以成功，关键在于上面的人怎样认识提拔。
English: At the time of the imperial court's selection of generals, Hu Song said in his last report: Rich people are easy to do good, and poor people are difficult to succeed. The key lies in how those at the top understand promotion.

古文：愿陛下亲出劳军，即行伍搜简之，必有可为时用者。 又奏： 恢复中原，必自山东始，山东归附，必自登、莱、密始，不特三郡民俗忠义，且有通、泰飞艘往来之便。 除兼侍讲。
现代文：希望陛下亲出慰问部队，就在军队中搜罗挑选，必然会有可以使用的人才。 又上奏： 恢复中原，必须从山东开始，山东归附，必须从登、莱、密州开始，不只是因为三郡民俗忠义，还因为有通、泰飞船往来的便利。 被任兼侍讲。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will personally send out the condolence troops, and will collect and select from the army, and there will certainly be talents that can be used. Also played: Restoration of the Central Plains must begin in Shandong, and the annexation of Shandong must begin in Deng, Lai, and Mizhou, not only because of the loyalty of the three counties, but also because of the convenience of having a pass and a Thai spaceship. Appointed as an assistant lecturer.

古文：王伦使金还，言金人欲再遣重臣来计议，以松年试工部尚书为韩肖胄副，充大金奉表通问使。
现代文：王伦出使金朝回来，说金朝想再派重臣前来计议讲和事宜，以胡松年任工部尚书作为韩肖胄的副手，充任大金奉表通问使。
English: Wang Lun sent an envoy back to the Kim dynasty, saying that the Kim dynasty wanted to send another senior minister to come and discuss peace matters, with Hu Song, who was the vice-minister of the Ministry of Industry, as the deputy of Han Xiaoqi, acting as the envoy of big money.

古文：时使命久不通，人皆疑惧，松年毅然而往。
现代文：当时使命久不通，人们都人心疑虑，胡松年毅然前往。
English: At that time, the mission was not clear for a long time, people were doubtful, and Hu Songnian resolutely went there.

古文：至汴京，刘豫令以臣礼见，肖胄未答，松年曰： 圣主万寿。 豫曰： 圣意何在？ 松年曰： 主上之意，必复故疆而后已。 使还，拜吏部尚书。
现代文：到达汴京，刘豫命令他们以臣子之礼相见，韩肖胄没有回答，胡松年说： 圣主万寿无疆。 刘豫问 ：圣主意图何在？ 胡松年回答 ：圣主的意图，必恢复故疆而后已。 出使回来，被任命为吏部尚书。
English: Arriving in Beijing, Liu Yu ordered them to meet with the courtesy of a vassal, Han Xiao Yu did not answer, Hu Songnian said: Long live the Lord. Liu Yu asked: What is the Lord's intention? Hu Songnian replied: The Lord's intention is to restore the motherland. After returning from the mission, he was appointed as the official secretary.

古文：岳飞收复襄、汉，令松年筹度守御事。
现代文：岳飞收复襄、汉，命令胡松年筹划守御事宜。
English: Yue Fei recovered Xiang and Han, and ordered Hu Song to plan the defense.

古文：松年奏： 乞飞班师，徐窥刘豫意向，若豫置不问，其情叵测，当饬将士谨疆场可也。 又条战舰四利：一曰张朝廷深入之军势，二曰固山东欲归之民心，三曰震叠强敌，使不敢窥江、浙，四曰牵制刘豫不暇营襄、汉。
现代文：胡松年上奏： 乞令岳飞班师，慢慢观察刘豫动向，如果刘豫置而不问，那么居心叵测，应当饬令将士谨严边疆守备。 又陈述战舰有四利：一是伸张朝廷深入的军势，二是巩固山东想要归顺的民心，三是震慑强敌，使其不敢窥视江、浙，四是牵制刘豫使其无暇经营襄、汉。
English: Hu Song made the following report: "If you ask Yuefei to send a squadron, slowly observe Liu Yu's movement. If Liu Yu does not ask, then it is a deliberate miscalculation, and you should order the soldiers to strictly guard the frontier." He also stated that the warship has four advantages: First, it is to extend the military power of the imperial court, second, it is to consolidate the people's hearts of Shandong who want to surrender, third, it is to deter the strong enemy, so that it does not dare to peep into Jiangsu and Zhejiang, and fourth, it is to restrain Liu Yu so that he has no time to operate in Xiang and

古文：除端明殿学士、签书枢密院事。
现代文：任端明殿学士、签书枢密院事。
English: He was appointed a member of the Privy Council.

古文：首奏八事：立规摹以定中兴之基，振纪纲以尊朝廷之势，驭将帅使知畏，抚士卒使知劝，收予夺之柄，察毁誉之言，无以小疵弃人才，无以虚文废实效。
现代文：首先上奏八事：建立规模以奠定中兴基业，振作纲纪以遵从朝廷权势，驾驭将帅使他们有所畏惧，抚慰士卒使他们知道努力，收回予夺之权柄，明察毁誉的言论，不要因小遗弃人才，不要因虚文而废弃实效。
English: First of all, eight things are listed: establish the scale to lay the foundation of ZTE, strengthen discipline to comply with the power of the imperial court, control the generals and marshals to make them afraid, soothe the soldiers to make them know the efforts, recover the power to be seized, and observe the discrediting remarks. Don't abandon the talent because of the small, and don't abandon the actual effect because of the fake.

古文：又荐张敌万： 向在淮南诱敌深入，步骑四集，悉陷于淖，无得解者，金人至今胆落。
现代文：又推荐张敌万 ：以前在淮南诱敌深入，敌军步骑四集，全部陷于泥淖之中，无人得以逃脱，金军至今依然胆寒。
English: He also recommended Zhang Jiwan: Previously, in Huainan, the enemy was lured deep, the enemy army marched four times, all were stuck in the mud, no one was able to escape, and the Golden Army is still timid.

古文：乞令统率军马别为任使，庶几外阃浙多名将，不独仗倚三四人而已。 
现代文：请求任命他统率兵马，这样才能使朝外名将渐多，不至于仅仅依赖三四位将领。 
English: It is requested that he be appointed to lead the troops and horses, so that there will be more and more famous names in the DPRK and abroad, rather than relying on only three or four generals.

古文：谍报刘豫于登、莱、海、密具舟楫，淮阳、顺昌积刍粟，欲凭藉金人侵我边鄙。
现代文：间谍报告刘豫在登、莱、海、密州修造战船，在淮阳、顺昌屯积粮草，打算依恃金朝入侵边疆。
English: The spy reported that Liu Yu was building warships in Deng, Lai, Hai, and Mizhou, and accumulating grain and grass in Huaiyang and Shunchang, intending to invade the frontier with the support of the Kim dynasty.

古文：议者谓韩、刘、岳各当一面，可保无虞。
现代文：议论者认为韩世忠、刘光世、岳飞各当一面，可保不发生意外。
English: Commentators believe that Han Shizhong, Liu Guangze, and Yuefei are each responsible for one side, which can prevent accidents from happening.

古文：松年奏： 三人声势初不相属，缓急必不相救。
现代文：胡松年上奏 ：三人名声地位不相统属，紧急时必然不能相互救援。
English: Husong insinuated: the three people do not belong to the same fame and status, so they cannot rescue each other in an emergency.

古文：况海道阔远，苏、秀、明、越最为要冲，乞选精兵万人，命一大臣往驻建康，亲督世忠、光世守采石、马家渡，以张两军之势，仍以兵五千屯明州、平江，控御江海。
现代文：况且海道阔远，苏、秀、明、越等州最是要冲之处，请求挑选精兵万人，命一大臣前驻建康，亲自督促韩世忠、刘光世守卫采石、马家渡，以伸张两军势力，并以兵五千人屯驻明州、平江，控制江海。
English: Moreover, the sea route was far and wide, and the states of Su, Xiu, Ming and Yue were the most important places to be attacked. They requested the selection of 10,000 elite soldiers, ordered a minister to be stationed in Jiankang, and personally urged Han Shizhong and Liu Guangze to guard the quarry and Majiadu to extend the influence of the two armies, and stationed 5,000 soldiers in Mingzhou and Pingjiang to control the river sea.

古文：或无人可遣，臣愿疾驰以赴其急。 诏遣松年往江上，与诸将会议进讨，因觇贼情。
现代文：如果无人可以派遣，我愿意急驰赶赴那里以应付紧急。 诏令派遣胡松年前往江上，同诸将会议进讨之策，并观察敌情。
English: If there is no one to send, I am willing to rush there to deal with the emergency.The imperial edict dispatched Hu Song to go to the river, discuss the strategy of the meeting with others, and observe the enemy situation.

古文：帝决意亲征，遂次平江，命松年权参知政事，专治战舰，张浚专治军器。
现代文：皇上决意亲征，于是到平江，任命胡松年权知参知政事，专门负责修治战舰，张浚专门负责修造兵器。
English: The emperor decided to personally recruit, so he went to Pingjiang and appointed Hu Songnian as a political advisor, specifically responsible for repairing warships, and Zhang Jun was specifically responsible for building weapons.

古文：松年曰： 议论既定，力行乃有效，若今日行，明日止，徒纷纷无益。 
现代文：胡松年说： 议论既定，力行才能收到实效，如果今天行，明天止，徒增纷扰而没有益处。 
English: Hu Songnian said: It is established to discuss, and it is necessary to work hard to receive the actual effect. If it is done today and stopped tomorrow, it will only increase the disturbance and will not be beneficial.

古文：俄以疾提举洞霄宫，卜居阳羡，虽居闲不忘朝廷事，屡言和籴科敛、防秋利害，帝皆嘉纳。
现代文：不久因病提举洞霄宫，居住在阳羡，虽然居闲但不忘国事，多次上书论说和籴科敛、防秋利害，皇上都嘉奖采纳。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to Dongxiao Palace due to illness. He lived in Yangzheng, and although he was idle, he did not forget the affairs of state. He repeatedly published books on the theory of harmony, discipline, and autumn prevention, and was commended and adopted by the emperor.

古文：十六年，病革，呼其子曰： 大化推移，有所不免。 乃就枕，鼻息如雷，有顷卒，人谓不死也。
现代文：绍兴十六年，病重，招呼儿子说： 生老病死，在所难免。 于是就枕，鼾声如雷，一会儿后去世，人们都说他没有死。
English: Sixteen years ago, Shaoxing was seriously ill, and he called out to his son, "Birth, old age, illness, and death are all inevitable," whereupon the pillow fell to the ground with a thud, and a moment later he passed away, and people all said that he had not died.

古文：年六十。
现代文：时年六十岁。
English: He was sixty years old.

古文：松年平生不喜蓄财，每除官例赐金帛，以军兴费广，一无所陈请，或劝其白于朝，曰： 弗请则已，白之是沽名也。 喜宾客，奉入不足以供费，或请节用为子孙计。
现代文：胡松年平生不喜欢积敛财产，每次任官按例要赐予金帛，胡松年因军事耗费巨大，一无所求，有人劝他告诉朝廷，他说 ：不请则已，告诉朝廷就成了沽名钓誉。 喜欢宾客，俸禄不足以供费，有人请他为子孙着想节省用度。
English: Throughout his life, Hu Songnian did not like to accumulate wealth. Every time he was appointed to an official position, he was usually given a golden scepter. Due to the huge military expenditure, Hu Songnian did not ask for anything. Someone advised him to tell the imperial court. He said, "If you do not ask, you have already been invited. If you tell the imperial court, you will become famous. If you like guests, your salary is not enough to provide expenses. Someone asked him to save expenses for the sake of his children and grandchildren.

古文：松年曰： 贤而多财，则损其志，况俸廪，主上所以养老臣也。 自持囊至执政，所举自代，皆一时闻人，所荐一以至公，权势莫能夺。
现代文：胡松年说： 贤能但多财，就会有损志节，况且俸禄，是皇上用来赡养老臣的。 自任官后直到执政，所推荐代替自己的，都是当时的名人，所推荐的全部出于至公，即使是权贵也不能让他改变。
English: Hu Songnian said: "If you are talented but rich, you will have a bad luck day. Moreover, the salary is used by the emperor to support the pensioners. From the time of his appointment to the time of his reign, the famous people of the time were recommended to replace him. All the recommendations were made for the sake of the public. Even the powerful could not make him change.

古文：方秦桧秉政，天下识与不识，率以疑忌置之死地，故士大夫无不曲意阿附为自安计。
现代文：当秦桧当权时，天下认识与不认识的，都以疑忌置于死地。因此士大夫无不曲意阿附以求得自保。
English: When Qin Hui was in power, everyone in the world, whether they knew him or not, was doomed to death by suspicion. Therefore, the scholar-officials had no choice but to follow him in order to protect themselves.

古文：松年独鄙之，至死不通一书，臣以此高之。
现代文：胡松年独自鄙视他，到死时没有给秦桧写一封书信，世人以此赞扬他。
English: Hu Songnian alone despised him, and when he died, he did not write a letter to Qin Hui, and the world praised him for this.

