古文：太公望封于齐。
现代文：太公望被周武王封于齐这个地方。
English: Taigongwang was given this place by King Zhouwu.

古文：齐有华士者，义不臣天子，不友诸侯，人称其贤。
现代文：齐国有个叫做华士的人，他以不为天子之臣，不为诸侯之友作为自己立身处世的宗旨，人们都称赞他的旷达贤明。
English: In the state of Qi, there was a man called Wah Shi. He made it his life's mission not to be a subject of the Son of Heaven, not to be a friend of princes. People praised him for his wisdom.

古文：太公使人召之三，不至；命诛之。
现代文：太公望派人请了他多次他都不肯来，于是就派人把他杀了。
English: Taikungwang sent someone to invite him several times, but he refused to come, so they sent someone to kill him.

古文：周公曰： 此人齐之高士，奈何诛之？ 
现代文：周公于是问太公说： 华士是齐国的一位高士，为什么杀了他呢？ 
English: Zhou Gong then asked Tai Gong: "Washi was a high-ranking official in Qi, why did you kill him?

古文：太公曰： 夫不臣天子，不友诸侯，望犹得臣而友之乎？
现代文：太公望说： 这样一个不做天子之臣，不做诸侯之友的人，我吕望还能以其为臣，与之交友吗？
English: Taigongwang said, "Such a person who is not a vassal of the Son of Heaven, not a friend of princes, can I Luwang still be his vassal and make friends with him?

古文：望不得臣而友之，是弃民也；召之三不至，是逆民也。
现代文：我吕望都无法臣服、难以结交的人，就一定是不可教训而应该要抛弃的人；召他多次而不来，就是叛逆之民。
English: Those who are difficult to befriend and cannot be subdued are those who cannot be taught and should be abandoned; those who are called many times but do not come are the rebellious people.

古文：而旌之以为教首，使一国效之，望谁与为君乎？ 
现代文：如果为此反而要表彰他，让他成为全国百姓效法的榜样，那还要我这个当国君的有什么用呢？ 
English: If, on the contrary, he is to be commended for this, and if he is to be made an example for the people of the whole country to follow, then what is the use of my being the sovereign?

古文：少正卯与孔子同时。
现代文：少正卯与孔子同处于一个时代。
English: Shosho and Confucius lived in the same era.

古文：孔子之门人三盈三虚。孔子为大司寇，戮之于两观之下。
现代文：孔子的学生曾经多次受到少正卯言论的诱惑，而离开学堂到少正卯那里去听讲课，导致学堂由满座变为空旷。于是到了孔子做大司寇的时候，就判处少正卯死刑，在宫门外把他杀了。
English: Confucius's students were repeatedly tempted by Shosho's remarks, and left the school to listen to Shosho's lectures, causing the school to go from full to empty. So when Confucius became the grand secretary, he sentenced Shosho to death and killed him outside the palace gate.

古文：子贡进曰： 夫少正卯，鲁之闻人。
现代文：子贡向孔子进言说： 少正卯是鲁国名望很高的人。
English: Zigong made a suggestion to Confucius, saying: Shoshengwu is a man of high reputation in Lu.

古文：夫子诛之，得无失乎？ 
现代文：老师您将他杀死，是不是有些不合适呢？ 
English: Teacher You killed him, isn't that a little inappropriate?

古文：孔子曰： 人有恶者五，而盗窃不与焉：一曰心达而险，二曰行僻而坚，三曰言伪而辩，四曰记丑而博，五曰顺非而泽。
现代文：孔子说： 人有五种罪恶，而盗窃与之相比还算好的行为：第一种是心思通达而为人阴险，第二种是行为乖僻反常却固执不改，第三种是言辞虚伪无实但却十分雄辩并能打动人心，第四种是所记多为怪异之说但是却旁征博引，第五种是顺助别人之错误还为其掩饰辩白。
English: Confucius said: There are five kinds of sins, and theft is a good deed compared to them: the first is being clever and being insidious, the second is behaving strangely and abnormally but stubbornly, the third is speaking words that are false but very eloquent and able to move people's hearts, the fourth is writing words that are mostly strange but soliciting pointers, and the fifth is helping others with their mistakes and covering up and justifying them.

古文：此五者，有一于此，则不免于君子之诛，而少正卯兼之。
现代文：一个人如果有这五种罪恶之一，就难免被君子所杀；而少正卯同时具备这五种恶行。
English: If a person has one of these five evils, he will inevitably be killed by a gentleman; while a less righteous person has all five evils at the same time.

古文：此小人之桀雄也，不可以不诛也。 
现代文：正是小人中的奸雄，这是不可不杀的。 
English: It is the villain of villains that must be killed.

古文：齐所以无惰民，所以终不为弱国。
现代文：因此，齐国没有懒惰之民，并始终没有沦为弱小的国家。
English: Therefore, there are no lazy people in Qi, and it has never become a weak country.

古文：韩非《五蠹》之论本此。
现代文：韩非《五蠹》中所讲论的学说就是以此为本的。
English: This is the basis of the theory expounded by Han Fei in the Five Classics.

古文：小人无过人之才，则不足以乱国。
现代文：如果小人没有过人的才干，想要祸乱国家就很困难。
English: It is difficult for a villain to wreak havoc on a country if he doesn't have superhuman abilities.

古文：然使小人有才而肯受君子之驾驭，则又未尝无济于国，而君子亦必不概摈之矣。
现代文：如果小人有才能但愿意接受君子的指挥，对国家来说未尝不是一件好事，而君子也不应该一概摒弃他们。
English: It is not a bad thing for the country if the little people have talent but are willing to accept the command of the gentleman, and the gentleman should not abandon them altogether.

古文：少正卯能煽惑孔门之弟子，直欲掩孔子而上之，可与同朝共事乎？
现代文：可是少正卯煽动迷惑年轻人，连孔子的弟子也不能幸免，几乎要胜过孔子，孔子还能和他同朝共事吗？
English: However, Shao Zhengwu incited and confused young people, and even the disciples of Confucius could not be spared, almost surpassing Confucius. Can Confucius still work with him?

古文：孔子下狠手，不但为一时辩言乱政故，盖为后世以学术杀人者立防。
现代文：孔子狠下杀手，不只阻止了当时因口才雄辩而扰乱政局的状况，也为后世以学术作为借口摒除异己祸乱国家者树立了 榜样 。
English: Confucius not only stopped the situation where eloquence and eloquence disturbed the political situation at that time, but also set an example for future generations to use scholarship as an excuse to get rid of foreigners and countries.

古文：华士虚名而无用，少正卯似大有用而实不可用。
现代文：夸夸其谈的人往往都是没有实际才干。少正卯看上去像是有才能能够担负重任，实际上并不可用。
English: Boastful talkers often have no real ability. Shoshengwu looks like he has the ability to shoulder heavy responsibilities, but he is actually useless.

古文：壬人佥士，凡明主能诛之；闻人高士，非大圣人不知其当诛也。
现代文：一般的奸佞小人，贤能明智的君主就能够发现并将其杀死，然而对于一些所谓的名人隐士，只有圣贤之人才能认识到其该死的理由。
English: Ordinary villains of treachery can be detected and killed by a wise and prudent prince, but for some so-called illustrious recluses, only a sage can discern the damnable reason.

古文：唐萧瑀好奉佛，太宗令出家。
现代文：唐朝萧瑀对佛教很痴迷，唐太宗就命令他出家为僧。
English: Xiao Yao was obsessed with Buddhism during the Tang Dynasty, and Emperor Taizong ordered him to become a monk.

古文：玄宗开元六年，河南参军郑铣阳、丞郭仙舟投匦献诗。
现代文：唐玄宗开元六年，河南参军郑铣阳、河南郡丞郭仙舟纷纷献诗陈情。
English: In the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty, Zheng Xinyang and Guo Xianzhou, both of Henan Province, offered poems and sentiments.

古文：敕曰： 观其文理，乃崇道教，于时用不切事情，宜各从所好。 
现代文：玄宗下诏说： 看你们诗中的意思是崇奉道教的，这种思想不切合实际所需，那就依着你们个人的喜好吧！ 
English: Xuanzong then said, "Look, the meaning of your poem is to worship Taoism, this kind of thought is not practical and necessary, so please follow your personal preferences!"

古文：罢官度为道士。
现代文：免去他们的官职做了道士。
English: They were relieved of their official posts and became Taoists.

古文：此等作用，亦与圣人暗合。
现代文：这种做法和圣人的行事正相吻合。
English: This kind of practice is in line with the saint's actions.

古文：如使佞佛者尽令出家，谄道者即为道士，则士大夫攻乎异端者息矣。
现代文：如果让那些痴迷佛、道的人都出家做和尚道士，那么士大夫学习异端邪说的事情就可以消失了。
English: If those who are obsessed with Buddhism and Taoism are allowed to become ordained as monks and Taoists, then the matter of scholars studying heresies can disappear.

