古文：历中夫天地之所贵者生也，万物之所尊者人也。役智穷神，无幽不察，是以动作云为，皆应天地之象。
现代文：天地间所宝贵的是生命，万物中最尊贵的是人，运用智慧深入探究事物就能做到没有什么隐秘不被了解，这样，人的行为、言论都与自然现象相适应。
English: What is precious in heaven and earth is life, and what is most precious in all things is human beings. By using wisdom to deeply explore things, we can ensure that there is nothing hidden that is not understood. In this way, human behavior and speech are compatible with natural phenomena.

古文：古先圣哲，拟辰极，制浑仪。
现代文：古代才智超群的人模拟天空中辰极的情况制作了浑仪。
English: In ancient times, a man of great intelligence made a compass to simulate the position of the sun in the sky.

古文：夫阴阳二气，陶育群品，精象所寄，是为日月。
现代文：世界上各种事物是由阴气、阳气造就培育的，太阳、月亮就是其精华的集中表现。
English: All kinds of things in the world are nurtured by yin and yang, and the sun and moon are the concentrated expression of their essence.

古文：群生之性，章为五才，五才之灵，五星是也。
现代文：各种生物的特征可分为五才，五才的精灵就是五大行星。
English: The characteristics of all kinds of creatures can be divided into five, and the spirits of the five are the five planets.

古文：历所以拟天行而序七耀，纪万国而授人时。
现代文：历法模拟天空运行的情况而了解曰月五星在天空中的次序，综理不同地区的情况而告知人们季节的变化。
English: The calendar simulates the movement of the sky to understand the order of the day, month and five stars in the sky, and summarizes the situation in different regions to inform people of seasonal changes.

古文：黄帝使大挠造六甲，容成制历象，羲和占日，常仪占月。
现代文：远古时代的黄帝命令大挠编造了六十甲子，容成推算天体运行的规律，羲和依据太阳的情况进行占卜，常仪则对月亮的情况占卜。
English: In ancient times, the Yellow Emperor ordered the Great Scroll to fabricate sixty-six scrolls, which can be used to calculate the laws of the movement of celestial bodies, and to conduct divination according to the situation of the sun, while the standing instrument divines the situation of the moon.

古文：少昊氏有凤鸟之瑞，以鸟名官，而凤鸟氏司历。
现代文：少吴氏时出现过凤鸟的祥瑞，故用乌来作为官的名称，就有凤乌氏管理历法。
English: When the Wu clan was young, the phoenix bird Xiang Rui appeared, so they used Wu as the name of the official, there is the phoenix Wu management calendar.

古文：颛顼之代，南正重司天，北正黎司地。
现代文：颛顼氏时代又有南止重掌管对天空的观察，北正黎负责对地的观察。
English: During the Shun Dynasty, Nan Zhe Re was in charge of observing the sky, and Beizhong Li was in charge of observing the earth.

古文：尧复育重黎之后，使治旧职，分命羲和，钦若昊天。
现代文：尧又培养了重、黎的后代，让他们担任旧有的职务，分别命羲、和敬观天象。
English: He also trained the descendants of Chung and Lai, allowing them to take up their old positions, respectively commanding and observing the celestial bodies.

古文：故《虞书》曰： 期三百有六旬六日，以闰月定四时成岁。 其后授舜，曰： 天之历数在尔躬。 
现代文：这样《虞书》中就说： 一周年三百六十六天，设置闰月确定四季而成一岁 以后又将此传授给舜，说： 上天的岁时节候的次序就在你这裹了。 
English: In this way, the "Book of the State" said: The first anniversary is 366 days old, and the leap month is set to determine the four seasons and become one year old. Later, he taught this to Zou, saying: In the heavenly year, the order of the festivals is wrapped up in you.

古文：舜亦以命禹。
现代文：舜也将此传给禹。
English: Later, Hao also used the same words to admonish Yu.

古文：爰及殷、周二代，皆创业革制，而服色从之。
现代文：到了商、周两代，都是创立基业改革制度的，车马祭牲的颜色也随之变化。
English: When the Shang and Zhou dynasties came to power, they both established the foundation reform system, and the color of the chariot and horse sacrifices also changed accordingly.

古文：顺其时气以应天道，万物群生，蒙其利泽。
现代文：顺应时代的气数，用以与上天的规律符合，这样各种事物都能得到好处。
English: The number of qi that conforms to the times and is used to conform to the laws of heaven, so that all kinds of things can benefit.

古文：三王既谢，史职废官，故孔子正《春秋》，以明司历之过。
现代文：三王的时代已经过去了，史官负责相应的工作而废弃了专职的官员，所以孔王以《春秋》的正确来指明掌管历法的人的过错。
English: The era of the three kings has passed, and the historian responsible for the corresponding work has abandoned the full-time officials, so King Kong used the correctness of "Spring and Autumn" to point out the mistakes of those in charge of the calendar.

古文：秦兼天下，自以为水德，以十月为正，服色上黑。
现代文：秦统一天下，认为自己的德性属水，以十月为正月，车马祭牲崇尚黑色。
English: After Qin Dynasty unified the country, he believed that his virtue was water. He regarded October as the first month of the year, and worshiped the black horse and chariot festival.

古文：汉兴，袭秦正朔，北平侯张苍首言律历之事，以《颛顼历》比于六历，所失差近。
现代文：汉代兴起，其正朔沿袭了秦代，北平侯张苍首先对律、历的有关问题作厂叙述，将《颛顼历》并列在古六历中，它与实际天象差异较小。
English: With the rise of the Han Dynasty, which was directly followed by the Qin Dynasty, Beiping marquis Zhang Cang first made a factory description of the relevant issues of law and calendar, and listed the "Dragon Calendar" in the ancient six calendars. It is less different from the actual celestial phenomenon.

古文：施用至武帝元封七年，太中大夫公孙卿、壶遂、太史令司马迁等，言历纪废坏，宜改正朔，易服色，所以明受之于天也。乃诏遂等造汉历。
现代文：该历使用到汉武帝元封七年，太中大夫公孙卿、壶遂、太史令司马迁等人说历法的核心内容已经过时无用，应当改变正朔，更换车马祭牲的颜色，以表明政权是上天赐予的于是皇帝就命令壶遂等人编制汉代的历法。
English: This calendar was used until the seventh year of Emperor Hanwu's reign, when the Tai Zhong Dafu Gongsunqing, Juxui, Tai Shi Ling Sima Qian and others said that the core content of the calendar was outdated and useless, and it should be changed to Zhengshuo, and the color of the chariot and horse sacrifices should be changed to show that the regime was given by God. Therefore, the emperor ordered Juxui and others to compile the calendar of the Han Dynasty.

古文：选邓平、长乐司马可及人间治历者，二十余人。方士唐都分天部，落下闳运算转历。
现代文：挑选了邓平、长乐司马可和民间历法家二十多人方士唐都划分天空区域，落下闳推算历法。
English: Dengping, Changle Simao and more than twenty folk calendarists were selected to divide the sky area and calculate the calendar.

古文：其法积八十一寸，则一日之分也，闳与邓平所治同。
现代文：其方法是将所求得的容积八十一寸作为一天中所具有的分数。落下闳与邓平的处理方法相同。
English: The method is to take the required volume of eighty-one inches as the number of points in a day. The method of dealing with falling anchors is the same as that of Dengping.

古文：于是皆观星度，日月行，更以算推，如闳、平法，一月之日二十九日八十一分日之四十三。
现代文：于是人们都观察恒星以度量太阳、月亮的运动，再进行推算，和落下闳、邓平的方法相同，一个月中有二十九又八十一分之四十二天。
English: As a result, people observed the stars to measure the movement of the sun and moon, and then calculated, in the same way as the method of falling anchor and Dengping, there are 42 days in 2981 days in a month.

古文：诏迁用邓平所造八十一分律历，以平为太史丞。
现代文：皇帝命令司马迁采用邓平所创造的八十一分律历，并任命邓平为太史丞。
English: The emperor ordered Sima Qian to adopt the eighty-one minute lunar calendar created by Deng Ping, and appointed Deng Ping as Tai Shi Rong.

古文：至元凤三年，太史令张寿王上书，以为元年用黄帝《调历》， 令阴阳不调，更历之过 。
现代文：到了元凤三年，太史令张寿王进献文书，认为汉代元年使用的是黄帝《调历》，而 现在阴阳不协调是改历的过错引起的 。
English: In the third year of the Yuan and Feng Dynasties, Emperor Taishi ordered Zhang Shouwang to submit a document, arguing that in the first year of the Han Dynasty, the Yellow Emperor's "Calendar Adjustment" was used, and now the yin and yang incongruity is caused by the fault of the calendar change.

古文：诏下主历使者鲜于妄人与治历大司农中丞麻光等二十余人杂候晦朔弦望二十四气。又诏丞相、御史、大将军、右将军史各一人杂候上林清台，课诸疏密，凡十一家，起三年尽五年。
现代文：皇帝命令主历使者鲜于妄人和治历大司农中丞麻光等二十多人共同观察晦、朔、弦、望、二十四节气的变化情况，又命令丞相、御史、大将军、右将军史各一人在上林苑的疆上共同观察、考核各历的精密情况，这些历共有十种。从元凤三年开始到五年结束。
English: The emperor ordered more than twenty people, including the chief calendar emissary and the chief calendar secretary, Nongzhongzheng Ma Guang, to jointly observe the changes in the waxing, waning, waxing, waxing, waning, and 24 solar terms, and also ordered the prime minister, the minister of history, the general, and the general of the right to jointly observe and examine the precision of each calendar on the territory of Shanglinyuan. There are a total of ten calendars. From the beginning of the third year of Yuanfeng to the end of the fifth year.

古文：寿王课疏远。
现代文：考核结果是张寿王的历法精度很差。
English: The examination proved that Zhang Shouwang's calendar was far from perfect.

古文：又汉元年不用黄帝《调历》，效劾寿王逆天地，大不敬，诏勿劾。
现代文：而且汉代元年并没有使用黄帝《调历》，揭发张寿王违背天地、对皇帝不敬重的罪过。
English: Moreover, in the first year of the Han Dynasty, the Yellow Emperor's "Calendar Adjustment" was not used to expose Zhang Shouwang's serious sin of violating heaven and earth and disrespecting the emperor.

古文：复候，尽六年，《太初历》第一。
现代文：皇帝命令不必立案。继续观察天象到元凤六年结束，《太初历》的精度在各历中最高。
English: The emperor's order does not need to be filed.Continue to observe the celestial phenomena until the end of the sixth year of Yuanfeng.The accuracy of the "Taihuanshi Calendar" is the highest among all calendars.

古文：寿王历乃太史官《殷历》也。
现代文：张寿王的历法就是太史官的《殷历》。
English: Zhang Shouwang's calendar is the "Yin Calendar" of the Grand Historian.

古文：寿王再劾不服，竟下吏。
现代文：强画王再次被揭发罪状而不服，最后被交给司法的官吏治罪。
English: Wang Qiangqiao was once again found guilty, but refused to accept it, and was finally handed over to judicial officials to be punished.

古文：至孝成时，刘向总六历，列是非，作《五纪论》。
现代文：到孝成帝时，刘向汇总了六部历法，列出了其正确与错误之处，写了《五纪论》。
English: By the time of Emperor Xiaocheng, Liu Xianglong had compiled six calendars, listed their rights and wrongs, and written "Five Chronicles."

古文：向子歆作《三统历》以说《春秋》，属辞比事，虽尽精巧，非其实也。
现代文：型回的儿子型邀编撰丫《三统历》以解说《春秋》，编辑文辞、排比史事，虽然十分精细巧妙，但并非实际情况。
English: The author's son was invited to compile the "Three Calendars" to explain the "Spring and Autumn," edit the text, and compare historical events. Although it is very delicate and ingenious, it is not the actual situation.

古文：班固谓之密要，故汉《历志》述之。
现代文：班固认为它细致而简要，在《汉书律历志》中进行了论述。
English: Banggu thought that it was detailed and concise, and discussed it in the "Hanshu Legal History."

古文：校之何承天等六家之历，虽六元不同，分章或异，至今所差，或三日，或二日数时，考其远近，率皆六国及秦时有人所造。
现代文：何承天等对六家历法进行了校订，虽然六历的历元不同，章的划分也有差异，但用到今天其差异有的达三天，有的达两天多。考证其年代，都是战国和秦代时的人编制的。
English: He Zhengtian and others revised the six calendars. Although the six calendars have different calendars and the division of chapters is also different, today the differences are up to three days, and some are more than two days. According to the research, they were all compiled by people in the Warring States and the Qin Dynasty.

古文：其术斗分多，上不可检于《春秋》，下不验于汉、魏，虽复假称帝王，只足以惑时人耳。
现代文：其推算中斗宿的分数部分偏大，向上推算不能与《春秋》相验证，向下又不能与汉、魏时相符，虽然借用了某些帝王的名号来称呼，这衹能迷惑当代的人们而已。
English: The score of Duoshuku in its calculation is too large, the upward calculation cannot be verified with "Spring and Autumn," and the downward calculation cannot be consistent with Han and Wei, although it borrowed the names of some emperors to call, it can only confuse contemporary people.

古文：光武建武八年，太仆硃浮上言历纪不正，宜当改治，时所差尚微，未遑考正。
现代文：光武帝建武八年。太仆朱浮进言说历法的核心内容有偏差，应当重新制订。当时这一偏差尚微小，未及时考校更正。
English: In the 8th year of the reign of Emperor Guangwu, Zhu Fuxing said that the core content of the calendar was biased and should be reformulated. At that time, this deviation was still small and was not corrected in time.

古文：明帝永平中，待诏杨岑、张盛、景防等典治历，但改易加时弦望，未能综校历元也。
现代文：明帝永平年间，待诏彊岑、垂盛、星堕等人主管历法，衹改动了月相出现时刻的推算，未对历法作根本的考校。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yongping of the Ming Dynasty, the people in charge of the calendar, such as Bai Zhao, Su Sheng, and Xing Zhuang, changed the calculation of the time when the moon phase appeared, and did not make a fundamental examination of the calendar.

古文：至元和二年，《太初》失天益远，宿度相觉浸多，候者皆知日宿差五度，冬至之日在斗二十一度，晦朔弦望，先天一日。章帝召治历编欣、李梵等综核意状。遂下诏书称： 《春秋保乾图》曰： 三百年斗历改宪。 史官用《太初》邓平术，有余分一，在三百年之域，行度转差，浸以缪错，璇玑不正，文象不稽。
现代文：到元扣二年，《太初历》的推算与实际天象相差更大，宿度已经感觉到有更大的差异，观察天象的人都知道太阳的位置差五度，冬至日太阳在 侩二十一度，晦、朔、弦、望的推算比实际要早一天卓童召集丫治历繦互、奎丝等人综合考校其情况后就发布诏书说： 《春秋保干图》说： 三百年斗历就要改变规定，现在史官所用的是邓垩的《太初历》，每年有一分的余数，在三百年的范围中推算的运行度数出现了偏差，渐至错谬，这样用来模拟天空运行的浑象就不能正常动作，天象难以考查。
English: Two years after the original deduction, the prediction of the "Tai Chuzhi Calendar" was more different from the actual celestial phenomenon, and the destination had already felt a greater difference. Those who observed the celestial phenomenon knew that the position of the sun was five degrees different. The winter solstice was on the 21st day of the month, and the prediction of the twilight, new moon, chord and vista was one day earlier than the actual. Zhuo Tong convened the comprehensive examination of Ya Zhi Liguo, Que Si and others. After the situation, he issued an edict saying: The "Spring and Autumn Bao Gan Map" said: The three-hundred-year calendar

古文：冬至之日，日在斗二十二度，先立春一日，则《四分》之立春日也。
现代文：冬至口太阳在斗二十一度。立春前一天就是《四分历》的立春曰。
English: At the winter solstice, the sun rises at 21 o'clock. The day before the first day of spring is the first day of spring according to the Chinese calendar.

古文：而以折狱断大刑，于气已逆；用望平和，盖亦远矣。
现代文：而用此来审理案件判决重刑，在节令上就违背了；用来看平常的事情，也相差很远。
English: But to use it to try a case and sentence a heavy penalty is a violation of the festival; to use it to look at ordinary things is also very different.

古文：今改行《四分》，以遵尧顺孔，奉天之文，同心敬授，傥获咸熙。 
现代文：现在改为行用《四分历》，就与帝蠢、王迂的传统一致，以实际天象为依据，共同确定时令颁布农时，或许可以得到广泛的好处。 
English: Changing to the "Quarterly Calendar" now, in line with the tradition of the Emperor and the King, and on the basis of the actual celestial objects, we can jointly determine the season and promulgate the agricultural time, which may bring a wide range of benefits.

古文：于是《四分法》施行。
现代文：这样《四分法》就使用了。
English: In this way, the "quartering method" is used.

古文：黄帝以来诸历以为冬至在牵牛初者，皆黜焉。
现代文：从黄壶以来那些认为冬至曰太阳在牵牛初的历法都废止了。
English: Since the yellow pot, those calendars that believed that the winter solstice was the first day of the year when the sun set have been abolished.

古文：和帝永元十四年，待诏太史霍融上言： 官漏刻率九日增减一刻，不与天相应，或时差至二刻半，不如夏历密。 
现代文：担布丞五十四年，待诏太史霍融向皇帝进言： 官方的漏壶每九天其昼夜刻分别增加或减少一刻，与实际情况不符，有时相差达两刻半，不如夏历漏刻精密。 
English: In the 54th year of the Tang Dynasty, Taizhao Taishi Huo Rong made a suggestion to the emperor: The official leaking pot increases or decreases its day and night hours by one minute every nine days, which does not correspond to the actual situation, sometimes the difference is two and a half minutes, which is not as precise as the leaking of the summer calendar.

古文：其年十一月甲寅，诏曰： 漏所以节时分，定昏明。
现代文：该年十一月甲寅曰发布的诏书说： 漏壶就是用来计测时刻、确定昏明的。
English: The imperial edict issued by Emperor Jia in November of the same year said: The leaking pot is used to measure the time and determine the time of dusk.

古文：昏明长短，起于日去极远近，日道周圜，不可以计率分。
现代文：昏明的变化是由太阳与北天极距离的远近所决定的，由于黄道是圆的，就不可以用简单平均的方法。
English: The changes in twilight are determined by the distance between the sun and the north celestial pole. Since the ecliptic is round, a simple average method cannot be used.

古文：官漏九日增减一刻，违失其实，以晷景为刻，密近有验，今下晷景漏刻四十八箭。 
现代文：官方漏壶采取的九天增加或减少一刻的方法与实际情况是违背的，用圭表正午时刻表影长度来决定昼夜刻的变化与实际非常接近。现在颁布与此相应的晷影漏刻的四十八根箭。 
English: The method of adding or subtracting one hour in nine days adopted by the official leaker is contrary to the actual situation. Using the shadow length of the Guiyu noon time table to determine the change of day and night is very close to the actual situation. Now, the forty-eight arrows of the corresponding shadow leak are promulgated.

古文：其二十四气日所在，并黄道去极、晷景、漏刻、昏明中星，并列载于《续汉律历志》。
现代文：其二十四节气时太阳的位置和太阳与北天极的角距离、圭表表影长度、昼夜漏刻数、昏明中星，都载于《绩汉书。律历志》中。
English: The position of the sun and the angular distance between the sun and the north celestial pole, the length of the shadow of the cuckoo clock, the number of missing hours of the day and night, and the twilight star at the 24th solar terms are all recorded in the "Chihanshu.

古文：安帝延光三年，中竭者亶诵上书言当用甲寅元，河南梁丰云当复用《太初》。
现代文：安帝延光三年，中谒者卖诵进献文书说应当使用甲寅历元，河南梁丰又说应仍然使用《太初历》。
English: In the three years since the establishment of the Andean Republic, the people of Central Yunnan have been selling and reciting offering documents saying that the Jiayin calendar should be used, and the Liangfeng people of Henan Province have also said that the Taihatsu calendar should still be used.

古文：尚书郎张衡、周兴皆审历，数难诵、丰，或不能对，或云失误。
现代文：尚书郎张衡、周兴都精通历法，几次诘问他们，不是回答不出就是说错了。
English: Shang Shulang, Zhang Heng and Zhou Xing were all proficient in the calendar, and when they were interrogated several times, they either couldn't answer or said the wrong thing.

古文：衡等参案仪注，考往校今，以为《九道法》最密。
现代文：张衡等人查考天文观测的记载，考校古今，认为《九道法》最为精密。
English: Zhang Heng and others examined the records of astronomical observations, and examined the ancient and modern schools, and believed that the "Nine Laws" was the most precise.

古文：诏下公卿详议。
现代文：皇帝下令由公卿详细讨论。
English: The emperor ordered the nobles to discuss the matter in detail.

古文：太尉恺等参议： 《太初》过天一度，月以晦见西方。
现代文：太尉恺等认为： 《太初历》的推算比实际天象超前一度，月亮晦曰时出现在西方。
English: Captain Zou et al. believed that: the calculation of the "Great First Calendar" was one time ahead of the actual celestial phenomenon, and the moon appeared in the west at the time of the New Year's Eve.

古文：元和改从《四分》，《四分》虽密于《太初》，复不正，皆不可用。
现代文：元和年问改用《四分历》。它虽比《太初历》精密，但仍有偏差。
English: In the Yuan and Nian dynasties, the "Quarterly Calendar" was used. Although it is more precise than the "Lunar Calendar," it still has some deviations.

古文：甲寅元与天相应，合图谶，可施行。 
现代文：都不能用了。以甲寅年为历元能与天象相符，和图谶相合，可以使用。 
English: None of them can be used. The lunar calendar based on the year of the Goat and the Goat can be used if it is consistent with the celestial phenomenon and the astrological chart.

古文：议者不同。
现代文：参加讨论者不同意造一意见。
English: The discussants did not agree to form an opinion.

古文：尚书令忠上奏： 天之历数，不可任疑从虚，以非易是。 
现代文：尚书令忠上奏说： 岁、时、节、候的次序是上天安排的，不能任意怀疑，用错的来代替对的。 
English: Shang Shuling Zhong Shangsoo said: The order of the year, time, festival, and season is arranged by heaven, and cannot be arbitrarily doubted. Use the wrong one to replace the right one.

古文：亶等遂寝。
现代文：这样直诵等人的意见也就搁置了起来。
English: In this way, the opinions of people such as recitation were also put aside.

古文：灵帝熹平四年，五官郎中冯光、沛相上计掾陈晃等言： 历元不正，故盗贼为害。
现代文：墓贸重迂四年，五官郎中逻光、沛相上计掾速垦等说： 历元不正确，引起了盗贼为害。
English: In the four years since the tomb trade was rediscovered, five officials, including Luo Guang and Pei Fang, have said: The calendar is incorrect, which has caused thieves to cause harm.

古文：历当以甲寅为元，不用庚申，乞本庚申元经纬明文。 
现代文：历法应以甲寅年为历元，不应用庚申年。希望能得到采用庚申历元作根据的明确记述。 
English: The calendar should be based on the year of the Goat, and not the year of the Goat. It is hoped that a clear description of the basis for using the Goat calendar will be obtained.

古文：诏下三府，与儒林明道术者详议。
现代文：皇帝发布诏书到三府，要学术界了解其道理的人详细讨论。
English: The emperor issued the edict to the three prefectures, and it should be discussed in detail by those in the academic world who understand its rationale.

古文：群臣会司徒府集议。
现代文：群臣聚集在司徒府中讨论。
English: The courtiers gathered in the palace to discuss the matter.

古文：议郎蔡邕曰： 历数精微，术无常是。
现代文：议郎蔡邕说： 历算之学精深微妙，没有永远正确的推算方法。
English: Councilor Cai Wei said: The study of calculation is profound and subtle, and there is no correct calculation method forever.

古文：汉兴承秦，历用《颛顼》，元用乙卯；百有二岁，孝武皇帝始改《太初》，元用丁丑。
现代文：堡优兴起继承了塞丛，使用了《颛顼历》，历元是乙卯。一百零二二年后孝武皇帝才改用《太初历》，其历元是丁丑。
English: Emperor Gaozong inherited the Jiezong calendar and used the "Qing" calendar, which was based on the "B" lunar calendar. Emperor Xiaowu only changed to the "Tai" lunar calendar 102 years later, which was based on the "Ding" lunar calendar.

古文：行之百八十九岁，孝章帝改从《四分》，元用庚申。
现代文：使用了一百八十九年，孝童壶又改用《四分历》，其历元是庚申。
English: It was used for one hundred and eighty-nine years, and the Xiaodong Jug was changed to the "Quarterly Calendar," whose calendar is based on the Hexin.

古文：今光等以庚申为非，甲寅为是。
现代文：现冯光等人认为历元用庚申是错了，应用甲寅才对。
English: Now, Feng Guang and others believe that the use of the Hegshen calendar is wrong, and the use of the Jiajing calendar is right.

古文：按历法，黄帝、颛顼、夏、殷、周、鲁，各自有元。
现代文：看《黄帝历》、《颛顼历》、《夏历》、《殷历》、《周历》、《鲁历》都有各自的历元。
English: Look at the "Yellow Emperor Calendar," "Jade Calendar," "Summer Calendar," "Yin Calendar," "Weekly Calendar" and "Lu Calendar," all of which have their own calendars.

古文：光、晃所援，则殷历元也。昔始用《太初》丁丑之后，六家纷错，争讼是非。
现代文：冯光、陈晃所引以为据的则是《殷历》的历元当初使用《太初历》的丁丑历元后六家历法均说它不对，争论过谁是谁非。
English: What Feng Guang and Chen Xiao refer to as the basis is that the calendar of "Yin Calendar" was originally based on the calendar of "Ding Xi Calendar," which was originally based on the calendar of "Taishu Calendar." After the founding of the six calendars, they all said that it was wrong, and they argued about who was right and who was wrong.

古文：张寿王挟甲寅元以非汉历，杂候清台，课在下第。《太初》效验，无所漏失。
现代文：彊昼王根据甲寅历元来反对汉历，在疆上共同观察考核的结果却是最差的。《太初历》与观察结果符合，没有差错。
English: Emperor Wu objected to the Chinese calendar on the basis of the Jia Yin calendar, but the result of the joint observation and assessment in Xinjiang was the worst. The "Taiyuan calendar" was consistent with the observation results, and there was no error.

古文：是则虽非图谶之元，而有效于前者也。
现代文：造就是虽然它不是图谶所给的历元但却比前者有效的情况。
English: This is a situation where, although it is not the era given by the diagram, it is more effective than the former.

古文：及用《四分》以来，考之行度，密于《太初》，是又新元有效于今者也。
现代文：使用了《四分历》后考查曰月的位置又比《太初历》精密，这又是新的历元在今天有效的情况。
English: After using the "Quarterly Calendar," it was found that the position of the crescent moon was more precise than that of the "Lunar Calendar," which is again the situation that the new calendar is effective today.

古文：故延光中，亶诵亦非《四分》，言当用甲寅元，公卿参议，竟不施行。
现代文：所以在延光年间，宜诵也曾反对过《四分历》，说应该采用甲寅历元，通过公卿的共同讨论，而并未实行。
English: Therefore, during the Yanguang period, Yichang also opposed the "Quarterly Calendar," saying that it should adopt the Jia Yin calendar, through the common discussion of the nobles, but it was not implemented.

古文：且三光之行，迟速进退，不必若一。故有古今之术。
现代文：况且曰、月、五星的运行，快慢和进退都不必完全相同，造就有了古代与今天的历法之不同。
English: Moreover, the movement of the moon and the five stars, the speed and the advance and retreat do not have to be exactly the same, resulting in the difference between the ancient and today's calendar.

古文：今术之不能通于古，亦犹古术不能下通于今也。
现代文：现在的历法不能向前通用到古代，也就像古代历法不能向后通用到现在一样。
English: The present calendar cannot be applied forward to antiquity, just as the ancient calendar cannot be applied backward to the present.

古文：又光、晃以《考灵耀》为本，二十八宿度数至日所在，错异不可参校。
现代文：另外冯光、陈晃以《考灵耀》为根据，其二十八宿度数和太阳位置的错误和差异无法检验考核。
English: In addition, Feng Guang and Chen Xiao used "Kao Lingyao" as the basis, and the errors and differences in its twenty-eight house frequency and the position of the sun could not be examined.

古文：元和二年用至今九十二岁，而光、晃言阴阳不和，奸臣盗贼，皆元之咎。
现代文：元和二年用到现在已九十二年，而冯光、陈晃却说阴阳不和、奸臣盗贼的出现都是历元的过错。
English: It has been ninety-two years since the first and second years of the Yuan Dynasty were used, but Feng Guang and Chen Ao said that the discord between yin and yang and the appearance of traitors and thieves were all the fault of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：元和诏书，文备义著，非群臣议者所能变易。 
现代文：元和年间的韶书讲得全面透彻，这不是群臣的讨论就能改变的。 
English: The imperial edicts of the Yuan and Zhou dynasties were comprehensively and thoroughly explained, and this is not something that can be changed by discussion among ministers.

古文：三公从邕议，以光、晃不敬，正鬼薪法，诏书勿治罪。
现代文：三公听从了蔡邕的意见，认为冯光、陈晃有不敬之罪，应以鬼薪法来处置。皇帝下诏书说不治他们的罪。
English: The three princes listened to Cai Xuan's opinion and believed that Feng Guang and Chen Huan were guilty of disrespect and should be dealt with according to the law of ghosts. The emperor issued an edict saying that they would not be punished for their crimes.

古文：何承天曰：夫历数之术，若心所不达，虽复通人前识，无救其为敝也。
现代文：包承天说：历算的方法如果不能理解，虽然人们对以前的认识有了进一步的了解，但无法补救古代的历算方法因有弊端而产生的错误。
English: Bao Chengtian said: If the calendar method cannot be understood, although people have gained further understanding of the previous understanding, it is impossible to remedy the errors caused by the drawbacks of the ancient calendar method.

古文：是以多历年岁，未能有定。
现代文：这样就出现了历时多年仍未有定论的情况。
English: This has led to a situation that has not been resolved for many years.

古文：《四分》于天，出三百年而盈一日。积代不悟，徒云建历之本，必先立元，假言谶纬，遂关治乱，此之为蔽，亦已甚矣。
现代文：《四分历》与实际天象比较，三百多年而增加一天，经历了好多年代都不能认识，徒然地说什么建立历法的根本必须先确定历元，假藉谶纬中的说法，在排除障碍改变混乱的时候还以此来掩盖，也太过分了。
English: Compared with the actual celestial phenomenon, the "Quarterly Calendar" has increased by one day in more than three hundred years, and it has been unrecognizable for many years. It is futile to say that the foundation of establishing a calendar must first determine the era. It is too much to use the argument in the middle of the world to remove obstacles and change the chaos.

古文：刘歆《三统法》尤复疏阔，方于《四分》，六千余年又益一日。
现代文：空邀的《三统历》比《四分历》更为粗疏，每六千多年还要再增加一天。
English: The uninvited "Three-Tiered Calendar" is more coarse than the "Four-Tiered Calendar," adding one more day every six thousand years.

古文：扬雄心惑其说，采为《太玄》，班固谓之最密，著于《汉志》；司彪因曰 自太初元年始用《三统历》，施行百有余年 。
现代文：扬雄受到刘歆观点的迷惑，在《太玄》中采用了它。班固认为《三统历》最为精密，在《汉书律历志》中加以叙述；司马彪因此说： 自立初元年开始采用《三统历》，使用了一百多年。 
English: Yang Xiong was puzzled by Liu Xuan's view and adopted it in "Tai Xuan." Ban Gu believed that the "Three Hierarchical Calendars" was the most precise and described it in the "Hanshu Rulings and Calendars"; Sima Biao therefore said: The "Three Hierarchical Calendars" was adopted in the first year of independence and was used for more than a hundred years.

古文：曾不忆刘歆之生，不逮太初，二三君子言历，几乎不知而妄言欤！
现代文：就没有想到刘歆的出生是在叁翅年以后，几个人对历法的议论是几乎一点不懂地乱说一气。
English: It didn't occur to me that Liu Ye was born after the Year of the Rooster's Wing, and several people's discussion of the calendar was almost incomprehensible gibberish.

古文：光和中，谷城门候刘洪始悟《四分》于天疏阔，更以五百八十九为纪法；百四十五为斗分，造《乾象法》。又制迟疾历以步月行。
现代文：光和年间，毅城门候刘洪最早认识到《四分历》与实际天象有较大的偏差，他用五百八十九为纪法，一百四十五为斗宿的分数部分，编制了《干象法》，又制订了用计算行星运行速度快慢的方法来度量月亮运行情况。
English: During the Guangwa era, Liu Hong, a disciple of Yicheng, was the first to recognize that there was a large deviation between the "Quarterly Calendar" and the actual celestial phenomena. He used 589 as the chronology and 145 as the fraction part of the zodiac to compile the "Dry Phenomena Method," and also developed a method for calculating the speed of the planets to measure the movement of the moon.

古文：方于《太初》、《四分》，转精微矣。
现代文：这才比《太初历》、《四分历》精密了。
English: This is more precise than the "Hundred-day Calendar" and "Quarterly Calendar."

古文：魏文帝黄初中，太史丞韩翊以为《乾象》减斗分太过，后当先天，造《黄初历》，以四千八百八十三为纪法，一千二百五为斗分。
现代文：球这违董勿年间，太史丞韩翅认为《干象法》中将斗宿的分数部分减少得太多丫，以后必然会出现推算比实际天象出现得早的情况，于是编制了《黄初历》，将纪法取为四千八百八十三，斗分数取为一千二百零五。
English: During this period, Han Yu, Taishi, thought that the number of points in the "Dry Elephant Method" had been reduced too much, and that there would inevitably be a situation in the future where the deduction appeared earlier than the actual celestial object. Therefore, the "Yellow Primary Calendar" was compiled, and the discipline was taken as four thousand eight hundred and eighty-three, and the score was taken as one thousand two hundred and five.

古文：其后尚书令陈群奏，以为 历数难明，前代通儒多共纷争。
现代文：后来尚书令陈群向皇帝上奏，认为： 历算难以弄清，以前历代博学的人就多有各种争论。
English: Later, Shang Shu ordered Chen Qun to report to the emperor, saying: It is difficult to figure out the calendar, and many learned people in previous generations had various disputes.

古文：《黄初》之元，以《四分历》久远疏阔，大魏受命，宜正历明时。
现代文：《黄初历》的本源是因为《四分历》使用时间已很长而不够精确，魏代建立后需要准确的历法确定节气。
English: The origin of the "Yellow First Calendar" is because the "Quarterly Calendar" has been used for a long time and is not accurate enough. After the establishment of the Wei Dynasty, an accurate calendar is needed to determine the solar terms.

古文：韩翊首建《黄初》，犹恐不审，故以《乾象》互相参校。历三年，更相是非，舍本即末，争长短而疑尺丈，竟无时而决。按三公议，皆综尽曲理，殊涂同归，欲使效之璇玑，各尽其法，一年之间，得失足定，合于事宜。 奏可。
现代文：韩翊最早编制了《黄初历》，尚担心考虑不周，所以用《干象法》互相比较，经过三年，愈加互相褒贬，放弃根本的问题而去追求捆枝末节，为争论两者的短长而去怀疑衡量的标准，最后也得不到结论审察三公的意见，都是罗列不全面的道理，从不同的途径得到相同的效果，要在天文仪器上进行检验，充分利用各自的方法推算，在一年之中就可以确定两历的得失情况了，与情况和条件也是符合的， 这一上奏得到了同意。
English: Han Zheng was the first to compile the "Yellow Primary Calendar" and was still worried that it was not well thought out, so he used the "Dried Image Method" to compare each other. After three years, they increasingly praised and criticized each other, abandoned the fundamental problem and pursued the end of the bundle, and doubted the measurement standard because of the short length of the dispute between the two. Finally, they could not reach a conclusion. The opinions of the three princes were examined. They were not comprehensive. The same effect was obtained from different ways. It was necessary to test on an astronomical instrument and make full use of their respective methods of calculation. In one year, the gains and losses of the two cal

古文：明帝时，尚书郎杨伟制《景初历》，施用至于晋、宋。
现代文：明帝时，尚书郎杨伟编制了《景初历》，一直使用到置伐和型蹇。
English: During the reign of Emperor Ming, Shang Shulang Yang Wei compiled the "New Year's Calendar," which was used until the establishment of logging and the establishment of the Han Dynasty.

古文：古之为历者，邓平能修旧制新，刘洪始减《四分》，又定月行迟疾，杨伟斟酌两端，以立多少之衷，因朔积分设差，以推合朔月蚀。
现代文：古代的历法学家中邓平能够修改旧历制订新历，刘洪最早减小了《四分历》的斗分，又确定丁月行迟疾的运算，杨伟则考虑了有关数据的最大、最小值，以确定其中间值，根据朔积分确定差值，用来推算合朔和月食，逭三个人是选、魏时精通历法的。
English: Among the ancient calendarists, Deng Ping was able to modify the old calendar and formulate a new calendar. Liu Hong was the first to reduce the "Quarterly Calendar" and determine the calculation of the delay of the Ding month. Yang Wei considered the maximum and minimum values of the relevant data to determine the median value, and determined the difference according to the intercalary point to calculate the new moon and lunar eclipse.

古文：此三人，汉、魏之善历者，然而洪之迟疾，不可以检《春秋》；伟之五星，大乖于后代，斯则洪用心尚疏，伟拘于同出上元壬辰故也。
现代文：但是刘洪的月行迟疾推算方法并不能用于检考《春秋》，杨伟五星位置的推算在后代也出现了很大的误差，这是刘洪的考虑还比较粗疏，杨伟则拘泥于曰、月、五星在上元壬辰年同时出发的缘故。
English: However, Liu Hong's method of calculating the delay of the moon can not be used to examine the "Spring and Autumn." Yang Wei's calculation of the position of the five stars also showed a large error in the future generations. This is because Liu Hong's consideration is still relatively rough, and Yang Wei is rigid in saying that the moon and the five stars set off at the same time in the year of Yinchuan.

古文：魏明帝景初元年，改定历数，以建丑之月为正，改其年三月为孟夏四月。
现代文：魏明帝量攰元年，对历法作了改变，以建丑的月份作为正月，改造一年的二月为孟夏四月。
English: In the first year of the Wei and Ming dynasties, the calendar was changed, with the month of Jiankui as the first month, and the February of the year was transformed into the April of Mengxia.

古文：其孟仲季月，虽与正岁不同，至于郊祀、迎气、祭祠、烝尝，巡狩、搜田，分至启闭，班宣时令，皆以建寅为正。
现代文：其孟、仲、季月的排列与以建寅之月为正月的不同，但祭天地、迎节气、祭祖庙、冬祭、秋祭、皇帝出巡、狩猎，分至和四立曰、颁布的节令都与以建寅之月为正月的情况一致。
English: The arrangement of Meng, Zhong and Qizhou is different from that of the first month of the month of Jianyin, but the festivals of heaven and earth, the welcoming of the solar terms, the celebration of ancestral temples, the winter festival, the autumn festival, the emperor's inspection tour, hunting, and the division into four days, and the promulgation of the festivals are consistent with the situation of the first month of the month of Jianyin.

古文：三年正月，帝崩，复用夏正。
现代文：景初三年正月，魏明帝去世后又恢复到以建寅之月为正月。
English: In the first month of the third year of Jingchu, after the death of Wei Mingdi, it was restored to the month of Jian Yin as the first month.

古文：杨伟表曰： 臣揽载籍，断考历数，时以纪农，月以纪事，其所由来，遐而尚矣。
现代文：扰售上奏的表中说： 我搜集群书，判断考校历术，节气用以记述农事，月份可以记载事件，其来源是久远的。
English: The cancellation notice said: I collect group books, judge the examination calendar, the solar terms are used to record agricultural affairs, the month can record events, and its source is long-standing.

古文：乃自少昊，则玄鸟司分；颛顼帝喾，则重、黎司天；唐帝、虞舜，则羲、和掌日。
现代文：从少吴帝时就有玄鸟掌握春秋分，颛顼、帝臀时则有重、黎掌管天象的观察，唐尧、虞舜则有羲、和负责观察太阳。
English: From the time when Emperor Wu was a boy, there was a mysterious bird that controlled the vernal equinox, the dragonfly and the emperor's buttocks were heavy, Li was in charge of the observation of the celestial body, and the dragonfly and the gooseberry were responsible for observing the sun.

古文：三代因之，则世有日官。
现代文：夏、商、周三代继承了这一传统，则就有了闩官。
English: Xia, Shang, and the third generation inherited this tradition, and then there were eunuchs.

古文：日官司历，则颁之诸侯，诸侯受之，则颁于境内。
现代文：官掌管历法，向诸侯公布，诸侯接受后又在诸侯国境内颁布。
English: It is said that the officials controlled the calendar, promulgated it to the lords, and after the lords obtained it, they promulgated it within the territory.

古文：夏后之代，羲、和湎淫，废时乱日，则《书》载《胤征》。
现代文：夏后氏时代的义、和沉湎于酒，使节令发生了混乱，在《尚书惰征》中有记载。
English: The righteousness and indulgence in liquor in the era of the Xia Guo clan caused confusion in the government, which is recorded in "Shang Shuxiao Zheng" (尚書惰征).

古文：由此观之，审农时而重人事者，历代然也。
现代文：由此看来，掌握农时并且看重人情事理，历来都是如此。
English: From this point of view, it has always been the case to master the farming time and attach importance to the human condition.

古文：逮至周室既衰，战国横骛，告朔之羊，废而不绍，登台之礼，灭而不遵。
现代文：直到周代王室衰落，战国纷杂混乱，告朔祭庙所用的活羊被废止而不再延续，登高台的礼仪也不再得到遵守。
English: Until the decline of the royal family in the Zhou Dynasty, the chaos of the Warring States, the live sheep used in the Keshuo Temple was abolished and no longer continued, and the etiquette of climbing the platform was no longer observed.

古文：闰分乖次而不识，孟陬失纪而莫悟，大火犹西流，而怪蛰虫之不藏也。
现代文：闰月的安排相差一次而看不出，正月不在相应的年中也不知道，大火星黄昏时刚刚偏西却已对昆虫的不冬眠感到奇怪。
English: The arrangement of the leap month is different once and cannot be seen, the first month is not in the corresponding year and does not know, the great Mars is just westward at dusk, but it is already strange for insects not to hibernate.

古文：是时也，天子不协时，司历不书日，诸侯不受职，日御不分朔，人事不恤，废弃农时。
现代文：当时统治者不协调时令，管理历法的人不写出日期，诸侯不接受管理，负直观察太阳的人不能分辨朔日，人情事理不体恤，农时节令受到废弃。
English: At that time, the rulers did not coordinate the seasons, the people who managed the calendar did not write the date, the lords did not accept the management, the people who observed the sun directly could not distinguish the new day, the human situation was unreasonable, and the agricultural season order was abandoned.

古文：仲尼之拨乱于《春秋》，托褒贬纠正，司历失闰，则讥而书之，登台颁朔，则谓之有礼。
现代文：壬迂的《春秋》力图改变这种混乱情况，藉助于赞扬和批评来纠正偏向，管理历法的人安排闰月不当则予以指责并记录下来，登高台颁布朔日就称赞为有礼之举。
English: In the book "Spring and Autumn," Zhongni carried out the "dispersion and rectification," relying on praise and criticism to correct mistakes, the official in charge of the calendar set the leap month improperly, then recorded it in the book with ridicule, and when he took the stage to announce the new moon, he said that he was polite.

古文：自此以降，暨于秦、汉，乃复以孟冬为岁首，闰为后九月，中节乖错，时月纰缪，加时后天，蚀不在朔，累载相袭，久而不革也。
现代文：从此以后直到秦、汉之时，又是以孟冬为一年的开始，闰月放在九月的后面，中气、节气有错误，时令月份出差谬，推算的天象发生时刻比实际要晚，食不发生在朔日，这种情况积年沿袭而无改变。
English: From then on, until the Qin and Han dynasties, Mengdong was used as the beginning of the year, the leap month was placed behind September, the mid-air and solar terms were wrong, the seasonal months were erroneous, the estimated time of occurrence of the celestial phenomenon was later than the actual time, and the eclipse did not occur on the New Year's Day. This situation has remained unchanged over the years.

古文：至武帝元封七年，始乃寤其缪焉。
现代文：到了漠武帝元封七年才开始认识到其错谬。
English: It was not until the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Mo Wu that they began to realize their error.

古文：于是改正朔，更历数，使大才通人，造《太初历》。校中朔所差，以正闰分；课中星得度，以考疏密，以建寅之月为正朔，以黄钟之月为历初。
现代文：于是就改变了正朔，更换了历法的有关数据，用具有卓越才能、学贯古今的人，编制了《太初历》，校验中气和朔日的偏差以使闰分准确，观察山星所在度数以考证推算的精度，以建寅的月份的朔日为止朔，以黄钟对应的月份为历的开始。
English: As a result, the Gregorian calendar was changed, the relevant data of the calendar was replaced, and the "Taihatsu Calendar" was compiled by people with outstanding talents and knowledge of ancient and modern times. The deviation between the middle day and the first day of the month was checked to make the leap day accurate, the accuracy of the observation of the degree of the mountain star was verified and the accuracy of the calculation was observed. The new day of the month of Jianyin was used as the new day, and the month corresponding to the yellow clock was used as the beginning of the calendar.

古文：其历斗分太多，后遂疏阔。
现代文：《太初历》的斗宿宿度奇零部分太大，以后就逐渐不精密了。
English: The scale of this calendar was too large, and later the error gradually increased.

古文：至元和二年，复用《四分历》。
现代文：到元和二年又使用了《四分历》。
English: In the first and second years, the "Quarterly Calendar" was used again.

古文：施而行之。至于今日，考察日蚀，率常在晦，是则斗分太多，故先密后疏而不可用也。
现代文：其颁布使用到现在，观察到的日食常发生在历法推算的晦，这是历法斗宿宿度奇零部分太大的缘故，所以开始时还算精密后来就粗疏而不能使用了。
English: Its promulgation and use until now, observed solar eclipses often occur at the end of the calendar calculation, which is due to the fact that the odd-zero part of the calendar is too large, so at the beginning it was still considered precise, but later it was rough and could not be used.

古文：是以臣前以制典余日，推考天路，稽之前典，验之食朔，详而精之，更建密历，则不先不后，古今中天。
现代文：为此我前一段时间制订法则，推算考求天文规律，考查了以前的典籍，用日食、朔日进行了验证，完备而精确地制定了精密的历法，就做到了对古今天象的推算与实际相比不早也不迟。
English: To this end, some time ago, I formulated rules, calculated and studied astronomical laws, examined previous classics, verified with solar eclipses and new moons, and fully and accurately developed a precise calendar. I was able to make a calculation of the ancient calendar that was neither earlier nor later than reality.

古文：以昔在唐帝，协日正时，允厘百工，咸熙庶绩也。
现代文：在唐尧时代，协调日期确定节令，公平地管理各类官员，各种事业都很兴盛。
English: In the past, under the Tang Dynasty, all kinds of undertakings flourished as the emperor coordinated the times and governed the people in good faith.

古文：欲使当今国之典礼，凡百制度，皆韬合往古，郁然备足，乃改正朔，更历数，以大吕之月为岁首，以建子之月为历初。
现代文：要使现在国家的各种礼仪制度都与古代暗中相合，作好充分的准备，再改变正朔，更换历法数据，以与大吕相对应的月份为一年的开始，以建子的月份作为历的起点。
English: In order to make the ceremonies and various systems of today's country consistent with the past and very complete and sufficient, the location of the first month was changed and the basic data of the calendar was changed, with the month of Lu as the beginning of the year and the month of Jianzi as the initial month of the calendar.

古文：臣以为昔在帝代，则法曰《颛顼》，曩自轩辕，则历曰《黄帝》。
现代文：我认为当年在帝代，历法称为《颛项历》，从前在轩辕帝的时候，历法则称为《黄帝历》。
English: I think that in the imperial era, the calendar was called the "Yan Xiang Calendar," and in the past, when Xuan Xiang was the emperor, the calendar rule was called the "Yellow Emperor Calendar."

古文：暨至汉之孝武，革正朔，更历数，改元曰太初，因名《太初历》。
现代文：直到汉武帝时改变正朔，更换历法数据，改年号为太初，历法就叫《太初历》。
English: Until Emperor Hanwu changed Zhengshuo, replaced the calendar data, and changed the year number to Taichung, the calendar was called "Taichung Calendar."

古文：今改元为景初，宜曰《景初历》。
现代文：现在改年号为景初，历法称为《景初历》是适宜的。
English: Now that the era has been changed to the beginning of the scene, the calendar should be called the "beginning of the scene calendar."

古文：臣之所建《景初历》，法数则约要，施用则近密，治之则省功，学之则易知。
现代文：我所制订的《景初历》基本数据简要，使用则精密，研究较省力，学习则易懂。
English: The method and data of the "New Year's Calendar" I developed are concise and concise, the application is close to precision, the research is efficient, and the learning is easy to understand.

古文：虽复使研、桑心算，隶首运筹，重、黎司晷，羲、和察景，以考天路，步验日月，究极精微，尽术数之极者，皆未如臣如此之妙也。
现代文：即使能让研、桑进行心算，隶首再来筹划，重、黎掌管圭表，羲、和观察表影的变化，以考察天文规律，推算考察日月的运行，研究到最为精微的程度，达到历算工作的最高水平，也都未能像我所做的那么好。
English: Even if I had been able to have Ken and Sang do mental calculations, and the heads of departments come up with the plans, and Chong and Lai take charge of the watch, calendar, and observation of the changes in appearance and shadow, to investigate the astronomical laws, to calculate and investigate the movement of the sun and moon, to study to the finest degree, and to reach the highest level of calendar work, I would not have been able to do as well as I did.

古文：是以累代历数，皆疏而不密，自黄帝以来，改革不已。
现代文：历代的历算工作都是粗疏而不精密的，从黄帝以后一直进行着改革。
English: The work of calculating the calendar throughout the ages has been crude and imprecise, and reforms have been carried out since the time of the Yellow Emperor.

古文：壬辰元以来，至景初元年丁巳，岁积四千四十六，算上。
现代文：从壬辰年历元到景初元年的丁巳岁，共有四千零四十六年。
English: A total of 4,046 years elapsed from the beginning of the Imjin calendar to the first year of the Jing.

古文：此元以天正建子黄钟之月为历初，元首之岁夜半甲子朔旦冬至。
现代文：该历元以与周正相应的建子的且与黄钟相对应的月份为历的开始，历元开始的一年甲子日夜半合朔且为冬至。
English: This calendar begins with the month corresponding to the building corresponding to Zhou Zheng and the month corresponding to the yellow clock. The year of the beginning of the calendar is the first half of the year and the winter solstice.

古文：元法，万一千五十八。
现代文：元法：一万一千零五十八。
English: Actual: 11,058.

古文：纪法，千八百四十三。
现代文：纪法：一千八百四十三。
English: Discipline: One thousand eight hundred and forty-three.

古文：纪月，二万二千七百九十五。
现代文：纪月：二万二干七百九十五。
English: Ji Yue: Twenty-two thousand seven hundred ninety-five.

古文：章岁，十九。
现代文：章岁：十九。
English: Chapter years: nineteen.

古文：章月，二百三十五。
现代文：章月：二百三十五。
English: Chapter Month: Two hundred thirty-five.

古文：章闰，七。
现代文：章闰：七。
English: Chapter: Seven.

古文：通数，十三万四千六百三十。
现代文：通数：十三万四千六百三十。
English: Total: one hundred thirty-four thousand six hundred thirty.

古文：日法，四千五百五十九。
现代文：日法：四千五百五十九。
English: Japan and France: 4559.

古文：余数，九千六百七十。
现代文：余数：九千六百七十。
English: Remaining: 9,670.

古文：周天，六十七万三千一百五十。
现代文：周天：六十七万三干一百五十。
English: Zhou Tian: 673,150.

古文：纪日岁中，十二。气法，十二。
现代文：岁中：十二。气法：十二。
English: Mid-year: twelve. Mid-season: twelve.

古文：没分，六万七千三百一十五。
现代文：没分：六万七千三百一十五。
English: No score: 67,315.

古文：没法，九百六十七。
现代文：没法：九百六十七。
English: No way: nine hundred and sixty-seven.

古文：月周，二万四千六百三十八。
现代文：月周：二万四千六百三十八。
English: Weeks of the month: 24,638.

古文：通法，四十七。
现代文：通法：四十七。
English: Passing: forty-seven.

古文：会通，七十九万一百二十。
现代文：会通：七十九万零一百一十。
English: Membership: 7,901,110.

古文：朔望合数，六万七千三百一十五。
现代文：朔望合数：六万七千三百一十五。
English: The total number of confirmed cases now stands at 67,315.

古文：入交限数，七十二万二千七百九十五。
现代文：入交限数：七十二万二千七百九十五。
English: Entry limit: up to 7,222,795.

古文：通周，十二万五千六百二十一。
现代文：通周：十二万五千六百二十一。
English: Weekly: 125,621.

古文：周日日余，二千五百二十八。
现代文：周曰曰余：二千五百二十八。
English: Sunday and the rest of the day: 2528.

古文：周虚，二千三十一。
现代文：周虚：二千零三十一。
English: Zhou Xiao: The year is 2031.

古文：斗分，四百五十五。
现代文：斗分：四百五十五。
English: Score: four hundred and fifty-five.

古文：甲子纪第一：
现代文：甲子纪是第一纪：
English: The Koshiki is the first period:

古文：纪首合朔，月在日道里。
现代文：纪开始时的合朔月亮在黄道北。
English: At the beginning of the new year, the moon is at the south of the zodiac.

古文：交会差率，四十一万二千九百一十九。
现代文：交会差率，四十一万二千九百一十九。
English: The difference at the trade fair was 4,112,919.

古文：迟疾差率，十万三千九百四十七。
现代文：迟疾差率，十万三千九百四十七。
English: The delayed diagnosis rate rose to 103,947.

古文：甲戌纪第二：
现代文：甲戌纪是第二纪：
English: The Ordovician is the second period:

古文：纪首合朔，月在日道里。
现代文：纪开始时的合朔月亮在黄道北。
English: At the beginning of the new year, the moon is at the south of the zodiac.

古文：交会差率，五十一万六千五百二十九。
现代文：交会差率，五十一万六干五百二十九。
English: The difference in the number of visitors was 5.16 million to 5.29.

古文：迟疾差率，七万三千七百六十七。
现代文：迟疾差率，七万三千七百六十七。
English: The delayed diagnosis rate rose to 73,767.

古文：甲申纪第三：
现代文：甲申纪是第三纪：
English: The Jiaoshen period is the third period:

古文：纪首合朔，月在日道里。
现代文：纪开始时的合朔月亮在黄道北。
English: At the beginning of the new year, the moon is at the south of the zodiac.

古文：交会差率，六十二万一百三十九。
现代文：交会差率，六十二万零一百三十九。
English: The difference at the trade fair was 6,201,139.

古文：迟疾差率，四万三千五百八十七。
现代文：迟疾差率，四万三千五百八十七。
English: The delayed diagnosis rate rose to 43,587.

古文：甲午纪第四：
现代文：甲午纪是第四纪：
English: The Cambrian is the Quaternary:

古文：纪首合朔，月在日道里。
现代文：纪开始时的合朔月亮在黄道北。
English: At the beginning of the new year, the moon is at the south of the zodiac.

古文：交会差率，七十二万三千七百四十九。
现代文：交会差率，七十二万三干七百四十九。
English: The difference in the number of visitors was 7,223,749.

古文：迟疾差率，一万三千四百七。
现代文：迟疾差率，一万三干四百零七。
English: The delayed diagnosis rate rose to 13,407.

古文：甲辰纪第五：
现代文：甲辰纪是第五纪：
English: The Cretaceous is the fifth age:

古文：纪首合朔，月在日道里。
现代文：纪开始时的合朔月亮在黄道南。
English: At the beginning of the new year, the moon is at the south of the zodiac.

古文：交会差率，三万七千二百四十九。
现代文：交会差率，三万七千二百四十九。
English: The total number of visitors to the fair was 37,249.

古文：迟疾差率，一十万八千八百四十八。
现代文：迟疾差率，十万八干八百四十八
English: The difference in the rate of delayed diagnosis, from 108,000 to 848,000

古文：甲寅纪第六：
现代文：甲寅纪是第六纪：
English: The Cretaceous-Paleogene is the sixth epoch:

古文：纪首合朔，月在日道里。
现代文：纪开始时的合朔月亮在黄道南。
English: At the beginning of the new year, the moon is at the south of the zodiac.

古文：交会差率，十四万八百五十九。
现代文：交会差率，十四万零八百五十九。
English: The difference at the fair was 140,859.

古文：迟疾差率，七万八千六百六十八。
现代文：迟疾差率，匕万八千六百六十八。
English: The delayed diagnosis rate rose to 78,668.

古文：交会纪差，十万三千六百一十。
现代文：交会纪差，十万三千六百一十。
English: Trade fair discipline, up 103,610.

古文：求其数之所生者，置一纪积月以通数乘之，会通去之，所去之余，纪差之数也。
现代文：该数的求得是取一纪的积月数乘以通数，再除以会通，得到的余数就是交会纪差。
English: This number is obtained by taking the number of accumulated months of a discipline and multiplying it by the total number, and then dividing it by the number of meetings. The remaining number is the difference in the number of meetings.

古文：以之转加前纪，则得后纪。
现代文：将它加在呆纪的交会差率上就得到后一纪的交会差率。
English: The result of the trade fair difference plus the trade fair difference rate of the previous trade fair is the trade fair difference rate of the next trade fair.

古文：加之未满会通者，则纪首之岁天正合朔，月在日道里，满去之，则月在日道表。
现代文：加后得到的数比会通小，则后一纪开始的一年周止正月合朔时月亮在黄道北。
English: If the number obtained after addition is smaller than the conjunction, then the moon is in the north of the ecliptic at the time of the new moon at the end of the first month of the year at the beginning of the latter period.

古文：加表满在里，加里满在表。迟疾纪差，三万一百八十。
现代文：如比会通大则减去会通，月亮则在黄道南对月亮在黄道南且加后比会通大则在黄道北，对月亮在黄道北且加后比会通大则变为在黄道南。
English: If the ecliptic is large, the ecliptic is subtracted, and the moon is south of the ecliptic; if the moon is south of the ecliptic and the ecliptic is large, the moon is north of the ecliptic; if the moon is north of the ecliptic and the ecliptic is large, the moon is south of the ecliptic.

古文：求其数之所生者，置一纪积月，以通数乘之，通周去之，余以减通周，所减之余，纪差之数也。以之转减前纪，则得后纪。
现代文：迟疾纪差，三万零一百八十该数的求得是取一纪的积月数乘以通数，除以通周，所得的余数再在通周中减去，其差即迟疾纪差将某纪的迟疾差率减去迟疾纪差就得后一纪的迟疾差率。
English: Delay discipline, 30,180 The maximum of this number is obtained by taking the number of accumulated months of a discipline multiplied by the total number, divided by the whole week, and the remaining number is then subtracted in the whole week. The difference is that the delay discipline will subtract the delay difference rate of a certain discipline from the delay discipline to obtain the delay difference rate of the next discipline.

古文：不足减者，加通周。
现代文：如不够减，则加上通周后再减。
English: If there is a shortfall, it will be added to the weekly total and then reduced.

古文：求次元纪差率，转减前元甲寅纪差率，余则次元甲子纪差率也。
现代文：求下一个历元的纪差率：将某一历元甲寅纪的迟疾差率减去迟疾纪差，所余就是下一历元甲子纪的迟疾差率。
English: To find the dimensional error rate: subtract the error rate from the pre-element error rate, and the result is the dimensional error rate.

古文：求次纪，如上法也。
现代文：要求下纪的迟疾差率，方法如前。
English: Find the difference between the second and third terms, the same as the previous method.

古文：推朔积月术曰：置壬辰元以来，尽所求年，外所求，以纪法除之，所得算外，所入纪第也，余则入纪年数。
现代文：推朔积月的方法说：取从壬辰年历元以来到需求朔月的年份所经过的年数，在年数中去除该年份，将该年数除以纪法，所得的商加一，就是该年份所在纪的序号，其余数就是该年份在相应的纪中的年数。
English: The method of deducing the leap month is as follows: take the number of years that have passed since the beginning of the lunar calendar in the year of the leap month, remove the year from the number of years, divide the number of years by the era, add one to the quotient, which is the serial number of the era in which the year is located, and the remaining number is the number of years of the year in the corresponding era.

古文：年以章月乘之，如章岁而一为积月，不尽为闰余。
现代文：将这年数乘以章月。再除以章岁，所得的商就是积月，其余数就是闰余。
English: Multiply this number of years by the number of months, and then divide by the number of years, the quotient obtained is the number of months, and the remaining number is the remainder.

古文：闰余十二以上，其年有闰。
现代文：闰余大于十二，则该年有闰月。
English: There were more than twelve leap days, and there was a leap month that year.

古文：闰月以无中气为正。
现代文：闰月的设置以月中没有中气为标准。
English: The intercalary month shall be determined based on the moon without a meridian.

古文：推朔术曰：以通数乘积月，为朔积分，如日法而一为积日，不尽为小余。
现代文：推朔日的方法说：将积月乘以通敷，得到朔积分。将朔积分除以日法，其商就是积曰，其余数就是小余。
English: The method of deducing the new moon says: multiply the accrued month by the common divisor to get the new moon integral. Divide the new moon integral by the Japanese method, the quotient is the accrued day, and the remaining number is the small remainder.

古文：以六十去积日，余为大余。大余命以纪，算外，所求年天正十一月朔日也。
现代文：积曰每超过六十就减去六十，最后得到的余数就是大余，将大余用干支名称来对应，并向外推后一天，就是所求年份与周正相应的十一月朔日的于支。
English: The product says that every time more than sixty, subtract sixty, and the last remaining number is the big surplus. Correspond the big surplus with the name of the stem branch, and extrapolate one day later, which is the new year in November corresponding to the week.

古文：求次月，加大余二十九，小余二千四百一十九，小余满日法从大余，命如前，次月朔日也。
现代文：求下一月：在大余上加二十九，小余上加二千四百一十九，小余如满曰法则减去曰法并在大余上加一，用前面所述的方法可得到下一个月朔日的干支。
English: Ask for the new moon day of the next month: on the basis of the previous month, increase the remainder by 29, and the small remainder by 2,419. If the small surplus is added after the full day method of 4,559, it will be converted into a large surplus. The method of starting and naming is the same as before, and the result is the new moon day of the next month.

古文：小余二千一百四十以上，其月大也。
现代文：如果小余大于二千一百四十，则这一个月月大。
English: If the monthly surplus is more than 2,140 yuan, it will be the largest in the month.

古文：推弦望，加朔大余七，小余千七百四十四，小分一，小分满二从小余，上余满日法从大余，大余满六十去之，余命以纪，算外，上弦日也。
现代文：推算上、下弦和望日：在朔日的大余上加七，小余上加一千七百四十四和一小分，小分满二则减，二并在小余上进一，小余满目法则减去曰法在大余上进一，大余超过六十则减去六十，其余数用干支名称对应，并向外推后一天，就是上弦的干支。
English: In terms of calculation, the lower chord and the expected date: add seven to the large remainder of the new year's day, add one thousand seven hundred and forty-four and one-tenth to the small remainder, subtract two from the small remainder, subtract one from the small remainder, subtract one from the large remainder, subtract sixty from the large remainder, and the remaining number corresponds to the name of the stem, and the day after extrapolation is the stem of the upper chord.

古文：又加得望、下弦、后月朔。
现代文：依法再加可得望日、下弦日和下一个月的朔日。
English: According to the law, the day of the week, the day of the week and the day of the month can be added.

古文：其月蚀望者，定小余，如所近中节间限，限数以下者，算上为日。
现代文：在望日发生月食的且其定小余比与其接近的中气或节气所对应的间限、限数小则作为一天来推算。
English: For lunar eclipses that occur on the sighting day and whose fixed small remainder ratio is as high as the interval corresponding to the middle or solar terms close to it, the small limit is calculated as one day.

古文：望在中节前后各四日以还者，视限数；望在中节前后各五日以上者，视间限。
现代文：望日在中或节气日前或后各四天以内时以限数作为衡量标准，各五天以上时则以间限作为衡量标准。
English: Within four days before and after the mid-air or solar terms, depending on the limit, and more than five days before and after the mid-air or solar terms, depending on the limit.

古文：推二十四气术曰：置所入纪年，外所求，以余数乘之，满纪法为大余，不尽为小余。
现代文：推算二十四节气的方法说：取需求二十四节气的年份在相应纪中的年数，不包含这一年，将其乘以余数，除以纪法，得到的商为大余，其余数为小余。
English: To calculate the 24 meridians and solar terms, subtract 1 from the year of the zodiac, multiply the remainder by 9,670 and divide by 1,843. The resulting quotient is a large remainder and the remainder is a small remainder.

古文：大余满六十去之，余命以纪，算外，天正十一月冬至日也。
现代文：当大余满六十就减去六十，最后余下的数以干支名称来对应，并向外推后一天，就是与周正相对应的十一月冬至日的干支。
English: If more than sixty, the remainder is subtracted, and the remaining less than sixty parts are counted from the beginning of the current year, and are not counted, that is, it is the winter solstice day in November.

古文：求次气，加大余十五，小余四百二，小分十一，小分满气法从小余，小余满纪法从大余，命如前，次气日也。
现代文：求下一个节气：在大余上加十五，小余上加四百零二和十一小分，小分满气法则减去气法并在小余上加一，小余满纪法则减去纪法并在大余上进一，按前述的方法就得到下一个节气曰的干支。
English: Asking for the next qi: on the basis of the previous qi, increase the remainder by fifteen, the small remainder by four hundred and two, the small fraction by eleven, if the small fraction is full of gas, the twelve will turn into a small remainder, the small remainder by the Manchu law will turn into a large remainder, the method of starting calculation and naming is the same as before, and the result is the next qi day.

古文：推闰月术曰：以闰余减章岁，余以岁中乘之，满章闰得一月，余满半法以上亦得一月。
现代文：推算闰月的方法说：将章岁减去闰余，得到的差乘以岁中，其积再除以章闰，其商就是月数，其余数大于章闰的一半则在月数上加一。
English: The method of calculating the leap month is as follows: subtract the leap year from the leap year, multiply the resulting difference by the year, divide the product by the leap year, the quotient is the number of months, and add one to the number of months if the remaining number is greater than half of the leap year.

古文：数从天正十一月起，算外，闰月也。
现代文：月数从与周正相应的十一月起算，再向外推算一个月，该月就是闰月。
English: The monthly allowance obtained in this way is counted from Tensho November onwards, and is not counted, resulting in a leap month.

古文：闰有进退，以无中气御之。
现代文：闰月的设置有前后的差异，以没有中气作为闰月的标准。
English: If there is a discrepancy in the setting of the leap month, use the presence or absence of the mid-air as a criterion.

古文：大雪，十一月节。
现代文：大雪，十一月的节气。
English: Heavy snow, the November solar term is over.

古文：冬至，十一月中。
现代文：需霱二丰三言=十天：冬至，十一月的中气。
English: It takes ten days to make two fortunes and three words: winter solstice, mid-autumn day in November.

古文：小寒，十二月节。
现代文：大寒，十二月的中气。
English: It's bitterly cold, the middle of December.

古文：大寒，十二月中。立春，正月节。
现代文：需慧二丰三言二享二：立春，正月的节气。
English: Need wisdom, abundance, three words, two enjoy two: the first day of spring, the first month of the solar term.

古文：雨水，正月中。
现代文：需慧二丰二芸七丰二：雨水，正月的中气。
English: It takes wisdom, wealth, and talent to make the seven wealths: rainwater, the first month's mid-air.

古文：惊蛰，二月节。
现代文：需慧二丰；昙；左二。惊垫，二月的节气。
English: Meng Hui, second from the right, and Feng Li, second from the left. The February solar term is approaching.

古文：春分，二月中。
现代文：春分，二月的中气。
English: The vernal equinox, the middle of February.

古文：清明，三月节
现代文：清明，三月的节气。
English: Qingming, the March solar term.

古文：谷雨，三月中。
现代文：谷雨，三月的中气。
English: Rain in the valley, midsummer in March.

古文：立夏，四月节。
现代文：守夏，四月的节气。
English: Summer protection, April's solar terms.

古文：小满，四月中。
现代文：小满，四月的中气。
English: A little full, with the mid-April air.

古文：芒种，五月节。
现代文：芒种，五月的节气。
English: Mangseong, the solar term for May.

古文：夏至，五月中。
现代文：夏至，五月的中气。
English: Summer solstice, the middle of May.

古文：小暑，六月节。
现代文：小暑，六月的节气。
English: A little heat, the June solar term.

古文：大暑，六月中。
现代文：大暑，六月的中气。
English: It's hot and midsummer in June.

古文：立秋，七月节。
现代文：立秋，七月的节气。
English: At the beginning of autumn, the July solar term begins.

古文：处暑，七月中。
现代文：处暑，七月的中气。
English: It's hot and midsummer in July.

古文：白露，八月节。
现代文：白露，八月的节气。
English: White dew, the August solar term.

古文：秋分，八月中。
现代文：秋分，八月的中气。
English: The autumnal equinox, the middle of August.

古文：寒露，九月节。
现代文：寒露，九月的节气。
English: Cold dew, the September solar term.

古文：霜降，九月中。
现代文：霜降，九月的中气。
English: The frosts are falling, and the air in September is mellow.

古文：立冬，十月节。
现代文：立冬，十月的节气。
English: The winter solstice, the October solstice.

古文：小雪，十月中。
现代文：小雪，十月的中气。
English: Light snow, mid-October.

古文：推没灭术曰：因冬至积日有小余者，加积一，以没分乘之，以没法除之，所得为大余，不尽为小余。大余满六十去之，余命以纪，算外，即去年冬至后没日也。
现代文：限数一千零六十五。
English: The limit is one thousand and sixty-five.

古文：求次没，加大余六十九，小余五百九十二，小余满没法得一，从大余，命如前。
现代文：问限一千零三十六。限数一千零八。
English: Subsequent requests: increase the remainder by 69, the small remainder by 592, the small surplus by 967 and add the large surplus. The method of starting and naming is as before.

古文：小余尽，为灭也。
现代文：间限九百十九。限数九百五十一。
English: A little more and it's gone.

古文：推五行用事日：立春、立夏、立秋、立冬者，即木、火、金、水始用事日也。各减其大余十八，小余四百八十三，小分六，余命以纪，算外，各四立之前土用事日也。大余不足减者，加六十；小余不足减者，减大余一，加纪法；小分不足减者，减小余一，加气法。推卦用事日：因冬至大余，六其小余，《坎卦》用事日也。加小余万九十一，满元法从大余，即《中孚》用事日也。
现代文：间限一千：二百：十九一。推没减的方法说：对于冬至曰的积曰有小余的，可使积曰加一，将积曰乘以没分，再除以没法，其商是大余，其余数为小余如大余大于六十则减去六十，最后得到的余数用干支的名称对应，并向外推后一天，就是去年的冬至后没曰的干支。求厂一个没日：在大余上加六十九，小余卜加五百九十二，小余满没法则减去没法且在大余上加一，用前述的方法，就得下一个没曰的干支。当小余为零时就是灭曰。推算五行起作用的期：立春、立夏、立秋、立冬就是木、火、金、水开始起作用的日子。各将其大余减去十八，小余减去四百八十三和六小分，所得的差用干支的名称对应并向外推后一天，就分别是在四立前土起作用的日子。运算中如大余不够减时则加上六十后再减；小余不够减时可将大余减一，并在小余上加纪法后再减；小分不够减时将小余减一，在小分上加气法后再减。推算各卦象起作用的日子：沿用冬至的大余，其小余乘以六，就是坎卦起作用的日子。在小余上加一万零九十一，满元法则减去元法并在大余上加一，就得到中孚起作用的日子。
English: The interval limit is one thousand: two hundred: nineteen one. The method of deduction without reduction says: for the product of the winter solstice, if there is a small surplus, the product can be increased by one, the product can be multiplied by zero, and then divided by zero, the quotient is a large surplus, the remaining number is a small surplus, if the surplus is greater than sixty, then subtract sixty, and the last remaining number corresponds to the name of the stem expenditure, and is extrapolated to the day after last year's winter solstice, that is, the day after the no day. Looking for a no day: add sixty-nine to the big surplus

古文：求次卦，各加大余六，小余九百六十七。
现代文：求下卦象：各在大余上加六，小余上加九百六十七，就可得到。
English: Query: Each big number has a remainder of six, and each small number has a remainder of nine hundred sixty-seven.

古文：其四正各因其中日，六其小余。
现代文：卦象中的四正各依据其对应的中间日子，小余乘以六。
English: Four positive determinations continue to be used in China and Japan, with a large remainder and a small remainder multiplied by six.

古文：推日度术曰：以纪法乘朔积日，满周天去之，余以纪法除之，所得为度，不尽为分。
现代文：推太阳位置的方法说：将朔积日乘以纪法，所得如大于周天则减去周天，最后的余数再除以纪法，得到的商就是度数，其余数为分数。
English: The method of pushing the sun's position is as follows: multiply the new moon day by the epoch, if the result is greater than the week day, subtract the week day, and then divide the last remaining number by the epoch. The quotient obtained is the degree, and the remaining number is a fraction.

古文：命度从牛前五起，宿次除之，不满宿，则天正十一月朔夜半日所在度及分也。
现代文：从牛宿前五度起算，每经过一宿就减去宿度值，直到其值比相应的宿度值小，就是与周正相对应的十一月朔日夜半时太阳位置所在宿的入宿度和分。
English: The degree points are counted from the fifth degree before the cattle lodge, and the full one is removed, and the remaining degree points are not satisfied with the hour of the lodge, then this is the degree and minute where the sun is at midnight on the first day of November.

古文：求次日，日加一度，分不加，经斗除斗分，分少退一度。
现代文：求第二天：每天加一度，分上不加，经过斗宿时则在分上减去斗分，如分比斗分小则减一度在分数上加纪法后再减。
English: For the second day: add one point every day, do not add on the score, subtract the score on the score when passing through the dormitory, and if the score is smaller than the score, subtract one point on the score after adding discipline.

古文：推月度术曰：以月周乘朔积日，满周天去之，余以纪法除之，所得为度，不尽为分，命如上法，则天正十一月朔夜半月所在度及分也。
现代文：推算月亮位置的方法说：将朔积乘以月周，所得如大于周天则减去周天，余下的敷再除以纪法，所得的商就是度数，余数足分。用以上相同的方法就可得到与周正对应的十一月朔日夜半时月亮所在相应宿中的入宿度和分。
English: The method of deducing the degree of the moon's location: multiply the Tuesday of the month by 14,638 by the new moon day, remove the full moon day by 673,150, and divide the remaining unsatisfactory part of the day by the calendar by 1,843. The quotient is the degree, and the remainder is the minute. The starting naming method is the same as that of the sun's location. You can get the degree and minute of the moon's location at midnight on the first day of November.

古文：求次月，小月加度二十二，分八百六；大月又加一日，度十三，分六百七十九；分满纪法得一度，则次月朔夜半月所在度及分也。
现代文：求下一月：当月是小月就在度上十二，分上加八百零六；是大月则又多了一天，度上再加十三，分上再加六百七十九；分满纪法则减去纪法并在度上加一，就得到下一月朔日夜半时月亮所在相应宿中的入宿度和分。
English: To find the next month: if the current month is a crescent, add twelve to the degree and eight hundred and sixty-six to the minute; if it is a full moon, add one more day, add thirteen to the degree and six hundred and seventy-nine to the minute; if you subtract the law of mani from the law of mani and add one to the degree, you will get the degree and minute of the moon's entry and stay in the corresponding quarter at midnight of the next month.

古文：其冬下旬，夕在张心署之。
现代文：在冬季的下旬，月亮在张宿和心宿之间则记下来。
English: In the late winter, the moon is recorded between Zhangjuku and Xinjuku.

古文：推合朔度术曰：以章岁乘朔小余，满通法为大分，不尽为小分。
现代文：推算合朔时位置的方法说：将朔小余乘以章岁，除以通法，其商就是大分，余数就是小分。
English: The method of deducing the place where Shuo is located: multiply Shuo's small remainder by Shuo's small remainder multiplied by Shuo's small remainder multiplied by Shuo's small remainder multiplied by Shuo's small remainder multiplied by Shuo's small remainder multiplied by Shuo's small remainder multiplied by Shuo's small remainder multiplied by Shuo's small remainder

古文：以大分从朔夜半日度分，分满纪法从度，命如前，则天正十一月合朔日月所共合度也。
现代文：将大分加在朔日夜半时太阳位置的度分数上，分数如满纪法则减去纪法并在度数上加一，用以前所述的方法就可得到与周正对应的十一月合朔时太阳月亮所共有的位置。
English: Adding the midnight sun degree from Oita to the full moon degree from the Gregorian calendar results in one thousand eight hundred and forty-three degrees. The starting naming method is the same as before, and the predestined degree can be obtained when the sun and the moon are in conjunction on the first day of November.

古文：求次月，加度二十九，大分九百七十七，小分四十二，小分满通法从大分，大分满纪法从度。经斗除其分，则次月合朔日月所共合度也。
现代文：求下一月：在度上加二十九，大分上加九百七十七，小分上加四十二，小分满通法则减去通法并在大分上加一，大分满纪法则减去纪法并在度上加一，经过斗宿时则要在分上减去斗分，就是下月合朔时太阳月亮所共有的位置。
English: For the next month: add 29 to the degree, add 977 to the major, add 42 to the minor, subtract the major from the minor and add 1 to the major, subtract the minor from the major and add 1 to the major, subtract the major from the minor and add 1 to the major, subtract the major from the minor and add 1 to the major, subtract the minor from the major from the minor, subtract the major from the minor and add 1 to the major, subtract the minor from the major and add 1 to the major, subtract the major from the minor and add 1 to the major, subtract the major from the minor and add 1 to the major, subt

古文：推弦望日所在度：加合朔度七，大分七百五，小分十，微分一，微分满二从小分，小分满通法从大分，大分满纪法从度，命如前，则上弦日所在度也。
现代文：推算弦望时太阳位置：在合朔位置的度上加七，大分上加七百零五，小分上加十，微分上加一，微分满二则减去二并在小分上进一，小分满通法则减去通法在大分上进一，大分满纪法则减去纪法在度数上进一，用前述的方法就得到上弦时太阳位置。
English: The degree of the sun's position at the time of deduction and observation: based on the degree of the sun's position at the time of conclusion, the degree of the sun's position at the time of addition is seven, the greatest is seven hundred and five, the smallest is ten, the differential is one, the differential is a perfect two into a small fraction, the small fraction is a perfect two into a large fraction, the small fraction is a perfect two into a large fraction, the small fraction is a perfect seven into a large fraction, the large fraction is a perfect seven into a small fraction, the perfect fraction is a perfect seven into a small fraction, the perfect fraction is a perfect seven into a small

古文：又加得望、下弦、后月合也。
现代文：依法再加就叮依次得到望、卜弦和下一月合朔时的太阳位置。
English: According to the law, the jingle is added to get the next sight, the prayer string and the position of the sun at the next month's new moon.

古文：推弦望月所在度：加合朔度九十八，大分千二百七十九，小分三十四，数满命如前，即上弦月所在度也。又加得望下弦后月合也。
现代文：推算弦望时月亮位置：在合朔位置的度上加九十八，大分上加一千二百七十九，小分上加三十四，按照前面的方法处理各数字满相应数的情况，就能得到上弦时月亮位置，如法再加就可依次得到望、下弦、下一次合朔时的位置。
English: To calculate the position of the moon at the sight of the chord: add ninety-eight to the degree of the new moon position, add twelve hundred and seventy-nine to the major, and add thirty-four to the minor. According to the previous method, the position of the moon at the sight of the chord can be obtained when the corresponding number of each number is full. If the method is added, the position of the moon at the sight, the next chord, and the next new moon can be obtained in turn.

古文：推日月昏明度术曰：日以纪法，月以月周，乘所近节气夜漏，二百而一，为明分。
现代文：推算太阳、月亮在昏、明时位置的方法说：对太阳用纪法，对月亮用月周乘以与所求日期最接近的节气的夜漏刻数，再除以二百，其商就是明分。
English: The method of calculating the difference between the brightness and dimness of the sun and the moon: the sun is calculated to be 1843 by the calendar, and the moon is calculated to be 146338 by the lunar calendar, multiplied by the nocturnal eclipse of the solar terms closest to the sun, divided by 200, and the result is the difference between the brightness of the sun and the moon.

古文：日以减纪法，月以减月周，余为昏分。
现代文：对太阳用纪法，对月亮用月周来减去明分，其差就是昏分。
English: According to the discipline method, subtract the day's bright points to get the dim points, and subtract the moon's bright points from the lunar week to get the moon's dim points.

古文：各以加夜半，如法为度。
现代文：明分、昏分分别用来与夜半时太阳、月亮的度分数相加，按相同的方法将分进位为度。
English: Add half of the night, divide by the lunar calendar or the lunar week, and convert to degrees.

古文：推合朔交会月蚀术曰：置所入纪朔积分，以所入纪交会差率之数加之，以会通去之，余则所求年天正十一月合朔去交度分也。
现代文：推算合朔、交会、月食的方法说：取所求朔在相应纪中的朔积分，加上相应纪的交会差率，所得满会通则减去会通，其差就是所求年与周正相应的十一月合朔时、月距黄白交点的度分数。
English: The method of calculating the new moon, the meeting, and the lunar eclipse is as follows: Take the new moon integral of the new moon in the corresponding era, add the meeting difference rate of the corresponding era, and subtract the meeting total from the full meeting total. The difference is the degree fraction of the lunar distance from the yellow-white intersection at the time of the new moon in November corresponding to the year and the week.

古文：以通数加之，满会通去之，余则次月合朔去交度分也。
现代文：将它加通数，满会通则减去会通，所余就是下一月合朔时日、月距黄白交点的度分数。
English: In addition, a total of several hundred and thirty-four thousand six hundred and thirty was added, and the total number of full meetings was removed. The remaining amount was the percentage of turnover at the end of the next month.

古文：以朔望合数各加其月合朔去交度分，满会通去之，余则各其月望去交度分也。
现代文：将合朔时月距黄白交点的度分数加朔望合敷，满会通则减去会通，所余就是该月望日时、月距黄白交点的度分数。
English: According to the calculation, the total number of shares outstanding at the end of the month is 67,315. The total number of shares outstanding at the end of the month is subtracted from the total number of shares outstanding at the end of the month, and the remaining shares are the total number of shares outstanding at the end of the month.

古文：朔望去交分如朔望合数以下，入交限数以上者，朔则交会，望则月蚀。
现代文：如果将朔、望时日、月与黄白交点的距离用分为单位表示时小于朔望合数，或大于入交限数，朔日则发生交会，望则月食。
English: If the distance between the new moon, the day of the watch, the moon and the yellow-white intersection is divided into units, when it is less than the number of the new moon watch, or greater than the entry limit, the new moon day will have a meeting, and the watch will have a lunar eclipse.

古文：推合朔交会月蚀月在日道表里术曰：置所入纪朔积分，以所入纪下交会差率之数加之，倍会通去之，余不满会通者，纪首表，天正合朔月在表，纪首里，天正合朔月在里。
现代文：推算合朔、交会、月食时月亮在黄道南北的方法说：取需求期在相应纪中的朔积分加上该纪下所列的交会差率，所得满会通的两倍则减去会通的两倍，所余如小于会通，纪首合朔月亮在黄道南，周正合朔时则也在黄道南，纪首合朔月亮在黄道北时它也在黄道北。
English: The method for calculating the Moon's position in the south and north of the ecliptic at the time of new moon, conjunction, and lunar eclipse is as follows: take the new moon integral of the demand period in the corresponding chronology and add the conjunction difference rate listed under the chronology. The result is twice the full conjunction minus twice the conjunction, and the remainder is less than the conjunction. The Moon is in the south of the ecliptic at the time of new moon, and it is also in the south of the ecliptic at the time of new moon. When the Moon is in the north of the ecliptic, it is also in the north of the eclipt

古文：满会通去之，表在里，里在表。
现代文：如果所余大于会通则减去会通，纪首合朔月亮在黄道南它在黄道北，前者在黄道北它就在黄道南。
English: If the remainder is greater than the conjunction, then subtract the conjunction. If the moon is in the south of the zodiac, it is in the north of the zodiac. If the former is in the north of the zodiac, it is in the south of the zodiac.

古文：求次月，以通数加之，满会通去之，加里满在表，加表满在里。先交会后月蚀者，朔在表则望在表，朔在里则望在里。
现代文：求下一月：将当月的余数加上通数，所得满会通则减去会通，如原来月亮在黄道北，并出现满会通的情况就变为月亮在黄道南，如原在黄道南，满会通则在黄道北。如果先发生交会后月食，朔时月亮在黄道南则望时也在黄道南，朔时在黄道北望时也在黄道北。
English: Ask for the next month: add the remaining number of the month to the total number, and subtract the result of the full moon. If the moon is in the north of the zodiac, and there is a full moon, the moon will be in the south of the zodiac. If it is in the south of the zodiac, the full moon will be in the north of the zodiac. If the lunar eclipse occurs after the meeting, the moon will be in the south of the zodiac when looking at the south of the zodiac, and in the north of the zodiac when looking at the north of the zodiac.

古文：先月蚀后交会者，看食月朔在里则望在表，朔在表则望在里。
现代文：如果先发生月食后交会，发生月食的月份朔时月亮在黄道北则望时在黄道南，朔时在黄道南望时在黄道北。
English: If the meeting takes place after a lunar eclipse, the moon will be in the north of the ecliptic during the new moon of the month in which the eclipse occurs, in the south of the ecliptic during the new moon, and in the north of the ecliptic during the south of the ecliptic during the new moon.

古文：交会月蚀如朔望会数以下，则前交后会；如入交限数以上，则前会后交。
现代文：交会、月食时如相应数小于朔望合数则黄白交点在前月会合在后；如大于入交限数则日月会合在前黄白交点在后。
English: At the time of a conjunction or a lunar eclipse, if the corresponding number is less than the synodic number, the yellow-white intersection will be after the previous month's conjunction; if the number is greater than the entry limit, the sun-moon conjunction will be after the previous yellow-white intersection.

古文：其前交后会近于限数者，则豫伺之前月；前会后交近于限数者，则后伺之后月。
现代文：黄白交点在前月会合在后的情况相应数与入交限数相近时则预先在前一个月注意观察。曰月会合在前黄白交点在后且相应数与入交限数接近时则在后一个月注意观察。
English: When the yellow-white intersection is after the previous month's meeting and the corresponding number is close to the entry limit, pay attention to the observation in advance in the previous month. When the next month's meeting is after the previous yellow-white intersection and the corresponding number is close to the entry limit, pay attention to the observation in the following month.

古文：求去交度术曰：其前交后会者，今去交度分如日法而一，所得则却去交度也。
现代文：求、月舆黄白交点的相距度数的方法说：如果是黄白交点在前、日月会合在后的情况，将距黄白交点的度分数除以日法，所得的商就是在黄白交点后与其相距度数。
English: The method of finding the distance degree of the yellow-white intersection of the moon and the moon is as follows: If the yellow-white intersection is in front and the sun-moon conjunction is behind, divide the degree fraction from the yellow-white intersection by the Japanese method, and the quotient obtained is the distance degree after the yellow-white intersection.

古文：其前会后交者，以去交度分减会通，余如日法而一，所得则前去交度，余皆度分也。
现代文：如果日月会合在前、黄白交点在后的情况则在会通中减去距黄白交点的度分数，其差再除以曰法，所得的商就是在黄白交点前的与其相距度数。两种情况下的余数都是度的分数。
English: If the Sun-Moon conjunction is before, and the yellow-white intersection is after, the degree fraction from the yellow-white intersection is subtracted in the conjunction, and the difference is then divided by the day method. The resulting quotient is the degree of separation before the yellow-white intersection. The remaining number in both cases is the degree fraction.

古文：去交度十五以上，虽交不蚀也。十以下是蚀，十以上亏蚀微少，光晷相及而已。
现代文：口月与黄白交点相距的度数大于十五，则虽然发生交会但不发生食，在十以下时才发生日食，在十以上则食分很小，不过光、影相接触而已。
English: If the degree of separation between the crescent moon and the yellow-white intersection is greater than fifteen, although there is a rendezvous, there is no eclipse. Solar eclipses occur when the degree is less than ten, and when the degree is greater than ten, the eclipse is very small, but the light and shadow are in contact.

古文：亏之多少，以十五为法。
现代文：食分的大小用以十五作分母的分子表示。
English: The specific amount of food loss is expressed by using fifteen as the denominator.

古文：求日蚀亏起角术曰：其月在外道，先交后会者，亏蚀西南角起；先会后交者，亏蚀东南角起。
现代文：求日食在日面上的起始方位的方法说：月亮在黄道以南时，对于黄白交点在前日月会合在后的情况，日食从曰面的西南角开始；对于曰月会合在前黄白交点在后的情况，食从曰面的东南角开始。
English: The way to find the azimuth angle of the eclipse: if the moon is in the outer path, the eclipse will start from the southwest corner when the moon is in the first place, and the eclipse will start from the southeast corner when the moon is in the second place.

古文：二十六推合朔交会月蚀入迟疾历术曰：置所入纪朔积分，以所入纪下迟疾差率之数加之，以通周去之，余满日法得一日，不尽为日余，命日算外，则所求年天正十一月合朔入历日也。
现代文：月亮在黄道以北时，对黄白交点在前日月交会在后的情况，食从曰面的西北角开始；对月交会在前黄白交点在后则日食从面的东北角开始。食分的多少和上述一样用以十五作分母的分子表示。会合发生在黄白交点上面则全部被食。月食时月亮在与太阳相对的方向上，其在月面上的起始方位与以上情况相反。曰有小分：百二十六 有误，据《晋书律历志》应为一译者注推算合朔、交会、月食在迟疾历中相应期的方法说：取所求的年份在其相应纪中的朔积分，加上相应纪下列出的迟疾差率，所得满通周则减去通周，最后的余数除以曰法，其商就是数，余数为曰余。将日数向外推后一天就是所求年与周正对应的十一月合朔在迟疾历中的期。
English: When the moon is north of the ecliptic, for the yellow-white intersection after the previous sun-moon conjunction, the eclipse begins from the northwest corner of the day side; for the lunar conjunction before the yellow-white intersection, the eclipse begins from the northeast corner of the day side. The number of eclipses is expressed by the same fifteen-digit numerator as above. The meeting takes place above the yellow-white intersection, and all are eclipsed. During the lunar eclipse, the moon is in the opposite direction from the sun, and its starting position on the moon is opposite to the above situation. There are small points: one hundred and twenty-six. According to

古文：求次月，加一日，日余四千四百五十。
现代文：求下一月：在数上加一，日余上加四千四百五十。
English: And the second month he shall add one day to it, and the number of the months shall be four thousand four hundred and fifty.

古文：求望，加十四日，日余三千四百八十九。
现代文：求望，在数上加十四，余上加三千四百八十九。
English: Seeking, add fourteen days, and the remaining three are four hundred and eighty-nine.

古文：日余满日法成日，日满二十七去之。又除余如周日余，日余不足者，减一日，加周虚。
现代文：曰余满法则减去曰法并在数上加一，数满二十七则减去二十七并在余上减去周曰余，如余不够减，则在敷上减一。在余上加上周虚即可。
English: According to the law of fullness of day, subtract the day and add one to the number. If the number is over 27, subtract the 27th and subtract the day of the week. If the day of the week is less than the day of the week, subtract one. If the day of the week is less than the day of the week, add the day of the week to the day of the week.

古文：推合朔交会月蚀定大小余：以入历日余，乘所入历损益率，以损益盈缩积分为定积分。
现代文：推算合朔、交会、月食的定大小余：将在迟疾历中的曰余乘以在迟疾历中相应日期的损益率，并以此减少或增加盈缩积分就得到定积分。
English: Calculate the fixed size surplus of the new year, the meeting, and the lunar eclipse: multiply the day's surplus in the delayed calendar by the profit and loss ratio of the corresponding date in the delayed calendar, and reduce or increase the profit and loss points to obtain a fixed point.

古文：以章岁减所入历月行分，余以除之，所得以盈减缩加本小余。
现代文：在迟疾历中相应日期月亮所运行的分数中减去章岁，再用定积分除以得到的差值，根据盈减缩加的原则将所得结果与朔日的大小余合并，就得到定大小余。
English: Subtract the 19th day of the month corresponding to the calendar day entered, and divide the difference by the fixed integral. If the result is a positive integral, it will be reduced by a small surplus, and if it is a reduced integral, it will be added by a small surplus, and it can be obtained as a small surplus.

古文：加之满日法者，交会加时在后日；减之，不足者，交会加时在前日。
现代文：如加的结果满曰法则月交会的时间在后一天；如果减时小余不够减，曰月交会的时间在前一天。
English: If the result is added, the rule of the full moon is that the time of the monthly fair is on the following day; if the subtracting time is less than or equal to the subtracting time, the time of the monthly fair is on the previous day.

古文：月蚀者，随定大小余为日加时。
现代文：月食也根据定大小余的情况来确定期和时间。
English: For lunar eclipses, it is also necessary to determine the extra time by setting a large remainder and a small remainder.

古文：入历在周日者，以周日日余乘缩积分，为定积分。以率损乘入历日余，又以周日日余乘之，以周日日度小分并之，以损定积分，余为后定积分。
现代文：如果推得在迟疾历中的期是周曰时就用周曰曰余乘以缩积分而得到定积分，再将表中所列周曰的损率乘以在迟疾历中的余，再乘以周曰余与周度的小分合并，冉在定积分中减去，就得到后定积分。
English: If it is deduced that the period in the delayed calendar is Sunday, then the weekly surplus is multiplied by the reduced integral to obtain the fixed integral, and then the weekly loss rate listed in the table is multiplied by the surplus in the delayed calendar, and then multiplied by the weekly surplus and the fraction of the weekly, and then subtracted from the fixed integral to obtain the final fixed integral.

古文：以章岁减周日月行分，余以周日日余乘之，以周日度小分并之，以除后定积分，所得以加本小余，如上法。
现代文：在周的月亮运行分数中减去章岁，其差乘以周曰余，再与周度的小分合并，将后定积分除以所得结果，其商加在朔日的大小余上，其方法和以上相同。
English: Subtract nineteen years from the week and month, multiply by the day of the week and the day of the week, add the weekly fraction, and then divide by the fixed integral. The result of adding this small surplus can be the fixed small surplus.

古文：推加时：以十二乘定小余，满日法得一辰，数从子起，算外，则朔望加时所在辰也。
现代文：推算发生的时刻：将定小余乘以十二，再除以法，其商就是时辰数，从子时起算，再向外推后一个时辰，就是朔望发生时刻的时辰数。
English: The rest of the method is the same as above. Pushing the extra time: multiply twelve by the fixed small surplus, and the full day method is four thousand five hundred and fifty-nine to obtain one hour. The number of hours obtained is calculated from the hour of the son, and is outside the calculation, that is, the hour where the extra time is expected.

古文：有余不尽者四之，如日法而一为少，二为半，三为太。
现代文：如有余数则将其乘以四，再除以法，得到一就是少，二为半，三为太。
English: If there is a remainder, multiply by four and then divide by five to get four thousand five hundred and fifty-nine. If you get one, it is less, if you get two, it is half, if you get three, it is too much.

古文：又有余者三之，如日法而一为强，半法以上排成之，不满半法废弃之。
现代文：如还有余数则将其乘以三，再除以法，得到一就是强，所余大于法的一半时也作为强，小于曰法的一半时则舍弃。
English: If there is a remainder, multiply by three and divide by four to get 4559. If you get one, you are strong. If you get more than half of 4559, you are strong. If you get less than half of 4559, you are weak.

古文：以强并少为少强，并半为半强，并太为太强。
现代文：强与少合并就是少强，与半合并为半强，与太合并为太强。
English: The combination of strong and less is less strong, the combination of strong and half is half strong, and the combination of strong and too strong is too strong.

古文：得二强者为少弱，以之并少为半弱，以之并半为太弱，以之并太为一辰弱。
现代文：有两强的是少弱，它与少合并为半弱，与半合并为太弱，与太合并为一辰弱。
English: If you get two strong, it will be a little weak, with a little weak and a little weak, it will be a half-weak, with a little weak and a half, it will be too weak, with a little weak and too weak, it will be a one-hour weak.

古文：以所在辰命之，则各得其少、太、半及强、弱也。
现代文：以所在的时辰称呼就能分别得到各时辰时少、太、半和强、弱的情况。
English: According to the time of the hour, you can get the situation of less than, too much, half, strong and weak respectively.

古文：其月蚀望在中节前后四日以还者，视限数；五日以上者，视间限。
现代文：对于月食望在中气、节气的前后四天之内的以限数作为衡量标准；在其前后五天以上的则以间限作为衡量标准。
English: For lunar eclipses within four days before and after the mid-gas and solar terms, the limit is used as the measurement standard; for more than five days before and after, the interval is used as the measurement standard.

古文：定小余如间限、限数以下者，以算上为日。
现代文：定小余比间限、限数小的算作一天。
English: If the fixed small remainder is below the interval limit and the limit number, it is counted as the day of the lunar eclipse.

古文：女十二虚十危十七室十六壁九
现代文：女十二虚十危十七室十六壁九
English: Twelve women, ten dangers, seventeen rooms, sixteen walls, nine mountains

古文：北方九十八度奎十六
现代文：胃十四昴十一毕十六觜二参九
English: stomach 14  11  16  2  9

古文：娄十二胃十四昴十一毕十六
现代文：柳十五星七张十八翼十八轸十七
English: Willow, fifteen stars, seven panels, eighteen wings, eighteen strings, seventeen strings

古文：觜二参九西方八十度
现代文：氐十五房五心五尾十八箕十一
English: The 15th house, the 5th heart, the 5th tail, the 18th and the 11th house

古文：井三十三
现代文：上边列出中气、节气共二十四节气，用前述方法推算得到冬至十一月中气，加一固定数得到下月的节气，再加得到其中气。
English: A total of twenty-four solar terms are listed above. Using the above method of calculation, the solar term for the winter solstice in November is obtained. Adding a fixed number of solar terms results in the solar term for the next month, and adding more solar terms results in the solar term for the middle month.

古文：鬼四柳十五星七
现代文：昏、明中星以太阳在恒星间的位置为标准。
English: The position of the sun among the stars is taken as the standard for the stars in twilight and dawn.

古文：张十八
现代文：取需推算的年份二十四节气的小余乘以四，满气法就得到一是少，其余数乘以三，满气法就得到强。
English: Take the small remainder of the 24 solar terms of the year to be calculated and multiply it by four. The full gas method will get one is less, and the remaining number will be multiplied by three. The full gas method will get strong.

古文：翼十八
现代文：在相应节气的昏、明中星中减去所得结果而得到确定值。推算五星的方法：所谓五星就是，木星即岁星，火星又叫荧惑，土星也称镇星，金星也就是太白，水星又名辰星。
English: The method of calculating five stars: the so-called five stars are: Jupiter is the year star, Mars is also called fluorescence, Saturn is also called the town star, Venus is too white, Mercury is also called the star.

古文：轸十七南方百一十二度
现代文：五星的运动有慢有快，有停留也有逆向运动。
English: The movement of the five stars varies from slow to fast, and from stop to reverse movement.

古文：角十二
现代文：从盘古开天辟地开始清气和浊气才分开，从而有曰月五星都会聚在星纪的情况。从星纪出发，它们同在天空中运行，慢、快、停留、逆行，互相追逐。
English: From the beginning of Pangu, the clear air and the turbid air were separated, so that there was a situation where the moon and the five stars would gather in the ecliptic. Starting from the ecliptic, they would run in the sky, slow, fast, stop, reverse, and chase each other.

古文：亢九
现代文：五星与太阳相会，在同一宿中的同一度就叫做合。
English: Five stars and the sun meet, and the same time in the same place is called a conjunction.

古文：氐十五房五
现代文：从一次合到下次合所经过的天数就叫做终。
English: The number of days elapsing from one cycle to the next is called the end.

古文：心五
现代文：分别取一终的天数和一年的天数通过通分相约的运算得到最小公倍数最后算出比率，其所包含的年敷称为合终岁数，包含的终数叫做合终合敷。
English: The number of days at the end of the year and the number of days in a year are taken separately, and the least common multiple is obtained through the operation of calculating the total score. Finally, the ratio is calculated. The annual allowance included is called the annual allowance at the end of the year, and the final amount included is called the annual allowance at the end of the year.

古文：以章岁乘合数为合月法，以纪法乘合数为日度法，以章月乘岁数为合月分，如合月法为合月数，合月之余为月余。
现代文：造两个比率确定以后其他数据就产生了。将合数乘以章岁就得到合月法，将合数乘以纪法就是度法，将岁数乘以章月得到合月分，将其除以合月法，商为合月数，余数就是月余。
English: After the two ratios are determined, other data will be generated. Multiply the composite number by the chapter year to get the month method, multiply the composite number by the period method to get the degree method, multiply the year number by the chapter month to get the month part, divide it by the month method, the quotient is the month number, and the remaining number is the month remainder.

古文：以通数乘合月数，如日法而一为大余，以六十去大余，余为星合朔大余。
现代文：将合月数乘以通数再除以曰法，其商为大余，将大余再逐次减去六十，最后得到小于六十的余数就是星合朔大余。
English: Multiply the number of conjoined months by the total number and then divide by the number of days. The quotient is a large remainder, and the large remainder is successively subtracted by sixty. Finally, the remainder that is less than sixty is a large remainder.

古文：大余之余为朔小余。
现代文：求大余时的余数就是朔小余。
English: The remainder beyond the large remainder is the small remainder.

古文：以通数乘月余，以合月法乘朔小余，并之，以日法乘合月法除之，所得星合入月日数也。
现代文：将月余乘以通数，将朔小余乘以合月法，两者合并起来后再除以法乘合月法之积，就得到星合入月的天数。
English: Multiply the common divisor by the remainder of the month, and the common divisor by the small remainder of the new moon. Add the two together, and divide by the product of the Japanese divisor 4559 and the lunar divisor. The resulting quotient is the number of months into which the planets are added.

古文：余以通法约之，为入月日。
现代文：其余数除以通法，其商就是入月曰余。
English: The remaining number is divided by the common law, and its quotient is the remainder of the month.

古文：以朔小余减日法，余为朔虚分。
现代文：将曰法减去朔小余就得到朔虚分。
English: Subtract the Japanese law from the small surplus, and the result is the imaginary fraction.

古文：以历斗分乘合数，为星度斗分。
现代文：将合数乘以历中的斗分就得到星度斗分。
English: Four hundred and fifty-five points multiplied by a composite number gives a star rating.

古文：木、火、土各以合数减岁数，余以周天乘之，如日度法而一，所得则行星度数也，余则度余。
现代文：木星、火星、土星分别用岁数减去合数，其差再乘以周天，除以曰度法，其商就是行星度数，其余数则是度余。
English: Jupiter, Mars and Saturn are calculated by subtracting the sum of their respective ages and multiplying the remainder by the number of days in a year, 673,150, and dividing by the solar day. The resulting quotient is the planetary degree, and the remainder is the degree-plus.

古文：金、水以周天乘岁数，如日度法而一，所得则行星度数也，余则度余。
现代文：金星、水星则将岁数乘以周天，除以曰度法，商就是行星度数，余数就是度余。
English: Venus and Mercury multiply the number of years by the number of days, and divide it by the number of days. The quotient is the planetary degree, and the remainder is the degree remainder.

古文：木：合终岁数，千二百五十五。
现代文：木星合终岁数：一千二百五十五。
English: Jupiter conjunct the number of years: one thousand two hundred and fifty-five.

古文：合终合数，千一百四十九。
现代文：合终合数：一千一百四十九。
English: The final total: eleven hundred and forty-nine.

古文：合月法，二万一千八百三十一。
现代文：合月法：二万一千八百三十一。
English: Harvest Moon: 21,831.

古文：日度法，二百一十一万七千六百七。
现代文：曰度法：二百一十一万七千六百零七。
English: Daily cases: 2,117,607.

古文：合月数，十三。
现代文：合月数：十三。
English: Total number of months: thirteen.

古文：月余，万一千一百二十二。
现代文：月余：一万一千一百二十二。
English: Monthly balance: 11,122.

古文：朔大余，二十三。
现代文：朔大余：二十三。
English: New Year's Eve: the 23rd.

古文：朔小余，四千九十三。
现代文：朔小余：四千零九十三。
English: Shuo Xiaoyu: Four thousand and ninety-three.

古文：入月日，十五。
现代文：入月：十五。
English: Moonrise: The fifteenth.

古文：日余，百九十九万五千六百六十四。
现代文：余：一百九十九万五千六百六十四。
English: Remainder: 1,995,664.

古文：朔虚分，四百六十六。
现代文：朔虚分：四百六十六。
English: Shuo imaginary part: four hundred and sixty-six.

古文：斗分，五十二万二千七百九十五。
现代文：斗分：五十二万二干七百九十五。
English: Points: 5,222,795.

古文：行星度，三十三。
现代文：行星度：三十三。
English: Planet degree: thirty-three.

古文：度余，百四十七万二千八百。
现代文：度余：一百四十七万二千八百六十九。
English: Excess deaths: 1,472,869.

古文：火：合终岁数，五千一百五。
现代文：火星合终岁数：五千一百零五。
English: Mars: Completion age: five thousand one hundred and five.

古文：合终合数，二千三百八十八。
现代文：合终合数：二千三百八十八。
English: The final count: two thousand three hundred eighty-eight.

古文：合月法，四万五千三百七十二。
现代文：合月法：四万五千三百七十二。
English: The number of the months of the year: 45,372.

古文：日度法，四百四十万一千八十四。
现代文：曰度法：四百四十万一千零八十四。
English: Daily cases: 4,411,084.

古文：合月数，二十六。
现代文：合月数：二十六。
English: Number of months: twenty-six.

古文：月余，二万三。
现代文：月余：二万零三。
English: Remaining months: 20,003.

古文：朔大余，四十七。
现代文：朔大余：四十七。
English: New Year's Eve: 47.

古文：朔小余，三千六百二十七。
现代文：朔小余：三千六百二十七。
English: Shuo Xiaoyu: Three thousand six hundred and twenty-seven.

古文：入月日，十三。
现代文：入月曰：十三。
English: On the first day of the month: It's the 13th.

古文：日余，三百五十八万五千二百三十。
现代文：余：三百五十八万五千二百三十。
English: Remaining days: 3,585,230.

古文：朔虚分，九百三十二。
现代文：朔虚分：九百三十二。
English: The new moon: nine hundred and thirty-two.

古文：斗分，百八万六千五百四十。
现代文：斗分：一百零八万六干五百四十。
English: Dou score: one hundred and eighty-six thousand five hundred and forty.

古文：行星度，五十。
现代文：行星度：五十。
English: Planetary degree: fifty.

古文：度余，百四十一万二千一百五十。
现代文：度余：一百四十一万二千一百五十。
English: Surplus: 1,412,150.

古文：土：合终岁数，三千九百四十三。
现代文：土星合终岁数：三千九百四十三。
English: Saturn: Conjunct the final years: three thousand nine hundred and forty-three.

古文：合终合数，三千八百九。
现代文：合终合数：三千八百零九。
English: Total number of beds: 3,809.

古文：合月法，七万二千三百七十一。
现代文：合月法：七万二千三百七十一。
English: The number of the months of the year is 72,371.

古文：日度法，七百一万九千九百八十七。
现代文：度法：七百零一万九千九百八十七。
English: Daily cases: 7,019,987.

古文：合月数，十二。
现代文：合月数：十二。
English: Total number of months: twelve.

古文：月余，五万八千一百五十三。
现代文：月余：五万八千一百五十三。
English: Remaining months: 58,153.

古文：朔大余，五十四。
现代文：朔大余：五十四。
English: New Year's Eve: Fifty-four.

古文：朔小余，千六百七十四。
现代文：朔小余：一千六百七十四。
English: Shuo Xiaoyu: One thousand six hundred and seventy-four.

古文：入月日，二十四。
现代文：入月：二十四。
English: On the first day of the month: It is the 24th.

古文：日余，六十七万五千三百六十四。
现代文：曰余：六十七万五千三百六十四。
English: Remaining days: 675 364.

古文：朔虚分，二千八百八十五。
现代文：七。朔虚分：二千八百八十五。
English: Shuo imaginary part: two thousand eight hundred and eighty-five.

古文：斗分，百七十三万三千九十五。
现代文：斗分：一百七十三万三千零九十五。
English: Dou score: up to one million seven hundred thirty three thousand and ninety five.

古文：行星度，十二。
现代文：行星度：十二。
English: Planetary degrees: twelve.

古文：度余，五百九十六万二千二百五十六。
现代文：度余：五百九十六万二千二百五十六。
English: Excess deaths: 5,962,256.

古文：金：合终岁数，千九百七。
现代文：金星合终岁数：一千九百零七。
English: Venus conjunct the final number of years: nineteen hundred and seven.

古文：合终合数，二千三百八十五。
现代文：合终合数：二千三百八十五。
English: Total number of beds: 2,385.

古文：合月法，四万五千三百一十五。
现代文：合月法：四万五千三百一十五。
English: The number of the first month of the year: 45,315.

古文：日度法，四百三十九万五千五百五十五。合月数，九。
现代文：度法：四百三十九万五千五百五十五。合月数：九。
English: degrees: 4,395,555. Number of months: nine.

古文：月余，四万三百一十。
现代文：月余：四万零三百一十。
English: Remaining months: 40,310.

古文：朔大余，二十五。
现代文：朔大余：二十五。
English: New Year's Eve: Twenty-five.

古文：朔小余，三千五百三十五。入月日，二十七。
现代文：朔小余：三干五百三五。入月曰：二十七。
English: At the time of the new moon, it is the 27th day.

古文：日余，十九万四千九百九十。
现代文：余：十九万四千九百九十。
English: Remaining days: 194,990.

古文：朔虚分，千二十四。
现代文：朔虚分：一千零二十四
English: New Year's Day: 1024

古文：斗分，百八万五千一百七十五。
现代文：斗分：一百零八万五千一百七十五。
English: Dou score: One hundred eighty-five thousand one hundred seventy-five.

古文：行星度，二百九十二。
现代文：行星度：二百九十二。
English: Planetary degrees: two hundred ninety-two.

古文：度余，十九万四千九百九十。
现代文：度余：十九万四千九百九十。
English: Excess deaths: 194,990.

古文：水：合终岁数，一千八百七十。
现代文：水星：合终岁数：一干八百七十。
English: Mercury: Completion age: One thousand eight hundred and seventy.

古文：合科合数，万一千七百八十九。
现代文：合终合数：一万一千七百八十九。
English: Grand total: 11,789.

古文：合月法，二十二万三千九百九十一。
现代文：合月法：二十二万三千九百九十一。
English: The number of the full moon: 2,239,911.

古文：日度法，二千一百七十二万七千一百二十七。
现代文：曰度法：二千一百七十二万七干一百二十。
English: The number of days is 21,722,712 and the number of months is one.

古文：合月数，一。
现代文：合月数：一。
English: Consecutive months: one.

古文：月余，二十一万五千四百五十九。
现代文：月余：二十一万五千四百五十九。
English: Remaining months: up 215,459.

古文：朔大余，二十九。
现代文：朔大余：二十九。
English: New Year's Eve: 29.

古文：朔小余，二千四百一十九。
现代文：朔小余：二千四百一十九。
English: Shuo Xiaoyu: Two stem four hundred and nineteen.

古文：入月日，二十八。
现代文：入月曰：二十八。
English: Moonrise: the 28th.

古文：日余，二千三十四万四千二百六十一。
现代文：曰余：二千零三十四万四千二百六十一。
English: Remaining days: 2,034,461.

古文：朔虚分，二千一百四十。
现代文：朔虚分：二千一百四十。
English: Shuo imaginary part: two thousand one hundred and forty.

古文：斗分，五百三十六万三千九百九十五。
现代文：斗分：五百三十六万三千九百九十五。
English: Points: 5,363,995.

古文：行星度，五十七。
现代文：行星度：五十七。
English: Planetary degrees: fifty-seven.

古文：度余，二千三十四万四千二百六十一。
现代文：度余：二千零三十四万四千二百六十。
English: Excess deaths: 2,03,444,260.

古文：推五星术曰：置壬辰元以来尽所求年，以合终合数乘之，满合终岁数得一，名积合，不尽名合余。
现代文：推算五星的方法说：取从壬辰历元以来到需推算的年份之间的年数，乘以合终合数，其积再除以合终岁数，所得的商称为积合，其余数称为合余。
English: The method of calculating the five stars is as follows: take the number of years between the beginning of the Imjin era and the year to be calculated, multiply it by the closing number, and then divide the product by the closing number. The resulting quotient is called the product, and the remaining number is called the remainder.

古文：以合终合数减合余，得一者星合往年，得二者合前往年，无所得，合其年。
现代文：将合余减合终合数，可减一次的星合在前一年发生，可减两次的则在前两年，不够减的就在当年发生。
English: Divide the quotient by the remainder and add the result. If the quotient is one, the planet was conjunct the sun last year. If the quotient is two, the planet was conjunct the sun the year before. If the quotient is zero, the planet was conjunct the sun the year before.

古文：余以减合终合数，为度分。
现代文：用合终合数减去该余数就得到度分。
English: The grade is calculated by subtracting the remaining number from the final grade.

古文：金、水积合，偶为晨，奇为夕。
现代文：金星、水星的积合为偶数则是早晨发生合，为奇数则为黄昏时发生合。
English: When the sum of Venus and Mercury is an even number, the sun is conjunct in the morning, when the sum is an odd number, the sun is conjunct in the evening.

古文：推五星合月：以月数月余各乘积合，余满合月法从月，为积月，不尽为月余。
现代文：推算五星发生合的月份：用积合分别乘以月数和月余，乘以月数的得到积月，乘以月余所得满合月法则减去合月法并在积月上进一，其余数就是月余。
English: Calculate the month of the five-star conjunction: multiply the product by the number of months and the number of months respectively, multiply the number of months to get the number of months, multiply the number of months to get the number of months, multiply the number of months to get the number of months, subtract the number of months from the number of months and add one to the number of months, and the remaining number is the number of months.

古文：以纪月除积月，所得算外，所入纪也，余为入纪月。
现代文：将积月除以纪月，得到的商向外推后一纪，就是需求的年份所在纪的序号，其余数就是入纪月。
English: The accrual month divided by the record month is 22,795, and the remainder is the record month, except for the income quotient.

古文：副以章闰乘之，满章月得一为闰，以减入纪月，余以岁中去之，余为入岁月，命以天正起，算外，星合月也。
现代文：将其乘以章闰，所得每满章月一次就有一个闰月，在入纪月中减去闰月数，其差每满岁中则减去岁中，最后所得余数就是入岁月，从周正起算并向外推后一月就是五星发生合的月份。
English: Multiply the intercalary month by the intercalary month, divide by the intercalary month and get 235. The result is the number of intercalary months. Subtract the intercalary month from the intercalary month. If the difference is greater than the middle of the year, subtract 11. The remaining part less than 12 is the intercalary year. Counting from November, the month in which the planets are in conjunction.

古文：其在闰交际，以朔御之。
现代文：如果逢闰月，则根据合朔来判断。
English: In the case of a leap month, the new moon day is determined.

古文：推合月朔：以通数乘入纪月，满日法得一为积日，不尽为小余。
现代文：推算发生合月份的朔日：将入纪月乘以通数，再除以曰法，其商为积曰，余数为小余。
English: To calculate the new moon day of the corresponding month: Multiply the number of days in the new moon month by the total number, and then divide by the number of days. The quotient is the product of the two, and the remainder is the remainder.

古文：以六十去积日，余为大余，命以所入纪，算外，星合朔日也。
现代文：积每满六十就减去六十，余下的就是大余，用干支名称与之对应，再外推一天，就是五星合所在月的朔。
English: Counting the number of days in a row and subtracting sixty, the remaining less than sixty parts are considered to be a large surplus. Counting from the first day of the previous year and excluding it, it is the first day of the month when the planets meet.

古文：推入月日：以通数乘月余，合月法乘朔小余，并之，通法约之，所得满日度法得一，则星合入月日也，不满为日余。
现代文：推算在相应月中的日期：将月余乘以通数，将朔小余乘以合月法，将两者合并后再除以通法，所得之商再除以曰度法就得到五星发生合在相应月中的日期，其余数是余。
English: Calculate the date in the middle of the corresponding month: multiply the month remainder by the common factor, multiply the small remainder by the common factor, combine the two and then divide by the common factor, and then divide the resulting quotient by the diurnal degree method to get the five-star date in the middle of the corresponding month, and the remaining number is the remainder.

古文：命日以朔，算外，入月日也。
现代文：从该月的朔日开始对应，向外推一天，就是五星合在相应月中的日期。
English: The solstice is counted from the day after tomorrow, and is the day of the new moon when the planets are in conjunction.

古文：推星合度：以周天乘度分，满日度法得一为度，不尽为余，命以牛前五度起，算外，星所合度也。
现代文：推算五星发生合时的位置：将度分乘以周天，再除以曰度法，其商为度数，余数为余，从牛宿前五度开始对应，并向外推算一度就得到五星合时的位置。
English: Calculate the position of the five stars at the time of conjunction: multiply the degree by the day of the week, and then divide by the day of the month. The quotient is the degree, and the remainder is the remainder. It corresponds to the first five degrees of the year, and once it is extrapolated, the position of the five stars at the time of conjunction is obtained.

古文：求后合月，以月数加入岁月，以余加月余，余满合月法得一月，月不满岁中，即在其年；满去之，有闰计焉，余为后年；再满，在后二年。
现代文：求下一次合的月份：将入岁月加上合月数，将月余加上合月数的月余，后者满合月法就减去合月法并在月数上进一，月数小于岁中，下一次合就在这一年中；月数满岁中就减去岁中，有闰月时也要计算在内，其余下的月数则属后一年的；如果月敷仍满岁中，则在后两年。
English: To find the month of the next conjunction: add the number of years to the number of months, and add the remainder of the month to the remainder of the number of months, and subtract the number of months from the number of months. The number of months is less than the number of years, and the next conjunction is in this year; the number of months is subtracted from the number of years, and if there is a leap month, it is also counted, and the remaining number of months belongs to the next year; if the month is still in the middle, it is in the last two years.

古文：金、水加晨得夕，加夕得晨也。
现代文：金星、水星的合如发生在清晨，加后推算的下次合就在黄昏，如合在黄昏，加后则在清晨。
English: After Venus, Mercury and another meeting, the morning meeting changes to an evening meeting, and the evening meeting changes to a morning meeting.

古文：求后合朔，以朔大小余数加合朔月大小余，其月余上成月者，又加大余二十九，小余一千四百一十九，小余满日法从大余，命如前法。
现代文：求下一次合所在月的朔：在发生合月份朔日的大小余上分别加上朔大余和朔小余，如果月余曾在月数上进过一的则在大余上还要加二十九，小余加二千四百一十九小余满日法则减去法并在大余上加一，用以上的方法就可得到下一次合所在月的朔。
English: Find the next close in the new moon of the month: add the new moon of the month and the new moon of the month respectively to the remainder of the size of the new moon of the month. If the month has entered one in the number of months, add twenty-nine to the remaining balance, add the remaining balance of two thousand four hundred and nineteen days to the remaining balance and add one to the remaining balance. With the above methods, you can get the next close in the new moon of the month.

古文：求后入月日，以入月日、日余加入月日及余，余满日度法得一。
现代文：求下次合在相应月中的期：将本次合在相应月中的期及余分别加上入月曰及曰余，曰余满曰度法则减去度法并在日期上加一。
English: Find the period of the next conjunction in the middle of the corresponding month: add the period and remainder of the current conjunction in the middle of the corresponding month to the day of the month and the day of the month, respectively, and subtract the degree law from the degree law and add one to the date.

古文：其前合朔小余满其虚分者，去一日；后小余满二千四百一十九以上，去二十九日；不满，去三十日，其余则后合入月日，命以朔。
现代文：如本次合所在月朔日的小余大于朔虚分，日期上减去一天；下一次合的小余满二千四百一十九以上，则期减去二十九天；如不满，则减去三十天，其余下来的就是下次合在相应月中的日期，从朔日起算。
English: If the surplus at the last meeting is greater than or equal to the corresponding fractional part, then one day shall be subtracted; if the surplus at this meeting is greater than or equal to 2,419, then 29 days shall be subtracted; if it is less than 2,419, then 30 days shall be subtracted, and the remainder shall be the day of the new moon at the time of this meeting, calculated from the new moon.

古文：求后合度，以度数及分，如前合宿次命之。
现代文：求下次合的位置，用度数和分从本次合的位置起算即得。
English: Find the seat occupied at the time of the next meeting, add the number of degrees and minutes to the number of degrees and minutes at the time of the next meeting, and calculate from the seat occupied at the time of the last meeting. The result is the seat occupied at the time of this meeting.

古文：木：晨与日合，伏，顺，十六日九十九万七千八百三十二分，行星二度百七十九万五千二百三十八分，而晨见东方，在日后。
现代文：木星：早晨与太阳合，观察不到，顺行，十六天九十九万七干八百三十二分，运行两度一百七十九万五千二百三十八分而清晨在东方出现。
English: Jupiter: Conjunction with the sun in the morning, unobservable, moving along, 16 days, 9997 hours, 832 minutes, orbiting twice, 17995238 minutes, and appearing in the east in the morning.

古文：顺，疾，日行五十七分之十一，五十七日行十一度。
现代文：在太阳的西边。顺行，速度快，每天运动五十七分之十一度，五十七天运行十一度。
English: Forward, fast, run every day for 11/57, and run for a total of 11 times in 57 days.

古文：顺，迟，日行九分，五十七日行九度而留。不行，二十七日而旋。逆，日行七分之一，八十四日退十二度，而复留二十七日。复迟，日行九分，五十七日行九度而复顺。
现代文：依然顺行，速度较慢，每天运行九分，五十七天运行九度而停留不动二十七天，转为逆行，每天运行七分之一度，八十四天反向运行了十二度，再停留二十七天，又运行较慢，每天运行九分，五十七天运行九度而依然顺行。
English: Still moving forward, the speed is slower, running nine minutes a day, running nine degrees for fifty-seven days and staying still for twenty-seven days, turning retrograde, running one-seventh of a degree a day, running twelve degrees in reverse for eighty-four days, staying another twenty-seven days, running slower again, running nine minutes a day, running nine degrees for fifty-seven days and still moving forward.

古文：疾，日行十一分，五十七日行十一度，在曰前，夕伏西方。
现代文：速度快，每天运行十一分，五十七天运行十一度，在太阳的东方，黄昏时在西方观察不到。
English: The speed is fast, it runs eleven minutes a day, eleven times a day for fifty-seven days, and it is not observable in the east of the sun and in the west at dusk.

古文：顺，十六日九十九万七千八百三十二分，行星二度百七十九万五千二百三十八分，而与日合。
现代文：顺行，十六天九十九万七干八百三十二分而运行两度一百七十九万五千二百三十八分后又与太阳合。
English: It moves clockwise for 16 days and 9 months and 7 days and 832 minutes, and it orbits the sun twice for 1,795,238 minutes, and then it merges with the sun.

古文：凡一终，三百九十八日百九十九万五千六百六十四分，行星三十三度百四十七万二千八百六十九分。
现代文：一终总计有三百九十八天一百九十九万五千六百六十四分，运行了三十三度一百四十七万二干八百六十九分。
English: In total, it took 398 days, 19,995,664 minutes and 33 hours, 1,472,869 minutes to complete.

古文：火：晨与日合，伏，七十二日百七十九万二千六百一十五分，行星五十六度百二十四万九千三百四十五分，而晨见东方，在日后。
现代文：火星：早晨与太阳合，观察不到，七十二天一百七十九万二千六百一十五分而运行五十六度一百二十四万九千三百四十五分而早晨在东方出现，在太阳西方。
English: Mars: morning conjunction with the sun, unobservable, 72 days 1,792,615 minutes, 56 degrees 1,249,345 minutes, morning appears in the east, west of the sun.

古文：顺，日行二十三分之十四，百八十四日行百一十二度。
现代文：顺行，每天运行二十三分之十四度，一百八十四天而运行了一百一十二度。
English: Running in a clockwise direction, it runs at twenty-three-four degrees every day, and at one hundred and twelve degrees for one hundred and eighty-four days.

古文：更顺，迟，日行十二分，九十二日行四十八度而留。不行，十一日而旋。逆，日行六十二分之十七，六十二日退十七度，而复留十一日。复顺，迟，日行十二分，九十二日，行四十八度而复疾。日行十四分，百八十四日行百一十二度，在日前，夕伏西方。
现代文：依然顺行，速度较慢，每天运行十二分，九十二天运行了四十八度而停留不动，十一天后转为逆行，每天运行六十二分之十七度，六十二天后退了十度，又停留了十一天再顺行，速度较慢，每天运行十二分，九十二天中运行了四十八度而速度又变快，每天运行十四分，一百八十四天运行一百一十二度，在太阳东边，黄昏时在西方而观察不到。
English: It continued to move along at a slower speed, moving at 12 minutes a day. For 92 days, it moved at 48 degrees and remained stationary. After 11 days, it turned retrograde, moving at 17/62 degrees a day. After 62 days, it retreated 10 degrees. It remained stationary for another 11 days and then moved along at a slower speed, moving at 12 minutes a day. For 92 days, it moved at 48 degrees and became faster. It moved at 14 minutes a day. For 184 days, it moved at 112 degrees. It was east of the sun and could not be observed at dusk in the west.

古文：顺，七十二日百七十九万二千六百一十五分，行星五十六度百二十四万九千三百四十五分，而与日合。
现代文：顺行，七十二天一百七十九万二千六百一十五分运行了五十六度一百二十四万九千三百四十五分又与太阳合。
English: It followed a course of seventy-two days and one thousand seven hundred ninety-two thousand six hundred and fifteen minutes, and orbited the sun for fifty-six degrees and one thousand two hundred forty-nine thousand three hundred and forty-five minutes.

古文：凡一终，七百八十日三百五十八万五千二百三十分，行星四百一十五度二百四十九万八千六百九十分。
现代文：总计一终有七百八十天三百五十八万五千二百三十分，运行了四百一十五度二百四十九万八千六百九十分。
English: In total, seven hundred and eighty days to three million five hundred and eighty thousand five thousand two hundred and thirty minutes, running four hundred and fifteen degrees two million four hundred and ninety nine thousand eight thousand six hundred and ninety minutes.

古文：土：晨与日合，伏，十九日三百八十四万七千六百七十五分半，行星二度六百四十九万一千一百二十一分半，而晨见东方，在日后。
现代文：土星：早晨与太阳合，观察不到，十九天三百八十四万七千六百七十五分半运行了两度六百四十九万 千 百二十一分半而早晨在东方出现，在太阳西方。
English: Saturn: morning conjunction with the sun, unobservable, nineteen days three hundred and eighty-four thousand seven thousand six hundred and seventy-five and a half orbited twice six hundred and forty-nine thousand one hundred and twenty-one and a half and morning appeared in the east, in the west of the sun.

古文：顺，行百七十二分之十三，八十六日行六度半而留。不行，三十二日半而旋。逆，日行十七分之一，百二日退六度而复留。
现代文：顺行，每天运行一百七十二分之十三度，八十六天运行六度半而停留不动，三十二天半后转为逆行，每天运行十七分之一度，一百零二天后退了六度又停留。
English: In the prograde direction, it moves up to 13/172 degrees every day, and after 86 days, it moves 6.5 degrees and stays still. After 32 and a half days, it turns retrograde, moves 1/17th of a degree every day, and after 102 days, it retreats 6 degrees and stays still.

古文：不行，三十二日半复顺，日行十三分，八十六日行六度半，在日前，夕伏西方。
现代文：不动，三十二天半后又顺行，每天运行十三分，八十六天运行六度半，在太阳的东方，黄昏时在西方而观察不到。
English: Unmoving, after thirty-two and a half days, it moves along, running thirteen minutes a day, eighty-six days running six and a half degrees, in the east of the sun, in the west at dusk and cannot be observed.

古文：顺，十九日三百八十四万七千六百七十五分半，行星二度六百四十九万一千一百二十一分半，而与日合。
现代文：顺行十九天三百八十四万七千六百七十五分半，运行了两度六百四十九万一千一百二十一分半又与太阳合。
English: Nineteen days and nineteen hours and nineteen minutes and nineteen seconds and nineteen days and nineteen minutes and nineteen minutes and nineteen minutes and nineteen minutes and nineteen days and nineteen days and nineteen days and nineteen days and nineteen days and nineteen days and nineteen days and nineteen days and nineteen days and nineteen days and nineteen days and nineteen days and nineteen days and nineteen days and nineteen days and nineteen days and nineteen days and nineteen days and nineteen days and nineteen days and nineteen days and nineteen days and nineteen days and nineteen days and nineteen days and nineteen days and nineteen days and nineteen days

古文：凡一终，三百七十八日六十七万五千三百六十四分，行星十二度五百九十六万二千二百五十六分。
现代文：总计一终有三百七十八天六十七万五千三百六十四分，运行了十二度五百九十六万二千二百五十六分。
English: In total, there were 378 days, 675,364 minutes, and 5,962,256 minutes of operation.

古文：金：晨与日合，伏，六日退四度，而晨见东方，在日后而逆。迟，日行五分之三，十日退六度。留，不行，七日而旋。顺，迟，日行四十五分之三十三，四十五日行三十三度而顺。疾，日行一度九十一分之十四，九十一日行百五度而顺。
现代文：金星：早晨与太阳合，观察不到，六天中反向运行了四度后早晨在东方出现，在太阳西方而逆行运行较慢，每天运行五分之三度，十天后退了六度后停留不动，七天后转为顺行，速度较慢，每天运行四十五分之三十三度，四十五天中运行了三十三度而依然顺行，速度较快，每天运行一又几十一分之十四度，九十一天中顺行了一百零五度。
English: Venus: Conjunction with the sun in the morning, unobservable, appeared in the east in the morning after four degrees of retrograde motion in six days, retrograde in the west of the sun and moving slower, moving three-fifths of a degree every day, retreated six degrees after ten days and remained motionless, turned prograde after seven days, slower speed, moving thirty-three degrees every day in forty-five days, moving thirty-three degrees in forty-five days and still moving prograde, faster speed, moving fourteen degrees every day in one-hundred-and-elevenths, and moving one hundred and fifty-five degrees prograde in ninety-one days.

古文：益疾，日行一度九十一分之二十一，九十一日行百一十二度，在日后，而晨伏东方。顺，四十二日十九万四千九百九十分，行星五十二度十九万四千九百九十分，而与日合。
现代文：速度更快，每天运行一又九十一分之二十一度，九十一天中运行了一百一十二度，在太阳西方，早晨在东方观察不到顺行，四十二天十九万四千九百九十分运行了五十二度十九万四千九百几十分而又与太阳合。
English: The speed is faster. It orbits every day once every twenty-one ninety-one minutes. In ninety-one days, it orbits at one hundred and twelve degrees. In the west of the sun, there is no prograde motion observed in the morning in the east. In forty-two days and one hundred ninety-four thousand nine hundred and ten minutes, it orbits at fifty-two degrees and one hundred ninety-four thousand nine hundred and ten minutes, and then it merges with the sun.

古文：一合，二百九十二日十九万四千九百九十分，行星如之。
现代文：一合有二百九十二天十几万四千九百九十分，运行的度数与其数值相等。
English: In total, 292 days, 194,9990 minutes, and 292 degrees, 194,9990 minutes of operation.

古文：金：夕与日合，伏，顺，四十二日十九万四千九百九十分，行星五十二度十九万四千九百九十分，而夕见西方，在日前。
现代文：金星：黄昏时与太阳合，观察不到，顺行，四十二天十九万四千九百九十分，运行了五十二度十九万四千九百九十分后黄昏时在西方出现，在太阳的东方。
English: Venus: Conjunct the sun at dusk, unobservable, in transit, forty-two days nineteen hundred and forty-nine thousand and ninety, appeared in the west at dusk after orbiting fifty-two degrees nineteen hundred and forty-nine thousand and ninety, in the east of the sun.

古文：顺，疾，日行一度九十一分之二十一，九十一日行百一十二度而更顺。
现代文：顺行，速度较快，每天运行一又九十一分之二十一度，九十一天运行了一百一十二度而依然顺行。
English: Go forward, fast, run once every day and once every twenty-one ninety-one days, run one hundred and twelve degrees for ninety-one days, then go forward.

古文：迟，日行一度十四分，九十一日行百五度而顺。
现代文：速度较慢，每天运行一度十四分，九十一天运行一百零五度后依然顺行。
English: Slow, run once a day for fourteen minutes, run one hundred and five degrees for ninety-one days, and then run.

古文：益迟，日行四十五分之三十三，四十五日行三十三度而留。不行，七日而旋。逆，日行五分之三，十日退六度，在日前，夕伏西方。
现代文：速度更慢，每天运行四十五分之三十三度，四十五天中运行三十三度而停留不动，七天后转为逆行，每天运行五分之三度，十天中后退了六度，在太阳的东方，黄昏时在西方观察不到。
English: Slower still, it moves thirty-three degrees of forty-five degrees every day, and in forty-five days it moves thirty-three degrees and remains motionless, after seven days it turns retrograde, it moves three-fifths of a degree every day, and in ten days it has retreated six degrees, and it is not observable in the east of the sun and in the west at dusk.

古文：逆，六日，退四度，而与日合。
现代文：逆行。六天中后退了四度而又与太阳合。
English: retrograde. In six days, it retreated four degrees and merged with the sun.

古文：凡再合一终，五百八十四日三十八万九千九百八十分，行星如之。
现代文：又经过一合而完成一终，共五百八十四天三十八万九千九百八十分，运行的度数数值与此相等。
English: The total of the second meeting was 584 days, 389,980 minutes, and the operation was 584 degrees, 389,980 minutes.

古文：水：晨与日合，伏，十一日退七度，而晨见东方，在日后。
现代文：水星：早晨与太阳合，观察不到，十一天后退了度而早晨在东方十现，在太阳的西方。
English: Mercury: Merged with the sun in the morning, disappeared, retreated seven degrees in eleven days, appeared in the east in the morning, after the sun.

古文：逆，疾，一日退一度而留。不行，一日而旋。顺，迟，日行八分之七，八日行七度而顺。
现代文：逆行，速度较快，一天后退一度而停留不动，一天后转为顺行，运行较慢，每天运行八分之七度，八天运行七度而依然顺行。
English: It runs in reverse, at a relatively fast speed, retreating once a day and remaining motionless, and turning into forward motion a day later. It runs more slowly, running seven-eighths of a degree a day, running seven degrees a day for eight days and still moving forward.

古文：疾，日行一度十八分之四，十八日行二十二度，在日后，晨伏东方。
现代文：运行较快，每天运行一又十八分之四度，十八天运行二十二度，在太阳的西方，早晨时在东方观察不到。
English: Fast, running every day one and four eighteenths of a degree, eighteen days running twenty-two degrees, after the sun, morning lurks in the east.

古文：顺，十八日二千三十四万四千二百六十一分，行星三十六度二千三十四万四千二百六十一分，而与日合。凡一合，五十七日二千三十四万四千二百六十一分，行星如之。
现代文：顺行，八天二千零三十四万四千二百六十一分中运行三十六度二千零三十四万四千二百六十一分后与太阳合，一合有五十七天二干零三十四万四千二百六十一分，运行度数与此数值相等。
English: It moves clockwise and counterclockwise for eight days and two thousand, three hundred and forty-four thousand, two hundred and sixty-one minutes, during which it moves thirty-six degrees and two thousand, three hundred and forty-four thousand, two hundred and sixty-one minutes, after which it is aligned with the sun, and has a period of fifty-seven days and two thousand, three hundred and forty-four thousand, two hundred and sixty-one minutes, and its movement speed is equal to this value.

古文：水：夕与日合，伏，十八日二千三十四万四千二百六十一分，行星三十六度二千三十四万四千二百六十一分，而夕见西方，在日前。
现代文：水星：黄昏时与太阳合，观察不到，十八天二千零三十四万四千二百六十一分运行了三十六度二千零三十四万四千二百六十一分后黄昏时出现在西方，在太阳的东方。
English: Mercury: Conjunction with the sun at dusk, unobservable, 18 days 203,444,261 minutes, orbited 36 degrees 203,444,261 minutes, appeared in the west at dusk, in the east of the sun.

古文：顺，疾，日行一度十八分之四，十八日行二十二度而更顺。迟，日行八分之七，八日行七度而留。不行，一日而旋。逆，一日退一度，在日前，夕伏西方。
现代文：顺行，运行较快，每天运行一又十八分之四度，十八天运行二十二度而依然顺行，速度较慢，每天运行八分之七度，八天运行七度而停留不动，一天后转为逆行，在一天中后退了一度，在太阳东方，黄昏时在西方观察不到。
English: Moving along, moving faster, moving one and four-eighths of a degree every day, moving twenty-two degrees every day for eighteen days and still moving along, moving slower, moving seven-eighths of a degree every day, moving seven degrees every day for eight days and staying still, turning retrograde one day later, moving back one degree in the middle of the day, in the east of the sun, not observable in the west at dusk.

古文：逆，十一日退七度，而与日合。
现代文：逆行，十一天中后退了七度而和太阳合。
English: retrograde, 11 days retrograde seven degrees, meeting with the sun.

古文：凡再合一终，百一十五日千八百九十六万一千三百九十五分，行星如之。
现代文：又经过一合而完成一终共有一百一十五天一千八百九十六万一千三百九十五分，运行的度数与此数值相等。
English: It was completed in a total of one hundred and fifteen days, eighteen hundred and ninety-six thousand one hundred and three hundred and ninety-five minutes, and the frequency of operation is equal to this value.

古文：五星历步术：以法伏日度余，加星合日度余，余满日度法得一从全，命之如前，得星见日及度余也。
现代文：推算五星历的方法：将五星合时的日期和余及所在位置的度数和余分别加上观察不到时的天数和余及在此期间运行的度数和余，余满度法则减去曰度法并在天或度数上加一，用以前说到的方法就可得到五星出现的日期或度数及相应的余。
English: The method of calculating the five-star calendar: add the date and cosine of the five-star conjunction and the degree and cosine of the location, respectively, to the number and cosine of the days when it is not observed and the degree and cosine of the operation during this period, subtract the degree and cosine of the day and add one to the day or cosine, and use the previously mentioned method to obtain the date or degree of the five-star appearance and the corresponding cosine.

古文：以星行分母乘见度分，如日度法得一，分不尽，半法以上，亦得一，而日加所行分，分满其母得一度。
现代文：用五星出现时的度分数乘以五星运行速度的相应分母，再除以曰度法，余数大于度法的一半时也进一。每天加上五星运行的度分数，分数满运行速度的分母时则减去该值并在度数上进一。
English: The degree score at the time of the five-star appearance is multiplied by the corresponding denominator of the five-star running speed, and then divided by the diurnal degree method. When the remaining number is greater than half of the degree method, it also enters one. Add the degree score of five-star running every day, and when the denominator of the score is full running speed, subtract this value and enter one on the degree.

古文：逆顺母不同，以当行之母乘故分，如故母而一，当行分也。
现代文：逆行顺行时五星运行速度的分母不同，在交替处时以当时的分母去乘原来的分数，除以原来的分母则得到当时的分数。
English: The denominator used for reverse and forward crosstalk is different. The current corresponding denominator is multiplied by the previous running point, and the denominator corresponding to the previous running point is subtracted. The result is the running point corresponding to the current denominator.

古文：留者承前，逆则减之，伏不书度，除斗分，以行母为率。
现代文：在发生停留时其度分数保留此前的数据，逆行时则在度分数上减去，观察不到时则不列出其度分数，去除斗分时也用运行时的分母作为表示的标准。
English: When there is a stop, the degree score retains the previous data, when there is a retrograde, the degree score is subtracted, when there is no observation, the degree score is not listed, and when the bucket score is removed, the denominator of the runtime is also used as the standard of representation.

古文：分有损益，前后相御。
现代文：在推算中分的数值虽有减少或增加，但前后是相抵的。
English: There is an increase and decrease in the running score, and they correspond to each other.

古文：凡五星行天，迟疾留逆，虽大率有常，至犯守逆顺，难以术推。
现代文：大概说来五星在天空中运行的快慢、停留和逆行，虽然大体上是有规律的，但五星相对于恒星位置的接近、停留、逆行、顺行都是难以推算的。
English: Generally speaking, the speed, stop, and retrograde motion of the five stars in the sky are generally regular, but the approach, stop, retrograde, and prograde motion of the five stars relative to the position of the star are difficult to calculate.

古文：月之行天，犹有迟疾，况五星乎！
现代文：月亮在天空中运动尚有快慢的变化，何况五大行星呢?
English: The movement of the moon in the sky still has changes in speed, let alone the five planets?

古文：唯日之行天有常，进退有率，不迟不疾，不外不内，人君德也。
现代文：衹有太阳在天空中的运动是有规律的，其在天球赤道上的进退有一定的标准，没有快慢的变化，不会在黄道的南或北边，这是统治者所具备的品德。
English: The movement of the sun in the sky is regular, its advance and retreat on the celestial equator has a certain standard, there is no change in speed, it will not be south or north of the ecliptic, which is the character of the ruler.

古文：求木合终岁数法，以木日度法乘一木终之日，内分，周天除之，即得也。
现代文：求木星的合终岁数的方法：将木星一终包含的天数乘以木星的曰度法，并要考虑天的分数，再除以周天就可得到。
English: The method for finding Jupiter's final age: multiply the number of days that Jupiter will eventually contain by Jupiter's diurnal method, and take into account the fraction of days, and then divide by the number of days in a week.

古文：求木合终合数法，以木日度法乘周天，满纪法，所得复以周天除之，即得。
现代文：求木星合终合数的方法：将周天乘以木星的曰度法，除以纪法，其商再除以周天就可得到。
English: The method of finding Jupiter's final composite number: multiply the day of the week by Jupiter's diurnal method, divide by the chronological method, and then divide the quotient by the day of the week.

古文：五星皆放此也。
现代文：五星中其他行星都可仿照该法求得。
English: All the other planets in the five-star system can be obtained by the same method.

古文：魏黄初元年十一月小，己卯蔀首，己亥岁，十一月己卯朔旦冬至，臣伟上。 
现代文：魏黄初元年十一月小，以己卯年为首，己亥年十一月己卯朔清晨冬至，臣杨伟上。
English: In the first month of the first year of the Wei and Huang Dynasties, November was the first month of the year, and the first month of the year was the first month of the year, and the first month of the year was the first month of the year, and the first month of the year was the first month of the year, and the first month of the year was the first month of the year.

古文：刘氏在蜀，不见改历，当是仍用汉《四分法》。
现代文：刘备在蜀建国，未发现对历法进行过修改，看来仍然使用束汉《四分历》。
English: Liu Bei in Shu Jianguo did not find any modifications to the calendar, and it seems that he still uses the Han Dynasty "Quarterly Calendar."

古文：吴中书令阚泽受刘洪《乾象法》于东莱徐岳字公河。故孙氏用《乾象历》，至于吴亡。
现代文：吴国中书令阐泽从东莱徐岳处学习到刘洪的《干象法》，故孙氏政权使用《干象历》，直到吴国灭亡。
English: In the middle of the Wu Dynasty, Xu Yue from Donglai learned the "Gan Xiang Law" from Liu Hong. Therefore, the Sun Dynasty used the "Gan Xiang Calendar" until the fall of the Wu Dynasty.

古文：晋武帝泰始元年，有司奏： 王者祖气而奉其囗终，晋于五行之次应尚金，金生于己，事于酉，终于丑，宜祖以酉日，腊以丑日。改《景初历》为《泰始历》。 
现代文：晋武帝泰始元年，有官吏上奏： 成王业的人兴起于某一种气而敬奉它直到结束，晋代在五行之中应该崇尚金，金气产生在己，起作用在酉，结束在丑，应当在酉曰祭祀祖先，在丑进行年终大祭，将《景初历》改为《泰始历》。 
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Jin Dynasty, an official recited: The people of Chengwangye arose from a certain kind of qi and worshiped it until the end. In the Jin Dynasty, among the five elements, gold should be revered. Gold qi originates in oneself, works in the yang, and ends in the yang. It should be sacrificed to ancestors on the 3rd day of the month, and the year-end festival should be held in the yang, and the "New Year's Calendar" should be changed to the "Old Year's Calendar."

古文：奏可。
现代文：这一上奏得到了同意。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：史臣按，邹衍五德，周为火行。
现代文：史臣根据邹衍的五德终始学说认为周代符合五行中的火德。
English: Shichen believed that Zhou Dynasty corresponded to the fire virtue of the five elements according to the five virtues end-to-end theory of Yu Yan.

古文：衍生在周时，不容不知周氏行运。且周之为历年八百，秦氏即有周之建国也。周之火木，其事易详。
现代文：邹衍是周代人，不可能不知道周代与哪一行相应，而且周代的历法有八百年，秦就是在周代建国的，周代符合火德还是木德的问题是容易搞清楚的。
English: Qinyan is from the Zhou Dynasty. It is impossible not to know which line corresponds to the Zhou Dynasty. Moreover, the Zhou Dynasty has an eight-hundred-year calendar. The Qin Dynasty was founded in the Zhou Dynasty. It is easy to figure out whether the Zhou Dynasty conforms to the fire ethics or the wood ethics.

古文：且五德更王，唯有二家之说。邹衍以相胜立体，刘向相生为义。
现代文：用五德终始循环学说来解释王朝的更迭衹有两家，邹衍用五行相克建立了一种体制，刘向又用五行相生来作另一种解释。
English: There are two schools of thought that explain the succession of dynasties in terms of the Five Elements and Five Elements-in-Cycle theory. One school uses the Five Elements and Five Elements-in-Cycle theory to establish a system, while the other school uses the Five Elements and Five Elements-in-Cycle theory to explain the succession of dynasties.

古文：据以为言，不得出此二家者。
现代文：根据这种学说所做的叙述不外乎这两家。
English: The two families are the only ones whose accounts are based on this theory.

古文：假使即刘向之说，周为木行，秦氏代周，改其行运。若不相胜，则克木者金；相生则木实生火。
现代文：如果按刘血的叙述，且丛与木行符合，豢伐取代了且伐就改变了与其相应的行相克就是金克木，相生则是木生火，但豢代却自称与水行相符合，道理上并无错谬。
English: If, according to Liu Xue's description, the clump and the tree line are consistent, and the felling replaces the felling and the felling changes the corresponding line, the opposite is the golden wood, and the concomitant is the wood and the fire, but the cormorant generation claims to be consistent with the water line, there is no fallacy in the principle.

古文：秦氏乃称水德，理非谬然，斯则刘氏所证为不值矣。臣以为张苍虽是汉臣，生与周接，司秦柱下，备睹图书。
现代文：这就是刘向的说法并不准确。我认为张苍虽然是选伐的官，但他出生在周代，担任过秦代柱下史，可以看到所有的图书。
English: This is Liu Xiang's statement is not accurate. I think that although Zhang Cang is a selection officer, he was born in the Zhou Dynasty, served as a Qin Dynasty pillar, and can see all the books.

古文：且秦虽灭学，不废术数，则有周遗文虽不毕在，据汉水行，事非虚作。
现代文：而且秦代摧残学术并不废除术数，这样虽然周代的文献未能全部保留下来，考据龇与水行相应，事情并不会是虚假的。
English: Moreover, the Qin Dynasty's destruction of scholarship did not abolish the number of operations, so although the literature of the Zhou Dynasty could not be preserved in its entirety, the examination records were consistent with the water line, and the matter would not be false.

古文：贾谊《取秦》云： 汉土德。 
现代文：宣谊的《取秦》中说： 汉代与土德相符。 
English: It says in "Taking Qin," a book of proclamation: The Han Dynasty is consistent with the native Germany.

古文：盖以是汉代秦。
现代文：就是以违丛来取代童丛。
English: That is, to replace the children's jungle with an illegal jungle.

古文：详论二说，各有其义。
现代文：详细地讨论两种说法，各有不同的含义。
English: Discuss in detail the two terms, each with a different meaning.

古文：张苍则以汉水胜周火，废秦不班五德。
现代文：张苍认为用汉代的水行来克且丝的火行，把台球排斥在外而不让其与五行相应。
English: Zhang Cang believed that the water line of the Han Dynasty was used to overcome the fire line of the silk, excluding the billiard ball and not allowing it to correspond to the five lines.

古文：贾谊则以汉土胜秦水，以秦为一代。
现代文：夏谊则认为用遵伐的土行克童伐的水行，把画也看作一个与五行相应的朝代。
English: Xia Yiyi, on the other hand, believes that the water line of Zunfa's earth line and Tongfa's water line should be used, and the painting should also be regarded as a dynasty corresponding to the five elements.

古文：论秦、汉虽殊，而周为火一也。
现代文：他们讨论的童、选虽有不同，但都一致认为周代与火行相应。
English: Although the children and candidates they discussed were different, they all agreed that the Zhou Dynasty corresponded to the Fire Festival.

古文：然则相胜之义，于事为长。
现代文：这样五行相克的解释还是占上风的。
English: This interpretation of the five elements still prevails.

古文：若同苍黜秦，则汉水、魏土、晋木、宋金；若同贾谊《取秦》，则汉土、魏木、晋金、宋火也。
现代文：如果同意强苍排斥童丛的说法，则还伐与水、逸丛与土、置伐与木、搴伐与金相应；如果赞成贾谊的《取秦》，则汉代与土、魏代与木、晋代与金、宋代与火相对应。
English: If you agree with the saying that the strong heaven repels the children's thicket, then the counter-felling corresponds to water, the thicket to earth, the felling to wood, and the felling to gold; if you agree with Jia Yi's "Taking Qin," then the Han Dynasty corresponds to earth, the Wei Dynasty corresponds to wood, the Jin Dynasty corresponds to gold, and the Song Dynasty corresponds to fire.

古文：难者云： 汉高断蛇而神母夜哭，云赤帝子杀白帝子，然则汉非火而何？ 斯又不然矣。
现代文：有人驳难说： 汉高祖斩蛇而有神母夜哭说赤帝子杀了白帝子，这样汉代不是与火行相应又是什么呢? 
English: Some people find it hard to refute: the Han Emperor Gaozhu cut off a snake, and a goddess cried at night saying that the Red Emperor killed the White Emperor, so the Han Dynasty is not the same as the fire, and what is it?

古文：汉若为火，则当云赤帝，不宜云赤帝子也。白帝子又何义况乎？
现代文：这是不对的。如果汉代与火行相对应就应该说是赤帝，不应说成赤帝子，况且白帝子又是什么意思呢?
English: This is not correct. If the Han Dynasty corresponds to the Fire Festival, it should be said to be the Red Emperor, not the Red Emperor, and what does the White Emperor mean?

古文：盖由汉是土德，土生乎火，秦是水德，水生乎金，斯则汉以土为赤帝子，秦以水德为白帝子也。
现代文：这都是来源于选伐与上行相应，土是由火产生的，秦代与水行相应，水足由金产生的，这样汉就以土为赤帝子，秦就以水为白帝子了。
English: These are all derived from the fact that the felling corresponds to the ascending line, the soil is produced by fire, the Qin Dynasty corresponds to the water line, and the water foot is produced by gold. Thus, the Han Dynasty used soil as the red emperor, and the Qin Dynasty used water as the white emperor.

古文：难者又曰： 向云五德相胜，今复云土为赤帝子，何也？ 
现代文：驳难者又说： 往昔一直说五行相克，现在又说土为赤帝子，这是什么道理呢? 
English: The rebuttal also said: In the past, it has always been said that the five elements compete with each other, and now it is said that the earth is the Red Emperor. What is the reason for this?

古文：答曰： 五行自有相胜之义，自有相生之义。不得以相胜废相生，相生废相胜也。相胜者，以土胜水耳；相生者，土自火子，义岂相关。 
现代文：回答说： 五行既有相克的一面，也有相生的一面，不应以相克否定相生，以相生否定相克：相克是指土克水，相生是指土生于火，其含义各不相关。 
English: He replied, "The five elements have both the aspect of opposing each other and the aspect of being born together. One should not negate opposing each other with opposing each other, nor should one negate opposing each other with being born together. Opposing each other means being born of water, and being born together means being born of fire. Their meanings are not related.

古文：崔寔《四人月令》曰：祖者，道神。
现代文：崔皇所著《四民月令》中说：祖就是路神。
English: According to the book "Four People's Monthly Order" by Cui Wang, Zhu is the god of the road.

古文：黄帝之子曰累祖，好远游，死道路，故祀以为道神。
现代文：董壶的儿子叫星担，喜爱旅游，死于旅途中，故供奉其为路神。
English: Dong Jue's son, named Xingtan, loved to travel and died on his journey, so he was worshipped as the god of the road.

古文：合《祖赋序》曰：汉用丙午，魏用丁未，晋用孟月之酉。
现代文：嵇含的《祖道赋》序言中说到：违垡用丙午，垫用丁末日，置代用四季的第一个月的酉来祭祀路神而不知道路神的来历。
English: In the preface to the "Ancestral Road Fu" (祖道赋), it is said that: "They used the first day of the first month of the four seasons to worship the Road God without knowing the origin of the Road God.

古文：曰莫识祖之所由。说者云祈请道神，谓之祖有事于道者，君子行役，则列之于中路，丧者将迁，则称名于阶庭。
现代文：有人说祭请路神是告诉他有事情要在路上办理，君子因事而在外跋涉则安排在半路上祭祀，有人去世了需要移走，则称扬其名于阶前的空地上。
English: Some people say that the road god is invited to the sacrifice to tell him that there is something to be handled on the road, while the gentleman arranges the sacrifice in the middle of the road when he is traveling abroad due to an event, and when someone has passed away and needs to be removed, his name is praised in the open space in front of the steps.

古文：或云，百代远祖，名谥凋灭，坟茔不复存于铭表，游魂不得托于庙祧，故以初岁良辰，建华盖，扬彩旌，将以招灵爽，庶众祖之来凭云尔。
现代文：又有一种说法，百代前的祖先其名字、谧号均被遗忘，坟墓也不再有铭刻的标记，飘荡的魂魄不能寄托于宗庙，这样就在年初的好子，建树华盖，飞扬彩旗，用来招引鬼神的精气，以便众祖先前来依靠，如此而已。
English: There is also a saying that the names and surnames of the ancestors of a hundred generations ago have been forgotten, the graves no longer have inscribed marks, and the wandering souls cannot be entrusted to the ancestral temple. Thus, at the beginning of the year, the good son built a tree cover and flew a bunting to attract the spirit of ghosts and gods, so that the ancestors could come to rely on it. That's all.

古文：晋江左时，侍中平原刘智，推三百年斗历改宪，以为《四分法》三百年而减一日，以百五十为度法，三十七为斗分。饰以浮说，以扶其理。
现代文：晋武壶时，侍中芒厘型智根据三百年叫。宿的宿度就要改变规定的说法，认为《四分法》使用三百年减少一天，取一百五十为度法，三十七为斗分，用没有根据的话进行粉饰，以使其做法得以成立。
English: At the time of the Jinwu Jug, the attendant, Mangli-type Zhizhi, called according to the three hundred years. The degree of the inn is to change the prescribed statement, that the "quarter method" uses three hundred years to reduce one day, takes one hundred and fifty as the degree method, and thirty-seven as the bucket point, and uses unfounded words to whitewash, so that its practice can be established.

古文：江左中领军琅邪王朔之以其上元岁在甲子，善其术，欲以九万七千岁之甲子为开辟之始，何承天云 悼于立意 者也。
现代文：逗左中领军琅邪王朔之以其历元是甲子年，对它很欣赏，想以九万七千年的甲千年作为天地产生的年代，何垂孟所说 可悲的想法 就是指此。
English: The leader of the left-wing comedians, the evil king Shuangzhu, said that his era was the Year of the Rooster, and he appreciated it very much. He wanted to use the 97,000th year, the year of the Rooster, as the year of the creation of heaven and earth. This is what the deplorable idea mentioned by He Tuo Meng refers to.

古文：《景初》日中晷景，即用汉《四分法》，是以渐就乖差。其推五星，则甚疏阔。
现代文：《景初历》中所列中午时圭表表影长度是用束汉《四分法》的数据，故逐渐显示出较大的误差，其推算五星的情况则很不精密。
English: The length of the shadow on the table at noon listed in the "New Year's Calendar" is based on the data of the Shuhan "Quarter Method," so it gradually shows a large error, and the five-star situation is very imprecise.

古文：晋江左以来，更用《乾象五星法》以代之，犹有前却。
现代文：塞置以后改用《干象五星法》推算五星的方法来代替，依然在位置的推算上有偏差。
English: After setting, it was replaced by the method of calculating five stars according to the "dry five-star method," but there was still a deviation in the position calculation.

古文：宋太祖颇好历数，太子率更令何承天私撰新法。元嘉二十年，上表曰：臣授性顽惰，少所关解。
现代文：宋太祖爱好历敷，太子率更令何承天私下制定了新的历法，元嘉二十年上表说：我生性蠢笨而懒惰，对学问很少能融会贯通。
English: Emperor Taizu of the Song Dynasty was fond of calendars, and the fact that he was also crown prince led He Zhengten to privately develop a new calendar. Twenty years ago, Yuan Jia said: I am stupid and lazy by nature, and I can rarely integrate and penetrate knowledge.

古文：自昔幼年，颇好历数，耽情注意，迄于白首。
现代文：从幼年开始就爱好历数，对其有浓厚的兴趣，直到年老依然如故。
English: From a young age, he was fond of the calendar and had a keen interest in it, which remained the same until old age.

古文：臣亡舅故秘书监徐广，素善其事，有既往《七曜历》，每记其得失。自太和至泰元之末，四十许年。
现代文：我去世的舅舅原秘书监徐广一向对此精通，对已经成为过去的《七曜历》，常考察具推算是否准确，从太和年间到太元年结束已有四十多年。
English: My late uncle, the former secretary of Supervisor Xu Guang, was always well-versed in this, and he often checked the accuracy of the calculation of the "Seven-Day Calendar," which has become a thing of the past. It has been more than forty years since the end of the Taichung Era to the end of the Taichung Era.

古文：臣因比岁考校，至今又四十载。故其疏密差会，皆可知也。
现代文：我因循其事每年也进行考校，到现在又有四十年，故它的精密与否都可以知道。
English: Since I have been following it, I have also conducted the examination every year, and now it has been forty years, so I can know whether it is accurate or not.

古文：夫圆极常动，七曜运行，离合去来，虽有定势，以新故相涉，自然有毫末之差，连日累岁，积微成著。
现代文：天是一直运动着的，月、五星在天空中运行，分开、会合、隐匿、重现虽然都有确定的模式，但将新观察到的情况与原来相比总会有不大的差异，曰积月累，这种差异叠加起来就很显著了。
English: The sky is always moving, the moon and the five stars move in the sky, separate, meet, hide, and reappear, although there are certain patterns, there will always be a slight difference between the newly observed situation and the original, that is, accumulated over time, this difference is very significant when superimposed.

古文：是以《虞书》著钦若之典，《周易》明治历之训，言当顺天以求合，非为合以验天也。
现代文：所以《虞书》写出了对天钦敬的典式，《周易》明确了制定历法的法则，说到历法应该迁就天象而求符合，而不是用符合来作为检验天象的标准。
English: Therefore, the "Book of the Goat" wrote a ceremony of reverence for the heavens, and the "Zhou Yi" clarified the rules for formulating the calendar, saying that the calendar should accommodate the celestial body and seek conformity, rather than using conformity as a standard for testing the celestial body.

古文：汉代杂候清台，以昏明中星，课日所在，虽不可见，月盈则蚀，必当其冲，以月推日，则躔次可知焉。
现代文：汉代在清台上共同观测，用观察昏明中星的方法来确定太阳的位置。虽然太阳的位置不能直接观察到，但月食发生在满月的时候，太阳必然在与月亮相对的位置上，用月亮来反推太阳，则其位置就能知道了。
English: The Han Dynasty observed together on the Qingdao observatory, using the method of observing the stars in the twilight to determine the position of the sun. Although the position of the sun cannot be directly observed, when a lunar eclipse occurs during a full moon, the sun must be in the opposite position to the moon. If the moon is used to push back the sun, its position can be known.

古文：舍易而不为，役心于难事，此臣所不解也。
现代文：舍弃容易的方法不用，而偏在充满困难的事情上伤脑筋，这是我不能理解的。
English: I don't understand the abandonment of easy methods in favour of worrying about things that are difficult.

古文：《尧典》云： 日永星火，以正仲夏 。
现代文：《尧典》中说 白大长，黄昏时大火星在正南方的天空中，以此确定夏季的第二个月 。
English: According to the "Analects of Confucius," the second month of summer is determined by the appearance of the great planet Mars in the southern sky at dusk.

古文：今季夏则火中。
现代文：现在夏季的第三个月黄昏时大火星在正南方。
English: Now, in the third month of summer, the great planet Mars is due south at dusk.

古文：又 宵中星虚，以殷仲秋 。
现代文：《尧典》又说 黑夜不长不短，黄昏时虚星在正南方天空中，以此确定秋季的第二个月 。
English: The "Qing Dynasty" also said that the night is neither long nor short, and at dusk the imaginary star is in the southern sky, thus determining the second month of autumn.

古文：今季秋则虚中。
现代文：现在秋季的第三个月黄昏时虚星在正南方。
English: Now, in the third month of autumn, at dusk, the false star is due south.

古文：尔来二千七百余年，以中星检之，所差二十七八度。
现代文：从那时到现在有二千七百多年，用昏明时分中星的位置检测，相差了二十七八度。
English: From then until now, there have been more than 2,700 years, and using the position of the star in twilight, the difference is 278 degrees.

古文：则尧冬令至，日在须女十度左右也。汉之《太初历》，冬至在牵牛初，后汉《四分》及魏《景初法》，同在斗二十一。
现代文：这样尧时的冬至太阳应在须女的十度左右銮优《太初历》中冬至太阳应在牵牛的初度，鳖选《四分历》和魏《景初历》则都在斗宿二十一度。
English: In this way, the winter solstice sun at noon should be around the tenth degree of the sun, and the winter solstice sun should be at the beginning of the cowherd in the middle of the spring equinox, and the winter solstice sun should be at the beginning of the cowherd in the spring equinox, and the winter solstice sun should be at the beginning of the cowherd in the spring equinox.

古文：臣以月蚀检之，则《景初》今之冬至，应在斗十七。
现代文：我用观察月食的方法进行校验，得到《景初历》现在的冬至太阳应在斗宿十七度。
English: I used the method of observing lunar eclipses to carry out the calibration, and obtained the "First View Calendar" that the current winter solstice sun should rise seventeen degrees in Dooshuku.

古文：又史官受诏，以土圭测景，考校二至，差三日有余。
现代文：史官受命用土圭测量表影长度来校验冬夏至曰，发现有三天多的相差。
English: The historian was ordered to use the dogwood to measure the length of the table shadow to check the winter and summer solstice, and found that there was a difference of more than three days.

古文：从来积岁及交州所上，检其增减，亦相符验。
现代文：根据历年和从交州送上的结果检验其增减情况也是符合的。
English: It is also consistent to check the increase and decrease according to the calendar year and the results sent from Jiaozhou.

古文：然则今之二至，非天之二至也。
现代文：这样，现在所说的冬、夏至就不是与天象所对应的了。
English: In this way, the winter and summer solstices that are now spoken of do not correspond to the celestial bodies.

古文：天之南至，日在斗十三四矣。此则十九年七闰，数微多差。
现代文：与天象对应的冬至太阳在斗宿十三四度，逭就是十九年中安排七个闰月的历法有微小偏差，积月累误差就形成了。
English: The winter solstice sun, which corresponds to the celestial phenomenon, rises in the thirteenth and fourth degrees of the zodiac. That is, there is a slight deviation in the calendar that arranges seven leap months in nineteen years, and the accumulated monthly error is formed.

古文：复改法易章，则用算滋繁，宜当随时迁革，以取其合。
现代文：再回过去改变历法的数据则增加了运算的复杂性，最好还是随时进行改革以取得符合。
English: The data of changing the calendar back to the past increases the complexity of the operation. It is best to reform at any time to achieve consistency.

古文：案《后汉志》，春分日长，秋分日短，差过半刻。
现代文：考据《后汉书。律历志》，春分时白昼长，秋分时白昼短，相差超过半刻，二分分别在二至之间。
English: According to the "Hou Han Shu. Rong Li Ji," the day is long at the vernal equinox and short at the autumnal equinox, with a difference of more than half an hour, and two minutes are between two and three respectively.

古文：寻二分在二至之间，而有长短，因识春分近夏至，故长；秋分近冬至，故短也。
现代文：因为白昼有长有短，从而知道春分较接近夏至，故白昼长，秋分较接近冬至，白昼也就较短。
English: Because there are long and short days, we know that the vernal equinox is closer to the summer solstice, so the day is long, and the autumnal equinox is closer to the winter solstice, so the day is shorter.

古文：杨伟不悟，即用之，上历表云： 自古及今，凡诸历数，皆未能并己之妙。 
现代文：握伟对此没有认识，仍然沿用旧的方法推算，并在所呈的历表中说： 从古到今，各种历法上的数据都不能和它同样高明。 
English: Katsuhide did not recognize this, still using the old method of calculation, and said in the presented calendar: From ancient times to the present, all kinds of calendar data can not be as clever as it.

古文：何此不晓，亦何以云。
现代文：如此不明白道理，还有什么可说的。
English: With such a lack of understanding, what else is there to say?

古文：是故臣更建《元嘉历》，以六百八为一纪，半之为度法，七十五为室分，以建寅之月为岁首，雨水为气初，以诸法闰余一之岁为章首。
现代文：于是我编制了《元嘉历》，用六百零八作为纪法，其一半为度法，七十五是室分，将建寅的月份作为岁首，雨水为二十四节气中最早的，规定闰余为一的年份为一章的开始。
English: So I compiled the "Yuan Jia Calendar," using six hundred and eight as the chronology, half of which is the degree method, seventy-five is the room division, the month of Jianyin as the beginning of the year, the rain is the earliest of the twenty-four solar terms, and the year with a leap remainder of one is the beginning of a chapter.

古文：冬至从上三日五时。日之所在，移旧四度。
现代文：冬至曰比原来提前了三天五个时辰，冬至时太阳位置也移动了四度。
English: The winter solstice is now three days and five hours earlier than it used to be, and the position of the sun at the winter solstice has also moved four degrees.

古文：又月有迟疾，合朔月蚀，不在朔望，亦非历意也。
现代文：另外，月亮运行有快慢，造成合朔、月食不正在朔、望，这也不是历法原有的意义。
English: In addition, the moon has a fast and slow movement, causing the new moon, the lunar eclipse is not in the new moon, the prospect, this is not the original meaning of the calendar.

古文：故元嘉皆以盈缩定其小余，以正朔望之日。
现代文：故在《元嘉历》中均根据月亮运动的盈缩定其小余，使朔望与实际情况符合。
English: Therefore, in the "Yuan Jia Calendar," the small surplus was determined according to the movement of the moon, so that the projection was consistent with the actual situation.

古文：伏惟陛下允迪圣哲，先天不违，劬劳庶政，寅亮鸿业，究渊思于往籍，探妙旨于未闻，穷神知化，罔不该览。
现代文：皇上诚信并实行道德智慧高超的人的主张，不违背上天的意志，为各种政务劳累，谨敬弘扬大业，在古书中探究深奥的思想，寻找从未听说过的美妙的道理，深入探究大自然的造化，没有什么看不到。
English: The emperor's integrity and the implementation of the claims of people with superior moral wisdom, do not violate the will of heaven, work hard for various government affairs, respectfully promote the great cause, explore the esoteric ideas in ancient books, find the wonderful truth that has never been heard of, and deeply explore the creation of nature, nothing can be seen.

古文：是以愚臣欣遇盛明，效其管穴。
现代文：我高兴遇到这样兴盛贤明的时代，愿意将狭小的见识贡献出来。
English: I am glad to encounter such a prosperous and wise era, and I am willing to contribute my narrow insights.

古文：伏愿以臣所上《元嘉法》下史官考其疏密，若谬有可采，庶或补正阙谬，以备万分。
现代文：希望以我呈上的《元嘉历》发付史官，考校其精度情况。假若在错谬之中还有一些可取之处，或许对某些缺漏或错误可以补正，以作备用。
English: I hope that the "Yuanjiali" I submitted will be sent to the historian to test its accuracy. If there are still some merits among the errors, perhaps some omissions or errors can be corrected as a backup.

古文：诏曰： 何承天所陈，殊有理据。可付外详之。 
现代文：皇帝对此下诏说： 何承天所说的与众不同而有根据，可以交给外边的学者详细讨论。 
English: To this, the emperor issued an edict saying, "What He Chengtian said is unique and well-founded, and can be handed over to outside scholars for detailed discussion.

古文：太史令钱乐之、兼丞严粲奏曰：太子率更令领国子博士何承天表更改《元嘉历法》，以月蚀检今冬至日在斗十七，以土圭测影，知冬至已差三日。
现代文：太史令钱乐之、兼丞严粲上奏说：太子率更令领国子博士何承天上表谈到更改历法为《元嘉历法》，他用观察月食的方法得到现在冬至时太阳在斗宿十七度，测量圭表的表影长度知道冬至曰有三天的误差。
English: Taishi ordered Qian Lezhi and Kanetsune Yan to make a report, saying: the prince's rate was even higher, and the leader, Dr. Kuniko He Zheng, talked about changing the calendar to the "Yuan Jia Calendar" on the heavenly table. He used the method of observing the lunar eclipse to get the sun at the winter solstice at seventeen degrees, and measured the length of the table shadow of the Gui table to know that the winter solstice has a three-day error.

古文：诏使付外检署。
现代文：对此下了诏书让交外检署。
English: In this regard, a decree was issued to relinquish the case to the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court.

古文：以元嘉十一年被敕，使考月蚀，土圭测影，检署由来用伟《景初法》，冬至之日，日在斗二十一度少。
现代文：于元嘉十一年诏书下来，要求观察月食和圭表表影长度。检署原来使用的杨伟《景初法》，冬至曰太阳在斗宿的二十一度少。
English: In the 11th year of Yuan Jia's reign, an imperial edict was issued requiring the observation of lunar eclipses and the length of the apparent shadow. According to Yang Wei's "Law of the Beginning of the Scene," which was originally used by the procuratorate, the winter solstice is said to have 21 times fewer suns in the sky.

古文：检十一年七月十六日望月蚀，加时在卯，到十五日四更二唱丑初始蚀，到四唱蚀既，在营室十五度末。《景初》其日日在轸三度。以月蚀所冲考之，其日日应在翼十五度半。
现代文：在十一年七月十六曰望时观测月食，发生的时间经推算为卯时，到十五日四更两点丑初时开始食，到四更四点时食既，月亮位置在营室的十五度结束处按《景初历》推算这天太阳位于轸宿的三度处，而用月食时月亮与太阳位置相对来推考，这天太阳应在翼宿的十五度半。
English: Observing the lunar eclipse at the time of the observation on the 16th day of July in the 11th year, the time of occurrence was calculated as the time of the eclipse, and the eclipse began at the beginning of the 15th day at four more than two o'clock, and the eclipse was completed at four more than four o'clock. The position of the moon was at the end of the 15th degree of the camp room. According to the "Lunar Calendar," the sun was located at the 3rd degree of the Pleiades on this day, and using the position of the moon relative to the sun during the lunar eclipse, the sun should be at the 15th degree and

古文：又到十三年十二月十六日望月蚀，加时在酉，到亥初始食，到一更三唱蚀既，在鬼四度。
现代文：又在十三年十二月十六日望观测月食，推算的发生时刻为酉时，在亥初时开始食，到一更三点时食既，月亮在鬼宿四度。
English: Another lunar eclipse was observed on the 16th day of December in the 13th year. The estimated time of occurrence was at dusk, the eclipse began at the beginning of winter, and the eclipse was over at one o'clock, and the moon was at four degrees of the zodiac.

古文：《景初》其日日在女三。
现代文：《景初历》推算造天太阳在女宿三度。
English: The "Lunar Calendar" estimates that the sun, which created the heavens, rises three times in the girls' dormitory.

古文：以冲考之，其日日应在牛六度半。
现代文：用月食时太阳、月亮位置相对推考，这天太阳应在牛宿六度半。
English: Using the relative positions of the sun and moon at the time of the lunar eclipse, the sun should be at six and a half degrees in Ushijuku on this day.

古文：又到十四年十二月十六日望月蚀，加时在戌之半，到二更四唱亥末始蚀，到三更一唱食既，在井三十八度。
现代文：又在十四年十二月十六闩望时观测月食，按推算时间应为戌时的当中，在二更四点、亥时的结束时开始食，到三更一点时食既，月亮在井宿三十八度。
English: Also, in the observation of the lunar eclipse on December 16, 2014, when looking at the lunar eclipse, according to the calculation, the time should be in the middle of the lunar eclipse, and the eclipse began at the end of the second lunar eclipse at four o'clock and the end of the lunar eclipse at one o'clock, and the eclipse began at one o'clock in the third lunar eclipse, and the moon was at thirty-eight degrees in the well.

古文：《景初》其日日在斗二十五。以冲考之，其日日应在斗二十二度半。
现代文：《景初历》推算这天太阳在斗宿二十五度，用曰月位置相对推考，太阳应在斗宿二十二度半。
English: The "Lunar Calendar" estimates that on this day, the sun will rise to 25 degrees in Doushuku. Using the relative position of the moon, the sun should be at 22.5 degrees in Doushuku.

古文：到十五年五月十五日望月蚀，加时在戌，其日月始生而已，蚀光已生四分之一格，在斗十六度许。
现代文：在十五年五月十五曰望观测月食，推算的发生时间为戌时，这天月亮升起时就已经食了，而且月面已有四分之一生光了，月亮在斗宿十六度左右。
English: On the fifteenth day of the fifteenth month of the fifteenth year of the fifth month of the fifteenth year of the observation of the lunar eclipse, when the estimated time of occurrence was, the moon had already eclipsed when the moon rose on this day, and a quarter of the moon had been born, and the moon was around sixteen degrees of Dooshu.

古文：《景初》其日日在井二十四。考取其冲，其日日应在井二十。
现代文：《景初历》推算这天太阳在井宿二十四度，用月位置相对推考，它应在井宿二十度。
English: The "Lunar Calendar" estimates that on this day the sun is at twenty-four degrees in Ijuku. Using the relative position of the moon, it should be at twenty degrees in Ijuku.

古文：又到十七年九月十六日望月蚀，加时在子之少，到十五日未二更一唱始蚀，到三唱蚀十五分之十二格，在昴一度半。
现代文：在十七年九月十六曰望观测月食，推算的发生时间是子时的少，在十五二更一点不到时开始食，到三点时食了月面的十五分之十二，月亮位于昴宿一度半处。
English: Observing the lunar eclipse on the 16th day of September in the 17th year, the estimated time of occurrence was less than a few hours. The eclipse began at 15:2 less than an hour, and at 3 o'clock it eclipsed 12/15 of the moon's surface. The moon was located at one and a half degrees of the zodiac.

古文：《景初》其日在房二。以冲考之，则其日日在氐十三度半。
现代文：《景初历》推算这天太阳在房宿二度，用曰月位置相对推考，则在氐宿十三度半。
English: According to the calculation of the "Jingchuan Calendar," the sun was in the room twice on this day, and according to the relative position of the moon, it was thirteen and a half degrees in the room.

古文：凡此五蚀。以月冲一百八十二度半考之，冬至之日，日并不在斗二十一度少，并在斗十七度半间，悉如承天所上。
现代文：这五次月食用与月亮相对一百八十二度半推考冬至时的太阳位置，它皆不在斗宿二十一度少，而在：宿一匕度半附近，均与何承天所上表中相同。
English: These five lunar eclipses and the moon relative to one hundred and eighty-two degrees and a half, according to the position of the sun at the winter solstice, are not less than twenty-one degrees from Dooshuku, but around one degree and a half from Dooshuku, and are the same as those in the above table.

古文：又去十一年起，以土圭测影。
现代文：另外，从十一年开始进行了圭表表影长度的测量。
English: In addition, the measurement of the length of Gui's shadow has been carried out since 2011.

古文：其年《景初法》十一月七日冬至，前后阴不见影。
现代文：当年《景初历》推算十一月七日冬至，在此前后因天阴看不到表影。
English: In that year, the winter solstice was calculated on November 7th according to the "Gyeongbokgung" calendar. Due to the cloudy sky, it was not possible to see the sunrise and sunset around that time.

古文：到十二年十一月十八日冬至，其十五日影极长。到十三年十一月二十九日冬至，其二十六日影极长。
现代文：到十二年十一月十八日冬至，十五的表影最长到十：年十一月二十九日冬至，二十六的表影最长。
English: By the winter solstice on November 18th, 2012, the length of the umbra of the fifteenth rose to a maximum of ten: on the winter solstice of November 29th, 2012, the umbra of the twenty-sixth was the longest.

古文：到十四年十一月十一日冬至，其前后并阴不见。
现代文：到十四年十一月十一冬至，该天前后连续阴天看不见表影。
English: By the winter solstice on November 11th, 1914, continuous cloudy days around that day could not be seen.

古文：到十五年十一月二十一日冬至，十八日影极长。
现代文：到十五年十一月：十一冬至，十八的表影最长。
English: By November of the fifteenth year: the eleventh winter solstice, the eighteenth eclipse is the longest.

古文：到十六年十一月二日冬至，其十月二十九日影极长。
现代文：到十六年十一月：二冬至，十月二十九日的表影最长。
English: November 2016: Winter solstice on the 2nd, with the longest shadow on the 29th of October.

古文：到十七年十一月十三日冬至，其十日影极长。
现代文：到十七年十一月十三冬至，十曰的表影最长。
English: By the thirteenth winter solstice in November 17th, the ten-day surface shadow will be the longest.

古文：到十八年十一月二十五日冬至，二十一日影极长。
现代文：到十八年十一月二二十五冬至十一日的表影最长。
English: By the winter solstice on November 25th, the eclipse will be at its longest.

古文：到十九年十一月六日冬至，其三日影极长。
现代文：到九年一月六冬至，三的表影最长。
English: By the winter solstice on January 6 of the ninth year, the apparent shadow of three is the longest.

古文：到二十年十一月十六日冬至，其前后阴不见影。
现代文：到二十年十一月十六日冬至，该前后天阴不见表影。
English: By the winter solstice on November 16th, 20th, there was no sign of the eclipse.

古文：寻校前后，以影极长为冬至，并差三日。
现代文：连续考校前后这些影长，以一年中表影最长的那天作为冬至曰，均相差三天?
English: These film directors, before and after the continuous examination, take the longest day of the year as the winter solstice, and are three days apart?

古文：以月蚀检日所在，已差四度。土圭测影，冬至又差三日。今之冬至，乃在斗十四间，又如承天所上。又承天法，每月朔望及弦，皆定大小余，于推交会时刻虽审，皆用盈缩，则月有频三大、频二小，比旧法殊为异。
现代文：用月食来检测太阳位置则已经相差四度，测量圭表表影长度，冬至又相差三天现在的冬至曰太阳就在：宿十四度附近，又与何承天所上表中相同义，何承天的方法中每月朔、望和上弦都确定大小余，在推求交会时刻时虽然比较详尽，都考虑了运行速度的快慢，这样就会有连续三个大月、连续两个小月的情况，与旧有的方法相比是不同的。
English: Using lunar eclipses to detect the sun's position, there is already a difference of four degrees, measuring the length of the table and shadow, and the winter solstice is three days away. The current winter solstice says that the sun is: near the 14th degree of the zodiac, and it has the same meaning as the above table. In the method of He Zheng Tian, the monthly new moon, the lookout and the rising sun are all determined. Although it is more detailed, the speed of operation is taken into account when calculating the meeting time. In this way, there will be three consecutive big months and two consecutive small months, which is different from the old method.

古文：旧日蚀不唯在朔，亦有在晦及二日。
现代文：旧法中日食并不衹是在朔日才发生，也有在晦或初二的。
English: In the old method, solar eclipses did not only occur on New Year's Day, but also on New Year's Eve or New Year's Day.

古文：《公羊传》所谓 或失之前，或失之后 。
现代文：也就是如《公羊传》中所说的 或错失在前，或错失在后 。
English: That is, as it is said in "The Story of the Ram," either the mistake comes first, or the mistake comes later.

古文：愚谓此一条自宜仍旧。
现代文：我认为这一条还是依照旧法比较适宜。
English: I think this article is still more appropriate according to the old law.

古文：员外散骑郎皮延宗又难承天： 若晦朔定大小余，纪首值盈，则退一日，便应以故岁之晦，为新纪之首。 
现代文：员外敌骑郎皮延宗又驳难何承天： 如果晦朔都确定大小余，在一纪的开始时正好与盈相对应就要退后一天，这就应该以上一年中的晦作为新的一纪的开始了。 
English: Piyanzong, a member of the foreign enemy cavalry, also said that it was difficult to refute He Jingtian: If both the new year and the old year are determined to be surplus, at the beginning of a year, it should be exactly the same as the surplus, and it should be one day behind. This should be the beginning of a new year.

古文：承天乃改新法依旧术，不复每月定大小余，如延宗所难，太史所上。
现代文：何承天也就按照旧有的方法对新方法作丁改变，不再每个月确定大小余，与皮延宗的驳难和太史令的上奏也就相同了。
English: He Chengtian also made a few changes to the new method according to the old method, and no longer determined the size of the surplus every month, which was the same as the refutation of the Piyan sect and the playing up of the Taishi order.

古文：有司奏： 治历改宪，经国盛典，爰及汉、魏，屡有变革。良由术无常是，取协当时。
现代文：有关官吏上奏： 制定历法修改法令，是治理国家的大事，于是到汉、魏时常有改变的事情，这是由于推算的方法没有永远是正确的，采用它衹是与当时的情况较为符合。
English: Relevant officials reported: Establishing a calendar and revising laws and regulations is an important matter of governing the country, so there are often changes in the Han and Wei dynasties. This is because the method of calculation is not always correct, and using it is more consistent with the situation at that time.

古文：方今皇猷载晖，旧域光被，诚应综核晷度，以播维新。
现代文：今天皇家的方略充满了光辉，照亮了原有的疆土，的确应该综合查对太阳的位置，播扬新的历法。
English: Today's imperial strategy is full of brilliance, illuminating the original territory. It is indeed necessary to comprehensively check the position of the sun and promote the new calendar.

古文：承天历术，合可施用。
现代文：何承天编制的历法与实际天象符合，可以使用。
English: The calendar compiled by He Zhengtian is consistent with the actual celestial phenomenon and can be used.

古文：宋二十二年，普用《元嘉历》。 
现代文：宋二十二年，开始普遍采用《元嘉历》。 
English: In the 22nd year of the Song Dynasty, the "Yuanjia Calendar" began to be widely used.

古文：诏可。
现代文：皇帝下诏认可了这一上奏。
English: The royal decree was approved.

