古文：子墨子言曰：仁之事者，必务求兴天下之利，除天下之害。
现代文：墨子说： 仁人做事，必须讲求对天下有利，为天下除害，将以此作为天下的准则。
English: Mozi said, "In doing things, a benevolent person must seek to be beneficial to the world and eliminate harm to the world. This will be used as a guideline for the world."

古文：将以为法乎天下，利人乎即为，不利人乎即止。
现代文：对人有利的，就做；对人无利的，就停止。 
English: If it is beneficial to others, do it; if it is not beneficial to others, stop.

古文：且夫仁者之为天下度也，非为其目之所美，耳之所乐，口之所甘，身体之所安，以此亏夺民衣食之财，仁者弗为也。
现代文：仁者替天下考虑，并不是为了能见到美丽的东西，听到快乐的声音，尝到美味，使身体安适。让这些来掠取民众的衣食财物，仁人是不做的。
English: The benevolent think for the world, not for the sake of being able to see beautiful things, hear happy sounds, taste delicious foods, and feel comfortable. The benevolent do not do these things in order to plunder the people's food, clothing, and possessions.

古文：是故子墨子之所以非乐者，非以大钟鸣鼓、琴瑟竽笙之声以为不乐也，非以刻镂华文章之色以为不美也，非以犓豢煎炙之味以为不甘也，非以高台厚榭邃野之居以为不安也。
现代文：因此，墨子之所以反对音乐，并不是认为大钟、响鼓、琴、瑟、竽、笙的声音不使人感到快乐，并不是以为雕刻、纹饰的色彩不美，并不是以为煎灸的豢养的牛猪等的味道不香甜，并不是以为居住在高台厚榭深远之屋中不安适。
English: Therefore, the reason why Mozi opposes music is not that the sound of bells, drums, harps, serpents, crickets, and cicadas does not make people feel happy; it is not that the colors of carvings and decorations are not beautiful; it is not that the taste of roasted and moxibustioned cattle and pigs is not sweet; it is not that it is uncomfortable to live in a high-rise, thick-walled, far-reaching house.

古文：虽身知其安也，口知其甘也，目知其美也，耳知其乐也，然上考之不中圣王之事，下度之不中万民之利。
现代文：虽然身体知道安适，口里知道香甜，眼睛知道美丽，耳朵知道快乐，然而向上考察，不符合圣王的事迹；向下考虑，不符合万民的利益。
English: Although the body knows comfort, the mouth knows sweetness, the eyes know beauty, and the ears know joy, however, looking up is not in line with the deeds of the holy king; looking down is not in line with the interests of the people.

古文：是故子墨子曰：为乐非也。
现代文：所以墨子说： 从事音乐活动是错误的！ 
English: That's why Mozi said, "It's wrong to be involved in music!"

古文：今王公大人虽无造为乐器，以为事乎国家，非直掊潦水、拆壤垣而为之也，将必厚措敛乎万民，以为大钟鸣鼓、琴瑟竽笙之声。
现代文：现在的王公大人为了国事制造乐器，不是象掊取路上的积水、拆毁土墙那么容易，而必是向万民征取很多钱财，用以制出大钟、响鼓、琴、瑟、竽、笙的声音。
English: Today's princes make musical instruments for state affairs. It is not as easy as scooping up standing water on the road or demolishing earthen walls, but they must collect a lot of money from all the people to make bells, drums, harps, cymbals, cymbals, gongs and gongs.

古文：古者圣王，亦尝厚措敛乎万民，以为舟车。既以成矣，曰： 吾将恶许用之？ 
现代文：古时的圣王也曾向万民征取很多的钱财，造成船和车，制成之后，说：我将在哪里使用它们呢？
English: The ancient sages also collected a lot of money from the people and made ships and chariots. After they were made, they said, "Where will I use them?"

古文：曰： 舟用之水，车用之陆，君子息其足焉，小人休其肩背焉。 
现代文：说： 船用于水上，车用于地上，君子可以休息双脚，小人可以休息肩和背 。
English: He said: A boat is used on the water, a car is used on the ground, a gentleman can rest his feet, a villain can rest his shoulders and back.

古文：故万民出财赍而予之，不敢以为慼恨者，何也？
现代文：所以万民都送出钱财来，并不敢因此而忧怨，是什么原因呢？
English: So all the people send money and don't dare to complain about it. What is the reason for this?

古文：以其反中民之利也。
现代文：因为它反而符合民众的利益。
English: Because, on the contrary, it is in the interests of the people.

古文：然则乐器反中民之利，亦若此，即我弗敢非也。
现代文：然而乐器要是也这样反而符合民众的利益。我则不敢反对。
English: However, if musical instruments are also in the interests of the people in this way, I would not dare to object.

古文：然则当用乐器，譬之若圣王之为舟车也，即我弗敢非也。
现代文：然而当象圣王造船和车那样使用乐器，我则不敢反对。
English: However, when musical instruments are used, as in the case of the Holy King's ships and chariots, I dare not object.

古文：民有三患，饥者不得食，寒者不得衣，劳者不得息，三者民之巨患也。
现代文：民众有三种忧患：饥饿的人得不到食物，寒冷的人得不到衣服，劳累的人得不到休息。这三样是民众的最大忧患。
English: The people have three kinds of worries: hungry people can't get food, cold people can't get clothes, and tired people can't get rest. These three are the biggest worries of the people.

古文：然即当为之撞巨钟、击鸣鼓、弹琴瑟、吹竽笙而扬干戚，民衣食之财，将安可得乎？
现代文：然而当为他们撞击巨钟，敲打鸣鼓，弹琴瑟，吹竽笙，舞动干戚，民众的衣食财物将能得到吗？
English: However, when a huge bell is struck for them, a drum is beaten, a harp is played, a bagpipe is blown, and a dance is performed, will the people's food, clothing, and possessions be obtained?

古文：即我以为未必然也。
现代文：我认为未必是这样。
English: I don't think that's necessarily the case.

古文：意舍此，今有大国即攻小国，有大家即伐小家，强劫弱，众暴寡，诈欺愚，贵傲贱，寇乱盗贼并兴，不可禁止也。
现代文：且不谈这一点，现在大国攻击小国，大家族攻伐小家族，强壮的掳掠弱小的，人多的欺负人少的，奸诈的欺骗愚笨的，高贵的鄙视低贱的，外寇内乱盗贼共同兴起，不能禁止。
English: Not to mention this, now the big countries attack the small countries, the big families attack the small families, the strong kidnap and plunder the weak, the many bully the few, the treacherous deceive the stupid, the noble despise the lowly, and the foreign invaders and thieves rise together and cannot be prohibited.

古文：然即当为之撞巨钟、击鸣鼓、弹琴瑟、吹竽笙而扬干戚，天下之乱也，将安可得而治与？
现代文：如果为他们撞击巨钟，敲打鸣鼓，弹琴瑟，吹竽笙，舞动干戚，天下的纷乱将会得到治理吗？
English: If a great bell were struck for them, if drums were beaten, if harps were played, if bagpipes were blown, if khans were danced, would the world's turmoil be settled?

古文：即我未必然也。
现代文：我以为未必是这样的。
English: I didn't think that was necessarily the case.

古文：是故子墨子曰：姑尝厚措敛乎万民，以为大钟鸣鼓、琴瑟竽笙之声，以求兴天下之利，除天下之害，而无补也。
现代文：所以墨子说： 且向万民征敛很多钱财，制作大钟、鸣鼓、琴、瑟、竽、笙之声，以求有利于天下，为天下除害，是无补于事的。 
English: Therefore, Mozi said, "It is useless to collect a lot of money from all the people and make big bells, drums, harps, cymbals, cymbals, gongs, and gong sounds in order to benefit the world and eliminate harm for the world.

古文：是故子墨子曰：为乐非也。
现代文：所以墨子说： 从事音乐是错误的！ 
English: That's why Mozi said, "It's wrong to be involved in music!"

古文：今王公大人唯毋处高台厚榭之上而视之，钟犹是延鼎也，弗撞击将何乐得焉哉！
现代文：现在的王公大人从高台厚榭上看去，钟犹如倒扣着鼎一样，不撞击它，将会有什么乐处呢？
English: What pleasure will it be for the current prince to look at the clock from the top of the tower, as if it were upside down, without striking it?

古文：其说将必撞击之。
现代文：这就是说必定要撞击它。
English: That means you have to hit it.

古文：惟勿撞击，将必不使老与迟者。
现代文：一旦撞击，将不会使用老人和反应迟钝的人。
English: In the event of an impact, the elderly and unresponsive will not be used.

古文：老与迟者，耳目不聪明，股肱不毕强，声不和调，明不转朴。
现代文：老人与反应迟钝的人，耳不聪，目不明，四肢不强壮，声音不和谐，眼神不灵敏。
English: The old and the slow-witted are deaf, blind, have weak limbs, discordant voices, and unresponsive eyes.

古文：将必使当年，因其耳目之聪明，股肱之毕强，声之和调，眉之转朴。
现代文：必将使用壮年人，用其耳聪目明，强壮的四肢，声音调和，眼神敏捷。
English: A man of vigorous age will be used, with keen ears and eyes, strong limbs, a harmonious voice, and quick eyes.

古文：使丈夫为之，废丈夫耕稼树蓺之时；使妇人为之，废妇人纺绩织纴之事。
现代文：如果使男人撞钟，就要浪费男人耕田、种菜、植树的时间；如果让妇女撞钟，就要荒废妇女纺纱、绩麻、织布等事情。
English: If a man is made to strike the bell, it will waste the time of men working the fields, growing vegetables and planting trees; if a woman is made to strike the bell, it will waste the time of women spinning yarn, making hemp and weaving cloth.

古文：今王公大人，唯毋为乐，亏夺民衣食之财以拊乐，如此多也。
现代文：现在的王公大人从事音乐活动，掠夺民众的衣食财物；大规模地敲击乐器。
English: The current Wang Gong adults are engaged in musical activities, plundering the people's food, clothing and property; playing musical instruments on a large scale.

古文：是故子墨子曰：为乐非也。
现代文：所以墨子说： 从事音乐是错误的！ 
English: That's why Mozi said, "It's wrong to be involved in music!"

古文：今大钟鸣鼓、琴瑟竿笙之声，既已具矣，大人肃然奏而独听之，将何乐得焉哉？
现代文：现在的大钟、响鼓、琴、瑟、竽、笙的乐声等已备齐了，大人们独自安静地听着奏乐，将会得到什么乐趣呢？
English: Now that the bells, drums, harps, cymbals, gongs, cymbals and gongs have all been prepared, what fun will the adults have listening to the music alone and in peace?

古文：其说将必与贱人不与君子，与君子听之，废君子听治；与贱人听之，废贱人之从事。
现代文：不是与君子一同来听，就是与贱人一同来听。与君子同听，就会荒废君子的听狱和治理国事；与贱人同听，就会荒废贱人所作的事情。
English: To listen with a gentleman is to listen with a vulgarian; to listen with a gentleman is to waste a gentleman's imprisonment and government; to listen with a vulgarian is to waste a vulgarian's work.

古文：今王公大人惟毋为乐，亏夺民之衣食之财以拊乐，如此多也。
现代文：现在的王公大人从事音乐活动，掠夺民众的衣食财物，大规模地敲击乐器。
English: The current Wanggong adults are engaged in musical activities, plundering the people's food, clothing and property, and playing musical instruments on a large scale.

古文：是故子墨子曰：为乐非也。
现代文：所以墨子说： 从事音乐是错误的！ 
English: That's why Mozi said, "It's wrong to be involved in music!"

古文：昔者齐康公兴乐万，万人不可衣短褐，不可食糠糟，曰： 食饮不美，面目颜色不足视也；衣服不美，身体从容丑羸不足观也。 
现代文：从前齐康公作《万舞》乐曲，跳《万》舞的人不能穿粗布短衣，不能吃糟糠。说： 吃的不好，面目色泽就不值得看了；衣服不美，身形动作也不值得看了。
English: Once upon a time, Qikang Gong composed the "Million Dance" music, and people who danced the "Million" dance could not wear coarse cloth shorts and could not eat the dregs. He said: If you do not eat well, the color of your face is not worth looking at; if your clothes are not beautiful, your body movements are not worth looking at.

古文：是以食必粱肉，衣必文绣。
现代文：所以必须吃好饭和肉，必须穿绣有花纹的衣裳。 
English: Therefore, it is necessary to eat good rice and meat, and it is necessary to wear embroidered clothes.

古文：此掌不从事乎衣食之财，而掌食乎人者也。
现代文：这些人常常不从事生产衣食财物，而常常吃别人的。
English: These people are often not engaged in the production of clothing, food and property, but often eat other people.

古文：是故子墨子曰：今王公大人，惟毋为乐，亏夺民衣食之财以拊乐，如此之也。是故子墨子曰：为乐非也。
现代文：所以墨子说：现在的王公大从事音乐活动，掠夺民众的衣食财物，大规模地敲击乐器。所以墨子说： 从事音乐是错误的！ 
English: That's why Mozi said, "The current Wang Gongda is engaged in musical activities, plundering the people's food, clothing, and property, and playing musical instruments on a large scale." That's why Mozi said, "Engaging in music is wrong!"

古文：今人固与禽兽、麋鹿、蜚鸟、贞虫异者也。
现代文：现在的人本来不同于禽兽、麋鹿、飞鸟、爬虫。
English: Today's human beings are fundamentally different from animals, moose, flying birds, and reptiles.

古文：今之禽兽、麋鹿、蜚鸟、贞虫，因其羽毛以为衣裘。因其蹄蚤以为绔屦。因其水草以为饮食。
现代文：现在的禽兽、麋鹿、飞鸟、爬虫，利用它们的羽毛作为衣裳，利用它们的蹄爪作为裤子和鞋子，把水、草作为饮食物。
English: Today's animals, moose, birds, and reptiles use their feathers as clothing, their hoof paws as pants and shoes, and water and grass as food.

古文：故唯使雄不耕稼树蓺，雌亦不纺绩织纴，衣食之财固已具矣。
现代文：所以，虽然让雄的不耕田、种菜、植树，雌的不纺纱、绩麻、织布，衣食财物本就具备了。
English: Therefore, although the male does not cultivate fields, grow vegetables, or plant trees, the female does not spin yarn, make hemp, weave cloth, and has food, clothing, and property.

古文：今人与此异者也，赖其力者生，不赖其力者不生。
现代文：现在的人与它们不同：依赖自己的力量才能生存，不依赖自己的力量就不能生存。
English: Today's people are different from them: they rely on their own strength to survive, and they cannot survive without relying on their own strength.

古文：君子不强听治，即刑政乱；贱人不强从事，即财用不足。
现代文：君子不努力听狱治国，刑罚政令就要混乱；贱人不努力生产，财用就会不足。
English: If a gentleman does not work hard to rule the country from prison, the penal decrees will be chaotic; if a slut does not work hard to produce, she will not have enough money.

古文：今天下之士君子以吾言不然。然即姑尝数天下分事，而观乐之害。王公大人蚤朝晏退，听狱治政，此其分事也。
现代文：现在天下的士人君子认为我的话不对，那么就试着列数天下份内的事，来看音乐的害处：王公大人早晨上朝，晚上退朝，听狱治国，这是他们的份内事。
English: Now the world's nobles and gentlemen think my words are wrong, so let's try to list a few things that belong to the world and see the harm of music: princes go to court in the morning, retire in the evening, listen to prison and govern the country, this is their share.

古文：士君子竭股肱之力，亶其思虑之智，内治官府，外收敛关市、山林、泽梁之利，以实仓廪府库，此其分事也。
现代文：士人君子竭尽全身的力气，用尽智力思考，于内治理官府，于外往关市、山林、河桥征收赋税，充实仓廪府库，这是他们的份内事。
English: It is their duty to exert all their strength and think with all their intelligence to administer the government offices at home and collect taxes from Guan, mountains, forests and river bridges abroad to enrich the government treasury.

古文：农夫蚤出暮入，耕稼树蓺，多聚叔粟，此其分事也。
现代文：农夫早出晚归，耕田、种菜、植树，多多收获豆子和粮食，这是他们的份内事。
English: Farmers go out early and come back late, cultivate fields, grow vegetables, plant trees, and harvest a lot of beans and grain. This is their job.

古文：妇人夙兴夜寐，纺绩织纴，多治麻丝葛绪、綑布縿，此其分事也。
现代文：妇女们早起晚睡，纺纱、绩麻、织布，多多料理麻、丝、葛、苎麻，织成布匹，这是她们的份内事。
English: Women get up early and go to bed late, spinning, twisting, weaving, cooking a lot of hemp, silk, gooseberry, nettle, weaving into cloth, this is their share.

古文：今惟毋在乎王公大人说乐而听之，即必不能蚤朝晏退，听狱治政，是故国家乱而社稷危矣！
现代文：现在的王公大人喜欢音乐而去听它，则必不能早上朝，晚退朝，听狱治国，那样国家就会混乱，社稷就会危亡。
English: If today's princes like music and listen to it, they will not be able to rule the country from prison in the morning and in the evening. Otherwise, the country will be in chaos and society will be in danger.

古文：今惟毋在乎士君子说乐而听之，即必不能竭股肱之力，亶其思虑之智，内治官府，外收敛关市、山林、泽梁之利，以实仓廪府库，是故仓廪府库不实。
现代文：现在的士人君子喜欢音乐而去听它，则必不能竭尽全身的力气，用尽智力思考，于内治理官府，于外往关市、山林、河桥征收赋税，充实仓廪府库。那么仓廪府库就不会充实。
English: If today's scholar-gentlemen like music and go to listen to it, they will not be able to exert their full strength and exhaust their intelligence to think, to administer the government office inside, and to collect taxes from Guan, mountains, forests, and rivers and bridges outside, and to enrich the Canglong prefectural treasury. Then the Canglong prefectural treasury will not be enriched.

古文：今惟毋在乎农夫说乐而听之，即必不能蚤出暮入，耕稼树蓺，多聚叔粟，是故叔粟不足。
现代文：现在的农夫喜欢音乐而去听它，则必不能早出晚归，耕田、植树、种菜，多多收获豆子和粮食，那么豆子和粮食就会不够。
English: If today's farmers like music and go to listen to it, they will not be able to go out early and return late, cultivate fields, plant trees, grow vegetables, harvest more beans and grain, then beans and grain will not be enough.

古文：今惟毋在乎妇人说乐而听之，即不必能夙兴夜寐，纺绩织纴，多治麻丝葛绪、綑布縿，是故布縿不兴。
现代文：现在的妇女喜欢音乐而去听它，则必不能早起晚睡，纺纱、绩麻、织布，多多料理麻、丝、葛、苎麻，织成布匹，那么布匹就不多。
English: Today's women like music and listen to it, so they can't get up early and go to bed late. They have to spin yarn, dye hemp, weave cloth, and prepare a lot of hemp, silk, goose down, and nettle, and weave them into cloth, so there aren't many pieces of cloth.

古文：曰：孰为大人之听治、而废国家之从事？
现代文：问：什么荒废了大人们的听狱治国和国家的生产呢？
English: Q: What has ruined the adults' ability to govern the country and the country's production?

古文：曰乐也。
现代文：答：是音乐。
English: A: It's music.

古文：是故子墨子曰：为乐非也。
现代文：所以墨子说： 从事音乐是错误的！ 
English: That's why Mozi said, "It's wrong to be involved in music!"

