古文：秦攻魏，取宁邑，诸侯皆贺。
现代文：秦国攻打魏国，夺取宁邑，各诸侯都前去祝贺。
English: Qin attacked Wei and captured Ningyi, and all the princes went to congratulate him.

古文：赵王使往贺，三反不得通。
现代文：赵惠文王也派使者前去祝贺。使者往返三次没有通报接见。
English: Zhao Huiwen Wang also sent an envoy to congratulate. The envoy went back and forth three times without notifying the audience.

古文：赵王忧之，谓左右曰： 以秦之强，得宁邑，以制齐、赵。
现代文：赵惠文王很忧愁，对左右的人说： 凭借秦国的强大，夺取宁邑以后，就将制裁齐国、赵国。
English: King Zhao Huiwen was very sad and said to the people around him: With the strength of Qin, after capturing Ningyur, he will sanction Qi and Zhao.

古文：诸侯皆贺，吾往贺而独不得通，此必加兵我，为之奈何？ 
现代文：诸侯都去祝贺，我们前往祝贺却不能通报接见，这一定是要攻打我们，对这件事怎么办？ 
English: The princes all went to congratulate, we went to congratulate but could not inform the audience, this must be to attack us, what should we do about this?

古文：左右曰： 使者三往不得通者，必所使者非其人也。
现代文：左右的人说： 使者多次往返不能得到通报接见，一定是所派出的人不是适当的人选。
English: People on both sides said: If the envoy cannot be notified and received after many trips, the person sent must not be the right person.

古文：曰谅毅者，辨士也，大王可试使之。 
现代文：有一个叫谅毅的，是能言善辩的人，大王可以派他去试试。 
English: There is a man called Forgiveness, who is a good speaker. The great king can send him to try.

古文：谅毅亲受命而往。
现代文：谅毅亲自接受赵王的命令前往。
English: Xuanyi personally accepted Zhao Wang's order to go.

古文：至秦，献书秦王曰： 大王广地宁邑，诸侯皆贺，敝邑寡君亦窃嘉之，不敢宁居，使下臣奉其币物三至王廷，而使不得通。
现代文：到了秦国，向秦王献上书傣说： 大王扩大土地到安邑，诸侯都来祝贺，敞国君王也私下赞许大王，不敢安闲住着，派臣下捧着礼物三次来到大王的宫廷，可是使者没能得到通报召见。
English: When he arrived in Qin, he presented a letter to the Qin king, saying: The great king expanded the land to An'yun, the princes came to congratulate him, and the king of the open country also privately praised the great king. He did not dare to live in peace, and sent his servants to the great king's court three times with gifts, but the envoy could not be notified and summoned.

古文：使若无罪，愿大王无绝其欢；若使有罪，愿得请之。 
现代文：使臣如果没有罪过，希望大王不要断绝我们承欢的机会。如果使臣有罪，愿意得到大王的惩处。 
English: If the envoy is not guilty, I hope the great king will not cut off our opportunity to have fun. If the envoy is guilty, I am willing to be punished by the great king.

古文：秦王使使者报曰： 吾所使赵国者，小大皆听吾言，则受书币。
现代文：秦王派使者告诉谅毅说： 我所要求赵国的，大事小情都要听我的话，那么我就接受送来的书信财物。
English: The Qin king sent an envoy to tell Yuanzhong Yi: "I demand that the people of Zhao listen to me in all matters, large and small, then I will accept the letters and property sent to me.

古文：若不从吾言，则使者归矣。 
现代文：如果不听从我的话，那么使者就回去吧。 
English: If you will not listen to me, then let the messenger go.

古文：谅毅对曰： 下臣之来，固愿承大国之意也，岂敢有难？
现代文：谅毅回答说： 臣下这次来，本来希望接受大国的旨意，怎么敢难为大王？
English: Xuanyi replied, "Since your vassal has come here this time, and originally hoped to accept the will of the great country, how dare he not become the great king?

古文：大王若有以令之，请奉而西行之，无所敢疑。 
现代文：大王如果有什么命令，请允许我们奉命实行，不敢有什么怀疑的地方。 
English: Great King, if there is any order, please allow us to carry it out as ordered, and we dare not have any doubts.

古文：于是秦王乃见使者曰： 赵豹、平原君数欺弄寡人，赵能杀此二人，则可。
现代文：这时秦昭王才接见赵国使，者，说： 赵豹、平原君，几次欺骗愚弄寡人。如果赵国能杀掉这两个人，那是可以的。
English: At this time, Qin Zhao Wang received the envoy of Zhao Guo, who said: Zhao Pan and Pingyuan Jun have deceived and fooled many people several times. If Zhao Guo can kill these two people, it is possible.

古文：若不能杀，请今率诸侯受命邯郸城下。 
现代文：如果不能杀，请让我现在率领诸侯在邯郸城下接受你们的命令。 
English: If you can't kill me, please let me now lead the lords to accept your order under the city of Zou.

古文：谅毅曰： 赵豹、平原君，亲寡君之母弟也，犹大王之有叶阳、泾阳君也。
现代文：谅毅说： 赵豹、平原君，是我们君王的亲兄弟，就像大王有叶阳君、泾阳君两个弟弟一样。
English: Zhaoyang and Pingyuan are our king's brothers, just as the great king has two younger brothers, Ye Yangjun and Fenyangjun.

古文：大王以孝治闻于天下，衣服使之便于体，膳啖使之嗛于口，未尝不分于叶阳、泾阳君。
现代文：大王用孝友之情治国闻名天下，穿的衣服使兄弟合身，膳食使兄弟满意合日，没曾有什么不分给叶阳君、泾阳君的。
English: The great king is famous throughout the world for governing the country with filial piety. The clothes he wears make his brothers fit, the meals make his brothers satisfied, and there has never been anything for both Ye Yangjun and Shenyangjun.

古文：叶阳君、泾阳君之车马衣服，无非大王之服御者。
现代文：叶阳君、泾阳君的车马衣服，没有不和大王相同的。
English: Ye Yangjun and Puyangjun's chariot and horse clothes are the same as those of the great king.

古文：臣闻之： 有覆巢毁卵，而凤皇不翔；刳胎焚夭，而麒麟不至。 
现代文：臣下听说这样的话： 鸟巢倾覆毁坏了鸟蛋，凤凰就不再飞到这里；剖开兽胎焚烧小兽，麒麟就不再来到这里。 
English: The vassals heard these words: "If the bird's nest is overturned and the eggs are destroyed, the phoenix will no longer fly here; if the animal's fetus is cut open and the small animal is burned, the unicorn will no longer come here."

古文：今使臣受大王之令以还报，敝邑之君，畏惧不敢不行，无乃伤叶阳君、泾阳君之心乎？ 
现代文：如今使臣接受大王的命令回国向敝国君主报告，敝国君主害怕不敢不执行，不过恐怕要伤叶阳君、泾阳君的心吧？ 
English: Now the envoys accept the king's order to return home and report to the monarchs of the two countries. The monarchs of the two countries are afraid not to implement it, but I'm afraid it will hurt the hearts of Ye Yangjun and Ye Yangjun?

古文：秦王曰： 诺，勿使从政。 
现代文：秦昭王说： 好。不要让他们从事国家政事。 
English: Qin Zhao Wang said: Good. Don't let them engage in national politics.

古文：谅毅曰： 敝邑之君，有母弟不能教诲，以恶大国，请黜之，勿使与政事，以称大国。 
现代文：谅毅说： 敝国的君主，有亲弟不能教诲，惹恼了大国，请让我们贬黜他们，不让他们参与国家政事，以称大国的心愿。 
English: Zhan Yi said: The monarch of the country has brothers and sisters who can't teach and have annoyed the big country. Please let's belittle them and not let them participate in national politics, which is the wish of the big country.

古文：秦王乃喜，受其弊而厚遇之。
现代文：秦王这才高兴，接受了谅毅带来的礼物，并且用优厚的礼节接待了他。
English: This made King Qin very happy. He accepted the gift brought by Xuanyi and received him with great courtesy.

