古文：唐哥舒翰为安西节度使，差都兵马使张擢上都奏事，逗留不返，纳贿交结杨国忠。
现代文：原文唐朝名将哥舒翰出任安西节度使时，有一次派遣都兵马使张擢进京奏事。不料张擢竟逗留京城不归，并且贿赂杨国忠，两人相互勾结。
English: When the Tang Dynasty named Goshukhan as the envoy to the Anxi Festival, he once sent Zhang Rong, the military envoy of the capital, to Beijing to make a report. Unexpectedly, Zhang Rong actually stayed in Beijing and did not return, and bribed Yang Guozhong. The two colluded with each other.

古文：翰适入朝，擢惧，求国忠除擢御史大夫兼剑南西川节度使。
现代文：不久，哥舒翰有事要入朝奏报，张擢心虚害怕，就请求杨国忠任命他为御史大夫兼剑南西川节度使。
English: Soon after, Goshukhan had something to report to the Chosonosho, and Zhang Zhan was afraid and asked Yang Guozhong to appoint him as a goshi taifu and Jianan Nishikawa festival envoy.

古文：敕下，就第谒翰，翰命部下摔于庭，数其罪，杖杀之，然后奏闻。
现代文：当正式任命诏命下达后，张擢到哥舒翰府上去晋见他，哥舒翰命令部下把张擢揪到庭中，并一一陈述其罪状，然后再将他乱棍打死。
English: After the official appointment edict was issued, Zhang Rongping went to the residence of Goshukhan to meet him. Goshukhan ordered his subordinates to arrest Zhang Rongping in the court and state his charges one by one, and then beat him to death.

古文：帝下诏褒奖，仍赐擢尸，更令翰决尸一百。
现代文：事后哥舒翰把处死张擢的经过奏报朝廷，玄宗不但没有怪罪，甚至还下诏褒奖他处理得当。最后便把张擢的尸首赐还他，让他再亲手鞭尸一百下。
English: After the fact, his brother Shuhan reported the details of Zhang Zhan's execution to the imperial court. Xuanzong not only did not blame him, but even issued an edict praising him for handling the matter properly. Finally, he returned Zhang Zhan's corpse to him, and let him give the corpse another hundred lashes with his own hands.

古文：太原节度王承业，军政不修，诏御史崔众交兵于河东。
现代文：太原节度使王承业因不理军政，因此朝廷下诏命御史崔众到河东去接手他的兵权。
English: The Taiyuan Festival caused Wang Chengye to ignore military affairs, so the imperial court issued an edict ordering the military to go to the east of the river to take over his military power.

古文：众侮易承业，或裹甲持枪突入承业厅事，玩谑之。
现代文：崔众因轻视王承业，就纵容自己的部下全副武装地闯进王承业的府衙中嬉戏玩闹。
English: Because Cui Zhong despised Wang Chengye, he allowed his subordinates to break into Wang Chengye's residence, fully armed, to play and have fun.

古文：李光弼闻之，素不平，至是交众兵于光弼，众以麾下来，光弼出迎，旌旗相接而不避。
现代文：李光弼得知此事心里不平，这时崔众要将兵权交给李光弼，崔众带着部下来见李光弼，李光弼出来迎接，二人的队伍相接时，崔众竟不顾礼法而不回避。
English: When Li Guangyao learned of this, he felt uneasy. At this time, Cui Zong wanted to hand over the military power to Li Guangyao. Cui Zong came down to meet Li Guangyao with his subordinates, and Li Guangyao came out to greet him. When the two teams met, Cui Zong did not shy away, regardless of etiquette.

古文：光弼怒其无礼，又不即交兵，令收系之。
现代文：李光弼对崔众的无礼行为很愤怒，而崔众又不立即把兵权交出，于是李光弼就下令将崔众逮捕。
English: Li Guangyao was very angry at Cui Zhong's rude behavior, and Cui Zhong did not immediately surrender military power, so Li Guangyao ordered Cui Zhong to be arrested.

古文：顷中使至，除众御史中丞，怀其敕，问众所在。
现代文：这时，朝廷派遣宦官来到河东，要任命崔众为御史中丞，手持敕书问李光弼崔众的行踪。
English: At this time, the imperial court sent eunuchs to Hedong to appoint Cui Zong as the imperial historian and ask Li Guangya and Cui Zong's whereabouts.

古文：光弼曰： 众有罪，系之矣。 
现代文：李光弼答道： 崔众犯法，我已将他逮捕。 
English: Li Guangyao replied: Cui Zhong violated the law, I have arrested him.

古文：中使以敕示光弼，光弼曰： 今只斩侍御史；若宣制命，即斩中丞；若拜宰相，亦斩宰相。 
现代文：宦官把敕书拿给李光弼看，李光弼说： 如今只不过是杀一位侍御史；如果宣布了诏命，我就斩杀一位御史中丞，如果拜授他为宰相，我也要斩杀他这位宰相。 
English: The eunuch showed the document to Li Guangyao, and Li Guangyao said, "Nowadays, it's just a case of killing a courtier; if the imperial edict is announced, I'll kill a courtier, and if he's made prime minister, I'll kill him too.

古文：中使惧，遂寝之而还。
现代文：宦官一听此话不敢再多言，只好带着敕书回京。
English: Upon hearing this, the eunuch did not dare to say anything more, and had no choice but to return to the capital with the imperial edict.

古文：翼日，以兵仗围众至碑堂下，斩之。威震三军，命其亲属吊之。
现代文：第二天，李光弼派兵包围崔众，在碑堂下把他当众杀死，还让崔众的亲属来祭吊。
English: The next day, Li Guangyao sent soldiers to surround Cui Zhong, killed him in public under the monument, and let Cui Zhong's relatives come to sacrifice and hang him.

古文：或问擢与众诚有罪，然已除西川节度使及御史中丞矣，其如王命何？
现代文：从此李光弼威震三军。或许有人会问： 张擢和崔众确实是有罪之人，但张擢已经被朝廷任命为西川节度使，而崔众也被任命为御史中丞，这时杀死他二人，是不是显得漠视朝廷诏命呢？ 
English: From then on, Li Guangya dominated the three armies. Perhaps someone will ask: Zhang Zang and Cui Zong are indeed guilty people, but Zhang Zang has been appointed by the court as the envoy of the West River Festival, and Cui Zong has also been appointed as the Vice-President of History, then killing him two, does it seem to disregard the court's edict?

古文：盖军事尚速，当用兵之际而逗留不返、拥兵不交，皆死法也。
现代文：其实用兵贵在神速，而张擢在用兵之际竟然滞留京师不归；崔众是擅自拥兵不交，此二人在军法上都犯了死罪。
English: In fact, Zhang Zhan was in a hurry to recruit soldiers, while Cui Zhong actually stayed in Beijing and did not return; Cui Zhong was unauthorized to recruit soldiers and did not hand them over. Both of them committed a capital crime in military law.

古文：二人之除命必皆夤缘得之，而非出天子之意者，故二将得伸其权，而无人议其后耳。
现代文：再说这两人之所以被任命为高位，都是出于人情的请托和贿赂，并非皇帝的本意。所以哥舒翰和李光弼才能伸张公权，而没有人敢在他们背后议论。
English: Moreover, the reason why these two people were appointed to high positions was due to personal solicitation and bribery, not the emperor's original intention. Therefore, Goshukhan and Li Guangyao were able to assert public power, and no one dared to discuss behind their backs.

古文：然在今日，莫可问矣。
现代文：事件若发生在今天，我看根本没有人敢做这类事。
English: If the incident happened today, I don't think anyone would dare to do such a thing.

