古文：入国而不存其士，则亡国矣。
现代文：治理国家如果不优待贤士，国家就会灭亡。
English: If the government does not give preferential treatment to the wise, the country will perish.

古文：见贤而不急，则缓其君矣。
现代文：见到贤士而不急于任用，他们就会怠慢君主。
English: If they see a wise man and do not hurry to appoint him, they will neglect the monarch.

古文：非贤无急，非士无与虑国。
现代文：没有比用贤更急迫的了，如果没有贤士，就没有人和自己谋划国事。
English: There is nothing more urgent than employing sages. If there are no sages, there will be no one to plan national affairs.

古文：缓贤忘士，而能以其国存者，未曾有也。
现代文：怠慢弃用贤士而能使国家长治久安的，还不曾有过这样的事情。
English: There has never been such a thing as neglecting to employ sages who can keep the country stable for a long time.

古文：昔者文公出走而正天下；桓公去国而霸诸侯；越王勾践遇吴王之丑而尚摄中国之贤君。
现代文：从前，晋文公被迫逃亡在外，最终匡正天下；齐桓公被迫离开国家，后来称霸于诸侯；越王勾践遭受过吴王的羞辱，最终成为威慑中原诸国的一代贤君。
English: Once upon a time, Prince Jinwen was forced to flee abroad and eventually became the ruler of the world; Prince Qi Huan was forced to leave the country and later dominated the princes; King Yue Guochun suffered the humiliation of King Wu and eventually became a generation of wise men to deter the Central Plains countries.

古文：三子之能达名成功于天下也，皆于其国抑而大丑也。
现代文：这三个人之所以能成功扬名于天下，都是因为他们的国家受压迫而自己蒙大耻，以图复仇。
English: All three men have successfully made a name for themselves by seeking revenge after being shamed by their country's oppression.

古文：太上无败，其次败而有以成，此之谓用民。
现代文：最成功的人是从不失败，其次是失败后继续想办法成功，这才叫善于用人。
English: The most successful people never fail, and the second is to continue to find ways to succeed after failure. This is called being good at employing people.

古文：吾闻之曰： 非无安居也，我无安心也；非无足财也，我无足心也。 
现代文：我曾听说： 我不是没有安定的住处，而是自己没有安定之心；不是没有丰足的财产，而是怀有无法满足的内心。 
English: I once heard: I am not without a stable place to live, but I do not have a stable heart; not without ample assets, but with an insatiable heart.

古文：是故君子自难而易彼，众人自易而难彼。
现代文：所以君子总是能严以律己，宽以待人。而一般人则宽以待己，严以律人。
English: Therefore, a gentleman is always able to be strict with himself and lenient with others, while an ordinary person is lenient with himself and strict with others.

古文：君子进不败其志，内究其情；虽杂庸民，终无怨心。
现代文：君子仕进顺利时不改变他的志向，不得志时心情也一样；即使杂处于平凡人之中，也始终没有怨恨之心。
English: A gentleman does not change his mind when things are going well, nor does he change his mind when things are not going well. Even if he is among ordinary people, he will never hold a grudge.

古文：彼有自信者也。
现代文：他们就是有自信的人。
English: They're just confident people.

古文：是故为其所难者，必得其所欲焉；未闻为其所欲，而免其所恶者也。
现代文：所以说，凡事能从难处做起，就一定能达到自己的愿望，但却没有听说只做自己所想的事情，而能免于他所厌恶的结果。
English: Therefore, if you can start from a difficult place, you will definitely be able to achieve what you want, but you have not heard that you can only do what you want and be free from the results that you dislike.

古文：是故逼臣伤君，谄下伤上。
现代文：所以倖臣与谗佞之辈往往伤害君主。
English: As a result, lucky retainers and those who were born in a lucky year often hurt the monarch.

古文：君必有弗弗之臣，上必有詻詻之下。分议者延延，而支苟者詻詻，焉可以长生保国。
现代文：君主必须有敢于矫正君主过失的臣僚，上面必须有直言极谏的下属，分辩议事的人争论锋起，互相责难的人互不退让，这才可以长养民生，保卫国土。
English: The monarch must have ministers who dare to correct the faults of the monarch, subordinates who are outspoken, debaters who argue, and those who blame each other. Only then can people's livelihoods be sustained and the country be protected.

古文：臣下重其爵位而不言，近臣则喑，远臣则吟，怨结于民心。
现代文：如果臣下只以爵禄为重，不对国事发表意见，近臣缄默不言，远臣闭口暗叹，怨恨就郁结于民心了。
English: If vassals only care about their peerage and do not express their opinions on national affairs, close vassals remain silent, and distant vassals keep their mouths shut, resentment will fester in the hearts of the people.

古文：谄谀在侧，善议障塞，则国危矣。
现代文：谄谀阿奉之人围在身边，好的建议被他们阻障难进，那国家就危险了。
English: A country is in danger when it is surrounded by sycophants who prevent good advice from getting through.

古文：桀纣不以其无天下之士邪？
现代文：桀、纣不正是因为他们不重视天下之士吗？
English: Isn't it because they don't value the people of the world?

古文：杀其身而丧天下。
现代文：结果身被杀而失天下。
English: As a result, he was killed and lost the world.

古文：故曰： 归国宝，不若献贤而进士。 今有五锥，此其铦，铦者必先挫。
现代文：所以说：赠送国宝，不如推荐贤士。比如现在有五把锥子，其中一把最锋利，那么这一把必定会最先被折断。
English: For example, if there are five cones, one of which is the sharpest, then this one will surely be broken first.

古文：有五刀，此其错，错者必先靡。
现代文：有五把刀，其中一把磨得最快，那么这一把必定最先损坏。
English: There are five knives, one of which is sharpened the fastest, so this one must be damaged first.

古文：是以甘井近竭，招木近伐，灵龟近灼，神蛇近暴。
现代文：所以甜的水井最易用干，高的树木最易被伐，灵验的宝龟最先被火灼占卦，神异的蛇最先被曝晒求雨。
English: Therefore, sweet wells are the easiest to use dry, tall trees are the easiest to be felled, effective turtles are the first to be burned by fire, and miraculous snakes are the first to be exposed to the sun for rain.

古文：是故比干之殪，其抗也；孟贲之杀，其勇也；西施之沈，其美也；吴起之裂，其事也。
现代文：所以，比干之死，是因为他抗直；孟贲被杀，是因为他逞勇；西施被沉江，是因为长得美丽；吴起被车裂，是因为他有大功。
English: Therefore, Bi Gan's death was because he resisted; Meng Yao was killed because he was brave; Xishi was sunk by the river because he was beautiful; Wu Qi was crushed by a car because he had great merits.

古文：故彼人者，寡不死其所长，故曰 太盛难守 也。
现代文：这些人很少不是死于他们的所长。所以说：太盛了就难以持久。
English: These people rarely die without their leader, so they say: too much prosperity is not sustainable.

古文：故虽有贤君，不爱无功之臣；虽有慈父，不爱无益之子。
现代文：因此，即使有贤君，他也不爱无功之臣；即使有慈父，他也不爱无益之子。
English: Therefore, even if there is a wise ruler, he does not love a worthless vassal; even if there is a kind father, he does not love a worthless son.

古文：是故不胜其任而处其位，非此位之人也；不胜其爵而处其禄，非此禄之主也。
现代文：所以，凡是不能胜任其事而占据这一位置的，他就不应居于此位；凡是不胜任其爵而享受这一俸禄的，他就不当享有此禄。
English: Wherefore, whosoever takes the place of a knight without ability, ought not to hold it; and whosoever takes the place of a baron without ability, ought not to have it.

古文：良弓难张，然可以及高入深；良马难乘，然可以任重致远；良才难令，然可以致君见尊。
现代文：良弓不容易张开，但可以射得高没得深；良马不容易乘坐，但可以载得重行得远；真正好的人才不容易驾驭，但可以使国君受人尊敬。
English: A good bow is not easy to open, but it can shoot high and not deep; a good horse is not easy to ride, but it can be carried far away; a truly good person is not easy to drive, but it can make the king respected.

古文：是故江河不恶小谷之满己也，故能大。
现代文：所以，长江黄河不嫌小溪灌注它里面，才能让水量增大。
English: Therefore, the Yangtze River and the Yellow River are not averse to small streams pouring into it in order to increase the amount of water.

古文：圣人者，事无辞也，物无违也，故能为天下器。
现代文：圣人勇于任事，又能接受他人的意见，所以能成为治理天下的英才。
English: Saints are courageous and can accept the opinions of others, so they can become the best talents to govern the world.

古文：是故江河之水，非一水之源也；千镒之裘，非一狐之白也。
现代文：所以长江黄河里的水，不是从同一水源流下的；价值千金的狐白裘，不是从一只狐狸腋下集成的。
English: Therefore, the water in the Yellow River of the Yangtze River does not flow down from the same water source; the priceless white fox fur is not integrated from the undercoat of a fox.

古文：夫恶有同方取不取同而已者乎？
现代文：哪里有与自己相同的意见才采纳，与自己不同的意见就不采纳的道理呢？
English: Where is the reason for adopting opinions that are the same as one's own and not adopting opinions that are different from one's own?

古文：盖非兼王之道也！
现代文：这不是统一天下之道。
English: This is not the way to unify the country.

古文：是故天地不昭昭，大水不潦潦，大火不燎燎，王德不尧尧者，乃千人之长也。
现代文：所以大地不昭昭为明，大水不潦潦为大，大火不燎燎为盛，王德不尧尧为高，才能做千万人的首领。
English: Therefore, the earth is not clear, the water is not big, the fire is not strong, and the king is not high, in order to be the leader of thousands of people.

古文：其直如矢，其平如砥，不足以覆万物。
现代文：像箭一样直，像磨刀石一样平，那就不能覆盖万物了。
English: Being as straight as an arrow and as flat as a grindstone, it cannot cover everything.

古文：是故溪陕者速涸，逝浅者速竭，埆者其地不育。
现代文：所以狭隘的溪流干得快，平浅的川泽枯得早，坚薄的土地不长五谷。
English: Therefore, narrow streams dry quickly, shallow streams dry early, and thin land does not have valleys.

古文：王者淳泽，不出宫中，则不能流国矣。
现代文：做王的人深恩厚泽不出宫中，就不能流遍全国。
English: If a man who is to be king does not go out of the palace, he cannot travel all over the country.

