古文：子西使人召王孙胜，沈诸梁闻之，见子西曰： 闻子召王孙胜，信乎？ 
现代文：子西派人召来王孙胜，叶公子高听说后，去见子西说： 我听说您要召来王孙胜，是真的吗？ 
English: Zixi sent someone to summon Wang Sunsheng. After Ye Gongzi Gao heard about it, he went to see Zixi and said: I heard that you want to summon Wang Sunsheng, is it true?

古文：曰： 然。 
现代文：子西说： 是的。 
English: Ying Hou replied: Yes.

古文：子高曰： 将焉用之？ 
现代文：子高问： 您打算怎样用他？ 
English: Zigao asked: How do you plan to use him?

古文：曰： 吾闻之，胜直而刚，欲置之境。 
现代文：子西说： 我听说，王孙胜正直而刚强，想把他安置在边境。 
English: Zixi said, "I have heard that Wang Sunsheng, who is honest and strong, wants to place him on the border.

古文：子高曰： 不可。
现代文：子高说： 不行。
English: Zigao said, "I can't do it."

古文：其为人也，展而不信，爱而不仁，诈而不智，毅而不勇，直而不衷，周而不淑。
现代文：王孙胜的为人，展而不可信，爱而不仁慈，诈而不明智，毅而不勇敢，直率而不衷，言谈周全而不淑。
English: Wang Sunsheng was a man who was eloquent but untrustworthy, loving but not kind, deceitful but not wise, resolute but not brave, forthright but not sincere, and well-spoken but not gracious.

古文：复言而不谋身，展也；爱而不谋长，不仁也；以谋盖人，诈也；强忍犯义，毅也；直而不顾，不衷也；周言弃德，不淑也。
现代文：实践诺言而不考虑自身的利害，叫做展；外表爱人而不为人作长远打算，叫做不仁；用计谋掩盖别人，叫做诈；狠心违背信义，叫做毅；直率而不顾及隐讳，叫做不衷；言谈周全却抛弃德行，叫做不淑。
English: To carry out one's promise without considering one's own interests is called expansion; to love someone outwardly without making long-term plans for him or her is called unkindness; to cover up others with cunning is called deception; to be hard-hearted and breach one's trust is called perseverance; to be forthright without considering concealment is called insincerity; to speak well but abandon virtue is called insincerity.

古文：是六德者，皆有其华而不实者也，将焉用之。
现代文：他这六种品性，都徒有其表而无其实，怎么能用他呢。
English: These six qualities of his are all appearance and no substance. How can you use him?

古文： 彼其父为戮于楚，其心又狷而不洁。
现代文： 他的父亲在楚国被杀，他的心地狭隘偏执而不纯洁。
English: His father was killed in Chu, and his heart is narrow, paranoid, and not pure.

古文：若其狷也，不忘旧怨，而不以洁悛德，思报怨而已。
现代文：如果他的心地狭隘偏执，不忘旧日的怨仇，而又不能用纯洁的心改变他的德行，那么他想的只是报仇罢了。
English: If his heart is narrow and bigoted, if he does not forget old grudges, and if he cannot change his behavior with a pure heart, then all he wants is revenge.

古文：则其爱也足以得人，其展也足以复之，其诈也足以谋之，其直也足以帅之，其周也足以盖之，其不洁也足以行之，而加之以不仁，奉之以不义，蔑不克矣。
现代文：那么他的爱人足以得到人们的拥护，他的讲信用足以实践他的诺言，他的直率足以统帅众人，他的言谈周全足以掩盖他的罪恶，他的内心肮脏足以支配他的行动，再加上他的不仁，奉行他的不义，那没有不成功的。
English: Then his love is enough to gain the people's support, his trustworthiness is enough to carry out his promise, his straightforwardness is enough to command the people, his words are enough to cover up his sins, his inner filth is enough to control his actions, coupled with his unkindness, pursuing his injustice, it is not unsuccessful.

古文： 夫造胜之怨者，皆不在矣。
现代文： 那些造成王孙胜怨恨的人，现在都不在了。
English: Those who caused Wang Sunsheng's resentment are now gone.

古文：若来而无宠，速其怒也。
现代文：如果召他来而不宠爱他，只会加速他的怨恨。
English: If you call him and don't pamper him, it will only accelerate his resentment.

古文：若其宠之，毅贪无厌，既能得入，而耀之以大利，不仁以长之，思旧怨以修其心，苟国有衅，必不居矣。
现代文：如果宠爱他，他会贪得无厌，设法得到人心，还会以更大的利益引诱别人，用不仁慈来助长他们的私欲，想着旧日的怨仇来激起复仇之心，一旦国家有些事端，他肯定不会安分。
English: If you pamper him, he will be insatiably greedy, try to win people's hearts, lure others with greater benefits, use unkindness to promote their selfish desires, think of old grudges to arouse revenge, and once the country has some trouble, he will certainly not be at peace.

古文：非子职之，其谁乎？
现代文：那不是您主要承受祸患，又会是谁呢？
English: It's not you who will suffer the most. Who will it be?

古文：彼将思旧怨而欲大宠，动而得人，怨而有术，若果用之，害可待也。
现代文：他将想着旧日的怨仇，又想得到大的宠幸，行动起来会得到人心，怨恨复仇也有办法，如果您真的用他，祸害是指日可待的。
English: He will think about old grudges, and want to get a big favor. When he acts, he will get people's hearts. There is also a way to resent and take revenge. If you really use him, disaster is just around the corner.

古文：余爱子与司马，故不敢不言。 
现代文：我爱您和子西，所以不敢不说。 
English: I love you and Zixi, so I dare not not say it.

古文：子西曰： 德其忘怨乎！
现代文：子西说： 用德安抚可以忘掉旧怨吧！
English: Zixi said, "If you appease with virtue, you can forget old grudges."

古文：余善之，夫乃其宁。 
现代文：我好好待他，他就会安宁。 
English: If I treat him well, he will be at peace.

古文：子高曰： 不然。
现代文：子高说： 不是这样。
English: Zigao said, "That's not true."

古文：吾闻之，唯仁者可好也，可恶也，可高也，可下也。
现代文：我听说，只有仁心的人对他好也可以，对他坏也可以，让他地位高也可以，让他地位低也可以。
English: I have heard that only a benevolent person can be good to him, bad to him, let him have a high status, and let him have a low status.

古文：好之不偪，恶之不怨，高之不骄，下之不惧。
现代文：对他好不会凌逼君上，对他坏不会拘怨，地位高不会骄傲，地位低不会忧惧。
English: If you are kind to him, he will not force you, if you are mean to him, you will not hold a grudge, if you are high-ranking, you will not be proud, and if you are low-ranking, you will not be worried.

古文：不仁者则不然。
现代文：不仁的人就不是这样。
English: This is not the case with the unkind.

古文：人好之则偪，恶之则怨，高之则骄，下之则惧。
现代文：别人对他好就会凌逼人，对他不好就会抱怨恨，地位高了就会骄傲，地位低了就会忧惧。
English: If others are kind to him, they will bully him; if they are not kind to him, they will complain and hate him; if his status is high, they will be proud; if his status is low, they will be worried.

古文：骄有欲焉，惧有恶焉，欲恶怨偪，所以生诈谋也。
现代文：骄傲就会有贪欲，忧惧就会抱怨恨，贪欲、怨恨和威逼，是所以产生诈谋的原因。
English: Pride leads to covetousness, fear leads to complaining and hatred, and covetousness, hatred and oppression give rise to deceit.

古文：子将若何？
现代文：您准备怎么办？
English: What are you going to do?

古文：若召而下之，将戚而惧；为之上者，将怒而怨。
现代文：如果召他来而安排在你下面，他将不安而忧惧；对在他上面的人，也将愤怒和抱怨。
English: If he is called and placed under you, he will be restless and anxious; he will be angry and complain about those above him.

古文：诈谋之心，无所靖矣。
现代文：他的狡诈的心，将无法安定。
English: His cunning heart will not be steady.

古文：有一不义，犹败国家，今壹五六，而必欲用之，不亦难乎？
现代文：有一种不义的品行，就会败坏国家，如今他一身而兼有五六种不义的品行，而您却一定要任用他，不是很危难吗？
English: If there is one form of unrighteous conduct, it will corrupt the country. Now he has five or six forms of unrighteous conduct, and you must appoint him. Isn't it very dangerous?

古文：吾闻国家将败，必用奸人，而嗜其疾味，其子之谓乎？
现代文：我听说国家将要败亡，必定任用坏人，而嗜好使人生病的美味，说的大概就是你吧？
English: I've heard that the country is going to ruin, that bad men must be appointed, and that it's the taste that makes people sick, is that what you're saying?

古文： 夫谁无疾眚！
现代文： 谁能没有灾病！
English: Who can get up without disaster!

古文：能者早除之。
现代文：有才能的人能及早除掉它。
English: Talented people can get rid of it early.

古文：旧怨灭宗，国之疾眚也，为之关蘥蕃篱而远备闲之，犹恐其至也，是之为日惕。
现代文：因为旧日的怨恨而灭了宗庙，是国家的病灾，设置关钥、篱笆来远远地防备它，还恐怕它的来到，为此要天天警惕。
English: Because of the old grudge, the ancestral temple was destroyed, which is a national disease. Set up gates and fences to prevent it from afar, but also fear its coming, so be vigilant every day.

古文：若召而近之，死无日矣。
现代文：如果您召他来而亲近他，那离死期就没有几天了。
English: If you call him and get close to him, you are only a few days away from death.

古文：人有言曰： 狼子野心，怨贼之人也。 
现代文：人们有句俗语说： 狼子野心，是有怨而生害心的人啊。 
English: People have a saying: A wolf's ambition is a person who bears grudges and causes harm.

古文：其又何善乎？
现代文：他又有什么好呢？
English: What good is he?

古文：若子不我信，盍求若敖氏与子干、子皙之族而近之？
现代文：如果您不相信我，何不寻求若敖氏和子干、子皙的族人来亲近他们呢？
English: If you don't believe me, why don't you seek out the Wakatsuki clan and members of the Zogan and Zogan clans to get closer to them?

古文：安用胜也，其能几何？
现代文：何必要任用公孙胜呢，这样能维持多久呢？
English: Why is it necessary to appoint Gongsun Sheng, and how long can it last?

古文： 昔齐驺马以胡公入于具水，邴歜、阎职戕懿公于囿竹，晋长鱼矫杀三郤于榭，鲁圉人荦杀子般于次，夫是谁之故也，非唯旧怨乎？
现代文： 以前齐国的驺马把胡公的尸体扔进了具水，邴歜和阎职在竹林里杀害了鲁懿公，晋国的长鱼矫在台榭上杀了三郤，鲁国的养马人荦在住所杀了子般，这些都是什么缘故呢，不都是因为了旧日的怨恨吗？
English: In the past, the horse-breeders of Qi threw the body of King Hu into the water, the horse-breeders of Zhai and Yan killed the horse-breeders of Lu in the bamboo forest, the horse-breeders of Jin killed the horse-breeders on the platform, and the horse-breeders of Lu killed the horse-breeders in the house. What was the reason for all of this? Wasn't it all because of old grudges?

古文：是皆子之所闻也。
现代文：这些都是您听到过的。
English: You've heard it all before.

古文：人求多闻善败，以监戒也。
现代文：人们想多听到善恶成败的教训，来作为自己的借鉴。
English: People want to hear more about the lessons of good and evil success and failure as a reference for themselves.

古文：今子闻而弃之，犹蒙耳也。
现代文：现在您听了却抛弃它，就像蒙上了耳朵。
English: Now you listen to it and discard it, as if you had covered your ears.

古文：吾语子何益，吾知逃也已。 
现代文：我告诉您有什么好处，我只是想逃避灾难罢了。 
English: I'll tell you what's good, I'm just trying to avoid disaster.

古文：子西笑曰： 子之尚胜也。 
现代文：子西笑着说： 您把王孙胜说得过份了。 
English: Zixi smiled and said, "You have spoken too highly of Wang Sunsheng.

古文：不从，遂使为白公。
现代文：没有听从子高的劝告，于是封公子胜为白公。
English: He didn't listen to Zigao's advice, so he changed his name to Baigong.

古文：子高以疾闲居于蔡。
现代文：子高推托生病闲居在蔡地。
English: Zigao Tutuo is ill and lives idly in Cai Di.

古文：及白公之乱，子西、子期死。
现代文：等到白公叛乱，子西和子期都被杀死了。
English: By the time of Baigong's rebellion, Zixi and Ziqi had both been killed.

古文：叶公闻之，曰： 吾怨其弃吾言，而德其治楚国，楚国之能平均以复先王之业者，夫子也。
现代文：叶公听闻后，说： 我恨他不听我的话，而感激他治理楚国，楚国能够得以治理、恢复了先王的功业的人，就是子西。
English: After hearing this, Ye Gong said: I hate him for not listening to my words, but I am grateful to him for governing the state of Chu. The person who was able to govern the state of Chu and restore the work of the former king was Zixi.

古文：以小怨置大德，吾不义也，将入杀之。 
现代文：因为小怨忘了大德，是我的不义，我要入京城杀了白公。 
English: Because of my petty grudge, I forgot my great virtue. It was my injustice. I wanted to enter the capital and kill Baikong.

古文：帅方城之外以入，杀白公而定王室，葬二子之族。
现代文：于是就率领方城之外的人进入京城，杀死了白公，安定了王室，埋葬了子西和子期被害的家族。
English: So he led people from outside Fangcheng to enter Beijing, killed Bai Gong, stabilized the royal family, and buried Zixi and Zi Shi's family.

