古文：○杨绾崔祐甫子植植再从兄俊
现代文：杨绾字公权，华州华阴人。祖父温玉，是武则天朝代的户部侍郎、国子祭酒。
English: Yang Xi Zi Gongquan, from Huaying, Huazhou. His grandfather, Wen Yu, was a household attendant of the Wu Zetian Dynasty and a Kuniko Matsuri sake brewer.

古文：常衮杨绾，字公权，华州华阴人也。祖温玉，则天朝为户部侍郎、国子祭酒。
现代文：父亲侃，为开元年间醴泉的县令，都是以操行儒雅受到赞许。绾天生聪慧，年仅四岁，就出类拔萃、敏识过人。
English: According to his father, in the first year of the 21st century, all the county magistrates in Jiuquan were praised for their refined manners. Jiuquan was born with intelligence, and at only four years old, he was outstanding and extremely perceptive.

古文：父侃，开元中醴泉令，皆以儒行称。绾生聪惠，年四岁，处群从之中，敏识过人。
现代文：曾有一次晚上款待宾客，要众人各自提出将座位中的器物以音韵四声读出来，各位宾客都没有说话，绾应声指着铁灯对应说： 灯盏柄曲。 众人都很惊奇。
English: Once upon a time, when entertaining guests in the evening, everyone was asked to read out the utensils in their seats in four-part harmony. None of the guests spoke, and the eavesdropper pointed to the iron lamp and said, "Lamp handle tune." Everyone was surprised.

古文：尝夜宴亲宾，各举坐中物以四声呼之，诸宾未言，绾应声指铁灯树曰： 灯盏柄曲。 众咸异之。
现代文：等到长大后，好学不倦，博通经史，九流七略，一览无遗，尤其擅长文辞，词藻结构清新韵足。
English: When they grow up, they are eager to learn and never get tired. They are well-versed in the history of scripture, with an exhaustive overview of the nine schools of thought. They are especially good at vocabulary, and their word structures are fresh and full of rhyme.

古文：及长，好学不倦，博通经史，九流七略，无不该览，尤工文辞，藻思清赡。
现代文：崇尚玄理，沉静寡欲，经常独处一室，左右摆满经书，凝视满席书籍，非常宁静。
English: He is a proponent of metaphysics, is quiet and abstemious, and often sits alone in a room, surrounded by scriptures and gazing at a table full of books. He is very peaceful.

古文：而宗尚玄理，沉静寡欲，常独处一室，左右经书，凝尘满席，澹如也。
现代文：内心明晰而运用隐晦，不求声名，每次写文章，羞愧于自白，不是知己的人不可看见。
English: Those who are clear-hearted and use obscurely, do not seek fame, write articles every time, are ashamed to confess, and are not confidants cannot be seen.

古文：含光晦用，不欲名彰，每属文，耻于自白，非知己不可得而见。
现代文：早年孤苦贫寒，以孝敬母亲而闻名，有时缺乏美味食物，脸上即显出忧虑。亲友劝说他去谋求俸禄，于是考取进士，调补为太子正字。
English: In his early years, he was lonely and poor. He was known for his filial piety to his mother. Sometimes he lacked delicious food, and his face showed worry. Relatives and friends persuaded him to seek a salary, so he took the entrance examination and became the crown prince.

古文：早孤家贫，养母以孝闻，甘旨或阙，忧见于色。
现代文：天宝十三年，玄宗御驾勤政楼，考试录用博通坟典、洞晓玄经、辞藻宏丽、军谋出众的贤人，命有关部门提供食物，天黑才结束。选取辞藻宏丽外，还加考诗赋各一首。
English: In the 13th year of the Heavenly Treasures, when Emperor Xuanzong was on his way to the Great Hall of the People, he ordered the relevant departments to provide food for the sages who passed the examination and were awarded the titles of "Boltong" (博通墓典), "Dongxiao" (洞晓玄經), "Dictum" (辞藻宏麗) and "Military Strategist" (軍谋出众). It was only after dark that the examination was over. In addition to selecting the dictum, one poem was also added to the examination.

古文：亲友讽令干禄，举进士。
现代文：制举考诗赋，就是从这里开始的。
English: It was from here that the poetry examination system began.

古文：调补太子正字。
现代文：此时登科有三人，杨绾为第一名，被破格授予右拾遗。
English: At this time, there were three people who entered the university, Yang Wei was the first, and was awarded the right to collect relics.

古文：天宝十三年，玄宗御勤政楼，试博通坟典、洞晓玄经、辞藻宏丽、军谋出众等举人，命有司供食，既暮而罢。
现代文：亲友劝说他去谋求俸禄，于是考取进士，调补为太子正字。天宝十三年，玄宗御驾勤政楼，考试录用博通坟典、洞晓玄经、辞藻宏丽、军谋出众的贤人，命有关部门提供食物，天黑才结束。
English: Relatives and friends persuaded him to seek a salary, so he took the entrance examination and was promoted to crown prince. In the 13th year of the Heavenly Treasures, Emperor Xuanzong drove to the government building, and the examination was accepted by the sages of the Bo Tong Cemetery, the Dong Xiao Xuan Jing, the magnificent diction, and the outstanding military strategy. The relevant departments were ordered to provide food, and it was dark before it was over.

古文：取辞藻宏丽外，别试诗赋各一首。
现代文：选取辞藻宏丽外，还加考诗赋各一首。
English: In addition to selecting the magnificent words, they also added one poem each.

古文：制举试诗赋，自此始也。
现代文：制举考诗赋，就是从这里开始的。
English: It was from here that the poetry examination system began.

古文：时登科者三人，绾为之首，超授右拾遗。
现代文：此时登科有三人，杨绾为第一名，被破格授予右拾遗。
English: At this time, there were three people who entered the university, Yang Wei was the first, and was awarded the right to collect relics.

古文：天宝末，安禄山反，肃宗即位于灵武。
现代文：天宝末年，安禄山反叛，肃宗在灵武即位。
English: At the end of the Tenpo era, An Lushan rebelled and Su Zong ascended to the throne.

古文：绾自贼中冒难，披榛求食，以赴行在。
现代文：绾在贼军中冒着危险，披榛求食，赶着路程。
English: They risked their lives among the bandits, put on their coats to beg for food, and hurried on their way.

古文：时朝廷方急贤，及绾至，众心咸悦，拜起居舍人、知制诰。
现代文：此时朝廷正急需贤臣，等到绾赶到，大家都感到很高兴，升为起居舍人、知制诰。
English: At this time, the imperial court was in urgent need of wise men, and by the time he arrived, everyone was happy, and he was promoted to the position of chief retainer and chieftain.

古文：历司勋员外郎、职方郎中，掌诰如故。
现代文：历任勋员外郎、职方郎中，仍然是知制诰。
English: He is still known as the second son of the previous members of the order and the second son of the officials.

古文：迁中书舍人，兼修国史。
现代文：升为中书舍人，兼修国史。
English: He was promoted to the position of junior high school teacher, and also studied national history.

古文：所冀数年之间，人伦一变，既归实学，当识大猷。
现代文：过去，对年龄大的舍人称为 阁老 ，官署杂乱难以统计，称为 阁老 的人有五分之四。
English: In the past, it was difficult to count the number of elderly people who were referred to as "kakuro" because the government offices were cluttered. Four out of five people were referred to as "kakuro."

古文：居家者必修德业，从政者皆知廉耻，浮竞自止，敦庞自劝，教人之本，实在兹焉。事若施行，即别立条例。
现代文：绾认为他们品秩同列，待遇同等，全都应平均分配，此举深受当时舆论称赞。又升为礼部侍郎，向皇上分条目上奏贡举的弊端。
English: Shun thought that they were of the same rank, with the same treatment, and that they should all be equally distributed, a move that was highly praised by the public opinion at the time. He was also promoted to the position of an attendant of the ceremonial department, and reported the drawbacks of the tribute to the emperor.

古文：宰臣等奏以举人旧业已成，难于速改，其今岁举人，望且许应旧举，来岁奉诏，仍敕礼部即具条例奏闻。
现代文：皇上诏令左右丞、各司侍郎、御史大夫、中丞、给、舍共同商议此奏文。给事中李訥、给事中李栖筠、尚书左丞贾至、京兆尹兼御史大夫严武所奏议的内容与绾相同。李訥等人的论述与绾相似，因文章长不写出来。宰臣们上奏说明举人旧业年月已久，很难速改，今年的举人还望能同意进行，来年再奉诏停止，仍然诏令礼部立即分条目上奏。
English: The Emperor issued an imperial edict to the left and right senators, the attendants of each division, the grand secretary, the middle secretary, the secretary, the secretary and the secretary to jointly discuss this message. The contents of the message sent by Li Xi, Li Sui, Shang Shu Zuo Jia Zi, and Jing Zha Yin and grand secretary Yan Wu were the same as that of the imperial edict. The discussion of Li Xi and others was similar to that of the imperial edict, because the article was too long to be written. The vice-ministers reported to the imperial edict that it was difficult to quickly change the old practice of inviting people, and it was hoped that this year'

古文：代宗以废进士科问翰林学士，对曰： 进士行来已久，遽废之，恐失人业。 
现代文：代宗以废止进士科问题询问翰林学士，对答说： 进士制度由来已久，立即废除它，恐怕会耽误学业。 
English: Daizong asked Hanlin Baccalaureate about the issue of abolishing the promotion system, to which he replied: The promotion system has a long history. Abolishing it immediately would probably delay students' studies.

古文：乃诏孝廉与旧举兼行。
现代文：于是诏令孝廉与旧举同时进行。
English: As a result, the Emperor ordered that Takakado be held at the same time as the old tournament.

古文：绾又奏岁贡孝悌力田及童子科等，其孝悌力田，宜有实状，童子越众，不在常科，同之岁贡，恐长侥幸之路。
现代文：绾又上奏关于史贡孝悌力田以及童子科等考试，其孝悌力田应该具有实际意义，童子越来越多，不在常科，而都在岁贡，担心助长侥幸风尚。
English: He also talked about the examination of Shigong's filial piety and children's studies. His filial piety and children's studies should have practical significance. There are more and more children, not in regular subjects, but in the years of tribute, worried about promoting the fluke fashion.

古文：诏停之。
现代文：皇上诏令停止。
English: The Emperor's edict stopped it.

古文：再迁吏部侍郎，历典举选，精核人物，以公平称。
现代文：又升为吏部侍郎，根据法则推举选用，精心考察人物，以办事公道受到称赞。
English: He was also promoted to the position of the secretary of the personnel department. He was elected and selected according to the law, carefully examined the characters, and was praised for his fairness.

古文：时元载秉政，公卿多附之，绾孤立中道，清贞自守，未尝私谒。
现代文：此时元载执掌大权，公卿大多依附他，绾孤立中道，清贞自守，未曾私下拜谒元载。
English: At this time, Yuan Zai was in power, and most of the nobles followed him. They isolated the middle way, kept their chastity, and never privately worshipped Yuan Zai.

古文：载以绾雅望素高，外示尊重，心实疏忌。
现代文：载认为绾平时声望很高，在外表示对他尊重，内心实际却对他疏远忌恨。
English: He thought that Zhai was very prestigious in peacetime, and expressed respect for him outside, but in reality he was estranged and hated him.

古文：会鱼朝恩死，载以朝恩尝判国子监事，尘污太学，宜得名儒，以清其秩，乃奏为国子祭酒，实欲以散地处之。
现代文：此时鱼朝恩死了，载将朝恩曾经出任国子监一事，认为尘污了太学，应该用名儒主理国子监，以明晰秩序，于是上奏将其提为国子祭酒，实际上想以散官安排对待他。
English: At this time, Yu Chao'en died, carrying the matter that Chao'en had once served as the provincial overseer, believing that the dust had polluted Taigaku and that the name of the Confucian in charge of the provincial overseer should be used to clarify the order, so the prelude mentioned it as the provincial son's sacrificial wine, in fact, he wanted to treat him as a loose official.

古文：载贪冒日甚，天下清议，亦归于绾，上深知之，以载久在枢衡，未即罢遣。
现代文：载贪财冒犯之举越来越盛，天下之人都对杨绾评论称赞，皇上非常清楚这些，考虑到载在枢衡任职已久，没有马上将其罢免。
English: The emperors were well aware of this, considering that Zang had been in office for a long time, and did not immediately dismiss him.

古文：仍迁绾为太常卿，充礼仪使，以郊庙礼久废，藉绾振起之也，亦以观其效用。
现代文：仍将绾升为太常卿，任礼仪使，凭借绾用以将久废的祭祀礼节振兴起来，同时也来观察其成效。
English: He will still be elevated to the position of Tai Changqing and appointed as the etiquette envoy, using the gong to revitalize the long-lost ritual etiquette and also to observe its effectiveness.

古文：是年三月，载伏诛，上乃拜绾中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事、集贤殿崇文馆大学士，兼修国史。
现代文：这年三月，载伏法，皇上于是将绾升为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事、集贤殿崇文馆大学士，兼修国史。
English: In March of the same year, after the enthronement ceremony, the emperor was promoted to attendant of the Chinese classics, member of the Chinese classics, member of the Chinese classics, member of the Chinese classics, member of the Chinese classics, member of the Chinese classics, member of the Chinese classics, member of the Chinese classics, member of the Chinese classics, member of the Chinese classics, member of the Chinese classics.

古文：绾久积公辅之望，及诏出，朝野相贺。
现代文：绾德高望重，诏令公布后，朝野之人相互祝贺。
English: Morality was held in high esteem, and after the edict was announced, people from both the imperial court and the countryside congratulated each other.

古文：绾累表恳让，上属意稍重，绾不敢辞。
现代文：绾多次表示恳请让位，皇上嘱咐语气加重，绾不敢推辞。
English: He repeatedly expressed his earnest request to give up his seat. The tone of the emperor's order became more serious, and he did not dare to refuse.

古文：绾素以德行著闻，质性贞廉，车服俭朴，居庙堂未数月，人心自化。
现代文：绾素以品德行为著称，质朴忠贞，车服俭朴，在位不到几个月，人心所归。
English: Huan Su was known for his moral conduct, simple loyalty, and simple clothing. He had been on the throne for less than a few months, and was loved by the people.

古文：御史中丞崔宽，剑南西川节度使宁之弟，家富于财，有别墅在皇城之南，池馆台榭，当时第一，宽即日潜遣毁拆。
现代文：御史中丞崔宽是剑南西川节度使宁的弟弟，家境富有，在皇城之南建有别墅，池馆台榭，在当时被称为第一，宽就在当天暗中派人将其拆毁。
English: Goshi Chujo Choi Kuan was the younger brother of Jian Nan Nishikawa Setsudo Jining. He came from a wealthy family and had built a villa south of the Imperial City. It was known as the first, and Kuan secretly sent someone to demolish it on the same day.

古文：中书令郭子仪在邠州行营，闻绾拜相，座内音乐减散五分之四。
现代文：中书令郭子仪在州驻扎，听说绾为相后，府内音乐减少五分之四。
English: Guo Ziyi was stationed in the prefecture by order of the Central Government, and it was said that the music in the prefecture was reduced by four-fifths after Zou became the consort.

古文：京兆尹黎干以承恩，每出入驺驭百余，亦即三日减损车骑，唯留十骑而已。
现代文：京兆尹黎干承蒙恩宠，每次出入车马有一百多辆，也在当日减少车马，只留十匹而已。
English: The Beijing Zhao Yin Lijian was favored, with more than one hundred carriages and horses entering and leaving each time, and also reduced the number of carriages and horses on the same day, leaving only ten horses.

古文：其余望风变奢从俭者，不可胜数，其镇俗移风若此。
现代文：其余的闻风而动、将奢变俭的人不可胜数，移风易俗变化诸如此类。
English: There are countless others who are influenced by the trends and change their lifestyles from extravagant to frugal, and so on.

古文：绾有宿痼疾，居职旬日，中风，优诏令就中书省摄养，每引见延英殿，特许扶入。
现代文：绾患有痼疾，任职不久，中风，优待诏令在中书省休养，每次在延英殿引见，特别允许由人扶入。
English: Zhai suffered from malaria, was not long in office, and had a stroke. He was ordered to rest and recuperate in Zhongshu, and was brought to Yan Ying Palace every time. He was allowed to be carried in by a person.

古文：时厘革旧弊，唯绾是瞻，恩遇莫二。
现代文：当时治理旧弊，惟绾是瞻，没有第二人承蒙宠爱。
English: At that time, there was no second person to inherit the favor.

古文：绾累抗疏辞位，频诏敦勉不许。
现代文：绾多次上奏请求辞职，又多次被皇上诏令回绝。
English: He repeatedly petitioned for resignation and was repeatedly rejected by imperial edict.

古文：所怀莫从，长想何及。况历官有素丝之节，居家无匹帛之余，故饰以华衮，增其法赙，备膺典策，载贲朝经。
现代文：等到绾病重，皇上每天派遣中使去住宅询问，御医在其身旁时刻守候。皇上听说他的病有起色喜形于色。不几天病逝，中使急驰马上奏，代宗震惊哀悼很久，辍朝三天。
English: When Shun fell seriously ill, the emperor sent a middle-ranking envoy to his residence every day to inquire about him, and his doctor waited by his side at all times. The emperor was overjoyed when he heard that his illness had taken a turn for the better. Within a few days of his illness, the middle-ranking envoy died suddenly, and the daimyō was shocked and mourned for a long time, missing the imperial court for three days.

古文：可赠司徒。又诏文武百僚临于其第，遣内常侍吴承倩会吊，赠绢千匹、布三百端。
现代文：又诏令文武百官到其宅第，派内常侍吴承倩吊唁，赠予绢千匹、布八百端。
English: He also ordered 100 military and civilian officials to come to his residence to offer condolences to Wu Chengyao, the regular attendant of the faction, and presented him with 1,000 horses and 800 pieces of cloth.

古文：上深惜之，顾谓朝臣曰： 天不使朕致太平，何夺我杨绾之速也！
现代文：皇上非常惋惜，对朝臣们说： 上天不让我致力于太平，为什么将我的杨绾夺走这样快！
English: The emperor was very sorry and said to his courtiers: Heaven forbid that I should devote myself to Taiping, why did you take away my poplars so quickly!

古文：宜谥曰文简。 
现代文：装殓之时，我与众卿悲痛哀悼之情正同啊。 
English: At the time of the decoration, I shared the feelings of grief and mourning with the lords.

古文：比部郎中苏端，性疏狂，嫉其贤，乃肆毁黩，异同其议。
现代文：宰相辅佐君主死后受到如此恩遇，近年来还没有谁与此能相比。太常初谥号为文贞。诏曰：略。比部郎中苏端，性格疏狂，嫉妒其贤能，于是大肆诋毁，观点与之相异。
English: In recent years, there has been no one who can compare with the grace shown to the prime minister's aide-de-camp after the monarch's death. At the beginning of the reign of the emperor, his posthumous name was Munzane. The edict said: "Omitted. Hiburo Nakasubasubasubasubasubasubasubasubasubasubasubasubasubasubasubasubasubasubasubasubasubasubasubasubasubasubasubasubasubasubasubasubasubasubasubasubasubasubasubasub

古文：上怒，贬端为广州员外司马。
现代文：皇上发怒，将端贬为广州员外司马。
English: The emperor was furious and demoted Duan to the rank of foreign secretary of Guangzhou.

古文：绾俭薄自乐，未尝留意家产，口不问生计，累任清要，无宅一区，所得俸禄，随月分给亲故。
现代文：绾以俭朴为乐，不曾留意自己家产。不过问生计，多次担任要职，无一区房宅，所得的俸禄，每月分发给亲友。
English: He enjoyed frugality and did not pay attention to his family property. However, when it came to his livelihood, he repeatedly held important positions, did not own a house, and distributed his monthly salary to relatives and friends.

古文：清识过人，至如往哲微言，《五经》奥义，先儒未悟者，绾一览究其精理。
现代文：思想明晰见识过人，盖如往哲微言，《五经》奥议，以前儒者们未知的东西，绾一看便知其精深至理。
English: The clear thinking of Confucius has been recognized by others, and the cover is as philosophical as ever. The "Five Classics" are abstruse, and things that were previously unknown to Confucians can be understood at a glance.

古文：雅尚玄言，宗释道二教，尝著《王开先生传》以见意，文多不载。
现代文：崇尚玄言，崇信释道二教，曾经著有《王开先生传》以表叙其意，文章因长不载。
English: He was a proponent of Confucianism and Taoism, and once wrote "The Biography of Mr. Wang Kai" to express his thoughts. The article was not published due to its length.

古文：凡所知友，皆一时名流。
现代文：凡是所结交的朋友，都是当时名流。
English: All the friends I made were celebrities at the time.

古文：或造之者，清谈终日，未尝及名利。
现代文：有的到他那里去的人，终日清淡，不曾追逐名利。
English: Some of the people who come to him are light-hearted and have never chased fame and fortune.

古文：或有客欲以世务干者，见绾言必玄远，不敢发辞，内愧而退。
现代文：有些客人想谋求职位，看见绾说话玄达，不敢提出，惭愧退下。
English: Some guests want to seek a position, and when they see a baboon's incomprehensible speech, they don't dare to put it forward, and are ashamed to withdraw.

古文：大历中，德望日崇，天下雅正之士争趋其门，至有数千里来者。
现代文：大历年中，德高望重，天下雅正之士都争着投奔其门下，还有从数千里外来的人。
English: Over the years, it has been highly respected, and the world's most elegant and upright people have been competing to join its ranks, as well as people from thousands of miles away.

古文：以清德坐镇雅俗，时比之杨震、邴吉、山涛、谢安之俦也。
现代文：以清正贤德改变雅俗，在当时可与杨震、邴吉、山涛、谢安为同类之人。
English: He changed the elegance and customs with the virtue of chastity and virtue. At that time, he was the same kind of person as Yang Zhen, Hao Ji, Shantao and Xie An.

