古文：初九日，写十二诗付崑即昆石上人，已上午矣。
现代文：初九日给昆石上人写了十二首诗，便已经到上午了。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, I wrote twelve poems to Kunshi Shonin, and it was already morning.

古文：即从草塘左循崖南下，路甚微削，伏深草中，或隐或现。
现代文：于是从草塘左面顺山崖往南朝下走，路很细小而且陡直，隐没在深草丛中，或隐或现。
English: So I walked from the left side of the meadow along the cliff to the south, the path was very small and steep, hidden in the deep grass, either hidden or present.

古文：直下三里，则溪自箫曲之后直从东南，与外层巨山夹而成者。
现代文：直往下三里，有条溪从箫曲峰后面一直自东南方流过来，这是箫曲峰与它外层的大山夹峙而形成的。
English: Three miles down, there is a stream flowing from the southeast all the way behind the peak, which was formed by the confrontation between the peak and its outer mountain.

古文：盖此山即闽界，其东北度而为箫曲，西北度而为应感峰、会仙峰，两腋溪流夹而西去，犹属新城也。
现代文：大概这大山就是福建省省界，它往东北延伸而形成箫曲峰，往西北延伸而形成应感峰、会仙峰，两条溪夹在山的两侧而向西流去，溪流仍属于新城县。
English: Presumably, this large mountain is the provincial boundary of Fujian Province. It extends to the northeast to form the curved peak, and extends to the northwest to form the responsive peak and the fairy summit. Two streams are sandwiched on both sides of the mountain and flow to the west. The streams still belong to Xincheng County.

古文：箫曲南溪之上，有居民数家，燕通 艺 ，种植山种姜芋茶竹为业，地名坂铺。
现代文：箫曲峰南面的溪岸上，有几家居民，他们以在山上种植姜、芋、茶、竹等为业，地名叫坂铺。
English: On the bank of the stream on the south side of the Qijiu Peak, there are several residents. They grow ginger, potato, tea, bamboo, etc. on the mountain for their business. The place is called Saka Pu.

古文：由此溪渡，东南上岭一里，则平转山腰。
现代文：从坂铺渡过溪，往东南朝岭上走一里，就平平地绕到了山腰。
English: Crossed the stream from the slope, walked one mile to the southeast morning ridge, and then walked around the mountainside.

古文：又南二里，复直上山顶。又二里，南下而东上，至应感岩。
现代文：再往南二里，又直往上爬到山顶。 又走二里，往南面下了山而往东上，到应感岩。
English: Two miles further south, climb straight up to the top of the mountain, walk two miles further south, descend the mountain and go east to the Yingchuan Rock.

古文：其岩西向，巨壑矗峭，环成一窝，置室于中，自下望之，真凭虚缀壁也。
现代文：岩洞朝向西边，下面是长而宽的深谷，崖壁高耸峻峭，壁上形成个圆状洞穴，洞穴中建有室屋，从下面望上去，真像悬空补缀在崖壁上似的。
English: The cave faces west, with a long, wide ravine below. The cliff walls are high and steep, forming a circular cave on the wall. There are houses built in the cave. From below, it really looks like a hanging patch on the cliff wall.

古文：石崖之顶尚高一里，崖僧留饭后，即从崖侧蹑蹬而登，以为诸峰莫高于此；既登而后知会仙之更高于众也。
现代文：石崖的顶端还高在岩洞一里以上，居住在崖间的僧人留我们吃饭后，我们便从崖侧踩着石瞪往上登，当时以为周围其它山峰都没有此峰高；登上峰顶后才知道会仙峰更高于众峰。
English: The top of the cliff was still more than a mile high in the cave. After the monks who lived between the cliffs left us to eat, we climbed up from the cliff side stepping on the rocks. At that time, we thought that there were no other peaks around this height; only after climbing to the summit did we know that Xianfeng would be higher than the other peaks.

古文：应感二峰连起，东属于大山，其属处过脊甚峭。
现代文：应感峰的两个山峰接连耸起，东面和福建省界的那座大山连着，连接处山脊越过来的地方很陡峭。
English: The two peaks of Yingxuan Peak rise one after another. To the east, it is connected to the big mountain on the Fujian provincial border. The place where the ridge crosses the junction is very steep.

古文：北流之水出于坂铺，南流之水即从会仙峰北向而去，自应感、会仙西流之水止此。
现代文：山脊北面的水流往坂铺，南面的水就从会仙峰向北流去，从应感、会仙两峰流往西面的水到山脊为止。
English: The water on the north side of the ridge flows to the slope, the water on the south side flows northward from the summit of the Xuanxian peak, and the water flowing westward from the two peaks of the Xuanxian and Xuanxian peaks flows to the ridge.

古文：余盖从应感南下三里，过此一水复南上，则会仙北属大山之脊也。
现代文：我大约从应感峰南面朝下走了三里，渡过那一条水后又往南向上爬，就到了会仙峰北面和福建省界的那座大山相连的山脊处。
English: I walked about three miles down from the south side of the Yingxuan Peak, crossed the water and climbed southward to the ridge connecting the north side of the Xianfeng Peak with the mountain on the Fujian provincial border.

古文：脊东之水西出会仙之南，其南又有大山，东北而属于应感后之大山，夹此水西去，其中坞落为九坊，乃新城之五十一都也。
现代文：从作为福建省界的那座大山的山脊越过来的地方到会仙峰之间，望过去很近，却要接连翻越四座山峰，峰峰都峻峭陡直。山脊下面乱壑纵横，水流汇集成潭，我怀疑所说的金龟湖就是这潭水。
English: From the place where I crossed the ridge of the big mountain that is the border of Fujian Province to between Huixian Peak, the view is very close, but I have to climb over four peaks in succession. The peaks are steep and straight. The ridge below is turbulent and vertical, and the water flows into a pool. I doubt that the said Golden Turtle Lake is this pool of water.

古文：对会仙之山名迷阳洞，南即为邵武之建宁，其大山东南为泰宁，其西南为建昌之广昌，则会仙南之大山，乃南龙北来东转之处也。
现代文：四下四上，又走四里便登上会仙峰最高顶，东面的大山都低伏在它下面，更不用说箫曲峰、应感峰了。从会仙峰往西到南丰县有一百里，往东南抵达建宁县也是一百里。
English: After four descents and four ascents, and four miles of walking, they reached the highest peak of Hui Xianfeng. The great mountains in the east all lie beneath it, not to mention Qian Qianfeng and Ying Xianfeng. From Hui Xianfeng, it is one hundred miles to the west to Nanfeng County, and one hundred miles to the southeast to Jianning County.

古文：自过脊至会仙，其下乱壑纵横，汇水成潭，疑所云金龟湖即此水也。初十日，由会仙峰西下，十里过溪，即应感西南来溪也。
现代文：分界处有几户人家呈斜向坐落在迷阳洞南边，偏僻荒凉，是与外界隔绝的地方。初十日从会仙峰往西朝下走，十里后渡过一条溪水，它就是从应感峰西南面流来的那条。
English: At the demarcation point, there are several houses diagonally located on the south side of the Maoyang Cave, a remote and desolate place, isolated from the outside world. On the 10th day of the first month, I walked down from the Xianfeng to the west, and after ten miles I crossed a stream, which is the one flowing from the southwest of the Yingchuan Peak.

古文：又五里为官公坳。
现代文：又走五里，为官公坳。
English: He walked another five miles and became a government official.

古文：又五里，下埔。
现代文：又走五里，到下埔。
English: Another five-mile walk to Shimo Po.

古文：应感溪自东而西，会仙南溪自南而北，俱会于下埔而北去。
现代文：从应感峰西南面流来的溪水自东而西，从会仙峰南面流来的溪水自南而北，都汇合在下埔而往北流去。
English: The streams flowing from the southwest of the Yingxuan Peak flow from east to west, and the streams flowing from the south of the Huanxian Peak flow from south to north. They all converge at the lower Po and flow northward.

古文：路由下埔南而西，逾一岭，五里为黄舍。
现代文：从下埔以上，悬崖间的瀑布到处可见，也都汇合在下埔。路从下埔南面往西走，翻过一座岭，行五里为黄舍。
English: From the lower Po above, the waterfalls between the cliffs can be seen everywhere, and they also converge in the lower Po. The road from the south of the lower Po to the west, over a ridge, five miles to Huang She.

古文：又西南逾二岭，五里至章村，山始大开，始有聚落阛闠。
现代文：又往西南翻越两座岭，走五里到章村，山才远离开，才有村落街市。
English: We also climbed over two ridges to the southwest and walked five miles to Zhangcun. It was only when the mountains were far away that there was a village street market.

古文：西五里至容田，又西三里过长江岭。
现代文：有条水从南向北流，它发源于建宁县邱家岭，流经章村南面十五里的地方，又流五十五里到达建宁县。
English: A stream of water flows from south to north. It originates from Qiu Jia Ling in Jianning County, flows through a place 15 miles south of Zhangcun, and flows another 55 miles to Jianning County.

古文：又三里，乌石。
现代文：往西走五里到容田，又往西三里经过长江岭。
English: Go west for five miles to Yongtian, and go west for three miles through the Yangtze Ridge.

古文：有卷石桥。又二里，上坪。
现代文：又走三里，到乌石。又走二里，到上坪。
English: Walk another three miles to Black Rock. Walk another two miles to Shangping.

古文：随溪西南四里，有大溪自西南向东北，复溯之。
现代文：顺一条溪往西南走四里、有条大溪自西南向东北流，又溯流而行。
English: Follow a stream to the southwest for four miles, there is a large stream flowing from the southwest to the northeast, and it flows backwards.

古文：西三里，过木桥，溯北来小溪，渡小石桥，北上岭。
现代文：往西三里，过一木桥，溯从北面来的一条小溪走，跨过一座小石桥，往北上了岭。
English: Go west for three miles, cross a wooden bridge, follow a small stream coming from the north, cross a small stone bridge, and head north up the ridge.

古文：三里，为茶坞坳。
现代文：走三里，为茶坞坳。
English: Walk three miles, and you'll find a teahouse.

古文：又西三里，为何木岭。
现代文：又往西三里，为何木岭。
English: Another three miles to the west is Hoi Mu Ling.

古文：越岭，西南二里，宿梅源。
现代文：越过岭，往西南走二里，投宿在梅源。
English: Crossed the ridge, walked two miles to the southwest, and stayed in Meiyuan.

古文：十一日，东方乍白，自梅源溯小流西上一岭。
现代文：十一日东方刚白，就从梅源溯一条小水流往西上了一座岭。
English: On the 11th day of Dongfang Gangbai, he followed a small stream from Meiyuan to the west up a ridge.

古文：岭北水下新城，岭南下永丰此处 永丰 恐为 南丰 之误，因为永丰离此地甚远，但随小水南行一里，可得大道。 
现代文：路本应越过山谷往西走，因听了歇店主人的话，竟然从北面直往岭上走。三里后翻到岭北，天渐渐亮了，向过路的人打听，才知道路走错了。于是从岭侧的小路折往南，越过两重岭，共走四里见到一个有村子坐落在的山坞，向村人询问，回答说： 这座岭就是南丰县界。岭北的水流下新城县，岭南的水流下南丰县，只须顺着小水往南行一里，就可以见到大路。 
English: The road should have crossed the valley to the west, but after listening to the words of the store owner, he went straight from the north to the ridge. After three miles, he turned over to the north of the ridge, the sky gradually brightened, and he asked the passers-by to know that the road was wrong. So he turned south from the side of the ridge, crossed the double ridge, and walked a total of four miles to see a dock where a village was located. He asked the villagers and answered: This ridge is the border of Nanfeng County. Xincheng County flows down the north of the ridge, and Nanfeng County flows down the south of the ridge

古文：从之，至漈ì指水边，闽方言称瀑布亦为漈上坞始与梅源大道合。其处平畴一环，四山绕壑，以为下土矣。
现代文：我们按那人所说的走，到涤上坞才与从梅源来的大路相合。那地方是片圆形而平坦的田地，四周山环沟绕，我以为是地势低下的地方了。
English: We walked as the man said, and it was only when we reached the dock that we met the main road coming from Meiyuan. That place is a round and flat field, surrounded by mountains and ditches. I thought it was a low-lying area.

古文：已而流忽下坠，捣级而下，最下遂成一瀑，乃知五泄、麻姑之名，以幸而独著也。
现代文：随后见水流忽然向下坠落，从一层层石台坎上冲泻而下，最下面便形成一条瀑布，这才知道五泄、麻姑的名字，是因为幸运才独自闻名。
English: Then I saw the water flow suddenly falling down, rushing down from the layers of stone platforms, and a waterfall formed at the bottom. This is why I know the names of Wuce and Magu. They are only famous because they are lucky.

古文：是名漈山灶，去梅源始五里，余迂作十里行矣。
现代文：此地名叫潦山灶，距离梅源才五里，我们却绕了十里。
English: This place is called Lushan stove, only five miles away from Meiyuan, but we went around ten miles.

古文：水上人家为 漈上 ，水下人家为 漈下 。
现代文：水流上面居住的人家称为 潦上 ，水流下面居住的人家称为 涤下 。
English: The people who live above the current are called 上, and the people who live below the current are called 涤下.

古文：又五里，夏家桥，又五里，尼姑坳，途中有两小水自北来合。
现代文：顺水流又走五里，到夏家桥，又走五里，到尼姑坳，途中有两条小水从北面来汇合。
English: Along the stream, it takes another five miles to get to Xiajiaqiao, and another five miles to get to Niuquan. On the way, two small streams come together from the north.

古文：又五里，乾昌桥，已胜筏。
现代文：又走五里，到乾昌桥，溪中已能够行船。
English: After walking another five miles, they reached the Qianchang Bridge and were able to sail in the creek.

古文：又五里，沧浪桥。
现代文：又走五里，到抢浪桥。
English: Walked another five miles to grab the wave bridge.

古文：又五里，黄婆桥。
现代文：又走五里，到黄婆桥。
English: Walk another five miles to Huangba Bridge.

古文：有一溪自北来，桥梁北溪上，水自桥南出，与漈上之水合，共下南山去；而陆路由北岭入山，迂回岭上。
现代文：有条溪流从北面流来，溪上架有桥，水从桥南面出来便与涤上坞流来的水汇合，共同流下南山中去，而陆路由北面山岭进入山中，在岭上曲折盘绕。
English: A stream flows from the north, there is a bridge over the stream, the water coming out from the south of the bridge merges with the water coming from the dock, and flows together down the Nanshan to the middle of the mountain, while the land route enters the mountain from the north and twists and turns on the ridge.

古文：北行五里，曰藏石岭。
现代文：往北行五里，叫藏石岭。
English: Five miles to the north is called Tibetan Stone Ridge.

古文：又三里，又过一小溪，亦自北而南。
现代文：再走三里，又渡过一条小溪，它也是自北向南流。
English: After walking another three miles, I crossed another stream, which also flows from north to south.

古文：越而西，二里，为思久铺。
现代文：越过溪水后往西走二里，为思久铺。
English: After crossing the stream, walk two miles to the west and stop for Siku.

古文：铺有小桥，桥下细流始西向行，路复随之。
现代文：那里有座小桥，桥下的细流才往西流，路又傍溪而去。
English: There is a small bridge there, and the stream under the bridge only flows to the west, and the road goes by the creek.

古文：五里，西至来陂桥。
现代文：走五里，往西到了来阪桥。
English: Walk five miles west to Hankyu.

古文：又一溪颇大，自北来会，同过桥下；而漈上大溪亦自南来会，遂同注而北。
现代文：又有一条溪水比较大，从北面流来相汇，一同流过桥下；而涤上坞流来的大溪也从南面流来，汇合后一同流往北去。
English: There is also a relatively large stream, flowing from the north to meet and flow together under the bridge; and the large stream flowing from the dock also flows from the south, and flows together to the north after meeting.

古文：又一里，溪之东有狮山，西有象山，狮山石独突兀，而象山半为斧斤所凿。
现代文：又走一里，溪水的东面有座狮山，西面有座象山，狮山上的石头分立突兀，而象山的一半已被刀斧凿削过。
English: After walking another mile, there was a lion mountain to the east of the stream and an elephant mountain to the west. The stones on the lion mountain were jagged, while half of the elephant mountain had been chiseled with a knife and axe.

古文：二山紧束水口，架石梁其中，曰石家桥，溪自桥下俱北去，路自桥上西向府。
现代文：两山紧夹着水口，一座石桥横架在两端，它叫石家桥，溪水从桥下向北流，路从桥上往西朝府城去。
English: Two mountains cling to the mouth of the stream, and a stone bridge spans both ends. It's called Shijia Bridge. The stream flows north from under the bridge, and the road goes from the bridge to West Chaofu City.

古文：渡桥一里，又有小溪自南而北，亦有石梁跨其上。
现代文：越过桥一里，又有条小溪自南往北流，也有石桥架在溪上。
English: A mile beyond the bridge, there is another stream flowing from south to north, and there is also a stone bridge over the stream.

古文：又三里，上艾家岭。
现代文：又走三里上了艾家岭。
English: I walked another three miles up Aijialing Mountain.

古文：又十里至南丰，入城东门。
现代文：又走十里，到南丰县，进入城东门内。
English: Walk another ten miles to Nanfeng County and enter the east gate of the city.

古文：三里，出西门，则盱江自西南抵西门，绕南门而北转，经东门而北下，想与漈上之水会于城北之下流也。
现代文：三里，出子城西门，便见吁江自西南面流到西门外，又绕流到南门外而后向北折，经东门外而往北流去，我猜想它与潦上坞来的溪水在城北面的下游处汇合。
English: Three miles away, at the west gate of Shizi City, I saw the Hujiang River flowing from the southwest to outside the west gate, then flowing around to outside the south gate and then turning north, flowing north through the outside of the east gate. I guessed that it would converge with the stream water coming from the dock on the north side of the city.

古文：西门外濒溪岸，则石突溪崖，凿道其间，架佛阁于上。
现代文：西门外溪岸边的山崖上，怪石突兀，崖壁间凿出道路，上面建有佛阁。
English: On the cliff on the shore of the West Gate Stream, strange rocks jut out, a road is hewn out between the cliff walls, and a Buddhist pavilion is built on top.

古文：濒江带城，甚可眺望，以行急不及登。
现代文：那山崖濒临溪流，屏绕城池，远望上去景色十分美好，但因为行程急而来不及攀登。
English: The mountain cliff is bordered by a stream, the screen surrounds the castle pond, and the view from afar is very beautiful, but because the trip is rushed, it is too late to climb.

古文：又西五里，一溪自北来，渡其桥；又一溪自西来，即溯之行。
现代文：又往西走五里，有条溪水从北面流来，我们越过溪上的桥；军峰溪从西面流来，于是溯溪走。
English: Another five miles to the west, there is a stream flowing from the north, and we cross the bridge on the stream; Junfeng Creek flows from the west, so we follow the stream.

古文：有数家在溪上，曰三江口，想即二溪与盱江合，故名也。
现代文：有几户人家住在溪岸边，地名叫三江口，我猜想就是两条溪水与吁江在此汇合，所以叫这个名。
English: Several families live on the banks of the stream, the place is called Sanjiangkou, I guess it is where the two streams meet the Hujiang River, hence the name.

古文：十二日，东方甫白，从三江西渡溪，循左路行，路渐微。
现代文：十二日东方刚白，就从三江口往西渡过溪流，顺左边的道路前行，越走路越小。
English: On the 12th day of Dongfang Gangbai, I crossed the stream from the mouth of the Sanjiang River to the west, and walked along the road on the left, getting smaller and smaller as I walked.

古文：六七里，日出，入山口，居舍一二家，去路颇遥。
现代文：走了六七里，太阳升起，进入一个山口，有一两户人家住在离路较远的山上。
English: After walking for six or seven miles, the sun rose and entered a mountain pass. There were one or two families living on the mountain far away from the road.

古文：先是，有言三江再进十里，有山口可宿者，余既讶其近，又疑其居者之寡。
现代文：原先，有人说从三江口往前走十里，有个叫山口的地方可以投宿，我既因为这里离三江口路近而感到诧异，又怀疑居民太少。
English: Originally, some people said that there was a place called Yamaguchi where you could stay if you walked ten miles from Sanjiangkou. I was surprised because it was close to Sanjiangkou Road, and I suspected that there were too few residents.

古文：连逾二岭，三里，遇来人询之，曰： 错矣！
现代文：接连越过两座山岭，走三里遇到对面来的一个人，向他询问，他说： 路走错了！
English: After crossing two mountains in succession, he walked three miles and met a man on the other side. He asked him about it, and he said: "You're on the wrong road!"

古文：正道在南，从三江渡溪已误也。 
现代文：正路在南面，从三江口渡溪就已经错了。 
English: The right road is in the south, and it is wrong to cross the stream from the mouth of the Sanjiang River.

古文：指余南循小路转。
现代文：他指给我往南边顺小路转往正道。
English: He pointed me south along the path to the main road.

古文：盖其岭西北为吴坑，东南为东坑，去三江已十里矣。
现代文：大概那岭的西北面为吴坑，东南面为东坑，距离三江口已经有十里远了。
English: The northwest face of that ridge is probably Wukeng, the southeast face is Dongkeng, and it is already ten miles away from Sanjiangkou.

古文：乃从南转下一坑，得居民复指上岭，共五里，至后阿大山。
现代文：于是从南面转下一个深谷中，遇到当地居民，他又指给我们上岭的路，共走五里，到后阿。
English: So from the south, we turned down a deep valley, met local residents, and he showed us the way up the ridge, a total of five miles, to Houa.

古文：从其西北小路直上二里，则一小庙当路岐。
现代文：从后阿西北面的小路直往上走二里，有一小座庙立在岔路边。
English: From the small road northwest of Houa, walk straight up for two miles. There is a small temple on the side of the road.

古文：从庙西北平循山半阴崖而行，又二里而至一山过脊处，南北俱有路，而西向登岭一路独仄，遂蹑之行。
现代文：从庙西北面平平地顺着山半腰的北侧山崖而行，又走二里到达一座山的山脊穿越过来的地方，山脊的南北边都有路，而往西攀登山岭的一条路最狭窄，于是便沿着那条路走。
English: From the northwest side of the temple, I walked flatly along the cliff on the north side halfway up the mountain, and then walked two miles to a place where the ridge of a mountain passed through. There are roads on the north and south sides of the ridge, and the one way to climb the mountain to the west is the narrowest, so I followed that road.

古文：既登一峰，即转入山峡。
现代文：刚登上一座山峰，就转进山峡中。
English: As soon as you climb a mountain, you turn into a canyon.

古文：其峡有溪在下，自西而东，东口破壁而下；绾口一峰，西南半壁，直倾至底，石骨如削铁；路在其对崖。
现代文：那山峡下面有一条溪水，自西向东流，到东面峡口处破壁而下；峡口盘结着一座山峰，它的西南半壁直向下斜插到底，崖壁上尖峭如骨的石头如削铁一般；道路在山峰对面的崖壁间。
English: At the bottom of the canyon there is a stream that flows from west to east and breaks through the wall at the eastern mouth of the canyon; the mouth of the canyon has a mountain peak, its southwestern half wall straight down and obliquely inserted to the end, the sharp bone-like stones on the cliff wall are like sharpened iron; the road is between the cliff walls opposite the peak.

古文：循峡阴西人，共三里。一石飞突南崖，瞰溪撑日，日光溪影，俱为浮动。
现代文：溪中有块大石头矗立着它的西面两座山崖紧相迫近而向上直立起，如同一道门，水流从中间的石壁上坠落下去，潇绕那大石头周围而后流出去。
English: In the stream there is a large rock, and to the west of it two cliffs rise straight up, close to each other, like a door, and the water falls down from the middle of the stone wall and flows around the large rock and back out.

古文：溪中大石矗立，其西两崖逼竖如门，水从崖中坠壁而下，崖下新架一桥。渡而北，又登岭半里，山回水聚，得岐路入一庵，名龙塘庵。
现代文：这水大概是军峰山东面溪流的源头。山崖下新架着一座桥。越过桥到了北面，又登上岭半里，山峦回环水流汇聚。见到一条岔路通到一座庵中，那庵叫龙塘庵。
English: This water is probably the source of the stream on the eastern side of Junfeng Mountain. There is a new bridge under the cliff. After crossing the bridge to the north, I climbed up the ridge for half a mile, and the water flow around the ridge converged. I saw a forked road leading to a hermitage. That hermitage is called Longtang Hermitage.

古文：有道人曰： 西有龙潭，路棘不可入。 
现代文：有个道人说： 庵西面有个龙潭，但路中荆棘丛生，不可能进去。 
English: A Taoist said: There is a dragon pool on the west side of the hermitage, but there are thorns on the road, so it is impossible to enter.

古文：得茗，食点数枚。
现代文：我们得到庵中道人给的一些茶水，于是吃了些点心。
English: We were given some tea by the monks at the hermitage and had some snacks.

古文：出庵，从左渡小溪，遂复直上岭。
现代文：出了庵，从左面渡过一条小溪，便又直往上攀登山岭。
English: After leaving the hermitage, we crossed a stream on the left and then climbed straight up the mountain ridge.

古文：二里，复循山北阴崖而行，屡有飞涧从山巅坠下，路横越涧上下复成溪。
现代文：爬了二里，又顺山北面的北侧山崖而行，不时有飞洒的山涧水从山顶坠落下来，道路五六次从山涧水上横越过，到了下面涧水又汇流成溪。
English: After climbing two miles, I walked along the cliff on the north side of the north face of the mountain. From time to time, there was a sprinkling of mountain spring water falling down from the top of the mountain. The road crossed over the mountain spring water five or six times, and when it reached the bottom, the spring water merged into a stream.

古文：又三里，得横木栈崖。
现代文：又走三里，见到一根横木架在山崖间。
English: After walking another three miles, I saw a crossbeam between the mountains and cliffs.

古文：又二里，直转军峰之北，仰望峰顶犹刺天也，有石涧自峰顶悬凹而下，盖北溪之源矣。
现代文：又走二里，直转到军峰山的北面，仰望峰顶犹如刺穿了青天一般，有一条山涧水从峰顶顺着凹陷处悬流下来，它大概是军峰山北面的溪流的源头。
English: I walked another two miles and went straight to the north side of Junfeng Mountain. Looking up at the peak, it was as if I had pierced the blue sky. There was a mountain stream hanging down from the peak along the depression. It was probably the source of the stream on the north side of Junfeng Mountain.

古文：渡溪复上一岭，始与北来大路合，遂高南向峰顶，而上无重峰之隔矣。
现代文：渡过溪走二百步，又上了一岭，道路才与北面来的大路交合，于是往南向着高高的军峰山顶爬去，而上面不再有层层峰峦的阻隔了。
English: After 200 steps across the stream and one more up the ridge, the road finally meets the main road coming from the north, so we climb south to the top of the high Junfeng Mountain, and there are no more layers of peaks above.

古文：自东北路口西上一里，至北岭度脊处，有空屋三间，中有绳床土灶而无人居，其西下宜黄之道，东即所从来大道也。
现代文：从军峰山东北路口处往西朝上走一里，到达军峰山北面山岭等的山脊越过来的地方，有三间空屋子，屋中有绳床土灶但无人居住，从空屋西面下去是到宜黄县的路，东面就是上来时所走的路。
English: From the junction of the northeast junction of the Junfeng Mountain, walk one mile to the west and up to the place where the ridges of the mountains on the north side of the Junfeng Mountain come over, there are three empty houses. The houses have rope beds and earthen stoves but are uninhabited. The road from the empty house to the west is the road to Yihuang County, and the road to the east is the road taken when coming up.

古文：自此南上，凿蹬叠级，次第间出，蹈空而上，道甚修广，则进贤金父母所助而成者。
现代文：从此处往南朝上走，人工修凿出的级级石瞪，次第涌出，从半空中攀越而上，石阶路很长很宽，它是进贤县一个姓金的人的父母资助而修成的。
English: From here, we walked up the Nan Dynasty. Graded stone slabs, which were artificially excavated, gradually gushed out and climbed up from the middle of the sky. The stone stairway was very long and wide. It was built with the financial support of the parents of a person surnamed Jin in Jinxian County.

古文：金名廷璧，自此愈上愈高，风气寒厉，与会仙异矣。登顶下望，五六尖峰自西南片片成队而来，乃闽中来脉也。
现代文：大略从南丰县来，自车盘岭南面上军峰山，不如北面的道路那样通畅；然而经过着棋峰上山，则必须走石栈，绕崖壁，穿越山峰西面的峡谷，踩着石瞪攀着石头间的缝隙而上，道路非常奇险。
English: Coming roughly from Nanfeng County, the road from the south face of Panling to Jianfeng Mountain is not as smooth as the road to the north; however, after passing Jifeng Mountain, you must take the stone stack, go around the cliff wall, cross the canyon on the west side of the mountain, step on the stone and climb the gap between the stones. The road is very dangerous.

古文：至绝顶之南，圆亘为着棋峰，亭亭峭削，非他峰所及。
现代文：我从北面道路中望见着棋峰上那条路，后悔没能亲历。
English: I saw the road on the peak from the north road, and regretted not being able to experience it myself.

古文：北起为绝顶，则石屋中浮，丘、王、郭三仙像共列焉。
现代文：军峰山顶的北部耸起为最高峰，石屋中列置着浮丘、王、郭三个仙人的像。
English: The northern part of the peak of the mountain rises as the highest peak. In the middle of the stone house, there are statues of three sages: Buoy, King and Guo.

古文：其北度之脉，则空室处。
现代文：最高顶往北越过去的山脉，就是有三间空屋子的地方。
English: At the very top of the mountain range that runs through northern Vietnam, there are three empty houses.

古文：其北又起一峰，直走而为王仙峰，东下而为麻姑，东北下而为云盖，以结建昌者也。
现代文：那里往北又耸起一峰，它一直向北绵延而成为王仙峰，向东延伸下去而成为麻姑山，向东北延伸下去而成为云盖山，从而与建昌府城的山交错盘结在一起。
English: There, to the north, another peak rises. It stretches all the way to the north and becomes Wang Xianfeng, extends to the east and becomes Magu Mountain, and extends to the northeast and becomes Yungai Mountain, thus interlacing with the mountains of Jianchang Prefecture.

古文：自着棋峰夹中望，下有洞穹然，攀箐挂石而下，日尚下午，至洞已渐落虞渊天色黄昏，亟仍攀蹑而上，观落日焉。
现代文：从着棋峰的山峡中望过去，峰下有个洞高高隆起，攀着竹木抓着石块往下行时，还是下午，到那洞时天色已经黄昏，于是赶忙仍旧攀着草木踩着崖石上到山顶，观看落日景象。
English: Looking down from the canyon of Qifeng, there is a high-rise cave at the foot of the peak. It was still afternoon when I climbed down the bamboo clinging to the stone. By the time I reached the cave, it was already dusk, so I hurriedly climbed up the cliff to the top of the mountain, watching the sunset.

