古文：秦穆公袭郑，晋纳邾捷菑。《三传》所书略相似。
现代文：秦穆公偷袭郑国，晋送郑捷百回国，《春秋三传》的记载大致相同。
English: Qin Mu Gong secretly attacked Zheng Guo and sent Zheng Jie back to China a hundred times. The records in the "Three Tales of Spring and Autumn" are roughly the same.

古文：《左氏》书秦事曰： 杞子自郑告秦曰： 潜师以来，国可得也。 
现代文：《左传》记秦国事情说： 杞子从郑国告诉秦国说： 暗地派兵来，可以灭掉郑国。 
English: "Zo Zhuan" describes the events in Qin as follows: Zizi told Qin from Zheng that if he sent troops secretly, he could destroy Zheng.

古文：穆公访诸蹇叔，蹇叔曰： 劳师以袭远，非所闻也，且行千里，其谁不知！ 
现代文：秦穆公和蹇叔商量，赛叔说： 疲劳军旅偷袭远国，我没听说过能胜利的，而且千里行军，人家还有不知道的！ 
English: Qin Mu Gong and Uncle Zhai had a discussion, and Uncle Sai said: Tired soldiers sneak into a faraway country. I have never heard of anything that can be victorious, and they have to march thousands of miles. People still don't know!

古文：公辞焉，召孟明出师。
现代文：穆公不听，让孟明出兵。
English: Mu Gong did not listen and let Meng Ming send troops.

古文：蹇叔哭之曰： 孟子，吾见师之出，而不见其入也。 
现代文：奏叔对孟明哭着说： 孟明啊，我能看到军队出去，看不到它回来了。 
English: Uncle Soo cried to Meng Ming and said, "Meng Ming, I can see the army go out, but I can't see it come back.

古文：公曰： 尔何知？
现代文：穆公说： 你知道什么！
English: Mu Gong said: You know what!

古文：中寿，尔墓之木拱矣。 
现代文：你如果是中年死亡，你坟上的树已经两手合抢了。 
English: If you die in middle age, the tree on your grave has already been snatched with both hands.

古文：蹇叔之子与师，哭而送之曰： 晋人御师必于殽，殽有二陵焉，必死是间，余收尔骨焉。 
现代文：赛叔的儿子参加了军队，襄叔哭着送他说： 晋国防御的军队，一定在殽的两座丘陵之间设伏，你一定死在那里，我去收拾你的尸骨。 
English: Uncle Sai's son joined the army, and Uncle Xiang sent him away crying, saying, "The army of the Jin Dynasty must camp between the two hills of Handan, and you must die there. I will go and collect your remains."

古文：秦师遂东。 
现代文：秦国军队遂去了东方。 
English: As a result, Qin's army went to the east.

古文：《公羊》曰： 秦伯将袭郑，百里子与蹇叔子谏曰： 千里而袭人，未有不亡者也。 
现代文：《公羊传》说： 秦伯将要偷袭郑国，百里奚与逛叔劝诫说： 行军千里偷袭人国，没有不失败的。 
English: "The Legend of the Ram" says: Qin Bo will raid Zheng Guo, and Bailiyao and Guan Xiu exhorted: "There is no way to march thousands of miles to raid other countries without failure."

古文：秦伯怒曰： 若尔之年者，宰上之木拱矣，尔曷知！ 
现代文：奏伯恼怒地说： 象你一样岁数的人，坟上的树已经两人合抱了，你知道什么？ 
English: The musician said angrily, "For someone as old as you, the tree on the grave has already been hugged by two people. What do you know?

古文：师出，百里子与蹇叔子送其子而戒之曰： 尔即死，必于殽嵚岩，吾将尸尔焉。 
现代文：军队就要出征了，百里奚与赛叔送他们的儿子并告诫说： 你们就要死了，一定是在殽山的岩壁下面，我将去收尸。 
English: When the army was about to leave for the war, Bai Lijuan and Uncle Sai sent their sons and warned them: "You are about to die. You must be under the cliff of Lushan Mountain. I will go and collect your bodies."

古文：子揖师而行，百里子与蹇叔子从其子而哭之。
现代文：他们的儿子进军出发了，百里奚与赛叔跟在儿子后面哭泣。
English: Their son marched off, and Bai Lijuan and Uncle Sai followed crying behind their son.

古文：秦伯怒曰： 尔曷为哭吾师？ 
现代文：秦伯恼怒说： 你们为什么哭我的军队？ 
English: Qin Bo said angrily: "Why are you crying for my army?

古文：对曰： 臣非敢哭君师，哭臣之子也。  
现代文：他们回答说： 我们不敢哭君王的军队，我们是哭自己的儿子呀！  
English: They answered, "We do not dare to weep for the king's army; we are weeping for our own sons."

古文：《穀梁》曰： 秦伯将袭郑，百里子与蹇叔子谏曰： 千里而袭人，未有不亡者也。 
现代文：《谷梁传》说： 秦伯将偷袭郑国，百里奚与蹇叔劝阻道： 千里行军偷袭人国，没有不失败死亡的。 
English: "The Tale of Gu Liang" says: Qin Bo will make a surprise attack on Zheng Guo. Bai Lijun and Uncle Zou dissuade him, saying: A thousand-mile march to make a surprise attack on Ren Guo, there is no death without failure.

古文：秦伯曰： 子之冢木已拱矣，何知？ 
现代文：秦伯说： 你们坟上的树木，已经合抱了，知道什么？ 
English: Qin Bo said, "The trees on your graves have already embraced each other. What do you know?

古文：师行，百里子与蹇叔子送其子而戒子曰： 女死，必于殽之岩灊之下，我将尸女于是。 
现代文：军队出发了，百里奚与赛叔送他们的儿子，告诫说： 你们必能死是在殽山的岩峰下面，我要在那里收你们的尸。 
English: When the army set out, Bai Lijuan and Uncle Sai sent their son to warn them: "You will surely die under the rocky peak of Lushan Mountain. I will collect your bodies there."

古文：师行，百里子与蹇叔子随其子而哭之，秦伯怒曰： 何为哭吾师也！ 
现代文：秦伯恼怒地说： 为什么哭我的军队？ 二人说： 我们不敢哭军队，是哭我们的儿子呀！我老了，他们不死，就是我死了。  
English: Qin Bo said angrily, "Why is my army crying?" The two said, "We don't dare to cry for the army, but we do cry for our son! I'm old, if they don't die, then I die."

古文：二子曰： 非敢哭师也，哭吾子也，我老矣，彼不死，则我死矣。  其书邾事，《左氏》曰： 邾文公元妃齐姜生定公，二妃晋姬生捷菑。
现代文：三家记载邾国事，《左传》说： 邾文公元妃齐姜生的定公，次妃晋姬生的捷菑。
English: The three families recorded the state affairs, and "Zo Zhuan" said: Zouwen, the consort of Empress Qi Jiang, was Dingong, and the second consort of Empress Jin, was Jie Tong.

古文：文公卒，邾人立定公。
现代文：邾文公去世，邾国人立定公当了都君。
English: After the death of King Wen, the people of the Kingdom of Wei became the rulers of the country.

古文：捷菑奔晋，晋赵盾以诸侯之师八百乘纳之。
现代文：捷蓄出走晋国，晋国赵盾率领诸侯的军队八百辆战车，送捷菑回国。
English: Jie Zuo left for Jin Province, and Zhao Dun of Jin Province led an army of 800 chariots and sent Jie Zuo back to the country.

古文：邾人辞曰： 齐出玃且长。 
现代文：邾国人不接受说： 齐姜生的玃且年长。 
English: Chinese people do not accept the saying: Qi Jiangsheng is old and old.

古文：宣子曰： 辞顺而弗从，不祥。 
现代文：赵宣子说： 理由正当，如不听从，后果不好。 
English: Zhao Xuanzi said: The reason is legitimate, if you do not obey, the consequences are not good.

古文：乃还。 
现代文：于是回国。 
English: So I came back.

古文：《公羊》曰： 晋郤缺帅师，革车八百乘，以纳接菑于邾娄，力沛然若有余而纳之，邾娄人辞曰： 接菑，晋出也，玃且，齐出也。
现代文：《公羊传》说： 晋国郤缺带兵，兵车八百辆，送捷菑回邾娄，力量雄厚有余。邾娄人拒绝说： 捷菑是晋姬生的，撰且是齐姜生的。
English: "The Story of the Ram" says: Jin Province lacked a mule to lead the troops, and there were eight hundred military vehicles to send the mule back to Jin. The mule had more than enough strength. The people of Jin refused to say: The mule was the son of Jin Ji, and the author was the son of Qi Jiang.

古文：子以其指则接菑也四，玃且也六，子以大国压之，则未知齐、晋孰有之也。
现代文：你用他们的手指头立君，那么捷菑四个，撰且六个，都不正常。你用大国的势力来压我们，若齐国也照办，那就不知道齐晋两国的外甥哪个为君了。
English: If you use their fingers to install a ruler, then four kings and six queens are not normal. If you use the power of a great power to oppress us, and if Qi also does the same, then I don't know which of Qi Jin's two nephews is the ruler.

古文：贵则皆贵矣，虽然，玃且也长。 
现代文：论身份贵重，他们是相等的，但撰且年长。 
English: In terms of status, they are equal, but older.

古文：郤缺曰： 非吾力不能纳也，义实不尔克也。 
现代文：郤缺说； 不是我的力量不能送接畜回国，是道义上不允许呀！
English: "It's not my strength that can't take the animals back to China, it's morally unacceptable," said Zou Que.

古文：引师而去之。 
现代文：遂带兵回国。 
English: He then returned to Japan with his soldiers.

古文：《穀梁》曰： 长毂五百乘，绵地千里，过宋、郑、滕、薛，敻入千乘之国，欲变人之主，至城下，然后知，何知之晚也！
现代文：《石梁传》说： 长车五百辆，连绵一千里，经地宋国、滕国、薛国，远到有战车千辆的大国，想改换他们的国君，到了城下，才知道不行，怎么知道的这么晚呢！
English: "Shi Liang Chuan" said: There are five hundred chariots, stretching for a thousand miles, passing through the Song, Teng, and Xue states, as far as the big countries with a thousand chariots. If they want to change their sovereign, they can't until they get to the city. How can they know so late?

古文：捷菑，晋出也，玃且，齐出也。玃且，正也，捷菑，不正也。 
现代文：捷菑是晋姬生的，撰且是齐姜生的，立撰且是正确的，立捷蓄是不正确的。 
English: Jiechi was created by Jinji, compiled and created by Qi Jiang, compiled and correct, and compiled and saved incorrectly.

古文：予谓秦之事，《穀梁》纡余有味，邾之事，《左氏》语简而切，欲为文记事者，当以是观之。
现代文：我以为记秦国事，《谷梁传》委婉有味。记邾国事，《左传》语言简明确切。想写文童记事，当看这两篇。
English: I thought that the memoirs of Qin and Gu Liang were euphemistic. The memoirs of Han and Zuo were concise and clear. If you want to write about children's literature, you should read these two articles.

