古文：司市掌市之治教、政刑、量度禁令。
现代文：司市掌管听断市场的争讼、教道经营、掌管有关的政令、刑罚、度量单位和禁令。
English: The city magistrate is in charge of hearing the disputes of the market, the operation of the teaching channel, and the relevant decrees, penalties, units of measurement and prohibitions.

古文：以次叙分地而经市，以陈肆辨物而平市，以政令禁物靡而均市，以商贾阜货而行市。以量度成贾而征价，以质剂结信而止讼，以贾民禁伪而除诈，以刑罚禁虣而去盗；以泉府同货而敛赊。
现代文：按照次和叙的设置来区分地段、划分市场，按照货物的不同来分类陈列店铺而使买卖公平，用政令禁止出售细巧侈靡的物品而使买卖合理，通过招致商贾而使货物丰盛、钱币流通，通过度量确定价格而招徕购买者，通过质剂结成买卖双方的信任而避免争讼，用胥师、贾师等小吏来禁止假货而杜绝欺诈，用刑罚来禁止暴乱而铲除盗贼，通过泉府的收购或赊予来体现与民同财货。
English: According to the setting of the Second and Third Dynasties, it is necessary to distinguish the lot and divide the market, classify the display shops according to the different goods to make the trading fair, prohibit the sale of delicate and luxurious goods by government order to make the trading reasonable, make the goods abundant and the coins circulate by attracting merchants, attract buyers by measuring and determining the price, avoid disputes by building trust between buyers and sellers, use the small officials such as the gongshi and the jiashi to prohibit the fake goods and eliminate the fraud, use the penalty to prohibit the riot and eliminate the thieves, and reflect the same goods with the people through the acquisition or donation of Quanfu.

古文：大市，日而市，百族为主；朝市朝时而市，商贾为主；夕市夕时而市；贩夫贩妇为主。
现代文：大市在日过正午的时候开始交易，以百姓为主。朝市在早晨开始交易，以商贾为主。夕市在夕时开始交易，以男女小贩为主。
English: The big market starts trading when the sun passes noon, mainly with people. The morning market starts trading in the morning, mainly with merchants. The evening market starts trading in the evening, mainly with male and female hawkers.

古文：凡市入，则胥执鞭度守门，市之群吏，平肆、展成、奠贾，上旌于思次以令市。
现代文：凡进入市场进行交易，胥手拿鞭杖守在肆门，市中群吏按货物分类划分行列，审视将成交的货物而估定价格，把旌旗悬挂到思次的屋楼丰以表示交易开始。
English: When people enter the market to trade, they stand at the gate with a whip in their hands, and the city officials divide the ranks according to the classification of goods, examine the goods to be traded and estimate the price, and hang the banner to the building Feng of Shiji to indicate the start of the transaction.

古文：市师莅焉，而听大治大讼；胥师贾师莅于介次，而听小治小讼。
现代文：司市来到思次，而听断大事和大的争讼；胥师，贾师来到介次，而听断小事和小的争讼。
English: The chief magistrate came to Shiji to hear the major and major disputes; the magistrate and the judge came to Jieji to hear the minor and minor disputes.

古文：凡万民之期于市者，辟布者、量度者、刑戮者各于其地之叙。
现代文：凡民众相约到市上进行交易的，其中有争讼钱物的，想量度货物的，或因违法当受处罚的，都各在所交易之地的叙处进行处理。
English: All people who agree to go to the market to conduct transactions, including disputes over money and goods, those who want to measure goods, or those who are subject to punishment for violations of the law, are all handled at the registration office in the place of the transaction.

古文：凡得货贿六畜者，亦如之，三日而举之。
现代文：凡拾得货物或牲畜的，也放在叙处供认领，过三天无人认领的就没收归公。
English: Any goods or livestock that are found are also placed at the registration office for claim. If they are not claimed after three days, they will be confiscated and returned to the public.

古文：凡治市之货贿六畜珍异，亡者使有，利者使阜，害者使亡，靡者使微。
现代文：凡调剂市中的货物、牲畜和四季珍异的食物，没有的使之有，对民有利的使之多，对民有害的使之消失，侈靡细巧的使之减少。
English: Whoever adjusts the goods, livestock and rare foods of the four seasons in the city, so that there are none, so that there are more beneficial to the people, so that there are no harmful to the people, and so that there are fewer luxuries.

古文：凡通货贿。
现代文：凡商贾运输货物，凭印章出入。
English: All merchants transporting goods shall enter and leave the city with the seal.

古文：以玺节出入之，国凶荒札丧，则市无征而作布。
现代文：国有大灾荒、大瘟疫，就不征收市场税，而多铸造钱币。
English: If there is a national disaster, famine or plague, the market tax will not be levied, and more coins will be minted.

古文：凡市伪饰之禁，在民者十有二，在商者十有二，在贾者十有二，在工者十有二。
现代文：凡市场禁止诈伪巧饰：对于民众有十二项，对于商人有十二项，对于贾人有十二项，对于工人有十二项，总计四十八项诈伪巧饰。
English: In all markets, counterfeit and pirated ornaments are prohibited: 12 items for the public, 12 items for merchants, 12 items for Jia people, and 12 items for workers, for a total of 48 items of counterfeit and pirated ornaments.

古文：市刑、小刑宪罚，中刑徇罚，大刑扑罚，其附于刑者，归于士。
现代文：市中的刑罚：小刑公布违禁之状以示罚，中刑游街以示罚，大刑鞭挞以示罚。其中有触犯刑律的，就交给司法官处置。
English: The punishment in the city: minor punishment is to be punished by publicizing the prohibited status, medium punishment is to be punished by walking the streets, and major punishment is to be punished by whipping. Among them, those who violate the criminal law will be handed over to the judicial officer for disposition.

古文：国君过市，则刑人赦；夫人过市，罚一幕；世子过市，罚一帟；命夫过市，罚一盖；命妇过市，罚一帷。
现代文：命夫经过市场，就罚当受刑的人出一盖了事。
English: When the condemned man passed through the market, the executioner punished him.

古文：凡会同、师役，市司帅贾师而従，治其市政，掌其卖儥之事。
现代文：命妇经过市场，就罚当受刑的人出一帷了事。凡有会同、征伐、劳役等事，司市率贾师随行，治理临时市场的事务，掌管市场买卖的事。
English: Whenever there was a matter of association, conquest, labor service, etc., the city magistrate accompanied Jia Shi to manage the affairs of the temporary market and take charge of the business of the market.

古文：质人掌成市之货贿、人民、牛马、兵器、车辇、珍异。
现代文：质人掌管评定市场上的货物、奴婢、牛马、兵器、珍异之物的价格。
English: Qualified persons were in charge of assessing the prices of goods, slaves, cattle, horses, weapons, and rare items on the market.

古文：凡卖儥者质剂焉，大市以质，小市以剂。
现代文：凡从事买卖的授予质剂做凭证：大买卖用质做凭证，小买卖用剂做凭证。
English: All those who are engaged in trading shall use the quality agent as a certificate: large trading shall use the quality agent as a certificate, small trading shall use the quality agent as a certificate.

古文：掌稽市之书契，同其度量，壹其淳制，巡而考之。犯禁者，举而罚之。
现代文：掌管考察市场上取予货物所用的书契，统一度量标准，统一布匹的幅宽和匹长，巡行检查，有违犯规定的就没收货物并罚钱。
English: It is in charge of inspecting the book contracts used to take the goods on the market, unifying the standard of weight, unifying the width and length of the cloth, patrol inspection, and confiscating the goods and fining if there is any violation of the regulations.

古文：凡治质剂者，国中一旬，郊二旬，野三旬，都三月，邦国期。
现代文：凡处理有关券契的争讼，都城中约定在十天以内，四郊在二十天以内，甸、稍之地在三十天以内，小都、大都在三个月以内，诸侯国在一年以内。
English: In all cases where disputes concerning the deed of guarantee are to be dealt with, it is agreed that the capital should be dealt with within ten days, the four suburbs within twenty days, the dynasties and counties within thirty days, the smaller cities and counties within three months, and the principalities within one year.

古文：期内听，期外不听。
现代文：在约定的时期内前来投诉就受理，过期不受理。
English: Complaints received within the agreed period will be accepted. Late complaints will not be accepted.

古文：廛人掌敛市絘布、緫、质布、罚布、廛布，而入于泉府。
现代文：廛人掌管收取市场的店铺税、货物税、质剂税、罚款、市宅税，而交入泉府。
English: The person in charge of collecting the market's shop tax, goods tax, quality tax, fine, and municipal housing tax, and handing it over to Quanfu.

古文：凡屠者，敛其皮、角、筋、骨，入于玉府。
现代文：凡屠宰牲畜的，收取牲畜的皮角筋骨以当税，交入玉府。
English: Anyone slaughtering livestock shall collect the skin, horns, sinews and bones of the livestock as tax and submit them to the Gyokufu.

古文：凡珍异之有滞者，敛而入于膳府。
现代文：凡珍异之物有滞销的，收购而交入膳夫之府。
English: All rare items have slow sales, so they are purchased and handed over to the chef's house.

古文：胥师各掌其次之政令；而平其货贿，宪刑禁焉。
现代文：胥师各自掌管本次的政令，而使各肆货物的价格公平，公布有关的刑罚和禁令。
English: Regulators are in charge of this decree, so that the prices of goods are fair, and the relevant penalties and prohibitions are announced.

古文：察其诈伪、饰行、儥慝者，而诛罚之，听其小治小讼而断之。
现代文：察觉那些欺诈作假、巧饰其行以兜售劣质货物的人而加以惩罚，受理小事和小的争讼而加以裁断。
English: to detect and punish those who commit fraud and forgery, and those who embellish their activities by peddling shoddy goods, and to hear and adjudicate minor cases and disputes.

古文：贾师各掌其次之货贿之治，辨其物而均平之。展其成而奠其贾，然后令市。
现代文：贾师各自掌管对本次货物的管理，辨别本次的货物使分类合理而价格公平，审视将成交的货物而估定价格，然后使他们成交。
English: The judges are in charge of the management of the goods this time, distinguish the goods this time to make the classification reasonable and the price fair, examine the goods to be traded and estimate the price, and then make them trade.

古文：凡天患，禁贵儥者，使有恒贾。
现代文：凡有天灾，禁止高价贵卖，使价格稳定。
English: Whenever there is a natural disaster, it is forbidden to sell at a high price, so that the price is stable.

古文：四时之珍异，亦如之。
现代文：对于四季珍异之物也禁止贵卖。
English: It is also prohibited to sell rare items of the four seasons at high prices.

古文：凡国之卖儥，各帅其属而嗣掌其月。
现代文：凡国家出卖或购买物资，就各自率领下属而按月相继轮流掌管买卖的事。
English: Where countries sell or buy materials, they each lead their subordinates and take turns in charge of trading on a monthly basis.

古文：凡师役、会同，亦如之。司虣掌宪市之禁令。
现代文：凡征伐、劳役、会同，也这样为公家掌管买卖的事。
English: In all matters of conquest, labor service, and association, the public also controls business.

古文：禁其斗嚣者，与其虣乱者，出入相陵犯者，以属游饮食于市者。
现代文：司虣掌管公布有关市场的禁令，禁止那些打斗吵闹的人和那些用暴力扰乱市场的人，禁止那些出入市场相互欺凌侵犯的人，禁止那些在市场上聚众游逛和吃喝的人。
English: The priests are in charge of promulgating prohibitions concerning the market, prohibiting those who fight noisily and those who disturb the market with violence, prohibiting those who enter and leave the market and bully each other, prohibiting those who gather in the market and eat and drink.

古文：若不可禁，则搏而戮之。
现代文：如果不可禁止，就抓捕而加以惩罚。
English: If they cannot be banned, they should be arrested and punished.

古文：司稽掌巡市。而察其犯禁者，与其不物者而搏之。
现代文：司稽掌管巡视市场，察觉违犯禁令的人以及那些奇装异服、窥探偷看和所拿的东西怪异的人而加以抓捕。
English: Inspectors patrol the market to catch violators of the ban, as well as those who dress up, snoop and take strange things.

古文：掌执市之盗贼以徇，且刑之。
现代文：负责抓捕市场上的盗贼游街示众，且处以刑罚。
English: He is responsible for catching the thieves in the market who parade in the streets and punishing them.

古文：胥各掌其所治之政，执鞭度而巡其前，掌其坐作出入之禁令，袭其不正者。
现代文：胥各自掌管所治理的二肆的事务，拿着鞭杖巡视在肆门前，掌管肆中有关坐起、出入的禁令，掩捕那些违犯禁令的入。
English: Each of them is in charge of the affairs of the two clubs they manage. They patrol in front of the club's door with a whip, control the ban on sitting up and entering the club, and arrest those who violate the ban.

古文：凡有罪者，挞戮而罚之。
现代文：凡有罪的人，加以鞭打而且罚款。
English: Whosoever is guilty, whip him and fine him.

古文：肆长各掌其肆之政令。陈其货贿，名相近者相远也，实相近者相尔也，而平正之。
现代文：肆长各自掌管本肆的政令，陈列肆中的货物，使名相近而实不同的相互远隔开来，使实相近而名不同的相互放在一起，而使分类正确、价格公平。
English: The government decreed that the chiefs of each guild should be in charge of their own guilds, and the goods in the guilds should be displayed at the highest level, so that the goods with similar names but different names should be separated from each other, and the goods with similar names but different names should be placed together, so that the classification would be correct and the price would be fair.

古文：敛其緫布，掌其戒禁。
现代文：收取本肆的货物税，掌管本肆的戒令。
English: Collect the goods tax of this business, and issue a command to take control of this business.

古文：泉府掌以市之征布。敛市之不售，货之滞于民用者，以其贾买之，物楬而书之，以待不时而买者。
现代文：泉府掌管用所征收的市场税款，收购市场上卖不动、滞销而又切于民用的货物，按原价收购，一件一件地加上标签标明价钱，以待急需的人购买。
English: Quanfu is in charge of using the collected market tax to purchase goods that are not sold on the market, slow-selling, and are essential for civilian use. They are purchased at the original price, and the price is marked with a label one by one, so that they can be purchased by people in urgent need.

古文：买者各従其抵，都鄙従其主，国人郊人従其有司，然后予之。
现代文：购买者各从他们的主管官那里采邑的人从他们的邑宰那里，国都的人和四郊的人从他们的有关官吏那里开出证明，然后卖给他。
English: The purchasers each took a certificate from their magistrate, the townspeople from their burgomaster, the people of the capital and the four suburbs from their respective officials, and then sold it to him.

古文：凡赊者，祭祀无过旬日，丧纪无过三月。
现代文：凡赊取钱物的，为祭祀而赊取不超过十天归还，为丧事而赊取不超过三个月归还。
English: Anyone who steals money shall return it within ten days for sacrificial rites, and within three months for funerals.

古文：凡民之贷者，与其有司辨而授之，以国服为之息。
现代文：凡民有贷取钱物的，就同他的主管官一起辨别钱物而授给他，按照国家规定的税率来收取利息。
English: If any citizen has borrowed money or goods, he shall, together with his competent officials, identify the money or goods and lend them to him, and collect the interest according to the tax rate set by the state.

古文：凡国事之财用取具焉。
现代文：凡国事所需钱物都从泉府支取。
English: All the money and goods needed for state affairs are drawn from Quanfu.

古文：岁终，则会其出入而纳其余。
现代文：夏历年终，计钱物的收支，而缴纳盈余给职币。
English: At the end of the year of the lunar calendar, the income and expenditure of the money-counting objects are summed up, and the surplus is paid to the local currency.

古文：司门掌授管、键，以启闭国门。
现代文：司门掌管授给属吏钥匙和锁，用以开关国都城门。
English: The steward in charge of the gate gave the key and lock to the official to open and close the gate of the national capital.

古文：几出入不物者，正其货贿凡财物。
现代文：检查那些奇装异服、窥探偷看和所拿的东西怪异的人，征收进出的货物税，凡贩卖的财物违犯禁令的加以没收。
English: Check those who wear strange clothes, spy and peep and take strange things, collect import and export goods tax, and confiscate any goods sold in violation of the ban.

古文：犯禁者，举之，以其财养死政之老与其孤。
现代文：用国门的委积抚养为国事而死者的父母和孩子。
English: The parents and children of those who died for the sake of the state are being raised by the state.

古文：祭祀之牛牲系焉，监门养之。
现代文：祭祀用的牛牲拴系在这里，由监门负责喂养。
English: Cattle and donkeys used for rituals are kept here, and the jailer is responsible for feeding them.

古文：凡岁时之门，受其余。
现代文：凡一年四季对国门的祭祀，接受祭祀的余财加以保管。
English: All four seasons of the year for the national gate of the sacrifice, to accept the sacrifice of the surplus to be kept.

古文：凡四方之宾客造焉，则以告。
现代文：凡四方的宾客到来，就向王报告。
English: When guests come from four directions, report to the king.

古文：司关掌国货之节以联门市。
现代文：司关掌管检查国境上过往货物的玺节，以与司门、司市相联合。
English: The Customs Department is in charge of inspecting the customs of past goods on the border, in cooperation with the Department and the city.

古文：司货贿之出入者，掌其治禁与其征廛。
现代文：检查携带货物出入的人，掌管有关治理的禁令和征收货物税以及货物存放仓库的租金。
English: Check the people who carry goods in and out, control the ban on governance and collect the goods tax and the rent of the warehouse where the goods are stored.

古文：凡货不出於关者，举其货，罚其人。
现代文：凡货物不从关门出入的，就没收货物，惩罚货主。
English: If the goods do not pass through the closed door, the goods will be confiscated and the owner will be punished.

古文：凡所达货贿者，则以节传出之。
现代文：凡携带货物到来而未经司市授予玺节的，就授给玺节和传而放行。
English: Anyone who arrives with goods and has not been granted a license by the city will be granted a license and released.

古文：国凶札；则无关门之征，犹几。
现代文：国家发生灾荒、瘟疫，就免除关税，但仍然要进行检查。
English: In the event of a national disaster or plague, tariffs are exempted, but inspections must still be carried out.

古文：凡四方之宾客关，则为之告。
现代文：凡四方的宾客前来见关人，就为他们向王报告。
English: All the foreign guests who came to see the governor reported to the king on their behalf.

古文：有外内之送令，则以节传出内之。
现代文：有境外或境内奉命传送贡物或文书等的，就授给旌节和传让他们通行。
English: Those who are ordered to convey tributes or documents, etc. from abroad or within the country shall be granted the right of passage.

古文：掌节掌守邦节而辨其用，以辅王命。
现代文：掌节负责保管王国的节而分辨它们的用途，以辅助执行王的命令。
English: The Hand is responsible for keeping track of the kingdom's stanzas and identifying their uses to help carry out the king's commands.

古文：守邦国者用玉节，守都鄙者用角节，凡邦国之使节，山国用虎节，土国用人节，泽国用龙节，皆金也。
现代文：诸侯派遣使者出使于国内用玉节，采邑主派遣使者出使于采邑内用角节。凡诸侯国的使者出境所用的节，山区之国用虎节，平地之国用人节，泽地之国用龙节，都是铜制的，用有画饰的函盛着。
English: The Jade Festival is used domestically when emissaries are sent by the lords of the provinces, and the Horn Festival is used when emissaries are sent by the lords of the counties. All the festivals used when emissaries of the lords of the provinces leave the country, the Tiger Festival in the mountainous country, the Human Festival in the country of the plains, and the Dragon Festival in the country of the marshes, are made of copper and are contained in decorated letters.

古文：以英荡辅之，门关用符节，货贿用玺节，道路用旌节，皆有期以反节。
现代文：出入国都城门和关门用符节，运输货物用玺节，通行道路用旌节，各种节的使用都规定了有效日期以便按期归还。
English: The entry and exit of the capital city gate and the closing door are marked with signs, the transportation of goods is marked with signs, and the roads are marked with signs. The use of various signs has specified the effective date in order to return them on time.

古文：凡通达於天下者必有节，以传辅之。
现代文：凡通行天下，必须持有节，用传辅助节。
English: Wherever there is traffic in the world, it is necessary to have a section and use a passing auxiliary section.

古文：无节者，有几则不达。
现代文：没有节的人，遇有检查就不得通行。
English: People without a pass are not allowed to pass through in the event of an inspection.

