古文：郑良霄既诛，国人相惊，或梦伯有介而行，曰： 壬子余将杀带，明年壬寅余又将杀段！ 
现代文：原文春秋郑简公二十三年的时候，大夫良霄因为专权，被驷带、公孙段等诸大夫群起而诛杀。然七年之后，郑国又有人因此事受到惊扰。有人在梦中见伯有全身胄甲，披挂而来，对其说道： 壬子日我要把驷带杀掉，明年的壬寅日我还要将公孙段杀死！ 
English: In the spring and autumn of the 23rd year of Zheng Jian Gong, Dr. Liang Xiaotang was killed by a group of doctors, including his son-in-law, son-in-law and grandson-in-law, because of his exclusive power. However, seven years later, another person in Zheng Guo was alarmed by this. Someone saw him in a dream wearing a full-body armor, and said to him: "On the Day of the Dragon, I will kill my son-in-law, and on the Day of the Dragon, I will kill my son-in-law!"

古文：驷带及公孙段果如期卒，国人益大惧。子产立公孙泄及良止以抚之，乃止。
现代文：这些事情发生后，他把良霄的儿子良止和以前也被诛杀的大夫子孔的儿子公孙泄重新立为大夫，安他们抚住了，这些事情才不再发生。
English: After these things happened, he reinstated Ryosho's son, Ryosei, and the doctor Zikong's son, Gongsun Ke, who had also been beaten to death, as doctors, pacified them, and these things did not happen again.

古文：子太叔问其故，子产曰： 鬼有所归，乃不为厉。
现代文：子产的儿子太叔问其缘故，子产回答： 死人的鬼魂没有归宿，就成为了无主的游魂，并成为厉鬼而搅扰人。
English: The uncle of Zibo's son asked the reason for this, and Zibo replied: The ghosts of the dead have no home, so they become wandering spirits without a master, and they become fierce ghosts and disturb people.

古文：吾为之归也。 太叔曰： 公孙何为？ 
现代文：把他们的儿子重新立为大夫，就是为了能够有人祭祀他们，让他们有归宿。 大叔又问： 那么立公孙泄为大夫是为什么？ 
English: They reinstated their son as a doctor in order to have someone to worship them and give them a place to return to.Uncle also asked: So why did you appoint Gongsun Ke as a doctor?

古文：子产曰： 说也。 
现代文：子产说： 是为了以继绝的名义向国人解说。 评译
English: Zi Yuan said: In order to explain to the Chinese people in the name of succession.

古文：不但通于人鬼之故，尤妙在立泄一着。
现代文：子产不但通达人鬼之事，更妙的是立公孙泄这一招。
English: Zi Yuan is not only knowledgeable about ghosts and goblins, but what is even better is the trick of setting up a public sun leak.

古文：鬼道而人行之，真能务民义而不惑于鬼神者矣！
现代文：鬼道由人来实行，真是能够一心为民而又不迷惑于鬼神。
English: The ghost path is practiced by people, and it is truly possible to devote oneself to the people without being bothered by ghosts and gods.

