古文：吴舍人名猛，字世云，有道术。
现代文：东晋时，侯官县有个人叫谢端，小的时候父母不幸双亡，没有亲戚依靠，被邻居所收养。
English: In the Eastern Jin Dynasty, there was a man named Xie Duan in Houguan County. When he was young, his parents died, and he had no relatives to rely on, so he was adopted by a neighbor.

古文：同县邹惠政迎猛，夜于家中庭烧香。
现代文：年龄到了十七八岁，他待人恭敬谨慎而自己也很遵循操守，不做不符合礼法的事情。
English: At the age of seventeen or eighteen, he treats people respectfully and cautiously, and he himself is very ethical and does not do things that are not in line with etiquette.

古文：忽有虎抱政儿超篱去。猛语云： 无所苦，须臾当还。 虎去数十步，忽然复送儿归。
现代文：他刚开始出来单独生活，还没有娶妻子，邻居们都很怜悯同情他，劝说他娶一个妻子，但都没有办成。谢端睡得晚起得早，自己耕田种地努力劳作，不分白天和黑夜。
English: He had just begun to live alone, and had not yet married a wife. His neighbors pitied and sympathized with him, and tried to persuade him to marry a wife, but to no avail. Xie Duan slept late and got up early, and worked hard on his farm, day and night.

古文：政遂精进，乞为好道士。猛性至孝，小儿时，在父母傍卧，时夏日多蚊虫，而终不摇扇。
现代文：后来他在村外拾得一只大田螺，有如三升的水壶那么大，认为这是很奇异的东西，就拿回了家来，放置在瓮中。
English: Later, he picked up a large snail outside the village, as big as a three-liter kettle, and thought it was a very strange thing, so he took it home and placed it in a cocoon.

古文：同宿人觉，问其故，答云： 惧蚊虫去啮我父母尔。 及父母终，行伏墓次。
现代文：这样喂养了十多天，谢端每天早晨下地到从田野回来，都看到自己家里有饭菜、酒汤、热水、温火，就像有人在家里专门为他做好的一样。谢端以为这是邻居们给他的照顾，几天都是这样，他就前去感谢邻居们。邻居说： 这些事本来就不是我们做的，怎么让你来感谢呢？ 
English: After more than ten days of being fed in this way, Xie Duan went to the field every morning to return from the field, and saw that his home had meals, wine soup, hot water, and a warm fire, as if someone had specially prepared it for him at home. Xie Duan thought that this was the care given to him by the neighbors, and this was the case for several days. He went to thank the neighbors. The neighbor said: These things were not originally done by us, how can you thank us?

古文：蜀贼纵暴，焚烧邑屋，发掘坟垅。
现代文：谢端又以为邻居们不理解自己的谢意，然而他数次去感谢都是如此，之后就问邻居们到底怎么回事。
English: Xie Duan also thought that the neighbors did not understand his gratitude, but he thanked them several times, and then asked the neighbors what was going on.

古文：民人迸窜。猛在墓侧，号恸不去。
现代文：邻居们笑着对他说： 你自己已经娶了妻子，悄悄藏在家中为你生火做饭，怎么反而说是我们为你做的饭呢？ 
English: The neighbors laughed and said to him, "You yourself have married a wife, and you quietly hide in your home to light a fire and cook for yourself. How can you say that we cook for you?"

古文：贼为之感怆，遂不犯。
现代文：谢端无言回答而心存疑惑，不知道其中是什么缘故。
English: Xie Duan was speechless when he answered, but had doubts in his heart. He didn't know what the reason was.

古文：谢允从武当山还，在桓宣武座，有言及左元放为曹公致鲈鱼者，允便云： 此可得尔。 求大瓮盛水，朱书符投水中。
现代文：后来一天他在鸡叫的时候起床出去，天一亮就悄悄回来，在篱笆外面偷偷察看自己家中。只见一个少女，从瓮中走出来，到灶下面点火做饭。谢端就进入家门，径直走到瓮前察看那只田螺，却只看到一个空壳。于是谢端就来到灶前问那少女： 新媳妇从什么地方来，还为我做饭？ 那少女非常惊惶不安，想要回到瓮中去，却又回去不了，就回答说： 我就是天河之中的白水素女。
English: Then one day he got up at the crowing of the rooster and went out. At dawn he crept back and peeped into his home from outside the fence. He saw a girl come out of the cocoon and light a fire under the stove to cook. Xie Duan entered the door of the house and went straight to the front of the cocoon to look at the snail, but saw only an empty shell. So Xie Duan went to the stove and asked the girl: Where did the new daughter-in-law come from and is she still cooking for me? The girl was very frightened and anxious. She wanted to go back to the cocoon, but she couldn't go back

古文：俄有一鲤鱼鼓鳍水中。钱塘杜子恭，有秘术。
现代文：天帝哀怜你年少孤单，待人恭敬谨慎又能自守礼节，所以就派我来暂且为你守屋做饭，在十年之中，使你身居富贵娶得妻子，我就应当回去。
English: The Heavenly Emperor pities you for being young and lonely, for being respectful and prudent, and for being able to observe etiquette. Therefore, he has sent me to guard your house and cook for you for the time being. In ten years, when you are rich and have a wife, I should return.

古文：尝就人借瓜刀，其主求之，子恭曰： 当即相还耳。 既而刀主行至嘉兴，有鱼跃入船中。
现代文：但你无故藏着身偷偷地看到了我的身子，使我的身形容貌已经暴露，我就不再适合留下来了，只有舍下你而去。
English: But for no reason, you hid and secretly saw my body, so that my physical appearance has been exposed, I am no longer suitable to stay, I can only leave you.

古文：破鱼腹，得瓜刀。太兴中，衡阳区纯作鼠市：四方丈余，开四门，门有一木人。纵四五鼠于中，欲出门，木人辄以手推之。
现代文：虽然以后你自然会少些缺些什么，但要辛勤耕田劳作、打鱼采集以打理生计。我留下螺壳你拿去，用来储藏粮食，常可以不缺吃用。 
English: Although you will naturally lack something in the future, you must work hard to cultivate the fields and collect fish to make a living. I left the shell for you to take, to store grain, and you can often eat without shortage.

古文：晋大司马桓温，字元子。
现代文：谢端请少女留下来，少女始终不答应。
English: Xie Duan asked the girl to stay, but she never agreed.

古文：末年，忽有一比丘尼，失其名，来自远方，投温为檀越。
现代文：这时天空忽然风雨大作，那少女飞快地飘然离去。谢端为她塑立了一个神位，一年四季祭祀她。
English: At this time, the sky suddenly became stormy, and the girl quickly flew away. Xie Duan created a god for her and worshipped her all year round.

古文：尼才行不恒，愠甚敬待，居之门内。
现代文：谢端日常生活富饶丰足，只是没到大富的程度。
English: Xie Duan's daily life is rich and plentiful, but not to the extent of great wealth.

古文：尼每浴，必至移时。
现代文：于是，乡里的人家把自己的女儿嫁给他为妻。
English: As a result, people in the village married their daughters to him.

古文：温疑而窥之。
现代文：他后来走上仕途当了县令。
English: He later went on to become a county magistrate.

古文：见尼裸身挥刀，破腹出脏，断截身首，支分脔切。温怪骇而还。
现代文：据说现在道中的素女祠就是祭祀这个白水素女的。东晋太元时期，谢家有一个出家人叫竺昙遂，年龄二十来岁，皮肤白净相貌端正，因为流落在外而出家作了僧人。
English: It is said that the current Taoist temple is dedicated to the White Hydrogen Woman. During the Eastern Jin Dynasty, there was a monk in the Xie family named Shusui. He was in his twenties, with fair skin and a neat appearance. Because he was exiled, he became a monk.

古文：及至尼出浴室，身形如常。
现代文：有一次他出外远行从清溪庙前经过，因此进入庙中观看。
English: Once, when he was on a long trip, he passed in front of the Qingxi Temple, so he entered the temple to watch the deer.

古文：温以实问，尼答曰： 若逐凌君上，形当如之。 时温方谋问鼎，闻之怅然。
现代文：傍晚回来，他梦见一个妇人走来，对他说道： 你应当来作我庙中的神，已经不会太久了。 竺昙遂在梦中问道： 你是什么人？ 
English: When he came back in the evening, he dreamed that a woman came to him and said, "You should come and be a god in my temple, it won't be long now," and he asked in his dream, "Who are you?"

古文：故以戒惧，终守臣节。
现代文：那妇人说： 我是清溪庙中的尼姑。 
English: The woman said, "I am a nun in Qingxi Temple.

古文：尼后辞去，不知所在。
现代文：这样的梦做了大约一个月，竺昙遂就病倒了。
English: I had this dream for about a month, and then I fell ill.

古文：沛国有一士人，姓周，同生三子，年将弱冠，皆有声无言。
现代文：竺昙遂在临死的时候，对年少的同学说： 我没有福缘，也没有多少罪过，死后就会去当清溪庙的神。
English: On his deathbed, Zou Sui said to his young classmates: "I have neither good fortune nor many sins. After I die, I will become the god of the Qingxi Temple."

古文：忽有一客从门过，因乞饮，闻其儿声，问之曰： 此是何声？ 答曰： 是仆之子，皆不能言。 客曰： 君可还内省过，何以至此？ 主人异其言，知非常人。
现代文：各位同学有出行之便，可以过来看看我。 
English: If you have the opportunity to travel, you can come and see me.

古文：良久出云： 都不忆有罪过。 客曰： 试更思幼时事。 入内，食顷，出语客曰： 记小儿时，当床上有燕巢，中有三子，其母从外得食哺，三子皆出口受之，积日如此。
现代文：竺昙遂死了之后，各位年少的僧人就到清溪庙去。他们一到，竺昙遂的灵魂就说话问候，其声音就像他过去活着的时候一样。竺昙遂在他们快要离开时说： 好久没有听到 赞偈 的唱颂声了，我想听一听。 其中的一个伙伴慧觐就为他唱颂 赞偈 ，唱颂完毕，竺昙遂的灵魂还在继续唱颂。
English: After So So's death, all the young monks went to Chingxi Temple. As soon as they arrived, So So's soul spoke greetings, his voice just like when he was alive. As they were about to leave, So So said, "I haven't heard the chanting of the hymn for a long time, I want to listen to it." One of his companions, Hui Yao, sang the hymn for him. After the chanting was over, So So's soul continued to sing the hymn.

古文：试以指内巢中，燕雏亦出口承受。
现代文：竺昙遂唱颂完后说： 生死路上的诀别，尚有凄楚悲伤，更何况像我们这样的分别。
English: After the chanting, she said, "Farewell on the road of life and death is still very sad, let alone such a difference as ours.

古文：因取三蔷茨，各与食之。
现代文：人体与神灵的离别，深藏在心中的感叹，这样的心情哪里能够用语言表达得出来啊！ 
English: The parting of the human body from the gods, the deep sigh in the heart, where can such a mood be expressed in words!

古文：既而皆死。母还，不见子，悲鸣而去。
现代文：竺昙遂的灵魂说完就禁不住叹息抽泣起来，各位僧人都为之流下眼泪。
English: The soul of Shosui couldn't help but sigh and sob after he finished, and all the monks shed tears for him.

古文：昔有此事，今实悔之。 客闻言，遂变为道人之容，曰： 君既自知悔，罪今除矣。 言讫，便闻其子言语。
现代文：王导的儿子王悦在当中书郎的时候，有一次王导梦到有人拿一百万钱来买王悦，王导就悄悄地把为儿子祈祷的各种事情都全部做了。
English: When Wang Yue, Wang Du's son, was in middle school, Wang Du had a dream that someone offered a million dollars to buy Wang Yue. Wang Du quietly did all kinds of things to pray for his son.

古文：周亦忽不见此道人。天竺人佛图澄，永嘉四年来洛阳，善诵神咒，役使鬼神。
现代文：王导随即挖地掘土，挖出了一百万钱，心里顿时感到非常痛恶，把这些钱全部都埋藏封闭起来。
English: Wang Du immediately dug into the ground and dug up a million money. He suddenly felt very disgusted and buried all the money and sealed it up.

古文：腹傍有孔，常以絮塞之。
现代文：到了王悦病得很严重时，王导的忧虑达到了心急如焚的地步，好几天吃不下饭。
English: When Wang Yue fell seriously ill, Wang Du's anxiety reached a fever pitch, and he couldn't eat for several days.

古文：每夜读书，则拔絮，孔中出光，照于一室。
现代文：一天忽然看见一个人身材相貌非常魁梧，身穿盔甲手持大刀。王导问他是什么人，那人说： 我，蒋侯是也。
English: One day, he suddenly saw a very large man, wearing armor and holding a large sword. Wang Du asked him who he was, and the man said, "I am Jiang Hou."

古文：平旦，至流水侧，从孔中引出五脏六腑洗之，讫，还内腹中。
现代文：你的儿子生病不好，我想要为他祈福保命，所以就前来了，你用不着再忧虑。 
English: Your son is not well, and I wanted to pray for him and save his life, so I came. You don't have to worry anymore.

古文：石虎邺中有一胡道人，知咒术。
现代文：王导因此就把饮食给那人吃，那人一吃就是几升。
English: Therefore, Wang Du gave the food to the man to eat, and the man ate a few liters.

古文：乘驴作估客，于外国深山中行。
现代文：吃完后，那人突然怒气冲冲地对王导说： 你那当中书郎的儿子生命走到尽头，已经不可救了。 
English: After eating, the man suddenly and angrily said to Wang Du: "In your country, Shuro's son's life has come to an end and can no longer be saved.

古文：下有绝涧，窅然无底。
现代文：那人说完就不见了，王悦也命殒气绝死去。
English: After the man finished speaking, he disappeared, and Wang Yue also died.

古文：忽有恶鬼，偷牵此道人驴，下入绝涧。
现代文：东晋太元时期，乐安县有个叫高衡的人当魏郡的太守，守卫石头城，他的孙子高雅之在他手下掌管马匹。
English: During the Eastern Jin Dynasty, there was a man named Gao Heng in Le'an County who was the governor of Wei County and guarded Stone Town. His grandson Gao Yazhi was in charge of horses under him.

古文：道人寻迹咒誓，呼诸鬼王。
现代文：有一天高雅之说有位神仙在他那里降临，自称是白头公，所拄的拐杖发出光辉照亮了整个屋子。
English: One day, Gao Yaozhi said that a fairy came to him, claiming to be a white-headed god, and his crutch emitted a glow that lit up the entire room.

古文：须臾，即驴、物如故。
现代文：那神仙把高雅之轻轻举起在夜空中行走，晚上到达京口而在早晨就已经返回来了。
English: The fairy gently lifted Gao Ya to walk in the night sky, arriving in Beijing in the evening and returning in the morning.

古文：昙游道人，清苦沙门也。
现代文：后来高雅之父子都被桓玄所杀害。晋朝豫章郡有个人叫刘广，年纪小而没有婚配。
English: Later, Gao Ya's father and son were both killed by Huan Xuan. During the Jin Dynasty, there was a man named Liu Guang in Yuzhang County. He was young and unmarried.

古文：剡县有一家事蛊，人啖其食饮，无不吐血死。
现代文：有一天他到乡下农家去，碰见一个女子。那女子对他说： 我是何参军的千金，年龄十四岁的时候就死去了，被女神西王母收养，让我来与凡人结合。 
English: One day he went to a farmer's house in the countryside and met a woman. The woman said to him: "I am a soldier's daughter. I died when I was fourteen years old. I was adopted by the goddess, the Queen of the West, so that I could be united with mortals.

古文：游尝诣之。
现代文：于是刘广就与那女子缠绵结合。
English: As a result, Liu Guang became entangled with the woman.

古文：主人下食，游依常咒愿。
现代文：这天，他从床席之下发现一条手巾，手巾里包裹着鸡舌香。
English: On this day, he found a hand towel from under the bed seat. The hand towel was wrapped in chicken tongue incense.

古文：双蜈蚣，长尺余，便于盘中跳走。
现代文：他的母亲就把手巾拿去用火烧，结果原来是火浣布做的。
English: His mother took the handkerchief and burned it, and it turned out to be a fire-breathing cloth.

古文：游便饱食而归，安然无他。
现代文：晋朝大司马桓温从南州回来，去拜谒简文皇帝的陵墓，他左右的随从发觉他有些异常。
English: When Ma Huanwen, the Grand Master of the Jin Dynasty, returned from Nanzhou to visit the mausoleum of Emperor Qian Jianwen, his entourage around him noticed something unusual about him.

古文：高悝家有鬼怪，言词呵叱，投掷内外，不见人形。
现代文：他登上了马车，就对随从说： 先帝以前曾经就显现过神灵。 
English: When he boarded the carriage, he said to his attendant, "The previous emperor once had a god appear before him.

古文：或器物自行再三发火。巫祝厌劾而不能绝。
现代文：但他却没有讲出先帝显灵所说的话，所以随从们对显灵的经过不得而知，只看见他快要拜谒的时候，口中不断说 为臣不敢 而已。
English: However, he did not speak the words spoken by the spirit of the former emperor, so his followers did not know what happened to the spirit. They only saw him when he was about to bow, and he kept saying that he did not dare to be a vassal.

古文：适值幸灵，乃要之。
现代文：桓温又问左右随从殷涓这个人的相貌如何。
English: Kuan Wen also asked Yin Qi, the left and right attendant, how this person looked like.

古文：至门，见符索甚多，并取焚之。
现代文：有个随从回答： 殷涓这个人又胖又矮，皮肤很黑非常丑陋。 
English: One of the attendants answered: Yin Xuan, this man is fat and short, his skin is very dark and very ugly.

古文：惟据轩小坐而去。其夕鬼怪即绝。
现代文：桓温说： 在拜谒时也看见这个人站在先帝的身旁，他的相貌的确如此。 
English: Kuan Wen said, "I also saw this man standing next to the former emperor when he was paying homage, and his appearance was indeed like that.

古文：赵固常乘一匹赤马以战征，甚所爱重。
现代文：表现出对这个人非常厌恶之意。于是桓温就患上了疾病，没过多久就死去了。
English: He was disgusted with the man, so he fell ill and died not long after.

