古文：黄帝曰：余闻天为阳，地为阴，日为阳，月为阴，其合之于人，奈何？
现代文：黄帝问：我听说天为阳，地为阴，日为阳，月为阴，它们与人体相对应的关系是怎样的呢？
English: Huangdi asked: I have heard that the sky is the sun, the earth is the shade, the sun is the sun, and the moon is the shade. What is their corresponding relationship with the human body?

古文：岐伯曰：腰以上为天，腰以下为地，故天为阳，地为阴，故足之十二经脉，以应为十二月，月生于水，故在下者为阴；手之十指，以应十日，日主火，故在上者为阳。
现代文：岐伯答道：在人体，腰以上像天一样属阳，腰以下像地一样属阴。下肢的十二条经脉，与一年中地支的十二个月相对应，月是禀受水性而产生的，所以与地支相对应的下肢经脉属阴。在上肢，手有十指，分别与天干的十日相对应，日是禀受火性而产生的，所以与天干相对应的上肢经脉属阳。
English: Qi Bo replied: In the human body, above the waist is yang, like the sky, and below the waist is yin, like the earth. The twelve meridians of the lower limbs correspond to the twelve months of the year. The moon is produced by water, so the meridians of the lower limbs corresponding to the earth are yin. In the upper limbs, the hands have ten fingers, corresponding respectively to the ten days of the heavenly stem. The sun is produced by fire, so the meridians of the upper limbs corresponding to the heavenly stem are yang.

古文：黄帝曰：合之于脉，奈何？
现代文：黄帝问：地支和天干怎样同经脉相配合呢？
English: Huangdi asked: How do the branches of the earth and the heavenly stem cooperate with the meridians?

古文：岐伯曰：寅者，正月之生阳也，主左足之少阳；未者，六月，主右足之少阳。
现代文：岐伯答道：寅纪正月，是阳气发生的时候，主身体左侧下肢的足少阳胆经；未纪六月，主身体右侧下肢的足少阳胆经。
English: Qibo replied: In the first month of the Yin Dynasty, when the yang qi occurred, the feet of the lower limbs on the left side of the main body had less yang qi; in the sixth month of the Yin Dynasty, the feet of the lower limbs on the right side of the main body had less yang qi.

古文：卯者，二月，主左足之太阳；午者，五月，主右足之太阳。
现代文：卯纪二月，主身体左侧下肢的足太阳膀胱经；午纪五月，主身体右侧下肢的足太阳膀胱经。
English: In February of Uji, the lower limbs of the left side of the main body were affected by foot sun bladder menstruation; in May of Nisan, the lower limbs of the right side of the main body were affected by foot sun bladder menstruation.

古文：辰者，三月，主左足之阳明；巳者，四月，主右足之阳明，此两阳合于前，故曰阳明。
现代文：辰纪三月，主身体左侧下肢的足阳明胃经；巳纪四月，主身体右侧下肢的足阳明胃经，三、四月是春夏交接之时，阳气由弱到盛完成转换交接，所以称为阳明。
English: In March of the Chen period, the foot yang of the lower limbs on the left side of the main body passed through the stomach meridian; in April of the Mi period, the foot yang of the lower limbs on the right side of the main body passed through the stomach meridian; in March and April, when the spring and summer met, the yang completed the transition from weak to strong, so it was called yangming.

古文：申者，七月之生阴也，主右足之少阴；丑者，十二月，主左足之少阴。
现代文：申纪七月，是阴气初生的时候，主身体右侧下肢的足少阴肾经；丑纪十二月，主身体左侧下肢的足少阴肾经。
English: In July of the Shen period, when yin and qi were first born, the right side of the main body and the lower limbs had less yin and less nephroliths; in December of the Ugly period, the left side of the main body and the lower limbs had less yin and less nephroliths.

古文：酉者，八月，主右足之太阴；子者，十一月，主左足之太阴。
现代文：酉纪八月，主身体右侧下肢的足太阴脾经；子纪十一月，主身体左侧下肢的足太阴脾经。
English: In August of the Heian period, the foot of the lower limb on the right side of the main body was too long; in November of the Zi period, the foot of the lower limb on the left side of the main body was too long.

古文：戌者，九月，主右足之厥阴；亥者，十月，主左足之厥阴，此两阴交尽，故曰厥阴。
现代文：戌纪九月，主身体右侧下肢的足厥阴肝经；亥纪十月，主身体左侧下肢的足厥阴肝经，九、十月是秋冬交接之时，阴气由弱到盛完成转化交接，所以称为厥阴。
English: In September of the Heian period, the foot of the lower limb on the right side of the main body passed through the Yin-Yang meridian; in October of the Heian period, the foot of the lower limb on the left side of the main body passed through the Yin-Yang meridian; in September and October, when the autumn and winter met, the Yin completed the transformation from weak to strong, so it was called the Yin-Yang meridian.

古文：甲主左手之少阳，己主右手之少阳。
现代文：甲日主身体左侧上肢的手少阳三焦经；己日主身体右侧上肢的手少阳三焦经。
English: On the first day, the left hand of the upper limb of the main body is Shao Yang Sanjiao Jing; on the second day, the right hand of the upper limb of the main body is Shao Yang Sanjiao Jing.

古文：乙主左手之太阳，戊主右手之太阳。
现代文：乙日主身体左侧上肢的手太阳小肠经；戊日主身体右侧上肢的手太阳小肠经。
English: On the second day, the hand of the upper limb on the left side of the main body passed through the solar small intestine; on the third day, the hand of the upper limb on the right side of the main body passed through the solar small intestine.

古文：丙主左手之阳明，丁主右手之阳明，此两火并合，故为阳明。
现代文：丙日主身体左侧上肢的手阳明大肠经；丁日主身体右侧上肢的手阳明大肠经，在五行归类中丙、丁都属火，两火合并，所以称为阳明。
English: On the day of C, the hand of the upper limb on the left side of the main body is the Yang Ming large intestine meridian; on the day of D, the hand of the upper limb on the right side of the main body is the Yang Ming large intestine meridian. In the classification of the five elements, C and D are fire, and the two fires are combined, so they are called Yang Ming.

古文：庚主右手之少阴，癸主左手之少阴。
现代文：庚日主身体右侧上肢的手少阴心经；癸日主身体左侧上肢的手少阴心经。
English: On the 7th day, the right upper limb of the body of the main body has less yin and more yang; on the 8th day, the left upper limb of the body of the main body has less yin and more yang.

古文：辛主右手之太阴，壬主左手之太阴。
现代文：辛日主身体右侧上肢的手太阴肺经；壬日主身体左侧上肢的手太阴肺经。
English: On a bad day, the hand of the upper limb on the right side of the main body is too yin lung meridian; on a good day, the hand of the upper limb on the left side of the main body is too yin lung meridian.

古文：故足之阳者，阴中之少阳也；足之阴者，阴中之太阴也。
现代文：位于下肢的足三阳经，为阴中的少阳，阳气微弱；位于下肢的足三阴经，是阴中的太阴，阴气最盛。
English: Located in the lower limbs of the foot of the three yang, for the yin of the less yang, yang is weak; located in the lower limbs of the foot of the three yang, is the yin of the yin, yin is the most.

古文：手之阳者，阳中之太阳也；手之阴者，阳中之少阴也。
现代文：位于上肢的阳经，是阳中的太阳，阳气最盛；位于上肢的阴经，是阳中的少阴，阴气微弱。
English: Yangjing, located in the upper limbs, is the sun in the sun, and the yang is at its peak; Yinjing, located in the upper limbs, is the lesser yin in the sun, and the yin is weak.

古文：腰以上者为阳，腰以下者为阴。
现代文：总的说来，腰部以上的就称为阳，腰部以下的就称为阴。
English: Generally speaking, the part of the body above the waist is called yang, and the part below the waist is called yin.

古文：其于五脏也，心为阳中之太阳，肺为阳中之少阴，肝为阴中少阳，脾为阴中之至阴，肾为阴中之太阴。
现代文：把这个划分阴阳的方法用于五脏，心位于膈上属火，为阳中之太阳，肺居于膈上而属金，为阳中之少阴，肝位于膈下属木，为阴中之少阳，脾位于膈下属土，阴中之至阴，肾位于膈下而属水，为阴中之太阴。
English: Apply this method of dividing yin and yang to the five viscera. The heart, which is located above the navel, is fire and is the sun in the middle of the yang. The lungs, which are located above the navel, are gold and are the lesser yin in the middle of the yang. The liver, which is located below the navel, is the lesser yang in the middle of the yin. The spleen, which is located below the navel, is earth and is the lesser yin in the middle of the yin. The kidney, which is located below the navel, is water and is the greater yin in the middle of the yin.

古文：黄帝曰：以治之奈何？
现代文：黄帝问：怎样把经脉与十二个月的阴阳相配规律运用到治疗之中呢？
English: Huang Di asked: How can the meridians and the twelve-month yin and yang matching rule be applied to the treatment?

古文：岐伯曰：正月、二月、三月，人气在左，无刺左足之阳。四月、五月、六月，人气在右，无刺右足之阳。
现代文：岐伯答道：正月、二月、三月，分主左足的少阳、太阳、阳明经，说明此时人的阳气偏重在左，所以不宜针刺左足的三阳经；四月、五月、六月，分主右足的阳明、太阳、少阳经，说明此时人的阳气偏重在右，所以不宜针刺右足的三阳经。
English: Qibo replied, "In the first month, February, and March, the main points of the left foot are Shao Yang, Sun, and Yang Ming Jing, indicating that at this time, the yang of the person is biased to the left, so it is not appropriate to prick the Sanyang Jing of the left foot; in April, May, and June, the main points of the right foot are Yang Ming, Sun, and Shao Yang Jing, indicating that at this time, the yang of the person is biased to the right, so it is not appropriate to prick the Sanyang Jing of the right foot.

古文：七月、八月、九月，人气在右，无刺右足之阴。十月、十一月、十二月，人气在左，无刺左足之阴。
现代文：七月、八月、九月，分主右足的少阴、太阴、厥阴经，说明此时人的阴气偏重在右，所以不宜针刺右足的三阴经；十月、十一月、十二月，分主左足的厥阴、太阴、少阴经，说明此时人的阴气偏重在左，所以不宜针刺左足的三阴经。
English: In July, August, and September, the minor yin, major yin, and minor yin of the right foot indicate that at this time, the person's yin is more on the right, so it is not appropriate to prick the right foot; in October, November, and December, the major yin, major yin, and minor yin of the left foot indicate that at this time, the person's yin is more on the left, so it is not appropriate to prick the left foot.

古文：黄帝曰：五行以东方为甲乙木，主春，春者苍色，主肝，肝者足厥阴也。今乃以甲为左手之少阳，不合于数，何也？
现代文：黄帝问：在五行归类中，方位的东方和天干中的甲、乙都属木，木气旺于春季，在五色中主青色，在五脏中主肝脏，隶属肝的经脉是足厥阴肝经，现在却把甲配属身体左侧上肢的手少阳三焦经，不符合天干配属五行的规律，这是为什么呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked: In the classification of the five elements, the Orient of the orientation and the A and B of the heavenly stem all belong to wood, and the wood gas is strong in the spring. In the five colors, the main color is cyan, and in the five organs, the main liver. The meridians belonging to the liver are the foot, jujube, yin, and liver meridians. Now, why is A, which belongs to the left upper limb of the body, the hand, shao yang, and san jiao meridians, which does not conform to the law of the heavenly stem belonging to the five elements?

古文：岐伯曰：此天地之阴阳也，非四时五行之以次行也。
现代文：岐伯答道：这里所讲的，是根据自然界阴阳变化的规律来配合天干地支的，用来说明十二经脉的阴阳属性，不是按照四季的次序和五行属性来配合天干地支的。
English: Qibo replied, "What we are talking about here is to match the heavenly and earthly branches according to the laws of yin and yang changes in the natural world. It is used to illustrate the yin and yang attributes of the twelve meridians, not to match the heavenly and earthly branches according to the order of the four seasons and the attributes of the five elements.

古文：且夫阴阳者，有名而无形，故数之可十，离之可百，散之可千，推之可万，此之谓也。
现代文：此外，阴阳是有名而无形的，即阴阳是一个抽象的概念，而不能局限于一种具体事物，用它可以概括一切事物的对立属性，所以它的运用非常广泛，阴阳可以指一种事物，也可以推演到十种、百种、千种、万种乃至无数的事物，不可以局限于某一事物而论，也就是这个意思。
English: In addition, yin and yang are famous and intangible, that is, yin and yang is an abstract concept, and cannot be limited to a specific thing. It can be used to summarize the opposing attributes of all things, so its use is very extensive. Yin and yang can refer to one thing, and can also be deduced to ten kinds, hundreds of kinds, thousands of kinds, tens of thousands of kinds and even countless things. It cannot be limited to one thing, that is, this meaning.

