古文：武王问太公曰： 引兵深入诸侯之地，与敌人冲军相当，敌众我寡，敌强我弱，敌人夜来，或攻吾左，或攻吾右，在军震动，吾欲以战则胜，以守则固，为之奈何？ 
现代文：武王询问太公说： 率领军队深入敌国境内，结果正好遭遇敌人突袭，敌众我寡，敌强我弱，而敌人又利用夜暗掩护前来攻击，有的攻击我左翼，有的攻击我右翼，使我军恐慌。我想进攻能够取得胜利，防御牢不可破，应该怎么办？ 
English: King Wu asked the Grand Duke: "I led the army deep into the enemy's territory. As a result, I happened to encounter a surprise attack by the enemy. The enemy is few and far between, and the enemy is strong and weak. The enemy also used the cover of darkness to attack. Some attacked my left wing, and some attacked my right wing, causing my army to panic. I think the attack can be victorious, and the defense is unbreakable. What should I do?"

古文：太公曰： 如此者，谓之震寇。
现代文：太公答道： 这样的敌人叫做震寇。
English: Taigong replied, "Such an enemy is called Shinko.

古文：利以出战，不可以守。
现代文：对付这样的敌人，以出战为利，不适合防守。
English: Against such an enemy, it is advantageous to go out to fight, and it is not suitable for defense.

古文：选吾材士强弩，车骑为之左右，疾击其前，急攻其后，或击其表，或击其里，其卒必乱，其将必骇。 
现代文：挑选勇武的士兵，以战车、骑兵为左右两翼，迅猛地攻击敌人正面，快速地攻击敌人侧后。既攻击敌人阵外，又攻击敌人阵内。这种情况下敌人士兵必然会乱作一团，敌人将帅必然惊恐骇惧，一定会被打败。 
English: Select brave soldiers, with chariots and cavalry as the left and right wings, quickly attack the enemy front, quickly attack the enemy side and rear. Attack the enemy outside the front, and attack the enemy inside the front. In this case, the enemy soldiers will inevitably make a mess, and the enemy generals will inevitably be terrified and will be defeated.

古文：武王曰： 敌人远遮我前，急攻我后，断我锐兵，绝我材士，吾内外不得相闻，三军扰乱，皆散而走，士卒无斗志，将吏无守心，为之奈何？ 
现代文：武王又问： 敌人如果在远处阻截我的前方，并急速地攻击我军后方，遮断我精锐的部队，阻我应援的材士，使我前后方失去联系，以致全军扰乱，散乱逃走，士卒没有斗志，将官无心固守，应该怎么办？ 
English: King Wu also asked: "What should I do if the enemy intercepts my front in the distance, and rapidly attacks the rear of our army, cutting off my elite troops, blocking my support personnel, causing me to lose contact with the front and rear, so that the whole army disrupts, scatters and flees, the soldiers have no fighting spirit, and the generals have no heart to defend?

古文：太公曰： 明哉，王之问也！
现代文：太公答道： 君王问的这个问题真是高明啊！
English: The father-in-law replied: What a clever question the king asked!

古文：当明号审令，出我勇锐冒将之士，人操炬火，二人同鼓，必知敌人所在，或击其表里，微号相知，令之灭火，鼓音皆止，中外相应，期约皆当，三军疾战，敌必败云。 武王曰： 善哉！ 
现代文：在这种情况下，应该明审号令，出动我军精锐，让每个人手持火炬，两人同击一鼓，这样就一定能探明敌人所在的位置，然后发起攻击，或攻击敌人的外部，或冲击敌人的内部。攻击的时候，部队都佩带暗号，以便互相识别，并扑灭火炬，停止击鼓，之后内外互相策应，各部按预先约定的计划行动。全军迅猛出击，英勇奋战，敌人必然失败灭亡。 武王说： 说得真好啊！ 
English: Under such circumstances, it is necessary to issue a clear order to dispatch the elite of our army, let everyone hold a torch, and two people beat a drum together, so that they can definitely find out the location of the enemy, and then launch an attack, or attack the outside of the enemy, or hit the inside of the enemy. When attacking, the troops all wear codes to identify each other, and extinguish the torch, stop beating the drum, and then coordinate with each other inside and outside, and each department acts according to the pre-agreed plan. The whole army attacks quickly, fights bravely, and the enemy will inevitably fail and perish. King Wu said: That's really good!

