古文：五行一昔八卦兆而天人之理著，九畴序而帝王之应明。
现代文：自从八卦创立而天与人的关系显现，治国大法立而帝王的心意彰明。
English: Since the creation of Bagua, the relationship between heaven and man has emerged, the great law of governing the country has been established, and the emperor's will has become clear.

古文：虽可以知从德获自天之祐，违道陷神听之罪，然未详举征效，备考幽明，虽时列鼎雉庭谷之异，然而未究者众矣。
现代文：虽然以智从德会获得来自上天的福气，违道害神会受到上天的惩罚，但是没有详细列举各种征兆和应验，没有全面考察善恶的报应，虽然时时出现雉鸡登上鼎耳呜叫、在庭中长出嘉谷之类的怪异，但是没有记载的还很多。
English: Although wisdom will receive blessings from heaven from the virtue association, and transgressions against the gods will be punished by heaven, there is no detailed list of various signs and fulfillments, and there is no comprehensive examination of the retribution of good and evil. Although there are always strange phenomena such as the rooster crowing on the top of the ear, and the jia valley growing in the yard, there are still many that have not been recorded.

古文：至于鉴悟后王，多有所阙。
现代文：至于作为后代帝王的鉴戒、启发，尚有许多缺漏。
English: As for the role of emperors as a warning and inspiration for future generations, there are still many gaps.

古文：故仲尼作《春秋》，具书祥眚，以验行事。
现代文：所以王迂作《春秋》，把吉祥和灾祸全部记载下来，以作为往事的证验。
English: Therefore, Wang Duan wrote "Spring and Autumn" and recorded all the auspicious and calamitous events as a verification of the past.

古文：是则九畴陈其义于前，《春秋》列其效于后也。
现代文：所以《雒书》陈述其道理在前，《春秋》列举其应验在后。
English: Therefore, "The Book of Changes" states its reason before, and "Spring and Autumn" lists its fulfillment after.

古文：逮至伏生创纪《大传》，五行之体始详；刘向广演《洪范》，休咎之文益备。
现代文：等到作《尚书大传》，五行的内容才详细；刘囟推演《洪范》写出了《洪范五行传》，有关吉凶征兆的解说才更加齐备。
English: It was not until he wrote "Shangshu Daquan" that the contents of the five lines were detailed; Liu Bei deduced "Hong Fan" and wrote "Hong Fan Five-Line Biography," and the explanation of auspicious and inauspicious signs was more complete.

古文：故班固斟酌《经》、《传》，详纪条流，诚以一王之典，不可独阙故也。
现代文：所以班固考察经传，详细记载各种征兆和应验，实在是因为一代王朝的典章，不能缺少任何一种啊。
English: Therefore, Ban Gu examined the sutras and recorded all kinds of signs and fulfillments in detail. It was really because of the generation of the dynasty's ordinances that none of them could be missing.

古文：夫天道虽无声无臭，然而应若影响，天人之验，理不可诬。
现代文：天道虽然无声无臭，但是天道与人事的关系如同影子随形，一样有呼有应，上天降给人的征兆，自有常理，不会骗人。
English: Although the heavenly way is silent and odorless, the relationship between the heavenly way and personnel is like a shadow that follows the shape, it has echoes and echoes, it is a sign from heaven, it has its own common sense, and it will not deceive people.

古文：司马彪纂集光武以来，以究汉事；王沈《魏书》志篇阙，凡厥灾异，但编帝纪而已。
现代文：塱屋彪编辑选韭亘遭以来的史实及各种灾异征兆，以考察篷伐之事；王选编纂《魏书》，其中无志，凡属那时候的灾变和怪异，祇是编入帝王本纪而已。
English: Zouya Biao, an editor, selected the historical facts and various signs of disasters and signs since the time of the siege to investigate the siege; Wang Zeng compiled the "Wei Shu," of which there was no intention, and all the disasters and strange things that belonged to that time were only compiled into the imperial chronicle.

古文：自黄初以降，二百余年，览其灾妖，以考之事，常若重规沓矩，不谬前说。
现代文：从茎翅年间以后，二百余年之中，看看那些灾变妖异，常常重复出现，和前人的说法没有一点差误。
English: In the more than two hundred years since the Year of the Stalk and the Wing, look at those cataclysms, often recurring, and there is not a bit of difference from the previous person's statement.

古文：又高堂隆、郭景纯等，据经立辞，终皆显应。
现代文：又有高堂隆、郭景纯等人，根据经书确立自己对各种灾变妖异的解说，最终都有显著的应验。
English: Others, such as Gaodang Long and Guo Jingshun, established their own interpretations of various cataclysms and monsters based on scriptures, and all of them eventually had significant fulfillment.

古文：阙而不序，史体将亏。
现代文：五行之事如果空缺不加陈述，那史书的体例将会有所缺损。
English: If the vacancy of the five elements is not stated, the style of the history book will be defective.

古文：今自司马彪以后，皆撰次论序，斯亦班固远采《春秋》，举远明近之例也。
现代文：现在本篇对司墨彪《续漠书》以后的各种灾变怪异，都依次编撰，评议述说，这也就是垂困采用《春秋》的说法，列举远古的史实以说明当代政事的体例。
English: Now, this article has compiled all the strange and disastrous changes that have occurred since Simo Biao's "Continuation of the Book of the Desert," and the commentary says that this is the way of listing ancient historical facts to illustrate contemporary politics.

古文：又按言之不从，有介虫之孽，刘歆以为毛虫；视之不明，有蠃虫之孽，刘歆以为羽虫。
现代文：又按：言之不从，就有介虫之孽，刘歆认为介虫应是毛虫；视之不明，就有蠃虫之孽，刘歆认为赢虫应是羽虫。
English: It is also said that: if you do not follow the words, there will be the evil of the aphids, and Liu Yao believes that the aphids should be caterpillars; if you do not know, there will be the evil of the aphids, and Liu Yao believes that the insects should be caterpillars.

古文：按《月令》，夏虫羽，秋虫毛，宜如歆说，是以旧史从之。
现代文：查《礼记·月令》，夏天的虫是羽虫，秋天的虫是毛虫，正如刘歆所说，因此，以前的史书遵从刘歆之说。
English: According to "The Book of Rites and the Lunar Calendar," the insects in summer are caterpillars and the insects in autumn are caterpillars, just as Liu Bei said. Therefore, the previous history books followed Liu Bei's words.

古文：五行精微，非末学所究。
现代文：五行的道理精深微妙，不是我这后学可以深究的。
English: The principle of the five elements is profound and subtle, and it is not something I can study in depth.

古文：凡已经前议者，并即其言以释之；未有旧说者，推准事理，以俟来哲。
现代文：凡是前人已经论定的，都根据他们的话加以解释；以前没有成说的，事理的推断，则要等待后代的贤哲。
English: Whatever the ancients have said has been interpreted according to their words; what has not been said before, the deduction of facts, must wait for the sages of future generations.

古文：《五行传》曰： 田猎不宿，饮食不享，出入不节，夺民农时，及有奸谋，则木不曲直，谓木失其性而为灾也。 
现代文：《尚书大传·洪范》中《五行传》说： 狩猎不按季节，饮食不行享献之礼，劳役没有限制使百姓丧失农时，以及有奸诈之谋，则树木没有曲直，是说树木失去了它的本性而为灾。 
English: The "Five Elements" in "Shang Shu Da Zhen·Hong Fan" said: "Hunting is not seasonal, eating is not allowed to enjoy the gift of dedication, there is no limit to labor, so that the people lose farm time, and if there is a treacherous plot, then the trees are not straight, which means that the trees have lost their nature and become a disaster.

古文：又曰： 貌之不恭，是谓不肃。
现代文：又说： 礼不恭，造就叫做不敬重。
English: He also said, "If you are not polite, you are not respected."

古文：厥咎狂，厥罚恆雨，厥极恶。
现代文：其罪曰狂，它带来的惩罚是恒雨，是极恶。
English: His crime is insanity, and the punishment it brings is constant rain, which is extremely evil.

古文：时则有服妖，时则有龟孽，时则有鸡祸，时则有下体生上之疴，时则有青眚、青祥。
现代文：会出现奇装异服、龟出水为灾，会出现鸡瘟，会出现头上长出腿来的怪胎，会出现青眚、青祥等灾害预兆。
English: There will be strange clothes, turtles out of the water as a disaster, there will be chicken plague, there will be a freak with legs growing out of his head, there will be signs of disasters such as Qingtao and Qingxiang.

古文：惟金沴木。 
现代文：其原因衹是金与木不和。 
English: It is made of gold birch.

古文：班固曰： 盖工匠为轮矢者多伤败，及木为变怪。 
现代文：逛固说： 指工匠制作车轮弓矢多数会毁坏，以及木出现各种灾变怪异。 
English: Shan Gu said: It means that most of the wheel bows and arrows made by craftsmen will be destroyed, and there will be all kinds of disasters and strange things in the wood.

古文：皆为不曲直也。
现代文：这都是木不曲直的表现。
English: It's all an act.

古文：木不曲直：魏文帝黄初六年正月，雨，木冰。
现代文：魏文帝黄初六年正月，下雨，树上结冰。
English: In the first month of the sixth year of Emperor Weiwenhuang's reign, it rained and the trees froze.

古文：按刘歆说，木不曲直也。
现代文：据型逖说，这种现象就是木不曲直的表现。
English: According to Kataoka, this phenomenon is a manifestation of wood not bending straight.

古文：刘向曰： 冰者阴之盛，木者少阳，贵臣象也。
现代文：刘向说： 结冰是阴气盛的结果，木是东方之象，是贵臣的象征。
English: Liu Xiang said: "Icing is the result of yin and yang, and wood is the symbol of the East, the symbol of the noblemen.

古文：此人将有害，则阴气胁木，木先寒，故得雨而冰也。 
现代文：这类人将有祸害，所以阴气侵害木，树木自身先有寒气，所以遇上雨水就结了冰。 
English: This person will be harmed, the gloomy weather will invade the wood, the wood will be cold, so if it rains, it will freeze.

古文：是年六月，利成郡兵蔡方等杀太守徐质，据郡反，多所胁略，并聚亡命。
现代文：这年六月，利成郡的兵士蔡方等人杀死太守鑪，占据郡城反叛，被胁迫随从作乱的人很多，并聚集了很多亡命之徒。
English: In June of that year, Cai Fang, a soldier from Licheng County, and others killed Taizhong, occupied the county seat and rebelled. Many people were coerced into following the rebels, and many outlaws were gathered.

古文：遣二校尉与青州刺史共讨平之。
现代文：朝廷派二名校尉和壹业刺史一起去讨伐，平定了叛乱。
English: The imperial court sent two lieutenants and a professional assassin to join the crusade and quell the rebellion.

古文：太守，古之诸侯，贵臣有害之应也。
现代文：太守，相当于古代诸侯，太守被杀，是贵臣有灾的应验。
English: Tai Shou, like the ancient princes, is the fulfillment of the noblemen's woes.

古文：一说以木冰为甲兵之象。
现代文：一说树木结冰是战事的征兆。
English: They say trees freezing over is a sign of war.

古文：是岁，既讨蔡方；又八月，天子自将以舟师征吴，戎卒十余万，连旍数百里，临江观兵。
现代文：当年，讨伐乎定蔡方叛乱之后，又在八月，天子亲自统率水军征吴，士卒共有十余万，旌旗相连敷百里，天子驾临长江检阅军队。
English: In that year, after fighting the rebellion of the Hu Ding Cai faction, in August, Tian Zi personally led the navy to conquer Wu, with a total of more than one hundred thousand soldiers and officers. The banner was stretched for one hundred miles, and Tian Zi drove to the Yangtze River to inspect the army.

古文：晋元帝太兴三年二月辛未，雨，木冰。
现代文：晋元帝太兴三年二月辛未日，下雨，树上结冰。
English: In February of the third year of the reign of Emperor Taixing of the Jin Dynasty, it rained and the trees froze.

古文：后二年，周顗、戴渊、刁协、刘隗皆遇害，与《春秋》同事，是其应也。
现代文：这事之后两年，且逊、越周、卫协、刘逸等人都遇害，这和《春秋》记载的事相同，遣是树木结冰的应验。
English: Two years after this event, Ji Sun, Yue Zhou, Wei Xie, Liu Yigang and others were all killed, which is the same as the events recorded in "Spring and Autumn."

古文：一曰，是后王敦攻京师，又其象也。
现代文：一说，此后王敦进攻京城，是树木结冰的又一征兆。
English: One said that Wang Dun's attack on the capital after that was another sign that the trees were frozen.

古文：晋穆帝永和八年正月乙巳，雨，木冰。
现代文：晋穆帝永和八年正月乙巳日，下雨，树木结冰。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the eighth year of Jin Mu Di Yonghe, it rained and the trees froze.

古文：是年，殷浩北伐；明年，军败；十年，废黜。
现代文：当年，殷浩北伐；第二年，殷浩兵败；永和十年，殷浩被废黜。
English: In that year, Yin Hao led the Northern Expedition; in the following year, Yin Hao was defeated; in the tenth year of Yonghe, Yin Hao was deposed.

古文：又曰，荀羡、殷浩北伐，桓温入关之象也。
现代文：一说，树木上结冰，是荀羡、殷浩北伐，桓温入关的征兆。
English: He also said that the Northern Expedition of Yan Zhen and Yin Hao is a sign of the accession of Huanwen to the alliance.

古文：晋孝武帝太元十四年十二月乙巳，雨，木冰。
现代文：晋孝武帝太元十四年十二月乙巳日，下雨，树木上结冰。
English: On the 21st day of the 12th month of the 14th year of the reign of Emperor Jin Xiaowu, it rained and there was ice on the trees.

古文：明年二月，王恭为北蕃；八月，庾楷为西蕃；九月，王国宝为中书令，寻加领军将军；十七年，殷仲堪为荆州。
现代文：第二年二月，王恭被任命为北藩的长官；八月，庾楷被任命为西藩的长官；九月，王国宝担任中书令，不久又加领军将军；太元十七年，殷仲堪任荆州刺史。
English: In February of the following year, Wang Qiong was appointed as the governor of the North Domain; in August, Zou Kai was appointed as the governor of the West Domain; in September, Wang Guobao was appointed as the secretary of the Central Government, and soon after, he was promoted to the general leading the army; in the 17th year of the Taiyuan Dynasty, Yin Zhong was appointed as the governor of Jingzhou.

古文：虽邪正异规，而终同摧灭，是其应也。
现代文：这几人虽然邪正不同，但最终都同样被摧减，造就是树木上结冰的应验。
English: Although the evil and righteous of these people are different, they are all equally destroyed in the end, which is the fulfillment of the icing on the trees.

古文：一曰，苻坚虽败，关、河未一，丁零鲜卑，侵略司、兗，窦扬胜扇逼梁、雍，兵役不已，又其象也。
现代文：另一种说法，苻坚虽然失败，但关、河一带并未统一，丁零鲜卑等族，侵犯占据司州、查业，窦扬胜进逼梁、雍战事不息，树木上结冰又正是这种现象的征兆。
English: Another way of saying this is that, although Jiaojian failed, the areas around Guan and He were not unified, and the Dingzixianbei and other ethnic groups invaded and occupied Shizhou and Cha'er, and the Douyang Shengjin forced Liang and Yong to continue fighting, and the icing on the trees was a symptom of this phenomenon.

古文：吴孙亮建兴二年，诸葛恪征淮南，行后，所坐听事栋中折。
现代文：吴孙亮建兴二年，诸葛恪征伐淮南，出发之后，他所坐的厅堂正梁从中折断。
English: In the second year of the construction of Wusunliang, Zhuge Quan conquered Huainan. After his departure, the main beam of the hall where he was sitting broke off.

古文：恪妄兴征役，夺民农时，作为邪谋，伤国财力，故木失其性，致毁折也。
现代文：诸葛恪任意征集士卒，使百姓错失农时，又实施自己的错误谋略，损伤国家财力，所以木失去了它的本性，以致折断。
English: Zhuge Ke arbitrarily recruited soldiers, so that when the people missed the farmers, he implemented his own wrong strategy and damaged the country's financial resources, so the tree lost its nature and broke.

古文：及旋师而诛灭，于《周易》又为栋桡之凶也。
现代文：他回师之后就被诛除，在《周易》中这种情况又说成是 栋桡之祸 。
English: After he returned to his teacher, he was purged, and in "Zhou Yi" this situation was also said to be the "scourge of Dong Xuan."

古文：晋武帝太康五年五月，宣帝庙地陷梁折。
现代文：晋武帝太康五年五月，宣帝庙地面下陷，屋梁折断。
English: In May of the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty, the ground of the Xuan Di Temple sank and the roof beam broke.

古文：八年正月，太庙殿又陷，改作庙，筑基及泉。
现代文：塞尘八年正月，太庙殿又下陷，改建庙，筑地基时遇上了泉水。
English: In the first month of the eighth year, the Great Temple collapsed again. The Great Temple was rebuilt, and the foundation and basement were built.

古文：其年九月，遂更营新庙，远致名材，杂以铜柱。
现代文：那年九月，于是重新营建新庙，从很远的地方运来名贵的木材，并用铜柱间杂在木材之中使用。
English: In September of that year, the new temple was rebuilt, precious wood was brought from far away, and copper columns were used in the wood.

古文：陈勰为匠，作者六万人。
现代文：陈勰担任大匠卿工匠有六万人。
English: There are 60,000 craftsmen working for Chen Wei.

古文：十年四月，乃成。
现代文：到塞尘十年四月新庙才建成。
English: The new temple was built in April of the tenth year of the Joseon Dynasty.

古文：十一月庚寅，梁又折。
现代文：十一月庚寅日，屋梁又折断。
English: On November 4th, the roof beam broke again.

古文：按地陷者，分离之象；梁折者，木不曲直也。
现代文：按：地面下陷是分离的征兆；屋梁折断，是木不曲直的表现。
English: Press: the ground sinking is a sign of separation; the roof beam breaking is a manifestation of the tree not bending straight.

古文：孙盛曰：于时后宫殿有孽火，又庙梁无故自折。
现代文：孙盛说：那时候后宫宫殿有邪火，又庙屋的屋梁无缘无故自己折断。
English: Sun Sheng said: At that time, there was an evil fire in the harem palace, and the roof beam of the temple house broke itself for no reason.

古文：先是帝多不豫，益恶之。
现代文：在造以前皇帝多病，更加厌恶这些怪事。
English: The fact that the emperor had been ill for a long time made him even more disgusted by these strange occurrences.

古文：明年，帝崩，而王室频乱，遂亡天下。
现代文：第二年，皇帝驾崩，而王室动乱频频发生。
English: The following year, the emperor died, and there were frequent disturbances in the royal court.

古文：晋惠帝太安二年，成都王颖使陆机率众向京师，击长沙王乂。
现代文：晋朝也随之灭亡。晋惠帝太安二年，盛都王司驴派陆毯率领军队直趋京城，进击长沙王司马义。
English: The Jin dynasty also perished. In the second year of Emperor Taian's reign, the king of Shengdu, Wangsisong, sent Lu Bao to lead the army straight to the capital and attacked Wang Simai in Changsha.

古文：军始引而牙竿折，俄而战败，机被诛。
现代文：军队刚刚出发而军旗旗竿折断。不久他们作战失败，陆卷被诛。
English: The army had just set out when the flagpole broke, and soon after they lost the battle and were captured.

古文：颖寻奔溃，卒赐死。
现代文：司马颖不久也溃败奔逃，最终被朝廷赐死。
English: Sima Ying was soon defeated and fled, and was eventually put to death by the imperial court.

古文：初，河间王颙谋先诛长沙，废太子，立颖。
现代文：起初，边题王司马颠暗中谋划先诛除长沙王，废黜太子，立司马颖为太子。
English: At first, Wang Sima secretly plotted to first overthrow the King of Changsha, depose the crown prince, and install Sima Ying as crown prince.

古文：长沙知之，诛其党卞粹等，故颖来伐。
现代文：长沙王知道了逭一阴谋，就诛除了河阎王的党徒卞粹等人，所以司马颖派军来进击。
English: Changsha King knew about the conspiracy and killed everyone except He Yan Wang's followers, so Sima Ying sent an army to attack.

古文：机又以颖得遐迩心，将为汉之代王，遂委质于颖，为犯从之将。
现代文：陆机又认为司马颖得到远近百姓的拥护，他将要像汉代代王那样被拥立为皇帝，于是为司马颖效忠献身，成为进犯正道的将领。
English: The land machine also believed that Sima Ying was supported by the people near and far, and he would be supported as an emperor like the king of the Han Dynasty, so he devoted his loyalty to Sima Ying and became the leader of the offensive.

古文：此皆奸谋之罚，木不曲直也。
现代文：这都是对奸谋的惩罚，属于木失其性的现象。
English: These are all punishments for treachery, which is a phenomenon that has lost its essence.

古文：王敦在武昌，铃下仪仗生华如莲花状，五六日而萎落，此木失其性而为变也。
现代文：王敦在武昌的时候，铃下的仪仗上长出家莲花一样的花，过了五六天枯萎陨落。这是木失去了它的本性而产生的变异。
English: When Wang Dun was in Wuchang, a flower like a house lotus grew on the ceremonial battle under the bell. After five or six days, it withered and fell. This is a mutation caused by the tree losing its nature.

古文：干宝曰： 铃合，尊贵者之仪；铃下，主威仪之官。
现代文：干宝说： 铃合，要显示尊贵者的威仪；铃下，是主管将帅威仪的官吏。
English: Gan Bao said, "The bell ring is to show the dignity of the dignitaries; the bell ringer is the official in charge of the commander's dignity.

古文：今狂花生于枯木，又在铃合之间，言威仪之富，荣华之盛，皆如狂花之发，不可久也。 
现代文：现在花不依季节在枯木上随意生长。又在将帅府中出现，预示威仪的富厚、荣华的鼎盛，都将像不按季节随意开放的花，不能持久。 
English: Now, flowers do not grow freely on dead trees according to the season. They also appear in the General Headquarters. The richness of the pre-demonstration ceremony and the peak of glory will be like flowers that do not open at will according to the season, and cannot last.

古文：其后终以逆命，没又加戮，是其应也。
现代文：以后王塾最终因为兴兵进犯朝廷，人死后被施加戮尸之刑，造就是枯木生花的应验。
English: Later, Wangjuku was eventually punished with the carving of the corpse after the death of a person because of the invasion of the imperial court. This was the fulfillment of the dead wood and flowers.

古文：一说此花孽也，于《周易》为 枯杨生华 。
现代文：一说遗花就是华孽，在《周易》中称为 枯杨生华 。
English: It is said that the leftover flowers are gorgeous, and in "Zhou Yi" they are called withered poplars.

古文：桓玄始篡，龙旗竿折。
现代文：桓玄刚刚篡位，龙旗竿折断。
English: Kuan Xuan has just usurped the throne, and the dragon flagpole is broken.

古文：玄田猎出入，不绝昏夜，饮食恣奢，土水妨农，又多奸谋，故木失其性也。
现代文：桓玄游猎出出进进，夜夜不停，饮食恣意豪奢，又兴土木营建之功，妨害农耕，又多设奸诈之谋，所以木失去它的本性。
English: Huan Xuan You hunted, went in and out, stayed up all night, ate extravagant food, made contributions to the construction of civil engineering, hindered farming, and made many treacherous plans, so the tree lost its nature.

古文：夫旗所以拟三辰，章著明也。
现代文：旗是用来模拟月星三辰、使典章彰明的标志。
English: The flag is a symbol used to simulate the moon and three stars, and to highlight the ceremony.

古文：旗竿之折，高明去矣。
现代文：旗竿折断，天命就离去了。
English: When the flagpole broke, the Mandate of Heaven departed.

古文：在位八十日而败。
现代文：桓玄在位八十天就垮台了。
English: Kuan Xuan's 80-day reign ended with his downfall.

古文：宋明帝泰始二年五月丙午，南琅邪临沂黄城山道士盛道度堂屋一柱自然，夜光照室内。
现代文：宋明帝泰始二年五月丙午，宜王国堕近黄城山道士盛道度堂屋中一根屋柱发生自燃现象，夜晚光照室内。
English: In the afternoon of May 3rd, the second year of the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Song Dynasty, a pillar in the house of the Taoist Sheng Daodu of the Kingdom of Yi, which fell near Huangcheng Mountain, spontaneously combusted. The room was illuminated at night.

古文：此木失其性也。
现代文：这是因为木失其本性。
English: This is because the wood loses its natural shape.

古文：或云木腐自光。
现代文：有人说道是木腐烂自己发光。
English: Some people say that wood glows when it rots.

古文：废帝升明元年，吴兴余杭舍亭禾蕈树生李实。
现代文：废帝升明元年，吴兴余杭舍亭禾蕈树长出了李树的果实。
English: In the first year of the reign of the former emperor, Wu Xingyu, the eucalyptus tree bore the fruit of the plum tree.

古文：禾蕈树，民间所谓胡颓树。
现代文：禾蕈树，就是民间所称的胡颓树。
English: The straw birch is what the common people call the cucumber tree.

古文：貌不恭：魏文帝居谅暗之始，便数出游猎，体貌不重，风尚通脱。
现代文：魏文帝在开始守丧的时候，就屡屡出外游玩打猎，举止不庄重，风姿仪态旷达而不拘小节。
English: When Emperor Weiwen began his funeral rites, he often went out to play and hunt. His behavior was not solemn, and his demeanor was expansive and informal.

古文：故戴凌以直谏抵罪，鲍勋以迕旨极刑。
现代文：所以越逵因为直言进谏触怒魏文帝而获罪，鲍勋因为违逆旨意而被处极刑。
English: Therefore, Yue Xi was found guilty of provoking the wrath of Emperor Weiwen by speaking out, and Bao Xun was sentenced to capital punishment for violating the emperor's will.

古文：天下化之，咸贱守节，此貌之不恭也。
现代文：天下人都仿效魏文查，轻视守丧期间的操守，这是貌不恭的表现。
English: People all over the world follow the example of Wei Wencha and despise the etiquette during the mourning period, which is a manifestation of cynicism.

古文：是以享国不永，后祚短促。
现代文：因此魏塞壶在位时间不长，他的后嗣居于帝位时间也很短。
English: Therefore, the reign of Wei Seijun was not long, and his heir lived on the throne for a short time.

古文：《春秋》鲁君居丧不哀，在戚而有嘉容，穆叔谓之不度，后终出奔。
现代文：《春秋》记载鲁昭公居丧时不哀痛，身处悲戚之中却有欣喜的表情，穆叔说鲁昭公不守礼法，昭公最终还是从鲁国出逃。
English: "Spring and Autumn" records that Lu Zhaogong was not sad at the time of his death, but he had a joyful expression in the midst of his grief. Mu Uncle said that Lu Zhaogong did not follow the etiquette, and that Lu Zhaogong eventually fled from Lu.

古文：盖同事也。
现代文：这是同类的事情。
English: It's the same kind of thing.

古文：魏尚书邓飏，行步弛纵，筋不束体，坐起倾倚，若无手足。
现代文：魏尚书邓飏，行步轻浮放纵，像是筋骨不能约束身体，坐立时身子不正，好像没有手足。
English: Wei Shangshu Dengyu, walking frivolous indulgence, as if the bones and sinews can not constrain the body, when sitting and standing, the body is not right, it seems to have no limbs.

古文：此貌之不恭也。
现代文：这属貌不恭的表现。
English: It's a cynical move.

古文：管辂谓之鬼躁。
现代文：管辖称这种行为为鬼躁。
English: The authorities call it "ghost mania."

古文：鬼躁者，凶终之征。
现代文：鬼躁是凶死的征兆。
English: Impetuousness is a sign of death.

古文：后卒诛死。
现代文：邓飏最终被杀。
English: Deng Yao was eventually killed.

古文：晋惠帝元康中，贵游子弟相与为散发倮身之饮，对弄婢妾。
现代文：晋惠帝元康年间，贵族子弟披头散发、赤身裸体在一起饮酒，相互当面玩弄婢女侍妾。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jingu, the sons of aristocrats wore long beards, drank together naked, and flirted with each other's maids.

古文：逆之者伤好，非之者负讥。
现代文：谁若是反对这样做，就因此而伤害感情；若是批评他们的这种行为，却反而受到嘲讽。
English: Anyone who objects to this gets their feelings hurt; anyone who criticises their behaviour is ridiculed.

古文：希世之士，耻不与焉。
现代文：追逐时尚的士人，以不能参与这种游乐为耻。
English: Fashion-chasing taxi drivers are ashamed not to be able to join in the fun.

古文：盖胡、翟侵中国之萌也。岂徒伊川之民，一被发而祭者乎？
现代文：这是胡人、戎狄侵犯中国的最初征兆，哪裹衹是的百姓，被披发而祭的戎狄影响同化呢。
English: This was the first sign of the invasion of China by the Hu people and the Rong Di. What kind of people were they, who were assimilated by the influence of the Rong Di?

古文：晋惠帝元康中，贾谧亲贵，数入二宫，与储君游戏，无降下心。
现代文：晋惠帝元康年间，翼箠受到亲宠，地位尊贵。他多次进入皇上和皇太子的宫殿，和皇太子一起游戏，毫无尊重储君、俯首为臣的礼数。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jingu, Tsubaki was favored and held a high position. He repeatedly entered the palaces of the emperor and the crown prince, and played games with the crown prince. He had no respect for the crown prince and bowed his head as a courtier.

古文：又尝同弈棋争道，成都王颖厉色曰： 皇太子，国之储贰，贾谧何敢无礼！ 
现代文：贾箠又曾经和太子一同下棋争夺棋路，成都王司昼题辞色严厉地说： 皇太子是国家的储君。贾箠怎敢无礼! 
English: Jia Wei also once played chess with the crown prince and competed for the chess pieces. Chengdu Wang Si said sternly: The crown prince is the crown prince of the country. How dare Jia Wei be rude!

古文：谧犹不悛，故及于祸。
现代文：夏趟还是不知改悔，所以最终遇上灾祸。
English: Xia Wu still did not know how to repent, so he eventually met with a disaster.

古文：齐王冏既诛赵伦，因留辅政，坐拜百官，符敕台府，淫专骄，不一朝觐。此狂恣不肃之容也。
现代文：变王司马同诛除盏迗司铋之后，因而就留在朝廷中辅政。在朝中他安坐着让百官行拜礼，用符令支使各部官员，任性酗酒，专断骄横，根本不行朝见之礼，这是狂妄恣横的表现。
English: After the removal of Wang Sima Tonglu, he remained in the imperial court to assist the government. In the imperial court, he sat quietly and allowed the officials to worship, used symbols to support the officials of various ministries, drank alcohol capriciously, was arbitrary and arrogant, and did not go to the court at all. This was a manifestation of arrogance and arbitrariness.

古文：天下莫不高其功，而虑其亡也。
现代文：天下之人没有谁不认为他安定晋室的功劳极高极大，但又都担心他败亡。
English: There is no one in the world who does not think that his contribution to the stability of the imperial court is extremely high, but they are all worried about his defeat.

古文：冏终弗改，遂至夷灭。
现代文：司马同始终不悔改，最终被夷灭。
English: Sima Tong remained unrepentant and was eventually destroyed.

古文：太元中，人不复著帩头。
现代文：太元年间，天下之人不再用帕头包裹头发。
English: In the 19th century, people all over the world stopped wrapping their hair in a headscarf.

古文：头者，元首；帩者，令发不垂，助元首为仪饰者也。
现代文：头是一身之首，而帕头是用来包裹头发使之不散乱下垂、又可作为头上仪饰的纱巾。
English: The head is the crown of the body, and the headscarf is used to wrap the hair so that it does not fall out and droop, and can also be used as a decorative scarf on the head.

古文：今忽废之，若人君独立无辅，以至危亡也。
现代文：现在突然废而不用，正如同君主居于帝位却没有人辅佐，而处在将要危急败亡的境地。
English: And now suddenly he is no more, as though he had reigned with no one to help him, but was on the verge of imminent defeat.

古文：其后桓玄篡位。
现代文：这以后就出现了桓玄篡位的事。
English: This was followed by the usurpation of the throne by Kangen.

古文：旧为屐者，齿皆达楄上，名曰 露卯 。
现代文：以前做木屐，木屐的齿都直达屐底，这称之为 露卯 。
English: In the past, when wooden rafts were made, the teeth of the raft reached all the way to the bottom of the raft, which was called "dew."

古文：太元中，忽不彻，名曰： 阴卯 。
现代文：左五年间，屐齿突然间都不贯通屐底，这称之为 阴卯 。
English: During the last five years, the molars suddenly do not penetrate the base of the palate, which is called "yinwu."

古文：其后多阴谋，遂致大乱。
现代文：逭以后人们多耍弄阴谋。最终招致天下大乱。
English: Since then, people have been plotting more and more, which eventually led to chaos in the world.

古文：晋安帝义熙七年，晋朝拜授刘毅世子。
现代文：晋安帝义熙七年，置室给玺隧世子拜授封爵。
English: In the seventh year of the reign of Emperor An of Jin, Emperor Yixi of Jin set up an office to confer a knighthood on the son of Emperor Qianlong.

古文：毅以王命之重，当设飨宴亲，请吏佐临视。
现代文：型赵认为是皇上之命，礼仪应当隆重，要摆设盛宴宴享亲人，请手下僚吏全来参加宴会。
English: Zhao believed that it was the emperor's order that the etiquette should be grand, that a feast should be set up to enjoy relatives, and that all subordinates and colleagues should be invited to the banquet.

古文：至日，国僚不重白，默拜于厩中。
现代文：到设宴那天，刘毅手下的僚吏不再禀报，衹是默不作声地在马厩中行拜礼。
English: On the day of the banquet, Liu Yi's subordinates no longer read the newspaper, but silently worshiped in the stables.

古文：王人将反命，毅方知，大以为恨，免郎中令刘敬叔官。
现代文：皇上使臣将要回朝廷覆命，刘毅才知道这情况，非常不满，因此免去了郎中令刘敬叔的官职。
English: The emperor's envoy was about to return to the imperial court to have his orders carried out. Liu Yi only found out about this and was very dissatisfied, so he dismissed his second-in-command Liu Jingshu from his official position.

古文：识者怪焉。
现代文：知道这事的人都非常奇怪。
English: People who know about it are very strange.

古文：此堕略嘉礼，不肃之妖也。
现代文：授官是嘉礼，礼仪却简略降格，正是不恭谨带来的妖异。
English: The bestowal of an official position is a commendation, but the etiquette is simply downgraded, which is precisely the weirdness brought about by disrespect.

古文：陈郡谢灵运有逸才，每出入，自扶接者常数人。
现代文：陈郡谢灵运才气俊逸，每次出入，常要几个人扶持。
English: Chen County Xie Lingyun is a talented and handsome man. Every time he goes out, he often needs a few people to support him.

古文：民间谣曰 四人挈衣裙，三人捉坐席 是也。
现代文：民间流传的 四个人帮提着衣裙，三个人帮拿着坐席 ，指的就是这种情况。
English: The folk tale of four people helping to carry a dress and three people helping to hold a seat refers to this situation.

古文：此盖不肃之咎，后坐诛。
现代文：遣正是不恭谨的过失，后来谢灵运就因为犯罪被诛杀。
English: The dismissal was a disrespectful mistake, and later Xie Lingyun was beaten to death for the crime.

古文：宋明帝泰始中，幸臣阮佃夫势倾朝廷，室宇豪丽，车服鲜明，乘车常偏向一边，违正立执绥之体。
现代文：宋明帝泰始年间，宠臣阮佃夫权势凌驾朝廷百官之上，房室豪华奢丽，车马服饰都鲜艳明丽。阮佃夫乘车常常偏向一边，违背了乘车时应当居中端正站立手执车绥的准则。
English: During the early years of the Song Dynasty, the power of Nguyn Xuân Phúc, a favorite of Emperor Ming, overtook the power of hundreds of officials in the imperial court. The rooms were luxurious, and the carriages and horses were brightly decorated. Nguyn Xuân Phúc often rode on the wrong side of the car, violating the rule that one should be in the middle of the car and stand up while driving.

古文：时人多慕效。
现代文：当时有很多人仿效他。
English: At that time, many people imitated him.

古文：此亦貌不恭之失也。
现代文：这也是貌不恭的过失。
English: This is also a careless mistake.

古文：时偏左之化行，方正之道废矣。
现代文：当时偏左之风盛行，坚守方正的风气就因此而衰败了。
English: At that time, the prevailing wind was to the left, and the tradition of adhering to the square was therefore in decline.

古文：后废帝常单骑游遨，出入市里营寺，未尝御辇。
现代文：后废帝常常单人独骑遨游，在集市里巷、兵营及文武官署中出入，未尝乘辇。
English: Emperor Houwu often rode around alone, going in and out of market alleys, military camps, and civil and military offices, without ever riding a donkey.

古文：终以殒灭。
现代文：最终也正是因此而丧身。
English: In the end, that's what killed him.

古文：恆雨：魏明帝太和元年秋，数大雨，多暴雷电，非常，至杀鸟雀。
现代文：魏明帝太和元年秋天，屡屡下大雨，又多猛烈的呜雷闪电，不同寻常，甚至鸟雀也被雷电震击而死。
English: In the autumn of the first year of the Wei and Ming dynasties, there were frequent heavy rains and more violent thunder and lightning, which was unusual. Even birds were shocked by lightning and died.

古文：案杨阜上疏，此恆雨之罚也。
现代文：据杨阜上奏朝廷的奏疏，这是恒雨的惩罚。
English: Yangfu reported a lack of rain, saying it was the result of continuous rainfall.

古文：时帝居丧不哀，出入弋猎无度，奢侈繁兴，夺民农时，故木失其性而恆雨为灾也。
现代文：当时皇帝正在守丧却不哀痛，出入遨游狩猎没有节制，奢侈的事件接连发生，役使百姓错失农时，所以木失其本性而恒阑造成灾害。
English: At that time, the emperor was in mourning but not mourning, there was no restraint in the entry and exit of the wandering hunting, the extravagant events occurred one after another, and the service caused the people to miss the farmers, so the tree lost its nature and the hail caused disasters.

古文：太和四年八月，大雨霖三十余日，伊、洛、河、汉皆溢，岁以凶饥。
现代文：太和四年八月，接连三十几天下大雨，伊、洛、河、汉等河流泛滥成灾，谷物不收百姓饥馑。
English: In August of the same year, it rained heavily for more than 30 days, and the rivers I, Lo, He and Han all overflowed. As a result, there was a terrible famine.

古文：孙亮太平二年二月甲寅，大雨震电；乙卯，雪，大寒。
现代文：孙亮太平二年二月甲寅日，大雨并有雷电；乙卯，下雪，天气又非常寒冷。
English: Sun Liang was born in Taiping in February of the second year of the Jia Yin. It was raining heavily with thunder and lightning. It was snowing and very cold.

古文：案刘歆说，此时当雨而不当大，大雨，恆雨之罚也。
现代文：据刘歆说，在这季节，应有雨却不应当有大雨，出现大雨，是恒雨之惩罚。
English: Liu Wei said that it should rain at the time of hail, but it should not be heavy rain. Heavy rain is the punishment for continuous rainfall.

古文：于始震电之明日而雪大寒，又恆寒之罚也。
现代文：在开始出现雷电的第二天下雪，天气又非常寒冷，又是恒寒之惩罚。
English: It snowed the day after the lightning started, and the weather was very cold, again the punishment of the cold snap.

古文：刘向以为既已震电，则雪不当复降，皆失时之异也。
现代文：刘向认为已经出现雷电，那么就不应当再降雪。雷电之后降雪，都是错乱季节的妖异。
English: Liu Xiang believes that lightning has already occurred, then it should not snow again. After lightning, snowfall is a strange phenomenon of the chaotic season.

古文：天戒若曰，为君失时，贼臣将起。
现代文：好像上天告诫说，作君主的违背天时，危害国家的奸臣将会作乱。
English: Thus saith the Lord, In the time of the king's wrath the traitor shall come.

古文：先震电而后雪者，阴见间隙，起而胜阳，逆杀之祸将及也。
现代文：先出现雷电而后下雪，是因为阴气寻到了间隙。勃然兴起胜过阳气。逭预示悖逆弑主的灾祸将会来临。
English: Thunder and lightning appear first, and then it snows, because the yin spirit has found a gap. It rises up and prevails over the yang spirit. The hail indicates that the calamity of disobeying the Lord will come.

古文：亮不悟，寻见废。
现代文：孙亮仍然不醒悟，不久就被废黜。
English: Sun Liang did not wake up and was soon eliminated.

古文：此与《春秋》鲁隐同也。
现代文：这和《春秋》记载的鲁隐公之事相同。
English: This is the same as the Lu Yin Gong incident recorded in "Spring and Autumn."

古文：晋武帝泰始六年六月，大雨霖；甲辰，河、洛、沁水同时并溢，流四千九百余家，杀二百余人，没秋稼千三百六十余顷。
现代文：晋武帝泰始六年六月，大雨连绵，甲辰日，黄河、洛水、沁水同时泛滥，冲垮四千九百余家的房屋，淹死了二百余人，淹没了秋天收获的三百六十余顷庄稼。
English: In June of the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Jinwu, continuous heavy rain caused the Yellow River, Luoshui River and Surabaya River to flood simultaneously on the first day of the second month, destroying more than 4,900 houses, drowning more than 200 people and inundating more than 360 hectares of crops harvested in the autumn.

古文：晋武太康五年七月，任城、梁国暴雨，害豆麦。
现代文：晋武帝太康五年七月，任城、梁国下暴雨，危害了豆麦等作物。
English: In July of the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty, it rained heavily in Rencheng and Liang Province, endangering crops such as soybeans and wheat.

古文：太康五年九月，南安霖雨暴雪，折树木，害秋稼；魏郡、淮南、平原雨水，伤秋稼。
现代文：太康五年九月，南安出现霖雨暴雪，摧折树木，损害秋天收获的庄稼；魏郡、淮南、平原等地的雨水，损伤秋天收获的庄稼。
English: In September of the fifth year of Taikang, rain and snowstorms occurred in Nan'an, destroying trees and damaging autumn harvest crops; rainwater in Wei County, Huainan and the plain damaged autumn harvest crops.

古文：是秋，魏郡、西平郡九县霖雨暴水，霜伤秋稼。
现代文：这年秋天，魏郡、西平郡九县出现霖雨洪水，并且降霜，损害了秋天收获的庄稼。
English: In the autumn of this year, nine counties in Wei County and Xiping County experienced rain and flood, and frost, which damaged the autumn harvest crops.

古文：晋惠帝永宁元年十月，义阳、南阳、东海霖雨，淹害秋麦。
现代文：晋惠帝永宁元年十月，义阳、南阳、东海等地出现霖雨，淹没、损害秋麦。
English: In October of the first year of the reign of Emperor Jinhui in Yongning, rain and rain occurred in Yiyang, Nanyang, Donghai and other places, flooding and damaging autumn barley.

古文：晋成帝咸康元年八月乙丑，荆州之长沙攸、醴陵、武陵之龙阳三县，雨水浮漂屋室，杀人，伤损秋稼。
现代文：晋成帝咸康元年八月乙丑，荆州长沙的攸、醴陵和武陵的龙阳三县，下雨涨水淹没、冲垮了房屋，淹死了人，损伤了秋天的庄稼。
English: In August of the first year of the reign of Emperor Jiancheng of the Han and Kang dynasties, in the three counties of Longyang in the provinces of Jing, Shatian, Fuling and Wuling, rain and rising water flooded and washed away houses, drowned people and damaged autumn crops.

古文：宋文帝元嘉二十一年六月，京邑连雨百余日，大水。
现代文：宋文帝元嘉二十一年六月，京城接连下雨一百余天，大水成灾。
English: In June of the 21st year of the reign of Emperor Songwen of Yuan Jia, it rained for more than 100 days in succession in Beijing, resulting in a major flood.

古文：孝武帝大明元年正月，京邑雨水。
现代文：孝武帝大明元年正月，京城因下雨而涨水。
English: In the first month of the year 1 of Emperor Xiaowu, the water rose in Beijing due to rain.

古文：大明五年七月，京邑雨水。
现代文：大明五年七月，京城因下雨而涨水。
English: In July of the 5th year of the Daming Dynasty, the capital city was flooded due to rain.

古文：大明八年八月，京邑雨水。
现代文：大明八年八月，京城因下雨而涨水。
English: In August of the 8th year of the Ming Dynasty, the capital city was flooded due to rain.

古文：明帝太始二年六月，京邑雨水。
现代文：明帝太始二年六月，京城因下雨而涨水。
English: In June of the second year of the reign of Emperor Ming, the capital city was flooded due to rain.

古文：顺帝升明三年四月乙亥，吴郡桐庐县暴风雷电，扬砂折木，水平地二丈，流漂居民。
现代文：顺帝升明三年四月乙亥曰，吴郡桐庐县出现暴风雷电，吹扬砂石，折断树木，平地涨起二丈深的水，冲走当地居民。
English: In April of the third year of Emperor Shun's reign, a thunderstorm and lightning occurred in Tonglu County, Wuxi County. Sand and stones were blown about, trees were broken, and water as deep as two meters rose from the flat land, sweeping away local residents.

古文：服妖：魏武帝以天下凶荒，资财乏匮，始拟古皮弁，裁缣帛为白帢，以易旧服。
现代文：魏武帝因为天下闹灾荒，资财匮乏，开始模仿古代皮弁，用缣帛裁制为白蛤，用作便帽替代旧的服饰。
English: Emperor Wu of Wei, because of the world's turmoil and scarcity of resources, began to imitate the ancient flapper, cut it into egrets, and used it as a cap to replace the old clothing.

古文：傅玄曰： 白乃军容，非国容也。 
现代文：傅玄说： 白色是军队服饰使用的颜色，而不应当是国家服饰使用的颜色。 
English: Fu Xuan said: White is the color used for military uniforms, and should not be the color used for national uniforms.

古文：干宝以为缟素，凶丧之象；帢，毁辱之言也。
现代文：干宝认为白色是凶丧的象征；恰有毁辱的意思。
English: According to Ganbao, white is a symbol of death; it has the meaning of humiliation.

古文：盖革代之后，攻杀之妖也。
现代文：制作这样的服饰，是在朝代更替之后，互相攻杀而出现的妖异。
English: The production of such clothing is a strange phenomenon that emerged after the dynasties were replaced.

古文：初为白帢，横缝其前以别后，名之曰 颜 ，俗传行之。
现代文：最初制作白蛤，在前方横着缝缀以便区别恰的前后，逭哈的横缝被称之为 颜 ，这种缝缀方法在民间流传开来。
English: Originally, chalk was made and sewn across the front to distinguish between the front and back. The cross-seam of the chalk was called "yan," and this method of stitching spread among the people.

古文：至晋永嘉之间，稍去其缝，名 无颜帢 。
现代文：到晋代永嘉年间，渐渐除去了这种横缝，除去横缝的恰称做 无颜恰 。
English: By the Yongjia period of the Jin Dynasty, this kind of cross-seam was gradually eliminated, and the removed cross-seam was called the faceless cross.

古文：而妇人束发，其缓弥甚，紒之坚不能自立，发被于额，目出而已。
现代文：而妇人束系头发非常松散，发髻松软不能竖起来，头发披散在额前，衹是露出眼睛罢了。
English: But the woman's hair is very loose, the hairpin is soft and cannot stand up, the hair is scattered on the forehead, and the eyelashes are just for showing the eyes.

古文：无颜者，愧之言也；覆额者，惭之貌；其缓弥甚，言天下忘礼与义，放纵情性，及其终极，至乎大耻也。
现代文：无颜，是惭愧的意思；头发覆盖额头，是惭愧的形貌；束系头发非常松散，象征天下忘记了礼义，放纵情性，到了最终，将要遭受大的耻辱。
English: Faceless, is the meaning of shame; hair covering the forehead, is the shape of shame; bunched hair is very loose, symbolizing that the world has forgotten the etiquette, indulgence of affection, and ultimately, will suffer great shame.

古文：永嘉之后，二帝不反，天下愧焉。
现代文：永嘉之后，愍帝、怀帝先后被俘，天下之人深感有愧。
English: After Yongjia, the two emperors were abducted and never returned, which was a disgrace to the world.

古文：魏明帝著绣帽，被缥纨半袖，尝以见直臣杨阜。
现代文：魏明帝戴绣帽，穿缥色细绢制做的短袖衣，召见忠臣杨阜。
English: Emperor Ming of Wei wore an embroidered cap and a short-sleeved shirt made of navy blue and fine satin, and summoned his loyal vassal Yang Fu.

古文：阜谏曰： 此于礼何法服邪？ 
现代文：杨阜进谏说： 这种衣服在礼法上称做什么服饰呢? 
English: Yang Fu Jinqi said: What is this kind of clothing called in etiquette?

古文：帝默然。
现代文：魏明帝默不作声。
English: The emperor was silent.

古文：近服妖也。
现代文：逭和服妖的情况相近。
English: Close to fancy dress.

古文：缥，非礼之色，亵服不贰。
现代文：缥即淡青色，是不合礼仪的颜色，与内衣的颜色没有分别。
English: , that is, light blue, is a color that is not suitable for etiquette, and is no different from the color of underwear.

古文：今之人主，亲御非法之章，所谓自作孽不可禳也。
现代文：身为人主，现在却自己穿着不合礼法的服饰，这正属于人们常说的自己作孽不可幸免啊。
English: As the head of the family, he is now wearing clothes that do not conform to etiquette, which is exactly what people often say about their own misdeeds.

古文：帝既不享永年，身没而禄去王室，后嗣不终，遂亡天下。
现代文：魏明帝寿命不长，他死后福禄也就离开了王室，他的后嗣未能寿终，最终丢失了天下。
English: Emperor Ming did not live for long, after his death, the good fortune also left the royal family, the descendants did not continue, and finally lost the world.

古文：魏明帝景初元年，发铜铸为巨人二，号曰 翁仲 ，置之司马门外。
现代文：晋兴元年，魏明帝向全国征收铜铸造成两个巨型铜人，称之为 翁仲 。把它们安放在司马门外。
English: In the first year of Jinxing, Wei Mingdi levied copper castings from all over the country to create two giant bronze people, called Wengzhong, and placed them outside the Sima Gate.

古文：案古长人见，为国亡；长狄见临洮，为秦亡之祸。
现代文：考案古事，古代巨人出现，是国家灭亡的预兆；长狄在临洮出现，带来了秦朝灭亡之祸。
English: The invention of ancient events, the appearance of ancient giants, is a harbinger of the country's demise; the appearance of Changdi in Linyi brought the disaster of the Qin Dynasty's demise.

古文：始皇不悟，反以为嘉祥，铸铜人以象之。
现代文：秦始皇不醒悟，反而认为是吉祥的征兆，铸造十二具铜人模拟长狄。
English: The first emperor did not wake up, but thought it was a good omen, casting a bronze man to symbolize it.

古文：魏法亡国之器，而于义竟无取焉。
现代文：魏朝效法秦，铸造导致亡国之祸的器物，而对于道义竟然无所取法。
English: Wei and Qian followed the rule of making objects for the dead, but in the end, it was not a good idea to do so in a religious ceremony.

古文：盖服妖也。
现代文：遣属于服妖一类。
English: It's the strangeness of clothing.

古文：魏尚书何晏，好服妇人之服。
现代文：翘曲尚书包垦，喜欢穿用女人的服饰。
English: He carries a crooked school bag and likes to wear women's clothing.

古文：傅玄曰： 此服妖也。 
现代文：傅玄说： 这是服妖。 
English: Fu Xuan said, "This is the demon of clothing.

古文：夫衣裳之制，所以定上下，殊内外也。
现代文：衣裳的规制，是用以确定身份尊卑、区分男女的标志。
English: The regulation of clothing is a sign used to determine the status of superiority and inferiority, and to distinguish between men and women.

古文：《大雅》云： 玄衮赤舄，钩膺镂锡。 
现代文：《大雅》说： 玄色的龙衣，赤色的靴头，马磐带有金饰，马额头有雕饰。 
English: "Daya" said: black dragon dress, red boots, horse with gold ornaments, horse forehead with carvings.

古文：歌其文也。
现代文：是歌颂服饰的仪制分明。
English: It is clearly a song in praise of the ceremonial dress.

古文：《小雅》云： 有严有翼，共武之服。 咏其武也。
现代文：《小雅》说： 威严而又敬慎，虔敬地恭行武事。 
English: "Xiao Ya" said: Be dignified and cautious, and piously and reverently perform martial arts.

古文：若内外不殊，王制失叙，服妖既作，身随之亡。
现代文：是歌颂服饰的刚健严整。假如内外没有分别，王朝的制度失去了条理，服妖出现之后，自身也随即灭亡。
English: If there is no difference between inside and outside, the monarchy will lose order, and after the appearance of the apparel, its body will perish.

古文：末喜冠男子之冠，桀亡天下；何晏服妇人之服，亦亡其家。
现代文：夏桀之妃走蝗戴男子之冠，夏凿也就丢失了天下；何昙穿女人的衣裳，也使自己家败亡。
English: If the Queen of the Summer Grasshopper wore a man's crown, the summer grasshopper would be lost to the world; if she wore a woman's dress, her family would also be lost.

古文：其咎均也。
现代文：给他们的责罚是均等的。
English: The punishment meted out to them is equal.

古文：吴妇人之修容者，急束其发，而劘角过于耳。
现代文：昱国妇人修饰容貌时，紧紧束系头发，而发髻却散垂过耳。
English: When Chinese women groom their faces, they tie their hair tightly, but the bun hangs loosely over the ear.

古文：盖其俗自操束大急，而廉隅失中之谓也。
现代文：这是那地方的民俗自己约束过于严、而品性有失中正的反映。
English: This is a reflection of the fact that the local folk customs are too strict in their self-restraint, and their character is not upright.

古文：故吴之风俗，相驱以急，言论弹射，以刻薄相尚。
现代文：所以吴地的风气，相互逼迫常使彼此陷入困窘，言论间相互指摘，崇尚刻薄的语言。
English: Therefore, the customs of Wuxi are to act urgently, speak harshly, and treat each other harshly.

古文：居三年之丧者，往往有致毁以死。
现代文：为父母守三年之丧的人，常常有因为哀毁过度而死的。
English: Those who observe the three-year mourning period often die with their bodies destroyed.

古文：诸葛患之，著《正交论》，虽不可以经训整乱，盖亦救时之作也。
现代文：诸葛恪担忧这类事情。着写了《正交论》，虽然他不能以经籍义理为依据整顿风俗的紊乱，但也算是拯救时弊的著作。
English: Zhuge Ke was worried about this, and wrote "Orthodoxy," although it could not rectify the chaos with classical education, it was also a work to save the times.

古文：孙休后，衣服之制，上长下短，又积领五六而裳居一二。
现代文：孙休为帝之后，衣服的规制，上长下短，又上衣有五六件而下裳衹有一两层。
English: After Sun Xiu became the emperor, the regulation of clothing was from long to short, and there were five or six coats and one or two layers of petticoats.

古文：干宝曰： 上饶奢，下俭逼，上有余下不足之妖也。 
现代文：干宝说： 上衣多而宽松，下裳少而窄小，是上有余下不足而出现的妖异。 
English: Gan Bao said: The upper body is abundant and luxurious, while the lower body is frugal and short. It is a strange phenomenon that there are some deficiencies on the upper body.

古文：至孙皓，果奢暴恣情于上，而百姓雕困于下，卒以亡国。
现代文：至孙皓继位，果然在上恣意奢费而又糟蹋财物，而百姓在下却困窘凋敝，最终就因为造而亡国。
English: When Sun Yat-sen succeeded to the throne, he indeed spent extravagantly and squandered wealth in the upper echelons, while the people in the lower echelons were in dire straits and eventually lost their country due to corruption.

古文：是其应也。
现代文：这正是服妖的应验。
English: This is exactly the fulfillment of the demon.

古文：晋兴后，衣服上俭下丰，著衣者皆厌腰盖裙。
现代文：晋朝兴起后，衣服上瘦下肥，穿着衣服的人都是缩腰，盖着下裳。
English: After the rise of the Jin Dynasty, the clothes became thinner and fatter, and people wearing clothes shrank and covered their undergarments.

古文：君衰弱，臣放纵，下掩上之象也。
现代文：这是君主衰弱，臣下放纵，下掩上的征兆。
English: This is a sign that the monarch is weak, that his vassals are indulgent, and that he is hiding something.

古文：陵迟至元康末，妇人出两裆，加乎胫之上，此内出外也。
现代文：往下逐渐演变，到元康末年，妇人制作补裆衫，罩在交领外衣之上，这是内出外的征兆。
English: It gradually evolved downwards, and by the end of the Yuan and Kang dynasties, women were making patched shirts and hoods on top of collared coats, which was a sign of going out.

古文：为车乘者，苟贵轻细，又数变易其形，皆以白蔑为纯，古丧车之遗象。
现代文：制造车辆的人，衹是看重轻巧和精美，又屡屡改变车辆的形制，都用白篾为车边的装饰，这是古代丧车留存的形制。
English: The people who manufacture vehicles attach great importance to lightness and refinement, and repeatedly change the shape of the vehicle. They all use chalk to decorate the side of the car. This is the shape of the ancient lost car.

古文：乘者，君子之器，盖君子立心无恆，事不崇实也。
现代文：车辆，是君子使用的器物，屡屡改变形制，是因为君子心中没有持久不变的准则，处事不崇尚实效的缘故。
English: A vehicle is a tool used by a gentleman. It has changed its shape many times because a gentleman does not have a long-lasting and unchanging standard in his heart, and he does not respect practicality.

古文：干宝曰： 及晋之祸，天子失柄，权制宠臣，下掩上之应也。
现代文：王室说： 到置塑出现祸乱的时候，天子失去权柄，大权被宠臣控制，这是下掩上的应验。
English: The royal family said: At the time of the calamity of the plaster, the heavenly son lost power, and the power was controlled by the favorite, which was the hidden fulfillment.

古文：永嘉末，六宫才人，流徙戎、翟，内出外之应也。
现代文：永嘉末年，六宫嫔妃宫女，流落到戎、翟之地，这是内出外的应验。
English: In the last years of Yongjia, the concubines of the six imperial concubines were exiled to the provinces of Rong and Shun. This was the fulfillment of their inner and outer wishes.

古文：及天下乱扰，宰辅方伯，多负其任，又数改易，不崇实之应也。 
现代文：到天下发生动乱，宰辅方伯，多数不能履行职责，朝廷又屡屡改变任命，这是不崇尚实效的应验。 
English: When the world was in turmoil, most of the vice-premiers were unable to perform their duties, and the imperial court repeatedly changed their appointments. This was the result of not respecting reality.

古文：晋武帝泰始后，中国相尚用胡床、貊盘，及为羌煮、貊炙。
现代文：晋武帝太康年之后，中原人相互崇尚使用胡床、貊盘等器物，以至于崇尚羌煮、貊炙等食物。
English: After the reign of Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty, the Central Plains people mutually advocated the use of wok beds, wok trays and other utensils, so much so that they advocated foods such as stewing and roasting.

古文：贵人富室，必置其器，吉享嘉会，皆此为先。
现代文：富贵人家，一定备有这样的器物；每逢祭祀之时、宴享宾客之际，也定要以这样的食物先入宴席。
English: Rich and noble families must have such utensils; whenever there is a religious service or a banquet, such food must be served first at the banquet.

古文：太康中，天下又以氈为絈头及络带、衿口，百姓相戏曰，中国必为胡所破也。
现代文：立尘年间，天下人又以毡制做缠头用的细头、腰系的络带以及领。百姓互相戏言说，中原一定会被胡人攻破。
English: During the years of the Dust Rising, the people of the world also used silk to make a thin headband for wrapping the head, a loincloth belt for the waist and a collar. The people joked with each other that the Central Plains would definitely be invaded by the Hu people.

古文：氈产于胡，而天下以为絈头带身、衿口，胡既三制之矣，能无败乎。
现代文：毡出产于胡地，而天下人以它制做细头、带身、领，胡人已经从三方面控制了中原人，中原人能不失败吗?
English: The yakitori is produced in the Central Plains, and people all over the world use it to make thin noodles, noodles, and noodles. The Hu people have controlled the Central Plains people from three aspects. Can the Central Plains people not fail?

古文：干宝曰： 元康中，氐、羌反，至于永嘉，刘渊、石勒遂有中都。
现代文：干实说： 五尘年间，压人、差人反叛，到了永嘉年间，鲤担人刘遄、羯人互勤占据京城。
English: Gan Zhi said: In the Five Dust Years, the oppressors and police officers rebelled, and in the Yongjia Years, the officials of Liu Bei and Han occupied the capital city.

古文：自后四夷迭据华土，是其应也。 
现代文：这以后四夷异族更替占据华夏的土地，这正是使用胡地器物的应验。 
English: After this, the four barbarian tribes took over the land of China, which is exactly the fulfillment of the use of Hudi ware.

古文：晋武帝太康后，天下为家者，移妇人于东方，空莱北庭，以为园囿。
现代文：晋武帝太康年后，皇帝把妇人住处移到宫廷的东面，把北庭空出来，让其草木生长，成为园囿。
English: After the reign of Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty, the emperor moved the woman's residence to the east of the palace, emptied the north courtyard, and let the plants and trees grow and become garden beds.

古文：干宝曰： 夫王朝南向，正阳也；后北宫，位太阴也；世子居东宫，位少阳也。
现代文：干宝说： 天子临朝面朝南，是处于正阳之位；后居于北宫，是处于太阴之位；太子居于东宫，是处于少阳之位。
English: Gan Bao said: Tianzi, who is facing south, is in the position of Zhengyang; Hou, who is in the North Palace, is in the position of Taiyin; Taizi, who is in the East Palace, is in the position of Shaoyang.

古文：今居内于东，是与外俱南面也。
现代文：现在让妇人居处东方，这是让妇人和男子同处朝南的位置。
English: Now let the women's habitat be in the east, which is the position for women and men to be in the south.

古文：亢阳无阴，妇人失位而干少阳之象也。
现代文：这种情况是亢阳无阴，是妇人没有处在自己的地位而干犯少阳之位的征兆。
English: This situation is a sign that there is no yin and no yang, and that women are not in their own position, but are in the position of the lesser yang.

古文：贾后谗戮愍怀，俄而祸败亦及。 
现代文：买后用谗言使愍怀太子获罪并杀害他，不久败亡之祸也及于自身。 
English: After the purchase, he used slander to incriminate and kill Prince Zou Huai, and soon the calamity of defeat also fell upon himself.

古文：昔初作履者，妇人圆头，男子方头。
现代文：当初做鞋的时候，妇人的鞋是圆头，男子的鞋是方头。
English: When shoes were first made, women's shoes had a round toe and men's shoes had a square toe.

古文：圆者，顺从之义，所以别男女也。
现代文：圆有顺从之义，圆头、方头是区分男女鞋履的标志。
English: Round has the meaning of obedience, round toe, square toe is a sign of distinguishing men's and women's shoes.

古文：晋太康初，妇人皆履方头，此去其圆从，与男无别也。
现代文：晋太康初年，妇人都穿方头鞋，这丢去了妇人顺从男子的含意，妇人和男子没有区别了。
English: In the first year of Jin Taikang, women wore square-toed shoes, which lost the meaning of women's obedience to men, and there was no difference between women and men.

古文：太康之中，天下为《晋世宁》之舞，手接杯盘反覆之，歌曰： 晋世宁，舞杯盘。 
现代文：太康年间，全国盛行名为《晋世宁》的舞蹈，跳舞的人手托住杯盘上下翻转跳舞，唱着歌辞说： 晋代安宁，舞动杯盘。 
English: During the Taikang years, a dance called "Jin Shining" was popular throughout the country. The dancers held the cup and saucer in their hands and flipped them up and down as they danced, singing the lyrics: "Jin Dynasty tranquility, dance the cup and saucer."

古文：夫乐生人心，所以观事。
现代文：乐生于人心，是人们考察事物的依据。
English: Leisure is born in people's hearts and is the basis for people to examine things.

古文：故《记》曰： 总干山立，武王之事也；发扬蹈厉，太公之志也；《武》乱皆坐，周、召之治也。 
现代文：所以《乐记》说： 持着盾牌，像山似的正立，象征武王总领天下之事；精神奋发，意气昂扬，象征太公威武鹰扬之志；《武舞》终结，舞者皆坐，象征周公、召公进行文治。 
English: Therefore, "Lecture on Music" says: Holding a shield, standing upright like a mountain, symbolizing the general leader of the world; spirited and high-spirited, symbolizing the aspiration of being too public and martial eagle; "Wu Dance" ends, the dancers are all seated, symbolizing Zhou Gong and summoning Gong to carry out civil government.

古文：又曰： 其治民劳者，舞行缀远；其治民逸者，舞行缀近。
现代文：又说： 那些治理百姓，使百姓劳苦的诸侯，赏给他们观赏的舞，舞蹈者的行距远；那些治理百姓，使百姓安逸的诸侯，赏给他们观赏的舞，舞蹈者的行距短。 
English: He also said: Those lords who govern the people and make the people work hard, give them a dance to watch, and the dancers walk far away; those lords who govern the people and make the people comfortable, give them a dance to watch, and the dancers walk short.

古文：今接杯盘于手上而反覆之，至危也。
现代文：现在舞蹈者用手托住杯盘上下翻转地跳舞，是非常危险的事情。
English: Now dancers hold cups and plates in their hands and dance upside down, which is very dangerous.

古文：杯盘者，酒食之器也。而名曰《晋世宁》者，言晋世之士，偷苟于酒食之间，而其知不及远，晋世之宁，犹杯盘之在手也。 
现代文：杯盘是盛装酒食的器具，而给这样的舞蹈取名为《晋世宁》，是指晋代的士人，在酒食之间苟且偷生，而他们的见识短浅，晋代的安宁，如同杯盘的安危寄托在舞蹈者的手中。
English: The cup and saucer are the utensils for holding food and drink, and the name "Jin Shining" given to such a dance refers to the scholars of the Jin Dynasty, who lived secretly between food and drink, and their knowledge was short-sighted. The tranquility of the Jin Dynasty, like the safety of the cup and saucer, was placed in the hands of the dancers.

古文：晋惠帝元康中，妇人之饰有五兵佩，又以金、银、玳瑁之属为斧、钺、戈、戟，以当笄囗。
现代文：晋惠帝元康年问，妇人用称为五兵佩的佩饰，又用金、银、玳瑁之类的材料制成斧、娥、戈、戟等形状，以此作笄。
English: According to Emperor Jingu Yuan Kangnian, women made brooches from gold, silver, and other materials in the shapes of axes, eagles, goats, and ploughshares.

古文：干宝曰： 男女之别，国之大节，故服物异等，贽币不同。
现代文：干实说： 凡事要分别男女，是关系国家兴衰的大事，所以男女的服饰器物规格不同，礼物的规格也有所不同。
English: In fact, it is important to separate men and women in everything. It is a major event related to the rise and fall of the country. Therefore, the specifications of men's and women's clothing and accessories are different, and the specifications of gifts are also different.

古文：今妇人而以兵器为饰，又妖之大也。
现代文：现在妇人却以兵器作佩饰，这是极大的妖异。 
English: Now the woman is adorned with weapons, which is very strange.

古文：遂有贾后之事，终以兵亡天下。 
现代文：于是有贾后乱政之事，晋室最终因为战乱而亡失天下。
English: As a result, there was a chaotic government after Jia, and Jinshitsu eventually lost the world because of the war.

古文：元康中，妇人结发者，既成，以缯急束其环，名曰撷子紒。
现代文：元康年间，妇人盘结头发，盘好之后，用缯紧紧束系发髻四周，这种发型称为撷子蚧。
English: During the Yuan and Kang dynasties, women braided their hair, and after it was braided, they tied it tightly around their head with a hairpin. This type of hairstyle is called the braided hairpin.

古文：始自中宫，天下化之。
现代文：这种发型起于宫中，后来天下人都仿效。
English: It started in the palace, and the whole world followed suit.

古文：其后贾后果害太子。
现代文：这以后买后果然谋害了太子。
English: After that, the buyer plotted to kill the prince.

古文：元康中，天下始相仿为乌杖，以柱掖其后，稍施其錞，住则植之。
现代文：元康年间，天下开始相互仿效制作捣杖，用以拄撑，以后又渐渐在杖的下端设置了平底的锌，停住的时候便于直立。
English: During the Yuan and Kang dynasties, people all over the world began to imitate each other in making canes to prop themselves up. Later, flat-bottomed zinc was gradually placed at the lower end of the cane, making it easier to stand upright when stopping.

古文：夫木，东方之行，金之臣也。
现代文：木，在五行中属东方，附属于金。
English: Wood, in the five elements, belongs to the East and is attached to gold.

古文：杖者，扶体之器，乌其头者，尤便用也。
现代文：杖是扶持身体的器物；把杖头做成槁形，特别便于使用。
English: The cane is a tool for supporting the body; the cane head is made into a beak shape, making it particularly easy to use.

古文：必傍柱掖者，傍救之象也。
现代文：一定要依靠槁杖拄掖，是要依靠辅臣挽救国家的征兆。
English: It is a sure sign that one must rely on one's vassals to save the country.

古文：王室多故，而元帝以蕃臣树德东方，维持天下，柱掖之应也。
现代文：王室多出现意外的变故，元帝以藩臣的身份在东方树立德政，维系天下人心，是依靠槁杖拄撑的应验。
English: Unexpected changes often occur in the royal family. Emperor Yuan established a virtuous government in the East as a vassal of the domain, and maintained the hearts of the people of the world. It is the fulfillment of relying on the cane.

古文：至社稷无主，海内归之，遂承天命，建都江外，独立之应也。
现代文：到社稷失去君主的时候，海内士人都归附元帝，元帝于是承受天命，在江南重建都城，另立王朝，这是槁杖可以独立的应验。
English: When the country no longer had a monarch, and the country surrendered to him, he received a heavenly mandate to build a capital south of the Yangtze River, which was a sign of independence.

古文：元康末至太安间，江、淮之域，有败编自聚于道，多者或至四五十量。
现代文：元康末年到太安年间，江、淮一带，有破草鞋自己在道路上聚集，多的时候有四五十双。
English: From the end of the Yuan Kang to the Taian period, in the areas of Jiang and Huai, there were broken grass shoes that gathered on the road, sometimes there were forty or fifty pairs.

古文：干宝尝使人散而去之，或投林草，或投坑谷。
现代文：干宝曾经派人把这些草鞋扔开，有的丢在草丛树林之中，有的投入山谷深坑之内。
English: Dry treasure had sent someone to throw these straw shoes away, some were thrown into the bushes and trees, and some were thrown into the deep pits of the valley.

古文：明日视之，悉复如故。
现代文：第二天去看，又都像以前那样聚集在道路上。
English: The next day, they all gathered on the road as before.

古文：民或云见狸衔而聚之，亦未察也。
现代文：有的百姓说看见狸把这些破草鞋衔聚到一起，也没有人去考察。
English: Some people said that they saw the raccoon dragging these broken grass shoes together, but no one went to investigate.

古文：宝说曰： 夫编者，人之贱服，最处于下，而当劳辱，下民之象也。
现代文：干宝解释这种现象说： 草鞋，是最贱的服饰，处于人身最下的部位，承担最为劳辱的职责，因而是处于下位百姓的象征。
English: Explaining this phenomenon, Gan Bao said: "Grass shoes are the most lowly clothing, located in the lowest part of the body, and bear the most humiliating duties, so they are a symbol of the lower people.

古文：败者，疲毙之象也。
现代文：破损，是疲敝的象征。
English: Broken, it is a symbol of weariness.

古文：道者，地理四方，所以交通王命所由往来也。
现代文：道路，是沟通四方、传达王命、交通往来的途径。
English: Roads are a means of communication in all directions, conveying the king's command, and facilitating traffic.

古文：故今败编聚于道者，象下民罢病，将相聚为乱，绝四方而壅王命之象也。
现代文：现在破损的草鞋在道路上聚集，正是处于下层的百姓疲敝困窘，将要聚集在一起作乱，堵塞四方交通、壅塞王命传布的征兆。 
English: Now the broken sandals are gathering on the road, which is a sign that the lower-class people are exhausted and distressed, and will gather together to make trouble, block traffic in all directions, and obstruct the spread of the king's life.

古文：在位者莫察。
现代文：皇上和诸多在官位的人没有谁察知这种征兆。
English: Neither the emperor nor many people in official positions were aware of this sign.

古文：太安中，发壬午兵，百姓嗟怨。
现代文：太安年间，皇上颁发《壬午诏书》征兵，称为 壬午兵 ，百姓嗟叹怨恨。
English: During the Taian era, the emperor issued the "Jinwu Zhao" Conscription, known as the "Jinwu soldiers," the people sighed with resentment.

古文：江夏男子张昌遂首乱荆楚，从之者如流。
现代文：江夏男子张昌于是首先在荆楚一带发动叛乱，人们像流水一样跟从他作乱。
English: Zhang Chang, a man from Jiangxia, was the first to launch a rebellion in the Jingchu area, and people followed him like water.

古文：于是兵革岁起，天下因之，遂大破坏。
现代文：从这以后，战乱年年发生，天下因而遭受大的破壤。
English: Since then, wars have occurred every year, and the world has suffered great devastation as a result.

古文：此近服妖也。 
现代文：逭和服妖之事相近。
English: The story of the kimono-wearing demon is similar.

古文：晋孝怀永嘉以来，士大夫竟服生笺单衣。
现代文：晋孝怀永嘉年以后，士大夫竞相穿着用未漂煮的生绢布制做的单衣。
English: After the auspicious year of Jinxiao and Huaiyong, the scholar-officials competed to wear a single dress made of unbleached oyster cloth.

古文：远识者怪之，窃指摘曰： 此则古者繐衰之布，诸侯大夫所以服天子也。
现代文：有远见的人对这种风气感到奇怪，暗中指责说： 这是古代制作总衰丧服所用的布，诸侯大夫为天子服丧就穿这种缚衰丧服。
English: People with foresight were puzzled by this custom, and made veiled accusations: This was the cloth used in ancient times to make mourning clothes. Princes and nobles wore these clothes to mourn the death of their sons.

古文：今无故毕服之，殆有应乎？ 
现代文：现在无缘无故大家都穿它，将要有什么应验吗? 
English: Now that everyone is wearing it for no reason, will anything come of it?

古文：其后愍、怀晏驾，不获厥所。
现代文：这以后，愍帝、怀帝驾崩，死在异族之地。
English: After this, Emperor Gong and Emperor Huai passed away and died in a foreign land.

古文：晋元帝太兴以来，兵士以绛囊缚紒。
现代文：晋元帝太兴年以后，兵士用绛红色囊袋套住发髻。
English: After the reign of Emperor Taheung of the Jin Dynasty, the soldiers used scarlet bags to cover their hair braids.

古文：紒在首，莫上焉。
现代文：发髻在头上，人身上没有什么再比它高。
English: There is nothing higher on a man's body than the hair on his head.

古文：《周易》《乾》为首，《坤》为囊。
现代文：依据《周易》，头为干，囊为坤。坤是配属干的。
English: According to "Zhou Yi," the head is the stem and the body is the trunk. The trunk belongs to the trunk.

古文：《坤》，臣道也。晋金行，赤火色，金之贼也。
现代文：晋朝五行属金，而赤是火的颜色，火是金的克星。
English: The five elements of the Jin dynasty belong to gold, while red is the color of fire. Fire is the enemy of gold.

古文：以硃囊缚紒，臣道上侵之象也。
现代文：用红色的囊袋套住发髻，是为臣者侵犯君上的征兆。
English: Wearing a red pouch over your hair is a sign that a vassal is encroaching on you.

古文：到永昌元年，大将军王敦举兵内攻，六军散溃。
现代文：到永昌元年，大将军王敦率领军队进攻京城，朝廷六军溃散。
English: In the first year of Yongchang, the general Wang Dun led the army to attack the capital, and the six armies of the imperial court were dispersed.

古文：旧为羽扇，柄刻木，象其骨形，羽用十，取全数也。
现代文：旧时制作羽扇，扇柄用有雕饰的木制做，仿效羽骨的形状，羽用十枚，是为了取用全数。
English: In the old days, a feather fan was made, the fan handle was made of carved wood, imitating the shape of the feather bone, with ten feathers, in order to use the full number.

古文：晋中兴初，王敦南征，始改为长柄下出，可捉，而减其羽用八。
现代文：束晋中兴之初，王敦南征，开始把扇柄改长，往下伸出，可以握持，而且把羽的数目由十减为八。
English: At the beginning of the revival of the fan fan, Wang Dun Nan Zheng began to lengthen the fan handle, extend it downwards so that it could be held, and reduce the number of wings from ten to eight.

古文：识者尤之曰： 夫羽扇，翼之名也。
现代文：有见识的人指责这种改变说： 羽扇，是用羽翼来命名。
English: People with insight criticized: "Feather fan is the name of a feather.

古文：创为长柄者，执其柄制羽翼也。
现代文：创制长柄，意思是执持扇柄控制羽翼。
English: Create a long handle, which means holding the fan handle to control the wings.

古文：以十改八者，将以未备夺已备也。 
现代文：把十改为八，意思是将要凭藉不完全的力量去夺取那已完备的东西。 
English: To change ten into eight, signifies that we are to lay hold of that which is perfect with imperfect strength.

古文：是时为衣者，又上短，带至于掖；著帽者，以带缚项。
现代文：这时候制作衣服，上面短，衣带衹到腋下；戴帽的人，又用带子缚住脖子。
English: At this time, clothes are made, the top is short, and the straps are tied to the armpits; the person wearing the hat is also tied by the neck with a band.

古文：下逼上，上无地也。
现代文：这象征下逼上，上无地位。
English: There's no room to go up.

古文：下裤者，直幅为口无杀，下大失裁也。
现代文：下面的裤，以直幅为裤腿，直到裤口也不缩小，下面遇大，剪裁不当。
English: The lower trousers, with the straight width as the trouser leg, do not shrink until the crotch, the bottom is large, the cut is improper.

古文：寻有兵乱，三年而再攻京师。
现代文：不久就发生战乱，三年中王敦两次进攻京城。
English: War soon broke out, and in the middle of the three years, Wang Dun attacked the capital twice.

古文：晋海西初嗣位，迎官忘设豹尾。
现代文：晋海西公刚继位为帝的时候，迎接他的官员忘记在属车上设置豹尾之饰。
English: When Jinhai Xigonggang succeeded to the throne as emperor, the officials who greeted him forgot to put the leopard's tail decoration on his car.

古文：识者以为不终之象，近服妖也。
现代文：有见识的人认为这是为帝不终的征兆。这和服妖相近。
English: People with insight believe that this is a sign of the end of the emperor. This kimono is close to the devil.

古文：晋司马道子于府北园内为酒钅卢列肆，使姬人酤鬻酒肴，如裨贩者，数游其中，身自巘易，因醉寓寝，动连日夜。
现代文：晋司马道子在府中北园内设置酒店商铺，命他的姬妾卖酒卖菜，如同集市的小贩，他自己屡屡在其中游玩，亲自购买酒物，乘着醉意就在园中住宿，往往连着几日几夜不出园。
English: Jin Sima Daozi set up a hotel shop in the north park of the prefecture, ordering his concubine to sell wine and vegetables, like a market hawker. He himself repeatedly visited it, personally purchased alcohol, stayed in the park while drunk, and often did not leave the park for several days and nights.

古文：汉灵帝尝若此。
现代文：漠灵帝也曾经像这样。
English: Emperor Neferneferuaten used to be like this.

古文：干宝以为： 君将失位，降在皁隶之象也。 
现代文：干宝认为： 这是君将要丢失自己的地位，贬斥为奴隶的征兆。 
English: Gan Bao thought: This is a sign that you will lose your status and be reduced to a slave.

古文：道子卒见废徙，以庶人终。
现代文：司马道子最终被废黜，以庶人的身份了结一生。
English: Sima Daozi was eventually deposed and ended his life as a commoner.

古文：桓玄篡立，殿上施绛绫帐，镂黄金为颜，四角金龙，衔五色羽葆流苏。
现代文：桓玄篡位为帝，在殿上设置绛绫帷帐，用雕饰的黄铜做匾额，匾额四角雕着金龙，金龙衔着五色的羽葆流苏。
English: Emperor Kuan Xuan usurped the throne, and the curtain was set up in the hall. The carved brass was used to make the eaves, the four corners of the eaves were carved with golden dragons, and the golden dragons were tied with five-colored feather tassels.

古文：群下窃相谓曰： 颇类蒐车。 
现代文：他的手下人暗中互相传说： 这很像载运棺柩的辆车。 
English: His men whispered to each other: It looks like a hearse.

古文：此服妖也。
现代文：逭就是服妖。
English: is a clothing demon.

古文：晋末皆冠小冠，而衣裳博大，风流相仿，舆台成俗，识者曰： 此禅代之象也。 
现代文：晋末年大家都戴小帽，而衣裳却很宽大，士大夫互相效法，奴仆贱人也养成这种习惯。有见识的人说： 这是改朝换代的征兆。 
English: At the end of the Jin Dynasty, everyone wore small hats, but the clothes were very large. The scholars and officials imitated each other, and the slaves also developed this habit. People with insight said: This is a sign of changing the dynasty.

古文：永初以后，冠还大云。
现代文：永初年之后，戴帽子又恢复为大的了。
English: After the first year, it's back to wearing a hat.

古文：宋文帝元嘉六年，民间妇人结发者，三分发，抽其鬟直向上，谓之 飞天紒 。
现代文：宋文帝元嘉六年，民间妇人绾结头发，三分其发使环形发髻直竖向上，称之为 飞天纷 。
English: In the sixth year of Emperor Yuanjia of the Song Dynasty, the women of the common people braided their hair, and three-quarters of them made the ring-shaped hairpins stand straight up, which was called "flying."

古文：始自东府，流被民庶。
现代文：这种发型是从丞相兼领扬州刺史的治所东府开始，在民间广为流传。
English: This hairstyle has been widely spread among the people since it started in the Eastern Prefecture of the Imperial Palace, where the chancellor was also the leader of the Yangzhou imperial court.

古文：时司徒彭城王义康居东府，其后卒以陵上徙废。
现代文：当时司徒彭城王刘义康身居东府，那以后，刘义康最终还是因侵凌君上之罪被贬谪废黜。
English: At that time, Liu Yikang, the king of Stubai Pengcheng, was living in Dongfu. After that, Liu Yikang was eventually dethroned for the crime of encroaching on the king.

古文：孝武帝世，豫州刺史刘德愿善御车，世祖尝使之御画轮，幸太宰江夏王义恭第。
现代文：孝武帝时代，豫州刺史刘德愿善于驾车，世祖曾经命刘德愿驾着画轮车，驾临太宰江夏王刘义恭的府第。
English: In the era of Emperor Xiaowu, Liu Dejun, the prince of Yuzhou, was good at driving. The founder once ordered Liu Dejun to drive a cart to visit the capital of Dazaigang Xia King Liu Yigong.

古文：德愿挟牛杖催世祖云： 日暮宜归！ 
现代文：刘德愿挟着赶牛杖催促世祖说： 时近日暮应当回去! 
English: Liu De would like to hold a cattle prod and urge the ancestor to say: It's time to go back!

古文：又求益僦车。
现代文：又戏言请求增加租车的钱。
English: He also jokingly asked for more money to rent a car.

古文：世祖甚欢。
现代文：世祖很高兴。
English: The patriarch was delighted.

古文：此事与汉灵帝西园蓄私钱同也。
现代文：这事和汉灵帝西园积蓄私钱的事情相同。
English: This is the same as the matter of Han Ling Di Xi Yuan's accumulation of private money.

古文：孝武世，幸臣戴法兴权亚人主，造圆头履，世人莫不效之。
现代文：孝武帝时代，宠臣戴法兴权力仅次于皇上，他制造圆头鞋，当时人个个都来仿效。
English: In the era of Emperor Xiaowu, his favorite, Dai Faxing, was second only to the emperor in power. He made round-toed shoes, and everyone at the time followed his example.

古文：其时圆进之俗大行，方格之风尽矣。
现代文：那时候圆通阿附的风气盛行，而方正的风气丧尽了。
English: At that time, the culture of rounding and attaching prevailed, while the culture of the square was exhausted.

古文：明帝初，司徒建安王休仁统军赭圻，制乌纱帽，反抽帽裙，民间谓之 司徒状 ，京邑翕然相尚。
现代文：明帝初年，司徒建安王刘休仁在赭圻统军，他创制了乌纱帽，使帽裙反向上托出，民间称这种帽为 司徒状 ，风靡京城，成为习尚。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, Liu Xuren, the King of Jian'an, created a black gauze hat, which made the hat skirt protrude backwards. People called this hat "Stoo-like," which swept the capital and became a fashion.

古文：休仁后果以疑逼致祸。
现代文：刘休仁后来果然因为声名与皇上相近、权势威逼皇上而招致灾祸。
English: Liu Xuren later caused a calamity because his reputation was similar to the emperor's and his power overpowered the emperor.

古文：龟孽：晋惠帝永熙初，卫瓘家人炊饭，堕地，尽化为螺，出足起行。
现代文：晋惠帝永熙初年，卫罐家人煮饭，饭掉到地上，全都变成螺，并且伸出足爬行。
English: In the first year of Emperor Yongxi's reign, Wei Jian's family was cooking rice. When the rice fell to the ground, they all turned into snails and crawled with their feet outstretched.

古文：螺，龟类，近龟孽也。
现代文：螺属于龟类，这事和龟孽相近。
English: The snail belongs to the tortoise family, which is similar to the tortoise.

古文：干宝曰： 螺被甲，兵象也。
现代文：干寅说： 螺披有甲壳，饭变成螺，是有兵事的征兆。
English: Gan Yin said: The snail is covered with a carapace, and the rice turns into a snail, which is a sign of war.

古文：于《周易》为《离》，《离》为戈兵。 
现代文：在《周易》中属于《离》卦，《离》卦预示着戈兵之事。 
English: In "Zhou Yi," it belongs to "Leave" gua, "Leave" gua foreshadowed the Gobi soldiers.

古文：明年，瓘诛。
现代文：第二年，卫璀被诛杀。
English: The following year, Wei Xuan was beaten to death.

古文：鸡祸：魏明帝景初二年，廷尉府中有雌鸡变为雄，不鸣不将。
现代文：魏明帝景初二年，廷尉府中有雌鸡变为雄鶸，变成雄鶸后既不会长呜报晓，也不在鶸群中称雄。
English: In the first two years of the reign of Emperor Jing of the Wei and Ming Dynasties, a hen in Tingyi Prefecture turned into a male pheasant. After turning into a male pheasant, it would not be able to tell the time, nor would it dominate the flock.

古文：干宝曰： 是岁，晋宣帝平辽东，百姓始有与能之义，此其象也。 
现代文：干宝说： 这一年，晋宣帝司马懿平定辽塞，百姓中开始出现推举贤能、以司马懿为帝的议论，雌鸡变雄鸡就是其征兆。 
English: Gan Bao said: In this year, the Emperor Sima Jiao of the Jin Dynasty began to subdue Liao Ce, and the people began to discuss the election of a virtuous person, with Sima Jiao as the emperor. The hen turning into a rooster is a sign of this.

古文：然晋三后并以人臣终，不鸣不将，又天意也。
现代文：但晋代宣帝、量童、塞童都以人臣的身份终其一生，不会长鸣报晓，不称雄，这又是天意。
English: However, all three emperors lived their entire lives as vassals. It was God's will that they did not complain or fight.

古文：晋惠帝元康六年，陈国有鸡生雄鸡无翅，既大，坠坑而死。
现代文：晋惠帝元康六年，陈国有鸡生下没有翅膀的雄鸡，长大以后掉进坑裹摔死了。
English: In the sixth year of Emperor Jingu's reign, Chen Guozhou chicken gave birth to a male chicken without wings. After he grew up, he fell into a pit and died.

古文：王隐曰： 雄，胤嗣象，坑地事为母象，贾后诬杀愍怀，殆其应也。 
现代文：王隐说： 雄鶸，是后嗣的象征；坑，属于大地，是母亲的象征。买后用欺诈手段杀害愍怀太子，大概就是雄鶸坠坑而死的应验。 
English: Wang Yin said: The stallion is a symbol of the heir; the pit, which belongs to the earth, is a symbol of the mother. The killing of the prince by fraudulent means after the purchase is probably the fulfillment of the death of the stallion falling into the pit.

古文：晋惠帝太安中，周家有雌鸡逃承溜中，六七日而下，奋翼鸣将，独毛羽不变。
现代文：晋惠帝太安年间，周圮家有只雌鸡逃进屋檐下承接雨水的承霤中，过了六七天才下来，奋翼长鸣，雄踞鶸群，衹是羽毛没有变。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taian of the Jin Dynasty, a hen of the Zhou Dynasty family escaped into the rainwater-bearing cocoon under the eaves of the house. After six or seven days, it came down, and its wings began to sing, the male chicks swarmed, and the chicks' feathers did not change.

古文：其后有陈敏之事。
现代文：这以后有陈敏割据江东叛乱主事。
English: After that, there was the Chen Min incident.

古文：敏虽控制江表，终无纲纪文章，殆其象也。
现代文：陈敏虽然控制了江表，但最终没有制定法令典章，雌鸡变雄鸡，但羽毛不变，大概就是陈敏未制定法令典章的征兆。
English: Although Chen Min controlled the river table, he ultimately did not formulate the legal code. The hen becomes a rooster, but the feathers remain unchanged. This is probably a sign that Chen Min did not formulate the legal code.

古文：卒为所灭。
现代文：陈敏最终被周诛灭。
English: It was eventually eliminated by Zhou Enlai.

古文：鸡祸见家，又天意也。
现代文：鶸祸在周圮家出现，遣又是天意。
English: The misfortune occurred in Zhou Ye's family, and it was also the will of heaven.

古文：晋元帝太兴中，王敦镇武昌，有雌鸡化为雄。
现代文：晋元帝太兴年间，王敦镇守武昌，当时有雌鶸变为雄鶸。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taheung of the Jin Dynasty, when Wang Dunzhen was in charge of Wuchang, a female pheasant turned into a male pheasant.

古文：天戒若曰： 雌化为雄，臣陵基上。 
现代文：上天警戒这类事情说： 雌变为雄，预示臣下欺凌主上。 
English: Heaven warns of such things, saying, "Females turn into males, foretelling that subjects will abuse masters."

古文：其后王敦再攻京师。
现代文：那以后王敦两次进攻京城。
English: After that, Wang Dun attacked Kyoto twice.

古文：晋孝武太元十三年四月，广陵高平阎嵩家雄鸡，生无右翅；彭城到象之家鸡，无右足。
现代文：晋孝武帝太元十三年四月，广陵高平阎嵩家的雄鶸，生下来就没有右翅；彭城到象之家的鸡，没有右足。
English: In April of the 13th year of the reign of Emperor Jin Xiaowu, a male pheasant from the Gaoping Yan Song family in Guangling was born without a right wing; a chicken from the Pengcheng to the Xiang family did not have a right foot.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 君用妇人言，则生鸡妖。 
现代文：京房《易传》说： 君主听信妇人之言，那么鸡就会出现妖异。 
English: Beijing House "Easy Biography" said: The monarch listens to the woman's words, then the chicken will appear strange.

古文：晋安帝隆安元年八月，琅邪王道子家青雌鸡化为赤雄，不鸣不将。
现代文：晋安帝隆安元年八月，琅邪王司马道子家青色雌鸡变为赤色雄鸡，既不会长时报晓，也不在鸡群称雄。
English: In August of the first year of the Jin and Andean dynasties, the blue hen of the evil king Sima Daozi's family turned into a red rooster. It would not be dawn for a long time, nor would it dominate the flock.

古文：后有桓玄之事，具如其象。
现代文：后来有桓玄篡逆之事，篡逆始末全和这征兆一样。
English: Later, there was a case of Kuan Xuan's usurpation, and the beginning and end of the usurpation was the same as this symptom.

古文：隆安四年，荆州有鸡生角，角寻堕落。
现代文：隆安四年，荆州有鶸长出角，角不久脱落。
English: In the fourth year of Long'an, Jingzhou had horns grow out, and the horns soon fell off.

古文：是时桓玄始擅西夏，狂慢不肃，故有鸡祸。
现代文：这时候桓玄开始在西夏专权，狂妄傲慢，所以出现鶸祸。
English: When Emperor Kuan Xuan began to exercise absolute power in the Western Xia region, he was arrogant and disrespectful, which led to his downfall.

古文：角，兵象；寻堕落者，暂起不终之妖也。
现代文：角是兵事的征兆；不久又脱落，预示着兵叛是突然而起，最终不能成功。
English: The horns are a sign of military service; they soon fall off, indicating that the mutiny is sudden and ultimately unsuccessful.

古文：晋安帝元兴二年，衡阳有雌鸡化为雄，八十日而冠萎。
现代文：晋安帝元兴二年，短屋有雌鸡变为雄鸡，过了八十天鶸冠就萎缩了。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Yuanxing of the Jin and An dynasties, a cockerel in a hut turned into a rooster. After eighty days, the cockerel's crown shrank.

古文：衡阳，桓玄楚国封略也。
现代文：衡阳在桓玄所封楚国的境内。
English: Hengyang was in the territory of Kuan Xuan's Chu Kingdom.

古文：后篡位八十日而败，徐广以为玄之象也。
现代文：后来桓玄篡位八十天就失败了，徐广认为衡阳鶸变就是桓玄篡位失败的征兆。
English: Later, Kuan Xuan's usurpation failed after 80 days, and Xu Guang believed that Hengyang's change was a sign of Kuan Xuan's failed usurpation.

古文：宋文帝元嘉十二年，华林园雌鸡渐化为雄。
现代文：宋文帝元嘉十二年，华林园中雌鸡渐渐变为雄鸡。
English: In the twelfth year of Emperor Yuanjia of the Song Dynasty, the hen gradually turned into a rooster in the Hualin Garden.

古文：后孝武即位，皇太后令行于外，亦犹汉宣帝时，雌鸡为雄，至哀帝时，元后与政也。
现代文：后来孝武帝即位，皇太后的命令在宫外颁行，遣也就如同汉宣帝时，雌鸡变为雄鸡，到哀帝即位后，元后参与朝政。
English: Later, when Emperor Xiaowu ascended the throne, the empress dowager's orders were issued outside the palace, and the empress dowager, like Emperor Xuan of Han, changed from a hen to a rooster. After Emperor Ai ascended the throne, Empress Yuan took part in court politics.

古文：明帝泰始中，吴兴东迁沈法符家鸡有四距。
现代文：宋明帝泰始年间，吴兴东迁选沈法符家的鸡脚后有四距。
English: In the early years of Emperor Taizong of Song and Ming Dynasties, Wu Xingdong moved to the east and selected the chicken feet of the Shen Fa Fu family.

古文：青眚青祥：晋武帝咸宁元年八月丁酉，大风折太社树，有青气出焉；此青祥也。
现代文：晋武帝咸宁元年八月丁酉日，大风吹折太社中的树，有青气从折断的树中冒出来。
English: On the first day of the eighth month of the first year of Emperor Xianning of the Jin Dynasty, a gale blew down a tree in the Taisha Shrine, and a green aura emerged from the broken tree.

古文：占曰： 东莞当有帝者。 
现代文：造就是青祥。占卜的结果说： 塞差将有作皇帝的人。 
English: Divination says: There should be an emperor in Szecha.

古文：明年，元帝生。
现代文：第二年，元帝出生。
English: The next year, five children were born.

古文：是时，帝大父武王封东莞，由是徙封琅邪。
现代文：元帝的祖父武王原来封在东莞，从这时候起改封在琅邪。
English: At the time of the envoys, the grandfather of the five children, Shigeo Wang, was sealed in the tomb, and changed his seal from Shibu to Shaka.

古文：孙盛以为中兴之表。
现代文：孙盛认为这是中兴的标志。
English: Su Sheng believes that it is a symbol of ZTE.

古文：晋室之乱，武帝子孙无孑遗，社树折之应，又恆风之罚也。
现代文：晋朝发生动乱之后，武帝的子孙没有一个幸免于难，这是社树被吹折的应验，又是恒风给予的惩罚。
English: After the turmoil in the Jin Dynasty, none of the descendants of Emperor Wu survived. This was the fulfillment of the blowing of the social tree, and the punishment given by the constant wind.

古文：晋惠帝元康中，洛阳南山有虻作声曰： 韩尸尸。 
现代文：晋惠帝元康年间，渔屋直山有小虫虻发出声音说： 韩尸尸。 
English: During the reign of Emperor Jingu during the reign of Emperor Yuan Kang, there was a small moth in the fisherman's cottage on the hill saying: "Han corpse corpse."

古文：识者曰： 韩氏将死也。
现代文：有见识的人说： 韩氏将要死。
English: Those with insight say: Han is about to die.

古文：言尸尸者，尽死意也。 
现代文：说尸尸，是全要死的意思。 
English: When I say dead, I mean dead.

古文：其后韩谧诛而韩族歼焉。
现代文：以后韩谧被诛而韩氏全族被灭。
English: Later, Han Xuan was captured and the entire Han clan was exterminated.

古文：此青祥也。
现代文：这是青祥。
English: This is Qingxiang.

古文：金沴木：魏文帝黄初七年正月，幸许昌。
现代文：魏文帝黄初七年正月，翘土豆驾临敛旦。
English: In the first month of the seventh year of Emperor Weiwenhuang's reign, the potato harvest was approaching its peak.

古文：许昌城南门无故自崩，帝心恶之，遂不入，还洛阳。
现代文：敛旦城南门无故自行崩塌，塞童以为不祥，于是不进许旦，而返回盗屋。
English: The south gate of Xuchang City collapsed on its own without any reason. Emperor Wen was so disgusted by this that he did not enter the city and returned to Luoyang.

古文：此金沴木，木动也。
现代文：这是金诊木，木发生震动。
English: This is the gold tree. The tree is shaking.

古文：五月，宫车晏驾。
现代文：五月，主童去世。
English: In May, the head boy passed away.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 上下咸悖，厥妖城门坏。 
现代文：塞庆《易传》说： 上下都悖乱，造成的妖异是城门崩塌。 
English: Sai Qing's "I Chuan" said: The top and bottom are in disarray, and the strange phenomenon is caused by the collapse of the city gate.

古文：晋元帝太兴二年六月，吴郡米廪无故自坏。
现代文：晋元帝太兴二年六月，呈登的米仓无故崩塌。
English: In June of the second year of the reign of Emperor Taixing of the Jin Dynasty, a storehouse of rice collapsed for no reason.

古文：是岁大饥，死者数千。
现代文：当年大饥荒，饿死数千人。
English: There was a great famine that year, and thousands of people starved to death.

古文：晋明帝太宁元年，周延自归王敦，既立宅宇，而所起五间六架，一时跃出堕地，余桁犹亘柱头。
现代文：晋明帝太宁元年，周延归顺王蓝，他新建房屋后，所建的五间六架房梁，全部跳起来又落在地上，剩下的桁条还挂在柱头上。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taining of the Jin Dynasty, Zhou Yan returned to Shun Wang Lan. After he built a new house, the five rooms and six beams he built all jumped up and fell to the ground. The remaining trusses are still hanging on the column head.

古文：此金沴木也。
现代文：这是金渗木的结果。
English: It's the golden birch.

古文：明年五月，钱凤谋乱，遂族灭筵，而湖熟寻亦为墟矣。
现代文：第二年五月，钱凤阴谋作乱，于是诛减全族，而塑塾之地不久就变为丘墟了。
English: In May of the following year, Qian Feng conspired to create a disturbance, and as a result, the whole family was reduced to poverty, and the site of the sculpture school was soon reduced to rubble.

古文：晋安帝元兴元年正月丙子，司马元显将西讨桓玄，建牙扬州南门，其东者难立，良久乃正。
现代文：晋安帝元兴元年正月丙子曰，司马元显将要西讨桓玄，在扬州南门竖起牙旗，束边的牙旗很难立住，花了很长时间才把牙旗树起。
English: In the first month of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year

古文：近沴妖也。
现代文：这接近于金诊木的妖异。
English: Closer to the weirdness of the cedar tree.

古文：寻为桓玄所禽。
现代文：不久，司马元显就被桓玄擒获。
English: Soon, Sima Yuanxian was captured by Kuan Xuan.

古文：元兴三年五月，乐贤堂坏。
现代文：元兴三年五月，乐贤堂崩塌。
English: In May of the third year of the Genxing era, the Le Xian Hall collapsed.

古文：天意若曰，安帝嚣眊，不及有乐贤之心，故此堂见沴也。
现代文：好像上天在说，玄童冥顽不灵，昏愤惑乱，谈不上有什么乐于求贤之心，所以銮竖堂受到妖气的侵害。
English: It was as if the heavens were saying, "The child of the dark side is tenacious, confused, and cannot be said to have a heart that is willing to seek virtue. Therefore, the hall was invaded by evil spirits."

古文：晋安帝义熙九年五月乙酉，国子圣堂坏。
现代文：晋安帝义熙九年五月乙酉日，国子圣堂崩塌。
English: On the 9th day of the 5th month of the 9th year of the reign of Emperor Jinnan and Emperor Yixi, the National Son Church collapsed.

古文：宋文帝元嘉十七年，刘斌为吴郡，郡堂屋西头鸱尾无故落地，治之未毕，东头鸱尾复落。
现代文：宋文帝元嘉十七年，刘斌任吴郡太守，郡中官署堂屋西头屋脊上用以禳灾的鸱尾无故掉下来，还没修好，东头屋脊上的鸱尾又掉下来。
English: In the seventeenth year of Song Emperor Yuan Jia, Liu Bin served as the governor of Wu County, and the appendix that was used to relieve the disaster on the west roof ridge of the county's liaison office building fell off for no reason. Before it was repaired, the appendix on the east roof ridge fell off again.

古文：顷之，斌诛。
现代文：不久，刘斌被诛。
English: Soon after, Liu Bin was arrested.

