古文：裴冕李宜得穆宁赵骅曹文洽阳城王义裴度廖有方
现代文：裴冕李宜得穆宁赵骅曹文洽阳城王义裴度廖有方
English: Li Yide, Muning Zhao, Yao Cao, Wen Cai, Yangcheng Wang, Yi Pei Du, Liao You Fang

古文：裴冕
现代文：裴冕
English: Fei Guorong

古文：裴冕为王鉷判官，鉷得罪伏法。
现代文：裴冕是王鉷聘用的中级官员。
English: Fei Guan is a mid-level official hired by Wang Hui.

古文：李林甫操窃权柄，咸惧之。鉷宾佐数人，不敢窥鉷门。冕独收鉷尸，亲自护丧，瘗于近郊。
现代文：王鉷获罪被杀，因为李林甫掌握朝廷的大权，官员们都害怕他，所以王鉷的几个关系亲近的门客和下级都不敢靠近王鉷家门口，只有裴冕单独去为王鉷收尸，并亲自护送灵柩埋葬到城外。
English: Wang Hui was convicted and killed, because Li Linfu held the power of the imperial court, and officials were afraid of him. Therefore, several of Wang Hui's close friends and subordinates did not dare to approach Wang Hui's front door. Only Fei Guan went alone to collect Wang Hui's body, and personally escorted the coffin to be buried outside the city.

古文：李宜得
现代文：李宜得
English: Li Yide

古文：李宜得，本贱人，背主逃。
现代文：李宜得本来是个身份低贱的人，背着主人逃跑了。
English: Li Yide was originally a low-ranking person and ran away behind his master's back.

古文：当玄宗起义，与王毛仲等立功。宜得官至武卫将军。
现代文：后来在玄宗起义的时候，他和王毛仲等人立了功，被任命为武卫将军。
English: Later, at the time of the Xuanzong Uprising, he and Wang Maozhong and others made great contributions and were appointed as Wuwei generals.

古文：旧主遇诸涂，趋而避之，不敢仰视。
现代文：他过去的主人在路上遇到他，立即躲到路旁，低头不敢看他。
English: His former owner met him on the road and immediately hid by the side of the road, not daring to look down at him.

古文：宜得令左右命之，主甚惶惧。至宅，请居上座，宜得自捧酒食。旧主流汗辞之，留连数日。
现代文：到了李宜得的住宅，他将旧主人让到上座，并亲自为旧主人端菜倒酒，旧主人紧张地流着汗推辞。
English: When he arrived at Li Yide's house, he made the old master take the upper seat, and personally served the old master dishes and poured wine for him. The old master nervously declined with sweat.

古文：遂奏云：臣蒙国恩，荣禄过分。
现代文：李宜得留旧主人住了几天，然后上朝对皇帝说：我蒙受国家的恩情，得到的官职和俸禄太高了。
English: Li Yidi had to keep the old master for a few days, and then said to the emperor: I have received the grace of the state, and the official position and salary I received are too high.

古文：臣旧主卑琐，曾无寸禄。臣请割半俸解官以荣之。愿陛下遂臣愚款。
现代文：而我的旧主人身份低贱，没有官职，我请示将我的一半官职和俸禄让给我的旧主人，希望皇帝满足我这个愚蠢的请求。
English: As my former master was lowly and had no official position, I asked the emperor to give half of my official position and salary to my former master, hoping that the emperor would grant me this foolish request.

古文：上嘉其志，擢主为郎将，宜得复其秩。朝廷以此多之。
现代文：皇帝表扬了他的义气，提拔他的旧主人为郎将，李宜得仍保留原来的官职，朝廷从此盛行讲道义的风气。
English: The emperor praised his loyalty and promoted his former master to the rank of general. Li Yide still retained his former official position. From then on, a moralistic atmosphere prevailed in the imperial court.

古文：穆宁
现代文：穆宁
English: by Munin

古文：穆宁不知何许人，颜真卿奏为河北道支使。
现代文：穆宁不知道是什么地方的人，颜真卿向朝廷推荐他担任河北支道史。
English: Munin did not know what kind of person he was, but Yan Zhenqing recommended him to the imperial court to serve as the Hebei branch road historian.

古文：宁以长子属母弟曰：唯尔所适，苟不乏嗣，吾无累矣。
现代文：穆宁以长子的身份对母亲说： 这是适合我的志愿的事，您不缺少儿子，我没有什么牵挂的了。 
English: As the eldest son, Munin said to his mother: This is a voluntary matter that suits me. You do not lack a son. I have nothing to worry about.

古文：因往平原，谓真卿曰：先人有嗣矣，古所谓死有轻于鸿毛者，宁是也。愿毕佐公，以定危难。
现代文：然后他前往平原，对颜真卿说：我的先人有后代子孙，古人讲有人死得轻于鸿毛的，我就是一个，我愿意全力帮助你，解决眼前的危难。
English: Then he went to the plain and said to Yan Zhenqing: "My ancestors have descendants and descendants. The ancients said that some people died lighter than a feather. I am one. I am willing to do my best to help you solve the current crisis."

古文：其后宁计或不行，真卿弃平原，夜渡河。
现代文：后来因为计策行不通，颜真卿放弃平原，夜间渡过河去。
English: Later, Yan Zhenqing abandoned the plain and crossed the river at night because his plan did not work.

古文：赵骅
现代文：赵骅
English: Zhao Wei

古文：赵骅因胁于贼中，见一妇人，问之，即江西廉察韦环之族女也。夫为畿官，以不往贼军遇害。韦氏没入为婢。
现代文：赵骅被胁迫呆在贼兵之中，他见到贼营里有一位妇女，便走上前去询问。了解到她是江西廉察韦环同族兄弟的女儿，丈夫是京官，因为不肯参加贼兵被晒还，韦氏被迫给贼兵充当女仆。
English: Zhao Wei was coerced to stay among the bandits. He saw a woman in the bandits' camp and walked forward to inquire. He learned that she was the daughter of a fellow brother of Jiangxi Liangcha Weihuan, and her husband was a Beijing official. Because she refused to join the bandits, she was exposed, and Wei was forced to work as a maid for the bandits.

古文：骅哀其冤抑，以钱赎之。俾其妻致之别院，而骅竟不见焉。
现代文：赵骅很同情她的遭遇，用钱将她赎了出来，然后让他的妻子将韦氏安排到别的院子里居住，从此不再和她见面。
English: Zhao Yao was very sympathetic to her plight and ransomed her with money. He then asked his wife to arrange for Mr. Wei to live in another courtyard and never see her again.

古文：明年，收复东都。骅以家财赡给，而求其亲属归之。
现代文：第二年，官军收复了东都，赵骅给了韦氏一些钱，寻找到她的亲属，将她送了回去。
English: The next year, when the government army recaptured Dongdu, Zhao Wei gave Ms. Wei some money to find her relatives and send her back.

古文：议者咸重焉。
现代文：知道这件事的人都称赞赵骅。
English: People who knew about this praised Zhao Yao.

古文：曹文洽
现代文：曹文洽
English: Cao Wencai

古文：曹文洽，郑滑之裨将也。
现代文：曹文洽是郑滑的副将。
English: Cao Wenchao is the vice-captain of Zhenglu.

古文：时姚南仲为节度使，被监军薛盈珍怙势于夺军政。
现代文：姚南仲为节度使，被监军薛盈珍依仗势力，篡夺了军政大权。
English: Yao Nanzhong was appointed as the commander of the festival, and was usurped the military and political power by the overseer Xue Yingzhen, who relied on military power.

古文：南仲不从，数为盈珍谗于上。上颇疑之。
现代文：姚南仲不服，薛盈珍多次到皇帝那里说姚南仲的坏话，皇帝对这件事有疑问。
English: Yao Nanzhong was not satisfied. Xue Yingzhen repeatedly went to the emperor to speak ill of Yao Nanzhong. The emperor had doubts about this matter.

古文：后盈珍遣小使程务盈驰表南仲，诬谗颇甚。
现代文：后来薛盈珍派了一名叫程务盈的下级官员送公文诬蔑姚南仲，内容非常恶毒。
English: Later, Xue Yizhen sent a lower-ranking official named Cheng Mu Ying to send official documents to slander Yao Nanzhong, the content of which was very vicious.

古文：文洽时奏事赴京师，窃知盈珍表中语。文洽愤怒，遂晨夜兼道追务盈。
现代文：曹文洽正好有事去京城，暗中知道了薛盈珍公文中的话，心中非常气愤，便日夜兼程，追赶程务盈。
English: Cao Wencai just happened to have something to go to Beijing, and secretly knew the words in Xue Yizhen's official document. He was very angry in his heart, so he traveled day and night to catch up with Cheng Wenzhen.

古文：至长乐驿，及之，与同舍宿。
现代文：到了长安驿站，追上了程务盈。
English: After arriving at Chang'an Railway Station, he caught up with Cheng Muying.

古文：中夜，杀务盈，沉盈珍表于厕中，乃自杀。
现代文：晚上两人住在一个房间，曹文洽把程务盈杀了，公文扔到厕所里，然后自杀了。
English: In the evening, the two lived in a room. Cao Wencai killed Cheng Shuyuan, threw the documents into the toilet, and then committed suicide.

古文：日旰，驿吏开门，见血伤满地，傍得文洽二缄：一状告盈珍，一表理南仲冤，且陈谢杀务盈。
现代文：晚上，驿站的管理人员开门，看到满地都是尸体和鲜血，旁边放着曹文洽写的两封信。一封信状告薛盈珍，一封信替姚南仲鸣冤，并且写明了杀程务盈的原因。
English: In the evening, the manager of the post office opened the door and saw the bodies and blood all over the ground. Next to them were two letters written by Cao Wenchao. One letter accused Xue Yingzhen, one letter avenged Yao Nanzhong, and explained the reason for killing Cheng Muying.

古文：德宗闻其事，颇疑。
现代文：德宗皇帝听到这件事，感到非常奇怪。
English: Emperor Dezong was very surprised to hear this.

古文：南仲虑衅深，遂入朝。
现代文：姚南仲怕皇帝疑虑日深，入朝去见皇帝。
English: Fearing that the emperor's doubts were deepening, Yao Nanzhong entered the court and went to see the emperor.

古文：初至，上曰：盈珍扰卿甚耶？
现代文：皇帝对他说：薛盈珍扰乱你很厉害吧。
English: The emperor said to him, "Xue Yingzhen has disturbed you very much.

古文：南仲曰：盈珍不扰臣，自隳陛下法耳。
现代文：姚南仲说：薛盈珍不是扰乱我，是破坏皇帝的法律制度。
English: Yao Nanzhong said: Xue Yizhen is not to disturb me, but to destroy the emperor's legal system.

古文：如盈珍辈所在，虽羊杜复生，抚百姓，御三军，必不能成恺悌父母之政，师律善阵之制矣。
现代文：如果允许薛盈珍这种人存在，虽然是羊祜和杜预那样正直有才能的人复活，来安抚百姓和统帅三军，也不能治理成和乐的太平盛世，师律善阵之制矣。
English: If people like Xue Yingzhen are allowed to exist, even if honest and talented people like Yang Xuan and Du Yuehong are resurrected to appease the people and command the three armies, it will not be able to govern a peaceful and prosperous world, and the system of discipline and good ranks will be destroyed.

古文：德宗默然久之。阳城
现代文：德宗沉默思考了很久。阳城
English: Dezong thought for a long time in silence. Yangcheng

古文：阳城，贞元中，与三弟隐居陕州夏阳山中，相誓不婚。
现代文：贞元年间，有个叫阳城的人和他的三弟隐居在陕州夏阳山中，两个人发誓一辈子不结婚。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhengyuan, a man named Yangcheng and his third brother lived in seclusion in the Xiayang Mountains of Shaanxi Province. The two swore never to marry.

古文：啜菽饮水，莞蕈布衾，熙熙怡怡，同于一室。
现代文：他们每日粗茶淡饭，睡草编的席子，盖粗布做的被，两个人快快乐乐地住在一间屋子里。
English: They had daily porridge, a mat made of sleeping grass and a blanket made of coarse cloth, and the two of them lived happily in one room.

古文：后遇岁荒，屏迹不与同里往来，惧于求也。
现代文：后来遇到一个灾荒年，他俩隐藏踪迹不与同乡的人来往，怕有求与别人。
English: Later, when they encountered a year of disaster and famine, they both hid their tracks and did not socialize with their fellow villagers, for fear of being sought out by others.

古文：或采桑榆之皮，屑以为粥。讲论诗书，未尝暂辍。
现代文：他俩采集桑树和榆树的皮切碎了做粥吃，在这种条件下仍然坚持学习诗词书籍，从来没有间断过学习。
English: The two of them collected mulberry and eucalyptus bark and chopped it up to make porridge to eat. Under these conditions, they still insisted on studying poetry books and never interrupted their studies.

古文：有苍头曰都儿，与主协心，盖管宁之比也。
现代文：他们有一个仆人叫都儿，于主任一条心。人们将阳城比作三国时辞官不作的管宁，同乡的人都很尊敬他们。
English: They have a servant named Duer, who is devoted to the director. People compare Yangcheng to the Three Kingdoms, when the officials did not do anything, and the people in the village respect them very much.

古文：里人敬以哀，馈食稍丰，则闭户不纳，散于饿禽。
现代文：人们赠送给他们的食物如果稍稍好一点，他们就关起门来，不肯接受，或是扔给鸟吃。
English: If people give them food that is a little better, they close the door, refuse to accept it, or throw it to the birds.

古文：后里人窃令于中户致糠核十数杯，乃就地食焉。
现代文：有一次同乡人暗中送给他们米糠十几杯，他们就地吃了。
English: Once, a fellow villager secretly gave them a dozen cups of rice bran, and they ate it.

古文：他日，山东诸侯闻其高义，发使寄五百缣。
现代文：山东的诸侯听说他们行为高尚，派使者送来五百匹缣。
English: When the lords of Shandong heard of their noble deeds, they sent an envoy with five hundred donkeys.

古文：城固拒却，使者受命不令返，城乃标于屋隅，未尝启缄。
现代文：阳城不收，使者按照命令不收就不回去。阳城只好将缣堆到屋子的角落里，从来也没使用过。
English: Yangcheng did not accept it, and the envoy would not go back if he did not receive it according to the order. Yangcheng had no choice but to pile the money in the corner of the house, and never used it.

古文：无何，有节土郑倜者，迫于营举，投人不应，因途经其门，往谒之。
现代文：不久，有个有节操的人叫郑倜，为了办理丧事，找亲友借钱没有借到，回来路过阳城的门前，进屋拜见阳城。
English: Soon, there was a person with discipline called Zheng Yu. In order to handle the funeral, he borrowed money from relatives and friends, but did not get it. When he came back, he passed in front of Yangcheng's door and entered the house to see Yangcheng.

古文：倜戚容瘵貌，城留食旬时，问倜所之，及其瘠瘁之端。
现代文：郑倜一副悲伤瘦弱的样子，阳城留他住了十多天，问郑倜悲伤瘦弱的原因。
English: Zheng Yao looked sad and thin. Yangcheng kept him for more than ten days and asked Zheng Yao the reason for his sadness and thinness.

古文：倜具以情告。城曰：感足下之操，城有诸侯近贶物，无所用，辄助足下人子终身之道。
现代文：郑倜将情况告诉了阳城，阳城说：被你的品德节操所感动，我这里有诸侯近来赠送的物品，放在这里没有用处，全都送给你，以尽孝道吧。
English: Zheng Yao told Yangcheng about the situation, and Yangcheng said, "Moved by your virtuous conduct, I have the goods that the lords have recently given here. There is no use in putting them here. I will give them all to you to fulfill my filial duty."

古文：倜固让。
现代文：郑倜推辞不要。
English: Don't accept Zheng Yu's resignation.

古文：城曰：子苟非妄，又何让焉？
现代文：阳城说：这东西不是我所需要的，你还让什么呢？
English: Yangcheng said, "This thing is not what I need. What else would you let go of?"

古文：倜对曰：君子既施不次之恩，某愿终志后，为奴仆偿之。
现代文：郑倜说：你既然给了我这个不寻常的恩惠，我愿意办完事后，做你的奴仆以偿还你的恩情。
English: Zheng Yao said, "Since you have given me this unusual favor, I am willing to repay your kindness by becoming your slave after the deed is done."

古文：遂去。
现代文：说完便走了。
English: The Qi army then left.

古文：倜东洛茔事罢，杖归城，以副前约。城曰：子奚如是？苟无他系，同志为学可也，何必云役己以相依？
现代文：郑倜在东洛办理完丧事以后，回到阳城这里，以履行自己的诺言，阳城说：你如果没有其他的地方可以去，作为同学留在这就可以了，何必要当奴仆呢？
English: After Zheng Rong's funeral in Dongluo, he returned to Yangcheng to fulfill his promise. Yangcheng said, "If you have no other place to go, you can stay here as a classmate. Why do you need to be a slave?"

古文：倜泣涕曰：若然者，微躯何幸。
现代文：郑倜流着泪说：要像你说的这样，我这个卑贱的人是多么的幸运。
English: Zheng Wei said with tears: To be like you said, how lucky I am, a lowly person.

古文：倜于记览苦不长，月余，城令讽毛诗，虽不辍寻读。及与之讨论，如水投石也。
现代文：郑倜在读书记忆上很不擅长，一个月以后，阳城叫他背诵《诗经》，虽然郑倜不停地学习，可是一讨论，他一句也回答不上来。
English: Zheng Yao wasn't very good at memorizing books. A month later, Yangcheng asked him to recite the Book of Songs. Although Zheng Yao kept studying, he couldn't answer a single question during the discussion.

古文：倜大惭。城曰：子之学，与吾弟相昵不能舍，有以致是耶？
现代文：郑倜非常惭愧，阳城说：主要是因为你和我弟弟太亲近了，所以效果不好。
English: Zheng Yao was very ashamed, Yangcheng said: Mainly because you and my brother are too close, so the effect is not good.

古文：今所止阜北，有高显茅斋，子可自玩习也。
现代文：这里的北面，有一幢高大的茅屋，你可以到那里单独学习。
English: To the north of here, there is a tall thatched cottage where you can study alone.

古文：倜甚喜，遽迁之。
现代文：郑倜很高兴，立刻搬了过去。
English: Zheng Yao was very happy and moved there immediately.

古文：复经月余，城访之，与论国风，倜虽加功，竟不能往复一辞。
现代文：又过了一个月，阳城取看他。与他讨论《国风》，郑倜虽然用功，但竟一句话也接不上。
English: After another month, Yangcheng took him to see him. He discussed "National Style" with him. Although Zheng Yao worked hard, he couldn't get a word in.

古文：城方出，未三二十步，倜缢于梁下。
现代文：阳城刚走出二三十步，郑倜就吊死在房梁上。
English: Yangcheng had just walked twenty or thirty steps when Zheng Yao hanged himself on the beam of the house.

古文：供饩童窥之，惊以告城。
现代文：送饭的童子看见了告诉了阳城，阳城哭得要昏死过去。
English: The boy who brought the meal saw and told Yangcheng, and Yangcheng cried until he passed out.

古文：城恸哭若裂支体，乃命都儿将酒祭之，及作文亲致祭，自咎不敏。
现代文：他命令小仆人备酒祭奠郑倜，并且作了祭文亲自在祭奠仪式上朗读。
English: He ordered his little servant to prepare a libation to pay tribute to Zheng Qi, and made an offering himself to be read aloud at the ceremony.

古文：我虽不杀倜，倜因我而死。
现代文：他说：我虽然没有杀郑倜，郑倜却是因我而死。
English: He said: Although I did not kill Zheng Yao, Zheng Yao died because of me.

古文：自脱衣，令仆夫负之。
现代文：然后脱去衣服，让老仆人背着他，由小仆人用槚木荆条鞭打十五下。
English: Then he would take off his clothes, let the old servant carry him on his back, and the young servant would give him fifteen lashes with a birch twig.

古文：都儿行槚楚十五，仍服缌麻，厚瘗之。由是为缙绅之所推重。后居谏议大夫时，极谏裴延龄不合为国相，其言至恳，唐史书之。
现代文：他再穿上丧服，将郑倜埋葬了，后来由于贵族以及官员们的推荐，阳城在当了谏仪大夫以后，极力向皇帝提意见，认为裴延龄不适合当宰相，其言词的诚恳，唐朝的史书上有记载。
English: He then put on mourning clothes and buried Zheng Yi. Later, due to the recommendation of nobles and officials, Yang Cheng, after becoming the Puyi doctor, tried his best to advise the emperor that Pei Yanling was not suitable to be the prime minister. The sincerity of his words is recorded in the history books of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：及出守江华都，日炊米两斛，鱼羹一大鬻。自天使及草衣村野之夫，肆其食之。并置瓦瓯樿杓，有类中衢樽也。
现代文：等到他出任江华都，每天都做两斛米的饭和一大锅鱼汤，召集皇帝的使者和没饭吃的村夫一起食用，并且准备了餐具，供大家吃饭的时候使用，真是恩泽于众人。
English: By the time he assumed the post of governor of Jianghuadu, he had made two bowls of rice and a large pot of fish soup every day, summoned the emperor's envoys to eat with the villagers who had no food, and prepared tableware for everyone to use when eating, which was a real blessing for everyone.

古文：王义
现代文：王义
English: Wang Yi

古文：王义，即裴度之隶人也。
现代文：王义是裴度的奴仆，裴度是御史中丞。
English: Wang Yi is Pei Du's slave, and Pei Du is the leader of the Imperial Historians.

古文：度为御史中丞，武元衡遇害之日，度为人所刺，义捍刃而死。
现代文：宰相武元衡遇害的那一天，裴度也被人刺了一刀。由于王义替裴度挡了这一刀而死，裴度才躲过死亡的灾难。
English: On the day that Prime Minister Wu Yuanheng was killed, Pei Du was also stabbed with a knife. Because Wang Yi blocked the knife for Pei Du and died, Pei Du only escaped the disaster of death.

古文：度由是获免，乃自为文以祭。厚给其妻子。
现代文：裴度做祭文哀悼王义，并给了王义的妻子很多钱。
English: Pei Du wrote a eulogy for Wang Yi and gave Wang Yi's wife a lot of money.

古文：是岁，进士撰王义传者，十二三焉。
现代文：当年的进士撰写《王义传》的，竟有十二三人。
English: There were actually twelve or thirteen scholars who wrote "The Biography of Wang Yi" that year.

古文：裴度
现代文：裴度
English: Pei Du

古文：元和中，有新授湖州录事参军，未赴任，遇盗，勷剽殆尽，告敕历任文薄，悉无孑遗。
现代文：元和年间，有个新任命的湖州录事参军，没等去上任遇到了强盗，将他的钱物都抢去了，就连委任状也没有给他留下。
English: During the Yuan and He years, there was a newly appointed Huzhou record keeper who joined the army. Before he could take office, he encountered a robber, who robbed him of all his money and things, and did not even leave him a letter of appointment.

古文：遂于近邑求丐故衣，迤假货，却返逆旅。
现代文：于是他便在京城附近收购旧衣服，然后想办法换钱，夜晚住在旅店里。
English: So he bought used clothes in the vicinity of the capital, and then tried to exchange money, staying in a hotel at night.

古文：旅舍俯逼裴晋公第。
现代文：这个旅店靠近裴晋公裴度的住宅。
English: The hotel is close to the residence of Pei Jintao Peidu.

古文：时晋公在假，因微服出游侧近邸，遂至湖紏之店。
现代文：这一天裴度休息，穿上便衣到附近散步，来到了这个人住的旅店。
English: On this day, Baidu rested, put on plainclothes to walk around the neighborhood, and came to the hotel where this person lived.

古文：相揖而坐，与语周旋，问及行止。紏曰：某之苦事，人不忍闻。
现代文：裴度与这个叫湖紏的人打招呼以后坐下说话，问他是干什么的。湖紏说：我的遭遇，别人都不忍听。
English: Pei Du said hello to this man named Hu Yao, then sat down to talk and asked him what he was doing. Hu Yao said, "What happened to me, others can't bear to hear about.

古文：言发涕零。
现代文：说着哭了起来。
English: She began to cry as she spoke.

古文：晋公悯之，细诘其事。
现代文：裴度觉得他很可怜，详细询问他的遭遇。
English: Pei Du felt very sorry for him and asked him in detail what had happened to him.

古文：对曰：某主京数载，授官江湖，遇冠荡尽，唯残微命，此亦细事尔。
现代文：他说：我在京城任职数年，被授予一个官职在湖州，遇到强盗把我的东西抢光了，只剩下一条性命。
English: He said: "I worked in Beijing for several years and was awarded an official post in Huzhou. When I encountered robbers, they robbed me of everything I had. I only have one life left.

古文：其如某将娶而未亲迎，遭郡牧强以致之，献于上相裴公，位亚国号矣。
现代文：这还是小事，还有的是，我准备结婚还没有去迎娶，未婚妻就被郡牧抢去，献给了宰相晋公裴度，他可是最大的官了。
English: This is still a small matter. Another thing is that when I was about to get married, I did not go to get married. My fiancée was snatched away by the county herdsman and given to the prime minister, Jin Gong Pei Du, who is the highest-ranking official.

古文：裴曰：子室之姓氏何也？答曰：姓某字黄娥。
现代文：裴度说：你未婚妻姓什么？回答说：姓某字，叫黄娥。
English: Pei Du said, "What is the surname of your fiancée?" He replied, "Her surname is a certain character, called Huang E."

古文：裴时衣紫袴衫，谓之曰：某即晋公亲校也，试为子侦。
现代文：裴度当时穿着有钱人常穿的紫色衣服，他对湖紏说：我就是裴度的亲信官员，会帮着你查访。
English: At that time, Pei Du was wearing a purple dress often worn by rich people. He said to Hu Yao: I am a trusted official of Pei Du, and I will help you to investigate.

古文：遂问姓名而往。紏复悔之，此或中令之亲近，入而白之，当致其祸也。寝不安席。迟明，诣裴之宅侧侦之，则裴已入内。
现代文：然后问了湖紏的姓名以后走了，湖紏非常后悔，心想刚才来的人如果是裴度的亲信，回去和裴度一说，会给我带来灾祸，当天晚上他想着这件事睡不着，等到天明，他来到裴度的住宅附近观察，可是他看不到屋内。
English: After that, he asked the name of Hubei and left. Hubei regretted it very much. He thought that if the person who had just come was a close friend of Pei Du, if he went back and spoke to Pei Du, it would bring me disaster. That night, he couldn't sleep thinking about it. When it was daylight, he came to the vicinity of Pei Du's residence to observe, but he couldn't see inside.

古文：至晚，有颕衣吏诣店，颇匆遽，称令公召。
现代文：到了傍晚，有个穿红衣服的公差来到旅店，非常急促地对他说，裴度让他去。
English: In the evening, an official in a red coat came to the hotel and told him very urgently that he had to let him go.

古文：紏闻之惶惧，仓卒与吏俱往。
现代文：湖紏的心里非常惊慌害怕，急忙跟着差人去了。
English: In her heart, Huchen was very panicked and afraid, and hurried to follow the policeman.

古文：至第斯须，延入小厅，拜伏流汗，不敢仰视。
现代文：他们进了裴度的住宅，来到一个小客厅。他趴在地上吓得直出汗，不敢抬头观看。
English: They entered Pei Du's home and came to a small living room. He lay on the floor sweating with fear, not daring to look up.

古文：即延之坐。窃视之，则昨日紫衣押牙也。因首过再三。
现代文：主人让他坐下，他偷着观看，正是昨天穿紫衣服的那个官员，再三点头表示谢罪。
English: His host told him to sit down, and he watched surreptitiously as the same official in purple yesterday nodded his head repeatedly in acknowledgment.

古文：中令曰：昨见所话，诚心恻然。今聊以慰其憔悴矣。
现代文：裴度说：昨天听了你说的话，心中很同情可怜你，今天可以弥补一下你的遭遇了。
English: Pei Du said, "After listening to what you said yesterday, I feel very sorry for you. Today, I can make up for what happened to you."

古文：即命箱中官诰授之，已再除湖紏矣。
现代文：说着命令将箱子里的授官凭证交给他，重新任命了他的官职，他高兴得要跳起来。
English: He jumped for joy as he was ordered to hand over the award certificate in the box, reappointing him to his post.

古文：喜跃未已，公又曰：黄娥可于飞之任也。
现代文：裴度又说：黄娥立刻就可以还给你，同你一起去那里上任。
English: Pei Du also said: Huang E can immediately return to you and go there with you to take office.

古文：特令送就其逆旅，行装千贯，与偕赴所任。
现代文：然后特意派人将他送回旅店，并给了他衣服行李和一千贯钱，第二天这个人和未婚妻一起上任去了。
English: He was then specially sent back to the hotel, given clothes, luggage and 1,000 yuan, and the next day he went to work with his fiancée.

古文：廖有方
现代文：廖有方
English: Liao Youfang

古文：廖有方，元和乙未岁，下第游蜀。至宝鸡西，适公馆。忽闻呻吟之声。潜听而微惙也。
现代文：廖有方在元和乙未年参加科举考试没有被录取去蜀郡游玩，走到宝鸡的西面，住在旅店里，他忽然听到有人呻吟，仔细一听又听不见了。
English: Liao Youfang, who was not admitted to go to Shu County to participate in the imperial examinations in the years of Yuan and Biyi, went to the west side of Baoji and lived in an inn. Suddenly, he heard someone moaning, and when he listened carefully, he could not hear it.

古文：乃于间室之内，见一贫病儿郎。
现代文：他从一间屋子里找到一个生了重病的贫困少年。
English: From one of the rooms he found a very sick, poor boy.

古文：问其疾苦行止，强而对曰：辛勤数举，未偶知音。
现代文：廖有方问他生了什么病，准备去哪里。青年吃力地说：我参加几次科举考试未被录取。
English: Liao Youfang asked him what illness he had and where he was planning to go. The young man said with difficulty: I have taken several entrance examinations but have not been admitted.

古文：眄睐叩头，久而复语。唯以残骸相托。
现代文：然后看着他磕头，过了一会儿又说：我死后的事只好托付给你了。
English: Then he looked at him and shook his head, and after a while he said: "After my death, I have no choice but to entrust my affairs to you."

古文：余不能言。拟求救疗，是人俄忽而逝。
现代文：廖有方没有回答，想要为他治病，但是不一会儿这个少年就死了。
English: Liao Yifang didn't answer and tried to treat him, but the boy died soon after.

古文：遂贱鬻所乘鞍马于村豪，备棺瘗之，恨不知其姓字。
现代文：廖有方将自己所骑的马和鞍具一块卖给了村子里有钱的富豪，用所得到的钱将少年安葬了。不知道这个少年的姓名，廖有方感到很遗憾。
English: Liao Youfang sold his horse and saddlery to a rich man in the village and used the money to bury the boy. Liao Youfang regretted not knowing the boy's name.

古文：苟为金门同人，临歧凄断。
现代文：同是参加科举考试的同路人，却是两种命运，真是令人悲伤。
English: It is really sad that the same fellow travelers who took part in the imperial examinations have two fates.

古文：复为铭曰：嗟君殁世委空囊，几度劳心翰墨场。半面为君申一恸，不知何处是家乡。
现代文：廖有方为这个少年所做的碑文是：感叹你死的时候两手空空，几年辛辛苦苦参加科举考试却没成名，只见了一面就与你永别，还不知道你的家乡在哪里。
English: The inscription made by Liao Youfang for this boy is: Lamenting that when you die, your hands are empty, you have worked hard for several years to take the imperial examinations but have not become famous, you only see one side and say goodbye, and you still don't know where your hometown is.

古文：后廖君自西蜀回，取东川路，至灵龛驿。
现代文：后来廖有方从西蜀回来，经过东川，走到灵龛驿站。
English: Later, Liao Youfang returned from West Shuxi, passed through the East River, and walked to Linglong Station.

古文：驿将迎归私第。
现代文：驿站的官员将他请到家中。
English: Officials from the station invited him to their home.

古文：及见其妻，素衣，再拜呜咽，情不可任，徘徊设辞，有同亲懿。
现代文：廖有方看到驿站官员妻子穿着白色的丧服，同他一边见面一边哭，表情非常伤心。然后围在他的周围招待他，如同对待自己的至亲。
English: Liao Youfang saw that the wife of the railway station official was wearing a white mourning dress. When she met him, she cried and looked very sad. Then she surrounded him and invited him, as if she were treating her own relatives.

古文：淹留半月，仆马皆饫。掇熊虎之珍，极賔主之分。
现代文：他们留他住了半个月，就连仆人和马匹都吃喂得很好，吃的尽是山珍，极力表达了宾主之间的情意。
English: They let him stay for half a month, and even the servants and horses were well fed, and all they ate was mountain delicacies, trying their best to express the affection between the guests.

古文：有方不测何缘，悚惕尤甚。
现代文：廖有方不知道这是什么原因，心中非常不安。
English: Liao Youfang did not know what the reason was and was very uneasy.

古文：临别，其妻又悲啼，赠赆缯锦一驮，其价值数百千。
现代文：等到分手的时候，驿站官员的妻子又哭了起来，并且赠送给廖有方一驮子价值千百贯的丝织品。
English: When they parted, the wife of the station official burst into tears again and presented Liao Youfang with a bundle of silk worth hundreds of thousands of yuan.

古文：驿将曰：郎君今春所葬胡绾秀才，即某妻室之季兄也。
现代文：驿站的官员对他说：你今年春天所安葬的叫做胡绾的秀才，就是我妻子最小的弟弟。
English: The station official said to him, "The scholar named Hu Yao, whom you buried this spring, was my wife's youngest brother.

古文：始知亡者姓字。复叙平生之吊，所遗物终不纳焉。
现代文：到这时廖有方才知道那个死亡少年的姓名，他也讲了当时安葬少年的情形和怀念的话，但是不肯接受所赠送的物品。
English: At this time, Liao Yifang only knew the name of the dead teenager. He also talked about the situation of the buried teenager at that time and the words of nostalgia, but refused to accept the gifts.

古文：少妇及夫，坚意拜上。
现代文：驿站的官员和他的妻子坚决请他收下。
English: The station official and his wife pleaded with him to accept.

古文：有方又曰：仆为男子，粗察古今。偶然葬一同流，不可当兹厚惠。
现代文：廖有方又说：我作为一个男子，明白一些古今做人的简单道理，偶然安葬了一个多次参加科举考试的同路人，不应该接受这样贵重的物品。
English: Liao Youfang also said: I, as a man, understand some simple principles of ancient and modern life. I accidentally buried a fellow traveler who took the imperial examinations many times. I should not accept such valuable items.

古文：遂促辔而前，驿将奔骑而送。复逾一驿，尚未分离。
现代文：说着便催马往前走。驿站的官员也骑着马送他，两个人又经过一个驿站，仍然没有分手。
English: Saying this, he urged the horse to go forward. The officials of the station also rode to see him off, and the two men passed through another station and still did not part.

古文：廖君不顾其物，驿将执袂。各恨东西，物乃弃于林野。
现代文：廖有方不拿所赠送的物品，驿站的官员与他最后握手告别，两人各奔东西，赠送的物品竟扔到了野外。
English: Liao Youfang did not take the gifts, the officials of the station shook hands with him for the last time and said goodbye. The two went their separate ways, and the gifts were thrown into the open.

古文：乡老以义事申州。州将以表奏朝廷。
现代文：乡里掌管教化的乡老将这件事上报给州里，州里又上报给朝廷。
English: The village elder in charge of education in the village reported the matter to the county, and the county reported it to the imperial court.

古文：文武宰寮，愿识有方，共为导引。
现代文：文武百官知道了都想结识廖有方，互相介绍引见。
English: When they found out, all the military and civilian officials wanted to get to know Liao Youfang and introduce him to each other.

古文：明年，李逢吉知举，有方及第，改名游卿，声动华夷，皇唐之义士也。
现代文：第二年，李逢吉主持科举考试廖有方被录取。他改名叫廖有卿，声名传遍了全国，被公认为国家的义士。
English: The following year, Liao Youfang, who presided over the imperial examinations, was admitted. He changed his name to Liao Youqing, and his fame spread throughout the country. He was recognized as a national hero.

古文：其主驿戴克勤，堂帖本道节度，甄升至于极职。
现代文：那个驿站的官员戴克勤，也被宰相发公文推荐提拔为当地的节度使，官升到了极高的位置。
English: The official of that station, Dai Keqin, was also recommended by the prime minister to be promoted to the local governor, and the official rose to a very high position.

古文：克勤名义，与廖君同远矣。
现代文：从此戴克勤的声名和廖有方的名字传得一样远。
English: Since then, Dyck's reputation has spread as far as Liao Youfang's name.

