古文：○高宗九三十一年春正月甲戌朔，以日食，不受朝。丁丑，雷。
现代文：绍兴三十一年春正月初一，因日食不接受朝拜。初四，打雷。
English: Shaoxing on the first day of the first month of the 31st year of the Spring Festival, because of the solar eclipse, did not accept the morning worship.

古文：丁亥，免湖州增丁所输绢。
现代文：十四日，免除湖州增加丁口所输纳的绢。
English: On the 14th, Huzhou was exempted from increasing the amount of cadmium received by Dingkou.

古文：夜，风雷雨雪交作。
现代文：夜晚，风雷雨雪交加。
English: In the evening, wind, thunderstorms, rain and snow mixed.

古文：辛卯，诏江、浙官民户均输和市絁帛。
现代文：十八日，下诏江、浙官户、民户都要输纳和买帛。
English: On the 18th, the lower Zhaojiang River, Zhejiang government households, and private households will all have to accept and buy money.

古文：壬辰，刘宝落节钺、福建路居住。
现代文：十九日，刘宝被削夺节钱，福建路居住。
English: On the 19th, Liu Bao was deprived of money and lived in Fujian Road.

古文：丙申，大雨雪，给三衙卫士、行在贫民钱及薪炭，命常平振给辅郡细民，诸路监司决狱。
现代文：二十三日，降大雨雪，供给三衙卫士、行在贫民钱及柴炭，命令常平机构贩济辅郡小民，各路监司处理诉讼案件。
English: On the 23rd, heavy rain and snow fell, and money and firewood were provided to the three guardians and the poor people, and the Changping organization was ordered to sell the small people of Jiefu County, and the supervisors of each road dealt with the litigation cases.

古文：己亥，放张浚、胡铨自便。
现代文：二十六日，释放张浚、胡锉，给他们自由。
English: On the 26th, Zhang Jun and Hu Yao were released.

古文：庚子，禁淮南拘籍户马。
现代文：二十七日，严禁淮南拘收户马。
English: On the 27th, Huainan was strictly prohibited from detaining horses.

古文：二月戊申，复置邛州惠民监。
现代文：二月初五，重新设立邓州惠民监。
English: On the fifth day of February, the Dengzhou Hui People's Supervision Bureau was re-established.

古文：癸丑，以赵密领殿前都指挥使。
现代文：十日，任命赵密担任殿前都指挥使。
English: On the 10th, Zhao Mi was appointed as the commander of the palace.

古文：甲寅，罢杨存中殿前都指挥使，进太傅，为醴泉观使，封同安郡王。
现代文：十一日，罢除杨存中殿前都指挥使的职务，进为太傅，为醛泉观使，封为同安郡王。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Yang Cun was removed from the post of commander of the middle palace, promoted to taifu, to aldehyde spring observation, and crowned as the king of Tongan County.

古文：丙辰，置行在会子务。
现代文：十三日，设立行在会子务。
English: On the 13th, the bank's banking business was established.

古文：乙丑，复鬻僧道度牒。
现代文：二十二日，恢复誓买僧道度碟。
English: On the 22nd, he renewed his vow to buy a monk's way of life.

古文：诏分经义、诗赋为两科。
现代文：下诏分经义、诗赋为两科。
English: The following edict divided the study of the sutras and poetry into two subjects.

古文：丙寅，诏通进司承受内降文字，并囊封送三省、枢密院。
现代文：二十三日，下诏通进司承受内降文字奏章，并负责用袋子装好交送三省、枢密院。
English: On the 23rd, the Lower Zhao Tongjin Division received the internal declination letter and was responsible for packing it in a bag and delivering it to the three provinces and the Privy Council.

古文：辛未，秦熺卒，赠太傅。
现代文：二十八日，秦嬉去世，赠给太傅。
English: On the 28th, Qin Qiao passed away and was given to Taifu.

古文：三月甲戌朔，命破敌军统制陈敏部兵屯太平州。
现代文：三月初一，命令破敌军统制陈敏率兵屯驻太平州。
English: On the first day of March, Chen Min, commander of the troops stationed in Taiping, was ordered to break the enemy's control.

古文：己卯，官勋臣魏仁浦、马知节、余靖、寇瑊诸孙各一人。
现代文：初六，授给勋臣魏仁浦、马知节、余靖、寇咸的孙子各一人官职。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, one official post was given to each of the grandsons of the honored ministers Wei Rimpu, Ma Zhizhe, Yu Jing, and Kou Han.

古文：选文臣宗室主西、南外两宗司。
现代文：选择文臣宗室主管西、南外两宗司。
English: The head of the western and southern branches of the family chose Wenshen.

古文：庚辰，禁两淮抑民附种。
现代文：初七，严禁两淮地区强迫百姓耕种营田，认纳租课。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, it is strictly forbidden to force the people in the two Huaihuai regions to cultivate camp fields and accept rent classes.

古文：以利州西路御前诸军都统制吴拱知襄阳府，部兵三千戍之。
现代文：任命利州西路御前各军都统制吴拱为襄阳知府，率兵三千人戍守襄阳。
English: Li Zhou Xi Lu appointed Wu Gong as governor of Xiangyang, leading 3,000 soldiers to defend Xiangyang.

古文：壬午，以兵部尚书杨椿参知政事。
现代文：初九，任命兵部尚书杨椿为参知政事。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, Yang Tsubaki, a member of the Ministry of Military Affairs, was appointed as a member of the Council of State.

古文：丁亥，夺秦熺赠官及遗表恩赏。
现代文：十四日，削夺秦嬉的赠官及遗表恩赏。
English: On the 14th, the bestowal of Qin Qi and the reward of the watch were cut off.

古文：庚寅，以陈康伯为尚书左仆射，朱倬右仆射，并同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十七日，任命陈康伯为尚书左仆射，朱悼为右仆射，都为同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 17th, Chen Kangbo was appointed as Shang Shu's left footman, and Zhu Wei as his right footman, both of which were the most important events in the history of the school.

古文：辛卯，复李光左中大夫，官其子孙二人。
现代文：十八日，恢复李光为左中大夫，授给他子孙二人官职。
English: On the 18th, Li Guang was reinstated as the left middle doctor, and two of his descendants were given official positions.

古文：壬辰，地震。
现代文：十九日，发生地震。
English: On the 28th, an earthquake.

古文：庚子，以前徽猷阁待制张宇发死节，赠四官，录其子孙。
现代文：二十七日，因前徽酞阁待制张宁发为国捐躯，赠给四官，录用他的子孙。
English: On the 27th, Zhang Ningfa sacrificed his life for the country and was presented to the four officials, and his children and grandchildren were hired.

古文：夏四月丁巳，以久雨伤蚕麦，盗贼间发，命侍从、台谏条上弭灾除盗之策。
现代文：夏四月十五日，因长期降雨，损伤蚕麦，盗贼不时发生，命令侍从、台谏官向朝廷陈述消灭灾害、除去盗贼的对策。
English: On the 15th day of the 4th month of the summer, due to the long-term rainfall, the damage to the silkworm wheat, and the occurrence of thieves from time to time, he ordered the attendants and the eunuchs to report to the imperial court on the countermeasures to eliminate the disasters and remove the thieves.

古文：出天申节银十万两加充户部籴本。
现代文：拿出祝贺天申节银十万两作为户部来本的追加经费。
English: Take out 100,000 taels of silver to congratulate the Tenshin Festival as additional funds from the budget of the Household Department.

古文：辛未，遣周麟之使金贺迁都。
现代文：二十九日，派遣周麟之出使金朝祝贺迁都。
English: On the 29th, Zhou Lin sent an envoy to the Kim dynasty to congratulate the relocation of the capital.

古文：壬申，权减荆南上供钱银绢丝米之半，用招填禁军。
现代文：三十日，暂且减省荆南上供钱银绢丝米的一半，用做招募补充禁军。
English: On the 30th, Jingnan temporarily reduced the supply of money, silver, silk and rice by half, and used it to recruit and supplement the forbidden army.

古文：是月，金主亮率文武群臣如汝、洛。
现代文：这个月，金主完颜亮率领文武群臣到汝、洛地区。
English: This month, the financial master, Guan Yanliang, led a group of civil and military officials to the Lu and Luo regions.

古文：五月癸酉朔，给两淮民兵荒田。
现代文：五月初一，拨给两淮民兵荒田。
English: On the first day of May, the wasteland was allocated to the two Huai militias.

古文：乙亥，增筑禁城。
现代文：初三，增筑皇城。
English: On the third day of the new year, the imperial city will be expanded.

古文：戊寅，诏吴拱视缓急退守荆南。
现代文：初六，下诏吴拱视军事缓急退守荆南。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, Wu Gong saw the military retreat to Jingnan as urgent.

古文：己丑，命沿淮州郡毋纳北人。
现代文：十七日，下令沿淮河州郡不要接纳金人。
English: On the 17th, it ordered the counties along the Huaihe River not to accept gold people.

古文：辛卯，金遣高景山、王全来贺天申节。
现代文：十九日，金国派遣高景山、王全来祝贺天申节。
English: On the 19th, the State of Kim sent Gao Jingshan and Wang Quan to congratulate the Tianshen Festival.

古文：全扬言无礼，致其主亮语，求淮、汉地及指取将相近臣计事，且以钦宗皇帝讣闻。
现代文：王全口出狂言，傲慢无礼，并传达金主亮的话，向朝廷索取淮河、汉水地区的土地，指名要朝廷将相近臣商议此事，并且告诉钦宗皇帝逝世的消息。
English: Wang Quanzhong uttered wild words, arrogant and rude, and conveyed the words of Jin Shuling, requesting land in the Huaihe and Hanshui regions from the imperial court, nominating the imperial court to discuss the matter with the close vassals, and telling the news of Emperor Qinzong's death.

古文：壬辰，选两浙、江东、福建诸州禁军弓弩手之半，部送枢密院按试。
现代文：二十日，挑选两浙、江东、福建各州禁军弓弩手一半，带领到枢密院进行检阅比试。
English: On the 20th, half of the archers of the two forbidden armies in Zhejiang, Jiangdong and Fujian were selected and led to the Privy Council for review and competition.

古文：甲午，宰执召同安郡王杨存中及三衙帅赵密等至都堂议举兵。
现代文：二十二日，宰执召同安郡王杨存中及三衙统帅赵密等到政事堂商议举兵。
English: On the 22nd, the commander-in-chief summoned Wang Yang Cunzhong of Dong'an County and the commander of the Third Division, Zhao Mi, to the government hall to discuss raising an army.

古文：诏以王全语谕诸路统制、帅守、监司，随宜应变，毋失机会。
现代文：下诏向各路统制、帅臣、监司传达王全的话，让他们随机应变，不失机会。
English: The following edict is to convey Wang Quan's words to all the commanders, generals, and supervisors, so that they can respond at random and not miss the opportunity.

古文：是日，为钦宗皇帝发丧，特诏持斩衰三年。
现代文：这天，为钦宗皇帝发丧，特诏守丧三年。
English: On this day, Emperor Qinzong mourned for three years.

古文：乙未，以吴璘为四川宣抚使，仍命制置使王刚中同处置军事。
现代文：二十三日，任命吴瞒为四川宣抚使，并且任命制置使王刚中一起处置军事。
English: On the 23rd, Wu Zhen was appointed as the Sichuan envoy, and Wang Gangzhong was appointed to deal with military affairs.

古文：丙申，命主管马军司成闵部兵三万人戍鄂州。
现代文：二十四日，命令主管马军司成阂率领三万士兵戍守鄂州。
English: On the 24th, he ordered the head of the Ma Military Department, Cheng Jun, to lead 30,000 soldiers to defend Ezhou.

古文：庚子，命两浙、江、湖、福建诸州起禁军弓弩手，部送明州、平江府、江、池、太平三州、荆南府军前。
现代文：二十八日，下命两浙、江、湖、福建各州准备好禁军弓弩手，派人率领送往明州、平江府、江州、池州、太平州、荆南府军前。
English: On the 28th, the states of Zhejiang, Jiangsu, Hubei and Fujian were ordered to prepare bowmen for the imperial army and send them to Mingzhou, Pingjiang, Jiangzhou, Chizhou, Taiping and Jingnan prefectures.

古文：殿中侍御史陈俊卿言，内侍张去为窃权挠政，乞斩之以作士气。
现代文：殿中侍御史陈俊卿说，内侍张去为窃权扰政，请求杀掉他以振作士气。
English: Chen Junqing, the palace chamberlain, said that the chamberlain Zhang went to steal power and disrupt politics, and asked to kill him to boost morale.

古文：六月乙巳，以群臣三上表，始听政。
现代文：六月初四，因大臣们三次上表高宗才上殿处理国事。
English: On the 4th day of the 6th month, the ministers went to the palace to deal with state affairs because they had to appear before Emperor Gaozong three times.

古文：丙午，刘锜乞即日移军渡江，诏锜进发，骑兵屯扬州。
现代文：初五，刘倚请求即日移军渡江。下诏刘倚进发，骑兵屯驻扬州。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Liu Jie requested to move the army across the river on the same day. Liu Jie marched in and the cavalry stationed in Yangzhou.

古文：丁未，出宫女三百九十人。
现代文：初六，放出三百九十名宫女。
English: On the sixth day of the new year, 390 maids of honor were released.

古文：蠲临安府禁军阙额钱五年。
现代文：免除临安府禁军缺额钱五年。
English: Lin'an will be exempted from the ban on the military for five years.

古文：乙酉，以御史中丞汪澈为湖北、京西宣谕使。
现代文：初八，任命御史中承汪澈为湖北、京西宣谕使。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Wang Chie, a member of the Imperial Historians, was appointed as the envoy to Hubei and West Beijing.

古文：辛亥，金主亮遣大怀正至盱眙，语送伴使吕广问云：将以六月迁汴京。令其归奏。
现代文：初十，金主完颜亮派遣大怀政到盯胎，对送伴使吕广问说，金国将在六月迁都汁京，命令他回国奏报。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, the ruler of Jin sent Dai Huai Zheng (大怀政) to observe the birth of the baby. He asked the escorting envoy Lü Guang (吕广) that Jin would move the capital to Beijing in June, and ordered him to return to China to report.

古文：癸丑，罢教坊，并敕令所归刑部。
现代文：十二日，罢除教坊，救令所归并到刑部。
English: On the 12th, the teaching center was abolished, and the relief office was merged into the criminal department.

古文：乙卯，以刘锜为淮南、江东西、浙西制置使。
现代文：十四日，任命刘倚为淮南、江东西、浙西制置使。
English: On the 14th, Liu Jian was appointed as the chief envoy of Huainan, Jiangxi and Zhejiang provinces.

古文：戊午，命带御器械刘炎同提举措置沿淮盗贼。
现代文：十七日，命令御器械刘炎参与提举措置处理淮河沿边盗贼。
English: On the 17th, Liu Yan, the commanding officer, was ordered to participate in the proposal of measures to deal with the thieves along the Huaihe River.

古文：庚申，彗出角。
现代文：十九日，彗星出现在角宿区域内。
English: On the 19th, the comet appeared in the Kakunodate area.

古文：遣步军司都统制戚方提总江上诸军策应军马，听刘锜节制。
现代文：派遣步军司都统制戚方提总江上各军策应军马，听从刘倚调遣和管束。
English: He dispatched the step-army division to the capital to control the relatives of the party and the general of the river to respond to the military strategy and obey the deployment and control of Liu Jie.

古文：谕吴拱严备襄阳，视缓急，合田师中、成闵兵以援之。
现代文：诏谕吴拱严密守备襄阳，视军事情况缓急会合田师中、成阂兵求救。
English: Wu Gong was ordered to keep a close watch on Xiangyang and, depending on the military situation, call for help from Tian Shizhong and Chenglu soldiers.

古文：甲子，始御正殿。
现代文：二十三日，开始到正殿。
English: On the 23rd, they started marching to the main hall.

古文：乙丑，放女乐二百余人。
现代文：二十四日，放出二百多名宫女。
English: On the 24th, more than 200 maids of honor were released.

古文：丙寅，听淮南诸州移治清野。
现代文：二十五日，允许淮南各州移治清野。
English: On the 25th, the states of Huainan were allowed to move to Qingye.

古文：戊辰，以周麟之辞使北，命枢密都承旨徐嚞代行。
现代文：二十七日，因周麟之推辞出使金国，命令枢密都承旨徐哲代替他前往。
English: On the 27th, due to Zhou Lin's resignation, he sent an envoy to the State of Jin and ordered the Privy Council to appoint Xu Zhe to replace him.

古文：淮北民兵崔唯夫、董臻等率众万余来归。
现代文：淮北民兵崔唯夫、董臻等率众一万多人来归附朝廷。
English: Huaibei militiamen Cui Weifu, Dong Zhen and others led more than ten thousand people to join the imperial court.

古文：秋七月丙子，命两浙、江东滨海诸州预备敌兵。
现代文：秋七月初五，命两浙、江东沿海各州预先防备金兵。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the autumn and the fifth day of the seventh month, it was ordered that the coastal states of Zhejiang and Jiangdong should prepare gold soldiers in advance.

古文：诏诸路帅臣教阅土兵、弓手。
现代文：下诏各路帅臣教阅士兵、弓手。
English: The following edict was issued to all field marshals to instruct soldiers and archers.

古文：戊寅，命雷州守臣节制高、容、廉、化四州军马。
现代文：初七，下命雷州守臣调遣、管束高、容、廉、化四州军马。
English: On the seventh day of his junior year, he was ordered to dispatch Leizhou guardsmen and control the high-ranking, high-spending, low-spending, and corrupt Shishu army horses.

古文：时雷州军贼凌铁作乱，东南第十二将高居弁会五州巡尉官兵讨平之。
现代文：当时雷州军贼凌铁叛乱，东南第十二将高居弃会五州巡尉官兵讨伐平定。
English: At that time, the Leizhou military bandits rebelled against Ling Tie, and the 12th Southeast Gaojing abandoned the Five Provinces' lieutenants and soldiers to fight and subdue.

古文：戊子，周麟之分司、筠州居住。
现代文：十七日，周麟之受到处分，箔州居住。
English: On the 17th, Zhou Linzhi was punished and went to live in Huzhou.

古文：辛卯，振给淮南归正人。
现代文：二十日，贩济淮南归附人。
English: On the 20th, the trafficker Ji Huainan was turned into an attached person.

古文：壬辰，徐嚞等至盱眙，金主亮以非所指取之人，谕遣亟还。
现代文：二十一日，徐哲等到达盯胎，金主完颜亮认为不是他所指定的人选，告诉他立即回国。
English: On the twenty-first day, when Xu Zhe and others arrived to check on the baby, the donor thought it was not the person he had designated and told him to return home immediately.

古文：癸巳，诏： 四川财赋，自当专任总领所。
现代文：二十二日，下诏： 四川财赋，本来应当专归总领所掌管。
English: On the 22nd, the following edict was issued: Sichuan's wealth should have been under the exclusive control of the General Consulate.

古文：如遇警急，调发不及申奏，则令宣、制司随宜措置，先举后闻。 
现代文：但如果遇到紧急情况需要调发而来不及申奏朝廷，就命令宣抚司、制置司随情况变化而灵活处理，先调发然后再报告朝廷。 
English: However, if in case of an emergency, it is necessary to dispatch dispatch but it is too late to report to the Imperial Court, it shall order the Publicity Department and the Production and Installation Department to deal with it flexibly according to changes in the situation, dispatch first and then report to the Imperial Court.

古文：乙未，行新造会子于淮、浙、湖北、京西诸州。
现代文：二十四日，在淮、浙、湖北、京西各州实施流通新印制的会子。
English: On the 24th, the newly printed club cards were put into circulation in Huaihe, Zhejiang, Hubei and West Beijing provinces.

古文：是月，金主亮徙都汴京，命其臣刘萼由唐、邓瞰荆、襄，张中彦、王彦章据秦、凤、窥巴、蜀，苏保衡、完颜郑家奴由海道趋两浙。
现代文：这个月，金主完颜亮迁都汁京，命令他的臣僚刘尊由唐、邓进攻荆、襄，张中彦、王彦章据秦、凤进攻巴、蜀，苏保衡、完颜郑家奴由海道进攻两浙。
English: This month, the financial lord, Guan Yan Liang, moved the capital to Beijing, and ordered his ministers, Liu Zun, Tang, and Deng to attack Jing and Xiang, Zhang Zhongyan, Wang Yanzhang, Qin, and Feng to attack Ba and Shu, and Su Baoheng, Guan Yan, and Zheng Jiannu to attack Zhejiang by sea.

古文：八月辛丑朔，忠义人魏胜复海州，李宝承制以胜知州事。
现代文：八月初一，忠义士兵魏胜收复海州，李宝秉承朝命委任他为知海州事。
English: On the first day of August, Wei Sheng, a loyal soldier, recaptured Haizhou, and Li Bao, adhering to the imperial order, appointed him as the governor of Chihai.

古文：丙午，蠲诸路逋欠经总制钱、江浙等路上供米。
现代文：初六，免除各路拖欠经总制钱、江浙等路上供米。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, exempt all roads from arrears and supply rice via the general money system, Jiangsu and Zhejiang provinces and other roads.

古文：丁未，以婉容刘氏妄预国政，废于家。
现代文：初七，因婉容刘氏妄图干预朝政，被废在家。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, because of Wanrong Liu's attempt to interfere in the politics of the dynasty, he was abandoned at home.

古文：蠲淮南、京西、湖北民秋税之半。
现代文：免除淮南、京西、湖北地区百姓一半的秋税。
English: Half of the people in Huainan, West Beijing and Hubei will be exempted from the autumn tax.

古文：辛亥，以刘婉容事连坐，昭庆军承宣使王继先福州居住，停子孙官，籍其赀。
现代文：十一日，因受刘婉容一事的牵连，昭庆军承宣使王继先贬福州居住，停止子孙官职，没收他的资财。
English: On the 11th day, because of the implication of the Liu Wanrong incident, the Zhaoqing Army announced that Wang Jixian would live in Fuzhou, stop his children and grandchildren from holding official positions, and confiscate his assets.

古文：甲寅，李宝率舟师三千发江阴，大风，退泊明州关澳，聚兵复进。
现代文：十四日，李宝率水师三千人从江阴出发，刮大风，退泊明州关澳，集聚军队再前进。
English: On the 14th, Li Bao and 3,000 sailors set out from Jiangyin, the wind was blowing hard, and they retreated to Mingzhou Guan'ao to gather troops before moving forward.

古文：乙卯，刘锜引兵屯扬州，遣统制王刚以兵五千屯宝应。
现代文：十五日，刘倚率兵屯驻扬州，派统制官王刚率五千士兵屯驻宝应。
English: On the 15th, Liu Yixing led the troops stationed in Yangzhou, and sent the commanding officer Wang Gang led five thousand soldiers stationed in Baoying.

古文：丁巳，召田师中赴行在。
现代文：十七日，召田师中前往行在。
English: On the seventeenth day, Zoda Shizhong went there.

古文：寻以吴拱为鄂州诸军都统制。
现代文：不久任命吴拱为鄂州各军都统制。
English: Soon after, Wu Gong was appointed as the commander-in-chief of all the armies in Ezhou.

古文：壬戌，复用资政殿学士张焘落致仕、知建康府。
现代文：二十二日，又任用资政殿学士张煮，特命复出任职，为建康知府。
English: On the 22nd, he also appointed Zhang Ni, a scholar of the House of Councillors, to return to his post by special order, as Jiankang Chifu.

古文：癸亥，分处归正人于淮南诸州，能自存者从便，愿为兵者籍之。
现代文：二十三日，分别把归附人分散安置在淮南各州，能够自己活下去听便，愿意当兵的登记造册。
English: On the 23rd, the registered persons who were able to live on their own and were willing to serve in the army were dispersed and resettled in various provinces of Huainan.

古文：乙丑，诏便宜选补战功人，后勿递减。
现代文：二十五日，下诏将帅自行决定选补有战功的将士，而后不递减。
English: On the 25th day of the following month, the commander-in-chief decided at his own discretion to choose additional soldiers who had distinguished themselves in the war, and then did not decrease.

古文：丙寅，出内帑钱七万缗，犒戍兵之家，仍悉除军债。
现代文：二十六日，拿出七万络内库钱，搞劳戍守士兵家属，并且全部废除军债。
English: On the 26th, he took out 70,000 yuan from the internal treasury to help the soldiers' families, and cancelled all military debts.

古文：乙巳，起复成闵为湖北、京西制置使，节制两路军马。
现代文：二十九日，重新起用成阂为湖北、京西制置使，调遣管束两路军马。
English: On the 29th, Chengyu was re-appointed as the Hubei and West Beijing stationing envoy, dispatching troops and horses from both directions.

古文：九月庚午朔，命大臣朝飨太庙。
现代文：九月初一，命令大臣们祭祀太庙。
English: On the first day of September, the ministers were ordered to hold a ritual at the Imperial Temple.

古文：辛未，宗祀徽宗于明堂，以配上帝，大赦。
现代文：初二，在明堂为徽宗举行庙祭，以配上天，举行大赦。
English: On the second day of junior high school, a temple festival was held in Myeongdong for the Huizong sect to match the heavens and hold an amnesty.

古文：甲戌，金人犯黄牛堡，守将李彦坚拒却之，金兵遂扼大散关，吴璘驻青野原，遣将高松等援之。
现代文：初五，金军进攻黄牛堡，守将李彦坚打退金军，金军于是控扼大散关，吴瞒屯驻青野原，派将领高松等救援。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the gold army attacked Huang Niu Fort, and the guard general Li Yan Jian fought back the gold army. The gold army then controlled Zhu Da Sankuan, Wu Xie stationed in Qingyuan, and sent generals such as Gao Song to rescue.

古文：庚辰，以给事中黄祖舜同知枢密院事。
现代文：十一日，任命给事中黄祖舜为同知枢密院事。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Huang Zuyao was appointed as Tongzhi Privy Councillor.

古文：壬午，流星昼陨。
现代文：十三日，流星白天陨落。
English: On the 13th, a meteor fell during the day.

古文：乙酉，诏刘锜、王权、李显忠、戚方严备清河、颍河、涡河口。
现代文：十六日，下诏刘倚、王权、李显忠、戚方严密防备清河口、颖河口、涡河口。
English: On the 16th, Liu Jie, Wang Quan, Li Xianzhong and their relatives were ordered to closely guard the Qinghekou, Yinghekou and Turuhekou.

古文：丁亥，成闵渡江，屯应城县，遣吴拱戍郢州。
现代文：十八日，成阂渡过长江，屯驻应城县，派吴拱戍守郑州。
English: On the 18th, Chengyi crossed the Yangtze River, stationed in Yingcheng County, and sent Wu Gongyi to defend Zhengzhou.

古文：博州民王友直聚兵大名，自称河北安抚制置使，以其徒王任为副，遣军师冯穀入朝奏事。
现代文：博州百姓王友直聚兵大名，自称河北安抚制置使，委任他的部下王任为副使，派军师冯前往朝廷奏事。
English: Wang Youzhi, a commoner from Bozhou, gathered soldiers and daimyos and called himself the Hebei Pacification Envoy, appointed his subordinate Wang Ren as the deputy envoy, and sent the military strategist Feng to the imperial court to report.

古文：吴璘遣将彭青至宝鸡渭河，夜劫金人桥头砦，破之。
现代文：吴瞒派将领彭青到宝鸡渭河，乘夜晚劫掠金军桥头寨，攻破金军。
English: Wu Zhen sent the general Peng Qing to Baoji Lianhe to take advantage of the night to plunder the bridgehead of the Jin army and defeat the Jin army.

古文：庚寅，成闵遣统制赵撙部兵五千驻德安。
现代文：二十一日，成阂派统制官赵搏率兵五千人屯驻德安。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Chenghuang sent the governor Zhao Bo and five thousand soldiers to stay in De'an.

古文：辛卯，金国趣使臣书至楚州，守臣以闻，其辞多悖慢。
现代文：二十二日，金国敦促使臣把致朝廷书送至楚州，守臣报告朝廷，措辞多傲慢无礼。
English: On the 22nd, Kim Guo urged the envoy to send the letter to the imperial court to Chuzhou, and the retainer reported to the imperial court, the wording of which was arrogant and rude.

古文：壬辰，监盱眙军淮河渡夏俊复泗州。
现代文：二十三日，监盯胎军淮河渡夏俊收复泅州。
English: On the 23rd, Xia Jun's patrol army crossed the Huai River and recaptured Ganzhou.

古文：癸巳，金人犯通化军，守将张超拒却之。
现代文：二十四日，金军攻打通化军，守将张超抵抗，打退金军。
English: On the 24th, the Chinese army attacked the Tonghua army, and the commander Zhang Chao resisted and repulsed the Chinese army.

古文：甲午，册谥大行皇帝曰恭文顺德仁孝皇帝，庙号钦宗。
现代文：二十五日，册封大行皇帝溢号为恭文顺德仁孝皇帝，庙号钦宗。
English: On the 25th, Emperor Da Xing was enthroned, with the posthumous name of Emperor Gongwen Shunde Renxiao and the temple name of Emperor Qinzong.

古文：吴璘遣将刘海复秦州，金守将萧济降。
现代文：吴瞒派将领刘海收复泰州，金朝守将萧济投降。
English: Wu Zhen sent his general Liu Hai to recover Taizhou, and the Kim dynasty's governor Xiao Jie surrendered.

古文：乙未，金人犯信阳军。
现代文：二十六日，金军攻打信阳军。
English: On the 26th, the Jin army attacked the Xinyang army.

古文：丙申，吴璘遣将曹氵休复洮州。
现代文：二十七日，吴瞒派将领曹林收复姚州。
English: On the 27th, Wu Zhen sent Cao Lin to recover Yaozhou.

古文：戊戌，刘锜发扬州。
现代文：二十九日，刘倚从扬州出发。
English: On the 29th, Liu Jie set off from Yangzhou.

古文：诏以金人背盟，降敕榜招谕中原军民。
现代文：下诏因金军背弃盟约，降救令指示招抚中原军民。
English: The following edict was issued to appease the Central Plains soldiers and civilians because the Chinese army had reneged on the treaty.

古文：己亥，兰州汉军千户王宏杀其刺史温敦乌乜来降。
现代文：三十日，兰州汉军千户王宏杀死刺史温敦乌也来归降。
English: On the 30th, the Chinese troops in Lanzhou, Chifu Wanghong killed the assassin, Shi Wen Dunwu, and also came to surrender.

古文：吴璘遣将彭青复陇州。
现代文：吴瞒派将领彭青收复陇州。
English: Wu Zhen sent general Peng Qing to recover Zhangzhou.

古文：是月，金主亮以尚书右丞李通为大都督，造浮梁于淮水之上，遂自将来攻，兵号百万，远近大震。
现代文：这个月，金主完颜亮任命尚书右承李通为大都督，在淮水上修造浮梁，于是亲自率领将士来进攻，兵号称百万，远近大为震动。
English: This month, the financial master, Guan Yanliang, appointed Shang Shuxu's right successor, Li Tong, as the grand governor. He built a floating beam on Huai Shui, and then personally led the generals to attack. The number of soldiers was one million, and there was great shock in the near and far.

古文：冬十月庚子朔，诏将亲征。
现代文：冬十月初一，下诏将要亲征。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the next emperor will personally march into battle.

古文：魏胜攻沂州，败，还海州，金人围之。李宝以舟师至东海县，金人解围去，宝遂入海州。
现代文：魏胜进攻沂州，失败，退回海州，金军围攻，李宝派水师到东海县，金军撤围退走，李宝于是进人海州。
English: Wei Sheng attacked Bozhou, failed, returned to Haizhou, the Golden Army besieged, Li Bao sent sailors to Donghai County, the Golden Army withdrew and retreated, Li Bao then entered Haizhou.

古文：辛丑，金人自涡口渡淮。
现代文：初二，金军从涡河口渡过淮河。
English: On the second day of the first month, the Chinese army crossed the Huai River from the mouth of the Vortex River.

古文：癸卯，以吴璘兼陕西、河东招讨使，刘锜兼京东、河北东路招讨使，成闵兼京西、河北西路招讨使。
现代文：初四，任命吴瞒兼陕西、河东招讨使，刘倚兼京东、河北东路招讨使，成阂兼京西、河北西路招讨使。
English: On the 4th day of the first month of the year, Wu Zhen and Shaanxi and Hedong Recruitment Envoy were appointed, Liu Jie and Jingdong and East Hebei Recruitment Envoy, Chengyu and West Beijing and West Hebei Recruitment Envoy.

古文：金人陷蒋州。
现代文：金军攻陷蒋州。
English: The Chinese army invaded and occupied Jiangzhou.

古文：李显忠遣统制孔福与金人战于大人洲，败之。
现代文：李显忠派统制官孔福在大人洲与金军交战，打败金军。
English: The loyalists of Lee Hsien Loong sent the commanding officer Confucius to fight against the Chinese army on the mainland and defeated the Chinese army.

古文：乙巳，金人复犯海州，魏胜、李宝击却之。
现代文：初六，金军又攻打海州，魏胜、李宝击退金军。
English: On the sixth day of the first month, the Golden Army attacked Haizhou again, and Wei Sheng and Li Bao repulsed the Golden Army.

古文：刘锜引兵次淮阴，金人将自清河口入淮，锜列兵于运河岸以扼之。
现代文：刘倚率兵驻扎淮阴，金军将从清河口进人淮河，刘倚在运河岸边布兵控扼要口。
English: Liu Jie led the soldiers stationed in Huaiyin, the Chinese army will enter the Huaihe River from the mouth of the Qing River, and Liu Jie will set up a control point on the bank of the canal.

古文：丁未，命宣抚制置司传檄契丹、西夏、高丽、渤海诸国及河北、河东、陕西、京东、河南诸路，谕出师共讨金人。
现代文：初八，命令宣抚制置司向契丹、西夏、高丽、渤海各国及河北、河东、陕西、京东、河南各路发布檄文，指示出兵共讨金军。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, he ordered the Proclamation and Settlement Division to issue an imperial edict to Khitan, Western Xia, Goryeo, Bohai countries, and Hebei, Hedong, Shaanxi, Jingdong and Henan provinces, instructing them to dispatch troops to fight against the Jin army.

古文：是日，金人立其东京留守葛王褒为皇帝，改元大定。
现代文：这天，金军立东京留守葛王雍为皇帝，改元大定。
English: On this day, Ge Wangyong, who was stationed in Tokyo as a member of the Chinese military, became emperor, and the era was changed to the Taisho era.

古文：戊申，王权闻金兵大至，自庐州引兵遁，屯昭关。
现代文：初九，王权听说金兵大规模压境，从庐州率兵逃跑，屯驻昭关。
English: At the beginning of the ninth month, Wang Quan heard that the Jin soldiers were massively oppressing the border, and he fled from Zhangzhou with his soldiers and settled in Zhaoguan.

古文：己酉，知均州武钜招纳北界杜海等二万人来归。
现代文：初十，均州知州武矩招纳金军控制区域杜海等二万人来归降朝廷。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Chizhou Wuchang of Junzhou recruited 20,000 people from Duhai and other areas under the control of the Jin Army to surrender to the imperial court.

古文：庚戌，复置机速房。
现代文：十一日，重新设置机速房。
English: On the 11th, the speed chamber was reset.

古文：知庐州龚涛闻金兵将至，弃城走。
现代文：庐州知州龚涛听说金兵快要打来，弃城逃走。
English: When Zhangzhou Zhizhou Baotao heard that Jinbei was about to call, he abandoned the city and fled.

古文：辛亥，金将萧琦陷滁州，守臣陆廉弃城走。
现代文：十二日，金军将领萧琦攻陷滁州，守臣陆廉弃城逃走。
English: On the 12th, the general of the Chinese army, Xiao Jian, invaded Zhangzhou, and the vassal Lu Liang abandoned the city and fled.

古文：壬子，改建王玮为镇南军节度使。
现代文：十三日，改命建王赵玮为镇南军节度使。
English: On the 13th, Jian Wang Zhao Wei was appointed as the festival envoy of the Zhenan Army.

古文：刘锜遣统制王刚等击败金人于清河口，金人复来战，刚失利。
现代文：刘倚派统制官王刚等在清河口击败金军，金军又来交战，王刚失利。
English: Liu Yixing sent the commanding officer Wang Gang and others to defeat the Chinese army at the mouth of the Qing River. The Chinese army came to fight again, and Wang Gang lost.

古文：吴拱遣将侯俊、郝敦书复唐州。
现代文：吴拱派遣将领侯俊、郝敦书收复唐州。
English: Wu Gong dispatched generals Hou Jun and Qu Dunshu to recover Tangzhou.

古文：癸丑，借江、浙、荆湖等路坊场净利钱三百八十万缗以备赏军。
现代文：十四日，调借江、浙、荆湖等路坊场净利钱三百八十万络用来赏赐军功。
English: On the 14th, the net profit of 3.8 million rupees was transferred from the provinces of Jiangsu, Zhejiang and Jinghu to reward military merit.

古文：金人围庐州，都监、权州事杨春率兵突阵出，守水砦。
现代文：金军围攻庐州，都监权州事杨春率兵突出金军围困，退守水寨。
English: The Chinese army besieged Bozhou, and Yang Chun, who had the power to supervise the affairs of the province, led the soldiers to highlight the siege of the Chinese army and retreated to the water village.

古文：金人又攻海州，李宝力战败之，解围去。
现代文：金军又攻打海州，李宝奋力抵抗，打败金军，金军解围退走。
English: The gold army attacked Haizhou again, Li Bao fought hard to resist, defeated the gold army, and the gold army withdrew from the siege.

古文：甲寅，金人攻樊城，吴拱遣守将翟贵、王进与战，贵、进俱战死，金兵亦退。
现代文：十五日，金军攻打樊城，吴拱派守将翟贵、王进与金军交战，翟贵、王进都战死，金兵也退走。
English: On the fifteenth day, the gold army attacked Shicheng, and Wu Gong sent the guards Zeng Gui and Wang Jin to fight with the gold army. Zeng Gui and Wang Jin were killed in the battle, and the gold soldiers also retreated.

古文：刘锜遣兵渡淮及金人战，死者十七八。
现代文：刘倚派兵渡淮与金军交战，十分之七、八战死。
English: Liu Yixing sent soldiers to Duahuai to fight against the Chinese army, and seven or eight out of ten died in the battle.

古文：金主亮以大军至庐州城北之五里，筑土城以居。
现代文：金主完颜亮率大军到达距城北五里的地方，修筑土城盘据。
English: After the completion of the gold master, the army reached a place five miles north of the city and built the earthen city.

古文：戚方遣将张宝复蒋州。
现代文：戚方派将领张宝收复蒋州。
English: Zhang Bao, a general sent by relatives, recaptured Jiangzhou.

古文：乙卯，以金人渝盟告于天地、宗庙、社稷。
现代文：十六日，就金朝背弃盟约祭告天地、宗庙、社翟。
English: On the 16th, he announced to the world, the ancestral temple, and the community that the Kim dynasty had abandoned the covenant.

古文：命州县谕富民捐赀助国。
现代文：命令州县告谕富民，劝他们出资助国。
English: He ordered the prefectures and counties to tell the rich people to leave the subsidized countries.

古文：刘锜闻王权遁，自淮阴引兵归扬州。
现代文：刘倚听说王权逃跑，从淮阴率兵退归扬州。
English: Hearing that Wang Quan had fled, Liu Yixing led his troops from Huaiyin back to Yangzhou.

古文：丙辰，金主亮入庐州，王权自昭关遁，金人追至尉子桥，破敌军统制姚兴战死，权退保和州。
现代文：十七日，金主完颜亮进人庐州，王权从昭关逃跑，金军追到尉子桥，破敌军统制姚兴战死，王权退保和州。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, the gold lord entered the state of Rencheng, Wangquan fled from Zhaoguan, the gold army chased him to Fuzi Bridge, defeated the enemy army and killed Yao Xing, and Wangquan withdrew to Hezhou.

古文：金州都统制王彦遣统制任天锡出洵阳，复丰阳县。
现代文：金州都统制王彦派统制任天锡出询阳，收复丰阳县。
English: Wang Yan, the governor of Jinzhou, sent the governor of Tianxi to inquire about Yang, and recovered Fengyang County.

古文：丁巳，帝闻王权败，召杨存中同宰执议于内殿，陈康伯赞帝定议亲征。
现代文：十八日，高宗听说王权失败，令杨存中与宰执一起在内殿商议对策，陈康伯赞成高宗决定亲征。
English: On the 18th, Gaozong heard that the royal power had failed, and he ordered Yang Cunzhong to discuss countermeasures with the leader in the inner hall. Chen Kangbo agreed with Gaozong's decision to personally enlist.

古文：武钜遣将荀琛复邓州。
现代文：武矩派遣将领荀深收复邓州。
English: Wu Zhen dispatched the general Zou Sheng to recapture Denzhou.

古文：戊午，任天锡复商洛县。
现代文：十九日，任天锡收复商洛县。
English: On the 19th, Tianxi regained Shangluo County.

古文：命吴璘趣出兵汉中，叶义问督视江、淮军马，中书舍人虞允文参谋军事。
现代文：命令吴瞒敦促出兵汉中，叶义问督视江、淮军马，中书舍人虞允文参谋军事。
English: In the Han Dynasty, Wu Zhen was ordered to urge the dispatch of troops, Ye Yi asked to supervise the Jijiang and Huai armies, and Yu Yunwen, who was not a scholar in the Chinese Dynasty, became a military staff officer.

古文：金人犯真州，步军司统制邵宏渊逆战于胥浦桥，兵败，真州陷。金人不入城，遂犯扬州。
现代文：金军攻打真州，步军司统制邵宏渊在青浦桥奋力抵抗，兵败，真州被攻陷，金军没有进城，于是攻打扬州。
English: The gold army attacked Zhenzhou, and Shao Hongyuan, the commander of the Infantry Division, fought hard in Qingpu Bridge. He was defeated, Zhenzhou was captured, and the gold army did not enter the city, so they attacked Yangzhou.

古文：己未，任天锡复商州，执其守完颜守能。
现代文：二十日，任天锡收复商州，俘虏金朝守臣完颜守能。
English: On the 20th, Ren Tianxi recovered Shangzhou, and captured the Kim dynasty's vassal, Guan Yan Shou Neng.

古文：赵撙引兵渡淮。
现代文：赵搏率兵渡淮。
English: Zhao Bo led the troops to Waduhuai.

古文：庚申，以杨存中为御营宿卫使。
现代文：二十一日，任命杨存中为御营宿卫使。
English: On the twenty-first day, Yang Cunzhong was appointed as Oying Juve Envoy.

古文：赵撙复褒信县。
现代文：赵搏收复褒信县。
English: Zhao Bo retook Poshin County.

古文：王权自和州遁归，屯于东采石。
现代文：王权从和州逃回，驻屯在东采石。
English: Wangquan fled back from Hezhou and settled in Dongquan.

古文：辛酉，复汤思退观文殿大学士、充醴泉观使兼侍读。
现代文：二十二日，恢复汤思退为观文殿大学士，担任醛泉观使兼侍读。
English: On the 22nd, Tang Si Rong was reinstated as a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism and Literature, and served as a Confucian scholar and attendant.

古文：分行在官吏三之一扈从，余留行遣常事。
现代文：分出行在官吏三分之一启从高宗，其余留下来处理日常事务。
English: About one-third of the officials started their journey from Gaozong, while the rest were left to deal with daily affairs.

古文：金人陷和州。
现代文：金军攻陷和州。
English: The Chinese army captured and occupied Hechu.

古文：壬戌，以将士劳于征讨，避殿减膳。
现代文：二十三日，因将士征讨辛劳，高宗不上殿，减少饮食。
English: On the 23rd, due to the hard work of recruiting soldiers, Gaozong did not go to the palace and reduced his diet.

古文：刘锜退军瓜州镇，金人陷扬州，淮东安抚使刘泽弃城奔泰州。
现代文：刘塌弃星军到瓜州镇，金军攻陷扬州，淮东安抚使刘泽弃城逃奔泰州。
English: Liu Cai abandoned the Star Army to Guazhou Town, the Jin Army invaded Yangzhou, and Huai Dong appeased Liu Ze abandoned the city and fled to Taizhou.

古文：以户部侍郎刘岑为御营随军都转运使，李显忠为御营先锋都统制屯芜湖，主管步军司李捧为前军都统制。
现代文：任命户部侍郎刘岑为御营随军都转运使，李显忠为御营先锋都统制屯驻芜湖，主管步军司李捧为前军都统制。
English: He appointed Liu Wei, the head of the Household Division, as the commander-in-chief of the army, Li Xianzhong as the commander-in-chief of the army, and Li Yu, the commander-in-chief of the army, as the commander-in-chief of the army.

古文：赵撙复新蔡县。
现代文：赵搏收复新蔡县。
English: Zhao Bo recovered Xin Cai County.

古文：癸亥，募诸州豪民招枪杖、弓箭手赴行在。
现代文：二十四日，招募各州豪民招收枪仗手、弓箭手前往行在。
English: On the 24th, they recruited heroes from every state to recruit gunslingers and archers to travel there.

古文：金人入扬州。
现代文：金军进人扬州。
English: The Golden Army marches into Yangzhou.

古文：王权自采石夜还建康， 寻复如采石。
现代文：王权从采石乘黑夜逃回建康，不久又到采石。
English: Wang Quan fled back to Jiankang from the quarry by night, and soon returned to the quarry.

古文：甲子，复张浚观文殿大学士、判潭州。
现代文：二十五日，恢复张浚为观文殿大学士，通判潭州。
English: On the 25th, Zhang Jun was reinstated as a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism, Tong Zhan Tan Zhou.

古文：吴璘遣统制吴挺、向起等及金人战于德顺军之治平砦，败之。
现代文：吴瞒派统制吴挺、向起等在德顺军的治平寨与金军交战，打败金军。
English: Wu Zhe sent his troops to control Wu Ting and Xiangqi, and they fought against and defeated the Jin army at Jipingzhai of the Deshun army.

古文：赵撙复平兴县。
现代文：赵搏收复平兴县。
English: Zhao Bo recovered Pingxing County.

古文：乙丑，金人趋瓜州，刘锜遣统领员琦拒之于皂角林，大败之，斩其统军高景山。
现代文：二十六日，金军进至瓜州，刘倚派统领员琦在皂角林抵抗，大败金军，斩杀金统军高景山。
English: On the 26th, the Golden Army marched into Guazhou, and Liu Yixing sent his commander-in-chief to resist in the Soqiao Forest, defeating the Golden Army and killing the Gaojing Mountain of the Golden United Army.

古文：丙寅，李宝遇金舟师于胶西县陈家岛，大败之，斩完颜郑家奴等五人。
现代文：二十七日，李宝在胶西县陈家岛与金军水师相遇，大败金军，斩杀完颜郑家奴等五人。
English: On the 27th, Li Bao met with the sailors of the gold army in Chenjiashima, Jiaoxi County, defeated the gold army, and killed five people including Yan Zhengjia.

古文：刘锜还镇江府。
现代文：刘倚回到镇江府。
English: Liu Yi returned to Zhenjiang Prefecture.

古文：赵撙复蔡州，斩其总管杨寓。
现代文：赵搏收复蔡州，斩杀金总管杨寓。
English: Zhao Bo regained Caizhou and killed the general manager of Jin, Yang Yue.

古文：分御营宿卫为五军。
现代文：分御营宿卫为五军。
English: The five guards of the detached imperial guard battalion.

古文：金人攻秦州，向起、吴挺击却之。
现代文：金军攻打秦州，向起、吴挺击退金军。
English: The Chinese army attacked Qinzhou, and Xiangqi and Wu Ting repulsed the Chinese army.

古文：丁卯，叶义问至镇江。
现代文：二十八日，叶义问到达镇江。
English: On the 28th, Ye Yiwu arrived in Zhenjiang.

古文：诏起江、浙、福建诸州强丁赴江上诸军。
现代文：下诏征发江、浙、福建各州强丁到长江上补充各军。
English: The following edict called for strong men from all the states of the Fujiang, Zhejiang and Fujian to go to the Yangtze River to supplement the armies.

古文：武钜复虢州卢氏县，任天锡复朱阳县。
现代文：武矩收复貌州卢氏县，任天锡收复朱阳县。
English: Wuchang recovered Lu County, Maozhou, and Ren Tianxi recovered Zhuyang County.

古文：戊辰，殿中侍御史杜莘老劾内侍张去为，帝不悦，去为致仕，出莘老知遂宁府。
现代文：二十九日，殿中侍御史杜苹老弹勃内侍张去为，高宗不高兴，张去为退休，杜苹老出知遂宁府。
English: On the 29th, the palace's chambermaid, Shi Du Ping, who had been playing for a long time, was replaced by the chambermaid Zhang, Gao Zong was unhappy, Zhang retired, and Du Ping was transferred to Suining.

古文：十一月己巳朔，邵宏渊遣统领崔皋及金人战于定山，败之。
现代文：十一月初一，邵宏渊派统领崔皋与金军战于定山，打败金军。
English: On the first day of November, Shao Hongyuan's faction, led by Cui Wei, fought against the Jin army in Jingshan and defeated the Jin army.

古文：任天锡复虢州，守将萧信遁去。
现代文：任天锡收复貌州，守将萧信逃跑。
English: Ren Tianxi recaptured Gaozhou, and guard general Xiao Xin fled.

古文：庚午，通州守臣崔邦弼弃城去。
现代文：初二，通州守臣崔邦弼弃城逃跑。
English: On the second day of the first month, the Tongzhou governor, Cui Bang, abandoned the city and fled.

古文：辛未，成闵引兵发应城县，援淮西。
现代文：初三，成阂率兵从应城县出发，救援淮西。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Cheng Ye and his soldiers set out from Yingcheng County to rescue Huaxi.

古文：遣权吏部侍郎汪应辰诣浙东措置海道。
现代文：派遣代理吏部侍郎汪应辰到浙东处理防守海道。
English: He dispatched Wang Yingchen, the deputy chief of the General Staff, to East Zhejiang to deal with the defense of the sea route.

古文：壬申，以张浚判建康府。
现代文：初四，任命张浚通判建康府。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Zhang Juntong was appointed to Jiankangfu.

古文：召王权赴行在，以李显忠代将。
现代文：召王权到行在，任命李显忠代替他统率军队。
English: He called the king to power and appointed Lee Hsien Loong to lead the army in his place.

古文：邵宏渊为池州都统制。
现代文：邵宏渊为池州都统制。
English: Shao Hongyuan is the leader of Chizhou.

古文：金人犯瓜州，镇江中军统制刘汜战败走，权都统制李横亦遁。
现代文：金军攻打瓜州，镇江中军统制刘祀战败退走，代理都统制李横也逃走。
English: The Golden Army attacked Guazhou, the Zhenjiang Central Army commanded by Liu Si was defeated and retreated, and the acting capital commander Li Yang also fled.

古文：金人铁骑奄至江上，统制魏俊、王方死之。
现代文：金军铁骑急驰江上，统制魏俊、王方战死。
English: The gold army rode on the river at high speed, and Wei Jun and Wang Fang died in the battle.

古文：叶义问惶怖欲退走，复趋建康。
现代文：叶义问惶恐害怕想退走，又赶到建康。
English: Ye Yiyi asked with trepidation, fearing that he wanted to retreat, and rushed to Jiankang.

古文：金人游骑至无为军，守臣韩髦弃城走。
现代文：金军游骑到无为军，守臣韩髦弃城逃走。
English: The gold army rode to the helpless army, and the guardian Han Xiang abandoned the city and fled.

古文：癸酉，淮宁府民陈亨祖执同知完颜耶鲁，以其城来归。
现代文：初五，淮宁府百姓陈亨祖俘虏同知府事完颜耶鲁，以府城来归降朝廷。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Chen Hengzu, a citizen of Huaining Prefecture, captured the governor of the same prefecture and returned to the imperial court.

古文：赵撙引兵去，蔡州复陷。
现代文：赵搏率兵退去，蔡州又失陷。
English: Zhao Bo and his soldiers retreated, and Caizhou fell again.

古文：甲戌，池州统制官崔定等复入无为军。
现代文：初六，池州统制官崔定等又进人无为军。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, Chishu control officer Cui Ding and others entered the army without doing anything.

古文：乙亥，金主亮临江筑坛，刑马祭天，期以翌日南渡。
现代文：初七，金主完颜亮在江边筑坛，杀马祭天，期望第二天能南渡长江。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the gold owner finished building the altar by the river, killed the horse and sacrificed to the heavens, expecting to be able to cross the Yangtze River the next day.

古文：丙子，虞允文督建康诸军统制官张振、王琪、时俊、戴皋等以舟师拒金主亮于东采石，战胜，却之。
现代文：初八，虞允文督促建康各军统制官张振、王琪、时俊、戴皋等率领水师在东采石抵抗完颜亮金军，取得胜利，击退金军。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Yu Yunwen urged Jiankang's military commanders Zhang Zhen, Wang Qi, Shi Jun, Dai Yao and other leading sailors to resist the Yan Liang's gold army in the East Quarry, achieve victory, and repel the gold army.

古文：崔定复巢县，任天锡复上津、商洛二县。
现代文：崔定收复巢县，任天锡收复上津、商洛二县。
English: Cui Ding recovered Jiao County, and Ren Tianxi recovered Shangjin and Shangluo County.

古文：丁丑，虞允文遣水军统制盛新以舟师击金人于杨林河口，又败之。
现代文：初九，虞允文派水军统制盛新率水师在杨林河口打击金军，又打败敌军。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Yu Yunwen sent Sheng Xin, commander of the naval forces, and his sailors to attack the Chinese army at the mouth of the Yanglin River, defeating the enemy army.

古文：金主亮焚其舟而去。
现代文：金主完颜亮焚船而退。
English: The owner of the money left the ship in a blaze of glory.

古文：戊寅，王彦遣将杨坚复栾川县。
现代文：初十，王彦派将领杨坚收复栗川县。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Wang Yan sent the general Yang Jian to recapture Kurikawa County.

古文：己卯，以汤思退为行宫留守。
现代文：十一日，任命汤思退为行宫留守。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Tang Siwei was appointed to be absent from the palace.

古文：虚恨蛮犯嘉州笼蓬堡，官军大败，副将郑祥等为所杀。
现代文：虚恨蛮攻打嘉州笼蓬堡，官军大败，副将郑样等被杀。
English: He brutally attacked Jiazhou Caged Fort, the official army was defeated, and Vice-General Zheng Samrong and others were killed.

古文：庚辰，金主亮引军趋淮东。
现代文：十二日，金主完颜亮率军到淮东。
English: On the 12th, Emperor Jin led his army to Huadong.

古文：癸未，吴璘病，自仙人原还兴州，留姚仲节制军事，虞允文自采石率李捧一军及戈船如镇江备敌。
现代文：十五日，吴瞒患病，从仙人原退到兴州，留下姚仲调遣管束军事。虞允文从采石率领李捧一军及战船到镇江防备金军。
English: On the 15th, Wu Zhen fell ill and retreated from Xianrenyuan to Xingzhou, leaving Yao Zhong to dispatch the military. Yu Yunwen led Li Tuo's army and warships from quarrying to Zhenjiang to protect the gold army.

古文：甲申，赠姚兴、魏俊、王方官。
现代文：十六日，赠给姚兴、魏俊、王方官。
English: On the 16th, it was presented to Yao Xing, Wei Jun and Wang Fang.

古文：金主亮至扬州。
现代文：金主完颜亮到达扬州。
English: The benefactor arrived in Yangzhou with a clean slate.

古文：乙酉，贷刘汜死、英州编管。
现代文：十七日，免刘祀死罪，英州编管。
English: On the 17th, Liu Xi was pardoned from the death penalty, and Yingzhou was released.

古文：江州统制李贵、忠义首领孟俊复顺昌府，金州将邢进复华州。
现代文：江州统制李贵、忠义首领孟俊收复顺昌府，金州将领邢进收复华州。
English: Li Gui, the governor of Jiangzhou, and Meng Jun, the leader of the loyalists, recovered Shunchang Prefecture, and Jinzhou General Gong Jin recovered Huazhou.

古文：丙戌，赐战士帛，给其家薪炭。
现代文：十八日，赐给战士帛，供给其家庭柴炭。
English: On the 18th, soldiers were given straw to provide charcoal for their families.

古文：任天锡复陕州。
现代文：任天锡收复陕州。
English: Ren Tianxi recovered Shaanxi Province.

古文：丁亥，刘锜以疾罢，以御营宿卫中军统制刘锐权镇江都统制。
现代文：十九日，刘倚因病罢职，任命御营卫宿中军统制刘锐代理镇江都统制。
English: On the 19th, Liu Jie resigned due to illness, and appointed Liu Rui, the military commander of Oyingweiju, as the acting commander of Zhenjiang.

古文：成闵自京西还建康，遂如镇江。
现代文：成阂从京西回到建康。于是到镇江。
English: Chengyao returned to Jiankang from West Beijing and then went to Zhenjiang.

古文：戊子，吴璘复力疾上仙人原。
现代文：二十日，吴瞒又带病到仙人原。
English: On the 20th, Wu Zhen took ill again and went to Xianren Plain.

古文：己丑，王权贷死、琼州编管。
现代文：二十一日，王权免死，琼州编管。
English: On the twenty-first day, Wang Quan was spared from death, and Qiong Zhou was appointed governor.

古文：李宝泛海南归。
现代文：李宝渡海南归。
English: Li Bao returned to Hainan.

古文：金人复攻陕州，任天锡破走之。复犯襄阳，统制官李胜等拒却之，复通化军。
现代文：金军又攻打陕州，任天锡打败金军，金军退走，又攻打襄阳，统制官李胜等抵抗打退金军，收复通化军。
English: The Chinese army attacked Shaanxi again, Ren Tianxi defeated the Chinese army, the Chinese army retreated, attacked Xiangyang again, and the commanding officer Li Sheng and others resisted to beat back the Chinese army and recover the Chinese army.

古文：王彦遣将杨坚、党清至西京长水县及金人战，败之。
现代文：王彦派将领杨坚、党清到西京长水县与金军交战，打败金军。
English: Wang Yan sent generals Yang Jian and Dang Qing to West Beijing's Changshui County to fight against the Chinese army and defeat it.

古文：庚寅，复长水县。
现代文：二十二日，收复长水县。
English: On the 22nd, Changshui County was recovered.

古文：癸巳，以成闵为镇江都统制、淮东制置使、京东西路河北东路淮北泗宿州招讨使，李显忠为淮西制置使、京畿河北西路淮北寿亳州招讨使，吴拱为湖北京西制置使、京西北路招讨使。
现代文：二十五日，任命成阂为镇江都统制、淮东制置使、京东西路河北东路淮北泅宿州招讨使，李显忠为淮西制置使、京瓷河北西路淮北寿毫州招讨使，吴拱为湖北京西制置使、京西北路招讨使。
English: On the 25th, Cheng Jun was appointed as the Zhenjiang Metropolitan Administration, the Huai Dong Administration, the Beijing East-West Road, the East Hebei Road, the Huai Bei and Suzhou Administration, Li Xianzhong was appointed as the Huai West Administration, the Kyocera Hebei West Road, the Huai Bei and Shumizhou Administration, Wu Gong was appointed as the Hubei Beijing West Administration, and the Beijing Northwest Road Administration.

古文：甲午，武钜遣乡兵总辖杜隐等复嵩州。
现代文：二十六日，武矩派遣乡兵总辖杜隐等收复篙州。
English: On the 26th, Wu Rong sent Du Ying and other soldiers to recapture Zhangzhou.

古文：乙未，金人陷泰州。
现代文：二十七日，金军攻陷泰州。
English: On the 27th, the Chinese army captured Taizhou.

古文：是日，金人弑其主亮于扬州龟山寺。
现代文：这天，金军在扬州龟山寺杀死金主完颜亮。
English: On this day, the gold army killed the gold master in Yangzhou Kameyama Temple.

古文：戊戌，金都督府遣人持檄诣镇江军中议和。
现代文：三十日，金都督府派人带着文书到镇江军中议和。
English: On the 30th, the Kimdu-guk-fu sent someone with a document to the Zhenjiang army to discuss peace.

古文：十二月己亥朔，赵撙夜袭蔡州，复入其城。
现代文：十二月初一，赵搏夜袭蔡州，又进人州城。
English: On the first day of December, Zhao Bo attacked Caizhou at night and entered Renzhou City.

古文：王彦遣兵复福昌县。
现代文：王彦派兵收复福昌县。
English: Wang Yan sent troops to recover Fuchang County.

古文：庚子，杨存中及虞允文渡江至瓜州察金兵。
现代文：初二，杨存中和虞允文渡江到瓜州侦察金兵动静。
English: On the second day of junior high school, Yang Cunzhong and Yu Yunwen crossed the river to Guazhou to spy on the movement of soldiers.

古文：金人犯汉南之茨湖，鄂州军士史俊登其舟，获一将，诸军继进，遂击却之。
现代文：金军攻打汉南的茨湖，鄂州军士史俊登上敌船，俘获一将，各军随后跟进，于是击退金军。
English: The Chinese army attacked Lake Tsui in Hannan. Ezhou sergeant Shijun boarded the enemy ship and captured a general. All the armies then followed suit, thus repelling the Chinese army.

古文：杨椿夜攻金人，杀其帅高定山，复庐州。
现代文：杨春夜攻金军，杀死金军统帅高定山，收复庐州。
English: Yang Chun attacked the Chinese army at night, killed the commander of the Chinese army, Gao Dingshan, and recovered Zhangzhou.

古文：辛丑，以李宝为靖海军节度使、浙西通泰海州沿海制置使、京东东路招讨使。
现代文：初三，任命李宝为靖海军节度使、浙西通泰海州沿海制置使、京东路招讨使。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Li Bao was appointed as the envoy of the Jing Navy Festival, the envoy of the Zhejiang West Tongtai Haizhou Coastal Construction, and the envoy of the Beijing East Road Invitation.

古文：金统军刘萼闻茨湖败，亦退师。
现代文：金军统军刘尊听说茨湖失败，也退军。
English: When Liu Zun, the leader of the unified army of the Golden Army, heard of the defeat at Lake Tsui, he also withdrew.

古文：王彦遣将阎巳复渑池县。
现代文：王彦派将领阎卫收复绳池县。
English: Wang Yan sent his general, Yan Wei, to recover Zheuchi County.

古文：壬寅，天有白气。
现代文：初四，天空有白气。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, the sky is white.

古文：以赵密为行宫在城都总管。
现代文：任命赵密为行宫在城都总管。
English: Zhao Mi was appointed as the general manager of the palace in the city.

古文：成闵渡江之扬州。
现代文：成阂渡江到扬州。
English: Chengyu River Crossing to Yangzhou.

古文：癸卯，命诸路招讨司率兵进讨，互相应援，沿江诸大帅条陈恢复事宜。
现代文：初五，命令各路招讨使率军进讨，互相应援；沿江各大帅陈述恢复故土事项。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, he ordered all the provinces to invite and lead the army to advance and support each other; the major generals along the river made a statement on the restoration of the motherland.

古文：复岳州旧名。
现代文：恢复岳州旧名。
English: The old name of Yuezhou was restored.

古文：右军统领沙世坚入泰州。
现代文：右军统领沙世坚进人泰州。
English: The right-wing army led by Sha Shijian entered Ren Taizhou.

古文：甲辰，虞允文自镇江入见。
现代文：初六，虞允文从镇江前往朝见高宗。
English: In his sixth year of junior high school, Yu Yunwen went from Zhenjiang to see Gao Zong.

古文：均州统领昝朝复邓州。
现代文：均州统领咎朝收复邓州。
English: The commander-in-chief of Gyeongju blames the North for the recovery of Dangzhou.

古文：乙巳，张浚至慈湖，命李显忠引兵渡江。
现代文：初七，张浚到达慈湖，命令李显忠率兵渡江。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Zhang Jun arrived at Cixi Lake and ordered Li Xianzhong to cross the river with his soldiers.

古文：丙午，淮东统制王选复楚州。
现代文：初八，淮东统制王选收复楚州。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, Huai Dong Dynasties Wang Xuan recovered Chuzhou.

古文：丁未，杜隐等入河南府。
现代文：初九，杜隐等进人河南府。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, Du Ying and others entered Henan Prefecture.

古文：吴拱遣统制牛宏入汝州。
现代文：吴拱派统领牛宏进人汝州。
English: Wu Gong faction led by Niu Hong marched into Ruzhou.

古文：戊申，帝发临安，建王从行。
现代文：初十，高宗从临安出发，建王跟随一起行动。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Gaozong set out from Lin'an, and Jianwang followed along.

古文：庚戌，金人渡淮北去。
现代文：十二日，金军渡淮北退。
English: On the 12th, the Chinese army withdrew from Huaibei.

古文：壬子，次平江。
现代文：十四日，高宗到达平江。
English: On the 14th, Gaozong arrived in Pingjiang.

古文：罢督视府。
现代文：罢除督视府。
English: Dismiss the inspector general.

古文：虞允文还至镇江。
现代文：虞允文退到镇江。
English: Yu Yunwen retreated to Zhenjiang.

古文：癸丑，淮东统制刘锐、陈敏引兵入泗州。
现代文：十五日，淮东统制刘锐、陈敏率兵进人泅州。
English: On the 15th, Liu Rui and Chen Min, the governors of Huaidong, led their troops into Ganzhou.

古文：鄂州统制杨钦以舟师追败金人于洪泽镇。
现代文：鄂州统制杨钦率水师追到洪泽镇，打败金军。
English: Yang Qin, the governor of Ezhou, led the sailors to chase them to Hongze Town and defeat the Chinese army.

古文：乙卯，江北金兵尽去，李显忠复入和州。
现代文：十七日，江北金军全部退走，李显忠又进人和州。
English: On the 17th, all the gold troops in the northern part of the Yangtze River retreated, and Li Hsien Chung again marched into Henan and Shuzhou.

古文：吴璘遣将复水洛城。
现代文：吴瞒派将领收复水洛城。
English: Wu Zhe sent generals to recapture Fushui Luo City.

古文：金人复破汝州，牛宏败走。
现代文：金军又攻破汝州，牛宏败退。
English: The Chinese army defeated Ruzhou again, and Niu Hong retreated in defeat.

古文：戊午，次镇江府。
现代文：二十日，高宗留驻镇江府。
English: On the 20th, Gaozong stayed in Zhenjiang.

古文：庚申，吴璘遣将拔金人治平砦。
现代文：二十二日，吴瞒派将领攻取金军占领的治平寨。
English: On the 22nd, Wu Zhen sent generals to attack the Jiping Village occupied by the Chinese army.

古文：壬戌，曲赦新复州军。
现代文：二十四日，因特殊情况赦免新近收复的州军。
English: On the 24th, due to special circumstances, the newly recovered state troops were pardoned.

古文：甲子，降淮南、京西、湖北杂犯死罪以下囚。
现代文：二十六日，减轻淮南、京西、湖北杂犯死罪以下囚犯罪刑。
English: On the 26th, Huainan, West Beijing, and Hubei commuted the sentences of death row prisoners.

古文：赏采石功，进统制张振、时俊等官。
现代文：赏赐采石之战战功，统制张振、时俊等人升官。
English: He rewarded the war service of quarrying, and promoted Zhang Zhen, Shi Jun and others to higher posts.

古文：金颍、寿二州巡检高显以寿春府来降。
现代文：金朝颖、寿二州巡检高显率寿春府来归降。
English: Jin Chaoying and Shou Erzhou's inspection showed a high probability of Shouchunfu's return.

古文：丁卯，命诸道籍乡兵。
现代文：二十九日，命各道登记乡兵。
English: On the 29th, the order was given to all provinces to register their soldiers.

古文：初，王友直、王任聚兵，尝命友直为天雄军节度使，任为天平军节度使。
现代文：起初，王友值、王任聚集士兵，曾命王友值为天雄军节度使，王任为天平军节度使。
English: At the beginning, Wang Youzhen and Wang Ren gathered soldiers. Wang Youzhen was appointed as the commander of the Tianxiong Army and Wang Ren as the commander of the Tianping Army.

古文：金主褒既立，下令散其众，友直等自寿春来归。
现代文：金主娜即位后，下令解散他们的部众，王友值等从寿春来归降。
English: After Empress Dowager Cixi ascended to the throne, she ordered the dismissal of their subordinates, and Wang Youwen and others were forced to abdicate by Emperor Shuchun.

古文：是月，金主知亮已死，遂趋燕京。
现代文：这个月，金主得知完颜亮已经去世，于是前往燕京。
English: This month, the donor learned that Guan Yanliang had passed away, so he went to Yanjing.

古文：三十二年春正月戊辰朔，日有食之。帝在镇江。
现代文：绍兴三十二年春正月初一，日食。高宗在镇江。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the first month of the 32nd year of Shaoxing's Spring Festival. Gaozong was in Zhenjiang.

古文：己巳，金人犯寿春府，忠义将刘泰战死，金兵引去。
现代文：初二，金军攻打寿春府，忠义将刘泰战死，金兵退去。
English: On the second day of the first month, the Golden Army attacked Shuchunfu. Liu Tai, the loyal general, was killed, and the Golden Army retreated.

古文：庚午，发镇江府。
现代文：初三，高宗从镇江府出发。
English: On the third day of the junior year, Gaozong set out from Zhenjiang Prefecture.

古文：壬申，至建康府，张浚入见。
现代文：初五，高宗到建康府，张浚朝见高宗。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Gao Zong went to Jiankangfu, and Zhang Jun went to see Gao Zong.

古文：丙子，祧翼祖主于夹室。己卯，李显忠引兵还建康。
现代文：初九，在夹室祭祀翼祖。十二日，李显忠率兵退还建康。
English: On the 9th day of the first lunar month, the Winged Ancestors were worshipped in the antechamber. On the 12th day, Li Hsien Chung and his soldiers returned to Jiankang.

古文：庚辰，罢郡守年七十者。
现代文：十三日，罢除年满七十岁的郡守。
English: On the 13th, the 70-year-old county governor was dismissed.

古文：壬午，金人复犯蔡州，赵撙力战却之。
现代文：十五日，金军又攻打蔡州，赵搏奋力抵抗，打退金军。
English: On the 15th, the Chinese army attacked Caizhou again, and Zhao fought hard to resist and beat back the Chinese army.

古文：乙酉，权知东平府耿京遣其将贾瑞、掌书记辛弃疾来奏事。
现代文：十八日，代理东平知府耿京派将领贾瑞、掌书记辛弃疾来奏事。
English: On the 18th, Geng Jing, the acting governor of Dongping Prefecture, sent the general Jia Rui and the chief secretary Xin Qiu Ji to report the matter.

古文：己丑，金主遣其臣高忠建等来告嗣位。
现代文：二十二日，金主派大臣高忠建等人来报告即皇帝位的消息。
English: On the 22nd, the emperor sent Minister Gao Zhongjian and others to report the news of the emperor's enthronement.

古文：以耿京为天平军节度使、知东平府。
现代文：任命耿京为天平军节度使、东平知府。
English: Geng Jing was appointed as the military governor of the Tianping Army and the leader of the Dongping Prefecture.

古文：庚寅，诏新复州县搜访仗节死义之士。
现代文：二十三日，下诏新近收复的州县搜罗寻访仗节死义的勇士。
English: On the 23rd, the newly-recovered prefectures and counties were searched to find the warriors who died bravely in the battle.

古文：丙申，以杨存中为江、淮、荆、襄路宣抚使，虞允文副之。
现代文：二十九日，任命杨存中为江、淮、荆、襄路宣抚使，虞允文为副使。
English: On the 29th, Yang Cunzhong was appointed as the envoy of Jiang, Huai, Jing and Xianglu, and Yu Yunwen was appointed as the deputy envoy.

古文：给事中金安节、中书舍人刘珙缴奏再上，乃改命存中措置两淮。
现代文：给事中金安节、中书舍人刘琪两次上奏请求收回成命，于是才改命杨存中措置两淮。
English: During the Jinan Festival, Liu Qi, a Chinese calligrapher, twice petitioned to withdraw his life, so he changed his name to Yang Cunzhong.

古文：二月戊戌朔，罢借两浙、江、淮坊场净利钱。
现代文：二月初一，罢除调借两浙、江、淮坊场净利钱。
English: On the first day of February, the net profit of the two Zhejiang, Jiangsu and Huai Fang farms was cancelled.

古文：以虞允文为兵部尚书、川陕宣谕使，措置招军市马及与吴璘议事。
现代文：任命虞允文为兵部尚书、川陕宣谕使，措置招军买马以及与吴瞒商议军事。
English: He appointed Yu Yunwen as the military secretary of the Ministry of Military Affairs and the envoy of the Sichuan-Shaanxi Proclamation, and took measures to recruit troops and negotiate with Wu Zhe about military affairs.

古文：庚子，兴州统领惠逢等复河州。
现代文：初三，兴州统领惠逢等收复河州。
English: On the third day of the first month, the leader of Xingzhou, Huifang, recovered Hezhou.

古文：振两淮饥民。
现代文：贩济两淮饥民。
English: They are helping the starving people.

古文：壬寅，金人犯汝州，守将王宣逆战，败之。
现代文：初五，金军攻打汝州，守将王宣奋力抵抗，打败金军。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the Chinese army attacked Ruzhou, and the guard Wang Xuan fought hard to resist and defeat the Chinese army.

古文：癸卯，帝发建康。
现代文：初六，高宗从建康府出发。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, Gaozong set out from Jiankangfu.

古文：惠逢复积石军，又克来羌城。
现代文：惠逢收复积石军，又攻克来羌城。
English: Huifang recovered the Jieshi Army and conquered Laiwu City.

古文：丁未，刘锜薨。
现代文：初十，刘倚逝世。
English: At the age of ten, Liu Jie passed away.

古文：己酉，王宣及金人再战于汝州。
现代文：十二日，王宣再次与金军在汝州交战。
English: On the 12th, Wang Xuan once again went to war with the Chinese army in Ruzhou.

古文：庚戌，金人全师来攻，宣败绩，弃去。
现代文：十三日，金军发动所有军队来进攻，王宣失败弃城退走。
English: On the 13th, the Golden Army launched all the troops to attack, and Wang Xuan abandoned the city and retreated.

古文：辛亥，金人复犯顺昌府，孟新拒却之，寻亦弃去。
现代文：十四日，金军又攻打顺昌府，孟新抵抗，打退金军，不久也放弃了。
English: On the 14th, the Chinese army attacked Shunchang Prefecture again. Meng Xin resisted and beat back the Chinese army, but soon gave up.

古文：壬子，赏蔡州功，赵撙等进官有差。
现代文：十五日，赏赐蔡州战功，赵搏等升官不等。
English: On the 15th, Cai Zhou was awarded for his war service, and Zhao Bo and others were promoted.

古文：乙卯，至临安府。
现代文：十八日，高宗到临安府。
English: On the 18th, Gao Zong went to Lin'an.

古文：兴元都统制姚仲攻巩州不下，退守甘谷城，遂引兵围德顺军。
现代文：兴元都统制姚仲攻巩州不下，退守甘谷城，于是率军围攻德顺军。
English: The governor of Xingyuan, Yao Zhong, was unable to attack Gongzhou and retreated to Gan Gu City, whereupon he led his army to besiege the Deshun army.

古文：丙辰，金人犯蔡州。赵撙击却之。
现代文：十九日，金军攻打蔡州，赵搏击退金军。
English: On the 19th, the Chinese army attacked Caizhou, and Zhao Bei repulsed the Chinese army.

古文：戊午，复引兵来攻，撙又败之，金兵遁去。
现代文：二十一日，金军又来进攻，赵搏又击败金军，金兵逃走。
English: On the twenty-first day, the Chinese army attacked again, Zhao Bo defeated the Chinese army again, and the Chinese soldiers fled.

古文：王彦遣将马贵断河中南桥，金兵来攻，贵战败之。
现代文：王彦派将领马贵拆断河中南桥，金兵来进攻，马贵击败金军。
English: Wang Yan sent the general Ma Gui to break the bridge in the south of the river, the gold soldiers attacked, and Ma Gui defeated the gold army.

古文：壬戌，诏军士战死者禄其家一年，伤重而死于营者半之。
现代文：二十五日，下诏军士战死者给其家一年的棒禄，重伤而死于军营的减半。
English: On the 25th day of the following month, the soldier who died in battle gave his family a year's bonus, and the one who was seriously injured and died in the camp was halved.

古文：乙丑，王宣及右军副将汲靖败金人于蔡州确山县。
现代文：二十八日，王宣和右军副将汲靖在蔡州确山县打败金军。
English: On the 28th, Wang Xuan and the vice-commander of the right army, Qiu Jing, defeated the Jin army in Jishan County, Caizhou.

古文：赵撙弃蔡州。
现代文：赵搏放弃蔡州。
English: Zhao Bo abandoned Caizhou.

古文：丙寅，金人复取之。
现代文：二十九日，金军又攻取蔡州。
English: On the 29th, the Chinese army captured Caizhou again.

古文：姚仲遣副将赵铨攻下镇戎军，金同知渭州秦弼及其子嵩来归。
现代文：姚仲派副将赵锉攻下镇戎军，金朝同知渭州秦弼及其儿子秦篙来归降。
English: Yao Zhong sent Vice-General Zhao Jun to capture the town's army, and Qin Jun and his son Qin Jun, who were also from the Kim dynasty, came to surrender.

古文：王彦遣兵救陕州，遇金人于虢州东，败之，金兵引去。
现代文：王彦派兵救援陕州，在貌州东与金军相遇，打败金军，金兵退去。
English: Wang Yan sent troops to rescue Shaanxi, met the Chinese army in the east of Maozhou, defeated the Chinese army, and the Chinese soldiers retreated.

古文：丁卯，吴珙遣将复永安军、永宁、福昌、长水三县。
现代文：三十日，吴琪派将领收复永安军和永宁、福昌、长水三县。
English: On the 30th, Wu Qi sent generals to recover the Yongan Army and Yongning, Fuchang and Changshui counties.

古文：闰月癸酉，金人破河州，屠其城。
现代文：闰二月初六，金军攻破河州，屠州城。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd lunar month, the Golden Army broke through Hezhou and entered the city of Tuozhou.

古文：乙亥，命杨存中、李显忠固守新复州军，量度进讨。
现代文：初八，命令杨存中、李显忠固守新收复的州军，看情况进讨。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, he ordered Yang Cunzhong and Li Xianzhong to hold fast to the newly recovered state army and discuss the situation.

古文：丙子，姚仲遣将复原州。
现代文：初九，姚仲派将领收复原州。
English: At the beginning of the ninth month, Yao Zhong sent a general to recover the original state.

古文：戊寅，祔钦宗主于太庙。癸未，振淮南归正人。
现代文：十一日，在太庙附祭钦宗神主。十六日，贩济淮南归正人。
English: On the 11th day, a memorial service was held for the god of the Qin Dynasty in the Great Temple. On the 16th day, the vendor from Huainan returned to his rightful place.

古文：金人犯虢州。
现代文：金军攻打貌州。
English: The Chinese army attacked Maozhou.

古文：吴璘遣杨从仪等攻拔大散关，分兵据和尚原，金人走宝鸡。
现代文：吴瞒派杨从仪等人攻取大散关，分兵占据和尚原，金军退走宝鸡。
English: Wu Zhe sent Yang Congyi and others to capture Dasankuan, the detachment occupied Monzhangyuan, and the Golden Army retreated to Baoji.

古文：丙戌，给张浚钱十九万缗，造沿江诸军战舰。
现代文：十九日，拨给张浚钱十九万络制造沿江各军战船。
English: On the 19th, Zhang Junqian was allocated 190,000 yuan to manufacture warships for the armies along the river.

古文：庚寅，王刚破金人于海州。辛卯，杨椿罢。
现代文：二十三日，王刚在海州攻破金军。二十四日，杨椿被罢。
English: On the 23rd, Wang Gang defeated the Golden Army in Haizhou. On the 24th, Yang Tsubaki was ousted.

古文：壬辰，姚仲攻德顺军，败金人于瓦亭砦、新店。
现代文：二十五日，姚仲进攻德顺军，在瓦亭寨、新店打败金军。
English: On the 25th, Yao Zhong attacked the Deshun army and defeated the Jin army in Wateingzhai and Xindian.

古文：是月，张安国等攻杀耿京，李宝将王世隆攻破安国，执之以献。
现代文：这个月，张安国等人攻杀耿京，李宝部将王世隆攻破张安国，俘虏他献给朝廷。
English: This month, Zhang An Guo and others attacked and killed Geng Jing, and Li Baobu defeated Wang Shilong in Zhang An Guo and captured him and presented him to the imperial court.

古文：三月壬寅，更定金使入境接伴、馆伴旧仪。
现代文：三月初六，改定原来金国使臣人境接伴、馆伴礼仪。
English: On the 6th day of the 3rd month, the original etiquette for Chinese envoys to be received in foreign countries and to be received in foreign embassies was revised.

古文：癸卯，成闵遣统制杜彦救淮宁，击败金人于项城县。
现代文：初七，成阂派统制杜彦救援淮宁，在项城县打败金军。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Chengyu sent Duyan to rescue Huaining and defeat the Jin army in Xiangcheng County.

古文：甲辰，罢扈从官吏赏典。
现代文：初八，罢除启从官吏赏典。
English: On the 8th day of the 1st month of the year, the award ceremony for newly appointed officials was held.

古文：乙巳，录商、虢之功，加吴璘少傅、王彦为保平军节度使。
现代文：初九，收集商、貌之战战功，加给吴瞒少傅衔，王彦为保平军节度使。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, the war exploits of the collector and Maozhi were given to Wu Zhenshao Fu, and Wang Yan was the festival envoy of the Baoping Army.

古文：戊申，吴璘复德顺军，又遣将严忠取环州。
现代文：十二日，吴瞒收复德顺军，又派将领严忠攻取环州。
English: On the 12th, Wu Zhe recovered the Deshun army and sent the general Yan Zhong to capture Huanzhou.

古文：辛亥，命兵部侍郎陈俊卿、工部侍郎许尹经画两淮堡砦屯田。
现代文：十五日，命令兵部侍郎陈俊卿、工部侍郎许尹经营策划两淮堡寨屯田。
English: On the 15th, he ordered Chen Junqing, the secretary of the Ministry of Military Affairs, and Xu Yin, the secretary of the Ministry of Industry, to manage and plan the two Huai Fort Zhai townships.

古文：癸丑，金人围淮宁府，守臣陈亨祖死之。
现代文：十七日，金军围攻淮宁府，守臣陈亨祖战死。
English: On the 17th, the Chinese army besieged Huaining Prefecture, and the retainer Chen Hengzu died in the battle.

古文：甲寅，吴璘自德顺军复还河池。
现代文：十八日，吴瞒从德顺军又退还河池。
English: On the 18th, Wu Zhe returned Hechi from the Deshun army.

古文：金人犯镇戎军。
现代文：金军攻打镇戎军。
English: The gold army attacked the town army.

古文：丁巳，遣洪迈等贺金主即位。
现代文：二十一日，派遣洪迈等人祝贺金主即位。
English: On the 21st, Hongmai and others were dispatched to congratulate Kim on his accession to the throne.

古文：戊午，忠义军统制、知兰州王宏拔会州。
现代文：二十二日，忠义军统制、兰州知州王宏攻取会州。
English: On the 22nd, Wang Hong of Lanzhou Chizhou captured Huizhou from the loyalist army.

古文：金人陷淮宁府，统领戴规战死。
现代文：金军攻陷淮宁府，统领戴规战死。
English: The Chinese army captured Huaining Prefecture, and the commander, Dai Jian, died in the battle.

古文：成闵归自淮东。
现代文：成阂从淮东回来。
English: Cheng Yao returns from Huadong.

古文：辛酉，金人攻原州。
现代文：二十五日，金军攻打原州。
English: On the 25th, the Chinese army attacked Wonju.

古文：丙寅，诏举贤良。
现代文：三十日，下诏推举贤良。
English: On the 30th, the next imperial edict was issued to promote the virtuous.

古文：夏四月丁卯朔，姚仲遣兵救原州。
现代文：夏四月初一，姚仲派兵救援原州。
English: On the first day of April in summer, Yao Zhong sent soldiers to rescue Wonju.

古文：己巳，使侍从、台谏条上防秋足食足民策。
现代文：初三，命令侍从、台谏官陈述防备金军秋季发动的进攻以及足食足民的对策。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, he ordered his attendants and the eunuchs to report on the prevention of the attack launched by the Golden Army in the autumn and the countermeasures for the foot-to-foot people.

古文：遣左武大夫都飞虎结约河东。
现代文：派左武大夫都飞虎前往河东连结义兵。
English: Dr. Zuo Wu sent the Flying Tigers to the east of the river to link up with the volunteers.

古文：壬申，赏御营宿卫将士四万余人进官有差。
现代文：初六，赏赐御营宿卫将士四万多人，升官不等。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, more than 40,000 Oyake-juku guardsmen were rewarded, with various promotions.

古文：癸酉，蠲淮东残破州军上供银绢、米麦及经、总制钱一年。
现代文：初七，免除淮东残破州军上供银绢、米麦及经、总制钱一年。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the remnants of Huaidong were exempted from the state military supply of silver ingots, rice and wheat, and the total production of money for one year.

古文：蒙城县民倪震率丁口数千来归。
现代文：蒙城县百姓倪震率丁口数千人来归降朝廷。
English: Ni Zhen, a commoner from Mengcheng County, led thousands of people from Dingkou to surrender to the imperial court.

古文：甲戌，募民耕淮东荒田，蠲其徭役及租税七年。
现代文：初八，招募百姓耕种淮东荒田，免除摇役及租税七年。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the people were recruited to cultivate the wasteland of Huaidong, and they were exempted from labor service and taxes for seven years.

古文：戊寅，以御史中丞汪澈参知政事。
现代文：十二日，任命御史中承汪澈为参知政事。
English: On the 12th, Wang Chieh was appointed as a member of the Council of State.

古文：金人围海州。
现代文：金军围攻海州。
English: The Chinese army besieged Haeju.

古文：戊子，洪迈等辞行，报聘书用敌国礼。
现代文：二十二日，洪迈等人辞行，报聘书用敌国礼。
English: On the 22nd, Hongmai and others resigned, and the letter of application used the enemy's national rite.

古文：是月，大雨，淮水暴溢数百里，漂没庐舍，人畜死者甚众。
现代文：这个月，降大雨，淮水溢出河道数百里，淹没庐舍，人畜淹死者很多很多。
English: This month, heavy rain fell, and floodwaters overflowed hundreds of miles of river channels, flooding homes and drowning many people and animals.

古文：五月戊戌，吴璘自河池如凤翔巡边，姚仲遣兵救原州，数败金人。
现代文：五月初二，吴瞒从河池到凤翔巡视边防，姚仲派兵救援原州，多次打败金军。
English: On the second day of May, Wu Zhen patrolled the border from Hechi to Fengxiang. Yao Zhong sent soldiers to rescue Yuanzhou and repeatedly defeated the Chinese army.

古文：庚子，复置提举秦州买马监，命四川总领官兼权其职。
现代文：初四，重新设置提举秦州买马监，命令四川总领官兼代其职。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, it was re-set to promote the Qinzhou horse-buying supervisor, and ordered the Sichuan general leader to also take his place.

古文：壬寅，姚仲及金人战于原州北岭，败绩。
现代文：初六，姚仲在原州北岭与金军交战，失败。
English: On his sixth day of junior high school, Yao Zhong fought against the Chinese army in Beiling, Yuanzhou, and was defeated.

古文：戊申，复以杨存中为醴泉观使，奉朝请。
现代文：十二日，又以杨存中为醛泉观使，逢一日、五日朝见皇上。
English: On the twelfth day, Yang Cunzhong was appointed as the inspector of the aldehyde spring, and he came to see the emperor every morning.

古文：罢御营宿卫司。
现代文：罢除御营卫司。
English: Removal of Oyake-Miyasaka.

古文：辛亥，镇江都统制张子盖救海州，遇金人于石湫堰，大败之，金人解去。
现代文：十五日，镇江都统制张子盖救援海州，在石揪堰与金军相遇，大败金军，金军撤退。
English: On the 15th, Zhang Ziguai, the governor of Zhenjiang, came to the rescue of Haizhou. He met the gold army at Shijiazhuang Weir, defeated the gold army, and the gold army retreated.

古文：甲寅，命张浚专一措置两淮事务兼节制淮东西、沿江州郡军马。
现代文：十八日，命令张浚专门处理两淮事务兼调遣管束淮东西、沿江州郡军马。
English: On the 18th, Zhang Jun was ordered to deal specifically with the affairs of the two Huai and dispatch troops to the east and west of the Huai and the military horses along Jiangzhou County.

古文：乙卯，知顺昌军孟昭率部曲来归。
现代文：十九日，顺昌知军孟昭率部众来归降。
English: On the 19th, Meng Zhao led the Shunchang army to surrender.

古文：己未，吴璘遣将复熙州。
现代文：二十三日，吴瞒派将领收复熙州。
English: On the 23rd, Wu Zhen sent generals to recapture Fuxi Province.

古文：壬戌，禁诸军互招逃亡。
现代文：二十六日，严禁各军互相招纳逃亡。
English: On the 26th, it was strictly forbidden for armies to recruit fugitives from each other.

古文：加郑藻太尉。
现代文：加给郑藻太尉衔。
English: Zheng Mousao was also given the rank of lieutenant.

古文：振东北流民。
现代文：贩济东北流民。
English: He sold rice to the Northeastern refugees.

古文：命张浚置御前万弩营，募淮民为之。
现代文：命令张浚设立御前万弩营，招募淮民充任士卒。
English: He ordered Zhang Jun to set up the Guzheng Wanyuan Camp and recruit Huai Minzheng soldiers.

古文：甲子，诏立建王玮为皇太子，更名昚。
现代文：二十八日，下诏立建王赵玮为皇太子，更改名字为赵砚。
English: On the 28th, King Jianwang Zhao Jun was made crown prince and his name was changed to Zhao Jun.

古文：加成闵太尉、主管殿前司，李显忠为太尉、主管马军司。
现代文：加给成阂太尉衔，主管殿前司；李显忠为太尉，主管马军司。
English: Cheng Rong was promoted to the rank of First Lieutenant, in charge of the front office of the palace; Li Hsien Chung was promoted to the rank of Second Lieutenant, in charge of the front office of the horse.

古文：籍诸州归正人，愿为农者给官田，复租十年；愿为兵者赴军中。
现代文：登记各州归正人，愿意从事农业生产的授给官田，免租十年；愿意当兵的前往军中。
English: Those who register as Converts in each state and are willing to engage in agricultural production will be granted government-owned farmland and will be exempt from rent for ten years; those who are willing to be soldiers will go to the army.

古文：六月丙寅朔，吴璘次大幽岭，檄召姚仲至军前，下河池狱，命夔路安抚使李师颜代将其兵。
现代文：六月初一，吴瞒驻扎大幽岭，发布文书召姚仲到军前，下河池狱，命令夔路安抚使李师颜代为率领他的部队。
English: On the first day of June, Wu Zhen stationed in Dayuling, issued a document to summon Yao Zhong to the front of the army, went down to the pond prison, and ordered the pacification of the road to make Li Shiyan lead his troops.

古文：戊辰，名新宫曰德寿。
现代文：初三，称新宫为德寿宫。
English: In the third year of junior high school, the new palace was called the De Shou Palace.

古文：庚午，以吴珙主管步军司。
现代文：初五，任命吴拱主管步军司。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Wu Gong was appointed as the head of the Department of Foot Troops.

古文：罢三招讨司。
现代文：罢除三个招讨司。
English: Removal of three solicitor generals.

古文：甲戌，加赠兄子为太师、中书令，追封秀王，谥安僖；妻张氏封王夫人。
现代文：初九，加赠哥哥赵子翱为太师、中书令，追封为秀王，溢号为安嘻；妻张氏封为王夫人。
English: On the first day of the ninth month of the year, his elder brother, Zhao Zixuan, was awarded the title of Grand Master and the title of General Secretary of the Communist Party of China. He was given the posthumous title of King Xiu and the posthumous title of Queen Anhui. His wife, Zhang, was given the title of Queen Consort.

古文：乙亥，朱倬罢。
现代文：初十，朱悼被罢。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Zhu Wei was ousted.

古文：丙子，诏皇太子即皇帝位。
现代文：十一日，下诏皇太子即皇帝位。
English: On the eleventh day, the crown prince became emperor.

古文：帝称太上皇帝，退处德寿宫，皇后称太上皇后。
现代文：高宗称为太上皇帝，退居德寿宫，皇后称为太上皇后。
English: Gao Zong was called the Emperor, retired to DeShou Palace, and the Empress was called the Empress Dowager.

古文：孝宗即位，累上尊号曰光尧寿圣宪天体道性仁诚德经武纬文绍业兴统明谟盛烈太上皇帝。
现代文：孝宗即位，累上尊号为光尧寿圣宪天体道性仁诚德经武纬文绍业兴统明漠盛烈太上皇帝。
English: When Emperor Xiaozong ascended to the throne, he was given the title of Guangxun Shou Shengxian Celestial Taoist Rensheng De Jing Wu Wei Wen Shao Ye Xing Tong Mingba Sheng Liang Dai Shang Emperor.

古文：淳熙十四年十月乙亥，崩于德寿殿，年八十一。
现代文：淳熙十四年十月初八，高宗在德寿殿逝世，终年八十一岁。
English: On the 8th day of the 10th month of the 14th year of Aung Hee, Gao Zong passed away at Deoksugung Palace at the age of 81.

古文：谥曰圣神武文宪孝皇帝，庙号高宗。
现代文：溢号为圣神武文宪孝皇帝，庙号为高宗。
English: His posthumous name was Emperor Shengwenwenxianxiao, and his temple name was Gaozong.

古文：十六年三月丙寅，欑于会稽之永思陵。
现代文：淳熙十六年三月丙寅日，葬在会稽的永思陵。
English: In March of the 16th year of Aung Hee, he was buried in the Yong Si Mausoleum.

古文：光宗绍熙二年，加谥受命中兴全功至德圣神武文昭仁宪孝皇帝。
现代文：光宗绍熙二年，加溢为受命中兴全功至德圣神武文昭仁宪孝皇帝。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Guangzong of the Shao Dynasty, Emperor Gaozong of the Shao Dynasty was ordered to make all-out efforts to revive Emperor Wu Zhaoren of the Shao Dynasty.

古文：赞曰：昔夏后氏传五世而后羿篡，少康复立而祀夏；周传九世而厉王死于彘，宣王复立而继周；汉传十有一世而新莽窃位，光武复立而兴汉；晋传四世有怀、愍之祸，元帝正位于建邺；唐传六世有安、史之难，肃宗即位于灵武；宋传九世而徽、钦陷于金，高宗缵图于南京：六君者，史皆称为中兴，而有异同焉。
现代文：评论说：从前夏后氏经历五世而后界篡夺王位，少康重新崛起而夏朝统治得以延续；周代经历九世而厉王在氦去世，宣王重新崛起而继承周代嗣统；汉代传了十一世后新莽篡夺了帝位，光武重新崛起后汉代又兴旺发达；西晋经历四世出现怀帝、憨帝被杀害的惨祸，直到晋元帝在建康建立东晋，才使晋的统治名正言顺；唐代经历六世出现安史之难，直到肃宗在灵武即位，才恢复了正常的统治秩序；宋代传历九主而徽宗、钦宗陷于金国之手，直到高宗在南京应天府即皇帝位，才又恢复了赵宋的统治地位。这六个君主，历史上都称为中兴之主，但互有差异。
English: He commented: From the former Xia and Wu dynasties, there were five generations and then the world usurped the throne, Shao Kang re-emerged and the reign of the Xia Dynasty continued; Zhou Dynasty experienced the ninth generation and Li Wang died in Helium, Xuan Wang re-emerged and inherited the Zhou dynasty succession; Han Dynasty passed down the eleventh generation after Xin Meng usurped the imperial throne, Guangwu re-emerged after the Han Dynasty and prospered; West Jin Dynasty experienced the fourth generation of the tragedy of the appearance of Emperor Huai and the killing of Emperor Xing, until Emperor Jin Yuan established East Jin in Jiankang,

古文：夏经羿、浞，周历共和，汉间新室、更始，晋、唐、宋则岁月相续者也。
现代文：夏代经历了后界、寒捉，才有少康中兴，周代经历了共和十多年，才有育王继统，汉代间隔了新室、更始，才有光武复兴，晋、唐、宋的中兴则年岁月日接续相承。
English: The Xia Dynasty went through the Later Period and the Cold War before the rise of the Shang Dynasty, the Zhou Dynasty went through the Republic for more than ten years before the succession of the Emperor, the Han Dynasty went through the period of the New Yuan Dynasty and the New Beginning before the revival of the Guangwu Dynasty, and the rise of the Jin Dynasty, the Tang Dynasty, and the Song Dynasty went on year after year.

古文：萧王、琅琊皆出疏属，少康、宣王、肃宗、高宗则父子相承者也。
现代文：萧王刘秀、琅监王司马睿都是皇室的远亲，少康、宣王、肃宗、高宗则是父子相承。
English: Xiao Wang, Liu Xiu, and Gong Supervisor Wang, Sima Rui were all distant relatives of the imperial family, while Shokang, Xuan Wang, Su Zong, and Gao Zong were inherited from father to son.

古文：至于克复旧物，则晋元与宋高宗视四君者有余责焉。
现代文：至于恢复皇族的统治，那么晋元帝、宋高宗比其他四君有更多的责任。
English: As for the restoration of imperial rule, Emperor Jin Yuan and Emperor Song Gaozong have more responsibilities than the other four princes.

古文：高宗恭俭仁厚，以之继体守文则有余，以之拨乱反正则非其才也。
现代文：高宗恭肃、节俭、仁爱、宽厚，让他继承国统守文而治是绰绰有余的，让他收拾残局而归于正常统治轨道，那不是他的才能所办得到的。
English: Gao Zong is respectful, frugal, benevolent, and generous. It is more than enough for him to inherit the country, abide by the Constitution, and govern the country. It is beyond his ability to clean up the mess and return to the normal governing track.

古文：况时危势逼，兵弱财匮，而事之难处又有甚于数君者乎？
现代文：况且时局危险，形势逼迫，兵力虚弱，财政医乏，国事的处理安排比起从前那几位君主更是难得多了。
English: Moreover, the situation is dangerous, the situation is pressing, the armed forces are weak, the finances are short, and the handling of state affairs is much more difficult than that of the previous monarchs.

古文：君子于此，盖亦有悯高宗之心，而重伤其所遭之不幸也。
现代文：在这种情形下，君子大都有怜悯高宗的想法，而为他所遭遇的不幸深为伤心。
English: Under these circumstances, most of the nobles felt pity for Gaozong and were deeply saddened by the misfortune that befell him.

古文：然当其初立，因四方勤王之师，内相李纲，外任宗泽，天下之事宜无不可为者。
现代文：然而就在他即位之初的时候，借助四方勤王的军队，朝内任用李纲为相，朝外任用宗泽，国家大事应当是没有办不成的。
English: However, at the very beginning of his reign, with the help of the troops loyal to the king in all four directions, the imperial court appointed Li Gang as the prime minister, and the imperial court appointed Soze as the foreign minister, the national event should have been accomplished.

古文：顾乃播迁穷僻，重以苗、刘群盗之乱，权宜立国，确虖艰哉。
现代文：但因为迁移到穷僻之地，又加上苗傅、刘正彦群盗的叛乱，临时变通，建立国体，确实也是相当艰难的啊！
English: However, because of the relocation to a remote place, coupled with the rebellion of Miao Fu and Liu Zhengyang's band of thieves, temporary flexibility and the establishment of a national system are indeed quite difficult!

古文：其始惑于汪、黄，其终制于奸桧，恬堕猥懦，坐失事机。
现代文：他开始被汪伯彦、黄潜善所迷惑，最终又为秦桧所掣肘，贪图安乐，怠惰消沉，苟且懦弱，导致坐失收复国土的大好时机。
English: At first, he was confused by Wang Bohian and Huang Kuanzhen, and finally, he was constrained by Qin Yu. He was greedy for happiness, lazy, depressed, and cowardly, which led him to miss a great opportunity to recover the country.

古文：甚而赵鼎、张浚相继窜斥，岳飞父子竟死于大功垂成之秋。
现代文：更有甚者，把赵鼎、张浚相继贬滴到边远地区，岳飞父子竟然在大功即将告成之际被残酷杀死。
English: What's more, Zhao Ding and Zhang Jun were successively banished to remote areas, and Yue Fei and his son were brutally killed just as their great achievement was coming to an end.

古文：一时有志之士，为之扼腕切齿。
现代文：一时间有志之士，无不为之扼腕叹惜，切齿痛恨。
English: For a while, there are aspirants, all of whom sigh and gnash their teeth.

古文：帝方偷安忍耻，匿怨忘亲，卒不免于来世之诮，悲夫！
现代文：高宗皇帝却忍受耻辱，苟且偷生，藏匿对金人的仇怨，忘掉亲人还在金国受辱，最终逃不脱后人对他的讥俏，可悲啊！
English: Emperor Gaozong, on the other hand, endured the humiliation, lived a secret life, concealed his grudge against the Jin people, forgot that his relatives were still being humiliated in Jin, and eventually could not escape the ridicule of his descendants. How sad!

