古文：《诗》云： 邦畿千里，维民所止。 《诗》云： 缗蛮黄鸟，止于丘隅。 
现代文：《诗经》说： 皇都及其周围都是百姓居住的地方。 《诗经》又说：  绵蛮 叫着的黄鸟，栖息在山冈上。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "The imperial capital and its surroundings are the place where the common people live." "The Book of Songs" also says: "Yellow birds, screaming wildly, perch on the mountains.

古文：子曰： 于止，知其所止，可以人而不如鸟乎？ 
现代文：孔子说： 连黄鸟都知道它该栖息在什么地方，难道人还可以不如一只鸟儿吗？ 
English: Confucius said: Even a yellow bird knows where it should roost. Can a person be better than a bird?

古文：《诗》云： 穆穆文王，於缉熙敬止！ 
现代文：《诗经》说： 品德高尚的文王啊，为人光明磊落，做事始终庄重谨慎。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: O King Wen, who is of high moral character, you are a bright and upright person, and you always do things with solemnity and caution.

古文：为人君，止于仁；为人臣，止于敬；为人子，止于孝；为人父，止于慈；与国人交，止于信。
现代文：做国君的，要做到仁爱；做臣子的，要做到恭敬；做子女的，要做到孝顺；做父亲的，要做到慈爱；与他人交往，要做到讲信用。
English: To be a sovereign, one must be benevolent; to be a courtier, one must be respectful; to be a child, one must be filial; to be a father, one must be loving; to interact with others, one must be trustworthy.

古文：《诗》云： 瞻彼淇澳，菉竹猗猗。
现代文：《诗经》说： 看那淇水弯弯的岸边，嫩绿的竹子郁郁葱葱。
English: "The Book of Songs" says: Look at the water's curved shore, the lush green bamboo.

古文：有匪君子，如切如磋，如琢如磨。
现代文：有一位文质彬彬的君子，研究学问如加工骨器，不断切磋；修炼自己如打磨美玉，反复琢磨。
English: There was a gentleman with a refined literary quality. He studied knowledge as if he were working on bone tools, constantly exchanging ideas; he cultivated himself as if he were polishing a jewel, repeatedly refining it.

古文：瑟兮僴兮，赫兮喧兮。
现代文：他庄重而开朗，仪表堂堂。
English: He is dignified and cheerful, with a regal air.

古文：有匪君子，终不可谖兮！ 
现代文：这样的一个文质彬彬的君子，真是令人难忘啊！ 
English: Such an urbane gentleman is truly unforgettable!

古文： 如切如磋 者，道学也。 如琢如磨 者，自修也。 瑟兮僴兮 者，恂栗也。 赫兮喧兮 者，威仪也。 有匪君子，终不可谖兮 者，道盛德至善，民之不能忘也。
现代文：这里所说的 如加工骨器，不断切磋 ，是指做学问的态度；这里所说的 如打磨美玉，反复琢磨 ，是指自我修炼的精神；说他 庄重而开朗 ，是指他内心谨慎而有所戒惧；说他 仪表堂堂 ，是指他非常威严；说 这样一个文质彬彬的君子，可真是令人难忘啊！ 
English: What is said here, such as processing bone tools and constantly learning from each other, refers to the attitude of doing learning; what is said here, such as polishing gems and repeatedly pondering, refers to the spirit of self-cultivation; to say that he is solemn and cheerful, refers to his inner prudence and fear; to say that he is elegant, refers to his very majesty; to say that he is such a gentleman, but it is really unforgettable!

古文：《诗》云： 於戏，前王不忘！ 
现代文：《诗经》说： 啊啊，前代的君王真使人难忘啊！ 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: Ah, the kings of the past are truly unforgettable!

古文：君子贤其贤而亲其亲，小人乐其乐而利其利，此以没世不忘也。
现代文：这是因为君主贵族们能够以前代的君王为榜样，尊重贤人，亲近亲族，一般平民百姓也都蒙受恩泽，享受安乐，获得利益。所以，虽然前代君王已经去世，但人们还是永远不会忘记他们。
English: This is because the monarchs and aristocrats can follow the example of the previous generation of monarchs, respect the wise, and be close to relatives. Ordinary people also receive grace, enjoy comfort, and gain benefits. Therefore, although the previous generation of monarchs has passed away, people will never forget them.

