古文：高闾山，澄州析木人。
现代文：高闾山，是澄州析木人。
English: Gao Lushan is a wood analyser from Chengdu.

古文：选充护卫，调顺义军节度副使，转唐括、移剌都飐详稳，改震武军节度副使、曹王府尉，大名治中。
现代文：他先是被选上充当护卫，后来调任顺义军节度副使，转做唐括、移剌都礣详稳，既而改为震武军节度副使、曹王府尉、大名治中。
English: He was first selected to serve as an escort, and later transferred to the vice-minister of Shunyi Army, and then to the vice-minister of Tang Army, then to the vice-minister of Shunyi Army, then to the vice-minister of Shunyi Army, then to the vice-minister of Shunyi Army, then to the vice-minister of Shunyi Army, then to the vice-minister of Shunyi Army, then to the vice-minister of Shunyi Army, and finally to the vice-minister of Shunyi Army.

古文：迁汝州刺史，改单州。
现代文：其后改任汝州刺史，又改做单州刺史。
English: After that, he was appointed as the governor of Ruzhou Province, and then he was appointed as the governor of a single province.

古文：制禁不依法用杖决人者，闾山见之笑曰： 此亦难行。 
现代文：有圣旨禁止违令用刑杖杀人，高闾山见了笑道： 这也难以执行。 
English: When Gao Lushan saw that there was a sacred edict prohibiting the use of the cane to kill people in violation of the edict, he laughed and said: This is also difficult to implement.

古文：是日，特用大杖杖死部民杨仙，坐削一官，解职。
现代文：这天，他特意使用大杖打死了他所管辖的平民杨仙，被削去一级官阶，解除职务。
English: On this day, he deliberately used a big stick to kill Yang Xian, a civilian under his jurisdiction, and was stripped of his first-class official rank and relieved of his duties.

古文：久之，降凤翔治中，历原州、济州、泗州刺史，改郑州防御使，迁蒲与路节度使，移临海军、盘安军、宁昌军。
现代文：过了很久以后，被贬为凤翔治中，历任原州、济州、泗州刺史，改任郑州防御使，又被提升为蒲与路节度使，又转换到临海军、盘安军和宁昌军。
English: After a long time, he was demoted to Fengxiangzhizhong, successively served as the governor of Wonju, Jeju and Bozhou, was reassigned to the Zhengzhou Defense Envoy, was promoted to the Puyolodou Defense Envoy, and was transferred to the Linyi Navy, Pan'an Army and Ningchang Army.

古文：贞祐二年，城破死之。
现代文：贞二年，高闾山死于城破之时。
English: In the second year of Zhen, Gao Lushan died when the city was breached.

古文：蒲察合住，以吏起身，久为宣宗所信，声势烜赫，性复残刻，人知其蠹国而莫敢言。
现代文：蒲察合住，以做小吏起家，一直受宣宗宠信，声势显赫，性格又刻毒残忍，众人知道他祸害国家却谁也不敢说出来。
English: He started his career as a minor official and was always favored by Emperor Xuanzong. He had a powerful voice and a vicious and cruel personality. Everyone knew that he was a scourge to the country, but no one dared to speak out.

古文：其子充护卫，先逐出之。
现代文：他的儿子充当护卫，先被他给赶了出去。
English: His son, who was acting as a bodyguard, was the first to be thrown out.

古文：继而合住为恒州刺史，需次近县。
现代文：既而蒲察合住担任恒州刺史，根据需要住在附近的县城。
English: Even though he and Putsa lived together, he served as the chief historian of Hengzhou and lived in the nearby county seat as needed.

古文：后大兵入陕西，关中震动。或言合住赴恒州为北走计，朝廷命开封羁其亲属，合住出怨言曰： 杀却我即太平矣。 
现代文：后来，大军攻入陕西，关中大为震动，有人说合住去恒州是为去北国做打算，朝廷下令开封府拘留合住的亲属，合住口出怨言道： 杀了我就太平了。 
English: Later, when a large army invaded Shaanxi, Guanzhong was greatly shaken. Some people said that He Zui went to Hengzhou to make plans to go to the north. The imperial court ordered the opening of the Fufeng Prefecture to detain He Zui's relatives. He complained: "If you kill me, it will be peaceful."

古文：寻为御史所劾，初议笞赎，宰相以为悖理，斩于开封府门之下。
现代文：不久他被御史弹劾，原本商议给他施以杖刑赎罪，但宰相认为有悖常理，就在开封府门前斩杀了合住。
English: Not long after, he was impeached by the emperor. Originally, it was discussed to give him a cane punishment to atone for his crime, but the prime minister thought it was against common sense and killed him in front of the gate of Kaifeng.

古文：故当时有宣朝三贼之目，谓王阿里、蒲察咬住，合住其一也。
现代文：因此当时有宣朝三贼的名目，指王阿里、蒲察咬住，蒲察合住是其中之一。
English: Therefore, there was a name of the three thieves of the proclamation of the dynasty at that time, referring to Wang Ali, Putsa bite, Putsa live together is one of them.

古文：兴定中，驸马仆散阿海之狱，京师宣勘七十余所，阿里辈乘时起事以肆其毒，朝士惴惴莫克自保，惟独吉文之在开封府幕，明其不反，竟不署字，阿海诛，文之亦无所问。
现代文：兴定年间，驸马仆散阿海被押入大狱，京师宣布勘正的事有七十多件，王阿里等人乘机作乱恣意为患，朝中士人都惴惴不安，无法保全自身，唯独吉文之在开封府做幕僚，申明他不反叛的意愿，终究没有签名。阿海被诛杀后，独吉文之没受牵连。
English: During the Xingding years, the imperial horse servant San Ahai was taken to prison, the Beijing division announced that there were more than 70 cases of investigation, Wang Ali and others took the opportunity to create chaos and act arbitrarily. The imperial sergeants were all uneasy and unable to protect themselves. However, Ji Wenzhi, who worked as a staff member in Kaifeng, declared his intention not to rebel, but ultimately did not sign. After Ahai was killed, Ji Wenzhi was not implicated.

古文：咬住，正大初致仕，居睢阳，溃军变，与其家皆被杀。
现代文：蒲察咬住，正大初年做了官，住在睢阳。败军发起兵变的时候，他和家人都被杀死。
English: When the defeated army launched a mutiny, he and his family were all killed.

古文：初，宣宗喜刑罚，朝士往往被笞楚，至用刀杖决杀言者。
现代文：起初，宣宗好用刑罚，朝中士人常常遭受杖打，甚至用刀杀死或用杖打死敢于直言的人。
English: At first, Emperor Xuanzong was fond of using punishment, and imperial sergeants were often beaten with canes, and even those who dared to speak out were killed with a sword or beaten to death with a cane.

古文：高琪用事，威刑自恣。
现代文：高琪执掌权柄，任意使用酷刑。
English: Gao Qi held power and arbitrarily used torture.

古文：南渡之后，习以成风，虽士大夫亦为所移，如徒单右丞思忠好用麻椎击人，号 麻椎相公 。
现代文：南下以后，施酷刑成风，即便是士大夫也受影响，例如徒单的右丞思忠，好用麻椎击人，别号 麻椎相公 。
English: After moving to the south, torture became a common practice, and even scholars were affected. For example, the single-minded Ujo Shizhong was good at hitting people with a machete, and his nickname was "Mashii Shoko."

古文：李运使特立号 半截剑 ，言其短小锋利也。
现代文：运使李特立，别号 半截剑 ，是说他短小而锋利。
English: Li Teli is nicknamed "Half-Cut Sword" because he is short and sharp.

古文：冯内翰璧号 冯刽 。
现代文：内翰冯璧，人称 冯刽 。
English: Inner Han Feng Bi, popularly known as Feng Jun.

古文：雷渊为御史，至蔡州得奸豪，杖杀五百人，号曰 雷半千 。
现代文：雷渊担任御史，在蔡州抓到奸诈豪强，杖杀了五百人，称 雷半千 。
English: Lei Yuan served as imperial historian, caught a treacherous strongman in Caizhou, killed five hundred people with a cane, and called Lei half a thousand.

古文：又有完颜麻斤出，皆以酷闻，而合住、王阿里、李涣之徒，胥吏中尤狡刻者也。
现代文：还有完颜麻斤出，都是以残酷闻名，而蒲察合住、王阿里、李涣之徒，是官吏中尤其奸狡刻毒的。
English: There are also those who are ruthless, all of whom are famous for their cruelty, and the followers of Putza Gaju, Wang Ali, and Li Xi are especially cunning and vicious among officials.

