古文：《齐民要术》：桑椹熟时，收黑鲁椹。
现代文：《齐民要术》：桑椹成熟的时候，采收黑鲁桑葚。
English: "Qi Min Yaoshu": When mulberry is ripe, harvest black mulberry.

古文：黄鲁桑不耐久。
现代文：黄鲁桑不耐长时间储存。
English: Rhodiola rosea does not tolerate long-term storage.

古文：谚曰： 鲁桑百，丰绵帛。 
现代文：谚语说： 好的桑树多了，养的优质蚕多；蚕丝多了，丝织品自然就丰富了。 
English: A proverb says: The more good mulberry trees there are, the more high-quality silkworms there are; the more silkworms there are, the more silk fabrics there are.

古文：言其桑好，功省，用多。
现代文：这是说鲁桑好，用功省，获得的利益多。
English: This is to say that Rusan is good, saves effort, and gains more benefits.

古文：《博闻录》：白桑少子，压枝种之。
现代文：《博闻录》：白桑，少有桑葚，须采用压条法繁殖。
English: "Houwen Record": White mulberry, with a few mulberry pods, must be propagated by the pressure strip method.

古文：若有子，可便种，须用地阴处。
现代文：假若有白桑子，便可将种子种在土地背阴处。
English: If you have white mulberry, you can plant the seeds in the shade.

古文：其叶厚大，得茧重实，丝每倍常。
现代文：白桑的叶子又厚又大，所得蚕茧又重又厚实，缫出的丝常比一般的茧高出一倍。
English: The leaves of the white mulberry are thick and large, the resulting cocoon is heavy and thick, and the silk produced is often twice as high as that of ordinary cocoons.

古文：《士农必用》：桑之种性，惟在辨其刚柔，得树艺之宜，使之各适其用。
现代文：《士农必用》：关于桑树的特性，重要的是在于辨别桑叶的刚劲和柔嫩，探求合适的种植方法，使各种桑都能得到充分的利用。
English: "Essential for farmers": Regarding the characteristics of mulberry trees, it is important to distinguish the stiffness and softness of mulberry leaves, explore suitable planting methods, and make full use of all kinds of mulberry.

古文：桑种甚多，不可遍举；世所名者， 荆 与 鲁 也。
现代文：桑的种类繁多，不胜一一列举。世上有名的品种，即为荆桑和鲁桑。
English: There are many kinds of mulberry trees, and it would be impossible to enumerate them all. The most famous varieties in the world are the wattled mulberry and the rhododendron.

古文：荆桑多椹，鲁桑少椹。
现代文：荆桑的葚多，鲁桑的葚少。
English: There are more nectarines in wattle and fewer nectarines in sedge.

古文：叶薄而尖，其边有瓣者，荆桑也；凡枝、干、条、叶坚劲者，皆荆之类也。
现代文：叶子薄而尖，叶子边缘有锯齿的是荆桑；凡是树的枝干、桑条、桑叶皆非常坚实刚劲的，均为荆桑一类。
English: The leaves are thin and pointed, and the leaves with serrated edges are mulberry. All tree branches, mulberry strips, and mulberry leaves are very solid and strong, and are all of the mulberry type.

古文：叶圆厚而多津者，鲁桑也；凡枝、干、条、叶丰腴者，皆鲁之类也。
现代文：叶子又圆又厚又多津液的皆属于鲁桑类；凡是树的枝干、桑条、桑叶柔嫩茂盛的，均为鲁桑一类。
English: Leaves that are round, thick, and have a lot of juice all belong to the mulberry family; all branches, mulberry strips, and mulberry leaves that are soft and lush belong to the mulberry family.

古文：荆之类，根固而心实，能久远，宜为树。
现代文：荆桑类，根深、树的心材坚实、树高，适宜于长成大树。
English: Mulberry, deep roots, solid heartwood, tall, suitable for growing into large trees.

古文：鲁之类，根不固而心不实，不能久远，宜为地桑。
现代文：鲁桑类，根不深、心材不坚实、树矮，适宜于作为地桑种植。
English: The roots are not deep, the heartwood is not solid, and the tree is short. It is suitable for planting as a ground mulberry.

古文：然荆桑之条、叶，不如鲁桑之盛茂；当以鲁条接之，则能久远而又盛茂也。
现代文：但是荆桑的枝条和叶子，都不如鲁桑生长茂盛，故应当用鲁桑的枝条嫁接到荆桑上，便会使桑树既能维持长久，又可以生长得非常茂盛。
English: However, the branches and leaves of the mulberry do not grow as luxuriantly as the alfalfa, so the branches of the alfalfa should be grafted onto the mulberry, which will make the mulberry tree both long-lasting and very lush.

古文：鲁为地桑，而有 压条 、 换根 之法，传转无穷；是亦可以长久也。
现代文：鲁桑为地桑，故可采用压条换根法繁殖新株，代替老桑，传递不绝，所以也是可以保持长久的。
English: Lusang is a ground mulberry, so it can be used to propagate a new strain by pressing the bar to replace the old mulberry, and it can be passed on continuously, so it can be maintained for a long time.

古文：荆桑之类，宜饲大蚕；其丝坚纫，中纱罗。
现代文：荆桑类的桑叶，适宜用来饲喂大蚕，蚕丝非常坚韧，可织纱和罗。
English: Mulberry leaves, suitable for feeding large silkworms. The silk is very tough and can be used to weave yarn and rope.

古文：《书·禹贡》 厥篚原丝 ，注曰： 膘，山桑。 
现代文：《尚书·禹贡》 厥篚原丝 的注解为： 膘，山桑。 
English: The annotation of "Shangshu Yugong" Jueyuan Yuan Si is as follows:,山桑.

古文：此荆之类而尤者也。
现代文：即是指荆桑类中最优异的一种。
English: That is to say, it is one of the most excellent of the mulberry family.

古文：鲁桑之类，宜饲小蚕。
现代文：鲁桑一类，适宜于喂饲小蚕。
English: It is suitable for feeding small silkworms.

