古文：黄帝者，少典之子，姓公孙，名曰轩辕。
现代文：黄帝是少典部族的后裔，姓公孙名轩辕。
English: The Yellow Emperor was a descendant of the Shao Di tribe, and his surname was Gongsunmei Xuanqi.

古文：生而神灵，弱而能言，幼而徇齐，长而敦敏，成而聪明。
现代文：他生下来就很有灵性，年龄很小就善于言辞，幼年时聪明机敏，长大后敦厚敏捷，成年以后聪慧明审。
English: He was very spiritual from birth, good at rhetoric at a very young age, clever and astute when he was young, brave and agile when he grew up, and wise and shrewd when he became an adult.

古文：轩辕之时，神农氏世衰。诸侯相侵伐，暴虐百姓，而神农氏弗能征。
现代文：轩辕当政的时候，神农氏的后代已经衰败，各诸侯互相攻战，用暴力虐待百姓，而神农氏没有力量征讨他们。
English: When Xuanzang was in power, the descendants of the Shennong clan were already in decline. All the lords fought against each other and abused the people with violence, and the Shennong clan did not have the strength to fight them.

古文：于是轩辕乃习用干戈，以征不享，诸侯咸来宾从。
现代文：于是轩辕就习兵练武，去征讨那些不来朝贡的诸侯，各诸侯这才都来归从。
English: As a result, Xuanzang began to train soldiers and practice martial arts, and went to solicit those lords who did not come to pay tribute. Only then did all the lords come to obey.

古文：而蚩尤最为暴，莫能伐。
现代文：而蚩尤在各诸侯中最为凶暴，没有人能去征讨他。
English: However, Kuyu was the most ferocious of all the lords, and no one was able to capture him.

古文：炎帝欲侵陵诸侯，诸侯咸归轩辕。
现代文：炎帝想进攻欺压诸侯，诸侯都来归从轩辕。
English: Emperor Yan wanted to attack and oppress the lords, and the lords all came to follow Xuan Zang.

古文：轩辕乃修德振兵，治五气，蓺五种，抚万民，度四方，教熊罴貔貅貙虎，以与炎帝战于阪泉之野。三战，然后得其志。
现代文：于是轩辕修行德业，整顿军旅，研究四时节气变化，种植五谷，安抚民众，丈量四方的土地，训练熊、罴、貔、貅、貙、虎等猛兽，跟炎帝在阪泉的郊野交战，先后打了几仗，才征服炎帝，如愿得胜。
English: As a result, Xuanzang practiced virtue, rectified the military expedition, studied the four-hour solar changes, planted grain, pacified the people, measured the square land, trained bears, baboons, roe deer, lynxes, jackals, tigers and other fierce beasts, and fought with the Emperor of Flame in the countryside of Hanquan. He fought several battles successively before conquering the Emperor of Flame, and won the victory as he wished.

古文：蚩尤作乱，不用帝命。
现代文：蚩尤发动叛乱，不听从黄帝之命。
English: Qiu You launched a rebellion and disobeyed the orders of the Yellow Emperor.

古文：于是黄帝乃征师诸侯，与蚩尤战于涿鹿之野，遂禽杀蚩尤。
现代文：于是黄帝征调诸侯的军队，在涿鹿郊野与蚩尤作战，终于擒获并杀死了他。
English: As a result, the Yellow Emperor mobilized the armies of the lords and fought with Baoyu in the countryside of Elk, and finally captured and killed him.

古文：而诸侯咸尊轩辕为天子，代神农氏，是为黄帝。
现代文：这样，诸侯都尊奉轩辕做天子，取代了神农氏，这就是黄帝。
English: In this way, the princes revered Xuan Zang as the son of heaven, replacing the Shennong clan, which is the Yellow Emperor.

古文：天下有不顺者，黄帝从而征之，平者去之，披山通道，未尝宁居。
现代文：天下有不归顺的，黄帝就前去征讨，平定一个地方之后就离去，一路上劈山开道，从来没有在哪儿安宁地居住过。
English: There are non-conformists all over the world, and the Yellow Emperor went to conquer them. After pacifying a place, he left. He split mountains and opened roads along the way, and never lived peacefully anywhere.

古文：东至于海，登丸山，及岱宗。
现代文：黄帝往东到过东海，登上了丸山和泰山。
English: The Yellow Emperor went east across the East China Sea and climbed Mount Maruyama and Mount Tai.

古文：西至于空桐，登鸡头。
现代文：往西到过空桐，登上了鸡头山。
English: I went west to pass through Ku-tong and climbed Mount Jitou.

古文：南至于江，登熊、湘。
现代文：往南到过长江，登上了熊山、湘山。
English: Heading south, he crossed the Yangtze River and climbed Mount Kumayama and Mount Xiangshan.

古文：北逐荤粥，合符釜山，而邑于涿鹿之阿。
现代文：往北驱逐了荤粥部族，来到釜山与诸侯合验了符契，就在逐鹿山的山脚下建起了都邑。
English: He drove the Goryeo tribe to the north, came to Busan to conclude a treaty with the lords, and built a capital city at the foot of Mt.

古文：迁徙往来无常处，以师兵为营卫。
现代文：黄帝四处迁徙，没有固定的住处，带兵走到哪里，就在哪里设置军营以自卫。
English: The Yellow Emperor migrated everywhere and had no fixed abode. Wherever he went with his soldiers, he set up military camps to defend himself.

古文：官名皆以云命，为云师。
现代文：黄帝所封官职都用云来命名，军队号称云师。
English: The official positions of the Yellow Emperor were all named after clouds, and the army was known as the cloud division.

古文：置左右大监，监于万国。
现代文：他设置了左右大监，由他们督察各诸侯国。
English: He set up grand inspectors of the left and right to inspect the various provinces.

古文：万国和，而鬼神山川封禅与为多焉。
现代文：这时，万国安定，因此，自古以来，祭祀鬼神山川的要数黄帝时最多。
English: At this time, all countries were stable, so since ancient times, the number of sacrifices to ghosts, gods, mountains and rivers was the highest during the Yellow Emperor.

古文：获宝鼎，迎日推策。举风后、力牧、常先、大鸿以治民。
现代文：黄帝获得上天赐给的宝鼎，于是观测太阳的运行，用占卜用的蓍草推算历法，预知节气日辰。他任用风后、力牧、常先、大鸿等治理民众。
English: The Yellow Emperor obtained the treasure given by heaven, so he observed the movement of the sun, used the divination of the ephemeral grass to calculate the calendar, and predicted the solar terms. He appointed Feng Hou, Li Mu, Chang Xian, Dahong and others to govern the people.

古文：顺天地之纪，幽明之占，死生之说，存亡之难。时播百谷草木，淳化鸟兽虫蛾，旁罗日月星辰水波土石金玉，劳勤心力耳目，节用水火材物。
现代文：黄帝顺应天地四时的规律，推测阴阳的变化，讲解生死的道理，论述存与亡的原因，按照季节播种百谷草木，驯养鸟兽蚕虫，测定日月星辰以定历法，收取土石金玉以供民用，身心耳目，饱受辛劳，有节度地使用水、火、木材及各种财物。
English: The Yellow Emperor conformed to the four-hour rule of heaven and earth, speculated on the changes of yin and yang, explained the principles of life and death, discussed the reasons for existence and death, sowed a hundred grains of grass and trees according to the season, domesticated birds and beasts, measured the sun, moon and stars with a fixed calendar, collected earth and stone gold balls for civilian use, mind and body, eyes and ears, suffered hardships, and used water, fire, wood and various property in moderation.

古文：有土德之瑞，故号黄帝。
现代文：他做天子有土这种属性的祥瑞征兆，土色黄，所以号称黄帝。
English: He is a sign of auspiciousness of this attribute, earthy yellow, so he is known as the Yellow Emperor.

古文：黄帝二十五子，其得姓者十四人。
现代文：黄帝有二十五个儿子，其中建立自己姓氏的有十四人。
English: The Yellow Emperor had twenty-five sons, fourteen of whom established their own surnames.

古文：黄帝居轩辕之丘，而娶于西陵之女，是为嫘祖。
现代文：黄帝居住在轩辕山，娶西陵国的女儿为妻，这就是嫘祖。
English: The Yellow Emperor lived in Xuanwu Mountain and married a daughter from Xiling Province. This is the ancestor of Xuanwu.

古文：嫘祖为黄帝正妃，生二子，其后皆有天下：其一曰玄嚣，是为青阳，青阳降居江水；其二曰昌意，降居若水。
现代文：嫘祖是黄帝的正妃，生有两个儿子，他们的后代都领有天下：一个叫玄嚣，也就是青阳，青阳被封为诸侯，降居在江水；另一个叫昌意，也被封为诸侯，降居在若水。
English: Zou Zu was the rightful wife of the Yellow Emperor. She gave birth to two sons, and their descendants all ruled the world: one was named Xuanren, that is, Qingyang. Qingyang was made a vassal and lived in Jiangshui; the other was named Changyi, who was also made a vassal and lived in Ruanshui.

古文：昌意娶蜀山氏女，曰昌仆，生高阳，高阳有圣德焉。
现代文：昌意娶了蜀山氏的女儿，名叫昌仆，生下高阳，高阳有圣人的品德。
English: Changyi married a daughter of the Shushan clan, named Changpu, and gave birth to Goyang. Goyang had the character of a saint.

古文：黄帝崩，葬桥山。其孙昌意之子高阳立，是为帝颛顼也。
现代文：黄帝死后，埋葬在桥山，他的孙子，也就是昌意的儿子高阳即帝位，这就是颛顼帝。
English: After the death of the Yellow Emperor, buried in Qiaoshan, his grandson, that is, the son of Changyi, Gaoyang, that is, the throne, this is the Emperor Zou.

古文：帝颛顼高阳者，黄帝之孙而昌意之子也。
现代文：颛顼帝高阳，是黄帝的孙子，昌意的儿子。
English: Emperor Gaoyang is the grandson of the Yellow Emperor and the son of Changyi.

古文：静渊以有谋，疏通而知事；养材以任地，载时以象天，依鬼神以制义，治气以教化，絜诚以祭祀。
现代文：他沉静稳练而有机谋，通达而知事理。他养殖各种庄稼牲畜以充分利用地力，推算四时节令以顺应自然，依顺鬼神以制定礼义，理顺四时五行之气以教化万民，洁净身心以祭祀鬼神。
English: He cultivated various crops and livestock to make full use of the earth's resources, calculated the four seasons to conform to nature, obeyed ghosts and gods to establish etiquette, rationalized the four and five elements to enlighten the people, and purified the body and mind to worship ghosts and gods.

古文：北至于幽陵，南至于交趾，西至于流沙，东至于蟠木。
现代文：他往北到过幽陵，往南到过交阯，往西到过流沙，往东到过蟠木。
English: He went north to Yuling, south to Jiaotong, west to Lingsha, and east to Shanyu.

古文：动静之物，大小之神，日月所照，莫不砥属。
现代文：各种动物植物，大神小神，凡是日月照临的地方，全都平定了，没有不归服的。
English: All kinds of animals and plants, great gods and lesser gods, wherever the sun and moon shine, are all pacified, and there is no one who will not submit.

古文：帝颛顼生子曰穷蝉。
现代文：颛顼帝生的儿子叫穷蝉。
English: The son of Emperor Zou is called Poor Cicada.

古文：颛顼崩，而玄嚣之孙高辛立，是为帝喾。
现代文：颛顼死后，玄嚣的孙子高辛即位，这就是帝喾。
English: After the death of Emperor Xuan, Gao Xin, the grandson of Emperor Xuan, ascended to the throne. This is the Emperor Xuan.

古文：帝喾高辛者，黄帝之曾孙也。
现代文：帝喾高辛，是黄帝的曾孙。
English: Emperor Gao Xin is the great-grandson of the Yellow Emperor.

古文：高辛父曰蟜极，蟜极父曰玄嚣，玄嚣父曰黄帝。
现代文：高辛的父亲叫蟜极，蟜极的父亲叫玄嚣，玄嚣的父亲就是黄帝。
English: Gao Xin's father is called Zhaoji, Zhaoji's father is called Xuanran, and Xuanran's father is Huangdi.

古文：自玄嚣与蟜极皆不得在位，至高辛即帝位。
现代文：玄嚣和蟜极都没有登上帝位，到高辛时才登上帝位。
English: Neither Xuan Rong nor Ya Ji Ji ascended to the throne, and only ascended to the throne when Gao Xin did.

古文：高辛于颛顼为族子。
现代文：高辛是颛顼的侄子。
English: Gao Xin is Zou's nephew.

古文：高辛生而神灵，自言其名。
现代文：高辛生来就很有灵气，一出生就叫出了自己的名字。
English: Gao Xin was born with a lot of aura. As soon as he was born, he called out his own name.

古文：普施利物，不于其身。
现代文：他普遍施予恩泽于众人而不及其自身。
English: He is generous to all, but not to himself.

古文：聪以知远，明以察微。
现代文：他聪明智慧，可以了解久远的情况，可以洞察细微的事理。
English: He is intelligent and wise, can understand the long-term situation, and can understand the subtleties.

古文：顺天之义，知民之急。
现代文：他顺应上天的意旨，了解下民之所急。
English: He conforms to the will of heaven and understands the urgent needs of the people.

古文：仁而威，惠而信，修身而天下服。
现代文：仁德而且威严，温和而且守信，修养自身，天下归服。
English: Be benevolent and dignified, gentle and trustworthy, cultivate yourself, and submit to the world.

古文：取地之财而节用之，抚教万民而利诲之，历日月而迎送之，明鬼神而敬事之。
现代文：他收取土地上的物产，俭节地使用；他抚爱教化万民，把各种有益的事教给他们；他推算日月的运行以定岁时节气，恭敬地迎送日月的出入；他明识鬼神，慎重地加以事奉。
English: He collects the produce of the land and uses it sparingly; he caresses and enlightens the people, teaching them all kinds of beneficial things; he calculates the movement of the sun and the moon to set the solar terms at a fixed time, and respectfully welcomes the sun and the moon; he knows the ghosts and gods, and serves them carefully.

古文：其色郁郁，其德嶷嶷。
现代文：他仪表堂堂，道德高尚。
English: He is a fine-looking man with high morals.

古文：其动也时，其服也士。
现代文：他行动合乎时宜，服用如同士人。
English: He acts in a timely manner and takes it like a gentleman.

古文：帝喾溉执中而遍天下，日月所照，风雨所至，莫不从服。
现代文：帝喾治民，像雨水浇灌农田一样不偏不倚，遍及天下，凡是日月照耀的地方，风雨所到的地方，没有人不顺从归服。
English: The emperor's rule over the people is as unbiased as the rain watering the farmland, spreading all over the world. Wherever the sun and moon shine, and wherever the wind and rain come, no one will disobey and submit.

古文：帝喾娶陈锋氏女，生放勋。
现代文：帝喾娶陈锋氏的女儿，生下放勋。
English: Emperor Yao married Chen Feng's daughter, and gave birth to a son, Fuxun.

古文：娶娵訾氏女，生挚。
现代文：娶娵訾氏的女儿，生下挚。
English: He married a daughter of the Shun clan and gave birth to a son.

古文：帝喾崩，而挚代立。
现代文：帝喾死后，挚接替帝位。
English: After the death of Emperor Xizong, he succeeded to the imperial throne.

古文：帝挚立，不善，而弟放勋立，是为帝尧。帝尧者，放勋。
现代文：帝挚登位后，没有干出什么政绩，于是弟弟放勋登位。这就是尧帝。尧帝，就是放勋。
English: After the Emperor ascended to the throne, he did not accomplish any political achievements, so his brother, Emperor Fuxun, ascended to the throne. This is Emperor Fuxun. Emperor Fuxun is Emperor Fuxun.

古文：其仁如天，其知如神。
现代文：他仁德如天，智慧如神。
English: He is as benevolent as the heavens and as wise as the gods.

古文：就之如日，望之如云。
现代文：接近他，就像太阳一样温暖人心；仰望他，就像云彩一般覆润大地。
English: To be close to him is to warm one's heart like the sun; to look up to him is like a cloud covering the earth.

古文：富而不骄，贵而不舒。
现代文：他富有却不骄傲，尊贵却不放纵。
English: He is rich but not proud, noble but not self-indulgent.

古文：黄收纯衣，彤车乘白马。
现代文：他戴的是黄色的帽子，穿的是黑色衣裳，朱红色的车子驾着白马。
English: He wore a yellow hat, black clothes, a scarlet car and a white horse.

古文：能明驯德，以亲九族。
现代文：他能尊敬有善德的人，使同族九代相亲相爱。
English: He is able to respect virtuous people and make the nine generations of his people love each other.

古文：九族既睦，便章百姓。
现代文：同族的人既已和睦，又去考察百官。
English: Now that the people of the same ethnic group have been reconciled, they went to investigate the officials.

古文：百姓昭明，合和万国。
现代文：百官政绩昭著，各方诸侯邦国都能和睦相处。
English: The political achievements of hundreds of officials are outstanding, and the various states can coexist harmoniously.

古文：乃命羲、和，敬顺昊天，数法日月星辰，敬授民时。
现代文：帝尧命令羲氏、和氏，遵循上天的意旨，根据日月的出没、星辰的位次，制定历法，谨慎地教给民众从事生产的节令。
English: The emperor ordered the Min and Wa clans to follow the will of heaven, to establish a calendar according to the appearance of the sun and moon and the order of the stars, and to carefully teach the people to engage in production.

古文：分命羲仲，居郁夷，曰旸谷。敬道日出，便程东作。
现代文：另外命令羲仲，住在郁夷，那个地方叫旸谷，恭敬地迎接日出，分别步骤安排春季的耕作。
English: In addition, he ordered Gongzhong, who lived in Ikui, that place is called Shibuya, to respectfully greet the sunrise and arrange the spring farming in separate steps.

古文：日中，星鸟，以殷中春。
现代文：春分日，白昼与黑夜一样长，朱雀七宿中的星宿初昏时出现在正南方，据此来确定仲春之时。
English: On the vernal equinox, the day is as long as the night, and the star in the seven houses of the starling appears in the south at the beginning of the twilight, according to which the time of mid-spring is determined.

古文：其民析，鸟兽字微。
现代文：这时候，民众分散劳作，鸟兽生育交尾。
English: At this time, the people are dispersed to work, and the birds and beasts are breeding and mating.

古文：申命羲叔，居南交。
现代文：又命令羲叔，住在南交，分别步骤安排夏季的农活儿，谨慎地干好。
English: He also ordered Uncle Zou, who lives in Nanjiao, to arrange the summer farm work in separate steps and do it carefully.

古文：便程南讹，敬致。日永，星火，以正中夏。
现代文：夏至日，白昼最长，苍龙七宿中的心宿初昏时出现在正南方，据此来确定仲夏之时。
English: On the summer solstice, the longest day of the year, the heart of the seven mansions of the dragon appears in the south at dusk, thus determining the time of midsummer.

古文：其民因，鸟兽希革。
现代文：这时候，民众就居高处，鸟兽毛羽稀疏。
English: At this time, the people live in high places, and the birds and animals are sparse.

古文：申命和仲，居西土，曰昧谷。敬道日入，便程西成。
现代文：又命令和仲，居住在西土，那地方叫做昧谷，恭敬地送太阳落下，有步骤地安排秋天的收获。
English: He also ordered them to live in the West, in a place called the Valley of the Shadow of Death, respectfully waiting for the sun to set, and systematically arranging the autumn harvest.

古文：夜中，星虚，以正中秋。
现代文：秋分日，黑夜与白昼一样长，玄武七宿中的虚宿初昏时出现在正南方，据此来确定仲秋之时。
English: On the autumnal equinox, when the night is as long as the day, the sun appears directly in the south at the beginning of the twilight of the imaginary inn in the Seven Inns of the Xuanwu Kingdom, which is used to determine the time of the Mid-Autumn Festival.

古文：其民夷易，鸟兽毛毨。
现代文：这时候，民众移居平地，鸟兽再生新毛。
English: At this time, people moved to the plains, and birds and animals began to grow new hair.

古文：申命和叔；居北方，曰幽都。
现代文：又命令和叔，住在北方，那地方叫做幽都，认真安排好冬季的收藏。
English: He also ordered his uncle, who lived in the north, in a place called Youdu, to carefully arrange the winter collection.

古文：便在伏物。日短，星昴，以正中冬。
现代文：冬至日，白昼最短，白虎七宿中的昴宿初昏时出现在正南方，据此来确定仲冬之时。
English: The winter solstice, the shortest day, occurs due south at dusk in the first of the White Tiger's seven mansions, and the time of midwinter is determined accordingly.

古文：其民燠，鸟兽氄毛。
现代文：这时候，民众进屋取暖，鸟兽长满细毛。
English: At this time, people come into the house to warm up, and birds and animals are covered with fine hair.

古文：岁三百六十六日，以闰月正四时。
现代文：一年有三百六十六天，用置闰月的办法来校正春夏秋冬四季。
English: There are three hundred and sixty-six days in a year, and the four seasons of spring, summer, autumn and winter are adjusted by placing a leap month.

古文：信饬百官，众功皆兴。
现代文：帝尧真诚地告诫百官各守其职，各种事情都办起来了。
English: The emperor sincerely admonished the hundred officials to perform their duties, and all kinds of things were done.

古文：尧曰： 谁可顺此事？ 
现代文：尧说： 谁可以继承我的这个事业？ 
English: Zou said, "Who can succeed me in this business?"

古文：放齐曰： 嗣子丹朱开明。 
现代文：放齐说： 你的儿子丹朱通达事理。 
English: He said, "Your son, Dan Zhu, is responsible for everything.

古文：尧曰： 吁！
现代文：尧说： 哼！
English: Toad said, "Humph!

古文：顽凶，不用。 
现代文：丹朱么，他这个人愚顽、凶恶，不能用。 
English: Is it Danzhu? He is a stupid and vicious person, and cannot be used.

古文：尧又曰： 谁可者？ 
现代文：尧又问道： 那么还有谁可以？ 
English: Hao also asked: So who else can play?

古文：驩兜曰： 共工旁聚布功，可用。 
现代文：驩兜说： 共工广泛地聚集民众，做出了业绩，可以用。 
English: Zhai Dabu said: The co-workers have gathered a wide range of people, made achievements, and can be used.

古文：尧曰： 共工善言，其用僻，似恭漫天，不可。 
现代文：尧说； 共工好讲漂亮话，用心不正，讲话的时候看似非常恭敬其实心不在焉，不能用。 
English: "Co-workers are good at telling pretty stories, but their hearts are not right. When they speak, they seem to be very respectful, but they are actually absent-minded and can't be used," said Zou.

古文：尧又曰： 嗟，四岳，汤汤洪水滔天，浩浩怀山襄陵，下民其忧，有能使治者？ 
现代文：尧又问： 唉，四岳啊，如今洪水滔天，浩浩荡荡，包围了高山，漫上了丘陵，民众万分愁苦，谁可以派去治理呢？ 
English: Zou also asked: Alas, four mountains, now the floods are enormous, vast and tumultuous, they have surrounded the high mountains and covered the hills, the people are very sad, who can be sent to govern?

古文：皆曰鲧可。
现代文：大家都说鲧可以。
English: Everyone says it can be done.

古文：尧曰： 鲧负命毁族，不可。 
现代文：尧说： 鲧违背天命，毁败同族，不能用。 
English: Zou said, "Zou violated the destiny of heaven and destroyed his compatriots, so he can't be used.

古文：岳曰： 异哉，试不可用而已。 
现代文：四岳都说： 就任用他吧，试试不行，再把他撤掉。 
English: The four mountains all said: Let's appoint him, try it, fail, and then remove him.

古文：尧于是听岳用鲧。
现代文：尧因此听从了四岳的建议，任用了鲧。
English: Therefore, Zou listened to Shigaku's suggestion and appointed Zou.

古文：九岁，功用不成。尧曰： 嗟！
现代文：鲧治水九年，也没有取得成效。尧说： 唉！
English: After nine years of flood control, no results have been achieved. The toad said: Alas!

古文：四岳：朕在位七十载，汝能庸命，践朕位？ 
现代文：各位首领，我在位已经七十年了，你们谁能顺应天命，接替我的帝位？ 
English: My lords, I have been on the throne for seventy years. Who among you will be able to fulfill your destiny and succeed me?

古文：岳应曰： 鄙德忝帝位。 
现代文：四岳回答说； 我们的德行鄙陋得很，不配登上帝位。 
English: Shidake replied, "Our morals are so low that we do not deserve to ascend to the throne."

古文：尧曰： 悉举贵戚及疏远隐匿者。 
现代文：尧说： 那就从所有同姓异姓远近大臣及隐居者当中推举吧。 
English: Zou said, "Then let's choose from all the ministers with the same or different surnames and those who live in seclusion."

古文：众皆言于尧曰： 有矜在民间，曰虞舜。 
现代文：大家都对尧说： 有一个单身汉流寓在民间，叫虞舜。 
English: Everyone said to Yu: There is a bachelor who lives in the folk, called Yu Yu.

古文：尧曰： 然，朕闻之。
现代文：尧说： 对，我听说过，他这个人怎么样？ 
English: Zou said, "Yes, I have heard of him. What is he like?

古文：其何如？ 岳曰： 盲者子。
现代文：四岳回答说； 他是个盲人的儿子。
English: Shidake answered; He is the son of a blind man.

古文：父顽，母嚚，弟傲，能和以孝，烝烝治，不至奸。 
现代文：他的父亲凶顽，母亲愚蠢而顽固，弟弟傲慢，而舜却能与他们和睦相处，尽孝悌之道，用美德治理家业，使他们不至于走向邪恶。 
English: His father was violent, his mother stupid and obstinate, and his younger brother arrogant, but he was able to live in harmony with them, practice filial piety, and manage the family business with virtue, so that they would not go to evil.

古文：尧曰： 吾其试哉。 
现代文：尧说： 那我就试试他吧。 
English: Zou said, "Then I'll try him."

古文：于是尧妻之二女，观其德于二女。
现代文：于是尧把两个女儿嫁给他，从两个女儿身上观察他的德行。
English: So she married off her two daughters to him, and observed his virtue from his two daughters.

古文：舜饬下二女于妫汭，如妇礼。
现代文：舜让她们降下尊贵之心住到妫河边的家中去，遵守为妇之道。
English: Let them lower their noble hearts and go to live in their homes by the Bohai River, and observe the way of women.

古文：尧善之，乃使舜慎和五典，五典能从。
现代文：尧认为这样做很好，就让舜试任司徒之职，谨慎地理顺父义、母慈、兄友、弟恭、子孝这五种伦理道德，人民都遵从不违。
English: Yao thought this was a good thing to do, so he let Yao try his hand at being a preceptor. He was careful to follow the five ethical morals of fatherly righteousness, motherly kindness, brotherly friendship, brotherly respect, and filial piety, and the people never disobeyed.

古文：乃遍入百官，百官时序。
现代文：尧又让他参与百官的事，百官的事因此变得有条不紊。
English: also let him participate in the affairs of the hundred officials, and the affairs of the hundred officials thus became orderly.

古文：宾于四门，四门穆穆，诸侯远方宾客皆敬。
现代文：让他在明堂四门接待宾客，四门处处和睦，从远方来的诸侯宾客都恭恭敬敬。
English: Let him receive guests at the four gates of Myeongdong, the four gates are harmonious everywhere, and the guests from far away are respectful.

古文：尧使舜入山林川泽，暴风雷雨，舜行不迷。
现代文：尧又派舜进入山野丛林大川草泽，遇上暴风雷雨，舜也没有迷路误事。
English: He also sent the dragonfly into the mountain and jungle, the great river and grassland, encountered storms and thunderstorms, and the dragonfly did not get lost.

古文：尧以为圣，召舜曰： 女谋事至而言可绩，三年矣。
现代文：尧更认为他十分聪明，很有道德，把他叫来说道： 三年来，你做事周密，说了的话就能做到。
English: Yao thought that he was very clever and very moral, and called him to say: "For the past three years, you have been doing things carefully, and you can do what you say.

古文：女登帝位。 
现代文：现在你就登临天子位吧。 
English: Now you can ascend to the heavenly throne.

古文：舜让于德不怿。
现代文：舜推让说自己的德行还不够，不愿接受帝位。
English: Yan Dujuan said that his virtue was not enough, and he did not want to accept the throne.

古文：正月上日，舜受终于文祖。
现代文：正月初一，舜在文祖庙接受了尧的禅让。
English: On the first day of the first month of the year, Zou accepted Zou's offer of Zen in the Temple of the Ancestors.

古文：文祖者，尧大祖也。
现代文：文祖也就是尧的太祖。
English: Bunzu is also the great-grandfather of Koto.

古文：于是帝尧老，命舜摄行天子之政，以观天命。
现代文：这时，尧年事已高，让舜代理天子之政事，借以观察他做天子是否合天意。
English: At this time, Zou was already old, so he asked Zou to act as the political affairs of the heavenly son to observe whether his being the heavenly son was in accordance with the will of heaven.

古文：舜乃在璿玑玉衡，以齐七政。遂类于上帝，禋于六宗，望于山川，辩于群神。
现代文：舜于是用观测天象的仪器，来定位日、月及金、木、水、火、土五星，接着举行临时仪式祭告上天，用把祭品放在火上烧的仪式祭祀天地四时，用遥祭的仪式祭祀名山大川，又普遍地祭祀了各路神祗。
English: Therefore, they used celestial observation instruments to locate the day, month, and the five stars of gold, wood, water, fire, and earth, and then held a temporary ceremony to announce it to the heavens. They sacrificed the heavens and the earth at four o'clock with the ceremony of placing the offerings on the fire, sacrificed the famous mountains and rivers with the ceremony of the distant festival, and generally sacrificed the gods.

古文：揖五瑞，择吉月日，见四岳诸牧，班瑞。
现代文：他收集起公侯伯子男五等侯爵所持桓圭、信圭、躬圭、谷璧、蒲璧五种玉制符信，选择良月吉日，召见四岳和各州州牧，又颁发给他们。
English: He collected five kinds of jade letters, including Huan Gui, Xinyu Gui, Mian Gui, Gu Bi and Pu Bi, which were held by five marquesses including the Duke Hanzhong and his son, selected a good month and day, summoned the four mountains and the states and issued them to them.

古文：岁二月，东巡狩，至于岱宗，祡，望秩于山川。
现代文：二月，舜去东方巡视，到泰山时，用烧柴的仪式祭祀东岳，用遥祭的仪式祭祀各地的名山大川。
English: In February, he went on a tour of the East, and when he arrived at Mount Tai, he used a firewood-burning ceremony to worship Dongyue, and a long-distance ceremony to worship famous mountains and rivers around the country.

古文：遂见东方君长，合时月正日，同律度量衡，修五礼五玉三帛二生一死为挚，如五器，卒乃复。
现代文：接着，他就召见东方各诸侯，协调校正四时节气、月之大小、日之甲乙，统一音律和长度、容量、重量的标准，修明吉、凶、宾、军、嘉五种礼仪，规定诸侯用五种圭壁、三种彩缯，卿大夫用羊羔、大雁二种动物，士用死雉作为朝见时的礼物，而五种圭璧，朝见典礼完毕以后仍还给诸侯。
English: Next, he summoned all the princes of the East to coordinate the calibration of the four-hour solar terms, the size of the moon, the day's A and B, the uniform melody and the standard of length, capacity, and weight, and the establishment of five kinds of etiquette: auspicious, inauspicious, auspicious, military, and auspicious. He stipulated that the princes should use five kinds of gui wall and three kinds of colored gongs, the noblemen should use lambs and two kinds of wild geese, and the scholars should use dead gongs as gifts at the morning meeting, and the five kinds of gui bi would be returned to the princes after the morning

古文：五月，南巡狩；八月，西巡狩；十一月，北巡狩：皆如初。
现代文：五月，到南方巡视；八月，到西方巡视；十一月，到北方巡视：都像起初到东方巡视时一样。
English: In May, inspection to the south; in August, inspection to the west; in November, inspection to the north: all the same as when inspecting to the east at the beginning.

古文：归，至于祖祢庙，用特牛礼。
现代文：回来后，告祭祖庙和父庙，用一头牛作祭品。
English: After returning, he offered a sacrifice to the Ancestral Temple and the Father Temple, using a cow as an offering.

古文：五岁一巡狩，群后四朝。
现代文：以后每五年巡视一次，在其间的四年中，各诸侯国君按时来京师朝见。
English: From then on, the inspection would take place every five years. During the intervening four years, the sovereigns of all the provinces would come to the capital to meet the emperor.

古文：遍告以言，明试以功，车服以庸。
现代文：舜向诸侯们普遍地陈述治国之道，根据业绩明白地进行考察，根据功劳赐给车马衣服。
English: He made a general statement to the princes about the way of governing the country, made a clear investigation according to their performance, and gave clothes to the chariots and horses according to their merits.

古文：肇十有二州，决川。
现代文：舜开始把天下划分为十二个州，疏浚河川。
English: He began to divide the country into twelve states and to dredge the rivers.

古文：象以典刑，流宥五刑，鞭作官刑，扑作教刑，金作赎刑。
现代文：规定根据正常的刑罚来执法，用流放的方法宽减刺字、割鼻、断足、阉割、杀头五种刑罚，官府里治事用鞭子施刑，学府教育用戒尺惩罚，罚以黄金可用作赎罪。
English: It is stipulated that the law should be enforced according to the normal punishments, and the five punishments of thorny characters, cutting noses, breaking feet, castration, and beheading should be mitigated by the method of banishment, the government should punish with whip, the school should punish with yardstick, and the punishment with gold can be used as atonement.

古文：眚灾过，赦；怙终贼，刑。
现代文：犯过失错误，予以赦免；怙恶不悛、坚持为害的要施以刑罚。
English: Those who commit mistakes and errors shall be pardoned; those who commit crimes and persist in doing harm shall be punished.

古文：钦哉，钦哉，惟刑之静哉！
现代文：谨慎啊，谨慎啊，可要审慎使用刑罚啊！
English: Be careful, be careful, but be careful in the use of punishment!

古文：驩兜进言共工，尧曰不可而试之工师，共工果淫辟。
现代文：驩兜曾举荐过共工，尧说 不行 ，而驩兜还是试用他做工师，共工果然放纵邪僻。
English: Zhaodou had recommended a co-worker, Zhou said no, but Zhaodou still tried him as a co-worker, and the co-worker really indulged the evil.

古文：四岳举鲧治鸿水，尧以为不可，岳彊请试之，试之而无功，故百姓不便。
现代文：四岳曾推举鲧去治理洪水，尧说 不行 ，而四岳硬说要试试看，试的结果是没有成效，所以百官都以为不适宜。
English: The four mountains once nominated the dragonfly to control floods, the dragonfly said it was not possible, and the four mountains insisted that they should try it, but the results of the test were not effective, so all the officials thought it was not appropriate.

古文：三苗在江淮、荆州数为乱。
现代文：三苗在江、淮流域及荆州一带多次作乱。
English: Sanmiao wreaked havoc several times in the Jiang and Huai river basins and around Jingzhou.

古文：于是舜归而言于帝，请流共工于幽陵，以变北狄；放驩兜于崇山，以变南蛮；迁三苗于三危，以变西戎；殛鲧于羽山，以变东夷：四罪而天下咸服。
现代文：这时舜巡视回来向尧帝报告，请求把共工流放到幽陵，以便改变北狄的风俗；把驩兜流放到崇山，以便改变南蛮的风俗；把三苗迁徙到三危山，以便改变西戎的风俗。在羽山将鲧诛杀，以便改变东夷的风俗：惩办了这四个罪人，天下人都悦服了。
English: At this time, the imperial inspectors came back to report to Emperor Wu, requesting that the co-workers be exiled to Yuling in order to change the customs of the Northern Di; that the yakitori be exiled to Chongshan in order to change the customs of the Southern Barbarians; that the three seedlings be moved to Sanguishan in order to change the customs of Xirong; and that they be killed in Mount Hasan in order to change the customs of the Eastern Yi: these four sinners were punished, and the whole world was pleased.

古文：尧立七十年得舜，二十年而老，令舜摄行天子之政，荐之于天。
现代文：尧在位七十年得到舜，又过二十年因年老而告退，让舜代行天子政务，向上天推荐。
English: In the 70th year of his reign, he was given the title of emperor, and after another 20 years, he retired due to old age, and let the emperor carry out the government affairs on behalf of the emperor, and recommended him to the emperor.

古文：尧辟位凡二十八年而崩。
现代文：尧让出帝位二十八年后逝世。
English: He died 28 years after abdicating the throne.

古文：百姓悲哀，如丧父母。
现代文：百姓悲伤哀痛，如同死了生身父母一般。
English: The people grieve and mourn, just as if their biological parents had died.

古文：三年，四方莫举乐，以思尧。
现代文：三年之内，四方各地没有人奏乐，为的是悼念帝尧。
English: For three years, no one played music in any part of Shifang to mourn the death of the emperor.

古文：尧之子丹朱之不肖，不足授天下，于是乃权授舜。
现代文：尧了解自己的儿子丹朱不贤，不配传给他天下，因此才姑且试着让给舜。
English: Yan knew that his son, Dan Zhu, was not worthy of being passed on to the world, so he tried to give it to Yan.

古文：授舜，则天下得其利而丹朱病；授丹朱，则天下病而丹朱得其利。
现代文：让给舜，天下人就都得到利益而只对丹朱一人不利；传给丹朱，天下人就会遭殃而只有丹朱一人得到好处。
English: If it is given to Zhai, everyone in the world will benefit and only one person, Danzhu, will be disadvantaged; if it is given to Danzhu, everyone in the world will suffer and only one person, Danzhu, will benefit.

古文：尧曰 终不以天下之病而利一人 ，而卒授舜以天下。
现代文：尧说： 我毕竟不能使天下人受害而只让一人得利 ，所以最终还是把天下传给了舜。
English: Zou said: After all, I can't make everyone in the world suffer and only let one person benefit, so I finally passed the world to Zou.

古文：尧崩，三年之丧毕，舜让辟丹朱于南河之南。
现代文：尧逝世后，三年服丧完毕，舜把帝位让给丹朱，自己躲到了南河的南岸。
English: After the death of Yao, after three years of mourning, Yao ceded the imperial throne to Dan Zhu and hid himself on the south bank of the Nanhe River.

古文：诸侯朝觐者不之丹朱而之舜，狱讼者不之丹朱而之舜，讴歌者不讴歌丹朱而讴歌舜。
现代文：诸侯前来朝觐的不到丹朱那里去却到舜这里来，打官司的也不去找丹朱却来找舜，歌颂功德的，不去歌颂丹朱却来歌颂舜。
English: Princes and lords who came to the pilgrimage did not go to Danzhu, but came here. Those who filed lawsuits did not go to Danzhu, but came to find faults and praise merits. Those who did not go to praise Danzhu, but came to praise faults.

古文：舜曰 天也 ，夫而后之中国践天子位焉，是为帝舜。虞舜者，名曰重华。
现代文：舜说 这是天意呀 ，然后才到了京都，登上天子之位，这就是舜帝。虞舜，名叫重华。
English: Yu said that this was the will of heaven, and then he arrived in Kyoto and ascended to the position of the Son of Heaven, which is Emperor Yu. Yu Yu, whose name is Chonghua.

古文：重华父曰瞽叟，瞽叟父曰桥牛，桥牛父曰句望，句望父曰敬康，敬康父曰穷蝉，穷蝉父曰帝颛顼，颛顼父曰昌意：以至舜七世矣。
现代文：重华的父亲叫瞽叟，瞽叟的父亲叫桥牛，桥牛的父亲叫句望，句望的父亲叫敬康，敬康的父亲叫穷蝉。穷蝉的父亲是颛顼帝，颛顼的父亲是昌意：从昌意至舜是七代了。
English: Chonghua's father is called Zou, Zou's father is called Qiao Niu, Qiao Niu's father is called Quan Wang, Quan Wang's father is called Jing Kang, Jing Kang's father is called Qidaxi. Qidaxi's father is Zou Di, Zou's father is Chang Yi: there are seven generations from Chang Yi to Zou.

古文：自从穷蝉以至帝舜，皆微为庶人。
现代文：自从穷蝉之后一直到舜帝，中间几代地位低微，都是平民。
English: From the time of the poor cicada all the way to Emperor Xizong, the middle generations had a low status and were all commoners.

古文：舜父瞽叟盲，而舜母死，瞽叟更娶妻而生象，象傲。
现代文：舜的父亲瞽叟是个瞎子，舜的生母死后，瞽叟又续娶了一个妻子生下了象，象桀骜不驯。
English: Zou's father, Zou, was blind. After the death of Zou's birth mother, Zou married another wife and gave birth to an elephant. The elephant was unruly.

古文：瞽叟爱后妻子，常欲杀舜，舜避逃；及有小过，则受罪。
现代文：瞽叟喜欢后妻的儿子，常常想把舜杀掉，舜都躲过了；赶上有点小错儿，就会遭到重罚。
English: Zhai liked his second wife's son and often wanted to kill him, but Zhai avoided it; if he made a small mistake, he would be severely punished.

古文：舜事父及后母与弟，日以笃谨，匪有解。
现代文：舜很恭顺地侍奉父亲、后母及后母弟，一天比一天地恭敬，没有一点懈怠。
English: He served his father, stepmother and stepbrother very obediently, becoming more and more respectful day by day, without any slacking.

古文：舜，冀州之人也。
现代文：舜，是冀州人。
English: He is from Jizhou.

古文：舜耕历山，渔雷泽，陶河滨，作什器于寿丘，就时于负夏。
现代文：舜在历山耕过田，在雷泽打过鱼，在黄河岸边做过陶器，在寿丘做过各种家用器物，在负夏跑过买卖。
English: Zou has cultivated fields in Leshan, fished in Laize, made pottery on the banks of the Yellow River, made various household utensils in Shouqiu, and ran a business in Xia.

古文：舜父瞽叟顽，母嚚，弟象傲，皆欲杀舜。
现代文：舜的父亲瞽叟凶顽，母亲嚣张，弟弟象桀骜不驯，他们都想杀掉舜。
English: Zhai's father Zhai is fierce, his mother is arrogant, and his younger brother Xiang Zhai is unruly. They all want to kill Zhai.

古文：舜顺适不失子道，兄弟孝慈。
现代文：舜却恭顺地行事，从不违背为子之道，友爱兄弟，孝顺父母。
English: However, he behaved obediently and never violated the principle of being a son, brotherly love, and filial piety.

古文：欲杀，不可得；即求，尝在侧。
现代文：他们想杀掉他，却始终不能得逞；而有事要找他的时候，他又经常陪伴左右。
English: They tried to kill him, but they couldn't, and when they needed him, he was always there.

古文：舜年二十以孝闻。
现代文：舜二十岁时，就因为孝顺出了名。
English: At the age of twenty, he became famous for his filial piety.

古文：三十而帝尧问可用者，四岳咸荐虞舜，曰可。
现代文：三十岁时，尧帝问谁可以治理天下，四岳全都推荐虞舜，说这个人可以。
English: At the age of thirty, Emperor Gong asked who could rule the world, and the four mountains all recommended Yu Yao, saying that this person could.

古文：于是尧乃以二女妻舜以观其内，使九男与处以观其外。
现代文：于是尧把两个女儿嫁给了舜来观察他在家的德行，让九个儿子和他共处来观察他在外的为人。
English: So Yao married his two daughters to Yao to observe his virtue at home, and let his nine sons live with him to observe his character outside.

古文：舜居妫汭，内行弥谨。
现代文：舜居住在妫水岸边，他在家里做事更加谨慎。
English: He lives on the shore of Surabaya and is more careful at home.

古文：尧二女不敢以贵骄事舜亲戚，甚有妇道。
现代文：尧的两个女儿不敢因为自己出身高贵就傲慢地对待舜的亲属，很讲究为妇之道。
English: Zou's two daughters did not dare to treat Zou's relatives arrogantly because of their noble birth, and they were very particular about being women.

古文：尧九男皆益笃。
现代文：尧的九个儿子也更加笃诚忠厚。
English: Yan's nine sons are also more sincere and loyal.

古文：舜耕历山，历山之人皆让畔；渔雷泽，雷泽上人皆让居；陶河滨，河滨器皆不苦窳。
现代文：舜在历山耕作，历山人都能互相推让地界；在雷泽捕鱼，雷泽的人都能推让便于捕鱼的位置；在黄河岸边制做陶器，那里就完全没有次品了。
English: In farming in Leshan, people in Leshan can push the land boundary to each other; in fishing in Laize, people in Laize can push the location that is convenient for fishing; in making pottery on the banks of the Yellow River, there are no defective products at all.

古文：一年而所居成聚，二年成邑，三年成都。
现代文：一年的功夫，他住的地方就成为一个村落，二年就成为一个小城镇，三年就变成大都市了。
English: With one year's effort, the place where he lived became a village, two years later it became a small town, and three years later it became a metropolis.

古文：尧乃赐舜絺衣，与琴，为筑仓廪，予牛羊。
现代文：见了这些，尧就赐给舜一套细葛布衣服，给他一张琴，为他建造仓库，还赐给他牛和羊。
English: When the donkey saw this, he gave him a robe of fine linen, and a harp, and built him a house, and gave him cattle and sheep.

古文：瞽叟尚复欲杀之，使舜上涂廪，瞽叟从下纵火焚廪。
现代文：瞽叟仍然想杀他，让舜登高去用泥土修补谷仓，瞽叟却从下面放火焚烧。
English: The badger still wanted to kill him, so he let the badger climb up to repair the barn with soil, but the badger set fire to it from below.

古文：舜乃以两笠自扞而下，去，得不死。
现代文：舜用两个斗笠遮避保护着自己，像长了翅膀一样跳下来，逃开了，才得以不死。
English: The dragonfly shielded and protected itself with two battle-axes, jumped down as if it had grown wings, and fled, only then was it able to survive.

古文：后瞽叟又使舜穿井，舜穿井为匿空旁出。
现代文：后来瞽叟又让舜挖井，舜挖井的时候，在侧壁凿出一条暗道通向外边。
English: Later, Zou asked Zou to dig a well. While Zou was digging the well, he chiseled out a secret passage in the side wall leading to the outside.

古文：舜既入深，瞽叟与象共下土实井，舜从匿空出，去。
现代文：舜挖到深处，瞽叟和象一起往下倒土填埋水井，舜从旁边的暗道出去，又逃开了。
English: The badger dug deep, the badger and the elephant together went down and filled the well, the badger went out through a side passage and ran away again.

古文：瞽叟、象喜，以舜为已死。
现代文：瞽叟和象很高兴，以为舜已经死了。
English: The baboon and the elephant were so happy that they thought the baboon was dead.

古文：象曰 本谋者象。 
现代文：象说： 最初出这个主意的是我。 
English: The elephant said, "I was the one who first came up with the idea."

古文：象与其父母分，于是曰： 舜妻尧二女，与琴，象取之。
现代文：象跟他的父母一起瓜分舜的财产，说： 舜娶过来尧的两个女儿，还有尧赐给他的琴，我都要了。
English: So he divided his property between his father and his mother, saying, "I will take my two daughters, whom I married, and my harp, which I gave to my father."

古文：牛羊仓廪予父母。 
现代文：牛羊和谷仓都归父母吧。 
English: Cows, sheep and barns should all belong to the parents.

古文：象乃止舜宫居，鼓其琴。
现代文：象于是住在舜的屋里，弹着舜的琴。
English: So the elephant lived in the donkey's house and played the donkey's harp.

古文：舜往见之。象鄂不怿，曰： 我思舜正郁陶！ 
现代文：舜回到自己的住处看到象，象大惊失色，继而又摆出闷闷不乐的样子，说： 我正在想念你呢，想得我好心闷啊！ 舜说： 是啊，但愿你是这样啊！ 
English: The Grasshopper went back to his home and saw the Elephant. The Elephant was shocked and disgraced. He then put on a sullen face and said, "I'm missing you. I'm so sad thinking about you!" The Grasshopper said, "Yes, I wish you were like that!"

古文：舜曰： 然，尔其庶矣！ 舜复事瞽叟爱弟弥谨。
现代文：舜还像以前一样待奉父母，友爱兄弟，而且更加恭谨。
English: He is still as devoted to his parents and brothers as before, and is even more respectful.

古文：于是尧乃试舜五典百官，皆治。
现代文：这样，尧才试用舜去理顺五种伦理道德和参与百官的事，都干得很好。
English: In this way, I have only tried to use the yakitori to rationalize the five kinds of ethics and morality and to participate in the affairs of the officials, and I have done a good job.

古文：昔高阳氏有才子八人，世得其利，谓之 八恺 。
现代文：从前高阳氏有富于才德的子孙八人，世人得到他们的好处，称之为八恺，意思就是八个和善的人。
English: Once upon a time, there were eight talented descendants of the Goyang clan, and the world benefited from them. They were called the Eight Graces, which means eight kindhearted people.

古文：高辛氏有才子八人，世谓之 八元 。
现代文：高辛氏有有才德的子孙八人，世人称之为 八元 ，意思就是八个善良的人。
English: Mr. Gao Xin has eight talented children and grandchildren. The world calls them eight yuan, which means eight good people.

古文：此十六族者，世济其美，不陨其名。
现代文：这十六个家族的人，世世代代保持着他们先人的美德，没有败落他们先人的名声。
English: The people of these sixteen families have maintained the virtues of their ancestors for generations, and have not lost the reputation of their ancestors.

古文：至于尧，尧未能举。
现代文：到尧的时候，尧没有举用他们。
English: When the time came, he did not use them.

古文：舜举八恺，使主后土，以揆百事，莫不时序。
现代文：舜举用了八恺的后代，让他们主管农业，负责各项政务，都办得有条有理。
English: Yao He used the descendants of Yao Yao, put them in charge of agriculture, responsible for various government affairs, and managed everything in an orderly manner.

古文：举八元，使布五教于四方，父义，母慈，兄友，弟恭，子孝，内平外成。
现代文：舜又举用了八元的后代，让他们向四方传布五种教化，使得做父亲的有道义，做母亲的慈爱，做兄长的友善，做弟弟的恭谨，做儿子的孝顺，家庭和睦，邻里真诚。
English: He also used the eight yuan to raise the descendants, let them spread the five kinds of enlightenment to the four directions, so that the father would have morality, the mother would be kind, the elder brother would be friendly, the younger brother would be respectful, the son would be filial, the family would be harmonious, and the neighborhood would be sincere.

古文：昔帝鸿氏有不才子，掩义隐贼，好行凶慝，天下谓之浑沌。
现代文：从前帝鸿氏有个不成材的后代，不施仁义，包庇残贼，好行凶作恶，天下人称他为浑沌。
English: Once upon a time, there was a worthless descendant of the Taihong clan. He did not practice benevolence, sheltered ruffians, and was fond of committing evil. People all over the world called him Chaos.

古文：少暤氏有不才子，毁信恶忠，崇饰恶言，天下谓之穷奇。
现代文：意思是说他野蛮不开化。少皞氏也有个不成材的后代，毁弃信义，厌恶忠直，喜欢邪恶的言语，天下人称他为穷奇，意思是说他怪异无比。
English: It means that he is barbaric and unenlightened. The Shao Wei clan also has a worthless descendant, who abandons loyalty, loathes loyalty, and likes evil words. People around the world call him bizarre, which means that he is extremely strange.

古文：颛顼氏有不才子，不可教训，不知话言，天下谓之檮杌。
现代文：颛顼氏有个不成材的后代，不可调教，不听取好话，天下人称他为梼杌，意思是说他凶顽绝伦。
English: Mr. Zou has an unqualified descendant, who cannot be trained and does not listen to kind words. People all over the world call him Zou, which means that he is extremely fierce.

古文：此三族世忧之。
现代文：这三个家族的人，世代令人感到忧虑。
English: In all three families, the generation gap is worrisome.

古文：至于尧，尧未能去。
现代文：到尧的时候，尧没有把他们除掉。
English: When the time came, he did not get rid of them.

古文：缙云氏有不才子，贪于饮食，冒于货贿，天下谓之饕餮。
现代文：缙云氏有个不成材的后代，贪于饮食，图于财货，天下人称之为饕餮，意思是说他贪得无厌。
English: Zou Yun had an illegitimate offspring who was greedy for food and money. People around the world called him Zou, which means he was insatiably greedy.

古文：天下恶之，比之三凶。
现代文：天下人憎恨他，把他与上面说的三凶并列在一起称为四凶。
English: People around the world hated him and called him the four evils along with the three evils mentioned above.

古文：舜宾于四门，乃流四凶族，迁于四裔，以御螭魅，于是四门辟，言毋凶人也。
现代文：舜在四门接待四方宾客时，流放了这四个凶恶的家族，把他们赶到了边远地区，去抵御害人的妖魔，从此开放了四门，大家都说没有恶人了。
English: While receiving guests from the four directions at the four gates, he exiled the four evil families and drove them to the outlying areas to resist the harmful demons. From then on, the four gates were opened, and everyone said that there were no evil people.

古文：舜入于大麓，烈风雷雨不迷，尧乃知舜之足授天下。
现代文：舜进入山林的时候，遇到暴风雷雨也不迷路误事，尧于是才知道了凭着舜的才能是可以把天下传授给他的。
English: When he entered the mountain forest, he did not get lost in the storms and thunderstorms, and only then did he know that with his talent, he could pass on the world to him.

古文：尧老，使舜摄行天子政，巡狩。
现代文：尧年纪大了，让舜代行天子之政，到四方去巡视。
English: Now that he is old, let him carry out the government of the Son of Heaven on his behalf, and go to the four directions to inspect.

古文：舜得举用事二十年，而尧使摄政。
现代文：舜被举用掌管政事二十年，尧让他代行天子的政务。
English: He was appointed to be in charge of government affairs for twenty years, and the emperor asked him to carry out the government affairs on behalf of the emperor.

古文：摄政八年而尧崩。
现代文：代行政务八年，尧逝世了。
English: After eight years of acting as chief executive, Zou passed away.

古文：三年丧毕，让丹朱，天下归舜。
现代文：服丧三年完毕，舜让位给丹朱，可是天下人都来归服舜。
English: After three years of mourning, he gave way to Danzhu, but people from all over the world came to pay their respects.

古文：而禹、皋陶、契、后稷、伯夷、夔、龙、倕、益、彭祖自尧时而皆举用，未有分职。
现代文：禹、皋陶、契、后稷、伯夷、夔、龙、倕、益、彭祖，从尧的时候就都得到举用，却一直没有职务。
English: Yu, Xuntao, Qi, Houyi, Boyi, Zou, Long, Zou, Yi, Pengzu, have all been promoted since the time of Zou, but they have never had a position.

古文：于是舜乃至于文祖，谋于四岳，辟四门，明通四方耳目，命十二牧论帝德，行厚德，远佞人，则蛮夷率服。
现代文：于是舜就到文祖庙，与四岳商计，开放四门，让四方言路畅通，他让十二州牧评论天子的德行，广施恩德，远离小人，偏远地区的部族就都会归服。
English: So he went to the Temple of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors.

古文：舜谓四岳曰： 有能奋庸美尧之事者，使居官相事？ 
现代文：舜对四岳说： 有谁能奋发努力，建立功业，光大帝尧的事业，授给他官职辅佐我办事呢？ 
English: Zou said to Si Yue, "Who can make the greatest efforts to establish a career, a career worthy of emperors, and be given an official position to assist me in my work?

古文：皆曰： 伯禹为司空，可美帝功。 舜曰： 嗟，然！
现代文：四岳都说： 让伯禹担任司空，可以光大帝尧的事业。 舜说： 嗯，好！
English: The four mountains all said: Let Bo Yu serve as the secretary of the sky, and he can light up the cause of the great emperor Zhai. Zhai said: Well, good!

古文：禹，汝平水土，维是勉哉。 
现代文：禹，你去负责平治水土，一定要努力办好啊！ 
English: Yu, you are in charge of water and soil remediation, you must do a good job!

古文：禹拜稽首，让于稷、契与皋陶。
现代文：禹跪地叩头拜谢，谦让给稷、契和皋陶。
English: Yu knelt down and bowed his head in thanks, humbly conceding to Yu, Qi and Yu Tao.

古文：舜曰： 然，往矣。 
现代文：舜说： 好了，去吧！ 
English: The dragonfly said, "All right, let's go!"

古文：舜曰： 弃，黎民始饥，汝后稷播时百谷。 
现代文：舜说： 弃，黎民正在挨饿受饥，你负责农业，去教他们播种百谷吧。 
English: Zou said, "Forget it. The people of Li are starving. You are in charge of agriculture. Go and teach them how to sow grain."

古文：舜曰： 契，百姓不亲，五品不驯，汝为司徒，而敬敷五教，在宽。 
现代文：舜又说： 皋陶，蛮夷侵扰中原，抢劫杀人，在我们的境内外作乱，你担任司法官，五刑要使用得当，根据罪行轻重在三个地方行刑。
English: Zou also said: Zou Tao, you are a barbarian who has invaded the Central Plains, robbed and killed people, and caused turmoil inside and outside our borders. As a judicial officer, you must use the five punishments properly, and execute the punishment in three places according to the severity of the crime.

古文：舜曰： 皋陶，蛮夷猾夏，寇贼奸轨，汝作士，五刑有服，五服三就；五流有度，五度三居：维明能信。 舜曰： 谁能驯予工？ 
现代文：五刑宽减为流放的，流放要根据罪行的轻重分为五种，流放地点分为三个等级：只有公正严明，才能使人信服。 舜问： 那么谁能管理我的各种工匠？ 
English: If the five-year sentence is reduced to banishment, the banishment should be divided into five types according to the severity of the crime, and the place of banishment should be divided into three levels: only if it is fair and strict can it be convincing.

古文：皆曰垂可。
现代文：大家都说垂可以。
English: Everyone says it can be done.

古文：于是以垂为共工。
现代文：于是任命垂为共工，统领各种工匠。
English: As a result, he appointed Zhuge as a co-worker to lead all kinds of craftsmen.

古文：舜曰： 谁能驯予上下草木鸟兽？ 
现代文：舜又问： 谁能管理我山上泽中的草木鸟兽？ 
English: The baboon also asked: Who can manage the plants, trees, birds and animals in my mountain meadow?

古文：皆曰益可。
现代文：大家都说益行。
English: Everyone says it's beneficial.

古文：于是以益为朕虞。
现代文：于是任命益为朕虞，主管山泽。
English: As a result, Yamazawa, who was in charge, was appointed to take over.

古文：益拜稽首，让于诸臣朱虎、熊罴。
现代文：益下拜叩头，推让给朱虎、熊罴。
English: More and more bowing and kowtowing, yielding to Zhu Hu and Xiong Yao.

古文：舜曰： 往矣，汝谐。 
现代文：舜说： 去吧，你行。 
English: Zou said, "Go ahead, you can do it."

古文：遂以朱虎、熊罴为佐。
现代文：就让朱虎、熊罴做他的助手。
English: He asked Zhu Hu and Xiong Yao to be his assistants.

古文：舜曰： 嗟！四岳，有能典朕三礼？ 
现代文：舜说： 啊，四岳，有谁能替我主持天事、地事、人事三种祭祀？ 
English: Zou said, "Ah, Siyue, is there anyone who can preside over the three sacrificial rites of heaven, earth and man for me?"

古文：皆曰伯夷可。
现代文：大家都说伯夷可以。
English: Everyone says Bo Yi can do it.

古文：舜曰： 嗟！伯夷，以汝为秩宗，夙夜维敬，直哉维静絜。 
现代文：舜说： 啊，伯夷，我任命你担秩宗，主管祭祀，要早晚虔敬，要正直清明啊！ 
English: Zou said, "Ah, Boyi, I have appointed you to be in charge of the Chichibu sect, in charge of the sacrificial rites. You must be pious in the morning and in the evening, and you must be honest and clear."

古文：伯夷让夔、龙。舜曰： 然。以夔为典乐，教稺子，直而温，宽而栗，刚而毋虐，简而毋傲；诗言意，歌长言，声依永，律和声，八音能谐，毋相夺伦，神人以和。 
现代文：伯夷推让给夔、龙，舜说： 那好，就任命夔为典乐，掌管音乐，教育少年，要正直而温和，宽厚而严肃，刚正而不暴虐，简约而不傲慢；诗用来表达思想，歌用来延长诗中语言的情感，乐声帮助表达，还要用标准的音律来使乐声和谐。
English: He said, "Well, then, let's appoint Gong to be the music master, to be in charge of the music, to educate the young people to be honest and gentle, generous and serious, upright and not tyrannical, simple and not arrogant; poetry is used to express thoughts, song is used to prolong the emotion of the language in the poem, music helps to express, and standard music is used to make the music harmonious.

古文：夔曰： 于！予击石拊石，百兽率舞。 
现代文：八种乐器的声音谐调一致，不相互失去次序，这样，就能通过音乐达到人与神相和的境界啦。 
English: Eight musical instruments sound in unison, without losing the order of each other, so that through music we can reach the realm of harmony between man and God.

古文：舜曰： 龙，朕畏忌谗说殄伪，振惊朕众，命汝为纳言，夙夜出入朕命，惟信。 
现代文：夔说： 呣，我有节奏地敲打石罄，各种禽兽都会跟着跳起舞来的。 舜说： 龙，我非常憎恶那种诬陷他人的坏话和灭绝道义的行为，惊扰我的臣民，我任命你为纳言官，早晚传达我的旨命，报告下情，一定要诚实守信。 
English: The dragon said, "Dragon, I detest the kind of slander and immoral behavior that disturbs my subjects. I have appointed you as my spokesman. Sooner or later, you must convey my will and mission, report the situation, and be honest and trustworthy."

古文：舜曰： 嗟！女二十有二人，敬哉，惟时相天事。 
现代文：舜说： 喂，你们二十二个人，要谨守职责，时时辅佐我做好上天交付的治国大事。 
English: Zou said, "Hello, you twenty-two people, you should be conscientious of your duties and always help me to do a good job of governing the country, which was entrusted to me by heaven.

古文：三岁一考功，三考绌陟，远近众功咸兴。
现代文：此后，每三年考核一次功绩，通过三次考核来决定罢免或升迁，因此远近的各项事务都发展起来了。
English: Since then, every three years, the performance appraisal has been conducted, and the dismissal or promotion has been decided through three appraisals. As a result, various matters have developed.

古文：分北三苗。
现代文：又分化瓦解了三苗部族。
English: In addition, the three seedlings were divided and disintegrated.

古文：此二十二人咸成厥功：皋陶为大理，平，民各伏得其实；伯夷主礼，上下咸让；垂主工师，百工致功；益主虞，山泽辟；弃主稷，百谷时茂；契主司徒，百姓亲和；龙主宾客，远人至；十二牧行而九州莫敢辟违；唯禹之功为大，披九山，通九泽，决九河，定九州，各以其职来贡，不失厥宜。
现代文：这二十二人个个成就功业：皋陶担任大理，掌管刑法，断案平正，人们都信服他实事求是；伯夷主持礼仪，上上下下能都够谦恭礼让；垂担任工师，主管百工，百工都能做好自己的工作；益担任虞，主管山泽，山林湖泽都得到开发；弃担任稷，主管农业，百谷按季节茂盛成长；契担任司徒，主管教化，百姓亲密和睦；龙主管接待宾客，远方的部族前来归附；舜所置十二州牧做事，禹所定九州内的民众没有谁违抗。其中禹的功劳最大，开通了九座大山，疏通了九处湖泽，治理了九条河流，划定了九州方界，各地都按照应缴纳的贡物前来进贡，没有违反规定的。
English: Each of these twenty-two people has achieved a great deal of work: Xun Tao served as Dali, in charge of criminal law, adjudicated cases fairly, and people were convinced that he sought truth from facts; Bo Yi presided over etiquette, and people from all walks of life were able to be humble and courteous; Duan served as an engineer, in charge of hundreds of workers, and hundreds of workers were able to do their work well; Yixing served as a state, in charge of mountains and lakes, and mountains and lakes were developed; abandoned as a magistrate, in charge of agriculture, and hundreds of valleys grew luxuriantly according to the season; Ji served

古文：方五千里，至于荒服。
现代文：纵横五千里的领域，都受到安抚，直到离京师最远的边荒地区。
English: The territory of five thousand miles in length and breadth was pacified, right up to the most remote and desolate regions farthest from Beijing.

古文：南抚交趾、北发，西戎、析枝、渠廋、氐、羌，北山戎、发、息慎，东长、鸟夷，四海之内咸戴帝舜之功。
现代文：那时，南方安抚到交阯、北发，西方安抚到戎、析枝、渠廋、氐、羌，北方安抚到山戎、发、息慎，东方安抚到长、鸟夷，四海之内，共同称颂帝舜的功德。
English: At that time, the South was pacified to Jiaozuo and the North to Fata, the West was pacified to Rong, Zhuling, Quqiao, Ying and Zeng, the North was pacified to Shan Rong, Fata and Shixian, and the East was pacified to Chang and Jiaozuo, within the four seas, to jointly praise the merits of the emperor.

古文：于是禹乃兴九招之乐，致异物，凤皇来翔。
现代文：于是禹创作《九招》乐曲歌颂舜的功德，招来了祥瑞之物，凤凰也飞来，随乐声盘旋起舞。
English: As a result, Yu composed "Nine Movements," a piece of music that extols the virtues of the phoenix, inviting auspicious things, and the phoenix also flew, circling and dancing with the music.

古文：天下明德皆自虞帝始。
现代文：天下清明的德政都从虞舜时代开始。
English: All clear-cut German politics began in the age of the yakuza.

古文：舜年二十以孝闻，年三十尧举之，年五十摄行天子事，年五十八尧崩，年六十一代尧践帝位。
现代文：舜二十岁时因为孝顺而闻名，三十岁时被尧举用，五十岁时代理天子政务，五十八岁时尧逝世，六十一岁时接替尧登临天子之位。
English: At the age of twenty, he was famous for his filial piety. At the age of thirty, he was promoted to the highest position. At the age of fifty, he was entrusted with the government affairs of heaven. At the age of fifty-eight, he died. At the age of sixty-one, he succeeded to the throne of heaven.

古文：践帝位三十九年，南巡狩，崩于苍梧之野。
现代文：登位三十九年，到南方巡视，在南方苍梧的郊野逝世。
English: In the thirty-ninth year of his enthronement, he went on a tour of the south and died in the vast countryside of the south.

古文：葬于江南九疑，是为零陵。
现代文：葬埋在长江南岸的九嶷山，这就是零陵。
English: Buried in Jiuyuan Mountain on the south bank of the Yangtze River, this is the Zero Mausoleum.

古文：舜之践帝位，载天子旗，往朝父瞽叟，夔夔唯谨，如子道。
现代文：舜登临帝位之后，乘着有天子旗帜的车子去给父亲瞽叟请安，态度谦恭谨慎，遵循为子之道。
English: After he ascended to the throne, he rode in a chariot bearing the banner of the Son of Heaven to greet his father. He was humble and prudent, and followed the way of being a son.

古文：封弟象为诸侯。
现代文：又把弟弟象封为诸侯。
English: He also made his younger brother Zhao a vassal.

古文：舜子商均亦不肖，舜乃豫荐禹于天。
现代文：舜的儿子商均也不成材，舜就事先把禹推荐给上天。
English: Yao's son, Shangjun, was also not a success, and Yao recommended Yu to Heaven in advance.

古文：十七年而崩。
现代文：十七年后舜逝世。
English: Seventeen years later, Zou died.

古文：三年丧毕，禹亦乃让舜子，如舜让尧子。
现代文：服丧三年完毕，禹也把帝位让给舜的儿子，就跟舜让给尧的儿子时的情形一样。
English: After three years of mourning, Yu also ceded the throne to Yu's son, just as Yu did to Yu's son.

古文：诸侯归之，然后禹践天子位。
现代文：诸侯归服禹，这样，禹就登临了天子之位。
English: The princes submitted to Yu, and in this way, Yu ascended to the position of the Son of Heaven.

古文：尧子丹朱，舜子商均，皆有疆土，以奉先祀。
现代文：尧的儿子丹朱，舜的儿子商均分别在唐和虞得到封地，来奉祀祖先。
English: Zou's son, Dan Zhu, and Zou's son, Shang, both obtained fiefs in Tang and Yu, respectively, to worship their ancestors.

古文：服其服，礼乐如之。
现代文：禹还让他们穿自己家族的服饰，用自己家族的礼乐仪式。
English: Yu also let them wear their family's costumes and perform their family's ritual music.

古文：以客见天子，天子弗臣，示不敢专也。
现代文：他们用宾客之礼朝见天子，天子也不把他们当臣下对待，以表示自己不敢独占天下。
English: They use the gift of guests to see the Son of God in the morning, and the Son of God does not treat them as subjects, to show that he does not dare to monopolize the world.

古文：自黄帝至舜、禹，皆同姓而异其国号，以章明德。
现代文：从黄帝到舜、禹，都是同姓，但立了不同的国号，为的是彰明各自光明的德业。
English: From the Yellow Emperor to Yao and Yu, they all have the same surname, but have set up different country names in order to highlight their respective bright virtues.

古文：故黄帝为有熊，帝颛顼为高阳，帝喾为高辛，帝尧为陶唐，帝舜为有虞。
现代文：所以，黄帝号为有熊，帝颛顼号为高阳，帝喾号为高辛，帝尧号为陶唐，帝舜号为有虞。
English: Therefore, the Yellow Emperor is U Xiong, the Empress Dowager is Gao Yang, the Empress Dowager is Gao Xin, the Empress Dowager is Tao Tang, and the Empress Dowager is You Gu.

古文：帝禹为夏后而别氏，姓姒氏。
现代文：帝禹号为夏后，而另分出氏，姓姒氏。
English: Emperor Yu's posthumous name was Xiao, but he also had another family name, Min.

古文：契为商，姓子氏。
现代文：契的后裔建立了商，姓子氏。
English: Chi's descendants established a trading company and took the surname Zhou.

古文：弃为周，姓姬氏。
现代文：弃的后裔建立了周，姓姬氏。
English: The abandoned descendants established Zhou, surnamed Ji.

古文：太史公曰：学者多称五帝，尚矣。
现代文：太史公说：学者们很多人都称述五帝，五帝的年代已经很久远了。
English: Taishigong said: Many scholars have claimed to describe the Five Emperors. The era of the Five Emperors is long gone.

古文：然尚书独载尧以来；而百家言黄帝，其文不雅驯，荐绅先生难言之。
现代文：《尚书》只记载着尧以来的史实；而各家叙说黄帝，文字粗疏而不典范，士大夫们也很难说得清楚。
English: "Shangshu" only records the historical facts since the Han Dynasty; while each family describes the Yellow Emperor, the writing is rough and not exemplary, and it is difficult for scholars to speak clearly.

古文：孔子所传宰予问五帝德及帝系姓，儒者或不传。
现代文：孔子传下来的《宰予问五帝德》及《帝系姓》，读书人有的也不传习。
English: "Ask the Five Gods" and "Imperial Surnames" handed down by Confucius, some readers do not learn.

古文：余尝西至空桐，北过涿鹿，东渐于海，南浮江淮矣，至长老皆各往往称黄帝、尧、舜之处，风教固殊焉，总之不离古文者近是。
现代文：我曾经往西到过空桐，往北路过涿鹿，往东到过大海，往南渡过长江、淮水，所到过的地方，到老人称赞黄帝、尧、舜事迹的地方，虽然风俗教化都有不同，但和古文记载不相悖的说法还是比较可信的。
English: I have been to the west to the Ku Tung, to the north to the Elk, to the east to the sea, to the south across the Yangtze River, Huai Shui, to the places I have been, to the place where the old man praised the deeds of the Yellow Emperor, the Dragonfly and the Grasshopper, although the customs and education are different, but the argument that does not contradict the ancient records is still more credible.

古文：予观春秋、国语，其发明五帝德、帝系姓章矣，顾弟弗深考，其所表见皆不虚。
现代文：我研读了《春秋》《国语》，它们对《五帝德》《帝系姓》的阐发都很明了，只是人们不曾深入考求，其实它们的记述都不是虚妄之说。
English: I have studied "Spring and Autumn" and "National Language," and their interpretations of "Five Gods and Goddesses" and "Imperial Surnames" are very clear, but people have not studied them in depth. In fact, their descriptions are not false.

古文：书缺有间矣，其轶乃时时见于他说。
现代文：《尚书》残缺，断断续续，但散轶的记载却常常可以从其他书中找到。
English: Shangshu is incomplete and intermittent, but scattered records can often be found in other books.

古文：非好学深思，心知其意，固难为浅见寡闻道也。
现代文：如果不是好学深思，真正在心里领会了它们的意思，想要向那些学识浅薄，见闻不广的人说明白，肯定是困难的。
English: If you are not studious and thoughtful, and truly understand their meaning in your heart, it must be difficult to explain to those who are not well-informed.

古文：余并论次，择其言尤雅者，故著为本纪书首。
现代文：我把这些材料加以评议编次，选择文辞特别雅正的，写成这篇本纪，作为全书第一篇。
English: I have reviewed and arranged these materials, and selected the most elegant wording to write this chronicle, which is the first part of the book.

