古文：闻古之善用人者，必循天顺人而明赏罚。
现代文：听说古代善于用人的君主，必定会遵循天道顺应人情并且赏罚分明。
English: It is said that the ancient emperors who were good at employing people would surely follow the heavenly way of accommodating people's feelings and clearly reward and punish them.

古文：循天，则用力寡而功立；顺人，则刑罚省而令行；明赏罚，则伯夷、盗跖不乱。
现代文：遵循天道，就能够少用气力而建立功业；顺应人情，就能够少用刑罚而推行法令；赏罚分明，伯夷、盗跖就不会混淆。
English: If you follow the way of heaven, you will be able to build your career with less effort; if you follow human nature, you will be able to implement laws and regulations with less punishment; reward and punishment are clear, and there will be no confusion between being a thief and a thief.

古文：如此，则白黑分矣。
现代文：这样一来，黑白就分明了。
English: In this way, the black and white is clear.

古文：治国之臣，效功于国以履位，见能于官以受职，尽力于权衡以任事。
现代文：太平国家的臣子，为国立功来履行职守，为公尽能来接受职务，依法尽力来担任职事。
English: The courtiers of the Taiping country should perform their duties for the national merit, do their best to accept their duties for the public, and do their best to perform their duties in accordance with the law.

古文：人臣皆宜其能，胜其官，轻其任，而莫怀余力于心，莫负兼官之责于君。
现代文：做臣子的都能发挥他们的才能，胜任他们的官职，完成他们的任务，而不需要把余力保存在心里，不需要对君主承担兼职的责任。
English: As courtiers, they can give full play to their talents, be competent in their official duties, and complete their tasks, without having to keep spare energy in their hearts, and without having to take on part-time responsibilities for the monarch.

古文：故内无伏怨之乱，外无马服之患。
现代文：所以在国内没有心怀怨恨的祸乱，在国外没有像赵括那样轻敌冒进的祸患。
English: Therefore, there is no scourge of resentment at home, and there is no scourge of the enemy rushing in abroad like Zhao Guan.

古文：明君使事不相干，故莫讼；使士不兼官，故技长；使人不同功，故莫争。
现代文：明君使职事不相干挠，所以不会发生争吵；使臣下不兼任官职，所以各自都有擅长的技能；使人们不为同一件事情而立功，所以不会发生争斗。
English: The Ming and Qing Dynasties made the posts irrelevant, so there would be no quarrels; the envoys and subordinates did not concurrently serve as officials, so they each had their own skills; so that people did not make merit for the same thing, so there would be no fights.

古文：争讼止，技长立，则强弱不觳力，冰炭不合形，天下莫得相伤，治之至也。
现代文：争吵平息了，擅长的技能表现出来了，强弱之间就不会争胜，如同冰炭不在同一个器皿中一样，天下所有的人不得相互伤害，这是治世的最高境界。
English: Quarrels have subsided, skills have been demonstrated, and there will be no competition between the strong and the weak. Just as ice and coal do not belong in the same vessel, all people in the world must not harm each other. This is the highest realm of governance.

古文：释法术而心治，尧不能正一国，去规矩而妄意度，奚仲不能成一轮；废尺寸而差短长，王尔不能半中。
现代文：放弃法术而凭主观办事，就是尧也不能治理好一个国家；不要规矩而胡乱猜测，就是奚仲也不能做好一个轮子；废弃尺寸而比较长短，就是王尔也不能做到半数符合标准。
English: If you give up magic and rely on subjectivity, even a baboon can't govern a country well; if you don't have rules and make wild guesses, even a baboon can't make a wheel; if you abandon size and compare length, even a king can't meet the standard by half.

古文：使中主守法术，拙匠守规矩尺寸，则万不失矣。
现代文：假如中等才能的君主遵循法术。笨拙的匠人掌握规矩尺寸，就会万无一失了。
English: If a prince of mediocre talent follows magic, and a clumsy craftsman grasps the rules of dimensions, he will be infallible.

古文：君人者能去贤巧之所不能，守中拙之所万不失，则人力尽而功名立。
现代文：做君主的能去掉贤人、巧匠也办不成事情的做法，奉行中主、拙匠都万无一失的做法，人们就会竭尽全力，功名也会建立起来。
English: Monarchs can get rid of the practice that sages and craftsmen can't do things, and people will do their best and their reputation will be established if they follow the practice that middlemen and unskilled craftsmen are infallible.

古文：明主立可为之赏，设可避之罚。
现代文：明君设立可以得到的赏赐，设立可以避免的刑罚。
English: Mingjun sets up rewards that can be obtained, and sets up punishments that can be avoided.

古文：故贤者劝赏而不见子胥之祸，不肖者少罪而不见伛剖背，盲者处平而不遇深谷，愚者守静而不陷险危。
现代文：所以贤者奋力立功得赏而没有伍子胥那样的灾祸，不贤者少犯罪而不会遭到驼背被剖那样的冤枉刑罚，盲人处在平地而不会遇到深渊，蠢人过着安静的生活而不会陷入险境。
English: Therefore, the wise man strives to be rewarded and does not have the calamity of Wu Zixuan, the unwise man commits less crimes and does not suffer the unjust punishment of being dissected like a hunchback, the blind man is in the plain and does not encounter the abyss, and the stupid man lives a quiet life and does not fall into danger.

古文：如此，则上下之恩结矣。
现代文：这样的话，君臣之间的恩情就结下了。
English: In such a case, the relationship between monarch and vassal would be sealed.

古文：古之人曰： 其心难知，喜怒难中也。 
现代文：古人说：人心难以捉摸，喜怒难以猜中。 
English: The ancients said: the human heart is elusive, and it is difficult to guess one's emotions.

古文：故以表示目，以鼓语耳，以法教心。
现代文：所以用标记来指示眼睛，用鼓声给耳朵传信息，用法制给人心作规范。
English: Therefore, use the mark to indicate the eyes, use the drum to transmit information to the ears, and use the legal system to regulate the hearts of the people.

古文：君人者释三易之数而行一难知之心，如此，则怒积于上而怨积于下。
现代文：做君主的放弃这三种容易的方法而用一种难以摸透的思想行事，这样办事，君主就会积怒，臣下就会积怨。
English: If a prince abandons these three easy methods and acts with an impenetrable mind, the prince will accumulate anger and the vassal will accumulate resentment.

古文：以积怒而御积怨，则两危矣。
现代文：用积怒的君主来驾驭积怨的臣下，君臣就都危险了。
English: If a resentful monarch is used to control a resentful subject, both the prince and the subject are in danger.

古文：明主之表易见，故约立；其教易知，故言用；其法易为，故令行。
现代文：明君的标准容易看到，信约就能确立；他的教导容易懂得，说话就起作用；他的法制容易遵守，命令就会得到执行。
English: His standards are easy to see, his covenants are easy to establish; his teachings are easy to understand, his words are effective; his laws are easy to obey, and his orders are carried out.

古文：三者立而上无私心，则下得循法而治，望表而动，随绳而断，因攒而缝。
现代文：这三方面都做到了，君主又没有私心，臣下就可以遵循法令而治理政事，如同看着标志来行动，随着墨线来下斧，根据锥孔来上针一样。
English: All three aspects have been achieved, the monarch has no selfishness, and the subjects can follow the laws and govern the government affairs, just like watching the sign to act, following the ink line to lower the axe, and according to the taper hole to thread the needle.

古文：如此，则上无私威之毒，而下无愚拙之诛。
现代文：这样一来，君主就没有滥施淫威的残酷，臣下也没有愚蠢笨拙的过失。
English: In this way, the monarch does not have the cruelty of abuse of power, and the vassals do not have the stupid and clumsy mistakes.

古文：故上居明而少怒，下尽忠而少罪。
现代文：所以君主明察而少怒，臣下尽忠而少罪。
English: Therefore, the monarch sees clearly and is less angry, and the vassals are loyal and less guilty.

古文：闻之曰： 举事无患者，尧不得也。 
现代文：听别人说： 办事不出差错，就是尧也做不到。 
English: Listen to what others say: If you can't do things right, you can't do them at all.

古文：而世未尝无事也。君人者不轻爵禄，不易富贵，不可与救危国。
现代文：而社会从没有平安无事的时候，做君主的不肯放手赏给臣下爵禄和富贵，就不能解救危亡的国家。
English: And when society is never safe and sound, if a monarch is not willing to let go and reward his vassals with peerages and wealth, he cannot save a country in peril.

古文：故明主厉廉耻，招仁义。
现代文：所以明君鼓励廉耻之心，提倡仁义之举。
English: Therefore, Ming Jun encourages the spirit of shamelessness and advocates the act of benevolence.

古文：昔者介子推无爵禄而义随文公，不忍口腹而仁割其肌，故人主结其德，书图著其名。
现代文：过去介子推没有爵禄，凭着 义 追随晋文公出亡；途中饥饿难忍，又凭着 仁 割下身上的肉给晋文公吃，所以君主铭记他的德行，书上著录他的名字。
English: In the past, Jie Zi did not have a peerage, and he followed Jin Wengu to exile with righteousness; on the way, hunger was unbearable, and with benevolence, he cut the meat from his body and gave it to Jin Wengu to eat, so the monarch remembered his virtues and recorded his name in the book.

古文：人主乐乎使人以公尽力，而苦乎以私夺威；人臣安乎以能受职，而苦乎以一负二。
现代文：君主乐于使臣下为公尽力，而苦于他们为私夺权；臣子安于量才录用，而苦于身兼二职。
English: The monarch is happy to send his vassals to do their best for the public, but suffers from them seizing power for themselves; the vassal is satisfied with the quantity, but suffers from having two positions.

古文：故明主除人臣之所苦，而立人主之所乐。
现代文：所以明君除去君臣苦恼的事，设立君臣快乐的事。
English: Therefore, Emperor Ming eliminated the troublesome things for princes and ministers and established the happy things for princes and ministers.

古文：上下之利，莫长于此。
现代文：君臣的利益，没有比这更深远的了。
English: There is no more far-reaching interest of princes and ministers than this.

古文：不察私门之内，轻虑重事，厚诛薄罪，久怨细过，长侮偷快，数以德追祸，是断手而续以玉也，故世有易身之患。
现代文：不考察大臣私下的活动，轻率地考虑重大的事情，过重地处罚犯轻罪的人，长期怨恨臣下的小错，经常侮弄臣下来取得一时的愉快，频繁地用恩惠来补偿给人造成的灾难，这就像砍断手臂而接上玉一样，所以天下有君位被篡的祸患。
English: Not scrutinizing the private activities of ministers, rashly considering important matters, excessively punishing those who commit misdemeanors, long-term resentment of subordinates' minor mistakes, often mocking subordinates to gain temporary pleasure, frequently using favors to compensate for the disasters caused to people, this is like cutting off an arm and connecting it to a ball, so the world has the scourge of usurpation.

古文：人主立难为而罪不及，则私怨生；人臣失所长而奉难给，则伏怨结。
现代文：君主树立难以达到的标准，而去怪罪臣下没有达到，臣下就会产生私怨；臣下丢掉特长而去从事难以胜任的事情，心头就会积下怨恨。
English: Monarchs set up standards that are difficult to achieve, and if they blame their subjects for not achieving them, their subjects will have personal grudges; if their subjects lose their expertise and engage in incompetent things, their hearts will accumulate resentment.

古文：劳苦不抚循，忧悲不哀怜，喜则誉小人，贤不肖俱赏，怒则毁君子，使伯夷与盗跖俱辱，故臣有叛主。
现代文：君主对臣子的劳苦不抚慰，忧伤不同情；高兴时连小人都称誉，对贤和不贤的人一律赏赐；发怒时连君子也诋毁，使伯夷和盗跖同遭侮辱；所以臣子中就有背叛君主的人。
English: The monarch does not comfort the toil of his vassals, does not sympathize with their sorrow; when he is happy, he praises even the little ones, and rewards both the virtuous and the unvirtuous; when he is angry, he also slanders the gentlemen, so that both the peasants and the thieves are insulted; therefore, there are traitors to the monarch among his vassals.

古文：使燕王内憎其民而外爱鲁人，而燕不用而鲁不附。
现代文：假如燕王对内憎恨本国民众，对外喜爱鲁国人，那么燕人就不为他所用，鲁人也不会依附他。
English: If King Yan hated his own people at home and loved the Lu people abroad, then the Yan people would not be of any use to him, and the Lu people would not cling to him.

古文：民见憎，不能尽力而务功；鲁见说，而不能离死命而亲他主。
现代文：燕人被憎恨，就不能尽力来求得功劳；鲁人被喜爱，但不能冒死罪去亲近别国君主。
English: If the Swallow is hated, he cannot do his best to get credit; the Lu is loved, but he cannot risk his life to get close to the monarchs of other countries.

古文：如此，则人臣为隙穴，而人主独立。
现代文：如果这样，臣子就成了缝隙一样的隐患，君主就会陷于孤立。
English: If this were to happen, the vassal would become a hidden danger like a crevice, and the monarch would become isolated.

古文：以隙穴之臣而事独立之主，此之谓危殆。
现代文：用成了隐患的臣子去侍奉孤立的君主，这就叫危险。
English: To employ as a hidden danger a vassal in the service of an isolated sovereign, this is called danger.

古文：释仪的而妄发，虽中小不巧；释法制而妄怒，虽杀戮而奸人不恐。
现代文：放弃靶子而胡乱发射，即使射中很小的东西也不算技艺高超；放弃法制而乱发脾气，即使大肆杀伐，好人也不会害怕。
English: Abandoning the target and firing indiscriminately, even if something small is shot, it is not a superb skill; abandoning the rule of law and throwing a tantrum, even if they kill wildly, good people will not be afraid.

古文：罪生甲，祸归乙，伏怨乃结。
现代文：甲犯了罪，祸归于乙，怨恨就产生了。
English: A commits a crime, the blame falls on B, and resentment arises.

古文：故至治之国，有赏罚而无喜怒。故圣人极有刑法，而死无螫毒，故奸人服。
现代文：所以治理得最好的国家，实行赏罚，但不凭个人喜怒，所以圣人能达到治国的极致；建立刑法，但不逞私威杀人，所以奸人服罪。
English: That is why the best-governed countries reward and punish, but do not rely on personal emotions, so that saints can achieve the ultimate in governing the country; establish criminal law, but do not dare to kill, so that traitors confess.

古文：发矢中的，赏罚当符，故尧复生，羿复立。
现代文：射箭中靶，赏罚得当，所以尧可复生，羿能再世。
English: Archery in the target, reward and punishment properly, so you can revive, you can reincarnate.

古文：如此，则上无殷、夏之患，下无比干之祸，君高枕而臣乐业，道蔽天地，德极万世矣。
现代文：这样一来，君主就没有殷、夏亡国的祸患，臣下就没有比干剖心的灾难，君主高枕无忧，臣下乐于尽职，法术普遍地实行于夫下，恩德流传千秋万代。
English: In this way, the monarch does not have the calamity of Yin and Xia overthrowing the country, and the vassals do not have the calamity of the heart, the monarch has no worries, the vassals are happy to do their duty, the magic is generally practiced under the husband, and the virtue is passed down from generation to generation.

古文：夫人主不寒隙穴而劳力于赭垩，暴雨疾风必坏。
现代文：君主不堵塞缝隙而致于粉饰外表，遇到暴风骤雨就一定会坏事。
English: If the monarch does not close the cracks and causes the exterior to be whitewashed, it will definitely be a bad thing if there is a storm.

古文：不去眉睫之祸而慕贲、育之死，不谨萧墙之患而固金城于远境，不用近贤之课而外结万乘之交于千里，飘风一旦起，则贲、育不及救，而外交不及至，祸莫大于此。
现代文：不消除眼前祸患，却幻想孟贲、夏育为自己效死，不谨防内部祸患，却在边远地带加固城墙，不采用国内贤士的谋略，却去结交千里之外的大国，突然变故一旦发生，孟贲、夏育来不及解救，而结交的大国来不及赶到，灾祸再没有比这更大的了。
English: Do not eliminate the immediate disaster, but fantasize that Meng Xuan and Xia Yu are working for their own death, do not guard against internal disasters, but strengthen the city walls in remote areas, do not use the strategy of domestic sages, but to make friends with a great country thousands of miles away, if a sudden change occurs, Meng Xuan and Xia Yu will not be able to rescue, and the friendly great country will not be able to arrive, there is no greater disaster than this.

古文：当今之世，为人主忠计者，必无使燕王说鲁人，无使近世慕贤于古，无思越人以救中国溺者。
现代文：在当今社会中，替君主忠心献计的人，一定不要使自己的君主学燕王爱鲁人，不要使当代君主去仰慕古代的贤人，不要去指望善于泅水的越国人来救中原的溺水者。
English: In today's society, those who loyally devise plans for the monarch must not make their monarchs learn from the Elves, nor make the contemporary monarchs admire the ancient sages, nor expect the Yue people, who are good at drawing water, to save the drowning people of the Central Plains.

古文：如此，则上下亲，内功立，外名成。
现代文：这样一来，君臣就能亲密无间，在国内建立功业，在国外成就威名。
English: In this way, monarchs and ministers will be able to be intimate, establish a career in the country, and achieve prestige abroad.

