古文：王说曰： 《诗》云： 他人有心，予忖度之。 
现代文：齐宣王听后很高兴地说： 《诗经·小雅·巧言》说： 别人有什么心思，我能揣测出。 
English: After listening, Qi Xuan Wang said happily: "Poetry, Elegance, and Eloquence" said: I can guess what other people are thinking.

古文：夫子之谓也。
现代文：这就是说的先生您吧。
English: That's what you said, sir.

古文：夫我乃行之，反而求之，不得吾心。
现代文：我自己这样做了，反过来想想为什么要这样做，却说不出所以然来。
English: I've done it myself and thought about why I did it, but I couldn't put my finger on it.

古文：夫子言之，于我心有戚戚焉。
现代文：倒是先生您这么一说，我的便豁然开朗了。
English: On the contrary, sir, as soon as you said that, I suddenly became cheerful.

古文：此心之所以合于王者，何也？ 
现代文：但您说我的这种心态与用道德统一天下的王道相合又怎么理解呢？ 
English: But how do you understand that this mindset of mine is compatible with the royal road of using morality to unify the world?

古文：曰： 有复于王者曰： 吾力足以举百钧 ，而不足以举一羽； 明足以察秋毫之末 ，而不见舆薪，则王许之乎？ 
现代文：孟子说： 如果有人来向大王报告说： 我的力量能够举得起三千斤的重物，却拿不起一根羽毛；视力能够看清秋天刚换过的兽毛的末梢，却看不见摆在眼前的一车柴草。 
English: Mencius said: If someone came to report to the great king: My strength can lift a three-thousand-pound weight, but I can't lift a feather; my eyesight can see the ends of the animal hair that has just changed in the fall, but I can't see a cart of firewood in front of me.

古文：曰： 否。 
现代文：大王您会相信他的话吗？ 宣王说： 当然不会。 
English: Original text from

古文： 今恩足以及禽兽，而功不至于百姓者，独何与？
现代文：孟子便接着说： 如今大王您的恩惠能够施及动物，却偏偏不能够施及老百姓，这是什么原因呢？
English: Now, Your Majesty, Your grace can be bestowed on animals, but not on the common people. Why is that?

古文：然则一羽之不举，为不用力焉；舆薪之不见，为不用明焉，百姓之不见保，为不用恩焉。
现代文：这样看一根羽毛拿不起，是不愿意用力气；一车柴草看不见，是不愿意看的缘故；老百姓无法安居乐业，是君王不愿意施恩惠的缘故。
English: If you can't pick up a feather, it's because you don't want to use your strength; if you can't see a cart of firewood, it's because you don't want to see it; if people can't live and work in peace, it's because the king doesn't want to grant favors.

古文：故王之不王，不为也，非不能也。 
现代文：所以大王您没有能够用道德来统一天下，是您不愿意做，而不是做不到。 宣王说： 不愿意做和做不到有什么区别呢？ 
English: Therefore, great king, you have not been able to unify the world with morality, it is that you are unwilling to do it, not unable to do it. King Xuan said: What is the difference between unwilling to do it and unable to do it?

古文：曰： 不为者与不能者之形何以异？ 曰： 挟太山以超北海，语人曰 我不能 ，是诚不能也。
现代文：孟子说： 要一个人把泰山夹在胳膊下跳过北海，这人对别人说： 我做不到。 这确实是做不到。
English: Mencius said, "If a man were to jump over the North Sea with Mount Tai under his arm, and if he were to say to someone else, 'I can't do it,' it would be impossible.

古文：为长者折枝，语人曰 我不能 ，是不为也，非不能也。
现代文：要一个人为老年人折一根树枝这人告诉别人说： 我做不到。 这是不愿意做，而不是做不到。
English: If someone is asked to break a branch for an elderly person, this person tells others: I can't do it. This is unwillingness to do it, not inability.

古文：故王之不王，非挟太山以超北海之类也；王之不王，是折枝之类也。 
现代文：所以大王您没有做到用道德来统一天下，不是属于把泰山夹在胳膊下跳过北海的一类，而是属于为老年人折枝一类。
English: Therefore, Your Majesty, you have failed to use morality to unify the world. You do not belong to the category of jumping over the North Sea with Mount Tai under your arm, but to the category of twisting branches for the elderly.

古文： 老吾老，以及人之老；幼吾幼，以及人之幼。
现代文： 尊敬自家长辈，并由此尊敬别人家的长辈；爱护自己的孩子，并由此爱护别人的孩子。
English: Respect your own elders, and in so doing, respect the elders of others; love your own children, and in so doing, love the children of others.

古文：天下可运于掌。《诗》云： 刑于寡妻，至于兄弟，以御于家邦。 
现代文：做到了这一点，治理天下就像在手掌上转动一件小东西那样容易了。《诗经·大雅·思齐》说： 先给妻子做榜样，再推广到兄弟，再推广到家族和国家。 
English: Having done this, ruling the world is as easy as turning a small object on the palm of one's hand. "Daya Sizi" says: First, set an example for your wife, then spread it to your brothers, then spread it to your family and country.

古文：言举斯心加诸彼而已。
现代文：说的就是要把自己的心推广到别人身上去。
English: It's about extending your heart out to others.

古文：故推恩足以保四海，不推恩无以保妻子。
现代文：所以，推广恩德足以安定天下，不推广恩德连自己的妻子儿女都保不了。
English: Therefore, the promotion of benevolence is enough to stabilize the world. Without the promotion of benevolence, even one's own wife and children cannot be protected.

古文：古之人所以大过人者无他焉，善推其所为而已矣。
现代文：古代的圣贤之所以能远远超过一般人，没有别的什么，不过是善于推广他们的好行为罢了。
English: The sages of antiquity were able to surpass ordinary people only by virtue of their ability to propagate their good deeds.

古文：今恩足以及禽兽，而功不至于百姓者，独何与？ 
现代文：如今大王您的恩惠能够施及动物，却不能够施及老百姓，偏偏是为什么呢？
English: Now, Your Majesty, Your grace can be bestowed on animals, but not on the common people. Why is that?

古文： 权，然后知轻重；度，然后知长短。物皆然，心为甚。
现代文： 称一称才知道物体的轻重，量一量才知道物体的长短，所有事物都是如此，人心更是这样。
English: Only by weighing can you know the weight of an object, and only by measuring can you know the length of an object. This is true for all things, and even more so for the human heart.

古文：王请度之！
现代文：大王请您考虑考虑吧！
English: Great King, please think about it!

古文：抑王兴甲兵，危士臣，构怨于诸侯，然后快于心与？ 
现代文：难道真要发动全国军队，让您的将士冒着生命危险，去和别的国家结下仇怨，这样您的心里才痛快吗？ 宣王说： 不，这样做我的心里怎么会痛快呢？
English: Do you really want to launch a national army and have your soldiers risk their lives to create hatred with other countries, so that your heart will be happy? King Xuan said: No, how can my heart be happy by doing this?

古文：王曰： 否。
现代文：我只不过想实现我心里的最大愿望啊。 
English: I'm just trying to fulfill my heart's deepest desire.

古文：吾何快于是？
现代文：孟子说： 大王的最大愿望是什么呢？
English: Mencius said: What is the great king's greatest wish?

古文：将以求吾所大欲也。 
现代文：可以讲给我听听吗？ 
English: Can you tell me about it?

古文：曰： 王之所大欲可得闻与？ 王笑而不言。曰： 为肥甘不足于口与？
现代文：齐宣王笑了笑，没有说话。孟子便说： 是因为肥美的食物不够吃吗？
English: King Qi Xuan smiled and did not speak. Mencius then said, "Is it because the rich food is not enough to eat?"

古文：轻暖不足于体与？
现代文：是因为轻暖的衣服不够穿吗？
English: Is it because they don't have enough light and warm clothing?

古文：抑为采色不足视于目与？声音不足听于耳与？
现代文：还是因为艳丽的色彩不够看呢？是因为美妙的音乐不够听吗？
English: Or is it because the bright colors are not enough to look at? Is it because the beautiful music is not enough to listen to?

古文：便嬖不足使令于前与？
现代文：还是因为身边伺候的人不够使唤呢？
English: Or is it because the people around you are not working hard enough?

古文：王之诸臣皆足以供之，而王岂为是哉？ 
现代文：这些，您手下的大臣都能够尽量给您提供，大王难道是为了这些吗？ 宣王说： 不，我不是为了这些。 
English: These are all things that your ministers can do their best to provide you with. Is this what the great king is for? King Xuan said, "No, I'm not for this.

古文：曰： 否。吾不为是也。 曰： 然则王之所大欲可知已。欲辟土地，朝秦楚，莅中国而抚四夷也。
现代文：孟子说： 那么，您的最大愿望便可以知道了，您是想要扩张国土，使秦、楚这些大国都来朝贡您，自己君临中国，安抚四方落后的民族。
English: Mencius said, "Well, then, we can see your greatest wish. You want to expand your territory, so that the great nations of Qin and Chu will pay tribute to you, and you yourself will reign over China and pacify the backward peoples in all directions.

古文：以若所为，求若所欲，犹缘木而求鱼也。 王曰： 若是其甚与？ 
现代文：不过，以您现在的做法来实现您现在的愿望，就好像爬到树上去捉鱼一样。 宣王说： 有这么严重吗？ 
English: However, with your current practice to achieve your current desire, it is like climbing a tree to catch a fish.Xuan Wang said: Is it so serious?

古文：曰： 殆有甚焉。
现代文：孟子说： 恐怕比这还要严重！
English: Mencius said, "I am afraid it is even more serious than that!"

古文：缘木求鱼，虽不得鱼，无后灾。
现代文：爬上树去捉鱼，虽然捉不到鱼，却也没有什么后患。
English: Climbing a tree to catch a fish, although you can't catch a fish, there is no aftereffect.

古文：以若所为，求若所欲，尽心力而为之，后必有灾。 
现代文：以您现在的做法来实现您现在的愿望，费劲心力去干，一定会有灾祸在后头。 
English: If you try to achieve your current wishes with your current methods, and work hard, disaster is sure to follow.

古文：曰： 可得闻与？ 
现代文：宣王说： 能把这些道理说给我听听吗？ 
English: Yi Wang said, "Could you please tell me these truths?"

古文：曰： 邹人与楚人战，则王以为孰胜？ 
现代文：孟子说： 假定邹国和楚国打仗，大王认为哪一个国家会胜利呢？ 
English: Mencius said, "Suppose that the states of Shandong and Chu go to war, which country do you think will win?"

古文：曰： 楚人胜。 
现代文：宣王说： 当然是楚国胜。 
English: King Xuan said: Of course, it is the victory of Chu.

古文：曰： 然则小固不可以敌大，寡固不可以敌众，弱固不可以敌强。
现代文：孟子说： 显然，小国本来就无法与大国为敌，人数少的本来就不敌人数多的，力量弱的本来就不敌力量强的。
English: Mencius said: Obviously, a small country cannot be an enemy of a big country, a small number of people cannot be an enemy of a large number of people, and a weak force cannot be an enemy of a strong force.

古文：海内之地方千里者九，齐集有其一。
现代文：中国的土地，拥有千里见方土地的国家一共有九个，齐国不过占有其中一块罢了。
English: There are a total of nine countries with thousands of square kilometers of land in China, and Qi Province only occupies one of them.

古文：以一服八，何以异于邹敌楚哉？
现代文：想用这一块去征服其他八块，这跟邹国和楚国打仗有什么区别呢？
English: If you want to use this piece to conquer the other eight pieces, what is the difference between this and the war between Shandong and Chu?

古文：盖亦反其本矣。
现代文：大王为什么不回过来好好想一想，从根本上着手呢？ 
English: Why doesn't the king come back to his senses and start from scratch?

古文： 今王发政施仁，使天下仕者皆欲立于王之朝，耕者皆欲耕于王之野，商贾皆欲藏于王之市，行旅皆欲出于王之涂⑾，天下之欲疾其君者皆欲赴愬于王。
现代文： 现在大王如果能施行仁政，使天下做官的人都愿意到您的朝廷上来做官，天下的农民都想到您的国家来种地，天下做生意的人都想到您的国家来做生意，天下旅行的人都想到您的国家来旅行，天下痛恨本国国君的人都想到您这儿来控诉。
English: Now, great king, if you can carry out benevolent government so that all the officials in the world are willing to come to your court to work as officials, all the farmers in the world want to come to your country to farm, all the businessmen in the world want to come to your country to do business, all the travelers in the world want to come to your country to travel, and all the people in the world who hate their kings want to come to you to complain.

古文：其若是，孰能御之？ 
现代文：真能做到这些，还有谁能够与您为敌呢？ 
English: If you can really do this, who else can be your enemy?

古文：王曰： 吾惛，不能进于是矣。
现代文：齐宣王说： 我头脑昏乱，对您的说法不能作进一步的领会。
English: Qi Xuanwang said, "I am in a daze, and I can't understand what you are saying any further.

古文：愿夫子辅吾志，明以教我，我虽不敏，请尝试之。 
现代文：希望先生开导我的心志，更明确的教导我。我虽然不聪明，请让我试着做一做。 
English: Mr. Hope enlightens my mind and teaches me more clearly. Although I am not smart, please let me try to do something.

古文：曰： 无恒产而有恒心者，惟士为能。
现代文：孟子说： 没有固定的产业收入却有固定的道德观念，只有读书人才能做到。
English: Mencius said: Only a reader can have a fixed moral concept without a fixed industrial income.

古文：若民，则无恒产，因无恒心。
现代文：至于一般老百姓，如果没有固定的产业收入，也就没有固定的道德观念。
English: As for ordinary people, if there is no fixed industrial income, there is no fixed moral concept.

古文：苟无恒心，放辟邪侈无不为已。
现代文：一旦没有固定的道德观念，那歪门邪道，不守法纪，胡作非为，什么都干得出来。
English: Once there is no fixed moral concept, those who are crooked, do not abide by the law, and commit illegal acts can do anything.

古文：及陷于罪，然后从而刑之是罔民也。
现代文：等到他们犯了罪，然后才施加刑罚，这等于是陷害人民。
English: Waiting until they have committed a crime before imposing a penalty is tantamount to framing the people.

古文：焉有仁人在位罔民而可为也？
现代文：哪里有仁慈的人在位执政却去陷害百姓的呢？
English: Where is there a benevolent person in power who would frame the people?

古文：是故明君制民之产，必是仰足以事父母，俯足以畜妻子；乐岁终身饱，凶年免于死亡。
现代文：所以，贤明的国君制定产业政策，一定要让他们上足以赡养父母，下足以抚养妻子儿女；好年成丰衣足食，坏年成也不致饿死。
English: Therefore, a wise ruler formulating an industrial policy must make sure that they have enough to support their parents when they are young, and enough to support their wives and children when they are old; that they have enough food and clothing when they are young, and that they do not starve to death when they are old.

古文：然后驱而之善，故民之从之也轻。
现代文：然后督促他们走善良的道路，老百姓也就很容易听从了。
English: Then he urged them to take the virtuous path, and the people readily obeyed.

古文： 今也制民之产，仰不足以事父母，俯不足以畜妻子；乐岁终身苦，凶年不免于死亡。
现代文：现在各国的国君制定老百姓的产业政策，上不足以赡养父母，下不足以养活妻儿；年成好尚且艰难困苦，遇上凶年饥岁更免不了要饿死。
English: At present, the sovereigns of various countries are formulating industrial policies for the common people. On the one hand, it is not enough to support parents, and on the other hand, it is not enough to support wives and children. It is still difficult and difficult to grow old, and in the case of famine, it is inevitable to starve to death.

古文：此惟救死而恐不赡，奚暇治礼义哉？ 
现代文：到了这个地步，老百姓连保命都困难，哪里还有什么工夫来修养礼仪呢？
English: At this stage, it is difficult for ordinary people to even save their lives. Where is the effort to cultivate etiquette?

古文： 王欲行之则盍反其本矣？
现代文：大王如果想施行仁政，为什么不从根本上着手呢？
English: If the great king wants to implement benevolent governance, why not start from scratch?

古文：五亩之宅，树之以桑，五十者可以衣帛矣。
现代文：在五亩的宅田上种上桑树，五十岁以上的老人都可以穿上丝织品的衣服了。
English: Mulberry trees have been planted on the five-acre homestead, and the elderly over the age of fifty can wear silk clothing.

古文：鸡豚狗彘之畜，无失其时，七十者可以食肉矣。
现代文：鸡狗猪等家禽家畜好好养起来，七十岁以上的老人就都可以吃肉了。
English: If poultry and livestock such as chickens, dogs and pigs are well raised, the elderly over seventy years old can eat meat.

古文：百亩之田，勿夺其时，八口之家可以无饥矣。
现代文：每户所种的百亩田地，不要去防碍他们的生产，八口人的家庭都可以吃得饱饱的了。
English: Don't interfere with the production of the hundred mu of fields planted by each household. A family of eight people can have enough to eat.

古文：谨庠序之教，申之以孝悌之义，颁白者不负戴于道路矣。
现代文：认真地兴办学校，用孝顺父母尊敬兄长的道理反复教导学生，头发发白的人也就不会在路上负重行走了。
English: If schools are built conscientiously, and students are repeatedly taught the principles of filial piety and respect for their elders, people with gray hair will not be burdened on the road.

古文：老者衣锦食肉，黎民不饥不寒，然而不王者，未之有也。 
现代文：老年人有丝绵衣服穿，有肉吃，一般老百姓吃得饱，穿得暖，做到了这样还不能得到人民拥戴而成为王者，那还从来没有过。 
English: The elderly have silk clothes to wear and meat to eat, and the ordinary people are well fed and warmly clothed. If you can do this, you can't get the people's support and become a king. That has never happened before.

