古文：楚人和氏得玉璞楚山中，奉而献之厉王。
现代文：楚人卞和在荆山中得到一块玉璞，捧着进献给楚厉王。
English: Chu Renjun and he obtained a piece of jade in the Jing Mountain, holding it in his hand and dedicating it to King Chu Li.

古文：厉王使玉人相之。
现代文：厉王让玉匠鉴定。
English: King Li asked the jeweler for an appraisal.

古文：玉人曰： 石也。 王以和为诳，而刖其左足。
现代文：玉匠说： 是石头。 厉王认为卞和是行骗，就砍掉了他的左脚。
English: The jeweller said, "It is a stone." The king thought it was a trick and cut off his left foot.

古文：及厉王薨，武王即位。
现代文：到厉王死，武王继位。
English: When King Li died, King Wu succeeded to the throne.

古文：和又奉其璞而献之武王。
现代文：卞和又捧着那块玉璞去献给武王。
English: Xun He also took the piece of jade and offered it to King Wu.

古文：武王使玉人相之。
现代文：武王让玉匠鉴定，玉匠又说： 是石头。 
English: King Wu asked the jeweler to identify it, and the jeweler said, "It's a stone."

古文：又曰： 石也。 王又以和为诳，而刖其右足。
现代文：武王也认为卞和是行骗，就砍掉了他的右脚。
English: King Wu also thought that Xinghe was cheating, so he chopped off his right foot.

古文：武王薨，文王即位。
现代文：武王死，文王登基。
English: King Wu died and King Wen ascended to the throne.

古文：和乃抱其璞而哭于楚山之下，三日三夜，泣尽而继之以血。
现代文：卞和就抱着那块玉璞在荆山下哭，哭了三天三夜，眼泪干了，跟着流出的是血。
English: Xun He held the piece of jade and cried at the foot of the Jade Mountain. He cried for three days and three nights. His tears dried up and blood flowed out.

古文：王闻之，使人问其故，曰： 天下之刖者多矣，子奚哭之悲也？ 和曰： 吾非悲刖也，悲夫宝玉而题之以石，贞士而名之以诳，此吾所以悲也。 王乃使玉人理其璞而得宝焉，遂命曰： 和氏之璧。 
现代文：文王听说后，派人去了解他哭的原因，问道： 天下受断足刑的人多了，你为什么哭得这么悲伤？ 
English: When King Wen heard about this, he sent someone to find out why he was crying and asked: There are many people in the world who have been sentenced to imprisonment. Why are you crying so sadly?

古文：夫珠玉，人主之所急也。
现代文：卞和说： 我不是悲伤脚被砍掉，而是悲伤把宝玉称作石头，把忠贞的人称作骗子。
English: Zouhe said, "I am not sad because my foot was cut off, but sad because the jewels are called stones and the loyal people are called liars."

古文：和虽献璞而未美，未为主之害也，然犹两足斩而宝乃论，论宝若此其难也！
现代文：这才是我悲伤的原因。 文王就让玉匠加工这块玉璞并得到了宝玉，于是命名为 和氏之壁 。珍珠宝玉是君主急需的，即使卞和献的玉璞不够完美，也并不构成对君主的损害，但还是在双脚被砍后宝玉才得以论定，鉴定宝玉就是如此的困难。
English: This is the reason for my sadness. King Wen had the jeweler process this piece of jade and got the precious stone, so he named it the Wall of the Prince of Peace. The pearl precious stone is urgently needed by the monarch, and even if the jade bowl presented by the Prince of Peace is not perfect, it does not constitute damage to the monarch, but the precious stone can only be determined after both feet have been cut off, and the identification of the precious stone is so difficult.

古文：今人主之于法术也，未必和璧之急也；而禁群臣士民之私邪。
现代文：如今君主对于法术，未必像对和氏壁那样急需，还要用来禁止群臣百姓的自私邪恶行为。
English: Today, the monarch does not necessarily need magic as urgently as he did with the Wall, but it is also used to prohibit the selfish and evil actions of his subjects.

古文：然则有道者之不戮也，特帝王之璞未献耳。
现代文：既然这样，那么法术之士还没被杀戮的原因，只是促成帝王之业的法宝还没进献罢了。
English: That being the case, the reason why the sorcerers haven't been killed yet is that the magic treasure that contributed to the Emperor's cause hasn't been presented yet.

古文：主用术，则大臣不得擅断，近习不敢卖重；官行法，则浮萌趋于耕农，而游士危于战陈；则法术者乃群臣士民之所祸也。
现代文：君主运用法术，大臣就不能擅权独断，左右近侍就不敢卖弄权势；官府执行法令，游民就得从事农耕，游说之士就得冒着危险去当兵打仗；那么法术就被群臣百姓看成是祸害了。
English: When a monarch uses magic, ministers cannot use arbitrary power, and courtiers do not dare to flaunt their power; when the government executes decrees, vagrants have to engage in farming, and lobbyists have to risk their lives to fight as soldiers; then magic is regarded as a scourge by the people.

古文：人主非能倍大臣之议，越民萌之诽，独周乎道言也，则法术之士虽至死亡，道必不论矣。
现代文：君主不能违背大臣的议论，摆脱黎民百姓的诽谤，单要完全采纳法术之言，那么法术之士即使到死，他们的学说也一定不会被认可。
English: The monarch cannot go against the advice of his ministers and get rid of the slander of the Lebanese people, but must fully adopt the words of magic, so that even if the magicians die, their teachings will not be recognized.

古文：昔者吴起教楚悼王以楚国之俗，曰： 大臣太重，封君太众；若此，则上逼主而下虐民，此贫国弱兵之道也。
现代文：从前吴起向楚悼王指出楚国的风气说： 大臣的权势太重，分封的贵族太多。像这样下去，他们就会上逼主而下虐民，这是造成国贫兵弱的途径。
English: Once upon a time, Wu Zi pointed out the customs of the State of Chu to the King of Chu Lian and said: The power of the ministers is too heavy, and there are too many nobles with separate fiefdoms. If things continue like this, they will go up to force the Lord and down to abuse the people. This is a way to make the country poor and weak.

古文：不如使封君之子孙三世而收爵禄，绝减百吏之禄秩，损不急之枝官，以奉选练之士。 
现代文：不如使分封贵族的子孙到第三代时君主就收回爵禄，取消或减少百官的俸禄，裁减多余的官吏，来供养经过选拔和训练的士兵。 
English: It would be better for the monarch to take back the peerage as early as the third generation of the descendants of the feudal nobles, cancel or reduce the salary of the centurions, and reduce the number of superfluous officials to support the soldiers who have been selected and trained.

古文：悼王行之期年而薨矣，吴起枝解于楚。
现代文：楚悼王施行此法一年就死了，吴起在楚遭到肢解。
English: Chu Mui Wang died within a year of implementing this law, and Wu Qi was dismembered in Chu.

古文：商君教秦孝公以连什伍，设告坐之过，燔诗书而明法令，塞私门之请而遂公家之劳，禁游宦之民而显耕战之士。
现代文：商君教秦孝公建立什伍组织，设置告密连坐的制度，焚烧诗书，彰明法令，堵塞私人的请托而进用对国家有功的人，约束靠游说做官的人而使农民士兵显贵起来。
English: The merchants taught Qin Xiaogong to establish Shwu organizations, set up a system of whistle-blowing, burn poetry books, clarify laws and regulations, block private requests and use people who are meritorious to the country, and restrict people who rely on lobbying officials to make peasant soldiers prominent.

古文：孝公行之，主以尊安，国以富强。
现代文：孝公实行这些主张，君主因此尊贵安稳，国家因此富庶强大。
English: Filial piety carries out these propositions, the monarch is thus dignified and stable, and the country is thus rich and powerful.

古文：八年而薨，商君车裂于秦。
现代文：八年后秦孝公死了，商鞅在秦受到车裂。
English: Eight years later, Qin Xiaogong died, and the merchants in Qin were crushed.

古文：楚不用吴起而削乱，秦行商君法而富强，二子之言也已当矣，然而枝解吴起而车裂商君者何也？
现代文：楚国不用吴起变法而削弱混乱，秦国推行商鞅变法而富庶强大。二人的主张已够正确的了，但是肢解吴起，车裂商鞅，又为的什么呢？
English: The state of Chu did not use the Wuqi transformation method to weaken the chaos, and the state of Qin implemented the Shangqi transformation method to become rich and powerful. The two people's claims are correct enough, but what is the purpose of dismembering Wuqi and splitting Shangqi?

古文：大臣苦法而细民恶治也。
现代文：为的是大臣苦于法令而小民憎恨社会安定吁。
English: For the minister suffers from the law and the common people hate social stability.

古文：当今之世，大臣贪重，细民安乱，甚于秦、楚之俗，而人主无悼王、孝公之听，则法术之士安能蒙二子之危也而明己之法术哉！
现代文：当今之世，大臣贪权，小民安于动乱，比秦、楚的坏风气还要严重，而君主义没有楚悼王、秦孝公那样的判断力，那么法术之士又怎能冒吴起、商鞅的危险来阐明自己的法术主张呢？
English: In today's world, the ministers' greed for power and the people's restlessness are even more serious than the bad customs of Qin and Chu, and the monarchism does not have the judgment of Chu Mui Wang and Qin Xiaogong, so how can the magicians take the risk of Wuqi and negotiation to clarify their magic claims?

古文：此世所以乱无霸王也。
现代文：这就是社会混乱而没有霸王的原因。
English: This is the reason for the social chaos and the absence of an overlord.

