古文：◎五行一
现代文：五行一
English: Five lines, one circle

古文：史志五行，始自《汉书》，详录五行传说及其占应。后代作史者因之。
现代文：史书记载水火木金土五行，从《汉书》开始便详细记录有关五行的解释阐述，以及五行占卜验证，后代写历史的人沿袭了下来。
English: Historians have recorded the five elements of water, fire, wood, gold and soil. From the beginning of the "Chinese Book," they have recorded the explanation of the five elements in detail, as well as the verification of the five elements of divination. Future generations of history writers have followed suit.

古文：粤稽《洪范》，首叙五行，以其为天地万物之所莫能外。
现代文：考察《洪范》，首先叙述五行，因为它包括天地万物，概不例外。
English: To examine "Hong Fan," first describe the five elements, because it includes all things in heaven and earth, without exception.

古文：而合诸人道，则有五事，稽诸天道，则有庶徵。
现代文：与人道相对应，便有五件事情；与天道相稽考，便有各种征候。
English: In accordance with humanity, there are five things; in accordance with heaven, there are various symptoms.

古文：天人相感，以类而应者，固不得谓理之所无。
现代文：天道与人事交相感应，按事类而应验，原本不能认为没有道理。
English: The way of heaven and the way of man are interrelated, and they are fulfilled according to the type of matter. Originally, it could not be considered unreasonable.

古文：而传说则条分缕析，以某异为某事之应，更旁引曲证，以伸其说。
现代文：解释阐述五行的人绦分缕析，把某种怪异视作某件事情的应验，再旁征博引，委曲求证，以此来陈说自己的观点。
English: Explain and expound the analysis of the five elements, regard some strange things as the fulfillment of certain things, and then ask for references and proofs to express their own views.

古文：故虽父子师弟，不能无所抵牾，则果有当于叙畴之意欤。
现代文：所以即使是父子之间，或者老师与学生之间，都不能没有矛盾之处，那么对于叔畴之意确实有所应验吧。
English: So even between a father and son, or between a teacher and a student, there can be no contradiction, so let's really fulfill the meaning of uncle.

古文：夫苟知天人之应捷于影响，庶几一言一动皆有所警惕。
现代文：如果懂得了天道与人事的感应比影子和回声还快，那么差不多一言一行都有所警惕了。
English: If you understand that heaven and human affairs are faster than shadows and echoes, then almost every word and line will have some vigilance.

古文：以此垂戒，意非不善。
现代文：以此来垂示警戒世人，其用意并非不好。
English: It is not a bad intention to warn the world.

古文：然天道远，人道迩，逐事而比之，必有验有不验。
现代文：然而天道遥远，人道接近，事事逐一比合，必定有应验的，有不应验的。
English: However, the heavenly way is far away, the human way is close, and things are compared one by one. There must be things that are fulfilled and things that are not fulfilled.

古文：至有不验，则见以为无徵而怠焉。
现代文：遇到有不应验的事，便认为不应验而懈怠。
English: In the event of non-compliance, they consider it to be non-compliance and slack off.

古文：前贤之论此悉矣。
现代文：前代贤人对这个问题的论述，已经很详备了。
English: The discussion of this issue by the previous generation of sages is already very detailed.

古文：孔子作《春秋》，纪异而说不书。
现代文：孔子着《春秋》，记载下怪异的事，却没有记下解说之辞。
English: In Spring and Autumn, Confucius recorded strange things, but did not write down the explanation.

古文：彼刘、董诸儒之学，颇近于术数禨祥，本无足述。
现代文：那刘向、董仲舒等儒者的学说，颇与数术、吉凶变异之类相近，本不值得叙述。
English: The teachings of Liu Xiang, Dong Zhongshu and other Confucians are quite similar to those of mathematics, auspicious and inauspicious variations, and are not worth describing.

古文：班氏创立此志，不得不详其学之本原。
现代文：班固创立了五行志的体例，不能不详细探究这种学说的根源。
English: Ban Gu created the style of the Five Elements, and it is impossible not to explore the roots of this theory in detail.

古文：而历代之史，往往取前人数见之说，备列简端。
现代文：但是历代的史书常常拾取前人屡见的述说，详细地列在简编首端。
English: However, the historical books of all times often pick up the frequent descriptions of predecessors and list them in detail at the beginning of the compendium.

古文：揆之义法，未知所处。
现代文：考察史书的义理法则，不知放在何处。
English: I don't know where to put the principles of historical books.

古文：故考次洪武以来，略依旧史五行之例，著其祥异，而事应暨旧说之前见者，并削而不载云。《洪范》曰 水曰润下 。
现代文：所以考论编排洪武以来的历史，大致依照旧有史书记载五行的条例，记录吉凶征兆和怪异的现象，而已应验的事和先前已见的旧有述说，便一并削除，不再记录。《洪范》说： 水滋润下土。 
English: Therefore, the compilation of the history since Hongwu is roughly in accordance with the regulations of the old historical records to record the auspicious and ominous signs and strange phenomena, but the things that have been fulfilled and the old descriptions that have been seen before are deleted and no longer recorded. "Hong Fan" said: Water moistens the soil.

古文：水不润下，则失其性矣。
现代文：水如果不滋润下土，便失去了它的本性。
English: Water loses its nature if it does not nourish the subsoil.

古文：前史多以恒寒、恒阴、雪霜、冰雹、雷震、鱼孽、蝗蝻、豕祸、龙蛇之孽、马异、人疴、疾疫、鼓妖、陨石、水潦、水变、黑眚黑祥皆属之水，今从之。
现代文：先前的历史多把恒寒、恒阴、雪霜、冰雹、雷震、鱼孽、蝗蝻、豕祸、龙蛇之孽、马异、人痫、疾疫、鼓妖、陨石、水潦、水变、黑眚黑祥都归属于水。
English: In the previous history, the cold, the shade, the frost, the hail, the thunder, the fish, the locusts, the hail, the dragon and the snake, the horse, the epilepsy, the plague, the drum, the meteorite, the leech, the water change, the black locust and the black dragon were all attributed to the water.

古文：▲恒寒
现代文：现在依照此法施行。恒寒
English: It is now enforced in accordance with this law.

古文：景泰四年冬十一月戊辰至明年孟春，山东、河南、浙江、直隶、淮、徐大雪数尺，淮东之海冰四十余里，人畜冻死万计。
现代文：景泰四年冬十一月戊辰日到第二年初春，山东、河南、浙江、直隶淮、徐等地天降大雪数尺，淮东的海面，结冰四十余里，人畜冻死的要以万来计算。
English: From November to early spring of the following year, several feet of heavy snow fell in Shandong, Henan, Zhejiang, Zhili, Huai, Xu and other places. The sea surface of Huaidong was frozen for more than 40 miles, and the number of people and animals who froze to death was calculated in tens of thousands.

古文：五年正月，江南诸府大雪连四旬，苏、常冻饿死者无算。
现代文：景泰五年正月，江南各府天降大雪连续四十天，苏州、常州冻死、饿死的人不计其数。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of Jingtai, all the provinces in the south of the Yangtze River had heavy snowfall for forty consecutive days, and countless people in Suzhou and Changzhou froze to death or starved to death.

古文：是春，罗山大寒，竹树鱼蚌皆死。
现代文：这年春天，罗山特别寒冷，竹树鱼蚌都被冻死。
English: In the spring of this year, Luoshan was particularly cold, and the bamboo, trees and fish hooks all froze to death.

古文：衡州雨雪连绵，伤人甚多，牛畜冻死三万六千蹄。
现代文：衡州降雪连绵不断，因灾受害的百姓很多，冻死牛畜九千头。
English: Snowfall in Hengzhou has been continuous, and many people have suffered from the disaster. Nine thousand heads of cattle have frozen to death.

古文：成化十三年四月壬戌，开原大雨雪，畜多冻死。
现代文：成化十三年四月壬戌日，开原地区天降大雪，牲畜多被冻死。
English: On the 13th day of the 4th month of Chenghua, heavy snow fell in the Kailuan area, and many livestock froze to death.

古文：十六年七八月，越巂雨雪交作，寒气若冬。
现代文：十六年七、八月间，越仑雨雪交加，寒冷之气如像严冬。
English: In July and August of 2016, rain and snow mixed in Yuelun, and the cold weather was like a severe winter.

古文：弘治六年十一月，郧阳大雪，至十二月壬戌夜，雷电大作，明日复震，后五日雪止，平地三尺余，人畜多冻死。
现代文：弘治六年十一月，鄙阳降大雪，直到十二月壬戌日晚上，电闪雷鸣，一时大作，第二天又雷震，五天以后，雪才停止，平地雪深三尺多，人口、牲畜多被冻死。
English: In November of the sixth year of the Hongzhi era, heavy snow fell in the low sun, until the evening of December's Linglong Day, lightning and thunder, at one time a big work, the next day thunderstorms, five days later, the snow stopped, the snow was more than three feet deep on the flat ground, and the population and livestock were mostly frozen to death.

古文：正德元年四月，云南武定陨霜杀麦，寒如冬。
现代文：正德元年四月，云南武定府降霜，伤害麦苗，寒冷如冬天。
English: In April of the first year of Zhengde, frosts fell in Wuding Prefecture, Yunnan Province, damaging wheat seedlings. It was as cold as winter.

古文：万历五年六月，苏、松连雨，寒如冬，伤稼。
现代文：万历五年六月，苏州、松州连续下雨，寒冷如冬季，庄稼受害。
English: In June of the fifth year of Wanli, it rained continuously in Suzhou and Songzhou. It was as cold as winter, and crops suffered.

古文：四十六年四月辛亥，陕西大雨雪，驘橐驼冻死二千蹄。
现代文：四十六年四月辛亥日，陕西降大雪，骆鸵被冻死五百头。
English: In April 1946, on the day of Xinhai, heavy snow fell in Shaanxi, and 500 lynx froze to death.

古文：▲恒阴
现代文：恒阴
English: Hengyin

古文：洪武十八年二月，久阴。
现代文：洪武十八年二月，天气久阴沉。
English: In February of the eighteenth year of Hongwu, the weather was gloomy for a long time.

古文：正统五年七月戊午、己未及癸亥，晓刻阴沉，四方浓雾不辨人。
现代文：正统五年七月戊午日、己末日和癸亥日，拂晓时刻天气阴沉，四方的浓雾使得分辨不出人来。
English: Traditionally, on July 5th, the afternoon of the 3rd, the last day of the 3rd and the first day of the 4th, the weather is gloomy at dawn, and the thick fog in all directions makes it impossible to distinguish people.

古文：八年，邳、海二州阴雾弥月，夏麦多损。
现代文：八年，邳、海二州阴沉的浓雾孺漫月光，夏季麦苗很多受到伤害。
English: Eight years ago, the gloomy thick fog in Luzhou and Haiyuzhou was suffused with moonlight, and many summer wheat seedlings were damaged.

古文：景泰六年正月癸酉，阴雾四塞，既而成霜附木，凡五日。
现代文：景泰六年正月癸酉日，阴沉的浓雾充塞四方，随后不久变成霜附在树上，历时五天。
English: On the third day of the first month of the sixth year of Jing Tai, a gloomy thick fog filled the four directions, and soon turned into frost on the trees, which lasted for five days.

古文：八年正月甲子，阴晦大雾，咫尺不辨人物。
现代文：八年正月甲子日，大雾阴暗，咫尺之内分辨不出人物。
English: On the first day of the first month of the eighth year, the fog was gloomy, and people could not be distinguished within a short distance.

古文：成化四年三月，昏雾蔽天，不见星日者累昼夜。
现代文：成化四年三月，昏暗的浓雾遮蔽天空，看不见星光和日光达几个白天和夜晚。
English: In March of 2004, a thick, dark fog covered the sky, making it impossible to see stars and sunlight for several days and nights.

古文：九年三月甲午，四月丁卯，山东黑暗如夜。
现代文：九年三月甲午日、四月丁卯日，山东地区白天黑暗得如同夜晚。
English: From the afternoon of March 1st to the evening of April 9th, the daytime in Shandong was as dark as night.

古文：二十年五月丙申，番禺天晦，良久乃复。
现代文：二十年五月丙申日，番禹天气晦暗，很久才恢复正常。
English: On the 20th day of May, the weather was gloomy, and it took a long time to return to normal.

古文：二十三年十二月辛卯，大雾不辨人。
现代文：二十三年十二月辛卯日，天降大雾，分辨不出人来。
English: On December 23rd, Xinwu Day, a heavy fog descended from the sky, and no one could be distinguished.

古文：弘治十五年十一月，景东昼晦者七日。
现代文：弘治十五年十一月，景东白天晦黑长达七天。
English: In November of the 15th year of Hongzhi, Jingdong was in darkness for seven days.

古文：十六年四月辛亥，甘肃昏雾障天，咫尺不辨人物。
现代文：十六年四月辛亥日，甘肃昏暗的浓雾遮蔽天空，咫尺之内分不清人物。
English: On April 16th, the day of the Chinese lunar new year, a thick fog in Gansu obscured the sky, making it impossible to distinguish people within a short distance.

古文：十八年秋，广昌大雨雾凡两月，民病且死者相继。
现代文：十八年秋天，广昌天降大雾气共两个月，人民疾病、死亡相继不断。
English: In the autumn of the 18th year, the sky of Guangchang was covered with fog for a total of two months, and people's diseases and deaths continued one after another.

古文：正德十年四月，巨野阴雾六日，杀谷。
现代文：正德十年四月，巨野阴沉浓雾连续六天，损害谷物。
English: In April of the 10th year of Zhengde's reign, the huge field of gloomy dense fog lasted for six consecutive days, damaging the grain.

古文：十四年三月戊午，阴晦。
现代文：十四年三月戊午日，天气阴沉黑暗。
English: On the afternoon of March 14th, the weather was gloomy and dark.

古文：嘉靖元年正月丁卯，日午，昏雾四塞。
现代文：嘉靖元年正月丁卯日，中午，昏暗的雾气充塞四周。
English: At noon on the first day of the month of Dingwu in the first year of Jiajing, a gloomy mist filled the air.

古文：三年，江北昏雾，其气如药。
现代文：三年，江北浓雾昏暗，它的气味如药味。
English: In the third year, the thick fog in the north of the Yangtze River was dim, and its smell was like medicine.

古文：天启六年六月丙戌，雾重如雨。
现代文：天启六年六月丙戌日，雾下如雨。
English: On the sixth day of the sixth month of the sixth year of the Apocalypse, it was raining and foggy.

古文：闰六月己未，如之。
现代文：闰六月己末日，又像那种情况。
English: It's the end of June and it's like that all over again.

古文：▲雨雪陨霜
现代文：雨雪陨霜
English: Rain, snow, sleet and frost

古文：洪武十四年五月丁未，建德雪。
现代文：洪武十四年五月丁末日，建德降雪。
English: On the last day of May in the 14th year of Hongwu, snow fell in Jiande.

古文：六月己卯，杭州晴日飞雪。
现代文：六月己卯日，杭州晴天飞降雪花。
English: It was a sunny day in June, and snowflakes were falling in Hangzhou.

古文：二十六年四月丙申，榆社陨霜损麦。
现代文：二十六年四月丙申日，榆社降霜，伤害麦苗。
English: In April of the 26th year, on the day of Yin Yin, the frost of the company was reduced and the wheat seedlings were damaged.

古文：景泰四年，凤阳八卫二三月雨雪不止，伤麦。
现代文：景泰四年，凤阳八卫三月问降雪不停，伤害麦苗。
English: In the fourth year of Jing Tai, the snowfall in Fengyang and Hebei in March was incessant, hurting the wheat seedlings.

古文：天顺四年三月乙酉，大雪，越月乃止。
现代文：天顺四年三月乙酉日，天降大雪，第二月才停。
English: In March of the 4th year of Tenshun, heavy snow fell from the sky, and it did not stop until the second month.

古文：成化二年四月乙巳，宣府陨霜杀青苗。
现代文：成化二年四月乙巳日，宣府降霜，伤害禾苗。
English: In April of the second year of Chenghua, on the day of the snake, Xuanfu reduced the frost, injuring the grass seedlings.

古文：十九年三月辛酉，陕西陨霜。
现代文：十九年三月辛酉日，陕西降霜。
English: On March 19th, the coldest day of the year, Shaanxi had frost.

古文：弘治六年十月，南京雨雪连旬。
现代文：弘治六年十月，南京降雪敷十日。
English: In October of the sixth year of the Hongzhi era, snow fell in Nanjing on the 10th.

古文：八年四月庚申，榆社、陵川、襄垣、长子、沁源陨霜杀麦豆桑。辛酉，庆阳诸府县卫所三十五，陨霜杀麦豆禾苗。
现代文：八年四月庚申日，榆社、陵川、襄垣、长子、沁源降霜，伤害麦苗、豆苗和桑树；辛酉日，庆阳等府县卫所三十五地降霜，伤害麦、豆、禾苗。
English: In April of the eighth year, on the Koshin day, frosts fell in Shinsha, Lingchuan, Yanggaki, the eldest son, and Yuyuan, injuring wheat seedlings, bean seedlings, and mulberry trees; on the Hsinchu day, frosts fell in 35 prefectural and county health centers in Qingyang, injuring wheat, beans, and grain seedlings.

古文：九年四月辛巳，榆次陨霜杀禾。是月，武乡亦陨霜。
现代文：九年四月辛巳日，榆次降霜，伤害禾苗；这个月，武乡也降霜。
English: In April of the ninth year, on the day of Xin Si, the frost fell for the third time, hurting the seedlings; this month, the frost also fell in Wuxiang.

古文：十七年二月壬寅，郧阳、均州雨雪雹，雪片大者六寸。六月癸亥，雨雪。
现代文：十七年二月壬寅日，郦阳、均州降雪雹，大的雪片达六寸；六月癸亥日，天降雪。
English: On February 17th, Ren Yin Day, it snowed heavily in Fenyang and Junzhou, with large snowflakes reaching six inches; in June, it snowed heavily on Jun Hai Day.

古文：正德八年四月乙巳，文登、莱阳陨霜杀稼。丙辰，杀谷。
现代文：正德八年四月乙巳日，文登、莱阳降霜伤害禾稼；丙辰日，伤害谷物。
English: In April of the eighth year of Zhengde, on the day of the snake, the frosts of Wenden and Laiyang harmed the crops; on the day of the hour, they harmed the grain.

古文：十三年三月壬戌，辽东陨霜，禾苗皆死。
现代文：十三年三月壬戌日，辽东降霜，禾苗都被冻死。
English: On March 13th, the frost hit Liaodong, and all the seedlings froze to death.

古文：嘉靖二年三月甲子，郯城陨霜杀麦。辛未，杀禾。
现代文：嘉靖二年三月甲子日，郯城降霜，伤害麦苗；辛未日，伤害禾稼。
English: In March of the second year of Jiajing, on the day of Jiazi, frost fell in Fucheng, harming wheat seedlings; on the day of Xinwei, harming crops.

古文：二十二年四月己亥，固原陨霜杀麦。
现代文：二十二年四月己亥日，固原降霜，伤害麦苗。
English: On April 22nd, the day of the year of the boar, Gugen dropped the frost and hurt the wheat seedlings.

古文：隆庆六年三月丁亥，南宫陨霜杀麦。
现代文：隆庆六年三月丁亥日，南宫降霜，伤害麦苗。
English: On the day of Dinghai in March of the sixth year of the Longqing Festival, frost fell in the southern palace, damaging the wheat seedlings.

古文：万历二十四年四月己亥，林县雪。
现代文：万历二十四年四月己亥日，林县降雪。
English: Snow fell in Lin County on April Fool's Day in the 24th year of Wanli.

古文：二十六年十一月辛亥，彰德陨霜，不杀草。
现代文：二十六年十一月辛亥日，彰德降霜，没有伤害植物。
English: On November 26, Xinhai Day, Zhangde reduced the frost and did not harm the plants.

古文：三十八年四月壬寅，贵州暴雪，形如土砖，民居片瓦无存者。
现代文：三十八年四月壬寅日，贵州降暴雪，形状像土砖，人民的住房被打得片瓦不存。
English: On April 38th, Ren Yin Day, heavy snow fell in Guizhou. The snow was shaped like mud bricks, and people's houses were completely destroyed.

古文：四十四年正月，雨红黄黑三色雪，屋上多巨人迹。
现代文：四十四年正月，天降红、黄、黑三种颜色的雪，房顶上多巨人的脚印。
English: In the first month of the 44th year, the sky fell red, yellow and black snow, and the footprints of many giants on the roof.

古文：崇祯六年正月辛亥，大雪，深二丈余。
现代文：崇祯六年正月辛亥日，天降大雪，雪深二丈多。
English: On the day of the first month of Xinhai in the sixth year of Chongzhen, the sky fell heavy snow, and the snow was more than two feet deep.

古文：十一年五月戊寅，喜峰口雪三尺。
现代文：十一年五月戊寅日，喜峰口雪降三尺。
English: On the 11th day of the month of May, three feet of snow fell at the mouth of the peak.

古文：十三年四月，会宁陨霜杀稼。
现代文：十三年四月，会宁降霜，伤害禾稼。
English: In April of the thirteenth year, frosts fell in Hening and damaged the crops.

古文：十六年四月，鄢陵陨霜杀麦。
现代文：十六年四月，鄢陵降霜，伤害麦苗。
English: In April of the 16th year, frosts fell in Fuling, damaging wheat seedlings.

古文：▲冰雹
现代文：冰雹
English: Hail

古文：洪武二年六月庚寅，庆阳大雨雹，伤禾苗。
现代文：洪武二年六月庚寅日，庆阳大降冰雹，伤害禾苗。
English: In June of the second year of Hongwu, Geng Yin Day, Qingyang was hit by a large hailstorm, which damaged the grain seedlings.

古文：三年五月丙辰，蔚州大雨雹，伤田苗。
现代文：三年五月丙辰日，蔚州大降冰雹，伤害田中禾苗。
English: On the third day of the month of May, hailstones fell heavily in Ulshu, injuring rice seedlings in Tanaka.

古文：五年五月癸丑夜，中都皇城万岁山雨冰雹，大如弹丸。
现代文：五年五月癸丑的晚上，中都皇城的万岁山降冰雹，大如弹丸。
English: On a gloomy evening in May of the same year, hailstones as big as marbles rained down from Mount Wanling in Zhongdu Imperial City.

古文：七年八月甲午，平凉，延安绥德、米脂雨雹。
现代文：七年八月甲午日，平凉、延安绥德、米脂降冰雹。
English: On the afternoon of August 7th, Pingliang, Yan'an, Shunde, and Mizhi had hailstorms.

古文：九月甲子，巩昌雨雹。
现代文：九月甲子日，巩昌降冰雹。
English: On the first day of September, hail fell in Gongchang.

古文：八年四月，临洮、平凉、河州雹伤麦。
现代文：八年四月，临洮、平凉、河州降冰雹，损伤麦苗。
English: In April, Linfen, Pingliang and Hezhou were hit by hailstorms, damaging wheat seedlings.

古文：十四年七月己酉，临洮大雨雹，伤稼。
现代文：十四年七月己酉日，临洮大降冰雹，伤害庄稼。
English: On July 14th, the hottest day of the year, large hailstones fell in Linyi, damaging crops.

古文：十八年二月，雨雹。
现代文：十八年二月，天降冰雹。
English: In February 18th, hail fell from the sky.

古文：永乐七年秋，保定、浙东雨雹。
现代文：永乐七年秋天，保定、浙东降冰雹。
English: In the autumn of the seventh year of Yongle, hail fell in Baoding and eastern Zhejiang.

古文：十二年四月，河南一州八县雨雹，杀麦。
现代文：十二年四月，河南有一州八县降冰雹，伤害麦苗。
English: In April 2012, hailstorms hit eight counties in Henan Province, damaging wheat seedlings.

古文：正统三年，西、延、平、庆、临、巩六府及秦、河、岷、金四州，自夏逮秋，大雨雹。
现代文：正统三年，西、延、平、庆、临、巩六府，以及秦、河、岷、金四州，从夏天到秋天，大降冰雹。
English: In the three years of orthodoxy, Xi, Yan, Ping, Qing, Lin and Gong six prefectures, as well as Qin, He, Handan and Jin four prefectures, from summer to autumn, heavy hail.

古文：四年五月壬戌，京师大雨雹。
现代文：四年五月壬戌日，京城大降冰雹。
English: On May 4th, 2004, hail fell heavily in the capital.

古文：五年四月丁酉，平凉诸府大雨雹，伤人畜田禾。
现代文：五年四月丁酉日，平凉等府大降冰雹，伤害人民、牲畜以及田中禾苗。
English: On April 5th, Dingye Day, large hailstones fell in Pingliang and other prefectures, injuring people, livestock and rice seedlings.

古文：六月壬申至丙子，山西行都司及蔚州连日雨雹，其深尺余，伤稼。
现代文：六月壬申日至丙子日，山西行都司以及蔚州连日降冰雹，冰雹积地厚达一尺多，伤害庄稼。
English: From June Jinshin to the third day of the third month, hailstorms fell on the capital of Shanxi Province and Ulshu for several days in a row. The hail accumulated more than a foot thick, damaging crops.

古文：八月庚辰，保定大雨雹，深尺余，伤稼。
现代文：八月庚辰日，保定大降冰雹，厚一尺多，伤害庄稼。
English: On August Gengchen Day, large hailstones fell in Baoding, more than a foot thick, damaging crops.

古文：景泰五年六月庚寅，易州大方等社雨雹甚大，伤稼百二十五里，人马多击死。
现代文：景泰五年六月庚寅日，易州大方等社降很大的冰雹，慯害庄稼面积达一百二十五里，人马多被打死。
English: In June of the fifth year of Jingtai, on the day of Geng Yin, a large hailstorm fell on Yizhou Dafang and other communities, damaging crops in an area of one hundred and twenty-five li. Many people were killed.

古文：六年闰六月乙巳，束鹿雨雹如鸡子，击死鸟雀狐兔无算。
现代文：六年闰六月乙巳日，束鹿降冰雹，大如鸡蛋，打死鸟雀狐兔无数。
English: Six years ago, on leap-year June, on the day of the snake, a bunch of deer dropped hailstones as big as eggs, killing countless birds, sparrows, foxes and rabbits.

古文：天顺元年六月己亥，雨雹大如鸡卵，至地经时不化，奉天门东吻牌摧毁。
现代文：天顺元年六月己亥日，天降冰雹大如鸡蛋，到达地面很久不融化，奉天门束面的吻牌被打毁。
English: In June of the first year of Tianshun, on the day of Ji Hai, the sky-falling hailstones were as big as eggs, and they did not melt for a long time when they reached the ground.

古文：八年五月丁巳，雨雹。
现代文：八年五月丁巳日，天降冰雹。
English: On the third day of the fifth month of the eighth year, hail fell from the sky.

古文：成化元年四月庚寅，雨雹大如卵，损禾稼。
现代文：成化元年四月庚寅日，天降冰雹，大如鹦蛋，损伤禾稼。
English: In April of the first year of the Jin Dynasty, the sky fell hailstones as large as parrots, damaging the crops.

古文：五月辛酉，又大雨雹。
现代文：五月辛酉日，又大降冰雹。
English: It was a bitterly cold day in May, and again there was a heavy fall of hail.

古文：五年闰二月癸未，琼山雨雹大如斗。
现代文：五年闰二月癸末日，琼山降冰雹，大如量斗。
English: At the end of February five years ago, hail fell on Mount Qiong, which was as big as a scale.

古文：八年七月丙午，陇州雨雹大如鹅卵，或如鸡子，中有如牛者五，长七八寸，厚三四寸，六日乃消。
现代文：八年七月丙午日，陇州降冰雹大如鹅蛋，有的大如鹦蛋，其中有五颗形状如牛，长七八寸，厚三四寸，遇了六天才融化。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of the seventh month of the eighth year, there were hailstones as big as goose eggs, some as big as parrot eggs, and five of them were shaped like cows, seven or eight inches long and three or four inches thick. It took six days for them to melt.

古文：九年五月丁巳，雨雹如拳。
现代文：九年五月丁巳日，天降冰雹，大如拳头。
English: On May 9th, Tinsy Day, hailstones as big as fists fell from the sky.

古文：十三年春，湖广大雨冰雹，牛死无算。
现代文：十三年春天，塑尘大降冰雹，牛死无数。
English: In the spring of the thirteenth year, the plastic dust caused a large hailstorm, and countless cattle died.

古文：十九年六月乙亥，潞州雨雹，大者如碗。
现代文：十九年六月乙亥日，潞州降冰雹，大的冰雹如同碗。
English: On the 19th of June, the day of the Chinese Year of the Goat, hailstones fell in Zhangzhou. The large hailstones were like bowls.

古文：二十年二月丙子，清远雨雹，大如拳。
现代文：二十年二月丙子日，清远降冰雹，大如拳头。
English: On February 20th, the third day of the third month, hailstones as big as fists fell in Qingyuan.

古文：丙戌，大雷电，复雨雹。
现代文：丙戌日，雷鸣电闪，又降冰雹。
English: On the same day, thunder, lightning and hail fell.

古文：二十一年三月己丑夜，番禺、南海风雷大作，飞雹交下，坏民居万余，死者千余人。
现代文：二十一年三月己丑日夜晚，番禺、南海风雷大起，飞落的冰雹交相下坠，打壤民居一万多问，死亡一千多人。
English: On the night of March 21, the fateful day, the wind and thunderstorms in Panyu and the South China Sea rose, and the falling hailstones collided with each other, damaging more than 10,000 residences and killing more than 1,000 people.

古文：二十二年三月甲寅，南阳雨雹，大如鹅卵。
现代文：二十二年三月甲寅日，直坠降冰雹，大如鹅蛋。
English: On March 22nd, the day of Jia Yin, hailstones as big as goose eggs fell straight down.

古文：弘治元年三月壬申夜，融县雨雹，坏城楼垣及军民屋舍，死者四人。
现代文：弘治元年三月壬申日黑夜，融县降冰雹，打壤城楼墙垣以及军民的房屋，死亡四个人。
English: On the dark night of the Jinshin day in March of the first year of the Hongzhi era, hail fell in Rong County, the walls of the castle and the houses of the military and civilians were damaged, and four people died.

古文：二年三月戊寅，宾州雨雹如鸡子，击杀牧竖三人，坏庐舍禾稼。庚辰，贵州安庄卫大雷，雨雪雹，坏麦苗。
现代文：二年三月戊寅日，宾州降冰雹，大如鸡蛋，打死牧童三人，打坏房屋和庄稼；庚辰日，贵坦塞蓝卫打大雷，降雪雹，打坏麦苗。
English: In March of the second year, on the day of Wu Yin, hailstones as large as eggs fell in Pennsylvania, killing three shepherds and damaging houses and crops; on the day of Geng Chen, the Guotansai Blue Guard thundered, sleet fell and damaged wheat seedlings.

古文：四月辛卯，洮州卫雨冰雹，水涌三丈。
现代文：四月辛卯日，洮州卫降冰雹，水涌起三丈。
English: On a gloomy day in April, the hail fell in Luzhou and the water surged three meters high.

古文：四年三月癸卯，裕、汝二州雨雹，大者如墙杵，积厚二三尺，坏屋宇禾稼。
现代文：四年三月癸卯日，裕、汝二州降冰雹，大的如墙杵，厚逮二三尺，打壤房屋庄稼。
English: On the day of March in the fourth year, the hail fell in Yu and You two states, large as a wall, two or three feet thick, and the houses and crops were loosened.

古文：四月己酉，洮州卫雨雹及冰块。
现代文：四月己酉日，洮州卫降冰雹和冰块。
English: Hailstones and ice fall from the sky in Weizhou in April.

古文：水高三四丈，漫城郭，漂房舍，田苗人畜多淹死。
现代文：水涨高三四丈，漫遇城郭，漂没房屋，田中禾苗、人民、牲畜多被淹死。
English: The water rose as high as three or four stories, swept through the city walls, and swept away houses. Most of the rice seedlings, people, and livestock in Tanaka were drowned.

古文：五年四月乙丑，莒、沂二州，安丘、郯城二县，雨雹大如酒杯，伤人畜禾稼。
现代文：五年四月乙丑日，莒、沂二州，安丘、郯城二县降冰雹，大如酒杯，打伤人民、牲畜、庄稼。
English: In April of the year five, on the day of the Ugly Goat, hailstones as big as wine glasses fell in the two counties of Handan and Handan, Anqiu and Handan, injuring people, livestock and crops.

古文：六年八月己巳，长子雨雹，大者如拳，伤禾稼，人有击死者。辛未，雨雹，大如弹丸，平地壅积。
现代文：六年八月己巳曰，长子降冰雹，大的如同拳头，打伤庄稼，有人被打死；辛末日，降冰雹，大的如弹丸，平地壅塞堆积。
English: In August of the sixth year, he said, the eldest son dropped hailstones as big as fists, injuring crops and killing some people; at the end of the year, hailstones as big as projectiles piled up on the plain.

古文：八年二月壬申，永嘉暴风雨，雨雹，大如鸡卵，小如弹丸，积地尺余，白雾四起，毁屋杀黍，禽鸟多死。
现代文：八年二月壬申，永嘉发生暴风雨，降冰雹，大的如鸡蛋，小的如弹丸，积聚在地上达一尺多，白雾从各处升起，毁坏房屋，伤害庄稼，禽乌死亡很多。
English: In February of the eighth year of Jinshin, a storm occurred in Yongjia. Hailstones, large as eggs and small as projectiles, accumulated on the ground for more than a foot. White fog rose from everywhere, destroying houses, damaging crops, and killing many birds.

古文：三月己亥，桐城雨雹，深五尺，杀二麦。己酉，淮、凤州县暴风雨雹，杀麦。
现代文：三月己亥日，桐城降冰雹，厚达五尺，伤害大麦、小麦；己酉日，淮、凤州县起暴风，降冰雹，伤害麦苗。
English: On the day of Ji Hai in March, hailstones up to five feet thick fell in Tongcheng, damaging barley and wheat; on the day of Ji Hai, a storm blew up in Huai and Fengzhou counties, dropping hailstones and damaging wheat seedlings.

古文：四月乙亥，常州、泗、邳雨雹，深五寸，杀麦及菜。丙子，沂州雨雹，大者如盘，小者如碗，人畜多击死。
现代文：四月乙亥日，常州、泗、邳降冰雹，厚五寸，伤害麦苗和蔬菜；丙子日，沂州降冰雹，大的如盘，小的如碗，人民、牲畜多被打死。
English: On the day of the Chinese New Year in April, hailstones as thick as five inches fell in Changzhou, Shandong and Fujian, damaging wheat seedlings and vegetables. On the day of the Chinese New Year, hailstones as large as plates and as small as bowls fell in Zhangzhou, killing many people and livestock.

古文：六月乙卯，雨雹。
现代文：六月乙卯日，降冰雹。
English: On the second day of June, hail fell.

古文：七月乙酉，洮州卫雨冰雹，杀禾。暴水至，人畜多溺死者。丙戌，甘肃西宁大雨雹，杀禾及畜。
现代文：七月乙酉日，洮州卫降冰雹，伤害禾稼，洪水到来，人口、牲畜很多被淹死；丙戌日，甘肃西宁大降冰雹，伤害庄稼和牲畜。
English: On the second day of July, hail fell in Bozhouwei, injuring crops, and floods came, and many people and livestock were drowned; on the third day of July, hail fell heavily in Xining, Gansu, injuring crops and livestock.

古文：九年五月丙辰，雨雹。
现代文：九年五月丙辰日，天降冰雹。
English: On the ninth day of the fifth month of the year, hail fell from the sky.

古文：十年二月己卯，江西新城雨冰雹，民有冻死者。
现代文：十年二月己卯日，江西新城降冰雹，人民有的被冻死。
English: On February 10, hail fell in Xincheng, Jiangxi Province, and some people froze to death.

古文：三月丁卯，北通州雨冰，深一尺。
现代文：三月丁卯日，北通州降冰雹，厚达一尺。
English: On the third day of March, hailstones, up to one foot thick, fell in Beitongzhou.

古文：十三年八月戊子，雨雹。丙午，又雨雹。
现代文：十三年八月戊子日，天降冰雹；丙午日，又降冰雹。
English: In August 13th, on the day of Wu Zi, the sky fell hail; on the afternoon of C, hail fell again.

古文：九月壬戌，又雨雹。
现代文：九月壬戌日，又降冰雹。
English: In September, on the first day of the new year, hail fell again.

古文：十四年四月丁酉，徐州、清河、桃源、宿迁雨冰雹，平地五寸，夏麦尽烂。
现代文：十四年四月丁酉日，徐州、清河、桃源、宿迁降冰雹，平地积雹五寸，夏季小麦全部被打毁。
English: On April 14th, Dinglong Day, hailstorms hit Xuzhou, Qinghe, Taoyuan and Suqian, and the flatland was covered with hailstones. The summer wheat was all destroyed.

古文：五月乙亥，登、莱二府雨雹杀禾。
现代文：五月乙亥日，登、莱二府降冰雹，伤害禾稼。
English: On the day of the Chinese New Year in May, hailstones fell in the two prefectures of Deng and Lai, damaging crops.

古文：七月辛卯，雨雹。
现代文：七月辛卯日，又降冰雹。
English: On a hot July day, hail fell again.

古文：正德元年六月戊辰，宣府马营堡大雨雹，深二尺，禾稼尽伤。
现代文：正德元年六月戊辰日，宣府置萤堡大降冰雹，积地厚二尺，庄稼全部遭到伤害。
English: On the day of Pentecost in June of the first year of the Zhengde era, a large hailstorm fell on Hwangbok, Xuanfu District, covering an area two feet thick, and all the crops were damaged.

古文：三年四月辛未，泾州雨雹，大如鸡卵，坏庐舍菽麦。
现代文：三年四月辛末日，泾州降冰雹，大如鸡蛋，打壤房屋和庄稼。
English: In April of the third year, at the end of the Chinese New Year, hailstones as large as eggs fell in Luzhou, damaging houses and crops.

古文：四年五月甲午，费县大雨雹，深一尺，坏麦谷。
现代文：四年五月甲午日，费县大降冰雹，厚达一尺，打壤庄稼。
English: On the afternoon of May 1, Fei County was hit by a large hailstorm, up to one foot thick, which damaged crops.

古文：八年十月戊戌，平阳、太原、沁、汾诸属邑，大雨雹，平地水深丈余，冲毁人畜庐舍。
现代文：八年十月戊戌日，平阳、太原、沁、汾等所属地区大降冰雹，平地水深一丈多，冲毁人口、牲畜、房屋。
English: On October 30, 2008, large hailstones fell in Pingyang, Taiyuan, Handan, Handan and other regions, and the water depth on the flat land was more than one meter, destroying people, livestock and houses.

古文：十一年六月甲戌，宣府大雨雹，禾稼尽死。
现代文：十一年六月甲戌日，宣府大降冰雹，庄稼全部被打死。
English: On June 11, Armor Day, hail fell heavily in Xuanfu, and all the crops were killed.

古文：九月丙申，贵州大雨雹。
现代文：九月丙申日，贵州大降冰雹。
English: Hail fell heavily in Guizhou on the third day of September.

古文：十二年五月己亥，安肃大雨雹，平地水深三尺，伤禾，民有击死者。
现代文：十二年五月己亥日，安肃大降冰雹，平地水深三尺，伤害庄稼，人民有被打死的。
English: In May of the 12th year, on the day of Ji Hai, there was a large hailstorm in Ansu, the flat land was three feet deep in water, the crops were damaged, and people were killed.

古文：十三年四月壬午，衡州疾风迅雷，雨雹，大如鹅子，棱利如刀，碎屋，断树木如剪。
现代文：十三年四月壬午日，衡州猛烈刮风，迅疾雷鸣，降冰雹，大如鹅蛋，棱角锋利如，打碎房屋，打断树木，如被剪断。
English: On the afternoon of April 13th, a fierce wind blew in Hengzhou, with rapid thunder and hail. It was as big as a goose egg, with sharp edges and corners, smashing houses, breaking trees, and being sheared.

古文：嘉靖元年四月甲申，云南左卫各属雨雹，大如鸡子，禾苗房屋被伤者无算。
现代文：嘉靖元年四月甲申日，云南左卫各属地降冰雹，大如鹦蛋，无数禾苗、房屋遭损害。
English: In April of the first year of Jiajing, on the 6th day of the 6th month, hailstones as large as parrots fell in the Zuowei area of Yunnan Province, damaging countless seedlings and houses.

古文：五月己未，蓬溪雨雹，大如鹅子，伤亦如之。
现代文：五月己未日，蓬溪降冰雹，大如鹅蛋，损害禾苗、房屋，情形如云南左卫。
English: It is the last day of May. Hailstones as big as goose eggs have fallen in Pengxi, damaging crops and houses. The situation is similar to that of Zuwei in Yunnan.

古文：二年五月丁丑，大同前卫雨雹。
现代文：二年五月丁丑日，大同前卫降冰雹。
English: In May of the second year, on the day of Dingushi, the Datong avant-garde came down in hail.

古文：四年四月丁未，大同卫雨雹。
现代文：四年四月丁末日，大同卫降冰雹。
English: On the last day of April in the fourth year, hail fell on Datongwei.

古文：五月戊子，固安雨雹。
现代文：五月戊子日，固安降冰雹。
English: Hail fell in Gouan on May Day.

古文：五年五月甲辰，满城雨雹。
现代文：五年五月甲辰日，满城降冰雹。
English: On the first hour of the fifth month of May, hail fell all over the city.

古文：六月丁巳，大同县雨冰雹，俱大如鸡子。丁卯，万全都司及宣府皆雨雹，大者如瓯，深尺余。
现代文：六月丁巳日，大同县降冰雹，都大如鸡蛋；丁卯日，万全都司和宣府都降冰雹，大的冰雹如瓯盆，厚一尺多。
English: On June 3rd, hailstones as large as eggs fell in Datong County; on June 4th, hailstones as large as a crock pot, more than a foot thick, fell in Wanzhong and Xuanfu.

古文：七月癸未，南丰雨雹，大如碗，形如人面。遂昌雨雹，顷刻二尺，大杀麻豆。
现代文：七月癸末日，南丰降冰雹，大如碗，形状如人脸；遂昌降冰雹，顷刻间积地厚逵二尺，严重伤害了麻和豆类。
English: At the end of July, Nanfeng had hailstones as big as bowls and shaped like human faces; Suichang had hailstones two feet thick, which seriously damaged hemp and beans.

古文：六年六月癸丑，镇番卫大雨雹，杀伤三十余人。
现代文：六年六月癸丑日，镇番卫大降冰雹，死伤三十多人。
English: In June of the sixth year, on Ugly Day, hailstones fell heavily on the town of Fanwei, killing and injuring more than 30 people.

古文：十四年三月辛巳，汉中雨雹陨霜杀麦。
现代文：十四年三月辛巳日，漠中降冰雹，降霜，伤害麦苗。
English: On the 14th day of the 3rd month, hail and frost fell in the desert, damaging the wheat seedlings.

古文：四月庚子，开封、彰德雨雹杀麦。
现代文：四月庚子日，开封、彰德降冰雹，伤害麦苗。
English: On April's Geng Zi Day, hail fell in Kaifeng and Changde, damaging wheat seedlings.

古文：十八年五月壬辰，庆都、安肃、河间雨冰雹，大如拳，平地五寸，人有死伤者。
现代文：十八年五月壬辰日，庆都、安肃、河间降冰雹，大如拳头，平地积雹五寸，有的人被打死打伤。
English: In May 18th, on the day of Yinchuan, hailstones as big as fists fell in Qingdu, Ansu, and Hebei. The flat ground was covered with hailstones five inches thick. Some people were killed or injured.

古文：二十八年三月庚寅，临清大冰雹，损房舍禾苗。
现代文：二十八年三月庚寅日，临清大降冰雹，损害房屋和禾苗。
English: On the 28th of March, Geng Yin Day, large hailstones fell in Linqing, damaging houses and seedlings.

古文：六月丁卯，延川雨雹如斗，坏庐舍，伤人畜。
现代文：六月丁卯日，延川降冰雹，大如量斗，打坏房屋，打伤人民、牲畜。
English: In June, on the third day of the month, hailstones as large as matchsticks fell on the Yanchuan River, damaging houses and injuring people and livestock.

古文：三十四年五月庚子，凤阳大冰雹，坏民田舍。
现代文：三十四年五月庚子日，凤阳大降冰雹，打坏人民的田园房屋。
English: In May of the year thirty-four, on the day of Geng Zi, a large hailstorm fell in Fengyang, damaging the people's rural houses.

古文：三十六年三月癸未，沂州雨雹，大如盂，小如鸡卵，平地尺余，径八十里，人畜伤损无算。
现代文：三十六年三月癸末日，沂州降冰雹，大的如盂钵，小的如鸡蛋，平地积雹厚一尺多，下雹面积径宽八十里，人口、牲畜被损害的不计其数。
English: At the end of March, 36 years ago, hailstorms fell in Luzhou, the largest of which was like hail, and the smallest was like eggs. The flat area was more than a foot thick, and the lower area was 80 miles wide. Countless people and livestock were damaged.

古文：四十三年闰二月甲申，雨雹。
现代文：四十三年闰二月甲申日，天降冰雹。
English: In the 43rd year of the leap year, on the 6th day of the 2nd month, there was hail.

古文：四月庚寅，又雨雹。
现代文：四月庚寅日，又降冰雹。
English: Hail fell again on April Fool's Day.

古文：隆庆元年七月辛巳，紫荆关雨雹，杀稼七十里。
现代文：隆庆元年七月辛巳日，紫剂关降冰雹，伤害庄稼达七十里。
English: In July of the first year of the Longqing Dynasty, on the day of the Snake Festival, hailstones fell in Zi Jia Guan, damaging crops up to seventy miles away.

古文：三年三月辛未，平溪卫雨雹。平地水涌三尺，漂没庐舍。
现代文：三年三月辛末日，平溪卫降冰雹，平地大水涌出三尺深，冲毁淹没房屋。
English: On the last day of Xin in March of the third year, the Pingxi River was hit by a hailstorm, and the flat water gushed out three feet deep, destroying and flooding houses.

古文：四月己丑，郧阳县雨雹。平地水深二尺。
现代文：四月己丑日，鄙阳县降冰雹，平地水深达二尺。
English: On April Fool's Day, hail fell in Mianyang County, and the water depth on the flat land reached two feet.

古文：五月癸丑，延绥口北马营堡雨雹，杀稼七十里。
现代文：五月癸丑日，延绥口北马营堡降冰雹，伤害庄稼，面积达七十里。
English: On May Fool's Day, hail fell on Yancheng's Beimaying Fortress, damaging crops over an area of 70 miles.

古文：四年四月辛酉，宣府、大同雨雹，厚三尺余，大如卵，禾苗尽伤。
现代文：四年四月辛酉日，宣府、大同降冰雹，平地积雹厚三尺多，大如鸡蛋，禾苗全部受伤害。
English: On a bitterly cold day in April of the fourth year, hail fell on Xuanfu and Datong. The flat ground was covered with hailstones more than three feet thick, as big as eggs, and all the seedlings were damaged.

古文：五年四月戊午，大雨雹。
现代文：五年四月戊午日，大降冰雹。
English: On the afternoon of April 5th, there was a heavy hailstorm.

古文：六年八月乙丑，祁、定二州大雨雹，伤损禾菽，击毙三人。
现代文：六年八月乙丑日，祁、定二州大降冰雹，伤害禾苗菽麦，打死三人。
English: In August of the sixth year, on the day of the second Ugly, hailstones fell heavily in Shandong and Shandong provinces, injuring wheat seedlings and buckwheat and killing three people.

古文：万历元年五月辛巳，雨雹。
现代文：万历元年五月辛巳日，天降冰雹。
English: In May of the first year of Wanli, the sky rained hail.

古文：四年四月丙午，博兴大雨雹，如拳如卵，明日又如之，击死男妇五十余人，牛马无算，禾麦毁尽。兖州相继损禾。
现代文：四年四月丙午日，博兴大降冰雹，有的大如拳头，有的大如鸡蛋，第二天又像这样，打死男女人口五十多人，打死牛马无数，禾麦全部遭毁坏，充州相继损伤禾稼。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of the fourth month of April, heavy hail fell in Bo Xing, some as big as fists, some as big as eggs, and the next day it was like this again, killing more than fifty men and women, killing countless cattle and horses, destroying all the crops, and damaging the crops in Chengzhou one after another.

古文：五月乙巳，定襄雨雹，大者如卵，禾苗尽损。
现代文：五月乙巳日，定襄降冰雹，大的如蛋，禾苗全部遭受损窨。
English: On the 21st day of May, hailstones fell steadily, large as eggs, and all the seedlings were damaged.

古文：九年八月庚子，辽东等卫雨雹，如鸡卵，禾尽伤。
现代文：九年八月庚子日，辽东等卫降冰雹，大如鸡蛋，禾苗全部被伤害。
English: In August 9th, Geng Zi Day, Liaodong and other provinces in Wei were hit by hailstones as large as eggs, and all the seedlings were damaged.

古文：十一年闰二月丁卯，泰州、宝应雨雹如鸡子，杀飞鸟无算。
现代文：十一年闰二月丁卯日，泰州、童尘降冰雹，大如鸡蛋，打死飞乌无数。
English: In February of the eleventh year, on the day of Dingwu, Taizhou and Tongdu dropped hailstones as large as eggs, killing countless flying insects.

古文：五月庚子，大雨雹。
现代文：五月庚子日，大降冰雹。
English: In May, on Geng Zi Day, there was a heavy hailstorm.

古文：十三年五月乙酉，宛平大雨雹，伤人畜千计。
现代文：十三年五月乙酉日，宛平大降冰雹，打伤人口、牲畜敷以千计。
English: On May 13th, a large hailstorm hit Wanping, injuring thousands of people and livestock.

古文：十五年五月癸巳，喜峰口大雨雹，如枣栗，积尺余，田禾瓜果尽伤。
现代文：十五年五月癸巳日。喜峰口大降冰雹，大如枣栗，积地厚一尺多，田中的禾苗瓜果全部被打伤。
English: On May 15th, a large hailstone fell at the mouth of the Kifeng Pass. The hailstone was as big as a jujube and covered an area more than a foot thick. All of the crops, seedlings, and fruits in the field were damaged.

古文：十九年四月壬子，雨雹。
现代文：十九年四月壬子日，天降冰雹。
English: On April 19th, Jinsi Day, hail fell from the sky.

古文：二十一年二月庚寅，贵阳府大雨雹。
现代文：二十一年二月庚寅日，贵阳府大降冰雹。
English: On February 21st, the Day of the Rooster, hail fell heavily in Guiyang.

古文：十月丙戌，武进、江阴大冰雹，伤五谷。
现代文：十月丙戌日，武进、江阴大降冰雹，伤害五谷。
English: On October 6th, large hailstones fell in Wujin and Jiangyin, causing damage to Wugu.

古文：二十三年五月乙酉，临邑雨雹，尽作男女鸟兽形。
现代文：二十三年五月乙酉日，临邑降冰雹，全部呈男女乌兽的形状。
English: On the 23rd day of the month of May, hailstones fell in Lin'e, all of which were in the shape of a male and female black beast.

古文：二十五年八月壬戌，风雹。
现代文：二十五年八月壬戌日，刮风，降冰雹。
English: On August 25th, the wind blew and hail fell.

古文：二十八年六月，山东大风雹，击死人畜，伤禾苗。河南亦雨冰雹，伤禾麦。
现代文：二十八年六月，山东刮大风，降冰雹，打死人口、牲畜，伤害禾苗；河南也降冰雹，伤害禾麦。
English: In June of the 28th year, a strong wind blew in Shandong, and hailstones fell, killing people and livestock, and injuring seedlings; hailstones also fell in Henan, injuring wheat.

古文：三十年四月己未，大雨雹。
现代文：三十年四月己末日，大降冰雹。
English: It's the last day of April for 30 years, and hail is falling.

古文：三十一年五月戊寅，凤阳皇陵雨雹。
现代文：三十一年五月戊寅日，凤阳皇陵天降冰雹。
English: On the 31st day of May, the Fengyang Emperor's Mausoleum was hit by a hailstorm.

古文：七月丁丑，大雨雹。
现代文：七月丁丑日又大降冰雹。
English: Hail fell heavily again on Dingushi Day in July.

古文：三十四年七月丙戌，又大雨雹。平地水深三尺。
现代文：三十四年七月丙戌日，又大降冰雹，平地水深三尺。
English: In July of the year thirty-four, there was another large hailstorm, and the water level was three feet deep.

古文：三十六年五月戊子，雨雹。
现代文：三十六年五月戊子日，天降冰雹。
English: On May 31, 1936, hail fell from the sky.

古文：四十一年七月丁卯，宣府大雨雹，杀禾稼。
现代文：四十一年七月丁卯日，宣府大降冰雹，伤害庄稼。
English: In July, 41st, on the day of Dingwu, heavy hail fell on Xuanfu, damaging crops.

古文：四十六年三月庚辰，长泰、同安大雨雹，如斗如拳，击伤城郭庐舍，压死者二百二十余人。
现代文：四十六年三月庚辰日，长泰、同安大降冰雹，大如量斗、拳头，打壤城郭房屋，压死二百二十多人。
English: On the day of Gengchen in March, 46, Changtai and Tong'an provinces were hit by hailstones as large as a javelin and a fist, which battered the city walls and houses, crushing more than 220 people to death.

古文：十月壬午，云南雨雹。
现代文：十月壬午日，云南降冰雹。
English: Hail fell in Yunnan on the afternoon of October 13th.

古文：天启二年四月壬辰，大雨雹。
现代文：天启二年四月壬辰日，大降冰雹。
English: In April of the second year of the Apocalypse, on the day of Imjin, there was a great hailstorm.

古文：崇祯三年九月辛丑，大雨雹。
现代文：崇祯三年九月辛丑日，大降冰雹。
English: On a bitterly cold day in September of the third year of the Chongzhen Emperor, there was a heavy hailstorm.

古文：四年五月，襄垣雨雹，大如伏牛盈丈，小如拳，毙人畜甚众。
现代文：四年五月，襄垣降冰雹，大的如伏在地上的牛，长达一丈，小的如拳头，打死很多人民、牲畜。
English: In May of the fourth year, hail fell from the mountainside. The large hailstones were like cows lying on the ground, up to a meter long, and the small ones were like fists, killing many people and livestock.

古文：六月丙申，大雨雹。
现代文：六月丙申日，大降冰雹。
English: In June, on the third day of the sixth month, there was a heavy hailstorm.

古文：七年四月壬戌，常州、镇江雨雹，伤麦。
现代文：七年四月壬戌日，常州、镇江降冰雹，伤害麦苗。
English: On April 7 of the year, Changzhou and Zhenjiang were hit by hailstorms, which damaged wheat seedlings.

古文：八年七月己酉，临县大冰雹三日，积二尺余，大如鹅卵，伤稼。
现代文：八年七月己酉日，临县大降冰雹，连续三天，堆积二尺多厚，雹大如鹅蛋，伤害庄稼。
English: On July 8th, Lin County was hit by heavy hail for three days in a row. The hail was two feet thick and the hailstones were as big as goose eggs, damaging crops.

古文：十年四月乙亥，大雨雹。
现代文：十年四月乙亥日，大降冰雹。
English: On April 10th, the first day of the year of the boar, there was a heavy hailstorm.

古文：闰四月癸丑，武乡、沁源大雨雹，最大者如象，次如牛。
现代文：闰四月癸丑日，武乡、沁源大降冰雹，最大的如象，次大的如牛。
English: On April Fool's Day, heavy hail fell in Wuxiang and Heyuan. The largest hailstone was as big as an elephant, and the second largest was as big as a cow.

古文：十一年六月甲寅，宣府乾石河山场雨雹，击杀马驘四十八匹。
现代文：十一年六月甲寅日，宣府干石河山场降冰雹，打死马、骡四十八匹。
English: On the 11th day of June, hailstones fell on the mountain field of the Xuanfu Dry Stone River, killing forty-eight horses and mules.

古文：九月，顺天雨雹。
现代文：九月，顺天降冰雹。
English: In September, hailstones fell throughout the day.

古文：十二年八月，白水、同官、雒南、陇西诸邑，千里雨雹，半日乃止，损伤田禾。
现代文：十二年八月，白水、旦官、雒南、陇西等地，千里区域降冰雹，半天才停止，伤害田中禾稼。
English: In August 2012, hailstorms hit thousands of kilometers in areas such as Baishui, Dangguan, Hunan, and Shaanxi, and lasted for half a day, damaging crops in Tanaka.

古文：十六年六月丁丑，乾州雨雹，大如牛，小如斗，毁伤墙屋，击毙人畜。
现代文：十六年六月丁丑日，干州降冰雹，大的如牛，小的如量斗，毁坏房屋，打死人口、牲畜。
English: On the day of Dingwu in June 16th, hailstones fell in Gansu Province. The large hailstones were like cows and the small ones were like weighing scales. They destroyed houses and killed people and livestock.

古文：▲雷震
现代文：雷震
English: Thunderstorms

古文：洪武六年十一月戊申，雷电交作。
现代文：洪武六年十一月戊申日，震雷和闪电交相发作。
English: In November of the sixth year of Hongwu, on the day of Wu Xun, thunder and lightning occurred.

古文：十三年五月甲午，雷震谨身殿。
现代文：十三年五月甲午日，雷击谨身殿。
English: On the afternoon of May 13th, lightning struck my body.

古文：六月丙寅，雷震奉天门。
现代文：六月丙寅日，雷击奉天门。
English: On June 4th, lightning struck the Fengtian Gate.

古文：十月甲戌，雷电。
现代文：十月甲戌日，打雷阙电。
English: On October 6th, thunder and lightning occurred.

古文：十二月己巳，广州大风雨雷电。
现代文：十二月己巳日，广州刮大风，降大雨，雷鸣电闪。
English: On December 6th, Guangzhou was hit by strong winds, heavy rain, thunder and lightning.

古文：十八年二月甲午，雷电雨雪。
现代文：十八年二月甲午日，打雷闪电，天降飞雪。
English: On the afternoon of February 18th, thunder and lightning struck, and snow fell from the sky.

古文：二十一年五月辛丑，雷震玄武门兽吻。
现代文：二十一年五月辛丑日，雷擎玄武门兽吻。
English: On the fateful day of May 21, Lei Qing Xuanwu's door was kissed by a beast.

古文：六月癸卯，暴风，雷震洪武门兽吻。
现代文：六月癸卯日，刮暴风，雷击洪武门兽吻。
English: On the last day of June, a storm blew and lightning struck Hongwu Gate.

古文：宣德九年六月甲子，雷震大祀坛外西门兽吻。
现代文：宣德九年六月甲子日，雷击大祀坛外西门兽吻。
English: In June of the ninth year of Xuan De, lightning struck the Great Altar and the West Gate Beast's Kiss.

古文：正统八年五月戊寅，雷震奉天殿鸱吻。
现代文：正统八年五月戊寅日，雷击奉天殿屋脊鸱吻。
English: In May of the eighth year of orthodoxy, lightning struck the roof of the Temple of Heaven.

古文：七月辛未，雷震南京西角门楼兽吻。
现代文：七月辛末日，雷击南京西角门楼的兽吻。
English: At the end of July, lightning struck the gate tower of West Point in Nanjing.

古文：是日，大同巡警军至沙沟，风雷骤至，裂肤断指者二百余人。
现代文：这一天，从大同巡警军到沙沟一带，大风挟雷突然而至，因遭雷击，肌肤开裂、手指折断的人有二百多个。
English: On this day, from the Datong Patrol Army to the area of Shagou, a gale with lightning suddenly came. More than 200 people suffered from lightning, cracked skin and broken fingers.

古文：九年正月辛亥朔，雷电大雨。闰七月壬寅，雷震奉先殿鸱吻。
现代文：九年正月辛亥朔日，雷鸣电闪，天降大雨真闰七月壬寅日，雷击奉先殿屋脊鸥吻。
English: In the first month of the ninth year, Xinhai New Year's Day, thunder and lightning, heavy rain fell from the sky, and in July, Ren Yin Day, lightning struck the roof of the front hall.

古文：十一年十二月壬寅，大雨雷电，翼日乃止。
现代文：十一年十二月壬寅日，天降大雨，雷鸣电闪，第二天才停止。
English: On December 11th, Ren Yin Day, the sky rained heavily, thunder and lightning, and it only stopped the next day.

古文：十四年六月丙辰，南京风雨雷电，谨身殿灾。
现代文：十四年六月丙辰日，南京刮风，降雨，雷鸣电闪，谨身殿起火。
English: On the 14th day of June, wind, rain, thunder and lightning hit Nanjing, and the Great Hall of the People caught fire.

古文：景泰三年六月庚寅，雷击宫庭中门，伤人。
现代文：景泰三年六月庚寅日，雷击官庭中门，伤害人民。
English: On Geng Yin Day in June of the third year of Jing Tai, lightning struck the middle gate of the official court, injuring people.

古文：天顺二年六月己卯，雷震大祀殿鸱吻。
现代文：天顺二年六月己卯日，雷击大祀殿屋脊鸥吻。
English: In June of the second year of Tenshun, lightning struck the roof of the Great Hall of Worship.

古文：四年六月癸丑，雷毁蓟州仓廒四。
现代文：四年六月癸丑日，雷击摧毁蓟州仓库四座。
English: In June, lightning strikes destroyed four warehouses in Ganzhou.

古文：成化三年六月戊申，雷震南京午门正楼。
现代文：成化三年六月戊申日，雷击直立生门的正楼。
English: In June of the third year of Chenghua, lightning struck the main building of the Zhi Li Sheng Gate.

古文：五年二月乙卯，又震山川坛具服殿之兽吻。
现代文：五年二月乙卯日，又雷击山川坛具服殿的兽吻。
English: In February of the fifth year, the lightning struck the beast kiss of the mountain and river altar dress hall.

古文：八年四月辛未，始雷。
现代文：八年四月辛末日，开始打雷。
English: On the last day of the Chinese New Year in April, lightning began to strike.

古文：十二年十一月癸亥，南京大雷雨。
现代文：十二年十一月癸亥日，南京霹雷，暴雨。
English: In November of the 12th year, on the day of the boar, Nanjing was hit by thunder and heavy rain.

古文：十三年二月甲戌，安庆大雪，既而雷电交作。
现代文：十三年二月甲戌日，安庆降大雪，随后不久惊雷闪电交相发作。
English: On February 13, Jiaxuan Day, heavy snow fell in Anqing, soon followed by thunder and lightning.

古文：十一月辛未冬至，杭州大雷雨。戊寅，荆门州大雷电雨雪。
现代文：十一月辛未冬至日，杭州打大雷，下大雨；戊寅日，剂门州雷电大发，天降大雪。
English: In November, just before the winter solstice, Hangzhou was hit by thunder and heavy rain; on the day of the Mid-Autumn Festival, Jiangmen Province was hit by thunder and lightning, and heavy snow fell.

古文：十七年七月己亥，雷震郊坛承天门脊兽。
现代文：十七年七月己亥日，雷擎郊坛承天门屋脊的野兽塑像。
English: On July 17th, the day of the Chinese lunar new year, the statue of the beast on the roof of the Tianmen Tower was erected.

古文：十一月丁酉，江南大雷雨雪。
现代文：十一月丁酉日，江南霹雷，大雪。
English: On November 9th, the south of the Yangtze River was hit by thunder and heavy snow.

古文：弘治元年五月丙子，辰刻，南京震雷坏洪武门兽吻。巳刻，坏孝陵御道树。
现代文：弘治元年五月丙子日，辰时，南京惊雷击壤洪武门兽吻；巳时，又击坏孝陵的御道树。
English: On the third day of the fifth month of the first year of the Hongzhi era, at that time, Nanjing was struck by lightning and the Hongwu Gate was kissed by a beast; at that time, the roadside tree of Xiaoling was also damaged.

古文：六月己酉，又坏鹰扬卫仓楼，聚宝门旗杆。
现代文：六月己酉日，又雷击打壤鹰扬卫的仓楼和聚壶旦的旗杆。
English: On the last day of June, lightning struck the warehouse of the Liao Ying Yang Wei and the flagpole of the Jiuyutang.

古文：二年四月庚子，又毁神乐观祖师殿。
现代文：二年四月庚子日，雷又击毁神乐观祖师殿。
English: In April of the second year, on the day of Geng Zi, the thunder destroyed the temple of God Optimistic Ancestor.

古文：三年七月壬子，又坏午门西城墙。
现代文：三年七月壬子日，雷又擎坏午门的西城墙。
English: In July of the third year, on the day of Ren Zi, thunder and lightning destroyed the west city wall of the noon gate.

古文：六年闰五月丁未，蓟州大风雷，拔木偃禾，牛马有震死者。
现代文：六年闺五月丁末日，蓟州狂风，霹雷，拔起树木，吹倒庄稼，有的牛马被雷擎而死。
English: Six years ago, at the end of May, the violent wind and thunderstorms in Luzhou uprooted trees, blew down crops, and some cattle and horses were killed by lightning.

古文：十二月壬戌，南京雷雨，拔孝陵树。
现代文：十二月壬戌日，南京打雷下雨，孝陵的树木被连根拔起。
English: On December 24, thunder and rain fell in Nanjing, uprooting trees in Xiaoling.

古文：七年六月癸酉，如之。
现代文：七年六月癸酉日，像光前那样。
English: On the third day of the sixth month of the seventh year, as it was before the light.

古文：七月丙辰，福州雷毁城楼。
现代文：七月丙辰日，福州城楼被雷击焚毁。
English: On July 4th, the Fuzhou City Tower was destroyed by lightning.

古文：八年十二月丙子，长沙大雷电雨雪。丁丑，南昌、彭水俱大雷电，雨雪雹，大木折。
现代文：八年十二月丙子日，长沙雷鸣电闪，天降大雪；丁丑日，南昌、彭水都雷电交加，天降雪雹，大树被折断。
English: On December 8th, the C day, Changsha thundered and lightning flashed, and the sky fell heavy snow; on the D day, Nanchang and Pengshui were hit by thunder and lightning, the sky fell snow, and large trees were broken.

古文：十年四月，雷震宣府西横岭之南山，倾三十余丈。
现代文：十年四月，雷击宣府西横岭的南山，山体倾塌三十多丈。
English: In April 2010, lightning struck the Nanshan Mountain in Xuanfu's Xiyangling District, causing the mountain to collapse more than 30 meters.

古文：七月乙卯，雷击吉王府端礼门兽吻。
现代文：七月乙卯日，雷击吉王府端礼门的兽吻。
English: On the 1st day of July, lightning struck the Beast's Kiss at the Gate of Kiofuta.

古文：十二年四月丙午，雷震楚府承运殿。
现代文：十二年四月丙午日，雷击楚府承运殿。
English: On the afternoon of April 12, lightning struck the Chu Prefecture Transportation Hall.

古文：十四年闰七月庚辰，福州大风雷，击坏教场旗杆、城楼、大树。
现代文：十四年闰七月庚辰日，福州刮大风，打大雷，擎坏教场的旗杆、城楼和大树。
English: On the 14th day of the 7th month of the 14th year of the leap year, Fuzhou was hit by strong winds and thunder, destroying the flagpoles, towers and big trees of the schoolyard.

古文：正德元年五月壬辰，雷震青州衣甲库兽吻，有火起库中。
现代文：正德元年五月壬辰日，雷擎青州衣甲库的兽吻，库中有火升起。
English: On the first day of the month of May in the year of Zhengde, there was a fire in the warehouse of the Qingzhou clothing and armor warehouse.

古文：六月辛酉，雷击西中门柱脊，暴风折郊坛松柏，大祀殿及斋宫兽瓦多堕落者。丙子，南京暴风雨，雷震孝陵白土冈树。
现代文：六月辛酉日，雷击西中门的柱脊，暴风吹断郊坛的松柏，大祀殿以及斋宫的兽形瓦很多被风刮落在地；丙子日，南京发生暴风雨，雷击孝陵白土冈的树木。
English: On the day of the full moon in June, lightning struck the column ridge of the West Middle Gate, the storm broke the pine trees of the suburb, and many of the animal-shaped tiles of the Great Hall of Worship and the Temple of Heaven were blown to the ground by the wind; on the day of the full moon, a storm occurred in Nanjing, and lightning struck the trees of Xiaoling Bai TuoGang.

古文：十二月己巳朔，南通州雷再震。
现代文：十二月己巳朔日，南通州发生两次雷擎。
English: On New Year's Day in December, two lightning strikes occurred in Nantong.

古文：四年十二月壬寅，杭州大雨雷电，越二日复作。
现代文：四年十二月壬寅日，杭州暴雨雷电，过了二日，再次发生。
English: On December 4th, Hangzhou was hit by torrential rain and lightning. Two days later, it happened again.

古文：五年六月丙申，雷震万全卫柴沟堡，毙墩军四人。
现代文：五年六月丙申日，雷擎万全卫柴沟堡，擎死墩军四人。
English: In June of the fifth year, on the seventh day of the sixth month, Lei Jing Wanquan defended Chai Gou Fort, and killed four soldiers.

古文：七年五月戊辰，雷震余干万春寨旗杆，状如刀劈。
现代文：七年五月戊辰日，雷击余千万春寨旗杆，情状如同用刀劈开。
English: On May 7th, the day of Pentecost, lightning struck more than ten million Spring Village flagpoles, splitting them as if with a knife.

古文：闰五月丁亥，雷震成都卫门及教场旗杆。
现代文：闺五月丁亥日，雷击成都卫门和教场旗杆。
English: On the day of Dinghai in May, lightning struck the Chengdu Gate and the schoolyard flagpole.

古文：十年闰四月甲申，蓟州赚狗崖、东墩及新开岭关雷火，震伤三十余人。
现代文：十年闰四月甲申日，蓟州赚狗崖、束墩以及新开岭关发生雷火，击伤三十多人。
English: On the 10th day of the 4th month of the 4th year of the 10th year, lightning fires occurred in Zhanzhou Zengou Cliff, Sokou and Xinkailing Pass, injuring more than 30 people.

古文：十二年八月癸亥，南京祭历代帝王，雷雨大作，震死斋房吏。
现代文：十二年八月癸亥日，南京祭祀历代帝王，雷雨猛烈发生，击死斋房官吏。
English: In August of the 12th year, on the day of the Year of the Boar, a thunderstorm raged in Nanjing, where the emperors of past dynasties were worshipped. The thunderstorm killed many officials.

古文：十二月庚辰，瑞州大雷电。
现代文：十二月庚辰日，瑞州大发雷电。
English: On December 14th, lightning occurred in Ruizhou.

古文：十六年八月，雷击奉天门。
现代文：十六年八月，雷击奉天门。
English: In August 16th, lightning struck Fengtianmen.

古文：嘉靖二年五月丁丑，雷击观象台。
现代文：嘉靖二年五月丁丑日，雷击观象台。
English: In May of the second year of Jiajing, on the day of Ding Jiu, lightning struck the observatory.

古文：四年七月己丑，雷击南京长安左门兽吻。
现代文：四年七月己丑日，雷击南京长安左门兽吻。
English: In July of the fourth year, on the ugly day, lightning struck the beast's kiss at the left gate of Chang'an, Nanjing.

古文：五年四月戊寅，雷击阜城门城楼南角兽吻及北九铺旗杆。
现代文：五年四月戊寅，雷击阜城门城楼南角兽吻和北九铺旗杆。
English: In April of the fifth year, lightning struck the south corner of the Fucheng Gate City Tower and the flagpole of the North Nine Pavilions.

古文：十年六月丁巳，雷击德胜门，破民屋柱，毙者四人。癸亥，雷击午门角楼及西华门城楼柱。
现代文：十年六月丁巳日，雷击德胜门，击破民房屋柱，击死四人；癸亥日，雷击午门的角楼和西华门城楼的柱子。
English: On the 10th day of June, lightning struck the Desheng Gate, breaking the pillars of the houses and killing four people; on the 19th day of the month, lightning struck the corner tower of the Noon Gate and the pillars of the West China Gate tower.

古文：十五年六月甲申，雷击南京西上门兽吻，震死男妇十余人。
现代文：十五年六月甲申日，雷击南京西上门兽吻，击死男女十多人。
English: On June 15th, lightning struck the west gate of Nanjing, killing more than a dozen men and women.

古文：十六年五月戊戌，雷震谨身殿鸱吻。
现代文：十六年五月戊戌日，雷击谨身殿屋脊鸥吻。
English: On May 16th, lightning struck the roof of the main hall.

古文：二十八年六月丁酉朔，雷震奉先殿左吻及东室门槅。
现代文：二十八年六月丁酉朔日，雷击奉先殿屋脊左吻和柬室的门格。
English: On June 28th, lightning struck the left side of the roof ridge of the front hall and the door frame of the reception room.

古文：三十三年四月乙亥，始雷。
现代文：三十三年四月乙亥日，开始打雷。
English: On April 1st, 1933, it began to thunder.

古文：三十八年六月丙寅，雷击奉先殿门外南西二墙。
现代文：三十八年六月丙寅日，雷击奉先殿门外的南面、西面二墙。
English: In June of the year 38, lightning struck the south and west walls outside the front door of the temple.

古文：隆庆元年八月，大暑雷震。
现代文：隆庆元年八月，非常暑热，发生疾雷。
English: In August of the first year of Longqing, it was very hot and thunderstorms occurred.

古文：次日，大寒，如严冬。
现代文：第二天，非常寒冷，如同严寒的冬季。
English: The next day, it was very cold, like the dead of winter.

古文：是夕，雷震达旦。
现代文：这天晚上，疾雷通宵逵旦。
English: On this night, lightning flashed all night long.

古文：四年六月辛酉，雷击圜丘广利门鸱吻。
现代文：四年六月辛酉日，雷击圜丘广利门屋脊鸥吻。
English: On June 4th, lightning struck the roof ridge of the Guangli Gate in Shaoqiu.

古文：万历三年六月己卯，雷击建极殿鸱吻。壬辰，雷击端门鸱尾。
现代文：万历三年六月己卯日，雷击建极殿屋脊鸥吻；壬辰日，雷擎端门的鹧尾。
English: On the third day of the sixth month of the third year of Wanli, lightning struck the roof of the Jianji Temple, and on the second day of the third month of the third year of Wanli, lightning struck the roof of the Jianji Temple, and on the third day of the third month of the third year of Wanli, lightning struck the roof of the Jianji Temple, and on the third day of the third month of the third year of Wanli, lightning struck the roof of the Jianji Temple.

古文：六年七月壬子，雷击南京承天门左檐。
现代文：六年七月壬子日，雷击南京承天门的左檐。
English: In July of the sixth year, on the day of Ren Zi, lightning struck the left gate of Nanjing Cheng Tianmen.

古文：十三年七月戊子，雷震郊坛广利门，震伤榜题 利 字及斋宫北门兽吻。
现代文：十三年七月戊子日，雷击郊坛的广利门，震坏匾额所题 利 字和斋宫北门兽吻。
English: On the 13th day of the 7th month, lightning struck the Guangli Gate of the Suburban Hall, shaking the inscription of the inscription and the beast's kiss on the north gate of the Temple of Heaven.

古文：十六年八月壬午，雷震南京旧西安门钟鼓楼兽头。
现代文：十六年八月壬午日，雷击南京旧西安门的钟鼓楼兽头。
English: On the afternoon of August 16, lightning struck the bell and drum tower of the old Xi'an Gate in Nanjing.

古文：十九年五月甲戌，太平路、喜峰路并雷击，墩台折，伤官军。
现代文：十九年五月甲戌日，太平路、喜峰路都遭雷击，墩台被折断，伤害官军。
English: On May 19th, Jiaxing Day, Taiping Road and Xifeng Road were both struck by lightning, and the battlements were broken, injuring the government troops.

古文：二十一年四月戊戌，雷震孝陵大木。
现代文：二十一年四月戊戌日，雷擎孝陵的大木。
English: On April 21st, the great tree of Lei Qing Xiaoling was uprooted.

古文：二十二年六月己酉，雷雨，西华门灾。
现代文：二十二年六月己酉，打雷降雨，西华门起火。
English: In June 22nd, thunder and rain fell, and the West China Gate caught fire.

古文：七月壬辰，雷击祈谷坛东天门左吻。
现代文：七月壬辰日，雷击祈壳坛束天门左吻。
English: On the day of Imjin in July, the lightning struck the prayer shell altar, and the left side of the heaven gate was kissed.

古文：二十四年二月己酉夜，酃县大雷雨，火光遍十余里。
现代文：二十四年二月己酉日晚上，酃县疾雷大雨，火光遍照十多里。
English: On the evening of February 24th, there was heavy rain and thunder in Jixian County, and the firelight shone for more than ten miles.

古文：二十五年七月庚寅朔，雷毁黄花镇台垣及火器。
现代文：二十五年七月庚寅朔日，雷火焚毁黄花镇台垣和火器。
English: On July 25th, the day of the Chinese New Year, a thunderstorm set fire to the stone walls and firearms of Huanghua Town.

古文：三十二年五月癸酉，雷毁长陵楼，又毁蓟镇松棚路墩台。
现代文：三十二年五月癸酉日，雷火焚毁长陵楼，又焚毁蓟镇松棚路的墩台。
English: On the third day of May in the year thirty-two, lightning and fire destroyed the Chang Mausoleum, and also burned down the Yingtai of Songtian Road, Yingzhen.

古文：三十三年五月庚子，大雷电，击毁南郊望灯高杆。
现代文：三十三年五月庚子日，大打雷，大闪电，雷击焚毁南郊的望灯高杆。
English: On May Day of the 33rd year of the Geng Zi Dynasty, thunder, lightning, and lightning struck and burned the south suburb's tall lampposts.

古文：三十七年八月甲寅，雷劈西城上旗杆。
现代文：三十七年八月甲寅日，雷擎劈断西城上的旗杆。
English: In August 37 of the year, on the day of Jia Yin, the lightning engine broke the flagpole on the west city.

古文：泰昌元年十月己未，雷毁淮安城楼。
现代文：泰昌元年十月己末日，雷火焚毁淮安城楼。
English: At the end of October in the first year of Taichang, a lightning fire destroyed the Huai'an City Tower.

古文：崇祯六年十二月丁亥，大风雪，雷电。
现代文：崇祯六年十二月丁亥日，刮大风，降大雪，雷鸣电闪。
English: On December 6th, the Dinghai Day, the wind was blowing, heavy snow was falling, and thunder and lightning were flashing.

古文：九年正月甲戌，雷毁孝陵树。
现代文：九年正月甲戌日，雷火焚毁孝陵树木。
English: In the first month of the ninth year, on the day of Jiajing, a lightning fire destroyed the trees of Xiaoling.

古文：十年四月乙亥，蓟州雷火焚东山二十余里。
现代文：十年四月乙亥日，煎赵雷火焚烧柬山二十多里。
English: On April 10th, the day of the Chinese lunar new year, the Zhao Lei fire burned more than 20 miles of the Cambodian mountains.

古文：十二年七月，雷击破密云城铺楼，所贮炮木皆碎。
现代文：十二年七月，雷击破坏密云城铺楼，贮藏的大炮和滚木都被擎碎。
English: In July of the 12th year, a lightning strike destroyed a shop in Miyuncheng, and the stored cannons and logs were smashed.

古文：十月乙未立冬，雷电大作。
现代文：十月乙未立冬日，雷电猛烈发作。
English: In October, just before the winter solstice, there was a violent thunderstorm.

古文：十四年四月癸丑，雷火起蓟州西北，焚及赵家谷，延二十余里。
现代文：十四年四月癸丑日，雷火从蓟州西北燃起，焚烧到赵家谷，蔓延二十多里。
English: On April 14th, the Day of the Ugly Duckling, a lightning fire broke out in the northwest of Zhangzhou, burning as far as Zhaojia Valley and spreading more than 20 miles.

古文：六月丙午，雷震宣府西门城楼。
现代文：六月丙午日，雷击宣府西门城楼。
English: On the afternoon of June 3rd, lightning struck the West Gate Tower of Xuanfu.

古文：十五年四月癸卯，雷震南京孝陵树，火从树出。
现代文：十五年四月癸卯日，雷击南京孝陵树木，火从树中燃出。
English: On April 15th, lightning struck the trees of Nanjing Xiaoling, and a fire broke out in the trees.

古文：十六年五月癸巳朔，雷震通夕不止。
现代文：十六年五月癸巳朔日，疾雷通霄未停。
English: May 16th was a new day, and the thunderstorms have not stopped.

古文：次日，见太庙神主横倒，诸铜器为火所铄，熔而成灰。
现代文：第二天，见太庙神位牌横倒在地，众多的铜器被火销熔，熔化成灰。
English: The next day, the shrine's altarpiece fell to the ground, and many bronze utensils were melted by the fire and turned to ashes.

古文：六月丙戌，雷震奉先殿鸱吻，槅扇皆裂，铜镮尽毁。
现代文：六月丙戌日，雷击奉先殿屋脊鸥吻，门窗格扇都被擎裂，铜环全部被毁坏。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month, the lightning hit the roof of the front hall, the door and window fans were cracked, and the copper rings were all destroyed.

古文：▲鱼孽
现代文：鱼孽
English: Fish poisons

古文：嘉靖四十一年二月乙亥，德州九龙庙雨鱼，大者数寸。
现代文：嘉靖四十一年二月乙亥日，德州九龙庙降鱼，大的有几寸。
English: In February of the 41st year of Jiajing, on the day of the Chinese zodiac, a fish fell from the Jiulong Temple in Texas. It was a few inches long.

古文：崇祯十年三月，钱塘江木鏚化为鱼，有首尾未变者。
现代文：崇祯十年三月，钱塘江木柿变化成鱼，有的头尾没有变。
English: In March of the 10th year of Chongzhen, the Qiantang River persimmons changed into fish, and some heads and tails did not change.

古文：▲蝗蝻
现代文：蝗蝻
English: Locust swarms

古文：洪武五年六月，济南属县及青、莱二府蝗。
现代文：洪武五年六月，济南隶属各县和青、莱二府发生蝗灾。
English: In June of the fifth year of Hongwu, locust plagues occurred in the two prefectures of Heqing and Lai, both of which belong to Jinan.

古文：七月，徐州、大同蝗。
现代文：七月，徐州、大同发生蝗灾。
English: In July, locust plagues occurred in Xuzhou and Datong.

古文：六年七月，北平、河南、山西、山东蝗。
现代文：六年七月，北平、河南、山西、山东发生蝗灾。
English: In July of the sixth year, locust plagues occurred in Beiping, Henan, Shanxi and Shandong.

古文：七年二月，平阳、太原、汾州、历城、汲县蝗。
现代文：七年二月，平阳、太原、汾州、历城、汲县发生蝗灾。
English: In February of the seventh year, locust plagues occurred in Pingyang, Taiyuan, Luzhou, Licheng and Qiu counties.

古文：六月，怀庆、真定、保定、河间、顺德、山东、山西蝗。
现代文：六月，怀庆、寞定、保定、河间、顺德、山东、山西发生蝗灾。
English: In June, locust plagues occurred in Huaiqing, Lianding, Baoding, Hema, Shunde, Shandong and Shanxi.

古文：八年夏，北平、真定、大名、彰德诸府属县蝗。
现代文：八年夏天，北平、真定、大名、彰德等府隶属各县发生蝗灾。
English: In the summer of the eighth year, locust plagues occurred in counties belonging to Beiping, Zhending, Daimyo, and Changde prefectures.

古文：建文四年夏，京师飞蝗蔽天，旬余不息。
现代文：建文四年夏天，京城飞蝗遮蔽天空，十多天不停息。
English: In the summer of the fourth year of Jianwen, the Beijing flying locusts covered the sky and did not stop for more than ten days.

古文：永乐元年夏，山东、山西、河南蝗。
现代文：永乐元年夏天，山东、山西、河南发生蝗灾。
English: In the summer of the first year of Yongle, locust plagues occurred in Shandong, Shanxi and Henan.

古文：三年五月，延安、济南蝗。
现代文：三年五月，延安、济南发生蝗灾。
English: In May of the third year, locust plagues occurred in Yan'an and Jinan.

古文：十四年七月，畿内、河南、山东蝗。
现代文：十四年七月，京畿内、河南、山束发生蝗灾。
English: In July 2014, locust plagues occurred in Gyeonggi Province, Henan Province, and Shanshu.

古文：宣德四年六月，顺天州县蝗。
现代文：童德四年六月，顺天各州县发生蝗灾。
English: In June of the 4th year of the Tongde era, a locust plague occurred in all prefectures and counties.

古文：九年七月，两畿、山西、山东、河南蝗蝻覆地尺许，伤稼。
现代文：九年七月，两京畿、山西、山东、河南蝗虫、幼蝗覆盖地面一尺多厚，伤害禾稼。
English: In July of the ninth year, locusts and young locusts in Gyeonggi Province, Shanxi Province, Shandong Province, and Henan Province covered the ground more than a foot thick, damaging crops.

古文：十年四月，两京、山东、河南蝗蝻伤稼。
现代文：十年四月，两京、山东、河南蝗虫、幼蝗伤害禾稼。
English: In April of the 10th year, locusts and young locusts in Beijing, Shandong and Henan began to damage crops.

古文：正统二年四月，北畿、山东、河南蝗。
现代文：正统二年四月，北畿、山东、河南发生蝗灾。
English: In April of the second year of the Juche era, locust plagues occurred in North Kivu, Shandong, and Henan.

古文：五年夏，顺天、河间、真定、顺德、广平、应天、凤阳、淮安、开封、彰德、兖州蝗。
现代文：五年夏天，顺天、河间、真定、顺德、广平、应天、凤阳、淮安、开封、彰德、兖州发生蝗灾。
English: In the summer of the fifth year, locust plagues occurred in Shuntian, Hema, Zhending, Shunde, Guangping, Yingtian, Fengyang, Huai'an, Kaifeng, Changde and Luzhou.

古文：六年夏，顺天、保定、真定、河间、顺德、广平、大名、淮安、凤阳蝗。
现代文：六年夏天，顺天、保定、真定、河间、顺德、广平、大名、淮安、凤阳发生蝗灾。
English: In the summer of the sixth year, locust plagues occurred in Shuntian, Baoding, Zhending, Hema, Shunde, Guangping, Daming, Huai'an and Fengyang.

古文：秋，彰德、卫辉、开封、南阳、怀庆、太原、济南、东昌、青、莱、兖、登诸府及辽东广宁前、中屯二卫蝗。
现代文：秋季，彰德、卫辉、开封、南阳、怀庆、太原、济南、束昌、青、莱、查、登等府，以及辽东尘宁前、中屯二卫发生蝗灾。
English: In autumn, locust plagues occurred in Changde, Weihui, Kaifeng, Nanyang, Wuchang, Taiyuan, Jinan, Sokchang, Qing, Lai, Cha, Deng and other prefectures, as well as in Liaodong, Dunning, Zhongtun and Erwei.

古文：七年五月，顺天、广平、大名、河间、凤阳、开封、怀庆、河南蝗。
现代文：七年五月，顺天、广平、大名、河间、凤阳、开封、怀庆、河南发生蝗灾。
English: In May of the seventh year, locust plagues occurred in Shuntian, Guangping, Daimyo, Hema, Fengyang, Kaifeng, Huaiqing, and Henan.

古文：八年夏，两畿蝗。
现代文：八年夏天，两畿发生蝗灾。
English: In the summer of 1978, a locust plague occurred in the two Kinki regions.

古文：十二年夏，保定、淮安、济南、开封、河南、彰德蝗。
现代文：十二年夏天，保定、淮安、济南、开封、河南、彰德发生蝗灾。
English: In the summer of 2000, locust plagues occurred in Baoding, Huai'an, Jinan, Kaifeng, Henan and Changde.

古文：秋，永平、凤阳蝗。
现代文：秋季，永平、凤阳发生蝗灾。
English: In autumn, locust plagues occurred in Yongping and Fengyang.

古文：十三年七月，飞蝗蔽天。
现代文：十三年七月，飞蝗遮蔽天空。
English: In July 13th, flying locusts covered the sky.

古文：十四年夏，顺天、永平、济南、青州蝗。
现代文：十四年夏天，顺天、永平、济南、青州发生蝗灾。
English: In the summer of 2014, locust plagues occurred in Suncheon, Yongping, Jinan and Qingzhou.

古文：景泰五年六月，宁国、安庆、池州蝗。
现代文：景泰五年六月，宁国、安庆、池州发生蝗灾。
English: In June of the fifth year of Jing Tai, locust plagues occurred in Ningguo, Anqing and Chizhou.

古文：七年五月，畿内蝗蝻延蔓。
现代文：七年五月，京畿内飞蝗、幼蝗蔓延。
English: In May of the seventh year, flying locusts and young locusts spread throughout Gyeonggi Province.

古文：六月，淮安、扬州、凤阳大旱蝗。
现代文：六月，淮安、扬州、风阳遭遇大旱和蝗灾。
English: In June, Huai'an, Yangzhou and Fengyang suffered from drought and locusts.

古文：九月，应天及太平七府蝗。
现代文：九月，应天和太平七府发生蝗灾。
English: In September, the locust plague occurred in seven prefectures in Yingtian and Taiping.

古文：天顺元年七月，济南、杭州、嘉兴蝗。
现代文：天顺元年七月，济南、杭州、嘉兴发生蝗灾。
English: In July of the first year of Tianshun, locust plagues occurred in Jinan, Hangzhou, and Jiaxing.

古文：二年四月，济南、兖州、青州蝗。
现代文：二年四月，济南、充州、青州发生蝗灾。
English: In April of the second year, locust plagues occurred in Jinan, Chongzhou and Qingzhou.

古文：成化三年七月，开封、彰德、卫辉蝗。
现代文：成化三年七月，开封、彰德、卫辉发生蝗灾。
English: In July of the third year of Chenghua, locust plagues occurred in Kaifeng, Zhangde and Weihui.

古文：九年六月，河间蝗。
现代文：九年六月，河问发生蝗灾。
English: In June of the ninth year, a locust plague occurred in Kawan.

古文：七月，真定蝗。
现代文：七月，真定发生蝗灾。
English: In July, a plague of locusts is certain to occur.

古文：八月，山东旱蝗。
现代文：八月，山束发生旱灾和蝗灾。
English: In August, droughts and locust plagues occurred in the mountains.

古文：十九年五月，河南蝗。
现代文：十九年五月，河南发生蝗灾。
English: In May of the 19th year, a locust plague occurred in Henan.

古文：二十二年三月，平阳蝗。
现代文：二十二年三月，平阳发生蝗灾。
English: In March of the 22nd year, a locust plague occurred in Pingyang.

古文：四月，河南蝗。
现代文：四月，河南发生蝗灾。
English: In April, a locust plague occurred in Henan Province.

古文：七月，顺天蝗。
现代文：七月，顺天发生蝗灾。
English: In July, a plague of locusts swept across the country.

古文：弘治三年，北畿蝗。
现代文：弘治三年，北畿发生蝗灾。
English: In the third year of the Hongzhi era, a locust plague occurred in North Kivu.

古文：四年夏，淮安、扬州蝗。
现代文：四年夏天，淮安、扬州发生蝗灾。
English: In the summer of 2004, locust plagues occurred in Huai'an and Yangzhou.

古文：六年六月，飞蝗自东南向西北，日为掩者三日。
现代文：六年六月，飞蝗从东南向西北发展，太阳被飞蝗遮蔽的情形长达三天。
English: In June of the sixth year, the flying locusts developed from the southeast to the northwest, and the sun was covered by the flying locusts for three days.

古文：七年三月，两畿蝗。
现代文：七年三月，两京畿发生蝗灾。
English: In March of the seventh year, locust plagues occurred in the two Gyeonggi Provinces.

古文：嘉靖三年六月，顺天、保定、河间、徐州蝗。
现代文：嘉靖三年六月，顺天、保定、河间、徐州发生蝗灾。
English: In June of the third year of Jiajing, locust plagues occurred in Shuntian, Baoding, Hema and Xuzhou.

古文：隆庆三闰六月，山东旱蝗。
现代文：隆庆三年闰六月，山束发生旱灾和蝗灾。
English: In the leap June of the third year of the Longqing Festival, droughts and locust plagues occurred in the mountains.

古文：万历十五年七月，江北蝗。
现代文：万历十五年七月，江北发生蝗灾。
English: In July of the 15th year of Wanli, a locust plague occurred in the northern part of the Yangtze River.

古文：十九年夏，顺德、广平、大名蝗。
现代文：十九年夏天，顺德、广平、大名发生蝗灾。
English: In the summer of 1919, locust plagues occurred in Shunde, Guangping, and Daming.

古文：三十七年九月，北畿、徐州、山东蝗。
现代文：三十七年九月，北畿、徐州、山束发生蝗灾。
English: In September 1937, locust plagues occurred in Beigui, Xuzhou and Shanshu.

古文：四十三年七月，山东旱蝗。
现代文：四十三年七月，山束发生旱灾和蝗灾。
English: In July of 1943, drought and locust plagues occurred in the mountains.

古文：四十四年四月，复蝗。
现代文：四十四年四月，又发生蝗灾。
English: In April of 1944, another locust plague occurred.

古文：七月，常州、镇江、淮安、扬州、河南蝗。
现代文：七月，常州、镇江、淮安、荡创、河南发生蝗灾。
English: In July, locust plagues occurred in Changzhou, Zhenjiang, Huai'an, Zhangchuang and Henan.

古文：九月，江宁、广德蝗蝻大起，禾黍竹树俱尽。
现代文：九月，逗窒、庭婆飞蝗幼蝗大规模发生，庄稼、竹林、树木都被吃完。
English: In September, the larvae of the grasshopper and garden locust occur on a large scale, and the crops, bamboo groves and trees are all eaten up.

古文：四十五年，北畿旱蝗。
现代文：四十五年，北畿发生旱灾和蝗灾。
English: In 1945, droughts and locust plagues occurred in North Kivu.

古文：四十六年，畿南四府又蝗。
现代文：四十六年，畿南四府又发生蝗灾。
English: In 1946, locust plagues occurred again in four prefectures in the southern part of Gyeongnam.

古文：四十七年八月，济南、东昌、登州蝗。
现代文：四十七年八月，济南、柬昌、登州发生蝗灾。
English: In August 1947, locust plagues occurred in Jinan, Camchang, and Dengzhou.

古文：天启元年七月，顺天蝗。
现代文：天启元年七月，顺天发生蝗灾。
English: In July of the first year of the Apocalypse, a plague of locusts swept across the sky.

古文：五年六月，济南飞蝗蔽天，田禾俱尽。
现代文：五年六月，济南飞蝗遮蔽天空，田中禾苗都被吃尽。
English: In June 2005, flying locusts in Jinan covered the sky, and all of the rice seedlings in Tanaka were eaten.

古文：六年十月，开封旱蝗。
现代文：六年十月，开封发生旱灾和蝗灾。
English: In October of the sixth year, drought and locust plagues occurred in Kaifeng.

古文：崇祯八年七月，河南蝗。
现代文：塞祯八年七月，河南发生蝗灾。
English: In July 2006, a locust plague occurred in Henan Province.

古文：十年六月，山东、河南蝗。
现代文：十年六月，山东、河南发生蝗灾。
English: In June of the same year, a plague of locusts occurred in Shandong and Henan.

古文：十一年六月，两京、山东、河南大旱蝗。
现代文：十一年六月，两京、山东，河南发生大旱和蝗灾。
English: In June of the eleventh year, droughts and locust plagues occurred in Beijing, Shandong and Henan.

古文：十三年五月，两京、山东、河南、山西、陕西大旱蝗。
现代文：十三年五月，两京、山东、河南、山西、陕西发生大旱和蝗灾。
English: In May 13th, drought and locust plague occurred in Beijing, Shandong, Henan, Shanxi and Shaanxi.

古文：十四年六月，两京、山东、河南、浙江大旱蝗。
现代文：十四年六月，两京、山东、河南、浙江发生大旱和蝗灾。
English: In June 2014, droughts and locust plagues hit Beijing, Shandong, Henan and Zhejiang.

古文：▲豕祸
现代文：豕祸
English: 祸

古文：嘉靖七年，杭州民家有豕，肉膜间生字。
现代文：嘉靖七年，杭州百姓家中有猎，肉膜之间长出字来。
English: In the seventh year of Jiajing, the people of Hangzhou had a hunt at home, and characters grew between the meat films.

古文：万历二十三年春，三河民家生八豕，一类人形，手足俱备，额上一目。三十八年四月，燕河路营生豕，一身二头，六蹄二尾。
现代文：万历二十三年春天，三河百姓家中生出八只猎，一只像人的形状，手足都具备，额头上有一只眼睛三十八年四月，燕河路营生出一只猎，一个身子，二个头，六只蹄，二条尾巴。
English: In the spring of the 23rd year of the Wanli calendar, eight geese were born in the homes of the people of Sanhe. One was shaped like a human, with both hands and feet, and an eye on its forehead. In April of the 38th year, a geese was born in Yanhe Road Camp. It had one body, two heads, six hooves, and two tails.

古文：六月，大同后卫生豕，两头四眼四耳。
现代文：六月，大同后卫生出一只猎，两个头，四只眼睛，四个耳朵。
English: In June, after Datong, the health department issued a hunt, two heads, four eyes, four ears.

古文：四十七年六月，黄县生豕，双头四耳，一身八足。
现代文：四十七年六月，黄县生出一只猎，两个头，四个耳朵，一个身子，八条腿。
English: In June, 47 years ago, Huangxian gave birth to a pheasant, with two heads, four ears, one body and eight legs.

古文：七月，宁远生豕，身白无毛，长鼻象嘴。
现代文：七月，宁速生出一只猎，身子是白色，设有毛，长鼻子，象嘴。
English: In July, Ningbo gave birth to a white-furred, long-nosed, elephant-billed peregrine falcon.

古文：天启三年七月，辰州玩平溪生豕，猪身人足，一目。
现代文：天启三年七月，辰州甑平溪生出一只猎，猎身子，人足，一只眼睛。
English: In July of the third year of the Apocalypse, a hunted, hunted body, a human foot, and an eye were born in Shuping Creek, Chenzhou.

古文：四年三月，神木生豕，额多一鼻逆生，目深藏皮肉，合则不见。
现代文：四年三月，神木生出一只猎，额头上多生一个鼻子，倒着生出，眼睛深陷，藏在皮肉中，合拢便不能看见。
English: In March of the fourth year, Shenmu gave birth to a hunting dog, with an extra nose on the forehead, which was born upside down, and deep-set eyes, which were hidden in the skin and could not be seen when closed.

古文：四月，榆林生豕，一首二身，二尾八足。
现代文：四月，榆林生出一只猎，一个头，两个身子，二条尾巴，八只足。
English: In April, a roe deer with one head, two bodies, two tails and eight legs was born in Yulin.

古文：六月，霍州生豕，二身二眼，象鼻，四耳四乳。
现代文：六月，霍州生出一只猜，二个身子，二只眼睛，象鼻子，四个耳朵，四个乳。
English: In June, Huozhou gave birth to a rhinoceros with two bodies, two eyes, an elephant nose, four ears, and four breasts.

古文：崇祯元年三月，石泉生豕类象，鼻下一目甚大，身无毛，皮肉皆白。
现代文：崇祯元年三月，石泉生出一只猎，像大象，鼻子下一只眼睛很大，身上没有毛，皮肉都是白色。
English: In March of the first year of Chongzhen, Shiquan gave birth to a huntsman, like an elephant, with a large eye under the nose, no hair on the body, and white skin.

古文：六年二月，建昌生豕，二身一首，八蹄二尾。
现代文：六年二月，建昌生出一只猎，二个身子，一个头，八只蹄子，二条尾巴。
English: In February of the sixth year, Jianchang gave birth to a deer, two bodies, one head, eight hooves, and two tails.

古文：十五年七月，聊城生豕，一首二尾七蹄。
现代文：十五年七月，聊城生出一只猎，一个头，二条尾巴，七只蹄子。
English: In July of the fifteenth year, Liaocheng gave birth to a deer, one head, two tails, and seven hooves.

古文：▲龙蛇之孽
现代文：龙蛇之孽
English: The Sins of Dragons and Snakes

古文：成化五年六月，河决杏花营，有卵浮于河，大如人首，下锐上圆，质青白，盖龙卵也。
现代文：成化五年六月，黄河在杏花营决口，有蛋在河中漂浮，大如人头，下面尖，上面圆，质地呈青白色，大概是龙蛋。
English: In June of the fifth year of Chenghua, the Yellow River was at the mouth of the apricot camp. There was an egg floating in the river. It was as big as a human head, pointed at the bottom and round at the top. It had a bluish-white texture. It was probably a dragon egg.

古文：弘治九年六月庚辰，宣府镇南口墩骤雨火发，龙起刀鞘内。
现代文：弘治九年六月庚辰日，宣府钟南口墩暴雨中产生火光，龙在刀鞘内腾起。
English: On the day of the Gengchen in June of the ninth year of the Hongzhi era, a firelight was generated in the rainstorm in Zhongnankou, Xuanfu, and the dragon rose up in the sheath of the sword.

古文：十八年五月辛卯，日午，旋风大起，云翳三殿，若有人骑龙入云者。
现代文：十八年五月辛卯日，中午，旋风猛烈刮起，云遮蔽三殿，好像有人骑着龙升入云中。
English: At noon on the day of Xinwu in May 18th, a whirlwind blew violently, clouds covered the three halls, as if someone rode a dragon into the clouds.

古文：正德七年六月丁卯夜，招远有赤龙悬空，光如火，盘旋而上，天鼓随鸣。
现代文：正德七年六月丁卯日夜晚，招速有赤色的龙悬浮天空，光亮如火，盘旋上腾，天上的鼓随着鸣响起来。
English: On the night of June 7th, Dingwu Day, Zhengde Year 7, a red dragon hovered in the sky, shining like fire, hovering and soaring, and the drums in the sky sounded with the sound.

古文：十二年六月癸亥，山阳见黑龙，一龙吸水，声闻数里，摄舟及舟女至空而坠。
现代文：十二年六月癸亥日，山阳出现黑龙，一条龙吸水，声响传闻好几里，把船和船上的女子提到空中，而后坠地。
English: In June of the twelfth year, on the day of the boar, a black dragon appeared in the sun. A dragon sucked water, and the sound was heard for several miles. It lifted the boat and the woman on board into the air, and then fell to the ground.

古文：十三年五月癸丑，常熟俞野村迅雷震电，有白龙一、黑龙二乘云并下，口中吐火，目睛若炬，撤去民居三百余家，吸二十余舟于空中。
现代文：十三年五月癸丑日，常熟俞野村雷电迅疾，有一条白龙、二条黑龙乘着云从天空一起下降，口中吐火，眼睛如同火炬，摧毁百姓的房屋三百多家，吸引二十多只船到空中。
English: On the 13th day of the 5th month of the Chinese lunar calendar, the lightning of Changshu and Nomura rose rapidly. A white dragon and two black dragons descended from the sky together on a cloud. They spit fire from their mouths, and their eyes were like torches. They destroyed more than 300 houses of the people and attracted more than 20 ships into the air.

古文：舟人坠地，多怖死者。
现代文：船上的人坠落到地上，很多因惊吓而死。
English: People on the boat fell to the ground and many died of shock.

古文：是夜红雨如注，五日乃息。
现代文：这天晚上红色的雨像倾注下来一样，五天才停息。
English: That evening, the red rain poured down like a torrent, and it didn't let up for five days.

古文：十四年四月，鄱阳湖蛟龙斗。
现代文：十四年四月，鄱阳湖中蛟龙争斗。
English: In April 14th, a dragon fight broke out in Poyang Lake.

古文：嘉靖四十年五月癸酉，青浦佘山九蛟并起，涌水成河。
现代文：嘉靖四十年五月癸酉日，青浦畲山九条蛟龙一同腾起，涌出的水形成河流。
English: On the 30th day of the 5th month of the 40th year of Jiajing, nine dragons of Qingpu Mountain rose together, and the gushing water formed a river.

古文：万历十四年七月戊申，舒城大雷雨，起蛟百五十八，迹如斧劈，山崩田陷，民溺死无算。
现代文：万历十四年七月戊申日，舒城打大雷，降大雨，腾起蛟龙一百五十八条，行迹像斧头劈开一样，山崩塌了，田凹陷了，人民淹死不计其数。
English: In July of the 14th year of the Wanli calendar, on the day of Wushen, Shucheng was hit by thunder, heavy rain fell, and 158 dragonflies flew up. The movement was like an axe splitting, the mountain collapsed, the fields sagged, and countless people drowned.

古文：是岁，建昌民樵于山，逢巨蛇，一角，六足如鸡距，不噬不惊，或言此肥〈虫遗〉也。
现代文：这一年，建昌百姓在山中打柴，遇上巨大的蛇，一只角，六只足像雄鸡的后爪，不咬食，不惊慌，有人说这种蛇名叫肥蜡。
English: This year, the people of Jianchang were collecting firewood in the mountains when they came across a huge snake. It had one horn and six legs like the hind claws of a rooster. It didn't bite and didn't panic. Some people said that this kind of snake was called a fatwax.

古文：十八年七月，猗氏大水，二龙斗于村，得遗卵，寻失。
现代文：十八年七月，狩氏发大水，二龙在村中搏斗，村民得到龙遗留下来的蛋，随即失去。
English: In July 18th, two dragons fought in the village, and the villagers got the eggs left by the dragon, but then lost them.

古文：十九年六月己未，公安大水，有巨蛇如牛，首赤身黑，修二丈余，所至堤溃。
现代文：十九年六月己未日，公安发大水，有巨蛇像牛，头呈赤色，身呈黑色，长二丈多，所到之处堤坝溃塌。
English: On the eve of June 19th, the public security department issued a flood warning. There was a giant snake resembling a cow, with a red head and black body, more than twice as long, and the dam collapsed everywhere.

古文：三十一年五月戊戌，历城大雨，二龙斗水中，山石皆飞，平地水高十丈。
现代文：三十一年五月戊戌日，历城降大雨，二龙在水中搏斗，山上的石头都飞起，平地水高十丈。
English: On the 31st day of May, heavy rain fell in Licheng, two dragons fought in the water, the stones on the mountain all flew up, and the water on the plain was very high.

古文：四十五年八月，安丘青河村青白二龙斗。
现代文：四十五年八月，安丘青河村青色？白色二龙相斗。
English: In August 1945, the blue and white dragons of Anqiu Qinghe Village fought against each other.

古文：▲马异
现代文：马异
English: Ma Yixing

古文：永乐十八年九月，诸城进龙马。
现代文：永乐十八年九月，诸城进献龙马。
English: In September of the 18th year of Yongle, cities and towns presented dragons and horses.

古文：民有牝马牧于海滨，一日云雾晦冥，有物蜿蜒与马接。
现代文：百姓有母马在海滨放牧，一天云雾笼罩，天色晦暗，有异物蜿蜒与马交接。
English: The villagers have a mare grazing on the seashore. One day, the sky was shrouded in fog, the sky was dark, and a foreign object meandered to meet the horse.

古文：产驹，具龙文，其色青苍，谓之龙马云。
现代文：后生出马驹，身上有龙纹，颜色青苍，人们把它叫做龙马。
English: Later, a foal was born, with dragon stripes on its body and a pale blue color. People called it Longma.

古文：宣德七年五月，忻州民武焕家马生一驹，鹿耳牛尾，玉面琼蹄，肉文被体如鳞。
现代文：宣德七年五月，忻州百姓武焕家的马生出一匹马驹，像鹿的耳朵，像牛的尾巴，像碧玉一样的面，像琼玉一样的蹄，肉纹遍布躯体，像鱼鳞。
English: In May of the seventh year of Xuande, the horse of the Zhuozhou people Wu Huan family gave birth to a foal, like a deer's ear, like a cow's tail, like a jasper stone, like a jade stone, like a jade stone hoof, meat lines all over the body, like fish scales.

古文：七月，沧州畜官马，一产二驹，州以为祥，献于朝。
现代文：七月，沧州畜养官马，一胎生二驹，州官认为吉祥，进献给朝廷。
English: In July, a Cangzhou animal husbandry official's horse gave birth to two foals, which was considered auspicious by the official and presented to the imperial court.

古文：宣宗曰： 物理之常，何足异也。 
现代文：宣宗说： 这是事物道理的常规，哪里值得怪异呢。 
English: Xuan Zong said: This is the normal way of things, what is so strange about it?

古文：成化十七年六月，兴济马生二驹。
现代文：成化十七年六月，兴济有马一胎生二驹。
English: In June of the seventeenth year of Chenghua, a horse in Xingji gave birth to two foals.

古文：弘治元年二月，景宁屏风山有异物成群，大如羊，状如白马，数以万计。
现代文：弘治元年二月，量窒屋风山有奇异之物成群，大如羊，形状如白马，数以万计。
English: In February of the first year of the Heian period, there were tens of thousands of flocks of strange things, as big as sheep and shaped like white horses, on Mt.

古文：首尾相衔，迤逦腾空而去。
现代文：首尾相接，渐次腾空而去。
English: One after the other, they gradually took off.

古文：嘉靖四十二年四月，海盐有海马万数，岸行二十余里。
现代文：嘉靖四十二年四月，海盐有海马上万匹，严整而行，长达二十多里。
English: In April of the 42nd year of Jiajing, there were ten thousand seahorses in the sea of salt, marching in strict formation for more than twenty miles.

古文：其一最巨，高如楼。
现代文：其中的一匹最大，高如楼屋。
English: One of them is the biggest, as tall as a building.

古文：▲人疴
现代文：人疴
English: People

古文：前史多志一产三男事，然近岁多有，不可胜详也，其稍异者志之。
现代文：前代史书多记载一胎生三男之事，然而近年多有这种情形，不能详尽记录，只选其稍稍特异的来记载。
English: The previous generation of history books mostly recorded the birth of a third son, but in recent years there have been many such cases, which cannot be recorded in detail, and only the slightly unusual ones are recorded.

古文：洪武二十四年八月，河南龙门妇司牡丹死三年，借袁马头之尸复生。
现代文：洪武二十四年八月，河南龙门妇人司牡丹死后三年，藉袁马头的尸体复生。
English: In August of the 24th year of Hongwu, three years after the death of the Henan Longmen woman Siu Dan, she was revived by the corpse of Yuan Ma Tou.

古文：宣德元年十一月，行在锦衣卫校尉綦荣妻皮氏一产四子。
现代文：宣德元年十一月，行在所锦衣卫校尉綦荣之妻皮氏一胎生四子。
English: In November of the first year of Xuande, Pishi, the wife of Shao Rong, a lieutenant of the Jin clothing guard, gave birth to four sons.

古文：天顺四年四月，扬州民妇一产五男。
现代文：天顺四年四月，扬州平民妇人一胎生五个男婴。
English: In April of the fourth year of Tianshun, a civilian woman in Yangzhou gave birth to five baby boys.

古文：成化十三年二月，南京鹰扬卫军陈僧儿妻朱氏一产三男、一女。
现代文：成化十三年二月，南京廉扬卫军陈僧儿之妻朱氏一胎生三个男婴、一个女婴。
English: In February of the thirteenth year of Chenghua, Zhu Shi, the wife of the Nanjing Lianyang Wei Army Chen Monk, gave birth to three boys and one girl.

古文：十七年六月，宿州民张珍妻王氏脐下右侧裂，生一子。
现代文：十七年六月，宿州平民张珍之妻王氏肚脐下右侧裂开，生下一子。
English: In June of the seventeenth year, the right side of the lower navel of Wang Shi, the wife of Zhang Zhen, a citizen of Suzhou, split open and gave birth to a son.

古文：二十年十二月，徐州妇人肋下生瘤，久之渐大，儿从瘤出。
现代文：二十年十二月，徐州一个妇人肋下生瘤子，遇了很久，渐渐长大，胎儿从瘤子中生出来。
English: In December of the 20th, a woman in Xuzhou had a lump under her rib. After a long time, it gradually grew, and the fetus was born from the lump.

古文：二十一年，嘉善民邹亮妻初乳生三子，再乳生四子，三乳生六子。
现代文：二十一年，嘉善平民邹亮之妻头胎生三个孩子，二胎生四个孩子，三胎生六个孩子。
English: In the 21st year, the first child of the wife of Jiashan commoner Zhu Liang gave birth to three children, the second child gave birth to four children, and the third child gave birth to six children.

古文：弘治十一年六月，腾骧左卫百户黄盛妻宜氏一产三男一女。
现代文：弘治十一年六月，腾壤左卫百户黄盛之妻宜氏一胎生三个男婴，一个女婴。
English: In June of the 11th year of the Hongzhi era, three boys and one girl were born to Yi, the first child of the wife of Huang Sheng of the 100 households of the Left Guards in Tengyeong Province.

古文：十六年五月，应山民张本华妻崔氏生须长三寸。
现代文：十六年五月，应山平民张本华之妻崔氏生胡须，长三寸。
English: On May 16, the wife of Zhang Benhua, a commoner from Yingshan, Cui Shi, grew a three-inch long beard.

古文：是时，郑阳商妇生须三缭，约百余茎。
现代文：这个时候，郑阳商人之妇生胡须三缭，大约有一百多根。
English: At this time, the Zhengyang merchant's wife had three whiskers, about more than a hundred.

古文：嘉靖二年六月，曲靖卫舍人胡晟妻生一男，两头四手三足。
现代文：嘉靖二年六月，曲靖卫舍人胡晟之妻生一男婴，两颗头，四只手，三只脚。
English: In June of the second year of Jiajing, the wife of the Qujing guardsman Hu Yao gave birth to a baby boy with two heads, four hands and three feet.

古文：四年，横泾农孔方协下产肉块，剖视之，一儿宛然。
现代文：四年，横泾农民孔方肋下生出肉块，剖开来看，一个胎儿清晰可见。
English: In the fourth year, a piece of meat was born under the rib of farmer Kong Fang, and when it was cut open, a fetus was clearly visible.

古文：五年，江南民妇生妖，六目四面，有角，手足各一节，独爪，鬼声。
现代文：五年，江南平民之妇生下一个怪物，六只眼睛，四张脸，头有角，手足各一节，一个指爪，像鬼一样的声音。
English: Five years ago, a woman in Jiangnan gave birth to a monster, with six eyes, four faces, a horned head, one limb for each hand and foot, one fingernail, and a voice like a ghost.

古文：十一年，当涂民妇一产三男一女。
现代文：十一年，当涂平民之妇一胎生三个男婴，一个女婴。
English: In the eleventh year, a local woman gave birth to three boys and one girl.

古文：十二年，贵州安卫军李华妻生男，两头四手四足。
现代文：十二年，贵州安卫军李华之妻生下一个男婴，两颗头，四只手，四只脚。
English: In 2012, the wife of Guizhou security guard Li Hua gave birth to a baby boy with two heads, four hands and four feet.

古文：二十七年七月，大同右卫参将马继舍人马录女，年十七化为男子。
现代文：二十七年七月，大同右卫参将马继舍人马录之女，十七岁时变化成男子。
English: In July of the 27th year, the daughter of Datong Uwei's successor, Ma Luo, became a man at the age of 17.

古文：隆庆二年十二月，静乐男子李良雨化为妇人。
现代文：隆庆二年十二月，静乐男子李良雨变化成妇人。
English: In December of the second year of Longqing, Jingle man Li Liangyu changed into a woman.

古文：五年二月，唐山民妇生儿从左胁出。
现代文：五年二月，唐山平民之妇生儿从左胁处生出。
English: In February of the fifth year, a Tangshan commoner's wife and child were born from the left hypotenuse.

古文：万历十年，淅川人化为狼。
现代文：万历十年，淅川有人变化成狼。
English: Over the past ten years, some people in Luochuan have turned into wolves.

古文：十八年，南宿州民妇一产七子，肤发红白黑青各色。
现代文：十八年，南宿州平民之妇一胎生七子，皮肤、头发红、白、黑、青，颜色各异。
English: In 18 years, a commoner's wife in Minamisukushu gave birth to seven children. Their skin and hair were red, white, black, and blue, with different colors.

古文：三十七年六月，繁峙民李宜妻牛氏一产二女，头面相连，手足各分。
现代文：三十七年六月，繁峙平民李宜之妻牛氏一胎生二女，头脸相连，手足各自分开。
English: In June 1937, Ushi, the wife of Li Yi, a commoner, gave birth to two daughters. Their heads and faces were joined, but their hands and feet were separate.

古文：四十六年，广宁卫民妇产一猴，二角四齿。
现代文：四十六年，广宁卫平民之妇生下一个猴子，二只角，四个牙齿。
English: In 1946, the wife of Guangning Wei, a commoner, gave birth to a monkey with two horns and four teeth.

古文：是时，大同民妇一产四男。
现代文：这个时候，大同平民之妇一胎生四个男婴。
English: At this time, a Datong commoner's wife gave birth to four baby boys.

古文：崇祯八年夏，镇江民妇产一子，顶载两首，臀赘一首，与母俱毙。
现代文：崇祯八年夏天，镇江平民之妇生下一子，顶上长着两个头，臀部赘着一个头，与母亲都一起死去。
English: In the summer of the eighth year of Chongzhen, a Zhenjiang commoner's wife gave birth to a son, with two heads on the top and one head on the hips, and both of them died together with their mother.

古文：十五年十一月，曹县民妇产儿，两头，顶上有眼，手过膝。
现代文：十五年十一月，曹县平民之妇生下一儿，两颗头，顶上有眼睛，手超过膝盖。
English: In November 1915, a woman from Cao County gave birth to a son with two heads, eyes on the top, and hands above the knees.

古文：▲疾疫
现代文：疾疫
English: Diseases and epidemics

古文：永乐六年正月，江西建昌、抚州，福建建宁、邵武自去年至是月，疫死者七万八千四百余人。
现代文：永乐六年正月，江西建昌、抚州，福建建宁、邵武从上一年至这个月，因传染病而死的人有七万八干四百多人。
English: In the first month of the sixth year of Yongle, Jiangxi Jianchang, Fuzhou, Fujian Jianning, and Shaowu, from the previous year to this month, more than 78,400 people died due to infectious diseases.

古文：八年，登州宁海诸州县自正月至六月，疫死者六千余人。
现代文：八年，登州宁海等州县从正月至六月，因传染病而死的有六千多人。
English: In 2008, from January to June, more than 6,000 people died of infectious diseases in Ninghai and other prefectures and counties.

古文：邵武比岁大疫，至是年冬，死绝者万二千户。
现代文：邵武连年传染病大流行，到这年的冬李，全家死绝的有一万二千户。
English: There was a pandemic of infectious diseases in Shao Wulian's year, and by the winter of this year, twelve thousand households had lost their entire families.

古文：九年七月，河南、陕西疫。
现代文：九年七月，河南、陕西流行传染病。
English: In July, Henan and Shaanxi had epidemics of infectious diseases.

古文：十一年六月，湖州三县疫。
现代文：十一年六月，湖州三县流行传染病。
English: In June of the same year, three counties in Huzhou were hit by an epidemic of infectious diseases.

古文：七月，宁波五县疫。
现代文：七月，宁波五县流行传染病。
English: In July, Ningbo's five counties were hit by an epidemic of infectious diseases.

古文：正统九年冬，绍兴、宁波、台州瘟疫大作，及明年，死者三万余人。
现代文：正统九年冬天，绍兴、宁波、台州瘟疫大流行，到第二年，死亡三万多人。
English: In the winter of the ninth year of orthodoxy, Shaoxing, Ningbo and Taizhou suffered a plague pandemic. By the following year, more than 30,000 people had died.

古文：景泰四年冬，建昌、武昌、汉阳疫。
现代文：景泰四年冬天，建昌、武昌、汉阳流行传染病。
English: In the winter of the fourth year of Jingtai, Jianchang, Wuchang and Hanyang had epidemics of infectious diseases.

古文：六年四月，西安、平凉疫。
现代文：六年四月，西安、平凉流行传染病。
English: In April, Xi'an and Pingliang had epidemics of infectious diseases.

古文：七年五月，桂林疫死者二万余人。
现代文：七年五月，桂林因传染病而死的人有二万多个。
English: In May 2007, more than 20,000 people died of infectious diseases in Guilin.

古文：天顺五年四月，陕西疫。
现代文：天顺五年四月，陕西流行传染病。
English: In April of the fifth year of Tianshun, Shaanxi was hit by an epidemic of infectious diseases.

古文：成化十一年八月，福建大疫，延及江西，死者无算。
现代文：成化十一年八月，福建传染病大流行，蔓延到江西，死者无数。
English: In August 11th, Chenghua, Fujian infectious disease pandemic, spread to Jiangxi, countless deaths.

古文：正德元年六月，湖广平溪、清凉、镇远、偏桥四卫大疫，死者甚众。
现代文：正德元年六月，湖广平溪、清凉、镇远、偏桥四卫传染病大流行，死亡的人很多。
English: In June of the first year of the Zhengde era, there was a major epidemic of infectious diseases in Pingxi, Qingli, Zhenyuan and Qiaoqiao of Huguang, and many people died.

古文：靖州诸处自七月至十二月大疫，建宁、邵武自八月始亦大疫。
现代文：靖州等处从七月至十二月传染病大流行，建宁、邵武从八月开始传染病也大流行。
English: Jingzhou and other places had epidemics of infectious diseases from July to December, and Jianning and Shaowu had epidemics of infectious diseases from August.

古文：十二年十月，泉州大疫。
现代文：十二年十月，泉州传染病大流行。
English: In October, Quanzhou was hit by a major epidemic of infectious diseases.

古文：嘉靖元年二月，陕西大疫。
现代文：嘉靖元年二月，陕西传染病大流行。
English: In February of the first year of Jiajing, an epidemic of infectious diseases broke out in Shaanxi.

古文：二年七月，南京大疫，军民死者甚众。
现代文：二年七月，南京传染病大流行，军人和平民死亡很多。
English: In July of the following year, a major epidemic of infectious diseases broke out in Nanjing, and many soldiers and civilians died.

古文：四年九月，山东疫死者四千一百二十八人。
现代文：四年九月，山东因传染病而死亡的有四千一百二十八人。
English: In September 2004, 4,128 people died of infectious diseases in Shandong.

古文：三十三年四月，都城内外大疫。
现代文：三十三年四月，都城内外传染病大流行。
English: In April of 1933, there was a major epidemic of infectious diseases in and around the capital.

古文：四十四年正月，京师饥且疫。
现代文：四十四年正月，京城遭饥荒并且流行传染病。
English: In the first month of the 44th year, the capital city suffered from famine and an epidemic of infectious diseases.

古文：万历十年四月，京师疫。
现代文：万历十年四月，京城流行传染病。
English: In April of the tenth year of Wanli, an epidemic of infectious diseases broke out in Beijing.

古文：十五年五月，又疫。
现代文：十五年五月，又流行传染病。
English: In May of the fifteenth year, another epidemic broke out.

古文：十六年五月，山东、陕西、山西、浙江俱大旱疫。
现代文：十六年五月，山东、陕西、山西、浙江都大旱，传染病流行。
English: In May 2016, Shandong, Shaanxi, Shanxi and Zhejiang all suffered from a severe drought and epidemics of infectious diseases.

古文：崇祯十六年，京师大疫，自二月至九月止。
现代文：崇祯十六年，京城传染病大流行，从二月至九月才停止。
English: In the 16th year of Chongzhen, the epidemic of infectious diseases in Beijing began, and only stopped from February to September.

古文：明年春，北畿、山东疫。
现代文：第二年春天，北畿、山东传染病流行。
English: In the spring of the following year, there was an epidemic of infectious diseases in North Kivu and Shandong.

古文：▲鼓妖
现代文：鼓妖
English: The drumming demon

古文：洪武五年八月己酉，徐沟西北空中有声如雷。
现代文：洪武五年八月己酉日，徐沟西北天空中有声音犹如打雷。
English: In August of the fifth year of Hongwu, there was a sound like thunder in the northwest sky of Xugu.

古文：十一年，瑞昌有大声如钟，自天而下，无形。
现代文：十一年，瑞昌有巨大的声音如钟，从天上传下来，没有外形。
English: In the eleventh year, Ruichang had a huge sound like a bell, coming down from the sky, with no shape.

古文：天顺六年九月乙巳夜，天无云，西北方有声如雷。
现代文：天顺六年九月乙巳日晚上，天空无云，西北方有声音如打雷。
English: On the evening of September 21st, the sixth year of Tianshun, the sky was cloudless, and there was a sound like thunder in the northwest.

古文：七年二月晦夜，空中有声。
现代文：七年二月底的夜晚，天空中有声音。
English: On the night at the end of February, 1978, there was a sound in the sky.

古文：大学士李贤奏，无形有声谓之鼓妖，上不恤民则有此异。
现代文：大学士李贤上奏说，没有外形而有声音叫做鼓妖，皇上不体恤人民就有这种怪异。
English: Li Xian, a college student, said that the drum is called a demon because it has no shape but has a voice. The emperor has no compassion for the people, which is why the drum is so strange.

古文：成化十三年正月甲子，代州无云而雷。
现代文：成化十三年正月甲子日，代州天空无云而打雷。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the year, the Daizhou sky was cloudless and thunderous.

古文：十四年八月戊戌，早朝，东班官若闻有甲兵声者，辟易不成列，久之始定。
现代文：十四年八月戊戌日，早朝，束班官好像听到有甲兵的声音，仓惶退避，不成班列，很久才安定下来。
English: In the early morning of August 14th, the day of Pentecost, it seems that the officers in charge heard the sound of armored soldiers. They retreated in panic, did not form a line, and did not settle down for a long time.

古文：弘治六年六月丁卯，石州吴城驿无云而震者再。
现代文：弘治六年六月丁卯日，石州昊城驿两次无云而打雷。
English: In June of the sixth year of Hongzhi, on the day of Dingwu, Shizhou Haocheng Tower was hit by thunder twice without a cloud.

古文：十七年六月甲申，江西庐山鸣如雷。
现代文：十七年六月甲申日，江西庐山鸣声如打雷。
English: On the 17th day of the 6th month of the 17th year, Lushan in Jiangxi Province rang like thunder.

古文：嘉靖二十九年二月甲子，隆庆州张山营堡山鸣。
现代文：嘉靖二十九年二月甲子日，隆庆州张山营堡山发出鸣声。
English: On February 29 of the year of Jiajing, the day of the birth of the first child, the bell of Zhangshan Yingbu Mountain in Longqing Province rang out.

古文：万历十二年十二月己未，萧县山鸣如惊涛澎湃，竟夜不止。
现代文：莴历十二年十二月己未日，萧县山上鸣响如像惊涛汹涌澎湃，整夜不停止。
English: On the last day of December in the twelfth year of the lunar calendar, the ringing on the mountains of Xiao County was like a storm surging and surging, and did not stop all night.

古文：二十八年八月戊戌，西北方有声如雷。
现代文：二十八年八月戊戌臼，西北方有声音如打雷。
English: In August of the 28th year, there was a sound like thunder in the northwest of the country.

古文：天启七年八月丁巳，庄烈即位，朝时，空中有声如天鼓，发于殿西。
现代文：天启七年八月丁巳日，庄烈皇帝即位，朝拜时，天空中有声音如像天鼓，从殿西开始发出。
English: On the seventh day of the eighth month of the seventh year of the Apocalypse, Ding Si Day, the solemn emperor ascended the throne. During the worship, there was a sound in the sky like a heavenly drum, which started from the west of the hall.

古文：崇祯十二年十二月乙未，萧县山鸣。
现代文：崇祯十二年十二月乙末日，萧县山体鸣响。
English: On the last day of December in the 12th year of Chongzhen, the mountains of Xiao County rang out.

古文：是月，西山大鸣如雷，如风涛。
现代文：这个月，西山巨大的鸣声像打雷，如大风掀起波涛。
English: This month, the West Mountain's huge singing sounded like thunder, like a gale whipping up waves.

古文：十三年二月壬子，浙江省城门夜鸣。
现代文：十三年二月壬子日，浙江省城门晚上呜响。
English: On the 13th day of February, the city gate of Zhejiang Province rang loudly in the evening.

古文：十六年冬，建极殿鸱吻中有声似鹁鸠，曰 苦苦 ，其声渐大，复作犬吠声，三日夜不止。
现代文：十六年冬天，建极殿屋脊鹧吻中有声音好像鹑鸠，发出 苦苦 的声响，其声音渐渐扩大，又作狗叫的声音，三天三夜不停止。
English: In the winter of the 16th year, there was a sound like a cricket in the roof of the Jianji Temple, emitting a bitter sound. Its sound gradually expanded, and it was the sound of a dog barking. It did not stop for three days and three nights.

古文：明年三月辛丑，孝陵夜有哭声，亦鼓妖也。
现代文：第二年三月辛丑日，孝陵夜晚有哭声，也是鼓妖。
English: In March of the second year, on the day of Xin Ugly, there was a cry in the night of Xiaoling, which was also a drum demon.

古文：▲陨石
现代文：陨石
English: meteorite

古文：成化六年六月壬申，阳信雷声如啸，陨石一，碎为三，外黑内青。
现代文：成化六年六月壬申日，阳信有雷声如海啸，落下一颗陨石，摔碎成三块，外表黑色，内部青色。
English: On Jinshin Day in June of the sixth year, Yangxin had thunder like a tsunami. A meteorite fell and broke into three pieces, black on the outside and blue on the inside.

古文：十四年六月辛亥，临晋天鸣，陨石县东南三十里，入地三尺，大如升，色黑。
现代文：十四年六月辛亥日，临晋天空鸣响，在县东南三十里处落下陨石，坠入地下三尺深，有升那样大，颜色为黑色。
English: In June 14th, Xinhai Day, the sky of Lintin rang with thunder. A meteorite fell 30 miles southeast of the county and fell three feet deep into the ground. It was as big as a crane and was black in color.

古文：二十三年五月壬寅，束鹿空中响如雷，青气坠地。掘之得黑石二，一如碗，一如鸡卵。
现代文：二十三年五月壬寅日，束鹿空中声响如雷，青气坠落地下，挖掘其地，得到二块黑色石头，一块大如碗，一块如鸡蛋。
English: On May 23rd, Renin Day, the sound of a bunch of deer in the air was thunderous. Qingqi fell to the ground, dug into the ground, and obtained two black stones, one as big as a bowl and one as big as an egg.

古文：弘治三年三月，庆阳雨石无数，大小不一，大者如鹅卵，小者如芡实。
现代文：弘治三年三月，庆阳落下陨石无数，大小不一致，大的如鹅蛋，小的如芡实。
English: In March of the 3rd year of Hongzhi, countless meteorites fell on Qingyang, the size was inconsistent, the large ones were like goose eggs, and the small ones were like tampons.

古文：四年十月丁巳，光山有红光如电，自西南往东北，声如鼓，久之入地，化为石，大如斗。
现代文：四年十月丁巳日，光山有红光如同闪电，从西南往东北，声音如鼓，很久入地中，变化成陨石，大如量斗。
English: On October 4th, Dingshi Day, Guangshan had a red light like lightning, from southwest to northeast, a sound like a drum, and after entering the ground for a long time, it changed into a meteorite, as big as a measuring cup.

古文：十年二月丙申，修武黑气入地，化为石，状如羊首。
现代文：十年二月丙申日，修武有黑气钻入地下，变化成陨石，形状像羊头。
English: On February 10th, black gas drilled into the ground and turned into a meteorite, shaped like a sheep's head.

古文：十二年五月戊寅，朔州有声，如迅雷，白气腾上，陨大石三。
现代文：十二年五月戊寅日，朔州有声音，如同迅疾的雷声，白气升腾而上，陨落大石三块。
English: On May 12th, Wu Yin Day, there was a sound in Shuozhou, like a rapid thunder, the white air rose up and three large stones fell down.

古文：正德元年八月壬戌，夜有火光落即墨，化为绿石，圆高尺余。
现代文：正德元年八月壬戌日，晚上有火光落在即墨，变化成绿石，圆形，直径一尺多。
English: In August of the first year of Zhengde, on the day of Linglong, in the evening, a firelight fell on the ink, changing it into a green stone, round, more than a foot in diameter.

古文：九年五月己卯，滨州有声陨石。
现代文：九年五月己卯日，滨州有声音，落下陨石。
English: In May of the ninth year, there was a sound in Binzhou and a meteorite fell.

古文：十三年正月己未，邻水陨石一。
现代文：十三年正月己末日，邻水落下陨石一块。
English: On the last day of the first month of the 13th year, a meteorite fell near the water.

古文：嘉靖十二年五月丁未，祁县有声如鼓，火流坠地为石。
现代文：嘉靖十二年五月丁末日，祁县有声音如击鼓，火流坠落地上，成为陨石。
English: On the last day of May in the twelfth year of Jiajing, there was a sound like drumming in Jixian County, and a stream of fire fell to the ground and became a meteorite.

古文：四十二年三月癸卯，怀庆陨石。
现代文：四十二年三月癸卯日，怀庆落下陨石。
English: In March of 42, a meteorite fell in the city of Huaiqing.

古文：隆庆二年三月己未，保定新城陨黑石二。
现代文：隆庆二年三月己末日，保定新城陨落黑石二块。
English: At the end of March in the second year of Longqing, two pieces of black stone fell from Baoding New Town.

古文：万历三年五月癸亥，有二流星昼陨景州城北，化为黑石。
现代文：万历三年五月癸亥日，有二颗流星白天陨落在景州城北，变化成黑色陨石。
English: In May of the third year of Wanli, there were two meteors that fell to the north of Jingzhou during the day and turned into black meteorites.

古文：十七年九月戊午，万载黑烟腾起，陨石演武厅畔。
现代文：十七年九月戊午日，万载黑畑腾起，在演武厅旁边落下陨石。
English: On the afternoon of September 17th, a meteorite fell near the Martial Arts Hall.

古文：十九年四月辛酉，遵化陨石二。
现代文：十九年四月辛酉日，遵化落下陨石二块。
English: On April 19, two meteorites fell in Zunhua.

古文：四十四年正月丁丑，易州及紫荆关有光化石崩裂。
现代文：四十四年正月丁丑日，易州和紫荆关有光亮变化成陨石崩裂。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 44th year of Ding Jiu, Yizhou and Bijingguan had a bright change into a meteorite.

古文：崇祯九年九月丁未，太康陨石。
现代文：崇祯丸年九月丁末日，太康天降陨石。
English: On the last day of September in the year of the Dragon, the Taikang meteorite fell from the sky.

古文：▲水潦
现代文：水潦
English: Water hyacinth

古文：洪武元年六月戊辰，江西永新州大风雨，蛟出，江水入城，高八尺，人多溺死。
现代文：洪武元年六月戊辰日，江西永新州刮大风降大雨，蛟龙出现，江水涌入城中，高达八尺，人多被淹死。
English: In June of the first year of Hongwu, on the day of Pentecost, Jiangxi Yongxinzhou was hit by strong winds and heavy rain, a dragon appeared, the river water poured into the city, up to eight feet, and many people were drowned.

古文：事闻，使赈之。
现代文：事情传入京城，朝廷派人救济。
English: The matter was reported to the capital, and the imperial court sent relief.

古文：三年六月，溧水县江溢，漂民居。
现代文：三年六月，溧水县江水泛滥，冲走人民的房屋。
English: In June of the third year, the river water in Surabaya County overflowed, washing away people's houses.

古文：四年七月，南宁府江溢，坏城垣。
现代文：四年七月，南宁府江水泛滥，冲坏城垣。
English: In July of the same year, the Nanning River overflowed, destroying the city walls.

古文：衢州府龙游县大雨，水漂民庐，男女溺死。
现代文：衢州府龙游县降大雨，洪水冲走人民的房屋，男女被淹死。
English: Heavy rain fell in Longyou County, Zhangzhou Province. Floods swept away people's houses, and men and women were drowned.

古文：五年八月，嵊县、义乌、余杭山谷水涌，人民溺死者众。
现代文：五年八月，嵊县、棰蛊、余杭山谷中大水涌出，人民被淹死很多。
English: In August 2005, a large amount of water gushed out in the valleys of Jixian, Handan and Yuhang, and many people were drowned.

古文：六年二月，崇明县为潮所没。
现代文：六年二月，崇明县被潮水淹没。
English: In February of the sixth year, Chongming County was flooded by the tide.

古文：七月，嘉定府龙游县洋、雅二江涨，翼日南溪县江涨，俱漂公廨民居。
现代文：七月，嘉定府龙游县洋、雅二江水涨，第二天，南溪县江水上涨，两地都冲走公家官署和人民房屋。
English: In July, the Yang River and the Ya Er River in Longyou County, Jiading Prefecture, rose, and the next day, the river water rose in Nanxi County. Both places were swept away by public offices and people's houses.

古文：七年八月，高密县胶河溢，伤禾。
现代文：七年八月，高密县胶河泛滥，损害禾稼。
English: In August of the seventh year, the Jiaohe River in Gaomi County flooded, damaging crops.

古文：八年七月，淮安、北平、河南、山东大水。
现代文：八年七月，淮安、北平、河南、山束发生大水灾。
English: In July of 2008, major floods occurred in Huai'an, Beiping, Henan and Shanshu.

古文：十二月，直隶苏州、湖州、嘉兴、松江、常州、太平、宁国，浙江杭州俱水。
现代文：十二月，直隶苏州、湖州、嘉兴、松江、常州、太平、宁国，浙江杭州都遭受水灾。
English: In December, Suzhou, Huzhou, Jiaxing, Songjiang, Changzhou, Taiping, Ningguo, and Hangzhou in Zhejiang all suffered from floods.

古文：九年，江南、湖北大水。
现代文：九年，江南、湖北发生大水灾。
English: Nine years ago, major floods occurred in the south of the Yangtze River and Hubei Province.

古文：七月，湖广、山东大水。
现代文：七月，湖广、山束发生大水灾。
English: In July, large-scale flooding occurred in Hukang and Yanshu.

古文：十年六月，永平滦、漆二水没民庐舍。
现代文：十年六月，永平滦、漆二河淹没人民房屋。
English: In June of the 10th year, the Yongping River and the Urushi River flooded people's houses.

古文：七月，北平八府大水，坏城垣。
现代文：七月，北平八府发生大水灾，冲坏城垣。
English: In July, a major flood occurred in Beiping's eight prefectures, destroying the city walls.

古文：十一年七月，苏、松、扬、台四府海溢，人多溺死。
现代文：十一年七月，苏、松、扬、台四府海水泛滥，人民多被淹死。
English: In July of the eleventh year, the four prefectures of Su, Song, Yang and Taiwan were flooded by seawater, and many people were drowned.

古文：十月丙辰，河决兰阳。
现代文：十月丙辰日，黄河溃决于兰阳。
English: On October 4th, the Yellow River broke through Lanyang.

古文：十二年五月，青田山水没县治。
现代文：十二年五月，青田山谷洪水淹没县治所。
English: In May 2012, floods in the Aota Valley inundated the prefectural government office.

古文：十三年十一月，崇明潮决沙岸，人畜多溺死。
现代文：十三年十一月，崇明潮水冲破沙岸，人民、牲畜多被淹死。
English: In November 13th, the Chongming tidal wave broke through the sandy shore, and many people and livestock were drowned.

古文：十四年八月庚辰，河决原武。
现代文：十四年八月庚辰日，黄河溃决于原武。
English: On August 14th, the day of Geng Chen, the Yellow River burst its banks.

古文：十五年二月壬子，河南河决。
现代文：十五年二月壬子日，河南黄河决堤。
English: In February of the fifteenth year, on Mizi Day, the Yellow River in Henan Province burst its banks.

古文：三月庚午，河决朝邑。
现代文：三月庚午日，黄河溃决于朝邑。
English: On the afternoon of March 6th, the Yellow River burst its banks in Chaoyu.

古文：七月，河溢荥泽、阳武。
现代文：七月，黄河淹没荣泽、阳武。
English: In July, the Yellow River flooded Rongze and Yangwu.

古文：是岁，北平大水。
现代文：这一年，北平发生大水灾。
English: In the same year, a major flood occurred in Beiping.

古文：十七年八月丙寅，河决开封，横流数十里。
现代文：十七年八月丙寅日，黄河在开封决堤，横流几十里。
English: On August 17th, the Yellow River broke through the dike in Kaifeng and flowed for dozens of miles.

古文：是岁，河南、北平俱水。
现代文：这一年，河南、北平都遭受水灾。
English: This year, both Henan and Beiping suffered from floods.

古文：十八年八月，河南又水。
现代文：十八年八月，河南又遭水灾。
English: In August 18th, Henan suffered another flood.

古文：是年，江浦、大名水。
现代文：这一年，江浦、大名遭水灾。
English: In the same year, Jiangpu and Daimyo suffered from floods.

古文：二十三年正月庚寅，河决归德。
现代文：二十三年正月庚寅日，黄河在归德决堤。
English: On the 23rd day of the first month of the year, the Yellow River broke through the dike at Guidong.

古文：七月癸巳，河决开封，漂没民居。
现代文：七月癸巳，黄河在开封决堤，冲走淹没人民的房屋。
English: At the end of July, the Yellow River burst its banks in Kaifeng, sweeping away and flooding people's houses.

古文：又海门县风潮坏官民庐舍，漂溺者众。
现代文：另外，海门县大风大潮毁坏官府和平民的房屋，很多人被淹死。
English: In addition, the high winds and tides in Haimen County destroyed the government and civilian houses, and many people were drowned.

古文：是岁，襄阳、沔阳、安阳水。
现代文：这一年，襄阳、沔阳、安阳遭水灾。
English: This year, Yangyang, Fenyang and Anyang were hit by floods.

古文：二十四年十月，北平、河间二府水。
现代文：二十四年十月，北平、河问二府遭水灾。
English: In October of the 24th year, floods hit Beiping and Huancheng.

古文：二十五年正月，河决阳武，开封州县十一俱水。
现代文：二十五年正月，黄河在阳武决堤，开封十一个州县都遭受水灾。
English: In the first month of the 25th year, the Yellow River broke through the dike in Yangwu, and eleven prefectures and counties in Kaifeng were flooded.

古文：二十六年十一月，青、兖、济宁三府水。
现代文：二十六年十一月，青、兖、渣室三府遭受水灾。
English: In November 2016, the three prefectures of Qingdao, Handan and Jamsil were hit by floods.

古文：二十七年三月，宁阳汶河决。
现代文：二十七年三月，宁阳汶阿决堤。
English: In March of the 27th year, the Wen'a dike was broken in Ningyang.

古文：二十八年八月，德州大水，坏城垣。
现代文：二十八年八月，德州发生大水灾，毁坏城垣。
English: In August of 1928, a great flood occurred in Texas, destroying the city walls.

古文：三十年八月丁亥，河决开封，三面皆水，犯仓库。
现代文：三十年八月丁亥日，黄河在开封决堤，三面都遭水灾，侵害仓库。
English: On August 30, Dinghai Day, the Yellow River broke through the dike in Kaifeng, flooding all three sides and damaging the warehouse.

古文：永乐元年五月，章丘漯河决岸、伤稼。
现代文：永乐元年五月，章丘漯河溃决堤岸，伤害庄稼。
English: In May of the first year of Yongle, the Zhangqiu River burst its banks, damaging crops.

古文：南海、番禺潮溢。
现代文：南海、番禺潮水泛滥。
English: The South China Sea, Panyu tidal flooding.

古文：八月，安丘县红河决。
现代文：八月，安丘县红河决堤。
English: In August, the Red River in Anqiu County burst its banks.

古文：二年六月，苏、松、嘉、湖四府俱水。
现代文：二年六月，苏、松、嘉、湖四府都遭受水灾。
English: In June of the following year, the four prefectures of Su, Song, Jia and Hubei all suffered from floods.

古文：七月，湖广、江西水。
现代文：七月，湖广、江西遭水灾。
English: In July, Hunan, Guangxi and Jiangxi provinces were hit by floods.

古文：九月，河决开封，坏城。
现代文：九月，黄河在开封决堤，毁坏城垣。
English: In September, the Yellow River broke through the dike in Kaifeng, destroying the city walls.

古文：三年三月，温县水决堤四十余丈。
现代文：三年三月，温县河水溃决堤岸四十多丈。
English: In March of the third year, the river in Wen County broke through the embankment more than forty meters high.

古文：济、涝二水溢。
现代文：济、涝二河泛滥。
English: Two rivers, the Jie and the Jian, are overflowing.

古文：八月，杭州属县多水，淹男妇四百余人。
现代文：八月，杭州所辖各县多遭水灾，淹死男女四百多人。
English: In August, many counties under the jurisdiction of Hangzhou were flooded, drowning more than 400 men and women.

古文：七年五月，安陆州江溢，决渲马滩圩岸千六百余丈。
现代文：七年五月，安陆州江水泛滥，溃决渲马滩圩岸一千六百多丈。
English: In May of the seventh year, the Anlu River was flooded, and the bank of the horse beach was more than 1,600 meters high.

古文：六月，寿州水决城。是岁，泰兴江岸沦于江者三千九百余丈。
现代文：六月，寿州洪水冲垮城墙真：这一年，泰兴长江河岸沦陷到长江中达三千九百多丈。
English: In June, floods in Shoushou brought down the city walls. It's true: this year, the banks of the Taixing Yangtze River fell more than 3,900 meters into the river.

古文：浑河决固安。
现代文：浑河溃决于固安。
English: The collapse of the Hunhe River is determined by Gu'an.

古文：八年五月，平度州濰水及浮糠河决，浸百十三所。
现代文：八年五月，平度州凿丞和浮糠河溃堤，淹没一百一十三所。
English: In May of the same year, the Pingdu County Chisel and Float River broke through the dike and flooded 113 villages.

古文：七月，平阳县潮溢，漂庐舍。
现代文：七月，平阳县潮水泛滥，漂没房屋。
English: In July, tidal flooding in Pingyang County caused houses to be swept away.

古文：八月庚申，河溢开封。
现代文：八月庚申日，黄河在开封泛滥。
English: In August, the Yellow River flooded in Kaifeng.

古文：十二月戊戌，河决汴梁，坏城。
现代文：十二月戊戌日，黄河在汴梁决堤，毁坏城墙。
English: On December 30th, the Yellow River broke through the dike in Huliang, destroying the city wall.

古文：九年正月，高邮甓社等九湖及天长诸水暴涨。
现代文：九年正月，高邮甓社等九湖和天长等河水暴涨。
English: In the first month of the ninth year, the water of the nine lakes and rivers such as Gaoposha and Tianchang soared.

古文：六月，扬州属州县五江潮涨四日，漂人畜甚众。
现代文：六月，扬州所属五个州县江潮连续上涨四天，冲走很多人口牲畜。
English: In June, the river tides in five prefectures and counties belonging to Yangzhou rose for four consecutive days, washing away many people and livestock.

古文：七月，海宁潮溢，漂溺甚众。
现代文：七月，痉窒潮水泛滥，冲走淹死很多人。
English: In July, torrential floods swept away and drowned many people.

古文：八月，漳、卫二水决堤淹田。
现代文：八月，漳、卫二河溃决堤岸，淹没农田。
English: In August, the Min River and the Wei River burst their banks and flooded farmland.

古文：九月，雷州飓风暴雨，淹遂溪、海康，坏田禾八百余顷，溺死千六百余人。
现代文：九月，雷州刮飓风，降暴雨，淹没遂溪、海康，毁坏田中庄稼八百多顷，淹死一千六百多人。
English: In September, a hurricane hit Leizhou, and torrential rain fell, flooding Suixi and Haikang, destroying more than 800 hectares of crops in the fields, and drowning more than 1,600 people.

古文：是岁，湖广、河南水。
现代文：这一年，塑尘、河南发生大水灾。
English: In the same year, a big flood occurred in Henan due to plastic dust.

古文：十年七月，庐沟水涨，坏桥及堤岸，溺死人畜。
现代文：十年七月，卢沟河水上涨，冲毁桥梁和堤坝，淹死人民牲畜。
English: In July, the Lugou River rose, destroying bridges and dams and drowning people's livestock.

古文：保定县决河岸五十四处。
现代文：保定县冲垮河岸五十四处。
English: Fifty-four riverbanks washed away in Baoding County.

古文：十一月，吴桥、东光、兴济、交河、天津决堤伤稼。
现代文：十一月，昊桥、柬光、兴济、交河、天津溃决河堤，伤害庄稼。
English: In November, the Haoqiao, Camiguang, Xingji, Jiahe and Tianjin rivers burst their banks, causing damage to crops.

古文：十二月，安州水决直亭等河口八十九处。
现代文：十二月，安州河水冲破直亭等河口八十九处。
English: In December, water from the Anzhou River broke through the mouth of the river in 89 places, including Zhaoting.

古文：十二年十月，临晋涑河逆流，决姚暹渠堰，流入硝池，淹没民田，将及盐池。
现代文：十二年十月，临晋涑河倒流，冲垮姚暹渠堤堰，水流入硝池，淹没农田，将要达到盐池。
English: In October of the 12th year, the backward flow of the Linyi-Jinling River broke through the weir of the Yao-Siam Canal, and the water flowed into the salt pond, flooded the farmland, and was about to reach the salt pond.

古文：崇明潮暴至，漂庐舍五千八百余家。
现代文：崇明潮水突然到来，冲毁房舍五千八百多家。
English: The sudden arrival of the tide in Chongming washed away more than 5,800 houses.

古文：十三年六月，北畿、河南、山东水溢，坏庐舍，没田禾，临清尤甚。
现代文：十三年六月，北畿、河南、山东洪水泛滥，冲毁房屋，淹没田中庄稼，临清水灾尤其严重。
English: In June 13th, floods in North Gyeongsang Province, Henan Province and Shandong Province destroyed houses and inundated crops in the middle of the fields. The floods in Linqing Province were particularly severe.

古文：滏、漳二水漂磁州民舍。
现代文：滏、漳二河洪水冲毁磁州人民的房屋。
English: The floods of the Min River and the Min River have destroyed the houses of the people in the magnetic state.

古文：十四年夏，南昌诸府江涨，坏民庐舍。
现代文：十四年夏天，南昌等府江水上涨，冲坏平民房屋。
English: In the summer of 2014, rivers in Nanchang and other prefectures rose, washing away the houses of civilians.

古文：七月，开封州县十四河决堤岸。
现代文：七月，开封十四州县黄迫溃决堤岸。
English: In July, the Yellow River in 14 prefectures of Kaifeng broke through the dike.

古文：永平滦、漆二河溢，坏民田禾。
现代文：永壬滦、漆二河泛滥，冲坏人民田中的庄稼。
English: The floods of the Yongin and Urushi Rivers have damaged the crops in people's fields.

古文：福宁、延平、邵武、广信、饶州、衢州、金华七府，俱溪水暴涨，坏城垣房舍，溺死人畜甚众。
现代文：扰室、延壬、登武、廑信、饶州、衢州、金华七府溪水都突然掹涨，冲壤城垣房屋，淹死许多人、牲畜。
English: Streams in the seven prefectures of Zhishu, Yanren, Dengwu, Yuxin, Raozhou, Zhangzhou and Jinhua all suddenly surged, washing away houses, drowning many people and livestock.

古文：辽东辽河、代子河水溢，浸没城垣屯堡。
现代文：辽东的辽河、代子河洪水泛滥，淹没城垣屯堡。
English: Flooding of the Liao River and the Daizi River in eastern Liaodong submerged the city's fortifications.

古文：十八年夏秋，仁和、海宁潮涌，堤沦入海者千五百余丈。
现代文：十八年夏秋季节，仁和、海空潮水汹涌，堤坝沉陷入大海达一千五百多丈。
English: In the summer and autumn of the 18th year, the tides in Renhe, the sea and the air were turbulent, and the dike sank into the sea to more than 1,500 meters.

古文：二十年五月，广东诸府潮溢，漂庐舍，坏仓粮，溺死三百六十余人。
现代文：二十年五月，庭塞等府潮水泛滥，漂没房屋，毁坏仓库粮食，淹死三百六十多人。
English: In May of the 20th year, more than 360 people were drowned in floods that swept through Tingsai and other prefectures, washing away houses and destroying grain warehouses.

古文：夏秋，湖广沔阳江涨，河南北及凤阳河溢。
现代文：夏秋季节，湖广沔阳江水上涨，黄河南北两岸和凤阳河水泛滥。
English: During the summer and autumn seasons, the water level of the Poyang River in Guangxi rises, and the north and south banks of the Yellow River and the Fengyang River flood.

古文：二十一年五月，峨眉溪水涨，溺死百三十人。
现代文：二十一年五月，峨眉溪水上涨，淹死一百三十人。
English: In May 2011, the waters of the Emei River rose, drowning 130 people.

古文：八月，琼州府潮溢，漂溺甚众。
现代文：八月，琼州府潮水泛滥，漂没淹死很多人。
English: In August, tidal floods swept through Qiongzhou, drowning many people.

古文：二十二年七月，黄岩潮溢，溺死八百人。
现代文：二十二年七月，黄岩潮水泛滥，淹死八百人。
English: In July 2022, the Huangyan tidal wave flooded, drowning 800 people.

古文：九月庚辰，河溢开封。
现代文：九月庚辰日，黄河在开封泛滥。
English: On Geng Chen Day in September, the Yellow River flooded in Kaifeng.

古文：洪熙元年六月，骤雨，白河溢，冲决河西务、白浮、宋家等口堤岸。
现代文：洪熙元年六月，突然降暴雨，白河泛滥，冲毁河西务、白浮、宋家等口堤岸。
English: In June of the first year of Hongxi, a sudden downpour of rain caused the Baihe River to overflow, washing away the embankments at the mouths of the Hexiwu, Baifu and Songjia.

古文：临漳漳、滏二河决堤岸二十四。
现代文：临漳漳、滏二河有二十四处堤岸决口。
English: There are 24 levee breaches along the Linyi and Shiji rivers.

古文：真定滹沱河大溢，没三州五县田。
现代文：真定滹沱河河水泛滥，淹没三个州五个县的田地。
English: The overflowing water of the Shandong Yangtze River has flooded the fields of five counties in three provinces.

古文：七月，容城白沟河涨，伤禾稼。
现代文：七月，容城白沟河水涨，伤害庄稼。
English: In July, the Yungcheng Baigou River swelled, damaging crops.

古文：浑河决庐沟桥东狼窝口，顺天、河间、保定、滦州俱水。
现代文：潭河溃决卢沟桥束的狼窝口，顺天、河问、保定、滦州都遭受水灾。
English: The Tan River broke through the wolf's den mouth of the Lugou Bridge Bundle, and Shuntian, Hefeng, Baoding, and Zhangzhou all suffered from floods.

古文：宣德元年六七月，江水大涨，襄阳、谷城、均州、郧县，缘江民居漂没者半。
现代文：宣德元年六七月，江水大涨，襄阳、谷城、均州、鄙县沿江平民的房屋被冲走淹没一半。
English: In June and July of the first year of Xuande, the river water rose sharply, and the houses of civilians along the river in Yangyang, Guicheng, Junzhou and Mianxian were washed away and half of them were flooded.

古文：黄、汝二水溢，淹开封十州县及南阳汝州、河南嵩县。
现代文：黄、汝二河泛滥，淹没开封十个州县和南阳汝州、河南嵩县。
English: The Huang and Ruyi Rivers overflowed, flooding ten counties in Kaifeng, as well as Nanyang Ruzhou and Songxian in Henan Province.

古文：三年五月，邵阳、武冈、湘乡暴风雨七昼夜，山水骤长，平地高六尺。
现代文：三年五月，邵阳、武冈、湘乡暴风雨长达七个昼夜，山水突然上涨，平地水高六尺。
English: In May of the third year, there was a storm in Shaoyang, Wuhan, and Hunan for seven days and nights. The landscape suddenly rose, and the water on the flat land was six feet high.

古文：永宁卫大水，坏城四百丈。
现代文：永宁卫发生大水灾，毁坏城墙四百丈。
English: A major flood occurred in Yongningwei, destroying the city wall four hundred meters high.

古文：六月，浑河水溢，决庐沟河堤百余丈。
现代文：六月，浑河水泛滥，冲破卢沟河堤一百多丈。
English: In June, the Hun River flooded, breaking through the Lugou River embankment by more than a hundred meters.

古文：七月，北畿七府俱水。
现代文：七月，北畿七个府都遭受水灾。
English: In July, all seven prefectures in the North Gyeongsang Province were affected by floods.

古文：五年七月，南阳山水泛涨，冲决堤岸，漂流人畜庐舍。
现代文：五年七月，南阳山水泛滥上涨，冲破堤岸，冲走人民、牲畜、房屋。
English: In July of the fifth year, the Nanyang floods rose, broke through the embankment, and swept away people, livestock, and houses.

古文：六年六月，浑河溢，决徐家等口，顺天、保定、真定、河间州县二十九俱水。
现代文：六年六月，浑河泛滥，冲破徐家等口，顺天、保定、真定、河问二十九个州县都遭受水灾。
English: In June of the sixth year, the Hunhe River flooded and broke through the Xujiakou and other mouths, and Shuntian, Baoding, Zhending, and Heyuan in 29 states and counties were flooded.

古文：河决开封，没八县。
现代文：黄河在开封决堤，淹没八个县。
English: The Yellow River burst its banks in Kaifeng, flooding eight counties.

古文：七年六月，太原河、汾并溢，伤稼。
现代文：七年六月，太原河、汾二河都泛滥，伤害庄稼。
English: In June of the seventh year, the Taiyuan River and the Yunnan Second River both flooded, damaging crops.

古文：八年六月，江西濒江八府江涨，漂没民田，溺死男妇无算。
现代文：八年六月，江西濒临大江的八府江水上涨，冲走人民淹没田地，淹死男女无数。
English: In June of the same year, the waters rose in the eight prefectures of Jiangxi Province bordering the Yangtze River, sweeping away people, flooding fields, and drowning countless men and women.

古文：九年正月，沁乡沁水涨，决马曲湾，经获嘉、新乡，平地成河。
现代文：九年正月，沁乡沁水上涨，冲垮马曲湾，经过获嘉、新乡，平地变成河。
English: In the first month of the ninth year, the floodwaters in Handan Township rose and washed down Maqu Bay. After passing through Wujia and Xinxiang, the flat land turned into a river.

古文：五月，宁海县潮决，徙地百七十余顷。
现代文：五月，窒蛊逊潮水溢出，漫越土地一百七十多顷。
English: In May, more than 170 hectares of land were inundated.

古文：六月，浑河决东岸，自狼河口至小屯厂，顺天、顺德、河间俱水。
现代文：六月，浑河冲破束岸，从狼河口到小屯厂，顺天、顺德、河间都遭受水灾。
English: In June, the Hun River burst its banks, flooding Shuntian, Shunde and Hema from the mouth of the Wolf River to Xiaotun Factory.

古文：七月，辽东大水。
现代文：七月，辽束发生大永灾。
English: In July, a great eternal disaster occurred in Liaozuke.

古文：正统元年闰六月，顺天、真定、保定、济南、开封、彰德六府俱大水。
现代文：正统元年闰六月，顺天、真定、保定、济南、开封、彰德六府都遭受大水灾。
English: In the leap June of the first year of the Juche era, Shuntian, Shinding, Baoding, Jinan, Kaifeng and Changde six prefectures all suffered major floods.

古文：二年，凤阳、淮安、扬州诸府，徐、和、滁诸州，河南开封，四五月河、淮泛涨，漂居民禾稼。
现代文：二年，凤阳、淮安、扬州等府，徐、和、滁等州，河南开封，在四、五月间黄河、淮河泛滥水涨，漂役居民庄稼。
English: In the second year, Fengyang, Huai'an, Yangzhou and other prefectures, Xu, He and Zou and other provinces, and Kaifeng in Henan Province, between April and May, the Yellow River and Huaihe River flooded and rose, drifting residents' crops.

古文：九月，河决阳武、原武、荥泽。
现代文：九月，黄河在阳武、原武、荣泽溃堤。
English: In September, the Yellow River burst its banks in Yangwu, Yuanwu and Rongze.

古文：湖广沿江六县大水决江堤。
现代文：塑魔沿长江六个县大水冲破江堤。
English: Heavy water broke through the river levees in six counties along the Yangtze River.

古文：三年，阳武河决，武陟沁决，广平、顺德漳决，通州白河溢。
现代文：三年，阳武黄河溃堤，武陟沁水溃堤，广平、顺德漳水溃堤，通州白河泛滥。
English: In three years, the Yangwu Yellow River burst its levees, the Wuhai River burst its levees, the Guangping River and the Shunde River burst their levees, and the Tongzhou Baihe River flooded.

古文：四年五月，京师大水，坏官舍民居三千三百九十区。
现代文：四年五月，京城遭大水灾，毁坏官府和平民房屋三干三百九十区。
English: In May of the same year, the capital city was hit by a major flood, destroying government offices and civilian homes in 390 districts.

古文：顺天、真定、保定三府州县及开封、卫辉、彰德三府俱大水。
现代文：顺天、真定、保定三府州县和开封、卫辉、堑灵三府都遭受大水灾。
English: The three prefectures of Shuntian, Zhending and Baoding, and the three prefectures of Kaifeng, Weihui and Yuling all suffered major floods.

古文：七月，滹沱、沁、漳三水俱决，坏饶阳、献县、卫辉、彰德堤岸。
现代文：七月，滹沱、沁、漳三条河都溃堤，冲毁饶阳、献县、卫辉、彰德的堤岸。
English: In July, three rivers, the Min, Min and Min, burst their banks, destroying the banks of the Raoyang, Xianxian, Weihui and Changde.

古文：八月，白沟、浑河二水溢，决保定安州堤。
现代文：八月，白沟、浑河二河泛滥，冲垮保定安州河堤。
English: In August, two rivers, the Baigou and the Hunhe, overflowed, bursting the Baoding-Anzhou river dike.

古文：苏、常、镇三府俱决，款饶阳、献县、卫辉、彰德堤岸。
现代文：苏、常、镇三府和江宁五县都遭水灾，淹死很多男女。
English: The three prefectures of Su, Chang and Zhen and the five counties of Jiangning were all flooded, drowning many men and women.

古文：九月，滹沱复决深州，淹百余里。
现代文：九月，滹沱河又在深州演堤，淹没一百多里。
English: In September, the Li River broke through the dike again in Shenzhou, flooding more than a hundred miles.

古文：五年五月至七月，江西江溢，河南河溢。
现代文：五年五月至七月，江西长江泛滥，河南黄河泛滥。
English: From May to July of 2005, the Yangtze River in Jiangxi Province flooded, and the Yellow River in Henan Province flooded.

古文：八月，潮决萧山海塘。
现代文：八月，潮水冲破萧山海塘。
English: In August, the tide broke through the Xiaoshan Reservoir.

古文：六年五月，泗州水溢丈余，漂庐舍。
现代文：六年五月，泗州河水泛滥，水高一丈多，冲走房屋。
English: In May of the sixth year, the Luzhou River flooded, and the water was much higher, washing away houses.

古文：七月，白河决武清、淳阝县堤二十二处。
现代文：七月，白河冲破武清、椁县河堤二十二处。
English: In July, the Shirakawa River broke through 22 river levees in Wuching and Handan counties.

古文：八月，宁夏久雨，水泛，坏屯堡墩台甚众。
现代文：八月，宁夏长时间降雨，大水泛滥，毁坏很多屯堡墩台。
English: In August, long-term rainfall and heavy flooding in Ningxia caused the destruction of many military camps.

古文：八年六月，浑河决固安。
现代文：八年六月，潭河在固安溃堤。
English: In June 2006, the Tan River burst its banks in Gu'an.

古文：八月，台州、松门、海门海潮泛溢，坏城郭、官亭、民舍、军器。
现代文：八月，台州、松门、海门海潮泛滥，毁坏城郭、官亭、民房、军器。
English: In August, the sea tides flooded Taizhou, Songmen and Haimen, destroying the city walls, government pavilions, private houses and military equipment.

古文：九年七月，扬子江沙洲潮水溢涨，高丈五六尺，溺男女千余人。
现代文：九年七月，扬子江沙洲潮水泛滥上涨，水高一丈五六尺，淹死男女一千多人。
English: In July of the ninth year, the tidal flooding of the Yangtze River sandbar rose, the water was five or six feet high, and more than a thousand men and women drowned.

古文：闰七月，北畿七府及应天、济南、岳州、嘉兴、湖州、台州俱大水。
现代文：闰七月，北畿七个府和应天、济南、岳州、嘉兴、湖州、台州都遭受大水灾。
English: In July, the seven prefectures of North Gyeongsang Province, including Yingtian, Jinan, Yuezhou, Jiaxing, Huzhou and Taizhou, all suffered major floods.

古文：河南山水灌卫河，没卫辉、开封、怀庆、彰德民舍，坏卫所城。
现代文：河南山问溪水注入卫河，淹没卫辉、开封、怀庆、彰德的平民房屋，毁坏卫所城墙。
English: The water from the mountain stream in Henan Province poured into the Weihe River, flooding the civilian houses in Weihui, Kaifeng, Huaiqing and Changde, and destroying the city wall of the Weihe.

古文：十年三月，洪洞汾水堤决，移置普润驿以远其害。
现代文：十年三月，洪洞汾水堤岸溃决，迁移到普润驿设立治所以速避水害。
English: In March of the 10th year, the flood dike of Hongdong Reservoir was breached, and it was moved to Purun Reservoir to set up a treatment center to quickly avoid water damage.

古文：夏，福建大水，坏延平府卫城，没三县田禾民舍，人畜漂流无算。
现代文：夏，福建发生大水灾，毁壤延平府卫城，淹没三个县的庄稼和民房，人民、牲畜被冲走无数。
English: In the summer, a major flood occurred in Fujian, destroying land from Yanping Prefecture to the Acropolis, flooding crops and houses in three counties, and countless people and livestock were swept away.

古文：河南州县多大水。
现代文：河南州县很多遭受大水灾。
English: Many counties in Henan Province have suffered major flooding.

古文：七月，延安卫大水，坏护城河堤。
现代文：七月，延安卫遭大水灾，毁坏护城河的堤坝。
English: In July, Yan'anwei suffered a major flood, destroying the moat's dike.

古文：九月，广东卫所多大水。
现代文：九月，广东的卫所很多都遭受大水灾。
English: In September, many health centers in Guangdong suffered major flooding.

古文：十月，河决山东金龙口阳谷堤。
现代文：十月，黄河冲破山东金龙口阳谷的堤坝。
English: In October, the Yellow River broke through a dike in Yanggu, Jinlongkou, Shandong Province.

古文：十一年六月，浑河溢固安。
现代文：十一年六月，潭河在固安泛滥。
English: In June of the same year, the Tan River in Gu'an began to flood.

古文：两畿、浙江、河南俱连月大雨水。
现代文：两畿、浙江、河南都连月下大雨，造成水灾。
English: The two provinces of Gyeonggi, Zhejiang and Henan have all been hit by months of heavy rain, causing flooding.

古文：是岁，太原、兖州、武昌亦俱大水。
现代文：这一年，太原、兖州、武昌也都发生大水灾。
English: This year, Taiyuan, Zhangzhou and Wuchang also experienced major floods.

古文：十二年春，赣州、临江大水。
现代文：十二年春季，赣州、临江发生大水灾。
English: In the spring of 2012, a major flood occurred in Ganzhou and Linjiang.

古文：五月，吉安江涨淹田。
现代文：五月，吉安江水上涨，淹没农田。
English: In May, the Ji'an River rose and flooded farmland.

古文：十三年六月，大名河决，淹三百余里，坏庐舍二万区，死者千余人。
现代文：十三年六月，大名河冲破河堤，淹没三百多里，毁壤房屋二万所，死亡一千多人。
English: On June 13, the Daimyo River burst its banks, flooding more than three hundred miles, destroying twenty thousand houses, and killing more than a thousand people.

古文：河南、济南、青、兖、东昌亦俱河决。
现代文：河南、济南、青、充、束昌也都河水溃堤。
English: Rivers in Henan, Jinan, Qingdao, Chongqing and Sokchang have also burst their banks.

古文：七月，宁夏大水。
现代文：七月，空夏发生大水灾。
English: In July, a major flood occurred in the summer.

古文：河决汉、唐二坝。
现代文：黄河冲垮汉、唐二堤坝。
English: The Yellow River broke through the Han and Tang Dams.

古文：河南八树口决，漫曹、濮二州，抵东昌，坏沙湾等堤。
现代文：河南八树口溃堤，淹没曹、濮二州，直达柬昌，毁壤沙湾等处堤岸。
English: A levee broke at the mouth of the Yaxu River in Henan Province, flooding Cao and Min Provinces and reaching as far as Camchang. The levee broke at Sand Bay and other places.

古文：十四年四月，吉安、南昌临江俱水，坏坛庙廨舍。
现代文：十四年四月，吉安、南昌临江都遭水灾，毁坏坛庙官舍。
English: In April 2014, Ji'an and Nanchang Linjiang were both flooded, destroying temples and official residences.

古文：景泰元年七月，应天大水，没民庐。
现代文：景泰元年七月，应天遭受大水灾，淹没人民房屋。
English: In July of the first year of Jing Tai, Jing Tai suffered a major flood in response to the weather, flooding people's houses.

古文：三年六月，河决沙湾白马头七十余丈。
现代文：三年六月，黄河冲毁沙湾白马头七十多丈。
English: In June of the third year, the Yellow River washed down Shawan Baima Tau, which is more than 70 meters high.

古文：八月，徐州、济宁间，平地水高一丈，民居尽圮。
现代文：八月，徐州、济宁之间，平地水高一丈，民房全部坍塌。
English: In August, between Xuzhou and Jining, the water level on the flat land was very high, and all the houses collapsed.

古文：南畿、河南、山东、陕西、吉安、袁州俱大水。
现代文：南畿、河南、山东、陕西、吉安、袁州都遭大水灾。
English: Nanki, Henan, Shandong, Shaanxi, Ji'an and Yuanzhou all suffered major flooding.

古文：四年春夏，河连决沙湾。
现代文：四年春夏之间，黄河连续在沙湾溃堤。
English: Between the spring and summer of 2004, the Yellow River continuously burst its banks in Shawan.

古文：五年六月，扬州潮决高邮、宝应堤岸。
现代文：五年六月，扬州潮水冲破高邮、宝应的堤岸。
English: In June 2005, the Yangzhou tides broke through the embankments of Gaoyou and Baoying.

古文：七月，苏、松、淮、扬、庐、凤六府大水。
现代文：七月，苏、松、淮、扬、庐、凤六府遭受大水灾。
English: In July, the six prefectures of Su, Song, Huai, Yang, Handan and Feng suffered major flooding.

古文：八月，东、兖、济三府大水，河涨淹田。
现代文：八月，柬、兖、济三府遭受大水灾，河水上涨，淹没农田。
English: In August, the three prefectures of Kampot, Perak and Jeju were hit by major flooding, with rising river waters inundating farmland.

古文：六年六月，开封、保定俱大水。
现代文：六年六月，开封、保定都遭受大水灾。
English: In June of the sixth year, Kaifeng and Baoding both suffered major floods.

古文：闰六月，顺天大水，滦河泛溢，坏城垣民舍，河间、永平水患尤甚。
现代文：闰六月，顺天发生大水灾，滦河泛滥，毁坏城垣和民房，河间、永平水害尤其严重。
English: In intercalary June, a major flood occurred along the sky, flooding the Li River, destroying city walls and houses. The floods in Hema and Yongping were particularly serious.

古文：武昌诸府江溢伤稼。
现代文：武昌等府长江泛滥，伤害庄稼。
English: The Yangtze River floods in Wuchang and other prefectures, damaging crops.

古文：七年六月，河决开封，河南、彰德田庐淹没。
现代文：七年六月，黄河在开封溃堤，河南、彰德田地房屋被淹没。
English: In June of the seventh year, the Yellow River broke through the dike in Kaifeng, and the houses in the fields of Henan and Changde were flooded.

古文：是岁，畿内、山东俱水。
现代文：这一年，畿内、山东都遭受水灾。
English: This year, both the Kinai region and Shandong province were hit by floods.

古文：天顺元年夏，淮安、徐州、怀庆、卫辉俱大水，河决。
现代文：天顺元年夏天，淮安、徐州、怀庆、卫辉都遭受大水灾，黄河演堤。
English: In the summer of the first year of Tianshun, Huai'an, Xuzhou, Huaiqing and Weihui all suffered major floods, and the Yellow River broke through the dike.

古文：三年六月，谷城、景陵襄水涌泛伤稼。
现代文：三年六月，毅城、景陵，襄水满溢泛滥，伤害庄稼。
English: In June of the third year, Yicheng, Jingling, Xiangshui overflowed and flooded, damaging crops.

古文：四年夏，湖北江涨，淹没麦禾。
现代文：四年夏天，湖北长江涨水，淹没庄稼。
English: In the summer of 2004, the Yangtze River in Hubei surged, flooding crops.

古文：北畿及开封、汝宁大水。
现代文：北畿和开封、汝窒发生大水灾。
English: Large-scale flooding occurred in North Gyeongsang Province, Kaifeng, and Ryukyu.

古文：七月，淮水决，没军民田庐。
现代文：七月，淮河溃堤，淹没军队、平民的房屋田地。
English: In July, the Huai River burst its banks, flooding the houses and fields of soldiers and civilians.

古文：五年七月，河决开封土城，筑砖城御之。
现代文：五年七月，黄河冲破开封土城，修筑砖墙来抵御洪水。
English: In July 2005, the Yellow River broke through Kaifeng Ducheng, and a brick wall was built to withstand the flood.

古文：越三日，砖城亦溃，水深丈余。
现代文：遇了三天，砖墙也被冲垮，水深一丈多。
English: After three days, the brick wall was also washed away, and the water was much deeper.

古文：周王后宫及官民乘筏以避，城中死者无算。
现代文：周王后宫和官吏平民都乘坐船筏躲避水灾，城中死亡的人不计其敷。
English: The palace of King Zhou and the officials and commoners all took rafts to escape the flood, and the people who died in the city were beyond counting.

古文：襄城水决城门，溺死甚众。
现代文：襄城河水冲垮城门，淹死很多人。
English: The waters of the Xiangcheng River swept down the city gate, drowning many people.

古文：崇明、嘉定、昆山、上海海潮冲决，溺死万二千五百余人。
现代文：崇明、嘉定、昆山、上海海潮冲破堤坝，淹死一万二千五百多人。
English: In Chongming, Jiading, Kunshan and Shanghai, the tides broke through the dikes, drowning more than 12,500 people.

古文：浙江亦大水。
现代文：浙江也发生大水灾。
English: Major flooding also occurred in Zhejiang.

古文：六年七月，淮安大水，潮溢，溺死盐丁千三百余人。
现代文：六年七月，淮安发生大水灾，潮水泛滥，淹死盐丁一千三百多人。
English: In July of the sixth year, a major flood occurred in Huai'an. The tides overflowed, drowning more than 1,300 people.

古文：七年七月，密云山水骤涨，军器、文卷、房屋俱没。
现代文：七年七月，密云山水突然猛涨，军器、文卷、房屋都被淹没。
English: In July of the seventh year, the Miyun Mountains and Rivers suddenly surged, and military equipment, documents, and houses were all flooded.

古文：成化三年六月，江夏水决江口堤岸，迄汉阳，长八百五十丈有奇。
现代文：成化三年六月，江夏河水冲破长江日堤岸，直达汉阳，长八百五十丈有余。
English: In June of the 3rd year of Chenghua, the water of the Jiangxia River broke through the sun embankment of the Yangtze River and reached as far as Hanyang, with a length of more than 850 meters.

古文：五年，湖广大水。
现代文：五年，塑魔发生大水灾。
English: Five years later, a great flood occurred in Plast.

古文：山西汾水伤稼。
现代文：山西汾水伤害庄稼。
English: Shanxi floods damage crops.

古文：六年六月，北畿大水。
现代文：六年六月，北畿发生大水灾。
English: In June of the sixth year, a major flood occurred in North Kivu.

古文：七年闰九月，山东及浙江杭、嘉、湖、绍四府俱海溢，淹田宅人畜无算。
现代文：七年闰九月，山东和浙江杭、嘉、湖、绍四府都发生海水泛滥，淹没田地房屋人口牲畜不计其敷。
English: In September, Shandong and Zhejiang's four prefectures of Hangzhou, Jia, Hubei and Shao were all flooded by seawater, inundating fields, houses, people and livestock.

古文：九年六月，畿南五府及怀庆俱大水。
现代文：九年六月，畿南五府和怀庆都发生大水灾。
English: In June 2009, major flooding occurred in all five prefectures of South Gyeongsang Province as well as in Huaiqing.

古文：八月，山东大水。
现代文：八月，山塞发生大水灾。
English: In August, a major flood occurred in Shansei.

古文：十一年五月，湖广水。
现代文：十一年五月，湖廑遭受水灾。
English: In May of the eleventh year, Hubei Province was hit by floods.

古文：十二年八月，浙江风潮大水。淮、凤、扬、徐亦俱大水。
现代文：十二年八月，浙江发生台风、海潮和大水灾，淮、凤、扬、徐也都发生大水灾。
English: In August 2012, a typhoon, a tidal wave and a major flood occurred in Zhejiang, and major floods also occurred in Huai, Feng, Yang and Xu.

古文：十三年二月甲戌，安庆大雪。次日大雨，江水暴涨。
现代文：十三年二月甲戌日，安庆天降大雪，第二天降大雨，江水暴涨。
English: On February 13, Jiaxuan Day, heavy snow fell on Anqing Day, heavy rain fell on the second day, and the river water surged.

古文：闰二月，河南大水。
现代文：闰二月，河南发生大水灾。
English: In leap February, a major flood occurred in Henan Province.

古文：九月，淮水溢，坏淮安州县官舍民屋，淹没人畜甚众。
现代文：九月，淮水泛滥，毁坏淮安州县的官舍和民房，淹死很多人和牲畜。
English: In September, the Huai River flooded, destroying government buildings and private houses in Huai'an County, drowning many people and livestock.

古文：十四年四月，襄阳江溢，坏城郭。
现代文：十四年四月，襄阳江水泛滥，毁坏城郭。
English: In April 14th, the Xiangyang River flooded, destroying the city walls.

古文：五月，陕州大水，人多淹死。
现代文：五月，陕州发生大水灾，人多被淹死。
English: In May, a major flood occurred in Shaanxi Province, and many people were drowned.

古文：七月，北畿、山东水。
现代文：七月，北畿、山东遭受水灾。
English: In July, floods hit North Gyeongsang Province and Shandong Province.

古文：九月，河决开封护城堤五十丈。
现代文：九月，黄河冲破开封护城堤五十丈。
English: In September, the Yellow River broke through the city's 50-meter-high moat.

古文：十八年七月，昌平大水，决居庸关水门四十九，城垣、铺楼、墩台一百二。
现代文：十八年七月，昌平发生大水灾，冲破居庸关水门四十九处，冲壤城垣、铺楼、墩台一百零二处。
English: In July 18th, a major flood occurred in Changping, breaking through 49 water gates of Juyongguan, and 102 city walls, shops and terraces.

古文：八月，卫、漳、滹沱并溢，自清平抵天津。
现代文：八月，卫、漳、滹沱三河都泛滥成灾，从清平直达天津。
English: In August, the Wei, Fen and Fen rivers all flooded, from Qingping to Tianjin.

古文：弘治二年五月，河决开封黄沙冈抵红船湾，凡六处，入沁河。
现代文：弘治二年五月，黄河冲垮开封黄沙冈堤坝直达红船湾，一共演六处，流入沁河。
English: In May of the second year of Hongzhi, the Yellow River broke through the Huangshagang Dam in Kaifeng and reached the Red Ship Bay. It played a total of six places and flowed into the Fen River.

古文：所经州县多灾，省城尤甚。
现代文：所经过的州县多遭水灾，省城尤其严重。
English: Most of the prefectures and counties we passed through were flooded, and the provincial cities were particularly badly affected.

古文：七月，顺、永、河、保四府州县大水。
现代文：七月，顺、丞、河、保四府州县发生大水灾。
English: In July, major floods occurred in Shun, Ye, He and Bao in four prefectures.

古文：八月，卢沟河堤坏。
现代文：八月，卢沟河堤岸毁坏。
English: In August, the embankment of the Lugou River was destroyed.

古文：四年八月，苏、松、浙江水。
现代文：四年八月，苏、松、浙江遭水灾。
English: In August 2004, Su, Song and Zhejiang provinces were hit by floods.

古文：五年夏秋，南畿、浙江、山东水。
现代文：五年夏秋季节，南畿、浙江、山束发生水灾。
English: In the summer and autumn of 2005, floods occurred in Nangui, Zhejiang and Shanshu.

古文：七年七月，苏、常、镇三府潮溢，平地水五尺，沿江者一丈，民多溺死。
现代文：七年七月，藐、常、镇三府潮水溢出，平地水深五尺，沿江地带水深达一丈，人民多被淹死。
English: In July of the seventh year, tidal waters overflowed from the three prefectures of Miao, Chang and Zhen. The water depth on the flat land was five feet, and the water depth along the river was up to one meter. Most people were drowned.

古文：九年六月，山阴、萧山山崩水涌，溺死三百余人。
现代文：九年六月，山阴、萧山山体崩塌，河水泛滥，淹死三百多人。
English: In June of the ninth year, the mountains of Shanyin and Xiaoshan collapsed, and the river flooded, drowning more than 300 people.

古文：十四年五月，贵池水涨，蛟出，淹死二百六十余人，旁邑十二皆大水。
现代文：十四年五月，贵池水上涨，蛟龙出现，淹死二百六十多人，邻近的县邑有十二个都遭受大水灾。
English: In May of the 14th year, the water of Guiche Pond rose, and a dragon appeared, drowning more than 260 people. Twelve neighboring counties and towns suffered major floods.

古文：七月，廉州及灵山海涨，淹死百五十余人。
现代文：七月，廉州和灵山海潮上涨，淹死一百五十余人。
English: In July, more than 150 people drowned when the tides rose in Lianzhou and Lingshan.

古文：闰七月，琼山飓风潮溢，平地水高七尺。
现代文：闰七月，琼山刮飓风，潮水泛滥，平地水高达七尺。
English: In leap July, Mount Qiong was hit by a hurricane, the tide flooded, and the water level rose to seven feet.

古文：八月，安、宁、池、太四府大水，蛟出，漂流房屋。
现代文：八月，安、宁、池、太四府发生大水灾，蛟龙出现，冲走房屋。
English: In August, major floods occurred in An, Ning, Chih, and Tai four prefectures. A dragon appeared and swept away houses.

古文：十五年七月，南京江水泛溢，湖水入城五尺余。
现代文：十五年七月，南京地区长江泛滥，湖水涌入城内深五尺多。
English: In July 1915, the Yangtze River in the Nanjing area flooded, and the lake water poured into the city to a depth of more than five feet.

古文：十七年六月，庐山平地水丈余，溺死星子、德安民，及漂没庐舍甚众。
现代文：十七年六月，庐山平地水深一丈多，淹死星子、德安百姓，并且冲走淹没很多房屋。
English: In June of the seventeenth year, the water depth of the Lushan Plain was more than one level, drowning the Xingzi and De'an people, and washing away and flooding many houses.

古文：正德元年六月，陕西徽州河溢，漂没居民孳畜。
现代文：正德元年六月，陕西、徽州河永泛滥，冲走淹死居民和牲畜。
English: In June of the first year of Zhengde, the He Yong River in Shaanxi and Huizhou flooded, washing away and drowning residents and livestock.

古文：二年六月，固原河涨，平地水高四尺，人畜溺死。
现代文：二年六月，固原河水上涨，平地水高四尺，百姓和牲畜被淹死。
English: In June of the following year, the waters of the Guhara River rose to a height of four feet in the flatlands, drowning people and livestock.

古文：三年九月，延绥、庆阳大水。
现代文：三年九月，延绥、庆阳发生大水灾。
English: In September of the third year, a major flood occurred in Yancheng and Qingyang.

古文：五年九月，安、宁、太三府大水，溺死二万三千余人。
现代文：五年九月，安、宁、太三府发生大水灾，淹死二万三千多人。
English: In September 2005, major flooding occurred in the three prefectures of An, Ning and Taizhou, drowning more than 23,000 people.

古文：十一月，苏、松、常三府水。
现代文：十一月，苏、松、常三府发生水灾。
English: In November, flooding occurred in the three prefectures of Su, Song and Chang.

古文：六年六月，汜水暴涨，溺死百七十六人，毁城垣百七十余堵。
现代文：六年六月，汜水暴涨，淹死一百七十六人，毁坏城垣一百七十多堵。
English: In June of the sixth year, the floodwaters surged, drowning 176 people and destroying more than 170 city walls.

古文：十二年，顺天、河间、保定、真定大水。
现代文：十二年，顺天、河间、保定、真定发生大水灾。
English: In 2012, major floods occurred in Shuntian, Hema, Baoding, and Zhending.

古文：凤阳、淮安、苏、松、常、镇、嘉、湖诸府皆大水。
现代文：凤阳、淮安、苏、松、常、镇、嘉、湖等府都发生大水灾。
English: Major floods occurred in Fengyang, Huai'an, Su, Song, Chang, Zhen, Jia, and Hubei.

古文：荆、襄江水大涨。
现代文：剂、襄江水大涨。
English: As a result, the water level of the Yangjiang River rose sharply.

古文：十五年五月，江西大水。
现代文：十五年五月，江西发生大水灾。
English: In May 15th, a major flood occurred in Jiangxi Province.

古文：十六年七月，辽阳汤跕堡大水决城。
现代文：十六年七月，辽阳汤砧堡大水冲破城墙。
English: In July of the 16th year, Liaoyang Tangye Fort was flooded and the city wall was breached.

古文：嘉靖元年七月，南京暴风雨，江水涌溢，郊社、陵寝、宫阙、城垣吻脊栏楯皆坏。
现代文：嘉靖元年七月，南京发生暴风雨，长江水满溢泛滥，郊社、陵寝、宫阙、城垣的吻脊栏杆都被冲壤。
English: In July of the first year of the Jiajing Dynasty, a storm occurred in Nanjing, the Yangtze River overflowed and flooded, and the balustrades of the suburbs, mausoleums, palaces, and city walls were washed away.

古文：拔树万余株，江船漂没甚众。
现代文：拔起树木一万多株，长江上的船只很多被沉没。
English: More than 10,000 trees were uprooted, and many boats on the Yangtze River were sunk.

古文：庐、凤、淮、扬四府同日大风雨雹，河水泛涨，溺死人畜无算。
现代文：庐、凤、淮、扬四府同天刮大风，降大雨，落冰雹，河水上涨泛滥，淹死人民牲畜不计其数。
English: On the same day, the four prefectures of Handan, Feng, Huai and Yang were hit by strong winds, heavy rain and hail, and the river water rose and flooded, drowning countless people and livestock.

古文：二年七月，扬、徐复大水。
现代文：二年七月，扬、徐二府又发生大水灾。
English: In July of the following year, another major flood occurred in Yang and Xu's second prefectures.

古文：夏、秋间，山东州县俱大水。
现代文：夏、秋之间，山东的州县都发生大水灾。
English: Between summer and autumn, major floods occurred in all prefectures and counties in Shandong.

古文：八月，苏、松、常、镇四府大水，开封亦如之。
现代文：八月，苏、松、常、镇四府发生大水灾，开封也像遭样。
English: In August, major flooding occurred in the four prefectures of Su, Song, Chang and Zhen, and Kaifeng was also affected.

古文：五年六月，陕西五郎坝大水三丈余，冲决官舍。
现代文：五年六月，陕西五郎坝大水深三丈多，冲壤官舍。
English: In June of the same year, the waters of the Gorangba Dam in Shaanxi Province reached a depth of more than three meters, inundating government buildings.

古文：徐、沛河溢，坏丰县城。
现代文：徐、沛二地黄河泛滥，冲坏丰县城墙。
English: Flooding of the Yellow River in Xu and Pei provinces damaged the Fengxian city wall.

古文：六年秋，湖广水。
现代文：六年秋季，塑堕发生水灾。
English: In the autumn of the sixth year, a flood occurred in Plast.

古文：十六年秋，两畿、山东、河南、陕西、浙江各被水灾，湖广尤甚。
现代文：十六年秋季，两畿、山东、河南、陕西、浙江各地遭受水灾，湖魔尤其严重。
English: In the autumn of the 16th year, the two Kis, Shandong, Henan, Shaanxi and Zhejiang regions were flooded, and the flooding of the lake was particularly serious.

古文：二十六年七月丙辰，曹县河决，城池漂没，溺死者甚众。
现代文：二十六年七月丙辰日，曹县黄河演堤，城池被冲走淹汝，淹死很多人。
English: In July 26th, the Yellow River in Cao County broke through the dike, and the city was swept away and flooded, drowning many people.

古文：二十七年正月，氵幵阳大水没城。
现代文：二十七年正月，淠阳大水淹没城池。
English: In the first month of the 27th year, the flood in Poyang submerged the city.

古文：隆庆元年夏，京师大水。
现代文：隆庆元年夏天，京城发生大水灾。
English: In the summer of the first year of the Longqing era, a major flood occurred in Beijing.

古文：六月，新河鲇鱼口沉运船数百艘。
现代文：六月，新河鲇鱼口沉没运输船只几百艘。
English: In June, hundreds of transport vessels sank in the estuary of the Xinhe River.

古文：是岁，襄阳、郧阳水。
现代文：这一年，襄阳、鄙阳发生水灾。
English: This year, floods occurred in Xiangyang and Mianyang.

古文：二年七月，台州飓风，海潮大涨，挟天台山诸水入城，三日溺死三万余人，没田十五万亩，坏庐舍五万区。
现代文：二年七月，台州刮飓风，海潮大涨，挟同天台山众水流灌入城中，三天淹死三万多人，淹没田地十五万亩，毁坏房屋五万所。
English: In July of the second year, Taizhou was hit by a hurricane, the sea tides rose sharply, and together with Tiantai Mountain, many streams of water poured into the city, drowning more than 30,000 people in three days, flooding 150,000 mu of fields, and destroying 50,000 houses.

古文：三年闰六月，真定、保定、淮安、济南、浙江、江南俱大水。
现代文：三年闰六月，真定、保定、淮安、渣南、浙江、江南都发生大水灾。
English: In leap June of the third year, major floods occurred in Zhending, Baoding, Huai'an, Jian'an, Zhejiang and the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：七月壬午，河决沛县，自考城、虞城、曹、单、丰、沛至徐州，坏田庐无算。
现代文：七月壬午日，黄河在沛县决堤，从考城、虞城、曹、单、丰、沛到逮盟，毁坏田地房屋不计其数。
English: On the afternoon of July 13th, the Yellow River broke through the dike in Pei County, destroying countless fields and houses from Kaocheng, Yucheng, Cao, Shan, Feng and Pei to Daming.

古文：九月，淮水溢，自清河至通济闸及淮安城西，淤三十里，决二坝入海。
现代文：九月，淮水泛滥，从清河到通渣塑以及淮安城西面，淤塞三十里，冲破二条堤坝，流入大海。
English: In September, the Huai River overflowed, silting up for 30 miles from the Qinghe River to the Tongsaba River and the west side of Huai'an City. It broke through two dikes and flowed into the sea.

古文：莒、沂、郯城之水又溢出邳州，溺人民甚众。
现代文：莒、沂、郯城之水又漫溢出邳州，淹死很多人。
English: The water from the cities of Handan, Handan and Handan overflowed into Handan, drowning many people.

古文：四年七月，沙、薛、汶、泗诸水骤溢，决仲家浅等漕堤。
现代文：四年七月，沙、薛、汶、泗等河突然泛滥，冲破仲家浅等漕堤。
English: In July of the same year, the rivers such as the Sha, Xue, Wen and Zou suddenly flooded and broke through the shallow dike of the Zhongjia.

古文：八月，陕西大水，河决邳州。
现代文：八月，陕西发生大水灾，黄河在邳州溃堤。
English: In August, a major flood occurred in Shaanxi, and the Yellow River burst its banks in Ganzhou.

古文：五年四月，又决邳州，自曲头集至王家口新堤多坏。
现代文：五年四月，又在邳州溃堤，从曲头集到王家口，新堤多被毁坏。
English: In April of the same year, a levee was breached in Zhangzhou, and the new levee was mostly destroyed from Qu Tou Ji to Wangjiakou.

古文：是岁，山东、河南大水。
现代文：这一年，山东、河南发生大水灾。
English: This year, major floods occurred in Shandong and Henan.

古文：万历元年七月，荆州、承天大水。
现代文：万历元年七月，剂州、承天发生大水灾。
English: In July of the first year of the Wanli era, a major flood occurred in Gezhou and Chengtian.

古文：二年六月，福建永定大水，溺七百余人。
现代文：二年六月，福建永定发生大水灾，淹死七百多人。
English: In June of the following year, a major flood occurred in Yongding, Fujian, drowning more than 700 people.

古文：是岁，海盐海大溢，死者数千人。
现代文：这一年，海盐海水大泛滥，淹死几千人。
English: This year, the sea salt water flooded, drowning thousands of people.

古文：八月庚午，淮安、扬州、徐州河溢伤稼。
现代文：八月庚午日，淮安、扬州、徐州河水泛滥，伤害庄稼。
English: In the afternoon of August, the rivers of Huai'an, Yangzhou and Xuzhou flooded, damaging crops.

古文：三年四月，淮、徐大水。
现代文：三年四月，淮、徐二府发生大水灾。
English: In April of the third year, a major flood occurred in Huai and Xu two prefectures.

古文：五月，淮水大决。
现代文：五月，淮水大溃堤。
English: In May, the Huai River burst its banks.

古文：六月，杭、嘉、宁、绍四府海涌数丈，没战船、庐舍、人畜不计其数。
现代文：六月，杭、嘉、宁、绍四府海水涌起数丈，漂没战船、房屋、人民、牲畜不计其敷。
English: In June, the seawater in the four prefectures of Hang, Jia, Ning, and Shao surged several meters, drowning warships, houses, people, and livestock.

古文：八月，淮、扬、凤、徐四府州大水，河决高邮、砀山及邵家口、曹家庄。
现代文：八月，淮、扬、凤、徐四府州发生大水灾，河水冲破高邮、殇山以及邵家口、曹家庄。
English: In August, major floods occurred in the four prefectures of Huai, Yang, Feng and Xu. The river broke through Gaoyou, Lushan, Shaojiakou and Caojiazhuang.

古文：九月，苏、松、常、镇四府俱水。
现代文：九月，苏、松、常、镇四府都遭受水灾。
English: In September, the four prefectures of Su, Song, Chang and Zhen were all flooded.

古文：四年正月，高邮清水堤决。
现代文：四年正月，高邮清水堤溃塌。
English: In the first month of the fourth year, the Gaoyou Clear Water Dike collapsed.

古文：九月，河决丰、沛、曹、单。
现代文：九月，黄河冲破丰、沛、曹、单等地堤岸。
English: In September, the Yellow River broke through the embankments of Feng, Pei, Cao and Shan.

古文：十一月，淮、黄交溢。
现代文：十一月，淮河、黄河交相泛滥。
English: In November, the Huaihe River and the Yellow River flooded.

古文：五年闰八月，徐州河淤，淮河南徙，决高邮、宝应诸湖堤。
现代文：五年闰八月，徐州黄河淤塞，淮河向南迁徙，冲破高鄞、宣尘等湖堤坝。
English: In August of the fifth year, the Yellow River in Xuzhou was silted up, and the Huaihe River migrated southward, breaking through the dams of Gaozhu, Xuancheng and other lakes.

古文：六年六月，清河水溢。
现代文：六年六月，清河洪水泛滥。
English: In June of the sixth year, the Qinghe River flooded.

古文：七年五月，苏、松、凤阳、徐州大水。
现代文：七年五月，苏、松、凤阳、徐州发生大水灾。
English: In May of the seventh year, a major flood occurred in Suzhou, Song, Fengyang and Xuzhou.

古文：八月，又水。
现代文：八月，又发生水灾。
English: In August, there was another flood.

古文：是岁，浙江大水。
现代文：这一年，浙江发生大水灾。
English: This year, a major flood occurred in Zhejiang Province.

古文：九年五月，从化、增城、龙门溪壑泛涨，田禾尽没，淹死男妇无算。
现代文：九年五月，从化、增城、龙门山溪沟壑水涨泛滥，田中庄稼全部被淹没，淹死男女不计其敷。
English: In May of the ninth year, water surged and flooded in the ravines of Conghua, Zengcheng and Longmen Mountain, and all the crops in Tanaka were flooded, drowning men and women regardless of their location.

古文：七月，福安洪水逾城，漂没庐舍殆尽。
现代文：七月，福安洪水越过城墙，房屋差不多全部被冲走淹没。
English: In July, the Fu'an flood overran the city wall, and almost all the houses were washed away and flooded.

古文：八月，泰兴、海门、如皋大水，塘圩坡埂尽决，溺死者甚众。
现代文：八月，泰兴、海门、如皋发生大水灾，塘圩坡埂全部冲垮，淹死很多人。
English: In August, major floods occurred in Taixing, Haimen and Rugao, and all the pontoons in Tanggu were washed away, drowning many people.

古文：十年正月，淮、扬海涨，浸丰利等盐场三十，淹死二千六百余人。
现代文：十年正月，淮、扬海潮上涨，淹没丰利等盐场三十处，淹死二千六百多人。
English: In the first month of the tenth year, the Huai and Yang tides rose, flooding 30 salt farms such as Fengli, and drowning more than 2,600 people.

古文：七月，苏、松六州县潮溢，坏田禾十万顷，溺死者二万人。
现代文：七月，苏、松六个州县潮水泛滥，毁坏田中庄稼十万顷，淹死二万人。
English: In July, tidal floods in six prefectures of Su and Song destroyed 100,000 hectares of crops in the middle of the field and drowned 20,000 people.

古文：十一年四月，承天江水暴涨，漂没民庐人畜无算。
现代文：十一年四月，承天江水突然猛涨，冲走淹没平民房屋、人口、牲畜不计其数。
English: In April of the eleventh year, the water of the Chengtian River suddenly surged, sweeping away and flooding countless civilian houses, people, and livestock.

古文：金州河溢没城。
现代文：金州河水泛滥淹没城池。
English: The flooding of the Jinzhou River inundated the city.

古文：十四年夏，江南、浙江、江西、湖广、广东、福建、云南、辽东大水。
现代文：十四年夏天，江南、浙江、江西、湖魔、魔塞、福建、云南、辽东发生大水灾。
English: In the summer of 2014, major floods occurred in Jiangnan, Zhejiang, Jiangxi, Humao, Mazi, Fujian, Yunnan, and Liaodong.

古文：十五年五月，浙江大水。
现代文：十五年五月，浙江发生大水灾。
English: In May of the fifteenth year, a great flood occurred in Zhejiang.

古文：七月，开封及陕州、灵宝河决。
现代文：七月，开封以及陕州、灵实黄河溃堤。
English: In July, the Yellow River in Kaifeng, Shaanxi and Lingshi burst its banks.

古文：是岁，杭、嘉、湖、应天、太平五府江湖泛溢，平地水深丈余。
现代文：这年，杭、嘉、湖、应天、太平五府江湖泛滥，平地水深一丈多。
English: In this year, the five provinces of Hang, Jiayu, Huzhou, Yingtian and Taiping were flooded, and the water depth of the flat land was more than a meter.

古文：七月终，飓风大作，环数百里，一望成湖。
现代文：七月末，飓风大发，横扫几百里，放眼望去，平地变成了湖泊。
English: At the end of July, a major hurricane hit, sweeping across hundreds of miles, and as far as the eye could see, the flat land turned into lakes.

古文：十六年八月，河决东光魏家口。
现代文：十六年八月，黄河在束光魏家口演堤。
English: In August of the 16th year, the Yellow River broke through the dike at Sokguang Weijiakou.

古文：十七年六月，浙江海沸，杭、嘉、宁、绍、台属县廨宇多圮，碎官民船及战舸，压溺者三百余人。
现代文：十七年六月，浙江海浪翻涌，杭、嘉、宁、绍、台所属各县官署房屋多被冲垮，撞碎官府、百姓的船只以及战船，压死淹死二百多人。
English: In June of the seventeenth year, waves surged in Zhejiang, and most of the buildings of the county government offices belonging to Hangzhou, Jiading, Ningde, Shao and Taiwan were washed down, smashing government offices, people's boats and warships, crushing and drowning more than 200 people.

古文：十九年六月，苏、松大水，溺人数万。
现代文：十九年六月，苏、松发生大水灾，淹死人数万。
English: In June 1919, a major flood occurred in Suzhou and Songshan, drowning tens of thousands.

古文：七月，宁、绍、苏、松、常五府滨海潮溢，伤稼淹人。
现代文：七月，宁、绍、苏、松、常五府滨海的潮水泛滥，伤害庄稼，淹死人民。
English: In July, the coastal waters of the five prefectures of Ning, Shaoxing, Suzhou, Songshan and Changzhou were flooded, damaging crops and drowning people.

古文：九月，泗州大水，州治浸三尺。
现代文：九月，泗州发生大水灾，州治所被淹三尺。
English: In September, a major flood occurred in Zhangzhou, and the prefectural government office was flooded by three feet.

古文：淮水高于城，祖陵被浸。
现代文：淮水比城墙还高，祖陵被淹没。
English: The floodwaters were higher than the city walls, and the ancestral mausoleum was completely submerged.

古文：十月，扬州湖淮涨溢，决邵伯堤五十余丈，高邮南北闸俱冲。
现代文：十月，扬州湖水、淮水上涨泛滥，冲破邵伯堤五十多丈，高邮南北闸门都被冲壤。
English: In October, Yangzhou Lake and Huai Water rose and flooded, breaking through the Shao Bo dike more than fifty meters high, and the north and south gates of Gaoyou were washed away.

古文：二十年夏秋，真、顺、广、大四府水。
现代文：二十年夏秋季节，真、顺、广、大四府遭水灾。
English: In the summer and autumn of 20 years ago, the four prefectures of Zhen, Shun, Guang and Da suffered from floods.

古文：二十一年五月，邳州、高邮、宝应大水决湖堤。
现代文：二十一年五月，邳州、高邮、寅应大水冲破湖堤。
English: In May 2011, large amounts of water broke through the lake's dike in Zhangzhou, Gaoyou and Yinying.

古文：二十二年七月，凤阳、庐州大水。
现代文：二十二年七月，凤阳、庐州发生大水灾。
English: In July 2002, a major flood occurred in Fengyang and Zhangzhou.

古文：二十三年四月，泗水浸祖陵。
现代文：二十三年四月，泅水淹没祖陵。
English: In April 23rd, floodwaters inundated the ancestral mausoleum.

古文：二十四年秋，杭、嘉、湖三府大水。
现代文：二十四年秋季，杭、嘉、湖三府发生大水灾。
English: In the autumn of 2004, major floods occurred in the three prefectures of Hang, Jiayu and Hubei.

古文：二十九年八月，沔阳大水入城。
现代文：二十九年八月，沔阳大水冲入城内。
English: In August of the 29th year, the Poyang flood came rushing into the city.

古文：三十年六月，京师大水。
现代文：三十年六月，京城发生大水灾。
English: In June of the 30th year, a major flood occurred in Kyoto.

古文：三十一年五月，成安、永年、肥乡、安州、深泽，漳、滏、沙、燕河并溢，决堤横流。
现代文：三十一年五月，成安、永年、肥乡、安州、深泽地区，漳水、滏水、沙水、燕河都泛滥成灾，冲破堤坝，洪水横流。
English: In May of 31st, Cheng'an, Yongnian, Feixiang, Anzhou, and Fukasawa regions, Surabaya, Surabaya, Shanshui, and Yanhe were all flooded, with levees bursting and floods spreading.

古文：祁州、静海圮城垣、庐舍殆尽。
现代文：祁州、静海的城垣、房屋几乎被全部冲垮。
English: The city walls and houses in Luzhou and Jinghai were almost completely destroyed.

古文：六月，泰安大水，淹八百余人。
现代文：六月，泰安发生大水灾，淹死八百多人。
English: In June, a major flood occurred in Tai'an, drowning more than 800 people.

古文：八月，泉州诸府海水暴涨，溺死万余人。
现代文：八月，泉俎等府海水突然猛涨，淹死一万多人。
English: In August, the seawater in Quanzhang and other prefectures suddenly surged, drowning more than 10,000 people.

古文：三十二年六月，昌平大水，坏各陵桥道。
现代文：三十二年六月，昌平发生大水灾，冲毁各陵的桥梁道路。
English: In June of the 32nd year, a major flood occurred in Changping, destroying the bridges and roads of various mausoleums.

古文：七月，永平、真、保三府俱水，淹男妇无算。
现代文：七月，永平、真、保三府都遭受水灾，淹死男女不计其敷。
English: In July, the three prefectures of Yongping, Zhen and Bao all suffered from floods, drowning men and women regardless of the cause.

古文：八月，河决苏家庄，淹丰、沛，黄水逆流灌济宁、鱼台、单县。
现代文：八月，黄河在苏家庄溃堤，淹没丰、沛二州，黄河倒流淹没渣空、鱼台、单县。
English: In August, the Yellow River broke through the dike in Sujiazhuang, flooding Feng and Pei Erzhou, and the reverse flow of the Yellow River flooded Jiankuo, Yutai and Shan County.

古文：三十五年六月，黄州蛟起，武昌、承天、郧阳、岳州、常德大水，漂没庐舍。
现代文：三十五年六月，黄州蛟龙出现；武昌、承天、鄙阳、岳州、常德发生大水灾，冲走淹没房屋。
English: In June 1935, the Huangzhou Hailong occurred; Wuchang, Chengdu, Danyang, Yuezhou and Changde were flooded, and houses were washed away and submerged.

古文：徽州、宁国、太平、严州四府山水大涌，漂人口甚众。
现代文：徽州、室国、太平、严州四府山谷洪水满溢，冲走很多人民。
English: The valleys of the four prefectures of Huizhou, Muroguni, Taiping and Yanzhou were flooded, and many people were swept away.

古文：闰六月，京师大水，长安街水深五尺。
现代文：闰六月，京城发大水，长安街水深五尺。
English: In the intercalary month of June, the capital city was flooded, and Chang'an Street was five feet deep in water.

古文：三十七年九月，福建、江西大水。
现代文：三十七年九月，福建、江西发生大水灾。
English: In September 1937, major floods occurred in Fujian and Jiangxi.

古文：四十一年六月，通惠河决。
现代文：四十一年六月，通惠河溃堤。
English: In June 1941, the Tonghui River burst its banks.

古文：七月，京师大水。南畿、江西、河南俱大水。
现代文：七月，京城发大水；直堂、江西、河南都发生大水灾。
English: In July, the capital city of Beijing was flooded, and major floods occurred in Zhaotang, Jiangxi and Henan.

古文：八月，山东、广西、湖广俱大水。
现代文：八月，山塞、产酉、湖广都发生大水灾。
English: In August, major floods occurred in Shansei, Zhoushan and Huguang.

古文：九月，辽东大水。
现代文：九月，辽束发生大水灾。
English: In September, a major flood occurred in Liaozuke.

古文：四十二年，浙江、江西、两广俱水。
现代文：四十二年，浙江、江西、两广都发生水灾。
English: In 1942, floods occurred in Zhejiang, Jiangxi and Guangxi.

古文：四十四年七月，江西、广东水。
现代文：四十四年七月，江西、广束发生水灾。
English: In July 1944, flooding occurred in Guangzhu, Jiangxi Province.

古文：四十六年八月，潮州六县海飓大作，溺万二千三百余人，坏民居三万间。
现代文：四十六年八月，潮州六县海上大风凶猛发作，淹死一万二千五百多人，毁坏人民房屋三万间。
English: In August 1946, six counties of Chaozhou were hit by ferocious sea winds, drowning more than 12,500 people and destroying 30,000 people's houses.

古文：天启三年，睢宁河决。
现代文：天启三年，壁皇董塑溃堤。
English: In the third year of the Apocalypse, the Wall Emperor Dong Shaping broke the dike.

古文：六年秋，河决匙头湾，倒入骆马湖，自新安镇抵邳、宿，民居尽没。
现代文：大年秋天，黄河在匙头湾溃堤，河水倒流入骆马湖，从新安镇抵达邳、宿二州，人民的房屋全部被淹没。
English: In the autumn of the year, the Yellow River broke through the dike in Shitou Bay, and the river water flowed into the Luoma Lake, reaching from Xin'an Town to Shantou, Shuku Nizhou, and all the people's houses were flooded.

古文：是岁，顺天、永平二府大水，边垣多圮。
现代文：这一年，顺天、永平二府发生大水灾，边地城垣多被冲垮。
English: In the same year, the two prefectures of Sunchon and Yeongpyeong were hit by major floods, and many city walls in outlying areas were washed away.

古文：崇祯元年七月壬午，杭、嘉、绍三府海啸，坏民居数万间，溺数万人，海宁、萧山尤甚。
现代文：崇祯元年七月壬午日，杭、嘉、绍三府发生海啸，毁坏百姓房屋敷万问，淹死敷万人，海室、萧山特别严重。
English: On the morning of July in the first year of Chongzhen, a tsunami occurred in the three prefectures of Hang, Jia and Shao, destroying tens of thousands of people's houses and drowning tens of thousands of people. Haishu and Xiaoshan were particularly serious.

古文：三年，山东大水。
现代文：三年，山束发生大水灾。
English: Three years ago, a major flood occurred in the mountains.

古文：四年六月，又大水。
现代文：四年六月，又发生大水灾。
English: In June 2004, another major flood occurred.

古文：五年六月壬申，河决孟津口，横浸数百里。
现代文：五年六月壬申日，黄河冲破孟津口，横流淹没敷百里。
English: On Jinshin Day in June of the fifth year, the Yellow River broke through Mengjinkou, and the cross-flow flooded a hundred miles.

古文：七年五月，邛、眉诸州县大水，坏城垣、田舍、人畜无算。
现代文：七年五月，邛、眉等州县发生大水灾，冲壤城墙、田舍，冲走人民牲畜不计其数。
English: In May of the seventh year, a major flood occurred in the prefectures of Handan and Meizhou, which washed away the city walls, farmhouses, and countless livestock.

古文：十年八月，叙州大水，民登州堂及高阜者得免，余尽没。
现代文：十年八月，叙州发生大水灾，人民登上州府大堂和高丘的才得以免于祸难，其余的全部被淹死。
English: In August of the tenth year, a great flood occurred in Suzhou. Only the people who climbed onto the lobby of the state capital and the hill were spared from the disaster. The rest were all drowned.

古文：十三年五月，浙江大水。
现代文：十三年五月，浙江发生大水灾。
English: On May 13, a major flood occurred in Zhejiang.

古文：十四年七月，福州风潮泛溢，漂溺甚众。
现代文：十四年七月，福州潮水泛滥，冲走、淹死很多人。
English: In July 14th, Fuzhou was flooded by the tidal wave, and many people were swept away and drowned.

古文：十五年六月，汴水决。
现代文：十五年六月，汴水溃堤。
English: In June 15th, Surabaya's dam burst.

古文：九月壬午，河决开封朱家寨。
现代文：九月壬午日，黄河冲破开封朱家寨。
English: On the afternoon of September 9th, the Yellow River broke through the Kaifeng Zhu Jia Zhai.

古文：癸未，城圮，溺死士民数十万。
现代文：癸末日，城墙垮塌，淹死士民几十万人。
English: At the end of the war, the city walls collapsed, drowning hundreds of thousands of soldiers and civilians.

古文：▲水变
现代文：水变
English: Water change

古文：洪武五年，河南黄河竭，行人可涉。
现代文：洪武五年，河南黄河枯竭，行人能够徒步遇河。
English: In the fifth year of Hongwu, the Yellow River in Henan was exhausted, and pedestrians were able to cross the river on foot.

古文：天顺二年十二月癸未，武强苦井变为甘。
现代文：天顺二年十二月癸未日，武强的苦井水变成了甘甜水。
English: On the last day of December in the second year of Tianshun, Wuqiang's bitter well water turned into sweet water.

古文：弘治十四年八月丙辰，融县河水红浊如黄河。
现代文：弘治十四年八月丙辰日，融县河水浑浊呈红色，如同黄河。
English: On the day of August of the 14th year of Hongzhi, the river water in Rong County was turbid and red, like the Yellow River.

古文：十月丙辰，马湖底涡江水白可鉴，翌日浊如泔浆，凝两岸沙石上者如土粉，十七日乃澄。
现代文：十月丙辰日，置塑底涡江江水清澈可以照人，第二天浑浊如同泔水，凝结在两岸的沙石上，如同土粉，十七天才清澄。
English: On the first day of October, the river water at the bottom of the plastic-bottomed whirlpool was clear enough to shine. The next day, it was cloudy like salty water, condensed on the sand and stone on both banks, like soil powder, and was clear for seventeen days.

古文：丁巳，叙州东南二河白如雪、浓如浆者三日。
现代文：丁巳日，叙州东南二河自如雪、浓如浆的情况长逵三天。
English: On the same day, the two rivers in southeastern Suzhou were covered with snow for three days.

古文：十五年九月丙戌，濮州井溢，沙土随水而出。
现代文：十五年九月丙戌日，濮州井水满溢，沙土随着水涌出来。
English: On September 15th, the day of the Dragon Boat Festival, the water in Zhangzhou Well was overflowing, and the sandy soil gushed out with the water.

古文：正德十年七月，文安水忽僵立，是日大寒，结为冰柱，高围俱五丈，中空旁穴。
现代文：正德十年七月，文安水忽然僵凝直立，这一天非常寒冷，水结成冰柱，高度和圆围都有五丈，中间空，旁有孔。
English: In July of the 10th year of Zhengde, the Wen'an Water suddenly froze and stood upright. It was a very cold day, and the water formed an icicle with a height and circumference of five meters, a space in the middle, and a hole next to it.

古文：数日而贼至，民避穴中，生全者甚众。
现代文：数日后盗贼到来，人民躲进孔洞，很多人赖以生存下来。
English: A few days later, the thieves arrived, and the people hid in holes, which many people relied on to survive.

古文：隆庆六年五月，南畿龙目井化为酒。
现代文：隆庆六年五月，南畿龙目井水变成酒。
English: In May, the sixth year of the Longqing Festival, the water from Longmei Well in Nanki Province was turned into wine.

古文：万历二十二年四月，南京正阳门水赤三日。
现代文：万历二十二年四月，南京正阳门水变成赤色达三天。
English: In April of the 22nd year of Wanli, the water of Nanjing Zhengyang Gate turned red for three days.

古文：二十五年八月甲申，蒲州池塘无风涌波，溢三四尺。
现代文：二十五年八月甲申日，蒲州的池塘没有风却涌起波澜，水满流出三四尺。
English: On August 6th, 2005, there was no wind in the pond of Puzhou, but the waves surged, and the water flowed out three or four feet.

古文：临淄濠水忽涨，南北相向而斗。
现代文：临淄濠中的水忽然上涨，南北相向而搏斗。
English: The water in Linyi suddenly rose, and the north and south fought against each other.

古文：又夏庄大湾潮忽起，聚散不恒，聚则丈余，开则见底。
现代文：夏庄大湾的潮水又忽然涌起，或聚或散，没有常态，聚合起来便达到一丈多高，散开便可以见到底。
English: The tide in Xiazhuang Bay suddenly surges again, either gathering or dispersing. There is no normal state. When it gathers, it will reach a certain height, and when it disperses, it can be seen to the end.

古文：乐安小清河逆流。
现代文：乐安小清河例流。
English: Le'an Xiaoqinghe routine.

古文：临清砖板二闸，无风大浪。
现代文：临清砖板二闸，没有风却涌起大浪。
English: There are two gates of limestone slabs, but there is no wind, but there are big waves.

古文：三十年闰二月戊午，河州莲花寨黄河涸。
现代文：三十年闲二月戊午日，河州莲花寨黄河干涸。
English: On the afternoon of February 30th, the Yellow River in Lotus Village, Hezhou, dried up.

古文：四十六年四月，宣武、正阳门外水赤三里，如血，一月乃止。
现代文：四十六年四月，宣武、正阳门外水变成赤色，长达三里，像鲜血，一个月才停止。
English: In April 1946, the water outside the Xuanwu and Zhengyang Gates turned red for three miles, like blood, and only stopped for a month.

古文：四十七年四月，宣武门响闸至东御河，水复赤。
现代文：四十七年四月，宣武门响闸到柬御河，河水又变成了赤色。
English: In April 1947, the gate of Xuanwu Gate was opened to the Cammi River, and the river turned red again.

古文：崇祯十年，宁远卫井鸣沸，三日乃止。
现代文：崇祯十年，宁速卫水井翻滚，发出鸣响，三天才停止。
English: In the past ten years, the Ningxiaowei water well has been tumbling, emitting a ringing sound, and only stopped three days later.

古文：河南汝水变色，深黑而味恶，饮者多病。
现代文：河南汝水变成深黑色，并且气味恶臭，喝了此水的人很多都生病。
English: The water in Henan has turned dark black and has a foul smell. Many people who have drunk this water have fallen ill.

古文：十三年，华阴渭水赤。
现代文：十三年，华阴渭水变成赤色。
English: In the thirteenth year of Huayin's reign, the water turned red.

古文：十四年，山西潞水北流七昼夜，势如潮涌。
现代文：十四年，山西潞水向北流七个昼夜，水势如同潮水奔涌。
English: In the 14th year, the water of the Shanxi Yishui River flowed northward for seven days and nights, and the water was like a rushing tide.

古文：十五年，达州井鸣，濠水变血。
现代文：十五年，达州井水呜响，濠水变得血红。
English: In the past 15 years, the well water in Dazhou has been booming, and the salty water has turned blood red.

古文：十六年，松江自五月至七月不雨，河水尽涸，而泖水忽增数尺。
现代文：十六年，松江自五月至七月不降雨，河水全部干涸，而泖水忽然增高数尺。
English: For 16 years, there was no rain in the Matsue River from May to July. All the river water dried up, while the flood water suddenly rose several feet.

古文：▲黑眚黑祥
现代文：黑眚黑祥
English: Kurosawa Kurosawa

古文：洪武十年正月丁酉，金华、处州雨水如墨汁。
现代文：洪武十年正月丁酉日，金华、处州雨水色如墨汁。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the 10th year of Hongwu, Jinhua and Wenzhou were as red as ink.

古文：十四年正月，黑气亘天。
现代文：十四年正月，黑色氛气横豆于天空。
English: In the first month of the 14th year, a black atmosphere hung in the sky.

古文：十一月壬午，黑气亘天者再。
现代文：十一月壬午日，黑色氛气两次横亘于天空。
English: On November's midsummer's day, a black atmosphere spread across the sky twice.

古文：二十一年二月乙卯，黑气亘天。
现代文：二十一年二月乙卯日，黑色氛气横页于天空。
English: On February 21st, a black atmosphere spread across the sky.

古文：宣德元年二月戊子，北方黑气东西亘天。
现代文：宣德元年二月戊子日，北方黑色氛气朝东西向横豆于天空。
English: In February of the first year of Xuande, on the day of Wuzi, the black atmosphere in the north spread east and west across the sky.

古文：八月辛巳，乐安城中有黑气如死灰。
现代文：八月辛巳日，乐安城中出现黑气，色如死灰。
English: On the day of Xin Si in August, a black atmosphere appeared in Le'an City, the color of which was like dead ash.

古文：正统元年九月辛亥，未刻，黑气亘天，自西南属东北。
现代文：正统元年九月辛亥日，未时，黑色氛气横豆于天空，从西南连接东北。
English: In September of the first year of the orthodox calendar, on the day of Xinhai, at the end of the year, a black atmosphere hovered in the sky, connecting the northeast with the southwest.

古文：二年八月甲申，北方黑气东西亘天。
现代文：二年八月甲申日，北方黑色氛气东西向横互于天空。
English: In August of the second year, on the day of Jia Sheng, the northern black atmosphere spread across the sky from east to west.

古文：十四年十一月己丑，晡时，西方有黑气从地而生。
现代文：十四年十一月己丑日，申时，西方有黑色氛气从地上产生。
English: On November 14th, the Ugly Day, at the time of the lunar new year, a black atmosphere emerged from the ground in the west.

古文：景泰元年二月壬寅，黑气南北亘天。
现代文：景泰元年二月壬寅日，黑色氛气南北向横豆于天空。
English: In February of the first year of King Taejo's reign, the black atmosphere stretched from north to south across the sky.

古文：十月辛未，西南黑气如烟火，南北亘天。
现代文：十月辛末日，西南方有黑色氛气像烟火，朝南北方向横互于天空。
English: At the end of October, the southwest has a black atmosphere like fireworks, stretching across the sky in a north-south direction.

古文：二年四月庚辰，有黑气如烟，摩地而上。
现代文：二年四月庚辰日，有黑色氛气如浓烟，贴地升向天空。
English: On Geng Chen Day in April of the second year, there was a black atmosphere like thick smoke rising to the sky.

古文：天顺五年七月己亥朔，东方有黑气，须臾蔽天。
现代文：天顺五年七月己亥朔日，东方有黑色氛气，一会儿功夫便遮蔽了天空。
English: It was the new year's day in July of the fifth year of Tianshun. The east had a black atmosphere, and it took a while to cover the sky.

古文：成化七年四月丙辰，雨黑沙如漆。
现代文：成化七年四月丙辰日，天降黑沙，色黑如漆。
English: In April of the 7th year of Chenghua, the sky fell black sand, and the color was black as paint.

古文：八年三月庚子，黑气起西北，临清、德州昼晦。
现代文：八年三月庚子日，黑色氛气从西北升起，临清、德州白天昏暗如晚上。
English: On March 8th, Geng Zi Day, a black atmosphere rose from the northwest, and the daytime in Linqing and Texas was as dark as the evening.

古文：十二年七月庚戌，京师黑眚见。
现代文：十二年七月庚戌日，京城出现黑色氛气。
English: On July 12th, Geng Zi Day, a black atmosphere appeared in Beijing.

古文：民间男女露宿，有物金睛修尾，状如犬狸，负黑气入牖，直抵密室，至则人昏迷。
现代文：民间有男女在室外住宿，看见有怪物长着金色的眼睛，长长的尾巴，其状貌像犬狸，背着黑气进入窗户，直达内室，到达时人便昏迷不醒。
English: Some men and women stayed outdoors and saw a monster with long golden eyes and a long tail, which looked like a beaver. It entered the window with its black breath and reached the inner room. When they arrived, they were unconscious.

古文：遍城惊扰，操刃张灯，鸣金鼓逐之，不可得。
现代文：遍城人民惊恐扰嚷，点着灯，敲击金鼓驱逐怪物而不能赶走。
English: The people all over the city were alarmed and disturbed, lighting lamps and beating golden drums to drive out the monsters, but they could not drive them away.

古文：帝常朝，奉天门侍卫见之而哗。
现代文：皇帝曾在朝见百官时，奉天门的侍卫见到怪物，不禁喧哗起来。
English: Once, when the emperor was meeting with hundreds of officials, the guards at the Gate of Heaven saw a monster and couldn't help but make a noise.

古文：帝欲起，怀恩持帝衣，顷之乃定。
现代文：皇帝想要起身，怀恩抓住皇帝的龙衣，一会儿才安定下来。
English: When the emperor tried to get up, Wynn grabbed the emperor's dragon robe and held it for a moment before settling down.

古文：弘治五年二月己巳，北方黑气东西亘天。
现代文：弘治五年二月己巳日，北方黑色氛气朝东西向横亘于天空。
English: On February 6th, the 5th year of the Heian period, the northern black atmosphere spread across the sky from east to west.

古文：六年八月壬申，南京有黑气，东西百余丈。
现代文：六年八月壬申日，南京有黑色氛气，东西向长达一百多丈。
English: On Jinshin Day in August of the sixth year, Nanjing had a black atmosphere, stretching more than a hundred meters from east to west.

古文：十四年四月辛未，应州黑风大作。
现代文：十四年四月辛末日，应州黑风猛烈刮起。
English: At the end of the bitter April 14th, the black wind of Yingzhou blew fiercely.

古文：十六年二月庚子，宜良黑气迷空，咫尺莫辨人形。
现代文：十六年二月庚子日，宜良的黑色氛气遮蔽天空，咫尺之内分不清人的形貌。
English: On the 16th day of the second month of the 16th year, the black atmosphere of Yili obscured the sky, and people's shapes were indistinguishable within a short distance.

古文：正德七年六月壬戌，黑眚见顺德、河间及涿，大者如犬，小者如猫，夜出伤人，有至死者。
现代文：正德七年六月壬戌日，黑眚出现在顺德、河间以及涿州，大的如狗，小的如犹，晚上出来伤害人，有的人被伤害至死。
English: On the seventh day of the sixth month of the seventh year of Zhengde, the black storks appeared in Shunde, Hemei and Zhangzhou. The big ones were like dogs, and the small ones were like devils. They came out at night to hurt people, and some people were hurt to death.

古文：寻见于京师，形赤黑，风行有声，居民夜持刁斗相警达旦，逾月乃息。
现代文：不久，出现在京城，形状呈赤黑色，挟风而行，有声响，居民在晚上拿着刁斗敲击，互相警示，直到天亮，一个多月以后才停息下来。
English: Soon, it appeared in the capital city, its shape was red and black, it moved with the wind, and it made noise. In the evening, residents held gongs and drums and beat them to alert each other. It didn't stop until dawn, more than a month later.

古文：后又见于封丘。
现代文：后来又出现在封丘。
English: Later, it reappeared in Fengqiu.

古文：十二年闰十二月丁丑夜，瑞州有红气变白，形如曲尺，中外二黑气，相斗者久之。
现代文：十二年闰十二月丁丑日晚上，瑞州有红色氛气变成白色，形状像曲尺，内外有两股黑气互相搏斗了很久。
English: On the evening of Leap Year 12, Ding Chou Day, the red atmosphere in Ruizhou changed to white. It was shaped like a musical scale. There were two dark forces inside and outside the city that had been fighting each other for a long time.

古文：八年十月癸巳，杭州雨黑水。
现代文：八年十月癸巳日，杭州降黑色雨水。
English: On October 8th, black rain fell in Hangzhou.

古文：三十七年三月，衡州黑眚见。
现代文：三十七年三月，衡州黑眚出现。
English: In March of 1937, the Henzhou Black Vultures appeared.

古文：隆庆二年四月，天雨黑豆。
现代文：隆庆二年四月，天降黑豆。
English: In April of the second year of Longqing, black beans fell from the sky.

古文：六年四月，杭州黑雾，有物蜿蜒如车轮，目光如电，冰雹随之。
现代文：六年四月，杭州出现黑雾，有怪物蜿蜒而行，像车轮，目光像闪电，随着天降冰雹。
English: In April of the sixth year, a black fog appeared in Hangzhou, with monsters meandering along, like wheels, eyes like lightning, and hail falling with the sky.

古文：万历二十四年十二月辛卯，同安生黑毛。
现代文：万历二十四年十二月辛卯日，同安发生黑毛。
English: On the twenty-fourth day of the twelfth month of the twelfth month of the year, Tongan had a black hair.

古文：二十五年二月癸亥，湖州黑雨杂以黄沙。
现代文：二十五年二月癸亥日，湖州降黑雨并夹杂着黄沙。
English: On February 25th, the day of the boar, black rain fell in Huzhou, mixed with yellow sand.

古文：崇祯十年，山东雨黑水，新乡亦如之。
现代文：崇祯十年，山东降黑雨，新乡也像这样。
English: In the past ten years, Shandong has seen black rain, and Xinxiang is also like this.

古文：十一年，京师有黑眚，状如狸，入民家为祟，半岁乃止。
现代文：十一年，京城有黑眚，状貌如狸，进入百姓家中作坏事，半年才止息。
English: In the eleventh year, there was a black stork in Beijing that looked like a raccoon dog. It entered people's homes to do bad things, and only stopped after half a year.

古文：十三年正月丁卯，黑气弥空者三日。
现代文：十三年正月丁卯日，黑色氛气弥漫天空，长达三天。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the year, a black atmosphere pervaded the sky for three days.

