古文：梁彦光，字修芝，安定乌氏人也。
现代文：梁彦光字修芝，安定乌氏人。
English: Liang Yan Guang Zi Xiu Zhi, a member of the Stable Wu clan.

古文：祖茂，魏秦、华二州刺史。
现代文：他的祖父梁茂，是西魏秦州、华州刺史。
English: His grandfather, Liang Mao, was a historian of Qin and Huazhou in the Western Wei Dynasty.

古文：父显，周邢州刺史。
现代文：他的父亲梁显，是北周荆州刺史。
English: His father, Liang Xian, was a scholar of Northern Zhou and Jingzhou.

古文：彦光少岐嶷，有至性，其父每谓所亲曰： 此兒有风骨，当兴吾宗。 
现代文：彦光小时很聪慧，有很好的天赋。他的父亲常对亲近的人说： 这孩子有风骨，将会使我的家族兴盛起来。 
English: As a child, Hikaru was very bright and had a great talent. His father often said to those close to him, "This child has a strong character and will make my family prosper."

古文：七岁时，父遇笃疾，医云饵五石可愈。时求紫石英不得。彦光忧瘁不知所为，忽于园中见一物，彦光所不识，怪而持归，即紫石英也。
现代文：梁彦光七岁时，父亲染上重病，医生说吃五石散可以治好，当时到处都搞不到紫石英，彦光忧虑憔悴，不知该怎么办，偶然在园中看到一件东西，彦光不认识，感到很奇怪，就拿回了家，原来这就是紫石英。
English: When Liang Yanguang was seven years old, his father fell seriously ill. The doctor said that eating five stone powder could cure him. At that time, purple quartz could not be found everywhere. Yanguang was worried and did not know what to do. By chance, he saw a thing in the garden that he did not know and felt very strange. He took it back home. It turned out to be purple quartz.

古文：亲属咸异之，以为至孝所感。
现代文：亲戚朋友们都感到很惊异，认为这是上天被他的孝心所感动而赐予他的。
English: His relatives and friends were surprised and thought that it was given to him by heaven, moved by his filial piety.

古文：魏大统末，入太学，略涉经史，有规检，造次必以礼。
现代文：西魏大统末年，彦光到太学学习，略略涉猎经、史，循规蹈矩，自我约束，举止都有礼节。
English: At the end of the Western Wei Dynasty, Yan Guang went to Taiyue to study. He dabbled in the classics and history, followed the rules and regulations, exercised self-restraint, and behaved with etiquette.

古文：解褐秘书郎，时年十七。
现代文：初出仕当秘书郎时，年仅十七岁。
English: He was only seventeen years old when he first started working as a secretary.

古文：周受禅，迁舍人上士。
现代文：北周受魏禅让，任舍人上士。
English: Northern Zhou was ceded to Wei and became a staff sergeant.

古文：武帝时，累迁小驭下大夫。
现代文：武帝时，又升任小驭下大夫。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu, he was promoted to a junior doctor.

古文：母忧去职，毁瘁过礼。
现代文：因母亲丧事离职，因过于哀伤，而身心憔悴。
English: She left her job because of her mother's death. She was so sad that she was physically and mentally exhausted.

古文：未几，起令视事，帝见其毁甚，嗟叹久之，频蒙慰谕。
现代文：不久，又奉命到职。武帝见他哀伤过度，叹息好久，多次慰问并劝谕他。
English: Not long after, he was ordered to take up his duties again. Emperor Wu saw that his grief was excessive, he sighed for a long time, and he repeatedly consoled and advised him.

古文：后转小内史下大夫。
现代文：后转任小内史下大夫。
English: Later, he was transferred to the position of a junior doctor.

古文：建德中，为御正下大夫。
现代文：建德中，任御正下大夫。
English: In Jiande Middle School, he was appointed as a junior doctor.

古文：从帝平齐，以功授开府、阳城县公，邑千户。
现代文：跟随武帝平定齐国，因有功而封开府、阳城县公，食邑一千户。
English: He followed Emperor Wu to subdue Qi, and was awarded the title of the governor of Kaifu and Yangcheng County for his achievements, and a thousand households in the food village were created.

古文：宣帝即位，拜华州刺史，进封华阳郡公，增邑五百户，以阳城公转封一子。
现代文：周宣帝即位，授他为华州刺史，又晋封为华阳郡公，增加食邑五百户，把阳城县公的封号转封给他的一个儿子。
English: Emperor Zhou Xuan ascended to the throne, bestowed him with the title of Huazhou Shishi, and promoted him to the title of Huayang County Gong, increased the number of food villages by 500, and transferred the title of Yangcheng County Gong to one of his sons.

古文：寻进位上大将军，迁御正上大夫。
现代文：不久，升为上大将军，又任御正上大夫。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the rank of senior general, and was also appointed to the post of Imperial Chief Physician.

古文：俄拜柱国、青州刺史，属帝崩，不之官。
现代文：不久又拜为柱国、青州刺史。碰上宣帝驾崩，没有到任。
English: Soon after, he was made a pillar of the state, and the history of Qingzhou was written. When Emperor Xuan died, he did not take office.

古文：及高祖受禅，以为岐州刺史，兼领岐州宫监，增邑五百户，通前二千户。
现代文：隋高祖文皇帝即位，让他担任岐州刺史，兼岐州宫督，增加食邑五百户，连同以前的计两千户。
English: When Emperor Sui Gao Zuwen ascended the throne, he appointed him as the Qizhou chief historian and the governor of the Qizhou Imperial Palace, increasing the number of food villages by 500 households, along with the previous total of 2,000 households.

古文：四海之内，凡曰官人，慕高山而仰止，闻清风而自励。 未几，又赐钱五万。
现代文：在任后，很有政绩，粮食丰收，还出口到别的州郡。开皇二年，高祖驾临岐州，很欣赏他的才能，于是下诏书奖励。不久，又赐钱五万。
English: After taking office, he had a lot of political achievements, a bumper grain harvest, and also exported to other prefectures and counties. In the second year of the emperor's reign, Gaozu visited Qizhou, and was very appreciative of his talent, so he issued a decree to reward him. Soon, he also gave money of fifty thousand.

古文：后数岁，转相州刺史。
现代文：过了几年，转任相州刺史。
English: A few years later, he was transferred to the post of Sangju Sashimi.

古文：彦光前在岐州，其俗颇质，以静镇之，合境大化，奏课连最，为天下第一。
现代文：彦光前在岐州，那里民风纯朴，他以清静无为来镇守那里，全州大受感化，上交的赋税连年最多，为天下第一。
English: Yan Guang was in Qizhou, where the people's style is pure and simple, and he kept the town with tranquility and inaction. The whole state was greatly influenced, and the tax paid was the highest in consecutive years, ranking first in the world.

古文：及居相部，如岐州法。
现代文：到相州后，还按照在岐州的办法。
English: After arriving in Sangju, they followed the same procedure as in Qizhou.

古文：鄴都杂俗，人多变诈，为之作歌，称其不能理化。
现代文：但邺都人口杂居，民风不纯，人很狡诈，给彦光作歌，说他不能治理教化这个地方。
English: However, the population of Hando is mixed, the folk style is not pure, and the people are very cunning. He wrote a song for Hikoko, saying that he could not govern and enlighten this place.

古文：上闻而谴之，竟坐免。
现代文：高祖听说后责备彦光，还因此免了他的职。
English: After hearing the news, Gaozu reprimanded Hikimitsu and dismissed him from his post.

古文：岁余，拜赵州刺史，彦光言于上曰： 臣前待罪相州，百姓呼为戴帽饧。
现代文：一年多以后，任命他为赵州刺史，彦光对高祖说： 我以前在相州获罪，百姓说我是戴帽饣易。
English: More than a year later, he was appointed as Zhaozhou chief historian, and Yan Guang said to Gao Zu: I was convicted in Xiangzhou before, and the people said that I wore a cap.

古文：臣自分废黜，无复衣冠之望，不谓天恩复垂收采。
现代文：我理当罢职，没抱做官的希望，不想皇上施恩，又起用我。
English: I resigned as I should have. I had no hope of becoming an official, and I didn't want the Emperor to be kind and re-employ me.

古文：请复为相州，改弦易调，庶有以变其风俗，上答隆恩。 
现代文：请求让我重新做相州刺史，改变以前的作法，希望能改变那里的民风以报答陛下厚恩。 
English: The request is for me to make a new history of Sangju, change the previous practice, and hope to change the people's customs there to repay His Majesty's kindness.

古文：上从之，复为相州刺史。
现代文：高祖同意了，彦光又任相州刺史。
English: Gao Zu agreed, and Yan Guang was also appointed as the governor of Xiangzhou.

古文：豪猾者闻彦光自请而来，莫不嗤笑。
现代文：相州的豪强地痞听说彦光是自己请求来相州的，没有不嗤笑的。
English: There is no one who doesn't laugh when they hear that Hikimitsu asked to come to Sōshū.

古文：彦光下车，发摘奸隐，有若神明，于是狡猾之徒，莫不潜窜，合境大骇。
现代文：彦光一上任，就公布有些人的罪状，像有神灵指引一样。于是，豪强地痞全都偷偷地逃走了。相州全境大为震惊。
English: As soon as Hikko took office, he announced the charges against some people, as if guided by a spirit. As a result, all of them bravely and secretly fled. The whole area of Sangju was shocked.

古文：初，齐亡后，衣冠士人多迁关内，唯技巧、商贩及乐户之家移实州郭。由是人情险诐，妄起风谣，诉讼官人，万端千变。
现代文：当初，齐亡以后，有身份的人都迁入关内，只有玩杂耍的、小商贩和说唱艺人住在相州城廓，因此人情险恶，谣言四起，诉告官员，变化无常。
English: At first, after Qi's death, people with status moved into Guanzhong. Only jugglers, small traders and rap artists lived in the outskirts of the city of Xiangzhou. As a result, the human condition was sinister, rumors were everywhere, officials were sued, and it was fickle.

古文：彦光欲革其弊，乃用秩俸之物，招致山东大儒，每乡立学，非圣哲之书不得教授。
现代文：彦光想革除这些弊端，就用官俸，从肴殳山之东请来大学问家，每乡都设立学堂，非圣人先哲的书不得教授。
English: To get rid of these drawbacks, Hikimitsu used his government salary to invite scholars from the eastern part of Mt. Sakakibara to visit the university. Schools were set up in every township, and books by non-sages were not allowed to be taught.

古文：常以季月召集之，亲临策试。
现代文：常在一季的末月召集他们，亲自进行考试。
English: They are often called together at the end of the season to take the exam in person.

古文：有勤学异等、聪令有闻者，升堂设馔，其余并坐廊下。
现代文：有勤奋学习成绩优异的，聪明出众的，就升堂设宴招待，其余的都坐在廊下。
English: The diligent ones with excellent academic performance, the clever ones, go to the hall to host a banquet, and the rest sit in the hallway.

古文：有好诤讼、惰业无成者，坐之庭中，设以草具。
现代文：有喜欢诉讼、懒惰而学业无成的，就让他们坐在堂中，给以粗粝饭食。
English: If someone likes to litigate or is lazy and unable to complete their studies, they are made to sit in the hall and are given coarse rice.

古文：及大成，当举行宾贡之礼，又于郊外祖道，并以财物资之。
现代文：到学习有成，就举行贡士的礼仪，又在郊外饯行，并资助他们财物。
English: When they succeed in their studies, they hold a ceremony to reward the students, go on a pilgrimage to the suburbs, and provide them with financial support.

古文：于是人皆克励，风俗大改。
现代文：于是人人都刻苦自励，风气大为改观。
English: As a result, everyone worked hard to cheer themselves up, and the culture changed dramatically.

古文：有滏阳人焦通，性酗酒，事亲礼阙，为从弟所讼。
现代文：有一个滏阳人叫焦通，喜欢酗酒，不好好伺候双亲，被堂兄弟告到公堂。
English: There was a young man from Shenyang named Jiaotong, who liked to drink alcohol, was not good at serving his parents, and was taken to court by his cousins.

古文：彦光弗之罪，将至州学，令观于孔子庙。
现代文：彦光没有问罪，而把他带到州学，让他到孔子庙去观看。
English: Instead of charging him with a crime, they took him to the State University of China and let him go to the Confucius Temple to watch.

古文：于时庙中有韩伯瑜，母杖不痛，哀母力弱，对母悲泣之像，通遂感悟，既悲且愧，若无自容。彦光训谕而遣之。
现代文：这时庙里画像中画着有个叫韩伯瑜的，因母亲打他不痛，为母亲没有力气而悲伤，对着母亲悲泣的情形。于是焦通感悟，既悲伤又惭愧，无地自容，彦光教训了一通就打发他走了。
English: At this time, there was a picture in the temple depicting a young man named Han Bo-yu, crying because his mother did not hit him, sad because his mother did not have the strength, and crying for his mother. So Jiaotong was deeply moved, both sad and ashamed, and had no self-respect, and sent him away as soon as he learned the lesson.

古文：后改过励行，卒为善士。
现代文：后来焦通改正了错误，行为规矩，最终成为善士。
English: Later, Jiaotong corrected his mistakes, behaved properly, and eventually became a good man.

古文：以德化人，皆此类也。
现代文：彦光用道德教化人民，都像这样。
English: Hikimitsu's moral education of the people was all like this.

古文：吏人感悦，略无诤讼。
现代文：官员和百姓都高兴，再也没有吵架告状的了。
English: Officials and citizens are happy, there are no more quarrels and complaints.

古文：后数岁，卒官，时年六十。
现代文：过了几年，彦光死在任上，享年六十岁。
English: A few years later, Hikaru died in office at the age of sixty.

古文：赠冀、定、青、瀛四州刺史，谥曰襄。
现代文：高祖追赠他为冀州、定州、青州、瀛州四州刺史，谥号 襄 。
English: Gao Zu posthumously gave him the four states of Jizhou, Dingzhou, Qingzhou and Zhangzhou, and the nickname "Xiang."

古文：子文谦嗣。
现代文：彦光的儿子文谦继承了爵禄。
English: Yan Guang's son Wen Qian inherited the peerage.

