古文：卢斌，开封人。
现代文：卢斌，开封人。
English: Lu Bin, the person who opened the envelope.

古文：以笔札事晋邸，太宗即位，补殿直。
现代文：在晋王官邸任书记官，太宗即位，补任殿直。
English: He served as a registrar at the official residence of King Jin, when Emperor Taizong ascended the throne, and was later appointed as a courtier.

古文：雍熙中，领兵屯霸州。
现代文：雍熙年间，率兵驻扎霸州。
English: During the reign of Yongxi, he stationed troops in Bazhou.

古文：会大举北伐，令以五千骑随曹彬抵祁沟。
现代文：恰好宋朝率大军北伐，朝廷令卢斌带领五千骑兵随曹彬抵达祁沟。
English: Just as the Song Dynasty was leading a large army in the Northern Expedition, the imperial court ordered Lu Bin to lead five thousand cavalrymen to follow Cao Bin to Shugu.

古文：时契丹据河，王师乏水，斌请以千弩斫砦，契丹遁去，遂移军夹河。
现代文：这时契丹据河而守，宋军缺水，卢斌请求用千名弓箭手砍断敌人的防守栅栏，契丹军队逃走，于是调动军队包围守河敌军。
English: At this time, the Khitan army was defending the river, and the Song army was short of water. Lu Bin requested that a thousand archers be used to cut through the enemy's defensive fence. The Khitan army fled, so the army was mobilized to surround the enemy army guarding the river.

古文：既克涿州，令斌以万人戍守，会食尽，大兵将还，斌因恳言： 涿州深在北境，外无援兵，内无资粮，丁籍残失，守之无利。
现代文：攻占涿州，朝廷命令卢斌率万人戍守，遇到粮食吃完，大军将返回，卢斌因而恳切进言： 涿州远在北方边境，没有援兵，也无军粮资助，人丁散失，坚守没有好处。
English: To capture Bozhou, the imperial court ordered Lu Bin to lead tens of thousands of people to stay behind. When the food ran out, the army would return, so Lu Bin earnestly said: Bozhou is far away from the northern border, there is no reinforcement, there is no military food support, people are scattered, and there is no benefit in holding on.

古文：今若还师，必须结阵而去，以一阵之役，比于固守，其利百矣。 复虑辽人乘便剽袭，宜为之备。
现代文：如今如果退兵，必须与敌军交战后退兵，一次战斗与长久坚守相比，有百倍之利。 又担心辽人趁机骚扰，也应当加以防备。
English: Nowadays, if you leave the army, you must leave the army after engaging the enemy army, and one battle is a hundred times more beneficial than holding out for a long time, and you should also be prepared for the Liao people to harass you.

古文：彬以为然，遂令斌拥城中老幼，并狼山南还易州。
现代文：曹彬认为这样好，就命令卢斌带着城中男女老少，抛弃狼山南回到易州。
English: Cao Bin thought this was a good idea, so he ordered Lu Bin to take the men, women and children in the city, abandon Wolf Mountain South and return to Yizhou.

古文：彬之旋也，无复行伍，果为契丹所乘。诸将皆以失律被谴，斌亦下枢密院问状，太宗闻其尝建议弃涿州，遂释不问。以为霸州破虏军缘边巡检。
现代文：卢斌迅速撤退，不再有军队驻守，果然被契丹军乘虚而入，其他大将都以违背军纪而被朝廷发遣，卢斌也被传到枢密院审问情况，太宗听到卢斌曾建议放弃涿州，就不再追究，让卢斌担任霸州破虏军缘边巡检。
English: Lu Bin quickly retreated, there were no longer any troops stationed there, and he was taken advantage of by the Khitan army. Other generals were dispatched by the court for violating military discipline. Lu Bin was also summoned to the Privy Council to interrogate the situation. When Taizong heard that Lu Bin had suggested abandoning Zhangzhou, he would no longer pursue the matter, and let Lu Bin serve as a border patrol to break the military edge of Zhangzhou.

古文：端拱中，又为永举军、华州巡检。
现代文：端拱年间，又任永兴军、华州巡检。
English: During the years of the end of the arch, he also served as the Yongxing Army and the Huazhou Inspection.

古文：时大贼侯和尚、刘渥劫兴平、栎阳，杀捕贼官二人。
现代文：这时大强盗侯和尚、刘渥强取兴平、栎阳，杀死捕贼官二人。
English: At this time, the great robber Hou Monk and Liu Wou forcibly took Xingping and Shenyang, and killed two thief-catching officers.

古文：斌率兵掩袭，且追且斗，薄南山，渡渭水，抵凤翔，复至耀州，擒锥并尽。
现代文：卢斌率兵袭击，边追边战，抵达南山，渡过渭水，到达凤翔，又到耀州，将盗贼全部擒获斩首。
English: Lu Bin and his soldiers attacked, chased and fought, arrived at Nanshan, crossed Surabaya, reached Fengxiang, and went to Yaozhou, where they captured all the thieves and beheaded them.

古文：以劳，改供奉官。
现代文：由于这次功劳，卢斌改任供奉官。
English: As a result of this achievement, Lu Bin was reappointed as a courtier.

古文：召还，面加奖慰，授阁门祗候，又赐白金、缗钱、衣带。
现代文：奉召回京，太宗亲自嘉奖慰问，授门祗候，又赐予银子、缗钱、衣带。
English: When he was called back to Beijing, Emperor Taizong personally gave him awards and condolences, bestowed him with an honorary title, and gave him silver, money, and a belt.

古文：寻为梓、遂十二州都巡检使，太宗谕之曰： 川陕人情易摇，设有寇攘，虽他境亦当袭逐，仍许便宜从事，不须中覆。 淳化二年，贼任诱等寇昌、合州。
现代文：不久任梓州、遂州等十二州都巡检使，太宗告诫卢斌说 ：川峡民情人心容易动摇，如果有敌人侵扰，即使在其他州郡也应当追逐袭击，允许见机行事，不需要回覆。 淳化二年敌贼任诱等侵扰昌州、合州。
English: Soon he was appointed as the inspector general of twelve states, including Zizhou and Suizhou. Taizong admonished Lu Bin, saying, "The hearts of the people of Sichuan can easily be swayed. If there is an enemy intrusion, even in other states and counties, they should pursue the attack. They are allowed to act at their own discretion and do not need to reply. In the second year of Chunhua, the enemy thieves were allowed to invade Changzhou and Hezhou.

古文：斌率兵顿昌州南牛斗山，侦知贼在龙水镇，值大雨，斌驰马四十里，骑从数十人，遂斩诱等百余级，贼众悉平。
现代文：卢斌率军驻扎在昌州以南的牛斗山，派人侦察得知敌贼在龙水镇，正遇大雨，卢斌骑马奔走四十里，带领随从数十人，于是将任诱等百余人全部斩首，其他盗贼全部被平定。
English: Lu Bin led the army stationed in Niu Dou Mountain, south of Changzhou. He sent someone to investigate and learned that the enemy thieves were in Longshui Town, which was experiencing heavy rain. Lu Bin rode for forty miles, leading dozens of followers. He then beheaded more than a hundred people, including Ren Yu, and all the other thieves were subdued.

古文：三年，富顺监蛮掠荣州，斌晨夜倍道以赴，得州兵千人，署随军粮料以张其势。
现代文：第三年，富顺监蛮掠夺荣州，卢斌日夜兼程开赴荣州，得州兵千人，安置随军粮草来扩张声势。
English: In the third year, Fushun Guan brutally plundered Rongzhou, and Lu Bin traveled to Rongzhou day and night, and placed a thousand soldiers from Dezhou with the grain and grass of the army to expand the momentum.

古文：蛮乃遁，追至地头镇东南八十里，树栅，招其酋甫羌一阿奴纲，谕以朝旨，歃血刻石为盟而遣之。
现代文：富顺监蛮于是逃走，卢斌率领州兵追到地头镇东南八十里，设置栅栏，召见其首领甫羌一阿奴纲，向他说明朝廷的旨意，双方杀牲饮血结为盟友并刻下石碑，然后卢斌将其首领遣送回去。
English: The Fushun guards then fled, and Lu Bin led the National Guard to chase them eighty miles southeast of the town of Jitou, set up a fence, summoned their leader, Fu Rongyi Anu Gang, and explained to him the will of the imperial court. The two sides killed and drank blood to become allies and carved a stone monument, and then Lu Bin sent his leader back.

古文：俄而荣、戎、资州、富顺监贼十五队钞乡邑，斌擒三百人，部送阙下，余悉临敌斩戮。
现代文：不久荣、戎、资州、富顺监盗贼一千五百人掠取乡邑，卢斌捉拿三百人，将其中一部分送到朝廷，其余的全部斩首示众。
English: Soon after, Rong, Rong, Zhizhou, and Fushun overseers captured 1,500 thieves who plundered villages and towns. Lu Bin captured 300 people, sent a part of them to the imperial court, and beheaded the rest.

古文：四年，贼王尽复起荣、资，斌击灭之，尽缚以献。
现代文：第四年，盗贼王尽又在荣州、资州侵扰，卢斌率军将其消灭，全部捆绑送到朝廷。
English: In the fourth year, the thief Wangyin invaded Rongzhou and Zhizhou again, and Lu Bin led the army to eliminate him, and all of them were bundled to the imperial court.

古文：迁内殿崇班。是冬，李顺为乱，斌即率兵六百抵成都，斗战连月，杀数万人。
现代文：升任内殿崇班，这年冬天，李顺作乱，卢斌立即率领六百军队抵达成都，经过数月战斗，消灭盗贼数万人。
English: Promoted to the Inner Court of the Supreme Court, this winter, Li Shun started a riot, and Lu Bin immediately led six hundred troops to the capital, and after several months of fighting, eliminated tens of thousands of thieves.

古文：明年，成都不守，斌还梓州，集十州兵赴援，知州张雍委以监护之任。
现代文：第二年，成都坚守不住，卢斌回到梓州，集中十州兵力前去支援成都，知州张雍被朝廷委以监护之职。
English: In the second year, Chengdu could not hold out, and Lu Bin returned to Zizhou and concentrated the troops of ten states to support Chengdu. Zhang Yong from Zhizhou was appointed as a guardian by the Imperial Court Committee.

古文：会江水泛溢，毁子城。
现代文：恰遇江水泛滥，淹没了成都周围其他城市。
English: Other cities around Chengdu were flooded when the river overflowed.

古文：斌劝谕州民，翌日，畚锸大集，自城西大濠中掘堑深丈，决西河水，注之以环城。
现代文：卢斌劝告州中百姓，全都拿着箕畚铁锹，从城西的护城河中挖掘丈余深的壕沟，引入西河水，流入环绕城墙的壕沟。
English: Lu Bin advised the people of Zhouzhong to dig a trench as deep as possible from the moat west of the city, all with pickaxes, and introduce the water of the West River into the trench surrounding the city wall.

古文：二月，贼渠相里贵众二十一万傅城下，城中兵裁三千。
现代文：二月，贼首相里贵部众二十一万人兵临城下，而成都城中兵力才三千人。
English: In February, two hundred and ten thousand soldiers of the Guibu army of the Prime Minister of Thieves came to the city, while the number of soldiers in Chengdu was only three thousand.

古文：斌曰： 军法倍兵不战，然狂丑乌合，非训练之师，以吾仗天子威灵，必可歼荡。 即感厉士伍，负土塞南北门，为固守之计。
现代文：卢斌说 ：按照军法不与超过自己军队一倍的军队交战，但是乌合草莽之众，不是训练有素军队，我们依仗天子的威灵，一定能够歼灭敌军。 于是用言辞来感染激励士兵，运来土石堵塞南门和北门，作坚固防守的打算。
English: Lu Bin said, "According to the military law, we should not fight with an army that is more than twice the size of our own army, but the reckless crowd is not a well-trained army, and we must rely on the will of the Son of God to be able to annihilate the enemy army." So he used words to infect and motivate soldiers, and brought earth and stone to block the south gate and the north gate, intending to make a solid defense.

古文：又突出与贼战，击刺三十余合，贼稍却。
现代文：又出城与盗贼交战，交战三十余回合，敌人逐渐退却。
English: He also went out of the city to fight with the thieves, fighting more than 30 rounds, and the enemy gradually retreated.

古文：俄复大设机石、连弩、冲车、云梯，四面鼓噪乘城，矢石乱下，斌与州将随机设备。
现代文：不久敌贼又运用机石、连弩、冲车、云梯，从四面击鼓叫喊着登城，弓箭机石乱下，卢斌与州将根据敌军情况安置防务。
English: Soon, the enemy bandits also used the machine stone, the chain hoist, the rushing vehicle, and the ladder to beat the drums and shout from all sides to enter the city. The bow and arrow machine stone was in disorder, and Lu Bin and the state would arrange the defense according to the enemy's situation.

古文：长围八十日，会王继恩令石知颙率兵来援，斌出东门迎劳王师，贼不战而溃。
现代文：被围困八十天，遇到王继恩令王知率军前来救援，卢斌走出城东门迎接慰劳朝廷大军，敌人没有经过战斗就溃逃了。
English: After being besieged for eighty days, Wang Jian ordered Wang Zhi and his army to come to the rescue. Lu Bin went out of the east gate of the city to meet the imperial army. The enemy fled without a fight.

古文：斌乘胜追斩及纳降二万余。
现代文：卢斌乘机追杀和接纳降兵二万多人。
English: Lu Bin took the opportunity to pursue and kill more than 20,000 soldiers.

古文：五月，贼数万围阆州，斌领千兵赴之，斩首五千，围遂解。
现代文：五月，敌人数万人围攻阆州，卢斌率兵千余人奔赴阆州，将敌人斩首五千，解除了阆州之围。
English: In May, tens of thousands of enemies besieged Ganzhou. Lu Bin and more than a thousand soldiers rushed to Ganzhou, beheaded five thousand enemies, and lifted the siege of Ganzhou.

古文：又至蓬州老雅山，贼众三千为阵拒斌，斌击败之，至城下，贼复大集，斩三千级。
现代文：又到蓬州老亚鸟山，敌兵三千人摆开阵势抗拒卢斌，卢斌将其打败，到阆州城下，敌贼又大肆聚集，被卢斌斩首三千。
English: He also went to Pengzhou Laoya Bird Mountain, where three thousand enemy soldiers took up positions to resist Lu Bin, and Lu Bin defeated them. At the foot of Zhangzhou Castle, the enemy bandits gathered again, and three thousand were beheaded by Lu Bin.

古文：蓬州平，斌传诏安抚蓬、阆、渠、达四州，擢授西京作坊使，领成州刺史。
现代文：蓬州平定后，卢斌传诏安抚蓬州、阆州、渠州、达州四州，提升为西京作坊使，领成州刺史。
English: After the pacification of Pengzhou, Lu Bin issued an edict to pacify the four provinces of Pengzhou, Zhangzhou, Quzhou and Dazhou, and was promoted to the West Beijing workshop envoy, leading the history of Chengdu.

古文：斌在川峡六年，以孤军御寇，累立战功，表求入奏。
现代文：卢斌在川峡六年，率领孤军抵御敌寇，多次建立战功。
English: Lu Bin spent six years in Sichuan Gorge, leading a lone army to resist enemy raiders, and repeatedly established his war exploits.

古文：太宗遣使谕之曰： 俟妖孽尽殄，当召汝。 既而贼党集梓、绵、汉三州境上，斌往平之。
现代文：上表请求回京奏事，太宗派遣使者对他说 ：等待妖孽全部消灭后，一定召回你。 不久敌贼党羽聚集在梓州、繇州、汉州三州境内，卢斌前往平定敌贼。
English: At the request of the above table to report back to Beijing, Emperor Taizong sent an envoy to him: "Wait for the destruction of all evil spirits, and you will be recalled." Soon, the enemy party gathered in the three states of Zizhou, Zhangzhou and Hanzhou, and Lu Bin went to pacify the enemy.

古文：未几，代还，太宗亲加劳问。
现代文：不久，回京，太宗亲自问候慰劳。
English: Soon after returning to Kyoto, Emperor Taizong sent his personal greetings of comfort and consolation.

古文：拜东上阁门使、检校左仆射，加食邑三百户，赐白金千两、袍笏、金带。
现代文：授任东上门使、检校左仆射，又赐予食邑三百户，赐予白金千两、袍笏、金带。
English: He was awarded the title of Dongshangmenshi, school inspection Zuofusa, and 300 households were given food, 1,000 taels of platinum, robes, and gold belts.

古文：上言： 葭萌路出师讨贼，可直入利州。
现代文：上奏说： 从葭萌中出军讨伐叛贼，可以直接进入利州。
English: The prelude said: If you go out to fight against the traitors from Ganmeng, you can directly enter Lizhou.

古文：若寇焚栈道，剑门之险不足固也，请置砦栅。 从之。
现代文：如果敌人焚烧栈道，剑门之险就不坚固了，请求设置防守栅栏。 
English: If the enemy burns the gangway, the danger of the sword gate will not be solid, and it is requested to set up a defensive fence.

古文：寻命为银、夏兵马钤辖，遣与李继隆等五路出师讨李继迁。
现代文：太宗听从了他的建议。不久任命为银、夏兵马钤辖，卢斌被朝廷派遣与李继隆等五路率军讨伐李继迁。
English: Emperor Taizong listened to his suggestion. Soon he was appointed as the governor of Yin and Xia Terracotta Warriors and Horses, and Lu Bin was dispatched by the imperial court to lead a five-way army with Li Jilong to fight against Li Jiji.

古文：斌求对，恳言曰： 羌夷之族，马骄兵悍，往来无定，败则走他境，疾战沙漠，非天兵所利。
现代文：卢斌请求入对，诚恳地说： 羌夷之族，马匹高大健壮兵士勇猛，来往没有定处，被打败后就逃到其他地方，在沙漠中与他们交战，对宋军不利。
English: Lu Bin pleaded for a truce and said sincerely, "The Qiang people, with their tall and robust horses and brave soldiers, have no fixed place to come and go. When they were defeated, they fled to other places and fought with them in the desert, which was unfavorable to the Song army.

古文：不若坚保灵州，于内地多积刍粮，以师援送。
现代文：不如坚守灵州，在内地大量聚储粮食，派军队护送。
English: It would be better to hold on to Lingshou, accumulate a large amount of grain in the inland, and send an army escort.

古文：苟其至也，会兵首尾击之，庶几无枉费，而不失固圉之策矣。 时业已出师，不从其议。
现代文：如果敌人前来，集中兵力前后夹击，这样或许不会白白浪费兵力钱财，也不丧失为坚固防阻的对策。 这时宋军已经出发，卢斌的建议未被采纳。
English: If the enemy comes forward and concentrates its forces to attack back and forth, this may not be a waste of troops and money, nor will it lose the countermeasures for solid obstruction.At this time, the Song Army has set off, and Lu Bin's suggestion has not been adopted.

古文：改授灵环路钤辖，领兵二万为前锋，令于乌、白池与诸军会。
现代文：改任灵环路钤辖，率兵二万人作为前锋，在乌、白池与其他各路军队会合。
English: He was reassigned to Linghuan Road, and led 20,000 soldiers as a forward, meeting with other armies in Wuxi and Baike.

古文：斌谓李继隆曰： 灵州抵乌、白池，月余方至。
现代文：卢斌对李继隆说 ：从灵州到乌、白池，差不多一个月左右才能到。
English: Lu Bin said to Li Jilong: It takes about a month to get from Lingzhou to Wuxi and Baike.

古文：若自环州橐驼路，裁十日程。 即不俟诏而往，与诸将失期，不见贼而还。
现代文：如果从环州橐驼路直接到乌、白池，才十天的路程。 于是没等待朝廷诏令就前往，耽误了同其他将领会合的日期，没有发现敌贼返回原地。
English: It would take only ten days to travel directly from Huanzhou Qiaolang Road to Wuxi and Baike, so he did not wait for the imperial edict to go, delayed the date of meeting with other generals, and did not find the enemy to return to the original place.

古文：俄徙屯宁州，以疾召归，勾当军头引见司。
现代文：不久调任宁州驻守，由于疾病被召回京，在此期间任为勾当军头引见司。
English: He was soon transferred to the garrison of Ningzhou, and was recalled to Beijing due to illness. During this time, he was appointed as the military leader to introduce the division.

古文：咸平初，卒，年五十。子文质殿中丞。
现代文：咸平初年，去世，终年五十岁，他的儿子卢文质任殿中丞。
English: In the first year of Xianping, he died at the age of fifty, and his son, Lu Wenzhong, was appointed to the post of junior secretary of the palace.

