古文：盛庸平安何福顾成
现代文：盛庸，不知何地人。
English: I don't know where it came from.

古文：盛庸，不知何许人。洪武中，累官至都指挥。
现代文：洪武年间，累升至都指挥。
English: During the Hongwu era, he rose to the position of commander of the capital.

古文：建文初，以参将从耿炳文伐燕。
现代文：建文初年，以参将的身份跟随耿炳文伐燕。
English: In the first year of Jianwen, he followed Geng Bingwen in felling swans as a general.

古文：李景隆代炳文，遂隶景隆麾下。
现代文：李景隆代替耿炳文后，他又隶属李景隆。
English: After Li Jinglong replaced Geng Bingwen, he was also subordinated to Li Jinglong.

古文：二年四月，景隆败于白沟河，走济南。
现代文：二年四月，李景隆败于白沟河，逃往济南。
English: In April of the following year, Li Jing was soundly defeated at Baigouhe and fled to Jinan.

古文：燕师随至，景隆复南走。
现代文：燕兵跟随而至，李景隆又南逃。
English: Yan Bing followed and Li Jinglong fled south again.

古文：庸与参政铁铉悉力固守，燕师攻围三月不克。
现代文：盛庸与参政铁铉全力固守，燕兵围攻济南三月不下。
English: Shengyong and Jiancheng held fast with all their strength, and the Yan soldiers besieged Jinan in March.

古文：庸、铉乘夜出兵掩击，燕众大败，解围去。乘胜复德州。
现代文：盛庸、铁铉乘夜出兵袭击，燕兵大败，解围而去，盛庸等乘胜收复德州。
English: Shengyong and Spade used the night to attack, Yan soldiers were defeated and left, Shengyong and others took advantage of the victory to recover Texas.

古文：九月，论功封历城侯，禄千石。
现代文：九月论功时，盛庸被封为历城侯，食禄一千石。
English: In September, when he was awarded for his meritorious service, Shengyong was made a prefect of Licheng, with a stipend of 1,000 koku.

古文：寻命为平燕将军，充总兵官。
现代文：盛庸随即被命为平燕将军，任总兵官。
English: Shengyong was immediately appointed as the general of Pingyan, and served as the chief military officer.

古文：陈晖、平安为左右副总兵，马溥、徐真为左右参将，进铉兵部尚书参赞军务。
现代文：陈晖、平安为左右副总兵，马溥、徐真为左右参将，铁铉进升为兵部尚书参赞军务。
English: Chen Qi and Ping An are the left and right vice-commanding officers, Ma Qi and Xu Zhen are the left and right vice-commanding officers, and Tie Xi Jin Rong is promoted to the military affairs counselor of the military department.

古文：时吴杰、平安守定州，庸驻德州，徐凯屯沧州，为犄角。
现代文：当时吴杰、平安防守定州，盛庸驻扎德州，徐凯屯于沧州，互为掎角。
English: At that time, Wu Jie and Ping An were defending Dingzhou, Sheng Yong was stationed in Dezhou, and Xu Keitun was in Cangzhou.

古文：是冬，燕兵袭沧州，破，擒凯。掠其辎重，进薄济宁。
现代文：这年冬天，燕兵袭击沧州，破擒徐凯，掠其辎重，进逼济宁。
English: This winter, Yan's soldiers attacked Cangzhou, broke Xu Kai's yoke, plundered his yoke, and forced Jining.

古文：庸引兵屯东昌以邀之，背城而阵。
现代文：盛庸率军驻扎东昌进行拦击，背城列阵。
English: Sheng Yong led the army stationed in Dongchang to intercept, leaving the city behind.

古文：燕王帅兵直前薄庸军左翼，不动。
现代文：燕王率军直逼盛庸军的左翼，其军不动。
English: Yan Wang led the army straight to the left wing of Sheng Yong's army, and his army did not move.

古文：复冲中坚，庸开阵纵王入，围之数重。
现代文：又冲其中坚，盛庸张开队列放进燕王，再以兵包围数重。
English: He also rushed to the center of it, and Sheng Yong opened the queue and put in Yan Wang, and then surrounded it with soldiers.

古文：燕将朱能帅番骑来救，王乘间突围出。
现代文：燕将朱能率番骑来救，燕王乘机突围而出。
English: Yan will ride to the rescue of Zhu Nengpi, and Yan Wang will take the opportunity to break out of the encirclement.

古文：而燕军为火器所伤甚众，大将张玉死于阵。
现代文：但许多燕军被火器所伤，大将军张玉死于阵中。
English: However, many of Yan's troops were wounded by firearms, and General Zhang Yu died in the battle.

古文：王独以百骑殿，退至馆陶。
现代文：只有燕王以百名骑兵殿后，退至馆陶。
English: Only Yan Wang, with a hundred cavalrymen, retreated to the pavilion.

古文：庸檄吴杰、平安自真定遮燕归路。
现代文：盛庸传令命吴杰、平安从真定拦截燕军归路。
English: Sheng Yong ordered Wu Jie and Ping An to intercept Yan Jun's retreat from Zhending.

古文：明年正月，杰、平安战深州不利，燕师始得归。
现代文：第二年正月，吴杰、平安在深州之战失利，燕军才得以返回。
English: In the first month of the second year, Wu Jie and Ping An were defeated in the Battle of Shenzhou, and Yan's army was able to return.

古文：是役也，燕精锐丧失几尽，庸军声大振，帝为享庙告捷。
现代文：在这次战役中，燕军精锐几乎丧失殆尽，盛庸军声威大振，皇上为此祭庙告捷。
English: In this battle, the elite of the Yan army was almost completely lost, and the Sheng Yong army was very powerful, and the emperor was successful in this temple.

古文：三月，燕兵复南出保定。
现代文：三月，燕兵又南出保定。
English: In March, Yanbing went south to Baoding again.

古文：庸营夹河。
现代文：盛庸军扎营夹河。
English: Shengyong's army encamped across the river.

古文：王将轻骑来觇，掠阵而过。
现代文：燕王率轻骑来探，掠阵而过。
English: The king of swallows rode lightly to investigate and passed by.

古文：庸遣千骑追之，为燕兵射却。
现代文：盛庸派遣千名骑兵追击，被燕兵射箭击退。
English: Shengyong dispatched a thousand cavalry to pursue, but was repulsed by the Yan soldiers with archery.

古文：及战，庸军列盾以进。
现代文：交战后，盛庸军持盾而进。
English: After the battle, Sheng Yong's army marched forward holding shields.

古文：王令步卒先攻，骑兵乘间驰入。
现代文：燕王命步兵先攻，骑兵则乘机迅速推进。
English: Yan Wang Sheng's infantry attacked first, while the cavalry took the opportunity to advance rapidly.

古文：庸麾军力战，斩其将谭渊。
现代文：盛庸率军力战，斩其大将谭渊。
English: Sheng Yong led the military war and killed his general Tan Yuan.

古文：而朱能、张武等帅众殊死斗。王以劲骑贯阵与能合。庸部骁将庄得、皂旗张等俱战死。
现代文：而朱能、张武等也率部殊死战斗，燕王以劲骑穿越阵地与朱能会合，盛庸的部将庄得、皂旗张等都战死。
English: However, Zhu Neng, Zhang Wu, and others also led their troops into a desperate battle. Yan Wang rode across the battlefield to join Zhu Neng. The wealthy general Zhuang De and Zhang Soqi all died in the battle.

古文：是日，燕军几败。
现代文：这一天，燕军几乎失败。
English: On this day, Yan's army almost failed.

古文：明日复战，燕军东北，庸军西南，自辰至未，互胜负。
现代文：第二天再战，燕军在东北，盛庸军在西南，从早晨至下午，双方互有胜负。
English: The next day they fought again, with Yan's army in the northeast and Shengyong's army in the southwest. From morning to afternoon, both sides had victories and defeats.

古文：两军皆疲，将士各坐息。
现代文：两军都已疲惫，将士各自坐下休息。
English: Both armies were exhausted, and the soldiers sat down to rest.

古文：复起战，忽东北风大起，飞尘蔽天。
现代文：又开始交战，忽然东北风大起，飞尘遮蔽天空。
English: They began to fight again, and suddenly a strong northeaster blew up, covering the sky with flying dust.

古文：燕兵乘风大呼，左右横击。
现代文：燕兵乘风大喊，左右横击。
English: The Yan soldiers rode the wind and shouted, striking from side to side.

古文：庸大败走还德州，自是气沮。
现代文：盛庸大败，逃回德州，从此气沮。
English: He lost big, fled back to Texas, and has been depressed ever since.

古文：已而燕将李远焚粮艘于沛县，庸军遂乏饷。
现代文：不久燕将李远在沛县焚毁运粮船只，盛庸军于是缺乏粮饷。
English: Soon after, Yan sent Li Yuan to burn grain ships in Pei County, and Shengyong's army was short of grain.

古文：明年，灵璧战败，平安等被执。
现代文：第二年，灵璧战败，平安等被捉。
English: In the second year, Ling Bi was defeated and Ping An was captured.

古文：庸独引军而南，列战舰淮南岸。
现代文：盛庸独自率军向南，在淮水南岸排列战舰。
English: Shengyong led the army to the south on his own and lined up the warships on the south bank of Huai Shui.

古文：燕将邱福等潜济，出庸后。
现代文：燕将丘福等偷偷渡过淮河，出现在盛庸军之后。
English: Yan Shouqufu and others secretly crossed the Huai River and appeared after the Shengyong Army.

古文：庸不能支，退为守江计。
现代文：盛庸军力不能支，只得退守长江。
English: Shengyong's military strength could not be sustained, and he had to retreat to the Yangtze River.

古文：燕兵渡淮，由盱眙陷扬州。
现代文：燕兵渡过淮水，由盱眙攻陷扬州。
English: Yan soldiers crossed Huai Shui and invaded Yangzhou from Shantou.

古文：庸御战于六合及浦子口，皆失利，都督陈瑄帅舟师降燕，燕兵遂渡江。
现代文：盛庸在六合及浦子口率军抵御，都失利。都督陈蠧率水师投降燕军，燕兵乘势渡江。
English: Shengyong led the army to resist in Liuhe and Puzigou, but both were defeated. Governor Chen Xi led the sailors to surrender to the Yan army, and the Yan soldiers took advantage of the situation to cross the river.

古文：庸仓卒聚海艘出高资港迎战，复败，军益溃散。
现代文：盛庸仓促聚集海船出高资港迎战，又败，军队更加溃散。
English: Shengyong hastily gathered seagoing ships from the high-capital port to meet the battle, but was defeated again, and the army was even more scattered.

古文：成祖入京师，庸以余众降，即命守淮安。
现代文：成祖进入京城，盛庸率余部投降，随即奉命驻守淮安。
English: Cheng Zu entered the capital, Sheng Yong led the rest to surrender, and was then ordered to stay in Huai'an.

古文：寻赐敕曰： 比以山东未定，命卿镇守淮安。
现代文：不久成祖赐诏说 ：以前山东未定，所以才命你镇守淮安。
English: Soon after, Cheng Zu issued an edict saying, "Before, Shandong was undecided, so I ordered you to guard Huai'an."

古文：今铁铉就获，诸郡悉平。
现代文：现在铁铉被俘，诸郡全部平定。
English: Now the Anvil has been captured and all the counties have been pacified.

古文：朕念山东久困兵革，惫于转输。
现代文：朕念山东久为兵乱所困，疲于转输之劳。
English: I miss Shandong, which has long been plagued by military turmoil. I am tired of the toil of transporting goods.

古文：卿宜辑兵养民，以称朕意。 
现代文：你应当抚兵养民，以称朕意。 
English: You should raise an army and support the people, so as to express our will.

古文：永乐元年，致仕。
现代文：永乐元年，盛庸辞去官职。
English: In the first year of Yongle, Sheng Yong resigned from his post.

古文：无何，千户王钦讦庸罪状，立进钦指挥同知。
现代文：不久，千户王钦揭发盛庸的罪状，朝廷立即进升王钦为指挥同知。
English: Soon, Wang Qin of Qianhu exposed the crime of extravagance, and the imperial court immediately promoted Wang Qin to the position of comrade-in-arms.

古文：于是都御史陈瑛劾庸怨望有异图。
现代文：于是都御使陈瑛弹劾盛庸心存怨恨，图谋不轨。
English: As a result, they all made Chen Ying impeach Sheng Yong, harboring resentment and plotting.

古文：庸自杀。
现代文：盛庸因而自杀。
English: Sheng Yong committed suicide as a result.

古文：平安，滁人，小字保儿。
现代文：平安，滁阳人，小字保儿。
English: Ping'an, Xinyang people, small-character childcare.

古文：父定，从太祖起兵，官济宁卫指挥佥事。
现代文：父亲平定，跟随太祖起兵，任济宁卫指挥佥事。
English: His father pacified the situation, followed his great-grandfather to raise an army, and appointed Jining Wei as commander.

古文：从常遇春下元都，战没。
现代文：随常遇春攻下元都，战死。
English: As often happens, the Yuan capital was attacked in the spring, and he died in battle.

古文：安初为太祖养子，骁勇善战，力举数百斤。
现代文：平安初为太祖的养子，骁勇善战，力大能举数百斤。
English: He was the adopted son of Taizu at the beginning of the Heian period. He was brave and good at fighting, and could lift hundreds of pounds.

古文：袭父职，迁密云指挥使，进右军都督佥事。
现代文：他承袭父职，迁升密云指挥使，又进升右军都督佥事。
English: He inherited his father's position, was promoted to commander of Miyun, and was promoted to right-wing military governor of Anji.

古文：建文元年，伐燕，安以列将从征。
现代文：建文元年伐燕，平安以列将身份随军出征。
English: In the first year of Jianwen, Heian went to war with the army as a general.

古文：及李景隆代将，用安为先锋。
现代文：李景隆代为统军后，命平安为先锋。
English: After Li Jinglong became the leader of the unified army, Pingan became the vanguard.

古文：燕王将渡白沟河，安伏万骑河侧邀之。
现代文：燕王将渡白沟河，平安在河边埋伏万名骑兵准备拦截。
English: Yan Wang will cross the Baigou River, safely ambushing 10,000 cavalry on the riverbank ready to intercept.

古文：燕王曰： 平安，竖子耳。往岁从出塞，识我用兵，今当先破之。 
现代文：燕王说道 ：平安这小子，往年随我出塞，知道我怎么用兵，现在应当先打败他。 
English: Yan Wang said, "Peace be upon this boy. In the past, he followed me out of the camp, and he knows how I use soldiers. Now, I should defeat him first."

古文：及战，不能挫安。
现代文：但双方交战后，燕军未能挫败平安。
English: However, after the two sides fought, Yan's army failed to defeat Ping'an.

古文：时南军六十万，列阵河上。
现代文：当时南军六十万列阵河上。
English: At that time, 600,000 Southern troops were on the river.

古文：王帅将士驰入阵，战至暝，互有杀伤。
现代文：燕王率将士突入阵中，战至天黑，双方互有死伤。
English: Yan Wang led his soldiers into the battle and fought until dark. Both sides suffered casualties.

古文：及夜深，乃各敛军。
现代文：及至深夜，才各自收兵。
English: It was not until late in the evening that each side withdrew its troops.

古文：燕王失道，从者仅三骑。下马伏地视河流，辨东西，始知营垒所在。
现代文：燕王迷了路，仅三名骑兵跟着他，下马伏地根据河流分辨东西后，才找到营垒所在。
English: Yan Wang lost his way, and only three cavalrymen followed him. They dismounted and walked along the river to find the location of the camp.

古文：明日再战，安击败燕蒋房宽、陈亨。
现代文：第二天再战，平安击败燕王部将房宽、陈亨。
English: On the second day of the rematch, Ping An defeated Yan Wangbu's generals, Fang Guang and Chen Heng.

古文：燕王见事急，亲冒矢石力战。
现代文：燕王见战事危急，便亲自上阵拼力战斗。
English: When Yan Wang saw that the war was in a critical situation, he personally went into battle and fought hard.

古文：马创矢竭，剑折不可击。
现代文：可是马伤箭尽，剑断不能击。
English: But when the horse is exhausted, the sword cannot strike.

古文：走登堤，佯举鞭招后骑以疑敌。
现代文：他只得徒步登上堤上，举起马鞭佯装招引后来的骑兵以迷惑敌人。
English: He had to climb up the embankment on foot, raise the whip and pretend to attract the later cavalry to confuse the enemy.

古文：会高煦救至，乃得免。
现代文：正好高煦援兵赶到，他才得以幸免。
English: It was only when reinforcements from Gaocheng arrived that he was spared.

古文：当是时，诸将中安战最力，王几为安槊所及。
现代文：那个时候，诸将中平安战得最猛，燕王差一点被平安的长矛刺中。
English: At that time, the war between the generals and Heian was the fiercest, and Yan Wang was almost stabbed by Heian's spear.

古文：已而败。语详《成祖纪》。
现代文：不久失败，详见《成祖传》。
English: It soon failed, as detailed in "Cheng Zu Zhen."

古文：燕兵围济南。
现代文：燕兵围攻济南。
English: Yan soldiers besieged Jinan.

古文：安营单家桥，谋出御河夺燕饷舟。
现代文：平安率军扎营单家桥，计划出兵御河夺取燕军运饷船只。
English: Ping'an led the army to encamp at Shanjiaqiao, and planned to send troops to Okawa to seize the Yan army's transport and supply ships.

古文：又选善水卒五千人渡河，将攻德州。围乃解。
现代文：又挑选五千名水性好的士兵渡河，准备进攻德州，济南城围才得以解除。
English: In addition, five thousand soldiers with good water skills were selected to cross the river and prepare to attack Texas. Only then was the siege of Jinan lifted.

古文：安与吴杰进屯定州。
现代文：平安与吴杰进驻定州。
English: Ping'an and Wu Jiejin were stationed in Dingzhou.

古文：明年，燕败盛庸于夹河，回军与安战单家桥。安奋击大破之，擒其将薛禄。
现代文：第二年，燕兵在夹河击败盛庸，回军与平安战于单家桥，平安率军奋击，大败燕兵，擒获其将薛禄，不久，薛禄逃跑。
English: In the second year, Yan soldiers defeated Sheng Yong at Jiahe, and the Hui army fought with Heian at Shanjiaqiao. Heian led the army to fight hard, defeated Yan soldiers, captured his general Xue Lu, and soon, Xue Lu fled.

古文：无何，逸去。再战滹沱河，又破之。
现代文：双方再战于滹沱河，平安击败对手。
English: The two sides fought again in Luohe, defeating the opponent safely.

古文：安于阵中缚木为楼，高数丈，战酣，辄登楼望，发强弩射燕军，死者甚众。
现代文：平安在阵中架起木楼，高数丈。急战时，他总要登楼眺望，以强弩射击燕军，死者甚多。
English: Heian erected a wooden tower in the middle of the battle, several stories high. In the case of an emergency, he always wanted to go up to the tower to look out and shoot the Yan army with a strong crossbow. There were many dead.

古文：忽大风起，发屋拔树，声如雷。
现代文：忽然刮起了大风，掀屋拔树，风声如雷。
English: Suddenly, a gale blew up, trees were uprooted from rooftops, and the wind sounded like thunder.

古文：都指挥邓戩、陈鹏等陷敌中，安遂败走真定。
现代文：都指挥邓戬、陈鹏等陷入敌军中，平安只得败逃真定。
English: Both commanders, Deng Yu and Chen Peng, fell into the enemy army, and Ping'an had no choice but to lose and escape.

古文：燕王与南军数大战，每亲身陷阵，所向皆靡，惟安与庸二军屡挫之。
现代文：燕王与南军屡次大战，每次都亲自冲锋陷阵，所向披靡，惟独屡受平安与盛庸二军所挫。
English: King Yan fought against the Southern Army many times. Each time, he personally charged into the battle and was victorious. However, he was repeatedly defeated by the two armies of Heian and Shengyong.

古文：滹沱之战，矢集王旗如蝟毛。
现代文：滹沱之战，射在燕王旗上的箭就像刺猬的毛那样多。
English: In the War of the Dragonflies, there were as many arrows shot at the flag of the Swallow King as there were hairs on a hedgehog.

古文：王使人送旗北平，谕世子谨藏，以示后世。
现代文：燕王命人将此旗送回北平，让世子小心收藏，以示后世。
English: Yan Wang ordered people to send this flag back to Beiping, and let the world carefully collect it to show it to future generations.

古文：顾成已先被执在燕，见而泣曰： 臣自少从军，今老矣，多历战阵，未尝见若此也。 
现代文：顾成已先被捉拿至燕，见到此旗后哭道： 臣自小从军。现在已经老了，多次作战，还从未见过像这样的。 
English: Gu Cheng, who had been captured first, cried after seeing the flag: "I have been in the army since I was a child. I am old now, I have fought many times, and I have never seen anything like this.

古文：逾月，燕师出大名。
现代文：一个月后，燕军出兵大名。
English: A month later, Yan's army dispatched troops to capture Daimyo.

古文：安与庸及吴杰等分兵扰其饷道。
现代文：平安与盛庸及吴杰等分兵骚扰其运饷之路。
English: Ping'an and Shengyong and Wu Jie and other detachments harassed their way of transportation.

古文：燕王患之，遣指挥武胜上书于朝，请撤安等息兵，为缓师计。
现代文：燕王很担心，便派指挥武胜上书朝廷，请求停战，撤退平安等人，以此作为缓兵之计。
English: King Yan was very worried, so he sent commander Bu Sheng to write to the imperial court, requesting an armistice, the withdrawal of Ping'an and others, as a delaying tactic.

古文：帝不许。
现代文：皇上不许。
English: The emperor would not allow it.

古文：燕王亦决计南下。遣李远等潜走沛县，焚粮舟，掠彰德，破尾尖寨，谕降林县。
现代文：燕王决计南下，派遣李远等潜至沛县，焚毁粮船，夺取彰德，攻破尾尖寨，招降林县。
English: Yan Wang decided to go south, sent Li Yuan and others to sneak into Peixian, burned grain ships, captured Zhangde, broke through Ojianzhai, and recruited Lin County.

古文：时安在真定，度北平空虚，帅万骑直走北平。
现代文：当时平安驻在真定，估计北平空虚，便率万名骑兵直奔北平。
English: At that time, Heian was stationed in Zhending, estimated that Beiping was empty, and led 10,000 cavalry straight to Beiping.

古文：至平村，去城五十里而军。
现代文：到达平村，在离北平城五十里之地扎营。
English: They arrived at Pingcun and set up camp 50 miles from Peiping.

古文：燕王惧，遣刘江等驰还救。
现代文：燕王害怕了，命刘江等迅速回救。
English: Yan Wang was scared, so Liu Jiang and others quickly came to his rescue.

古文：安战不利，引还。
现代文：平安战而不利，引军返回。
English: Peaceful war was unfavorable, and the troops were brought back.

古文：时大同守将房昭引兵入紫荆关，据易州西水寨以窥北平，安自真定饷之。
现代文：当时大同守将房昭率军进入紫荆关，占据易州西水寨以窥视北平，平安从真定供饷给他。
English: At that time, Datong Guo led the army of Fang Zhao into the Bauhinia Pass, occupied the West Water Village of Yizhou to peep into Peiping, and provided him with a safe passage from Zhending.

古文：八月，燕兵北归。
现代文：八月，燕兵北归。
English: In August, Yan Bing returned to the north.

古文：安及燕将李彬战于杨村，败之。
现代文：平安与燕将李彬战于杨村，李彬战败。
English: Ping'an and Yan fought Li Bin in Yangcun, and Li Bin was defeated.

古文：四年，燕兵复南下，破萧县。
现代文：建文四年，燕兵重又南下，攻破萧县。
English: In the fourth year of Jianwen, the Yan soldiers went south again and broke through Xiao County.

古文：安引军蹑其后，至淝河。
现代文：平安率军跟随其后，到达氵肥河。
English: The troops led by Ping'an followed them and reached the Fenhui River.

古文：燕将白义、王真、刘江迎敌。
现代文：燕王令白义、王真、刘江迎敌。
English: Yan Wang ordered Bai Yi, Wang Zhen and Liu Jiang to meet the enemy.

古文：安转战，斩真。
现代文：平安转战，斩杀王真。
English: Turning from peace to war, Wang Zhen was killed.

古文：真，骁将。燕王尝曰： 诸将奋勇如王真，何事不成！ 
现代文：王真是一名骁将，燕王曾说 ：如果诸将都能像王真一样勇猛，什么事情办不成呢？ 
English: Wang Zhen is a great general. Yan Wang once said: If all generals can be as brave as Wang Zhen, what can't be done?

古文：至是为安所杀。
现代文：这时王真却为平安所杀。
English: At this time, Wang Zhen was killed by Pingan.

古文：燕王乃身自迎战，安部将火耳灰挺槊大呼，直前刺王。
现代文：燕王不得不亲自迎战。平安的部将火耳灰手持长矛，大喊直向燕王刺去。
English: Yan Wang had to face the battle in person. Ping An's troops stabbed Yan Wang with spears, shouting at him.

古文：马忽蹶，被擒。安稍引却。
现代文：但因战马突然摔倒而被擒，平安率军稍退。
English: However, he was captured when his horse suddenly fell, and Heian led his army back a little.

古文：已，复进至小河，张左右翼击燕军，斩其将陈文。
现代文：不久，又进至小河，派出左右翼进击燕军，斩其大将陈文。
English: Soon, it entered Xiaohe again, and sent its left and right wings to attack Yan's army, beheading its general, Chen Wen.

古文：已，复移军齐眉山，与诸将列阵大战。自午至酉，又败之。
现代文：随后又移军齐眉山，与诸将列阵大战，从中午到下午，又败燕军。
English: Subsequently, the army moved to Mount Qi Mei, and fought with the generals, from noon to afternoon, and defeated the Yan army.

古文：燕诸将谋北还，图后举。
现代文：燕军诸将建议北还，以图后举。
English: The generals of Yan's army suggested that they should return to the north.

古文：王不听。
现代文：燕王不听。
English: Xiang Wang still did not listen.

古文：寻阻何福军亦至，与安合。
现代文：随即何福军也赶到，与平安会合。
English: Immediately afterwards, He Fook's army also arrived and met with Ping An.

古文：燕军益大惧，王昼夜擐甲者数日。
现代文：燕军更为恐慌，燕王一连数日昼夜披甲在身。
English: Yan's army panicked even more. Yan Wang wore armor day and night for several days.

古文：福欲持久老燕师，移营灵璧，深堑高垒自固。而粮运为燕兵所阴，不得达。
现代文：何福想持久以拖垮燕军，于是移驻灵璧，以深壕高垒自固，但粮运却被燕兵所阻，不能运达。
English: He Fu wanted to last long enough to defeat Yan's army, so he moved to Lingbi and fortified himself with deep trenches and high walls, but the grain transport was blocked by Yan's soldiers and could not be transported.

古文：安分兵往迎，燕王以精骑遮安军，分为二。
现代文：平安分兵去迎，燕王以精锐骑兵拦截平安军，将其一分为二。
English: The Heian detachment went to meet them, and Yan Wang intercepted the Heian army with his elite cavalry, splitting it in two.

古文：福开壁来援，为高煦所败。
现代文：何福打开军营的围墙出来支援，被高煦所败。
English: He Fu opened the fence of the military camp and came out to support, but was defeated by Gao Yao.

古文：诸将谋移军淮河就粮，夜令军中闻三炮即走。
现代文：诸将建议转移到淮河去寻找粮食，于是当夜下令：听到三声炮响马上出发。
English: The generals suggested moving to the Huai River to look for food, so that night they ordered: "When you hear three cannons, leave immediately."

古文：翌日，燕军猝薄垒，发三炮。
现代文：第二天，燕军突然进逼营垒，发射三炮。
English: The next day, Yan's army suddenly forced their way into the camp and fired three cannons.

古文：军中误以为己号，争趋门，遂大乱。
现代文：军中将士误以为是自己的信号，争相奔往营门，于是营中大乱。
English: The lieutenant generals mistakenly thought it was their own signal and rushed to the gate of the camp. As a result, there was chaos in the camp.

古文：燕兵乘之，人马坠壕堑俱满。
现代文：燕兵乘机进攻，使南军人马坠落壕沟。
English: Yan soldiers took advantage of the opportunity to attack, causing the South Korean soldiers to fall into the trench.

古文：福单骑走，安及陈晖、马溥、徐真、孙成等三十七人皆被执。
现代文：何福独自骑马逃走，平安及陈晖、马溥、徐真、孙成等三十七人都被捉拿。
English: He Fu alone fled on horseback, and Ping An and thirty-seven others, including Chen Yao, Ma Yao, Xu Zhen, and Sun Cheng, were all captured.

古文：文臣宦官在军被执者又百五十余人，时四月辛已也。
现代文：在军中的文臣、宦官一百五十余人被俘，这天是四月二十九日。
English: On April 29, more than 150 civil servants and eunuchs in the army were captured.

古文：安久驻真定，屡败燕兵，斩骁将数人，燕将莫敢婴其锋。
现代文：平安久驻真定，屡败燕兵，斩杀骁将数人，燕将中无人敢挡其锋。
English: He stayed in Zhending for a long time in peace and security, repeatedly defeated Yan soldiers, killed several Yan generals, and no one dared to stand up to Yan generals.

古文：至是被擒，军中欢呼动地，曰： 吾属自此获安矣！ 
现代文：这时平安被俘，燕军中欢声雷动： 我们现在安全了。 
English: At this time, Ping'an was captured, and there was thunderous rejoicing in Yan's army: We are safe now.

古文：争请杀安。
现代文：纷纷请求杀死平安。
English: There were many requests to kill Heian.

古文：燕王惜其材勇，选锐卒卫送北平，命世子及郭资等善视之。
现代文：燕王爱惜他的才勇，便挑选精锐士兵将他护送到北平，命世子及郭资等善待他。
English: Yan Wang cherished his talent and bravery, so he selected elite soldiers to escort him to Beiping. He was treated kindly by his son-in-law and Guo Zi.

古文：王即帝位，以安为北平都指挥使。寻进行后府都督佥事。
现代文：燕王即帝位后，以平安为北平都指挥使，随即进升为行后府都督佥事。
English: After the enthronement of Yan Wang, Ping'an was appointed as the commanding envoy of Beiping, and then promoted to the post of prefectural governor.

古文：永乐七年三月，帝巡北京。
现代文：永乐七年三月，皇上巡幸北京。
English: In March of the seventh year of Yongle, the emperor went on a tour of Beijing.

古文：将至，览章奏见安名，谓左右曰： 平保儿尚在耶？ 
现代文：将到时，翻阅奏章见到平安的名字，向左右问道： 平保儿还在吗？ 
English: When the time came, he flipped through the score, saw Heian's name, and asked around: Is Heian still alive?

古文：安闻之，遂自杀。
现代文：平安听说后，遂自杀。
English: After hearing the news, Ping'an committed suicide.

古文：命以指挥使禄给其子。
现代文：皇上下令将指挥使的俸禄传给其儿子。
English: The Emperor's second-in-command passed on the commander's salary to his son.

古文：何福，凤阳人。
现代文：何福，凤阳人。
English: What a blessing, Fengyang people.

古文：洪武初，累功为金吾后卫指挥同知。
现代文：洪武初年，因功屡升为金吾后卫指挥同知。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, he was repeatedly promoted to the post of Kingu guard commander due to his merits.

古文：从傅友德征云南，擢都督佥事。
现代文：他跟随傅友德征讨云南，被提升为都督佥事。
English: He followed Fu Youde in conquering Yunnan and was promoted to the post of governor.

古文：又从蓝玉出塞，至捕鱼儿海。
现代文：又随蓝玉出塞，到达捕鱼儿海。
English: And with the blue jade out of the dam, reached the fishing sea.

古文：二十一年，江阴侯吴高帅迤北降人南征。
现代文：二十一年，江阴侯吴高率迤北降人南征。
English: In the 21st year, Wu Gao of Jiangyin Province was the first to go to the south.

古文：抵沅江，众叛，由思州出荆、樊，道渭河，欲遁归沙漠。
现代文：抵达沅江时，部众反叛，由思州出荆、樊，取道渭河，企图逃回沙漠。
English: When they arrived at the Li River, they rebelled and tried to escape back to the desert by taking the Li River from Shizhou.

古文：明年正月，福与都督聂纬追击，及诸鹿阝、延，尽歼之。
现代文：第二年正月，何福与都督聂纬奉命追击，追至、延，将他们全部歼灭。
English: In the first month of the second year, He Fu and the governor Zou Wei were ordered to pursue, chase, and annihilate them all.

古文：移兵讨平都匀蛮，俘斩万计。
现代文：然后移兵讨平都匀蛮族，俘斩数以万计。
English: Then they moved troops to subdue the Duyun barbarians, capturing and slaughtering tens of thousands.

古文：二十四年，拜平羌将军，讨越州叛蛮阿资，破降之。
现代文：二十四年，何福被授为平羌将军，征讨越州叛蛮阿资，破降之。
English: In the 24th year, He Fu was awarded the title of General of Pingyao, and fought against the rebellious Ah Zi in Yuezhou, and defeated him.

古文：择地立栅处其众，置宁越堡。
现代文：并选择地方树立栅栏安排其部众，设置宁越堡。
English: He also chose a place to erect a fence, arranged his subordinates, and set up the Ningyue Fort.

古文：遂平九名、九姓诸蛮。
现代文：遂平定九名、九姓诸蛮。
English: As a result, nine people and nine surnames were subdued.

古文：寻与都督茅鼎会兵，徇五开。
现代文：随后与都督茅鼎会合攻战于五开。
English: Subsequently, he and the governor Maoding met to fight in Wukai.

古文：未行，而毕节诸蛮复叛，大掠屯堡，杀吏士。
现代文：还未出发，毕节诸蛮重又反叛，大肆抢掠屯堡，杀害官兵。
English: Before they set off, Bijie Zhuang rebelled and plundered the fort and killed officers and soldiers.

古文：福令毕节诸卫严备，而檄都督陶文等从鼎捣其巢。
现代文：何福命毕节诸卫严密防备，又召都督陶文等跟随茅鼎直捣其巢穴。
English: He Fuxin ordered all the guards to be on high alert, and called upon the governor Tao Wen and others to follow Mao Ding and raid his lair.

古文：擒叛酋，戮之。分兵尽捕诸蛮，建堡设戍，乃趋五开。
现代文：擒获叛酋，将其处死，并分兵将诸蛮全部捕获，建堡设卫之后，这才赶往五开。
English: He captured the traitor chief, put him to death, and the detachment of soldiers captured all the barbarians. After building a fort and setting up a guard, they rushed to Wukai.

古文：请因兵力讨水西奢香，不许。
现代文：何福请求趁此用兵征讨水西奢香。皇上不许。
English: Hefuku requested to use this opportunity to conscript soldiers to fight against Mizunishi Luxor, but the emperor would not allow it.

古文：三十年三月，水西蛮居宗必登等作乱，会顾成讨平之。
现代文：三十年三月，水西蛮居宗必登作乱，何福会合顾成讨平。
English: In March of the thirtieth year, the Mizusai Banzhuzong was determined to start a riot, and Ho Fook met with Gu Cheng to settle the dispute.

古文：其冬拜征虏左将军，副西平侯沐春讨麓川叛蛮刀干孟。
现代文：这年冬天，他被授为征虏左将军，协助西平侯沐春征讨麓川叛蛮刀干孟。
English: In the winter of that year, he was awarded the title of General of the Left Conquest, and assisted Xiping Prince Mu in the Spring Conquest of the Luchuan Rebellion.

古文：明年，福与都督瞿能逾高良公山，捣南甸，擒其酋刀名孟。
现代文：第二年，何福与都督瞿能越过高良公山，直捣南甸，擒获其酋长刀名孟。
English: In the second year, He Fook and the local governor, Yan Neng, crossed the Goryang Mountains and went straight to Nandian, where they captured the chief's sword, Meng.

古文：回军击景罕寨，不下。
现代文：然后回军进攻景罕寨，不下。
English: Then the Hui army attacked Jinghan Village, and could not get out.

古文：春以锐军至，贼惊溃。干孟惧，乞降。
现代文：沐春率精锐部队赶到，贼军惊溃，干孟害怕了，请求投降。
English: Mu Chun led the elite troops to arrive, the bandits were routed, and Gan Meng was afraid and asked to surrender.

古文：已而春卒，贼复怀贰。
现代文：不久沐春死去，蛮贼又心怀两端。
English: Not long after, Mu Chun died, and the bandits were back with a vengeance.

古文：是时太祖已崩，惠帝初即位，拜福征虏将军。
现代文：这时太祖已经去世，惠帝刚刚即位，授何福为征虏将军。
English: At this time, the great-grandfather had already passed away, and Hui Di had just ascended the throne, awarding He Fu as a conscript general.

古文：福遂破擒刀干孟，降其众七万。分兵徇下诸寨，麓川地悉定。
现代文：何福遂破擒刀干孟，降服其七万部众，并分兵攻下诸寨，麓川之地全部平定。
English: He Fu finally defeated Gan Meng with his scythe, subdued his seventy thousand followers, and subdued the villages with a detachment of soldiers, and the land of Fuchuan was completely pacified.

古文：建文元年，还京师，论功进都督同知。
现代文：建文元年，何福返回京城，论功时进升为都督同知。
English: In the first year of Jianwen, He Fu returned to Beijing and was promoted to the governor of the capital.

古文：练兵德州，进左都督。
现代文：后练兵于德州，进升左都督。
English: After training soldiers in Texas, he was promoted to Governor of the Left.

古文：与盛庸、平安会兵伐燕，战淮北不利，奔还。
现代文：又与盛庸、平安合兵伐燕，在淮北战而不利，奔返。
English: He also joined forces with Shengyong and Ping'an to fight Yan, but was defeated in the north of Huaihai and had to return home.

古文：成祖即位，以福宿将知兵，推诚用之。聘其甥女徐氏为赵王妃。
现代文：成祖即位后，因何福是宿将，熟知兵事，而推诚任用，并将其外甥女徐氏聘为赵王妃。
English: After the enthronement of Cheng Zu, because He Fu was a retired general and was familiar with military affairs, he appointed Xu Cheng and hired his niece, Ms. Xu, as Zhao Wangfei.

古文：寻，命佩征虏将军印，充总兵官，镇宁夏，节制山、陕、河南诸军。
现代文：随即又命何福佩带征虏将军印，充任总兵官，镇守宁夏，节制山、陕、河南诸军。
English: He immediately ordered He Fufu to wear the seal of the general of the conscript army, to serve as the chief military officer, to guard Ningxia, and to control the armies of Shan, Shaanxi, and Henan.

古文：福至镇，宣布德意，招徕远人，塞外诸部降者相踵。
现代文：何福到宁夏后，宣布圣恩，招来远处之人，塞外诸部纷纷前来降附。
English: After He Fu arrived in Ningxia, he announced the holy grace, invited people from far away, and various ministries outside Tibet came one after another to join.

古文：边陲无事，因请置驿、屯田、积谷，定赏罚，为经久计。
现代文：边陲无事，何福因此请求设立驿站，屯田积粮，制定赏罚标准，作为长远之计。
English: There was nothing wrong with the border, so He Fu requested the establishment of a post station, the accumulation of grain in the field, and the establishment of reward and punishment standards, as a long-term plan.

古文：会有谗之者。
现代文：当时有人说他的坏话。
English: He was vilified at the time.

古文：帝不听，降敕褒慰。
现代文：皇上不听，并降旨褒奖慰劳他。
English: The emperor did not listen, and reduced his praise to console him.

古文：永乐五年八月，移镇甘肃。
现代文：永乐五年八月，何福移兵镇守甘肃。
English: In August of the fifth year of Yongle, He Fu transferred troops to guard Gansu.

古文：福驭军严，下多不便者。
现代文：何福治军极严，许多部下不以为然。
English: He Fu ruled the army very strictly, and many of his subordinates were not impressed.

古文：帝间使使戒福，善自卫，毋为小人所中。
现代文：皇上暗里命使臣告诫何福，要善于自卫，不要被小人中伤。
English: The emperor secretly ordered an envoy to warn He Fu to be good at self-defense and not to be injured by villains.

古文：六年，福请遣京师蕃将将迤北降人。
现代文：六年，何福请求派京城蕃将统领迤北降人。
English: In the sixth year, He Fu requested to send the general of the capital city to lead the troops to the north.

古文：帝报曰： 尔久总蕃、汉兵，恐势众致谗耳。
现代文：皇上回答说 ：你长期统率蕃、汉军队，惟恐势众而招来谗言。
English: The emperor replied, "You have been leading the Han army for a long time, and you are afraid of being criticized by the masses.

古文：尔老将，朕推诚倚重，毋顾虑。 
现代文：你是老将，朕推诚倚重，你不要有什么顾虑。 
English: You're a veteran, I'm serious, you don't have to worry.

古文：寻请以布市马，选其良者别为群，置官给印专领之。
现代文：随后，何福请求用钱买马，选出其中的良马另外分群，设立官吏，发给印章，专门进行管理。
English: Subsequently, He Fu requested to buy horses with money, select another group of good horses among them, set up officials, issue seals, and carry out special management.

古文：于是马大蕃息。
现代文：于是马匹大量增加。
English: Since then, horses have proliferated.

古文：永昌苑牧马自此始。
现代文：永昌苑牧马自此开始。
English: The herding of horses in Yongchangyuan started from here.

古文：明年，本雅失里纠阿鲁台将入寇，为瓦剌所败，走胪朐河，欲收诸部溃卒窥河西。
现代文：第二年，本雅失里纠集阿鲁台将入侵，为瓦剌所败，逃往胪朐河，企图聚集诸部溃兵窥视河西。
English: In the second year, Benya lost his way and gathered the invaders from Arutai, but was defeated by the Varangians, and fled to the Li River, attempting to gather the defeated soldiers from various provinces to spy on the west of the river.

古文：诏福严兵为备。
现代文：皇上诏令何福严密防备。
English: The emperor ordered He Fu to be on high alert.

古文：迤北王子、国公、司徒以下十余人帅所部驻亦集乃，乞内附。
现代文：迤北王子、国公、司徒以下十余人率所部驻扎亦集乃，请求内附。
English: More than ten people, including the Prince of North Gyeongsang Province, the Duke of Gyeongsang Province, and the Prince of Gyeongsang Province, were also gathered at the station, and their requests are attached.

古文：福以闻，帝令庶子杨荣往，佐福经理，其众悉降。
现代文：何福将此事上奏。皇上命庶子杨荣前去协助何福，其部众全部投降。
English: The emperor ordered his son-in-law Yang Rong to go and assist He Fu, and all his subordinates surrendered.

古文：福亲至亦集乃镇抚之，送其酋长于京师。
现代文：何福亲自到亦集乃加以安抚，将其酋长送至京城。
English: He Fu personally went to Yishi to pacify him and sent his chief to the capital.

古文：帝嘉福功，命荣即军中封福为宁远侯，禄千石，且诏福军中事先行后闻。
现代文：皇上称赞何福有功，命杨荣前往军中封何福为宁远侯，年禄一千石，并且诏令何福军中之事可先行后奏。
English: The emperor praised He Fu for his service, and ordered Yang Rong to go to the middle of the army to give He Fu the title of Ningyuan Hou, with a reward of one thousand koku, and ordered that He Fu's military affairs could be discussed first.

古文：八年，帝北征，召福从出塞。
现代文：八年，皇上北征，召何福跟随出塞。
English: Eight years later, when the emperor was enlisting in the Northern Expedition, he summoned He Fu to follow him out of Tibet.

古文：初，帝以福有才略，宠任逾诸将。
现代文：当初，皇上因何福富于才略，对他的宠信超过其他将领。
English: In the beginning, the emperor was blessed with many talents, and he was favored more than other generals.

古文：福亦善引嫌，有事未尝专决。
现代文：何福也善于避嫌，遇事从不独断专行。
English: He Fu is also good at avoiding displeasure and never acts arbitrarily.

古文：在镇尝请取西平侯家巩昌蓄马，以充孳牧。
现代文：他率军镇守时曾请求选在西平侯的家乡巩昌养马，以充实畜牧。
English: When he led the army to guard the town, he asked to raise horses in Gongchang, the hometown of Xiping Hou, in order to enrich animal husbandry.

古文：帝报曰： 皇考时贵近家多许养马，以示共享富贵之意。
现代文：皇上回答说 ：先皇时各显贵亲近之家大多允许养马，以示共享富贵。
English: The emperor replied, "In the time of the former emperor, most of the noble families were allowed to keep horses as a sign of shared wealth.

古文：尔所奏固为国矣，然非待勋戚之道。 
现代文：你所奏固然是为了国家，但却非待勋臣外戚之道。 
English: Of course, you are playing for the sake of the country, but it is not the way of honourable vassals and maternal relatives.

古文：不听。
现代文：因而没有采纳。
English: The emperor does not allow it.

古文：其余有请辄行，委寄甚重。
现代文：其余凡是何福的请求都下令执行，对他委任甚重。
English: The rest of He Fook's requests were ordered to be carried out, and he was given a heavy assignment.

古文：及从征，数违节度。
现代文：可当何福随行北征时，屡次违反节度。
English: However, when He Fu accompanied the Northern Expedition, he repeatedly violated the rules.

古文：群臣有言其罪者，福益怏怏有怨言。
现代文：群臣中有人揭发何福的罪状，何福更加闷闷不乐，抱有怨言。
English: Someone in the group of courtiers exposed He Fu's crime, and He Fu became even more sullen and complained.

古文：师还，都御史陈瑛复劾之。
现代文：回师之后，都御史陈瑛又弹劾他。
English: After returning to his teacher, the Metropolitan Chen Ying also impeached him.

古文：福惧，自缢死，爵除。
现代文：何福很害怕，便自缢而死，封爵被除。
English: He Fu was very scared, so he hanged himself and died. He was stripped of his knighthood.

古文：而赵王妃亦寻废。
现代文：而赵王妃也随后被废。
English: And Zhao Wangfei was also subsequently abolished.

古文：顾成，字景韶，其先湘潭人。
现代文：顾成，字景韶，其祖先是湘潭人。
English: Gu Cheng, also known as Gu Cheng, whose ancestor was from Xiangtan.

古文：祖父业操舟，往来江、淮间，遂家江都。
现代文：祖父以撑船为业，往来于江、淮之间，因此在江都安家。
English: His grandfather was a boat builder and traveled back and forth between the Yangtze River and Huai River, so he made his home in the Yangtze River.

古文：成少魁岸，膂力绝人，善马槊，文其身以自异。
现代文：顾成年少魁梧，臂力绝人，善于骑马、持矛，并纹身以使自己与众不同。
English: As a young man, Gu was burly, strong-armed, good at riding horses and carrying spears, and had tattoos to distinguish himself.

古文：太祖渡江，来归，以勇选为帐前亲兵，擎盖出入。
现代文：太祖渡江后，顾成前来投靠，因勇猛被选为帐前亲兵。
English: After the great-grandfather crossed the river, Gu Cheng came to stay with him, and was chosen as a front-line soldier for his bravery.

古文：尝从上出，舟胶于沙，成负舟而行。
现代文：有一次他随太祖出行，船被泥沙所阻，顾成便背船而行。
English: Once when he was traveling with his great-grandfather, the boat was blocked by mud and sand, and Gu Cheng walked behind the boat.

古文：从攻镇江，与勇士十人转斗入城，被执，十人皆死。成跃起断缚，仆持刀者，脱归。
现代文：随大军攻镇江时，顾成与十名勇士转战入城，被捉，十名勇士全部死去，顾成挣断绳索，一跃而起，扑倒持刀者，逃脱而归。
English: When attacking the Zhenjiang River with a large army, Gu Cheng and ten warriors turned to fight and entered the city. They were caught, and all ten warriors died. Gu Cheng broke the rope, jumped up, threw down the person holding the knife, and escaped.

古文：导众攻城，克之，授百户。
现代文：并引军攻城，攻克后，授为百户。
English: He also led an army to attack the city, and after conquering it, he was awarded a hundred households.

古文：大小数十战，皆有功，进坚城卫指挥佥事。
现代文：经历大小数十战，顾成都有功劳，晋升为坚城卫指挥佥事。
English: After experiencing dozens of battles, both large and small, Gu Cheng was promoted to commander of the Jiancheng garrison.

古文：从伐蜀，攻罗江，擒元帅以下二十余人，进降汉州。蜀平，改成都后卫。
现代文：随军伐蜀，进攻罗江，擒获元帅以下二十余人，进而降服汉州，四川平定，顾成改任成都后卫。
English: He followed the army to cut down Shu, attacked Luojiang, captured more than 20 people below the rank of marshal, and then subdued Hanzhou, pacified Sichuan, and Gu Cheng was appointed as the defender of Chengdu.

古文：洪武六年，擒重庆妖贼王元保。
现代文：洪武六年，擒获重庆妖贼王元保。
English: In the sixth year of Hongwu, Chongqing thief Wang Yuanbao was captured.

古文：八年调守贵州。
现代文：八年，顾成调守贵州。
English: Eight years later, Gu Cheng was transferred to Guizhou.

古文：时群蛮叛服不常，成连岁出兵，悉平之。
现代文：当时群蛮时叛时从。顾成连年出兵，全部平定诸蛮。
English: At that time, Gu Cheng Lian sent troops to subdue all the barbarians.

古文：已，从颍川侯傅友德征云南，为前锋，首克普定，留成列栅以守。
现代文：不久，他随颍川侯傅友德征讨云南，为前锋，首先攻克普定，顾成留下设栅而守。
English: Not long after, he went to Yunnan with Fu Youde, the lord of Shichuan, as a vanguard. He first conquered Puting, and Gu Cheng stayed behind to set up a defense.

古文：蛮数万来攻，成出栅，手杀数十百人，贼退走。
现代文：数万蛮贼来攻，顾成跃出栅栏，亲手杀死数十上百人，蛮贼退走。
English: Tens of thousands of bandits attacked, Gu Cheng jumped out of the fence, killed dozens of people with his own hands, and the bandits retreated.

古文：余贼犹在南城，成斩所俘而纵其一，曰： 吾夜二鼓来杀汝。 
现代文：其他蛮贼仍在南城，顾成斩杀所俘蛮贼，而将一人放回，并对他说： 我今夜二更再来杀你。 
English: The other bandits were still in Nancheng. Gu Chengcheng released one of the captured bandits and said to him, "I'll come back to kill you again tonight."

古文：夜二鼓，吹角鸣炮，贼闻悉走，获器甲无算。进指挥使。
现代文：当夜二更，吹角鸣炮。蛮贼听后全部逃走，顾成获得器械无数，进升为指挥使。
English: On the second day of the night, the horn was blown and the cannon was fired. After hearing this, the bandits all fled. Gu Cheng obtained countless instruments and was promoted to commander.

古文：诸蛮隶普定者悉平。
现代文：隶属普定的诸蛮亦全被平定。
English: The barbarians under the command of Pu Ding were also completely subdued.

古文：十七年，平阿黑、螺蛳等十余寨。
现代文：十七年，顾成平定阿黑、螺蛳等十余寨。
English: In the seventeenth year, more than ten villages such as Gu Chengding, Ah Hei and Lulong were conquered.

古文：明年奏罢普定府，析其地为三州、六长官司。进贵州都指挥同知。
现代文：第二年，顾成奏请取消普定府，将其地分为三州、六长官司，又进升为贵州都指挥同知。
English: The following year, Gu Chengso requested that Puting Prefecture be abolished, and its territory be divided into three prefectures, six prefectures, and promoted to Guizhou.

古文：有告其受赇及僣用玉器等物者，以久劳不问。
现代文：有人告发顾成受贿及僭用玉器等物，太祖因他长期的功劳而不予问罪。
English: Some people accused Gu Cheng of taking bribes and stealing jade objects, but the great-grandfather was not charged because of his long-term achievements.

古文：二十九年迁右军都督佥事，佩征南将军印。会何福讨水西蛮，斩其酋居宗必登。
现代文：二十九年，顾成升为右军都督佥事，佩带征南将军印，会合何福征讨水西蛮贼，斩杀其酋居宗必登。
English: In the 29th year, Gu Chengsheng became the right-wing military governor of Anji, wearing the seal of the Southern Conquest General, and met with He Fu to conquer the Western barbarians, and killed his chief Juzong Bidenteng.

古文：明年，西堡、沧浪诸寨蛮乱，成遣指挥陆秉与其子统分道讨平之。
现代文：第二年，西堡、沧浪诸寨蛮族叛乱。顾成命指挥陆秉与其子陆统分道讨平之。
English: In the second year, the barbarian tribes in Xibao, Canglang and other villages rebelled. Gu Chengming ordered Lu Bing and his son, Lu Tong, to negotiate a way out.

古文：成在贵州凡十余年，讨平诸苗洞寨以百数，皆诛其渠魁，抚绥余众。
现代文：顾成在贵州共十余年，讨平诸苗洞寨数以百计，都只杀其首领，而安抚余众。
English: Gu Cheng has been in Guizhou for more than ten years. He has leveled hundreds of Miao Caves, killing only their leaders and pacifying the rest.

古文：恩信大布，蛮人帖服。
现代文：大示恩德、信用，蛮人十分帖服。
English: Show kindness, trust, and the barbarians will be very happy.

古文：是年二月，召还京。
现代文：这年二月，顾成应诏回京。
English: In February of this year, Gu Cheng returned to Beijing in response to the edict.

古文：建文元年，为左军都督，从耿炳文御燕师，战真定，被执。
现代文：建文元年，顾成为左军都督，随耿炳文抵御燕兵，战于真定，被捉。
English: In the first year of Jianwen, Gu became the left-wing military governor, followed Geng Bingwen to resist Yan soldiers, fought in Zhending, and was captured.

古文：燕王解其缚曰： 此天以尔授我也！ 
现代文：燕王解开捆绑他的绳索，说道： 这是上天把你交给我。 
English: The Swallow King untied the ropes that bound him and said, "It is Heaven that has given you to me."

古文：送北平，辅世子居守。
现代文：然后将他送回北平，辅助世子留守。
English: Then he was sent back to Beiping to assist the heir to the throne.

古文：南军围城，防御、调度一听于成。
现代文：南军围城时，城中一切防御、调度都听从于顾成。
English: When the Southern Army besieged the city, all the defense and dispatching in the city were subject to Gu Cheng.

古文：燕王即位，论功，封镇远侯，食禄千五百石，予世券。命仍镇贵州。
现代文：燕王即位后，论功时，顾成被封为镇远侯，食禄一千五百石，并被授予世袭凭证，仍奉命镇守贵州。
English: After the enthronement of King Yan, Gu Cheng was awarded the title of Zhenyuanhou, with a stipend of 1,500 koku, and was awarded a hereditary certificate. He was still ordered to guard Guizhou.

古文：永乐元年，上书，请严备西北诸边，及早建东宫。
现代文：永乐元年，顾成上书，请求在西北边境严加防备，并及早修建东宫。
English: In the first year of Yongle, Gu Cheng submitted a letter, requesting strict precautions at the northwest border and the early construction of the East Palace.

古文：帝褒答之。
现代文：皇上褒奖了他。
English: The emperor praised him and agreed.

古文：六年三月召至京，赐金帛遣还。
现代文：六年三月，他应召至京，被赏赐黄金、布帛，又返回贵州。
English: In March of the sixth year, he was summoned to Beijing, was awarded gold and cloth, and returned to Guizhou.

古文：思州宣慰使田琛与思南宣慰使田宗鼎构兵，诏成以兵五万压其境，琛等就擒。
现代文：思州宣慰使田琛与思南宣慰使田宗鼎兴兵，皇上诏令顾成率兵五万压境，田琛等被俘。
English: Shizhou Xuancheng made Tian Xuan and Sinan Xuancheng made Tian Zonding raise an army, the emperor ordered Gu Cheng to lead 50,000 soldiers to suppress the border, and Tian Xuan and others were captured.

古文：于是分思州、思南地，更置州县，遂设贵州布政司。
现代文：于是在思州、思南分别改设州县，遂设贵州布政司。
English: As a result, the prefectures of Shizhou and Sinan were separately reorganized into counties, and the Guizhou Political Bureau was established.

古文：其年八月，台罗苗普亮等作乱，诏成帅二都司三卫兵讨平之。
现代文：这年八月，台罗苗普亮等作乱，皇上诏令顾成率二都司三卫兵讨平之。
English: In August of the same year, Tai Luo Miao Pu Liang and others started a riot, and the emperor issued an imperial edict ordering Gu Cheng Liang, the second secretary of the capital, and three guardsmen to quell the riot.

古文：成性忠谨，涉猎书史。
现代文：顾成性情忠诚、谨慎，广泛涉猎文史书籍。
English: Gu Cheng is loyal and prudent, and is widely involved in literature and history books.

古文：始居北平，多效谋画，然终不肯将兵，赐兵器亦不受。
现代文：他开始住在北平，多为出谋划策，但始终不肯统兵，赏赐兵器也不接受。
English: He began to live in Peiping, mostly to offer advice, but he always refused to lead the army and did not accept the award of weapons.

古文：再镇贵州，屡平播州、都匀诸叛蛮，威镇南中，土人立生祠祀焉。
现代文：后来镇守贵州，屡次平定播州、都匀诸叛蛮，威震南中，土人为此设生祠祭祀他。
English: Later, he was the town guard of Guizhou, and he repeatedly subdued the Banshu, the Duyun, the rebels, and the Southern Zhou Dynasty. For this reason, the natives set up a shrine to worship him.

古文：其被召至京也，命辅太子监国。
现代文：他被召至京，受命辅佐太子监国。
English: He was summoned to Kyoto and ordered to assist the crown prince in supervising the state.

古文：成顿首言： 太子仁明，廷臣皆贤，辅导之事非愚臣所及，请归备蛮。 
现代文：顾成叩首说道 ：太子仁爱、英明，廷臣都很贤能，辅佐之事非愚臣所及，请求回去防备诸蛮。 
English: Gu Cheng bowed his head and said, "The prince is benevolent and wise, and the courtiers are very capable. It is not up to the courtiers to assist him. I ask you to go back and guard against the barbarians."

古文：时群小谋夺嫡，太子不自安。
现代文：当时群臣图谋夺嫡立庶，太子心中不安。
English: At that time, a group of courtiers were plotting to seize the throne, and the crown prince was worried.

古文：成入辞文华殿，因曰： 殿下但当竭诚孝敬，孳孳恤民。万事在天，小人不足措意。 
现代文：顾成到文华殿辞行，趁机安慰道 ：殿下只须竭诚孝敬，体恤百姓，万事在天，不必在意那些小人。 
English: When Gu Cheng went to Wenhua Palace to resign, he took the opportunity to comfort her, saying, "Your highness only needs to show sincerity and filial piety, and sympathize with the people. Everything is in the sky. You don't have to care about those villains."

古文：十二年五月卒，年八十有五。
现代文：十二年五月，顾成去世，终年八十五岁。
English: In May of the 12th year, Gu Cheng passed away at the age of 85.

古文：赠夏国公，谥武毅。
现代文：被追赠为夏国公，谥号武毅。
English: He was posthumously given the title of Xia Guogong, and his posthumous name was Wu Yi.

