古文：道士司马承祯，字子微。
现代文：司马承祯道士，别名子微，河内温县人。
English: Sima Chengyong Daoist, alias Zi Wei, from Wen County, Hanoi.

古文：河内温人，周晋州刺史、琅邪公裔玄孙。
现代文：他是北周晋州刺史、琅笽公司马裔的孙子的孙子。
English: He is the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson

古文：少好学，薄于为吏，遂为道士。
现代文：年轻时爱好学习，对做官看得淡薄，于是当了道士。
English: When he was young, he loved to study and was indifferent to being an official, so he became a Taoist priest.

古文：事籓师正，传其符箓及辟谷导引服饵之术。
现代文：拜潘师正为师，向他学习道家的秘密文书 符 和修炼成仙、服食丹药的法术。
English: Teacher Baipan is his teacher, from whom he learns the secret scriptures of Taoism and the magic of cultivating immortality and taking herbs.

古文：师正特赏异之，谓曰： 我自陶隐居传正一之法，至汝四叶矣。 
现代文：潘师正对他特别赞赏，说： 我从陶弘景学习道教法术，到你共有四世了。 
English: Master Pan Zheng gave him special praise, saying, "I have been learning Taoist magic from Tao Hongjing for four generations.

古文：承祯尝遍游名山，乃止于天台山。
现代文：司马承祯游历了所有名山之后，才定居在天台山。
English: Sima Chengyu traveled to all the famous mountains before settling in Tiantai Mountain.

古文：则天闻其名，召至都，降手敕以赞美之。
现代文：则天皇后听到他的名望，把他召到京都，颁下亲手写的诏书赞美他。
English: On hearing of his fame, the empress summoned him to Kyoto and issued a handwritten imperial edict praising him.

古文：及将还，敕麟台监李峤饯之于洛桥之东。
现代文：在回天台山前夕，则天皇后诏令麟台监李峤在洛桥东边为他饯行。
English: On the eve of returning to Mt. Tiantai, the Empress Dowager issued an imperial edict ordering Lintai Supervisor Li Yan to accompany him on the east side of Luo Bridge.

古文：景云二年，睿宗令其兄承祎就天台山追之至京，引入宫中，问以阴阳术数之事。
现代文：景云二年，睿宗命令他的哥哥司马承到天台山邀请他到京城，带进皇宫，询问关于用阴阳五行生克制化的数理来推断人事吉凶方面的事情。
English: In the second year of Jingyun, Ruizong ordered his brother Sima Cheng to invite him to Tiantai Mountain in Beijing, bring him to the imperial palace, and inquire about the use of the mathematical theory of the restraint of yin and yang and the five elements to deduce the fate of personnel.

古文：承祯对曰： 道经之旨： 为道日损，损之又损，以至于无为。 
现代文：司马承祯回答说： 道教经典的主旨是： 学道就要一天一天减少浮华不实，减少再减少，以到达纯朴无为的境界。 
English: Sima Chengyao replied, "The main theme of the Taoist classics is: to learn the Tao, we must reduce the pompous and unreal day by day, reduce and reduce, in order to reach the realm of simplicity and inaction.

古文：且心目所知见者，每损之尚未能已，岂复攻乎异端，而增其智虑哉！ 
现代文：就连纷扰人的内心的事物，往往有意减少尚且不能做到，怎么还能追求非分的东西，来增加自己的精神负担啊！ 
English: Even the things that disturb people's hearts are often intentionally reduced and cannot be done, how can they still pursue the wrong things to increase their spiritual burden!

古文：帝曰： 理身无为，则清高矣！
现代文：睿宗说： 用无为来修身养性，就会清静高洁了。
English: Ruizong said, "If you cultivate yourself by doing nothing, you will become calm and refined."

古文：理国无为，如何？ 
现代文：用无为来治理国家，怎么样呢？ 
English: How about governing the country by doing nothing?

古文：对曰： 国犹身也。
现代文：司马承祯回答说： 国家像人一样。
English: He replied: A country is like itself.

古文：《老子》曰： 游心于淡，合气于漠，顺物自然而无私焉，而天下理。 
现代文：《老子》说： 存心淡泊，留神宁静，顺应客观世界的本来模样而没有个人欲望，那么天下就太平了。 
English: "Lao Zi" said: "If you deliberately stay away from others, pay attention to tranquility, and conform to the original appearance of the objective world without personal desires, then the world will be peaceful."

古文：《易》曰： 圣人者，与天地合其德。 
现代文：《周易》说： 圣人，他的德性和天地融为一体。 
English: "Zhou Yi" said: A saint, his virtue and heaven and earth are integrated.

古文：是知天不言而信，不为而成。
现代文：这就可知天不强争却可让人信赖，天不强求却可把事办成。
English: This shows that God is not forceful, but can be trusted, and God is not forceful, but can get things done.

古文：无为之旨，理国之道也。 
现代文：无为的主旨，就是治国的指导思想。 
English: The principle of doing nothing is the guiding principle of China's governance.

古文：睿宗叹息曰： 广成之言，即斯是也！ 
现代文：睿宗赞叹说： 广成子的话，正是这个意思。 
English: Ruizong said with admiration, "This is exactly what Guangcheng Zi said.

古文：承祯固辞还山，仍赐宝琴一张，及霞纹帔而遣之，朝中词人赠诗者百余人。
现代文：司马承祯坚决要求回天台山，睿宗就赐给一张宝琴和一套道士服装让他离去，朝廷为他做诗送别的诗人就有一百多名。
English: Sima Chengyao insisted on returning to Tiantai Mountain, and Emperor Ruizong gave him a Baojin and a set of Taoist clothing to let him go. More than a hundred poets composed poems for him.

古文：开元九年，玄宗又遣使迎入京，亲受法箓，前后赏赐甚厚。
现代文：开元九年，玄宗又派使者接他进京，亲自向他学习符，前前后后赏赐非常丰厚。
English: In the ninth year of the first century, Xuanzong also sent an envoy to meet him in Beijing, and personally learned the characters from him. He was rewarded very richly.

古文：十年，驾还西都，承祯又请还天台山，玄宗赋诗以遣之。
现代文：开元十年，玄宗回到西京长安，司马承祯又要求回天台山，玄宗做诗为他送行。
English: In the 10th year of the first century, Xuanzong returned to Chang'an, West Beijing, and Sima Chengyao asked him to return to Tiantai Mountain. Xuanzong wrote a poem to see him off.

古文：十五年，又召至都。
现代文：开元十五年，又把他接到京都。
English: In the fifteenth year of the Heian period, he was transferred to Kyoto.

古文：玄宗令承祯于王屋山自选形胜，置坛室以居焉。
现代文：玄宗叫司马承祯在王屋山自己选择一个风景优美的地方，建筑坛场庙宇住在那里。
English: Xuanzong told Sima Chengyao to choose a scenic place on Wangyashan and build the temple there.

古文：承祯因上言： 今五岳神祠，皆是山林之神，非正真之神也。
现代文：司马承祯就这个问题禀奏说： 如今嵩山、泰山、华山、衡山、恒山这 五岳 的神庙，祭祀的都是山林的神灵，不是真正的神仙。
English: Sima Chengyao commented on this issue: Nowadays, the temples of the five mountains, Songshan, Taishan, Huashan, Hengshan and Hengshan, all worship the gods of the mountains and forests, not the real gods.

古文：五岳皆有洞府，各有上清真人降任其职，山川风雨，阴阳气序，是所理焉。
现代文：五岳都有神仙居住的洞府，各洞府都有上清真人降落下来担任那里的职务，山河风雨，阴阳节令，都由他管理。
English: The five mountains all have caves inhabited by immortals. In each cave, a Shang Halin has descended to take up a position there. Mountains, rivers, wind and rain, yin and yang festivals, are all managed by him.

古文：冠冕章服，佐从神仙，皆有名数。
现代文：礼帽礼服的等级，各位神仙的身份，都有明确的记载。
English: The rank of the ceremonial hat and dress, as well as the identity of each deity, are clearly recorded.

古文：请别立斋祠之所。 
现代文：请在五岳另外安排建立道观的地方。 
English: Please arrange a place to establish a Taoist temple in Wudake.

古文：玄宗从其言，因敕五岳各置真君祠一所，其形象制度，皆令承祯推按道经，创意为之。
现代文：玄宗听从了他的要求，于是诏令在五岳各建一所真君祠，真君祠的造型样式规模大小，都让司马承祯按照道教经典进行推算，设计蓝图进行建造。
English: Xuanzong listened to his request, so he issued an edict to build a True Monk's Shrine in each of the five mountains. The shape, style and size of the True Monk's Shrine were all calculated by Sima Chengyao according to Taoist classics, and the blueprint was designed and built.

古文：承祯颇善篆隶书，玄宗令以三体写《老子经》，因刊正文句，定著五千三百八十言为真本以奏上之。
现代文：司马承祯擅长篆、隶书法，玄宗要他用篆、隶、楷三种字体书写老子的《道德经》，同时校正字句，定下五千三百八十个字叫作真本呈奏玄宗。
English: Sima Chengyu was good at calligraphy, and Xuanzong asked him to write Lao Zi's "Moral Classic" in three fonts, and at the same time correct the words, and set down 5,380 characters to be the true text to present Xuanzong.

古文：以承祯王屋所居为阳台观，上自题额，遣使送之。
现代文：把司马承祯在王屋山建造的坛场庙宇叫作阳台观，玄宗亲笔书写匾额，派使者送给司马承祯。
English: The altar temple built by Sima Chengyu in Wangyashan is called the balcony view. Xuanzong personally wrote the inscription and sent an envoy to Sima Chengyu.

古文：赐绢三百匹，以充药饵之用。
现代文：赏赐三百匹绢，作为炼丹的费用。
English: He was rewarded with three hundred yakitori, which he used to pay for the refined sake.

古文：俄又令玉真公主及光禄卿韦縚至其所居，修金箓斋，复加以锡赍。
现代文：不久又命令玉真公主和光禄卿韦纟舀到阳台观会集道众修造名为 金 的道场，又给予赏赐。
English: Not long after, he ordered Princess Tamasena and Emperor Guanglu to go to the balcony to watch the assembly of Taoists to build a dojo called Jin, and also gave them a reward.

古文：是岁，卒于王屋山，时年八十九。
现代文：这年，司马承祯在王屋山去世，终年八十九岁。
English: That year, Sima Chengyao died in Wangyashan at the age of eighty-nine.

古文：其弟子表称； 死之日，有双鹤饶坛，及白云从坛中涌出，上连于天，而师容色如生。 
现代文：他的弟子呈表禀奏说： 去世那天，有一对仙鹤在坛场上空盘旋，后来一团白云从坛场腾起，直上九天，而先师的面容跟活着一样。 
English: His disciple recited: On the day of his death, a pair of cranes hovered over the altar, and then a white cloud rose from the altar for nine days, and his face was as if he were still alive.

古文：玄宗深叹之，乃下制曰： 混成不测，入寥自化。
现代文：玄宗深感叹惜，发出诏书说： 混沌之中自然生成，万物变化不可预料，你已进入空灵寂静的境界，飞往神仙所在的天国。
English: Deeply regretting, Xuanzong issued an edict saying, "In the midst of chaos, things naturally come into being. Changes in all things are unpredictable. You have entered the realm of ethereal silence, flying to the heaven where the immortals are.

古文：虽独立有象，而至极则冥。
现代文：虽然活得超凡脱俗也是虚相，而到达极点就会物我两忘。
English: Although it is a lie to live an extraordinary life, when you reach the extreme, you will forget everything.

古文：故王屋山道士司马子微，心依道胜，理会玄远，遍游名山，密契仙洞。
现代文：所以王屋山的道士司马子微，情感寄托于神仙的境界，思想贯通了奥妙的道经，游遍了名山胜景，寄情于神仙洞府。
English: Therefore, the Taoist of Wangya Mountain, Sima Ziwei, placed his emotions in the realm of the immortals, his thoughts penetrated the mysterious Taoist scriptures, traveled throughout the famous mountains and scenic spots, and sent his love to the immortal cave.

古文：存观其妙，逍遥得意之场；亡复其根，宴息无何之境。
现代文：在凡间就欣赏它那神奇美妙，在适意的地方安闲自得；离尘世就返回自己的本源，在空灵虚无的地方安息。
English: Appreciate the magic and beauty of it everywhere, relax in the right place; leave the world and return to your source, rest in the place of ethereal nothingness.

古文：固以名登真格，位在灵官。
现代文：你的名字本来进入了神仙的行列，你的职务本来排在了仙官的位置。
English: Your name would have entered the ranks of the immortals, your position would have been in the position of a fairy official.

古文：林壑未改，遐霄已旷；言念高烈，有怆于怀。宜赠徽章，用光丹箓。
现代文：山林没有改变，高天已成阻隔，想起你的崇高纯正，心里就涌起悲伤，应追认你的名号，以光大道家的历史。
English: The mountains and forests have not changed. The high sky has become a barrier. When I think of your sublimity and purity, sadness surges in my heart. I should recognize your name and the history of Guangdao family.

古文：可银青光禄大夫，号真一先生。 
现代文：同意追认为银青光禄大夫，赐号叫真一先生。 
English: He agreed to be referred to as Silver Qing Guanglu Doctor, and was given the title of Mr. Zhenyi.

古文：仍为亲制碑文。
现代文：还为他亲笔撰写了碑文。
English: He also wrote the inscription himself.

