古文：十有一年春，王二月，叔弓如宋，葬宋平公。夏四月丁巳，楚子虔诱蔡侯般杀之于申。
现代文：十一年春季，周历正月，叔弓到宋国去。夏季四月丁巳日，楚子虔引诱蔡侯般到申地将其杀死。
English: In the spring of the eleventh year, in the first month of the lunar calendar, Shuqian went to Song. In the summer, on the fourth day of the month, Chu Zi Qian lured Cai Houhan to Shendi and killed him.

古文：楚公子弃疾帅师围蔡。
现代文：楚国的公子疾率领军队包围了蔡国都城。
English: The Duke of Chu led an army to encircle the capital city of Cai.

古文：五月甲申，夫人归氏薨。
现代文：五月甲申日，鲁国夫人归氏去世。
English: On May 6th, Mrs. Lu Guo died.

古文：大蒐于比蒲。
现代文：这个月在比蒲这个地方检阅战车和步兵。
English: Russia held a large military parade in Bibo.

古文：仲孙貜会邾子盟于祲祥。
现代文：仲孙貜在祲祥与邾子订立盟约。
English: Nakasone entered into a treaty with Shoshi at Shosho.

古文：秋，季孙意如会晋韩起、齐国弱、宋华亥、卫北宫佗、郑罕虎、曹人、杞人于厥慭。
现代文：秋季，季孙意如与晋国的韩起、齐国的国弱、宋国的华亥、卫国的北宫佗、郑国的罕虎、曹国人、杞国人在厥慭会见。
English: In autumn, Ji Sun Yiru met with Han Qi of Jin, Guo Weak of Qi, Hua Hai of Song, Bei Gong Yao of Wei, Han Tiger of Zheng, Cao Guo Ren and Yao Guo Ren in Jueyun.

古文：九月己亥，葬我小君齐归。
现代文：九月己亥日，安葬鲁国国君夫人齐归。
English: In September, on the day of Ji Hai, the wives of Lu Guoqun and Lu Guoqun returned together.

古文：冬十有一月丁酉，楚师灭蔡，执蔡世子有以归，用之。
现代文：冬季十一月丁酉日，楚国军队灭掉蔡国，拘捕蔡国世子有回国，使用世子有。
English: In the winter of November on the day of Ding Xi, the Chu army eliminated Cai Guo, arrested Cai Guo's heir and returned to the country, and used the heir.

古文：十一年春，王二月，叔弓如宋，葬平公也。
现代文：十一年春季，周王朝历法的二月，叔弓到宋国去，这是为了安葬宋平公。
English: In the spring of the eleventh year, in the second month of the Zhou Dynasty calendar, Uncle Bow went to Song Province to bury Song Ping.

古文：景王问于苌弘曰： 今兹诸侯，何实吉？何实凶？ 
现代文：周景王向苌弘询问说： 现在诸侯之中，哪里吉祥，哪里凶险？ 
English: Zhou Jingwang asked Gong Hong, "Among the princes now, where is auspicious and where is dangerous?"

古文：对曰： 蔡凶。
现代文：苌弘回答说： 蔡国凶险。
English: Zhai Hong replied: Cai Guo is in grave danger.

古文：此蔡侯般弑其君之岁也。
现代文：这是蔡侯般杀死他国君的年份。
English: This is the year that Cai Hou killed his sovereign.

古文：岁在豕韦，弗过此矣。
现代文：岁星在豕韦，不会过这一年了。
English: The stars are in Zouwei, and this year will not pass.

古文：楚将有之，然壅也。
现代文：楚国将会据有蔡国，然而这是积累邪恶。
English: Chu will have the upper hand over Cai, but this is an accumulation of evils.

古文：岁及大梁，蔡复楚凶，天之道也。 
现代文：岁星到达大梁，蔡国复国，楚国不吉利，这是上天的常道。 
English: When the year star reaches the great beam, Cai Guo will be restored to the country, and Chu Guo will be unlucky. This is the common way of heaven.

古文：楚子在申，召蔡灵侯。
现代文：楚灵王在申地，召见蔡灵侯。
English: King Chuling is in Shensi and summons Prince Cai Ling.

古文：灵侯将往。蔡大夫曰： 王贪而无信，唯蔡于感，今币重而言甘，诱我也，不如无往。 
现代文：蔡灵侯打算前去，蔡国的大夫说： 楚王贪婪而没有信用，唯独怨恨蔡国。现在财礼重而说话甜，这是引诱我们，不如不去。 
English: Cai Ling Hou was planning to go, but Cai Guo's doctor said: King Chu is greedy and untrustworthy, but he resents Cai Guo. Now, he is heavy on money and gifts, but sweet-talking. This is a temptation for us, so we might as well not go.

古文：蔡侯不可。
现代文：蔡灵侯不同意。
English: Cai Linghou disagreed.

古文：三月丙申，楚子伏甲而飨蔡侯于申，醉而执之。
现代文：三月十五日，楚灵王在申地埋伏甲士而设享礼招待蔡灵侯，让他喝醉了酒就囚禁了他。
English: On March 15th, King Chuling set up a banquet to invite Cai Linghou after he had ambushed the knights in Shen. He got him drunk and imprisoned him.

古文：夏四月丁巳，杀之，刑其士七十人。
现代文：夏季，四月初七日，杀死了蔡灵侯，杀死了蔡国的士七十人。
English: In the summer, on the 7th day of the 4th month, he killed Cai Linghou and seventy of Cai Guo's soldiers.

古文：公子弃疾帅师围蔡。
现代文：公子弃疾领兵包围蔡国。
English: The prince abandoned the army and led the soldiers to surround Cai Guo.

古文：韩宣子问于叔向曰： 楚其克乎？ 
现代文：韩宣子向叔向询问说： 楚国会战胜吗？ 
English: Han Xuan Zi asked his uncle: Will the Chu nation win?

古文：对曰： 克哉！
现代文：叔向回答说： 可以战胜的！
English: Xiangxiang replied, "It can be defeated!"

古文：蔡侯获罪于其君，而不能其民，天将假手于楚以毙之，何故不克？
现代文：蔡灵侯得罪了他的国君，而得不到百姓的拥护，上天将要借楚国的手来把他杀死，为什么不能战胜？
English: Cai Ling Hou had offended his sovereign, but failed to win the people's support. Heaven was going to use the hands of the State of Chu to kill him. Why couldn't they win?

古文：然肸闻之，不信以幸，不可再也。
现代文：然而肸听说，由于没有信用而得利，不可能有第二次。
English: However, I heard that because of the lack of trust and profit, there can not be a second time.

古文：楚王奉孙吴以讨于陈曰，将定而国。
现代文：楚灵王事奉太孙吴讨伐陈国，说： 将要安定你们的国家。 
English: King Chuling served the great-grandson Wu to fight against the State of Chen and said, "We will stabilize your country."

古文：陈人听命，而遂县之。
现代文：陈国人听从了他的命令，就灭了陈国建置为县。
English: The people of Chen Province obeyed his order and abolished Chen Province and established it as a county.

古文：今又诱蔡而杀其君，以围其国，虽幸而克，必受其咎，弗能久矣。
现代文：现在又诱骗蔡国而杀了他们的国君，来包围他们的国家，虽然侥幸而得胜，必然受到它的灾殃，不能长久了。
English: Now they have tricked Cai Guo into killing their sovereign to encircle their country. Although they won by chance, they will inevitably be plagued by it. It can't last.

古文：桀克有以丧其国，纣克东夷而陨其身。
现代文：夏桀战胜了有缗而丢掉了国家，商纣战胜东夷而丢掉了生命。
English: Xia Yao defeated You Yao and lost the country, Shang Yao defeated Dong Yi and lost his life.

古文：楚小位下，而亟暴于二王，能无咎乎？
现代文：楚国疆域小地位低，而屡次表现得比上面两个国王还要暴虐，能够没有灾祸吗？
English: Can the small territory and low status of the Chu Kingdom, which has repeatedly shown itself to be even more tyrannical than the above two kings, be without disaster?

古文：天之假助不善，非祚之也，厚其凶恶而降之罚也。
现代文：上天借助于坏人，不是降福给他，而是增多他的凶恶然后给他惩罚。
English: Heaven helps the bad man, not by blessing him, but by multiplying his evil and then punishing him.

古文：且譬之如天，其有五材而将用之，力尽而敝之，是以无拯，不可没振。 
现代文：而且比如像天有金、木、水、火、土五种材料而由人加以使用，材力用尽就丢弃了，因此楚国不可拯救，最后也不能兴盛了。 
English: Moreover, for example, there are five kinds of materials such as gold, wood, water, fire, and earth, and they are used by people. When the material is exhausted, it is discarded. Therefore, Chu cannot be saved, and in the end, it cannot prosper.

古文：五月，齐归薨，大蒐于比蒲，非礼也。
现代文：五月，齐归去世。在比蒲举行盛大的阅兵，这是不符合礼的。
English: In May, Qi Gui passed away. It is not proper to hold a grand military parade in Bibo.

古文：孟僖子会邾庄公盟于祲祥，修好，礼也。
现代文：孟僖子会见邾庄公，在祲祥结盟，重修从前的友好，这是符合礼的。
English: It is proper for Meng Yanzi to meet with Gong Zhuang, make an alliance in Gongxiang, and reestablish the former friendship.

古文：泉丘人有女梦以其帷幕孟氏之庙，遂奔僖子，其僚从之。
现代文：泉丘人有一个女儿，梦见用她的帷幕覆盖了孟氏的祖庙，就私奔到孟僖子那里，她的同伴也跟着去了。
English: A daughter of the Quanqiu people had a dream that she had covered Meng's ancestral temple with her curtain, so she ran away to Meng's daughter, and her companion followed her.

古文：盟于清丘之社，曰： 有子，无相弃也。 
现代文：在清丘的土地神庙里盟誓说： 有了儿子，不要丢掉我！ 
English: In the land temple of Qingqiu, I swore: If you have a son, don't throw me away!

古文：僖子使助薳氏之簉。
现代文：孟僖子让她们住在薳氏那个地方做妾。
English: Meng Yanzi asked them to live in the same area as the Xing family as concubines.

古文：反自祲祥，宿于薳氏，生懿子及南宫敬叔于泉丘人。其僚无子，使字敬叔。
现代文：孟僖子从祲祥回来，住在薳氏那里，在泉丘的那个女人生了懿子和南宫敬叔。她的同伴没有儿子，就让同伴抚养敬叔。
English: Meng Zizi returned from Yuxiang and lived with the Zi clan. The woman in Quanqiu gave birth to Zizi and Nan Gong Jing uncle. Her companion did not have a son, so she let her companion raise Jing uncle.

古文：楚师在蔡，晋荀吴谓韩宣子曰： 不能救陈，又不能救蔡，物以无亲，晋之不能，亦可知也已！为盟主而不恤亡国，将焉用之？ 秋，会于厥慭，谋救蔡也。
现代文：自己做盟主而不去为灭亡的国家担忧，又哪里用得着盟主？ 秋季，季孙意如和晋国韩起、齐国国弱、宋国华亥、卫国北宫佗、郑国罕虎、曹国人、杞国人在厥慭会见，为了商量救援蔡国。
English: In the autumn, Ji Sun Yiru met with the leaders of Jin, Han, Qi, Wei, Song, Bei Gong, Zheng, Han, Cao, and Yan in Jiuyuan to discuss the rescue of Cai.

古文：郑子皮将行。
现代文：郑国的子皮将要出行。
English: Zheng Guo's calf is about to travel.

古文：子产曰： 行不远，不能救蔡也。
现代文：子产说： 走不远的，已经不能救援蔡国了。
English: "We can't go far, we can't rescue Cai Guo," Zi Yuan said.

古文：蔡小而不顺，楚大而不德，天将弃蔡以壅楚。盈而罚之，蔡必亡矣。
现代文：蔡国小而不顺服，楚国大而不施仁德，上天将要抛弃蔡国来使楚国积累邪恶，恶贯满盈然后惩罚它，蔡国一定灭亡了。
English: Cai Guo is small but disobedient, Chu Guo is big but not benevolent. Heaven will abandon Cai Guo to make Chu Guo accumulate evil, and then punish it. Cai Guo will surely perish.

古文：且丧君而能守者，鲜矣。
现代文：而且丧失了国君而能够守住国家的也是很少的。
English: And it is rare that a country can hold on to power after losing its ruler.

古文：三年，王其有咎乎！
现代文：到了三年，楚王大概有灾难吧！
English: In three years, King Chu will probably have a disaster!

古文：美恶周必复，王恶周矣。 
现代文：美和恶的岁星绕行一周的时候必然会有报应，楚灵王的邪恶已经要到岁星绕行一周的时候了。 
English: When the stars of good and evil orbit around each other, there is bound to be retribution. The evil of King Chuling has already reached the time when the stars orbit around each other.

古文：晋人使狐父请蔡于楚，弗许。
现代文：晋国人派狐父到楚国请求楚国宽免蔡国，楚国人不答应。
English: The people of Jin sent Foxtel to Chu to ask Chu to pardon Cai, but the people of Chu did not agree.

古文：单子会韩宣子于戚，视下言徐。
现代文：单成公在戚地会见韩宣子，目光向下，说话迟缓。
English: When he met Han Xuan Zi at a relative's place, Shan Cheng Gong looked down and spoke slowly.

古文：叔向曰： 单子其将死乎。
现代文：叔向说： 单子大概将要死了吧！
English: Uncle Xiang said: Shan Zi is probably going to die!

古文：朝有著定，会有表，衣有，带有结。
现代文：朝见有规定的席位，会见有标志，衣服有交叉，衣带有交结子。
English: The morning assembly has designated seats, the meeting has a sign, the clothes have a cross, and the clothes have a knot.

古文：会朝之言，必闻于表著之位，所以昭事序也。
现代文：会见和朝见的言语，一定要使在座的人都能听到，用它来表明事情有条有理。
English: The words "meeting" and "visit" must be heard by everyone present, and used to show that things are in order.

古文：视不过结、之中，所以道容貌也。
现代文：目光不低于衣服交叉和衣带交结之处，用它来端正仪容形貌。
English: Look at the place where the clothes intersect and the belt intersects, and use it to straighten the appearance.

古文：言以命之，容貌以明之，失则有阙。
现代文：言语用来发布命令，仪容相貌用来表明态度，做不到就有错误。
English: Words are used to issue orders, gestures and facial expressions are used to express attitudes, and if this is not done, there will be mistakes.

古文：今单子为王官伯，而命事于会，视不登带，言不过步，貌不道容，而言不昭矣。
现代文：现在单子做天子的百官之长，在盟会上宣布天子的命令，目光不高于衣带，声音超过一步就听不到，相貌不能端正仪容，言事就不能明白了。
English: Now, as the chief of the hundred officials of the Son of Heaven, he announces the order of the Son of Heaven at the alliance meeting, his eyes are not higher than his belt, his voice cannot be heard more than one step, his appearance cannot be polished, and his words cannot be understood.

古文：不道不共，不昭不从，无守气矣。 
现代文：不端正，就不恭敬；不明白，别人就不顺从。
English: If you are not correct, you will not be respected; if you do not understand, others will not obey.

古文：九月，葬齐归，公不慼。
现代文：他已经没有保养身体的精气了。 九月，安葬齐归，鲁昭公不悲痛。
English: He no longer had the energy to take care of his body. In September, the funeral was held, and Lu Zhaogong did not grieve.

古文：晋士之送葬者，归以语史赵。
现代文：晋国来送葬的士人，回去把情况告诉史赵。
English: The scholar who came from Jin Province to attend the funeral should go back and tell Shi Zhao about the situation.

古文：史赵曰： 必为鲁郊。 
现代文：史赵说： 昭公一定会寄居到别国的郊外。 
English: Shi Zhao said: Akihiro will definitely live in the suburbs of another country.

古文：侍者曰： 何故？ 
现代文：侍从的人说： 为什么？ 
English: The servant said, "Why?

古文：曰： 归，姓也。不思亲，祖不归也。 
现代文：史赵说： 他是归氏的儿子，不想念母亲，祖先不会保佑他的。 
English: Shi Zhao said: He is the son of a returnee, he does not miss his mother, and his ancestors will not bless him.

古文：叔向曰： 鲁公室其卑乎。
现代文：叔向说： 鲁国公室的地位要下降了吧！
English: My uncle said, "The status of the State Chancellery of the Republic of Lu is going to decline!

古文：君有大丧，国不废蒐。
现代文：国君发生大丧事，国家却不停止阅兵。
English: A great tragedy has befallen the country's ruler, but the country does not stop the military parade.

古文：有三年之丧，而无一日之慼。
现代文：有三年的丧期，却没有一天的悲痛。
English: There is a three-year mourning period, but not a single day of grief.

古文：国不恤丧，不忌君也。
现代文：国家不为丧事去悲哀，这是不畏惧国君。
English: A country does not mourn for its dead. It is not afraid of its ruler.

古文：君无慼容，不顾亲也。
现代文：国君没有悲痛的样子，这是不顾念亲人。
English: The fact that the sovereign did not look like he was grieving was out of consideration for his relatives.

古文：国不忌君，君不顾亲，能无卑乎？
现代文：国人不畏惧国君，国君不顾念亲人，地位能够不下降吗？
English: Chinese people do not fear the sovereign, the sovereign does not care about relatives, can the status not decline?

古文：殆其失国。 
现代文：恐怕将会丢掉他的国家。 
English: I'm afraid he will lose his country.

古文：冬十一月，楚子灭蔡，用隐大子于冈山。
现代文：冬季，十一月，楚灵王灭亡了蔡国，杀死了隐太子用来祭祀冈山。
English: In the winter, in November, King Chuling overthrew Cai Guo and killed the Hidden Prince to sacrifice to Okayama.

古文：申无宇曰： 不祥。
现代文：申无宇说： 不吉祥。
English: Shen Wuyu said: It is not auspicious.

古文：五牲不相为用，况用诸侯乎？
现代文：五种牲口不能互相用来祭祀，何况用诸侯呢？
English: Five kinds of animals cannot be used to sacrifice to each other, let alone to the princes.

古文：王必悔之。 
现代文：国君一定要后悔的。 
English: The Emperor will surely regret it.

古文：十二月，单成公卒。
现代文：十二月，单成公去世。
English: In December of that year, Shan Zi passed away.

古文：楚子城陈、蔡、不羹。
现代文：楚灵王在陈地、蔡地、不羹筑城。
English: King Chuling built cities in Chen, Cai, and Nian.

古文：使弃疾为蔡公。
现代文：派弃疾做蔡公。
English: Cai Gong as a representative of abandoning disease.

古文：王问于申无宇曰： 弃疾在蔡，何如？ 
现代文：楚灵王向申无宇询问说： 弃疾在蔡地怎么样？ 
English: King Chuling asked Shen Wuyu: "How is the abandonment of disease in Cai Di?"

古文：对曰： 择子莫如父，择臣莫如君。
现代文：申无宇回答说： 选择儿子没有像父亲那样合适的，选择臣子没有像国君那样合适的。
English: Shen Wuyu replied, "Choosing a son is not as appropriate as choosing a father, and choosing a vassal is not as appropriate as choosing a sovereign.

古文：郑庄公城栎而寘子元焉，使昭公不立。
现代文：郑庄公在栎地筑城而安置子元，让昭公不能立为国君。
English: Zheng Zhuanggong built a city in Shunde and installed his son Yuan, so that Zhaogong could not become the king.

古文：齐桓公城穀而寘管仲焉，至于今赖之。
现代文：齐桓公在穀地筑城而安置管仲，到现在齐国还得到利益。
English: King Qi Kuan built a city in the valley and installed a governor, and now Qi is still benefiting from it.

古文：臣闻五大不在边，五细不在庭。
现代文：臣听说五种大人物不在边境，五种小人物不在朝廷。
English: The minister heard that there are five kinds of big people who are not at the border and five kinds of small people who are not at the imperial court.

古文：亲不在外，羁不在内。
现代文：亲近的人不在外边，寄居的人不在里边。
English: Those who are near are not outside, and those who are outside are not inside.

古文：今弃疾在外，郑丹在内。君其少戒。 
现代文：现在弃疾在外边，郑丹在朝廷，君王恐怕要稍加戒备！ 
English: Now that Zheng Dan is out of the country and Zheng Dan is in the imperial court, I'm afraid the king has to be a little more careful!

古文：王曰： 国有大城，何如？ 
现代文：楚灵王说： 国都有高大的城墙，怎么样？ 
English: King Chuling said, "Countries all have tall city walls, right?

古文：对曰： 郑京、栎实杀曼伯，宋萧、亳实杀子游，齐渠丘实杀无知，卫蒲、戚实出献公，若由是观之，则害于国。
现代文：申无宇回答说： 在郑国的京地、栎地杀死了曼伯，在宋国的萧地、亳地杀死了子游，在齐国的渠丘杀死了公孙无知，在卫国的蒲地、戚地驱逐了献公。如果从这些看来，就有害于国都。
English: Shen Wuyu replied, "In the capital of Zheng, the capital of Shandong, he killed Manbo, in the capital of Song, the capital of Shandong, he killed Ziyu, in the capital of Qi, he killed Gongsun Wuzhong, in the capital of Pu, and in the capital of Guizhou, he expelled Xiangguo. From these perspectives, it would be harmful to the capital.

古文：末大必折，尾大不掉，君所知也。 
现代文：树枝大了一定折断，尾巴大了就不能摇摆，这是君王所知道的。 
English: The king knows that a big branch is sure to break, and a big tail cannot be swung.

