古文：唐定王桱，太祖第二十三子。
现代文：唐定王朱桱，太祖第二十三子。
English: King Zhu Xi of the Tang Dynasty, the 23rd son of the great-grandfather.

古文：洪武二十四年封。
现代文：洪武二十四年受封。
English: Hongwu was given the title in the 24th year.

古文：永乐六年就藩南阳。
现代文：永乐六年前往藩地南阳。
English: Yongle went to Nanyang six years ago.

古文：十三年薨。
现代文：十三年去世。
English: He died 13 years later.

古文：子靖王琼烃嗣。
现代文：其子靖王朱琼烃继嗣。
English: His son, Jing Wang Zhu Qiong, became the heir.

古文：综核有矩矱，为成祖所喜。
现代文：朱琼烃行为规矩，为成祖疼爱。
English: Zhu Qionghai behaved in a proper manner and loved Cheng Zuo.

古文：惑于嬖人，囚世子器墭及其子聿键于承奉司，器墭中毒死。
现代文：入朝之后，成祖三天两头召见他。宣德元年，朱琼烃去世。其妃高氏还未被册封，她自己便已上吊殉夫，宣宗下诏封她为靖王妃。朱琼烃无子，其弟宪王朱琼火旦继嗣，成化十一年去世。
English: In the first year of the Xuande Emperor, Zhu Qiongnu died. His wife Gao had not yet been canonized, she had already hanged herself, and Emperor Xuanzong had her proclaimed as the Empress of Jing. Zhu Qiongnu had no children, and his brother, Emperor Xianwang, Zhu Qiongnu's successor, died in the eleventh year of his reign.

古文：崇祯五年，硕熿薨，聿键嗣。
现代文：崇祯五年，朱硕火黄去世，朱聿键继嗣。
English: In the fifth year of Chongzhen, Zhu Shuo Huhuang passed away, and Zhu Shujian became his successor.

古文：七年，流贼大炽，蠲金筑南阳城，又援潞藩例，乞增兵三千人。
现代文：七年，流贼势头正盛，朱聿键免献黄金，而用来修筑南阳城，又援用潞藩陈例，请求增兵三千人。
English: In the seventh year, the bandits were in full swing. Zhu Rongji exempted the gold from the donation and used it to build Nanyang City. He also invoked the precedent of the Lop County and requested an increase of three thousand soldiers.

古文：不许。
现代文：崇祯帝不许。
English: The Emperor does not allow it.

古文：九年秋八月，京师戒严，倡义勤王。
现代文：九年八月，京城戒严，朱聿键带头勤王。
English: In August of the ninth year, the capital was placed under martial law, with Zhu Rongji taking the lead.

古文：诏切责，勒还国。
现代文：崇祯帝下诏切责，勒令他返回藩地。
English: Emperor Chongzhen issued an edict ordering him to return to the domain.

古文：事定，下部议，废为庶人，幽之凤阳。
现代文：事定之后，崇祯帝将其下部议罪，废为庶人，幽禁于凤阳。
English: After the matter was decided, Emperor Chongzhen condemned the lower part of him as a commoner and banished him to Fengyang.

古文：弟聿镆嗣。
现代文：其弟朱聿镆继嗣。
English: His younger brother, Zhu Xi, succeeded him.

古文：十四年，李自成陷南阳，聿镆遇害。
现代文：十四年，李自成攻陷南阳，朱聿镆遇害。
English: Fourteen years later, Li Zicheng invaded Nanyang, and Zhu Xi was killed.

古文：十七年，京师陷，福王由崧立于南京，乃赦聿键出。
现代文：十七年，京城失陷，福王朱由崧立位于南京，才将朱聿键赦免出来。
English: Seventeen years later, after the fall of the capital, Zhu Yuqian, the King of Fortune, was located in Nanjing. It was only then that Zhu Yuqian was pardoned.

古文：大清顺治二年五月，南都降。
现代文：大清顺治二年五月，南都投降。
English: In May of the second year of the Great Qing Dynasty, Nanto surrendered.

古文：聿键行至杭，遇镇江总兵官郑鸿逵、户部郎中苏观生，遂奉入闽。
现代文：朱聿键行至杭州，遇到镇江总兵官郑鸿逵、户部郎中苏观生，于是两人尊奉朱聿键进入闽境。
English: Zhu Rongji went to Hangzhou, met Zhenjiang general officer Zheng Hongyi and the head of the household, Zhong Su Guan Sheng, so the two men honored Zhu Rongji and entered the territory.

古文：南安伯郑芝龙、巡抚都御史张肯堂与礼部尚书黄道周等定议，奉王称监国。
现代文：南安伯郑芝龙、巡抚都御史张肯堂与礼部尚书黄道周等议定，尊奉朱聿键为监国。
English: Zheng Zhilong, Nan'an Bo, Zhang Kendang, the governor of the capital, and the ceremonial department agreed to honor Zhu Rongji as the supervisor of the country.

古文：闰六月丁未，遂立于福州，号隆武，改福州为天兴府。
现代文：闰六月二十八日，朱聿键在福州即位，年号隆武，改福州为天兴府。
English: On leap June 28th, Zhu Rongji ascended to the throne in Fuzhou, and changed Fuzhou to Tianxingfu.

古文：进芝龙、鸿逵为侯，封郑芝豹、郑彩为伯，观生、道周俱大学士，肯堂为兵部尚书，余拜官有差。
现代文：他进封郑芝龙、郑鸿逵为侯，封郑芝豹、郑彩为伯，苏观生、黄道周为大学士，张肯堂为兵部尚书，其他人都分别授以官职。
English: He appointed Zheng Zhilong and Zheng Hongyi as princes, Zheng Zhipao and Zheng Cai as princes, Su Guan Sheng and Huang Dao Zhou as university scholars, Zhang Kendang as military secretary, and the others were all given official positions.

古文：聿键好学，通典故，然权在郑氏，不能有所为。
现代文：朱聿键十分好学，通晓典故，然而实权被郑氏掌握，不能有所作为。
English: Zhu Rongji was very studious and familiar with allusions, but the real power was controlled by Zheng, and he could not make a difference.

古文：是年八月，芝龙议简战守兵二十余万，计饷不支其半。
现代文：这年八月，郑芝龙提出操练备战守军二十余万，而粮饷却不足以支付军队的一半。
English: In August of that year, Zheng Zhilong proposed to train and prepare for war a garrison of more than 200,000 men, but grain was not enough to pay for half of the army.

古文：请预借两税一年，令群下捐俸，劝绅士输助，征府县银谷未解者。
现代文：请求预借一年税收，并命下属捐出俸禄，劝说绅士出资捐助，征调府县库存银两、谷粮。
English: He requested to borrow a year's tax in advance, ordered his subordinates to donate their salaries, persuaded the gentry to make donations, and requisitioned the prefectural and county stocks of silver and grain.

古文：官吏督迫，闾里骚然。
现代文：官吏四处督促，乡里一片骚乱。
English: Officials are on the lookout everywhere, and the countryside is in an uproar.

古文：又广开事例，犹苦不足。
现代文：又广开事例，犹苦不足。
English: There are also many examples, but it is still not enough.

古文：仙霞岭守关兵仅数百人，皆不堪用。
现代文：仙霞岭守关军队仅数百人，而且都不堪使用。
English: There are only a few hundred troops guarding the Xianxialing Pass, and they are not fit for use.

古文：聿键屡促芝龙出兵，辄以饷诎辞。
现代文：朱聿键屡次催促郑芝龙出兵，他总是以缺饷为由昧心推辞。
English: Zhu Rongji repeatedly urged Zheng Zhilong to send troops, but he always reluctantly declined on the grounds of lack of money.

古文：久之，芝龙知众论不平，乃请以鸿逵出浙东，彩出江西，各拥兵数千，号数万。
现代文：时间一久，郑芝龙知道舆论不平，于是请求命郑鸿逵前往浙东，郑彩前往江西，各拥兵数千，号称数万。
English: After a long time, Zheng Zhilong knew that public opinion was not fair, so he requested the order of Zheng Hongyi to go to East Zhejiang, Zheng Cai to go to Jiangxi, each with thousands of soldiers, known as tens of thousands.

古文：既行，托候饷，皆行百里而还。
现代文：两人出发后，借口等候粮饷，都行至百里而返。
English: After the two set out, on the pretext of waiting for grain, they both walked as far as a hundred miles and returned.

古文：先是，黄道周知芝龙无意出师，自请行，从广信趋婺源，兵溃死，事详《道周传》。
现代文：在此之前，黄道周了解郑芝龙无意出兵，便自己请求率军而行，从广信直趋婺源，兵败而死，事情详见《黄道周传》。
English: Prior to this, Zodiac Zhou understood that Zheng Zhilong had no intention of sending troops, so he requested to lead the army, from Guangxin straight to the source, and died in defeat. The details of the matter can be found in "The Zodiac Weekly."

古文：是时，李自成兵败，走死通山。其兄子李锦帅众降于湖广总督何腾蛟，一时增兵十余万。
现代文：当时，李自成兵败逃走，死于通山，其兄之子李锦率部投降湖广总督何腾蛟，何腾蛟一时增兵十余万。
English: At that time, Li Zicheng's soldiers were defeated and fled, and he died in Tongshan. His brother's son, Li Jin, led the troops to surrender to the governor of Hougang, He Tengyu, and He Tengyu temporarily increased the number of troops by more than one hundred thousand.

古文：侍郎杨廷麟、祭酒刘同升起兵复吉安、临江。
现代文：侍郎杨廷麟、祭酒刘同升起兵收复吉安、临江。
English: Attendant Yang Tinglin and celebrant Liu Tongsheng led the troops to recapture Ji'an and Linjiang.

古文：于是廷麟等请聿键出江右，腾蛟请出湖南。
现代文：于是杨廷麟等请求朱聿键前去江右，而何腾蛟请求他前往湖南。
English: As a result, Yang Tinglin and others asked Zhu Rongji to go to the right side of the river, while He Tengyu asked him to go to Hunan.

古文：原任知州金堡言腾蛟可恃，芝龙不可恃，宜弃闽就楚。
现代文：原任知州金堡说何腾蛟可以依靠，而郑芝龙不可依靠，应当弃闽趋楚。
English: The former Chizhou Jinbao said that He Tengyu could be relied on, while Zheng Zhilong could not be relied on, and should abandon his pursuit of Chu.

古文：聿键大喜，授堡给事中，遣观生先行募兵。
现代文：朱聿键听后大喜，便授金堡为给事中，派苏观生先行募兵。
English: Zhu Rongji was overjoyed after hearing this, and awarded Jinbao as a gift, and sent Su Guanzheng to recruit soldiers in advance.

古文：先是，靖江王亨嘉僣称监国，不奉聿键命，为巡抚瞿式耜等所擒，以捷闻。
现代文：在此之前，靖江王亨嘉僭称监国，不遵从朱聿键的命令，被巡抚瞿式耜等擒获，瞿式耜等向朱聿键报捷。
English: Prior to this, Jingjiang King Heng Jiaxuan claimed to be the overseer of the country, and disobeyed Zhu Rongji's order, and was captured by the inspector, Zou Shihong, and others. Zou Shihong and others reported to Zhu Rongji.

古文：而鲁王以海又称监国于绍兴，拒聿键使者，故聿键决意出江西、湖广。
现代文：而鲁王朱以海又在绍兴称监国，并将朱聿键的使者拒之门外，所以朱聿键决意前往江西、湖广。
English: However, Zhu Yihai, the king of Lu, claimed to be the overseer of the country in Shaoxing and shut out the emissaries of Zhu Xiakian, so Zhu Xiakian decided to go to Jiangxi and Hunan.

古文：十二月发福州，驻建宁。
现代文：十二月，从福州出发，驻扎建宁。
English: In December, it departed from Fuzhou and stationed in Jianning.

古文：广东布政汤来贺运饷十万，由海道至。
现代文：广东布政使汤来贺由海路运来十万石粮饷。
English: Guangdong Bu Zhengyi Tang Lai He transported 100,000 koku of grain by sea.

古文：明年二月驻延平。
现代文：第二年二月，驻扎延平。
English: In February of the following year, he was stationed in Yanping.

古文：三月，大清兵取吉安、抚州，围杨廷麟于赣州。
现代文：三月，大清军队攻取吉安、抚州，将杨廷麟围困于赣州。
English: In March, the Qing Dynasty army captured Ji'an and Fuzhou and besieged Yang Tinglin in Ganzhou.

古文：尚书郭维经出闽，募兵援赣。
现代文：尚书郭维经离开闽，募兵援赣。
English: Shang Shuguo and Wei Jing left Yunnan to recruit soldiers to help Yunnan.

古文：六月，大兵克绍兴，鲁王以海遁入海，闽中大震。
现代文：六月，清军攻克绍兴，鲁王朱以海逃亡入海，闽中大为震惊。
English: In June, the Qing army conquered Shaoxing, and Lu Wang Zhu Yihai fled into the sea, which shocked Yu Zhongda.

古文：芝龙假言海寇至，彻兵回安平镇，航海去。
现代文：郑芝龙假称海寇到来，撤兵返回安平镇，然后航海而逃。
English: Zheng Zhilong pretended that the pirates had arrived, withdrew his troops back to Anping Town, and then sailed away.

古文：守关将士皆随之，仙霞岭空无一人。
现代文：守关将士都跟随而去，仙霞岭空无一人。
English: The gatekeepers all left with him, and there was no one in Xianxialing.

古文：七月，何腾蛟遣使迎聿键，将至韶州。
现代文：七月，何腾蛟派遣使者迎接朱聿键，即将到达韶州。
English: In July, He Tengyu sent an envoy to meet Zhu Rongji, who was about to arrive in Zhangzhou.

古文：唯时我兵已抵闽关，守浦城御史郑为虹、给事中黄大鹏、延平知府王士和死焉。
现代文：这时清军已抵闽关，驻守浦城的御史郑为虹、给事中黄大鹏、延平知府王士和战死。
English: At this time, the Qing army had arrived in Shaoguan. Zheng Weihong, who was stationed in Pucheng, and Huang Dapeng, who was in charge of Yanping Prefecture, died in the battle.

古文：八月，聿键出走，数日方至汀州。
现代文：八月，朱聿键出走，数日才至汀州。
English: In August, Zhu Rongji ran away and only arrived in Tingzhou a few days later.

古文：成祖四子。仁宗、汉王高煦、赵王高燧俱文皇后生。
现代文：清军突至，随从官吏四处奔散，朱聿键与其妃曾氏均被俘获。曾氏在九泷投水而死，朱聿键则死于福州。
English: The Qing army rushed in, and the government officials scattered everywhere. Zhu Rongji and his wife Zeng were both captured. Zeng was drowned in Jiuyuan, and Zhu Rongji died in Fuzhou.

古文：高爔未详所生母。
现代文：给事中熊纬、尚书曹学亻全、通政使马思礼等自缢而死。
English: In the process, Xiong Wei, Shang Shucao, Xuanzhen Quan, and Tong Zhengzhi Ma Sili all committed suicide.

古文：汉王高煦，成祖第二子。
现代文：汉王朱高煦，成祖第二子。
English: Han King Zhu Gaozhen, the second son of Cheng Zu.

古文：性凶悍。
现代文：性情凶悍。
English: He has a violent temper.

古文：洪武时，召诸王子学于京师。
现代文：洪武年间，太祖将各位王子召往京城学习。
English: During the Hongwu era, Emperor Taizu invited the princes to study in the capital.

古文：高煦不肯学，言动轻佻，为太祖所恶。
现代文：朱高煦不肯学，而且言行轻佻，为太祖所厌恶。
English: Zhu Gaozhen did not want to learn, and his words and deeds were frivolous, which was abhorred by the great ancestor.

古文：及太祖崩，成祖遣仁宗及高煦入临京师。
现代文：太祖去世后，成祖派仁宗及朱高煦进入京城。
English: After the death of his great-grandfather, Cheng Zu sent Rinzong and Zhu Gaozhong to Beijing.

古文：舅徐辉祖以其无赖，密戒之。
现代文：朱高煦的舅舅徐辉祖见他游手好闲，品行不端，便暗中告诫他。
English: Zhu Gaozhen's uncle, Xu Huizu, saw his idleness and misconduct, and secretly admonished him.

古文：不听，盗辉祖善马，径渡江驰归。途中辄杀民吏，至涿州，又击杀驿丞，于是朝臣举以责燕。
现代文：他不听劝告，并偷走徐辉祖的一匹好马，径直渡江返回燕，朱高煦在归途中动不动就杀死官民，到涿州时，又击杀驿丞，于是朝臣以此指责燕。
English: He did not listen to the advice, and stole a good horse of Xu Huizu, and went straight across the river to return to Yan. Zhu Gaozhen killed officials and civilians on his way back. When he arrived in Zhangzhou, he also killed Zou Zheng, so the courtier accused Yan of this.

古文：成祖起兵，仁宗居守，高煦从，尝为军锋。
现代文：成祖起兵时，仁宗留守，朱高煦跟随成祖，曾为军中先锋。
English: When Cheng Zu raised an army, Ren Zong stayed behind, Zhu Gaojun followed Cheng Zu, and was once a pioneer in the army.

古文：白沟河之战，成祖几为瞿能所及，高煦帅精骑数千，直前决战，斩能父子于阵。
现代文：白沟河之战，成祖几乎被瞿能赶上时，朱高煦率领数千精锐骑兵，上前决战，将瞿能父子斩于阵前。
English: At the Battle of Baigou River, when Cheng Zu was almost overtaken by Yan Neng, Zhu Gaozhu, leading thousands of elite cavalrymen, advanced to the decisive battle and decapitated Yan Neng and his son.

古文：及成祖东昌之败，张玉战死，成祖只身走，适高煦引师至，击退南军。
现代文：到成祖东昌兵败，张玉战死，成祖只身逃走时，又是朱高煦率军赶到，击退南军。
English: When Chengzu Dongchang was defeated and Zhang Yu was killed in battle, and Chengzu fled alone, Zhu Gaozhen arrived with his army to repel the Southern Army.

古文：徐辉祖败燕兵于浦子口，高煦引蕃骑来。
现代文：徐辉祖在浦子口打败燕兵，朱高煦率领番骑奔来。
English: Xu Huizu defeated the Yan soldiers in Puzigou, and Zhu Gaozhu led the cavalry.

古文：成祖大喜，曰： 吾力疲矣，儿当鼓勇再战。 
现代文：成祖大喜，说： 我已精疲力竭了，我儿应当奋勇再战。 
English: Cheng Zu was overjoyed and said, "I am exhausted, my son should fight again."

古文：高煦麾蕃骑力战，南军遂却。
现代文：朱高煦指挥番骑，拼力作战，南军这才退兵。
English: Zhu Gaozhen commanded the cavalry, fought hard, and the Southern Army only then withdrew.

古文：成祖屡濒于危而转败为功者，高煦力为多。
现代文：成祖屡次濒临危难而转败为胜，朱高煦功劳很大。
English: Cheng Zu was repeatedly on the brink of disaster and turned defeat into victory. Zhu Gaozhen deserves great credit.

古文：成祖以为类己，高煦亦以此自负，恃功骄恣，多不法。
现代文：成祖认为他很像自己，朱高煦也以此自负，恃功骄纵，经常违法。
English: Chengzu thought that he was very much like himself, and Zhu Gaozhu was also conceited, arrogant, and often broke the law.

古文：成祖即位，命将兵往开平备边。
现代文：成祖即位后，命朱高煦率军前往开平防守边境。
English: After Cheng Zu ascended the throne, he ordered Zhu Gaofeng to lead an army to Kaiping to defend the border.

古文：时议建储，淇国公丘福、驸马王宁善高煦，时时称高煦功高，几夺嫡。
现代文：当时朝廷正在商议立储之事，淇国公丘福、驸马王宁喜欢朱高煦，常常在成祖面前称赞他功劳很大，几乎废立长子。
English: At that time, the imperial court was discussing the matter of the establishment of the reserve. Zhu Gaozhen was liked by the sovereigns Qufu and Wanning Ma Wangning, who often praised him in front of Cheng Zu for his great contribution, almost ruining the establishment of the eldest son.

古文：成祖卒以元子仁贤，且太祖所立，而高煦又多过失，不果。
现代文：成祖最终还是认为长子仁爱、贤能，况且是太祖所立，而朱高煦过失又多，没有改立朱高煦。
English: In the end, Cheng Zu still believed that the eldest son was benevolent, virtuous, and moreover was established by the great-grandfather, while Zhu Gaoqi had many faults and did not change the establishment of Zhu Gaoqi.

古文：永乐二年，仁宗立为太子，封高煦汉王，国云南。
现代文：永乐二年，仁宗立为太子，朱高煦封为汉王，藩地为云南。
English: In the second year of Yongle, Ren Zong became the crown prince, Zhu Gao was enthroned as the king of Han, and the domain was renamed Yunnan.

古文：高煦曰： 我何罪！斥万里。 
现代文：朱高煦说： 我有何罪，要被排斥到远隔万里之地。 
English: Zhu Gaozhen said: What is my sin that I should be banished to a land thousands of miles away?

古文：不肯行。
现代文：不肯前往。
English: He refused to go.

古文：从成祖巡北京，力请并其子归南京。
现代文：朱高煦跟随成祖巡幸北京，极力请求与其子一起返回南京。
English: Zhu Gaoqi followed Cheng Zu on a sightseeing tour of Beijing and strongly requested to return to Nanjing with his son.

古文：成祖不得已，听之。
现代文：成祖不得已，只好同意了他的请求。
English: Cheng Zu had no choice but to agree to his request.

古文：请得天策卫为护卫，辄以唐太宗自比。
现代文：朱高煦求得天策卫为护卫，动不动就自比为唐太宗。
English: Zhu Gaozhen sought Tian Zewei as an escort and compared himself to Tang Taizong at every turn.

古文：己，复乘间请益两护卫，所为益恣。
现代文：不久，他又乘机请求增加两护卫，其所作所为更加放纵。
English: Soon after, he took the opportunity to request two more guards, and his behaviour became even more intemperate.

古文：成祖尝命同仁宗谒孝陵。
现代文：成祖曾命他与仁宗一起谒拜孝陵。
English: Cheng Zu had ordered him to worship the tomb of Xiaoling together with Rinzong.

古文：仁宗体肥重，且足疾，两中使掖之行，恒失足。
现代文：仁宗身体肥硕，且有足疾，在雨中由使臣搀扶行走，还常常失足。
English: He was a portly man with a bad foot. Envoys had to help him walk in the rain and he often lost his footing.

古文：高煦从后言曰： 前人蹉跌，后人知警。 
现代文：朱高煦便从后说道： 前人失足，后人知警。 
English: Zhu Gaozhen then said: The predecessors lost their footing, the successors knew the police.

古文：时宣宗为皇太孙，在后应声曰： 更有后人知警也。 
现代文：当时是皇太孙的宣宗，在其后应声道： 更有后人知警啊。 
English: At that time, it was the Emperor's grandson, Emperor Xuan Zong, who later responded, "Even later generations know the police."

古文：高煦回顾失色。
现代文：朱高煦回首失色。
English: Zhu Gaozhen looked back, fading.

古文：高煦长七尺余，轻趫善骑射，两腋若龙鳞者数片。
现代文：朱高煦身高七尺余，动作轻捷，善于骑射，两腋皮肤长似数片龙鳞。
English: Zhu Gaoqin is more than seven feet tall, has light movements, is good at riding and shooting, and his cheek skin resembles several dragon scales.

古文：既负其雄武，又每从北征，在成祖左右，时媒孽东宫事，谮解缙至死，黄淮等皆系狱。
现代文：朱高煦依仗自己威武雄壮，又每次随军北征，跟在成祖左右，便经常在成祖面前挑拨是非，陷害东宫，因为他的谮言，使解缙致死，黄淮等人被捕下狱。
English: Zhu Gaoqi relied on his own mighty and strong, and every time he followed the Northern Expedition, following Cheng Zu around, he often stirred up trouble in front of Cheng Zu and framed the East Palace. Because of his slander, he caused the death of Xie Yao, and Huang Huai and others were arrested and imprisoned.

古文：十三年五月改封青州，又不欲行。
现代文：十三年五月，朱高煦改封青州，又不想前往。
English: In May 13th, Zhu Gaoxuan changed his fief to Qingzhou and did not want to go.

古文：成祖始疑之，赐敕曰： 既受藩封，岂可常居京邸！
现代文：成祖才开始怀疑他，赐诏说道： 你既已受封藩地，岂可常居守邸。
English: It was only when Cheng Zu began to doubt him that he issued an edict saying, "Since you have been given the fief of the domain, how can you always stay at the residence?"

古文：前以云南远惮行，今封青州，又托故欲留侍，前后殆非实意，兹命更不可辞。 
现代文：前因云南遥远，害怕前往，而今封于青州，又托故欲留，前后恐非实意，此命更不可辞。 
English: Because Yunnan was far away before, he was afraid to go, but now he is sealed in Qingzhou, and he wants to stay, but his fear is not real, and this life is even more irrevocable.

古文：然高煦迁延自如。
现代文：但是朱高煦仍拖延自如。
English: But Zhu Gaozhen still procrastinated.

古文：私选各卫健士，又募兵三千人，不隶籍兵部，纵使劫掠。
现代文：私自挑选各卫壮士，又募兵三千人，不隶属兵部，纵使他们四处劫掠。
English: I hand-picked every able-bodied guard and recruited 3,000 soldiers who were not part of the military, even though they went on a looting spree.

古文：兵马指挥徐野驴擒治之。
现代文：兵马指挥徐野驴将他们擒获惩处。
English: The commander of the soldiers and horses, Xu Nanzhe, caught them and punished them.

古文：高煦怒，手铁瓜挝杀野驴，众莫敢言。
现代文：朱高煦大怒，手持铁勺击杀徐野驴，对此无人敢言。
English: Zhu Gaozhen flew into a rage and, armed with an iron spoon, killed Xu's donkey. No one dared to say anything about it.

古文：遂僣用乘舆器物。
现代文：朱高煦于是僭用御用车马器物。
English: Zhu Gaozhen then used the royal chariots and horses.

古文：成祖闻之怒。
现代文：成祖听说后十分生气。
English: Chengzu was very angry when he heard about it.

古文：十四年十月还南京，尽得其不法数十事，切责之，褫冠服，囚系西华门内，将废为庶人。
现代文：十四年十月，成祖返回南京，尽获其违法之事数十桩，于是对他予以切责，褫夺其冠服，将他囚禁于西华门内，并准备将他废为庶人。
English: In October 14th, Cheng Zu returned to Nanjing. He was found guilty of dozens of illegal activities. Therefore, he was severely punished, his crown robe was taken away, he was imprisoned in the West China Gate, and he was about to be dethroned as a commoner.

古文：仁宗涕泣力救，乃削两护卫，诛其左右狎〈目匿〉诸人。
现代文：仁宗流泪力救，成祖乃削其两护卫，处死其左右狎昵数人。
English: With tears streaming down his face, Rinzong saved his life, but Cheng Zuo cut down his two guards and executed several people around him.

古文：明年三月徙封乐安州，趣即日行。
现代文：第二年三月迁封乐安州，命其即日启程。
English: In March of the following year, he was transferred to Le An Prefecture and ordered to leave the same day.

古文：高煦至乐安，怨望，异谋益急。
现代文：朱高煦到乐安后，心中怨恨，便急于谋反。
English: After Zhu Gaozhen arrived in Le'an, he harbored resentment in his heart and was eager to rebel.

古文：仁宗数以书戒，不悛。
现代文：仁宗多次以信警告，他却不肯悔改。
English: Rinzong repeatedly warned him by letter, but he refused to repent.

古文：成祖北征晏驾。
现代文：成祖北征而死。
English: Cheng Zu died in the Northern Expedition.

古文：高煦子瞻圻在北京，觇朝廷事驰报，一昼夜六七行。
现代文：朱高煦之子朱瞻圻当时正在北京，窥视朝廷情况，迅速报告其父，一昼夜信使往返六七次。
English: Zhu Gaozhen's son, Zhu Zhanzhong, was in Beijing at the time, spying on the situation in the imperial court and quickly reporting to his father. The courier went back and forth six or seven times a day and night.

古文：高煦亦日遣人潜伺京师，幸有变。
现代文：朱高煦也连日派人潜入京城，伺机叛乱。
English: Zhu Gaozhen also sent people to infiltrate the capital several days in a row, waiting for an opportunity to rebel.

古文：仁宗知之，顾益厚遇。
现代文：仁宗获悉后，反而更厚待他。
English: After Rinzong learned of this, he treated him more generously.

古文：遗书召至，增岁禄，赐赉万计，仍命归藩。
现代文：写信将朱高煦召回京城，增其岁禄，赏赐数以万计，然后仍命其返回藩地。
English: He wrote a letter to call Zhu Gaozhen back to Beijing, increase his salary, reward him with tens of thousands, and then ordered him to return to the domain.

古文：封其长子为世子，余皆郡王。
现代文：封其长子为世子，其他儿子均为郡王。
English: His eldest son is the heir, and his other sons are all county kings.

古文：先是，瞻圻怨父杀其母，屡发父过恶。
现代文：在此之前，朱瞻圻怨恨父亲杀死其母，屡次揭发父亲罪过。
English: Prior to this, Zhu Junyao resented his father for killing his mother and repeatedly exposed his father's sins.

古文：成祖曰： 尔父子何忍也！ 
现代文：成祖听后说： 你们是父子，你这么做于心何忍呢？ 
English: After listening, Cheng Zu said, "You are father and son, why do you do this?

古文：至是高煦入朝，悉上瞻圻前后觇报中朝事。
现代文：现在朱高煦入朝，则将朱瞻圻前后窥报朝中情况一事全部上奏皇上。
English: Now that Zhu Gaofeng has entered the imperial court, he will report to the emperor all the information about the situation in the imperial court before and after Zhu Zhanpeng.

古文：仁宗召示瞻圻曰： 汝处父子兄弟间，谗构至此，稚子不足诛。 
现代文：仁宗于是将朱瞻圻召来说道 ：你在父子兄弟之间，谗害至此，我念你年纪尚幼，不处死你。 
English: Renzong then summoned Zhu Zhansheng and said, "You have caused so much harm between father and son, I think you are still young, so I will not execute you."

古文：遣守凤阳皇陵。
现代文：乃命朱瞻圻守护凤阳皇陵。
English: It was Zhu Zhanqin's mission to guard the Fengyang Emperor's tomb.

古文：未几，仁宗崩，宣宗自南京奔丧。
现代文：不久，仁宗去世，宣宗从南京前往奔丧。
English: Soon after, Rinzong died, and Xuan Zong traveled from Nanjing to pay his respects.

古文：高煦谋伏兵邀于路，仓卒不果。
现代文：朱高煦企图在路上伏击，因行动仓促，未能成功。
English: Zhu Gaozhen tried to ambush on the road, but failed due to his hasty actions.

古文：及帝即位，赐高煦及赵王视他府特厚。
现代文：宣宗即帝位后，对朱高煦及赵王的赏赐比其他王府优厚。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xuanzong, Zhu Gaozong and King Zhao were rewarded more generously than other royal families.

古文：高煦日有请，并陈利国安民四事。
现代文：朱高煦有一天向宣宗提出请求，同时敷陈利国安民四事。
English: One day, Zhu Gaozhen made a request to Xuan Zong, and at the same time put forward four things to improve national security.

古文：帝命有司施行，仍复书谢之。
现代文：宣宗命有关官员将其建议予以实施，又复信答谢。
English: Xuan Zong ordered the relevant officials to implement his suggestion, and they replied with a letter of thanks.

古文：因语群臣曰： 皇祖尝谕皇考，谓叔有异志，宜备之。
现代文：并因此对群臣说： 皇祖曾嘱咐先皇，说皇叔存有二心，应当加以防备。
English: Therefore, he said to his courtiers, "The emperor's ancestors had instructed the former emperor that the emperor's uncle had two hearts and should be guarded against.

古文：然皇考待之极厚。
现代文：但先皇十分厚待皇叔。
English: However, the former emperor was very kind to his uncle.

古文：如今所言，果出于诚，则是旧心已革，可不顺从。 
现代文：而今皇叔所言，果然出于一片诚心，说明他已革心洗面，皇祖此话可以不听从。 
English: However, what the Emperor's uncle said now was indeed out of a sincere heart, indicating that he had changed his mind and washed his face. The Emperor can disobey this word.

古文：凡有求请，皆曲徇其意。高煦益自肆。
现代文：以后朱高煦提出任何请求，宣宗都委曲顺从。而朱高煦则更加放肆。
English: After that, Zhu Gaoxuan made any request, and the Xuan Zongdu Committee obeyed. But Zhu Gaoxuan was more presumptuous.

古文：宣德元年八月，遂反。
现代文：宣德元年八月，朱高煦终于谋反。
English: In August of the first year of Xuande, Zhu Gaozhen finally rebelled.

古文：遣其亲信枚青等潜至京师，约旧功臣为内应。
现代文：他派遣亲信枚青等潜至京城，约集旧功臣为内应。
English: He sent his close confidants, including many young men, to infiltrate the capital, gathering around him former meritorious vassals as his inner circle.

古文：英国公张辅执之以闻。
现代文：英国公张辅将他们逮捕，并予以上奏。
English: They were arrested by the British public prosecutor and brought to trial.

古文：时高煦已约山东都指挥靳荣等，又散弓刀旂帜于卫所，尽夺傍郡县畜马。
现代文：当时朱高煦已与山东都指挥靳荣等约定，又在卫所散发刀箭、旗帜，夺取了相邻郡县所有马匹。
English: At that time, Zhu Gaozhen had already made an agreement with the commander of the Shandong capital, Zou Rong, and distributed swords, arrows and flags in the Wei Institute, and seized all the horses in the neighboring counties.

古文：立五军：指挥王斌领前军，韦达左军，千户盛坚右军，知州朱恒后军，诸子各监一军，高煦自将中军。
现代文：设立五军：指挥王斌统领前军，韦达统领左军，千户盛坚统领右军，知州朱恒统领后军，诸子各自监督一军，朱高煦亲自统率一军。
English: Five armies were set up: commander Wang Bin led the front army, Wei Da led the left army, Qianhu Sheng Jian led the right army, Zhizhou Zhu Heng led the rear army, each of them supervised an army, and Zhu Gaolu personally led an army.

古文：世子瞻坦居守，指挥韦弘、韦兴，千户王玉、李智领四哨。
现代文：世子朱瞻坦留守，指挥韦弘、韦兴，千户王玉、李智统领四哨。
English: The heir apparent Zhu Zhiantan stayed behind, commanding Wei Hong and Wei Xing, while Chifu Wang Yu and Li Zhi led the four sentries.

古文：部署已定，伪授王斌、朱恒等太师、都督、尚书等官。
现代文：部署已定，朱高煦又伪授王斌、朱恒等为太师、都督、尚书等官职。
English: The deployment has been decided, and Zhu Gaozhen has also falsely awarded Wang Bin, Zhu Heng, and others with official positions such as Taishi, Tudor, and Shangshu.

古文：御史李濬以父丧家居，高煦招之，不从，变姓名，间道诣京师上变。
现代文：御史李因父丧在家守丧，朱高煦招他前来，李拒不从命，并改名换姓，抄小路赶往京城禀报谋反一事。
English: Due to his father's death, Li Shishi stayed at home to mourn. Zhu Gaozhu invited him to come, but Li refused to obey, and changed his name and surname, and hurried to Beijing to report the plot.

古文：帝犹不忍加兵，遣中官侯泰赐高煦书。
现代文：宣宗仍不忍用兵，而派宦官侯泰前去送信。
English: Emperor Xuanzong still could not bear to use troops, and sent eunuch Hou Tai to send a message.

古文：泰至，高煦盛兵见泰，南面坐，大言曰： 永乐中信谗，削我护卫，徙我乐安。
现代文：侯泰一到，朱高煦便大军压阵会见侯泰，他南面而坐，对侯泰大声说道 ：永乐年中皇上听信谗言，削除我的护卫，将我迁徙乐安。
English: As soon as Hou Tai arrived, Zhu Gaozhen led the army to meet Hou Tai. He sat facing south and said loudly to Hou Tai: Yongle Emperor listened to my advice, removed my escort, and moved me to Le An.

古文：仁宗徒以金帛饵我，我岂能郁郁居此！
现代文：仁宗也仅以黄金、丝帛对我加以引诱，我岂能这样郁郁不乐地生活？
English: Rinzong also seduced me with only gold and silk brocade. How could I live such a gloomy life?

古文：汝归报，急缚奸臣夏原吉等来，徐议我所欲。 
现代文：你回去答复宣宗，迅速将奸臣夏原吉等捆绑送来，然后再慢慢商议我的要求。 
English: You should go back to reply to Xuan Zong, quickly send the traitorous vassal Xia Yuanji, etc. in a bundle, and then slowly discuss my request.

古文：泰惧，唯唯而已。
现代文：侯泰非常害怕，面对朱高煦只是连连卑恭应答而已。
English: Hou Tai was very scared. In the face of Zhu Gaoqi, he only responded with a string of groveling.

古文：比还，帝问汉王何言，治兵何如，泰皆不敢以实对。
现代文：返回京城后，宣宗问起汉王说了些什么话，治兵情况如何，侯泰都不敢如实回答。
English: After returning to the capital, Xuanzong asked Hou Tai about what Han Wang had said and how the military situation was. Hou Tai did not dare to answer truthfully.

古文：是月，高煦遣百户陈刚进疏，更为书与公侯大臣，多所指斥。
现代文：当月，朱高煦派遣百户陈刚进疏，又亲自写信给公侯大臣，大多是指斥之言。
English: In the same month, Zhu Gaozhen sent 100 households to Chen Gang Jinso, and also personally wrote to the prince minister, most of which were words of rebuke.

古文：帝叹曰： 汉王果反。 
现代文：宣宗叹道 ：汉王果然谋反。 
English: Xuan Zong sighed, "The Han king has indeed plotted a rebellion."

古文：乃议遣阳武侯薛禄将兵往讨。
现代文：于是商议派遣阳武侯薛禄率军前往征讨。
English: As a result, they discussed sending Yangwu marquis Xue Lu to lead the army to fight.

古文：大学士杨荣等劝帝亲征。
现代文：大学士杨荣等则劝说宣宗亲征。
English: Yang Rong, a university scholar, and others tried to persuade Xuan Zong to enlist himself.

古文：帝是之。
现代文：宣宗认为杨荣等的建议正确。
English: The emperor thought it was right.

古文：张辅奏曰： 高煦素懦，愿假臣兵二万，擒献阙下。 
现代文：张辅上奏说 ：朱高煦一向懦弱，臣愿领兵二万，将其擒获献给皇上。 
English: Zhang Fu said: Zhu Gaoqi has always been cowardly, and the vassal is willing to lead twenty thousand soldiers and give his treasure to the emperor.

古文：帝曰： 卿诚足擒贼，顾朕初即位，小人或怀二心，不亲行，不足安反侧。 
现代文：宣宗回答说： 你诚然可以擒获此贼，但我才刚刚即位，也许还有心怀二意的小人，朕若不亲征，便不能安定小人的反叛。 
English: Xuan Zong replied, "You can indeed capture this thief, but I have just ascended the throne, and there may still be villains with ambiguous intentions. If I do not personally recruit, I will not be able to stabilize the villain's rebellion.

古文：于是车驾发京师，过杨村，马上顾从臣曰： 度高煦计安出？ 
现代文：于是宣宗率军从京城出发，御驾亲征。经过杨村时，宣宗骑着马，回头对随从大臣问道 ：你们估计朱高煦会有什么计谋呢？ 
English: Therefore, Emperor Xuanzong led the army from the capital and went on a personal crusade. When passing through Yangcun, Emperor Xuanzong rode on horseback and turned to his attendant minister and asked: What do you think Zhu Gaozhen will do?

古文：或对曰： 必先取济南为巢窟。 
现代文：有的大臣回答说 ：一定会先攻取济南，作为其巢穴。 
English: Some ministers replied that they would certainly capture Jinan first, as it was their lair.

古文：或对曰： 彼曩不肯离南京，今必引兵南下。 
现代文：有的则说： 他昔日不肯离开南京，而今必然引兵南下。 
English: Others said: He refused to leave Nanjing in the past, but now he must lead troops to the south.

古文：帝曰： 不然。
现代文：宣宗听后说道： 你们都说得不对。
English: Emperor Xuan said, "That's not right."

古文：济南虽近，未易攻，闻大军至，亦不暇攻。
现代文：济南虽近，却不易攻取，听说大军到来，他们也来不及进攻。
English: Although Jinan is close, it is not easy to capture. I heard that a large army is coming, and they are too late to attack.

古文：护卫军家乐安，必内顾，不肯径趋南京。
现代文：护卫军家住乐安，必然内顾，而不肯直趋南京。
English: The escorting troops lived a happy life at home, and were inevitably cautious, and did not want to head straight for Nanjing.

古文：高煦外夸诈，内实怯，临事狐疑不能断。
现代文：朱高煦对外夸耀、欺诈，其实内心十分胆怯，遇事多疑而不能决断。
English: Zhu Gaoqi boasts and cheats to the outside world, but in fact, he is very timid and hesitant and cannot make a decision.

古文：今敢反者，轻朕年少新立，众心未附，不能亲征耳。
现代文：如今他敢谋反，是轻视朕年少新立，众心未附，不能亲征。
English: If he dares to rebel now, it is because he despises the fact that I am young and newly-established, that I have not won the hearts and minds of the people, and that I cannot personally enlist.

古文：今闻朕行，已胆落，敢出战乎？
现代文：而现在听说朕率军亲征，便已丧胆，还敢出战吗？
English: But now that they have heard that I am leading the army to enlist, they have lost their courage. Do they still dare to go to war?

古文：至即擒矣。 
现代文：所以大军一到即可将他擒获。 
English: So he could be captured as soon as the army arrived.

古文：高煦初闻禄等将兵，攘臂大喜，以为易与。
现代文：朱高煦开始听说薛禄等率军，攘臂大喜，以为容易对付。
English: Zhu Gaozhen began to hear that Xue Lu and others were leading the army, and he was overjoyed, thinking it would be easy to deal with.

古文：及闻亲征，始惧。
现代文：后来获悉宣宗亲征，才害怕起来。
English: It was only later that he learned that Emperor Xuanzong himself had been conscripted into the army that he became afraid.

古文：时有从乐安来归者，帝厚赏之，令还谕其众。
现代文：当时有人从乐安前来归附，宣宗厚赏他们，命其回去晓示其他人。
English: At that time, some people from Le'an came to convert, and Xuanzong rewarded them generously and ordered them to go back and tell others.

古文：仍遗书高煦曰： 张敖失国，始于贯高；淮南被诛，成于伍被。
现代文：又写信给朱高煦说： 张敖失国，始于贯高；淮南被诛，成于伍被。
English: He also wrote to Zhu Gaobao, saying: Zhang Ye lost his country and started from Guan Gaobao; Huainan was exiled and became Yiwu.

古文：今六师压境，王即出倡谋者，朕与王除过，恩礼如初。不然，一战成擒，或以王为奇货，缚以来献，悔无及矣。 
现代文：而今六师压境，汉王你马上交出首倡谋反之人，朕便可免除你的过失，恩礼如初，不然，一旦被擒，有人会将你看成奇货，捆绑起来献给朕的，到那时你就悔之晚矣。 
English: But now, at the time of the six-division oppression, Han Wang, if you immediately hand over the person who initiated and plotted the rebellion, I will be able to absolve you of your fault, and the reward will be the same as before. Otherwise, once you are captured, someone will see you as a rare commodity, tied up and dedicated to me, and by then it will be too late for you to regret it.

古文：前锋至乐安，高煦约诘旦出战。
现代文：征讨大军前锋到达乐安，朱高煦约定次日清晨出战。
English: The forward of the great army arrived in Le'an, and Zhu Gaozhen agreed to go to war in the early morning of the next day.

古文：帝令大军蓐食兼行，驻跸乐安城北，壁其四门。
现代文：宣宗命大军在寝苌上吃饭，星夜兼程，御驾停留乐安城北，军营堵住乐安四城门。
English: Emperor Xuan Zong's army dined on the palanquin, and drove through the starry night. They stopped at the north of Le'an City, and the military camp blocked the four gates of Le'an City.

古文：贼乘城守，王师发神机铳箭，声震如雷。
现代文：贼军据城而守，王军发射神机铳箭，声震如雷。
English: The rebel army defended the city, the king's army fired magical arrows, and the sound was thunderous.

古文：诸将请即攻城。帝不许。
现代文：诸将请求立即攻城，宣宗不许。
English: The generals requested an immediate attack on the city, and declared that they would not be allowed to leave.

古文：再敕谕高煦，皆不答。
现代文：再下诏谕示朱高煦，可他均不作答。
English: Zhu Gaozhen again issued an edict, but he did not reply.

古文：城中人多欲执献高煦者，高煦大惧。
现代文：这时城中许多人都想捉拿朱高煦献给宣宗，朱高煦十分恐惧。
English: At this time, many people in the city wanted to capture Zhu Gaoqi and offer him to Xuanzong. Zhu Gaoqi was very afraid.

古文：乃密遣人诣行幄，愿假今夕诀妻子，即出归罪。
现代文：便秘密派人到宣宗所驻帐幕，表示今晚辞别妻儿，便马上出城认罪归降，宣宗允许。
English: He secretly sent someone to the tent of the Xuan Zong residence, saying that he would leave his wife and children tonight. He immediately went out of the city to confess and surrender, and Xuan Zong allowed it.

古文：帝许之。是夜，高煦尽焚兵器及通逆谋书。
现代文：当夜，朱高煦将兵器及叛逆谋反来往的书信全部焚毁。
English: That night, Zhu Gaozhen burned all the weapons and letters sent and received from the traitors.

古文：明日，帝移跸乐安城南。
现代文：第二天，宣宗移驻乐安城南。
English: The next day, Xuanzong moved to the south of Le'an City.

古文：高煦将出城，王斌等力止曰： 宁一战死，无为人擒。 
现代文：朱高煦准备出城，王斌等极力劝阻说 ：宁可战死，不为人擒。 
English: When Zhu Gaolu was preparing to leave the city, Wang Bin and others tried their best to dissuade him, saying that they would rather die in battle than be captured.

古文：高煦绐斌等复入宫，遂潜从间道出见帝。
现代文：朱高煦哄骗王斌等重新入宫，然后偷偷从小路出城拜见宣宗。
English: Zhu Gaozhen coaxed Wang Bin and others to re-enter the palace, and then secretly went out of the city to see Xuan Zong.

古文：群臣请正典刑。
现代文：群臣请求将其处以正典之刑。
English: The courtiers requested that he be given the canonical punishment.

古文：不允。
现代文：宣宗不同意。
English: He did not agree to the request of the Guru.

古文：以劾章示之，高煦顿首言： 臣罪万万死，惟陛下命。 
现代文：只是以弹劾奏章晓示他，朱高煦叩首说道： 臣罪该万死，唯听陛下之命。 
English: However, the impeachment report was presented to him, and Zhu Gaozhen bowed his head and said: "The crime of a vassal deserves death, but obey the order of your majesty."

古文：帝令高煦为书召诸子，余党悉就擒。
现代文：宣宗命朱高煦写信召其诸子，余党全部就擒。
English: Xuanzong ordered Zhu Gaozhen to write a letter to summon his sons, and the rest of the party all went to bed.

古文：赦城中罪，胁从者不问。
现代文：宣宗赦免城中守军之罪，协从者也不予问罪。
English: Xuanzong pardoned the sins of the defenders in the city, and his followers were not charged with any crimes.

古文：命薛禄及尚书张本镇抚乐安，改曰武定州，遂班师。
现代文：命薛禄及尚书张本镇抚乐安，将乐安改名为武定州，然后班师回朝。
English: He ordered Xue Lu and Shang Shu to move the capital to Fuzhou, rename Fuzhou as Wuding Prefecture, and then return to the imperial court.

古文：废高煦父子为庶人，筑室西安门内锢之。
现代文：将朱高煦父子废为庶人，在西安门内建造房屋，将他们禁锢于内。
English: He dismissed Zhu Gaozhen and his son as commoners, built a house inside Xi'an Gate, and confined them inside.

古文：王斌等皆伏诛，惟长史李默以尝谏免死，谪口北为民。
现代文：王斌等均被处死，只有长史李默因曾进谏而免死，被贬谪至口北为民。
English: Wang Bin and others were all executed, but only Changshi Li Mo was spared death because he had been imprisoned, and he was exiled to the north of the province.

古文：天津、青州、沧州、山西诸都督指挥约举城应者，事觉相继诛，凡六百四十余人，其故纵与藏匿坐死戍边者一千五百余人，编边氓者七百二十人。
现代文：天津、青州、沧州、山西诸都督指挥相约举城响应者，事发之后相继被诛，共六百四十余人，那些故意放纵与藏匿反贼而获罪被处死或戍边者达一千五百余人，被编为边民者达七百二十人。
English: The governors of Tianjin, Qingzhou, Cangzhou, and Shanxi provinces made an agreement to summon the city to respond to the incident. After the incident, more than 640 people were sequentially arrested. Those who deliberately indulged and hid the anti-thieves and were convicted and executed or broke the border amounted to more than 1,500 people, and those who were classified as border residents amounted to 720 people.

古文：帝制《东征记》以示群臣。
现代文：宣宗亲自写成《东征记》以示群臣。
English: Emperor Xuanzong personally wrote the "Eastern Expedition" to show his vassals.

古文：高煦及诸子相继皆死。
现代文：朱高煦及诸子均相继死去。
English: Zhu Gaozhen and his sons all died one after another.

