古文：索元礼，胡人也，天性残忍。
现代文：索元礼，本是胡人，天性残忍。
English: Suo Yuanli, originally a Hu man, was cruel by nature.

古文：初，徐敬业兵兴，武后患之，见大臣常切齿，欲因大狱去异己者。
现代文：起先，徐敬业兴兵讨伐武。武后震怒，又见大臣们似有仇恨状，就想以威制服天下，审讯并排除异己。
English: At first, Xu Jingye raised an army to fight Wu. Wu was furious, and when he saw that the ministers seemed to hate him, he wanted to use his power to subdue the world, interrogate and eliminate dissidents.

古文：元礼揣旨，即上书言急变，召对，擢游击将军，为推使。
现代文：索元礼揣摩到武后的旨意，上书告密。武后召见，问对时颇得武后欢心，升他为游击将军，任推使按问罪犯，令他在洛州牧院任制狱。
English: Suo Yuanli guessed the will of Empress Wu and reported it in a letter. When Empress Wu summoned him and asked the right questions, he was quite popular with Empress Wu. He was promoted to a guerrilla general, assigned to push and interrogate criminals, and ordered him to serve as a prison guard at the Loshou Pastoral Home.

古文：即洛州牧院为制狱，作铁笼赩囚首，加以楔，至脑裂死。
现代文：他制作铁笼梏住囚犯的头，外加木楔，以致脑裂髓出而死。
English: He made an iron cage to hold the prisoner's head, plus a wooden wedge, so that the brain ruptured and he died.

古文：又横木关手足转之，号 晒翅 。
现代文：又用横木捆住犯人手足，再加捩转，称之为凤凰晒翅。
English: They also tied the prisoner's hands and feet with a beam, and then twisted his ankles, calling it "phoenix flapping its wings."

古文：或纺囚梁上，缒石于头。
现代文：有时将犯人系在梁上，再用石头缒在他头上。
English: Sometimes they would tie the prisoner to a beam and then hit him over the head with a rock.

古文：讯一囚，穷根柢，相牵联至数百未能讫，衣冠气褫。
现代文：每审讯一个人，一定要穷根刨底，枝牵蔓引到几百人都还不罢休。
English: Every time a person is interrogated, it is necessary to go to the very bottom of the investigation. If the investigation leads to hundreds of people, it will not stop.

古文：后数引见赏赐，以张其威，故论杀最多。
现代文：内外官民，人人屏息不敢动。武后多次召见他，且多加赏赐，以助其威。所以审讯后论罪，多为死刑。
English: Officials and people at home and abroad held their breath and dared not move. Empress Wu summoned him many times, and gave him more rewards to help him. Therefore, after the trial, the sentence was mostly death.

古文：是时来俊臣、周兴踵而奋，天下谓之 来索 。
现代文：当时，来俊臣、周兴等人奋起效法。天下人称之为 来索 。
English: At that time, Lai Junchen, Zhou Xing and others rose up to follow suit. People around the world called it Lai So.

古文：薛怀义始贵，而元礼养为假子，故为后所信。
现代文：薛怀义很得武后宠幸，索元礼是薛怀义的养子，所以深得武后信任。
English: Xue Huaiyi was very favored by Empress Dowager Wu, and Suo Yuanli was the adopted son of Xue Huaiyi, so he was deeply trusted by Empress Dowager Wu.

古文：後以苛猛，复受赇，后厌众望，收下吏，不服，吏曰： 取公铁笼来！ 
现代文：后来因他过分苛毒残忍，再加受贿，武后为满足众人要求，收索元礼下狱，索元礼不服，狱吏说 ：把你制的铁笼拿来。 
English: Later, because he was excessively harsh and cruel, in addition to accepting bribes, Wu Wu, in order to meet the demands of the people, went to prison to collect the reward, but was not satisfied with the reward. The warden said, "Bring me the iron cage you made."

古文：元礼服罪，死狱中。
现代文：元礼只得服罪，死于狱中。
English: Yuan Li had to plead guilty and died in prison.

古文：来俊臣，京兆万年人。
现代文：来俊臣，京兆万年人。
English: Come on, my lord, I've been here for a thousand years.

古文：父操，博徒也，与里人蔡本善。
现代文：其父来操，是个赌徒，与同乡蔡本结友。
English: His father, a gambler, befriended a fellow villager, Cai Ben.

古文：本负博数十万不能偿，操因纳其妻，先已娠而生俊臣，冒其姓。
现代文：蔡本赌输了几十万，拿不出钱来，来操就以蔡本的妻子抵债。其妻入来操家门时已怀身孕，以后生子即为俊臣，也就改姓为来。
English: Cai Ben lost hundreds of thousands in gambling and couldn't come up with the money, so he used Cai Ben's wife to pay off his debts. His wife was pregnant when she came to manage the family, and after the baby was born, he changed his surname to Ben.

古文：天资残忍，喜反覆，不事产。
现代文：来俊臣天性凶险残忍，喜好反覆无常，不事生产。
English: Lai Junshin is cruel and dangerous by nature, likes to be capricious, and does not produce anything.

古文：客和州为奸盗，捕送狱，狱中上变，刺史东平王续按讯无状，杖之百。
现代文：客居和州时犯奸盗被捕入狱。在狱中胡乱告密。刺史东平王李续调查后知他是诬告，打了他一百大板。
English: He was arrested and jailed for committing robbery while staying at a guest house and in a prefecture. He made wild accusations in prison. After further investigation, he was found to be a false accuser, and he was beaten with a hundred large boards.

古文：天授中，续以罪诛，俊臣上书得召见，自陈前上琅邪王冲反状，为续所抑。
现代文：天授年中，东平王李续因罪被杀，来俊臣又上书告密，得武后召见，奏言前次上告琅笽王李冲谋反的事，被李续扣压。
English: In the middle of the year of the Consecration of Heaven, Dongping King Li Cong was killed for a crime. Lai Junchen sent a letter to inform, and was summoned by the Empress Dowager. Li Cong was detained and pressured to make a report on the matter of the previous petition accusing Wang Li Cong of plotting rebellion.

古文：武后以为谅，擢累侍御史，按诏狱，数称旨。
现代文：武后认为他忠诚，升官直至侍御史，他去审讯案件，多次使武后满意。
English: Empress Wu considered him to be loyal, and he was promoted to the position of attendant to the Empress Dowager. He went to hear cases and satisfied Empress Wu many times.

古文：后阴纵其惨，胁制群臣，前后夷千馀族。
现代文：武后放纵其惨毒，用以胁制群臣。前后牵连夷灭了一千多族。
English: Empress Wu indulged in its deadly poison, using it to coerce her vassals. It was implicated in the extermination of more than a thousand tribes.

古文：生平有纤介，皆入于死。
现代文：生平只要有纤微小过，均入狱论死。
English: As long as there is even the slightest flaw in their lives, they all go to prison and are sentenced to death.

古文：拜左台御史中丞，中外累息，至以目语。
现代文：后来，来俊臣任左台御史中丞，朝内外从此屏息，没有人相互谈话，只以眼睛示意。
English: Later, Lai Junshin was appointed as the Left Division's Vice-Minister of History, and from then on, both inside and outside the imperial court held their breath. No one spoke to each other, only gestured with their eyes.

古文：俊臣乃引侯思止、王弘义、郭弘霸、李仁敬、康韦、卫遂忠等，阴啸不逞百辈，使飞语诬蔑公卿，上急变。
现代文：来俊臣引荐了侯思止、王弘义、郭弘霸、李仁敬、康日韦、卫遂忠等人，暗中招集无赖之徒上百人，让他们造谣诬蔑公卿，然后秘密告发。
English: Lai Junchen introduced Hou Sizhi, Wang Hongyi, Guo Hongba, Li Renking, Kang Rihwei, Wei Suizhong and others to secretly convene hundreds of scoundrels, let them fabricate rumors and slander the nobles, and then secretly denounce them.

古文：每擿一事，千里同时辄发，契验不差，时号为 罗织 ，牒左署曰： 请付来俊臣或侯思止推实必得。 
现代文：每要诬陷一件事，就让好多地方同时告发，调查校核起来，自然不差。当时称这种做法为 罗织 。牒左署说： 案子交给来俊臣或侯思志审查，定能查得结果。 
English: Whenever they wanted to frame up a case, they would have many places report it at the same time, and the investigation and verification would naturally follow. At that time, this practice was called "rope-a-dope." Chozo said: "If you submit the case to Lai Junshi or Hou Sisi for review, you will definitely be able to find out the results."

古文：后信之，诏于丽景门别置狱，敕俊臣等颛按事，百不一贷。
现代文：武后相信，诏令在丽景门另设推事院，嘱来俊臣等专门审案。审讯一百件案件，没一件不招供的。
English: Wu Hou believed that the imperial edict set up a separate court of justice at Lijingmen, and ordered courtiers and others to specially try cases. One hundred cases were tried, and not a single one did not confess.

古文：弘义戏谓丽景门为 例竟 ，谓入者例皆尽也。
现代文：王弘义曾戏称丽景门为 例竟门 ，意思是入此门的人照例要命尽。
English: Wang Hongyi once jokingly called the Lijing Gate the "Example Gate," meaning that those who enter this gate will, as usual, die.

古文：俊臣与其属硃南山、万国俊作《罗织经》一篇，具为支脉纲由，咸有首末，按以从事。
现代文：来俊臣曾与其党徒朱南山、万国俊撰写《罗织经》一篇，如何布置事状，如何步步审讯，如何令其招供，条贯支节，纲由始末均列得清清楚楚，只要按照办理，没有不成功的。
English: Zhu Nanshan and Wang Guojun wrote an article on "Luo Weijing" with their party members, Zhu Nanshan and Wang Guojun. How to arrange the situation, how to step by step interrogation, how to make him confess, the sequence of branches, and the outline were all clearly listed from beginning to end. As long as they were handled in accordance, there was no failure.

古文：俊臣鞫囚，不问轻重皆注醯于鼻，掘地为牢，或寝以匽溺，或绝其粮，囚至啮衣絮以食，大抵非死终不得出。
现代文：来俊臣审讯囚犯，不问罪行轻重，都往犯人鼻子里灌醋，还掘地为牢，或让人泡在屎尿里，或不给饭吃，囚犯有饿到吞咽衣服里的棉花，一般不死出不了牢门。
English: When the courtiers came to interrogate the prisoners, no matter how serious the crime, they would pour vinegar into the prisoner's nose, dig up the ground to make a prison, or let people soak in excrement and urine, or not give them food. The prisoners were so hungry that they could swallow the cotton in their clothes. Generally, they could not get out of the prison without dying.

古文：每赦令下，必先杀重囚乃宣诏。
现代文：每次大赦令下来，来俊臣一定先把重犯杀了然后宣布诏令。
English: Every time an amnesty order comes down, the minister must first kill the repeat offender and then announce the edict.

古文：又作大枷，各为号：一、定百脉，二、喘不得，三、突地吼，四、著即臣，五、失魂胆，六、实同反，七、反是实，八、死猪愁，九、求即死，十、求破家。
现代文：他还制作大枷，共有十等，各有名称：一号叫定百脉，二号叫喘不得，三号叫突地吼，四号叫著即臣，五号叫失魂胆，六号叫实同反，七号叫反是实，八号叫死猪愁，九号叫求即死，十号叫求破家。
English: He also made large yokes, a total of ten grades, each with a name: No. 1 is called the hundred veins, No. 2 is called the breathless, No. 3 is called the sudden roar, No. 4 is called the immediate minister, No. 5 is called the lost soul, No. 6 is called the real and the opposite, No. 7 is called the real and the opposite, No. 8 is called the dead pig sorrow, No. 9 is called the immediate death, and No. 10 is called the broken home.

古文：后以铁为冒头，被枷者宛转地上，少迁而绝。
现代文：后来还有用铁笼头连在枷上，被枷住的人被拉着在地上转圈，一会儿工夫就被闷死了。
English: Later, iron cages were used to keep people shackled. The shackled person was pulled around the ground in a circle, and in a short time was suffocated to death.

古文：凡囚至，先布械于前示囚，莫不震惧，皆自诬服。
现代文：审讯时，犯人提来，一定先把枷棒等刑具放在前面给犯人看。没一个不魂飞胆裂，都能屈认罪状。
English: During the interrogation, the prisoner must first put the shackles and other torture tools in front of the prisoner. No one can confess to the crime without a broken heart.

古文：如意初，诬告大臣狄仁杰、任令晖、李游道、袁智弘、崔神基、卢献等下狱。
现代文：如意初年，来俊臣诬告大臣狄仁杰、任令晖、李游道、袁智弘、崔神基、卢献等人，将他们下狱。
English: In the first year of Ruyi, Lai Junchen falsely accused Minister Di Renjie, Ren Ronglu, Li Youdao, Yuan Zhihong, Cui Shengi, Lu Xian and others, and put them in prison.

古文：俊臣颛以夷诛大臣为功，乃奏囚降制，一问而服者同首，法得减死。
现代文：来俊臣专以诛杀夷灭大臣为功，奏请武后降敕立制：凡一问即承认的，在同案犯中能得减死。
English: Lai Shunchen made a special effort to assassinate and exterminate the minister, and requested Wu Hou to lower the death penalty: anyone who confessed immediately upon being asked could receive a reduced death sentence among the co-perpetrators.

古文：仁杰等已论死，待日而决，稍挺之，仁杰乃遣子持帛书称枉。
现代文：狄仁杰等人已判了死刑，只是等待行刑日了，看押略有放松，狄仁杰向守者求得笔砚，撕下一片衣服，写了冤状放在棉衣里，送出狱去。
English: Di Renjie and the others had been sentenced to death, but they were just waiting for the day of execution. The detention was slightly relaxed. Di Renjie asked the guards for a pen, tore off a piece of clothing, wrote a complaint, put it in a cotton coat, and was sent out of prison.

古文：后见愕然，责谓俊臣，对曰： 是囚不褫巾服，何肯服罪？ 
现代文：狄仁杰的儿子拿了这冤状去呼冤，得武后召见。武后看了十分惊讶，责问来俊臣。来俊臣回答说 ：这个囚犯连他的袍带都没有剥掉，他怎会肯服罪？ 
English: Di Renjie's son took this grievance to appeal for justice, and was summoned by the Empress Dowager. The Empress looked very surprised and scolded Lai Junchen. Lai Junchen replied: This prisoner has not even stripped off his robe and belt, how could he be willing to plead guilty?

古文：后遣通事舍人周綝往视，遽假仁杰幞带立西厢，綝惧俊臣，东视唯唯去，莫敢闻。
现代文：说有急变之事上告，得到武后召见。那孩子说 ：来俊臣凶残，欺罔皇上，横行不道。
English: When he reported that there had been a sudden change, he was summoned by the Empress Dowager. The child said, "Come, handsome vassal, you are cruel, you are bullying the Emperor, and you are acting immorally."

古文：先是，宰相乐思晦为俊臣夷其家，有子九岁隶司农，上变，得召见，言： 俊臣凶惨，罔上不道，若陛下假条反状付之，无大小皆如诏。臣父死族夷，不求生，但惜陛下法为俊臣所弄耳！ 
现代文：假如陛下任设一个谋反罪状交给他，不论哪一个大小官员，由他审讯，都会承认自己谋反之罪正如陛下所说的那样。臣的父亲已遭诛杀，臣家也已破灭，臣不在于求生，只是可惜陛下的英明、国家的大法都被来俊臣侮弄了。 
English: If His Majesty were to assign a charge of treason to him, any official, great or small, who was tried by him, would confess to the crime of treason, just as His Majesty said. My father has been killed, my family has been destroyed, I am not trying to survive, but it is a pity that Your Majesty's wisdom and the country's great law have been mocked by the young men.

古文：后意寤，由是仁杰六族皆免。
现代文：武后有所醒悟，狄仁杰等六人得以免死。
English: Wu Hou had a wake-up call, and six people including Di Renjie were spared from death.

古文：又按大将军张虔勖、内侍范云仙，虔勖不堪枉，讼于大理徐有功，俊臣使卫士乱斫之，云仙自陈事先帝，命截其舌，皆即死，人人胁息。
现代文：来俊臣又审讯大将军张虔勖、内侍范云仙。张虔勖不堪受屈，到大理徐有功处上诉，来俊臣派卫士乱刀砍死。范云仙自称曾伺奉先帝，来俊臣命人割掉他的舌头，两人均即毕命，以后人人破胆，没人敢说话。
English: Zhu Junshi also interrogated the general Zhang Qianyao and the chamberlain Fan Yunxian. Zhang Qianyao was unbearable, and appealed to Dali Xu Youxing. Zhu Junshi sent guards to hack him to death. Fan Yunxian claimed to have served the former emperor, and Zhu Junshi ordered someone to cut out his tongue. Both of them died. After that, everyone lost their courage, and no one dared to speak.

古文：久之，俊臣纳贾人金，为御史纪履忠所劾，下狱当死。
现代文：后来，来俊臣多次收人贿赂，被御史纪履忠揭发检举，下狱判死罪。
English: Later, Lai Junshin repeatedly accepted bribes, was exposed and prosecuted by the imperial historian Ji Lizhong, and was sentenced to death.

古文：后忠其上变，得不诛，免为民。
现代文：武后因他以前能侦察各种急变，赦他不死，贬为庶民。
English: Empress Wu forgave him for not dying because he had been able to detect all kinds of sudden changes, and relegated him to the common people.

古文：长寿中，还授殿中丞，坐赃贬同州参军事，暴纵自如，夺同僚妻，又辱其母。
现代文：长寿年间，又将他召回，任他殿中丞，又因纳贼贬为同州参军事。但他暴虐恣肆不改。逼迫夺取同列参军的妻子，又侮辱其母。
English: During his long life, he was recalled, appointed to the post of court middle-ranked officer, and demoted to the same state as a military man for accepting thieves. However, he did not change his tyrannical ways. He forced to seize his wife, who was also in the army, and insulted his mother.

古文：俄召为合宫尉，擢洛阳令，进司仆少卿，赐司农奴婢十人。
现代文：不久，又召来俊臣为合宫尉，提拔为洛阳令，又晋升为司仆少卿，赐给司农奴婢十人。
English: Not long after, he also summoned a young courtier to be a palace attendant, promoted him to be the governor of Luoyang, and promoted him to be a servant of a minor lord, and gave him ten serfs and maids.

古文：以官户无面首，闻西蕃酋阿史那斛瑟罗有婢善歌舞，令其党告以谋反，而求其婢，诸蕃长数十人，割耳剺面讼冤，仅得解。
现代文：来俊臣又因官户中没有美婢，听说西突厥酋长阿史那斛瑟罗有个婢女善歌舞。来俊臣就令其党人告发斛瑟罗将要造反，目的在于夺取那婢女。各蕃的酋长几十人到朝廷自割耳朵划破脸面申诉斛瑟罗之冤，仅得免死。
English: Since there were no beautiful maids in the official households, he also heard that the Western Turkic chieftain Ashina Zoseroh had a maid who was good at singing and dancing. He ordered his party members to inform him that Zoseroh was going to rebel, with the aim of seizing the maid. Dozens of chieftains from each clan went to the court to cut their ears and scratch their faces to complain about the injustice of Zoseroh, only to be spared from death.

古文：綦连耀等有异谋，吉顼以白俊臣，杀数十族。
现代文：那时，綦连耀、刘思礼等人阴结朝士，图谋不轨。明堂尉吉顼将此事告诉来俊臣，辗转牵连，杀了几十族。
English: At that time, Zou Lianyao, Liu Sili and others conspired to assassinate the emperor. Ming Tang's lieutenant, Jizhao, told this to Lai Junshi, who was implicated and killed dozens of people.

古文：既欲擅发奸功，即中顼以法，顼大惧，求见后自直，乃免。
现代文：事后，来俊臣想独揽检举之功，又罗织吉顼的罪状。吉顼十分恐慌，求见武后，自陈心迹，才得免祸。
English: After the incident, Lai Junchen wanted to take the credit for the investigation and fabricated the charges against Ji Yao. Ji Yao was very panicked and asked to see Wu Hou to confess his feelings so that he could be spared.

古文：俊臣诬司刑史樊戬，以谋反诛，其子诉阙下，有司无敢治，因自刳腹。
现代文：来俊臣诬陷司刑史樊戬，以谋反罪判死刑，樊戬之子到朝廷申诉，有司没有人敢接治这个案子。
English: Lai Junchen framed the magistrate, Shi Yan, and sentenced him to death for conspiracy. Yan's son went to the imperial court to appeal, but no magistrate dared to take up the case.

古文：秋官侍郎刘如璿为流涕，俊臣奏与同恶，如璿自诉年老而涕，吏论以绞，后为宥死，流汉州。
现代文：以致其子当廷剖腹明志。秋官侍郎刘如王睿同情而流泪，来俊臣就上奏说刘如王睿是樊戬的同党。刘如王睿申诉是因年老有眼疾，所以泪流无法控制。审讯结果论处绞刑。武后赦他不死，流放汉州。
English: As a result, Liu Ruowangrui, the attendant of the autumn official, burst into tears in sympathy, and the courtiers came to report that Liu Ruowangrui was a member of the same party as Yao. Liu Ruowangrui's complaint was due to old age and eye disease, so the tears could not be controlled. The result of the trial was sentenced to hanging. Empress Wu pardoned him not to die and exiled him to Hanzhou.

古文：万岁通天中，上巳，与其党集龙门，题搢绅名于石，抵而仆者先告，抵李昭德不能中。
现代文：万岁通天年间，上巳节，来俊臣与其党羽集聚在龙门，将缙绅的名字一个个贴在石头上，再拿小石头去掷，掷中哪一个就先告哪一个，想掷宰相李昭德却不能掷中。
English: During the Year of the Monkey, on the Day of the Snake, Lai Junchen and his followers gathered at the Dragon Gate, affixed the names of the gentry to the stones one by one, and then took small stones to throw. Whichever one was thrown would tell which one first. If Prime Minister Li Zhaode wanted to throw, he couldn't.

古文：或以告昭德，昭德谋绳其恶，未发。
现代文：有人把这事告诉李昭德，李昭德打算将来俊臣的恶行绳之以法，但还未行动。
English: Someone told Li Zhaode about this, and Li Zhaode intends to bring Juncheng's evil deeds to justice in the future, but has yet to act.

古文：卫遂忠虽无行，颇有辞辩，素与俊臣善。
现代文：那天，来俊臣正与妻家的亲属宴饮。正喝在兴头上，卫遂忠来了，守门人不肯进去通报，骗他说 出去了 。
English: On that day, Lai Junchen was having a banquet with relatives of his wife's family. He was drinking happily when Wei Suizhong arrived. The gatekeeper refused to let him in and lied to him, saying that he had already left.

古文：始王庆诜女适段简而美，俊臣矫诏强娶之。
现代文：卫遂忠知道是骗自己，直闯入内堂，破口大骂，言语含辱。
English: Wei Suizhong knew that he was deceiving himself, and broke straight into the inner hall, shouting abuse and insulting words.

古文：它日，会妻族，酒酣，遂忠诣之，阍者不肯通，遂忠直入谩骂，俊臣耻妻见辱，已命驱而缚于廷，既乃释之，自此有隙，妻亦惭，自杀。
现代文：来俊臣耻于妻子及姻家受辱，命人殴打卫遂忠，并将他反捆起来，事后又放了他。从此两人之间有了仇怨，来俊臣的妻子也因羞惭而自杀。
English: Shamed and humiliated by his wife and in-laws, Lai Junchen ordered someone to beat Wei Suizhong, tied him up, and then released him. From then on, there was a grudge between the two, and Lai Junchen's wife also committed suicide out of shame.

古文：简有妾美，俊臣遣人示风旨，简惧，以妾归之。
现代文：段简有个妾很美，来俊臣派人去暗示，段简很害怕，就把那妾送给了来俊臣。
English: Duan Jian had a very beautiful concubine, and Lai Jun Sheng sent someone to hint that Duan Jian was very afraid and gave the concubine to Lai Jun Sheng.

古文：俊臣知群臣不敢斥己，乃有异图，常自比石勒，欲告皇嗣及庐陵王与南北衙谋反，因得骋志。
现代文：来俊臣知道群臣不敢对自己怎么样，于是心里产生了狂妄的念头，常常以石勒自比。他准备诬告太子及庐陵王、南北衙通同谋反，好让他独揽朝政。
English: Lai Junchen knew that the courtiers did not dare to do anything to him, so he developed arrogant thoughts in his heart, often comparing himself to Shi Le. He was preparing to falsely accuse the prince and the king of Fuling and the north and the south of conspiring against each other, so that he could monopolize the government.

古文：遂忠发其谋。
现代文：卫遂忠告发了他的阴谋。
English: Wei Sui admonished his plot.

古文：初，俊臣屡掎摭诸武、太平公主、张昌宗等过咎，后不发。
现代文：以前，来俊臣多次告发武家人、太平公主及张昌宗等人的过错，武后都压下不提。
English: In the past, Lai Junchen repeatedly denounced the mistakes of the Wu family, Taiping Princess and Zhang Changzong, but Wu Hou did not mention them.

古文：至是诸武怨，共证其罪。
现代文：这一次可激怒了武家众人，共同揭发来俊臣的罪恶。
English: This time, he enraged everyone in the samurai family, and together they exposed the evil of the young retainer.

古文：有诏斩于西市，年四十七，人皆相庆，曰： 今得背著床瞑矣！ 
现代文：最后诏令在西市斩首。
English: The final edict was to behead him in Nishiichi.

古文：永昌初，子珣上书，擢左台监察御史，无学术，语言蚩恶，后倚以按狱，多徇后旨，故赐姓武，字家臣。
现代文：死时年四十七岁。人人都抚额相庆，说： 今天才能把背贴着床安心睡觉了。 大家争着去剜他的眼、摘他的肝、剁他的肉以泄愤，一会儿工夫只剩下一副骨头，又用马践踏其骨，尸骸丝毫都没有留存。其家属也均没收入官。
English: He was forty-seven years old at the time of his death. Everyone rubbed their foreheads in celebration and said, "Today, I can sleep with my back against the bed with peace of mind." Everyone fought to poke his eyes, pick his liver, and beat his flesh to vent their anger. For a while, only one pair of bones remained, and they trampled his bones with horses. No remains of the corpse were left at all. None of his family members received an income.

古文：既诬雅州刺史刘行实弟兄谋反，已诛，掘夷先墓，得迁游击将军。
现代文：在来俊臣嚣张专权时，托天官得选为官的有二百多人。来俊臣被诛，有司来自首违纪选官事，武后斥责他。他回答说 ：臣破坏了陛下的法制，我一个人被杀；但冒犯了来俊臣，我的全族都将遭覆灭。 
English: There were more than two hundred people who had been chosen to be officials by the heavenly officer when the young minister came to arrogate his authority. The young minister was arrested, the head of the department violated the rules and regulations for the selection of officials, and the empress dowager rebuked him. He replied, "The minister destroyed your majesty's legal system, and I alone was killed; but if I offend the young minister, my entire family will be destroyed."

古文：常衣锦半臂自异，俄流死爱州。
现代文：武后赦免了他。
English: Empress Wu pardoned him.

古文：兴，少习法律，自尚书史积迁秋官侍郎，屡决制狱，文深峭，妄杀数千人。
现代文：周兴，年轻时曾学习法律，从尚书史慢慢升为秋官侍郎，多次判决案件，文字严峻结构周密，曾妄杀几千人。
English: Zhou Xing, who had studied law when he was young, slowly rose from being a scholar of literature and history to become a courtier of the autumn official, repeatedly adjudicated cases, the text was severe and well-structured, and he had killed several thousand people.

古文：武后夺政，拜尚书左丞，上疏请去唐宗正属籍。
现代文：武后称帝后，任他为尚书左丞。为巴结武后，曾上疏请求除去李唐的宗正属籍。
English: Empress Wu called him Emperor Wu and appointed him as Shang Shuzo Zojo. For Emperor Ba, Shang Shu requested that Li Tang's membership in the Zong Zheng be removed.

古文：是时左史江融有美名，兴指融与徐敬业同谋，斩于市。
现代文：那时，左史江融有美名，周兴就指控江融与徐敬业同谋，终于将江融斩于市曹。
English: At that time, Zuo Shi Jiang Rong had a good reputation. Zhou Xing accused Jiang Rong of being an accomplice of Xu Jingye, and finally executed Jiang Rong in the city of Cao.

古文：临刑，请得召见，兴不许，融叱曰： 吾死无状，不赦汝。 
现代文：临刑时，江融请求能见武后一面，周兴不许，江融呵叱他： 我被你冤死，死了也饶不了你。 
English: At the time of his execution, Jiang Rong asked to see Wu Hou's face, but Zhou Xing would not allow it. Jiang Rong scolded him: "I was unjustly killed by you, and I can't forgive you even if I die."

古文：遂斩之，尸奋而行，刑者蹴之，三仆三作。
现代文：斩杀以后，尸体直立而行，行刑的人将尸体踢倒，倒下又再跳起，三次踢倒三次跳起。
English: After the beheading, the body walks upright, the executioner kicks the body down, falls down and jumps up again, kicks down three times and jumps up three times.

古文：天授中，人告子珣、兴与丘神勣谋反，诏来俊臣鞫状。
现代文：天授年间有人告发来子繤、周兴与丘神责力通同谋反，诏令来俊臣去审讯。
English: During the Tianzhu era, someone reported that Lai Zixuan, Zhou Xing, and Yau Shen Li Li had conspired together to rebel, and ordered Lai Junchen to investigate.

古文：初，兴未知被告，方对俊臣食，俊臣曰： 囚多不服，奈何？ 
现代文：当初，周兴还不知自己被告，正与来俊臣相对吃饭。来俊臣说 ：审讯中很多犯人都不肯招供服罪，你看有什么办法？ 
English: At first, Zhou Xing did not know that he was the defendant and was having dinner with Lai Junchen. Lai Junchen said, "During the trial, many prisoners refused to confess and serve their sentence. What do you think should be done?"

古文：兴曰： 易耳，内之大甕，炽炭周之，何事不承。 俊臣曰： 善。 
现代文：周兴说： 那还不容易，把犯人放在个大瓮里，周围用炭火烧，还有什么事他能不承认的？ 来俊臣说 ：好办法。 
English: Zhou Xing said, "That's not easy. The prisoner was put in a large coffin, and charcoal was burned around him. What else could he not admit? Let Junchen say, "Good idea."

古文：命取甕且炽火，徐谓兴曰： 有诏按君，请尝之。 
现代文：当即命人取来大瓮和烧炽的炭火，慢悠悠地对周兴说： 我奉诏令来审讯你，请你尝尝滋味吧。 
English: He immediately ordered someone to fetch the ladle and the burning charcoal, and slowly said to Zhou Xing: I have been ordered to interrogate you, please taste it.

古文：兴骇汗，叩头服罪。
现代文：周兴吓得满头大汗，叩头服罪。
English: Zhou Xing was so scared that he was sweating profusely. He bowed his head and confessed.

古文：诏诛神勣而宥兴岭表，在道为雠人所杀。
现代文：最后诏令诛杀丘神责力而赦周兴死，流放到岭表，半路上被仇人所杀。
English: In the end, Zhao ordered Zou to kill Qiu Shen Rongli and forgave Zhou Xing's death. Zou was exiled to Lingbo and was killed by his enemies on the way.

