古文：芮伯若曰： 予小臣良夫，稽道谋告，天子惟民父母，致厥道，无远不服，无道，左右臣妾乃违。
现代文：周厉王失去道义，芮伯陈述他的警诫，史臣就此作《芮良夫》一文。芮伯这样说： 我小臣良夫叩头谨告天子：作为百姓的父母，只要尽到他的职责，远方人没有不服从的。 如果不讲道义，身边的臣妾也会背离。
English: Zhou Li Wang lost his morality, Zhou Bo stated his warning, and Shi Zhen wrote an article about it, "A Liang Fu." Zhou Bo said this: My vassal Liang Fu bowed down and told Tian Zi: As a parent of the people, as long as he fulfills his duties, the distant people will not disobey. If he does not preach morality, the vassals and concubines around him will also deviate.

古文：民归于德，德则民戴，否则民雠。
现代文：百姓归向恩德。有德百姓会拥戴，无德百姓就仇恨。
English: The people turn to the benevolence. The people with virtue will embrace, and the people without virtue will hate.

古文：兹言允效与前不远。商纣不道，夏桀之虐肆无有家。
现代文：这句话真实地验证在此前不远：商纣王不改夏王桀的残暴，因此才有我们周朝以及国家。 啊呀!
English: This sentence is a true verification of what happened not long ago: the mercantile king does not change the brutality of the summer king, so we have the Zhou Dynasty and the country.

古文：呜呼，惟尔天子嗣文武业，惟尔执政小子同先王之臣昏行□顾道，王不若，专利作威，佐乱进祸，民将弗堪。
现代文：你天子继承了文王、武王的基业，而你的执政大臣如同王夷王的大臣，行事昏昏又无所顾及，导引君王于不顺。独占其利作威作福，帮助作乱，引起灾祸，百姓将不堪忍受。
English: Your heavenly son has inherited the inheritance of King Wen and King Wu, and your ministers of government are like the ministers of King Yao. They act in a dazed and heedless manner, leading the king into disobedience. They monopolize their profits, use their power to create blessings, help create turmoil, and cause disasters. The people will not be able to bear it.

古文：治乱信乎，其行惟王，暨而执政小子攸闻。
现代文：国家的安定或混乱确实在于你们的行为，这是君王和你的执政大臣所听到过的。
English: The stability or disorder of the country does depend on your actions, as the monarch and your chancellor have heard.

古文：古人求多闻以监戒，不闻是惟弗知。除民害不惟民害，害民乃非后，惟其雠。
现代文：你虽然听了，你也知道了，可是不改变你的想法，也就难了，国君除去百姓的祸害，就不是百姓的祸害。如果祸害百姓，就不是君王，而是他们的仇人。
English: Though thou hast heard, and knowest, yet wilt thou not change thy mind, and there is the rub. The prince who removes the people's ills is not the people's ills. If the ills are the people's ills, it is not the prince, but their enemy.

古文：后作类，后弗类，民不知后，惟其怨。
现代文：君王当行善事。君王不行善，百姓就不认他为君王，只是怨恨他。
English: Let the king do what is good; but if he does not do what is good, the people will not accept him as king; they will only hate him.

古文：民至亿兆，后一而已，寡不敌众，后其危哉。
现代文：百姓多到十万、百万，君王一人而已。寡不敌众，君王就危险了。
English: There are a hundred thousand or a million people, but only one king. Outnumbered, the king is in danger.

古文： 呜呼！
现代文：啊呀!
English: Alas!

古文：□□□如之。今尔执政小子，惟以贪谀为事，不勤德以备难。
现代文：野禽能够被人驯服，家畜见人反而奔逃，这并不是禽、畜的本性，实际上在于人。
English: Wild birds can be tamed by humans, but domestic animals run away when they see humans. This is not the nature of birds and animals, but actually lies in humans.

古文：下民胥怨，财力单竭，手足靡措，弗堪上，不其乱而。
现代文：老百姓也是这样。现今你的执政大臣只以贪利奉承对待君王，不尽心于道德以预防灾难。致使在下的百姓都生怨恨，财力枯竭，手足无措，不堪奉上，岂不作乱吗?
English: The same is true for the common people. Today, your ruling ministers only treat the king with greed and flattery, and do not devote themselves to morality to prevent disasters. As a result, the people below are full of resentment, depleted of financial resources, helpless, and unable to serve, will they not make a mess?

古文：以予小臣良夫，观天下有土之君，厥德不远，罔有代德。
现代文：凭我小臣良夫所见，天下有封土的国君，他的道德不广大，不可能代代相传。
English: According to my vassal, Ryofu, there is a feudal lord in the world whose morality is not broad and cannot be passed down from generation to generation.

古文：时为王之患，其惟国人。
现代文：这正是君王的忧患，它来自君王的大臣。
English: This is the king's grief, and it comes from the king's minister.

古文：呜呼！惟尔执政朋友小子其惟洗尔心、改尔行，克忧往愆，以保尔居。
现代文： 啊呀，你们这些执政的朋党小人，只有洗净心灵，端正品行，能深思过去的错误，才可保住你们的地位。
English: Ah, you ruling crony villains, you can only maintain your status if you purify your hearts, behave properly, and reflect on the mistakes of the past.

古文：尔乃聩祸玩烖，遂弗悛，余未知王之所定，矧乃□□。
现代文：你们如果忽视灾祸，充耳不闻，坚持错误不改，我不知君王如何才能安全，何况你们这些小子?
English: If you ignore calamity, turn a deaf ear, and persist in error, I don't know how kings can be safe, much less you boys.

古文：惟祸发于人之攸忽，于人之攸轻，□不存焉。变之攸伏。
现代文：灾祸从人们忽略的地方发生，过错从人们轻视的地方引出。心不在那里，那里就有变故潜伏。
English: Calamity comes from where men overlook, and error from where men despise; where there is no heart, perdition lurks.

古文：尔执政小子不图善，偷生苟安，爵以贿成，贤智箝口，小人鼓舌，逃害要利，并得厥求，唯曰哀哉。
现代文：你们这些执政小子不希望出大难而已，只求苟且偷生，官爵以贿赂而成。使得贤智之士闭口不言以逃避祸事，让小人摇唇鼓舌获取利益。虽然两种人都得到他们的希求，也只能说可悲啊。
English: You boys of the government, who do not wish for anything but disaster, who wish for nothing but survival, and for a nobility of bribery, who make wise men hold their tongues to escape misfortune, and petty men speak with forked tongues to gain advantage, although both of them got what they wished for, it is sad to say.

古文： 我闻曰，以言取人，人饰其言；以行取人，人竭其行。
现代文：我听说： 以言辞取用人，人就会修饰他的言辞。以行动取用人，人们就会竭尽他的行动。
English: I have heard it said that if you employ people with words, they will embellish their words. If you employ people with actions, they will exhaust their actions.

古文：饰言无庸，竭行有成。
现代文：修饰言辞没有用处，尽力办事必有成果。 
English: There is no use in embellishing the words, and every effort must be made to achieve results.

古文：惟尔小子，饰言事王，黡蕃有徒。
现代文：正是你们这些小子，修饰言辞侍奉君王。实际上你们的门徒还很多。
English: It is you young men who are serving the king, and many of you are his disciples.

古文：王貌受之，终弗获用，面相诬蒙，及尔颠覆。
现代文：君王看来是接受了你们的意见，而最终不会取得效用。你们公开相互欺蒙，甚至反复折腾。
English: The king seems to have accepted your advice, but it will not work in the end. You are openly deceiving each other, even repeatedly.

古文：尔自谓有余，予谓尔弗足。
现代文：你们自以为还有馀力，我认为你们力量不足。
English: You think you have more strength, but I think you are not strong enough.

古文：敬思以德，备乃祸难。
现代文：认真想想你们的德行，防备你们的灾难。
English: Think hard about your virtues and prepare for your disasters.

古文：难至而悔，悔将安及，无曰予为惟尔之祸也。 
现代文：灾难到了才后悔，后悔怎么来得及?不要说我的话不实在，那是你们自己的灾祸。 
English: Don't say my words aren't true, that's your own misfortune.

