古文：◎明宗明宗翼献景孝皇帝，讳和世〈王束〉，武宗长子也。母曰仁献章圣皇后，亦乞烈氏。
现代文：明宗翼献景孝皇帝，名叫和世王束，是武宗的长子。母亲是仁献章圣皇后，出自亦乞烈氏。
English: Emperor Mingzong Wing Dedication to Emperor Jingxiao, named He Shiyangzhu, was the eldest son of Emperor Wuzong. His mother was the Holy Empress Jianzhong, from the Yikiri clan.

古文：成宗大德三年，命武宗抚军北边，帝以四年十一月壬子生。
现代文：成宗大德三年，命武宗抚治军马于北方边地，帝于大德四年十一月十一日出生。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Chengzong, Emperor Wu was ordered to lead an army to the northern border. The emperor was born on November 11th in the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Chengzong.

古文：成宗崩，十一年，武宗入继大统，立仁宗为皇太子，命以次传于帝。
现代文：大德十一年，成宗逝世，武宗入继帝位，立仁宗为皇太子，约定按次序将皇位传授于帝。
English: In the eleventh year of Dadu, Chengzong died, Buzong succeeded to the imperial throne, and Renzong became the crown prince. It was agreed that the imperial throne would be passed on to the emperor in the following order.

古文：武宗崩，仁宗立，延祐三年春，议建东宫，时丞相铁木迭而欲固位取宠，乃议立英宗为皇太子，又与太后幸臣识烈门谮帝于两宫，浸润久之，其计遂行。
现代文：武宗逝世后，仁宗得立。延三年春，商议设立东宫，当时丞相铁木迭而为了固位取宠，竟建议立英宗为皇太子，又与太后宠臣识烈门一道诬陷帝于仁宗及皇太后处，为时既久，其计谋渐渐得以施行。
English: After the death of Emperor Wuzong, Emperor Nizong was enthroned. In the spring of the 3rd year of Yan, the establishment of the East Palace was discussed. At that time, in order to secure the position and gain favor, the chancellor Tie Mu Di actually proposed that Emperor Nizong be crown prince, and together with the empress dowager's favorite subject, Emperor Cheng Ryemen, they framed Emperor Nizong and the empress dowager. It took a long time, but the plan was gradually implemented.

古文：于是封帝为周王，出镇云南。
现代文：于是册封帝为周王，出守云南。
English: As a result, Emperor Zhou was enthroned and went to Yunnan.

古文：置常侍府官属，以遥授中书左丞相秃忽鲁、大司徒斡耳朵、中政使尚家奴、山北辽阳等路蒙古军万户孛罗、翰林侍讲学士教化等并为常侍，中卫亲军都指挥使唐兀、兵部尚书赛罕八都鲁为中尉，仍置谘议、记室各二员，遣就镇。
现代文：设置常侍府官属，任命遥授中书左丞相秃忽鲁、大司徒斡耳朵、中政使尚家奴、山北辽阳等路蒙古军万户孛罗、翰林侍讲学士教化等人并为常侍府常侍，中卫亲军都指挥使唐兀、兵部尚书赛罕八鲁为中尉，照例设置谘议、记室各二员，遣往镇守。
English: The officials and subordinates of the General Office of Attendants were set up, and the long-distance scholar of the Middle School of the Left, the Minister of the Left, Bald Khullu, the great scholar of the Middle School of the Left, Shang Jia Nu, the Central Government Envoy of the Central Government, the Mongolian army of Shanbei and Liaoyang, the Hanlin attendant, the lecturer and the scholar, and others were appointed as the General Office of Attendants, the commander of the Central Guards, Tang Jun, and the lieutenant of the Military Department of the General School of Attendants, Saihan Baloo. As usual, two members each were set up for consultation and recording

古文：是年冬十一月，帝次延安，秃忽鲁、尚家奴、孛罗及武宗旧臣厘日、沙不丁、哈八儿秃等皆来会。
现代文：这一年冬天，十一月，帝到达延安，秃忽鲁、尚家奴、孛罗及武宗旧臣厘日、沙不丁、哈八儿秃等人都来会合。
English: In the winter of that year, in November, the emperor arrived in Yan'an, and people such as Zhao Kulu, Shang Jianu, Zhao Luo, and the former vassals of Emperor Wuzong, Shabudin and Habar Zhao, all came to the meeting.

古文：教化谋曰： 天下者，我武皇之天下也，出镇之事，本非上意，由左右构间致然。
现代文：教化谋划说 ：天下本是我武皇的天下。外出镇守之事，本来就不是后皇上的意思，而是左右宠臣煽构其间使之然。
English: The indoctrination plan said: "The world is originally the world of my warrior emperor. The matter of going out to guard the town was not originally the intention of the empress dowager, but was instigated by the right and left favorites to make it so.

古文：请以其故白行省，俾闻之朝廷，庶可杜塞离间，不然，事变叵测。 
现代文：请将其原因告知行省，使之奏闻朝廷，或许可以堵塞离间之计，不然的话，事情变化将不可预测。 
English: Please inform the line ministry of the reason and report it to the imperial court. It may be possible to plug the rift, otherwise, things will change unpredictably.

古文：遂与数骑驰去。
现代文：于是与数名从骑奔驰而去。
English: He then left in a Mercedes with several others.

古文：先是，阿思罕为太师，铁木迭儿夺其位，出之为陕西行省丞相，及教化等至，即与平章政事塔察儿、行台御史大夫脱里伯、中丞脱欢，悉发关中兵，分道自潼关、河中府入。
现代文：从前，阿思罕为太师，铁木迭儿夺其职位，让他出任陕西行省丞相，等教化等人到来时，就和平章政事塔察儿、行台御史大夫脱里伯、中丞脱欢，悉数调发关中兵马，分道从潼关与河中府进军。
English: Once upon a time, Ashan was the Grand Master, but Tiemu Di'er usurped his position and made him the acting provincial chancellor of Shaanxi Province. When the scholars and others arrived, they peacefully signed the political affairs tachar, the governor's secretary of guanxi and hebei, and the vice-chancellor of hebei and hebei, and dispatched all the soldiers and horses in Guan, and marched from Shaoguan and Hechuan.

古文：已而塔察儿、脱欢袭杀阿思罕、教化于河中，帝遂西行，至北边金山。
现代文：不久，塔察儿、脱欢袭杀阿思罕、教化于河中府，帝于是西行，到达北方边地金山。
English: Not long after, Tachara and his hooligans attacked and killed Ashan, and he was educated in Hezhongfu. The emperor then traveled westward and reached the northern borderland of Jinshan.

古文：西北诸王察阿台等闻帝至，咸率众来附。
现代文：西北诸王察阿台等人闻知帝已到来，都率领其众前来依附。
English: Hearing that the emperor had arrived, the kings of northwestern China, such as Zhaatai, led their people to come and follow him.

古文：帝至其部，与定约束，每岁冬居紥颜，夏居斡罗斡察山，春则命从者耕于野泥，十余年间，边境宁谧。
现代文：帝到其部，与之商订规约，每年冬季居住扎颜，夏季居住斡罗斡察山，春季则命部下耕种于野泥地方，十多年间，边境安宁无事。
English: The emperor went to his ministry, negotiated a statute with them, and every year he lived in winter in Zayan, in summer in the mountains, and in spring he ordered his subordinates to cultivate in muddy places. For more than ten years, there was no trouble on the border.

古文：延祐七年，仁宗崩，英宗嗣立。
现代文：延七年，仁宗逝世，英宗继立。
English: After seven years, Ninsong died and Yingzong succeeded him.

古文：是岁夏四月丙寅，子妥欢帖木尔生，是为至正帝。
现代文：这一年夏四月十七日，其子妥欢帖木儿出生，后来成为至正皇帝。
English: On the 17th day of the 4th month in the summer of that year, his son, Tuo Huan Timur, was born, who later became the rightful emperor.

古文：至治三年八月癸亥，御史大夫铁失等弑英宗，晋王也孙铁木儿自立为皇帝，改元泰定。
现代文：至治三年八月初四，御史大夫铁失等人杀害英宗，晋王也孙铁木儿自立为皇帝，改年号为泰定。
English: On the 4th day of the 8th month of the 3rd year of the Heian period, the imperial historian Tetsuro and others killed Emperor Yeongjong, and Emperor Jin and his son Tiemul declared themselves emperor, changing the era name to Taejeong.

古文：五月，遣使扈从皇后八不沙至自京师。二年，帝弟图帖睦尔以怀王出居于建康。
现代文：五月，派遣使者护送八不沙皇后从京师到此地，泰定二年，帝之弟怀王图帖睦尔出居于建康。
English: In May, an emissary was sent to escort the Queen of the Eight Uns from Beijing to this place. In the second year of the reign of Emperor Taiding, the emperor's younger brother, King Huai Tut Timur, came to live in Jiankang.

古文：三年三月癸酉，子懿璘质班生，是为宁宗。
现代文：泰定三年三月二十九日，其子懿王质班出生，这就是宁宗。
English: On the 29th day of the 3rd month of the 3rd year of the Tai Dynasty, his son Wang Qiban was born. This was Ningzong.

古文：岁戊辰七月庚午，泰定皇帝崩于上都，倒剌沙专权自用，逾月不立君，朝野疑惧。
现代文：戊辰年七月初十，泰定皇帝逝世于上都。倒剌沙专权自用，过了一个月还未拥立新君，朝野人士无不疑惧。
English: On the 10th day of the 7th month of the 1st month of the 7th month of the 1st year of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 7th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 7th year of the 7th year of the 8th year of the 7th year of the 7th year of the 8th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9

古文：时佥枢密院事燕铁木儿留守京师，遂谋举义。
现代文：当时佥枢密院事燕铁木儿留守京师，图谋举义。
English: At that time, the Secretary of the Privy Council, Yan Tiemu'er, stayed in Beijing and tried to raise a righteous army.

古文：八月甲午黎明，召百官集兴圣宫，兵皆露刃，号于众曰： 武皇有圣子二人，孝友仁文，天下归心，大统所在，当迎立之，不从者死！ 
现代文：八月初四黎明时分，召来百官会集于兴圣宫，兵器都露出锋利的一端，在众人中号召说： 武皇有圣子二人，为人孝友且有仁义文德，天下之人归心，是皇朝大统之所在，应当迎立为帝，不服从者死。 
English: At dawn on the fourth day of the first month of August, hundreds of officials were summoned to gather at the Xing Sheng Palace. Their weapons were all exposed at the sharp end, and they called out among the crowd: Emperor Wu has two holy sons, who are filial pals and have benevolence, righteousness and morality. The people of the world have come to their senses. This is where the great unity of the imperial dynasty lies. He should be enthroned as emperor, and those who disobey him should die.

古文：乃缚平章乌伯都剌、伯颜察儿，以中书左丞朵朵、参知政事王士熙等下于狱。
现代文：于是将平章乌伯都剌、伯颜察儿捆绑起来，并把中书左丞朵朵、参知政事王士熙等抓进牢狱。
English: As a result, they tied up Pingzhang Wuboduo and Bo Yanchaer, and took the Chinese scholar Zuo Doudou and the political advisor Wang Shixi to prison.

古文：燕铁木儿与西安王阿剌忒纳失里固守内廷。
现代文：燕铁木儿与西安王阿剌忒纳失里固守内廷。
English: Yan Tie Mu'er and Xi'an's King Ajna lost their way and clung to the Inner Court.

古文：于是帝方远在沙漠，猝未能至，虑生他变，乃迎帝弟怀王于江陵，且宣言已遣使北迎帝，以安众心。
现代文：当时明宗正远在漠北地区，急促之际不能到来，因怕发生别的变化，于是往迎明宗之弟怀王于江陵，而且宣称已派使者北向迎接明宗，以安定众心。
English: At that time, Myongjong was far away in the north of the country, and could not come at the time of urgency, for fear of other changes, so he went to meet Myongjong's brother, King Huai, in Gangneung, and announced that he had sent an envoy north to meet Myongjong to stabilize the hearts of the people.

古文：复矫称帝所遣使者自北方来，云周王从诸王兵整驾南辕，旦夕即至矣。
现代文：又假托明宗所派遣的使者从北方来，说是周王率诸王兵马整驾南还，早晚就到京师。
English: Also, the emissary sent by Tominzong came from the north, saying that King Zhou and his soldiers and horses were heading south, and would arrive in Beijing sooner or later.

古文：丁巳，怀王入京师，群臣请正大统，固让曰： 大兄在北，以长以德，当有天下。
现代文：二十七日，怀王到达京师，群臣奏请正位大统，怀王一再推让说 ：大兄在北方，无论凭年长还是凭德行，都应君临天下。
English: On the 27th, King Huai arrived in Beijing, and the courtiers asked him to be the legitimate emperor. King Huai repeatedly said: "Big brother in the north, regardless of age or virtue, should reign over the world."

古文：必不得已，当明以朕志播告中外。 
现代文：如实在推脱不了，应将我的意图明确地告知内外臣民。 
English: If it is really unavoidable, I should clearly inform my subjects at home and abroad of my intention.

古文：九月壬申，怀王即位，是为文宗，改元天历，诏天下曰： 谨俟大兄之至，以遂朕固让之心。 
现代文：九月十三日，怀王即皇帝位，成为文宗。改年号为天历，下诏于天下说： 恭待大兄到来，以达到我一再让位之心。 
English: On September 13, Emperor Huaiwang ascended the throne and became Emperor Wenzong. He changed the name of the year to the Chinese calendar, and issued the following edict to the world: "I am waiting for my elder brother to come, so that I can give up my position again and again."

古文：时倒剌沙在上都，立泰定皇帝子为皇帝，乃遣兵分道犯大都，而梁王王禅、右丞相答失铁木儿、御史大夫纽泽、太尉不花等兵皆次于榆林，燕帖木儿与其弟撒敦、子唐其势等，帅师与战，屡败之。上都兵皆溃。
现代文：当时倒剌沙还在上都，他拥立泰定皇帝之子为皇帝，然后派遣兵马分道进犯大都。梁王王禅、右丞相答失铁木儿、御史大夫纽泽、太尉不花等人，皆率兵马驻扎于榆林，燕帖木儿与其弟撒敦、其子唐其势等人，统率军队与之作战，多次击败上都兵马。
English: At that time, Qianlingsha was still in Shangdu, he supported the son of Emperor Taiding as the emperor, and then sent soldiers and horses to attack the capital separately. Liang Wang Wangzen, the Minister of the Right, the Minister of the Right, the Minister of the Right, the Minister of the Right, the Minister of the Right, the Minister of the Right, the Minister of the Right, the Minister of the Right, the Minister of the Right, the Minister of the Right, the Minister of the Right, the Minister of the Right, the Minister of the Right, the Minister of the Right, the Minister of the Right, the Minister of the Right, the Minister of the Right, the

古文：十月辛丑，齐王月鲁帖木儿、元帅不花帖木儿以兵围上都，倒剌沙乃奉皇帝宝出降，两京道路始通。
现代文：上都军队全都溃败而逃。十月十三日，齐王月鲁帖木儿、元帅不花帖木儿率兵包围上都，倒剌沙于是捧皇帝宝出降，两京道路方才打通。
English: Shangdu's army was defeated and fled. On October 13th, King Qiuyue Lutemur and Marshal Fuhuatemur led their troops to encircle Shangdu, but were defeated and forced to surrender with the emperor's treasure. Only then was the road between the two capitals opened.

古文：于是文宗遣哈散及撒迪等相继来迎，朔漠诸王皆劝帝南还京师，遂发北边。
现代文：这时文宗派遣哈散及撒迪等人相继来迎，北方沙漠诸王都劝明宗南还京师，于是从北边出发。
English: At this time, Emperor Wenzong sent Hasan and Sadi and others to welcome him successively. The kings of the northern deserts all advised Emperor Mingzong to return to Beijing from the south, so he set out from the north.

古文：诸王察阿台、沿边元帅朵烈捏、万户买驴等，咸帅师扈行，旧臣孛罗、尚家奴、哈八儿秃皆从。
现代文：诸侯王察阿台、沿边元帅朵烈捏、万户买驴等人，都率领部队随行。旧臣孛罗、尚家奴、哈八儿秃都随同南返。
English: The princes Wang Zhaatai, along with the border marshal Dou Lijunqin, and the people of Wanyu buy donkeys, all accompanied the troops. The former vassals Zhao Luo, Shang Jianu, and Habar Bald all returned to the south.

古文：至金山，岭北行省平章政事泼皮奉迎，武宁王彻彻秃、佥枢密院事帖木儿不花继至。
现代文：到达金山时，岭北行省平章政事泼皮奉迎，武宁王彻彻秃、佥枢密院事帖木儿不花随即到来。
English: When they arrived at Jinshan, they were warmly welcomed by Pingzhang, the governor of Lingbei Province, and immediately followed by King Wuming and the Privy Council.

古文：乃命孛罗如京师，两京之民闻帝使者至，欢呼鼓舞曰： 吾天子实自北来矣！ 
现代文：于是派孛罗前往京师。两京民众听到明宗所派使者到来，欢呼鼓舞说： 我们的天子真的从北方来了！ 
English: The people of the two capitals heard the arrival of the envoy sent by the Ming Sect, cheered and cheered and said: Our heavenly son has really come from the north!

古文：诸王、旧臣争先迎谒，所至成聚。
现代文：诸侯王、旧臣争先迎接，所至之地，热闹非常。
English: Princes, princes, and former vassals raced to be the first to welcome him, and the place he arrived at was very lively.

古文：天历二年正月乙丑，文宗复遣中书左丞跃里帖木儿来迎。
现代文：天历二年正月初七，文宗又派使者中书左丞跃里帖木儿前来迎接。
English: On the 7th day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of the lunar calendar, Emperor Wenzong sent an envoy, Chushu Zuojo Yueli Tetsumu'er, to welcome him.

古文：乙酉，撒迪等至，入见帝于行幄，以文宗命劝进。
现代文：二十七日，撒迪等人到来，进见明宗于行营幄殿，根据文宗之命劝进。
English: On the 27th, Sadi and others came to see Emperor Mingzong at the Xingyuan Hall and persuaded him to come according to Emperor Wenzong's order.

古文：丙戌，帝即位于和宁之北，扈行诸王、大臣咸入贺，乃命撒迪遣人还报京师。
现代文：二十八日，明宗即皇帝位于和宁北边，随行诸王、大臣都来敬贺。于是命撒迪派人回报京师。
English: On the 28th, Mingzong, the emperor, was located in the north of Haining, and all the kings and ministers who accompanied him came to pay their respects. Therefore, he ordered Sadi to send someone to return the capital.

古文：是月，前翰林学士承旨不答失里以太府太监沙剌班辇金银币帛至。
现代文：这一月，前任翰林学士承旨不答失里与太府太监沙剌班运送金银币帛到来。
English: In this month, the former Hanlin Scholar and the Taifu Eunuch, Shao Pan, came to deliver gold and silver coins.

古文：遣撒迪等还京师，帝命之曰： 朕弟曩尝览观书史，迩者得无废乎？
现代文：派遣撒迪等人还报京师，明宗对他们说 ：我的兄弟从前曾观览书史，近来不曾荒废吧？
English: Sending Sadi and others to report to the Beijing division, Mingsong said to them, "My brother once observed the history of books. Hasn't it been abandoned recently?"

古文：听政之暇，宜亲贤士大夫，讲论史籍，以知古今治乱得失。
现代文：治理政事后的闲暇时间里，应亲近贤士大夫，讲说议论史籍，以此来了解古今治乱得失。
English: In the leisure time after the governance of the government, you should be close to the sages and doctors, talk and discuss historical records, in order to understand the gains and losses of the ancient and modern times.

古文：卿等至京师，当以朕意谕之。 
现代文：你们到京师后，应把我这个意思告诉他。 
English: When you come to Beijing, you should tell him what I mean.

古文：二月壬辰，宣靖王买奴自京师来觐。
现代文：二月初五，宣靖王买奴从京师前来拜见。
English: On the fifth day of the second month of the year, King Xuanjing came from Beijing to pay a visit.

古文：辛丑，追尊皇妣亦乞烈氏曰仁献章圣皇后。
现代文：十四日，追尊皇妣亦乞烈氏为仁献章圣皇后。
English: On the 14th day of the month, the Emperor's posthumous imperial edict also asked the Li family to present a medal to the Holy Empress for her benevolence.

古文：是月，文宗立奎章阁学士院于京师，遣人以除目来奏，帝并从之。
现代文：这一月，文宗设立奎章阁学士院于京师，派人奏闻任职名单，明宗都表示认可。
English: In the same month, Wenzong established the Keizhangge Academy in Beijing, and sent a delegation to report the appointment list, which was approved by Mingzong.

古文：三月戊午朔，次洁坚察罕之地。
现代文：三月初一，到达洁坚察罕地区。
English: On the first day of March, they arrived in the Jiejiancahan area.

古文：辛酉，文宗遣右丞相燕铁木儿奉皇帝宝来上，御史中丞八即剌、知枢密院事秃儿哈帖木儿等，各率其属以从。
现代文：初四，文宗派遣右丞相燕铁木儿献上皇帝的宝印，御史中丞八即剌、知枢密院事秃儿哈帖木儿等人，各自率领其部属护从。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Emperor Wenzong sent the minister of justice, Yan Tiemu Er, to present the emperor's treasure seal, and the minister of history, Zhongzheng Yao, and the secretary of the Privy Council, Gao Er, and others, each led by their subordinates, followed.

古文：壬戌，造乘舆服御及近侍诸服用。
现代文：初五，制造御车御服等物及近侍所需的服用等物。
English: Fifth year of junior high school, manufacturing items such as chariot clothing and utensils needed by attendants.

古文：丙寅，帝谓中书左丞跃里帖木儿曰： 朕至上都，宗藩诸王必皆来会，非寻常朝会比也，诸王察阿台今亦从朕远来，有司供张，皆宜豫备。
现代文：初九，明宗对中书左丞跃里帖木儿说： 我到上都，宗藩诸王必定都来会集，这不同于平常朝会，诸侯王察阿台现在也随从我远来，有关部门接待供应，都应有所准备。
English: On the ninth day of the first lunar month, Emperor Mingzong said to Empress Timur: "When I go to Shangdu, the kings of my father's domains will certainly come to the assembly. This is different from the usual imperial assembly. Prince Czartai is now also coming with me from afar. The relevant departments should be prepared to receive and supply.

古文：四月癸巳，燕铁木儿见帝于行在，率百官上皇帝宝，帝嘉其勋，拜太师，仍命为中书右丞相，开府仪同三司、上柱国、录军国重事、监修国史、答剌罕、太平王并如故。复谕燕铁木儿等曰： 凡京师百官，朕弟所用者，并仍其旧，卿等其以朕意谕之。 燕铁木儿奏： 陛下君临万方，国家大事所系者，中书省、枢密院、御史台而已，宜择人居之。 
现代文：你可与中书省同僚商议商议。 三十日，刮大风，降尘土。四月初六，燕铁木儿来行在所拜见明宗，率领百官献上皇帝之宝，明宗表彰其功劳，拜为太师，照旧命为中书右丞相，开府仪同三司、上柱国、录军国重事、监修国史、答剌罕、太平王一并照旧。再次晓谕燕铁木儿等人说： 京师百官，凡我兄弟任用的，一并照旧，你们要把我的意思晓谕清楚。 燕铁木儿上奏说 ：陛下君临天下，关系国家大事的部门，唯有中书省、枢密院、御史台而已，应选择贤人居于其位。 
English: On the 30th day, a strong wind blew and dust fell. On the 6th day of the 4th month, Yan Tiemu'er came to pay homage to Mingzong, leading hundreds of officials to present the emperor's treasure. Mingzong commended his merits, worshiped him as the Grand Master, and appointed him as the Minister of the Right of the Chinese People's Literature as before. The Kaifu ceremony and the three departments, Shangzhuang country, recording the important matters of the military country, supervising the national history, answering questions, and pacifying the king were all the same as before. Once again, Yan Tiemu'er and others said: Beijing masters,

古文：帝然其言，以武宗旧人哈八儿秃为中书平章政事，前中书平章政事伯帖木儿知枢密院事，常侍孛罗为御史大夫。
现代文：明宗认为他说得有理，便任命武宗旧臣哈八儿秃为中书平章政事，前任中书平章政事伯帖木儿知枢密院事，常侍孛罗为御史大夫。
English: Mingzong thought that he was right, so he appointed Wu Zong's former vassal, Harbacher Balding, as the political secretary of the Central Shogunate, the former political secretary of the Central Shogunate, Bc Thm Đc, as the Privy Councillor, and the regular attendant, M Lo, as the Grand Historian.

古文：甲午，立行枢密院，命昭武王、知枢密院事火沙领行枢密院事，赛帖木儿、买奴并同知行枢密院事。
现代文：初七，设立行枢密院，命昭武王、知枢密院事火沙领行枢密院事，赛帖木儿、买奴并为同知行枢密院事。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the Privy Council was established, and it was ordered that King Zhaowu, Zhishu led the Privy Council, and Sai, Timur, and Bui led the Privy Council.

古文：是日，帝宴诸王、大臣于行殿，燕铁木儿、哈八儿秃、伯帖木儿、孛罗等侍。
现代文：这天，明宗宴请诸王、大臣于行殿，燕铁木儿、哈八儿秃、伯帖木儿、孛罗等人侍于其侧。
English: On this day, the Ming Dynasty banquet invited kings and ministers to the hall, and Yan Tie Mu'er, Habar Gao, Bo Tie Mu'er, Yao Luo and others served at his side.

古文：帝特命台臣曰； 太祖皇帝尝训敕臣下云： 美色、名马，人皆悦之，然方寸一有系累，即能坏名败德。 
现代文：明宗特命御史台官员说 ：太祖皇帝曾经训敕臣下说 ：美色、名马，人人都喜爱，但心中一有拖累，就能坏其名誉，败其德行。 
English: An official of the Mingzong Special Mission History Station said: Emperor Taizu once said to his subordinates: Beautiful, famous horses are loved by everyone, but if there is a drag in the heart, it can ruin their reputation and defeat their virtue.

古文：卿等居风纪之司，亦尝念及此乎？
现代文：你们身居法纪纠察部门，也曾考虑到这一点吗？
English: Have you ever considered this when you were in law enforcement and picketing?

古文：世祖初立御史台，首命塔察儿、奔帖杰儿二人协司其政。
现代文：世祖皇帝初次设立御史台，首先任命塔察儿、奔帖杰儿二人协同管领其政。
English: The founder emperor first set up the imperial history station, and first appointed two people, Tachara and Bentetsu Jie, to jointly manage his government.

古文：天下国家，譬犹一人之身，中书则右手也，枢密则左手也。
现代文：天下国家，就像一个人的身体，中书省相当于右手，枢密院相当于左手。
English: The country under heaven is like a person's body. The Ministry of Education is equivalent to the right hand, and the Privy Council is equivalent to the left hand.

古文：左右手有病，治之以良医，省、院阙失，不以御史台治之可乎？
现代文：左右手有病，用良医来治疗，中书省与枢密院有缺失之处，不用御史台加以治理，能行吗？
English: The right and left hands have diseases, and good doctors are used to treat them. The Chinese Ministry of Education and the Privy Council have deficiencies, and do not need to be treated by the State Administration of History. Is it possible?

古文：凡诸王、百司，违法越礼，一听举劾。
现代文：诸王与各部门机构，凡违反法制超出规定的举动，都要举报弹劾。
English: All kings and all departments and agencies that violate the rule of law and go beyond the regulations must report for impeachment.

古文：风纪重则贪墨惧，犹斧斤重则入木深，其势然也。
现代文：法纪严明，贪官污吏就有所畏惧，这就如同运斧猛砍就入木很深一样，是其形势使之然。
English: Laws and regulations are strict, and corrupt officials are afraid of them. This is just like the axe cutting deep into the wood, it is the situation that makes it so.

古文：朕有阙失，卿亦以闻，朕不尔责也。 
现代文：我有过失，你们也要奏闻，我不会责怪你们的。 
English: I made a mistake, you're going to have to answer for it, and I don't blame you.

古文：乙未，特命孛罗等传旨，宣谕燕铁木儿、伯答沙、火沙、哈八儿秃、八即剌等曰： 世祖皇帝立中书省、枢密院、御史台及百司庶府，共治天下，大小职掌，已有定制。
现代文：初八，特别命令孛罗等人传达旨意，宣谕燕铁木儿、伯答沙、火沙、哈八儿秃、八即剌等人说： 世祖皇帝设立中书省、枢密院、御史台以及各种部门机构，共同治理天下，大小职掌，都有定制。
English: On the first day of the eighth month, he specifically ordered Zhao Luo and others to convey his will, proclaiming to Yan Tie Muer, Baota Sha, Huo Sha, Habara Zhao, Hachi Zhou and others that: The ancestral emperor established the Central Ministry of Literature, the Privy Council, the Imperial Historian's Office, and various departments and agencies to jointly govern the world, and all positions, large and small, are custom-made.

古文：世祖命廷臣集律令章程，以为万世法。
现代文：世祖命令朝廷大臣会集律令章程，作为万世之法。
English: The founder ordered the Council of Imperial Ministers to compile the Ritsuryo Code as a law for all time.

古文：成宗以来，列圣相承，罔不恪遵成宪。
现代文：成宗以来，各位圣人相继其位，无不谨守成规。
English: Since the founding of the sect, all the saints have successively ascended to the throne, all of them adhering to the rules.

古文：朕今居太祖、世祖所居之位，凡省、院、台、百司庶政，询谋佥同，摽译所奏，以告于朕。
现代文：我现在居于太祖、世祖所居之位，凡属省、院、台及各部门共同商议谋划的事件，选择所应上奏的材料，以告知于我。
English: I am now in the position of the great ancestor, the world ancestor, and all the events that belong to the province, the academy, Taiwan and various departments have been jointly discussed and planned, and the materials that should be played have been selected to inform me.

古文：军务机密，枢密院当即以闻，毋以夙夜为间而稽留之。
现代文：军务机密大事，枢密院必须及时奏闻，不得以早晚不便而致拖延。
English: In matters of military secrecy, the Privy Council must be informed in a timely manner, and must not be delayed due to inconvenience.

古文：其他事务，果有所言，必先中书、院、台，其下百司及纮御之臣，毋得隔越陈请。
现代文：其他事务，如有所言，必须先经中书省、枢密院与御史台，其下各部门及侍御之臣，不得越级陈事奏请。
English: For other matters, if there is any comment, it must first go through the Chinese Ministry of Literature, the Privy Council and the Imperial Historian's Office, and the departments under them and the attendants of the minister must not exceed the level.

古文：宜宣谕诸司，咸俾闻知。
现代文：应宣谕各部门，都得以知晓。
English: It should be announced to all departments, so that everyone knows what is going on.

古文：傥违朕意，必罚无赦。 
现代文：如果违背我的意图，必定惩罚而不赦免。 
English: If it is contrary to My intention, it must be punished and not forgiven.

古文：丁酉，以陕西行台御史大夫铁木儿脱为上都留守。
现代文：初十，任命陕西行台御史大夫铁木儿脱为上都留守。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, the appointment of Shaanxi Guotai goshi doctor Tiemu Ertu as Shangdu left.

古文：辛丑，文宗立都督府于京师，遣使来奏，又以台宪官除目来上，并从之。
现代文：十四日，文宗设立都督府于京师，派遣使者前来奏闻，又把台宪官任用人员名单拿来上奏，一并表示认可。
English: On the 14th, Emperor Wenzong established the Governor-General's Office in Beijing, dispatched an envoy to report the news, and also reported the list of persons appointed as Taiwan gendarmes, and expressed his approval.

古文：癸卯，遣使如京师，卜日命中书左丞相铁木儿补化摄告即位于郊庙、社稷。
现代文：十六日，派使者到京师，卜测吉日命中书左丞相铁木儿补化代为告祭郊庙、社稷之神即皇帝位一事。
English: On the 16th, an emissary was sent to Beijing to prophesy that the auspicious day would bring about the death of the left-wing chancellor Tie Mu'er and the enthronement of the emperor.

古文：遣武宁王彻彻秃及哈八儿秃立文宗为皇太子，仍立詹事院，罢储庆司，以彻里铁木儿为中书平章政事，阔儿吉司为中书右丞，怯来、只儿哈郎并为甘肃行省平章政事，忽剌台为江浙行省平章政事，那海为岭北行省平章政事。
现代文：派遣武宁王彻彻秃与哈八儿秃册立文宗为皇太子，仍旧设立詹事院，撤销储庆司。任命彻里铁木儿为中书平章政事，阔儿吉司为中书右丞，怯来、只儿哈郎并为甘肃行省平章政事，忽剌台为江浙行省平章政事，那海为岭北行省平章政事。
English: He dispatched the King of Wu Ning, Cherchebald, and the Emperor's daughter, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the

古文：甲辰，敕中书省赐官吏送宝者秩一等，从者赉以币帛。
现代文：十七日，敕令中书省赐予官吏送宝者官秩一等。随从人员赏以币帛。
English: On the 17th, the Ministry of Education and Culture issued an order to award the first-class official rank to the official who sent the treasure. The attendants were rewarded with coins.

古文：乙巳，监察御史言： 岭北行省，控制一方，广轮万里，实为太祖肇基之地，国家根本系焉。
现代文：十八日，监察御史上言 ：岭北行省，控制一方，幅员有万里之广，实为太祖创建基业之地，关系到国家的根本。
English: On the 18th, the supervising governor said in a statement: "Lingbei Province, the controlling party, has a vast territory. It is indeed the place where the great ancestor founded the foundation, and it is related to the foundation of the country.

古文：方面之寄，岂可轻任。
现代文：方面重任，不可轻视。
English: This is an important task and should not be taken lightly.

古文：平章塔即吉素非勋旧，奴事倒剌沙，倔起宿卫，辄为右丞，俄升平章，年已七十，眊昏殊甚。
现代文：平章塔即吉并非勋旧之臣，只因奴才般地服侍倒剌沙，才倔起于宿卫人员之中，一下提拔为右丞，不久就升为平章政事，年已七十岁，昏庸特甚。
English: Hira-sang-ta-sokichi was not an honored old retainer. He only rose through the ranks of the palace guards because he served the fallen Bansha like a slave. He was immediately promoted to Ujo, and soon after to Hira-sang-seiji. He was already seventy years old, and very weak.

古文：左丞马谋，本晋邸部民，以女妻倒剌沙，引为都水，遂除左丞。
现代文：左丞马谋，本为晋王部民，因嫁女儿给倒剌沙，引用为都水监职事官，接着任命为左丞。
English: Zuo Ma Mu, who was originally a member of the Jin imperial court, was cited for marrying his daughter to Fan Basha, and was appointed as the official water inspector of the capital. He was then appointed Zuo.

古文：郎中罗里，市井小人，秃鲁忽乃晋邸卫卒，不谙政务。
现代文：郎中罗里，本是市井小人，秃鲁忽原是晋王卫兵，不熟悉政务，皆应罢免。 
English: Brother-in-law Rory, originally a common villain, and Bald Lu, formerly a guard of the King of Jin, are not familiar with government affairs, and should be dismissed.

古文：并宜黜退。 台臣以闻，帝曰： 御史言甚善，其并黜之。 
现代文：御史台官员以此奏闻，明宗说： 御史说的很对，一并罢免其职。 
English: After hearing this report, Mingzong said, "What you said is quite right. I have removed you from your post."

古文：又谕台臣曰： 御史劾岭北省臣，朕甚嘉之。
现代文：明宗还对御史台官员说 ：御史弹劾岭北行省官员，我很满意。
English: Mingzong also said to the official of the History Channel: I am very satisfied with the impeachment of the official of Lingbei Province by the History Channel.

古文：继今所当言者，毋有所惮。
现代文：今后凡有当言之事，不必有所畏惧。
English: In the future, there is nothing to be afraid of when it comes to speaking out.

古文：被劾之人，苟营求申诉，朕必罪之。
现代文：受弹劾之人，如钻营门路以求申诉，我必定加以治罪。
English: If an impeached person goes out of his way to appeal, I will certainly punish him.

古文：或廉非其实，毋辄以闻。 
现代文：如经核查，所言不合实情，不得随意奏闻。 
English: If, after verification, what is said is untrue, it shall not be reported at will.

古文：五月丁巳朔，次朵里伯真之地。
现代文：五月初一，到达朵里伯真之地。
English: On the first day of May, I arrived at the true land of Doliboh.

古文：戊午，遣西安王阿剌忒纳失里还京师，封帖木儿为保德郡王。
现代文：初二，派遣西安王阿剌忒纳失里返回京师。册封帖木儿为保德郡王。
English: On the second day of the junior high school year, Xi'an's King Ajna was sent back to Beijing. Timur was crowned the king of Baode County.

古文：赐扈驾宿卫士等币帛有差。
现代文：赐予随驾宿卫士卒等人币帛不等。
English: The amount of money given to the guards accompanying the train ranged from the lowest to the highest.

古文：己未，皇太子遣翰林学士承旨阿邻帖木儿来觐。
现代文：初三，皇太子派遣翰林学士承旨阿邻帖木儿前来朝觐。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the crown prince sent the scholar Hanlin Zongzhi and the scholar Ahing Timur to come to the imperial court.

古文：庚申，次斡耳罕木东。
现代文：初四，到达斡耳罕水之东。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, I arrived at the east side of the water.

古文：辛酉，御史大夫孛罗、中政使尚家奴，并特授开府仪同三司，以典四番宿卫。
现代文：初五，御史大夫孛罗、中政使尚家奴，皆特授开府仪同三司，以掌管四番宿卫。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the new year, the chief historian Jairo and the middle-ranking government envoy Shang Jia Nu were all given the special honor of opening the government and the three offices to take charge of the fourth guard.

古文：癸亥，次必忒怯秃之地，翰林学士承旨斡耳朵自京师来觐。
现代文：初七，到达必忒怯秃之地，翰林学士承旨斡耳朵从京师前来朝见。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, when he reached the place where he must have been scared and bald, Hanlin Scholar came from Beijing to see the morning.

古文：命有司新武宗幄殿、车舆。
现代文：命有关部门翻新武宗幄殿与车驾。
English: He ordered the relevant departments to renovate the palace and the carriage house.

古文：庚午，命燕铁木儿升用岭北行省官吏，其余官吏并赐散官一级。
现代文：十四日，命铁燕木儿升职任用岭北行省官员，其余官员一并赐予散官一级。
English: On the 14th, Tie Yanmu Er was promoted and appointed as an official of Lingbei Xing Province, and the remaining officials were also given the first-level officials.

古文：选用潜邸旧臣及扈从士，受制命者八十有五人，六品以下二十有六人。
现代文：先用潜邸旧臣及随从卫士，接受制命的有八十五人，六品官职以下的有二十六人。
English: Former ministers and attendant guards were the first to be used, with eighty-five people receiving orders, and twenty-six people below the six grades of official posts.

古文：壬申，次探秃儿海之地。
现代文：十六日，到达探秃儿海之地。
English: On the 16th, we arrived at the place where we explored the Bald Eagle Sea.

古文：封亦怜真八为柳城郡王，以八即剌为陕西行台御史大夫，众家奴为御史中丞。
现代文：册封亦怜真八为柳城郡王。任命八即剌为陕西行台御史大夫，众家奴为御史中丞。
English: He also crowned Zhenpachi as the king of Liucheng County, and appointed Hachi to be the governor of Shaanxi and Guandong, and Zheke to be the vice-governor of Guandong.

古文：乙亥，次秃忽剌。
现代文：十九日，到达秃忽剌地方。
English: On the 19th, they arrived at the place of Zhao Hulun.

古文：敕大都省臣铸皇太子宝。
现代文：敕令大都中书省官员铸造皇太子宝。
English: He ordered officials from the Ministry of Education and Culture to cast the crown prince's treasure.

古文：时求太子故宝不知所在，近侍伯不花言宝藏于上都行幄，遣人至上都索之，无所得，乃命更铸之。
现代文：当时寻求旧太子宝而不知所在，近侍伯不花上言，说太子宝藏在上都行幄，派人到上都寻找而无所得，于是下令重新铸造。
English: At that time, he was looking for the old prince's treasure without knowing where it was, and his close attendant did not need to say anything, saying that the prince's treasure was all over the place. He sent people to the top to look for it, but there was no income, so he ordered it to be recast.

古文：西木邻等四十三驿旱灾，命中书以粮赈之，计八千二百石。
现代文：西木邻等四十三处驿站旱灾，命中书省用粮食予以赈济，共计八千二百石。
English: Forty-three rice-growing stations in and around Nishiki were affected by the drought, and Shusho was able to provide relief with grain, a total of 8,200 koku.

古文：丁丑，皇太子发京师。
现代文：二十一日，皇太子从京师出发。
English: On the 21st, the crown prince set off from Kyoto.

古文：镇南王帖木儿不花，诸王也速、斡即、答来不花、朵来只班、伯颜也不干，驸马别阇里及扈卫百官，悉从行。
现代文：镇南王帖木儿不花，诸王也速、斡即、答来不花、朵来只班、伯颜也不干，驸马别里以及护卫官员，都随同出发。
English: The king of Zhenan, Timur, did not spend, the kings also made haste, mediated promptly, answered without flowers, came only to work, and did not do anything, and Bebeli and the escort officials all set off together.

古文：戊寅，京师市马二百八十匹，载乘舆服御送行在所。
现代文：二十二日，京师买马二百八十匹，装载乘舆服用之物送往行在处所。
English: On the 22nd, the Beijing Division bought 280 horses, loaded them with supplies and sent them to the site.

古文：己卯，次秃忽剌河东。
现代文：二十三日，到达秃忽剌河东岸。
English: On the 23rd, they arrived at the east bank of the Zhenghuyu River.

古文：加翰林学士承旨唐兀为太尉。
现代文：加封翰林学士承旨为太尉。
English: In addition, Hanlin was promoted to the rank of second lieutenant.

古文：赵王马札罕部落旱，民五万五千四百口不能自存，敕河东宣慰司赈粮两月。
现代文：赵王马札罕部落干旱，人民五万五千四百多口不能维持生存，敕令河东宣慰司赈济粮食两个月。
English: The Zhao Wang Mazahan tribe is experiencing drought, and more than 55,400 people are unable to maintain their livelihoods. Xuanling from Hedong Province has been consoling the priests and providing grain for two months.

古文：庚辰，赐诸王燕只哥台钞二百锭、币帛二千匹。
现代文：二十四日，赐予诸侯王燕只歌台钱钞二百锭、币帛二千匹。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the princes gave Wang Yan a song table with two hundred banknotes and two thousand coins.

古文：辛巳，次斡罗斡秃之地。
现代文：二十五日，到达斡罗斡秃之地。
English: On the 25th, they arrived at the place of the battle.

古文：壬午，次不鲁通之地。
现代文：二十六日，到达不鲁通之地。
English: On the 26th, we arrived in the land of the non-lucid.

古文：是日，左丞相铁木儿补化等以帝即位，摄告南郊。
现代文：这天，左丞相铁木儿补化等人以明宗即皇帝位之事，代为告祭于南郊。
English: On this day, the Left Chancellery's Minister of Justice, Temur Byungwha, and others held a memorial service in the southern suburb on behalf of Emperor Mingzong.

古文：甲申，次忽剌火失温之地。
现代文：二十八日，到达忽剌火失温之地。
English: On the 28th, we arrived at the place where the sudden bonfire caused the temperature to drop.

古文：六月丁亥朔，次坤都也不剌之地。
现代文：六月初一，到达坤都也不剌地方。
English: On the first day of June, there is no better place to arrive in Kundu.

古文：是日，铁木儿补化等以帝即位，摄告于宗庙、社稷。
现代文：这天，铁木儿补化等人以明宗即皇帝位之事，代为告祭于宗庙、社稷之神。
English: On this day, Temur Tsuika and others took Mingzong, that is, the emperor's throne, as a substitute for the sacrifice in the ancestral temple and the god of the shrine.

古文：戊子，燕铁木儿等奏： 中政院越中书擅奏除授，移文来征制敕，已如所请授之，然于大体非宜，乞申命禁止，庶使政权归一。 
现代文：初二，燕铁木儿等人上奏说： 中政院越过中书省擅自上奏除授官员，行文来征求制书敕令，已按所请给予除授，但于规定不合，请申命加以禁止，以使政务权力归于一统。 
English: On the second day of the junior high school, Yan Tiemu'er and others submitted a petition saying: The Central People's Government has bypassed the Chinese Book Ministry to submit a petition to remove the awarding officials without authorization, and has written a document to solicit a decree on book production. The awarding has been removed as requested, but if it is not in accordance with the regulations, please issue an order to prohibit it, so that the political power can be unified.

古文：从之。
现代文：同意这项提议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：庚寅，次撒里之地。
现代文：初四，到达撒里地方。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, I arrived in Sarri.

古文：陕西行省告饥，遣使还都，与诸老臣议赈救之。
现代文：陕西行省上告饥荒，派使者回京师，与各元老大臣商议救灾之事。
English: The province of Shaanxi went to Beijing to complain about the famine and sent an envoy back to Beijing to discuss the matter of disaster relief with the various veteran ministers.

古文：丁酉，次兀纳八之地。
现代文：十一日，到达兀纳八地方。
English: On the 11th day, it reached eight places in Jinnah.

古文：升都督府为大都督府。
现代文：将都督府升格为大都督府。
English: The prefectural governor's office was upgraded to a major prefectural governor's office.

古文：己亥，次阔朵之地。
现代文：十三日到达阔朵地方。
English: On the thirteenth day, they arrived at the place of flowers.

古文：枢密院奏： 皇太子遣使来言，近已颁敕，四川诸省兵悉遣还营，惟云南逆谋叵测，兵未可即罢，令臣等以闻。 
现代文：枢密院上奏说： 皇太子派使者来说，近来已颁布赦令，四川等行省兵马都已遣还军营，唯有云南行省逆谋难以预测，兵马不能马上撤回，令我等前来奏闻。 
English: The report to the Privy Council said: The crown prince sent an envoy to say that a pardon order has recently been issued, and the soldiers and horses sent to Sichuan and other provinces have been sent back to the military camp. However, it is difficult to predict the countermeasures of Yunnan Province, and the soldiers and horses cannot be withdrawn immediately, so we have to wait to report.

古文：帝曰： 可仍屯戍，俟平定而后罢。 
现代文：明宗说 ：可照旧屯守，等云南平定之后撤回。 
English: Mingzong said, "We can keep the garrison as before, and withdraw after Yunnan is pacified."

古文：辛丑，次撒里怯儿之地。
现代文：十五日，到达撒里怯儿地方。
English: On the fifteenth day, they arrived at the place called Sarri-Chaos.

古文：壬寅，戒近侍毋得辄有奏请。
现代文：十六日，告诫近侍不得有所奏请。
English: On the sixteenth day, he admonished his attendants not to make any music.

古文：甲辰，赐驸马脱必儿钞千锭，往云南。
现代文：十八日，赐与驸马脱必儿钱钞千锭，前往云南。
English: On the 18th, he gave thousands of money and banknotes to his horse and went to Yunnan.

古文：丁未，次哈里温。
现代文：二十一日，到达哈里温地方。
English: On the twenty-first day, they arrived in the Harivin region.

古文：戊申，次阔朵杰阿剌伦。
现代文：二十二日，到达阔朵杰阿剌伦。
English: On the 22nd, we arrived at Kuodu Jiaolun.

古文：辛亥，次哈儿哈纳秃之地。
现代文：二十五日，到达哈儿哈纳秃地方。
English: On the 25th, they arrived at the Harkhana Desert.

古文：诏谕中书省臣： 凡国家钱谷、铨选诸大政事，先启皇太子，然后以闻。 
现代文：下诏宣谕中书省官员说： 凡属国家钱粮、选拔官吏等重大政事，先请示皇太子，然后再行奏闻。 
English: In the following imperial edict, the officials of the Ministry of Education and Culture said: For all important political affairs, such as the state's money and grain, and the selection of officials, the crown prince should be consulted first, and then a report should be made.

古文：癸丑，次忽秃之地。
现代文：二十七日，到达忽秃地方。
English: On the 27th, we arrived at the bald spot.

古文：甲寅，赈陕西临潼、华阴二十三驿钞一千八百锭，晋宁路十五驿钞八百锭。
现代文：二十八日，赈济陕西临潼、华阴二十三所驿站钱钞一千八百锭，晋宁路十五所驿站钱钞八百锭。
English: On the 28th, the 23 stations of Linyi and Huayin in Shaanxi Province issued banknotes of 1800 baht, and the 15 stations of Jining Road issued banknotes of 800 baht.

古文：是月，铁木儿补化以久旱启于皇太子，辞相位，乞更选贤德，委以燮理，皇太子遣使以闻。
现代文：这个月，铁木儿补化因久旱不雨上奏于皇太子，请辞去相位，另选贤德之人，委以燮理阴阳之任。皇太子派遣使者奏明其事。
English: This month, because of the long drought and lack of rain, Tiemu'er Shuhua appealed to the crown prince, asking him to resign from the position, and to select a virtuous person to be entrusted with the responsibility of controlling the yin and yang. The crown prince sent an envoy to report the matter.

古文：帝谕阔儿吉思等曰： 修德应天，乃君臣当为之事，铁木儿补化所言良是。
现代文：明宗对阔儿吉思等人说 ：修德以合天意，是君臣应做的事情，铁木儿补化所言很对。
English: Mingzong said to Kuo'er Jisi and others, "Cultivating virtue in accordance with the will of Heaven is what a monarch and a minister should do. Temuer's words are right.

古文：天明可畏，朕未尝斯须忘于怀也。
现代文：上天明察诚可畏惧，我心中片刻不曾忘怀。
English: Heaven knows what I was afraid of, but I never forgot it for a moment.

古文：皇太子来会，当与共图其可以泽民利物者行之。
现代文：皇太子前来集会，应和他共同商议一些为民谋利的办法加以实施。
English: When the crown prince comes to the assembly, he should discuss with him some measures for the benefit of the people and implement them.

古文：卿等其以朕意谕群臣。 
现代文：你们要把我的意图告谕群臣。 
English: You must inform my ministers of my intentions.

古文：七月丙辰朔，日有食之。甲子，次孛罗火你之地。
现代文：七月初一，发生日食。初四，到达孛罗火你地方。
English: On the first day of July, there will be a solar eclipse. On the fourth day of the first month, the fire will reach your place.

古文：壬申，监察御史把的于思言： 朝廷自去秋命将出师，戡定祸乱，其供给军需，赏赉将士，所费不可胜纪。
现代文：十七日，监察御史马的于思上言： 朝廷自从去年秋季命将出师，平定祸乱以来，其间供给军需，赏赐将士，花费极大。
English: On the 17th, Yu Xizhong, the inspector of the Imperial Horse, said: Since the imperial court ordered the division last autumn to quell the calamity, it has been extremely expensive to supply military supplies and reward soldiers.

古文：若以岁入经赋较之，则其所出已过数倍。
现代文：如将每年赋税收支做个比较，那么支出已经超过收入好几倍。
English: If we compare the annual taxation and expenditure, then the expenditure has exceeded the income several times.

古文：况今诸王朝会，旧制一切供亿，俱尚未给，而陕西等处饥馑荐臻，饿殍枕籍，加以冬春之交，雪雨愆期，麦苗槁死，秋田未种，民庶遑遑，流移者众。
现代文：况且现在诸王朝会，按旧制规定的供应之物尚未具备，而陕西等地饥荒不断，饿死者众多，加上冬春之际，雨雪不落，麦田枯死，秋播作物不能下种，民众遑遑不安，流亡移徙者众多。
English: Moreover, now the dynasties are meeting, the supplies stipulated by the old system are not yet available, and the famine in Shaanxi and other places continues, there are many starving people, and in winter and spring, the rain and snow do not fall, the wheat fields die, the autumn sowing crops cannot be sown, the people are uneasy, and there are many emigrants.

古文：臣伏思之，此正国家节用之时也。如果有功必当赏赉者，宜视其官之崇卑而轻重之，不惟省费，亦可示劝。
现代文：我认为这正是国家应该节省财用的时候，如果有功劳非得赏赐不可的，可根据其官职的高低而斟酌轻重，这样不仅节省费用，还可表示鼓励。
English: I think that this is the time when the state should save money. If there is merit that must be rewarded, it can be weighed according to the level of its official position. This will not only save costs, but also show encouragement.

古文：其近侍诸臣奏请恩赐，宜悉停罢，以纾民力。 
现代文：其近侍官员奏请恩赏的，都应停止，以减轻人民的负担。 
English: The officials close to him should stop asking for rewards in order to lighten the burden on the people.

古文：台臣以闻，帝嘉纳之，仍敕中书省以其所言示百司。
现代文：御史台官员以此奏闻，明宗高兴地接受这项建议，并敕令中书省将其所言告知各部官员。
English: With this report, the official of the Imperial Historical Research Station, Mingzong, gladly accepted this suggestion and ordered the Ministry of Literature to inform the officials of all ministries of what he had said.

古文：乙亥，次不罗察罕之地。
现代文：二十日，到达不罗察罕地方。
English: On the 20th, they arrived at the city of Borochakhan.

古文：丙子，文宗受皇太子宝。
现代文：二十一日，文宗接受皇太子之宝。
English: On the twenty-first day, Wenzong accepted the crown prince's treasure.

古文：戊寅，次小只之地。
现代文：二十三日，到达小只地方。
English: On the 23rd, we arrived at a small village.

古文：壬午，遣使诣京师，敕中书平章政事哈八儿秃同翰林国史院官祭太祖、太宗、睿宗三朝御容。
现代文：二十七日，派遣使者前往京师，敕令中书平章政事哈八儿秃，会同翰林国史院官员，致祭于太祖、太宗、睿宗三朝御容之前。
English: On the 27th, an emissary was dispatched to Beijing, and by imperial order, the Chinese scholar Pingzhang and the statesman Habara Zhao, together with officials from the Hanlin Academy of National History, offered a sacrifice in front of the three imperial families of Taizu, Taizong, and Ruizong.

古文：发诸卫军六千完京城。
现代文：调发诸卫军士六千人修膳京师城墙。
English: Six thousand guardsmen were dispatched to repair the walls of the capital.

古文：八月乙酉朔，次王忽察都之地。
现代文：八月初一，到达王忽察都地方。
English: On the first day of August, they arrived at the Wanghu Town.

古文：丙戌，皇太子入见。
现代文：初二，皇太子入见明宗。
English: On the second day of the school year, the crown prince met with Myongjong.

古文：是日，宴皇太子及诸王、大臣于行殿。
现代文：这天，明宗宴请皇太子以及诸王、大臣于行殿。
English: On this day, Myongjong held a banquet for the crown prince as well as kings and ministers in the main hall.

古文：庚寅，帝暴崩，年三十，葬起辇谷，从诸陵。
现代文：初六，明宗突然逝世，终年三十岁。埋葬于起辇谷，陪同诸陵。
English: At the age of six, Mingzong died suddenly, at the age of thirty. He was buried in the Valley of the Ancestors, accompanied by the tombs.

古文：是月己亥，皇太子复即皇帝位。
现代文：这个月十五日，皇太子再次即皇帝位。
English: On the 15th of this month, the crown prince once again became emperor.

古文：十二月乙巳，知枢密院事臣也不伦等议请上尊谥曰翼献景孝皇帝，庙号明宗。
现代文：十二月二十三日，知枢密院事官员也不伦等人商议奏请加上尊谥为翼献景孝皇帝，庙号为明宗。
English: On December 23rd, the officials of the Privy Council, including Ni Lun and others, discussed and proposed to add Emperor Jingxiao as the wing and Emperor Mingzong as the temple name.

古文：三年三月壬申，祔于太庙。
现代文：天历三年三月二十一日，附祭于太庙。
English: On the 21st day of the 3rd month of the 3rd year of the lunar calendar, the supplementary festival was held at Taimiao.

