古文：呜呼，夷狄居处饮食，随水草寒暑徙迁，有君长部号而无世族、文字记别，至于弦弓毒矢，强弱相并，国地大小，兴灭不常，是皆乌足以考述哉！
现代文：唉，夷狄的住地饮食，随着水草、寒暑的不同而迁移变化，有君长部号的名称而没有有关世族的文字记载，至于凭借弦弓毒箭，强弱相互吞并，国土时大时小，兴亡无常，这些哪里值得都去一一考察叙述呢！
English: Alas, the living and eating habits of the Yidi have migrated and changed according to the differences in water, grass, cold and heat. There is the name of the king's chief minister, but there is no written record of the world's people. As for the use of bow and arrow, the strong and weak annexing each other, the size of the country, the rise and fall, and the fickleness of life, these are all worth exploring and describing!

古文：惟其服叛去来，能为中国利害者，此不可以不知也。
现代文：不过，他们归附、反叛、离去、到来，能够影响中原的利害的事迹，则是不可以不加了解的。
English: However, it is important to understand their acts of affiliation, rebellion, departure, and arrival, which can affect the interests of the Central Plains.

古文：自古夷狄之于中国，有道未必服，无道未必不来，盖自因其衰盛。
现代文：自古以来夷狄对于中原来说，中原正当治世时他们未必归服，不当治世时他们未必不来，大概是由于他们自己有盛衰的缘故。
English: For the Central Plains since ancient times, when the Central Plains ruled the world justly, they did not necessarily submit, and when they ruled the world unjustly, they did not necessarily not come, probably because of their own rise and fall.

古文：虽尝置之治外，而羁縻制驭恩威之际，不可失也。
现代文：虽曾把他们排除在统治范围之外，但在笼络控制、恩威并施的情况下，也不能失去他们。
English: Although they have been excluded from the scope of governance, they cannot be lost under the circumstances of co-optation, control and favor.

古文：其得之未必为利，失之有足为患，可不慎哉！
现代文：得到他们未必有利，失去他们又足以造成灾患，能不谨慎吗！
English: To get them may not be beneficial, to lose them is enough to cause disaster, can we not be prudent!

古文：作《四夷附录》。
现代文：因此要作《四夷附录》。
English: Therefore, "Siyi Appendix" should be made.

古文：新五代史·附录夷狄，种号多矣。
现代文：夷狄，种号很多。
English: Yidi, there are many names for it.

古文：其大者自以名通中国，其次小远者附见，又其次微不足录者，不可胜数。
现代文：大的种落，自以名称通报中原，其次小而远的依附大的而出现，再其次微不足道的，数都数不完。
English: Since the Central Plains was announced by name, large settlements have appeared, followed by small and distant ones that are dependent on large ones, and then insignificant ones. The number is endless.

古文：其地环列九州之外，而西北常强，为中国患。
现代文：他们的居住地环列于中原之外，而西北方的常常很强大，是中原的祸患。
English: Their habitat is outside the Central Plains, and the Northwest is often very strong and is the scourge of the Central Plains.

古文：三代猃狁，见于《诗》、《书》。
现代文：夏、商、周三代时的猿狁，见于《诗经》、《尚书》。
English: The plaster casts of Xia, Shang, and the third generation are found in "Shijing" and "Shangshu."

古文：秦、汉以来，匈奴著矣。
现代文：秦、汉以来，匈奴最有名。
English: Since the Qin and Han dynasties, the Xiongnu have been the most famous.

古文：隋、唐之间，突厥为大。
现代文：隋、唐之间，突厥最强大。
English: Between the Sui and Tang dynasties, the Turks were the most powerful.

古文：其后有吐蕃、回鹘之强。
现代文：后来有强大的吐蕃、回鹊。
English: Later, there were powerful Tujue and Hui Dynasties.

古文：五代之际，以名见中国者十七八，而契丹最盛。
现代文：五代时，闻名于中原的有十七八个，而契丹最强盛。
English: During the five dynasties, there were seventeen or eight famous dynasties in the Central Plains, and Khitan was the most powerful.

古文：契丹自后魏以来，名见中国。
现代文：契丹自从后魏以来，名称为中原所知。
English: Qidan has been known as Zhongyuan since the late Wei Dynasty.

古文：或曰与库莫奚同类而异种。
现代文：有人说它和库莫奚同类异种。
English: Some say it is a different species from the Cuomo's warbler.

古文：其居曰枭罗个没里。
现代文：他们的住处叫枭罗个没里。
English: Their place of residence is called 羅个没里.

古文：没里者，河也。
现代文：役里，意为河。
English: "Yakuri" means "river."

古文：是谓黄水之南，黄龙之北，得鲜卑之故地，故又以为鲜卑之遗种。
现代文：这是说他们住在黄水南面，黄龙北面，得到鲜卑旧地，因此又认为他们是鲜卑的后代。
English: This means that they lived in the south of the Yellow River and the north of the Yellow Dragon, and obtained the old land of Xianbei. Therefore, they believed that they were the descendants of Xianbei.

古文：当唐之世，其地北接室韦，东邻高丽，西界奚国，而南至营州。
现代文：唐朝时，契丹国土北接室韦，柬邻高丽，西面和奚国交界，而南面到达营州。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, the territory of Khitan was bordered to the north by Shwe, to the west by Koryo, to the west by Shan, and to the south by Yingzhou.

古文：其部族之大者曰大贺氏，后分为八部，其一曰伹皆利部，二曰乙室活部，三曰实活部，四曰纳尾部，五曰频没部，六曰内会鸡部，七曰集解部，八曰奚枿部。
现代文：大的部族叫大贺氏，后来分成八部，一是伹皆剁部，二是乙室活部，三是寅活部，四是纳尾部，五是频没部，六是内会鸡部，七是集解部，八是奚咀部。
English: The large tribe was called the Ohga clan. Later, it was divided into eight parts. The first was the 皆部, the second was the乙室活部, the third was the寅活部, the fourth was the纳尾部, the fifth was the频没部, the sixth was the内会鸡部, the seventh was the集解部, and the eighth was the咀部.

古文：部之长号大人，而常推一大人建旗鼓以统八部。
现代文：各部的首长称为大人，而常常推举一个大人建立旗鼓以便统率八部。
English: The heads of each department are called adults, and one adult is often elected to set up a drum to lead the eight departments.

古文：至其岁久，或其国有灾疾而畜牧衰，则八部聚议，以旗鼓立其次而代之。
现代文：到年岁久了，有时他们的国家有灾荒瘟疫而使畜牧业衰落，那么八部就聚会商议，用旗鼓拥立第二个大人接代他。
English: When they reach old age, and sometimes their country is hit by a natural disaster such as a plague, causing the decline of animal husbandry, the eight clans meet to discuss and rally around a second adult to succeed him.

古文：被代者以为约本如此，不敢争。
现代文：被代替的人认为约定原本如此，不敢争执。
English: The person being replaced believes that the agreement is as it is and does not dare to argue.

古文：某部大人遥辇次立，时刘仁恭据有幽州，数出兵摘星岭攻之，每岁秋霜落，则烧其野草，契丹马多饥死，即以良马赂仁恭求市牧地，请听盟约甚谨。
现代文：某部大人逼辇氏依次继位，当时刘仁恭占据幽州，多次出兵摘星岭攻打他们，每年降秋霜时，就烧掉他们的野草，契丹的马很多被饿死，就用好马贿赂刘仁恭请求换取牧场，愿意遵守盟约，并很恭谨。
English: At that time, Liu Rengong occupied Yuzhou. He sent troops to the Xingling Mountains several times to attack them. Every year, when the autumn frosts fell, he burned their wild grasses. Many horses of the Khitan were starved to death. He used good horses to bribe Liu Rengong to request a pasture in exchange. He was willing to abide by the covenant and was very respectful.

古文：八部之人以为遥辇不任事，选于其众，以阿保机代之。
现代文：八部的人认为迁辇氏不能担负大事，在众人中挑选，让阿保机接代他。
English: The people of Hachibe thought that Mr. Qian Ye could not take on such a big responsibility, so they chose from the crowd and asked Ah Bo to succeed him.

古文：阿保机，亦不知其何部人也，为人多智勇而善骑射。
现代文：阿保机，也不知他是哪一部的人，为人多智勇而擅长骑马射箭。
English: Ah Bao Ji, I don't know what part of the world he comes from, is a man of many wits and is good at riding and archery.

古文：是时，刘守光暴虐，幽、涿之人多亡入契丹。
现代文：这时，刘守光暴虐，幽、涿二州的人很多逃入契丹。
English: At this time, Liu Shouguang was tyrannical, and many people from the two states fled to Khitan.

古文：阿保机乘间入塞，攻陷城邑，俘其人民，依唐州县置城以居之。
现代文：阿保机乘机进入长城，攻陷城邑，俘虏那里的百姓，依仿唐的州县建城让他们住下。
English: A Baoji took the opportunity to enter the Great Wall, captured the towns, captured the people there, and built a city for them to live in, following the example of Tang's prefectures.

古文：汉人教阿保机曰： 中国之王无代立者。 
现代文：汉人教阿保机说： 中原的帝王没有被替代的制度。 
English: The Han people taught Abochi to say: The emperor of the Central Plains has not been replaced by the system.

古文：由是阿保机益以威制诸部而不肯代。
现代文：因此阿保机更加用烕严控制各部而不愿受到替代。
English: As a result, the security apparatus has tightened its control over all departments and does not want to be replaced.

古文：其立九年，诸部以其久不代，共责诮之。
现代文：他在位的第九年，各部因他很久没有被替代，共同斥责讥诮他。
English: In the ninth year of his reign, because he had not been replaced for a long time, the ministries jointly rebuked and ridiculed him.

古文：阿保机不得已，传其旗鼓，而谓诸部曰： 吾立九年，所得汉人多矣，吾欲自为一部以治汉城，可乎？ 
现代文：阿保机迫不得已，传下他的旗鼓，而对各部说： 我在位九年，得到的汉人很多，我想自建一部统治汉城，行吗？ 
English: As a last resort, Ah Bao Ji passed down his flag and drum, and said to the ministries: I have been in power for nine years, and I have gained a lot of Han people. I want to build a part of myself to rule Seoul. Is that okay?

古文：诸部许之。
现代文：各部答应了他。
English: The ministries agreed with him.

古文：汉城在炭山东南滦河上，有盐铁之利，乃后魏滑盐县也。
现代文：汉城在炭山东南滦河上，有盐、铁之利，原是后魏的滑盐县。
English: Seoul is located on the Minho River, southeast of the Coal Mountain, and is rich in salt and iron. It was originally known as the Post-Wei Province's Suishan County.

古文：其地可植五谷，阿保机率汉人耕种，为治城郭邑屋廛市，如幽州制度，汉人安之，不复思归。阿保机知众可用，用其妻述律策，使人告诸部大人曰： 我有盐池，诸部所食。
现代文：那里可以种植五谷，阿保机率领汉人耕种，依照幽州的制度修建城郭房屋街市，汉人安居乐业，不再想回去，阿保机懂得人多可以利用，用他妻子述律氏的计策，派人告诉各部大人说： 我有盐池。是各部所吃的。
English: There, grain could be grown. Ah Bao Ji led the Han people in farming. According to the Yuzhou system, they built castles, houses, and markets. The Han people lived and worked in peace and no longer wanted to go back. Ah Bao Ji knew that many people could make use of it. Using his wife Su Lu's strategy, he sent someone to tell the adults in each ministry that: I have a salt pond. It is what the ministries eat.

古文：然诸部知食盐之利，而不知盐有主人，可乎？
现代文：但各部知道吃盐的好处，却不知道盐有主人，行吗！
English: But the ministries know the benefits of eating salt, but they don't know that salt has an owner, okay?

古文：当来犒我。 
现代文：应当来犒劳我。 
English: You should come and reward me.

古文：诸部以为然，共以牛酒会盐池。
现代文：各部信以为然，共同带着牛酒到盐池聚会。
English: The ministries believed this to be true, and together they brought cow wine to the salt pond for a party.

古文：阿保机伏兵其旁，酒酣伏发，尽杀诸部大人，遂立，不复代。
现代文：阿保机在一旁埋下伏兵，饮酒正酣时伏兵出动，全部杀掉各部大人，于是登位，不再被替代。
English: Ah Bao Ji planted an ambush on the side, and when the drinking was in full swing, the ambush was dispatched, killing all the adults in each department, so he ascended the throne and was no longer replaced.

古文：梁将篡唐，晋王李克用使人聘于契丹，阿保机以兵三十万会克用于云州东城。
现代文：后梁将要篡唐，普王李克用派人通好契丹，阿保机率兵三十万人在云州束城和李克用会师。
English: Hou Liang was going to usurp Tang, Pu Wang and Li Ke used to send people to sympathize with Khitan, and Ah Bao led 300,000 soldiers in Yunnan Sokcheng and Li Ke used to organize divisions.

古文：置酒。酒酣，握手约为兄弟。
现代文：摆下酒宴，酒酣耳熟，两人握手约为兄弟。
English: A banquet is laid out, the wine is familiar, and the two shake hands like brothers.

古文：克用赠以金帛甚厚，期共举兵击梁。
现代文：李克用髋赠金银绸缎十分丰厚，约定和他共同出兵攻打后梁。
English: Li Ke was very generous with gifts of gold, silver and silk, and it was agreed that he would jointly send troops to attack Houliang.

古文：阿保机遗晋马千匹。
现代文：阿保机送给晋一千匹马。
English: Ah Bao Ji gave Jin a thousand horses.

古文：既归而背约，遣使者袍笏梅老聘梁。
现代文：回去后就背约，派使臣袍笏官梅老通好后梁。
English: After returning, he reneged on the agreement and sent an envoy, the eunuch Mei Lao Tong, to persuade Hou Liang.

古文：梁遣太府卿高顷、军将郎公远等报聘。
现代文：后梁派太府卿高顷、军将郎公远等人回访。
English: Later, Liang sent Taifuqing Gao He and military commander Lang Gongyuan to pay a return visit.

古文：逾年，顷还，阿保机遣使者解里随顷，以良马、貂裘、朝霞锦聘梁，奉表称臣，以求封册。
现代文：过了一年，高顷返回，阿保机派使臣解里跟高顷一道，带着良马、貂皮、朝霞锦出使后梁，献表称臣，求后梁册封。
English: A year later, Gao He returned, and together with Gao He, Ah Bao Ji sent an envoy to Tongli, and sent Hou Liang with good horses, mink, and morning glory brocade. He presented the table to praise Gao He, and asked Hou Liang to seal the book.

古文：梁复遣公远及司农卿浑特以诏书报劳，别以记事赐之，约共举兵灭晋，然后封册为甥舅之国，又使以子弟三百骑入卫京师。
现代文：后梁又派郎公远和司农卿潭特带着诏书回访慰劳，另外赐给记有皇帝起居大事的书册，约定共同出兵消灭晋王，然后册封契丹焉甥舅之国，又让他们派子弟三百骑兵入卫京师。
English: Hou Liang also sent Lang Gongyuan and Sino-Qing Tant to pay a return visit to the emperor with an edict of condolence, and also gave him a booklet recording the events of the emperor's life. They agreed to jointly send troops to eliminate the Jin king, and then to seal the country of the nephew of Khitan Tanyan, and let them send three hundred cavalrymen into the Beijing division.

古文：克用闻之，大恨。
现代文：李克用获知后，十分愤恨。
English: After learning of the use, Li Keqiang was very angry.

古文：是岁克用病，临卒，以一箭属庄宗，期必灭契丹。
现代文：这年李克用患病，临死时，把一支箭交给唐庄宗，希望一定要消灭契丹。
English: This year, when Li Ke took advantage of his illness and was about to die, he gave an arrow to Tang Zhuangzong, hoping to eliminate Khitan.

古文：浑特等至契丹，阿保机不能如约，梁亦未尝封册。
现代文：浑特等人到达契丹，阿保机汝能守约，后梁也不曾册封他。
English: When Hunte and others arrived in Khitan, Ahoji could keep his promise, but Houliang did not have him canonized.

古文：而终梁之世，契丹使者四至。
现代文：直到后梁灭亡，契丹的使臣共来了四次。
English: Until Houliang's death, Khitan envoys came four times.

古文：庄宗天祐十三年，阿保机攻晋蔚州，执其振武节度使李嗣本。
现代文：唐庄宗天佑十三年，阿保机攻打晋的蔚州，抓获振武军节度使李嗣本。
English: In the thirteenth year of Tangzhuangzong Tianyou, A Baoji attacked Jin's Ulshu and captured the Zhenwu army's commander Li Shihben.

古文：是时，庄宗已得魏博，方南向与梁争天下，遣李存矩发山北兵。
现代文：这时，唐庄宗已得到魏博镇，正向南和后梁争夺天下，派李存矩出动山北兵。
English: At this time, Tang Zhuangzong had already obtained Weibo Town and was heading south to compete with Houliang for the world. He sent Li Cunmeng to mobilize soldiers from the north of the mountain.

古文：存矩至祁沟关，兵叛，拥偏将卢文进击杀存矩，亡入契丹。
现代文：李存矩到达祁沟关，军队叛乱，拥立副将卢文进攻杀李存矩，随后逃入契丹。
English: When Li Cunmeng arrived at Gongdouguan, the army rebelled, supported Vice Admiral Lu Wen to attack and kill Li Cunmeng, and then fled to Khitan.

古文：契丹攻破新州，以文进部将刘殷守之。
现代文：契丹攻破新州，派卢文进的部将刘殷把守。
English: The Khitan invaded Xinzhou and sent Lu Wenjin's general Liu Yin to guard it.

古文：庄宗遣周德威击殷，而文进引契丹数十万大至，德威惧，引军去，为契丹追及，大败之。
现代文：唐庄宗派周德威攻打刘殷，而卢文进招契丹几十万人到来，周德威害怕，率军离去，被契丹追上，大败。
English: The Tangzhuang sect sent Zhou Dewei to attack Liu Yin, and hundreds of thousands of people came to Luwen to recruit Khitan. Zhou Dewei was afraid and led the army to leave. He was caught up by Khitan and defeated.

古文：德威走幽州，契丹围之。
现代文：周德威逃跑到幽州，契丹包围他。
English: Zhou Dewei fled to Yuzhou, and the Khitan surrounded him.

古文：幽、蓟之间，虏骑遍满山谷，所得汉人，以长绳连头系之于木，汉人夜多自解逃去。
现代文：幽、蓟二州之间，契丹骑兵满山遍谷，抓到的汉人，用长绳头挨头拴在树上，晚上很多汉人自己解绳逃去。
English: Between the two prefectures of Yu and Shan, the Khitan cavalry rode through the mountains and valleys. The captured Han Chinese were tied to trees with long ropes, head to head. In the evening, many Han Chinese untied the ropes themselves and fled.

古文：文进又教契丹为火车、地道、起土山以攻城。
现代文：卢文进又教契丹做火炮车、掘地道、堆土山攻城。
English: Lu Wenjin also taught Qidan to make artillery cars, dig tunnels, pile up mountains to attack the city.

古文：城中熔铜铁汁挥之，中者辄烂堕。
现代文：城中熔钢铁汁洒向他们，被洒中的人身上烧烂从马上摔下。
English: The molten steel juice in the city was sprinkled on them, and the people who were sprinkled were burned and fell off their horses.

古文：德威拒守百余日，庄宗遣李嗣源、阎宝、李存审等救之。
现代文：周德威拒守一百多天，唐庄宗派李嗣源、阎宝、李存审等人救援。
English: Zhou Dewei refused to hold out for more than 100 days, and the Tangzhuang sect sent Li Siyuan, Yan Bao, Li Cunxin and others to rescue him.

古文：契丹数为嗣源等所败，乃解去。
现代文：契丹多次被李嗣源等人打败，纔解围离开。
English: Khitan was repeatedly defeated by Li Siyuan and others, and left the encirclement.

古文：契丹比他夷狄尤顽傲，父母死，以不哭为勇，载其尸深山，置大木上，后三岁往取其骨焚之，酹而呪曰： 夏时向阳食，冬时向阴食，使我射猎，猪鹿多得。 
现代文：契丹比别的夷狄更加冥顽傲慢，父母死，以不哭为勇敢，把尸体载到深山中，放在大树上，三年后去取尸骨焚烧，洒酒于地念符咒说： 夏天向阳吃，冬天向阴吃，使我打猎，猎鹿多得。 
English: Khitan was more stubborn and arrogant than other Yidis. When his parents died, he was so brave that he did not cry. He carried their bodies deep into the mountains and placed them on large trees. Three years later, he went to collect the bones and burn them. He sprinkled wine on the ground and recited a spell, saying: "Eat in the sun in summer and in the shade in winter, so that I can go hunting and hunt deer more often."

古文：其风俗与奚、靺鞨颇同。
现代文：他们的风俗和奚、棘鞫很相同。
English: Their customs are very similar to those of the baboons and egrets.

古文：至阿保机，稍并服旁诸小国，而多用汉人，汉人教之以隶书之半增损之，作文字数千，以代刻木之约。
现代文：到阿保机时，逐渐吞并降服四周的小国，而多任用汉人，汉人教他们用隶书的部分笔画加以改动，组成几千个文字，代替刻木记事。
English: When they arrived at Abaoji, they gradually annexed the small countries around them that had surrendered, and many of them were appointed by the Chinese. The Chinese taught them to use part of the strokes of the script to make thousands of characters instead of engraving.

古文：又制婚嫁，置官号。
现代文：又规定婚嫁制度，设置官号。
English: It also stipulates the marriage system and the establishment of official titles.

古文：乃僭称皇帝，自号天皇王。
现代文：阿保机于是越分称皇帝，自称天皇王。
English: As a result, Ahoki called himself the Emperor of Yuefeng and the Emperor of the Emperor.

古文：以其所居横帐地名为姓，曰世里。
现代文：以他们宗室官帐所在的地名作为姓，叫世里。
English: They used the name of the place where their family registry office was located as their surname, calling it Shiri.

古文：世里，译者谓之耶律。
现代文：世里，译者译焉耶律。
English: In today's world, translators translate according to the law.

古文：名年曰天赞。
现代文：取年号叫天赞。
English: The year is called Tianzan.

古文：以其所居为上京，起楼其间，号西楼，又于其东千里起东楼，北三百里起北楼，南木叶山起南楼，往来射猎四楼之间。
现代文：把他们的住处称焉上京，在其中建楼，称为西楼，又在束面千里处建束楼，北面三百里处建北楼，南面木叶山建南楼，在四楼间往来打猎。
English: They called their residence "Shangjing," and built a building in the middle of it, called the West Building, and also built the Bund Building at the thousand-mile point of the Bund, the North Building at the three-hundred-mile point of the North, and the South Building at the south side of the Mountain of Leaves, and went hunting between the four floors.

古文：契丹好鬼而贵日，每月朔旦，东向而拜日，其大会聚、视国事，皆以东向为尊，四楼门屋皆东向。
现代文：契丹好鬼而尊崇太阳，每月初一早晨，向东拜太阳，他们大聚会、处理国事，都以坐西面束为尊，四楼门屋都朝东。
English: On the first morning of every month, the Khitans worshipped the sun in an easterly direction. When they held large gatherings and dealt with state affairs, they revered the western-facing face, and the gatehouses on the fourth floor all faced east.

古文：庄宗讨张文礼，围镇州。
现代文：唐庄宗讨伐张文礼，包围镇州。
English: Tangzhuangzong besieged Zhang Wenli and encircled Zhenzhou.

古文：定州王处直惧镇且亡，晋兵必并击己，遣其子郁说契丹，使入塞以牵晋兵。
现代文：定州王处直怕镇州一旦失去，晋兵必定会合力攻打自己，就派他的儿子王郁游说契丹，让他们进入长城牵制晋兵。
English: The king of Dingzhou was afraid that once Zhenzhou was lost, the Jin soldiers would certainly join forces to attack him, so he sent his son Wang Yu to lobby the Khitan and let them enter the Great Wall to hold back the Jin soldiers.

古文：郁谓阿保机曰： 臣父处直使布愚款曰：故赵王王镕，王赵六世，镇州金城汤池，金帛山积，燕姬赵女，罗绮盈廷。
现代文：王郁对阿保机说： 我父亲王处直让我转达他的衷情：已故的趟王王镕，在赵称王六代，镇州城池固若金汤，金银绸缎堆积如山，燕姬赵女，丝绸满庭。
English: Wang Yu said to Ah Bao Ji: My father, Wang Shanzhu, asked me to convey his heartfelt feelings: the late Wang Wangyao, six generations of kings in Zhao, Zhenzhou City, Gu Ruo Jin Tang, mountains of gold and silver silk cocoons, Yan Ji Zhao Woman, and a garden full of silk.

古文：张文礼得之而为晋所攻，惧死不暇，故皆留以待皇帝。 
现代文：张文礼得到这些而受到晋的进攻，性命危在旦夕，因此那些东西都是留着等你的。 
English: Zhang Wenli got these and was attacked by Jin, his life was in danger, so those things were kept waiting for you.

古文：阿保机大喜。
现代文：阿保机大喜。
English: Ahoji was overjoyed.

古文：其妻述律不肯，曰： 我有羊马之富，西楼足以娱乐，今舍此而远赴人之急，我闻晋兵强天下，且战有胜败，后悔何追？ 
现代文：他的妻子述律氏不同意，说： 我们富有羊马，西楼足够娱乐，如今放弃这些而到远方救别人的危急，我听说晋兵在天下最强大，而且打仗有胜有败，万一打败，后悔怎么来得及？ 
English: His wife, Su Lu, disagreed, saying, "We are rich in sheep and horses, and Xilou is enough for entertainment. Now we have to give up these things and go far away to save others from danger. I heard that Jin soldiers are the most powerful in the world, and there are victories and defeats in war. If we are defeated, how can we regret it?

古文：阿保机跃然曰： 张文礼有金玉百万，留待皇后，可共取之。 
现代文：阿保机兴奋地说： 张文礼有百万金玉，留着等你皇后，我们可以一起去取。 
English: Ah Baoqi said excitedly: Zhang Wenli has a million pieces of gold, keep it and wait for your queen, we can get it together.

古文：于是空国入寇。
现代文：于是举国进犯。
English: As a result, the whole country attacked.

古文：郁之召契丹也，定人皆以为后患不可召，而处直不听。
现代文：王郁召契丹时，定州人都认为后患无穷不能招引，而王处直不听。
English: When Wang Yu summoned Khitan, the people of Dingzhou all thought that the latter could not be attracted, and the king did not listen to him.

古文：郁已去，处直为其子都所废。
现代文：王郁离开后，王处直被他的儿子王都废掉。
English: After Wang Yu left, Wang Shizhi was abolished by his son Wang Du.

古文：阿保机攻幽州不克，又攻涿州，陷之。
现代文：阿保机进攻幽州役能攻克，又攻打涿州，攻陷了。
English: Ah Bao Ji attacked Yuzhou and was able to conquer it. He also attacked Zhangzhou and conquered it.

古文：闻处直废而都立，遂攻中山，渡沙河。
现代文：获知王处直被废而王都继位，于是攻打中山，渡过沙河。
English: When he learned that Wang Shizhi had been abolished and Wang Du had succeeded to the throne, he attacked Zhongshan and crossed the Sand River.

古文：都告急于庄宗。
现代文：王都向唐庄宗告急。
English: All the kings were in a hurry to Tangzhuangzong.

古文：庄宗自将铁骑五千，遇契丹前锋于新城，晋兵自桑林驰出，人马精甲，光明烛日。虏骑愕然，稍却，晋军乘之，虏遂散走，而沙河冰薄，虏皆陷没。
现代文：唐庄宗亲自率领铁骑五千人，在新城和契丹前锋遭遇，晋兵从桑树林中飞驰而出，人马都装备有镗甲，光亮耀日，契丹骑兵十分惊愕，略一退却，晋军乘胜追击，契丹兵于是逃散，而沙河冰薄，契丹兵都陷役在河中。
English: Tang Zhuangzong personally led 5,000 cavalrymen. They encountered the Khitan vanguard in Xincheng. The Jin soldiers raced out of the mulberry forest. All the men and horses were equipped with armor and shone brightly. The Khitan cavalry were very surprised. They retreated slightly. The Jin army took advantage of the victory to pursue. The Khitan soldiers then fled. The sand river was ice-cold, and the Khitan soldiers were all trapped in the river.

古文：阿保机退保望都。
现代文：阿保机退保望都。
English: Ah, the machine is returning to the capital.

古文：会天大雪，契丹人马饥寒，多死，阿保机顾卢文进以手指天曰： 天未使我至此。 
现代文：正逢天下大雪，契丹人马饥寒交迫，死了很多，阿保机望着卢文进用手指天说： 天没有让我到这里。 
English: It was snowing heavily, the Khitan people were hungry and cold, and many died. Ah Baoqi looked at Lu Wenjin and said with his finger to the heavens: The heavens didn't let me get here.

古文：乃引兵去。
现代文：于是率兵离去。
English: So he led his soldiers away.

古文：庄宗蹑其后，见其宿处，环秸在地，方隅整然，虽去而不乱，叹曰： 虏法令严，盖如此也！ 
现代文：唐庄宗跟在他们后面，见他们住遇的地方，地上环铺着麦杆，四方整齐，虽离去却不慌乱，感叹说： 虏人法令严整，居然如此！ 
English: Tang Zhuangzong followed them and saw the place where they lived. The ground was ringed with wheat stalks and the four sides were neat. Although they left, they were not panicked. He lamented, "The laws of the people of Kunming are very strict. How can this be!

古文：契丹虽无所得而归，然自此颇有窥中国之志，患女真、渤海等在其后，欲击渤海，惧中国乘其虚，乃遣使聘唐以通好。
现代文：契丹虽然一无所得而回，但从此很有窥伺中原的打算。因担心女真、渤海等族在他们后面，想攻打渤海，而又怕中原兵乘虚而入，于是派使臣出使后唐以通友好。
English: Although the Khitan returned with nothing, they were very intent on spying on the Central Plains. Fearing that the Jurchen, Bohai, and other tribes were behind them and wanted to attack the Bohai, and fearing that the Central Plains soldiers would take advantage of the situation, they sent envoys to establish friendly relations with the Tang Dynasty.

古文：同光之间，使者再至。
现代文：同光年间，使臣两次前来。
English: In the same year, envoys came twice.

古文：庄宗崩，明宗遣供奉官姚坤告哀于契丹。
现代文：唐庄宗死，唐明宗派供奉官姚坤到契丹报丧。
English: After the death of Tangzhuangzong, the Tangming sect's offering official Yao Kun went to Qidan to report the death.

古文：坤至西楼而阿保机方东攻渤海，坤追至慎州见之。
现代文：姚坤到达西楼，而阿保机正向东攻打渤海，姚坤追到慎州见阿保机。
English: Yao Kun arrived at Xilu, while Ah Bao Ji was attacking Bohai to the east. Yao Kun chased him to Shenzhou to see Ah Bao Ji.

古文：阿保机锦袍大带垂后，与其妻对坐穹庐中，延坤入谒。
现代文：阿保机身穿锦袍，大带垂后，和他的妻子对坐在毡帐中，让姚坤进来拜见。
English: Ah Bao, dressed in a brocade robe with a large sash hanging down his back, and his wife sat opposite each other in the anteroom, inviting Yao Kun to come in and meet them.

古文：阿保机问曰： 闻尔河南、北有两天子，信乎？ 
现代文：阿保机问他说： 听说你们黄河南北有两个天子，真的吗？ 
English: Ah Baoqi asked him, "I heard that there are two heavenly sons in the north and south of the Yellow River. Is it true?

古文：坤曰： 天子以魏州军乱，命总管令公将兵讨之，而变起洛阳，凶问今至矣。
现代文：姚坤说： 天子因魏州军队作乱，命令总管令公率兵讨伐他们，而变乱起自洛阳，天子遇难的消息现在纔到这里。
English: Yao Kun said: Tianzi, because of the Wei State army's rebellion, ordered the commander-in-chief to lead the soldiers to fight them, and the rebellion started from Luoyang. The news of Tianzi's death has now reached here.

古文：总管返兵河北，赴难京师，为众所推，已副人望。 
现代文：总管回师到黄河以北，到京师救难，受到众人推举，已得到人们的认可了。 
English: The general manager of the rescue division went to the north of the Yellow River and to the rescue of the Beijing division. He was elected by the people and has been recognized by the people.

古文：阿保机仰天大哭曰： 晋王与我约为兄弟，河南天子，即吾兒也。
现代文：阿保机仰头望天大哭说： 晋王和我相约焉兄弟，黄河南的天子，就是我的儿子。
English: Looking up at the sky, Ah Baoqi cried loudly and said, "King Jin and I have a mutual agreement that my brother, the son of heaven from the south of the Yellow River, is my son.

古文：昨闻中国乱，欲以甲马五万往助我兒，而渤海未除，志愿不遂。 
现代文：前些时听说中原动乱，我想用带甲马五万骑去援助我儿，可是渤海还没除掉，没能如愿。 
English: Some time ago, I heard that Central Plains was in turmoil. I wanted to ride to the aid of my son with 50,000 armored horses, but the Erhai Lake had not yet been cleared and I was unable to do so.

古文：又曰： 我兒既没，理当取我商量，新天子安得自立？ 
现代文： 我儿既然死了，理当让我去商计，新天子怎能擅自登位？ 
English: Since my son is dead, I should be allowed to do business. How can the new emperor ascend to the throne without my permission?

古文：坤曰： 新天子将兵二十年，位至大总管，所领精兵三十万，天时人事，其可得违？ 
现代文：姚坤说： 新天子率兵二十年，官做到大总管，率领的精兵有三十万，天时人和，能违背吗？ 
English: Yao Kun said: The new heavenly son has been leading soldiers for twenty years, the official has become the general manager, and there are three hundred thousand elite soldiers led by him. He is the man of the hour. Can he renege?

古文：其子突欲在侧曰： 使者无多言，蹊田夺牛，岂不为过！ 
现代文：阿保机的儿子突欲在一旁说： 使臣不要多说，踏了别人的田而夺走别人的牛，难道不是过错！ 
English: Ah Baoji's son suddenly said, "Envoy, don't talk too much. Isn't it wrong to step on someone else's field and take away someone else's cattle?"

古文：坤曰： 应天顺人，岂比匹夫之事。
现代文：姚坤说： 顺应天人，难道能和常人的事等同？
English: Yao Kun said: Can conforming to gods and mortals be equated with the affairs of ordinary people?

古文：至如天皇王得国而不代，岂强取之邪？ 
现代文：至于像天皇王得到国家而不接受替代，难道是强取的吗？ 
English: As for the Emperor receiving the country and not accepting a replacement, is that taking it by force?

古文：阿保机即慰劳坤曰： 理正当如是尔！ 又曰： 吾闻此兒有宫婢二千人，乐官千人，放鹰走狗，嗜酒好色，任用不肖，不惜人民，此其所以败也。
现代文：阿保机就慰劳姚坤说： 按理正当如此： 又说： 我听说我儿有宫女两千人，乐官一千人，放鹰纵狗，嗜酒好色，任用不贤的人，不怜惜百姓，这些是他失败的原因。
English: Ah Bao Ji consoled Yao Kun, saying, "It is justifiable." He also said, "I heard that my son has two thousand concubines, a thousand musicians, a hawk and a dog, is a drunkard and a womanizer, hires immoral people, and has no mercy for the people. These are the reasons for his failure."

古文：我自闻其祸，即举家断酒，解放鹰犬，罢散乐官。
现代文：我自从获知他的灾祸后，就全家戒酒，放掉鹰、狗，取消并解散了乐官。
English: Since I learned of his misfortune, my whole family has quit drinking, let go of the hawk and the dog, and canceled and disbanded the musicians.

古文：我亦有诸部乐官千人，非公宴不用。
现代文：我也有各部乐官一干人，不是公宴就不用他们。
English: I also have a cadre of music officials from various departments, so I don't need them unless it's a public banquet.

古文：我若所为类吾兒，则亦安能长久？ 
现代文：如果我的所作所为像我儿，那又怎能长久？ 
English: If I act like a child, how can I last?

古文：又谓坤曰： 吾能汉语，然绝口不道于部人，惧其效汉而怯弱也。 
现代文：又对姚坤说： 我会汉话，但对部族人绝口不说，怕他们效法汉人而变得怯弱。 
English: He also said to Yao Kun: "I can speak Chinese, but I never speak to the tribesmen, for fear that they will imitate the Chinese and become weak.

古文：因戒坤曰： 尔当先归，吾以甲马三万会新天子幽、镇之间，共为盟约，与我幽州，则不复侵汝矣。 
现代文：于是告诚姚坤说： 你应当先回去，我率领三万骑兵在幽、镇二州问和新天子会合，共订盟约，给我幽州，就不再侵犯你们了。 
English: So he told Yao Kun, "You should go back first. I will lead thirty thousand cavalrymen to Yuzhou, the town of Yuzhou, and meet with the new emperor to make a covenant. Give me Yuzhou, and I will no longer invade you."

古文：阿保机攻渤海，取其扶余一城，以为东丹国，以其长子人皇王突欲为东丹王。
现代文：阿保机攻打渤海，夺取他们的扶余一城，作为束丹国，任他的长子人皇王突欲为束丹王。
English: Ah Baoqi attacked Bohai and captured their city of Fuyu, which became the State of Shu Dan. His eldest son, the Emperor Wang, suddenly became the King of Shu Dan.

古文：已而阿保机病死，述律护其丧归西楼，立其次子元帅太子耀屈之。
现代文：不久阿保机病死，述律氏护丧回到西楼，立次子元帅太子耀屈之焉帝。
English: Soon after, Ah Bao Ji died of illness, and the Su Luo clan returned to the West Tower to hold a funeral, and the second son, the Marshal Prince Yao Jue, was crowned emperor.

古文：坤从至西楼而还。
现代文：姚坤跟随到西楼纔返回。
English: Yao Kun followed him to the West Tower and then returned.

古文：当阿保机时，有韩延徽者，幽州人也，为刘守光参军，守光遣延徽聘于契丹。
现代文：当阿保机时，有个韩延徽，是幽州人，任刘守光的参军，刘守光派韩延徽出访契丹。
English: When Ah Bao was in the army, there was a Han Yanhui, a Yuzhou native, who was appointed by Liu Shuguang to join the army. Liu Shuguang sent Han Yanhui to visit Khitan.

古文：延徽见阿保机不拜，阿保机怒，留之不遣，使牧羊马。
现代文：韩延徽见到阿保机不下拜，阿保机发怒，扣留他不让他回去，派他放牧羊马。
English: When Han Yanhui saw that Ah Baoqi could not bow, Ah Baoqi got angry, detained him and did not let him go back, and sent him to herd sheep and horses.

古文：久之，知其材，召与语，奇之，遂用以为谋主。
现代文：时间长了，了解到他的才能，召他谈话，觉得他不同一般，于是用他为主要谋臣。
English: Over time, they learned of his talents, courted him, found him unusual, and used him as their chief strategist.

古文：阿保机攻党项、室韦，服诸小国，皆延徽谋也。
现代文：阿保机攻打党项、室韦，征服各个小国，都是韩延徽的计谋。
English: It was Han Yanhui's stratagem for Ah Bao Ji to attack the Party and Shuwae, and to conquer various small countries.

古文：延徽后逃归，事庄宗，庄宗客将王缄谮之，延徽惧，求归幽州省其母。
现代文：韩延徽后来逃回，跟随唐庄宗，唐庄宗的客将王缄诋毁他，韩延徽害怕，请求回幽州探望母亲。
English: Han Yanhui later fled back and followed Tang Zhuangzong. Tang Zhuangzong's guest general Wang Qi slandered him. Han Yanhui was afraid and asked to return to Yuzhou to visit his mother.

古文：行过常山，匿王德明家。
现代文：经过常山时，藏在王德明家中。
English: When passing through Changshan, it was hidden in Wang Deming's home.

古文：居数月，德明问其所向，延徽曰： 吾欲复走契丹。 
现代文：遇了几个月，王德明问他去哪里，韩延徽说： 我想再逃回契丹。 
English: A few months later, when Wang Deming asked him where he was going, Han Yanhui said, "I want to escape to Khitan again."

古文：德明以为不可，延徽曰： 阿保机失我，如丧两目而折手足，今复得我，必喜。 
现代文：王德明认为不行，韩延徽说： 阿保机失去我，就像失去了两只眼睛，折断了手足，现在又得到我，必定欢喜。 
English: Wang Deming did not think so, and Han Yanhui said: Ah Baoqi lost me, just like losing two eyes, breaking a limb, and now he has me, he must be happy.

古文：乃复走契丹。
现代文：于是又逃回契丹。
English: He then fled back to Qidan.

古文：阿保机见之，果大喜，以谓自天而下。
现代文：阿保机见了他，果然大喜，认为他是从天而降。
English: When Ah Bao saw him, he was overjoyed and thought he had fallen from the sky.

古文：阿保机僭号，以延徽为相，号 政事令 ，契丹谓之 崇文令公 ，后卒于虏。
现代文：阿保机越分称帝，任韩延徽焉宰相，称为 政事令 ，契丹叫做 崇文令公 ，后来死在契丹。
English: Ahoji Yuefen was called the emperor, Han Yanhui became the prime minister, known as the political order, the Khitan was called Chongwen Rongguo, and later died in the Khitan.

古文：耀屈之后更名德光。
现代文：耀屈乏后来改名叫德光。
English: Yao Qubei later changed his name to De Guang.

古文：葬阿保机木叶山，谥曰大圣皇帝，后更其名曰亿。
现代文：在木叶山安葬阿保机，谧号叫大圣皇帝，后来改名叫亿。
English: Ah Bao Ji was buried in Mubeishan. His posthumous name was Daxing Emperor, and later he changed his name to Renmin.

古文：德光立三年，改元曰天显，遣使者以名马聘唐，并求碑石为阿保机刻铭。
现代文：德光登位三年，改年号叫天显，派使臣带着名马出使后唐，并索求碑石焉阿保机刻铭文。
English: Three years after De Guang ascended the throne, the year was changed to Tian Xian, and he sent an envoy to the Later Tang Dynasty with a famous horse, and asked for the inscription to be engraved on the monument.

古文：明宗厚礼之，遣飞胜指挥使安念德报聘。
现代文：唐明宗优厚地礼待他，派飞胜指挥使安念德回访。
English: Tang Mingzong treated him courteously and sent Feixing conductor to make Annende return visit.

古文：定州王都反，唐遣王晏球讨之。
现代文：定州王都反叛，后唐派王晏球讨伐他。
English: The king of Dingzhou rebelled, and the Later Tang Dynasty sent Wang Xuanqiu to fight him.

古文：都以蜡丸书走契丹求援，德光遣秃馁、荝剌等以骑五千救都，都及秃馁击晏球于曲阳，为晏球所败。
现代文：王都派人带着蜡丸书跑到契丹求援，德光派秃馁、蔚刺等人率五千骑兵救援王都，王都和秃馁在曲阳攻打王晏球，被王晏球打败。
English: Wangdu sent people to run to Khitan with the wax ball book to ask for help. Deguang sent vultures, vultures and others with five thousand cavalry to rescue Wangdu. Wangdu and the vultures attacked Wangye in Quyang and were defeated by Wangye.

古文：德光又遣惕隐赫邈益秃馁以骑七千，晏球又败之于唐河。
现代文：德光又派惕隐赫邈增援秃馁骑兵七千，王晏球又在唐河打败他们。
English: De Guang also sent seven thousand reinforcements to the vulture cavalry from the Yinghe River, and Wang Yaoqiu defeated them in the Tang River.

古文：赫邈与数骑返走，至幽州，为赵德钧所执，而晏球攻破定州，擒秃馁、荝剌，皆送京师。
现代文：赫邈和几个骑兵返回逃走，到达幽州，被趟德钧抓获，而王晏球攻破定州，擒获秃馁、蓟刺，都送到京师。
English: He Rong and several cavalrymen returned to escape and arrived in Yuzhou, where they were captured by the Wadi Deru, while Wang Rongqiu broke through Dingzhou, captured the Vulture and the Grasshopper, and sent them to the Beijing Division.

古文：明宗斩秃馁等六百余人，而赦赫邈，选其壮健者五十余人为 契丹直 。
现代文：唐明宗斩秃馁等六百多人，而赦免赫邈，挑选五十多个壮健的人组成 契丹直 。
English: Tang Mingzong beheaded more than six hundred people, including the vultures, but pardoned Hun Sen and selected more than fifty strong people to form the Khitan Straight.

古文：初，阿保机死，长子东丹王突欲当立，其母述律遣其幼子安端少君之扶余代之，将立以为嗣。
现代文：当初，阿保机死时，长子束丹王突欲应当继位，他的母亲述律氏派她的幼子安端少君到扶余接替他，准备立他焉继承人。
English: At the time of Ahok's death, his eldest son, King Soktan, suddenly wanted to succeed to the throne. His mother, the Shuritsu clan, sent her young son, Ando Shokun, to Fuyu to succeed him, preparing to make him the heir.

古文：然述律尤爱德光。
现代文：但述律氏尤其喜爱德光。
English: But the Suritsu clan is particularly fond of Deguang.

古文：德光有智勇，素已服其诸部，安端已去，而诸部希述律意，共立德光。
现代文：德光智勇双全，素来已令各部佩服，安端离去后，而各部迎合述律氏的心意，共同拥立德光。
English: The combination of virtue, wisdom and courage has always been admired by all departments. After Ahn Do left, all departments catered to Su Lu's heart and jointly supported the establishment of virtue.

古文：突欲不得立，长兴元年，自扶余泛海奔于唐。
现代文：突欲没能继位，长兴元年，从扶余航海投奔到后唐。
English: Unexpectedly, he was not able to succeed to the throne, and in the first year of the Changxing Dynasty, he sailed from Buyeo to the late Tang Dynasty.

古文：明宗因赐其姓为东丹，而更其名曰慕华。
现代文：唐明宗因而赐他姓束丹，改名叫慕华。
English: Tang Mingzong therefore gave him the surname Sokdan and changed his name to Mu Hua.

古文：以其来自辽东，乃以瑞州为怀化军，拜慕华怀化军节度、瑞慎等州观察处置等使。
现代文：因他从辽东来，于是以瑞州为怀化军，封东丹慕华为怀化军节度、瑞慎等州观察处置等使。
English: Because he came from the east of Liaoning Province, he was sent to Ruizhou to serve the Huaihua Army, and to observe and deal with the Huaihua Army's detachment, Ruishen and other states.

古文：其部曲五人皆赐姓名，罕只曰罕友通，穆葛曰穆顺义，撒罗曰罗宾德，易密曰易师仁，盖礼曰盖来宾，以为归化、归德将军郎将。
现代文：他的五名部下都赐给姓名，罕只叫罕友通，穆葛叫穆顺义，撒罗叫罗宾德，易密叫易师仁，盖礼叫盖来宾，任为归化、归德将军郎将。
English: His five subordinates were all given names. Han was called Han Yutong, Muge was called Mu Shunyi, Saro was called Robbind, Yi Mi was called Yi Shiren, and Ge Li was called Ge Lai Bin. They were appointed as naturalized and returned to Germany generals.

古文：又赐前所获赫邈姓名曰狄怀惠，抯列曰列知恩，荝剌曰原知感，福郎曰服怀造，竭失讫曰讫怀宥。
现代文：又给以前俘获的赫邈赐姓名叫狄怀惠，狙列叫列知恩，荆刺叫原知感，福郎叫服怀造，竭失记叫乙怀宥。
English: He also gave names to the previously captured Hsuan, calling him Di Huai Hui, Xi Lian called Lechien, Jing Sheng called Yuan Zhixuan, Fulao called Fufu Huai Zong, and Zi Zhizhong called Yi Huai Yu.

古文：其余为 契丹直 者，皆赐姓名。
现代文：其余当 契丹直 的人，都赐给姓名。
English: The rest of those to be named were given names.

古文：二年，更赐突欲姓李，更其名曰赞华。
现代文：二年，改赐突欲姓李，改名叫赞华。
English: Two years later, he changed his surname to Li and changed his name to Zhanhua.

古文：三年，以赞华为义成军节度使。
现代文：三年，任李赞华为义成军节度使。
English: For three years, Li Zanhua served as the envoy of the Yicheng Army.

古文：契丹自阿保机时侵灭诸国，称雄北方。
现代文：契丹自从阿保机时侵略消灭各国，在北方称雄。
English: The Khitans have been invading and annihilating countries since the time of Ahok, and have become dominant in the north.

古文：及救王都，为王晏球所败，丧其万骑，又失赫邈等，皆名将，而述律尤思念突欲，由是卑辞厚币数遣使聘中国，因求归赫邈、荝剌等，唐辄斩其使而不报。
现代文：到救援王都时，被王晏球打败，损失一万骑兵，又失去赫邈等人，都是名将，而述律氏特别想念突欲，因此多次派使臣用谦卑的语言及厚礼重金通好中原，藉此请求归还赫邈、荆刺等人，后唐往往杀了他们的使臣而不作答复。
English: When they came to the rescue of the capital, they were defeated by Wang Qianqiu, lost ten thousand cavalrymen, and lost He Jian and others, all of whom were famous generals. The Su Li clan particularly missed the sudden desire, so they repeatedly sent envoys to Zhongyuan with humble language and heavy gifts to request the return of He Jian and others. The Later Tang often killed their envoys without reply.

古文：当此之时，中国之威几振。
现代文：这个时候，中原的声威几乎重振。
English: At this time, the prestige of the Central Plains was almost revived.

古文：距幽州北七百里有榆关，东临海，北有兔耳、覆舟山。
现代文：距幽州北面七酉里处有个榆关，束面临海，北有兔耳、覆舟山。
English: There is a pass seven nautical miles north of Yuzhou, with Sokou facing the sea, and Hujie and Zhoushan to the north.

古文：山皆斗绝，并海东北，仅通车，其旁地可耕植。
现代文：山势都很陡峭，沿着海的东北面，仅能过车，旁边的土地可以耕种。
English: The mountains are very steep, along the northeast side of the sea, can only be passed by car, and the land next to it can be cultivated.

古文：唐时置东西狭石、渌畴、米砖、长扬、黄花、紫蒙、白狼等戍，以扼契丹于此。
现代文：唐时设置束狭石、西狭石、渌畴、米砖、长扬、黄花、紫蒙、白狼等戍镇，以此扼制契丹。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, the towns of Shu Xianshi, Xi Xianshi, Zhaozhuang, Meibiao, Changyang, Huanghua, Zhi Meng, Bai Wol and other towns were set up in order to suppress the Khitan.

古文：戍兵常自耕食，惟衣絮岁给幽州，久之皆有田宅，养子孙，以坚守为己利。
现代文：戍守的士兵常常自耕自食，只有衣服棉絮每年由幽州供给，时间长了都有田地住宅，养育子孙，把坚守当作自己的利益。
English: The soldiers who hold fast often grow their own food. Only cotton clothes are supplied by Yuzhou every year. After a long time, they have field houses, raise their children and grandchildren, and regard holding fast as their own interests.

古文：自唐末幽、蓟割据，戍兵废散，契丹因得出陷平、营，而幽、蓟之人岁苦寇钞。
现代文：从唐末幽、蓟二州割据以来，戍守的军队废置散失，契丹因而得以出来攻陷平、营二州，而幽、蓟二州的人每年深受契丹侵犯掠夺之苦。
English: Since the end of the Tang Dynasty and the separation of the two states of Yunnan and Shandong, the garrison troops have been disbanded and dispersed, and the Khitan have been able to come out to attack and occupy the two states, while the people of the two states of Yunnan and Shandong have suffered from the invasion and plunder of the Khitan every year.

古文：自涿州至幽州百里，人迹断绝，转饷常以兵护送，契丹多伏兵盐沟以击夺之。
现代文：从涿州到幽州一百里地，人迹断绝，转运粮饷常常派兵护送，契丹常在盐沟埋下伏兵攻夺粮饷。
English: From Bozhou to Yuzhou, a hundred miles away, there is no human trace. The grain carts transporting grain are often escorted by soldiers, and the Khitan often ambush soldiers in the salt ditch to capture the grain carts.

古文：庄宗之末，赵德钧镇幽州，于盐沟置良乡县，又于幽州东五十里筑城，皆戍以兵。
现代文：唐庄宗末年，趟德钧镇守幽州，在盐沟设置良乡县，又在幽州东面五十里处建城，都派兵戍守。
English: At the end of Tangzhuangzong's reign, he sent soldiers to defend Yuzhou, setting up Liangxiang County in Yanigou and building a city 50 miles east of Yuzhou.

古文：及破赫邈等，又于其东置三河县。
现代文：到攻破赫邈等人后，又在束面设置三河县。
English: After defeating Hebei and others, he also set up Sanhe County in Sokumen.

古文：由是幽、蓟之人，始得耕牧，而输饷可通。
现代文：从此幽、蓟二州的百姓，纔得以耕作放牧，而运送粮饷的道路也畅通了。
English: Since then, the people of the two states have been able to farm and graze, and the road for transporting grain has been smooth.

古文：德光乃西徙横帐居揆剌泊，出寇云、朔之间。
现代文：德光于是把宗室官帐西迁到揆刺泊住下，出来寇掠云、朔二州问。
English: De Guang then moved the official residence west of the ancestral room to live in Xizhampo, and went out to invade the clouds and explore the two states.

古文：明宗患之，以石敬瑭镇河东，总大同、彰国、振武、威塞等军御之。
现代文：唐明宗对此忧虑，任石敬瑭镇守河东，总领大同、彰国、振武、威塞等军抵御他们。
English: Tang Mingzong was worried about this, and sent Ren Shi Jingwu to guard the east of the river, leading the armies of Datong, Zhangguo, Zhenwu, and Wessai to resist them.

古文：应顺、清泰之间，调发馈饷，远近劳敝。
现代文：应顺、清泰年间，调送饿饷，使远近各地疲于奔命。
English: During the Ying Shun, Qing and Thai dynasties, starving peasants were sent to work, making people from far and near run for their lives.

古文：德光事其母甚谨，常侍立其侧，国事必告而后行。
现代文：德光事奉他的母亲很恭谨，常常站在一旁侍候，国家大事必定先向她报告然后再施行。
English: De Guang served his mother very respectfully, often standing by and waiting. National affairs must first be reported to her and then implemented.

古文：石敬瑭反，唐遣张敬达等讨之。
现代文：石敬瑭反叛，后唐派张敬达等人讨伐他。
English: Shi Jingyao rebelled, and the post-Tang faction of Zhang Jingda and others joined in to fight him.

古文：敬瑭遣使求救于德光。
现代文：石敬瑭派使臣向德光求救。
English: Shi Jingyao sent envoys to Deguang to ask for help.

古文：德光白其母曰： 吾尝梦石郎召我，而使者果至，岂非天邪！ 
现代文：德光告诉他的母亲说： 我曾梦见石郎召我，而他的使臣果然前来，难道不是天意吗！ 
English: De Guang told his mother, "I had a dream that Shi Lang called me, and his envoys really came, isn't that the will of heaven!

古文：母召胡巫问吉凶，巫言吉，乃许。
现代文：他的母亲召胡人巫师询问吉凶，巫师说吉祥，于是答应。
English: His mother called a goose shaman to inquire about his fortune. The shaman said it was auspicious, so he agreed.

古文：是岁九月，契丹出雁门，车骑连亘数十里，将至太原，遣人谓敬瑭曰： 吾为尔今日破敌可乎？ 
现代文：这年九月，契丹从雁门出兵，车骑连绵几十里，快到太原时，派人对石敬瑭说： 我今天就替你破敌行吗？ 
English: In September of that year, Khitan dispatched troops from the Wild Goose Gate, driving and riding for dozens of miles, and when they were close to Taiyuan, they sent a person to Shi Jingyao to say: Shall I break the enemy line for you today?

古文：敬瑭报曰： 皇帝赴难，要在成功，不在速，大兵远来，而唐军甚盛，愿少待之。 
现代文：石敬瑭回答说： 皇帝前来救难，关键是要成功，不在快，大军远道而来，而唐军气势很高，希望稍等一下。 
English: Shi Jingyao replied, "When the emperor comes to the rescue, the key is to be successful, not to be fast, the army is coming from far away, and the Tang army is very powerful, I hope to wait for a while.

古文：使者未至，而兵已交。
现代文：使臣还没到达，而两军已经交战。
English: Before the envoys arrived, the two armies were already at war.

古文：敬达大败。
现代文：张敬达大败。
English: Zhang Jingda suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：敬瑭夜出北门见德光，约为父子，问曰： 大兵远来，战速而胜者，何也？ 
现代文：石敬瑭晚上出北门见德光，相约为父子，问道： 大军远道而来，逮战速胜，是什么原因？ 
English: Shi Jingyao went out of the north gate in the evening to see De Guang, who was about the same as his father and son, and asked: What is the reason for the large army coming from far away and winning the battle quickly?

古文：德光曰： 吾谓唐兵能守雁门而扼诸险要，则事未可知。
现代文：德光说： 我认为如果唐兵能够把守雁门而控制各险要之地，那么事情就不可预测。
English: De Guang said: I think that if the Tang soldiers can guard the Wild Goose Gate and control all the critical areas, then things will be unpredictable.

古文：今兵长驱深入而无阻，吾知大事必济。
现代文：如今我的军队长驱直入而没有受到阻止，我知道必成大事。
English: Now that my commander is charging in and not being stopped, I know it's going to be big.

古文：且吾兵多难久，宜以神速破之。
现代文：而且我的军队人很多，难以持久，应当神速攻破他们。
English: Moreover, my army is too numerous to be able to hold out for long, and they should be quickly defeated.

古文：此其所以胜也。 
现代文：这是我取胜的原因。 
English: That's why I won.

古文：敬达败，退保晋安寨，德光围之。
现代文：张敬达战败，退保晋安寨，德光包围他。
English: Zhang Jingda was defeated and retired to Jin'an Village. Deguang surrounded him.

古文：唐遣赵德钧、延寿救敬达，而德钧父子按兵团柏谷不救。
现代文：后唐派趟德钧、趟延寿救援张敬达，而趟德钧父子在团柏谷按兵不动。
English: Later, the Tang Dynasty sent Zhu Deyu and Zhu Yanshou to rescue Zhang Jingda, while Zhu Deyu and his son remained in the valley.

古文：德光谓敬瑭曰： 吾三千里赴义，义当彻头。 
现代文：德光对石敬瑭说： 我从三千里外赶来主持正义，好事要做到底。 
English: De Guang said to Shi Jingyao: I came from three thousand miles away to preside over justice, good things must be done to the end.

古文：乃筑坛晋城南，立敬瑭为皇帝，自解衣冠被之，册曰： 咨尔子晋王，予视尔犹子，尔视予犹父。 
现代文：于是在晋城南面筑坛，立石敬瑭为皇帝，亲自脱下衣帽给他披戴上，册文写道： 唉，儿子晋王，我把你看做儿子，你把我看做父亲。 
English: Therefore, he built an altar in the south of Jincheng, and set up a stone for the emperor, and personally took off his cap and put it on him. The inscription read: Alas, son of King Jin, I see you as a son, and you see me as a father.

古文：已而杨光远杀张敬达降晋。
现代文：不久，杨光速杀掉张敬逮向后晋投降。
English: Soon after, Yang Guanghui killed Zhang Jing and captured Xuan Jin, who surrendered.

古文：晋高祖自太原入洛阳，德光送至潞州，赵德钧、延寿出降。
现代文：晋高祖从太原进入洛阳，德光送到潞州，趟德钧、赵延寿出来投降。
English: Jin Gaozu entered Luoyang from Taiyuan, Deguang was sent to Zhangzhou, and Deguang and Zhao Yanshou came out to surrender.

古文：德光谓晋高祖曰： 大事已成。
现代文：德光对晋高祖说： 大事已成。
English: De Guang said to Jin Gao Zu: The important thing has been accomplished.

古文：吾命大相温从尔渡河，吾亦留此，俟尔入洛而后北。 
现代文：我命令大相温随你渡黄河，我也留在这里，等你进入洛阳后再北归。 
English: I order Daso Wen to cross the Yellow River with you. I will also stay here and wait for you to enter Luoyang before returning to the north.

古文：临诀，执手嘘戏，脱白貂裘以衣高祖，遗以良马二十匹，战马千二百匹，戒曰： 子子孙孙无相忘！ 
现代文：临别时，握着手感叹，脱下白貂皮给晋高祖穿上，赠送二十匹好马，一千二百匹战马，告诫说： 子子孙孙永不相忘！ 
English: At the time of parting, he held his hands and sighed. He took off his white mink coat to put it on Jinguo's ancestor, presented him with twenty good horses and twelve hundred war horses, and admonished, "Our children and grandchildren will never forget each other!"

古文：时天显九年也。
现代文：逭时是天颢九年。
English: At the time of the earthquake, it was nine years since the earthquake.

古文：高祖已入洛，德光乃北，执赵德钧、延寿以归。
现代文：晋高祖进入洛阳后，德光纔北归，俘虏赵德钧、趟延寿而回。
English: After Jin Gaozu entered Luoyang, De Guangya returned to the north, captured Zhao Deqi, and returned to Yanju.

古文：德钧，幽州人也，事刘守光、守文为军校，庄宗伐燕得之，赐姓名曰李绍斌。
现代文：赵德钩，幽州人，焉刘守光、刘守文效力任军校，唐庄宗攻伐燕国时得到他，赐姓名叫李绍斌。
English: Zhao Dehu, a native of Yuzhou, and Liu Shouguang and Liu Shouwen served in the military academy. Tang Zhuangzong received him when he invaded Yan Province, and gave him the name Li Shaobin.

古文：其子延寿，本姓刘氏，常山人也，其父邧为蓚县令，刘守文攻破蓚县，德钧得延寿并其母种氏而纳之，因以延寿为子。
现代文：他的儿子趟延寿，原姓刘，常山人，父亲刘郡任蓓县令，刘守文攻破蓓县，赵德钧得到赵延寿并娶了他的母亲种氏，因而把趟延寿当成儿子。
English: His son, Watan Yan Shou, originally surnamed Liu, was from Changshan. His father, Liu Guorong, was the governor of Min County, and Liu Shouwen conquered Min County. Zhao Deyu obtained Zhao Yan Shou and married his mother, Semei. Therefore, he considered Watan Yan Shou as his son.

古文：延寿为人，姿质妍柔，稍涉书史，明宗以女妻之，号兴平公主。
现代文：赵延寿这个人，资质秀美柔顺，粗通书史，唐明宗把女儿嫁给他，称为兴平公主。
English: Zhao Yanshou was a man with the qualifications of being beautiful and gentle, with a thorough knowledge of book history. Tang Mingzong married his daughter to him, calling her Xingping Princess.

古文：庄、明之世，德钧镇幽州十余年，以延寿故，尤见信任。
现代文：唐庄宗、唐明宗时，趟德钧镇守幽州十多年，由于赵延寿的缘故尤其受到信任。
English: When he was a member of the Tangzhuang and Tangming dynasties, he went to Deyu Town to guard Yuzhou for more than ten years. He was especially trusted because of Zhao Yanshou.

古文：延寿明宗时为枢密使，罢，至废帝立，复以为枢密使。
现代文：赵延寿，唐明宗时任枢密使，罢职。到唐废帝登位时，又任为枢密使。
English: Zhao Yanshou, Tang Mingzong's envoy at the time, resigned. He was appointed envoy again when the deposed emperor of Tang ascended the throne.

古文：晋高祖起太原，废帝遣延寿将兵讨之。
现代文：晋高祖在太原起兵，唐废帝派趟延寿率兵讨伐他。
English: Jin Gaozu raised an army in Taiyuan, and Emperor Tang sent Yan Shou and his soldiers to fight against him.

古文：而德钧亦请以镇兵讨贼，废帝察其有异志，使自飞狐出击其后，而德钧南出吴，会延寿于西唐，延寿因以兵属之。
现代文：而趟德钧也请求率镇兵讨贼，唐废帝察觉他有二心，让他从飞狐出兵攻打敌人后方，而赵德钧南出昊儿，和趟延寿在西唐会师，趟延寿于是把军队交给他。
English: However, Diệm also asked him to lead the town's soldiers to hunt down the thieves. Tang Emperor Cao Cao noticed that Diệm was of two minds and asked him to attack the enemy's rear from the flying fox, while Zhao Deyn went to the south, and Diệm met with Yan Shou in western Tang. Diệm then handed over the army to him.

古文：废帝以德钧为诸道行营都统，延寿为太原南面招讨使。
现代文：唐废帝任赵德钧为各道行营都统，赵延寿为太原南面招讨使。
English: Emperor Gaozong of Tang appointed Zhao Deyu as the general envoy to all provinces, and Zhao Yanshou as the envoy to the south of Taiyuan.

古文：德钧为延寿求镇州节度使。
现代文：赵德钧替趟延寿请求镇州节度使一职。
English: Zhao Deyu asked Zhenzhou Festival to make a post instead of Yan Shou.

古文：废帝怒曰： 德钧父子握强兵，求大镇，苟能败契丹而破太原，虽代予亦可。
现代文：唐废帝发怒说： 趟德钧父子手握强兵，请求大镇，如能抒败契丹而攻破太原，即使代替我也可以。
English: Tang Wulai said angrily, "Let Decheng father and son hold a strong army and ask Decheng, if he can defeat Khitan and break through Taiyuan, even if he can replace me."

古文：若玩寇要君，但恐犬兔俱毙。 
现代文：如果忽视敌寇要挟君主，只怕是犬兔皆亡。 
English: If you ignore the enemy and threaten the monarch, you may end up with all the dogs and rabbits dying.

古文：因遣使者趣德钧等进军。
现代文：因而派使臣催促赵德钧等人进军。
English: Therefore, he sent envoys to urge Zhao Deyu and others to march.

古文：德钧阴遣人聘德光，求立己为帝。
现代文：赵德钧暗中派人通好德光，请求立自己做皇帝。
English: Zhao Deyu secretly sent someone to ask the emperor to make himself emperor.

古文：德光指穹庐前巨石谓德钧使者曰： 吾已许石郎矣。
现代文：德光指着毡帐前的巨石对趟德钧的使臣说： 我已答应石郎了。
English: Pointing to the huge rock in front of the curtain, De Guang said to the envoys of De Guang: I have already agreed to leave the stone.

古文：石烂，可改也。 
现代文：这个石头烂了，纔能改变。 
English: This stone is rotten, but it can be changed.

古文：德光至潞州，锁德钧父子而去。
现代文：德光到达潞州，囚禁赵德钧父子而离去。
English: Deguang arrived in Zhangzhou, imprisoned Zhao Deguan and his son and left.

古文：德光母述律见之，问曰： 汝父子自求为天子何邪？ 
现代文：德光的母亲述律氏见到他们，问道： 你们父子为什么自己请求做天子呢？ 
English: When De Guang's mother, Su Lu, saw them, she asked, "Why did your father and son ask to become gods?"

古文：德钧惭不能对，悉以田宅之籍献之。
现代文：赵德钧羞惭不能回答，把田宅登记造册全部献给她。
English: Shamefacedly unable to answer, Zhao Deyu dedicated the whole register to her.

古文：述律问何在，曰： 幽州。 
现代文：述律氏问田宅在哪里。回答说： 在幽州。 
English: Mr. Suritsu asked where the farmhouse was, and he replied, "It's in Yuzhou."

古文：述律曰： 幽州属我矣，何献之为？ 
现代文：述律氏说： 幽州属于我了，哪用得着你献给我？ 
English: Shuritsu said, "Yuzhou belongs to me, why do I need you to dedicate it to me?

古文：明年，德钧死，德光以延寿为幽州节度使，封燕王。
现代文：第二年，趟德钧死，德光任趟延寿为幽州节度使，封为燕王。
English: In the second year, Wazi Deyu died, and Deguang appointed Wazi Yanju as the Yuzhou festival envoy and crowned him as the King of Swallows.

古文：契丹当庄宗、明宗时攻陷营、平二州，及已立晋，又得雁门以北幽州节度管内，合一十六州。
现代文：契丹在唐庄宗、唐明宗时已攻陷营、平二州，到扶立后晋后，又得到雁门以北幽州节度管辖区，共十六个州。
English: During the Tangzhuang and Tangming dynasties, the Khitan conquered Ying and Ping two provinces, and after the Fu-Li and Jin dynasties, they gained the jurisdiction over the Yuzhou Festival north of the Wild Goose Gate, a total of sixteen provinces.

古文：乃以幽州为燕京，改天显十一年为会同元年，更其国号大辽，置百官，皆依中国，参用中国之人。
现代文：于是以幽州焉燕京，改天显十一年为会同元年，改国号叫大辽，设置百官，都依照中原的官制，参用中原人。
English: As a result, Yuzhou was renamed Yanjing, Tianxian 11 was changed to Xian in the first year of the year, the country name was changed to Daliao, and hundreds of officials were set up, all in accordance with the official system of the Central Plains, with the participation of Central Plains people.

古文：晋高祖每遣使聘问，奉表称臣，岁输绢三十万匹，其余宝玉珍异，下至中国饮食诸物，使者相属于道，无虚日。
现代文：普高祖每次派使臣来访，上表都称臣，每年送绢三十万匹，其他珍奇实玉，下至中原饮食等物品，使臣在道路上来往不断，没有哪天没有。
English: Every time Pu Gaozu sent an envoy to visit, the upper table praised the envoy, and sent three hundred thousand yakitori every year, other rare and real yakitori, and food and other items from the Central Plains. The envoys kept coming and going on the road, and there was never a day without it.

古文：德光约高祖不称臣，更表为书，称 兒皇帝 ，如家人礼。
现代文：德光约晋高祖不要称臣，把表改焉书，署称 儿皇帝 ，依照家人的礼节。
English: De Guang about the promotion of Gao Zu, do not praise the minister, change the watch to the letter, the deputy called the child emperor, in accordance with the etiquette of the family.

古文：德光遣中书令韩颎奉册高祖为英武明义皇帝。
现代文：德光派中书令韩颓册封晋高祖焉英武明义皇帝。
English: The Deguang school of Chinese calligraphy ordered Han Xuan to be crowned as Emperor Mingyi.

古文：高祖复遣赵莹、冯道等以太常卤簿奉册德光及其母尊号。
现代文：晋高祖又派遣趟莹、冯道等人以太常卤簿奉册德光和他的母亲尊号。
English: Jin Gaozu also sent Wai Ying, Feng Dao and others to the Tai Changlu Book to receive the Book of De Guang and his mother's honor.

古文：终其世，奉之甚谨。
现代文：整个晋高祖时代，事奉德光很恭谨。
English: Throughout the time of the founding fathers of Jin Gao, Deguang was very respectful in his service.

古文：高祖崩，出帝即位，德光怒其不先以告，而又不奉表，不称臣而称孙，数遣使者责晋。
现代文：晋高祖死，晋出帝即位，德光对他不先报告发怒，而且他又不上表，不称臣而称孙，于是多次派使臣责备后晋。
English: When Emperor Jin Gao's ancestor died and Emperor Jin ascended to the throne, De Guang became angry with Emperor Jin Gao for not informing him first, and because he did not appear before the emperor and called him his grandson instead of his vassal, he repeatedly sent envoys to rebuke Emperor Jin.

古文：晋大臣皆恐，而景延广对契丹使者语，独不逊。
现代文：后晋的大臣都很恐惧，但景延广对契丹使臣说话，偏偏又不恭敬。
English: The ministers of the Later Jin were all afraid, but Jing Yanguang spoke to the Khitan envoys, but not respectfully.

古文：德光益怒。
现代文：德光更加愤怒。
English: De Guang was even more angry.

古文：杨光远反青州，招之。
现代文：杨光速在青州反叛，契丹招降他。
English: Yang Guanghui rebelled in Qingzhou, and the Khitan recruited him.

古文：开运元年春，德光倾国南寇，分其众为三：西出雁门，攻并、代，刘知远击败之于秀容；东至于河，陷博州，以应光远；德光与延寿南，攻陷贝州。
现代文：开运元年春，德光举国南侵，分他的军队为三支：一支西出雁门，攻打并、代二州，刘知速在秀容打败他们；一支东到黄河，攻陷博州，以便接应杨光速；德光和赵延寿一支向南，攻陷贝州。
English: In the spring of the first year of the year, De Guang led the country to invade the south, and divided his army into three: one went west to the Wild Goose Gate, attacked and defeated the two states, and Liu Zhidao defeated them in Xiurong; one went east to the Yellow River and invaded Bozhou in order to meet Yang Guangdao; De Guang and Zhao Yanshou went south and invaded Bozhou.

古文：德光屯元城，兵及黎阳。
现代文：德光屯驻元城，兵锋到达黎阳。
English: De Guangton was stationed in Yuancheng, and the troops arrived in Liyang.

古文：晋出帝亲征，遣李守贞等东驰马家渡，击败契丹。
现代文：晋出帝亲自出征，派李守贞等人东驰马家渡，打败契丹。
English: Emperor Jin personally went to war and sent Li Shouzhen and others to the East to defeat Khitan.

古文：而德光与晋相距于河，月余，闻马家渡兵败，乃引众击晋，战于戚城。
现代文：而德光和后晋军在黄河相拒，一个多月后，听说马家渡兵败，于是率领众军攻打后晋军，在戚城交战。
English: However, De Guang and the Later Jin Army opposed each other in the Yellow River. More than a month later, he heard that Ma Jiaodu was defeated, so he led the army to attack the Later Jin Army and fought in Qicheng.

古文：德光临阵，望见晋军旗帜光明，而士马严整，有惧色，谓其左右曰： 杨光远言晋家兵马半已饿死，何其盛也！ 
现代文：德光亲临战阵，望见晋军族帜鲜明，而兵马严整，面有畏色，对他的手下人说： 杨光速说晋的兵马已饿死一半，为什么如此强盛啊！ 
English: De Guang himself came to the battle, saw that the Jin army's nationality was clear, and the soldiers and horses were strict and fearful, and said to his men: Yang Guangyao said that half of Jin's soldiers and horses had starved to death, why are they so strong!

古文：兵既交，杀伤相半，阵间断箭遗镞，布厚寸余。
现代文：两军交锋后，相互死伤一半，战阵上留下的断箭头，有一寸多厚。
English: After the clash between the two armies, half of the casualties were mutual, and the broken arrows left on the battlefield were more than an inch thick.

古文：日暮，德光引去，分其兵为二，一出沧州，一出深州以归。
现代文：傍晚，德光退去，把他的军队分成两部分，一部分出沧州，一部分出深州而回。
English: In the evening, De Guang retreated and divided his army into two parts, one from Cangzhou and one from Shenzhou.

古文：二年正月，德光复倾国入寇，围镇州，分兵攻下鼓城等九县。
现代文：二年正月，德光又举国进犯，包围镇州，分兵攻克鼓城等九县。
English: In the first month of the second year, Deguang attacked the whole country again, surrounded Zhenzhou, and divided the army to conquer nine counties including Gucheng.

古文：杜重威守镇州，闭壁不敢出。
现代文：杜重威守镇州，闭城不敢出来。
English: Du Chongwei guarded Zhenzhou and dared not leave the closed city.

古文：契丹南掠邢、洺、磁，至于安阳河，千里之内，焚剽殆尽。
现代文：契丹向南掠夺邢、沼、磁三州，到达安阳河，千里之内，几乎被烧抢一空。
English: The Khitan went south to plunder the three states of Min, Numa, and Ge, and reached the Anyang River. Within a thousand miles, they were almost completely burned and robbed.

古文：契丹见大桑木，骂曰： 吾知紫披袄出自汝身，吾岂容汝活邪！ 
现代文：契丹军见到大桑树，骂道： 我知道紫披袄出自你身上，我难道能让你活吗！ 
English: When the Khitan army saw the big mulberry tree, they cursed: "I know that the purple mantle comes from you, how can I let you live!

古文：束薪于木而焚之。
现代文：把柴捆在树上将树烧毁。
English: Bundle the wood on the tree and burn it down.

古文：是时，出帝病，不能出征，遣张从恩、安审琦、皇甫遇等御之。
现代文：这时，晋出帝患病，不能出征，派张从恩、安审琦、皇甫遇等人抵御契丹。
English: At this time, Emperor Jinzei fell ill and was unable to go to war, so he sent Zhang Cong'en, An Ji'an, Emperor Fuyu and others to resist Khitan.

古文：遇前渡漳水，遇契丹，战于榆林，几为所虏。
现代文：皇甫遇先渡漳水，遇上契丹军队，在榆林交战，几乎被契丹俘虏。
English: The crown prince was the first to cross the Surabaya River, encounter the Khitan army, fight in Yulin, and was almost captured by the Khitan.

古文：审琦从后救之，契丹望见尘起，谓救兵至，引去。
现代文：安审琦从后面赶来救援他，契丹望见烟尘飞起，说救兵到了，退去。
English: An Qidan came from behind to rescue him. When Qidan saw the smoke and dust rising, he said that the rescuers had arrived and left.

古文：而从恩畏怯，不敢追，亦引兵南走黎阳。
现代文：而张从恩畏惧胆怯，不敢追击，也带兵向南逃回黎阳。
English: Zhang, however, was too timid and afraid to pursue, and he also fled south with his soldiers back to Liyang.

古文：契丹已北，而出帝疾少间，乃下诏亲征，军于澶州，遣杜重威等北伐。
现代文：契丹北去后，晋出帝的病稍有好转，于是下诏亲自出征，驻扎在澶州，派杜重威等人北伐。
English: After Khitan went to the north, Emperor Jin's illness improved slightly, so Emperor Jing personally went to the front, stationed in Zhangzhou, and sent Du Chongwei and others to the north.

古文：契丹归至古北，闻晋军且至，即复引而南，及重威战于阳城、卫村。
现代文：契丹回到古北旦，听说后晋军快到了，就又率兵向南，与杜重威在阳城、卫村交战。
English: When Khitan returned to ancient Hokutan and heard that the Later Jin army was about to arrive, he led his army south again and fought with Du Chongwei in Yangcheng and Imura.

古文：晋军饥渴，凿井辄坏，绞泥汁而饮。
现代文：后晋军又饿又渴，一挖井就坏，只好绞泥土中的水汁来喝。
English: Later, the Jin army was hungry and thirsty. As soon as they dug a well, it broke, so they had to drink the water from the ground.

古文：德光坐奚车中，呼其众曰： 晋军尽在此矣，可生擒之，然后平定天下。 
现代文：德光坐在奚车中，对众人呼喊说： 晋军全都在这里了，可以活捉他们，然后平定天下。 
English: De Guang sat in the carriage and shouted to the crowd: "The Jin army is all here, we can capture them alive and then pacify the world."

古文：会天大风，晋军奋死击之，契丹大败。
现代文：这时天刮大风，后晋军冒死攻打他们，契丹大败。
English: At this time, a strong wind was blowing, and the Hojin army risked their lives to attack them, and the Khitan were soundly defeated.

古文：德光丧车，骑一白橐驼而走。
现代文：德光失去奚车，骑着一只白骆驼逃跑。
English: De Guang lost his carriage and fled on a white camel.

古文：至幽州，其首领大将各笞数百，独赵延寿免焉。
现代文：到了幽州，他的首领大将各被鞭打几百鞭，只有赵延寿免打。
English: When he arrived in Yuzhou, his chief generals were each flogged with several hundred lashes, but only Zhao Yanshou was exempted.

古文：是时，天下旱蝗，晋人苦兵，乃遣开封府军将张晖假供奉官聘于契丹，奉表称臣，以修和好。
现代文：这时，旱灾蝗灾并起，后晋人苦于用兵，于是派开封府军将张晖任代理供奉官问候契丹，上表称臣，以便讲和。
English: At this time, the drought and locust plagues coincided, and the Later Jin people were struggling to employ soldiers, so they sent Zhang Ye, the commander of the Huanfu army, to serve as a representative to greet the Khitan, and to praise the minister in order to make peace.

古文：德光语不逊。
现代文：德光出言不逊。
English: Deguang spoke harshly.

古文：然契丹亦自厌兵。
现代文：但契丹自己也讨厌打仗了。
English: But Khitan himself hated war.

古文：德光母述律尝谓晋人曰： 南朝汉兒争得一向卧邪？
现代文：德光的母亲述律氏曾对后晋人说： 南朝的漠儿怎么纔能安睡一会呢？
English: De Guang's mother, Su Lu, once said to Queen Jin, "How can a child of the Southern Dynasty sleep peacefully for a while?

古文：自古闻汉来和蕃，不闻蕃去和汉，若汉兒实有回心，则我亦何惜通好！ 
现代文：自古以来只听说汉人前来同蕃人和好，没听说蕃人前去同汉人和好，如果这次汉儿确实回心转意，那么我们又何必吝惜和好！ 
English: Since ancient times, we have only heard of Han people coming to make peace with Han people, but never heard of Han people going to make peace with Han people. If Han people have indeed changed their minds this time, then why should we begrudge making peace!

古文：晋亦不复遣使，然数以书招赵延寿。
现代文：后晋也不再派使臣来，但多次写信招赵延寿。
English: Later Jin also stopped sending envoys, but wrote to Zhao Yanshou several times to recruit him.

古文：延寿见晋衰而天下乱，尝有意窥中国，而德光亦尝许延寿灭晋而立之。
现代文：赵延寿见后晋衰落而天下动乱，曾有意窥伺中原，而德光也曾许诺趟延寿消灭后晋拥立他。
English: When Zhao Yanshou saw that the Later Jin Dynasty was in decline and the world was in turmoil, he had the intention to spy on the Central Plains, and Deguang had also promised to support him after the extinction of the Later Jin Dynasty.

古文：延寿得晋书，伪为好辞报晋，言身陷虏思归，约晋发兵为应。
现代文：趟延寿碍到后晋的信，假意说好话答复后晋，说身陷胡虏中想回去，约后晋出兵接应他。
English: After his death, he wrote a letter to Hou Jin, saying that he wanted to go back to his hometown, and Hou Jin sent troops to meet him.

古文：而德光将高牟翰亦诈以瀛州降晋，晋君臣皆喜。
现代文：而德光的将领高牟翰也诈称献瀛州向后晋投降，后晋的君臣都很欢喜。
English: However, the general of Deguang, Gao Muhan, also falsely claimed that Xianyanzhou surrendered to Later Jin. Later Jin's princes and ministers were very happy.

古文：三年七月，遣杜重威、李守贞、张彦泽等出兵，为延寿应。兵趋瀛州，牟翰空城而去。
现代文：三年七月，后晋派杜重威、李守贞、张彦泽等人出兵，接应趟延寿，军队赶到瀛州，高牟翰却留下空城离去。
English: In July of the third year, Emperor Jin dispatched Du Chongwei, Li Shouzhen, Zhang Yanzhe and others to send troops to meet Yan Shou, and the army rushed to Zhangzhou, but Gaomuhan left the empty city.

古文：晋军至城下，见城门皆启，疑有伏兵，不敢入。
现代文：后晋军到达城下，见城门都开着，疑心有伏兵，不敢进城。
English: After the Jin army arrived at the foot of the city, they saw that the city gates were open. They suspected an ambush and did not dare to enter the city.

古文：遣梁汉璋追牟翰及之，汉璋战死。
现代文：派梁漠璋追上高牟翰，梁漠璋战死。
English: He sent Liang Muchen to catch up with Gao Mouhan, and Liang Muchen died in the battle.

古文：重威等军屯武强。
现代文：杜重威等人的军队屯驻武强。
English: The troops of Du Chongwei and others were stationed in Wuqiang.

古文：德光闻晋出兵，乃入寇镇州。
现代文：德光听说后晋出兵，于是入侵镇州。
English: De Guang heard that Jin dispatched troops, so he invaded Zhenzhou.

古文：重威西屯中渡，与德光夹水而军。
现代文：杜重威向西屯驻中渡，和德光隔河驻军。
English: Du Chongwei stationed in Zhongdu to the west of Xitun, and stationed troops across the river from Deguang.

古文：德光分兵，并西山出晋军后，攻破栾城县，县有骑军千人，皆降于虏。
现代文：德光分兵，沿着西山出现在后晋军后面，攻破乐城县，县中有骑兵一千人，都向契丹军投降。
English: The Deguang detachment appeared behind the Later Jin army along the West Mountain, and broke through Lecheng County. There were one thousand cavalry in the county, and they all surrendered to the Khitan army.

古文：德光每获晋人，刺其面，文曰 奉敕不杀 ，纵以南归。
现代文：德光每次抓到后晋人，就刺他们的脸，刺文是 奉敕不杀 ，放他们南归。
English: Every time Deguang caught a Hojin, he stabbed them in the face, with the inscription "Bongyeon ni shisho" (don't kill, let them go back to the south).

古文：重威等被围粮绝，遂举军降。
现代文：杜重威等人被包围粮食吃光，于是全军投降。
English: Du Chongwei and others were surrounded and ran out of food, so the whole army surrendered.

古文：德光喜，谓赵延寿曰： 所得汉兒皆与尔。 
现代文：德光很高兴，对赵延寿说： 得到的汉儿都给你。 
English: De Guang was very happy and said to Zhao Yanshou, "I will give you everything I can get.

古文：因以龙凤赭袍赐之，使衣以抚晋军，亦以赭袍赐重威。
现代文：于是将龙凤赭红袍赐给他，让他穿上安抚后晋军，也拿赭红袍赐给杜重威。
English: So he gave him a dragon and phoenix embroidered red robe, and let him wear it to appease the Jin army. He also gave a embroidered red robe to Du Chongwei.

古文：遣傅住兒监张彦泽将骑二千，先入京师。
现代文：派傅住儿监督张彦泽率骑兵两千人，先进京师。
English: Zhang Yanzawa, who was sent to supervise Fu Zhubei, led 2,000 cavalry and advanced to the capital.

古文：晋出帝与太后为降表，自陈过咎。
现代文：晋出帝和太后写下降表，陈说自己的过失。
English: The emperor and empress dowager who were promoted to the throne wrote a letter of resignation, confessing their faults.

古文：德光遣解里以手诏赐帝曰： 孙兒但勿忧，管取一吃饮处。 
现代文：德光派解里带着他的亲笔诏书赐给晋出帝说： 孙儿不要忧虑，保证给你个吃饭的地方。 
English: Deguang sent an envoy to the emperor with his autograph edict, saying, "Don't worry, grandchild, I'll guarantee you a place to eat.

古文：德光将至京师，有司请以法驾奉迎，德光曰： 吾躬擐甲胃，以定中原，太常之仪，不暇顾也。 
现代文：德光快要到京师，官府请求准备法驾奉迎，德光说： 我身披着镗甲戴着头盔，平定中原，太常的礼仪，没有时间管。 
English: Deguang was about to leave for Beijing, and the government asked him to prepare for the welcoming ceremony. Deguang said, "I'm wearing armor and a helmet to pacify the Central Plains. It's a very common etiquette, and I don't have time to manage it.

古文：止而不用。
现代文：作罢不用。
English: There's no need to stop.

古文：出帝与太后出郊奉迎，德光辞不见，曰： 岂有两天子相见于道路邪！ 
现代文：晋出帝和太后到郊外奉迎，德光谢绝不见，说： 难道有两个天子在路上相见的吗！ 
English: When Emperor Jinzhi and Empress Dowager Jinzhi went to the suburbs to greet each other, De Guangxie refused to see them, saying, "Did two heavenly sons meet on the road?"

古文：四年正月丁亥朔旦，晋文武百官班于都城北，望帝拜辞，素服纱帽以待。
现代文：四年正月丁亥初一早上，后晋的文武百官，在都城北面列队，望着晋出帝朝拜辞别，穿戴白衣纱帽等待路旁。
English: On the morning of the first day of Dinghai in the first month of the fourth year, hundreds of civil and military officials of the Later Jin Dynasty lined up on the north side of the capital, looking at the Emperor of the Jin Dynasty and bidding farewell, wearing white clothes and hats and waiting by the roadside.

古文：德光被甲衣貂帽，立马于高冈，百官俯伏待罪。
现代文：德光身穿镗甲头戴貂帽，在山岗上停下马，百官拜伏等待治罪。
English: De Guang, wearing armor and a skullcap, stopped his horse on a hill, and hundreds of officials bowed down to wait for the punishment.

古文：德光入自封丘门，登城楼，遣通事宣言谕众曰： 我亦人也，可无惧。
现代文：德光从封丘门入城，登上城楼，派翻译向众人宣告说： 我也是人，不必害怕。
English: De Guang entered the city from the Fengqiu Gate, ascended the city tower, and sent an interpreter to announce to everyone: I am also a person, do not be afraid.

古文：我本无心至此，汉兵引我来尔。 
现代文：我原本无心到这里，不过是汉兵带我来的罢了。 
English: Originally, I had no intention of coming here, but the Chinese soldiers brought me here.

古文：遂入晋宫，宫中嫔妓迎谒，皆不顾，夕出宿于赤冈。
现代文：于是进入晋官，宫中的嫔妃宫女迎拜他，他都不予理睬，晚上出官住在赤冈。
English: So he entered the imperial court, and the concubines in the palace bowed to him, but he ignored them. In the evening, he left the court and lived in Akaoka.

古文：封出帝负义侯，迁于黄龙府。
现代文：封晋出帝为负义侯，迁到黄龙府。
English: He moved to Huanglongfu after he was deprived of the title of imperial prince.

古文：癸巳，入居晋宫，以契丹守诸门，门庑殿廷皆磔犬挂皮，以为厌胜。
现代文：癸巳日，入居后晋宫内，让契丹兵把守各道门，门廊殿廷上都杀狗并挂上狗皮，以方术压邪。
English: On the following day, after moving into the palace of Jin, the Khitan soldiers were allowed to guard all the doors. Dogs were killed and their skins were hung on the porch of the palace to suppress evil.

古文：甲午，德光胡服视朝于广政殿。
现代文：甲午日，德光身着胡服到广政殿处理朝政。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of the month, De Guang went to the Guangzheng Palace to deal with the imperial government.

古文：乙未，被中国冠服，百官常参，起居如晋仪，而氈裘左衤任，胡马奚车，罗列阶陛，晋人俯首，不敢仰视。
现代文：乙末日，穿戴上中原衣帽，百官行日常参拜礼，起居依照后晋的礼俄，而毡裘胡服，胡马奚车，都罗列在官中台阶上，晋人低头不敢仰看。
English: At the end of the second day, wearing the Central Plains clothes and hats, hundreds of officials went to daily worship, living in accordance with the post-Jin ritual, while the Qiu Hu clothing and the horse-drawn carriage were all lined up on the official steps, and the Jin people did not dare to look up.

古文：二月丁巳朔，金吾六军、殿中省仗、太常乐舞陈于廷，德光冠通天冠，服绛纱袍，执大珪以视朝，大赦，改晋国为大辽国，开运四年为会同十年。
现代文：二月丁巳初一，在殿廷上陈设金吾六军、殿中省仪仗、太常寺乐舞，德光头戴通天冠，身穿绛色纱袍，手持大珪处理朝政，实行大赦，改晋国为大辽国，开运四年为会同十年。
English: On the first day of the second month of Ding Si, the six armies of King Wu, the ceremonial battle of the provinces in the palace, and the music and dance of Taizhong Temple were displayed in the imperial court. The emperor, wearing a crown of heaven on his bare head, wore a navy blue robe, and held a scepter in his hand to deal with the imperial government. An amnesty was carried out, the country was promoted to the Great Liao Kingdom, and the four years of operation were the ten years of unification.

古文：德光尝许赵延寿灭晋而立以为帝，故契丹击晋，延寿常为先锋，虏掠所得，悉以奉德光及其母述律。
现代文：德光曾许诺赵延寿，消灭后晋后立他做皇帝，因此契丹攻打后晋，趟延寿常做先锋，抢掠所得，全部拿来奉献给德光和他的母亲述律氏。
English: De Guang had promised Zhao Yan Shou that he would make him emperor after eliminating Jingu, so the Khitan attacked Jingu, and Yan Shou often led the way, and all the loot was dedicated to De Guang and his mother, the Shuritsu clan.

古文：德光已灭晋而无立延寿意，延寿不敢自言，因李崧以求为皇太子。
现代文：德光已消灭后晋，却没有立趟延寿的意思，赵延寿自己不敢说，托李崧请求做皇太子。
English: De Guang had already eliminated Hou Jin, but he had no intention of extending his life. Zhao Yan Shou himself did not dare to say that he asked Tuo Lijun to be crown prince.

古文：德光曰： 吾于燕王无所爱惜，虽我皮肉，可为燕王用者，吾可割也。
现代文：德光说： 对燕王，我没有什么舍不得的，即使是我的皮肉，能为燕王用的，我都可以割下。
English: De Guang said, "I have nothing to begrudge the king of swallows. Even if my skin and flesh can be used for the king of swallows, I can cut it off.

古文：吾闻皇太子是天子之子，燕王岂得为之？ 
现代文：我听说皇太子是天子的儿子，燕王怎么能做皇太子？ 
English: I've heard that the crown prince is the son of the son of heaven. How can Yan Wang be the crown prince?

古文：乃命与之迁秩。
现代文：于是命令给他升官。
English: He was then ordered to be promoted.

古文：翰林学士张砺进拟延寿中京留守、大丞相、录尚书事、都督中外诸军事。
现代文：翰林学士张砺拟升趟延寿焉中京留守、大丞相、录尚书事、都督中外诸军事。
English: Zhang Ye, a scholar of Chinese classics, planned to stay in Beijing for the rest of his life, serving as grand chancellor, secretary of state, and military governor.

古文：德光索笔，涂其录尚书事、都督中外诸军事，止以为中京留守、大丞相，而延寿前为枢密使、封燕王皆如故。
现代文：德光要来笔，划掉录尚书事、都督中外诸军事，只任为中京留守、大丞相，而趟延寿以前任的枢密使、封的燕王都依旧。
English: De Guang wanted to write a letter, and he crossed out the records, the governors, and the foreign military, and only left for the capital, the grand chancellor, while Yan Wang, the previous envoy to Yan Shou, remained the same.

古文：又以砺为右仆射兼门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事，与故晋相和凝并为宰相。
现代文：又任张砺为右仆射兼门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事，与过去篷晋的宰相和凝同任宰相。
English: He also appointed Zhang Xuan as his right-hand man and attendant, and Xia Ping Zhangji as his second-in-command, which was the same as the prime minister of Tang Jin and the prime minister of Jingdong.

古文：砺，明宗时翰林学士，晋高祖起太原，唐废帝遣砺督赵延寿进军于团柏谷，已而延寿为德光所锁，并砺迁于契丹。
现代文：张砺，唐明宗时的翰林学士，晋高祖在太原起兵，唐废帝派张砺督趟延寿进驻团柏谷，不久赵延寿被德光囚禁，连同张砺迁到契丹。
English: Zhang Ye, a scholar of Hanlin during the Tang and Ming Dynasties, and the founder of the Jingu School, raised an army in Taiyuan. The deposed emperor of the Tang Dynasty sent Zhang Ye to Yanshou, who was stationed in Baiyun. Soon, Zhao Yanshou was imprisoned by Deguang and moved to Khitan together with Zhang Ye.

古文：德光重其文学，仍以为翰林学士。
现代文：德光看重他的文章学问，仍任他焉翰林学士。
English: De Guang valued his knowledge of writing, and still considered him a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：砺常思归，逃至境上，为追者所得，德光责之，砺曰： 臣本汉人，衣服饮食言语不同，今思归而不得，生不如死。 
现代文：张砺常想回去，逃到境上，被迫他的人抓到，德光斥责他，张砺说： 我原是汉人，衣服饮食语言都和你们不同，现在想回去不成，生不如死。 
English: Zhang Xuan often wanted to go back. He fled to the mainland and was caught by his captors. De Guang rebuked him and Zhang Xuan said, "I used to be a Han Chinese. My clothes, food, and language are all different from yours. If I want to go back now, I won't be able to. I'd rather die than live."

古文：德光顾其通事高唐英曰： 吾戒尔辈善待引人，致其逃去，过在尔也。 
现代文：德光望着他的通事直卢墓说： 我警告过你们好好对待这个人，却让他逃离，遇错在你们。 
English: I warned you to treat this man well, but you let him escape. You are the ones at fault.

古文：因笞唐英一百而待砺如故，其爱之如此。
现代文：于是鞭打高唐英一百下而仍像过去那样对待张砺，德光就是如此喜爱张砺。
English: As a result, Gao Tangying was whipped a hundred times, but still treated Zhang Xuan as he had in the past. De Guang was so fond of Zhang Xuan.

古文：德光将视朝，有司给延寿貂蝉冠，砺三品冠服，延寿与砺皆不肯服。
现代文：德光将要临朝听政，官府给趟延寿貂蝉冠，给张砺三品官衣帽，趟延寿和张砺都不愿穿戴。
English: De Guang is going to attend the imperial court to listen to the government, the government will give Watan Yan Shou a cicada crown, and give Zhang Ye a three-grade official cap, but neither Watan Yan Shou nor Zhang Ye are willing to wear it.

古文：而延寿别为王者冠以自异。
现代文：而趟延寿另做王冠让自己与众不同。
English: However, he decided to make a crown to make himself unique.

古文：砺曰： 吾在上国时，晋遣冯道奉册北朝，道赍二貂冠，其一宰相韩延徽冠之，其一命我冠之。
现代文：张砺说： 我在上国时，后晋派冯道奉册北朝，冯道带着两顶貂冠，一顶给宰相韩延徽戴，一顶命令我戴。
English: Zhang Ye said: When I went to China, the Later Jin Dynasty sent Feng Dao to the Northern Dynasty. Feng Dao brought two crowns, one for Prime Minister Han Yanhui to wear, and one for me to wear.

古文：今其可降服邪！ 
现代文：现今可降低冠服等级吗！ 
English: Is it possible to downgrade the crown now?

古文：卒冠貂蝉以朝。
现代文：最终还是戴着貂蝉冠上朝。
English: In the end, he ascended to the throne wearing a cicada crown.

古文：三月丙戌朔，德光服靴、袍，御崇元殿，百官入阁，德光大悦，顾其左右曰： 汉家仪物，其盛如此。
现代文：三月丙戌初一，德光穿着靴、袍，到崇元殿，百官入朝，德光非常高兴，望着手下人说： 漠家的礼仪，如此壮观。
English: On the first day of the third lunar month, De Guang, wearing shoes and a robe, went to the Chongyuan Palace. Hundreds of officials were entering the imperial court. De Guang was very happy. He looked at his subordinates and said, "The etiquette of the Mo family is so spectacular."

古文：我得于此殿坐，岂非真天子邪！ 
现代文：我能在此殿坐下，鸡道不是真天子吗！ 
English: Can I sit down in this hall, isn't the chicken course really divine!

古文：其母述律遣人赍书及阿保机明殿书赐德光。
现代文：他的母亲述律氏派人带信和阿保机的明殿书诏赐给德光。
English: His mother, a member of the Shuritsu clan, sent someone with a letter and a copy of the Imperial edict from the Ming dynasty to give to Toko.

古文：明殿，若中国陵寝下宫之制，其国君死，葬，则于其墓侧起屋，谓之明殿，置官属职司，岁时奉表起居如事生，置明殿学士一人掌答书诏，每国有大庆吊，学士以先君之命为书以赐国君，其书常曰报兒皇帝云。
现代文：明殿，如同中原陵寝下宫的制度，国君死后，安葬毕，就在墓旁建屋，称为明殿，设置官吏管理，每年按时奉表问安，就像事奉活人一样，设置明殿学士一人负责写答复书诏，每当国家有大的庆典祭祀，学士依照先君的命令写书诏赐给国君，这种害诏常称 答复儿皇帝 等等。
English: The Ming Dynasty, like the system of the Central Plains mausoleum, after the death of the sovereign, after he was buried, a house was built next to the tomb, called the Ming Dynasty. Officials were set up to manage it. Greetings were sent out on time every year, just like serving a living person. A Ming Dynasty scholar was set up to be responsible for writing a reply. Whenever the country had a big celebration, the scholar would write a reply according to the order of the forefather and give it to the sovereign. This kind of reply was often called a reply to the emperor, etc.

古文：德光已灭晋，遣其部族酋豪及其通事为诸州镇刺史、节度使，括借天下钱帛以赏军。
现代文：德光消灭后晋后，派他的部族酋豪和通事任各州镇刺史、节度使，搜刮天下钱财犒赏军队。
English: After the elimination of De Guang and the promotion, he sent his tribal chieftain and secretary to serve as the town of each state to assassinate the history and the festival envoy, to collect the world's money and reward the army.

古文：胡兵人马不给粮草，遣数千骑分出四野，劫掠人民，号为 打草谷 ，东西二三千里之间，民被其毒，远近怨嗟。
现代文：契丹兵人马粮草供给不上，于是派几千骑兵分赴四野，劫掠百姓，称焉 打草谷 ，东西两三千里之间，百姓深受其害，远近怨声载道。
English: The Khitan soldiers and horses could not supply grain and grass, so they sent several thousand cavalrymen to the four fields, looted the people, and called the Atka Valley, between two and three thousand miles east and west, the people suffered from it, and complained from far and near.

古文：汉高祖起太原，所在州镇多杀契丹守将归汉，德光大惧。
现代文：漠高祖在太原起兵，所在州镇多杀契丹守将归附后漠，德光十分恐惧。
English: Mogao's ancestor raised an army in Taiyuan, and the governor of the prefectural town where most of the Khitan were killed would be annexed to Houma. Deguang was very afraid.

古文：又时已热，乃以萧翰为宣武军节度使。
现代文：又天气已热，于是任萧翰焉宣武军节度使。
English: The weather was already hot, so Xiao Han Yan was appointed as the envoy to proclaim the military festival.

古文：翰，契丹之大族，其号阿钵，翰之妹亦嫁德光，而阿钵本无姓氏，契丹呼翰为国舅，及将以为节度使，李崧为制姓名曰萧翰，于是始姓萧。
现代文：萧翰，是契丹的大族，号称为阿钵，他的妹妹也嫁给德光，而阿钵原无姓氏，契丹称芦塑焉国舅，到要任他为节度使时，李崧焉他取姓名叫萧翰，于是开始姓萧。
English: Xiao Han is a member of the large clan of the Khitan people. He is known by the name of Aqan, and his sister is also married to Deguang. Whereas Aqan originally had no surname, the Khitan people called him the uncle of the country. When they wanted to appoint him as the festival envoy, Li Qian took the name Xiao Han, and thus began to use the surname Xiao.

古文：德光已留翰守汴，乃北归，以晋内诸司伎术、宫女、诸军将卒数千人从。
现代文：德光留下萧翰镇守汴州后，就北归，带着后晋官内各部门技艺人、宫女、各军兵将几千人随行。
English: After De Guang left Xiao Han to guard Bozhou, he returned to the north, accompanied by several thousand people including craftsmen from various departments of the Later Jin government, palace maids, and soldiers.

古文：自黎阳渡河，行至汤阴，登愁死冈，谓其宣徽使高勋曰： 我在上国，以打围食肉为乐，自入中国，心常不快，若得复吾本土，死亦无恨。 
现代文：从黎阳渡过黄河，走到汤阴，登上愁死冈，对他的宣徽使高勋说： 我在本国，以打围吃肉为乐，自从进入中原，心中常不快乐，如能回到我的本土，死也无憾了。 
English: From Liyang, he crossed the Yellow River, walked to Tangyin, and ascended Mount Sorrowful. Gao Xun said to his herald: In my home country, I enjoy eating meat. Since I entered the Central Plains, I have often been unhappy. If I can return to my home country, I will not regret dying.

古文：勋退而谓人曰： 虏将死矣。 
现代文：高勋退下对人说： 这个胡虏快死了。 
English: Gao Xun retreated and said to the people, "This hu Rui is about to die.

古文：相州梁晖杀契丹守将，闭城距守。
现代文：相州梁晖杀掉契丹守将，闭城拒守。
English: Xiangzhou Liang Yi killed the Qidan guard and refused to close the city.

古文：德光引兵破之，城中男子无少长皆屠之，妇女悉驱以北。
现代文：德光率兵攻破他们，城中男子无论老少都被杀掉，妇女被全部赶往北方。
English: Deguang's soldiers defeated them. The men of the city, both young and old, were killed, and the women were all driven to the north.

古文：后汉以王继弘镇相州，得髑髅十数万枚，为大冢葬之。
现代文：后来后漠委任王继弘镇守相州，得到尸骨几十万块，修大墓安葬。
English: Later, Houma appointed Wang Jihong to guard the town of Xiangzhou, obtained hundreds of thousands of bones, repaired the tomb and buried it.

古文：德光至临洺，见其井邑荒残，笑谓晋人曰： 致中国至此，皆燕王为罪首。 
现代文：德光到达临沼，见那里井邑荒残，笑着对后晋人说： 让中原落到这步，燕王是罪魁祸首。 
English: De Guang arrived at Linmo, saw the ruins of the wells there, smiled and said to Hou Jin: Let Zhongyuan fall to this step, Yan Wang is the main culprit.

古文：又顾张砺曰： 尔亦有力焉。 
现代文：又望着张砺说： 你也对此出了力。 
English: He also looked at Zhang Ye and said, "You also contributed to this."

古文：德光行至栾城，得疾，卒于杀胡林。
现代文：德光走到乐城，患病，死在杀胡林。
English: De Guang went to Lecheng, fell ill, and died in Zhihuling.

古文：契丹破其腹，去其肠胃，实之以盐，载而北，晋人谓之 帝羓 焉。
现代文：契丹人剖开他的肚腹，除掉肠胃，灌上盐，载着北去，后晋人称之焉 帝把 。
English: The Khitan cut open his belly, removed his intestines and stomach, poured salt on him, and carried him north. Later, the Jin people called him Emperor Yan.

古文：永康王兀欲立，谥德光为嗣圣皇帝，号阿保机为太祖，德光为太宗。
现代文：永康王兀欲登位，德光的谧号叫嗣圣皇帝，称阿保机为太祖，德光为太宗。
English: King Yongkang wanted to ascend to the throne, and Deguang's posthumous name was Emperor Shisheng. He called Ah Baoji his great-grandfather and Deguang his great-uncle.

