古文：武十七王武帝二十三男：穆皇后生文惠太子、竟陵文宣王子良；张淑妃生卢陵王子卿、鱼复侯子响；周淑仪生安陆王子敬、建安王子真；阮淑媛生晋安王子懋、衡阳王子峻；王淑仪生随郡王子隆；蔡婕妤生西阳王子明；乐容华生南海王子罕；傅充华生巴陵王子伦；谢昭仪生邵陵王子贞；江淑仪生临贺王子岳；庾昭容生西阳王子文；荀昭华生南康王子琳；颜婕妤生永阳王子珉；宫人谢生湘东王子建；何充华生南郡王子夏；第六、十二、十五、二十二皇子早亡。子珉建武中继衡阳元王后。
现代文：武帝生有二十三个儿子：穆皇后生文惠太子、竟陵文宣王子良，张淑妃生庐陵王子卿、鱼复侯子响，周淑仪生安陆王子敬、建安王子真，阮淑媛生晋安王子懋、衡阳王子峻，王淑仪生随郡王子隆，蔡婕妤生西阳王子明，乐容华生南海王子罕，傅充华生巴陵王子伦，谢昭仪生邵陵王子贞，江淑仪生临贺王子岳，庾昭容生西阳王子文，荀昭华生南康王子琳，颜婕妤生永阳王子珉，宫人谢氏生湘束王子建，何充华生南郡王子夏。其中第六、十二、十五和二十二皇子早亡，子珉在建武年间过继给衡阳元王为后。
English: Emperor Wu had twenty-three sons: Empress Mu had Prince Wen Hui, Emperor Jingling had Prince Xuan Liang, Empress Zhangshui had Prince Gongling, Emperor Yu Fu Fu had Prince Zi Xiang, Empress Zhoushui had Prince Anlu, Empress Jianan had Prince Zhen, Empress Nguyen Shuyun had Prince Jinan, Empress Hengyang had Prince Jun, Empress Wangshui had Prince Xiyang, Empress Le Rong had Prince Nanhai, Empress Fu Zheng had Prince Baling, Empress Xie had Prince Shao Ling, Empress Jiangshui had Prince Lin He, Empress Zhao had Prince Xiy

古文：竟陵文宣王子良，字云英，世祖第二子也。
现代文：竟陵文宣王子良字云英，是世祖的第二子。
English: In fact, Ling Wen Xuan Prince Liang Zi Yun Ying was the second son of the patriarch.

古文：初，沈攸之难，随世祖在盆城，板宁朔将军。仍为宋邵陵王左军行参军，转主簿，安南记室参军，邵陵王友，王名友。
现代文：当初沈攸之发难时跟随世祖在盆城，任命为宁朔将军，并为宋邵陵王左军行参军，转主簿，安南记室参军，邵陵王府友。
English: At the beginning, when Shen Youzhi was in trouble, he followed his ancestor in Bincheng and was appointed as the general of Ningshuo. He joined the army of the left army of King Song Shao Ling, changed his home directory, joined the army of the Annan Records Office, and was a friend of King Shao Ling's palace.

古文：不废此官。迁安南长史。
现代文：王名字是叁，但并没有因此而废除友这种官职。迁安南长史。
English: The king's name was, but this did not result in the abolition of the official post of 友.

古文：升明三年，为使持节、都督会稽东阳临海永嘉新安五郡、辅国将军、会稽太守。
现代文：升明三年，为使持节、都督会稽东阳临海永嘉新安五郡、辅国将军、会稽太守。
English: In the third year after his ascension to the throne, the five counties of Dongyang, Linhai, Yongjia, Xin'an, the general of Fu Guo, and the auditor-general of the association were selected for the festival.

古文：宋世元嘉中，皆责成郡县；孝武征求急速，以郡县迟缓，始遣台使，自此公役劳扰。
现代文：宋世元嘉年间，均督促郡县课税赋役，至孝武帝时征求特别急促，觉得郡县动作迟缓，才开始派遣台使，从这以后公役劳烦扰民很重。
English: During the Song and Yuan Dynasties, they all urged counties and counties to levy taxes and pay labor, and when Emperor Xiaowu was solicited, he was particularly urgent, and felt that counties and counties were slow to act, so he began to send envoys. Since then, the public service has been very troublesome for the people.

古文：太祖践阼，子良陈之曰：
现代文：太祖登基后，子良进言说：
English: After Emperor Taizu ascended to the throne, Zira said:

古文：前台使督逋切调，恒闻相望于道。
现代文：从前台使催讨拖欠的赋税，被派去催督赋税的人多至相望于道。
English: From the front desk to urge the collection of tax arrears, the number of people who were sent to the tax inspector to collect tax arrears was as high as the road.

古文：及臣至郡，亦殊不疏。
现代文：等我到了郡县，仍然一点也没有减少。
English: By the time I got to the county, there was still no reduction at all.

古文：凡此辈使人，既非详慎勤顺，或贪险崎岖，要求此役。
现代文：大抵这些台使，本不是周详谨慎、勤勉和顺的人，有的还贪婪险诈心思难测，才请求这个差使。
English: Most of these envoys are not thorough, prudent, diligent and obedient people, and some are greedy, treacherous and unpredictable, and only request this mission.

古文：朝辞禁门，情态即异；暮宿村县，威福便行。
现代文：早上离开宫禁之门，就情态顿改；晚间寄宿村县，更加作威作福。
English: In the morning, when you leave the gate of the palace, you will change the situation; in the evening, when you stay in the village, you will be more arrogant.

古文：但令朱鼓裁完，铍槊微具，顾眄左右，叱咤自专。
现代文：衹要红色钟鼓刚刚完备，长矛大戟稍稍具全，便左右顾视，叱咤生威，专断弄权。
English: When the red bells and drums were just completed, and the big spears were a little more complete, he looked to the right and left, rebuked them, and arbitrarily usurped power.

古文：擿宗断族，排轻斥重，胁遏津埭，恐喝传邮。
现代文：断灭宗族，轻遭排挤，重被斥逐，威胁恐吓于水陆冲要之地。
English: Destroying the clan, being ousted, being expelled, threatening and intimidating in critical places on land and at sea.

古文：破岗水逆，商旅半引，逼令到下，先过己船。浙江风猛，公私畏渡，脱舫在前，驱令俱发。
现代文：破岗那儿水势倒逆，商家旅人大半退让，台使逼令其到下游，使自己的船先过；浙江上风浪威猛，公私船只都不敢轻易渡过，他们却不顾眼前破船的危险，驱使船家开船。
English: At the breakwater, the water flowed in the opposite direction, and most of the merchant travelers retreated. The Taiwan envoy forced them to go downstream, so that their ships could pass ahead of them. In Zhejiang, the wind and waves were fierce, and both public and private ships did not dare to cross easily, but they drove the boatmen to sail, regardless of the immediate danger of shipwreck.

古文：呵蹙行民，固其常理；侮折守宰，出变无穷。
现代文：呵责百姓行人，还算是寻常道理，侮辱郡守县宰，更是花样百出。
English: It is not uncommon for people to scold pedestrians, and insulting the county magistrate is even more common.

古文：既瞻郭望境，便飞下严符，但称行台，未显所督。
现代文：一看见城郭边境，就飞快地发下符节，衹自称行台使，却不指明出使权限。
English: As soon as he saw the border of the castle, he quickly sent a signal, claiming to be an envoy, but without specifying his authority.

古文：先诃强寺，却摄群曹，开亭正榻，便振荆革。
现代文：先是呵斥强大官署，后又威慑众官吏，张设亭阁铺正坐榻，就抡起荆条皮鞭大施刑罚。
English: First, he rebuked the powerful government office, and then he deterred all the officials by setting up a pavilion while they were sleeping, and then he whipped them with a whip and severely punished them.

古文：其次绛标寸纸，一日数至；征村切里，俄刻十催。
现代文：然后发下片纸手令，一天要发下好几次；征讨村庄课税，一会儿就催了十来遍。
English: Then a piece of paper was issued, which had to be issued several times a day; the collection of village taxes was hurried through ten times in a short time.

古文：四乡所召，莫辨枉直，孩老士庶，具令付狱。
现代文：从四周乡里召来的人，一概不管是非曲直，不论是老人小孩还是士人、庶民，都下令关造牢狱。
English: The people who were called from the surrounding villages, regardless of the rights and wrongs, whether they were old people or children, nobles or commoners, were all ordered to close the prison.

古文：或尺布之逋，曲以当匹；百钱余税，且增为千。
现代文：甚或把拖欠一尺布的硬说成欠一匹；把差一百钱税的随便增添成差一千。
English: They may even say that the arrears of one foot of cloth are equivalent to the arrears of one horse; they may arbitrarily add the arrears of one hundred tax money to the arrears of one thousand.

古文：或诳应质作尚方，寄系东冶，万姓骇迫，人不自固。
现代文：又或者欺人说应当抵债去尚方为皇宫制造器物，或送去东冶服役，使万民惊惧，人人不能自保。
English: Or they may lie and say that they should pay off their debts and go to Shangfang to make utensils for the imperial palace, or send them to Dongye for service, which will frighten the people and everyone will not be able to protect themselves.

古文：遂漂衣败力，竞致兼浆。
现代文：于是纷纷倾尽家裹的财力向台使行贿。
English: As a result, they poured all their financial resources into bribing Taiwanese envoys.

古文：值今夕酒谐肉饫，即许附申赦格；明日礼轻货薄，便复不入恩科。
现代文：碰上今晚酒肴辔盛，台使就把他们列在可以赦免的名单上；明天礼轻物贱。便回覆说不能开恩。
English: Tonight, when the wine and food were plentiful, the emissary put them on the list of those who could be pardoned; tomorrow, when the gifts are cheap, they will reply that they cannot be forgiven.

古文：筐贡微阙，总棰挞肆情，风尘毁谤，随忿而发。
现代文：缺了一筐贡奉之物，即肆意鞭打，诋毁诽谤的流言，随着他的忿怒任意散发。
English: What was missing was a basket of tribute, that is, lashes, slanderous and defamatory gossip, to be distributed at will according to his anger.

古文：及其蒜转积，鹅栗渐盈，远则分鬻他境，近则托贸吏民。
现代文：等些猪鹅蒜栗一类物品越积越多，便拿到远处去卖，或就近托人卖给本地官吏百姓。
English: Some pigs, geese, garlic, chestnuts and other items are accumulating more and more, and they are taken to sell them far away, or they are entrusted to sell them to local officials and people.

古文：反请郡邑，助民由申缓，回刺言台，推信在所。
现代文：反来请求郡县，帮着下民乞求缓交赋税，郡县回覆台使，信任与否都由他好恶来定。
English: On the other hand, counties and prefectures ask counties and prefectures to help their citizens to delay the payment of taxes, and counties and prefectures reply to the envoy, and whether they trust him or not is determined by his likes and dislikes.

古文：如闻顷者令长守牧，离此每实，非复近岁。
现代文：听说近来令长守牧等地方官，离任时总是私囊饱满，也已不是近来的事了。
English: It is not a recent thing to hear that local officials, such as the recently appointed governor Shoumu, always leave office with their pockets full.

古文：愚谓凡诸检课，宜停遣使。密畿州郡，则指赐敕令，遥外镇宰，明下条源。既各奉别旨，人竞自罄。
现代文：愚臣以为大凡各种课敛，应该停止派遣台使征收，切近的王畿州郡，则直接下达敕令，边远的地域，明确颁布条律，既已各自奉行所领帝旨，人人自会争相尽力效命。
English: The foolish courtiers thought that they should stop sending emissaries to collect taxes, and directly issue imperial edicts to the nearby Wangqizhou County, and clearly promulgate rules and regulations to the outlying areas. Since they had already followed the imperial edict, everyone would compete to do their best.

古文：虽复台使盈凑，会取正属所办，徒相疑偾，反更淹懈。
现代文：而若台使派遣得很多，和郡县属共同办理，徒然相互心生疑虑把事情弄糟，反而更加松懈滞迟。
English: On the other hand, if Taiwan's envoys are dispatched in large numbers and handled jointly with the county and prefectural governments, mutual misgivings will be raised in vain to make things worse. Instead, there will be more slackness and delay.

古文：凡预衣冠，荷恩盛世，多以暗缓贻愆，少为欺猾入罪。
现代文：凡是入仕为官，在当今盛世承受皇恩的，多是由于昏昧迟缓而犯了过失，很少是因为奸猾欺诈犯罪。
English: All those who enter the service of officials and receive royal grace in today's prosperous times are mostly guilty of negligence due to drowsiness and slowness, and rarely because of treachery and fraud.

古文：若类以宰牧乖政，则触事难委，不容课逋上纲，偏觉非才。
现代文：那些人身为地方负责官员却玩忽职守，就凡事都难推卸责任，不能追缴逃避的赋税，自然被认为没有才干。
English: Those who are personally responsible for local officials but neglect their duties, find it difficult to shirk responsibility in everything, cannot recover evaded taxes, and are naturally considered incompetent.

古文：但赊促差降，各限一期，如乃事速应缓，自依违纠坐之。坐之之科，不必须重，但令必行，期在可肃。
现代文：衹须分别情况，对可延缓的、须紧促的、或可降减的，分别定下期限，像那事情急迫而办来延迟的，自当依照违背条律的罪名定罪，获罪的处置，不必过重，衹要令下一定执行，就可望肃清吏治。
English: The circumstances should be distinguished, and the time limit should be separately set for what can be delayed, what needs to be done urgently, or what can be reduced. If the matter is urgent and is delayed, it is appropriate to convict according to the crime of violating the rules, and the disposition of the crime should not be too heavy. If it is necessary to order certain execution, it is expected to clear the bureaucracy.

古文：且两装之船，充拟千绪；三坊寡役，呼订万计。
现代文：况且加倍装载的船只事情繁多；坊巷繁重的差役又千头万绪。
English: Moreover, there are a lot of things to do with double-loaded ships; there are also a lot of heavy-duty dispatchers.

古文：每一事之发，弥晨方办，粗计近远，率遣一部，职散人领，无减二十，舟船所资，皆复称是。
现代文：每因一事发遣，要经夜忙到早晨才能办好，粗略计算一下路程远近，便派遣人员押运，领头的及民夫等合在一起，总不下于二十。船只费用，也都是这样。
English: Whenever there was a dispatch due to a matter, it would take a busy night until the morning to get it done. After a rough calculation of the distance, they would send escort personnel, the leader and the people's servants, etc. together, always no less than twenty. The ship costs are also the same.

古文：长江万里，费固倍之。
现代文：长江行程漫长，费用更是加倍于此。
English: The trip on the Yangtze River is long and costs twice as much.

古文：较略一年，脱得省者，息船优役，实为不少。
现代文：一年之间，如果能够省免，停息船运让差役得些安闲，益处实在不少。
English: Over the course of a year, if it is possible to make savings and exemptions, and stop interest-free shipping so that dispatchers can have some leisure, the benefits are really quite a lot.

古文：兼折奸减窃，远近暂安。
现代文：并且可以消灭奸邪之事，使远近都得到暂时的安宁。
English: Moreover, it can eliminate treachery and evil, and bring temporary peace to both near and far.

古文：封闻喜县公，邑千五百户。
现代文：于是被封为闻喜县公，享受一千户的封邑。
English: As a result, he was made the lord of Wensi County and enjoyed the fiefdom of a thousand households.

古文：子良敦义爱古。
现代文：子良看重道义爱好古物。
English: Zilang values morality and loves antiques.

古文：郡民朱百年有至行，先卒，赐其妻米百斛，蠲一民给其薪苏。
现代文：本郡的朱百年有高尚的德行，死得早，就赐给他的妻子一百斛米，指派一个人为她提供柴草。
English: The county's Zhu Centenary had a noble virtue, died early, and gave his wife a hundred glutinous rice and assigned a person to provide firewood for her.

古文：郡阁下有虞翻旧床，罢任还，乃致以归。
现代文：郡署内有从前虞翻用的旧床，离任回乡时，便带回去。
English: There is an old bed in the county office that has been reused from the previous state, and when he returns to his hometown, he will take it back.

古文：后于西邸起古斋，多聚古人器服以充之。
现代文：后来在西邸造了一间古斋，聚藏了很多古人的器物。
English: Later, Xiao Ziliang built an antique restaurant in the West Mansion, and collected many ancient people's utensils and clothes and arranged them inside.

古文：夏禹庙盛有祷祀，子良曰： 禹泣辜表仁，菲食旌约，服玩果粽，足以致诚。 
现代文：夏禹庙裹祭祀的事很盛，子良说： 禹哀怜罪人表彰仁义之士，食用简单提倡节约，衹要用些服用所需的东西和果类粽子，就足以表达虔诚敬意了。 
English: There are many people praying in Xia Yu Temple, Xia Ziliang said: Dayu sympathizes with criminals and commends benevolent people, advocates simple diet and frugality, wears and plays with fruits, which is enough to express sincerity.

古文：使岁献扇簟而已。
现代文：让人衹是每年供奉纸扇和竹器盛的饭食而已。
English: So far, people have only offered a few bamboo curtains and bamboo seats each year.

古文：建元二年，穆妃薨，去官。
现代文：建元二年，穆妃薨，辞官。
English: In the 2nd year of the first year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Mu Huiqian was promoted to the post of secretary.

古文：仍为征虏将军、丹阳尹。
现代文：仍旧是征虏将军、丹阳尹。
English: Danyang Yin is still the conscript general.

古文：开私仓赈属县贫民。
现代文：打开自己的粮仓救济本县的贫民。
English: Open your own granary to help the county's poor.

古文：明年，上表曰： 京尹虽居都邑，而境壤兼跨，广袤周轮，几将千里。
现代文：第二年，就上表说： 京尹虽然是大都城，但地域广阔，范围将近千里。
English: In the second year, he said on the above table: Although Jing Yin is the capital city, it is a vast area with a range of nearly a thousand miles.

古文：萦原抱隰，其处甚多，旧遏古塘，非唯一所。
现代文：平原环绕，低地很多，古售池塘也不止一处。
English: It is surrounded by plains, with many lowlands and more than one ponds.

古文：而民贫业废，地利久芜。
现代文：而百姓贫苦农业荒废，土地久遭荒芜。
English: But the people are poor, agriculture is in ruins, and the land has long been desolate.

古文：近启遣五官殷沵、典签刘僧瑗到诸县循履，得丹阳、溧阳、永世等四县解，并村耆辞列，堪垦之田，合计荒熟有八千五百五十四顷；修治塘遏，可用十一万八千余夫，一春就功，便可成立。 
现代文：最近派遣了五官殷浦、典签刘僧瑗到各县去勘察，得到丹阳、溧阳、永世等四县并村庄长老的申报，可以耕种的田地，荒田熟地共计有八千五百五十四顷，整修池塘洼地，可以征用十一万八千余人，一个春天完工，很快就能办好。 
English: Recently, five officials from Yinpu and Liu Xiangyao, the signer of the edict, were sent to the counties to investigate, and obtained the declarations of the elders of four counties and villages including Danyang, Shenyang and Yongxing. There are a total of 8,554 hectares of fields that can be cultivated and wasteland, and more than 118,000 people can be requisitioned to renovate pond depressions. Completed in the spring, it can be done quickly.

古文：上纳之。
现代文：皇上接纳了这个建议。
English: The Emperor accepted their suggestion.

古文：会迁官，事寝。
现代文：又碰上改易官职，事情就搁下了。
English: When he was transferred to another post, the matter was shelved.

古文：是年，始制东宫官僚以下官敬子良。
现代文：这一年才开始规定束宫众官以下的官长都要敬事子良。
English: It was only in this year that it began to be stipulated that all officials below the officials of the imperial court should be respectful.

古文：世祖即位，封竟陵郡王，邑二千户。
现代文：世祖即位，封为竟陵郡王，赐给封邑二千户。
English: King Sejong ascended to the throne and was named King of Geungneung County. He gave 2,000 households in the county as fiefs.

古文：为使持节、都督南徐兖二州诸军事、镇北将军、南徐州刺史。
现代文：为使持节、都督南徐兖二州诸军事、镇北将军、南徐州刺史。
English: To celebrate the festival, the governor of South Xuzhou, the military of the two states, the general of Zhenbei, and the history of South Xuzhou.

古文：永明元年，徙为侍中、都督南兖兖徐青冀五州、征北将军、南兖州刺史，持节如故。
现代文：永明元年，改任侍中、都督南兖兖徐青冀五州、征北将军、南兖州刺史，仍为持节。
English: In the first year of the Yongming era, he was reappointed as a chamberlain, the governor of the five states of Nanxi, Xuqing and Hebei, the general of the Northern Expedition, and the historian of Nanxi, but he still held the title of Ji Jie.

古文：给油络车。
现代文：赐给油络车。
English: Kudos to the oil rig.

古文：明年，入为护军将军，兼司徒，领兵置佐，侍中如故。镇西州。
现代文：第二年，入朝为护军将军，兼司徒，领兵置佐，仍为侍中。镇西州。
English: In the second year, he entered the imperial court as a general of the escorting army, and also as an apprentice to the shogun, an assistant to the leader of the army, and still as a chamberlain.

古文：三年，给鼓吹一部。
现代文：永明三年，赏赐鼓吹一部。
English: In the third year of Yongming, he was awarded a prize for preaching.

古文：四年，进号车骑将军。
现代文：四年，进封车骑将军。
English: Four years later, he was promoted to General of the Cavalry.

古文：子良少有清尚，礼才好士，居不疑之地，倾意宾客，天下才学皆游集焉。
现代文：子良年轻时就有高洁志趣，礼遇有才能者喜好士子，居于没有疑忌的地位，竭诚以待宾客，天下有才学的人从各处聚集于此。
English: Xiao Ziliang, a young man, has a refined taste, treats the wise with courtesy, and loves the scribes. He is in a high position, and yearns for guests. The world's talented people have gathered here.

古文：善立胜事，夏月客至，为设瓜饮及甘果，著之文教。
现代文：善于做成快意胜事，夏季有客来，就为他们陈设瓜果饮料，在士林中传为美谈。
English: He is good at making happy things. When guests come in the summer, he sets out melon and fruit drinks for them, which is known as a beautiful talk in Shilin.

古文：士子文章及朝贵辞翰，皆发教撰录。
现代文：士人君子和朝廷显贵的文章诗作，都由子良为之辑录刊发。
English: The scholar's articles and the court noble's works were all found for them to copy down.

古文：是时上新亲政，水旱不时。
现代文：这时皇上刚刚执政，常有水旱灾害。
English: At this time, the emperor had just come to power, and there were frequent floods and droughts.

古文：子良密启曰：
现代文：子良私下启奏说：
English: Privately, Zira said:

古文：臣思水潦成患，良田沃壤变为污泽。农政告祥，因高肆务，播植既周，继以旱虐。
现代文：臣下想这水患猖獗，肥沃良田都变成了泥沼；司农官报告凶兆，因此更要重视正经大事，现在播种的事才完毕，又接连发生了旱灾。
English: The vassals thought that the flood was rampant, and the fertile fields had all turned into a quagmire; the agricultural officials reported bad omens, so they should pay more attention to serious matters. Now the sowing has just been completed, and droughts have occurred one after another.

古文：黔庶呼嗟，相视褫气。
现代文：老百姓痛呼怨叹，相互观望丧失了胆气。
English: The common people complained bitterly and lost their courage as they watched each other.

古文：夫国资于民，民资于食，匪食匪民，何以能政？
现代文：国家赖百姓存在，人民靠粮食生存，没有粮食和百姓，哪裹还谈得上政事?
English: The country relies on the people for its existence, the people survive on grain, without grain and people, how can we even talk about politics?

古文：臣每一念此，寝不便席。
现代文：臣下每次想到这些，连觉都睡不安稳。
English: Every time his vassals think about this, they can't sleep well.

古文：本始中，郡国大旱，宣帝下诏除民租。
现代文：本始年间，国内大旱，宣帝就颁布韶书免除民众租税。
English: At the beginning of this year, the country was in a severe drought, and Emperor Xuan issued an imperial edict exempting the people from paying taxes.

古文：今闻所在逋余尚多，守宰严期，兼夜课切，新税力尚无从，故调于何取给？
现代文：现在据说要追讨的欠税还有很多，郡县长官严定期限，日夜督促，新税尚且没有能力交纳，过去的旧账又从什么地方出呢。
English: Now, it is said that there are still a lot of tax arrears to be recovered. County magistrates have strict deadlines, and they are urging day and night. The new tax has not yet been able to be paid, and where did the old account come from?

古文：政当相驱为盗耳。
现代文：如此为政实在是驱使他们去做强盗了。
English: This kind of politics is actually driving them to become robbers.

古文：愚谓逋租宜皆原除，少降停恩，微纾民命。
现代文：愚臣以为应该废除原来的欠租，稍稍发布恩典，使民生暂时得到舒缓。
English: Foolish ministers thought that the original rent arrears should be abolished, and a little grace should be issued, so that the people's livelihood would be temporarily relieved.

古文：自宋道无章，王风陵替，窃官假号，骈门连室。
现代文：自从宋君无道，王朝混乱失序，窃取官职假造名号的，处处皆是。
English: Ever since the Song Dynasty lost its way, the dynasty has been chaotic and disorderly, and those who steal official positions and forge names are everywhere.

古文：今左民所检，动以万数，渐渍之来，非复始适，一朝洗正，理致沸腾。
现代文：现在左民曹官所检举的，动辄数以万计，是渐渐积累而来的，不是才开始出现，欲图在朝夕之间肃?旨改正，按道理会导致群情激愤。
English: The tens of thousands of cases reported by the left-wing magistrates are gradually accumulating, not just beginning to appear, and they want to make serious corrections between morning and evening, which will lead to public indignation.

古文：小人之心，罔思前恩，董之以威，反怨后罚。兽穷则触，事在匪轻。
现代文：小人的心地，是不会反省先前过失的，用威严对他加以督察，反要埋怨后来受到的刑罚，就像野兽无路可走便要撞人，这件事也不简单。
English: It is not easy for the heart of a small man to reflect on his previous misdeeds, to supervise them with dignity, but to complain about the punishment he received later, like a beast that has nowhere to go and wants to hit someone.

古文：齐有天下日浅，恩洽未布，一方或饥，当加优养。
现代文：齐王朝拥有天下日子不多，恩德还没有深入民心，某处发生饥荒，应当给予优待养息。
English: The days of the Qi Dynasty ruling the world are not long, the benevolence has not yet penetrated into the hearts of the people, famine has occurred somewhere, and preferential treatment and interest should be given.

古文：愚谓自可依源削除，未宜便充猥役。
现代文：愚臣以为可以照例减削免除，不应就发配做苦役。
English: Foolish ministers thought that they could be exempted from the reduction as usual, and should not be assigned to hard labor.

古文：且部曹检校，诚存精密；令史奸黠，鲜不容情。情既有私，理或枉谬。
现代文：况且部曹官查核检举，固然很是精确周密，而令史等长官奸猾狡黠，很少有不徇情枉法的既然有徇私情者，推想就有冤枉错谬的案例。
English: Moreover, although the investigation and prosecution by the sergeant-major is very precise and meticulous, the chiefs such as Shi are devious and cunning. There are very few cases that are not unfair. Since there are selfish people, there are cases of unfairness and fallacy.

古文：耳目有限，群狡无极。变易是非，居然可见。
现代文：耳目探查毕竟有限，群下狡诈却没个穷尽，使是非颠倒，清清楚楚可以明鉴。
English: After all, there are only a limited number of ears and eyes to detect, but there is no end to the cunning of the group, so that the rights and wrongs can be reversed and the lessons can be clearly learned.

古文：详而后取，于事未迟。
现代文：等掌握详情再下决定，也不算晚。
English: It's not too late to make a decision once you know the details.

古文：明诏深矜狱圄，恩文累坠。
现代文：知道皇上深怜牢狱罪人，恩典的韶文常有下达。
English: Knowing the Emperor's deep compassion for criminals in prison, letters of pardon were often issued.

古文：今科网严重，称为峻察。
现代文：现今法令森严，可称得上是严峻明察。
English: Nowadays, the laws and regulations are very strict, which can be said to be a severe inspection.

古文：负罪离愆，充积牢户。
现代文：犯罪被抓的人，充满了牢房。
English: The cells are full of people who have been arrested for crimes.

古文：暑时郁蒸，加以金铁。聚忧之气，足感天和。
现代文：暑天闷热如蒸，又要身戴枷锁，忧苦的怨气积聚，足以影响上天的和顺之德。
English: The hot weather is stifling hot, and you have to wear shackles, and the sorrowful resentment accumulates, which is enough to affect the harmony of heaven.

古文：民之多怨，非国福矣。
现代文：百姓多怨恨，不是国家的福分。
English: More resentment among the people is not a blessing for the country.

古文：顷土木之务，甚为殷广，虽役未及民，勤费已积。
现代文：近来上木工程非常盛大，虽然没有役使百姓，但劳苦耗费已很严重。
English: Recently, the timbering project has been very grand, although it has not helped the people, but the labor cost has been very serious.

古文：炎旱致灾，或由于此。
现代文：大旱成灾，或者是因为此事。
English: The drought has come, or is coming, because of this.

古文：皇明载远，书轨未一，缘淮带江，数州地耳。以魏方汉，犹一郡之譬，以今比古，复为远矣。
现代文：太乎盛世还远称不上，文字车制各异天下尚未统一，沿着长江、淮河一带，不过有几个州郡，拿魏国去比汉朝，尚且好比是汉的一个郡，拿当今来比古代，更加差得远了。
English: It is far too early to call it a prosperous era. The writing system of different countries has not yet been unified. Along the Yangtze River and the Huai River, however, there are several states and counties. Compared with the Han Dynasty, the Wei Dynasty is like a county of the Han Dynasty. Compared with ancient times, it is far worse today.

古文：何得不爱其民，缓其政，救其危，存其命哉？
现代文：凭什么能够不爱惜人民，放宽政事，挽救危难，使国家得以生存呢?
English: On what basis is it possible not to care about the people, to liberalize government affairs, to save the peril, and to enable the country to survive?

古文：湘区奥密，蛮寇炽强，如闻南师未能挫戮。
现代文：湘地深险隐秘，少数民族的强盗很猖獗，听说南下军队没有剿败他们。
English: The danger in Hunan is deep and secret. Robbers from ethnic minorities are rampant. I heard that the troops that went south did not defeat them.

古文：百姓齐民，积年涂炭，疽食侵淫，边虞方重。
现代文：平民百姓，长年生活困苦，祸患漫延累积，边远地区特别严重。
English: Ordinary people have been living in hardship for many years, and the scourge has been spreading and accumulating. The situation is particularly serious in remote areas.

古文：交州夐绝一垂，实惟荒服，恃远后宾，固亦恒事。
现代文：交州位于边陲绝地，实在是荒凉的地界，藉着辽远的名义后来朝见，也是常有的事。
English: Jiaozhou is located on the edge of the desert, it is really a desolate area, and it is common for people to see each other later in the morning with the name of Liaoyuan.

古文：自青德启运，款关受职，置之度外，不足絓言。
现代文：自从本朝兴起，外族前来通好受职，这,片地方算不了什么，根本不必放在心上。
English: Since the rise of this dynasty, foreigners have come here to get jobs. This is not a big deal. You don't have to worry about it at all.

古文：今县军远伐，经途万里，众寡事殊，客主势异，以逸待劳，全胜难必。
现代文：现在率军远去征讨，行程万里，与敌相比众寡悬殊，主客地位之势优劣明显，敌方以逸待劳，我军要获全胜是难以办到的。
English: Now I am leading an army to go far away to fight, the journey is thousands of miles, compared with the enemy, the number is few and far between, the advantages and disadvantages of the status of the host and guest are obvious, the enemy is lazy, and it is difficult for our army to win a complete victory.

古文：又缘道调兵，以足军力，民丁乌合，事乖习锐。
现代文：另外又沿途微调兵丁补充军力，民丁不过是乌合之众，不能战胜久经训练的敌人。
English: In addition, along the way, soldiers were fine-tuned to supplement military strength. The people were just a rabble and could not defeat the enemy who had been trained for a long time.

古文：广州积岁无年，越州兵粮素乏，加以发借，必致恇扰。
现代文：广州连年没有收成，越州向来缺少军粮，如果从这几处征调借用，肯定会导致恐惧慌乱。
English: Guangzhou has not had a harvest for years, and Yuezhou has always been short of military rations. If they were to borrow from these places, it would certainly lead to fear and panic.

古文：愚谓叔献所请，不宜听从；取乱侮亡，更俟后会。
现代文：愚臣以为叔献的请求，不可以接受；攻打乱军流民，还是等待以后的机会。
English: The foolish minister thought that his uncle's request could not be accepted; he would have to wait for a later opportunity to attack and disrupt the army and displaced people.

古文：虽缓岁月，必有可禽之理，差息发动费役之劳。
现代文：虽然日期延迟了，一定能够擒获敌军，稍稍停歇发动军兵的劳顿，减少费用和劳役。
English: Although the date is delayed, it will certainly be possible to capture the enemy troops, slightly stop the fatigue of the mobilized soldiers, and reduce the cost and labor.

古文：刘楷见甲以助湘中，威力既举，蚁寇自服。
现代文：刘楷以现成的军士在帮助湘中剿寇，军威已经大振，盗贼自会臣服。
English: Liu Kai is a ready-made sergeant to help Hunan repel the invaders. The military power has been greatly shaken, and the thieves will submit.

古文：诏折租布，二分取钱。
现代文：皇帝下诏命令将租布折价，朝廷取其十分之二。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict to reduce the rent cloth price, and the court took two-tenths of it.

古文：子良又启曰：臣一月入朝，六登玫陛，广殿稠人，裁奉颜色，纵有所怀，岂敢自达。
现代文：子良又上书奏请说：臣下一月之内，六次登上殿阶，殿中人数众多，都谨慎侍候皇上，纵然有什么想法，又哪敢擅自进言。
English: Ziliang wrote again, "Please say: Within the next month, six times the vassal ascended the steps of the palace. There are many people in the palace, and they are all carefully waiting for the emperor. Even if they have any ideas, how dare they speak without permission."

古文：比天眚亟见，地孽亟臻，民下妖讹，好生噂沓。
现代文：正赶上皇天屡不开恩，土地屡次作孽，百姓间妖言惑论，议论纷杂。
English: Just as the emperor is catching up, the heavens are repeatedly ungrateful, the land is repeatedly doing evil, the people are bewitched, and there are various discussions.

古文：谷价虽和，比室饥嗛；缣纩虽贱，骈门裸质。
现代文：尽管谷价很低，家家都挨饿；尽管丝絮很贱，人人都裸着身体。
English: Despite the low price of grain, everyone is starving; despite the low price of silk, everyone is naked.

古文：臣一念此，每入心骨。
现代文：臣下一想到这些，总是痛入心骨。
English: It is always painful for a vassal to think about this.

古文：三吴奥区，地惟河、辅，百度所资，罕不自出，宜在蠲优，使其全富。
现代文：三吴居处腹地，衹有河、辅两地，各种用度所依赖的，没有什么不是自己出产的，应该免除租税给予优待，使它能得富庶。
English: 3. In the hinterland of Wu where they live, including the rivers and the two auxiliary regions, there is nothing that they do not produce themselves, and they should be exempted from taxes and given preferential treatment so that they can become rich.

古文：而守宰相继，务在裒克，围桑品屋，以准赀课，致令斩树发瓦，以充重赋，破民财产，要利一时。
现代文：但是郡守执宰相继而来，衹是专事聚敛搜刮，围起桑林评定房屋等次，来完成缴纳赋税的数目。以致使人砍树卖瓦，凑足繁重的租税，使百姓破产，为己追求一时的利禄。
English: However, the county governors came one after another, and they were dedicated to collecting and raiding, surrounding the mulberry grove to evaluate the houses and so on, to complete the number of taxes paid. As a result, people were forced to cut down trees and sell tiles, to make up for the heavy taxes, to bankrupt the people, and to pursue a temporary reward for themselves.

古文：东郡使民，年无常限，在所相承，准令上直。
现代文：束郡役使百姓，一年中没有固定的期限，往往相继征调用人，以完成上司给的任务。
English: County officials do not have a fixed deadline for the year, and they often conscript people one after another to complete the tasks given by their superiors.

古文：每至州台使命，切求悬急，应充猥役，必由穷困。
现代文：每每到了州郡长官及台使发下差使，征求十分急迫，便调拨去做繁杂的劳役，所以弄得很穷困。
English: Every time the state and county governors and the Taiwanese envoys sent envoys, the request was very urgent, and they were assigned to do complex labor, so they were very poor.

古文：乃有畏失严期，自残躯命；亦有斩绝手足，以避徭役。
现代文：于是就有人害怕错过苛刻的期限而得罪，便自杀自残，也有斩断手足以逃避徭役的。
English: As a result, some people commit suicide or self-harm out of fear of missing the strict deadline, while others cut off their hands in order to escape punishment.

古文：生育弗起，殆为恒事。
现代文：不能够繁衍生息，也是很平常的事。
English: Not being able to reproduce is also very common.

古文：守长不务先富民而唯言益国，岂有民贫于下，而国富于上邪？
现代文：郡县长官不力求使百姓先富足，却衹说什么国家利益，难道会有下面百姓贫困，国家却得富强的事吗?
English: County magistrates do not strive to make the people rich first, but talk about what the national interest is. Will there be a situation where the people below are poor, but the country is rich and strong?

古文：又泉铸岁远，类多剪凿，江东大钱，十不一在。
现代文：又钱币铸成已久，大抵都毁损不堪，江东的大钱，存下的不到十分之一。
English: In addition, coins have been minted for a long time, and most of them are damaged beyond repair. Less than one-tenth of the big money in Jiangdong has been saved.

古文：公家所受，必须轮郭完全，遂买本一千，加子七百，犹求请无地，棰革相继。
现代文：官府收钱，一定要边缘完整的，于是旧钱收进时本价一千的，再加收七百，还是无处求请，衹连用鞭打逼迫。
English: When the government collects money, the edges must be complete. Therefore, when the old money is collected, the original price of one thousand will be increased by seven hundred. There is still nowhere to ask for help, and Qilian is forced to use whipping.

古文：寻完者为用，既不兼两，回复迁贸，会非委积，徒令小民每婴困苦。
现代文：寻找完整的钱币才能使用，既然不再实行钱帛各芈的制度，又须辗转变卖，碰上行情不好则堆积难售，凭白使老百姓遭受困苦。
English: It is necessary to look for complete coins before they can be used, and since the system of money changing hands is no longer implemented, they must be changed and sold, and when the market is not good, they are piled up and difficult to sell, causing the people to suffer.

古文：且钱帛相半，为制永久，或闻长宰须令输直，进违旧科，退容奸利。
现代文：钱帛各交一半，是历来的制度，听说郡县长官一定要求交纳钱币，在上违背了过去的制度，在下又助长了奸人谋利。
English: The system of paying half of the money to each of the officials is the traditional system. I heard that the county magistrate must require the payment of coins, which violates the previous system on the top, and promotes the profiteering of swindlers on the bottom.

古文：八属近县，既在京畿，发借征调，实烦他邑。民特尤贫，连年失稔，草衣藿食，稍有流亡。
现代文：近旁的八个属县，紧邻着京城，发借粮草征调赋税，实在是烦难其他地方，百姓特别的贫困，连年没有收成，穿草衣吃粗食，有的还流亡他乡。
English: The eight nearby counties, immediately adjacent to the capital city, have to borrow grain and grass, levy and adjust taxes, which is really troublesome. In other places, the people are particularly poor, have no harvest for years, wear grass clothes and eat coarse food, and some have fled to other towns.

古文：今农政就兴，宜蒙赈给；若逋课未上，许以申原。
现代文：现在农业正始发动，应该给予救济，如果欠租尚未交上，准许其申辩理由。
English: Now that the agricultural sector is starting up, relief should be given. If rent arrears have not been paid, they should be allowed to plead their case.

古文：兖豫二藩，虽曰旧镇，往属兵虞，累弃乡土。
现代文：兖、豫两州，虽说自古以来就是一方大镇，过去屡遭战事，土地都废弃了。
English: Although the two provinces of Handan and Henan have been one big town since ancient times, they have been repeatedly affected by wars in the past, and the land has been abandoned.

古文：密迩寇庭，下无安志。
现代文：盗贼时时劫掠家室，民众不得安居。
English: Thieves are constantly robbing homes, and people cannot live in peace.

古文：编草结庵，不违凉暑。扶准聚洛，靡有生向。
现代文：编草搭成草屋，难避寒暑；沿着淮河聚居，简直没有活路。
English: Weaving grass and building grass huts, it is difficult to avoid the cold and heat; living together along the Huai River, there is simply no way out.

古文：俱禀人灵，独绝温饱，而赋敛多少，尚均沃实。
现代文：同样是托生为人，他们却和温饱无缘，而赋税收取的多少，却与土地肥沃，物产丰富的地区等同。
English: They are also dependent on others for their livelihood, but they have no chance of having enough to eat and drink, while the amount of taxes collected is the same as that of regions with fertile land and rich products.

古文：谓凡在荒民，应加蠲减。
现代文：我以为对荒年的民众，应当减免税收。
English: I thought that tax relief should be given to the people in the lean years.

古文：又司市之要，自昔所难。
现代文：又司市造一职位紧要，向来是难以担当的。
English: It is also important to create a position in the city government, which has always been difficult to handle.

古文：顷来此役，不由才举，并条其重赀，许以贾衒。
现代文：近来这件事，不是因才能举荐，一并列举其财货，许给炫卖财富的人。
English: Lately, it's not so much a matter of recommending talent, but of listing the goods and services available to those who flaunt their wealth.

古文：前人增估求侠，后人加税请代，如此轮回，终何纪极？
现代文：前任增高物价以追求侠义之名，后任便添加税目以接续前者，如此循环，到什么地步才能了结?
English: The predecessor increased prices in the name of chivalry, the successor added tax items to continue the former, and so on. To what extent can this cycle be ended?

古文：兼复交关津要，共相唇齿，愚野未闲，必加陵诳，罪无大小，横没赀载。
现代文：并且交通往来枢要之地，相互之间唇齿相依，乡野愚民不通世故，肯定会被欺诈，罪过不论大小，财物一律横加没收。
English: Moreover, it is an important transportation hub, and the lips and teeth of each other are interdependent. The rural fools are not well-versed in the world, and they will certainly be cheated. Regardless of the size of the crime, all property will be confiscated.

古文：凡求试谷帛，类非廉谨，未解在事所以开容？
现代文：凡是请求任掌管谷帛之职的，大抵不是廉洁勤谨的，我不知道为什么对此开脱相容?
English: I don't know why anyone who asks to be in charge of Gu Yao's position is usually not honest and diligent. Is that excusable?

古文：夫狱讼惟平，画一在制。虽恩家得罪，必宜申宪；鼎姓贻愆，最合从纲。
现代文：诉讼争执惟求道理公平，制度应平等划一，即使恩人犯罪，也必须绳之以法，显贵大族有罪，更应该纳入法纲。
English: Litigation disputes only seek reason and fairness, and the system should be equal and uniform. Even if a benefactor commits a crime, he must be brought to justice. If a prominent person is guilty, it should be included in the legal framework.

古文：若罚典惟加贱下，辟书必蠲世族，惧非先王立理之本。
现代文：如果惩罚的规定衹用在卑贱下民身上，而征召的文书总是赦免世家豪族，恐怕不是先王立下法理的本意。
English: If the provisions of punishment are applied to the lowly people, and the conscription document always pardons the powerful families, it is probably not the original intention of the first king to establish the law.

古文：尚书列曹，上应乾象。
现代文：尚书省的各个机构，上舆天象相应。
English: The various institutions of Shangshu Province, Shangshu Tianxiang correspondingly.

古文：如闻命议所出，先谘于都，都既下意，然后付郎，谨写关行。
现代文：听说命令奏议的拟定，先向左右司征寻意见，左右司同意，再交给郎官，谨慎撰写执行。
English: It is said that the drafting of the order motion should first solicit opinions from the left and right divisions, the left and right divisions should agree, and then it should be handed over to the vassal, and it should be carefully written and implemented.

古文：愚谓郎官尤宜推择。
现代文：愚臣以为对郎官尤其要严格选拔。
English: The foolish vassal thought that the vassal should be selected strictly.

古文：宋运告终，戎车屡驾，寄名军牒，动窃数等。
现代文：宋王朝运数告终，多次进行征战，投军寄名的人，动辄窃取到数等官爵。
English: After the Song Dynasty ended, many wars were waged, and those who sent their names to join the army often stole the titles of several officials.

古文：故非分充朝，资奉殷积。
现代文：所以非分得官的充斥朝廷，支取的俸薪累积起来很多。
English: As a result, the imperial court was full of non-assigned officials, and the salaries they received accumulated a lot.

古文：广、越邦宰，梁、益郡邑，参差调补，实允事机。
现代文：广、越、梁、益等州郡的长官，反复调补杂乱参差，以求满足政事的需要。
English: The governors of Guang, Yue, Liang, Yixi and other prefectures and counties have repeatedly adjusted the chaotic and uneven situation in order to meet the needs of political affairs.

古文：且此徒冗杂，罕遵王宪，严加廉视，随违弹斥，一二年间，可减太半。
现代文：这样的官僚繁多杂乱，且很少遵从王法行事，对之可以严格查处，有违于廉政的就随时弹劾斥逐，一二年内，可以减去大半冗员。
English: Such bureaucrats are complex and disorderly, and rarely act in accordance with the royal law. They can be strictly investigated and dealt with. If they violate the integrity of the government, they can be impeached and expelled at any time. Within one or two years, most of the redundant personnel can be reduced.

古文：五年，正位司徒，给班剑二十人，侍中如故。
现代文：永明五年，任司徒之位，赐给班剑仪仗队二十人，仍旧是侍中。
English: In the fifth year of Yongming, he served as an attendant, and was assigned to twenty honor guards, but his position as an attendant was still the same.

古文：移居鸡笼山邸，集学士抄《五经》、百家，依《皇览》例为《四部要略》千卷。
现代文：迁居到鸡笼山的宅院，罗致学者抄写《五经》、诸子百家，依照《皇览》的体例撰成《四部要略》一千卷。
English: After moving to a mansion on Mt. Chicken Cage, Luo invited scholars to copy the "Five Classics" and hundreds of schools, and compiled a thousand volumes of "Outlines of the Four Sections" according to the style of the "Imperial Review."

古文：招致名僧，讲语佛法，造经呗新声。道俗之盛，江左未有也。
现代文：招来名僧，讲解辩论佛法，推动佛经梵咀的新声名，在道俗问盛行一时，是江束未曾有过的。
English: Inviting famous monks, explaining and debating Buddhism, and promoting the new fame of the Buddhist scripture, Van Tui, was unprecedented in Jiangsu when Taoism and Confucianism were popular.

古文：世祖好射雉，子良谏曰：銮举亟动，天跸屡巡，陵犯风烟，驱驰野泽。
现代文：世祖喜好猎取野鸡，子良规劝说：皇上的车驾屡次出行，冒着风尘寒暑，在野地裹驱逐奔驰。
English: The ancestor of the world liked to hunt pheasants, and Ziliang persuaded him: the emperor's chauffeur repeatedly traveled, braved the wind, cold and heat, and drove the Mercedes in the field.

古文：万乘至重，一羽甚微。
现代文：皇上万乘之躯无比尊贵，野鸡的羽毛却是多么轻微。
English: The body of the Emperor Ten Thousand Buddhas is incomparably noble, but the feathers of a pheasant are so light.

古文：从甚微之欢，忽至重之诫。
现代文：为了求得如此微不足道的快意，而忽视了至为尊贵的您的安危警诫。
English: For the sake of such trifling pleasures, they have ignored Your Most Exalted injunctions of safety.

古文：顷郊郛以外，科禁严重，匪直刍牧事罢，遂乃窀掩殆废。
现代文：近来都城郊外，定下重重严禁的条律，并不到砍柴放牧均已完结的季节，竟然就已经掩埋芜败几乎都荒废了。
English: Recently, in the suburbs of the capital, a series of strictly prohibited regulations have been set, and it is not until the season of cutting firewood and grazing has ended that the devastation has been buried and almost all abandoned.

古文：且田月向登，桑时告至，士女呼嗟，易生噂议，弃民从欲，理未可安。
现代文：况且田中谷物快要成熟，采桑养蚕的时候也到了，男女人众呼告埋怨，很容易造成不好的舆论，抛下百姓的甘苦而一味随从自己的意愿，在道理上也难以心安。
English: Moreover, the Tanaka cereals are about to mature, the time for harvesting mulberries and raising silkworms has come, men and women are complaining, it is easy to cause bad public opinion, leaving the people's sweetness and bitterness and blindly following their own wishes, and it is difficult to have peace of mind.

古文：曩时巡幸，必尽威防，领军景先、詹事赤斧坚甲利兵，左右屯卫。
现代文：从前巡察出游，必定竭力设防护卫，领军景先、詹事赤斧等将官身穿坚硬的甲胄手持锐利的武器，在左右守卫。
English: In the past, when inspectors went on a tour, they would do their best to set up guards. The leaders of the army, such as Jian Zhi Chiaxing, would wear hard armor and hold sharp weapons, guarding on the left and right.

古文：今驰鹜外野，交侍疏阔，晨出晚还，顿遗清道，此实愚臣最所震迫。
现代文：如今在野外奔驰，侍从疏散，又早出晚归，清除道路有失严密，这实在是最让愚臣恐惧担忧的。
English: Now they are galloping in the open, the attendants are evacuating, they are leaving early and returning late, and the roads are not properly cleared. This is what really worries the foolish.

古文：狡虏玩威，甫获款关，二汉全富，犹加曲待。
现代文：狡诈的敌人逞示军威，刚刚攻破关防，二汉国势盛大，尚且要委曲求全好生对待。
English: The cunning enemy is showing off its military might, has just broken through the barrier, and the two Han states are in a grand position, and yet it must be treated well.

古文：如闻使臣频亦怨望，前会东宫，遂形言色。
现代文：现在听说使臣常常抱怨，前次在束宫聚会，就在言辞神色间表现了出来。
English: Now I've heard that envoys often complain, and the last time they gathered at Sokogu, they showed it in their words and facial expressions.

古文：昔宋氏遣使，旧列阶下，刘缵衔使，始登朝殿。
现代文：从前宋朝派遣使臣，是站在台阶下的，刘缀领受出使的使命，才开始登上殿堂。
English: The envoys dispatched from the former Song Dynasty stood at the foot of the steps. It was only after Liu Zhen received the mission of the envoy that he began to ascend the hall of fame.

古文：今既反命，宜赐优礼。
现代文：现在他们既然已经完成使命前来回报，应该给予优待和礼遇。
English: Now that they have fulfilled their mission, they should reciprocate by giving preferential treatment and courtesy.

古文：伏谓中堂云构，实惟峻绝，檐陛深严，事隔凉暑，而别为一室，如或有疑。
现代文：臣以为皇宫高大壮丽，实在是高峻无比，屑檐重阶深广庄严，可以隔断寒暑，而要另外营造宫室，应该有所疑虑。
English: The courtiers thought that the imperial palace was tall and magnificent, it was really incomparably high, deep, wide and solemn, it could cut off the cold and heat, but if they wanted to build another palace room, they should have doubts.

古文：边带广途，讹言孔炽，毁立之易，过于转圆，若依旧制通敞，实允观听。
现代文：边界和内地，谣言都很兴盛，毁名立名非常容易，比转动圆环还要简单，如果依照旧的制度使宫室通达宽广，实在有益于教化。
English: Both at the border and in the interior, rumours are rife. It is very easy to ruin one's reputation. It is even simpler than turning a circle. If, in accordance with the old system, access to the palace is made wider, it will really be beneficial to enlightenment.

古文：顷市司驱扇，租估过刻，吹毛求瑕，廉察相继，被以小罪，责以重备。
现代文：近来司市煽动市情，租价过于苛刻，吹毛求疵，连着勘察查访，仅以小罪，就严加责备。
English: Recently, the city instigated the market situation, the rental price was too harsh, the fault-finding, coupled with the investigation and inspection, only with a petty crime, it was severely reproached.

古文：愚谓宜敕有司，更详优格。
现代文：愚臣以为应诏命有司官吏，重新审察可以宽待的一类。
English: The foolish minister thought that there were magistrates in response to the imperial edict, and the re-examination was a kind of leniency.

古文：臣年方朝贤，齿未相及，以管窥天，犹知失得，廊庙之士，岂暗是非？
现代文：臣子年纪刚与朝臣相仿，岁数可能还不及他们，以管窥天，见闻狭窄，尚且稍知政事得失，朝廷上的大臣，难道不懂得是非?
English: The courtier is just as old as the courtiers, and may not be as old as them, so as to spy on the heavens, see the narrow, and even know a little about the political gains and losses, the minister at the court, do not understand right and wrong?

古文：未闻一人开一说为陛下忧国家，非但面从，亦畏威耳。
现代文：但没听说有一个人进言为陛下操心国家大事，不仅是因为表面顺从，也是敬畏天威的缘故。
English: However, I have not heard of a single person who is concerned about the affairs of state on behalf of His Majesty, not only because of his apparent obedience, but also because of his reverence for the Almighty.

古文：臣若不启，陛下于何闻之？
现代文：如果臣下不启奏皇上，陛下哪裹能够听得到呢?
English: If the vassals do not play for the Emperor, how will His Majesty be able to listen?

古文：先是六年，左卫、殿中将军邯郸超上书谏射雉，世祖为止。
现代文：在此六年前，左卫、殿中将军邯郸超上书谏止射猎野鸡，世祖为此停止了打猎。
English: Six years before this, the left guard and the general of the palace, 超上書, stopped shooting pheasants, and the founder stopped hunting for this reason.

古文：久之，超竟被诛。
现代文：过了许久，邯郸超竟然被杀掉了。
English: After a long time, Gong Chao was actually killed.

古文：永明末，上将射雉。子良谏曰：
现代文：丞塱末年，皇上将要去射猎野鸡，子良规劝说：
English: In the last years of the Joseon Dynasty, the emperor wanted to go pheasant shooting. Ziliang persuaded him:

古文：忽闻外议，伏承当更射雉。
现代文：忽然听见外廷议论，想是又要去射猎野鶸。
English: Suddenly, I heard the discussion outside the court, and I thought I was going to go shoot wild mink again.

古文：臣下情震越，心怀忧悚，犹谓疑妄，事不必然。
现代文：愚臣心裹感到震惊和忧虑，还以为是自己多心，事情不一定是逭样。
English: The follower was shocked and worried, and thought that he was being overcautious and that things were not necessarily wrong.

古文：伏度陛下以信心明照，所以倾金宝于禅灵，仁爱广洽，得使禽鱼养命于江泽，岂惟国庆民欢，乃以翱翔治乐。
现代文：我想陛下诚信之心明照天下，所以多施金钱实物给，仁爱的德性遍布于世间，能够使飞禽和游鱼都各居其所，何止是国家安泰百姓欢乐，天下治平的景象乃至达于禽兽。
English: I think that the sincerity of His Majesty's heart shines brightly in the world. Therefore, more money is given in kind, and the virtue of benevolence is spread all over the world. It can make birds and fish live in their own places, and more than that, it can make the people of the country safe and happy, and even bring peace to the world and even to the animals.

古文：夫卫生保命，人兽不殊；重躯爱体，彼我无异。
现代文：想要保全生命，人和兽都是一样；爱惜身体，彼此也没有什么不同。
English: To preserve life, man and beast are alike; to cherish the body, there is no difference between them.

古文：故《礼》云： 闻其声不食其肉，见其生不忍其死。 
现代文：所以《礼》经上说 听见它的声音就不吃它的肉，看见它活生生的样子就不忍心把它弄死 。
English: Therefore, the "Ritual" says that if you hear its sound, you should not eat its meat, and if you see it alive, you should not kill it.

古文：且万乘之尊，降同匹夫之乐，夭杀无辜，伤仁害福之本。
现代文：况且以您帝王的尊贵，屈尊降格至于与平民一样游乐，残杀无辜的生灵，有伤您的仁德有碍于您的福分。
English: Moreover, to take the dignity of your emperor, to condescend and demean, to enjoy the same pleasures as commoners, to kill innocent beings, to hurt your benevolence is to hinder your happiness.

古文：菩萨不杀，寿命得长。
现代文：菩萨不杀生，才能够长寿。
English: A bodhisattva does not kill before he can live a long life.

古文：施物安乐，自无恐怖。不恼众生，身无患苦。
现代文：使生物各得安乐，自然就没什么值得恐惧的了；不烦扰众生，身体便无病无灾。
English: When all living beings are at ease, there will naturally be nothing to fear; when there is no disturbance to sentient beings, there will be no illness or harm to the body.

古文：臣见功德有此果报，所以日夜劬勤，厉身奉法，实愿圣躬康御若此。
现代文：臣子看见做功德有这样的因果报应，所以日夜勤勤恳恳，修身奉行佛法，实在诚愿陛下圣体也如此康健。
English: Seeing that there is such a karmic retribution for doing meritorious deeds, the courtiers worked diligently day and night to cultivate themselves and practice Buddhism. I sincerely hope that His Majesty's sacred body will also be so healthy.

古文：每至寝梦，脱有异见，不觉身心立就沄烂。
现代文：每每睡下做梦，倘或梦见什么异常景象，不觉身心都顿时焦灼如焚。
English: Every time I fall asleep and have a dream, if I dream of some abnormal scene, my mind and body are suddenly on fire.

古文：陛下常日舍财修福，臣私心颙颙，尚恨其少，岂可今日有见此事？
现代文：陛下平常捐舍财物求福，臣下心中仰慕，尚且遗憾以为捐舍太少，怎么可以今天又看见射猎这宗事呢?
English: Your Majesty usually donates his wealth and property for the welfare of his subjects, and his subjects look up to him. Even though they regret that the donation is too small, how can they see the shooting today?

古文：一损福业，追悔便难。
现代文：一旦损害了福分，再追悔也来不及了。
English: Once you damage your good fortune, it's too late to repent.

古文：臣此启闻，私心实切。
现代文：臣下启奏这些，心中实在出于真切之意。
English: The vassals sang these words with sincerity in their hearts.

古文：若是大事，不可易改，亦愿陛下照臣此诚，曲垂三思；况此嬉游之间，非关当否，而动辄伤生，实可深慎！
现代文：如果是一桩大事，不能更改，也希望陛下明察臣子忠诚之心，对此三思，何况这是游戏的事，谈不上是否适当，却动不动要伤害生灵，实在应该十分审慎。
English: If it is an important matter that cannot be changed, I also hope that His Majesty will examine the loyalty of his ministers and think twice about it. Moreover, this is a game, and it is not appropriate to talk about it, but it should be very prudent to harm living beings at every turn.

古文：臣闻子孝奉君，臣忠事主，莫不灵祇通感，征祥证登。
现代文：臣下听说孝子侍奉父亲，忠臣事奉君主，没有不感动神灵，显现祥瑞征兆的。
English: Subjects have heard that filial sons serve their fathers, loyal subjects serve the monarch, and there is no one who does not move the gods and show signs of auspiciousness.

古文：臣近段仰启，赐希受戒，天心洞远，诚未达胜善之途，而圣恩迟疑，尚未垂履曲降尊极，岂可今月复随此事？
现代文：臣下近来上奏此事，希望圣上稍稍警戒，天心能洞察幽远，实在还没有达到美善地步，而圣恩犹疑不定，尚未能降尊而采纳实行，怎么可以现在重又做起这事呢?
English: My subjects have recently brought this matter to my attention, and I hope that the Holy Father will be a little more vigilant, and that the Heavenly Heart will be able to see into the distance. It is true that we have not yet reached the stage of goodness, and the Holy Grail is hesitant, and we have not yet been able to lower our esteem and adopt and implement it. How can we start this again now?

古文：臣不隐心，即实上启。
现代文：臣下不隐藏心事，以实情上告。
English: Subordinates do not hide their feelings and appeal with the truth.

古文：虽不尽纳，而深见宠爱。
现代文：虽然没有全被采纳，但是很受皇上恩宠。
English: Although not all of them were accepted, they were greatly favored by the emperor.

古文：又与文惠太子同好释氏，甚相友悌。
现代文：又和文惠太子共同爱好佛教，非常友好。
English: He also shares a love of Buddhism with Prince Wen Hui, and they are very friendly.

古文：子良敬信尤笃，数于邸园营斋戒，大集朝臣众僧，至于赋食行水，或躬亲其事，世颇以为失宰相体。
现代文：子良敬信佛法特别心诚，屡次在宅园里举办斋戒活动，召集许多朝臣和名僧，舍给食物并用水洁身以祈佛，有时还亲自做这些事，世人都觉得有失宰相身份。
English: Ziliang was a particularly sincere believer in Buddhism. He repeatedly held fasting activities in his garden, gathered many courtiers and famous monks, gave out food and purified himself with water to pray to Buddha, and sometimes did these things himself. People all over the world felt that he had lost his status as prime minister.

古文：劝人为善，未尝厌倦，以此终致盛名。
现代文：劝人行善事，从不厌倦，因此终于享有盛名。
English: He never tired of exhorting people to do good deeds, and eventually became famous for it.

古文：寻代王俭领国子祭酒，辞不拜。
现代文：不久代替士俭领国子祭酒，推辞不受。
English: Soon, he replaced Shijian as the leader of the national son's sacrificial wine, and was not rejected.

古文：八年，给三望车。
现代文：永明八年，赐给三望车。
English: In the eighth year of the Yongming era, he was assigned to Sanwang Car.

古文：九年，京邑大水，吴兴偏剧，子良开仓赈救，贫病不能立者于第北立廨收养，给衣及药。
现代文：九年，京都发大水，吴兴一带特别严重，子良打开粮仓救济灾民，贫困有病不能活命的在宅第北面设立官舍收养他们，供给衣食和药物。
English: In the ninth year, when there was a big flood in Kyoto, and the Wuxing area was particularly serious, Ziliang opened the granary to help the victims. The poor and the sick who could not survive were taken in by setting up an official residence on the north side of the house to provide food, clothing and medicine.

古文：十年，领尚书令。
现代文：十年，领尚书令。
English: Ten years later, he received a letter of appointment.

古文：寻为使持节、都督扬州诸军事、扬州刺史，本官如故。
现代文：不久为使持节、都督扬州诸军事、扬州刺史，本官依旧。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as Yangzhou Military Governor, Yangzhou Military Historian, Yangzhou Military Governor, Yangzhou Military Historian, and Yangzhou Military Governor.

古文：寻解尚书令，加中书监。
现代文：不久又解除尚书令，加中书监。
English: Soon after, he dismissed Shang Shuling and appointed him as the Central Supervisor of Chinese Books.

古文：文惠太子薨，世祖检行东宫，见太子服御羽仪，多过制度，上大怒。以子良与太子善，不启闻，颇加嫌责。
现代文：文惠太子薨，世祖检视束宫，看见太子的服饰车马仪仗，大多僭越制度，皇上非常生气，因为子良和太子交好，却没有上报，对子良也嫌忌责备。
English: When Wen Hui, the prince's father-in-law, inspected the palace, he saw that the prince's clothes, chariots and horses were ceremonial, and most of them were beyond the system. The emperor was very angry, because Ziliang and the prince were friends, but they did not report it, and they did not want to blame Ziliang.

古文：世祖不豫，诏子良甲仗入延昌殿侍医药。
现代文：世祖有病，诏令子良带着披甲执仗的卫士进延昌殿侍候医药杂事。
English: The founder of the dynasty was ill, and the emperor ordered Ziliang to take the armor-clad guards into the Yanchang Palace to attend to medical and other matters.

古文：子良启进沙门于殿户前诵经，世祖为感梦见优昙钵华。子良按佛经宣旨使御府以铜为华，插御床四角。
现代文：子良上奏进献佛徒在大殿前诵经，世祖有感应而梦见无花果开花，子良按照佛经下令让御府制成铜花，插在御床的四角。
English: Kira played the oboe and the Buddhist devotees chanted sutras in front of the main hall. The ancestor was inspired and dreamed of figs in bloom. Kira, in accordance with the Buddhist scriptures, ordered the imperial palace to be made of copper flowers and inserted in the four corners of the imperial bed.

古文：日夜在殿内，太孙间日入参承。
现代文：日夜守候殿中，太孙闲暇之曰入殿参拜。
English: During the day and night vigil at the shrine, the great-grandson visits the shrine in his spare time.

古文：世祖暴渐，内外惶惧，百僚皆已变服，物议疑立子良，俄顷而苏，问太孙所在，因召东宫器甲皆入。
现代文：世祖的病突然加剧，宫廷内外都惊惶忧惧，百官都已经改变服饰，众人议论怀疑要立于良为帝，一会儿皇上清醒过来，问太孙在哪裹，于是召东宫带器物甲士一同入殿。
English: The Emperor's illness suddenly worsened, both inside and outside the court were alarmed and worried, all the officials had changed their clothes, and everyone was discussing and doubting whether to make Yu Liang emperor. After a while, the Emperor came to his senses and asked where his great-grandson was, so he called the East Palace to enter the hall with the armor bearer.

古文：遗诏使子良辅政，高宗知尚书事。
现代文：遣韶让子良辅佐政事，高宗萧鸾知尚书事。
English: He sent his son, Janzi Ryosuke, to assist in political affairs, and Gao Zong, Xiao Yao, to assist in bookkeeping.

古文：子良素仁厚，不乐世务，乃推高宗。
现代文：子良向来仁德淳厚，不喜管理世务，就一齐推给高宗。
English: Ziliang had always been a benevolent and honest person, but he did not like to manage the affairs of the world, so they all recommended him to Gao Zong.

古文：诏云： 事无大小，悉与鸾参怀。 子良所志也。
现代文：诏令所说的 不论大事小情，都和萧鸾共同参酌 ，就是子良的意见。
English: What the edict said was that no matter how big or small the matter, Xiao Yao and I would discuss it together, which was Ziliang's opinion.

古文：太孙少养于子良妃袁氏，甚著慈爱，既惧前不得立，自此深忌子良。
现代文：太孙幼时由于良的妃子袁氏抚养，对之非常慈祥宠爱，既因前次担心不得立为帝，从此对于良非常忌惮。
English: When the great-grandson was a child, he was raised by the Yuan family, who were very kind to him and loved him very much. Since he was worried that he would not be able to become emperor the last time, he was very wary of Ryo.

古文：太行出太极殿，子良居中书省，帝使虎贲中郎将潘敞领二百人仗屯太极西阶防之。
现代文：为先帝发丧出太极殿，子良在中书省，皇上使虎贲中郎将潘敞领二百人驻守在太极西侧防备。
English: For the former emperor's funeral, the Taiji Hall was sent out, Zira was in the Chinese Literature Department, and the emperor asked the Vice-Minister of the State Council to guard the west side of the Taiji with two hundred people.

古文：成服后，诸王皆出，子良乞停至山陵，不许。
现代文：大殓成服后，诸王都出来了，子良要求留下守山陵，未得准许。
English: After putting on mourning clothes, all the kings went out. Xiao Ziliang asked to stay in front of the coffin, but was not allowed.

古文：进位太傅，增班剑为三十人，本官如故。
现代文：进位为太傅，增加班剑仪仗至三十人，本官依旧。
English: He was promoted to taifu, and the number of players in the ceremonial banjo battle was increased to thirty, but his position remained the same.

古文：解侍中。
现代文：解除侍中之职。
English: Resigned from the post of chamberlain.

古文：隆昌元年，加殊礼，剑履上殿，入朝不趋，赞拜不名。
现代文：隆昌元年，给予特别的礼遇，准许佩剑着履上殿，入朝不必行趋礼，赞拜行礼时不须称名。
English: In the first year of the Longchang era, he was given a special courtesy, allowing him to enter the palace with a sword. He did not have to make a bow when entering the palace, and he did not have to say his name when making a bow.

古文：进督南徐州。
现代文：进督南徐州。
English: He was appointed governor of South Xuzhou.

古文：其年疾笃，谓左右曰： 门外应有异。 
现代文：这一年病重，对侍从左右的人说： 门外应当有不寻常的事。 
English: He was very ill this year, and said to people around him: There should be abnormal conditions outside the door.

古文：遣人视，见淮中鱼万数，皆浮出水上向城门。
现代文：派人去看，见淮河裹有数万条鱼，都浮出水面朝向城门。
English: They sent someone to look, and saw tens of thousands of fish in the Huai River, all of which floated out of the water towards the city gate.

古文：寻薨，时年三十五。
现代文：不久去世，当时三十五岁。
English: He died shortly afterwards, aged 35.

古文：帝常虑子良有异志，及薨，甚悦，诏给东园温明秘器，敛以衮冕之服。
现代文：皇上常常担心子良有谋反企图，等他死了，很是高兴。下诏赐给束园温明葬器，用衮冕的服制装殓。
English: The emperor was often worried that Ziliang was plotting to rebel, and was very happy when he died. The following edict gave Sakuyuan a warm burial vessel, decorated with a crowned robe.

古文：东府施丧位，大鸿胪持节监护，太官朝夕送祭。
现代文：在束府设立丧位，以大鸿胪持节监守卫护，太官早晚奉送祭品。
English: A funeral pyre was set up in Sokfu, guarded by the Taihong, and the eunuchs offered sacrifices morning and evening.

古文：又诏曰： 褒崇明德，前王令典，追远尊亲，沿情所隆。
现代文：又诏令说： 褒奖发扬光明的德行，是先王美好的法则，追悼死者尊敬亲长，为历来情理所尊崇。
English: The edict also said: "It is the good rule of the late king to reward and promote bright and virtuous conduct, and to respect the relatives of the deceased in the memorial, which has always been respected by reason."

古文：故使持节、都督扬州诸军事、中书监、太傅、领司徒、扬州刺史、竟陵王、新除督南徐州，体睿履正，神鉴渊邈。
现代文：故去的使持节、都督扬州诸军事、中书监、太傅、领司徒、扬州刺史、竟陵王、新除督南徐州，思悟明哲行止周正，见识高远。
English: The deceased Emissary Festival, the Yangzhou Military Governor, the Central Book Supervisor, the Taifu, the Leader of the Sages, the Yangzhou Historian, the King of the Tombs, the new governor of South Xuzhou, the Thinker, the Philosopher, the Zhou Zheng, and the far-sighted.

古文：道冠民宗，具瞻允集。
现代文：德高望重，万民景仰。
English: He is highly respected and admired by all the people.

古文：肇自弱龄，孝友光备。爰及赞契，协升景业。
现代文：自从幼年时起，就具备孝顺父母友爱兄弟的美德；等到辅佐君主，帮助治理社稷使呈升平景象。
English: From a young age, they have the virtues of filial piety, friendship and brotherly love; when they assist the monarch and help to govern the society, they are more level-headed.

古文：燮曜台陛，五教克宣。
现代文：光辉照耀殿堂，五教得以发扬光大。
English: The glory shines in the hall of fame, and the five teachings are able to flourish.

古文：敷奏朝端，百揆惟穆。
现代文：身居朝臣之首，百官敬仰有加。
English: As the head of the court, he is held in high esteem by hundreds of officials.

古文：寄重先顾，任均负图。
现代文：身受先帝顾命的重托，承担辅佐幼帝的责任。
English: Entrusted by the previous emperor to take care of his life, he assumed the responsibility of assisting the young emperor.

古文：谅以齐晖《二南》，同规往哲。
现代文：推想他能光大《周南》、《召南》的精神，创立过去的贤哲那样的仪范。
English: It can be inferred that he was able to magnify the spirit of "Zhou Nan" and "Zhao Nan" and create a ritual like the sages of the past.

古文：方凭保佑，永翼雍熙。
现代文：正要依靠他的佑助，以期永远的和乐兴盛。
English: He was about to rely on his blessing, with the hope of eternal harmony and prosperity.

古文：天不慭遗，奄焉薨逝。
现代文：上天为何不留下如此贤臣，忽然辞世。
English: Why didn't God leave such a wise man to die suddenly?

古文：哀慕抽割，震于厥心。
现代文：哀伤恋慕之情痛如刀割，心中震动。
English: The pain of sad love is like a knife cutting, and the heart is shaken.

古文：今龟谋袭吉，先远戒期。
现代文：现在占卜得吉，先提前确定日期。
English: Now it's divination. First, set the date in advance.

古文：宜崇嘉制，式弘风烈。
现代文：应该推崇美善，光大其遣风。
English: It is necessary to promote beauty and virtue, and let the sun shine brightly.

古文：可追崇假黄钺、侍中、都督中外诸军事、太宰、领大将军、扬州牧，绿綟绶，备九服锡命之礼。
现代文：可以追赠假黄铁、侍中、都督中外诸军事、太宰、领大将军、扬州牧，绿级鳗，采用九服锡命的礼制。
English: It is possible to posthumously present a fake yellow iron, a chamberlain, a military general, a Dazai, a leading general, a Yangzhou herdsman, and a green-ranked gong, using the nine-service tin life ritual system.

古文：使持节、中书监、王如故。
现代文：使持节、中书监、王号依旧。
English: Ji Ji Jie, the Chinese librarian, and the king are still the same.

古文：给九旒鸾辂，黄屋左纛，辒辌车，前后部羽葆鼓吹，挽歌二部，虎贲班剑百人，葬礼依晋安平王孚故事。 
现代文：赐给九旒鸾辖，黄屋左纛，辊鲸车，前后部羽葆鼓吹，挽歌两部，虎贲班剑队一百人，葬礼按照晋安垩王司马孚的旧例办。 
English: He was bestowed with nine gongs, the left gong for the Yellow House, the right gong for the Whale Carriage, the front and back gongs for the eulogy, two elegies, and a hundred people for the Tiger's Beak Sword Team. The funeral was held according to the old practice of King Sima Fu of Jin'an.

古文：初，豫章王嶷葬金牛山，文惠太子葬夹石，子良临送，望祖硎山，悲感叹曰： 北瞻吾叔，前望吾兄，死而有知，请葬兹地。 
现代文：当初，逸童主芦盛葬在金牛山，文惠太子葬在夹互，王旦送葬，望着狙泌煌，悲哀伤感叹道： 向北看见我的叔父，向前望到我的兄长，如果死而有知觉，请把我葬在这块地方。 
English: At first, Yitong Lord Lu was buried in Taurus Mountain, Prince Wen Hui was buried next to each other, and Wang Dan attended the funeral, looking at the coffin and sighing sadly: I saw my uncle to the north, I saw my brother looking forward, if I die and am conscious, please bury me in this place.

古文：既薨，遂葬焉。
现代文：去世以后，就埋葬于此。
English: After his death, he was buried here.

古文：所著内外文笔数十卷，虽无文采，多是劝戒。
现代文：所写的各种韵散文章几十卷，虽然没有什么文采，多有劝诫的话。
English: He wrote dozens of volumes of various rhymes and prose articles, although there was little poetry, but rather words of exhortation.

古文：建武中，故吏范云上表为子良立碑，事不行。
现代文：建武年问，他过去的下属丝昼上表请求为工皇立碑，事情没有办成。
English: According to Jianwu Nian, his former subordinate Si Rongjian requested to erect a monument for the emperor, but the matter was not done.

古文：子昭胄嗣。
现代文：其子昭胄继承其位。
English: His son, Akihito, succeeded to the throne.

古文：昭胄字景胤。
现代文：昭胄字景胤。
English: Voiced by: Akitane Aza Kagein.

古文：泛涉有父风。
现代文：行为有其父的风范。
English: Behaves like his father.

古文：永明八年，自竟陵王世子为宁朔将军、会稽太守。
现代文：永明八年，以竟陵王世子的身份为宁朔将军、会稽太守。
English: In the eighth year of the Yongming era, he became the Ningshuo general and the grand steward of the imperial court, with the status of the heir of King Jingling.

古文：郁林初，为右卫将军，未拜，迁侍中，领右军将军。
现代文：郁昼登位之初，为右卫将军，未拜，迁侍中，领右军将军。
English: At the beginning of the enthronement of Emperor Wu, he was the general of the right guard, the general of the right army.

古文：建武三年，复为侍中，领骁骑将军，转散骑常侍，太常。
现代文：建武三年，又为侍中，领骁骑将军，转散骑常侍，太常。
English: In the third year of Jianwu, he was also a member of the chamberlains, leading and riding the general, and then riding the regular chamberlains, too often.

古文：以封境边虏，永元元年，改封巴陵王。
现代文：因为封地临近虏境，在永元元年，改封巴陵王。
English: Because the fief was close to the territory of Ruqi, in the first year of Yongyuan, the fief of Baling Wang was changed.

古文：先是王敬则事起，南康侯子恪在吴郡，高宗虑有同异，召诸王侯入宫，晋安王宝义及江陵公宝览等住中书省，高、武诸孙住西省，敕人各两左右自随，过此依军法，孩抱者乳母随入。
现代文：这之前王敬则叛乱，南康侯子恪在吴郡，高宗塞担心有什么差错，召集诸王侯入宫。晋安王宝义和江陵公宝览等住在中书省，高帝、武帝诸王孙住西省，诏令每人身边随带两个侍从，超过了就照军法论处，还是小孩子的由乳母跟着入宫。
English: Prior to this, Wang Jing rebelled, Nan Kang Hou Zi Ke was in Wuxi County, Gao Zong Ce was worried about something going wrong and summoned all the princes to enter the palace. Jinan Wang Baoyi and Jiangling Gong Baozhan lived in Zhongshuo Province, and Gao Di and Wu Di Wang Sun lived in Xi Province. The emperor ordered that each person should be accompanied by two attendants, exceeding the military law, and the children were accompanied by a nanny to enter the palace.

古文：其夜太医煮药，都水办数十具棺材，须三更当悉杀之。
现代文：那一晚太医煮了毒药，都水官采办了几十具棺材，要在三更时将诸王孙全部杀掉。
English: That night, the imperial physician boiled poison, and the capital water officials purchased dozens of coffins to kill all the kings and queens in three hours.

古文：子恪奔归，二更达建阳门刺启。
现代文：子恪急奔回朝，二更时到了建阳门投递他的名片。
English: His son hurried back to the morning, and two hours later he arrived at Jianyang Gate to deliver his business card.

古文：时刻已至，而帝眠不起，中书舍人沈徽孚与帝所亲左右单景隽共谋少留其事。
现代文：时刻已经到了，皇上却昏睡不起，中书舍人沈徽孚和皇上所亲信的侍从里量鱼共同商议暂缓这件事。
English: The time had come, but the emperor couldn't sleep. Shen Huifu, the keeper of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and the emperor's trusted attendant Li Jiaohu jointly discussed postponing the matter.

古文：须臾帝觉，景隽启子恪已至，惊问曰： 未邪？ 
现代文：一会儿皇帝醒过来，量隽报告说子恪已经到了，皇上惊问道： 还没做吗? 
English: After a while, the emperor woke up. He was surprised to hear that his son-in-law had arrived. The emperor asked, "Hasn't he done it yet?"

古文：景隽具以事答。
现代文：景隽详细地说了当时的情形。
English: Jingyao gave a detailed account of the situation at the time.

古文：明日悉遣王侯还第。
现代文：第二天把王侯全都遣送回他们各自的宅第。
English: The next day, all the princes were sent back to their respective homes.

古文：建武以来，高、武王侯居常震怖，朝不保夕，至是尤甚。
现代文：从建迭以来，产童、亘瞳的王侯等平常都惶恐不安，朝不保夕，到这一次更加严重。
English: Since the construction of the overpass, the princes who gave birth to children, and the princes of Watahito, are usually scared and uneasy. They are insecure day and night, and this time it is even more serious.

古文：及陈显达起事，王侯复入宫，昭胄惩往时之惧，与弟永新侯昭颖逃奔江西，变形为道人。
现代文：到陈显达起兵，王侯再次入宫。昭胄以过去的经历而心生戒惧，与弟永新侯昭颖逃往江西，假扮成道人。
English: When Chen Xianda raised an army, Wang Hou once again entered the palace. Using his past experiences to instill fear in his heart, Zhaohui and his younger brother Yongxin Hou Zhaoying fled to Jiangxi, pretending to be Taoists.

古文：崔慧景举兵，昭胄兄弟出投之。
现代文：崔慧景兴兵，昭胄兄弟出来投奔他。
English: Cui Huiqing raised an army, and the brothers of Zhaojun came out to join him.

古文：慧景事败，昭胄兄弟首出投台军主胡松，各以王侯还第。
现代文：慧景兵败，昭胄兄弟伏罪出投台军主胡松，各自以王侯身份归家。
English: After Hui Jing's defeat, Zhaojun's brothers committed treason by defecting to the Taiwanese commander Hu Song. They each returned home as princes.

古文：不自安，谋为身计。
现代文：不能心安，谋虑存身之计。
English: If you can't find peace of mind, think of a way to save yourself.

古文：子良故防阁桑偃为梅虫儿军副，结前巴西太守萧寅，谋立昭胄。
现代文：子良过去的防合将军桑偃是梅虫儿的军副，联合从前的巴西太守萧寅，谋划要拥立昭胄。
English: Ziliang's former anti-coalition general, Mulberry, is Mei Zueri's deputy, and together with the former Brazilian governor, Xiao Yin, they plan to support Zhaojun.

古文：昭胄许事克用寅为尚书左仆射、护军将军。
现代文：昭胄答应事成之后用萧寅为尚书左仆射、护军将军。
English: After Akihito's promise was fulfilled, Xiao Yin was used as Shangshu's right-hand man and general of the escort.

古文：以寅有部曲，大事皆委之。
现代文：因为萧寅拥有军队，大事都委托给他。
English: Because Xiao Yin has an army, all important matters are entrusted to him.

古文：时胡松领军在新亭，寅遣人说之云： 须昏人出，寅等便率兵奉昭胄入台，闭城号令。
现代文：当时胡松领军在新亭，萧寅派人去游说他，说 等到昏人出来，我等就率领军兵敬奉昭胄进入禁城，关闭城门发下号令。
English: At that time, Hu Song was leading the army in Xinting, and Xiao Yin sent someone to lobby him, saying, "Wait until the drowsy come out, we will lead the soldiers to enter the Forbidden City, close the gate and issue an order."

古文：昏人必还就将军，将军但闭垒不应，则三公不足得也。 
现代文：昏人必来投靠将军，将军衹是闭塞营垒不要答应，那么要得三公也算不了什么大事。 
English: Foolish men will come to the aid of a general, but if the general is a blockaded fortress, don't agree, and then it's no big deal to get the Three Kingdoms.

古文：松又许诺。
现代文：胡松同意了。
English: Husong agreed.

古文：会东昏新起芳乐苑，月许日不复出游，偃等议募健儿百余人从万春门入突取之，昭胄以为不可。
现代文：正碰上东昏侯新建芳乐苑，一个来月没有再出游，桑偃等人计划招募强健军兵百余人从万春门突袭夺取禁城，昭胄觉得不行。
English: The newly-built Fangle Courtyard is facing the east dusk, and there is no outing next month. Mulberry and others plan to recruit more than a hundred strong soldiers to raid and seize the Forbidden City from the Wanchun Gate.

古文：偃同党王山沙虑事久无成，以事告御刀徐僧重。
现代文：桑偃同伙王山沙想到事情已久而一无所成，把这件事向御刀徐僧重告发了。
English: Mulberry's fellow party member Wang Sansha considered that the matter had been delayed for too long and would not be successful, so he went to report the matter to the Emperor.

古文：寅遣人杀山沙于路，吏于麝郤中得其事迹，昭胄兄弟与同党皆伏诛。
现代文：萧寅派人在路上把王山沙杀了，官吏从王山沙的物袋裹得知了此事，昭胄兄弟和那一伙人都被处死。
English: Xiao Yin sent someone to kill Wang Shansha on the road, and the officials learned about it from Wang Shansha's bag. The Zhaojun brothers and their group were all executed.

古文：昭颖官至宁朔将军、彭城太守。
现代文：昭颖官至宁朔将军、彭城太守。
English: Zhao Yingguan to Ningshuo General, Pengcheng Governor.

古文：梁王定京邑，追赠昭胄散骑常侍、抚军将军，昭颖黄门郎。
现代文：梁王平定京都，追赠昭胄散骑常侍、抚军将军，昭颖黄门郎。
English: Liang Wang subdued Kyoto, posthumously awarding Akitomi Sanzhijishi, Fushun Shogun, and Akiyoshi Komuro.

古文：梁受禅，降封昭胄子同监利侯。
现代文：梁王受惮让登帝位，降封昭胄之子为同监利侯。
English: King Liang was afraid to let him ascend to the throne, and demoted the son of Zhaojun to the position of co-regent.

古文：庐陵王子卿，字云长，世祖第三子也。
现代文：庐陵王子卿字云长，是世祖钓第三子。
English: Yuling Prince is the third son of the founder.

古文：建元元年，封临汝县公，千五百户。
现代文：建元元年，封为临汝县公，食邑一千五百户。
English: In the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year.

古文：兄弟四人同封。
现代文：兄弟四人一同受封。
English: The four brothers were ennobled together.

古文：世祖即位，为持节、都督郢州司州之义阳军事、冠军将军、郢州刺史。
现代文：世祖即位，则为持节、都督郢州司州之义阳军事、冠军将军、郢州刺史。
English: The enthronement of the ancestor of the world is a festival, a military parade of the Yiyang military, a champion general, and a history of Zhangzhou, the capital of Zhangzhou.

古文：永明元年，徙都督荆湘益宁梁南北秦七州、安西将军、荆州刺史，持节如故。
现代文：永明元年，徙都督荆湘益宁梁南北秦七州、安西将军、荆州刺史，持节依旧。
English: In the first year of the Yongming era, Jing Xiang, Yixing, Liang, Nanbei, Qin, Shichizhou, Anxi, and Jingzhou were transferred to the capital, and the festival is still held.

古文：始兴王鉴为益州，子卿解督。
现代文：始兴王萧鉴为益州刺史，于卿解督益、宁二州。
English: Shi Xing Wang Xiao Jian is the history of Yizhou, Yujing is the history of Duqi, and Ning is the history of Erzhou.

古文：子卿在镇，营造服饰，多违制度。
现代文：子卿在任上，营造服饰器度，大多不合于制度。
English: While Ziqing was in office, he created a number of costumes, most of which did not conform to the system.

古文：上敕之曰： 吾前后有敕，非复一两过，道诸王不得作乖体格服饰，汝何意都不忆吾敕邪？
现代文：皇上韶令说： 我先后几番下令，不止是一两次了，说是诸王不许制作违背其身份的服饰，你为什么一点也不记得?
English: The emperor's edict said: I have issued several orders in succession, more than once or twice, saying that kings are not allowed to make clothing that contradicts their status, why do you not remember at all?

古文：忽作瑇瑁乘具，何意？
现代文：忽然用玳瑁制作骑马的用具，是什么意思?
English: What does it mean to suddenly make riding equipment out of straw?

古文：已成不须坏，可速送下。纯银乘具，乃复可尔，何以作镫亦是银？
现代文：既已做了也不必毁掉，可赶快去除以纯银制作骑马的用具，倒还罢了，为什么做的鞍蹬也是银的?
English: It has already been made and does not have to be destroyed, you can quickly remove the horseback riding equipment made of sterling silver, but why is the saddle also made of silver?

古文：可即坏之。
现代文：赶快毁去。
English: Destroy it now.

古文：忽用金薄裹箭脚，何意？
现代文：又忽然用金箔包裹箭尾，是什么意思?
English: What do you mean by wrapping the tail of the arrow in gold foil all of a sudden?

古文：亦速坏去。
现代文：也须赶紧毁掉。
English: It must also be destroyed as soon as possible.

古文：凡诸服章，自今不启吾知复专辄作者，后有所闻，当复得痛杖。 
现代文：凡是各种服饰用具，从今起不启奏使我知道就白行决定制作，等我听说了，一定要痛打一顿。 
English: All kinds of clothing and equipment, from now on, do not open the music, so I know that it is a waste of time to decide to make it, and when I hear it, I must beat it.

古文：又曰： 汝比在都，读学不就，年转成长。吾日冀汝美，勿得敕如风过耳，使吾失气。 
现代文：又说： 你靠近京都，不致力学业，年纪渐渐长大成人，我每天希望你德才兼美，不要把我的话当作耳边风，让我失望。 
English: He also said: You are close to Kyoto, you are not committed to your studies, you are getting older and older, I hope every day that you are both talented and beautiful, don't take my words as wind in your ears and let me down.

古文：五年，入为侍中、抚军将军，未拜，仍为中护军，侍中如故。
现代文：永明五年，入朝为侍中、抚军将军，未拜受，仍然为中护军，侍中。
English: In the fifth year of Yongming, he entered the imperial court as a chamberlain and general of the garrison, but he was not received into the imperial court, and he remained a middle-ranking guard and chamberlain.

古文：六年，迁秘书监，领右卫将军，寻迁中军将军，侍中并如故。
现代文：六年，迁秘书监，领右卫将军，不久迁为中军将军，侍中还是依旧。
English: Six years later, he was transferred to the position of secretary-supervisor, leader of the Right Division of the General Staff, and soon to the position of General of the Chinese Army, but he remained a chamberlain.

古文：十年，进号车骑将军。俄迁使持节、都督南豫豫司三州军事、骠骑将军、南豫州刺史，侍中如故。
现代文：十年，进号车骑将军，很快又迁为使持节、都督南豫豫司三州军事、骠骑将军、南豫州刺史，侍中依旧。
English: Ten years later, it was renamed the General Cavalry and Cavalry Parade, and soon moved to the Festival of Envoys, the Military Governor of Southern Henan Province, the General Cavalry and Cavalry Parade, the History of Southern Henan Province, and the Attendants.

古文：子卿之镇，道中戏部伍为水军，上闻之，大怒，杀其典签。
现代文：子卿前往任上，在途中把部队编为水军游戏，皇上听说了，特别生气，杀了他的典签官。
English: Ziqing went to take office, and on the way he organized the troops into a naval game. When the emperor heard about it, he was particularly angry and killed his signing officer.

古文：遣宜都王铿代之。
现代文：派宜都王萧铿去代替他。
English: He sent Yidu Wang Xiao Yao to replace him.

古文：子卿还第，至崩，不与相见。
现代文：子卿回到家裹，皇上到死时，都没有和他见面。
English: Ziqing returned home, and the emperor did not meet him until his death.

古文：郁林即位，复为侍中、骠骑将军。隆昌元年，转卫将军、开府仪同三司，置兵佐。
现代文：郁林王即位，又为侍中、骠骑将军隆昌元年，转卫将军、开府仪同三司，置兵佐。
English: King Yulin ascended the throne, and in the first year of Longchang, he was also a chamberlain and cavalry general, a general of the guard, a keeper of the imperial residences and three officers, and a military aide.

古文：鄱阳王锵见害，以子卿代为司徒，领兵置佐。
现代文：鄱阳王锵被害，以子卿为司徒，领兵置佐。
English: When Shanyang Wang Yao was killed, he took Zixing as his disciple, leading his troops and placing him as his assistant.

古文：寻复见杀，时年二十七。
现代文：不久也被杀，当时二十七岁。
English: He was also killed shortly afterwards, at the age of 27.

古文：鱼复侯子响，字云音，世祖第四子也。
现代文：鱼复侯子响字云音，是世祖的第四子。
English: Yu Fu Hou Zi is the fourth son of Shizu.

古文：豫章王嶷无子，养子响，后有子，表留为嫡。
现代文：豫章王萧嶷没有子嗣，领养子响，后来有了儿子，上表朝廷留子响仍为嫡子。
English: Yu Zhang Wang Xiaohui did not have a son. He adopted a son, and later had a son. The above-mentioned son of the imperial court is still the legitimate son.

古文：世祖即位，为辅国将军、南彭城临淮二郡太守，见诸王不致敬。
现代文：世祖即位，为辅国将军、南彭城临淮二郡太守，会见诸王子不须致敬。
English: The ancestor of the world ascends to the throne, is the general of the auxiliary country, and the governor of the second county of Linhuai in Nan Pengcheng. There is no need to pay tribute when meeting princes.

古文：子响勇力绝人，关弓四斛力，数在园池中帖骑驰走竹树下，身无亏伤。
现代文：子响勇武有力无人能比，弯弓有四斛的力量，屡次在园林中贴着坐骑在竹树下奔驰，全身没受一点伤。
English: Zi Xing is brave and powerful beyond compare. He can bend a bow with the strength of four fists. He has repeatedly galloped under a bamboo tree with a mount in the garden, and his whole body has not been injured at all.

古文：既出继，车服异诸王，每入朝，辄忿怒，拳打车壁。
现代文：过继以后，车驾服饰与诸王不同，每当入朝之时，就非常愤怒，挥拳打击车壁。
English: After the succession, the driver's clothing is different from that of the kings. Whenever he enters the court, he is very angry and punches the wall of the car.

古文：世祖知之，令车服与皇子同。
现代文：世祖知道了，命令给他的车驾服饰和皇子一样。
English: When the patriarch found out, he ordered his chauffeur to wear the same outfit as the prince.

古文：永明三年，迁右卫将军。
现代文：永明三年，迁右卫将军。
English: In the third year of Yongming, he was transferred to the General of the Right Division.

古文：仍出为使持节、都督豫州郢州之西阳司州之汝南二郡军事、冠军将军、豫州刺史。
现代文：并出为使持节，都督豫州郢州之西阳、司州之汝南二郡军事，冠军将军，豫州刺史。
English: In addition, as part of the festival, the governor of the two counties of Xiyang and Renan in the two prefectures of Yuzhou and Shizhou, the champion general, and the history of Yuzhou.

古文：明年，进号右将军。
现代文：第二年，进号为右将军。
English: The next year, he was promoted to General of the Right.

古文：进督南豫州之历阳、淮南、颍川、汝阳四郡。
现代文：进督南豫州之历阳、淮南、颖川、汝阳四郡。
English: He will govern the four counties of Liyang, Huainan, Yingchuan and Ruyang in southern Yuzhou.

古文：入为散骑常侍，右卫将军。
现代文：入朝为散骑常侍，右卫将军。
English: He entered the imperial court as a samurai on horseback, a general of the right guard.

古文：六年，有司奏： 子响体自圣明，出继宗国。
现代文：六年，官吏上奏议说： 子响本是圣上骨肉，出继给宗族。
English: In the sixth year, the officials made a report saying: Zi Xiang is the sacred bone and flesh, and will be handed over to the clan.

古文：大司马臣嶷昔未有胤，所以因心鞠养。
现代文：大司马萧嶷过去没有子嗣，所以用心抚养。
English: Chief Secretary Ma Xiaohui did not have any children in the past, so he raised them with all his heart.

古文：陛下弘天伦之爱，臣嶷深犹子之恩，遂乃继体扶疏，世祚垂改，茅蒋奄蔚，冢嗣莫移。诚欣惇睦之风，实亏立嫡之教。
现代文：陛下弘扬天伦爱心，大臣萧嶷深味义子的恩情，于是才扶助弱枝，改变他的世系。这就像茅、蒋都是周公后裔，兴旺盛大，不改易后代子嗣，固然敦厚和睦之风可喜，而实在是亏损了立嫡的准则。
English: His Majesty promoted the love of heaven, and Minister Xiao Jian deeply appreciated the kindness of his son-in-law, so he supported the weak branch and changed his lineage. This is like Mao and Chiang are descendants of Zhou Gong, thriving, not changing the descendants of descendants, although the strong wind of harmony is gratifying, but it is really a loss of the founding principle.

古文：臣等参议，子响宜还本。 
现代文：臣等参酌商议，以为王飨应回属本支。 
English: After deliberation, the vassals thought that Wang Qi should return to his own branch.

古文：乃封巴东郡王，迁中护军，常侍如故。
现代文：于是封为巴东郡王，迁中护军，常侍依旧。
English: As a result, he was given the title of King of Padang County, moved to guard the troops, and remained a regular attendant.

古文：寻出为江州刺史，常侍如故。
现代文：不久出任为江州刺史，常侍依旧。
English: He was soon appointed as the Governor of Jiangsu Province, and remains a regular attendant.

古文：七年，迁使持节、都督荆湘雍梁宁南北秦七州军事、镇军将军、荆州刺史。
现代文：永明七年，迁使持节、都督荆湘雍梁宁南北秦七州军事、镇军将军、荆州刺史。
English: In the seventh year of Yongming, the relocation of the Jizhi Festival, the military of the seven states of North and South Qin, the general of the town army, and the history of Jingzhou were carried out by the governor of Jingxiang, Yongliangning.

古文：子响少好武，在西豫时，自选带仗左右六十人，皆有胆干。
现代文：子响从小爱好武艺，在西豫地方的时候，自己选拔了带仗侍从六十人，都颇有胆略与才干。
English: Zixing has been fond of martial arts since he was a child. When he was in Xiyu, he personally selected 60 attendants with military experience, all of whom were courageous and talented.

古文：至镇，数在内斋杀牛置酒，与之聚乐。
现代文：到了任上，屡次在内庭杀牛摆设酒席，同他们聚集取乐。
English: When he took office, he repeatedly slaughtered cows in the inner courtyard, set up a banquet, and gathered with them to have fun.

古文：令内人私作锦袍绛袄，欲饷蛮交易器仗。
现代文：让内侍私下制作锦缎官袍和深红色棉袄，想要拿去同蛮人交换兵器。
English: Let the chambermaid privately make brocade official robes and crimson cotton coats, and want to exchange them with the barbarians for weapons.

古文：长史刘寅等连名密启，上敕精检。
现代文：长史刘寅等联名秘密奏知皇上，皇上诏令仔细核查。
English: Long history Liu Yin and other joint secret report to the emperor, the emperor's edict to carefully check.

古文：寅等惧，欲秘之。
现代文：刘寅等人害怕，想把此事保密。
English: Liu Yin and others were afraid and wanted to keep the matter confidential.

古文：子响闻台使至，不见敕，召寅及司马席恭穆、谘议参军江愈、殷昙粲、中兵参军周彦、典签吴修之、王贤宗、魏景渊于琴台下诘问之。
现代文：子响听说台使来到，却没有见到韶令，召集刘寅和司马席恭穆、谘议参军江愈、殷昙粲、中兵参军周彦、典签吴脩之、王贤宗、魏景渊到琴台旁询问实情。
English: Zixing heard that the Taiwanese envoy had arrived, but did not see the imperial edict. He summoned Liu Ying and Sima Xie Qunmu, and consulted with Jiang Yu, Yin Yu, Zhou Yan, Wu Xizhi, Wang Xianzong, and Wei Jingyuan to inquire about the truth.

古文：寅等无言。
现代文：刘寅等无话可说。
English: Liu Ying and others had nothing to say.

古文：修之曰： 既以降敕旨，政应方便答塞。 
现代文：吴脩之说： 既然降下圣旨，执政应该见机行事加以应对。 
English: Wu Shanzhi said, "Since the imperial edict has been issued, the government should take the opportunity to respond to it.

古文：景渊曰： 故应先检校。 
现代文：景渊说： 照例应当先核查。 
English: Jingyuan said: As usual, it should be checked first.

古文：子响大怒，执寅等于后堂杀之。
现代文：子响大怒，绑缚刘寅等人到后堂杀了。
English: Zixing flew into a rage, tied up Liu Ying and the others, and killed them in the back hall.

古文：以启无江愈名，欲释之，而用命者已加戮。
现代文：因为奏书上没有江愈的名字，想释放他，而执行命令的人已经把他杀了。
English: Because there was no name of Jiang Yu in the report, they wanted to release him, but the person who carried out the order had already killed him.

古文：上闻之怒，遣卫尉胡谐之、游击将军尹略、中书舍人茹法亮领斋仗数百人，检捕群小，敕： 子响若束首自归，可全其性命。 
现代文：皇上听说此事很愤怒，派遣卫尉胡谐之、游击将军尹略、中书舍人茹法亮率领皇宫武士数百人，查捕众人。诏令说： 如果子响自缚来自首，可以保全他的性命。 
English: The emperor was very angry when he heard about this, and he sent the palace guardsman, Hu Junzhi, the guerrilla general, Yin Liang, and the chief scribe, Zhu Faruang, to lead hundreds of imperial palace warriors to investigate and arrest everyone. The imperial decree said: If Zixing binds himself and surrenders, his life can be saved.

古文：谐之等至江津，筑城燕尾洲，遣传诏石伯儿入城慰劳。
现代文：胡谐之等人到了江津，在燕尾洲筑城屯兵，派传诏石伯儿进城慰劳子响。
English: Hu Junzhi and others arrived in Jiangjin, built a garrison in Yanweizhou, and sent the envoy Shi Bo'er into the city to comfort the laborers.

古文：子响曰： 我不作贼，长史等见负，今政当受杀人罪耳。 乃杀牛具酒馔，饷台军。
现代文：子响说： 我没有叛乱，长史等人背负我，现在论法衹应计杀人之罪罢了 于是杀牛摆设酒肴，供给台使的军队。
English: Zixuan said: I did not rebel, Changshi and others carried me on their backs, now it's just about the crime of killing people according to the law. So they killed cattle, set up alcoholic beverages, and supplied the envoy's army.

古文：而谐之等疑畏，执录其吏。
现代文：而胡谐之等人心存疑虑畏惧，扣留了他的官吏。
English: But officials such as Hujiri were suspicious and fearful, and detained him.

古文：子响怒，遣所养数十人收集府州器仗，令二千人从灵溪西渡，克明旦与台军对阵南岸。
现代文：子响发怒，派遣他所豢养的几十人收集州府中的兵器，命令二千人从灵溪向西渡河，至第二天早上与台使军在南岸对阵。
English: Zi Xiang became angry and sent dozens of people he had raised to collect weapons from the state capital. He ordered two thousand people to cross the river from Lingxi to the west, and the next morning they confronted the Taiwanese army on the south bank.

古文：子响自与百余人袍骑，将万钧弩三四张，宿江堤上，明日，凶党与台军战，子响于堤上放弩，亡命王冲天等蒙盾陵城，台军大败，尹略死之，官军引退。
现代文：子响自己同骑兵百余人，带着有万钧之力的弩机三四张，驻扎在江堤上。第二天，他的部下与台军作战，子响在堤上放弩，亡命之徒王冲天等人顶着盾牌登上城墙，台军大败，尹略死于此，官军撤退了。
English: Zixing himself and more than a hundred cavalrymen, with three or four powerful rafts, were stationed on the river embankment. The next day, his men fought with the Taiwanese army, Zixing set anchor on the embankment, and the outlaw Wang Chongtian and others mounted the city wall with shields. The Taiwanese army was defeated, Yin Liao died from this, and the government army retreated.

古文：上又遣丹阳尹萧顺之领兵继至，子响部下恐惧，各逃散。子响乃白服降，赐死。
现代文：皇上又派丹阳尹萧顺之领兵再来讨伐，子响部下感到恐惧，各自逃散，子响才穿白衣投降，被赐死。
English: The emperor also sent Danyang Yin Xiao Shun's leading troops to fight again. Zihong's subordinates were afraid and fled separately. Zihong only surrendered in white and was sentenced to death.

古文：时年二十二。
现代文：当时二十二岁。
English: He was twenty-two at the time.

古文：临死，启上曰： 刘寅等入斋检杖，具如前启。
现代文：临死时，向皇上上书说： 刘寅等人进内庭检视兵器一事，前次奏书中已详尽呈报。
English: When he was on the verge of death, he wrote to the emperor: "The matter of Liu Yin and others entering the inner court to inspect weapons has been reported in detail in the previous report.

古文：臣罪既山海，分甘斧钺。
现代文：臣子既然犯下重罪，甘愿受斧钹之刑。
English: Since the vassal has committed a serious crime, he is willing to suffer the punishment of the axe.

古文：奉敕遣胡谐之、茹法亮赐重劳，其等至，竟无宣旨，便建旗入津，对城南岸筑城守。
现代文：韶令派胡谐之、茹法亮劳顿来伐，他们到了以后，竟然不宣明圣旨，就树起旗帜进入江津，在城南岸筑城守阵。
English: When they arrived, they did not declare their holy will, but raised a flag to enter Jiangjin and set up a defensive line on the south bank of the city.

古文：臣累遣书信唤法亮渡，乞白服相见，其永不肯，群小惧怖，遂致攻战，此臣之罪也。
现代文：臣子几次派人送信请法亮渡河，乞求身穿白衣见他们，他们始终不肯，部下众人畏惧，于是导致攻城作战，这是臣子的罪过。
English: Several times, the vassal sent messengers to ask Faryo to cross the river and begged to see them in white clothes. They always refused, and their men were afraid, which led to the siege of the city. This was the fault of the vassal.

古文：臣此月二十五日束身投军，希还天阙，停宅一月，臣自取尽，可使齐代无杀子之讥，臣免逆父之谤。
现代文：臣子此月二十五日自缚投降，希望回到朝廷，居家一月后，白尽而死，可以使齐代不遭受杀子的非议，臣子也免去违逆父命的指责。
English: On the 25th of this month, the vassal tied himself up and surrendered, hoping to return to the imperial court. After staying at home for a month, he died in vain, so that Qi Dai would not be accused of killing his son, and the vassal would also be free from the accusation of disobeying his father's order.

古文：既不遂心，今便命尽，临启哽塞，知复何陈。 
现代文：既然不能如我所愿，现在就将丧命，对着奏书哽咽泪下，不知还能说些什么。 
English: Since I can't do what I want, I'm going to die now, and I don't know what else to say as I choke back tears while looking at the music book.

古文：有司奏绝子响属籍，削爵土，收付廷尉法狱治罪。
现代文：官吏奏上永不将子响列入宗室名册，削去爵号采邑，交付廷尉法狱处治。
English: The officials never listed Zixing in the family register, removed the title of nobility, and sent him to the imperial court to be punished.

古文：赐为蛸氏。
现代文：改其姓为蛸氏。
English: He changed his family name to Zou.

古文：诸所连坐，别下考论。
现代文：各类牵连的人，另外再考察论罪。
English: People implicated in all kinds of crimes will be investigated and dealt with separately.

古文：赠刘寅侍中，席恭穆辅国将军、益州刺史，江愈、殷昙粲黄门郎，周彦骁骑将军。
现代文：追赠刘寅侍中，席恭穆辅国将军、益州刺史，江愈、殷昙粲黄门郎，周彦骁骑将军。
English: Liu Yin was posthumously awarded the title of Vice-Commander-in-Chief, while General Mu Yu, General Yizhou Zhishi, General Jiang Yu, General Yin Qi and General Zhou Yan were posthumously awarded the title of General of Cavalry.

古文：寅字景蕤，高平人也。
现代文：刘寅字景蕤，是高平人。
English: Liu Yin, whose Chinese character is 景, is from Gaoping.

古文：有文义而学不闲世务。
现代文：擅长写文章而不熟悉世情杂务。
English: Good at writing articles but not familiar with the world's chores.

古文：席恭穆，安定焉氏人，关陇豪族。
现代文：席恭穆，是安定焉氏人，为关陇一带的豪族。
English: Shi Gongmu is a member of the Stabilization Clan, a powerful clan in the Guanzhou area.

古文：上怜子响死，后游华林园，见猿对跳子鸣啸，上留目久之，因呜咽流涕。
现代文：皇上哀怜子响之死，后来游览华林园，看见猿猴对幼子呼啸，皇上注视了很久，因而呜咽流泪。
English: The emperor mourned his son's death. Later, he toured the Hualin Garden and saw a monkey whistling at his young son. The emperor stared at it for a long time and wept.

古文：豫章王嶷上表曰： 臣闻将而必戮，炳自《春秋》，罄于甸人，著于《经礼》，犹怀不忍之言，尚有如伦之痛。
现代文：豫章王萧嶷上表说： 臣下听说将领有不得不杀的，《春秋》中已很明白；处死于执行公族死刑的人，《经》、《礼》上也很显著，然而还是怀藏不忍心的言辞，有如丧失亲人的哀痛。
English: Yuanzhang Wang Xiaoqi said on the table: His subjects heard that there were generals who had to be killed, which was already clear in "Spring and Autumn"; those who died in the execution of the death penalty of the public were also significant in "Scripture" and "Rite," but still harbored the words of impatience, like the grief of losing a loved one.

古文：岂不事因法往，情以恩留。
现代文：难道不是因为事情按照法律去办，而恩情自留心中吗。
English: Isn't it because things are done in accordance with the law, and gratitude is kept in mind?

古文：故庶人蛸子响，识怀靡树，见沦不逞，肆愤一朝，取陷凶德，遂使迹邻非孝，事近无君，身膏草野，未云塞衅。
现代文：已故的庶人蛸子响，见识不多，以致陷入不快之事，一时泄愤，而陷于凶残不义的名声，于是弄成做人近于不孝，处事好像无视君主，身体被弃置荒野，没能补救他的罪过。
English: The late commoner was so depraved, and so little enlightened, that he fell into ill-feelings, and, for a time, into a fury, and fell into a reputation for cruelty and injustice, and so became almost unfilial, and behaved as if he had no regard for the sovereign, and his body was cast into the wilderness, and he could not atone for his sins.

古文：但韔矢倒戈，归罪司戮，即理原心，亦既迷而知返。
现代文：衹看他收藏起弓箭倒提长戈，负罪归降受斩，推想他的本心，也算是迷途而知返了。
English: If you look at his collection of bows and arrows and the way he took on the Long March, taking the blame, surrendering, and being beheaded, you can deduce his true intentions. It's as if he's lost his way and found his way back.

古文：衅骨不收，辜魂莫赦，抚事惟往，载伤心目。
现代文：躯骨不曾收殓，有罪的魂灵仍未得到赦免，追想往事，实在让人伤心。
English: Bodies have not been recovered, guilty souls have still not been pardoned, and it is really sad to think about the past.

古文：昔闵荣伏痍，怆动坟园；思荆就辟，侧怀丘墓。
现代文：过去闵荣伏诛，怆痛震动坟园；思荆被杀，哀怜充溢墓地。
English: In the past, there was great glory, and great pain shook the cemetery; thoughts were killed, and the cemetery overflowed with sorrow.

古文：皆两臣衅结于明时，二主议加于盛世，积代用之为美，历史不以云非。
现代文：都是两位臣子在昌明年代犯下罪过，两位盛世君主却施加恩德，历代以此事为善举，史官也从来没有说它不对。
English: It was the two courtiers who committed the crime in the Changming era, but the two prosperous monarchs imposed benevolence, and the past generations regarded this as a good deed. Historians have never said that it was wrong.

古文：伏顾一下天矜，爰诏蛸氏，使得安兆末郊，旋窆余麓，微列苇韔之容，薄申封树之礼。
现代文：我请求陛下稍稍显示天子的怜恤，下诏使蛸氏得以在都城郊野之末安下墓地，归葬余出的山地。略微陈列简朴的灵车，稍稍采用封土植树的礼遇。
English: I would like to ask Your Majesty to show a little mercy by issuing an edict so that Mr. Xing can be buried in a cemetery at the end of the capital's countryside and buried in the remaining mountainous area, with a little display of a simple hearse and a little courtesy of planting trees in the fief.

古文：岂伊穷骸被德，实且天下归仁。
现代文：不仅是他的骸骨受到恩德，实在能使天下人归于仁义。
English: Not only was his skeleton blessed, but he was able to convert the whole world to benevolence.

古文：臣属忝皇枝，偏留友睦，以臣继别未安，子响言承出命，提携鞠养，俯见成人，虽辍胤蕃条，归体璇萼，循执之念不移，傅训之怜何已。
现代文：臣下也算是皇族的一支，蒙受皇上友爱，因为臣没有子嗣，使子响继承我的香火，我辛勤抚养他，眼见他成人，虽然后来不再过继给我，回归本支，但我关怀牵挂的情分没有改变，辅佐教导他的慈爱又哪能停止。
English: My vassal is also a member of the imperial family, and is loved by the emperor. Because my vassal has no children, I let my son inherit my incense. I raised him diligently and saw him grow up. Although I later did not give him to me and returned to this branch, my feelings of care and concern have not changed. The assistant teaches his love and can not stop.

古文：敢冒宸严，布此悲乞。 
现代文：现在胆敢冒犯圣上神威，提出造一悲哀的乞求。 
English: Now he dares to offend the divine majesty by making a sad supplication.

古文：上不许。
现代文：皇上没有应允。
English: The Emperor did not give his permission.

古文：先是贬为鱼复侯。
现代文：在此之前已贬为鱼复侯。
English: Prior to this, it had been downgraded to Fushifuko.

古文：安陆王子敬，字云端，世祖第五子也。初封应城县公。
现代文：安陆王子敬字云端，是世祖第五子。开始封为应城县公。
English: Prince Anlu, the fifth son of the patriarch, was given the title of Yingcheng County official.

古文：永明二年，出为持节、监南兖兖徐青冀五州、北中郎将、南兖州刺史。
现代文：永明二年，出京城为持节、监南兖兖徐青冀五州、北中郎将、南兖州刺史。
English: In the second year of Yongming, he went to Beijing to hold the festival, supervise the five states of Nanzhao, Xuqing and Hebei, the general of the North and the governor of the South.

古文：四年，进号右军。
现代文：四年，进号为右将军。
English: Four years later, he was promoted to the rank of General of the Right.

古文：明年，徙都督荆湘梁雍南北秦六州军事、平西将军、荆州刺史，持节如故。
现代文：第二年，徙都督荆湘梁雍南北秦六州军事、干西将军、荆州刺史，持节依旧。
English: In the second year, the governor of Jing, Xiang, Liang, Yong, North and South Qin, the six military states, the general of Ganxi, and the history of Jingzhou were transferred, and the festival was still held.

古文：寻进号安西将军。
现代文：不久进号为安西将军。
English: He was soon promoted to General Anxi.

古文：七年，征侍中，护军将军。
现代文：七年，征侍中，护军将军。
English: Seven years later, during his enlistment, he became a general of the escort.

古文：十年，转散骑常侍、抚军将军、丹阳尹。
现代文：十年，转散骑常侍、抚军将军、丹阳尹。
English: Ten years later, Danyang Yin, the riding attendant, general of the army, was dispersed.

古文：十一年，进车骑将军。
现代文：十一年，进为车骑将军。
English: In the eleventh year, he was promoted to general of the cavalry.

古文：寻给鼓吹一部。
现代文：不久赐给鼓吹一部。
English: Soon he was given a part in the preaching.

古文：隆昌元年，迁使持节、都督南兖兖徐青冀五州、征北大将军、南兖州刺史。
现代文：隆昌元年，迁使持节、都督南兖兖徐青冀五州、征北大将军、南兖州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Longchang era, the transfer of envoys to the Five Provinces, the governor of Nanxi, Xuqing and Hebei, the general of the Northern Expedition, and the history of Nanxizhou.

古文：延兴元年，加侍中。高宗除诸蕃王，遣中护军王玄邈征九江，王广之袭杀子敬，时年二十三。
现代文：延兴元年，加官侍中高宗扫除诸王侯，派遣中护军王玄邈、征九江王广之等人袭击诛杀子敬，当时二十三岁。
English: In the first year of the Yanxing era, Gaozong, a high-ranking courtier, swept away the princes and sent Wang Xuanqin, a middle-ranking military officer, and Wang Guangzhi, a high-ranking military officer, to attack and kill Zi Zi, who was 23 years old at the time.

古文：晋安王子懋，字云昌，世祖第七子也。初封江陵公。
现代文：晋安王子懋字云昌，是世祖第七子。开始封为江陵公。
English: Prince Jinan, surnamed Yunchang, was the seventh son of the founder of the dynasty. He was first given the title of Gangneunggong.

古文：永明三年，为持节、都督南豫豫司三州、南中郎将、南豫州剌史。
现代文：永明三年，为持节、都督南豫豫司三州、南中郎将、南豫州刺史。
English: In the third year of the Yongming era, it was the turn of Jixi, the governor of Nan Yu Yu, the governor of Sanzhou, the governor of Nan Zhong Lang, and the governor of Nan Yu Yu.

古文：鱼复侯子响为豫州，子懋解督。
现代文：鱼复侯子响为遂州刺史，王懋解督。
English: Yu Fu Hou Zi Xiang is the history of Suizhou, and Wang Qi is the governor.

古文：四年，进号征虏将军。
现代文：四年，进号征虏将军。
English: Four years later, he was promoted to General of Conscription.

古文：南豫新置，力役寡少，加子懋领宣城太守。
现代文：南豫州新设，劳役很少，加官子懋兼宣城太守。
English: Southern Yu Prefecture was newly established, with few laborers, and the official's son and the governor of Xuancheng were appointed.

古文：明年，为监南兖兖徐青冀五州军事、后将军、南兖州刺史，持节如故。
现代文：第二年，为监南兖兖徐青冀五州军事、后将军、南兖州刺史，持节依旧。
English: In the second year, the five-state military, post-general, and South Luzhou history were engraved for the supervision of South Luzhou, and the festival was still held.

古文：六年，徙监湘州、平南将军、湘州刺史。
现代文：六年，徙监湘州、平南将军、湘州刺史。
English: In the sixth year, he became the migratory supervisor of Hunan, the general of Pingnan, and the historian of Hunan.

古文：明年，加持节、都督。
现代文：第二年，加持节、都督。
English: The following year, on the day of blessing, he became the governor of the capital.

古文：八年，进号镇南将军。
现代文：八年，进号镇南将军。
English: Eight years later, he was promoted to General Zhenan.

古文：撰《春秋例苑》三十卷奏之，世祖嘉之，敕付秘阁。
现代文：撰写《春秋例苑》三十卷上奏，世祖很是夸奖，诏令交付宫禁中藏书阁。
English: He wrote the thirty-volume prelude of "Spring and Autumn Example Garden," which was highly praised by the founder of the dynasty, and was ordered to be delivered to the bookcase in the palace.

古文：九年，亲府州事。
现代文：九年，亲自办理府州事务。
English: Nine years later, he was personally in charge of prefectural affairs.

古文：十年，入为侍中，领右卫将军。
现代文：十年，入朝为侍中，领右卫将军。
English: Ten years later, he entered the imperial court as a chamberlain, leading the right guard.

古文：十一年，迁散骑常侍，中书监。
现代文：十一年，迁散骑常侍，中书监。
English: In the eleventh year, he was transferred to the position of riding attendant, middle school librarian.

古文：未拜，仍为使持节、都督雍梁南北秦四州郢州之竟陵司州之随郡军事、征北将军、雍州刺史，给鼓吹一部。
现代文：没有拜受，仍然是使持节、都督雍梁南北秦四州和郢州的竟陵、司州的随郡各州郡军事、征北将军、雍州刺史，赏赐鼓吹一部。
English: It was not worshiped, but it was still the festival of the envoys, the governor of Yongliang, the four states of North and South Qin, and the imperial mausoleums of Bozhou, the military of the counties of the counties of the counties of the counties of the counties of the counties of the counties of the counties of the counties of the counties of the counties of the counties of the counties of the counties of the counties of the counties of the counties of the counties of the counties of the counties of the counties of the counties of the counties of the counties of the counties of the counties of the counties of the counties of the counties of the counties of the counties of the counties of the counties

古文：豫章王丧服未毕，上以边州须威望，许得奏之。
现代文：豫章王的丧期还没有满，皇上因边境州郡需要有威望者镇守，准许他上奏此事。
English: The mourning period for King Yuanzhang had not yet ended, and the emperor allowed him to report the matter because the border county needed a prestigious person to guard it.

古文：郁林即位，即本号为大将军。
现代文：郁林王即位，就本号为大将军。
English: When King Yulin ascended the throne, he was given the title of General.

古文：子懋见幼主新立，密怀自全之计，令作部造器杖。
现代文：子懋看幼小君主刚刚即位，私下怀持自保的计谋。使作坊锻造兵器。
English: Zi Yan saw that the young monarch had just ascended the throne, and secretly harbored a self-protection strategy. He ordered the workshop to forge weapons.

古文：陈显达时为征虏，屯襄阳，欲胁取以为将帅。
现代文：陈显达当时是征虏将军，驻扎在襄阳，想要胁迫他作为自己的将帅。
English: Chen Xianda was a conscript general stationed in Xiangyang at the time, and they wanted to coerce him into serving as their commander.

古文：显达密启，高宗征显达还。
现代文：显达秘密上告，高宗征显达回朝。
English: Hentai secretly appealed, and Gao Zongzheng sent Hentai back to the North.

古文：隆昌元年，迁子懋为都督江州剌史，留西楚部曲助镇襄阳，单将白直侠毂自随。
现代文：隆昌元年，迁子懋为都督江州刺史，留下西楚部队帮助镇守襄阳，衹带侍从卫队随行。
English: In the first year of Longchang, Qian Ziqian became the governor of Jiangsu Province, leaving the West Chu troops to help guard Xiangyang. He was accompanied by an attendant from the guard.

古文：显达入别，子懋谓曰： 朝廷令身单身而反，身是天王，岂可过尔轻率。
现代文：陈显达来同子懋告别，子懋说： 朝廷命你一个人回朝，你身是尊王，怎么能如此轻率。
English: Chen Xianda came to bid farewell to his son-in-law, and his son-in-law said, "The imperial court has ordered you to return to the imperial court alone. As a respected king, how can you be so careless?"

古文：今犹欲将二三千人自随，公意何如？ 
现代文：现在还是愿你带着二三千人跟随着，你觉得怎么样? 
English: Now I want two or three thousand horses to accompany me. I don't know, General, what do you think?

古文：显达曰： 殿下若不留部曲，便是大违敕旨，其事不轻。
现代文：显达说： 殿下如果不留下部众，就是大大违背了圣旨，这可非轻微小事。
English: Hende said, "Your highness, if you do not retain your followers, you will have greatly violated the sacred will. This is no small matter.

古文：且此间人亦难可收用。 
现代文：况且这些闲杂人员也难以收用。 
English: Moreover, these idle people are also difficult to employ.

古文：子懋默然，显达因辞出便发去，子懋计未立，还镇寻阳。
现代文：子懋沉默不语，陈显达出来就上路了，子懋的计策没有成功，回去镇守寻阳。
English: Zixuan was silent, Chen Xanda came out and went on the road. Zixuan's strategy did not succeed, and he went back to the town to look for the sun.

古文：延兴元年，加侍中。
现代文：延兴元年，加侍中。
English: In the first year of the Enhei era, he was promoted to junior samurai.

古文：闻鄱阳、随郡二王见杀，欲起兵赴难。
现代文：听说鄱阳、随郡二王被杀，想起兵往救国难。
English: I heard that the two kings of Shenyang and Su County were killed, and I thought of the soldiers going to save the country.

古文：母阮在都，遣书欲密迎上，阮报其兄于瑶之为计，瑶之驰告高宗。
现代文：其母阮淑媛在都城，送信去想让他秘密地迎接皇上，阮淑媛报告给同胞兄弟于瑶之一同商量计策，瑶之跑去报告高宗。
English: His mother, Nguyn Thunh, was in the capital and sent a message to secretly invite him to meet the emperor. Nguyn Thunh reported to one of his brothers, Yu Thunh, to discuss strategies. Thu Thunh ran to report to Quang Trung.

古文：于是纂严，遣平西将军王广之南北讨，使军主裴叔业与瑶之先袭寻阳，声云为郢州行司马。
现代文：于是内外戒严，派遣平西将军王广之南北讨伐，让军主裴叔业和于瑶之先去袭击寻阳，声称是郢州行司马。
English: As a result, martial law was imposed both at home and abroad, and the north-south crusade of the Pingxi general Wang Guang was dispatched, and the military leader Pei Shuhei and Yu Qi were sent to attack Xuanyang first, claiming to be Xingzhou Xingma.

古文：子懋知之，遣三百人守盆城。
现代文：子懋得知此事，派三百人镇守盆城。
English: When Zixuan learned of this, he sent three hundred men to guard the city.

古文：叔业溯流直下，至夜回下袭盆城。
现代文：裴叔业逆流直上，到夜间回师袭击盆城。
English: Pei Shuhei went upstream against the current, and attacked the basin city at night.

古文：城局参军乐贲开门纳之。
现代文：城局参军乐贲开城门迎他们进来。
English: The city government joined the army and opened the city gate to welcome them in.

古文：子懋率府州兵力，先已具船于稽亭渚，闻叔业得盆城，乃据州自卫。
现代文：子懋率领府州的兵士，已经先在稽亭渚准备好船只，听说裴叔业取下了盆城，就据守州城自卫。
English: The soldiers of Fuzhou, led by Zixuan, had already prepared the ships in Jingting first. Hearing that Pei Shuhei had taken down the city of Pan, they defended the city of Guozhou.

古文：子懋部曲多雍土人，皆踊跃愿奋，叔业畏之，遣于瑶之说子懋曰： 今还都，必无过忧，政当作散官，不失富贵也。 
现代文：子懋的部众裹有很多雍州本地人，于战事都踊跃振奋，叔业对之感到畏惧，派于瑶之去劝说子懋： 现在如果回朝廷，一定不计较你的过错，政事上可以做散官，仍然不失富贵。 
English: Zixuan's subordinates, many of whom were natives of Yongzhou, were excited about the war. Shude was afraid of Zixuan and sent him to persuade Zixuan: "If you return to the imperial court now, no matter what mistakes you make, you can be a non-official in politics and still be rich and noble."

古文：子懋既不出兵攻叔业，众情稍沮。
现代文：子懋既然不出兵攻打裴叔业，部众情绪都有些沮丧。
English: Since Xiao Zixuan did not send troops to attack Pei Shiye, the mood of his subordinates gradually became somewhat depressed.

古文：中兵参军于琳之，瑶之兄也，说子懋重赂叔业，子懋使琳之往。
现代文：中兵参军于琳之，是瑶之的兄长。劝说子懋用厚礼贿赂裴叔业，子懋就派于琳之前往。
English: The middle-ranking soldier who joined the army was Yu Linzhi, the elder brother of Zou Zi. Zou Zi was persuaded to bribe Pei Shuye with a heavy gift, and Zou Zi was sent ahead of Yu Linzhi.

古文：琳之因说叔业请取子懋。叔业遣军主徐玄庆将四百人随琳之入州城，僚佐皆奔散，琳之从二百人拔刃入斋。子懋骂曰： 小人何忍行此事！ 
现代文：于琳之于是劝说裴叔业让他去捉拿子懋，叔业派军主徐玄庆带领四百人跟着琳之进入州城，子懋属下官吏都纷纷逃散，于琳之率二百人在破晓时攻入府门，子懋骂道： 小人怎么能忍心做出这种事。 
English: Yu Linzhi then persuaded Pei Shuhei to let him capture Zikang. Shuhei sent the military commander Xu Xuanqing to lead four hundred people to follow Linzhi into the state capital. Zikang's subordinate officials fled in droves. Yu Linzhi led two hundred people to break into the government gate at dawn. Zikang scolded: How can a villain have the heart to do such a thing?

古文：琳之以袖鄣面，使人害之。
现代文：于琳之用袖子遮住脸部，命人把他杀了。
English: Yuling covered his face with his sleeve and ordered someone to kill him.

古文：时年二十三。
现代文：死时二十三岁。
English: He was 23 when he died.

古文：初，子懋镇雍，世祖敕以边略曰： 吾比连得诸处启，所说不异，虏必无敢送死理，然为其备，不可暂懈。
现代文：当初，子懋镇守雍州，世祖诏令驻守边境的策略： 我们近来接连攻占好几处地方，如果所说的情况确切，敌人一定没有敢来送死的道理，但为了戒备，仍不可松懈。
English: At the beginning, Zibo Town guarded Yongzhou, and Shizuo Daharu ordered the strategy of garrisoning the border: We have recently occupied several places one after another. If the above situation is accurate, the enemy must not have dared to send death, but in order to be on the alert, we must not relax.

古文：今秋犬羊辈越逸者，其亡灭之征。
现代文：今年秋天敌军逃逸，是其将要灭亡的征兆。
English: The enemy's flight this autumn is a portent of his impending doom.

古文：吾今亦行密纂集，须有分明指的，便当有大处分。
现代文：我们现在也秘密聚集兵力，衹要有明确目标，就可以大举进攻。
English: We are now also secretly amassing forces, and if we have a clear goal, we can attack in a big way.

古文：今普敕镇守，并部偶民丁，有事即便应接运，已敕更遣，想行有至者，汝共诸人量觅，可使人数往南阳舞阴诸要处参觇。
现代文：现在广泛告知镇守官员和部众民兵，有战事就立即接应，已下诏令来重新派遣，估计不久就有到达的了，你和大家一同参酌寻找，可以让人多次去南阳舞阴等重要防地视察。
English: Now widely inform the town guard officials and subordinate militia that if there is a war, they will immediately respond, and have issued a decree to re-dispatch, and it is estimated that they will arrive soon. You and everyone can participate in the search, and you can let people go to Nanyangwujin and other important defense sites for inspection many times.

古文：粮食最为根本，更不忧人仗，常行视驿亭马，不可有废阙。
现代文：粮食是最根本的，更不必说人马兵器，应常常去视察驿站的车马，不能有毁坏缺乏的情况。
English: Grain is the most fundamental, not to mention man-horse weapons, should often go to inspect the stagecoach station, there can not be a lack of destruction.

古文：并约语诸州，当其堺皆尔，不如法，即问事。 
现代文：并且和各州约定好，在其界内都要如此，不这么办，就追究其责任。 
English: And they agreed with the states that they would do so within their borders, and if they did not do so, they would be held accountable.

古文：又曰： 吾敕荆、郢二镇各作五千人阵，本拟应接彼耳。
现代文：又说： 我诏令荆、郢两镇，各排成五千人的大阵，本来想要接应他的。
English: He also said, "I ordered the two towns of Jing and Handan to form a large army of five thousand men each. I originally wanted to meet him.

古文：贼若送死者，更即呼取之。
现代文：敌军如果有来送死的，就立刻拿下他们。
English: If the enemy comes to kill them, take them down immediately.

古文：已敕子真，鱼继宗、殷公愍至镇，可以公愍为城主，三千人配之便足。
现代文：已诏令子真，鱼继宗殷公愍到镇上，可以让公愍做城主，配备三千人给他就足够了。
English: He has ordered Zizhen, the successor of Yu Zong Yin Gongjun to the town, to let Gongjun be the lord of the town, and it is enough to equip him with three thousand people.

古文：汝可好以阶级在意，勿得人求，或超五三阶级。
现代文：你应好好地关心尊卑等级一事，不要被人一加请求，就越级拔高三五阶。
English: You should take good care of the matter of the rank of superiority and inferiority, and do not be asked to be promoted three or five levels higher.

古文：及文章诗笔，乃是佳事，然世务弥为根本，可常忆之。
现代文：至于文章诗赋，本是好事，但世情时务更为重要，应当经常记住这点。
English: As for writing poetry, it is a good thing, but the current situation is more important, and we should always remember this.

古文：汝所启仗，此悉是吾左右御仗也，云何得用之。
现代文：你所要求的兵器，都是我左右侍从的御用兵器，你怎么可以使用。
English: The weapons you asked for are all the official weapons of my right and left attendants. How can you use them?

古文：品格不可乖，吾自当优量觅送。 
现代文：品级规格不可违背，我自然会好好地为你挑选。 
English: The grade specifications cannot be violated, and I will naturally make a good selection for you.

古文：先是启求所好书，上又曰： 知汝常以书读在心，足为深欣也。 
现代文：在此之前上奏请求赐给他所喜好的书，皇上又说： 知道你常把读书放在心上，足以让我深感欣慰了。 
English: Before that, he had asked for a favorite book to be given to him, and the Emperor said, "I am deeply gratified to know that you often take reading to heart.

古文：赐子懋杜预手所定《左传》及《古今善言》。
现代文：赏赐子懋由杜预亲手勘定的《左传》和《古今善言》。
English: Awarded "Zo Chuan" and "Ancient and Modern Sayings," both of which were written by Du Yu himself.

古文：随郡王子隆，字云兴，世祖第八子也。有文才。
现代文：随郡王子隆字云兴，是世祖第八子。有文才。
English: He was the eighth son of the ancestor of the county prince, Longzi Yunxing. He was a man of letters.

古文：初封枝江公。
现代文：开始封为枝江公。
English: He was initially given the title of Edo no kimi.

古文：永明三年，为辅国将军、南琅邪彭城二郡太守。
现代文：永明三年，为辅国将军、南琅邪彭城两郡太守。
English: In the third year of Yongming, he was the general of the auxiliary province and the governor of the two counties of Nanxun and Pengcheng.

古文：明年，迁江州刺史，未拜，唐宇之贼平，迁为持节、督会稽东阳新安临海永嘉五郡、东中郎将、会稽太守。
现代文：第二年，迁江州刺史，没有拜受，唐寓之叛乱平定后，迁为持节、督会稽束阳新安临海永嘉五郡、东中郎将、会稽太守。
English: In the second year, he was transferred to Jiangzhou to make history, but he was not welcomed. After the rebellion of Tang Yue was quelled, he was transferred to Ji Jie, the superintendent of the Yangshinan and Yongjia Five Counties, the East Middle Lord, and the superintendent of the party.

古文：迁长兼中书令。
现代文：迁长兼中书令。
English: He became the chief of relocation and the chief of correspondence.

古文：子隆娶尚书令王俭女为妃，上以子隆能属文，谓俭曰： 我家东阿也。 
现代文：子隆娶了尚书令王俭的女儿为王妃，皇上因为子隆擅长写文章，对王俭说： 这是我们家的东阿。 
English: Zilong married Wang Jian, the daughter of Shang Shuling, as the princess. Because Zilong was good at writing articles, the emperor said to Wang Jian, "This is the father of our family."

古文：俭曰： 东阿重出，实为皇家蕃屏。 
现代文：王俭说： 东四重新出世，实在是皇室的屏障。 
English: Wang Jian said: Dong Si's rebirth is really a barrier for the royal family.

古文：未及拜，仍迁中护军，转侍中、左卫将军。
现代文：没有来得及拜领，仍然迁为中护军，转侍中、左卫将军。
English: He did not have time to receive them, but he was still transferred to the middle guard, and became the general of the middle and left guards.

古文：八年，代鱼复侯子响为使持节、都督荆雍梁宁南北秦六州、镇西将军、荆州刺史，给鼓吹一部。
现代文：永明八年，代替鱼复侯子响为使持节、都督荆雍梁宁南北秦六州、镇西将军、荆州刺史，赐给鼓吹一部。
English: In the eighth year of the Yongming era, instead of Yu Fu Hou Zi Hang, it was the Envoys' Day, and the governors Jing Yong Liang Ning of the six states of North and South Qin, Zhen Xi Zhen, and Jing Zhou Zhishi were given a part of the propaganda.

古文：其年，始兴王鉴罢益州，进号督益州。
现代文：遣一年，始兴王鉴罢任益丛，进号督益业。
English: After one year of service, Shi Xing Wang Jian resigned from the position of Yixun Cong and entered the position of Inspector of Yixing.

古文：九年，亲府、州事。
现代文：九年，亲自治理府州杂事。
English: Nine years, pro-self-government prefectural miscellaneous affairs.

古文：十一年，晋安王子懋为雍州，子隆复解督。
现代文：十一年，晋安王子懋为雍州刺史，子隆又解督。
English: In the eleventh year, Prince Jian'an was appointed as the governor of Yongzhou, and Zilong was also relieved of his duties.

古文：郁林立，进号征西将军。
现代文：郁林王即位，进号征西将军。
English: King Yulin ascended to the throne and was given the title of General of the Western Expedition.

古文：隆昌元年，为侍中、抚军将军，领兵置佐。
现代文：隆昌元年，为侍中、抚军将军，领兵置佐。
English: In the first year of the Longchang era, he was a chamberlain, a general of the army, and an assistant to the leader.

古文：延兴元年，转中军大将军，侍中如故。
现代文：延兴元年，转中军大将军，侍中依旧。
English: In the first year of the Yanxing Dynasty, he was promoted to the rank of general in the Chinese army, but remained a chamberlain.

古文：子隆年二十一，而体过充壮，常服芦茹丸以自销损。
现代文：子隆二十一岁时，身体过于健壮，常常服用芦茹丸以减轻体重。
English: When Zilong was 21 years old, his body was too robust, and he often took aloe vera pills to lose weight.

古文：高宗辅政，谋害诸王，世祖诸子中，子隆最以才貌见惮，故与鄱阳王锵同夜先见杀。
现代文：高宗辅佐政事，谋害诸王侯，世祖各皇子中，子隆最因他的才貌受忌惮，所以和鄱阳王蕴锤在同一晚先被诛杀。
English: Gao Zongfu assisted in political affairs, plotted to kill princes, and of all the princes of the ancestors, Zilong was the most feared because of his talent, so he was killed on the same night as the King of Shenyang.

古文：文集行于世。
现代文：他的文集流传于世。
English: Ren Xiaoqiang's literary works have been circulated around the world.

古文：建安王子真，字云仙，世祖第九子也。
现代文：建安王子真字云仙，是世祖的第九子。
English: Prince Jian'an, whose real name was Yun Xian, was the ninth son of the founder.

古文：永明四年，为辅国将军、南琅邪彭城二郡太守。
现代文：永明四年，为辅国将军、南琅邪彭城两郡太守。
English: In the 4th year of Yongming, he was the general of the auxiliary province and the governor of the two counties of Nanxun and Pengcheng.

古文：迁持节、督南豫司二州军事、冠军将军、南豫州刺史，领宣城太守。
现代文：迁持节、督直辽司二州军事、冠军将军、南豫业刺史，领宣球太守。
English: Jian Zhi Festival, Governor Zhi Liao of the Two-State Military, Champion General, Nan Yuye stabbed history, and led Xuanqiu Taimou.

古文：进号南中郎将。
现代文：进号为南中郎将。
English: His shin-go (shifting number) was Minami Churo-sei.

古文：六年，以府州稍实，表解领郡。
现代文：六年，因为州府稍稍充实，卜表解领郡。
English: In six years, because the prefectural government was slightly enriched, Bu table was removed from the county.

古文：七年，进号右将军，迁丹阳尹，将军如故。
现代文：七年，进号右将军，迁昼阳尹，将军依旧。
English: In the seventh year, the general's name was changed to Right General, and the general's name was changed to Yang Yin.

古文：转左卫将军。
现代文：转左卫将军。
English: Turn left, General Zou.

古文：七年，迁中护军，仍出为持节、都督郢司二州军事、平西将军、郢州刺史。
现代文：七年，迁中护军，仍然出任为持节、都督郢司两州军事、平西将军、郢州刺史。
English: Seven years later, he was transferred to protect the troops in the middle of the country, and still served as Jisetsu, the military governor of the two states, the general of Pingxi, and the chief historian of Bozhou.

古文：郁林立，进号安西将军。
现代文：郁林王即位，进号为安西将军。
English: King Yulin ascended to the throne and was given the title of General Anxi.

古文：隆昌元年，为散骑常侍、护军将军。
现代文：隆昌元年，为散骑常侍、护军将军。
English: In the first year of the Longchang era, he was a horseback riding attendant and escort general.

古文：延兴元年，转镇军将军，领兵置佐，常侍如故。
现代文：延兴元年，转镇军将军，领兵置佐，常侍依旧。
English: In the first year of Yanxing, the general of the town army, the leader of the army, and the attendant were still the same.

古文：其年见杀，年十九。
现代文：这一年被杀，十九岁。
English: He was killed this year, aged nineteen.

古文：西阳王子明，字云光，世祖第十子也。永明元年，封武昌王。
现代文：西阳王子明字云光，是世祖第十子。永明元年，封为武昌王。
English: Xiyang Prince Mingzha Yunguang, the tenth son of the founder of the dynasty, was crowned King of Wuchang in the first year of the Yongming Dynasty.

古文：三年，失国玺，改封西阳。
现代文：三年，遣失传国玺印，改封西阳王。
English: Three years later, he lost the imperial seal and was renamed Xiyang Wang.

古文：六年，为持节、都督南兖兖徐青冀五州军事、冠军将军、南兖州刺史。
现代文：六年，为持节、都督南兖兖徐青冀五州军事、冠军将军、南兖业刺史。
English: In the sixth year, the five-state military, champion general, and Nanzhong industry of Nanzhong, Xuqing and Hebei, the governor of Nanzhong, made history.

古文：八年，进号征虏将军。
现代文：八年，进号征虏将军。
English: Eight years later, he was promoted to General of Conscription.

古文：十年，进左将军，仍为督会稽东阳临海永嘉新安五郡军事、会稽太守。将军如故。
现代文：十年，进为左将军，仍然督会稽束阳临海永嘉新安五郡军事、会稽太守，将军依旧。
English: Ten years later, Jin was the left general, still the inspector of the five counties of Yangling, Linhai, Yongjia, Xin'an, and the inspector of the military, and the general was still the same.

古文：子明风姿明净，士女观者，咸嗟叹之。
现代文：子明风采明朗澄净，不论男女看见他的，都嗟叹赞赏。
English: Zi Ming style is bright and clear, regardless of whether men and women see him, they all sigh with admiration.

古文：郁林初，进号平东将军。
现代文：郁林王即位之初，进号平束将军。
English: At the beginning of the reign of King Yulin, he was given the title of General Hiratsuka.

古文：隆昌元年，为右将军、中书令。
现代文：隆昌元年，为右将军、中书令。
English: In the first year of the Longchang era, he became the right general and the middle secretary.

古文：延兴元年，迁侍中，领骁骑将军，右军如故。
现代文：延兴元年；迁侍中，领骁骑将军，右军依旧。
English: In the first year of the Yanxing Dynasty, the right army was still led by the general who led the cavalry during the transfer of the retainers.

古文：建武元年，转抚军将军，领兵置佐。
现代文：建武元年，转抚军将军，领兵置佐。
English: In the first year of the Jianwu era, he was transferred to the general of the Fuzhou army and became the leader of the army.

古文：二年，诛萧谌，诬子明及弟子罕、子贞与谌同谋，见害。
现代文：二年，诛杀萧谌，诬告子明和其弟子罕、子贞与萧谌同谋，被杀。
English: Two years later, he was killed for assassinating Xiao Yao and falsely accusing Ziming and his disciples Han and Zizhen of being accomplices of Xiao Yao.

古文：年十七。
现代文：死时十七岁。
English: He was 17 years old.

古文：南海王子罕、字云华，世祖第十一子也。
现代文：南海王子罕字云华，是世祖第十一子。
English: Nanhai Prince, also known as Yunhua, was the 11th son of the founder.

古文：永明六年，为北中郎将、南琅邪彭城二郡太守。
现代文：永明六年，为北中郎将、南琅邪彭城二郡太守。
English: In the sixth year of the Yongming era, he became the general of the Northern Middle Kingdom and the governor of the two counties of the Southern Han Dynasty and Pengcheng.

古文：上初以白下地带江山，徙琅邪郡自金城治之，子罕始镇此城。
现代文：皇上当初因为白下地连长江、钟山，迁徙琅邪郡以金城为郡治，子罕开始镇守这城。
English: At the beginning, the emperor moved to Jincheng to govern Jincheng County because of Bai Shitai's connection to the Yangtze River and Zhongshan, and Zihang began to guard this city.

古文：十年，为持节、都督南兖兖徐青冀五州军事、征虏将军、南兖州刺史。
现代文：十年，为持节、都督南兖兖徐青冀五州军事、征虏将军、南兖州刺史。
English: In ten years, it will be the anniversary of the five-state military, the conscript general, and the history of Nanluozhou, the governor of Nanlu, Xuqing and Hebei.

古文：郁林即位，进号后将军。
现代文：郁林王即位，进号后将军。
English: King Yulin ascended to the throne and was given the title of general.

古文：隆昌元年，迁散骑常侍、右卫将军。
现代文：隆昌元年，迁散骑常侍、右卫将军。
English: In the first year of the Longchang era, the equestrian constables and the right guard generals were dispersed.

古文：建武元年，转护军将军。
现代文：建武元年，转护军将军。
English: In the first year of the Jianwu era, he became a general of the escort army.

古文：二年，见杀。
现代文：二年，被杀。
English: Two years, killed.

古文：年十七。
现代文：时年十七岁。
English: He was 17 years old.

古文：巴陵王子伦，字云宗，世祖第十三子也。
现代文：巴陵王子伦字云宗，是世祖第十三子。
English: Baling Prince Lunzhi Yunzong was the thirteenth son of the founder.

古文：永明七年，为持节、都督南豫司二州军事、南中郎将、南豫州刺史。
现代文：永明七年，为持节、都督南豫司二州军事、南中郎将、南豫州刺史。
English: In the seventh year of the Yongming era, he was Jisai, the military governor of Nanyu Province, the military commander of Nanyu Province, the vice-governor of Nanyu Province, and the historian of Nanyu Province.

古文：十年，迁北中郎将、南琅邪彭城二郡太守。
现代文：十年，迁北中郎将、南琅邪茎球二郡太守。
English: Ten years later, he was transferred to the position of Kita no churo shogun and became the governor of two counties in the southern part of the country.

古文：郁林即位，以南彭城禄力优厚，夺子伦与中书舍人綦母珍之，更以南兰陵代之。
现代文：郁林王即位，因为南彭城俸禄丰厚，取消子伦之职转给中书舍人綦母珍之，改子俭为直堕坠太守。
English: When King Yulin ascended to the throne, he abolished the position of son-in-law and transferred it to the second-ranked scholar, the mother-in-law Zhen, and changed the position of son-in-law to the first-ranked and second-ranked governor, because the salary of Nanpeng was rich.

古文：隆昌元年，迁散骑常侍、左将军。
现代文：塑元年，迁散骑常侍、左将军。
English: In the first year of the year of the pig, the cavalry general and the left general moved away.

古文：延兴元年，遣中书舍人茹法亮杀子伦，子伦正衣冠出受诏，曰： 鸟之将死，其鸣也哀；人之将死，其言也善。
现代文：延兴元年，派中书舍人茹法亮去诛杀子伦，工俭整理衣冠出来接受诏令，说： 乌到了临死的时候，呜叫声也格外哀切；人到要死时，他的话语也会友善。
English: In the first year of the Yanxing era, Zhu Farang, a scholar from the Middle Kingdom, was sent to kill Zilun, and he came out to accept the edict, saying: When Wu was about to die, his cry was particularly sad; when a person was about to die, his words would also be friendly.

古文：先朝昔灭刘氏，今日之事，理数固然。
现代文：我朝过去灭掉刘宋，今天的事，正是理所当然。
English: I have eliminated Liu Song in the past, and today's matter is just a matter of course.

古文：君是身家旧人，今衔此使，当由事不获已。 
现代文：你是我们家的旧属下，现在接受这个使命，正是因为事不由己。 
English: You are an old man who once served Emperor Wu, and now you have been ordered to come here. You cannot help yourself, you are only acting under orders.

古文：法亮不敢答而退。
现代文：茹法亮不敢答话退了下去。
English: Rufa Liang did not dare to answer and retreated.

古文：年十六。
现代文：死时十六岁。
English: He was sixteen when he died.

古文：邵陵王子贞，字云松，世祖第十四子也。永明十年，为东中郎将、吴郡太守。
现代文：登陆王王贞字雪松，是世祖第十四子。丞明十年，为东中郎将、吴郡太守。
English: Wang Wang Zhen, surnamed Cedar, was the 14th son of the founder of the dynasty. In the 10th year of the Joseon Dynasty, he became the general of the Eastern Middle Kingdom and the governor of Wu County.

古文：郁林即位，进号征虏将军，还为后将军。
现代文：郁林王即位，进号征虏将军，后又为后将军。
English: King Yulin ascended to the throne, and was given the title of General of Conscription, and later General of Conscription.

古文：建武二年，见诛。
现代文：建迭二年，被杀。
English: He was killed two years later.

古文：年十五。
现代文：时年十五岁。
English: She is fifteen years old.

古文：临贺王子岳，字云峤，世祖第十六子也。永明七年封。
现代文：临贺王子岳字云崤，是世祖第十六子。永明七年受封。
English: Lin He Prince Yue Zi Yun Qi was the 16th son of the founder of the dynasty. He was crowned in the seventh year of the Yongming Dynasty.

古文：高宗诛世祖诸子，唯子岳及弟六人在后，世呼为七王。
现代文：高宗诛杀世祖各皇子时，衹有子岳和六个弟弟在后宫，世间叫做七王。
English: When Gao Zongxuan killed the princes of his ancestors, Gao Youzidake and his six brothers were in the harem, known in the world as the seven kings.

古文：朔望入朝，上还后宫，辄叹息曰： 我及司徒诸儿子皆不长，高、武子孙日长大。 
现代文：初一、十五入朝，皇上回到后宫，就要叹息说： 我和司徒的儿子们都不长大，高帝、武帝的子孙却渐长大。 
English: On the 15th day of the 1st month of the 1st year of the reign of the emperor, when the emperor returned to the harem, he would sigh and say: I and the sons of Stutts did not grow up, but the sons and daughters of Emperor Gao and Emperor Wu gradually grew up.

古文：永泰元年，上疾甚，绝而复苏。
现代文：永泰元年，皇上病重，死去又苏醒过来。
English: In the first year of Yongtai, the emperor fell seriously ill, died and came back to life.

古文：于是诛子岳等。
现代文：于是杀掉了子岳等人。
English: So he killed Zi Yue and others.

古文：延兴建武中，凡三诛诸王，每一行事，高宗辄先烧香火，呜咽涕泣，众以此辄知其夜当相杀戮也。
现代文：延兴、建武年间，一共三次诛杀诸王，每次行事，高宗总是先烧香火，呜咽哭泣，众人就知道当夜要杀诸王了。
English: During the Yanxing and Jianwu years, there were a total of three battles to kill kings. At each event, Gaozong always burned incense first, sobbing and weeping, and everyone knew that the kings would be killed that night.

古文：子岳死时，年十四。
现代文：子岳死时，十四岁。
English: Zi Yue was 14 years old when he died.

古文：西阳王子文，字云儒，世祖第十七子也。永明七年，封蜀郡王。
现代文：西阳王子文字云儒，是世祖第十七子。永明七年，封为蜀郡王。
English: Xiyang Prince, also known as Yunru, was the seventeenth son of the founder of the dynasty. He was crowned King of Shu County in the seventh year of Yongming.

古文：建武中，改封西阳王。
现代文：建武年间，改封西阳王。
English: During the Jianwu era, he was renamed Xiyang Wang.

古文：永泰元年，见杀。
现代文：永泰元年被杀。
English: Yongtai was killed in the first year of the year.

古文：年十四。
现代文：时年十四岁。
English: He was 14 years old at the time.

古文：衡阳王子峻，字云嵩，世祖第十八子也。
现代文：衡阳王子峻字云嵩，是世祖第十八子。
English: Hengyang Prince Junziyun, the 18th son of the founder of the dynasty.

古文：永明七年，封广汉郡王。
现代文：永明七年，封为广汉郡王。
English: In the seventh year of Yongming, he was named the king of Guanghan County.

古文：建武中，改封。
现代文：建武年间，改封。
English: During the Kenmu era, the name was changed.

古文：永泰元年，见杀。
现代文：永泰元年被杀。
English: Yongtai was killed in the first year of the year.

古文：年十四。
现代文：时年十四岁。
English: He was 14 years old at the time.

古文：南康王子琳，字云璋，世祖第十九子也。母荀氏，盛宠。
现代文：南康王子琳字云璋，是世祖第十九子。母亲荀氏，非常得宠。
English: Nankang Prince Lingzhi Yunjie was the 19th son of the founder. His mother, Zou, was very popular.

古文：子琳钟爱。
现代文：子琳也特别受到钟爱。
English: Zilin is also particularly loved.

古文：永明七年，封宣城王。
现代文：永明七年，封为宣城王。
English: In the seventh year of Yongming, he was named the king of Xuancheng.

古文：明年，上改南康公褚蓁以封子琳。
现代文：第二年，皇上改用南康公荡蓁来封王继。
English: In the second year, the emperor changed to the Nan Kang Gong Wang Zong to seal Wang Zhi.

古文：永泰元年，见杀。
现代文：永泰元年被杀。
English: Yongtai was killed in the first year of the year.

古文：年十四。
现代文：时年十四岁。
English: He was 14 years old at the time.

古文：湘东王子建，字云立，世祖第二十一子也。
现代文：湘东王子建字云立，是世祖第二十一子。
English: Shandong Prince Jian Zi Yun Li was the twenty-first son of the founder.

古文：母谢氏，无宠，世祖度为尼。
现代文：母亲谢氏，不受宠，世祖时剃度为尼。
English: His mother, Xie, was not favored, and he was shaved when he was a child.

古文：高宗即位，使还母。
现代文：高宗即位，使他母亲回来。
English: Gao Zong ascended the throne and brought his mother back.

古文：子建，永泰元年见杀，年十三。
现代文：王建在永泰元年被杀，时年十三岁。
English: Wang Jian was 13 years old when he was killed in the first year of Yongtai.

古文：南郡王子夏，字云广，世祖第二十三子也。
现代文：南郡王子夏字云广，是世祖第二十三子。
English: Prince Xia Zi Yunguang of Nan County is the 23rd son of the founder.

古文：上春秋高，子夏最幼，宠爱过诸子。
现代文：皇上年事已高，子夏年龄最小，对他的宠爱超过其他各子。
English: The emperor was very old, and Zixia was the youngest. He was favored more than any other son.

古文：初，世祖梦金翅鸟下殿庭，搏食小龙无数，乃飞上天。
现代文：当初，世祖梦见金翅乌飞下殿来，捕食无数小龙，又飞上天去。
English: At first, the ancestor dreamed that the golden winged owl flew down to the palace, preyed on countless little dragons, and flew up to the sky.

古文：永泰元年，子夏诛。
现代文：永泰元年，子夏被杀。
English: In the first year of Yongtai, Zixia was killed.

古文：年七岁。
现代文：时年七岁。
English: He was seven years old at the time.

古文：史臣曰：民之劳逸，随所遭遇，习以成性，有识斯同。
现代文：史臣曰：平民百姓或者劳苦或者安逸，都由他的生平遭遇决定，习惯了就形成他的品性，成年后大致相同。
English: Shi Zhen said: The common people, whether they are hard-working or easy-going, are all determined by their life experiences. Once they get used to it, it will form their character, and it will be roughly the same after they become adults.

古文：帝王子弟，生长尊贵，薪禽之道未知，富厚之图已极。
现代文：而帝王子弟，生长在尊贵之家，不知道筹划生计的事情，已经享有极高的荣华富贵。
English: But the younger brother of the emperor, who grew up in a noble family and did not know how to plan his livelihood, has already enjoyed great glory and wealth.

古文：龆年稚齿，养器深宫，习趋拜之仪，受文句之学，坐蹑搢绅，傍绝交友，情伪之事，不经耳目，忧惧之道，未涉胸衿。虽卓尔天悟，自得怀抱，孤寡为识，所陋犹多。
现代文：从很小时起，就在深广的宫廷裹抚养，学习趋拜一类礼仪，接受文章学问方面的教导。行走坐卧都垂着绅带插着笏板，不同其他人交往，真真假假的各种事情，没有耳闻目见，心胸中也不曾有值得忧虑恐惧的事，尽管是天分悟性很高，自然有不凡的胸襟，然而见识稀少，眼光短浅的情况很多。
English: From a very young age, he was raised in the vastness of the palace, learning to worship a kind of etiquette, accepting the teaching of literature and culture. Walking, sitting and sleeping are hanging with a sash inserted with a cutting board, different from other people's interactions, all kinds of true and false things, there is no hearing and seeing, and there has never been anything worth worrying and fearing in his heart. Although he is highly gifted and intelligent, he naturally has an extraordinary mind, but there are many cases where his knowledge is scarce and his vision is short-sighted.

古文：朝出阃闺，暮司方岳，帝子临州，亲民尚小。年序次第，宜屏皇家，防骄剪逸，积代恒典，平允之情，操捶贻虑。
现代文：早晨出了宫禁之门，晚上就治理州郡，身为皇子降临州郡，治理百姓年纪尚小，论年龄次序，又当避免倚重皇室身份，防止骄傲消除放纵之态，历代都以此为永恒的准则，追求公正平等的情感，出仕从政的锻炼，都要竭尽思虑。
English: In the morning, he went out of the palace gate, and in the evening, he governed the prefecture and county. As a prince, he came to the prefecture and county to govern the people who were still young. In terms of age order, it was also necessary to avoid relying on the royal identity, prevent pride, and eliminate the state of indulgence. All generations have taken this as an eternal standard. The pursuit of justice and equality, and the exercise of serving in politics, must be carefully considered.

古文：故辅以上佐，简自帝心，劳旧左右，用为主帅。州国府第，先令后行，饮食游居，动应闻启。端拱守禄，遵承法度，张弛之要，莫敢厝言。行事执其权，典签掣其肘，苟利之义未申，专违之咎已及。
现代文：所以需要辅佐的大臣，由皇上加以选择，又要烦劳皇上旧臣，为之做主帅，州国府第内外各事，先发出命令再实行，饮食游乐和常起居，随时应当使皇上知道，正身拱手谨守自己的福禄，继承遵守已有的法律制度，政事应该紧严还是宽和不敢随意发表议论，行事官为他具体执行职权，典签官从旁加以牵制，贪求不正当利益的念头尚未实行，却已经有了专断违逆的过失。
English: Therefore, the ministers who need support should be selected by the emperor, and they should bother the emperor's old ministers and be the head of them. For the internal and external affairs of the state and national government, they should first issue orders and then implement them. For eating, playing and living, they should always let the emperor know that they are committed to their own fortunes, inheriting and abiding by the existing legal system, whether the government affairs should be tight or loose and not dare to make comments at will, the acting officials should specifically perform their duties for him, and the signing officers should restrain them from the side. The idea of greed for illegitimate interests has not yet been implemented, but it has already

古文：处地虽重，行己莫由，威不在身，恩未接下，仓卒一朝，艰难总集，望其释位扶危，不可得矣。
现代文：所处地位虽然重要，行事却不能根据自己的意见，威严不在自身，恩德也未施给下民，一旦事有仓促，碰上各种艰难之事纠结杂集，指望他们身居其位扶助国家度过危难，也是不可能的。
English: Although the position they occupy is important, they cannot act according to their own opinions. They do not have the authority to act on their own, and they do not show their benevolence to their subordinates. It is also impossible to expect them to stay in their positions to help the country overcome the crisis when things are rushed and various difficult matters are encountered.

古文：路温舒云： 秦有十失，其一尚存。 
现代文：路温舒说： 秦朝有十种过失，其中之一还存在着。 
English: Lu Wenshu said: The Qin Dynasty had ten kinds of faults, one of which still exists.

古文：斯宋氏之余风，在齐而弥弊也。
现代文：这是刘宋时遗留下来的风气，到齐代更加败坏不堪了。
English: This is the culture left over from the Liu Song Dynasty, and it became even more corrupt in the Qi Dynasty.

古文：赞曰：武十七王，文宣令望，爱才悦古，仁信温良，宗英是寄，遗惠未忘。
现代文：赞曰：武帝的十七个王子，文宣王德高望重，爱惜人才珍好古物，仁义有信温良可喜，是宗族中的英才，遣下的恩惠至今不能忘怀。
English: Zang said: Emperor Wu's seventeen princes, King Wenxuan, were highly respected for their virtue, cherished talent, treasured antiquities, benevolence and righteousness, faithfulness and gentleness, and could be pleased. They were great talents in the clan, and the favors they received cannot be forgotten to this day.

古文：庐陵犯色，安陆括囊。
现代文：庐陵王冒犯天子，安陆王沉默无言。
English: The King of Fuling offends the Son of Heaven, the King of Anlu is silent.

古文：晋安早悟，随郡雕章。
现代文：晋安王少年早慧，瞪难王文采斐然。
English: The boy Jinan Wang is quick-witted, and the boy Wang Wencai is brilliant.

古文：建贺湘海，二陵二阳，幼蕃盛宠，南郡南康。
现代文：建贺湘海，二陵二阳，幼年均极受宠爱，还有南郡王南康王也如此。
English: Jian He Xianghai, Er Ling Er Yang, were all extremely loved in their early years, as was King Nankang of Nan County.

