古文： 中经 ，谓振穷趋急，施之能言厚德之人。
现代文： 中经 所论述的是那些救人危难，给人教诲和施以大恩大德的人。
English: The middle book is about those who save people from danger, teach people, and show great kindness.

古文：救拘执穷者，不忘恩也。
现代文：如果他们救助了那些拘捕在牢房的人，那些被救者，是不会忘记其恩德的。
English: If they rescue those detained in the cell, those rescued will not forget their kindness.

古文：能言者，俦善博惠，施德者，依道；而救拘执者，养使小人。
现代文：能言之士，能行善而广施恩惠，有德之人，按照一定的道义准则去救助那些被拘押的人，被拘押的人一旦被救，就会感恩而听命了。
English: Those who are able to speak, those who are able to do good and spread goodness, and those who are virtuous, according to a certain moral code, help those who are detained. Once the detainees are saved, they will be grateful and obedient.

古文：盖士，当世异时，或当因免阗坑，或当伐害能言，或当破德为雄，或当抑拘成罪，或当戚戚自善，或当败败自立。
现代文：一些士人，生不逢时，在乱世里侥幸免遭兵乱；有的因善辩而受残害；有的起义成为英雄，更遭受陷害；有的恪守善道；有的虽遭失败，却自强自立。
English: Some scholars were born at the wrong time, and in a chaotic world, they were lucky to be spared from military turmoil; some were martyred for their good arguments; some became heroes in the uprising, and were even framed; some adhered to the good way; and some, although they were defeated, became self-reliant.

古文：故道贵制人，不贵制于人也；制人者握权，制于人者失命。
现代文：因此，恪守 中经 之道的人，推重以 中经 之道施于人，而不要被他人控制。
English: Therefore, those who adhere to the Middle Way should focus on using the Middle Way to influence others, rather than being controlled by others.

古文：是以见形为容，象体为貌，闻声和音，解仇斗郄，缀去却语，摄心守义。
现代文：控制他人者掌握主动权，而一旦被他人控制，就会失掉许多机遇。 中经 之道就是关于 见形为容，象体为貌，闻声和音，解仇斗郄，缀去却语，摄心守义 的原则探讨。
English: Those who control others have the initiative, but once they are controlled by others, they will lose many opportunities.The middle way is to discuss the principles of seeing the form as the face, the image as the body, hearing the voice and the sound, solving the feud, decorating the Chao language, and concentrating on righteousness.

古文：本经纪事者，纪道数，其变要在《持枢》、《中经》。
现代文：《本经》中记载的理论，权变的要旨，均在《持枢》、《中经》两篇中。
English: The theory recorded in this sutra, and the gist of the power change, are both in the two articles of "Holding the Pivot" and "Middle Classic."

古文： 见形为容，象体为貌 者，谓爻为之生也，可以影响、形容、象貌而得之也。
现代文：所谓 见形为容，象体为貌 ，是因人而变化的人的行为，可以影响人的形容和相貌。
English: The so-called "seeing the form as the face, the body as the appearance" is the behavior of people that changes due to people, which can affect the description and appearance of people.

古文：有守之人，目不视非、耳不听邪，言必《诗》、《书》，行不僻淫，以道为形，以德为容，貌庄色温，不可象貌而得也，如是隐情塞郄而去之。
现代文：伪狡者，仅凭他们的形容和外貌就能够辨识他们；而恪守道德的有为之人，他们不看违背礼节的事，耳朵不听邪恶之言，他们谈论的都是《诗经》《尚书》之类，他们没有乖僻淫乱行为。他们以道为外貌，以德为容颜，相貌端庄神色温和，不能光从外表来辨识他们。常常是隐名埋姓而回避人世。
English: Deceitful and cunning people can be recognized only by their descriptions and appearance; while virtuous people who abide by morality, they do not look at things that violate etiquette, their ears do not listen to evil words, they talk about the "Song of Songs," "Song of Songs" and the like, they do not have perverse and lewd behavior. They take the Tao as their appearance, virtue as their face, their appearance is dignified and gentle, and they cannot be distinguished from their appearance. They often hide their names and avoid the world.

古文： 闻声和音 ，谓声气不同，则恩爱不接。
现代文： 闻声和音 ，听到声音是否与之相合，也是一种方法。
English: It is also a way to hear whether the sound is consistent with it.

古文：故商角不二合，徵羽不相配。
现代文：如果说人与人意气不投：也就不接受对方的恩爱友好。
English: If it is said that people do not invest in each other, they will not accept each other's kindness and friendship.

古文：能为四声主，其唯宫乎？
现代文：就如同在五音中，商与角两种声音不相和，徵与羽不般配一样。
English: Just as in the pentatonic scale, the consonant and the angle do not go together, and the semicolon and the feather do not go together.

古文：故音不和则不悲，是以声散、伤、丑、害者，言必逆于耳也。
现代文：能成为四声的主音唯有宫声而已。所以说，音声不和谐，悲伤韵律是不会产生的，散、伤、丑、害都是不和之音，如果把它表现出来一定是很难入耳的。
English: The only sound that can be the main sound of four voices is the imperial harp. Therefore, the sound is not harmonious, and the sad rhyme does not occur. The dissonance, injury, ugliness, and harm are all discordant sounds, and if it is expressed, it must be difficult to hear.

古文：虽有美行盛誉，不可比目，合翼相须也，此乃气不合、音不调者也。
现代文：就算这些行为良好和声名盛大，也不能像比目鱼和比翼鸟那样亲密无间，这是意气不投、音律不和的缘故。
English: Even if they are well-behaved and well-known, they cannot be as close as the flounder and the pterodactyl, because of their different temperaments and musical rhythms.

古文： 解仇斗郄 ，谓解赢微之仇。斗郄者，斗强也。
现代文：所谓 解仇斗郄 ，就是解决矛盾。 解仇 是调解两个弱小者的不和； 斗郄 则是当两个强大的国家不和时，使他们相争的策略。
English: The so-called reconciliation is to solve the contradiction; reconciliation is to mediate the discord between the two weak ones; confrontation is the strategy to make the two powerful countries fight each other when they are at odds.

古文：强郄既斗，称胜者，高其功，盛其势。
现代文：强大敌手相斗时，得胜的一方，夸大其功业，虚张声势。
English: When powerful enemies fight each other, the winning side will exaggerate its achievements and bluff.

古文：弱者哀其负，伤其卑，污其名，耻其宗。
现代文：而失败的一方，则因兵败力弱，玷污了自己声名，有侮于祖先而痛心。
English: On the other hand, the losing side, because of its weak military defeat, has tarnished its own reputation, and is heartbroken at having disrespected its ancestors.

古文：故胜盅，闻其功势，苟进而不知退。
现代文：所以，得胜者，一听到人们称赞他的威势，就会轻敌而贸然进攻。
English: Therefore, the victor, as soon as he hears people praise his power, will treat the enemy lightly and rush to attack.

古文：弱者闻哀其负，见其伤则强大力倍，死为是也。
现代文：而失败者，听到有人同情他的不幸时，反而会努力支撑，拼死抵抗。
English: And the loser, when he hears someone sympathize with his misfortune, will instead try to support, desperately resist.

古文：郄无极大，御无强大，则皆可胁而并。
现代文：敌人虽然强大，往往有弱点，对方虽说有防御，而实际力量并不一定强大。我方是可以用强大的兵势胁迫对方，让他们服从，吞并其国家。
English: Although the enemy is strong, it often has weaknesses, and although the other side has defenses, its actual strength is not necessarily strong. We can use strong military forces to coerce the other side, make them obey, and annex their country.

古文： 缀去 者，谓缀己之系言，使有余思也。
现代文：所谓 缀去 的方法是说对那些即将离去的人，说出真心挽留的话，以便使对方留下回忆与追念。
English: The so-called embellishment method is to say to those who are about to leave, to say the words of sincere retention, so that the other party can leave memories and reminiscences.

古文：故接贞信者，称其行、厉其志，言可为可复，会之期喜，以他人之庶，引验以结往，明款款而去之。
现代文：所以遇到忠贞信义的人，一定要称颂他的德行，鼓励他再接再厉。表示可以再度合作，后会有期，对方一定会很高兴。以他人之幸运，去引验他往日的光荣，即使款款而去，也必定十分留恋于我们。
English: Therefore, when you meet a loyal and faithful person, you must praise his virtues and encourage him to make further efforts. If you say that you can cooperate again, there will be a period later, the other party will be very happy. If you use the luck of others to test his past glory, even if he leaves, he will surely be very attached to us.

古文： 却语 者，察伺短也。
现代文： 却语 的方法是说要在暗中观察他人的短处。
English: The method of rebuttal is to observe the shortcomings of others in secret.

古文：故言多必有数短之处，议其短验之。
现代文：因为人话说的太多，就一定会有过失。要议论他的过失，并加以验证。
English: Because people talk too much, there must be faults. Talk about his faults and verify them.

古文：动以忌讳，示以时禁，其人因以怀惧，然后结以安其心，收语尽藏而却之，无见己之所不能于多方之人。
现代文：要经常揭他忌讳的短处，并证明它是触犯了时政所禁止的。这样他就会畏惧，真诚地安抚他恐惧的心向他表明自己没有恶意，让他安心。对以前说过的话，也不再说了，暗中则藏起这些证据，秘不示人。
English: It is necessary to constantly expose the shortcomings of his taboo and prove that it violates the prohibition of the current government. In this way, he will be afraid, sincerely appease his fearful heart, show him that he has no malicious intent, and reassure him. He will not say anything more about what he has said before, but secretly hide these evidence and hide it from others.

古文： 摄心 者，谓逢好学伎术者，则为之称远。
现代文：而且，还要叮嘱他不要再把这些过失暴露给有见识的人。
English: Moreover, he should be told not to expose these faults to knowledgeable people.

古文：方验之，敬以奇怪，人系其心于己。效之于人，验去，乱其前，吾归诚于己。
现代文： 摄心 的方法是，遇到那些好学且技艺高超的人，应该四处宣扬，为他扩大影响，然后验证他的本领，让远近的人都尊敬他，并惊叹他的奇才异能，别人则将会与自己拉近关系。
English: The method of concentration is that when encountering those who are eager to learn and highly skilled, you should spread it around, expand the influence for him, and then verify his ability, so that people near and far respect him and marvel at his amazing abilities, and others will draw closer to themselves.

古文：遭淫色酒者，为之术，音乐动之，以为必死、生日少之忧。
现代文：为别人效力者，要将之与历史上的贤才相对照，称其与前贤一样，诚心诚意地相待，这样方能得到贤能的人。
English: Those who work for others should be compared with the sages in history, saying that they are the same as the former sages, and sincerely treat each other. In this way, you can get a virtuous person.

古文：喜以自所不见之事，终可以观漫澜之命，使有后会。 守义 者，谓守以人义。
现代文：遇到沉于酒色的人，就要用音乐感动他们，并以酒色会致人于死，要忧余命无多，以此，教谕他们，让他们高兴地看到见所未见的事，最终认识到遥远的未来，使命之重大，使之觉得将会与我后会有期。
English: Encountering people who are addicted to alcohol, it is necessary to move them with music, and with alcohol will cause people to die, and there is not much left to worry about. In this way, teach them, let them be happy to see things they have never seen, and finally realize the distant future, the importance of the mission, and make them feel that they will have a future with me.

古文：探心在内以合也。探心深得其主也。
现代文： 守义 的方法说的是，自己坚持仁义之道，并用仁义探察人心，使对方从心底里广行仁义。
English: The way to safeguard righteousness is to adhere to the way of benevolence and righteousness, and use benevolence to explore the hearts of people, so that the other party can carry out benevolence from the bottom of their hearts.

古文：从外制内，事有系由而随也。
现代文：通过仁义之道，从外到内控制人心，由此就能无往而不胜。
English: Through the path of benevolence and righteousness, controlling people's hearts from the outside to the inside, this will lead to victory.

古文：故小人比人则左道，而用之至能败家辱国。
现代文：而小人对待人，则用旁门左道，用此则就会家破国亡。
English: A villain, on the other hand, uses the side door to the left to deal with people, and this will lead to the destruction of the family and the country.

古文：非贤智，不能守家以义，不能守国以道，圣人所贵道微妙者，诚以其可以转危为安，救亡使存也。
现代文：如果不是贤明智慧之人，是不能用义来治家的，用道来守国的。圣人是特别重视 道 的微妙的。因为 道 确实可以使国家转危为安，救亡存国的。
English: If you are not a wise and intelligent person, you will not be able to use righteousness to govern your family and the way to protect the country. The sage attaches great importance to the subtlety of the way, because the way can really turn the country around and save the surviving country.

