古文：江南有文科者，衣冠之族，性奸巧，好以术困人而取其资。
现代文：原文江南有个参加经学考试的士子，虽出身权贵之家，但个性奸诈，善于投机取巧，喜欢用计使别人落入他所设计的圈套，再进而要胁，诈骗对方财物。
English: According to the original text, there was a scholar in Jiangnan Province who took part in the academic examination. Although he came from a powerful family, he had a treacherous personality, was good at opportunism, and liked to use tricks to make others fall into the trap he designed, and then to threaten and defraud the other party's property.

古文：有房一所，货于徽人。
现代文：这士子有栋房子卖给一位徽州人。
English: This gentleman sold a house to a Huizhou resident.

古文：业经改造久矣，科执原直取赎，不可，乃售计于奴，使其夫妇往投徽人为仆，徽人不疑也。
现代文：那徽州人买下房子，经过改建后已经住了很长时间。士子持着原来双方买卖房屋的契约，想向徽州人买回房子，遭到拒绝。士子于是心生一计，命自家一对仆人夫妇投身徽州人家为奴仆，徽州人丝毫未加怀疑。
English: Na Huizhou people bought the house and have lived in it for a long time after the reconstruction. The scholar held the original contract for the sale and purchase of the house between the two parties and wanted to buy the house back from the Huizhou people, but was refused. The scholar then made a plan of his own and ordered a servant couple to devote themselves to the Huizhou people as slaves. The Huizhou people did not have the slightest doubt.

古文：两月余，此仆夫妇潜窜还家，科即使他奴数辈谓徽人曰： 吾家有逃奴某，闻靠汝家，今安在？ 
现代文：两个多月后，这对夫妇暗中潜逃回士子家，士子命多名奴仆到徽州人家，说： 我们有两名奴仆逃走，听说是投身你家为奴，现在他俩在何处？ 
English: More than two months later, the couple secretly sneaked back to Shizi's house. Shizi ordered several servants to go to Huizhou's house and said, "We have two servants who have run away. We heard that they have joined your family as slaves. Where are they now?"

古文：徽人曰： 某来投，实有之，初不知为贵仆，昨已逸去矣。 
现代文：徽州人说： 确实有这样的两人来我家为奴，当初我并不知道是贵府的仆人。但这两人昨天已逃走了。 
English: The Huizhou resident said, "It's true that two people like this came to my home as slaves. At first, I didn't know that they were servants of your government. But the two people escaped yesterday.

古文：奴辈曰： 吾家昨始缉知在宅，岂有逸去之事？
现代文：奴仆们说： 昨天我们还看见这两人出入这宅府，哪有这么巧，晚上就逃走了？
English: The servants said, Yesterday also we saw these two men come and go out of the house, and by what chance did they escape in the evening?

古文：必汝家匿之耳，吾当搜之! 
现代文：一定是你们把他俩藏起来了，我们要搜。 
English: You must have hidden them. We have to search for them.

古文：徽人自信不欺，乃屏家眷于一室，而纵诸奴入视，诸奴搜至酒房，见有土松处，佯疑，取锄发之，得死人腿一只，乃哄曰： 汝谋害吾家人矣!
现代文：徽州人自认清白，无所隐瞒，于是就将家人集中在一间屋子里，任凭士子的奴仆四处查看。奴仆们来到酒窖，见有一堆土隆起，乃故作怀疑状，拿起锄头挖掘，竟挖出一条死人腿，于是起哄说： 你竟敢谋害我府上的人！
English: The people of Huizhou admitted their innocence and had nothing to hide, so they gathered their family members in one room and allowed the servants of the nobles to look around. The servants came to the wine cellar, saw a pile of soil bulge, but they were suspicious, picked up the hoe to dig, and dug out a dead man's leg, and then said: How dare you murder the people in my house!

古文：不然，此腿从何而来？
现代文：这死人腿你作何解释？
English: How do you explain this dead man's leg?

古文：当执此讼官耳。 
现代文：我们要将你送官治罪。 
English: We're going to send you to jail.

古文：徽人惧，乃倩人居间，科曰： 还吾屋契，当寝其事耳。 
现代文：徽州人顿时吓得失了主意，只好央请他人居间作调解人。士子说： 还我房契，这事我便不再追究。 
English: The man from Huizhou suddenly lost his nerve and had to ask someone else to act as a mediator. The scholar said: Give me back my lease, and I won't pursue the matter any further.

古文：徽人不得已，与之期而迁去。
现代文：徽州人不得已只好答应，限期搬离。
English: The people of Huizhou had no choice but to agree to the deadline and move out.

古文：向酒房之人腿，则前投靠之奴所埋也。
现代文：其实酒窖中所挖出的人腿，就是前来投靠的那对夫妇事先掩埋的。
English: In fact, the human leg dug up in the wine cellar was buried in advance by the couple who came to help.

古文：科尝为人居间公事。
现代文：这位士子有一次也为人居间作财物公证人，对方约他到公所查看财物，然后再贴上封条。
English: On one occasion, this scholar also acted as a property notary for a person's living quarters. The other party asked him to go to the office to check the property, and then affix the seal.

古文：其人约于公所封物，正较量次，有一跛丐，右持杖，左携竹篮，篮内有破衣，捱入乞赏。科拈零星与之，丐嫌少，科佯怒，取元宝一锭掷篮中，叱曰： 汝欲此耶？ 
现代文：正在清点财物时，有名跛脚的乞丐，右手拄着拐杖，左手拿着竹篮，篮内还有一件破衣服，溜进公所乞讨赏钱，士子随手拿了一块碎银丢给乞丐，乞丐竟然嫌少，士子大怒，拿起一锭元宝掷到乞丐的竹篮里，斥责说： 你想要这元宝是不是？ 
English: While they were counting their belongings, a famous lame beggar, on crutches in his right hand and holding a bamboo basket in his left hand, with a piece of torn clothing in the basket, slipped into the public office to beg for money. The scholar took a piece of silver and threw it to the beggar. The beggar was so disgusted, the scholar was furious, picked up a heap of yuan and threw it into the beggar's bamboo basket, and scolded him: "Do you want this yuan treasure?

古文：丐悚惧，曰： 财主不添则已，何必怒？ 
现代文：乞丐害怕颤抖说： 大善人不愿再多给赏钱就算了，何必发脾气呢？ 
English: The beggar, trembling with fear, said, "Even if the great benefactor is not willing to give more money, why should he lose his temper?

古文：双手捧宝置几上而去。
现代文：接着双手捧着元宝放在桌上，然后离去。
English: Then he put the original treasure on the table with both hands and left.

古文：后事不谐，其人启封，则元宝乃伪物，为向丐者易去矣，丐者，即科党所假也。
现代文：过了一段日子，另一名公证人开封取物，发现元宝竟是假的，原来早就被那乞丐调了包，而那乞丐，正是士子的党羽所装扮的。
English: Some time later, another notary opened the seal to take the object and found that the original treasure was actually fake. The original had already been reshuffled by the beggar, and that beggar was dressed up by the party members of the scholar.

古文：苏城四方辐凑之地；骗局甚多。
现代文：苏州交通发达，商业繁荣，诈骗事件也层出不穷。
English: Suzhou has developed transportation, business prosperity, and fraud cases are also emerging one after another.

古文：曾记万历季年，有徽人叔侄争坟事，结讼数年矣，其侄先有人通郡司理，欲于抚台准一词发之。
现代文：明朝万历年间，曾有一对叔侄争坟地大打官司，缠讼多年一直没有结果。后来侄儿买通郡府法曹，希望抚台能判自己胜诉。
English: During the Ming and Wanli dynasties, there was a case of a pair of uncles and nephews fighting over a grave site, and the litigation went on for many years without a result. Later, the nephew bribed the county magistrate in the hope that the magistrate would rule in his favour.

古文：忽有某公子寓阊门外，云是抚公年侄，衣冠甚伟，仆从亦都。徽侄往拜，因邀之饮。偶谈及此事，公子一力承当。
现代文：一天，忽然有个住在阊门外的贵公子，自称是抚台的世侄，看他衣着华丽，一表人才，随行的侍仆也多，于是侄儿就去邀贵公子喝酒，闲谈中谈到与叔父争夺坟地的事。
English: One day, out of the blue, there was a nobleman who lived outside the city gate. He claimed to be the great-nephew of Fudai. He was well-dressed, talented, and had many attendants. So his nephew went to invite the nobleman for a drink. During their chit-chat, they talked about competing with their uncle for the cemetery.

古文：遂封物为质，及期，公子公服，取讼词纳袖中，径人抚台之门，徽侄从外伺之，忽公事已毕而门闭矣，意抚公留公子餐也。
现代文：公子一口答应这事包在他身上，为表示自己诚意，公子还交给侄儿一件信物。到了约定日期，公子拿了侄儿的讼状，直接进入抚台大人的官府，侄儿在门外守候许久，一直到府衙公务处理完毕，大门紧闭，还不见公子出来，侄儿猜测可能抚台大人留公子吃饭，问门房公子下落，都答称未见过此人。
English: On the agreed date, the boy took his nephew's complaint and went directly to Fudai no Okimi's government office. The nephew waited outside the door for a long time until the government's official business was completed. The door was closed and the boy did not come out. The nephew guessed that Fudai no Okimi might keep the boy for dinner and asked the doorman about the boy's whereabouts. The doorman replied that he had not seen the man.

古文：询门役，俱莫知，乃晚衙，公子从人丛中酒容而出，意气扬扬，云： 抚公相待颇厚，所请已谐。 
现代文：直到入夜，才见公子满脸酒意地从人群中走来，一脸得意洋洋的神情，对侄儿说抚台大人热忱地招待他，所托付的事都已打点妥当，两人回到侄儿住处。
English: It wasn't until nightfall that I saw the young man walk from the crowd with a face full of wine, a triumphant look on his face, saying to his nephew that the adults of Fudai had warmly invited him, and that everything entrusted to him had been done properly. The two of them returned to their nephew's place of residence.

古文：抵徽寓，出官封袖中，印识宛然。
现代文：公子从袖中拿出一封公文，公文上盖有官府的官印，侄儿大为高兴，命人备酒谢公子，公子拿了当初两人协议的报酬后离去。
English: The prince took out a letter from his sleeve, the official seal of the government was stamped on the document, the nephew was very happy, he ordered someone to prepare wine to thank the prince, the prince took the remuneration of the original agreement between the two and left.

古文：徽侄大喜，复饮食之，公子索酬如议而去，明日徽侄以文书付驿卒，此公子私从驿卒索文书自投，驿卒不与，公子言是伪封不可投。驿卒大惊，还责徽侄，急访公子，故在寓也，反叱徽人用假批假印，欲行出首。
现代文：第二天，侄儿将公文交给驿卒送官府，公子却派人索取公文，官府的驿卒不肯交出公文，公子才表明这公文是伪造的，不能送交官府，驿卒害怕获罪，立即将公文退还侄儿，并且斥责侄儿，侄儿拿着假文书赶往公子住处，公子正巧在家，看了假文书，反而斥责侄儿用假官印，假批示唬人，要到官府控告他。
English: The next day, the nephew handed the official document to the courier to be sent to the government office, but the boy sent someone to request the official document. The courier of the government office refused to hand over the official document. The boy only showed that the official document was forged and could not be sent to the government office. The courier, afraid of being convicted, immediately returned the official document to the nephew and scolded the nephew. The nephew rushed to the boy's residence with the fake document. The boy was at home and read the fake document. Instead, he scolded the nephew for using a fake official seal and fake instructions to deceive people and wanted to sue him at the government office.

古文：徽人惧，复出数十金赂之始免。
现代文：侄儿大惊，只有再拿出数十金贿赂公子，才平息此事。
English: The nephew was shocked, and only after taking out tens of gold to bribe the prince, did the matter calm down.

古文：后访知此棍惯假宦、假公子为骗局。
现代文：后来，侄儿向别人打听，才知道这人常假冒宦官或贵公子，设计诈人钱财。
English: Later, his nephew asked someone else, only to find out that this person often pretended to be a eunuch or nobleman, planning to swindle people out of money.

古文：时有春元谒见抚院，彼乘闹混入，潜匿于土地堂中，众不及察，遂掩门。
现代文：当初，正碰到春元入府谒见抚台，公子就趁忙乱中混入府内，暗中躲在佛堂中，府中奴仆一时没留意到他，就依往日按时关门。
English: At first, just as Chun Yuan entered the palace to meet Fudai, the prince took advantage of the chaos to sneak into the palace and secretly hide in the Buddhist hall. The servants of the palace did not notice him for a moment, and closed the door as usual.

古文：渠预藏酒糕以烧酒制糕，食之醉饱，啗之，晚衙复乘闹出，封筒印识皆预造藏于袖中者，小人行险侥幸至此，亦可谓神棍矣。
现代文：公子事先曾准备净糕，以烧酒制作糕饼，食后饱且醉，就在佛堂内吃喝起来，等府衙到了夜间办公时，再伺机混出府衙，至于官印等物，都是事先准备好放在袖中的。像这种心机深沉、存心诈财的小人，真可说是神棍。
English: In advance, the prince had prepared a pure cake, made cakes with soju, and after eating and getting drunk, he ate and drank in the Buddhist temple. When the prefect arrived at the night office, he waited for the opportunity to leave the prefect. As for the official seal and other things, they were prepared in advance and placed in the sleeve. A small person like this, with a deep heart and intent to defraud, can truly be said to be a god stick.

