古文：刘一止，字行简，湖州归安人。
现代文：刘一止字行简，湖州归安人。
English: Liu Yizhong, a returnee from Huzhou.

古文：七岁能属文，试太学，有司欲举八行，一止曰： 行者士之常。 不就。
现代文：七岁时能做文，参加太学考试，有关部门想举荐他具备孝、悌、睦、渊、任、恤、忠、和等八行，刘一止说： 品行是士人应该具备的。 不就。
English: When he was seven years old, he was able to write an essay and take part in the exam for the Chinese University of Hong Kong. The relevant departments wanted to recommend him as having eight qualities, including filial piety, courtesy, harmony, depth, dedication, benevolence, loyalty, and harmony. Liu Yihang said, "Character and conduct are what a scholar should have. Not just that.

古文：登进士第，为越州教授。
现代文：中进士及第，任越州教授。
English: He was promoted to the rank of Junior Associate Professor and Senior Associate Professor, and was appointed as a professor of Yuezhou University.

古文：如其不为，俟天命自回，人事自正，敌国自屈，盗贼自平，有是哉？ 高宗称善，且谕近臣以所言剀切知治道，欲骤用，执政不乐，除秘书省校书郎。
现代文：参知政事李邴推荐他任详定一司敕令所删定官。绍兴初年，召任馆职，他大略说 ：事情不能成功的，患在于不做，不患其困难，圣人不怕多难，通过难而图谋事情。如果不去做，而等待天命自回，人事自正，敌国自屈，盗贼自平，有这样的事吗？ 高宗称赞他说得好。并且晓谕近臣认为他所言剀切符合治国之道，打算超擢使用，执政不乐，任命他为秘书省校书郎。
English: In the first year of Shaoxing, when he was appointed to the post of librarian, he said roughly: "Things cannot be successful, the problem lies in not doing it, not suffering its difficulties, saints are not afraid of difficulties, and try to do things through difficulties. If you do not do it, and wait for the fate of heaven to return, the personnel to be self-correcting, the enemy country to be self-subduing, and the thieves to be self-leveling, is there such a thing? Gaozong praised him well. And he told his close vassals that what he said was in line with the way of governing the country, he intended to use

古文：考两浙类试，以科举方变，欲得通时务者，同列皆患无其人，一止出一卷曰： 是宜为首。 启号乃张九成也，众皆厌服。
现代文：主持两浙地区的省试，以科举考试刚刚改变，要得到精通时务的人，同列官员都恐怕没有这样的人。刘一止从中取出一份试卷说 ：这位应该为第一名。 开启号码原来是张九成，众人皆叹服。
English: Presiding over the provincial examinations in the two Zhejiang regions, with the science examination examination just changed, to get people who are proficient in current affairs, the same officials are afraid that there is no such person. Liu Yihong took out a test paper and said: This should be the first place. The opening number was originally Zhang Jiucheng, everyone was impressed.

古文：迁监察御史。
现代文：迁任监察御史。
English: The Imperial Court promoted him to inspector general.

古文：上疏谓： 天下之治，众君子成之而不足，一小人败之而有余，君子虽众道则孤，小人虽寡势易蔓，不加察，则小人伺隙而入以败政矣。 又言： 陛下悯宿蠹未除，颓纲未振，民困财竭，故置司讲究，然未闻有所施行，得无有以疑似之说欺陛下，曰 如此将失人心 。
现代文：上奏说： 天下治道，众多君子成之而不足，一小人败坏而有余，君子虽多道则孤，小人虽少而势力容易蔓延，如不加以觉察，那小人伺机而入就会败坏朝政了。 又说 ：陛下怜悯固有的弊端没有铲除，颓废的朝纲没有振兴，民困财竭，因此设立机构讲求研究，但没有听说有所施行，并有似是而非的议论欺骗陛下，说什么 这样将失去人心 。
English: The prelude said: The way of the world is ruled by a multitude of gentlemen, but they are not enough; a small man is corrupt, but they are more than enough; a gentleman, although he has many ways, is lonely; a small man, although he is few, but his power is easy to spread; if he is not noticed, that small man will wait for an opportunity to enter and corrupt the imperial government. It also said: His Majesty's mercy has not eradicated the inherent drawbacks, the decadent imperial program has not been revitalized, and the people's wealth has been exhausted. Therefore, the establishment of an organization to promote research, but it has not been heard that it

古文：夫所谓失人心者，必刑政之苛，赋役之多，好恶之不公，赏罚之不明；若皆无是，则所失者小人之心耳，何病焉。 
现代文：所谓失去人心，必定是由于刑罚过于严苛，赋役过多，好坏不公，赏罚不明，如果这些都不存在，那么所失去的不过是小人之心，有什么弊病呢。 
English: The so-called loss of the people's heart must be due to the punishment being too harsh, the punishment being too much, the good and bad being unfair, and the reward and punishment being unclear. If none of these exist, then what has been lost is nothing more than the heart of a small person. What are the ills?

古文：时庶事草创，有司以吏所省记为法，吏并缘为奸，一止曰： 法令具在，吏犹得舞文，矧一切听其省记，所欲与则陈与例，欲夺则陈夺例，与夺在其牙颊，患可胜言哉！
现代文：当时各种事情正处于草创时期，有关部门以吏所省记作为法度，官吏因此勾结为奸，刘一止说： 法令都在，官吏依然营私舞弊，况且一切听凭省记，想任官就引用任例，想夺官就引用夺例，任夺在他的嘴上，弊病能够胜数吗？
English: At that time, all kinds of things were in the pioneering period. The relevant departments took the Provincial Records of the People's Government as the law, and the officials therefore colluded as spies. Liu Yihai said: The laws are all there, the officials still engage in personal malpractice, and moreover, everything is subject to the Provincial Records. If you want to appoint officials, you can cite the appointment cases, if you want to take officials, you can cite the appointment cases, if you want to take officials, you can cite the appointment cases, if you want to take officials, you can cite the appointment cases, if you want to take officials, you can cite the appointment cases

古文：请以省记之文刊定颁行，庶几绝奸吏弄法受赇之弊。 从之。
现代文：请将省记之文刊定颁行，这样才能杜绝奸吏玩法受贿的弊端。 
English: Please publish the text of the provincial record on a regular basis, so as to eliminate the drawbacks of corrupt officials taking bribes.

古文：逾年而书成。
现代文：朝廷听从了他的意见。过了一年才写成。
English: The court followed his advice, and it took a year to complete.

古文：秦桧请置修政局，一止言： 宣王内修政事，修其外攘之政而已。
现代文：秦桧请求设立修政局，刘一止说： 宣王内修政事，不过修明外御敌人的政事而已。
English: Qin Hui asked for the establishment of a political reform bureau, but Liu Yiguo said: proclaiming the king's internal political reform, but reforming the external enemy's political affairs.

古文：今之所修，特簿书狱讼，官吏迁降，土木营建之务，未见所当急也。 又谓： 人才进用太遽，仕者或不由铨选，朝士入而不出，外官虽有异能，不见召用，非军事而起复，皆幸门不塞之故。
现代文：现在所修的，不过是簿书狱讼、官吏选降、土木营建等事务，不见得是当务之急。 又说： 人才进用太快，任官有的不经过铨选，朝廷官员只进不出，外任官员虽有特殊才能，不被召用，不是军事而起复，都是侥幸之门没有堵塞的原故。
English: He also said: People's talents are used too quickly, some officials are appointed without being elected, officials of the imperial court cannot be appointed, and foreign officials, although they have special talents, are not called up, and are not reinstated by the military, all of which are the result of the door not being blocked by luck.

古文：请选近臣晓财利者，仿刘晏法，濒江置司以制国用，乡村置义仓以备水旱，增重监司之选。 后多采用其言。
现代文：请选用近臣中通晓财利的，仿效刘晏之法，沿海设置官司以制国用，在乡村设义仓以防备水旱灾害。增加监司权限。 后来他的意见多被采用。
English: Please choose a close minister who is financially savvy and follow the example of Liu Bei, set up courts along the coast for national use, set up warehouses in villages to prevent floods and droughts, and increase the powers of supervisors. Later, his opinions were mostly adopted.

古文：迁起居郎。奏事，帝迎语曰： 朕亲擢也，繇六察迁二史，祖宗时有几？ 一止谢： 先朝惟张澄、李棁耳。 因极陈堂吏宦官之蠹，执政植私党，无忧国心。
现代文：迁起居郎，上奏言事，高宗对他说： 你是由我亲自提拔的，从六察迁二史，祖宗时有几人？ 刘一止拜谢说 ：先朝只有张贗、李木兑两人。 并极力陈述堂吏宦官之害，执政扶植私党，没有忧国之心。
English: Liu Yizhong said to Bai Xie, "In the previous dynasty, there were only two people, Zhang Xuan and Li Muqi, and I tried my best to explain the harm caused by the eunuchs of the palace officials, that the ruling party supported the establishment of a private party, and had no concern for the country.

古文：翌日罢，主管台州崇道观。
现代文：次日被罢免，主管台州崇道观。
English: He was removed from office the next day, and the person in charge of Taizhou, Chong Dao Guan, took over.

古文：召为祠部郎、知袁州，改浙东路提点刑狱，为秘书少监，复除起居郎，擢中书舍人兼侍讲。
现代文：召任祠部郎、知袁州，改任浙东路提点刑狱，任秘书少监，复任起居郎，擢任中书舍人兼侍讲。
English: He was appointed as the priest of the ancestral hall and the scholar of Yuanzhou, was transferred to the East Zhejiang Road Detention Center, was appointed as the secretary of the junior superintendent, was reinstated as the curate, and was appointed as the middle school teacher and the assistant lecturer.

古文：莫将赐出身除起居郎，一止奏： 将以上书助和议，骤自太府丞缀从班，前此未有，臣乃与将同命，愿并臣罢之。 不报。
现代文：莫将被赐出身任起居郎，刘一止奏： 莫将因上书赞同和议，突然自太府丞到从班，以前从来没有这样的先例，我原是同他同时任命，希望将我同他一起罢免。 
English: Mo will be given the post of kichijiro, Liu Yizheng play: Mo will be because of the letter to endorse the peace talks, suddenly from the Taifu to the class, there has never been such a precedent before, I was originally appointed at the same time as him, I hope to be dismissed together with him.

古文：迁给事中。
现代文：朝廷没有回答。迁任给事中。
English: Sheng Shanshui is in the middle of something.

古文：徐伟达者，尝事张邦昌为郎，得知池州，一止言： 伟达既仕伪廷，今付以郡，无以示天下。 孟忠厚乞试郡，一止言： 后族业文如忠厚虽可为郡，他日有援例者，何以却之？ 汪伯彦知宣州入觐，诏以元帅府旧人，特依见任执政给奉，一止言： 伯彦误国之罪，天下共知，以郡守而例执政，殆与异时非待制而视待制，非两府而视两府者类矣。 帝皆为罢之，于凡贵近之请，虽小事亦论执不置。
现代文：有一人名徐伟达，曾经事奉张邦昌任郎官，这时被任知池州，刘一止说： 伟达既然出仕伪廷，今天又将一郡交给他，无以昭示天下。 孟忠厚请求担任郡守，刘一止说： 皇后亲属像孟忠厚这样学习文化的可以担任郡守，以后有援引此例的，又怎么能够拒绝呢？ 汪伯彦知宣州入朝觐见，诏令因他是原元帅府旧人，特依照现任宰执给予俸禄，刘一止说： 汪伯彦误国之罪，天下共知，以郡守官职而俸禄等同执政，大概与他时不是待制而视同待制、不是两府而视同两府类似了。 高宗都因此废止。对显贵亲近的所有请求，即使是小事也争执不放。
English: There was a man named Xu Weida, who once served Zhang Bangchang as a vassal, and was then appointed to Zhichizhou. Liu Yizhong said: "Since Weida has served as a pseudo-court, today he will be given a county, and there is no way to show it to the world." Meng Zhonghou requested to serve as county governor. Liu Yizhong said: "The queen's relatives who study culture like Meng Zhonghou can serve as county governor. If this example is invoked in the future, how can it be refused?" Wang Boyan Zhixuan entered the imperial court, and the emperor ordered that because he was a former marshal

古文：御史中丞廖刚谓其僚曰： 台当有言者，皆为刘君先矣。 
现代文：御史中丞廖刚对僚属说 ：台官应当谏言的，都让刘君先说了。 
English: Chief Historian Liao Gang said to his colleagues, "Let Liu Jun speak first, because Taiwan officials should speak first."

古文：居琐闼百余日，缴奏不已，用事者始忌，奏： 一止同周葵荐吕广问，迎合李光。 罢，提举江州太平观。
现代文：居此官百余天，上奏不断，当权者开始忌恨他，上奏： 刘一止同周葵推荐吕广问，迎合李光。 刘一止被罢免，提举江州太平观。
English: He stayed in this position for more than 100 days, and was constantly criticized, and those in power began to loathe him. He was criticized: Liu Yihong and Zhou Kui recommended Lü Guangqian and pandered to Li Guang. Liu Yihong was dismissed and Jiangzhou Taiping Guan was promoted.

古文：进敷文阁待制。
现代文：进为敷文阁待制。
English: It was converted into the Shikibunkaku waiting system.

古文：御史中丞何若奏： 一止朋附光，偃蹇慢上。 落职，罢祠。
现代文：御史中丞何若上奏： 刘一止朋附李光，傲慢蔑视皇上。 刘一止被落职，罢祠。
English: Goshi Chujo He Ruo played: Liu Yizhong befriended Li Guang and arrogantly defied the emperor; Liu Yizhong was dismissed from his post and banished to an ancestral shrine.

古文：后八年，请老，复职，致仕。
现代文：过了八年，请求告老还乡，复职，退休。
English: After eight years, he asked to return to his hometown, be reinstated, and retire.

古文：秦桧死，召至国门，以病不能拜，力辞，进直学士，致仕。
现代文：秦桧死后，召他到朝廷，刘一止以病不能拜谢，极力推辞，进为直学士，退休。
English: After Qin Hui's death, he was summoned to the imperial court. Liu Yizhong, unable to offer thanks due to his illness, strongly declined the invitation and retired as a direct bachelor.

古文：卒年八十三。
现代文：去世时八十三岁。
English: He was eighty-three when he died.

古文：一止冲澹寡欲，尝诲其子曰： 吾平生通塞，听于自然，唯机械不生，故方寸自有乐地。 博学无不通，为文不事纤刻，制诰坦明有体，书诏一日数十辄办，尝言： 训诰者，赏善罚恶词也，岂过情溢美、怒邻骂坐之为哉。 其草颜鲁公孙特命官制甚伟，帝叹赏，为手书之。
现代文：刘一止淡泊寡欲，曾教诲他的儿子说 ：我平生任官通达坎坷，听凭自然，不投机取巧，因此方寸之间自有乐地。 博学多才无所不通，做文不讲求纤刻，草拟制诰坦明有体，书诏一日数十都能按时办理，曾说： 训诰，是赏善罚恶之词，岂能过分溢美、怒邻骂坐而为呢？ 他草拟的颜鲁公孙特命官制诰十分优美，高宗叹赏，亲自手书。
English: Liu Yi, who was indifferent and lacking in desire, once taught his son to say, "I have been a bureaucrat all my life, and I have been through many ups and downs. I listen to nature and do not take advantage of opportunities, so there is a happy medium between the two. I am an all-round polymath, and I do not require precision in my writing. I am an honest and decent draftsman, and I can handle dozens of edicts a day on time. I once said, "The edict is a word for rewarding good and punishing evil, so how can I be overly praiseworthy and scold my neighbors? The edict he drafted for Yanlu Gong

古文：诗自成家，吕本中、陈与义读之曰： 语不自人间来也。 有类稿五十卷。
现代文：诗词自成一家，吕本中、陈与义阅读后说： 词语不是从人间得来的。 著有类稿五十卷。
English: Poetry is a family of its own. After reading the poem, Lu Bongzhong, Chen Youyi said, "Words do not come from human beings. There are fifty volumes of similar manuscripts.

