古文：十一日，饭后出东江门，渡浮桥，共一里，过嘉熙桥，问龙隐路。
现代文：十一日饭后出了东江门，走过浮桥，共行一里，过了花桥，就打听去龙隐岩的路。
English: On the 11th day, after dinner, I went out of Dongjiangmen, walked across the pontoon bridge, walked a mile, crossed the flower bridge, and inquired about the way to Longyin Rock.

古文：龙隐岩即在桥东之南崖，乃来时所过。
现代文：龙隐岩就在桥东南面的山崖上，是来桂林时路过的地方。
English: Longyin Rock is just on the cliff southeast of the bridge. It is a place I passed by when I came to Guilin.

古文：夹路两山，北为七星，南为龙隐，其岩洞俱西向临江。
现代文：两座山夹路而立，北面的是七星山，南边的是龙隐山，山上的岩洞都向西临江。
English: Two mountains stand between the two roads, Qixing Mountain to the north and Longyin Mountain to the south. The caves on the mountain all face west towards the river.

古文：七星之后穿山而东者，为曾公岩，其前有峰分岐，植立路北。
现代文：七星岩的后面穿过山往东去的，是曾公岩，洞前有座支峰，独立在路北。
English: Behind Qixingyan, going through the mountain to the east, is Zengongyan. There is a spur in front of the cave, independently in the north of the road.

古文：隐龙之后逾岭而南者，为隐真岩，其北有石端拱，俯瞰路南。
现代文：龙隐岩的后方越过山岭往南的，是隐真岩，洞北有块岩石如正身拱手的人，俯瞰着路南。
English: Behind Longjing Rock, rising over the mountains to the south, is Jingzhen Rock. To the north of the cave, there is a rock that looks down on the south side of the road, like a man crossing his arms.

古文：此来时初入之隘，至是始得其详也。
现代文：这是最初来桂林时走入的隘口，到这时才得以知道它的详情了。
English: This is the pass that we entered when we first came to Guilin, and it was only then that we were able to learn more about it.

古文：从桥下南眺，龙隐与月牙并列东崖，第月牙稍北，度桥循山，有路可通；而龙隐稍南，须从桥下涉江而上；其大道则自端拱之石南逾岭坳，循隐真而西，又从怡云北转始达，其间又迂回里余矣。
现代文：从桥上向南眺望，龙隐岩与月牙岩并列在东面的山崖上，只是月牙岩稍偏北些，过了桥顺着山走，有路可以通行；而龙隐岩稍偏南，必须从桥下涉过江爬上去；通往那里的大道却从如正身拱手的岩石旁往南越过岭坳，沿隐真岩往西走，又从怡云亭转向北才能到达，这中间又迂回了一里多路了。
English: Looking south from the bridge, Longyin Rock and Yuefa Rock are side by side on the cliff to the east. However, Yuefa Rock is slightly north of the bridge, and if you walk along the mountain, there is a road you can pass. Longyin Rock is slightly south of the bridge, and you have to wade through the river to climb up. The road to get there, however, goes south from the rock you are standing on, over the ridge, west along Yingzheng Rock, and turns north from Yiyunting to get there. You have to walk more than a mile in between.

古文：余欲并眺端拱石人，遂由桥东直趋岭下，乃南上平瞻石人。
现代文：我想要一并眺望正身拱手的石人，便由桥东径直赶到岭下，于是向南上岭平视石人。
English: I wanted to look at the stone man who was holding out his hand, so I drove straight from the east of the bridge to the foot of the ridge, and then walked south to the top of the ridge to look at the stone man.

古文：又南下，即得一大塘。
现代文：又向南下走，马上见到一个大水塘。
English: Walking south again, I immediately saw a large pond.

古文：由塘北循山西转，其崖石俱盘削飞突。
现代文：由水塘北岸沿着山向西转，那里的崖石全屈曲陡削，飞突而起。
English: From the north shore of the reservoir, follow the mountain to the west, where the cliffs are steep and jut up.

古文：崖有隐真岩，建阁祠。
现代文：共一里多，到达山的西南隅。
English: A total of more than one kilometer, reaching the southwest corner of the mountain.

古文：共里余，抵山之西南隅。其峰益嵯峨层叠，中空外耸，上若鹊桥悬空，心异之，知龙隐在下，始攀隙而登，上有台址，拂崖读记，则怡云亭之废迹也。
现代文：此处的山峰更加巍峨，层层叠叠，山腹中空，外形高耸，上面好像鹊桥悬在空中，心中很奇怪，明白龙隐岩就在下面，开始攀着石缝上登，上面有高台的基址，拂拭崖壁读了碑记，原来是怡云亭的废址。
English: Here, the peaks are more towering, layer upon layer, the mountainside is hollow, the shape is soaring, the above seems to be a bridge hanging in the air, it is very strange in my heart, I understand that Longyin Rock is just below, I began to climb up the stone crevice, there is the base of the high platform above, I wiped the cliff wall and read the monument, it was originally the waste site of Yiyun Pavilion.

古文：由其上转罅梯空，穿石锷上跻，其石片片悬缀，侧者透峡，平者架桥，无不嵌空玲珑。
现代文：由亭址上方转到裂缝处，踏着空处，穿过剑刃般的岩石上登，那片片岩石悬缀着，那倾斜着的刺到峡谷对面，平卧着的架为桥梁，无不嵌入空中，玲珑剔透。
English: From the top of the pavilion to the crack, stepping on the gap, climbing through the sword-like rock, that piece of rock is suspended, the inclined stab to the opposite side of the canyon, the lying frame is a bridge, all embedded in the air, exquisite.

古文：既而踞坐桥下，则上覆为龛，攀历桥上，则下悬成阁，此真龙角之宫，蟾之窟也。下至怡云，其右即龙隐在焉。
现代文：随即盘腿坐在桥下，则上边下覆着成为石完，攀援跋涉到桥上，则下边悬空成为楼阁，这真是龙角星君的宫殿，月宫中的窟穴呀下山来到怡云亭址，它右边便是龙隐洞在那里。
English: Then sit cross-legged under the bridge, then the top and bottom are covered with stone, climb and trek to the bridge, then the bottom is suspended as a castle, this is really the palace of the dragon horn star, the cave in the moon palace, down the mountain to the Iyun Pavilion site, on the right is the Dragon Hidden Cave.

古文：洞门西向，高穹广衍，无奥隔之窍，而顶石平覆，若施幔布幄，有纹二缕，蜿蜒若龙，萃而为头，则悬石下垂，水滴其端，若骊珠焉。
现代文：洞口向西，高处弯隆而起，宽处扩展开来，没有幽深隔绝的洞穴，但洞顶的岩石平滑地下覆，有如铺展开的帷慢，有两条石纹，蜿蜿蜒蜒好像游龙一样，聚集在一起成为龙头，而悬石下垂，水滴从石端滴下来，好似宝珠一般。
English: The mouth of the cave faces west, the height rises steeply, the width expands, there is no deep isolated cave, but the rock at the top of the cave is covered with smooth ground, like a spread-out curtain, there are two stone stripes, winding like a dragon, gathered together to become a dragon's head, and the hanging stone droops, water drops from the stone end, like a precious pearl.

古文：此龙隐之所由其名也。
现代文：这就是龙隐岩得名的由来了。
English: This is how Longyin Rock got its name.

古文：其洞昔为释迦寺，僧庐甚盛，宋人之刻多萃其间，后有《元崡党人碑》，则其尤著者也。
现代文：这个洞过去是释迩寺，僧人和房舍十分兴盛，宋代人的刻石大多会集在洞壁之间，后面有《元枯党籍碑》，就是其中特别著名的碑刻。
English: In the past, this cave was the Shijiazhuang Temple. The monks and the buildings were very prosperous. Most of the carved stones of the Song Dynasty were collected between the cave walls. Behind there is the "Yuan Kuang Party Monument," which is a particularly famous monument.

古文：今已废弃，寂无人居。
现代文：今天寺已废弃，安安静静无人居住。
English: Today, the temple has been abandoned, and no one lives there.

古文：岂释教之盛衰，抑世变之沧桑也！洞右近口，复绾台垂柱，环为层龛，内瞩重洞，外瞰深流，此为最胜。
现代文：真是佛教的盛衰，也同人世一样沧桑巨变啊洞右靠近洞口之处，又盘结为石台，垂挂着石柱，环绕成层层石会，向内看去是一重重洞穴，往外俯瞰是深深的江流，这是最优美的景致。
English: It is really the rise and fall of Buddhism, as well as the vicissitudes of the human world. The cave on the right, near the mouth of the cave, is also coiled into a stone platform, hanging stone pillars, surrounded by layers of stone, looking inward is a heavy cave, looking outward is a deep river, this is the most beautiful scenery.

古文：出岩，已过午矣。
现代文：出了岩洞，已过了中午了。
English: It's past noon when we leave the cave.

古文：仍从怡云南麓，东北逾端岭，过 拱石人 处。
现代文：仍从怡云亭南的山麓，往东北越过端岭，经过 拱手石人 之处。
English: Still from the foothills of the south of Iyunting, to the northeast across the Dangling, passing the place of the stone man.

古文：乃西转循街共里余，将至花桥，令顾仆北炊于朝云岩。
现代文：于是转向西顺着街道共走一里多，将到花桥时，命令顾仆往北到朝云岩去做饭。
English: So he turned west and walked along the street for more than a mile. When he reached Hanabashi, he ordered his servant to go north to Asayun Rock to cook.

古文：即融止所栖处。共里余，余与静闻南沿西麓，随流历磴半里，入月牙岩。
现代文：共走一里多，我与静闻向南沿着山的西麓，顺江水经过石瞪行半里，走入月牙岩。
English: In total, we walked more than a mile. I and Jing Wen walked south along the western foot of the mountain, along the water of the river, through the rocky half-mile, and into the crescent rock.

古文：其岩西向，与龙岩比肩而立，第此则叠石通磴，彼则断壁削崖，路分通塞耳。
现代文：这个岩洞向西，与龙隐岩并肩而立，只是这里砌通了石瞪，那里却是断壁削崖，道路分为通与不通罢了。
English: This cave faces west and stands side by side with Longjing Rock, but here there is a stone wall, there is a cliff, and the road is divided into passable and impassable.

古文：其岩上环如玦而西缺其口，内不甚深而半圆半豁，形如上弦之状，钩帘垂幌，下映清泠，亦幽境也。
现代文：这个岩洞上部呈环状，在西边缺了一个口子，如玉块一样，洞内不怎么深可半圆半缺，形状如上弦月的样子，似钩着的帘子垂着的布慢，下边映衬着清冷冷的水，也是一处幽静的地方。
English: The upper part of this cave is ring-shaped, with a hole missing on the west side, like a jade block. The cave is not very deep, but it can be semi-circular and semi-missing. The shape is like the waxing moon, like a hooked curtain hanging slowly. The lower side is contrasted with the cold water, and it is also a quiet place.

古文：既而仍由街北过七星，入寿佛寺。
现代文：不久仍由街北过七星岩，进入寿佛寺。
English: Soon, I passed Qixingyan Rock on the north side of the street and entered Shubo Temple.

古文：寺在七星观北，其后即栖霞大洞。
现代文：寺院在七星观北面，寺后就是栖霞大洞。
English: The temple is on the north side of Qixingyuan, and the Qixia Cave is behind the temple.

古文：僧空生颇雅饬，因留客。
现代文：僧人空生十分风雅谨慎，因而留客。
English: The monk Kuo Sheng was very elegant and prudent, so he stayed behind.

古文：时余急于朝云之餐，遂辞。
现代文：此时我急着到朝云岩吃饭，便辞谢了。
English: At this point, I was in a hurry to get to Asayun Rock for dinner, so I declined.

古文：乃从其北而东蹑磴，则朝云之餐已熟，亟餐之，下午矣。
现代文：于是从寺北往东登石瞪，朝云岩的饭已经熟了，连忙吃了饭，已是下午了。
English: As a result, I walked from the north of the temple to the east. The rice at Asayunyan was already ripe, so I hurriedly ate it. It was already afternoon.

古文：下山，北过葛老桥，东入一王孙之苑，中多果木，方建亭饬庑焉。
现代文：下山后，向北过葛老桥，往东走入一家王孙的园子，园中果树很多，正在建造亭子修整廊庞。
English: After descending the mountain, we walked north across the Ge Lao Bridge and east into the garden of the Wang Sun family. There are many fruit trees in the garden, and a pavilion is being built to renovate the corridor.

古文：地幽而制板，非余所欲观也。
现代文：地点幽静可形制呆板，不是我所想要观览的地方。
English: The place is secluded and can be a bit stuffy, not a place I would want to visit.

古文：时余欲觅屏风，而遍询莫识，或有以黄金岩告者，谓去城东北五里，其道路吻合，疑即此山。
现代文：此时我打算寻找屏风岩，但四处打听无人认识，有人告诉我是黄金岩，说是在离城东北五里处，他说的路线吻合，怀疑就是这座山。
English: At this time, I planned to look for the folding screen rock, but I asked around and no one knew it. Someone told me it was the golden rock, saying it was five miles northeast of the city. His route matched, and I suspected it was this mountain.

古文：及询黄金，又多指朝云下佛庐当之，谓内阉王公所建，此乃王公，非黄金也。
现代文：到打听黄金岩时，又有很多人指为朝云岩下的佛寺，说是宦官王公建造的，这是王公岩，不是黄金岩了。
English: When inquiring about the Golden Rock, many people pointed to the Buddhist temple under the Chaoyun Rock, saying that it was built by the eunuch Wang Gong. This is Wang Gong Rock, not the Golden Rock.

古文：求屏风而不得，并黄金而莫从，乃贸贸蒙昧不明焉望东北而趋。
现代文：寻找屏风岩找不到，一并连黄金岩也无从寻找，只好闷头转身望着东北方赶去。
English: I couldn't find the folding screen rock, and I couldn't find the golden rock either, so I had to turn my head and look to the northeast.

古文：约三里，遇负担而询之，其指村北山曰： 此即是矣。 
现代文：约走了三里，遇上挑担子的人便向他打听，他指着村北的山说： 这就是了。 
English: After walking about three miles, he met a porter who asked him about it. He pointed to the mountain to the north of the village and said, "That's it.

古文：此中土人鲜知其名，乃从村右北趋，问之村人，仍不知也。
现代文：这一带的本地人极少有人知道它的名字，就从村右向北赶去，向村里人打听屏风岩，仍旧不知道。
English: Very few local people in this area know its name, so they rushed from the village to the north to ask the villagers about the folding screen rock, but they still don't know.

古文：中犹疑信参半，及抵山东麓，则削崖平展，列嶂危悬，所云屏风，庶几也许不远。
现代文：途中还半信半疑，等来到山东麓时，就见陡峭的山崖平平地展开，众多屏风似的山峰高高悬起，所说的屏风岩，大概差得不远了。
English: On the way, I was still half-believing and half-doubting, and when I came to the eastern foot of the mountain, I saw the steep cliffs spread out flatly, with many peaks like screens hanging high. The so-called screen rock is probably not far away.

古文：已转北麓，则洞门如峡，自下高穹，山顶两崖，阔五丈，高十余丈。
现代文：随即转到北麓，就见洞口好像峡谷，从下方高高弯隆而起，山顶两侧的崖壁，宽五丈，高十多丈。
English: Then turn to the northern foot, you will see the mouth of the cave looks like a canyon, rising from the bottom high and high, and the cliff walls on both sides of the summit are five meters wide and more than ten meters high.

古文：初向南平入，十丈之内，忽少转东南向，忽明穴天开，自下望之，层楼结蜃，高镜悬空，即非屏风岩，亦异境也。
现代文：开始时向南平平地走进去，十丈之内，稍稍转向东南方，突然一个明亮的洞穴在天上张开，从下望它，如层层高楼结成海市屋楼，如明镜高悬在空中，即便不是屏风岩，也是奇异的胜境了。
English: At the beginning, I walked flatly to the south, within ten feet, and turned slightly to the southeast. Suddenly, a bright cave opened in the sky. Looking at it from below, it was like layers of high-rise buildings combined into a sea of skyscrapers, like a mirror hanging high in the air. Even if it was not a screen rock, it was a strange wonderland.

古文：从此遂高跻也，又十余丈而出明穴之口。
现代文：从这里登高，又走十多丈便出了明亮洞穴的洞口。
English: From here, I climbed up to a height of more than ten meters and emerged from the mouth of a bright cave.

古文：先，余一入洞，即采嫩松拭两崖，开藓剔翳，而古刻露焉。
现代文：先前，我一进洞，马上采来嫩松枝擦拭两侧的崖壁，剥开苔醉剔除蒙在上边的东西，于是古老的碑刻露了出来。
English: Earlier, as soon as I entered the cave, I immediately picked up tender pine branches to wipe the cliff walls on both sides, peeled away the moss and removed what was covered on the top, so the ancient monument was exposed.

古文：字尽得松膏之润，如摹拓者然，虽蚀亦渐可辨。
现代文：字全都有松烟墨的润泽，好像摹拓过的一样，虽然剥蚀了也慢慢地可以辨认出来。
English: The characters all have the wetness of pine smoke ink, as if they have been rubbed out, although they have been peeled off, they can slowly be recognized.

古文：右崖镌 程公岩 三大字。
现代文：右边崖壁上刻着 程公岩 三个大字。
English: Engraved on the cliff wall on the right are three large characters of Cheng Gongyan.

古文：西有记文一通，则是岩为鄱阳程公所开，而程子邻嗣为桂帅，大观四年。属侯彭老为记，梵仙赵岍书之者也。
现代文：西侧有记文一块，原来这个岩洞是都阳人程公在崇宁年间任桂林地方长官时开辟出来的，而程子邻继任为桂林长官，属官侯彭老作了记文，是僧人赵妍写的碑文。
English: On the west side, there is a piece of writing. Originally, this cave was excavated by Duyang man Cheng Rong when he was the local governor of Guilin during the Chongning era. Cheng Zi Niang succeeded him as the governor of Guilin, and the official Hou Peng Lao made a writing. It is an inscription written by the monk Zhao Qi.

古文：《志》言屏风岩一名程公，至此乃憬然无疑，而转讶负担指点之人所遇之奇也。
现代文：志书说屏风岩又叫程公岩，到此时才醒悟过来不再疑惑，转而惊讶遇上挑担子指点的人真是神奇。
English: The biography says that the folding screen rock is also called Chenggong Rock. It was only at this time that I came to my senses and no longer doubted, but was surprised to meet the person who picked up the burden and pointed it out. It was really amazing.

古文：乃更拭，其西又镌《壶天观铭序》，有 石湖居士名之曰空明之洞 之文，而后不著撰名，第复草书二行于后曰： 淳熙乙未二十八日，酌别碧虚七人复过壶天观。 
现代文：于是再拂拭崖壁，它西面又刻有《壶天观铭序》，有 石湖居士把它起名叫空明之洞 的碑文，可后面不署撰写人的名字，只是又用草书在后边写了两行字，说： 淳熙乙未年二十八日，设酒宴辞别碧虚等七人又路过壶天观。 
English: So he wiped the cliff wall again. On the west side of the cliff, there is also an inscription of "Jug Heaven Inscription," and there is an inscription of Shihu villager calling it the Empty Cave. However, the author's name is not written on the back, but two lines are written on the back in cursive, saying: "On the 28th day of the second month of the second year of the second month of the second year of the third year of the third year of the second year of the third year of the third year of the second year of the third year of the third year of the second year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the

古文：姓字在栖霞，必即范公无疑，又不可无栖霞一番详证矣。
现代文：姓名在栖霞洞，必定就是范成大先生无疑了，又不能不到栖霞洞去做一番详细的考证了。
English: If his name is in Qixia Cave, there is no doubt that he is Mr. Fan Chengda, and he must go to Qixia Cave to do the most detailed research.

古文：左崖镌张安国诗题，其字甚放逸。
现代文：左边崖壁上刻有张安国的题诗，他的字非常奔放飘逸。
English: On the cliff wall on the left, there is a poem inscribed by Zhang Anguo. His words are very free and flowing.

古文：其西又镌《大宋磨崖碑》，为李彦弼大书深刻者。
现代文：它的西面又刻有《大宋磨崖碑》，是李彦弼写的，大字深刻在壁上。
English: On the west side of it, there is also an engraving of "The Great Song Dynasty Cliff-Hanging Monument," which was written by Li Yanqi. The large characters are deeply engraved on the wall.

古文：其书甚大而高，不及尽拭而读之。
现代文：他的字非常大而且很高，来不及全部擦拭出来读它。
English: His handwriting was so large and high that it was too late to wipe it all away and read it.

古文：遂西向登级，上登穴口，其内岩顶之石，层层下垂，若云翼势空，极其雄峻。
现代文：于是向西登石阶，上登到洞口，洞内岩洞顶上的岩石，一层层垂下来，好像云中的飞鸟排空而来，极其雄壮险峻。
English: So I climbed the stone steps to the west and climbed up to the mouth of the cave. The rocks at the top of the cave inside the cave were hanging down layer by layer, like birds in the clouds, extremely majestic and precipitous.

古文：将至穴口，其处少平。
现代文：将到洞口时，那地方稍稍平缓些。
English: When you get to the mouth of the cave, the area will be a little flatter.

古文：北奥有大石幢，盘叠至顶，圆若转轮，累若覆莲，色碧形幻，何造物之设奇若此也！
现代文：北边深处有个大石幢，盘绕着直叠到顶，圆得好像转动的车轮，累起来好似下覆的莲花，颜色碧绿，形态奇幻，造物主是怎么创造出如此奇特的东西来的呢！
English: Deep in the north there is a large stone building, coiled and stacked to the top, round like a spinning wheel, tiring like a lotus flower, green in color, fantastic in shape, how did the Creator create such a strange thing!

古文：是处当壶天观故址，劫尘荡尽，灵穴当悬，更觉空明不夹。
现代文：此处应当是壶天观的旧址，尘世的劫难把它涤荡净尽，灵异的洞穴正中高悬，更觉得空旷明亮不感狭窄。
English: This place should be the former site of the Kettle of Heaven, the calamities of the world have washed it clean, and the ethereal caves are hanging high in the middle, and they feel more open and bright than narrow.

古文：出穴而西，其外山回崖转，石骨森森，下即盘峰成窝。
现代文：出洞后往西走，洞外山回崖转，石骨森森，下方就是山峰环绕成山窝。
English: After coming out of the cave, walk west. The mountain outside the cave turns back to the cliff, the stone bones are scattered, and the lower part is surrounded by mountains and becomes a mountain cave.

古文：窝底有洞北向，心颇异之。遂不及返观前洞，竟从明穴之后觅径西南下，及抵窝入洞，洞不甚深。
现代文：山窝底部有洞向着北方，心中感到很奇异，便来不及返回去观看前洞，竟然从明亮洞穴的后边找到小径向西南下去，抵达山窝进洞后，洞不怎么深。
English: At the bottom of the cave, there is a hole to the north, and I felt very strange. I did not have time to go back to see the front cave, but I found a path to the southwest from the back of the bright cave. When I arrived at the cave, the hole was not very deep.

古文：乃即逾窝而西，有石峰骈枝并起，一为石工锤凿垂尽，一犹亭亭独立。
现代文：于是立即越过山窝往西行，有石峰似骄拇指一样并排耸起，一座快被采石工用锤子凿子开采完了，一座仍独自亭亭玉立。
English: So I immediately crossed the mountain cave to the west, with stone peaks rising side by side like proud thumbs, one almost mined out by quarrymen with hammers and chisels, one still standing alone.

古文：从其东更南三里，已出葛老桥之西，于是循朝云、七星西麓，西度花桥。
现代文：从山峰东边再往南走三里，已走到葛老桥的西头，于是沿着朝云岩、七星岩的西麓，往西过了花桥。
English: From the eastern side of the mountain peak, walk three miles further south, and you have reached the western end of Ge Lao Bridge. Then, walk along the western foot of Chaoyun Rock and Qixing Rock, and pass the Flower Bridge to the west.

古文：时方日落，市人纷言流贼薄永城，省城戒严，城门已闭。
现代文：此时刚刚日落，市上的人纷纷传言流贼逼近永州城，省城戒严，城门已经关闭。
English: At this time, the sun had just set, and people in the market were spreading rumors that thieves were approaching Yongzhou City, that the provincial capital was under martial law, and that the city gates had been closed.

古文：亟驰一里，过浮桥，而门犹半启，得返寓焉。
现代文：急忙快跑一里，过浮桥，城门还半开着，得以返回寓所。
English: I hurriedly ran one mile, crossed the pontoon bridge, the gate was still ajar, and was able to return to my apartment.

古文：十二日，复二里，过初旸宗室，换得一石，令顾仆肩之，欲寄于都府街东裱工胡姓家。
现代文：十二日又是二里路，拜访王族朱初肠，换到一块石头，命令顾仆扛着它，打算寄放在都府街东头姓胡的裱工家。
English: On the twelfth day, he went another two miles to visit the Zhu royal family, and in exchange for a stone, he ordered his servant to carry it, intending to send it to the potter's house of Dongtou surnamed Hu in Dufu Street.

古文：适大雨如注，共里余抵胡。
现代文：恰逢大雨如注，共走一里多到了胡家。
English: Coinciding with the heavy rain, we walked an extra mile to Hu's house.

古文：胡亟来接，入手而石尖硁中断，余无如之奈何，姑置其家。
现代文：姓胡的慌忙来接石头，刚到手中石尖铿的一声断了，我拿它不知怎么办，姑且放在他家。
English: Mr. Hu hurried to pick up the stone, but just as he got it, the tip snapped off. I didn't know what to do with it, so I left it at his house.

古文：候雨少止，遂西过都府前，又西径学宫，乃南行，共二里而出丽泽门。
现代文：等雨稍停后，就往西走过都指挥使司府衙前，又向西取道学宫，于是往南行，共二里便出了丽泽门。
English: After waiting for the rain to stop for a while, he walked westward past the Metropolitan Command and General Staff Building, and then westward to the Taoist Study Palace, and then southward, a total of two miles, and then out of the Lize Gate.

古文：门外有巨塘汇水，自北而南，有石梁跨之，其梁北塘中，莲花盛开，幽香艳色，坐梁端树下眺之，令人不能去。
现代文：门外有个巨大的水塘积着水，塘水从城西北角马留山延过的山脊处，往南流抵振武门北，流入阳江，自北往南，有石桥跨在水上，叫凉水洞桥。此桥北边的池塘中，莲花盛开，幽香艳色，坐在桥头树下眺望过去，令人不忍离去。
English: Outside the gate, there is a huge pond with water. The pond water flows from the northwest corner of the city, from the ridge of Mount Malu, southward to the north of Zhenwumen, and flows into the Yangjiang River. From the north to the south, there is a stone bridge across the water, called Liangshui Cave Bridge. In the pond on the north side of this bridge, lotus flowers are in full bloom, fragrant and colorful. Sitting under the trees at the bridge and looking over the past, it is unbearable to leave.

古文：又西南行一里，已出隐山之外。
现代文：又向西南行一里，已走出隐山之外。
English: Another mile to the southwest and I was out of Hidden Mountain.

古文：从其西度西湖桥，溯阳江北岸而西，通侯山背；而大道犹在西南，当自振武门西度定西桥。
现代文：从这里向西越过西湖桥，溯阳江北岸往西行，通到侯山背面；可大道还在西南方，应当从振武门向西越过定西桥。
English: From here, cross the West Lake Bridge to the west, follow the north bank of the Yangjiang River to the west, and pass to the back of Hou Mountain; but the avenue is still in the southwest, and you should cross the Dingxi Bridge from Zhenwu Gate to the west.

古文：时余欲觅中隐山，久询不得，《志》言在城西南十里，乃转而南向行。
现代文：此时我想要寻找中隐山，打听了很久找不到，志书说在城西南十里处，于是转向南行。
English: At this time, I wanted to look for the Hidden Mountain. After a long search, I couldn't find it. The journal said it was ten miles southwest of the city, so I turned south.

古文：又一里抵振武门，于是越桥西行，一里，忽见路右有山森然，有洞岈然，即北趋其下。
现代文：又走一里来到振武门，于是越过桥往西行，一里，忽然见路右有座山森然直立，有个洞十分深邃，马上向北赶到山下。
English: He walked another mile to Zhenwu Gate, then crossed the bridge to travel west. One mile later, he suddenly saw a mountain standing upright on the right side of the road, and a very deep cave. He immediately drove north to the bottom of the mountain.

古文：前有古寺，拭碑读之，则西山也。
现代文：山前有座古寺，拂拭石碑读了碑文，就是西山了。
English: There is an ancient temple in front of the mountain. After wiping the stone tablet and reading the inscription, it is the West Mountain.

古文：西山之胜，余以为与隐山、西湖相近，先是数询之不获，然亦不知有洞也。
现代文：西山的优美之处，我认为与隐山、西湖相近，在此之前几次打听它找不到，这样也不知道有洞了。
English: The beauty of the West Mountain, I think, is similar to that of Hidden Mountain and West Lake. Before that, I asked several times and couldn't find it, so I didn't know there was a hole.

古文：亟舍寺趋洞，洞门南向。
现代文：急忙放弃古寺赶去山洞，洞口向南。
English: I hurriedly abandoned the ancient temple and hurried to the cave. The cave entrance is to the south.

古文：其东又有裂石，自峰顶下跨成门。
现代文：洞东边又有迸裂的岩石，自峰顶下跨为石门。
English: On the east side of the cave, there is also a cleft in the rock, which spans from the top of the peak to the stone gate.

古文：复舍洞趋之，则其门南北豁然，亦如雉山、象鼻之中空外跨，但彼则急流中贯，此则澄潭外绕耳。
现代文：又放弃了山洞赶到那里，就见这石门南北向豁然相通，也像难山、象鼻山一样中间是空洞外侧跨出去，但那两处是急流从洞中穿流而过，此处却是清澄的潭水环绕在外边罢了。
English: After abandoning the cave, he rushed there and saw that the stone gate suddenly connected the north and south directions, and also, like Mount Difficult and Elephant's Nose, there was a hollow in the middle and a gap on the outside, but in those two places, the rapids flowed through the cave, but here, it was just a clear pool of water surrounding the outside.

古文：然其外跨之石，其上欹叠交错，尤露奇炫异放。
现代文：然而它那外跨的岩石，在洞上倾斜重叠交错在一起，尤其显露出奇特的光芒和异彩。
English: But it is the outstretched rock, leaning over the cave, overlapping and intertwining, that is most strangely radiant and brilliant.

古文：亦未遽入门中，先绕其东，遂抵山北，则北向亦有洞岈然。
现代文：也没有马上进入石门中，先绕到它的东面，便来到山北，北面也有山洞十分深邃。
English: They did not immediately enter the stone gate, but first went around it to the east, and then came to the north of the mountain. There is also a very deep cave on the north side.

古文：穿洞而南，横透山腹，竟与南洞南北贯彻，第中有夹门，有垂柱，不若穿山中洞、风洞西岩一望皎然耳。
现代文：穿过洞往南走，横穿山腹，竟然与南面的山洞南北贯通，只不过中间有狭窄的石门，有下垂的石柱，不像穿山的中洞、风洞西边的岩洞那样一眼望去皎洁明亮罢了。
English: Walking through the cave to the south, across the mountainside, it actually connects with the southern cave from north to south. However, there is a narrow stone gate in the middle and a sagging stone pillar. It is not as clear and bright as the cave in the middle of the mountain and the cave on the west side of the wind tunnel.

古文：然其内平整曲折，以小巧见奇，固居然一胜也。
现代文：但是洞内平整曲折，以小巧见奇，固然也是一处胜境了。
English: However, the smooth twists and turns in the cave, which are surprisingly small, are also a win-win situation.

古文：出南洞，望洞左有磴叠嵯峨中。
现代文：走出南洞，望见洞左有石瞪垒砌在巍峨的山间。
English: Coming out of the South Cave, you can see on the left side of the cave the stone ramparts built between the towering mountains.

古文：循之北跻峰顶，则怪异之石，锷簇锋攒，既下至南洞前，始东入门。
现代文：顺着石瞪向北登上峰顶，就见怪异之石，似刀刃剑锋一样成簇攒聚在一起，中部下旋为平坦的凹地，长长的好像沟恤，特别光滑。下到南洞前，才向东进入石门。
English: Climbing to the top of the peak along the stone face to the north, you can see the strange stones, clustered together like a blade of a sword, the central downturn is a flat concave, long like a trench coat, very smooth. Go down to the south of the cave before entering the stone gate to the east.

古文：其门乃片石下攒，垂石上覆，中门高辟，众窍旁通，内穹一室，外启八窗，亦以小巧见奇，又一胜也。
现代文：这石门是片状的岩石往下聚集，下垂的岩石覆盖在上面，中间门混高张，旁边通着众多小石洞，里面隆起一个石室，外边开有八个石窗，也是以小巧见奇，又是一处胜境。
English: This stone gate is a collection of flaky rock downwards, covered with sagging rock on the top, the middle gate is jumbled, and there are many small stone caves next to it. A stone room rises inside, and there are eight stone windows on the outside. It is also surprising with its small size, and it is a win-win situation.

古文：停憩久之，望其西峰，石亦耸列。
现代文：停下休息了很久，望见它的西峰，岩石也是高耸排列着。
English: I stopped and rested for a long time. I could see its western peak, and the rocks were also lined up high.

古文：从寺后西历其上，由峰崿è山崖中历级南下，出庆元伯祠。
现代文：从寺后往西跋涉到峰上，从峰峦山崖之中经由石阶向南下山，出到庆元伯祠。
English: From the back of the temple, trek westward to the peak, from the middle of the peak and the cliff, go south down the mountain through the stone steps, and out to the Qingyuan Bo Shrine.

古文：乃弘治时孝穆皇太后祠其父者。
现代文：往西沿着大道行，又走三里，由岔开的小径向北赶到木陵村。
English: I walked west along the main road, walked another three miles, and drove north to Muling Village along the paved path.

古文：西循大道行，又三里，由岐径北趋木陵村。先是，求中隐不，至此有居人朱姓者。告余曰： 中隐、吕公，余俱未之闻，惟木陵村有佛子岩，其洞三层，道里相，或即此岩未可知。 
现代文：这以前，寻找中隐山找不到，来到此地有个姓朱的居民，告诉我说： 中隐山、吕公岩，我全没有听说过，只是木陵村有个佛子岩，那洞有三层，道路和里程相同，或许就是这个岩洞也未必可知。 
English: Before this, I couldn't find it when looking for Zhongyin Mountain. A resident surnamed Zhu came here and told me: "I haven't heard of Zhongyin Mountain or Lugang Rock, but there is a Buddha Rock in Muling Village. The cave has three layers, and the road and the mileage are the same. Perhaps this cave is also unknown."

古文：余颔之，遂从此岐入。
现代文：我点头同意他，于是从此处的岔路进去。
English: I nodded and agreed with him, so I took the side road from here.

古文：西北二里，望见石峰在侯山东麓，洞门高悬。
现代文：往西北行二里，望见有石峰在侯山东麓，洞口高悬。
English: Two miles to the northwest, there is a view of a stone peak at the eastern foot of Mount Hou, with the cave entrance high above.

古文：乃令顾仆就炊村氓家，余同静闻北抵岩下。
现代文：于是叫顾仆到村民家去做饭，我与静闻向北走到岩洞下。
English: So I asked Gu to go to the villager's house to cook dinner, and I walked north to the cave with Jingwen.

古文：其岩之东，先有二洞南向，余先入最东者，则洞敞而不深。
现代文：这个岩洞的东边，先有两个洞向着南方，我首先进入最东边的一个，就见山洞宽敞却不深。
English: On the east side of this cave, there are two caves facing south. I first entered the easternmost one and saw that the cave was spacious but not deep.

古文：稍西，则洞门侧裂，外垂列乳，中横一屏。
现代文：稍往西走，就见侧边裂开洞口，外面垂着许多钟乳石，中间横着一道屏风似的岩石。
English: If you walk a little to the west, you will see the side of the cave split open, with many stalactites hanging outside, and a screen-like rock in the middle.

古文：屏后深峡下坠，屏东西俱有门可瞰而下，由峡中北入，其窍旁裂，渐隘而黑。
现代文：后面下坠成深峡，屏风石东西两侧都有洞口，可以俯瞰，往下走经由峡中向北进去，石窍在两旁裂开，渐渐变窄变黑。
English: Behind and below, it fell into a deep gorge. There are openings on both sides of the screen stone, east and west, which can be overlooked. Walking down through the gorge to the north, the crags cracked on both sides, gradually becoming narrower and darker.

古文：乃复出，又西上入大洞。
现代文：于是重又出来，又向西往上进入大洞。
English: So it came out again, and went up again to the west into a big hole.

古文：其洞南下北上。穹然高透，颇如程公岩。
现代文：此洞南低北高，弯然隆起，高大通透，颇像程公岩。
English: This cave is low to the south and high to the north, curved and raised, tall and transparent, quite similar to Chenggong Rock.

古文：瞻右崖有题，亟以松枝磨拭之，则宋绍兴甲戌七月望吕愿忠题中隐山《吕公洞诗》也， 假守洛阳吕叔恭游中隐山无名洞，客有言： 此洞自君题，当以吕公名之。 
现代文：抬头望见右边石崖上有题字，急忙用松枝磨擦石壁，原来是宋朝绍兴甲戌年七月十五日吕愿忠为中隐山题写的《吕公洞诗》。后边题写道： 代理知府洛阳吕叔恭游览中隐山无名洞，宾客中有人说： 此洞由大人题词，应该用吕公来命名它。 
English: Looking up, there was an inscription on the right side of the cliff, and he hurriedly rubbed the stone wall with pine branches. It turned out to be "Lugong Cave Poem" inscribed by Lv Jianzhong for Zhongjing Mountain on July 15, Song Dynasty, Shao Xing Jiajing. The inscription on the back reads: Acting Governor of Luoyang, Lv Shujong, visited the Nameless Cave of Zhongjing Mountain. Some of the guests said: This cave was inscribed by an adult, and it should be named after Lv Gong.

古文：余未敢披襟，在坐者，旨曰： 当甚。 
现代文：我不敢冒然而动。在座的人都说： 十分恰当。
English: I didn't dare make a move. Everyone in the room said, "That's very appropriate."

古文：因书五十六字镌于壁。 
现代文：夕因此写了五十六个字刻在壁上。 
English: So he wrote fifty-six characters on the wall.

古文：余见之，更憬然喜，始知佛子岩之即吕公，吕公岩之即中隐也。
现代文：我见了这段话，醒悟过来，更加高兴，这才明白佛子岩就是吕公岩，吕公岩就是中隐山了。
English: When I saw this passage, I came to my senses and was even happier. Only then did I understand that the Buddha Rock is the Lugang Rock, and the Lugang Rock is the Middle Hidden Mountain.

古文：于是北跻后穴，其内云翼劈空，叠层倒骞，与洞俱上，不作逼隘之观。
现代文：于是往北登上后洞，洞内的岩石有如云层中的飞鸟凌空而来，层层叠叠倒立高举，与山洞一同向上，没有显出逼窄的景象来。
English: As a result, I climbed north to the back cave. The rocks inside the cave were like birds in the clouds, flying through the air. They were stacked on top of each other, upside down, and lifted up together with the cave. There was no constricted view.

古文：而穴口高朗，更大于程公岩之后也。
现代文：而洞口高敞明亮，更比程公岩的后洞大了。
English: But the mouth of the cave is high, spacious and bright, even bigger than the back hole of Cheng Gongyan.

古文：出口而北，有石磴二道，一东北下山麓，一西北跻山顶。
现代文：出洞口往北去，有两条石瞪，一条向东北下达山麓，一条往西北上登山顶。
English: The exit of the cave is to the north, there are two stone gates, one to the northeast down to the foot of the mountain, one to the northwest up to the top of the mountain.

古文：余先从其下者，则北向之麓，皆崆峒如云嘘幔覆，外有倒石，界而为门，列而为窗，而内蜿蜒旁通，绕若行廊复道，此下洞之最幽奇者也。
现代文：我先从那条向下的石瞪走，就到了向北的山麓，山麓全是空洞，像是云气喷出帷慢下覆，外边有倒立的岩石，分隔成门，排列为窗，而里面蜿蜿蜒蜒四通八达，绕着走好像走在回廊与双层通道之中，这是下洞中最幽深奇妙的地方了。
English: I followed the descending line of stones and arrived at the foot of the mountain to the north. The foot of the mountain was completely empty, like a curtain of clouds slowly descending, with inverted rocks on the outside, separated into doors and lined up as windows, while the inside meandered in all directions. Walking around was like walking in a corridor and a double-decker passage. This was the deepest and strangest place in the lower cave.

古文：既而复上中洞后穴，从其左西北跻级而上，忽复得一洞。
现代文：随即再上到中洞的后洞，从它左侧往西北登石阶上去，忽然又见到一洞。
English: Then I went up to the back hole of the middle hole, and from the left side of it to the northwest stone steps, I suddenly saw another hole.

古文：其前有巨石柱，如屏中峙，东西界为两门：西窍大而正，自下远眺，从窍直透北山，而东则隐焉；东窍狭而偏，其窍内东旋一龛，中圆覆而外夹如门，门上龙虎交两旁，有因而雕缋ì之者，及失天真，则真之宫也。
现代文：此洞北边深入进去，南边高高隆起，十分空旷、平坦、明亮，中央向南之处有一块岩石耸立，好像高台，丰边有尊石佛，不知它是从哪里来的，佛子洞的名字就是由此来的。石佛前有根巨大的石柱，如屏风样屹立在中央，把东西两面分隔成两道石门：西边的石窍又大又正，从下边远望去，从窍中一直看到北面的山，可东边的却隐而不见；东边的石窍又狭又偏，此窍之内在东面旋绕出一个石完，中间圆圆地覆盖下来而外边两旁相夹如门，门上龙虎交立两旁，有人因而把它们加以雕凿彩绘，反而失去了天然的真趣，损害了真实。
English: The north side of this cave is deeply penetrated, the south side is high and elevated, very empty, flat and bright. In the center to the south, there is a rock towering, like a platform. There is a stone Buddha on the rich side. I don't know where it came from, which is where the name of the Buddha's cave comes from. There is a huge stone pillar in front of the stone Buddha. It stands in the center like a screen, separating the two sides into two stone doors. The stone door on the west side is large and straight. Looking far from the bottom, you can see the mountain on the north side from the door, but the east side is invisible. The

古文：窍外循崖东转，又辟一门，下临中洞之上，则关帝之座也。
现代文：从石窍外沿着崖壁向东转，又开有一个门洞，下临中洞的上方，是关帝的神座。
English: From the outside of the crag, follow the cliff wall to the east, and there is a doorway. Above the middle hole, is the throne of Guan Di.

古文：余得一佛子，而中隐、吕公岩诸迹种种毕现，诚意外之奇遇也。
现代文：我找到一个佛子岩，随即中隐山、吕公岩各处胜迹的种种奇观全都出现了，真是意外的奇遇呀！
English: I found a Buddha rock, and then all the wonders of Zhongyin Mountain, Lugang Rock and other places of interest appeared, it was really an unexpected encounter!

古文：仍由洞北东下，穿中洞南出，再读吕公五十六字题，识之以待归录。
现代文：仍从洞北向东下走，穿过中洞往南出来，再读了吕公五十六个字的题词，把它记住以便等回去后记录下来。
English: He still walked from the north of the cave to the east, through the middle cave to the south, and then read the fifty-six-character inscription of Lü Gong, memorizing it in order to record it after returning.

古文：出中洞，复循山西行。
现代文：出了中洞，再沿着山往西行。
English: Out of the cave, and then along the mountain to the west.

古文：又开一洞，南向与中洞并列，中存佛座、柱础，则昔时梵宇也，而内不甚宏。
现代文：又开有一个洞，朝向南方，与中洞并列，洞中残存有佛座、柱础，是往昔的佛寺，然而洞内不十分宽阔。
English: There is also a cave, facing south, next to the middle cave. In the cave, there are remains of the Buddha's seat and pillar base. It is a former Buddhist temple, but the cave is not very wide.

古文：由其西攀磴而上，又有南向之洞，余时腹已枵然，急下山，饭于木陵氓家。
现代文：由洞西攀石往上走，又有个向南的洞，我此时已肚内空空如也，急忙下山，在木陵村村民家吃饭。
English: After climbing up from the west side of the cave, there was another cave to the south. At this time, my stomach was empty, so I hurried down the mountain to eat at a villager's house in Muling village.

古文：氓言： 西向侯山之下，尚有铜钱岩，可透出前山；北向赵家山，亦有洞可深入；南向茶庵之西，又有陈抟岩，颇奇。 
现代文：村民说： 向西走到侯山之下，还有个铜钱岩，可通到前山；向北到赵家山，也有洞可以深入；向南到茶庵的西边，又有个陈传岩，十分奇妙。 
English: Villagers said: To the west, under the Hou Mountain, there is a copper money rock, which can lead to the front mountain; to the north, to the Zhao Jia Mountain, there is also a hole that can be deepened; to the south, to the west of the tea house, there is an old rock, which is very strange.

古文：余思诸岩不能遍历，而侯山为众峰之冠，其岩不可交臂而过。
现代文：我考虑各处岩洞不能遍游，而侯山在群峰之中数第一，这个岩洞不可擦肩而过。
English: I considered that I couldn't visit all the caves everywhere, but Mount Hou is the first among the peaks, and this cave can't be missed.

古文：遂由中隐旧路越小桥西，共一里，登侯山东麓。
现代文：于是由中隐山的原路越到小桥西头，共走一里，登上侯山东麓，来到侯山庙。
English: So I walked one mile from the original road of Zhongyin Mountain to the west end of the small bridge, ascended the eastern foot of Mount Hou, and came to Mount Hou Temple.

古文：茫不得洞。
现代文：庙后的山麓上水流漫溢，踩着水分开草丛，茫然找不到洞。
English: At the foot of the mountain behind the temple, the water flow is overflowing. I step on the water to separate the grass, and I can't find the hole.

古文：但见有级上跻，几欲贾勇一登绝顶，而山前行者，高呼日暮不可登。
现代文：只见有石阶上登，差一点想要鼓足勇气一口气登上绝顶，可山前走路的人高声呼叫天晚了不可上登。
English: I saw some people climbing up the stone steps, and I almost wanted to muster up the courage to climb to the top in one go, but the people walking in front of the mountain shouted loudly that it was too late to climb.

古文：第西南遥望大道之南，削峰东转，有洞东北穹焉。
现代文：只是向西南遥望大道的南面，有陡削的山峰往东转去，有山洞面朝东北高高隆起，不知是铜钱岩还是陈传岩，姑且望着它赶去。
English: Just to the south of the Southwest Distant View Avenue, there are steep peaks turning to the east, there are caves rising high and high to the northeast, I don't know whether it is Tongcheng Rock or Chenchuan Rock, just look at it and go.

古文：不知为铜钱、为陈抟，姑望之而趋、交大道南去，共一里抵其下。
现代文：与大道相交向南走去，共一里抵达山下。洞口朝向东北，高高依傍在半山腰，而山前有积水，汇流成深潭。
English: Intersected with the main road to the south and walked a total of one mile to reach the bottom of the mountain. The cave entrance faces northeast, high in the mountainside, and there is standing water in front of the mountain, merging into a deep pool.

古文：洞门东北向，高倚山半，而前有潴水，汇而成潭。
现代文：从水潭上沿石阶抓住荆棘上登，就进人了洞中。
English: Climbing up the stone steps from the pool, holding on to the thorns, he entered the cave.

古文：从潭上拾级攀棘，遂入洞中。其洞乱石堆门，外高内深，历石级西南下，直坠洞底，则水涯渊然。
现代文：这个山洞的洞口堆积着乱石，外高内深，沿石阶向西南下去，一直坠到洞底，就到了水边，潭水十分幽深。
English: The mouth of this cave is heaped with jumbled rocks, high and deep, descending along the stone steps to the southwest, falling all the way to the bottom of the cave, to the water's edge. The pool is very deep.

古文：内望有一石横突而出，若龙首腾空，下有仄崖嵌水，内有裂隙旁通。
现代文：向内望去，有一块岩石横突而出，好似龙头腾空，下方有道倾斜的石崖嵌入水中，里面有条裂隙通往旁侧。
English: Looking inward, a rock juts out sideways, as if a spigot has been released. Below, a sloping cliff is embedded in the water, with a crack inside leading to the side.

古文：余抵龙首之下，畏仄崖峭滑，逡巡未前，而从者高呼： 日暮，路险。
现代文：我来到龙头之下，害怕倾斜的石崖太陡太滑，犹疑不前，而此时跟随来的人高呼： 天黑了，此路危险。
English: I came to the bottom of the crane, afraid that the sloping cliff was too steep and slippery, hesitated to move forward, and at this time the people who followed shouted: It's dark, this road is dangerous.

古文：此可莫入！ 乃从之出，下山。
现代文：此处可莫要进去！  只得跟随他出来，下山。
English: You can't go in here! You just have to follow him out and down the mountain.

古文：循麓转出东南，则此山之背，似复有门，前复汇水，岂所云铜钱岩可透前山者，乃即此耶？
现代文：沿山麓转到东南方，就是此山的山背后，似乎又有个洞口，洞前又有积水，莫不是所说的铜钱岩可以通到前山的地方，便就是此处了吗？
English: Turning along the foothills to the southeast, just behind the mountain of this mountain, there seems to be another cave mouth, and there is standing water in front of the cave. Isn't it the place where the copper money rock can pass to the front of the mountain, is it here?

古文：日暮急驰，姑留以为后日之游。
现代文：此处西面的山峰成双耸立，没有侯山那么高，可陡峭挺拔超过侯山。
English: Here, the western peaks rise in pairs, not as high as Mount Hou, but steeper than Mount Hou.

古文：共二里，南出大道，回顾其西路南夹道之山，上有一窍东西透空，亦与佛子穿岩无异，俱留为后游，不暇执途人而问。
现代文：天晚了急忙赶路，暂且留着作为日后游览的地方。共行二里，往南走上大道，回头望西面大路和在南边夹住道路的山，上面有一个洞穴东西两头穿空，也与佛子岩两头穿通的岩洞无异，都留作以后游览之地，来不及进去。
English: It was late in the day and we hurried to make our way, temporarily reserving it as a place to visit in the future. We walked for two miles, walked south on the main road, looked back at the west road and the mountain that sandwiched the road on the south side, there was a cave on it that was empty on both sides, and it was also no different from the rock cave that penetrated both sides of the Buddha Rock. Both were reserved as places to visit in the future, too late to go in.

古文：时途中又纷言城门已闭，竭蹶东趋三里，过茶庵，又二里，过前木陵分岐处，已昏黑矣。
现代文：此时途中又纷纷传说城门已关，竭力跌跌绊绊向东赶了三里路，路过茶庵，又赶了二里，经过先前到木陵村分岔的地方，天已经昏黑了，估计已来不及进城了。
English: At this time, on the way, there were also rumors that the city gate had been closed, and they stumbled and stumbled to the east for three miles, passed the tea house, and drove two miles, passing through the place where they had previously divided into Muling Village, the sky was already dark, and it was estimated that it was too late to enter the city.

古文：度已不及入城，又三里抵振武门，犹未全掩也。侧身而入，从容抵寓。
现代文：又行三里到达振武门，城门还没有全掩上，侧着身子进了城，从从容容来到寓所。
English: He walked another three miles to arrive at the Zhenwu Gate. The gate was not yet completely closed, so he entered the city sideways and calmly walked to his apartment.

