古文：吴人入楚，昭王奔郧，郧公之弟怀将弑王，郧公辛止之。
现代文：吴国军队攻入楚国，楚昭王出奔到郧地，郧公的弟弟鬬怀想要杀害昭王，郧公鬬辛阻止他。
English: The army of the State of Wu invaded the State of Chu, and the King of Chu, Zhao Zhao, fled to the Shandong Province. The brother of the Duke of Shandong, Zhou Huai, wanted to kill the King of Zhao, but the Duke of Shandong, Xin Xin, stopped him.

古文：怀曰： 平王杀吾父，在国则君，在外则仇也。
现代文：鬬怀说： 楚平王杀了我的父亲，在国都内昭王是国君，在国都外他就是我的仇人。
English: Hao Huai said: King Chuping killed my father. In the capital, King Zhao is the sovereign, but outside the capital, he is my enemy.

古文：见仇弗杀，非人也。 
现代文：见到仇人不杀，那就不算是人了。 
English: If you don't kill when you see the enemy, then you are not a human being.

古文：郧公曰： 夫事君者，不为外内行，不为丰约举，苟君之，尊卑一也。
现代文：郧公说： 事奉君王，不能因为在国都内和国都外就改变自己的行为，不能因为国君的兴盛和哀亡而有不同的举动，如果尊奉他为君王，尊卑就定下来了。
English: Zang Gong said, "When you serve the king, you can't change your behavior just because you are in or out of the capital. You can't act differently because of the king's prosperity or sorrow. If you respect him as the king, the superiority and inferiority will be fixed."

古文：且夫自敌以下则有仇，非是不仇。
现代文：而且是敌人才谈得上有仇，不是敌人便不记仇。
English: Moreover, it is the enemy who can talk about revenge, not the enemy who does not remember revenge.

古文：下虐上为弑，上虐下为讨，而况君乎！
现代文：下杀上称作弑，上杀下称为讨，更何况是君王呢！
English: Killing from above is called, killing from above is called 讨, and what's more, it's a king!

古文：君而讨臣，何仇之为？
现代文：作为君而讨伐臣，怎么能记仇呢？
English: As a prince fighting a vassal, how can you take revenge?

古文：若皆仇君，则何上下之有乎？
现代文：如果大家都去仇恨君王，那么还有什么上下之别呢？
English: If everyone hates the king, what is the difference between the top and the bottom?

古文：吾先人以善事君，成名于诸侯，自鬬伯比以来，未之失也。
现代文：我们先人用善行来事奉君王，在各诸侯国都很出名，从鬬伯比以来，一直没有丧失过。
English: Our ancestors, who served the king with good deeds, were famous in all the provinces, and they have not been lost since the time of King Bo-bi.

古文：今尔以是殃之，不可。 
现代文：现在你因为这件事而败坏名声，那不行。 
English: Now you're going to ruin your reputation over this, and that's not okay.

古文：怀弗听，曰： 吾思父，不能顾矣。 
现代文：鬬怀不听，说： 我思念父亲，不能顾及那些了。 
English: But she refused to listen and said, "I miss my father, I can't take care of them anymore."

古文：郧公以王奔随。
现代文：郧公便跟昭王一起逃亡到了随国。
English: Shao Gong then fled with King Zhao to Sui Province.

古文：王归而赏及郧、怀，子西谏曰： 君有二臣，或可赏也，或可戮也。
现代文：昭王回国后对郧公和鬬怀都赏赐，子西进谏说： 您有两个臣子，有一个应该赏他，有一个应该杀掉。
English: After returning to the country, King Zhao rewarded both Zi Gong and Zi Huai, and Zi Xi Jinqi said: You have two courtiers, one should reward him, and one should kill him.

古文：君王均之，群臣惧矣。 
现代文：君王却同样对待他们，群臣就要害怕了。 
English: The king treats them in the same way, and the courtiers are afraid.

古文：王曰： 夫子期之二子耶？
现代文：昭王说： 您是指子期的两个儿子吗？
English: Zhao Wang said: Are you referring to the two sons in the childbearing period?

古文：吾知之矣。
现代文：我知道了。
English: I know.

古文：或礼于君，或礼于父，均之，不亦可乎！ 
现代文：他们有一个对君王有礼，有一个对父亲有礼，我同样对待他们，不是也可以嘛！ 
English: One of them is courteous to the king, one is courteous to his father, I treat them the same, isn't that okay!

