古文：高斯得字不妄，利州路提点刑狱、知沔州稼之子也。
现代文：高斯得，字不妄，是利州路提点刑狱、沔州知州高稼的儿子。
English: Gosted, the word is not preposterous, is the son of Lizhou Luti Point Penitentiary and Zhangzhou Zhizhou Gaozhuo.

古文：少从李坤臣学，坤臣瞽，斯得左右扶持之。
现代文：少年时跟从李坤臣学习，李坤臣失明后，高斯得在左右扶持他。
English: When he was a boy, he studied under Li Kuncheng. After Li Kuncheng went blind, Gauss had to support him on his right and left.

古文：中成都路转运司试，补入太学。
现代文：他参加成都路转运司的考试合格后，被补入太学。
English: After he passed the examination of the Chengdu Road Transportation Division, he was admitted to Styria University.

古文：绍定二年举进士，授利州路观察推官。
现代文：绍定二年，他被推举参加进士考试，被授予利州路观察推官。
English: In the second year of Shaoding, he was elected to participate in the entrance examination and was awarded the title of Lizhou Road observation officer.

古文：越二年，辟差四川茶马干办公事。
现代文：过了两年，他被召用为四川茶马干办公事。
English: Two years later, he was called to do office work for Sichuan Tea Horse.

古文：李心传以著作佐郎领史事，即成都修《国朝会要》，辟为检阅文字。
现代文：李心传以著作佐郎的身份管理修史的事，就在成都修《国朝会要》，高斯得被征辟为检阅文字。
English: Li Xinchuan managed the revision of history with the identity of the author Saro. He revised the "Important Documents of the State Council" in Chengdu, and Gauss was conscripted to review the text.

古文：端平二年九月，稼死事于沔，时大元兵屯沔，斯得日夜西向号泣。
现代文：端平二年九月，高稼在沔州战死，当时大元兵驻在沔州，高斯得日夜向着西方哭泣。
English: In September of the second year of Dengping, Gao Jia was killed in battle in Zhangzhou. At that time, Da Yuan soldiers were stationed in Zhangzhou, and Gao Suda cried day and night to the West.

古文：会其僮至自沔，知稼战没处，与斯得潜行至其地，遂得稼遗体，奉以归，见者感泣。
现代文：恰好他的仆僮从沔州回来，知道高稼战死的地方，和高斯得偷偷地走到那个地方，就找到了高稼的遗体，他们把遗体运回来，见到的人都感慨地哭了。
English: It so happened that when his servants returned from Zhangzhou, they knew the place where Gao Zuo died in the war, and Gao Szu secretly went to that place and found Gao Zuo's body. They brought the body back, and everyone who saw it cried with emotion.

古文：服除而哀伤不已，无意仕进。
现代文：高斯得给父亲服丧期满后，仍是哀伤不已，无意做官。
English: At the end of the period of mourning for his father, Gauss was still grieving and had no intention of becoming an official.

古文：心传方修四朝史，辟为史馆检阅，秩同秘阁校勘，盖创员也。
现代文：李心传正修四朝史，召用他为史馆校勘，官俸和秘阁校勘一样，是班子成立时的成员。
English: Li Xinchuan is currently studying the history of the four dynasties. He was appointed as a reviewer of the history museum. He was a member of the team at the time of its establishment, just like the official and secret reviewer.

古文：斯得分修光、宁二帝《纪》。
现代文：高斯得负责写光、宁二帝《纪》。
English: Gauss was responsible for writing the "Chronicle" of Emperor Guangxu and Emperor Ning.

古文：寻迁史馆校勘，又迁军器监主簿兼史馆校勘。
现代文：不久高斯得升为史馆校勘，又升为军器监主簿兼史馆校勘。
English: Soon after, Gauss was promoted to the position of history museum proofreader, and then to the position of military equipment supervisor and history museum proofreader.

古文：时丞相史嵩之柄国，斯得遇对，空臆尽言。
现代文：当时丞相史嵩之掌权，高斯得在回答询问时，畅所欲言，把自己的肺腑之言都说了。
English: At that time, when the prime minister Shisong was in power, Goss had to speak freely when answering inquiries, and said all his heartfelt words.

古文：冬雷，斯得应诏上封事，乞择才并相，由是迕嵩之意。
现代文：冬天打雷，高斯得应诏旨上疏，请求选用有才能的人和史嵩之一起任宰相，因此违背了史嵩之的心愿。
English: In the dead of winter, Gauss had to go to the imperial court to request the selection of a talented person and one of Shisung to be appointed prime minister, thus violating Shisung's wishes.

古文：迁太常寺主簿，仍兼史馆校勘。
现代文：高斯得升为太常寺主簿，仍兼史馆校勘。
English: Gauss was promoted to the position of the main bookkeeper of Taijō-ji Temple, while still serving as a proofreader for the history museum.

古文：时斯得叔父定子以礼部尚书领史事，时人以为美谈。
现代文：这时高斯得的叔父高定子以礼部尚书的身份负责修史，当时人认为这是令人称道的好事。
English: At this time, Gaust's uncle, Gaostetso, was in charge of revising history as a ceremonial official, which was considered a commendable good deed at the time.

古文：会太学博士刘应起入对，拄嵩之，嵩之恚，使其党言叔父兄子不可同朝，以斯得添差通判绍兴府。
现代文：恰好太学博士刘应起入朝奏对，讥刺史嵩之，史嵩之恼恨，就指使他的党羽说叔父兄子不能同为朝官，高斯得被任命为添差通判绍兴府。
English: It just so happened that Liu Ying, a doctor of science, entered the imperial court and ridiculed Shi Song. Out of anger, Shi Song ordered his followers to say that an uncle and a brother could not both be imperial officials, and that Gao Szu had to be appointed as the magistrate of Shaoxing.

古文：淳祐二年，四朝《帝纪》书成，上之。
现代文：淳二年，四朝《帝纪》写成，把它上给皇上。
English: In the second year of Jun, the Four Dynasties "Imperial History" was written and sent to the emperor.

古文：嵩之妄加毁誉于理宗、济王，改斯得所草《宁宗纪》末卷，斯得与史官杜范、王遂辨之。
现代文：史嵩之在理宗、济王面前妄加诽谤，改高斯得所写的《宁宗纪》末卷，高斯得和史官杜范、王遂辩论这件事。
English: Shi Songzhi slandered and altered the last volume of "Ningzong Ji" written by Gosted in front of Rizong and King Jie, and Gosted debated the matter with historians Du Fan and Wang.

古文：范报书亦有 奸人剿入邪说 之语，然书已登进矣。
现代文：杜范的回书也有 奸人抄入邪说 的话，但史书已进献给皇上了。
English: Du Fan's reply also had the words "traitors copied in evil sayings," but the history book had already been dedicated to the emperor.

古文：心传藏斯得所草，题其末曰 前史官高某撰 而已。
现代文：李心传收藏高斯得所写的部分，在后面写上 前史官高某撰 。
English: Li Xinchuan collected the parts written by Gauss, and wrote "previous historian Gao Mou" on the back.

古文：逾年，添差通判台州。
现代文：过了一年，高斯得为添差通判台州。
English: A year later, Goss had to sue Taizhong for the bonus.

古文：范既入相，召为太常博士，迁秘书郎。
现代文：杜范已任宰相，召用他为太常博士，升为秘书郎。
English: Du Fan has been appointed as the prime minister, he has been appointed as the chief doctor, and he has been promoted to secretary.

古文：六年正月朔，日有食之，斯得应诏上封事，言： 大奸嗜权，巧营夺服，陛下奋独断而罢退之，是矣。
现代文：淳六年正月初一，日食，高斯得应诏上疏，说： 最奸邪的人特别喜欢权力，通过巧妙的办法使自己超过别人，陛下独自决断而罢退他，是对的。
English: On the first day of the first month of the sixth year, the day of the solar eclipse, Gauss had to issue an edict to the emperor, saying: The most perfidious person is particularly fond of power, and through clever means makes himself superior to others. His Majesty is right to remove him at his own discretion.

古文：谏宪之臣，交疏其恶，或请投之荒裔，或请勒之休致。
现代文：台谏官相继弹劾他的罪恶，有的请求把他流放到偏远荒凉的地方，有的请求勒令他辞官。
English: The Taiwanese eunuchs successively impeached him for his crimes, some requested that he be exiled to a remote and desolate place, and some requested that he be removed from office.

古文：陛下苟行其言，亦足昭示意向，涣释群疑。
现代文：陛下如果采纳台谏官的话，也足以表明自己的意图，消除大家的疑虑。
English: If His Majesty were to accept the position of eunuch, it would be enough to show his intentions and dispel everyone's doubts.

古文：乃一切寝而不宣，历时既久，人言不置，然后黾勉传谕，委曲诲奸，俾于袭绖之时，妄致挂冠之请，因降祠命，苟塞人言，又有奸人阴为之地。
现代文：陛下却把弹劾他的奏章扣住不发布，时间长了，别人的议论不放在心上，然后努力传达谕旨，委曲自己的意图教导奸邪，使他在服丧的时候，胡乱地提出辞职的请求，于是才降下给他宫观之职的任命，暂时搪塞人们的议论，又有奸邪的人暗中帮助他。
English: His Majesty, however, withheld the report of his impeachment and did not publish it. It took a long time, he did not care about the opinions of others, and then he tried to convey the edict, misrepresented his intention to teach treachery, and made him submit a request for resignation at the time of his funeral. Therefore, he lowered his appointment to the position of palace observer, temporarily obstructed people's discussions, and treacherous people secretly helped him.

古文：是以讹言并兴，善类解体，谓圣意之难测，而大奸之必还，莽、卓、操、懿之祸，将有不忍言者。 时监察御史江万里及它台谏累疏论嵩之罪恶，竟不施行，第因嵩之致仕，予祠而已，故斯得封事首及之。
现代文：所以谣言并起，善良的人解体，认为皇上的意志难推测，大奸定会还朝，王莽、董卓、曹操、司马懿的祸患，将有不堪说的。 那时监察御史江万里和别的台谏多次上疏论奏史嵩之的罪恶，最终都没施行。只因史嵩之辞官，给他宫观的官职才这样，因此高斯得上封事首先议论这件事。
English: Therefore, rumors arose simultaneously, good people disintegrated, thinking that the emperor's will was difficult to predict, that the traitor would definitely return to the court, and that the evil of Wang Mang, Dong Zhuo, Cao Cao, and Sima Yi would be unspeakable. At that time, the inspector of the imperial court, Jiang Wanli, and other court officials repeatedly discussed the evil of playing Shisong, but ultimately did not implement it. It was only because Shisong's secretary gave him the official post of the imperial court, so Goss had to discuss the matter first.

古文：又言： 大臣贵乎以道事君，今乃献替之义少而容悦之意多，知耻之念轻而患失之心重。
现代文：高斯得又说 ：大臣可贵之处就是以道事君，如今大臣们诤言进谏的少而逢迎取悦的多，知道羞耻的念头轻而患得患失的心思重。
English: Gauss also said: The valuable thing about a minister is that he is a moralist. Nowadays, ministers are less likely to speak ill of others and more likely to please them. They know that the thought of shame is light and the thought of suffering loss is heavy.

古文：内降当执奏，则不待下殿而已行；滥恩当裁抑，则不从中覆而遽命。
现代文：内降应该奏明，却不等离开宫殿就已经实行了；不合规定的恩典应该裁减和抑制，却不经过认真审查就已经下达了命令。
English: Indulgences were to be made known, but not executed till he had left the palace; irregular graces were to be curtailed and restrained, but not carefully examined before the order was given.

古文：嫉正而庇邪，喜同而恶异，任术而诡道，乐媮而惮劳。
现代文：嫉妒正直的人，包庇邪恶的人，喜欢和自己观点一致的人，讨厌不同意自己观点的人，玩弄权术并违背道理，喜欢享乐但害怕劳苦。
English: Envious of those who are honest, covetous of those who are evil, fond of those who agree with them, hateful of those who disagree with them, manipulative and unreasonable, lovers of pleasure but afraid of hard work.

古文：陛下虚心委寄，所责者何事，而其应乃尔。 时范钟独当国，过失日章，故斯得及之。
现代文：陛下虚心把政事托付给他们，他们要负责的是哪些事，而他们只是应付而已。 当时范钟独自掌权，他的过错日益显露出来，所以高斯得议论触及到他。
English: His Majesty humbly entrusted the government to them, what they were responsible for, and they just coped with it. At that time, Fan Zhong was in power alone, and his faults were increasingly revealed, so the Gaussian debate touched him.

古文：又言： 便嬖侧媚之人，尤足为清明之累，腐夫巧谗而使传几摇，妖〈女监〉外通而魁邪密主，阴奸伏蛊，互煽交攻，陛下之心至是其存者几希矣。
现代文：高斯得又说 ：靠阿谀奉承得到皇上宠信的近臣，足以连累陛下的清明，宦官的谗言几乎可以造成使臣传达诏书的变化，宫女与外面勾结，最奸邪的人偷着做主，这些人包藏祸心，互相煽动，交替攻击，陛下的心至此保存的差不多只有一点点了。
English: Gaustus also said: the courtiers who have gained the emperor's favor through flattery are enough to taint his majesty's purity. The eunuchs' insults can almost cause the envoys to change the imperial edict. The concubines collude with the outside world. The most treacherous people secretly take the lead. These people harbor evil intentions, instigate each other, and attack alternately. Your majesty's heart has only been preserved a little bit so far.

古文：陛下之心，大化之本也。洗濯磨淬，思所以更之，乃徒立为虚言无实之名，而谓之更化，此天心之所以未当，大异之所以示儆也。 言尤切直，帝嘉纳焉。
现代文：陛下的心，是教化的根本，洗涤磨砺，考虑怎么去改变它，而现在只说空话却没有实际内容，却称为革新，这就是上天不应时，出现大灾异以示警告的原因。 高斯得讲得十分恰当，皇上高兴地采纳了。
English: His Majesty's heart is the root of edification, it needs to be washed and sharpened, and it is necessary to consider how to change it, but now it is just empty words without actual content, but it is called innovation, which is the reason why, when Heaven is not in the mood, there is a catastrophe to warn.

古文：又言： 群臣厖杂，宫禁奇邪，黩货外交，岂可坐视而不之问！
现代文：高斯得又说： 群臣庞杂，后宫与他们贪污纳贿，内外勾结，陛下怎能坐视不管！
English: Gausted also said: How can His Majesty sit idly by while his courtiers, who are a motley crew, corrupt and take bribes, and collude internally and externally with their harem!

古文：顾乃并包兼容之意多，别邪辨正之虑浅，忧谗避谤之心重，直前迈往之志微，遂使众臣争衡，大权旁落，养成积轻之势，以开窥觊之渐。
现代文：于是对此多是兼容并包，很少考虑去分辨直正和邪恶，大臣们担心谗言，躲避诽谤的心思很重，勇往直前的志向很小，这就使群臣争相横行，大权旁落，逐渐形成陛下被看轻的形势，开启了窥伺陛下的局面。
English: As a result, much of this was all-inclusive, with little thought given to distinguishing between right and wrong. The ministers were worried about slander, had a strong desire to avoid slander, and had little ambition to move forward. This caused the ministers to compete with each other, and power to fall by the wayside, gradually creating a situation in which His Majesty was looked down upon, opening up the situation of spying on His Majesty.

古文：设有不幸，变故乘之，上心一移，凶渠立至，使宗社有沦亡之忧，衣冠遭鱼肉之祸，生灵罹涂炭之厄。
现代文：如果有不幸的事发生，变故乘机而出，陛下的心一动摇，凶险的事就会马上发生，会使国家有沦亡的忧患，百官遭到被鱼肉的大祸，百姓遭到涂炭。
English: If something unfortunate happens, if circumstances take advantage of the opportunity, if His Majesty's heart is shaken, something dangerous will happen immediately, causing the country to fall into ruin, the officials to suffer a great calamity, and the people to suffer.

古文：当是时也，能洁身以去，其能逃万世之清议乎？ 于是群憸悚惧，或泣诉上前，或上章求去，合力排摈，斯得遂求补外。
现代文：在那时候，即使能洁身而去，又怎能逃脱万世公正的评论呢？ 于是那些奸邪的人恐惧，有的哭着在皇上面前论诉高斯得，有的上奏章请求罢免高斯得，他们一起排挤高斯得，高斯得就请求到地方去任职。
English: At that time, even if they were able to leave with a clean slate, how could they escape the judgment of universal justice? Therefore, those treacherous people were afraid. Some of them cried and argued with Gosted in front of the emperor, and some petitioned the emperor to dismiss Gosted. Together, they ousted Gosted, and Gosted asked to go to the provinces to serve.

古文：在告几百余日，于是差知严州，斯得三请乞祠，不许。
现代文：他的请求过了一百多天，才被差派为严州知州，高斯得三次请求担任闲职，皇上不许。
English: It took more than a hundred days for his request to be sent to Yanzhou Zhizhou. Gauss had to ask three times to take on a sinecure, but the emperor would not allow it.

古文：严环山为郡，虽丰岁犹仰它州。
现代文：严州在山的周围，即使是丰年也要依赖别的州。
English: Yanzhou is surrounded by mountains. Even in good years, it has to rely on other prefectures.

古文：夏旱，斯得蠲租发廪，招籴劝分，请于朝，得米万石以振济。
现代文：夏季大旱，高斯得免去百姓的租税并发放救济粮，招集人买粮，劝人们互助，向朝廷奏请，得到朝廷调拨的一万石米来赈济灾民。
English: In the summer drought, Goss was exempted from the people's tax and distributed relief grain, called people to buy grain, persuaded people to help each other, appealed to the court, and received 10,000 koku of rice allocated by the court to help the victims.

古文：迁浙东提点刑狱，遂劾知处州赵善瀚、知台州沈暨等七人倚势厉民，疏上，不报。
现代文：高斯得升为浙东提点刑狱，他就弹劾处州知州赵善瀚、台州知州沈等七人仗势欺压百姓，他的奏疏献上后，没得到答复。
English: When Gauss was promoted to the East Zhejiang Provincial Penitentiary, he impeached seven people, including Zhizhou Zhizhou Zhao Shanhan and Taizhou Zhizhou Shen, for oppressing the people. After his report was submitted, there was no reply.

古文：改江西转运判官，斯得具辞免，上奏曰： 臣劾奏赵善瀚等七人，未闻报可，固疑必有党与营救，惑误圣听，今奉恩除，乃知中臣所料。
现代文：高斯得改任江西转运判官，高斯得请求辞职，并一五一十地陈述自己的理由，他上奏说： 臣弹劾赵善瀚等七人，没得到批准奏章的答复，我本来就怀疑这一定是有他们的党羽营救他们，蛊惑陛下，现在我蒙受恩惠改任江西转运判官，才知道与我预料的一样。
English: Gauss had to be reappointed as the judge of Jiangxi transshipment. Gauss had to ask for his resignation and explain his reasons in detail. He reported: The minister impeached Zhao Shanhan and seven others, but did not receive a reply to approve the report. I originally suspected that it must be their party members who rescued them and bewitched His Majesty. Now that I have been graciously reappointed as the judge of Jiangxi transshipment, I only know what I expected.

古文：善瀚者，侍御史周坦之妇翁也，赃吏之魁，锢于圣世，郑清之与之有旧，复与州符。
现代文：赵善瀚，是侍御史周坦的岳父，赃吏魁首，钅固于圣世，郑清之和赵善瀚有老交情，就又给他知州的官职。
English: Zhao Shanhan was the father-in-law of the attendant Shi Zhoutan, the leader of the eunuchs, firmly entrenched in the holy world. Zheng Qingzhi and Zhao Shanhan had an old friendship, so he also gave him the official post of Zhizhou.

古文：沈塈者，同签书枢密院事史宅之妻党也。
现代文：沈，是同签书枢密院事史宅之妻子的亲戚。
English: Shen is a relative of the wife of the co-signer of the letter, Privy Councillor Zhi Shizhu.

古文：祖宗以来，未有监司按吏一不施行者，坏法乱纪，未有甚此。
现代文：自从祖宗以来，没有监司弹劾官吏而不施行的，破坏法制、紊乱纲纪，没有比这更严重的。
English: Since the time of our ancestors, no supervising magistrate has impeached an official without carrying it out, and there is nothing more serious than this in terms of undermining the legal system and disrupting discipline.

古文：臣身为使者，劾吏不行，反叨易节，若贪荣冒拜，则与世之顽顿无耻者何异？
现代文：我身为使臣，弹劾官吏却没被采纳，反而被调走担任别的官职，我如果贪图荣华富贵接受这个任命，那与世间没有骨气、不知羞耻的人有什么区别？
English: If I, as an envoy, impeach an official and am not accepted, but am transferred to another post, if I covet glory and wealth and accept this appointment, what is the difference between me and the spineless and shameless people in the world?

古文：乞并臣镌罢，以戒奉使无状者。 章既上，坦自谓己任台谏而反见攻，遍恳同列论斯得，同列难之，计急，自上章劾罢斯得新任，未几，坦亦罢，七人竟罢去。
现代文：请罢去我的官职，用来告诫那些在其位不谋其政的人。 高斯得的奏章献上后，周坦自认为自己身为台谏反而被别人攻击，就广泛地恳请同僚弹劾高斯得，同僚们反驳他，周坦黔驴技穷，就亲自上奏弹劾高斯得，希望皇上罢免高斯得的新任官职，不久，周坦也被罢官，赵善瀚等七人最终也被罢官。
English: Please dismiss my official position, used to admonish those who do not seek political power in their position. After Gosted's report was presented, Zhou Tan, who considered himself to be a Taiwan rebel and was attacked by others, widely implored his colleagues to impeach Gosted, his colleagues contradicted him, Zhou Tan, who was poor in skills, personally submitted a report to impeach Gosted, hoping that the emperor would dismiss Gosted's new official position. Soon, Zhou Tan was also dismissed, and Zhao Shanhan and seven others were eventually dismissed.

古文：移湖南提点刑狱，荐通判潭州徐经孙等六人。
现代文：高斯得担任湖南提点刑狱，他推荐潭州通判徐经孙等六人。
English: Gao Ste served as Hunan's point of punishment prison. He recommended six people, including Xu Jingsun, to be sentenced in Tanzhou.

古文：攸悬富民陈衡老，以家丁粮食资强贼，劫杀平民。
现代文：攸县富豪陈衡老，用自己家的仆从和粮食资助盗贼，劫杀平民百姓。
English: Chen Henglao, a wealthy man from You County, used his family's servants and grain to finance thieves who robbed and killed civilians.

古文：斯得至，有诉其事者，首吏受赇而左右之，衡老造庭，首吏拱立。
现代文：高斯得到任后，有诉讼这件事的，为首的官吏受贿后帮助陈衡老，陈衡老到公堂，为首的官吏拱手而立，十分恭敬。
English: After Gauss was appointed, if there was a lawsuit about this matter, the leading officials took bribes and helped Chen Henglao. When Chen Henglao went to court, the leading officials stood aside, very respectful.

古文：斯得发其奸，械首吏下狱，群胥失色股栗。
现代文：高斯得揭露他的罪状，把为首的官吏投到狱中，其他官员都惊慌失色、十分恐惧。
English: Gauss had to expose his crime and throw the leading official in prison, the other officials were panicked and very afraid.

古文：于是研鞫具得其状，乃黥配首吏，具白朝省，追毁衡老官资，簿录其家。
现代文：于是经过审问完全了解了这件事的情况，就处为首的官吏黥刑并被发配，高斯得把这件事一五一十地汇报给朝廷，朝廷毁去了陈衡老做官的资历，记录下他家。
English: Therefore, after the interrogation, he fully understood the situation of this matter, and the leading official was punished and dispatched. Goss had to report this matter to the imperial court in detail. The imperial court destroyed Chen Henglao's qualifications as an official and recorded his family.

古文：会诸邑水灾，衡老愿出米五万石振济以赎罪。
现代文：恰好各县发生水灾，陈衡老愿意拿出五万石米赈济灾荒以便赎罪。
English: Just as floods occurred in various counties, Chen Henglao was willing to take out 50,000 koku of rice to help with the disaster in order to atone for his sins.

古文：衡老婿吴自性，与衡老馆客太学生冯炜等谋中伤斯得盗拆官椟。
现代文：陈衡老的女婿吴自性，与陈衡老的馆客太学生冯炜等谋划中伤高斯得不经允许拆开官府的卷柜。
English: Chen Henglao's son-in-law, Wu Zicheng, and Chen Henglao's guest, the student Feng Jun, plotted to injure Goss so that he could open the cabinet without permission.

古文：斯得白于朝，复正其罪，出一箧书，具得自性等交通省部吏胥情状。
现代文：高斯得向朝廷汇报，重新定下陈衡老的罪名。拿出一箱文书，完全得到了吴自性等同省部官员勾结的情况。
English: Gauss had to report to the imperial court to re-establish Chen Henglao's guilt. He took out a box of documents and fully got the situation of Wu Zicheng's collusion with provincial and ministerial officials.

古文：斯得并言于朝，下其事天府，索出赇银六万余两，黥配自性及省寺高铸等二十余人。
现代文：高斯得一并把这些向朝廷汇报，皇上把这事送交天府，追查出受贿的银子六万多两，吴自性与那些受贿的中央官吏高铸等二十多人都被处以黥刑并被发配。
English: Gauss had to report all of this to the imperial court, and the emperor sent the matter to the Heavenly Palace. More than sixty thousand taels of bribe money were traced, and more than twenty people, including Wu Zicheng and the bribe-taking central officials Gao Jiao, were sentenced to flogging and dispatched.

古文：初，自性厚赂宦者言于理宗曰： 斯得以缗钱百万进，愿易近地一节。 理宗曰： 高某硬汉，安得有是。 而斯得力求去，清之以书留之。
现代文：当初，吴自性用厚礼贿赂宦官对理宗说： 高斯得进献了一百万缗钱，希望能改在离京城近的地方做官。 理宗说 ：高某是有骨气的人，怎能做这种事。 高斯得极力请求辞官，郑清之写信挽留他。
English: At first, Wu Zicheng bribed the eunuch with a generous gift and said to Li Zong: Gao Si had to offer one million baht in hopes of being transferred to a position closer to the capital.Li Zong said: Gao Mou is a person with backbone, how can he do such a thing?Gao Si had to plead with the official, Zheng Qing's letter to retain him.

古文：又荐李晞颜等五人。
现代文：高斯得又荐举李日希颜等五人。
English: Gost also recommended five stars, including Li Rixiyan.

古文：加直秘阁、湖南转运判官，改尚右郎官，未至，改礼部郎中。
现代文：高斯得被加官为直秘阁、湖南转运判官，改任尚右郎官，他还没到任，又改为礼部郎中。
English: Gao Sude was promoted to the post of the direct secretary of the cabinet, the judge of Hunan transshipment, and was reassigned to the post of Shang Yu's vassal. Before he arrived, he was also changed to Reibu's vassal.

古文：上疏极论时事，改权左司，力辞，内批兼侍立修注官。
现代文：高斯得上疏透彻地论述时事，他被改为权左司，极力推辞，皇上又任命他兼任侍立修注官。
English: Gauss had to be very thorough in discussing current affairs. He was changed to the left and right division, but he strongly refused. The emperor also appointed him as an attendant and commentator.

古文：言水灾曰： 愿陛下立罢新寺土木，速反迕旨诸臣，遏绝邪说，主张善良，谨重刑辟，爱惜士类，抑远佞臣，绝其干挠，则天意可回，和气可召矣。 会斥左司徐霖，帝虑给事中赵汝腾争逐霖事，乃徙汝腾翰林学士，汝腾闻命即去国。
现代文：他上疏讲水灾说 ：希望陛下马上停止修建新的寺院，赶紧召回那些违反陛下心意的大臣们，遏止邪说，主张善良，谨慎地使用刑法，爱惜士大夫，压制和疏远奸邪的官员，阻断他们对朝政的干扰，这样才能挽回天意，招来和气。 正巧左司徐霖被贬斥，皇上担心给事中赵汝腾争辩逐走徐霖的事，就调赵汝腾担任翰林学士，赵汝腾听到这个任命后就辞官。
English: He went on to talk about the floods and said: I hope that His Majesty will immediately stop building new temples, quickly recall those ministers who violate His Majesty's will, curb evil theories, advocate kindness, use criminal law cautiously, cherish scholars and doctors, suppress and alienate treacherous officials, and block their interference in the government, so as to restore the will of heaven and bring harmony. It just so happened that Zuo Si Xu Lin was disparaged, and the emperor was worried about Zhao Ruten's argument in the matter of expelling Xu Lin, so he transferred Zhao Ruten to serve as a scholar of Hanlin, and Zhao Ruten resigned after hearing this appointment.

古文：斯得言： 汝腾一世之望，宗老之重，飘然引去，陛下遂亦弃之有如弁髦，中外惊怪，将见贤者力争不胜而去，小人踊跃增气而来。
现代文：高斯得说 ：赵汝腾有一世的名望，是当朝很重要的老臣，很容易就辞去官职，陛下也就像丢弃无用之物而丢弃了他，朝内外十分惊异，将要出现贤德的人力争不胜而离去，奸邪的人增加勇气纷纷而来的局面。
English: Gauss said: Zhao Ruten had a reputation for a lifetime. He was a very important old minister of the time. He easily resigned from his official post. His majesty also discarded him as if he were a useless thing. The imperial court and the outside world were very surprised. There will be a situation in which virtuous people will leave because they cannot win, and treacherous people will increase their courage.

古文：陛下改纪仅数月，初意遽变，臣深惜之。 
现代文：陛下改元才几个月，就改变了最初的想法，我深为陛下惋惜。 
English: I deeply regret that His Majesty changed his mind only a few months after the change of the era.

古文：时上封事言得失者众，或者恶其讙詉，遂谓 空言徒乱人听，无补国事。 斯得因转对，言： 诸臣之言，上则切劘圣主，下则砥砺大臣，内则摧压奸邪，外则销遏寇虐，顾以为无补于实政乎？
现代文：当时上封事讲朝政得失的很多，有的人讨厌这种事，认为是喧闹，就说 ：空话只能扰乱人心，对国事没有好处。 高斯得在轮次奏对时，对皇上说： 众大臣的话，对上是和圣明的君主切磋，对下是磨砺大臣，对内是摧压奸邪，对外是阻止寇盗，能认为这是对朝政没好处吗？
English: At that time, there was a lot of talk about the merits and demerits of the imperial government, and some people hated this kind of thing and thought it was noisy, so they said: Empty talk can only disturb people's hearts, and is not good for national affairs. Gauss had to say to the emperor during the rounds: The words of the ministers, on the one hand, are to compete with the sacred monarch, on the other hand, are to sharpen the minister, on the inside are to suppress evil, and on the outside are to prevent robbery, can you think that this is not good for the imperial government?

古文：空言之讥，好名之说，欲一网君子而尽去之，其言易入，其祸难言，此君子去留之机，国家安危之候，不可不深留圣虑者也。 监察御史萧泰来论罢。
现代文：认为大臣讲朝政得失是空话的讥议，追求名声的说法的人，是想把正人君子一网打尽，这些话容易说，灾祸却难说，这是正人君子离开或者留下的时机，国家安危的时候，陛下不能不深深地留意啊。 监察御史萧泰来上奏请求罢免高斯得。
English: It is easy to say these words, but it is difficult to say what is the calamity. This is the time for an upright gentleman to leave or stay, and when the country is in danger, His Majesty cannot but pay close attention. Supervisor Shi Xiaotai came to appeal for the dismissal of Gao Sude.

古文：逾年，以直宝文阁知泉州，力辞，迁福建路计度转运副使。
现代文：过了一年，高斯得以直宝文阁的身份为泉州知州，他极力推辞，被升为福建路计度转运副使。
English: A year later, Goss was promoted to vice-envoy of Fujian Road Metrology and Transportation after he was able to become Quanzhou Zhizhou with the status of Zhi Bao Wen Ge.

古文：朝廷行自实田，斯得言： 按《史记》，秦始皇三十一年，令民自实田。
现代文：朝廷施行让百姓自报田赋数目，由官府注册核实的自实法，高斯得说 ：据《史记》记载，秦始皇三十一年，下令百姓自实田。
English: The imperial court implemented the self-sufficiency law, which allowed the people to self-report the number of rice fields, and the registration and verification by the government. Gauss said: According to the "History," the first emperor of the Qin Dynasty ordered the people to self-sufficiency in 31 years.

古文：主上临御适三十一年，而异日书之史册，自实之名正与秦同。 丞相谢方叔大愧，即为之罢。
现代文：陛下统治现在正好是三十一年，等来日把这写入史书，自实的名正和秦代相同。 丞相谢方叔十分羞愧，因此被罢去相位。
English: His Majesty's reign is now exactly thirty-one years old, and it will be written in the history books in the future that his name is the same as that of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：董槐入相，召为司农卿。
现代文：董槐担任宰相时，召高斯得为司农卿。
English: When Dong Xi served as prime minister, he summoned Gauss to be the secretary of agriculture.

古文：程元凤入相，改秘书监。
现代文：程元凤担任宰相时，高斯得改任秘书监。
English: When Cheng Yuanfeng served as prime minister, Goss had to be reassigned to the post of secretary.

古文：丁大全入相，监察御史沈炎论斯得以闽漕交承钱物，下郡吏天府，榜死数人。
现代文：在丁大全担任宰相时，监察御史沈炎弹劾高斯得因闽漕交承钱物一事，把郡中的官吏送到天府处治，鞭打致死好几个人。
English: When Ding Daquan was the prime minister, the inspector of imperial history, Shen Yan, impeached Gao Suda for squabbling over the transfer of money and property, sent the officials in the county to Tianfu for punishment, and whipped several people to death.

古文：先是，吴自性之狱，高铸为首恶黥配广州，捐资免行，至是为相府监奴，嗾炎发其端。
现代文：从前，吴自性一案，高铸作为首犯被处以黥刑发配到广州，高铸拿出财产作为不去广州的补偿，这时担任宰相府的管家，唆使沈炎揭发高斯得。
English: Once upon a time, in the case of Wu Zicheng, Gao Ying, as the first offender, was sentenced to flogging and sent to Guangzhou. Gao Ying took out property as compensation for not going to Guangzhou. At that time, he served as the steward of the Prime Minister's Office and instigated Shen Yan to expose Gao Sude.

古文：京尹顾岩傅会其狱，安吉守何梦然奉行其事，陵铄甚至，斯得不少挫，竟无所得。
现代文：京尹顾岩附会这一案件，安吉守臣何梦然受命处理这件事，对高斯得倍加凌侮，高斯得毫不屈服，他们最终一无所得。
English: In the case of the Beijing Yin Guyan Auxiliary Association, Anji Shouwen He Mengran was ordered to deal with the matter, and he was doubly insulted by Goss. Goss did not give in, and they eventually got nothing.

古文：大全既谪，朝廷罪其委任非人，遂斩铸。
现代文：丁大全被贬后，朝廷认为他犯有用人不当的罪过，于是就杀了高铸。
English: After Ding Daquan was demoted, the imperial court believed that he had committed the crime of employing an improper person, so he killed Gao Jiao.

古文：斯得既拜浙西提点刑狱之命，炎，浙西人，泣于上前，乞更之，移浙东提举常平。
现代文：高斯得接受了浙西提点刑狱的任命，沈炎，是浙西人，他在皇上面前哭着请求改派高斯得到别处任官，高斯得被改为浙东提举常平。
English: Gao Sidi accepted the appointment of Zhejiang Xidi Punitive Prison, and Shen Yan, a native of Zhejiang Xidi, cried in front of the emperor and requested that Gao Sidi be reassigned to another post, and Gao Sidi was changed to Zhejiang East Promotion Changping.

古文：命下，给事中章鉴缴还。
现代文：皇上的诏命下达后，被给事中章鉴封驳归还。
English: After the emperor's imperial decree was issued, it was returned to the emperor with the seal of the Central Government.

古文：斯得杜门不出，著《孝宗系年要录》。
现代文：高斯得闭门不出，编著《孝宗系年要录》。
English: Gauss had to stay behind closed doors, compiling the "Yearbook of the Xiaozong Dynasty."

古文：彗星见，应诏上封事，曰： 陛下专任一相，虚心委之，果得其人，宜天心克享，灾害不生。
现代文：天上出现彗星，高斯得应皇上的诏命上封事说： 陛下专门任用一个宰相，诚心把政事委托给他，如果用人得当，就应该是符合天意，不发生灾害。
English: A comet appeared in the sky, and Gauss had to respond to the emperor's edict with a letter saying: His Majesty specifically appointed a prime minister and sincerely entrusted the government to him. If the person is used properly, it should be in accordance with the will of heaven and no disasters will occur.

古文：而庚申、己未之岁，大水为灾，浙西之民死者数百千万。
现代文：然而庚申、己未两年，发生水灾，浙西百姓死的数百千万。
English: However, less than two years after Goshun, a flood occurred, killing millions of people in western Zhejiang.

古文：连年旱暵，田野萧条，物价翔跃，民命如线。
现代文：连年干旱，田野萧条，物价暴涨，人命如线。
English: Consecutive years of drought, depressed fields, skyrocketing prices, human lives on the line.

古文：今妖星突出，其变不小。
现代文：如今妖星突然出现，变故不小。
English: Now, a mysterious star has suddenly appeared, and the situation has changed considerably.

古文：若非大失人心，何以致天怒如此之烈。 封事之上也，似道匿不以闻。
现代文：如果不是大失人心，怎能招致上天如此暴怒。 高斯得封事献上后，贾似道藏起来没交给皇上。
English: If he had not been so unpopular, how could he have incurred the wrath of heaven? After Gauss had presented the letter, Jia Xi Dao hid it and did not give it to the emperor.

古文：度宗即位，召为秘书监，又论罢。
现代文：度宗即位后，高斯得被召用为秘书监，又被弹劾罢官。
English: After Emperor Wuzong ascended to the throne, Gao Szu was called to serve as secretary-superintendent and was impeached and dismissed.

古文：复迁秘书监，屡辞不许，擢起居舍人兼国史院编修官、实录院检讨官兼侍讲。
现代文：高斯得再任秘书监，多次辞官都没被允许，他被提升为起居舍人兼国史院编修官、实录院检讨官兼侍讲。
English: Gauss had to be reappointed superintendent of secretaries, and he was not allowed to resign several times. He was promoted to living attendant and editor-in-chief of the Academy of National History, and to inspector and assistant lecturer of the Academy of Historical Records.

古文：进读之时，每于天命去留之际，人心得失之因，前代治乱之故，祖宗基业之难，必反复陈之。
现代文：他在为皇上讲读时，关于天命去留的时机，人心得失的原因，前代治乱的缘故，祖宗创业的艰难，每次都一定要反复讲述。
English: When he read for the emperor, he always had to repeat the story about the timing of the fate to stay, the reasons for the people's gains and losses, the reasons for the previous generation's chaos, and the difficulties of the ancestors' entrepreneurship.

古文：兼权工部侍郎，遂兼同修国史、实录院同修撰，仍兼侍讲。
现代文：高斯得兼权工部侍郎，兼同修国史、实录院同修撰，仍兼侍讲。
English: Gao Shizhong was also an attendant of the Power Engineering Department, a fellow student of national history and a scholar of the Academy of Historical Records, and also a lecturer.

古文：进《高宗系年要录纲目》，帝善之。
现代文：他进献《高宗系年要录纲目》，皇上认为这很好。
English: He presented the "Yearly Curriculum of the Gaozong School," which the emperor thought was very good.

古文：大元军下襄阳，斯得疏论言事，最为切要，帝嘉纳，迁工部侍郎。
现代文：大元军队攻下襄阳，高斯得上疏议论国事，十分切中要害，皇上欣然采纳，他升为工部侍郎。
English: The Yuan army captured Xiangyang, and Gauss had the opportunity to discuss state affairs, which was very important. The emperor gladly accepted his offer, and he was promoted to Chamberlain of the Ministry of Works.

古文：屡求补外，以显文阁待制、知建宁府。
现代文：高斯得多次请求到地方任职，他以显文阁待制的身份，担任建宁府知府。
English: Gauss received many requests to serve in local government, and he served as the governor of Jianning Prefecture as a member of the Hsienwen Cabinet.

古文：度宗崩，陈宜中入相，以权兵部尚书召。
现代文：度宗去世，陈宜中入朝担任宰相，召用高斯得为权兵部尚书。
English: After Emperor Wuzong died, Chen Yizhong entered the imperial court to serve as prime minister, and appointed Gao Shude as the commander of the military.

古文：斯得痛国事之阽危，疏言诛奸臣以谢天下，开言路以回天心，聚人才以济国事，旌节义以厉懦夫，竭财力以收散亡。
现代文：高斯得对国家的危机感到悲痛，他上疏说应该杀奸臣以谢天下，广开言路以挽回天意，招揽人才以利国事，表彰节义以激励懦夫，倾全部财力使流散的人回来。
English: Gauss was saddened by the crisis of the country. He said that it was necessary to kill treacherous ministers to thank the world, to speak widely to restore the will of heaven, to recruit talents to benefit the country, to encourage cowards by commending righteousness, and to devote all financial resources to bring back the exiles.

古文：忠愤激烈，指陈当时之事无所遗。
现代文：他的话忠愤激烈，毫不遗漏地指明和陈述当时的事。
English: His words were angry and furious, and he did not omit to point out and state the events of the time.

古文：擢翰林学士、知制诰兼侍读，进端明殿学士、签书枢密院事兼参知政事，同提举编修《敕令》及《经武要略》。
现代文：高斯得被提升为翰林学士、知制诰兼侍读，进升为端明殿学士、签书枢密院事兼参知政事，同提举编修《敕令》及《武经要略》。
English: Gauss was promoted to the rank of Hanlin Baccalaureate, scholar and attendant, promoted to the rank of Duanmingden Baccalaureate, Signing Privy Councillor and Councillor of State, and promoted to edit the "Imperial Edict" and the "Outline of the Martial Arts."

古文：大元年下饶州，江万里赴水死，事闻，赠太傅。
现代文：大元兵攻下饶州，江万里赴水而死，此事传到朝廷，江万里被赠为太傅。
English: The Taiyuan soldiers captured Raozhou, and Jiang Wanli went to the water and died. The matter was reported to the imperial court, and Jiang Wanli was given the title of Taifu.

古文：斯得言赠恤之典，所当度越故常，以风厉天下，遂加赠太师。
现代文：高斯得说追封官爵的制度，是可以超越的，这样可以劝勉天下人，于是江万里被加赠为太师。
English: Gauss said that the system of pursuing the title of nobility could be surpassed, so that the people of the world could be encouraged, so Jiang Wanli was given the title of grandmaster.

古文：又言赏通判池州赵卯发死节太薄，乃加赠待制。
现代文：高斯得又说对池州通判赵卯发为国而死的赏赐太薄，于是赵卯发被加赠为待制。
English: Gost also said that the reward for Chizhou Tongjun Zhao Ufa's death for the country was too thin, so Zhao Ufa was added as a pending gift.

古文：台谏徐直方等四人论似道误国之罪，乞安置岭表，簿录其家。
现代文：台谏徐直方等四人弹劾贾似道的误国罪状，请求把贾似道安置到岭表，登记籍没他家。
English: Four people, including Taiwanese politician Xu Naifang, impeached Jia Liangdao for the crime of misleading the country, and requested that Jia Liangdao be relocated to Lingbo, and that his home not be registered.

古文：丞相留梦炎庇护似道，止令散官居住，且谓簿录扰及无辜。
现代文：丞相留梦炎庇护贾似道，只命令让贾似道以散官的身份居住，并说登记籍没他家会连累无辜的人。
English: The prime minister sheltered Jia Lian Dao, but ordered that Jia Lian Dao be allowed to live as a non-official, and said that without his family's registration, innocent people would be affected.

古文：斯得谓 散官则安置，追降官分司则居住，祖宗制也。 梦炎语塞。
现代文：高斯得说 ：散官就安置，追降官分司则居住，这是祖宗时的制度。 留梦炎无以回答。
English: Gauss said: The system of the time of the ancestors, in which officials who were dismissed were resettled and subordinate officials who were promoted were allowed to live, cannot be answered.

古文：梦炎乘间直罢去平章事王钥、监察御史俞浙，并罢斯得，于是宋亡矣。
现代文：留梦炎乘机罢免了平章事王火龠、监察御史俞浙，并罢免了高斯得，于是宋朝灭亡了。
English: Liu Mengyan took the opportunity to dismiss Pingzhang, the King of Fire, and the Supervisor of History, and dismissed Gosted, and the Song Dynasty was destroyed.

古文：所著有《诗肤说》、《仪礼合抄》、《增损刊正杜佑通典》、《徽宗长编》、《孝宗系年要录》、《耻堂文集》行世。
现代文：高斯得著有《诗肤说》、《仪礼合抄》、《增损刊正杜佑通典》、《徽宗长编》、《孝宗系年要录》、《耻堂文集》，它们在世上流行。
English: Gauss was the author of "Poetry and Poetry," "Rites and Rites Compiled," "Additional Edition of Zhengdu You Tong," "Hui Sect Chief Editor," "Yearbook of the Xiaozong Sect," and "Collection of Shitang," all of which are popular around the world.

