古文：豫章文献王嶷字宣俨，高帝第二子也。
现代文：豫章文献王萧嶷，字宣俨，是齐高帝的第二个儿子。
English: Wang Xiaohui, also known as Xuanwu, was the second son of Emperor Qigong.

古文：宽仁弘雅，有大成之量，高帝特锺爱焉。
现代文：宽厚仁慈、弘博高雅，有成大器的度量，高帝对他特别钟爱。
English: Generous, benevolent, magnanimous and elegant, Gao Di was especially fond of him.

古文：仕宋爲尚书左户郎，钱唐令。
现代文：在宋朝做官担任尚书左户郎，钱塘令。
English: In the Song Dynasty, he served as the left-hand man of Shangshu and the chief of Qiantang.

古文：高帝破薛索儿，改封西阳，以先爵赐嶷，爲晋寿县侯。
现代文：高帝击破薛索儿，改封在西阳，而把他先前的爵位赐给了萧嶷，为晋寿县侯。
English: Emperor Gao defeated Xue Sol, changed his title to Xiyang, and gave his previous title to Xiao Yao, as the lord of Jinzhou County.

古文：后爲武陵内史。
现代文：后来担任武陵内史。
English: Later, he served as the Wuling Inner Historian.

古文：时沈攸之责赕，伐荆州界内诸蛮，遂及五溪。
现代文：当时沈攸之责令蛮人以钱财赎罪，讨伐荆州地界内的诸蛮邦，于是到了五溪。
English: At that time, Shen Youzhi ordered the barbarians to atone for their sins with money and resources, and to fight the barbarian states within the territorial boundaries of Jingzhou, and thus came to Wuxi.

古文：禁断鱼盐，群蛮怨怒。
现代文：切断了鱼盐的供应，群蛮怨恨愤怒。
English: When the supply of fish salt was cut off, there was a lot of resentment and anger.

古文：酉溪蛮王田头拟杀攸之使，攸之责赕千万，头拟输五百万，发气死。
现代文：酉溪蛮王田头拟杀死了沈攸之的使者，沈攸之责求赎罪钱财上千万，田头拟只交五百万，就生气而死。
English: The barbarian king of Qixi, Tian Touqi, killed the messenger of Shen Youzhi. Shen Youzhi demanded ten million yuan to atone for his sins, while Tian Touqi only paid five million yuan, and died of anger.

古文：其弟娄侯篡立，头拟子田都走入獠中。
现代文：他的弟弟娄侯篡位登基，田头拟的儿子田都逃到了獠人当中。
English: His brother Yan Hou usurped the throne and ascended to the throne, and Tian Touqin's son Tian Du fled to the Yan people.

古文：于是蛮部大乱，抄掠至郡城下，嶷遣队主张英儿击破之。
现代文：这时蛮邦大乱，抄掠到了郡城下，萧嶷派遣队中主帅张英儿将他击破。
English: At this time, the barbarian country was in turmoil, the looting reached the county seat, and the head coach Zhang Ying'er of Xiao Yu's dispatched team defeated him.

古文：田都自獠中请立，而娄侯亦归附。
现代文：田都在獠人中请求立他为王，而娄侯也归附了。
English: All the provinces petitioned to make him king, and the vassals also acceded.

古文：嶷诛娄侯于郡狱，命田都继其父，蛮衆乃安。
现代文：萧嶷在郡狱中把娄侯杀死，命令田都继承他的父亲，蛮国的众人才安定下来。
English: Xiao Yao killed Yan Hou in the county jail and ordered Tian Du to succeed his father. The barbarians were able to settle down.

古文：入爲宋顺帝骠骑从事中郎。
现代文：后来入京做了宋顺帝的骠骑从事中郎。
English: Later, he went to Beijing and became the middle-man of Emperor Song Shun's cavalry.

古文：诣司徒袁粲，粲谓人曰： 后来佳器也。 
现代文：他曾去拜望司徒袁粲，袁粲对别人说： 这是后来的英才啊！ 
English: He once went to pay homage to the scholar Yuan Qi, and Yuan Qi said to others: "This is a later great talent!"

古文：高帝在领军府，嶷居青溪宅。
现代文：齐高帝住在领军府中，萧嶷住在青溪的宅院里。
English: Emperor Qigong lived in the headquarters of the leader of the army, and Xiao Yao lived in a courtyard in Qingxi.

古文：苍梧王夜中微行，欲掩袭宅内，嶷令左右舞刀戟于中庭，苍梧从墙间窥见已有备，乃去。
现代文：苍梧王曾经夜里隐瞒身份出行，打算偷袭宅院，萧嶷命令左右的人在院中舞动刀枪，苍梧王从墙缝中窥见已经有了准备，便离去了。
English: Cangwu Wang once traveled at night, concealing his identity, intending to raid the courtyard. Xiao Yao ordered the people around him to dance with knives and guns in the courtyard. Cangwu Wang peeked through the cracks in the wall and saw that preparations had already been made, and he left.

古文：高帝忧危既切，腹心荀伯玉劝帝度江北起兵。
现代文：高帝忧虑危难，十分心急，他的心腹荀伯玉劝高帝渡江在江北起兵。
English: Emperor Gao worried about the danger and was very anxious. His confidant, Zang Boyu, advised Emperor Gao to cross the river and raise an army in the north of the river.

古文：嶷谏曰： 主上狂凶，人不自保，单行道路，易以立功，外州起兵，鲜有克胜，于此立计，万不可失。 
现代文：萧嶷进谏说： 皇上凶狂，人们不能自保，单独行动的道路，易于立功，而在外州起兵，很少有能取胜的，就在这里立足谋划，万万不可失策。 
English: Xiao Junjin said: The emperor is fierce, people can not protect themselves, the way of acting alone is easy to make merit, and in the outlying provinces, few can win, it is here to base the plan, must not make mistakes.

古文：及苍梧殒，高帝报嶷曰： 大事已判，汝明可早入。 
现代文：等到苍梧王死去，高帝告诉萧嶷说： 大事已经判定，你明天可以一早入京。 
English: After the death of King Cangwu, Emperor Gao told Xiao Yao, "The important matter has been decided. You can enter Beijing tomorrow morning."

古文：顺帝即位，转侍中，总宫内直卫。
现代文：顺帝即位，转任侍中，总管宫内的值班保卫。
English: When Emperor Shun ascended to the throne, he was transferred to the position of chamberlain, in charge of guarding the palace on duty.

古文：沈攸之之难，高帝入朝堂，嶷出镇东府，加冠军将军。
现代文：沈攸之叛乱发生，高帝进入朝堂，萧嶷出京镇守东府，加封冠军将军。
English: Shen You's rebellion occurred, Gao Di entered the imperial court, Xiao Yao went out of Beijing to defend the eastern capital, and Gao Feng became the champion general.

古文：及袁粲举兵夕，丹阳丞王逊告变，先至东府，嶷遣帐内军主戴元孙二千人随薛道深等俱至石头，焚门之功，元孙预焉。
现代文：到了袁粲举兵的那天晚上，丹阳丞王逊宣告叛变，先到了东府，萧嶷派帐内的军中主帅戴元孙领兵二千人跟随薛道深等一齐到达石头城，烧毁城门的功劳，戴元孙参与了。
English: On the evening of the day when Yuan Shikun raised an army, Danyang Commander Wang Xun declared a mutiny. He first went to Dongfu. Xiao Shikun sent the commander of the army, Dai Yansun, to lead two thousand soldiers, followed by Xue Daoshen, to arrive at Stone City and burn the gate. Dai Yansun participated.

古文：先是王蕴荐部曲六十人助爲城防，实以爲内应也。
现代文：在此以前，王蕴献出了自己的部下六十人帮助进行城防，实际上是让他们做内应。
English: Prior to this, Wang Yun had dedicated sixty of his subordinates to help with the defense of the city, in effect letting them do the inner work.

古文：嶷知蕴怀贰，不给其仗，散处外省。
现代文：萧嶷知道王蕴怀有二心，不供给他们武器，分开安置在外面。
English: Xiao Yao knew that Wang Yun was of two minds. He did not provide them with weapons and placed them separately outside.

古文：及难作搜检，皆已亡去。
现代文：等事变发生以后搜索检查，都已经逃跑了。
English: After the incident occurred, the search and inspection team had already fled.

古文：上流平后，武帝自寻阳还。
现代文：上游平定以后，武帝从寻阳回来。
English: After the upstream was pacified, Emperor Wu returned from seeking the sun.

古文：嶷出爲都督、江州刺史。
现代文：萧嶷出京担任都督、江州刺史。
English: Xiao Jie went to Beijing to serve as the governor of the capital, and Jiangzhou to serve as the governor of the province.

古文：以定策功，改封永安县公。
现代文：以制定策略的功劳，改封为永安县公。
English: He was awarded the title of Yong'an County official for his efforts in formulating the strategy.

古文：仍徙镇西将军、都督、荆州刺史。
现代文：调任镇西将军、都督、荆州刺史。
English: He was transferred to the posts of Zhenxi General, Governor, and Jingzhou Chief Historian.

古文：时高帝作辅，嶷务存约省，停府州仪迎物。
现代文：当时高帝担任辅佐大臣，萧嶷力求节俭，停止府州的迎接仪式。
English: At that time, Gao Di was an assistant minister, and Xiao Wei tried to be frugal and stopped the welcoming ceremony in Fuzhou.

古文：及至州，坦怀纳善，侧席思政。
现代文：等到了荆州，袒开胸怀采纳善言，独坐思考政事。
English: When he arrived in Jingzhou, he opened his heart to accept the kind words and sat alone to think about politics.

古文：王俭与嶷书曰： 旧楚萧条，仍岁多故，政荒人散，实须缉理。
现代文：王俭给萧嶷写信说： 古老的楚地一片萧条，多年以来多灾多难，政治荒乱，人心分散，实在需要认真治理。
English: Wang Jian wrote a letter to Xiao Yao, saying: The ancient land of Chu is in a depression. For many years, there have been many disasters and hardships, political turmoil, and people's hearts are scattered. It really needs to be seriously governed.

古文：公临莅甫尔，英风惟穆，江汉来苏，八荒慕义，庾亮以来，荆州无复此政。
现代文：您一到职便开始整顿，英风壮美，江汉获得重生，八方仰慕大义，自从庾亮以来，荆州没再有过这样的政治。
English: As soon as you came to office, you began to rectify, the heroic style was magnificent, the Han Dynasty was reborn, and the Eight Directions admired the Great Righteousness. Since the brilliant, Jingzhou has never had such a politics.

古文：古人云 期月有成 ，而公旬日成化，岂不休哉。 
现代文：古人说 一月见效 ，而您十天便达成化育，岂不美善！ 
English: The ancients said that one month is effective, and you will achieve chemical breeding in ten days, isn't it wonderful!

古文：初，沈攸之欲聚衆，开人相告，士庶坐执役者甚衆。
现代文：起初，沈攸之想要聚集人众，启发人们互相告发，士子和平民因此而判服劳役的十分众多。
English: At first, Shen Youzhi wanted to gather people and inspire people to inform on each other. As a result, a large number of scholars and commoners were sentenced to forced labor.

古文：嶷至镇，一日遣三千馀人，见囚五岁刑以下不连台者，皆原遣。
现代文：萧嶷到任后，一个月放了三千多人，现正服刑的囚犯刑期五年以下和台阁没有联系的，统统宽大释放。
English: After Xiao Wei took office, he released more than 3,000 people in one month. All prisoners currently serving sentences of less than five years who had no connection with the Taigou were released with leniency.

古文：以市税重，多所宽假。百姓甚悦。
现代文：因为市场收税太重，实行了很多放宽和替代政策，百姓们非常高兴。
English: Because the market tax is too heavy, a lot of relaxation and substitution policies have been implemented, and the people are very happy.

古文：禅让之间，武帝欲速定大业，嶷依违其事，默无所言。
现代文：禅让期间，齐武帝想迅速稳定大业，萧嶷对这事犹豫不决，沉默不语。
English: During the period of abdication, Emperor Qiwu wanted to quickly stabilize the great cause, but Xiao Yao hesitated and remained silent.

古文：建元元年，高帝即位，赦诏未至，嶷先下令蠲除部内升明二年以前逋负。
现代文：建元元年高帝即位，大赦的诏令还没有到达，萧嶷提前下令免除辖区以内升明二年以前的拖欠赋税。
English: Emperor Gao ascended to the throne in the first year of Jianyuan, but the amnesty decree had not yet arrived. Xiao Yao ordered in advance to exempt the tax arrears within the jurisdiction from two years ago.

古文：迁侍中、尚书令、都督、扬州刺史、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，封豫章郡王。
现代文：后来调任侍中、尚书令、都督、扬州刺史、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，封豫章郡王。
English: Later, he was transferred to the position of chamberlain, secretary, governor of Yangzhou, Yangzhou governor, Yangzhou governor, Yangzhou governor, Yangzhou governor, Yangzhou governor, Yangzhou governor, Yangzhou governor, Yangzhou governor.

古文：会魏军动，诏以嶷爲南蛮校尉、荆湘二州刺史，都督八州。
现代文：正赶上魏朝军队行动，诏令以萧嶷为南蛮校尉、荆湘二州刺史，统领八州。
English: Just in time for the military operations of the Wei Dynasty, the imperial edict named Xiao Wei as the captain of Nanban, and Jing Xiang as the governor of Erzhou, leading the eight states.

古文：寻给油络侠望车。
现代文：不久赠给油络侠望车。
English: Soon after, he presented the chariot to the knight.

古文：二年，给班剑二十人。
现代文：建元二年，赠给仪仗二十人。
English: In the second year of the first century, it was given to twenty honorable soldiers.

古文：其夏，于南蛮园东南开馆立学，上表言状。
现代文：这年夏天，在南蛮园东南开建楼馆成立学校，上表说明情况。
English: In the summer of this year, a building was built in the southeast of Nanban Park to establish a school. The table above shows the situation.

古文：置生三十人，取旧族父祖位正佐台郎年二十五以下十五以上补之。
现代文：招收学生三十人，录取旧家族中父亲、祖父位居正副台郎的年龄二十五岁以下、十五岁以上的人来补足。
English: Thirty students will be enrolled, supplemented by people under the age of twenty-five and over the age of fifteen from the old family, whose fathers and grandfathers were Tairo.

古文：置儒林参军一人，文学祭酒一人，劝学从事二人。
现代文：设置儒林参军一人，文学祭酒一人，劝学从事二人。
English: One person is assigned to join the army, one person to participate in the literature festival, and two people to engage in persuasion.

古文：行释菜礼。
现代文：对老师行释菜礼。
English: Give the teacher a compliment.

古文：以谷过贱，听人以米当口钱，优评斛一百。
现代文：因为谷物价格过贱，允许学生拿米作为抵口钱，优等的每斛抵一百钱。
English: Because the price of grain is too low, students are allowed to use rice as a substitute, with the best rice fetching up to 100 yuan each.

古文：义阳劫帅张群亡命积年，鼓行爲贼，义阳、武陵、天门、南平四郡界被其残破，沈攸之连讨不禽，末乃首用之。
现代文：义阳的强盗统率张群亡命多年，击鼓行路进行抢劫，义阳、武陵、天门、南平四郡的边界被他们破坏，沈攸之连年讨伐，没有捉住，于是便以脚当头地加以任用。
English: The leader of the bandits in Yiyang, Zhang Qun, had been on the run for many years, beating the drums and robbing. The borders of the four counties of Yiyang, Wuling, Tianmen and Nanping were destroyed by them. Shen Youzhi had been fighting them for years, but they did not catch him, so he was appointed as the leader.

古文：攸之起事，群从下郢，于路先叛，结柴于三溪，依据深险。
现代文：沈攸之起事，张群随从开往郢都，在路上首先叛变，在三溪集结营寨，倚凭深溪进行拒守。
English: When Shen You initiated the incident, Zhang Qun followed him to Shidu. On the way, he was the first to mutiny. He set up a camp in Sanxi and refused to defend it, relying on Shankei.

古文：嶷遣中兵参军虞欣祖爲义阳太守，使降意诱纳之，厚爲礼遗，于坐斩首，其党皆散，四郡获安。
现代文：萧嶷派遗中兵参军虞欣祖为义阳太守，让他放下架子去引诱捉拿他，备下厚礼赠给他，于是在座位上把他斩首，他的党羽都逃散，四方各郡获得安宁。
English: Xiao Yao sent the remaining soldiers to join the army, Yu Xinzu as the Yiyang governor, let him put down his pride to lure him, prepared a gift for him, and then beheaded him on the seat, his party fled, and the counties in all directions gained peace.

古文：入爲中书监、司空、扬州刺史，都督二州，侍中如故，加兵置佐，以前军临川王映府文武配司空。
现代文：后来入京担任中书监、司空、扬州刺史，统率二州，侍中职务保留不变，增加兵卒，增置僚佐，以军队先锋临川王萧映府中的文武官员配给司空。
English: Later, he went to Beijing to serve as the Central Supervisor of Books, the Secretary of the Air Force, and the Yangzhou Chief Historian, leading two states, retaining his position as an aide-de-camp, increasing the number of soldiers, increasing the number of aides-de-camp, and assigning the civil and military officials in the army pioneer Linchuan King Xiao Yingfu to the Secretary of the Air Force.

古文：嶷以将还都，修廨宇及路陌，东归部曲不得齎府州物出城。
现代文：萧嶷因为将要返回都城，修建官舍和道路，规定东归的部下不许携带州府的东西出城。
English: Because Xiao Yao was going to return to the capital to build official residences and roads, he stipulated that his subordinates who were returning east were not allowed to leave the city with anything from the state capital.

古文：发江津，士女观送数千人皆垂泣。
现代文：他从江津出发，前来送行的男女数千人都掉下眼泪。
English: He set off from Jiangjin, and thousands of men and women who came to see him off shed tears.

古文：嶷发江陵感疾，至都未瘳，上深忧虑，爲之大赦，三年六月壬子赦令是也。
现代文：萧嶷从江陵出发感染了疾病，到了都城还没有痊愈，皇上深感忧虑，为此而实行大赦，建元三年六月二十四日的赦令就是。
English: The Emperor was deeply worried that Xiao Yao, who had contracted the disease after leaving Gangneung, had not recovered by the time he arrived in the capital. Therefore, he issued an amnesty. The amnesty decree on June 24th, the third year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, is a case in point.

古文：疾愈，上幸东府，设金石乐，使乘舆至宫六门。
现代文：病痊愈后，皇上驾临东府，给他配金石药物，让他乘坐车子到宫中六门散心。
English: After he recovered from his illness, the emperor came to Dongfu, gave him a precious stone medicine, and let him take a car to the center of the palace to relax.

古文：武帝即位，进位太尉，增置兵佐，解侍中，增班剑三十人。
现代文：武帝即位后，晋升为太尉，增加兵士和辅佐官员，解去侍中职务，增加仪仗三十人。
English: After Emperor Wu ascended the throne, he was promoted to the rank of captain, increased the number of soldiers and assistant officials, removed the position of chamberlain, and increased the number of honor guards by thirty.

古文：建元中，武帝以事失旨，高帝颇有代嫡之意。
现代文：建元年间，因为武帝办事曾经不合旨意，高帝很有另立太子取代嫡长子的意思。
English: During the first year of the Jianwen era, Emperor Gao had a strong desire to replace his eldest son with another crown prince, because Emperor Wu's actions had not been in accordance with his wishes.

古文：而嶷事武帝恭悌尽礼，未尝违忤顔色，故武帝友爱亦深。
现代文：而萧嶷侍奉武帝恭谨尽礼，不曾违抗过他的意见，所以武帝对他爱重很深。
English: However, Xiao Yu served Emperor Wu with respect and courtesy, and never disobeyed his advice, so Emperor Wu loved him very much.

古文：性至孝，高帝崩，哭泣过度，眼耳皆出血。
现代文：他的性格十分孝顺，高帝逝世，哭泣过度，眼睛耳朵都出血了。
English: His character is very filial. When Emperor Gao died, he cried excessively and his eyes and ears bled.

古文：永明元年，领太子太傅，解中书监。
现代文：永明元年，兼任太子太傅，解去了中书监职务。
English: In the first year of the Yongming era, he also served as the prince's daifu, and dismissed the position of the Chinese book supervisor.

古文：宋武以来，州郡秩俸及杂供给，多随土所出，无有定准。
现代文：宋武帝以来，州郡的俸禄和各种供给，大多随着当地的出产，没有一定的标准。
English: Since Emperor Songwu, the salaries and various supplies of prefectures and counties mostly depend on local production, and there is no certain standard.

古文：嶷上表请明立定格，班下四方，永爲恒制，从之。
现代文：萧嶷上表请求明文确立标准，分别下达到四方，永远作为固定的制度，被采纳了。
English: Xiao Wei's request to explicitly establish the standard in the above table, and to achieve the four sides separately, as a fixed system forever, was adopted.

古文：嶷不参朝务，而言事密谋，多见信纳。
现代文：萧嶷不参与朝中事务，而言事或者密谋，多被信任采纳。
English: Xiao Wei does not participate in the affairs of the DPRK and China, but is generally trusted and accepted.

古文：服阕，加侍中。
现代文：服丧期满，加封侍中。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was given the additional title of Junior Chamberlain.

古文：宋元嘉制，诸王入斋合，得白服裙帽见人主，唯出太极四厢，乃备朝衣。
现代文：根据宋朝元嘉时期的制度，诸王进入斋阁，可以穿戴白色衣帽拜见君主，只有出了太极殿的四面厢房，才改穿朝服。
English: According to the system during the Song Dynasty and the Yuan Jia Dynasty, when kings entered the pavilion, they could wear a white cap to meet the monarch. Only when they came out of the four-sided pavilion of the Taiji Hall did they change into the imperial robes.

古文：自比以来，此事一断。
现代文：近世以来，这些规矩都中断了。
English: Since modern times, these rules have been suspended.

古文：上与嶷同生相友睦，宫内曲宴，许依元嘉。
现代文：皇上与萧嶷是同母所生，互相友爱和睦，宫内的私宴，准许依照元嘉时的规矩。
English: The emperor and Xiao Yao were born of the same mother, and they were friendly and harmonious with each other. Private banquets in the palace were permitted according to the rules of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：嶷固辞，不奉敕；唯车驾幸第，乃白服乌纱帽以侍宴焉。
现代文：萧嶷坚决推辞，不接受命令；只有皇帝的车驾到他的府第去，才穿白色衣服、戴乌纱帽来陪宴。
English: Xiao Yao resolutely refused and did not accept the order; only when the emperor's car drove to his residence did he wear white clothes and a black hat to attend the banquet.

古文：至于衣服制度，动皆陈啓，事无专制，务从减省，并不见许。
现代文：至于衣服制度，常常是一切请示，什么事都不自己独断专行，务求减省，都没有被批准。
English: As far as the clothing system is concerned, it is often a case of everything being done by request, nothing being done arbitrarily, in order to save costs, and nothing being approved.

古文：又啓曰： 北第旧邸，本自甚华，臣往岁作小眠斋，皆补接爲办，无乖格制。
现代文：又请示说： 北面府第中的旧住所，本来是很豪华的，臣往年建了一个小眠斋，都是补接建成的，不违背规格。
English: He also requested that: The old residence in the middle of the north-facing courtyard was originally very luxurious. The minister built a small dormitory in previous years. It was all built as a supplement and does not violate the specifications.

古文：要是柽柏之华，一时新净，东府又有此斋，亦爲华屋，而臣顿有二处住止，下情窃所未安。
现代文：主要是红柳松柏华美，一时清新干净，东府中又有这样的斋房，也是豪华的房屋，这样臣就顿时有了两处住址，自己心中感到非常不安。
English: Mainly the red willow pine and cypress trees are gorgeous, fresh and clean at the same time. In the eastern prefecture, there is also such a temple, which is also a luxurious house. As a result, the minister suddenly has two addresses, and he feels very uneasy in his heart.

古文：讯访东宫玄圃，乃有柏屋，制甚古拙，臣乃欲坏取以奉太子，非但失之于前，且补接既多，不可见移，亦恐外物或爲异论，不审可有垂许送东府斋理不？ 
现代文：听说东宫的玄圃中，有一座柏屋，结构十分古拙，臣就想拆毁拿来献给太子，不过这样不但说明以前做得不对，而且补接很多，不可移动，也怕外面有人会说闲话，不知道可有允许赠送东府斋房的道理么？ 
English: I heard that in the garden of the East Palace, there is a cypress tree house, the structure is very old-fashioned, and the minister wanted to demolish it to dedicate it to the prince. However, this not only shows that it was not done correctly before, but also that there are many connections, it cannot be moved, and I am afraid that someone outside will gossip. I don't know if there is a reason to allow the gift of the East Palace's dining room?

古文：上答曰： 见别纸，汝劳疾，亦复那得不动，何意爲作烦长啓事。 
现代文：皇上答复说： 看到来信，你劳累有病，而且不能行动，为什么还要写那样长篇的文字！ 
English: The emperor replied: "Seeing the letter, you are tired and ill, and unable to act. Why do you have to write such a long letter!

古文：竟不从。
现代文：终于没有答应。
English: In the end, he did not agree.

古文：三年，文惠太子讲孝经毕，嶷求解太傅，不许。
现代文：永明三年，文惠太子讲《孝经》结束，萧嶷请求解除太傅的职务，没有批准。
English: In the third year of the Yongming era, Prince Wen Hui finished reading "The Filial Piety Sutra," and Xiao Yao requested the dismissal of Taifu, but it was not approved.

古文：嶷常虑盛满，又因言宴求解扬州授竟陵王子良，上终不许，曰： 毕汝一世，无所多言。 
现代文：萧嶷常常忧虑事情过于满盈，又利用宴会的机会请求解除自己的扬州刺史职务授给竟陵王萧子良，皇上终于没有答应，说： 你这整个一生，都不要再多说了。 
English: Xiao Yao often worried that things were too full, and used the opportunity of the banquet to request that he be relieved of his duties as Yangzhou chief historian and be given to King Xiao Ziliang. The emperor finally did not agree, saying: "Don't say anything more for your entire life."

古文：武帝即位后，频发诏拜陵，不果行，遣嶷拜陵。
现代文：武帝即位以后，频繁的颁发诏书拜谒皇陵，都没有落实，就派萧嶷去拜陵。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Wu, frequent decrees were issued to pay homage to the imperial mausoleum, but they were not implemented, so Xiao Wei was sent to pay homage to the mausoleum.

古文：还过延陵季子庙，观沸井，有水牛突部伍，直兵执牛推问，嶷不许，取绢一疋，横系牛角，放归其家。
现代文：回来的时候路过延陵季子庙，观看井水喷涌，有一头水牛冲进自己下属的人群中，值勤的兵士把牛抓住要进行追查，萧嶷不许，拿了绢纱一疋，横系在牛角上，放回到它的家中。
English: When he came back, he passed by the Yanling Jiizi Temple and watched the water gushing from the well. A water buffalo rushed into the crowd of his subordinates. The soldiers on duty grabbed the cow to investigate. Xiao Yu did not allow it. He took a piece of gauze, tied it across the horn of the cow, and returned it to its home.

古文：政在宽厚，故得朝野欢心。
现代文：他为政宽厚，所以很得朝内外人们的欢心。
English: He is generous in politics, so he is very popular with people inside and outside the DPRK.

古文：四年，唐宇之贼起，嶷啓上曰： 此段小寇，出于凶愚，天网宏罩，理不足论。
现代文：永明四年，唐宇之贼兵起事，萧嶷启奏皇上说： 这些小贼寇，完全是出于凶蛮愚蠢，天网宏大，道理不需要讨论。
English: In the fourth year of the Yongming era, the bandits of Tang and Yu revolted, and Xiao Zhen said to the emperor: These small bandits are completely out of ferocious stupidity, the sky net is magnificent, and the reason does not need to be discussed.

古文：但圣明御世，幸可不尔。
现代文：只是圣明的皇帝可以侥幸不遇上这种事情。
English: It's just that the emperor of the sacred light can get away with this kind of thing.

古文：比藉声听，皆云有由而然。
现代文：近来传闻，都说是有原因而造成这种结果的。
English: Recent rumours are that there is a reason for this result.

古文：但顷小大士庶，每以小利奉公，不顾所损者大。
现代文：所有大大小小的士子黎民，常常以小利奉公，不顾所损失的十分重大。
English: All the Li people, great and small, often serve the public with small profits, regardless of the very significant losses.

古文：擿籍检功巧，督恤简小塘，藏丁匿口，凡诸条制，实长怨府。
现代文：揭发纳税中的取巧行为，督察救济中的微小漏洞，隐藏人丁户口，所有这些条例制度，实在会增加怨气。
English: The disclosure of tax evasion, the inspection of small loopholes in relief, the hiding of personal accounts, all these regulations and systems will really increase resentment.

古文：此目前交利，非天下大计。
现代文：这些都是眼前的利益，不是天下大计。
English: These are short-term gains, not the end of the world.

古文：一室之中，尚不可精，宇宙之内，何可周洗。
现代文：一家当中，尚且不能精确，宇宙之内，怎能全部理清！
English: In a family, even if it is imprecise, in the universe, how can everything be clear!

古文：公家何尝不知人多欺巧，古今政以不可细碎，故不爲耳。
现代文：公家何尝不知道人间有许多欺诈伪巧，古今正因为不可细碎计较，所以不再费力去做。
English: The public does not know that there are many deceptions in the world, and it is precisely because of the indivisibility of the past and the present that it is no longer difficult to do.

古文：爲此者实非乖理，但识理者百不有一。
现代文：这样去做的人实际上并不违背情理，但是识大理的人这样做的百人中没有一个。
English: People who do this aren't actually being unreasonable, but not one in a hundred reasonable people do it.

古文：陛下弟儿大臣，犹不能伏理，况复天下，悠悠万品？
现代文：陛下的弟弟、儿子、大臣们尚且不能完全接受治理，何况是天下悠悠万千品第呢！
English: His Majesty's younger brothers, sons, and ministers are not yet able to fully accept governance, not to mention the fact that there are thousands and thousands of people in the world!

古文：怨积聚党，凶迷相类，止于一处，何足不除，脱复多所，便成纭纭。 
现代文：怨恨积累，聚集党徒，凶暴昏迷，结为一类。如果只有一处，不怕不能剪除，如果又有很多，便成纷乱局面。 
English: The accumulation of resentment, the gathering of party members, and the violent coma are all of the same kind. If there is only one, it may not be able to be eliminated, but if there are many, it will lead to a chaotic situation.

古文：上答曰： 欺巧那可容！
现代文：皇上回答说： 欺诈伪巧哪里可以容许！
English: The Emperor replied: "Fraud and trickery can never be tolerated!

古文：宋世混乱，以爲是不？
现代文：宋代社会混乱，不就是因为这么？
English: Social chaos in the Song Dynasty, isn't it because of this?

古文：蚊蚁何足爲忧，至今都应散灭。
现代文：蚊子蚂蚁哪里值得忧虑，现在都应该消灭。
English: Where mosquitoes and ants are a concern, they should be eliminated now.

古文：吾政恨其不办大耳，亦何时无亡命邪。 
现代文：我正恨他们不把事闹大哩，又什么时候没有亡命徒呢！ 
English: I just hate it when they don't make a big deal out of it, and when they don't have a fugitive!

古文：后乃诏听复籍注。
现代文：后来他又下诏书允许那些人恢复户口登记。
English: Later, he issued an imperial edict to allow those people to resume their household registration.

古文：是时武帝奢侈，后宫万余人，宫内不容，太乐、景第、暴室皆满，犹以爲未足。
现代文：这时候武帝生活奢侈，后宫有一万多人，宫内容纳不下，太乐、景第、暴室都已经住满，还是觉得不满足。
English: At this time, Emperor Wu was living a luxurious life. There were more than ten thousand people in the harem, and the palace could not accommodate them all. The Tai Le, Jing Di, and the violence room were already full, but he still felt dissatisfied.

古文：嶷后房亦千馀人。
现代文：萧嶷的后房中也有一千多人。
English: There are also more than a thousand people in Xiao Yao's back room.

古文：潁川荀丕献书于嶷，极言其失，嶷咨嗟良久，爲书答之，又爲之减遣。
现代文：颍川人荀丕写信给萧嶷，极力说明这样做的错误，萧嶷嗟叹了很久，写了一封信答复他，又为此而减放人员。
English: People from Sichuan wrote to Xiao Yu, trying to explain the error of doing so. Xiao Yu sighed for a long time, wrote a letter in reply to him, and reduced the number of personnel for this reason.

古文：丕字令哲，后爲荆州西曹书佐，长史王秀与其书，题之云 西曹荀君 。
现代文：荀丕字令哲，后来担任荆州西曹书佐，长史王秀给他写信，题名是 西曹荀君 。
English: Long Shi Wang Xiu wrote a letter to Xizhi Ling Zhe, who later served as the Jingzhou West Cao Shuzo, with the title of West Cao Zhe Jun.

古文：丕报书曰： 第五之位，不减骠骑，亦不知西曹何殊长史！
现代文：荀丕回信说： 第五伦的职位，不低于骠骑将军，也不知道西曹和长史有什么不同！
English: Zou wrote back: The position of the Fifth Lun is not lower than that of the General of the Horse Cavalry, and I don't know what the difference is between Sicao and Changshi!

古文：且人之处世，当以德行称着，何遽以一爵高人邪？
现代文：而且人处在世上，应当以德行著称，怎么能就凭一席爵位高于别人呢？
English: Moreover, how can a man, who is in the world, and ought to be distinguished for his virtue, be superior to others by virtue of a title?

古文：相如不见屈于渑池，毛遂安受辱于郢都，造敌临事，仆必先于二子，未知足下之贵，足下之威，孰若秦、楚两王。
现代文：蔺相如在渑池没有被屈服，毛遂在郢都哪能受侮辱，前往敌方遇到情况，在下必定比这两位更加英勇，不知道足下您的富贵，您的威势，比秦、楚两王怎样。
English: Yuxiang did not succumb at Dianchi, so Mao could not be humiliated at Dianchi, and when he encountered the enemy, he must be more heroic than these two. I don't know if your wealth and power are better than the Qin and Chu kings.

古文：仆以德爲宝，足下以位爲宝，各宝其宝，于此敬宜。 
现代文：在下是以德行为宝贵，足下是以职位为宝贵，各自宝贵自己的宝贝，愿在这里与您共享。 
English: At the bottom is the precious virtue, at the bottom is the precious position, each precious their own treasure, I would like to share with you here.

古文：于是直题云 长史王君 。
现代文：于是直接题字称 长史王君 。
English: As a result, the direct inscription says "Changshi Wangjun."

古文：时尚书令王俭当朝，丕又与俭书曰： 足下建高人之名，而不显高人之迹，将何以书于齐史哉。 
现代文：当时尚书令王俭主持朝政，荀丕又给王俭写信说： 足下建立了高人的名声，却显不出高人的事迹，将拿什么写在齐朝历史上呢？ 
English: At that time, Shang Shu ordered Wang Jian to preside over the government of the dynasty. Zou also wrote to Wang Jian, saying, "I have established the reputation of a great man, but there is no sign of a great man. What will I write about in the history of the Qi Dynasty?

古文：及南郡纲纪啓荆州刺史随王子隆请罪丕，丕自申乃免。
现代文：王俭趁南郡整顿的机会写信给荆州刺史随王萧子隆请求对荀丕治罪，荀丕经过自我申辩才得以免除。
English: Wang Jian took the opportunity of Nan County's rectification to write a letter to Jingzhou Zhi Shi with Wang Xiao Zilong's request to punish him, and he was exempted after self-defense.

古文：又上书极谏武帝，言甚直，帝不悦，丕竟于荆州狱赐死。
现代文：荀丕又上书对武帝极力劝谏，言辞非常爽直，武帝很不高兴，荀丕终于在荆州狱中被赐令自杀。
English: Yao also wrote to Emperor Wu to strongly advise Yao, his words were very straightforward, Emperor Wu was very unhappy, and Yao was finally ordered to commit suicide in Jingzhou Prison.

古文：徐孝嗣闻其死，曰： 丕纵有罪，亦不应杀，数千年后，其如竹帛何！ 
现代文：徐孝嗣听说了他死的消息，说： 荀丕纵然有罪，也不应该杀死，数千年后，你该拿史书怎么办呢！ 
English: Xu Xiaoji heard the news of his death and said, "Even if you are guilty, you shouldn't kill him. After thousands of years, what should you do with the history books?"

古文：五年，嶷进位大司马。八年，给皁轮车。
现代文：永明五年，萧嶷提升为大司马，八年，配给了皂轮车。
English: In the fifth year of Yongming, Xiao Yao was promoted to the chief secretary, and in the eighth year, he was given a soap wheel cart.

古文：寻加中书监，固让。
现代文：不久担任了中书监。他坚决推辞。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the Central Library Supervisor. He firmly refused.

古文：嶷身长七尺八寸，善持容范，文物卫从，礼冠百僚。
现代文：萧嶷身高七尺八寸，善于保持自己的音容仪范，用文雅物品装饰，以侍卫人员跟从，彬彬有礼，超过百官。
English: Xiao Yao is seven feet eight inches tall. He is good at maintaining his tone, decorating with elegant items, and following with bodyguards. He is courteous and has more than a hundred officials.

古文：每出入殿省，皆瞻望严肃。
现代文：常常出入宫殿台省，都是安详瞻望，神态严肃。
English: He often goes in and out of Palatine Province, looking serene and serious.

古文：自以地位隆重，深怀退素，北宅旧有园田之美，乃盛修理之。
现代文：他知道自己地位重要，很想退官闲居，北面的宅院中过去曾有美丽的田园，他又大加修整。
English: He knows his position is important, and would like to retire to idleness. There used to be a beautiful meadow in the courtyard to the north, which he has spruced up considerably.

古文：武帝尝问临川王映居家何事乐，映曰： 政使刘瓛讲礼，顾则讲易，朱广之讲庄、老，臣与二三诸彦兄弟友生时复击赞，以此爲乐。 
现代文：武帝曾经问临川王萧映住在家中有什么事情感到快乐。萧映说： 最近正在让刘讲《礼》，顾则心讲《易》，朱广之讲《庄子》、《老子》，臣和几位贤德的兄弟朋友时时击掌赞叹，以此为乐。 
English: Emperor Wu once asked Xiao Ying, the King of Linchuan, what made her feel happy living at home. Xiao Ying said, "Recently, I have been having Liu recite "Li Jun," Gu Zexin recite "Yi," Zhu Guangzhi recite "Zhuang Zi" and "Lao Zi," and the minister and several virtuous brothers and friends have been clapping their hands and applauding from time to time, taking this as fun.

古文：上大赏之。
现代文：皇上大加赞赏。
English: The emperor was very appreciative.

古文：他日谓嶷曰： 临川爲善，遂至于斯。 
现代文：以后又对萧嶷说： 临川王要行善事，于是才到这种境界。 
English: Later, he said to Xiao Yao: "Lingchuan King wants to do good deeds, so he has come to this state.

古文：嶷曰： 此大司马公之次弟，安得不尔！ 
现代文：萧嶷说： 这是大司马的次弟，怎会不是这样呢！ 
English: Xiao Yao said: This is the second brother of Da Sima, how could it be otherwise!

古文：上仍以玉如意指嶷曰： 未若皇帝之次弟爲善最多也。 
现代文：皇上便拿着玉如意指着萧嶷说： 还是不如皇帝的弟弟行善最多啊！ 
English: The emperor then took the jade and pointed it at Xiao Yu and said, "It's still not as good as the emperor's younger brother who does the most good!"

古文：嶷常戒诸子曰： 凡富贵少不骄奢，以约失之者鲜矣。
现代文：萧嶷常常告诫儿子们说： 凡是富贵的人，少年时期不骄横奢侈，而以节俭丧失它的，是很少的。
English: Xiao Yao often admonished his sons, saying, "There are very few rich people who are not arrogant and extravagant when they are young, but lose it by being frugal.

古文：汉世以来，侯王子弟，以骄恣之故，大者灭身丧族，小者削夺邑地，可不戒哉！ 
现代文：汉代以来，侯王子弟，因为骄奢恣纵的缘故，大则灭亡自身、丧失家族，小则削减剥夺封邑土地，怎能不加警戒呢！ 
English: Since the Han Dynasty, because of their arrogance and self-indulgence, princes and princes' younger brothers have, on the one hand, perished themselves and lost their families, and, on the other hand, have been reduced and deprived of fief lands. How can we not be vigilant?

古文：称疾不利住东城，累求还第，令世子子廉代镇东府。
现代文：他称言自己有病，不利于住在东城，屡次要求返回宅院，让世子子廉代替镇守东府。
English: He said that he was ill, which was not conducive to living in Dongcheng, and repeatedly asked to return to the mansion and let his son take the place of guarding Dongfu.

古文：上数幸嶷第，宋长宁陵隧道出第前路，上曰： 我便是入他家墓内寻人。 
现代文：皇上多次到萧嶷府上去，宋朝长宁陵隧道的出口就在他府门前的路旁，皇上说： 我是进到他家的陵墓内去找人。 
English: The emperor went to Xiaohui Mansion many times. The exit of the tunnel of the Changning Mausoleum of the Song Dynasty was on the side of the road in front of his mansion. The emperor said: I went into the mausoleum of his family to look for someone.

古文：乃徙其表阙骐驎于东冈。
现代文：于是便把陵墓地上阙门前的麒麟移到东冈。
English: As a result, the unicorn in front of the gate on the ground floor of the mausoleum was moved to Higashioka.

古文：骐驎及阙，形势甚巧，宋孝武于襄阳致之，后诸帝王陵皆模范，而莫及也。
现代文：麒麟和阙门，造型十分巧妙，是宋孝武帝从襄阳弄来的，后来各个帝王的陵墓都模仿它，却都不如它。
English: The Kirin and the Gate of Heaven, very cleverly shaped, were brought from Xiangyang by Emperor Song Xiaowu. Later, the mausoleums of various emperors imitated it, but they were not as good as it.

古文：永明末，车驾数游幸，唯嶷陪从。
现代文：永明末年，皇帝的车驾多次出游，只有萧嶷陪同。
English: In the last years of Yongming, the emperor's chauffeur made several trips, accompanied only by Xiao Tong.

古文：上尝出新林苑，同辇夜归，至宫门，嶷下辇辞出，上曰： 今夜行，无使爲尉司所呵也。 
现代文：皇上曾外出到新林苑去，萧嶷和他同车在夜间归来，到了宫门，萧嶷下车告辞，皇上说： 现在夜间行走，不要被卫兵们呵斥啊！ 
English: The emperor once went out to Xinlinyuan. Xiao Yao and his car returned at night. When they reached the palace gate, Xiao Yao got out of the car to say goodbye. The emperor said, "Walking at night, don't be shouted at by the guards!"

古文：嶷对曰： 京辇之内，皆属臣州，愿陛下不垂过虑。 
现代文：萧嶷回答说： 京城以内，都是臣的辖地，希望陛下不必过虑。 
English: Xiao Yao replied, "Within the capital, everything is under the jurisdiction of the vassals. I hope Your Majesty does not have to worry about it.

古文：上大笑，赐以魏所送毡车。
现代文：皇上大笑，把魏朝所送的毡车赠给了他。
English: The emperor laughed loudly and gave him the carriage sent by the Wei Dynasty.

古文：每幸第，不复屏人，敕外监曰： 我往大司马第，是还家耳。 
现代文：每次到他的府上去，不再让人回避，吩咐外监说： 我到大司马府上去，就是回家了。 
English: Every time he went to his residence, he would no longer allow anyone to avoid him, and he ordered the overseer to say: "When I go to Daishima's residence, I am going home."

古文：嶷妃庾氏，尝有疾，瘳，上幸嶷邸，后堂设金石乐，宫人毕至。
现代文：萧嶷的妃子庾氏，曾经生了病，痊愈后，皇上到了萧嶷的府中，在后堂安排了金石乐队，宫人们都来了。
English: Xiao Yao's concubine, Zou Shi, had once been ill, but after she recovered, the emperor came to Xiao Yao's residence, arranged a gold and stone band in the back hall, and the palace people all came.

古文：登桐台，使嶷着乌纱帽，极日尽欢，敕嶷备家人之礼。
现代文：登上桐台，让萧嶷戴上乌纱帽，一整天尽情欢乐，指示萧嶷实行家人的礼仪。
English: boarded the platform, let Xiao Yao put on a black gauze cap and enjoy the whole day, and instructed Xiao Yao to practice family etiquette.

古文：嶷谓上曰： 古来言愿陛下寿比南山，或称万岁，此殆近貌言。
现代文：萧嶷对皇上说： 自古以来都说是愿陛下寿比南山，或者称万岁，这几乎近于不实之言。
English: Xiao Wei said to the emperor: Since ancient times, it has been said that may his majesty live longer than Nanshan, or that he will live forever, which is almost close to being untrue.

古文：如臣所怀，实愿陛下极寿百年亦足矣。 
现代文：而在臣的心中，实在希望陛下的寿命最长有一百年也就足够了。 
English: On the other hand, in the heart of a vassal, it is enough to sincerely hope that His Majesty will live for a maximum of one hundred years.

古文：上曰： 百年复何可得，止得东西一百，于事亦济。 
现代文：皇上说： 一百年又怎么可以得到，只要能得家族产业延续一百年，事情也就算成功了。 
English: The emperor said, "How can it be obtained in a hundred years? As long as the family industry can be continued for a hundred years, the matter will be considered a success."

古文：因相执流涕。
现代文：于是互相握手流泪。
English: So they shook hands and shed tears.

古文：十年，上封嶷诸子。
现代文：永明十年，皇上加封萧嶷的各个儿子。
English: In the 10th year of the Yongming era, the emperor gave Xiao Yao's sons additional fiefs.

古文：旧例王子封千户，嶷欲五子俱封，啓减，人五百户。
现代文：过去的先例是王子封一千户，萧嶷希望五个儿子都给予加封，请求减少，每人封五百户。
English: The precedent in the past was that the prince sealed a thousand households, and Xiao Yao hoped that all five sons would be sealed, and the request was reduced, with each person sealing five hundred households.

古文：其年疾笃，表解职，不许，赐钱五百万营功德。
现代文：这年他病重，上表请求解除职务，没有批准，赐钱五百万供他用于念佛、诵经、布施等。
English: This year, he was seriously ill. He requested to be relieved of his duties from the above table, but was not approved. He was given five million yuan to be used for praying to Buddha, chanting sutras, and giving alms.

古文：薨，年四十九。
现代文：逝世时，四十九岁。
English: He was forty-nine when he died.

古文：其日上视疾，至薨乃还宫。
现代文：当天皇上去探病，直到去世才回宫。
English: When the emperor went to visit the sick, he did not return to the palace until his death.

古文：诏敛以衮冕之服，温明秘器，大鸿胪持节护丧事，太官朝夕送祭奠，大司马、太傅二府文武悉停过葬。
现代文：诏令穿上衮衣和冠冕入殓，用温明秘器殉葬，大鸿胪手持仪节主持丧事，太官一天到晚送祭奠物品，大司马、太傅二府中的文武官员都停止工作参与丧事。
English: Dahirong put on the imperial robe and crown, and was buried with the warm Ming secret utensil. Dahongyu presided over the funeral with the ceremonial festival in hand. The eunuchs sent tribute items all day long. The civil and military officials in the two prefectures of Tai Sima and Tai Fu all stopped working to participate in the funeral.

古文：诏赠假黄钺、都督中外诸军事、丞相、扬州牧，绿綟绶，具九服锡命之礼，侍中、大司马、太傅、王如故。
现代文：诏令追赠假黄钺、都督中外诸军事、丞相、扬州牧，绿绶带，安排九服锡命的大礼，侍中、大司马、太傅、王仍旧不变。
English: The imperial edict ordered the posthumous presentation of the fake yellow ribbon, the military, chancellors, and Yangzhou pastors, the green ribbon, and the grand gift of nine services, and the attendants, grand steward, grand steward, and king remained unchanged.

古文：给九旒鸾辂，黄屋左纛，虎贲班剑百人，轀輬车，前后部羽葆、鼓吹。
现代文：赠予九旒鸾车，黄屋左纛，虎贲仪仗一百人，灵柩车，前后设置羽葆、乐队。
English: A nine-car carriage, a yellow-roofed left-hand carriage, a tiger-drawn ceremonial carriage for 100 people, and a hearse were presented. Feathers and bands were set up in front and behind.

古文：丧葬送仪，并依汉东平王苍故事。
现代文：丧葬送殡的仪式，都依照汉朝东平王刘苍的旧时规格。
English: The funerals and funeral rites are all in accordance with the old-time specifications of Liu Cang, the Dongping King of the Han Dynasty.

古文：嶷临终，召子子廉、子恪曰： 吾无后，当共相勉励，笃睦爲先。
现代文：萧嶷临终的时候，叫来他的儿子子廉、子恪说： 我去世以后，一定要互相勉励，亲密和睦是最重要的。
English: When Xiao Yao was on his deathbed, he called his sons, Zi Ren and Zi Ke, and said, "After I die, we must encourage each other. Intimacy and harmony are the most important."

古文：才有优劣，位有通塞，运有富贫，此自然理，无足以相陵侮。
现代文：才能有优有劣，职位有通有塞，运气有贫有富，这是自然的道理，不可因此互相欺侮。
English: Talent has its advantages and disadvantages, position has its advantages and disadvantages, and luck has its advantages and disadvantages. This is a natural principle and should not be used to bully each other.

古文：勤学行，守基业，修闺庭，尚闲素，如此足无忧患。
现代文：勤奋学习上进，保守家中基业，治理闺房门庭，推尚闲雅朴素，这样就足可以无忧无虑。
English: Studying hard and making progress, maintaining the family foundation, managing the boudoir, and promoting leisure and simplicity, so that you can be carefree.

古文：圣主储皇及诸亲贤，亦当不以吾没易情也。
现代文：皇上、太子和各位亲友，也一定不会因为我去世而改变情谊的。
English: The Emperor, the Crown Prince and your relatives and friends will not change their friendship because of my death.

古文：三日施灵，惟香火、盘水、乾饭、酒脯、槟榔而已，朔望菜食一盘，加以甘果，此外悉省。
现代文：三天守灵，只需要香火、盘水、干饭、酒果、槟榔就够了，初一、十五菜食一盘，加些干果，此外一切都省掉。
English: For a three-day wake, just incense, a bowl of water, dried rice, wine and fruit, and betel nut are enough. For the first day, one plate of fifteen dishes, add some dried fruit, and leave out everything else.

古文：葬后除灵，可施吾常所乘舆扇伞。
现代文：葬后除灵，可以用我平常所乘车子上的扇子和伞。
English: After the funeral and the exorcism, I can use the fan and umbrella from the car I usually take.

古文：朔望时节，席地香火、盘水、酒脯、乾饭、槟榔便足。
现代文：初一、十五的时候，地上铺一条席，摆上香火、盘水、酒脯、干饭、槟榔就足够了。
English: On the first and fifteenth day of the first month, it is enough to lay a seat on the ground and put incense, a bowl of water, wine, dried rice, and betel nuts.

古文：棺器及墓中勿用馀物爲后患也。
现代文：棺材和墓中不要再耗用其他物品，以致变为祸患。
English: Don't let coffins and graves become so cluttered with other items that they become a nuisance.

古文：朝服之外，唯下铁环刀一口。
现代文：朝服以外，只需要下入铁环刀一口。
English: In addition to the morning dress, you only need to enter the iron ring cutter.

古文：作冢勿令深，一一依格，莫过度也。
现代文：挖墓坑不要深，一一依照规格，不要过度。
English: Don't dig the grave pit too deep, dig according to the specifications, don't overdo it.

古文：后堂楼可安佛，供养外国二僧，馀皆如旧。
现代文：后堂的楼上可以安放佛像，供养外国的两个僧人，其余的一概如同以前。
English: A Buddha statue can be placed on the upper floor of the back hall to support two foreign monks, and the rest will be the same as before.

古文：与汝游戏后堂船乘，吾所乘牛马，送二宫及司徒。
现代文：和你们一块游戏的后堂的船和车马，我所骑的牛马，送给两宫和司徒。
English: Together with you, I would like to give the boats and carriages from the back hall of the game, as well as the oxen and horses that I rode, to Ryonomiya and Satoru.

古文：服饰衣裘，悉爲功德。 
现代文：穿用的皮袄衣服等物，都布施给众人。 
English: All the fur coats, clothes, and other things to wear were given to the people.

古文：子廉等号泣奉行。
现代文：子廉等人哭着答应奉行。
English: Crying, Zillian and the others agreed to do so.

古文：武帝哀痛特至，蔬食积旬。
现代文：武帝特别哀痛，有十来天时间只吃蔬菜。
English: Emperor Wu was particularly sad, and only ate vegetables for about ten days.

古文：太官朝夕送祭奠，敕王融爲铭，云： 半岳摧峰，中河坠月。 
现代文：太官一天到晚送祭奠物品，命令王融写铭文，铭文中写道： 半岳摧峰，中河坠月。 
English: The eunuch sent offerings all day long, and ordered Wang Rong to write an inscription, which read: "Half-mountain destroys peak, middle-river falls to the moon."

古文：帝流涕曰： 此正吾所欲言也。 
现代文：武帝流着眼泪说： 这正是我想说的话。 
English: With tears streaming down his face, Emperor Wu said, "This is exactly what I wanted to say.

古文：至其年十二月，乃举乐宴朝臣。
现代文：到了这一年的十二月，才奏乐招待朝臣参加宴会。
English: It was not until December of that year that the orchestra invited the courtier to a banquet.

古文：乐始举，上便歔欷流涕。
现代文：乐声刚开始，皇上便叹息流泪。
English: At the very beginning of the music, the Emperor began to sigh and shed tears.

古文：嶷薨后，第库无见钱，武帝敕货杂物服饰得数百万，起集善寺，月给第见钱百万，至上崩乃省。
现代文：萧嶷去世后，府库中没有现钱，武帝让卖掉杂物服饰得到数百万，修了一座集善寺，每月供给府中钱一百万，直到皇上逝世才省掉。
English: After Xiao Yao's death, there was no cash in the prefectural treasury. Emperor Wu made Zhu Rong get millions by selling miscellaneous articles of clothing, built a collection temple, and provided the prefectural government with one million yuan every month until the emperor's death.

古文：嶷性泛爱，不乐闻人过失，左右投书相告，置靴中，竟不视，取火焚之。
现代文：萧嶷的性格仁爱，不乐于听到别人的过失，周围的人写信告状，他就放在靴子里，到底不看，拿火来烧掉。
English: Xiao Yao's character is benevolent and loving. He does not like to hear about other people's faults. When people around him write a complaint letter, he puts it in his shoe, ignores it, and burns it with fire.

古文：斋库失火，烧荆州还资，评直三千余万，主局各杖数十而已。
现代文：斋库失火，烧掉了从荆州带回的资财，折合价值三千余万，当事人各打几十杖就完了。
English: The warehouse caught fire and burned the money and property brought back from Jingzhou, equivalent to a value of more than 30 million yuan, and the parties each had to pay dozens of sticks.

古文：嶷薨后，忽见形于沈文季曰： 我未应便死，皇太子加膏中十一种药，使我痈不差，汤中复加药一种，使利不断。
现代文：萧嶷死后，忽然在沈文季眼前现形说： 我不应该现在就死，皇太子在食物中加了十一种药，使我的毒疮不能除去，汤中又加药一种，使痢泻不断。
English: After Xiao Yao's death, he suddenly appeared in front of Shen Wenzhi and said: I should not die now. The crown prince added eleven kinds of medicine to the food, so that my poisonous sores could not be removed, and added another medicine to the soup, so that the diarrhea continued.

古文：吾已诉先帝，先帝许还东邸，当判此事。 
现代文：我已经告诉了先帝，先帝准许回到东面的宅院，一定会审判这件事。 
English: I have already told the former emperor that the former emperor has allowed me to return to the mansion in the east and will certainly judge this matter.

古文：因胸中出青纸文书示文季曰： 与卿少旧，因卿呈上。 
现代文：于是从胸前掏出一张青纸文书让沈文季看，并说： 和您少有旧交，托您呈上去。 
English: Therefore, he pulled out a piece of blue paper from his chest for Shen Wenzhi to see, and said: I have few old friends with you, I ask you to present it.

古文：俄失所在。
现代文：马上便不见了。
English: It was gone in an instant.

古文：文季秘而不传，甚惧此事，少时太子薨。
现代文：沈文季把它藏起来没有传出，十分害怕这件事，不久太子就死了。
English: Shen Wenzhi hid it and did not disclose it, he was very afraid of this matter, and soon the prince died.

古文：又尝见形于第后园，乘腰舆，指麾处分，呼直兵，直兵无手板，左右授一玉手板与之，谓曰： 橘树一株死，可觅补之。 
现代文：他又曾在府里的后花园现形，乘坐着腰舆，指挥安排，呼喊值勤的兵士，值勤的兵士没有手板，身旁的人就拿了一个玉手板给他，他对兵士说： 有一棵橘树死了，可以找一棵补上。 
English: He also appeared in the back garden of the mansion, riding a horse, commanding and shouting at the soldiers on duty. The soldiers on duty did not have a hand board, so the people around him took a jade hand board to him. He said to the soldiers: An orange tree has died, you can find one to replace it.

古文：因出后园合，直兵倒地，仍失手板。
现代文：于是出了后花园的小门，值勤的兵士倒在地上，仍然失去了手板。
English: So out of the small door of the back garden, the soldier on duty fell to the ground, still missing his handboard.

古文：群吏中南阳乐蔼、彭城刘绘、吴郡张稷，最被亲礼。
现代文：众官吏中南阳人乐蔼、彭城人刘绘、吴郡人张稷，最受到亲近和礼遇。
English: Of all the officials, Zhongnanyang's Le A, Pengcheng's Liu M, and Wu County's Zhang Q were the closest and received the most courtesy.

古文：蔼与竟陵王子良笺，欲率荆、江、湘三州僚吏建碑，托中书侍郎刘绘营办。
现代文：乐蔼给竟陵王萧子良写信，打算率领荆、江、湘三州官吏为萧嶷立碑，托中书侍郎刘绘具体办理。
English: Le Er wrote a letter to King Xiao Ziliang of Jingling, intending to lead officials from the three states of Jing, Jiang and Hunan to erect a monument to Xiao Ziliang, entrusting Liu Peng, a junior clerk, to handle the details.

古文：蔼又与右率沈约书，请爲文。
现代文：乐蔼又给右率沈约写信，请他撰写碑文。
English: Le Er also wrote a letter to the Right Leader Shen Yu, asking him to write an inscription.

古文：约答曰： 郭有道汉末之匹夫，非蔡伯喈不足以偶三绝。
现代文：沈约回答说： 郭有道是汉朝末年的一个平民，非蔡伯喈不足以合为三绝。
English: Shen Yu replied: Guo Youdao was a commoner at the end of the Han Dynasty. If he was not Cai Boqi, he would not have been able to become a member of the Three Absolutes.

古文：谢安石素族之台辅，时无丽藻，迄乃有碑无文。
现代文：谢安石是世族出身的宰相，当时并没有华丽的词藻，至今还是有碑无文。
English: Xie Anshi was a prime minister who was born into a noble family. At that time, there were no ornate sayings, and there are still inscriptions without writing.

古文：况文献王冠冕彜伦，仪刑宇内，自非一代辞宗，难或与此。
现代文：况且文献王人品盖世，为天下楷模，假如不是一代辞宗，是难以参与此事的。
English: Moreover, it is difficult to participate in this matter if it is not a generation of dictionaries.

古文：约闾閈鄙人，名不入第，欻酬今旨，便是以礼许人，闻命惭顔，已不觉汗之沾背也。 
现代文：我是一个民间的粗人，名字不入品第，匆忙酬答现在的指令，便是以虚礼答应别人，听到命令十分惭愧，已经不知不觉流汗沾背了。 
English: I am a vulgar commoner, my name is not listed in the catalogue, I hastily reply to the current order, that is, I agree to others with false courtesy, I am very ashamed to hear the order, and I have unknowingly sweated and stained my back.

古文：建武中，第二子子恪托约及太子詹事孔珪爲文。
现代文：建武年间，第二个儿子萧子恪托沈约和太子詹事孔圭写了碑文。
English: During the Jianwu period, the second son, Xiao Zi, entrusted the inscription to Shen You and the prince, Zhan Shixi Kong Gui.

古文：妃庾氏，有女功妇德，嶷甚重之。
现代文：萧嶷的妃子庾氏，擅长女红，具有妇德，萧嶷十分器重她。
English: Xiao Yao's concubine, Ms. Zou, is good at being a womanizer, with feminine virtues. Xiao Yao values her very much.

古文：宋时，武帝及嶷位宦尚轻，家又贫薄，庾氏常彻己损身，以相营奉。
现代文：宋朝的时候，武帝和萧嶷官位还比较低，家中又很贫穷，庾氏常常自身吃苦受累，来奉养萧嶷。
English: At the time of the Song Dynasty, Emperor Wu and Xiao Yao were still relatively low-ranking officials, and the family was very poor. The Yao clan often suffered hardships to support Xiao Yao.

古文：兄弟每行来公事，晚还饥疲，躬营饮食，未尝不迎时先办。
现代文：兄弟经常出去办公事，回来很晚，饥饿劳累，她就亲自做饭，经常都是提前办好。
English: Her brother often went out on business and came back late, hungry and tired, so she cooked for herself, often in advance.

古文：时闽中宰守并受宝应署置，干独不屈，徙居郊野。
现代文：虽然丰盛或俭约要根据家中的情况，但总是又香又干净，非常可口。穆皇后不肯自己动手，又不整洁，所以皇上也因此很看重庾氏。
English: Although richness or frugality depends on the situation at home, cucumbers are always fragrant, clean and very tasty. Empress Mu did not want to do it herself, and it was not tidy, so the emperor also attached great importance to the cucumber.

古文：及宝应平，都督章昭达以闻，文帝甚嘉之，超授五兵尚书。
现代文：她又不忌妒，所以萧嶷倍加敬重。萧嶷死后，很快她也死了。
English: She was not jealous, so she respected Xiao Yao even more. After Xiao Yao's death, she also died soon.

古文：卒，諡静子。子显字景阳，子范弟也。幼聪慧，嶷偏爱之。
现代文：萧子显字景阳，是萧子范的弟弟。幼年聪慧，萧嶷很偏爱他。
English: Xiao Zixian, also known as Jingyang, is Xiao Zifan's younger brother. Xiao Zifan was very intelligent as a child, and Xiao Yu loved him very much.

古文：七岁，封宁都县侯，梁天监初，降爲子。
现代文：七岁的时候，封为宁都县侯，梁朝天监初年，降为子爵。
English: When he was seven years old, he was given the title of Ningdu County Marquis, and in the first year of Liang Chaotian, he was reduced to a viscount.

古文：位太尉录事参军。
现代文：位居太尉录事参军。
English: Joined the army at the rank of captain.

古文：子显身长八尺，状貌甚雅，好学，工属文。
现代文：萧子显身高八尺，状貌很文雅，好学，很善于写文章。
English: Xiao Zixian is eight feet tall, very elegant, eager to learn, and very good at writing articles.

古文：尝着鸿序赋，尚书令沈约见而称曰： 可谓明道之高致，盖幽通之流也。 
现代文：曾著有《鸿序赋》，尚书令沈约见到后称赞说： 可以称得是明道的高级文章，属于《幽通》一流。 
English: He was the author of "Hong Sequence Fu," which was praised by Shang Shuling after he met Shen Rong: It can be said to be a high-level article of Mingdao, which belongs to the first class of "Yutong."

古文：又采衆家后汉考正同异，爲一家之书。
现代文：他又采录众家《后汉书》考正异同，成为一家之书。
English: He also selected "Post-Han Shu" from all families to examine the differences and similarities, and it became a book for the whole family.

古文：又啓撰齐史，书成表奏，诏付秘阁。
现代文：又开始撰写《齐史》，书写成以后上表奏明皇上，诏令存放在秘阁之中。
English: He also began to write "Qi Shi" (History of Qi), which was later presented to Emperor Ming, and the edict was stored in a secret cabinet.

古文：累迁邵陵王友。
现代文：逐步升迁为邵陵王友。
English: Gradually promoted to Shaoling Wangyou.

古文：后除黄门郎。
现代文：后来任命为黄门郎。
English: He was later named Huangmenro.

古文：中大通二年，迁长兼侍中。
现代文：中大通二年，调为长兼侍中。
English: In the second year of junior high school, he was transferred to the post of chief and attendant.

古文：梁武帝雅爱子显才，又嘉其容止吐纳，每御筵侍坐，偏顾访焉。
现代文：梁武帝平时很喜欢萧子显的才华，又很称赞他的举止谈吐，每当举行御宴他在座的时候，武帝都要到他那里一起交谈。
English: Emperor Wu of the Liang Dynasty liked Xiao Zixuan's talent very much and praised his manners and conversation. Whenever there was a royal banquet and he was present, Emperor Wu would go to him and talk with him.

古文：尝从容谓曰： 我造通史，此书若成，衆史可废。 
现代文：武帝曾经从容地对他说： 我要编一部《通史》，这部书如果写成，其余的书都可以废除了。 
English: Emperor Wu once calmly said to him: I want to compile a "general history," if this book is written, the rest of the books can be abolished.

古文：子显对曰： 仲尼赞易道，黜八索；述职方，除九丘。
现代文：萧子显回答说： 孔仲尼赞颂《易》道，贬斥《八索》，讲述职方，删除《九丘》。
English: Xiao Zixian replied: Kong Zhongniong praised "Yi" Road, disparaged "Hasso" Road, talked about the workers' side, and deleted "Jiuqiu" Road.

古文：圣制符同，复在兹日。 
现代文：圣上的制作与此相同，又在今天。 
English: The production of the saint is the same, and it continues today.

古文：时以爲名对。
现代文：当时认为是著名的对答。
English: At the time, it was considered a famous repartee.

古文：三年，以本官领国子博士。
现代文：中大通三年，以本官兼国子博士。
English: Three years later, he became the head of the department, leading Dr. Kuniko.

古文：武帝制孝经义，未列学官，子显在职，表置助教一人，生十人。
现代文：武帝写成了《孝义经》，没有列入官学科目，萧子显在职时，上表请求设助教一人，学生十人。
English: Emperor Wu wrote the "Filial Piety Sutra," which was not included in the official curriculum. When Xiao Zixian was in office, the above table requested the establishment of one assistant teacher and ten students.

古文：又啓撰武帝集并普通北伐记。
现代文：又上表请求编撰武帝文集和《普通北伐记》。
English: In addition, the above table requests the compilation of the Emperor Wu's Anthology and the General Northern Expedition.

古文：迁国子祭酒，加侍中，于学递述武帝五经义，迁吏部尚书，侍中如故。
现代文：调任国子祭酒，加任侍中，在学校逐次讲述武帝的《五经义》，调任吏部尚书，侍中职务依旧。
English: He was transferred to the Kuniko Matsuri Sake, and was also appointed as an attendant, and successively recited Emperor Wu's "Five Classics" in school. He was also transferred to the Personnel Department, and his duties as an attendant remained the same.

古文：子显风神洒落，雍容闲雅，简通宾客，不畏鬼神。
现代文：萧子显风度潇洒，文雅大方，很少和宾客来往，不怕鬼神。
English: Xiao Zi has a dashing demeanor, is elegant and generous, rarely interacts with guests, and is not afraid of ghosts and gods.

古文：性爱山水，爲伐社文以见其志。
现代文：生性爱好山水，写了《伐社文》来表达自己的志向。
English: He has a natural affinity for mountains and rivers, and wrote "Fawashawon" (伐社文) to express his aspirations.

古文：饮酒数斗，颇负才气。
现代文：饮酒数斗，很有才气。
English: He drinks several barrels of alcohol and is very talented.

古文：及掌选，见九流宾客不与交言，但举扇一撝而已，衣冠窃恨。
现代文：等他负责选拔人才以后，见了九流宾客，不和他们交谈，只是举扇一挥而已，官员们私下怨恨。
English: After he was put in charge of selecting talent, he met with ninth-rate guests and did not talk to them, just waved a fan. Officials secretly resented this.

古文：然简文素重其爲人，在东宫时，每引与促宴。
现代文：然而简文帝平时很重视他的为人，在东宫的时候，常常邀请他一齐宴饮。
English: However, Emperor Jianwen attached great importance to him as a person, and often invited him to banquets when he was in the East Palace.

古文：子显尝起更衣，简文谓坐客曰： 常闻异人间出，今日始见，知是萧尚书。 
现代文：萧子显曾经起来解手，简文帝对座上的客人说： 常常听说奇异的人是相间出现的，今日才见到，知道是萧尚书。 
English: Xiao Zixian once got up to relieve himself, and Emperor Jianwen said to the guests at the table: I have often heard that strange people appear in pairs, but today I saw and knew it was Xiao Shangshu.

古文：其见重如此。出爲吴兴太守。
现代文：他就是这样地被看重。后来出京为吴兴太守。
English: This is how he was valued. Later, he went to Beijing as Wu Xing Taishu.

古文：卒时年四十九，诏赠侍中、中书令。
现代文：死时年龄四十九岁，诏令赠他为侍中、中书令。
English: He was forty-nine years old at the time of his death, and the imperial edict gave him the titles of chamberlain and chancellor.

古文：及请諡，手敕曰： 恃才傲物，宜諡曰骄。 
现代文：后来请求谥号，皇上发下手令说： 他恃才傲物，谥号应该为骄。 
English: Later, he asked for a posthumous name, and the emperor issued an order saying: He is proud of his talent, and his posthumous name should be Pride.

古文：子显尝爲自序，其略云： 余爲邵陵王友，忝还京师，远思前比，即楚之唐、宋，梁之严、邹。
现代文：萧子显曾经写过一篇《自序》，其中大略说： 我是邵陵王友，回到了京城，远想从前的可比之人，就是楚国的唐、宋，梁国的严、邹。
English: Xiao Zixian once wrote a "self-sequence," which roughly said: I am Shaoling Wangyou, returned to Beijing, longing for comparable people in the past, that is, the Tang and Song dynasties of Chu, and the Yan and Han dynasties of Liang.

古文：追寻平生，颇好辞藻，虽在名无成，求心已足。
现代文：追寻平生，颇喜欢词藻，虽然名声没有成功，而心里已经满足。
English: Looking back on my life, I am very fond of poetic words. Although I have not become famous, my heart has been satisfied.

古文：若乃登高目极，临水送归，风动春朝，月明秋夜，早雁初鹦，开花落叶，有来斯应，每不能已也。
现代文：至于登高望远，临水送归，风动春晨，月明秋夜，早雁初莺，开花落叶，有来即应，常常激动不止。
English: As for the ascent to high and far, the return to the water, the windy spring morning, the moonlight autumn night, the early goose chrysanthemum, the flowering and leaf fall, it is often exciting.

古文：且前代贾、傅、崔、马、邯郸、缪、路之徒，并以文章显，所以屡上歌颂，自比古人。
现代文：而且前代的贾、傅、崔、马、邯郸、缪、路之徒，都是以文章显耀，所以屡次奉献歌颂，自比古人。
English: Moreover, the previous generations of Jia, Fu, Cui, Ma, Zou, Miao, and Lu, were all famous for their writings, so they have repeatedly offered songs of praise since ancient times.

古文：天监十六年，始预九日朝宴，稠人广坐，独受旨云： 今云物甚美，卿将不斐然赋诗。 
现代文：天监十六年，才参加了初九的朝廷宴会，人多坐广，自己独个接受了圣旨说： 今天的云彩景物很美，卿怎可不斐然赋诗！ 
English: In the sixteenth year of his celestial governorship, he attended the imperial banquet for the ninth grade of junior high school. Many people sat in the audience, but he was the only one to accept the sacred edict, saying, "Today's cloud scenery is very beautiful, how can you not write a poem!"

古文：诗既成，又降旨曰： 可谓才子。 
现代文：诗成以后，又降下圣旨说： 真是一位才子。 
English: After the poem was completed, he sent a message saying: "What a talent.

古文：馀退谓人曰：一顾之恩，非望而至，遂方贾谊何如哉，未易当也。
现代文：我退下来后对别人说：一顾之恩，并非盼望就能得到，于是自比贾谊怎么样，也不一定恰当。
English: After I stepped back, I said to others, "It is not a hope that you can get a favor, so it is not necessarily appropriate to compare yourself to friendship.

古文：每有制作，特寡思功，须其自来，不以力构。
现代文：每次有所创作，特别缺少构思的功夫，总是它自己来临，不以气力拼合。
English: Whenever there is a production, I rarely go to the trouble of conceiving it. I have to let the inspiration come from within, without trying too hard to brew it.

古文：太清中，卒于侍中。子显弟子云。
现代文：少年以来所写的诗赋中，有《鸿序》一篇，体式兼有各种特点，文风具备多项长处，很被喜好者所传写，所以虚名远扬。 
English: Among the poems he has written since he was a teenager, there is a poem called "Hongxue," which has various characteristics in style, and has many strengths in literary style. It is very popular with those who like to write, so it has a high reputation.

古文：子云字景乔，年十二，齐建武四年，封新浦县侯。
现代文：萧子显的著作有《后汉书》一百卷，《齐书》六十卷，《普通北伐记》五卷，《贵俭传》三卷，文集二十卷。萧子云字景乔，十二岁时，是齐朝建武四年，封为新浦县侯。
English: Xiao Zixian's works include "Post-Han Shu" one hundred volumes, "Qi Shu" sixty volumes, "Ordinary Northern Expedition" five volumes, "Precious and Frugal Life" three volumes, and twenty volumes of anthologies. Xiao Zixian, at the age of twelve, was four years old in Jianwu in the Qi Dynasty and was given the title of Xinpu County.

古文：自制拜章，便有文采。
现代文：自己给自己写的任命诏书，很有文采。
English: The letter of appointment, which he wrote himself, is very literary.

古文：梁天监初，降爵爲子。
现代文：梁朝天监初年，降爵位为子。
English: In the first year of Liang Chao's tenure as overseer of heaven, he was demoted to the peerage.

古文：及长，勤学有文藻，弱冠撰晋书，至年二十六，书成百馀卷，表奏之，诏付秘阁。
现代文：长大后，勤恳学习，富有辞藻，二十岁撰写《晋书》，到了二十六岁，全书写成，共一百多卷，上表呈奏给皇帝，皇帝诏令存放在秘阁当中。
English: After growing up, he studied diligently and was rich in words. At the age of twenty, he wrote "Jin Shu." At the age of twenty-six, he wrote the entire book, a total of more than one hundred volumes. The above table was presented to the emperor, and the emperor's edict was stored in the secret cabinet.

古文：子云性沈静，不乐仕进，风神闲旷，任性不群。
现代文：萧子云性格沉静，不喜欢追求升官，精神闲散旷达，任性不同众人。
English: Xiao Ziyun's personality is quiet, he does not like to pursue promotion, his spirit is idle, and he is capricious.

古文：夏月对宾客，恒自裸袒。
现代文：夏天面对宾客，经常袒裸着身子。
English: In the summer, she often performs naked in front of guests.

古文：而兄弟不睦，乃至吉凶不相吊问，时论以此少之。
现代文：兄弟之间很不和睦，乃至于吉凶事件互不慰问，舆论因此对他颇有微词。
English: The brothers do not get along well with each other, and they do not offer condolences to each other in the event of misfortune. As a result, the public opinion is quite critical of him.

古文：年三十，方起家爲秘书郎，迁太子舍人，撰东宫新记奏之，敕赐束帛。
现代文：三十岁时，才开始做官，担任秘书郎，升为太子舍人，撰写了《东宫新记》上奏，诏令赐给他五匹丝帛。
English: At the age of thirty, he began to work as an official, served as a secretary, rose to become a prince's concubine, wrote the prelude to the "New History of the Eastern Palace," and was given five silk cocoons by the Imperial Edict.

古文：累迁丹阳郡丞。
现代文：逐步改任丹阳郡丞。
English: He was gradually promoted to Danyang county magistrate.

古文：湘东王绎爲丹阳尹，深相赏好，如布衣之交。
现代文：湘东王萧绎做丹阳尹，对他非常欣赏，好像平民朋友。
English: Hunan Wang Xiaoyan as Danyang Yin, he is very much appreciated, like a civilian friend.

古文：中大通三年，爲临川内史，在郡以和理称，人吏悦之。
现代文：中大通三年，他担任临川内史，在郡中以平和安定著称，百姓、官吏都很喜欢他。
English: He served as the Linchuan Inner Historian for three years, and was known as a peaceful and stable person in the county. The people and government officials liked him very much.

古文：还除散骑常侍。
现代文：回京后被任命为散骑常侍。
English: After returning to Kyoto, he was appointed a samurai for horseback riding.

古文：历侍中，国子祭酒。
现代文：又历任侍中、国子祭酒。
English: He was also successively appointed as a chamberlain, and brewed the Kuniko Matsuri sake.

古文：梁初，郊庙未革牲牷，乐辞皆沈约撰，至是承用。
现代文：梁朝初年，祭祀天地祖宗尚未革除使用完整牲畜的典仪，乐辞都是沈约撰写的，到现在仍然沿用。
English: In the first year of the Liang Dynasty, the ritual of sacrificing the ancestors of heaven and earth had not yet abolished the ritual of using complete livestock. The music lyrics were all written by Shen Yu and are still in use today.

古文：子云啓宜改之，敕答曰： 此是主者守株，宜急改也。 
现代文：萧子云上表提议进行改革，诏书回答说： 这是主持者墨守成规，应该立即加以修改。 
English: Xiao Ziyun proposed a reform on the table, and the edict replied: This is the host adhering to the rules, and it should be amended immediately.

古文：仍使子云撰定。
现代文：便让萧子云撰写制定。
English: He then asked Ziyun to compose the music.

古文：敕曰： 郊庙歌辞，应须典诰大语，不得杂用子史文章浅言。
现代文：诏令说： 祭祀天地祖宗的歌词，应该使用典诰大语，不能杂用子史文章中的浅近语言。
English: The edict said: The lyrics of the sacrificial rites of the ancestors of heaven and earth should be written in classical Chinese, and should not be mixed with the shallow language of the children's history articles.

古文：而沈约所撰，亦多舛谬。 
现代文：而沈约所撰写的，也有很多错误。 
English: However, there are also many mistakes in what Shen Youyou wrote.

古文：子云作成，敕并施用。
现代文：萧子云写成以后，诏令全部施行。
English: After Xiao Ziyun was written, the edict was fully implemented.

古文：子云善草隶，爲时楷法，自云善效锺元常、王逸少而微变字体。
现代文：萧子云善于草书和隶书，为当时所效法，他自己说是善于仿效钟元常、王逸少而稍微改变了字体。
English: Xiao Ziyun was good at cursive and cursive writing, and he himself said that he was good at imitating Zhongyuan Chang and Wang Yishao and slightly changed the font.

古文：尝答敕云： 臣昔不能拔赏，随时所贵，规摹子敬，多历年所。
现代文：他曾经回复诏书说： 我过去不能独自鉴拔欣赏，随着时代潮流的趋尚，追慕王子敬，过了多年。
English: He once replied to the imperial edict, saying, "In the past, I couldn't judge and appreciate things on my own. With the trend of the times, it took me many years to admire and respect princes.

古文：年二十六着晋史，至二王列传，欲作论草隶法，言不尽意，遂不能成，略指论飞白一事而已。
现代文：二十六岁著《晋史》，写到《二王列传》，打算论述草隶书法，言不尽意，于是没能做成，只是大略地讨论了一下飞白技法罢了。
English: At the age of twenty-six, he wrote "The History of Jin" and "The Tale of the Two Kings," intending to discuss the calligraphy of Caozhi, but he was not satisfied with what he said, so he could not complete it, but only roughly discussed the flying white technique.

古文：十许年，始见敕旨论书一卷，商略笔状，洞澈字体，始变子敬，全范元常。
现代文：十来年后，才见到《敕旨论书》一卷，探讨笔法，洞悉字体，开始改变学王子敬，完全学习钟元常。
English: It was more than ten years later that he saw the first volume of "The Treatise on the Four Noble Truths" and began to study calligraphy and fonts. He began to change from studying Prince Kei to studying Zhongyuan Zang.

古文：逮尔以来，自觉功进。 
现代文：从此以后，自觉功夫长进。 
English: Since then, I have felt that my writing skills have improved.

古文：其书迹雅爲武帝所重，帝尝论书曰： 笔力劲骏，心手相应，巧逾杜度，美过崔寔,当与元常并驱争先。 
现代文：他的书法很被武帝所看重，武帝曾经评论他的手迹说： 笔力劲骏，心手相应，巧越杜度，美过崔萛，当与钟元常并驱争先。 
English: His calligraphy was highly valued by Emperor Wu, who once commented on his handwriting, saying: "The pen is strong, the heart is corresponding, the skill is superior to the skill, the beauty is superior to the beauty, and it should compete with Zhongyuan.

古文：其见赏如此。
现代文：他就是如此受赏识。
English: This shows the appreciation for him.

古文：出爲东阳太守。百济国使人至建邺求书，逢子云爲郡，维舟将发。
现代文：后来调出京城，担任了东阳太守，百济国的使者到建邺请求书法，正逢萧子云出去做郡守，船只将要出发。
English: Later, he was transferred out of Beijing and became the governor of Dongyang. An envoy from Baekje came to Jianye to request calligraphy. At the same time, Xiao Ziyun went out to be the county governor, and the ships were about to set off.

古文：使人于渚次候之，望船三十许步，行拜行前。
现代文：使者便在沙洲附近等候，望见船只还有三十余步的时候，便一边下行一边向前。
English: The messenger waited near the sandbar, and when he saw that the ship was still more than thirty paces away, he went down one side and forward the other.

古文：子云遣问之，答曰： 侍中尺牍之美，远流海外，今日所求，唯在名迹。 
现代文：萧子云派人询问，回答说： 侍中的书信之美，远流海外，今天所请求的，就是名人手迹。 
English: Xiao Ziyun sent someone to inquire, and replied: The beauty of the attendant's letter is far away overseas. What we are requesting today is the handwriting of a famous person.

古文：子云乃爲停船三日，书三十纸与之，获金货数百万。
现代文：萧子云于是便为他停船，书写了三十余张，交给了他，得到了金银财物数百万。
English: Xiao Ziyun then stopped the ship for him, wrote down more than thirty pieces of paper, handed them to him, and received millions of gold, silver and property.

古文：性吝，自外答饷不书好纸，好事者重加赂遗，以要其答。
现代文：他性格吝啬，对外赠答不写好纸，有些书法爱好者便对他重加贿赂馈赠，以求得他的答复。
English: His character is stingy, and he does not write well when giving gifts to others. Some calligraphy enthusiasts have bribed him with gifts in order to get his reply.

古文：太清元年，复爲侍中、国子祭酒。
现代文：太清元年，重新担任了侍中、国子祭酒。
English: In the first year of the Taichung period, he was reappointed as a chamberlain and the head of the Kuniko Matsuri.

古文：二年，侯景寇逼，子云逃人间。
现代文：二年，侯景进逼，萧子云逃入民间。
English: In the second year, Hou Jing was forced to flee, and Xiao Ziyun fled to the people.

古文：三年，宫城失守，奔晋陵，馁卒于显云寺僧房，年六十三。
现代文：三年，宫城失守，他逃往晋陵，饿死在显云寺僧房，享年六十三岁。
English: Three years later, when Miyagi fell, he fled to Jinling and starved to death in the monk's quarters of Xianyun Temple at the age of sixty-three.

古文：所着晋书一百一十卷，东宫新记二十卷。
现代文：著有《晋书》一百卷，《东宫新记》二十卷。
English: He is the author of one hundred volumes of "Jin Shu" and twenty volumes of "Donggu Xin Ji."

古文：子特字世达，早知名，亦善草隶，时人比之卫恒、卫瓘。
现代文：他的儿子萧特，字世达，很早就知名，也擅长草隶，当时的人把他比作卫恒、卫馞。
English: His son, Xiao Te, also known as Shida, was famous for a long time, and was also good at grass cloth. At that time, people compared him to Wei Heng and Wei Zhuang.

古文：武帝尝使特书，及奏，帝曰： 子敬之迹不及逸少，萧特之书遂逼于父。 
现代文：武帝曾经让萧特写字，等呈奏以后，武帝说： 子敬的墨迹不及逸少，萧特的书法却逼似父亲。 
English: Emperor Wu once asked Xiao Te to write, and after the performance, Emperor Wu said: Zi Kei's ink is less than Yixiao, but Xiao Te's calligraphy is similar to his father's.

古文：位太子舍人，海盐令，坐事免。
现代文：他位居太子舍人、海盐令，因为犯事被罢免。
English: He was deposed from his position as crown prince, and was removed from the position of sea salt order because of the offense.

古文：先子云卒，遗啓简文求爲墓志铭，帝爲制铭焉。
现代文：先于萧子云去世，遗书奏请简文帝为他写一篇墓志铭，简文帝果然为他撰写了。
English: Prior to Xiao Ziyun's death, his will asked Emperor Jianwen to write an epitaph for him, which Emperor Jianwen did.

