古文：周后稷，名弃。
现代文：周的始祖后稷，名叫弃。
English: Zhou's ancestor, Houyi, was named Zhao.

古文：其母有邰氏女，曰姜原。
现代文：他的母亲是有邰氏的女子，名叫姜原。
English: His mother was a woman named Jiang Yuan from the Yi clan.

古文：姜原为帝喾元妃。
现代文：姜原是帝喾的正妃。
English: Jiang Yuan was the empress dowager.

古文：姜原出野，见巨人迹，心忻然说，欲践之，践之而身动如孕者。
现代文：姜原外出到郊野，看见一个巨人脚印，心中喜悦，想去踩它一脚，一踩就觉得身子振动像怀了孕似的。
English: Jiang Yuan went out to the countryside and saw a giant's footprints. He was delighted and wanted to step on it. When he stepped on it, he felt his body vibrate as if he were pregnant.

古文：居期而生子，以为不祥，弃之隘巷，马牛过者皆辟不践；徙置之林中，適会山林多人，迁之；而弃渠中冰上，飞鸟以其翼覆荐之。
现代文：满了十月就生下一个儿子，姜原认为这孩子不吉祥，就把他扔到了一个狭窄的小巷里，但不论是马还是牛从他身边经过都绕着躲开而不踩他，于是又把他扔在树林里，正赶上树林里人多，所以又挪了个地方;把他扔在渠沟的冰上，有飞鸟飞来用翅膀盖在他身上，垫在他身下。
English: At the end of October, she gave birth to a son. Jiang Yuan considered this child to be unlucky and threw him into a narrow alley, but no matter whether it was a horse or a cow passing by, they all avoided stepping on him, so he threw him into the woods again. He was just catching up with more people in the woods, so he moved another place. He threw him on the ice of the ditch, and birds flew to cover him with their wings and padded him under his body.

古文：姜原以为神，遂收养长之。
现代文：姜原觉得这太神异了，就抱回来把他养大成人。
English: Jiang Yuan thought this was too strange, so he took him back and raised him to be an adult.

古文：初欲弃之，因名曰弃。
现代文：由于起初想把他扔掉，所以就给他取名叫弃。
English: At first he wanted to throw it away, so he gave it a name and abandoned it.

古文：弃为兒时，屹如巨人之志。
现代文：弃还是孩童的时候，就有伟大人物那般的高远志向。
English: When I was a child, I had the lofty ambitions of a great man.

古文：其游戏，好种树麻、菽，麻、菽美。
现代文：他做游戏的时候，喜欢栽麻种豆，种下去的麻和豆都长得很茂盛。
English: When he was playing games, he liked to plant hemp seeds and beans. The hemp and beans he planted grew very luxuriantly.

古文：及为成人，遂好耕农，相地之宜，宜穀者稼穑焉，民皆法则之。
现代文：等他长大成人了，他就喜欢耕作，他能观察土地的特性，选择适宜的谷物来种植，人民都仿效他。
English: When he became an adult, he liked farming, he could observe the characteristics of the land, choose the appropriate grain to plant, and the people followed him.

古文：帝尧闻之，举弃为农师，天下得其利，有功。
现代文：帝尧听说了这些事，便任用弃担任农师，教民众种植庄稼，天下百姓都因此获利，他立下了功劳。
English: When the emperor heard about these things, he appointed him as an agronomist to teach the people how to grow crops. People all over the world benefited from this, and he deserves great credit.

古文：帝舜曰： 弃，黎民始饥，尔后稷播时百穀。 
现代文：帝舜说： 弃，百姓们当初忍饥挨饿，多亏你担任后稷来播种各种谷物。 
English: Empress Dowager Cixi said: Abandon, the people were starving at the beginning, thanks to you acting as a guardian to sow all kinds of grains.

古文：封弃於邰，号曰后稷，别姓姬氏。
现代文：所以分封弃在邰这个地方，号称后稷，另外以姬为姓。
English: Therefore, it was divided and abandoned in this place, known as Houyi, and her surname was Ji.

古文：后稷之兴，在陶唐、虞、夏之际，皆有令德。
现代文：后稷的出名，在陶唐、虞、夏几代之间，这一个家族都很有美德。
English: Houyi's fame, between the generations of Tao, Tang, Yu and Xia, this family is very virtuous.

古文：后稷卒，子不窋立。
现代文：后稷去世后，他的儿子不窋继位。
English: After Hou Yi's death, his son Bu Xi Rong succeeded to the throne.

古文：不窋末年，夏后氏政衰，去稷不务，不窋以失其官而饹戎狄之间。
现代文：不窋晚年的时候，夏后氏的国政衰败，舍弃了后稷这个官，不再重视农业，不窋因为失去官职就逃奔到戎狄地区。
English: In his later years, the Xia Guo clan's national politics began to decline. They abandoned the post of Houyi, no longer valued agriculture, and fled to the Yongdi region because they lost their official position.

古文：不窋卒，子鞠立。
现代文：不窋去世后，他的儿子鞠继位。
English: After his father's death, he was succeeded by his son, Mu.

古文：鞠卒，子公刘立。
现代文：鞠去世后，他的儿子公刘继位。
English: After the death of Mu, his son, Gong Liu, succeeded to the throne.

古文：公刘虽在戎狄之间，复脩后稷之业，务耕种，行地宜，自漆、沮度渭，取材用，行者有资，居者有畜积，民赖其庆。
现代文：公刘虽身在戎狄之中，却重新经营修复后稷的基业，从事农事耕种，按照土地的栽培特性来种植庄稼，他从漆水、沮水渡过渭水，砍伐获取材木以供使用，使得出门的人有旅费，在家的人有积蓄，人民的生活依靠他好了起来。
English: Although he was in the military, he resumed the management of the foundation business of Jiuquan after the restoration, engaged in agricultural farming, and planted crops according to the cultivation characteristics of the land. He crossed the Jiuquan River from the lacquered water and the depressed water, and cut down and obtained timber for use, so that people who went out had travel expenses, people at home had savings, and people's lives depended on him.

古文：百姓怀之，多徙而保归焉。
现代文：百姓都感恩爱戴他，很多人迁居来归顺投靠他。
English: The people are grateful and love him, and many people have moved to follow and rely on him.

古文：周道之兴自此始，故诗人歌乐思其德。
现代文：周朝的治国之道大兴正是从这里开始的，因此诗人创作诗歌乐曲赞颂追念他的恩德。
English: The great prosperity of the Zhou Dynasty's governance of the country began here, so the poet created poems and music to praise and remember his kindness.

古文：公刘卒，子庆节立，国於豳。
现代文：公刘去世后，他的儿子庆节继位，在豳建立国都。
English: After the death of Prince Liu, his son Qing Jie succeeded him and established the national capital in Handan.

古文：庆节卒，子皇仆立。
现代文：庆节去世后，他的儿子皇仆继位。
English: After the death of Heydar, his son, the imperial servant, succeeded to the throne.

古文：皇仆卒，子差弗立。
现代文：皇仆去世后，他的儿子差弗继位。
English: After the death of the imperial servant, his son Zhafre succeeded to the throne.

古文：差弗卒，子毁隃立。
现代文：差弗去世后，他的儿子毁隃继位。
English: After Chafo's death, his son succeeded to the throne.

古文：毁隃卒，子公非立。
现代文：毁隃去世后，他的儿子公非继位。
English: After his death, his son Gongfei ascended the throne.

古文：公非卒，子高圉立。
现代文：公非去世后，他的儿子高圉继位。
English: After Gongfei's death, his son Gao Jun took the throne.

古文：高圉卒，子亚圉立。
现代文：高圉去世后，他的儿子亚圉继位。
English: After Gao Pi's death, his son, Artem, succeeded to the throne.

古文：亚圉卒，子公叔祖类立。
现代文：亚圉去世后，他的儿子公叔祖类继位。
English: After the death of Aachen, his son, his great-uncle, succeeded to the throne.

古文：公叔祖类卒，子古公亶父立。
现代文：公叔祖类去世后，他的儿子古公亶父继位。
English: After the death of Gongzhu Zu, his son Gu Gongzhu succeeded to the throne.

古文：古公亶父复脩后稷、公刘之业，积德行义，国人皆戴之。
现代文：古公亶父重新经营恢复后稷、公刘的基业，积累德行，广施仁义，国都中的百姓都拥戴他。
English: Old Gongjun's father resumed the business of restoring the foundation of Gongjun and Gong Liu, accumulated virtues, and widely practiced benevolence. The people in the national capital all support him.

古文：薰育戎狄攻之，欲得财物，予之。
现代文：薰育等戎狄部族来攻打他们，想要掠夺财物，古公亶父就把财物给他们。
English: When the soldiers of the Di tribe, such as the Fuyu, came to attack them and wanted to plunder their property, the old prince and his father gave them the property.

古文：已复攻，欲得地与民。
现代文：过了不久戎狄部族又来攻打，想得到土地和人民。
English: Soon after, the Yongdi tribe attacked again, wanting the land and the people.

古文：民皆怒，欲战。
现代文：人民都非常愤怒，想要出去迎战。
English: People are very angry and want to go to war.

古文：古公曰： 有民立君，将以利之。
现代文：古公说： 民众拥立君主，是想让他给大家谋求利益。
English: The ancients said: The people support the monarch because they want him to seek benefits for everyone.

古文：今戎狄所为攻战，以吾地与民。
现代文：现在戎狄前来侵犯，目的是想要我的土地和人民。
English: Now the soldiers are invading to take my land and my people.

古文：民之在我，与其在彼，何异。
现代文：人民跟着我或跟着他们，有什么区别呢?
English: What difference does it make whether the people follow me or follow them?

古文：民欲以我故战，杀人父子而君之，予不忍为。 
现代文：人民因为我的缘故去打仗，依靠着牺牲人民的父子兄弟来做君主，我实在不忍心这样做。 
English: The people went to war because of me, and I relied on the sacrifice of the people's sons and fathers to become the monarch. I really can't bear to do this.

古文：乃与私属遂去豳，度漆、沮，逾梁山，止於岐下。
现代文：于是古公亶父和他的亲属左右离开了豳，渡过漆水、沮水，翻过梁山，定居在歧山脚下。
English: As a result, Gu Gongyu's father and his relatives left Handan to the right and left to the left, crossed the lacquered water, the muddy water, crossed the Liangshan Mountain, and settled at the foot of the Qizhan Mountain.

古文：豳人举国扶老携弱，尽复归古公於岐下。
现代文：而在豳地的人民全都扶老携幼，来到岐山脚下，全部重新归附到古公身边。
English: However, the people of Shunde all came to the foot of Qishan, bringing their children with them, and all of them re-attached themselves to the side of the old lord.

古文：及他旁国闻古公仁，亦多归之。
现代文：附近的国家听说古公仁爱，也有很多来归从他。
English: Nearby countries have heard of the ancient emperor's benevolence and love, and many have come to follow him.

古文：於是古公乃贬戎狄之俗，而营筑城郭室屋，而邑别居之。
现代文：于是古公摒弃戎狄的习俗，建造城郭和房屋，设置邑落让民众定居下来。
English: As a result, the ancient emperors abandoned the custom of emperors, built castles and houses, and set up towns and villages for the people to settle down.

古文：作五官有司。民皆歌乐之，颂其德。
现代文：设立了司徒、司马、司空、司士、司寇五种官职衙署。人民都创作诗歌乐曲赞美他，歌颂他的恩德。
English: He set up the five official posts and departments of Sito, Sima, Siku, Soshi, and Siko. The people all created poems and music to praise him and sing of his benevolence.

古文：古公有长子曰太伯，次曰虞仲。
现代文：古公的长子叫太伯，次子叫虞仲。
English: The eldest son of the old lord was called Tai Bo, and the second son was called Yu Zhong.

古文：太姜生少子季历，季历娶太任，皆贤妇人，生昌，有圣瑞。
现代文：太姜生小儿子季历，季历娶太任为妻，太姜、太任都是贤惠的妻子。太任生子昌，有圣明之兆。
English: Tai Jiang gave birth to her youngest son, Jiali, and Jiali married Tai Ren. Both Tai Jiang and Tai Ren were virtuous wives. Tai Ren gave birth to many children, which was a sign of enlightenment.

古文：古公曰： 我世当有兴者，其在昌乎？ 
现代文：古公说： 我的后代当有成大事者，大概就是昌吧？ 
English: The ancients said: If my descendants are to be great, they must be great, right?

古文：长子太伯、虞仲知古公欲立季历以传昌，乃二人亡如荆蛮，文身断发，以让季历。
现代文：长子太伯和虞仲知道古公想立季历，以便将来能传位于昌，所以两人便逃亡到了荆蛮，身刺花纹，剪短头发，而让位给季历。
English: The eldest son Taibo and Yu Zhong knew that Gu Gong wanted to set up a quarterly calendar in order to be able to pass it on in the future, so the two fled to Jingmang, tattooed their bodies, cut their hair short, and gave way to the quarterly calendar.

古文：古公卒，季历立，是为公季。
现代文：古公去世后，季历继位，就是公季。
English: After the death of the ancient emperor, the succession of the calendar is the official season.

古文：公季脩古公遗道，笃於行义，诸侯顺之。
现代文：公季修持古公留下的治国之道，坚定地施行仁义，诸侯都顺从他。
English: Gongji practiced the way of governing the country left by the ancient ruler, firmly implementing benevolence and righteousness, and all the lords obeyed him.

古文：公季卒，子昌立，是为西伯。
现代文：公季去世后，他的儿子昌继位，就是西伯。
English: After the death of King Gojong, he was succeeded by his son Gojong, also known as Xi Bo.

古文：西伯曰文王，遵后稷、公刘之业，则古公、公季之法，笃仁，敬老，慈少。
现代文：西伯被称为文王，他继承后稷、公刘的事业，遵循古公、公季的法则，笃行仁义，尊敬老者，慈爱幼小。
English: Xibe was known as King Wen. He inherited the cause of Hou Yi and Gong Liu, followed the rules of the ancient kings and queens, practiced benevolence, respected the elderly, and loved the little ones.

古文：礼下贤者，日中不暇食以待士，士以此多归之。
现代文：对贤能之人以礼相待，为了接待贤士，有时到了中午都顾不上吃饭，士人因此都归附他。
English: In order to receive the sages, he sometimes does not have time to eat at noon, so the sages are attached to him.

古文：伯夷、叔齐在孤竹，闻西伯善养老，盍往归之。
现代文：伯夷、叔齐在孤竹国，听说西伯很是会敬重赡养老人，就一同前往归附于西伯。
English: Bo Yi and Uncle Qi were in Lone Bamboo Country, and they heard that Xibe would respect and support the elderly, so they went to join Xibe together.

古文：太颠、闳夭、散宜生、鬻子、辛甲大夫之徒皆往归之。
现代文：太颠、闳夭、散宜生、鬻子、辛甲大夫等人也都去归顺了他。
English: Taibing, Qiao Yao, San Yisheng, Zizi, Xinjia Dafu and others also went to submit to him.

古文：崇侯虎谮西伯於殷纣曰： 西伯积善累德，诸侯皆向之，将不利於帝。 
现代文：崇侯虎在殷纣王面前讲西伯的坏话说： 西伯积德行善，诸侯都归顺于他，将会对您不利。 
English: In front of King Yin, Chong Houhu spoke ill of Xibe, saying, "Xibe has accumulated virtue and done good deeds, and all the princes have submitted to him, which will be unfavorable to you."

古文：帝纣乃囚西伯於羑里。
现代文：于是殷纣把西伯囚禁在羑里。
English: So Yin Xuan imprisoned Xibe in the tower.

古文：闳夭之徒患之。乃求有莘氏美女，骊戎之文马，有熊九驷，他奇怪物，因殷嬖臣费仲而献之纣。
现代文：闳夭等人很担忧西伯，想尽办法寻求来了有莘氏的美女，骊戎地区的彩色骏马，有熊国出产的九辆马车，以及其他种种奇珍异宝，通过殷商的宠臣费仲进献给纣王。
English: Xiao Yao and others were very worried about Xibe, and tried their best to find a beautiful woman from the Xiong clan, a colorful horse from the Xiong Rong region, nine horse-drawn carriages from Xiong Guo, and other treasures, which were dedicated to the King of Xiong through Fei Zhongjin, the favorite of the merchants.

古文：纣大说，曰： 此一物足以释西伯，况其多乎！ 
现代文：纣王非常高兴，说： 这里面的任何一件东西都足够让我释放西伯了，何况还有这么其他的好东西呢！ 
English: The Skull King was very pleased and said, "Any one of these things would be enough for me to free Xibe, let alone all the other good things!"

古文：乃赦西伯，赐之弓矢斧钺，使西伯得征伐。
现代文：于是赦免了西伯，赐给他弓箭斧钺，让西伯有征讨临近的诸侯的权利。
English: So he pardoned Sibyl, and gave him a bow, and arrows, and an axe, and a javelin, so that Sibyl might have the right to invade the neighbouring kingdoms.

古文：曰： 谮西伯者，崇侯虎也。 
现代文：纣王告诉西伯说： 陷害西伯的人，是崇侯虎。 
English: Shao Wang told Xi Bo that: The person who framed Xi Bo was Chong Houhu.

古文：西伯乃献洛西之地，以请纣去砲格之刑。
现代文：西伯回国之后就献出洛水以西的土地，请求纣废除炮烙的刑法。
English: After Xibe returned to China, he donated the land west of Luoshui and requested that the criminal law of cannon fire be abolished.

古文：纣许之。
现代文：纣答应了他。
English: He agreed.

古文：西伯阴行善，诸侯皆来决平。
现代文：西伯暗自行善，诸侯都来请他裁决是非。
English: Xibo secretly did good on his own, and the lords came to ask him to adjudicate between right and wrong.

古文：於是虞、芮之人有狱不能决，乃如周。
现代文：当时虞、芮两国的人有讼事不能裁决，故前往周。
English: At that time, there was a dispute between the two countries that could not be adjudicated, so he went to Zhou.

古文：入界，耕者皆让畔，民俗皆让长。
现代文：他们进入周的境界，看到种田的人都互让田界，人民都以谦让长者为美德。
English: They entered the realm of Zhou, and saw that people who farmed gave up their fields to each other, and that the people regarded it as a virtue to be humble and yield to their elders.

古文：虞、芮之人未见西伯，皆惭，相谓曰： 吾所争，周人所耻，何往为，祇取辱耳。 
现代文：虞、芮两国的人还没见到西伯，已觉惭愧，相互说： 我们所争的，正是周人所耻，还去干什么，去了只是自取羞辱罢了。 
English: The people of the two countries, Yu and Zou, had not yet seen Xibe, but they were already ashamed and said to each other: What we are fighting for is exactly what Zhou is ashamed of, what else are we going to do, we only went there to humiliate ourselves.

古文：遂还，俱让而去。
现代文：于是返回，互相谦让而去。
English: So they returned and went their separate ways.

古文：诸侯闻之，曰 西伯盖受命之君 。
现代文：诸侯听说，都说： 西伯当是受有上天之命的君主。 
English: When the princes heard of it, they all said, "Sipadan is a sovereign who has received a mandate from heaven.

古文：明年，伐犬戎。
现代文：第二年，西伯征伐犬戎。
English: The following year, the Xibe Conquest of the Dogs of the Forest began.

古文：明年，伐密须。
现代文：下一年，征伐密须。
English: The following year, the conquest of Mysu.

古文：明年，败耆国。
现代文：又下年，打败耆国。
English: The following year, they beat the Republic of Korea.

古文：殷之祖伊闻之，惧，以告帝纣。
现代文：殷朝的祖伊听说了，非常害怕，把这些情况报告给纣王。
English: When Zui of the Yin Dynasty heard about this, he was very afraid and reported the situation to the king of Qin.

古文：纣曰： 不有天命乎？
现代文：纣王说： 不是有天命助我吗？
English: The king said, "Isn't there a destiny to help me?"

古文：是何能为！ 
现代文：他能怎么样！ 
English: What can he do!

古文：明年，伐邘。
现代文：次年，西伯征伐邘。
English: The following year, the West Siberian Logging Expedition began.

古文：明年，伐崇侯虎。
现代文：次年，征伐崇侯虎。
English: The following year, the subjugation of the Chongwu Tiger began.

古文：而作丰邑，自岐下而徙都丰。
现代文：营建了丰邑，从岐下迁都到丰。
English: He built Fengyi and moved the capital from Qishimo to Feng.

古文：明年，西伯崩，太子发立，是为武王。
现代文：次年，西伯逝世，太子发登位，这就是武王。
English: The following year, Xibe passed away, and the crown prince ascended to the throne. This was King Wu.

古文：西伯盖即位五十年。
现代文：西伯大概在位五十年。
English: Zebah reigned for about fifty years.

古文：其囚羑里，盖益易之八卦为六十四卦。
现代文：当他被囚禁在羑里的时候，大概曾把《易》的八卦增为六十四卦。
English: When he was imprisoned in Yili, he probably increased the number of gossip in Yi to 64 gossips.

古文：诗人道西伯，盖受命之年称王而断虞芮之讼。
现代文：从《诗》的作者对西伯的称颂看，大概西伯就是在那一年受命称王，裁决虞、芮两国讼事。
English: Judging from the praise of the author of the "Poem" to Sibyl, it was probably in that year that Sibyl was ordered to proclaim himself king and adjudicate the disputes between the two countries.

古文：後十年而崩，谥为文王。
现代文：十年后去世，谥号是文王。
English: He died ten years later, and his nickname was King Wen.

古文：改法度，制正朔矣。
现代文：他曾改变了殷的律法制度，制定了历法。
English: He changed the Yin legal system and established a new calendar.

古文：追尊古公为太王，公季为王季：盖王瑞自太王兴。
现代文：曾追尊古公为太王，公季为王季：大概是说帝王的瑞兆是从太王时开始的。
English: There was a time when the ancient emperor was revered as the great king, and the emperor was revered as the king: it is probably said that the auspiciousness of the emperor began when he was the great king.

古文：武王即位，太公望为师，周公旦为辅，召公、毕公之徒左右王，师脩文王绪业。
现代文：武王即位，太公望任太师，周公旦做辅相，召公、毕公一班人辅佐武王，遵循文王的遗业。
English: King Wu ascended to the throne, Taigongwang was appointed as Taishi, Zhou Gongdan was appointed as assistant minister, Zhao Gong and Bi Gong a group of people assisted King Wu, following the legacy of King Wen.

古文：九年，武王上祭于毕。东观兵，至于盟津。
现代文：武王受命第九年，武王先在毕祭祀文王，然后前往东方举行阅兵，到达盟津。
English: In the ninth year of King Wu's appointment, King Wu first offered a sacrifice to King Wen in Bi, and then went to the East to hold a military parade, arriving at Mengjin.

古文：为文王木主，载以车，中军。
现代文：设文王的木主，用车子运载，供在中军帐中。
English: The owner of the wood, identified as Wen Wang, transported it by car and offered it to the Chinese military.

古文：武王自称太子发，言奉文王以伐，不敢自专。
现代文：武王自称太子发，表示是以文王的名义征伐，不敢独断专行。
English: King Wu claimed to be the crown prince, and said that he was leading a campaign in the name of King Wen, and that he did not dare to act arbitrarily.

古文：乃告司马、司徒、司空、诸节： 齐栗，信哉！
现代文：他向司马、司徒、司空等受王命执符节的官员宣告： 要小心谨慎，说到做到！
English: He declared to Sima, Sitou, Sikuo and other officials who were ordered by the king to hold the festival: Be careful, do what you say!

古文：予无知，以先祖有德臣，小子受先功，毕立赏罚，以定其功。 
现代文：我本是无知之人，只因先祖有德行，我承受了先人的功业。现在已制定了各种赏罚制度，来确保完成祖先的功业。 
English: I am an ignorant person, but because of the virtues of my ancestors, I have inherited the merits of my ancestors. Now, various reward and punishment systems have been established to ensure the accomplishment of the ancestors' merits.

古文：遂兴师。
现代文：于是发兵。
English: So they sent in the troops.

古文：师尚父号曰： 总尔众庶，与尔舟楫，後至者斩。 
现代文：师尚父下令说： 集合起你们的部下，把好船桨，迟到者一律斩杀。 
English: Master Shang ordered, "Gather your subordinates, take the good oars, and kill everyone who is late."

古文：武王渡河，中流，白鱼跃入王舟中，武王俯取以祭。
现代文：武王渡黄河，船到达河的中央，有白鱼跳进武王的船中，武王俯身拾起它用来祭祀。
English: King Wu crossed the Yellow River. When the boat reached the middle of the river, a white fish jumped into King Wu's boat. King Wu bent down and picked up the fish to offer as a sacrifice.

古文：既渡，有火自上复于下，至于王屋，流为乌，其色赤，其声魄云。
现代文：渡过河之后，有一个火团从天而降，落在武王的屋顶上，凝固成乌鸦状，赤红的颜色，发出魄魄的鸣声。
English: After crossing the river, a ball of fire fell from the sky, landed on the roof of King Wu, solidified into a crow-like, reddish color, and emitted a bold singing sound.

古文：是时，诸侯不期而会盟津者八百诸侯。
现代文：当时，诸侯不约而同前来盟津会盟的有八百诸侯。
English: At that time, there were eight hundred lords who came to join the alliance.

古文：诸侯皆曰： 纣可伐矣。 
现代文：诸侯都说： 纣可以伐了。 
English: The lords all said, "The yakitori can be cut."

古文：武王曰： 女未知天命，未可也。 
现代文：武王说： 你们还不了解天命，现在还不行。 
English: King Wu said, "You still don't understand the Mandate of Heaven. You can't do it now.

古文：乃还师归。
现代文：于是率领军队回去了。
English: So he led his army back.

古文：居二年，闻纣昏乱暴虐滋甚，杀王子比干，囚箕子。
现代文：过了两年，听说纣昏乱暴虐更甚于前，杀死了王子比干，囚禁了箕子。
English: After two years had passed, it was learned that Yao had become even more violent than before, killing Prince Bi Gan and imprisoning Yao Zi.

古文：太师疵、少师彊抱其乐器而饹周。
现代文：太师疵、少师彊抱着他们的乐器逃到了周国。
English: Taishigaki and Shoshigaki fled to Zhou with their instruments in their arms.

古文：於是武王遍告诸侯曰： 殷有重罪，不可以不毕伐。 
现代文：这时武王才向所有的诸侯宣告说： 殷王罪恶深重，不可不合力讨伐！ 
English: At this time, King Wu declared to all the princes: "King Yin's crimes are serious, we must fight together!"

古文：乃遵文王，遂率戎车三百乘，虎贲三千人，甲士四万五千人，以东伐纣。
现代文：于是遵循文王的遗旨，率领战车三百辆，勇士三千人，披甲战士四万五千人，东进伐纣。
English: Therefore, he followed the last wishes of King Wen and led three hundred chariots, three thousand warriors, and forty-five thousand armored soldiers to march eastward.

古文：十一年十二月戊午，师毕渡盟津，诸侯咸会。
现代文：第十一年十二月戊午日，军队全部渡过盟津，诸侯都来会合。
English: On the afternoon of the eleventh day of the twelfth month, the army had all passed through Meitsu, and the lords came to meet.

古文：曰： 孳孳无怠！ 
现代文：武王说： 要勤勤恳恳，不可懈怠呀！ 
English: King Wu said: "Be diligent and do not slack off!

古文：武王乃作太誓，告于众庶： 今殷王纣乃用其妇人之言，自绝于天，毁坏其三正，离逷其王父母弟，乃断弃其先祖之乐，乃为淫声，用变乱正声，怡说妇人。
现代文：武王因而作《太誓》，向众人宣告： 现在殷王纣竟然听信妻妾之言，自绝于上天，违背日、月、北斗的运行，疏远自己的同祖兄弟，竟然废弃其先祖的音乐，敢采用淫乱的音乐去窜改典雅的音乐，以取悦于他的妻妾。
English: As a result, King Wu made the "Great Oath" and announced to everyone: Now, King Yin has listened to the words of his wife and concubine, renounced heaven, violated the movement of the sun, the moon, and the Big Dipper, alienated his cousins, abandoned the music of his ancestors, and dared to use lewd music to change classical music to please his wife and concubine.

古文：故今予发维共行天罚。
现代文：所以现在我发要恭敬地执行上天的惩罚。
English: So now I'm going to respectfully carry out heaven's punishment.

古文：勉哉夫子，不可再，不可三！ 
现代文：要努力呀，男子汉们，不能有第二战，更不能有第三战！ 
English: Let's work hard, men, there can't be a second war, let alone a third!

古文：二月甲子昧爽，武王朝至于商郊牧野，乃誓。
现代文：二月甲子日的凌晨，武王一早就来到商郊牧野，举行誓师。
English: In the early morning of the first day of February, King Wu came to the commercial suburb of Makino early in the morning to hold the oath ceremony.

古文：武王左杖黄钺，右秉白旄，以麾。
现代文：武王左手拿着黄色的钺，右手握着以白色旄牛尾为饰的旗，用来指挥。
English: King Wu holds a yellow scepter in his left hand and a flag decorated with a white yakitori in his right hand, which is used for command.

古文：曰： 远矣西土之人！ 武王曰： 嗟！
现代文：说： 辛苦了，西方来的将士们！ 武王说： 啊!
English: He said, "Well done, soldiers from the West!" King Wu said, "Ah!

古文：我有国冢君，司徒、司马、司空，亚旅、师氏，千夫长、百夫长，及庸、蜀、羌、髳、微、纑、彭、濮人，称尔戈，比尔干，立尔矛，予其誓。 
现代文：我的友邦的国君们，司徒、司马、司空、亚旅、师氏各位卿大夫们，千夫长、百夫长各位将领们，还有庸人、蜀人、羌人、鬃人、微人、人、彭人、濮人，高举你们的戈，排齐你们的盾，竖起你们的矛，让我们来发誓! 
English: Sovereigns of my friendly countries, Shtu, Sima, Sku, A-trab, Shih, Lords, Doctors, Chieftains, Centurions, Generals, as well as Yonin, Shu, Yao, Yao, Wei, Yao, Peng, Yao, lift up your swords, line up your shields, raise your spears, and let us swear!

古文：王曰： 古人有言 牝鸡无晨。
现代文：武王说： 古人有句老话： 母鸡不报晓。
English: King Wu said: There is an old saying among the ancients: The hen does not bring the dawn.

古文：牝鸡之晨，惟家之索 。
现代文：母鸡报晓，就会使家毁败。 
English: When the hen crows, the house falls.

古文：今殷王纣维妇人言是用，自弃其先祖肆祀不答，昬弃其家国，遗其王父母弟不用，乃维四方之多罪逋逃是崇是长，是信是使，俾暴虐于百姓，以奸轨于商国。
现代文：如今殷王纣只听妇人之言，废弃祭祀祖先的事不加过问，放弃国家大政，抛开亲族兄弟不予任用，却纠合四方罪恶多端的逃犯，抬高他们，尊重他们，信任他们，使用他们，让他们欺压百姓，在商国为非作歹。
English: Nowadays, Yin Wangtao only listens to the words of women, abandons the matter of sacrificing ancestors without asking questions, abandons national politics, and does not appoint relatives and brothers. However, he corrects the evildoers in the four directions, elevates them, respects them, trusts them, uses them, and allows them to oppress the people and commit crimes in Shangguo.

古文：今予发维共行天之罚。
现代文：现在我姬发恭敬地执行上天的惩罚。
English: Now I humbly carry out Heaven's punishment.

古文：今日之事，不过六步七步，乃止齐焉，夫子勉哉！
现代文：今天我们作战，每前进六步七步，就停下来齐整队伍，大家一定要努力呀!
English: Today we are fighting, every six or seven steps forward, we stop to form a line, everyone must work hard!

古文：不过於四伐五伐六伐七伐，乃止齐焉，勉哉夫子！
现代文：刺击过四五次、六七次，就停下来齐整队伍，努力吧，各位将士!
English: After stabbing four, five, six or seven times, stop and form a line. Work hard, soldiers!

古文：尚桓桓，如虎如罴，如豺如离，于商郊，不御克饹，以役西土，勉哉夫子！
现代文：希望大家威风勇武，像猛虎，像熊罴，像豺狼，像蛟龙。在商都郊外，不要阻止前来投降的殷纣士兵，要让他们帮助我们西方诸侯，一定要努力呀，各位将士!
English: I hope that everyone will be bold and brave, like a fierce tiger, like a bear cub, like a wolf, like a dragon. In the suburbs of the commercial capital, do not stop the soldiers who come to surrender, let them help us western princes, we must work hard, fellow soldiers!

古文：尔所不勉，其于尔身有戮。 
现代文：你们谁要是不努力，我将拿他问斩! 
English: If any of you don't work hard, I'll kill you!

古文：誓已，诸侯兵会者车四千乘，陈师牧野。
现代文：誓师完毕，前来会合的诸侯军队，共有战车四千辆，在牧野摆开了阵势。
English: At the end of the oath ceremony, the armies of the feudal lords who had come to the meeting, with a total of four thousand chariots, took up positions in Makino.

古文：帝纣闻武王来，亦发兵七十万人距武王。
现代文：纣王听说武王前来讨伐，也发兵七十万来抵御武王。
English: King Yao heard that King Wu was coming to fight, and he sent 700,000 soldiers to fight against King Wu.

古文：武王使师尚父与百夫致师，以大卒驰帝纣师。
现代文：武王派师尚父率领百名勇士前去挑战，然后他自己率领拥有战车三百五十辆、士卒两万六千二百五十人、勇士三千人的大部队冲进殷纣的军队。
English: King Wu sent his mentor, King Shangdi, to challenge him with a hundred warriors, and then he himself led a large force of three hundred and fifty chariots, twenty-six thousand two hundred and fifty soldiers, and three thousand warriors into Yin Xi's army.

古文：纣师虽众，皆无战之心，心欲武王亟入。
现代文：纣王的军队虽然人多，但都没有作战的意愿，心里只盼着武王的军队赶快攻打进来。
English: Although there were many people in the army of King Min, they did not have the will to fight. They only hoped that the army of King Wu would attack quickly.

古文：纣师皆倒兵以战，以开武王。
现代文：纣王的军队都掉转武器来攻打纣，为武王开路。
English: King Wu's troops all turned their weapons around to attack the dragonfly, clearing the way for King Wu.

古文：武王驰之，纣兵皆崩畔纣。
现代文：武王急驱战车冲进来，纣的军队溃不成军，都背叛了殷纣。
English: Wu Wangyu's chariot rushed in, and Yan's army collapsed and failed to form an army, all of which betrayed Yin Yu.

古文：纣走，反入登于鹿台之上，蒙衣其殊玉，自燔于火而死。
现代文：纣逃跑，返回进入城中，登上鹿台，把他的宝玉都穿戴在身上，投火自焚而死。
English: He ran away, returned to the city, climbed onto the deer terrace, put all his precious jewels on his body, set fire to himself and died.

古文：武王持大白旗以麾诸侯，诸侯毕拜武王，武王乃揖诸侯，诸侯毕从。
现代文：武王手持太白旗指挥诸侯，诸侯都拜向武王，武王也作揖还礼，诸侯全都跟从武王。
English: King Wu marched with a white flag in his hand to command the princes. The princes all bowed to King Wu. King Wu also bowed back. All the princes followed King Wu.

古文：武王至商国，商国百姓咸待於郊。
现代文：武王来到商的都城，城中的百姓都在城郊等待欢迎。
English: King Wu came to the commercial capital, and the people in the city were waiting to welcome him on the outskirts.

古文：於是武王使群臣告语商百姓曰： 上天降休！ 
现代文：于是武王派群臣告诉商的百姓说： 上天将赐福给大家！ 
English: So King Wu sent his courtiers to tell the merchant's people, "Heaven will bless you all!"

古文：商人皆再拜稽首，武王亦答拜。
现代文：商都民众都向武王叩头拜谢，武王也恭敬还礼拜谢。
English: The merchants and the people of the capital all bowed down to King Wu and thanked him. King Wu also respectfully bowed down and thanked him.

古文：遂入，至纣死所。
现代文：于是武王进城，找到纣自焚的地方。
English: So King Wu went to the city and found the place where Yao had set himself on fire.

古文：武王自射之，三发而后下车，以轻剑击之，以黄钺斩纣头，县大白之旗。
现代文：武王亲自发箭射纣的尸体，射了三箭然后走下战车，又用轻吕宝剑刺纣的尸体，用黄色大斧砍下了纣的头，悬挂在大白旗上。
English: King Wu personally shot the body of the dragonfly, shot three arrows and then got off the chariot, and stabbed the body of the dragonfly with a light sword, cut off the dragonfly's head with a big yellow axe, and hung it on the big white flag.

古文：已而至纣之嬖妾二女，二女皆经自杀。
现代文：然后又到纣的两个宠妾那里，发现这两个宠妾都已上吊自杀。
English: He then went to the two mistresses and found that they had both hanged themselves.

古文：武王又射三发，击以剑，斩以玄钺，县其头小白之旗。
现代文：武王又向她们射了三箭，用剑刺击，用黑色的大斧砍下了她们的头，把她们的头挂在小白旗上。
English: King Wu shot three more arrows at them, stabbed them with a sword, cut off their heads with a big black axe, and hung their heads on a small white flag.

古文：武王已乃出复军。
现代文：做完这一切，武王才出城，回到军中。
English: After doing all this, King Wu went out of the city and returned to the army.

古文：其明日，除道，脩社及商纣宫。
现代文：第二天，武王命人清理道路，修整社庙和商纣的宫室。
English: The next day, King Wu ordered people to clean up the roads and repair the shrine and temple and the palace of the merchants.

古文：及期，百夫荷罕旗以先驱。
现代文：到了约好的日子，一百名士兵扛着有飘带的罕旗走在前面。
English: On the appointed day, a hundred soldiers marched ahead, carrying a rare banner with streamers.

古文：武王弟叔振铎奉陈常车，周公旦把大钺，毕公把小钺，以夹武王。
现代文：武王的弟弟叔振铎布护卫并摆列开常车，周公旦手持大钺，毕公手持小钺，夹立在武王的两边。
English: King Wu's younger brother, Uncle Zhen Rong Bu, was escorted by guards and placed in a regular car. Zhou Gongdan, holding a large scepter, and Bi Gong, holding a small scepter, stood on both sides of King Wu.

古文：散宜生、太颠、闳夭皆执剑以卫武王。
现代文：散宜生、太颠、闳夭都持剑环卫武王。
English: Sangisho, Taibetsu, and Soyao are all holding swords to protect King Wu.

古文：既入，立于社南大卒之左，右毕从。
现代文：武王进了城，站在社庙南面大卒的左边，左右的大臣们都跟着他。
English: King Wu entered the city and stood on the left side of the colossal colossus on the south side of the shrine. The ministers on his right and left followed him.

古文：毛叔郑奉明水，卫康叔封布兹，召公奭赞采，师尚父牵牲。
现代文：毛叔郑双手端着明月夜取得的露水，卫康叔封铺开草席，召公奭帮着拿好彩帛，师尚父牵着祭牲。
English: Mao Uncle Zheng held the dew obtained from the bright moon night in his hands, Wei Kang Uncle Feng rolled out the straw mat, called on the public servants to help him hold the good straw mat, and Master Shang father led the sacrificial animal.

古文：尹佚筴祝曰： 殷之末孙季纣，殄废先王明德，侮蔑神祇不祀，昏暴商邑百姓，其章显闻于天皇上帝。 
现代文：尹佚朗读竹简上的祭文说： 殷的末代子孙季纣，废弃先王的美德，蔑视神明，不去祭祀，对商城中的百姓昏乱暴虐，这些事在天帝面前都表现得清清楚楚。 
English: Yin Zhen read aloud the sacrificial text on the bamboo slips and said: Yin's youngest descendant Ji Zhen, abandoned the virtue of the former king, despised the gods, did not go to sacrifice, and brutally abused the people in the commercial city. These things were all clearly demonstrated in front of the heavenly emperor.

古文：於是武王再拜稽首，曰： 膺更大命，革殷，受天明命。 
现代文：于是武王再拜稽首，说： 我承受上天之命，革除殷朝弊政，接受上天降下的光明之命。 
English: Then King Wu bowed his head again and said, "I have received Heaven's command to abolish the evil rule of the Yin Dynasty and accept Heaven's command of light."

古文：武王又再拜稽首，乃出。
现代文：武王又再拜稽首，然后才出城。
English: King Wu bowed his head again before leaving the city.

古文：封商纣子禄父殷之馀民。
现代文：武王把殷的遗民都封给商纣的儿子禄父。
English: King Wu assigned Yin's remaining people to Shangguan's son Luo Zifu.

古文：武王为殷初定未集，乃使其弟管叔鲜、蔡叔度相禄父治殷。
现代文：武王因天下刚刚平定下来，还没有安定和睦，所以派他的弟弟管叔鲜、蔡叔度辅佐禄父治理殷国。
English: Because the country had just been pacified and there was no stability and harmony, King Wu sent his younger brothers, Guan Shuxian and Cai Shudu, to help their father govern Yin.

古文：已而命召公释箕子之囚。
现代文：然后又命令召公放箕子出狱。
English: He then ordered the public executioner to be called out of prison.

古文：命毕公释百姓之囚，表商容之闾。
现代文：命毕公将囚禁的百姓放出狱，表彰商容闾巷的百姓。
English: He ordered Bi Gong to release the imprisoned people from prison, and commended the people of Shang Ronglu Lane.

古文：命南宫括散鹿台之财，发钜桥之粟，以振贫弱萌隶。
现代文：命令南宫括散发聚集在鹿台的钱财和巨桥的粮食，用来赈济贫苦的野人和贱民。
English: He ordered the Southern Court to distribute the money and wealth gathered in Lutetia and the grain from the huge bridge to help the poor savages and untouchables.

古文：命南宫括、史佚展九鼎保玉。
现代文：命令南宫括、史佚搬走殷人的九鼎和宝玉。
English: He ordered Nan Gong Bu and Shi Xuan to take away the Nine Treasures and the Nine Jewels.

古文：命闳夭封比干之墓。
现代文：命闳夭为比干的坟墓培土修缮。
English: He spent the rest of his life digging and repairing graves in Bikaner.

古文：命宗祝享祠于军。
现代文：命令宗祝在军队中祭祀阵亡的将士。
English: He ordered Zongzhu to hold a memorial service for the fallen soldiers in the army.

古文：乃罢兵西归。
现代文：然后撤兵回到西方。
English: They then withdrew back to the west.

古文：行狩，记政事，作武成。
现代文：一路上武王巡视了各个诸侯国，记录下政事，写下了《武成》篇，宣告武灭殷的功业成就。
English: Along the way, King Wu inspected all the principalities, recorded the political affairs, wrote down the "Wu Cheng" chapter, and announced the achievements of Wu Qianyin.

古文：封诸侯，班赐宗彝，作分殷之器物。
现代文：他分封诸侯，将殷的宗庙祭器分别赏赐给他们，写下了《分殷之器物》篇，记录他的命令和诸侯分封所得的器物。
English: He divided the fiefs among the lords and gave them the Yin ancestral temple ritual vessels separately, and wrote down the "Division of Yin's Vessels" chapter, recording his orders and the vessels received by the lords.

古文：武王追思先圣王，乃襃封神农之後於焦，黄帝之後於祝，帝尧之後於蓟，帝舜之後於陈，大禹之後於杞。
现代文：武王追思古代的圣王，因此表彰嘉封神农的后代在焦，嘉封黄帝的后代在祝，嘉封帝尧的后代在蓟，嘉封帝舜的后代在陈，嘉封大禹的后代在杞。
English: King Wu thought back to the ancient holy kings, so the descendants of Jiafeng Shennong were commended in Jiao, the descendants of Jiafeng Huangdi were commended in Zhu, the descendants of Jiafeng Dizhao were commended in Zhou, the descendants of Jiafeng Dizhao were commended in Chen, and the descendants of Jiafeng Dayu were commended in Zhou.

古文：於是封功臣谋士，而师尚父为首封。
现代文：接着又封功臣谋士，而师尚父是被封的第一个。
English: Next, he was awarded the title of meritorious adviser, while his mentor, Shang Fu, was the first to be awarded the title.

古文：封尚父於营丘，曰齐。
现代文：武王封尚父于营丘，国号齐。
English: Wu Wang Feng Shangfu in Yingqiu, the country names are the same.

古文：封其弟周公旦於曲阜，曰鲁。
现代文：封他的弟弟同公旦于曲阜，国号鲁。
English: He placed his younger brother Tong Gongdan in Qufu, with the country name Ru.

古文：封召公奭於燕。
现代文：封召公奭于燕。
English: The call to public service went out to Yan.

古文：封弟叔鲜於管，弟叔度於蔡。
现代文：封他的弟弟叔鲜于管，封他的弟叔度于蔡。
English: His younger brother and uncle were placed under control, and his younger brother and uncle were placed under Tsai.

古文：馀各以次受封。
现代文：其他人也都依次受封。
English: The others were also knighted in turn.

古文：武王徵九牧之君，登豳之阜，以望商邑。
现代文：武王征集召见九州的长官，登上豳的高地，遥望商的都城。
English: King Wu conscripted and summoned the governors of Kyushu, ascended the rugged highlands, and gazed at the merchant capital from afar.

古文：武王至于周，自夜不寐。
现代文：武王回到周，晚上总是睡不着。
English: When King Wu returned to Zhou, he could not sleep at night.

古文：周公旦即王所，曰： 曷为不寐？ 
现代文：周公旦来到王的住处，问： 您为什么睡不着呢？ 
English: Zhou Gongdan came to Wang's residence and asked: Why can't you sleep?

古文：王曰： 告女：维天不飨殷，自发未生於今六十年，麋鹿在牧，蜚鸿满野。
现代文：武王说： 告诉你：都只因为上天不受享殷的祭贡，从我姬发还没生下来到现在六十年，远郊一带到处是野兽和害虫。
English: King Wu said, "I'll tell you, it's all because Heaven doesn't enjoy the heavenly tribute. For the past sixty years since I was born, there have been beasts and pests all over the countryside.

古文：天不享殷，乃今有成。
现代文：上天不再受享殷的祭贡，所以才有我们今天的成功。
English: Heaven no longer enjoys Yin's tribute, so we have today's success.

古文：维天建殷，其登名民三百六十夫，不显亦不宾灭，以至今。
现代文：上天建立了殷国，殷任用能人贤士有三百六十人，虽然没有做出明显的政绩，但是也没有让殷灭亡，所以殷才维持到了今天。
English: God established the Kingdom of Yin. Yin appointed 360 able men and sages. Although they did not make any obvious political achievements, they did not let Yin perish, so Yin has been maintained to this day.

古文：我未定天保，何暇寐！ 
现代文：我还没有真正得到上天的保佑，哪有闲暇时间睡觉！ 
English: I haven't really been blessed with any leisure time to sleep!

古文：王曰： 定天保，依天室，悉求夫恶，贬从殷王受。
现代文：武王说： 如果想真正得到上天的庇佑，就要依靠太室山，把不知天命的作恶之人全部找出来，贬黜了他们，与殷王受同样的罪。
English: King Wu said, "If you really want to be blessed by heaven, you must rely on Mt. Taimuro to find out all the evil-doers who do not know the fate of heaven, denounce them, and suffer the same sin as King Yin."

古文：日夜劳来定我西土，我维显服，及德方明。
现代文：要日夜勤勉努力，保证安定好西方国土，我要克尽职守做好各项事务，直到我们的德行在四方发扬光大。
English: It is necessary to work diligently day and night to ensure the stability of the western land. I must do my duty and do a good job in all matters until our virtue is carried forward in the four directions.

古文：自洛汭延于伊汭，居易毋固，其有夏之居。
现代文：从洛水拐弯处一直到伊水拐弯处，人们安居在这里的平坦之处而非险隘之处，这是夏人的活动中心。
English: From the Luoshui Curve all the way to the Yishui Curve, people live in a flat place rather than a narrow place, which is the activity center of the summer people.

古文：我南望三涂，北望岳鄙，顾詹有河，粤詹雒、伊，毋远天室。 
现代文：我向南面可以望见三涂山，向北面可以望见太行山，回首可以看见黄河，又仔细观察了雒水、伊水，这里离天帝的居室不远。 
English: To the south, I can see Mount Santu, to the north, I can see Mount Taihang, and looking back, I can see the Yellow River. I also carefully observed Surabaya and Yishui, which are not far from the Emperor's bedroom.

古文：营周居于雒邑而後去。
现代文：于是在雒邑策划营建周城，然后离去。
English: So he planned the construction of Zhoucheng in Zouyi, and then left.

古文：纵马於华山之阳，放牛於桃林之虚；偃干戈，振兵释旅：示天下不复用也。
现代文：在华山南面放养马匹，在桃林一带放养牛，让军队放倒武器，整顿军队后解散军队：向天下民众表示不再用兵。
English: Stock horses in the south of Huashan Mountain, stock cattle in the Taolin area, let the army put down weapons, reorganize the army and disband the army: to the people of the world that they would no longer use soldiers.

古文：武王已克殷，後二年，问箕子殷所以亡。
现代文：武王战胜殷朝之后二年，向箕子询问殷朝灭亡的原因。
English: Two years after King Wu defeated the Yin Dynasty, he asked Zizi about the reasons for the downfall of the Yin Dynasty.

古文：箕子不忍言殷恶，以存亡国宜告。
现代文：箕子不忍心说殷朝的罪恶，就向武王讲述了国家存亡道理。
English: Xun Zi could not bear to talk about the evils of the Yin Dynasty, so he told King Wu about the principle of national survival.

古文：武王亦丑，故问以天道。
现代文：武王也觉得不太好意思，所以又转而询问了天道。
English: King Wu also felt embarrassed, so he turned to inquire about the Heaven Realm.

古文：武王病。
现代文：武王病重。
English: King Wu is seriously ill.

古文：天下未集，群公惧，穆卜，周公乃祓斋，自为质，欲代武王，武王有瘳。
现代文：而这时天下尚未统一，众公卿们都很害怕，进行 穆卜 ；周公因而祓除斋戒，自愿作替身，想代替武王承受灾疾，武王的病渐渐有了好转。
English: At that time, the whole world was not yet unified, and all the nobles were very afraid, and they were performing "Mubo"; Zhou Gong thus exorcised the fast, volunteered to be a stand-in, and wanted to replace King Wu to suffer from the disaster, and King Wu's illness gradually improved.

古文：後而崩，太子诵代立，是为成王。
现代文：后来武王死了，太子诵继承了王位，就是成王。
English: Later, King Wu died, and Prince Qiao inherited the throne, that is, he became king.

古文：成王少，周初定天下，周公恐诸侯畔周，公乃摄行政当国。
现代文：成王幼小，周刚刚平定天下，周公担心诸侯背叛周，就代理成王管理政务，主持国事。
English: Cheng Wang was young, Zhou had just pacified the world, and Zhou Gong was worried that the princes would betray Zhou, so he acted as Cheng Wang to manage government affairs and preside over state affairs.

古文：管叔、蔡叔群弟疑周公，与武庚作乱，畔周。
现代文：管叔、蔡叔等兄弟怀疑周公篡位，联合武庚发动叛乱，背叛周。
English: Guan Xiu, Cai Xiu and other brothers suspected Zhou Gong of usurping the throne, and jointly launched a rebellion with Wu Geng to betray Zhou.

古文：周公奉成王命，伐诛武庚、管叔，放蔡叔。
现代文：周公奉成王之命，诛杀了武庚、管叔，流放了蔡叔。
English: Zhou Gong, on the orders of King Cheng, killed Wu Geng and Uncle Guan, and exiled Uncle Cai.

古文：以微子开代殷後，国於宋。
现代文：让微子开继承殷朝的后嗣，在宋地建国。
English: Let Micron Zi Kai inherit the heirs of the Yin Dynasty and build a country in the Song Dynasty.

古文：颇收殷馀民，以封武王少弟封为卫康叔。
现代文：又稍稍收聚了殷朝的遗民，封给武王的小弟弟封，让他做了卫康叔。
English: He also gathered the remnants of the Yin Dynasty, and gave the seal to King Wu's little brother, making him Wei Kang's uncle.

古文：晋唐叔得嘉穀，献之成王，成王以归周公于兵所。
现代文：晋唐叔获得吉祥的谷穗，献给成王，成王把它送到周公的驻兵之地。
English: Uncle Jin Tang received an auspicious ear of corn, dedicated to Cheng Wang, who sent it to Zhou Gong's garrison.

古文：周公受禾东土，鲁天子之命。
现代文：周公在东方受此吉祥的谷穗，颂扬了天子赐禾谷的圣命。
English: Zhou Gong received this auspicious ear of corn in the East and praised the sacred life of the grain given by the Son of Heaven.

古文：初，管、蔡畔周，周公讨之，三年而毕定，故初作大诰，次作微子之命，次归禾，次嘉禾，次康诰、酒诰、梓材，其事在周公之篇。
现代文：起初，管叔、蔡叔背叛了周朝，周公前去讨伐，经过三年时间才彻底平定，所以先写下了《大诰》，向天下陈述东征讨伐叛逆的大道理;接着又写下了《微子之命》，封命微子继续殷后;写下了《归禾》、《嘉禾》，记述和颂扬天子赠送嘉禾;写下《康诰》、《酒诰》、《梓材》，下令封康叔于殷，训诫他戒除嗜酒，教给他为政之道。
English: At first, Uncle Guan and Uncle Cai betrayed the Zhou Dynasty, and Zhou Gong went to the crusade, and it took three years to completely subdue them. Therefore, he first wrote the "Great Dragonfly," stating to the world the great principle of the crusade against the rebellion; then he wrote the "Life of the Microbe," and the microbe continued to be sealed after Yin; wrote the "Return to the Heavens," "Jiahe," describing and praising the heavenly gift of Jiahe; wrote the "Hanging," "Wine" and "Zi Zai," and ordered the sealing of Uncle Kang in Yin, admonishing him to abstain

古文：周公行政七年，成王长，周公反政成王，北面就群臣之位。
现代文：那些事件的经过记载在《鲁周公世家》中。周公代行国政七年，成王长大成人，周公把政权交还给成王，自己又回到群臣的行列中去。
English: The course of those events is recorded in "The Family of Lu Zhou Gong." Zhou Gong carried out state affairs for seven years, Cheng Wang became an adult, Zhou Gong returned power to Cheng Wang, and he himself returned to the ranks of ministers.

古文：成王在丰，使召公复营洛邑，如武王之意。
现代文：成王住在丰邑，派召公再次规划测量洛邑，以完成武王的遗愿。
English: Cheng Wang lived in Fengyi, and sent a summoner to plan and measure Luoyang again to fulfill King Wu's last wish.

古文：周公复卜申视，卒营筑，居九鼎焉。
现代文：周公再次卜问勘察，终于动工营建，把九鼎安放在那里。
English: Zhou Gong once again inquired and surveyed, and finally started construction and placed Jiuding there.

古文：曰： 此天下之中，四方入贡道里均。 
现代文：他说： 这里是天下的中心，四方进贡，路程都一样。 
English: He said, "This is the center of the world. Tribute is paid in all directions, and the distance is the same.

古文：作召诰、洛诰。
现代文：因而作《召诰》、《洛诰》。
English: Therefore, he wrote "Call" and "Lotus."

古文：成王既迁殷遗民，周公以王命告，作多士、无佚。
现代文：成王把殷朝遗民迁徙到那里，周公向他们宣布了成王的命令，写下了训诫殷民的《多士》、《无佚》。
English: Cheng Wang moved the remnants of the Yin Dynasty to there. Zhou Gong announced Cheng Wang's order to them, and wrote "Toshi" and "Mujing" to admonish the Yin people.

古文：召公为保，周公为师，东伐淮夷，残奄，迁其君薄姑。
现代文：召公担任太保，周公担任太师，东伐淮夷，灭奄国，把他们的国君迁到薄姑。
English: Zhaogong served as Taibo, Zhou Gong as Taishi, Dongba Huaiyi, and Zhimao, and moved their sovereigns to Bo Gu.

古文：成王自奄归，在宗周，作多方。
现代文：成王从奄国回来，在宗周写下了《多方》，告诫天下诸侯。
English: Cheng Wang returned from Amakuni and wrote "Many Ways" in Zong Zhou, admonishing the world's lords.

古文：既绌殷命，袭淮夷，归在丰，作周官。兴正礼乐，度制於是改，而民和睦，颂声兴。
现代文：成王消灭了殷朝的残余势力，袭击了淮夷，回到丰邑，写下了《周官》，说明周朝设官分职用人之法，重新规定了礼仪，谱制了音乐，法令、制度这时也都进行了修改，百姓和睦、太平，颂歌四处兴起。
English: Cheng Wang eliminated the residual forces of the Yin Dynasty, attacked Huaiyi, returned to Fengyi, wrote "Zhou Official," explained the law of the Zhou Dynasty on the appointment of officials, re-established the etiquette, composed music, and the laws and systems were also revised at this time. The people were harmonious and peaceful, and carols arose everywhere.

古文：成王既伐东夷，息慎来贺，王赐荣伯作贿息慎之命。
现代文：成王征伐东夷之后，息慎前来祝贺，成王命荣伯作《贿息慎之命》。
English: After Cheng Wang's conquest of the Eastern Yi, Xi Sheng came to congratulate him. Cheng Wang wrote "The Life of Xi Sheng."

古文：成王将崩，惧太子钊之不任，乃命召公、毕公率诸侯以相太子而立之。
现代文：成王临终，害怕太子钊不能很好处理国事，便命召公、毕公率诸侯共同辅佐太子使之即位。
English: On the deathbed of King Cheng, fearing that the crown prince could not handle the affairs of state well, he ordered the prince, Bi Gong and the princes to jointly assist the crown prince to succeed to the throne.

古文：成王既崩，二公率诸侯，以太子钊见於先王庙，申告以文王、武王之所以为王业之不易，务在节俭，毋多欲，以笃信临之，作顾命。
现代文：成王逝世后，召公、毕公率诸侯，带太子钊拜谒先王的宗庙，用文王、武王开创周朝王业的艰难反复告诫太子，要他一定力行节俭，戒除贪欲，专心办理国政，写下了《顾命》，要求大臣们辅佐关照太子钊。
English: After the death of King Cheng, he summoned the princes and Bi Gong to lead the princes, and took the prince to pay homage to the ancestral temple of the previous king, and repeatedly warned the prince with the difficulties of King Wen and King Wu to create the royal career of the Zhou Dynasty, and asked him to be frugal, abstain from greed, and concentrate on handling national affairs. He wrote "Care for Life" and asked the ministers to assist in taking care of the prince.

古文：太子钊遂立，是为康王。
现代文：太子钊因此即位，这就是康王。
English: As a result, the crown prince ascended to the throne. This was the ascension of King Kang.

古文：康王即位，遍告诸侯，宣告以文武之业以申之，作康诰。
现代文：康王即位，遍告诸侯，反复宣传文王、武王的功业，因而作《康诰》。
English: Kang Wang ascended to the throne, reported to all the princes, and repeatedly publicized the exploits of King Wen and King Wu, thus creating "Kang Xuan Wu."

古文：故成康之际，天下安宁，刑错四十馀年不用。
现代文：所以成、康两王时，天下安宁，刑罚弃置不用达四十多年。
English: Therefore, during the reigns of King Cheng and King Kang, the world was at peace, and there was no need to abandon the punishment for more than forty years.

古文：康王命作策毕公分居里，成周郊，作毕命。
现代文：康王命作策毕公规划分别百姓居所，划定周都郊区，因而作《毕命》。
English: Kang Wang made a plan to divide the people's residences and delineate the suburbs around the capital, and thus made "Divided Lives."

古文：康王卒，子昭王瑕立。
现代文：康王去世后，他的儿子昭王瑕即位。
English: After the death of King Kang, his son Zhaowangke ascended the throne.

古文：昭王之时，王道微缺。
现代文：昭王在位时，王道衰落了。
English: During the reign of King Zhao, the royal road fell into decline.

古文：昭王南巡狩不返，卒於江上。
现代文：昭王到南方巡狩未能回来，死在江上。
English: King Zhao went on a hunting tour to the south, but failed to return and died on the river.

古文：其卒不赴告，讳之也。
现代文：死了也不告丧，是想掩饰。
English: He didn't announce his death, he tried to cover it up.

古文：立昭王子满，是为穆王。
现代文：于是立昭王之子满，这就是穆王。
English: As a result, the son of King Zhao was named Man, which is King Mu.

古文：穆王即位，春秋已五十矣。
现代文：穆王即位的时候，已经五十岁了。
English: When King Mu ascended the throne, he was already fifty years old.

古文：王道衰微，穆王闵文武之道缺，乃命伯申诫太仆国之政，作命。
现代文：当时王道衰败，穆王痛惜文王、武王的德政遭到损害，就命令伯冏为太仆并反复告诫要管理好国家政事，作《臩命》。
English: At that time, the royal road was in decline, and King Mu deplored the damage to the moral government of King Wen and King Wu. He ordered Bo Xuan to be the eunuch and repeatedly admonished him to manage the country's political affairs well, and to write "Fighting for Life."

古文：复宁。
现代文：天下才又重新安宁。
English: Only then did peace return to the world.

古文：穆王将征犬戎，祭公谋父谏曰： 不可。
现代文：穆王准备攻打犬戎，祭公谋父劝谏说： 不可以。
English: King Mu was preparing to attack Injun Rong, but his father, the priest and counsellor, advised him not to.

古文：先王燿德不观兵。
现代文：我们先王都以光耀德行来服人，而不炫耀武力。
English: Our forefathers all served the people with brilliance and virtue, without showing off force.

古文：夫兵戢而时动，动则威，观则玩，玩则无震。
现代文：军队平时蓄积力量，待必要时才出动，一出动就有威力。如果只是炫耀武力，就会漫不经心，漫不经心就没有人惧怕了。
English: In normal times, the military accumulates strength, and only mobilizes when necessary. Once it is mobilized, it has power. If it only shows off force, it will be careless, and no one will be afraid of carelessness.

古文：是故周文公之颂曰： 载戢干戈，载櫜弓矢，我求懿德，肆于时夏，允王保之。 
现代文：所以周文公所作的颂说： 收起盾和戈，藏起弓和箭，我求美德，华夏传遍，圣王诚能保全。 
English: Therefore, the eulogy made by Zhou Wengu said: Put away shields and spears, hide bows and arrows, I pray for virtue, spread throughout China, and the holy king can preserve it.

古文：先王之於民也，茂正其德而厚其性，阜其财求而利其器用，明利害之乡，以文脩之，使之务利而辟害，怀德而畏威，故能保世以滋大。
现代文：先王对待人民，勉励和端正其道德，使其性情敦厚，增加其财产并改良其器物，懂得利害关系所在，用礼法培养他们，教他们趋利避害，心怀仁德而畏惧惩罚，所以能世代相传，子孙蕃昌。
English: The Ancestor King treated the people, encouraged and rectified their morals, strengthened their disposition, increased their property and improved their utensils, understood their interests, cultivated them with etiquette, taught them to seek profit and avoid harm, and feared punishment with benevolence, so that it could be passed down from generation to generation.

古文：昔我先王世后稷以服事虞、夏。
现代文：从前我们的先王世世代代为后稷之官，供职于虞、夏两代。
English: In the past, our forefathers were the officials of the imperial eunuchs for generations, serving the two generations of Yu and Xia.

古文：及夏之衰也，弃稷不务，我先王不窋用失其官，而自窜於戎狄之间。
现代文：待到夏朝衰亡时，废弃农官，不再劝民务农，我们的先王不窋因而失去官职，自己流落于戎狄之间。
English: By the time of the decline and fall of the Xia Dynasty, the agrarian officials had been abandoned, and people were no longer advised to engage in agriculture. As a result, our forefather Wang Fuxi lost his official position, and he himself was exiled among the soldiers.

古文：不敢怠业，时序其德，遵脩其绪，脩其训典，朝夕恪勤，守以敦笃，奉以忠信。
现代文：他不敢懈怠祖先的遗业，继承祖先的德行，遵循祖先的传统，遵行祖先的教训和典法，早晚都敬慎勤勉，以敦厚笃实自持，忠诚老实自奉。
English: He does not dare to slack off the legacy of his ancestors, inherits the virtues of his ancestors, follows the traditions of his ancestors, follows the teachings and classics of his ancestors, is cautious and diligent in the morning and in the evening, is self-supporting with courage and integrity, and is loyal and honest.

古文：奕世载德，不忝前人。
现代文：世世代代崇奉德行，不辱没祖先。
English: From generation to generation, they have been advocating the practice of virtue, and have never disgraced their ancestors.

古文：至于文王、武王，昭前之光明而加之以慈和，事神保民，无不欣喜。
现代文：到了文王和武王，进一步发扬光大前人的业绩，再加上仁慈和睦，敬事神明，保护人民，神民皆大欢喜。
English: When King Wen and King Wu came, they further carried forward the achievements of their illustrious predecessors, combined with benevolence and harmony, respected the gods, and protected the people. The gods and the people were very happy.

古文：商王帝辛大恶于民，庶民不忍，䜣载武王，以致戎于商牧。
现代文：商王帝辛对其人民作恶大甚，庶民忍无可忍，乐意拥戴武王，因而才能干商的牧野列阵而战。
English: Emperor Taishin, the merchant king, did great evil to his people, and the common people could not bear it and gladly supported King Wu, so Makino, who was able to do business, lined up to fight.

古文：是故先王非务武也，劝恤民隐而除其害也。
现代文：所以先王并非有意要去使用武力，而只是因为时刻关怀人民的疾苦，想为民除害。
English: Therefore, the former king did not intend to use force, but only because he was always concerned about the suffering of the people and wanted to eliminate harm for the people.

古文：夫先王之制，邦内甸服，邦外侯服，侯卫宾服，夷蛮要服，戎翟荒服。
现代文：按照先王的制度，邦畿之内是 甸服 ，邦畿之外是 侯服 ，设置侯、卫的地方叫 宾服 ，蛮夷之地叫 要服 ，戎翟之地叫 荒服 。
English: According to the former king's system, within the province of Gyeonggi, it was called "Dianfu," and outside the province of Gyeonggi, it was called "Houfu." The place where "Hou" and "Wei" were set up was called "Binfu," the land of barbarians was called "Koufu," and the land of the military was called "Arafu."

古文：甸服者祭，侯服者祀，宾服者享，要服者贡，荒服者王。日祭，月祀，时享，岁贡，终王。
现代文：属于甸服的要 祭 ，属于侯服的要 祀 ，属于宾服的要 享 ，属于要服的要 贡 ，属于荒服的要 王 。 祭 是以日计， 祀 是以月计， 享 是以季节计， 贡 是以年计， 王 是以终身计。
English: The festival is counted in days, the worship is counted in months, the enjoyment is counted in seasons, the tribute is counted in years, and the king is counted for life.

古文：先王之顺祀也，有不祭则脩意，有不祀则脩言，有不享则脩文，有不贡则脩名，有不王则脩德，序成而有不至则脩刑。
现代文：按照先王的遗训，如果不 祭 就要端正其意志，如果不 祀 就要端正其言辞，如果不 享 就要端正其礼法，如果不 贡 就要端正其名分，如果不 王 就要端正其道德，依次做了而仍不能尽其职守，就要施以刑罚。
English: According to the former king's behest, if he does not sacrifice, he should rectify his will, if he does not worship, he should rectify his words, if he does not enjoy, he should rectify his etiquette, if he does not pay tribute, he should rectify his name, if he is not a king, he should rectify his morality, and if he is unable to perform his duties, he should be punished.

古文：於是有刑不祭，伐不祀，征不享，让不贡，告不王。
现代文：因而才有对不祭者的刑罚，对不祀者的攻伐，对不享者的征讨，对不贡者的谴责，对不王者的告谕天下。
English: As a result, there are punishments for those who do not offer sacrifices, attacks on those who do not worship, campaigns against those who do not enjoy, condemnation of those who do not pay tribute, and a warning to the world for those who do not obey the king.

古文：於是有刑罚之辟，有攻伐之兵，有征讨之备，有威让之命，有文告之辞。
现代文：因而也才有刑罚的各种规定，才有攻伐的各种武器，才有征讨的各种准备，才有严厉谴责的命令，才有大告天下的文辞。
English: That is why there are all kinds of penal provisions, all kinds of weapons for attack, all kinds of preparations for requisition, orders for severe condemnation, and words for denouncing the world.

古文：布令陈辞而有不至，则增脩於德，无勤民於远。
现代文：用命令和文辞宣告而仍然不来述职者，则进一步端正其道德，不必劳民远征。
English: Those who do not come to report for duty, even if they are announced with orders and words, will further rectify their morals and do not have to go on a labor expedition.

古文：是以近无不听，远无不服。
现代文：这样才能使邻近的国家无不听从，远方的国家无不归顺。
English: Only in this way can the neighboring countries obey and the distant countries submit.

古文：今自大毕、伯士之终也，犬戎氏以其职来王，天子曰 予必以不享征之，且观之兵 ，无乃废先王之训，而王几顿乎？
现代文：现在从犬戎氏二君大毕、伯士去世，犬戎氏能世守其职，前来朝拜，而天子却说 我非要按 不享 的罪名加以征讨，而且还要向他们炫耀武力 ，这不是抛弃先王的教训，而使您处于危险境地吗？
English: Now that the two senior princes and nobles of the Inuwakushi clan have passed away, the Inuwakushi clan is able to perform its duties and come to worship, but the Son of Heaven says that I have to charge them with crimes that they are not entitled to, and also show them force. Isn't this abandoning the teachings of the former king and putting you in a dangerous situation?

古文：吾闻犬戎树敦，率旧德而守终纯固，其有以御我矣。 
现代文：我听说犬戎氏提倡敦厚的风气，循前人的德行而能始终如一，他们是有足以抵御我们的东西呀。 
English: I've heard that the Inukura clan promotes a dignified culture, following the virtues of their predecessors and being able to remain consistent. They have what it takes to resist us.

古文：王遂征之，得四白狼四白鹿以归。
现代文：但穆王还是出兵征讨，获取四只白狼和四只白鹿回来。
English: However, King Mu still sent out soldiers to collect four white wolves and four white deer.

古文：自是荒服者不至。
现代文：从这以后，属于荒服的国家就不再来了。
English: Since then, the country, which belonged to the barbarians, no longer comes.

古文：诸侯有不睦者，甫侯言於王，作脩刑辟。
现代文：诸侯各国中有些国家不太和睦，甫侯向穆王报告，于是制定了刑法。
English: Some of the vassal states were not very harmonious, so the vassal reported to the king of Mu, and a criminal code was established.

古文：王曰： 吁，来！
现代文：穆王说： 喂，到我这里来！
English: Mu Wang said: Hey, come to me!

古文：有国有土，告汝祥刑。
现代文：凡是封有国邑和土地的诸侯们，我要告诉给你们如何慎重地使用刑法。
English: To all the lords of the manor and land, I would like to tell you how to use the criminal law prudently.

古文：在今尔安百姓，何择非其人，何敬非其刑，何居非其宜与？
现代文：如今你们要安顿百姓，应选择的难道不是执法人材吗？应尊重的难道不是刑法本身吗？
English: Now that you want to settle the people, isn't it the law enforcement personnel that should be chosen? Isn't it the criminal law itself that should be respected?

古文：两造具备，师听五辞。
现代文：应掌握的难道不是量刑尺度吗？
English: Is it not the scale of punishment that should be grasped?

古文：五辞简信，正於五刑。
现代文：原告和被告都到齐了，士师就要从等 五辞 来观察。
English: Both the plaintiff and the defendant are present, and the judge will observe from a distance.

古文：五刑不简，正於五罚。
现代文：如果犯罪事实够不上 五刑 ，就用 五罚 来定罪。
English: If the facts of the crime do not meet the five punishments, the five punishments will be used to convict.

古文：五罚不服，正於五过。
现代文：如果犯罪事实够不上 五罚 ，被判者不服，就用 五过 来定罪。
English: If the facts of the crime do not meet the five punishments, and the convict is not satisfied, the convict will be convicted with five violations.

古文：五过之疵，官狱内狱，阅实其罪，惟钧其过。
现代文：属于 五过 方面的各种问题，如高官显贵不便诉诸刑庆的各种讼事，要查核其罪，使罪名与过失相当。
English: For all kinds of problems related to the five offenses, such as the inconvenience of high-ranking officials and dignitaries resorting to criminal prosecution, it is necessary to check their crimes and make the crimes and mistakes equivalent.

古文：五刑之疑有赦，五罚之疑有赦，其审克之。
现代文：凡遇该按 五刑 治罪而有疑问不得不赦免的讼事，凡遇该按 五罚 治罪而有疑问不得不赦免的讼事，要仔细查验。
English: In the case of a case that should be punished with five punishments and there is a doubt that it must be pardoned, in the case of a case that should be punished with five punishments and there is a doubt that it must be pardoned, it should be carefully investigated.

古文：简信有众，惟讯有稽。
现代文：取证要从众，审讯要有据。
English: Evidence must be gathered from the public, and evidence must be provided at the trial.

古文：无简不疑，共严天威。
现代文：如果没有充分证据便不能定罪，要知道老天在上。
English: You can't convict someone without sufficient evidence, for heaven's sake.

古文：黥辟疑赦，其罚百率，阅实其罪。
现代文：属于黥刑而不够定罪的，其罚金为一百率，要查核其罪。
English: If the punishment is flogging but not enough to convict, the fine shall be 100 percent, and the crime shall be verified.

古文：劓辟疑赦，其罚倍洒，阅实其罪。
现代文：属于劓刑而不够定罪的，其罚金为前者的两倍，要查核其罪。
English: In the case of flogging without conviction, the fine is twice that of the former, and the crime must be verified.

古文：膑辟疑赦，其罚倍差，阅实其罪。
现代文：属于膑刑而不够定罪的，其罚金为前者的两倍半，要查核其罪。
English: In the case of flogging without conviction, the fine is two and a half times that of the former, and the crime must be verified.

古文：宫辟疑赦，其罚五百率，阅实其罪。
现代文：属于宫刑而不够定罪的，其罚金为五百率，要查核其罪。
English: If it is a palace punishment, but not enough to convict, the fine is five hundred percent, and the crime must be verified.

古文：大辟疑赦，其罚千率，阅实其罪。
现代文：属于大辟之刑而不够定罪的，其罚金为千率，要查核其罪。
English: If a person is sentenced to capital punishment but is not convicted, the fine shall be 1,000% of the fine, and the crime shall be investigated.

古文：墨罚之属千，劓罚之属千，膑罚之属五百，宫罚之属三百，大辟之罚其属二百：五刑之属三千。 
现代文：属于墨刑的罚金条文有上千条，属于劓刑的罚金条文有上千条，属于膑刑的罚金条文有五百条，属于宫刑的罚金条文有三百条，属于大辟之刑的罚金条文有二百条，五种刑罚的有关条文共有三千条。 
English: There are thousands of articles on fines for ink chastisement, thousands of articles on fines for whipping, 500 articles on fines for whipping, 300 articles on fines for palace punishment, 200 articles on fines for beating, and a total of 3,000 articles on five types of punishments.

古文：命曰甫刑。
现代文：被称之为《甫刑》。
English: It was called "The Execution."

古文：穆王立五十五年，崩，子共王繄扈立。
现代文：穆王在位五十五年逝世，他的儿子共王繄扈即位。
English: King Mu died in the 55th year of his reign, and his son, King Gong, ascended the throne.

古文：共王游於泾上，密康公从，有三女饹之。
现代文：共王在泾水上游玩，密康公服侍在旁，有三个女子来投奔密康公。
English: The king and the king's concubine are playing on the Surabaya River, with King Myeong Kang serving as an attendant. Three women have come to court King Myeong Kang.

古文：其母曰： 必致之王。
现代文：密康公的母亲说： 你一定要把她们献给国王。
English: Mikang's mother said, "You must give them to the king."

古文：夫兽三为群，人三为众，女三为粲。
现代文：野兽够三只就叫 群 ，人够三个就叫 众 ，美女够三人就叫 粲 。
English: If there are three beasts, it's a herd; if there are three people, it's a crowd; if there are three beautiful women, it's a crowd.

古文：王田不取群，公行不下众，王御不参一族。
现代文：王田猎从不猎取三只以上的兽，王公出行要对众人谦恭有礼，王的妃嫔没有三人属于同族。
English: The king of hunting never hunts more than three beasts. The prince should be courteous to everyone when traveling. No three of the king's concubines belong to the same tribe.

古文：夫粲，美之物也。众以美物归女，而何德以堪之？
现代文：众人以美好的东西送给你，你有什么德行配去享用呢？
English: People give you nice things. What virtue do you have to enjoy them?

古文：王犹不堪，况尔之小丑乎！
现代文：王都不配享用，更何况你这样的小人物呢！
English: Kings are not worthy of it, let alone little people like you!

古文：小丑备物，终必亡。 
现代文：小人物占有这类东西，最终会灭亡。 
English: Petty people possess such things and eventually perish.

古文：康公不献，一年，共王灭密。
现代文：密康公不肯献出那三个女子，过了一年，共王就把密国灭了。
English: King Myeongkang refused to give up the three women, and after a year, the co-rulers destroyed Myeongkang.

古文：共王崩，子懿王畑立。
现代文：共王去世后，他的儿子懿王即位。
English: After the death of King Gong, his son, King Gong, ascended to the throne.

古文：懿王之时，王室遂衰，诗人作刺。
现代文：懿王在位期间，周王室衰落，诗人们开始作诗讥刺。
English: During the reign of King Zhou, the Zhou royal family was in decline, and poets began to write satirical poems.

古文：懿王崩，共王弟辟方立，是为孝王。
现代文：懿王去世后，共王的弟弟辟方即位，就是孝王。
English: After the death of King Min, King Gong's younger brother, King Bi Fang, ascended to the throne as King Xiao.

古文：孝王崩，诸侯复立懿王太子燮，是为夷王。
现代文：孝王去世后，诸侯又立懿王的太子燮即位，就是夷王。
English: After the death of Prince Takahito, the lords again enthroned Prince Shiori, the son of Prince Shiori, who became the King of the Barbarians.

古文：夷王崩，子厉王胡立。
现代文：夷王去世后，他的儿子厉王胡即位。
English: After the death of Yi Wang, his son Li Wang Hu ascended to the throne.

古文：厉王即位三十年，好利，近荣夷公。
现代文：厉王登位三十年，贪财好利，亲近荣夷公。
English: Li Wang has been on the throne for thirty years. He is greedy for money and close to Rongyi Gong.

古文：大夫芮良夫谏厉王曰： 王室其将卑乎？
现代文：大夫芮良夫劝谏厉王说： 王室恐怕要衰微了！
English: Dr. Yan Liang advised King Yan Li, saying, "I'm afraid the royal family will decline!

古文：夫荣公好专利而不知大难。
现代文：那个荣公只喜欢独占财利，却不知道大难临头。
English: That Rongong only likes to monopolize money and profit, but he does not know that a great calamity is approaching.

古文：夫利，百物之所生也，天地之所载也，而有专之，其害多矣。天地百物皆将取焉，何可专也？
现代文：财物，本是天地万物所生所长，要想垄断，害处太多了。天地万物是供大家所取，怎么可以垄断呢？
English: Wealth, originally, is the birthright of all things in heaven and earth. If you want to monopolize it, the harm is too much. All things in heaven and earth are for everyone to take. How can you monopolize it?

古文：所怒甚多，不备大难。
现代文：他触怒的人很多，却不防备大难。
English: He has angered a lot of people, but he's not prepared for the worst.

古文：以是教王，王其能久乎？
现代文：还用这些来教王，王难道能够长治久安吗？
English: Still using these to teach the king, can the king reign long and prosper?

古文：夫王人者，将导利而布之上下者也。
现代文：称王的人，本应开发财源而遍施其惠。
English: Those who praise the king should have developed financial resources and spread their benefits everywhere.

古文：使神人百物无不得极，犹日怵惕惧怨之来也。
现代文：尽管使神、人万物得其所，仍然每天提心吊胆，害怕引起不满。
English: Despite putting God, people and all things in their rightful place, they still live in fear every day, afraid of causing discontent.

古文：故颂曰 思文后稷，克配彼天，立我蒸民，莫匪尔极 。大雅曰 陈锡载周 。
现代文：所以《颂》说： 追念祖先后稷，能够与天同德，安定我众多百姓，没有不合乎其原则。 《大雅》说： 布施赐予，成我周邦。 
English: Therefore, "Ode" said: "In memory of our ancestors, I will be able to share the same virtues with the heavens and stabilize my numerous people, which is not inconsistent with its principles." "Daya" said: "Give generously and become my weekly state."

古文：是不布利而惧难乎，故能载周以至于今。
现代文：这不正是广施财利而又畏惧灾难吗？所以能成我周邦，绵延至今。
English: Isn't this just giving money and benefits to others while fearing disaster? That's why I've been able to become my Zhou Bang, which has lasted to this day.

古文：今王学专利，其可乎？
现代文：现在王学的是垄断财利，这怎么可以呢？
English: Now Wang Xue is monopolizing financial interests. How can this be?

古文：匹夫专利，犹谓之盗，王而行之，其归鲜矣。
现代文：一个普通人垄断财利，尚且要称之为 盗 ，作为王也这样干，愿意归附的人就很少了。
English: If an ordinary person monopolizes wealth and profit and is called a thief, and if a king does the same, there will be few people who are willing to adhere to him.

古文：荣公若用，周必败也。 
现代文：荣夷公若得重用，周朝必定衰败。 
English: If Rong Yi Gong is reused, the Zhou Dynasty will surely decline.

古文：厉王不听，卒以荣公为卿士，用事。
现代文：厉王不听，到底还是任用荣夷公为卿士，让他主持国家大事。
English: Li Wang did not listen, but in the end he appointed Rong Yi Gong as a noble and let him preside over national events.

古文：王行暴虐侈傲，国人谤王。
现代文：厉王暴虐无道，奢侈傲慢，国人都公开议论他的过失。
English: Li Wang was violent, extravagant and arrogant, and the Chinese people openly discussed his faults.

古文：召公谏曰： 民不堪命矣。 
现代文：召公劝谏说： 人民受不了您的政令了。 
English: Zhao Gongxuan said: The people can't stand your decree.

古文：王怒，得卫巫，使监谤者，以告则杀之。
现代文：厉王大怒，找到一个卫国的巫士，派他监视非议王的人。
English: Enraged, King Li found a wizard to protect the country and sent him to watch those who were criticizing the king.

古文：其谤鲜矣，诸侯不朝。
现代文：凡是报告上来有属于这种罪的都杀掉。这样非议是减少了，诸侯也不再来朝见。
English: Anyone who was reported to have committed such a crime was killed. This reduced the number of complaints, and the lords did not come to court again.

古文：三十四年，王益严，国人莫敢言，道路以目。厉王喜，告召公曰： 吾能弭谤矣，乃不敢言。 
现代文：三十四年，厉王更加严苛，国人没有谁再敢开口说话，路上相见也只能互递眼色示意而已。厉王很得意，告诉召公说： 我能平息人们的非议，使他们连话也不敢讲。 
English: In the thirty-fourth year, King Li was even more severe. No Chinese dared to speak, and when they met on the road, they could only exchange glances. King Li was very proud and told the summoner: "I can calm people's criticism, so that they do not even dare to speak."

古文：召公曰： 是鄣之也。
现代文：召公说： 这是因为您把他们的嘴堵起来了。
English: Zhao Gong said: This is because you gagged them.

古文：防民之口，甚於防水。
现代文：堵人民的嘴可是比堵水还要危险。
English: Blocking people's mouths is even more dangerous than blocking water.

古文：水壅而溃，伤人必多，民亦如之。
现代文：水被堵塞会决堤泛滥，伤人肯定很多，人民也是一样的。
English: If the water is blocked, it will break through the dike and flood. There will definitely be a lot of injuries, and the people will be the same.

古文：是故为水者决之使导，为民者宣之使言。
现代文：所以管理水的人要对水加以疏导，管理人民的人要让他们畅所欲言。
English: Therefore, those who manage the water should channel the water, and those who manage the people should let them speak freely.

古文：故天子听政，使公卿至於列士献诗，瞽献曲，史献书，师箴，瞍赋，矇诵，百工谏，庶人传语，近臣尽规，亲戚补察，瞽史教诲，耆艾脩之，而后王斟酌焉，是以事行而不悖。
现代文：因此天子为了了解下情，要让上至公卿下至列士的人都献诗，让盲乐师献曲，让史官献书，让师父规诫，让无眼珠的盲人叙事，让有眼珠的盲人朗诵，让百工劝谏，让庶人街谈巷议，让近臣都来规劝，让亲戚补察过失，让盲人乐师和史官来教诲，让老人们来告诫，而后由帝王斟酌，所以政事得以施行而不违背情理。
English: Therefore, in order to understand the situation, the Son of Heaven asked people from the highest to the lowest to the lowest to offer poems, blind musicians to offer music, historians to offer books, masters to give instructions, blind people without eyeballs to narrate, blind people with eyeballs to recite, hundred craftsmen to advise, common people to discuss, close ministers to advise, relatives to make up for mistakes, blind musicians and historians to teach, old people to admonish, and then the emperor to weigh, so that political affairs could be implemented without violating reason.

古文：民之有口也，犹土之有山川也，财用於是乎出：犹其有原隰衍沃也，衣食於是乎生。
现代文：人民有嘴，就像土地上有山川，是财货之源，就像土地有平原沃野，是衣食的来源。
English: The people have mouths, just as the land has mountains and rivers, which are the source of wealth and goods, just as the land has plains and fertile fields, which are the source of food and clothing.

古文：口之宣言也，善败於是乎兴。
现代文：让人自由言论，好事坏事都能反映出来。
English: Let people speak freely, and good and bad things can be reflected.

古文：行善而备败，所以产财用衣食者也。
现代文：做好事而防备坏事，是财货和衣食的真正来源。
English: To do good and avoid evil is the real source of wealth, food and clothing.

古文：夫民虑之於心而宣之於口，成而行之。
现代文：人民在心中考虑，从口中说出来，事情决定了再去做。
English: People think in their hearts and speak out of their mouths, and things are decided before they are done.

古文：若壅其口，其与能几何？ 王不听。
现代文：如果把他们的嘴堵起来，又怎么能够长久呢？ 王不听。
English: If their mouth is stopped, how can they go on? The king will not listen to them.

古文：於是国莫敢出言，三年，乃相与畔，袭厉王。
现代文：因此国内没有人敢讲话，过了三年，竟一起叛乱，袭击厉王。
English: As a result, no one in the country dared to speak out. Three years later, there was actually a rebellion and an attack on King Li.

古文：厉王出奔於彘。
现代文：厉王逃亡到彘。
English: King Li fled to Shandong.

古文：厉王太子静匿召公之家，国人闻之，乃围之。召公曰： 昔吾骤谏王，王不从，以及此难也。
现代文：厉王的太子静藏在召公家里，国人知道了，就把召公家包围起来，召公说： 先前我多次劝谏君王，君王不听，以至于遭到这样的灾难。
English: Li Wang's prince quietly hid in the summoner's house. When the people of the country found out, they surrounded the summoner and said to the summoner: "I have advised the king many times before, but the king did not listen, so he suffered such a disaster.

古文：今杀王太子，王其以我为雠而懟怒乎？
现代文：如果现在太子被人杀了，君王将会以为我对他们记仇而在怨恨君王吧?
English: If someone were to kill the crown prince now, the king would think that I had a grudge against them and would hate the king, right?

古文：夫事君者，险而不雠懟，怨而不怒，况事王乎！ 
现代文：侍奉国君的人，即使遇到危险也不该怨恨;即使怨恨也不该发怒，更何况侍奉天子呢? 
English: Those who serve the sovereign, even if they are in danger, should not be resentful; even if they are resentful, they should not be angry. How much more should they serve the Son of Heaven?

古文：乃以其子代王太子，太子竟得脱。
现代文：于是用自己的儿子代替了王太子，王太子终于免遭杀害。
English: So he replaced the crown prince with his own son, and the crown prince was finally saved from being killed.

古文：召公、周公二相行政，号曰 共和 。
现代文：召公、周公两相共同执政，号称 共和 。
English: Zhao Gong and Zhou Gong jointly governed the country, which was known as a republic.

古文：共和十四年，厉王死于彘。
现代文：共和十四年，厉王死于彘。
English: In the 14th year of the Republic of China, King Li died suddenly.

古文：太子静长於召公家，二相乃共立之为王，是为宣王。
现代文：太子静在召公家中长大，两相因共立之为王，就是宣王。
English: Prince Jing grew up in a family of court officials, and because of the two aspects, he became a king, that is, a king of proclamation.

古文：宣王即位，二相辅之，脩政，法文、武、成、康之遗风，诸侯复宗周。
现代文：宣王即位，两相辅佐他，修明政治，遵循文王、武王、成王、康王的遗风，诸侯又重新归附于周。
English: When King Xuan ascended the throne, the two supported each other, reformed politics, followed the legacy of King Wen, King Wu, King Cheng and King Kang, and the princes were reattached to Zhou.

古文：十二年，鲁武公来朝。
现代文：十二年，鲁武公来朝见。
English: In the twelfth year, Prince Roh Moo came to see the emperor.

古文：宣王不脩籍於千亩，虢文公谏曰不可，王弗听。
现代文：宣王废弃千亩上的籍礼，虢文公劝谏说这样不行，宣王不听。
English: When King Xuan abandoned the registration ceremony on the thousand mu, King Wen advised him that this was not possible, but King Xuan did not listen.

古文：三十九年，战于千亩，王师败绩于姜氏之戎。
现代文：三十九年，在千亩打了一仗，宣王的军队被姜戎打得大败。
English: In the 39th year, a battle was fought in Qianmu, and the army of King Xuan was defeated by Jiang Rong.

古文：宣王既亡南国之师，乃料民於太原。
现代文：宣王丧失了征伐南方的军队之后，竟在太原直接统计民户。
English: After Emperor Xuanwang lost the army to invade the south, he actually conducted a direct count of households in Taiyuan.

古文：仲山甫谏曰： 民不可料也。 
现代文：仲山甫劝谏说： 人口是不能清点的。 
English: Zhongshan Fu advised: "The population cannot be counted.

古文：宣王不听，卒料民。
现代文：宣王不听劝阻，最终还是清点了。
English: Xuan Wang did not listen to the dissuasion, and finally made a clean sweep.

古文：四十六年，宣王崩，子幽王宫湦立。
现代文：四十六年，宣王死，其子幽王宫湦即位。
English: In 46, King Xuan died, and his son King Gongjun ascended to the throne.

古文：幽王二年，西周三川皆震。
现代文：幽王二年，周西部丰、镐和泾、渭、洛一带都发生地震。
English: In the second year of Yu Wang, an earthquake occurred in the areas of Feng, Handan, Handan, Handan and Luo in western Zhou.

古文：伯阳甫曰： 周将亡矣。
现代文：伯阳甫说： 周快要灭亡啦。
English: Bo Yangfu said: Zhou is about to perish.

古文：夫天地之气，不失其序；若过其序，民乱之也。
现代文：天地间的阴阳之气，不应该没有秩序;如果打乱了秩序，那也是有人使它乱的。
English: The yin and yang between heaven and earth should not be out of order; if the order is disturbed, then someone has disturbed it.

古文：阳伏而不能出，阴迫而不能蒸，於是有地震。
现代文：阳气沉伏在下，不能出来，阴气压迫着它使他不能上升，所以就会有地震发行。
English: Yang qi is submerged and cannot come out, and yin qi oppresses it and prevents it from rising, which is why earthquakes occur.

古文：今三川实震，是阳失其所而填阴也。
现代文：如今三川地区发生地震，是因为阳气离开了它原来的位置，而被阴气压在下面了。
English: Earthquakes now occur in the Mikawa region because the yang air has left its original position and has been pushed down by the yin air.

古文：阳失而在阴，原必塞；原塞，国必亡。
现代文：阳气不在上面却处在阴气的下面，水源就必定受阻塞，水源受到阻塞，国家一定灭亡。
English: If the yang qi is not above but below the yin qi, the water source will definitely be blocked, the water source will be blocked, and the country will definitely perish.

古文：夫水土演而民用也。
现代文：水土通气才能供民众从事生产之用。
English: Soil and water ventilation can only be used for the people to engage in production.

古文：土无所演，民乏财用，不亡何待！
现代文：土地得不到滋润，民众就会财用匮乏，如果到了这种地步，国家不灭亡还等待什么!
English: If the land does not receive moisture, the people will be deprived of wealth. If it comes to this, what is waiting for the country if it does not perish!

古文：昔伊、洛竭而夏亡，河竭而商亡。
现代文：从前，伊水、洛水干涸夏朝就灭亡了；黄河枯竭商朝就灭亡了。
English: Once upon a time, when the Yishui and Luo waters dried up, the Xia Dynasty perished; when the Yellow River dried up, the Shang Dynasty perished.

古文：今周德若二代之季矣，其川原又塞，塞必竭。
现代文：如今周的气数也像夏、商两代末年一样了，河源的水流又被阻塞，水源被阻塞，河流必定要枯竭。
English: Now Zhou's qi number is also the same as that of Xia and Shang at the end of the two generations. The water flow at the source of the river is blocked, the water source is blocked, and the river must be exhausted.

古文：夫国必依山川，山崩川竭，亡国之徵也。
现代文：一个国家的生存，一定要依赖于山川，高山崩塌，河川枯竭，这是亡国的征象。
English: The survival of a country must depend on its mountains and rivers. Collapsed mountains and dried-up rivers are signs of a ruined country.

古文：川竭必山崩。
现代文：河川枯竭了，高山就一定崩塌。
English: When the rivers run dry, the mountains are sure to collapse.

古文：若国亡不过十年，数之纪也。
现代文：这样看来，国家的灭亡用不了十年了，因为十刚好是数字的一个循环。
English: From this perspective, the country's demise will not take ten years, because ten is just a cycle of numbers.

古文：天之所弃，不过其纪。 
现代文：上天若要抛弃我们，不会超过十年。 
English: If God were to abandon us, it would not take more than ten years.

古文：是岁也，三川竭，岐山崩。
现代文：当年，泾、渭、洛枯竭，岐山崩颓。
English: In that year, Shan, Shan and Luo were exhausted, and Qishan collapsed.

古文：三年，幽王嬖爱襃姒。
现代文：三年，幽王宠爱褒姒。
English: For three years, Yue Wang has been a favorite of Bo Xuan.

古文：襃姒生子伯服，幽王欲废太子。
现代文：褒姒生下儿子伯服，幽王想废黜太子。
English: When Bo Xun gave birth to her son Bofu, Yu Wang wanted to dethrone the crown prince.

古文：太子母申侯女，而为后。
现代文：太子的母亲是申侯之女，被立为王后。
English: The prince's mother was the daughter of Shen Hou and was made queen.

古文：後幽王得襃姒，爱之，欲废申后，并去太子宜臼，以襃姒为后，以伯服为太子。
现代文：后来幽王得到褒姒，宠爱她，打算废黜申后，并把太子宜臼也一块儿废掉，立褒姒为王后，让伯服为太子。
English: Later, Yu Wang fell in love with Bo Xuan and wanted to dethrone her. He also dethroned Prince Yisu, making Bo Xuan the queen and Bo Xuan the prince.

古文：周太史伯阳读史记曰： 周亡矣。 
现代文：周太史伯阳读历史记录说： 周朝就要灭亡了。 
English: Zhou Taishi Boyang read the historical record and said: The Zhou Dynasty is about to perish.

古文：昔自夏后氏之衰也，有二神龙止於夏帝庭而言曰： 余，襃之二君。 
现代文：从前当夏后氏衰败，有两条神龙降落在夏帝的庭院而开口说： 我们，是褒国的两个君主。 
English: Once upon a time, when the Xia Hou clan was in decline, two divine dragons landed in the courtyard of Emperor Xia and said, "We are the two monarchs of Bao Guo.

古文：夏帝卜杀之与去之与止之，莫吉。
现代文：夏帝不知道是该杀掉它们，还是赶跑他们，还是留住他们，就进行占卜，结果都不吉利。
English: Xia Di didn't know whether to kill them, drive them away, or keep them, so he did divination, but the results were not auspicious.

古文：卜请其漦而藏之，乃吉。
现代文：卜问是否可以把龙的涎沫收藏起来，才得到吉兆。
English: Bu asked if he could collect the dragon's foam and received a good omen.

古文：於是布币而策告之，龙亡而漦在，椟而去之。
现代文：于是摆设出币帛祭物，书写简策，向二龙祷告，二条龙不见了，留下了唾液。
English: So he set up a coin offering, wrote a brief plan, and prayed to the two dragons. The two dragons disappeared, leaving saliva behind.

古文：夏亡，传此器殷。
现代文：夏灭亡，此器被传于商。
English: After Xia's death, this utensil was passed down to merchants.

古文：殷亡，又传此器周。
现代文：商亡，此器又传于周。
English: After the death of Shang, this utensil was passed down to Zhou.

古文：比三代，莫敢发之，至厉王之末，发而观之。
现代文：接连三个朝代，都没有人敢打开它。到厉王末年，才打开观看。
English: For three successive dynasties, no one dared to open it. It was not until the last years of King Li that it was opened for viewing.

古文：漦流于庭，不可除。
现代文：涎沫流于庭院，除不去。
English: The foam flows in the courtyard and cannot be removed.

古文：厉王使妇人裸而譟之。
现代文：厉王让女人赤身裸体而大声呼叫。
English: Li Wang made the woman strip naked and call out loudly.

古文：漦化为玄鼋，以入王後宫。
现代文：涎沫化为黑色的蜥蜴，钻进王的后宫。
English: The foam turned into a black lizard and burrowed into the king's harem.

古文：後宫之童妾既龀而遭之，既笄而孕，无夫而生子，惧而弃之。
现代文：后宫有个童女刚满七岁，碰上它，到十五岁行过笄礼后怀了孕，因为没有丈夫就生下孩子，感到害怕而把该子扔掉。
English: There was a maiden in the harem who had just turned seven years old when she met him. At the age of fifteen, after performing the rites of purification, she became pregnant and gave birth to a child without a husband. She was afraid and threw the child away.

古文：宣王之时童女谣曰： 檿弧箕服，实亡周国。 
现代文：宣王时有童女唱歌谣说： 见到山桑做成的弓和箕木做成的箭囊，周国将要灭亡。 
English: At the time of the proclamation of the king, there was a maiden singing a ballad saying: Seeing a bow made of mountain mulberry and a quiver made of birch, Zhou will perish.

古文：於是宣王闻之，有夫妇卖是器者，宣王使执而戮之。
现代文：宣王听到了这首歌，有一对夫妻正好卖山桑弓和箕木制的箭袋，宣王命人去抓捕他们，想把他们杀掉。
English: When King Xuan heard the song, a couple happened to be selling mountain mulberry bows and arrowheads made of birch wood. King Xuan ordered people to catch them and wanted to kill them.

古文：逃於道，而见乡者後宫童妾所弃妖子出於路者，闻其夜啼，哀而收之，夫妇遂亡，饹於襃。
现代文：夫妇二人逃到大路上，发现了先前被小宫女扔掉的婴孩，听着她在深更半夜里啼哭，非常怜悯，就收留了她。夫妇二人继续往前逃，逃到了褒国。
English: The couple fled to the main road, found the baby who had previously been thrown away by the concubine, listened to her crying in the middle of the night, took pity on her and took her in. The couple continued to flee and fled to Bao Province.

古文：襃人有罪，请入童妾所弃女子者於王以赎罪。弃女子出於襃，是为襃姒。
现代文：后来褒国人得罪了周朝，就想把被小宫女扔掉的那个女孩献给厉王，以求赎罪，因为当初这个被扔掉的女孩是褒国献出，所以叫她褒姒。
English: Later, when the Bao Guo people offended the Zhou Dynasty, they wanted to offer the girl who had been thrown away by the concubine to the King of Li in order to atone for their sins, because the girl who had been thrown away was originally offered by the Bao Kingdom, so they called her Bao Guo.

古文：当幽王三年，王之後宫见而爱之，生子伯服，竟废申后及太子，以襃姒为后，伯服为太子。
现代文：周幽王三年，幽王到后宫去，一见到这女子就非常喜爱，生下儿子伯服，最后竟把申后和太子都废掉了，让褒姒当了王后，伯服做了太子。
English: In the third year of Zhou Yuwang's reign, Yuwang went to the harem. As soon as he saw this woman, he was very fond of her. He gave birth to his son, Bofu. In the end, he abolished both the queen and the prince, and made Bo Xuan the queen and Bofu the prince.

古文：太史伯阳曰： 祸成矣，无可奈何！ 
现代文：太史伯阳说： 灾祸己形成，没有任何办法了！ 
English: Taishi Boyang said: The calamity has already formed, there is no way out!

古文：襃姒不好笑，幽王欲其笑万方，故不笑。
现代文：褒姒不喜欢笑。幽王使用多种方法，她都不笑。
English: Bao Bao does not like to smile. Yu Wang uses a variety of methods, but she does not smile.

古文：幽王为烽燧大鼓，有寇至则举烽火。
现代文：周幽王设置了烽火狼烟和大鼓，有敌人来侵犯就点燃烽火。
English: Zhou Yuwang set up bonfires, wolf smoke and big drums, and lit bonfires when enemies invaded.

古文：诸侯悉至，至而无寇，襃姒乃大笑。
现代文：周幽王为了让褒姒笑，点燃了烽火，诸侯见到烽火，全都赶来了，赶到之后，却不见有敌寇，褒姒看了果然哈哈大笑。
English: In order to make Bo Xilai laugh, Zhou Yu Wang lit a bonfire. When the princes saw the bonfire, they all came. After they arrived, they did not see any enemy, and Bo Xilai actually laughed out loud.

古文：幽王说之，为数举烽火。
现代文：幽王喜欢这个办法，为褒姒多次举烽火。
English: Yu Wang liked this method, and held bonfires for the reward many times.

古文：其後不信，诸侯益亦不至。
现代文：后来，失去信用，诸侯们渐渐也就不再来了。
English: Later, having lost their trust, the princes gradually stopped coming.

古文：幽王以虢石父为卿，用事，国人皆怨。
现代文：幽王任用虢石父为卿士，主持国政，国都中的人都忿忿不平。
English: Yu Wang appointed Zou Shi's father as a nobleman to preside over state affairs, and the people in the capital were furious.

古文：石父为人佞巧善谀好利，王用之。
现代文：虢石父为人能说会道，喜欢阿谀奉承和贪图财利，幽王却重用他。
English: Zou Shi's father was a well-spoken man, fond of flattery and greedy for money, but Yu Wang made heavy use of him.

古文：又废申后，去太子也。
现代文：再加上废黜申后和除去太子。
English: Add to that the dethronement of the Empress Dowager and the removal of the Crown Prince.

古文：申侯怒，与缯、西夷犬戎攻幽王。
现代文：申侯很气愤，联合缯和属于西夷的犬戎攻打幽王。
English: Shen Hou was very angry and, together with Xing and Xiyi's dog Rong, attacked Yu Wang.

古文：幽王举烽火徵兵，兵莫至。
现代文：幽王举烽火征发诸侯的军队，但诸侯的军队都不来。
English: Yu Wang held a bonfire to summon the armies of the lords, but the armies of the lords did not come.

古文：遂杀幽王骊山下，虏襃姒，尽取周赂而去。
现代文：申侯就把幽王杀死在骊山脚下，俘虏了褒姒，把周的财宝都拿走才离去。
English: Shen Hou then killed Yu Wang at the foot of Lushan Mountain, captured Bo Yao, and took away Zhou's treasure before leaving.

古文：於是诸侯乃即申侯而共立故幽王太子宜臼，是为平王，以奉周祀。
现代文：当时诸侯都到申侯这里来共立从前幽王的太子宜臼，就是平王，以保持周朝的祀统。
English: At that time, all the princes came to Shenhu to co-establish the prince of the former Yu Wang, that is, Hei Wang, in order to maintain the Zhou Dynasty's worship system.

古文：平王立，东迁于雒邑，辟戎寇。
现代文：平王即位，把都城东迁到雒邑，以躲避戎寇。
English: When King Hei ascended the throne, he moved the capital to the east of the city, to avoid the military invasion.

古文：平王之时，周室衰微，诸侯彊并弱，齐、楚、秦、晋始大，政由方伯。
现代文：平王在位时，周王室衰败，诸侯强大之国吞并弱小之国，齐、楚、秦、晋开始强大，政令往往出于称霸的君主。
English: When King Ping was on the throne, the Zhou royal family was in decline, powerful states began to annex weak states, and the states of Qi, Chu, Qin, and Jin began to become powerful. Government decrees were often issued by monarchs seeking hegemony.

古文：四十九年，鲁隐公即位。
现代文：四十九年，鲁隐公即位。
English: In the 49th year, Emperor Luyin ascended to the throne.

古文：五十一年，平王崩，太子洩父蚤死，立其子林，是为桓王。
现代文：五十一年，平王去世，而太子洩父早死，立了他的儿子林为王，这就是桓王。
English: In the fifty-first year, King Hei passed away, and the Crown Prince Kaede, whose father had died young, appointed his son Lin as king. This was King Kan.

古文：桓王，平王孙也。
现代文：桓王，是平王的孙子。
English: King Kan is the grandson of King Hei.

古文：桓王三年，郑庄公朝，桓王不礼。
现代文：桓王三年，郑庄公来朝见，桓王不予礼遇。
English: In the third year of King Kuan, Zhengzhuang came to the Imperial Court for a meeting, but King Kuan did not give him any courtesy.

古文：五年，郑怨，与鲁易许田。
现代文：五年，郑使宛与鲁国交换许田。
English: In the fifth year, Zheng sent Wan to exchange the promised land with Lu.

古文：许田，天子之用事太山田也。
现代文：许田，是天子用来祭祀泰山的土地。
English: Xu Tian is the land that the Son of Heaven used to worship Mount Tai.

古文：八年，鲁杀隐公，立桓公。
现代文：八年，鲁国杀隐公，立桓公。
English: In the eighth year, Lu killed Ying Gong and set up Kuan Gong.

古文：十三年，伐郑，郑射伤桓王，桓王去归。
现代文：十三年，伐郑，郑射伤桓王，桓王逃跑回来。
English: In the thirteenth year, he attacked Zheng, Zheng shot and wounded King Kan, and King Kan fled back.

古文：二十三年，桓王崩，子庄王佗立。
现代文：二十三年，桓王去世，儿子庄王佗登位。
English: In 233, King Kuan died, and his son, King Zhuang, ascended to the throne.

古文：庄王四年，周公黑肩欲杀庄王而立王子克。
现代文：庄王四年，周公黑肩想杀掉庄王拥立王子克。
English: In the fourth year of Zhuang Wang, Zhou Gong's black shoulder wanted to kill Zhuang Wang.

古文：辛伯告王，王杀周公。王子克饹燕。
现代文：辛伯把这个消息报告给庄王，庄王杀掉周公，王子克逃往燕国。
English: Xinbo reported this news to Zhuang Wang. Zhuang Wang killed Zhou Gong, and Prince Ke fled to Yan Province.

古文：十五年，庄王崩，子釐王胡齐立。
现代文：十五年，庄王去世，他的儿子釐王胡齐即位。
English: In 15 years, King Zhuang died, and his son King Hu Qi ascended to the throne.

古文：釐王三年，齐桓公始霸。
现代文：釐王三年，齐桓公开始称霸。
English: In the third year of King Gong, King Qi Huan began to dominate.

古文：五年，釐王崩，子惠王阆立。
现代文：五年，釐王去世，他的儿子惠王阆即位。
English: Five years later, King Gong died and his son King Hui ascended to the throne.

古文：惠王二年。初，庄王嬖姬姚，生子穨，穨有宠。
现代文：惠王二年，当初庄王的宠妾姚氏生下子颓，颓受宠。
English: In the second year of Hui Wang, Yao's favorite concubine Yao, who was originally the favorite concubine of Zhuang Wang, gave birth to her second son Yao, and Yao was favored.

古文：及惠王即位，夺其大臣园以为囿，故大夫边伯等五人作乱，谋召燕、卫师，伐惠王。
现代文：等到惠王即位，惠王夺其大臣的园林作自己的猎场，因此大夫边伯等五人作乱，策划召燕、卫的军队，讨伐惠王。
English: When King Hui ascended to the throne, he seized the gardens of his ministers to make his own hunting grounds. Therefore, five people, including the doctor Bianbo, caused a riot and planned to summon Yan and Wei's army to fight against King Hui.

古文：惠王饹温，已居郑之栎。
现代文：惠王逃奔到温，不久又住在郑国的栎。
English: Hui Wang fled to Wen, and soon he was living in Zhengzhou.

古文：立釐王弟穨为王。
现代文：他们立了釐王的弟弟颓为王。
English: They set up the king's younger brother, Zang, as king.

古文：乐及遍舞，郑、虢君怒。
现代文：奏了全套的舞乐。郑、虢二国之君非常愤怒。
English: A full set of dance music was played. Zheng and Zou Niguo were very angry.

古文：四年，郑与虢君伐杀王穨，复入惠王。
现代文：四年，郑国和虢国的国君来讨伐，杀死王颓，重新迎立惠王。
English: In four years, the sovereigns of Zhengzhou and Shandong came to fight, killed Wang Yao, and reinstated Hui Wang.

古文：惠王十年，赐齐桓公为伯。
现代文：惠王十年，赐齐桓公为伯。
English: In the tenth year of King Hui's reign, Prince Qi Kuan was given the title of count.

古文：二十五年，惠王崩，子襄王郑立。
现代文：二十五年，惠王逝世，儿子襄王郑登位。
English: Twenty-five years later, King Hui died, and his son King Xiang Zheng ascended to the throne.

古文：襄王母蚤死，後母曰惠后。
现代文：襄王的母亲早已去世。继母就是惠后。
English: King Xiang's mother had died long ago, and his stepmother was Empress Dowager.

古文：惠后生叔带，有宠於惠王，襄王畏之。
现代文：惠后生了叔带，很受惠王的宠爱，襄王不放心他。
English: Queen Hui gave birth to an uncle, who was much loved by King Hui. King Xiang was worried about him.

古文：三年，叔带与戎、翟谋伐襄王，襄王欲诛叔带，叔带饹齐。
现代文：三年叔带和戎国、翟国商议攻打襄王，襄王想要杀掉叔带，叔带逃到了齐国。
English: For three years, Uncle Zhou negotiated with the Kingdom of Rong and the Kingdom of Wei to attack King Xiang. King Xiang wanted to kill Uncle Zhou, but Uncle Zhou fled to the Kingdom of Qi.

古文：齐桓公使管仲平戎于周，使隰朋平戎于晋。
现代文：齐桓公派管仲去劝说戎和周讲和，派隰朋去劝说戎和晋讲和。
English: Qi Kuan Gong sent Guanzhong to persuade Rong and Zhou to make peace, and sent Yu to persuade Rong and Jin to make peace.

古文：王以上卿礼管仲。
现代文：襄王以上卿的礼节接待管仲。
English: King Xiang was the most courteous host.

古文：管仲辞曰： 臣贱有司也，有天子之二守国、高在。若节春秋来承王命，何以礼焉。
现代文：管仲辞谢道： 我身为下卿，不过是个低下的一般官吏，齐国还有天子您亲自任命的两位大臣上卿国氏、高氏在，如果他们届时在春、秋两季来朝见天子，您将怎样接见他们呢?
English: Guan Zhong thanked him and said, "I am a lower-ranking official, but I am just a low-ranking general official. There are two ministers personally appointed by Heavenly Son, namely, Shangqing Guo and Gao, in Qi Province. If they come to see Heavenly Son in the spring and autumn, how will you receive them?

古文：陪臣敢辞。 王曰： 舅氏，余嘉乃勋，毋逆朕命。 
现代文：我以天子和齐桓公的双重臣子的身份冒昧地辞谢了。 襄王说： 你是我舅父家的使臣，我赞赏你的功绩，请不要拒绝我的好意。 
English: I took the liberty of thanking him in my capacity as a double vassal of Heaven and King Qi Huan. King Xiang said: You are an envoy of my uncle's family, I appreciate your achievements, please do not refuse my kindness.

古文：管仲卒受下卿之礼而还。
现代文：管仲最终还是接受了下卿的礼节，然后回国了。
English: In the end, Guanzhong accepted the courtesy of the Lord and returned to China.

古文：九年，齐桓公卒。
现代文：九年，齐桓公逝世。
English: In the ninth year, Prince Qi Huan passed away.

古文：十二年，叔带复归于周。
现代文：十二年，叔带又返回到周朝。
English: In the twelfth year, Zhuge again returned to the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：十三年，郑伐滑，王使游孙、伯服请滑，郑人囚之。
现代文：十三年，郑国攻打滑国，周襄王派游孙、伯服为滑说情，郑国拘禁了这两个人。
English: In the thirteenth year, Zheng Guo attacked and defeated Niu Guo, and Zhou Xiang Wang sent Yu Sun and Bo Guo to intercede for Niu. Zheng Guo detained these two people.

古文：郑文公怨惠王之入不与厉公爵，又怨襄王之与卫滑，故囚伯服。
现代文：郑文公怨恨惠王被护送回朝廷之后，送给虢公酒器玉爵而不送给郑厉公，又怨恨襄王帮助卫国和滑国，所以拘禁了伯服。
English: Zheng Wenguang resented that Hui Wang was escorted back to the imperial court, and gave the imperial wine cup to Gong Gong without giving it to Zheng Liguang. He also resented that Xiang Wang helped defend the country and slide the country, so he detained Bofu.

古文：王怒，将以翟伐郑。
现代文：襄王很生气，打算用翟人去攻打郑国。
English: Xiang Wang was very angry and planned to attack Zheng Guo with his men.

古文：富辰谏曰： 凡我周之东徙，晋、郑焉依。
现代文：富辰劝谏襄王说： 周东迁的时候，靠的是晋国和郑国的力量。
English: When Zhou moved eastward, he relied on the strength of Jin and Zheng.

古文：子穨之乱，又郑之由定，今以小怨弃之！ 
现代文：子颓叛乱，又是依靠郑国得以平定，如今能因为一点小小的怨恨就抛弃它吗? 
English: Zibo's rebellion was once again pacified by Zheng Guo, but can it now be abandoned because of a small grudge?

古文：王不听。
现代文：襄王不听劝阻。
English: Xiang Wang still did not listen.

古文：十五年，王降翟师以伐郑。
现代文：十五年，襄王派翟国的军队前去攻打了郑国。
English: In the fifteenth year, the king of Xiang sent troops from the kingdom of Yao to attack the kingdom of Zheng.

古文：王德翟人，将以其女为后。
现代文：襄王感激翟人，准备把翟王的女儿立为王后。
English: King Xiang was grateful and prepared to make the king's daughter his queen.

古文：富辰谏曰： 平、桓、庄、惠皆受郑劳，王弃亲亲翟，不可从。 
现代文：富辰又劝谏说： 平王、桓王、庄王、惠王都曾受到郑国的好处，君王您抛开同姓之亲的郑国而去亲近翟国，这样做实在不可取。 
English: Fuchen also advised Yu, "Hei Wang, Kuan Wang, Zhuang Wang, and Hui Wang have all received benefits from Zheng Guo. It is really not advisable for you, the king, to leave Zheng Guo, a relative with the same surname, to get close to Zheng Guo.

古文：王不听。
现代文：襄王仍是不听。
English: Xiang Wang still did not listen.

古文：十六年，王绌翟后，翟人来诛，杀谭伯。
现代文：十六年，襄王废黜了翟后，翟人前来诛讨，杀死了周大夫谭伯。
English: Sixteen years later, after the dethronement of King Xiang, his followers came to discuss the matter and killed Dr. Zhou Tanbo.

古文：富辰曰： 吾数谏不从。如是不出，王以我为懟乎？ 
现代文：富辰说： 我屡次劝谏君王，君王都不听，如今到了这个局面，我若不出去迎战，君王可能会以为我在怨恨他吧! 
English: Fuchen said, "I have repeatedly advised the king, but the king did not listen, and now we have reached this situation. If I do not go out to fight, the king may think that I hate him!"

古文：乃以其属死之。
现代文：于是就带领着他的属众出去与狄子作战，结果战死。
English: As a result, he led his followers out to fight against Di Zi, and as a result, he died in battle.

古文：初，惠后欲立王子带，故以党开翟人，翟人遂入周。
现代文：当初，惠后打算立王子叔带为太子，因此派其党羽充当翟人的内应，翟人因而攻入周。
English: At first, Empress Dowager Hui planned to make Prince Guo the crown prince, so she sent her party members to act as courtiers, and the courtiers invaded Zhou.

古文：襄王出饹郑，郑居王于氾。
现代文：襄王逃亡到郑，郑把王安顿在汜。
English: Xiang Wang fled to Zheng, and Zheng settled Wang in Yao.

古文：子带立为王，取襄王所绌翟后与居温。
现代文：子带即位为王，带上襄王所废黜的翟后一起住在温。
English: The younger son became king, and he and the queen, who had been dethroned by King Xiang, lived together in Wen.

古文：十七年，襄王告急于晋，晋文公纳王而诛叔带。
现代文：十七年，襄王向晋告急，晋文公送王回国并杀死叔带。
English: In the seventeenth year, King Xiang sent an urgent message to King Jin, and King Jin sent him back to China and killed his uncle.

古文：襄王乃赐晋文公珪鬯弓矢，为伯，以河内地与晋。
现代文：襄王因此赐给晋文公圭瓒、秬鬯、弓矢，封他为伯，把河内的土地赐给晋。
English: As a result, King Xiang gave Jinwen Gong Guizhong, the scepter, and the bow and arrow, and made him a great-grandfather, and gave him the land in Hanoi.

古文：二十年，晋文公召襄王，襄王会之河阳、践土，诸侯毕朝，书讳曰 天王狩于河阳 。
现代文：二十年，晋文公召襄王，襄王与他在河阳、践土会见，诸侯都来朝见，史书加以掩饰，说是 周王巡狩至于河阳 。
English: Twenty years ago, King Jinwen summoned King Xiang, and King Xiang met with him at the foot of the Heyang Mountains. The princes all came to see the emperor, but the history books covered it up, saying that King Zhou was on a hunting trip to the Heyang Mountains.

古文：二十四年，晋文公卒。
现代文：二十四年前，晋文公去世。
English: Twenty-four years ago, Emperor Jinwen passed away.

古文：三十一年，秦穆公卒。
现代文：三十一年，秦穆公去世。
English: Thirty-one years ago, Qin Mu Gong passed away.

古文：三十二年，襄王崩，子顷王壬臣立。
现代文：三十二年，襄王去世，其子顷王壬臣即位。
English: Thirty-two years later, King Xiang died, and his son King Jinshin ascended to the throne.

古文：顷王六年，崩，子匡王班立。
现代文：顷王六年，去世，其子匡王班即位。
English: He Wang six years, died, his son Kuang Wangban ascended to the throne.

古文：匡王六年，崩，弟瑜立，是为定王。
现代文：匡王六年，去世，其弟瑜即位，就是定王。
English: Six years after the death of King Kuang, his younger brother Yu ascended the throne and became King Ding.

古文：定王元年，楚庄王伐陆浑之戎，次洛，使人问九鼎。
现代文：定王元年，楚庄王征伐陆浑地方的戎族，军队驻扎在洛邑，楚王派人询问九鼎的大小轻重。
English: In the first year of King Ding's reign, the King of Chu Zhuang conquered the Yongzhu people in the Lukhun region. The army was stationed in Luoyu. The King of Chu sent someone to inquire about the size and importance of Jiuding.

古文：王使王孙满应设以辞，楚兵乃去。
现代文：定王命王孙满用巧妙的辞令应付了他，楚兵这才离去。
English: King Ding ordered Wang Sunman to deal with him with a clever speech, and the Chu soldiers left.

古文：十年，楚庄王围郑，郑伯降，已而复之。
现代文：十年，楚庄王包围了郑国，郑伯投降，不久又恢复了郑国。
English: Ten years later, King Chu Zhuang besieged Zheng, Zheng Bo surrendered, and Zheng was soon restored.

古文：十六年，楚庄王卒。
现代文：十六年，楚庄王去世。
English: Sixteen years later, Chu Zhuang Wang passed away.

古文：二十一年，定王崩，子简王夷立。
现代文：二十一年，定王去世，其子简王夷即位。
English: In the twenty-first year, King Ding died, and his son King Jian ascended to the throne.

古文：简王十三年，晋杀其君厉公，迎子周於周，立为悼公。
现代文：简王十三年，晋杀死他们的国君厉公，从周接回子周，把他立为悼公。
English: In the thirteenth year of the reign of King Jian, the Jin killed their king, Li Gong, and brought back his son Zhou from Zhou successively, setting him up as a mourner.

古文：十四年，简王崩，子灵王泄心立。
现代文：十四年，简王逝世，儿子灵王泄心登位。
English: Fourteen years later, King Jan passed away, and his son, King Ling, ascended the throne.

古文：灵王二十四年，齐崔杼弑其君庄公。
现代文：灵王二十四年，齐国的崔杼杀了他们的君王庄公。
English: In the twenty-fourth year of King Ling, Cui Xuan of Qi killed their king Zhuang Gong.

古文：二十七年，灵王崩，子景王贵立。
现代文：二十七年，灵王逝世，其子景王贵即位。
English: In the 27th year, King Ling died, and his son King Jing ascended to the throne.

古文：景王十八年，后太子圣而蚤卒。
现代文：景王十八年，王后、太子圣明却早死。
English: In the eighteenth year of King Gyeongjo, Queen and Crown Prince Seongmyong died prematurely.

古文：二十年，景王爱子朝，欲立之，会崩，子丐之党与争立，国人立长子猛为王，子朝攻杀猛。
现代文：二十年，景王宠爱子朝，打算立他为太子，但景王却在这时死掉，子丐一伙人与子朝争立，国都中的人立长子猛为王，子朝攻打并杀死猛。
English: For twenty years, King Gyeonggi loved Son Doong and planned to make him crown prince. However, King Gyeonggi died at this time. A group of sons of beggars fought against Son Doong, and the people in the capital made the eldest son of Son Doong king. Son Doong attacked and killed Son Doong.

古文：猛为悼王。
现代文：猛即悼王。
English: The king was immediately mourned.

古文：晋人攻子朝而立丐，是为敬王。
现代文：晋人攻打子朝而立丐为王，就是敬王。
English: If the Jin people attack the Zi Dynasty and establish a beggar as king, it is to respect the king.

古文：敬王元年，晋人入敬王，子朝自立，敬王不得入，居泽。
现代文：敬王元年，晋人护送敬王回朝。因子朝已自立为王，敬王不能进入国都，就居住在泽邑。
English: In the first year of King Kei's reign, the Jin people escorted King Kei back to the dynasty. As the dynasty had become independent, King Kei could not enter the capital, so he lived in Ze-eup.

古文：四年，晋率诸侯入敬王于周，子朝为臣，诸侯城周。
现代文：四年，晋率领诸侯把敬王护送回周，子朝做了臣子，诸侯给周修筑都城。
English: In the fourth year, Jin led the lords to escort King Kei back to Zhou, and Zichang became a vassal, and the lords built the capital city for Zhou.

古文：十六年，子朝之徒复作乱，敬王饹于晋。
现代文：十六年，子朝一伙人再次作乱，敬王逃亡到晋。
English: Sixteen years later, a group of sons of the emperor once again caused a disturbance, and King Kei fled to Jin.

古文：十七年，晋定公遂入敬王于周。
现代文：十七年，晋定公终于把周王送回周都。
English: Seventeen years later, Prince Jinding finally sent King Zhou back to Zhou.

古文：三十九年，齐田常杀其君简公。
现代文：三十九年，齐国田常杀死了他们的国君简公。
English: In the 39th year of the Qin Dynasty, Tian Chang killed their sovereign Jian Gong.

古文：四十一年，楚灭陈。
现代文：四十一年，楚灭掉陈国。
English: Forty-one years ago, Chu wiped out Chen Guo.

古文：孔子卒。
现代文：孔子在这一年去世。
English: Confucius died the same year.

古文：四十二年，敬王崩，子元王仁立。
现代文：四十二年，周敬王逝世，儿子元王仁登位。
English: In 42, King Zhou Jing died and his son, Yuan Wangren, ascended to the throne.

古文：元王八年，崩，子定王介立。
现代文：元王八年，逝世，儿子定王介登位。
English: In the eighth year of the Yuan Dynasty, he died, and his son, Ding Wang Jie, ascended the throne.

古文：定王十六年，三晋灭智伯，分有其地。
现代文：定王十六年，赵、魏、韩三国灭智伯，瓜分了他的土地。
English: In the 16th year of the reign of King Ding, Zhao, Wei, and Han all three countries killed Zhi Bo and divided his land.

古文：二十八年，定王崩，长子去疾立，是为哀王。
现代文：二十八年，定王逝世，长子去疾登位，这就是哀王。
English: In the twenty-eighth year, King Ding died, and his eldest son ascended the throne due to illness. This was the king's lament.

古文：哀王立三月，弟叔袭杀哀王而自立，是为思王。
现代文：哀王登位三个月，他的弟弟叔袭杀了哀王，自己登上王位，这就是思王。
English: Three months after King Miao ascended the throne, his younger brother and uncle attacked and killed King Miao and ascended the throne themselves. This is King Miao.

古文：思王立五月，少弟嵬攻杀思王而自立，是为考王。
现代文：思王登位五个月，他的最小的弟弟嵬攻打并杀死思王而自立为王，就是考王。
English: Five months after Si Wang ascended to the throne, his youngest brother Zou attacked and killed Si Wang and became king himself, that is, King Khao.

古文：此三王皆定王之子。
现代文：这三个王都是定王的儿子。
English: All three kings were sons of King Ding.

古文：考王十五年，崩，子威烈王午立。
现代文：考王十五年，逝世，他的儿子威烈王午即位。
English: In the fifteenth year of King Kao's reign, he died, and his son, King Weli, ascended the throne.

古文：考王封其弟于河南，是为桓公，以续周公之官职。
现代文：考王把他的弟弟封在河南，就是西周桓公，让他承续周公这个官位职事。
English: Kao Wang sealed his younger brother in Henan, that is, Xi Zhou Huan Gong, and let him succeed Zhou Gong in this official position.

古文：桓公卒，子威公代立。
现代文：桓公死后，儿子威公继任。
English: After the death of Prince Kan, his son Prince Weigong succeeded him.

古文：威公卒，子惠公代立，乃封其少子於巩以奉王，号东周惠公。
现代文：威公死后，儿子惠公继任，把他的小儿子封在巩地以护卫周王，号为东周惠公。
English: After the death of Wei Gong, his son Huigong succeeded him, and he sealed his younger son in Gongdi to guard King Zhou. His name was Dong Zhou Huigong.

古文：威烈王二十三年，九鼎震。
现代文：威烈王二十三年，放置九鼎的王城地震。
English: In the 23rd year of the reign of Emperor Wei Liang, there was an earthquake in the city of Wangcheng.

古文：命韩、魏、赵为诸侯。
现代文：这一年，周王策命韩、魏、赵为诸侯。
English: In this year, King Zhou decreed that Han, Wei, and Zhao should become princes.

古文：二十四年，崩，子安王骄立。
现代文：二十四年，威烈王逝世，他的儿子安王骄即位。
English: Twenty-four years later, King Weli died, and his son, King An, ascended to the throne.

古文：是岁盗杀楚声王。
现代文：这一年，盗贼杀了楚声王。
English: This year, thieves killed King Chuseong.

古文：安王立二十六年，崩，子烈王喜立。
现代文：安王在位二十六年，逝世，他的儿子烈王喜即位。
English: King An, who reigned for 26 years, died, and his son, the late King He, ascended to the throne.

古文：烈王二年，周太史儋见秦献公曰： 始周与秦国合而别，别五百载复合，合十七岁而霸王者出焉。 
现代文：烈王二年，周太史儋见秦献公，说： 当初周和秦是合在一起的，后来分开了，分开五百年之后又合在一起，合在一起十七年后，将会有一位称霸统一天下的人出现。 
English: In the second year of King Li's reign, Zhou Taishi met with Qin Xingguo and said: At first, Zhou and Qin were together, then separated, separated for five hundred years and then reunited, and after seventeen years together, there will be a person who claims to be the ruler.

古文：十年，烈王崩，弟扁立，是为显王。显王五年，贺秦献公，献公称伯。
现代文：十年，祝贺秦献公，勤献公称霸。九年，显王又把祭祀文王、武王的胙肉送给秦孝公。
English: In the 10th year, he congratulated Qin Xiaogong on his dedication to the emperor, and in the 9th year, King Hsien gave Qin Xiaogong the meat from the sacrificial offerings to King Wen and King Wu.

古文：九年，致文武胙於秦孝公。
现代文：二十五年，秦在周国都与诸侯会盟。
English: In the 25th year, Qin entered into an alliance with the princes in Zhou.

古文：二十五年，秦会诸侯於周。二十六年，周致伯於秦孝公。
现代文：二十六年，周王把诸侯霸主方伯这个名称送给秦孝公。
English: In the twenty-sixth year, King Zhou gave the title of the overlord of the princes, Fangbo, to Qin Xiaogong.

古文：三十三年，贺秦惠王。
现代文：三十三年，祝贺秦惠王。
English: Thirty-three years, congratulations to Qin Hui Wang.

古文：三十五年，致文武胙於秦惠王。
现代文：三十五年，又把祭祀文王、武王的胙肉送给秦惠王。
English: Thirty-five years later, he also gave the meat from the sacrificial offerings to King Wen and King Wu to King Qin Hui.

古文：四十四年，秦惠王称王。
现代文：四十四年，秦惠王称王。
English: In the 44th year, Qin Hui Wang was proclaimed king.

古文：其後诸侯皆为王。
现代文：自此以后，诸侯都各自称王了。
English: From then on, the lords each claimed to be king.

古文：四十八年，显王崩，子慎靓王定立。
现代文：四十八年，显王逝世，他的儿子慎靓王定即位。
English: In the 48th year, King Hsien died, and his son, King Shentong, ascended the throne.

古文：慎靓王立六年，崩，子赧王延立。
现代文：慎靓王在位六年，逝世后，他的儿子赧王延即位。
English: Shennong Wang reigned for six years. After his death, his son Shennong Wang Yan ascended to the throne.

古文：王赧时东西周分治。
现代文：王赧时东周和西周各自为政。
English: At the time of Wang Xi, the Eastern Zhou Dynasty and the Western Zhou Dynasty each had their own government.

古文：王赧徙都西周。
现代文：王赧迁都于西周。
English: Wang Qianqian is located in West Zhou.

古文：西周武公之共太子死，有五庶子，毋適立。
现代文：西周武公的共太子去世了，还有五个儿子都是庶出的，没有嫡子可以立为太子。
English: The co-crown prince of West Zhou Wuchong passed away, and there are still five sons who were born out of wedlock. No legitimate son can become crown prince.

古文：司马翦谓楚王曰： 不如以地资公子咎，为请太子。 
现代文：司马翦对楚王说： 不如用土地资助公子咎，为他请求太子之位。 
English: Sima Yi said to King Chu, "It would be better to use the land to subsidize the prince and ask for the position of crown prince for him."

古文：左成曰： 不可。
现代文：左成说： 不行。
English: Zuo Cheng said, "No."

古文：周不听，是公之知困而交疏於周也。
现代文：如果周不听从我们，那您的处境就尴尬困顿了，和周的交情也疏远了。
English: If Zhou does not listen to us, then your situation will be awkward and difficult, and your friendship with Zhou will be alienated.

古文：不如请周君孰欲立，以微告翦，翦请令楚之以地。 
现代文：不如去问问周君想要立谁为太子，然后私下悄悄告诉给翦，翦再让楚国资助给他土地。 
English: It would be better to ask Zhou Jun who he wanted to make the crown prince, and then quietly tell Zou privately. Zou would then ask the State of Chu to give him land.

古文：果立公子咎为太子。
现代文：西周果然立公子咎为太子。
English: West Zhou did indeed appoint Prince Guan as crown prince.

古文：八年，秦攻宜阳，楚救之。
现代文：八年，秦攻打宜阳，楚国派兵前去援救。
English: In the eighth year, Qin attacked Yiyang, and Chu sent troops to the rescue.

古文：而楚以周为秦故，将伐之。
现代文：而楚国以为周是帮助秦国，所以想攻打周。
English: However, Chu thought that Zhou was helping Qin, so they wanted to attack Zhou.

古文：苏代为周说楚王曰： 何以周为秦之祸也？
现代文：苏代替周游说楚王说： 您怎么知道周帮助秦国是祸患呢？
English: Su lobbied King Chu on behalf of Zhou and said: How do you know that Zhou's help to Qin is a disaster?

古文：言周之为秦甚於楚者，欲令周入秦也，故谓 周秦 也。
现代文：那些说周帮助秦国比帮助楚国更出力的人，是想让周投到秦国阵营里去，所以人们都把周、秦放在一起说 周秦 啊。
English: Those who said that Zhou helped Qin more than he helped Chu wanted Zhou to join the Qin camp, so people put Zhou and Qin together and said "Zhou Qin."

古文：周知其不可解，必入於秦，此为秦取周之精者也。
现代文：周明白自己没办法解脱得了，就必定会投入秦国的阵营，这就是帮助秦国取周的妙计。
English: Zhou knew that he could not get rid of Zhou, so he would definitely join the Qin camp. This was a clever plan to help Qin take Zhou.

古文：为王计者，周於秦因善之，不於秦亦言善之，以疏之於秦。
现代文：若真为大王考虑，那周为秦出力要善待;不为秦出力也要善待，这样，才能让周和秦疏远。
English: If you really consider yourself a great king, you should be kind to Zhou when he is working for Qin; you should also be kind to him when he is not working for Qin, so that Zhou and Qin can be estranged.

古文：周绝於秦，必入於郢矣。 
现代文：周和秦绝了交，就一定会投向楚国郢都。 
English: When Zhou and Qin broke off diplomatic relations, they would definitely go to the capital of Chu.

古文：秦借道两周之间，将以伐韩，周恐借之畏於韩，不借畏於秦。
现代文：秦国在东周和西周之间借道，准备攻打韩国，周担心借道给秦国会得罪韩国，不借道又怕会得罪秦国。
English: Qin took the road between East Zhou and West Zhou and prepared to attack South Korea. Zhou was worried that he would offend South Korea by taking the road to Qin, and that he would offend Qin if he did not take the road.

古文：史厌谓周君曰： 何不令人谓韩公叔曰 秦之敢绝周而伐韩者，信东周也。
现代文：史厌对周君说： 为什么不派人去见韩公叔呢？对韩公叔说： 秦国之所以敢经过周去讨伐韩国，是因为信任东周。
English: Shi Yan said to Zhou Jun: Why don't you send someone to see Uncle Han? He said to Uncle Han: The reason why Qin dared to go through Zhou to attack South Korea was because they trusted Eastern Zhou.

古文：公何不与周地，发质使之楚 ？
现代文：您为何不送给周一些土地，并派出人质到楚国去呢？ 
English: Why don't you give some land to Zhou and send the hostages to Chu?

古文：秦必疑楚不信周，是韩不伐也。
现代文：秦国一定会怀疑楚国而不相信周，这样也就不会去攻打韩国了。
English: Qin would doubt Chu and not believe Zhou, and thus would not attack Korea.

古文：又谓秦曰 韩彊与周地，将以疑周於秦也，周不敢不受 。
现代文：然后又对秦国讲： 韩非得把土地送给周，为的是用这样的方法让秦怀疑周，所以周不敢不接受。 
English: Then he said to Qin Guo: Han Fei had to give the land to Zhou, in order to use this method to make Qin suspect Zhou, so Zhou did not dare not to accept.

古文：秦必无辞而令周不受，是受地於韩而听於秦。 
现代文：秦国必定没有让周不接受土地的说辞，这样就能既得到韩的土地又是听从秦国的命令了。 
English: Qin must not have allowed Zhou to refuse to accept the land, so that he could not only get the land of Han, but also obey the orders of Qin.

古文：秦召西周君，西周君恶往，故令人谓韩王曰： 秦召西周君，将以使攻王之南阳也，王何不出兵於南阳？
现代文：秦召见西周君，西周君不愿去，所以就派人对韩王说： 秦国召见西周君，他是想派他去攻打大王的南阳，大王为什么不出兵驻守南阳呢？
English: Qin summoned Xi Zhoujun, Xi Zhoujun did not want to go, so he sent someone to Han Wang to say: Qin summoned Xi Zhoujun, he wanted to send him to attack the great king's Nanyang, why did the great king not send troops to garrison Nanyang?

古文：周君将以为辞於秦。
现代文：到时周君就会以此为借口拒绝到秦国去。
English: At that time, Zhou Jun would use this as an excuse to refuse to go to Qin.

古文：周君不入秦，秦必不敢逾河而攻南阳矣。 
现代文：周君不到秦国去，秦国就一定不敢渡过黄河来攻打南阳了。 
English: If Zhou Jun did not go to Qin, Qin would not dare to cross the Yellow River to attack Nanyang.

古文：东周与西周战，韩救西周。
现代文：东周与西周交战，韩派兵去救援西周。
English: East Zhou and West Zhou fought, and South Korea sent troops to rescue West Zhou.

古文：或为东周说韩王曰： 西周故天子之国，多名器重宝。王案兵毋出，可以德东周，而西周之宝必可以尽矣。 
现代文：有人替东周劝说韩王说： 西周原先是天子的国都，有许多珍稀器物和贵重的珍宝，大王按兵不动，就可以让东周感念您的恩德，而西周的宝物也可以全部得到。 
English: Someone persuaded Han Wang on behalf of Eastern Zhou, saying: Western Zhou was originally the capital of the son of Heaven, with many rare objects and precious treasures. If the king does not move, he can let Eastern Zhou feel your grace, and the treasures of Western Zhou can all be obtained.

古文：王赧谓成君。
现代文：周王赧被称做成君。
English: Zhou Wangyao was known as "Doing Zengjun."

古文：楚围雍氏，韩徵甲与粟於东周，东周君恐，召苏代而告之。
现代文：楚国围攻了韩国的雍氏，韩国在东周征集兵器和粮草，东周君很害怕，召见苏代把这事告诉了他。
English: Chu besieged South Korea's Yong, and South Korea collected weapons and grain and grass in East Zhou. East Zhou was very afraid and summoned the Soviet leader to tell him about it.

古文：代曰： 君何患於是。
现代文：苏代说： 您何必为这件事担忧。
English: Sudai said, "Why should you worry about this?

古文：臣能使韩毋徵甲与粟於周，又能为君得高都。 
现代文：臣下能让韩国不向东周征用兵器和粮食，又能为您得到高都。 
English: Your vassal can keep South Korea from requisitioning weapons and grain from Eastern Zhou, and can get Gaodu for you.

古文：周君曰： 子苟能，请以国听子。 
现代文：东周君说： 您若真有这样的能力，我就让整个国家都听从于您。 
English: Eastern Zhou said: If you really have such ability, I will make the whole country obey you.

古文：代见韩相国曰： 楚围雍氏，期三月也，今五月不能拔，是楚病也。
现代文：苏代去见韩国的相国公仲侈说： 楚国围攻雍氏，曾约定三月就攻打下来，如今已经五个月还是攻不下，这是说明楚国已经很疲惫了。
English: When the Soviet leader went to see his South Korean counterpart, Kim Jong-il, he said, "Chu has been besieging Yong, and we had agreed to attack in March, but now it has been five months and we still haven't been able to attack. This shows that Chu is very tired."

古文：今相国乃徵甲与粟於周，是告楚病也。 韩相国曰： 善。
现代文：如今相国您竟向周征集兵器和粮食，相当于向楚国宣告您已经损耗严重。 韩国相国说： 说得对。
English: Now that you are collecting weapons and grain from Zhou, it is tantamount to announcing to Chu that you have suffered serious losses.The South Korean partner country said: You are right.

古文：使者已行矣。 
现代文：可使者已经出发了。 
English: But the messenger has already set off.

古文：五代曰： 何不与周高都？ 
现代文：苏代说： 为什国不把高都送给周？ 
English: Sudai said: Why doesn't the country give Gao to Zhou?

古文：韩相国大怒曰： 吾毋徵甲与粟於周亦已多矣，何故与周高都也？ 
现代文：韩国相邦大怒说道： 我不向周征用兵器和粮食就已经是很大的让步了，凭什么还把高都送给东周？ 
English: The South Korean counterpart said angrily: If I don't requisition weapons and grain from Zhou, it's already a big concession. Why should I give Gaodu to East Zhou?

古文：代曰： 与周高都，是周折而入於韩也，秦闻之必大怒忿周，即不通周使，是以弊高都得完周也。曷为不与？ 相国曰： 善。 
现代文：苏代说： 把高都送给周，那么周就会转而投靠韩国，秦国听说了必定会对周非常愤恨怨怒，就断绝和和周的使者的往来，这就相当于是用破败的高都换来一个完整的周。为什么不给呢？ 相国说： 你所得对。 
English: Su Dai said: Give Gaodu to Zhou, then Zhou will turn to South Korea. Qin Guo heard that Zhou would be very angry and resentful, and cut off contacts with Zhou's envoys. This is equivalent to exchanging a ruined Gaodu for a complete Zhou. Why not give it? The other country said: You got it right.

古文：果与周高都。
现代文：果真把高都给了周。
English: As it turned out, Zhou was given all of Gao.

古文：三十四年，苏厉谓周君曰： 秦破韩、魏，扑师武，北取赵蔺、离石者，皆白起也。
现代文：三十四年，苏厉对周君说： 秦攻破了韩国、魏国，打败了魏将师武。在北方攻取了赵国的蔺、离石等地，这都是白起所为。
English: In the 34th year, Su Li said to Zhou Jun, "Qin conquered Korea and Wei, defeated the Wei general Shimu, and in the north, conquered Zhao's Huan and Liangshi, all of which were done for nothing.

古文：是善用兵，又有天命。
现代文：白起善于用兵，又有天命护佑。
English: Bai Qi is good at using soldiers, and he is also blessed by fate.

古文：今又将兵出塞攻梁，梁破则周危矣。
现代文：现在他又率领军队出伊阙塞去攻打梁国，如果梁国被攻破，那么周就危险了。
English: Now he is leading his army out of Ilsai to attack Liang. If Liang is defeated, Zhou will be in danger.

古文：君何不令人说白起乎？
现代文：您为什么不派人去劝说白起呢？
English: Why don't you send someone to persuade Bai Qi?

古文：曰 楚有养由基者，善射者也。
现代文：就说： 楚国有个养由基，是个擅长射箭的人。
English: He said, "Chu has a foster father who is good at archery.

古文：去柳叶百步而射之，百发而百中之。
现代文：他在距离柳叶百步之远的地方射箭，可以百发百中。
English: He shoots arrows at a distance of a hundred paces from the willow leaves, and can hit a hundred arrows.

古文：左右观者数千人，皆曰善射。
现代文：在左右围观的人有几千人，大家都称赞他射得好。
English: There were several thousand people on the sidelines, and everyone praised his shooting.

古文：有一夫立其旁，曰 善，可教射矣 。
现代文：唯独有个男子站在他身旁说： 不错，可以交给他射箭了。 
English: But a man stood next to him and said, "That's right, you can give him archery."

古文：养由基怒，释弓搤剑，曰 客安能教我射乎 ？
现代文：养由基大怒，放下弓，握住剑，说： 客人你有什么能耐教我射箭？ 
English: Nurturing Yuki's rage, he put down his bow, gripped his sword, and said, "Guest, how can you teach me archery?

古文：客曰 非吾能教子支左诎右也。
现代文：那客人说： 不是我能教您左手执弓右手拉弦的技术。
English: The guest said, "I can't teach you how to hold the bow with your left hand and pull the strings with your right hand.

古文：夫去柳叶百步而射之，百发而百中之，不以善息，少焉气衰力倦，弓拨矢钩，一发不中者，百发尽息 。
现代文：像刚才那样距离柳叶百步远射箭，百发百中，不知道在射得最好的时候停下，不久就会精疲力尽，弓拿不正，箭射不直，只要一发射不中，那一百发也就全作废了。 
English: If you shoot arrows at a distance of a hundred paces from the willow leaves as you did just now, if you don't know when to stop shooting, you will soon be exhausted. If you don't hold the bow properly and don't shoot the arrows straight, as long as you don't hit the target, the hundred shots will all be wasted.

古文：今破韩、魏，扑师武，北取赵蔺、离石者，公之功多矣。
现代文：现在就凭攻破韩国、魏国，杀死师武，在北夺取赵国的蔺、离石这些事，您的功劳已经很多了。
English: Now that you have defeated Korea and Wei, killed Shifu, and captured Zhao's fief in the north, you have already done a lot of things.

古文：今又将兵出塞，过两周，倍韩，攻梁，一举不得，前功尽弃。
现代文：现在您又率领军队出塞，经过东周、西周，背靠韩国，围攻梁国，只要一战不胜，就会前功尽弃。
English: Now, you are leading your army out of Tibet, passing through Eastern Zhou and Western Zhou, turning your back on South Korea, and besieging Liangguo. If you do not win the first battle, you will lose all your achievements.

古文：公不如称病而无出 。 
现代文：您不如称病不出战了。  
English: You might as well call in sick.

古文：四十二年，秦破华阳约。
现代文：四十二年，秦国攻破了魏国的华阳险地。
English: In 42, Qin broke through Wei's Huayang Pass.

古文：马犯谓周君曰： 请令梁城周。 
现代文：周的大臣马犯对周君说： 请允许我游说梁国来为周筑城。 
English: Zhou's minister Ma Fang said to Zhou Jun: Please allow me to persuade Liang Guo to build a city for Zhou.

古文：乃谓梁王曰： 周王病若死，则犯必死矣。
现代文：于是去对梁王说： 周王如果因担忧秦伐周而去世，那么我也必死无疑了。
English: So he went to Liang Wang and said: "If Zhou Wang dies because he is worried about Qin Huazhou, then I will undoubtedly die as well."

古文：犯请以九鼎自入於王，王受九鼎而图犯。 梁王曰： 善。 
现代文：我请求主动把九鼎进献给大王，大王得到九鼎要为我考虑我所说的事情。 梁王说： 好。 
English: I asked him to take the initiative to offer Jiudingjin to the great king, and when the great king received Jiuding, he should consider what I said for me.

古文：遂与之卒，言戍周。
现代文：于是派兵给他，声称是去守卫周城。
English: So he sent soldiers to him, claiming that they were to guard Zhoucheng.

古文：因谓秦王曰： 梁非戍周也，将伐周也。
现代文：马犯趁机去对秦王说： 梁出兵并不是去守卫周城，而是要攻打周。
English: The horse criminal took the opportunity to go to Qin Wang and said: Liang did not send troops to guard Zhou, but to attack Zhou.

古文：王试出兵境以观之。 
现代文：大王您可以试着出兵到边境观察情形如何。 
English: Your Majesty, you can try to send troops to the border to observe the situation.

古文：秦果出兵。
现代文：秦国果然派兵去了。
English: Qin really did send troops.

古文：又谓梁王曰： 周王病甚矣，犯请後可而复之。
现代文：马犯趁机又对梁王说： 周王的病已经好了，我请求的进献九鼎的事以后时机到了再说吧。
English: The horse criminal took advantage of the opportunity to say to King Liang: King Zhou's illness has been cured. Let's talk about it after the time has come for the offering of the Nine Treasures that I requested.

古文：今王使卒之周，诸侯皆生心，後举事且不信。
现代文：现在大王派兵前往周，诸侯都会产生疑心，以后您再有行动人家不会相信了。
English: Now that the great king is sending troops to Zhou, the lords will be suspicious, and no one will believe your actions in the future.

古文：不若令卒为周城，以匿事端。 梁王曰： 善。 
现代文：不如让士兵帮助修筑周城，以掩盖诸侯怀疑您要攻打周的事。 梁王说： 好。 
English: It would be better to let the soldiers help build Zhoucheng to cover up the fact that the lords suspected that you were going to attack Zhou.

古文：遂使城周。
现代文：于是派兵去修建周国都的城墙。
English: So he sent soldiers to build the city wall around the capital.

古文：四十五年，周君之秦客谓周曰： 公不若誉秦王之孝，因以应为太后养地，秦王必喜，是公有秦交。
现代文：四十五年，周君的秦国宾客对周冣说： 您不如称赞秦王的孝道，趁机把应地献给秦国作为太后的供养之地，秦王一定很高兴，这样您和秦国就有了交情。
English: In 45 years, Zhou Jun's Qin State guests said to Zhou Yu: You might as well praise the Qin King's filial piety and take the opportunity to dedicate the land to the Qin State as a place to support the empress dowager. The Qin King must be very happy, so you and the Qin State have a friendship.

古文：交善，周君必以为公功。交恶，劝周君入秦者必有罪矣。 
现代文：交情好了，周君一定认为这是您的功劳；交情不好，劝周君归附秦国的人一定会获罪。 
English: If the friendship is good, Zhou Jun will certainly think that this is your merit; if the friendship is not good, the person who persuades Zhou Jun to join Qin will certainly be punished.

古文：秦攻周，而周勣谓秦王曰： 为王计者不攻周。
现代文：秦去攻打周，周冣对秦王说： 如果为大王您考虑，就不要去攻打周。
English: When Qin attacked Zhou, Zhou Yu said to King Qin: "If you consider yourself a great king, do not attack Zhou.

古文：攻周，实不足以利，声畏天下。
现代文：攻打周，实在获得的利益不多，却使您的名声让天下人都害怕。
English: Attacking Zhou, there is not much profit gained, but it makes your reputation so that the world is afraid.

古文：天下以声畏秦，必东合於齐。
现代文：天下人都因为秦攻打周的名声而害怕，一定会往东去联合齐国。
English: People all over the world are afraid because of Qin's reputation for attacking Zhou, and they will definitely go east to unite with Qi.

古文：兵弊於周。合天下於齐，则秦不王矣。
现代文：军队因为攻打周疲惫了，天下也都去与齐联合了，这样，秦国就不能统一天下称王了。
English: The army was exhausted from attacking Zhou, and the whole country went to unite with Qi. As a result, Qin could no longer unify and claim to be the king.

古文：天下欲弊秦，劝王攻周。
现代文：天下正希望使秦国实力消耗，所以劝说您去攻打周。
English: The world is hoping to exhaust Qin's strength, so I urge you to attack Zhou.

古文：秦与天下弊，则令不行矣。 
现代文：如果秦国和诸侯都疲惫了，那样您的号令就不会通行了。 
English: If Qin and the princes are exhausted, then your order will not be carried out.

古文：五十八年，三晋距秦。
现代文：五十八年，韩、赵、魏三国共同抵抗秦国。
English: In 58, Han, Zhao, and Wei jointly resisted Qin.

古文：周令其相国之秦，以秦之轻也，还其行。
现代文：周派相国到秦国去，因为怕秦国轻视，就半路返回来了。
English: Zhou sent his brother-in-law to Qin, but fearing that Qin would despise him, he returned halfway.

古文：客谓相国曰： 秦之轻重未可知也。
现代文：有游客对相国说： 秦对周是轻视还是重视尚未知道。
English: Some tourists said to their compatriots: It is not yet known whether Qin despised or valued Zhou.

古文：秦欲知三国之情。
现代文：秦想要了解三国的情况。
English: Qin wanted to know about the situation in the three countries.

古文：公不如急见秦王曰 请为王听东方之变 ，秦王必重公。
现代文：您不如赶紧去见秦王说 请让我为王打探东方各国的情况 ，秦王必定会重视您。
English: You might as well hurry to see King Qin and say, "Please let me investigate the situation of the Eastern countries for the king," King Qin will certainly pay attention to you.

古文：重公，是秦重周，周以取秦也；齐重，则固有周聚以收齐：是周常不失重国之交也。 
现代文：重视您，秦也就会看重周，周就会取得秦的信任；齐国对周重视，本来就有周冣和齐国联络好了：这样，周就不会失去与强国的交情。 
English: If Qin attaches importance to you, Qin will also attach importance to Zhou, and Zhou will gain the trust of Qin; if Qi attaches importance to Zhou, there will already be a connection between Zhou and Qi: in this way, Zhou will not lose its friendship with a powerful country.

古文：秦信周，发兵攻三晋。
现代文：秦信任周，就发兵去攻打韩、赵、魏三国。 
English: Qin trusted Zhou and sent troops to attack Han, Zhao, and Wei.

古文：五十九年，秦取韩阳城负黍，西周恐，倍秦，与诸侯约从，将天下锐师出伊阙攻秦，令秦无得通阳城。
现代文：五十九年，秦夺取韩国的阳城和负黍，西周很恐慌，背叛了秦，与其他诸侯联合，率领天下精兵出伊阙塞去攻打秦，使秦兵无法到达阳城。
English: In 59 AD, Qin conquered Yangcheng and Nanzhong in Korea. Xi Zhou panicked and betrayed Qin. He united with other princes and led the world's best soldiers out of Yixi to attack Qin, making it impossible for Qin soldiers to reach Yangcheng.

古文：秦昭王怒，使将军摎攻西周。
现代文：秦昭王大怒，派将军摎攻打西周。
English: Qin Zhao Wang was furious and sent his general Zou to attack West Zhou.

古文：西周君饹秦，顿首受罪，尽献其邑三十六，口三万。
现代文：西周君逃奔到秦国，叩头认罪，献上其全部城邑三十六座，人口三万人。
English: Xi Zhou fled to Qin, bowed down, confessed, and offered all of his thirty-six cities and towns, with a population of thirty thousand.

古文：秦受其献，归其君於周。
现代文：秦接受西周君的进献，让他返回周地。
English: Qin accepted the donation from Xi Zhoujun and let him return to Zhou.

古文：周君、王赧卒，周民遂东亡。
现代文：周君、王赧去世后，周地的百姓就逃亡到东方。
English: After the death of Zhou Jun and Wang Qi, the people of Zhou fled to the east.

古文：秦取九鼎宝器，而迁西周公於狐。
现代文：秦取得九鼎等贵重器物，把西周君迁往狐。
English: Qin obtained the Nine Treasures and other precious objects, and moved Xi Zhoujun to the Fox.

古文：後七岁，秦庄襄王灭东周。
现代文：过了七年，秦庄襄王灭亡东周。
English: Seven years later, King Xiang of Qinzhuang fell to Eastern Zhou.

古文：东西周皆入于秦，周既不祀。
现代文：东西周就全都归属于秦了，从此周朝的祭祀没有人主持了。
English: East and West Zhou all belonged to Qin, and from then on, no one presided over the sacrificial rites of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：太史公曰：学者皆称周伐纣，居洛邑，综其实不然。
现代文：太史公说：学者都说周讨伐商纣，定都洛邑，综合考察它的实际情况却并非如此。
English: Taishigong said: Scholars all say that Luoyang is the capital of Shandong, but a comprehensive examination of its actual situation is not the case.

古文：武王营之，成王使召公卜居，居九鼎焉，而周复都丰、镐。
现代文：虽然武王曾测量营建洛邑，成王也派召公占卜选择位置，把九鼎放在那里，但周仍然以丰、镐为都。
English: Although King Wu had surveyed the construction of Luoyang, and King Cheng also sent a diviner to choose a location and put Jiuding there, Zhou still used Feng and Handan as the capital.

古文：至犬戎败幽王，周乃东徙于洛邑。
现代文：直到犬戎打败幽王，周才东迁到洛邑。
English: It was not until Injun Rong defeated You Wang that Zhou moved to Luoyang.

古文：所谓 周公葬毕 ，毕在镐东南杜中。
现代文：所谓 周公葬在毕 ，毕就在镐东南的杜中。
English: The so-called Zhou public funeral is in Bi, Bi is in Duzhong, southeast of Handan.

古文：秦灭周。
现代文：是秦灭亡了周。
English: It was the week of Qin's downfall.

古文：汉兴九十有馀载，天子将封泰山，东巡狩至河南，求周苗裔，封其後嘉三十里地，号曰周子南君，比列侯，以奉其先祭祀。
现代文：汉朝建立九十多年以来，天子要在泰山行封禅礼，东去巡狩到达河南县，访求周的后裔子孙，封给周的后人嘉三十里地，封号为周子南君，位同列侯，让他以供奉对周祖先的祭祀。
English: Since the establishment of the Han Dynasty more than ninety years ago, the heavenly son has to perform a sealing Zen ceremony on Mount Tai, go east on a hunting tour to Henan County, visit the descendants of Zhou, and give the descendants of Zhou Jia 30 miles of land. The sealing name is Zhou Zi Nanjun, and he is the same as the feudal lord, so that he can offer sacrifices to Zhou's ancestors.

