古文：黄帝曰：余闻阴阳之人何如？
现代文：黄帝说：我听说人体有不同的阴阳属性，他们是如何区别的呢？
English: Huang Di said: I heard that the human body has different yin and yang attributes, how do they differ?

古文：伯高曰： 天地之间，六合之内，不离于五，人亦应之。故五五二十五人之政，而阴阳之人不与焉。其态又不合于众者五。 
现代文：伯高曾对我讲： 天地之间，东西南北上下的宇宙空间里，一切事物都禀受五行之气，也离不开五行运动变化的道理，人也与此相应，根据人的先天禀赋不同，各自体现着木、火、土、金、水五行性质的类型特征，而每一类型的人又表现出五种个体差异，所以，人群中体现了二十五种类型。
English: Bogao once said to me: Between heaven and earth, in the cosmic space from east to west, north to south, and up and down, all things are influenced by the five elements, and it is also inseparable from the principle of changes in the movement of the five elements. People also correspond to this. According to people's innate endowment, they each embody the type characteristics of the five elements of wood, fire, earth, gold, and water. And each type of person shows five individual differences. Therefore, there are twenty-five types reflected in the crowd.

古文：余已知之矣。愿闻二十五人之形，血气之所生，别而以候，从外知内，何如？
现代文：但是二十五种人的形体特征、性格特点各有不同，但并不包括阴阳两种属性。如果按照阴阳属性分类，可以分为太阴、少阴、太阳、少阳、阴阳和平五种。 这些我已经知道了。
English: However, the twenty-five kinds of people have different physical characteristics and personality traits, but they do not include the two attributes of yin and yang. If they are classified according to yin and yang attributes, they can be divided into five types: too yin, less yin, sun, less yang, yin and yang, and peace. I already know these.

古文：岐伯曰：悉乎哉问也！此先师之秘也，虽伯高犹不能明之也。
现代文：我还想知道二十五种人形态的具体情况，了解他们由于血气不同而形成的各种特征，从而在治疗时能够分别候察，由外知内，可以做到吗？岐伯说：问得真详细啊！
English: I also want to know the specifics of the twenty-five human forms, understand the various characteristics they have formed due to different blood gases, and thus be able to observe them separately during treatment. From outside to inside, can it be done? Qibo said: It's a detailed question!

古文：黄帝避席遵循而却曰：余闻之，得其人弗教，是谓重失；得而泄之，天将厌之，余愿得而明之，金柜藏之，不敢扬之。
现代文：这是先师秘而不传的，就是伯高也不能彻底明白其中的道理。黄帝离席后退几步，很恭敬地说：我听说，遇到适当的人而不把秘学传授给他，这是过于慎秘；获得了秘学而随随便便泄露出去，天所不容。我希望获得这种秘学，并领会透彻，而后秘藏在金柜里面，不敢随便传扬。
English: This was something that the previous teacher kept secret and did not pass on, and even Bo Kao could not fully understand the reason for this. Huang Di stepped back a few steps from the table and said very respectfully: I heard that it was too cautious not to pass on the secret knowledge to the right person; it was unacceptable to divulge the secret knowledge casually. I hope to acquire this secret knowledge and understand it thoroughly, and then hide it inside the gold cabinet, and dare not pass it on casually.

古文：岐伯曰：先立五形，金木水火土，别其五色，异其五形之人，而二十五人具矣。
现代文：岐伯说：首先明确木、火、土、金、水五种类型的人，然后按照五色的不同加以区别，就容易知道二十五种人的形态了。
English: Qi Bo said: First of all, the five types of people of wood, fire, earth, gold and water are clearly defined, and then they are distinguished according to the differences of the five colors. It is easy to know the forms of twenty-five people.

古文：黄帝曰：愿卒闻之。
现代文：黄帝说：我希望立即知道全部内容。
English: Huang Di said, "I want to know everything immediately."

古文：岐伯曰：慎之慎之！
现代文：岐伯道：一定要慎而又慎啊！
English: Gibo: We must be cautious and prudent!

古文：臣请言之。
现代文：现在让我来详细地谈谈这个问题吧。
English: Now let me talk about this in detail.

古文：木形之人，比于上角，似于苍帝。
现代文：形体与性情禀承木性的人，属于木音中的上角，这类人的形态特征是皮肤呈青色，像天空中东方的苍帝一样。
English: People with the shape and temperament of the wood inheritor belong to the upper corner of the wood sound. The morphological characteristics of this type of person are that the skin is bluish, like the eastern emperor in the sky.

古文：其为人苍色，小头，长面，大肩背，直身，小手足。
现代文：形体特点是，皮肤偏青色，头小，脸长，肩背宽大，身躯挺直，手足小。
English: The characteristics of the body are that the skin is bluish, the head is small, the face is long, the shoulders are broad, the body is straight, and the hands and feet are small.

古文：好有才，劳心，少力，多忧劳于事。
现代文：性情特点是，有才智，好施心机，体力不强，常为各种事务忧心劳神。
English: Characteristic of his temperament is that he has talent, is a good giver, is not physically strong, and often worries about various matters.

古文：能春夏，不能秋冬，感而病生。
现代文：对时令季节的适应是，耐受春夏不耐秋冬，秋冬季节容易感受病邪而发生疾病。
English: The adaptation to the seasonal seasons is to tolerate the spring and summer but not the autumn and winter. In the autumn and winter, it is easy to feel the sickness and disease.

古文：足厥阴佗佗然。太角之人，比于左足少阳，少阳之上遗遗然；左角之人，比于右足少阳，少阳之下随随然；釱角之人，比于右足少阳，少阳之上推推然；判角之人，比于左足少阳，少阳之下枯枯然。
现代文：在木音中属于上角的人，比类于足厥阴肝经，其情态是从容自得、不急不躁，是禀受木气最全的人。另外还有四种禀受木气不全的人，分左右上下四种：在木音中属于太角的人，在左上方，比类于左足少胆阳经的上部，其情态是拖拖拉拉、畏缩不前；在木音中属于左角的人，在右下方，比类于右足少阳胆经的下部，其情态是过于随和、唯唯诺诺；在木音中属于釱角的人，在右上方，比类于右足少阳胆经的上部，其情态是喜欢冒进、急功近利；在木音中属于判角的人，在左下方，比类于左足少阳胆经的下部，其情态是过于刚直、缺乏灵活。
English: There are also four types of people who are not affected by wood gas, divided into four types: those who are too angular in the wood tone, in the upper left, the upper part of which is similar to the left foot, the upper part of which is similar to the left foot, the upper part of which is similar to the left foot, the upper part of which is similar to the left foot, the upper part of which is similar to the left foot, the upper part of which is similar to the left foot, the upper part of which is similar to the left foot, the upper part of which is similar to the left foot, the upper part of which is similar to the left foot, the lower part of

古文：火形之人，比于上徵，似于赤帝。
现代文：形体与性情禀承火性的人，属于火音中的上徵，像天空中南方的赤帝一样。
English: Those whose body and disposition are of the nature of fire belong to the upper sign of fire, like the Red Emperor in the south in the sky.

古文：其为人赤色，广䏖，脱面，小头，好肩背髀腹，小手足，行安地，疾心，行摇肩，背肉满。
现代文：这类人的形体特征是，皮肤偏红色，齿根宽广，尖脸，头小，肩、背、腰、腹及两腿发育匀称，手足小，步履急速，心性急，走路时身体摇摆，肩背肌肉丰满。
English: The physical characteristics of this type of person are that the skin is reddish, the tooth roots are broad, the face is pointed, the head is small, the shoulders, back, waist, abdomen and legs are well developed, the hands and feet are small, the gait is rapid, the heart is anxious, the body sways when walking, and the muscles of the shoulder back are plump.

古文：有气，轻财，少信，多虑，见事明，好颜，急心，不寿暴死。
现代文：性情特征是，好使气，轻钱财，不轻易相信他人，多疑虑，观察和分析事物敏锐而又透彻，容颜美好，性情急躁，不能长寿，往往暴亡。
English: Characteristic of temperament is that they are easy-going, easy with money, do not easily trust others, have many doubts, observe and analyze things keenly and thoroughly, have a beautiful face, quick-tempered, cannot live long, and often die violently.

古文：能春夏，不能秋冬，秋冬感而病生。
现代文：这类人对时令的适应是，耐春夏的温暖，不耐秋冬的寒冷，秋冬容易感受外邪而生病。
English: This kind of person's adaptation to the seasons is to tolerate the warmth of spring and summer, but not the cold of autumn and winter. In autumn and winter, it is easy to feel the external evil and get sick.

古文：手少阴核核然。质徵之人，比于左手太阳，太阳之上肌肌然；少徵之人，比于右手太阳，太阳之下慆慆然；右徵之人，比于右手太阳，太阳之上鲛鲛然；质判之人，比于左手太阳，太阳之下支支颐颐然。
现代文：在火音中属于上徵的人，比类于手少阴心经，是禀承火气最全的一类人，其情态是诚实可信。另有四种禀受火气不全的人，分为左右上下四种：左上方，在火音中属于质徵，比类于左手太阳小肠经的上部，其情态是开朗光明；右下方，在火音中属于少徵，比类于右手太阳小肠经的下部，其情态是多疑多虑；右上方，在火音中属于右徵，比类于右手太阳小肠经的上部，其情态是踊跃鲁莽；左下方，在火音中属于半徵，比类于左手太阳小肠经的下部，其情态是逍遥自得。
English: There are four kinds of people who are not full of fire, and they are divided into four types: the upper left, which is qualitative in fire, is similar to the upper part of the left-hand small intestine of the sun, and its mode is cheerful and bright; the lower right, which is less in fire, is similar to the lower part of the right-hand small intestine of the sun, and its mode is more doubtful; the upper right, which is right-handed in fire, is similar to the upper part of the right-hand small intestine of the sun, and its mode is more doubtful;

古文：土形之人，比于上宫，似于上古黄帝。
现代文：形体与性情禀承土性的人，属于土音中的上宫，像天空中央的黄帝一样。
English: People with the shape and temperament of the earth, belong to the upper palace in the earth tone, like the Yellow Emperor in the middle of the sky.

古文：其为人黄色，圆面，大头，美肩背，大腹，美股胫，小手足，多肉，上下相称，行安地，举足浮。
现代文：这类人的形体特征是，皮肤偏黄色，圆脸，大头，肩背丰满而健美，腰腹壮大，两腿健壮，手足小，肌肉丰满，身体各部发育匀称，走路脚步稳健，步态轻盈。
English: The physical characteristics of this type of person are that the skin is yellowish, the face is round, the head is large, the shoulders are plump and toned, the waist and abdomen are large, the legs are strong, the hands and feet are small, the muscles are plump, all parts of the body are well developed, the walking pace is steady, and the gait is light.

古文：安心，好利人，不喜权势，善附人也。
现代文：性情特征是，安稳自若，爱作对别人有利的事，不争逐权势，惯常依附他人。
English: Characteristic of his disposition is that he is stable and self-assured, likes to do things that are beneficial to others, does not compete for power, and habitually depends on others.

古文：能秋冬，不能春夏，春夏感而病生，足太阴敦敦然。
现代文：这种类型的人对时令的适应是，能耐秋冬的寒凉，不能耐春夏的温热，春夏容易感受外邪而生病。
English: This type of person's adaptation to the seasons is to be able to tolerate the cold of autumn and winter, but not the heat of spring and summer. In spring and summer, it is easy to feel the external evil and get sick.

古文：太宫之人，比于左足阳明，阳明之上婉婉然。
现代文：这一类型的人在土音中称为上宫，比类于足太阴脾经，是禀受土气最全的人，其情态是诚恳而忠厚。
English: This type of person is called Shanggong in the tone of the soil, and is similar to the foot Taiyin spleen, is the person who is most affected by the soil, and his state is sincere and loyal.

古文：加宫之人，比于左足阳明，阳明之下坎坎然。少宫之人，比于右足阳明，阳明之上枢枢然。左宫之人，比于右足阳明，阳明之下兀兀然。
现代文：禀承土气不全者也分为左右上下四种：左上方，土音中属于太宫者，比类左足阳明胃经的上部，其情态是温柔和顺；左下方，土音中属于加宫者，比类于左足阳明胃经的下部，其情态是端庄持重；右上方，土音中属于少宫者，比类于右足阳明胃经的上部，其情态是圆转灵活；右上方，土音中属于左宫者，比类于右足阳明胃经的下部，其情态是独立不动摇。
English: There are also four types of people who are deficient in the earth element: the top left, those who belong to the palace in the earth tone, are similar to the upper part of the left foot yangming stomach meridian, and their state is gentle and smooth; the bottom left, those who belong to the palace in the earth tone, are similar to the lower part of the left foot yangming stomach meridian, and their state is dignified and heavy; the top right, those who belong to the small palace in the earth tone, are similar to the upper part of the right foot yangming stomach meridian, and their state is round and flexible; the top right, those who belong to the left

古文：金形之人，比于上商，似于白帝。
现代文：形体与性情禀承金性的人，属于金音中的上商，好比天空中西方的白帝一样。
English: Those who have the nature of gold in their body and disposition belong to the merchants in the golden sound, just like the Western White Emperor in the sky.

古文：其为人方面，白色，小头，小肩背，小腹，小手足，如骨发踵外，骨轻。
现代文：这类人的形体特征是，方脸，皮肤偏白色，头小，肩背小，腹小，手足小，足跟部骨骼显露，行走轻快。
English: The physical characteristics of this type of person are a square face, white skin, small head, small shoulders, small abdomen, small hands and feet, exposed bones in the heel, and brisk walking.

古文：身清廉，急心，静悍，善为吏。
现代文：性格特点是，禀性廉洁，办事不拖踏，外表柔静而内实悍勇，能够当好官吏。
English: Characteristic is that he is tenacious and incorruptible, does not procrastinate, is soft-spoken on the outside and courageous on the inside, and is able to be a good official.

古文：能秋冬，不能春夏，春夏感而病生。
现代文：对时令的适应是，能耐受秋冬的寒凉，不能耐受春夏的温热，春夏易感受邪气而患病。
English: In terms of adaptation to the seasons, it is resistant to the cold of autumn and winter, and not resistant to the heat of spring and summer. In the spring and summer, it is easy to feel the evil spirit and become ill.

古文：手太阴敦敦然。釱商之人，比于左手阳明，阳明之上廉廉然；右商之人，比于左手阳明，阳明之下脱脱然；左商之人，比于右手阳明，阳明之上监监然；少商之人，比于右手阳明，阳明之下严严然。
现代文：这一类型的人，在金音中称为上商，比类于手太阴肺经，是禀受金气最全的人，其情态是敦厚重义。此外，禀受金气不全的人分为左右上下四种：左上方，金音中属于釱商一类的人，比类于左手阳明大肠经的上部，其情态是锋芒毕露；左下方，金音中属于右商一类的人，比类于左手阳明大肠经的下部，其情态是清俊洒脱；右上方，金音中属于左商一类的人，比类于右手阳明经的上部，其情态是善于明察秋毫；右下方，金音中属于少商一类的人，比类于右手阳明经的下部，其情态是威严而庄重。
English: This type of person is called Shang Shang in the gold tone, which is similar to the palm of the hand being too yin and lung meridian, and is the person with the most complete gold qi, whose state is thick and heavy. In addition, the person with insufficient gold qi is divided into four types of left and right: the upper left, the person belonging to the category of Shang Shang in the gold tone, is similar to the upper part of the left hand Yang Ming large intestine meridian, whose state is sharp and exposed; the lower left, the person belonging to the category of Right Merchant in the gold tone, is similar to the lower part of the left hand Yang Ming large intestine meridian

古文：水形之人，比于上羽，似于黑帝。
现代文：形体与性情禀承水性的人，属于水音中的上羽，就像天空中北方的黑帝一样。
English: People who are water-bearing in body and temperament belong to the upper echelon of water sounds, just like the Black Emperor in the northern sky.

古文：其为人黑色，面不平，大头，廉颐，小肩，大腹，动手足，发行摇身，下尻长，背延延然。
现代文：这类人的形体特征是，皮肤偏黑色，颜面凹凸不平，头大，面颊消瘦，肩小，腹大，手足喜动，走路时身体摇摆晃动，腰背及臀部修长。
English: The physical characteristics of this type of person are that the skin is black, the face is uneven, the head is large, the cheeks are thin, the shoulders are small, the abdomen is large, the hands and feet are moving, the body is swaying when walking, and the waist and hips are slender.

古文：不敬畏，善欺绍人，戮死。
现代文：性格特点是，无所敬畏，善于欺诈，常因作恶而被杀身丧命。
English: Characteristic is that he is fearless, good at deception, and is often killed for doing evil.

古文：能秋冬，不能春夏，春夏感而病生。
现代文：在对时令的适应上，耐秋冬的寒冷，不耐春夏的温热，春夏季节容易感受邪气而发病。
English: In terms of adaptation to the seasons, it is resistant to the cold of autumn and winter, and not resistant to the heat of spring and summer. In the spring and summer, it is easy to feel the evil spirit and become ill.

古文：足少阴汙汙然。太羽之人，比于右足太阳，太阳之上颊颊然；少羽之人，比于左足太阳，太阳之下纡纡然；众之为人，比于右足太阳，太阳之下洁洁然；桎之为人，比于左足太阳，太阳之上安安然。
现代文：这种人属于水音中的上羽，比类于足少阴肾经，是禀受水气最全的人，其情态是卑下谦虚。水音中还有左右上下禀受水气不全的四种人：右上方，水音中属于太羽者，比类于右足太阳膀胱经的上部，其情态是意满自得；左下方，在水音中属于少羽者，比类于左足太阳膀胱经的下方，其情态是郁闷不舒畅；右下方，水音中属于众羽者，比类于右足太阳膀胱经的下部，其情态是洁身自好；左上方，水音中属于桎羽者，比类于左足太阳膀胱经的上部，其情态是安闲恬静。
English: This kind of person belongs to the upper feather in the water sound, which is similar to the foot less yin kidney meridian, and is the person whose gills are most affected by moisture, and whose condition is humble and modest. There are also four kinds of people in the water sound whose left and right upper and lower gills are not affected by moisture: the upper right, which belongs to the water sound, is similar to the upper part of the right foot sun bladder meridian, and its condition is self-satisfied; the lower left, which belongs to the water sound, is similar to the lower part of the left foot sun bladder meridian, and its condition is depressed and uncomfortable; the lower right,

古文：是故五形之人二十五变者，众之所以相欺者是也。黄帝曰：得其形，不得其色何如？
现代文：以上就是木火土金水五种类型人的特征，因为禀赋差异又分为五五二十五种变化，因为他们的禀赋是相同之中有不同，不同之中又存在相同之处，所以一般人不容易辨识而造成混淆。
English: The above are the characteristics of the five types of people of wood, fire, earth, metal and water. Because the difference in endowment is divided into 5525 changes, because their endowment is different among the same, and there are similarities among the differences, it is not easy for the average person to identify and cause confusion.

古文：岐伯曰：形胜色、色胜形者，至其胜时，年加感则病行，失则忧矣。
现代文：黄帝问道：有的人具备了五行中某一行的体型特征，但他的肤色却和这一行不相符，这是怎么回事呢？
English: Huangdi asked: Some people have the physical characteristics of one of the five elements, but his skin color does not match this element. What is going on?

古文：形色相得者，富贵大乐。
现代文：岐伯回答说：按照五行生克的原理，形体的五行属性克制肤色的五行属性，或肤色的五行属性克制形体的五行属性，出现形色相克的现象，再碰上相克的时令和遇到自己禁忌的年龄，又感受了邪气就会生病，如果治疗不及时或治疗不当，就值得忧虑了。若形色相称，为形质气机调和，则将富而且贵，将享受大快乐。
English: Qi Bo replied: According to the principle of the five elements, the five elements of the body restrain the five elements of the skin color, or the five elements of the skin color restrain the five elements of the body, and the phenomenon of the appearance of the appearance of the appearance of the appearance of the appearance of the appearance of the appearance of the appearance of the appearance of the appearance of the appearance of the appearance of the appearance of the appearance of the appearance of the appearance of the appearance of the appearance of the appearance of the appearance of the appearance of the appearance of the appearance of the appearance of the appearance of the appearance of the appearance of the appearance of the appearance of the appearance of the appearance of the appearance of the appearance

古文：黄帝曰：其形色相当胜之时，年加可知乎？
现代文：黄帝问道：在形色相克制的时侯，年忌的相加能够推算出来吗？
English: Huangdi asked: In a time of restraint, can the sum of the anniversaries be calculated?

古文：岐伯曰：凡年忌下上之人，大忌常加七岁，十六岁、二十五岁、三十四岁、四十三岁、五十二岁、六十一岁皆人之大忌，不可不自安也。感则病行，失则忧矣。
现代文：岐伯回答说：一般人重大的年忌，从七岁这一大忌之年算起，以后在此基数上每九年递加，即十六岁、二十五岁、三十四岁、四十三岁、五十二岁、六十一岁，这些年龄都是大忌之年，要注意精神和身体的调养与保护，在生活起居和行为上，千万不要自我损害，不然容易感受病邪而发生疾病。
English: Qibo replied, "Generally, people have a major death anniversary. Starting from the death anniversary of seven years old, it will be added to this base number every nine years, that is, sixteen years old, twenty-five years old, thirty-four years old, forty-three years old, fifty-two years old, sixty-one years old. These ages are all death anniversaries. Pay attention to mental and physical training and protection. In life and behavior, do not self-harm, otherwise it is easy to feel the evil and cause disease.

古文：当此之时，无为奸事，是谓年忌。
现代文：若发生疾病之后又疏于调治，便会有生命之忧。
English: If after the occurrence of the disease and neglect of regulation, there will be a fear of life.

古文：黄帝曰：夫子之言，脉之上下，血气之候，似知形气，奈何？
现代文：所以，在上述年龄时，要谨慎保养，预防疾病的发生，更不要做那些奸邪之事，以免损伤精神和身体，这就是所说的年忌。
English: Therefore, at the above-mentioned age, it is necessary to carefully maintain and prevent the occurrence of diseases, let alone do those evil things, so as not to damage the spirit and body. This is the so-called year of death.

古文：岐伯曰：足阳明之上，血气盛则髯美长；血少气多则髯短。
现代文：黄帝问道：先生你曾说，根据经脉在人体的上下循行和气血的多少变化，就可知道形气的强弱，这是怎样的呢？
English: Huang Di asked: Sir, you once said that according to the number of meridians running up and down the human body and the changes in qi and blood, you can know the strength of qi. How is this?

古文：故气少血多则髯少；血气皆少则无髯，两吻多画。足阳明之下，血气盛则下毛美，长至胸；血多气少则下毛美，短至脐，行则善高举足，足趾少肉，足善寒。血少气多则肉而善瘃；血气皆少则无毛，有则稀、枯悴，善痿厥，足痹。
现代文：岐伯回答说：足阳明胃经的上部，如果，气血充盛，两侧面颊的胡须美好而长；血少气多，面颊部的胡须就短；气少血多，面颊部的胡须就稀少；血气均少，则两颊部完全无胡须，而且嘴角多皱纹。足阳明胃经的下部，如果，气血充盛，阴毛美好而长，可向上衍生至胸部；血多气少，则阴毛虽美，但较短少，向上只能衍生至脐部，走路时喜欢高抬脚，足趾的肌肉较少，足部常觉寒冷；血少气多，则下肢肌肉上容易生冻疮；血气均不足，阴毛不生，即便有也很稀少且显枯槁，并且容易发生两足痿厥或痹痛的症状。
English: Qi Bo replied: "In the upper part of the foot yang bright stomach meridian, if the qi and blood are abundant, the whiskers on both sides of the cheeks are beautiful and long; if the blood is less and the qi is more, the whiskers on the cheeks are short; if the qi is less and the blood is more, the whiskers on the cheeks are scarce; if the blood is less, the cheeks are completely without whiskers, and the corners of the mouth are wrinkled. In the lower part of the foot yang bright stomach meridian, if the qi and blood are abundant, the pubic hair is beautiful and long,

古文：足少阳之上，气血盛则通髯美长，血多气少则通髯美短；血少气多则少髯；血气皆少则无须，感于寒湿则善痹，骨痛爪枯也。
现代文：足少阳胆经的上部，如果，气血充盛，面颊两侧胡须连鬓而生、美好而长；如果血多气少，两颊胡须连鬓，虽美但较短小；血少气多，则少长胡须；血气都不足，则胡须不生，感受寒邪湿气两足容易患痹症、骨痛、爪甲干枯等症。
English: In the upper part of the foot, if the qi and blood are rich, the whiskers on both sides of the cheeks will grow together, beautiful and long; if the blood is more qi and less, the whiskers on both cheeks will grow together, although beautiful but shorter; if the blood is less qi and more, the whiskers will not grow; if the blood is insufficient, the whiskers will not grow, and if the feet feel cold and damp, they are prone to polio, bone pain, and dry nails.

古文：足少阳之下，血气盛则胫毛美长，外踝肥；血多气少则胫毛美短，外踝皮坚而厚；血少气多则胻毛少，外踝皮薄而软；血气皆少则无毛，外踝瘦无肉。
现代文：足少阳胆经的下部，如果，气血充盛，则小腿的毛美好而长，外踝附近的肌肉丰满；血多气少，则小腿的汗毛虽美好但较短小，外踝周围皮坚而厚；血少气多，则小腿的毛少，外踝周围皮薄而软；血气都少，则毛不生，外踝处瘦而没有肌肉。
English: In the lower part of the foot, if the qi and blood are abundant, the hair of the calf is beautiful and long, and the muscles near the outer ankle are plump; if the blood is more qi and less, the hair of the calf is beautiful but shorter, and the skin around the outer ankle is firm and thick; if the blood is less qi and more, the hair of the calf is less, and the skin around the outer ankle is thin and soft; if the blood is less qi, the hair does not grow, and the outer ankle is thin and has no muscle.

古文：足太阳之上，血气盛则美眉，眉有毫毛；血多气少则恶眉，面多少理；血少气多则面多肉；血气和则美色。
现代文：足太阳膀胱经的上部，如果，气血充盛，则眉毛清秀而长，眉毛中并见长的毫毛；血多气少，则眉毛枯萎无华，脸面部多见细小的皱纹；血少气多，面部的肌肉就丰满；气血调和，则颜面秀丽。
English: In the upper part of the solar plexus, if the qi and blood are rich, the eyebrows will be long and beautiful, and there will be long hair in the eyebrows; if the blood is more qi and less, the eyebrows will be withered and dull, and the face will have small wrinkles; if the blood is less qi and more, the muscles of the face will be plump; if the qi and blood are in harmony, the face will be beautiful.

古文：足太阳之下，血气盛则跟肉满，踵坚；气少血多则瘦，跟空；血气皆少则善转筋，踵下痛。
现代文：足太阳膀胱经的下部，如果，气血充盛，则足跟部肌肉丰满而坚实；气少血多，则足跟部肌肉消瘦；气血均少，容易发生痉挛、足跟痛等症。
English: In the lower part of the soleus, if the qi and blood are abundant, the heel muscles will be plump and solid; if the qi and blood are low, the heel muscles will be thin; if the qi and blood are low, it is easy to have cramps, heel pain and other symptoms.

古文：手阳明之上，血气盛则髭美；血少气多则髭恶；血气皆少则无髭。
现代文：手阳明大肠经的上部，如果，气血充盛，则唇上胡须清秀而美；血少气多，则唇上胡须稀疏无华；血气都少，则唇无胡须。
English: The upper part of the large intestine, if the qi and blood are abundant, the whiskers on the lips are clean and beautiful; if the blood is less and the qi is more, the whiskers on the lips are sparse and dull; if the blood is less, the lips have no whiskers.

古文：手阳明之下，血气盛则腋下毛美，手鱼肉以温；气血皆少则手瘦以寒。
现代文：手阳明大肠经的下部，如果，气血充盛，腋毛秀美，手部的肌肉经常是温暖的；气血都不足，则手部肌肉消瘦而且寒凉。
English: The lower part of the large intestine, if the qi and blood are rich and the mane is beautiful, the muscles of the hand are often warm; if the qi and blood are insufficient, the muscles of the hand are thin and cold.

古文：手少阳之上，血气盛则眉美以长，耳色美；血气皆少则耳焦恶色。
现代文：手少阳三焦经的上部，如果，气血充盛，则眉毛美好而长，耳部的色泽明润；气血均不足，则耳部焦枯无华。
English: The upper part of Shao Yang Sanjiao Jing, if the qi and blood are rich, then the eyebrows are beautiful and long, the color of the ear is bright and moist; if the qi and blood are insufficient, then the ear is dry and dull.

古文：手少阳之下，血气盛则手卷多肉以温；血气皆少则寒以瘦；气少血多则瘦以多脉。
现代文：手少阳三焦经的下部，如果，气血充盛，则手部的肌肉丰满，并且常觉温暖；气血均不足，则手部肌肉消瘦并且寒凉；气少血多，则手部肌肉消瘦，并且络脉多浮显而易见。
English: In the lower part of the three-focal meridian, if the qi and blood are abundant, the muscles of the hand are plump and often feel warm; if the qi and blood are insufficient, the muscles of the hand are thin and cold; if the qi and blood are more, the muscles of the hand are thin and the vas deferens are obvious.

古文：手太阳之上，血气盛则多须，面多肉以平；血气皆少则面瘦恶色。
现代文：手太阳小肠经的上部，如果血气充盛，唇下多胡须，面部丰满；血气少则，面部消瘦无光华。
English: The upper part of the small intestine of the hand, if the blood gas is rich, the lower lip is more whiskers, the face is plump; if the blood gas is low, the face is thin and dull.

古文：手太阳之下，血气盛则掌肉充满；血气皆少则掌瘦以寒。
现代文：手太阳小肠经的下部，如果气血充盛，则掌上肌肉充实而丰满；气血少，则掌部肌肉消瘦而寒凉。
English: In the lower part of the small intestine of the hand, if the qi and blood are abundant, the muscles on the palm will be full and plump; if the qi and blood are less, the muscles of the palm will be thin and cold.

古文：黄帝曰：二十五人者，刺之有约乎？
现代文：黄帝问道：这二十五种类型的人，在针刺治疗时，有一定的规则吗？
English: Huang Di asked: Do these twenty-five types of people have certain rules when receiving acupuncture treatment?

古文：岐伯曰：美眉者，足太阳之脉气血多；恶眉者，血气少；其肥而泽者，血气有余；肥而不泽者，气有余，血不足；瘦而无泽者，气血俱不足，审察其形气有余不足而调之，可以知逆顺矣。
现代文：岐伯回答说：眉毛清秀美好，是足太阳膀胱经气血充盛；眉毛稀疏无华，是该经脉气血均少；肥胖而肤色光润的，是气血有余；肥胖而肤色不润泽的，是气有余而血不足；消瘦而肤色不润泽的，是气血均不足，根据人形体的外在表现，就可推知体内气血的有余与不足的情况，据此对他们加以调治，就可针对疾病的虚实、顺逆做出恰当的治疗，不致贻误病机。
English: Qi Bo answered: the eyebrows are beautiful and beautiful, it is the foot of the sun that the bladder is filled with qi and blood; the eyebrows are sparse and dull, it is the meridian with less qi and blood; the obese and the skin color is bright, it is qi and blood; the obese and the skin color is not moist, it is qi and blood; the emaciated and the skin color is not moist, it is qi and blood. According to the external performance of the human body, it can be inferred that there is excess and deficiency of qi and blood in the body. According to this, they can be adjusted and appropriate treatment can be

古文：黄帝曰：刺其诸阴阳奈何？
现代文：黄帝问：针刺诸阴经、阳经，应怎样做呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked, "What should I do if I need to prick the Yin and Yang scriptures with a needle?"

古文：岐伯曰：按其寸口人迎，以调阴阳。
现代文：岐伯答道：诊按人迎、寸口脉，以测知阴阳气血盛衰的变化而加以调治。
English: Qi Bo replied: The diagnosis is made according to the person's heartbeat and pulse, and the treatment is adjusted by detecting the changes in yin and yang qi and blood.

古文：切循其经络之凝涩，结而不通者，此于身皆为痛痹，甚则不行，故凝涩。
现代文：再沿着经络循行的部位，诊查有无结聚等气血滞涩不通的现象，如果气血阻滞不通，一般是患痛痹之病，严重的则不能行走，所以据此可判断为是血气凝涩。
English: Then, along the part of the meridians, check whether there is a phenomenon of qi and blood stagnation, such as agglomeration. If the qi and blood block does not pass, it is generally a disease of pain, and if it is serious, it can not walk, so it can be judged as blood stasis.

古文：凝涩者，致气以温之，血和乃止。
现代文：对于血气凝涩，治疗当用针刺调补气机，使阳气运行至该部位，以温通其涩滞的气血，待气血通调后，才能停止治疗。
English: For blood stasis, the treatment is to use acupuncture to adjust the qi machine, make the yang qi run to the site, and warm the stagnant qi and blood. After the qi and blood are adjusted, the treatment can be stopped.

古文：其结络者，脉结血不和，决之乃行。
现代文：如果气血结聚在小的络脉，造成浅部瘀血，治疗应当用针刺放血来开决疏通，气血即可运行。
English: If the qi and blood are concentrated in a small vein, resulting in a superficial hemorrhage, the treatment should be to use acupuncture and bloodletting to open and clear, and the qi and blood can run.

古文：故曰： 气有余于上者，导而下之；气不足于上者，推而休之；其稽留不至者，因而迎之。
现代文：所以说： 凡上部病气有余的，应采取上病下取的取穴方法，引导病气下行；凡上部正气不足的，用推而扬之的针法，促使正气上行，使气血达到新的平衡；气迟滞不至而没有针感，则应采用多种手法，迎之接之，使气必至。
English: Therefore, it is said that: If there is excess qi in the upper part, the method of taking a hole from the upper to the lower part should be adopted to guide the qi downward; if there is insufficient qi in the upper part, the needle method of pushing and lifting the needle should be used to promote the upward movement of qi, so that the qi and blood can reach a new balance; if the qi is not delayed and there is no needle sensation, then various methods should be used to meet it and make the qi come.

古文：必明于经隧，乃能持之。
现代文：要先明确经脉的循行通路，才能正确采用各种不同的针刺方法。
English: In order to correctly use various different acupuncture methods, it is necessary to first clarify the meridian path.

古文：寒与热争者，导而行之；其宛陈血不结者，则而予之。 
现代文：如果出现寒热交争的现象，应根据阴阳盛衰的不同情况，补其不足而泄其有余，调理气血达到平衡；若脉中虽有郁滞而尚未瘀结的，可从旁侧取穴予以刺治。 
English: If the phenomenon of cold and heat conflict occurs, it should be based on the different circumstances of the rise and fall of yin and yang, make up for its deficiency and release its surplus, regulate qi and blood to achieve balance; if there is stagnation in the vein but it has not been knotted, it can be punctured from the side.

古文：必先明知二十五人，则血气之所在，左右上下，刺约毕也。
现代文：总之，必须首先熟悉二十五种人的不同外部特征，辨别血气盛衰及有余不足的所在，或左侧或右侧，或上部或下部，取适当穴位予以针刺治疗，这就是针刺的法则。
English: In short, we must first be familiar with the different external characteristics of twenty-five kinds of people, distinguish the location of blood gas rise and fall and surplus and deficiency, or the left or right side, or the upper or lower part, and take the appropriate acupuncture points for acupuncture treatment. This is the rule of acupuncture.

