古文：圣宗六二十八年春正月辛亥朔，不受贺。
现代文：统和二十八年春正月初一，皇上未受朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 28th year of the Heian period, the Emperor did not receive Imperial congratulations.

古文：甲寅，如乾陵。
现代文：初四，至乾陵。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, he went to Qianling.

古文：癸酉，奉安大行皇太后梓宫于乾州菆涂殿。
现代文：二十三日，将大行皇太后灵柩安放于乾州涂殿。
English: On the 23rd, the casket of Empress Dowager Da Xing was placed in the Qianzhou Tu Hall.

古文：二月丙戌，宋遣王随、王儒等来吊祭。
现代文：二月初六，宋派王随、王儒前来吊唁祭祀。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month of the lunar month, Wang Sui and Wang Rong of the Song Dynasty came to offer condolences.

古文：己亥，高丽遣魏守愚等来祭。
现代文：十九日，高丽派魏守愚等前来吊唁祭祀。
English: On the 19th, Goryeo sent Wei Shouwu and others to offer condolences.

古文：是月，遣左龙虎卫上将军萧合卓馈大行皇太后遗物于宋，仍遣临海军节度使萧虚列、左领军卫上将军张崇济谢宋吊祭。
现代文：同月，派左龙虎卫上将军萧合卓将大行皇太后遗物馈赠给宋国，并派临海军节度使萧虚列、左领军卫上将军张崇济等前去感谢宋国的吊祭。
English: In the same month, he sent General Xiao Hezhuo of the Left Dragon and Tiger Guards to present the relics of the Dowager Empress Dowager Dajing to Song, and sent the Navy Sect to make Xiao Hulie and General Zhang Chongji, the left leader of the Guards, to thank Song for the hanging sacrifice.

古文：三月癸卯，上大行皇太后谥为圣神宣献皇后。
现代文：三月二十四日，给大行皇太后上谥号为圣神宣献皇后。
English: On March 24th, the Dowager Empress Dowager Da Xing was given the honorary title of the Queen of the Holy Spirit.

古文：是月，宋、高丽遣使来会葬。
现代文：同月，宋、高丽派使者前来会葬。
English: In the same month, Song and Goryeo sent envoys to the funeral.

古文：夏四月甲子，葬太后于乾陵。
现代文：夏四月十五日，葬太后于乾陵。
English: On the 15th day of the 4th month of the summer, the funeral of the Empress Dowager was held at the Qianling Mausoleum.

古文：赐大丞相耶律德昌名曰隆运。
现代文：给大丞相耶律德昌赐名为耶律隆运。
English: The grand chancellor, Yelu Dechang, was given the name Yelu Longyun.

古文：庚午，赐宅及陪葬地。
现代文：二十一日，赐给他宅第和陪葬地。
English: On the twenty-first day, he was given a house and a burial place.

古文：五月己卯朔，如中京。
现代文：五月初一，到中京。
English: On the first day of May, I went to Chukyo.

古文：辛卯，清暑七金山。
现代文：十三日，避暑于七金山。
English: On the 13th, they spent the summer in Qizhan Mountain.

古文：乙巳，西北路招讨使萧图玉奏伐甘州回鹘，破萧州，尽俘其民。
现代文：二十七日，西北路招讨使萧国玉奏报征伐甘州回鹘，攻破肃州，尽数俘虏其百姓。
English: On the 27th, the Northwest Road Invitation caused Xiao Guo Yusao to report the conquest of Gansu back to Qi, defeated Suzhou, and captured as many of its people as possible.

古文：诏修土隗口故城以实之。
现代文：皇上下诏修筑土隗口故城让他们居住下来。
English: The emperor issued an edict to rebuild the old city of Tsuchiguchi and let them live there.

古文：丙午，高丽西京留守康肇弑其主诵，擅立诵从兄询，诏诸道缮甲兵，以备东征。
现代文：二十八日，高丽西京留守康肇弑其君王诵，擅立诵从兄王询为高丽王，诏令诸道修缮甲兵，为东征做准备。
English: On the 28th, Kang Zhaozong, the ruler of Goryeo, who stayed in Xijing, recited, and his brother Wang Xun, the king of Goryeo, recited without permission, and ordered all the roads to repair the armored soldiers and prepare for the Eastern Expedition.

古文：秋八月戊申，振平州饥民。
现代文：秋八月初二，赈济平州饥民。
English: On the 2nd day of the 8th month of autumn, the starving people in Pingzhou were fed.

古文：辛亥，幸中京。
现代文：初五，临幸中京。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Rinzai Chukyo was born.

古文：丙寅，谒显、乾二陵。
现代文：二十日，拜谒显、乾二陵。
English: On the 20th, the two mausoleums of Emperor Xianxian and Emperor Qian were built.

古文：丁卯，自将伐高丽，遣使报宋。
现代文：二十一日，皇上将亲征高丽，派使者将消息告知宋国。
English: On the twenty-first day, the emperor will personally conquer Goryeo and send an envoy to inform Song.

古文：以皇弟楚国王隆祐留守京师，北府宰相、驸马都尉萧排押为都统，北面林牙僧奴为都监。
现代文：任命皇弟楚国王隆佑留守京师，北府宰相、驸马都尉萧排押为都统，北面林牙僧奴为都监。
English: The emperor's younger brother, King Longyou of Chu, was appointed to stay in Beijing, the prime minister of the northern prefecture, Lieutenant Xiao Pai, was appointed as the governor of the capital, and the monk Lin Ya from the north was appointed the governor of the capital.

古文：九月乙酉，遣使册西平王李德昭为夏国王。
现代文：九月初十，派使者册封西平王李德昭为夏国王。
English: On the 10th day of the 9th month, an envoy was sent to crown the king of Xiping, Li Dezhao, as the king of Xia.

古文：辛卯，遣枢密直学士高正、引进使韩杞宣问高丽王询。
现代文：十六日，派枢密直学士高正、引进使韩杞到高丽宣问高丽王王询。
English: On the 16th, he sent the privy councilor Gao Zheng, a direct bachelor, to introduce Han Zheng to Korea to inquire about the king of Korea.

古文：冬十月丙午朔，女直进良马万匹，乞从征高丽，许之。
现代文：冬十月初一，女真献上万匹良马，请求随军征伐高丽，得到允许。
English: In winter, on the first day of October, Yeonjin presented 10,000 fine horses and requested permission to accompany the army to conquer Korea.

古文：王询遣使奉表乞罢师，不许。
现代文：王询派使者请求辽撤回军队，皇上没有答应。
English: Wang Quan sent an envoy to request Liao to withdraw the troops, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：十一月乙酉，大军渡鸭渌江，康肇拒战，败之，退保铜州。
现代文：十一月初十，大军渡过鸭绿江，康肇率军抵抗，失利后退守铜州。
English: On the 10th day of the 11th month, the great army crossed the Yalu River, and Kang Zhao led the army to resist. After the defeat, he retreated to defend Tongzhou.

古文：丙戌，肇复出，右皮室详稳耶律敌鲁擒肇及副将李立，追杀数十里，获所弃粮饷、铠仗。
现代文：十一日，康肇再次出战，右皮室详稳耶律敌鲁生擒肇及其副将李正，追杀高丽军队数十里，获得其丢弃的粮饷、铠仗。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Kang Zhao once again went to war. He was accompanied by his right-hand man and sworn enemy, Lu Sheng, and his second-in-command, Li Zheng. They chased the Koryo army for dozens of miles to get the food and supplies they had thrown away.

古文：戊子，铜、霍、贵、宁等州皆降。
现代文：十三日，铜、霍、贵、宁等州均投降。
English: On the 13th, Copper, Ho, Guizhou, Ning and other prefectures all surrendered.

古文：排押至奴古达岭，遇敌兵，战败之。
现代文：排押率军至奴古达岭，遭遇敌兵，击败之。
English: He led his detachment to Nuguda Ridge, encountered enemy soldiers, and defeated them.

古文：辛卯，王询遣使上表请朝，许之。
现代文：十六日，王询上表请求朝见，得到允许。
English: On the 16th, Wang Ying requested to see the emperor and was granted permission.

古文：禁军士俘掠。
现代文：皇上禁止军士抢掠。
English: The emperor forbade the sergeants to loot.

古文：以政事舍人马保佑为开京留守，安州团练使王八为副留守。
现代文：任命政事舍人马保佑为开京留守，安州团练使王八为副留守。
English: He appointed Ma Baoyou, a political commissar, to stay behind in Beijing, and Wang Bax, a regimental drill instructor from Anzhou, to stay behind as a deputy.

古文：遣太子太师乙凛将骑兵一千，送保佑等赴京。
现代文：派太子太师乙凛等率骑兵一千人，送保佑等赴开京。
English: The Crown Prince sent the Grand Master Aitrin and a thousand cavalry to the capital to send blessings.

古文：壬辰，守将卓思正杀辽使者韩喜孙等十人，领兵出拒，保佑等还。
现代文：十七日，高丽守将卓思正杀死辽使者韩喜孙等十人，率兵出城阻拒辽军，马保佑等回营。
English: On the 17th, Goryeo's commander-in-chief, Zhuo Si Zheng, killed Liao envoy Han Xisun and ten others, led his troops out of the city to resist the Liao army, and Ma Baoyou and others returned to camp.

古文：遣乙凛领兵击之，思正遂奔西京。
现代文：皇上派乙凛率军攻击卓思正，卓思正于是奔赴西京。
English: The emperor sent Yitrin to lead an army to attack Zhuo Sizheng, and Zhuo Sizheng then rushed to West Beijing.

古文：围之，五日不克。驻跸城西。
现代文：皇上率军围城五天，未能攻克，于是歇驾于城西。
English: The emperor and his army besieged the city for five days, but were unable to conquer it, so they withdrew to the west of the city.

古文：高丽礼部郎中渤海陀失来降。
现代文：高丽礼部郎中渤海陀失前来投降。
English: Goryeo's Vice-Minister of Ceremonial, Ye Haida, came forward to surrender.

古文：庚子，遣排押、盆奴等攻开京，遇高丽兵，败之。
现代文：二十五日，皇上派排押、盆奴等攻开京，击败高丽军队。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the emperor sent troops such as the platoon commander and the bon slave to attack Beijing and defeat the Korean army.

古文：王询弃城遁去，遂焚开京，至清江，还。
现代文：王询弃城逃跑，于是辽军纵火焚烧开京。追击至清江，回师。
English: Wang Zhen abandoned the city and fled, so the Liao Army set fire to and burned Beijing. They pursued to Qingjiang and returned to the division.

古文：二十九年春正月乙亥朔，班师，所降诸城复叛。
现代文：二十九年春正月初一，班师，降附的诸城复又叛变。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the 29th year, the group division, the subordinate cities rebelled and mutinied.

古文：至贵州南峻岭谷，大雨连日，马驼皆疲，甲仗多遗弃，霁乃得渡。
现代文：大军到达贵州南峻岭谷时，大雨连日不停，马匹骆驼均十分疲乏，甲仗多被遗弃，至天晴方才得以渡河。
English: When the large army arrived at the Nanjunling Valley in Guizhou, it rained heavily for days on end, the horses and camels were very tired, and the battlements were mostly abandoned. They were only able to cross the river when the weather cleared.

古文：己丑，次鸭渌江。
现代文：十五日，皇上驻于鸭绿江。
English: On the 15th, the emperor was stationed at the Yalu River.

古文：庚寅，皇后及皇弟楚国王隆祐迎于来远城。
现代文：十六日，皇后和皇弟楚国王隆佑到来远城迎接皇上。
English: On the 16th, the empress and her brother, King Longyou of Chu, arrived in the distant city to meet the emperor.

古文：壬辰，诏罢诸军。
现代文：十八日，下诏遣散诸军。
English: On the 18th, the army was ordered to disband.

古文：己亥，次东京。
现代文：二十五日，皇上驻于东京。
English: On the 25th, the Emperor arrived in Tokyo.

古文：二月己酉，谒乾、显二陵。
现代文：二月初五，拜谒乾、显二陵。
English: On the 5th day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month.

古文：戊午，所俘高丽人分置诸陵庙，馀赐内戚、大臣。
现代文：十四日，将俘虏的高丽人分别配置给各个陵庙，余下的人则赐给内戚和大臣。
English: On the 14th, the captured Goryeo people were allocated to each mausoleum separately, and the remaining people were given to relatives and ministers.

古文：三月己卯，大丞相晋国王耶律隆运薨。
现代文：三月初六，大丞相晋国王耶律隆运逝世。
English: On the 6th day of the 3rd month of the lunar calendar, King Jeru Longyun passed away.

古文：庚辰，皇弟楚国王隆祐权知北院枢密使事，枢密直学士高正为北院枢密副使。
现代文：初七，皇弟楚国王隆佑暂任知北院枢密使事。枢密直学士高正为北院枢密副使。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, the emperor's younger brother, King Longyou of Chu, temporarily served as the Privy Envoy of the Northern Yuan. The Privy Direct Bachelor Gao Zheng was the Deputy Privy Envoy of the Northern Yuan.

古文：庚寅，南京、平州水，振之。
现代文：十七日，南京、平州遭水灾，赈济之。
English: On the 17th, Nanjing and Pingzhou were hit by floods.

古文：己亥，以北院大王耶律室鲁为北院枢密使，封韩王，北院郎君耶律世良为北院大王，前三司使刘慎行参知政事兼知南院枢密使事。
现代文：二十六日，任命北院大王耶律室鲁为北院枢密使，封为韩王。任命北院郎君耶律世良为北院大王，前三司使刘慎行为参知政事兼知南院枢密使事。
English: On the 26th, he appointed the Northern Yuan Emperor Yeluxurong as the Northern Yuan Privy Councilor and named him King Han. He appointed the Northern Yuan Emperor's son-in-law, Yeluxerong, as the Northern Yuan Emperor, and appointed the former Three Emissaries, Liu Shen, as the Co-prefect of the Southern Yuan Privy Council and the Co-prefect of the Southern Yuan Privy Council.

古文：夏四月，清暑老古埚。
现代文：夏四月，在老古埚避暑。
English: Summer in April, summering in Laoguang.

古文：五月甲戌朔，诏已奏之事送所司附日历。
现代文：五月初一，诏令将已上的奏章递交主管部门时须附上《日历》。
English: On the first day of May, the Emperor decreed that the "Calendar" must be attached when submitting the completed record to the competent authorities.

古文：又诏帐族有罪，黥墨依诸部人例。
现代文：又诏令如果帐族犯罪，给予黥墨处罚时依部人之例。
English: In addition, it was decreed that if a member of the Zhe family committed a crime, the punishment would be in accordance with the example of the subordinates.

古文：乙未，以刘慎行为南院枢密使，南府宰相邢抱质知南院枢密使事。
现代文：二十三日，任命刘慎行为南院枢密使，南府宰相邢抱质为知南院枢密使事。
English: On the 23rd, Liu Shen was appointed as the envoy of the Southern Yuan, and the prime minister of Nanfu was appointed as the envoy of the Southern Yuan.

古文：六月庚戌，升蔚州、利州为观察使。
现代文：六月初八，升蔚州、利州为观察使。
English: On the 8th day of the 6th month, he was sent to Ulsan and Lisu as an observation envoy.

古文：乙卯，韩王耶律室鲁薨。
现代文：十三日，韩王耶律室鲁逝世。
English: On the 13th, King Yerutsuro passed away.

古文：丙辰，以南院大王化哥为北院枢密使。
现代文：十四日，任命南院大王化哥为北院枢密使。
English: On the 14th, King Huagang of the Southern Yuan Dynasty was appointed as the Privy Envoy of the Northern Yuan Dynasty.

古文：丁巳，诏西北路招讨使、驸马都尉萧图玉安抚西鄙。
现代文：十五日，诏令西北路招讨使、驸马都尉萧图玉安抚西境。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, he issued an imperial edict to the Northwest Road to invite the envoy, Lieutenant Xiao Tuyu, to pacify the western region.

古文：置阻卜诸部节度使。
现代文：设置阻卜诸部节度使。
English: Set to block all parts of the throttle.

古文：是秋，猎于平地松林。
现代文：这年秋天，出猎于平地松林。
English: This autumn, I went hunting in the flat pine forest.

古文：冬十月庚子朔，驻跸广平淀。
现代文：冬十月初一，歇驾于广平淀。
English: On the first day of October in winter, it stopped in Guangpingyuan.

古文：甲寅，赠大丞相晋国王耶律隆运尚书令，谥文忠。
现代文：十五日，追赠大丞相晋国王耶律隆运为尚书令，谥为文忠。
English: On the fifteenth day, the posthumous conferment of the grand chancellor Jin King Yelu Longyun was Shang Shuling, and the bestowal was Wen Zhong.

古文：十一月庚午朔，幸显州。
现代文：十一月初一，临幸显州。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, Lin Xingxing went to Xianzhou.

古文：十二月庚子朔，复如广平淀。
现代文：十二月初一，再次到广平淀。
English: On the first day of December, I went to Guangpingyuan again.

古文：癸丑，以知南院枢密使事邢抱质年老，诏乘小车入朝。
现代文：十四日，因为知南院枢密使事邢抱质年老，下诏允许他乘小车上朝。
English: On the 14th, because the Privy Counsellor of South China Hospital was old and frail, he was allowed to take a small car to the morning.

古文：是月，置归、宁二州。
现代文：同月，设置归、宁二州。
English: In the same month, it was set up in the two prefectures of Gu and Ning.

古文：是年，御试，放高承颜等二人及第。
现代文：这一年，殿试，录取高承颜等二人及第。
English: This year, in the entrance examination, Gao Chengyan and two others were admitted.

古文：开泰元年春正月己巳朔，宋遣赵湘、符成翰来贺。
现代文：开泰元年春正月初一，宋派赵湘、符成翰前来朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the year, Song sent Zhao Xiang and Fucheng Han to come for morning greetings.

古文：癸未，长白山三十部女直酋长来贡，乞授爵秩。
现代文：十五日，长白山三十部女真酋长前来进贡，请求赐给他们官爵封号。
English: On the fifteenth day, thirty Jianzhen chiefs from Changbai Mountain came to pay tribute and requested that they be given titles of nobility.

古文：甲申，驻跸王子院。
现代文：十六日，歇驾于王子院。
English: On the 16th, he rested at the Prince's Palace.

古文：丙戌，望祠木叶山。
现代文：十七日，遥祭木叶山。
English: On the seventeenth day, the remote festival leaves Mt.

古文：丁亥，女直太保蒲捻等来朝。
现代文：十八日，女真太保蒲扌然等前来朝见。
English: On the 18th day, Lady Zhengtai Bao Pengran came to see the morning.

古文：戊子，猎于买曷鲁林。
现代文：十九日，出猎于买曷鲁林。
English: On the 19th, he went hunting in Maiduguri.

古文：庚寅，祠木叶山。辛卯，曷苏馆大王曷里喜来朝。
现代文：二十一日，祭祀木叶山，二十二日，曷苏馆大王曷里喜前来朝见。
English: On the twenty-first day, they held a religious service at Mubei Mountain, and on the twenty-second day, the great king of the Su Pavilion, Bao Lixi, came to see them in the morning.

古文：二月壬子，驻跸瑞鹿原。
现代文：二月十四日，歇驾于瑞鹿原。
English: On the 14th of February, it stopped at Rui Luchuan.

古文：三月甲戌，以蔚州为观察，不隶武定军。
现代文：三月初七，以蔚州为观察，不再隶属于武定军。
English: On the 7th day of the 3rd month, with Ulshu as an observation, it was no longer affiliated with the Wuding Army.

古文：乙亥，如苇泺。
现代文：初八，到苇泊。
English: At the beginning of eighth grade, I went to Oshidomari.

古文：丁丑，诏封皇女八人为郡主。
现代文：初十，下诏册封皇女八人为郡主。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, eight princesses were crowned princesses in the next imperial edict.

古文：乙酉，诏卜日行拜山、大射柳之礼，命北宰相、驸马、兰陵郡王萧宁，枢密使、司空邢抱质督有司具仪物。
现代文：十八日，下令择吉日举行拜山礼，命令北宰相、驸马、兰陵郡王萧宁及枢密使、司空邢抱质督促有司准备仪式所需物品。
English: On the 18th, it was ordered to hold the mountain worship on the auspicious day, and ordered the Northern Prime Minister, Xi Ma, Lanling County Wang Xiaoning, and the Privy Councilor and the Secretary of the Air Force to urge the department to prepare the necessary items for the ceremony.

古文：丁亥，皇弟楚国王隆祐徙封齐国王，留守东京。
现代文：二十日，改封皇弟楚国王隆佑为齐国王，留守东京。
English: On the 20th, his younger brother, King Chu, was renamed King Longyou and remained in Tokyo.

古文：夏四月庚子，高丽遣蔡忠顺来，乞称臣如旧，诏王询亲朝。
现代文：夏四月初三，高丽派使者蔡忠顺前来请求照旧向我称臣，皇上下诏令王询亲理朝政。
English: On the third day of the fourth month of the summer, Cai Zhongshun, an envoy sent by the Goryeo Dynasty, came to me to request that I continue to be honored as a courtier, and that the emperor issue an imperial edict to ask the crown prince to take over the government of the dynasty.

古文：壬寅，夏国遣使进良马。
现代文：初五，夏国派使者进献良马。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Xia Guo sent an envoy to present good horses.

古文：己酉，祀风伯。
现代文：十二日，祭祀风伯。
English: On the twelfth day, the ritual began.

古文：辛酉，以前孟父房敞稳萧佛奴为左夷离毕。
现代文：二十四日，任命前孟父房敞稳萧佛奴为左夷离毕。
English: On the 24th, the appointment of former Meng's father Zhang Jian and Xiao Funu as Zuoying left.

古文：五月戊辰朔，还上京。
现代文：五月初一，回上京。
English: On the first day of May, I went back to Tokyo.

古文：诏裴玄感、邢祥知礼部贡举，放进士史简等十九人及第。
现代文：下诏令裴玄感、邢祥管理礼部贡举之事，录取进士史简等十九人及第。
English: He issued an order to Pei Xuanquan and Zou Xiang to manage the tribute of the ceremonial department, and nineteen people including Jin Shi Jian were admitted.

古文：以驸马萧绍宗为郑州防御使。
现代文：任命驸马萧绍宗为郑州防御使。
English: He appointed Zhou Ma Xiao Shaozong as Zhengzhou defense envoy.

古文：乙亥，以邢抱质为大同军节度使。
现代文：初八，任命邢抱质为大同军节度使。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, he was appointed as the Grand Commander of the Datong Army.

古文：六月，驻跸上京。
现代文：六月，歇驾于上京。
English: In June, he stopped in Kamigyo.

古文：秋七月丙子，以耶律遂贞为辽兴军节度使，遂正北院宣徽使，张昭莹南院宣徽使，耶律受益上京副留守，寇卿彰德军节度使。
现代文：秋七月初十，任命耶律遂贞为辽兴军节度使，遂正为北院宣徽使，张昭莹为南院宣徽使，耶律受益为上京副留守，寇卿为彰德军节度使。
English: On the 10th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Ye Lu Sui Zhen was appointed as the Liao Xing Army's festival envoy, Sui Zheng as the Northern Court's emblem envoy, Zhang Zhao Ying as the Southern Court's emblem envoy, Ye Lu Guan as the deputy left-behind in Beijing, and Kou Qing as the Changde Army's festival envoy.

古文：命耶律释身奴、李操充贺宋国生辰信使副，萧涅衮、齐泰贺宋正旦使副。
现代文：任命耶律释身奴、李操任祝贺宋生辰国信使、副使，萧涅衮、齐泰为祝贺宋正旦使、副使。
English: Ye Lu Shixin Niu and Li Xuan Ren were appointed as messengers and deputy envoys to congratulate Song Sheng Chen, while Xiao Nie Rong and Qi Tai were appointed as envoys and deputy envoys to congratulate Song Zhengdan.

古文：进士康文昭、张素臣、郎玄达坐论知贡举裴玄感、邢祥私曲，秘书省正字李万上书，辞涉怨讪，皆杖而徒之，万役陷河冶。
现代文：进士康文昭、张素臣、郎玄达私下议论知贡举裴玄感、邢祥隐私，秘书省正字李万上书，言辞中颇有怨谤之意，均受到杖责，被判徒刑，李万服役于陷河冶。
English: Insiders Kang Wen Zhao, Zhang Su Chen, Lang Xuan Da and others privately discussed the knowledge of the tribute, the feelings of Pei Xuan, and the privacy of Xiang Xiang, and the secretary of the Ministry of Justice, Li Wan, wrote a letter, and the words were quite defamatory. They were all punished with the cane and sentenced to imprisonment. Li Wan served in Zheheye.

古文：八月丙申朔，铁骊那沙等送兀惹百馀户至宾州，赐丝绢。
现代文：八月初一，铁骊那沙等将兀惹百余户送到宾州，皇上赐给他丝绢。
English: On the first day of August, Tie Xuan Nasa and others sent more than a hundred households in Hunyang to Pennsylvania, and the emperor gave him silk brocade.

古文：是日，那沙乞赐佛像、儒书，诏赐《护国仁王佛像》一，《易》、《诗》、《书》、《春秋》、《礼记》各一部。
现代文：同日那沙乞求赐给他佛像、儒学书籍，下诏赐给他护国仁王佛像一尊，《易》、《诗》、《书》、《春秋》、《礼记》各一部。
English: On the same day, Nasa begged for a Buddha statue and books on Confucianism to be given to him, and the following edict gave him a statue of the Buddha, the protector of the country, and a copy of "I," "Poetry," "Book," "Spring and Autumn" and "Rites."

古文：己未，高丽王询遣田拱之奉表，称病不能朝，诏复取六州地。
现代文：二十四日，高丽王询派田拱之上表告称因病不能来朝见，皇上下诏再次索取六州地。
English: On the 24th, the King of Goryeo sent a letter to Tian Gong saying that he could not come to the court due to illness, and the emperor once again requested six provinces.

古文：是月，齐国王隆祐薨，辍朝五日。
现代文：同月，齐国王隆佑逝世，皇上为之停止上朝五天。
English: In the same month, King Longyou of Qi died, which caused the emperor to stop ascending the throne for five days.

古文：冬十月辛亥，如中京。
现代文：冬十月十七日，到中京。
English: Winter, October 17th, to Chukyo.

古文：闰月丁卯，赠隆祐守太师，谥仁孝。
现代文：闰十月初三，追赠隆佑为守太师，谥号为仁孝。
English: On the third day of leap October, Takayuki was posthumously awarded the title of Shudaiji, and his posthumous name was Ninko.

古文：十一月甲午朔，文武百官加上尊号曰弘文宣武尊道至德崇仁广孝聪睿昭圣神赞天辅皇帝。
现代文：十一月初一，文武百官给皇上加尊号为弘文宣武尊道至德崇仁广孝聪睿昭圣神赞天辅皇帝。
English: On the first day of November, hundreds of civil and military officials gave the emperor the honorific title of Hongwen Xuanwu Zun Dao Zu De Chongren Guang Xiao Cong Rui Zhao Shen Zhan Tianfu Emperor.

古文：大赦，改元开泰。
现代文：大赦天下，改元为开泰。
English: The country was amnestied, and the era name was changed to Kaitai.

古文：改幽都府为析津府，蓟北县为析津县，幽都县为宛平县，覃恩中外。
现代文：将幽都府改称析津府，蓟北县改称析津县，幽都县改称宛平县，广施恩泽于国内外。
English: Renamed Yudu-fu to Seletsu-fu, Renbei-gun to Seletsu-gun, Yudu-gun to Wanping-gun, benefiting both at home and abroad.

古文：己亥，赐夏国使、东头供奉官曹文斌、吕文贵、窦珪祐、守荣、武元正等爵有差。
现代文：初六，赐给夏国使者、东头供奉官曹文斌、吕文贵、窦皀佑、守荣、武元正等官爵各有等差。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Cao Wenbin, Lü Wengui, Dou Xiyu, Shou Rong, and Wu Yuanzheng, the envoys of Xia and the officials of Dongtou, were given peerage.

古文：癸卯，前辽州录事张庭美六世同居，仪坤州刘兴胤四世同居，各给复三年。
现代文：初十，前辽州录事张庭美六代同居，仪坤州刘兴胤四世同堂，分别免除其家三年的赋税徭役。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, the sixth generation of Zhang Tingmei of the former Liaozhou Record lived together, and the fourth generation of Liu Xingyin of Yi Kunzhou lived together, respectively exempting their families from three years of tax payment.

古文：甲辰，西北招讨使萧图玉奏七部太师阿里底因其部民之怨，杀本部节度使霸暗并屠其家以叛，阻卜执阿里底以献，而沿边诸部皆叛。
现代文：十一日，西北招讨使萧图玉奏报七部太师阿里底利用其部民的不满情绪，杀死本部节度使霸暗并杀掉其家属叛乱，阻卜活捉了阿里底献给我国，而沿边诸部此时都发生叛乱。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the Northwest Invitation made Xiao Tu Yusao Newspaper's seventh division Grand Master Alidi take advantage of the dissatisfaction of his subordinates, kill the headquarters of the festival, make him tyrannical and kill his family members for rebellion, and block and capture Alidi alive for our country. At this time, rebellions occurred in all the provinces along the border.

古文：十二月丙寅，奉迁南京诸帝石像于中京观德殿，景宗及宣献皇后于上京五鸾殿。
现代文：十二月初三，将南京诸帝石像迁至中京观德殿，景宗及宣献皇后石像置于上京五鸾殿。
English: On the third day of December, the stone statues of the emperors of Nanjing were moved to the Guan De Hall in central Beijing, and the stone statues of Emperor Jingzong and Empress Xuanqian were placed in the Wusong Hall in upper Beijing.

古文：壬申，振奉圣州饥民。
现代文：初九，赈济奉圣州饥民。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month of the lunar calendar, he gave alms to the hungry people in Fong Shengzhou.

古文：庚辰，赐皇弟秦晋国王隆庆铁券。
现代文：十七日，赐给皇弟秦晋国王隆庆铁券。
English: On the 17th, Longqing Iron Coupon was given to his younger brother, King Qin Jin.

古文：癸未，刘晨言殿中高可垣、中京留守推官李可举治狱明允，诏超迁之。
现代文：二十日，刘晨奏称殿中高可垣、中京留守推官李可举判案严明恰当，皇上下诏破格提拔他们。
English: On the 20th, Liu Chenxu said that the high school students in the palace, the high school students in Kegaki, and the stay-at-home supervisors in Beijing, Li Ke, were strictly appropriate in making judgments, and the emperor promoted them in an unprecedented manner.

古文：甲申，诏诸道水灾饥民质男女者，起来年正月，日计佣钱十文，价折佣尽，遣还其家。
现代文：二十一日，下诏命令诸道因水灾由饥民抵押的男女，从来年正月起，每天按十文佣钱计算，待到其佣钱与其身价相抵时，主人就要将他们送回家。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, an edict was issued ordering that men and women who were mortgaged by starving people due to floods in various provinces should be charged a daily ten-cents commission from the first month of the year. When their commission was equal to their net worth, their masters would send them home.

古文：归州言其居民本新罗所迁，未习文字，请设学以教之，诏允所请。
现代文：归州因其居民都是从新罗迁来，不识文字，上书请求设立学校以教化居民，皇上下诏答应了他们的请求。
English: Because the residents of Gwoshu had all moved from Silla and could not read or write, they petitioned for the establishment of a school to educate the residents, and the emperor granted their request.

古文：贵德、龙化、仪坤、双、辽、同、祖七州，至是有诏始征商。
现代文：对贵德、龙化、仪坤、双、辽、同、祖七州，皇上到现在才下诏开始征收他们的商税。
English: For Guide, Longhua, Yikun, Shuang, Liao, Tong and Zu seven states, the emperor has only now issued an edict to begin collecting their trade tax.

古文：己丑，诏诸镇建宣敕楼。
现代文：二十六日，诏令诸镇修建宣敕楼。
English: On the 26th, he ordered all towns to build Xuanwu towers.

古文：二年春正月癸巳朔，以裴玄感为翰林承旨，邢祥给事中，石用中翰林学士，吕德推枢密直学士，张俭政事舍人，邢抱质加开府仪同三司、守司空兼侍中，王继忠中京留守、检校太师，户部侍郎刘泾加工部尚书，驸马萧绍宗加检校太师，耶律控温加政事令，封幽王。
现代文：二年春正月初一，任命裴玄感为翰林承旨，邢祥为给事中，石用中为翰林学士，吕德推为枢密直学士，张俭为政事舍人，邢抱质兼任开府仪同三司、守司空兼侍中。王继忠为中京留守、检校太师，户部侍郎刘泾加封工部尚书，驸马萧绍宗加任检校太师，耶律控温加封政事令，册封为豳王。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of spring, Pei Xuanxuan was appointed as Hanlin's successor, Xiang Xiang was appointed as the presenter, Shi Ying Zhong was appointed as Hanlin's bachelor, Lu De was promoted to the direct bachelor of the Privy Council, Zhang Jian was appointed as the person who was not in charge of political affairs, and Zou Bao Quan concurrently served as the third secretary of the opening ceremony, the third secretary of the guard, and the attendant. Wang Jizhong was appointed as the stayer in Beijing and the inspector of the school, Liu Xiang was appointed as the attendant of the

古文：丁未，如瑞鹿原。
现代文：十五日，皇上到瑞鹿原。
English: On the fifteenth day, the Emperor went to Ruikahara.

古文：北院枢密使耶律化哥封豳王。
现代文：封北院枢密使耶律化哥为豳王。
English: The Privy Council of the Northern Yuan Dynasty appointed Yelu Huagong as the king of Shao.

古文：以马氏为丽仪，耿氏淑仪，尚寝白氏昭仪，尚服李氏顺仪，尚功艾氏芳仪，尚书孙氏和仪。
现代文：以马氏为丽仪，耿氏为淑仪、尚寝白氏为昭仪、尚服李氏为顺仪、尚功艾氏为芳仪、尚仪孙氏为和仪。
English: Ima's is Ri, Geng's is Shuku, Shosebai's is Sho, Shobu's is Shun, Shanggongai's is Fang, and Sun's is Wa.

古文：己未，录囚。
现代文：二十七日，察看犯人口供。
English: On the 27th, the inspectors heard the prisoners' confessions.

古文：乌古、敌烈叛，右皮室详稳延寿率兵讨之。
现代文：乌古、敌烈部叛乱，右皮室详稳延寿率兵征讨之。
English: Ugu, the enemy stronghold of the rebellion, the right ventricle detailed stability and longevity rate of soldiers conscripted.

古文：是月，达旦国兵围镇州，州军坚守，寻引去。
现代文：同月，鞑靼国兵马围攻镇州，镇州守军坚守城池，鞑靼兵不久即解围而去。
English: In the same month, the Tatar soldiers and horses besieged Zhenzhou, the Zhenzhou defenders held the city, and the Tatar soldiers soon broke the siege and left.

古文：二月丙子，诏以麦务川为象雷县，女河川为神水县，罗家军为闾山县，山子川为富庶县，习家砦为龙山县，阿览峪为劝农县，松山川为松山县，金甸子为金原县。
现代文：二月十四日，下诏改称麦务川为象雷县，女河川为神水县，罗家军为闾山县，山子川为富庶县，习家砦为龙山县，阿览峪为劝农县，松山川为松山县，金甸子为金原县。
English: On February 14, the next edict changed the names of Mu Mu River to Xiang Lei County, Mei River to Shenshui County, Luo Jia Jun to Lushan County, Yamzi River to Fushai County, Xi Jia Fort to Longshan County, Ashang River to Sheng Nong County, Matsuyama River to Matsuyama County, and Jin Dianzi to Jin Yuan County.

古文：壬午，遣北院枢密副使高正按察诸道狱。
现代文：二十日，派北院枢密副使高正到诸道巡查诉讼之事。
English: On the 20th, Gao Zheng, Deputy Privy Councilor of the Northern Yuan, was sent to inspect the proceedings in various provinces.

古文：三月壬辰朔，化哥以西北路略平，留兵戍镇州，赴行在。
现代文：三月初一，因西北路形势稍稳，化哥留下兵马戍守镇州，自己赶赴皇上行宫。
English: On the first day of March, due to the slightly stable situation on the Northwest Road, Hua Ge left the Terracotta Warriors and Horses to guard Zhenzhou and rushed to the imperial palace.

古文：夏四月甲子，拜日。
现代文：夏四月初三，祭拜太阳。
English: On the third day of the fourth month in summer, the sun is worshipped.

古文：诏从上京请，以韩斌所括赡国、挞鲁河、奉、豪等州户二万五千四百有奇，置长霸、兴仁、保和等十县。
现代文：下诏允许上京的请求，将韩斌在赡国、挞鲁河、奉、豪等州检括出的二万五千四百多户口分置于长霸、兴仁、保和等十县。
English: The lower edict allowed the request to go to Beijing, and placed the more than 25,400 household accounts inspected by Han Bin in the states of Yingguo, Jiluhe, Feng and Hao in 10 counties including Changba, Xingren and Bohol.

古文：丙子，如缅山。
现代文：十五日，皇上到缅山。
English: On the 15th, the Emperor went to Mount Myeongsan.

古文：五月辛卯朔，复命化哥等西讨。
现代文：五月初一，命令化哥再次西征。
English: On the first day of May, Huagang was ordered to march west again.

古文：六月辛酉朔，遣中丞耶律资忠使高丽，取六州旧地。
现代文：六月初一，派中丞耶律资忠出使高丽，索取六州旧地。
English: On the first day of June, he sent the middle-ranking general Ye Ruzhizhong as an envoy to Korea to reclaim the six old provinces.

古文：秋七月壬辰，乌古、敌烈皆复故疆。
现代文：秋七月初二，乌古、敌烈均恢复原有疆域。
English: On the 2nd day of the 7th month of autumn, both Ugu and the enemy forces resumed their original territory.

古文：乙未，西南招讨使、政事令斜轸奏党项诸部叛者皆遁黄河北模赧山，其不叛者曷党、乌迷两部因据其地，今复西迁，诘之则曰逐水草，不早图之，后恐为患。
现代文：初四，西南招讨使、政事令斜轸奏报：党项叛乱诸部均逃往黄河以北的模赧山，未叛乱的曷党、乌迷两部因而全部据有党项故地，现在他们又开始西迁，派人去问原因，回答说是要逐水草而放牧。如果不早点防犯他们，以后恐怕要成为祸患。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the Southwestern Invitation and Interrogation Envoy and the government order were obliquely reported: All the rebellious party members fled to Muxian Mountain north of the Yellow River. The non-rebellious party members and the two fanatics thus all settled in the party's ancestral land. Now they have begun to move west again. They sent someone to ask the reason, and the answer was that they wanted to graze grass and water. If they were not prevented from committing crimes earlier, it would probably become a disaster in the future.

古文：又闻前后叛者多投西夏，西夏不纳。
现代文：又听说前前后后的叛乱者多去投靠西夏，但西夏未接纳他们。
English: It was also heard that most of the rebels around the time went to join Xi Xia, but Xi Xia did not accept them.

古文：诏遣使再问西迁之意，若归故地，则可就加抚谕。
现代文：皇上闻奏，下诏派使者再去询问他们西迁的意图，如果他们有意回归故地，则可对他们加以安抚晓谕。
English: When the emperor heard of this, he sent an envoy to inquire about their intention to move west, and if they intended to return to their homeland, he could calm them down.

古文：使不报，上怒，欲伐之。
现代文：使者没有得到回音，皇上发怒，准备讨伐之。
English: The emissary did not receive a reply, and the emperor became angry and prepared to fight.

古文：遂诏李德昭： 今党项叛，我欲西伐，尔当东击，毋失掎角之势。 
现代文：于是下诏给李德昭说 ：现今党项叛乱，我准备西征，你应当向东进击他们，以和我军形成互为犄角之势。 
English: Therefore, he issued an edict to Li Dezhao, saying, "Now that the Party is in rebellion, I am preparing to march westward. You should march eastward to attack them, so as to create a situation of mutual conflict with our army."

古文：仍命诸军各市肥马。
现代文：并命令诸军各自购买肥硕的战马。
English: He also ordered all the armies to buy fat horses.

古文：丁酉，以惕隐耶律涤洌为南府宰相，太尉五哥为惕隐。
现代文：初七，任命惕隐耶律涤洌为南府宰相，太尉五哥为惕隐。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Titiyin was appointed as the prime minister of Nanfu, and the fifth brother of the captain was appointed as Titiyin.

古文：癸卯，钓鱼曲沟。
现代文：十三日，在曲沟钓鱼。
English: On the 13th, we went fishing in the meander.

古文：戊申，诏以敦睦宫子钱振贫民。
现代文：十八日，下诏用敦睦宫之子钱赈济贫民。
English: On the 18th, the emperor issued an edict to use the money of Qian Ye, the son of Dunmu Palace, to help the poor.

古文：己酉，化哥等破阻卜酋长乌八之众。
现代文：十九日，化哥等攻破阻卜酋长乌八部众。
English: On the 19th, Huago and others broke through the resistance of the chiefs of the eight departments of Wu.

古文：丁卯，封皇子宗训大内惕隐。
现代文：丁卯日，封皇子宗训为大内惕隐。
English: On the day of Dingwu, the emperor's son Zongxun became Dainai Tiyin.

古文：八月壬戌，遣引进使李延弘赐夏国王李德昭及义成公主车马。
现代文：八月初三，派引进使李延弘赐给夏国王李德昭和义成公主车马。
English: On the 3rd day of the 8th month, Li Yanhong, the chief of the imperial envoy, sent the carriage and horses to the summer king, Li De Showa, for Princess Yicheng.

古文：己丑，耶律资忠使高丽还。
现代文：三十日，耶律资忠出使高丽回国。
English: On the 30th, Yerutsuchong sent an envoy to Korea to return home.

古文：冬十月己未朔，畋麃井之北。
现代文：冬十月初一，在井之北狩猎。
English: In winter, on the first day of October, go deer hunting in the north of Ino.

古文：命耶律阿营等使宋贺生辰。
现代文：命令耶律阿营等出使宋国祝贺宋主生辰。
English: He ordered Ye Lua Ying and other envoys from Song to congratulate Song on his birthday.

古文：辛酉，驻跸长泺。
现代文：初三，歇驾于长泊。
English: On the third day of junior high school, he stopped at Nagatoro.

古文：丙寅。详稳张马留献女直人知高丽事者。
现代文：初八，详稳张马留献上通晓高丽国情况的女真人。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Zhang Ma Liu presented a female real person who is familiar with the situation in Korea.

古文：上问之，曰： 臣三年前为高丽所虏，为郎官，故知之。
现代文：皇上问这些女真人，他们回答说： 微臣三年前被高丽人掳去，在那里任郎官，故而知道那里的情况。
English: When the Emperor asked these Jurchens, they replied, "Weichen was captured by the Koreans three years ago, and he was a retainer there, so he knows the situation there.

古文：自开京东马行七日，有大砦，广如开京，旁州所贡珍异，皆积于此。
现代文：从开京往东骑马走七天，有大砦，其广阔有如开京，邻州所贡的珍宝异物，均收藏在这里。
English: It takes seven days to ride from Kaijing to the east, there is a large fort, its vastness is like Kaijing, and the treasures and foreign objects donated by neighboring states are all collected here.

古文：胜、罗等州之南，亦有二大砦，所积如之。
现代文：胜、罗等州之南，也有两个大砦，也同样收藏着许多的财物。
English: There are also two large forts in the south of the state, such as Sheng and Luo, which also collect a lot of belongings.

古文：若大军行由前路，取曷苏馆女直北，直渡鸭渌江，并大河而上，至郭州与大路会，高丽可取而有也。 
现代文：若大军从上次出师时的旧路行军，取道曷苏馆女真北面，直渡鸭绿江，沿河而上，到郭州再上大路，则可攻占高丽。 
English: If a large army marches along the old road from the last time it was sent out, taking the road to the north of Yeosu Pavilion, crossing the Yalu River, going up the river to Guozhou and then taking the highway, it can capture Goryeo.

古文：上纳之。
现代文：皇上采纳了他们的建议。
English: The Emperor accepted their suggestion.

古文：十一月甲午，录囚。
现代文：十一月初六，察看犯人口供。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of November, the inspection of the criminal population began.

古文：癸丑，枢密使豳王化哥以西征有罪，削其官封，出为大同军节度使。
现代文：二十五日，枢密使豳王化哥因西征犯有罪过，被削夺官爵封号，出贬为大同军节度使。
English: On the 25th, the privy envoy, Wang Huagong, was found guilty of the Western Conscription, stripped of his title and demoted to the position of the Datong Army's festival envoy.

古文：十二月甲子，以北院大王耶律世良为北院枢密使，封岐王。
现代文：十二月初七，任命北院大王耶律世良为北院枢密使，册封为岐王。
English: On the 7th day of the 12th month of the lunar calendar, the Great King of the Northern Court, Yerut Se-ryong, was appointed as the Privy Councilor of the Northern Court, and was named the King of Qi.

古文：以宰臣刘晟监修国史，牛璘为彰国军节度使，萧孝穆为西北路招讨使。
现代文：命令宰臣刘晟监修国史，任命刘瞞为彰国军节度使，萧孝穆为西北路招讨使。
English: He ordered Vice-Minister Liu Xuan to supervise the revision of the national history, appointed Liu Xie as the envoy of the National Day of the People's Republic of China, and Xiao Xiaomu as the envoy of the Northwest Road.

古文：放进士鲜于茂昭等六人及第。
现代文：录取进士鲜于茂昭等六人及第。
English: Six freshmen, including Shigeaki, were admitted to the university.

古文：三年春正月己丑，录囚。
现代文：三年春正月初二，察看犯人口供。
English: On the second day of the first month of the third year of spring, the inspection of the criminal population began.

古文：阻卜酋长乌八来朝，封为王。
现代文：阻卜酋长乌八前来朝见，被封为王。
English: The chief of Dzobu, Ubachi, came to see the emperor and was crowned king.

古文：乙未，如浑河。
现代文：初八，皇上到浑河。
English: On the first day of the eighth month, the emperor went to Hunkawa.

古文：丁酉，女直及铁骊各遣使来贡。
现代文：初十，女真及铁骊均派使者前来进贡。
English: On the 10th day of the 1st month, Nyoshin and Tetsuko both sent emissaries to pay tribute.

古文：是夕，彗星见西方。
现代文：这天晚上，彗星出现在西方。
English: That evening, the comet appeared in the west.

古文：丙午，畋潢河滨。
现代文：十九日，田猎于潢河之滨。
English: On the 19th, the hunting began on the banks of the Li River.

古文：壬子，帝及皇后猎瑞鹿原。
现代文：二十五日，皇上及皇后行猎于瑞鹿原。
English: On the 25th, the Emperor and Empress went on a hunting trip to Rui Luchuan.

古文：二月戊午，诏增枢密使以下月俸。
现代文：二月初二，下诏增加枢密使以下官员按月发放的俸禄。
English: On the 2nd day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 3rd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2

古文：甲子，遣上京副留守耶律资忠复使高丽取六州旧地。
现代文：初八，派上京副留守耶律资忠再次出使高丽索取六州旧地。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Ye Lu Zizhong, who was sent to Beijing as a vice-resident, once again sent an envoy to Korea to claim the six old provinces.

古文：三月庚子，遣耶律世良城招州。
现代文：三月十五日，派耶律世良在招州筑城。
English: On the 15th of March, Pai Yerutselang was in Zhaozhou, Chuxing.

古文：戊申，南京、奉圣、平、蔚、云、应、朔等州置转运使。
现代文：二十三日，南京、奉圣、平、蔚、云、应、朔等州设置转运使。
English: On the 23rd, Nanjing, Feng Sheng, Ping, Wei, Yun, Ying, Shuo and other provinces set up transit envoys.

古文：夏四月戊午，诏南京管内毋淹刑狱，以妨农务。
现代文：夏四月初三，下诏令南京辖内不得拖延刑事案件的处理，以致妨碍农事。
English: On the third day of the fourth month of the summer, it was decreed that the handling of criminal cases within the jurisdiction of Nanjing should not be delayed, thus hindering agricultural affairs.

古文：癸亥，乌古叛。
现代文：初八，乌古叛乱。
English: On the 8th day of the first month, the Ugu rebellion began.

古文：乙亥，沙州回鹘曹顺遣使来贡。
现代文：二十日，沙州回鹘曹顺派使者前来进贡。
English: On the 20th, Cao Shun, the governor of Shazhou, sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：丙子，以西北路招讨都监萧孝穆为北府宰相。
现代文：二十一日，任命西北路招讨都监萧孝穆为北府宰相。
English: On the 21st, Xiao Xiaomu, the supervisor of the Northwest Invitation Campaign, was appointed as the prime minister of Beifu.

古文：五月乙酉朔，清暑缅山。
现代文：五月初一，在缅山避暑。
English: On the first day of May, I spent the summer in Mount Myeongsan.

古文：六月乙亥，合拔里、乙室二国舅为一帐，以乙室夷离毕萧敌烈为详稳以总之。
现代文：六月二十一日，将拔里、乙室两个国舅帐合为一帐，任命乙室夷离毕萧敌烈为详稳总理帐内事务。
English: On June 21, the accounts of the two heads of state, Baili and Second Chamber, were combined into one account, and the Second Chamber was appointed to be responsible for the internal affairs of the Prime Minister.

古文：甲申，封皇侄胡都古为广平郡王。
现代文：三十日，封皇侄胡都古为广平郡王。
English: On the 30th, Hu Dugu, the nephew of the emperor, became the king of Guangping County.

古文：是夏，诏国舅详稳萧敌烈、东京留守耶律团石等讨高丽，造浮梁于鸭渌江，城保、宣义、定远等州。
现代文：这年夏天，下诏令国舅详稳萧敌烈、东京留守耶律团石等讨伐高丽，让他们在鸭绿江上造浮桥，在保、宣等州修筑城池。
English: In the summer of that year, he issued an imperial edict ordering the uncle of the country, Ji Jianwen, to defeat the enemy, and Yerutuan Shi, who stayed in Tokyo, to fight against the Goryeo Dynasty, and ordered them to build a floating bridge on the Yalu River, and to build castles in the provinces of Bao and Xuan.

古文：秋七月乙酉朔，如平地松林。
现代文：秋七月初一，皇上到平地松林。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, the emperor went to the flat pine forest.

古文：壬辰，诏政事省、枢密院，酒间授官释罪，毋即奉行，明日覆奏。
现代文：初八，下诏命令政事省和枢密院对于皇上在酒宴间所下的加官进爵释放罪犯的指令，不要立即奉行，须等到第二天上奏核准后方可执行。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, he issued an imperial edict ordering the Ministry of Political Affairs and the Privy Council not to immediately carry out the emperor's order to promote officials to knighthoods and release criminals, which had been issued during a banquet. The order had to be submitted for approval the next day before being implemented.

古文：八月甲寅朔，幸沙岭。
现代文：八月初一，临幸沙岭。
English: On the first day of August, Linxingshan Ridge is at its peak.

古文：九月丁酉，八部敌烈杀其详稳稍瓦，皆叛，诏南府宰相耶律吾剌葛招抚之。
现代文：九月十四日，八部敌烈杀死其详稳稍瓦，全部叛乱，皇上下诏令南府宰相耶律吾剌葛前去招抚。
English: On September 14th, eight hostile forces killed all the rebels, and the emperor issued an imperial edict ordering the chancellor of Nanfu, Yerutu Wuzhongge, to go and appease them.

古文：辛亥，释敌烈数人，令招谕其众。
现代文：二十八日，释放敌烈部人犯数名，让他们回去招降抚谕其族人。
English: On the 28th, several enemy martyrs and criminals were released, and they were allowed to go back to invite their compatriots to surrender.

古文：壬子，耶律世良遣使献敌烈俘。
现代文：二十九日，耶律世良派使者献上敌烈俘虏。
English: On the 29th, Yerushalayim sent an emissary to present the enemy prisoners.

古文：冬十月甲寅朔，幸中京。
现代文：冬十月初一，临幸中京。
English: On the first day of October in winter, Linxing Zhongjing.

古文：丙子，以旗鼓拽剌详稳题里姑为奚六部大王。
现代文：二十三日，任命旗鼓拽剌详稳题里姑为奚六部大王。
English: On the 23rd, she was appointed as the leader of the Six Departments of the State Council.

古文：放进士张用行等三十一人及第出身。
现代文：放榜赐录进士张用行等三十一人进士及第出身。
English: Zhang Yingxing, one of the thirty-one new recruits and the first-born, was listed on the list of new recruits.

古文：四年春正月乙酉，如瑞鹿原。
现代文：四年春正月初四，到瑞鹿原。
English: On the 4th day of the 1st month of the 4th year of spring, I went to Rui Luchuan.

古文：丙戌，诏耶律世良再伐迪烈得。
现代文：初五，诏令耶律世良再次征伐迪烈得。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the emperor issued an order to Yerushalayim to invade Diridat again.

古文：戊子，命详稳拔姑潴水瑞鹿原，以备春蒐。
现代文：初七，命详稳拔姑在瑞鹿原蓄水为春搜做作准备。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, it was ordered to steadily collect water in Ruiluguan to prepare for the spring search.

古文：丁酉，猎马兰淀。
现代文：十六日，出猎于马兰淀。
English: On the 16th, they went hunting in Malan Yodo.

古文：壬寅，东征。
现代文：二十一日，东征。
English: On the 21st, the Eastern Expedition began.

古文：东京留守善宁、平章涅里衮奏，已总大军及女直诸部兵分道进讨，遂遣使赍密诏军前。
现代文：东京留守善宁、平章涅里衮奏称已总领大军及女真部兵马分道进讨，皇上派使者携带密诏前去军中宣旨。
English: Zenning, who remained in Tokyo, and Pingzhang Nieri sent a message saying that they had led the army and the female troops and horses of the Ministry of the People's Liberation Army to advance the discussion, and the emperor sent an envoy to carry the secret edict to the army.

古文：二月壬子朔，如萨堤泺。于阗国来贡。
现代文：二月初一，到萨堤泊。于阗国前来进贡。
English: On the first day of February, he went to Satipo. He came to pay tribute in the country of Yunnan.

古文：夏四月癸丑，以林牙建福为北院大王。
现代文：夏四月初四，任命林牙建福为北院大王。
English: On the fourth day of the fourth month of the fourth month of the summer, Lin Ya Jianfu was appointed as the king of the Northern Court.

古文：甲寅，萧敌烈等伐高丽还。
现代文：初五，萧敌烈等征讨高丽回国。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Xiao Jirel and others returned to Korea to fight.

古文：丙辰，曷苏馆部请括女直王殊只你户旧无籍者，会其丁入赋役，从之。
现代文：初七，曷苏馆部上书请求检括女真王殊只你部下以前未入户籍者，让他们中的丁壮纳赋税服劳役，得到允许。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the Department of the Museum of the Soviet Union sent a letter to the Empress Zhen Wang requesting that only those of her subordinates who had not previously been registered with the household be allowed to receive tax payment and labor service.

古文：枢密使贯宁奏大破八部迪烈得，诏侍御撒剌奖谕，代行执手之礼。
现代文：枢密使贯宁奏称大破八部迪烈得，皇上下诏让侍御撒剌前往褒奖表彰，代皇上向贯宁行执手之礼。
English: The confidential envoy Janning made a speech saying that it was a great success, and the emperor issued an imperial edict to let the attendant Sakaki go to the commendation and commendation, and the acting emperor gave Janning a handshake.

古文：丙寅，耶律世良等上破阻卜俘获数。
现代文：十七日，耶律世良等表上攻破阻卜所得的俘虏及缴获物数目。
English: On the 17th, the number of captives and captured items obtained by breaking through the obstruction appeared on the table.

古文：戊辰，驻跸沿柳湖。
现代文：十九日，歇驾于沿柳湖。
English: On the 19th, they stopped along Liuhe Lake.

古文：己巳，女直遣使来贡。
现代文：二十日，女真派使者前来进贡。
English: On the fifteenth day, Jurchen sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：壬申，耶律世良讨乌古，破之。
现代文：二十三日，耶律世良等讨伐乌古，攻破之。
English: On the 23rd, Yelu Shiliang and others went to fight Ugu and defeated it.

古文：甲戌，遣使赏有功将校。
现代文：二十五日，派使者奖赏有功将领。
English: On the 25th, an envoy was sent to reward the meritorious generals.

古文：世良讨迪烈得至清泥埚。
现代文：耶律世良进讨迪烈得至清泥埚。
English: Yerut Se-Ryong's treatment of Delia is pure filth.

古文：时于厥既平，朝廷议内徙其众，于厥安土重迁，遂叛。
现代文：当时于厥部已被讨伐平定之后，朝廷决定将于厥居民迁徙到内地，他们安土重迁，重新发动了叛乱。
English: At that time, the imperial court decided to relocate the residents of Yüköy to the inland after Yüköy had been subdued by the crusade, and they resettled and restarted the rebellion.

古文：世良惩创，既破迪烈得，辄歼其丁壮。
现代文：世良吸取这一教训，在攻破迪烈得之后，就将其青壮年全部杀光。
English: Se-ryo learned this lesson, and after defeating Di-rye-do, he killed all of his young men.

古文：勒兵渡曷剌河，进击馀党，斥候不谨，其将勃括聚兵稠林中，击辽军不备。
现代文：世良带领军队渡曷剌河，进击迪烈得余部，由于侦察不严密，使得迪烈得将领勃括得以在密林中招集兵马，趁辽军不备进行偷袭。
English: Sera led the army across the Yunnan River and attacked the rest of Dili, but because the reconnaissance was not strict, the general of Dili was able to recruit soldiers and horses in the dense forest and take advantage of the Liao army's unpreparedness to make a surprise attack.

古文：辽军小却，结阵河曲。
现代文：辽军向后稍事退却，在河曲集结驻扎。
English: The Liao army retreated a little behind and gathered and stationed in Hequ.

古文：勃括是夜来袭。
现代文：勃括当天晚上又前来偷袭。
English: On the evening of the day of the outbreak, they came to attack again.

古文：翌日，辽后军至，勃括诱于厥之众皆遁，世良追之，军至险厄。勃括方阻险少休，辽军侦知其所，世良不亟掩之，勃括轻骑遁去。
现代文：第二天，辽后卫部队赶到，勃括引诱于厥部众一起逃跑，世良进行追击，大军到达险要之地，勃括率众据险阻休憩，辽军侦察到了驻扎场所，世良没有及时进击冲杀，致使勃括得以乘轻骑逃脱。
English: The next day, Liao's rearguard troops arrived, Liao's outflankers lured the troops of the imperial army to flee together, Sheliang pursued, the army reached the critical place, Liao's outflankers led the troops to a break from the dangerous obstacle, the Liao army scouted the stationing place, Sheliang did not attack and kill in time, resulting in Liao's outflankers being able to escape by light horse.

古文：获其辎重及所诱于厥之众，并迁迪烈得所获辖麦里部民，城胪朐河上以居之。
现代文：辽军缴获其辎重并俘获被诱逃的于厥部众。将他们连同被迪烈得所获的辖麦里部居民一起迁徙到内地，在胪朐河上筑城让他们居住下来。
English: The Liao army captured their baggage and captured the Yugube people who had been lured to flee. They moved them to the mainland together with the residents of the governed Meribe who had been captured by the Di Li, and built a city on the Wei River for them to live in.

古文：是月，萧杨哥尚南平郡主。
现代文：同月，萧杨哥娶南平郡主。
English: In the same month, Xiao Yangge married Nanping Princess.

古文：五月辛巳，命北府宰相刘晟为都统，枢密使耶律世良为副，殿前都点检萧屈烈为都监以伐高丽。
现代文：五月初二，命令北府宰相刘晟为都统，枢密使耶律世良为副都统，殿前都点检萧屈烈为都监，准备征伐高丽。
English: On the second day of the first month of May, he ordered the prime minister of Beifu, Liu Ye, to be the leader of the Tongtong, the confidential envoy, Ye Luo Shiliang, to be the deputy leader of the Tongtong, and the prefectural inspector, Xiao Qurei, to be the leader of the Tongtong, in preparation for the conquest of Korea.

古文：晟先携家置边郡，致缓师期，追还之。
现代文：刘晟先将家属安置到边郡，致使出师日期被迫推迟，皇上派人追赶让他返回京师。
English: Liu Bei first placed his family members in Bian County, resulting in the forced postponement of the departure date, and the emperor sent someone to chase him back to the Beijing Division.

古文：以世良、屈烈总兵进讨。
现代文：另由萧屈烈统率部队进军讨伐。
English: On the other hand, the troops led by Xiao Qurei marched into the crusade.

古文：以耶律德政为辽兴军节度使，萧年骨烈天成军节度使。
现代文：任命耶律德政为辽兴军节度使，萧年骨烈为天城军节度使。
English: He appointed Yelu Desheng as the military envoy of the Liao Xing Army and Xiao Nian Bonyer as the military envoy of the Tiancheng Army.

古文：李仲举卒，诏赙恤其家。
现代文：李仲举去世，皇上下诏赐钱助丧，并抚恤其家属。
English: After the death of Li Zhongji, the emperor issued an imperial edict to give money to help with the funeral and to support his family.

古文：六月庚戌，上拜日如礼。
现代文：六月初二，皇上按照礼仪拜日。
English: On the second day of the first month of June, the Emperor went on a Sunday visit in accordance with protocol.

古文：以麻都骨世勋，易衣马为好。
现代文：因麻都骨世代之功勋，与他交换衣服马匹结交为友。
English: They exchanged clothes and horses with him and became friends because of the merits of the Mahdu Bone generation.

古文：以上京留守耶律八哥为北院枢密副使。
现代文：任命上京留守耶律八哥为北院枢密使。
English: Yeruhachi, who stayed in Kyoto, was appointed to be the Privy Councilor of the Northern Court.

古文：秋七月，上又拜日，遂幸秋山。
现代文：秋七月，皇上再次拜祭太阳，然后临幸秋山。
English: In autumn and July, the emperor once again paid homage to the sun, and then visited Mount Akiyama.

古文：自八月射鹿至于九月，复自癸丑至于辛酉，连猎于有柏、碎石、太保、响应、松山诸山。
现代文：从八月开始射鹿直到九月，又从九月初六直到十四日，皇上连续在有柏、碎石、太保、响应、松山诸山游猎。
English: From August to September, and from the 6th of September to the 14th, the emperor continuously hunted in the mountains of Aribo, Gravel, Taibo, Response, and Matsuyama.

古文：丁卯，与夷离毕、兵部尚书萧荣宁定为交契，以重君臣之好。
现代文：二十日，与夷离毕、兵部尚书萧荣宁结为好友以加深君臣之间的感情。
English: On the 20th, he became friends with Xiao Rongning, who had left the Yi and joined the military to deepen the feelings between the emperor and the people.

古文：丙子，以旗鼓拽剌详稳题里姑为六部奚王。
现代文：二十九日，任命旗鼓拽剌详稳题里姑为六部奚王。
English: On the 29th, she was appointed as the leader of the six-part performance.

古文：冬十月，驻跸挞剌割泺。
现代文：冬十月，歇驾于挞剌割泊。
English: Winter in October, resting at the gelding's berth.

古文：十一月庚申，诏汰东京僧，及命上京、中京洎诸宫选精兵五万五千人以备东征。
现代文：十一月十四日，下诏淘汰东京僧人，并命令上京、中京和诸道选拔精兵五万五千人以备东征。
English: On November 14, he issued an edict to eliminate the Tokyo monks and ordered 55,000 elite soldiers to be selected from Shangjing, Zhongjing and all the provinces to prepare for the Eastern Expedition.

古文：十二月，南巡海徼。
现代文：十二月，南巡海疆。
English: In December, it made a tour of the southern seas.

古文：还，幸显州。
现代文：回，临幸显州。
English: Back, Linhong Hsiengzhou.

古文：五年春正月丁未，北幸。
现代文：五年春正月初二，北幸。
English: On the second day of the first month of the fifth year of spring, the northern fortune.

古文：庚戌，耶律世良、萧屈烈与高丽战于郭州西，破之，斩首数万级，尽获其辎重。
现代文：初五，耶律世良、萧屈烈与高丽交战于郭州之西，破之，斩首数万级，尽数俘获其辎重。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Yelu Shiliang, Xiao Qurei and Goryeo fought in the west of Guozhou, defeated them, beheaded tens of thousands of levels, and captured as many as possible.

古文：乙卯，师次南海军，耶律世良薨于军。
现代文：初十，军队驻扎于南海军，耶律世良在军中逝世。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the army was stationed in the South Sea Fleet, and Yerutseryo died in the army.

古文：癸酉，驻跸雪林。
现代文：二十八日，皇上歇驾于雪林。
English: On the 28th, the emperor went to rest in the snow forest.

古文：二月己卯，阻卜长来朝。
现代文：二月初四，阻卜酋长前来朝见。
English: On the 4th day of the 2nd month of the year, Chief Dabo came to see me.

古文：辛巳，如萨堤泺。
现代文：初六，皇上到萨堤泊。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month, the emperor went to Satipo.

古文：庚寅，以前东京统军使耶律韩留为右夷离毕。
现代文：十五日，任命前东京统军使耶律韩留为右夷离毕。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, Hanryu Yerut, who had been appointed as the envoy of the former Tokyo United Army, left for Ui.

古文：戊戌，皇子宗真生。
现代文：二十三日，皇子宗真出生。
English: On the 23rd, Prince Munezane was born.

古文：三月乙卯，鼻骨德长撒保特、赛剌等来贡。
现代文：三月十一日，鼻骨德酋长撒保特、赛剌等前来朝贡。
English: On March 11th, the nasal bone chieftains, Sabote, Sayu, and others came to pay tribute.

古文：辛酉，诸道狱空，诏进阶赐物。
现代文：十七日，诸道狱中已无犯人，下诏给官员晋级赐物。
English: On the seventeenth day, there were no more prisoners in the jails, and the officials were given a promotion gift.

古文：丙寅，以前北院大王耶律敬温为阿紥割只。
现代文：二十二日，任命前北院大王耶律敬温为阿扎割只。
English: On the 22nd, he appointed the former Northern Court Grand Prince Ye Lu Kei Wen as the Azagare.

古文：辛未，党项魁可来降。
现代文：二十七日，党项魁可前来降附。
English: On the 27th, the leader of the party can come to join.

古文：夏四月乙亥，振招州民。
现代文：夏四月初二，赈济招州饥民。
English: On the second day of the fourth month of the summer, the starving people in Zhaozhou were fed.

古文：戊寅，以左夷离毕萧合卓为北院枢密使，曷鲁宁为副使。
现代文：初五，任命左夷离毕萧合卓为北院枢密使，曷鲁宁为枢密副使。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Zuo Yili appointed Bi Xiao He Zhuo as the Privy Envoy to the Northern Yuan, and Jia Luning as the Deputy Privy Envoy.

古文：庚辰，清暑孤树淀。
现代文：初七，在孤树淀消夏。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the summer ends in孤树淀.

古文：五月甲子，尚书萧姬隐坐出使后期，削其官。
现代文：五月二十一日，尚书萧姬隐因不按期出使获罪，被削夺官职。
English: On May 21st, Shangshu Xiao Jiyin was punished for not dispatching envoys as scheduled, and was stripped of his official position.

古文：丁卯，以耿元吉为户部使。
现代文：二十四日，任命耿元吉为户部使。
English: On the 24th, Geng Yuanji was appointed as the new chief of the Household Division.

古文：六月，以政事舍人吴克昌按察霸州刑狱。
现代文：六月，命政事舍人吴克昌巡察霸州刑狱。
English: In June, Wu Kechang, a political dissident, inspected the Bazhou Penitentiary.

古文：丁丑，回鹘献孔雀。
现代文：初五，回鹘献上孔雀。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, a peacock was presented to the emperor.

古文：秋七月甲辰，猎于赤山。
现代文：秋七月初二，皇上田猎于赤山。
English: On the 2nd day of the 7th month of autumn, the Emperor Tian hunts in Akayama.

古文：八月丙子，幸怀州，有事于诸陵。
现代文：八月初五，临幸怀州，祭祀诸陵。
English: On the 5th day of the 8th month of the lunar calendar, in the auspicious month of Huai Zhou, all the tombs will be dedicated.

古文：戊寅，还上京。
现代文：初七，回上京。
English: On his seventh day of junior high school, he returned to Tokyo.

古文：九月癸卯，皇弟南京留守秦晋国王隆庆来朝，上亲出迎劳，至实德山，因同猎于松山。
现代文：九月初二，皇弟南京留守秦晋国王隆庆前来朝见，皇上亲自到实德山迎接慰问，并和他一起在松山打猎。
English: On the second day of the first month of September, Emperor Longqing, the younger brother of Emperor Qin, who stayed behind in Nanjing, came to see the emperor. The emperor himself came to Shide Mountain to receive condolences, and went hunting with him in Matsuyama.

古文：乙丑，驻跸杏埚。
现代文：二十四日，歇驾于杏埚。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, he rested in the almond grove.

古文：冬十月甲午，封秦晋国王隆庆长子查割中山郡王，次子遂哥乐安郡王。
现代文：冬十月二十三日，封秦晋国王隆庆长子查割为中山郡王，次子遂哥为乐安郡王。
English: On the 23rd day of winter in October, Longqing, the eldest son of King Longqing of the Qin and Jin Dynasties, was crowned as the King of Zhongshan County, and his second son and brother were crowned as the King of Le'an County.

古文：十一月辛丑朔，以参知政事马保忠同知枢密院事、监修国史。
现代文：十一月初一，任命参知政事马保忠为同知枢密院事、监修国史。
English: On the first day of November, Ma Baotong, a political advisor to the prefectural governor, was appointed as a privy councilor of the prefectural governor and supervisor of national history.

古文：丁巳，以北面林牙萧隗洼为国舅详隐。
现代文：十七日，任命北面林牙萧隈洼为国舅详稳。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, he appointed Lin Ya Xiao Kuwua from the north as the uncle of the country.

古文：十二月乙酉，秦晋国王隆庆还，至北安薨，讣闻，上为哀恸，辍朝七日。
现代文：十二月十五日，秦晋国王隆庆回封地，至北安时逝世，皇上得到凶讯，哀伤恸哭，为之停止上朝七天。
English: On December 15th, King Longqing of Qin and Jin returned to his fiefdom, and died at Bei'an. The emperor received the bad news, wept with grief, and stopped going to court for seven days.

古文：丁酉，宋遣张逊、王承德来贺千龄节。
现代文：二十七日，宋派张逊、王承德前来祝贺千龄节。
English: On the 27th, Zhang Xun and Wang Chengde of the Song Dynasty came to congratulate the Millennium Festival.

古文：是岁，放进士孙杰等四十八人及第。
现代文：这一年，录进士孙杰等四十八人及第。
English: This year, Sun Jie and other forty-eight people were inducted.

古文：六年春正月癸卯，如锥子河。
现代文：六年春正月初三，皇上到锥子河。
English: On the third day of the first month of the sixth year of spring, the emperor went to the Jizhe River.

古文：二月甲戌，以公主赛哥杀无罪婢，驸马萧图玉不能齐家，降公主为县主，削图玉同平章事。
现代文：二月初五，因公主赛哥无故杀死无罪侍婢，驸马萧图玉治家无方，下令将公主降为郡主，削去萧图玉同平章事官职。
English: On the fifth day of the second month of the year, because the princess Saigo killed the innocent servants and maidservants without any reason, the family of Xiao Tu and Yu Zhi had no choice but to order the princess to be reduced to the rank of princess, and to remove Xiao Tu and Yu Zhi from the official posts.

古文：丁丑，诏国舅帐详稳萧隗洼将本部兵东征高丽，其国舅司事以都监摄之。
现代文：初八，诏令国舅帐详稳萧隗洼率本部兵马东征高丽，国舅所司政务暂由其都监代为处理。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the emperor ordered the provincial governor to set up the headquarters of the Eastern Expedition of the Korean People's Army, and the government affairs of the provincial governor were temporarily handled by his deputy.

古文：庚辰，以南面林牙涅合为南院大王。
现代文：十一日，任命南面林牙涅合为南院大王。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Lin Chia Niu was appointed as the King of the Southern Court.

古文：三月乙巳，如显州，葬秦晋国王隆庆。
现代文：三月初六，皇上到显州，安葬秦晋国王隆庆。
English: On the 6th day of the 3rd month, the emperor went to Xianzhou to bury King Longqing of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：有事于显、乾二陵。
现代文：祭祀显、乾二陵。
English: The ritual takes place in two mausoleums.

古文：追册隆庆为太弟。
现代文：追封隆庆为太弟。
English: He was the great-grandson of Jufeng Longqing.

古文：夏四月辛卯，封隆庆少子谢家奴为长沙郡王，以枢密使漆水郡王耶律制心权知诸行宫都部署事。
现代文：夏四月二十三日，册封隆庆少子谢家奴为长沙郡王，任命枢密使漆水郡王耶律制心权知诸行宫都部署事。
English: On the 23rd day of the 4th month of the summer, Longqing's young son, Xie Jia Nong, was enthroned as the county king of Changsha County, and the royal envoy of the county king of Lishui County, Ye Lu, was appointed to organize the affairs of the palace.

古文：壬辰，禁命妇再醮。
现代文：二十四日，禁止朝廷命妇再嫁。
English: On the 24th, the court ordered the woman to stop remarrying.

古文：丙申，如凉陉。
现代文：二十八日，至凉陉。
English: On the 28th, it will be cool.

古文：五月戊戌朔，命枢密使萧合卓为都统，汉人行宫都部署王继忠为副，殿前都点检萧屈烈为都监，以伐高丽。
现代文：五月初一，任命枢密使萧合卓为都统，汉人行宫都部署王继忠为副都统，殿前都点检萧屈烈为都监，让他们统兵征伐高丽。
English: On the first day of May, Xiao Hezhuo, the envoy of the Privy Council, was appointed as the leader of the Goryeo Dynasty, Wang Jizhong was appointed as the deputy leader of the Goryeo Dynasty, and Xiao Qurei was appointed as the governor of the Goryeo Dynasty in front of the palace, so that they could lead an army to conquer Goryeo.

古文：翌日，赐合卓剑，俾得专杀。
现代文：第二天，皇上赐给萧合卓剑，让他在军中有先斩后奏之权。
English: The next day, the emperor gave Xiao He Zhuo Rong a sword, giving him the right to be the first to cut and play in the army.

古文：丙午，录囚。
现代文：初九，查看犯人口供。
English: On the morning of the ninth day of the month, the prisoners' confessions were examined.

古文：己酉，设四帐都详稳。
现代文：十二日，设置四帐都详稳之职。
English: On the 12th, all four accounts were set up.

古文：甲寅，以南京统军使萧惠为右夷离毕。
现代文：十七日，任命南京统军使萧惠为右夷离毕。
English: On the 17th, Xiao Hui was appointed as the leader of the Nanjing United Army.

古文：乙卯，祠木叶山、潢河。乙丑，驻跸九层台。
现代文：十八日，祭祀木叶山、潢河，十九日，歇驾于九层台。
English: On the 18th, there will be a religious service at Mubei Mountain and Lugu River, and on the 19th, there will be a rest on the ninth floor.

古文：六月戊辰朔，德妃萧氏赐死，葬兔儿山西。
现代文：六月初一，德妃萧氏被赐死，葬于兔儿山之西。
English: On the first day of June, the Dowager Empress Dowager Xiao died and was buried in the west of Tuxiaoshan.

古文：后数日，大风起冢上，尽暝，大雷电而雨不止者逾月。
现代文：数日之后，从坟上刮起一阵狂风，顿时天昏地暗，雷电交加，大雨一直下了一个多月。
English: A few days later, a gust of wind blew up from the grave, suddenly the sky was dark, thunder and lightning were added, and it rained heavily for more than a month.

古文：是月，南京诸县蝗。
现代文：同月，南京诸县发生蝗灾。
English: In the same month, locust plagues occurred in all counties of Nanjing.

古文：秋七月辛亥，如秋山。
现代文：秋七月十五日，到秋山。
English: Autumn On July 15th, I went to Akiyama.

古文：遣礼部尚书刘京、翰林学士吴叔达、知制诰仇正己、起居舍人程翥、吏部员外郎南承颜、礼部员外郎王景运分路按察刑狱。
现代文：派礼部尚书刘京、翰林学士吴叔达、知制诰仇正己、起居舍人程翥、吏部员外郎南承颜、礼部员外郎王景运分头巡察各道刑狱。
English: He sent the head of the ceremonial department, Shangshu Liu Jing, the scholar of Hanlin Wu Shuda, the scholar of intellectual discipline, Qu Zhengyi, the layman of living, Cheng Yao, the member of the administrative department, Wai Lang Nan Cheng Yan, and the member of the ceremonial department, Wai Lang Wang Jing Yun, to inspect each prison.

古文：辛酉，以西南路招讨请，置宁仁县于胜州。
现代文：二十五日，应西南路招讨使之请，在胜州设宁仁县。
English: On the 25th, Ningren County was set up in Shengzhou at the invitation of the Southwest Road.

古文：九月庚子，还上京，以皇子属思生，大赦。
现代文：九月初五，回上京，因皇子属思出生，大赦天下。
English: On the 5th day of the 9th month, he went back to Kyoto, because his son, Prince Zenshi, was born.

古文：丁未，以驸马萧琏、节度使化哥、知制诰仇正己、杨佶充贺宋生辰正旦使副。
现代文：十二日，任命驸马萧琏、节度使化哥、知制诰仇正己、杨佶充任出使宋国祝贺宋生辰正旦使、副使。
English: On the 12th, he appointed Gao Ma Xiaohui, Jiedu Envoy Hua Ge, Zhizhuo Envoy Zhengyi, and Yang Yuchong as envoys to congratulate Song Shengchen Zhengdan Envoy and Deputy Envoy.

古文：乙卯，萧合卓等攻高丽兴化军不克，还师。
现代文：二十日，萧合卓等进攻高丽兴化军未能攻克，班师回国。
English: On the 20th, Xiao Hezhuo and other attacking Koryo Xinghua Army failed to conquer, and the team returned home.

古文：冬十月丁卯，南京路饥，輓云、应、朔、弘等州粟振之。
现代文：冬十月初二，南京路发生饥荒，从云、应、朔、弘等州运来粟米赈济灾民。
English: At the beginning of October in winter, a famine occurred in Nanjing Road, and corn was transported from Yun, Ying, Shuo, and Hong to help the victims.

古文：辛未，猎铧子河。
现代文：初六，皇上出猎于铧子河。
English: On his sixth day of junior high school, the emperor went hunting in the Choshi River.

古文：庚寅，驻跸达离山。
现代文：二十五日，歇驾于达离山。
English: On the 25th, we stopped at a remote mountain.

古文：十一月乙卯，建州节度使石匡弼卒。
现代文：十一月二十一日，建州节度使石匡弼去世。
English: On November 21st, the Founding of the People's Republic of China Day, Shi Kuangyao passed away.

古文：十二月丁卯，上轻骑还上京。戊子，宋遣李行简、张信来贺千龄节。
现代文：十二月初三，皇上乘快马回上京，二十四日，宋派李行简、张信前来祝贺千龄节。
English: On the third day of early December, the emperor returned to Beijing on a fast horse. On the 24th day, Song sent Li Xingjian and Zhang Xin to congratulate the millennium festival.

古文：翌日，宋冯元、张纶来贺正旦。
现代文：第二天，宋冯元、张纶前来祝贺正旦。
English: The next day, Song Fengyuan and Zhang Ye came to congratulate Zheng Dan.

