古文：岛夷桓玄，字敬道，本谯国龙亢楚也。
现代文：岛夷桓玄，字敬道，本是谯国龙亢的楚人。
English: Shimaichikangen, also known as Keido, was originally a Chu man from Yongkang, Shikoku.

古文：僭晋大司马温之子，温爱之，临终命以为后。
现代文：是伪晋大司马桓温之子，桓温很喜爱他，临终时嘱令他作为自己的继承人。
English: He was the son of the pseudo-Jin Daishi Ma Kanwen. Kanwen loved him very much, and on his deathbed ordered him to be his successor.

古文：年七岁，袭封南郡公。
现代文：桓玄七岁的时候，袭承父爵被封为南郡公。
English: When Kangen was seven years old, he inherited his father's title and was made the lord of Minami-gun.

古文：登国五年，为司马昌明太子洗马。
现代文：登国五年，任司马昌明的太子洗马。
English: Five years after ascending to the throne, Prince Saima, the son of Sima Changming, was crowned.

古文：玄志气不伦，欲以雄豪自许。
现代文：桓玄志气无与伦比，总是要以雄豪来称许自己。
English: Kuan Xuan's ambition is unparalleled. He always wants to praise himself as a hero.

古文：朝议以温有陵虐之迹，故抑玄兄弟，出为义兴太守，不得志。
现代文：朝臣议论因为桓温有侵犯帝位的旧迹，所以压制桓玄兄弟，把他贬谪为义兴太守，因此他不得志。
English: The courtiers argued that because Kuan-Wen had a history of encroaching on the imperial throne, he suppressed Kuan-Hsun's brother and relegated him to the position of Yixing's daimyō. As a result, Kuan-Wen lost his ambition.

古文：少时去职。
现代文：不多时就去职。
English: They don't often leave their jobs.

古文：皇始初，司马德宗立，其会稽王道子擅权，信任尚书仆射王国宝，为时所疾。
现代文：皇始初年，司马德宗即位，他的会稽王司马道子擅权，信任尚书仆射王国宝，为当时人所憎恶。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, Sima Dezong ascended to the throne. His regent, King Sima Daozi, abused his power and trusted Shang Shubu to seize the treasure of the kingdom, which was hated by the people at that time.

古文：玄说荆州刺史殷仲堪，令推德宗兗州刺史王恭为盟主，以讨国宝，仲堪从之。
现代文：桓玄游说荆州刺史殷仲堪，要他推举司马德宗的兖州刺史王恭为盟主，共同讨伐王国宝，殷仲堪听从他的意见。
English: Huan Xuan lobbied Yin Zhongkang, the governor of Jing Province, asking him to nominate Wang Qiong, the governor of Jing Province, who was a member of the Sima De School, as the leader and to jointly fight for the treasure of the kingdom. Yin Zhongkang listened to his advice.

古文：会恭使亦上，相逢于中路，约同大举，并抗表起兵。
现代文：恰好王恭派遣的使者也来了，两下在中途相逢，便相约一同举事，并且进表起兵。
English: It just so happened that the envoy sent by Wang Qiong also came. The two met each other in the middle of the road, and they made an appointment to work together, and marched into battle.

古文：寻平王国宝等。
现代文：不久就平定了王国宝等。
English: Soon after, the Kingdom's treasures and so on were pacified.

古文：天兴初，德宗以玄为使持节、督交广二州诸军事、建威将军、一越中郎将、广州刺史。
现代文：天兴初年，司马德宗授任桓玄为使持节、督交、广二州诸军事、建威将军、平越中郎将、广州刺史。
English: In the first year of Tianxing, Sima Dezong appointed Kan Xuan as the envoy of the festival, the superintendent of diplomatic relations, the military of Guangzhou, the general of Jianwei, the general of Pingyue, and the historian of Guangzhou.

古文：后王恭复与德宗豫州刺史庾楷共起兵，以讨其江州刺史王愉、司马尚之兄弟。
现代文：后来王恭又与司马德宗的豫州刺史庾楷共同起兵，讨伐其江州刺史王愉及司马尚之兄弟。
English: Later, Wang Qiong also raised an army with Sima De Zong's brother, Yu Zhou Shishi Shunkai, to fight against his brothers, Jiangzhou Shishi Wang Yu and Sima Shang.

古文：玄及龙骧将军扬佺期、荆州刺史殷仲堪等率军应恭。
现代文：桓玄和龙骧将军杨期、荆州刺史殷仲堪等率军响应王恭。
English: The armies led by Huan Xuan and Longyu Generals Yang Zi and Jingzhou Zishi Yin Zhongkan responded to Wang Qiong.

古文：玄等造于石头。
现代文：桓玄等人进军到了石头。
English: Kuan Xuan and others marched to Stone Mountain.

古文：于时德宗征虏将军司马元显一军仍守石头，列舟舰断淮口。
现代文：当时司马德宗的征虏将军司马元显一军仍据守在石头，陈列战船拦断淮水口。
English: At that time, the army of Sima Yuanxian, the conscript general of Sima Dezong, was still kept in the stone, displaying warships to block Huai Shuikou.

古文：道子出军，将屯中堂，忽有马惊，军中扰乱，人马赴江者甚众，良久乃定。
现代文：司马道子出兵，准备屯守中堂，忽然有马被惊，军中骚乱，人马掉进江中的非常多，过了许久才安定下来。
English: Sima Daozi dispatched troops, prepared to garrison Zhongtang, suddenly some horses were frightened, there was a riot in the army, a lot of people fell into the river, and it took a long time to settle down.

古文：玄等不知建业危弱，且王恭寻败，玄甚惶惧，乃回军于蔡洲，王恭司马刘军之率北府军来次新亭，于是德宗以桓修为荆州，仲堪为广州，玄为江州，佺期为雍州，刺史郗恢为尚书。
现代文：桓玄等人不知道建业城已十分危弱，而且王恭不久兵败，桓玄甚为惶恐，就回军到了蔡洲。王恭的司马刘牢之率北府军前来驻扎在新亭。于是司马德宗以桓为荆州刺史，殷仲堪为广州刺史，桓玄为江州刺史，杨期为雍州刺史，刺史郗恢为尚书。
English: Huan Xuan and others did not know that Jianye City was already very weak, and that Wang Gong was soon defeated. Huan Xuan was very frightened and returned to Cai Zhou. Wang Gong's Sima Liu Rong led the Beifu Army to station in Xinting. Therefore, Sima Dezong took Huan as the historian of Jingzhou, Yin Zhong Kan as the historian of Guangzhou, Huan Xuan as the historian of Jiangzhou, Yang Zi as the historian of Yongzhou, and the historian of Jianye as the historian of Shangshu.

古文：仲堪回师南旋，乃使人徇于玄等军曰： 若不各散归，大军至江陵，当悉戮余口。 
现代文：殷仲堪回军返还南边，就派人宣示桓玄等各军说： 如果不各自散开退回，大军到了江陵，大家都会遭到杀戮。 
English: When Yin Zhongkang returned his army to the south, he sent someone to announce to Huan Xuan and the other armies: If you do not disperse and return separately, the large army has arrived in Gangneung, and everyone will be killed.

古文：仲堪偏将刘系先领兵二千隶于佺期，辄率众而归，玄等大惧，乃狼狈而走。
现代文：殷仲堪的偏将刘系原先领兵二千人隶属于杨期，这时就率领部队退回，桓玄等人大为惊惧，狼狈而走。
English: Yin Zhongkang, who had subordinated the original 2,000 soldiers led by Liu to the Yang Dynasty, led the troops back at this time. Kuan Xuan and others were greatly alarmed and left in dismay.

古文：庾楷亦弃众奔于南军。
现代文：庾楷也抛弃部下逃奔到南军。
English: Chiang Kai-shek also abandoned his men and fled to the Southern Army.

古文：玄并趣轻舟追仲堪，至寻阳，而推率为盟主，镇于夏口。
现代文：桓玄就驾轻舟追赶殷仲堪，到寻阳才赶上，大家共推桓玄为盟主，镇守夏口。
English: Huan Xuan drove a light boat to catch up with Yin Zhongkan, and only caught up with him when he reached Huan Yang. Everyone considered Huan Xuan to be the leader and the town guard of Xiakou.

古文：德宗加玄都督荆州四郡，以玄兄西昌公伟为辅国将军、南蛮校尉。
现代文：司马德宗加授桓玄都督荆州四郡，任命桓玄的哥哥西昌公桓伟为辅国将军、南蛮校尉。
English: Sima De Zongjia appointed Huan Xuan as the governor of four counties in Jingzhou, and appointed Huan Xuan's brother, Xichanggong Huan Wei, as an auxiliary general and Nanban lieutenant.

古文：宠玄兄弟，欲以侵削荆雍。
现代文：司马德宗宠信桓玄兄弟，想要借他们来削减荆、雍各州的势力。
English: The Sima De sect favored the brothers Shinkangen and wanted to use them to reduce the power of the states of Jing and Yong.

古文：先是荆州大水，仲堪仓廪空竭，玄乘其虚而伐之，先遣军袭巴陵。
现代文：起先荆州遭遇大水，殷仲堪的仓库空竭，桓玄就乘他内部空虚而向他进攻，先派兵袭击巴陵。
English: At first, Jingzhou encountered heavy water, and Yin Zhongkan's storehouse was empty. Huan Xuan took advantage of his inner emptiness to attack him, and first sent soldiers to attack Baling.

古文：梁州刺史郭铨当之镇，路逢玄，玄遣铨为前驱。
现代文：梁州刺史郭铨正要到他的镇所，半路遇到桓玄，桓玄就派他为前驱。
English: Liangzhou assassin Guo Wei was on his way to his town when he met Huan Xuan. Huan Xuan sent him ahead.

古文：玄发夏口，与仲堪书云： 今当入沔，讨除佺期，顿兵江口。
现代文：桓玄在夏口发兵，传书与殷仲堪说： 现在我正要入沔，讨除杨期，屯兵在长江口。
English: Huan Xuan sent troops to Xiakou, and sent a letter to Yin Zhongkan saying, "Now I am about to enter the war to eliminate the Yang Dynasty, and the troops are at the mouth of the Yangtze River.

古文：若相与无贰，可杀杨广，若其不尔，便当率军入江。 
现代文：如果你对我没有二心，就可杀掉杨广，如若不这样做，我就要率军进入长江。 
English: If you have no hard feelings toward me, you can kill Yang Guang. If you don't, I will lead my army into the Yangtze River.

古文：别与桓伟书，今克期为内应，伟惶遽，以书示仲堪，仲堪慰喻遣归，夜乃执之。
现代文：另外又给桓伟写了书信，要他到期作为内应，桓伟感到惶恐，就把书信拿给殷仲堪看，殷仲堪对他进行一番抚慰，把他送回，到了夜晚就将桓伟扣押起来。
English: In addition, he also wrote a letter to Huan Wei, asking him to serve as a confidant. Huan Wei felt frightened, so he showed the letter to Yin Zhongkan. Yin Zhongkan comforted him, sent him back, and detained Huan Wei at night.

古文：仲堪遣龙骧将军殷迈、振威将军刘山民等统众七千至西江口。
现代文：殷仲堪派龙骧将军殷迈、振威将军刘山民等人领兵七千人到了西江口。
English: Yin Zhong was able to send Longyu's General Yin Mai, Zhenwei's General Liu Shanmin and others to lead seven thousand soldiers to the mouth of the West River.

古文：玄闻迈至，复与其当苻永道领帐下击之，迈等败走。
现代文：桓玄听说殷迈到来，就同他的亲信苻永道一起带领其帐下部众进行攻击，殷迈等人败走。
English: When Huan Xuan heard of Yin Mai's arrival, he and his close confidant Zou Yongdao led his subordinates in an attack. Yin Mai and the others were defeated and fled.

古文：玄顿巴陵，收其兵而馆其谷，复破杨广于夏口。
现代文：桓玄屯军巴陵，收集这里的兵众和粮食，又在夏口打败杨广。
English: Huan Xuan garrisoned Baling, gathered soldiers and grain here, and defeated Yang Guang in Xiakou.

古文：仲堪既失巴陵之积，又诸将皆败，江陵骇震，城内大饥，皆以胡麻为廪。
现代文：殷仲堪既然失去了巴陵的积蓄，加之各部将都被打败，江陵恐惧震惊，城内大闹饥荒，军民都以胡麻充饥。
English: Since Yin Zhongkan lost the savings of Baling, in addition, all departments were defeated, Jiangling was shocked by fear, there was a famine in the city, and the military and civilians were fed with sesame seeds.

古文：初，仲堪之得玄书也，急召佺期，佺期曰： 江陵无食，何以待敌？
现代文：当初，殷仲堪收到桓玄的书信时，急忙召杨期来，杨期回话说： 江陵没有粮食，用什么来抵御敌军？
English: At first, when Yin Zhongkang received Huan Xuan's letter, he hastily summoned Yang Cui. Yang Cui replied, "There is no grain in Jiangling. What should we use to fend off the enemy?"

古文：可来见就，共守襄阳。 
现代文：你可以到我这里来，共同据守襄阳。 
English: You can deign to come to me, and together we will defend Xiangyang.

古文：仲堪犹以全军，无缘弃城迸走，甚忧佺期弗来，乃绐之曰： 比来收集，已有储矣，可有数万人百日粮。 
现代文：殷仲堪认为自己的军队还很完整，没有理由要弃城逃走，又非常担心杨期不肯来，就欺骗他说： 近来收集粮食，已经有了储存，可以供数万人吃一百天。 
English: Yin Zhongkan thought that his army was still very complete, and there was no reason to abandon the city and flee. He was also very worried that Yang Zi would not come, so he deceived him and said, "Recently, we have been collecting grain, and we already have a stockpile that can feed tens of thousands of people for a hundred days.

古文：佺期信之，乃率步骑八千，既至，仲堪惟以饭饷其军。
现代文：杨期相信了他，就率领步骑兵八千人来到江陵，到达之后，殷仲堪只有饭给他的军队吃。
English: Yang Zi believed him and led eight thousand infantry and cavalry to Gangneung. After arriving, Yin Zhongkan could only feed his army with rice.

古文：佺期大怒曰： 今兹败矣！ 
现代文：杨期大怒说： 如今就要失败了！ 
English: Yang Jie said very angrily, "There is no doubt that we will lose this time!"

古文：不过见仲堪，使人于舰上横射玄，玄军亦射之，佺期乃退。
现代文：他不肯与殷仲堪相见，派人在舰船上用箭射桓玄军，桓玄部众也用箭回射，杨期就退兵回去。
English: He refused to meet with Yin Zhongkan, and sent someone on the ship to shoot arrows at the army of Huan Xuan, and the people of Huan Xuan also shot back with arrows. Yang eventually withdrew and went back.

古文：玄乃渡军于马头，命其诸军进，破杀仲堪，杀杨广、佺期、殷道护及仲堪参军罗企生等。
现代文：桓玄于是率军渡江到了马头，命令各部军队一齐进攻，大败殷仲堪并把他杀死，又杀了杨广、杨期、殷道护和殷仲堪的参军罗企生等人。
English: Huan Xuan then led the army across the river to Ma Tau and ordered all the troops to attack together, defeated Yin Zhongkan and killed him, and killed Yang Guang, Yang Zi, Yin Daogu and Yin Zhongkan's army Luo Qisheng and others.

古文：德宗下书曰： 竖子桓玄，故大司马不腆之息，少怀狡恶，长而不悛，遂与王恭协同奸谋，阻兵内侮，三方云集志在问鼎，窥拟神器。
现代文：司马德宗任命桓玄为持节、都督荆司雍秦梁益宁江八州及扬豫八郡诸军事、后将军、荆江二州刺史。桓玄大论功赏，以长史卞范之兼任南郡相，对他委以心腹重任。竟然截断长江上游交通，阻绝商旅往来。司马德宗下诏说道： 小人桓玄，已故大司马不善的子息，年轻时心性狡恶，年长后不思悔改，与王恭互相勾结谋划，拥兵侮慢朝廷，多方集合兵马，意在问鼎，窥视皇位。
English: Sima De Zong appointed Huan Xuan as the head of the Yong Qin Liang, the governor of the Eight Provinces of the Yangtze River and the Eight Counties of the Yangyuan River. Huan Xuan made a great speech on the merits, and concurrently served as the minister of the Southern Counties, entrusting him with important duties. He even cut off the traffic in the upper reaches of the Yangtze River and blocked the commercial travel. Sima De Zong said in his edict: Little Huan Xuan, the son of the late great Sima, who was not good, had a cunning heart when he was young, and did not want to repent when

古文：赖祖宗威灵。宰傅神略，忠义奋发，罪人斯殒。
现代文：幸赖祖宗威灵，宰相神略，忠义奋发，罪人得以受诛。
English: It was thanks to the benevolence of the ancestors, the shrewdness of the prime minister, and their loyalty and hard work that the criminals were able to be arrested.

古文：玄等猖狂失图，回舟鸟逝。
现代文：桓玄等猖狂失却主意，回舟作鸟兽散。
English: Kuan Xuan and the others lost their tempers and returned to the boat to scatter the birds and animals.

古文：便宜乘会，歼除奸源，于是同异之论，用惑庙策，遂使王宪废挠，宠授非所。
现代文：本应当乘此机会，歼除奸邪之源，但当时朝中议论各异，朝廷谋略迟疑不决，致使朝廷法令受到阻挠，桓玄得到非分的宠信任用。
English: It should have taken this opportunity to eliminate the source of treachery and evil, but at that time, the discussion between the two countries was different, and the imperial court was hesitant to make a decision, resulting in the obstruction of the imperial decree, and Huan Xuan was favored and trusted by non-participants.

古文：犹冀玄当洗濯胸腑，小惩大诫，而狼心弗革，悖慢愈甚，割据江湘，擅威荆郢，矫命称制，与夺在手。
现代文：本希望桓玄会洗心革面，对他小的过错加以惩诫以接受教训，但他却野心不改，对朝廷悖慢日益严重，竟然割据江、湘，擅威于荆、郢，伪托朝命假借名义，手握生杀予夺之权。
English: It was hoped that Huan Xuan would change his mind and face, and his small mistake would be punished to learn a lesson, but his ambition did not change, and his disobedience to the imperial court became more and more serious, to the extent that he cut off Jiang and Hunan, arrogated to Jing and Zhou, and pretended to be the emperor's life in the name, holding the power of life and death.

古文：又对侍中王谧放肆丑言，欲纵凶毒，陵陷上京。
现代文：又对侍中王谧大放厥词，妄图放纵凶险之心，侵犯并攻取京都。
English: He also spoke harshly to the chamberlain, Wang Xi, in a vain attempt to indulge his dangerous heart and invade and capture Kyoto.

古文：无君之心，形于音翰；不臣之迹，日月弥著。
现代文：无视君主的野心，已见之于他的书信；不甘为臣的行迹，每日每月更加显露。
English: The disregard of the monarch's ambition is already seen in his letters; his unwillingness to be a subject is daily and monthly becoming more apparent.

古文：是可忍也，孰不可怀！
现代文：是可忍，孰不可忍？
English: Is it tolerable or intolerable?

古文：宜明九伐，以宁西夏。
现代文：应当明示九伐之法对他予以制裁，以使中原西部得以安宁。
English: It is necessary to explicitly impose sanctions on him according to the Nine Felling Laws, so that the western part of the Central Plains can be left in peace.

古文：尚书令、后将军元显可为征讨大都督、督十八州诸军事、骠骑大将军、仪同三司。 
现代文：尚书令、后将军司马元显可任征讨大都督、督十八州诸军事、骠骑大将军、仪同三司。 
English: Shang Shuling and later General Sima Yuanxian could be appointed as the Grand Governor, the Governor of the Eighteen Military Provinces, the Grand General of Cavalry, and the Third Secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：以刘牢之为前锋，行征西将军，权领江州；命司马尚之入沔水。
现代文：于是，以刘牢之为前锋，任征西将军，暂兼江州刺史；又令司马尚之进军沔水。
English: As a result, Liu Diao was appointed as the forward, the general of the Western Expedition, and temporarily the governor of Jiangsu Province; and Sima Shangzhu was ordered to march into Surabaya.

古文：玄闻元显处分，甚骇惧，欲保江陵。
现代文：桓玄听说司马元显将要领兵前来征讨，非常惊骇恐惧，想要保住江陵。
English: When Kuan Xuan heard that Sima Yuanxian was going to lead an army to attack, he was terrified and wanted to save Gangneung.

古文：长史卞范之说玄东下，玄甚狐疑，范之苦劝，玄乃留桓伟守江陵，率军东下。
现代文：长史卞范之劝说桓玄领兵东下，桓玄十分犹豫，卞范之苦苦相劝，桓玄才决定留下桓伟据守江陵，自己率军东下。
English: Changshi Yu Fan persuaded Huan Xuan to lead his army eastward, but Huan Xuan hesitated, and Yu Fan tried to persuade him, but Huan Xuan decided to leave Huan Wei to defend Gangneung and lead his army eastward.

古文：至夏口，乃建牙传檄曰：案扬州刺史元显：凶暴之性，自幼加长；犯礼毁教，发蒙如备。
现代文：到了夏口，桓玄就建牙旗传檄说： 案扬州刺史司马元显：其凶暴之性，自幼以来愈加滋长；违犯礼法毁坏教化，轻而易举早有准备。
English: When he arrived in Xiakou, Huan Xuan set up a banner and said: "The case of Yangzhou stabbing the historian Sima Yuanxian: its ferocity has been growing since childhood; violating etiquette and destroying enlightenment is easy to prepare in advance."

古文：居丧无一日之哀，衰绖为宵征之服，弦觞于殷忧之时，穷色于罔极之日，劫略王国宝妓妾一朝空房，比基恶之始，骇愕视听者矣。
现代文：居丧时无一日有哀痛之惑，把丧服当作夜行的服装，在应深切忧伤之时却弦歌饮酒，在报答父恩之日却穷极色欲，把王国宝的妓妾劫掠一空，这只是他一切恶行的开始，就足以惊骇人们视听了。
English: There is no day of mourning when there is sadness, the mourning clothes are used as night clothes, when there is deep sadness, he sings and drinks, when there is a day to repay his father's kindness, he is extremely lustful, and he has plundered the kingdom's treasure of prostitutes. This is just the beginning of all his evil deeds, and it is enough to shock people.

古文：相王有疾，情无悚惧，幸灾擅命，扬州篡授，遂乃父子同录，比肩连案。
现代文： 相王道子有病，元显毫无恐惧之情，趁机假称皇帝之命，篡夺扬州刺史的大权，于是就有父子同就官职，比肩连衔奏事。
English: Seeing that Wang Daozi was ill, Yuan Xian showed no fear and took advantage of the opportunity to usurp the power of Yangzhou to usurp the emperor's order. As a result, both father and son were appointed to official positions, shoulder to shoulder.

古文：既专权重，双行险暴，恐相王知之，杜绝视听。
现代文：他在把持朝廷大权之后，多有险恶暴虐的行为，惟恐相王得知，就杜绝其一切视听。
English: After he took control of the power of the imperial court, he had many sinister and tyrannical behaviors, but fearing that the prime minister would find out, he stopped all his audio-visual activities.

古文：恶声无闻，佞誉日至。
现代文：恶声无处不闻，佞誉与日俱至。
English: Bad reputation is everywhere, and good reputation is everywhere.

古文：万机之重，委之厮孽，国典朝政，纷纭淆乱。
现代文：国家万机之重，委付给这等孽障，致使国典朝政，日趋纷纭混乱。
English: The weight of the country's omnipotence has been entrusted to such evils, resulting in the increasingly chaotic and chaotic government of the dynasty.

古文：又讽旨尚书，使普敬录公。录公之位，非尽敬之所。
现代文：又以婉辞向皇帝要求任尚书令，致使朝廷随意授任录尚书事之职，录公之位，并不是可以随意送人的。
English: He also used a euphemism to ask the emperor to appoint Shang Shuling, resulting in the imperial court arbitrarily awarding the post of Shang Shuling, the post of Shang Shuling, which is not something that can be given away at will.

古文：苟自尊贵，遂悖朝礼。
现代文：他苟且自得尊贵之位，就悖离朝廷礼法。
English: He violated the Imperial Court's etiquette just because he had won a prestigious position.

古文：又妖贼陵纵，破军殄民之后，己为都督，亲则刺史，于宜降之日，辄加崇进。
现代文：又在妖贼侵侮肆虐，兵败民亡之后，自己身为都督，亲任刺史，在应当降伏妖贼之时，反而对其加以崇敬进用。
English: Moreover, after the invasions and outrages of the yakuza, the defeat of the soldiers and the death of the people, he, as the governor, personally stabbed history, and when he should have surrendered to the yakuza, he revered and used it instead.

古文：弱冠之年，古今莫比。
现代文：于弱冠之年如此妄为，古今无人与之相比。
English: In the year of the weak crown, no one has ever done so.

古文：宰相惩恶，己独解录，推祸委罚，归之有在，自古僭逆未有若斯之甚者。
现代文：宰相本应惩处邪恶，他却擅自为自己解脱，推脱罪责，归罪于人，自古以来僭越悖逆之人没有像他这样严重的。
English: The prime minister should have punished the evil, but he arbitrarily absolved himself, shirked the blame, and blamed others. Since ancient times, there has never been a more rebellious person than him.

古文：取妾之僭，殆同六礼，乃使尚书仆射为媒人，长史为迎宾，嬖媵饕餮，贺同长秋，所谓无君之心，触事而发。
现代文： 元显娶妾超越礼制，几乎同婚姻的六礼相同，竟然叫尚书仆射为媒人，长史为迎客，受其宠幸的贪残之徒，前往庆贺如同对皇后一样，所谓目无君主的野心，随时随事都显露出来。
English: Yuan Xian's marriage to his concubine went beyond the etiquette and was almost the same as the six rites of marriage. He even had Shang Shufu as a matchmaker, Chang Shi as a greeter, and his favored greedy people to go to the celebration, just as he did with the queen. The so-called emperor's ambition was revealed at any time and in any place.

古文：八日观佛，略人子女，至人家宿，唐突归妾。
现代文：八日观看佛事，抢掠良家女子，到民家住宿，恣意侮辱人家妻妾。
English: On the eighth day, he watched a Buddhist ceremony, robbed a woman from a good family, stayed at a private home, and arbitrarily insulted another man's wife and concubine.

古文：庆封迄今，甫见易室之饮；晋灵以来，忽有支解之刑。
现代文：从庆封至今，方才见易室之饮；自晋灵公以来，忽然有肢解之刑。
English: From the time of the enthronement to the present, we have only just seen the drinking of Yishu; since the time of Jin Lingguo, we have suddenly seen the punishment of dismemberment.

古文：喜怒轻戮，人士割裂，治城之暴，一睡而斩。
现代文：凭个人喜怒轻易杀戮，随意把人宰割肢解，治政残暴，一瞬间就问斩。
English: It is easy to kill people based on personal emotions and anger, to slaughter and dismember people at will, to rule with brutality, and to behead people in an instant.

古文：又以四岁孽子，兴东海之封。
现代文：又把四岁的孽子，封为东海王。
English: He also crowned his four-year-old illegitimate son as the king of the East Sea.

古文：吴兴残暴之后，横复若斯之调。
现代文：吴兴郡遭妖贼残暴之后，恃势专横又达到这种地步。
English: After Wuxing County was brutally attacked by evil bandits, the tyranny reached this level again.

古文：妖贼之兴，实由此竖。
现代文：妖贼之兴，实在是由此人引起的。
English: The rise of the yakuza was really caused by this man.

古文：居丧极味，孙泰供其膳；在夜思游，亦孙泰延其驾。
现代文：居丧之时极尽美味，是孙泰供给他的膳食；夜间想要出外游玩，也是孙泰接待他的车马。
English: When he was in mourning, it was Sun Tai who provided him with the most delicious meal; when he wanted to go out at night, it was also Sun Tai who received his chariot and horse.

古文：泰承其势，得行威福，虽加诛戮，所染既多。
现代文：孙泰倚仗他的权势，得以作威作福，虽然最终受到诛戮，百姓已经深受其荼毒。
English: Relying on his power, Sun Tai was able to use his authority to do good, and although he was eventually defeated, the people were already deeply poisoned by him.

古文：加之以苦发乐属，枉滥者众，驱逐徙拨，死叛殆尽。
现代文：加之他大量征发人丁，许多人被他非法征集，驱赶迁徙到京师，死亡和叛离后所剩无几。
English: In addition, he recruited and dispatched a large number of people, many of whom were illegally recruited by him, driven away and migrated to Beijing Division, and only a few remained after death and defection.

古文：改号元兴，以为己瑞，莽之符命，于斯尤著。
现代文：将年号改为元兴，用来作为自己的吉祥之兆，比当年王莽接受祥瑞的符命有过之而无不及。
English: Changing the name of the year to Genxing and using it as his own auspicious sign was more than Wang Mang's acceptance of the auspicious sign.

古文：否极必亨，天盈其毒，不义不昵，势必崩丧，取乱侮亡，实在斯会。
现代文：闭塞到了极点必然转向通达顺利，他的祸害充盈天地之间，对君不义对亲不昵，势必崩溃丧亡，自取灭亡，就在于这个时机。
English: When the blockage reaches the extreme, it will inevitably turn to the smooth passage, and his scourge will be filled with heaven and earth, and he will be unfair to you and unkind to you, and he is bound to collapse and perish, and self-destruct. This is the opportunity.

古文：三军文武，愤踊即路。
现代文：三军将士文武官员，一齐愤发踊跃上路出征。 
English: The generals, officers and men of the three armies set out on the road in anger and joy.

古文：玄亦失荆楚人情，而师出不顺，其兵虽强，虑弗为用，恆有回师之计。
现代文：桓玄也失去荆楚的人心，而且兴师不顺名分，他的兵力虽然强大，却担心将士不会替他卖命，常常有回兵的想法。
English: Huan Xuan also lost the hearts and minds of his men, and he did not succeed in raising an army. Although he had a strong army, he was worried that his soldiers would not fight for him, and he often had thoughts of returning to the army.

古文：既过寻阳，不见东军，玄意乃定。
现代文：军队过了寻阳，却不见东面司马元显的人马，桓玄的主意才坚定。
English: After the army searched for the sun, they did not find Sima Yuanxian's men in the east, and Kuan Xuan's idea became firm.

古文：于是遂鼓行而进，径至姑熟，又克历阳。
现代文：于是就击鼓行军向前进发，径直到达姑熟，又攻克历阳。
English: So they beat drums and marched forward, until they reached Dagu Rong and conquered Liyang.

古文：刘牢之遣子敬宣诣玄请降，玄大喜，与敬宣置酒宴集。
现代文：刘牢之派儿子刘敬宣到桓玄那里请求投降，桓玄大喜过望，给刘敬宣设置酒宴以示欢迎。
English: Liu Diao's son Liu Jingxuan went to Huan Xuan to ask for surrender. Huan Xuan was overjoyed and gave Liu Jingxuan a welcome banquet.

古文：玄至新亭，元显弃船，退入国子堂，列陈宣阳门前。
现代文：桓玄进至新亭，司马元显丢弃战船，退入国子堂，在宣阳门前列阵以待。
English: When Kuan Xuan entered Xinting, Sima Yuanxian abandoned the warship, retreated into the Imperial Palace, and waited at the front of Xuanyang Gate.

古文：元显欲挟德宗出战，而军中相惊，言玄已及南桁，乃回军赴宫。
现代文：司马元显想要挟持司马德宗出战，但军队中自相惊扰，说是桓玄已经到了南桁，只得退兵回到宫中。
English: Sima Yuanxian wanted to take Sima Dezong hostage to go to war, but the army was alarmed, saying that Huan Xuan had already reached the south ditch, and had to retreat back to the palace.

古文：既至中堂，一时崩散。
现代文：到了中堂，元显军一时间崩溃逃散。
English: When they reached the central hall, Yuan Xian's army collapsed and dispersed.

古文：元显奔东府，惟张法顺一骑随之。
现代文：司马元显逃往东府，只剩张法顺一人跟随他。
English: Sima Yuanxian fled to Dongfu, leaving only Zhang Fashun to follow him.

古文：玄乃为侍中、都督中外诸军、承相、录尚书事、扬州牧、领徐州刺史，持节、荆江二州、公如故；假黄钺、羽葆、鼓吹、班剑二十人；置左右长史，从事中郎四人；甲仗二百人入殿。
现代文：桓玄于是受任为侍中、都督中外诸军、丞相、录尚书事、扬州牧、领徐州刺史，持节、荆江二州刺史，公的爵位仍照旧；赐予黄钺、羽葆、鼓吹、班剑二十人等仪仗；置左右长史，设从事中郎四人；准带甲仗二百人入殿。
English: Therefore, Kuan Xuan was appointed as a chamberlain, governor of the armies at home and abroad, chancellor, recorder of records, Yangzhou herdsman, leader of Xuzhou engraving history, holding festival, Jingjiang two-state engraving history, and the official rank was still the same as before; twenty people were given the honorific titles of Huang Xuan, Fei Xuan, Taobao, and Pan Jian; four people were assigned to the left and right long history, and four people were assigned to the middle lords; two hundred people were allowed to enter the hall with armor.

古文：于是收道子付廷尉，免为庶人，徙于安城郡；杀元显并其子，乃豫州刺史司马尚之、吏部郎袁遵、张法顺等。
现代文：于是将司马道子逮捕交付廷尉，黜为庶人，迁徙到安城郡；诛杀司马元显和他的儿子，以及豫州刺史司马尚之、吏部郎袁遵、张法顺等人。
English: As a result, Sima Daozi was arrested and handed over to a court lieutenant, treated as a commoner, and moved to Ancheng County; Sima Yuanxian and his son were killed, as well as Sima Shangzhi, Yuan Zun, Zhang Fashun and others.

古文：又灭庾楷于豫章。
现代文：又在豫章消灭了庾楷。
English: In addition, it has eliminated the cormorant in Yuzhang.

古文：徙尚之弟丹杨尹恢之、辅国将军允之，及国宝、王绪诸子于交、广州。
现代文：把司马尚之的弟弟丹阳尹司马恢之、辅国将军司马允之，以及王国宝、王绪的几个儿子都贬徙到交州和广州。
English: They deported Sima Shangzhi's younger brother Danyang Yin Sima Guangzhi, the auxiliary general Sima Yunzhi, and several sons of Wang Guobao and Wang Xu to Jiaozhou and Guangzhou.

古文：以刘牢之为会稽内史，将欲解其兵也。
现代文：任命刘牢之为会稽内史，打算解除他的兵权。
English: Liu Diao was appointed as the internal auditor of the association, and it was planned to relieve him of his military powers.

古文：初，敬宣既降，随入东府，至是求归。
现代文：当初，刘敬宣已经投降，随桓玄进入东府，到这时要求回去。
English: At first, Liu Jingxuan had already surrendered and entered Dongfu with Huan Xuan. At this time, he asked to go back.

古文：玄冀牢之受命，乃遣之。
现代文：桓玄希望刘牢之受命于自己，就送他回去了。
English: Kuan Xuan hoped that Liu Dangzhi would follow his orders, so he sent him back.

古文：敬宣既至，牢之知将不免，欲袭玄，众皆离散，乃于班渎北走，缢于新洲。
现代文：刘敬宣回来以后，刘牢之知道自己将不会幸免于祸，就想要袭击桓玄，但部下全都逃离四散，只得从班渎往北逃走，在新洲自缢身亡。
English: After Liu Jingxuan's return, Liu Dolezhi knew that he would not be spared from the disaster and wanted to attack Huan Xuan, but his subordinates all fled. He had to flee north from Banfu and hanged himself in Xinzhou.

古文：传首建鄴。
现代文：他的首级被送到建业。
English: His head was sent to Jianye.

古文：敬宣奔于江北。
现代文：刘敬宣逃到长江之北。
English: Liu Jingxuan fled to the north of the Yangtze River.

古文：玄白德宗，大赦，改年为大亨。
现代文：桓玄禀告司马德宗，实行大赦，把年号改为大亨。
English: Kuan Xuan sued Sima Dezong, amnesty was implemented, and the year name was changed to Tycoon.

古文：玄让丞相、荆江除三州及录尚书事。
现代文：桓玄让出了丞相、荆江徐三州刺史及录尚书事的职位。
English: Kuan Xuan gave up the post of chancellor, and Jing Jiang and Xu wrote the history and records of the three states.

古文：乃改授太尉、都督中外、扬州牧、领平西将军、豫州刺史；绿綟绶，加兗冕之服，剑履之礼，入朝不趋，赞拜不名，增班剑六十人，甲仗二百人入殿。
现代文：朝廷改授他为太尉、都督中外、扬州牧、领平西将军、豫州刺史等职；赐给深绿色绶带，加衮冕之服，享受佩剑穿履朝见皇帝的待遇，入朝时不需快步行走，赞拜时不需自报姓名，增加班剑六十人，准带甲仗二百人随之入殿。
English: The imperial court re-assigned him to the positions of captain, governor of the Middle and Outer Provinces, Yangzhou Patriarch, leader of Pingxi General, and Yuzhou Historian; he was given a dark green sash, a crowned robe, and enjoyed the treatment of wearing a sword to see the emperor. He did not have to walk fast when entering the court, and did not have to give his name when praising. Sixty swords were added, and 200 people were allowed to enter the temple with armor.

古文：玄乃镇姑熟。
现代文：桓玄于是镇守姑熟。
English: As a result, Kuan Xuan became acquainted with the town guard.

古文：既而大筑府第，田游无度，政令屡改，骄侈肆欲，朋党翕习，沮乱内外。
现代文：不久就大兴土木建造府第，出外游猎没有限度，处理政务朝令夕改，骄奢纵欲，聚集朋党，败坏朝廷内外法制。
English: He soon began to build a large number of civil engineering and construction sites, went on unlimited hunting trips, dealt with government affairs from morning to evening, indulged in extravagance, gathered cronies, and corrupted the legal system both inside and outside the court.

古文：朝政皆谘焉，小事则决于左仆射桓谦及丹阳尹卞范之。
现代文：一切朝政都要向他征询，小事则决断于左仆射桓谦和丹阳尹卞范之。
English: He had to be consulted on all matters of imperial policy, while minor matters were decided by the left-hand man, Sha Kuan Qian, and Danyang, Yin Xuan Fan.

古文：玄大赋三吴富室，以赈饥民，犹不能济也。
现代文：桓玄加重征收三吴富室的赋税，用来赈济饥民，但还是无济于事。
English: Huan Xuan increased the tax levied on the rich families in Sanwu to help feed the hungry, but it was to no avail.

古文：东郡既由兵掠，因以饥馑，死者甚众。
现代文：东部各郡由于连年兵战遭到掠夺，以致大闹饥荒，百姓死亡众多。
English: The eastern counties were plundered due to successive years of military battles, resulting in widespread famine, and many people died.

古文：三吴户口减半，会稽则十三四，临海、永嘉死散殆尽。
现代文：三吴地区民户减少了一半，会稽则只剩十分之三四，临海、永嘉的人口几乎全都死亡或逃散。
English: The number of private households in the Sanwu area has been reduced by half, and only three-fourths of the households have been audited. Almost all the residents of Linhai and Yongjia have died or fled.

古文：诸旧富室皆衣罗谷，佩金玉，相守闭门而死。
现代文：原先的富室人家都穿着轻软的丝绸，佩带着金玉饰物，关上门户相守而死。
English: The original rich families all wore light and soft silk, wore gold and jade ornaments, closed their doors to each other and died.

古文：玄自封豫章郡公，食安成七千五百户；后来封桂阳郡公，邑二千王百户；本封南郡如故。
现代文：桓玄自封为豫章郡公，食邑安成七千五百户；后封为桂阳郡公，食邑二千五百户；本封南郡公照旧。
English: Kuan Xuan appointed himself as the county magistrate of Yuzhang County, with 7,500 households in the food village of Ancheng; he later appointed himself as the county magistrate of Guiyang County, with 2,500 households in the food village; the county magistrate of Nan County remained the same.

古文：既而鸩杀道子。
现代文：不久他毒杀了司马道子。
English: Soon after, he poisoned Sima Daozi.

古文：玄削夺德宗供奉之具，务尽约陋，殆至饥寒。
现代文：桓玄削夺了司马德宗享受的供奉待遇，一切都尽量简单粗陋，使他接近于饥饿受冻的地步。
English: Huan Xuan had deprived Sima Dezong of the offering treatment he enjoyed. Everything was as simple and crude as possible, bringing him close to the point of starvation and freezing.

古文：虽杀逆未至，君臣之体尽矣。
现代文：虽没有弑杀，但君臣的体统已经完全不顾了。
English: Although there is no fighting, the dignity of the sovereign has been completely disregarded.

古文：进位大将军，加前后部羽葆鼓吹，奏事不名。
现代文：桓玄又进位为大将军，增加前后部羽葆鼓吹等仪仗，奏事时不报姓名。
English: Kuan Xuan was also promoted to the rank of general, and ceremonial battles such as the blowing of feathers at the front and back were added. His name was not reported at the time of the report.

古文：又表请自率诸军，命诸蕃方扫平关洛，德宗不许之。
现代文：又上奏请求自己统率诸军，命各边境地区的蕃兵扫平关、洛，司马德宗未予准许。
English: He also requested that he should command the troops and order the soldiers in the border regions to sweep Pingguan and Luo, but Sima Dezong did not allow him to do so.

古文：玄本无资力，但好为大言，既不办行，乃云奉诏故止。
现代文：桓玄本来没有资历和能力，但却喜欢说大话，既不履行手续，就说是奉诏行事。
English: Originally, Kuan Xuan had no qualifications or abilities, but he liked to talk big. If he did not perform the formalities, he would say that he was acting according to the edict.

古文：玄既无他处分，先作征行服玩，并制装书画之具。
现代文：桓玄没有别的什么处置，只是事先就制作打仗行军时的服装玩器，并制作装书画用的器具。
English: Huan Xuan had nothing else to do, but to make a costume toy for the war march in advance, and to make a tool for writing and painting.

古文：或谏曰： 今日之行，必有征无战，辎重自足相运。不烦复有制造。 
现代文：有人劝他说： 今日的出行，必然是有征无战，辎重之物自然会准备充足一同运走，不必烦劳又另外去制造。 
English: Someone advised him: Today's trip is bound to be without war, and the heavy things will naturally be sufficiently prepared to be transported together, without having to go to the trouble of making them separately.

古文：玄日： 书画服玩宜恆在左右，且兵凶战危，脱有意外，当使轻而易运。 
现代文：桓玄说： 书画服玩等物，应当经常带在身边，况且眼下兵凶战危，倘若有意外，也便于运送。 
English: Kuan Xuan said, "You should always carry things such as calligraphy, painting, clothes and toys with you. Moreover, the soldiers are in a dangerous situation at the moment. If there is an accident, it is also easy to transport.

古文：众咸笑之。
现代文：众人听了都笑他。
English: Everyone thought it was a joke.

古文：玄所亲仗，惟桓伟而已，先欲征还，以自副贰。
现代文：桓玄所亲信倚仗的人，惟有桓伟而已，先前想把他征召回来，作为自己的辅佐。
English: The only person whom Kuan Xuan trusted and relied on was Kuan Wei, and he had previously wanted to call him back as his assistant.

古文：伟既死，玄甚恇惧。
现代文：桓伟死了以后，桓玄甚为恐慌不安。
English: After Kuan Wei died, Kuan Xuan was very worried.

古文：初，玄常以其父王业垂成，以己弱年，不昌前构，常怀恨愤。
现代文：起初，桓玄常常因为他父亲王业垂成，而自己年富力强，不能振兴前辈造就的王业，心里总是满怀愤慨。
English: At first, Kuan Xuan was always full of indignation because his father Wangye had achieved success, while he was rich and powerful and could not revitalize the Wangye created by his predecessors.

古文：及昌明死，便有四方之计，既克建业，无复居下之心。
现代文：到司马昌明死后，他就有了志在四方的心怀，攻下建业城以后，就再也没有居人之下的心思。
English: After the death of Sima Changming, he had the ambition to be in the four directions. After the capture of Jianye City, he no longer had the desire to live under others.

古文：及伟死，虑一己单危，益欲速成大业。
现代文：及至桓伟死去，他忧惧自己一个人力量单薄，越发想要尽快地成就大业。
English: Until Huan Wei's death, he was worried about his own lack of strength as a person, and increasingly wanted to achieve a great cause as soon as possible.

古文：卞范之之徒，既虑事变，悬殊幸其利，咸共催促，于是殷仲文等并已撰集策命矣。
现代文：卞范之之流，既担心事态有变，又希望从中谋得私利，就一起催促桓玄行事，殷仲文等人甚至已经撰写整理好各种策书命令。
English: Yu Fan and others, both worried about the changing state of affairs and hoping to seek personal gain from it, urged Huan Xuan to act together. Yin Zhongwen and others have even written and sorted out various planning orders.

古文：德宗加玄相国，总百揆，封南郡、南平、宜都、天门、零陵、桂阳、营阳、衡阳、义阳、建平十郡为楚王，备九锡之礼，扬州牧、领平西将军、豫州刺史如故。
现代文：司马德宗又加授桓玄为相国，总领文武百官，封赐他南郡、南平、宜都、天门、零陵、桂阳、营阳、衡阳、义阳、建平十郡为楚王，备九锡之礼，扬州牧、领平西将军、豫州刺史等职照旧。
English: Sima Dezong also conferred on Huan Xuan the title of "Fatherland," the title of "Commander-in-Chief of the Army and Navy," the title of "King of Chu" to ten counties including Nan County, Nanping, Yidu, Tianmen, Luling, Guiyang, Yingyang, Hengyang, Yiyang and Jianping, and the title of "King of Jiuxi" to Yangzhou Maki, the title of "Commander-in-Chief of the Army and Navy," the title of "Commander-in-Chief of the Western Regions of Pingxi" and the title of "Historian of Yuzhou."

古文：遣司徒王谧授相国印绶，光禄大夫武陵王司马遵授楚王玺策。
现代文：派司徒王谧授予他相国的印绶，光禄大夫武陵王司马遵授予他楚王的玺策。
English: He sent the scholar Wang Xi to award him the seal of his country, and the Guanglu doctor Wuling Wang Sima Zun awarded him the seal of the king of Chu.

古文：德宗先遣百僚固请，又云当亲幸敦喻。
现代文：司马德宗先派百官前去迎请，又说要亲自前去敦请。
English: Sima De Zong first sent hundreds of officials to welcome them, and also said that he would personally go to urge them.

古文：十二月，德宗禅位于玄，大赦所部，称永始元年。
现代文：十二月，司马德宗将皇位禅让给桓玄，桓玄大赦所部，称年号为永始元年。
English: In December, Sima Dezong ceded the imperial throne of Zen to Kuan Xuan, Kuan Xuan general amnesty department, saying that the year was the first year of Yongshi.

古文：初欲改年为建始，左丞王纳之曰： 建始者，晋赵王伦之号也。 
现代文：起初要改年号为建始，左丞王纳之说： 建始，是晋代赵王伦的年号。 
English: At first, they wanted to change the era name to Jianzhi, and Wang Nazhi, the left-hand man, said: Jianzhi is the era name of Zhao Wanglun in the Jin Dynasty.

古文：于是易为永始，复同王莽始贵之年。
现代文：于是就改为永始，又和王莽始贵之年类同。
English: So it was changed to Yongshi, which is also similar to the year of Wang Mangshi.

古文：玄入建业宫，逆风迅激，旌旗、服章、仪饰一皆倾偃。
现代文：桓玄进入建业宫中，突然逆风迅疾猛烈，旌旗、服章、仪饰全部被大风吹倒。
English: Huan Xuan entered the Jianye Palace, and suddenly the headwind was swift and fierce, and the flag, insignia, and decorations were all blown down by the strong wind.

古文：是月酷寒，此日尤甚。
现代文：这一月天气酷寒，这一天尤其寒冷。
English: The weather has been bitterly cold this month, and this day was particularly cold.

古文：多行苛政而时施小惠。
现代文：桓玄即位后多行苛政而有时施以小惠。
English: After Kangen ascended the throne, he often imposed harsh policies and sometimes granted small benefits.

古文：迎温神主进于太庙。
现代文：他迎奉桓温的神主送进太庙。
English: He welcomed the deity of Kan'en into the Imperial Temple.

古文：玄游行无度，至此不出。
现代文：桓玄一向出行游猎没有节制，到这时就不再外出。
English: Kuan Xuan has always gone on hunting trips without restraint. At this time, he no longer goes out.

古文：殿上施金额流苏绛帐，颇类轜车、王莽仙盖。
现代文：他在殿堂上设置金匾、流苏和绛纱帐，装饰得颇像运载棺木的车需车和王莽的仙盖。
English: He set up gold braid, tassels and embroidered curtains on the hall of fame, decorated much like the carriage carrying the coffin and Wang Mang's fairy cover.

古文：太庙、郊斋皆二日而已。
现代文：太庙之祭和郊祀之祭都只进行两天而已。
English: The temple's festival and the suburb's festival both last only two days.

古文：又其庙祭不及于祖，以玄曾祖已上名位不显，故不列序。
现代文：还有，桓玄的庙祭不及于祖辈，因为他的曾祖父以上名位不显著，所以不予排列次序。
English: Also, Kangen's temple festival is less than that of his ancestors, because his great-grandfather and above are not significant, so they are not ranked in order.

古文：且以王莽立九庙，见讥前史，遂以一庙矫之。
现代文：而且由于王莽曾立九庙，被前人史书所讥讽，他就只立一庙来加以矫正。
English: Moreover, since Wang Mang had built nine temples and was ridiculed by the previous history books, he only built one temple to correct it.

古文：又毁僭晋小庙，以崇台榭。
现代文：他还毁坏晋朝的小庙，用来修造台榭。
English: He also destroyed a small temple of the Jin Dynasty, which was used to build the platform.

古文：其庶母蒸尝，未有定所。
现代文：他庶母的祭祀之位，没有定所。
English: There is no fixed place for his stepmother's place of worship.

古文：慢祖忘亲，时人知其不永。
现代文：侮慢祖先忘掉亲情，当时的人们都知道他不会长久。
English: People at that time knew that he would not last long.

古文：是月，玄出游水南，飘风飞其仪盖。
现代文：这一月，桓玄出游水南，一阵旋风刮走了他车上的仪盖。
English: This month, Huan Xuan was out for a trip to the south of the country when a cyclone blew away the instrument cover on his car.

古文：又欲造大辇，使容三十人坐，以二百人舆之。
现代文：他就想制造一辆大车，使它能容纳三十人坐，用二百人推拉。
English: He wanted to make a big cart, so that it could hold thirty people sitting, with two hundred people pushing and pulling.

古文：玄骄逸荒纵，不恤时事，奏案停积，了不省览；或亲细事，手注直官，自用令史，制度乱出，主司奉签不暇。
现代文：桓玄骄逸荒纵，不顾时事，奏案积压，全不览阅；有时过问小事，代替史官亲手注记，代替令史自撰文书，随意变动制度，主管的官员应接不暇。
English: Huan Xuan was arrogant, reckless of current affairs, had a backlog of cases to report, and did not read them at all; sometimes he asked too many questions, took notes by hand instead of the historian, wrote his own documents instead of ordering the historian, changed the system at will, and the officials in charge were too busy to respond.

古文：晨夜游猎，文武困乏。
现代文：从早到晚外出游猎，文武官员困乏不堪。
English: Out hunting from morning till night, civil and military officials are exhausted.

古文：直侍之官，皆系马省中；休下之吏，留供土木之役。
现代文：直侍的官员，都把马系在宫禁之内；休假的官吏，都留下来充当建筑的差役。
English: The officials who were on duty all kept their horses within the palace walls; the officials who were on leave were left behind to serve as construction workers.

古文：朝士劳瘁，百姓力尽，民之思乱，十室而八。
现代文：朝中之士操劳憔悴，天下百姓财力殆尽，民众当中盼望动乱的，十户就有八户。
English: The people of the world have exhausted their financial resources. Among the people who hope for turmoil, there are eight households out of ten.

古文：德宗彭城内史刘裕因是斩徐州刺史桓修环境京口，与沛国刘毅、东海何无忌收众济江。
现代文：司马德宗的彭城内史刘裕乘机在京口斩杀了徐州刺史桓，与沛国的刘毅、东海的何无忌等收集部众渡过长江。
English: Liu Yu, the historian of Pengcheng in Sima Dezong, took the opportunity to kill the Xuzhou assassin Shi Huan in Jingkou, and crossed the Yangtze River with Liu Yi from Pei Province, He Wu Mui from the East China Sea and other collectors.

古文：玄加桓谦征讨都督，召侍官皆入止省中。
现代文：桓玄授任桓谦为征讨都督，召集侍从官员留住在宫禁之内。
English: Kuan Xuan appointed Kuan Qian as the governor of the capital and summoned officials to stay within the palace.

古文：玄移还上宫，百僚步从。
现代文：桓玄迁回到上宫，文武百官都步行跟从。
English: Kuan Xuan moved back to Shanggu, and all the civil and military officials followed him on foot.

古文：赦扬、豫、徐、兗、青、冀六州。
现代文：又大赦扬、豫、徐、兖、青、冀等六州。
English: Yang, Yu, Xu, Handan, Qing and Hebei were also amnestied.

古文：遣顿丘太守吴甫之、右卫将军皇甫敷北拒刘裕于江乘。
现代文：派顿丘太守吴甫之、右卫将军皇甫敷在江乘抗拒北边的刘裕。
English: He sent Wu Fuzhi, the governor of Dongqiu, and Wang Fuxi, the general of the Right Division, to resist Liu Yu on the north side of the river.

古文：裕斩甫之，进至罗落桥，又枭敷首。
现代文：刘裕斩了吴甫之，进军到了罗落桥，又斩了皇甫敷的首级。
English: Liu Yu beheaded Wu Fuzhi, marched to Luo Luo Bridge, and beheaded Wang Fuzhi.

古文：玄外粗猛，内恇怯，及闻二将已没，志虑荒窘，计无所出，日与巫术道士为厌胜之法。
现代文：桓玄表面上粗疏威猛，骨子里怯懦恐惧，及至听说两将已死，主意已经穷尽，无计可施，天天和巫术道士作诅咒制胜之法。
English: On the surface, Kuan Xuan is coarse and powerful, but in his bones he is cowardly and fearful, and when he hears that the two generals are dead, he has exhausted his ideas and has nothing left to do but curse the sorcerers every day.

古文：乃谓众曰： 朕其败乎？ 
现代文：于是他问众人道： 我难道失败了吗？ 
English: So he asked the crowd: Did I fail?

古文：黄门郎曹靖对曰： 神怒民怨，臣实忧惧。 
现代文：黄门侍郎曹靖回答说： 神明发怒民众忿怨，为臣实在忧虑恐惧。 
English: Huangmen waiter Cao Jing replied: The gods are angry with the people's anger, and the vassals are really worried and afraid.

古文：玄曰： 民怨可然，神何为怒？ 
现代文：桓玄说： 民众忿怨尚可理解，神明为何发怒？ 
English: Kuan Xuan said: The people's anger is understandable. Why are the gods angry?

古文：对曰： 移晋宗庙，飘泊无所；大楚之祭，不及于祖。
现代文：曹靖回答说： 迁走了晋朝的宗庙，使其祖宗飘泊没有定所；大楚朝的庙祭，又不能及于祖先。
English: Cao Jing replied, "We moved away the ancestral temple of the Jin Dynasty, so that its ancestors wandered without a fixed place; the temple festival of the Great Chu Dynasty could not match the ancestors.

古文：此其所以怒也。 
现代文：这就是神明发怒的原因啊。 
English: That's why the gods are angry.

古文：玄曰： 卿何不谏？ 
现代文：桓玄说： 你为何早不对我谏劝？ 
English: Kuan Xuan said: Why didn't you advise me earlier?

古文：对曰： 辇上诸君子皆以为尧舜之世，臣何敢谏。 
现代文：回答说： 朝中诸位君子都认为大楚是尧舜之世，为臣怎么敢谏劝。 
English: He replied, "All the courtiers in the imperial court think that the Great Leader is a scoundrel. How dare a minister try to persuade him?"

古文：玄使桓谦、何澹之屯于东掖门，卞范之屯覆舟山西，众合二万。
现代文：桓玄派桓谦、何澹之屯兵于东陵口，卞范之屯兵于覆舟山之西，两下合兵共二万人。
English: Kuan Xuan sent the troops of Kuan Qian and He Xuan to Donglingkou, and the troops of Xuan Fan to the west of Zhoushan, with a total of 20,000 soldiers from the two armies.

古文：又遣武卫庾赜之配以精卒利器，援助谦等。
现代文：又派武卫庾赜之配备精锐的士卒武器，前往援助桓谦等人。
English: He also sent a military escort, equipped with the weapons of elite soldiers, to aid Huan Qian and others.

古文：谦等大败，玄声云赴战，将子侄出南掖门，西至石头。
现代文：桓谦等大败，桓玄扬言要亲往作战，带领子侄出南掖门，向西到达石头城。
English: After the crushing defeat of Huan Qian and others, Huan Xuan threatened to fight personally, leading his son and nephew out of the South Gate and westward to the Stone City.

古文：先使殷仲文具船于津，遂相与南走。
现代文：先已派殷仲文在渡口准备了船只，于是就一道乘船往南逃走。
English: They had already sent Yin Zhongwen to prepare a boat at the ferry port, so they fled south by boat together.

古文：经日不得食，左右进以粗粥，咽不能下。
现代文：一连几天找不到粮食，左右只得用粗粮做的粥送给他吃，难于吞咽下去。
English: Unable to find food for several days in a row, they had to give him porridge made from coarse grains, which was difficult to swallow.

古文：玄子升五六岁，抱率胸而抚之，玄悲不自胜。
现代文：桓玄之子桓升才只五六岁，抱着桓玄的胸脯抚摸他，桓玄见状悲不自胜。
English: Kuan Xuan's son, Kansho, was only five or six years old. He held Kuan Xuan's chest and stroked him. Kuan Xuan was heartbroken.

古文：玄挟德宗发寻阳，至江陵，西中郎将桓石康纳之。
现代文：桓玄挟持司马德宗从寻阳出发，到达江陵，西中郎将桓石康接纳了他们。
English: Huan Xuan and Sima Dezong set off from Xuanyang and arrived in Gangneung, where they were received by Nishi no chujo (vice-regent) Huan Shi Kang.

古文：张幔屋，止城南，署置百官，以卞范之为尚书仆射，殷仲文为徐州，其余各显用。
现代文：桓玄在江陵城南搭起帐幕，设置文武百官，以卞范之为尚书仆射，殷仲文为徐州刺史，其余各官都予以显要的任用。
English: Huan Xuan set up a tent in the south of Gangneung City, and set up a hundred civil and military officials, with Xuan Fan as Shang Shufu, Yin Zhongwen as Xuzhou Zhishi, and the rest of the officials were given important appointments.

古文：玄谓诸侍臣曰： 卿等并升清涂，翼从朕躬，都下窃位者方应谢罪军门，其见卿等入石头，无异云霄中人也。 
现代文：桓玄对诸侍臣说： 你们都是通过清净的途径得以荣升，翼从于我的身边，京都中那些窃居官位者正应当来军门谢罪，等到他们看见你们再次进入石头城，你们就无异于云霄中的人了。 
English: Kuan Xuan said to his courtiers, "You have all been promoted through pure means, and you have followed my side. Those in Kyoto who have usurped official positions should come to the gate of the army to repent. By the time they see you enter Stone Town again, you will be no different from people in the sky."

古文：玄以奔败之后，惧法令不肃，遂轻怒妄杀，逾甚暴虐。
现代文：桓玄因为在失败逃亡之后，害怕法令不能整肃，就轻易动怒妄杀无辜，越发变得暴虐。
English: Because Kuan Xuan was afraid that the law could not be rectified after he failed to escape, he easily got angry and killed innocent people, becoming more and more violent.

古文：殷仲文谏之，玄大怒曰： 汉高、魏武凡遇败，但诸将失利耳。
现代文：殷仲文对他进行谏劝，桓玄大怒道： 汉高祖、魏武帝屡次遭遇失败，只是因为他们的部将作战失利而已。
English: Yin Zhongwen tried to persuade him, but Huan Xuan became very angry and said, "Han Gao Zu and Wei Wu Di repeatedly suffered defeat, but only because their commanders lost the battle.

古文：以天文恶，故还都旧楚，而群小愚惑，妄生是非，方当纠之以猛，未宜施之以恩也。 
现代文：由于上天纵容邪恶，所以我回来以旧楚为都，但群小愚昧无知，妄生是非，正应当用威猛予以追究，不应对他们施以恩惠。 
English: Since heaven condones evil, I came back to the old Chu as the capital, but the small group of ignorance and ignorance, born wrong, should be pursued with vigor, and they should not be given favors.

古文：荆、江郡守，以玄播越，咸遣使通表，有匪宁之辞，玄悉不受，乃更令所在表贺迁都。
现代文：荆、江一带的郡守，由于桓玄流亡到此，都派使者来进表交结，其中有不安定的言辞，桓玄一概不予接受，就命令所在各郡进表庆贺他迁都之喜。
English: The governors of counties around Jing and Jiang, as a result of Huan Xuan's exile here, all sent envoys to Inba to exchange views, some of which were unsettling words. Huan Xuan did not accept any of them, and ordered his counties to go to Inba to celebrate the joy of his moving the capital.

古文：玄在道自作《起居注》，叙其拒刘裕事，自谓算略无失，诸将违节度，以至于败。
现代文：桓玄在逃亡路上自己撰写《起居注》，叙述他抗拒刘裕的事，自称他的谋略没有失误之处，而是诸将违背节制调度，以至于失败。
English: On the way to escape, Huan Xuan wrote his own "Resident's Note," describing his resistance to Liu Yu, claiming that there was no mistake in his strategy, but that they would violate the restraint schedule and fail.

古文：不暇谋议军事，惟诵述写传之。
现代文：他没有时间去谋划议论军事，只是述说记录他的经历而已。
English: He didn't have time to strategize or talk about the military, only to narrate and record his experiences.

古文：刘裕遣其冠军将军刘毅发建鄴，追之。
现代文：刘裕派遣他的冠军将军刘毅从建邺发兵，追击桓玄。
English: Liu Yu dispatched his champion general Liu Yi from Jianye to pursue Kuan Xuan.

古文：玄军屡败。
现代文：桓玄军屡次打败仗。
English: Kangen's army was repeatedly defeated.

古文：玄常装轻舸于舫侧，故其兵人莫有斗志。
现代文：桓玄经常在他的大船旁边装配轻便小舟以备不时之需，所以他的将士没有斗志。
English: Huan Xuan often prepared a small boat next to his big boat in case of emergency, so his soldiers had no fighting spirit.

古文：玄乃弃众而走，余军以次崩散，遂与德宗还江陵。
现代文：桓玄竟丢弃部下而逃，其余军队就依次崩溃逃散，他就与司马德宗一起逃回到江陵。
English: Huan Xuan actually abandoned his subordinates and fled, the rest of the army collapsed and fled in turn, and he fled back to Gangneung together with Sima Dezong.

古文：初，玄留德宗妻子巴陵，殷仲文与玄同舟，乃说玄求别舫收集散军，遂以德过妻归于建鄴。
现代文：起初，桓玄把司马德宗的妻儿留在巴陵，殷仲文与桓玄同在一条船上，就劝说桓玄寻找别的船只收集散军，于是把司马德宗之妻送回到建邺。
English: At first, Huan Xuan left Sima Dezong's wife and child in Baling. Yin Zhongwen was on a ship with Huan Xuan, and persuaded Huan Xuan to look for other ships to gather scattered troops, so he sent Sima Dezong's wife back to Jianye.

古文：玄入江陵城，南平太守冯该劝玄更战。
现代文：桓玄进入江陵城，南平太守冯该劝桓玄再战。
English: Huan Xuan entered Gangneung Castle, and the Nanping governor Feng Jia advised Huan Xuan to fight again.

古文：玄欲出汉中，投梁州刺史桓希，夜中处分将发，城内已乱，禁令不行，将亲近腹心百许人出城北。
现代文：桓玄想要出发到汉中，投奔梁州刺史桓希，夜晚安排停当将要出发，城内已经大乱，他的命令已不能执行，只好带领其心腹百余人往城北逃出。
English: Huan Xuan wanted to set out for Hanzhong and head for Liangzhou to attack Shishi Huanxi. At night, he arranged to stop when he was about to set out. The city was already in chaos, and his orders could no longer be carried out. He had no choice but to lead more than a hundred of his henchmen to the north of the city to escape.

古文：至城门，左右即于暗中斫玄面，前后相杀，交横盈路。
现代文：走到城门边，左右就在黑暗中迎面砍杀桓玄，前后相互厮杀，人马交错塞满了道路。
English: When they got to the edge of the city gate, they slashed and killed Huan Xuan on both sides in the dark, fighting each other back and forth. The road was jammed with people and horses.

古文：玄仅得至船。
现代文：桓玄仅仅得以逃到船上。
English: Kangen was only able to escape to a boat.

古文：德宗入南郡府。
现代文：司马德宗则进入了南郡府第。
English: Sima Dezong, on the other hand, entered Minami-gun prefecture.

古文：玄既下船，犹欲走汉中。
现代文：桓玄已经下船，还想要往汉中逃走。
English: Kuan Xuan had already disembarked and wanted to flee to Hanzhong.

古文：玄屯骑校尉毛修之诱以入蜀，遂与石康等沂江而上。
现代文：桓玄的屯骑校尉毛之诱骗他进入蜀地，他就同桓石康等人溯江而上。
English: Huan Xuan's cavalry lieutenant Mao Zhi tricked him into entering Shu, and he followed Huan Shikang and others up the river.

古文：达枚回洲，为益州参军费恬而迎射之，箭如雨下。
现代文：船到枚回洲，被益州参军费恬等人迎面射击，箭如雨下。
English: When the ship arrived at Hekizhou, it was fired on by Feiyu, a member of the Yizhou military, and others, and the arrows rained down.

古文：玄中流矢，子升辄拔之。
现代文：桓玄一中了流矢，他的儿子桓升就把箭拔出来。
English: When Kuan Xuan was hit by a stray arrow, his son Kansho pulled the arrow out.

古文：益州督护冯迁抽刃而登玄舰，玄曰： 是何人也，敢杀天子！ 
现代文：益州督护冯迁抽刀登上桓玄的舰船，桓玄叫道： 你是何人，敢杀天子！ 
English: Feng Qian, the governor of Yizhou Province, boarded Huan Xuan's ship with a drawn sword. Huan Xuan shouted: "Who are you, daring to kill the Son of Heaven!

古文：迁曰： 我自欲杀天子之贼耳。 
现代文：冯迁说： 我就是要杀掉天子的逆贼。 
English: Feng Qian said: I just want to kill the traitor.

古文：遂斩玄首并石康等，斩升于江陵市，传送玄首，枭于朱雀门。
现代文：于是斩下桓玄以及桓石康等人的首级，把桓升斩于江陵街市，将桓玄首级传送到建业，悬挂在朱雀门示众。
English: As a result, they cut off the heads of Kuan Xuan and Kuan Shi Kang and others, cut off Kansho in Gangneung Street, transported Kuan Xuan's head to Jianye, and hung it at Suzakumen for the public to see.

古文：玄既败，桓谦匿于沮中。
现代文：桓玄已经失败，桓谦在沮中藏匿起来。
English: Kuan Xuan has failed, and Kuan Qian has gone into hiding in despair.

古文：桓振逃于华容之浦，阴聚党数千人，晨袭江陵，克之。
现代文：桓振逃到华容水滨，暗中聚集党徒数千人，在早晨袭击江陵城，把它占领了。
English: Huan Zhen fled to Huarong Waterfront, secretly gathered thousands of party members, attacked Gangneung City in the morning, and occupied it.

古文：桓谦亦聚众而出。
现代文：桓谦也就聚众而出。
English: Kanen also came out of the crowd.

古文：振既至，问玄子升所在，知升已死，欲杀德宗，谦苦禁之。
现代文：桓振到了江陵，打听桓玄之子桓升之所在，得知桓升已死，就要杀掉司马德宗，桓谦苦苦相劝才得以住手。
English: When Kuan Zhen arrived in Gangneung, he inquired about the whereabouts of Kansheng, the son of Kuan Xuan. When he learned that Kansheng was dead, he wanted to kill Sima Dezong. It took Kuan Qian much persuasion to stop him.

古文：于是为玄举哀，谥为武悼皇帝。
现代文：于是桓振等人就为桓玄举哀，给他定谥号为武悼皇帝。
English: As a result, Kuan Zhen and others mourned for Kuan Xuan and gave him the posthumous title of Emperor Wuyi.

古文：谦率群官复立德宗，振自为都督八州、镇军将军、荆州刺史，谦复本职，又加江豫二州刺史。
现代文：桓谦率领群官又立司马德宗为帝，桓振自任为都督八州、镇军将军、荆州刺史，桓谦恢复原职，又加授江豫二州刺史。
English: Huan Qian led a group of officials and established Sima Dezong as emperor, Huan Zhen appointed himself as the governor of eight states, the general of the town army, and the chief historian of Jingzhou, Huan Qian resumed his original position, and was also awarded the chief historian of two states of Jiangyu.

古文：跋有男百余人，悉为文通所杀。
现代文：后来，司马德宗的益州刺史毛璩在汉中杀了桓希。桓振入侵江陵，被唐兴所杀。
English: Later, Sima Dezong's Yizhou acolyte Shifu killed Hanzhong in the Han Dynasty. Hanzhong invaded Gangneung and was killed by Tang Xing.

古文：文通，跋之少弟也，本名犯显祖庙讳。
现代文：他的其余亲信随从，有的当时被擒获，有的逃散到外地，几年之间，全都被消灭。冯文通，是冯跋最小的弟弟。他的本名犯了显祖的庙讳。
English: The rest of his close followers, some of whom were captured at the time, and some of whom fled to other places, were all wiped out within a few years. Feng Wentong was Feng Baw's youngest brother. His real name was unknown to the temple.

古文：高云僭号，以为征东大将军，领中领军，封汲郡公。
现代文：高云僭立为帝的时候，授任他为征东大将军，兼任中领军，封为汲郡公。
English: When Gao Yun was enthroned as emperor, he was awarded the title of General of the Expedition to the East, and also served as the leader of the central army, and was given the title of Prince of Ku County.

古文：跋立，为尚书左仆射，改封中山，仍为领军，内掌禁卫，外总朝政，历位司徒。
现代文：冯跋在高云死后即帝位，授予冯文通尚书左仆射之职，改封为中山公，仍旧任领军，在内掌管宫廷禁卫之事，在外总管朝廷政事，官位做到了司徒。
English: After Gao Yun's death, Feng Baw ascended to the throne and gave Feng Wentong the position of Shangshu's second-in-command, changing his title to Zhongshan Gong. He was still the leader of the army, in charge of the palace guards, and in charge of the imperial court's political affairs abroad. He achieved the official rank of Sutor.

古文：及自立，乃与刘义隆交通。
现代文：到了冯跋死后，冯文通即帝位，就与刘义隆交结往来。
English: After the death of Feng Badu, Feng Wentong, that is, the emperor, made contact with Liu Yilong.

古文：延和元年，世祖亲讨之，交通婴城固守。
现代文：延和元年，世祖亲自率兵征讨冯文通，冯文通固城自守。
English: In the first year of the Yanhe era, the ancestor personally led an army to recruit Feng Wentong, and Feng Wentong defended Gucheng.

古文：文通营丘、辽东、成周、乐浪、带方、玄菟六郡皆降，世祖徙其三万余户于幽州。
现代文：冯文通所辖营丘、辽东、成周、乐浪、带方、玄菟等六郡全都向大魏投降，世祖就把这里的三万多户人家迁徙到幽州。
English: The six counties administered by Feng Wentong, including Yingqiu, Liaodong, Chengzhou, Lelang, Bihang and Xuanzang, all surrendered to the Great Wei Dynasty, and the founder moved more than 30,000 households here to Yuzhou.

古文：文通尚书郭渊劝其归诚进女，乞为附庸，保守宗庙。
现代文：冯文通的尚书郭渊劝文通向大魏朝投诚归附，并进献女儿入朝，请求做大魏的附庸，以保全自己的王位。
English: Feng Wuntong's disciple Guoyuan advised Wuntong to surrender to the Great Wei Dynasty, and offered his daughter to the imperial court, requesting to be a vassal of the Great Wei Dynasty in order to preserve his throne.

古文：文通曰： 负衅在前，忿形已露，降附取死，不如守志，更图所适也。 
现代文：冯文通说道： 我背负魏廷导致仇隙已成为事实，魏廷对我的愤怒也已经显露出来，投降归附只会得到死路一条，倒不如保持志向坚守到底，另外再谋求更好的出路。 
English: Feng Wentong said, "It is a fact that I carried Wei Ting on my back, which led to the feud, and Wei Ting's anger toward me has also been revealed. Surrendering to annexation will only lead to a dead end. It is better to maintain the ambition to stick to the end, and then seek a better way out.

古文：先是，文通废其元妻王氏，黜世子崇，令镇肥如，以后妻慕容氏子王仁为世子。
现代文：起先，冯文通废掉了他的原配妻子王氏，又废黜了王氏所生的长子冯崇，令他镇守肥如，把后妻慕容氏所生之子冯王仁立为太子。
English: At first, Feng Wentong dethroned his original wife Wang Ruan, and dethroned the eldest son of Wang, Feng Chong, and made him the governor of Hiryu, and made the son of his second wife Murong, Feng Wangren, the prince.

古文：崇母弟广平公朗、乐陵公邈相谓曰： 大运有在，家国已亡，又慕容之谮，祸将至矣。 
现代文：冯崇同母的弟弟广平公冯朗、乐陵公冯邈两人在一起说： 天运依然存在，家国已经衰亡，现在慕容氏又在背后诬陷我们，大祸肯定就会要来临。 
English: Feng Chong's younger brothers by the same mother, Guangping Gong Feng Lang and Le Ling Gong Feng Yu, said together: The good fortune still exists, our country has fallen, and now the Murong clan is framing us behind our backs, a great disaster is sure to come.

古文：于是遂出奔辽西，劝崇来降，崇纳之。
现代文：于是他们就逃出奔往辽西，劝冯崇前来归降大魏，冯崇接受了他们的意见。
English: As a result, they fled to the west of Liao and urged Feng Chong to come and surrender to Wei. Feng Chong accepted their advice.

古文：会世祖使给事中王德陈示成败，崇遣邈入朝。
现代文：恰好世祖派遣给事中王德前去向冯崇陈述事情的成败得失，冯崇就派冯邈来到朝廷。
English: It just so happened that the ancestor sent Wang De to Feng Chong to report the success or failure of the matter, and Feng Chong sent Feng Ye to the imperial court.

古文：世祖遣兼鸿胪李继持节拜崇假节、侍中、都督幽平二州东夷诸军事、车骑大将军、领护东夷校尉、幽平二州牧，封辽西王，录其国尚书事，食辽西十郡；承制，假授文官尚书、刺史，武官征虏已下。
现代文：世祖派兼鸿胪卿李继手持符节授予冯崇假节、侍中、都督幽、平二州东夷诸军事、车骑大将军、领护东夷校尉、幽、平二州牧等职，封他为辽西王，执掌他们国中尚书之事，食邑辽西十郡；并且秉承皇帝的旨意，借朝廷的名义授予他的属下文官尚书、刺史、武官征虏将军以下的官职。
English: Li Jie, the founder of the school and the Hongwu Emperor, awarded Feng Chongfushi, the chamberlain, the governor Yu, the military of the East Yiwu of the two states of Ping, the general of the cavalry, the lieutenant of the East Yiwu, Yu, the pastor of the two states of Ping, and other positions to Feng Chongfushi, the courtier, the governor Yu, and the military of the East Yiwu of the two states of Ping. He was named the king of West Liaoning, in charge of the affairs of Shangshu in their country, and the ten counties of West Liaoning; and adhering to the emperor's will

古文：文通遣其将封羽率众围崇，世祖诏永昌王健督诸军救之。
现代文：冯文通派遣他的将领封羽率领部众围攻冯崇，世祖诏令永昌王拓跋健督率诸军前往救援。
English: Feng Wentong sent his general Fu Yu to lead the troops to besiege Feng Chong, and the emperor ordered Yongchang Wang Tuoba Jian to lead the troops to the rescue.

古文：封羽又以凡城降，徙其三千余家而还。
现代文：封羽又献冯文通所属的凡城投降大魏，就把那里的民户三千余家迁回。
English: After Feng Yu and Feng Wentong surrendered Fancheng to the Wei Dynasty, more than 3,000 households were relocated there.

古文：文通遣其尚书高颙请罪，乞以季女充掖庭。
现代文：冯文通被迫派遣他的尚书高禺页前来朝廷请罪，请求把他的小女儿充当后宫的嫔妃。
English: Feng Wentong was forced to send his official letter to the imperial court to plead guilty and request that his little daughter be used as the concubine of the harem.

古文：世祖许之，征其子王仁入朝，文通不遣。
现代文：世祖准许了他的请求，并征召他的儿子冯王仁入朝侍奉，冯文通拒不接受。
English: The patriarch granted his request and conscripted his son Feng Wangren to serve in the imperial court, but Feng Wentong refused to accept.

古文：其散骑常侍刘训言于文通曰： 虽结婚和通，而未遣侍子，魏若大举，将有危亡之虑。
现代文：他的散骑常侍刘训对冯文通说： 虽然与魏朝缔结婚姻互通和好，但不遣太子入朝侍奉，魏朝如果大举进攻，我们将有危亡之忧。
English: Liu Xun, his horseback-riding attendant, said to Feng Wentong: Although we have concluded a marriage and mutual reconciliation with the Wei Dynasty, we will not send the prince to serve in the imperial court. If the Wei Dynasty attacks in a big way, we will be in danger.

古文：夫以重山之隘，刘禅衔璧；长江之难，孙皓归命。
现代文：昔日刘禅凭借重山作为屏障，最终落得衔璧投降；孙皓倚仗长江天险来拒敌，最终还是归顺晋朝。
English: In the past, Liu Zhen relied on heavy mountains as a barrier and eventually surrendered; Sun Yat-sen relied on the Yangtze River to resist the enemy and eventually surrendered to the Jin Dynasty.

古文：况魏强于晋氏，燕弱环境吴蜀，愿时遣世子，以恭大国之命。
现代文：况且如今魏朝强大胜过晋氏，我们燕国势力弱于吴、蜀，但愿能够按时派遣世子入朝，以奉行大国的诏令。
English: Moreover, today, the Wei Dynasty is stronger than the Jin Dynasty, and the power of our Yan State is weaker than that of Wu and Shu. I hope that we can send the heir to the dynasty on time to carry out the imperial edict of the great country.

古文：然后收离集散，厚布恩泽，分赈仓廪以济民乏，劝督农桑以邀秋稔，庶大业危而更安，社稷可以永保。 
现代文：然后再收集离散的兵民，对他们施以深厚的恩泽，分赈仓廪来接济百姓的困乏，大力劝导百姓从事农桑以求取丰收之年，方可望国家大业能够转危为安，社稷得以永久保存。 
English: Then, gather the scattered soldiers and people, bestow them with profound grace, distribute straw to relieve the hardships of the people, and vigorously persuade the people to engage in agricultural mulberry in order to obtain a bumper harvest. It is hoped that the great cause of the country can turn the corner and the society can be preserved forever.

古文：文通大怒，杀之。
现代文：冯文通听了他这番话大怒，把他杀死。
English: When Feng Wentong heard his words, he flew into a rage and killed him.

古文：世祖又诏乐平王丕等讨之，日就蹙削，上下危惧。
现代文：世祖又诏令乐平王拓跋丕等人率兵前往征讨，情况日益紧张急迫，上下无不深感危惧。
English: The patriarch also ordered Leping Wang Tuobao and others to lead the troops to go to collect. The situation became increasingly tense and urgent, and everyone was deeply worried.

古文：文通太常阳岷复劝文通请罪乞降，速令王仁入侍。
现代文：冯文通属下太常阳山民日再次劝说文通向大魏请罪求降，赶快让冯王仁到大魏朝廷充当人质。
English: Feng Wentong's subordinate, Tai Changyang Shan Min, once again persuaded Wentong to plead guilty to the Great Wei Dynasty, and quickly let Feng Wangren go to the Great Wei Dynasty to serve as a hostage.

古文：文通曰： 吾未忍为此，若事不幸，且欲东次高丽，以图后举。 
现代文：冯文通说道： 我不忍心这样做，倘若事情果然不幸，我想暂且去东边临时住在高丽，以谋求今后的行动。 
English: Feng Wentong said, "I can't bear to do this. If things turn out to be unfortunate, I would like to temporarily go to the east and temporarily live in Korea to seek future action."

古文：岷曰： 魏以天下之众周一隅之地，以臣愚见，势必土崩。
现代文：阳山民日说： 魏朝用天下之众来攻击我们一隅之地，凭我愚昧的看法，我朝势必土崩瓦解。
English: Yangshan Minri said: The Wei Dynasty used the whole world to attack our corner of the world. According to my ignorant opinion, our dynasty is bound to collapse.

古文：且高丽夷狄，难以信期，始虽相亲，终恐为变。
现代文：况且高丽乃是夷狄，对它不能轻易相信并有所期望，它即使开始时同我们相亲，恐怕最终还是会变的。
English: Besides, Goryeo is a barbarian country, and we cannot easily believe in it and expect anything from it. Even if it is friendly with us at the beginning, I am afraid it will eventually change.

古文：若不早裁，悔无及也。 
现代文：此事如果不及早决断，到时后悔也就来不及了。 
English: If this matter is not decided early, it will be too late to regret it.

古文：文通不听，乃密求迎于高丽。
现代文：冯文通不听，就秘密派人到高丽请求接纳。
English: When Feng Wentong did not listen, he secretly sent someone to Goryeo to request admission.

古文：太延二年，高丽遣将葛卢等率众迎之，入和龙城，脱其弊褐，取文通精仗以赋其众。
现代文：太延二年，高丽派将领葛卢等人率领部众迎接冯文通，葛卢等人来到和龙城，就脱掉他们粗陋的布衣服，拿来冯文通的精良兵器装备他的部下。
English: In the second year of Taien, the Koryo faction's general Ge Lu and others led the troops to welcome Feng Wentong. When Ge Lu and others came to Hailong City, they took off their coarse cloth clothes and brought Feng Wentong's sophisticated weapons to equip his men.

古文：文通乃拥其城内士女入于高丽。
现代文：冯文通于是就带着和龙城内的成年男女进入高丽。
English: Feng Wentong then took with him the adult men and women in Yongcheng to enter Goryeo.

古文：先是，其国有狼夜绕城群嗥，如是终岁；又有鼠集于城西，阗满数里，西行至水，则在前者衔马矢，迭相啮尾而渡；宿军地燃，一旬而灭触地生蛆，月余乃止；和龙城生白毛，长一尺二寸。
现代文：早先，冯文通国内有狼群在晚上围绕着和龙城嗥叫，像这样持续了一年之久；又有老鼠群集于城西，填满道路有好几里，向西而行到了河边，在前面的老鼠口里衔着马粪，互相交替地咬着尾巴渡过河去；又有宿军这个地方燃起地火，过了十天才熄灭，遍地长满了蛆虫，一个多月才消失；和龙城里到处长出白毛，有一尺二寸长。
English: Earlier, in Feng Wentong's country, there were wolves howling at night around He Longcheng, and it continued like this for a year; there were also rats that gathered in the west of the city, filled the road for several miles, and went west to the river, carrying horse manure in the front of the rat's mouth, and biting their tails alternately to cross the river; there were also local soldiers who lit a ground fire in this place, and it took ten days to extinguish, and maggots grew everywhere, and it took more than a month to disappear; and white hair grew everywhere in Longcheng, one foot and two inches long.

古文：文通至辽东，高丽遣使劳之曰： 龙城王冯君爰适野次，士马劳乎？ 
现代文：冯文通到了辽东，高丽国派遣使者前去慰劳他，说： 龙城王冯君来到野外止息，兵马很辛苦吧？ 
English: When Feng Wentong arrived in Liaodong, Goryeo sent an envoy to console him, saying: "Dragon City King Feng Jun has come to rest in the open, isn't it hard for soldiers and horses?

古文：文通惭怒，称制答让之，高丽乃处之于平郭，寻徙北丰。
现代文：冯文通听了非常羞惭恼怒，用皇帝的身份来应答使者，高丽就把冯文通安置在平郭，不久又让他迁往北丰。
English: Hearing this, Feng Wentong was very ashamed and angry. He used his status as emperor to reply to the envoy. Goryeo placed Feng Wentong in Pingguo, and soon moved him to Beifeng.

古文：文通素侮高丽，政刑赏罚，犹如其国。
现代文：冯文通向来轻侮高丽，到这里之后，他的政令刑法、赏赐处罚，都还是像在自己国内一样。
English: Feng Wentong has always treated Goryeo with contempt. After arriving here, his decrees, criminal laws, rewards and punishments are all the same as in his own country.

古文：高丽乃夺其侍人，质任王仁。
现代文：高丽竟然夺走冯文通的侍从，把冯王仁扣为人质。
English: Goryeo actually took away Feng Wentong's attendant and held Feng Wangren hostage.

古文：文通忿怨之，谋将南奔。
现代文：冯文通对此十分气愤怨恨，计划奔走到南边去。
English: Feng Wentong was very angry and resentful about this, and planned to run to the south.

古文：世祖又征文通于高丽，高丽乃杀之于北丰，子孙同时死者十余人。
现代文：世祖又向高丽征索冯文通，高丽就在北丰把他杀掉，其子孙同时遇害的有十多人。
English: King Sejong also solicited Feng Wentong from Goryeo, and Goryeo killed him in Beifeng. More than ten of his descendants were killed at the same time.

