古文：起阏逢执徐六月，尽强圉协洽三月，凡二年有奇。
现代文：起阏逢执徐六月，尽强圉协洽三月，凡二年有奇。
English: Every two years, there is a strange coincidence. The first day of spring falls in June, and the second day of spring in March.

古文：僖宗惠圣恭定孝皇帝下之上中和四年六月，壬辰，东川留后高仁厚奏郑君雄斩杨师立出降。
现代文：唐僖宗和四年六月，壬辰，东川留后高仁厚上奏说郑君雄斩杀杨师立出来投降。
English: In June of the fourth year of Tang Yanzong and Imjin, after Gao Renkou stayed in Dongchuan, Gao Renkou stood up and said that Zheng Junxiong killed Yang Shili and surrendered.

古文：仁厚围梓州久不下，乃为书射城中，道其将士曰： 仁厚不忍城中玉石俱焚，为诸君缓师十日，使诸君自成其功。
现代文：高仁厚围攻梓州城好长时间拿不下来，于是写了一封信用箭射入城中，对城内的将领士卒说： 高仁厚不忍心看到城内良莠不分都遭杀戮，暂缓进攻十天，让你们自己完成这一功业。
English: Gao Renhuo besieged the city of Zizhou for a long time and could not take it down, so he wrote a letter of credit arrow shot into the city and said to the generals and officers in the city: Gao Renhuo could not bear to see all the good and bad people in the city were killed, suspended the attack for ten days, and let you complete this work yourself.

古文：若十日不送师立首，当分见兵为五番，番分昼夜以攻之，于此甚逸，于彼必困矣。
现代文：如果十天内不送出杨师立的脑袋，就要把这些官兵分为五番，分番别在白天和黑夜轮流攻打，这样对于我们是很安逸的，对于你们则一定是疲困不堪。
English: If the head of Yang Shili is not sent out within ten days, these officers and soldiers should be divided into five groups, and the groups should not take turns attacking during the day and night. This is very comfortable for us, but must be exhausting for you.

古文：五日不下，四面俱进，克之必矣。
现代文：五天若还没有攻打下来，就从四面八方一同进攻，一定会攻克的。你们考虑吧！ 
English: If they haven't attacked us in five days, we will attack them from all directions, and we will definitely defeat them. Think about it!

古文：诸君图之！ 数日，君雄大呼于众曰： 天子所诛者元恶耳，他人无预也！ 
现代文：过了几天，郑君雄对众人大声疾呼说： 天子所要杀戮的是罪魁祸首，与别的人没有关系。 
English: A few days later, Zheng Junxiong shouted out to the crowd, "The person that Heavenly Son wants to kill is the culprit, and has nothing to do with anyone else.

古文：众呼万岁，大噪，突入府中，师立自杀，君雄挈其首出降。
现代文：大家高喊万岁，嚷嚷吵吵，冲进府第，杨师立自杀身亡，郑君雄提着杨师立的头出来投降。
English: Everyone shouted hooray, shouted and quarreled, rushed into the government office, Yang Shili committed suicide and died, and Zheng Junxiong came out to surrender with Yang Shili's head.

古文：仁厚献其首及妻子于行在，陈敬瑄钉其子于城北，敬瑄三子出观之，钉者呼曰： 兹事行及汝曹，汝曹于后努力领取！ 
现代文：高仁厚将杨师立的头和他的妻子儿女送到唐僖宗那里，陈敬下令把杨师立的儿子钉死在城的北面，陈敬的三个儿子出去观看这场景，被钉的人大叫： 这种事也会轮到你们，你们以后等着努力领取吧！ 
English: Gao Renhou sent the head of Yang Shili and his wife and children to Tang Xizong. Chen Jing ordered Yang Shili's son to be crucified to death on the north side of the city. Chen Jing's three sons went out to watch the scene. The crucified man shouted: "This kind of thing will also happen to you. You should wait and try to collect it later!"

古文：三子走马而返。
现代文：陈敬的三个儿子骑上马逃了回去。
English: Chen Jing's three sons fled back on horseback.

古文：以高仁厚为东川节度使。
现代文：朝廷任命高仁厚为东川节度使。
English: The imperial court appointed Gao Renhou as the Dongchuan Festival envoy.

古文：甲辰，武宁将李师悦与尚让追黄巢至瑕丘，败之。
现代文：甲辰，武宁将军李师悦和尚让追击黄巢到瑕丘，打败黄巢。
English: Jia Chen, General Li Shiyue and the Monk of Wu Ning chased the Yellow Nest to Kejiu, and defeated the Yellow Nest.

古文：巢众殆尽，走至狼虎谷，丙午，巢甥林言斩巢兄弟妻子首，将诣时溥，遇沙陀博野军，夺之，并斩言首以献于溥。
现代文：黄巢的人马没剩下多少，逃到泰山东南部的狼虎谷。丙午，黄巢的外甥林言斩下黄巢和黄巢的兄弟、妻子的头颅，正要拿着送到时溥那里，遇上了沙陀人博野军，将黄巢等人的头颅夺去，并且砍下林言的脑袋，一同献给了时溥。
English: Huang Chao's men did not have much left and fled to the Valley of Wolves and Tigers in the southeast of Mount Tai. At noon, Huang Chao's nephew Lin Yan chopped off the heads of Huang Chao and his brother and wife, and was about to take them to Shi Yan, when he met the Shado's troops, who took the heads of Huang Chao and others, and chopped off Lin Yan's head, and together they presented it to Shi Yan.

古文：蔡州节度使秦宗权纵兵四出，侵噬邻道。天平节度使硃瑄，有众三万，从父弟瑾，勇冠军中。
现代文：蔡州节度使秦宗权放纵士兵四处出击，侵犯邻近各道；天平节度使朱，有人马三万，堂弟朱瑾，勇猛过人，在军营中可称第一。
English: Caizhou Festival made Qin Zongquan indulge soldiers to attack everywhere, encroaching on neighboring provinces; Tianping Festival made Zhu, with 30,000 soldiers and 30,000 horses, and his cousin Zhu Xi, with extraordinary bravery, can be said to be the first in the military camp.

古文：宣武节度使硃全忠为宗权所攻，势甚窘，求救于瑄，瑄遣瑾将兵救之，败宗权于合乡。
现代文：宣武节度使朱全忠受到秦宗权的进攻，处境十分紧迫，向朱求救，朱派遣朱瑾带领军队前往救援，在合乡打败了秦宗权。
English: The Xuanwu Festival caused Zhu Quanzhong to be attacked by the Qin Patriarchate, the situation was very urgent, he asked Zhu for help, Zhu sent Zhu Xi to lead the army to the rescue, and defeated the Qin Patriarchate in He Township.

古文：全忠德之，与瑄约为兄弟。
现代文：朱全忠很感激他，与朱结为兄弟。
English: Zhu Quanzhong was very grateful to him and became a brother with Zhu Jie.

古文：秋，七月，壬午，时溥遣使献黄巢及家人首并姬妾，上御大玄楼受之。
现代文：秋季，七月，壬午，时溥派遣使臣进献黄巢和他家人的头颅以及他的众妾，唐僖宗亲临成都大玄楼接受进献。
English: In the autumn, in July, at noon, when the emperor sent envoys to offer the heads of Huang Chao and his family, as well as his concubines, Tang Yizong himself came to Chengdu's Great Hall of the Forbidden City to accept the offering.

古文：宣问姬妾： 汝曹皆勋贵子女，世受国恩，何为从贼？ 
现代文：僖宗向黄巢的众妾问话： 你们都是显贵人家的子女，世代接受国家的恩惠，为什么要跟随贼寇呀？ 
English: Zong Zong asked the concubines of the Yellow Nest: You are all the children of a noble family, and you have received state favors for generations. Why do you want to follow the bandits?

古文：其居首者对曰： 狂贼凶逆，国家以百万之众，失守宗祧，播迁巴、蜀；今陛下以不能拒贼责一女子，置公卿将帅于何地乎！ 
现代文：站在前面的一位回答说： 贼寇逞凶作乱，大唐有百万军队，却不能固守祖庙，流落到巴蜀一带，今天陛下责备一个女子不能抗拒贼寇，那么朝中的王公大臣将军统帅们又怎么说呢！ 
English: One of those standing in front replied: "Thieves and robbers are trying their best to create chaos. Datang has a million-strong army, but they can't hold on to their ancestral temple and have been driven to the region of Bashu. Today, His Majesty reproached a woman for not being able to resist thieves and robbers. So what do the princes, ministers, generals and commanders of the imperial court have to say?

古文：上不复问，皆戮之于市。
现代文：僖宗不再问话，下令全部在集市杀掉。
English: Shizong stopped asking questions and ordered that they all be killed in the bazaar.

古文：人争与之酒，其馀皆悲怖昏醉，居首者独不饮不泣，至于就刑，神色肃然。
现代文：人们争着给黄巢的众妾送酒，其余的人都悲痛恐惧昏昏沉沉地喝醉了，唯独站在前面的那位既不饮酒也不哭泣，到了处刑的时候，神态脸色肃穆坦然。
English: People scrambled to bring wine to the concubines of the Yellow Nest, and the rest of the people were drunk with grief and fear, but the one who stood in front neither drank nor cried, and when it was time for the execution, his face was solemn and calm.

古文：硃全忠击秦宗权，败示权于溵水。
现代文：朱全忠攻击秦宗权，在水将他打败。
English: Zhu Quanzhong attacked Qin Zongquan and defeated him in the water.

古文：李克用至晋阳，大治甲兵，遣榆次镇将雁门李承嗣奉表诣行在，自陈： 有破黄巢大功，为硃全忠所图，仅能自免，将佐已下从行者三百馀人，并牌印皆没不返。
现代文：李克用到达晋阳，大规模地修整盔甲武器，派遣镇守榆次的将军雁门人李承嗣恭奉表文到唐僖宗那里，部陈述道： 李克用有打败黄巢的大功劳，却中了朱全忠的阴谋圈套，仅是免于一死，身边的将领辅佐官员之下跟随的三百余人，和朝廷授给的牌印都全覆没。
English: Li Ke used his arrival in Jinyang to repair armor and weapons on a large scale, and dispatched the garrison commander of Jiji, the general of the Wild Goose Gate, Li Chengzhi, to Tang Yanzong. The ministry stated: Li Ke used the great merit of defeating the Yellow Nest, but fell into the conspiracy trap of Zhu Quanzhong. He was only spared one death. The more than three hundred people around him, including the generals and assistant officials, and the plaques awarded by the court were all destroyed.

古文：全忠仍榜东都、陕、孟，云臣已死，行营兵溃，令所在邀遮屠翦，勿令潮失，将士皆号泣冤诉，请复仇雠。
现代文：朱全忠还屡屡在东都、陕州、孟州张贴告示，说我已经死亡，军营中的人马溃散，他命令各地拦截阻击全部斩杀，不许漏网一个，为此军营中的将领和士兵都哭诉冤屈，请求报仇。
English: Zhu Quanzhong also repeatedly posted notices in Dongdu, Shaanxi, and Mengzhou, saying that I had died, and the men and horses in the military camp had dispersed. He ordered all regions to intercept and block all the killings, and not allow one to slip through the net. For this reason, the generals and soldiers in the military camp were crying about grievances and requesting revenge.

古文：臣以朝廷至公，当俟诏命，拊循抑止，复归本道。
现代文：我认为朝廷最为公正，应当等皇上颁发了诏命再行动，因此安抚手下人马遵循朝纲，制止了他们要擅自报仇的请求，又回到原来的营地。
English: I think that the Imperial Court is the most just, and should wait for the Emperor to issue the Imperial Edict before taking action. Therefore, they should appease their subordinates, follow the Imperial Program, stop their request to take revenge without authorization, and return to the original camp.

古文：乞遣使按问，发兵诛讨，臣遣弟克勤将万骑在河中俟命。 
现代文：现在恳求皇上派遣使臣审查讯问这一事件，发兵讨伐朱全忠，我派弟弟李克勤带领一万骑兵在河中府等候命令。 
English: Now I implore the emperor to send envoys to examine and interrogate this incident and to send troops to fight Zhu Quanzhong. I sent my brother Li Keqin to lead ten thousand cavalry to wait for orders in Hezhongfu.

古文：时朝廷以大寇初平，方务姑息，得克用表，大恐，但遣中使赐优诏和解之。
现代文：当时朝廷认为黄巢大寇刚刚平灭，为政应当宽容一些，接到李克用的表文，大为吃惊，只是派遣宦官赐发褒嘉奖励李克用诏书，劝二人和解。
English: At that time, the imperial court believed that the Yellow Nest bandits had just been wiped out, and that the government should be more tolerant. When it received Li Ke's petition, it was very surprised, but it sent a eunuch to give a commendation and reward Li Ke with an edict to persuade the two to reconcile.

古文：克用前后凡八表，称： 全忠妒功疾能，阴狡祸贼，异日必为国患。
现代文：李克用先后共八次进呈表文，说： 朱全忠妒忌他人的功劳和才能，是阴险狡诈的乱臣贼子，将来一定会成为国家的祸患。
English: Li Ke used a total of eight times to submit a written statement, saying: Zhu Quanzhong envies the merits and talents of others, is an insidious and cunning ruffian thief, and will surely become a national scourge in the future.

古文：惟乞下诏削其官爵，臣自帅本道兵讨之，不用度支粮饷。 
现代文：只皇上颁发诏令削去朱全忠的官职和爵位，我亲自率领本道官兵对他进行讨伐，不用朝廷支给粮食和兵饷。 
English: Only the emperor issued a decree to reduce Zhu Quanzhong's official position and peerage, and I personally led the local officers and soldiers to fight against him, without the need for the court to provide food and soldiers.

古文：上累遣杨复恭等谕指，称： 吾深知卿冤，方事之殷，姑存大体。 
现代文：唐僖宗几次派遣杨复恭等人向李克用传达谕令，说： 我深知你的冤屈，可是现在事务繁多，你姑且以大局为重吧。 
English: Tang Xizong sent Yang Fuqong and others to Li Ke several times to convey the edict to Li Ke, saying: I am well aware of your grievances, but there are many things to do now, so you should focus on the overall situation.

古文：克用终郁郁不平。
现代文：对此李克用一直愤懑不平。
English: Li Kegui has been complaining bitterly about this.

古文：时籓镇相攻者，朝廷不复为之辨曲直。
现代文：当时对各藩镇的相互攻打，朝廷不再为他们明辨谁是谁非。
English: At that time, the imperial court was no longer able to distinguish who was to blame for the mutual attacks of the various domains and towns.

古文：由是互相吞噬，惟力是视，皆无所禀畏矣。
现代文：由于这样，各藩镇尽管互相侵吞，只看实力，都没有什么因禀告朝廷而畏惧的了。
English: As a result of this, despite the fact that the various domains and towns were encroaching on each other and only looked at their own strength, there was nothing to fear from denouncing the imperial court.

古文：八月，李克用奏请割麟州隶河东，又奏请以弟克修为昭义节度使，皆许之。
现代文：八月，李克用上奏请求朝廷把麟州割让隶属河东节度使管辖，又请求任命他的弟弟李克为昭义节度使，朝廷都准许了他。
English: In August, Li Ke requested the imperial court to cede Linzhou to the jurisdiction of the Eastern Hedong Jiedu Envoy, and also requested the appointment of his brother Li Ke as the Shouyi Jiedu Envoy. The imperial court granted him both.

古文：由是昭义分为二镇，进克用爵陇西郡王。
现代文：从此，昭义分成了两个镇。朝廷还为李克用晋升爵位为陇西郡王。
English: From then on, Shouyi was divided into two towns. The imperial court also promoted Li Kegui to the title of King of Shaanxi County.

古文：克用奏罢云蔚防御使，依旧隶河东，从之。
现代文：李克用奏请裁撤云蔚防御使，云州、蔚州、朔州仍隶属河东节度使管辖，朝廷也依从了他。
English: Li Ke used the speech to request the abolition of the Yunnan and Yunnan Defense Commission. Yunnan, Yunnan, and Shuozhou are still under the jurisdiction of the Hedong Defense Commission. The imperial court also obeyed him.

古文：九月，己未，加硃全忠同平章事。
现代文：九月，己未，朝廷加封朱全忠为同平章事。
English: In September, the imperial court made Zhu Quanzhong a peer.

古文：以右仆射、大明宫留守王徽知京兆尹事。
现代文：朝廷任命右仆射、大明宫留守王徽为知京兆尹牧事。
English: The imperial court appointed the right-hand man of Emperor Jia, Wang Hui, who was staying at the Daming Palace, as the pastor of Zhijing Zhaoyun.

古文：上以长安宫室焚毁，故久留蜀未归。
现代文：唐僖宗因为长安宫殿被黄巢烧毁，所以长期留在蜀地而没回去。
English: Because the Chang'an Palace was burned down by the Yellow Nest, Tang Yanzong stayed in Shunde for a long time and did not return.

古文：徽招抚流散，户口稍归，复缮治宫室，百司粗有绪。
现代文：王徽招抚流散的百姓，长安的居民稍微回来一些，又修缮治理宫室，各官署粗略地有了些头绪。
English: Wang Hui attracted the scattered people, the residents of Chang'an came back a little, and repaired and governed the palace, and the various government departments had a rough clue.

古文：冬，十月，关东籓表请车驾还京师。
现代文：冬季，十月，关东的藩镇进呈表文请求唐僖宗回京师长安。
English: In the winter, in October, the towns of Kanto submitted a petition requesting Tang Xizong to return to Beijing and establish Chang'an.

古文：硃全忠之降也，义成节度使王鐸为都统，承制除官。
现代文：朱全忠投降的时候，义成节度使王铎是都统，受命为朱全忠封官授职。
English: At the time of Zhu Quanzhong's surrender, the Yicheng Festival made Wang Qi the leader of the whole country, and he was ordered to give Zhu Quanzhong a post.

古文：全忠初镇大梁，事鐸礼甚恭，鐸依以为援。
现代文：起初朱全忠镇守大梁，侍奉王铎礼节十分恭谦，王铎依赖朱仓忠为援。
English: At first, Zhu Quanzhong was the keeper of the great beam, and he served Wang Yao with great courtesy. Wang Yao relied on Zhu Cangzhong for support.

古文：而全忠兵浸强，益骄倨，鐸知不足恃，表请还朝，徙鐸为义昌节度使。
现代文：随着朱全忠人马的渐渐强大，他越来越骄横傲慢，王铎知道朱全忠这人靠不住，便进呈表文请求回到朝廷任职，朝廷于是将王铎调任义昌节度使。
English: As Zhu Quanzhong became more and more powerful, he became more and more arrogant. Wang Xi knew that Zhu Quanzhong could not be trusted, so he submitted a written request to return to the imperial court. The imperial court then transferred Wang Xi to Yichang Festival.

古文：鹿晏弘之去河中，王建、韩建、张造、晋晖、李师泰各帅其众与之俱；及据兴元，以建等为巡内刺史，不遣之官。
现代文：鹿晏弘离开河中时，王建、韩建、张造、晋晖、李师泰分别率领所部人马与他一同前去，等到占据了兴元，便任命王建等人为巡内剌史，但没有派遣他们赴任。
English: When Lu Qianhong left Hezhong, Wang Jian, Han Jian, Zhang Zong, Jintao and Li Shitai led the staff to go with him. When they occupied Xingyuan, they appointed Wang Jian and others to inspect the history, but did not send them to the post.

古文：晏弘猜忌，众心不附，王建、韩建素相亲善，晏弘尤忌之，数引入卧内，待之加厚。二建密相谓曰： 仆射甘言厚意，疑我也，祸将至矣！ 
现代文：鹿晏弘猜疑各将领不再真心依附，王建、韩建二人平时相互亲近友善，鹿晏弘尤为忌恨，多次把他俩带进内室，以很厚的礼节款待他们，王建、韩建相互说： 鹿仆射以好言美意招侍我们，是在怀疑我们，大祸快要降临了。 
English: Lu Qianhong suspected that the generals were no longer sincerely attached to him. Wang Jian and Han Jian were close and friendly to each other in peacetime. Lu Qianhong was particularly jealous. He took the two of them into the inner room many times and treated them with great courtesy. Wang Jian and Han Jian said to each other: "Deerslayer invited us with kind words and sentiments, he is doubting us, a great disaster is about to come."

古文：田令孜密遣人以厚利诱之，十一月，二建与张造、晋晖、李师泰帅众数千逃奔行在，令孜皆养为假子，赐与巨万，拜诸卫将军，使各将其众，号随驾五都。
现代文：田令孜秘密派人以丰厚利益去引诱王建等人。十一月，王建、韩建与张造、晋晖、李师泰率领几千人马逃奔到成都唐僖宗那里，田令孜把他们都收养为义子，赏赐给他们大量钱财，封他们为各卫将军，让他们分别带领自己的人马，号称随驾五都。
English: In November, Wang Jian, Han Jian, Zhang Zou, Jin Wei, and Li Shitai led thousands of horses to flee to Tang Xizong in Chengdu. Tian Lingzi adopted all of them as his adopted sons, rewarded them with a large amount of money, and made them each guards generals, letting them lead their own men and horses separately. They were known as the Five Accompanying Cities.

古文：又遣禁兵讨晏弘，晏弘率众弃兴元走。
现代文：朝廷又派遣禁卫军讨伐鹿晏弘，鹿晏弘放弃兴元城逃跑。
English: The imperial court also dispatched the imperial guard to fight against the logging of Deerslayer, and Deerslayer abandoned Xingyuan City and fled.

古文：初，宦者曹知悫，本华原富家子，有胆略。
现代文：当初，宦官曹知悫，本来是华原富贵人家的儿子，有勇气和智谋。
English: At first, the eunuch Cao Zhisheng, who was originally the son of a wealthy family in Hua Yuan, had courage and wisdom.

古文：黄巢陷长安，知悫归乡里，集壮士，据嵯峨山南，为堡自固，巢党不敢近。
现代文：黄巢攻陷长安后，曹知悫回到故乡，招集强壮勇士，占据嵯峨山南部，建筑营垒固守，黄巢的人马不敢接近。
English: After Huang Chao captured Chang'an, Cao Zhisheng returned to his hometown, summoned strong warriors, occupied the southern part of Saga Mountain, built a stronghold, and the people of Huang Chao did not dare to approach.

古文：知悫数遣壮士变衣服语言，效巢党，夜入长安攻贼营，贼惊以为鬼神；又疑其下有叛者，由是心不自安。
现代文：曹知悫多次派遣招集的强壮勇士变换衣服和言语，仿效黄巢手下的人，夜间进入长安攻打贼寇军营，贼寇惊恐万状以为是鬼神作怪。黄巢又怀疑手下人有叛变的，因此心神不定。
English: Cao Zhisheng repeatedly dispatched strong warriors to change their clothes and words, imitating Huang Chao's men, to enter Chang'an at night to attack the bandit camp. The bandits were terrified and thought it was a trick of ghosts and gods. Huang Chao also suspected that his men had mutinied, so his mind was uncertain.

古文：朝廷闻而嘉之，就除内常侍，赐金紫。
现代文：朝廷得知这一情况特地嘉奖曹知悫，授给他内常侍官职，赐给金印紫绶。
English: When the imperial court learned of this situation, it specially commended Cao Zhisheng, awarded him the post of regular attendant, and gave him the golden seal and purple ribbon.

古文：知悫闻车驾将还，谓人曰： 吾施小术，使诸军得成大功，从驾群臣但平步往来，俟至大散关，当阅其可归者纳之。 
现代文：曹知悫听说唐僖宗要回京师长安，对人讲： 我略施小说，使各路官军取得了收复长安的大功，那些跟随皇上的百官只是轻松地来来往往，等到他们到达大散关，我要审视其中应该返回京师任职的人才能接纳。 
English: Cao Zhisheng heard that Tang Xizong wanted to return to the Beijing division of Chang'an, and said to the people: I have a little novel, so that the various government forces have made great achievements in recovering Chang'an. Those hundred officials who follow the emperor just come and go easily. Until they reach the Great Sankuan, I want to examine those who should return to the Beijing division to accept them.

古文：行在闻之，恐其为变；田令孜尤恶之，密以敕旨谕邠宁节度使王行瑜，使诛之。行瑜潜师自嵯峨山北乘高攻之，知悫不为备，举营尽殪。
现代文：这话传到僖宗那里，朝廷担心曹知悫会发动变乱。田令孜尤其仇视曹知悫，便暗中假借僖宗的旨意谕令宁节度使王行瑜，让他将曹知悫杀掉，王行瑜秘密派出军队从嵯峨山的北面登上高处发起进攻，曹知悫没有任何准备，全部人马都被杀死。
English: This word spread to Emperor Xizong, and the imperial court feared that Cao Zhisheng would start a revolution. Tian Lingzi especially hated Cao Zhisheng, so he secretly borrowed Emperor Xizong's will to order Ning Jiedu to tell Wang Xingyu to kill Cao Zhisheng. Wang Xingyu secretly sent an army from the north side of the towering mountain to launch an attack. Cao Zhisheng had no preparation, and all the men and horses were killed.

古文：令孜益骄横，禁制天子，不得有所主断。
现代文：田令孜更加骄横起来，控制皇上，使僖宗不能主断事务。
English: Tian Lingzhe became even more arrogant and controlled the emperor, making it impossible for Emperor Xizong to make decisions.

古文：上患其专，时语左右而流涕。
现代文：僖宗厌恨田令孜的专权，经常向身边的人谈起这事而痛哭流涕。
English: Zou Zong hated Tian Lingzi's exclusive power, and often talked about it to people around him and cried bitterly.

古文：鹿晏弘引兵东出襄州，秦宗权遣其将秦诰、赵德諲将兵会之，共攻襄州，陷之；山南东道节度使刘臣容奔成都。
现代文：鹿晏弘带领军队往东出发奔向襄州，秦宗权派遣将领秦诰、赵德率领军队与鹿晏弘会合，共同攻陷襄州。山南东道节度使刘巨容逃奔成都。
English: Lu Xunhong led the army to the east and rushed to Xiangzhou. Qin Zongquan dispatched generals Qin Hui and Zhao De to lead the army to meet with Lu Xunhong and jointly capture Xiangzhou. Shannan hosted the festival and made Liu Jirong flee to Chengdu.

古文：德諲，蔡州人也。
现代文：赵德是蔡州人。
English: Zhao De is from Caizhou.

古文：晏弘引兵转掠襄、邓、均、房、庐、寿，复还许州。
现代文：鹿晏弘带领人马，在襄州、邓州、均州、房州、庐州、寿州各州之间辗转抢掠，又回到许州。
English: Lu Yinghong led his men in robbing and pillaging between the states of Xiangzhou, Dengzhou, Junzhou, Fangzhou, Ganzhou, and Shoushou, and then returned to Huzhou.

古文：忠武节度使周岌闻其至，弃镇走，晏弘遂据许州，自称留后，朝廷不能讨，因以为忠武节度使。
现代文：忠武节度使周岌听说鹿晏弘来到，放弃州城逃跑，鹿晏弘于是占据了许州，自称留后，朝廷难以对他进行讨伐，便任命他为忠武节度使。
English: Zhongwu Jiedu caused Zhou Rui to hear that Lu Xunhong was coming, abandon the state capital and flee. Lu Xunhong then occupied Huzhou, claiming that after he stayed, it would be difficult for the court to fight him, so he appointed him as Zhongwu Jiedu envoy.

古文：十二月，己丑，陈敬瑄表辞三川都指挥、招讨、制置、安抚等使，从之。
现代文：十二月，己丑，陈敬具呈表章请求辞去三川都指挥、招讨、制置、安抚等官职、朝廷依从。
English: In December, Chen Jing submitted a request to resign from the posts of directing, inviting, establishing, and pacifying the three provincial capitals, and the imperial court complied.

古文：初，黄巢转掠福建，建州人陈岩聚众数千保乡里，号九龙军，福建观察使郑镒奏为团练副使。
现代文：当初，黄巢辗转掠侵福建时，建州人陈岩招集了几千人保卫家乡，号称九龙军，福建观察使郑镒奏请，朝廷，任命陈岩为团练副使。
English: At first, when Huang Chao turned to plunder and invaded Fujian, Chen Yan, the founder of Fujian, called up several thousand people to defend his hometown, known as the Kowloon Army. The Fujian observation envoy, Zheng Bingxiao, invited the imperial court to appoint Chen Yan as the deputy envoy for regimental training.

古文：泉州刺史、左厢都虞候李连有罪，亡入溪洞，合众攻福州，岩击败之。
现代文：泉州剌史、左厢都虞候李连犯了罪，逃入河间石洞，陈岩将李连打败。
English: Li Lian, a Quanzhou warlord, committed a crime and fled into a rock cave in the river. Chen Yan defeated Li Lian.

古文：镒畏岩之逼，表岩自代，壬寅，以岩为福建观察使。
现代文：郑镒害怕陈岩威逼自己，便上表请让陈岩代替自己，壬寅，朝廷任命陈岩为福建观察使。
English: Zheng Rong was afraid of Chen Yan forcing himself on him, so he went to the table and asked Chen Yan to replace him. Meng Yin, the imperial court appointed Chen Yan as the Fujian Observer.

古文：岩为治有威惠，闽人安之。
现代文：陈岩治理地方恩威并用，福建民人都较安定。
English: Chen Yan's governance combined with local benevolence, Fujian's people are more stable.

古文：义昌节度使兼中书令王鐸，厚于奉养，过魏州，侍妾成列，服御鲜华，如承平之态。
现代文：义昌节度使兼中书令王铎，生活享受极其丰厚，当他经过魏州时，侍从众妾竟站成一排，穿着打扮鲜艳华丽，像天下太平时的样子。
English: During the Yichang Festival, Wang Hui, who was also the Chinese scribe, enjoyed an extremely rich life. When he passed through Weizhou, the attendants of the concubines actually stood in a row, dressed in bright and gorgeous clothes, like the appearance of the world at peace.

古文：魏博节度使乐彦祯之子从训，伏卒数百人于漳南高鸡泊，围而杀之，及宾僚从者三百馀人皆死，掠其资装侍妾而还。
现代文：魏博节度使乐彦祯的儿子乐从训，在漳南鸡泊一带设下几百名伏兵，围攻并将王铎杀掉，连同王铎的宾客幕僚三百多人也都处死，然后掠抢王铎所带的行李侍妾回去。
English: During the Wei Bo Festival, Le's son, Le Zongxun, set up several hundred ambushes in the area of Ji Po in southern Anhui Province, besieged and killed Wang Xi, along with more than three hundred of Wang Xi's guests and staff, and then robbed the luggage of Wang Xi's concubine and went back.

古文：彦祯奏云为盗所杀，朝廷不能诘。
现代文：乐彦祯上奏说王铎被盗贼杀害，朝廷也未能查问。
English: The imperial court also failed to inquire into the rumor that Wang Yao had been killed by thieves.

古文：赐邠宁军号曰静难。
现代文：朝廷赐宁军名号为静难。
English: The imperial court gave the Ning Army the name of Jingnan.

古文：是岁，馀杭镇使陈晟逐睦州刺史柳超，颍州都知兵马使汝阴王敬荛逐其刺史，各领州事，朝廷因命为刺史。
现代文：这一年，余杭镇使陈晟驱逐睦州剌史柳超，颍州都知兵马使汝阴人王敬荛赶走当地剌史，分别主持本州事宜，朝廷于是分别任命他们为睦州剌史、颍州剌史。
English: In the same year, Yuhang Town ordered Chen Jie to expel Muczhou warlord Liu Chao, and Bozhou Duzhi soldiers and horses ordered Ruyin Man Wang Jingyi to drive away the local warlord, and presided over the affairs of the state respectively. The imperial court then appointed them as the warlord of Muczhou and the warlord of Bozhou respectively.

古文：均州贼帅孙喜聚众数千人，谋攻州城，刺史吕烨不知所为。都将武当冯行袭伏兵江南，自乘小舟迎喜，谓曰： 州人得良牧，无不归心，然公所从之卒大多，州人惧于剽掠，尚以为疑。
现代文：均州地方的贼寇头目孙喜召集几千人，筹划攻打均州城，剌史吕烨不知如何应付，都将武当人冯行袭在汉江南岸设下伏兵，自己乘坐小船过江迎接孙喜，对孙喜说： 均州城内的百姓得到象你这样贤良的长官，没有不归顺的，可是跟随你的兵卒太多了，均州城内的人害怕抢劫，尚且对你有疑心。
English: Sun Xi, the leader of the bandits in the Junzhou region, gathered several thousand people and planned to attack the city of Junzhou. Shih Lvun did not know how to deal with it. He set an ambush on the south bank of the Han River for the Wu-tang people to attack Feng Xing. He took a small boat to cross the river to meet Sun Xi. He said to Sun Xi: The people in the city of Junzhou have such a wise leader like you. There is no one who will not surrender, but there are too many soldiers following you. People in the city of Junzhou are afraid of robbery, and they are still suspicious of you.

古文：不若置军江北，独与腹心轻骑俱进，行袭请为前道，告谕州人，无不服者矣。 
现代文：你不如把人马放在江北，单独与左右亲信轻装过江，我冯行袭请求在前面为你开道，告诉均州城内的人，那么就没有人不顺服你的人了。 
English: Why don't you put your horse and carriage on the north side of the river, and cross the river alone and lightly loaded with your right and left cronies. I beg you to open a path in front of you and tell the people in the city of Junzhou, then there will be no one who disobeys you.

古文：喜以为然，从之；既渡江，军吏迎谒，伏兵发，行袭手击喜，斩之，从喜者皆死，江北军望之俱溃。
现代文：陈喜认为这样不错，便听从冯行袭的安排。不久，孙喜渡过汉江，军中官吏前来迎接拜见，原来设下的伏兵突然发起进攻，冯行袭亲手与孙喜搏头，将孙喜斩杀，跟随孙喜过来的人也都被杀死，江北面孙喜的人马看到这种情况都溃散了。
English: Chen Xi thought this was a good idea, so he followed the arrangement of Feng Xing's attack. Soon after, Sun Xi crossed the Han River, the military officials came to greet him, the ambush that was originally set up suddenly launched an attack, Feng Xing personally fought with Sun Xi and killed Sun Xi, and the people who followed Sun Xi were also killed. Sun Xi's people in the north of the river saw this situation and dispersed.

古文：山南东道节度使上其功，诏以行袭为均州刺史。
现代文：山南东道节度使上疏奏报冯行袭的功劳，唐僖宗颁诏任命冯行袭为均州剌史。
English: The Shannan Host Festival made Shang Shouzo report the merits of Feng Xingai, and Tang Xizong issued an edict to appoint Feng Xingai as the leader of the history of Junzhou.

古文：州西有长山，当襄、邓入蜀之道，群盗据之，抄掠贡赋，行袭讨诛之，蜀道以通。
现代文：均州西面有座长山，正对着从襄州、邓州进入蜀地的交通要道，不少盗贼占据长山，掠抢送往成都的贡品赋税，冯行袭消灭了长山的盗贼，使去往蜀地的道路得以通行。
English: There is a long hill to the west of Junzhou, facing the main traffic route from Xiangzhou and Dengzhou into Shoudi. Many thieves occupied the long hill, plundering and taxing the tributes sent to Chengdu. Feng Xinghai eliminated the thieves in the long hill and made the road to Shoudi passable.

古文：凤翔节度使李昌言病，表弟昌符知留后。
现代文：凤翔节度使李昌言患病，进表请让他的弟弟李昌符主管留后事宜。
English: The Fengxiang Festival has caused Li Changyan to fall ill. Please let his brother, Li Changfu, stay behind.

古文：昌言薨，制以昌符为凤翔节度使。
现代文：李昌言死去，唐僖宗便颁诏任命李昌符为凤翔节度使。
English: After the death of Li Changyan, the Emperor of Tang Dynasty issued an edict to appoint Li Changfu as Fengxiang's festival envoy.

古文：时黄巢虽平，秦宗权复炽，命将出兵，寇掠邻道，陈彦侵淮南，秦贤侵江南，秦诰陷襄、唐、邓，孙儒陷东都、孟、陕、虢，张晊陷汝、郑，卢瑭攻汴、宋，所至屠翦焚荡，殆无孑遗。
现代文：当时黄巢虽已消灭，可是秦宗权又兴起作乱，命令各将领派出军队，抢掠邻近各道，陈彦进攻淮南，秦贤进攻江南，秦诰攻克襄州、唐州、邓州，孙儒攻克东都、孟州、陕州、虢州，张攻克汝州、郑州，卢瑭攻打汴州、宋州，所到之处烧杀抢掠，无人能免，其残暴程度比黄巢更为厉害。
English: At that time, although Huang Chao had been wiped out, the Qin Zongquan rose up again to create turmoil and ordered the generals to send troops to plunder the neighboring provinces. Chen Yan attacked Huainan, Qin Xian attacked the south of the Yangtze River, Qin Hui conquered Xiangzhou, Tangzhou, and Dengzhou, Sun Ru conquered Dongdu, Mengzhou, Shaanxi, and Ganzhou, Zhang conquered Keluzhou and Zhengzhou, and Lu Wei attacked and plundered Ganzhou and Songzhou. Wherever they went, they burned, killed, and plundered. No one was immune, and their brutality was even more severe

古文：其残暴又甚于巢，军行未始转粮，车载盐尸以从。
现代文：军队出征未来得及转运粮食，竟把盐腌的死尸装在车上随军出发。
English: The army did not have enough time to transport the grain before they left for the campaign, but they actually loaded the dead bodies of the salt pans onto the truck and set off with the army.

古文：北至卫、滑，西及关辅，东尽青、齐，南出江、淮，州镇存者仅保一城，极目千里，无复烟火。
现代文：北面到卫州、滑州，西及关辅，东面包括青州、齐州，南面直达江、淮以远，上此范围内州镇得以保存的仅有一城，千里远望，也见不到烟火。
English: In the north, it extends to Weizhou, Slanting, West and Guanfu; in the east, it includes Qingzhou and Qizhou; in the south, it is as far as the Yangtze River and Huaiyi; within this range, there is only one city that has been preserved in Zhouzhou Town. You can look for thousands of miles and still not see any fireworks.

古文：僖宗惠圣恭定孝皇帝下之上光启元年
现代文：唐僖宗将要返回长安，又害怕秦宗权作乱危害。光启元年
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang was about to return to Chang'an, and he was afraid that the Qin Emperor might cause trouble.

古文：春，正月，戊午，下诏招抚之。
现代文：春季正月，戊午，唐僖宗颁发诏令招抚秦宗权。
English: At noon on the first day of the first month of spring, Emperor Taizong of Tang issued an edict inviting the Qin Dynasty.

古文：己卯，车驾发成都，陈敬瑄送至汉州而还。
现代文：已卯，唐僖宗从成都出发，陈敬将皇帝送到汉州才回去。
English: Already, Tang Xizong set out from Chengdu, and Chen Jing sent the emperor to Hanzhou before returning.

古文：荆南监军硃敬玫所募忠勇军暴横，节度使陈儒患之。
现代文：荆南监军朱敬玫招募来的忠勇军残暴横行，节度使陈儒很是担忧。
English: The loyal and brave troops recruited by Zhu Jingmei, the inspector of the Jingnan Army, were atrocious and rampant, which made Chen Ru very worried.

古文：郑绍业之镇荆南也，遣大将申屠琮将兵五千击黄巢于长安。军还，儒告琮，使除之。
现代文：郑绍业镇守荆南，派遣大将申屠琮带领军队五千到长安攻打黄巢；军队回来，陈儒告诉申屠琮忠勇军的暴行，让申屠琮消灭它。
English: Zheng Shaoye, who was in charge of Jingnan, sent General Shen Tuo Tong to lead an army of five thousand to Chang'an to attack Huang Chao; when the army returned, Chen Ru told Shen Tuo Tong about the atrocities of the loyal army and asked Shen Tuo Tong to eliminate it.

古文：忠勇将程君之闻之，帅其众奔朗州，琮追击之，杀百馀人，馀众皆溃，自是琮复专军政。
现代文：忠勇军将领程君从得知，便率领人马奔往朗州，中屠琮追击攻打忠勇军，斩杀一百多人，此后申屠琮又独自掌管军政大权。
English: When Cheng Jun, the general of the Loyalist Army, learned of this, he led his men and horses to Lanzhou. Zhong Tuoqi chased and attacked the Loyalist Army, killing more than a hundred people. After that, Shen Tuoqi took sole control of military and political power.

古文：雷满屡攻掠荆南，儒重赂以却之。
现代文：雷满多次攻打抢掠荆南，陈儒用丰厚的资财贿赂让他退兵。
English: Lei Man repeatedly attacked and plundered Jing Nan, and Chen Ru bribed him with abundant wealth to let him leave the army.

古文：淮南将张瑰、韩师德叛高骈，据复、岳二州，自称刺史，儒请瑰摄行军司马，师德摄节度副使，将兵击雷满。
现代文：淮南将领张、韩师德背叛高骈，分别占据复州、岳州，自称刺史，陈儒请张暂为行军司马，韩师德暂为节度副使，带领军队攻打雷满。
English: Huainan generals Zhang and Han Shide betrayed Gaocheng, occupied Fuzhou and Yuezhou, respectively, and claimed to be stabbing history. Chen Ru asked Zhang to temporarily be the marching sergeant, and Han Shide to temporarily be the deputy envoy for discipline, leading the army to attack Lei Man.

古文：师德引兵上峡大掠，归于岳州，瑰还兵逐儒而代之。
现代文：韩师德率领军队到巫峡一带大肆抢掠，回到岳州；张率军回去驱逐陈儒而取代了他。
English: Han Shide led the army to plunder the Wuxia area and returned to Yuezhou; Zhang led the army back to expel Chen Rong and replaced him.

古文：儒将奔行在，瑰劫还，囚之。
现代文：陈儒要逃奔唐僖宗那里，被张挟持回去，囚禁起来。
English: Chen Ru wanted to flee to Tang Xizong, but was held back by Zhang and imprisoned.

古文：瑰，渭州人，性贪暴，荆南旧将夷灭殆尽。
现代文：张是滑州人，性情贪婪暴虐，荆南地方的旧有将领几乎全被他杀光了。
English: Zhang was a native of Slanting, greedy and tyrannical, and he killed almost all of the old generals in Jingnan.

古文：先是，硃敬玫屡杀大将及富商以致富，朝廷遣中使杨玄晦代之。
现代文：在这之前，朱敬玫多次屠杀军中大将和富商，霸占他们的资财使自己富有，朝廷派遣宦官杨玄晦去取代了他。
English: Prior to this, Zhu Jingmei had repeatedly massacred generals and wealthy merchants, appropriating their wealth to enrich himself. The court sent eunuch Yang Xuanhui to replace him.

古文：敬玫留居荆南，尝曝衣。瑰见而欲之，遣卒夜攻之，杀敬玫，尽取其财。
现代文：朱敬玫留居荆南，他曾经晾晒衣服，被张看到而产生了贪欲，便派遣军队夜间前去攻打，杀掉朱敬玫，把财物全部抢去。
English: Zhu Jingmei stayed in Jingnan. He used to hang out his clothes, and when Zhang saw him, he became greedy. He sent an army to attack at night, killing Zhu Jingmei and stealing all of his property.

古文：瑰恶牙将郭禹慓悍，欲杀之，禹结党千人亡去，庚申，袭归州，据之，自称刺史。
现代文：张很忌恨牙将郭禹的勇悍，想杀害他，郭禹联合党羽一千人逃离。庚申，郭禹攻占归州，予以占据，自称刺史。
English: Zhang hated Guo Yu's bravery very much and wanted to kill him. Guo Yu and a thousand party members fled. Goshun, Guo Yu attacked and occupied Guizhou, claiming to stab history.

古文：禹，青州人成汭也，因杀人亡命，更其姓名。
现代文：郭禹本来是青州人叫成，因为杀人逃亡，更改了姓名。
English: Guo Yu was originally from Qingzhou, but he changed his name after fleeing from the murder.

古文：南康贼帅卢光稠陷虔州，自称刺史，以其里人谭全播为谋主。
现代文：南康贼寇头目卢光稠攻克虔州，自称刺史，用他的同乡谭全播为主谋。
English: Lu Guangcong, the leader of the Nankang Thieves and Robbers, invaded Qianzhou, claimed to be a history-maker, and used his countryman Tan Quanbo as the mastermind.

古文：秦宗权责租赋于光州刺史王绪，绪不能给，宗权怒，发兵击之。
现代文：秦宗权责令光州刺史王绪提供田租赋税，王绪不能供给；秦宗权大为震怒，发兵攻打王绪。
English: Qin Zongquan ordered Wang Xiu, the governor of Gwangju, to provide land rent and taxes, but Wang Xiu was unable to do so; Qin Zongquan was furious and sent troops to attack Wang Xiu.

古文：绪惧，悉举光、寿兵五千人，驱吏民渡江，以刘行全为前锋，转掠江、洪、虔州，是月，陷汀、漳二州，然皆不能守也。
现代文：王绪恐惧，调动光州、寿州全部军队五千人，驱赶这里的百姓过江，任命刘行全为前锋，辗转抢掠江州、洪州、虔州，这个月，又攻克了汀州、漳州，但都不能固守。
English: In fear, Wang Xu mobilized the entire army of five thousand people from Gwangju and Shoushu, drove the people here to cross the river, appointed Liu Xingquan as the forward, and plundered Jiangzhou, Hongzhou, and Qianzhou. This month, he also conquered Tingzhou and Zhangzhou, but could not hold on.

古文：秦宗权寇颍、亳，硃全忠败之于焦夷。
现代文：秦宗权进犯颍州、毫州，朱全忠在焦夷将他打败。
English: Qin Zongquan invaded Bozhou and Maozhou, and Zhu Quanzhong defeated him in Jiao'i.

古文：二月，丙申，车驾至凤翔。
现代文：二月，丙申，唐僖宗到达凤翔。
English: In February, Emperor Xinshen and Tang Yizong arrived in Fengxiang.

古文：三月，丁卯，至京师；荆棘满城，狐兔纵横，上凄然不乐。
现代文：三月，丁卯，唐僖宗回到京师。长安城内到处野草丛生，狐狸野兔四下乱跑，唐僖宗悲伤难过，闷闷不乐。
English: In March, Dingwu, Tang Yizong returned to Beijing. The city of Chang'an was overgrown with weeds, foxes and hares were running everywhere, and Tang Yizong was sad and unhappy.

古文：己巳，赦天下，改元。
现代文：已巳，唐僖宗下诏赦免犯人，改用光启年号。
English: Already, Emperor Tang Xizong issued an edict to pardon the prisoners and changed the name to Guangqi Year.

古文：时朝廷号令所在，惟河西、山南、剑南、岭南数十州而已。
现代文：当时，朝廷号令能够达到的，只有河西、山南、剑南、岭南的几十个州罢了。
English: At that time, only dozens of prefectures in Hexi, Shannan, Jiannan and Lingnan could be reached by the imperial order.

古文：秦宗权称帝，置百官，诏以武宁节度使时溥为蔡州四面行营兵马都统以讨之。
现代文：秦宗权自称皇帝，设置百官。朝廷下诏命令武宁节度使时溥任蔡州四面行营兵马都统讨伐秦宗权。
English: Qin Zongquan claimed to be the emperor and set up hundreds of officials. The imperial court issued an edict ordering the Wu Ning Festival to assign Shijian to Caizhou to march in all directions with soldiers and horses to fight Qin Zongquan.

古文：卢龙节度使李可举、成德节度使王镕恶李克用之强，而义武节度使王处存与克用亲善，为侄鄴娶克用女。
现代文：卢龙节度使李可举、成德节度使王熔忌恨李克用的强大，但是义武节度使王处存与李克用亲善，为侄子王邺迎取李克用的女儿为妻。
English: The Lulong Festival made Li Kejun powerful, the Chengde Festival made Wang Rongren hate Li Kejun powerful, but the Yiwu Festival made Wang Ducheng be friendly with Li Kejun and welcome Li Kejun's daughter as a wife for his nephew Wang Yao.

古文：又，河北诸镇，惟义武尚属朝廷，可举等恐其窥伺山东，终为己患，乃相与谋曰： 易、定，燕、赵之馀也。 
现代文：河北各镇中，只有义武节度使还归属朝廷，李可举等人担心义武节度使会图谋恒山以东的地盘，最终成为自己的隐患，于是他们互相筹谋说： 易州、定州，本来是燕国、赵国的旧地方。 
English: Of all the towns in Hebei Province, only Yiwu Jiedu still belonged to the imperial court. Li Keju and others were worried that Yiwu Jiedu would try to seize the territory east of Hengshan Mountain and eventually become a hidden danger to themselves, so they plotted with each other and said: Yizhou and Dingzhou were originally the old places of Yan and Zhao.

古文：约共灭处存而分其地。又说云中节度使赫连鐸使攻克用之背。
现代文：相约一起消灭王处存然后瓜分他的地盘，又劝说云中节度使赫连锋，让他攻打克用的后方。
English: They agreed to eliminate Wang Shuxu together and then divide his territory. They also persuaded Yunzhong Zhengdu to make him join the front and let him attack Kegui's rear.

古文：可举遣其将李全忠将兵六万攻易州，镕遣将将兵攻无极。
现代文：李可举派遣将领李全忠带领六万人马攻打易州，王熔派遣将领带领军队攻打定州的无极。
English: Li Keqiang dispatched general Li Quanzhong to lead 60,000 soldiers to attack Yizhou, and Wang Rong dispatched a general to lead an army to attack Dingzhou.

古文：处存告急于克用，克用遣其将康君立等将兵救之。
现代文：王处存向李克用报急，李克用派遣将领康君立等人带领军队前往救援。
English: The king's office reported the emergency to Li Ke, and Li Ke dispatched generals Kang Junli and others to lead the army to the rescue.

古文：闰月，秦宗权遣其弟宗言寇荆南。
现代文：闰三月，秦宗权派令他的弟弟秦宗言进犯荆南。
English: In the intercalary month of March, Qin Zongquan sent his brother Qin Zongyan to invade Jingnan.

古文：初，田令孜在蜀募新军五十四都，每都千人，分隶两神策，为十军以统之，又南牙、北司官共万馀员。是时籓镇各专租税，河南、北、江、淮无复上供，三司转运无调发之所，度支惟收京畿、同、华、凤翔等数州租税，不能赡，赏赉不时，士卒有怨言。
现代文：起初，田令孜在蜀地招募新的军队设五十四都，每都一千人，分别隶属左右神策军，共组成十个军进行统率，还有南牙、北司的官员共一万余人，当时各藩镇独占田租赋税，河南道、河北道、江南道、淮南道不再向朝廷进贡纳赋，朝廷的盐铁使、度支使、户部使三司转运钱粮而没有调取征发的地方，财政上只是收取京畿、同州、华州和凤翔等几个州的田租赋税，不够用，赏赐不能准时，军中士卒有怨言。
English: At the beginning, Tian Lingzi recruited new troops in Shoudi and set up fifty-four capitals, each with a thousand people, respectively subordinated to the left and right Shen Zhe army, forming a total of ten armies for command and control, as well as more than ten thousand officials in the South Division and the North Division. At that time, the provinces and towns monopolized the field rent tax. Henan Province, Hebei Province, Jiangnan Province, and Huainan Province no longer paid tribute to the imperial court. The salt and iron envoy, the subsistence allowance envoy, and the household department envoy of the imperial court transferred money and grain to the three departments without collecting and distributing

古文：令孜患之，不知所出。
现代文：田令孜对此很担心，但又不知从何处开辟财源。
English: Tian Lingzi is very worried about this, but he does not know where to open up financial resources.

古文：先是，安邑、解县两池盐皆隶盐铁，置官榷之。
现代文：在这以前，安邑、解县的两池盐都隶属户部的盐铁使，朝廷命官吏管理池盐专卖事宜。
English: Prior to this, the salt of the two ponds in Ami and Ho County had been under the control of the household's salt envoy, and the imperial court had ordered officials to manage the sale of salt from the ponds.

古文：中和以来，河中节度使王重荣专之，岁献三千车以供国用，令孜奏复如旧制隶盐铁。
现代文：中和年号以来，河中节度使王重荣独占池盐收入，每年向朝廷进献三千车盐供国家调用，田令孜上奏请求恢复过去的制度仍由盐铁使管理安邑、解县的两盐池。
English: Since the Chinese New Year, the Mid-Autumn Festival in the middle of the river has made Wang Chong Rong monopolize the income of the salt ponds. Every year, he will donate three thousand cars of salt to the imperial court for the state to call. Tian Lingzi made a request to restore the past system by the salt iron to manage the two salt ponds in Ami and Xie County.

古文：夏，四月，令孜自兼两池榷盐使，收其利以赡军。
现代文：夏季，四月，田令孜自己兼任安邑、解县两盐池的榷盐使，收取所得利钱来供养军队。
English: In the summer, in April, Tian Lingzi himself also served as a salt collector for the two salt ponds in Ami and Jie counties, collecting the profits to support the army.

古文：重荣上章论诉不已，遣中使往谕之，重荣不可。
现代文：王重荣不停地上奏辩论申诉，唐僖宗派遣宦官前往晓谕，王重荣仍不罢休。
English: Wang Chong Rong continued to appeal for debate, Tang Yanzong sent eunuchs to the oracle, and Wang Chong Rong still did not give up.

古文：时令孜多遣亲信觇籓镇，有不附己者，辄图之。
现代文：当时，田令孜派遣许多亲信侦探各个藩镇的内情，有不归附自己的，田令孜就暗算他。
English: At that time, Tian Lingzi sent many trusted detectives to investigate the internal affairs of various provinces and towns. If there was anything that did not belong to him, Tian Lingzi would plot against him.

古文：令孜养子匡祐使河中，重荣待之甚厚，而匡祐傲甚，举军皆愤怒。
现代文：田令孜的养子匡被派往河中任职，王重荣对待他十分优厚，可是匡极其傲慢，全军士卒都怨恨他。
English: Tian Lingzi's adopted son, Kuang, was sent to serve in Hechuan. Wang Chongrong treated him very well, but Kuang was extremely arrogant, and all the soldiers resented him.

古文：重荣乃数令敢罪恶，责其无礼，监军为讲解，仅得脱去。
现代文：这时，王重荣便历数田令孜的罪状，谴责匡放肆无礼，监军为他们讲和劝解，匡才逃脱走掉。
English: At this time, Wang Chong Rong went through the charges of several Tian Lingzi, condemned Kuang to be impudent and rude, and the supervising troops talked and persuaded them. Kuang finally escaped and ran away.

古文：匡祐归，以告令孜，劝图之。
现代文：匡回去，把王重荣的所做所为告诉田令孜，劝田令孜设法整治王重荣。
English: Kuang went back and told Tian Lingzi what Wang Chung Rong had done and advised Tian Lingzi to try to rectify Wang Chung Rong.

古文：五月，令孜徙重荣为泰宁节度使，以泰宁节度使齐克让为义武节度使，以义武节度使王处存为河中节度使，仍诏李克用以河东军援处存赴镇。
现代文：五月，田令孜将王重荣调任泰宁节度使，以泰宁节度使齐克让为义武节度使，而将义武节度使王处存调任河中节度使，多次诏令李克用动用河东军队援助王处存前赴镇所。
English: In May, Tian Lingzi transferred Wang Chung Rong to be the delegate of the Taining Festival, and used the Taining Festival to transfer Qi Ke Ren to be the delegate of the Yiwu Festival, and used the Yiwu Festival to transfer Wang Shizhu to be the delegate of the Hechu Festival, and repeatedly ordered Li Ke to use the Hedong Army to assist Wang Shizhu to go to the town hall.

古文：卢龙兵攻易州，裨将刘仁恭穴地入城，遂克之。
现代文：卢龙的军队攻打易州，副将刘仁恭挖地道进入城内，予以攻克。
English: Lulong's army attacked Yizhou. Vice Admiral Liu Rengong dug a tunnel into the city and conquered it.

古文：仁恭，深州人也。
现代文：刘仁恭是深州人。
English: Liu Rengong is from Shenzhen.

古文：李克用自将救无极，败成德兵。
现代文：李克用亲自率领人马救援无极，打败成德军队。
English: Li Ke personally led the rescue of countless people and horses to defeat the Chengde army.

古文：成德兵退保新城，克用复进击，大破之，拔新城，成德兵走，追至九门，斩首万馀级。
现代文：成德军退到新城固守，李克用再次发动进攻，大破守兵，攻占了新城，成德军队逃跑，李克用追到九门，斩杀一万余人。
English: The Chengde army retreated to Xincheng and held fast, and Li Ke used his horse to launch an attack again, destroying the defenders and capturing Xincheng. The Chengde army fled, and Li Ke used his horse to chase them to Jiumen and slaughter more than 10,000 people.

古文：卢龙兵既得易州，骄怠，王处存夜遣卒三千蒙羊皮造城下，卢龙兵以为羊也，争出掠之，处存奋击，大破之，复取易州，李全忠走。
现代文：卢龙军队占据了易州，骄傲松懈，王处存夜间派遣士兵三千人蒙上羊皮到易州城下，卢龙军队以为是羊群，争先恐后地出来抢掠，王处存率兵奋力攻打，大破卢龙军，又夺回易州，李全忠逃跑。
English: The Lulong army occupied Yizhou, pride lax. Wang Shuzhen sent three thousand soldiers at night under the sheepskin to the city of Yizhou. The Lulong army thought it was a flock of sheep and rushed out to loot. Wang Shuzhen and his soldiers fought hard, defeated the Lulong army, and recaptured Yizhou. Li Quanzhong fled.

古文：加陕虢节度使王重盈同平章事。
现代文：朝廷加封陕虢节度使王重盈同平章事。
English: The Imperial Court's addition of the title of Shaanxi and Fujian Grand Duke made Wang Chongying a peer.

古文：李全忠既丧师，恐获罪，收馀众还袭幽州。
现代文：李全忠损兵折将丧失了人马，担心会被治罪，便召集剩下的人回去攻打幽州。
English: Li Quanzhong, fearing that he would be punished for the loss of soldiers and horses, called the remaining men back to attack Yuzhou.

古文：六月，李可举窘急，举族登楼自焚死，全忠自为留后。
现代文：六月，李可举因形势紧迫，带全族人登上幽州城楼自焚而死，李全忠便自称幽州留后。
English: In June, due to the urgency of the situation, Li Kegui took the whole family to board the Yuzhou City Tower to self-immolate and died. Li Quanzhong then claimed to stay behind in Yuzhou.

古文：东都留守李罕之与秦宗权将孙儒相拒数月，罕之兵少食尽，弃城，西保渑池，宗权陷东都。
现代文：东都留守李罕之与秦宗权的将领孙儒相互攻打持续了几个月。李罕之人马缺少，粮食也用完，最后放弃东都城，往西退到渑池固守，于是秦宗权攻占了东都。
English: Li Hanzhi, who was left in charge of the eastern capital, and Sun Rong, the general of the Qin Dynasty, fought against each other for several months. Li Hanzhi was short of men and horses, and ran out of grain. Finally, he abandoned the eastern capital and retreated to the west to hold on to Dianchi. As a result, the Qin Dynasty captured the eastern capital.

古文：秋，七月，以李全忠为卢龙留后。
现代文：秋季七月，朝廷任命李全忠为卢龙留后。
English: In the autumn of July, the imperial court appointed Li Quanzhong as Lu Long's successor.

古文：乙巳，右补阙常浚上疏，以为： 陛下姑息籓镇太甚，是非功过，骈首并足，致天下纷纷若此，犹未之寤，岂可不念骆谷之艰危，复怀西顾之计乎！
现代文：乙巳，右补阙常浚向唐僖宗具呈奏章，他认为： 陛下对藩镇的宽容放纵太过份了，是非曲直功劳过错，齐头并足不分高低，致使天下纷纷攘攘这样混乱，可是皇上对此还不醒悟，怎么能不想想骆谷时的艰难险境，难道还有西走蜀地的打算吗！
English: At this time, the Right Auxiliary Bishop Changjun presented the music chapter to Tang Xizong, and he thought: His Majesty's tolerance and indulgence of the town was too excessive. The rights and wrongs, merits and demerits, were all at the same time, regardless of the level, resulting in the chaos of the world. However, the emperor did not realize this. How could he not think about the difficult and dangerous situation in Luogu? Was there still a plan to go west to Shu?

古文：宜稍振典刑以威四方。 
现代文：现在应该整顿一下朝纲法纪以使四方敬畏朝廷的威严。 
English: Now it is time to rectify the legal discipline of the imperial syllabus so that the four parties will revere the majesty of the imperial court.

古文：田令孜之党言于上曰： 此疏传于籓镇，岂不致其猜忿！ 
现代文：田令孜的党羽对唐僖宗说： 常浚这个奏疏的内容若是传到各藩镇，岂不是让他们产生猜忌怨恨吗？ 
English: Tian Lingzi's partisans said to Tang Xizong: If the contents of this record were to be passed on to all the provinces and towns, wouldn't they arouse suspicion and resentment?

古文：庚戌，贬浚万州司户，寻赐死。
现代文：庚戌，朝廷将常浚贬为万州司户，不久赐死。
English: Geng Zheng, the imperial court demoted Chang Jun to Banzhou steward, and he died soon after.

古文：沧州军乱，逐节度使杨全玫，立牙将卢彦威为留后，全玫奔幽州。
现代文：沧州军队发生叛乱，赶走节度使杨全玫，拥立牙将卢彦威为留后，杨全玫逃奔幽州。
English: The Cangzhou army rebelled, and Yang Quanmei fled to Yuzhou, after Yang Quanmei drove out Jiedu, and supported Lu Yanwei, the commander of Jiedu.

古文：以保銮都将曹诚为义昌节度使，以彦威为德州刺史。
现代文：朝廷任命保銮都将曹诚为义昌节度使，任命卢彦威为德州刺史。
English: The imperial court appointed Cao Cheng as the envoy of the Yichang Festival, and appointed Lu Yanwei as the governor of Texas.

古文：孙儒据东都月馀，烧宫室、官寺、民居，大掠席卷而去，城中寂无鸡犬。
现代文：孙儒占据东都一个多月，焚烧宫殿、官府、寺庙、民房，大肆抢掠席卷而去，留下的东都城寂静得连鸡鸣狗叫之声都听不到。
English: Sun Ju occupied Dongdu for more than a month, burned palaces, government offices, temples, and private houses, and plundered extensively before sweeping away. The Dongdu City he left behind was so quiet that even the sound of chickens and dogs could not be heard.

古文：李罕之复引其众入东都，筑垒于市西而居之。
现代文：李罕之又带领他的人马进入东都，在市西筑造营垒驻守。
English: Li Hanzhi also led his men into Dongdu and built a fortress in the west of the city.

古文：王重荣自以有复京城功，为田令孜所摈，不肯之兗州，累表论令孜离间君臣，数令孜十罪，令孜结邠宁节充使硃玫、凤翔节度使李昌符以抗之。
现代文：王重荣自以为有收复京城长安的功劳，却受到田令孜的排挤，不肯到兖州任职，多次上表诉说田令孜挑拔皇帝和臣僚不和，历数田令孜的十大罪状；田令孜交结宁节度使朱玫、凤翔节度使李昌符，来与王重荣抗衡。
English: Wang Chong Rong thought that he had the merit of recovering the capital Chang'an, but he was pushed out by Tian Lingzi and refused to serve in Zhangzhou. He repeatedly went public to report that Tian Lingzi provoked discord between the emperor and his ministers, and listed the ten major crimes of Tian Lingzi; Tian Lingzi made Zhu Mei and Li Changfu to compete with Wang Chong Rong.

古文：王处存亦上言： 幽、镇兵新退，臣未敢离易、定。
现代文：王处存也上疏言道： 李可举、王的人马刚刚退去，我不敢轻易离开易州、定州一带。
English: Wang Shucun also said: Li Keju, Wang's men have just retreated, I dare not easily leave Yizhou and Dingzhou areas.

古文：且王重荣无罪，有大功于国，不宜轻有改易，摇籓镇心。 
现代文：而且，王重荣没有罪过，却对国家有莫大的功劳，不应该草率地有所变更。 
English: Moreover, Wang Chong Rong is not guilty, but he has made great contributions to the country, and should not be hastily changed.

古文：诏趣其上道。八月，处存引军至晋州，刺史冀君武闭城不内而还。
现代文：唐僖宗颁诏催促王处存启程，八月，王处存带领军队到达晋州，刺史冀君武关闭城门不让他进入，王处存只好回去。
English: Tang Xizong issued an edict urging Wang Shucun to leave. In August, Wang Shucun led the army to Jinzhou, but Shi Jijunwu closed the city gate and did not allow him to enter. Wang Shucun had to go back.

古文：洺州刺史马爽，与昭义行军司马奚忠信不叶，起兵屯邢州南，胁孟方立请诛忠信。
现代文：洺州刺史马爽，与昭义行军司马奚忠信不和，起兵驻扎邢州南部，胁迫孟方立请求诛杀奚忠信。
English: Ma Shuang, the governor of Zhangzhou, did not get along with the commander of the Shouyi Campaign, Ma Jun, and stationed troops in the southern part of Zhangzhou to coerce Meng Fangli to request the assassination of Ma Jun.

古文：既而众溃，爽奔魏州，忠信使人赂乐彦祯而杀之。
现代文：不久，马爽的军队溃败，马爽本人逃奔魏州，奚忠信派人贿赂乐彦祯而杀死了马爽。
English: Soon after, Ma Shuang's army was routed, and Ma Shuang himself fled to Weizhou. Zou Zhongxin sent someone to bribe Le Yanjun to kill Ma Shuang.

古文：秦宗权攻邻道二十馀州，陷之；唯陈州距蔡百馀里，兵力甚弱，刺史赵犨日与宗权战，宗权不能屈。
现代文：秦宗权攻打临近各道二十多个州，都予攻克。唯有陈州距离蔡州一百余里，兵力很弱，刺史赵每天与秦宗权对阵，秦宗权不能使赵屈服。
English: Qin Zongquan attacked more than 20 states in the vicinity of each province, and all of them were conquered. Only Chenzhou was more than 100 miles away from Caizhou, and its military strength was very weak. Shi Zhao fought against Qin Zongquan every day, and Qin Zongquan could not make Zhao surrender.

古文：诏以犨为蔡州节度使。
现代文：唐僖宗颁诏任命赵为蔡州节度使。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang Dynasty issued an edict to appoint Zhao as the chief envoy of the festival in Caizhou.

古文：犨德硃全忠之援，与全忠结婚，凡全忠所调发，无不立至。
现代文：赵感激朱全忠的救援，与朱全忠结为姻亲，凡是朱全忠有所调动分派，赵马上就到。
English: Zhao was grateful for Zhu Quanzhong's rescue, and he and Zhu Quanzhong became in-laws. Whenever Zhu Quanzhong was transferred, Zhao would arrive immediately.

古文：王绪至漳州，以道险粮少，令军中 无得以老弱自随，犯者斩！ 
现代文：王绪到达漳州，因为道路艰险粮食缺少，便传令军中 不许老弱家人跟随，违犯命令者斩首！ 
English: Wang Xu arrived in Zhangzhou, because the road was difficult and there was a shortage of grain, he ordered the army not to allow the old and weak family members to follow, and those who violated the order would be beheaded!

古文：唯王潮兄弟扶其母董氏崎岖从军，绪召潮等责之曰： 军皆有法，未有无法之军。
现代文：唯有王潮兄弟搀扶母亲董氏在崎岖不平的道路上跟随军队行走，王绪召来王潮兄弟斥责他们说： 军队都有军法，没有军法的军队是没有的。
English: Only the Wang Chao brothers helped their mother, Ms. Dong, to follow the army on the bumpy road. Wang Xi summoned the Wang Chao brothers and scolded them, saying, "The army has military law, and there is no army without military law."

古文：汝违吾令而不诛，是无法也。 
现代文：你们违犯我的命令而不诛杀，那就没有军法了。 
English: If you disobey my orders and do not fight, there will be no martial law.

古文：三子曰： 人皆有母，未有无母之人；将军奈何使人弃其母！ 
现代文：王潮兄弟三人说： 人都有自己的母亲，没有母亲的人是没有的；将军你怎么能叫人抛弃他们的生母呢？ 
English: The three Wang Chao brothers said, "Everyone has their own mother, and those who have no mother have nothing. General, how can you make people abandon their birth mother?"

古文：绪怒，命斩其母。
现代文：王绪勃然大怒，命令斩杀王潮的母亲。
English: Wang Xuxu flew into a rage and ordered Wang Chaozhou's mother to be beheaded.

古文：三子曰： 潮等事母如事将军，既杀其母，安用其子！
现代文：王潮兄弟三人说： 我们兄弟侍奉母亲如同侍奉将军一样，既然要杀我们的母亲，还怎么能用母亲的儿子！
English: The three Wang Chao brothers said, "Our brothers serve our mother as if they were serving a general. Since we want to kill our mother, how can we use our mother's son?"

古文：请先母死。 
现代文：请在处死母亲之前先把我们杀了吧！ 
English: Please kill us before you kill our mother!

古文：将士皆为之请，乃舍之。
现代文：军中将士都为王潮兄弟求情，这才免除处罚。
English: The lieutenant generals of the army all pleaded for the Wang Chao brothers, which exempted them from punishment.

古文：有望气者谓绪曰： 军中有王者气。 
现代文：有个观望云气以测吉凶征兆的方士对王绪说： 军营中云气显示有的人要称王。 
English: A fortuneteller who was watching the clouds for signs of good or bad fortune said to Wang Xiu: The clouds in the military camp show that some people want to be king.

古文：于是绪见将卒有勇略逾己及气质魁岸者皆杀之。
现代文：于是，王绪见到将领士卒中有胆略智谋超过自己以及气质不凡身材魁梧的人都杀掉。
English: As a result, Wang Xu saw that some of the generals and soldiers had more daring and wit than himself, as well as those with extraordinary temperament and stature were killed.

古文：刘行全亦死，众皆自危，曰： 行全亲也，且军锋之冠，犹不免，况吾属乎！ 
现代文：刘行全也被斩杀，军营中人人自危，大家说： 刘行全是王绪的亲戚，而且在军中的勇猛数第一，这样的人还不能免于杀身之祸，更何况我们这些人！ 
English: Liu Xingquan was also beheaded. Everyone in the military camp feared for their lives. Everyone said: Liu Xingquan is a relative of Wang Xu, and he is the most courageous person in the army. Such a person is not immune to the scourge of killing, let alone us!

古文：行至南安，王潮说其前锋将曰： 吾属违坟墓，捐妻子，羁旅外乡为群盗，岂所欲哉！
现代文：军队行到南安，王潮劝说前锋将说： 我们背井离乡，舍弃老婆孩子，流落外乡做一群盗贼，这难道是我们希望的吗？
English: When the army marched to Nan'an, Wang Chao persuaded the vanguard to say: "We have left our hometown, abandoned our wives and children, and gone to live in a foreign country to become a group of thieves. Is this what we want?

古文：乃为绪所迫胁故也。
现代文：这都是王绪裹胁逼迫的结果。
English: This is all the result of Wang Xiu's coercion.

古文：今绪猜刻不仁，妄杀无辜，军中孑孑者受诛且尽。子须眉若神，骑射绝伦，又为前锋，吾窃为子危之！ 
现代文：现在王绪猜忌苛刻不仁不义，乱杀无罪之人，军营中有气度、才干出众的人都快要杀光了，你的容貌如同天神，骑马射箭的技艺在军中独一无二，而且又是前锋将，我暗地里为你的安危担忧呀！ 
English: Now Wang Xuxi is suspicious of the harsh, the unkind and the unjust, and is killing innocent people indiscriminately. The military camp is running out of people with good manners and outstanding talents. Your appearance is like an angel, your horse-riding and archery skills are unique in the army, and you are also a striker. I am secretly worried about your safety!

古文：前锋将执潮手泣，问计安出。
现代文：前锋将拉着王潮的手哭泣，问他该怎么办。
English: The striker will hold Wang Chao's hand and cry, asking him what to do.

古文：潮为之谋，伏壮士数十人于篁竹中，伺绪至，挺剑大呼跃出，就马上擒之，反缚以徇，军中皆呼万岁。
现代文：王潮为前锋将谋划，在竹林里埋伏下几十名强壮士兵，等到王绪来到，这些人拔出剑大声呼喊着跳出来，在马背上将王绪擒获，然后把他反绑起来游行，军营中的将士都呼喊万岁。
English: Wang Chao planned to be the vanguard, and ambushed dozens of strong soldiers in the bamboo forest. When Wang Xu arrived, these people pulled out their swords and shouted loudly, jumped out, captured Wang Xu on horseback, and then tied him up and marched him back. The soldiers in the camp all shouted "long live."

古文：潮推前锋将为主，前锋将曰： 吾属今日不为鱼肉，皆王君力也。
现代文：王潮推举前锋将做主帅，前锋将说： 我们今天避免了杀身之祸，都是王先生的功劳。
English: Wang Chao will nominate a striker to be the manager, and the striker will say: We avoided the scourge of suicide today, all thanks to Mr. Wang.

古文：天以王君为主，谁敢先之！ 
现代文：天意让王先生做主帅，有谁敢争！ 
English: It was God's will for Mr. Wang to be the head coach, who would dare to argue!

古文：相推让数四，卒奉潮为将军。
现代文：他们相互推让了好多次，最后尊王潮为将军。
English: They pushed and shoved each other many times, and finally the king was crowned as the general.

古文：绪叹曰： 此子在吾网中不能杀，岂非天哉！ 
现代文：王绪叹息道： 王潮这个人是我手中之物而没能杀掉他，难道不是天意吗！ 
English: Wang Xu sighed, "Wang Chao, this person, was in my hands, but I couldn't kill him. Isn't that God's will?"

古文：潮引兵将还光州，约其属，所过秋豪无犯。
现代文：王潮带领人马准备回光州，约令他的部属，所经过的地方不能有丝毫的侵犯。
English: Wang Chaozhou led the men and horses to prepare to return to Gwangju, and ordered his subordinates not to infringe on the places they passed.

古文：行及沙县，泉州人张延鲁等以刺史廖彦若贪暴，帅耆老奉牛酒遮道，请潮留为州将，潮乃引兵围泉州。
现代文：队伍行到沙县，有泉州人张延鲁等带领年高望重的老人敬献牛肉美酒拦住道路，诉说刺史廖彦若的贪婪残暴，请求王潮留下做泉州的刺史，王潮于是率领人马围攻泉州。
English: The procession went to Shaxian. Zhang Yanlu, a Quanzhou native, and other respected elders led the procession, offering beef and wine to block the road, telling of the greed and cruelty of the assassin Liao Yanru, and asking Wang Chao to remain as the assassin of Quanzhou. Wang Chao then led the men and horses to besiege Quanzhou.

古文：九月，戊申，以陈敬瑄为三川及峡内诸州指挥、制置等使。
现代文：九月，戊申，朝廷任命陈敬为三川及三峡之内各州都指挥、制置等使。
English: In September, the imperial court appointed Chen Jing as the envoy to the three provinces of Sichuan and the Three Gorges.

古文：蔡军围荆南，马步使赵匡谋奉前节度使陈儒以出，留后张瑰觉之，杀匡及儒。
现代文：蔡州军队围攻荆南，马步使赵匡谋划拥立被张囚禁的前任节度使陈儒重出来主政，被留后张察觉，杀死了赵匡和陈儒。
English: Cai Zhou's army besieged Jingnan, Ma Bu made Zhao Kuang plan to support the establishment of Zhang's imprisoned predecessor Jie Du, so that Chen Ru regained the presidency. Zhang noticed after he was left behind and killed Zhao Kuang and Chen Ru.

古文：冬，十月，癸丑，秦宗权败硃全忠于八角。
现代文：冬季十月，癸丑，秦宗权在八角镇打败朱全忠。
English: In the winter of October, Qin Zongquan defeated Zhu Quanzhong in Bajiao Town.

古文：王重荣求救于李克用，克用方怨朝廷不罪硃全忠，选兵市马，聚结诸胡，议攻汴州，报曰： 待吾先灭全忠，还扫鼠辈如秋叶耳！ 
现代文：王重荣向李克用请求救援，李克用正在怨恨朝廷对朱全忠在上源驿陷害他而不治罪，挑选兵卒购买马匹，聚集联合北方的各胡族部落，商议攻打汴州，他回答王重荣说： 等我先消灭了朱全忠，回头再收拾这些鼠辈就象秋风落叶一样容易！ 
English: Wang Chongrong asked Li Kegui for help. Li Kegui, who was resenting the imperial court for framing Zhu Quanzhong in Shangyuanli without punishing him, selected soldiers to buy horses, gathered together the Hu tribes in the north, and discussed attacking Zhangzhou. He replied to Wang Chongrong: "As long as I eliminate Zhu Quanzhong first, it will be as easy to clean up these rats as the autumn leaves!

古文：重荣曰： 待公自关东还，吾为虏矣。
现代文：王重荣说： 等您从关东回来，我已成为阶下囚了。
English: Wang Chongrong said: By the time you return from Kanto, I will have become a prisoner.

古文：不若先除君侧之恶，退擒全忠易矣。 
现代文：不如先除掉皇帝身边的恶棍，然后再退兵擒拿朱全忠就容易了。 
English: It would be easier to get rid of the villains around the emperor first, and then withdraw to capture Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：时硃玫、李昌符亦阴附硃全忠，克用乃上言： 玫、昌符与全忠相表里，欲共灭臣，臣不得不自救，已集蕃、汉兵十五万，决以来年济河，自谓北讨二镇；不近京城，保无掠扰。
现代文：当时朱玫、李昌符也暗中归附朱全忠、李克用于是上疏说： 朱玫、李昌符与朱全忠内外勾结，要一起消灭我，我不得不自救，现已集结蕃夷和汉族的军队十五万，决意在明年过河，从渭河的北面讨伐朱玫、李昌符；但不逼近京城，保证长安不会受到惊扰。
English: At that time, Zhu Mei and Li Changfu were also secretly subordinated to Zhu Quanzhong, and Li Ke used to say: Zhu Mei and Li Changfu were colluding with Zhu Quanzhong inside and outside, and they wanted to destroy me together. I had to save myself. I have now gathered 150,000 troops from the Qiang and Han ethnic groups, and I am determined to cross the river next year and fight against Zhu Mei and Li Changfu from the north side of the Min River; but I will not approach the Beijing city to ensure that Chang'an will not be disturbed.

古文：既诛二镇，乃旋师灭全忠以雪仇耻。 
现代文：杀掉朱玫、李昌符二人之后，便撤回军队消灭朱全忠，以报仇雪耻。 
English: After killing Zhu Mei and Li Changfu, he withdrew the army to eliminate Zhu Quanzhong and take revenge.

古文：上遣使者谕释，冠盖相望。
现代文：唐僖宗接连不断地派遣使臣前往李克用处进行规劝解释。
English: Tang Yanzong continuously sent envoys to Li Ke to persuade and explain.

古文：硃玫欲朝廷讨克用，数遣人潜入京城，烧积聚，或刺杀近侍，声云克用所为。于是京师震恐，日有讹言。
现代文：朱玫想使朝廷讨伐李克用，多次派人偷偷进入京城，纵火焚烧积聚的财物，或者刺杀近臣，放出风声说是李克用干的，于是京师长安震惊恐慌，每天都有谣言传出。
English: Zhu Mei wanted to make the imperial court fight Li Ke, and repeatedly sent people to secretly enter Beijing to set fire to the accumulated wealth, or to assassinate close ministers, releasing rumors that Li Ke had done it, so the Beijing division of Chang'an was shocked and panicked, and rumors were spread every day.

古文：令孜遣玫、昌符将本军及神策鄜、延、灵、夏等军各三万人屯沙苑，以讨王重荣。重荣发兵拒之，告急于李克用，克用引兵赴之。
现代文：田令孜派遣朱玫、李昌符带领他们自身的军队以及神策军、州、延州、灵州、夏州等地的军队共三万人，驻扎在沙苑，以征伐王重荣，王重荣派出军队进行抵抗，并向李克用告急，李克用带领人马赶往这里。
English: Tian Lingzi dispatched Zhu Mei and Li Changfu to lead their own army as well as the army of Shen Zhe, Zhou, Yanzhou, Lingzhou, Xiazhou and other places, a total of 30,000 troops, stationed in Sha Yuan, to conquer Wang Chong Rong. Wang Chong Rong sent troops to resist, and used Li Ke as an emergency, Li Ke used to lead people and horses to rush here.

古文：十一月，重荣遣兵攻同州，刺史郭璋出战，败死。
现代文：十一月，王重荣派遣军队攻打同州，刺史郭璋出来迎战，战败身亡。
English: In November, Wang Chung Rong sent troops to attack Tongzhou, and stabbed Guo Gan, who came out to fight and was defeated and killed.

古文：重荣与玫等相守月馀，克用兵至，与重荣俱壁沙苑，表请诛令孜及玫、昌符。
现代文：王重荣与朱玫、李昌符相互对持一个多月，李克用的军队赶到，与王重荣一起在沙苑设置营垒，进呈表文请求诛杀田令孜及朱玫、李昌符。
English: Wang Chung Rong and Zhu Mei and Li Changfu confronted each other for more than a month. Li Ke's army arrived, set up a camp in Sha Yuan with Wang Chung Rong, and submitted a written request to assassinate Tian Lingzi and Zhu Mei and Li Changfu.

古文：诏和解之，克用不听。
现代文：唐僖宗颁诏劝李克用与田令孜等和解，李克用拒绝接受。
English: Tang Xizong issued an edict to persuade Li Kegui to reconcile with Tian Lingzi and others, but Li Kegui refused to accept.

古文：十二月，癸酉，合战，玫、昌符大败，各走还本镇，溃军所过焚掠。
现代文：十二月，癸酉，双方会战，朱玫、李昌符大败，分别逃回自己的镇所，溃败的军队在所经过的地方大肆焚烧抢掠。
English: In December, the two sides fought a battle. Zhu Mei and Li Changfu were defeated and fled back to their respective towns. The defeated army burned and looted everywhere they passed.

古文：克用进逼京城，乙亥夜，令孜奉天子自开远门出幸凤翔。
现代文：李克用逼近京城，乙亥夜间，田令孜侍奉唐僖宗从长安城的开远门出奔凤翔。
English: Li Ke used to approach the capital, and in the night of Yihai, Tian Lingzi, who served Tang Xizong, came out of the open gate of Chang'an City and ran to Fengxiang.

古文：初，黄巢焚长安宫室而去，诸道兵入城纵掠，焚府寺民居什六七，王徽累年补葺，仅完一二，至是复为乱兵焚掠，无孑遗矣。
现代文：当初，黄巢离开长安时曾纵放火焚烧宫殿房舍，各道官兵进入长安城后大肆抢掠，焚烧官府、寺庙和民房有十分之六七，经王徽多年修补，仅完成了十分之一二，到这时再次遭到作乱军队的焚烧抢掠，就没有什么遗留的了。
English: At the beginning, when Huang Chao left Chang'an, he set fire to the palace buildings. After entering Chang'an, the officers and soldiers of various provinces looted and burned the government offices, temples and private houses. After Wang Hui repaired for many years, only two-tenths of the palace buildings were completed. At this time, he was again burned and looted by the rioting army, and there was nothing left.

古文：是岁，赐河中军号护国。
现代文：本年，朝廷赐河中官军护国称号。
English: This year, the imperial court awarded the title of national protector to the middle-ranking army in the river.

古文：僖宗惠圣恭定孝皇帝下之上光启二年春，正月，镇海牙将张郁作乱，攻陷常州。
现代文：光启二年春季，正月，镇海牙将张郁兴兵作乱，攻占常州。
English: In the spring of the second year of Guangqi, in the first month, the town of Hague led Zhang Yuxing's soldiers into a riot and captured Changzhou.

古文：李克用还军河中，与王重荣同表请大驾还宫，因罪状田令孜，请诛之。
现代文：李克用撤军回到河中，与王重荣一同进呈表章请唐僖宗返回长安，并指出田令孜的罪状，请求诛杀田令孜。
English: Li Ke used the withdrawal of troops to return to the middle of the river, and together with Wang Chung Rong, he presented a badge to ask Tang Yizong to return to Chang'an, and pointed out the crime of Tian Ling Ze, and asked him to kill Tian Ling Ze.

古文：上复以飞龙使杨复恭为枢密使。
现代文：唐僖宗再次任命飞龙使杨复恭为枢密使。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang once again appointed Yang Fuzhong, the Flying Dragon Envoy, as the Privy Envoy.

古文：戊子，令孜请上幸兴元，上不从。
现代文：戊子，田令孜请僖宗前往兴元，唐僖宗不同意。
English: Boshi and Tian Lingzhe asked Jianzong to go to Xingyuan, but Tang Jianzong did not agree.

古文：是夜，令孜引兵入宫，劫上幸宝鸡，黄门卫士从者才数百人，宰相朝臣皆不知。
现代文：这天夜间，田令孜带领军队进入僖宗的行宫，劫持僖守前去宝鸡，跟随的宦官侍卫士兵仅几百人，宰相和朝中大臣都不知道。
English: On this night, Tian Ling Ze led the army into the imperial palace of Emperor Taizong, kidnapped the eunuchs and went to Baoji. There were only a few hundred eunuch guards and soldiers, and neither the prime minister nor the ministers of the dynasty knew about it.

古文：翰林学士承旨杜让能宿直禁中，闻之，步追乘舆，出城十馀里，得人所遗马，无羁勒，解带系颈而乘之，独追及上于宝鸡。
现代文：翰林学士承旨杜让能这天正在唐僖宗行宫值宿，听说僖宗被劫持，跑步追赶皇帝的车舆，出以凤翔城十几里，杜让能碰到一匹别人遗弃的马，没有笼头缰绳，便下腰带绑在马脖子上，骑马独自追到宝鸡见到僖宗。
English: On this day, Du Jiangneng, a scholar of Hanlin, was on duty at the palace of Tang Yanzong. He heard that Yanzong had been kidnapped, ran to catch up with the emperor's carriage, and went out to Fengxiang City for more than ten miles. Du Jiangneng met a horse abandoned by others. There was no bridle, so he tied his belt to the horse's neck and rode alone to chase Baoji to see Yanzong.

古文：明日，乃有太子少保孔纬等数人继至。
现代文：第二天，才有太子少保孔纬等几个人相继赶到。
English: It was only on the second day that several people, including Prince Shobo, arrived one after another.

古文：让能，审权之子；纬，戣之孙也。
现代文：杜让能是杜审权的儿子；孔纬是孔的孙子。
English: Du Zheneng is the son of Du Xianquan; Kong Wei is the grandson of Kong.

古文：宗正奉太庙神主至鄠，遇盗，皆失之。
现代文：宗正官奉持太庙先帝的牌位行至县时，遇到盗贼，神主牌位都散失了。
English: When Zong Zheng Guan went to the county to hold the card rank of the first emperor of the Great Temple, he encountered thieves, and all the card ranks of the god's master were lost.

古文：朝士追乘舆者至盩厔，为乱兵所掠，衣装殆尽。
现代文：朝臣追赶僖宗到达，遭到作乱军队的抢掠，衣服几乎都丢光了。
English: When the courtiers arrived in pursuit of Shizong, they were robbed by the rioting army and almost lost all their clothes.

古文：庚寅，上以孔纬为御史大夫，使还召百官，上留宝鸡以待之。
现代文：庚寅，唐僖宗任命孔纬为御史大夫，派他回凤翔召来朝中百官，僖宗留在宝鸡等待他们。
English: In Goyang, Emperor Taizong of Tang appointed Kong Wei as the Imperial Historian and sent him back to Fengxiang to summon hundreds of officials from the central government. Emperor Taizong stayed in Baoji to wait for them.

古文：时田令孜弄权，再致播迁，天下共忿疾之。
现代文：当时田令孜玩弄权势，以致皇帝再次离开京城流亡迁徒，天下的人们都对田令孜愤怒痛恨。
English: At that time, Tian Lingzi played with power, so that the emperor once again left the capital in exile, and people all over the world were angry and hated Tian Lingzi.

古文：硃玫、李昌符亦耻为之用，且惮李克用、王重荣之强，更与之合。
现代文：朱玫、李昌符也感到被田令孜利用的羞耻，并且惧怕李克用、王重荣兵力的强大，便改弦更张与李克用、王重荣联合起来。
English: Zhu Mei and Li Changfu also felt the shame of being taken advantage of by Tian Lingzi, and were afraid of the strong military power of Li Ke with and Wang Chung Rong, so they changed their minds and joined forces with Li Ke with and Wang Chung Rong.

古文：萧遘因邠宁奏事判官李松年至凤翔，遣召硃玫亟迎车驾，癸巳，玫引步骑五千至凤翔。
现代文：宰相萧遘见宁的奏事判官李松年到达凤翔，便派他召令朱玫快来迎接唐僖宗。癸巳，朱玫带领步兵和骑兵五千人赶到凤翔。
English: When Prime Minister Xiao Rong saw that Li Songnian, the judge of record of Ning, arrived in Fengxiang, he sent him to summon Zhu Mei to come quickly to meet Tang Yanzong. Soon, Zhu Mei led 5,000 infantry and cavalry to Fengxiang.

古文：孔纬诣宰相，欲宣诏召之，萧遘、裴澈以令孜在上侧，不欲往，辞疾不见。
现代文：孔纬到达宰相那里，想宣读诏令请他们去宝鸡；萧遘、裴澈因为田令孜在皇帝身边，不想去，就以有病为托辞而不见孔纬。
English: When Kong Wei arrived at the prime minister's place, he wanted to read out the imperial edict and asked them to go to Baoji; Xiao Wei and Pei Che did not want to go because Tian Lingzi was at the emperor's side, so they used illness as an excuse to avoid seeing Kong Wei.

古文：纬令台吏趣百官诣行在，皆辞以无袍笏，纬召三院御史，泣谓： 布衣亲旧有急，犹当赴之。
现代文：孔纬命令台吏催促朝中百官去宝鸡唐僖宗驻地，都以没有衣袍和朝笏为词拒绝前往。孔纬再召请台院、殿院和察院这三院的御史大夫，流着眼泪对他们说： 普通平民的亲朋旧友有了危难，还应当前去帮忙。
English: Kong Yat-sen ordered the Taiwanese officials to urge the hundreds of officials from the central government to go to the residence of the Baoji Tang Dynasty, but they all refused to go on the grounds that they did not have robes and the hajj. Kong Yat-sen then summoned the chief historians of the three courts, the Taiyuan Court, the Palace Court, and the Inspection Court, and said to them with tears streaming down his face, "When the relatives, friends, and old friends of ordinary citizens are in danger, they should still go to help.

古文：岂有天子蒙尘，为人臣子，累召而不往者！ 
现代文：哪里有皇帝蒙受风法流亡在外，做臣僚的被再三召请仍不动身前往的！ 
English: Where are the emperors who have suffered the custom of exile, and the ministers who have been repeatedly summoned and still do not move to go!

古文：御史请办装数日而行，纬拂衣起曰： 吾妻病垂死且不顾，诸君善自为谋，请从此辞！ 
现代文：御史大夫们请求置办行装过几天再启程，孔纬把衣袖一甩起身说： 我的妻子患病都快要死了我尚且不顾，你们如此为自己打算，那么我们从此分手吧！ 
English: The historians asked for a few days to prepare for the trip, and Kong Wei flung up his sleeves and said: My wife is ill and is about to die, but I don't care. You have planned this for yourselves, so let's break up!

古文：乃诣李昌符，请骑卫送至行在，昌符义之，赠装钱，遣骑送之。
现代文：孔纬于是去见李昌符，请李昌符派骑兵护送他回宝鸡唐僖宗那里，李昌符感佩孔纬的大义行动，便向他赠送服装钱粮，派遣骑兵护送孔纬启行。
English: Kong Wei then went to see Li Changfu, and asked Li Changfu to send cavalry to escort him back to Baoji Tang Yanzong. Li Changfu was impressed by Kong Wei's great act of righteousness, so he presented him with clothing and money, and sent cavalry to escort Kong Wei on his way.

古文：瑄宁、凤翔兵追逼乘舆，败神策指挥使杨晟于潘氏，钲鼓之声闻于行宫。
现代文：瑄宁宁、凤翔的军队追赶逼近宝鸡唐僖宗的行宫，在宝鸡东北的潘氏打败神策军指挥使杨晟，激战的锣鼓声在僖宗的行宫都能听见。
English: The armies of Hun Ning Ning and Feng Xiang chased the approaching Baoji Tang Shizong's imperial palace. In the northeast of Baoji, the Pan clan defeated the Divine Providence army commanded by Yang Hui. The sound of the drums of fierce battle could be heard in the imperial palace of Shizong.

古文：田令孜奉上发宝鸡，留禁军守石鼻为后拒。
现代文：田令孜侍奉皇帝离开宝鸡，留下禁卫军固守石鼻寨在后面阻击掩护。
English: Tian Lingzi, serving the emperor, left Baoji, leaving the imperial guard to hold the Stone Nose Village behind to block the cover.

古文：置感义军于兴、凤二州，以杨晟为节度使，守散关。
现代文：又在兴州、凤州置感义军，任命杨晟为节度使，坚守散关。
English: In addition, in Xingzhou and Fengzhou, he appointed Yang Jie as the commander of the festival and insisted on the dispersal of the troops.

古文：时军民杂糅，锋镝纵横，以神策军使王建、晋晖为清道斩斫使，建以长剑五百前驱奋击，乘舆乃得前。
现代文：当时军队和百姓混杂在一起，交战的刀刃和箭头纵横飞舞，僖宗任命神策军使王建、晋晖为清道斩斫使。王建率领王百人手持长剑在前面奋力冲杀开路，僖宗乘坐的车舆才得以向前行进。
English: At that time, the army and the people were mixed together, and the blades and arrows of the war were flying vertically and horizontally. Emperor Taizong appointed Wang Jian as the commander of the Divine Providence Army and Jin Yong as the commander of the Clear Way Campaign. Wang Jian led hundreds of people in front of the king with long swords in their hands to fight to open the road, and the car in which Emperor Taizong was riding was able to move forward.

古文：上以传国宝授建使负之以从，登大散岭。
现代文：僖宗把传国之宝交给王建背着随行，攀登大散岭。
English: Shanzong gave the national treasure to Wang Jian and accompanied him on his back to climb the Dashanling.

古文：李昌符焚阁道丈馀，将摧折，王建扶掖上自烟焰中跃过。
现代文：李昌符放火将登山的栈道焚烧了一丈多长，栈道就要折断，王建搀扶着僖宗从烟火中跳过。
English: Li Changfu set fire to the mountain climbing path and burned it for a long time. The path was about to be broken, and Wang Jianyong jumped over the pyrotechnics with the support of Xizong.

古文：夜，宿板下，上枕建膝而寝，既觉，始进食，解御袍赐建曰： 以其有泪痕故也。 
现代文：夜里，就睡在木板下，僖宗枕着王建的膝盖入睡，睡完觉开始吃饭，僖宗脱下身穿的御袍赏给王建说： 这上面粘满了泪痕，所以赏赐给你。 
English: At night, he slept under a wooden board. He fell asleep with Wang Jian's knees under his pillow. After he fell asleep, he began to eat. He took off the robe he was wearing and presented it to Wang Jian, saying, "This robe is covered with tears, so I'm giving it to you."

古文：车驾才入散关，硃玫已围宝鸡。
现代文：僖宗刚刚进入散关，朱玫的人马已经围攻宝鸡。
English: Shanzong has just entered Sankuan, and Zhu Mei's men have already besieged Baoji.

古文：石鼻军溃，玫长驱攻散关，不克。
现代文：石鼻的军队溃败，朱玫长驱直入进攻散关，没有攻克。
English: The army of Stone Nose was routed, and Zhu Mei Long drove straight into the attack of Sankuan, but did not conquer it.

古文：嗣襄王煴，肃宗之玄孙也，有疾，从上不及，留遵涂驿，为玫所得，与俱还凤翔。
现代文：襄王的儿子李，是肃宗的第五代孙子，身患疾病，跟不上僖宗，便留在遵涂驿，被朱玫俘获，和他一起回到凤翔。
English: Xiang Wang's son Li, Su Zong's fifth-generation grandson, fell ill and could not keep up with Xiang Zong, so he stayed in Zunzhuiyang. He was captured by Zhu Mei and returned to Fengxiang with him.

古文：庚戌，李克用还太原。
现代文：庚戌，李克用回到太原。
English: After Geng Xuan, Li Ke used to go back to Taiyuan.

古文：二月，王重荣、硃政、李昌符复上表请诛田令孜。
现代文：二月，王重荣、朱玫、李昌符再次进呈表章，请求诛杀田令孜。
English: In February, Wang Chung Rong, Zhu Mei, and Li Changfu once again presented their badges, requesting that Tian Lingzi be killed.

古文：以前东都留守郑从谠为守太傅兼侍中。
现代文：朝廷任命从前的东都留守郑从谠为守太傅兼侍中。
English: The imperial court appointed the former governor of the Eastern Capital, Zheng Conglu, as the governor and chamberlain.

古文：硃玫、李昌符使山南西道节度使石君涉栅绝险要，烧邮驿，上由它道以进。山谷崎岖，邠军迫其后，危殆者数四，仅得达山南。
现代文：朱玫、李昌符指使山南西道节度使石君涉在险要的地方安设栅栏断绝交通，烧毁邮传驿站，唐僖宗一行只好经由其他道路向前行进；高山深谷，道路崎岖不平，朱玫的军队在后面副近，险情再三出现，最后才勉强到达山南。
English: Zhu Mei and Li Changfu ordered the Shannan West Road Festival to make Shijun wade into the dangerous place, set up a fence to cut off traffic, and burn the post and telegraph station. Tang Yizong and his party had to travel forward through other roads; high mountains and deep valleys, the road was bumpy, Zhu Mei's army was close behind, and dangerous situations repeatedly appeared, and finally they barely reached Shannan.

古文：三月，壬午，石君涉弃镇逃归硃玫。
现代文：三月，壬午，石君涉放弃镇所逃奔朱玫。
English: In March, at Renpo, Shi Jun waded into abandoning the town and fleeing to Zhu Mei.

古文：癸未，凤翔百官萧遘等罪状田令孜及其党韦昭度，请诛之。
现代文：癸未，留在凤翔的百官萧遘等谴责田令孜及其党羽韦昭度的罪行，奏请将他们斩杀。
English: Not long after, the centurion Xiao Yao, who remained in Fengxiang, condemned Tian Lingzi and his followers for their egregious crimes, and requested that they be beheaded.

古文：初，昭度因供奉僧澈结宦官，得为相。
现代文：当初，韦昭度因为侍奉和尚澈而得以与宦官交结，最后当上宰相。
English: At first, Wei Zhaodu was able to make friends with eunuchs because he served as a monk, and eventually became the prime minister.

古文：澈师知玄鄙澈所为，昭度每与同列诣知玄，皆拜之，知玄揖使诣澈啜茶。
现代文：澈的师傅知玄鄙视澈的所做所为，韦昭度每次与澈一同去知玄那里，都向知玄行礼，而知玄却作揖让他们到澈那里去喝茶。
English: Chie's master, Chihaku, despised Chie's actions. Whenever Wei Zhaodu went to Chihaku with Chie, he bowed to Chihaku, but Chihaku made them go to Chie to drink tea.

古文：山南西道监军冯翊严遵美迎上于西县，丙申，车驾至兴元。
现代文：山南西道监军冯翊人严遵美在西县迎接唐僖宗，丙申，唐僖宗到达兴元。
English: Shannan West Road Supervisor Feng Xuanren and Yan Zunmei met Tang Xizong in the West County. According to him, Tang Xizong arrived in Xingyuan.

古文：戊戌，以御史大夫孔纬、翰林学士承旨、兵部尚书杜让能并为兵部侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：戊戌，朝廷任命御史大夫孔纬、翰林学士承旨、兵部尚书杜让能二人同为兵部侍郎、同平章事。
English: At that time, the Imperial Court appointed the Imperial Historian Kong Wei, the Hanlin Scholar Zheng Zi, and the Hyobusho (Minister of Military Affairs) Shoshu Dujan Neng as both the Hyobushojiro and the Tongping Zhangji.

古文：保銮都将李鋋等败邠军于凤州。
现代文：保銮都将李铤等人在凤州打败朱玫的军队。
English: Both the bodyguards and Li Yao and others defeated Zhu Mei's army in Fengzhou.

古文：诏加王重荣应接粮料使，使调本道谷十五万斛以济国用。
现代文：唐僖宗颁诏加封王重荣为应接粮料使，命令他调集本道的粮谷十五万斛以接济国家急用。
English: Emperor Xizong of Tang Dynasty issued an edict to appoint Wang Chong Rong as the Grain Receiving Envoy and ordered him to collect 150,000 mu of grain for the country's urgent needs.

古文：重荣表称令孜未诛，不奉诏。
现代文：王重荣进呈表章声称田令孜没有斩除，不能奉行诏令。
English: Wang Chong Rong submitted a form stating that Tian Lingzi had not been eliminated and that he could not comply with the edict.

古文：以尚书左丞卢渥为户部尚书，充山南西道留后。
现代文：朝廷任命尚书左丞卢渥为户部尚书，充任山南西道留后。
English: The imperial court appointed Shangshu Zuojo Luwo as the head of the household of Shangshu, after he stayed in the western part of Shannan Province.

古文：以严遵美为内枢密使，遣王建帅部兵戍三泉，晋晖及神策使张造帅四都兵屯黑水，修栈道以通往来。
现代文：任命严遵美为内枢密使，派遣王建率领本部人马在三泉防守，晋晖和神策军使张造率领从驾的四都人马驻扎黑水，修建栈道以便相互交通往来。
English: He appointed Yan Zunmei as the Inner Privy Council's special envoy, dispatched Wang Jian to lead the headquarters troops to defend Sanquan, and sent Zhang Zou to lead the Shinduo troops to garrison Heishui, and built a causeway to facilitate mutual traffic.

古文：以建遥领壁州刺史。
现代文：朝廷任命王建隔地遥领壁州刺史。
English: The imperial court appointed Wang Jian to be the chief historian of Wuzhou.

古文：将帅遥领州镇自此始。
现代文：军中将帅隔地兼任州镇官职从这时开始。
English: From this time on, Lieutenant General Shuai concurrently held the post of prefectural official.

古文：陈敬瑄疑东川节度使高仁厚，欲去之。
现代文：陈敬对东川节度使高仁厚起了疑心，想除掉他。
English: Chen Jing was suspicious of Dongchuan Jiedu and wanted to get rid of him.

古文：遂州刺史郑君立起兵攻陷汉州，进向成都。
现代文：遂州刺史郑君雄兴兵攻占了汉州，向成都进发。
English: Suizhou assassin Zheng Junxiong's troops conquered Hanzhou and marched to Chengdu.

古文：敬瑄遣其将李顺之逆战，君立败死。
现代文：陈敬派遣将领李顺之迎战，郑君雄战败身亡。
English: Chen Jing dispatched the general Li Shunzhi to meet the battle, and Zheng Junxiong was defeated and died.

古文：敬瑄又发维、茂羌军击仁厚，杀之。
现代文：陈敬又派出维、茂两地羌族军队攻打高仁厚，将高仁厚杀掉。
English: Chen Jing also sent Wei and Maozhu Yi troops to attack Gao Renhou, and killed Gao Renhou.

古文：硃玫以田令孜在天子左右，终不可去，言于萧遘曰： 主上播迁六年，中原将士冒矢石，百姓供馈饷，战死饿死，什减七八，仅得复京城。
现代文：朱玫因为田令孜在唐僖宗身边，到头来还是没有把他除掉，就对萧遘说： 六年来皇上流离迁徙，中原一带的将领士卒出入于刀箭之中，老百姓供给军粮，交战中阵亡和饥饿致死的人，十分已去了七八，才得以收复京师。
English: Zhu Mei, because Tian Lingzhe was close to Tang Xizong and did not get rid of him in the end, said to Xiao Yao: In the past six years, the emperor has been displaced and migrated, the generals and soldiers around the Central Plains have come and gone amidst swords and arrows, the common people have provided military food, and the people who died in battle and died of hunger have gone to the seventh and eighth centuries, only to be able to recover the Beijing division.

古文：天下方喜车驾还宫，主上更以勤王之功为敕使之荣，委以大权，使堕纲纪，骚扰籓镇，召乱生祸。
现代文：天下官民正为皇上返回长安宫殿高兴，皇上却把拯救皇室的功劳归于宦官田令孜，将朝廷大权委任给他，致使朝纲法纪遭到践踏，各藩镇不进受到骚扰，召致王重荣兴兵作乱惹出祸害。
English: Officials and people around the world were rejoicing at the emperor's return to the Chang'an Palace. However, the emperor gave the credit for saving the imperial family to the eunuch Tian Rongzi and entrusted him with the supreme power of the imperial court. As a result, the Imperial Regulations were trampled upon, the towns of various domains were harassed, and Wang Chongrongxing was summoned to stir up trouble.

古文：玫昨奉尊命来迎大驾，不蒙信察，反类胁君。
现代文：我昨天奉您的命令来迎接皇上，不但没有受到信任理解，反而似乎有胁迫皇上的嫌疑。
English: I came to greet the Emperor yesterday at your behest, but instead of being trusted and understood, I seem to have been suspected of coercing the Emperor.

古文：吾辈报国之心极矣，战贼之力殚矣，安能垂头弭耳，受制于阍寺之手哉！
现代文：我们这些人报效国家的一片忠心最为赤诚，征讨贼寇竭尽全力，现在怎能俯首贴耳，去受宦官们的控制管束！
English: How can those of us who have served our country with the utmost loyalty, who have done our best to fight against thieves and robbers, now bow our heads and submit to the control of the eunuchs!

古文：李氏孙尚多，相公盍改图以利社稷乎？ 
现代文：大唐皇室李氏的子孙还有许多，你为什么不为杜稷国家的长治久安而另做图谋呢？ 
English: There are still many descendants of the Tang Dynasty's imperial family, the Li clan. Why don't you make another plan for the long-term peace and stability of the Cuckoo country?

古文：遘曰： 主上践阼十馀年，无大过恶。
现代文：萧遘对他说： 当今皇上即位十几年，没有什么大的过错。
English: Xiao Yao said to him: The current emperor has been on the throne for more than ten years, and there is no big mistake.

古文：正以令孜专权肘腋，致坐不安席，上每言之，流涕不已。
现代文：正是因为，田令孜在皇上身边擅揽大权，致使皇上坐立不安，皇上每当谈到这些，都痛苦器流涕不止。
English: It was precisely because Tian Lingzi was arrogating great power around the emperor that the emperor was uneasy. Whenever the emperor talked about these things, he was in agony.

古文：近日上初无行意，令孜陈兵帐前，迫胁以行，不容俟旦。
现代文：近些天的事，皇上起初没有意图迁移，无奈田令孜在皇上的住所安置兵卒，强迫皇上出走，竟不容许等到天亮。
English: In recent days, the emperor initially had no intention of moving, but the emperor's residence was forced to relocate soldiers, forcing the emperor to leave, and he was not allowed to wait until dawn.

古文：罪皆在令孜，人谁不知！
现代文：一切罪过都在田令孜身上，人们有谁不知。
English: All the blame is on Tian Lingzi, and people don't know who is to blame.

古文：足下尽心王室，正有引兵还镇，拜表迎銮。
现代文：你对皇室尽心效力，正应当带领人马回到镇所，进呈表章迎接皇上。
English: You have devoted yourself to the royal family and should be leading people back to the town hall to present the insignia to greet the emperor.

古文：废立重事，伊、霍所难，遘不敢闻命！ 
现代文：废黜和拥立皇上事关重大，商朝伊尹放逐商王太甲、汉朝霍光废黜昌邑王都曾感到为难，我萧遘可不敢遵命。 
English: The dethronement and enthronement of the emperor is of great importance. The merchants' king Tai Jia of the Shang Dynasty and the merchants' king Huo Guang of the Han Dynasty were both banished by the Emperor Yin, and the dethronement of the emperor Changyi of the Han Dynasty were both difficult. I, Xiao Wei, did not dare to follow the order.

古文：玫出，宣言曰： 我立李氏一王，敢异议者斩！ 
现代文：朱玫出去后，公开宣告说： 我拥立大唐皇室李氏的一个王，有敢反对的人一律斩头！ 
English: After Zhu Mei went out, she publicly announced: "I support the establishment of a king of the Great Tang Dynasty's royal family, the Li clan. Anyone who dares to oppose me will be beheaded!"

古文：夏，四月，壬子，玫逼凤翔百官奉襄王煴权监军国事，承制封拜指挥，仍遣大臣入蜀迎驾，盟百官于石鼻驿。
现代文：夏季，四月，壬子，朱玫逼迫留在凤翔的朝中百官尊奉襄王李暂且监管军国大事，受命授任指挥各官，仍派遣大臣进入蜀地迎接车驾，在石鼻驿会盟百官。
English: In the summer, in April, Ren Zi and Zhu Mei forced hundreds of officials from the central government to stay in Fengxiang, and appointed Yang Wang Li to supervise the military affairs for the time being. He was also assigned to command the officials. He still sent a minister to enter Shu to meet the driver, and the hundreds of officials gathered in Shishan.

古文：玫使萧遘为册文，遘辞以文思荒落；乃使兵部侍郎判户部郑昌图为之。
现代文：朱玫让萧遘撰写拥立襄王李的册文，萧遘以文笔生疏思路下畅为托词推辞了。于是朱玫委命兵部侍郎判户部郑昌图起草册文。
English: Zhu Mei asked Xiao Jie to write a pamphlet supporting the establishment of Xiang Wang Li, but Xiao Jie refused on the pretext that the writer's pen was not good at writing and his thoughts were not clear. Therefore, the Zhu Mei Committee ordered Zheng Changtu, the attendant of the Military Department and the Household Department, to draft the pamphlet.

古文：乙卯，煴受册，玫自兼左、右神策十军使，帅百官奉煴还京师；以郑昌图同平章事、判度支、盐铁、户部，各置副使，三司之事一以委焉。
现代文：乙卯，李接受众官拥立他的册文，朱玫自己兼任左、右神策十军使，率领朝中百官侍奉李返回京师长安。又任命郑昌图为同平章事，判度支、盐钱、户部事，分别设置副使，所有三司的事务都委托给他一人。
English: Second, Li accepted the officials to support his book, Zhu Mei himself concurrently served as the left and right ten military envoys, and led the hundreds of officials in the Middle Kingdom to serve Li to return to Beijing Shifang. He also appointed Zheng Changtu as Tongping Zhangji, Judgement Branch, Salt Money and Household Department, and set up deputy envoys separately, and all three departments were entrusted to him alone.

古文：河中百官崔安潜等上襄王笺，贺受册。
现代文：留在河中府的朝中百官崔安潜等人向襄王李进呈表笺，恭贺他接受拥立。
English: Cui Anqian and other officials of the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party, who remained in Hechu Prefecture, presented a certificate to Xiang Wang Li Jin, congratulating him on accepting the position.

古文：田令孜自知不为天下所容，乃荐枢密使使杨复恭为左神策中尉、观军容使，自除西川监军使，往依陈敬瑄。复恭斥令孜之党，出王建为利州刺史，晋晖为集州刺史，张造为万州刺史，李师泰为忠州刺史。
现代文：田令孜自己知道天下官民不会饶恕他，于是推荐枢密使杨复恭为左神策中尉、观军容使，自己充任西川监军使，前去依附陈敬，杨复恭排斥田令孜的党羽，调出王建为利州刺史，晋晖为集州刺史，张造为万州刺史，李师泰为忠州刺史。
English: Tian Lingze himself knew that the world's officials and people would not forgive him, so he recommended the Privy Envoy Yang Fujong as the lieutenant of Zuo Shengke and the envoy to observe the troops, and he himself served as the envoy to supervise the troops in the West River. He went to attach Chen Jing, Yang Fujong rejected Tian Lingze's party members, and transferred Wang Jian as the historian of Lishu, Jin Xi as the historian of Jishu, Zhang Zuo as the historian of Wanzhou, and Li Shitai as the historian of Chungju.

古文：五月，硃玫以中书侍郎、同平章事萧遘为太子太保，自加侍中、诸道盐铁、转运等使；加裴澈判度支，郑昌图判户部；以淮南节度使高骈兼中书令，充江、淮盐铁、转运等使、诸道行营兵马都统；淮南右都押牙、和州刺史吕用之为岭南东道节度使；大行封拜以悦籓镇。
现代文：五月，朱玫委任中书侍郎、同平章事萧遘为太子太保，自加侍中、诸道盐铁、转运等使官职；加授裴澈判度支，郑昌图判户部；委任淮南节度使高骈兼中书令，充任江淮盐铁、转运等使，及诸道行营兵马都统；任命淮南右都押牙、和州刺史吕用之为岭南东道节度使。
English: In May, Zhu Mei appointed Xiao Wei as the prince's grand marshal, and added the posts of vice-commander, salt railway, and transportation to himself. He also appointed Pei Che as the judge of the branch, and Zheng Changtu as the judge of the household department. He also appointed Gao Wei, the festival envoy of Huainan Province, as the envoy of Jianghuai Province, salt railway, transportation, and transportation, and the general of the troops in the campaign in various provinces. He also appointed Huainan Yu Du as the envoy of the tooth, and Zhu Shishi Lu as the host festival envoy of Lingnan Province.

古文：遣吏部侍郎夏侯潭宣谕河北，户部侍郎杨陟宣谕江、淮，诸籓镇受其命者什六七，高骈仍奉笺劝进。
现代文：朱玫大行封爵拜官，目的是以此求得各藩镇的支持。他还派遣吏部侍郎夏侯潭到河北，派户部侍郎杨陟到江州淮，分别传达旨意，各处藩镇接受朱玫命令的占十分之六七，高骈因而进呈表笺劝襄王李称帝。
English: The purpose of Zhu Mei's grand knighting ceremony was to gain the support of all the provinces and towns. He also sent the clerk Xia Houtan to Hebei Province and the clerk Yang Jie to Huai, Jiangsu Province, respectively, to convey his will. 67 out of every ten provinces and towns accepted Zhu Mei's order. Gao Jie therefore submitted a petition to persuade Xiang Wang Li to be proclaimed emperor.

古文：吕用之建牙开幕，一与骈同；凡骈之腹心，及将校能任事者，皆逼以从己，诸所施为，不复咨禀。骈颇疑之，阴欲夺其权，而根蒂已固，无如之何。
现代文：吕用之设置的官府衙署，都与高骈相同，所有高骈的亲信及各将校中能够委任的人，都逼迫他们顺从自己，所做所为，不再向高骈禀告，可是吕用之已是根深蒂固，没有办法对付。
English: The government departments and bureaus set up by Lv Ying were all the same as Gao Yu. All of Gao Yu's close confidants and those who could be appointed from among the officers forced them to obey themselves and not report what they had done to Gao Yu. However, Lv Ying was already entrenched and there was no way to deal with it.

古文：用之知之，甚惧，访于其党前度支巡官郑杞、前知庐州事董瑾，杞曰： 此固为晚矣！ 
现代文：吕用之察觉到骈有疑心，十分恐惧，便去征询他的党羽、以前的度支巡官郑和以前主管庐州事宜的董瑾，郑说： 高骈现在为时已晚了。 
English: Lyu Yanzhi noticed that Gao Ye was suspicious and very afraid, so he went to consult his party members, the former provincial inspector Zheng and the former director of Zhangzhou affairs Dong Ye. Zheng said: Gao Ye is too late now.

古文：用之问策安出，杞曰： 曹孟德有言： 宁我负人，无人负我。  
现代文：吕用之问郑有什么计策，郑杞说： 曹操曾经有这样的话： 宁可我负别人，决不能让别人负我。 
English: When Lü Yizhi asked Zheng what his strategy was, Zheng Yao said: Cao Cao once said: "I would rather be a burden to others, but I will never let others burden me."

古文：明日，与瑾共为书一缄授用之，其语秘，人莫有知者。
现代文：第二天，郑与董瑾共同写了一封信给吕用之，信中所谈十分秘密，人们都不知道。
English: The next day, Zheng and Dong Jun jointly wrote a letter to Lü Yizhi. The contents of the letter were very secret, and no one knew about it.

古文：萧遘称疾归永乐。
现代文：萧以身体有病为托辞回到永乐县。
English: Xiao used his illness as an excuse to return to Yongle County.

古文：初，凤翔节度使李昌符与硃玫同谋立襄王，既而玫自为宰相专权，昌符怒，不受其官，更通表兴元。
现代文：当初，凤翔节度使李昌符和朱玫共同谋划拥立襄王李，后来朱玫自己做宰相独揽大权；李昌符很恼怒，不接受朱玫封给他的官职，改变立场向兴元唐僖宗进呈表章。
English: At first, the Fengxiang Festival made Li Changfu and Zhu Mei jointly plan to support the establishment of Xiang Wang Li, and later Zhu Mei himself became the prime minister to monopolize power; Li Changfu was very angry, did not accept the official post given to him by Zhu Meifeng, and changed his position to present a badge to Xingyuan Tang Yizong.

古文：诏加昌符检校司徒。
现代文：唐僖宗颁诏加封李昌符为检校司徒。
English: Emperor Xizong of Tang Dynasty issued an imperial edict to seal Li Changfu as a school inspector.

古文：硃玫遣其将王行瑜将邠宁、河西兵五万追乘舆，感义节度使杨晟战数却，弃散关走，行瑜进屯凤州。
现代文：朱玫派遣手下将领王行瑜带领宁、河西军队五万人追赶唐僖宗，感义节度使杨晟交战后再三退却，最后放弃散关逃走，王行瑜开进凤驻扎。
English: Zhu Mei dispatched his general Wang Xingyu to lead the Ning and Hexi armies of 50,000 people to chase down Tang Xizong. The Xingyi Festival made Yang Jie retreat repeatedly after the battle, and finally abandoned the Sankuan and fled. Wang Xingyu entered Feng and stationed there.

古文：是时，诸道贡赋多之长安，不之兴元，从官卫士皆乏食，上涕泣，不知为计。
现代文：当时，各道进贡纳赋大多都是送往长安，而不关给唐僖宗，跟随唐僖宗的官员和卫士都缺乏粮食，唐僖宗痛器流涕，不知如何是好。
English: At that time, most of the tributes from each province were sent to Chang'an, but not to Tang Xizong. The officials and guards who followed Tang Xizong were short of food, and Tang Xizong was in pain and did not know what to do.

古文：杜让能言于上曰： 杨复光与王重荣同破黄巢，复京城，相亲善；复恭其兄也。
现代文：杜让能向唐僖宗进言说： 杨复光与王重荣一同打败黄巢，收复京师长安，彼此亲近友好；杨复恭是他的哥哥。
English: Du Zhaneng gave advice to Tang Xizong, saying: Yang Fuguang and Wang Chung Rong defeated Huang Chao and regained the capital Chang'an together, and they were close and friendly to each other; Yang Fuguang was his brother.

古文：若遣重臣往谕以大义，且致复恭之意，宜有回虑归国之理。 
现代文：如果派遣朝中重臣前往王重荣那里，向他申明大义，并且转达杨复恭规劝他的意愿，按理说王重荣应当回心转意归顺朝廷。 
English: If high-ranking officials of the DPRK and China were sent to Wang Chung-Rong to express their sincerity to him and convey Yang Fook's wishes to persuade him, it is reasonable to say that Wang Chung-Rong should change his mind and submit to the imperial court.

古文：上从之，遣右谏议大夫刘崇望使于河中，赍诏谕重荣，重荣既听命，遣使表献绢十万匹，且请讨硃玫以自赎。
现代文：唐僖宗采纳了杜让能的意见，派遣右谏议大夫刘崇望出使河中，拿着唐僖宗的诏书向王重荣传达谕旨，王重荣当即表示听从朝廷的命令，派遣使臣向唐僖宗进呈表章，献绢十万匹，并请征讨朱政以赎罪。
English: Tang Xizong adopted Du Jianneng's opinion and sent Liu Chongwang, the doctor of the Right Division of the Council of Elders, to the middle of the river to take Tang Xizong's edict and convey it to Wang Chung Rong. Wang Chung Rong immediately obeyed the order of the imperial court, sent envoys to Tang Xizong to present the seal, offered 100,000 horses, and asked Zhu Zheng to atone for his sins.

古文：戊戌，襄王煴遣使至晋阳赐李克用诏，言： 上至半涂，六军变扰，苍黄晏驾，吾为籓镇所推，今已受册。 
现代文：戊戌，襄王李派遣使臣赴晋阳赐给李克诏书，诏书上说： 皇帝行至半路，朝廷的禁卫军发生变乱纷扰，皇帝不幸死去，我被各藩镇推举拥立，现在已接受册封。 
English: According to legend, King Li of Xiang dispatched an envoy to Jinyang to give Li Ke an imperial edict. The imperial edict said: The emperor was only halfway through his journey, the imperial guard was in turmoil, and the emperor unfortunately died. I was elected and supported by all the provinces and towns, and now I have accepted the title.

古文：硃玫亦与克用书，克用闻其谋皆出于玫，大怒。
现代文：朱玫也给李克用写了信，李克用听说拥立襄王李这件事都是朱玫谋划的，勃然大怒。
English: Zhu Mei also wrote a letter to Li Kegui. Li Kegui was furious when he heard that the matter of supporting Xiang Wang Li was all planned by Zhu Mei.

古文：大将盖寓说克用曰： 銮舆播迁，天下皆归咎于我，今不诛玫，黜李煴，无以自湔洗。 
现代文：大将军盖寓规劝李克用说： 皇帝流离迁徒，天下都归罪于我们当初进逼京师，现在如果不诛杀朱玫，废黜襄王李，就没有办法洗清我们自己。 
English: General Gao Fuxi advised Li Ke to say, "When the emperor displaced the exiles, the whole world blamed us for forcing our way into Beijing. Now, if we don't kill Zhu Mei and depose Xiang Wang Li, there is no way to purify ourselves.

古文：克用从之，燔诏书，囚使者，移檄邻道，称： 玫敢欺籓方，明言晏驾。
现代文：李克用听从盖寓的话，焚烧了襄王李的诏书，囚禁派来的使臣，向邻近各道发出檄文，说： 朱玫竟敢欺骗藩镇，公然说皇帝死了。
English: Li Ke used to listen to the words of Gaetiao, burned the imperial rescript of Xiang Wang Li, imprisoned the envoys sent, and issued a warning to the neighboring provinces, saying: Zhu Mei dared to deceive the towns, openly saying that the emperor was dead.

古文：当道已发蕃、汉三万兵进讨凶逆，当共立大功。 
现代文：本道已派出蕃夷、汉族军队三万人讨伐这一凶顽恶逆，大家应当一起建立大的功业。 
English: This province has already dispatched 30,000 soldiers from the Yi and Han ethnic groups to fight against this heinous evil, and everyone should work together to build a great cause.

古文：寓，蔚州人也。
现代文：盖寓是蔚州人。
English: Gaiye is from Ulsan.

古文：秦贤寇宋汴，硃全忠败之于尉氏南；癸巳，遣都将郭言将步骑三万击蔡州。
现代文：秦贤侵扰宋州、汴州，被朱全忠在尉氏的南部打败，癸巳，又派遣都将郭言带领步、骑步三万攻打蔡州。
English: Qin Xian invaded Songzhou and Ganzhou, was defeated by Zhu Quanzhong in the southern part of the lieutenant's territory, and dispatched Guo Yan to lead and ride 30,000 troops to attack Caizhou.

古文：六月，以扈跸都将杨守亮为金商节度、京畿制置使，将兵二万出金州，与王重荣、李克用共讨硃玫，守亮本姓訾，名亮，曹州人，与弟信皆为杨复光假子，更名守亮、守信。
现代文：六月，朝廷任命随从御驾的扈跸都将杨守亮为金商节度使、京畿制置使，带领军队二万从金州出征、与王重荣、李克用联合讨伐朱玫。杨守亮本来姓訾名亮，曹州人，与弟弟訾信都是杨复光的养子，更改姓名为杨守亮、杨守信。
English: In June, the imperial court appointed Yang Shouliang as the gold merchant's festival envoy and Gyeonggi system envoy, leading an army of twenty thousand from Jinzhou, and jointly fighting Zhu Mei with Wang Chung Rong and Li Ke. Yang Shouliang was originally surnamed Ying Ming Liang, a man from Caozhou, and his brother Ying Xin was the adopted son of Yang Fuguang, and changed his name to Yang Shouliang and Yang Shouxin.

古文：李克用遣使奉表称： 方发兵济河，除逆党，迎车驾，愿诏诸道与臣协力。 
现代文：李克用派遣使臣恭奉表章进呈，说： 现在我片派军队渡过黄河，消灭朱玫逆党，迎接皇帝车驾，希望诏令各道人马与我一道齐心协力攻打朱玫。 
English: Li Ke used the dispatch of envoys to respectfully present the seal and said: Now I have sent an army to cross the Yellow River, eliminate Zhu Mei's rebel party, and meet the emperor's chariot. I hope that the emperor will order all people and horses to work together with me to attack Zhu Mei.

古文：先是，山南之人皆言克用与硃玫合，人情忷惧；表至，上出示从官，并谕山南诸镇，由是帖然。
现代文：在这之前，山南道的人都传说李克用与朱玫和好，人心惶惶，李克用的表章送到，唐僖宗向跟随的官员们展示，并且谕告山南各镇，从此才稳定下来。
English: Prior to this, the people of Shannan Province had a legend that Li Ke used to make peace with Zhu Mei, and people were panicked. Li Ke used to send the seal to Tang Yanzong, who showed it to the officials who followed him and sent it to all the towns in Shannan Province. From then on, the situation stabilized.

古文：然克用表犹以硃全忠为言，上使杨复恭以书谕之云： 俟三辅事宁，别有进止。 
现代文：但是李克用的表章仍坚持要朝廷治朱全忠当年谋害他的罪，唐僖宗命令杨复恭写信告诉李克用说： 待京畿一带的事情安宁下来，后上会另有一番安排。 
English: However, Li Kegui still insisted that the imperial court punish Zhu Quanzhong for the crime of plotting to assassinate him that year. Tang Xizong ordered Yang Fukyong to write a letter to Li Kegui, saying: "When the situation in the Gyeonggi region calms down, there will be another arrangement at the next meeting."

古文：衡州刺史周岳发兵攻潭州，钦化节度使闵勖招淮西将黄皓入城共守，皓遂杀勖。
现代文：衡州刺史周岳派发军队攻打潭州，钦化节度使闵勖招来淮西将领黄皓进入潭州共同固守，黄皓却杀掉闵勖。
English: Zhou Yue, the statesman of Hengzhou, dispatched an army to attack Tanzhou, and the ruler of the Jin Dynasty, Huai Xi, summoned the general Huang Qi to enter Tanzhou and jointly defend it. Huang Qi, however, killed Qi.

古文：岳攻拔州城，擒皓，杀之。
现代文：周岳攻克占据潭州城后，抓获黄皓，将他杀掉。
English: After Zhou Yue conquered and occupied Tanzhou City, he captured Huang Qi and killed him.

古文：镇海节度使周宝遣牙将丁从实袭常州，逐张郁。郁奔海陵，依镇遏使南昌高霸。
现代文：镇海节度使周宝派遣牙将丁从实攻打常州，驱逐张郁，张郁逃往海陵，投奔镇遏使南昌人高霸。
English: The Zhenhai Festival made Zhou Bao send Ding Congsheng to attack Changzhou, expel Zhang Yu, Zhang Yu fled to Hailing, and rushed to Zhen to stop the Nanchang people from becoming a high-ranking tyrant.

古文：霸，高骈将也，镇海陵，有民五万户，兵三万人。
现代文：高霸是高骈的部将，镇守海陵，拥有百姓五万户，军队三万人。
English: Gaoba was the general of Gaozhen, the town guard of Hailing, with fifty thousand households and thirty thousand soldiers.

古文：秋，七月，秦宗权陷许州，杀节度使鹿晏弘。
现代文：秋季，七月，秦宗权攻克许州，杀节度使鹿晏弘。
English: In the autumn, in July, the Qin Zongquan conquered Keshu, and the killing of the festival made the deer go away.

古文：王行瑜进攻兴州，感义节度使杨晟弃镇走，据文州，诏保銮都将李鋋、扈跸都将李茂贞、陈佩屯大唐峰以拒之。
现代文：王行瑜进攻兴州，感义节度使杨晟放弃兴州逃跑，占据文州，唐僖宗诏令保銮都将李铤、扈跸都将李茂贞和陈佩驻扎大唐峰来抵抗王行瑜。
English: Wang Xingyu attacked Xingzhou, and the sensibility of the Qing Dynasty made Yang Jie abandon Xingzhou to escape and occupy Wenzhou. The Emperor of Tang Dynasty issued an edict ordering the bodyguards to detain Li Jie, and the eunuchs to detain Li Maozhen and Chen Pei at Datangfeng to resist Wang Xingyu.

古文：茂贞，博野人，本姓宋，名文通，以功赐姓名。
现代文：李茂贞是博野人，本来姓宋，名叫文通，因为有功赐姓名李茂贞。
English: Li Maozhen is a Bo wild person, originally surnamed Song, named Wentong, because the name Li Maozhen was given by merit.

古文：要命钦化军曰武安，以衡州刺史周岳为节度使。
现代文：朝廷更改钦化军名为武安军，任命衡州刺史周岳为节度使。
English: The imperial court changed the name of the Jinhua Army to the Wu'an Army, and appointed Zhou Yue, a statesman from Hengzhou, as the envoy.

古文：八月，卢龙节度使李忠薨，以其子匡威为留后。
现代文：八月，卢龙节度使李全忠死去，朝廷任命他的儿子李匡威为留后。
English: In August, the Lulong Festival caused the death of Li Quanzhong, and the court appointed his son, Li Kuangwei, to succeed him.

古文：王潮拔泉州，杀廖彦若。
现代文：王潮攻克泉州，杀廖彦若。
English: Wang Chao conquered Quanzhou and killed Liao Yanrao.

古文：潮闻福建观察陈岩威名，不敢犯福州境，遣使降之，岩表潮为泉州刺史。
现代文：王潮久知福建观察使陈岩的威名，不敢进犯福州地区，派遣使者向他降服，陈岩便进呈表章请求任命王潮为泉州刺史。
English: Wang Chao had known for a long time that the observation of Fujian had made Chen Yan famous, and he did not dare to invade the Fuzhou region and send an envoy to submit to him. Chen Yan then submitted a petition to appoint Wang Chao as the historian of Quanzhou.

古文：潮沈勇有智略，既得泉州，招怀离散，均赋缮兵，吏民悦服。
现代文：王潮沉稳勇敢又有智谋，占据泉州之后，他招募安抚流离失所的百姓，均平赋税修武器，官吏和百姓都心悦诚服。
English: Wang Chao was calm, brave and resourceful. After he occupied Quanzhou, he recruited soldiers to pacify the displaced people, levelled taxes and repaired weapons. The officials and the people were sincerely convinced.

古文：幽王绪于别馆，绪惭，自杀。
现代文：王潮把王绪幽禁在别一所馆舍，王绪羞愧沮丧，自杀身亡。
English: Wang Chao confined Wang Xu to another mansion. Wang Xu, ashamed and depressed, committed suicide.

古文：九月，硃玫将张行实攻大唐峰，李鋋等击却之。
现代文：九月，朱玫带领张行实攻打大唐峰，李铤等人将他们击退。
English: In September, Zhu Mei led Zhang Xingshi to attack Datang Peak, and Li Yu and others repulsed them.

古文：金吾将军满存与邠军战，破之，复取兴州，进守万仞寨。
现代文：金吾将军满存与朱玫的军队交战，将其打败，再次占领了兴州，开进万仞寨驻守。
English: General Kingu Manchu confronted Zhu Mei's army, defeated it, occupied Xingzhou again, and entered Wanzhizhai to garrison it.

古文：李克修攻孟方立，甲午，擒其将吕臻于焦冈，拔故镇、武安、临洺、邯郸、沙河，以大将安金俊为邢州刺史。
现代文：李克攻打孟方位，甲午，焦冈擒获孟方立的将领吕臻，攻克故镇、武安、临、邯郸、沙河，任命大将安金俊为邢州刺史。
English: Li Ke attacked Mengzi, and in the afternoon of the first day of the second month, Jiao Gang won the general Lv Zhen of Meng Fangli, conquered the old town, Wu'an, Lin, Handan and Shahe, and appointed the general An Jinjun as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：长安百官太子太师裴璩等劝进于襄王煴。
现代文：留在京师长安的朝廷百官太子太师裴璩等人劝说襄王李称帝。
English: The imperial eunuch Daishi Pei Yao and others, who remained in the capital Chang'an, persuaded the Xiang Wang Li to become emperor.

古文：冬，十月，煴即皇帝位，改元建贞，遥尊上为太上元皇帝。
现代文：冬季，十月，李登基称帝，改年号为建贞，隔地尊奉唐僖宗为太上元皇圣帝。
English: In the winter, in October, Li was enthroned as emperor, the year name was changed to Jianzhen, and Tang Yanzong was revered as the Holy Emperor.

古文：董昌谓钱镠曰： 汝能取越州，吾以杭州授汝。 
现代文：董昌对钱说： 你如果能攻占越州，我就把杭州刺史的官员职授给你。 
English: Dong Chang said to Qian: If you can conquer Yuezhou, I will give you the official post of Hangzhou's chief historian.

古文：镠曰： 然，不取终为后患。 
现代文：钱说： 好吧，不拿下越州最终也是个后患。 
English: Qian said: Well, not winning Yuezhou is ultimately a hindrance.

古文：遂将兵自诸暨趋平水，凿山开道五百里，出曹娥埭，浙东将鲍君福帅众降之。
现代文：于是钱带领军队从诸暨奔赴越州会稽县的平水镇，凿挖高山开辟道路长达五百里，经由曹娥埭杀出，浙东将军鲍君福率领所部人马向钱投降。
English: As a result, Qian led the army from Zhuji to Pingshui Town of Yuezhou Hui County, dug up a mountain to open a road of up to five hundred miles, and went out through Cao Eui. East Zhejiang General Bao Junfu led the staff to surrender to Qian.

古文：镠与浙东军战，屡破之，进屯丰山。
现代文：钱与浙东的军队交战，多次将其打败，其进丰山驻扎。
English: Qian fought with the army of eastern Zhejiang, defeated it many times, and stationed it in Fengshan.

古文：感化牙将张雄、冯弘鐸得罪于节度使时溥，聚众三百，走渡江，袭苏州，据之。
现代文：感化军牙将张雄、冯弘铎得罪了节度使时溥，召集三百人马，渡过长江，攻打苏州，予以占据。
English: The influential generals Zhang Xiong and Feng Hongyao offended the commander of the festival, Shijie, and gathered three hundred men and horses to cross the Yangtze River, attack Suzhou, and occupy it.

古文：雄自称刺史，稍聚兵至五万，战舰千馀，自号天成军。
现代文：张雄自称苏州刺史，逐渐招募军队达到五万人，战舰一千余艘，自己号称天成军。
English: Zhang Xiong claimed to be the founder of Suzhou and gradually recruited an army of fifty thousand people and more than a thousand warships, calling himself the Tiancheng Army.

古文：河阳节度使诸葛爽薨，大将刘经、张全义立爽子仲方为留后。
现代文：河阳节度使诸葛爽死去，大将刘经、张全义拥立诸葛爽的儿子诸葛仲方做留后。
English: Heyang Jiedu killed Zhuge Shuang, and Generals Liu Jing and Zhang Quanyi supported Zhuge Shuang's son Zhuge Zhongfang to succeed him.

古文：全义，临濮人也。
现代文：张全义是临濮人。
English: Zhang Quanyi is from Linyi.

古文：李克修攻邢州，不克而还。
现代文：李克攻打邢州，未能攻克又带兵回去。
English: Li Ke attacked Zhangzhou, but failed to conquer it and returned with his soldiers.

古文：十一月，丙戌，钱镠克越州，刘汉宏奔台州。
现代文：十一月，丙戌，钱攻克越州，刘汉宏逃往台州。
English: In November, Puyi and Qian conquered Yuezhou, and Liu Hanhong fled to Taizhou.

古文：义成节度使安师儒委政于两厢都虞候夏侯晏、杜标，二人骄恣，军中忿之。
现代文：义成节度使安师儒委任两厢都虞候夏候晏、杜标主持政务，这两个人傲慢专横，军营中对他们愤愤不平。
English: The Yicheng Festival made An Shifu appoint Du Yu, Du Biao to preside over government affairs. These two men were arrogant and arbitrary, and there was resentment against them in the military camp.

古文：小校张骁潜出，聚众二千攻州城，师儒斩晏、标首谕之，军中稍息。
现代文：小校张骁偷偷出去，召集了二千人马前来攻打滑州城，安师儒砍下夏侯晏、杜标二人的脑袋谕告手下人马，军中的愤怒情绪才稍微平息一些。
English: The junior schoolmaster Zhang Qian secretly went out and gathered two thousand horses to attack the city of Slizhou. An Shiru chopped off the heads of Xia Houjun and Du Bian and told his subordinates. Only then did the anger in the army subside a little.

古文：天平节度使硃瑄谋取滑州，遣濮州刺史硃裕将兵诱张骁，杀之。
现代文：天平节度使朱谋划夺取滑州，派遣濮州刺史朱裕带领军队引诱张骁上当，将斩杀张骁。
English: The balance of power caused Zhu to plan to seize the city of Slanting, and sent Zhang Zhou's aide Zhu Yu to lead the army to lure Zhang Xuan into a trap and kill him.

古文：硃全忠先遣其将硃珍、李唐宾袭滑州，入境，遇大雪。珍等一夕驰至壁下，百梯并升，遂克之。
现代文：朱全忠先派遣手下将领朱珍、李唐宾攻打滑州，进入滑州境内，恰遇大雪，朱珍等人一个夜晚就赶到滑州城下，百个云梯一同升起，攻克了滑州城，抓获安师儒。
English: Zhu Quanzhong first sent his generals Zhu Zhen and Li Tangbin to attack the city of Leshou. They entered the territory of Leshou when it happened to snow heavily. Zhu Zhen and others arrived at the foot of the city of Leshou in one night. A hundred ladders rose together, conquered the city of Leshou and captured An Shiru.

古文：虏师儒以归。全忠以牙将江陵胡真知义成留后。
现代文：朱全忠委任牙将江陵人胡真掌管义成留后事宜。
English: Zhu Quanzhong appointed Jianglinger Hu Zhen to be in charge of Yicheng.

古文：田令孜至成都请寻医，许之。
现代文：田令孜到达成都请求寻找医生治病，朝廷予以准许。
English: When Tian Lingzi arrived in Chengdu, he requested to find a doctor to treat his illness, and the imperial court granted his request.

古文：十二月，戊寅，诸军拔凤州，以满存为凤州防御使。
现代文：十二月，戊寅，各路军队攻克凤州，朝廷满存为凤州防御使。
English: In December, Wu Yin, the various armies conquered Fengzhou, and the imperial court was appointed as the defense envoy of Fengzhou.

古文：杨复恭传檄关中，称 得硃玫首者，以静难节度使赏之。 
现代文：杨复恭向关中传发檄文，说： 谁能斩下朱玫脑袋，就把朱玫静难节度使转授给他。 
English: Yang Fuxiong sent a message to Guan Zhong saying, "Whoever can cut off Zhu Mei's head will be awarded the title of Zhu Mei's guardian."

古文：王行瑜战数败，恐获罪于玫，与其下谋曰： 今无功，归亦死；曷若与汝曹斩玫首，定京城，迎大驾，取邠宁节钺乎？ 
现代文：王行瑜与李铤、满存交战，屡战屡败，担心朱玫治他的罪，就与属下谋划说： 现在没有战功，回去也是死，不如和你们一起砍下朱玫的脑袋，迎接皇帝回来，拿到宁的符节与黄钺，怎样样？ 
English: Wang Xingyu and Li Qian, full of warring, repeatedly defeated, worried about Zhu Mei's sin of ruling him, plotted with his subordinates and said: Now there is no war merit, going back is death, it is better to cut off Zhu Mei's head with you, welcome the emperor back, get Ning's rune and yellow beak, how is it?

古文：众从之。
现代文：大家依从王行瑜的意见。
English: As a result, the entire city fell to the Mongols.

古文：甲寅，行瑜自凤州擅兵引归京师，玫方视事，闻之，怒，召行谕，责之曰： 汝擅归，欲反邪？ 
现代文：甲寅，王行瑜从凤州擅自带领军队返回京师长安，朱玫正在料理政事，听说此事，十分震怒，召来王行瑜，责问他说： 你擅自回来。要谋反吗？ 
English: A Yin, Wang Xingyu from Fengzhou without authorization led the army to return to Beijing Shi Chang'an, Zhu Mei is cooking politics, heard about this, very angry, summoned Wang Xingyu, scolded him and said: You came back without authorization. Do you want to rebel?

古文：行瑜曰： 吾不反，欲诛反者硃玫耳！ 
现代文：王行瑜说： 我不谋反，而是要诛杀谋反的人朱玫！ 
English: Wang Xingyu said: I am not plotting a rebellion, but I want to fight and kill the rebel Zhu Mei!

古文：遂擒斩之，并杀其党数百人。诸军大乱，焚掠京城，士民无衣冻死者蔽地。
现代文：于是将朱玫擒获斩杀，并且杀死朱玫的党羽几百人，各路军队顿时乱成一团，焚烧抢掠京城长安，士人百姓没有衣服被冻死的，尸体遍地都是。
English: As a result, Zhu Meiqi was beheaded, and several hundred members of Zhu Mei's party were killed. The armies of all directions suddenly formed a chaotic group, burning and looting the capital Chang'an. The nobles and commoners were frozen to death without clothes, and the corpses were everywhere.

古文：裴澈、郑昌图帅百官二百馀人奉襄王奔河中，王重荣诈为迎奉，执煴，杀之，囚澈、昌图；百官死者殆半。
现代文：裴澈、郑昌图率领众官二百多人侍奉襄王李奔往河中，王重荣假装出来迎接，抓住李，将他杀死，囚禁裴澈、郑昌图，众官被处死的将近一半。
English: Pei Che and Zheng Changtu led more than 200 officials to serve Wang Li Ben in the river. Wang Chongrong pretended to come out to meet him, grabbed Li, killed him, imprisoned Pei Che and Zheng Changtu, and nearly half of the officials were executed.

古文：台州刺史杜雄诱刘汉宏，执送董昌，斩之。
现代文：台州刺史杜雄引诱刘汉宏，把他抓获送到董昌那里，将他处斩。
English: Taizhou assassin Shi Duxion seduced Liu Hanhong, captured him, sent him to Dongchang, and beheaded him.

古文：昌徙镇越州，自称知浙东军府事，以钱镠知杭州事。
现代文：董昌将镇所迁到越州，自称主持浙东军府事宜，委任钱掌管杭州事宜。
English: Dong Chang moved the town office to Yuezhou, claimed to preside over the affairs of the East Zhejiang Military Government, and appointed Qian to be in charge of the affairs of Hangzhou.

古文：王重荣函襄王煴首送行在，刑部请御兴元城南门献馘，百官毕贺。
现代文：王重荣将襄王李的头装在匣内送到唐僖宗那里，刑部请僖宗到兴元城南楼接受进献，朝廷百官都前往祝贺。
English: Wang Chong Rong sent the head of Xiang Wang Li in a box to Tang Xizong. The criminal department invited Xizong to the south tower of Xingyuan City to receive the offering. Hundreds of officials from the imperial court came to congratulate him.

古文：太常博士殷盈孙议，以为： 煴为贼臣所逼，正以不能死节罪耳。
现代文：太常博士殷盈孙提出意见，他认为： 李是被朱玫一伙逼迫的，他的罪过在于不能以死相拒。
English: Too often, Dr. Yin Yinsun made comments, he thought: Li was persecuted by Zhu Mei's group, his crime was that he could not refuse to die.

古文：礼，公族罪在大辟，君为之素服不举。
现代文：《礼记》上载，公族里有人犯了死罪被处斩，君主为他穿素服停止奏乐。
English: According to "The Book of Rites," some members of the nobility committed capital crimes and were beheaded, and the monarch stopped playing music for them because they were wearing plain clothes.

古文：今煴已就诛，宜废为庶人，令所在葬其首。
现代文：现在襄王李已被斩杀，应当颁诏把他废为平民，命令所在的地方安葬他的头颅。
English: Now that Xiang Wang Li has been beheaded, an edict should be issued to revoke him as a commoner and order the place where his head is buried.

古文：其献馘称贺之礼，请俟硃玫首至而行之。 
现代文：至于献馘称贺的大礼，请等朱玫的头颅送到再举行。 
English: As for the congratulatory gift, please wait for Zhu Mei's head to arrive before holding it.

古文：从之。盈孙，侑之孙也。
现代文：唐僖宗采纳了殷盈孙的意见。殷盈孙是殷侑的孙子。
English: Tang Xizong adopted the opinion of Yin Yinsun, who was the grandson of Yin Xi.

古文：河阳大将刘经，畏李罕之难制，自引兵镇洛阳，袭罕之于渑池，为罕之所败，经弃洛阳走，罕之追杀殆尽。
现代文：河阳大将刘经，担心李罕之难以控制，亲自领军镇守洛阳，在渑池袭击李罕之，却被李罕之打败。刘经放弃洛阳逃跑，李罕之追击斩杀，把他的人马几乎消灭光。
English: General Liu Jing of Kheyang, worried that Li Han was difficult to control, personally led an army to defend Luoyang, attacked Li Han in Dianchi, but was defeated by Li Han. Liu Jing abandoned Luoyang to escape, Li Han chased and killed, and almost wiped out his men.

古文：罕之军于巩，将渡河，经遣张全义将兵拒之。
现代文：李罕之在巩县驻扎军队，正要渡过黄河，刘经派遣张全义前来拒挡。
English: Li Hanzhi stationed troops in Gong County and was about to cross the Yellow River when Liu Jing sent Zhang Quanyi to come and block him.

古文：时诸葛仲方幼弱，政在刘经，诸将多不附。全义遂与罕之合兵攻河阳，为经所败，罕之、全义走保怀州。
现代文：当时诸葛仲方幼小软弱，正权在刘经的手中，各位将领多有不服，张全义于是与李罕之联合起来攻打河阳，但被刘经打败，李罕之、张全义退守怀州。
English: At that time, Zhuge Zhongfang was young and weak, and the power was in the hands of Liu Jing. The generals were mostly dissatisfied. Zhang Quanyi then united with Li Hanzhi to attack Heyang, but was defeated by Liu Jing. Li Hanzhi and Zhang Quanyi retreated to defend Waizhou.

古文：初，忠武决胜指挥使孙儒与龙骧指挥使朗山刘建锋戍蔡州，拒黄巢，扶沟马殷隶军中，以材勇闻。
现代文：当初，忠武决胜指挥使孙儒与龙骧指挥使朗山人刘建锋驻防蔡州，抵抗黄巢，扶沟人马殷隶属军营中，因为身材魁梧勇猛果敢而出名。
English: At the beginning, the commander of the decisive victory of Zhongwu sent Sun Ru and the commander of Longyu sent Liu Jianfeng, a man from the Langshan Mountains, to defend Caizhou and resist the Yellow Nest, and Ma Yin, a man from the ditch, belonged to the military camp. He was famous for his huge stature and courage.

古文：及秦宗权叛，儒等皆属焉。
现代文：等到秦宗权反叛，孙儒等人都归属了秦宗权。
English: When the Qin patriarchate rebelled, Sun Ru and others all belonged to the Qin patriarchate.

古文：宗权遣儒将兵攻陷郑州，刺史李璠奔大梁。
现代文：秦宗权派遣孙儒攻关克郑州，郑州刺史李逃奔大梁。
English: Qin Zongquan sent Sun Ru to attack Zhengzhou, Zhengzhou stabbed Shi Li and fled to Daliang.

古文：儒进陷河阳，留后诸葛仲方奔大梁。
现代文：孙儒再进军攻克河阳，河阳留后诸葛仲方也逃往大梁。
English: Sun Ru then marched to conquer Heyang. Zhuge Zhongfang also fled to Daliang after Heyang stayed.

古文：儒自称节度使，张全义据怀州，李罕之据泽州以拒之。
现代文：孙儒自称节度使，张全义占据怀州，李罕之占据泽州来抵抗孙儒。
English: Sun Ru claimed to be the messenger of the festival, Zhang Quan Yi occupied Waizhou, Li Han Zhi occupied Zezhou to resist Sun Ru.

古文：初，长安人张佶为宣州幕僚，恶观察使秦彦之为人，弃官去，过蔡州，宗权留以为行军司马。
现代文：起初，长安人张佶在宣州做幕僚，憎恨观察使秦彦的为人，辞去官职离开。张佶经过蔡州时，秦宗权留下他做行军司马。
English: At first, Chang'an's Zhang Ye worked as a staff officer in Xuanzhou, but he hated the observation that Qin Yan was a person and resigned from his post. When Zhang Ye passed through Caizhou, Qin Zongquan left him as a marching steed.

古文：佶谓刘建锋曰： 秦公刚鸷而猜忌，亡无日矣，吾属何以自免！ 
现代文：张佶对刘建锋说： 秦宗权刚愎凶恨又猜疑忌妒，他的末日就要到了，我们应该考虑怎么能够免除大祸！ 
English: Zhang Ye said to Liu Jianfeng, "Qin Zongquan is full of fierce hatred, suspicion, and jealousy. His end is near. We should consider how to avoid a great disaster!"

古文：建锋方自危，遂与佶善。
现代文：刘建锋正为自己安危担忧，于是与张佶结为好友。
English: Liu Jianfeng was worried about his own safety, so he became friends with Zhang Ye.

古文：寿州刺史张翱遣其将魏虔将万人寇庐州，庐州刺史杨行愍遣其将田頵、李神福、张训拒之，败虔于褚城。
现代文：寿州刺史张翱派遣属下将领魏虔带领一万人马侵扰庐州，庐州刺史杨行愍派遣手下将领田、李神福、张训进行抗击，在褚城打败魏虔。
English: Zhang Qian, the governor of Shoushou, dispatched his subordinate general Wei Qian to invade Shoushou with ten thousand horses. Yang Xingyao, the governor of Shoushou, dispatched his subordinate generals Lingtian, Li Shenfu, and Zhang Xun to fight back and defeat Wei Qian in Shucheng.

古文：滁州刺史许勍袭舒州，刺史陶雅奔庐州。
现代文：滁州刺史许攻打舒州，舒州刺史陶雅逃往庐州。
English: Bozhou assassin Xu attacked Shuzhou, and Shuzhou assassin Tao Ya fled to Bozhou.

古文：高骈命行愍更名行密。
现代文：高骈命令杨行愍改名为杨行密。
English: Gao Gan ordered Yang Xingyao to change his name to Yang Xingmi.

古文：是岁，天平牙将硃瑾逐泰宁节度使齐克让，自称留后。
现代文：这一年，天平牙将朱瑾赴走泰宁节度使齐克让，自称泰宁留后。
English: This year, Tianpingya sent Zhu Xi to Taining for the festival, which made Zike Zhan, who claimed to be from Taining, stay behind.

古文：瑾将袭衮州，求婚于克让，乃自郓盛饰车服，私藏兵甲以赴之。
现代文：朱瑾要攻打兖州，假装向齐克让请求通婚讲和。又安排华丽的车辆服装，暗中派出军队裹藏武器，从郓州前赴兖州。
English: Zhu Xi wanted to attack Zhangzhou, and pretended to make peace with Zeke by asking for a marriage. He also arranged gorgeous vehicles and clothing, and secretly sent troops to carry weapons from Zhangzhou to Zhangzhou.

古文：亲迎之夕，甲士窃发，逐克让而代之。
现代文：刘克让迎接朱瑾的当天夜晚，朱瑾的人马偷偷发起进攻，赶走了齐克让而取代了他。
English: On the evening of the same day that Liu Kejian greeted Zhu Xi, Zhu Xi's men secretly launched an attack, drove away Zi Kejian and replaced him.

古文：朝廷因以瑾为泰宁节度使。
现代文：朝廷于是任命朱瑾为泰宁节度使。
English: The imperial court then appointed Zhu Xi as the chief envoy to the Taining Festival.

古文：安陆贼帅周通攻鄂州，路审中亡去。
现代文：安陆贼寇头目周通攻打鄂州，据守鄂州的路审中逃离。
English: Zhou Tong, the ringleader of the Anlu bandits, attacked Ezhou and escaped from the road inspection in Ezhou.

古文：岳州刺史杜洪乘虚入鄂，自称武昌留后，朝廷因以授之。
现代文：岳州刺史杜洪乘虚而入占据鄂州，自称武昌留后，朝廷便正式任命杜洪为武昌留后。
English: After Du Hong, the governor of Yue Prefecture, took advantage of a loophole to occupy Ezhou and claimed to stay in Wuchang, the imperial court officially appointed Du Hong as the new ruler of Wuchang.

古文：湘阴贼帅邓进思复乘虚陷岳州。
现代文：汀阴贼寇头目邓进思也是乘虚而入攻占了岳州。
English: Deng Jinshi, the leader of the Dingyin Thieves and Robbers, also took advantage of the situation and invaded and occupied Yuezhou.

古文：秦宗言围荆南二年，张环婴城自守，城中米斗直钱四十缗，食甲鼓皆尽，击门扉以警夜，死者相枕。
现代文：秦宗言围攻荆南长达两年之久，张在荆南顽强固守，城内的米价每米高达四十缗钱，粮食、武器、更鼓都用尽了，只好击打门板在夜间报时辰，死尸在地上横竖相枕。
English: Qin Zongyan besieged Jingnan for two years, Zhang stubbornly held out in Jingnan, the price of rice in the city was as high as forty yuan per meter, grain, weapons, and drums were exhausted, so they had to beat the door panel to announce the time at night, and the dead bodies were piled up on the ground.

古文：宗言竟不能克而去。
现代文：可是秦宗言最后还是未能攻克荆南城而离去。
English: However, Qin Zongyan finally failed to conquer Jingnan City and left.

古文：僖宗惠圣恭定孝皇帝下之上光启三年
现代文：光启三年
English: Three years after the Enlightenment

古文：春，正月，以邠州都将王行瑜为静难军节度使，扈跸都头李茂贞领武定节度使，扈跸都头杨守宗为金商节度使，右卫大将军顾彦朗为东川节度使，金商节度使杨守亮为山南西道节度使。
现代文：春季正月，朝廷任命州都将王行瑜为静难军节度使，扈跸都头李茂贞兼任武定节度使，扈跸都头杨守宗为金商节度使，右卫大将军顾彦朗为东川节度使，金商节度使杨守亮为山南西道节度使。
English: In the first month of spring, the imperial court appointed the prefectural governor Wang Xingyu as the festival envoy of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, the prefectural governor Li Maozhen as the festival envoy of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, the prefectural governor Yang Shuzong as the festival envoy of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, the prefectural governor Gu Yanlang as the festival envoy of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, and the prefectural governor Yang Shuliang as the festival envoy of the Chinese People's Liberation Army.

古文：彦朗，丰县人也。
现代文：顾彦朗是丰县人。
English: Gu Yanlang is from Feng County.

古文：辛巳，以董昌为浙东观察使，钱镠为杭州刺史。
现代文：辛巳，朝廷任命董昌为浙东观察使，钱为杭州刺史。
English: Soon after, the imperial court appointed Dong Chang as the East Zhejiang Observer and Qian as the Hangzhou Historian.

古文：秦宗权自以兵力十倍于硃全忠，而数为全忠所败，耻之，欲悉力以攻汴州。
现代文：泰宗权自以为兵力是朱全忠的十倍，多次被朱全忠打败，感到耻辱，想集中全部兵力攻打汴州。
English: Tai Zongquan thought that his force was ten times that of Zhu Quanzhong. He had been defeated by Zhu Quanzhong many times and felt humiliated. He wanted to concentrate all his forces to attack Zhangzhou.

古文：全忠患兵少，二月，以诸军都指挥使硃珍为淄州刺史，募兵于东道，期以初夏而还。
现代文：朱全忠担心兵马太少，二月，他委任诸军都指挥使朱珍为淄州刺史，到东道招募军队，预期初夏时回来。
English: Zhu Quanzhong was worried that there were too few soldiers and horses. In February, he appointed Zhu Zhen as the commander of all the armies to make history for Zhangzhou, and went to the host to recruit troops, expecting to return in early summer.

古文：戊辰，削夺三川都监田令孜官爵，长流端州。
现代文：戊辰，朝廷革除三川都监田令孜的官职爵位，把他长期流放端州。
English: At that time, the imperial court stripped the official title and rank of the Mikawa governor, Tendai Ryoze, and exiled him to Hanzhou for a long time.

古文：然令孜依陈敬瑄，竟不行。
现代文：可是田令孜依附陈敬，竟然不启程。
English: However, Tian Lingzhe clung to Chen Jing and did not set off.

古文：代北节度使李国昌薨。
现代文：代北节度使李国昌去世。
English: On behalf of the Northern Festival, Li Guochang passed away.

古文：三月，癸未，诏伪宰相萧遘、郑昌图、裴澈，于所在集众斩之，皆死于岐山。
现代文：三月，癸未，唐僖宗颁发诏令，命令将襄王李任命的伪宰相萧、郑昌图、裴澈于所在地召集兵民当众处斩，这几个人都死在岐山县。
English: In March, not long after, Tang Xizong issued a royal edict, ordering that Xiao, Zheng Changtu, and Pei Che, the pseudo-prime ministers appointed by Xiang Wang Li, be publicly beheaded by summoning soldiers and people to the location. These several people all died in Qishan County.

古文：时朝士受煴官者甚众，法司皆处以极法。杜让能力争之，免者什七八。
现代文：当时朝廷官员接受李授给官职的人很多，刑部要将他们全部处斩；杜让能为这些人极力争辨，最后有十分之七八的人免于一死。
English: At that time, there were many imperial officials who accepted the official positions conferred by Li Zhuang, and the criminal department wanted to behead them all; Dujuan was able to fight for these people, and in the end, seven or eight out of ten people were spared from death.

古文：壬辰，车驾至凤翔，节度使李昌符，恐车驾还京虽不治前过，恩赏必疏，乃以宫室未完，固请驻骅府舍，从之。
现代文：壬辰，唐僖宗到达凤翔，节度使李昌符担心，唐僖宗回到京城长安即使不追究他从前与朱玫驱赶圣驾的罪过，对他的恩赏也一定少了，于是以长安宫室还没修整完毕为理由，再请求唐僖宗在凤翔府第留住，唐僖宗依从了他。
English: At the same time, Tang Xizong arrived in Fengxiang, and the festival made Li Changfu worried. When Tang Xizong returned to the capital Chang'an, even if he did not pursue the crime of driving away the holy driver with Zhu Mei, his reward must have been less. Therefore, he asked Tang Xizong to stay in Fengxiang Prefecture on the grounds that the Chang'an palace room had not yet been renovated. Tang Xizong obeyed him.

古文：太傅兼侍中郑从谠罢为太子太保。
现代文：朝廷将太傅兼侍中郑从谠贬斥为太子太保。
English: The imperial court relegated Zheng Conglu, the grand steward and chamberlain, to the position of prince's bodyguard.

古文：镇海节度使周宝募亲军千人，号后楼兵，禀给倍于镇海军，镇海军皆怨，而后楼兵浸骄不可制。
现代文：镇海节度使周宝招募随身护卫军一千人，号称号楼兵，供给的粮饷是镇海军的几倍。镇海军的兵卒都怨气冲天，而后楼兵却是越来越骄横无法遏制。
English: The Zhenhai Festival made Zhou Bao recruit a thousand-man escort army, called the tower soldiers, and the grain supply was several times that of the town navy. The soldiers of the town navy were resentful, but the rear tower soldiers were becoming more and more arrogant and could not be contained.

古文：宝溺于声色，不亲政事，筑罗城二十馀里，建东第，人苦其役。
现代文：周宝沉溺于歌舞和女色，不亲自料理政务活动，修筑罗城长达二十多里，建造府第 东第 ，人们都苦于沉重的劳役。
English: Zhou Bao indulged in singing, dancing and womanizing, and did not personally take part in government affairs. The construction of Luo City was more than 20 miles long, and the construction of the capital was the longest. People were all suffering from heavy labor.

古文：宝与僚属宴后楼，有言镇海军怨望者，宝曰： 乱则杀之！ 
现代文：周宝和他的臣僚属下曾在后楼饮宴，有人说镇海军有抱怨的人，周宝说： 谁敢作乱就杀掉谁！ 
English: Zhou Bao and his subordinates had a banquet in the back room. Some people said that there were complainers in the town navy. Zhou Bao said: Whoever dares to make trouble will be killed!

古文：度支催勤使薛朗以其言告所善镇海军将刘浩，戒之使戢士卒，浩曰： 惟反可以免死耳！ 
现代文：度支催勘使把周宝的话告诉与他相好的镇海军将领刘浩，告诫他命令手下士卒注意一些，刘浩说： 只有造反可以免于一死了！ 
English: Du urged the surveyor to tell Zhou Bao's words to his friend, the town's naval general Liu Hao, and warned him to order his subordinates to pay attention. Liu Hao said: Only rebellion can be spared from death!

古文：是夕，宝醉，方寝，浩帅其党作乱，攻府舍而焚之。
现代文：当天夜晚，周宝喝醉，刚刚入睡，刘浩率领手下人马发动叛乱，攻打节度使府第，并放火焚烧。
English: On the evening of the same day, Zhou Bao was drunk and had just fallen asleep, Liu Hao led his men to launch a rebellion, attack the headquarters of the provincial government, and set it on fire.

古文：宝惊起，徒跣叩芙蓉门呼后楼兵，后楼兵亦反矣。
现代文：周宝惊慌失措地起来，光着脚去敲芙蓉门呼喊后楼兵，但后楼兵也谋反了。
English: Zhou Bao panicked and got up. He went to knock on the door of Hibiscus with bare feet and shouted for the soldiers behind the gate, but the soldiers behind the gate also plotted a rebellion.

古文：宝帅家人步走出青阳门，遂奔常州，依刺史丁从实。
现代文：周宝带领全家人徒步跑出青阳门，于是奔往常州，前去依附刺史丁从实。
English: Zhou Bao led the whole family to run out of Qingyang Gate on foot, so he rushed to Changzhou to attach himself to Ding Zhuo.

古文：浩杀诸僚佐，癸巳，迎薛朗入府，推为留后。
现代文：刘浩将周宝的属僚佐官斩杀，癸巳，迎接薛朗进入府第，推举他做留后。
English: Liu Hao beheaded Zhou Bao's subordinate aide-de-camp, and then, after welcoming Xue Lang into the capital and appointing him as his successor.

古文：宝先兼租庸副使，城中货财山积，是日，尽于乱兵之手。
现代文：周宝以前兼任租庸副使，城内货物资财堆积如山，这一天，全都落入作乱士兵的手中。
English: Zhou Bao had previously served as vice-envoy of the Xianyong, and the goods and resources in the city piled up like a mountain. On this day, they all fell into the hands of the soldiers.

古文：高骈闻宝败，列牙受贺，遣使馈以齑粉。
现代文：高骈听说仇敌周宝惨败，命令牙将列队庆贺，又派遣使臣向周宝送去细粉。
English: When Gao Wei heard that his enemy Zhou Bao had suffered a crushing defeat, he ordered his generals to form a procession to celebrate, and also sent an envoy to Zhou Bao to bring him fine flour.

古文：宝怒，掷之地曰： 汝有吕用之在，他日未可知也！ 
现代文：周宝十分恼怒，把高骈送来的细粉扔在地上怒骂高骈： 有吕用之在你身边，日后结果怎样还难以预料！ 
English: Zhou Bao was very angry. He threw the fine powder sent by Gao Yao on the ground and scolded Gao Yao: If you have Lv Ying by your side, it is difficult to predict what will happen in the future!

古文：扬州连岁饥，城中馁死者日数千人，坊巷为之寥落，妖异数见，骈悉以为周宝当之。
现代文：扬州连续几年闹饥荒，城内被饿死的人每天都有几千，店市冷落，灾害经常出现，高骈把罪过都加在周宝身上。
English: Yangzhou has been suffering from famine for several years in a row. Thousands of people in the city starve to death every day. Shops and markets are neglected, and disasters often occur. Gao Gan has placed all the blame on Zhou Bao.

古文：山南西道节度使杨守亮忌利州刺史王建骁勇，屡召之。建惧，不往。
现代文：山南西道节度使杨守亮嫉妒利州刺史王建的勇猛果敢，多次召令王建前往他的镇所。
English: The festival of Shannan West Road made Yang Shouliang jealous of the bravery and courage of Wang Jian, the governor of Lizhou, and repeatedly called Wang Jian to go to his town.

古文：前龙州司仓周庠说建曰： 唐祚将终，籓镇互相吞噬，皆无雄才远略，不能戡济多难。
现代文：王建担心被杨守视谋害，始终不去。原龙州司仓周痒规劝王建说： 大唐王朝将要完结，现在藩镇之间相互吞并，但都没有雄才大略，不能够平定拯救这个多灾多难的天下。
English: Wang Jian was worried that he would be assassinated by Yang Shouyi, but he still did not go. The former Longzhou Secretary Cang Zhou advised Wang Jian to say: The Great Tang Dynasty is coming to an end, and now the provinces and towns are annexing each other, but there is no general plan, and it is not possible to pacify and save this world of many disasters and difficulties.

古文：公勇而有谋，得士卒心，立大功者非公而谁！
现代文：你勇敢又有智谋，深得士卒拥护，建功立业的人除了你还有谁呢！
English: You are brave and resourceful. You are deeply supported by your peers. Who are the people who have made achievements besides you?

古文：然葭萌四战之地，难以久安。
现代文：但是利州这个地方是军事要地争战最多，难以长久安定。
English: However, Lizhou is the place with the most military conflicts, and it is difficult to maintain long-term stability.

古文：阆州地僻人富，杨茂实，陈、田之腹心，不修职贡，若表其罪，兴兵讨之，可一战而擒也。 
现代文：阆州偏僻人民富有，刺史杨茂实，是陈敬、田令孜的心腹，不服朝廷管辖，不纳税贡，如果进呈表章列举他的罪状，发动军队进行讨伐，可以一交战就把他擒获。 
English: The people in the remote areas of Zhangzhou are rich, with a rich history. He is the favorite of Chen Jing and Tian Lingzi. He does not accept the jurisdiction of the imperial court and does not pay taxes. If you submit a form to list his crimes and launch an army to fight, you can capture him in a single battle.

古文：建从之，召募溪洞酋豪，有众八千，沿嘉陵江而下，袭阆州，逐其刺史杨茂实而据之，自称防御使，招纳亡命，军势益盛，守亮不能制。
现代文：王建采纳了痒的意见，召请河沟山洞间的部落首领，聚集八千人，沿着嘉陵江而下，袭击阆州，赶走阆州刺史杨茂实，攻占其地。王建自称防御使，招收接纳四处逃亡的人们，军队的势力更加盛大起来，杨守亮已不能控制他了。
English: Wang Jian accepted the suggestion, called on the tribal leaders in the river ditches and caves, gathered eight thousand people, descended along the Jialing River, attacked Zhangzhou, drove away the Zhangzhou leader Yang Muxi, and occupied his land. Wang Jian claimed to be a defense envoy, recruited and accepted people fleeing everywhere, and the army's power became more magnificent. Yang Shouliang could no longer control him.

古文：部将张虔裕说建曰： 公乘天子微弱，专据方州，若唐室复兴，公无种矣。
现代文：王建的属下将领张虔裕劝诫他说： 你乘着天子的势力还微弱，独自战据一方，如果唐朝皇室重新兴盛起来，你就要遭受灭族之灾。
English: Zhang Qianyu, one of Wang Jian's subordinate generals, admonished him: You are still weak, relying on the power of the Son of Heaven, and you are fighting alone. If the Tang Dynasty royal family flourishes again, you will suffer the disaster of extermination.

古文：宜遣使奉表天子，杖大义以行师，蔑不济矣。 
现代文：你应该派遣使臣向皇帝进呈表章，以大义统率军队，没有不能战胜的。 
English: You should send an envoy to the emperor to present the badge, and lead the army with great righteousness. There is nothing that cannot be defeated.

古文：部将綦毋谏复说建养士爱民，以观天下之变，建皆从之。
现代文：手下将领綦毋谏也规劝王建，叫他招养人才爱护百姓，静观天下的变化。王建都听从了这些劝诫。
English: Wang Jian was also admonished by his generals to recruit talents, love the people, and watch the changes in the world. Wang Jian obeyed these admonitions.

古文：庠、虔裕、谏，皆许州人也。
现代文：周痒、张虔裕、綦毋谏三个人，都是许州人。
English: Zhou Itch, Zhang Qianyu, and Zou Liao are three people, all from Huzhou.

古文：初，建与东川节度使顾彦朗俱在神策军，同讨贼。建既据阆州，彦朗畏其侵暴，数遣使问遗，馈以军食，建由是不犯东川。
现代文：当初，王建与东川节度使顾彦朗都在神策军，一同讨贼伐贼寇；王建占据了阆州之后，顾彦朗害怕王建侵扰暴掠，多次派出使者前往问候和赠送礼物，送难王建军需粮食，因此王建没有进犯东川顾彦朗的地盘。
English: At first, Wang Jian and Dongchuan Jiedu had Gu Yanlang both in the Shenzhe army to fight against thieves and bandits together; after Wang Jian occupied Zhangzhou, Gu Yanlang was afraid of Wang Jian's intrusion and robbery, and repeatedly sent envoys to send greetings and gifts. Wang Jian's army needed grain to survive the hardships, so Wang Jian did not invade Dongchuan Gu Yanlang's territory.

古文：初，周宝闻淮南六合镇遏使徐约兵精，诱之使击苏州。
现代文：起初，周宝听说淮南六合镇遏使徐约的军队精壮，便引诱他去攻打苏州。
English: At first, Zhou Bao heard that Huainan Liuhe Town had made Xu You's army strong, so he lured him to attack Suzhou.

