古文：殷琰，陈郡长平人也。
现代文：殷琰，陈郡长平人。
English: Yin Qi, Chen County Governor Pingren.

古文：父道鸾，衡阳王义季右军长史。
现代文：他的父亲殷道鸾，官至衡阳王刘义季右军长史。
English: His father, Yin Daojun, was a high-ranking official of Hengyang King Liu Yizi, the commander-in-chief of the right army.

古文：琰少为太祖所知，见遇与琅邪王景文相埒。
现代文：殷琰少年时候便被文帝欣赏。享受的宠遇和琅王牙的王景文一样。
English: When he was a young boy, he was admired by Emperor Wen. He enjoyed the same favors as Wang Jingwen, who had the king's teeth.

古文：初为江夏王义恭征北行参军，始兴王浚后军主簿，出为鄱阳、晋熙太守，豫州治中从事史，庐陵内史。
现代文：开始当江夏王刘义恭征北行参军和始兴王刘浚后军主簿。接着出外当鄱阳和晋熙二郡太守，豫州治中从事史，庐陵内史。
English: It began when the king of Jiangxia, Liu Yigong, marched north to join the army, and the main book of the army of the king of Shixing, Liu Jianhou. Then he went abroad to be the governor of the two counties of Fenyang and Jinxi, engaged in history in Yuzhou, and in the history of Fuling.

古文：臧质反，弃郡奔北皖。
现代文：臧质造反，丢下郡务逃到北皖城。
English: He rebelled, left the county government and fled to Beilun City.

古文：琰性有计数，欲进退保全，故不还都邑。
现代文：殷琰有些心计，想进退自如保全自身，所以没回到京城。
English: Yin Yao had some plans, he wanted to advance and retreat freely to protect himself, so he did not return to Beijing.

古文：事平，坐系尚方，顷之被宥。除海陵王国郎中令，不拜。
现代文：臧质被平定后，因这被抓到尚方寺，不久又被原谅，被任为海陵王国的郎中令，没有赴任。
English: After the war was settled, he was taken to Shangfang Temple for this, but was soon pardoned and appointed as a vice-commander of the Kingdom of Hailing, but did not take up the post.

古文：临海王子顼为冠军将军、吴兴太守，以琰为录事参军，行郡事。
现代文：临海王刘子顼当冠军将军、吴兴太守，让殷琰当录事参军，代管郡中事务。
English: Linhai King Liu Zixuan became the champion general and Wu Xing the de facto ruler, and let Yin Zixuan enlist in the army and take charge of the affairs of the county middle school.

古文：复为豫州别驾，太宰户曹属，丹阳丞，尚书左丞，少府，寻阳王子房冠军司马，行南豫州，随府转右军司马，又徙巴陵王休若左军司马。
现代文：再当豫州别驾，太宰户曹部属，丹阳郡丞，尚书左丞，少府，寻阳王刘子房冠军司马，代管南豫州事务，随同本府转右军司马，又转官巴陵王刘休若为左军司马。
English: He also served as the Sima of Yuzhou, Dazaifu, Caube, Danyang, Shangshu, Zuozhu, Shaofu, the champion of the Liu Zifang of Guoyang, the Sima of Southern Yuzhou, the Sima of the Right Army, and the Sima of the Left Army of the Baling King Liu Xiu.

古文：前废帝永光元年，除黄门侍郎，出为山阳王休祐右军长史、南梁郡太守。
现代文：前废帝永光元年，殷琰被任命为黄门侍郎，又出外当山阳王休祐右军长史，南梁郡太守。
English: In the first year of the former emperor Yongguang, Yin Xi was appointed as a Yellow Gate attendant, and went abroad to serve as the commander of the right army of Sanyang King Xuyu and the governor of Nanliang County.

古文：休祐入朝，琰仍行府州事。
现代文：休祐到朝廷，殷琰仍然代理州府事务。
English: Hugh Yu went to the imperial court, but Yin Xi still acted for the state affairs.

古文：太宗泰始元年，以休祐为荆州，欲以吏部郎张岱为豫州刺史。
现代文：太宗泰始元年，朝廷用休祐做荆州刺史，想用吏部郎张岱当豫州刺史。
English: In the first year of Emperor Taizong's reign, the imperial court used Xuyu to write the history of Jingzhou, and wanted to use Zhang Ye, the official's son, to write the history of Yuzhou.

古文：会晋安王子勋反，即以琰督豫司二州南豫州之梁郡诸军事、建武将军、豫州刺史，以西汝阴太守庞道隆为琰长史，殿中将军刘顺为司马。
现代文：恰遇晋安王刘子勋造反，便用殷琰为督豫、司二州、南豫州的梁郡诸军事，建武将军，豫州刺史，以西汝阴太守庞道隆当殷琰的长史，殿中将军刘顺做他的司马。
English: When Liu Zixun, the king of Jin'an, rebelled, he used Yin Xi as the military commander of Duyu, the governor of Erzhou and Liang County in South Yuzhou, General Jianwu, the governor of Yuzhou, the long-time governor of Western Ruyin, Pang Daolong, and the general of the palace Liu Shun as his steward.

古文：顺劝琰同子勋。
现代文：刘顺劝殷琰倒向刘子勋。
English: Liu Shun urged Yin Qi to fall to Liu Zixun.

古文：琰家累在京邑。
现代文：殷琰家人眷属在京城，打算拥护朝廷。
English: Yin Xi's family members and dependents are in Beijing, intending to support the imperial court.

古文：意欲奉顺，而土人前右军参军杜叔宝、前陈南顿二郡太守皇甫道烈、道烈从弟前马头太守景度、前汝南颍川二郡太守庞天生、前睢阳令夏侯季子等，并劝琰同逆。
现代文：但当地人前右军参军杜叔宝，前陈、南顿二郡太守皇甫道烈，及道烈堂弟前马头太守景度，前汝南、颍川二郡太守庞天生，前睢阳令夏侯季子等，都劝殷琰拥护叛军。
English: However, local people such as Du Shubao, the former right-wing army member, Wang Fu Daolai, the former Chen and Nantong two-county grand marshal, and Daolai's cousin, the former Ma Tou grand marshal Jingtou, the former Runan and Zhangchuan two-county grand marshal Pang Tian Sheng, and the former Puyang deputy Xia Hou Ji Zi, all advised Yin Qi to support the rebels.

古文：琰素无部曲，门义不过数人，无以自立，受制于叔宝等。
现代文：殷琰一向没有亲兵部属，门人不过几人，无法自主，只能受制于杜叔宝等人。
English: Yin Xi has never had any personal subordinates, but only a few followers. He cannot be independent and can only be controlled by Du Shubao and others.

古文：太宗遣冗从仆射柳伦领军助，骠骑大将军山阳王休祐又遣中兵参军郑瑗说琰令还。二人至，即与叔宝合。
现代文：明帝派冗从仆射柳伦带领军队帮助殷琰，骠骑大将军山阳王刘休皊又派中兵参军郑瑗游说殷琰叫他拥护朝廷，这二人一到那里，便投向杜叔宝。
English: The Ming Emperor sent his lackey Liu Lun to lead the army to help Yin Zhao, and Liu Shuxuan, the king of Shanyang, sent soldiers to join Zheng Zhao's army to persuade Yin Zhao to support the imperial court. Once they arrived there, the two of them threw themselves into the arms of Du Shubao.

古文：叔宝者，杜坦之子，既土豪乡望，内外诸军事并专之。
现代文：杜叔宝即杜坦的儿子，既是当地豪绅大族，于是便控制了殷琰的内外部队。
English: Du Shubao, the son of Du Tan, was both a local aristocrat and a member of a large clan, and therefore controlled the internal and external troops of the Yin and Yang.

古文：弋阳太守卜天生据郡同逆，断梁州献马得百余匹。
现代文：弋阳太守卜天生占据本郡响应叛军，截留梁州上献朝廷的一百多匹马。
English: In response to the rebels, the Yang di-Pertuan Agong naturally occupied the county, and intercepted more than a hundred horses from Liangzhou to be presented to the imperial court.

古文：边城令宿僧护起义斩天生，传首京邑。太宗嘉之，以为龙骧将军，封建兴县侯，食邑三百户。
现代文：边城令宿僧护起义杀天生，送卜天生的脑袋到京城，明帝表示赞赏，用宿僧护当龙骧将军，封他为建兴县侯，享有三百户的租税。
English: The Emperor Ming expressed his appreciation for the fact that the border town ordered the monk to guard the uprising and send his head to the capital. He used the monk to guard the dragon dragon general, and named him the prince of Jianxing County, enjoying the tax of three hundred households.

古文：时绥戎将军、汝南新蔡二郡太守周矜起义于悬瓠，收兵得千余人。
现代文：当时的绥戎将军，汝南新蔡二郡太守周矜在悬瓠起义，集合千余士兵。
English: At that time, the general of Qiong Rong, the governor of Runan New Cai Er County, Zhou Qi, was in a suspended uprising, gathering more than a thousand soldiers.

古文：袁顗遗信诱矜司马汝南人常珍奇，以金铃为信。珍奇即日斩矜，送首诣顗，顗以珍奇为汝南、新蔡二郡太守。
现代文：袁顗派人诱说周矜的司马汝南人常珍奇，用金铃作信号，常珍奇当天便杀了周矜，把周矜的脑袋送给袁顗，袁顗用常珍奇为汝南新蔡二郡太守。
English: Yuan Shun sent someone to lure Zhou Qi's steward, the Runan man Chang Zhenqi, with a golden bell as a signal. Chang Zhenqi killed Zhou Qi on the same day and gave Zhou Qi's head to Yuan Shun. Yuan Shun used Chang Zhenqi as the governor of the new Caiyi County of Runan.

古文：太宗追赠矜本官，以义阳内史庞孟虬为司州刺史，领随郡太守。孟虬不受命，起兵同子勋。子勋召孟虬出寻阳，而以孟虬子定光行义阳郡事。
现代文：明帝追赠周矜的一切官爵，用义阳内史庞孟虬当司州刺史，兼领随郡太守，孟虬不接受这个命令，反而响应刘子勋，刘子勋召回孟虬到寻阳，而用他的儿子庞定光代管义阳郡事。
English: Emperor Ming bestowed all the titles of nobility and honor on Zhou Qi, and appointed Meng Qi as the governor of Yiyang and the governor of the county. Meng Qi did not accept this order, but instead responded to Liu Zixun. Liu Zixun recalled Meng Qi to Huanyang, and used his son Pang Ding Guang to take charge of Yiyang County affairs.

古文：太宗知琰逼迫土人，事不获已，犹欲羁縻之。
现代文：明帝明白殷琰是被当地人逼迫而不得已的，所以还想牵住他。
English: Emperor Ming understood that Yin Qi was forced by the local people and had no choice, so he still wanted to hold him.

古文：以琰兄前中书郎瑗为司徒右长史，子邈为山阳王休祐骠骑参军。
现代文：用他的哥哥前中书郎殷瑗当司徒右长史，他的儿子殷邈当山阳王休祐的骠骑将军。
English: He used his elder brother, the former middle school teacher, Yin Xi, as the head priest, and his son, Yin Xi, as the cavalry general of the king of Sanyang, Xuyu.

古文：子勋遣使以琰为辅国将军、梁郡太守，后又加豫州，假节督南豫数郡。
现代文：刘子勋则选殷琰为辅国将军，梁郡太守，后又加官豫州刺史，假节管南豫州的的几郡军事。
English: Liu Zixun then selected Yin Xi as the auxiliary national general, the governor of Liang County, and later the governor of Yuzhou, and the military of several counties in southern Yuzhou.

古文：杜叔宝求琰上佐，庞道隆虑其为祸，乃请奉表使寻阳。
现代文：杜叔宝请求做殷琰的主要助手，庞道隆担心杜做坏事，于是请求带上表章出使寻阳。
English: Du Shubao asked to be Yin Qi's main assistant. Pang Daolong was worried that Du would do something bad, so he asked him to bring his watch badge and go out to seek the sun.

古文：琰即以叔宝为长史、梁郡太守。休祐步入朝，家内犹分停寿阳，琰资给供赡，事尽丰厚。
现代文：殷琰马上用杜叔宝当长史，梁郡太守，休祐步行上朝，家中仍有些人留在寿阳，殷琰供应他家人很充足，一点不缺乏。
English: Yin Yao immediately used Du Shubao as the long history, the governor of Liang County, and Huiyu walked to the morning. Some people still stayed at home in Shouyang. Yin Yao's supply to his family was very sufficient, there was no shortage at all.

古文：二年正月，太宗遣辅国将军刘勔率宁朔将军吕安国西讨，休祐出镇历阳，为诸军总统。
现代文：泰始二年正月，明帝派辅国将军刘勔率领宁朔将军吕安国西向讨伐。休祐出外坐镇历阳，作各路大军的统帅。
English: In the first month of the second year of the reign of Emperor Taizhi, Emperor Ming sent the general of the Auxiliary State Liu Bei to lead the general of Ningshuo, Lu'an, to the west of the country for a crusade. He went to Liyang and became the commander of the army.

古文：时徐州刺史薛安都亦据彭城反，募能生禽琰、安都，封千户县侯，赐布绢各二千匹。
现代文：当时徐州刺史薛安都也占据彭城反叛。朝廷悬赏能生擒殷琰，薛安都的人，封他为一千户的侯爵，赏赐布匹丝绢各二千匹。
English: At that time, Xuzhou's governor, Xue Andu, also occupied Pengcheng and rebelled. The imperial court offered a reward to anyone who could produce a yakitori, and the people of Xue Andu made him the marquis of a thousand households and rewarded him with two thousand yakitori each.

古文：二月，勔进军小岘。
现代文：二月，刘勔进占小岘。
English: In February, Liu Yujin appeared on the small screen.

古文：初，合肥戍主、南汝阴太守薛元宝委郡奔子勋，前太守硃辅之据城归顺。琰遣攻辅之，辅之败走。
现代文：之前，合肥戍主、南汝阴太守薛元宝逃离本郡，投奔刘子勋，前太守朱辅之占据城池归顺朝廷，殷琰派人攻击朱辅之，朱辅之逃跑了。
English: Previously, Xue Yuanbao, the lord of Hefei and the governor of South Ruyin, fled the county and went to Liu Zixun. Zhu Yue, the former governor, occupied the city and surrendered to the imperial court. Yin Xi sent people to attack Zhu Yue, and Zhu Yue fled.

古文：琰以前右军参军裴季为南汝阴太守，季又归顺，太宗即而授之。
现代文：殷琰用前右军参军裴季当南汝阴太守，裴季又归顺朝廷，太宗便也授他本郡太守。
English: Yin Xi used the former right-wing army to join the army to make Pei Ji the governor of Nanruyin. Pei Ji also submitted to the imperial court, and Emperor Taizong also awarded him the governor of the county.

古文：琰所用象县令许道莲亦率二百人归降，太宗以为马头太守。
现代文：殷琰选用的象县县令许道莲也率二百人归顺，太宗便用他当马头太守。
English: Xiangxian County Governor Xu Daolian, who was selected by Yin Xi, also led 200 people to submit, and Emperor Taizong then used him as Ma Tou Taishu.

古文：三月，上又遣宁朔将军刘怀珍、段僧爱、龙骧将军姜产之马步三军，助勔讨琰。
现代文：三月，明帝又派宁朔将军刘怀珍、段僧爱，龙骧将军姜产之，率领骑步兵三支军队帮助刘勔讨伐殷琰。
English: In March, Emperor Ming also sent Ningshuo Generals Liu Huizhen, Duan Xiang'ai, and Longjing General Jiang Shanzhi to lead three cavalry and infantry armies to help Liu Bei fight Yin Qi.

古文：义军主黄回募江西楚人千余，斩子勋所置马头太守王广元，以回为龙骧将军。
现代文：起义军小帅黄回招募江西楚地壮士千余人，杀刘子勋选用的马头太守王广元，用黄回当龙骧将军。
English: Huang Hui, a minor commander of the rebel army, recruited more than a thousand strong men from Chudi, Jiangxi Province, and killed Wang Guangyuan, the grand marshal of Ma Tou selected by Liu Zixun, and used Huang Hui as the general of Longyan.

古文：淮西人前奉朝请郑墨率子弟部曲及淮右郡起义于陈郡城，有众一万，太宗以为司州刺史。后虏寇淮西，战败见杀，追赠冠军将军。
现代文：淮西人前奉朝请郑墨率领子弟部众和淮河右边诸郡兵士在陈郡城起义，有一万多人，明帝用他当司州刺史，后来魏人侵略淮西，郑墨打败后被杀害，朝廷追认他当冠军将军。
English: The people of Huaixi asked Zheng Mo to lead his followers and soldiers from the counties on the right side of the Huai River to revolt in Chen County Town. There were more than 10,000 people. The Ming Emperor used him to make history in Zhizhou. Later, the Wei people invaded Huaixi. Zheng Mo was defeated and killed. The court recognized him as a champion general.

古文：是月，刘顺、柳伦、皇甫道烈、庞天生等马步八千人，东据宛唐，去寿阳三百里。
现代文：这月，刘顺、柳伦、皇甫道烈、庞天生等骑步兵八千人向东据守宛唐，距寿阳城三百里。
English: This month, Liu Shun, Liu Lun, Wang Fu Daoling, Pang Tian Sheng and other eight thousand cavalry and infantry went east to defend Wan Tang, three hundred miles from Shouyang City.

古文：勔率众军并进，去顺数里立营。
现代文：刘勔率领各路军队一同前进，在离刘顺几里处安营扎寨。
English: Liu Shun led all the troops to advance together and set up camp a few miles away from Liu Shun.

古文：在道遇雨，旦始至，垒堑未立，顺欲击之。
现代文：他们在路上遇到大雨，天明时才抵达。营寨还未安好，刘顺想乘机出击。
English: They encountered heavy rain on the way and arrived at dawn. The camp was not yet secure, and Liu Shun wanted to take the opportunity to attack.

古文：时琰所遣诸军并受节度，而以皇甫道烈、土豪柳伦，台之所遣，顺本卑微，不宜统督，唯二军不受命。
现代文：当时殷琰派的各军都受自己指挥，但因皇甫道烈、土豪柳伦，是原先朝廷派的，刘顺本来是寒族人士，也不宜加以指挥，只这二支军队不接受命令。
English: At that time, all the armies of the Yin and Yang faction were under their own command, but because the Emperor Dowager and the local strongman Liu Lun were originally from the imperial court, and Liu Shun was originally a member of the Kham people, it was not appropriate to command them. Only these two armies did not accept orders.

古文：至是道烈、伦不同，顺不能独进，乃止。
现代文：此时皇甫道烈、柳伦不同意出击，刘顺不能单独进攻，只好作罢。
English: At this time, Empress Dowager Dowager Dowager and Liu Lun did not agree to attack, Liu Shun could not attack alone, and had no choice but to give up.

古文：既而勔营垒渐立，不可复攻，因相持守。
现代文：不久刘勔的营寨便已稳固，再也没有易攻的好机会，于是两方互相僵持。
English: Soon Liu Ye's encampment was secure, and there was no longer a good opportunity for an easy attack, so the two sides were at a stalemate.

古文：四月，勔录事参军王起、前部贼曹参军甄澹等五人委勔奔顺，顺因此出军攻勔。
现代文：四月刘勔的录事参军王起，前部贼曹参军甄澹等五人背叛刘勔投奔刘顺，刘顺因而出动部队进攻。
English: In April, Wang Qi, the record of Liu Bei's entry into the army, and Zhen Qi, the front thief Cao's entry into the army, betrayed Liu Bei and defected to Liu Shun, and Liu Shun sent troops to attack.

古文：顺幢主樊僧整与台马军主骠骑中兵参军段僧爱交槊斗，僧整刺僧爱，杀之，追赠屯骑校尉。
现代文：刘顺的队长樊僧整和中央骑军队长骠骑中兵参军段僧爱相互用长矛打斗，樊僧整将段僧爱挑于马下，杀了他。
English: Liu Shun's captain, Xuan Zang Zheng, and the commander of the Central Cavalry Army, Xuan Zang Zheng, fought each other with spears. Xuan Zang Zheng took Xuan Zheng under his horse and killed him.

古文：僧爱勇冠三军，军中并惧。
现代文：段僧爱死后被追赠屯骑校尉，段僧爱勇盖三军，军中都很害怕。
English: After Duan Ai's death, he was posthumously awarded the post of a cavalry captain, and Duan Ai bravely led the three armies. Everyone in the army was afraid.

古文：太宗又遣太尉司马垣闳率军来会，步兵校尉庞沈之助裴季戍合肥。
现代文：明帝又派太尉司马垣闳率领军队来会合，步兵校尉庞沈之帮助裴季据守合肥。
English: Emperor Ming also sent Lieutenant Sima Qianqian to lead the army to the meeting, with the help of Infantry Lieutenant Pang Shen, Pei Ji was able to defend Hefei.

古文：初，淮南人周伯符说休祐求起义兵，休祐不许，固请，乃遣之。
现代文：当初淮南人周伯符请求休祐允许自己起兵帮助朝廷，休皊不同意，周伯符便更坚决要求休祐，只好同意了。
English: At first, Zhou Bofu, a native of Huainan Province, asked Huiyu to allow him to raise an army to help the imperial court. Huiyu did not agree, and Zhou Bofu insisted on Huiyu even more, and had no choice but to agree.

古文：杖策单行，至安丰，收得八百余人，于淮西为游兵。珍奇所置弋阳太守郭确遣将军郭慈孙击伯符于金丘，琰又遣中兵参军杜叔宝助之。
现代文：周伯符手持节仗单独前往，到安丰，收集八百余人，在淮西当游兵，常珍奇所派的弋阳太守郭确，派将军郭慈孙在金丘攻击周伯符，殷琰又派中兵参军杜叔宝帮助郭慈孙。
English: Zhou Bofu went to the festival alone, to Anfeng, to collect more than eight hundred people, and to be a tour soldier in Huaxi. Chang Zhenqi sent Guo Jizhi, the governor of Shenyang, to attack Zhou Bofu in Jinqiu, and Yin Qi sent Du Shubao to help Guo Jizhong.

古文：慈孙等为伯符所败，并投水死。
现代文：郭慈孙等人被周伯符打败，都投水自杀。
English: Guo Cisun and others were defeated by Zhou Bofu and committed suicide by throwing themselves into the water.

古文：太宗以伯符为骠骑参军。
现代文：明帝便以周伯符当骠骑将军。
English: Emperor Ming then made Zhou Bofu the general of the cavalry.

古文：叔宝本谓台军停住历阳不办进，顺等至，无不瓦解，唯赍一月日粮。
现代文：杜叔宝本来以为中央军队停在历阳不敢前进，刘顺等人一到，中央军队便会顷刻瓦解，所以只带一个月的粮食。
English: Du Shubao originally thought that the central army would stop at Liyang and would not dare to advance. As soon as Liu Shun and others arrived, the central army would collapse in an instant, so he only brought a month's worth of grain.

古文：既与勔相持，军食尽，报叔宝送食；叔宝乃发车千五百乘，载米饷顺，自以五千精兵防送之。
现代文：既然和刘勔等人僵持不下，粮食又很快吃完了，于是刘顺等人，便叫杜叔宝快送粮食，杜叔宝于是征调一千五百辆大车，运米接济刘顺，亲自用五千精兵护送运粮部队。
English: Since he couldn't hold out with Liu Shun and others, and the grain was quickly eaten up, Liu Shun and others asked Du Shubao to send grain quickly. Du Shubao then requisitioned and transferred 1,500 trucks to transport rice to help Liu Shun, and personally escorted the grain transport troops with 5,000 elite soldiers.

古文：勔闻之，军副吕安国曰： 刘顺精甲八千，而我众不能居半，相持既久，强弱势殊，苟复推迁，则无以自立，所赖在彼粮将竭，我食有余耳。若使叔宝米至，非唯难可复图，我亦不能持久。
现代文：刘勔等人知道这一消息，副将吕安国说： 刘顺有精兵八千，我们的人马不及他们一半，僵持一久，强弱局势更加突出，再往后拖，我们便无法坚持，可喜的是敌人粮食将吃完，我们有余粮，如果杜叔宝的大米一到，不仅无法应付，我们终究不能坚持下去。
English: When Liu Shun and others learned this news, Vice Admiral Lu Anguo said: Liu Shun has eight thousand elite soldiers, our manpower is less than half of theirs, we have been at a standstill for a long time, the situation of strength and weakness is more prominent, if we delay any further, we will not be able to hold out. Fortunately, the enemy will run out of grain, we have surplus grain. If Du Shubao's rice arrives, we will not only be unable to cope, we will not be able to hold out after all.

古文：今唯有间道袭其米车，出彼不意。若能制之，将不战走矣。 
现代文：现今惟有从小路袭击他们的运米大车，出其意料，如果能成功，敌人将不战而逃。 
English: Now, the only way out is to attack their rice trucks from a side road. If they succeed, the enemy will flee without a fight.

古文：勔以为然，乃以疲弱守营，简选千百精手，配安国及军主黄回等，间路出顺后，于横塘抄之。
现代文：刘勔觉得这个方案很好，于是用老弱部队守卫军营，精选一千多强健士兵配给吕安国和队长黄回等人，从小路走在刘顺的军营背后，即在横塘截击敌人运米部队。
English: Liu Jun thought this plan was very good, so he used the old and weak troops to guard the camp, selected more than a thousand strong soldiers to distribute to Lu'an Guo and captain Huang Hui and others, and walked from the path behind Liu Shun's camp, that is, intercepted the enemy's rice transport troops in Hengtang.

古文：安国始行，计叔宝寻至，止赍二日熟食，食尽，叔宝不至，将士并欲还。
现代文：吕安国开始出发时，只带两天熟食，熟食吃完了，杜叔宝还未到，将士们都想回去。
English: At the beginning of the departure from Lu'an, only two days of cooked food were brought. The cooked food was finished, and Du Shubao had not yet arrived. The soldiers all wanted to go back.

古文：安国曰： 卿等旦已一食，今晚米车不容不至。若其不至，夜去不晚。 
现代文：吕安国说： 你们白天已吃过一餐，今天晚上敌人的米车一定会来，如果万一不来，夜晚回去不迟。 
English: Lu'an Guo said: You have already eaten a meal during the day. The enemy's rice truck will definitely come tonight. If it doesn't come, it won't be too late to go back at night.

古文：叔宝果至，以米车为函箱阵，叔宝于外为游军，幢主杨仲怀领五百人居前，与安国、回等相会。仲怀部曲并欲退就叔宝，并力击安国。仲怀曰： 贼至不击，复欲何待？
现代文：杜叔宝果然不久来了，把米车编成函箱阵，杜叔宝在外面作机动增援，队长杨仲怀带五百人在前面探路，和吕安国黄回等相遇，杨仲怀的部属都想逃到杜叔宝那里，合力攻击吕安国等人，杨仲怀说： 敌人到了，不出击还等什么？
English: Du Shubao did indeed come soon. He arranged the rice carts into a line of boxes. Du Shubao was on the outside as a mobile reinforcement. Captain Yang Zhonghuai led five hundred people to explore the road ahead, and met with Lu'an Guo Huang Hui and others. Yang Zhonghuai's subordinates all wanted to escape to Du Shubao and jointly attack Lu'an Guo and others. Yang Zhonghuai said: The enemy has arrived, what are you waiting for if you don't attack?

古文：且统军在后，政三二里间，比吾交手，何忧不至。 
现代文：况且统帅在后，不过二三里，等到我们和敌人交战了，还怕他们不来吗？ 
English: Moreover, the commander-in-chief is behind, but only two or three miles, and when we are at war with the enemy, are we afraid that they will not come?

古文：即便前战，回所领并淮南楚子，天下精兵，众力既倍，合战，便破之。于阵杀仲怀，仲怀所领五百人死尽。
现代文：便冲上前去。黄回带的都是淮南楚地士兵，是国内的极精锐的部队，两军相交，便打败了敌人，在战斗中杀了杨仲怀，杨仲怀的五百部众全部被杀。
English: They rushed forward. The soldiers of the Yellow Belt were all soldiers from Huainan and Chudi, and they were the most elite troops in the country. When the two armies intersected, they defeated the enemy and killed Yang Zhonghai in the battle. Yang Zhonghai's five hundred followers were all killed.

古文：叔宝至，而仲怀及士卒伏尸蔽野，回等欲乘胜击之，安国曰： 彼将自走，不假复击。 
现代文：杜叔宝到时，但见杨仲怀和他的士兵横尸满地，黄回等人想乘机进攻。吕安国说： 他们将会自动逃跑，不需再打。 
English: When Du Shubao arrived, he saw Yang Zhonghuai and his soldiers lying dead on the ground. Huang Hui and others wanted to take the opportunity to attack. Lu'an Guo said: They will run away automatically, no need to fight again.

古文：退军三十里止宿，夜遣骑参候，叔宝果弃米车奔走。
现代文：退兵三十里地驻扎，晚上派骑兵侦察，杜叔宝果然丢下米车逃走。
English: The retreating soldiers were stationed thirty miles away, and sent cavalry to reconnoitre in the evening. Du Shubao did indeed abandon the rice cart and flee.

古文：安国即复夜往，烧米车，驱牛二千余头而还。
现代文：吕安国便当夜前进，烧掉敌军米车，赶着二千头牛回来了。
English: Lu'an then advanced that night, burned the enemy's wagons, and returned with two thousand head of cattle.

古文：刘顺闻米车见烧，叔宝又走，五月一日夜，众溃，奔还寿阳，仍走淮西就常珍奇。勔于是方轨而进。
现代文：刘顺听说米车被烧掉，杜叔宝逃跑，五月一日夜间，刘的部队也崩溃了，逃回寿阳，接着又逃到淮西依仗常珍奇，刘勔大军于是方轨而进。
English: Liu Shun heard that the rice cart was burned, Du Shubao fled, and on the night of May 1, Liu Shun's troops also collapsed, fled back to Shouyang, and then fled to Huaxi.

古文：叔宝敛居民及散卒，婴城自守。勔与诸军分营城外，黄回立航渡肥水。叔宝遣马步三千，欲破航，并栅断小岘埭，回击大破之，焚其船栅。
现代文：杜叔宝集合老百姓和溃兵，加固城池防守，刘勔和各路大军分别驻扎在城外，黄回在肥水边建立浮桥过河，杜叔宝派骑步兵三千人想打破这个浮桥，且截断小岘水坝，黄回奋击大败敌人，烧毁了敌人船舰。
English: Du Shubao gathered the common people and the routed soldiers to strengthen the defense of the city. Liu Bei and the various armies were stationed outside the city. Huang Hui built a pontoon bridge to cross the river at the edge of the fertile water. Du Shubao sent 3,000 cavalry infantry to break the pontoon bridge and cut off the Xiaobai Dam. Huang Hui defeated the enemy and burned the enemy ship.

古文：休祐与琰书曰： 君本文弱，素无武干，是远近所悉，且名器清显，不应复有分外希觊。
现代文：休祐给殷琰写信说： 你本来是文雅书生，一向没有军事才干，这是远近熟悉的，况且国家的皇位，显而易见你是不能有半分希望的。
English: Huiyu wrote to Yin Qi, "You are originally a gentle scholar, and you have never had any military talent. This is something that is familiar from near and far. Moreover, it is obvious that you cannot have half a hope for the country's throne.

古文：近者之事，当是劫于凶竖，不能守节。
现代文：近来发生的事，一定是为小人们逼迫所至，而你又不能坚定。
English: What has happened recently must be the result of the persecution of the little people, and you can't be firm.

古文：今大军长驱，已造城下，势孤援绝，祸败交至，顾昔情款，犹有恻然。
现代文：今日朝廷大军前进，已抵达你们的城下，你们力量很小，而且没有增援部队，失败的灾难是一定会来临的，但考虑到当年我们的交情，不免有些可怜你。
English: Today, the imperial army has advanced and has arrived at the foot of your castle. Your strength is small, and there are no reinforcements. The disaster of defeat is sure to come, but considering our friendship at that time, I can't help but feel a little sorry for you.

古文：圣上垂天地之仁，开不世之泽，好生恶杀，遐迩所闻。
现代文：皇上施天地般的仁惠，赏赐从未有过的恩泽，喜欢救人讨厌杀伐，这是远近人们熟知的。
English: The Emperor bestows benevolence like heaven and earth, bestows unprecedented grace, likes to save people and hates to kill, which is well known to people near and far.

古文：顾琛、王昙生等皆军败迸走，披草乞活，尚蒙恩恕，晏处私门。
现代文：顾琛王昙生等人都兵败逃亡，在野外求生，都得到皇恩的宽恕，安静地呆在家里。
English: Gu Yao, Wang Xinsheng and others were defeated and fled, trying to survive in the open. They were all forgiven by the emperor and stayed quietly at home.

古文：今神锋所临，前无横陈，况穷城弱众，残伤之余，而欲自固乎！
现代文：今日我军兵锋所向的地方，前面没有对手，况且你们孤小城弱的部队，加上是受到打击的残余，难道能自我保守吗？
English: Today, where the front of our army is heading, there is no opponent in front, and what's more, your isolated and weak troops, plus the remnants of the attack, can they protect themselves?

古文：若开门归顺，自可不失富贵；将佐小大，并保荣爵。何故苟困士民，自求齑脍，身膏斧镬，妻息并尽，老兄垂白，东市受刑邪！
现代文：如果开门投降，还能保住原来的富贵，大小将士们，仍可保原先爵位，何必苟且困扰兵士民众，自找灭亡，招致自己蒙受刀斧的惩罚，妻子儿女被杀，兄长以白发之年在东街市上被砍头。
English: If you open the door to surrender, you can still keep the original wealth, the great and small generals can still keep the original rank, why bother the soldiers and the people, seek their own demise, incur the punishment of the knife and axe, the wife and children are killed, and the elder brother is beheaded in the East Street Market.

古文：幸自思之。
现代文：请你自已详细考虑。
English: Please do your own due diligence.

古文：信言不爽，有如皎日。 
现代文：我每句话都会兑现。如同明夜皓月一般明白。 
English: I'll do everything I say. It's as clear as night and day.

古文：上又遣王道隆赍诏宥琰罪。
现代文：明帝又派王道隆带诏书原谅殷琰的罪过。
English: Emperor Ming also sent Wang Daolong with an imperial edict to forgive Yin Xi's sins.

古文：勔又与琰书曰： 昔景和凶悖，行绝人伦，昏虐险秽，谏诤杜塞，遂残毁陵庙，芟刈百僚，纵毒穷凶，靡有纪极。
现代文：刘勔又给殷琰写信说： 当年景和帝凶恶疯狂，丧尽人伦道德，昏乱暴虐，阴险卑鄙。进谏的道路被堵绝，以致毁坏先帝陵庙，杀戮百官，流毒四方，穷凶极恶，简直没有比这更坏的。
English: Liu Wei also wrote to Yin Qi, saying: "The situation at that time and the emperor were vicious and crazy, losing all human ethics and morals, chaotic and tyrannical, insidious and despicable. The road to the capital was blocked, resulting in the destruction of the former emperor's mausoleum, the killing of hundreds of officials, the spread of poison in all directions, and the extreme evil, there is simply nothing worse than this.

古文：于时人神回遑，莫能自保，中外士庶，咸愿一匡。
现代文：当时神灵和人们惶惶无主，无法自保，朝野的官民，都想拯救这危险的时局。
English: At that time, the gods and people were panicked and helpless, unable to protect themselves. The government and the people, both at home and abroad, all wanted to save this dangerous situation.

古文：予职在直卫，目所备睹。
现代文：我此时正在警卫部门工作，这些都是亲眼所见。
English: I was working in the security department at the time and I saw it with my own eyes.

古文：主上神机天发，指麾克定，横流涂炭，一朝太平，扶危拯急，实冠终古。
现代文：皇上奋发神武韬略，迅速拨乱反正。惨遭涂炭的人民，一日间便得到太平。扶持危险拯救急难，确实是自古以来没有过的。
English: The emperor made strenuous efforts to find a solution and quickly set things right. The people, who had suffered so much, were pacified in a single day. Supporting danger and rescuing people in an emergency is something that has never happened since ancient times.

古文：而四方持疑，成此乖逆，资斧所临，每从偃简。
现代文：但四方心怀疑虑，造成这种叛逆的局面。朝廷大军所向，无不摧破。
English: However, the four sides were suspicious and caused this rebellious situation. The imperial army was determined and invincible.

古文：足下以衣冠华胄，信概夙昭，附戾从违，犹见容养。
现代文：阁下是高门士族，信义昭著，附和反逆，仍被宽容。
English: Your Excellency is a member of a high-ranking family of scholars. He is known for his loyalty and righteousness, and he is still tolerated because of his cooperation and rebellion.

古文：贤兄长史，阶升清列；贤子参军，亦塞国网。
现代文：令兄殷瑗长史，升进为清显大官，令郎殷邈参军，也被国家选用。
English: His elder brother, Yin Xi, had a long history and was promoted to a high-ranking official of the Qing Dynasty. His younger brother, Yin Xi, joined the army and was also selected by the state.

古文：间者进军宛唐，计由刘顺，退众闭城，当时未了。
现代文：前段时期我们进军宛唐，都是由刘顺出谋划策，收敛兵众退守城池，还没有结束。
English: In the previous period, when we marched into Wan'tang, Liu Shun was the one to come up with the plan, and he gathered the soldiers to retreat from the city. It is not over yet.

古文：过蒙朝恩，谬充将帅，蚤承风素，情有依然。今皇威远申，三方蹙弱，胜败之势，皎然可览。
现代文：我蒙受皇上大恩，侥幸作了将帅，早年便承蒙阁下欣赏，有依恋的心意，当今皇上威名远播，三方叛军日渐衰弱，胜负形势，昭然若揭。
English: I received the Emperor's great favor and was fortunate enough to become a general. In my early years, I was appreciated by Your Excellency and felt affection for him. Today, the Emperor's prestige is spreading far and wide. The rebels of the three sides are weakening day by day, and the situation of victory and defeat is obvious.

古文：王御史昨至，主上敕、骠骑教、贤兄贤子书，今悉遣送。
现代文：王御史昨日到我这里，皇上的敕书，骠骑大将军的教令，令兄令郎的书信，现在都送给你。
English: Wang Youshi came to me yesterday. The emperor's imperial edict, the general's edict, and my brother's letter have all been sent to you.

古文：百代以来，未有弘恩曲宥，乃至于此。
现代文：百代以来从未有恩泽宽容到这步田地的。
English: For a hundred generations, there has never been the grace and tolerance to take this step.

古文：且朝廷方宣示大义，惟新王道，何容摽虚辞于士女，失国信于一州。
现代文：况且朝廷正向天下显示信用道义，不需对士人百姓说假话，失信于一州人民。
English: Moreover, the imperial court is demonstrating its trustworthiness and morality to the world. It does not need to tell lies to the people, nor does it need to betray the trust of the people of a state.

古文：以足下明识渊见，想必不俟终日。
现代文：因为足下远见卓识，大概不会要很长时间便会幡然悔悟。
English: Because of his foresight, it probably won't take him long to come to his senses.

古文：如其孤背亭毒，弗忌屠陷者，便当穷兵肆武，究法极刑。
现代文：如果要背负到底自招祸害，便可打到底，一直到被判死刑。
English: If you want to bear the self-inflicted scourge to the end, you can fight to the end, until you are sentenced to death.

古文：将恐贵门无复祭祀之主，坟垄乏扫洒之望。进谢忠臣，退惭孝子，名实两丧，没有余责。
现代文：只怕您家再也没有祭祀主人，祖坟也没有扫除的指望，进则愧对忠臣，退则羞对孝子，名实两亏，死有余辜。
English: Just fear that your family will no longer have the hope of sacrificing the master, and the ancestral grave will not be swept away. If you advance, you will be ashamed of the loyal subject, and if you retreat, you will be ashamed of the filial son. You will lose both reputation and reality, and you will have more regrets after death.

古文：扶力略白，幸加研览。 
现代文：我尽力简述，还希望仔细阅览。 
English: I have tried to summarize it as best I can, and I hope you will read it carefully.

古文：琰本无反心，事由力屈，叔宝等有降意，前后屡遣送诚笺，而众心持疑，莫能相一，故归顺之计，每多愆塞，婴城愈固。
现代文：殷琰本来没有反叛之心，只因无法制服部将，杜叔宝等人有投降的意思，前后多次派人送想投诚的信件，但众人相互怀疑，无法一致，所以投降的计策总不能相吻合，只好敛城固守。
English: Yin Yao did not have a rebellious heart, but because he could not subdue the general, Du Shubao and others had the intention of surrendering. He repeatedly sent people to send letters to surrender, but everyone was suspicious of each other and could not agree, so the surrender strategy could not coincide, so they had to hold the city.

古文：弋阳西山蛮田益之起义，攻郭确于弋阳，以益之为辅国将军，督弋阳西山事。
现代文：弋阳西山蛮人田益之起义，在弋阳攻讨郭确，朝廷以田益之当辅国将军，都督弋阳西山的事务。
English: The uprising of the barbarian Tian Yizhong in the western mountains of Shenyang was the beginning of the fight against Guo Jizhong in Shenyang. The imperial court made Tian Yizhong the auxiliary general and the governor of the western mountains of Shenyang.

古文：六月，勔筑长围始合。
现代文：六月，刘勔构筑的长围才合拢。
English: In June, the long perimeter built by Liu Wei was closed.

古文：田益之率蛮众万余人攻庞定光于义阳，定光遣从兄文生拒之，为益之所破，见杀，遂围其城。
现代文：田益之率领蛮人一万多在义阳攻击庞定光，定光派堂兄文生抵挡他，被田益之打败，并被杀。于是包围城池，庞定光向刘子勋求助。
English: Tian Yizhi led more than ten thousand barbarians to attack Pang Dingguang in Yiyang. His cousin Wensheng resisted him and was defeated and killed by Tian Yizhi. They then surrounded the city, and Pang Dingguang appealed to Liu Zixun for help.

古文：定光求救于子勋，子勋以定光父孟虬为司州刺史，率精兵五千救义阳，并解寿阳之围。
现代文：刘子勋让庞定光的父亲庞孟虬当司州刺史，率领五千精兵救援义阳，同时解除寿阳的包围。
English: Liu Zixun asked Pang Mengyu, the father of Pang Dingguang, to lead five thousand soldiers to rescue Yiyang and lift the siege of Shouyang.

古文：常珍奇又自悬瓠遣三千人援定光，屯军柳水。益之不战，望风奔散。孟虬乘胜进军向寿阳。
现代文：常珍奇又从悬瓠派三千人增援庞定光，驻扎军队于柳水，田益之没有打便望风奔逃，庞孟虬乘胜向寿阳进军。
English: Chang Zhenqi also sent 3,000 reinforcements to Pang Dingguang from Huanqian, stationed the army in Liushui, Tian Yizhi fled without waiting for the wind, and Pang Mengyao marched to Shouyang with victory.

古文：初，常珍奇遣周当、垣式宝率数百人送仗与琰。
现代文：当初常珍奇派周当、垣式宝率几百人送武器给殷琰。
English: At the beginning, Zhou Dang and Kaki Shih-tao of the Chang Zhenqi faction led hundreds of people to send weapons to Yin Qi.

古文：式宝骁勇绝众，因留守北门，乃率所领，开门掩袭勔，入其营；勔逃避得免，式宝得勔衣帽而去。
现代文：垣式宝骁勇绝伦，于是留守北门，率他的部属，开门掩袭刘勔，进入他的军营，刘勔逃避才免受被抓，垣式宝只得到刘勔的衣帽而回。
English: Kaki Shiki Takara was so brave that he stayed at the north gate, led his subordinates, opened the door to cover Liu Ye, entered his camp, Liu Ye escaped from being arrested, and Kaki Shiki Takara only got Liu Ye's clothes and hat and returned.

古文：勔于是乃竖长围，治攻道于东南角，并填堑。东南角有高楼，队主赵法进计曰： 外若进攻，必先攻楼，楼颓落，既伤将士，又使人情沮坏，不如先自毁之。 
现代文：刘勔于是竖起长围，在东南角修治攻城道路，且填满城池，东南角有高楼，队长赵法进献计说： 从外面进攻，必定首先攻打城楼，城楼颓落，既伤士兵又使士气受损，不如首先击毁。 
English: Liu Bei then erected a long perimeter, and in the southeast corner he built a road to attack the city, and filled the city pond. There were high-rises in the southeast corner. Captain Zhao Fajin said: To attack from the outside, we must first attack the city tower. If the city tower falls, it will not only injure soldiers but also damage morale. It is better to destroy it first.

古文：从其言。
现代文：刘勔听了他的话。
English: Liu Ye listened to his words.

古文：勔用草茅苞土，掷以塞堑。掷者如云，城内乃以火箭射之，草未及燃，后土续至，一二日，堑便欲满。赵法进复献计，以铁珠子灌之。珠子流滑，悉缘隙得入，草于是火燃，二日间草尽，堑中土不过二三寸。
现代文：刘勔用野草茅根包土，掷进城壕，扔的人像云一样多，城内用火箭射城外的人，草还未燃烧，后面的土包接着跟来，一二日间，城壕便填满了，赵法进再献计，用铁珠子灌进去，珠子流滑，都沿着空隙进去，城壕中的干草于是燃烧，两天之内草便烧完。城壕中的土不过二三寸。
English: Liu Yao used wild grass and thatch to wrap the soil, threw it into the trench, and there were as many people throwing it as there were clouds. The people inside the city used rockets to shoot people outside the city. The grass had not yet burned, but the soil bales behind it followed. Within a day or two, the trench was filled. Zhao Faxin tried again, filling it with iron beads. The beads slid, and they all went in along the gap. The hay in the trench then burned, and the grass burned out within two days. The soil in the trench was only two or three inches.

古文：勔乃作大虾蟆车载土，牛皮蒙之，三百人推以塞堑。
现代文：刘勔于是做大蛤蟆车装土，用牛皮蒙上，三百人推进去塞城壕。
English: Liu Wei then made a large cart to load the soil, covered it with cowhide, and three hundred people pushed it into the trench.

古文：琰户曹参军虞挹之造确车，击之以石，车悉破坏。
现代文：殷琰的户曹参军虞挹之制出石高车，用石头猛击，蛤蟆车都破碎了。
English: Cao, a member of the imperial army, made a stone chariot and hit it with a stone. The chariot was broken.

古文：初，庐江太守王子仲弃郡奔寻阳，庐江人起义，休祐遣员外散骑侍郎陆悠之助之。
现代文：当初庐江太守王子仲丢下郡务逃回浔阳。庐江人起义，休祐派员外散骑侍郎陆悠之帮助他们。
English: At the beginning, the governor of the Min River, Prince Naka, left the county government and fled back to Shenyang. The people of the Min River revolted, and Hugh Yu sent his foreign cavalry to help them.

古文：刘胡遣其辅国将军薛道标渡江煽动群蛮，规自庐江掩袭历阳，悠之众弱，退保谯城。
现代文：刘胡派他的辅国将军薛道标渡江煽动各种蛮人，打算从庐江掩袭历阳城。陆悠之的人马不多，只好退保谯城。
English: Liu Hu sent his adjutant general Xue Daobiao across the Yangtze River to incite all kinds of barbarians, intending to attack Liyang City from the Yangtze River. Lu Yu's men were not many, so he had to retreat to defend Liyang City.

古文：司徒建安王休仁遣参军沈灵宠驰据庐江，道标后一日方至，悠之自谯城来会，因与道标相持。
现代文：司徒建安王刘休仁派参军沈灵宠快速占据庐江，薛道标后一天才到，陆悠之从谯城来合师，于是和薛道标相互僵持。
English: Liu Xuren, the King of Jian'an, sent Shen Lingzhao to join the army to quickly occupy the Minjiang River. He arrived only one day after Xue Daobao. Lu Youzhi came from Lucheng to join the army, so he and Xue Daobao were in a standoff.

古文：七月，庞孟虬至弋阳，勔遣吕安国、垣闳、龙骧将军陈显达、骠骑参军孟次阳拒之。
现代文：七月，庞孟虬到弋阳，刘勔派吕安国、垣闳、龙骧将军陈显达、骠骑将军孟虬阳抵挡庞孟虬。
English: In July, Pang Mengyao went to Fenyang, and Liu Bei sent the generals Chen Xianda and Meng Biyang from the provinces of Lu'an, Yunnan, and Yongkang to resist Pang Mengyao.

古文：孟虬军副吕兴寿与安国有旧，率所领降。
现代文：庞孟虬的副将吕兴寿和吕安国有老交情，便率他的部属投降。
English: Pang Mengyao's vice-general Lv Xing Shou, who had a long-standing friendship with Lv An Guo, led his subordinates to surrender.

古文：安国进军，破孟虬于蓼潭，义军主陈肫又破之于汝水，孟虬走向义阳；义阳已为王玄谟子昙善起义所据，乃逃于蛮中。
现代文：吕安国进军，在蓼潭打败庞孟虬。义军军主陈肫又在汝水门打败庞孟虬。庞孟虬逃到义阳。义阳已被王玄谟的儿子王昙善起义占据，于是逃到蛮人当中。
English: He marched into Lu'an Province and defeated Pang Mengtao at Shuitan. The leader of the rebel army, Chen Qi, also defeated Pang Mengtao at Ruxuimen. Pang Mengtao fled to Yiyang. Yiyang had been occupied by the uprising of Wang Xuanxuan, the son of Wang Xuanmu, and he fled to the barbarians.

古文：淮西人郑叔举起义击常珍奇，以为北豫州刺史。
现代文：淮西人郑叔举起义攻击常珍奇，朝廷用他当北豫州刺史。
English: Uncle Zheng from Huaxi made a righteous attack on Chang Zhenqi, and the imperial court used him to make history in North Henan Province.

古文：八月，皇甫道烈、柳伦等二十一人闻孟虬败，并开门出降。勔因此又与琰书曰： 柳伦来奔，具相申述，方承足下迹缠秽乱，心秉忠诚，惘默穷愁，不亲戎政。
现代文：八月，皇甫道烈、柳伦等二十一人听说庞孟虬败逃，都开门出降，刘勔因此又给殷琰写信说： 柳伦来投降，说得很清楚，方知你被叛军拖入，但心怀忠诚，所以沉默愁怨，不管军事。
English: In August, when the twenty-one emperors, including the Empress Dowager Dowager and Liu Lun, heard that Pang Mengyao had been defeated and had fled, they all opened their doors and surrendered. As a result, Liu Bei also wrote to Yin Qi, saying: "Liu Lun has come to surrender. He said it very clearly. You know that you have been dragged in by the rebels, but you are loyal, so you are silent and sorrowful, regardless of the military.

古文：去冬开天之始，愚迷者多，如足下流比，进非社稷宗臣，退无顾命寄托，朝廷既不偏相嫌责，足下亦复无所独愧。程天祚已举城归顺，庞孟虬又继迹奔亡，刘胡困于钱溪，袁顗欲战不得，推理揆势，亦安能久。
现代文：从去年皇上即位，迷误的人很多，像足下这样的人，进不是国家重臣，退也不会受皇帝的临终托付，朝廷对你并不是特别嫌疑，阁下你也不需独自惭愧，程天祚已举城投降，庞孟虬又接着溃逃，刘胡在钱溪困守无法。袁顗想打也打不成，推测形势，怎么能长久呢？
English: Since the emperor's accession to the throne last year, there have been many people who have gone astray. People like Fu Jian are not state chief ministers, and they will not be entrusted by the emperor on his deathbed. The court is not particularly suspicious of you, and you do not have to be ashamed alone. Cheng Tianyao has surrendered the city, Pang Mengyao has fled, and Liu Hu is trapped in Qianxi. Yuan Qi can not fight if he wants to fight, how can he speculate on the situation for a long time?

古文：且南方初起，连州十六，拥徒百万，仲春以来，无战不北，摧陷殄灭，十无一二。
现代文：况且南方叛军刚行动时，连结十六州人马，拥有百万大兵，从二月以来，每战必败，被摧败消灭的十有七八。
English: Moreover, when the Southern rebels first took action, they had a million soldiers from 16 states. Since February, they have been defeated in every battle, and 7 out of 10 of them have been destroyed.

古文：南凭袁顗弱卒，北恃足下孤城，以兹定业，恐万无一理。
现代文：在南则凭借袁顗的弱兵，在北方则仰仗你的孤城，用这点力量想平定大业，恐怕是没有成功的道理。
English: In the south, you rely on Yuan Shao's weak soldiers, and in the north, you rely on your lonely city. If you want to use this strength to pacify the great cause, I am afraid there is no reason for success.

古文：方今国网疏略，示举宏维，比日相白，想亦已具矣。
现代文：当今国家法律仁道，明白地实行宽大政策。近来反复开导声明，大概你已很清楚了。
English: Today, the country's laws are benevolent and clearly implement the policy of leniency. Recently, the enlightenment statement has been repeated, and you probably know it very well.

古文：且伦等皆是足下腹心牙爪，所以携手相舍，非有怨恨也，了知事不可济，祸害已及故耳。
现代文：况且柳伦等人都是阁下的心腹爪牙，之所以联合抛弃你，并不怨恨你，只是确知你们的大事不能成功，祸害快到头了。
English: Moreover, Liulun and the others are Your Excellency's henchmen. The reason why they have jointly abandoned You is not because they hate You, but because they know for certain that Your great undertaking cannot succeed, and the calamity is coming to an end.

古文：夫拥数千乌合，抗天下之兵，倾覆之状，岂不易晓。
现代文：况且拥有几千乌合之众，抗衡全国军队，败亡的结局，难道还不容易明了吗？
English: Moreover, with several thousand Uyghur people to counterbalance the national army, the outcome of the defeat, is it not easy to understand?

古文：假令六蔽之人，犹当不为其事，况复足下少祖名教，疾没世无称者邪。
现代文：假使是个白痴的话，也不会做这种事，况且阁下少年时便明晓礼教，是个以在世上不立功为耻的人呢？
English: Even if he were an idiot, he would not do such a thing, and besides, your excellency learned etiquette when he was a boy, and he is a man who is not ashamed to make a contribution in the world?

古文：所以复有此白者，实惜华州重镇，鞠为茂草，兼伤贵门一日屠灭。
现代文：我之所以对你说这么多，实在是可惜中华重镇，化为茂草荒丘，加上怜悯你家一同被杀戮干净。
English: The reason why I'm telling you all this is that it's really a pity that Zhonghua Town was turned into a grassy wasteland, and it's a pity that your family was killed together.

古文：足下若能封府库，开四门，宣语文武，示以祸福，先遣咫尺之书，表达诚款，然后素车白马，来诣辕门，若令足下发肤不全，兒侄雕耗者，皇天后土，实闻此言。
现代文：阁下如果能封锁仓库，大开城池四门，告知文武部属，晓以利害，先派人给我写一封投诚的信，表达诚意，然后坐白车白马，前来我们军营辕门。如这样而使您身体头发不全，儿侄辈消灭的话，皇天在上，后土在下，也听到这话。
English: Your Excellency, if you can seal the warehouse, open the four gates of the city, and inform the civil and military subordinates, knowing the interests, first send someone to write me a sincere letter to express sincerity, and then take a white horse and carriage to come to the gate of our military camp. If this makes your body hair incomplete, and your children and grandchildren are destroyed, the emperor will be on top, and the hinterland will be on the bottom, and you will hear this.

古文：至辞不华，宁复多白。 
现代文：最真诚的话不华丽，难道需再用多说吗？ 
English: The most sincere words are not flashy, do you really need to say more?

古文：薛道标犹在庐江，刘胡又分兵扬声向寿阳及合肥。
现代文：薛道标还在庐江，刘胡又分兵声称向寿阳和合肥。
English: Xue Daobao was still in the Minjiang River, and Liu Hu's detachment claimed to be moving toward Shouyang and Hefei.

古文：勔遣许道莲驰赴合肥，助裴季文，又遣黄回、孟次阳乃屯骑校尉段佛荣、武卫将军王广之继之。
现代文：刘勔派许道莲迅速到合肥增援，帮助裴季文，又派黄回、孟次阳和屯骑校尉段佛荣、武卫将军王广之增援他们。
English: Liu Bei quickly sent Xu Daolian to Hefei to reinforce and help Pei Jiwen, and also sent Huang Hui, Meng Ziyang, and the cavalry colonel Duan Fo Rong, and the military commander Wang Guang to reinforce them.

古文：道标率其党薛元宝等攻合肥，勔所遣诸军未至，为道标所陷，季文及武卫将军叶庆祖力战死之。
现代文：薛道标率领他的部将薛元宝等人攻打合肥，刘勔派的部队又没有来，被薛道标所攻拔，裴季文和武卫将军叶庆祖力战而死。
English: Xue Daobiao led his troops, including Xue Yuanbao, to attack Hefei. Liu Bei's troops did not come and were attacked by Xue Daobiao. Pei Jiwen and Wuwei General Ye Qingzu died in the battle.

古文：勔驰遣垣闳总统诸军攻合肥。
现代文：刘勔又派垣闳统率各军迅速攻打合肥。
English: Liu Bei also sent the army led by Gao Jun to quickly attack Hefei.

古文：是月，刘胡败走，寻阳平定。太宗遣叔宝从父弟季文至琰城下，与叔宝语，说四方已定，劝令时降。
现代文：当月，刘胡败逃，寻阳平定，太宗派杜叔宝堂兄弟杜季文到殷琰城下，杜季文和杜叔宝对话，说明四方已经平定，劝他趁机投降。
English: In the same month, Liu Hu was defeated and fled, and Xuanyang was pacified. Du Jiwen, a cousin of Du Shubao, a member of the Tai Sect, went to the town of Yinlu. Du Jiwen and Du Shubao had a dialogue, explaining that the four sides had been pacified, and advised him to take the opportunity to surrender.

古文：叔宝曰： 我乃信汝，恐为人所诳耳！ 
现代文：杜叔宝说： 我是信任你的，只是怕被别人欺骗罢了。 
English: Du Shubao said: I trust you, but I am afraid of being deceived by others.

古文：叔宝闭绝子勋败问，有传者即杀之。
现代文：杜叔宝封锁刘子勋的失败消息，有传播消息的人便杀掉。
English: Du Shubao blocked the news of Liu Zixun's defeat and killed anyone who spread the news.

古文：时琰子邈东在京邑，系建康，太宗送邈与琰，令说南贼已平之问，自建康出，便防送就道。
现代文：当时殷琰的儿子殷邈在东方的守城被软禁，太宗送殷邈给殷琰，叫他告知南方叛军已平定的消息，从建康出发，叫人防送上路。
English: At that time, Yin Xi's son, Yin Xi, was under house arrest in the eastern defense of the city. Emperor Taizong sent Yin Xi to Yin Xi, asking him to inform the southern rebels of the news that they had been pacified, and set out from Jiankang to send people to the road.

古文：议者以为宜听邈与伯父瑗私相见，不尔无以解城内之惑，不从。
现代文：谋划的人认为应允许殷邈和他的伯父殷瑗私下相见，不然不能解除城内敌军的怀疑。
English: The planners thought that Yin Xuan and his uncle Yin Xuan should be allowed to meet in private, otherwise the suspicions of the enemy troops in the city would not be relieved.

古文：邈至，叔宝等果疑，守备方固。
现代文：明帝没听从，殷邈到了，杜叔宝等果然怀疑，守卫更加坚固。
English: Emperor Ming disobeyed, Yin Xuan arrived, Du Shubao and others doubted, and the guards were more solid.

古文：十月，薛道标突围，与十余骑走奔淮西，投常珍奇，薛元宝归降。
现代文：十月，薛道标突围出城，和十余个骑兵逃奔淮西，投奔常珍奇。薛元宝投降。
English: In October, Xue Doubiao broke out of the encirclement of the city and fled to Huaxi with more than ten cavalrymen, defecting to Changzhenqi. Xue Yuanbao surrendered.

古文：先是，晋熙太守阎湛之据郡同逆，至是沈灵宠自庐江攻之。湛之未知寻阳已败，固守不降。
现代文：之前，晋熙太守阎湛之占据本郡响应叛军，到这时沈灵从庐江攻讨此城，阎湛之还不知寻阳已失败，固守不投降。
English: Previously, Yan Tianzhi, the eunuch of the Jin Dynasty, had occupied the county in response to the rebels. At this time, Shen Ling attacked the city from the Li River. Yan Tianzhi did not know that the search for the sun had failed, and insisted on not surrendering.

古文：灵宠乃取诸将破刘胡文书置车中，攻城伪败，弃车而走。湛之得书大骇，其夜奔逃。
现代文：沈灵宠于是搜集各将打败刘胡的文书放在车中，在攻城时假装败退，丢下车子逃跑，阎湛之得到书信非常恐惧，当夜便奔逃了。
English: Shen Lingzhao then collected the documents of each side to defeat Liu Hu and put them in the car, pretended to retreat when attacking the city, left the car and ran away. Yan Tianzhi was very afraid to get the letter and ran away that night.

古文：十一月，常珍奇乞降，虑不见纳，又求救于索虏。
现代文：十一月，常珍奇请求投降，担心不被接纳，又向魏军求救。
English: In November, Chang Zhenqi requested to surrender, fearing that he would not be accepted, and appealed to the Wei army for help.

古文：太宗即以珍奇为司州刺史，领汝南、新蔡二郡太守。
现代文：太宗便用常珍奇当司州刺史，兼领汝南、新蔡二郡太守。
English: Emperor Taizong used Chang Zhenqi to write the history of Shizhou, and also made him the governor of Runan and the new Caiyi County.

古文：虏亦遣伪帅张穷奇骑万匹救之。十二月，虏至汝南，珍奇开门纳虏，淮西七县民并连营南奔，刘顺亦弃虏归顺。
现代文：魏人也派他们的将领张穷奇率领骑兵万人救援常珍奇，十二月，魏军到汝南，常珍奇开门请魏人进城，淮西七县都联合南逃，刘顺也离开魏人归顺朝廷。
English: The Wei also sent their general Zhang Qianqi to lead 10,000 cavalrymen to rescue Chang Zhenqi. In December, the Wei army arrived in the south of Ryu, Chang Zhenqi opened the door to invite the Wei to enter the city, the seven counties of Huaixi fled south together, and Liu Shun also left the Wei to surrender to the imperial court.

古文：南贼降者，太宗并送琰城下，令与城内交言，由是人情沮丧。琰将降，先送休祐内人出城，然后开门。
现代文：南方叛军投降的，太宗都送到殷琰的城下，叫这些人和城内交谈，于是寿阳城内人心沮丧，殷琰将投降，先送休祐的家人出城，然后开门出降。
English: When the southern rebels surrendered, Emperor Taizong sent them all to the outskirts of Shouyang, telling them to talk to the townspeople. As a result, the townspeople of Shouyang were disheartened, and Shouyang was about to surrender. First, he sent the family members of Huiyu out of the city, and then he opened the door to surrender.

古文：时琰有疾，以板自舆，与诸将帅面缚请罪。
现代文：当时殷琰有病，叫人用木板抬着自己，和各个部将绑着自己请示治罪。
English: At that time, Yin Xuan was ill and asked people to carry him on a wooden board. He and the other ministers tied themselves together to ask for punishment.

古文：勔并抚宥，无所诛戮，自将帅以下，财物资货，皆以还之，纤毫无所失。
现代文：刘勔都安抚原谅，没有杀一个，从将帅以下，各人的财物货品都还给他们，一点也没有丢失。
English: Liu Bei appeased and pardoned them all, and did not kill a single one. From the commander on down, everyone's property and goods were returned to them, and nothing was lost.

古文：虏骑救琰，至师水，闻城陷，乃破义阳，杀掠数千人而去。
现代文：魏人骑兵增援殷琰的到师水，听说城池已被攻下，于是攻破义阳，杀死掠夺几千人回去了。
English: Wei cavalry reinforcements arrived in Shishui to reinforce Yin Qi. Hearing that the city had been captured, they broke through Yiyang, killed and plundered several thousand people and went back.

古文：垣式宝寻复反叛，投常珍奇。
现代文：垣式宝不久又反叛了，投奔常珍奇。
English: Kaki Shikiho soon rebelled again, defecting to the Shinsengumi.

古文：以平琰功，刘怀珍封艾县侯，食邑四百户，垣闳乐乡县侯，孟次阳攸县子，王广之蒲圻县子，陈显达彭泽县子，吕安国钟武县子，食邑各三百户，黄回葛阳县男，食邑二百户。送琰及伪节还京都。
现代文：因为平定殷琰的功劳，刘怀珍封爵艾县侯，享受四百户租税的待遇，垣闳乐乡县侯，孟次阳攸县子，王广之蒲圻县子，陈显达彭泽县子，吕安国钟武县子，都享受三百户租税待遇，黄回葛阳县男，享受二百户租税，送殷琰和伪节符回到京城。
English: Liu Huai Zhen was awarded the title of Count of Ai County and enjoyed the tax treatment of 400 households for his contribution to the pacification of Yin Xi. The Counts of Yuexiang County, Meng Ziyang, Wang Guangzhi, Pengze County, and Zhongwu County of Lu'an Province all enjoyed the tax treatment of 300 households. Huang Hui, Count of Geyang County, enjoyed the tax treatment of 200 households and sent Yin Xi and fake festival flags back to Beijing.

古文：久之，为王景文镇南谘议参军，兼少府。
现代文：不久以后，殷琰被用为王景文镇南谘议参军，兼少府。
English: Soon after, Yin Qi was used as Wang Jingwen's southern advisory to join the army, as well as a minor prefect.

古文：泰豫元年，除少府，加给事中。
现代文：泰豫元年，被正式用为少府，加官给事中。
English: In the first year of the Taiyuan era, it was officially used as a minor prefecture, and officials were added to it.

古文：后废帝元徽元年，卒，时年五十九。
现代文：后废帝元徽元年逝世，享年五十九岁。
English: Emperor Yuan died in the first year of Hui, at the age of fifty-nine.

古文：琰性和雅静素，寡嗜欲，谙前世旧事，事兄甚谨，少以名行见称。
现代文：殷琰性格平和、温雅、沉静、朴素、恬淡寡欲，熟悉前代故事，伺候兄长很恭谨，少时因节义著名。
English: Yin Qi's personality is peaceful, gentle, quiet, simple, and modest. He is familiar with the stories of the previous generation, is very respectful when serving his elder brother, and is famous for his righteousness at times.

古文：在寿阳被攻围积时，为城内所怀附。
现代文：在寿阳被围击很长时间，被城内人所依附。
English: In Shouyang, it was besieged for a long time and was attached by people in the city.

古文：扬州刺史王景文、征西将军蔡兴宗、司空褚渊，并与之友善云。
现代文：扬州刺史王景文、征西将军蔡兴宗、司空褚渊，都和他关系很好。
English: Yangzhou scribe Wang Jingwen, Western Conquest General Cai Xingzong, and Sikuo Yuanyuan all had a good relationship with him.

