古文：晔字蔚宗，母如厕産之，额爲砖所伤，故以砖爲小字。
现代文：○范晔范晔字蔚宗，母亲到厕所去产了他，额头被砖碰伤，所以就以砖为小字。
English: ○ Fan Xuan Fan Xuan Zi Wei Zong, his mother went to the toilet to give birth to him, his forehead was injured by a brick, so he used a brick as a small character.

古文：出继从伯弘之，后袭封武兴县五等侯。
现代文：出门过继给了堂伯范弘之，后来世袭封爵为武兴县五等侯。
English: He was succeeded by his cousin, Fan Hongzhi, who was later hereditary knighted as the 5th Marquess of Wuxing County.

古文：少好学，善爲文章，能隶书，晓音律。
现代文：少年时候爱学习，善于作文章，能写隶书，通晓音律。
English: When he was a boy, he loved to study, was good at writing articles, could write scripts, and was familiar with musical rhythms.

古文：爲秘书丞，父忧去职。
现代文：担任秘书丞，遇到父亲的丧事离职。
English: He worked as a secretary and left his job after his father's death.

古文：服阕，爲征南大将军檀道济司马，领新蔡太守。
现代文：服丧期满，担任征南大将军檀道济的司马，兼任新蔡太守。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he served as the Sima of the General of the Southern Expedition, and also served as the new Cai Taizhou.

古文：后爲尚书吏部郎。
现代文：后来做尚书吏部郎。
English: He later became a member of the Shoshriiburo.

古文：元嘉九年，彭城太妃薨，将葬，祖夕，僚故并集东府，晔与司徒左西属王深及弟司徒祭酒广夜中酣饮，开北牖听挽歌爲乐。
现代文：元嘉九年，彭城太妃去世，将要埋葬，发送的那天晚上，同僚和旧友都聚集在东府，范晔和司徒左西属王深以及他的弟弟司徒祭酒王广夜里痛饮，打开北面的窗子听唱挽歌作为娱乐。
English: In the ninth year of Yuan Jia, when Pengcheng Toi died and was to be buried, on the evening of the funeral, colleagues and old friends gathered in Dongfu. Fan Yu and the priest Zuoxi, who belonged to Wang Sheng and his brother, the priest, drank heavily in the night and opened the north-facing window to listen to elegy as entertainment.

古文：彭城王义康大怒，左迁宣城太守。
现代文：彭城王刘义康大怒，把他降职为宣城太守。
English: Liu Yikang, the king of Pengcheng, was so angry that he demoted him to the position of the governor of Xuancheng.

古文：不得志，乃删衆家后汉书爲一家之作，至于屈伸荣辱之际，未尝不致意焉。
现代文：他很不得志，便删改众家的《后汉书》为自己的一家之作，在写到人物屈伸荣辱的地方，未尝不深深地寄托着自己的心情。
English: He was very discouraged, so he edited and revised the "Post-Han Shu" for his own family, and in the places where the characters were humiliated, he deeply pinned his feelings.

古文：迁长沙王义欣镇军长史。
现代文：调任长沙王刘义欣镇军长史。
English: Liu Yixin, the king of Changsha, was transferred to the post of military governor of the town.

古文：兄暠爲宜都太守，嫡母随暠在官亡，报之以疾，晔不时奔赴。
现代文：他的哥哥范詗做宜都太守，嫡母随着哥哥在任职的地方去世，送信告诉他说是得了病，范晔没有及时前往。
English: His elder brother, Fan Xuan, was the governor of Yidu, and his mother died with him in the place where he was in office. The messenger told him that he was ill, and Fan Xuan did not go there in time.

古文：及行，又携伎妾自随，爲御史中丞刘损所奏。
现代文：等到出发，又携带着伎妾跟随自己，被御史中丞刘损上表检举。
English: When he was ready to leave, he took his concubine with him, and was reported to the Imperial Historian, Liu Jia.

古文：文帝爱其才，不罪也。
现代文：文帝爱他的才华，没有治罪。
English: Emperor Wen loved his talent and did not punish him.

古文：服阕，累迁左卫将军、太子詹事。
现代文：服丧期满，逐步升迁为左卫参军、太子詹事。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was gradually promoted to the left guard to join the army, Prince Zhan Zhi.

古文：晔长不满七尺，肥黑，秃眉鬓，善弹琵琶，能爲新声。
现代文：范晔身高不到七尺，肥胖而黑，秃眉秃鬓角，善于弹琵琶，能作新曲。
English: Fan Yao is less than seven feet tall, fat and black, with a bald brow and horns. He is good at playing the lute and can compose new songs.

古文：上欲闻之，屡讽以微旨，晔僞若不晓，终不肯爲。
现代文：皇上很想听到，屡次委婉地流露这种意思，范晔假装不懂，终于不肯弹。
English: The emperor was eager to hear, and repeatedly and tactfully expressed this meaning. Fan Ye pretended not to understand, and finally refused to play.

古文：上尝宴饮劝适，谓晔曰： 我欲歌，卿可弹。 
现代文：皇上曾经在宴会上鼓励他演奏，对范晔说： 我想唱歌，卿可以弹奏。 
English: The Emperor once encouraged him to play at a banquet, saying to Fan Ye: "I want to sing, but you can play."

古文：晔乃奉旨。
现代文：范晔于是奉旨。
English: Fan Ye then obeyed the order.

古文：上歌既毕，晔亦止弦。
现代文：皇帝歌唱完毕，范晔也停止了琴弦。
English: When the emperor had finished singing, Fan Ye also stopped strumming the strings.

古文：初，鲁国孔熙先博学有从横才志，文史星算，无不兼善，爲员外散骑侍郎，不爲时知，久不得调。
现代文：起初，鲁国的孔熙先非常博学，有纵横家的才能和志向，文学、历史、星相、算术，无不擅长，担任员外散骑侍郎，不为当时的人们所了解，久久不能升调。
English: At the beginning, Kong Xixian of the State of Lu was very erudite, with the talent and aspiration of a vertical and horizontal person. He was good at literature, history, astrology, and arithmetic. He served as a non-commissioned officer riding horseback, which was not understood by the people at that time, and he could not be promoted for a long time.

古文：初，熙先父默之爲广州刺史，以赃货下廷尉，大将军彭城王义康保持之，故免。
现代文：起初，孔熙先的父亲孔默之做广州刺史，因为贪赃被廷尉囚禁，大将军彭城王刘义康为他担保，所以免罪。
English: At first, Kong Xixian's father, Kong Miao, was sentenced to death in Guangzhou. Because he was imprisoned by a courtier for corruption, the general Pengcheng Wang Liu Yikang vouched for him, so he was exonerated.

古文：及义康被黜，熙先密怀报效，以晔意志不满，欲引之，无因进说。
现代文：刘义康被贬斥，孔熙先秘密地下定决心加以报效，因为范晔心怀不满，打算对他进行拉拢，却没有机会谈话。
English: Liu Yikang was disparaged, and Kong Xixian secretly made up his mind to retaliate, because Fan Rong was dissatisfied and planned to woo him, but there was no opportunity to talk.

古文：晔甥谢综雅爲晔所知，熙先藉岭南遗财，家甚富足，乃倾身事综。
现代文：范晔的外甥谢综很为范晔所赏识，孔熙先凭借岭南的遗财，家中十分富足，于是就全身心地侍奉谢综。
English: Fan Kuo's nephew Xie Zomei was highly appreciated by Fan Kuo. Kong Xixian's family was very wealthy thanks to Lingnan's bequest, so he devoted himself to serving Xie Zomei.

古文：始与综诸弟共博，故爲拙行，以物输之，情意稍款。
现代文：开始与谢综的几个兄弟一起赌博，故意表现笨拙，把财物输给他们，情意渐渐加深。
English: He began to gamble with several of Xie Zomei's brothers, deliberately acting clumsy and losing property to them, and his feelings gradually deepened.

古文：综乃引熙先与晔戏，熙先故爲不敌，前后输晔物甚多。
现代文：谢综于是便引孔熙先让他与范晔玩赌，孔熙先故意装作不是敌手，前后输给范晔财物很多。
English: Xie Zhao then induced Kong Xixian to let him gamble with Fan Yu. Kong Xixian deliberately pretended not to be an enemy and lost a lot of property to Fan Yu.

古文：晔既利其财宝，又爱其文艺，遂与申莫逆之好。
现代文：范晔既得了他的财宝，又爱好他的文艺，于是与他结成了知心朋友。
English: Fan Ye had obtained his treasure and loved his literature and art, so he formed a close friendship with him.

古文：熙先始以微言动晔，晔不回。
现代文：孔熙先开始以精妙的话说动范晔，范晔不回答。
English: Kong Xi first began to use subtle words to move Fan Ye, but Fan Ye did not answer.

古文：晔素有闺庭论议，朝野所知，故门胄虽华，而国家不与姻，以此激之曰： 丈人若谓朝廷相待厚者，何故不与丈人婚，爲是门户不得邪？
现代文：范晔平时有很多的室内和庭院议论，朝内朝外都很闻名，所以门第虽然高华，但是国家却不与他们通婚，孔熙先以此刺激他说： 您如果说是朝廷相待宽厚，为什么不与你们通婚，是因为门户不合适吗？
English: Fan Xuan usually has a lot of indoor and courtyard discussions. He is well-known inside and outside the DPRK. Therefore, although his family is high-ranking, the state does not marry them. Kong Xi first used this to stimulate him and said: If you say that the court treats you generously, why not marry you, is it because the portal is not suitable?

古文：人作犬豕相遇，而丈人欲爲之死,不亦惑乎。 
现代文：别人把您当作猪狗来对待，而您却为他们效命，不是太糊涂了吗？ 
English: Aren't you confused that others treat you like a pig and you work for them?

古文：晔默然不答，其意乃定。
现代文：范晔沉默不答话，他的意向却坚定了。
English: Fan Ye was silent and did not answer, but his intention was firm.

古文：时晔与沈演之并爲上所知待，每被见多同，晔若先至，必待演之，演之先至，常独被引，晔又以此爲怨。
现代文：当时范晔与沈演之都被皇上所重视厚待，常常是同时被接见，范晔如果先到，一定要等待沈演之，沈演之先到，则常常独自被引见。范晔又因此产生怨恨。
English: At that time, both Fan Rong and Shen Rong were valued and treated well by the emperor, and were often received at the same time. If Fan Rong arrived first, he had to wait for Shen Rong, and if Shen Rong arrived first, he was often introduced alone. As a result, Fan Rong became resentful.

古文：晔累经义康府佐，见待素厚，及宣城之授，意好乖离。
现代文：范晔多次做过刘义康府中的辅佐官员，平素受到的待遇非常丰厚，在加封为宣城王之后，彼此的爱好不合。
English: Fan Qi has been an assistant official in Liu Yikang's government for many times. He has always received very generous treatment. After he was crowned the king of Xuancheng, their interests did not match.

古文：综爲义康大将军记室参军，随镇豫章。
现代文：谢综担任刘义康的大将军记室参军，随他去镇守豫章。
English: Xie served as Liu Yikang's general secretary to join the army, and followed him to the town of Yuzhang.

古文：综还，申义康意于晔，求解晚隙，复敦往好。
现代文：谢综回来，把刘义康的心意说给范晔，请求消除后来的矛盾，恢复以往的友好。
English: Xie Zhao came back and told Fan Qi about Liu Yikang's intentions, asking him to eliminate the later contradictions and restore the previous friendship.

古文：晔既有逆谋，欲探时旨，乃言于上曰： 臣历观前史二汉故事，诸蕃王政以妖诅幸灾，便正大逆之罚。
现代文：范晔既然有了叛逆的谋划，很想试探一下朝廷的意向，于是对皇上说： 臣综观前代历史上两汉时期的状况，诸藩王正在以妖言诅咒、幸灾乐祸的时候，便以重大叛逆的大罪进行惩罚。
English: Since Fan Xuan had a rebellious plan, he was eager to test the intentions of the imperial court, so he said to the emperor: "Comparing the situation of the two Han dynasties in the history of the previous generation, when the kings of various domains were cursing and gloating, they were punished with the major crime of rebellion.

古文：况义康奸心衅迹，彰着遐迩，而至今无恙,臣窃惑焉。
现代文：何况刘义康的奸邪之心、挑衅之迹已经十分显明，远近共知，却至今没有受到任何触动，臣的心里暗自感到疑惑。
English: Moreover, the trait of treachery and provocation of Liu Yikang has been very obvious, known far and wide, but has not been touched by anything so far, and the minister's heart secretly feels doubtful.

古文：且大梗常存，将成乱阶。 
现代文：而且大祸根一直存在，必将酿成祸患。 
English: Moreover, the root cause has always existed, and it will inevitably lead to disaster.

古文：上不纳。
现代文：皇上不予采纳。
English: The Emperor did not listen.

古文：熙先素善天文，云： 文帝必以非道晏驾，当由骨肉相残。
现代文：孔熙先素来擅长天文，他说： 文帝必定会由于不正常的原因去世，应当是由于骨肉自相残杀。
English: Kong Xixian, who had always been good at astronomy, said: Emperor Wen will certainly die due to abnormal reasons, it should be due to fratricide.

古文：江州应出天子。 
现代文：江州应当出现天子。 
English: A heavenly son should appear in Jiangzhou.

古文：以爲义康当之。
现代文：认为刘义康便是。
English: Liu Yikang thinks this is the case.

古文：综父述亦爲义康所遇，综弟约又是义康女夫，故文帝使综随从南上。
现代文：谢综的父亲谢述也被刘义康所款待，谢综的弟弟谢约又是刘义康女儿的丈夫，所以文帝让谢综随从到南方去。
English: Xie Zhao's father Xie Shu was also entertained by Liu Yikang, and Xie Zhao's brother Xie You is also the husband of Liu Yikang's daughter, so Emperor Wen let Xie Zhao follow him to the south.

古文：既爲熙先奖说，亦有酬报之心。
现代文：他既然被孔熙先所奖励欣赏，也有加以酬报的心意。
English: Since he was rewarded and appreciated by Kong Xixian, he also has the intention to reward him.

古文：广州人周灵甫有家兵部曲，熙先以六十万钱与之，使于广州合兵。灵甫一去不反。
现代文：广州人周灵甫拥有家兵和部队，孔熙先把六十万钱给了他，让他在广州招兵，周灵甫一去不回。
English: Zhou Lingfu, a native of Guangzhou, had his own soldiers and troops. Kong Xi first gave him 600,000 yuan to recruit soldiers in Guangzhou. Zhou Lingfu never returned.

古文：大将军府史仲承祖，义康旧所信念，屡衔命下都，亦潜结腹心，规有异志。
现代文：大将军府史仲承祖，是刘义康长期信赖的人，屡次带着使命到京城去，也暗中结交了许多心腹，抱有异志。
English: General Fuchizhong, Liu Yikang's long-term confidant, repeatedly went to Beijing with a mission. He also secretly made friends with many confidants who had different ambitions.

古文：闻熙先有诚，密相结纳。
现代文：他听说孔熙先有诚心，便秘密地前来结交。
English: He heard that Kong Xi was sincere, so he secretly came to make friends.

古文：丹阳尹徐湛之素爲义康所爱，虽爲舅甥，恩过子弟，承祖因此结事湛之，告以密计。
现代文：丹阳尹徐湛之平时被刘义康所喜爱，虽然是舅甥关系，而恩情超过子弟，仲承祖因此结识了徐湛之，把秘密计划告诉了他。
English: Danyang Yin Xu Zhan Zhi was loved by Liu Yikang in ordinary times. Although it was an uncle-nephew relationship, the favor exceeded that of a child. Therefore, Zhong Chengzu met Xu Zhan Zhi and told him the secret plan.

古文：承祖南下，申义康意于萧思话及晔，云： 本欲与萧结婚，恨始意不果。
现代文：仲承祖南下，把刘义康的想法告诉了萧思话和范晔，说： 本来想和萧家结婚，遗憾的是开始的心意结果没有实现。
English: Zhong Chengzu went to the south and told Liu Yikang's idea to Xiao Sizhe and Fan Yu, saying: I originally wanted to marry Xiao Jia, but unfortunately the initial intention did not come to fruition.

古文：与范本情不薄，中间相失，傍人爲之耳。 
现代文：与范晔的感情本来不薄，中间失去了联系，完全是由旁人造成的。 
English: The feelings with Fan Qi were originally strong, but they lost contact in the middle, which was completely caused by others.

古文：有法略道人先爲义康所养，粗被知待。
现代文：有一个法略道人先前曾经由刘义康所供养，粗略地受到欣赏和款待。
English: There was a man from the Dojo who had previously been supported by Liu Yikang, and he was rudely appreciated and entertained.

古文：又有王国寺法静尼出入义康家内，皆感激旧恩，规相拯拔，并与熙先往来。
现代文：又有王国寺的法静尼姑常常出入刘义康家中，都很感激旧日的恩情，准备加以救助，他们都与孔熙先往来。
English: Another nun, Fa Jing of the Kingdom Temple, often visited Liu Yikang's home. They were very grateful for the old days' kindness and were ready to help. They all had dealings with Kong Xi.

古文：使法略罢道。
现代文：又让法略停止了道人活动。
English: He also allowed the Doryo to stop Taoist activities.

古文：法略本姓孙，改名景玄，以爲臧质宁远参军。
现代文：法略本来姓孙，改名叫景玄，让他担任臧质的宁远参军。
English: He was originally surnamed Sun, but changed his name to Jing Xuan, so that he could join the army in Ningyuan.

古文：熙先善疗病兼能诊脉，法静尼妹夫许耀领队在台，宿卫殿省，尝有疾，因法静尼就熙先乞疗得损，因成周旋。
现代文：孔熙先善于治病兼能诊脉，法静尼姑的妹夫许耀在宫中担任领队，保卫殿省，他曾经得了病，通过法静尼姑找孔熙先请求治疗，得以减轻，于是有了交往。
English: Kong Xixian was good at curing diseases and diagnosing veins. Sister-in-law Xu Yao, sister-in-law of Fa Jing nun, served as a team leader in the palace, guarding the palace. He once had an illness, and through Fa Jing nun, he asked Kong Xixian for treatment, and it was alleviated, so they had a relationship.

古文：熙先以耀胆干，因告逆谋，耀许爲内应。
现代文：孔熙先认为许耀有胆略和才干，便把叛逆的计谋告诉了他，许耀答应做内应。
English: Kong Xixi first thought that Xu Yao had courage and talent, so he told him about the treasonous plot, and Xu Yao agreed to do it.

古文：豫章胡藩子遵世与法静甚款，亦密相酬和。
现代文：豫章人胡藩的儿子胡遵世和法静很要好，也互相有着亲密的往来。
English: Hu Zun Shih, the son of the Yu Zhang people of the Hu clan, and Fa Jing are very good friends, and they also have close contacts with each other.

古文：法静尼南上，熙先遣婢采藻随之，付以笺书，陈说图谶。
现代文：法静尼姑去南方，孔熙先派遣婢女采藻随他前往，交给她书信，解说图谶。
English: When the nun Far Jing went to the south, Kong Xi first sent a servant girl to go with him to collect algae, and handed her a letter, explaining the story.

古文：法静还，义康饷熙先铜匕铜镊袍段棋奁等物。
现代文：法静回来，刘义康赠给孔熙先铜匕、铜镊、袍缎、棋盒等物品。
English: When Fang Jing returned, Liu Yikang presented Kong Xixian with a bronze gong, a bronze gong, a robe, a chess set and other items.

古文：熙先虑事泄，酖采藻杀之。
现代文：孔熙先怕事情泄露，用毒酒把采藻杀死。
English: Kong Xi Xian was afraid of the affair leaking out, and used poisoned wine to kill Zhaoxing.

古文：湛之又谓晔等： 臧质见与异常，质与萧思话款密，二人并受大将军眷遇，必无异同,不忧兵力不足，但当勿失机耳。 
现代文：徐湛之又对范晔等人说： 臧质参与了异常活动，他和萧思话交情亲密，二人都受到大将军的厚待，必定没有异心，不怕兵力不足，只是不要失去时机。 
English: Xu Zhanzhi also said to Fan Qian and others: Gongye participated in abnormal activities, he and Xiao Si had a close friendship, both of them were treated well by the general, there must be no hostility, there is no fear of shortage of troops, just don't lose the opportunity.

古文：乃备相署置：湛之爲抚军将军、扬州刺史，晔中军将军、南徐州刺史，熙先左卫将军。
现代文：于是详备地加以安排：徐湛之为抚军将军、扬州刺史，范晔为中军将军、南徐州刺史，孔熙先为左军将军。
English: Therefore, it was arranged in detail: Xu Zhan was the general of the Fuzhou army, Yangzhou was the stabbing history, Fan Yu was the general of the Chinese army, South Xuzhou was the stabbing history, and Kong Xixian was the general of the Left Army.

古文：其馀皆有选拟。
现代文：其余的人都有安置。
English: The rest have been resettled.

古文：凡素所不善及不附义康者，又有别簿，并入死目。
现代文：凡是平时关系不好和不依附刘义康的，又有另外的登记，都列入死者名单。
English: Anyone who did not have a good relationship with Liu Yikang in ordinary times and did not depend on him, but had another registration, was included in the list of the dead.

古文：熙先使弟休先豫爲檄文，言贼臣赵伯符肆兵犯跸，祸流储宰，乃奉戴义康。
现代文：孔熙先让他的弟弟孔休先预先写好檄文，说是贼臣赵伯符发兵侵犯外出的皇上，灾祸流及太子宰相，于是拥戴刘义康。
English: Kong Xi first asked his brother Kong Xiu first to write a good obituary in advance, saying that the robber vassal Zhao Bofu sent soldiers to invade the outgoing emperor, the calamity current and the prince prime minister, and then supported Liu Yikang.

古文：又以既爲大事，宜须义康意旨，乃作义康与湛之书，宣示同党。
现代文：又认为既然是大事，应该等待刘义康的意旨，于是便写好了刘义康给徐湛之的信，向同党们宣告。
English: He also thought that since it was a big event, he should wait for Liu Yikang's intention, so he wrote a letter from Liu Yikang to Xu Zhan and announced it to his fellow party members.

古文：二十二年九月，征北将军衡阳王义季、右将军南平王铄出镇，上于武帐冈祖道。
现代文：元嘉二十二年九月，征北将军衡阳王刘义季、右将军南平王刘铄出京赴任，皇上在武帐冈祭祀路神。
English: In September of the 22nd year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Northern Expeditionary General Hengyang Wang Liu Yizi and the Right General Nanping Wang Liu Ye left for Beijing to take office, and the emperor worshiped the road god in Wuzhigang.

古文：晔等期以其日爲乱，许耀侍上，扣刀以目晔，晔不敢视，俄而坐散，差互不得发。
现代文：范晔等人预定在这一天作乱，许耀侍卫皇上，按着刀柄盯着范晔，范晔不敢对视，不一会座席解散，发生了差错不能引发。
English: Fan Qi and others planned to make a disturbance on this day. Xu Yao, who was guarding the emperor, stared at Fan Qi with the handle of his sword. Fan Qi did not dare to look at him, and the seat was immediately dissolved. If a mistake occurred, it could not be triggered.

古文：十一月，徐湛之上表告状，于是悉出檄书选事及同恶人名手迹。
现代文：十一月，徐湛之上表报告情况，于是完全交出了檄文、委任计划和同党人名手稿。
English: In November, Xu Zhan reported the situation on the table, and then completely handed over the manuscript of the letter, the appointment plan and the names of the party members.

古文：诏收综等，并皆款服，唯晔不首。
现代文：诏令拘捕谢综等人，并且都已服罪，只有范晔拒不自首。
English: The imperial edict ordered the arrest of Xie Zomei and others, and they have all pleaded guilty. Only Fan Qi refused to surrender.

古文：上频使穷诘，乃曰： 熙先苟诬引臣。 
现代文：皇上频频派人穷追细问，便说： 是孔熙先胡乱拉扯臣的名字。 
English: The emperor frequently sent people to inquire about it, and they said: Kong Xixian is the name of the minister.

古文：熙先闻晔不服，笑谓殿中将军沈邵之曰： 凡诸处分、符檄书疏，皆晔所造及改定，云何方作此抵。 
现代文：孔熙先听说范晔不认帐，笑着对殿中将军沈邵之说： 其中的一切部署、符檄书信，都是范晔所写或改定，为什么还要这样抵赖？ 
English: When Kong Xi first heard that Fan Ye refused to acknowledge the account, he smiled and said to the general of the palace, Shen Shao Zhi: All of the deployments and correspondence are written or revised by Fan Ye, why do you have to deny it?

古文：上示以晔墨迹，晔乃引罪。
现代文：皇上把范晔的墨迹拿出来看，范晔才服罪了。
English: The emperor took out Fan Xuan's ink blot and read it. Only then did Fan Xuan admit his guilt.

古文：明日送晔付廷尉，入狱，然后知爲湛之所发。
现代文：第二天把范晔送交给廷尉，关入狱中，然后才知道是由于徐湛之所告发。
English: The next day, Fan Qi was handed over to the imperial lieutenant and put in prison, and only then did it become known that it was because of Xu Zhan's denunciation.

古文：熙先望风吐款，辞气不挠，上奇其才，使谓曰： 以卿之才而滞于集书省，理应有异志，此乃我负卿也。 
现代文：孔熙先昂首远望，吐露真情，辞气不屈，皇上很惊异他的才华，让人对他说： 以卿的才华而困顿于集书省，理应有异志，这是我对不起卿！ 
English: Kong Xixian looked far and wide, confided his true feelings, and refused to give in. The emperor was very surprised by his talent, and had someone say to him: I'm sorry, sir, for being stuck in the Book Collection Department because of your talent. You should have a dream.

古文：熙先于狱中上书陈谢，并陈天文占候，诫上有骨肉相残之祸，其言深切。
现代文：孔熙先在狱中上书道谢，并且陈说天文占候，告诫皇上有骨肉相残之祸，其言词十分深切。
English: Kong Xi first wrote a letter in prison to thank the emperor, and said that the emperor was divined by the heavens, and warned the emperor that there was the evil of the flesh and blood. His words were very profound.

古文：晔后与谢综等得隔壁，遥问综曰： 疑谁所告。 
现代文：范晔后来与谢综等人正好关在隔壁，范晔遥问谢综说： 你怀疑是谁告发的？ 
English: Later, Fan Yu was locked up right next door to Xie Zami and others. Fan Yuyao asked Xie Zami: "Do you suspect who reported you?

古文：综曰： 不知。 
现代文：谢综说： 不知道。 
English: Xie Zhao said: I don't know.

古文：晔乃称徐湛之小名曰： 乃是徐僮也。 
现代文：范晔便称徐湛之的小名说： 就是徐僮。 
English: Fan Ye then called Xu Zhanzhi's nickname, saying: "It's Xu Ye."

古文：在狱爲诗曰： 祸福本无兆，性命归有极，必至定前期，谁能延一息。
现代文：他在狱中写诗道： 祸福本无兆，性命归有极，必至定前期，谁能延一息。
English: While in prison, he wrote a poem: "Both good and evil have no omen, but life has a limit, and it must reach the predetermined period.

古文：在生已可知，来缘或无识，好丑共一丘，何足异枉直。
现代文：在生已可知，来缘无识，好丑共一丘，何足异枉直。
English: During his lifetime, it was already known that he had no idea where he came from, that he was both good and bad, and that he was nothing special.

古文：岂论东陵上，宁辨首山侧，虽无嵇生琴，庶同夏侯色。
现代文：岂论东陵上，宁辨首山侧，虽无嵇生琴，庶同夏侯色。
English: As for the east mausoleum, it is better to distinguish the top from the mountain side, although there is no gong, it is similar to the summer palace.

古文：寄言生存子，此路行复即。 
现代文：寄言生存子，此路行复即。 
English: If you send a message to the surviving son, you will be sent back immediately.

古文：上有白团扇甚佳，送晔令书出诗赋美句。
现代文：皇上有白团扇极好，送给范晔让他写出诗赋美句。
English: The emperor's white fan was very good, and he gave it to Fan Yu to make him write a poem.

古文：晔受旨援笔而书曰： 去白日之照照，袭长夜之悠悠。 
现代文：范晔接了旨令拿来笔写道： 去白日之照照，袭长夜之悠悠。 
English: Fan Xuan took the decree and wrote with a pen: Go to the sunshine of the day, attack the long night.

古文：上循览凄然。
现代文：皇上抚摸观览，神情凄凉。
English: The emperor stroked and looked on, his expression desolate.

古文：晔本谓入狱便死，而上穷其狱，遂经二旬，晔更有生望。
现代文：范晔本来以为入狱便死，而皇上穷追案情，于是便经过了两旬，范晔又有了生存的希望。
English: Fan Qi originally thought that he would die in prison, but the emperor was desperately pursuing the case, so after two years, Fan Qi had hope of survival.

古文：狱吏因戏之曰： 外传詹事或当长系。 
现代文：狱吏于是调戏他说： 外面传说詹事可能要长期囚禁。 
English: The warden then teased him, saying, "There is a rumor out there that Zhan Zhe may be imprisoned for a long time.

古文：晔闻之惊喜。
现代文：范晔听说后十分惊喜。
English: Fan Ye was very surprised when he heard about it.

古文：综、熙先笑之曰： 詹事尝共论事，无不攘袂瞋目，及在西池射堂上，跃马顾眄，自以爲一世之雄，而今扰攘纷纭，畏死乃尔。
现代文：谢综、孔熙先笑他说： 詹事曾经共同讨论事情，无不捋袖瞪眼，后来在西池的射堂上，跃马回望，自以为是一世的英雄，而现在扰攘纷纭，却是这样怕死。
English: Xie Zhao and Kong Xi first laughed and said, "Zhan Zhi used to discuss things together, and everyone stared at each other. Later, on the firing range of the West Pool, he looked back and thought he was a hero for life. But now, he is so afraid of death.

古文：设令今时赐以性命，人臣图主，何顔可以生存。 
现代文：假设现在赐给他性命，臣子谋害君主，有什么脸面可以生存？ 
English: Suppose his life is given to him now, a courtier plotting to kill the monarch, what face can survive?

古文：晔谓卫狱将曰： 惜哉，埋如此人。 
现代文：范晔对卫军中的狱将说： 可惜呀，埋没了这样一个人！ 
English: Fan Qi said to the warden of the guards: What a pity, such a person has been buried!

古文：将曰： 不忠之人，亦何足惜。 
现代文：狱将说： 不忠的人，又有什么可惜？ 
English: The warden said, "What's wrong with being unfaithful?

古文：晔曰： 大将言是也。 
现代文：范晔说： 大将的话说得对。 
English: Fan Ye said: The general's words are right.

古文：及将诣市，晔最在前，于狱门顾谓综曰： 次第当以位邪？ 
现代文：等将要去到刑场，范晔走在最前面，在监狱门口他回头望谢综说： 行刑的顺序会按照地位吗？ 
English: When he was about to go to the execution site, Fan Qi walked in the front. At the prison gate, he looked back at Xie Zhao and said: Will the order of execution be according to status?

古文：综曰： 贼帅当爲先。 
现代文：谢综说： 贼帅应当在先。 
English: Xie Zhao said: The thief should go first.

古文：在道语笑，初无惭耻。
现代文：在路上又说又笑，丝毫不觉得惭愧和耻辱。
English: We talked and laughed on the way, without feeling any shame or embarrassment.

古文：至市问综曰： 时欲至未？ 
现代文：到了刑场问谢综说： 时候快到了吗？ 
English: When he arrived at the execution site, he asked Xie Zhao: "Is it almost time?"

古文：综曰： 势不复久。 
现代文：谢综说： 看样子不会太久了。 
English: Xie Zhao said: It doesn't look like it will be too long.

古文：晔既食，又苦劝综，综曰： 此异疾笃，何事强饭。 
现代文：范晔吃罢东西，又苦劝谢综，谢综说： 现在特异病情危重，何必还要勉强吃饭？ 
English: Fan Qi stopped eating and tried to persuade Xie Zhao. Xie Zhao said, "Now that my illness is critical, why do I have to force myself to eat?

古文：晔家人悉至市，监刑职司问曰： 须相见不？ 
现代文：范晔家里的人也都到了刑场，监刑的官吏问道： 还要相见吗？ 
English: Members of Fan Qi's family also arrived at the execution site, and the prison officials asked: Do you still want to see each other?

古文：晔问综曰： 家人已来，幸得相见，将不暂别？ 
现代文：范晔问谢综说： 家里的人已经来了，幸好得以相见，还不暂且告别一下？ 
English: Fan Yu asked Xie Zhao: The people from home have already come, fortunately we were able to see each other, why not say goodbye for a while?

古文：综曰： 别与不别，亦何所存，来必当号泣，正足乱人意。 
现代文：谢综说： 告别与不告别，又有什么意义，来了一定是痛哭流涕，正足以让人心乱。 
English: Xie Zhao said, "Whether it's a farewell or not, what's the meaning? It's sure to be full of tears, which is enough to make people upset.

古文：晔曰： 号泣何关人，向见道边亲故相瞻望，吾意故欲相见。 
现代文：范晔说： 痛哭流涕有什么关系，刚才看到路边的亲戚旧友对我观望，我心里所以希望相见。 
English: Fan Wei said: "It doesn't matter if I cry, just now I saw my relatives and old friends on the roadside looking at me, so in my heart I hope to meet them.

古文：于是呼前。
现代文：于是叫到了跟前。
English: So he called the groom forward.

古文：晔妻先抚其子，回骂晔曰： 君不爲百岁阿家，不感天子恩遇，身死固不足塞罪，奈何枉杀子孙。 
现代文：范晔的妻子先抚摸着他的儿子，回头骂范晔说： 您不为百岁老母，不感谢天子的恩情，自身死去固然不足可惜，为什么要害死无辜的子孙？ 
English: Fan Yao's wife first touched his son, then turned around and scolded Fan Yao, saying: You are not a hundred-year-old mother, you do not thank God for His grace, it is a pity that you died, but why kill your innocent children and grandchildren?

古文：晔乾笑，云罪至而已。
现代文：范晔干笑，只是说罪过极大而已。
English: Fan Qian dryly laughed, but only said that the crime was extremely serious.

古文：晔所生母对泣曰： 主上念汝无极，汝曾不能感恩，又不念我老，今日奈何！ 
现代文：范晔的生母对着他哭道： 皇上对你无限关怀，你竟然不能感恩，又不挂念我年老，今日还有什么办法？ 
English: Fan Qian's birth mother cried to him, "The emperor has infinite concern for you. You can't even be grateful, and you don't care about my old age. What else can you do today?"

古文：仍以手击晔颈及颊。
现代文：于是用手去打范晔的脖颈和脸颊。
English: So he used his hands to hit Fan Qi's neck and cheek.

古文：晔妻云： 罪人，阿家莫忆莫念。 
现代文：范晔的妻子说： 罪人，婆母不要想他念他。 
English: Fan Qi's wife said, "Sinner, mother-in-law, don't think of him, think of him."

古文：妹及妓妾来别，晔乃悲泣流涟。
现代文：妹妹和妓妾前来告别，范晔于是悲泣流泪。
English: When her younger sister and the prostitute came to say goodbye, Fan Qi burst into tears.

古文：综曰： 舅殊不及夏侯色。 
现代文：谢综说： 舅舅远不如夏侯的神色。 
English: Xie Zomei said, "My uncle is not as good-looking as Xia Hou.

古文：晔收泪而已。
现代文：范晔收住眼泪不再哭泣。
English: Fan Qi held back her tears and stopped crying.

古文：综母以子弟自陷逆乱，独不出视。
现代文：谢综的母亲因为儿子自陷于逆乱，独不出来相见。
English: Xie Zomei's mother couldn't meet him alone because her son had been caught up in the rebellion.

古文：晔语综曰： 姊今不来，胜人多也。 
现代文：范晔对谢综说： 老人家现在不来，胜过其他人许多。 
English: Fan Wei said to Xie Zhao: The old people are not coming now, which is better than many others.

古文：晔转醉，子蔼亦醉，取地土及果皮以掷晔，呼爲别驾数十声。晔问曰： 汝瞋我邪？ 
现代文：范晔逐渐变醉，他的儿子范蔼也醉了，抓起地上的土和果皮投掷范晔，呼为别驾几十声，范晔问他说： 你生我的气了吗？ 
English: Fan Qi gradually became intoxicated, and his son Fan Ai also became intoxicated. He grabbed soil and fruit peels from the ground and threw them at Fan Qi. He called out to him dozens of times to stop. Fan Qi asked him, "Are you angry with me?"

古文：蔼曰： 今日何缘复瞋，但父子同死，不能不悲耳。 
现代文：范蔼说： 今天为什么还要再生气？只是父子同死，不能不悲伤罢了。 
English: Fan A said, "Why do I have to be angry again today? It's just that the father and son died together, and I can't help but feel sad."

古文：晔常谓死爲灭，欲着无鬼论，至是与徐湛之书 当相讼地下 。
现代文：范晔常把死说成灭，想建立无鬼论，到现在给徐湛之写信说 让我们到地下再去争论 。
English: Fan Zhen often talked about death as annihilation and wanted to establish a ghost theory, and now he wrote to Xu Zhanzhi saying, "Let's go underground and argue again."

古文：其缪乱如此。
现代文：他就是这样的荒谬悖乱。
English: He's such a ridiculous mess.

古文：又语人： 寄语何仆射，天下决无佛鬼，若有灵，自当相报。 
现代文：他又告诉别人： 请转告何仆射，天下绝没有佛和鬼，如果有灵的话，自然当会相报答。 
English: He also told others: "Please tell He Pu Ya that there is no Buddha or ghost in the world, and if there is a spirit, it will naturally reward each other.

古文：收晔家，乐器服玩并皆珍丽，妓妾亦盛饰。
现代文：朝廷抄了范晔的家，乐器服装玩物都很珍贵华美，妓妾也都装饰艳丽。
English: The imperial court copied Fan Qi's home, musical instruments, clothing and playthings are all precious and gorgeous, and prostitutes are also gorgeously decorated.

古文：母住止单陋，唯有二厨盛櫵薪。
现代文：而他母亲住址简陋，只有两间厨房盛着柴禾。
English: His mother, on the other hand, lives at a humble address with only two kitchens for firewood.

古文：弟子冬无被，叔父单布衣。
现代文：弟子冬天没有被子，叔父只穿着单布衣服。
English: The disciple did not wear a coat in winter, and the uncle only wore a single piece of cloth.

古文：晔及党与并伏诛，晔时年四十八。
现代文：范晔和他的同党都被处死，范晔当时年龄四十八岁。
English: Fan Yu, who was 48 years old at the time, and his fellow party members were all executed.

古文：谢综弟纬徙广州。
现代文：谢综的弟弟谢纬流放广州。
English: Xie Zomei's younger brother Xie Wei was exiled to Guangzhou.

古文：蔼子鲁连，吴兴昭公主外孙，请全生命，亦得远徙。
现代文：范蔼的儿子范鲁连，是吴兴昭公主的外孙，请求保全他的生命，也判为流放远方。
English: Fan's son, Fan Lulian, the grandson of Princess Wu Xingzhao, asked for his life to be spared and was also sentenced to exile far away.

古文：孝武即位，乃还。
现代文：孝武帝即位，才返回来。
English: Emperor Xiaowu ascended to the throne, only then did he return.

古文：晔性精微，有思致，触类多善，衣裳器服，莫不增损制度，世人皆法学之。
现代文：范晔性情精细，有思考能力，接触的东西大多能够通达。衣裳器物，无不超过或不够规格，世上的人都仿效他。
English: Fan Qi has a fine temperament, has the ability to think, and can understand most of the things he touches. Clothes and utensils, none of which exceed or fall short of specifications, are imitated by people all over the world.

古文：撰和香方，其序之曰： 麝本多忌，过分必害。
现代文：他撰写了一部《和香方》，在序言中说： 麝香本来多有忌讳，过量必定有害。
English: He wrote a book, "Wakanko," in which he said in the preface: "There are many taboos about musk, and too much must be harmful.

古文：沈实易和，盈斤无伤。
现代文：沈实容易调和，用足一斤也无损伤。
English: Shen solid is easy to reconcile, and there is no damage from using one pound of feet.

古文：零藿虚燥，詹唐黏湿。
现代文：零藿虚燥，詹唐黏湿。
English: Zengqi is dry, Zhan Tang is sticky and wet.

古文：甘松、苏合、安息、郁金、奈多、和罗之属，并被珍于外国，无取于中土。
现代文：甘松、苏合、安息、郁金、奈多、和罗之类，都在外国极受珍视，在中国没有出产。
English: The likes of the amaryllis, the succulent, the rhododendron, the tulip, the rhododendron, and the rhododendron are all highly prized in foreign countries, but are not produced in China.

古文：又枣膏昏钝，甲煎浅俗，非唯无助于馨烈,乃当弥增于尤疾也。 
现代文：又枣膏昏钝，甲煎浅俗，不仅无助于减轻烈性疾病，还会更增加这种病情。 
English: In addition, the jujube paste is dull and shallow, which not only does not help to alleviate the violent disease, but also increases the disease.

古文：所言悉以比类朝士：麝本多忌，比庾仲文；零藿虚燥，比何尚之；詹唐黏湿，比沈演之；枣膏昏钝，比羊玄保；甲煎浅俗，比徐湛之；甘松苏合，比慧琳道人；沈实易和，以自比也。
现代文：他所说的都用来比喻朝中的官员：麝香本来多有忌讳，比喻庾仲文；零藿虚燥，比喻何尚之；詹唐黏湿，比喻沈演之；枣膏昏钝，比喻羊玄保；甲煎浅俗，比喻徐湛之；甘松苏合，比喻慧林道人；沈实易和，则用以自比。
English: What he said are all used to compare officials in the dynasty: musk originally had a lot of taboos, likened to wangzhongwen; zero-scented vapid, likened to whatshang; jandang sticky, likened to Shen Yuan; jujube paste dull, likened to Yang Xuanbao; jia sen shallow, likened to Xu Zhan; sweet pine, Su He, likened to Huilin Taoist; and Shen Shiji and, are used for self-comparison.

古文：晔狱中与诸生侄书以自序，其略曰：
现代文：范晔在狱中给众子侄写信以自叙生平，其中大略说：
English: While in prison, Fan Qi wrote a letter to his sons and nephews, in which he outlined his life story:

古文：吾少懒学问，年三十许，始有尚耳。
现代文： 我少年的时候懒于求学问，年龄三十岁左右，才有了追求。
English: When I was a teenager, I was too lazy to study, and it wasn't until I was about thirty years old that I began to pursue it.

古文：自尔以来，转爲心化，至于所通处，皆自得之胸怀。
现代文：自从那时以来，转为心中融化，到了通达的地方，都是自己从胸中获得。
English: Since then, I have been melting in my heart, and I have reached a place where I can get everything from my own chest.

古文：常谓情志所托，故当以意爲主，以文传意。
现代文：人们常说情志所托，所以应当以意为主，以文传意。
English: People often say that sentiments are entrusted, so it should be based on intention and conveyed in writing.

古文：以意爲主，则其旨必见；以文传意，则其辞不流。
现代文：以意为主，则他的主旨必定显现；以文传意，则他的词句不会流荡。
English: If the meaning is primary, then his main idea will certainly appear; if the meaning is conveyed by the text, then his words will not wander.

古文：然后抽其芬芳，振其金石耳。
现代文：然后再提升它的芬芳气息，调配它的金石声音。
English: and then enhance its fragrance and blend its gemstone sound.

古文：观古今文人多不全了此处，年少中谢庄最有其分，手笔差易，于文不拘韵故也。
现代文：观察古今的文人大多数对这一点并不完全了然，少年当中谢庄最有这种才分，则因为手笔比较平易，在文字上不拘音韵的缘故。
English: Observing that most of the literati from ancient times to the present are not completely clear about this, Xie Zhuang has the most talent among the boys, because the handwriting is relatively easy and the text is not subject to phonology.

古文：吾思乃无定方，但多公家之言，少于事外远致，以此爲恨，亦由无意于文名故也。
现代文：我的思路没有固定的方向，只是多有官家语言，缺少事情以外的幽远情致，以此为遗憾，也是由于没有存心追求文名的缘故。
English: My way of thinking does not have a fixed direction, but there are more official languages and a lack of distant feelings other than things, which is a pity, also because I did not intentionally pursue literary names.

古文：本未开史书，政恒觉其不可解耳。
现代文： 我本来没有阅读史书，正是因为总觉得它不可理解。
English: I didn't read history books originally, precisely because I always found them incomprehensible.

古文：既造后汉，转得统绪。
现代文：自从撰写《后汉书》以后，转而得到了脉络。
English: Since the writing of the "Post-Han Shu," the context has been changed.

古文：详观古今着述及评论，殆少可意者。
现代文：详细观察古今著述以及评论，几乎很少有合意的。
English: A close look at ancient and modern writings, as well as commentaries, shows little agreement.

古文：班氏最有高名，既任情无例，唯志可推耳。
现代文：班氏最有高名，既然没有感情丰满的例子，就只有志向可以推尊。
English: Mr. Ban is the most famous. Since there is no example of emotional fullness, only ambition can be respected.

古文：博赡不可及之，整理未必愧也。
现代文：广博丰富不可以赶上它，但是整理未必有愧。
English: It is impossible to catch up with it in terms of breadth and depth, but it is not necessarily a bad thing to tidy up.

古文：吾杂传论皆有精意深旨，至于循吏以下及六夷诸序论，笔势纵放，实天下之奇作。
现代文：我在传论中都融汇有精深的旨意，到了《循吏》以下和《六夷》各篇的序、论，笔势纵放，实在是天下的奇作。
English: I have integrated a profound intention in the theory of transmission, and the preface, discussion, and gestures of each chapter from "Chu Li" and "Li Yi" are truly a miracle of the world.

古文：其中合者，往往不减过秦篇。
现代文：其中写得深切的，往往不亚于《过秦篇》。
English: Among them, the ones that are written deeply are often no less than the "Passing the Qin."

古文：尝共比方班氏所作，非但不愧之而已。
现代文：曾经一齐比方为班氏的作品，不只是无愧于它们。
English: When I compare the books I once read by my classmates, there are so many that are much better, and I'm not just not ashamed.

古文：欲遍作诸志，前汉所有者悉令备，虽事不必多，且使见文得尽。
现代文：我很想把各代的史志都做一遍，《前汉书》中所具有的都让它具备，虽然事情不必记得太多，却能使人看到文章就能全部了解。
English: I would very much like to do the history of each generation all over again. Let it have everything that the former Chinese book has. Although you don't have to remember too many things, you can see the article and understand everything.

古文：又欲因事就卷内发论，以正一代得失，意复不果。
现代文：又打算就着事实在每卷内发表议论，用以揭示每一朝代的得失，这个想法也没有能够实现。
English: He also planned to publish a discussion of the facts in each volume to reveal the gains and losses of each dynasty, but this idea could not be realized.

古文：赞自是吾文杰思，殆无一字空设，奇变不穷，同合异体，乃自不知所以称之。
现代文：论赞自然是我的文章中杰出思考的所在之处，几乎没有一个字是虚设的，奇异变化无穷，融合了不同的文体，连我自己也不知道应该如何称呼它。
English: Praise, of course, is where the outstanding thinking in my article lies, almost no word is fictitious, the strangeness is endless, the fusion of different styles, and I don't even know what to call it.

古文：此书行，故应有赏音者。
现代文：这部书问世以后，自然应该有知音者对它表示欣赏。
English: This book appears in society, and it is bound to be appreciated by people.

古文：纪传例爲举其大略耳，诸细意甚多。
现代文：纪传文章照例只是记录一下大概情况，而其中的细致意思还有很多。
English: As usual, the chronicle article only records the general situation, but there is a lot of detailed meaning in it.

古文：自古体大而思精，未有此也。
现代文：自古以来文章体式宏大而思虑精微的，还没有见过能像这样的。
English: Since ancient times, there has never been a work of such a grand structure and thought-provoking precision.

古文：恐世人不能尽之，多贵古贱今，所以称情狂言耳。
现代文：恐怕世上的人不能领会，大多是贵古贱今，所以便任情狂言了。
English: I'm afraid that people in the world can't understand, most of them are too old and too young, so they let their emotions run wild.

古文：吾于音乐，听功不及自挥，但所精非雅声爲可恨，然至于一绝处，亦复何异邪。
现代文： 我对于音乐，聆听的功力不如自弹，只是我所精通的不是雅声，是令人遗憾的，然而到了一个隔绝的地方，又有什么不同呢？
English: I am not as good at listening to music as I am at playing it myself, but what I am good at is not yakitori, which is regrettable, but when I get to an isolated place, what's the difference?

古文：其中体趣，言之不可尽。
现代文：其中的乐趣，是无法说尽的。
English: The joy of it is indescribable.

古文：弦外之意，虚响之音，不知所从而来。
现代文：弦外之意，空响之音，不知道是从什么地方来的。
English: The implication of the strings, the sound of ringing in the air, I don't know where it came from.

古文：亦尝以授人，士庶中未有一毫似者，此永不传矣。
现代文：也曾经把它教给别人，士人平民中没有一毫与它相似的，这一技术将永远不传了。
English: I have also taught it to others, and there is not a single scholar or commoner who is similar to it. This technique will never be passed on.

古文：吾书虽小小有意，笔势不快，馀竟不成就，每愧此名。
现代文：我的书法虽然小小有些意思，但笔势不快，其余的最终都没有什么成就，常常惭愧自己虚有名声。 
English: Although my calligraphy is small and somewhat meaningful, the brushstrokes are unpleasant, and the rest ultimately have no achievements. I am often ashamed of my false reputation.

古文：晔自序并实，故存之。
现代文：范晔的自序都是实在的，所以把它保存下来。
English: Fan Ye's self-ordering is real, so save it.

古文：蔼幼而整洁，衣服竟岁未尝有尘点,死时年二十。
现代文：范蔼幼年就很整洁，衣服上一年到头也不曾有污点，死的时候年龄二十岁。
English: Fan Aizhe was very neat when she was young, and her clothes did not have any stains throughout the last year. She was twenty years old when she died.

古文：晔少时,兄晏常云： 此儿进利，终破门户。 
现代文：范晔少年的时候，他的哥哥范晏常常说： 这个孩子贪利，终究会破坏门户。 
English: When Fan Rong was a teenager, his brother Fan Rong often said: This child is greedy and will eventually destroy the portal.

古文：果如其言。
现代文：果然像他所说的那样。
English: He really nailed it.

古文：初，何尚之处铨衡，自谓天下无滞才，及熙先就拘，帝诘尚之曰： 使孔熙先年三十犹作散骑侍郎，那不作贼。 
现代文：起初，何尚之掌管选拔官员，自称天下没有被遗漏的人才，等孔熙先被捕，文帝质问何尚之说： 让孔熙先三十岁还做散骑侍郎，怎么会不做贼？ 
English: At first, He Shangzhi, who was in charge of the selection of officials and claimed that there was no missing talent in the world, waited for Kong Xi to be arrested first. Emperor Wen questioned He Shangzhi and said: "If Kong Xi is thirty years old and still works as a horseback rider, how can he not be a thief?"

古文：熙先死后，又谓尚之曰： 孔熙先有美才，地胄犹可论，而翳迹仕流，岂非时匠失乎？ 
现代文：孔熙先死后，又对何尚之说： 孔熙先有美好的才华，也可以称得上是世族大家，却在仕途中沉沦不显，这难道不是主管官员的失误吗？ 
English: After Kong Xi's death, he also said to He Shangzhi: Kong Xi had wonderful talent, and could be called a world-class person, but he did not sink during his service. Isn't this a mistake of the responsible officials?

古文：豁宋永初初，爲尚书左丞、山阴令，精练法理，爲时所推。
现代文：何尚之说： 臣过去曾经勉强在选曹负责，确实没有能够很好地贬斥庸才、任用贤能，然而君子具有智能，就像凤凰具有文采，等待时机而舒展羽翼，哪用忧虑不高飞云霞之上。
English: He Shangzhi said: In the past, the minister had reluctantly been responsible for the selection of Cao, and indeed had not been able to properly disparage mediocrity and appoint talent. However, a gentleman has intelligence, just like a phoenix has literary talent, waiting for the opportunity to stretch its wings, which is not to worry about flying above the clouds.

古文：元嘉初，爲始兴太守，表陈三事。文帝嘉之，赐绢二百匹，谷一千斛。
现代文：而像孔熙先这样的人一定要隐藏自己的文采，自弃于污泥，就终于不值得讨论了。 
English: But people like Kong Xixian must hide their literary talent and abandon themselves to the sludge, so they are finally not worth discussing.

古文：徙广州刺史，未拜卒。
现代文：皇上说： 从前有优秀的才能而遇不上知己，哪能不给后人留下遗憾呢？ 
English: The emperor said, "Once upon a time, there was an outstanding talent who did not find a confidant. How can we not leave regrets for future generations?

古文：郑鲜之字道子，荥阳开封人，魏将作大匠浑之玄孙也。
现代文：○郑鲜之郑鲜之字道子，荥阳开封人，是魏朝的将作大匠郑浑的玄孙。
English: ○ Zheng Xian's Zheng Xian's disciple, a native of Fenyang Kaifeng, is the great-great-grandson of the great Wei dynasty master Zheng Hun.

古文：祖袭，大司农，经爲江乘令，因居县境。
现代文：祖父郑袭，是大司农，曾经做过江乘县令，所以就住在了境内。
English: Grandfather Zheng Wei, the chief farmer, once served as the county magistrate of Jiangren County, so he lived in the territory.

古文：父遵，尚书郎。
现代文：父亲郑遵，是尚书郎。
English: His father, Zheng Zun, was Shang Shuro.

古文：鲜之下帷读书，绝交游之务。
现代文：郑鲜之闭门读书，杜绝与人交往。
English: Zheng Xianzhi read books behind closed doors and cut off contact with others.

古文：初爲桓伟辅国主簿。
现代文：起初做桓伟的辅国主簿。
English: At first, it was the main book of the subsidiary country of Huanwei.

古文：先是，兖州刺史滕恬爲丁零翟辽所没，尸丧不反。
现代文：在这以前，兖州刺史滕恬被丁零的翟辽所消灭，尸体没有返回内地。
English: Prior to this, the Zhangzhou hedgehog was killed by Ding Zi's hedgehog, and the body did not return to the mainland.

古文：恬子羡仕宦不废，论者嫌之。
现代文：滕恬的儿子滕羡照样做官不误，舆论对他不满。
English: Teng Quan's son Teng Qian is still in office, and public opinion is dissatisfied with him.

古文：桓玄在荆州，使群僚博议。鲜之议曰： 名教大极，忠孝而已。
现代文：桓玄在荆州，让群僚对此进行广泛议论，郑鲜之说： 名教极大，忠孝而已。
English: In Jingzhou, Huan Xuan let his colleagues discuss this extensively, and Zheng Xianzhi said: The famous teaching is great, but the loyalty and filial piety are better.

古文：至乎变通抑引，每事辄殊。
现代文：至于变通抑扬，常常事情不同。
English: When it comes to flexible intonation, things are often different.

古文：本而寻之，皆求心而遗迹。
现代文：追根溯源，都是寻求心意而舍弃行迹。
English: Tracing the roots and tracing the source is all about seeking the mind and abandoning the traces.

古文：迹之所乘，遭遇或异。
现代文：若看行迹，人们的遭遇可能不同。
English: People's experiences may be different depending on where they go.

古文：故圣人或就迹以助教，或因迹以成罪，屈申与夺，难可等齐，举其阡陌，皆可终言矣。
现代文：所以圣人有时通过事情来辅助教化，有时通过事情而定出罪名，屈伸予夺，很难等同，统观各种情况，全都可以总而论之。
English: Therefore, sages sometimes use things to help with enlightenment, and sometimes use things to determine guilt, and give and take. It is difficult to equate, and all situations can be viewed as a whole.

古文：天可逃乎？
现代文：天命可以逃脱吗？
English: Can destiny be escaped?

古文：而伊尹废君；君可胁乎？
现代文：而伊尹废了君主；君王可以胁迫吗？
English: But Yi Yin abolished the monarch; can the monarch be coerced?

古文：而鬻拳见善；忠可愚乎？
现代文：而鬻拳受到称赞；忠诚可以愚昧吗？
English: But taekwondo is praised; can loyalty be foolish?

古文：而箕子同仁。
现代文：而箕子同样仁义。
English: And dice are just as benevolent.

古文：自此以还，殊实而齐声，异誉而等美者，不可胜言。
现代文：由此以下，情况不同而声望一致、赞誉异样而美名同等的例子，不可胜数。
English: Therefore, the following are countless examples of different situations but the same reputation, different praise but the same reputation.

古文：今如滕羡情事者，或终身隐处，不关人事，或升朝理务，无讥前哲。
现代文：现在像滕羡这种情况，或者终身隐居，隔绝人间杂事；或者入朝从政，前人无可讥讽。
English: Now, as Teng envies this situation, or lives in seclusion for life, isolated from human affairs; or enters the court and politics, the predecessors are beyond ridicule.

古文：通滕者则以无讥爲证，塞滕者则以隐处爲美。
现代文：赞成滕羡做官的就以无讥为证据，反对滕羡做官的则以隐居为美谈。
English: Those who are in favor of Teng Qian as an official take mockery as evidence, while those who are against Teng Qian as an official take seclusion as a fairy tale.

古文：折其两中，则异同之情可见矣。
现代文：两者折中，则情况的异同就可以看清了。
English: In the middle of the two, the differences and similarities of the situation can be seen clearly.

古文：夫圣人立教，犹言有礼无时，君子不行。
现代文：圣人设立礼教，还曾说过有礼教而无时机，君子也无法通行。
English: The saint set up the etiquette, and once said that there is etiquette but no opportunity, and the gentleman cannot pass.

古文：有礼无时，政以事有变通，不可宗一故耳。 
现代文：有礼教而无时机，正因为事情有所变通，是不可固守一种模式的。 
English: There is a time and a place for etiquette, and it is precisely because things have changed that it is impossible to stick to one model.

古文：宋武帝起义兵，累迁御史中丞。
现代文：宋武帝兴起义兵后，他逐步升为御史中丞。
English: After Emperor Songwu raised a volunteer army, he was gradually promoted to goshi chujo.

古文：性刚直，甚得司直之体。
现代文：性格刚直，很合乎司直的职务特点。
English: He has a straightforward personality, which is very much in keeping with the characteristics of his position.

古文：外甥刘毅权重当时，朝野莫不归附，鲜之尽心武帝，独不屈意于毅，毅甚恨焉。
现代文：他的外甥刘毅在当时权力很大，朝野人士无不归附，郑鲜之尽心于武帝，独独不肯屈从刘毅，刘毅非常愤恨。
English: His nephew Liu Yi was very powerful at that time. People from both the imperial court and the field were all attached to him. Zheng Xian devoted himself to Emperor Wu, but refused to yield to Liu Yi. Liu Yi was very angry.

古文：以与毅舅甥制不相纠，使书侍御史丘洹奏弹毅辄宥传诏罗道盛。
现代文：因为他和刘毅是舅甥关系，制度规定不能互相纠弹，便让侍御史丘垣奏表弹劾刘毅专擅赦免传诏罗道盛。
English: Because he and Liu Yi are nephews and nieces, the system stipulates that they cannot quarrel with each other, so he asked the attendant Shi Qiu to impeach Liu Yi for pardoning the preacher Luo Daosheng.

古文：诏无所问。
现代文：诏令没作处理。
English: The issue was not dealt with by the Imperial Edict.

古文：时新制，长吏以父母疾去官，禁锢三年。
现代文：当时的新制度规定，长吏因为父母的疾病离职，三年内不准做官。
English: The new system at the time stipulated that officials who left their posts due to their parents' illness would not be allowed to hold public office for three years.

古文：山阴令沈叔任父疾去职，鲜之因此上议曰： 今省父母之疾而加以罪名，悖义疾理，莫此爲大。
现代文：山阴令沈叔任由于父亲生病离职，郑鲜之因此建议说： 现在因为探望父母的疾病而加给罪名，违背义理，没有比这更大的。
English: Sangyin ordered Shen Shuren to leave his post due to his father's illness, so Zheng Xianzhi suggested: "Nowadays, if you are charged with a crime because you visit your parents when they are ill, there is no greater violation of justice.

古文：谓宜从旧，于义爲允。 
现代文：我以为应该依从旧章规定，在理义上才恰当。 
English: I thought it was logically appropriate to follow the provisions of the old chapter.

古文：从之。
现代文：朝廷采纳了他的建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：于是自二品以上，父母及爲祖父母后者，坟墓崩毁及疾病，族属辄去，并不禁锢。
现代文：从此自二品以上，做父母或做祖父母较晚的，坟墓崩毁以及生有疾病，族属就可以离职去照看，都不加禁罚。
English: From now on, members of the same family who have been parents or grandparents for more than two generations, whose graves have been destroyed or who have diseases, can leave their jobs to take care of their relatives without any penalty.

古文：刘毅当镇江陵，武帝会于江宁，朝士毕集。
现代文：刘毅将去镇守江陵，武帝在江宁和他举行宴会，朝士都参加了。
English: Liu Yi will go to the town of Jiangling, Emperor Wu held a banquet with him in Jiangning, and all the Asashi attended.

古文：毅素好摴蒱，于是会戏。
现代文：刘毅平素爱玩詂，便在这里一块游戏。
English: Liu Yiping loves to play dice, so here is a game.

古文：帝与毅敛局各得其半，积钱隐人，毅呼帝并之。
现代文：武帝和刘毅在收局时各得了其中的一半，钱币堆得很多，刘毅呼叫武帝合在一起。
English: At the end of the game, Emperor Wu and Liu Yi each won half of the coins. There were a lot of coins, so Liu Yi called Emperor Wu to join them.

古文：先掷得雉，帝甚不悦，良久乃答之，四坐倾属。
现代文：刘毅先掷得了雉，武帝很不高兴，过了好一阵才作答，四座的人们都聚精会神地注视着。
English: Liu Yi threw the thunderbolt first, and Emperor Wu was very unhappy. It took him a long time to answer, and the people in all four seats watched attentively.

古文：既掷得卢，毅意大恶，谓帝曰： 知公不以大坐席与人。 
现代文：结果掷得了卢，刘毅心里十分厌恶，对武帝说： 我知道您不会把大座席让给别人。 
English: As a result, Lu won the toss. Liu Yi was very disgusted in his heart and said to Emperor Wu: I know you will not give up the big seat to others.

古文：鲜之大喜，徒跣绕床大叫，声声相续，毅甚不平，谓之曰： 此郑君何爲者？ 
现代文：郑鲜之大喜，光着脚绕床大叫，一声接着一声，刘毅感到非常不满，对着他说： 这位郑君是干什么的？ 
English: Zheng Xian's great joy, bare feet around the bed, shouting, one after another, Liu Yi was very dissatisfied and said to him: What does this Zheng Jun do?

古文：无复甥舅之敬。
现代文：不再有甥舅间的恭敬。
English: No more deference between nephews and uncles.

古文：帝少事戎旅，不经涉学，及爲宰相，颇慕风流。
现代文：武帝少年参加军队，不曾涉猎学问，等做了宰相，很羡慕风流。
English: Emperor Wu's boy joined the army, never dabbled in learning, became prime minister, and was very envious of the courtesan.

古文：时或谈论，人皆依违不敢难。
现代文：当时一块交谈，人们都是顺着他的意思说，不敢辩驳。
English: In a group conversation at the time, people all said what he wanted them to say and dared not contradict him.

古文：鲜之难必切至，未尝宽假。
现代文：郑鲜之则是猛力驳难，不曾放松。
English: Zheng Xian's was hard to refute, and he never relaxed.

古文：与帝言，要须帝理屈，然后置之。
现代文：和武帝说话，务必让他理屈，然后才罢休。
English: When talking to Emperor Wu, be sure to let him reason, and then stop.

古文：帝有时惭恧变色，感其输情，时人谓爲 格佞 。
现代文：武帝有时惭愧变色，感念他的能讲真情，当时的人们称赞他是破除谄媚的 格佞 。
English: Emperor Wu would sometimes turn pale with shame, feeling sorry for his ability to speak the truth. At that time, people praised him for breaking the spell of flattery.

古文：十二年，武帝北伐，以爲右长史。
现代文：义熙十二年，武帝北伐，以他为右军长史。
English: In the twelfth year of Yixi, Emperor Wu led the Northern Expedition, with him as the commander of the right army.

古文：鲜之曾祖晋江州长史哲墓在开封，求拜省，帝以骑送之。
现代文：郑鲜之的曾祖晋朝江州长史郑哲的墓在开封，他请求去参拜，武帝派骑兵送他。
English: The tomb of Zheng Xianzhi's great-grandfather, Jin Dynasty governor of the Yangtze River, Shi Zheng Zhe, was being opened. He asked to visit it, and Emperor Wu sent cavalry to escort him.

古文：及入咸阳，帝遍视阿房、未央故地，凄怆动容，问鲜之秦、汉所以得丧。
现代文：等入了咸阳，武帝遍看了阿房宫、未央宫故地，凄怆动容，问郑鲜之秦、汉灭亡的原因。
English: After entering Xianyang, Emperor Wu looked over the former sites of the Afang Palace and the Weiyang Palace with great emotion, and asked Zheng Xian of the Qin and Han dynasties the reason for their demise.

古文：鲜之具以贾谊过秦对。
现代文：郑鲜之以贾谊的《过秦论》作了回答。
English: Zheng Xian replied with Jia Youyi's "On Overthrowing the Qin Dynasty."

古文：帝曰： 及子婴而亡，已爲晚矣。
现代文：武帝说： 到了子婴而亡，已经算是很晚了。
English: Emperor Wu said, "It's already too late when a baby dies.

古文：然观始皇爲人，智足见是非，所任不得人，何也？ 
现代文：然而看秦始皇的为人，智力足以分出是非，任用的却不是良臣，这是为什么？ 
English: However, looking at Qin Shi Huang as a person, the intellect is enough to distinguish right from wrong, but the appointment is not a good minister, why is this?

古文：答曰： 夫佞言似忠，奸言似信，中人以上，乃可语上。始皇未及中人，所以暗于识士。 
现代文：回答说： 那些佞言仿佛忠义，奸言好似真实，中人以上，才算明智，秦始皇不及中人，所以不能识别贤士。 
English: He replied, "Those slanderous words seem to be loyal and righteous, while the treacherous words seem to be true. Only those who are above the middle class can be considered wise. The First Emperor of Qin was not above the middle class, so he could not recognize the wise men.

古文：前至渭滨，帝复叹曰： 此地甯复有吕望邪？ 
现代文：前行走到渭水旁边，武帝又慨叹说： 此地难道还会有吕望么？ 
English: Walking forward, he came to the side of Surabaya. Emperor Wu sighed and said, "Will there still be a Luwang here?"

古文：鲜之曰： 昔叶公好龙而真龙见，燕昭市骨而骏足至。
现代文：郑鲜之说： 从前叶公好龙而真龙出现，燕昭买骨而骏马到来。
English: Zheng Xianzhi said: From the previous leaf, the dragon is good and the dragon appears, Yan Zhao buys bones and the horse arrives.

古文：明公以旰食待士，岂患海内无人。 
现代文：明公您以诚恳态度待士，还用担忧海内无人？ 
English: My lord, do you treat your staff with sincerity, and do you worry that there is no one at sea?

古文：帝称善者久之。
现代文：武帝接连称赞了好久。
English: Emperor Wu praised the performance for a long time.

古文：宋国初建，转奉常。
现代文：宋国初建时期，他转为奉常。
English: At the beginning of the Song Dynasty, he became a magistrate.

古文：赫连勃勃陷关中，武帝复欲北讨，鲜之表谏。
现代文：赫连勃勃攻陷了关中，武帝又想北伐，郑鲜之上表谏阻。
English: Khelian vigorously attacked the pass, Emperor Wu wanted to go north again, and Zheng Xian resisted.

古文：及践阼，迁太常、都官尚书。
现代文：登基以后，升任太常、都官尚书。
English: After ascending to the throne, he was promoted to the post of Taizang and the post of capital official.

古文：时傅亮、谢晦位遇日隆，范泰尝衆中让诮鲜之曰： 卿与傅、谢俱从圣主有功关、洛，卿乃居僚首，今日答飒，去人辽远，何不肖之甚。 
现代文：当时傅亮、谢晦的地位和恩遇日益隆盛，范泰曾经在公众场合讥诮郑鲜之说： 您与傅、谢都跟随圣主在关中、洛阳立功，您位居臣僚之首，今天颓丧，距离别人遥远，多么无能啊！ 
English: At that time, Fu Liang and Xie Wei's status and favors were becoming increasingly prosperous. Fan Tai once ridiculed Zheng Xianzhi in public, saying: You and Fu and Xie both followed the Lord in Guanzhong and Luoyang and made great contributions. You are at the head of the ministers. Today, you are bereaved. You are far away from others. How incompetent!

古文：鲜之熟视不对。
现代文：郑鲜之一直看着他，并不回答。
English: Zheng Xian looked straight at him and did not answer.

古文：鲜之爲人通率，在武帝坐，言无所隐晦，亦甚惮焉。
现代文：郑鲜之为人通达直率，在武帝座前，说话无所隐晦，人们都很怕他。
English: Zheng Xian was a man of directness and straightforwardness. In front of Emperor Wu, he spoke openly, and people were afraid of him.

古文：而隐厚笃实，赡恤亲故，游行命驾，或不知所适，随御者所之。
现代文：但他敦厚实在，关心亲友。乘车出游，有时茫无目的，随便御手走向哪里。
English: But he is genuine and cares about his relatives and friends. He travels by car, sometimes aimlessly, and goes wherever he wants.

古文：尤爲武帝所狎。
现代文：他尤其被武帝所亲昵。
English: He was especially favored by Emperor Wu.

古文：上曾内殿宴饮，朝贵毕至，唯不召鲜之。
现代文：皇上曾在内殿宴饮，朝廷显贵都到了，惟独不召郑鲜之。
English: The emperor had a banquet in the inner hall, and all the dignitaries of the imperial court came, but Zheng Xian was not invited.

古文：坐定，谓群臣曰： 郑鲜之必当自来。 
现代文：坐定以后，武帝对群臣说： 郑鲜之一定会自己跑来。 
English: After sitting down, Emperor Wu said to his courtiers: "One of the Zheng Cakes will surely come running by itself."

古文：俄而外啓尚书郑鲜之诣神兽门求啓事，帝大笑引入。
现代文：不一会外面禀报尚书郑鲜之来到神兽门请求奏事，武帝大笑引入。
English: Not long after, it was reported that Shangshu Zhengxian came to the Gate of the Gods and Beasts to request a report, and Emperor Wu laughed loudly.

古文：其被遇如此。
现代文：他就是这样受到厚待。
English: That's how he was treated.

古文：以从征功，封龙阳县五等子。
现代文：因为跟随征战的功劳，被封为龙阳县五等子。
English: Because of the merit of following the war, he was awarded the title of the fifth son of Longyang County.

古文：景平中，徐、傅当权，出爲豫章太守。
现代文：景平年间，徐羡之、傅亮当权，把他调出京城任豫章太守。
English: During the Jingping era, Xu Enzhi and Fu Liang were in power, and he was transferred from the capital to be the governor of Yuzhang.

古文：时王弘爲江州刺史，窃谓人曰： 郑公德素，先朝所礼，方于前代，锺元常、王景兴之流。
现代文：当时王弘为江州刺史，私下对人说： 郑公道德纯朴，先朝十分礼遇，以前代作比，是钟元常、王景兴一类人物。
English: At that time, Wang Hong was a historian of Jiangzhou. Privately, he said to people: Zheng Gong's morality is simple, the previous dynasty is very polite, compared to the previous generation, he is a person like Zhong Yuanchang and Wang Jingxing.

古文：今徐、傅出以爲郡，抑当有以。 
现代文：现在徐、傅调他出京为郡官，或许当有缘故。 
English: Now that Xu and Fu have transferred him to Beijing as a county official, perhaps there is a reason.

古文：寻有废立事。
现代文：不久就发生了废立君王的事。
English: The dethronement soon followed.

古文：元嘉三年，弘入爲相，举鲜之爲尚书右仆射。
现代文：元嘉三年，王弘入京为宰相，举荐郑鲜之为尚书右仆射。
English: In the third year of Yuan Jia, Wang Hong entered Beijing as prime minister, recommended by Zheng Xianqiao.

古文：四年卒。
现代文：元嘉四年去世。
English: He died four years later.

古文：文集行于世。
现代文：文集流传在世间。
English: Ren Xiaoqiang's literary works have been circulated around the world.

古文：子愔，始安太守。裴松之字世期，河东闻喜人也。
现代文：○裴松之裴松之字世期，河东闻喜人。祖父裴昧，是光禄大夫。
English: ○ Peisong's Peisong's character period, Hedong Wenshi person. Grandfather Pei Ma, is the first doctor of Guanglu.

古文：祖昧，光禄大夫。父珪，正员外郎。
现代文：父亲裴圭，是正员外郎。
English: His father, Pei Kei, was a full-fledged samurai.

古文：松之博览坟籍，立身简素。
现代文：裴松之博览典籍，立身简素。
English: Peisong's expositional classic, based on a simple structure.

古文：年二十，拜殿中将军。
现代文：二十岁时，被任命为殿中将军。
English: At the age of twenty, he was appointed General of the Palace Guard.

古文：此官直卫左右，晋孝武太元中，革选名家以参顾问，始用琅邪王茂之、会稽谢輶，皆南北之望。
现代文：这个官职是在皇帝身边值班警卫，晋孝武帝太元年间，选任名家作为顾问，开始起用琅笽王茂之、会稽谢，都是南北方的著名人物。
English: This official position was a guard on duty around the emperor. During the reign of Emperor Jinxiao and Emperor Wu, he appointed famous families as advisers, and began to use Shao Wangmao and He Jianxie, both of whom were famous figures in the north and south.

古文：义熙初，爲吴兴故彰令，在县有绩。
现代文：义熙元年，他担任吴兴故彰令，在县里很有政绩。
English: In the first year of Yixi, he served as Wu Xing's former promotion order, and had a lot of political achievements in the county.

古文：入爲尚书祠部郎。
现代文：入京担任尚书祠部郎。
English: Entered the capital to serve as the secretary of the Shoshu Shrine.

古文：松之以世立私碑，有乖事实，上表陈之，以爲 诸欲立碑者，宜悉令言上，爲朝议所许，然后听之，庶可以防遏无征，显彰茂实 。
现代文：裴松之因为世人立有私碑，有的碑文不合事实，便上表陈奏，认为 那些想立碑的人，应该都让他们向上级申请，经朝廷讨论同意，然后进行，这样大概才能防止虚假，显扬实情 。
English: Pei Songzhi, because the world has private monuments and some inscriptions are not true, said that those who want to erect a monument should apply to their superiors, discuss and agree with the imperial court, and then proceed. In this way, it is possible to prevent falsehood and reveal the truth.

古文：由是普断。
现代文：从此普遍杜绝了这种现象。
English: Since then, this phenomenon has been generally eliminated.

古文：武帝北伐，领司州刺史，以松之爲州主簿，转中从事。
现代文：武帝北伐，兼任司州刺史，以裴松之为州主簿，转为中从事。
English: Emperor Wu of the Northern Expedition, concurrently served as the secretary of the state history, with Peisong as the state chief, and then engaged in the middle.

古文：既克洛阳，松之居州行事。
现代文：攻克洛阳后，裴松之居州行事。
English: After conquering Luoyang, Pei Songzhi went to live in Jiuzhou.

古文：宋国初建，毛德祖使洛阳，武帝敕之曰： 裴松之廊庙之才，不宜久居边务，今召爲世子洗马，与殷景仁同，可令知之。 
现代文：宋国初建，毛德祖出使洛阳，武帝指示他说： 裴松之是栋梁之才，不应长久地担任边地事务，现在召他为太子洗马，与殷景仁相同，可以让他知道。 
English: At the beginning of the Song Dynasty, Mao Zedong sent an envoy to Luoyang, and Emperor Wu instructed him: Pei Songzhi is a great talent and should not be in charge of border affairs for a long time. Now he is called to wash horses for the prince, the same as Yin Jingren, so he can let him know.

古文：时议立五庙乐，松之以妃臧氏庙用乐亦宜与四庙同。
现代文：当时议论设立五庙乐，裴松之认为妃子张氏庙用乐也应该与四庙相同。
English: At that time, the establishment of five temple music was discussed, and Pei Songzhi believed that the music used in the Prince Zhang Temple should also be the same as that of the four temples.

古文：除零陵内史，征爲国子博士。
现代文：任命为零陵内史，征他为国子博士。
English: He was appointed as the Zero Mausoleum's internal historian, and was awarded the title of Kuniko Doctor.

古文：元嘉三年，诛司徒徐羡之等，分遣大使巡行天下，并兼散骑常侍，班宣二十四条诏书。
现代文：元嘉三年，处死了司徒徐羡之等人，分别派遣大使巡视天下，都兼任散骑常侍，宣布二十四条诏书。
English: In the third year of Yuan Jia, he executed Stu Xu Enzhi and others, separately dispatched ambassadors to inspect the world, both concurrently served as horseback riding attendants, and announced the twenty-four articles of the edict.

古文：松之使湘州，甚得奉使之义，论者美之。
现代文：裴松之出使湘州，很符合出使的目的，受到了舆论的赞美。
English: The dispatch of Pei Song to Hunan Province is in line with the purpose of the dispatch and has been praised by the public opinion.

古文：转中书侍郎。
现代文：后转任中书侍郎。
English: Later, he was transferred to the position of Chusho-sajiro.

古文：上使注陈寿三国志，松之鸠集传记，广增异闻。
现代文：皇上派他注陈寿的《三国志》，裴松之聚集传记，广增异闻。
English: The emperor sent him to annotate Chen Shou's "History of the Three Kingdoms," Pei Song's collected biographies, with a wide range of anecdotes.

古文：既成奏之，上览之曰： 裴世期爲不朽矣。 
现代文：完成以后上奏，皇上看了说： 裴世期将永垂不朽了。 
English: After the performance, the emperor said, "Pei's life will be immortalized forever."

古文：出爲永嘉太守，勤恤百姓，吏人便之。
现代文：出京后担任了永嘉太守，勤恳爱护百姓，吏人感到方便。
English: After leaving Beijing, he served as Yongjia Dazhong, diligently caring for the people, and the officials felt convenient.

古文：后爲南琅邪太守，致仕，拜中散大夫。
现代文：后来做南琅笽太守，离休后，封为中散大夫。
English: Later, he became the governor of Nanlu, and after his retirement, he was appointed as the doctor of Zhongshan.

古文：寻爲国子博士，进太中大夫。
现代文：不久做了国子博士，晋升为太中大夫。
English: He soon became a Kuniko doctor and was promoted to Taichung doctor.

古文：使续成何承天国史，未及撰述，卒。
现代文：派他续成何承天编写的国史，还没来得及撰述，就去世了。
English: He died before he could write the history of the country that he was assigned to write.

古文：若能自立，则不如一经。 
现代文：他的儿子裴马因，任南中郎参军。
English: His son, Pei Ma Ying, joined the army as the Southern Middle Son.

古文：故终身一不事産业。中兴二年卒。子子野。
现代文：裴松之所著的文论和《晋记》，裴马因注的司马迁《史记》，一起流行在世上。○裴子野
English: The literary theory and "Jin Ji" written by Pei Song, and "Shih Ji" annotated by Sima Qian written by Pei Ma, became popular in the world together.

古文：子野字几原，生而母魏氏亡，爲祖母殷氏所养。
现代文：裴子野字几原，一生下来，他的母亲魏氏就去世了，为祖母殷氏所抚养。
English: When Peizhino Zi Qianyuan was born, his mother Wei died, and he was raised by his grandmother Yin.

古文：殷柔明有文义，以章句授之。
现代文：殷氏温柔明达而懂文章，以章句学问向他讲授。
English: Yin's gentle, intelligent and understanding of the article, with paragraphs of knowledge to teach him.

古文：年九岁，殷氏亡，泣血哀恸，家人异之。
现代文：九岁的时候，殷氏去世，他泣血哀痛，家里的人感到非常诧异。
English: When Yin died at the age of nine, his family was stunned by his tears and grief.

古文：少好学，善属文，仕齐爲江夏王行参军。
现代文：他少年好学，善于写文章，在齐朝做官担任江夏王行参军。
English: As a young boy, he was eager to learn and good at writing articles. He served as an official in the Qi Dynasty and joined the army of Jiangxia Wangxing.

古文：遭父忧去职。
现代文：遭到父亲的丧事离职。
English: He was forced to resign due to the death of his father.

古文：初，父寝疾弥年，子野祷请备至，涕泗沾濡。
现代文：起初，他的父亲卧床整整一年，裴子野求神灵，请医生，努力备至，泪湿衣衫。
English: At first, his father was bedridden for a whole year. Pei Zino prayed to the gods, asked a doctor, tried to prepare, and his shirt was wet with tears.

古文：父夜梦见其容，旦召视如梦，俄而疾间，以爲至孝所感。
现代文：父亲夜里梦见了他的面容，早晨召见他，好像梦中的样子，很快病就好了，他认为是虔诚的孝心所传感。
English: His father dreamed of his face at night and summoned him in the morning, as if in a dream, and he soon recovered from his illness, which he believed was caused by pious filial piety.

古文：命着孝感传，固辞乃止。
现代文：让他撰写《孝感传》，他坚持推辞，才算罢了。
English: Let him write "The Autobiography of a Filial Son," he insisted on refusing, and that was that.

古文：及居丧，每之墓所，草爲之枯。
现代文：后来为父亲居丧，每当到了墓地，草就因他而枯萎。
English: Later, he mourned for his father, and whenever he went to the cemetery, the grass withered because of him.

古文：有白兔白鸠驯扰其侧。
现代文：有白兔白鸠驯顺地活动在他身边。
English: A white rabbit and a white stork meekly move around him.

古文：梁天监初，尚书仆射范云嘉其至行，将表奏之，会云卒不果。
现代文：梁朝天监元年，尚书仆射范云赞赏他的模范行为，将要上表举荐他，遇上范云去世，没有做成。
English: In the first year of Liang Chao's tenure as overseer of heaven, Shang Shuxu's servant, Sha Fanyun, appreciated his exemplary behavior and wanted to recommend him to the table. However, when Fanyun passed away, it was not done.

古文：乐安任昉有盛名，爲后进所慕，游其门者，昉必推荐。
现代文：乐安人任窻当时名声很大，为后进人士所仰慕，上门和他交往的，他必定加以推荐。
English: Ren Zheng, a member of the Le An, had a great reputation at that time. He was admired by backward people. If you came to his house and interacted with him, he would definitely recommend you.

古文：子野于昉爲从中表，独不至，昉亦恨焉，故不之善。
现代文：裴子野和任窻为中表亲戚，独独不去，任窻也很恼恨，所以对他不好。
English: Peizhino and Ren Rong are middle table relatives. Only Ren Rong does not go. Ren Rong is also very angry, so it is not good for him.

古文：久之兼廷尉正，时三官通署狱，子野尝不在，同僚辄署其名。
现代文：很久以后，他兼任廷尉正，当时三官一同在案卷上署名，裴子野曾经不在，同僚们就把他的名字给署上了。
English: Much later, he also served as a court lieutenant. At that time, the three officials signed the case file together. Peizhino was not there, so his colleagues signed his name.

古文：奏有不允，子野从坐免职。
现代文：奏表没有得到批准，裴子野也随同被免职。
English: The report was not approved, and Peizhino was also removed from office.

古文：或劝言请有司，可无咎，子野笑曰： 虽惭柳季之道，岂因讼以受服。 
现代文：有人劝他向有关部门说明情况，提出请求，可以免受处分，裴子野笑着说： 即使羞惭于柳季的办法，岂能借着讼案而求官？ 
English: Some people advised him to explain the situation to the relevant departments, make a request, and he could be exempted from punishment. Pei Zino said with a smile: Even if he is ashamed of Liu Ji's approach, can he use the lawsuit to apply for a job?

古文：自此免黜久之，终无恨意。
现代文：从此贬抑了很久，始终没有什么恨意。
English: It's been a long time since I was dismissed, but I don't hold any grudges.

古文：中书郎范缜与子野未遇，闻其行业而善焉。
现代文：中书郎范缜与裴子野没见过面，听说了他的情况十分赞赏。
English: Chushiro Fan Rong and Peizhino have never met, and I have heard that he is very appreciative of his situation.

古文：会迁国子博士，乃上表让之，有司以资历非次，不爲通。
现代文：正赶上升任国子博士，于是便上表谦让给裴子野，有关部门因为资历不合，没有为他们通融。
English: He was just in time to be promoted to Dr. Kuniko, so he humbly conceded to Peizhino. The relevant departments did not accommodate them because their qualifications did not match.

古文：后爲诸暨令，在县不行鞭罚，人有争者，示之以理，百姓称悦，合境无讼。
现代文：他后来做了诸暨令，在县里不施行鞭打，众人有了争执，就给他们讲理，百姓们很高兴，全县境内没人来打官司。
English: Later, he issued an order not to carry out whipping in the county. When people had disputes, he reasoned with them. The people were happy, and no one in the county came to sue.

古文：初，子野曾祖松之，宋元嘉中受诏续修何承天宋史，未成而卒，子野常欲继成先业。
现代文：起初，裴子野的曾祖裴松之，宋朝元嘉年间接受诏令续修何承天的宋史，没有修成就死了，裴子野常常想要继承先人的事业。
English: At first, Peizhino's great-grandfather Pei Songzhi, who received the imperial decree to continue the study of Song history during the Song Dynasty and Yuan Jia Dynasty, died without completing the study. Peizhino often wanted to inherit the cause of his predecessors.

古文：及齐永明末，沈约所撰宋书称 松之已后无闻焉 。
现代文：到了齐朝的永明末年，沈约所撰的《宋书》中说 裴松之以后便没有声息了 。
English: At the end of the Yongming era of the Qi Dynasty, Shen You's "Song Book" said that there was no sound after Pei Song.

古文：子野更撰爲宋略二十卷，其敍事评论多善，而云 戮淮南太守沈璞，以其不从义师故也 。
现代文：裴子野另撰为《宋略》二十卷，其中叙事评论大多很好，曾说 杀死淮南太守沈璞，是因为他不随从义师的缘故 。
English: Peizhino also wrote 20 volumes of "Song Liang," of which the narrative comments are mostly good. He once said that he killed Huainan's eunuch, Shen Qi, because he did not follow his mentor.

古文：约惧，徒跣谢之，请两释焉。
现代文：沈约害怕了，光着脚前往谢罪，请两方消除隔阂。
English: Shen Yuang was scared and went to Xie Sin with bare feet, asking the two sides to eliminate the estrangement.

古文：叹其述作曰： 吾弗逮也。 
现代文：又慨叹他的述作说： 我比不上的。 
English: He also lamented his work, saying, "I'm no match."

古文：兰陵萧琛言其评论可与过秦、王命分路扬镳。
现代文：兰陵人萧琛说他的评论可以与《过秦》、《王命》分道扬镳。
English: Lanling resident Xiao Wei said that his comments can be separated from "Passing the Qin" and "King's Life."

古文：于是吏部尚书徐勉言之于武帝，以爲着作郎，掌修国史及起居注。
现代文：于是吏部尚书徐勉告诉了武帝，让他做了著作郎，掌管修撰国史和起居注。
English: As a result, the head clerk, Shangshu Xu, told Emperor Wu to let him be the scribe, in charge of compiling the national history and living notes.

古文：顷之，兼中书通事舍人，寻除通直员外，着作、舍人如故。
现代文：不久，兼任了中书通事舍人，很快又任命为通直员外，著作、舍人依旧。
English: Soon, he also served as the secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and soon he was appointed as the secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters, but he continued to be a writer and secretary.

古文：敕又掌中书诏诰。
现代文：皇帝又命令他掌管中书诏诰。
English: The emperor also ordered him to take charge of the imperial rescript.

古文：时西北远边有白题及滑国遣使由岷山道入贡，此二国历代弗宾，莫知所出。
现代文：当时西北远方边疆有白题和滑国派遣使者由岷山道路前来进贡，这两个国家历代都不曾宾从，不知道是从哪里出现的。
English: At that time, the far northwestern frontier had Baitui and Nian countries sending envoys from Lushan Road to pay tribute. These two countries have never been guests, I don't know where they came from.

古文：子野曰： 汉潁阴侯斩胡白题将一人。
现代文：裴子野说： 汉朝的颍阴侯斩了胡白题的将官一人。
English: Peizhino said, "Han Dynasty's Zou Yinhou beheaded one general with the title of Hu Baiqi.

古文：服虔注云： 白题，胡名也。 
现代文：服虔注释说： 白题，胡人国名。 
English: Zhu Qian commented: Bai Zi, Hu Ren Ren Guo.

古文：又汉定远侯击虏，八滑从之，此其后乎。 
现代文：又汉朝的定远侯攻打敌虏，八滑做他的随从，这恐怕是他们的后代！ 
English: In the Han Dynasty, Dingyuan Hou defeated the invaders, followed by Hachisui, and now it is his descendants who are coming.

古文：时人服其博识。
现代文：当时的人很佩服他的博识。
English: At the time, people admired his broad knowledge.

古文：敕仍使撰方国使图，广述怀来之盛，自要服至于海表，凡二十国。
现代文：皇帝命令仍然让他撰写《方国使图》，广述邻国来朝的盛况，从中原到海外，共二十国。
English: The emperor still ordered him to write "The Map of Envoys from Foreign Countries," describing the grandeur of the visits of neighboring countries to the DPRK, from the Central Plains to overseas, a total of twenty countries.

古文：子野与沛国刘显、南阳刘之遴、陈郡殷芸、陈留阮孝绪、吴郡顾协、京兆韦棱皆博学，深相赏好，显尤推重之。
现代文：裴子野与沛国刘显、南阳刘之遴、陈郡殷芸、陈留阮孝绪、吴郡顾协、京兆韦棱都很博学，互相深深地赏识和友好，刘显尤其推重他。
English: Peizhino and Peiguo Liu Xian, Nanyang Liu Zhiming, Chen County Yin Yun, Chen County Ruan Ruan Xiaoxu, Wu County Gu Xie, Beijing Zhaowei Ren are all very knowledgeable, deeply appreciate each other and are friendly, Liu Xian especially promotes him.

古文：时吴平侯萧劢、范阳张缵每讨论坟籍，咸折衷于子野。
现代文：当时吴平侯萧劢、范阳人张缵常常讨论典籍，都是以裴子野为正确准则。
English: At that time, Wu Ping Hou Xiao Yao and Fan Yang people Zhang Yao often discussed classics, and both took Peizhino as the correct criterion.

古文：继母曹氏亡，居丧过礼，服阕，再迁员外郎。
现代文：继母曹氏去世，他居丧超过常礼，服丧期满后，两次改任做了员外郎。
English: After the death of his stepmother Cao, his mourning exceeded the usual ceremony. After the period of mourning was over, he was twice reassigned as a member of the outer circle.

古文：普通七年，大举北侵，敕子野爲移魏文，受诏立成。
现代文：普通七年，大举北伐，诏令裴子野撰写《移魏文》，他接了诏令立即写成。
English: In the seventh year, the Northern Expedition was launched, and Peizhino was ordered to write the "Importation of Wei Texts," which he did immediately after receiving the order.

古文：武帝以其事体大，召尚书仆射徐勉、太子詹事周舍、鸿胪卿刘之遴、中书侍郎朱异集寿光殿以观之，时并叹服。
现代文：武帝因为这事关系重大，召集尚书仆射徐勉、太子詹事周舍、鸿胪卿刘之遴、中书侍郎朱异聚会在寿光殿共同观看，当时都很叹服。
English: Because this matter was of great importance, Emperor Wu called together Shang Shuxu's servant, Jie Xu, Prince Zhan Zhi Zhou She, Hong Zhenqing's servant, Liu Zhi Zhan, and Zhu Yi's servant, Zhong Shuxu, to watch together at the Shuguang Palace. They were all impressed at the time.

古文：武帝目子野曰： 其形虽弱，其文甚壮。 
现代文：武帝看着裴子野说： 身体虽弱，文章甚壮。 
English: Emperor Wu looked at Peizhino and said: Although his body is weak, his writing is very strong.

古文：俄又敕爲书喻魏相元叉。
现代文：很快又诏令他写信给魏朝宰相元叉。
English: He was soon ordered to write to the prime minister of the Wei Dynasty, Yuan Zhaorong.

古文：其夜受旨，子野谓可待旦方奏，未之爲也，及五鼓，敕催令速上。
现代文：那天夜里接了指示，裴子野想着可以等第二天早晨上奏，没有马上便写，等到了五更，诏令催促赶快交上。
English: Having received instructions that night, Peizhino thought that he could wait until the next morning to begin the performance. If he didn't, he would write it down immediately. When it was five o'clock, he was ordered to hand it in as soon as possible.

古文：子野徐起操笔，昧爽便就。
现代文：裴子野慢慢起身操起笔来，拂晓时便写成了。
English: Peizhino slowly got up and began to write, and by dawn he had finished.

古文：及奏，武帝深嘉焉。
现代文：奏上以后，武帝深深赞赏。
English: After the performance, Emperor Wu deeply appreciated it.

古文：自是诸符檄皆令具草。
现代文：从此诸种符檄都让他起草。
English: Since then, all kinds of characters have been drafted by him.

古文：子野爲文典而速，不尚靡丽，制多法古，与今文体异。
现代文：裴子野写文章典雅而迅速，不崇尚靡丽，风格大多取法古人，和当今的文体不同。
English: Peizhino writes articles elegantly and quickly, and does not advocate elegance. The style is mostly taken from the ancients, and is different from today's style.

古文：当时或有诋诃者，及其末，翕然重之。
现代文：当时也有的人对他加以指责，但到最后，却又变为赞同和重视了。
English: At the time, there were also people who criticized him, but in the end, it turned into approval and attention.

古文：或问其爲文速者，子野答云： 人皆成于手，我独成于心。 
现代文：有人问他写文章为何这么快，裴子野回答说： 别人都是成在手里，而我却是成在心里。 
English: When someone asked him why he wrote articles so quickly, Peizhino replied, "Other people write with their hands, but I write with my heart."

古文：迁中书侍郎、鸿胪卿，领步兵校尉。
现代文：升为中书侍郎、鸿胪卿，兼任步兵校尉。
English: He was promoted to Chushushushijiro, Hongyuqing, and also served as an infantry lieutenant.

古文：子野在禁省十馀年，默静自守，未尝有所请谒。
现代文：裴子野在禁省十余年，静默自守，不曾向谁拜请。
English: Peizhino has been in the forbidden province for more than ten years, keeping silent and never asking for anyone's help.

古文：外家及中表贫乏，所得奉悉给之。
现代文：外公和中表家里贫困，所得薪水都供给了他们。
English: Grandpa and Zhong Bao's family were poor, and all the salary they earned was given to them.

古文：无宅，借官地二亩，起茅屋数间，妻子恒苦饥寒，唯以教诲爲本，子侄祗畏，若奉严君。
现代文：他没有宅院，借了官地二亩，建了茅屋数间，妻子儿女一直苦于饥寒，只以教诲为根本，子侄非常敬畏，如同侍奉严厉的君王。
English: He did not have a mansion, but borrowed two mu of government land and built several huts. His wife and children suffered from hunger and cold all the time, with only teaching as the foundation. His sons and nephews were very reverent, as if they were serving a stern king.

古文：刘显常以师道推高之。
现代文：刘显以师长之道推尊他。
English: Liu Xian respected him as a teacher.

古文：末年深信释教，终身饭麦食蔬。
现代文：末年深信佛教，终身只吃麦子和蔬菜。
English: At the end of his life, he was a firm believer in Buddhism and only ate wheat and vegetables for the rest of his life.

古文：中大通二年卒。
现代文：中大通二年去世。
English: Nakadamichi died two years later.

古文：先是，子野自占死期不过庚戌岁，是年自省移疾，谓同官刘之亨曰： 吾其逝矣。 
现代文：在此以前，裴子野自己占卜死期不会超过庚戌年，这年看到自己生病，便对同官刘之亨说： 我要死了！ 
English: Prior to this, Peizhino himself had divined that he would not live beyond the year of the Rooster. When he saw that he was ill this year, he said to his colleague Liu Zhihong, "I'm going to die!"

古文：遗命务存俭约。
现代文：遗命安排丧葬务必俭约。
English: It is important to be frugal when arranging a funeral.

古文：武帝悼惜，爲之流涕。
现代文：武帝悼念惋惜，为之流泪。
English: Emperor Wu mourned, lamented, and shed tears.

古文：赠散骑常侍，即日举哀。
现代文：追赠为散骑常侍，即日举行葬礼。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of samurai horseman, and his funeral was held the same day.

古文：先是，五等君及侍中以上乃有諡，及子野特以令望见嘉，赐諡贞子。
现代文：先前，五等君和侍中以上才有谥号，到了裴子野，特别以名望美好受到嘉奖，赐给谥号为贞子。
English: Previously, it was only fifth-ranked officials and those above the rank of chamberlain who were given a posthumous name. When he arrived in Peizhino, he was especially praised for his beauty and given the posthumous name of Sadako.

古文：子野少时集注丧服、续裴氏家传各二卷，抄合后汉事四十馀卷。
现代文：裴子野年少时曾经集注《丧服》、续《裴氏家传》各二卷，抄录后汉事迹四十余卷。
English: When he was young, Peizhino had collected and annotated two volumes each of "The Funeral Robe" and the sequel, "The Biography of the Pei Family," and transcribed more than forty volumes of post-Han events.

古文：又敕撰衆僧传二十卷，百官九品二卷，附益諡法一卷，方国使图一卷，文集二十卷：并行于世。
现代文：又诏令他撰写《众僧传》二十卷，《百官九品》二卷，《附益谥法》一卷，《方国使图》一卷，文集二十卷。
English: He also ordered him to write 20 volumes of "Biographies of the Monks," 2 volumes of "Hundreds of Officials and Nine Articles," 1 volume of "The Law of Supplementary Benefits," 1 volume of "Fang Guo Zhi Tu" and 20 volumes of anthologies.

古文：又欲撰齐梁春秋，始草创，未就而卒。
现代文：一并在世上流传。他又想撰写《齐梁春秋》，刚刚草创，还没写成就死了。
English: He also wanted to write "Qiliang Spring and Autumn," which he had just created, but he died before he could write it.

古文：及葬，湘东王爲之墓志铭，陈于藏内。
现代文：埋葬的时候，湘东王为他写了墓志铭，陈放起来。
English: When he was buried, the king of eastern Hunan wrote an epitaph for him, which was put on display.

古文：又改定元嘉历，改漏刻用二十五箭，皆从之。
现代文：邵陵王又立了墓志，堵在入墓的隧道里，墓道里放置墓志，就是从这时开始的
English: Shao Ling Wang also set up tombstones, blocked in the tunnel into the tomb, and placed tombstones in the cemetery. It was from this time that

古文：曾孙逊。
现代文：○何逊
English: ○ Somewhat less

古文：逊字仲言，八岁能赋诗，弱冠，州举秀才。
现代文：何逊字仲言，八岁就能作诗，二十岁时，州中选为秀才。
English: At the age of eight, he was able to write poetry, and at the age of twenty, he was selected as an outstanding talent in the state.

古文：南乡范云见其对策，大相称赏，因结忘年交。
现代文：南乡人范云看见何逊对皇上策问的回答，大加赞赏，因而与他结为忘年交。
English: When Fan Yun, a Nanxiang man, saw Ho Sun's answer to the emperor's question, he greatly appreciated it, and thus formed a long-lasting friendship with him.

古文：谓所亲曰： 顷观文人，质则过儒，丽则伤俗，其能含清浊，中今古，见之何生矣。 
现代文：范云对关系亲近的人说： 近来我观察文人，质朴的过于柔弱，华丽的又失于庸俗，那种能够清而不浊，适合古今标准的，可以在何逊身上看到。 
English: Fan Yun said to those who are close to him: Recently, I have observed that the literati are simple and too soft, and the gorgeous ones are lost in vulgarity. The kind that can be pure and unspoiled, suitable for the standards of ancient and modern times, can be seen in He Xun.

古文：沈约尝谓逊曰： 吾每读卿诗，一日三复，犹不能已。 
现代文：沈约曾经对何逊说： 我每次读您的诗，一日三遍，还是放不下。 
English: Shen You once said to Ho Sun: Every time I read your poem, three times a day, I still can't put it down.

古文：其爲名流所称如此。
现代文：何逊就是这样受到名流人士的称赞。
English: This is how he was praised by celebrities.

古文：梁天监中，兼尚书水部郎，南平王引爲宾客，掌记室事，后荐之武帝，与吴均俱进幸。
现代文：梁朝天监年间，何逊兼任尚书水部郎，南平王把他引为宾客，掌管记室事务，后来推荐给武帝，和吴均一起受到宠幸。
English: During the Liang Dynasty's time as overseer of heaven, he also served as Shang Shu's water minister. Nanping King invited him as a guest, in charge of the record office affairs, and later recommended him to Emperor Wu. He was favored along with Wu Jun.

古文：后稍失意，帝曰： 吴均不均，何逊不逊。
现代文：后来逐渐失意，武帝说： 吴均不均，何逊不逊。
English: Later, gradually disappointed, Emperor Wu said, "Wu Jun is not equal, he is inferior.

古文：未若吾有朱异，信则异矣。 
现代文：不如我有朱异，确实很异的。 
English: I'd rather be different, really different.

古文：自是疏隔，希复得见。
现代文：从此疏远隔膜，很少能再见到。
English: From this alienated diaphragm, it is rarely seen again.

古文：卒于仁威庐陵王记室。
现代文：死在仁威庐陵王记室的职位上。
English: He died in the post of the Ren Wei and Fuling Wang Ji's office.

古文：初，逊爲南平王所知，深被恩礼，及闻逊卒，命迎其柩而殡藏焉，并饩其妻子。
现代文：起初，何逊被南平王所赏识，深深地受到恩泽和礼遇，等到听说何逊去世，便命令迎来他的灵柩而加以埋葬，并且给他的妻子儿女赠送食物。
English: At first, he was appreciated by the king of Nanping and was treated with deep grace and courtesy. When he heard of his death, he ordered his coffin to be buried and gave food to his wife and children.

古文：东海王僧孺集其文爲八卷。
现代文：东海人王僧儒收集他的文章编为八卷。
English: The East Sea King Monk Zhu collected his articles and compiled them into eight volumes.

古文：初，逊文章与刘孝绰并见重，时谓之何、刘。
现代文：起初，何逊的文章与刘孝绰一齐被推重，当时称作何、刘。
English: At first, his articles were given equal weight with Liu Xiaoqiao's. At that time, they were called He and Liu.

古文：梁元帝着论论之云： 诗多而能者沈约，少而能者谢朓、何逊。 
现代文：梁元帝写文章评论说： 诗写得多而且擅长的是沈约，写得少而且擅长的是谢緿、何逊。 
English: Writing an article, Emperor Liang Yuan commented: Shen Yotong wrote more poetry and was good at it, while Xie Yao and He Xun wrote less and were good at it.

古文：逊从叔涧字彦夷，亦以才着闻，宦游不达，作拍张赋以喻意。
现代文：何逊的堂叔何亻间字彦夷，也以文才著名，官路不够通达，便作了一篇《拍张赋》来寄托自己的心意。
English: His uncle, Ho Yan, also known as Yan Yan, was also famous for his literary talent, but his official path was not enough, so he wrote a "Patting Zhang Fu" to support his heart.

古文：末云： 东方曼倩发愤于侏儒，遂与火头食子禀赐不殊。 
现代文：末尾说： 东方曼倩从少年时代就发愤努力，结果与掌管炊事的火头、奉祭祀的供养者待遇相同。 
English: At the end, it said: "Dongfang Mengyao has been working hard since he was a boy. As a result, he is treated the same as the person who is in charge of the fire for cooking and the one who offers sacrifices.

古文：位至台郎。
现代文：他的职位达到台郎。
English: He rose to the rank of Tairo.

古文：时有会稽虞骞工爲五言，名与逊埒，官至王国侍郎。
现代文：当时会稽有个虞骞善于作五言诗，名气与何逊相同，官做到王国侍郎。
English: At that time, there was a yakitori master who was good at writing five-character poems, and his fame was the same as that of his subordinates.

古文：后又有会稽孔翁归、济阳江避并爲南平王大司马府记室。
现代文：后来又有会稽人孔翁归、济阳人江避，都是南平王大司马的记室。
English: Later, there were auditors Kong Wengui and Jiyang resident Jiang Yu, both of whom were the recorders of Nanping Wang Daisima.

古文：翁归工爲诗，避博学有思理，注论语、孝经。
现代文：孔翁归善于作诗，江避博学富有思考能力，注了《论语》、《孝经》。
English: Kong Weng was said to be good at writing poetry, while Jiang Yu was a polymath with great thinking ability. He wrote "Analects" and "Book of Filial Piety."

古文：二人并有文集。
现代文：二人都有文集。
English: Both of them have collections.

