古文：道宗二八年春正月癸丑，如鸭子河。
现代文：清宁八年春正月初五，皇上到鸭子河。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the eighth year of the Qing Dynasty, the emperor went to the Duck River.

古文：二月，驻跸纳葛泺。
现代文：二月，歇驾于纳葛泊。
English: In February, he stayed in Nagpur.

古文：三月戊申朔，楚王萧革致仕，进封郑国王。
现代文：三月初一，楚王萧革辞官，进封为郑国王。
English: On the first day of March, King Chu Xiao Ge resigned and was enthroned as King Zheng.

古文：夏五月，吾独婉惕隐屯秃葛等乞岁贡马、驼，许之。
现代文：夏五月，吾独婉惕隐屯秃葛等人请求每年贡献马匹、骆驼，得到皇上许可。
English: In the summer of May, Zhuge and others requested that horses and camels be donated every year, and obtained the emperor's permission.

古文：六月丙子朔，驻跸拖古烈。
现代文：六月初一，皇上歇驾于拖古烈。
English: On the first day of June, the emperor retired to Toguryo.

古文：辛丑，以右夷离毕奚马六为奚六部大王。
现代文：二十六日，任命右夷离毕奚马六为奚六部大王。
English: On the 26th, he appointed Uyigye Bi Yongmalu as the King of the Six Provinces.

古文：是月，御清凉殿放进士王鼎等九十三人。
现代文：同月，御临清凉殿录取进士王鼎等九十三人。
English: In the same month, ninety-three people, including Wang Ding, were admitted to the Imperial Palace.

古文：秋七月甲子，射熊于外室剌。
现代文：秋七月十九日，在外室剌射熊。
English: On the 19th of July, a bear was shot in the outer room.

古文：冬十月甲戌朔，驻跸独卢金。
现代文：冬十月初一，歇驾于独卢金。
English: On the first day of October, winter comes to an end in Lukin, Germany.

古文：十二月庚辰，以知北院枢密使事萧图古辞为北院枢密使。
现代文：十二月初七，任命知北院枢密使事萧图古辞为北院枢密使。
English: On the 7th day of the 12th month of the year, Xiao Tu Guji, the Privy Envoy of the Northern Yuan, was appointed.

古文：癸未，幸西京。
现代文：初十，临幸西京。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Rinjo Nishikyo.

古文：戊子，以皇太后行再生礼，曲赦西京囚。
现代文：十五日，因为皇太后举行再生礼，特赦西京囚犯。
English: On the 15th, because the Empress Dowager held a rebirth ceremony, she pardoned the prisoners in West Beijing.

古文：九年春正月辛亥，幸鸳鸯泺。
现代文：九年春正月初九，临幸鸳鸯泊。
English: On the ninth day of the ninth month of the first month of the ninth year of spring, Lin Xing stayed overnight.

古文：辛未，禁民鬻铜。
现代文：二十九日，禁止百姓卖铜。
English: On the 29th, the people were prohibited from selling copper.

古文：三月辛未，宋主祯殂，以侄曙为子嗣位。
现代文：三月二十九日，宋主赵祯崩殂，以其侄子赵曙为嗣子即位。
English: On March 29th, the Lord of Song, Zhao Qi, died and was succeeded by his nephew, Zhao Shu.

古文：夏五月丙午，以隋王仁先为南院枢密使，徙封许王。
现代文：夏五月初五，任命隋王耶律仁先为南院枢密使，改封许王。
English: On the 5th day of the 5th month of the 5th month of the summer, the king of Sui Dynasty, Yelulun, was appointed as the envoy to the Southern Yuan Dynasty, and his title was changed to King Xu.

古文：是月，清暑曷里狘。
现代文：同月，消夏于曷里犭戊。
English: In the same month, she spent the summer in Bali.

古文：秋七月丙辰，如太子山。
现代文：秋七月十七日，到太子山。
English: On the 17th day of the 7th month of autumn, I went to Mount Taizi.

古文：戊午，皇太叔重元与其子楚国王涅鲁古及陈国王陈六、同知北院枢密使事萧胡睹、卫王贴不、林牙涅剌溥古、统军使萧迭里得、驸马都尉参及弟术者、图骨、旗鼓拽剌详稳耶律郭九、文班太保奚叔、内藏提点乌骨、护卫左太保敌不古、按答、副宫使韩家奴、宝神奴等凡四百人，诱胁弩手军犯行宫。
现代文：十九日，皇太叔重元与他的儿子楚国王涅鲁古以及陈国王陈六、同知北院枢密使事萧胡睹、卫王贴不、林牙涅剌溥古、统军使萧迭里得、驸马都尉参及其弟术里、图骨、旗鼓拽剌详稳耶律郭九、文班太保奚叔、内藏提点乌骨、护卫左太保敌不古、按答、副宫使韩家奴、宝神奴等共四百人，引诱胁迫弩手军犯驾。
English: On the 19th, the Emperor's uncle, Chongyuan, together with his son, the King of Chu, Nehru Gu, and the King of Chen, Chen Li, as well as the Northern Court's confidential envoy, Xiao Hujian, the King of Wei, Lin Ya Nirvana Gu, the Unification Army's envoy, Xiao Dieride, the Prince's lieutenant, and his brother, Shuli, the map bone, the banner and drum dragging, the detailed and stable Guo Ji, the literary class, the bodyguard, the uncle, the black bone, the guard, the left guard, the enemy, the answer, the vice palace, the Han

古文：时南院枢密使许王仁先、知北枢密院事赵王耶律乙辛、南府宰相萧唐古、北院宣徽使萧韩家奴、北院枢密副使萧惟信、敦睦宫使耶律良等率宿卫士卒数千人御之。
现代文：当时南院枢密使许王仁先，知北枢密院事赵王耶律乙辛、南府宰相萧唐古、北院宣徽使萧韩家奴、北院枢密副使萧惟信、敦睦宫使耶律良等率宿卫士卒数千人进行抗击。
English: At that time, thousands of innkeepers, including Xu Wang Rensen, the envoy of the Southern Privy Council, Zhao Wang Yelu Yixin, the secretary of the Northern Privy Council, Xiao Tanggu, the prime minister of Nanfu, Xiao Han Jianlu, the envoy of the Northern Privy Council, Xiao Weixin, the deputy envoy of the Northern Privy Council, and Yelu Liang, the envoy of the Dunmu Palace, fought back.

古文：涅鲁古跃马突出，将战，为渤海近侍详稳阿厮、护卫苏射杀之。
现代文：涅鲁古跃马冲出，前来交战，被近侍详稳渤海阿厮、护卫苏射杀。
English: Nehru's prancing horse rushed out, came to fight, and was shot and killed by his close attendant, Zeng Jeng Hao, and his escort, Su.

古文：己未，族逆党家。
现代文：二十日，族灭逆党家族。
English: On the 20th, the family of the Ethnic Suppression Party left.

古文：庚申，重元亡入大漠，自杀。
现代文：二十一日，重元逃到大漠，自杀。
English: On the twenty-first day, Chongyuan fled to the desert and committed suicide.

古文：辛酉，诏谕诸道。
现代文：二十二日，皇上下诏晓谕诸道。
English: On the 22nd, the emperor issued an imperial edict to all the provinces.

古文：壬戌，以仁先为北院枢密使，进封宋王，加尚父，耶律乙辛南院枢密使，萧韩家奴殿前都点检，封荆王。
现代文：二十三日，任命仁先为北院枢密使，进封宋王，加尚父，耶律乙辛为南院枢密使，萧韩家奴为殿前都点检，封荆王。
English: On the 23rd, he appointed Rensen as the Northern Privy Councilor, Song Wang, Jia Shangfu, Yelu Yixin as the Southern Privy Councilor, and Xiao Han Jia Rong as the Forecourt.

古文：萧惟信、耶律冯家奴并加太子太傅。
现代文：萧惟信、耶律冯家奴并为太子太傅。
English: Xiao Weixin, Yelu Feng's servant, and the prince's grandfather.

古文：宿卫官萧乙辛、回鹘海邻、褭里、耶律挞不也、阿厮、宫分人急里哥、霞抹、乙辛、只鲁并加上将军。
现代文：宿卫官萧乙辛、回鹘海邻、袅里、耶律挞不也、阿厮、宫分人急里哥、霞抹、乙辛、只鲁均被授为上将军。
English: The guards, Xiao Yixin, Hui Ying Haizhong, Baoli, Yerutunbuya, Aqiu, Guobunren, Qiu Liguo, Xiamak, Yixin, and Zhuolu were all promoted to the rank of general.

古文：诸护卫及士卒、庖夫、弩手、伞子等三百余人，各授官有差。
现代文：诸位护卫及士卒、庖夫、弩手、伞子等三百余人也各被授官不等。
English: More than three hundred guards, officers, porters, porters, umbrellas, etc. were also awarded various ranks.

古文：耶律良密告重元变，命籍横帐夷离堇房，为汉人行宫都部署。
现代文：耶律良秘密告知重元之变，皇上命他隶籍于横帐夷离堇房，担任汉人行宫都部署之职。
English: Yeruliang secretly informed Chongyuan of the change, and the emperor ordered him to be subordinate to Hengjie and leave Xingfang to serve as the Han people's marching palace.

古文：癸亥，贴不诉为重元等所胁，诏削爵为民，流镇州。
现代文：二十四日，贴不申诉参与叛乱系为重元等所胁迫，诏令削去官爵降为庶民，流放到镇州。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, he was forced to participate in the rebellion by Shigeyuan and others, and was demoted to a commoner and exiled to Zhenzhou.

古文：戊辰，以黑白羊祭天。
现代文：二十九日，用黑白羊祭天。
English: On the 29th, a black and white lamb was sacrificed to the heavens.

古文：八月庚午朔，遣使安抚南京吏民。
现代文：八月初一，皇上派使者安抚南京流民。
English: On the first day of August, the emperor sent an envoy to pacify the Nanjing exiles.

古文：癸酉，以永兴宫使耶律塔不也有定乱动，为同知点检司事。
现代文：初四，因永兴宫使耶律塔不也有平定叛乱之功，任命他为同知点检司事。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, because Yongxing Palace did not have the merit of suppressing the rebellion, he appointed him as Tongzhi District Procurator.

古文：冬十月戊辰朔，幸兴王寺。
现代文：冬十月初一，皇上临幸兴王寺。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the emperor visited the Xingwang Temple.

古文：庚午，以六院部太保耶律合术知南院大王事。
现代文：初三，任命六院部太保耶律合术知南院大王事。
English: In the third year of junior high school, he was appointed the Grand Prince of the Chunan Academy of the Six Affiliated Hospitals.

古文：是月，驻跸藕丝淀。
现代文：同月，歇驾于藕丝淀。
English: In the same month, he took a rest in Goseidian.

古文：十一月辛丑，以南院宣徽使萧九哥为北府宰相。
现代文：十一月初四，任命南院宣徽使萧九哥为北府宰相。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of November, Xiao Jiu Ge was appointed as the prime minister of Beifu by the Southern Court.

古文：己未，追封故富春郡王耶律义先为许王。
现代文：二十二日，追封已故富春郡王耶律义先为许王。
English: On the 22nd, the late King of Fuchun County, Ye Li Yixian, was enthroned as King Xu.

古文：是岁，封皇子浚为梁王。
现代文：这一年，封皇子耶律浚为梁王。
English: In the same year, the crown prince Ye Lujun became the King of Liang.

古文：十年春正月己亥，北幸。
现代文：十年春正月初三，皇上北幸。
English: On the 3rd day of the 1st month of the 10th year of the Spring, Emperor Hoku was born.

古文：二月，禁南京民决水种粳稻。
现代文：二月，禁止南京百姓决河引水种植粳稻。
English: In February, the people of Nanjing were prohibited from diverting water from the river to plant indica rice.

古文：秋七月壬申，诏决诸路囚。
现代文：秋七月初九，诏令审讯诸路囚犯。
English: On the 9th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the imperial edict ordered the interrogation of all prisoners.

古文：辛巳，禁僧尼私诣行在，妄述祸福取财物。
现代文：十八日，禁止僧民私自到行宫所在，妄言祸福之事以骗取财物。
English: On the 18th, it was forbidden for monks and laymen to go to the palace without permission, and to lie about misfortune and fortune in order to obtain wealth.

古文：九月壬寅，幸怀州，谒太宗、穆宗庙。
现代文：九月壬寅日，皇上临幸怀州，拜谒太宗、穆宗庙。
English: On September's Ren Yin Day, the emperor visited Huai Zhou and paid homage to Emperor Taizong and the Mu Zong Temple.

古文：冬十月壬辰朔，驻跸中京。
现代文：冬十月初一，歇驾于中京。
English: On the first day of October in winter, it stops in Chukyo.

古文：戊午，禁民私刊印文字。
现代文：二十七日，禁止民间私自刊印文字。
English: On the 27th, it was forbidden for private individuals to publish and print texts.

古文：十一月甲子，定吏民衣服之制。
现代文：十一月初三，颁定吏民服装样式。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, the style of clothing for officials and citizens was announced.

古文：辛未，禁六斋日屠杀。
现代文：初十，禁止在六斋日行屠宰之事。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, it is forbidden to slaughter animals on the sixth day.

古文：丁丑，诏求乾文阁所阙经籍，命儒臣校雠。
现代文：十六日，下诏征求乾文阁所缺经籍，命儒臣校雠。
English: On the 16th, he issued an edict to solicit the missing scriptures from the Qianwen Pavilion, and ordered the Ju Sen School to be built.

古文：庚辰，以彰国军节度使韩谢十为惕隐。
现代文：十九日，任命彰国军节度使韩谢十为惕隐。
English: On the 19th, the appointment of the Zhangguo Army Festival made Han Xie ten years old.

古文：诏南京不得私造御用彩缎，私货铁，及非时饮酒。
现代文：诏令南京不得私自制造御用彩缎，私自买卖铁及在规定的时间之外饮酒。
English: According to the edict, Nanjing was not allowed to manufacture its own lacquerware for imperial use, buy or sell iron, or drink alcohol outside of the stipulated time.

古文：命南京三司，每岁春秋以官钱飨将士。
现代文：命令南京三司，每年春秋均以官钱犒饷将士。
English: He ordered the three departments of Nanjing to recruit soldiers with government money every spring and autumn.

古文：十二月癸巳，以北院大王萧兀古匿为契丹行宫都部署。
现代文：十二月初二，任命北院大王萧兀古匿为契丹行宫都部署。
English: On the second day of the first month of December, Xiao Tong Guanqian, the king of the Northern Yuan Dynasty, was appointed as the crown prince of Khitan.

古文：是岁，南京、西京大熟。
现代文：这一年，南京、西京大丰收。
English: This year, Nanjing and West Beijing had a bumper harvest.

古文：咸雍元年春正月辛酉朔，文武百僚加上尊号曰圣文神武全功大略广智聪仁睿孝天佑皇帝。
现代文：咸雍元年春正月初一，文武百官给皇上加上尊号为圣文神武全功大略广智总仁睿孝天佑皇帝。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the first year of the Heian and Joseon dynasties, hundreds of civil and military officials gave the emperor the honorific title of "Shenwen Shenwu QuanGong Liao GuangZhi ZongRenRui Xiao TianYu Emperor."

古文：改元，大赦。
现代文：改元。大赦天下。
English: The era was changed. There was a general amnesty.

古文：册梁王浚为皇太子，内外官赐级有差。
现代文：册立梁王耶律浚为皇太子，内外官员赐级各有等差。
English: Liang Wang Ye Rujun was appointed crown prince, and officials at home and abroad gave him different ranks.

古文：甲子，如鱼儿泺。
现代文：初四，到鱼儿泊。
English: On the fourth day of junior high school, I went to stay with a fish.

古文：庚寅，诏诸遇正旦、重午、冬至，别表贺东宫。
现代文：三十日，诏令诸道每逢正旦、端午、冬至，须另表向东宫祝贺。
English: On the 30th, it was decreed that all provinces should send a separate congratulatory letter to the Eastern Palace on every Shodan, Dragon Boat Festival, and Winter Solstice.

古文：三月丁亥，以知兴中府事杨绩知枢密院事。
现代文：三月二十七日，以兴中府知府杨绩为知枢密院事。
English: On March 27th, Yang Jie, the governor of Xingzhongfu, was appointed to the Privy Council.

古文：夏四月辛卯，以知枢密院事张嗣复疾，改知兴中府事。
现代文：夏四月初二，因知枢密院事张嗣复生病，改任为兴中府知府。
English: On the second day of the fourth month of the summer, Zhang Xi fell ill again due to the Privy Council matter, and was reappointed as the governor of Xingzhongfu.

古文：庚子，清暑拖古烈。
现代文：十一日，在拖古烈消夏。
English: On the 11th day, they spent the summer in Toguryo.

古文：五月辛巳，夏国遣使来贡。
现代文：五月二十二日，夏国派使者前来进贡。
English: On May 22, Xia Guo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：秋七月丙子，以皇太后射获熊，赏赉百官有差。
现代文：秋七月十八日，因皇太后打猎射得一只熊，赏赉百官各有等差。
English: On the 18th day of the 7th month of autumn, the empress dowager shot a bear while hunting, and hundreds of officials were equally impressed.

古文：八月丙申，客星犯天庙。诏诸路备盗贼，严火禁。
现代文：八月初九，客星犯营室，诏令诸路防备盗贼，严格火禁。
English: On the 9th day of the 8th month, the guest star criminal camp room ordered all roads to be prepared for thieves, and strictly prohibited fire.

古文：九月乙亥，驻跸藕丝淀。
现代文：九月十八日，歇驾于藕丝淀。
English: On September 18th, he stopped in Goseidian.

古文：丁丑，左夷离毕綎古为孟父敞稳。
现代文：二十日，任命左夷离毕忄造古为孟父敞稳。
English: On the 20th, he appointed Zuo Yili as Meng's father.

古文：冬十月丁亥朔，幸医巫闾山。
现代文：冬十月初一，临幸医巫闾山。
English: On the first day of October in winter, Lin Xingyi heals Wushan Mountain.

古文：己亥，皇太后射获虎，大宴群臣，令各赋诗。
现代文：十三日，皇太后射得一只虎，大宴群臣，让他们分别赋诗。
English: On the 13th day, the empress dowager shot a tiger and held a grand banquet for her ministers, asking them to compose poems.

古文：十一月壬戌，有星如斗，逆行，隐隐有声。
现代文：十一月初六，有星如斗状，偏离正常方向而运行，隐隐发出声响。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the 11th month, there was a star like a bucket, deviating from the normal direction and running, faintly emitting a sound.

古文：十二月甲午，以辽王仁先为南京留守，徙封晋王。
现代文：十二月初九，任命辽王耶律仁先为南京留守，改封为晋王。
English: On the 9th day of the 12th month, Liao King Yelujin was appointed to stay in Nanjing and was renamed Jin Wang.

古文：辛亥，以南京留守萧惟信为左夷离毕。
现代文：二十六日，以南京留守萧惟信为左夷离毕。
English: On the 26th, Xiao Weixin, who stayed in Nanjing, left for Zuoying.

古文：壬子，荧惑与月并行，自旦至午。
现代文：二十七日，火星与月亮并列运行，自清晨直到正午。
English: On the 27th, Mars will move alongside the Moon from early morning until noon.

古文：二年春正月丁巳，如鸭子河。
现代文：二年春正月初二，皇上到鸭子河。
English: On the second day of the first month of the second year of spring, the emperor went to the Duck River.

古文：宋贺正使王严卒，以礼送还。
现代文：宋国贺正使王严去世，依礼仪送回本国。
English: Song Guo He Zheng made Wang Yan die and sent him back to his home country according to etiquette.

古文：癸未，幸山榆淀。
现代文：二十八日，皇上临幸山榆淀。
English: On the 28th, the emperor went to Mt. Linxing and Shandong Province.

古文：二月甲午，诏武定军节度使姚景行，问以治道，拜南院枢密使。
现代文：二月初十，下诏给武定军节度使姚景行，问以治国之道，拜为南院枢密使。
English: On the 10th day of the 2nd month of the year, the emperor issued an edict to the Wu Ding Jun to make Yao Jing line up, ask him about the way of governing the country, and worship him as a privy envoy of the Southern Yuan.

古文：三月辛巳，以东北路详稳耶律韩福奴为北院大王。
现代文：三月二十七日，任命东北路详稳耶律韩福奴为北院大王。
English: On March 27th, Han Funu, a member of the Jianwen Hierarchy from the Northeast Road, was appointed as the Great King of the Northern Court.

古文：壬午，彗星见于西方。
现代文：二十八日，彗星出现于西方。
English: On the 28th, the comet appeared in the west.

古文：夏四月，霖雨。
现代文：夏四月，连降好雨。
English: In the summer of April, it rained continuously.

古文：五月乙亥，驻跸拖古烈。
现代文：五月二十二日，歇驾于拖古烈。
English: On the 22nd of May, he rested in Toguryo.

古文：辛巳，以户部使刘诜为枢密副使。
现代文：二十八日，任命户部使刘诜为枢密副使。
English: On the 28th, Liu Wei, the envoy of the Household Division, was appointed as the confidential deputy envoy.

古文：六月丙戌，回鹘来贡。
现代文：六月初三，回鹘前来进贡。
English: On the third day of the sixth lunar month, Hui Xuan came to pay tribute.

古文：甲辰，阻卜来贡。
现代文：二十一日，阻卜前来进贡。
English: On the twenty-first day, Zibo came to pay tribute.

古文：秋七月癸丑朔，以西北路招讨使萧术者为北府宰相，左夷离毕萧惟信南院枢密使，同知南院枢密使事耶律白惕隐。
现代文：秋七月初一，以西北路招讨使萧术者为北府宰相，以左夷离毕萧惟信为南院枢密使，以同知南院枢密使事耶律白为惕隐。
English: On the first day of the first month of the autumn and the first day of the seventh month of the year, the Northwest Road was used to recruit and make Xiao Zhurong the prime minister of Beifu, Zuo Yili Bi Xiao Weixin as the Southern Yuan's confidential envoy, and Tongzhi Southern Yuan's confidential envoy Yerubai as the discreet one.

古文：丙辰，南院枢密使姚景行致仕。
现代文：初四，南院枢密使姚景行辞官。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, Yao Jingxing, the Privy Councilor of the Southern Yuan Dynasty, resigned from his post.

古文：庚申，录囚。
现代文：初八，察看犯人口供。
English: On the 28th, the inspectors heard the prisoners' confessions.

古文：辛酉，景行复前职。
现代文：初九，姚景行官复原职。
English: At the beginning of the ninth month, Yao Jingxing was reinstated as an official.

古文：丁卯，如藕丝淀。
现代文：十五日，皇上到藕丝淀。
English: On the fifteenth day, the emperor arrived in Gansu.

古文：以岁旱，遣使振山后贫民。
现代文：因为岁逢旱年，派使者赈济山后贫民。
English: Because every year is a year of drought, an emissary is sent to give alms to the poor in the mountains.

古文：九月壬子朔，日有食之。
现代文：九月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of September, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：以参知政事韩孚为枢密副使。
现代文：以参知政事韩孚为枢密副使。
English: With Han Fu, the political advisor to the Sanchi, as the Privy Vice-Envoy.

古文：冬十二月壬午，以知枢密院事杨绩为南院枢密使，枢密副使刘诜参知政事。
现代文：冬十二月初二，以知枢密院事杨绩为南院枢密使，以枢密副使刘诜为参知政事。
English: On the 2nd day of the 12th month of winter, Yang Jie, the privy councilor of the South Privy Council, and Liu Jun, the deputy privy councilor of the South Privy Council, took the lead in the political affairs of the councilor.

古文：戊子，僧守志加守司徒。
现代文：初八，僧人守志升任守司徒。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the monk Shushi was promoted to the position of Shushi-tsu.

古文：丁酉，以西京留守合术为南院大王。
现代文：十七日，以西京留守合术为南院大王。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, he was enthroned as the King of the Southern Court.

古文：辛丑，以萧术者为武定军节度使。
现代文：二十一日，任命萧术者为武定军节度使。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Xiao Zhushi was appointed as the military envoy of the Wuding Army.

古文：是年，御永安殿，放进士张臻等百一人。
现代文：这一年，御临永安殿录用进士张臻等一百零一人。
English: In that year, the Yong'an Palace recruited one hundred and one scholars, including Zhang Zhen.

古文：三年春正月辛亥，如鸭子河。
现代文：三年春正月初二，皇上到鸭子河。
English: On the second day of the first month of the third year of spring, the emperor went to the Duck River.

古文：甲子，御安流殿钓鱼。
现代文：十五日，御临安流殿钓鱼。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, I went fishing at Gorinan Ryuden.

古文：三月癸亥，宋主曙殂，子顼嗣位，遣使告哀；即遣右护卫太保萧挞不也、翰林学士陈觉第吊祭。
现代文：三月十五日，宋主赵曙崩殂，子赵顼即位，派使者前来告哀，当即派遣右护卫太保萧挞不也、翰林学士陈觉等前往吊唁祭祀。
English: On March 15th, the Song Lord Zhao Shuguang passed away and his son Zhao Yao ascended to the throne. He sent an envoy to pay his respects, and immediately dispatched the right guard Taibo Xiao Yifuya, Hanlin Scholar Chen Jue and others to go to the condolence sacrifice.

古文：闰月丁亥，扈驾军营火，赐钱、粟及马有差。
现代文：闰三月初九，扈驾军营发生火灾，赐给钱、粟米及马匹各若干。
English: On the 9th day of the 3rd month, a fire broke out in the military camp, and he was given some money, corn and horses.

古文：辛卯，驻跸春州北淀。
现代文：十三日，歇驾于春州北淀。
English: On the 13th, the train stopped in Chunzhou Beidian.

古文：乙巳，以萧兀古匿为北府宰相。
现代文：二十七日，任命萧兀古匿为北府宰相。
English: On the 27th, Xiao Jun Guanyin was appointed as the prime minister of Beifu.

古文：夏五月壬辰，驻跸纳葛泺。
现代文：夏五月十五日，歇驾于纳葛泊。
English: On the fifteenth day of the fifth month of summer, he stopped at Nagpur.

古文：壬寅，赐随驾官诸工人马。
现代文：二十五日，赐给随驾官员各种工匠及兵卒。
English: On the 25th, various craftsmen and soldiers were given to the accompanying officials.

古文：六月戊申，有司奏新城县民杨从谋反，伪署官吏。
现代文：六月初二，有司奏称新城县百姓杨从谋反，伪署官吏。
English: On the second day of June, You Siso said that Yang, a citizen of Xincheng County, was a rebel and a fake official.

古文：上曰： 小人无知，此儿戏尔。 
现代文：皇上说： 小人无知之举，这不过是儿戏罢了。 
English: The emperor said, "This is a childish and ignorant act. It is nothing but a child's play."

古文：独流其首恶，余释之。
现代文：只是将首恶流放，其余的一概释免。
English: Only the head villain was exiled, the rest were all released.

古文：庚戌，宋遣使馈其先帝遗物。
现代文：初四，宋国派使者馈赠其先帝遗物。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the Song Dynasty sent an envoy to present relics of its former emperor.

古文：辛亥，宋以即位，遣陈襄来报，即遣知黄龙府事萧图古辞、中书舍人马铉往贺。
现代文：初五，宋因新主即位，派陈襄前来告知，当即派遣黄龙府知府萧图古辞、中书舍人马铉前往祝贺。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Song sent Chen Xiang to announce the enthronement of the new ruler, and immediately dispatched the governor of Huanglong Prefecture, Xiao Tu Guorong, and the Chinese scholar, Ma Jun, to congratulate him.

古文：壬戌，南府宰相韩王萧唐古致仕。
现代文：十六日，南府宰相韩王萧唐古辞官。
English: On the 16th, the prime minister of Nanfu, Han Wang Xiao Tanggu, resigned.

古文：壬申，以广德军节度使耶律蕊奴为南府宰相，度支使赵徽参知政事。
现代文：二十六日，以广德军节度使耶律蕊奴为南府宰相，以度支使赵徽为参知政事。
English: On the 26th, the Guangde Army sent Ye Li Rui Nu as the prime minister of Nanfu, and sent Zhao Hui as the party secretary.

古文：秋七月辛丑，荧惑昼见，凡三十五日。
现代文：秋七月二十五日，火星白天出现，共三十五日。
English: On the 25th day of the 7th month of autumn, Mars will appear during the day, for a total of 35 days.

古文：九月戊戌，诏给诸路囚粮。
现代文：九月二十三日，诏令发给各路囚犯粮食。
English: On September 23rd, the imperial edict distributed food to all prisoners.

古文：癸卯，幸南京。
现代文：二十八日，临幸南京。
English: On the 28th, I visited Nanjing.

古文：冬十一月壬辰，夏国遣使进回鹘僧、金佛、《梵觉经》。
现代文：冬十一月十八日，夏国派使者进献回鹘僧人、金佛、《梵觉经》。
English: In the winter, on November 18th, Xia Guo sent an envoy to present the monks, the golden Buddha, and the "Buddha Consciousness Sutra" to the emperor.

古文：十二月丁未，以参知政事刘诜为枢密副使，东北路详稳高八南院大王，枢密直学士张孝杰参知政事。
现代文：十二月初三，以参知政事刘诜为枢密副使，以东北路详稳高八为南院大王，以枢密直学士张孝杰为参知政事。
English: On the 3rd day of December, Liu Wei, the political advisor to the Privy Council, was appointed as the Vice-Minister of the Privy Council, Zhaozheng Gaoba of the Northeast Road was appointed as the Grand Prince of the Southern Yuan, and Zhang Xiaojie, the direct scholar of the Privy Council, was appointed as the political advisor to the Privy Council.

古文：己酉，以张孝杰同知枢密院事。
现代文：初五，任命张孝杰为同知枢密院事。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Zhang Xiaojie was appointed as Tongzhi Privy Councilor.

古文：丁巳，行再生礼，赦死罪以下。
现代文：十三日，举行再生礼，赦免死罪以下犯人。
English: On the 13th, a rebirth ceremony was held, and prisoners sentenced to death or less were pardoned.

古文：是月，夏国王李谅祚薨。
现代文：同月，夏国王李谅诈逝世。
English: In the same month, Xia King Lijunzhuang passed away.

古文：是岁，南京旱、蝗。
现代文：这一年，南京遭受旱灾、蝗灾。
English: This year, Nanjing suffered from drought and locusts.

古文：四年春正月甲戌朔，日有食之。丙子，如鸳鸯泺。
现代文：四年春正月初一，日食。初三，皇上到鸳鸯泊。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year of spring, a solar eclipse. On the third day of the first month, the emperor went to Oshidomari.

古文：辛巳，改易州兵马使为安抚使。
现代文：初八，改易州兵马使为安抚使。
English: On the 8th day of the first month, the State Troops and Horses Envoy was changed to the Pacification Envoy.

古文：丁亥，猎炭山。
现代文：十四日，在炭山打猎。
English: On the 14th, they went hunting in Su Shan.

古文：辛卯，遣使振西京饥民。
现代文：十八日，派使者赈济西京饥民。
English: On the 18th, an envoy was sent to feed the starving people in West Beijing.

古文：二月甲辰朔，诏元帅府募军。
现代文：二月初一，诏令元帅府招募军人。
English: On the first day of February, the Marshal's Office issued a decree to recruit soldiers.

古文：壬子，夏国王李谅祚子秉常遣使告哀。
现代文：初九，夏国王李谅诈之子秉常派使者前来告哀。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the lunar month, the son of the Xia king, Li Pengrui, sent an envoy to mourn.

古文：癸丑，颁行《御制华严经赞》。
现代文：初十，颁行《御制华严经赞》。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, "Gosei Hua Yan Jing Zan" was issued.

古文：丁卯，北行。
现代文：二十四日，皇上北上。
English: On the 24th, the emperor left for the north.

古文：三月丙子，遣使夏国吊祭。
现代文：三月初四，派使者前往夏国吊唁祭祀。
English: On the fourth day of the third month, an envoy was sent to Xia to offer condolences.

古文：甲申，振应州饥民。
现代文：十二日，赈济应州饥民。
English: On the 12th, the starving people in Yingzhou were given food.

古文：乙酉，诏南京除军行地，余皆得种稻。
现代文：十三日，诏令南京除了行军之处，其余一概须种稻谷。
English: On the 13th, Nanjing was ordered to grow rice except where the troops were marching.

古文：庚寅，振朔州饥民。
现代文：十八日，赈济朔州饥民。
English: On the 18th, the starving people in Shuozhou, Fujian Province.

古文：乙未，夏国李秉常遣使献其父谅祚遗物。
现代文：二十三日，夏国李秉常派使者进献其父李谅诈之遗物。
English: On the 23rd, Li Bingzhang of Xia Province sent an envoy to present the relics of his father, Li Yuexuan.

古文：夏四月戊午，阿萨兰回鹘遣使来贡。
现代文：夏四月十七日，阿萨兰回鹘派使者前来进贡。
English: On the 17th day of the 4th month of the summer, Asalan Uighur sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：五月丙戌，驻跸拖古烈。
现代文：五月十五日，歇驾于拖古烈。
English: On the 15th of May, he rested in Toguryo.

古文：六月壬子，西北路雨谷，方三十里。
现代文：六月十二日，西北路从天降下谷子，方圆三十里。
English: On June 12th, Northwest Road dropped corn from the sky, covering an area of 30 miles.

古文：丙寅，以北院林牙耶律赵三为北院大王，右夷离毕萧素飒中京留守。
现代文：二十六日，以北院林牙耶律赵三为北院大王，以右夷离毕萧素飒为中京留守。
English: On the 26th, Zhao San of the Northern Court, Lin Ya'erut, became the Great King of the Northern Court, and Bi Xiao Suru of the Eastern Court, Uyi Li, remained in Beijing.

古文：秋七月壬申，置乌古敌烈部都统军司。
现代文：秋七月初二，设置乌古敌烈部都统军司。
English: On the 2nd day of the 7th month of autumn, the Imperial General Headquarters of the ancient enemy was established.

古文：丙子，猎黑岭。
现代文：初六，在黑岭打猎。
English: In my sixth year of junior high school, I went hunting in Heiling.

古文：是月，南京霖雨，地震。
现代文：同月，南京降了霖雨，又发生了地震。
English: In the same month, it rained heavily in Nanjing and there was another earthquake.

古文：九月己亥，驻跸藕丝淀。
现代文：九月三十日，歇驾于藕丝淀。
English: On September 30th, he stopped in Goseidian.

古文：冬十月辛亥，曲赦南京徒罪以下囚。
现代文：冬十月十二日，特赦南京被判徒罪以下的囚犯。
English: On October 12 in winter, Nanjing granted amnesty to prisoners who had been sentenced to imprisonment or less.

古文：永清、武清、安次、固安、新城、归义、容城诸县水，复一岁租。
现代文：永清、武清、安次、固安、新城、归义、容县等县发生水灾，免除灾民一年的租税。
English: Floods occurred in Yongqing, Wuqing, Anji, Gu'an, Xincheng, Guiyi, Rongxian and other counties, and the victims were exempted from tax for one year.

古文：戊辰，册李秉常为夏国王。
现代文：二十九日，册封李秉常为夏国王。
English: On the 29th, Li Bingzhang was proclaimed King of Xia.

古文：十二月辛亥，夏国遣使来贡。
现代文：十二月十三日，夏国派使者前来进贡。
English: On December 13, Xia Guo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：五年春正月，阻卜叛，以晋王仁先为西北路招讨使，领禁军讨之。
现代文：五年春正月，阻卜反叛，任命晋王耶律仁先为西北路招讨使，率领禁军前往讨伐。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of Spring, in order to thwart the rebellion, the Jin king, Yerujin, first appointed a recruiting envoy for the Northwest Road and led the forbidden army to the crusade.

古文：夏六月己亥，驻跸拖古烈。
现代文：夏六月初四，歇驾于拖古烈。
English: On the 4th day of the 6th month of the summer, I rested in Toguryo.

古文：丙午，吐蕃遣使来贡。
现代文：十一日，吐蕃派使者前来进贡。
English: On the 11th day, Tubo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：壬戌，以南院枢密使萧惟信知北院枢密使事。
现代文：二十七日，以南院枢密使萧惟信为知北院枢密使事。
English: On the 27th, Xiao Weixin, the envoy of the Southern Privy Council, was appointed as the envoy of the Northern Privy Council.

古文：秋七月乙丑朔，日有食之。
现代文：秋七月初一，日食。
English: Autumn, the first day of July, a solar eclipse.

古文：戊辰，夏国遣使来谢封册。
现代文：初四，夏国派使者前来感谢封册。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Xia Guo sent an envoy to thank the seal.

古文：癸未，诏禁皇族恃势侵渔细民。
现代文：十九日，下诏禁止皇族侵夺平民。
English: On the 19th, the imperial edict was issued prohibiting the imperial family from invading and seizing civilians.

古文：八月，谒庆陵。
现代文：八月，拜谒庆陵。
English: In August, he paid homage to the Yongqing Mausoleum.

古文：九月戊辰，仁先遣人奏阻卜捷。
现代文：九月初五，仁先派人奏称讨伐阻卜告捷。
English: On the 5th day of the 9th month, Rensen sent someone to report that the campaign against obstruction had been successful.

古文：冬十月己亥，驻跸藕丝淀。
现代文：冬十月初六，歇驾于藕丝淀。
English: On the 6th day of the 10th month of winter, it stopped in Goseidian.

古文：十一月丁卯，诏四方馆副使止以契丹人充。
现代文：十一月初四，诏令四方馆副使只由契丹人充任。
English: On the 4th day of the 11th month of the lunar calendar, the deputy envoy of the Sifang Pavilion was appointed by the Khitan people.

古文：丁丑，五国剖阿里部叛，命萧素飒讨之。
现代文：十四日，五国剖阿里部叛乱，命令萧素飒讨伐之。
English: On the 14th, the five countries dissected Ali's rebellion and ordered Xiao Susu to fight it.

古文：闰月戊申，夏国王李秉常遣使乞赐印绶。
现代文：闰十一月十五日，夏国王李秉常派使者请求赐予印绶。
English: On the 15th day of the 11th month of the leap year, the king of Xia, Li Bingchang, sent an envoy to ask for a seal.

古文：己未，僧志福加守司徒。
现代文：二十六日，僧人志福升任守司徒。
English: On the 26th, the monk Zhifu was promoted to the position of abbot.

古文：十二月甲子，行皇太子再生礼，减诸路徒以下罪一等。
现代文：十二月初二，举行皇太子再生礼，诸路徒罪以下犯人减罪一等。
English: On the 2nd day of the 12th month, the crown prince's rebirth ceremony was held, and the prisoners whose crimes were lower than those of the ruffians had their crimes reduced to the first class.

古文：乙丑，诏百官廷议国政。
现代文：初三，诏令百官在宫廷上商议国家大政。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the Emperor issued an edict ordering all officials to discuss the state's major policies at court.

古文：甲戌，五国来降。仍献方物。
现代文：十二日，五国部前来降附，依旧进献土产。
English: On the twelfth day, the five provinces came to surrender, still offering local products.

古文：六年春正月甲午，如千鹅泺。
现代文：六年春正月初二，皇上到千鹅泊。
English: On the second day of the first month of the sixth year of spring, the emperor went to Chigosepaku.

古文：二月丙寅，阻卜来朝，贡方物。
现代文：二月初五，阻卜前来朝拜，贡献土产。
English: On the fifth day of the second month of the year, they came to pay homage and contribute to the local economy.

古文：夏四月癸未，西北路招讨司以所降阻卜酋长至行在。
现代文：夏四月二十三日，西北路招讨司带着招降的阻卜酋长到皇上行宫。
English: On the 23rd day of April in summer, the Northwest Road Recruiting Division took the recruiting chiefs to the emperor's palace.

古文：五月甲辰，清暑拖古烈。
现代文：五月十五日，在拖古烈消夏。
English: On the 15th of May, I spent the summer in Toguryo.

古文：甲寅，设贤良科，诏应是科者，先以所业十万言进。
现代文：二十五日，开设贤良科，诏令应考本科者，先围绕所习术业写出十万言进献。
English: On the 25th, the Department of Virtue and Virtue was opened, and it was decreed that those who should take the undergraduate exam should first write a 100,000-word contribution based on their academic studies.

古文：六月辛巳，阻卜来朝。
现代文：六月二十二日，阻卜前来朝见。
English: On June 22nd, Zibo came to see me in the morning.

古文：乙酉，以惕隐耶律白为中京留守。
现代文：二十六日，以惕隐耶律白为中京留守。
English: On the 26th, I left for Chukyo.

古文：是月，御永安殿放进士赵廷睦等百三十八人。
现代文：同月，御临永安殿录用进士赵廷睦等一百三十八人。
English: In the same month, one hundred and thirty-eight people, including Zhao Tingmu, were recruited to the Yongan Palace.

古文：秋七月辛亥，猎于合鲁聂特。
现代文：秋七月二十三日，在合鲁聂特打猎。
English: On the 23rd of July in autumn, I went hunting in Hallstatt.

古文：八月丙子，耶律白薨，追封辽西郡王。
现代文：八月十九日，耶律白逝世，追封为辽西郡王。
English: On August 19th, Yelubai passed away and was posthumously crowned the King of Liaoxi County.

古文：九月庚戌，幸藕丝淀。
现代文：九月二十三日，临幸藕丝淀。
English: On September 23rd, Lin Xing visited Shidian.

古文：甲寅，以马希白诗才敏妙，十吏书不能给，召试之。
现代文：二十七日，因为马希白诗才敏捷高妙，即使十个吏部尚书也比不上他，征召前来考试之。
English: On the 27th, because Ma Xibai's poetry was so nimble and exquisite that even ten officials could not compare with him, he was summoned to come and take the examination.

古文：冬十月丁卯，五国部长来朝。
现代文：冬十月初十，五国部酋长前来朝见。
English: On the tenth day of the tenth month of the winter, the chiefs of the five provinces came to see the emperor.

古文：壬申，西北路招讨司擒阻卜酋长来献。
现代文：十五日，西北路招讨司擒获阻卜酋长前来进献。
English: On the fifteenth day, the Northwest Road Invitation to the Priest was received by the chief of the block.

古文：十一月乙卯，禁鬻生熟铁于回鹘、阻卜等界。
现代文：十一月二十八日，禁止卖出生铁或熟铁到回鹘、阻卜等境内。
English: On November 28, it was prohibited to sell raw iron or cooked iron to Huizhou, Zibo and other territories.

古文：十二月戊午，加圆释、法钧二僧并守司空。
现代文：十二月初二，圆释、法钧二僧均升任守司空。
English: On the second day of the first month of December, the two monks, Yuan Xie and Fang Xie, were both promoted to the position of provincial governor.

古文：己未，以坤宁节，赦死罪以下。
现代文：初三，因逢坤宁节，赦免死罪以下犯人。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, because it falls on Kunming Festival, prisoners with death sentences or less will be pardoned.

古文：辛酉，禁汉人捕猎。
现代文：初五，禁止汉人捕猎。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the Chinese were prohibited from hunting.

古文：七年春正月戊子，如鸭子河。
现代文：七年春正月初二，皇上到鸭子河。
English: On the second day of the first month of the seventh year of spring, the emperor went to the Duck River.

古文：二月乙丑，女直进马。
现代文：二月初九，女真进献马匹。
English: On the 9th day of the 2nd month, Nyoshin presented horses.

古文：丙寅，以南院枢密使姚景行知兴中府事。
现代文：初十，以南院枢密使姚景行为兴中府知府。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, the Southern Yuan Privy Council sent Yao Jing to act as the governor of Xingzhongfu.

古文：三月己酉，以讨五国功，加知黄龙府事蒲延、怀化军节度使高元纪、易州观察使高正并千牛卫上将军，五国节度使萧陶苏斡、宁江州防御使大荣并静江军节度使。
现代文：三月二十四日，因为征讨五国部立有战功，黄龙府知府蒲延、怀化军节度使高元纪、易州观察使高正均加号千牛卫上将军，五国节度使萧陶苏斡、宁江州防御使大荣均升任静江军节度使。
English: On March 24th, Puyan, the governor of Huanglong, Gao Yuanji, commander of the Huaihua Army, Gao Zhengjun, commander of the Yizhou Observation, Qian Niu Wei Shang, commander of the Five Nations, Xiao Tao Su, and Da Rongjun, commander of the Ningjiang Defense, were promoted to commander of the Jingjiang Army.

古文：幸黑水。
现代文：皇上临幸黑水。
English: The Emperor is congratulating Kurosuke.

古文：夏四月癸酉，如纳葛泺。
现代文：夏四月十八日，到纳葛泊。
English: Summer April 18th, to Nagpur.

古文：乙亥，禁布帛短狭不中尺度者。
现代文：二十日，禁止买卖使用布帛短窄不合尺寸者。
English: On the 20th, the sale and purchase of those who use short, narrow and unsuitable cloth stirrups was prohibited.

古文：六月己卯，吐蕃来贡。
现代文：六月二十六日，吐蕃前来进贡。
English: On June 26th, the tributes came from as far away as Tubo.

古文：癸未，南院大王高八致仕。
现代文：三十日，南院大王高八辞官。
English: On the 30th, the Nanyin Daowang Gaohachi resigned from his post.

古文：秋七月甲申朔，以东北路详稳合里只为南院大王，西南面招讨使拾得奴为奚六部大王。
现代文：秋七月初一，以东北路详稳合里只为南院大王，西南面招讨使拾得奴为奚六部大王。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, only Nanin Daowang was in the northeastern road, and the southwestern side of the southwestern road was the great king of the six provinces.

古文：己丑，遣使按问五京囚。
现代文：初六，派使者查究审问五京囚犯。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, he sent an envoy to investigate and interrogate the Wujing prisoners.

古文：庚子，如藕丝淀。
现代文：十七日，到藕丝淀。
English: On the 17th, I arrived in Gansu.

古文：八月辛巳，置佛骨于招仙浮图，罢猎，禁屠杀。
现代文：八月二十九日，在招仙浮图中放置佛骨，停止打猎，禁止屠宰牲畜。
English: On August 29th, Buddha's bones were placed in the Zhaoxian float, hunting was stopped, and the slaughter of livestock was prohibited.

古文：冬十月己卯，如医巫闾山。
现代文：冬十月初四，皇上到医巫闾山。
English: On the 4th day of the 10th month of winter, the emperor went to Lushan to receive medical treatment.

古文：壬戌，以南府宰相耶律蕊奴为南京统军使。
现代文：十一日，以南府宰相耶律蕊奴为南京统军使。
English: On the 11th, the chancellor of Nanfu, Ye Li Rui Nu, became the envoy of the Nanjing unified army.

古文：戊辰，谒乾陵。
现代文：十七日，拜谒乾陵。
English: On the 17th, the Qianling Mausoleum was built.

古文：庚辰，诏百官廷议军国事。
现代文：二十九日，诏令百官廷议军国大事。
English: On the 29th, the Imperial Edict ordered the Hundred-Officials' Court to discuss military affairs.

古文：十一月戊子，免南京流民租。
现代文：十一月初七，免去南京流民租税。
English: On the 7th day of the 11th month of the lunar calendar, the tax of the Nanjing exiles was exempted.

古文：己丑，振饶州饥民。
现代文：初八，赈济饶州饥民。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, the starving people of Raozhou were fed.

古文：丙午，高丽遣使来贡。
现代文：二十五日，高丽派使者前来进贡。
English: On the 25th, Goryeo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：十二月壬子，以契丹行宫都部署耶律胡睹知北院枢密使事，知北院枢密使事萧惟信为南府宰相，兼契丹行宫都部署。
现代文：十二月初二，以契丹行宫都部署耶律胡睹为知北院枢密使事，以知北院枢密使事萧惟信为南府宰相，兼任契丹行宫都部署。
English: On the 2nd day of the 12th month of the year, Yerut Hujian was appointed as the envoy of the Privy Council of the Northern Yuan Dynasty, and Xiao Weixin, the envoy of the Privy Council of the Northern Yuan Dynasty, was appointed as the prime minister of Nanfu, and was also appointed as the envoy of the Imperial Court of the Northern Yuan Dynasty.

古文：丁巳，汉人行宫都部署李仲禧、北院宣徽使刘霂、枢密副使王观、都承旨杨兴工各赐国姓。
现代文：初七，给汉人行宫都部署李仲禧、北院宣徽使刘輄、枢密副使王观、都承旨杨兴工分别赐予国姓。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Li Zhongxi, the envoy to the Han People's Court of the Northern Yuan Dynasty, Liu Zhen, the envoy to the Northern Yuan Dynasty, Wang Guan, the deputy envoy to the Privy Council, and Yang Xinggong were all given the surname of the country.

古文：戊寅，回鹘来贡。
现代文：二十八日，回鹘前来进贡。
English: On the 28th, Hui Xuan came to pay tribute.

古文：是岁，春州斗粟六钱。
现代文：这年，春州粟米每斗价值六钱。
English: This year, the price of corn in Chunzhou was six yuan per barrel.

