古文：韩昉，字公美，燕京人。
现代文：韩昉，字公美，燕京人。
English: Han Yu, Zi Gongmei, Yan Jingren.

古文：仕辽，累世通显。
现代文：他的先人在辽国做官，几代官运亨通，地位显达。
English: His ancestors were officials in Liaoning Province. Several generations of officials were successful, and their status was prominent.

古文：昉五岁丧父，哭泣能尽哀。
现代文：韩昉五岁丧父，哭泣能尽哀。
English: Han Wei lost his father at the age of five. He could not stop crying.

古文：天庆二年，中进士第一。
现代文：辽天庆二年，韩昉高中进士第一名。
English: In the second year of Liao Tianqing, Han Yu High School won the first place.

古文：补右拾遗，转史馆修撰。
现代文：补任右拾遗的官职，后转史馆修撰。
English: He was appointed to fill the post of official responsible for the right to collect relics, and later transferred to the history museum for revision.

古文：累迁少府少监、乾文阁待制。
现代文：曾迁任少府少监、乾文阁待制。
English: He was once transferred to the post of Junior Prefectural Junior Inspector, and the post of Kengbunkaku was vacant.

古文：加卫尉卿，知制诰，充高丽国信使。
现代文：又加任卫尉卿、知制诰，并充任高丽国信使。
English: In addition, he was appointed to the posts of Captain of the Imperial Guards, Chisei Shogun, and served as the messenger of Korea.

古文：高丽虽旧通好，天会四年，奉表称藩而不肯进誓表，累使要约，皆不得要领。
现代文：高丽国虽然过去就和我朝互通友好，但是在天会四年，他们奉表称藩而不肯进献有诺言条款的誓表，屡次派人去要盟约，都不得要领。
English: Although the Koryo Kingdom had been on friendly terms with Korea in the past, in the past four years of the Heavenly Reunion, they refused to present an oath with the terms of the promise, and repeatedly sent people to ask for a covenant, but they were unable to get it.

古文：而昉复至高丽，移督再三。
现代文：而韩昉又到高丽，再三督促。
English: But Han Min went to Goryeo again and again to urge him.

古文：高丽征国中读书知古今者，商榷辞旨，使酬答专对。
现代文：高丽征求国中读书知古今的人，商榷宗旨措辞，让酬答有针对性。
English: Koryo solicits people who have read books in middle school and know the past and present, discuss the wording of the purpose, and make the reward and answer targeted.

古文：凡涉旬乃始置对，谓昉曰： 小国事辽、宋二百年无誓表，未尝失藩臣礼。
现代文：大概经过十天才开始设对。他们对韩昉说： 我们小国侍奉辽、宋二百年来没有誓表，不曾失藩臣礼。
English: After about ten days, they began to set it right. They said to Han Zheng: Our small country has served Liao and Song for two hundred years without an oath, and has never lost the feudal vassal.

古文：今事上国，当与事辽、宋同礼。
现代文：现在侍奉贵国应当和对辽、宋是同样的礼节。
English: Now, serving your country should be the same etiquette as Liao and Song.

古文：而屡盟长乱，圣人所不与，必不敢用誓表。 
现代文：而屡次盟誓却常常违犯是圣人所不赞许的，一定不敢用誓表。 
English: But to repeatedly swear an oath but often violate it is not approved of by the sages, and one must not dare to use an oath form.

古文：昉曰： 贵国必欲用古礼，舜五载一巡狩，群后四朝。周六年五服一朝，又六年王乃时巡，诸侯各朝于方岳。今天子方事西狩，则贵国当从朝会矣。 
现代文：韩昉说： 贵国一定要用古代的礼制，那么舜帝五年出巡狩猎一次，诸位后妃四出朝拜；周代六年五服一朝，并且六年君王才巡幸一次，诸侯各自向方岳朝拜，现今天子正在西部狩猎，贵国也应当随从向西朝会了。 
English: Han Zheng said, "Your country must use the ancient ritual system. Then Emperor Zhao would go on a hunting tour once every five years, and your queens would go out four times to worship. In the six years of the Zhou Dynasty, there would be five ceremonies a day, and in the six years of the Zhou Dynasty, the emperors would only go on a tour once a year. The princes would each go to worship Fangyue. Now that the emperor is hunting in the west, your country should also follow the westward movement.

古文：高丽人无以对，乃曰： 徐议之。 
现代文：高丽人无言以对，才说： 这件事情慢慢商议。 
English: The Goryeo people were speechless before they said, "Let's discuss this matter slowly."

古文：昉曰： 誓表朝会，一言决耳。 
现代文：韩昉说： 进誓表朝会，一句话就决定了。 
English: Han Zheng said, "When the oath form is submitted to the morning meeting, it is decided in one sentence.

古文：于是高丽乃进誓表如约，昉乃还。
现代文：于是高丽才进誓表像约定的那样，韩昉还朝。
English: As a result, Goryeo entered the oath table as agreed, and Han Xuan returned home.

古文：宗干大说曰： 非卿谁能办此。 
现代文：宗干非常高兴，说 ：如果不是卿前往，谁能办成这件事？ 
English: Dzongkang was very happy and said, "If you don't go, who will do it?"

古文：因谓执事者曰： 自今出疆之使，皆宜择人。 
现代文：因此对执事的人说 ：从今天开始出境的使者都应当选择。 
English: Wherefore he said unto the officers, This day shall even the messenger that goeth forth out of the city choose him that is to come in.

古文：明年，加昭文馆直学士，兼堂后官。再加谏议大夫，迁翰林侍讲学士。
现代文：第二年，加授韩昉昭文馆直学士之职，兼任堂后官，再加授谏议大夫，迁翰林侍讲学士。
English: In the second year, he was additionally awarded the post of direct bachelor of the Han Yu Zhao Literature Museum, concurrently serving as a postmaster, and was additionally awarded the post of doctor of debate, and transferred to the Hanlin attendant lecturer.

古文：改礼部尚书，迁翰林学士，兼太常卿、修国史，尚书如故。
现代文：后改任礼部尚书，迁升翰林学士，兼太常卿、修国史，尚书之职如故。
English: Later, he was transferred to the Ministry of Rites and Literature, and was promoted to Hanlin Scholar, concurrently to the Grand Duke and Grand Duchess, and to the Ministry of National History.

古文：昉自天会十二年入礼部，在职凡七年。
现代文：韩昉自从天会十二年进入礼部，在职共七年。
English: Han Wei has been working in the ritual department for seven years since he joined the Heavenly Society in 2002.

古文：当是时，朝廷方议礼，制度或因或革，故昉在礼部兼太常甚久云。
现代文：当时，朝廷刚开始讨论礼仪，有的制度沿袭前朝，有的制度要改革，所以韩昉在礼部兼任太常卿时间很久。
English: At that time, the Imperial Court had just begun to discuss etiquette. Some systems followed the former imperial system, while others needed to be reformed. Therefore, Han Zheng was concurrently appointed as the First Secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies for a long time.

古文：除济南尹，拜参知政事。
现代文：后被任命为济南府尹，拜参知政事。
English: Later, he was appointed as Yin of Jinan Prefecture, and served as a political advisor to the governor.

古文：皇统四年，表乞致仕，不许。
现代文：皇统四年，上表请求辞去官职，未获批准。
English: In the fourth year of imperial unification, the above request to resign from office was not approved.

古文：六年，再表乞致仕，乃除汴京留守，封郓国公。
现代文：六年，再次上表请求辞职，又拜汴京留守，封郓国公。
English: Six years later, he once again requested to resign from the cabinet, but he stayed in Beijing and was appointed as the head of state.

古文：复请如初，以仪同三司致仕。
现代文：韩昉仍像当初那样请求辞职，结果按仪同三司的待遇辞了职。
English: Han Wei still requested to resign as he did at the beginning, and as a result, he resigned in accordance with the treatment of the three departments.

古文：天德初，加开府仪同三司。
现代文：天德初年，加封开府仪同三司。
English: In the first year of Tiande, Jiafeng held the ceremony of opening the prefecture and the three departments.

古文：薨。年六十八。
现代文：韩昉逝世的时候，是六十八岁。
English: He was sixty-eight years old when he died.

古文：昉性仁厚，待物甚宽。
现代文：韩昉性情仁厚，待人接物很宽厚。
English: Han Yan is kind-hearted and generous in his treatment of others.

古文：海陵尝选廷臣十人备谘访，独永祺议论宽厚，时称长者。
现代文：有个家奴告韩昉把马送给叛徒资助他逃出边境，经考查没有这事，有司把这个家奴还给韩昉，韩昉待他像以前一样，说： 奴才诬告主人有罪，是为了求得好人，有什么值得怪他的呢？ 
English: A manservant accused Han Xuan of giving a horse to a traitor to help him escape from the border. After investigation, there was no such thing. An official returned the manservant to Han Xuan. Han Xuan treated him as before, saying, "A manservant falsely accuses his master of being guilty in order to get a good man. What is there to blame him for?"

古文：卒年五十七。
现代文：人们称韩昉为长者。
English: People call Han Min the Elder.

古文：胡砺，字元化，磁州武安人。少嗜学。
现代文：韩昉地位虽然尊贵，读书从不曾中断，书不离手，善于写文章，最擅长的是起草诏册，他的著作《太祖睿德神功碑》，当时很被世人称道。
English: Although Han Xuan's status was honorable, he never stopped reading. He never let go of his books. He was good at writing articles, and his best skill was drafting the imperial edict. His book "Tai Zu Rui De Shen Gong Biao" was highly praised by the world at that time.

古文：天会间，大军下河北，砺为军士所掠，行至燕，亡匿香山寺，与佣保杂处。
现代文：自从出使高丽归来，后来高丽使者到我朝一定问候韩昉是否安好。胡砺，字元化，是磁州武安人。少年时代就特别好学。天会年间，大军下河北，胡砺被军士劫掠，走到燕地，胡砺逃跑躲藏在香山寺，和雇工们处在一起。
English: Since the return of the dispatched Koryo, the Koryo emissary to my dynasty later sent a certain greeting to Han Min as to whether Han Min was safe. Hu Min, a characterization, is a person from the magnetic state of Wu'an. He was particularly good at learning when he was a boy. During the Tianhui, the army went to Hebei, Hu Min was robbed by sergeants and went to Yan Di, Hu Min fled and hid in Xiangshan Temple, and was with the hired workers.

古文：韩昉见而异之，使赋诗以见志，砺操笔立成，思致清婉，昉喜甚，因馆置门下，使与其子处，同教育之，自是学业日进。
现代文：韩昉看见对他很惊异，让他赋诗来看他的学问，胡砺操笔写来，立刻写成，思路清晰，韩昉高兴极了，就安置在自己门下，让他跟自己的儿子住在一起，一同教育他们，从此胡砺的学业天天有长进。
English: Han Xuan was surprised to see him. He asked him to compose a poem to show his knowledge. Hu Xuan took the pen and wrote it down immediately, his thoughts were clear. Han Xuan was very happy. He placed him under his own door, let him live with his son, and educated them together. Since then, Hu Xuan's studies have progressed every day.

古文：昉尝谓人曰： 胡生才器一日千里，他日必将名世。 
现代文：韩昉曾经对人说： 胡生的才能一日千里，他日必将闻名于世。 
English: Han Zheng once said to people: Hu Sheng's talent reaches a thousand miles a day, and he will surely be famous in the world one day.

古文：十年，举进士第一，授右拾遗，权翰林修撰。
现代文：十年，考中进士第一名，被授予右拾遗的职务，掌握翰林修撰的权力。
English: Ten years later, he won the first place in the middle school entrance examination, was awarded the right to collect relics, and mastered the power of Hanlin Shuxian.

古文：久之，改定州观察判官。
现代文：时间长了，改任定州观察判官。
English: After a long time, he was reappointed as a Jingzhou observation judge.

古文：定之学校为河朔冠，士子聚居者常以百数，砺督教不倦，经指授者悉为场屋上游，称其程文为 元化格 。
现代文：定州的学校是河朔最好的，士子聚居在这里求学的常常以百来计数，胡砺督促教育，乐此不倦，经他指点教授的全部是场屋上游，他的程文即科举考试作为示范的文章，被称为 元化格 。
English: Dingzhou's school is the best in Hexuo. The number of scholars who live and study here is often counted in the hundreds. Hu Wei urged education and enjoyed it tirelessly. All of the professors he pointed out were in the upper reaches of the field. His program, that is, the imperial examination examination, was a model article and was called Yuanhua Ge.

古文：皇统初，为河北西路转运都勾判官。
现代文：皇统初年，胡砺是河北西路转运都勾判官。
English: In the first year of imperial reunification, Hu Yao was the judge of the West Hebei Road Transfer Station.

古文：砺性刚直无所屈。
现代文：胡砺性格刚直无所屈。
English: Hu Yao's character is unyielding.

古文：行台平章政事高桢之汴，道真定，燕于漕司。
现代文：行台平章政事高桢到汴京，取道真定，在漕司设宴。
English: Gaotai Pingzhang Political Affairs College students went to Beijing, took the road of Zhending, and held a banquet in Caozhi.

古文：砺欲就坐，桢责之，砺曰： 公在政府则礼绝百僚，今日之会自有宾主礼。 
现代文：胡砺想就座，高桢教训他，胡砺说 ：公在政府则礼绝百僚，今日相会自然应有宾主礼。 
English: Hu Yao wanted to take a seat, Gao Yao scolded him. Hu Yao said, "In the government, there are more than a hundred officials, so today's meeting should naturally have a guest of honor."

古文：桢曰： 汝他日为省吏当何如？ 
现代文：高桢说 ：你他日做了省级官员该当如何？ 
English: Gao Yao said: You were a provincial official the other day, what should you do?

古文：砺曰： 当官而行，亦何所避。 
现代文：胡砺说： 当官则行，也没什么要避讳的。 
English: Hu Yao said: "Officials can do it, and there is nothing to be ashamed of.

古文：桢壮其言，改谢之。
现代文：高桢因为他出言雄壮，改变了态度向他道歉。
English: Gao Jun changed his attitude and apologized to him for his bold words.

古文：改同知深州军州事，加朝奉大夫。
现代文：胡砺改任同知深州军州事，加朝奉大夫。
English: Hu Yao was reassigned to the same position as Zhi Sheng State Military Affairs, and became a military doctor.

古文：郡守暴戾，蔑视僚属，砺常以礼折之，守愧服，郡事一委于砺。
现代文：郡守残暴凶狠，蔑视同僚和下属，胡砺常常以礼折服他，郡守惭愧，完全服了他，把郡事一概委托胡砺。
English: The county magistrate was cruel and ferocious, contemptuous of his colleagues and subordinates. Hu Yao often treated him with courtesy. The county magistrate was ashamed and completely obeyed him, entrusting all county affairs to Hu Yao.

古文：州管五县，例置弓手百余，少者犹六七十人，岁征民钱五千余万为顾直。
现代文：深州所辖五个县，按惯例应该设置弓手一百多名，少者也得六七十人，一年要征收民间钱财五千多万作为这些弓手的酬金。
English: In the five counties under the jurisdiction of Shenzhou, according to the usual practice, more than one hundred archers should be set up, and those who are less should be sixty or seventy. More than fifty million yuan of private money and property should be collected each year as remuneration for these archers.

古文：其人皆市井无赖，以迹盗为名，所至扰民。
现代文：这些弓手都是市井无赖，以缉盗为名，所到之处骚扰百姓。
English: These archers are all rogues, harassing people everywhere they go in the name of anti-theft.

古文：砺知其弊，悉罢去。继而有飞语曰： 某日贼发，将杀通守。 
现代文：胡砺知道了其中的弊病，全部罢免了这些弓手，接着流传一些谣言，说 某日盗贼要发难，将杀通守。 
English: Hu Yao became aware of the problems and dismissed all of these archers, and then spread rumors that one day the thieves would attack and kill everyone.

古文：或请为备，砺曰： 盗所利者财耳，吾贫如此，何备为。 
现代文：有人请求胡砺防备，胡砺说： 盗贼所贪图的是钱财罢了，吾贫穷到这个地步，有什么防备的？ 
English: Someone asked Hu Yao to be on guard. Hu Yao said, "Thieves are only after money. I am so poor, how can I be on guard?

古文：是夕，令公署撤关，竟亦无事。
现代文：当天晚上，命令公署撤除警卫，竟然平安无事。
English: In the evening of the same day, he ordered the public security bureau to remove the guards, but nothing happened.

古文：再补翰林修撰，迁礼部郎中，一时典礼多所裁定。
现代文：胡砺又被授翰林修撰，迁任礼部郎中，一时各种典礼如何举行多由胡砺裁定。
English: Hu Yao was also awarded the title of Hanlin Shuxian, and was transferred to the position of Vice-Minister of Ceremonies. At one time, how various ceremonies were held was mostly decided by Hu Yao.

古文：海陵拜平章政事，百官贺于庙堂，砺独不跪。
现代文：海陵拜平章政事，百官都到庙堂恭贺，独有胡砺不下跪。
English: When it comes to politics, all the government officials come to the temple to offer congratulations. Only Hu Jintao can't get off his knees.

古文：海陵问其故，砺以令对，且曰： 朝服而跪，见君父礼也。 
现代文：海陵问他为什么不跪，胡砺拿政令来答对，并且说 ：着朝服下跪，是见君父的礼。 
English: When Hailing asked him why he did not kneel, Hu Rong replied with a government order, and said, "To kneel in a court uniform is a salute to your father."

古文：海陵深器重之。
现代文：海陵深深器重他。
English: Hailing deeply valued him.

古文：天德初，再迁侍讲学士，同修国史。
现代文：天德初年，胡砺再次升迁为侍讲学士、同修国史。
English: In the first year of the Tiande era, Hu Yaobang was once again promoted to be an assistant lecturer and a student of national history.

古文：以母忧去官。
现代文：因为母亲丧事离职。
English: Due to the death of his mother, he resigned from his post.

古文：起复为宋国岁元副使，刑部侍郎白彦恭为使，海陵谓砺曰： 彦恭官在卿下，以其旧劳，故使卿副之。 
现代文：服丧期满任宋国岁元副使，刑部侍郎白彦恭为使，海陵王对胡砺说： 彦恭官位在卿以下，因为他过去的功劳，所以让卿当副使。 
English: After completing the period of mourning, he was appointed as the deputy envoy of Song Guo Rai Yuan, and the attendant of the Department of Criminal Law, Bai Hikong, was appointed as the envoy. King Hailing said to Hu Yao: "Hikong's official rank is lower than that of the lord, because of his past achievements, so let the lord be the deputy envoy.

古文：迁翰林学士，改刑部尚书。
现代文：胡砺又迁任翰林学士，改任刑部尚书。
English: Hu Yao was transferred to the Hanlin Academy, and changed his post to the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：扈从至汴得疾，海陵数遣使临问，卒，深悼惜之。
现代文：海陵王出巡，胡砺作为护驾侍从人员到汴京，不幸得了病，海陵数次派人临床慰问，胡砺逝世，海陵深切哀悼十分痛惜。
English: King Hailing went on a tour, and Hu Yao accompanied him to Beijing. Unfortunately, he fell ill, and Hailing sent clinical condolences several times. Hu Yao passed away, and Hailing deeply regretted the loss.

古文：年五十五。
现代文：胡砺享年五十五岁。
English: Hu Yao was 55 years old.

古文：王竞，字无竞，彰德人。
现代文：王竞，字无竞，彰德人。
English: Wang Jing, Zi Wu Jing, Zhang De Ren.

古文：警敏好学。年十七以荫补官。
现代文：机警聪敏，勤奋好学，十七岁就借助于父祖的功绩补官。
English: Alert, intelligent, diligent and eager to learn, at the age of seventeen, he was promoted to the post with the help of his father's achievements.

古文：宋宣和中，太学两试合格，调屯留主簿。
现代文：宋宣和年间，王竞在太学两次考试合格，被任屯留主簿。
English: During the Song and Xuanwu era, Wang Jing passed the examination twice in Taishu and was appointed as the principal.

古文：入国朝，除大宁令，历宝胜盐官，转河内令。
现代文：进入当朝后，授职大宁县令，历任宝胜盐官，又转为河内县令。
English: After entering the Tang Dynasty, he was given the post of Dangning County magistrate, successively held the post of Baosheng Salt Officer, and then became the Hanoi County magistrate.

古文：时岁饥盗起，竞设方略以购贼，不数月尽得之。
现代文：这一年地方发生了饥荒，盗贼四起，王竞想方设法悬赏抓拿贼人，不出数月就全部抓获。
English: This year there was a famine in the area, and thieves were on the rise. Wang Jing tried to find a way to offer a reward for the capture of the thieves, and they were all captured within a few months.

古文：夏秋之交，沁水泛溢，岁发民筑堤，豪民猾吏因缘为奸，竞核实之，减费几半，县民为之谚曰： 西山至河岸，县官两人半。 
现代文：夏秋季节之交，沁水泛滥，王竞征发百姓修筑堤坝。
English: At the turn of the summer and autumn seasons, the floodwaters were overflowing, and the king summoned the people to build a dam.

古文：盖以前政韩希甫与竞相继治县，皆有干能，绛州正平令张元亦有治绩而差不及，故云然。
现代文：土豪劣绅和狡猾的官吏趁机作恶，搜刮民财。王竞核实情况后，把要征收的费用几乎削减了一半。全县百姓编了谚语说 ：西山至河岸，县官两人半。 因为前任韩希甫与王竞相继治理河内县，都很有才干，而绛州正平县令张元也有些业绩，但比起两人则赶不上，所以谚语这样说。
English: Local tyrants, bad gentry and cunning officials took advantage of the opportunity to do evil and rob the people's wealth. After Wang Jing verified the situation, he reduced the fees to be levied by almost half. The people of the whole county made up a proverb saying: "From the West Mountain to the riverbank, there are two and a half county officials. Because the predecessors Han Xifu and Wang Jing successively governed Hanoi County, they are very talented, and Zhang Yuan, the governor of Zhangzhou Zhengping County, also has some performance, but compared to the two, he can't keep up, so the proverb says.

古文：天眷元年，转固安令。
现代文：天眷元年，王竞转任固安县令。
English: In the first year of Tianxin, Wang Jing was transferred to Gu'an County.

古文：皇统初，参政韩昉荐之，召权应奉翰林文字，兼太常博士。
现代文：皇统初年，参政韩窻向朝廷举荐王竞，于是便召他暂任翰林文字之职，并兼任太常博士。
English: In the first year of imperial unification, Han Zheng, a political advisor, recommended Wang Jing to the imperial court, and Wang Jing was temporarily appointed to the post of Hanlin, and concurrently held the post of Taizang Doctor.

古文：诏作《金源郡王完颜娄室墓碑》，竞以行状尽其实，乃请国史刑正之，时人以为法。
现代文：皇上下诏书，命令做金源郡王完颜娄室墓碑的碑文，王竞完全按实际情况来记述，又请国史校对，因而当时的人都把他写的碑文作为范例。
English: According to the imperial edict, Wang Jing ordered the inscription of the tombstone of the tomb of Wang Ganyan in Jinyuan County to be made. Wang Jing described it completely according to the actual situation, and asked the national history to proofread it. Therefore, the people at that time took his inscription as a model.

古文：二年，试馆阁，竞文居最，遂为真。
现代文：天眷二年，在馆阁的考试中，王竞的文章位居魁首，于是他被正式授职。
English: Two years later, in the examination of the pavilion, Wang Jing's article ranked first, so he was officially awarded the post.

古文：迁尚书礼部员外郎。
现代文：后来，王竞升迁为尚书礼部员外郎。
English: Later, Wang Jing was promoted to the position of a member of the Shoshu etiquette club.

古文：时海陵当国，政由己出，欲令百官避堂讳，竞言人臣无公讳，遂止。
现代文：当时海陵王执掌国政，处理政事都由他一人做主。他想让百官在处置朝政时都避开朝堂。王竞说，作为臣子没有避讳朝政公事的。
English: At that time, King Haering was in charge of state affairs, and he was the only one who was responsible for dealing with political affairs. He wanted to let all officials avoid the imperial court when dealing with imperial affairs. Wang Jing said that as a courtier, he did not avoid imperial affairs.

古文：萧仲恭以太傅领三省事封王，欲援辽故事，亲王用紫罗伞。
现代文：于是，海陵王才终止了这种做法。萧仲恭由于作为太傅统领三省的功绩而加封亲王，他想援引辽国的旧制，使亲王使用紫罗伞。
English: As a result, King Hailing put an end to this practice. Xiao Zhongxiong, who was awarded the title of prince for his achievements as a taifu in charge of the three provinces, wanted to invoke the old system of Liao and make the prince use a violet umbrella.

古文：事下礼部，竞与郎中翟永固明言其非是，事竟不行，海陵由是重之。
现代文：事情下传到礼部，王竞和郎中翟永固明白地说这不对，最终没让事情通过。海陵王因此很看重王竞。
English: When the matter was reported to the Ministry of Ceremonies, Wang Jing and his second-in-command Yan Yong firmly said that this was not right, and ultimately did not allow the matter to pass. Therefore, King Hailing valued Wang Jing very much.

古文：天德初，转翰林待制，迁翰林直学士，改礼部侍郎，迁翰林侍讲学士，改太常卿，同修国史，擢礼部尚书，同修国史如故。
现代文：天德初年，王竞转任翰林待制，迁升翰林直学士后，改做礼部侍郎，后又升为翰林侍讲学士，改任太常卿，与其他人一起修订国史。再被提拔为礼部尚书，仍然参与编修国史。
English: In the first year of Tiande, Wang Jing was transferred to the Hanlin Preparatory School, and after being promoted to the Hanlin Direct Bachelor, he was changed to the Ceremonial Department Attendant, and then he was promoted to the Hanlin Attendant Lecturer, and then he was appointed to the Tai Changqing, and revised the national history with others. He was then promoted to the Ceremonial Department, and still participated in compiling the national history.

古文：大定二年春，从太傅张浩朝京师，诏复为礼部尚书。
现代文：大定二年春天，王竞跟随太傅张浩进京朝拜，皇上下诏书重又封他为礼部尚书。
English: In the spring of the 2nd year of Dading, Wang Jing followed the Taifu Zhang Hao into Beijing to pay homage, and the imperial edict was re-issued and he was awarded the title of ceremonial minister.

古文：是岁，奉迁睿宗山陵，仪注不应典礼，竞削官两阶。
现代文：这年，王竞奉旨搬迁睿宗的陵墓，所行礼仪不符合典礼制度，结果他被削去两级官职。
English: In this year, Wang Jing was ordered to relocate the mausoleum of Ruizong, and the etiquette he performed did not conform to the ceremonial system. As a result, he was stripped of his two-level official post.

古文：诏改创五龙车，兼翰林学士承旨，修国史。
现代文：皇帝又下诏令他创制五龙车，让他兼任翰林学士承旨、编修国史。
English: The emperor also issued a decree ordering him to create a five-dragon chariot, allowing him to concurrently serve as a scholar of Hanlin and compile national history.

古文：四年，卒官。
现代文：大定四年，王竞死于任上。
English: In the fourth year of Datong, Wang Jing died in office.

古文：竞博学而能文，善草隶书，工大字，两都宫殿榜题，皆竞所书，士林推为第一云。
现代文：王竞学识渊博，能做文章，善于草书、隶书，擅长写大字，两京宫殿上的榜文题字都是王竞所写。士大夫推举他为书法第一人。
English: Wang Jie had a profound knowledge of learning, could write articles, was good at cursive and cursive writing, and was good at writing large characters. The inscriptions on the walls of the palaces in the two capitals were all written by Wang Jie. The magistrate praised him as the first person in calligraphy.

古文：杨伯仁，字安道，伯雄之弟也。
现代文：杨伯仁，字安道，是杨伯雄的弟弟。
English: Yang Boren, also known as Ando, is Yang Boseong's younger brother.

古文：天性孝友，读书一过成诵。
现代文：他本性孝顺友爱，读书能过目成诵。
English: His nature is filial, obedient and friendly, and he can recite books by heart.

古文：登皇统九年进士第，事亲不求调。
现代文：皇统九年，杨伯仁考中进士，但他为了侍奉父母，并不要求安排职务。
English: In the ninth year of imperial rule, Yang Boren passed the junior high school entrance examination, but in order to serve his parents, he did not require a position.

古文：天德二年，除应奉翰林文字。
现代文：天德二年，他奉旨接受翰林文字之职。
English: Two years later, he was ordered to accept the post of Hanlin Writer.

古文：初名伯英，避太子光英讳，改今名。
现代文：杨伯仁本名伯英，为了避太子光英的忌讳，才改成现在的名字。
English: Yang Boren's real name was Bo Ying, but he changed it to his current name in order to avoid Prince Guang Ying's taboo.

古文：海陵尝夜召赋诗，传趣甚亟，未二鼓奏十咏，海陵喜，解衣赐之。
现代文：海陵王曾经有一天晚上召杨伯仁来赋诗，杨伯仁诗兴很高，不到二鼓的时间就做了十首，海陵王十分欢喜，把外衣脱下来赏赐给他。
English: One evening, King Hailing once summoned Yang Boren to compose a poem. Yang Boren was very enthusiastic about poetry and composed ten poems in less than two hours. King Hailing was very pleased and took off his coat to reward him.

古文：海陵射乌，伯仁献《获乌诗》以讽。
现代文：海陵王射乌鸦，杨伯仁献上《获乌诗》委婉劝谏。
English: Hailing Wang shoots a crow, Yang Boren presents "Winning a poem" to euphemistically persuade him.

古文：丁父忧，起复，赐金带袭衣，及赐白金以奉母。
现代文：伯仁父亲去世，他守孝期满后重新任职，皇上赏赐给他金带袭衣，又赐给他白金，以便奉养母亲。
English: After the death of his father and the expiration of his term of filial piety, Boren resumed his duties. The emperor gave him a gold belt and a cloak, and also gave him platinum in order to support his mother.

古文：改左拾遗。
现代文：杨伯仁改任左拾遗。
English: Yang Boren was reassigned to collect the remains.

古文：进士吕忠翰廷试已在第一，未唱名，海陵以忠翰程文示伯仁，问其优劣，伯仁对曰： 当在优等。 
现代文：进士吕忠翰在殿中考试时已经名列第一，却没有宣布他的名字。海陵王把吕忠翰在科举考试时做的文章拿给杨伯仁看，问他文章是好是坏，杨伯仁回答说： 应该属于优等。 
English: Lv Zhonghan, a member of the Jin Dynasty, had already ranked first in the examination of the palace, but his name was not announced. King Hailing showed Yang Boren the article written by Lv Zhonghan in the examination of the imperial examination, and asked him whether the article was good or bad. Yang Boren replied: It should be excellent.

古文：海陵曰： 此今试状元也。 
现代文：海陵王说 ：那么这人就是今日殿试的状元了。 
English: King Haering said, "Then this man is the ideal candidate for today's palace test."

古文：伯仁自以知忠翰姓名在第一，遂宿谏省，俟唱名乃出，海陵嘉其慎密。
现代文：杨伯仁因为自己事先知道吕忠翰排名第一，于是就夜间住在谏省机关，直等到宣布了他的名字才从谏省出来。海陵王非常赞许杨伯仁做事的谨慎周密。
English: Yang Boren, because he knew in advance that Lv Zhonghan was ranked first, stayed in the night at the Handan provincial government office and did not come out of Handan until his name was announced. King Hailing highly praised Yang Boren's careful and meticulous work.

古文：转翰林修撰。
现代文：杨伯仁被转调为翰林修撰。
English: Yang Boren was transferred to Hanlin Shuxian.

古文：孟宗献发解第一，伯仁读其程文，称之 此人当成大名 。
现代文：孟宗献在乡试中以第一名考取举人，杨伯仁读了他应试的文章，称赞他 这个人必会成就大名 。
English: Meng Zongxian won the first place in the township examination. Yang Boren read his essay and praised him. This person will surely achieve fame.

古文：是岁，宗献府试、省试、廷试皆第一，号 孟四元 ，时论以为知文。
现代文：这一年，孟宗献在府试、省试、殿试中都得了第一名，号称 孟四元 ，当时的舆论都认为他通晓文章。
English: In that year, Meng Zonken won the first place in the prefectural, provincial and palace examinations, and was known as Meng Shiyuan. At that time, the public opinion believed that he was well versed in literature.

古文：故事，状元官从七品，阶承务郎，世宗以宗献独异等，与从六品，阶授奉直大夫。
现代文：按照惯例，状元的官级是从七品，授职承务郎，而世宗由于孟宗献的与众不同，授予他从六品官级，任命他做奉直大夫。
English: According to the usual practice, the official rank of the jogi was from the seventh grade, and he was given the post of jojuro, while the sejong, due to the uniqueness of Meng Zongxian, awarded him the official rank from the sixth grade, and appointed him to be a doctor.

古文：改著作郎。
现代文：杨伯仁改任了著作郎。
English: Yang Boren was reassigned to the post of editor.

古文：居母丧，服除，调镇西节度副使。入为起居注兼左拾遗，上书论时务六事。
现代文：遇到他母亲逝世，守孝期满脱去孝服后，他调迁为镇西节度副使，进入朝中任起居注，并兼做左拾遗，常上书谈论各方面时事。
English: After the death of his mother and the end of the period of filial piety, he was transferred to the vice-envoy of the Zhenxi Festival, and entered the middle of the dynasty. He also worked as a left relic collector, and often wrote about various aspects of current affairs.

古文：改大名少尹。
现代文：杨伯仁又改任大名郡少尹。
English: Yang Boren was also reappointed as Daimyo County Shao Yin.

古文：郡中豪民横恣甚，莫可制，民受其害，伯仁穷竟渠党，四境帖然。
现代文：大名郡里的土豪劣绅横行霸道，没人管制得了，百姓深受其害。杨伯仁把他们的党羽清除干净，使全郡境内安定下来。
English: The local tyrants and despicable gentry in Daimyo County were rampant and domineering. No one could control them, and the people suffered greatly as a result. Yang Boren cleaned up their party feathers and stabilized the entire county.

古文：谳馆陶大辟，得其冤状，馆陶人为立祠。
现代文：他审察馆陶县大辟的案子，获知了其中的冤情，馆陶人因此给他修建祠堂。
English: He examined the case of Dabi in Guantao County, learned of the grievances, and the Guantao people therefore built him an ancestral hall.

古文：府尹荆王文坐赃削封，降德州防御使，同知裴满子宁及伯仁、判官谢奴皆以不能匡正解职。
现代文：大名郡的府尹是荆王完颜文，他由于贪赃枉法被削去封号，降职为德州防御使，身为同知的裴满子宁和杨伯仁、判官谢奴，都因为没有能够纠正荆王的过失而被解除官职。
English: The prefect of Daming County was Jing Wang Ganyanwen. He was stripped of his title and demoted to the post of Texas defense envoy due to corruption and embezzlement. Pei Man Zi Ning, Yang Boren, and Judge Xianwu, who were all known to him, were all dismissed from their posts for failing to correct Jing Wang's mistake.

古文：伯仁降南京留守判官，改同知安化军节度使，到官三日，召为太子右谕德、兼侍御史，改翰林待制，复兼右谕德。
现代文：杨伯仁被降为南京留守判官，改为同知安化军节度使，到任三天的时候，被召为太子右谕德，兼侍御史，改任翰林待制后，再次兼职右谕德。
English: Yang Boren was relegated to the position of judge-in-residence in Nanjing. He was changed to the chief envoy of the Anhua Army. When he had been in office for three days, he was called to serve as the prince's right-hand man and the imperial historian. After he was transferred to the position of Hanlin, he again served as a part-time right-hand man.

古文：除滨州刺史。
现代文：杨伯仁做了滨州刺史。
English: Yang Boren made history in Binzhou.

古文：郡俗有遣奴出亡，捕之以规赏者，伯仁至，责其主而杖杀其奴，如是者数辈，其弊遂止。
现代文：郡中有这样的风气：派出做事的家奴逃跑，捉住后可以得到奖赏。杨伯仁到任以后，却斥责家奴的主人，杖杀逃跑的家奴。像这样做了几次，这种坏风气就被制止了。
English: In the county, there was a custom of sending out slaves to do chores and then reward them when they were caught. However, after Yang Boren took office, he reprimanded the slave owners and killed the runaway slaves with a stick. After doing this several times, this bad custom was stopped.

古文：入为左谏议大夫，兼礼部侍郎、翰林直学士。
现代文：杨伯仁入朝任左谏议大夫，兼礼部侍郎、翰林直学士。
English: Yang Boren entered the imperial court as the doctor of the Left Division of the Privy Council, concurrently the attendant of the Ceremonial Department, and the direct scholar of Hanlin.

古文：故事，谏官词臣入直禁中，上闵其劳，特免入直。
现代文：依照以前的规矩，谏官和文学侍从都要进入宫禁值班。皇上怜恤杨伯仁的辛苦，特别恩准他免入宫禁值班。
English: According to the previous rules, eunuchs and literary attendants had to enter the palace on duty. The emperor took pity on Yang Boren's hard work and granted him special permission to enter the palace on duty.

古文：改吏部侍郎，直学士如故。
现代文：杨伯仁改做吏部侍郎，仍然兼为直学士。
English: Yang Boren changed his position to that of an attendant in the cadre department, but he was still a direct graduate.

古文：郑子聃卒，宰相举伯仁代之，乃迁待讲兼礼部侍郎。
现代文：郑子聃逝世，宰相举荐杨伯仁接替他的位置。于是，杨伯仁被提升为侍讲，并兼任礼部侍郎。
English: After the death of Zheng Zixuan, the Prime Minister recommended Yang Boren to take over his position. As a result, Yang Boren was promoted to the position of an attendant speaker and also served as a ceremonial attendant.

古文：伯仁久在翰林，文词典丽，上曰： 自韩昉、张钧后，则有翟永固，近日则张景仁、郑子聃，今则伯仁而已，其次未见能文者。
现代文：杨伯仁在翰林的时间很长，文章词采典雅华丽。皇上说： 自韩窻、张钧之后，有翟永固，近期就是张景仁、郑子聃，现在就只有杨伯仁罢了，其他人没见谁会做文章。
English: Yang Boren has been in Hanlin for a long time, and his articles are full of elegant and gorgeous words. The emperor said: Since Han Zheng and Zhang Zheng, there has been Zhang Yonggu, and recently there has been Zhang Jingren and Zheng Zichen. Now there is only Yang Boren, and no one else can write articles.

古文：吕忠翰草《降海陵庶人诏》，点窜再四，终不能尽朕意，状元虽以词赋甲天下，至于辞命，未必皆能。
现代文：吕忠翰起草《降海陵庶人诏》，几次修改加工，却始终不能完全符合朕的意思。状元尽管以诗词文赋冠盖天下，但至于作为使节相互往来，未必都会应对言辞。
English: Lv Zhonghan drafted the "Declaration of the Empress Dowager of Hai Ling" and revised and reworked it several times, but it still could not fully meet my intention. Although the emperor crowned the world with poetry and prose, as far as mutual exchanges as envoys are concerned, they may not all deal with words.

古文：凡进士可令补外，考其能文者召用之。 
现代文：凡是进士，可以先让他们补充京城外官位的空缺，等考察出其中有善于写文章的人再召来任用。 
English: For all new recruits, they can first be asked to fill vacancies for posts outside the capital, and then those who are good at writing articles will be recalled for appointment.

古文：不数月，兼左谏议大夫，俄兼太常卿。
现代文：不出数月，杨伯仁受命兼任左谏议大夫，没多久，又兼任太常卿。
English: Within a few months, Yang Boren was appointed to concurrently serve as the doctor of the Left Division of the Legislative Yuan, and not long after that, he also served as the First Secretary of the Central Military Commission.

古文：大臣举可修起居注者数人，上以伯仁领之。
现代文：大臣们推荐了几位能够修撰起居注的人，皇上让杨伯仁领导他们工作。
English: The ministers recommended several people who could write the commentary, and the emperor asked Yang Boren to lead their work.

古文：从幸上京，伯仁多病，至临潢，地寒因感疾，还中都。
现代文：杨伯仁身体多病，跟随皇上驾临上京，走到临潢的时候，由于当地气候寒冷得了感冒，于是返回中都。
English: Yang Boren was often ill, and he followed the emperor to Beijing. When he went to Linyi, he caught a cold due to the cold local weather, so he returned to the capital.

古文：明年，上还幸中都，遣使劳问，赐以丹剂。
现代文：第二年，皇上回驾中都，派使臣慰问杨伯仁，赏赐他药剂。
English: The following year, when the emperor was on his way back to the capital, he sent an envoy to Yang Boren to commiserate with him and reward him with medicine.

古文：是岁，卒。
现代文：这年，杨伯仁逝世。
English: This year, Yang Boren passed away.

