古文：五王桓彦范，字士则，润州丹阳人。
现代文：桓彦范，字士则，润州丹阳人。
English: Kanehiko Fan, a calligrapher, was born in Danyang, Rongzhou.

古文：以门廕调右翊卫，迁司卫主簿。
现代文：年轻时因门荫调补右翊卫，升司卫主簿。
English: When he was young, because of the shadow of the door, he supplemented the right guard, and became the main guard.

古文：狄仁杰曰： 君之才，当自光大，毋恤于初。 
现代文：狄仁杰曾说 ：以君的才能，一定能担重任，不限于当初的门荫。 
English: Di Renjie once said: With your talent, you will surely be able to shoulder heavy responsibilities, not limited to the initial shadow.

古文：厚为礼。
现代文：对他礼待甚厚。
English: He was treated with great courtesy.

古文：寻擢监察御史，迁累中丞。
现代文：不久，升任监察御史，至长安三年，升至御史中丞。
English: Soon, he was promoted to inspector of imperial history, and three years later, he was promoted to imperial history junior secretary.

古文：长安中，为司刑少卿。
现代文：长安四年，转为司刑少卿。
English: In the fourth year of Chang'an, he was transferred to the position of chief magistrate.

古文：张昌宗引妖人迎占，言计不轨。
现代文：那时，司仆卿张昌宗引妖人占卜，言语中图谋不轨。
English: At that time, Zhang Changzong, the servant of the chief priest, led the demon people to divination, and they plotted evil in their words.

古文：宋璟请穷治其奸，武后以昌宗尝自归，不许。
现代文：御史中丞宋瞡要求深究其罪，武后因张昌宗曾自首，不许深究。
English: The Imperial Historian, Song Xi, demanded a thorough investigation of his crime, but Wu Guo was not allowed to investigate further because Zhang Changzong had surrendered.

古文：彦范谏曰： 昌宗谬横恩，苞祸心，亻意测天命，皇神降怒，自擿其咎。
现代文：桓彦范上疏谏 ：张昌宗无功而蒙圣宠，心藏叛乱意图，竟然妄测天命，以致皇神降怒，自招罪咎。
English: Kuan Yan Fan Shang Shou Qi: Zhang Changzong was favored without merit, harbored a rebellious intention, and even miscalculated the fate of heaven, so that the imperial god was angry and self-incriminated.

古文：推原厥情，盖防事暴之日得引首以免，未败则候时为逆。
现代文：他之所以自首上报，那是为了一旦事情暴露，可以因自首而免罪；未曾败露，那就等待时机叛逆。
English: The reason why he turned himself in was so that he could be exonerated by turning himself in once the matter was revealed; if it was not revealed, then he would wait for the right time to rebel.

古文：此凶诡之臣，营惑圣心。
现代文：这样凶险奸诈之臣，专谋蛊惑圣心。
English: Such a dangerous and treacherous vassal, plotting to seduce the Sacred Heart.

古文：既自归露，而尚与妖人祈福禳解，则果于必成，初无悔意。
现代文：他既自首，而仍要妖人祈福免灾。此正足以证明他本就无悔改之意。
English: Even after he turned himself in, he still wanted to pray for good fortune and to be spared from disaster, which is enough to prove that he had no intention of repenting.

古文：今而宥之，诚恐昌宗自谓应运，天下浩然从之。
现代文：这次如果原谅了他，张昌宗定会自诩应了天运，天下之人也会以为天命所归而跟从。
English: If he forgives him this time, Zhang Changzong will certainly believe that he has responded to the fate of heaven, and people around the world will also believe that they are destined to follow him.

古文：父在，子称尊为逆子；君在，臣图位为逆臣。
现代文：父亲活着时就自称尊的，是为逆子；君主健在时，谋夺君位的，是为逆臣。
English: He who claims to respect his father when he is alive is a traitor; when the monarch is alive, he is a traitor who is plotting to seize the throne.

古文：逆而不诛，社稷惧亡。
现代文：有逆臣而不诛杀，社稷必亡。
English: If a rebellious vassal does not fight and kill, the whole society will perish.

古文：请付三司考治。 
现代文：恳请将张昌宗交付三司审讯。 
English: I earnestly request that Zhang Changzong be handed over to the Third Division for trial.

古文：不纳。
现代文：武后不听。
English: Chuseok did not accept his request.

古文：时内史李峤等屡奏： 往为酷吏破家者，请皆宥雪。 
现代文：那时内史李峤等人也多次奏称： 过去遭酷吏诬陷而破家的，请为他们昭雪。 
English: At that time, the internal historian Li Wei and others also repeatedly said: In the past, they were framed by cruel officials and broke the family, please shed light on them.

古文：依违未从。
现代文：武后犹疑未采纳。
English: Wu Hou hesitated and did not accept.

古文：彦范复上言： 自文明后得罪，惟扬、豫、博三州不免，它可悉赦。 
现代文：桓彦范再次上疏： 自文明年后获罪之人，除扬州、豫州、博州三州的不可赦外，其他的人均该赦免。 
English: Kuan Yan Fan once again came up with the following: People who have been convicted since the end of civilization should be pardoned except for those in the three states of Yangzhou, Yuzhou and Boshou.

古文：疏十上，卒见听。
现代文：表疏前后共十次，终于被采纳。
English: The list was revised a total of ten times before and after it was finally adopted.

古文：尝曰： 大理，人命所县，不可便辞诡合以自免。 
现代文：桓彦范曾说： 大理，是人命所悬之处，一定不可以顺应某些人的旨意而编造假判词以求自己的苟安。 
English: Kanehiko Fan once said, "Dairi is the place where people's lives hang in the balance. You must not conform to the will of certain people and make up false judgments in order to seek your own peace of mind."

古文：张柬之将诛易之等，引与定策。
现代文：凤阁侍郎张柬之准备诛杀张易之等人，找桓彦范一同制定策略。
English: Fengge's chamberlain Zhang Kamm prepared to kill Zhang Yizhi and others, and asked Kuan Yan Fan to work out a strategy together.

古文：于是，以彦范、敬晖为左、右羽林将军，属以禁兵。
现代文：那时，以桓彦范、敬晖为左右羽林将军，将禁兵交付给他们。
English: At that time, with Kuan Yan Fan and Jing Yi as the left and right Ulin generals, the forbidden soldiers were handed over to them.

古文：时中宗每北门起居，因得谒陈秘计。
现代文：那时，皇太子住在北门宫中，桓彦范、敬晖谒见太子，秘密陈述诛张计划。
English: At that time, the crown prince was living in the North Gate Palace. Kanehiko Fan and Keisuke met with the crown prince and made a secret statement about their plan to overthrow him.

古文：神龙元年正月，彦范、晖率羽林兵与将军李湛、李多祚、杨元琰、薛思行等千骑五百人讨贼。令湛、多祚就东宫迎中宗至玄武门，彦范等斩关入，士皆鼓噪，时武后处迎仙宫之集仙殿，斩易之等庑下。
现代文：神龙元年正月，桓彦范、敬晖率羽林军与将军李湛、李多祚、杨元琰、薛思行等千骑共五百人讨伐张易之兄弟，令李湛、李多祚去东宫迎皇太子，兵到玄武门，桓彦范等人护拥太子斩杀卫兵，夺关而入。士兵们都大声喧闹起来。那时，武后正居住在迎仙宫的集仙殿，就在殿外廊庑下将张易之兄弟处死。
English: In the first month of the first year of the divine dragon, five hundred horsemen led by Huan Yan Fan, Jing Yi and the Ulin army, and the generals Li Zhan, Li Dorong, Yang Yuan Rong, Xue Si Xing and other thousand horsemen fought against Zhang Yi's brothers, and ordered Li Zhan and Li Dorong to go to the East Palace to welcome the crown prince. The soldiers went to the Xuanwu Gate, and Huan Yan Fan and others supported the prince to kill the guards and enter the pass. The soldiers all made a loud noise. At that time, Empress Wu was living in the Hall of Immortals in the Hall of Immort

古文：后闻变而起，见中宗曰： 乃汝耶？竖子诛，可还宫。 
现代文：武后始见变乱，惊而起身，看见皇太子，说： 原来是你干的，那两个小子既已被杀，你可回东宫了。 
English: Seeing the commotion, Empress Wu suddenly stood up, saw the crown prince, and said, "It was you who did it. Now that the two boys have been killed, you can return to the East Palace."

古文：彦范进曰： 太子今不可以归！
现代文：桓彦范上前说： 太子今天不可以回东宫。
English: Kanehiko Fan stepped forward and said, "The prince is not allowed to return to the East Palace today."

古文：往天皇弃群臣，以爱子托陛下。
现代文：以前天皇去世时将爱子托付给陛下。
English: In the past, when the Emperor died, he entrusted his beloved son to His Majesty.

古文：今久居东宫，群臣思天皇之德，不血刃，清内难，此天意人事归李氏。
现代文：却一直让他住在东宫。群臣时刻思念天皇之恩德，肃清内难。这是天意人心都归向李家。
English: However, he has been allowed to live in the East Palace. The courtiers are constantly thinking about the emperor's kindness and clearing their inner turmoil. This is God's will that all hearts return to the Li family.

古文：臣等谨奉天意，惟陛下传位，万世不绝，天下之幸。 
现代文：臣等谨奉天意，希望陛下传位给太子，使李家天下万代不绝，这就是天下之大幸了。 
English: In accordance with the will of heaven, the ministers sincerely hope that His Majesty will pass the throne to the Crown Prince, so that the Li family will continue for generations to come. This is a great blessing for the world.

古文：后乃卧，不复言。
现代文：武后又躺下了，不再说话。
English: Wu Hou lay down again and stopped talking.

古文：明日，中宗复位，以彦范为侍中，封谯郡公，赐实封五百户。
现代文：第二天，则天皇帝正式让位，中宗复位。任桓彦范为侍中，封爵谯郡公，赐实封五百户。
English: The next day, Emperor Zetian officially abdicated, and Chuzo was restored to the throne. He appointed Kanehiko Fan as a chamberlain, made him a duke of Shishun, and granted him 500 households.

古文：上书戒帝曰：《诗》以《关雎》为始，言后妃者人伦之本，治乱之端也。
现代文：桓彦范又上疏告诫皇帝： 《诗》以《关睢》篇为首，说的是后妃是人伦的根本，国家治乱的开端。
English: Kuan Yan Fan went on to admonish the emperor: "Poetry" is headed by "Passage," saying that the empress dowager is the foundation of human relations and the beginning of national chaos.

古文：故舜之兴以皇、英，而周之兴以任、姒。
现代文：所以有了娥皇、女英，舜之道兴旺；有了太任、太姒，周之宗发达。
English: Therefore, with Empress E and Empress Ye, the Zhou Dynasty flourished; with Taimen and Taibei, the Zhou Dynasty developed.

古文：桀奔南巢，祸阶末嬉；鲁桓灭国，惑始齐姜。
现代文：商纣最后逃奔南巢，祸患起于妹喜，鲁桓公的国被灭，根子在于齐姜。
English: The merchants finally fled to the southern nest, the calamity originated in Meixi, Lu Huan's kingdom was destroyed, and the root was Qi Jiang.

古文：伏见陛下临朝视政，皇后必施帷殿上，预闻政事。
现代文：此刻臣见陛下每次临朝听政，皇后定要坐在殿上帷幔后面，干预政事。
English: At this moment, every time a subject sees His Majesty on the throne listening to politics, the Empress must sit behind the curtain of the palace and intervene in politics.

古文：臣愚谓古王者谋及妇人，皆破国亡身，倾辀继路。且以阴乘阳，违天也；以妇凌夫，违人也。
现代文：臣等愚昧，只见史书记载各位君主，有与妇人商量政事的，没一个不是国破身亡的。况且以阴乘阳，是违背天理；以妇驭夫，是违背人理。
English: With regard to the folly of ministers, history records that of all the monarchs who discussed political affairs with their wives, not a single one did not ruin the country. Moreover, to use yin and yang is contrary to the laws of heaven; to use a woman to control a man is contrary to human reason.

古文：违天不祥，违人不义。
现代文：违背天理将不祥，违背人理为不义。
English: Violation of the laws of nature is ominous, violation of the laws of man is unjust.

古文：故《书》曰： 牝鸡之晨，惟家之索。 
现代文：所以《书》上说： 母鸡叫晨，家庭就会离乱。 
English: That's why the Book says, "When the hen crows, the family falls apart."

古文：《易》曰： 无攸遂，在中馈。 
现代文：《易》上说： 妇女在家中，是主持饮食的。 
English: "Women are in charge of eating and drinking in the home," Yi said.

古文：言妇人不得预外政也。
现代文：意思是妇女不得干预外政。
English: It means that women are not allowed to interfere in foreign affairs.

古文：伏愿上以社稷为重，令皇后无居正殿，干外朝，深居宫掖，修阴教以辅佐天子。
现代文：恳请皇上以社稷为重，令皇后不要到正殿参与外朝，专居内宫，修正女教以辅佐天子。
English: He implored the emperor to place social status above all else, so that the empress would not come to the main hall to participate in the outer court, but would live exclusively in the inner palace, correcting the female teachers to assist the emperor.

古文：又道路籍籍，皆云胡僧慧范托浮屠法，诡惑后妃，出入禁奥，渎挠朝政。
现代文： 臣还听说京师市内议论纷纷，都说胡僧慧范矫托佛法迷惑欺骗后妃，得以出入宫禁，扰乱时政。
English: The minister also heard that there was a lot of discussion in the city of Beijing, all of which said that Hu Xiang Hui Fan used Buddhism to deceive the empress, so that he could enter and leave the palace and disrupt the current government.

古文：陛下尝轻骑微服，数幸其居，上下污慢，君臣亏替。
现代文：陛下曾微服简从，多次到慧范家去。上下狎玩，有亏尊严。
English: His majesty had been a little submissive, and had gone to Hui Fan's house many times. It was undignified for him to play up and down.

古文：臣谓兴化致治以康乂国家者，繇进善而弃恶。
现代文：臣听说兴化达到国治，是由于听信善言；使国家强盛人民安康，是由于坚决除恶。
English: The vassal heard that the prosperity of the country was achieved by listening to good words; the prosperity of the country and the well-being of the people were due to the resolute elimination of evil.

古文：孔子曰： 执左道以乱政者杀，假鬼神以危人者杀。 
现代文：孔子曾说： 用旁门邪道来乱政的人，该杀；借鬼神妖魔来危害百姓的人，该杀。 
English: Confucius once said: Those who use devious methods to disrupt the government should be killed; those who use ghosts, gods and demons to harm the people should be killed.

古文：今慧范乱政危人者也，不急诛，且有变。
现代文：今日的慧范，就是乱政害民的人。若不迅速诛杀，必生变乱。
English: Today's Hui Fan is a person who harms the people with chaotic politics. If he does not fight and kill quickly, chaos will surely occur.

古文：除恶务本，愿早裁之。
现代文：除恶必须铲根，恳请皇上早日裁决。 
English: We must root out the evil and implore the emperor to make a ruling as soon as possible.

古文：帝孱昏，狃左右，不能有所省纳。
现代文：皇帝孱弱昏愦，习于左右的谄媚，不能有所醒悟，采纳善言。
English: The emperor is weak and drowsy, accustomed to the flattery of the right and left, unable to wake up and adopt good words.

古文：俄墨敕以方士郑普思为秘书监，叶静能为国子祭酒。
现代文：不久，有墨敕下来，任方士郑普思为秘书监、任叶静能为国子祭酒。
English: Soon, there was ink trickling down, and Zheng Pu Si, a member of the party committee, was appointed as the secretary supervisor, and Ren Ye Jingyan was appointed as the national son's sacrificial wine.

古文：彦范执不可，帝曰： 要已用之，不可止。 
现代文：桓彦范苦谏不可以。皇帝说： 已经任命了，不可更改。 
English: The Emperor said, "He has been appointed and cannot be changed.

古文：彦范曰： 陛下始复位，制诏： 军国皆用贞观故事。 
现代文：桓彦范说 ：陛下初复位时就下诏说 ：军国之事全用贞观时的政策。 
English: Kanehiko Fan said, "When His Majesty was restored to the throne for the first time, he issued the following edict: In matters of the military, the policy of chastity is to be used at all times.

古文：贞观时，以魏徵、虞世南、颜师古为监，以孔颖达为祭酒，如普思等方伎猥下，安足继踪前烈。
现代文：贞观时，用魏征、虞世南、颜师古等人为秘书监，用孔颖达为国子祭酒，现郑普思等人是方伎庸人之流，靠他们怎能追继前烈的踪迹？
English: At the time of Zhenguan, Wei Zheng, Yu Shennan, Yan Shigu and others were used as secretaries, and Kong Yingda was used as the national son's sacrificial wine. Now, Zheng Pu Si and others are a group of mediocrities. How can they follow the footsteps of the former martyrs?

古文：臣恐物议谓陛下官不择才，以天秩加私爱。 
现代文：臣担心世人会议论陛下用人不择才，随意将上天所赐而给予私心所爱。 
English: The vassal was worried that the world would say that His Majesty did not choose talent, but freely gave what was given by heaven to those he loved.

古文：不从。
现代文：皇帝依然不采纳。
English: Le Zhu Rong did not listen.

古文：时武三思以迁太后衔恚，虑不利诸武，而韦后雅为帝宠畏，且三思与蒸乱，由是朋谗奇中。未几，罢彦范等政事。
现代文：那时，武三思因武后被迁往上阳宫的事怀恨在心，又担心武家人会有不利。韦后此时受皇帝宠幸至极。武三思与她有了奸情，借此勾结一起在皇帝面前说桓彦范等人的坏话，皇帝不由得听信了。
English: At that time, Wu Sansi held a grudge against Wu Po for being moved to Shangyang Palace, and was worried that the Wu family would be disadvantaged. Wei Po was extremely favored by the emperor at this time. Wu Sansi had an affair with her, and through this, they colluded together to speak ill of Huan Yan Fan and others in front of the emperor. The emperor could not help but listen.

古文：五月，加特进，封扶阳郡王，赐姓韦，同后属籍，锡金银、锦绣，皆以铁券恕十死，令朝朔望。
现代文：不久，罢免了桓彦范等人的政职。五月，加桓彦范为特进，封爵扶阳郡王，赐姓韦，与韦后同属籍，赐给金银、锦绣，并赐铁券可有免死权，还让他只需初一、十五入朝。
English: In May, he promoted Kuan Yan Fan to be a special envoy, knighted him as the King of Fuyang County, gave him the surname Wei, the same nationality as Queen Wei, gave him gold, silver, and brocade, and gave him an iron certificate to have the right to be exempt from death, and also allowed him to enter the imperial court only on the first day of the first month and the fifteenth day of the first month.

古文：寻出为洺州刺史，改濠州。
现代文：表面尊崇，实质剥权。不久，出任州刺史，又改为濠州刺史。
English: On the surface, he was respected, but in reality he was stripped of his power. Soon, he was appointed as the prefect of the prefecture and changed to the prefect of the prefecture.

古文：王同皎谋诛三思，事泄，三思诬彦范等同逆，阴令许州司功参军郑愔上变。
现代文：驸马都尉王同皎打算诛杀武三思，不幸事情泄露，武三思诬称桓彦范等是同谋，暗中叫许州司功参军郑忄音去告密。
English: Captain Wang Tongya planned to assassinate Wu Sansi, but the unfortunate event was leaked. Wu Sansi falsely accused Huan Yan Fan and others of being accomplices, and secretly ordered Xu Zhou Shigong to inform on Zheng Yuyin.

古文：乃贬彦范泷州司马，敬晖崖州司马，袁恕己窦州司马，崔玄白州司马，张柬之新州司马，悉夺勋封。
现代文：于是，桓彦范被贬为泷州司马，敬晖被贬为崖州司马，袁恕己被贬为窦州司马，崔玄日韦被贬为白州司马，张柬之被贬为新州司马。所有的勋封全部剥夺。
English: As a result, Kuan Yan Fan was demoted to the Sima of Zhangzhou, Jing Xi was demoted to the Sima of Yanzhou, Yuan Shuji was demoted to the Sima of Douzhou, Cui Xuanrivi was demoted to the Sima of Baizhou, and Zhang Khamzhi was demoted to the Sima of Xinzhou. They were all stripped of their decorations.

古文：三思又疏韦后隐秽，榜于道，请废之。
现代文：武三思又上疏揭发韦后的丑事，请皇帝废黜韦后，且令人把韦后丑事在道旁公布。
English: Wu Sanxi also went up to the ditch to expose the ugly things of Wei Hou, asked the emperor to depose Wei Hou, and had the ugly things of Wei Hou announced on the roadside.

古文：帝震怒，三思猥曰： 此殆彦范辈为。 
现代文：皇帝极为震怒。武三思诬陷说 ：这可能是桓彦范等人干的。 
English: The emperor was furious. Takezanshi framed him and said, "This may have been done by Kanehiko Fan and others."

古文：命御史大夫李承嘉鞫状，物色其人。
现代文：皇帝命御史大夫李承嘉审讯，寻找张榜的人。
English: The emperor ordered the interrogation of Dr. Li Chengjia, who was looking for Zhang Pang.

古文：承嘉即奏： 彦范、晖、柬之、恕己、玄暴讪摇变，内托废后，而实危君。
现代文：李承嘉按武三思的意思奏称 ：桓彦范、敬晖、张柬之、袁恕己、崔玄日韦故意暴露丑闻，煽动叛乱情绪。
English: Li Chengjia made a speech in accordance with the intention of Wu Sanxi: Huan Yanfan, Jing Jun, Zhang Xizhi, Yuan Shouji, and Cui Xuanrivi deliberately exposed the scandal and incited rebellious sentiments.

古文：人臣无将，当伏诛。 
现代文：托言废黜皇后，实际上有动摇皇上的意思。人臣而有反心，该判死。 
English: The pretext of dethroning the empress, in fact, has the intention of shaking the emperor. If a vassal has a grudge, he should be sentenced to death.

古文：诏有司议罪。
现代文：诏令有司评议该判何罪。
English: According to the imperial edict, there is a division to discuss what crime should be sentenced.

古文：大理丞李朝隐执奏： 彦范等未讯即诛，恐为雠家诬衊，请遣御史按实。 
现代文：大理丞李朝隐上奏 ：桓彦范等人未经审讯就判死刑，恐怕会被仇家得到口实，请派御史审讯后再判。 
English: Grand Councilor Ri Choin: If Kanehiko Fan and the others are sentenced to death without a trial, I'm afraid they will be justified by their enemies. Please send your historian to try them before passing judgment.

古文：卿裴谈请即诛斩，家籍没。
现代文：大理卿裴谈要求即刻诛杀，家属及财产没收。
English: Daliqing Pei Dan demanded immediate execution and confiscation of his family members and property.

古文：帝业尝许以不死，遂流瀼州，禁锢终身，子弟年十六以上谪徙岭外。
现代文：皇帝曾赐铁券，许他没有死罪，于是流放氵襄州，禁锢终身，其子弟十六岁以上的也流放岭外。
English: The emperor had given him an iron certificate, allowing him not to be sentenced to death, so he was exiled to Zhangzhou, imprisoned for life, and his sons over the age of sixteen were also exiled outside the ridge.

古文：擢承嘉金紫光禄大夫、襄武郡公，后又赐彩五百段、锦被一。
现代文：升李承嘉为金紫光禄大夫、封爵襄武郡公，韦后又赐他彩五百段，锦被一。
English: Li Chengjia was promoted to Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor and knighted as the Prince of Xiangwu County. The Empress Dowager Wei also gave him a five-hundred-dan decoration and a brocade quilt.

古文：进谈刑部尚书，而贬朝隐。
现代文：升裴谈为刑部尚书，李朝隐则遭贬。
English: Sheng Pei was appointed as the head of the criminal investigation department, while Li Chaoying was demoted.

古文：三思又讽节愍太子请夷彦范等三族，帝不从。
现代文：武三思又暗示节愍太子去向皇帝要求夷灭桓彦范等人的三族，皇帝不同意。
English: Wu Sanxi also hinted that Prince Jiechi went to the emperor to demand the extermination of the three tribes of Huan Yan Fan and others, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：三思虑五人者且复用，乃纳崔湜计，遣周利贞矫制杀之。
现代文：武三思担心这五个人以后会又被起用，于是采用崔的计谋，派崔的姨兄嘉州司马周利贞用伪制书杀他们。
English: Wu Sansi was worried that these five people would be used again in the future, so he used Cui's stratagem to send Cui's cousin, Jiazhou Sima Zhou Lizhen, to kill them with forged books.

古文：利贞至贵州，逢彦范，即缚曳竹槎上，肉尽，杖杀之，年五十四。
现代文：周利贞到贵州，在路上遇见桓彦范，将他绑在竹槎上拖拽，皮绽骨露，最后又用杖打死，死时桓彦范五十四岁。
English: Zhou Lizhen went to Guizhou, met Kanen Fan on the road, tied him to a bamboo pole, dragged him until his skin was bare, and finally beat him to death with a cane. At the time of his death, Kanen Fan was 54 years old.

古文：睿宗即位，彦范等并追复官爵，赐实封二百户，还其子孙，谥曰忠烈。
现代文：睿宗即位，对桓彦范等人追复官爵，赐实封二百户，放还其子孙，赠谥为 忠烈 。
English: Emperor Ruizong ascended to the throne, restored the title of nobility to Huan Yanfan and others, granted 200 households with real fiefs, released their children and grandchildren, and bestowed the title of "Faithful."

古文：开元六年，诏与晖、玄、柬之、恕己勤劳王家，皆配享中宗庙庭。
现代文：开元六年，诏令桓彦范与敬晖、崔玄日韦、张柬之、袁恕己都曾勤劳王家，可以配享中宗庙庭。
English: In the sixth year of the first year of the year, it was decreed that Huan Yanfan, together with Jing Xi, Cui Xuan Rih Wei, Zhang Kam Zhi, and Yuan Shuji, all of whom had worked hard for the royal family, could share the Chinese temple garden.

古文：建中三年，复赠彦范为司徒，晖太尉，玄太子太师，柬之司徒，恕己太子太傅。
现代文：建中三年，再追赠桓彦范为司徒，追赠敬晖为太尉，追赠崔玄日韦为太子太师，追赠张柬之为司徒，追赠袁恕己为太子太傅。
English: In the third year of Jianzhong Middle School, he posthumously awarded Kuan Yan Fan as an apprentice, posthumously awarded Jing Xi as a lieutenant, posthumously awarded Cui Xuan Rong Wei as a prince's apprentice, posthumously awarded Zhang Kam as an apprentice, and posthumously awarded Yuan Shuji as a prince's apprentice.

古文：彦范工属文，然不甚喜观书，所志惟忠孝大略。
现代文：桓彦范擅长撰文，但不很喜欢看书，所专心致志的只有忠孝大略。
English: Kanehiko Fan is good at writing, but he doesn't like reading very much. He only cares about loyalty and filial piety.

古文：居若不能言，及议论帝前，虽被诘让，而安辞定色，辨色愈切。
现代文：居家时，好像不大会说话，但到皇帝面前议论事情，即使诘问谴责，也依然镇定自若，据理力争。
English: When he was at home, he didn't seem to talk much, but when he came before the emperor to discuss things, even if he was interrogated and condemned, he remained calm and reasoned.

古文：诛二张也，柬之勒兵景运门，将遂夷诸武。
现代文：在诛杀张易之二人时，张柬之率兵到景运门，准备同时铲除武家人。
English: While fighting and killing Zhang Yi's two men, Zhang Khamzhi led his soldiers to Jingyun Gate, preparing to eradicate the Wu family at the same time.

古文：洛州长史薛季昶劝曰： 二凶虽诛，产、禄犹在，请除之。 
现代文：洛州长史薛季昶劝道： 两个坏蛋虽已诛杀，但 吕产 、 吕禄 还在，请一并除掉。 
English: Luo Governor Shi Xuejian advised: Although the two villains have been killed, but Lushan and Lulu are still there, please get rid of them together.

古文：会日暮事遽，彦范不欲广杀，因曰： 三思机上肉尔，留为天子藉手。 
现代文：那时天已晚了，桓彦范不想多杀人，就说： 武三思现在只是砧板上的肉罢了，留下给天子使唤使唤罢。 
English: At that time, it was already late in the day, and Kuan Yan Fan did not want to kill more people, so he said, "Wu San Si is just meat on the chopping block now, leave it to the Son of Heaven."

古文：委昶叹曰： 吾无死所矣！ 
现代文：薛季昶叹气说 ：我将死无葬身之地了。 
English: Xue Jizhe sighed and said, "I will die without a place to bury myself."

古文：俄而三思窃入宫，因韦后反盗朝权。
现代文：不久，武三思偷偷入宫，借韦后的手又盗得朝政大权。
English: Soon after, Wu Sansi sneaked into the palace and, with the help of Wei Hou, stole the supreme power of the imperial government.

古文：同功者叹曰： 死我者，桓君也。 
现代文：当时一同行事的人也叹息 ：送我命的人是桓君啊！ 
English: The people who were walking with me at the time also sighed: the one who sent me to my death was Huanjun!

古文：彦范亦曰： 主上昔为英王，故吾留武氏使自诛定。
现代文：桓彦范也说 ：皇上过去是英明的君王，所以我留下姓武的，希望皇上自己诛杀他们。
English: Kanehiko Fan also said, "The Emperor was a wise ruler in the past, so I kept the surname Wu, hoping that the Emperor would kill them himself."

古文：今大事已去，得非天乎！ 
现代文：如今大势已去，岂不是天意吗？ 
English: Now that the tide has turned, is it not the will of heaven?

古文：初，将起事，告其母。母曰： 忠孝不并立，义先国家可也。 
现代文：当初，准备起事时，曾告诉他的母亲，他的母亲说： 忠孝不能两全，为义应该先为国家。 
English: At the beginning, when he was preparing for the uprising, he told his mother that his mother said: Loyalty and filial piety cannot be two different things. For the sake of justice, the country should come first.

古文：御史李福业者，尝与彦范谋，及被杀，福业亦流番禺。
现代文：御史李福业，曾经参与桓彦范的谋划，桓彦范被杀后，李福业也被流放番禺。
English: Li Fuye, the chief historian, was once involved in the planning of Kuan Yan Fan. After Kuan Yan Fan was killed, Li Fuye was also exiled to Panyu.

古文：后亡匿吉州参军敬元礼家，吏捕得，元礼俱坐死。
现代文：后来逃到吉州参军敬元礼处躲藏，狱吏将他逮捕，敬元礼也被牵连杀死。
English: Later, he fled to the Jizhou Military Recruiting Office to hide, the prison officers arrested him, and Jiyuanli was also implicated and killed.

古文：福业将刑，谢元礼曰： 子有亲，吾甚愧恨。 
现代文：李福业受刑前，向敬元礼道歉： 您还有上人在，我真是对你有愧。 
English: Before he was sentenced, Li Fuye apologized to Jingyuanli: You still have a guru, I really feel sorry for you.

古文：元礼曰： 公穷而归我，我得已乎？ 
现代文：敬元礼说： 您没办法了来投奔我，我能拒绝吗？ 
English: Jingyuanli said: You have no choice but to come to me, can I refuse?

古文：见者伤之。
现代文：见此情况的人都为他们难过。
English: Everyone who saw this felt sorry for them.

古文：时监察御史卢袭秀亦坐与桓、敬善，为冉祖雍所按，不屈。
现代文：那时，监察御史卢袭秀也因与桓彦范、敬元礼是朋友而遭到冉祖雍的审讯，卢袭秀不肯屈招。
English: At that time, the supervising magistrate Lu Weixiu was also interrogated by Ran Zuyong because he was friends with Kuan Yan Fan and Kei Yuanli. Lu Weixiu refused to give in.

古文：或报曰： 南使至，桓、敬已死。 
现代文：有人告诉他 ：有南方使者来，说到桓彦范和敬元礼都已经死了。 
English: Someone told him that an emissary from the south had come and said that both Kanehikoman and Keigenrei were dead.

古文：袭秀泫然。
现代文：卢袭秀潸然泪下。
English: Lu Wei Xiu burst into tears.

古文：祖雍怒曰： 彦范等负国，君乃流涕。
现代文：冉祖雍生气地说 ：桓彦范等人有叛国罪，你竟然为他们流泪。
English: Ran Zuyong said angrily, "Kuan Yan Fan and others are guilty of treason, and you are shedding tears for them.

古文：且君下狱，诸弟皆纵酒无忧色，何邪？ 
现代文：你犯罪下狱，而你的弟弟们都照样喝酒，毫不着急，为什么？ 
English: You go to jail for a crime, and your brothers are still drinking, no worries, why?

古文：对曰： 我何负哉？正坐与彦范善耳。
现代文：卢袭秀说 ：我没有犯罪，只因为是桓彦范的朋友而受牵连罢了。
English: Lu Haishu said: I did not commit a crime, I was only implicated because I was a friend of Kanehiko Fan.

古文：今尽杀诸弟则已，如独杀袭秀，恐公不得高枕而瞑！ 
现代文：这一次如果把我的弟弟们都杀了那就完了。如果只杀我一个，我怕你以后不能高枕而卧了！ 
English: If you kill all my brothers this time, it's over. If you kill only me, I'm afraid you won't be able to sleep with your head held high in the future!

古文：祖雍色动，握其手曰： 当活公。 
现代文：冉祖雍为他所感，握了他的手说： 我一定要让你活着。 
English: Ran Zuyong felt sorry for him, shook his hand and said, "I must let you live."

古文：遂得不坐。
现代文：卢袭秀因而没受牵连。
English: Lu Wei Xiu was not implicated.

古文：袭秀者，其祖方庆，武德中，为察非掾，秦王器之。
现代文：卢袭秀，其祖父卢方庆，武德年间任察非掾，秦王很看重他。
English: Lu Heixiu, his grandfather Lu Fangqing, was appointed to the post of Czar during the reign of Emperor Wu De. The Qin Dynasty highly valued him.

古文：尝引与议建成事，方庆辞曰： 母老矣，丐身归养。 
现代文：曾经与他一同议论建成的事，卢方庆说： 我的母亲老了，请放我回家奉养母亲。 
English: Once, when discussing the construction with him, Lu Fangqing said: My mother is old, please let me go home to take care of her.

古文：王不逼也。
现代文：秦王没有坚持留他。
English: Qin Wang did not insist on keeping him.

古文：御身以约，善与人交，士乐从之游云。敬晖，字仲晔，绛州平阳人。
现代文：贞观年间任高木城县令。桓彦范的弟弟桓玄范，任官到常州刺史；桓臣范，任工部侍郎。敬晖，字仲晔，绛州平阳人。
English: During the Zhenguan era, he served as the governor of Takagijo County. Kuan Yan Fan's younger brother, Kuan Xuan Fan, was appointed to Changzhou to write history; Kuan Zhen Fan served as a chamberlain in the engineering department. He was nicknamed "Zhongyao" and was from Pingyang, Zhangzhou.

古文：弱冠举明经。
现代文：二十岁即考中明经科。
English: At the age of twenty, he passed the middle school entrance examination.

古文：圣历初，为卫州刺史。
现代文：圣历初年，任卫州刺史。
English: In the first year of the sacred calendar, he was appointed as the governor of Weizhou.

古文：是时，河北经突厥所骚，方秋而城，晖曰： 金汤非粟不守，岂有弃农亩，事池隍哉？ 
现代文：那时，河北经受突厥的骚扰，正在修筑城池，而时当秋收。敬晖知道后说： 金城汤池再坚固，没有粮食也不能守住，哪有丢弃农事而筑城池的呢？ 
English: At that time, Hebei was being harassed by the Turks and was in the process of building a castle, just in time for the autumn harvest. Upon learning this, Jing Yi said, "No matter how strong Jincheng Tangchi is, it cannot hold out without grain. Who would abandon farming and build a castle?"

古文：纵民归敛，阖部赖安。
现代文：于是让人民回去秋收。全部都因此安宁。
English: So the people were allowed to return for the autumn harvest. Everything was peaceful as a result.

古文：迁夏官侍郎，出为太州刺史，改洛阳长史。
现代文：后升为夏官侍郎，出任太州刺史，又改任洛州长史。
English: Later, he was promoted to the position of the summer governor's chamberlain, served as the governor of Taizhou, and was also appointed the governor of the city of Luo.

古文：武后幸长安，为副留守，以治干闻，玺书劳之，多赐物段。
现代文：武后到达长安时，敬晖任副留守，以治理有方闻名，武后下玺书慰劳，赏赐甚厚。
English: When Empress Wu arrived in Chang'an, her vice-regent, Qian Ye, stayed behind. He was known for his good governance. Empress Wu sent him a letter of consolation, and he received a very generous reward.

古文：长安二年，授中台右丞。
现代文：长安二年，委任他为中台右丞。
English: In the second year of the Chang'an era, he was appointed to the post of Zhongtai Rojo.

古文：以诛二张功，加金紫光禄大夫，为侍中、平阳郡公，实封五百户，进封齐国。
现代文：因诛杀张昌宗兄弟有功，加官金紫光禄大夫，任侍中、封爵平阳郡公，实封五百户，又晋封齐国公。
English: Due to his meritorious service in killing Zhang Changzong's brother, he was promoted to Jin Ziguanglu Doctor, appointed as an attendant, knighted as the governor of Pingyang County, awarded 500 households, and promoted to the governor of Qi Province.

古文：晖表请诸武王者宜悉降爵，繇是皆为公。
现代文：敬晖上表要求武氏家族中曾封了王的都应该降爵，由此，他们都由王降为公。
English: The table above requested that all members of the Takeshi family who had been made kings should be knighted, and as a result, they were all reduced from kings to princes.

古文：三思愤。
现代文：武三思心中愤恨。
English: Wu Sanxi felt resentment in his heart.

古文：俄封平阳郡王，加特进罢政事。
现代文：不久，封敬晖为平阳郡王，加为特进，但罢了他的政职。
English: Soon after, he was named the king of Pingyang County and was promoted to special envoy, but he did not take up his political post.

古文：时淫潦，狱决而霁，都民相语，歌舞于道。
现代文：当初，张易之等人已除，薛季昶建议铲除所有武家人，敬晖也曾苦劝，但未被皇帝采纳。后来武三思淫乱宫中，敬晖常常悔恨不已，甚至击拳出血。
English: At first, Zhang Yizhi and others had already been eliminated, Xue Jizhao suggested eradicating all military families, and Jing Xi also had a hard time persuading, but was not adopted by the emperor. Later, in the palace of Wu San Si's adultery, Jing Xi often regretted, and even boxed bleeding.

古文：徙陕虢观察使。
现代文：不久，遭贬，又流放琼州，被周利贞杀害。
English: Soon after, he was demoted and exiled to Qiongzhou, where he was killed by Zhou Lizhen.

古文：军乱，贬怀州司马，卒。
现代文：睿宗时，追复官爵，又追赠为秦州都督，赐谥为 肃愍 。
English: When Ruizong was restored to nobility, he was posthumously made the governor of Qin Province and given the title of Zhu Xi.

古文：张柬之，字孟将，襄州襄阳人。
现代文：张柬之字孟将，襄州襄阳人。
English: Zhang Kham's character Meng Zheng, a native of Xiangyang, Xiangzhou.

古文：少涉经史，补太学生。
现代文：年轻时涉猎经书史籍，补缺为太学生。
English: When he was young, he dabbled in scriptures and historical books, filling in the gaps as a student.

古文：祭酒令狐德棻异其才，便以王佐期之。
现代文：祭酒令狐德认为他有奇才，便以帝王的辅臣期待他。
English: Sacrificing wine made the fox deem him to be a prodigy, and he was expected to be the emperor's assistant.

古文：中进士第，始调清源丞。
现代文：中进士后，起初调任清源县丞。
English: After graduating from middle school, he was initially transferred to Qingyuan County.

古文：永昌元年，以贤良召，时年七十余矣。
现代文：永昌元年，朝廷以贤良科目召试，这时他七十多岁了。
English: In the first year of the Yongchang era, the imperial court summoned him for an examination in a virtuous subject. At that time, he was more than 70 years old.

古文：对策者千余，柬之为第一。
现代文：对答策问的一千余人，张柬之名列第一。
English: Of the more than 1,000 people who answered the question, Zhang Xia ranked first.

古文：授监察御史，迁凤阁舍人。
现代文：授官监察御史，后升任凤阁舍人。
English: He was awarded the post of inspector of imperial history, and later promoted to the post of Fengge villager.

古文：时突厥默啜有女请和亲，武后欲令武延秀娶之。
现代文：这时突厥首领默啜请以女儿和亲，武则天皇后想让武延秀娶她。
English: At this time, the Turkic leader silently asked for a daughter and a relative, and the Empress Wu Zetian wanted Wu Yanxiu to marry her.

古文：柬之奏： 古无天子取夷狄女者。 
现代文：张柬之进言说： 自古从无天子娶异民族女子的事。 
English: Zhang Kamm said: Since ancient times, there has never been a case of a divine son marrying a woman of a different ethnicity.

古文：忤旨，出为合、蜀二州刺史。
现代文：触犯了武后旨意，被调出朝廷任合、蜀二州刺史。
English: He violated the empress dowager's will, was transferred out of the imperial court, and was banished to Shu Erzhou.

古文：故事，岁以兵五百戍姚州，地险瘴，到屯辄死。
现代文：旧例，每年派兵五百驻守姚州，此地险恶有瘴气，到此即死。
English: In the past, five hundred soldiers were stationed in Yaozhou every year. Here, the evil spirits would come and immediately die.

古文：柬之论其弊曰：臣按姚州，古哀牢国，域土荒外，山阻水深。
现代文：张柬之力陈其弊端说： 臣考证姚州，为古哀牢国，地处八荒域外，山险水恶。
English: Zhang Khamzili said: Yaozhou is an ancient prison state. It is located outside the eight wilderness areas, and the mountains are dangerous.

古文：汉世未与中国通，唐蒙开夜郎、滇笮，而哀牢不附。
现代文：西汉时尚未与中国交往，汉武帝时唐蒙打通去夜郎、滇、笮的道路，哀牢却不归附。
English: At the time of the Western Han Dynasty, there was no contact with China. During the reign of Emperor Wu of Han, Tang Meng opened the way to Yelang, Shao, and Qian, but he did not adhere to them.

古文：东汉光武末，始请内属，置永昌郡统之。
现代文：东汉光武末年，它才请求纳为属国，设永昌郡统辖它。
English: It was only in the last years of the Eastern Han Dynasty that Guangwu requested that it be made a vassal state, and Yongchang County was established to govern it.

古文：赋其盐布氈罽以利中土。
现代文：征收它的盐、布、毡毯、毛织品以有利于中国。
English: Its salt, cloth, rugs, and woolen goods were requisitioned for the benefit of China.

古文：其国西大秦，南交趾，奇珍之贡不阙。
现代文：它西邻大秦，南接交趾，珍奇的贡物充足。
English: It is adjacent to Daqin in the west and adjacent to Jiaozuo in the south. There are plenty of rare tributes.

古文：刘备据蜀，甲兵不充，诸葛亮五月度泸，收其产入以益军，使张伯岐选取劲兵，以增武备。
现代文：刘备占据蜀地，军备不足，诸葛亮五月渡过泸水，征收其物产用以补充军备，派张伯歧去选取强壮士兵，以增强兵力。
English: Liu Bei occupied Shu and was under-equipped, Zhuge Liang crossed the Surabaya River in May, requisitioned their goods to supplement the armament, and sent Zhang Bokui to select strong soldiers to strengthen the army.

古文：故《蜀志》称亮南征后，国以富饶。
现代文：因此《蜀志》称诸葛亮南征以后，蜀国因而富足。
English: Therefore, "Shu Zhi" said that after Zhuge Liang's Southern Expedition, Shu became rich.

古文：此前世置郡，以其利之也。
现代文：前代王朝在此设郡，是因为有利。
English: The previous dynasty set up a county here because it was advantageous.

古文：今盐布之税不供，珍奇之贡不入，戈戟之用不实於戎行，宝货之资不输於大国。
现代文：现今它的盐、布等赋税不上供，珍奇的贡物不入朝，戈戟等兵器不充实我朝军队，当地资财不献给天朝大国。
English: Nowadays, its taxes such as salt and cloth cannot be supplied, rare tributes do not enter the country, weapons such as the Golang do not enrich our country's army, and local resources are not dedicated to the great country of the Heavenly Dynasty.

古文：而空竭府库，驱率平人，受役蛮夷，肝脑涂地。
现代文：朝廷却耗尽官府财物，驱使、率领百姓去受蛮夷役使，以致悲惨丧生。
English: The imperial court, however, exhausted the treasury of the government, and drove and led the people to be subjected to barbaric forced labor, resulting in a tragic loss of life.

古文：臣窃为陛下惜之。
现代文：臣私心为陛下惋惜。
English: I feel sorry for His Majesty because of my selfishness.

古文：昔汉历博南山，涉兰仓水，更置博南、哀牢二县。
现代文： 当年东汉使臣翻越博南山，渡过澜沧水，改设博南、哀牢两县。
English: In that year, the envoys of the Eastern Han Dynasty climbed over Bonan Mountain, crossed the Lancang Water, and changed the two counties of Bonan and Anji.

古文：蜀人愁苦，行者作歌曰： 历博南，越兰津，度兰仓，为他人。 
现代文：蜀地民众为此愁苦，出使者作歌道： 越博南，过兰津，渡兰沧，为别人。 
English: The people of Shu were saddened by this, and sent out messengers to write a song: "Go beyond Bonan, go beyond Lanzin, go beyond Lancang, for others."

古文：盖讥其贪珍奇之利，而为蛮夷所驱役也。
现代文：就是讽刺为贪图珍奇物产之利，而被蛮夷役使的事。
English: It is the irony of being exploited by barbaric barbarians for the profit of coveting rare products.

古文：汉获其利，人且怨歌。
现代文：汉朝得其利益，民众尚且唱出怨歌。
English: The Han Dynasty gained its benefits, but the people still sang songs of complaint.

古文：今减耗国储，费调日引，使陛下赤子身膏野草，骸骨不归，老母幼子哀号望祭於千里之外。
现代文：如今却是损耗国家储备，开支、户税日益减缩，去让陛下的子民以身躯肥野草，尸骨不能归，使其老母幼子只能向千里之外哀号遥祭。
English: Today, however, the country's reserves are being depleted, and expenses and household taxes are shrinking day by day. In order to let His Majesty's people fatten the weeds with their bodies, their bones cannot be returned, and their mothers and children can only wail and cry from thousands of miles away.

古文：朝廷无丝发利，而百姓蒙终身之酷，臣窃为国家痛之。
现代文：朝廷无丝毫利益，而百姓却蒙受终身惨痛，臣私心为国家痛心。
English: The imperial court has no benefit at all, while the people have suffered lifelong pain, and the selfishness of the vassals has caused pain to the country.

古文：往诸葛亮破南中，即用渠率统之，不置汉官，不留戍兵。
现代文： 往时诸葛亮攻下南中，就地任用其首领统辖，不设汉族官员，不留驻守士兵。
English: In the past, when Zhuge Liang conquered Nanzhong, he appointed its leaders to administer it on the spot. There were no Han officials and no soldiers stationed there.

古文：言置官留兵有三不易：置官必夷汉杂居，猜嫌将起；留兵转粮，为患滋重；后忽反叛，劳费必甚。
现代文：他以为设官留兵有三难：设官势必汉人与土著民族杂居，将引起猜忌怨恨；留兵转运粮草，祸患将日益加重；日后突然反叛，劳民费财必然严重。
English: He thought that there were three difficulties in appointing officials to retain soldiers: the appointment of officials would inevitably lead to the intermingling of Han Chinese and indigenous peoples, which would cause suspicion and resentment; the transfer of soldiers to transport grain and grass, which would increasingly aggravate the disaster; and the sudden rebellion in the future, which would inevitably cause serious labor, expense and wealth.

古文：故粗设纲纪，自然久定。
现代文：因此粗立法规纲常，自然长久安定。
English: Therefore, the coarse-grained regulation is normal and naturally stable for a long time.

古文：臣谓亮之策，诚尽羁縻蛮夷之要。
现代文：臣以为诸葛亮的策略，确已尽笼络蛮夷的纲要。
English: The vassal thought that Zhuge Liang's strategy was indeed a complete outline of barbarism.

古文：今姚州官属，即无固边厌寇之心，又无亮且纵且擒之伎。
现代文：现今姚州的官吏，既无强固边防抑制外寇的意识，又无诸葛亮能擒能纵的本领。
English: At present, the officials of Yaozhou have neither the awareness of strong border defense to suppress foreign invaders, nor the ability of Zhuge Liang to suppress them.

古文：唯诡谋狡算，恣情割剥；扇动酋渠，遣成朋常：折支谄笑，取媚蛮夷，拜跪趋伏，无复为耻；提挈子弟，啸引凶愚，聚会蒲博，一掷累万。
现代文：只是苛索诈取，任意掠夺残害；煽动其首领，使之结成宗派；或卑躬巴结，向蛮夷献媚，行礼跪拜恭敬屈服，不再以为羞耻；或带领子弟门生，啸聚凶暴愚昧之徒，聚众赌博，一掷万金。
English: They are only demanding and defrauding, pillaging and destroying at will; instigating their leaders to form sects; or groveling, flattering the barbarians, bowing down and obeying, no longer ashamed; or leading their children and disciples, gathering violent and ignorant people, gathering people to gamble, and throwing away thousands of dollars.

古文：凡逋逃亡命在彼州者，户赢二千，专事剽夺。
现代文：总计逃亡在姚州的罪犯，户数超过二千，专门从事抢劫。
English: The total number of fugitive criminals in Yaozhou, with more than two thousand households, specializes in robbery.

古文：且姚州本龙朔中武陵主簿石子仁奏置，其后长史李孝让、辛文协死於群蛮，诏遣郎将赵武贵讨击，兵无噍类，又以将军李义总继往，而郎将刘惠基战死，其州遂废。
现代文：同时，姚州本是龙朔年间武陵王主簿石子仁奏请设置的，此后长史李孝让、辛文协死在土著人众手里；诏令郎将赵武贵前去讨伐，士兵无一生还；又派将军李义聏继续前往征讨，郎将刘惠基战死，该州始被废止。
English: At the same time, Yaozhou was originally set up by Wuling Wang during the Long Shuo period, after which Changshi Li Xiaojan and Xin Wen Xie died at the hands of the indigenous people; Zhao Wu Gui was sent to fight, and no soldier survived; and General Li Yixuan was sent to continue the campaign, and Liu Huiji was killed in battle, and the state was abolished.

古文：臣窃以亮有三不易，其言卒验。
现代文：臣私下认为诸葛亮的 三难 之说，尽都应验。
English: Privately, the minister believed that Zhuge Liang's three difficulties had all been fulfilled.

古文：垂拱中，蛮郎将王善宝、昆州刺史爨乾福复请置州，言课税自支，不旁取於蜀。
现代文： 垂拱年间，当地民族出身的郎将王善宝、昆州刺史爨乾福再度奏请在此设州，声称赋税自理，不从蜀郡另取。
English: In the year of the Hanging Arch, Wang Zhenbao, the son-in-law of the local ethnic group, and Qianfu, the son-in-law of the state, once again petitioned to set up a state here, claiming that they would pay their own taxes and would not collect additional taxes from Shu County.

古文：及置，州掾李棱为蛮所杀。
现代文：设州后，州掾李眣被蛮人杀害。
English: After the establishment of the prefecture, the prefect of the prefecture, Li Xi, was killed by barbarians.

古文：延载中，司马成琛更置泸南七镇，戍以蜀兵，蜀始扰矣。
现代文：延载年中，司马成琛又设泸南七镇，派蜀兵驻守，蜀郡方才乱了。
English: In the middle of the year of extension, Sima Chengguo also set up seven towns in southern Anhui Province and sent Shu soldiers to garrison. Shu County only became chaotic.

古文：且姚府总管五十七州间，皆巨猾游客。
现代文：同时姚州都督府统辖的五十七个州内，都是极狡诈的流民。
English: At the same time, within the fifty-seven states under the jurisdiction of the Yaozhou Governor's Office, they are all extremely cunning migrants.

古文：国家设官，所以正俗防奸，而无耻之吏，败谬至此。
现代文：国家设置官员，是用以纠正民风防止作乱，然而无耻的官吏，腐败荒谬到如此地步。
English: The state sets up officials to correct the people's habits and prevent disorder, but the corruption of shameless officials has reached such an absurd level.

古文：今劫害未止，恐惊扰之祸日滋。
现代文：至今劫难祸患未止，恐怕惊国扰民的灾祸将日益滋长。
English: So far, the calamities have not stopped, and I am afraid that the calamity of alarming the country and disturbing the people will grow more and more.

古文：宜罢姚州，隶巂府，岁时朝觐同蕃国；废泸南诸镇，而设关泸北，非命使，不许交通；增巂屯兵，择清良吏以统之。
现代文：应撤销姚州，让哀牢隶属州都督府，其首领、使臣逢年按时朝见天子，视同外邦；废除泸南诸镇，而在泸北设关驻防，不是朝廷使臣，不许与其交往；增加州驻军，选派清正贤良官员去统辖。
English: Yaozhou should be revoked, and Ai Du should be subordinated to the prefectural governor's office, and its leaders and envoys should meet with the emperor on time every year, and be regarded as foreign states; the towns in southern Anhui should be abolished, and a checkpoint should be set up in northern Anhui. They are not the envoys of the imperial court, and they are not allowed to interact with them; the garrison of the prefecture should be increased, and the Qing Dynasty officials should be selected and sent to govern the prefecture.

古文：臣愚以为便。
现代文：臣下愚见以为这样有利。 
English: His vassals foolishly thought this was advantageous.

古文：疏奏不纳。
现代文：张柬之的奏议不被采纳。
English: Zhang Kamshi's appeal is not accepted.

古文：俄为荆州大都督府长史。
现代文：不久调他任荆州大都督府长史。
English: He was soon appointed governor of Jingzhou.

古文：长安中，武后谓狄仁杰曰： 安得一奇士用之？ 
现代文：长安年间，武后问狄仁杰 ：从何处能得到一位奇士使用他？ 
English: During the Chang'an era, Wu Hou asked Di Renjie: Where can I get a wizard to use him?

古文：仁杰曰： 陛下求文章资历，今宰相李峤、苏味道足矣。
现代文：狄仁杰说 ：陛下若求文章、资历，现宰相李峤、苏味道足够了。
English: Di Renjie said: If His Majesty is looking for articles and qualifications, the current Prime Minister Li Yong and Su Yi are enough.

古文：岂文士龌龊，不足与成天下务哉？ 
现代文：难道是文士拘泥小节，不足以共成天下大业吗？ 
English: Isn't it enough for scribes to stick to small details to achieve great things for the world?

古文：后曰 然。 
现代文：武后说： 是的。 
English: Takego said, "Yes."

古文：仁杰曰：荆州长史张柬之虽老，宰相材也。
现代文：狄仁杰说： 荆州长史张柬之虽然年老，却是宰相之才。
English: Di Renjie said: Although Governor Jing Shi Zhang Khamzhi is old, he is a talented prime minister.

古文：用之必尽节于国。 
现代文：用他，他必定为国家尽心竭力。 
English: With him, he will surely do his best for the country.

古文：即召为洛州司马。
现代文：武后立即召请张柬之任洛州司马。
English: Wu Hou immediately summoned Zhang Kamm to be appointed as the Lozhou Sima.

古文：它日又求人，仁杰曰： 臣尝荐张柬之，未用也。 
现代文：过了一阵，武后又求才，狄仁杰说： 臣曾举荐张柬之，您没用他。 
English: After a while, Wu Hou again asked for talent, Di Renjie said: The minister had recommended Zhang Kamm, but you didn't use him.

古文：后曰： 迁之矣。 
现代文：武后说 ：提升他了。 
English: Takego said, "He has been promoted."

古文：曰： 臣荐宰相而为司马，非用也。 
现代文：狄说 ：臣举荐宰相却任司马，这不是用才。 
English: Di said, "It is no use for a vassal to recommend a prime minister, but for the prime minister to be appointed by the vassal.

古文：乃授司刑少卿，迁秋官侍郎。
现代文：于是张柬之被授官为司刑少卿，迁升秋官侍郎。
English: As a result, Zhang Khamzhi was awarded the post of Sentencing Junior Secretary, and was promoted to the position of Autumn Official Attendant.

古文：后姚崇为灵武军使，将行，后诏举外司可为相者，崇曰： 张柬之沉厚有谋，能断大事，其人老，惟亟用之。 
现代文：其后姚崇出任灵武军使，即将启程，武后诏另举荐宫外百官中可任宰相的人，姚崇说： 张柬之深沉稳重有谋略，能决断大事，他已年老，要赶快任用。 
English: After that, Yao Chong was appointed as the military envoy of Lingwu, and was about to leave. Wu Hou Zhao recommended another person who could be appointed as the prime minister among the hundreds of officials outside the palace. Yao Chong said: Zhang Kam is deep, stable, and has a strategy. He can decide on important matters. He is old, so he should be appointed quickly.

古文：即日召见，拜同凤阁鸾台平章事，进凤阁侍郎。
现代文：武后当天就召见他，授官同凤阁鸾台平章事，晋升凤阁侍郎。
English: On the same day, Empress Wu summoned him and promoted him to Fengge's chamberlain.

古文：诛二张也，柬之首发其谋。
现代文：诛除张易之、张昌宗，张柬之首先设谋。
English: In addition to Zhang Yi and Zhang Changzong, Zhang Kham was the first to plot.

古文：以功擢天官尚书、同凤阁鸾台三品、汉阳郡公，实封五百户。
现代文：论功提升为天官尚书、同凤阁鸾台三品、汉阳郡王，封给实纳租税的食户五百户。
English: On merit, he was promoted to Tianguang Shangshu, Tongfeng Pavilion Xingtai Sanpin, Hanyang Guo Wang, and 500 tax-paying households were awarded.

古文：不半岁，以汉阳郡王加特进，罢政事。
现代文：不到半年，他以汉阳郡王加 特进 衔，免除治理政事。
English: Less than half a year later, he was promoted to the rank of Hanyang County Wang Jia, exempted from the governance of government affairs.

古文：柬之既失权，愿还襄州养疾，乃授襄州刺史。
现代文：张柬之失权后，愿回襄州养病，便任命他为襄州刺史。
English: After Zhang Kamm's loss of power, he wanted to return to Xiangzhou to recuperate, so he appointed him as Xiangzhou chief historian.

古文：中宗为赋诗祖道，又诏群臣饯定鼎门外。
现代文：启程前，中宗为他赋诗祭路神，还下诏群臣到定鼎门外给他饯行。
English: Before his departure, Zhong Zong dedicated a poem to the god of the road for him, and ordered a group of courtiers to give him a parade outside the Dingding Gate.

古文：至州，持下以法，虽亲旧无所纵贷，会汉水涨啮城郭，柬之因垒为堤，以遏湍怒，阖境赖之。
现代文：到襄州后，他以法纪对待下属，即使是亲朋旧故也不放纵宽免。适逢汉水暴涨侵及外城，张柬之就军营壁垒筑堤，遏制急流怒涛，全境依赖它防洪。
English: After arriving in Xiangzhou, he treated his subordinates with legal discipline, even his relatives and friends did not indulge in forgiveness. When the Han River surged and invaded the outer city, Zhang Khamzhi built a dike on the military camp barrier to curb the rapid current, and the whole territory relied on it for flood control.

古文：又垦辞王爵，不许。
现代文：他又恳切地辞去王爵，朝廷不准。
English: He also earnestly resigned his title of prince, which was not allowed by the court.

古文：俄及贬，又流泷州，忧愤卒，年八十二。
现代文：不久遭贬，并流放到泷州，忧愁愤懑而死，享年八十二岁。
English: He was soon demoted and exiled to Zhangzhou, where he died in sorrow and anger at the age of eighty-two.

古文：景云元年，赠中书令，谥曰文贞，授一子官。
现代文：睿宗景云元年，被追赠为中书令，谥号文贞，授予他一个儿子官职。
English: Ruizong Jingyun, in the first year of the year, was posthumously awarded the title of Zhongshu Ling, the nickname Wenzhen, and his son was awarded an official post.

古文：柬之刚直不傅会，然邃於学，论次书数十篇。
现代文：张柬之为人刚直不牵强附会，学术精深，有评议篇次的书文数十篇。
English: Zhang Kamyi is a straight-forward person, academically profound, and has dozens of books with commentaries.

