古文：阴隐客谭宜王可交杨通幽
现代文：阴隐客谭宜王可交杨通幽
English: Hidden guest Tan Yi Wang may be related to Yang Tongyu

古文：阴隐客
现代文：阴隐客
English: The Hidden Guest

古文：唐神龙元年，房州竹山县百姓阴隐客，家富。
现代文：唐中宗神龙元年时，房州竹山县有个百姓叫阴隐客，家里很富。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Shenlong in the middle of the Tang Dynasty, there was a commoner in Zhushan County, Fuzhou, named Yin Yingke. His family was very rich.

古文：庄后穿井二年，已浚一千余尺而无水，隐客穿凿之志不辍。
现代文：他在自家庄园的后面打井，打了两年凿下去一千多尺仍然没有水，但他仍坚持不懈地往下凿。
English: He dug a well at the back of his manor house. After two years and more than a thousand feet down, there was still no water, but he kept on digging.

古文：二年外一月余，工人忽闻地中鸡犬鸟雀声，更凿数尺，傍通一石穴，工人乃入穴探之。
现代文：又打了一个多月，打井工人忽然听见地下有鸡叫狗咬和鸟雀的叫声，再往下凿了几尺，井壁上出现了一个石洞，工人就从洞口钻进去。
English: After more than a month of drilling, the drilling workers suddenly heard the cries of chickens, dogs and birds underground. A few feet further down, a stone cave appeared on the wall of the well, and the workers drilled into it through the hole.

古文：初数十步无所见，但扪壁傍行。
现代文：起初几十步没看见什么，只是摸着石壁侧着身子向前去。
English: At first, I didn't see anything for dozens of steps, just felt the stone wall and moved forward.

古文：俄转有如日月之光，遂下，其穴下连一山峰，工人乃下山，正立而视，则别一天地日月世界。
现代文：石洞一拐弯，突然看见了日月的光亮，工人就接着走下去，石洞尽头连着一个山峰，工人就从洞口下了山，站直了身子一看，竟来到另一个世界。
English: As soon as the cave turned a corner, they suddenly saw the light of the sun and the moon, and the workers continued to walk down. At the end of the cave, there was a mountain peak, and the workers went down the mountain from the mouth of the cave, stood up straight, and saw that they had come to another world.

古文：其山傍向万仞，千岩万壑，莫非灵景。
现代文：那山峰的一侧有万丈高，千山万谷都像是神仙境界。
English: One side of the peak is so high that all the mountains and valleys look like the realm of the gods.

古文：石尽碧琉璃色，每岩壑中，皆有金银宫阙。
现代文：山中的岩石都是碧蓝的琉璃色，每道山谷中都有金银建成的宫殿。
English: The rocks in the mountains are turquoise blue, and there are palaces made of gold and silver in every valley.

古文：有大树，身如竹有节，叶如芭蕉，又有紫花如盘。
现代文：山中还有些大树，树干像竹子似的有节，树叶像芭蕉叶，开着盘子一样大的紫花。
English: There are also some large trees in the mountains, the trunks of which have knots like bamboo shoots, the leaves are like plantain leaves, and the purple flowers are as big as plates.

古文：五色蛱蝶，翅大如扇，翔舞花间。五色鸟大如鹤，翱翔树杪。
现代文：很多翅膀像扇子一样大的五色彩蝶在花间飞来飞去，还有像仙鹤的五色鸟在树梢间飞翔。
English: Many five-coloured butterflies with wings as big as fans flit about among the flowers, and five-coloured birds resembling cranes fly among the treetops.

古文：每岩中有清泉一眼，色如镜；白泉一眼，白如乳。
现代文：每条峡谷中都有一眼清澈如镜的山泉，还有一眼白泉，泉水像乳一样白。
English: In every canyon there is a mountain spring as clear as a mirror, and a white spring, the water of which is as white as milk.

古文：工人渐下至宫阙所，欲入询问。
现代文：工人来到一座宫殿前，想进去打听一下这是什么地方。
English: A workman came upon a palace and wanted to go in and find out what it was.

古文：行至阙前，见牌上署曰： 天桂山宫 ，以银字书之。
现代文：抬头见宫门上挂着一块匾，上写 天桂山宫 四个银字。
English: Looking up, I saw a plaque hanging on the palace gate, inscribed with the words "Tengui Mountain Palace" in four silver characters.

古文：门两阁内，各有一人惊出。
现代文：这时，宫门内的两间阁房里跑出来两个人，神色很吃惊。
English: At this time, two people ran out of two attics inside the palace gate, looking very surprised.

古文：各长五尺余，童颜如玉，衣服轻细，如白雾绿烟，绛唇皓齿，须发如青丝，首冠金冠而跣足。顾谓工人曰： 汝胡为至此？ 
现代文：这两个人都五尺多高，面貌像童子，红唇白齿，头发胡子像青丝一样光泽稠密。他们穿的衣服非常轻柔，像是白雾绿烟织成的，头上戴着金冠，但却光着脚。他俩问工人： 你到这儿来做什么？ 
English: The two of them were more than five feet tall, boyish-looking, with red lips and white teeth, their hair and beards shiny and thick as blue silk. They were dressed very softly, as if made of white mist and green smoke, with gold crowns on their heads, but their feet were bare. They asked the worker: What are you doing here?

古文：工人具陈本末。言未毕，门中有数十人出云： 怪有昏浊气。 令责守门者。
现代文：工人就说了他来的经过，还没说完，宫门中又涌出来好几十人，都说这里怎么有一股混浊的气味，并责备守宫门的人。
English: The worker explained how he had come, and before he had finished, dozens of people poured out of the palace gate, all saying how there was a foul smell here, and blaming the people guarding the palace gate.

古文：二人惶惧而言曰： 有外界工人，不意而到，询问途次，所以未奏。 
现代文：两个守门人惶恐地说： 有个外界的工人突然闯到这儿来打听道儿，所以没有奏报。 
English: Two doorkeepers said fearfully: An outside worker suddenly broke in here to ask for directions, so there was no report.

古文：须臾，有绯衣一人传敕曰： 敕门吏礼而遣之。 
现代文：不一会儿，有个穿红衣的人来传达命令，让门官把工人遣送回去，但要礼貌地对待工人，工人赶忙拜谢。
English: After a while, a man in a red coat came to convey the order for the doorman to send the workers back, but to treat the workers politely, and the workers hurried to say their goodbyes.

古文：工人拜谢未毕，门人曰： 汝已至此，何不求游览毕而返？ 
现代文：这时门官说： 你既然已经来了，为什么不请求在这里游览一下然后再回去呢？ 
English: At this point the gatekeeper said: Since you are already here, why don't you ask to take a tour here and then go back?

古文：工人曰： 向者未敢，傥赐从容，乞乘便言之。 
现代文：工人说： 我便是有这个想法，但刚才没敢。如果您方便的话，恳求您替我请求一下吧。 
English: The worker said: I had this idea, but I didn't dare just now. If it's convenient for you, please ask for me.

古文：门人遂通一玉简入，旋而玉简却出，门人执之。
现代文：门官就往宫门里递进去一只玉版，玉版立刻就传了出来。
English: The gatekeeper handed a jade plate into the palace gate, and the jade plate was immediately passed out.

古文：引工人行至清泉眼，令洗浴及浣衣服，又至白泉眼，令盥漱之。
现代文：门官拿到玉版后，就领工人到一口清泉前，让他洗了澡并洗了衣服，然后又领他到一口白泉边让他洗脸漱口。
English: After the gatekeeper got the jade plate, he led the worker to a clear spring, let him take a bath and wash his clothes, and then led him to a white spring to wash his face and rinse his mouth.

古文：味如乳，甘美甚，连饮数掬，似醉而饱。
现代文：工人漱口时，觉得那白泉水十分甜美，就用手捧水喝了好几口，感到又像醉又很饱了。
English: When the worker rinsed his mouth, he felt that the white spring water was very sweet, so he took a handful of water and drank several sips, feeling drunk and full.

古文：遂为门人引下山。每至宫阙，只得于门外，而不许入。
现代文：门官领他到各个宫殿游览，但只准在门口，不许进去。
English: The doorkeepers led him on a tour of the palaces, but he was only allowed to stand at the gates and was not allowed to enter.

古文：如是经行半日，至山趾，有一国城。皆是金银珉玉为宫室城楼，以玉字题云： 梯仙国 。
现代文：这样走了半天，来到山脚下，见有一个都城，城中的宫殿城楼都是用金银或美玉建造的，城门上用玉石镶嵌着三个大字 梯仙国 。
English: After walking for half a day in this way, I came to the foot of the mountain and saw a capital city. The palace towers in the city were all built with gold and silver or precious stones, and the gates were inlaid with jade.

古文：工人询于门人曰： 此国何如？ 门人曰： 此皆诸仙初得仙者，关送此国，修行七十万日，然后得至诸天，或玉京蓬莱、昆阆姑射。然方得仙宫职位，主策主印，飞行自在。 
现代文：工人问门官 梯仙国 是怎么回事，门官说： 凡是刚成仙的人就送进这梯仙国中，然后在这里继续修行七十万天，才能升入天宫，到达三十二位天帝所住的玉京，或者到蓬莱仙洲，或者到神仙聚居的昆仑阆苑，或者到神女们居住的姑射山，然后才能得到仙界的官位，被授予符命和官印，就可以自由自在地在天界飞翔了。 
English: The workers asked the gatekeeper what was going on in the Land of Immortals. The gatekeeper said, "Anyone who has just become an immortal is sent into the Land of Immortals, and then continues to practice here for seven hundred thousand days, in order to ascend to the Heavenly Palace, to reach the Jade Capital where thirty-two heavenly emperors live, or to Penglai Fairytale Land, or to Kunlun Fairy Garden where immortals live, or to Gushan Mountain where goddesses live, and then to get the official rank of the fairy world, to be awarded the official seal and the official seal, and to be able to fly freely in the heavenly world.

古文：工人曰： 既是仙国，何在吾国之下界？ 
现代文：工人又问道： 这里既然是仙国，怎么会在我们人世上国家的下面呢？ 
English: The worker asked again: Since this is fairyland, how can it be below our earthly country?

古文：门人曰： 吾此国是下界之上仙国也，汝国之上，还有仙国如吾国，亦曰 梯仙国 ，一无所异。 
现代文：门官说： 这里只是下界的上仙国，你们国家的上面，还有一个和这里一样的仙国，也叫梯仙国，和这里完全一样。 
English: The gatekeeper said, "This is just the lower realm of the upper fairyland. Above your realm, there is another fairyland just like this one, also called the ladder fairyland, which is exactly the same as this one.

古文：言毕，谓工人曰： 卿可归矣 。遂却上山，寻旧路，又令饮白泉数掬。
现代文：说完后就让工人就此结束游览，然后又领他上山找到来时的路，并让他又喝了几口白泉里的水。
English: After saying this, he asked the worker to end the tour, and then led him up the mountain to find the way he came, and let him drink a few more sips of water from the white spring.

古文：临至山顶求穴，门人曰： 汝来此虽顷刻，人间已数十年矣，却出旧穴，应不可矣。
现代文：到了山顶，工人找他来时的那个洞穴，门官说： 你来到这里虽然不大一会，但人间已过去好几十年了，再从你来时的洞走就走不通了。
English: At the top of the mountain, the gatekeeper said to the worker who was looking for him in the cave from which he had come, "Although you have only been here for a short while, many decades have passed since you were born, and it is no longer possible to walk through the cave from which you came.

古文：待吾奏请通天关钥匙送卿归。 
现代文：等我去向上面奏请为你要来通天关的钥匙，然后送你回去。 
English: When I go up to play, please give me the key to open the sky gate for you, and then send you back.

古文：工人拜谢。
现代文：工人连忙拜谢。
English: The workers hurried to say their goodbyes.

古文：须臾，门人携金印及玉简，又引工人别路而上。至一大门，势侔楼阁，门有数人，俯伏面候。门人示金印，读玉简，划然开门。
现代文：不一会儿，门官拿着金印和玉版回来，领着工人从另外一条路走上去，来到一个大门前，门内同样有很多楼阁，门前有几个人都跪在地上迎接，门官出示了金印，读了玉版上写的命令，门就自动打开了。
English: After a while, the gatekeeper came back with the gold seal and the jade plate, and led the workers up another path to a gate. There were also many castles inside the gate, and several people knelt on the ground in front of the gate to welcome them. The gatekeeper showed the gold seal and read the order written on the jade plate, and the door opened automatically.

古文：门人引工人上，才入门，为风云拥而去，因无所睹，唯闻门人云： 好去，为吾致意于赤城贞伯。 
现代文：门官领着工人向门里走，刚一进门，工人就觉得身子像腾云驾雾般地飞升起来，一时什么也看不见了，只听得门官在身后喊： 祝你一路平安，替我问候赤城的贞伯！ 
English: The doorkeeper led the worker towards the door. As soon as he entered the door, the worker felt his body fly up like a billowing cloud. For a moment, he couldn't see anything. All he could hear was the doorkeeper shouting behind him: "Have a safe trip, and say hello to Zhenbo from Akagi for me!"

古文：须臾云开，已在房州北三十里孤星山顶洞中。
现代文：不一会儿云开风住，工人发现自己已经在房州北三十里孤星山顶的一个洞中。
English: Soon after, the wind died down and the workers found themselves in a cave on the top of Lone Star Mountain, 30 miles north of Fangzhou.

古文：出后，询阴隐客家，时人云： 已三四世矣。 
现代文：他出洞以后，就去寻找阴隐客家，人们告诉他，已经过去了三四代人了。
English: After he came out of the cave, he went to look for the hidden Hakka. People told him that three or four generations had passed.

古文：开井之由，皆不能知。
现代文：工人向人讲述他为阴隐客家打井的事，谁也不知道这件事了。
English: The worker tells people about the well he dug for the Yingying Hakka, but no one knows about it.

古文：工人自寻其路，唯见一巨坑，乃崩井之所为也。
现代文：工人就自己寻找当初打井的地方，找到原地，只见一个很大的深坑，原来井早就崩塌了。
English: The workers themselves searched for the place where the well was originally drilled, found the original site, and saw only a large pit. The original well had collapsed long ago.

古文：时贞元七年矣。
现代文：这时已是德宗贞元七年了。
English: By this time, it had been seven years since the death of Narimune Sadamoto.

古文：工人寻觅家人，了不知处。
现代文：工人找自己的家，根本就找不到了。
English: Workers can't find their homes at all.

古文：自后不乐人间，遂不食五谷，信足而行。
现代文：从此以后，工人再也不愿在人世停留，就绝食修行，随意漫游。
English: From then on, the workers no longer wanted to stay on earth, so they went on hunger strikes and roamed at will.

古文：数年后，有人于剑阁鸡冠山侧近逢之，后莫知所在。
现代文：几年后，有人在四川峨嵋山剑阁旁边的鸡冠山上遇见过他，后来就不知道他的去处了。
English: A few years later, someone met him in Sichuan's Mount Emei next to Jiange, and later did not know where he had gone.

古文：谭宜
现代文：谭宜
English: Tan Yi

古文：谭宜者，陵州民叔皮子也，开元末年生。
现代文：谭宜是陵州人谭叔皮的儿子，唐玄宗开元末年生。
English: Tan Yi is the son of Tan Shupi, a native of Lingzhou. He was a student of Tang Xuan Zong at the end of the first century.

古文：生而有异，堕地能言。
现代文：他一出生就和别人不一样，生下来就会说话。
English: As soon as he was born, he was different from others. He was born able to speak.

古文：数岁之中，身逾六尺，髭鬓风骨，不与常儿同。
现代文：才几岁就长了六尺高，而且是个有鬓角有胡须的堂堂男子汉。
English: At just a few years old, he had grown six feet tall and was a tall man with sideburns and a beard.

古文：不饮不食，行及奔马。
现代文：他不吃不喝，走路能追上奔跑的马。
English: He doesn't eat or drink. He can walk as far as a galloping horse.

古文：二十余岁，忽失所在，远近异之，以为神人也。
现代文：谭宜二十多岁时忽然失踪了，人们都十分惊奇，认为他是个神仙。
English: When Tan Yi suddenly disappeared in his twenties, people were very surprised and thought he was a god.

古文：至是父母思念，乡里追立庙以祀之。
现代文：他父母十分想念他，乡亲们为他建了庙，把他当作神仙祭祀供奉。
English: His parents miss him very much, and the villagers have built a temple for him and worship him as a god.

古文：大历元年丙午，忽然到家，即霞冠羽衣，真仙流也。
现代文：代宗大历元年丙午月时，谭宜突然回到家中，穿着羽毛做的衣服，戴着绣有云霞图案的帽子，一看就是一位神仙。
English: In the first lunar month of the first year of the Daizong era, Tan Yi suddenly returned home, wearing clothes made of feathers and a hat embroidered with a cloud pattern. At first glance, she was a fairy godmother.

古文：白父母曰： 儿为仙官，不当久有人世。
现代文：他对父母说： 儿子是一名仙官，不能在人世久留。
English: He said to his parents, "My son is a genie and cannot stay alive for long.

古文：虽父母忆念，又不宜作此祠庙，恐物所凭，妄作威福，以害于人，请为毁之。
现代文：父母想念儿子是可以理解的，但乡亲们不该为我建庙，怕这庙宇被妖魔鬼怪窃据后作威作福祸害乡亲们，所以请乡亲们把庙拆除了吧。
English: It is understandable that parents miss their son, but the villagers should not build a temple for me. I am afraid that this temple will be stolen by demons and devils, who will then use it as a blessing to harm the villagers. Therefore, I ask the villagers to demolish the temple.

古文：庙基之下，昔藏黄金甚多，撤庙之后，凿地取金，可以分济贫民，散遣乡里矣。 
现代文：庙基的地下过去埋藏着不少黄金，拆了庙后请把金子挖出来，分给穷苦的乡亲们吧。 
English: There used to be a lot of gold buried under the foundation of the temple. After the temple is demolished, please dig out the gold and distribute it to the poor villagers.

古文：言讫，腾空而去。
现代文：说罢，就腾空飞去了。
English: With that, he took off.

古文：如其言，毁庙掘地，皆得金焉。
现代文：于是按照他的话拆了庙，果然在庙基下挖出了金子，大家都分得了。
English: So they tore down the temple according to his words, and sure enough, gold was dug out from under the foundation of the temple, and everyone got a share of it.

古文：所掘之处，灵泉涌出，澄澈异常，积雨不加，至旱不减。
现代文：所挖的地方涌出一汪泉水，泉水非常清澈，下雨后水不涨，大旱时水也不落。
English: A spring gushes out of the excavated area. The spring water is very clear, the water does not rise after rain, and the water does not fall when there is a drought.

古文：郡邑祷祝，必有灵应，因名 谭子池 ，亦谓之 天池 。
现代文：乡亲们到这口灵泉前祈祷求福，都十分灵验，于是就把这口泉叫 谭子池 ，也叫天池。
English: The villagers came to this spiritual spring to pray and seek blessings, which were very effective, so they called this spring Tanzi Pond, also known as Heaven Pond.

古文：进士周郭藩，为诗以记其事曰： 澄水一百步，世名谭子池。
现代文：有位叫周郭藩的进士写了一首诗记述这件事： 澄水一百步，世名谭子池。
English: A member of the Zhou Guo clan wrote a poem to describe the event: Clear water at a hundred paces, the world-famous Tanzi Pond.

古文：余诘陵阳叟，此池当因谁？
现代文：余诘陵阳叟，此池当因谁？
English: Who is to blame for this pond?

古文：父老谓余说，本郡谭叔皮。
现代文：父老为余说，本郡谭叔皮。
English: My father used to say, "This county belongs to Uncle Tan."

古文：开元末年中，生子字阿宜。
现代文：开元末年中，生子字阿宜。
English: In the middle of the end of the first year of the year, the word "Ai" was born.

古文：坠地便能语，九岁多须眉。
现代文：坠地便能语，九岁多须眉。
English: He could speak fluently at the drop of a hat, and was fluent by the age of nine.

古文：不饮亦不食，未尝言渴饥。
现代文：不饮亦不食，未尝言渴饥。
English: They neither eat nor drink, nor are they ever hungry or thirsty.

古文：十五能行走，快马不能追。
现代文：十五能行走，快马不能追。
English: A fifteen-year-old can walk, but a fast horse cannot be chased.

古文：二十入山林，一去无还期。
现代文：二十入山林，一去无还期。
English: Twenty into the mountains and forests, and there is no return period.

古文：父母忆念深，乡闾为立祠。
现代文：父母忆念深，乡间为立祠。
English: My parents remember it fondly, and there is a small shrine in the countryside.

古文：大历元年春，此儿忽来归。
现代文：大历元年春，此儿忽来归。
English: In the spring of the first year of the great calendar, I suddenly came back here.

古文：头冠簪凤凰，身着霓裳衣。
现代文：头冠簪凤凰，身着霓裳衣。
English: Head crowned with a phoenix, dressed in a gown.

古文：普遍拯疲俗，丁宁告亲知。
现代文：普遍拯疲俗，丁宁告亲知。
English: Ding Ning was widely known as a reformer.

古文：余为神仙官，下界不可祈。
现代文：余为神仙官，下界不可祈。
English: Yu is a divine official, the lower world is not to be prayed for.

古文：恐为妖魅假，不如早平夷。
现代文：恐为妖魅假，不如早平夷。
English: If you are afraid of being tricked by evil spirits, it is better to get rid of them as soon as possible.

古文：此有黄金藏，镇在兹庙基。
现代文：此有黄金藏，镇在兹庙基。
English: There is a gold mine here, and the town is built on the foundations of a temple.

古文：发掘散生聚，可以救贫羸。
现代文：发掘散生聚，可以救贫羸。
English: The excavation of dispersed growth aggregates can save the barren land.

古文：金出继灵泉，湛若清琉璃。
现代文：金出继灵泉，湛若清琉璃。
English: Jinde Jiling Spring, with crystal clear water.

古文：泓澄表符瑞，水旱无竭时。
现代文：泓澄表符瑞，水旱无竭时。
English: When water and drought are inexhaustible.

古文：言讫辞冲虚，杳霭上玄微。
现代文：言讫辞冲虚，杳霭上玄微。
English: The rhetoric is empty, and the hypocrisy is subtle.

古文：凡情留不得，攀望众号悲。
现代文：凡情留不得，攀望众号悲。
English: You can't stay in the same place forever.

古文：寻禀神仙诫，彻庙斸开窥。
现代文：寻禀神仙诫，彻庙斸开窥。
English: Seek out the precepts of the immortals, look into the temples.

古文：果获无穷宝，均融沾困危。
现代文：果获无穷宝，均融沾困危。
English: The fruits are priceless, but the harmony is in danger.

古文：巨源出岭顶，喷涌世间稀。
现代文：巨源出岭顶，喷涌世间稀。
English: The huge source emerges from the top of the ridge, spewing out rare.

古文：异境流千古，终年福四维。 
现代文：异境流千古，终年福四维。 
English: A thousand years of history in a foreign land, four dimensions of happiness throughout the year.

古文：王可交
现代文：王可交
English: Wang Keqiao

古文：王可交，苏州昆山人也，以耕钓自业，居于松江南赵屯村。年三十余，莫知有真道。
现代文：王可交是苏州府昆山县人，住在松江南岸的赵屯村，靠种田、打渔为生，三十多岁了，不知道有修道成仙的事。
English: Wang Kejia is from Kunshan County, Suzhou Province. He lives in Zhaotun Village on the south bank of the Songjiang River. He makes a living by farming and fishing. He is in his thirties and does not know about the cult of immortality.

古文：常取大鱼，自喜以槌击杀，煮之，擣蒜韭以食，常谓乐无以及。
现代文：每次他钓到大鱼就非常高兴，用木槌把大鱼打死炖熟然后蘸上蒜泥韭酱吃，并对人说世上再也没有比吃炖鱼更美的事了。
English: Every time he caught a big fish, he was very happy. He killed the big fish with a mallet and then dipped it in garlic dipping sauce, and said that there is nothing more beautiful in the world than eating squid.

古文：一旦棹渔舟，方击楫高歌入江，行数里间，忽见一彩画花舫，漾于中流。有道士七人，皆年少，玉冠霞帔，服色各异，侍从十余人，总角云鬟。
现代文：有一天，他划着渔船高唱着渔歌在江里走了几里地，忽然看见江中有一只彩船，船里坐着非常年轻的七位道士，戴着镶嵌着宝玉的帽子，披着绣有云霞图形的帔肩，周围有十几个侍从都是童男童女，男的头上梳两个抓髻，女的头发梳成云鬟样式。
English: One day, he paddled a fishing boat and walked several miles in the river, singing a fishing song. Suddenly, he saw a colorful boat in the river. There were seven very young Taoists sitting in the boat, wearing hats inlaid with precious stones, draped with embroidered clouds, and surrounded by more than a dozen attendants, all boys and girls. The man's head was combed with two combs, and the woman's hair was combed into a cloud-like style.

古文：又四人黄衣，乘舫。
现代文：船上还有四个穿黄衣的人。
English: There are also four people in yellow on board.

古文：一人呼可交以姓名，方惊异，不觉渔舟已近舫侧。
现代文：这时，船上有个道士喊王可交的名字，王可交正在惊讶中，自己的船已经自动靠在了道士的彩船旁了。
English: At this time, there was a Taoist monk on the boat calling Wang Keqiao's name. Wang Keqiao was surprised that his boat had automatically pulled alongside the Taoist monk's boat.

古文：一道士令总角引可交上舫，见七人面前，各有青玉盘酒器果子，皆莹彻有光，可交莫识。
现代文：一个道士让小僮领着王可交上了彩船，只见七位道士的面前都摆着青玉的松盘酒器，酒器餐具都透明闪光，王可交不认识那些餐具酒器是什么制成的。
English: A Taoist asked Xiao Yao to lead Wang Ke to hand over the colored boat, only to see that the seven Taoists were all standing in front of the sapphire-colored wine vessels, the wine vessels and tableware were all transparent and sparkling, and Wang Ke did not know what those tableware and wine vessels were made of.

古文：又有女妓十余人，悉持乐器。
现代文：还有十几个乐妓，手拿各种乐器站在一旁。
English: A dozen or so geishas, holding musical instruments in their hands, stand to one side.

古文：可交远立于筵末，遍拜。
现代文：王可交站在筵席的远处向每个道士一一行礼后，七位道士都仔细打量他。
English: Wang Keqiao stood at the far end of the banquet and bowed to each Taoist, after which the seven Taoists looked at him carefully.

古文：七人共视可交，一人曰： 好骨相，合仙，生于凡贱，眉间已灸破矣。 
现代文：一位道士说： 此人骨相很好，应该成仙，只是他生在人世，由于生病针灸，把眉间刺破了。 
English: A Taoist said, "This man's bone structure is very good, and he should be immortal. However, he was born in this world, and due to illness and acupuncture, he got a puncture wound between his eyebrows.

古文：一人曰： 与酒吃 。
现代文：另一个道士说： 给他些酒喝吧。 
English: Another Taoist said, "Give him some wine to drink."

古文：侍者泻酒，而樽中酒再三泻之不出，侍者具以告。道士曰： 酒是灵物，必得入口，当换其骨。
现代文：一名侍者就拿酒壶往杯子里倒酒，但怎么倒酒也不出来，侍者就报告给道士，道士说： 这酒是仙酒，他必须把凡人的骨头换掉才能喝得了这酒。
English: A waiter took a wine jug and poured wine into a glass, but the wine did not come out. The waiter reported this to the Taoist priest, who said: This wine is the wine of the immortals. He had to replace the bones of mortals in order to drink this wine.

古文：泻之不出，亦乃命也。 
现代文：酒倒不出来，正说明他命中不该喝仙酒。 
English: He couldn't pour the wine, which meant that he shouldn't have drunk the elixir.

古文：一人又曰： 与栗吃 。
现代文：又一个道士说： 让他吃栗子吧。 
English: Another Taoist said: Let him eat chestnuts.

古文：俄一人於筵上取二栗，付侍者与可交，令便吃。
现代文：一位道士就从酒桌上拿了两个栗子递给侍者，侍者又把栗子给了王可交让他吃。
English: A Taoist priest took two chestnuts from the wine table and handed them to the waiter, who in turn gave the chestnuts to Wang Ke to eat.

古文：视之，其栗青赤，光如枣，长二寸许，啮之有皮，非人间之栗，肉脆而甘如饴，久之食方尽。
现代文：王可交看那栗子是黑红色，像枣子那样光滑，二寸多长，一啃有皮，栗肉又脆又甜，不像人间的栗子，吃了好半天才把两个栗子吃完。
English: Wang Keqiao could see that the chestnuts were black and red, as smooth as jujubes, more than two inches long, with a skin, and the chestnut meat was crispy and sweet, unlike human chestnuts. It took him half an hour to finish eating the two chestnuts.

古文：一人曰： 王可交已见之矣，可令去。 
现代文：这时一个道士说： 王可交已经和我们见过面了，让他回去吧。 
English: At this time, a Taoist said: Wang Keqiao has already met with us, let him go back.

古文：命一黄衣送上岸。
现代文：说罢就让一个穿黄衣的人把王可交送到岸上。
English: Just say the word and let a man in a yellow coat bring Wang Ke to the shore.

古文：于船边觅所乘渔舟不见，黄衣曰： 不必渔舟，但合眼自到。 
现代文：王可交在彩船边到处找不到自己的渔船，黄衣人说： 不必坐渔船，你一闭上眼就到了。 
English: Wang Kechu couldn't find his fishing boat anywhere near the boat. The man in yellow said, "You don't have to take a fishing boat. You can get there as soon as you close your eyes."

古文：于是合眼，若风水林木浩浩之声。
现代文：王可交就闭上眼睛，立刻觉得耳边响起呼呼的风声和水声。
English: Wang Keqiao closed his eyes and immediately felt the wind and water roaring in his ears.

古文：令开眼，已到，失黄衣所在，但见峰峦重叠，松柏参天，坐于草中石上。
现代文：黄衣人让他睁开眼，他发现自己坐在草丛中的一块大石头上，四周是重重山峰和参天的松柏，那黄衣人也不见了。
English: The man in yellow told him to open his eyes, and he found himself sitting on a large rock in the grass, surrounded by mountains and towering pines, and the man in yellow was gone.

古文：及望见有门楼，人出入。
现代文：不远处有一个高大的门楼，有人在门楼中出出进进。
English: Not far away, there is a tall gatehouse. People come and go through the gatehouse.

古文：俄顷采樵者并僧十余人到，问可交何人，可交具以前事对。
现代文：不一会儿，有几个打柴的和几个和尚来到王可交面前，问他是什么人，他就把详情说了。
English: After a while, a few woodcutters and a few monks came to Wang Keqiao and asked him who he was, and he told them the details.

古文：又问何日离家，可交曰： 今日早离家。 
现代文：那些人又问他什么时候离开家的，他说是今天早上。
English: The men also asked him when he left home and he said it was this morning.

古文：又问今日是何日，对是三月三日。
现代文：那些人问王可交今天是几月几日，王可交说： 三月三日呀。 
English: Those people asked Wang Keqiao what day of the month it was. Wang Keqiao said: March 3rd.

古文：樵者与僧惊： 今日是九月九，去三月三日已半年余。 
现代文：那些人大吃一惊说： 今天是九月初九，离三月初三已经半年多了！ 
English: Those people were very surprised and said, "Today is the ninth day of the ninth month, and it has been more than half a year since the third day of the third month!"

古文：可交问地是何所，僧曰： 此是天台山瀑布寺前也。 
现代文：王可交又问这里是什么地方，一位和尚说： 这里是天台山的瀑布寺前哪。 
English: Wang Keqiao also asked what this place was, and a monk said: This is the waterfall temple in front of Tiantai Mountain.

古文：又问此去华亭多少地，僧曰： 水陆千余里。 
现代文：王可交又问这里离华亭多远，和尚说： 水路陆路加在一起一千多里。 
English: Wang Keqiao also asked how far it was from Huating, and the monk said, "It's more than a thousand miles by land and water."

古文：可交自讶不已。
现代文：王可交十分惊讶。
English: Wang Keqiao was very surprised.

古文：乃为僧邀归寺，设食，可交但言饱，不喜闻食气，唯饮水耳。
现代文：那和尚请他到庙里去休息并请他吃饭，王可交说一点不饿，只是想喝水。
English: The monk invited him to the temple to rest and invited him to eat. Wang Keqiao said that he was not hungry at all, but just wanted to drink water.

古文：众僧审问，极异之，乃以状白唐兴县，以达台州，以闻。
现代文：和尚们都围着他问长问短，十分惊奇，就把这事报告了唐兴县并上报给台州。
English: The monks were all around him asking questions, very surprised, they reported this to Tangxing County and reported to Taizhou.

古文：越州廉使王沨素奉道，召之见，极以为非常之事，神仙变化不可测也。
现代文：越州的廉使王沨向来尊奉道教，就召见了王可交。听王可交谈了以后，非常相信，认为神仙的变化是无所不能的，谁也不可理解。
English: After listening to Wang Ke's conversation, he was very convinced that the changes of the gods are omnipotent and cannot be understood by anyone.

古文：可交身长七尺余，仪貌殊异，言语清爽。
现代文：王可交身材七尺多高，仪表和一般人很不同，谈吐也很高雅。
English: Wang Keqiao is more than seven feet tall, his appearance is very different from the average person, and he speaks very elegantly.

古文：沨叹曰： 此诚真仙人也。 
现代文：王沨感叹地说： 王可交真是位神仙啊！ 
English: Wang Yao sighed and said, "Wang Kejiao is really a god!

古文：又以同姓，益敬之，饰以道服。
现代文：又因为王可交和自己同姓，就对他更加敬重，并让他穿上道士的衣裳。
English: Also, since the king could have the same last name as himself, they respected him even more and dressed him in the robes of a Taoist priest.

古文：而遣人至苏州，以诘其实。具言三月三日，可交乘渔舟入江不归，家人寻得渔舫，谓堕江死，漉之无迹，妻子以招魂葬讫。王沨具以表闻，诏甚称异。
现代文：后来王沨派人到苏州去了解核实王可交的事，人们都说三月初三王可交坐着渔船到江中去再也没回来，他家的人只是找到了他的渔船，以为他一定是落入江中淹死了，到处也打捞不到他的尸体，他的妻儿只好用招魂的仪式给他办了丧事，王沨证实了这一切后就向皇帝上表报告这件事，皇上也大为惊奇。
English: Later, Wang Hui sent someone to Suzhou to verify Wang Keqiao's death. People said that in early March, Wang Keqiao went to the river on a fishing boat and never came back. His family members only found his fishing boat and thought that he must have drowned in the river. They couldn't find his body anywhere. His wife and children had to hold a funeral for him with a soul-winning ceremony. After Wang Hui confirmed all of this, he reported the matter to the emperor. The emperor was also very surprised.

古文：后可交却归乡里，备话历历，及与乡人到江上，指所逢花船之处依然。
现代文：后来王可交回到他的家乡，把一切经过都对乡亲们说了，并领着人们到江上看他遇见彩船和仙人的地方。
English: Later, Wang Kefu returned to his hometown, told the villagers everything that had happened, and led the people to the river to see the place where he met the boat and the fairy.

古文：可交食栗后，已绝谷，动静若有神助。
现代文：王可交自从吃了神仙给的栗子后就再也不吃饭了，一举一动都像有神在佑护帮助。
English: Wang Keqiao has not eaten since he ate the chestnuts given to him by the gods. His every move is as if he is being protected and helped by the gods.

古文：不复耕钓，乃挈妻儿往四明山。
现代文：他不再种田打鱼，带着妻子进了四明山。
English: He no longer farmed or fished, and he and his wife moved to Shiming Mountain.

古文：时言药则壶公所授，酒则余杭阿母。
现代文：二十多年后，王可交出山到明州卖药，让人帮着卖酒，把卖药和酒的钱全都布施给穷人。
English: More than twenty years later, Wang Ke handed over the mountain to sell medicine in Mingzhou, let people help sell alcohol, and gave all the money from the sale of medicine and alcohol to the poor.

古文：相传药极去疾，酒甚醉人。
现代文：当时，人们都说王可交卖的药是壶公给的，酒则是余杭阿母的。
English: At that time, people said that the medicine sold by Wang Ke was given by Jug Gong, and the wine was given by Yuhang Amu.

古文：明州里巷，皆言王仙人药酒，世间不及。
现代文：人们都说这药酒非常好使，药治病最灵，酒一喝就醉。
English: People say that this medicinal liquor is very effective, it is the most effective medicine for curing diseases, and you will get drunk as soon as you drink it.

古文：道俗多图其形像，有患掂及邪魅者，图于其侧即愈。
现代文：人们有时得了疾病或家里闹邪，就画一张王可交的像贴上，立刻就能好。
English: Sometimes when people get sick or there's trouble at home, they just draw a cute picture and stick it up, and they're instantly better.

古文：后三十余年，却入四明山，不复出，今人时有见之者。
现代文：过了三十多年，王可交又进了四明山再也没出来，现在还有人见过他。
English: More than thirty years later, Wang Keqiao went back into the Siming Mountains and never came out again. People still see him now.

古文：杨通幽
现代文：杨通幽
English: Yang Tongyu

古文：杨通幽，本名什伍，广汉什邠人。
现代文：杨通幽，本名叫杨什伍，是广汉郡什邠县人。
English: Yang Tongyu, whose real name is Yang Shwu, is from Shifang County, Guanghan County.

古文：幼遇道士，教以檄召之术，受三皇天文，役命鬼神，无不立应。
现代文：他小时候遇见过一个道士教给他召鬼神的法术，授给他三皇的天书，用这天书召唤鬼神，鬼神会立刻就到。
English: When he was a child, he met a Taoist who taught him the magic of summoning ghosts and gods, and gave him the heavenly book of the three emperors. He used this heavenly book to summon ghosts and gods, and the ghosts and gods would arrive immediately.

古文：驱毒疠，剪氛邪，禳水旱，致风雨，是皆能之，而木讷疏傲，不拘于俗。其术数变异，远近称之。
现代文：他驱除瘟疫，制服妖魔，消除水旱天灾，呼风唤雨无所不能。杨什伍为人古板孤傲，不随凡俗，他的道术千变万化，远近闻名。
English: He can drive out plagues, subdue demons, eliminate floods, droughts, and natural disasters, and can do everything from calling for wind to calling for rain. Yang Shwu is an old-fashioned and lonely person, who does not follow the ordinary. His Taoism is ever-changing and is well-known far and wide.

古文：玄宗幸蜀，自马嵬之后，属念贵妃，往往辍食忘寐。
现代文：唐玄宗李隆基由于安禄山造反逃出长安来到四川，非常思念死在马嵬坡的杨贵妃，常常不吃饭不睡觉，心情十分苦闷。
English: Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty, Li Longji, fled from Chang'an to Sichuan due to the Anlu Mountain Rebellion. He missed Yang Guifei, who died in Malangpo, very much. He often did not eat or sleep, and his mood was very depressed.

古文：近侍之臣，密令求访方士，冀少安圣虑。
现代文：于是唐明皇身边的一些近臣就密令求访道术高明的方士，希望能多少解除一下皇上的痛苦忧伤。
English: As a result, some of Emperor Tang Ming's close vassals secretly ordered a visit from a well-versed sorcerer, hoping to relieve some of the emperor's pain and sorrow.

古文：或云： 杨什伍有考召之法。 征至行朝。
现代文：听说杨什伍有召聚驱使鬼神的法术，就把他召到了唐明皇的四川行宫中。
English: Hearing that Yang Shwu had a spell to summon and drive away ghosts and gods, he summoned him to the Sichuan palace of Emperor Tang Ming.

古文：上问其事，对曰： 虽天上地下，冥寞之中，鬼神之内，皆可历而求之。 
现代文：明皇问杨什伍有什么道术，回答说： 不管是天上地下仙界地府，以及鬼神之中，我都能找到她！ 
English: The Ming Emperor asked Yang Shwu what kind of Taoism she practised, to which she replied: "I can find her in heaven, in the underworld, in the realm of the dead, and among the ghosts and gods!"

古文：上大悦，于内置场，以行其术。
现代文：唐明皇非常高兴，命令在宫内设了道场神坛，让杨什伍施道术寻找杨贵妃。
English: Emperor Tang Ming was very pleased and ordered to set up a dojo shrine in the palace for Yang Shwu to practice Taoism to find Yang Guifei.

古文：是夕奏曰： 已于九地之下，鬼神之中，遍加搜访，不知其所。 
现代文：当天夜里，杨什伍就向唐明皇奏报说： 我已经在阴曹地府九泉之下找遍了，那里没有贵妃娘娘的踪迹。 
English: In the evening of the same day, Yang Shwu sent a report to Emperor Tang Ming saying: "I have searched all over the underworld, and there is no trace of the princess.

古文：上曰： 妃子当不坠于鬼神之伍矣。 
现代文：唐明皇说： 爱妃绝不会落到阴曹和鬼魂们在一起的。 
English: Tang Mingwang said, "Aifei will never end up with the evil spirits and ghosts.

古文：二日夜，又奏曰： 九天之上，星辰日月之间，虚空杳冥之际，亦遍寻访而不知其处。 
现代文：第二天夜晚，杨什伍又奏报说： 我去了九重天界，在虚空浩瀚的天空和日月星辰之间寻访，仍然没找到贵妃娘娘。 
English: In the evening of the next day, Yang Shwu also reported, "I went to the Nine-Heavens Realm and searched between the vast sky of the void and the stars of the sun, moon and stars, but still did not find the princess."

古文：上悄然不怿曰： 未归天，复何之矣？ 
现代文：唐明皇沉默了半天，悲伤地叹息说： 她既不在九泉，也不在天上，能够去了哪里呢？ 
English: Emperor Tang Ming was silent for half a day, sighed sadly and said: She is neither in heaven nor in hell, where can she go?

古文：炷香冥烛，弥加恳至。
现代文：然后就熄了灯烛点起香火，更加急切地恳求杨贵妃能降临。
English: Then he turned off the lights and candles, lit incense, and begged Yang Guifei to come more urgently.

古文：三日夜，又奏曰： 于人寰之中，山川岳渎祠庙之内，十洲三岛江海之间，亦遍求访，莫知其所。
现代文：第三天夜里，杨什伍又奏报： 我又找遍了人间的河流山川寺庙道观，还去了东海的蓬莱、方丈、瀛洲三仙岛和祖洲、玄洲、炎洲、长洲、瀛洲、元洲、流洲、生洲、凤麟洲、聚窟洲这十仙洲，仍然没有找到贵妃娘娘。
English: On the evening of the third day, Yang Shwu also reported: I have searched the rivers of the world, the mountains, the rivers, the temples, and the Taoism, and I have also gone to the East Sea's Penglai, Hojo, Luzhou, the Three Immortals, and the ten Immortals of Zhou, Xuan Zhou, Yan Zhou, Chang Zhou, Zhou Zhou, Yuan Zhou, Liu Zhou, Zhou Zhou, Fenglin Zhou, and Zhou Zhou Zhou, and still have not found Guifei Niang.

古文：后于东海之上，蓬莱之顶，南宫西庑。有群仙所居，上元女仙太真者，即贵妃也。
现代文：后来，我来到东海的蓬莱山顶，在群仙居住的地方打听到有一位上元女仙名叫太真，我在她居住的南宫西廊屋里拜见了她，原来这位太真女仙就是贵妃娘娘。
English: Later, I came to the top of Penglai Mountain in the East China Sea, and in the place where the immortals lived, I heard that there was a Shangyuan female fairy named Taizhen. I visited her in the west corridor of the South Palace, where she lived. It turned out that this Taizhen female fairy was Guifei's daughter.

古文：谓什伍曰： 我太上侍女，隶上元宫。
现代文：她对我说： 我现在是天帝的侍女，隶属于上元宫。
English: She said to me, "I am now a maidservant of the Heavenly Emperor, and I belong to Shangyuan Palace."

古文：圣上太阳朱宫真人，偶以宿缘世念，其愿颇重，圣上降居于世，我谪于人间，以为侍卫耳。
现代文：明皇陛下本来是太阳朱宫的神仙，由于他有了很重的凡念，才让他下凡到人世，我也被贬到人间侍奉他。
English: His Majesty the Emperor Ming was originally a divine being of the Sun Zhu Palace. Because he had very heavy worldly desires, he was allowed to come down to earth. I was also relegated to the human world to serve him.

古文：此后一纪，自当相见，愿善保圣体，无复意念也。 
现代文：十二年后，我们就会相见，希望陛下多多珍重，保养圣体，不要过分思念我吧。 
English: Twelve years later, we will meet again. I hope Your Majesty will cherish and preserve the Blessed Sacrament, and not miss me too much.

古文：乃取开元中所赐金钗钿合各半，玉龟子一，寄以为信，曰： 圣上见此，自当醒忆矣。 
现代文：说罢，贵妃娘娘就拿出陛下在开元年间赐给她的金钗和钿盒各一半，还有一只玉制的小龟作为凭据，她说陛下见了这几件东西就会醒悟，也就知道她也在思念陛下了。
English: Having said that, the noblewoman took out half of the gold ingot and half of the enamel box that His Majesty had given her at the beginning of the year, as well as a small turtle made of jade as evidence. She said that when His Majesty saw these things, he would wake up and know that she was also thinking about His Majesty.

古文：言讫流涕而别。 
现代文：然后，她就和我流着泪告别了。 
English: Then she said goodbye to me in tears.

古文：什伍以此物进之，上潸然良久。
现代文：杨什伍奏报后就把杨贵妃让他捎的那几样东西呈给唐明皇，明皇睹物伤情，饮泣了很久。
English: After Yang Shwu delivered the report, he presented the few things that Yang Guifei let him carry to Emperor Ming of Tang. Emperor Ming witnessed the injury and cried for a long time.

古文：乃曰： 师升天入地，通幽达冥，真得道神仙之士也。 
现代文：唐明皇对杨什伍说： 道长你能够升天入地，和仙界冥府相通，真是一位道术高明的仙师啊！ 
English: Tang Mingwang said to Yang Shwu: Daochang, you can ascend to heaven and earth, and communicate with the celestial world and the underworld. You are truly a master of Taoism!

古文：手笔赐名 通幽 ，赐物千段，金银各千两，良田五千亩，紫霞帔、白玉简，特加礼异。
现代文：当时就提笔赐名为 通幽 ，赐给他千种宝物，金银各一千两，良田五千亩，还赐给他紫霞图样的帔肩和白玉笏版，对他优礼有加。
English: At that time, he raised his pen and was given the name Tongyu. He was given a thousand kinds of treasures, a thousand taels of gold and silver, and five thousand mu of good farmland. He was also given a purple and blue patterned shoulder strap and a white jade embroidered plate. He was treated with great courtesy.

古文：暇日问其所受之道，曰： 臣师乃西城王君青城真人，昔于后城山中，教以召命之术曰： 可以辅赞太平之君，然后方得飞升之道。 
现代文：后来唐明皇在闲暇时问杨什伍和谁学的道术，杨什伍说： 我的老师是西城王君、青城真人。当年在后城山里教给我召神术，并让我辅助太平盛世的皇帝，然后我就可以飞升成仙。
English: Later, in his spare time, Emperor Tang Ming asked Yang Shwu who he had learned Taoism from. Yang Shwu said, "My teacher was the King of Xicheng and the True Man of Qingcheng. That year, he taught me to invoke the divine in the mountains behind the city, and let me assist the Emperor of Taiping and prosperous times, and then I could fly into immortality."

古文：戒以护气希言，目不妄视，绝声利，远嚣尘，则可以凌三界，登太清矣。 
现代文：老师告诫我要养气少言，目不乱视，杜绝对名利的追求，远离世间凡俗，这样我就可以凌驾于天、地、人三界之上，升入仙界了。 
English: The teacher warned me to keep my spirits up, speak less, keep my eyes open, give up the pursuit of fame and fortune, and stay away from the mundane world, so that I could rise above the three realms of heaven, earth, and man, and ascend into the spirit world.

古文：又问升天入地，何门而往，何所为碍。曰： 得道之人，入火不爇，入水不濡，蹑虚如履实，触实如蹈虚。
现代文：唐明皇又问他升天入地有什么途径，怕什么东西阻碍，杨什伍说： 得了仙道的人，在火中不怕烧，进水不湿衣，足踏虚空像踩在实地上，接触实地上又像踏在虚空中。
English: Tang Minghu also asked him what is the way of ascending to heaven and entering the earth, afraid of something hindering him, Yang Shwu said: People who have obtained the way of the immortals are not afraid of burning in the fire, they are not wet in the water, and stepping on the void is like stepping on the ground, and touching the ground is like stepping on the void.

古文：虽九地之厚，巨海之广，八极之远，万方之大，应念倏忽，何所拘滞乎。
现代文：不管多么厚的土地，多么宽的海洋，八极多么遥远，万方那么广大，我一念之间都可以上下纵横升降飞腾，什么也阻挡不了我。
English: No matter how thick the land, how wide the ocean, how far away the eight poles are, and how vast the universe is, I can fly up and down, up and down, up and down, and nothing can stop me.

古文：所以然者，形与道合。
现代文：我之所以能这样，是因为我的形体和道完全融合在一起了。
English: I am able to do this because my body and the Tao are completely integrated.

古文：道无不在，毫芒之细，万物之众，道皆居之。 
现代文：道无处不在，从毫毛麦芒那么细微的东西，到世间万物，全都有道在其中。 
English: Tao is everywhere, from the tiniest things to everything in the world, everything has Tao in it.

古文：上善其对。
现代文：唐明皇非常赞赏他对道的解释。
English: Emperor Ming appreciated his explanation of the Tao.

古文：居数载，乃登后城山，葺静室于其顶，时还其家。
现代文：杨什伍在宫里住了几年，就进了后城山，在山顶上修了一间修炼道术的静室，也常常回家看看。
English: After living in the palace for several years, Yang Shwu went to Houcheng Mountain and built a quiet room for cultivating Taoism on the top of the mountain. He often went home to have a look.

古文：门人言天真累降于静室。
现代文：他的弟子说天真常常降临他的静室指导他修炼。
English: His disciples said that Innocence often came to his seclusion room to guide him in cultivation.

古文：一旦与群真俱去。
现代文：后来，杨什伍和一群神仙一同飞升进入仙界了。
English: Later, Yang Shwu and a group of immortals soared into the spirit world together.

