古文：墨家之论，以为人死无命；儒家之议，以为人死有命。
现代文：墨家的学说，认为人死不由命决定；儒家的学说，认为人死有命来决定。
English: The doctrine of the Mohists holds that man's death is not determined by his life; the doctrine of the Confucians holds that man's death is determined by his life.

古文：言有命者，见子夏言 死生有命，富贵在天。 
现代文：说有命来决定的，听见子夏说过 人的死与生是由命来决定，富与贵是在于上天安排 。
English: When I heard Zixia say that life and death are determined by fate, I also heard that life and death are determined by fate, and wealth and honor are determined by God's arrangement.

古文：言无命者，闻历阳之都，一宿沉而为湖；秦将白起坑赵降卒於长平之下，四十万众，同时皆死；春秋之时，败绩之军，死者蔽草，尸且万数；饥馑之岁，饿者满道；温气疫疬，千户灭门，如必有命，何其秦、齐同也？
现代文：说不由命决定的，闻悉历阳城一夜沉沦而为湖泊；秦国大将白起活埋赵国降兵在长平地下，四十万人同时死亡。春秋时期，溃败的军队，死者只能用草遮盖，尸体将以万计。灾荒之年，挨饿的人到处都是，瘟疫流行，千家死绝，如果一定要说有命，怎么西边秦国与东边齐国人的命完全相同呢？
English: Saying that it is not determined by fate, I heard that Liyang City sank overnight and became a lake; the general of Qin buried the fallen soldiers of Zhao in Changping in vain, and 400,000 people died at the same time. In the spring and autumn period, the defeated army, the dead can only be covered with grass, and the bodies will be counted in tens of thousands. In the year of disaster, starving people are everywhere, plague is prevalent, and thousands of families have died. If it must be said that there is life, how can the lives of Qin people in the west and Qi people in the east be exactly the same?

古文：言有命者曰：夫天下之大，人民之众，一历阳之都，一长平之坑，同命俱死，未可怪也。
现代文：讲由命来决定的人说： 天下之大，人民之多，一个历阳城，一个长平坑，同命的都死在里面，这没有什么值得奇怪的。
English: The fate-determining person said: There is nothing strange about the vastness of the world and the large number of people, a Liyang city and a Changping pit, and all those who share the same fate die in it.

古文：命当溺死，故相聚於历阳；命当压死，故相积於长平。
现代文：命当淹死，所以互相聚积在历阳；命该压死，因此相互堆积在长平。 
English: Life should be drowned, so they accumulate each other in Liyang; life should be crushed, so they accumulate each other in Changping.

古文：犹高祖初起，相工入丰、沛之邦，多封侯之人矣，未必老少男女俱贵而有相也，卓砾时见，往往皆然。
现代文：像汉高祖开始起事，扶助其事业到丰、沛一带的，后来许多是被封侯的人，未必这些老少男女都有贵命而且有贵相，杰出人物同时出现，往往都是这样。
English: It is not necessarily the case that these men and women, young and old, have noble lives and noble faces, but it is often the case that outstanding figures appear at the same time.

古文：而历阳之都，男女俱没，长平之坑，老少并陷，万数之中，必有长命未当死之人。遭时衰微，兵革并起，不得终其寿。
现代文：历阳城的男女都被淹没了，长平坑中的老少同时被活埋了，万数之中，一定有长命不该死的人，遇上时世衰败，战争四起，就不能正常活完他的寿命。
English: The men and women of Liyang City were all drowned, and the old and young in the Changping pit were buried alive at the same time. Among the tens of thousands, there must be a long-lived person who does not deserve to die. In the face of the decline of the times and the four wars, he cannot live out his life normally.

古文：人命有长短，时有盛衰，衰则疾病，被灾蒙祸之验也。 
现代文：人命有长短，时世有盛衰，时世衰乱，人就容易得病死亡，这正是遭受灾祸的证明。
English: People's lives are long and short, with ups and downs, and ups and downs, and people are prone to get sick and die, which is proof of suffering calamity.

古文：宋、卫、陈、郑同日并灾，四国之民，必有禄盛未当衰之人，然而俱灭，国祸陵之也。
现代文：宋、卫、陈、郑四国同一天一起遭火灾，四国人民当中一定有禄命旺盛不该衰退的人，然而都跟着一齐受灾祸，这真是国祸高于禄命。
English: The four countries of Song, Wei, Chen and Zheng suffered a fire on the same day. Among the people of the four countries, there must be people whose fortunes should not decline, but they all suffered the disaster together. This is really a national disaster higher than the fortunes.

古文：故国命胜人命，寿命胜禄命。
现代文：所以，国命胜过人命，寿命胜过禄命。
English: Therefore, national life is more important than human life, and life expectancy is more important than longevity.

古文：人有寿夭之相，亦有贫富贵贱之法，俱见於体。
现代文：人有长寿短命的相，也有贫富贵贱的相，这些都能从身体面貌上表现出来。
English: People have long-lived and short-lived aspects, as well as rich and poor aspects, all of which can be expressed in their physical appearance.

古文：故寿命修短，皆禀於天；骨法善恶，皆见於体。
现代文：所以，寿命的长短全在于从天上承受的气，骨相的善恶全可以从身体面貌上表现出来。
English: Therefore, the length of life depends entirely on the qi received from heaven, and the good and evil of the bones can all be shown from the physical appearance.

古文：命当夭折，虽禀异行，终不得长；禄当贫贱，虽有善性，终不得遂。
现代文：命该夭折，虽有与众不同的好操行，最终还是活不长；禄该贫贱，虽有好的本性，最终富贵还是不能如愿。
English: Life should be premature, although there is a distinctive good conduct, in the end still do not live long; Loku should be poor, although there is a good nature, in the end rich or not as desired.

古文：项羽且死，顾谓其徒曰： 吾败乃命，非用兵之过。 
现代文：项羽快要死了，环顾周围对他的随从说： 我的失败是命中注定的，并不是我指挥有错误。 
English: Xiang Yu was about to die, and he looked around at his followers and said, "My failure was predestined, it's not that I made a mistake in my command.

古文：此言实也。实者项羽用兵过於高祖，高祖之起，有天命焉。
现代文：这是实话，之所以真实，是因为项羽指挥打仗胜过于汉高祖，高祖的起事，是得到天命的。
English: This is the truth, and the reason why it is true is that Xiang Yu's command of war was superior to that of Han Gaozu. Gaozu's uprising was ordained by Heaven.

古文：国命系於众星，列宿吉凶，国有祸福；众星推移，人有盛衰。
现代文：国家的命运决定于众多的星宿。各星宿的凶吉，使得国家有祸有福；众星宿的移动，使得人有盛有衰。
English: The fate of a country is determined by many stars. The bad luck of each star causes the country to have misfortune and good luck; the movement of many stars causes people to have prosperity and decline.

古文：人之有吉凶，犹岁之有丰耗，命有衰盛，物有贵贱。
现代文：人有凶吉，好像一年中作物有丰收和歉收。人有盛衰，东西有贵贱。
English: People have bad luck, just as crops have good harvests and bad harvests throughout the year. People have their ups and downs, and things have their highs and lows.

古文：一岁之中，一贵一贱；一寿之间，一衰一盛。
现代文：一年之中，有的作物贵，有的作物贱；一生当中，有人失意，有人腾达。
English: In a year, some crops are expensive, some crops are cheap; in a lifetime, some people are frustrated, some people are successful.

古文：物之贵贱，不在丰耗；人之衰盛，不在贤愚。
现代文：作物的贵贱，不在乎丰收与歉收；人的衰盛，不在乎贤能与愚蠢。
English: The nobility and lowliness of crops do not care about the bumper harvest and poor harvest; the prosperity of man does not care about wisdom and stupidity.

古文：子夏曰 死生有命，富贵在天 ，而不曰 死生在天，富贵有命 者，何则？
现代文：子夏说 死生由命来决定，富贵在天安排 ，而不说 死生在天安排，富贵由命来决定 ，为什么呢？
English: Zixia said that life and death are determined by fate, and wealth is arranged by heaven, but did not say that life and death are arranged by heaven, and wealth is determined by fate. Why?

古文：死生者，无象在天，以性为主。
现代文：人的生死，不是由天上星象来决定，而是由气形成生命强弱所主宰。
English: A person's life and death are not determined by the stars in the sky, but by the strength and weakness of the life force formed by qi.

古文：禀得坚强之性，则气渥厚而体坚强，坚强则寿命长，寿命长则不夭死。禀性软弱者，气少泊而性羸窳，羸窳则寿命短，短则蚤死。
现代文：承受的气形成坚强的生命，则气浓厚而身体坚强，身体坚强则寿命长，长就不会夭折；承受的气形成的生命软弱，则气稀薄而身体瘦弱，身体瘦弱则寿命短，短就会早死。
English: The life that endures the formation of qi forms a strong life, then the qi is thick and the body is strong, the body is strong and the life is long, long will not die young; the life that endures the formation of qi is weak, then the qi is thin and the body is weak, the body is weak and the life is short, short will die early.

古文：故言 有命 ，命则性也。
现代文：所以子夏说，人的生死由命来决定，这个命就是性。
English: Therefore, Zixia said, people's life and death are determined by life, and this life is sex.

古文：至於富贵所禀，犹性所禀之气，得众星之精。
现代文：至于形成富贵所承受的气，就像形成生命所承受的气一样，是得到了各星宿散发的气。
English: As for the gas that sustains the formation of wealth, just like the gas that sustains the formation of life, it is obtained from the gas emitted by each star.

古文：众星在天，天有其象。
现代文：众星宿在天上，天上有富贵贫贱的星象。
English: The constellations are in the heavens, and on the heavens are constellations, rich and poor.

古文：得富贵象则富贵，得贫贱象则贫贱，故曰 在天 。
现代文：接受富贵星象的就富贵，接受贫贱星象的就贫贱，所以说是 在于天决定 。
English: Those who accept the rich and noble stars will be rich, and those who accept the poor and lowly stars will be lowly, so it is said to be decided by heaven.

古文：在天如何？
现代文：怎样由天决定？
English: How is it decided by the heavens?

古文：天有百官，有众星。
现代文：天上有大小百官，有众多星宿。
English: In the sky, there are hundreds of stars, big and small, and many constellations.

古文：天施气而众星布精，天所施气，众星之气在其中矣。
现代文：天施放气而各星宿也在散布气，天所施放的气，其中也包括众星宿散布的气。
English: The sky emits gas, and the stars are also emitting gas. The gas emitted by the sky also includes the gas emitted by the stars.

古文：人禀气而生，含气而长，得贵则贵，得贱则贱；贵或秩有高下，富或资有多少，皆星位尊卑小大之所授也。故天有百官，天有众星，地有万民，五帝、三王之精。
现代文：人承受气而出生，怀气而长大，承受尊贵的气则人尊贵，承受卑贱的气人卑贱。同属尊贵有时官阶还有高有低，同属富裕有时财物也有多有少，这都是按众星宿地位尊卑大小授给的缘故，所以天上有大小百官，有众多星宿，地上就有形成万民、五帝、三王的气。
English: People are born with the qi, grow up with the qi, become noble with the noble qi, and become lowly with the lowly qi. When people belong to the same noble family, there are high and low ranks, and when people belong to the same rich family, there are more and less possessions. All of this is due to the fact that the stars are given according to their status of high and low. Therefore, there are hundreds of ranks in the sky and many stars, and the qi of all nations, five emperors, and three kings is formed on the earth.

古文：天有王梁、造父，人亦有之，禀受其气，故巧於御。
现代文：天上有王梁，造父两星座，人间也就有王梁，造父这样的人，因是承受它们的气，所以善于驾驭车马。
English: In heaven, there is Wang Liang, the creator of the two constellations. On earth, there is also Wang Liang, the creator of such people, who are good at driving chariots and horses because they bear their spirits.

古文：传曰： 说命有三，一曰正命，二曰随命，三曰遭命。 
现代文：经传上说： 命有三种：一叫正命，二叫随命，三叫遭命。 
English: According to legend, there are three kinds of life: one is called righteous life, the second is called obedient life, and the third is called suffering life.

古文：正命，谓本禀之自得吉也。
现代文：正命，是说本来给的就是好命，自然会得到富贵。
English: Good fortune, is to say that the original is to give a good life, will naturally get rich.

古文：性然骨善，故不假操行以求福而吉自至，故曰正命。
现代文：生下来骨相就好，不需要良好操行来寻求福祐而富贵自然会到来，所以叫正命。
English: If you are born with a good bone structure, you don't need to behave well to seek good fortune, and wealth will come naturally. That's why it's called good fortune.

古文：随命者，戳力操行而吉福至，纵情施欲而凶祸到，故曰随命。
现代文：随命，是说要努力端正操行而富贵福祐才能得到，若放纵自己的情欲那么贫贱灾祸就会跟随而来，所以叫随命。
English: To follow one's destiny means that one should strive to live a virtuous life in order to obtain wealth and good fortune. If one indulges one's passions, poverty and misfortune will follow. Therefore, one should follow one's destiny.

古文：遭命者，行善得恶，非所冀望，逢遭於外而得凶祸，故曰遭命。
现代文：遭命，是说做善事遭恶报，并非自己希望的结果，而是偶然碰上外来的事故，遭到贫贱与灾祸，所以叫遭命。
English: To be ordered is to do a good deed and receive a bad reward. It is not the result of one's own hope, but to accidentally encounter an external accident, to be subjected to poverty and disaster, so it is called being ordered.

古文：凡人受命，在父母施气之时，已得吉凶矣。
现代文：人得到生命，是在父母交合的时倏，那时已经注定了自己的吉凶。
English: People get life when their parents mate, when they have already determined their own fortunes.

古文：夫性与命异，或性善而命凶，或性恶而命吉。
现代文：性与命不同，有的性善而命凶，有的性恶而命吉。
English: Sex and life are different. Some people have good sex and bad life, and some people have bad sex and good life.

古文：操行善恶者，性也；祸福吉凶者，命也。
现代文：操行品德的好坏，是性；遇到的祸福凶吉，是命。
English: The good or bad of moral conduct is sex; the misfortune, fortune, and bad luck encountered is life.

古文：或行善而得祸，是性善而命凶；或行恶而得福，是性恶而命吉也。
现代文：有的人操行良好而遭到灾祸，这是性善而命凶；有的人操行恶劣却得到福祐，这是性恶而命吉。
English: Some people behave well and suffer misfortune, which is good and fatal; some people behave badly but receive blessings, which is bad and fatal.

古文：性自有善恶，命自有吉凶。
现代文：性自然有善有恶，命自然有吉有凶。
English: Sex naturally has good and evil, life naturally has good and evil.

古文：使命吉之人，虽不行善，未必无福；凶命之人，虽勉操行，未必无祸。
现代文：假使命吉的人，即使不做好事，未必得不到福祐；命凶的人，即使努力修养操行，也未必没有灾祸。
English: Those who pretend to be lucky, even if they don't do good deeds, may not receive blessings; those who are unlucky, even if they work hard to cultivate and practice, may not be free from disasters.

古文：孟子曰： 求之有道，得之有命。 
现代文：孟子说： 追求富贵有一定门径，能否得到由命来决定。 
English: Mencius said: The pursuit of wealth has a certain path, and whether it can be obtained is determined by fate.

古文：性善乃能求之，命善乃能得之。
现代文：性善才能追求富贵，命善才能得到富贵。
English: It takes a good nature to pursue riches, and a good life to get them.

古文：性善命凶，求之不能得也。
现代文：性善命凶，追求富贵是不能得到的。
English: Good-natured and fierce, the pursuit of wealth is unattainable.

古文：行恶者祸随而至。而盗跖、庄蹻横行天下，聚党数千，攻夺人物，断斩人身，无道甚矣，宜遇其祸，乃以寿终。
现代文：如果做坏事灾祸就会随之而到来，那么跖、庄跷率众横行天下，聚集同党数千人，到处打人夺物，宰杀民众，没有道义到极点，应当遭受灾祸，但却活到了正常寿命才死去。
English: If doing bad things would bring disaster, then Zou and Zhuang Zheng led the crowd to rampage around the world, gathered thousands of party members, beat people and things everywhere, and slaughtered people. They were extremely immoral and should have suffered disaster, but they lived to a normal life span before dying.

古文：夫如是，随命之说，安所验乎？
现代文：这样，随命的说法，怎么能证实呢？
English: So, how can we confirm this arbitrary statement?

古文：遭命者，行善於内，遭凶於外也。
现代文：遭命的人，自身做好事，却由于外来的原因遭到灾凶。
English: Those who were ordered to do so did good deeds themselves, but suffered disaster due to external reasons.

古文：若颜渊、伯牛之徒，如何遭凶？
现代文：像颜渊、伯牛这样的人，为什么会遭到灾凶呢？
English: Why do people like Yan Yuan and Bo Niu suffer from disasters?

古文：颜渊、伯牛，行善者也，当得随命，福佑随至，何故遭凶？
现代文：颜渊、伯牛，是操行贤良的人，应该是随命，福祐就当随之而来，怎么又遭到灾凶？
English: Yan Yuan and Bo Niu are people with virtuous conduct. They should follow their fates, and good fortune should follow them. How did they become victims of calamity?

古文：颜渊困於学，以才自杀；伯牛空居而遭恶疾。
现代文：颜渊被研究学问弄得疲劳过度，而很快结束了自己生命；伯牛是老老实实呆在家里而得了不治之症。
English: Yan Yuan was overworked by his studies and soon took his own life; Bo Niu stayed at home and got an incurable disease.

古文：及屈平、伍员之徒，尽忠辅上，竭王臣之节，而楚放其身，吴烹其尸。
现代文：到屈原，伍子胥这些人，竭尽忠心辅佐君王，尽了臣子的节操，而楚王却放逐了屈原，吴王却把伍子胥的尸体用鼎烹煮。
English: When they arrived in Quyuan, Wu Zixuan and his men tried their best to be loyal and assist the king, and they did their best to protect their vassals. However, King Chu banished Quyuan, while King Wu boiled Wu Zixuan's corpse in boiling water.

古文：行善当得随命之福，乃触遭命之祸，何哉？
现代文：操行贤良应当得到随命的福祐，竟受到遭命的灾祸，为什么呢？
English: Why is it that the virtuous should receive the blessings of fate, but the wicked the calamities of fate?

古文：言随命则无遭命，言遭命则无随命，儒者三命之说，竟何所定？
现代文：说随命就没有遭命，说遭命就不会有随命，那儒者的三命说法，究竟是根据什么作出的呢？
English: What is the basis for the Confucianist's saying of the three lives, that if you follow orders, you will not be ordered, and if you are ordered, you will not follow orders?

古文：且命在初生，骨表著见。
现代文：生命在生下来之后，一个人骨相体貌就能清楚地看出来。
English: After life is born, a person's bone structure and appearance can be clearly seen.

古文：今言随操行而至，此命在末，不在本也。
现代文：现在说命的吉凶是随操行而到来，这样命是在出生之后才有，而不是在最初承受气时所具有。
English: It is now said that one's fate is determined by one's deeds, so that one's fate is determined after birth, rather than at the time of initial breath-taking.

古文：则富贵贫贱皆在初禀之时，不在长大之後，随操行而至也。
现代文：可见富贵贫贱都在最初承受气的时候决定了，不在长大之后随操行而到来。
English: It can be seen that the rich and the poor are decided at the time of the initial suffering of qi, and do not come with the practice after growing up.

古文：正命者，至百而死；随命者，五十而死。
现代文：正命的人活到百岁死。随命的人活到五十岁死。
English: Those who lead a virtuous life live to the age of one hundred and those who follow their calling live to the age of fifty.

古文：遭命者，初禀气时遭凶恶也，谓妊娠之时遭得恶也，或遭雷雨之变，长大夭死。
现代文：遭命的人最初承受气的时候就遭到意外的凶祸，比如说，怀孕的时候碰到不祥之物，或者遇到打雷下雨这样气候的突然变化，以后长大了也会早死。
English: For example, if a pregnant woman encounters an ominous object, or a sudden change in the weather such as thunder and rain, she will grow up to die early.

古文：此谓三命。
现代文：这就是所说的三种命。
English: This is the so-called three lives.

古文：亦有三性：有正，有随，有遭。
现代文：也有三种性：有正，有随，有遭。
English: There are also three kinds of sex: there is positive, there is with, and there is misfortune.

古文：正者，禀五常之性也；随者，随父母之性；遭者，遭得恶物象之故也。
现代文：正，就是禀承仁、义、礼、智，信的性；随，就是顺从，任凭父母的性；遭，就是遭受恶物的性。
English: Right is the nature of inheriting benevolence, righteousness, propriety, wisdom, and faith; following is the nature of obeying and letting go of parents; suffering is the nature of suffering evil things.

古文：故妊妇食兔，子生缺脣。
现代文：所以孕妇吃兔子肉，孩子生下来嘴唇是缺的。
English: That's why pregnant women eat rabbit meat, and babies are born with missing lips.

古文：《月令》曰： 是月也，雷将发声。 有不戒其容者，生子不备，必有大凶，喑聋跛盲。
现代文：《月令》上说： 这个月一一夏历二月，要开始打雷，有同房行为不谨慎的，生下来的子女形体就会有缺陷，而且肯定要有大的灾祸。 
English: "Monthly Calendar" said: This month, the first month of the second month of the lunar calendar, will begin to thunder, and if there is a roommate who acts imprudently, the children born will have defects in shape, and there must be a great disaster.

古文：气遭胎伤，故受性狂悖。羊舌似我初生之时，声似豺狼，长大性恶，被祸而死。
现代文：嗓哑、耳聋、脚跛，目盲，是因为气碰上恶物，使胎儿受到损伤，所以受气形成的性狂乱背理。羊舌似我刚生下来的时候，声音像豺狼，长大之后性恶劣，遭受凶祸而死。
English: Mute, deaf, lame, blind, because the qi collides with evil things, causing damage to the fetus, so the sexual frenzy formed by the qi is contrary to reason. The sheep's tongue is like when I was just born, the voice is like a jackal, after growing up, the sex is bad, and it suffers from evil and dies.

古文：在母身时，遭受此性，丹硃、商均之类是也。
现代文：在母体内时，遭受这种性的，与丹朱，商均是一类。
English: When in the mother's body, suffering from this kind of sex, and Danzhu, Shang are all in the same category.

古文：性命在本，故《礼》有胎教之法：子在身时，席不正不坐，割不正不食，非正色目不视，非正声耳不听。
现代文：性和命是最初承受气时形成的，所以《礼记》上有胎教的各种礼法：妇女有身孕时，座席不在正中不坐，割下的肉不方正不吃，不纯正的颜色眼睛不看，不正当的声音耳朵不听。
English: Sexuality and life are initially formed when bearing qi, so there are various etiquettes of fetal education in the "Rituals": when a woman is pregnant, the seat is not in the middle, do not sit, do not eat cut meat, do not look at impure colors, do not listen to improper sounds.

古文：及长，置以贤师良傅，教君臣父子之道，贤不肖在此时矣。
现代文：等到孩子长大，安排个贤良的老师，教授君臣父子的道理。是贤良还是不肖都在母体内时形成。
English: When the child grows up, arrange a virtuous teacher to teach the principle of father and son. Whether it is virtuous or not is formed in the mother's body.

古文：受气时，母不谨慎，心妄虑邪，则子长大，狂悖不善，形体丑恶。
现代文：父母交合时，如果母亲不谨慎，心中胡乱想邪恶的事，以后子女长大，狂妄背理行为恶劣，相貌难看。
English: When parents have sexual intercourse, if the mother is not careful and thinks of evil things in her mind, the children will grow up, behave arrogantly and unreasonably, and look ugly.

古文：素女对黄帝陈五女之法，非徒伤父母之身，乃又贼男女之性。
现代文：素女对黄帝陈述御女淫乱的行为，不只是损伤了父母的身体，而且还伤害了子女的性。
English: When an unmarried woman reported her daughter's adulterous behavior to the Yellow Emperor, she not only damaged her parents' bodies, but also harmed her children's sexuality.

古文：人有命，有禄，有遭遇，有幸偶。
现代文：人有命，有禄，有遭遇，有幸偶。
English: A person has a life, a reward, an encounter, and a lucky charm.

古文：命者，贫富贵贱也；禄者，盛衰兴废也。
现代文：命，决定人的贫富贵贱；禄，决定人的盛衰兴废。
English: Life determines a person's wealth and status; luck determines a person's rise and fall, success and failure.

古文：以命当富贵，遭当盛之禄，常安不危；以命当贫贱，遇当衰之禄，则祸殃乃至，常苦不乐。
现代文：如命该富贵，又碰上正当禄命旺盛，就会长久安适而没有危险。如命该贫贱，又遇上禄命衰微，那灾祸于是就会到来，经常感到痛苦而没有欢乐。
English: If one's fortune is to be rich, and if one's fortune is to be just, and if one's fortune is to be prosperous, then one will be safe and secure for a long time, and there will be no danger. If one's fortune is to be poor, and if one's fortune is to be poor, then the calamity will come, and one will always feel pain and not joy.

古文：遭者，遭逢非常之变，若成汤囚夏台，文王厄牖里矣。
现代文：遭，就是碰到意料不到的灾祸，像成汤被夏桀囚禁在夏台，文王被商纣囚禁在牖里。
English: Suffering is to encounter unexpected disasters, like Cheng Tang was imprisoned by Xia Yao in Xatai, and King Wen was imprisoned by Shang Yao in Jiali.

古文：以圣明之德，而有囚厄之变，可谓遭矣。
现代文：以圣明的德操，却有被囚禁的灾祸，真可称为遭啊！
English: To have the virtue of holiness, but the calamity of being imprisoned, can truly be called a misfortune!

古文：变虽甚大，命善禄盛，变不为害，故称遭逢之祸。
现代文：灾祸即使很严重，要是命好禄旺盛，灾祸不会造成损害，所以称作碰上的灾祸。
English: Even if the disaster is very serious, if the fortune is good, the disaster will not cause damage, so it is called the disaster encountered.

古文：晏子所遭，可谓大矣。直兵指胸，白刃如颈，蹈死亡之地，当剑戟之锋，执死得生还。
现代文：晏子遇到的情况，可以说太危险了，长剑直抵胸膛，戟架在颈子上，陷于生死存亡的境地，面对剑戟的锋尖，处于死地而能活下来。
English: The situation encountered by the cripple can be said to be too dangerous. The long sword is raised straight to the chest, the halter is on the neck, trapped in a life-and-death situation, facing the sharp edge of the sword, and can survive in death.

古文：命善禄盛，遭逢之祸，不能害也。
现代文：可见命善禄盛，碰到灾祸，是不会受到危害的。
English: It can be seen that life is good and prosperous, and when it encounters disaster, it will not be harmed.

古文：历阳之都，长平之坑，其中必有命善禄盛之人，一宿同填而死。遭逢之祸大，命善禄盛不能却也。
现代文：历阳的城中，长平的坑中，其中肯定有命善禄盛的人，一夜之间同时被水淹，活埋而死，这是遇到灭顶的灾祸，就是命善禄盛的人也无法能避免。
English: In the city of Liyang, in the pits of Changping, there must be people with a good fortune in life, who were simultaneously flooded overnight and buried alive. This is the disaster of encountering death. Even people with a good fortune in life cannot avoid it.

古文：譬犹水火相更也，水盛胜火，火盛胜水。
现代文：比如像水火相互交替，水多可以胜过火，火大能够胜过水。
English: For example, as water and fire alternate with each other, more water can be better than fire, and more fire can be better than water.

古文：遇者，遇其主而用也。
现代文：遇，就是遇上其君主重用他。
English: When the occasion arises, the monarch reuses it.

古文：虽有善命盛禄，不遇知己之主，不得效验。
现代文：即使有好命和旺盛的禄命，不遇上知己的君主，他就得不到体现。
English: Even if he has a good fortune and a strong fortune, if he does not meet the monarch of his confidant, he will not be reflected.

古文：幸者，谓所遭触得善恶也。
现代文：幸或不幸，是说碰巧得到好坏不同的结果。
English: Fortunate or unlucky is to say that you happen to get a different result.

古文：获罪得脱，幸也。无罪见拘，不幸也。
现代文：有罪能脱身，是幸；无罪被拘禁，是不幸。
English: It is fortunate for the guilty to escape; it is unfortunate for the innocent to be detained.

古文：执拘未久，蒙令得出，命善禄盛，夭灾之祸不能伤也。
现代文：被捉拿拘禁不久，就蒙赦令得以出脱，这是命好，命禄旺盛，夭折的灾祸不能伤害。
English: Not long after being arrested and detained, he was pardoned and was able to escape. This is a good life, a prosperous life, and the scourge of premature death cannot hurt.

古文：偶者，谓事君也。
现代文：偶，是说事奉君主能得到重用。
English: By the way, it is said that serving the monarch can be of great use.

古文：以道事君，君善其言，遂用其身，偶也。行与主乖，退而远，不偶也。
现代文：用正道事奉君主，君主喜欢其意见，就重用这个人，这是偶；所作所为与君主的好恶不合，就被斥退贬谪，这是不偶。
English: It is not by chance that a person who serves the sovereign in an upright manner and whose opinions are favored by the sovereign is often used. It is not by chance that a person who acts in a way that is not to the liking or disliking of the sovereign is rejected and disparaged.

古文：退远未久，上官录召，命善禄盛，不偶之害不能留也。
现代文：斥退贬谪不久，被上司召回任用，这是命好，命禄旺盛，不偶的祸害无法滞留。
English: Not long after being dismissed, he was recalled by his boss. This is a good fortune, a good fortune, and an unlucky misfortune.

古文：故夫遭遇幸偶，或与命禄并，或与命离。
现代文：所以、遭、遇、幸、偶，有的与命禄一致；有的则与命禄相反。
English: Therefore, misfortune, encounter, good fortune, and coincidence, some are consistent with destiny; some are contrary to destiny.

古文：遭遇幸偶，遂以成完；遭遇不幸偶，遂以败伤，是与命并者也。中不遂成，善转为恶，是与命禄离者也。
现代文：遭遇幸偶，由于命中注定于是就因此得以实现，这是与命善禄盛相一致的；遭遇碰上不幸和不偶，于是就因此失败和受损，中途不能顺利实现，由富贵转为贫贱，这是与命善禄盛不相一致的情况。
English: Encountering a lucky coincidence, because it is destined by fate, it is therefore able to be realized, which is consistent with the good fortune of life; encountering misfortune and unlucky, it is therefore failed and damaged, cannot be realized smoothly in the middle, and changes from rich to poor, which is inconsistent with the good fortune of life.

古文：故人之在世，有吉凶之命，有盛衰之，重以遭遇幸偶之逢，获从生死而卒其善恶之行，得其胸中之志，希矣。
现代文：因此人在世间，命有好有坏，禄有兴盛之日也有衰微之时，再加上有遭、遇、幸、偶的遭遇，能得以从生到死始终保持自己善恶分明的操行，实现自己胸中抱负的，实在是太少了。
English: Therefore, in the world, people have good and bad lives, they have good days and bad days, they have prosperous days and declining days, and they also have misfortunes, encounters, happiness, and coincidental encounters. There are too few people who can always maintain their good and evil behavior from birth to death and realize their ambitions.

