古文：高帝十二王高帝十九男：昭皇后生武帝、豫章文献王嶷；谢贵嫔生临川献王映、长沙威王晃；罗太妃生武陵昭王晔；任太妃生安成恭王暠；陆修仪生鄱阳王锵、晋熙王銶；袁修容生桂阳王铄；何太妃生始兴简王鉴、宜都王铿；区贵人生衡阳王钧；张淑妃生江夏王锋、河东王铉；李美人生南平王锐；第九、第十三、第十四、第十七皇子早亡。
现代文：高帝共十九个儿子：昭皇后生武帝、豫章文献王萧嶷；谢贵嫔生临川献王萧映、长沙威王萧晃；罗太妃生武陵昭王萧挚；任太妃生安成恭王萧万；陆脩仪生鄱阳王萧锵、晋熙王萧銶；袁脩容生桂阳王萧铄；何太妃生始兴简王萧鉴、宜都王萧铿；区贵人生衡阳王萧钩；张淑妃生江夏王萧锋、河东王萧铉；李美人生南平王萧锐；第九、第十三、第十四、第十七皇于早亡。
English: Emperor Gao had a total of nineteen sons: Empress Zhao gave birth to Emperor Wu, Yu Zhang gave birth to Wang Xiaojun; Xie Gui gave birth to Linchuan Xian Wang Xiaoying, Changsha Wei Wang Xiaojun; Lu Taifei gave birth to Wuling Zhao Wang Xiaojun; Ren Taifei gave birth to Ancheng Guo Wang Xiaojun, Jin Xi Wang Xiaojun; Yuan Shun Rong gave birth to Guiyang Wang Xiaojun; He Taifei gave birth to Shi Xing Jian Wang Xiaojun, Yidu Wang Xiaojun; Guo Guo gave birth to Hengyang Wang Xia

古文：衡阳王钧出继元王后。
现代文：衡阳王萧钧出继元王道度为后嗣。
English: The King of Hengyang, Xiao Xuan, became the successor of the King of Yuan, Daodu.

古文：临川献王映，字宣光，太祖第三子也。
现代文：临川献王萧映字宣光，是太祖第三子。
English: Linchuan Xian Wang Xiao Ying Zi Xuan Guang is the third son of the great-grandfather.

古文：宋元徽四年，解褐著作佐郎，迁抚军行参军，南阳王文学。
现代文：宋元徽四年，脱去布衣由百姓任著作佐郎，迁抚军行参军，南阳王文学。
English: In the fourth year of the Song and Yuan dynasties, the people took off their clothes and were allowed to write the book "Saro," "Move to the army," "Join the army" and "Nanyangwang Literature."

古文：沈攸之事难，太祖时领南徐州，以映为宁朔将军，镇京口。
现代文：沈攸之在寻阳起兵发难，太祖当时领南徐州刺史，任萧映做事朔将军，镇守直口。
English: When Shen Youzhi raised an army in Huanyang, his great-grandfather was in charge of Southern Xuzhou, and appointed Xiao Ying as general, and Zhikou as town guard.

古文：事宁，除中军谘议、从事中郎、辅国将军、淮南宣城二郡太守，并不拜。
现代文：沈攸之的事平定后，除中军谘议、从事中郎、辅国将军、淮南宣城二郡太守，都未接受任职命令。
English: After the matter of Shen You was settled, except for the Chinese army's advisory, engaged in middlemen, auxiliary generals, and Huainan Xuancheng two county governors, they did not accept the appointment order.

古文：仍为假节、督南兖兖徐青冀五州诸军事、行南兖州刺史，将军如故。
现代文：于足就为假节、督南兖兖徐青冀五州诸军事、行南兖州刺史，将军依前未变。
English: At the foot of the false festival, the governor of the five states of the military, the governor of the five states of the military, the governor of the five states of the military, the governor of the five states of the military, the governor of the five states of the military, the governor of the five states of the military, the governor of the five states of the military, the governor of the five states of the military.

古文：寻除给事黄门侍郎，领前军将军，仍复为冠军将军、南兖州刺史，假节督，复为监军，督五州如故。
现代文：不久授给事黄门侍郎，领前军将军，仍又做冠军将军、南兖州刺史，假节督，复为监军，督五州依前未变。
English: Soon, he was awarded the title of Huangmen waiter, leading the former army general, and still became the champion general, the South Luzhou chief historian, the false festival governor, and the supervisor of the army, and the governor of the five states remained unchanged.

古文：齐台建，宋帝诏封映及弟晃、晔、暠、锵、铄、鉴并为开国县公，各千五百户，未及定土宇，而太祖践阼。
现代文：齐王府建立，宋帝下诏封萧映及他弟弟萧晃、萧晔、萧暠、萧锵、萧铄、萧鉴一并为开国县公，各赐食邑一千五百户，还没有来得及确定他们封赐的土字，左袒登基做了皇帝。
English: After the establishment of King Qi's palace, Emperor Song decreed that Xiao Ying and his brothers Xiao Huan, Xiao Huan, Xiao Huan, Xiao Huan, Xiao Huan, Xiao Huan, and Xiao Jian would be the county governors of the founding of the country. Each of them granted food to 1,500 households. However, before they had time to determine the local characters they would grant, Zuo Huan ascended to the throne and became emperor.

古文：以映为使持节、都督荆湘雍益梁宁南北秦八州诸军事、平西将军、荆州刺史。
现代文：萧蝗被任为使持节、都督荆湘雍益梁宁南北秦八州诸军事、平西将军、荆州刺史。
English: Xiao Locust was appointed as the envoy of the festival, the military governor of the eight states of north and south Qin, the general of Pingxi, the governor of Jing, the governor of Hunan, the governor of Yongyi, the governor of Liangning, and the governor of Jing.

古文：封临川王，食邑例二千户。
现代文：封临川王，食邑依例二千产。
English: King of Linchuan County, the food county has produced 2,000 cases.

古文：又领湘州刺史。
现代文：又领湘州刺史。
English: It also led the history of Hunan Province.

古文：豫章王嶷既留镇陕西，映亦不行。
现代文：豫章五、萧嶷已经留镇医酉，蕴迭也就没动身。
English: Yu Zhaowu and Xiao Yao had already stayed in the town to receive medical treatment, so they did not leave.

古文：改授散骑常侍、都督扬南徐二州诸军事、前将军、扬州刺史，持节如故。
现代文：改授散骑常侍、都督扬南徐二州诸军事、前将军、扬州刺史，还依前一样持节。
English: The military, former generals, Yangzhou chief historian, Yangnan Xu Erzhou military governor, and Yangzhou Zhangjiajie regular attendants, as well as Yangnan Xu Erzhou military governor, will still hold the festival as before.

古文：国家初创，映以年少临神州，吏治聪敏，府州曹局皆重足以奉禁令，自宋彭城王义康以后未之有也。
现代文：当时国家刚刚创立，萧映年纪轻轻治理神州，吏治明了敏捷，府州曹局，都很敬重而听从调度，自从宋彭城王义康以后没有过这样的事情。
English: At that time, the country had just been founded, Xiao Ying was young to govern Shenzhou, the officials were clear and agile, and the Fuzhou Cao Bureau were all respectful and obedient to the dispatch, and there had not been such a thing since Song Pengcheng Wang Yikang.

古文：出为都督荆湘雍益梁巴宁南北秦九州诸军事、镇西将军、荆州刺史，持节、常侍如故。
现代文：出京任都督荆湘雍益梁巴宁南北秦九州诸军事、镇西将军、荆州刺史，持节、常侍依前未变。
English: The military, Zhenxi generals, Jingzhou scribes, festival-goers, and regular attendants of Jing Hunan, Yong Yixiang, Banning, North and South Qin, and Kyushu, who were appointed as governors of Beijing, remain unchanged.

古文：给鼓吹一部。
现代文：给一部鼓吹。
English: Part of the trumpet band.

古文：以国忧解散骑常侍，进号征西。
现代文：因为国忧而解除散骑常侍职，进爵号为征西将军。
English: Because of national anxiety, he was relieved of the position of horseback riding attendant, and was given the title of General of the Western Expedition.

古文：永明元年入为侍中，骠骑将军。
现代文：永明元年，入朝为侍中，骠骑将军。
English: In the first year of the Yongming era, he entered the imperial court as a chamberlain and served as a cavalry general.

古文：二年，给油络车。
现代文：永明二年，赏赐他油络车。
English: In the second year of Yongming, he was rewarded with an oil tanker.

古文：五年，即本号开府仪同三司。
现代文：永明五年，即为本封号开府仪同三司。
English: In the fifth year of the Yongming era, this seal was used to open the prefectural government and the three departments.

古文：七年，薨。
现代文：永明一年去世。
English: Yongming died a year later.

古文：映善骑射，解声律，工左右书左右射，应接宾客，风韵韶美，朝野莫不惋惜焉。
现代文：芦迭擅长骑马射箭，懂音乐声律，精于左右书和左右射，应付接待宾客，风度韵致都很美好，对他的逝世朝野没有不惋惜的。
English: Ludii was good at horse riding and archery, knew the musical melody, was good at reading and writing and archery, handled the reception of guests, and had a beautiful demeanor. The court was not without regret at his death.

古文：时年三十二。
现代文：当时年仅三十二岁。
English: He was only thirty-two at the time.

古文：诏赐东园秘器，朝服一具，衣一袭。
现代文：下诏赏赐棺椁一副，朝服一套，衣一套。
English: The following edict rewards a pair of coffin nails, a set of morning dress, and a set of clothes.

古文：赠司空。九子皆封侯。
现代文：追赠司空他的九个儿子都封为侯爵。
English: He posthumously made nine of his sons marquesses.

古文：长子子晋，历东阳、吴兴二郡太守，秘书监，领后军将军。
现代文：他的长子子晋曾经做束阳吴兴二郡太守。秘书监，领后军将军。
English: His eldest son, Jin, once served as the governor of Sokyang Wuxing Second County, the supervisor of secretaries, and the leader of the rear army.

古文：永元初，为侍中，迁左民尚书。
现代文：永元初年，为侍中，迁左民尚书。
English: In the first year of the Yong Yuan Dynasty, he became a samurai and was transferred to the left of Min Shangshu.

古文：坐从妹祖日不拜，为有司所奏，事留中，子晋遂不复拜。
现代文：因为堂妹的出葬日没有接受任命，被有关官员弹劾，皇帝将奏章留在禁中不作处理，子置因此也就没再接受任命。
English: Because he did not accept the appointment on the day of his cousin's funeral, he was impeached by the relevant officials, and the emperor left the report in the ban without dealing with it. Therefore, Ziqi did not accept the appointment.

古文：梁王定京邑，犹服侍中服。
现代文：当梁王平定京都时，王置仍然穿着侍中的官服。
English: When Liang Wang conquered Kyoto, Wang Jie was still wearing the official uniform of an aide-de-camp.

古文：入梁为辅国将军、高平太守。
现代文：进入梁朝后子晋为辅国将军、高平太守。
English: After entering the Liang Dynasty, he was promoted to Vice-Governor General and Takahira Daju.

古文：第二子子游，州陵侯。
现代文：第二个儿子名叫子游，被封州陵侯。
English: The second son, named Ziyu, was given the title of county magistrate.

古文：解褐员外郎，太子洗马，历琅邪、晋陵二郡太守，黄门侍郎。
现代文：起初做员外郎，太子洗马，历官琅邪、晋陵二郡太守，黄门侍郎。
English: At first, he worked as a member of the outer circle, the prince washed the horse, the officials of the imperial court, the governor of Jinling County, and the attendant of the Yellow Gate.

古文：好音乐，解丝竹杂艺。
现代文：爱好音乐，懂得丝竹等乐器弹奏技艺。
English: Loves music, knows how to play musical instruments such as silk and bamboo.

古文：梁初坐闺门淫秽及杀人，为有司所奏，请议禁锢。
现代文：梁朝初年因闺门中淫秽事以及杀人，被有关官员弹劾，议定免除他的官职永不录用。
English: In the first year of the Liang Dynasty, he was impeached by the relevant officials for obscene acts and homicide in his girlfriends, and it was agreed that he would be relieved of his official position and would never be hired.

古文：子晋谋反，兄弟并伏诛。
现代文：因子晋谋反，兄弟们一并遭诛杀。
English: As a result of Jin Zi's rebellion, the brothers were killed together.

古文：长沙威王晃，字宣明，太祖第四子也。
现代文：长沙威王萧晃字宣明，是太祖的第四个儿子。
English: King of Changsha Wei, Xiao Huan Zi Xuanming, is the fourth son of the great ancestor.

古文：少有武力，为太祖所爱。
现代文：从小武力过人，被叁担喜爱。
English: From a young age, he excelled in martial arts and was loved by his family.

古文：宋世解褐秘书郎邵陵王友，不拜。
现代文：在塞伐脱去布衣任秘书郎邵坠王友，他没有接受任命。
English: He did not accept the appointment of Wang You, the secretary of Lang Shao Kuan, who was stripped of his clothes in Sevastopol.

古文：升明二年，代兄映为宁朔将军、淮南宣城二郡太守。
现代文：旦塱二年，代他兄长趸丛为宁朔将军、进直宣越二郡太守。
English: In the second year of the Tang Dynasty, he replaced his brother Gong Cong as the general of Ningshuo and Jin Zhi Xuan as the governor of the two counties of Xuan Yue.

古文：初，沈攸之事起，晃便弓马，多从武容，熏赫都街，时人为之语曰： 焕焕萧四伞。 
现代文：起先，沈攸之事发，董星熟习骑马射箭，带领好些行伍打扮的人，在大街上往往来来气势显赫，当时的人为此说他： 光明鲜亮的萧四伞。 
English: At the beginning of Shen You's incident, Dong Xing was familiar with riding horses and archery, and led a number of people dressed in military attire. He often came and went on the streets with great pomp. People at the time said of him: "The bright and shiny Xiao Si umbrella."

古文：其年，迁为持节、监豫司二州郢州之西阳诸军事、西中郎将、豫州刺史。
现代文：那年，迁为持节、监豫司二州郢州的西阳诸军事、西中郎将、豫州刺史。
English: In that year, the Xiyang Military, the West Zhonglang General, and the Yuzhou Historian were moved to hold the festival and supervise the Yuzhou Division of the Second Zhou Dynasty.

古文：太祖践祚，晃欲陈政事，辄为典签所裁，晃执杀之。上大怒，手诏赐杖。
现代文：太祖登基后，萧晃想插手行政事务，每每被典签节制，他就把典签抓起来杀了，皇上大发脾气，亲手写了韶旨赐予杖刑。
English: After the great-grandfather ascended the throne, Xiao Huan wanted to meddle in administrative affairs. Whenever he was restrained by a warrant, he grabbed the warrant and killed it. The emperor lost his temper and personally wrote the imperial edict to give him a cane.

古文：寻迁使持节、都督南徐兖二州诸军事、后将军、南徐州刺史。
现代文：时隔不久迁使持节、都督南徐兖二州诸军事、后将军、南徐州刺史。
English: After a short interval, the festival was moved, and the military, generals, and history of South Xuzhou were performed by the military governor of South Xuzhou.

古文：世祖为皇太子，拜武进陵，于曲阿后湖斗队，使晃御马军，上闻之，又不悦。
现代文：世祖为皇太子，拜祭武进陵，在曲阿后湖排演队列阵斗，让萧晃指挥马军，皇上听说这件事，又不高兴。
English: The ancestor was a crown prince, and the emperor paid homage to him and entered the mausoleum, rehearsed a line-up battle in Quahou Lake, and let Xiao Huan command the horse army. When the emperor heard about this, he was not happy.

古文：入为侍中、护军将军，以国忧，解侍中，加中军将军。
现代文：入朝为侍中、护军将军，闽为国忧，解除侍中官职，加中军将军。
English: He entered the imperial court as an attendant and escort general, but was dismissed from the position of attendant and escort general, and became a general in the Chinese army.

古文：太祖临崩，以晃属世祖，处以辇毂近蕃，勿令远出。
现代文：太祖临近驾崩，把萧晃嘱托给世祖，把他安置在京城附近的地方为藩屏，不要让他远离京城。
English: When his great-grandfather was about to die, he entrusted Xiao Xiang to his great-grandfather. He was placed in a place near the capital as a hanping, and he should not be allowed to go far from the capital.

古文：永明元年，上迁南徐州刺史竟陵王子良为南兖州，以晃为使持节、都督南徐兖二州诸军事、镇军将军、南徐州刺史。
现代文：永明元年，皇上调南徐州刺史竟陵王子良为南兖州刺史，以萧晃为使持节、都督南徐兖二州诸军事、镇军将军、南徐州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Yongming era, the emperor promoted the Southern Xuzhou general Xingling Wangziliang to the Southern Xuzhou general, and appointed Xiao Huan as the envoy, the governor of Southern Xuzhou, the military of the two states, the general of the town army, and the Southern Xuzhou general.

古文：入为散骑常侍，中书监。
现代文：入朝为散骑常侍、中书监。
English: He entered the imperial court as a samurai on horseback and a middle school librarian.

古文：诸王在京都，唯置捉刀左右四十人。晃爱武饰，罢徐州还，私载数百人仗还都，为禁司所觉，投之江水。
现代文：诸王在京都，带刀侍卫左右的祇设四十人，萧晃喜好武备装扮，从徐州罢职还朝，他私自载运几百侍卫仪仗返回京都，被禁卫官员发觉，把那些人仗丢到江水裹去了。
English: The kings were in Kyoto, and there were only forty guards with swords on either side. Xiao Wang, who liked to dress up in military attire, resigned from Xuzhou and returned to the imperial court. He personally transported several hundred guards of honor back to Kyoto. When the guards' officers found out, they threw those guards into the river.

古文：世祖禁诸王畜私仗，闻之大怒，将纠以法。
现代文：世祖禁诸王私自蓄养卫仗，听说这件事大发脾气，打算依法追究他的罪责。
English: The founder of the world forbade all kings to maintain a military garrison out of selfishness. When he heard about this, he lost his temper and intended to investigate his guilt according to law.

古文：豫章王嶷于御前稽首流涕曰： 晃罪诚不足宥。
现代文：豫章王萧嶷在皇帝面前叩头流泪说： 萧晃罪过确实不能原谅。
English: Yuanzhang Wang Xiaohui bowed down before the emperor and shed tears, saying: Xiaohui's sins really cannot be forgiven.

古文：陛下当忆先朝念白象。 
现代文：陛下应当回想先朝太祖皇帝眷念白象的情景。 
English: Your Majesty should recall the scene of the previous emperor's great-grandfather fondly remembering the white elephant.

古文：白象，晃小字也。
现代文：白象，是萧晃的小名，皇上也流了眼泪。
English: The white elephant is Xiao Xiang's small character.

古文：上亦垂泣。太祖大渐时，诫世祖曰： 宋氏若不骨肉相图，他族岂得乘其衰弊，汝深戒之。 
现代文：太祖病危时，曾告诫世祖说： 宋氏假若不是骨肉间白相残杀，别姓人怎么能够乘他的衰弱弊病的机会，你要好好以此为戒。 
English: When the great-grandfather was critically ill, he warned the great-grandfather: "If the Song clan is not a blood feud, how can someone else take advantage of his weakness and illness? You should take this as a warning.

古文：故世祖终无异意。
现代文：所以世祖始终对萧晃没有别的用意。
English: Therefore, the founder had no other intention for Xiao Xiao.

古文：然晃亦不见亲宠。
现代文：然而萧晃也没有被世祖亲近宠信。
English: However, Xiao Ao was not a close confidant of the patriarch.

古文：当时论者以世祖优于魏文，减于汉明。
现代文：当时评论的人认为世担比瑟塞壶宽厚，但较汉型豆逊色些。
English: The commentators at the time thought that the Shitan was thicker than the Seersucker, but less colorful than the Han-type bean.

古文：寻加晃镇军将军，转丹阳尹，常侍、将军如故。
现代文：没多久加萧晃镇军将军，转丹杨尹，常侍、将军依前未变。
English: Not long after, Xiao was promoted to the general of the town army, then to Dan Yang Yin, the regular attendant, and the general remained unchanged.

古文：又为侍中、护军将军，镇军如故。
现代文：又为侍中、护军将军，镇军依前未变。
English: In addition, he was made a chamberlain and a general of the guard, and the town's army remained unchanged.

古文：寻进号车骑将军，侍中如故。
现代文：随后进号车骑将军，侍中依前未变。
English: Then came the carriage and cavalry generals, and the chamberlains remained unchanged.

古文：给油络车，鼓吹一部。
现代文：皇帝赐给油络车，一部鼓吹。
English: The emperor gave the oil tanker, a part of the propaganda.

古文：八年，薨，年三十一。
现代文：永明八年，去世，当时三十一岁。
English: Yongming eight years, died, then thirty-one years old.

古文：赐东园秘器，朝服一具，衣一袭。
现代文：赐给棺椁，朝服一套，衣一套。
English: Give him a coffin, a morning suit and a suit of clothes.

古文：即本号，赠开府仪同三司。
现代文：就本号追赠开府仪同三司。
English: For this issue, Kaifu ceremony was posthumously presented to the three departments.

古文：世祖尝幸钟山，晃从驾，以马槊刺道边枯蘖，上令左右数人引之，银缠皆卷聚，而槊不出。
现代文：世祖曾驾临钟山，萧晃伴驾随从，他骑在马上用丈八矛头刺入路边枯树中，皇上命令身边的数人把矛拔出来，上面的银缠都卷曲聚结，可矛却拔不出来。
English: The ancestor of the world once drove to Zhongshan, accompanied by Xiao Xing, who rode on a horse and stabbed into a dead tree on the roadside with a long spearhead. The emperor ordered several people around him to pull out the spear. The silver coils above were curled together, but the spear could not be pulled out.

古文：乃令晃复驰马拔之，应手便去。
现代文：于是皇上又命萧晃再骑上马驱驰而过拔下长矛，结果应手就拔下来了。
English: As a result, the emperor ordered Xiao Xiang to ride on the horse and drive and pull down the lance. As a result, the lance was pulled down by hand.

古文：每远州献骏马，上辄令晃于华林中调试之。
现代文：每逢边远州进献骏马，皇上就命令萧晃在华林中调试这些马。
English: Each time the outlying prefectures contributed a horse, the emperor sent Xiao Jiao to debug the horse in the Hualin Garden.

古文：太祖常曰： 此我家任城也。 
现代文：太祖常说： 这是我家的任城。 
English: My great-grandfather used to say, "This is my family's hometown."

古文：世祖缘此意，故谥曰威。
现代文：世祖依据这个意思，所以给他的谧号为威。
English: According to this meaning, the ancestor of the world gave him his nickname.

古文：武陵昭王晔，字宣照，太祖第五子也。
现代文：武陵昭王萧雏字宣照，是太祖的第五个儿子。
English: Wuling Zhao Wang Xiao Xuanzhao is the fifth son of the great-grandfather.

古文：母罗氏，从太祖在淮阴，以罪诛，晔年四岁，思慕不异成人，故每见爱。
现代文：他的母亲罗氏，跟随太祖在淮阴，因为罪错遭诛杀，萧毕当时衹有四岁，思念母亲和成年人没有什么不同，因而萧晕被太祖喜爱。
English: His mother, Luo Shi, followed his great-grandfather to Huaiyin, where he was killed for his crime. Xiao Bi was only four years old at the time, and he missed his mother no differently than an adult. As a result, Xiao Dang was loved by his great-grandfather.

古文：初除冠军将军，转征虏将军。
现代文：起初授职冠军将军，转征虏将军。
English: At first, he was given the post of champion general, and then he was transferred to the post of conscript general.

古文：晔刚颖俊出，工弈棋，与诸王共作短句，诗学谢灵运体，以呈上，报曰： 见汝二十字，诸儿作中最为优者。
现代文：萧皋的才能智慧犹如锋利的刀尖那样突出显露。精于棋艺，和诸王一起作短句，诗学谢灵运体，把那些一起呈给太祖，得报说： 看见你的二十个字，是诸儿作品中最好的。
English: Xiao Yao's talent and wisdom are as prominent as the sharp tip of a knife. He is good at chess, and makes short sentences with kings. He is also good at poetry, thanks to the spirit carrier. When he presents these to his grandfather, he has to report: "I see that your twenty characters are the best among all the children's works."

古文：但康乐放荡，作体不辨有首尾，安仁、士衡深可宗尚，颜延之抑其次也。 
现代文：但是康乐放荡不羁，文体不分头尾，安仁、士衡很可学习推崇，颜延之则在他们之后。 
English: However, leisure and pleasure are unrestrained, and there is no distinction between the beginning and the end of the style. Anren and Shiheng can be learned and respected very well, while Yan Yan is after them.

古文：建元三年，出为持节、都督会稽东阳新安永嘉临海五郡军事、会稽太守，将军如故。
现代文：建元三年，出京为持节、都督会稽、东阳、新安、永嘉、临海五郡军事、会稽太守，将军依前未变。
English: In the third year of Jianyuan, he went to Beijing for the Jixi Festival, the governor's meeting, Dongyang, Xin'an, Yongjia, the military of the five counties along the coast, the chairman of the meeting, and the general remained unchanged.

古文：上遣儒士刘瓛往郡，为晔讲《五经》。
现代文：皇上派遣孔孟儒家学者刘珊来郡，为他讲述《五经》。
English: The emperor sent the Confucian scholar Liu Shanrong to the county to tell him about the Five Classics.

古文：世祖即位，进号左将军，入为中书令，将军如故。
现代文：世祖即皇帝位后，萧皋进号为左将军，入朝为中书令，将军依前未变。
English: After the founding father, that is, the emperor's enthronement, Xiao Yujin's title was the Left General, and he entered the imperial court with the title of the General of the People's Republic of China. The general remained unchanged.

古文：转散骑常侍，太常卿。
现代文：转散骑常侍，太常卿。
English: Scatter the knights-in-waiting, Lord Tai.

古文：又为中书令，迁祠部尚书，常侍并如故。
现代文：后又为中书令，迁祠部尚书，常侍依前未变。
English: Later, it was changed to Chushirei, and the shrine was moved to Shangshu, but the regular attendants remained the same.

古文：晔无宠于世祖，未尝处方岳，数以语言忤旨。
现代文：萧晔在世祖时没有受过宠信，也不曾受任镇守一方，多次用话语抵触皇帝的意旨。
English: At the time of the founder of the world, Xiao Yu was not favored, nor was he appointed as a town guard, and he repeatedly contradicted the emperor's will with his words.

古文：世祖幸豫章王嶷东田宴诸王，独不召晔。
现代文：世祖驾临豫章王萧嶷的束田、宴请诸位王爷，惟独不召萧晔。
English: The ancestor drove to the Sokuta field of Yuanzhang King Xiao Yao, and held a banquet for all the princes, but did not invite Xiao Yao.

古文：嶷曰： 风景殊美，今日甚忆武陵。 
现代文：萧嶷说： 风景真是特别美好，今天很想念武陵。 
English: Xiao Yao said: The scenery is very beautiful. I miss Wuling very much today.

古文：上乃呼之。
现代文：世祖才呼唤他来。
English: It was the patriarch who called him.

古文：晔善射，屡发命中，顾谓四坐曰： 手如何？ 
现代文：萧晔擅长射箭，屡发屡中，回过头对在座的人说：手法怎么样? 
English: Xiao Yao is good at archery. He shoots a lot of arrows in a row. He turned to the audience and said, "How about the technique?"

古文：上神色甚怪。
现代文：皇上神色很不好看。
English: The Emperor's expression is very ugly.

古文：嶷曰： 阿五常日不尔，今可谓仰藉天威。 
现代文：萧嶷说： 老五平时没有这样好，今天可说仰仗天子威风。 
English: Xiao Wei said: "The old five-year plan was not so good in peacetime. Today, we can say that we rely on the power of heaven.

古文：帝意乃释。
现代文：皇上的神情才缓解。
English: Only then did the emperor's anger subside.

古文：后于华林赌射，上敕晔叠破，凡放六箭，五破一皮，赐钱五万。
现代文：后来又在华林比赛射箭，皇上告诉萧晕要他箭箭从一个箭孑中穿透，总共放了六箭，有五支箭是从同一箭孔中穿透的，皇上赏赐五万钱。
English: Later, at an archery competition in Hualin, the emperor told Xiao Huan to let his arrow pierce through an arrowhead. He shot a total of six arrows, five of which pierced through the same arrowhole. The emperor rewarded Xiao Huan with 50,000 yuan.

古文：又于御席上举酒劝晔，晔曰： 陛下尝不以此处许臣。 
现代文：又在御席上举起酒杯劝萧毕，萧击说： 陛下以往没有因此赞许过我。 
English: At the imperial banquet, he raised his glass to persuade Xiao Bi to leave, and Xiao Bei said, "Your Majesty has never approved of me in the past.

古文：上回面不答。
现代文：皇上回过脸来没作答理。
English: The Emperor made a face and did not answer.

古文：久之，出为江州刺史，常侍如故。
现代文：过了很长一段时间，萧皋出京任江州刺史，常侍依前未变。
English: After a long period of time, Xiao Wei went to Beijing to serve as the governor of Jiangsu Province, and the regular attendants remained unchanged.

古文：上以晔方出外镇，求晔宅给诸皇子。
现代文：皇上因为萧皋正离京在外镇守，想索求萧皋的宅院给他的皇子。
English: Because Xiao Yao was away from Beijing guarding a foreign town, the emperor wanted to claim Xiao Yao's mansion for his prince.

古文：晔曰： 先帝赐臣此宅，使臣歌哭有所。陛下欲以州易宅，臣请不以宅易州。 
现代文：萧皋说： 先帝赏赐我这宅院，是让我有个地方歌哭，陛下想用州交换我的宅院，我请求准许我不用宅院来换州。 
English: Xiao Yao said, "The previous emperor gave me this mansion so that I would have a place to sing and cry. Your Majesty wants to exchange my mansion for a state. I ask for permission not to use the mansion to exchange states."

古文：至镇百余日，典签赵渥之启晔得失，于是征还为左民尚书。
现代文：萧翠到州镇一百多天后，典签赵渥之向皇上禀报萧杜的得失情况，于是征召萧皋返京为左民尚书。
English: More than a hundred days after Xiao Cui arrived in Zhouzhen, Zhao Wotong reported Xiao Du's gains and losses to the emperor, and then summoned Xiao Cui to return to Beijing as Zuomin Shangshu.

古文：俄转前将军，太常卿，累不得志。
现代文：随后又转前将军，太常卿，一直不得志。
English: Subsequently, the former general, Tai Changqing, has been discouraged.

古文：冬节问讯，诸王皆出，晔独后来，上已还便殿，闻晔至，引见问之。
现代文：冬节问讯，诸王都到了，萧肇却独自后到，皇上已返回便殿，听说萧辇到了，引来见了面，问他怎么迟来。
English: According to the Winter Festival, all the kings arrived, but Xiao Zhao arrived alone. The emperor had already returned to the hall. When he heard that Xiao Yao had arrived, he invited him to meet him and asked him why he was late.

古文：晔称牛羸，不能取路。
现代文：萧鞋声称拉车的牛瘦弱，不能赶路。
English: Xiao Shou claimed that the cow pulling the cart was too thin and weak to make the journey.

古文：上敕车府给副御牛一头。
现代文：皇上敕告车府给他另配一头御牛。
English: The emperor decreed that Chefu should be given one head of oxen.

古文：敕主客： 自今诸王来不随例者，不得复为通。 
现代文：敕告主客说： 从今诸王来时不遵例规的，不能再替他通报。 
English: The obituary of the host and guest said: From now on, if the kings do not follow the rules when they come, they can no longer inform him.

古文：以公事还过竟陵王子良宅，冬月道逢乞人，脱襦与之。
现代文：萧晕因为公事造访竟陵王子良的住处，冬月路上遇到乞丐，脱下短袄送了乞丐。
English: Because Xiao Huan was on a business trip to visit the residence of Qingting Prince Liang, he met a beggar on the road in the winter moon. He took off his shorts and gave the beggar a ride.

古文：子良见晔衣单，荐襦于晔。
现代文：子良看萧罐衣服单薄，送袄给萧毕。
English: Ziliang saw that Xiao Can's clothes were too thin, so he sent a pair of socks to Xiao Bi.

古文：晔曰： 我与向人亦复何异！ 
现代文：萧皋说： 我同刚才那个人又有什么不同呢! 
English: Xiao Yao said: What's the difference between me and that person just now?

古文：尚书令王俭诣晔，晔留俭设食，柈中菘菜邑鱼而已。
现代文：尚书令王俭拜访萧晕，萧鞑留王俭吃饭，盘中衹有白菜、咸鱼。
English: Shang Shu ordered Wang Jian to visit Xiao Dang, and Xiao Jian stayed with Wang Jian for a meal. The dish included Chinese cabbage and salted fish.

古文：又名后堂山为 首阳 ，盖怨贫薄也。
现代文：他给后堂的山取名叫做 首阳 ，大约是抱怨贫穷吧。
English: He named the hill behind the hall "Shouyang," probably to complain about poverty.

古文：寻为丹阳尹，常侍、将军如故。
现代文：不久为丹阳尹，常侍、将军依前未变。
English: Soon it was Danyang Yin, and the regular attendants and generals remained unchanged.

古文：始不复置行事，得自亲政。
现代文：从这开始不再设置行事，能够由他自己亲自管理政务。
English: From then on, he was no longer required to act, and was able to manage the affairs of state himself.

古文：转侍中，护军将军。
现代文：转侍中、护军将军。
English: He later became a general of the escort.

古文：给油络车。
现代文：赏给油络车。
English: Kudos to the oil rig.

古文：又给扶二人。
现代文：又给扶二人。
English: Two more helpers were brought in.

古文：世祖临崩，遗诏为卫将军，开府仪同三司，给鼓吹一部。
现代文：世祖临近驾崩，遣诏任萧华为卫将军，开府仪同三司，给一部鼓吹。
English: When the founder of the dynasty was about to pass away, he sent an imperial edict to appoint General Xiao Hua Wei as the head of the government and the three departments to preach to a group of people.

古文：大行在殡，竟陵王子良在殿内，太孙未立，众论喧疑。晔众中言曰： 若立长则应在我，立嫡则应在太孙。 
现代文：大行皇帝在殡，竞陵王子良在殿内，太孙尚未立，大家议论喧闹不定，萧驻在众人面前说： 若要守长做皇帝那就应当立我，要立嫡就应当立太孙。 
English: Emperor Da Xing was at the funeral, Prince Jing Liang was in the hall, the great-grandson had not yet been appointed, everyone was talking noisily and uncertainly, Xiao Jie said in front of everyone: If you want to make the head of the imperial guard emperor, then you should appoint me, and if you want to appoint the heir, then you should appoint the great-grandson.

古文：郁林即立，甚见凭赖。
现代文：郁林王做皇帝后，萧挚很被皇帝仰仗依靠。
English: After King Yulin became the emperor, Xiao Zhi was highly relied on by the emperor.

古文：隆昌元年，年二十八，薨。
现代文：隆吕元年去世，时年二十八岁。
English: Long Lyu died in the first year of the year, at the age of twenty-eight.

古文：赐东园秘器，朝服。
现代文：下诏赏赐棺椁、朝服。
English: The following edict rewarded him with a coffin and a morning suit.

古文：赠司空，侍中如故。
现代文：赠司空，侍中依前不变。
English: There is no vacancy for a secretary, but the position of a chambermaid remains unchanged.

古文：给节，班剑二十人。
现代文：给节，班剑二十人。
English: On a given day, a squad of 20 swordsmen will march.

古文：安成恭王暠，字宣曜，太祖第六子也。
现代文：安成恭王萧焉字宣曜，是太祖皇帝第六个儿子。
English: An Cheng Gong Wang Xia Yan Zi Xuan You is the sixth son of Emperor Taizu.

古文：建元二年，除冠军将军，镇石头戍，领军事。
现代文：建元二年，除授冠军将军，镇石头戍，领军事。
English: In the second year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, in addition to being awarded the title of general, the town of Stone Mountain, led the military.

古文：四年，出为使持节、督江州豫州之晋熙诸军事、南中郎将、江州刺史。
现代文：建元四年，出京为使持节、督江州豫州的置毖诸军事、南中郎将、江州刺史。
English: In the fourth year of Jianyuan, he went to Beijing for the Jizhi Festival, the governor of Jiangzhou and Yuzhou were promoted to military, Nan Zhongro was promoted to general, and Jiangzhou was awarded the title of history.

古文：永明元年，进号征虏将军。
现代文：永明元年，进号征虏将军。
English: In the first year of the Yongming era, he was promoted to General of Conscription.

古文：明年，为左卫将军。
现代文：第二年为左卫将军。
English: The next year, it was General Sae.

古文：寻迁侍中，领步兵校尉。
现代文：随后又迁侍中，领步兵校尉。
English: Later, he was transferred to the middle ranks and became an infantry captain.

古文：转中书令。
现代文：转中书令。
English: The transfer order is issued.

古文：五年，迁祠部尚书，领骁骑将军。
现代文：永明五年，迁祠部尚书，领骁骑将军。
English: In the 5th year of the Yongming era, Shang Shuxu, the leader of the Ancestral Hall Relocation Department, led the cavalry.

古文：六年，出为南徐州刺史。
现代文：丞塱六年，出京任盘途州刺史。
English: After serving for six years, he went to Beijing to serve as the governor of Pan-Tuzhou Province.

古文：九年，迁散骑常侍，秘书监，领石头戍事。
现代文：丞塱九年，迁散骑常侍，秘书监，领石玺处事。
English: In the ninth year of the Joseon Dynasty, the equestrian constables, secretary supervisors, and collars were relocated.

古文：暠性清和多疾，其夏薨，年二十四。
现代文：董员争陆清静平和，又多疾病，就在那年夏季去世，年仅二十四岁。
English: That summer, the twenty-four-year-old director Zhou Lu passed away in peace and quiet, after a long illness.

古文：赠抚军将军，常侍如故。
现代文：追赠妩军将军，常侍依前不变。
English: The general of the Shao army will be awarded posthumously, and the regular attendants remain unchanged.

古文：鄱阳王锵，字宣韶，太祖第七子也。
现代文：鄱阳王萧锵字宣韶，是太祖皇帝第七个儿子。
English: Xuanwu, the seventh son of Emperor Taizu, was the king of Shenyang.

古文：建元四年，世祖即位，以锵为使持节、督雍梁南北秦四州郢州之竟陵司州之随郡军事、北中郎将、宁蛮校尉、雍州刺史。
现代文：建元四年，世祖即皇帝位，以萧锵为使持节、督雍梁南北秦四州及郢州的竟陵、司州的随郡军事、北中郎将、宁蛮校尉、雍州刺史。
English: In the fourth year of the founding of the year, the founder was the emperor, with Xiao Yu as the envoy of the festival, the governor of Yongliang, the four states of North and South Qin, and the imperial mausoleum of Ganzhou, the military of the county of Sizhou, the general of the North, the captain of Ningman, the captain of Ningman, and the historian of Yongzhou.

古文：永明二年，进号征虏将军。
现代文：永明二年，进号征虏将军。
English: In the second year of the Yongming era, he was promoted to General of Conscription.

古文：四年，为左卫将军，迁侍中，领步兵校尉。
现代文：永明四年，为左卫将军，迁侍中，领步兵校尉。
English: In the fourth year of Yongming, he was the General of the Left Division, the middle-ranking officer, and the leading infantry captain.

古文：七年，转征虏将军，丹阳尹。
现代文：永明七年，转征虏将军，丹阳尹。
English: In the seventh year of Yongming, the conscript general, Danyang Yin, came to the fore.

古文：寻加散骑常侍，进号抚军。
现代文：不久加散骑常侍，进号抚军。
English: He was soon joined by the knights-errant, who marched in to support the troops.

古文：出为江州刺史，常侍如故。
现代文：出京为江州刺史，常侍依前未变。
English: The departure from Beijing is a historic event for Jiangzhou, and the regular attendants remain unchanged.

古文：九年，始亲府、州事。
现代文：永明九年，开始亲自执掌府、州事情。
English: In the ninth year of Yongming, he began to personally take charge of the government and state affairs.

古文：加使持节、督江州诸军事、安南将军，置佐史，常侍如故。
现代文：加使持节、督江州诸军事、安南将军，置佐史，常侍依前未变。
English: In addition, Jichijie, the governor of Jiangzhou, the military, General Annan, and Okisashi were added, and the regular attendants remained unchanged.

古文：先是二年省江州府，至是乃复。
现代文：在这之前二年撤江州府，到此时又恢复了。
English: Two years before that, Jiangzhou was evacuated, but by this time it had been restored.

古文：十一年，为领军，常侍如故。
现代文：永明十一年，为领军，常侍依前未变。
English: In the eleventh year of the Yongming era, he was the leader, and the regular attendants remained unchanged.

古文：锵和悌美令，有宠于世祖，领军之授，齐室诸王所未为。
现代文：萧锵平和友爱善良美好，在世祖那裹颇受宠信，领军的职任，在齐室诸王中是投有过的。
English: Xiao Yu's peace and friendship are good and beautiful. He was quite favored by the ancestors, and the position of leading the army has been voted among the kings of Qi.

古文：锵在官理事无壅，当时称之。
现代文：萧锵为官处事从不滞积，当时的人都夸赞他。
English: Xiao Yao never lagged behind in his work as an official, and people at that time praised him.

古文：车驾游幸，常甲仗卫从，恩待次豫章王嶷。
现代文：皇上巡游，他常披甲带仗随从侍卫，享受的恩惠待遇仅次于豫章王萧嶷。
English: When the emperor went on a tour, he often wore armor and accompanied the guards. He enjoyed the most favorable treatment second only to Yuanzhang Wang Xiaoqi.

古文：其年，给油络车。
现代文：那年，赏给油络车。
English: That year, the award went to the oil tanker.

古文：隆昌元年，转尚书右仆射，常侍如故。
现代文：隆昌元年，转尚书右仆射，常侍依前未变。
English: In the first year of the Longchang era, he changed his title to Shangshu Yuhubei, but his position as a regular attendant remained unchanged.

古文：俄迁侍中、骠骑将军、开府仪同三司，领兵置佐。
现代文：随后又迁侍中、骠骑将军、开府仪同三司，率领兵马设置官佐。
English: Subsequently, the chamberlains, the cavalry generals, and the governors of the prefectures were transferred to the three departments, leading the soldiers and horses to set up the officers and assistants.

古文：锵雍容得物情，为郁林王所依信。
现代文：萧锵仪态大方颇得人心，被郁林王依赖信任。
English: Xiao Yu's generous demeanor was quite popular, and he was trusted and relied on by King Yulin.

古文：郁林心疑高宗，诸王问讯，独留锵谓之曰： 公闻鸾于法身何如？ 
现代文：郁林王心中怀疑高宗，诸王参拜问候，单独留下萧锵对他说道： 公听说萧鸾对法身有什么想法吗? 
English: Yu Lin Wang suspected Gao Zong in his heart. All the kings came to pay their respects, leaving Xiao Yao alone. He said to him, "Has the public heard what thoughts Xiao Yao has about the Dharma body?

古文：锵曰： 臣鸾于宗戚最长，且受寄先帝。臣等年皆尚少，朝廷之干，唯鸾一人，愿陛下无以为虑。 
现代文：萧锵说： 萧鸾在宗族亲人中年龄最大，而且受先帝重托，我等年纪尚轻，朝廷的柱石，衹在萧鸾一人，望陛下不要从其他方面猜疑他。 
English: Xiao Yao said: Xiao Yao is the oldest among the relatives of the clan, and he was entrusted by the former emperor. We are still young. The pillar of the imperial court is Xiao Yao alone. I hope that His Majesty will not suspect him from other aspects.

古文：郁林退谓徐龙驹曰： 我欲与公共计取鸾，公既不同，我不能独办，且复小听。 
现代文：郁林王退朝后对徐龙驹说： 我想同他共同计划诛萧鸾，他的想法既然不同，我又不能够单独措办，祇好再任其过些时候罢。 
English: After his abdication, King Yulin said to Xu Longyu: "I want to work with him to plan Xiao Yu. Since his ideas are different, I can't do it alone. I'll leave it to him later."

古文：及郁林废，锵竟不知。
现代文：等到郁林王被废黜，萧锵居然不知道。
English: When King Yulin was deposed, Xiao Yao didn't even know.

古文：延兴元年，进位司徒，侍中、骠骑如故。
现代文：延兴元年，萧锵进位做司徒，侍中、骠骑依前未变。
English: In the first year of the Yanxing Dynasty, Xiao Jian was promoted to the position of the steward, and the position of the chamberlain and the equestrian remained unchanged.

古文：高宗镇东府，权势稍异，锵每往，高宗常屣履至车迎锵。
现代文：高宗坐镇束府，权势更为显赫，萧锵每次去，高宗常常慌忙拖着鞋子跑到他的车子跟前来迎接他。
English: Gao Zong sat in the town of Sokfu, and his power was more prominent. Every time Xiao Yao went, Gao Zong often hurriedly dragged his shoes and ran to his car to meet him.

古文：语及家国，言泪俱下，锵以此推信之。
现代文：谈及国家大事，说着说着就声泪俱下，萧锵因此很相信萧鸾。
English: When talking about national events, Xiao Yao shed tears as he spoke. Therefore, Xiao Yao believed in Xiao Yao very much.

古文：而宫台内皆属意于锵，劝锵入宫发兵辅政。
现代文：可是宫禁皇城裹的人都心向着萧锵，劝萧锵进入皇宫发动军兵辅佐朝政。
English: However, all the people in the imperial palace were eager to persuade Xiao Yao to enter the palace and launch the army to assist the government.

古文：制局监谢粲说锵及随王子隆曰： 殿下但乘油壁车入宫，出天子置朝堂，二王夹辅号令，粲等闭城门上仗，谁敢不同？
现代文：制局监谢粲劝说萧锵及随王子隆说： 殿下衹要乘坐油壁车进入宫内，请出天子坐在朝堂之上，两位王爷挟持辅佐发布号令，我谢粲等人封闭城门、装设器仗，谁敢不赞同?
English: The superintendent of the Bureau of Construction, Xie Jun, persuaded Xiao Jun and Prince Long to follow him and said: "Your highness, if you want to enter the palace by oil-walled carriage, please come out of heaven and sit on the top of the palace, the two princes will hold the assistant to issue a decree, I, Xie Jun and others will close the gate and install the battlements, who would dare not agree?

古文：东城人政共缚送萧令耳。 
现代文：柬城的人正想共同把萧令捆缚送来啊。 
English: The people in Cambodia are trying to work together to send Xiao Ling a pair of handcuffs.

古文：子隆欲定计，锵以上台兵力既悉度东府，且虑事难捷，意甚犹豫。
现代文：子隆打算这样干，萧锵觉得皇上的官兵力量全都归东府调度了，并且担心起事后很难制胜，心中犹豫不定。
English: Zilong planned to do so, but Xiao Yao felt that the emperor's officers and soldiers were all under the control of Dongfu, and he was worried that it would be difficult to win after the incident, so he hesitated.

古文：马队主刘巨，世祖时旧人，诣锵请间，叩头劝锵立事。
现代文：马队主刘巨，是世祖时的老臣，拜访萧锵时屏退左右，叩头暗劝萧锵举事。
English: Liu Jiu, the head of the horse team, was an old minister at the time of the founder of the dynasty. When he visited Xiao Yao, the screen retreated to the right and left, kowtowing and secretly advising Xiao Yao to take action.

古文：锵命驾将入，复回还内与母陆太妃别，日暮不成行。
现代文：萧锵指挥车驾将入宫内，又转身回到自己府内同他母亲陆太妃辞别，直到曰暮他还没有动身。
English: Xiao Yao drove the car into the palace, and then turned around and went back to his own palace to say goodbye to his mother, Lu Taifei. He did not leave until nightfall.

古文：数日，高宗遣二千人围锵宅害锵，谢粲等皆见杀。
现代文：几天后，高宗派遣两千人包围了萧锵的住宅杀害了萧锵，谢粲等人都一起被杀了。
English: A few days later, Gaozong sent two thousand people to surround Xiao Yao's house and killed Xiao Yao. Xie Yao and the others were all killed together.

古文：锵时年二十六。
现代文：萧锵当时二十六岁。
English: Xiao Yao was 26 years old at the time.

古文：凡诸王被害，皆以夜遣兵围宅，或斧关排墙叫噪而入，家财皆见封籍焉。
现代文：大凡诸王被害，都是在夜晚派兵包围住宅，有的是用刀斧劈开门户、推倒院墙叫喊着冲进去的，他们的家人财产都被查封籍没了。
English: Most of the kings who were killed sent soldiers to surround their houses at night. Some of them used knives and axes to break open the doors, knock down the courtyard walls and rushed in screaming. Their families' property was seized and their names were removed from the register.

古文：桂阳王铄，字宣朗，太祖第八子也。
现代文：桂阳王萧铄字宣朗，是太祖皇帝的第八个儿子。
English: King of Guiyang, Xiao Zhi Zi Xuan Lang, was the eighth son of Emperor Taizu.

古文：永明二年，出为南徐州刺史，镇京口。
现代文：永明二年，出京为南徐州刺史，镇守京口。
English: In the second year of Yongming, he went to Beijing to become the governor of Southern Xuzhou and the town guard of Jingkou.

古文：历代镇府，铄出蕃，始省军府。
现代文：历代镇府，由萧铄外出做藩卫，才开始掌管军政事务。
English: In the town governments of past generations, it was not until Xiao Yao went out to serve as a guard that he began to take charge of military and political affairs.

古文：四年，加散骑常侍。
现代文：永明四年，加萧铄散骑常侍。
English: In the 4th year of the Yongming era, Xiao Yao was added to the cavalcade of regular attendants.

古文：六年，迁中书令，度支尚书。
现代文：永明六年，迁中书令，度支尚书。
English: In the sixth year of the Yongming era, the move to the middle of the book order, the degree of support for the book.

古文：七年，转中书令，加散骑常侍。
现代文：永明七年，转中书令，加散骑常侍。
English: In the seventh year of the Yongming era, he was transferred to the position of middle-ranking official and became a samurai.

古文：时鄱阳王锵好文章，铄好名理，时人称为 鄱桂。 
现代文：当时鄱阳王萧锵喜爱文学写作，桂阳王萧铄喜爱研究事物的是非道理，那时他俩被人称作 鄱桂 。
English: At that time, there was no reason why the King of Guiyang, Xiao Yao, liked to write literature, while the King of Guiyang, Xiao Yao, liked to study things. At that time, they were both called Gui Gui.

古文：十年，迁太常，常侍如故。
现代文：永明十年，迁太常，常侍依前未变。
English: In the 10th year of the Yongming era, the relocation was too frequent, and the regular attendants remained unchanged.

古文：铄清羸有冷疾，常枕卧。
现代文：萧铄清瘦体弱有寒症，经常躺卧枕席。
English: Xiao Jieqing is thin and weak with a cold, and often lies on a pillow.

古文：世祖临视，赐床帐衾褥。
现代文：世祖曾亲临看望，赏赐床帐被褥。
English: The founder of the world once paid a visit in person and presented a bedspread and a quilt.

古文：隆昌元年，加前将军。
现代文：隆昌元年，加前将军。
English: In the first year of Longchang, he was promoted to the rank of general.

古文：给油络车，并给扶侍二人。
现代文：赐给油络车，并赐扶侍的人两个。
English: And to the mule, and to the ass's boy, two.

古文：海陵立，转侍中、抚军将军，领兵置佐。
现代文：海陵被立为皇帝时，他转侍中、抚军将军，统领军兵设置官佐。
English: When Hailing was enthroned as emperor, he was transferred to serve as the middle and general of the army, leading the army and setting up officers and aides.

古文：鄱阳王见害，铄迁中军将军，开府仪同三司。
现代文：鄱阳王萧锵被害时，萧铄迁中军将军，开府仪同三司。
English: When the king of Shenyang, Xiao Qi, was killed, Xiao Qi was transferred to the general of the Chinese army, and the ceremony of opening the capital was carried out with three divisions.

古文：铄不自安，至东府诣高宗还，谓左右曰： 向录公见接殷勤，流连不能已，而貌有惭色，此必欲杀我。 
现代文：萧铄自感不安，走到束府拜访高宗，返回府中对身边的人说： 刚才尚书令会见我时接待殷勤，感伤流泪好像不能控制。但形象中掩饰不住羞愧的神色，这必定是想杀我。 
English: Feeling uneasy, Xiao Yao went to Sokfu to visit Gao Zong, and when he returned to Sokfu, he said to the people around him: Just now, when Shang Shuling met with me, he received me with hospitality. It seemed that he couldn't control his sentimental tears. But the look of shame couldn't be hidden in the image. He must have wanted to kill me.

古文：三更中，兵至见害。
现代文：半夜三更，果然兵来被杀害。
English: It was three o'clock in the morning, and sure enough, the soldier was killed.

古文：时年二十五。
现代文：当时羞铿二十五岁。
English: He was just shy of 25 at the time.

古文：始兴简王鉴，字宣彻，太祖第十子也。
现代文：始兴简王萧鉴字宣彻，是太祖皇帝第十个儿子。
English: Shixing Jian Wang Xiao Jian Zi Xuan Chie was the tenth son of Emperor Taizu.

古文：初封广兴王，后国随郡改名。
现代文：起初封为广兴王，后来跟随郡名而将封国改名始兴。
English: At first, he was given the title of Guangxing Wang. Later, he changed his title to Shixing, following the county name.

古文：永明二年，世祖始以鉴为持节、都督益宁二州军事、前将军、益州刺史。
现代文：永明二年，世祖以萧鑪为持节、都督益宁二州军事、前将军、益州刺史。
English: In the 2nd year of the Yongming era, the founder took Xiao Yu as his successor, the military governor of Yining and two states, a former general, and a historian of Yizhou.

古文：广汉什邡民段祖以錞于献鉴，古礼器也。
现代文：广汉什邡名叫段祖的庶民，拿来锌于献给萧鉴。锌于是古时祭祀用的乐器。
English: The common people of Guanghan Shifang, called Duanzu, brought zinc to dedicate to Xiao Jian. Zinc then became a musical instrument used in ancient rituals.

古文：高三尺六寸六分，围二尺四寸，圆如筒，铜色黑如漆，甚薄。
现代文：高三尺六寸六分，围长：二尺四寸，圆得像筒，铜的颜色黑得像漆，很薄。
English: Height: 3'6," girth: 2'4," round like a cylinder, copper color black like lacquer, very thin.

古文：上有铜马，以绳县马，令去地尺余，灌之以水，又以器盛水于下，以芒茎当心跪注錞于，以手振芒，则其声如雷，清响良久乃绝。
现代文：上有铜马，用绳悬挂马，让它离地一尺多些，用水灌注到马裹面，又用器盛水放在下面，用芒草茎从当心跪注入锌于，用手振动芒草茎，那么它的声音响如雷鸣，清韵悠扬很久才停止。
English: There is a bronze horse on it. A rope is used to suspend the horse, so that it is more than a foot off the ground. Water is poured into the horse's face, and a container of water is placed underneath. Zinc is injected into the horse's face from the horse's knees with a mung bean stem. The mung bean stem is vibrated by hand, then its sound is thunderous, and the clear rhyme is melodious for a long time before it stops.

古文：古所以节乐也。
现代文：这也是古代用作节制指挥军队的乐器。
English: It was also used in ancient times as a musical instrument to control and command troops.

古文：五年，鉴献龙角一枚，长九尺三寸，色红，有文。
现代文：永明五年，萧鉴进献龙角一枚，长九尺三寸，红色有花纹。
English: In the fifth year of Yongming, Xiao Jian presented a dragon horn piece, nine feet and three inches long, red with patterns.

古文：八年，进号安西将军。
现代文：永明八年，进爵号为安西将军。
English: In the eighth year of the Yongming era, he was given the title of General Anxi.

古文：明年，为散骑常侍，秘书监，领石头戍事。
现代文：永明九年，萧鉴为散骑常侍、秘书监，领石头戍事。
English: In the ninth year of the Yongming era, Xiao Jian was a strolling equerry, a secretary supervisor, and a stone-collar anecdote.

古文：上以与鉴久别，车驾幸石头宴会赏赐。
现代文：皇上因为同萧鉴分别时间长了，驱车驾临石头戍宴会赏赐。
English: Because the emperor and Xiao Jian had been separated for a long time, he drove to the stone feast as a reward.

古文：寻迁左卫将军，未拜，遇疾。
现代文：时过不久迁萧鉴为左卫将军，没有接受任职命令，患病了。
English: Not long after, Xiao Jian was transferred to the General of the Left Division, but he did not accept the appointment order and fell ill.

古文：上为南康王子琳起青阳巷第新成，车驾与后宫幸第乐饮，其日鉴疾甚，上遣骑问疾相继，为之诏止乐。
现代文：皇上为南康王子琳在青阳巷建造府第落成，皇上及后宫临幸新造府第欢乐宴饮，那天萧鉴病情加剧，皇上派遣询问病情的人马，一起接着一起，并为他下韶停止奏乐。
English: On the day when Xiao Jian's illness worsened, the emperor sent people to inquire about his condition, one after another, and stopped playing music for him.

古文：薨，年二十一。
现代文：去世，时年二十一。
English: He died at the age of 21.

古文：遣赠中军将军，本官新除悉如故。
现代文：追赠中军将军，本官及新授的官职都依前不变。
English: As a posthumous gift to the Chinese military general, my position and the newly conferred official position remain unchanged.

古文：江夏王锋，字宣颖，太祖第十二子。
现代文：江夏王萧锋字宣颖，是太祖皇帝第十二个儿子。
English: King Xiaofeng of Jiangxia, also known as Xuanying, was the twelfth son of Emperor Taizu.

古文：永明五年，为辅国将军，南彭城、平昌二郡太守。
现代文：永明五年，为辅国将军，南彭城、平昌二郡太守。
English: In the 5th year of Yongming, he was an auxiliary general of the country, and the first governor of the two counties of Nan Pengcheng and Pyeongchang.

古文：转散骑常侍。
现代文：转散骑常侍。
English: He was transferred to the post of Sangai (free riding) Samurai.

古文：七年，迁左卫将军，仍转侍中，领石头戍事。
现代文：永明七年，迁左卫将军，仍转侍中，领石头戍事。
English: In the seventh year of Yongming, he was transferred to the General of the Left Division of the Guards, and he was still transferred to the Middle Division of the Guards, leading the Stone Anecdote.

古文：九年，出为徐州刺史。
现代文：永明九年，出京为徐州刺史。
English: In the ninth year of Yongming, he went to Beijing to write the history of Xuzhou.

古文：郁林即位，加散骑常侍。
现代文：郁林王即皇帝位，加散骑常侍。
English: King Yulin, i.e. the emperor's throne, was crowned, with attendants riding separately.

古文：隆昌元年，入为侍中，领骁骑将军，寻加秘书监。
现代文：隆昌元年。入朝为侍中，领骁骑将军，不久加秘书监。
English: In the first year of the Longchang era, he entered the imperial court as a chamberlain, led the imperial cavalry as a general, and soon became a secretary supervisor.

古文：锋好琴书，有武力。
现代文：萧缝爱好弹琴书法，勇武过人。
English: Xiao Jie likes to play the piano, calligraphy, and is very brave.

古文：高宗杀诸王，锋遗书诮责，左右不为通，高宗深惮之。
现代文：直塞杀害诸王，芦缝送信讥诮责备直塞，左右的人不敢为他通报。
English: Dangdang killed kings, sent taunts and reproaches to Dangdang, and people around him did not dare to inform on him.

古文：不敢于第收锋，使兼祠官于太庙，夜遣兵庙中收之。
现代文：直塞也很畏怯他，不敢在姜缝府第收捕他，令其在太庙兼任祠官，夜裹派兵去太庙逮捕他。
English: Nao Sai was also afraid of him, and did not dare to arrest him in Jiangxi Province. He made him concurrently serve as an ancestral hall official in the Grand Temple, and sent soldiers to the Grand Temple at night to arrest him.

古文：锋出登车，兵人欲上车防勒，锋以手击却数人，皆应时倒地，于是敢近者遂逼害之。
现代文：萧缝出来登上车后，手持兵器的人想上车强制管东，芦缝徒手打退数人，都当即倒地，于是有敢于近前的就逼近把他杀了。
English: After Xiao Xi came out and boarded the car, a person with a weapon in his hand wanted to get on the car and force the tube to the east. Lu Xi fought off several people with his bare hands, and they all immediately fell to the ground, so he dared to approach and killed him.

古文：时年二十。
现代文：当时衹有二十岁。
English: Cao Pi was only 20 years old when he ceded the imperial throne to Emperor Jinwu.

古文：南平王锐，字宣毅，太祖第十五子也。
现代文：南平上萧锐字宣毅，是太祖皇帝的第十五个儿子。
English: Nanping Shang Xiao Rui, also known as Xuan Yi, was the fifteenth son of Emperor Taizu.

古文：永明七年，为散骑常侍，寻领骁骑将军。
现代文：永明七年，为散骑常侍，随后不久领骁骑将军。
English: In the seventh year of Yongming, he was a straggler, and soon after that, he led the cavalry general.

古文：明年，为左民尚书。
现代文：第二年为左民尚书。
English: The next year, it was left to Min Shangshu.

古文：朝直勤谨，未尝属疾，上嘉之。
现代文：上朝当值勤劳谨慎，不曾告过病假，皇上很欣赏他。
English: When he was on duty during the last reign, he was diligent and prudent, and never took sick leave. The Emperor appreciated him very much.

古文：十年，出为持节、都督湘州诸军事、南中郎将、湘州刺史，以此赏锐。
现代文：永明十年，出京为持节、都督湘州诸军事、南中郎将、湘州刺史，皇卜把这些作为对萧锐的赏赐。
English: In the 10th year of the Yongming era, Xiao Rui was presented with gifts from Emperor Bo, the military governor of Hunan Province, the vice-governor of the south, and the governor of Hunan Province, as well as gifts from Emperor Bo.

古文：郁林即位，进号前将军。
现代文：郁林王即皇帝位，萧锐进爵号为前将军。
English: Yu Linyu is the emperor, and the knighthood goes to the former general.

古文：延兴元年，害诸王，遣裴叔业平寻阳，仍进湘州。
现代文：延兴元年，高宗谋害诸王，派遣裴叔业讨平寻阳，接着进讨湘州。
English: In the first year of Yanxing, Gaozong plotted to kill the kings, and sent Pei Xueye to pacify Xiangyang, and then to Xiangzhou.

古文：锐防阁周伯玉劝锐拒叔业，而府州力弱不敢动，锐见害，年十九。伯玉下狱诛。
现代文：萧锐的防合将军周伯玉劝萧锐抵抗裴叔业，可是府州力量弱小不敢动作，萧锐被害时，年龄衹有一周伯玉也被关押到牢狱中诛杀了。
English: Xiao Rui's defensive general Zhou Bo-yu advised Xiao Rui to resist Pei Shuye, but the prefectural forces were too weak to act. When Xiao Rui was injured, Zhou Bo-yu, who was only one week old, was also imprisoned and killed.

古文：宜都王铿，字宣严，太祖第十六子也。
现代文：宜都王萧铿，字宣严，是太祖皇帝的第十六个儿子。
English: The 16th son of Emperor Taizu, Yidu King Xiao Zhen, was named Xuan Yan.

古文：初除游击将军。
现代文：起初除授游击将军。
English: At first, he was awarded the title of guerrilla general.

古文：永明十年，迁左民尚书。
现代文：永明十年，迁左民尚书。
English: In the 10th year of the Yongming era, Qizha Min Shangshu was founded.

古文：十一年，为持节、都督南豫司二州军事、冠军将军、南豫州刺史，镇姑熟。
现代文：永明十一年，为持节、都督南豫、司二州军事、冠军将军、南豫州刺史，镇守姑熟。
English: In the eleventh year of the Yongming era, he was the festival, the governor of Nanyu, the secretary of the two-state military, the champion general, the history of Nanyu, and the town guard.

古文：时有盗发晋大司马桓温女冢，得金蚕银茧及圭璧等物。
现代文：当时有盗墓贼发掘了晋大司马桓温女儿的墓冢，弄到了金蚕银茧以及址璧等宝物。
English: At that time, a grave robber unearthed the tombstone of the daughter of Jin Daishi Ma Huanwen, and got treasures such as gold and silver cocoons and site gems.

古文：铿使长史蔡约自往修复，纤毫不犯。
现代文：萧铿派长史蔡约去修复了墓冢，丝毫不侵犯。
English: Xiao Wei sent the head of Shi Caiyou to repair the tomb, without any infringement.

古文：郁林即位，进号征虏将军。
现代文：郁林王即皇帝位，萧铿进爵号为征虏将军。
English: King Yulin is the emperor, and Xiao Junjin's title is Conscript General.

古文：延兴元年见害，年十八。
现代文：延兴元年，被高宗杀害，年龄仅有十八岁。
English: He was only eighteen years old when he was killed by Gaozong in the first year of Yanxing.

古文：晋熙王銶，字宣攸，太祖第十八子也。
现代文：晋熙王萧字宣攸，是太祖皇帝的第十八个儿子。
English: Xiao Zhi Xuan You, King of Jinxi, was the eighteenth son of Emperor Taizu.

古文：永明十一年，除骁骑将军。
现代文：永明十一年，除授骁骑将军。
English: In the eleventh year of Yongming, he was awarded the title of General of Cavalry.

古文：隆昌元年，出为持节、督郢司二州军事、冠军将军、郢州刺史。
现代文：旦蝎元年，出京为持节、督郢、司二州军事、冠军将军、艰州刺史。
English: In the first year of the year of the scorpion, he went to Beijing to hold a festival, be a governor, a military leader of two states, a champion general, and a historian of Herzhou.

古文：延兴元年，进号征虏将军。
现代文：延璺元年，进爵号为征虏将军。
English: In the first year of Yancheng, the knighthood was conferred on a conscript general.

古文：寻见害，年十六。
现代文：时隔不久即被杀害，死时年仅十六岁。
English: He was killed soon after and was only sixteen years old when he died.

古文：河东王铉，字宣胤，太祖第十九子也。
现代文：河东王萧铉字宣胤，是太祖皇帝的第十九个儿子。
English: The 19th son of Emperor Taizu, the King of Hedong, Xiao Zhi Zhi Xuanyin.

古文：隆昌元年，为骁骑将军。
现代文：隆昌元年，为骁骑将军。
English: In the first year of the Longchang era, he was the general of the cavalry.

古文：出为徐州刺史，迁中书令。
现代文：出京为徐州刺史，迁中书令。
English: To go to Beijing is to write the history of Xuzhou, and to move there is to write the history of China.

古文：高宗诛诸王，以铉年少才弱，故不加害。
现代文：产塞诛杀诸王时，因为萧麸年纪轻、才力弱，所以没有遭杀害。
English: When Xiao Jie killed the kings, he was not killed because Xiao Jie was young and weak.

古文：建武元年，转为散骑常侍，镇军将军，置兵佐。
现代文：壅武元年，转为散骑常侍，镇军将军，安置了兵丁僚佐。
English: In the first year of Xingwu, he was transformed into a horseback riding attendant, the general of the town army, and placed the soldier Ding Liang Zuo.

古文：建武之世，高、武子孙忧危，铉每朝见，常鞠躬俯偻，不敢平行直视。
现代文：建武时代，高帝、武帝的子孙担惊受怕，萧铉每次朝见时，总是恭敬谨慎弯腰低头，不敢平行直视。
English: In the Jianwu era, Emperor Gao and Emperor Wu's children and grandchildren were terrified. Whenever Xiao Yao saw them in the morning, he always respectfully and cautiously bent down and did not dare to look straight ahead.

古文：寻迁侍中、卫将军。铉年稍长。四年，诛王晏，以谋立铉为名，免铉官，以王还第，禁不得与外人交通。
现代文：随后不久迁侍中、卫将军占萧铉年龄稍大，建武四年，高宗诛杀王晏，用堇晏阴谋立萧铉做皇帝为名，免去萧铉的官职，以王的身份退回府第，禁止他同外人往来交接。
English: Not long after that, Gao Zongxuan killed Wang Xuan, who was a little older than Xiao Xuan. Gao Zongxuan, who was four years older than Xiao Xuan, used the conspiracy to make Xiao Xuan emperor as a pretext to remove Xiao Xuan from his official position and return to the capital as the king. He was forbidden to have contact with outsiders.

古文：永泰元年，上疾暴甚，遂害铉，时年十九。
现代文：永泰元年，高宗病势迅猛，于是杀害了萧铉。死时年仅十九岁。
English: In the first year of Yongtai, Gaozong became very ill, so he killed Xiao Yao. He was only nineteen years old when he died.

古文：二子在孩抱，亦见杀。
现代文：他的两个儿子尚属婴儿，也被杀了。
English: His two infant sons were also killed.

古文：太祖诸王，铉独无后，众窃冤之。
现代文：太祖诸王，惟独萧铉无后嗣，很多人因此暗暗替他抱冤。
English: The great-grandfathers of kings, only Xiao Yu had no heirs, so many people secretly held a grudge against him.

古文：乃使扬州刺史始安王遥光、临川王子晋、竟陵王昭胄、太尉陈显达、尚书令徐孝嗣、右仆射沈文季、尚书沈渊、沈约、王亮奏论铉，帝答不许，再奏，乃从之。
现代文：于是就使扬州刺史始安王遥光、临川王子晋、竞陵王昭胄、太尉陈显达、尚书令徐孝嗣、右仆射沈文季、尚书沈渊、沈约、王亮奏说为萧铉立后嗣的事，高宗皇帝答覆不允许，经再次奏请，才听从了他们的意见。
English: Therefore, Emperor Gaozong did not allow Yangzhou to make a reply to Xiao Yu's heirs, and only listened to the opinions of Yangzhou's scribes Shi An Wang Yao Guang, Linchuan Prince Jin, Jingling Wang Zhaojun, Tai Li Chen Xian Da, Shang Shuling Xu Xiaozhi, Right Servant Shao Shen Wenzhi, Shang Shuling Shen Yuan, Shen Yao, and Wang Liang after he was asked to write again.

古文：史臣曰：陈思王表云： 权之所存，虽疏必重；势之所去，虽亲必轻。 
现代文：史臣日：陈思王表中说道 权位存在时，即使关系疏远也必定会被看重；势力失去了，即使关系亲密也必定会被轻视 。
English: Shi Zhenri: Chen Si Wang said in the table that when power exists, even if the relationship is distant, it will be valued; when power is lost, even if the relationship is close, it will be despised.

古文：若夫六代之兴亡，曹冏论之当矣。
现代文：像那六代的兴亡，曾同说的话再恰当不过了。
English: Like the rise and fall of the six generations, the words once said together could not be more appropriate.

古文：分圭命社，实寄宗城。就国之典，既随世革，卿士入朝，作贵蕃辅。皇王托体，同禀尊极，仕无常资，秩有恒数，礼地兼隆，易生猜疑。世祖顾命，情深尊嫡，渊图远算，意在无遗。
现代文：分玉珪、命民社，实在是宗藩当防卫的城垣，接受封国的典礼仪式，已经随着时代的变化而变革，卿士进入朝堂，做贵戚藩王的辅佐，皇王依附了身体，身体也禀承了极尊极贵的气质，做官不存在长久固定的凭依，俸禄却有恒定的数额，品级地位都高了，容易产生猜疑世祖临终遗命，一往情深以嫡孙为尊，深谋远虑用意周密。
English: The imperial edict and the imperial edict for the people's community are really the castle walls for the clan to defend, and the ceremony for accepting the title of the country has changed with the changes of the times. The nobles entered the imperial court and served as assistants to the noble relatives of the king of the clan. The king was attached to the body, and the body also inherited the extremely noble temperament. There is no long-term fixed support for officials, but the salary has a constant amount, and the rank status is high. It is easy to suspect the death of the ancestor. In the past, the grandson was deeply respected, and the forethought was well-planned.

古文：岂不以群王少弱，未更多难，高宗清谨，同起布衣，故韬末命于近亲，寄重权于疏戚，子弟布列，外有强大之势，疏亲中立，可息觊觎之谋，表里相维，足固家国。
现代文：怎不感到群王年轻力弱，未能经历多方磨难，高宗清廉稳重，是一同从布衣百姓起家发迹的，因此同近亲谋划临终遣命的事，对疏戚寄托重要权力，让子弟布列藩屏，使京城外围有强大的势力，让疏远的宗亲在朝中建树，可以抑止亲藩觊觎皇位的图谋，这样内外连结牵制，足可以巩固家国。
English: How could he not feel that the kings were young and weak, unable to experience the hardships of many sides, that Gaozong was clean, honest and stable, and that they had made a fortune together from the cloth-clothed people. Therefore, he planned with his close relatives to send him to his death, entrusted important power to his close relatives, let his son Bure Hanping, so that the outskirts of the capital had strong power, and let the estranged great-grandparents build a tree in the middle of the court, which could deter the attempt of the pro-clan to usurp the throne. In this way, the internal and external links could be controlled, and the country could be

古文：曾不虑机能运衡，权可制众，宗族歼灭，一至于斯。
现代文：然而竟没有想到机关能运动衡木，少的可以制胜多的，宗族遭到歼灭，一下竟然落到这步田地。
English: However, it did not occur to them that an organization can move mountains, that the few can conquer the many, that a clan can be annihilated, and that they could suddenly find themselves in this predicament.

古文：曹植之言信之矣。
现代文：曹植的话确实说得对啊。
English: Cao Zhi's words are indeed right.

古文：赞曰：高十二王，始建封植。献、昭机警，威、江才力。恭、简恬和，鄱、桂清识。
现代文：赞日：高帝十二王，刚刚有封立，献、昭颇机警，盛、辽具才力；茎、简安静平和，鄱、挂见识高明。
English: Praise for the day: Emperor Gao, the 12th king, had just been enthroned, Xian and Zhao were quite alert, Sheng and Liao were talented; Zeng and Jian were quiet and peaceful, and Zou and Hang were knowledgeable and clever.

古文：四王少盛，同规谨敕。
现代文：其余四王年纪轻轻，却都是谨慎严正的典范。
English: The remaining four kings are young, but they are models of prudence and rigor.

