古文：国朝馆阁之选，皆天下英俊，然必试而后命。
现代文：我朝馆阁官职的人选，都是天下的贤良之才，但是必须经过考试，中试之后才任命。
English: My candidates for cabinet posts are the best in the world, but they must pass an exam, and they are not appointed until after the mid-term exam.

古文：一经此职，遂为名流。
现代文：凡是担任过这种官职的，就成为社会的名流。
English: Anyone who has held such a post becomes a social celebrity.

古文：其高者，曰集贤殿修撰、史馆修撰、直龙图阁、直昭文馆、史馆、集贤院、秘阁。次曰集贤、秘阁校理。官卑者，曰馆阁校勘、史馆检讨，均谓之馆职。
现代文：官位高的，称集贤殿修撰、史馆修撰、直龙图阁、直昭文馆、史馆、集贤院、秘阁；次一等的，称集贤院或秘阁校理；低的，称馆阁校勘、史馆检讨，这些，都被称为馆职。
English: High-ranking officials are called Shuxianden Shuxian, Shihukan Shuxian, Zhaolong Tukou, Zhaozhuang Library, Shihukan, Shixian Academy, and Hekou; second-ranking officials are called Shuxianden or Hekou Shuxian; and low-ranking officials are called Shujuan Academy, Shujuan Academy and Hekou Shujian.

古文：记注官缺，必于此取之，非经修注，未有直除知制诰者。
现代文：修起居注的官员出现空缺，肯定从馆职官员里挑选递补，不经过记注官的阶段，没有直接任命为知制诰的。
English: If there is a vacancy in the position of the official responsible for the correction of the annotation, the replacement must be selected from among the librarian officials, without going through the stage of the annotator, and without being directly appointed by the prefect.

古文：官至员外郎则任子，中外皆称为学士。
现代文：官阶到了员外郎那一级就可以保举子弟一人为官，朝廷内外都称他为学士。
English: When the official rank reached the level of Jianwei Lang, one of his sons could be promoted to the official rank. Both inside and outside the imperial court, he was called a bachelor.

古文：及元丰官制行，凡带职者，皆迁一官而罢之，而置秘书省官，大抵与职事官等，反为留滞。
现代文：等到元丰年间新官制颁行，凡是兼任其他职事官的，都官升一级但去掉馆职，可是设置秘书省的官员，阶官却大抵与职事官相等，反而呈现出升迁迟滞的局面。
English: By the time the new official system was promulgated in the Yuanfeng era, all officials who concurrently served as other officials were promoted to the first level of prefectural officials but removed from the post, but the officials of the secretary province were set up, but the officials were mostly equal to the officials, but there was a situation of delayed promotion.

古文：政和以后，增修撰直阁贴职为九等，于是材能治办之吏、贵游乳臭之子，车载斗量，其名益轻。
现代文：政和之后，增加修撰、直阁的贴职，形成九个等级，贴职是科加恩兼职，并不担任馆阁职务，于是乎有治理之才的官吏、乳臭未干的贵族子弟都染指于此，车载斗量，馆职的名声更加低轻。
English: After the conclusion of the Peace Treaty, nine grades were formed by increasing the number of posts for officials and cabinet ministers. The posts were Kogane part-time and did not serve as cabinet posts. As a result, government officials with the ability to govern and the children of aristocrats who had not yet grown up were all involved in this. The number of vehicles carried was small, and the reputation of the post was even lower.

古文：南渡以来，初除校书正字，往往召试，虽曰馆职不轻畀，然其迁叙，反不若寺监之径捷。
现代文：南渡以后，开始任命为校书、正字之官的时候，往往召集起来进行考试，虽说是给职不能轻易予人，但是他们的以序升迁，反而没有其他寺监部升迁的捷径。
English: After arriving in Nanto, when they began to be appointed as officials of school books and orthography, they were often called together for examinations. Although it is said that the post cannot be easily given to people, but their promotion in order, but there is no shortcut to the promotion of other temple supervisory departments.

古文：至推排为郎，即失其故步，混然无别矣。
现代文：升币孚决。至于递次推举为郎，失去了原来的少骤，和其他官员混同无别了。
English: As for the successive election of officials, they have lost the original minor steps, and there is no difference between them and other officials.

