古文：文炳师侍其先生，警敏善记诵，自幼俨如成人。
现代文：董文炳，字彦明，董俊长子。父亲去世时他才十六岁。拜侍其轴先生为师，天性敏慧，善记诵，年幼就如同成人。
English: He was only 16 years old when his father passed away. He was taught by his father's servant, Mr. Shaft. He was naturally quick-witted and good at memorizing and reciting. As a child, he was just like an adult.

古文：岁乙未，以父任为藁城令。同列皆父时人，轻文炳年少，吏亦不之惮。
现代文：太宗七年，因父亲是功臣而任他为藁城县令，同僚都与其父同辈，轻视他年少，下属胥吏也不怕他。
English: In the seventh year of Taizong's reign, because his father was a meritorious subject, he was appointed as the magistrate of Licheng County. His colleagues were all his father's contemporaries. They despised him for being young, and the subordinate magistrates were not afraid of him.

古文：文炳明于听断，以恩济威。
现代文：文炳善于决断诉讼，施恩不施威。
English: Wen Jiabao is good at adjudicating lawsuits, and does not impose his will.

古文：未几，同列束手下之，吏抱案求署字，不敢仰视，里人亦大化服。
现代文：不久，同僚们听他指使，胥吏们拿文书求他签字时不敢仰视，百姓听他的教导。
English: Before long, his colleagues were following his lead, magistrates dared not look up when they asked him to sign documents, and the people listened to his teachings.

古文：县贫，重以旱蝗，而征敛日暴，民不聊生。
现代文：该县本来贫困，又加上旱灾蝗灾，上级又苛征暴敛，真是民不聊生。
English: The county was originally poor, coupled with drought and locust plagues, and the superiors were harsh and violent, it was really the people who did not want to live.

古文：文炳以私谷数千石与县，县得以宽民。
现代文：文炳将自己的粮食拿出数千石交给本县，以减轻人民的负担。
English: In order to lighten the burden on the people, Wenyi donated thousands of koku of his grain to the county.

古文：乃以田庐若干亩计直与贷家，复籍县闲田与贫民为业，使耕之。于是流离渐还，数年间，民食以足。
现代文：前任县令因军费不足，曾向有钱人家借贷，年息为本金一倍，计划用百姓的蚕丝麦粟偿还。文炳接任后，自己卖田若干亩以还债，又将县境内的闲田分给贫民耕种，因此流离外县的人相继还乡，数年之内家给人足。
English: Due to insufficient military expenditure, the previous county magistrate had borrowed money from rich people, with an annual interest rate of double the principal, and planned to repay it with silk and poppy from the people. After taking over the post, Wen Wei sold several mu of land to repay the debt, and distributed idle fields in the county to the poor for cultivation. As a result, people who had been displaced from other counties returned to their hometowns one after another, and within a few years, there were enough homes for people.

古文：朝廷初料民，令敢隐实者诛，籍其家。
现代文：朝廷来清查户口，敢于隐瞒者诛杀并没收家产。
English: The imperial court came to investigate the account, and those who dared to conceal it were killed and their property confiscated.

古文：旁县民有讼不得直者，皆诣文炳求决。
现代文：文炳使百姓合家而居，这样可使户数减少。大家认为不可，查出来县令吃罪不起。文炳说： 为民获罪，我甘心情愿。 
English: Wen Jiabao encouraged people to live together as a family, which would reduce the number of households. Everyone thought it was impossible, and the county government could not afford to be found guilty. Wen Jiabao said: I am willing to be convicted for the sake of the people.

古文：文炳尝上谒大府，旁县人聚观之，曰： 吾亟闻董令，董令顾亦人耳，何其明若神也！ 
现代文：因而赋税额大减。邻县百姓有冤不能申，来求文炳决断。文炳去拜谒知府时，别县人都来看他，有人说： 吾多次听说董令，董令也同我们一样是人，但他为何明若神灵？ 
English: As a result, the tax amount was greatly reduced. People in neighboring counties who had grievances that they could not appeal to came to seek the decision of Wenyu. When Wenyu went to visit the prefectural government, people from other counties came to see him. Some said: I have heard of Dongling many times. Dongling is a human being like us, but why is he like a god?

古文：时府索无厌，文炳抑不予。
现代文：府衙向县索取无厌，文炳就是不给。
English: The prefectural government never tires of asking the prefectural government for money, but the county government just won't give it.

古文：或谗之府，府欲中害之，文炳曰： 吾终不能剥民求利也。 
现代文：有人到府里去告他的状，府衙想陷害他，文炳说 ：我决不能剥削百姓来为自己谋利。 
English: Someone went to the government to sue him. The government wanted to frame him. Wen Wei said, "I must not exploit the people to make a profit for myself."

古文：即弃官去。
现代文：便弃官而去。
English: He resigned his post and left.

古文：世祖在潜藩，癸丑秋，受命宪宗征南诏。文炳率义士四十六骑从行，人马道死殆尽，及至吐番，止两人能从。
现代文：宪宗三年秋，世祖奉命征南诏，文炳率义士四十六骑随行，人马在途中几乎死尽，到吐蕃时，随他而来的只剩下两人。
English: In the autumn of the third year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, Emperor Xizong was ordered to conquer Nanzhao, accompanied by 46 knights led by Wenyu. On the way, almost all the men and horses died. By the time they reached Tubo, there were only two people left to follow him.

古文：两人者挟文炳徒行，踯躅道路，取死马肉续食，日行不能三二十里，然志益厉，期必至军。
现代文：这两人扶着文炳徒步前进，十分艰难，取死马肉为食，每天走不到三二十里，但其志更坚，决心按时赶上部队。
English: It was very difficult for the two of them to advance on foot with the support of Wenyu. They had to eat dead horse meat and walk less than thirty miles a day. However, their determination was even stronger and they were determined to catch up with the troops on time.

古文：会使者过，遇文炳，还言其状。
现代文：有使臣路过，遇见文炳，回去向世祖报告了文炳艰苦跋涉的情形。
English: An envoy passed by, met Wen Rong, and went back to report to the patriarch about Wen Rong's arduous trek.

古文：文炳驰至寨下，谕以祸福，不应，文炳脱胄呼曰： 吾所以不极兵威者，欲活汝众也，不速下，令屠寨矣。 守者惧，遂降。
现代文：当时文炳之弟文忠早已随从世祖在军中，世祖立即命他带领五匹马载着粮食去迎接。文炳到了军中，世祖奖励其忠毅，念其穷苦，厚加赏赐。宪宗九年秋，世祖伐宋，至淮西，命文炳夺取台山寨。文炳至寨下，对守寨军讲明祸福，守军不理，文炳高声喊道 ：我之所以不挥兵进攻，是想让你们不遭兵刃之灾，若坚持不降，那就要发动进攻，把你们杀个干净。 守军惧怕，开寨投降。
English: At that time, Wenjun's younger brother, Wenzhong, had already followed the ancestor in the army, and the ancestor immediately ordered him to lead five horses carrying grain to meet him. When Wenjun arrived in the army, the ancestor rewarded his loyalty, remembered his poverty, and rewarded him generously. In the autumn of the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, the ancestor of the Song Dynasty went to Huaxi and ordered Wenjun to seize the mountain fortress. When Wenjun reached the fortress, he told the defenders of the fortress about the evil and good, and the defenders did not care, and Wenjun shouted in a loud voice: The reason why I do not attack

古文：九月，师次阳罗堡。
现代文：九月，大军进至阳罗堡。
English: In September, the large army marched to Yangluo Castle.

古文：宋兵筑堡于岸，陈船江中，军容甚盛。
现代文：宋军筑堡于江岸，列船于江中，显示出军势很盛的样子。
English: The Song army built fortresses on the riverbank and lined up ships in the middle of the river, showing the appearance of a strong army.

古文：文炳请于世祖曰： 长江天险，宋所恃以为国，势必死守，不夺其气不可，臣请尝之。 
现代文：文炳请示世祖： 长江天险，以此作为捍卫国家的屏障，势必死守。非攻下这地方以杀其气焰不可，臣请去试攻。 
English: Wen Xuan asked his ancestor: The Yangtze River is a natural hazard, and as a barrier to defend the country, it is bound to be defended to the death. If this place is not conquered, it is necessary to kill its pride. Please go and try.

古文：即与敢死士数十百人当其前，率弟文用、文忠，载艨艟鼓棹疾趋，叫呼毕奋。
现代文：经世祖同意，便率敢死队数十百人为先锋，其弟文用、文忠率艨艟战船随后擂鼓呐喊以助威势。
English: With the consent of the patriarch, he led a death squad of several hundred people as the vanguard, and his younger brothers, Wenyo and Wenzhong, led the warship, and then marched out with drums and shouts to show their support.

古文：锋既交，文炳麾众趋岸搏之，宋师大败。
现代文：两军交锋，文炳挥众登岸战斗，宋军大败。
English: The two armies clashed, Wen Xuan led the troops ashore to fight, and the Song army was defeated.

古文：且命他师毋解甲，明日将围城。
现代文：文用轻舟报捷，世祖驻香炉峰，策马上山问战胜的具体情况，听罢，命其他军队兵不解甲，准备明日攻城。
English: Literature and light boats are used to report the victory, the founder of the world is stationed at the peak of the incense burner, the strategy is to ask the mountain for the specific situation of the victory, listen to it, the orders of other army soldiers are not to disarm, prepare to attack the city tomorrow.

古文：既渡江，会宪宗崩。闰十一月，班师。
现代文：大军渡江后，闻宪宗崩，于闰十一月班师北还。
English: After the great army crossed the river, Emperor Wenxian collapsed and returned to the north in the leap November.

古文：庚申，世祖即位于上都，是为中统元年，命文炳宣慰燕南诸道。
现代文：第二年世祖即位于上都，是为中统元年，命文炳至燕南抚慰诸道。
English: In the second year, the patriarch was located in Shangdu, and in the first year of the unification of China, he was ordered to travel to Yan'nan to pacify the provinces.

古文：还奏曰： 人久驰纵，一旦遽束以法，不可。危疑者尚多，宜赦天下，与之更始。 
现代文：文炳去了解一些情形回来奏报 ：那里的人久已随意惯了，若立即以法来约束他们是不行的，会引起他们的疑虑，最好大赦天下，除旧立新。 
English: Wen Xuan went to understand some situations and came back to report: The people there have long been accustomed to arbitrariness. If they are immediately constrained by the law, it is not possible, it will cause their doubts. It is best to forgive the world, remove the old and establish a new one.

古文：世祖从之，反侧者遂安。
现代文：世祖采行，那些不愿顺从朝廷的人安静下来了。
English: Those who did not want to obey the imperial court calmed down.

古文：二年，擢山东东路宣抚使。
现代文：中统二年，提升文炳为山东东路宣抚使。
English: In the second year of China's reunification, Wen Jiabao was promoted to the post of Shandong East Road propaganda envoy.

古文：方就道，会立侍卫亲军，帝曰： 亲军非文炳难任。 即遥授侍卫亲军都指挥使，佩金虎符。
现代文：刚刚起程赴任，朝廷建立侍卫亲军，世祖认为亲军非由董文炳领导不可，于是立即遥授他为侍卫亲军都指挥使，佩带金虎符。
English: Just after taking office, the imperial court established the bodyguard of the pro-army. The founder believed that the pro-army must be led by Dong Wenyi, so he immediately gave him the command of the bodyguard of the pro-army, wearing the golden tiger.

古文：三年，李璮反济南。
现代文：中统三年，李王在济南起兵反叛。
English: Three years after the unification of China and Korea, Li Wang rebelled in Jinan.

古文：璮剧贼，善用兵。文炳会诸军围之，璮不得遁。
现代文：李王善于用兵，文炳约会诸军重重包围济南城，使李王不得逃跑。
English: Li Wang was good at using soldiers, and Wen Xuan ordered the armies to encircle Jinan City, so that Li Wang could not escape.

古文：久之，贼势日蹙，文炳曰： 穷寇可以计擒。 乃抵城下，呼璮将田都帅者曰： 反者璮耳，余来即吾人，毋自取死也。 
现代文：围困日久，李王的势力日弱，这时文炳认为 穷寇可以计擒 了，进抵城下，喊王将田都帅答话： 反抗朝廷者只李王一人，其余的只要来投顺都是自己人，不要自取灭亡。 
English: The siege lasted for a long time, and King Li's power became weaker and weaker. At this time, Wenyu thought that the poor bandit could be outwitted. When he arrived at the foot of the city, he called out to the king to be a field marshal. The king replied: King Li was the only one who resisted the court, and the rest were his own people as long as they came to Tushun. Don't self-destruct.

古文：然他杀之者已众，皆大悔。
现代文：田都帅弃城而下，交械投降。田是李王的爱将，他投降，守城官兵大乱，生擒李王，开城投降。
English: Tian Duxiao abandoned the city and surrendered. Tian was the favorite general of King Li, he surrendered, the officers and soldiers of the city were in turmoil, King Li was captured alive, and the city surrendered.

古文：璮伏诛，山东犹未靖，乃以文炳为山东东路经略使，率亲军以行。
现代文：李王伏诛，然山东并未平定，于是任文炳为山东东路经略使，率亲军去弹压。
English: However, Shandong was not pacified, so Ren Wenyi became the envoy for the eastern route of Shandong and led the pro-independence forces to exert pressure.

古文：出金银符五十，有功者听与之。
现代文：还给他金银符五十个，由他颁给有功之人。
English: And he gave him again fifty pieces of silver and fifty pieces of gold, which he bestowed on those who did well in the war.

古文：闰九月，文炳至益都，留兵于外，从数骑衣冠而入。
现代文：闰九月，文炳至益都，留兵于城外，只带数骑入城。
English: In leap September, Wenyi went to Yidu, left his soldiers outside the city, and rode into the city with only a few soldiers.

古文：居府，不设警卫，召璮故将吏立之庭，曰： 璮狂贼，诖误汝等。
现代文：住在城内也不设警卫，召王的故将训话： 王是狂贼，你们是受牵连。
English: And there was no watchman in the city, and they that called upon the king charged him, saying, The king is mad, and ye are shut up.

古文：璮已诛死，汝皆为王民。天子至仁圣，遣经略使抚汝，当相安毋惧。
现代文：现王已死，你们都是朝廷臣民，天子是圣人，心怀仁爱，遣经略使来安抚你们，你们应当相安勿惧。
English: Now that the king is dead, you are all subjects of the imperial court. The Son of Heaven is a holy man, with a heart of benevolence and love. He has sent His emissary to pacify you. You should be at peace with one another and not be afraid.

古文：经略使得便宜除拟将吏，汝等勉取金银符，经略使不敢格上命不予有功者。 
现代文：本经略使有权任免将吏，只要你们勉力为朝廷效忠，就可得到金银符，本经略使决不敢违背朝命不给有功之人。 
English: This sutra has the power to appoint and dismiss generals. As long as you are loyal to the imperial court, you can get gold and silver, and this sutra will never dare to disobey the imperial order and not give it to those who have meritorious deeds.

古文：所部大悦，山东以安。
现代文：人心大喜，山东安然无事。
English: People's hearts are overjoyed and Shandong is safe and sound.

古文：至元三年，帝惩李璮之乱，欲潜销方镇之横，以文炳代史氏两万户为邓州光化行军万户、河南等路统军副使。
现代文：至元三年，为防止像李王这样的不义人叛乱，世祖想暗中消除各地区军事长官的兵权，便以文炳取代史氏两万户为邓州光化行军万户、河南等路统军副使。
English: In the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, in order to prevent the rebellion of the unrighteous like King Li, the founder secretly wanted to eliminate the military power of the military commanders in various regions, so he replaced the 20,000 households of the Shi family with the 20,000 households of Dengzhou, Guanghua and Henan as the deputy envoys of the Road Union Army.

古文：到官，造战舰五百艘，习水战，预谋取宋方略，凡厄塞要害皆列栅筑堡，为备御计。
现代文：他到任后，造战舰五百艘，军队练习水战，准备取宋。凡要塞之处，皆列栅筑堡，加强防御。
English: After he took office, he built five hundred warships, and the army practiced naval warfare, preparing to take Song. Wherever there were fortresses, they all lined up to build forts and strengthen their defenses.

古文：帝尝召文炳密谋，欲大发河北民丁。
现代文：世祖召文炳秘密商议，准备大量征调河北民丁。
English: Shizu summoned Wenyu for secret deliberation and prepared to conscript a large number of Hebei civilians.

古文：文炳曰： 河南密迩宋境，人习江淮地利，宜使河北耕以供军，河南战以辟地。
现代文：文炳建议 ：河南紧连宋境，人民习于江淮地利，最好使河北人种田收粮以供军需，河南以战争开辟疆土。
English: Wen Rong suggested: Henan is closely connected to the Song Dynasty, and the people are accustomed to the Jianghuai region. It is best to let the people of Hebei collect grain from the fields to supply the military, and let Henan use war to open up the territory.

古文：俟宋平，则河北长隶兵籍，河南削籍为民。如是为便。
现代文：待平宋之后，河北人民长期籍为兵，河南则改兵为民，这样为便。
English: After the Ping and Song dynasties, the people of Hebei were soldiers for a long time, while the people of Henan changed from soldiers to citizens. This was convenient.

古文：又将校素无俸给，连年用兵，至有身为大校出无马乘者。
现代文：将校素无俸禄，连年用兵，以致有官为大校而出无马可乘。
English: Officers do not receive a salary and are required to serve in the army year after year. As a result, some officers have no choice but to become colonels.

古文：臣即所部千户私役兵士四人，百户二人，听其雇役，稍食其力。 
现代文：臣所部千户私役兵士四人，百户私役兵士二人，听从他们役使劳动，以自食其力。 
English: Four soldiers from each of the 1,000 households and two soldiers from each of the 100 households in the vassalage were selected to serve and work under them and earn their own living.

古文：帝皆从之，始颁将校俸钱，以秩为差。
现代文：帝皆听从，从此将校按军阶发给俸钱。
English: Emperors obeyed, and from then on officers were paid according to their military rank.

古文：七年，改山东路统军副使，治沂州。
现代文：至元七年，改任文炳为山东路统军副使，首府设于沂州。
English: In the seventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was appointed as the deputy envoy of the Shandong Road Union Army, and the capital was set up in Zhangzhou.

古文：沂与宋接境，镇兵仰内郡饷运。
现代文：沂州与宋接界，其镇守军队给养靠内郡供应。
English: Zhangzhou shares a border with Song, and its garrison army was supported and supplied by Inner County.

古文：有诏和籴本部，文炳命收州县所移文。
现代文：朝廷命就地购粮，文炳命收回发给州县的购粮文书。
English: The imperial court ordered that grain be purchased locally, and the civil magistrate ordered that grain purchase documents issued to prefectures and counties be withdrawn.

古文：众谏以违诏，文炳曰： 但止之。 
现代文：大家认为这是违背圣旨，文炳说： 暂不征购。 
English: Everyone considered this to be a violation of the holy will, and Wenyu said, "We will not solicit purchases for the time being."

古文：乃遣使入奏，略曰： 敌人接壤，知吾虚实，一不可；边民供顿甚劳，重苦此役，二不可；困吾民以惧来者，三不可。 
现代文：立即派人入奏皇上 ：敌人与我接壤，这样做会让敌人知我虚实，此一不可；边民供应军需已很劳苦，若再向他们征购，是增加其负担，此二不可；把我区的百姓弄得贫困不堪，别处的百姓就不敢来了，此三不可。 
English: Immediately send someone to report to the emperor: the enemy is on the border with me, this will let the enemy know my true and false, this is an impossibility; the border people have been working hard to supply military supplies, if they are requisitioned again, it will increase their burden, this is an impossibility; the people in my district are impoverished, the people elsewhere will not dare to come, this is an impossibility.

古文：帝大悟，罢之。
现代文：世祖顿时觉悟，停止向该地区征粮。
English: The patriarch suddenly came to his senses and stopped collecting grain from the region.

古文：九年，迁枢密院判官，行院事于淮西。
现代文：至元九年，调任枢密院判官，负责枢密院的军务。
English: In the ninth year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was transferred to be the judge of the Privy Council, responsible for the military affairs of the Privy Council.

古文：筑正阳两城，两城夹淮相望，以缀襄阳及捣宋腹心。
现代文：文炳在正阳夹淮河构建两城，连接襄阳以扰乱宋朝腹心之地。
English: Wen Xuan built two cities in Zhengyang and Huaihe, connecting Xiangyang to disturb the heartland of the Song Dynasty.

古文：十年，拜参知政事。
现代文：至元十年，拜参知政事。
English: In the 10th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Bai Sanzhong became the governor.

古文：夏，霖雨，水涨，宋淮西制置使夏贵帅舟师十万来攻，矢石雨下，文炳登城御之。
现代文：是年夏季大雨连绵，淮水猛涨。宋淮西制置使夏贵率水军十万来攻，箭如雨下，文炳登城指挥抵御。
English: It was the year of continuous heavy rain in the summer, and the floodwaters soared. Song Huaixi's construction made Xia Gui lead 100,000 sailors to attack, and it rained like arrows. Wen Yu went to the city to command the defense.

古文：一夕，贵去复来，飞矢贯文炳左臂，着胁。文炳拔矢授左右，发四十余矢。
现代文：有天夜间，贵去复来，文炳左臂中箭。他拔出箭交给左右，自己射出四十余箭。
English: One night, when Gui returned, Wen Yao was hit by an arrow in his left arm. He pulled out the arrow and passed it to his right and left, and shot more than forty arrows himself.

古文：箙中矢尽，顾左右索矢，又十余发，矢不继，力亦困，不能张满，遂闷绝几殆。
现代文：自带的箭射完了，向左右索取，又射发十余箭，箭用完了，力量也用尽了，不能拉开弓。
English: He finished shooting the arrows he brought with him, asked for more arrows from the left and right, and shot more than ten arrows. The arrows were used up, and his strength was exhausted, so he couldn't draw the bow.

古文：明日，水入外郭，文炳麾士卒却避，贵乘之，压军而阵。
现代文：第二天，河水漫入正阳外城，文炳指挥士卒退避，夏贵乘势迫近守城。
English: The next day, the river water flowed into the outer city of Zhengyang, the commanding officer of Wenqi retreated, and Xia Gui approached the city to defend it.

古文：文炳病创甚，子士选请代战，文炳壮而遣之，复自起束创，手剑督战。
现代文：文炳箭创甚重，子士选请代父指挥战斗。文炳鼓励他，让他去出战，他自己起来包扎好创口，挥剑督战。
English: Wen Xuan's arrow wound was very serious, and his sons chose to ask their father to command the battle. Wen Xuan encouraged him and asked him to go to war. He got up, bandaged the wound, and waved his sword to control the battle.

古文：士选以戈击贵将仆，不死，获之以献。
现代文：士选以戈击倒夏贵，夏贵未死，撤兵而去，不敢再来。
English: Shi Xuan knocked down Xia Gui with a hammer, but Xia Gui did not die, he withdrew and did not dare to come back.

古文：贵遂去，不敢复来。是岁，大举兵伐宋，丞相伯颜自襄阳东下，与宋人战阳罗堡。
现代文：这年，元军大举伐宋，丞相伯颜自襄阳东下，与宋军战于阳罗堡。
English: In that year, the Yuan army launched a large-scale attack on the Song Dynasty, and the chancellor Bo Yan went east from Xiangyang to fight the Song Dynasty army at Yangluo Fort.

古文：文炳以九月发正阳，十一年正月，会伯颜于安庆。安庆守将范文虎以城降。
现代文：文炳九月从正阳出发，次年正月伯颜于安庆会师，安庆宋守将范文虎开城投降。
English: In September, Wenyi set out from Zhengyang. In the first month of the following year, Bo Yan met with Anqing, and Anqing Song Shou surrendered to Fan Wenhu.

古文：文炳请于伯颜曰： 大军既疲于阳罗堡，吾兵当前行。 
现代文：文炳请示伯颜 ：大军在阳罗堡战斗，十分疲劳，让我军前行。 
English: Wen Xuan asked Bo Yan: The large army is fighting in Yangluo Fort, very tired, let our army go forward.

古文：伯颜许之。
现代文：伯颜同意。
English: Bo Yan agreed.

古文：宋都督贾似道来御，师陈于芜湖，似道弃师走。
现代文：宋都督贾似道率军抵御，但到了芜湖就逃跑了。
English: The Song governor Jia Li Dao led the army to resist, but fled to Wuhu.

古文：次当涂，文炳复言于伯颜曰： 采石当江之南，和州对峙，不取，必有后顾。 
现代文：元军至当涂，文炳对伯颜说： 采石在长江南岸，与北岸和州对峙，若不攻取必有后顾之忧。 
English: When the Yuan army arrived at Dangtu, Wenyi said to Bo Yan: Quarrying is on the south bank of the Yangtze River, facing the north bank and the prefecture. If you do not capture it, you will have to worry about the future.

古文：遂进攻之，降知州事王喜。
现代文：于是进攻和州，知州事王喜降。
English: As a result, the attack and the prefecture, the prefect of the prefecture were defeated.

古文：三月，有诏以时向暑热，命伯颜军驻建康，文炳军驻镇江。
现代文：三月，朝廷考虑到南方天气渐热，暂停进军，命伯颜军驻扎建康，文炳军驻扎镇江。
English: In March, the imperial court, taking into account the increasingly hot weather in the south, suspended the advance, and stationed the Mu Bo Yan Army in Jiankang, and the Wen Hui Army in Zhenjiang.

古文：时扬州、真州坚守不下，常州、苏州既降复叛。
现代文：当时扬州、真州宋军坚守不下，常州、苏州又降而复叛。
English: At that time, the Song armies of Yangzhou and Zhenzhou could not hold out, and Changzhou and Suzhou surrendered and rebelled.

古文：士表固请，乃许。文炳乘轮船，建大将旗鼓，士选、士表船翼之，大呼突阵，诸将继进，飞矢蔽日。
现代文：宋将张世杰、孙虎臣约真、扬两州兵誓死战斗，而真、扬兵每战必败。张世杰等将大舰万艘停泊于焦山下江中。文炳乘轮船，树大将旗，其子士选、侄士表领战舰为两翼，大呼冲锋陷阵，诸将随后前进，飞箭蔽日。
English: Song made Zhang Shijie, Sun Huzhen, Yozhen and Yang soldiers of the two states fight to the death, and the true and Yang soldiers would be defeated in every battle. Zhang Shijie and others anchored the large ships in the lower reaches of Jiao Mountain. Wen Yu took the steamship, the tree was the flag, and his sons and nephews led the warships as two wings, shouting loudly to charge the front, and the generals then advanced, flying arrows to cover the sun.

古文：战酣，短兵相接，宋兵亦殊死战，声震天地，横尸委仗，江水为之不流。
现代文：两军短兵相接，宋兵亦殊死战斗，声震天地，横尸弃仗，江水为之不流。
English: The short soldiers of the two armies met, the Song soldiers also fought to the death, the sound shook the world, the corpses abandoned the battle, and the river did not flow.

古文：自寅至午，宋师大败，世杰走，文炳追及于夹滩。
现代文：自寅时战到午时，宋军大败，世杰退走，文炳追到夹滩。
English: From the battle of Yin to the afternoon, the Song army was defeated, Shijie retreated, and Wenyu chased him to the beach.

古文：世杰收溃卒复战，又破之，遂东走于海。文炳船小，不可入海，夜乃还。
现代文：世杰收纳溃兵再战，又败，东退入海。文炳因船小不能入海，至夜回师。
English: Shijie received the defeated soldiers, fought again, lost again, and retreated to the east into the sea. Wenyi could not go to sea because of the small ship, and returned to the division at night.

古文：俘甲士万余人，悉纵不杀，获战船七百艘，宋力自此遂穷。
现代文：这次战役，俘宋军万余人，都释放不杀，缴获战船七百艘。宋军力量从此削弱。
English: In this battle, more than ten thousand Song Army prisoners were released without being killed, and seven hundred warships were captured. The strength of the Song Army has been weakened ever since.

古文：十月，诸军分三道而进，文炳居左，由江并海趋临安。
现代文：十月，元军分三路前进，文炳居左，出大江沿海直趋临安。
English: In October, the Yuan army advanced in three directions, with Wen Xun on the left, and out along the coast of the Yangtze River, heading straight for Lin'an.

古文：先是，江阴军佥判李世修欲降不果，文炳檄谕之，世修以城来附，令权本军安抚使。
现代文：在此以前，宋江阴军佥判李世修想降，但未成功，文炳传令晓谕利害，世修归附，令他暂为本军安抚使。
English: Prior to this, the Song Jiangyin military commander had decided that Li Shixiu wanted to abdicate, but he was not successful. Wen Xuan ordered that the interests of Li Shixiu should be made clear, and that Li Shixiu should be subordinated, so that he would temporarily be the pacifying envoy of the army.

古文：所过民不知兵，凡获生口，悉纵遣之，无敢匿者，威信前布，皆望旗而服。
现代文：文炳军纪律严明，所过之地，民不知兵，凡俘虏百姓，一律释放，无人敢隐藏，颇有威信，人们望旗而服。
English: The Manchukuo army is well-disciplined. The people do not know the soldiers in the places they pass. Anyone who captures the people will be released. No one dares to hide. They are quite authoritative. People obey the flag.

古文：张瑄有众数千，负海为横，文炳命招讨使王世强及士选往降之。
现代文：张王宣拥众数人，横行海上，文炳命招讨使王世强及子士选去劝降。
English: Zhang Wang Xuan led a large number of people to the sea, and ordered Wen Xuan to persuade Wang Shijiang and his sons to go to the sea to persuade him to surrender.

古文：士选单舸至瑄所，谕以威德，瑄降，得海舶五百。
现代文：士选单舟到张王宣处，谕以威德，王宣降，得海船五百艘。
English: The officials selected a canoe and went to Zhang Xuan's office. They used their wisdom to persuade Wang Xuan to surrender, and obtained five hundred ships.

古文：十三年春正月，次盐官。
现代文：至元十三年春正月，文炳军至盐官。
English: In the first month of the spring of the thirteenth year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Wenhui army became salt officials.

古文：盐官，临安剧县，俟救至，招之再返不下。
现代文：盐官是临安的重要县城，正等待救兵。文炳两次派人去招降，都不肯从。
English: Yanquan, an important county seat of Lin'an, was awaiting rescue. Wen Xuan twice sent men to invite them to surrender, but they refused.

古文：将佐请屠之，文炳曰： 县去临安不百里，声势相及，临安约降已有成言，吾轻杀一人，则害大计，况屠一县耶？ 
现代文：将佐们要求攻下后大肆屠杀，文炳不许，对将佐说： 该县距离临安不远，声势相通。临安约降不杀人，已有言在先，我若轻杀一人就有害于大局，何况屠杀一县之人。 
English: The generals asked for a large-scale massacre after the capture, but Wen Xuan did not allow it, and said to the generals: The county is not far from Lin'an, and the situation is similar. Lin'an has agreed not to kill people, it has been said before, if I lightly kill one person, it will be harmful to the overall situation, not to mention the massacre of people in one county.

古文：于是遣人入城谕意，县降。
现代文：再派人入城去劝说，表明诚意，该县终降。
English: Then they sent someone into the city to persuade and show their sincerity, and the county finally gave in.

古文：遂会伯颜于临安城北。
现代文：文炳与伯颜会师于临安城北。
English: Wen Xuan and Bo Yan met in the north of Lin'an City.

古文：张世杰欲以其主逃之海，文炳绕出临安城南，戍浙江亭。
现代文：张世杰欲拥宋皇帝逃入海中，文炳绕到临安城南，戍守浙江亭，使世杰的逃跑计划不能实行。
English: Zhang Shijie wanted to embrace the Song Emperor and escape into the sea, while Wenyu went around to the south of Lin'an City and guarded Zhejiang Pavilion, so that Zhang Shijie's escape plan could not be carried out.

古文：世杰计不行，乃窃宋主弟吉王鸑、广王昺南走，而宋主鳷遂降。
现代文：世杰又私自将宋恭宗的兄长吉王赵曰正、弟广王赵籨带往南方，宋恭宗赵投降。
English: Shijie also personally took Song Gongzong's elder brother Ji Wang Zhao Zhaizheng and younger brother Guang Wang Zhao Yao to the south, and Song Gongzong Zhao surrendered.

古文：伯颜命文炳入城，罢宋官府，散其诸军，封库藏，收礼乐器及诸图籍。
现代文：伯颜命文炳入临安城，废除宋朝官府，解散宋军，封锁库藏，没收礼乐器及各类图册。
English: Bo Yan ordered Wen Rong to enter Lin'an City, abolished the Song Dynasty government, disbanded the Song Army, sealed the treasury, and confiscated ceremonial musical instruments and all kinds of picture books.

古文：文炳取宋主诸玺符上于伯颜。
现代文：文炳将宋皇帝玉玺送交伯颜。
English: Wen Xuan sent the Song Emperor Yulin to Bo Yan.

古文：伯颜以宋主入觐，有诏留事一委文炳。
现代文：伯颜要亲自送宋皇帝到京师大都去觐见世祖，诏令文炳留守临安，一切事务委董文炳办理。
English: Bo Yan wanted to personally send the Song Emperor to the Beijing Normal University to meet the founder of the dynasty. The Emperor ordered Wenyi to stay in Lin'an, and all affairs were handled by Dong Wenyi.

古文：禁戢豪猾，抚慰士女，宋民不知易主。
现代文：文炳禁止豪强横行，抚慰百姓，以致宋民还不知道国家已换了皇帝。
English: Wen Xuan forbade arrogance and tyranny and comforted the people, so that Song Min did not know that the country had changed the emperor.

古文：时翰林学士李槃奉诏招宋士至临安，文炳谓之曰： 国可灭，史不可没。
现代文：当时，翰林学士李奉诏招宋朝的读书人到临安，文炳对他们说： 国可灭，但史不可埋没无闻。
English: At that time, the scholar of Hanlin, Li Bongzao, invited the readers of the Song Dynasty to Lin'an. Wenqi said to them: The country can be destroyed, but history cannot be buried.

古文：宋十六主，有天下三百余年，其太史所记具在史馆，宜悉收以备典礼。 
现代文：宋朝历经十六个皇帝，统治天下三百余年，其历史由太史官所记载的都在史馆，应都收集起来，以便考察其制度和礼仪。 
English: The Song Dynasty went through sixteen emperors and ruled the world for more than three hundred years. The history recorded by the imperial historian is all in the history museum, and should all be collected in order to examine its system and etiquette.

古文：乃得宋史及诸注记五千余册，归之国史院。宋宗室福王与芮赴京师，遍以重宝致诸贵人，文炳独却不受。
现代文：经收集，得宋史及各种注记共五千余册，都送存于国史院，宋宗室福王赵与芮赴京师，将其珍宝馈赠给元朝廷诸贵人，只有文炳拒不接受。
English: After the collection, a total of more than five thousand volumes of Song history and various notes were obtained, all of which were sent to the National Academy of History. King Fu Zhao of the Song Dynasty and Emperor Gong went to Beijing to study, and presented their precious treasures to dignitaries of the former imperial court. Only Emperor Wen refused to accept.

古文：及官录与芮家，具籍受宝者，惟文炳无名。
现代文：官府登记与芮的家产，籍册所记载接受他馈赠珍宝的人，唯独没有董文炳的名字。
English: The government registered Dong Wenyu's family property with the family register, but the register did not record the names of the people who received his precious gifts.

古文：伯颜入朝奏曰： 臣等奉天威平宋，宋既已平，怀徕安集之功，董文炳居多。 
现代文：伯颜入朝奏报 ：臣等奉天威平宋，宋既平定，招引和安抚百姓之功，董文炳居多。 
English: Bo Yan entered the morning report: the ministers and others praised Tian Wei for pacifying the Song Dynasty, and the Song Dynasty was pacified, attracting and appeasing the people, and Dong Wenyi was mostly responsible.

古文：帝曰： 文炳吾旧臣，忠勤朕所素知。 
现代文：世祖说： 文炳是我朝旧臣，其忠勤朕所素知。 
English: The ancestor said: Wen Xuan was my old vassal, and I knew of his loyalty.

古文：乃拜资德大夫、中书左丞。
现代文：于是拜为资德大夫、中书左丞。
English: As a result, Bai became a doctor of finance and economics and a chancellor of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：时张世杰奉吉王鸑据台州，而闽中亦为宋守。
现代文：张世杰奉吉王曰正占据台州，福建也为宋人所有。
English: Zhang Shijie said that he was occupying Taizhou, and Fujian was also owned by the Song people.

古文：敕文炳进兵，所过禁士马无敢履践田麦，曰： 在仓者吾既食之，在野者汝又践之，新邑之民何以续命？ 
现代文：文炳奉敕进兵，明令：所过兵马不得践踏田麦。他对将士说 ：仓库的粮食我们吃了，在田野的禾苗被你们践踏，新区百姓如何生存下去？ 
English: Wen Rong Feng Rong marched into the army with a clear order: the passing soldiers and horses must not trample the fields of wheat. He said to the soldiers: We have eaten the grain in the warehouse, and the seedlings in the fields have been trampled by you. How can the people of the New Area survive?

古文：是以南人感之，不忍以兵相向。
现代文：因此，人民无不感激，不忍以武力对抗。
English: Therefore, the people are very grateful and cannot bear to fight back by force.

古文：次台州，世杰遁。
现代文：文炳军进抵台州，世杰又逃走了。
English: Wen Xuan's army entered Taizhou, and Shijie fled again.

古文：诸将先俘州民，文炳下令曰： 台人首效顺于我，我不暇有，故世杰据之，其民何罪？
现代文：诸将俘虏台州百姓，文炳下令： 台州人民首先效顺于我军，只是我军来不及到此，故世杰占有，其民何罪。
English: When they captured the people of Taizhou, Wen Jiabao ordered: The people of Taizhou were the first to obey our army, but our army was too late to get here, so Shijie took possession of it. What was the crime of his people?

古文：敢有不纵所俘者，以军法论！ 
现代文：敢有不释放所俘平民者，将以军法论处。 
English: Anyone who dares not to release the captured civilians will be dealt with according to military law.

古文：得免者数万口。
现代文：因此，幸免为奴者数万口。
English: As a result, tens of thousands of piglets were spared.

古文：至温州，温州未下，令曰： 毋取子女，毋掠民有。 
现代文：蒙军至温州，温州尚未攻下，文炳下令不准取民子女，不准掳掠民财。
English: The Mongolian army reached Wenzhou, but Wenzhou had not yet been conquered. Wen Jiabao ordered that they were not allowed to take people's children, and they were not allowed to plunder people's wealth.

古文：众曰： 诺。 
现代文：众皆愿遵行。
English: Everyone is willing to comply.

古文：其守将火城中逃，文炳亟命灭火，追擒其将，数其残民之罪，斩以徇。
现代文：宋温州守将烧城逃走，文炳急命灭火，追擒其将，列举其害民之罪，斩首示众。
English: Song Wenzhou's governor fled the burning city, while Wen Xuan desperately extinguished the fire, pursued his general, enumerated his crimes against the people, and beheaded him in public.

古文：逾岭，闽人扶老来迎，漳、泉、建宁、邵武诸郡皆送款来附。凡得州若干、县若干、户口若干。
现代文：进入福建，百姓扶老携幼来迎，漳州、建宁、邵武诸郡都诚心投顺，得州、县、户口各若干。
English: Entering Fujian, the people helped the elderly and brought their children to welcome them. The counties of Bozhou, Jianning and Shaowu all wholeheartedly voted for Shun, with a number of Texhou, county and hukou.

古文：闽人感文炳德最深，庙而祀之。
现代文：福建人民对文炳感恩戴德最深，建生祠祭祀。
English: The people of Fujian are most grateful to Wen Jiabao, and have built an ancestral shrine for him.

古文：十四年，帝在上都，适北边有警，欲亲将北伐。正月，急召文炳。
现代文：至元十四年，北边有警，帝在上都准备御驾亲征。正月，急召文炳回朝。
English: In the 14th year of the Yuan Dynasty, there were police on the north side, and the emperor was preparing to go to Shangdu. In the first month, he urgently summoned Wenyi to return to the imperial court.

古文：四月，文炳至自临安。比至，帝日问来期。
现代文：四月，文炳从临安来到京师，帝立即召见。
English: In April, Wen Xuan came to Beijing from Lin'an, and the emperor immediately summoned him.

古文：及至，即召入。文炳拜稽首曰： 今南方已平，臣无所效力，请事北边。 帝曰： 朕召卿，意不在是也。
现代文：文炳拜见后请求道： 今南方已平，臣无处效力，请领兵北征。 帝曰： 朕召你回来不是这个意思。
English: After the meeting, Emperor Wenxun requested, "Now that the South has been pacified, and your vassal is of no use anywhere, please lead your soldiers to the North." Emperor Wenxun said, "I didn't mean to call you back.

古文：竖子盗兵，朕自抚定。
现代文：那些小子造反，朕自己去平息。
English: Those kids are rebelling, I'm going to quell them myself.

古文：山以南，国之根本也，尽以托卿。
现代文：山以南是国家根本所在，都托付给你了。
English: The south of the mountain is where the country is fundamentally located. Everything has been entrusted to you.

古文：卒有不虞，便宜处置以闻。
现代文：若有什么意外事情发生，你先自行处置后再奏报我。
English: If anything unexpected happens, please handle it on your own before reporting to me.

古文：中书省、枢密院事无大小，咨卿而行，已敕主者，卿其勉之。 
现代文：中书省、枢院，事无大小都要先问你而后行，已敕令各主持人照办，望卿勉力为之。 
English: The Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology and the Central People's Procuratorate have ordered the presiding officers to ask you first before proceeding with any matter, no matter how big or small.

古文：文炳避谢，不许，因奏曰： 臣在临安时，阿里伯奉诏检括宋诸藏货宝，追索没匿甚细，人实苦之。宋人未洽吾德，遽苦之以财，恐非安怀之道。 
现代文：文炳辞谢，不准，他又进一步奏道： 臣在临安时，阿里伯奉诏清查宋朝所藏货宝时追索无遗，人们苦不敢言，宋人未沾到我朝恩德，反而因财货而受苦，恐非安抚怀柔之道。 
English: Wenyi thanked him, but he was not allowed to do so, and he went on to say: When the minister was in Lin'an, Ali Bo issued an edict to investigate the treasures of the Song Dynasty. People were afraid to say that the Song people were not touched by the benevolence of my dynasty, but instead suffered because of the wealth. I am afraid that this is not the way to appease Huai Rong.

古文：即诏罢之。
现代文：世祖立即诏令停止追索。
English: The patriarch immediately issued a decree to stop the pursuit.

古文：又曰： 昔者泉州蒲寿庚以城降，寿庚素主市舶，谓宜重其事权，使为我扞海寇，诱诸蛮臣服，因解所佩金虎符佩寿庚矣，惟陛下恕其专擅之罪。 
现代文：又奏道 ：昔日泉州蒲寿庚开城投降。寿庚素来主持市舶事务，我以为应重用他，使他为我朝捍御海寇，引导海滨诸蛮臣服，所以把我所佩的金虎符给他佩戴，望陛下恕臣擅自做主之罪。 
English: Also played: Once upon a time, Quanzhou Pu Shou Geng surrendered at Kaesong. Shou Geng used to be in charge of the city's naval affairs. I thought that I should make good use of him, so that he would defend my country against the sea pirates and lead the barbarians on the seashore into submission. Therefore, I gave him the golden tiger charm, which I admire, to wear. I hope that His Majesty will forgive me the sin of being the master without permission.

古文：帝大嘉之，更赐金虎符。
现代文：世祖对此大为嘉奖，再赐金虎符。
English: The ancestor greatly appreciated this and gave him a golden tiger charm.

古文：燕劳毕，即听陛辞。
现代文：设宴慰劳之后，文炳即辞别皇帝，又求见皇太子，太子恳切慰劳。
English: After a banquet was held to console the emperor, Wenyi bid farewell to the emperor and asked to see the crown prince. The prince sincerely consoled the emperor.

古文：皇太子闻之，谓宫臣竹忽纳曰： 董文炳深虑，非尔曹所知。 
现代文：文炳留其子士选于近卫亲军，自己在上都仅三日立即启程往大都。到大都第二天至中书省和枢密院，但不过问中书省的事。当时平章政事阿合马正恃宠弄权，任意杀生，但只怕文炳，故其不法行为稍有收敛。
English: On the third day of his stay in Shangdu, he immediately left for Dadu. On the second day of his stay in Dadu, he went to the Ministry of Chinese Literature and the Privy Council, but did not inquire about the Ministry of Chinese Literature. At that time, Pingzhang Political Affairs Ahama was spoiling his power and killing at will, but he was only afraid of Wenya, so his illegal behavior was slightly restrained.

古文：后或私问其故，文炳曰： 主上所付托者，在根本之重，非文移之细。
现代文：文炳本为中书左丞，应当过问中书省事，阿合马再三再四请他去，他一直不肯。有人私下问他为什么如此，文炳说： 主上所托付于我的是维护国家根本，而非处理公文这些小事。
English: Wenyuan was the secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China. He was supposed to handle the affairs of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, but Ahma repeatedly asked him to go, but he always refused. Someone privately asked him why this was so, and Wenyuan said: What the Lord entrusted to me was to safeguard the foundation of the country, not to deal with minor matters such as official documents.

古文：且吾少徇则济奸，不徇则致谗。谗行则身危，而深失付托本意。吾是以预其大政，而略其细务也。 
现代文：如果稍徇私情，那就是帮助奸人；不徇私情，就会遭到谗言，谗言行则我必身危，则深失皇上付托之本意，所以我只管大政而不管具体小事。 
English: If I indulge in a little selfishness, it is to help a traitor; if I do not indulge in selfishness, I will be criticized. If I indulge in selfishness, I will be in danger. If I indulge in selfishness, I will lose the intention entrusted to me by the Emperor. Therefore, I am only in charge of major policies and do not care about minor matters.

古文：十五年夏，文炳有疾，奏请解机务，诏曰： 大都署炽，非病者宜，卿可来此，固当愈。 
现代文：至元十五年夏，文炳因病奏请解除他机要重任。皇帝下诏说 ：大都暑热，不适宜养病，卿可来此，病定痊愈。 
English: In the summer of the 15th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Wen Xuan was ill and asked to be relieved of his important duties. The emperor issued an edict saying, "It is hot in most places, and it is not suitable for recovering from illness. Your highness can come here, and you will definitely recover from your illness."

古文：文炳至上都，奏曰： 臣病不足领机务，西北高寒，筋骸舒畅，当复自愈，请尽力北边。 
现代文：文炳上书说 ：臣有病不能担此机要重任，西北高寒，能使我筋骨舒畅，病会自愈，还可尽力于北边事务。 
English: The letter on the letterhead said: "The minister is ill and cannot take on this important task. The high and cold weather in the northwest can make my bones and muscles comfortable, the illness will heal itself, and I can also do my best in the northern affairs."

古文：帝曰： 卿固忠孝，是不足行也。枢密事重，以卿佥书枢密院事，中书左丞如故。 
现代文：世祖说： 卿固然忠孝，但不能去西北，枢密事重，卿还是照旧为佥书枢院事和中书左丞。 
English: The ancestor said: Although he is loyal and filial, he can't go to the northwest, and the secret is important. He is still a member of the Imperial Academy of Letters and a member of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：愿董氏世有男能骑马者，勉力报国，则吾死瞑目矣。 
现代文：是夜，文炳病复发，皇上令御医诊视。九月十三日，病情加重。召其弟文忠等，叮嘱他们要 勉力报国 ，言毕而卒。
English: In the evening, Wenzhong's illness relapsed, and the emperor ordered his doctor to examine him. On September 13, his condition worsened. He summoned his brother Wenzhong and others, and told them to do their best to report to the country.

古文：言毕，就枕卒。帝闻，悼痛良久，命文忠护丧葬藁城，令所过有司以礼吊祭，赠金紫光禄大夫、平章政事，谥忠献。子士元、士选。
现代文：帝闻知哀痛良久，命文忠护丧归葬藁城，令所过地方官府都要吊祭，赠金紫光禄大夫、平章政事，谥忠献。子二人：士元、士选，各有传。
English: Emperor Wen knew the sorrow for a long time. He ordered that the funeral of Wen Zhongguo should be held in Shicheng, and ordered that the local government offices he passed through should hold a hanging ceremony. He also gave gold, purple, and light to the doctor, the title of government affairs, and the gift of loyalty. Two sons: Shi Yuan and Shi Xuan, each has a legend.

古文：自襁褓丧母，祖母李氏爱之，谓文炳曰： 俟儿能言，即令读书。 数岁，从名儒受学。及长，善骑射。
现代文：董士元一名不花，字长卿，董文炳之长子。出生后不久母亲去世，数岁从名儒为师，长大善于骑射。
English: Dong Shiyuan was the eldest son of Dong Wenyuan, the eldest son of Dong Wenyuan. His mother died shortly after he was born, and he was taught by a famous Confucian for several years. He grew up to be good at riding and shooting.

古文：帝知其忠勤可任以事。会文蔚病卒，无子，命士元袭为千夫长。
现代文：宪宗征蜀时，士元二十三岁，随叔父董文蔚率邓州一军西行。蒙古军至钓鱼山，宋军坚守，士元请求代文蔚攻打，率所部先登，奋战许久，因后续部队未到而退。
English: At the time of the Confucian Conquest of Shu, Shiyuan was 23 years old. He followed his uncle, Dong Wenwei, to lead an army from Dengzhou to the west. The Mongolian army reached the Diaoyu Mountains, while the Song army held firm. Shiyuan asked Shiyuan to attack on behalf of Wenwei. He led the headquarters first, fought for a long time, and retreated because the follow-up troops did not arrive.

古文：出师南征襄、汉，分禁兵戍淮上。
现代文：中统初年，随世祖巡行北方，参与武定山之战。
English: In the first year of China's reunification, he accompanied the patriarch on a tour of the north and took part in the Battle of Wuding Mountain.

古文：士元在军中修敕武备，号令肃然。
现代文：文蔚死，无子，命士元承袭其叔之职为千夫长，随大军南征襄、汉。士元率领禁军奉命戍守淮上，修整武备，号令严明。
English: After the death of Wen Wei, who had no children, he ordered Shigen to take over his uncle's position as commander of a thousand soldiers and march south with a large army. Shigen led the forbidden army and was ordered to stay in Huaiyang, improve his military equipment, and issue strict orders.

古文：丞相伯颜克江南，宋兵保两淮未下，士元数与战，拔淮安堡，以功迁武节将军。
现代文：丞相伯颜进军江南，宋军坚守两淮，士元多次进攻，夺取淮安堡，因功升武节将军。
English: The chancellor Bo Yan marched into the south of the Yangtze River, the Song army held fast to the two Huai, Shiyuan attacked many times, captured Huai'an Fort, and was promoted to the general of the martial festival for his service.

古文：从太师博鲁欢攻扬州，驻师湾头堡。
现代文：随太师博鲁欢攻扬州，大军屯驻湾头堡。
English: Following the attack on Yangzhou by the divisional commander Bolu Huan, a large army was stationed at the Bay Head Fort.

古文：时方大暑，博鲁欢病还京师，以行省阿里代领诸军。
现代文：时值盛暑，博鲁欢因病北还京师，由行省阿里代其统帅职务。
English: At the height of the summer, Bolu Huan returned to Beijing due to illness, and was replaced as commander-in-chief by Governor Ali.

古文：士元与哈剌秃以部兵赴敌死战，鼓噪震地，泥淖马不能驰，乃弃马步战，至四更，敌众始退。
现代文：宋扬州守将姜才乘机进攻，阿里素来不知用兵，率轻骑数百出湾头堡，士元与别将哈剌秃率百骑随从。日落时，宋兵来攻者万余人，阿里逃走了，士元与哈剌秃率部奋力死战，喊杀声震天动地。马落入泥淖不能动，士元率部便弃马步战，直战斗到四更，敌才退走。
English: Song Yangzhou commander Jiang Cai took advantage of the opportunity to attack, Ali did not know how to use soldiers, led hundreds of light horsemen out of the Bay Head Fort, Shiyuan and Be will follow Harun Bald and 100 horsemen. At sunset, Song soldiers came to attack more than 10,000 people, Ali fled, Shiyuan and Harun Bald led the department to fight to the death, shouting and shaking the earth. The horse fell into the mud and could not move, Shiyuan led the department to abandon the horse and fight on foot, fighting until four more, the enemy only retreated.

古文：及旦，阿里来视战地，见士元卧泥中，身被十七枪，甲裳尽赤，肩舁至营而绝，年四十二。
现代文：第二天清晨，阿里来视察阵地，见士元卧于泥中，身受十七枪，衣甲都染红了，把他救回营中，因伤势太重而卒，年四十二岁。
English: Early the next morning, Ali came to inspect the position. He saw Shiyuan lying in the mud, with seventeen bullets in his body and his armor stained red. He rescued him and brought him back to the camp. He died of his injuries at the age of forty-two.

古文：哈剌秃亦战死。
现代文：哈剌秃也战死沙场。
English: H Bald also died on the battlefield.

古文：江淮既平，伯颜入朝，言于帝曰： 淮海之役，所损者二将而已。 
现代文：江淮平定后，伯颜向朝廷报告 ：淮海之役损失二将。 世祖问是谁。
English: After Jianghuai was pacified, Bo Yan reported to the imperial court: Two generals were lost in the Huaihai Campaign.

古文：帝问其人，以士元与哈剌秃对。
现代文：伯颜说是董士元与哈剌秃。
English: Bo Yan said that Dong Shiyuan and Harbin Bald are the same.

古文：帝曰： 不花健捷过人，昼战必能制敌，夜战而死，甚可惜也。 
现代文：世祖说 ：士元健捷过人，昼战必能制敌，夜战而死，十分可惜。 
English: The ancestor said: Shigen was a great warrior. He could defeat the enemy during the day, but it was a great pity that he died during the night.

古文：至大元年，赠镇国上将军、佥书枢密院事，谥节愍。
现代文：至大元年，赠镇国上将军、佥书枢密院事，谥节愍。
English: In the first year of the Taisho era, he was given the title of Zhenguo Shangzhen, the title of Zenshu Privy Councillor, and the title of Zi Jie.

古文：后加赠推诚效节功臣、资德大夫、中书左丞、护军，追封赵郡公，改谥忠愍。
现代文：后加赠推诚效节功臣、资德大夫、中书左丞、护军，追封越郡公，改谥忠愍。
English: Later, he was posthumously awarded the titles of meritorious vassal, meritorious doctor, meritorious left-hand man, and military escort, and was posthumously awarded the title of Yue County magistrate, and changed his surname to Zhongyuan.

古文：士选字舜卿，文炳次子也。幼从文炳居兵间，昼治武事，夜读书不辍。
现代文：董士选，字舜卿，董文炳之次子，幼随父于军中，白天习武，夜间读书。
English: Dong Shixuan, the second son of Dong Wenzhong, the second son of Dong Wenzhong, followed his father in the army when he was young. He studied martial arts during the day and read books at night.

古文：文炳总师与宋兵战金山，士选战甚力，大败之，追至海而还。
现代文：文炳率军与宋兵战于焦山，士选也参加战斗，而且十分勇猛，大败宋军，追至海滨而还。
English: Wen Xuan led the army to fight against the Song soldiers in Jiaoshan. Shixuan also participated in the battle, and was very brave. He defeated the Song army and chased it to the seashore.

古文：及降张瑄等，丞相伯颜临阵观之，壮其骁勇，遣使问之，始知为文炳子。奏功，佩金符，为管军总管。
现代文：丞相伯颜临阵观战，称赞其勇敢，遣人询问，才知是文炳之子，奏其功，授佩金符，为管军总管。
English: The chancellor, Boyan, came to watch the battle, praised his bravery, and sent someone to inquire, only to find out that he was the son of Wenyi, who played his role, was awarded a gold medal, and was the commander-in-chief.

古文：战数有功。
现代文：以后累立战功。
English: He went on to achieve great success in the war.

古文：宋降，从文炳入宋宫，取宋主降表及收其文书图籍，静重识大体，秋毫无所取，军中称之。
现代文：宋皇帝降，士选随文炳入宋朝皇宫取降表及清收文书档案。他自己一无所取，受全军称赞。
English: When the Song emperor abdicated, Shi Xuan followed Wen Xuan into the Song imperial palace to retrieve the abdication certificate and archive the documents. He did not take anything and was praised by the whole army.

古文：宋平，班师，诏置侍卫亲军诸卫，以士选为前卫指挥使，号令明正，得士大夫心。
现代文：平宋后班师，朝廷设侍卫亲军诸卫，任士选为前卫指挥使。他号令严明，大得人心。
English: After the Song Dynasty, the imperial court set up bodyguards who were close to the troops, and appointed him as the vanguard commander. His orders were strict and popular.

古文：未几，以其职让其弟士秀。
现代文：不久，将其职务让与弟士秀。
English: Soon, he relinquished his duties to his younger brother, Shu.

古文：帝嘉其意，命士秀将前卫，而以士选同佥行枢密院事于湖广，久之召还。
现代文：世祖嘉奖其用意，命士秀领导前卫，任士选为同佥湖广行枢密院事。以后又召还回京。
English: The Emperor commended his intention, appointed him to lead the vanguard, and selected him to be a member of the Tonglu Lake Guangxing Privy Council. He was later recalled to Beijing.

古文：宗王乃颜叛，帝亲征，召士选至行在所，与李劳山同将汉人诸军以御之。
现代文：宗王乃颜反叛，帝御驾亲征，召士选到皇上驻地，令与李劳山一同率领汉人诸军抵御乃颜。
English: King Naien rebelled, and the emperor personally led the troops to the imperial residence and ordered him and Li Laoshan to lead the Chinese troops to resist Naien.

古文：乃颜军飞矢及乘舆前，士选等出步卒横击之，其众败走。
现代文：在战斗中士选冒矢进击，大败乃颜军，受帝嘉奖。桑哥违法乱纪事败露，世祖征求正直之士来革除弊政，与士选商议办法，遣他以中书左丞之职与平章政事彻理往浙西去挑选僚属。
English: In the battle, the sergeant-elect made a daring attack, defeated the Yan army, and received the Emperor's commendation. Sango's record of lawlessness and disorder was revealed. The ancestor solicited honest people to eliminate maladministration, and discussed with the officer-elect. He sent him to the west of Zhejiang to select his colleagues with the position of the secretary-general of the CPC Central Committee and the political affairs of Pingzhang.

古文：缓急进退有礼，帝甚善之。
现代文：他们到浙西后，考察出有害于民的事，按照皇上旨意加以革除，百姓大喜。
English: After they arrived in western Zhejiang, they investigated things that were harmful to the people and eliminated them in accordance with the emperor's will. The people were overjoyed.

古文：有聚敛之臣为奸利，事发得罪且死，诈言所遣舶商海外未至，请留以待之，士选曰： 海商至则捕录之，不至则无如之何，不系斯人之存亡也。苟此人幸存，则无以谢天下。 
现代文：凡搜括钱财之臣图利为奸者，被查出后判以死刑。被判处死刑人诈称所遣往海外的海商尚未回，要求等待他们回来再处理。士选道 ：海商回来则逮捕问罪，不回来就没办法，此人生死存亡与这个海商回来与否无关。如果让此人幸存，则不好向天下人交代。 
English: The person sentenced to death falsely claimed that the overseas merchant had not yet returned, and asked to wait for them to come back before dealing with it. Shi Zheng said: If the merchant returns, he will be arrested and questioned. If he does not return, there is no way. The life and death of this person has nothing to do with whether the merchant returns or not. If this person survives, it is not good to tell the world.

古文：遂竟其罪。
现代文：将这个聚敛之臣处死。
English: Put this vassal of concentration to death.

古文：浙多湖泊，广蓄泄以备水旱，率为豪民占以种艺，水无所居积，故数有水旱，士选与彻理力开复之。
现代文：浙西多湖泊，可广蓄水以防旱涝灾害，但均为有钱有势的人家霸占种植，无处蓄水，故常闹水旱之灾，士选与彻理极力把这些湖泊开发蓄水。
English: There are many lakes in western Zhejiang that can widely store water to prevent drought and flood disasters, but they are all occupied and planted by rich and powerful people. There is nowhere to store water, so they often cause floods and droughts. Shi Xuan and Cheri tried their best to develop and store water in these lakes.

古文：成宗即位，佥行枢密院于建康。未几，拜江西行省左丞。
现代文：成宗即位，任士选为建康佥行枢密院事，不久，拜江西行省左丞。
English: When Chengzong ascended to the throne, he was appointed as Jiankang Xingxing Privy Councillor, and soon after, he was appointed as Bai Jiangxi Xingxing Zuojie.

古文：赣州盗刘六十伪立名号，聚众至万余。
现代文：赣州刘六十起兵反元，建立国号，拥众万余。
English: Zhangzhou Liu sixtieth anti-Yuan uprising, the establishment of the country, more than ten thousand supporters.

古文：朝廷遣兵讨之，主将观望退缩不肯战，守吏又因以扰良民，贼势益盛。
现代文：朝廷遣兵镇压，主将观望退缩不敢出战，而地方官吏又扰害良民，所以刘六十的势力更加扩大。
English: The imperial court dispatched troops to suppress the rebellion, the main generals watched and retreated, not daring to go to war, while local officials harassed the good people, so the influence of Liu Si Si was further expanded.

古文：士选请自往，众欣然托之。即日就道，不求益兵，但率掾史李霆镇、元明善二人，持文书以去，众莫测其所为。
现代文：士选请求自往，即日启程，但不带兵将，只率属吏李霆镇、元明善二人先持文书去，大家不知他去干什么。
English: Shi Xuan requested to go on the same day, but he did not take any soldiers with him. He only led the officials Li Ting Zhen and Yuan Mingshan to go first with documents. Everyone did not know what he was going to do.

古文：遣使以事平报于朝。中书平章政事不忽木召其使谓之曰： 董公上功簿邪？ 
现代文：士选到了赣境，先将那些扰害百姓的官吏逮捕治罪，而后进至兴国县，离刘六十的根据地不到百里，命选派的将校领兵分别驻守待命。
English: When the magistrates arrived at Xizhou, they first arrested and punished those officials who disturbed the people, and then went to Xingguo County, less than a hundred miles from Liu's base. The officers and soldiers sent by the magistrates were stationed on standby.

古文：使者曰： 某且行，左丞授之言曰：朝廷若以军功为问，但言镇抚无状，得免罪幸甚，何功之可言！ 
现代文：他察知煽动造反人，把他们依法惩处，诛杀窝藏反叛分子的奸民。于是百姓争相出来愿为官府效力，不几天擒获叛民的首领，其余解散归农，士选遣使向朝廷报捷。中书平章政事不忽木问使者： 董公是叫你来送呈功劳簿的吗？ 使者回答道： 我启程时，左丞嘱咐说 ：朝廷若问起军功，只说镇抚没做出成绩来，能免罪就甚幸了，何功可言！  
English: He detected the seditionists, punished them according to the law, and killed the traitors who harbored the rebels. Therefore, the people came out eagerly to serve the government. Within a few days, the leaders of the rebels were captured, the rest were disbanded and returned to the peasants, and the elected officials were sent to report their success to the imperial court. The Chinese book Pingzhang Zhengji asked the envoy: Did Dong Gong ask you to submit a merit book? The envoy replied: When I left, Zuo Zhao instructed: If the imperial court asks about military merit, just say that Zhenfu did not make achievements, it would be very fortunate to be exonerated

古文：因出其书，但请黜赃吏数人而已，不言破贼事。
现代文：拿出士选的奏折，其中只请罢黜赃官数人而已，不提镇压反叛者的事。
English: He produced a report on the election of officials, in which he only asked for the dismissal of a few officials, and did not mention the suppression of the rebels.

古文：廷议深叹其知体而不伐。
现代文：廷臣们深叹他识大体而不求功名。
English: His courtiers lamented that he was a man of common sense and did not seek glory.

古文：拜江南行御史台中丞，廉威素著，不严而肃，凛然有大臣风。
现代文：拜为江南行御史中丞，其廉洁威望素为世人所称道，所以能不严而肃，令人敬畏，有大臣风度。
English: Bai is the middle-ranking official in the history of the Southern Yangtze River, and his integrity and prestige have been praised by the world. Therefore, he can be not strict but solemn, awe-inspiring, and has the demeanor of a minister.

古文：时丞相完泽用刘深言，出师征八百媳妇国，远冒烟瘴，及至，未战，士卒死者十已七八。
现代文：回朝任佥枢密院事，不久拜御史中丞。当时丞相完泽听信刘深之言，出师征八百媳妇国。士卒远行，经不住瘴气侵害，未战已损失十之七八。
English: He returned to the imperial court to serve as a member of the Imperial Privy Council, and soon became the Imperial Historian. At that time, the Prime Minister Kanazawa listened to Liu Shen's words and went out to recruit 800 daughters and daughters-in-law. The soldiers traveled far and wide, could not withstand the aggression of the enemy, and had lost seventy-eight out of ten before the war.

古文：驱民转粟饷军，谿谷之间不容舟车，必负担以达。一夫致粟八斗，率数人佐之，凡数十日乃至。由是民死者亦数十万，中外骚然。
现代文：驱使百姓运送军饷，溪谷之间不通舟车，只能肩负背驮，一夫运八斗还要几人帮助，经数十天才能运到，民为此而死者数十万。
English: They drove the people to transport the military supplies. There was no boat between the valleys, so they could only carry the backpacks on their shoulders. It took dozens of days to transport the supplies, and several people were needed to help. Hundreds of thousands of people died because of this.

古文：而完泽说帝： 江南之地尽世祖所取，陛下不兴此役，则无功可见于后世。 
现代文：上下骚动，而刘深对皇帝说： 江南之地都是世祖所平定，陛下不征此国，则无功于后世。 
English: Riots broke out up and down the country, and Liu Sheng said to the emperor, "All the land south of the Yangtze River was pacified by our ancestors. If Your Majesty does not invade this country, it will be of no benefit to future generations."

古文：帝入其言，用兵意甚坚，故无敢谏者。
现代文：成宗听取刘深的话，决意用兵，无人敢谏阻。
English: Chengzong listened to Liu Shen's words and decided to use troops. No one dared to oppose him.

古文：士选率同列言之，奏事殿中毕，同列皆起，士选乃独言： 今刘深出师，以有用之民而取无用之地。
现代文：而士选一人敢于直言极谏： 今刘深出师，以有用之兵而取无用之地。
English: However, one of the judges dared to say it bluntly: Now Liu Sheng has become a master, using useful soldiers to take advantage of a useless place.

古文：就令当取，亦必遣使谕之，谕之不从，然后聚粮选兵，视时而动。
现代文：即或当取，也必须先遣使去晓谕其国，若不肯臣服，然后聚粮选兵，视机而动。
English: Even if it should be taken, it must first be sent to tell its country, if it does not want to submit, then collect grain and select soldiers, and move as the opportunity arises.

古文：岂得轻用一人妄言，而致百万生灵于死地？ 
现代文：岂可轻易采取一人之妄言而致百万生灵于死地。 
English: Is it easy to take the words of one man and lead millions of people to their deaths?

古文：帝色变，士选犹明辨不止，侍从皆为之战慄，帝曰： 事已成，卿勿复言。 
现代文：帝有怒色，士选还在辩驳，侍从皆为他战战兢兢。成祖厉声说 ：事情已定，卿勿再言！ 
English: The emperor was furious, the judges were still arguing, and all the attendants were trembling with fear for him. Cheng Zu snapped, "The matter is settled, sir, don't say another word!"

古文：士选曰： 以言受罪，臣之所当。
现代文：士选说： 因谏言而得罪，臣是应该的。
English: Shi Xuan said, "It is proper for a minister to be offended by insults.

古文：他日以不言罪臣，臣死何益！ 
现代文：日后判我不言之罪，就是臣死又有何益！ 
English: If I am later found guilty of not speaking out, what good is it if I die as a vassal?

古文：帝麾之起，左右拥之以出。
现代文：帝挥手而去。
English: The emperor waved his hand and left.

古文：未数月，帝闻师败绩，慨然曰： 董二哥之言验矣，吾愧之。 
现代文：几个月后，帝闻大军征讨失败，深有感慨地说 ：董二哥之言成了现实，我只有惭愧。 
English: A few months later, when Emperor Wen's army failed in the campaign, he said with deep emotion: "Second Brother Dong's words have become reality, I am only ashamed."

古文：因赐上尊以旌直言，始为罢兵，诛刘深等。
现代文：赐士选上等酒器以表彰其直言。罢兵，诛刘深等。
English: In recognition of his outspokenness, the emperor gave him the choice of a fine wine vessel.

古文：世祖尝呼文炳曰董大哥，故帝以二哥呼士选。
现代文：世祖曾直呼文炳为董大哥，所以武宗呼士选为二哥。
English: The founder of the dynasty had directly called Wenyi as the eldest brother of Dong, so he chose Wuzong Wuxi as the second brother.

古文：久之，出为江浙行省右丞，迁汴梁行省平章政事，又迁陕西。
现代文：以后，士选出任江浙行省右丞，调汴梁行省平章政事，又调陕西行省平章政事。
English: Later, he was elected to be the right-hand man of Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province, the right-hand man of Pingzhang Province, and the right-hand man of Shaanxi Province.

古文：士选平生以忠义自许，尤号廉介，自门生部曲，无敢持一毫献者。
现代文：士选平生以忠义自命，特别讲求廉洁，无论门生部属，无人敢以一丝一毫敬献给他。
English: Zhixuan had always prided himself on his loyalty, and especially on his incorruptibility. No one, regardless of whether they were his protégés or subordinates, dared to show him the slightest respect.

古文：治家甚严，而孝弟尤笃。时言世家有礼法者，必归之董氏。
现代文：他治家甚严，尤重孝悌，当时世家之有礼法者，必指董氏而言。
English: He ruled his family very strictly, with a particular emphasis on filial piety. At that time, if there was anyone in the family with manners and etiquette, it was Mr. Dong.

古文：其礼敬贤士尤至。在江西，以属掾元明善为宾友，既又得吴澄而师之，延虞汲于家塾以教其子。
现代文：好礼贤下士，在江西以部属元明善为朋友，拜吴澄为师，聘请虞汲为家庭教师，教育其子。
English: Corporal Ho Lai Xian, in Jiangxi Province, took the subordinate Yuan Mingshan as a friend, worshipped Wu Cheng as a teacher, and hired Yu Qi as a tutor to educate his son.

古文：诸老儒及西蜀遗士，皆以书院之禄起之，使以所学教授。
现代文：一些老儒生及西蜀遗士，都请到书院来以其所学来教授学生。
English: Some old Confucian scholars and Western Shu scholars were invited to the college to teach students what they had learned.

古文：迁南行台，又招汲子集与俱，后又得范梈等数人，皆以文学大显于时。
现代文：调南行御史台后，又请来虞汲之子虞集，后又得范木亨等数人，在当时他们都以文学称著。
English: After he moved south to preside over the history stage, he also invited the son of Yuqi, Yu Ji, and later several people such as Fan Mu Heng, who were all famous for literature at that time.

古文：子守忠，云南行省参知政事；守悫，侍正府判官；守思，知威州。张弘范张弘范，字仲畴，柔第九子也。
现代文：故世人说到求贤荐士，首先要数董氏。晚年好读《易经》。一生不求名利，每次任官，先卖先祖田庐做路费，故老而益贫，子孙与一般平民无异，做了官也往往被称为廉吏。张弘范，字仲畴，张柔之第九子。
English: The deceased said that when looking for a wise mentor, the first person to be considered was Mr. Dong. In his later years, he was fond of reading the I Ching. He did not seek fame and fortune throughout his life. Every time he was appointed to a post, he first sold his ancestors' rice fields to pay for his travel expenses. As a result, he grew old and became poor. His children and grandchildren were no different from ordinary citizens. Once they became officials, they were often called corrupt officials. Zhang Hongfan, Zhaozhong, the ninth son of Zhang Rou.

古文：善马槊，颇能为歌诗。
现代文：善于骑马使枪，又颇能写诗做歌。
English: He is good at riding a horse and wielding a gun, and is quite capable of writing poetry and songs.

古文：年二十时，兄顺天路总管弘略上计寿阳行都，留弘范摄府事，吏民服其明决。
现代文：二十岁时，兄弘略任顺天路总管，去寿阳行都报告一年内本路户口、田地和赋税征收等政事，弘范代行兄之职务，吏民都佩服他办事果断，有条有理。
English: At the age of twenty, his elder brother Hong Liang was appointed as the head of Shuntian Road, and went to Shouyang to report on the political affairs such as the collection of households, fields and taxes in this road within one year. Hong Fan acted as his elder brother's duties, and the officials and the people all admired his decisive and orderly work.

古文：蒙古军所过肆暴，弘范杖遣之，入其境无敢犯者。
现代文：蒙古军在所过之地肆意杀掠，弘范对他们施以杖刑，使入顺天的蒙古军士不敢违法乱纪。
English: The Mongolian army killed and plundered at will in the places they passed, and Hongfan punished them with a cane, so that the Mongolian sergeants who entered Shun Tian did not dare to break the law and discipline.

古文：中统初，授御用局总管。
现代文：中统初年，授弘范为御用局总管。
English: In the first year of the unification, Juhongfan was appointed as the head of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：弘范营城西，璮出军突诸将营，独不向弘范。
现代文：三年，改为行军总管，随从亲王合必赤讨伐李王于济南。弘范扎营城西，王遣军出城袭击蒙古军各营，唯独不攻击弘范。
English: In the third year, he was appointed as the commander-in-chief of the march, and followed Prince He Bicheng to fight against King Li in Jinan. Hong Fan camped west of the city, and Wang sent troops out of the city to attack the Mongolian army battalions, but did not attack Hong Fan.

古文：弘范曰： 我营险地，璮乃示弱于我，必以奇兵来袭，谓我弗悟也。 
现代文：弘范说： 我扎营在险地、李王是向我示弱，但又以为我无警惕，必以奇兵来袭击。 
English: Hongfan said: I camped in a dangerous place. King Li showed me weakness, but he also thought that I was not alert and would attack with a surprise attack.

古文：遂筑长垒，内伏甲士，而外为壕，开东门以待之，夜令士卒浚壕益深广，璮不知也。
现代文：于是他筑长垒，内伏甲兵，外围壕沟，开东门等待李王军到来，夜间又令士卒把壕沟加深加宽，而不让李王知道。
English: So he built a long bastion, surrounded himself with armored soldiers, dug a trench outside, opened the east gate to wait for the arrival of King Li's army, and at night ordered his soldiers to deepen and widen the trench without letting King Li know.

古文：明日，果拥飞桥来攻，未及岸，军陷壕中，得跨壕而上者，突入垒门，遇伏皆死，降两贼将。
现代文：第二天，李王果然来攻，其军士陷入壕中，跨过壕沟者，冲入垒门又为伏兵所杀，这次战斗收两降将。
English: The next day, Li Wang really attacked, his sergeant fell into a trench, those who crossed the trench, rushed into the gate and were killed by the ambush, this battle received two surrender.

古文：柔闻之曰： 真吾子也。 璮既诛，朝廷惩璮尽专兵民之权，故能为乱，议罢大藩子弟之在官者，弘范例罢。
现代文：处决李王后，朝廷认为李王有军政大权，故能为乱，决定将一些大藩臣子弟中有为官者罢其官，弘范是其中之一。
English: After the execution of Queen Li, the imperial court believed that King Li had great military and political power, so he was able to cause chaos, and decided to dismiss some of the sons of great vassals who were officials. Hong Fan was one of them.

古文：至元元年，弘略既入宿卫，帝召见，意其兄弟有可代守顺天者，且念弘范有济南之功，授顺天路管民总管，佩金虎符。
现代文：至元元年，弘范入侍卫亲军，世祖念弘范在济南平定李王之乱有功，授为顺天路管民总管，佩金虎符。二年，调为大名太守。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Hong Fan became a member of the Imperial Guards, and his great-grandfather Nian Hong Fan was awarded the title of Shuntianlu Guanmin Shouguan and a gold tiger badge for his contribution to the suppression of the Rebellion of King Li in Jinan. In the second year, he was transferred to the position of Daimyo Taishou.

古文：二年，移守大名。岁大水，漂没庐舍，租税无从出，弘范辄免之。
现代文：这年大水灾，人民房屋被漂没，官府租税无处征收，弘范决定免征。
English: This year, there was a major flood, people's houses were swept away, and the government had nowhere to collect taxes. Hongfan decided to waive the tax.

古文：朝廷罪其专擅，弘范请入见，进曰： 臣以为朝廷储小仓，不若储之大仓。 
现代文：朝廷要治他以专断独行之罪，弘范辩解说 ：臣以为朝廷将赋税储于小仓不如储于大仓。 
English: The imperial court wanted to punish him for the crime of acting arbitrarily, but Hongfan defended himself by saying, "The vassal thought that it would be better for the imperial court to store taxes in a small warehouse than in a large warehouse."

古文：帝曰： 何说也？ 
现代文：世祖问他 ：此话怎讲？ 
English: The patriarch asked him, "How can I say this?"

古文：对曰： 今岁水潦不收，而必责民输，仓库虽实，而民死亡殆尽，明年租将安出？
现代文：他说 ：今年水灾无收成，若强迫百姓交纳租税，国家仓库是充实了，而人民死亡几尽，明年租税从哪里出？
English: He said: "This year's floods have no harvest. If the people are forced to pay taxes, the state warehouse is full, and people are dying, where will the taxes come from next year?

古文：曷若活其民，使不致逃亡，则岁有恒收，非陛下大仓库乎！ 
现代文：不若赈济百姓，使他们不逃离家乡，则每年都有收获，这岂不是陛下的大仓库吗？ 
English: If we do not help the people, so that they do not flee their homes, then every year there will be a harvest. Is this not His Majesty's great storehouse?

古文：帝曰： 知体，其勿问。 
现代文：世祖说 ：你识大体，不问罪。 
English: The founder of the world said: You know the general idea, don't blame.

古文：六年，括诸道兵围宋襄阳，授益都淄莱等路行军万户，复佩金虎符。
现代文：六年，调集诸道兵围攻宋之襄阳，授弘范益都、淄莱等路万户，复令佩金虎符。
English: In the sixth year, Taoist soldiers were mobilized to besiege Xiangyang in the Song Dynasty, and millions of households in Fan's Capital and Bailai were ordered to return the gold tiger charms.

古文：朝廷以益都兵乃李璮所教练之卒，勇悍难制，故命领之。
现代文：朝廷认为益都兵是李王所教练的士卒，勇悍难以驾御，故命弘范统领。
English: The imperial court believed that the Yidu soldiers were the soldiers trained by Li Wang, brave and difficult to control, and commanded by Hong Fan.

古文：戍鹿门堡，以断宋饷道，且绝郢之救兵。
现代文：攻襄阳之蒙古大军，一部分由弘范率领戍守鹿门堡，以截断宋军运粮之道，且阻击由郢州来的援军。
English: The Mongolian army that attacked Xiangyang, led in part by Hong Fan, besieged Lumen Fort to cut off the Song army's supply route and block reinforcements from Zhangzhou.

古文：弘范建言曰： 国家取襄阳，为延久之计者，所以重人命而欲其自毙也。
现代文：弘范建议说 ：国家取得襄阳是长久的事，所以珍惜百姓生命，不进行战斗，让守城的宋军自毙。
English: Hongfan suggested, "The country's acquisition of Xiangyang is a long-term matter, so cherish the lives of the people, do not fight, and let the Song army guarding the city kill themselves."

古文：曩者，夏贵乘江涨送衣粮入城，我师坐视，无御之者。
现代文：以往，夏贵乘江水上涨送衣粮入城，我军坐视不阻止他们。
English: In the past, Xia Gui used the rising water of the river to send clothes and grain into the city. Our army did not stop them.

古文：而其境南接江陵、归、峡，商贩行旅士卒络绎不绝，宁有自毙之时乎！
现代文：襄阳南接江陵、归州、峡州，商贩、旅客、士卒来往不绝，襄阳宋军能有自毙之时吗？
English: South of Xiangyang, there are Jiangling, Guizhou, and Xiaozhou. Merchants, travelers, and soldiers come and go incessantly. Can the Xiangyang Song Army have the time to commit suicide?

古文：宜城万山以断其西，栅灌子滩以绝其东，则庶几速毙之道也。 
现代文：应该在万山建城堡以阻断襄阳与西边的联系，在灌子滩设立栅寨以绝其与东部的联系，这样可望使襄阳守军迅速自毙。 
English: A castle should be built in Wanshan to block the connection between Xiangyang and the west, and a stockade should be set up in Hanzi Beach to cut off its connection with the east, which is expected to make the Xiangyang defenders quickly commit suicide.

古文：帅府奏用其言，移弘范兵千人戍万山。
现代文：帅府采纳了他的建议，调弘范兵千人去戍守万山。
English: Shuaifu accepted his suggestion and dispatched a thousand soldiers to defend Wanshan.

古文：既城，与将士较射出东门，宋师奄至。将佐皆谓众寡不敌，宜入城自守。
现代文：万山城堡建成后，宋军突然到来，将佐们都认为众寡不敌，应入城堡自守。
English: After the construction of Wanshan Castle, the Song Army suddenly arrived, and the generals thought that they were outnumbered and should enter the castle to defend themselves.

古文：弘范曰： 吾与诸君在此何事，敌至将不战乎？
现代文：弘范厉声道： 我与诸君在此何事，敌人来而我们竟不应战吗？
English: Hongfan snapped, "What's the matter with me and you here, shouldn't we fight when the enemy comes?"

古文：敢言退者死！ 
现代文：有敢言退守者斩！ 
English: Kill anyone who dares to retreat!

古文：宋军步骑相间突阵，弘范军不动，再进再却，弘范曰： 彼气衰矣。 鼓之，前后奋击。宋师奔溃。
现代文：他立即穿上铠甲，跨上战马，遣偏将李庭为前锋，其他将率随其后，自率二百骑兵为长阵。宋军步兵骑兵轮番进攻，弘范按兵不动，敌再进，弘范再退。弘范见敌气势已衰，便击鼓进攻，前后奋击，宋军败溃。
English: He immediately put on his armor, mounted his horse, and sent Li Ting to the front, followed by other generals, and led 200 cavalry to form a long line. Song Army infantry and cavalry attacked in turn, Hong Fan did not move, the enemy advanced again, and Hong Fan retreated again. When Hong Fan saw that the enemy's momentum had waned, he attacked with drums, fought back and forth, and the Song Army was defeated.

古文：八年，筑一字城逼襄阳。破樊城外郭。
现代文：八年，在逼进襄阳的地方构筑一字城。先攻破樊城的外城。
English: In the eighth year, a one-character city was built in the place where it was forced into Yangyang. The outer city of Shicheng was broken first.

古文：九年，攻樊城，流矢中其肘，裹疮见主帅曰： 襄、樊相为唇齿，故不可破。
现代文：九年，弘范在攻樊城的战斗中，手臂为箭射中。他包扎好伤口见主帅说 ：襄、樊互为唇齿，故难以攻破。
English: In the ninth year, Hong Fan's arm was hit by an arrow in the battle to capture Yingcheng. He bandaged the wound well and saw the coach say: Xiang and Zou are both lips and teeth, so it is difficult to break through.

古文：若截江道，断其援兵，水陆夹攻，樊必破矣。樊破则襄阳何所恃。 
现代文：若截拦江道，阻断援军，水陆夹攻，樊城必破，樊城破则襄阳无所依恃。 
English: If the river is blocked, reinforcements are blocked, and the land and water are attacked, the city of Liancheng will be destroyed, and if the city of Liancheng is destroyed, there will be no place for Xiangyang to hide.

古文：从之。
现代文：主帅同意他的意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：明日，复出锐卒先登，遂拔之。
现代文：第二天，弘范再率锐卒进攻，首先攻克樊城。
English: The next day, Hong Fan again led a sharp attack, first conquering Lucheng.

古文：襄阳既下，偕宋将吕文焕入觐，赐锦衣、白金、宝鞍，将校行赏有差。
现代文：襄阳攻下后，弘范随同宋降将吕文焕赴京朝见世祖，赐锦衣、白金、宝鞍，其他将校也各有奖赏。
English: After the fall of Xiangyang, Hong Fan, together with Song Ren, sent Lu Wenhuan to Beijing to meet the founder of the dynasty, and gave him a brocade robe, platinum, and a saddle. Other officers also received rewards.

古文：十一年，丞相伯颜伐宋，弘范率左部诸军循汉江，东略郢西，南攻武矶堡，取之。北兵渡江，弘范为前锋。
现代文：至元十一年，丞相伯颜伐宋，弘范率左部诸军沿汉江东取郢州，南攻武矶堡。蒙古军渡江，弘范为前锋。
English: In the eleventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, the left wing of the army led by the Minister of War, Bojan, attacked the Song Dynasty along the east of the Han River to take Bozhou, and the south to attack Wuye Fort. The Mongolian army crossed the river, and Hong Fan was the vanguard.

古文：宋相贾似道督兵阻芜湖，殿帅孙虎臣据丁家洲。
现代文：宋相贾似道督兵在芜湖抵抗，殿帅孙虎臣占据丁家洲。
English: Song Xiangjia resembled the Taoist soldiers resisting in Wuhu, and the general Sun Huchen occupied Dingjiazhou.

古文：弘范转战而前，诸军继之，宋师溃，弘范长驱至建康。
现代文：弘范转战前进，诸军随后，宋军溃败，弘范长驱直抵建康。
English: Hong Fan turned to battle and advanced. The armies were subsequently routed by the Song army, and Hong Fan drove straight to Jiankang.

古文：十二年五月，帝遣使谕丞相毋轻敌贪进，方暑，其少驻以待。
现代文：十二年五月，世祖遣使告诫丞相毋轻贪进，天气炎热，应稍稍休整，待命前进。
English: In May of the twelfth year, the patriarch sent an envoy to admonish the prime minister not to be greedy, the weather was hot, he should take a short break and be ready to move forward.

古文：弘范进曰： 圣恩待士卒诚厚，然缓急之宜，非可遥度。
现代文：弘范认为： 圣恩待士卒诚厚，然应缓应急，不可预测。
English: Hongfan believes that: the grace of the saints is sincere, but it should be delayed and unpredictable.

古文：今敌已夺气，正当乘破竹之势，取之无遗策矣。
现代文：今敌气势已衰，我正因乘破竹之势连续进攻，舍此无他策略。
English: Now that the enemy's momentum has waned, I am taking advantage of the broken bamboo momentum to continuously attack. There is no other strategy.

古文：岂宜迂缓，使敌得为计耶？ 
现代文：岂应迟缓而让敌人的计划得逞？ 
English: Shall we tarry and allow the enemy's plans to succeed?

古文：丞相然之，驰驿至阙，面论形势，得旨进师。
现代文：丞相认为很对，便立即回朝，对皇帝面奏江南形势，并得到继续进军的旨令。
English: The prime minister thought it was a good idea and immediately returned to the imperial court to explain the situation in the south of the Yangtze River to the emperor, and received an order to continue the march.

古文：十二年，次瓜州，分兵立栅，据其要害。
现代文：至元十二年，大军进至瓜洲，分兵建立栅寨，占据要害之地。
English: In the 12th year of the Yuan Dynasty, a large army marched to Guazhou, and a detachment of soldiers built a stockade to occupy the key place.

古文：扬州都统姜才所统兵劲悍善战，至是以二万人出扬子桥。
现代文：宋扬州都统姜才所统领的军队，强悍善战，以二万人出攻扬子桥。
English: The army led by Jiang Cai, the governor of Song and Yangzhou, was strong and good at fighting, and attacked Yangzi Bridge with twenty thousand people.

古文：弘范佐都元帅阿术御之，与宋兵夹水阵。
现代文：弘范辅助都元帅阿术抵御，与宋军隔水列阵。
English: Hongfan supported the defense of the capital by Marshal Ah Shu, and stood in a line across the water from the Song army.

古文：弘范以十三骑径度冲之，阵坚不动，弘范引却。
现代文：弘范领十三骑渡水攻击，敌阵坚固不为所动，弘范退却。
English: Hong Fan led the 13th cavalry to attack across the water, the enemy line was firm and unmoved, and Hong Fan retreated.

古文：一骑跃马挥刀，直趣弘范，弘范旋辔反迎刺之，应手顿毙马下，其众溃乱，追至城门，斩首万余级，自相蹂藉溺死者过半。
现代文：敌军一人跃马挥刀，直向弘范扑来，弘范回马迎刺，手起刀落，杀敌军于马下，尾随者溃乱。弘范挥军进击，追至城门，斩首万余级，敌人自相践踏，溺死于河中者过半数。
English: One of the enemy troops jumped on a horse and swung a sword, rushed straight to Hong Fan, Hong Fan returned to the horse to meet the stabbing, picked up the sword and fell, killed the enemy troops under the horse, and the followers rioted. Hong Fan waved the army to attack, chased to the city gate, beheaded more than 10,000 levels, the enemy trampled each other, and more than half of the people drowned in the river.

古文：宋将张世杰、孙虎臣等率水军于焦山决战，弘范以一军从旁横冲之，宋师遂败。追至圌山之东，夺战舰八十艘，俘馘千数。
现代文：宋将张世杰、孙虎臣等，率水军于焦山与蒙军决战，弘范率领一军从旁横击，战败宋军，追至山之东，夺战舰八十艘，俘虏数千人。
English: Song general Zhang Shijie, Sun Huchen, and others led the naval forces into a decisive battle with the Mongolian army in Jiaoshan. Hong Fan led an army to attack from the side, defeated the Song army, pursued it to the east of the mountain, captured eighty warships, and captured thousands of people.

古文：上其功，改亳州万户，后赐名拔都。
现代文：上报其功于朝廷，改任弘范为亳州万户，后赐名拔都。
English: His contribution to the imperial court was reported, and he was renamed Hongfan to Banzhou Wanyu, and later given the name Badu.

古文：从中书左丞董文炳由海道会丞相伯颜，进次近郊。
现代文：弘范随同中书左丞董文炳由海道与丞相伯颜会师临安。
English: Hong Fan accompanied by the chancellor of the Chinese Academy of Letters and Calligraphy, Dong Wenzhong, and the minister of education, Bo Yan, and the teacher, Lin'an.

古文：弘范将命入城，数其大臣之罪，皆屈服，竟取称臣降表来上。十三年，台州叛，讨平之，诛其为首者而已。
现代文：大军进至临安近郊，宋皇帝上表投降，对元朝皇帝以伯侄相称。弘范奉命入城。列举宋朝大臣之罪，都俯首屈服。十三年，台州抗元，弘范领兵讨平，只诛其为首者。
English: A large army marched to the outskirts of Lin'an. Emperor Song surrendered at the table, calling the emperor of the Yuan Dynasty a great-nephew. Hong Fan was ordered to enter the city. The crimes of the Song Dynasty ministers were enumerated, and they all bowed their heads in submission. In the thirteenth year, Taizhou resisted Yuan, and Hong Fan led the troops to fight for peace, but he was only the leader.

古文：十四年，师还，授镇国上将军、江东道宣慰使。
现代文：十四年，班师北还，授弘范为镇国上将军、江东道宣慰使。
English: Fourteen years later, Banshi Bei also awarded Hong Fan as Zhenguo Shangzheng and Jiangdodu Xuanyongshi.

古文：十五年，宋张世杰立广王昺于海上，闽、广响应，俾弘范往平之，授蒙古汉军都元帅。
现代文：十五年，宋张世杰在海上立广王赵籨为帝，闽、广皆起兵响应。使弘范去讨平，授蒙古汉军都元帅。
English: In the fifteenth year, Song Zhang Shijie made the Guang king Zhao Qian emperor on the sea, and Zhao and Guang both raised an army in response. He sent Hong Fan to fight for peace and awarded the Mongolian Han army with the title of marshal.

古文：陛辞奏曰： 汉人无统蒙古军者，乞以蒙古信臣为首帅。 
现代文：临行之时弘范向世祖奏道： 汉人素来不统领蒙古军，请委任蒙古臣中可信赖者为首帅。 
English: When he was about to leave, Hongfan sent a message to Shizu: Chinese people have never led the Mongolian army, please appoint a trustworthy person from among the Mongolian vassals as the leader.

古文：帝曰： 汝知而父与察罕之事乎？
现代文：世祖说 ：你知道你父亲与察罕的事吗？
English: The patriarch said: Do you know what happened between your father and Chahan?

古文：其破安丰也，汝父欲留兵守之，察罕不从。
现代文：在攻破安丰之后，你父亲建议留兵戍守，察罕不听。
English: After conquering Anfeng, your father suggested that you stay behind, but you didn't listen.

古文：师既南，安丰复为宋有，进退几失据，汝父深悔恨，良由委任不专故也，岂可使汝复有汝父之悔乎？
现代文：大军南行，安丰复为宋人占有，以致蒙军进退失据，你父亲深深悔恨。这完全是由于委任未赋与专职之权所致，难道使你也要有像你父亲那样的悔恨吗？
English: Your father deeply regretted the fact that the Mongolian army was unable to advance and retreat because the large army went south and Anfengfu was occupied by the Song people. This was entirely due to the fact that he was not given the power of full-time appointment. Do you want to have the same regret as your father?

古文：今付汝大事，能以汝父之心为心，则予汝嘉。 
现代文：今将此重任交付与你，你能以你父亲之心为心，那就要嘉奖你。 
English: If you can take your father's heart to heart, then you are to be commended.

古文：面赐锦衣、玉带，弘范不受，以剑甲为请。
现代文：面赐他锦衣、玉带，弘范不受，要求赐予剑甲。
English: He was presented with a brocade robe and a jade belt, but he did not accept them and demanded that he be given a sword.

古文：帝出武库剑甲，听其自择，且谕之曰： 剑，汝之副也，不用令者，以此处之。 
现代文：帝命拿出武库的剑甲来，任他挑选，并郑重对他说 ：这剑就是你的副帅，有不听令者，用此剑来处置他。 
English: The emperor ordered to bring out the sword and armor of the arsenal, let him choose, and solemnly said to him: This sword is your second-in-command. If someone disobeys orders, use this sword to deal with him.

古文：将行，荐李恒为己贰，从之。
现代文：行将启程，弘范又奏荐李恒为其副帅，得到批准。
English: Hong Fan also recommended Li Heng as his second-in-command, which was approved.

古文：至扬州，选将校水陆二万，分道南征，以弟弘正为先锋，戒之曰： 选汝骁勇，非私汝也。军法重，我不敢以私挠公，勉之。 
现代文：到扬州，以水陆二万官兵分道南征。其弟弘正为先锋，弘范告诫他说： 选你为先锋，并非是徇私情，军法严明，我不敢以私损公，你要尽力而为。 
English: He went to Yangzhou to lead 20,000 officers and soldiers by land and sea on a separate southern expedition. His younger brother, Hong Zheng, was the vanguard, and Hong Fan admonished him: "Choosing you as the vanguard is not a selfish act, the military law is strict, I dare not use my private interests to harm the public, you must do your best."

古文：弘正所向克捷。
现代文：弘正在战斗中所向皆克。
English: Hiroshi is doing well in the battle.

古文：进攻三江寨，寨据隘乘高，不可近，因连兵向之。
现代文：进攻三江寨，该寨居高临下，难以靠近。
English: They attacked Sanjiang Village, which was high and difficult to approach.

古文：寨中持满以待，弘范下令下马治朝食，若将持久者。持满者疑不敢动，而他寨不虞也。
现代文：弘范下令将校军官下马做饭，好像长期对峙下去，寨上宋军弓箭手疑惑不敢动，其他寨也猜测不到是怎么回事。
English: Hong Fan ordered the officers and officers to dismount and cook, as if the confrontation would continue for a long time. The Song Army archers on the village did not dare to move, and the other villages could not guess what was going on.

古文：忽麾军连拔数寨，回捣三江，尽拔之。
现代文：弘范忽然挥军进攻，连拔数寨。又回军攻击三江，尽拔所有山寨。
English: Hong Fan suddenly launched an attack and took several villages. He then returned to attack Sanjiang and took all the villages.

古文：至漳州，军其东门，命别将攻南门、西门，乃乘虚破其北门，拔之。攻鲍浦寨，又拔之。
现代文：至漳州，大军扎营于东门，遣别将攻南门、西门，乘虚破北门，攻下漳州，接着攻克鲍浦寨，从此沿海郡县相继投降。
English: To Luzhou, the large army camped at the East Gate, and then attacked the South Gate, the West Gate, and took advantage of the North Gate to attack Luzhou, and then attacked Baopuzhai. Since then, the coastal counties have surrendered one after another.

古文：由是濒海郡邑皆望风降附。获宋丞相文天祥于五坡岭，使之拜，不屈，弘范义之，待以宾礼，送至京师。获宋礼部侍郎邓光荐，命子珪师事之。
现代文：俘获宋丞相文天祥于五坡岭，要他行跪拜礼。天祥不屈，弘范待之以礼，送至京师。又俘宋礼部侍郎邓光荐，命其子张王圭拜光荐为师。
English: He captured Song chen minister Wen Tianxiang in Wuholing and ordered him to kneel in worship. Tianxiang was unyielding, and he was sent to the capital to be trained. He also captured Deng Guangxian, the attendant of the Song etiquette department, and ordered his son Zhang Wang Guibai Guangxian to be trained.

古文：十六年正月庚戌，由潮阳港发舶入海，至甲子门，获宋斥候将刘青、顾凯，乃知广王所在。
现代文：至元十六年正月初二日，弘范由潮阳港驶船入海，至甲子门，捕获宋军斥候军将领刘青、顾凯，因知宋广王赵籨之所在。
English: On the 2nd day of the first month of the 16th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Hong Fan sailed from Chaoyang Port into the sea to Koshimen, and captured Liu Qing and Gu Kai, the generals of the Song Army's scouting army, because he knew the whereabouts of Zhao Xizhi, the king of Song Guang.

古文：辛酉，次崖山。宋军千余艘碇海中，建楼橹其上，隐然坚壁也，弘范引舟师赴之。
现代文：十三日，至崖山，宋军千余艘战舰停泊在海中，舰上建立起望台和防御的高台，看起来坚固难攻。
English: On the 13th, when they reached the cliff, more than a thousand warships of the Song Army were anchored in the sea. An observation deck and a defensive platform were built on the ship, which looked solid and difficult to attack.

古文：崖山东西对峙，其北水浅，舟胶，非潮来不可进，乃由山之东转南入大洋，始得逼其舟。
现代文：崖山东西对峙，北边水浅，大船非乘潮而不可进。弘范令水军由山之东向南入大洋，这样可逼近敌舰。
English: The cliff faces east and west, the water is shallow on the north side, and large ships cannot enter without riding the tide. Hongfan ordered the navy to enter the ocean from the east of the mountain to the south, so that they could approach the enemy ship.

古文：又出奇兵断其汲路，烧其宫室。
现代文：又出奇兵截断敌军汲取淡水的通道，烧掉敌人的宫室。
English: Another extraordinary soldier cut off the enemy's access to fresh water and burned down the enemy's palace.

古文：世杰有甥在弘范军中，三使招之，世杰不从。
现代文：世杰有外甥在弘范军中，三次使他去劝降，世杰不肯。
English: Shijie had a nephew in Hongfan's army, and three times he tried to persuade him to surrender, but Shijie refused.

古文：甲戌，李恒自广州至，授以战舰二，使守北面。
现代文：正月二十六日，李恒自广州来，弘范授他战舰二只，防守北面。
English: On the 26th day of the first month, Li Heng came from Guangzhou, and Hong Fan gave him two warships to defend the north.

古文：二月癸未，将战，或请先用炮。弘范曰： 火起则舟散，不如战也。 
现代文：二月初四日，将发起进攻，有人提出先用炮轰，弘范则认为，火起则敌舰散，不如近战。
English: On the 4th day of the 2nd month, an attack will be launched. Some people proposed to use artillery bombardment first, but Hongfan believed that the enemy ships would scatter when the fire started, rather than close combat.

古文：明日，四分其军，军其东南北三面，弘范自将一军相去里余，下令曰： 宋舟潮至必东遁，急攻之，勿令得去，闻吾乐作乃战，违令者斩！ 
现代文：第二天，军分四路，东南北各一路，弘范自领一军与各路军相距一里多远，下令： 宋舰必乘潮东逃，火速进攻，不要让他们跑掉。各路军听我奏乐就出战，违令者斩！ 
English: The next day, the army was divided into four directions, one each for the southeast, north, and south, with Hong Fan leading an army that was as far as one mile away from each army, and he ordered: Song ships must flee eastward with the tide, attack at high speed, and do not let them run away. The armies of all directions will go to war after listening to my music, and those who disobey the order will be killed!

古文：飞矢集如猬，伏盾者不动。
现代文：先指挥北面一军乘潮进攻，没有成功，李恒等顺潮而退。弘范作乐，宋将以为是在设宴，不加警惕。
English: He first commanded an army in the north to attack with the tide, but it was not successful, and Li Heng and others retreated with the tide. When Hong Fan made music, Song Zheng thought he was setting up a banquet, and did not pay attention.

古文：舟将接，鸣金撤障，弓弩火石交作，顷刻并破七舟，宋师大溃。
现代文：弘范水军勇往直前，其他水军继之于后。在接近敌舰时，弓箭炮火交相发射，顷刻破敌七舰，宋军大败。
English: Hong Fan's naval force boldly advanced, followed by other naval forces. When approaching the enemy ship, the bow and arrow cannons fired at each other, instantly breaking the seven enemy ships, and the Song Army was defeated.

古文：出所赐剑甲，命付嗣子珪曰： 汝父以是立功，汝佩服勿忘也。 
现代文：宋臣抱其主赵籨跳海而死，获其符玺印章。世杰先逃，李恒追到大洋没追上，世杰逃向交趾，船为大风所坏，淹死于海陵港，其余将吏皆降。岭海平定后，弘范在崖山南面，刻石记功而还。十月，弘范入朝，世祖在内殿赐宴慰劳。
English: Song Chen jumped into the sea with his master Zhao Wei and died, receiving his seal. Shijie fled first, Li Heng chased him to the ocean but did not catch him, Shijie fled to Jiaozuo, the ship was damaged by high winds and drowned in Hailing Port, and the rest of the generals all surrendered. After the Linghai was settled, Hong Fan was on the south side of the cliff mountain, engraved with his achievements and survived. In October, when Hong Fan entered the dynasty, the patriarch gave a banquet in the inner hall.

古文：语竟，端坐而卒。年四十三。
现代文：不久，弘范病发，帝命御医诊视，医治无效而卒，年四十三岁。
English: Soon after, Hong Fan fell ill and was examined by the imperial doctor, but the treatment was ineffective and he died at the age of forty-three.

古文：赠银青荣禄大夫、平章政事，谥武烈。
现代文：赠银青荣禄大夫、平章政事，谥武烈。
English: He was awarded the Silver Qing Ronglu Doctor, the Order of the Silver Star, the Order of the Silver Star, the Order of the Silver Star and the Order of the Silver Star.

古文：至大四年，加赠推忠效节翊运功臣、太师、开府仪同三司、上柱国、齐国公，改谥忠武。
现代文：至大四年，加赠推忠效节翊运功臣、太师、开府仪同三司、上柱国、齐国公，改谥忠武。
English: In the fourth year of his senior year, he was awarded the title of "loyal warrior" in addition to the titles of "virtuous warrior," "virtuous warrior," "heroic warrior," "heroic warrior," "heroic warrior," "heroic warrior," "heroic warrior," "heroic warrior," "heroic warrior," "heroic warrior," "heroic warrior," "heroic warrior."

古文：延祐六年，加保大功臣，加封淮阳王，谥献武。
现代文：延六年，加保大功臣，加封淮阳王，又改谥献武。
English: Six years later, he was awarded the title of Great Meritorious Public Servant, the title of King of Huaiyang was added to his title, and he was awarded the Military Medal.

