古文：李顾言元和二相李源郑权樊阳源吴少诚陈彦博陆宾虞王璠崔玄亮
现代文：李顾言元和二相李源郑权樊阳源吴少诚陈彦博陆宾虞王璠崔玄亮
English: Li Guyan Yuan and two phases Li Yuan Zheng Quan Yang Quan Wu Shao Cheng Chen Yan Bo Lu Bin Yu Wang Yao Cui Xuan Liang

古文：韦贯之
现代文：韦贯之
English: Wei Gangzhi

古文：李顾言
现代文：李顾言
English: Lee Kuan Yew

古文：唐监察御史李顾言，贞元末，应进士举，甚有名称。
现代文：唐朝有个监察御史李顾言，贞元末年考中进士，很有希望中榜。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was an inspector of imperial history, Li Guyan, who was promoted to the middle school at the end of the Zhenyuan year, and was very promising.

古文：岁暮，自京西客游回，诣南省，访知己郎官。
现代文：年末，李顾言从京城西面游玩回来后，又前往南省，看望一个做郎官的知己。
English: At the end of the year, after Li Guyan returned from a trip to the west side of Beijing, he went to Nan Province to visit a friend who was a vassal.

古文：适至，日已晚，省吏告郎官尽出。
现代文：到达南省，天色已晚，省署的差官告诉他郎官们都出去了。
English: When he arrived in the southern province, it was late in the day, and the duty officer of the provincial department told him that the officials had gone out.

古文：顾言竦辔而东，见省东南北街中，有一人挈小囊，以乌纱蒙首北去，徐吟诗曰： 放榜只应三月暮，登科又校一年迟。 
现代文：李顾言骑马向东走去。省署东南北街有一个人提着个小口袋，头戴乌纱帽，向北走去。一边走，一边缓慢地高声朗诵两句诗：发榜应在三月末，成名必然晚一年。
English: Li Guyan rode eastward. A man carrying a small bag and wearing a woollen cap walked northward from the Dongnanbei Street of the Provincial Department. While walking, he slowly recited two poems in a loud voice: the album should be released at the end of March, and the fame must be delayed by one year.

古文：又稍朗吟，若令顾言闻。
现代文：稍停顿一下，又继续朗诵，似乎就是要让李顾言听到。
English: After a short pause, the recitation continued, as if to let Li Guyan hear it.

古文：顾言策马逼之，于省北有惊尘起，遂失其人所在。
现代文：李顾言驱马追了上去，这时省署北边扬起一片尘土，随后便失去了这个人的踪影。
English: Li Guyan drove his horse and chased after him. At this time, the north side of the provincial office raised a cloud of dust, and then lost track of this person.

古文：明年，京师自冬雨雪甚，畿内不稔，停举。
现代文：第二年，京城附近雨雪很大，庄稼歉收，朝廷暂时停止了科举考试。
English: The following year, due to heavy rain and snow in the vicinity of the capital and poor crops, the imperial court temporarily suspended the imperial examinations.

古文：贞元二十一年春，德宗皇帝晏驾，果三月下旬放进士榜。顾言元和元年及第。
现代文：贞元二十一年春天，德宗皇帝死了。果然在三月下旬才公布了考中进士举子的名单，李顾言在元和元年中榜成为进士。
English: In the spring of the twenty-first year of the Zhengyuan, Emperor Dezong died. It was only in late March that the list of candidates for the junior high school entrance examination was announced, and Li Guyan became a candidate in the middle of the Yuan and the first year.

古文：元和二相
现代文：元和二相
English: Original and two-phase power

古文：元和中，宰相武元衡与李吉甫齐年，又同日为相。
现代文：元和年间，宰相武元衡和李吉甫同岁，又是同一天当的宰相。
English: During the Yuan and He years, Prime Minister Wu Yuanheng and Li Jifu were the same age and became prime ministers on the same day.

古文：及出镇，又分领扬益。
现代文：及出任镇守。又分领扬州和盖州。
English: and served as the town guard. He also led Yangzhou and Gaizhou.

古文：至吉甫再入，元衡亦还。
现代文：等到李吉甫回京城，武元衡也回来了。
English: By the time Li Jifu returned to Beijing, Wu Yuanhei had also returned.

古文：吉甫前一年，以元衡生月卒。元衡以吉甫生月遇害，年五十八。
现代文：李吉甫在前一年武元衡出生的那个月份死亡，武元衡在第二年李吉甫出生的那个月份遇害，死时五十八岁。
English: Li Jifu died the previous year in the same month that Wu Yuanheng was born, and Wu Yuanheng was killed the following year in the same month that Li Jifu was born. He was 58 years old when he died.

古文：先长安忽有童谣云： 打麦，麦打，三三三。
现代文：在这之前，长安有小孩念童谣说： 打麦，麦打，三三三。 
English: Prior to this, there was a child in Chang'an who recited a nursery rhyme, saying: "Beating wheat, beating wheat, three three three."

古文：既而旋其袖曰： 舞了也。
现代文：然后旋转身体说： 舞完了！ 
English: Then he spun around and said, "Dance is over!"

古文：解者曰： 以为打麦刈麦时也，麦打谓暗中突击也，三三三谓六月三日也，舞了谓元衡卒也。
现代文：有人解释说： 打麦就是割麦子的时候， 麦打 是暗中袭击的意思， 三三三 是说六月三日， 舞完了 是说武元衡完了。 
English: Some people explained: beating the barley means cutting the wheat, beating the barley means a sneak attack, three three three means June 3rd, the dance is over means the war is over.

古文：元衡初从蜀归，荧惑犯上相星，云： 三相皆不利，始轻末重。
现代文：反贼刺杀武元衡，割下他的头颅而去。武元衡刚从蜀郡回来，火星侵犯相星。相士说： 对三个宰相都不利。开始的轻，后面的重。 
English: An anti-thief assassinated Wu Yuanhei, cut off his head and left. Wu Yuanhei had just returned from Shu County when Mars invaded the conjunction star. The astrologer said, "It is not good for the three prime ministers. The beginning is light, the latter is heavy."

古文：月余，李绛以足疾免，明年十月，李吉甫暴卒，又一年，元衡遇害。
现代文：一个月后，李绛因为患了脚病免了官，第二年十月李吉甫突然死了，又过了一年，武元衡遇害。
English: A month later, Li Gan was relieved of his duties due to a foot ailment. In October of the following year, Li Jifu died suddenly. A year later, Wu Yuanheng was killed.

古文：李源
现代文：李源
English: Li Yuan

古文：李源，洛城北惠林寺住。以其父憕为禄山所害，誓不履人事，不婚，不役僮仆。
现代文：李源在洛城北边的惠林寺居住，因为父亲李憕被安禄山所杀害，发誓不求功名利禄，不结婚，不雇用奴仆。
English: Li Yuan lives in Huilin Temple on the north side of Los Angeles, because his father Li Yan was killed by Anlu Mountain, he swore not to seek fame and fortune, not to marry, and not to employ slaves.

古文：暮春之际，荫树独处。有一少年，挟弹而至。
现代文：晚春的一天，他独自呆在树荫下面，看见一个少年，手拿弹弓跑来。
English: One day in late spring, alone under the shade of a tree, he saw a boy running with a slingshot.

古文：源爱其风秀，与之驯狎。问其氏行，但曰武十三。甚依阿，不甚显扬。
现代文：李源喜欢少年的风流俊秀，便主动和少年交谈，问少年的姓名和排行。少年说自己姓武，排行第十三，性情随和，不显露张狂。
English: Li Yuan liked the boy's good manners and good looks, so he took the initiative to talk to the boy and asked the boy's name and rank. The boy said that his surname was Wu, ranking thirteenth, his temperament was easygoing, and he did not show ostentation.

古文：讯其所居，或东、或西、或南、或北不定。
现代文：李源又问他住在什么地方。少年回答说，或南、或北、或东、或西，没有固定的住处。
English: Li Yuan also asked him where he lived. The boy replied that there was no fixed place to live, either in the south, or the north, or the east, or the west.

古文：源叔父为福建观察使，源修觐礼，武生亦云，有事东去，同舟共载。
现代文：李源的叔叔任福建观察使，李源准备去探望叔叔，武十三郎也说有事要往东去，和李源同乘一条船出发。
English: Li Yuan's uncle was the Fujian Observer, Li Yuan was preparing to visit his uncle, and Wu Juzhirong also said that he wanted to go to the east, and he and Li Yuan set off on a boat.

古文：行及宋之谷熟桥，携手登岸。
现代文：走到宋谷熟桥，两个人一同上岸。
English: They walked to the Songgu Rongqiao Bridge and went ashore together.

古文：武曰： 与子诀矣。 
现代文：武十三郎说： 我要和你分手了。 
English: Take Juzaburo said, "I'm breaking up with you."

古文：源惊讯之，即曰： 某非世人也。为国掌阴兵百有余年，凝结此形。
现代文：李源吃惊地问他为什么？他说： 我本是阴世间的人，已经为我们国家管理阴间军队一百多年了，所以修炼凝结成人形。
English: Li Yuan was surprised and asked him why? He said: I am originally a person from the underworld, and I have been managing the underworld army for our country for more than a hundred years, so my cultivation has condensed into an adult form.

古文：今夕，托质于张氏为男子。十五得明经，后终邑令。 
现代文：今晚，托生到张家成为一个男孩，十五岁考中明经，以后当县令一直到死。 
English: Tonight, Tosheng went to Zhangjiajie to become a boy, passed the middle school entrance examination at the age of 15, and served as a county magistrate until his death.

古文：又云： 子之禄亦薄。年登八十，朝廷当以谏议大夫征。
现代文：又说： 你的福分也不大，到八十岁的时候，朝廷将聘任你当谏议大夫，再过两年死去。
English: He also said, "Your fortune is not great. When you are 80 years old, the imperial court will hire you to be a medical examiner, and you will die two years later.

古文：我后七年，复与君相见。 
现代文：我七年以后，还会与你相见。 
English: I'll see you again in seven years.

古文：言讫，抵村户，执手分袂。
现代文：说完，已到达村庄，两人握手分别。
English: Having said that, they arrived at the village and shook hands separately.

古文：既而张氏举家惊喜，新妇诞一男。
现代文：随后，姓张的人家全家非常高兴，媳妇生下一个男孩。
English: Subsequently, the whole family of the Zhang family was very happy, and the daughter-in-law gave birth to a boy.

古文：源累载放迹闽南。
现代文：李源经年在闽南访亲游玩。
English: Li Yuan has been visiting relatives in southern Anhui Province for years.

古文：及还，省前事，复诣村户，见一童儿形貌类武者，乃呼曰： 武十三相识耶？ 
现代文：等到李源回来，想起武十三郎的事，又找到那个村庄。看到一个小孩的体形相貌很像武十三郎，便叫： 武十三郎还认识我吗？ 
English: When Li Yuan came back, he remembered the story of Take Jusaburo and found the village again. When he saw a child with a body shape and appearance very similar to Take Jusaburo, he called out: Does Take Jusaburo still know me?

古文：答曰： 李七健乎？ 
现代文：那个小孩回答说： 李七身体还好吗？ 
English: The child replied, "Is Li Qiye well?"

古文：其后宪宗读国史，感叹李憕、卢奕之事，有荐源名，遂以谏议大夫征，不起。
现代文：后来宪宗阅读本朝的历史，感叹李憕和卢奕的功绩和遭遇。正好有人推荐李源，便决定任命李源作谏议大夫。
English: Later, after reading the history of this dynasty, Emperor Xianzong lamented the exploits and sufferings of Li Yu and Lu Yi. It just so happened that someone recommended Li Yuan, so he decided to appoint Li Yuan as the doctor of consultation.

古文：明年，源卒于惠林寺。
现代文：李源有重病卧床不起，第三年死在惠林寺。
English: Li Yuan was seriously ill and bedridden, and died in the third year at Huilin Temple.

古文：张终于宣州广德县令。
现代文：武十三郎托生的那个姓张的男子死的时候是宣州广德县令。
English: The man with the surname Zhang, who was the son of Takeshi Juzaburo, was the governor of Xuanzhou Guangde County at the time of his death.

古文：郑权
现代文：郑权
English: Zheng Quan

古文：初有日者，梦沧州衙门署榜，皆作权字。以告程执恭，遂奏请改名。未几，朝命郑权代之。时人深异其事。
现代文：程之恭任沧州郡守时，有一天，一个人梦见沧州衙门张贴榜文，上面写的全是 权 字，把这件事告诉了程之恭，于是要求改名，没过几天，朝廷就任命郑权代替程之恭做沧州太守，当时人们都感到这件事非常奇怪。
English: When Cheng Zhigong was appointed as the governor of Cangzhou County, one day, a person dreamed that Cheng Zhigong posted a notice on the gate of Cangzhou Castle, which was all written by Quan. He told this to Cheng Zhigong, and then asked to change his name. Within a few days, the imperial court appointed Zheng Quan to replace Cheng Zhigong as the governor of Cangzhou. At that time, people all felt that this was very strange.

古文：樊阳源
现代文：樊阳源
English: Shenyangyuan

古文：唐山南节判殿中侍御史樊阳源，元和中，入奏。
现代文：唐山南节判殿中侍御史樊阳源在元和年间，有事要去京城向朝廷请示。
English: On the Southern Festival of Tangshan, during the Yuan and Zhou dynasties, the attendant of the court, Shi Xingyangyuan, had to go to Beijing to ask the imperial court for instructions.

古文：岐下诸公携乐，于岐郊漆方亭饯饮。
现代文：官员们带着乐班子在城外的漆方亭设宴为他饯行。
English: Officials with a music band held a banquet for him at Urushikata-tei outside the city.

古文：从事中有监察陈庶、独孤乾礼皆在幕中六七年，各叹淹滞。
现代文：一起参加饯行宴会的有监察陈庶、独孤乾礼都已经在州署中干了六七年了，两个人感叹升官的艰难。
English: Supervisors Chen Shiao and Duolong Qianli, who attended the banquet together, have been working in the state department for 67 years, and the two men lamented the difficulties of promotion.

古文：阳源乃曰： 人之出处，无非命也。
现代文：阳源说：人能否当官，不过是命运罢了。
English: Yang Yuan said, "Whether a person can become an official is just a matter of fate.

古文：某初名源阳，及第年，有人言至西府与取事。某时闲居洛下。
现代文：我当初的名字叫源阳。考中进士那年，有人说应该到西府中找个事做，我当时住在洛下，已经八个月了。
English: My original name was Genyang. The year I passed the junior high school entrance examination, someone said that I should go to West Fuchu to find something to do. I had been living in Lokeshita for eight months at that time.

古文：约八月间，至其年七月，有表兄任密县令，使人招某骤到密县。某不得已遂出去。
现代文：到那一年的七月，我表哥在密县当县令，他派人叫我立刻去密县，我不得已便赶往密县。
English: By July of that year, my cousin was the county magistrate in My County. He sent someone to tell me to go to My County immediately. I had no choice but to rush to My County.

古文：永通门宿。夜梦见一高冢，上一著麻衣人，似欲乡饮之礼。顾视左右，又有四人。
现代文：一天住在永通门，夜里梦见一座很高的坟墓，坟墓上有一个穿麻衣的人，似乎是摆设酒馔请客，我看看左右还有四个。
English: One day I was living in Yongtongmen, and at night I dreamed of a high tomb. On the tomb there was a man dressed in sackcloth, who seemed to be setting out wine jars to invite guests. I looked around and saw four more.

古文：冢上其人，乃以手招阳源，阳源不乐去。
现代文：坟上那人用手招呼阳源上去，阳源不愿意上去。
English: The man on the grave beckoned Yang Yuan up with his hand, but Yang Yuan did not want to go up.

古文：次一人从阳源前而上，又一人蹑后而上，左右四人皆上，阳源意忽亦愿去，遂继陟之。
现代文：身旁一人从阳源前面往坟上走去，又有一个人也悄悄地跟了上去，旁边四个人都往上去。阳源忽然也愿意去了。
English: A person next to him walked from in front of Yang Yuan to the grave, and another person quietly followed, and the four people next to him all went up. Yang Yuan suddenly wanted to go, too.

古文：联绵一月，困惫甚。稍间，径归洛中，谓表兄曰： 两府取解，旧例先须申。某或恐西府不得，兄当与首送密宰矣。 
现代文：于是跟在他的后面住上走。等到五个人登上坟头，见坟上那人从袖子里取出一张公文，是河南府报送推荐举子的名单，第六人是樊阳源，没有樊源阳。等到睡醒了，自己觉得很奇怪，不几天到了密县。到了密县后得了痢疾，一个月才好，感到非常疲劳虚弱，稍休息几天后，便要回洛中。对表哥说，两府录用官员，按照惯例要事先申请，我恐怕不能被录用在西府。兄当于首送密宰了。
English: So I followed him. When the five people reached the top of the grave, I saw the man on the grave take out a document from his sleeve. It was a list of recommended sons sent by Henan prefecture. The sixth person was Fenyangyuan, but there was no Fenyangyuan. When I woke up, I felt very strange. A few days later, I arrived in My County. After arriving in My County, I got dysentery. It took a month to get better. I felt very tired and weak. After a few days of rest, I had to go back to Luochu. I told my cousin that officials from the two prefectures should apply in advance according to

古文：曰： 不可处。 但令密县海送，固不在托。
现代文：表哥回答说 这个办法不可取，但令密县海送。固不在托。
English: My cousin replied that this was not a good idea, but that it was better to send them by sea.

古文：及到洛中，已九月半。洛中还往，乃劝不如东府取解。
现代文：等到送到洛中，已经是九月中旬了，从洛中再往回传递消息，需要多长时间？
English: By the time it gets to Los Angeles, it's already the middle of September. How long does it take to send a message back and forth from Los Angeles?

古文：已与西府所期违矣。
现代文：所以我劝你不如到东府找事做，因为与去西府所需要的时间差得太多。 
English: That's why I advise you to look for something to do in the eastern part of the prefecture, because it takes much longer than in the western part of the prefecture.

古文：阳源心初未决。忽见密县解申府，阳源作第六人，不得源阳。
现代文：阳源当初下不了决心，忽然知道密县推荐名单已经报到府里，阳源是第六名，没有源阳的名字。
English: At first, Yang Yuan could not make up his mind. Suddenly, he found out that the list of recommended candidates had been submitted to the prefectural government. Yang Yuan was the sixth, and there was no Yang Yuan's name.

古文：处士石洪曰： 阳源实胜源阳。 
现代文：处士石洪说 阳源这名字确实比源阳好 我便将那天晚上所做的梦告诉了他。
English: Officer Shi Hong said that the name Yangyuan was indeed better than Yuanyang, so I told him about the dream I had that night.

古文：遂话梦于洪，洪曰： 此梦固往冢者丘也，岂非登冢为丘徒哉。
现代文：他说 这梦中的坟墓就是土丘，那么登土丘就是登高啊！从此升官也说不定呢？ 
English: He said that the grave in this dream is a mound, so climbing the mound is climbing high! From now on, promotion is also possible?

古文：于此大振，亦未可知。况县申名第，一如梦中，未必比府榜出，阳源依县申第六人。
现代文：这一年，许孟容当川守，他开玩笑称阳源是 密县第六人 并说他已经吩咐试官，让他将你的名字提二三位。等到府里录用的名单贴出，阳源按照县里申报的顺序仍然是第六名。
English: This year, when Xu Meng Rong was the governor of Sichuan, he jokingly said that Yang Yuan was the sixth person in the county and said that he had ordered the examiner to let him mention your name two or three times. When the list of the prefecture was posted, Yang Yuan was still the sixth in accordance with the order of the county's declaration.

古文：孟容怒，责试官，阳源以梦告。明年，权侍郎不及第。
现代文：许孟容大怒。责问试官，阳源便将自己所做的梦告诉了他，第二年，在权侍郎的主考下考中进士。
English: Xu Meng Rong was furious. He scolded the examiner, and Yang Yuan told him about the dream he had had. The next year, he was admitted to the middle school under the examination of the master of rights and attendants.

古文：吴少诚
现代文：吴少诚
English: Wu Shaocheng

古文：吴少诚，贫贱时为官健，逃去，至上蔡，冻馁，求丐于侪辈。
现代文：吴少诚在贫贱的时候被征去当兵，逃跑后去了上蔡，饥寒交迫只好求助于乞丐中的同类人。
English: Wu Shaocheng was conscripted as a soldier when he was poor. After escaping, he went to Shangcai. Starving and cold, he had to turn to the same kind of people among the beggars for help.

古文：上蔡县猎师数人，于中山得鹿。
现代文：上蔡县有几个猎人在山中打了一头鹿，当地的风俗凡是打到大野兽，要将内脏下水祭山神。
English: Several hunters in Shangcai County shot a deer in the mountains. The local custom is to sacrifice the entrails of the big beast to the mountain gods.

古文：忽闻空中有言曰： 待吴尚书。 众人惊骇，遂止。
现代文：祭过山神后猎人们刚要吃鹿肉。突然听到天空中说： 等吴尚书！ 众人害怕，便不敢吃了。
English: The hunters were just about to eat the venison after the sacrifice to the mountain god. Suddenly, they heard a voice in the sky saying, "Wait for Wu Shangshu!" Everyone was afraid and didn't dare to eat it.

古文：良久欲食，又闻曰： 尚书即到，何不且住。 
现代文：过了很长时间，猎人们又要吃。又听到天空中说： 尚书马上就到，为什么不等？ 
English: After a long time, the hunters wanted to eat again. They also heard the sky saying, "Shangshu will be here soon, why not wait?"

古文：逡巡，又一人是脚力，携小袱过，见猎者，揖而坐。
现代文：一会儿，一个像是个做苦工的人，带着个小包袱路过这里，看到猎人，拱拱手坐下来。
English: After a while, a man who looked like a laborer passed by with a small bag. He saw the hunter and sat down.

古文：问之姓吴，众皆惊。
现代文：猎人们问他姓名，他说姓吴，众人都很吃惊。
English: When the hunters asked him his name, he said his surname was Wu, which surprised everyone.

古文：食毕，猎人起贺曰： 公即当贵，幸记某等姓名。 
现代文：吃完鹿肉，猎人们起身祝贺他说： 您很快就要升官发财了，希望能记住我们的姓名。 
English: After eating the venison, the hunters got up to congratulate him, saying, "You will soon be promoted and become rich. I hope you will remember our names."

古文：具述本末，少诚曰： 某辈军健儿，苟免擒获，效一卒之用则足矣，安有富贵之事？ 
现代文：然后向他讲述了刚才的事情。吴少诚说： 我是个逃兵，侥幸没有被抓回去。能够当一个吃官饷的兵丁就满足了，哪能有什么富贵之事。 
English: Then he told him about what had just happened. Wu Shao Cheng said: I am a deserter, luckily I was not caught back. I am satisfied with being a soldier who eats officer's pay, how can there be anything rich.

古文：大笑执别而去。后数年为节度使，兼工部尚书。使人求猎者，皆厚以钱帛赍之。陈彦博
现代文：大笑着同猎人们握手告别，过了几年，吴少诚果然成为节度使兼兵部尚书，他派人寻找当初请他吃鹿肉的猎人，送给每个人不少钱财。陈彦博
English: Laughing, he shook hands with the hunters and said goodbye. A few years later, Wu Shaocheng did indeed become the military governor and commander of the army. He sent someone to find the hunters who had originally invited him to eat venison, and gave each of them a lot of money.

古文：陈彦博与谢楚同为大学广文生。
现代文：陈彦博和谢楚都是大学的广文生。
English: Chen Yanbo and Xie Chu are both university students.

古文：彦博将取解，忽梦至都堂，见陈设甚盛，若行大礼然。
现代文：陈彦博即将要考进士，忽然梦中来到一座大厅，厅内陈设庄严排场，好像要举行仪式的样子。
English: Chen Yanbo is about to take the entrance examination, and suddenly, in his dream, he comes to a hall. Inside the hall, there is a solemn display, as if a ceremony is about to take place.

古文：庭中帏幄，饰以锦绣。中设一榻，陈列几案。上有尺牍，望之照耀如金字。
现代文：大厅中央设有帐幕，上面装饰着彩绣，里面放着一张床，陈列着一张几案，几案上有一封书信，远远望去光芒闪耀，似乎写着金字。
English: In the center of the hall there is a tent, decorated with colored embroidery, and inside there is a bed, displaying a few cases, on which there is a letter, which shines from afar and seems to be written in gold.

古文：彦博私问主事曰： 此何礼也？ 
现代文：陈彦博暗中问主持人： 这是什么礼仪呀？ 
English: Chen Yanbo secretly asked the host: What kind of etiquette is this?

古文：答曰： 明年进士人名，将送上界官司阅视之所。 
现代文：回答说： 明年进士的名单，将要送到上界官司去审阅的地方。 
English: He replied, "The list of next year's recruits will be sent to the higher court for review."

古文：彦博惊喜，因求一见。
现代文：陈彦博又惊又喜，要求看一看名单，主持人领他走到几案旁。
English: Surprised and delighted, Chen Yanbo demanded to see the list. The host led him to several cases.

古文：其人引至案旁，有一紫衣，执象简。彦博见之，敛衽而退。紫衣曰： 公有名矣，可以视之。 
现代文：陈彦博看见有一个穿紫衣服的人，手里拿着象牙笏，便恭恭敬敬地退了下来，穿紫衣服的人说： 上面有您的名字，可以去看一看。 
English: Chen Yanbo saw a man in purple with an ivory scepter in his hand and respectfully stepped back. The man in purple said, "It has your name on it, you can have a look."

古文：遂前，见有三十二，彦博名在焉。从上二人皆姓李，而无谢楚。
现代文：于是陈彦博上前观看，见上面有三十二人的名字，自己的名字也在里面，排在自己上面的两个人都姓李，然而没有谢楚。
English: So Chen Yanbo stepped forward to look, and saw the names of thirty-two people on it, his own name was also in it, and the two people above him were surnamed Li, but there was no Xie Chu.

古文：既悟独喜，不以告人。
现代文：明白自己能中榜以后心里非常高兴，对谁也没说。
English: After I realized that I could make it to the top, I was very happy and didn't tell anyone.

古文：及与楚同策试，有自中书见名者，密以告楚，而不言彦博。
现代文：等到和谢楚一同考完试以后，有人在中书那里看见名单后回来告诉谢楚，但是没说有陈彦博。
English: After waiting for the exam to be completed with Xie Chu, someone came back to tell Xie Chu after seeing the list in the Chinese book, but did not say that there was Chen Yanbo.

古文：彦博闻之，不食而泣。
现代文：陈彦博知道后不吃饭，总是哭。
English: When Chen Yanbo found out, he didn't eat and cried all the time.

古文：楚乃谕曰： 君之能岂后于我。
现代文：谢楚开导他说： 您怎么会落在我的后面呢？
English: Xie Chu Kaidong said to him: How could you fall behind me?

古文：设使一年未利，何若是乎？ 
现代文：假如今年没考中，也不必这个样子啊！ 
English: If you didn't take the middle school entrance exam this year, you don't have to look like this!

古文：彦博方言其梦。且曰： 若果无验，吾恐终无成矣。 
现代文：陈彦博这才将自己所做的梦告诉谢楚，还说： 如果没有应验，我恐怕这一生都不会有成就了。 
English: It was only then that Chen Yanbo told Xie Chu about his dream, adding: "If it doesn't come true, I'm afraid I won't be able to achieve anything in this life.

古文：大学诸生曰： 诚如说，事未可知。 
现代文：同学们说： 哪像你说的那么严重，事情还不知道结果呢。
English: The students said, "It's not as serious as you say, we don't know the outcome yet."

古文：明旦视榜，即果如梦中焉。
现代文：明天看榜，很可能你就考中了。 
English: If you look at the list tomorrow, it is likely that you will pass the exam.

古文：彦博以元和五年崔枢侍郎及第，上二人李顾行、李仍叔。
现代文：陈彦博元和五年考中进士主考是崔枢侍郎，排在他上面的两个人是李顾行、李仍叔。
English: Chen Yanbo Yuan and the five-year examination for junior high school students The main examiner is Cui Zui Lang, and the two people above him are Li Gu Xing and Li Ying Tong.

古文：谢楚明年于尹躬下擢第。
现代文：谢楚第二年在尹躬主考下中榜。
English: The second year, Xie Chu was ranked in the middle of the list under the examination of Yin Mu.

古文：陆宾虞
现代文：陆宾虞
English: Lu Bingyou

古文：陆宾虞举进士，在京师。
现代文：陆宾虞考进士来到京城。
English: Lu Bingyu, a candidate for the entrance examination, came to Beijing.

古文：常有一僧曰惟瑛者，善声色，兼知术数。宾虞与之往来。每言小事，无不必验。
现代文：有一个叫惟瑛的和尚精通音律还会相面和算卦，陆宾虞与他交往，他所说的事情没有不应验的。
English: There was a monk named Wei Ying who was well versed in music and also knew the rules of physiognomy and divination. Lu Bingyu had dealings with him, and there was nothing untoward in what he said.

古文：至宝历二年春，宾虞欲罢举归吴，告惟瑛以行计。瑛留止一宿。
现代文：到宝历第二年春天，陆宾虞想要不参加考试回归吴地，将自己的打算告诉惟瑛，惟瑛留陆宾虞住了一宿。
English: In the spring of the second year of the Baoli calendar, Lu Bingyu wanted to return to Wudi without taking the exam, and told his plan to Wei Ying. Wei Ying stayed with Lu Bingyu for one night.

古文：明旦，谓宾虞曰： 若来岁成名，不必归矣。
现代文：第二天早晨对陆宾虞说： 如果明年能够考中成名，就不必回去了。
English: The next morning, he said to Lu Bingyu: "If you can become famous in the middle school entrance examination next year, you don't have to go back."

古文：但取京兆荐送，必在高等。 
现代文：只要请京兆府推荐，必然高中。 
English: As long as you ask for a recommendation from the Beijing and Shanghai Municipal Government, you will definitely be able to go to high school.

古文：宾虞曰： 某曾三就京兆，未始得事。
现代文：陆宾虞说： 我曾经三次请求京兆府，全都不行。
English: Lu Bingyu said, "I have asked the Beijing and Shanghai Municipal Government for permission three times, but none of them could do it.

古文：今岁之事，尤觉甚难。 
现代文：今年这件事，尤其觉得难办。 
English: This year, I find it particularly difficult.

古文：瑛曰： 不然，君之成名，不以京兆荐送，他处不可也。
现代文：惟瑛说： 不然，您要成名，必须经京兆府推荐，别的路走不通。
English: Wei Ying said: Otherwise, if you want to become famous, you must be recommended by the Beijing Municipal Government. There is no other way.

古文：至七月六日，若食水族，则殊等与及第必矣。 
现代文：到七月六日，你如果能吃到鱼虾之类的水产，就一定能考中成名。 
English: By July 6th, if you can eat seafood such as fish and shrimp, you will definitely be able to pass the exam.

古文：宾虞乃书于晋昌里之牖，日省之。
现代文：陆宾虞便把这件事写在他所住的晋昌里的窗子上，每天看一看。
English: Lu Bingyu wrote about this incident on the window of Jinchangli, where he lived, and looked at it every day.

古文：数月后，因于靖恭北门，候一郎官。
现代文：几个月以后，陆宾虞在靖恭北门等候一名官员，适遇朝客。
English: A few months later, Lu Bingyu was waiting for an official at the North Gate of Jingyong, just in time for morning guests.

古文：适遇朝客，遂回憩于从孙闻礼之舍。既入，闻礼喜迎曰： 向有人惠双鲤鱼，方欲候翁而烹之。 
现代文：于是便到自己侄孙闻礼家休息。闻礼高兴地迎出来说： 头两天有人送来两条鲤鱼，正要等着您来做着吃呢。 
English: So he went to rest at the home of his grandnephew, Wen Lai. Wen Lai welcomed him with joy and said, "In the first two days, someone brought two eels, and they are just waiting for you to cook and eat them."

古文：宾虞素嗜鱼，便令做羹，至者辄尽。
现代文：陆宾虞历来喜欢吃鱼，便叫做成鱼羹，大家把鱼吃光了。
English: Lu Bingyu has always liked to eat fish, so it's called fish soup. Everyone has eaten all the fish.

古文：后日因视牖间所书字，则七月六日也。
现代文：回去后陆宾虞看见窗子上写的字，想到正是七月六日。
English: After returning, Lu Bingyu saw the words written on the window and thought of July 6th.

古文：遽命驾诣惟瑛，且绐之曰： 将游蒲关，故以访别。 
现代文：立即命令驾车去见惟瑛，见面后他哄骗惟瑛说： 我将要去蒲关走走，所以前来告别。 
English: He immediately ordered to drive to see Wei Rong. After the meeting, he tricked Wei Rong and said, "I am going for a walk in Baguan, so I came to say goodbye."

古文：瑛笑曰： 水族已食矣，游蒲关何为？ 
现代文：惟瑛笑着说： 水产已经吃完了，还去蒲关干什么？ 
English: Wei Ying said with a smile, "I've already eaten all the seafood, why do I still want to go to Baguan?"

古文：宾虞深信之，因取荐京兆府，果得殊等。
现代文：这下陆宾虞对惟瑛信服了。因而请了京兆府推荐，所以有了把握。
English: At this point, Lu Bingyu was convinced of Wei Ying. Therefore, he asked the Beijing Municipal Government for a recommendation, so he had a grasp.

古文：明年入省试毕，又访惟瑛。
现代文：第二年，参加尚书省主持的考试结束。陆宾虞又去拜访惟瑛。
English: In the second year, after the examination held by the Ministry of Education and Culture was over, Lu Bingyu went to visit Wei Ying again.

古文：瑛曰： 君已登第，名籍不甚高，当在十五人之外。状元姓李，名合曳脚。 
现代文：惟瑛说： 你已经中榜，但名次不算太好，应当在十五名之后，状元姓李，名叫合曳脚。
English: Wei Ying said, "You have made it to the top of the list, but your ranking is not so good. You should be in the fifteenth, followed by the first runner-up, surnamed Li, whose name is He Huijiao."

古文：时有广文生朱俅者，时议当及第。监司所送之名未登料。
现代文：当时还有个姓朱的，都说他能中榜，但监司所初选的名单没有他。
English: At that time, there was another surnamed Zhu, and everyone said that he could make it into the list, but he was not on the primary election list of the Supervision Bureau.

古文：宾虞因问其非姓朱乎？
现代文：陆宾虞问中榜者有没有姓朱的。
English: Lu Bingyu asked if any of the people on the list had the surname Zhu.

古文：瑛曰： 三十三人无姓朱者。 
现代文：惟瑛说： 三十三个人里没有姓朱的。 
English: Wei Ying said: There is no surname Zhu among the thirty-three people.

古文：时正月二十四日，宾虞言于从弟符，符与石贺书壁。
现代文：这天正是正月二十四日，陆宾虞将好消息告诉堂弟符，符与石贺书壁。
English: It was on the 24th day of the first month that Lu Bingyu told the good news to his cousin Fu, Fu and Shi He Shuxi.

古文：后月余放榜，状头李憕，宾虞名在十六，即三十人也。惟瑛又谓宾虞曰： 君成名后，当食禄于吴越之分，有一事甚速疾。 
现代文：一个多月后发榜，状元叫李憕，陆宾虞排在第十六名，一共三十名，惟瑛对陆宾虞说： 你考中成名以后，将在吴越一带，还有一点就是很快得一场急病。 
English: More than a month later, the list was released. The first name was Li Yu, and Lu Bingyu ranked 16th, with a total of 30 names. However, Ying said to Lu Bingyu: After you become famous in the middle school entrance examination, you will be in the Wuyue area. Another point is that you will soon have a sudden illness.

古文：宾虞后从事于越，半年而暴终。
现代文：陆宾虞后做官在越地，就是今天浙江绍兴一带做官，半年后突然死亡。
English: After serving as an official in Yueji, Lu Bingyu served as an official in the Shaoxing area of Zhejiang today, and died suddenly half a year later.

古文：王璠王璠以元和五年登科，梦为河南尹，平旦视事，有二客来谒，一衣紫而东坐，一衣绯而西坐。
现代文：王璠王璠以元和五年登科，梦为河南尹，平旦视事，有二客来谒，一衣紫而东坐，一衣绯而西坐。
English: Wang Xuan Wang Xuan entered the university in Yuan and five years. His dream was to become a Henan Yin, and he saw things as a plain man. Two guests came to see him, one wearing a purple robe and sitting on the east side, and one wearing a blue robe and sitting on the west side.

古文：绯者谓紫者曰： 仑邦如何处置？ 
现代文：绯者谓紫者曰： 仑邦如何处置？ 
English: Those who are lazy are called lazy, and those who are lazy are called lazy. How should the country deal with them?

古文：曰： 已决二十，递出界讫。 
现代文：曰： 已决二十，递出界讫。 
English: It said: "Twenty decisions have been made, and the surrender notice has been issued."

古文：觉，乃书于告牒之后别纸上。
现代文：觉，乃书于告牒之后别纸上。
English: Therefore, do not write on the paper after the ultimatum.

古文：后二十年，果除河南尹。
现代文：后二十年，果除河南尹。
English: In the last twenty years, Henan Yin has been eliminated.

古文：既上，洛陽令与分司郎官皆故人，从容宴语。
现代文：既上，洛阳令与分司郎官皆故人，从容宴语。
English: On top of that, the Luoyang governor and the branch secretary were both deceased, so they were able to enjoy the banquet.

古文：郎官谓令曰： 仑邦如何处置？ 
现代文：郎官谓令曰： 仑邦如何处置？ 
English: The vassal said, "How does Lunbang dispose of it?"

古文：令曰： 已决二十，递出界。 
现代文：令曰： 已决二十，递出界。 
English: The decree said: "Twenty decisions have been made, and it is time to surrender."

古文：璠闻之，遽起还内，良久不出。
现代文：璠闻之，遽起还内，良久不出。
English: According to the rumor, he suddenly went back to school, but did not return for a long time.

古文：二客甚讶曰： 吾等向者对答率易，王尹得非怒耶？ 
现代文：二客甚讶曰： 吾等向者对答率易，王尹得非怒耶？ 
English: The two guests were very surprised and said, "We are easy to answer, so why did Wang Yin get angry?"

古文：顷之，璠持告牒所记，出示二客。徐征其人，乃郎官家奴，窃财而遁，擒获送县，县为断之如此。
现代文：原来刚才所说的人，是郎官家的家奴，因为偷了郎官家的东西逃跑，被抓住后送到县衙，县令作出如此判决。
English: Originally, the person just mentioned was a servant of the Langguan family. Because he stole something from the Langguan family and ran away, he was caught and sent to the county magistrate. The county magistrate made such a judgment.

古文：崔玄亮
现代文：崔玄亮
English: Cui Xuanliang

古文：元和十一年，监察御史段文昌，与崔植同前入台。
现代文：元和十一年，监察御史段文昌和崔植同时进入御史台。
English: In the eleventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, the supervisors of the historical section, Wenchang and Cui Zhi, entered the historical section at the same time.

古文：先是御史崔玄亮，察院之长。
现代文：先前御史崔玄亮是监察院的长官。
English: The previous governor, Cui Xuanliang, was the head of the Supervision Bureau.

古文：每以二监察后至，不由科名，接待间多所脱略。段与崔深衔之。
现代文：看到崔和段是后来的，不是科举出身，接待时神色轻慢，段文昌和崔植非常反感。
English: Seeing that Cui and Duan are from a later generation, not from the Science Education Department, and their reception was slow, Duan Wenchang and Cui Zhi were very disgusted.

古文：元和十五年春，穆宗皇帝龙飞，命二公入相。
现代文：元和十五年春天，穆宗皇帝即位。任命两人为宰相。
English: In the spring of the 15th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Emperor Muzong ascended the throne and appointed two people as prime ministers.

古文：段自翰长中书舍人拜，植自御史中丞拜。
现代文：段文昌从翰长中书舍人提升，崔植从御史中丞提升。
English: Duan Wenchang was promoted from Han Chang Middle School, and Cui Zhi was promoted from Gushi Middle School.

古文：同在中书。
现代文：同入中书省。
English: It was also included in the Central Book Ministry.

古文：时玄亮罢密州刺史，谒宰相。
现代文：这时崔玄亮被解除了密州刺史职务，来京城拜见宰相。
English: At this time, Cui Xuanliang was relieved of his duties as the chief historian of Mishu and came to Beijing to meet with the prime minister.

古文：二相相顾，掏玄亮名曰： 此人不久往他役，而有心求官。 
现代文：两位宰相互看看，指着崔玄亮的名字说： 这个人不久还将把他支得远远的，还想来求当京官。 
English: The two officials looked at each other, pointed to Cui Xuanliang's name and said, "This man will soon be supporting him from afar, and still wants to become a Beijing official."

古文：时门下侍郎萧俯亦在长安，因问二相。
现代文：当时两位宰相的学生侍郎萧俯也在长安，问两位宰相。
English: At that time, the two prime ministers' student chamberlain Xiao Qian was also in Chang'an and asked the two prime ministers.

古文：二相具以事对。
现代文：两位宰相将看法说了。
English: The two prime ministers made their views known.

古文：萧相曰： 若如此，且令此汉闲三五年可矣。 
现代文：萧俯说： 既然这样，就让他闲个三年五载。 
English: Xiao Qian said: Since this is the case, let him be idle for three years and five years.

古文：不数日，宣州奏歙州刺史阙。
现代文：不几天，宣州报告歙州刺史出缺。
English: Not a few days later, Xuanzhou reported that there was a vacancy for the post of secretary-general in Zhangzhou.

古文：其日印在段相宅，便除歙州刺史。
现代文：当天相印在段文昌的家里，段文昌便随手任命了崔玄亮为歙州刺史。
English: On the same day, the seal was printed at Duan Wenchang's home, and Duan Wenchang immediately appointed Cui Xuanliang as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：明日，段入朝，都忘前事，到中书大怒，责吏房主事阳述云： 威权在君，更须致宰相。
现代文：第二天，段文昌上朝，将昨天的事全忘了。回到中书省大发雷霆，责问吏房主事阳述说： 你这样有权威，还需要宰相干什么？
English: The next day, Duan Wenchang went to the capital and completely forgot about yesterday's events. He returned to the Chinese Literature Department furious, and scolded the head clerk, saying, "You have such authority, what do you need a prime minister for?

古文：必是此贼纳贿除官，若不是人吏取钱，崔玄亮何由得歙州刺史？ 
现代文：必然是这个贼子给你行贿才被任命，要不是人事官员收了钱，崔玄亮怎么当上了歙州刺史？ 
English: It must be this thief who bribed you to be appointed. If the personnel officer did not accept the money, how did Cui Xuanliang become the history of Zhangzhou?

古文：述惶怖谢罪云： 文书都不到本房，昨日是相公手书拟名进黄。 
现代文：阳述胆战心惊地检讨说： 公文本来都不传到本房，昨天是宰相亲笔写的推荐公文报送给皇帝的。 
English: Yang Xiu examined it fearfully and anxiously and said, "In the first place, the official documents were not delivered to this room. Yesterday, the prime minister personally wrote a letter of recommendation and sent it to the emperor.

古文：及检勘，翻省述忘，实是自书。
现代文：等到段文昌检查核对，才忽然想起来，确实是自己写的批文。
English: It was not until Duan Wenchang checked and checked that he suddenly remembered that it was indeed his own written approval.

古文：植欲改拟覆奏。段曰： 安知不是天与假吾手耳。 
现代文：崔植想要改变人选重新请示皇帝，段文昌说： 怎么知道不是上天假借我的手呢？ 
English: When Cui Zhi wanted to change the candidate and re-solicit the emperor, Duan Wenchang said, "How do I know that it is not God's pretense to lend me a hand?

古文：遂放敕下。
现代文：就把任命发下去了。
English: So the appointment went ahead.

古文：武元衡与韦贯之，同年及第。武拜门下侍郎，韦罢长安尉，赴选，元衡以为万年丞。
现代文：武元衡和韦贯之同一年考中进士，武元衡被任命为门下侍郎，韦贯之被免除长安尉，等等重新任命，武元衡任命韦贯之为万年丞。
English: In the same year, Wu Yuanheng and Wei Gangzhi passed the junior high school entrance examination. Wu Yuanheng was appointed as a footman, Wei Gangzhi was exempted from the rank of Chang'an lieutenant, and so on, and was reappointed. Wu Yuanheng appointed Wei Gangzhi as a perpetual senator.

古文：过堂日，元衡谢曰： 某与先辈同年及第，元衡遭逢，滥居此地。使先辈未离尘土，元衡之罪也。 
现代文：在官员们互通姓名拜见丞相的日子里，武元衡对韦贯之说： 我与前辈同年考中进士，元衡多遭受苦难，滥竽充数做了官，使先辈仍然没有职务，这都是元衡的罪过呀！ 
English: On the day when the officials exchanged names and met with the prime minister, Wu Yuanheng said to Wei Gangzhi: I entered the junior high school exam the same year as my predecessors. Yuanheng suffered a lot of hardships, made a lot of officials, so that my predecessors still did not have positions. This is all Yuanheng's fault!

古文：贯之呜咽流涕而退。
现代文：韦贯之痛哭着退了出去。
English: Wei Gangzhi cried bitterly and withdrew.

古文：后数月，除补阙。
现代文：几个月以后韦贯之补缺得到了任命。
English: A few months later, Wei Gangzhi was appointed to fill the vacancy.

古文：是年，元衡帅西川。三年后入相。与贯之同日宣制。
现代文：当年，武元衡统帅镇守西川，三年后入朝当了宰相，与韦贯之同一天到任。
English: In that year, General Takemotohei was in charge of Nishikawa, and three years later he became prime minister, taking office on the same day as Wei Gang.

