古文：楚绝齐，齐举兵伐楚。
现代文：楚国与齐国断绝关系后，齐发兵攻打楚国。
English: After the severance of relations between Chu and Qi, Qi sent troops to attack Chu.

古文：陈轸谓楚王曰： 王不如以地东解于齐，西讲于秦。 
现代文：陈轸对楚怀王说： 大王不如割让土地赠送给齐国求得谅解，然后再跟西面的秦国建立邦交。 
English: Chen Xuan said to King Chu Huai: It would be better for the great king to cede land and present it to the state of Qi to seek understanding, and then establish diplomatic relations with the western state of Qin.

古文：楚王使陈轸之秦，秦王谓轸曰： 子，秦人也，寡人与子故也，寡人不佞，不能亲国事也，故子弃寡人，事楚王。
现代文：于是楚怀王派陈轸出使秦国。秦惠王对陈轸说： 贤卿本来就是秦国人，而且是寡人的老臣。但因为寡人不识才，对于处理国家大事又欠周详，以致使贤卿离开寡人去侍奉楚王。
English: Therefore, the king of Chuhuai sent Chen Xuan as an envoy to Qin. The king of Qin Hui said to Chen Xuan: Xianqing was originally from Qin, and he was an old retainer of a few people. However, because he was not intelligent, he was not well-versed in handling national affairs, so that he made Xianqing leave the few people to serve the king of Chu.

古文：今齐、楚相伐，或谓救之便，或谓救之不便，子独不可以忠为子主计，以其余为寡人乎? 
现代文：如今齐、楚两国互相攻伐，有的人认为救援有利，有的人认为不救援有利。贤卿为何不在为楚国效忠之余，也为我出些主意呢？ 
English: Now that the two countries of Qi and Chu are attacking each other, some people think that rescue is advantageous, while others think that not rescuing is advantageous. Why doesn't the sage not only be loyal to Chu, but also come up with some ideas for me?

古文：陈轸曰： 王独不闻吴人之游楚者乎?
现代文：陈轸说： 大王难道没听说过吴国人到楚国去做官的故事吗？
English: Chen Yao said, "Hasn't the great king heard the story of the Wu people going to Chu to become officials?

古文：楚王甚爱之，病，故使人问之，曰： 诚病乎?
现代文：楚王很喜欢这位客卿，有一次他生病了，楚王就派人去问候说： 是真生病吗？
English: King Chu liked this guest very much. Once when he was ill, King Chu sent someone to greet him and said, "Is he really ill?

古文：意亦思乎? 
现代文：还是思念吴国呢？ 
English: Or do you miss Wuzhou?

古文：左右曰： 臣不知其思与不思，诚思则将吴吟。 
现代文：左右侍臣回答说： 不知道他是否是思念家乡，假如真是思念家乡的话，那他就要唱吴歌了。 
English: The courtiers around him replied, "I don't know if he misses his hometown, but if he really misses his hometown, then he should sing Wu Ge."

古文：今轸将为王吴吟。
现代文：现在我就准备为大王唱 吴歌 。
English: Now I am ready to sing Wu Song for the great king.

古文：王不闻夫管与之说乎?
现代文：不知大王有没有听说管与的故事？
English: I wonder if the great king has ever heard the story of Guan Yu?

古文：有两虎诤人而斗者，管庄子将刺之，管与止之曰： 虎者，戾虫；人者，甘饵也。今两虎诤人而斗，小者必死，大者必伤。子待伤虎而刺之，则是一举而兼两虎也。
现代文：这个故事是说有两只老虎，因为争吃人肉而打斗起来，管庄子准备去刺杀这两只虎，可是管与赶忙来制止说： 老虎是贪狠的大虫，人肉是他的最香甜的食物，现在两只老虎为争吃人肉而打斗，小虎必然因斗败而死，大虎也必然因苦斗而伤，你就等着去刺杀那只受伤的大虎吧！
English: This story is about two tigers who got into a fight because they wanted to eat human flesh. Guan Zhuangzi was about to stab the two tigers, but Guan Yu hurried to stop him, saying, "Tigers are voracious beasts, and human flesh is their sweetest food. Now the two tigers are fighting because they want to eat human flesh. The small tiger is sure to die as a result of the fight, and the big tiger is sure to be injured as a result of the fight. You just wait to stab the injured big tiger!"

古文：无刺一虎之劳，而有刺两虎之名。 
现代文：这是一举而杀两虎的妙计，不用费杀死一只老虎的辛苦，实际上却能兼得刺杀两只虎的英名。 
English: This is a brilliant plan to kill two tigers at once. It is not difficult to kill one tiger, but in fact it can kill two tigers.

古文：齐、楚今战，战必败。败，王起兵救之，有救齐之利，而无伐楚之害。
现代文：如今齐、楚两国既然正在苦战，战则双方必有伤亡，那时大王再度救援，既能获得救齐的好处，而又没有伐楚的危险与害处。
English: Since the two countries of Qi and Chu are now in a bitter war, there will be casualties on both sides of the war. When the great king rescues again, he can get the benefits of rescuing Qi, but there is no danger or harm of cutting Chu.

古文：计听知复逆者，唯王可也。
现代文：是否听从我的计谋，预知事情的反复逆顺，那就全看大王自己定夺了。
English: Whether or not to follow my advice, knowing that things will go wrong again and again, is entirely up to the great king himself.

古文：计者，事之本也；听者，存亡之机。
现代文：计谋是做事的根本，听从良计是国家存亡的关键。
English: Strategy is the foundation of doing things, and following a good strategy is the key to a country's survival.

古文：计失而听过，能有国者寡也。
现代文：计谋错了，或听从错计，而能保住国家的君王很少。
English: There are few princes who can preserve a state when their counsel is faulty, or when they follow a faulty counsel.

古文：故曰： 计有一二者难悖也，听无失本末者难惑。 
现代文：所以说： 计谋要反复再三地权衡得失才不会失策，听信不失去根本的计策才不会被迷惑。  
English: Therefore, it is said that: the strategy should repeatedly weigh the gains and losses so that it will not fail, and the fundamental strategy will not be confused if it is not lost.

