古文：武王问太公曰： 吾欲未战先知敌人之强弱，预见胜负之征，为之奈何？ 
现代文：武王询问太公说： 我想在还未交战之前就知道敌人的强弱，预见战争胜负的征兆，想要做到这一点应该怎么办呢？ 
English: King Wu asked the Grand Duke, "I want to know the enemy's strength and weakness before the battle, and predict the signs of victory and defeat in the war. How should I do this?"

古文：太公曰： 胜负之征，精神先见，明将察之，其效在人。
现代文：太公答道： 胜败的征兆，首先表现在人的精神面貌上。
English: Taigong replied, "The signs of victory and defeat are first manifested in a person's mental outlook.

古文：谨候敌人出入进退，察其动静，言语妖祥，士卒所告。
现代文：明智的将帅能够察觉，但能否利用征兆打败敌人，关键还是在人自身。周密地侦察敌人出入进退的情况，观察它的举动，言中谈论的吉凶预兆和士卒们相互议论的事情。
English: A wise general can detect it, but the key to defeating the enemy with the help of omens lies in oneself. Carefully observe the enemy's entry and exit, observe its movements, the omens discussed in the speech, and the things that the soldiers discuss with each other.

古文：凡三军说怿，士卒畏法，敬其将命，相喜以破敌，相陈以勇猛，相贤以威武，此强征也。三军数惊，士卒不齐，相恐以敌强，相语以不利，耳目相属，妖言不止，众口相惑，不畏法令，不重其将，此弱征也。
现代文：凡是全军喜悦，士卒畏惧法令，尊重将帅命令，相互以破敌为喜，相互以勇猛为荣，相互以威武为誉，这是军队战斗力强大的征兆；相反，如果全军上下不断惊动，士卒散乱行列不整，相互之间都对敌人的强大感到畏惧，相互传播作战不利的消息，相互之间议论纷纷，谣言四起不能制止，互相煽惑欺蒙，不畏惧法令，不尊重将帅，这是军队战斗力弱的征兆。
English: If the whole army is happy, the soldiers fear the decrees and respect the orders of the commander-in-chief, they are happy to defeat the enemy, they are proud of their bravery, and they are proud of their might, this is a sign of a strong combat capability of the army; on the other hand, if the whole army is constantly alarmed, the soldiers are scattered and the ranks are not in order, they are afraid of the enemy's strength, they are spreading unfavorable news about the war, they are arguing with each other, they cannot stop the rumors, they are instigating and deceiving each other, they do not fear the decrees and do not respect the commander-in

古文： 三军齐整，阵势已固，深沟高垒，又有大风甚雨之利，三军无故，旌旗前指，金铎之声扬以清，鼙鼓之声扬以清，鼙鼓之声宛以鸣，此得神明之助，大胜之征也。行陈不固，旌旗乱而相绕，逆大风甚雨之利，士卒恐惧，气绝而不属，戎马惊奔，兵车折轴，金铎之声下以浊，鼙鼓之声湿以沐，此大败之征也。
现代文：全军团结一心，阵势坚固，沟深垒高，又凭借大风大雨的有利气候条件，三军不待命令就开始行动，金铎之声高扬而清晰，鼙鼓之声婉转而嘹亮，这是军队得到神明的帮助，作战必将胜利的征兆；相反，行阵不稳固，旌旗纷乱而方向不明，又逆着大风大雨的不利气候条件，士兵惊恐害怕，士气衰竭溃散，军马受惊乱奔，战车轴木折断，金铎之声低沉而混浊，鼙鼓之声沉闷而压抑，这是作战会失败的征兆。
English: The whole army is united with one heart, the formation is solid, the ditch is deep and the foundation is high, and by virtue of the favorable weather conditions of heavy wind and heavy rain, the three armies begin to act without waiting for orders. The sound of the golden gongs is high and clear, and the sound of the gongs and drums is gentle and bright. This is a sign that the army is helped by the gods and the battle will be victorious. On the contrary, the formation is not stable, the flags are in disarray and the direction is unknown, and against the adverse weather conditions of heavy wind and rain, the soldiers are frightened and scared, the morale is exhausted and scattered, the horses

古文： 凡攻城围邑：城之气色如死灰，城可屠；城之气出而北，城可克；城之气出而西，城必降；城之气出而南，城不可拔；城之气出而东，城不可攻；城之气出而复入，城主逃北；城之气出而覆我军上，军必病；城之气出高而无所止，用兵长久。
现代文：凡是攻打包围城邑：如果城上的气是死灰之色，那么这座城邑被毁灭；如果城邑上空的气出而向北流动，城可被攻克；如果城上的气出而向西流动，城可能投降：如果城上的气出而向南流动，城就坚不可拔；如果城上的气出而向东流动，城就不能进攻；如果城上的气出而又人，守城的主将必定逃亡败北；如果城上的气出而覆盖我军，我军必遭不利；如果城上的气高升而不停止，作战一定历时长久。
English: When attacking and besieging a city: If the wind is gray, the city will be destroyed; if the wind is blowing north, the city can be conquered; if the wind is blowing west, the city can surrender; if the wind is blowing south, the city is impregnable; if the wind is blowing east, the city cannot be attacked; if the wind is blowing south, the city will be defeated; if the wind is blowing east, the city will be defeated; if the wind is blowing north, the city will be defeated; if the wind is blowing west, the city will surrender; if the wind is blowing south, the city will not be defeated; if the wind is blowing east, the city

古文：凡攻城围邑，过旬不雷不雨，必亟去之，城必有大辅，此所以知可攻而攻，不可攻而止。 
现代文：凡是攻城围邑，如果过了十天仍不打雷下雨，必须迅速撤围，因为城中一定有贤能的辅助。这样，就可以知道为什么可攻就攻，不可攻就停止的道理了。 
English: If after ten days there is no thunder or rain in any besieged city or town, the siege must be speedily withdrawn, because there must be able assistance in the city. In this way, we can know why it is possible to attack, and why it is impossible to attack and stop.

古文：武王曰： 善哉！ 
现代文：武王说： 说得好啊！ 
English: King Wu said, "What a great way to say it!

