古文：癸丑之三月晦，自宁海出西门。
现代文：癸丑年三月的最后一天。我自宁海出西门。
English: On the last day of March in the Year of the Dragon, I left the West Gate from Ninghai.

古文：云散日朗，人意山光，俱有喜态。
现代文：这天阴云尽散，阳光明媚，人的心情、山中的景物，都有喜悦之态。
English: On this day, the clouds are completely dispersed, the sun is shining, and people's moods and the scenery in the mountains are all joyful.

古文：三十里，至梁隍山。
现代文：走过三十里路，到达梁隍山。
English: After walking 30 miles, we arrived at Liangzhu Mountain.

古文：闻此於菟即老虎夹道，月伤数十人，遂止宿。
现代文：听说这一带路边常有猛虎出没，一个月间就伤害数十行人，于是我只好找旅店住下。
English: I heard that tigers often haunt the roadside in this area, injuring dozens of pedestrians in a month, so I had to find a hotel to stay.

古文：四月初一日早雨。
现代文：四月初一这天，早上一直下雨。
English: On the first day of April, it rained all morning.

古文：行十五里，路有岐，马首西向台山，天色渐霁。
现代文：前行十五里，路旁有岔道，勒马从西面向天台山进发，这时候天逐渐转晴。
English: Fifteen miles ahead, there is a fork in the road, and the horse starts from the west facing Tiantai Mountain. At this time, the sky gradually turns clear.

古文：又十里，抵松门岭，山峻路滑，舍骑步行。
现代文：又走了十里路，抵达松门岭下。山高路滑，只好舍弃骑马，步行前进。
English: I walked another ten miles and arrived at the foot of Songmenling. The mountain road was slippery, so I had to give up riding and walk.

古文：自奉化来，虽越岭数重，皆循山麓；至此迂回临陟，俱在山脊。
现代文：自奉化以来，虽然经过数重山岭，但多数是顺着山脚走；到这里却是迂回曲折地登高，都是在山脊上面走。
English: Although I have passed through several mountains since I came to Fenghua, I mostly walked along the foot of the mountain. However, I climbed up here in a roundabout way, walking on the top of the ridge.

古文：而雨后新霁晴，泉声山色，往复创变，翠丛中山鹃映发，今人攀历忘苦。
现代文：雨后新晴，秀美的山色中叮咚的流泉声随处可闻，山色交替变化，绿树丛与那怒放的红杜鹃花相互辉映，令人忘却了攀登跋涉的辛苦。
English: After the rain, it was a new fine day. The tinkling sound of flowing springs in the beautiful mountain scenery could be heard everywhere. The mountain scenery alternated, and the green trees and the angry red rhododendrons reflected each other. People forgot the hard work of climbing and trekking.

古文：又十五里，饭于筋竹庵。
现代文：又前行十五里路，在筋竹庵里休息、用饭。
English: They also went on a fifteen-mile journey, resting and eating in a bamboo hut.

古文：山顶随处种麦。
现代文：所在山顶到处都种有麦子。
English: Wheat is grown everywhere on the top of the mountain.

古文：从筋竹岭南行，则向国清大路。
现代文：从筋竹岭向南走，就是通往国清寺的大路。
English: Walking south from Sujizhuling is the main road leading to Guoxing Temple.

古文：适有国清僧云峰同饭，言此抵石梁，山险路长，行李不便，不若以轻装往，而重担向国清相待。
现代文：恰好有国清寺僧人云峰同桌吃饭。他说：从这条路到石梁，山险岭峻，路途漫长，带着行李很不方便，不如轻装前往，行李则由挑夫挑到国清寺等候。
English: Yunfeng, a monk of Guoxing Temple, happened to be dining at the same table. He said: "From this road to Shiliang, the mountains are steep, the road is long, and it is very inconvenient to carry luggage. It is better to travel lightly, and the luggage is picked up by the porter to wait at Guoxing Temple.

古文：余然之，令担夫随云峰往国清。余与莲舟上人，行五里，过筋竹岭。
现代文：我同意他的建议，于是让担夫挑着行李随云峰先去国清寺，我则与莲舟上人一起从石梁道上动身前行。走过五里路，翻越过筋竹岭。
English: I agreed with his suggestion, so I let the porter take the luggage and follow Yunfeng to Guoxing Temple first, and I set off from Shiliang Road with the people on the lotus boat. I walked five miles and climbed over Sujizhu Ridge.

古文：岭旁多短松，老干屈曲，根叶苍秀，俱吾阊门盆中物也。
现代文：山岭近旁很多又老又矮的松树，屈曲虬枝，盘根枝叶苍老秀美，就像阊门家里的盆景。
English: Near the mountain, there are many old and short pine trees, twisted twigs, intertwined roots and leaves, old and beautiful, just like the bonsai in the Ximen family.

古文：又三十余里，抵弥陀庵。
现代文：又走三十多里，才抵达弥陀庵。
English: They walked another thirty-odd miles before they arrived at Mida-an.

古文：上下高岭，深山荒寂，恐藏虎，故草木俱焚去。
现代文：山岭高高低低，深山里荒凉寂寞，为防止树丛中藏卧老虎，草木都被焚烧殆尽。
English: Mountains are high and low, desolate and lonely in the deep mountains. In order to prevent tigers from hiding in the bushes, all the plants and trees are burned out.

古文：泉轰风动，路绝旅人。
现代文：泉水轰鸣，劲风动地，山路上没有其他旅行的人，显得荒凉而漫长。
English: The spring water is roaring, the wind is strong, and there are no other travelers on the mountain road, which seems desolate and long.

古文：庵在万山坳低洼处中，路荒且长，适当其半，可饭可宿。
现代文：弥陀庵坐落在万山坳中，小路长满杂草而且曲曲折折，伸延到很远，庵正好在小路的中点，可供食宿。
English: Mida-an is located in the middle of the mountains. The path is overgrown with weeds and twists and turns, stretching far away. The hermitage is right in the middle of the path and can be used for accommodation.

古文：初二日饭后，雨始止。
现代文：初二这天吃完饭后，雨才停止。
English: On the second day of the first semester, the rain only stopped after lunch.

古文：遂越潦积水攀岭，溪石渐幽，二十里，暮抵天封寺。
现代文：于是越过路上的积水，攀登山岭，溪流、山岩越来越显得清澈、幽静。走完二十里路，傍晚时抵达天封寺。
English: So I crossed the standing water on the road, climbed the mountain ridge, and the streams and mountain rocks became increasingly clear and quiet.After walking twenty miles, I arrived at Tianfeng Temple in the evening.

古文：卧念晨上峰顶，以朗霁为缘，盖连日晚霁，并无晓晴。
现代文：睡在床上还惦念着明晨登攀峰顶的事，若有缘份则雨停天朗，因为连日来都是晚上雨后转晴，并没有一天是天亮时晴朗。
English: Sleeping in bed, I still think about climbing the peak tomorrow morning. If there is a predestination, the rain will stop and the sky will be clear, because it has been raining in the evening for days, and there is no day when it is clear at dawn.

古文：及五更梦中，闻明星满天，喜不成寐。
现代文：五更时从睡梦中醒来，听仆从说，满天都是明亮的星星，高兴得再也无法入睡。
English: When he awoke from his sleep at five o'clock and heard his servant say that the sky was full of bright stars, he was so happy that he could not go back to sleep.

古文：初三日晨起，果日光烨烨，决策向顶。
现代文：初三日清晨起床，果然见阳光如火光一般闪耀，于是决策向山顶前进。
English: On the morning of the third day of the first lunar month, I got up and saw that the sun was shining brightly, so I decided to go to the top of the mountain.

古文：上数里，至华顶庵；又三里，将近顶，为太白堂，俱无可观。
现代文：向上攀爬数里山路，到达华顶庵。再走三里，到达太白堂，已快要接近华顶峰了，而沿途都没有值得观赏的景物。
English: After climbing up several miles of mountain road, we arrived at Huadingan. After walking another three miles, we arrived at Taibai Hall. We were close to Huading Peak, but there was nothing worth seeing along the way.

古文：闻堂左下有黄经洞，乃从小径。
现代文：听说太白堂左下方有黄经洞可游览，于是从小路走。
English: I heard that there is a cave to visit at the bottom left of Taibai Hall, so I walked along the path.

古文：二里，俯见一突石，颇觉秀蔚。
现代文：二里路后，俯身看见一块很突出的大石头，感到很是秀丽华美。
English: Two miles down the road, I leaned over and saw a large, protruding rock. I felt very beautiful and magnificent.

古文：至则一发僧结庵于前，恐风自洞来、以石甃塞堆砌填塞其门，大为叹惋。
现代文：临近一看，是一位发僧在黄经洞前构的庵，恐怕风从洞里吹出来，就用石头砌塞洞门，我不由大为感叹而惋惜。
English: At a closer look, it was a hermitage built by a monk in front of Huangjing Cave. I was afraid that the wind would blow out of the cave, so I blocked the cave door with stones. I couldn't help but sigh with regret.

古文：复上至太白，循路登绝顶。
现代文：于是只好重新往上走，到达太白堂，然后顺山路登上天台山绝顶华顶峰。
English: So I had to walk up again, reaching Taibai Hall, and then along the mountain road up to the peak of Tiantai Mountain.

古文：荒草靡靡，山高风冽，草上结霜高寸许，而四山回映，琪花玉树，玲珑弥望。
现代文：峰顶上，四处的荒草被劲风吹得纷纷倒伏，峰高因而寒风凛冽，草上结的霜约有一寸多厚。而回顾峰下四周的山峦上，美丽的鲜花与碧玉般的绿树，远远望去觉得非常玲珑明晰。
English: At the top of the peak, the wild grass everywhere was blown down by the strong wind, the peak was high and the cold wind was biting, and the frost on the grass was about an inch thick. But looking back at the mountains around the peak, the beautiful flowers and green trees like jasper felt very exquisite and clear from far away.

古文：岭角山花盛开，顶上反不吐色，盖为高寒所勒限制耳。
现代文：山脚下山花盛开，峰顶上反而不开花，大概是因为高处寒冷所造成的。
English: The mountain flowers are in full bloom at the foot of the mountain, but do not bloom at the peak, probably because of the cold at high altitudes.

古文：仍下华顶庵，过池边小桥，越三岭。
现代文：顺着原路下山到华顶庵，经过池边的小桥，又翻越三座山岭。
English: Follow the original path down the mountain to Huatian, pass the small bridge by the pond, and climb over three mountains.

古文：溪回山合，木石森丽，一转一奇，殊慊所望。
现代文：这里的溪水潇徊，山峦重重，树木繁茂丛生，岩石光采焕发，每转过一个地方就有另一处奇景，使观赏愿望得到很大的满足。
English: The streams here are meandering, the mountains are heavy, the trees are luxuriant, the rocks are radiant, and every place you turn there is another wonder, so that the desire to watch is greatly satisfied.

古文：二十里，过上方广，至石梁，礼佛昙花亭，不暇细观飞瀑。
现代文：走了二十里路，经过上方广，到达石梁，在昙花亭敬佛，已经没有时间去仔细观赏石梁飞瀑的奇景。
English: After walking twenty miles, passing Shangfangguang, reaching Shiliang, and worshiping Buddha at the Flower Pavilion, there was no time to carefully watch the wonder of Shiliang Flying Waterfall.

古文：下至下方广，仰视石梁飞瀑，忽在天际。
现代文：往下走到下方广，抬头仰望石梁飞瀑，忽然觉得它似乎从天际倾泻下来一样。
English: I walked down to the lower square, looked up at the Shiliang Fei Waterfall, and suddenly felt like it was pouring down from the sky.

古文：闻断桥、珠帘尤胜，僧言饭后行犹及往返，遂由仙筏桥向山后。
现代文：听说断桥、珠帘水是闻名的盛景，僧人说吃过饭再去还来得及往返，于是便从仙筏桥先去山后。
English: Hearing that the broken bridge and pearl curtain of water were famous attractions, the monk said that he could go there after dinner and still have time to go back and forth, so he went from Xianyao Bridge to the back of the mountain.

古文：越一岭，沿涧八九里，水瀑从石门泻下，旋转三曲。
现代文：翻过一座山岭，顺着溪涧走八九里，就见流水形成瀑布从石门飞泻而下，回旋流转，经过三道溪湾。
English: After climbing over a mountain ridge and walking for eight or nine miles along the creek bed, I saw running water form a waterfall cascading down from the stone gate, swirling around and around, passing through the three creek bays.

古文：上层为断桥，两石斜合，水碎迸石间，汇转入潭；中层两石对峙如门，水为门束，势甚怒；下层潭口颇阔，泻处如阈，水从坳中斜下。
现代文：最上面的一层是断桥，有两块巨石倾斜而相结联，溪水迸流于两石之间，浪花飞溅，汇合后流入潭中；中间的那层，两巨石相对峙有如窄门，溪水因为被窄门所约束，流势很汹涌；最下面的一层，潭的出口很宽阔，而溪水倾泻处受到门槛阻隔，只能从低洼的地方斜涌而下。
English: The uppermost layer is a broken bridge, two boulders are inclined and connected, the stream flows between the two stones, the waves splash, and flow into the pool after the confluence; the middle layer, the two boulders stand opposite each other like a narrow gate, the stream is constrained by the narrow gate, the flow is very turbulent; the bottom layer, the exit of the pool is very wide, and the stream is blocked by the threshold, and can only rush down from the low-lying areas.

古文：三级俱高数丈，各级神奇，但循级而下，宛转处为曲所遮，不能一望尽收，又里许，为珠帘水，水倾下处甚平阔，其势散缓，滔滔汩汩。
现代文：三级瀑布都高达数丈，各级的景观都很神奇，但溪流顺台级而下流，弯转的地方被溪湾所遮掩，不能一览无余。又一里多路，就是珠帘水，溪水倾泻而下的地方很平坦宽阔，水的流势也因此缓和、散漫，汩汩流水满溢潭中。
English: The three-level waterfalls are all several meters high, and the landscape at all levels is amazing, but the stream flows down the steps, and the place where it turns is covered by the creek, so you can't see it all. Another mile-long road is the pearl curtain water, and the place where the stream water pours down is very flat and wide, so the water flow is moderate and diffuse, and the trickling water is full of overflowing pools.

古文：余赤足跳草莽中，揉木缘崖意指攀住树枝爬上高岩，莲舟不能从。
现代文：我光着脚跳进草莽之中，攀援树木，沿着山崖前行，弄得莲舟上人不能跟随。
English: I jumped barefoot into the weeds, climbed trees, and walked along the cliffs, making it impossible for the people on the boat to follow.

古文：暝色夜色四下，始返。
现代文：夜色四处降下时，我们才返回。
English: We didn't get back until night was falling everywhere.

古文：停足仙筏桥，观石梁卧虹，飞瀑喷雪，几不欲卧。
现代文：在仙筏桥上停下脚步，在朦胧的夜色中观赏如彩虹的天然石桥，瀑布水花飞溅有如喷雪一样的奇妙景观，这绝妙景致让人无心入睡。
English: Stopping on the Xianyao Bridge, watching the natural stone bridge like a rainbow in the hazy night, and the waterfall splashing water like a snow spray, is a wonderful landscape. This wonderful view makes people fall asleep.

古文：初四日天山一碧如黛。
现代文：初四这天碧蓝的天空万里无云，广裹的群山一片墨绿。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the blue sky is cloudless, and the vast mountains are dark green.

古文：不暇晨餐，即循仙筏上昙花亭，石梁即在亭外。
现代文：顾不上吃早餐，就沿着仙筏桥登上昙花亭，石桥即在昙花亭外。
English: Even if you can't eat breakfast, you can walk along the Xianyu Bridge to the Flower Pavilion. The stone bridge is just outside the Flower Pavilion.

古文：梁阔尺余，长三丈，架两山坳间。
现代文：石桥宽一尺多，长达三丈，架在两山坳之间。
English: The stone bridge is more than a foot wide and three stories long, standing between two mountains.

古文：两飞瀑从亭左来，至桥乃合以下坠，雷轰河隤，下瞰深潭，毛骨俱悚。
现代文：两般飞瀑从亭左边流来，至桥边汇合成一股急流向下飞坠，形成瀑布，响声有如雷声轰鸣，如河堤坍塌，瀑布高达百丈以上。
English: The two waterfalls flow from the left side of the pavilion, and when they come to the edge of the bridge, they combine to form a jet stream that flies down to form a waterfall. The sound is like thunder, like a river dike collapsing, and the waterfall is more than 100 meters high.

古文：梁尽，即为大石所隔，不能达前山，乃还。
现代文：我从石桥上走过去，向下俯视深潭，不禁毛骨惊然。走过石桥，就被前面的大石所阻隔，不能由此去前山，于是返回原路走。
English: I walked over from the stone bridge and looked down into the deep pool, and I couldn't help but be shocked. After walking over the stone bridge, I was blocked by the large stones in front of me, and I couldn't go to Qianshan from there, so I returned to the original path.

古文：过昙花，入上方广寺。
现代文：经过昙花亭，进入上方广寺。
English: After passing through Shibata-tei, enter Kamigakuko-ji Temple.

古文：循寺前溪，复至隔山大石上，坐观石梁。
现代文：顺着寺前的溪水，再爬上阻隔前山的大石上面，坐下来观赏石桥。
English: Walk along the stream in front of the temple, then climb to the top of the large stone that blocks the front of the mountain, sit down and watch the stone bridge.

古文：为下寺僧促饭，乃去。
现代文：因为下方广寺的僧人摧促去用饭，于是起身离开。
English: Because the monks of the lower Fangguang Temple urged him to go to dinner, he got up and left.

古文：饭后，十五里，抵万年寺，登藏经阁。
现代文：吃过饭后，走十五里路，抵达万年寺，登上藏经阁。
English: After eating, walk fifteen miles, arrive at the Temple of Ten Thousand Years, and board the Zangjing Pavilion.

古文：阁两重，有南北经两藏。
现代文：阁有两层，存有南北佛经两藏。
English: The pavilion is two-storied, with two collections of Buddhist scriptures from the north and south.

古文：寺前后多古杉，悉三人围，鹤巢于上，传声嘹呖声音响亮而清远，亦山中一清响也。
现代文：万年寺寺前寺后有很多古老的杉树，都是三人围的粗千，鹤群在树上筑巢，传来的鹤鸣声响亮而清远，也是深山中的一种清雅的响声。
English: There are a lot of ancient cedar trees in front of and behind the temple of the Temple of the Thousand-Year Temple, all of which are about three people, cranes build nests on the trees, and the cranes' singing is loud and clear, and it is also a kind of elegant sound in the deep mountains.

古文：是日，余欲向桐柏宫，觅琼台、双阙，路多迷津，遂谋向国清。
现代文：这天，我原想去桐柏宫，寻觅琼台、双网胜景，因路途中有许多使人迷惑的错道，于是改变计划去国清寺。
English: On this day, I originally wanted to go to Tongbai Palace to find Qiongdai and Shuangwang Scenic Spot, but there were many confusing wrong paths on the way, so I changed my plan to go to Guoxing Temple.

古文：国清去万年四十里，中过龙王堂。
现代文：国清寺离万年寺有四十里路，途中经过龙王堂。
English: Kokusei-ji Temple is forty li away from Mannen-ji Temple, passing through Ryuo-do Hall on the way.

古文：每下一岭，余谓已在平地，及下数重，势犹未止，始悟华顶之高，去天非远！
现代文：每走下一座山岭，我都以为已走到平地上，等到连接走下好几重山岭，下坡的态势还远没有停止，这才开始领悟到华顶峰之高，似乎离天已经不远了！
English: Every time I walked down a mountain, I thought I had reached the level ground. It wasn't until I connected and walked down several mountains, and the downhill situation was far from stopping, that I began to realize the height of Huading Peak. It seemed to be not far from the sky!

古文：日暮，入国清，与云峰相见，如遇故知，与商探奇次第。
现代文：傍晚时分，才进入国清寺，与云峰和尚相见，就像遇见久别的知心故友，于是和他商量游览探奇的先后顺序。
English: It was late in the evening when I entered Guoxing Temple. Seeing Yunfeng Monk was like meeting a long-lost friend, so I discussed with him the order of the tour.

古文：云峰言： 名胜无如两岩，虽远，可以骑行。
现代文：云峰和尚说： 风景名胜没有比得过寒岩、明岩两处幽险的，虽然路程遥远一些，但可以骑马去。
English: Yunfeng Monk said: "There is no scenic spot that compares to the two dangerous places of Cold Rock and Bright Rock. Although the distance is far, you can go there by horse.

古文：先两岩而后步至桃源，抵桐柏，则翠城、赤城，可一览收矣。 
现代文：先游览寒岩、明岩，然后步行到桃源洞，抵达桐柏宫，那么翠壁、赤城栖霞两处胜景，也可以一览尽收了。 
English: First, visit the Cold Rock and Ming Rock, then walk to the Taoyuan Cave and arrive at Tongbai Palace. Then, the two scenic spots of the Green Wall and Akagi Qixia can also be fully appreciated at a glance.

古文：初五日有雨色，不顾，取寒、明两岩道，由寺向西门觅骑。
现代文：初五这天虽有下雨的迹象，也顾不及了。选择了去寒岩、明岩的道路，由国清寺去西门寻找乘骑。
English: Although there were signs of rain on the day of the fifth day of the first month, it was too late. I chose the road to the rock of cold and the rock of bright, and went to the west gate from Kokusei-ji Temple to look for a ride.

古文：骑至，雨亦至。
现代文：找到马匹时，雨也下来了。
English: It was raining when we found the horses.

古文：五十里至步头，雨止，骑去。
现代文：雨中走完五十里路后到达步头，雨停了，舍弃马步行。
English: After walking 50 miles in the rain, they reached the trailhead, the rain stopped, and they abandoned the horse and walked.

古文：二里，入山，峰索水映，木秀石奇，意甚乐之。
现代文：步行二里路后，进入山中，山峰倒映在潇绕流动的溪水之中，树木秀丽，岩石奇异，心情因此很愉悦。
English: After a two-mile walk, I entered the mountains. The mountain peaks were reflected in the flowing streams. The trees were beautiful and the rocks were strange, which made me feel very happy.

古文：一溪从东阳来，势甚急，大若曹娥。
现代文：一条溪水从东阳流来，水势湍急，流量大小与曹娥江相似。
English: A stream flows from Dongyang, the water is rapid, and the flow rate is similar to that of the Cao E River.

古文：四顾无筏，负奴背而涉。
现代文：四处一看没有竹筏可以渡人，只好由仆人背着涉水过溪。
English: Looking around, there were no bamboo rafts to ferry people across, so the servants had to wade across the stream on their backs.

古文：深过于膝，移渡一涧，几一时。
现代文：溪水深过膝盖，渡过一条溪涧，大约花了一个时辰。
English: The stream was knee-deep, and it took about an hour to cross a creek bed.

古文：三里，至明岩。
现代文：又走三里路，到达明岩。
English: Walk another three miles and you will reach Mingyan Mountain.

古文：明岩为寒山、拾得隐身地，两山回曲，《志》所谓八寸关也。
现代文：明岩是寒山、拾得两位高僧隐居之地，两座山迂回曲折，即《大明一统志》所记述的八寸关。
English: Mingyan is a cold mountain, the place where two high monks lived in seclusion. The two mountains are twists and turns, that is, the eight-inch pass described in the "Daming Book of Records."

古文：入关，则四周峭壁如城。
现代文：进入八寸关，四周的石壁陡峭得像城墙一样。
English: Entering the eight-inch pass, the surrounding stone walls are as steep as city walls.

古文：最后，洞深数丈，广容数百人。
现代文：最后面有一个山洞，深有数丈，宽处能容纳数百人。
English: At the end, there is a cave, several meters deep and wide enough to accommodate hundreds of people.

古文：洞外，左有两岩，皆在半壁；右有石笋突耸，上齐石壁，相去一线，青松紫蕊，翁苁于上，恰与左岩相对，可称奇绝。
现代文：山洞外面，左边有两座石岩，都悬在半壁间；右边有石笋高耸，石笋顶端与石壁相齐，两者只有一线之隔。石笋顶上青松和紫色的花蕊生长茂盛，恰好与左边的两座石岩相对峙，真可谓奇绝的景致了。
English: Outside the cave, on the left, there are two stone rocks, both hanging halfway between the walls; on the right, there is a towering stalagmite, the top of the stalagmite is aligned with the stone wall, and the two are only separated by a line. On the top of the stalagmite, green pines and purple flower buds grow luxuriantly, just opposite the two stone rocks on the left. It is truly an amazing landscape.

古文：出八寸关，复上一岩，亦左向。
现代文：走出八寸关，再登上一座石岩，也是方向朝左。
English: Go out of Hassun Pass, and then climb up a stone rock, also facing left.

古文：来时仰望如一隙，及登其上，明敞容数百人。
现代文：来的时候，仰望就像相隔一线缝隙，待攀登到石岩顶上，才看清它很宽敞，可以容纳数百人。
English: When you arrive, you look up as if there is a gap between you. It is only when you climb to the top of the stone rock that you see that it is very spacious and can accommodate hundreds of people.

古文：岩中一井。曰仙人井，浅而不可竭。
现代文：石岩中间有一口井，叫仙人井，水很浅但是从不枯竭。
English: There is a well in the middle of the stone, called the Fairy Well. The water is very shallow, but it never runs out.

古文：岩外一特石，高数丈，上岐立如两人，僧指为寒山、拾得云。
现代文：石岩外还矗立着一块奇特的石头，有数丈之高，上部分开成两部分，就像两个站立的人，当地和尚称之为寒山、拾得的化身。
English: Outside the rock, there still stands a strange stone, several meters high, with the upper part split into two parts, like two standing people. The local monk calls it the Cold Mountain, the incarnation of Gupta.

古文：入寺。
现代文：回到寺里。
English: Back to the temple.

古文：饭后云阴溃散，新月在天，人在回岩顶上，对之清光溢壁。
现代文：晚饭后阴云散尽，一弯新月挂在碧空，人站立回崖顶上，对着满天月色，只见岩壁上洒满了明亮皎洁的月光。
English: After dinner, the overcast clouds dispersed, a crescent moon hung in the blue sky, and people stood back on the cliff top, facing the full moon, only to see the rock walls sprinkled with bright and clear moonlight.

古文：初六日凌晨出寺，六七里至寒岩。
现代文：初六这天凌晨从寺里出发，走六七里路后到达寒岩。
English: On the morning of the 6th day of the 6th month, I set out from the temple and walked 67 miles to reach the rock.

古文：石壁直上如劈，仰视空中，洞穴甚多。
现代文：石壁笔直向上有如刀劈一般，抬头仰望空中，有很多洞穴。
English: The stone wall is straight up like a knife, looking up at the sky, there are many caves.

古文：岩半有一洞，阔八十步，深百余步，平展明朗。
现代文：岩壁半中腰有一洞穴，宽大约八十步，深大约一百余步，洞内平坦而明亮。
English: Halfway down the rock wall there is a cave, about eighty paces wide and more than a hundred paces deep. The cave is flat and bright.

古文：循岩石行，从石隘仰登。
现代文：顺着石岩往右走，从岩石的狭窄小道向上攀登。
English: Follow the crags to the right and climb up a narrow path through the rocks.

古文：岩坳有两石对耸，下分上连，为鹊桥，亦可与方广石梁争奇，但少飞瀑直下耳。
现代文：山岩的低洼处有两块岩石相对耸立，下部分开而上部相连，即是所谓的 鹊桥 ，可以与上方广寺的石桥互争奇异，只是少了飞泄的瀑布。
English: At the low point of the mountain rock, two rocks stand opposite each other, the lower part is separated and the upper part is connected, that is, the so-called Dragon Bridge, which can compete with the stone bridge of Shangfanguang Temple, but it lacks the waterfall.

古文：还饭僧舍，觅筏渡一溪。
现代文：返回僧人的住处用饭，然后找到竹筏渡过一溪流，顺着溪流行至山下。
English: Return to the monk's residence for dinner, then find a bamboo raft to cross a stream and follow the stream to the bottom of the mountain.

古文：循溪行山下，一带峭壁巉崖，草木盘垂其上，内多海棠紫荆，映荫溪色，香风来处，玉兰芳草，处处不绝。
现代文：这一带都是峭壁嵘崖，荒草盘结、树枝下垂，有很多海棠树、紫荆藤，浓荫倒映溪中，更添美景。香风飘来的地方，玉兰花、芬芳的香草，处处都有，没有穷尽。
English: This area is full of cliffs and cliffs, tangled weeds, and drooping branches. There are many begonia trees and purple wisteria, and the deep shade reflects in the stream, adding to the beauty. Where the fragrance comes from, magnolia flowers and fragrant herbs are everywhere, and there is no end to them.

古文：已至一山嘴，石壁直竖涧底，涧深流驶，旁无余地。
现代文：已走到一山嘴处，岩壁笔直插到涧底，涧水深而湍急，四旁没有可行走的多余地方。
English: I have walked to the mouth of a mountain, the rock wall pen is stuck straight to the bottom of the raft, the water is deep and rushing, and there is no feasible place to walk around.

古文：壁上凿孔以行，孔中仅容半趾脚，逼身而过，神魄为动，自寒岩十五里至步头，从小路向桃源。
现代文：岩壁上凿有石孔用来通行，石孔仅仅能容下半只脚，身体贴近岩壁而过，使人惊心动魄。从寒岩走出十五里路到达步头，从小路再去桃源洞。
English: There are stone holes on the rock wall to pass through. The stone hole can only accommodate half a foot, and the body passes close to the rock wall, which is thrilling. From the cold rock, walk fifteen miles to reach the step, and then go to Taoyuan Cave from the path.

古文：桃源在护国寺旁，寺已废，土人茫无知者。
现代文：桃源洞在护国寺旁边，而护国寺的庙宇已成废墟，问当地人都很茫然，没有人知道。
English: Taoyuan Cave is next to the National Guard Temple, and the temple of the National Guard Temple has fallen into ruins. When asked, the locals are at a loss, no one knows.

古文：随云峰莽行曲路中，日已堕，竟无宿处，乃复问至坪头潭。
现代文：跟随云峰和尚在草木丛生的弯弯曲曲的山路上行走，太阳已经落山，竟还找不到住宿的地方，于是再问路，终于到达坪头潭。
English: Following Yunfeng Monk on the winding mountain road full of vegetation, the sun had set, but they still couldn't find a place to stay, so they asked for directions again and finally arrived at Pingtou Lake.

古文：潭去步头仅二十里，今从小路，返迂回三十余里。宿。
现代文：从坪头潭到步头仅有二十里路，现在从小路走，反而迂回三十多里，才得以住宿下来。
English: It's only a twenty-mile walk from Pontoon Lake to Butou. Now, instead of taking the back roads, I have to make a detour of more than thirty miles to be able to stay there.

古文：信桃源误人也。
现代文：确实是桃源洞误人了。
English: It was indeed Taoyuan Cave.

古文：初七日自坪头潭行曲路中三十余里，渡溪入山。
现代文：初七这天从坪头潭开始，在弯弯曲曲的山路中行走三十多里路，渡过溪水进入五台山。
English: On the seventh day of the seventh day of the seventh month, I started from Pingtou Lake, walked more than 30 miles on the winding mountain road, crossed the stream and entered Mount Wutai.

古文：又四五里山口渐夹狭窄，有馆曰桃花坞。
现代文：又前行四五里，山口渐渐狭窄，有一处房舍，叫 桃花坞 。
English: Another four or five miles ahead, the mountain pass gradually narrows, there is a house, called the peach dock.

古文：循深潭而行，潭水澄碧，飞泉自上来注，为鸣玉涧。
现代文：顺着深潭边前行，潭中的水清澈、碧蓝，飞溅的山泉水从上注入潭中，叫作鸣玉涧。
English: Walking along the edge of the deep pool, the water in the pool is clear and blue, and the splashing mountain spring water is injected into the pool from above, which is called the ringing jade dragonfly.

古文：涧随山转，人随涧行。
现代文：涧水顺着山流转，人则顺着涧水边走。
English: Surabaya water flows along the mountain, and people walk along the edge of the water.

古文：两旁山皆石骨，攒簇拥峦夹翠，涉目成赏，大抵胜在寒、明两岩间。
现代文：涧两旁的山都是裸露的岩石，攒簇的山峦到处夹杂着翠绿的树木，凡是眼睛看到的都是可观赏的景致，景致的优美大体上都在寒岩、明岩这两岩之间。
English: The mountains on both sides of the ridge are bare rock, and the clustered ridges are interspersed with emerald green trees everywhere. Everything the eye sees is a view that can be enjoyed. The beauty of the landscape is generally between the two rocks of cold rock and bright rock.

古文：涧穷路绝，一瀑从山坳泻下，势甚纵横。
现代文：涧水穷尽处，路也就消失了。一条瀑布从山坳间倾泻而下，态势非常奔放。
English: At the point where the water runs out, the road disappears. A waterfall cascades down from between the mountains, the situation is very unrestrained.

古文：出饭馆中，循坞山洼东南行，越两岭，寻所谓 琼台 、 双阙 ，竟无知者。
现代文：饭后，从桃花坞出来，顺着山洼向东南方走，翻越两座山岭，去寻觅所说的 琼台 、 双网 两处胜景，竟然没有人知道。
English: After dinner, I came out of Taohua Dock, walked along the mountains to the southeast, climbed over two mountains, and went in search of the two scenic spots, Qiongtai and Shuangwang, which no one knew about.

古文：去数里，访知在山顶。
现代文：走出数里路，才访知在山顶上。
English: After a few miles, we reached the top of the mountain.

古文：与云峰循路攀援，始达其巅。
现代文：与云峰和尚顺山路攀援而上，才到达山巅。
English: With Yunfeng Monk climbing up the mountain road, they reached the top of the mountain.

古文：下视峭削环转，一如桃源，而翠壁万丈过之。
现代文：向下俯视那陡峭逼削而环转的山岩，完全就像桃源洞的景致，而布满翠绿树木的万丈岩壁则超过了桃源洞的险峻。
English: Looking down at the steep, forced-cut and circling mountain rock, it is completely like the scenery of Taoyuan Cave, while the towering rock walls full of verdant trees exceed the steepness of Taoyuan Cave.

古文：峰头中断，即为双阙；双阙所夹而环者，即为琼台。
现代文：山峰之顶中间被断隔分开，就是所谓的 双网 ；夹在双网正中间的环形石台，就是琼台。
English: The tops of the peaks are separated by a ridge in the middle, which is the so-called double net; the ring-shaped stone platform sandwiched in the middle of the double net is the Qiong Da.

古文：台三面绝壁，后转即连双阙。
现代文：琼台的三面都是绝壁，后转就与双网相连结。
English: The three sides of Qiong Tai are cliffs, and the back turn is connected to the double net.

古文：余在对阙，日暮不及复登，然胜风景已一日尽矣。
现代文：我已经站在对胭之上，天黑了来不及再爬上琼台。然而，优美的景致已被我一眼全饱览尽了。
English: I was already standing on the opposite bank, and it was too late to climb up Qiongdao when it got dark. However, I had already seen enough of the beautiful scenery at a glance.

古文：遂下山，从赤城后还国清，凡三十里。
现代文：于是下山，从赤城的后面返回国清寺，总计旅程三十里。
English: So I went down the mountain and returned to Kokusei-ji Temple from the back of Akagi, a total journey of thirty miles.

古文：初八日离国清，从山后五里登赤城。
现代文：初八这天离开国清寺，从山后走了五里路然后登上赤城。
English: On the day of the first day of the eighth grade, I left Kokusei-ji Temple, walked five miles from the back of the mountain and then ascended Akagi.

古文：赤城山顶圆壁特起，望之如城，而石色微赤。
现代文：赤城山顶上圆形的岩壁耸起，非常特别，从远处看像一堵城墙，而岩石的颜色微微发红。
English: The rounded rock wall that rises on the top of Mount Akagi is very special. From a distance it looks like a city wall, and the color of the rock is slightly reddish.

古文：岩穴为僧舍凌杂，尽掩天趣。
现代文：岩洞都成了僧舍，被侵扰得非常的杂乱，天然的景趣完全被人为因素掩盖掉了。
English: The caves have all been turned into monks' dwellings, and have been disturbed to such an extent that they have become a mess. The natural beauty has been completely overshadowed by the human factor.

古文：所谓玉京洞、金钱池、洗肠井，俱无甚奇。
现代文：人们所说的玉京洞、金钱池、洗肠井，都没有什么很奇特的地方。
English: There is nothing very special about what people call the Jade King's Cave, the Money Pond, or the Bowel Washing Well.

