古文：初，光武长于民间，颇达情伪，见稼穑艰难，百姓病害，至天下已定，务用安静，解王莽之繁密，还汉世之轻法。
现代文：起初，光武生于民间，非常了解世间的真伪，目睹耕作艰难和百姓的疾患，所以天下平定以后，务求安静，除王莽时期繁杂之法，恢复汉伐的宽大之法。
English: At first, Guangwu was born among the common people. He knew the truth and falsehood of the world very well, and witnessed the hardships of farming and the diseases of the people. Therefore, after the world was pacified, he tried to be quiet, remove the complicated laws of the Wang Rong period, and restore the magnanimous laws of the Han Dynasty.

古文：身衣大练，色无重采，耳不听郑、卫之音，手不持珠玉之玩，宫房无私爱，左右无偏恩。
现代文：噬身穿粗陋的衣服，衣服没有第二种颜色。光武耳不听靡靡之音，手不拿珠玉一类的器玩，后宫裹没有偏爱，近臣没有两样的待遇。
English: They wear coarse clothes, and their clothes do not have a second color. They do not listen to the whispers, they do not play with jewel-like objects, there is no preference for harem wrapping, and there is no different treatment for close retainers.

古文：建武十三年，异国有献名马者，日行千里，又进宝剑，贾兼百金，诏以马驾鼓车，剑赐骑士。
现代文：建武十三年，外国献来名马，一日跑千里，又进献宝剑，其价值可抵得上百斤黄金。诏命以马驾拉鼓的车，将宝剑赐给骑士。
English: In the 13th year of the Jianwu era, a foreign country presented a famous horse, which ran a thousand miles a day, and a sword, whose value could be worth a hundred pounds of gold. The emperor ordered a horse-drawn carriage to give the sword to the knight.

古文：损上林池籞之官，废骋望弋猎之事。
现代文：又裁减上拯禁苑的官员，废除游览打猎之类的事情。
English: They also reduced the number of officials at the Shangzhuang Forbidden City, and abolished things like hunting tours.

古文：其以手迹赐方国者，皆一札十行，细书成文。
现代文：皇帝赐给地方和诸侯国的手书，全部一简十行，用小字。
English: The Emperor's handwritten letters to the provinces and principalities were all a simple ten lines, using small characters.

古文：勤约之风，行于上下。
现代文：勤俭节约的风气，盛行于朝廷上下。
English: An ethos of thrift and economy prevailed throughout the imperial court.

古文：数引公卿郎将，列于禁坐。
现代文：皇帝多次让公卿大臣和左右郎将，坐在御座上。
English: The emperor many times had nobles, ministers and courtiers sit on the throne.

古文：广求民瘼，观纳风谣。
现代文：广泛访求百姓疾苦，采集民谣。
English: He made extensive visits to inquire about the hardships of the people and collected folk songs.

古文：故能内外匪懈，百姓宽息。
现代文：所以朝廷内外谁也不敢懈怠，百姓得到了休息。
English: Therefore, no one inside or outside the imperial court dared to slack off, and the common people were able to rest.

古文：自临宰邦邑者，竞能其官。
现代文：地方长官，竞相努力。
English: District commissioners, let's work hard.

古文：若杜诗守南阳，号为 杜母 ，任延、锡光移变边俗，斯其绩用之最章章者也。
现代文：像杜诗任南阳太守，被称为 杜母 ，任延、锡光改变边境地区的习俗，这些是其中政绩最为显着的人。
English: Like Du Shiren Nanyang Dazhu, known as Du Ma, Ren Yan, and Xiguang, who changed the customs of the border areas, these are the most notable political achievements.

古文：又第五伦、宋均之徒，亦足有可称谈。
现代文：又有第五伦、宋均等人，也有许多值得称道的地方。
English: There are also the Fifth Lun, Song Jun and others, and there are also many commendable places.

古文：然建武、永平之间，吏事刻深，亟以谣言单辞，转易守长。
现代文：然而在建武、永平年间，政事过于严峻苛细，多次凭传闻和一面之辞，就撤换地方长官。
English: However, during the Jianwu and Yongping dynasties, political affairs were too severe and demanding, and local governors were replaced many times on the basis of rumors and one-sided remarks.

古文：故朱浮数上谏书，箴切峻政，钟离意等亦规讽殷勤，以长者为言，而不能得也。
现代文：所以朱浮多次上书就提出一针见血的意见，钟整童等人也反复规谏，他们以忠诚宽厚的长者身份说话，但不被采纳。
English: Therefore, Zhu Fu repeatedly submitted a letter to put forward a pin-pointed opinion, and Zhong Zhengdong and others also repeatedly criticized it. They spoke as loyal and generous elders, but they were not adopted.

古文：所以中兴之美，盖未尽焉。
现代文：所以中兴时期的美盛，也还有不足之处。
English: Therefore, the prosperity of the ZTE period also has its shortcomings.

古文：自章、和以后，其有善绩者，往往不绝。
现代文：自章帝、和帝以后，一些突出政绩的官员，不断出现。
English: Since Emperor Zhang and Emperor He, there have been a number of officials with outstanding political achievements.

古文：如鲁恭、吴祐、刘宽及颍川四长，并以仁信笃诚，使人不欺；王堂、陈宠委任贤良，而职事自理：斯皆可以感物而行化也。
现代文：如鲁恭、吴佑、刘宽和题川的四位县长，都是以仁爱信义忠厚诚实而使人们不相欺诈；王堂、陈宠任用有德有才的人而政事自然得到治理：这些都能够使万物受到感动而教化得以推行。
English: For example, the four prefectural governors of Lukong, Wuyou, LiuKuan, and Tiechuan were all benevolent, faithful, loyal, and honest, so that people would not cheat each other; WangTang and ChenChu appointed virtuous and talented people, and the government affairs were naturally governed: all of these can make all things be moved and enlightenment be promoted.

古文：边凤、延笃先后为京兆尹，时人以辈前世赵、张。
现代文：边凤、延笃相继担任京兆尹，人们将他们比作赵广漠和张敞。
English: Bianfeng and Yan Du successively served as Jing Zhaoyun, and people likened them to Zhao Guangmo and Zhang Zhang.

古文：又王涣、任峻之为洛阳令，明发奸伏，吏端禁止，然导德齐礼，有所未充，亦一时之良能也。
现代文：另外，王涣、任峻担任洛阳令，公开惩办坏人坏事，吏治有所好转，所要禁的自然禁止了，虽然在道德和礼仪方面，有不够完备的地方，但也不失为当时的好官。
English: In addition, Wang Qian and Ren Jun served as Luoyang commanders, publicly punishing bad people and bad things, and the administration of officials was improved. The prohibition was naturally prohibited. Although there were some incomplete areas in terms of morality and etiquette, they were also good officials at that time.

古文：今缀集殊闻显迹，以为《循吏篇》云。
现代文：现在将显著业绩的良吏汇集到一起，作为《循吏篇》。
English: Now, the good officials with outstanding performance have been brought together as the "follow-up officials."

古文：卫飒字子产，河内脩武人也。
现代文：◆卫飒传，卫飒，字子产，河内脩武人。
English: ◆The legend of Wei Xuan, Wei Xuan, the birth of characters, the story of the warriors in Hanoi.

古文：家贫好学问，随师无粮，常佣以自给。
现代文：卫飒家境贫寒但喜欢学问，他跟着老师学习而没有粮食，经常靠做工来维持生存。
English: Wei Wei's family was poor, but he loved learning. He studied with his teacher, but had no food, and often had to work to survive.

古文：王莽时，仕郡历州宰。
现代文：王莽时，做遇州刺史。
English: When Wang Mang, do meet state stabbing history.

古文：建武二年，辟大司徒邓禹府。
现代文：建武二年，他到大司徒邓禹府中任职。
English: In the second year of Jianwu, he took up a post at Deng Yu Middle School.

古文：举能案剧，除侍御史，襄城令。
现代文：以举荐贤才处理繁重公务而被任侍御史、襄城令。
English: He was recommended as a talented person to deal with heavy official duties and was appointed as an attendant to the governor and the governor of Xiangcheng.

古文：政有名迹，迁桂阳太守。
现代文：他治政有声誉和政绩，升为桂阳太守。
English: He had a reputation and achievements in governance, and was promoted to the governor of Guiyang.

古文：郡与交州接境，颇染其俗，不知礼则。
现代文：桂阳与交州交界，受交州影响很大，百姓不懂得礼法。
English: Guiyang is on the border with Jiaozhou and is greatly influenced by Jiaozhou. The people do not know the etiquette.

古文：飒下车，修庠序之教，设婚姻之礼。
现代文：卫飒上任以后，兴建学校，整治教化，制定婚姻的礼规。
English: After Wei Wei took office, he built schools, rectified education, and formulated the etiquette of marriage.

古文：期年间，邦俗从化。
现代文：一年时间，风气大变。
English: In a year's time, the culture has changed dramatically.

古文：先是，含洭、浈阳，曲江三县，越之故地，武帝平之，内属桂阳。
现代文：原先含沤、演阳、曲江三县属于越地，武帝平定越地后，才收归桂阳。
English: Originally, the three counties including Handan, Yenyang and Qujiang belonged to Yueji. After Emperor Wu conquered Yueji, it was returned to Guiyang.

古文：民居深山，滨溪谷，习其风土，不出田租。
现代文：百姓住在深山，靠着溪水，沿袭过去的风俗习惯，不交田租。
English: The people live deep in the mountains, by streams, follow the customs and habits of the past, and do not pay land rent.

古文：去郡远者，或且千里。
现代文：离郡远的地方，有的将近千里。
English: Some are nearly a thousand miles away from the county.

古文：吏事往来，辄发民乘船，名曰 传役 。
现代文：官吏往来办事，总是调发百姓驾船接送，称之为 传役 。
English: When government officials come and go, they always send the common people to drive the boat to pick them up, which is called "passing the torch."

古文：每一吏出，徭及数家，百姓苦之。
现代文：每一位官吏外出，徭役摊派到好几家，百姓为其所苦。
English: Every government official goes out, and the people suffer because of it.

古文：飒乃凿山通道五百余里，列亭传，置邮驿。
现代文：卫飒于是凿通五百多里的山道，修驿站，设邮馆。
English: Wei Wei then chiseled more than five hundred miles of mountain road, repaired the post station, and set up a post office.

古文：于是役省劳息，奸吏杜绝。
现代文：这样减少了劳役，也杜绝了官吏的奸猾。
English: In this way, labor service was reduced, and the treachery of officials was eliminated.

古文：流民稍还，渐成聚邑，使输租赋，同之平民。
现代文：外流的百姓慢慢回来，渐渐聚成乡镇，这才要他们像平民一样交纳赋税。
English: The exiled people are slowly returning and gradually gathering into townships, which is why they are required to pay taxes like civilians.

古文：又耒阳县出铁石，佗郡民庶常依因聚会，私为冶铸，遂招来亡命，多致奸盗。
现代文：另外，耒阳县出产铁矿石，其他郡的百姓经常聚在一起，私下炼铁，结果招来亡命之徒，导致很多奸盗的事情。
English: In addition, Poyang County is the largest producer of iron ore, and people from other counties often get together to smelt iron in private. As a result, desperadoes are attracted, leading to many cases of theft.

古文：飒乃上起铁官，罢斥私铸，岁所增入五百余万。
现代文：卫飒于是上书请设立负责铸铁的官员，不允许私人铸铁，每年增加的收入达五百多万。
English: Wei Wei then wrote to request the establishment of an official responsible for cast iron, not allowing private cast iron, with an annual increase in income of more than five million.

古文：飒理恤民事，居官如家，其所施政，莫不合于物宜。
现代文：卫飒善于处理民事，体恤民情。他做官好比治理自己家一样，他所施行的政策，无一不合乎事理。
English: Wei Xuan is good at handling civil affairs and sympathizes with the people's feelings. He is like governing his own family when he is an official, and none of the policies he implements are unreasonable.

古文：视事十年，郡内清理。
现代文：他任职十年，郡治太平。
English: He has been in office for ten years, and the county is peaceful.

古文：二十五年，征还。
现代文：二十五年，卫飒被朝廷征还。
English: Twenty-five years later, the Imperial Guard was conscripted back.

古文：光武欲以为少府，会飒被疾，不能拜起，敕以桂阳太守归家，须后诏书。
现代文：光武想任命他为少府，正赶上他生病，没法授职管事，光武命他以桂阳太守身份回家休养，等候韶书。
English: Guangwu wanted to appoint him as a young prefect, but just as he was about to be appointed, he fell ill and was unable to confer the post of steward. Guangwu ordered him to go home to recuperate as the dean of Guiyang and wait for the imperial edict.

古文：居二岁，载病诣阙，自陈困笃，乃收印绶，赐钱十万，后卒于家。
现代文：过了两年，卫飒带病到朝廷，说自己病重，皇帝逭才收回他的印绶，赐给他十万钱。后来他在家中去世。
English: Two years later, Wei Xuan brought his illness to the imperial court, saying that he was seriously ill. Only then did the emperor take back his seal and give him 100,000 yuan. He later died at home.

古文：南阳茨充代飒为桂阳。
现代文：直厘茎直接替挝担任拄屋太守，他也擅长治理。
English: Zhi Li Zhi directly replaced Lao as the governor of the imperial villa, and he was also good at governance.

古文：亦善其政，教民种殖桑柘麻之属，劝令养蚕织履，民得利益焉。
现代文：他教导百姓种植桑柘麻纡之类的东西，鼓励百姓养蚕织鞋，百姓得到不少益处。
English: He taught the people to grow things such as mulberry, nettle and papyrus, and encouraged the people to raise silkworms to weave shoes. The people gained a lot of benefits.

古文：任延字长孙，南阳宛人也。
现代文：◆任延传，任延，字长孙，南阳宛县人。
English: ◆Ren Yan Chuan, Ren Yan, the great-great-grandson, was born in Nanyang County.

古文：年十二，为诸生，学于长安，明《诗》、《易》、《春秋》，显名太学，学中号为 任圣童 。
现代文：十二岁时，他就成了太学的学生，在长安学习。他通晓《诗致、《易经》和《春秋》，在太学中有名气，在学府中被称为 任圣童 。
English: At the age of twelve, he became a student of Taixue, studying in Chang'an. He was familiar with "Poetry," "I Ching" and "Spring and Autumn." He was famous in Taixue and was known as "Ren Sheng Tong" in the school.

古文：值仓卒，避兵之陇西。
现代文：赶上兵荒马乱，他到陇西避难。
English: Caught up in the chaos of war, he took refuge in Shaanxi.

古文：时隗嚣已据四郡，遣使请延，延不应。
现代文：当时隗嚣已经占领陇西四郡，派人去请任延，任延置之不理。
English: At that time, Yan Hanran had already occupied four counties in Shaanxi Province, and sent people to ask Ren Yan to postpone the appointment, but Ren Yan ignored it.

古文：更始元年，以延为大司马属，拜会稽都尉。
现代文：更始元年，任命任延为大司马部属，授予他会稽都尉一职。
English: In the first year of the new era, Ren Yan was appointed as the subordinate of the Chief Secretary Ma, and he was awarded the post of inspector.

古文：时年十九，迎官惊其壮。
现代文：当时他十九岁，来接他的官员见他年轻很吃惊。
English: He was 19 at the time, and the official who picked him up was surprised to see how young he was.

古文：及到，静泊无为，唯先遣馈礼祠延陵季子。
现代文：他到郡以后，恬淡无为，衹是先派人拿了祭品去祭祀延陵季札。
English: After he arrived in the county, he did not do anything. Instead, he first sent someone to take the offerings and offer them to Yanling Ji-Fat.

古文：时，天下新定，道路未通，避乱江南者皆未还中土，会稽颇称多士。
现代文：当时天下刚刚平定，道路不通，来江南避难的人都没有回中原，所以会稽一带有才能的人很多。
English: At that time, the country had just been pacified, the roads were impassable, and the people who came to the south of the Yangtze River to take refuge did not return to the Central Plains, so there were many talented people.

古文：延到，皆聘请高行如董子仪、严子陵等，敬待以师友之礼。
现代文：任延上任以后，对品行高洁之士像董子仪、严子陵等人一概聘请，并以师友之礼相待。
English: After Ren Yan took office, he hired people of high moral character such as Dong Zi Yi and Yan Zi Ling, and treated them with the courtesy of teachers and friends.

古文：掾吏贫者，辄分奉禄以赈给之。
现代文：部属有贫难，他总是分出自己的俸禄救济他们。
English: When his subordinates were in need, he always gave out his salary to help them.

古文：省诸卒，令耕公田，以周穷急。
现代文：他裁减士兵，要他们耕种公家的田地，以便周济穷困之人。
English: He reduced the number of soldiers and asked them to cultivate public land in order to help the poor.

古文：每时行县，辄使慰勉孝子，就餐饭之。
现代文：他每次到各县巡行，总是派人慰问孝子，并招待他们吃饭。
English: Every time he went on a tour of the counties, he always sent someone to console the filial sons and invite them to dinner.

古文：吴有龙丘苌者，隐居太末，志不降辱。
现代文：吴地有个叫龙丘苌的人，在太末隐居，立志不变。
English: In Wu, there was a man named Longqiu Yao, who lived in seclusion at the end of his life, determined to remain unchanged.

古文：王莽时，四辅三公连辟，不到。
现代文：王莽时期，四辅和三公连续召他做官，他都不去。
English: During Wang Mang's time, the Four Assistants and the Three Princes continuously called him to be an official, but he did not go.

古文：掾史白请召之。
现代文：掾史禀告任延，请求将他召来。
English: Zou Shixi reported to Ren Ren and requested that he be summoned.

古文：延曰： 龙丘先生躬德履义，有原宪、伯夷之节。
现代文：任延说： 龙丘先生躬行德义，具有原宪、伯夷的节操。
English: Ren Yan said: Mr. Longqiu is a virtuous person, and has the original constitution and the integrity of Bo Yi.

古文：都尉埽洒其门，犹惧辱焉，召之不可。 
现代文：我上门洒水扫地，还担心使他受到羞辱，召见他是绝对不可以的。 
English: I went to the door to sprinkle water and sweep the floor, and I also feared that he would be humiliated, and it was absolutely impossible to summon him.

古文：遣功曹奉谒，修书记，致医药，吏使相望于道。
现代文：于是派功曹拿了礼品拜见他，给他写信，送去医药，使者一个接一个。
English: So he sent Gong Cao to visit him with gifts, write to him, and send medicine, one messenger after another.

古文：积一岁，苌乃乘辇诣府门，愿得先死备录。
现代文：一年后，龙丘苌才坐车来到郡府，表示愿意在临死以前在郡供职。
English: A year later, Long Qiuyao took a car to the county government and expressed his willingness to work in the county before his death.

古文：延辞让再三，遂署议曹祭酒。
现代文：任延再三推辞，最后要他暂任议曹祭酒。
English: Ren Yan repeatedly put off his resignation, and finally he was asked to temporarily serve as a councillor.

古文：苌寻病卒，延自临殡，不朝三日。
现代文：龙丘苌不久病逝，任延亲自为他治丧，三天没有处理政务。
English: Long Qiuyao died of illness not long after, Ren Yan personally mourned for him, and did not deal with government affairs for three days.

古文：是以郡中贤士大夫争往宦焉。
现代文：所以郡内有才能的士大夫争着到他这裹任职。
English: That's why talented magistrates in the county are vying to fill his shoes.

古文：建武初，延上书愿乞骸骨，归拜王庭。
现代文：建武初年，任延上书辞职，回去拜见天子。
English: In the first year of Jianwu, Ren Yan submitted his letter of resignation and went back to see Tianzi.

古文：诏征为九真太守。
现代文：诏书召任延，任命他为九真太守。
English: The imperial edict was issued to postpone the appointment, and he was appointed as the 9th Empress Dowager.

古文：光武引见，赐马杂缯，令妻子留洛阳。
现代文：光武召见他，赐给他马匹和各种丝织品，让他的妻子儿女留在洛阳。
English: Guangwu summoned him, gave him horses and all kinds of silk fabrics, and let his wife and children stay in Luoyang.

古文：九真俗以谢猎为业，不知牛耕，民常告籴交阯，每致困乏。
现代文：九真以打猎为业，不知道耕地种粮，老百姓经常到交趾去买粮，往往弄得穷困不足。
English: Jiu Zhen took hunting as his profession, and did not know how to cultivate land and grow grain. The common people often went to Kota to buy grain, which often led to poverty.

古文：延乃令铸作田器，教之垦辟。
现代文：于是任延要他们造农具，教他们垦荒种地。
English: So Ren Yan asked them to make farm tools and taught them how to plough up wasteland.

古文：田畴岁岁开广，百姓充给。
现代文：这样耕地年年增多，百姓自给富足。
English: In this way, the cultivated land increased year by year, and the people became self-sufficient.

古文：又骆越之民无嫁娶礼法，各因淫好，无適对匹，不识父子之性，夫妇之道。
现代文：又骆越的百姓没有婚姻礼法，各自凭着情欲喜好，没有固定的妻子，也不了解父子间的天性和夫妇间的道理。
English: In addition, the people of Luoyang and Yue do not have the marriage etiquette, each of them go by their own sexual preferences, do not have a fixed wife, and do not understand the nature between father and son and the reason between husband and wife.

古文：延乃移书属县，各使男年二十至五十，女年十五至四十，皆以年齿相配。
现代文：任延于是发文书给所属各县，要求男子年龄在二十到五十岁之间，女子年龄在十五到四十之间，都按照年龄大小结合。
English: Ren Yan then issued a document to the counties he belonged to, requiring that men between the ages of twenty and fifty, and women between the ages of fifteen and forty, should be married according to their age.

古文：其贫无礼娉，令长吏以下各省奉禄以赈助之。
现代文：有贫穷而出不起聘礼的，就要长吏以下的官员各自从俸禄中拿出一部分救助他们。
English: If there are poor people who cannot afford to pay the bride price, officials below the rank of prefect should each take out a part of their salary to help them.

古文：同时相娶者二千余人。
现代文：结果同时娶妻的有二千多人。
English: As a result, more than two thousand people got married at the same time.

古文：是岁风雨顺节，谷稼丰衍。
现代文：逭一年，风调雨顺，粮食丰收。
English: It has been a good year, with good weather and a bumper grain harvest.

古文：其产子者，始知种姓。
现代文：这些人生下孩子，才知道宗族姓氏。
English: It was only when they had children that they learned their family names.

古文：咸曰： 使我有是子者，任君也。 
现代文：他们都说： 使我有孩子的，是任君啊！ 
English: They all say: It was Renjun who made me have children!

古文：多名子为 任 。
现代文：许多人给孩子取名为 任 。
English: Many people named their children Ren.

古文：于是徼外蛮夷夜郎等慕义保塞，延遂止罢侦候戍卒。
现代文：于是边境外的蛮夷夜郎等部落仰慕德义，愿意守保边关，因此任延撤掉了侦察候望的人和把守边关的士卒。
English: As a result, the barbarian Yelang and other tribes outside the border admired virtue and were willing to guard the border, so Ren Yan removed the people waiting for reconnaissance and the soldiers guarding the border.

古文：初，平帝时，汉中锡光为交阯太守，教导民夷，渐以礼义，化声侔于延。
现代文：起初，在平帝时候，汉中人锡光担任交阯太守，他引导夷民，慢慢用礼义影响他们。
English: At first, during the time of Emperor Ping, Hanzhong man Xiguang served as the governor of Jiaozuo. He guided the barbarians and gradually influenced them with courtesy.

古文：王莽末，闭境拒守。
现代文：他使蛮夷开化的名声和任延差不多。王莽末年，锡光封锁边境，派兵拒守。
English: His reputation for making barbarians civilized is similar to that of Ren Yan. In the last years of Wang Mang's life, Xi Guang blocked the border and refused to send troops to defend it.

古文：建武初，遣使贡献，封盐水侯。
现代文：建武初年，他派使者进贡，被封为盐水侯。
English: In the first year of the Jianwu era, he sent an envoy to pay tribute, and was named the Saline Marquis.

古文：领南华风，始于二守焉。
现代文：岭南有华夏风气，从这两位太守开始。
English: Lingnan has a Chinese summer atmosphere, starting with these two governors.

古文：延视事四年，征诣洛阳，以病稽留，左转睢阳令，九真吏人生为立祠。
现代文：任延在九真任职四年，皇帝召他去洛阳，由于生病耽搁了行程，被降为睢阳令。九真的官员和百姓在他活着时就为他建了祠堂。
English: Ren Yan served in Jiu Zhen for four years. The emperor summoned him to Luoyang, but he delayed his trip due to illness, and was reduced to the position of the Yang di-Pertuan Agong. The officials and people of Jiu Zhen built an ancestral hall for him when he was alive.

古文：拜武威太守，帝亲见，戒之曰： 善事上官，无失名誉。 
现代文：到京后他被任命为武威太守。皇帝亲自召见他，告诫他说： 好好侍奉上级，不要坏了名声。 
English: After he arrived in Beijing, he was appointed the military governor. The emperor personally summoned him and admonished him: "Serve your superiors well and don't ruin your reputation."

古文：延对曰： 臣闻忠臣不私，私臣不忠。
现代文：任延回答说： 臣听说忠臣无私，有私则不忠。
English: Ren Yan replied, "I have heard that a loyal subject is selfless, while a selfish one is disloyal.

古文：履正奉公，臣子之节。
现代文：一心为国，这是臣子的本分。
English: It is the duty of a vassal to be devoted to the country.

古文：上下雷同，非陛下之福。
现代文：上下雷同，不是陛下的福气。
English: It is not His Majesty's good fortune that we are all alike.

古文：善事上官，臣不敢奉诏。 
现代文：好好侍奉上级官员，臣不敢接受您的指示。 
English: Serve your superiors well. Your vassals dare not take orders from you.

古文：帝叹息曰： 卿言是也。 
现代文：皇帝叹息，说： 您说得对。 
English: The emperor sighed and said, "You are right.

古文：既之武威，时将兵长史田绀，郡之大姓，其子弟宾客为人暴害。延收绀系之，父子宾客伏法者五六人。
现代文：到了武威以后，当时统率军队的长史田绀是郡内的望族，他的子侄及宾客为害百姓，任延将田绀拘捕，他父子和宾客有五六人被处死。
English: After arriving in Wuwei, the then commander-in-chief of the army, Tian Xuan, was a respected family in the county. His nephew and guests harmed the people. Ren Yan arrested Tian Xuan, and five or six of his father, son and guests were executed.

古文：绀少子尚乃聚会轻薄数百人，自号将军，夜来攻郡。
现代文：田钳的小儿子田尚于是聚集了几百放荡轻薄的人，自称将军，夜间攻打郡府。
English: Tian Yao's youngest son, Tian Shang, then gathered several hundred dissolute and frivolous people, calling himself a general, and attacked the county seat at night.

古文：延即发兵破之。
现代文：任延随即发兵打败了田尚。
English: Ren Yan immediately sent troops to defeat Tian Shang.

古文：自是威行境内，吏民累息。
现代文：自此，他的威信大震，官吏和百姓都小心翼翼。
English: Since then, his prestige has been shaken, and officials and ordinary people have been wary of him.

古文：郡北当匈奴，南接种羌，民畏寇抄，多废田业。
现代文：武威北对匈奴，南接羌人，老百姓害怕匈奴和羌人的入侵和抄掠，许多人荒废了耕种。
English: The north fought against the Huns and the south against the Mongols. The common people were afraid of the invasion and plundering of the Huns and Mongols, and many people abandoned farming.

古文：延到，选集武略之士千人，明其赏罚，令将杂种胡骑休屠黄石屯据要害，其有警急，逆击追讨。
现代文：任延到后，挑选了一千懂得用兵的人，申明赏罚，要他们率领种族庞杂的胡人休屠黄石的骑兵占据要害地方，一旦有紧急情况，就可以迎战和追击敌人。
English: After Ren Yan arrived, he selected a thousand people who knew how to use soldiers, affirmed rewards and punishments, and asked them to lead the racially diverse Hu people to occupy the key places, and in the event of an emergency, they could fight and chase the enemy.

古文：又造立校官，自掾史子孙，皆令诣学受业，复其徭役。
现代文：每战敌人伤亡必多，自此，不敢再来。河西过去缺雨，任延于是设立主管水利的官员，负责修建水沟渠道，百姓都得到益处。
English: In every war, the enemy must have many casualties, and since then, they dare not come again. In the past, there was a lack of rain in Hexi, so the officials in charge of water conservancy were set up, responsible for the construction of drainage channels, and the people all benefited.

古文：章句既通。悉显拔荣进之。
现代文：他又兴建学校，派官员管理，自掾史以下官员的子孙都让他们到学校接受教育，免去他们的徭役。
English: He also built a school and sent officials to manage it. The children and grandchildren of officials from Zou Shi on down were allowed to go to school to receive an education, freeing them from their duties as attendants.

古文：郡遂有儒雅之士。
现代文：通晓经义的一概任用，使其荣显。
English: The appointment of a general who is familiar with the meaning of the sutra makes it more prominent.

古文：后坐擅诛羌不先上，左转召陵令。
现代文：武威自此有了博学多才的人。后来任延因擅自杀害羌人被降职为召陵令。
English: Since then, Wuwei has produced many learned and talented people. Later, Ren Yan was demoted to the position of the highest-ranking official to be summoned to the mausoleum for committing suicide.

古文：显宗即位，拜颍川太守。
现代文：显宗即位，授予他颖川太守。
English: Emperor Xuanzong ascended to the throne, and he was given the title of Yingchuan governor.

古文：永平二年，征会辟雍，因以为河内太守。
现代文：永平二年，皇帝召他到学校，接着任命他为河内太守。
English: In the second year of Yongping, the emperor summoned him to the school and then appointed him as the governor of Hanoi.

古文：视事九年，病卒。
现代文：任职九年，病逝。
English: He died after nine years in office.

古文：少子恺，官至太常。
现代文：他的小儿子任恺，官做到太常。
English: His youngest son, Ren Zheng, was too young to become an official.

古文：王景字仲通，乐浪讲邯人也。
现代文：◆王景传，王景，字仲通，乐浪讶邯人。
English: ◆ Wang Jing Chuan, Wang Jing, Zha Zhong Tong, Le Lang surprised everyone.

古文：八世祖仲，本琅邪不其人。
现代文：他的八世祖王仲，原是琅邪不其人。
English: His eighth-generation ancestor, Wang Zhong, was originally an evil-doer.

古文：好道术，明天文。
现代文：王仲喜欢道术，懂得天象。
English: Wang Zhong likes Daoism and knows about celestial elephants.

古文：诸吕作乱，齐哀王襄谋发兵，而数问于仲。
现代文：诸吕作乱时，齐哀王刘襄策划发兵，多次向王仲请教。
English: When Zhu Lü made a disturbance, King Liu Xiang planned to send troops and repeatedly asked Wang Zhong for advice.

古文：及济北王兴居反，欲委兵师仲，仲惧祸及，乃浮海东奔乐浪山中，因而家焉。
现代文：济北王刘兴居反叛时，想要他担任军师。王仲害怕遭祸，就乘船束渡大海，逃到乐浪山中，就此在那裹安了家。
English: When Liu Xingju, the king of Northern Jilin, rebelled, he wanted him to serve as his military instructor. Wang Zhong was afraid of disaster, so he took a boat across the sea and fled to the Lelang Mountain, where he made his home.

古文：父闳，为郡三老。
现代文：王景的父亲王闳，做过郡的三老。
English: Wang Jing's father, Wang Yao, once served as the county's third elder.

古文：更始败，土人王调杀郡守刘宪，自称大将军、乐浪太守。
现代文：更始失败后，当地人王调杀了郡守刘宪，自称为大将军、乐浪太守。
English: After the failed reshuffle, the local man Wang transferred and killed the county governor Liu Xian, calling himself the general and the governor of Lelang.

古文：建武六年，光武遣太守王遵将兵击之。
现代文：建武六年，光武派太守王遵率军攻打王调。
English: In the sixth year of Jianwu's reign, the Guangwu faction's grand marshal Wang Zun led an army to attack Wang Zhe.

古文：至辽东，闳与郡决曹史杨邑等共杀调迎遵，皆封为列侯，闳独让爵。
现代文：王遵到辽东，王闳与郡府决曹史杨邑等人一起杀了王调，迎接王遵。天子将他们都封为列侯，惟独王闳辞让官爵。
English: When Wang Zun went to Liaodong, Wang Qian and the county governor Cao Shi Yangyi and others killed Wang Qian together to welcome Wang Zun. Tianzi made them all princes, but only Wang Qian resigned to become a peer.

古文：帝奇而征之，道病座。
现代文：皇帝很感惊奇，召他进京，谁知他在路上病逝了。
English: The emperor was very surprised and called him to Beijing, but he died of illness on the way.

古文：景少学《易》，遂广窥众书，又好天文术数之事，沈深多伎艺。
现代文：王景从小学习《周易》，接着广泛阅读各种书籍，他又喜欢天文数术一类的事，所以性格深沉，擅长的技艺很多。
English: Wang Jing studied "Zhou Yi" as a child, and then read a wide range of books. He also likes things like astronomy and mathematics, so he has a deep personality and is good at many skills.

古文：辟司空伏恭府。
现代文：司空伏恭召他到府中任职。
English: Siku Furuyoshi called him to serve in the prefectural government.

古文：时有荐景能理水者，显宗诏与将作谒者王吴共修作浚仪渠。
现代文：当时有人荐举王景能治水，显宗下韶书要他与将作谒者王吴一道修建浚仪渠。
English: At that time, it was recommended that Wang Jing could control water, and Emperor Xuanzong ordered him to build a dredging channel together with the author of the edict, Wang Wu.

古文：吴用景墕流法，水乃不复为害。
现代文：王吴采用王景提出的低坝挡水的办法，才不再有水害。
English: Wang Wu adopted the low dam water-blocking method proposed by Wang Jing, so that there would be no more water damage.

古文：初，平帝时，河、汴决坏，未及得修。
现代文：起初，在平帝时候，黄河、汴水决口，冲坏河堤，没来得及治理。
English: At first, during the time of Emperor Ping, the Yellow River and the Surabaya River broke through and broke the river dike, and there was no time to manage it.

古文：建武十年，阳武令张汜上言： 河决积久，日月侵毁，济渠所漂数十许县。
现代文：建武十年，阳武令张汜上书说： 黄河决很长时间了，天天为害，济渠淹了几十个县。
English: In the tenth year of the Jianwu era, Yangwu's commander Zhang Xuan wrote: "The Yellow River has been dying for a long time, causing harm every day. Dozens of counties have been flooded by the canal.

古文：修理之费，其功不难。
现代文：花些钱治水，取得成功并不困难。
English: It is not difficult to spend some money on flood control and achieve success.

古文：宜改修堤防，以安百姓。 
现代文：最好改建河堤，使百姓安定。 
English: It is best to rebuild the river levee to stabilize the people.

古文：书奏，光武即为发卒。
现代文：奏章送上去，光武立刻派去士卒。
English: The medal was sent up, and Mitsutake immediately dispatched his soldiers.

古文：方营河功，而逡仪令乐俊复上言： 昔元光之间，人庶炽盛，缘堤垦殖，而瓠子河决，尚二十余年，不即拥塞。
现代文：正筹划治理黄河的事，浚仪令乐俊又上书说： 从前在武帝年间，人口众多，都沿着河堤开垦种植，而瓠子河决口，尚且有二十多年，不会立刻就阻塞的。
English: They were planning to control the Yellow River, and the dredger ordered Lejun to write again, saying: Once upon a time, during the reign of Emperor Wu, there was a large population, and they all cleared and planted along the embankment, but the mouth of the Lizi River, which has existed for more than twenty years, will not be blocked immediately.

古文：今居家稀少，田地饶广，虽未修理，其患犹可。
现代文：现在人口稀少，田地广阔，虽然没有治理，灾患还可以承受。
English: Now the population is sparse, the fields are vast, and although there is no governance, the disaster is still bearable.

古文：且新被兵革，方兴役力，劳怨既多，民不堪命。
现代文：而且又经过战争，现在又兴动劳役，劳苦和怨恨一旦多了，百姓无法承受。
English: Moreover, after the war, labor service is now popular again. Once there is too much labor and resentment, the people can't bear it.

古文：宜须平静，更议其事。 
现代文：最好等稳定的时候，再讨论逭件事。 
English: It's best to wait until things are stable before discussing this matter.

古文：光武得此遂止。
现代文：光武看到这个意见就取消了治水的事。
English: When Mitsutake saw this opinion, he cancelled the flood control.

古文：后汴渠东侵，日月弥广，而水门故处，皆在河中，兗、豫百姓怨叹，以为县官恒兴佗役，不先民急。
现代文：后来汴渠束流，越来越大，而水闸原先所在的地方，都已经到了黄河中间。兖州、豫州的百姓埋怨，认为朝廷经常兴动其他劳役，而不先考虑百姓最急的事情。
English: Later, the diversion of the canal became larger and larger, and the places where the sluices were originally located have reached the middle of the Yellow River. The people of Zhangzhou and Yuzhou complained that the imperial court often engaged other laborers without first considering the most urgent matters of the people.

古文：永平十二年，议修汴渠，乃引见景，问以理水形便。
现代文：永平十二年，天子商议治理汴渠的事，就召见王景，询问治水地理形势和便利条件。
English: In the twelfth year of Yongping, when the emperor was discussing the management of the canal, he summoned Wang Jing to inquire about the geographical situation and convenient conditions for water control.

古文：景陈其利害，应对敏给，帝善之。
现代文：王景陈述治水的利害，灵敏迅速，皇帝很欣赏。
English: Wang Jing made a presentation on the benefits of water control. It was quick and sensitive, and the emperor appreciated it very much.

古文：又以尝修浚仪，功业有成，乃赐景《山海经》、《河渠书》、《禹贡图》及钱帛衣物。
现代文：又由于他曾经治理过浚仪，就赐给他《山海经》、《河渠书》、《禹贡图》以及钱币布帛衣服物品。
English: In addition, because he had been in charge of dredging equipment, he was given the "Book of Mountains and Seas," "Book of Canals," "Yugongtu" and coins, cloth and clothing items.

古文：夏，遂发卒数十万，遣景与王吴修渠筑堤，自荥阳东至千乘海口千余里。
现代文：夏天，朝廷终于征调几十万军队，派王景和王吴修筑渠道和河堤，从荣阳到千乘海口有一千多里。
English: In the summer, the imperial court finally conscripted hundreds of thousands of troops and sent Wang Jing and Wang Wu to build canals and dikes. It is more than a thousand miles from Rongyang to Qianren Haikou.

古文：景乃商度地势，凿山阜，破砥绩，直截沟涧，防遏冲要，疏决壅积，十里立一水门，令更相洄注，无复溃漏之患。
现代文：王景于是测量地形，打通山陵，清除水中沙石，直接切断大沟深涧，在要害之处筑起堤坝，又疏通引导阻塞积聚的水流，每十里修造一座水闸，使得水流能够来回灌注，不再有溃决之害。
English: Wang Jing then measured the terrain, cut through the mountains, cleared the sand and stones from the water, directly cut the deep gully, built a dam at the key point, and dredged and guided the accumulated water flow, and built a sluice every ten miles, so that the water flow could be perfused back and forth, and there would no longer be the harm of breakthrough.

古文：景虽简省役费，然犹以百亿计。
现代文：虽然王景节约工程费用，但花费还是以百亿计算。
English: Although Wang Jing saves project costs, the cost is still calculated in tens of billions.

古文：明年夏，渠成。
现代文：第二年夏天，水渠建成了。
English: The canal was completed in the summer of the following year.

古文：帝亲自巡行，诏滨河郡国置河堤员吏，如西京旧制。
现代文：皇帝亲自巡视，下诏书要靠黄河的郡国设立负责河堤的官员，一如西汉的制度。
English: The emperor personally inspected, and the next edict required the counties of the Yellow River to set up officials responsible for the river dike, just like the Western Han Dynasty system.

古文：景由是知名。
现代文：王景由此知名。
English: Wang Jing is famous for this.

古文：王吴及诸从事掾史皆增秩一等。
现代文：王吴和从事掾史们都增加一级官爵俸禄。
English: Both Wang Wu and those engaged in the study of history have increased the first-class government salary.

古文：景三迁为侍御史。
现代文：王景经三次升迁而担任侍御史。
English: After being promoted three times, Wang Jing finally became an attendant to the emperor.

古文：十五年，从驾车巡狩，至无盐，帝美其功绩，拜河堤谒者，赐车马缣钱。
现代文：十五年，他跟随天子到束部巡视，到达无盐时，皇帝称赞他的功绩，授予他河堤谒者一职，赐给他车马、细绢和钱币。
English: In the fifteenth year, he followed the heavenly son to Sokubo for inspection. When he arrived at Bezalt, the emperor praised his achievements, awarded him the post of embankment dredger, and gave him a carriage, a fine plow and coins.

古文：建初七年，迁徐州刺史。
现代文：建初七年，王景调任徐州刺史。
English: In the seventh year of Jianchu, Wang Jing was transferred to the post of Xuzhou chief historian.

古文：先是杜陵杜笃奏上《论都赋》，欲令车驾迁还长安。
现代文：在这以前杜陵人杜笃向皇帝进献《论都赋》，想使都城迁往长安。
English: Prior to this, Du Du, a man from Durying, presented "On the Capital" to the emperor, hoping to move the capital to Chang'an.

古文：耆老闻者，皆动怀土之心，莫不眷然伫立西望。
现代文：上了年纪的人听说以后，都萌动怀念故土的想法，一个个深情地长时间地向西遥望。
English: After hearing about it, the elderly all began to miss their homeland, and one by one they looked longingly to the west.

古文：景以宫庙已立，恐人情疑惑，会时有神雀诸瑞，乃作《金人论》，颂洛邑之美，天人之符，文有可采。
现代文：王景认为宫室宗庙已经建成，担心人心疑惑，正好当时出现神雀等各种祥瑞，就写了《金人论赞颂洛邑的华美和天人相应的祥瑞，文章有可取之处。
English: Wang Jing thought that the Imperial Family's ancestral temple had already been built, and he was worried about people's doubts. Just at that time, there were various auspicious events such as the appearance of the divine sparrow, so he wrote "On the praise of Luoyang's splendor and the auspicious events corresponding to the heavenly beings, the article has merits.

古文：明年，迁庐江太守。
现代文：第二年，王景调任庐江太守。
English: The following year, Wang Jing was transferred to the position of the governor of the Li River.

古文：先是，百姓不知牛耕，致地力有余而食常不足。
现代文：在这以前，庐江的百姓不知道用牛耕地，造成土地肥力有余而粮食经常不够的现象。
English: Before this, the people of the Li River did not know that the use of cattle to cultivate the land caused the phenomenon that the land had more fertility but often did not have enough grain.

古文：郡界有楚相孙叔敖所起芍陂稻田。
现代文：郡的边界上有楚国相孙叔敖所修的芍陂稻田。
English: On the border of the county, there is a rice paddy field built by the great-great-grandson of the founder of the State of Chu.

古文：景乃驱率吏民，修起芜废，教用犁耕，由是垦辟倍多，境内丰给。
现代文：王景于是率领督促官吏和百姓，重新开垦荒芜的土地，教百姓用犁耕地，这样开垦的田地比原有土地增加了一倍多，郡内的粮食丰盛充足。
English: Wang Jing then led the officials and the people to re-cultivate the barren land and taught the people to use ploughs to cultivate the land. In this way, the cultivated fields have more than doubled compared to the original land, and the grain in the county is abundant.

古文：遂铭石刻誓，令民知常禁。
现代文：于是将诫命刻在石头上，使百姓知道一般的禁令。
English: So they engraved a commandment on a stone to let the people know the general prohibition.

古文：又训令蚕织，为作法制，皆著于乡亭，庐江传其文辞。
现代文：另外，他引导百姓养蚕织布，给他们制订法规，将法规全部刻在乡间亭子上。庐江还流传他制订的条文。
English: In addition, he guided the people to raise silkworms and weave cloth, and formulated laws and regulations for them, engraving all the laws and regulations on the village pavilion.

古文：卒于官。
现代文：王景在官任上去世。
English: He died in office.

古文：初，景以为《六经》所载，皆有卜筮，作事举止，质于蓍龟，而众书错糅，吉凶相反，乃参纪众家数术文书，冢宅禁忌，堪舆日相之属，适于事用者，集为《大衍玄基》云。
现代文：起初，王景认为《六经》所记载的，都有筮，做事情都蓍龟求，然而群书所说的吉凶不一致，于是整理各家数术方面的书籍，及建墓造宅的禁忌、阴阳风水、占星之类适用的部分，编成《大衍玄基》。
English: At first, Wang Jing thought that everything recorded in the "Six Classics" was all wrong, and everything was wrong. However, the fortunes and misfortunes mentioned in the books were inconsistent, so he sorted out the books on mathematics, the taboos of building tombs and houses, the yin and yang of feng shui, and the applicable parts of astrology, and compiled them into "The Great Origin."

古文：秦袁字伯平，扶风茂陵人也。
现代文：◆秦彭传，秦彭，字伯平，扶风茂陵人。
English: ◆Qin Peng Chuan, Qin Peng, Zhe Bo Ping, Fu Feng Murying Ren.

古文：自汉兴之后，世位相承。
现代文：自汉朝以后，秦氏世代继承官位。
English: Since the Han Dynasty, the Qin Dynasty has succeeded to the official position.

古文：六世祖袭，为颍川太守，与群从同时为二千石者五人，故三辅号曰 万石秦氏 。
现代文：秦彭的六世祖秦袭，担任颖！太守，他与同族兄弟同时担任二千石的有五个人，所以三辅地区称他们为 万石秦氏 。
English: Qin Peng's sixth-generation ancestor Qin Sui, served as Ying! Daju, and he and his brothers of the same ethnicity simultaneously served as five people of 2,000 koku, so the Sanfu area called them the 10,000-koku Qin clan.

古文：彭同产女弟，显宗时入掖庭为贵人，有宠。
现代文：秦彭的妹妹在显宗时入宫为贵人，很受宠幸。
English: Qin Peng's younger sister was a noblewoman when she entered the court of Emperor Xuanzong, and she was very favored.

古文：永平七年，以彭贵人兄，随四姓小侯擢为开阳城门候。
现代文：永平七年，作为彭贵人的哥哥，秦彭跟着四姓外戚小侯一道被提拔为开阳城门候。
English: In the seventh year of Yongping, as the elder brother of Peng Guijin, Qin Peng was promoted to the gatekeeper of Kaiyang City along with four maternal relatives.

古文：十五年，拜骑都尉，副驸马都尉耿秉北征匈奴。
现代文：十五年，他被授予骑都尉一职，帮助驸马都尉耿秉北征匈奴。
English: In 15 years, he was awarded the post of cavalry captain and helped the cavalry captain Geng Bing to march north to conquer the Huns.

古文：建初元年，迁山阳太守。
现代文：建初元年，秦彭升为山阳太守。
English: In the first year of Jian, Qin Pengsheng became the governor of Sanyang.

古文：以礼训人，不任刑罚。
现代文：他以礼义教育百姓，不用刑罚。
English: He educated the people in manners and righteousness, and did not punish them.

古文：崇好儒雅，敦明庠序。
现代文：他推崇儒学，提倡教育。
English: He respected Confucianism and advocated education.

古文：每春秋飨射，辄修升降揖让之仪。
现代文：每到春秋飨食习射的时候，他总是整顿上升下降及宾主揖让的礼仪。
English: Every spring and autumn, when he was shooting practice, he always rectified the rise and fall and the etiquette of the host.

古文：乃为人设四诫，以定六亲长幼之礼。
现代文：他为百姓制订了四条训诫，用来确定父子、兄弟、夫妇、长幼之间的礼仪。
English: He laid down four precepts for the people to determine the etiquette between father and son, brother and sister, husband and wife, and elder and younger.

古文：有遵奉教化者，擢为乡三老，常以八月致酒肉以劝勉之。
现代文：谁遵守奉行教化，就提拔他为乡三老，经常在八月份送去酒肉作为勉励。
English: Whoever adheres to the practice of edification will be promoted to the three elders of the village, and will often send wine and meat in August as encouragement.

古文：吏有过咎，罢遣而已，不加耻辱。
现代文：官员犯了罪和过错，免去其官职并打发走而已，不使其受辱。
English: If an official has committed a crime or a mistake, he will be relieved of his post and sent away, but he will not be humiliated.

古文：百姓怀爱，莫有欺犯。
现代文：结果百姓都心怀仁爱，没人互相欺骗或侵犯。
English: As a result, the people were all benevolent, and no one cheated or violated each other.

古文：兴起稻田数千顷，每于农月，亲度顷亩，分别肥瘠，差为三品，各立文簿，藏之乡县。
现代文：他开垦了几千顷稻田，每到农事季节，秦彭亲自测量土地的亩数，划分出土地的肥沃和贫瘠，列为三等，分别记在公文簿上，将其收藏在乡里和县府。
English: He reclaimed several thousand hectares of rice paddies. Every farming season, Qin Peng personally measured the number of mu of land, divided the land into fertile and barren, classified it into three classes, recorded it separately in the official document book, and collected it in the village and the county government.

古文：于是奸吏跼蹐，无所容诈。
现代文：这样，奸猾的官吏不敢妄为，没法藏奸。
English: In this way, treacherous officials would not dare to act rashly and could not hide their treachery.

古文：彭乃上言，宜令天下齐同其制。
现代文：秦彭于是上书给朝廷，说最好让全国都实行这种制度。
English: Qin Peng then sent a letter to the imperial court, saying that it would be best to implement this system throughout the country.

古文：诏书以其所立条式，班令三府，并下州郡。
现代文：诏书将他所列的条文，分发给三府，并且向州郡下达。
English: The edict distributed the provisions listed by him to the three prefectures and issued to the prefectures.

古文：在职六年，转颍川太守，仍有凤皇、麒麟、嘉禾、甘露之瑞，集其郡境。
现代文：秦彭任职六年，调任颖川太守。经常有凤凰、麒麟、特别茁壮的稻禾、甘美的雨露等祥瑞，在郡内到处出现。
English: Qin Peng served for six years and was appointed governor of Yingchuan. There are often auspicious signs such as phoenix, unicorn, especially strong rice, and sweet rain, which appear everywhere in the county.

古文：肃宗巡行，再幸颍川，辄赏赐钱谷，恩宠甚异。
现代文：肃宗外出视察，再次到颖川，总是赏给他钱粮，对他的优遇宠爱特别突出。
English: Su Zong went out to inspect, and came to Yingchuan again. He was always given money and grain, and his preferential treatment was particularly prominent.

古文：章和二年卒。
现代文：他在章和二年去世。
English: He died two years later.

古文：鼓弟忄享、褒，并为射声校尉。
现代文：秦彭的弟弟秦惇、秦裹，一道担任射声校尉。
English: Qin Peng's younger brothers, Qin Yu and Qin Wai, both served as firing squad lieutenants.

古文：王涣字稚子，广汉郪人也。
现代文：◆王涣传，王涣，字稚子，广漠郑县人。
English: ◆Wang Yuchuan, Wang Yao, Zhaozhuangzi, a native of the vast Zheng County.

古文：父顺，安定太守。
现代文：王涣的父亲王顺，担任安定太守。
English: Wang Xuan's father, Wang Shun, served as the Prince of Stability.

古文：涣少好侠，尚气力，数通剽轻少年。
现代文：王涣从小喜欢行侠，崇尚武力，多次和强悍轻捷的少年往来。
English: Wang Yao has been fond of chivalry and advocating the use of force since he was a child. He has had many dealings with strong and agile boys.

古文：晚而改节，敦儒学，习《尚书》，读律令，略举大义。
现代文：后来他改变操行，留意儒学，修习《尚书》，诵读法律，大致能把握其主要意思。
English: Later, he changed his behavior, paid attention to Confucianism, studied "Shang Shu" and recited the law, and could roughly grasp its main meaning.

古文：为太守陈宠功曹，当职割断，不避豪右。
现代文：他担任太守陈宠的功曹，敢于决断，不顾豪强。
English: He served as a meritorious student of the Great Guardian Chen Ji, dared to make decisions, and was brave and strong.

古文：宠风声大行，入为大司农。
现代文：陈宠治政的名声广泛流传，到京师担任大司农。
English: Chen Jie's reputation for governance was widely spread, and he went to Beijing to serve as the Chief Secretary of Agriculture.

古文：和帝问曰： 在郡何以为理？ 
现代文：和帝问他： 你在郡用什么方法治理的？ 
English: And the emperor asked him: What method did you use to govern the county?

古文：宠顿首谢曰： 臣任功曹王涣以简贤选能，主簿镡显拾遗补阙，臣奉宣诏书而已。 
现代文：陈宠叩头辞让说： 臣任用功曹王涣来选用贤明有才能的人，任用主簿坛显来纠正过失补充遗漏。臣不过捧读韶书罢了。 
English: Chen Zhao bowed and said: "The vassal appointed Gong Cao Wang Yao to select the wise and talented people, and appointed the chief scribe Yan Xian to correct the mistakes and supplement the omissions. The vassal only read the scribbles."

古文：帝大悦，涣由此显名。
现代文：和帝听了大为高兴。王涣由此出了名。
English: The emperor was very pleased to hear this, and Wang Yao became famous.

古文：州举茂才，除温令。
现代文：州府荐举他为茂才，朝廷任命他为温县令。
English: The prefectural government recommended that he be named Maocai, and the imperial court appointed him as the governor of Wen County.

古文：县多奸猾，积为人患。
现代文：县内奸恶狡猾的人很多，长期给老百姓造成灾难。
English: There are many treacherous and cunning people in the county, who have caused long-term disasters to the people.

古文：涣以方略讨击，悉诛之。
现代文：王涣想方设法攻打坏人，将他们全部消灭。
English: Wang Yao tried his best to attack the bad guys and eliminate them all.

古文：境内清夷，商人露宿于道。
现代文：境内自此太平，商人可以在路边过夜。
English: The territory has been peaceful since then, and merchants can spend the night on the side of the road.

古文：其有放牛者，辄云以属稚子，终无侵犯。
现代文：那些放牛的人，经常说将牛交给王涣了，始终没发生互相侵犯的事。
English: Those who herd the cattle often say that they have handed over the cattle to Wang Yao, and there has never been any mutual infringement.

古文：在温三年，迁兗州刺史，绳正部郡，风威大行。
现代文：王涣在温县三年，升为兖州刺史，他以法律治理兖州各郡，德化和声威得到广泛推行。
English: Wang Qian served in Wenzhou County for three years and was promoted to be the governor of Zhangzhou. He governed all counties in Zhangzhou with the law, and his deification and prestige were widely promoted.

古文：后坐考妖言不实论。
现代文：后来他因为考问妖妄言论不符合实情而被判罪。
English: He was later found guilty of making false statements.

古文：岁余，征拜侍御史。
现代文：几年后，又被朝廷征召，授予侍御史职位。
English: A few years later, he was called up again by the imperial court and given the post of courtier-historian.

古文：永元十五年，从驾南巡，还为洛阳令。
现代文：永元十五年，王涣跟随皇上到南方巡视，回来后担任洛阳令。
English: In the 15th year of the Yongyuan era, Wang Yao accompanied the emperor on a tour to the south, and after his return, he served as the Luoyang governor.

古文：以平正居身，得宽猛之宜。
现代文：王涣处世正直，施政时能做到宽严合宜。
English: Wang Hui is honest in his dealings with the world, and is able to be lenient and strict when governing.

古文：其冤嫌久讼，历政所不断，法理所难平者，莫不曲尽情诈，压塞群疑。
现代文：那些长期诉讼的冤案疑案，历经几任县令都没有断决的，有根据法律情理都难以评判的，王涣都能够巧妙地弄清案情真假，消除大家的疑惑。
English: For those long-term litigation cases, which have not been decided after several county orders, and which are difficult to judge according to legal reasons, Wang Xi can skillfully clarify the truth and falsity of the case and eliminate everyone's doubts.

古文：又能以谲数发奸伏。
现代文：他还能用奇谋异术发现潜藏的坏人坏事。
English: He can also use conjuring tricks to find hidden bad people and bad things.

古文：京师称叹，以为涣有神算。
现代文：京师的百姓都称赞惊叹，认为王涣有神机妙算。
English: The people of Beijing all praised and marveled at Wang Yao, believing that Wang Yao had a clever plan.

古文：元兴元年，病卒。
现代文：元兴元年，王涣病逝。
English: In the first year of the Genxing era, Wang Qi died of illness.

古文：百姓市道莫不咨嗟。
现代文：无论是城市中的居民还是行旅之人没有不叹息的。
English: Whether you are a city dweller or a traveller, you can't help but sigh.

古文：男女老壮皆相与赋敛，致奠醊以千数。
现代文：男女老少相互凑集钱粮，上千人为他举行祭奠。
English: Men and women, young and old, pooled their money and grain, and thousands of people held a memorial service for him.

古文：涣丧西归，道经弘农，民庶皆设盘桉于路。
现代文：王涣的灵柩西归，中途经过弘农，老百姓都在路边摆起了盘子桌子，放上祭品。
English: Wang Yao's coffin returned to the west, passing through Hongnong on the way. The people set up a plate table on the side of the road and placed offerings.

古文：吏问其故，咸言平常持米到洛，为卒司所抄，恒亡其半。
现代文：官吏向他们询问原因，他们都说平时带粮食去洛阳，被士兵和官吏掠夺，经常损失一半。
English: When the officials asked them why, they all said that they usually took grain to Luoyang, but were plundered by soldiers and officials, and often lost half of it.

古文：自王君在事，不见侵枉，故来报恩。
现代文：自从王涣当了县令，再没被侵夺，所以前来报答他的恩德。
English: Since Wang Xi became the county magistrate, he has not been robbed again, so he came to repay his kindness.

古文：其政化怀物如此。
现代文：王涣施政使百姓感化到如此地步。
English: Wang Hui's policies have influenced the people to such an extent.

古文：民思其德，为立祠安阳亭西，每食辄弦歌而荐之。
现代文：百姓想念他的恩德，在安阳亭西面为他建造祠堂，每到吃饭时就和弦而歌并祭奠王涣。
English: The people miss his kindness and built an ancestral hall for him on the west side of Anyang Pavilion. Every time they come to eat, they sing and pay tribute to Wang Yao.

古文：永初二年，邓太后诏曰： 夫忠良之吏，国家所以为理也。
现代文：永初二年，邓太后下诏书说： 有了忠心耿耿而有才德的官吏，国家才得以治理。
English: In the second year of the Yongzheng era, Empress Dowager Deng issued an imperial edict saying, "Only with loyal and talented officials can the country be governed."

古文：求之甚勤，得之至寡。
现代文：朝廷访求这样的官吏很勤勉，但得到的非常少。
English: The imperial court solicited such officials very diligently, but received very little.

古文：故孔子曰： 才难不其然乎！ 
现代文：所以孑乙子说： 有才很难，难道不是这样吗？
English: Therefore, Zou Bizi said, "It's difficult to succeed, isn't that so?"

古文：莫大司农朱邑、右扶风尹翁归，政迹茂异，令名显闻，孝宣皇帝嘉叹悯惜，而以黄金百斤策赐其子。
现代文：过去大司农朱邑、右扶风尹翁归，政绩优异，美名到处传颂，孝宣皇帝夸奖，并且下韶书赏赐他们的儿子百斤黄金。
English: In the past, the grand secretary of the farmers Zhuyun and the right-hand wind Yin Wengui were outstanding in their political achievements, and their good names were praised everywhere. Emperor Xiaoxuan praised them, and rewarded their sons with one hundred pounds of gold.

古文：故洛阳令王涣，秉清修之节，蹈羔羊之义，尽心奉公，务在惠民，功业未遂，不幸早世，百姓追思，为之立祠。
现代文：原洛阳令王涣，守持清廉的节操，遵循《诗羔羊》阐述的含义，尽心为公，一心使百姓得到好处，功业没有成功，就不幸过早逝世，百姓对他追忆怀念，为他修建祠堂。
English: Originally, Luo Yang ordered Wang Yao to keep a clean and virtuous life, to follow the meaning of the "Lamb of Poetry," to serve the public with all his heart, and to benefit the people. However, his work did not succeed, and he died prematurely. The people remembered him fondly and built an ancestral hall for him.

古文：自非忠爱之至，孰能若斯者乎！
现代文：要不是他忠心仁爱到了极点，谁能够达到这样的境地！
English: If it were not for his extreme loyalty and benevolence, who could have reached such a state!

古文：今以涣子石为郎中，以劝劳勤。 
现代文：现在任命王涣的儿子王石为郎中，以奖励为国为民辛勤操劳的人。 
English: Now he has appointed Wang Shi, the son of Wang Yao, as his son-in-law, to reward those who work hard for the country and the people.

古文：延熹中，桓帝事黄、老道，悉毁诸房祀，唯特诏密县存故太傅卓茂庙，洛阳留王涣祠焉。
现代文：延熹年间，桓帝事奉黄老学说，将所有的祠堂全部毁去，惟独专门下诏书要密县保留原太傅卓茂的庙，洛阳保留王涣的祠堂。
English: During the Yanqi Dynasty, Emperor Kuan, who followed the teachings of Huang Lao, completely destroyed all the ancestral halls. However, he specifically issued an edict to preserve the original Tai Fu Zhuo's temple in Mi County and Wang Yao's ancestral hall in Luoyang.

古文：镡显后亦知名，安帝时为豫州刺史。
现代文：坛显后来也知名，他在安帝时担任豫州刺史。
English: Dan Xian later became famous as well. He served as the Henan Provincial Historian during the Andean Dynasty.

古文：时，天下肌荒，竞为盗贼，州界收捕且万余人。
现代文：当时天下饥荒，人们争着做盗贼，豫州境内被逮捕的差不多有一万多人。
English: At that time, there was famine in the world, people were competing to be thieves, and almost more than ten thousand people were arrested in Yuzhou.

古文：显愍其困穷，自陷刑辟，辄擅赦之，因自劾奏。
现代文：铎显同情这些人的穷困，宁愿自己触犯法律，经常擅自赦免罪犯，因此自我弹劾。
English: Yan Xian sympathized with the poverty of these people, preferred to break the law himself, often pardoned criminals without authorization, and thus impeached himself.

古文：有诏勿理。
现代文：皇帝下诏书叫不要受理坛显的自劾。
English: The emperor issued an edict saying that the self-impeachment of the mandarin should not be accepted.

古文：后位至长乐卫尉。
现代文：坛显后来做到长乐卫尉。
English: The altar was later made into a Changle watchtower.

古文：自涣卒后，连诏三公特选洛阳令，皆不称职。
现代文：自从王涣去世以后，皇帝连续下韶书给三公，要他们专门挑选洛阳令，但挑出来的都不称职。
English: Since the death of Wang Qian, the emperor has continuously issued decrees to the three princes, asking them to specially select the Luoyang Ruling, but the selected ones are all incompetent.

古文：永和中，以剧令勃海任峻补之。
现代文：永和年间，朝廷任命剧县令勃海人任峻任洛阳令。
English: During the Yonghe era, the imperial court appointed the magistrate of Jing County, Bohai Renjun, as the magistrate of Luoyang.

古文：峻擢用文武吏，皆尽其能，纠剔奸盗，不得旋踵，一岁断狱，不过数十，威风猛于涣，而文理不及之。
现代文：任峻选拔文武官员，充分发挥这些人的才能。这些人举发剪除奸恶盗贼，决不畏避退缩，所以一年中要判的案件，不过几十个。任峻在威猛方面超过王涣，但在文德治理方面比不上王涣。
English: Renjun selected civil and military officials and gave full play to the talents of these people. These people raised their hair to cut off evil thieves and never feared to shrink back, so there were only a few dozen cases to be judged in a year. Renjun surpassed Wang Qian in terms of power, but was not as good as Wang Qian in terms of cultural and moral governance.

古文：峻字叔高，终于太山太守。
现代文：任峻字叔高，最后在太山太守任上逝世。
English: Ren Junzha Shugao, and finally died in Taishan Taishou.

古文：许荆字少张，会稽阳羡人也。
现代文：◆许荆传，许荆，字少张，会稽阳羡人。
English: ◆ Xu Jing Chuan, Xu Jing, fewer characters, people will be envious.

古文：祖父武，太守第五伦举为孝廉。
现代文：他的祖父许武，被太守第五伦举荐为孝廉。
English: His grandfather, Xu Wu, was recommended as a filial son by the Fifth Emperor.

古文：武以二弟晏、普未显，欲令成名，乃请之曰： 礼有分异之义，家有别居之道。 
现代文：许武因为两个弟弟许晏、许普尚未有名，想让他们出名，就把他们叫来说： 根据礼有分开的原则，家产也有分开的道理。 
English: Because Xu Wu's two younger brothers, Xu Yao and Xu Pu, were not yet famous, he wanted to make them famous, so he called them and said, "According to the principle of separation of propriety, there is also a reason for the separation of family property.

古文：于是共割财产以为三分，武自取肥田广宅奴婢强者，二弟所得并悉劣少。
现代文：于是将财产分为三份，许武自己拿田地肥美住宅宽敞奴婢能干的一份，两个弟弟得到的都是又差又少的一份。
English: As a result, the property was divided into three parts. Xu Wu himself took a share of the fertile fields, beautiful houses, spacious mansions, and capable servants, and the two younger brothers received a poor and small share.

古文：乡人皆称弟克让而鄙武贪婪，晏等以此并得选举，武乃会宗亲，泣曰： 吾为兄不肖，盗声窃位，二弟长年，未豫荣禄，所以求得分财，自取大讥。
现代文：同乡的人都称赞许武的弟弟能够谦让而鄙视许武的贪婪，许晏和许普因此一并得到推举。许武遣才会集宗族亲戚，流着泪说： 我作为哥哥行为不贤，窃取名声地位，两个弟弟已经成人，没得到富贵俸禄，所以要求分财产，情愿自己遭到很大讥讽。
English: His fellow townspeople praised the humility of Xu Wu's younger brother and despised the greed of Xu Wu. As a result, Xu Xi and Xu Pu were both promoted. Xu Wuyan gathered his relatives and said with tears: "As an older brother, I have acted unethically, stealing reputation and status. My two younger brothers have grown up and have not received a rich salary, so I demand a share of the property. I would rather be ridiculed."

古文：今理产所增，三倍于前，悉以推二弟，一无所留。 
现代文：现在治理的财产比以前增加了三倍，我将其全部让给两个弟弟，一件都不留下。 
English: The property I manage now is three times more than before, and I will give it all to my two brothers, leaving nothing behind.

古文：于是郡中翕然，远近称之。
现代文：于是郡内舆论一致称赞许武。
English: As a result, public opinion in the county unanimously praised Xu Wu.

古文：位至长乐少府。
现代文：许武做到长乐少府。
English: Xu Wu achieved the title of Changle Junior High School.

古文：荆少为郡吏，兄子世尝报仇杀人，怨者操兵攻之。
现代文：许荆年轻时做郡吏，他哥哥的儿子许世曾经为了报仇杀人，怨恨许世的人拿了武器来找他算账。
English: When Xu Jing was a young county official, his brother's son Xu Shizhen once killed a man for revenge. The man who resented Xu Shizhen took up arms to settle accounts with him.

古文：荆闻，乃出门逆怨者，跪而言曰： 世前无状相犯，咎皆在荆不能训导。
现代文：许荆得知后，就出门迎着那些仇家，跪下来说： 许世以前无礼，冒犯了你们，责任都因为我没能加以训导。
English: After learning this, Xu Jing went out to meet those enemies, kneeled down and said, "I was rude and offended you a long time ago, and I am responsible because I failed to discipline you.

古文：兄既早没，一子为嗣，如令死者伤其灭绝，愿杀身代之。 
现代文：兄长很早就已过世，就一个儿子延续血统，假使让死去的人为血统的灭绝伤痛，我情愿以死相代。 
English: My brother died a long time ago, and I have only one son to carry on the bloodline. If I had to let the dead person be the cause of the extinction of the bloodline, I would rather die.

古文：怨家扶荆起，曰： 许掾郡中称贤，吾何敢相侵？ 
现代文：仇家将许荆扶起来，说： 您在郡中被称赞为有贤德，我们怎么敢对您无礼？ 
English: The enemy held Xu Jing up and said, "You have been praised for your virtue in the county. How dare we be rude to you?"

古文：因遂委去。
现代文：因而就此作罢。
English: Therefore, the matter is closed.

古文：荆名誉益著。
现代文：许荆的名声更加显著。
English: Xu Jing's reputation is even more remarkable.

古文：太守黄兢举孝廉。
现代文：太守黄兢将他举荐为孝廉。
English: The daimyō, Huang Jing, recommended him as a filial son.

古文：和帝时，稍迁桂阳太守。
现代文：和帝时，许荆逐步升为桂阳太守。
English: When he became emperor, Xu Jing gradually rose to become the governor of Guiyang.

古文：郡滨南州，风俗脆薄，不识学义。
现代文：桂阳靠近南州，风气习俗很轻薄，不懂得学识道义。
English: Guiyang is close to Nanzhou, the customs are very light, and they do not understand learning and morality.

古文：荆为设丧纪婚姻制度，使知礼禁。
现代文：许荆为他们制订婚丧制度，让百姓知道礼义法禁。
English: Xu Jing formulated a marriage and funeral system for them, so that the people knew the etiquette and legal prohibition.

古文：尝行春到耒阳县，人有蒋均者，兄弟争财，互相言讼。
现代文：他曾经在春季到末阳县巡视，有个叫蒋均的人，兄弟之间因争夺财物而互相控告。
English: He once made an inspection tour to Suiyang County in the spring. There was a man named Jiang Jun, whose brothers were suing each other for fighting over property.

古文：荆对之叹曰： 吾荷国重任，而教化不行，咎在太守。 
现代文：许荆面对兄弟俩感叹说： 我担负国家的重任，但教化没有得到推行，责任在我太守。 
English: Faced with the two brothers, Xu Jing sighed and said: I bear the heavy responsibility of the country, but the indoctrination has not been carried out, the responsibility lies with me.

古文：乃顾使吏上书陈状，乞诣廷尉。
现代文：于是转过头来要身边小吏向朝廷上书说明情况，请求到廷尉那裹接受刑罚。
English: So he turned around and asked the minor officials around him to write to the imperial court to explain the situation and request that they be sent to the palace to receive the punishment.

古文：均兄弟感悔，各求受罪。
现代文：蒋均兄弟感悟后悔，各自要求接受处罚。
English: The Jiang Jun brothers felt regret and each demanded to be punished.

古文：在事十二年，父老称歌。
现代文：许荆在太守任上十二年，百姓们对他赞扬歌颂。
English: Xu Jing served as governor for 12 years, and the people sang his praises.

古文：以病自上，征拜谏议大夫，卒于官。
现代文：由于生病，他上书朝廷，结果被征召，任命为谏议大夫，在任上去世。
English: As a result of his illness, he wrote to the imperial court. As a result, he was conscripted, appointed as a medical officer, and died in office.

古文：桂阳人为立庙树碑。
现代文：桂阳人为他建庙立碑。
English: Guiyang built a temple for him and erected a monument.

古文：荆孙有彧，灵帝时为太尉。
现代文：许荆的孙子许碱，灵帝时担任太尉。
English: Xu Jing's grandson, Xu Cao, served as a first lieutenant to Emperor Lingdi.

古文：孟尝字伯周，会稽上虞上也。
现代文：◆孟尝传，孟尝，字伯周，会稽上虞人。
English: ◆Meng Yuchuan, Meng Yuchuan, Zhe Bo Zhou, will be audited.

古文：其先三世为郡吏，并伏节死难。
现代文：他的祖先三代担任郡吏，都在祸乱中守节而死。
English: His ancestors served as county officials for three generations, and all of them died during the calamity to protect the festival.

古文：尝少修操行，仕郡为户曹史。
现代文：孟尝从小修养操行，在郡府出任户曹史。
English: Meng has been cultivating self-discipline since childhood, and has served as a household Cao Shi in the county government.

古文：上虞有寡妇至孝养姑。姑年老寿终，夫女弟先怀嫌忌，乃诬妇厌苦供养，加鸩其母，列讼县庭。
现代文：上虞有位寡妇奉养婆婆极为孝顺，婆婆年老去世，小姑子原先就心怀忌恨，就诬陷寡妇对供养婆婆感到厌烦，毒死了她的母亲，向县投诉。
English: In Shangyu, there was a widow who was extremely dutiful in supporting her mother-in-law. When her mother-in-law died of old age, her younger sister-in-law, who originally harbored a grudge, accused the widow of being bored with supporting her mother-in-law, poisoned her mother, and complained to the county.

古文：郡不加寻察，遂结竟其罪。
现代文：郡府没有加以考察，就给寡妇结案定罪。
English: The county did not investigate the case and convicted the widow.

古文：尝先知枉状，备言之于太守，太守不为理。
现代文：孟尝原先知道寡妇的冤情，就将详情告诉太守，但太守没去审理。
English: Meng, who knew the grievances of the widow, told the details to the governor, but the governor did not go to trial.

古文：尝哀泣外门，因谢病去，妇竟冤死。
现代文：孟尝在郡府门外哀哭，因而藉口有病辞去官职。寡妇最终含冤而死。
English: Meng Tan wept outside the county government, and resigned from his post on the pretext of illness. The widow eventually died unjustly.

古文：自是郡中连旱二年，祷请无所获。
现代文：自此郡中连续两年干旱，怎么祷告都不起作用。
English: Since then, there have been two consecutive years of drought in the county, and no amount of prayer has worked.

古文：后太守殷丹到官，访问其故，尝诣府具陈寡妇冤诬之事。
现代文：后来太守殷丹上任，询问干旱的原因，孟尝到郡府详细陈述寡妇被冤死的事情，顺便说： 从前束海有位孝妇。
English: Later, the grand marshal Yin Dan took office, inquired about the cause of the drought, and Meng Yao went to the county government to make a detailed statement about the widow's unjust death. By the way: Once upon a time, there was a filial wife in Sokhae.

古文：因曰： 昔东海孝妇，感天致旱，于公一言，甘泽时降。
现代文：感动上天而造成干旱，于公一句话，上天立刻降下甘雨。
English: Touched by heaven and caused drought, in a public statement, heaven immediately rained down sweet rain.

古文：宜戮讼者，以谢冤魂，庶幽枉获申，时雨可期。 
现代文：应当将投诉的人杀掉，以向冤死的魂灵道歉，希望能使冥间的冤屈得到伸张，应时之雨可以指望。 
English: The complainant should be killed, in order to apologize to the souls of the unjustly killed, in the hope that the grievances of the underworld will be vindicated, and timely rain can be expected.

古文：丹从之，即刑讼女而祭妇墓，天应澍雨，谷稼以登。
现代文：殷丹听从他的意见，立刻将投诉的女子治罪并且祭祀寡妇的坟墓，结果上天感应降下大雨，庄稼因此丰收。
English: Yin Dan listened to his advice and immediately punished the complaining woman and sacrificed the widow's grave. As a result, the heavens sent down heavy rain, resulting in a bumper harvest.

古文：尝后策孝廉，举茂才，拜徐令。
现代文：孟尝后来被策封为孝廉，又被推荐为秀才。
English: Meng Yao was later crowned as a filial son and recommended as an outstanding talent.

古文：州郡表其能，迁合浦太守。
现代文：朝廷任命他为徐县县令。州府和郡府上书举荐他的才能，所以升为合浦太守。
English: The imperial court appointed him as the county magistrate of Xu County, and the prefectural and county governments recommended his talent in a letter, so he was promoted to the governor of Hepu.

古文：郡不产谷实，而海出珠宝，与交阯比境，常通商贩，留籴粮食。
现代文：合浦不生产粮食，但海中出产珍宝。合浦与交吐接壤，经常有商贩往来，买卖粮食。
English: Hepu does not produce grain, but treasures are produced in the sea. Hepu shares a border with Kofu, and there are often traders who come and go to buy and sell grain.

古文：先时宰守并多贪秽，诡人采求，不知纪极，珠遂渐徙于交阯郡界。
现代文：从前的太守大都贪婪，要求人们采集，不知限度，珍珠就逐渐跑到交耻郡内去了。
English: Most of the former emperors were greedy and asked people to collect pearls. Without knowing the limit, the pearls gradually went to Jiaoxi County.

古文：于是行旅不至，人物无资，贫者饿死于道。
现代文：结果行旅不再来了，人和牲畜都没有吃的，穷苦的人饿死在道边。
English: As a result, travelers stopped coming, people and livestock had nothing to eat, and poor people starved to death on the roadside.

古文：尝到官，革易前敝，求民病利。
现代文：孟尝上任后，革除过去的弊端，访求百姓的疾苦和有利于百姓的事情。
English: After Meng Yu took office, he eliminated the shortcomings of the past, visited the sufferings of the people and the things that are beneficial to the people.

古文：曾未逾岁，去珠复还，百姓皆反其业，商货流通，称为神明。
现代文：还不到一年的时间，流失的珠子又回到合浦，老百姓都恢复他们的本业，商人开始来往，货物开始流通，孟尝被称赞为明智如神。
English: In less than a year's time, the lost beads returned to Hapu, the people all resumed their original occupations, merchants began to come and go, goods began to circulate, and Meng Yao was praised as wise as a god.

古文：以病自上，被征当还，吏民攀车请之。
现代文：孟尝因病自己上书辞职，朝廷征召他将要返回京师，官吏百姓抓住孟尝的车子恳求他留下。
English: Due to illness, Meng Yu himself submitted a letter of resignation. The imperial court summoned him to return to Beijing. Officials and commoners seized Meng Yu's car and begged him to stay.

古文：尝既不得进，乃载乡民船夜遁去。
现代文：孟尝既然没法走，就坐了乡间百姓的船连夜离去。
English: Since Meng couldn't leave, he took a boat belonging to a villager and left overnight.

古文：隐处穷泽，身自耕佣。
现代文：孟尝在荒僻的沼泽地隐居，自己动手耕种。
English: Meng lives in seclusion in a desolate swamp and does his own farming.

古文：邻县士民慕其德，就居止者百余家。
现代文：邻县的士人百姓仰慕孟尝的德行，搬来和他住在一起的有一百多家。
English: The people of neighboring counties admire Meng Yao's virtue, and more than a hundred people have moved to live with him.

古文：桓帝时、尚书同郡杨乔上书荐尝曰：臣前后七表言故合浦太守孟尝，而身轻言微，终不蒙察。
现代文：桓帝时期，尚书同郡人杨乔上书推荐孟尝说： 臣先后七次上书推荐原合浦太守盂尝，但人微言轻，始终没得到考虑。
English: During the reign of Emperor Kuan, Shang Shuxu and Yang Qiao, a resident of the county, wrote a letter to recommend Meng Yao, saying: "The minister has recommended the former Hepu Taishou seven times in succession, but the person is soft-spoken and has never been considered.

古文：区区破心，徒然而已。
现代文：臣剖心相示，但什么作用也不起。
English: The minister makes a gesture, but it has no effect.

古文：尝安仁弘义，耽乐道德，清行出俗，能干绝群。
现代文：孟尝安乐于仁爱，弘扬道义，特别醉心于道德，行为高洁脱俗，才干出类拔萃。
English: Meng Yao was happy to be benevolent, promoted morality, was particularly passionate about morality, behaved in a pure and refined manner, and his talent was outstanding.

古文：前更守宰，移风改政，去珠复还，饥民蒙活。
现代文：以前做太守时，移风易俗，改革政治，失去的珍珠又重新回来，饥饿的百姓赖他得以存活。
English: Previously, he was too punctual, changed customs, reformed politics, lost pearls came back again, and hungry people relied on him to survive.

古文：且南海多珍，财产易积，掌握之内，价盈兼金，而尝单身谢病，躬耕垄次，匿景藏采，不扬华藻。
现代文：而且南海珍宝很多，财产容易积蓄，他手中掌管的珍宝，价值超过兼金，但孟尝只身一人因病引退，亲自在田间耕作，隐藏起自己的踪迹和风采，不显露自己的华采。
English: Moreover, there are a lot of treasures in the South China Sea, and it is easy to accumulate property. The value of the treasures under his control exceeds that of gold. However, Meng Ya retired alone due to illness, and personally cultivated in the fields, hiding his traces and style, and not revealing his brilliance.

古文：实羽翮之美用，非徒腹背之毛也。
现代文：他实在是作为羽翼用的大才，而不是腹下背上的捆毛。
English: He really is a great talent to use as a wing, rather than a bundle of hair on the lower back.

古文：而沉沦草莽，好爵莫及，廊庙之宝，弃于沟渠。
现代文：然而他埋没在荒野之中，好的官爵没他的份，致使国家宝器，被抛弃在沟渠中。
English: But he was lost in the wilderness, the good barons had no part of him, and the national treasure was abandoned in a ditch.

古文：且年岁有讫，桑榆行尽，而忠贞之节，永谢圣时。
现代文：再说年岁有限，他已近暮年，而他忠贞的节操，却在圣明的时代长期凋零。
English: Moreover, his age is limited, he is nearing his twilight years, and his loyal discipline has long withered in the age of enlightenment.

古文：臣诚伤心，私用流涕。
现代文：臣心裹实在伤痛，私下为此流泪。
English: It really hurt my heart, and I shed tears in private.

古文：夫物以远至为珍，士以稀见为贵。
现代文：从很远地方弄来的物品被枧为珍奇，士人不同一般被当作宝贵。
English: Items brought from far away places are considered rare, and are generally considered valuable by different people.

古文：蟠木朽珠，为万乘用者，左右为之容耳。
现代文：盘曲腐朽的树不能够为天子所用，是由于手下人的雕刻修饰。
English: The rotten tree cannot be used by the Son of Heaven because of the carvings made by his servants.

古文：王者取士，宜拔众之所贵。
现代文：天子任用士人，应当选拔大家都推重的人。
English: The Son of Heaven appoints scholars, and those who are highly regarded by everyone should be selected.

古文：臣以斗筲之姿，趋走日月之侧。思立微节，不敢苟私乡曲。窃感禽息，亡身进贤。
现代文：臣以才识短浅的资质，在天子身边奔走驱使，想着建树微不足道的节操，并不敢与同乡暗徇私情，私下受禽息行为的感动，不顾性命推举有才德的人。 
English: The vassal is driven by the talent with a short-sighted qualification, runs around the heavenly son, thinks about building a trivial discipline, does not dare to have a personal relationship with his fellow villagers, is privately moved by the behavior of the birds, and chooses the talented person regardless of life.

古文：尝竟不见用。
现代文：孟尝最终也没被起用。
English: Meng did not end up being hired.

古文：年七十，卒于家。
现代文：七十岁时，他在家中去世。
English: He died at home at the age of seventy.

古文：第五访字仲谋，京兆长陵人，司空伦之族孙也。
现代文：◆第五访传，第五访，字仲谋，京兆长陵人，司空第五伦的同族孙子。
English: ◆The fifth visit, the fifth visit, the word mediator, the Jingzhao Changling person, the grandson of the same family as Siku Vuelen.

古文：少孤贫，常佣耕以养兄嫂。
现代文：第五访小时候失去父亲，家贫为供养兄嫂他经常为人耕种。
English: On his fifth visit, he lost his father when he was a child, and he often worked as a farmer to support his brother and sister-in-law.

古文：有闲暇，则以学文。
现代文：一有空闲，就学习道艺。
English: Whenever he has free time, he studies Taoism.

古文：仕郡为功曹，察孝廉，补新都令。
现代文：他出任郡府功曹，被选拔为孝廉，并补任新都令。
English: He served as a county prefectural meritorious service award recipient, was selected as a filial piety award recipient, and was appointed as the new metropolitan governor.

古文：政平化行，三年之间，邻县归之，户口十倍。
现代文：他施政平允，推行教化，三年之内，邻县的百姓来投奔他，户口比过去增加了十倍。
English: He administered politics with equanimity and promoted enlightenment. Within three years, people from neighboring counties flocked to him, and the number of household registrations increased tenfold.

古文：迁张掖太守。
现代文：他升任张掖太守。
English: He was promoted to the position of the Zhangye Grand Empress.

古文：岁饥，粟石数千，访乃开仓赈给以救其敝。
现代文：年成饥荒，一石粮食的价格涨到几千钱。第五访就打开粮仓救济百姓度遇难关。
English: In the year of famine, the price of a stone of grain rose to several thousand dollars. On the fifth visit, the granary was opened to aid the people in their time of need.

古文：更惧谴，争欲上言。
现代文：官员们害怕被追究，争着上报朝廷。
English: Officials are afraid of being held accountable and are scrambling to inform the imperial court.

古文：访曰： 若上须报，是弃民也。
现代文：第五访说： 若是上书再等到答覆，就是丢下老百姓不管。
English: A fifth interviewee said: "If we wait for a reply before sending the letter, we will be abandoning the people."

古文：太守乐以一身救百姓！ 
现代文：我情愿用自己的性命来救百姓！ 
English: I would rather use my own life to save the people!

古文：遂出谷赋人。
现代文：于是拿出粮食分给百姓。
English: So he took out grain and distributed it to the people.

古文：顺帝玺书嘉之。
现代文：顺帝下韶书褒奖第五访。
English: This is Shun's fifth visit.

古文：由是一郡得全。
现代文：全郡的百姓由此得到了保全。
English: As a result, the people of the entire county were protected.

古文：顺辞默谏，多见省用。
现代文：一年多后，官员百姓一并丰足，郡内没有发生奸邪盗贼的事情。
English: More than a year later, officials and ordinary people are both plentiful, and there have been no cases of treachery and theft in the county.

古文：复以日食免。
现代文：后调任南阳太守。
English: Later, he was transferred to the position of Nanyang governor.

古文：因乞骸骨，卒于家。
现代文：离任后被授予护羌校尉一职，边境地区的人都信服他的威信。
English: After leaving office, he was awarded the post of lieutenant of the garrison, and people in the border areas were convinced of his prestige.

古文：刘宠字祖荣，东莱牟平人，齐悼惠王之后也。
现代文：第五访在任去世。◆刘宠传，刘宠字祖荣，东莱郡牟平县人。齐悼惠王的后代。
English: The fifth visit died in office. ◆ Liu Zhaozhong, Liu Zhaozhong, Muping County, Donglai County. The descendants of Hui Wang mourn together.

古文：悼惠王子孝王将闾，将闾少子封牟平侯，子孙家焉。
现代文：悼惠王子孝王将闾，将闾的少子封牟平侯，他的子孙就家居牟平。
English: Prince Xiaowang will be mourned, and his young son will be enshrined, and his children and grandchildren will be enshrined.

古文：父丕，博学，号为通儒。
现代文：刘宠的父亲刘丕，很有学问，称为通儒。
English: Liu Zhao, the father of Liu Zhao, was very learned and was known as a Confucian scholar.

古文：宠少受父业，以明经举孝廉，陈东平陵令，以仁惠为吏民所爱。
现代文：刘宠年轻时从父亲学习，因精通经学被举为孝廉，授东平陵县令。因仁爱惠民被吏民爱戴。
English: When he was young, Liu Zhaocheng learned from his father. Because he was proficient in the study of Chinese classics, he was honored as a filial son and given the title of Dongpingling County. He was loved by the officials for his benevolence and beneficence.

古文：母疾，弃官去。
现代文：母亲病了，弃官回家。
English: My mother was ill and resigned to return home.

古文：百姓将送塞道，车不得进，乃轻服遁归。
现代文：百姓送他，连道路也堵塞了，车子不能前进，于是穿着便服跑回去了。
English: Even the road was blocked, so the car couldn't go any further, so he ran back in his civilian clothes.

古文：后四迁为豫章太守，又三迁拜会稽太守。
现代文：后来四次升迁任豫章太守，又三次迁升授会稽太守。
English: Later, he was promoted four times to the post of Yuzhang Dazhong, and three times to the post of Jiaotong auditor.

古文：山民愿朴，乃有白首不入市井者，颇为官吏所扰。
现代文：山里有的老百姓朴实拘谨，竟有从小到老没有进过城市的，往往被官吏欺诈。
English: Some ordinary people in the mountains are simple and prudish, and some have never been to the city from childhood to old age. They are often deceived by officials.

古文：宠简除烦苛，禁察非法，郡中大化。征为将作大匠。
现代文：刘宠除去那些繁琐的规章制度，禁止部属扰民等不法行为，郡中秩序井然，老百姓安居乐业。被征任将作大臣。
English: Liu Zhao removed those cumbersome rules and regulations, prohibited subordinates from disturbing the people and other illegal acts, the county was orderly, and the people lived and worked in peace. He will be appointed as a minister.

古文：山阴县有五六老叟，厖眉皓发，自若邪山谷间出，人赍百钱以送宠。
现代文：山阴县有五六个老翁，眉毛头发都花白了，从若邪山谷间出来，每人拿着百钱送给刘宠。
English: There are five or six old men in Shanyin County, whose eyebrows and hair have turned white. They came out from the Waka Yai Valley, each holding a hundred coins to give to Liu Cai.

古文：宠劳之曰： 父老何自苦？ 
现代文：刘宠安慰他们说 ：各位长者何必这样呢？ 
English: Liu Zhao consoled them: "Elders, why do you have to do this?

古文：对曰： 山谷鄙生，未尝识郡朝。
现代文：回答说 ：山谷里无知识的人，没有见过郡守。
English: He replied, "People in the valley without knowledge have never seen a county magistrate."

古文：它守时吏发求民间，至夜不绝，或狗吠竟夕，民不得安。
现代文：过去太守在任时，派官吏到民间搜求财物，白天黑夜不断，有时狗叫通宵，百姓不得安宁。
English: In the past, when the governor-general was in office, he sent officials to the people to search for property, day and night, sometimes the dogs barked all night, and the people had no peace.

古文：自明府下车以来，狗不夜吠，民不见吏。
现代文：自从您到任以来，夜里听不见狗叫声，百姓看不到官吏。
English: Since you took office, no dogs have been heard barking at night, and no officials have been seen by the people.

古文：年老遭值圣明，今闻当见弃去，故自扶奉送。 
现代文：我们年老难得逢此太平盛世，现在听说您要离任而去，因此我们特来奉送。 
English: It is rare for us old people to live in such a peaceful and prosperous time. Now that I have heard that you are leaving your post, we have come to give you a special send-off.

古文：宠曰： 吾政何能及公言邪？
现代文：刘宠说 ：我的政治哪里能够如您们长者所说的那样呢？
English: Liu Zhao said: Where can my politics succeed as your elders have said?

古文：勤苦父老！ 
现代文：您们辛苦了啊！ 
English: You have worked hard!

古文：为人选一大钱受之。
现代文：在各人的钱中挑了一枚大的接受了。
English: He took a large piece of each man's money and accepted it.

古文：转为宗正、大鸿胪。
现代文：调任宗正、大鸿胪。
English: Muneyoshi and Taihongjun were transferred.

古文：延熹四年，代黄琼为司空、以阴雾愆阳免。
现代文：延熹四年，代黄琼为司空，因天气阴雾犯阳免官。
English: For four years, Huang Qiong served as the Air Vice-Marshal, but was relieved of his duties due to the weather.

古文：顷之，拜将作大匠，得为宗正。
现代文：不久，授将作大匠，再任宗正。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the title of Daisho (master craftsman) and was reappointed to the post of Sosei.

古文：建宁元年，代王暢为司空，频迁司徒、太尉。
现代文：建宁元年，代王畅为司空，接连任司徒、太尉。
English: In the first year of the Jianning era, Wang Chang was appointed as the second-in-command, and was successively appointed as the second-in-command and the first-lieutenant.

古文：二年，以日食策免，归乡里。
现代文：二年，因日食策命免官，回乡里。
English: Two years later, he was relieved of his duties due to the solar eclipse and returned to his hometown.

古文：宠前后历宰二郡，累登卿相，而清约省素，家无货积。
现代文：刘宠前后连任二郡太守，多次任卿相大官，但清廉朴素，家里没有多少资财。
English: Liu Zhaozhong was successively re-appointed as the governor of the two counties, and he was appointed as the secretary of the cabinet of ministers for many times. However, he was simple and honest, and his family did not have much wealth.

古文：尝出京师，欲息亭舍，亭吏止之，曰： 整顿洒埽，以待刘公，不可得止。 
现代文：曾经自京师外出，想在亭舍休息，亭吏制止他，说道： 我们整顿屋舍，打扫干净，是为了等待刘公的到来，你不得在这里休息。 
English: Once, when a scholar from Beijing went out and wanted to rest in the pavilion, the pavilion officials stopped him and said: We are reorganizing the house and cleaning it up in order to wait for Liu Gong's arrival. You are not allowed to rest here.

古文：宠无言而去，时人称其长者。
现代文：刘宠没有说话就走了，当时人称他为长者。
English: Liu Zhao left without a word. At that time, people called him "elder."

古文：以老病卒于家。
现代文：因年老病死在家里。
English: He died of old age and illness at home.

古文：弟方，官至山阳太守。
现代文：刘宠的弟弟刘方，官至山阳太守。
English: Liu Fang, Liu Zhao's younger brother, became the governor of Shanyang.

古文：方有二子：贷字公山，繇字正礼。
现代文：刘方有两个儿子：刘岱字公山，刘繇字正礼。
English: Liu Fang has two sons: Liu Kunzhu Gongshan and Liu Kunzhu Zhengli.

古文：兄弟齐名称。
现代文：兄弟齐名。
English: Brothers with the same name.

古文：董卓入洛阳，岱从侍中出为兗州刺史。
现代文：董卓入洛阳，刘岱从侍中出任兖州刺史。
English: Dong Zhuo went to Luoyang, and Liu Zhen became the governor of Zhangzhou from his position as a chamberlain.

古文：虚己爱物，为士人所附。
现代文：虚心爱物，为士人所拥护。
English: It is loved by the humble and championed by the gentry.

古文：初平三年，青州黄巾贼入兗州，杀任城相郑遂，转入东平。
现代文：初平三年，青州黄巾贼进入兖州，杀任城相郑遂，辗转进入东平。
English: At the beginning of the third year of the Heian period, the thief of the Qingzhou yellow scarf entered Zhangzhou, killed the city councillor Zheng Sui, and then entered Dongping.

古文：岱击之，战死。
现代文：刘岱击黄巾贼，战死。
English: Liu Ye killed a yellow scarf thief.

古文：兴平中，繇为杨州牧、振威将军。
现代文：兴平中，刘繇任扬州牧、振威将军。
English: In Xingping, Liu Ye served as Yangzhou Maki and Zhenwei Zong.

古文：时袁术据淮南，繇乃移居曲阿。
现代文：这时，袁术据淮南，刘繇不得已移居曲阿。
English: At this time, Yuan Shuxin was in Huainan, and Liu Ye had to move to Qu'ao.

古文：值中国丧乱，士友多南奔，繇携接收养，与同优剧，甚得名称。
现代文：遇上国家丧乱，士大夫朋友多向南方逃难，刘繇接待收养，与他们共患难，获得好名。
English: When the country was in turmoil, most of Shidafu's friends fled to the south. Liu Yao received them for adoption, shared hardships with them, and gained a good reputation.

古文：袁术遣孙策攻破繇，因奔豫章，病卒。
现代文：袁术派孙策攻破刘繇，刘繇跑到豫章，病死。
English: Yuan sent Sun Ce to defeat Liu Bei, but Liu Bei fled to Yuzhang and died of illness.

古文：仇览字季智，一名香，除留考城人也。
现代文：◆仇览传，仇览字季智，一名香，陈留郡考城县人。
English: ◆Kenchan Chuan, Kenchan Ji Zhi, one incense, from Kaocheng County, Chenlu County.

古文：少为书生淳默，乡里无知者。
现代文：年轻时为书生，淳朴沉默，乡里人都不知道他。
English: When he was young, he was a scholar, simple and silent, and the villagers did not know him.

古文：年四十，县召补史，选为蒲亭长。
现代文：四十岁时，县府召他补吏，升为蒲亭长。
English: At the age of forty, the prefectural government called him to be a supplementary official, and he was promoted to Puting chief.

古文：劝人生业，为制科令，至于果菜为限，鸡豕有数，农事既毕，乃令子弟群居，还就黉学。
现代文：劝老百姓治生产，制定规章法令，果菜多少，鸡豕有数。农事完了，就令子弟集合在一起，入学学习。
English: Advise the common people to regulate production, formulate rules and regulations, how many fruits and vegetables, and how many chicken coops. After the agricultural work is completed, let the children gather together and go to school.

古文：其剽轻游恣者，皆役以田桑，严设科罚。
现代文：那些游手好闲为非作歹的，都使之种田治桑，严加管教。
English: Those who were idle and misbehaved were all made to work the fields, and were strictly disciplined.

古文：躬助丧事，赈恤穷寡。
现代文：自己亲为百姓治理丧事，救济穷困鳏寡。
English: He personally administered funerals for the people and provided relief for the poor and widows.

古文：期年称大化。
现代文：一年之内，教化大行。
English: Within a year, the indoctrination was in full swing.

古文：览初到亭，人有陈元者，独与母居，而母诣览告元不孝。
现代文：仇览到亭时，有个叫陈元的人，独与母亲住在一块，母亲去仇览那里控告陈元不孝。
English: When Qian Qian arrived at the pavilion, there was a man named Chen Yuan, who lived alone with his mother. His mother went to Qian Qian to accuse Chen Yuan of being unfilial.

古文：览惊曰： 吾近日过舍，庐落整顿，耕耘以时。
现代文：仇览吃惊地说： 我最近经过你的房子，院落整齐，按时耕种。
English: Surprised, Xuchan said, "I recently passed by your house. The yard is neat and tidy, and the crops are planted on time.

古文：此非恶人，当是教化未及至耻。
现代文：他不是恶人，可能是我的教化没有达到啊。
English: He's not an evil person, maybe I'm not enlightened enough.

古文：母守寡养孤，苦身投老，奈何肆忿于一朝，欲致子以不义乎？ 
现代文：母亲守寡，扶养孤儿，辛苦到老，为什么一旦生气，想使儿子陷于不义呢？ 
English: A mother keeps a widow, supports an orphan, and works hard until old age. Why, once she is angry, does she want to trap her son in injustice?

古文：母闻感悔，涕泣而去。
现代文：这位母亲听了心里感动，后悔起来，流着眼泪回去。
English: Moved by what she heard, the mother regretted what she had done and returned home in tears.

古文：览乃亲到元家，与其母子饮，因为节人伦孝行，譬以祸福之言。
现代文：仇览于是亲自到陈元家里同他们母子饮酒，就便为他们讲人伦孝行，用祸福利害告诫他们。
English: Therefore, Qian Qian went to Chen Yuan's home to drink alcohol with his mother and son. He talked to them about human ethics and filial piety, and warned them of the benefits and harms.

古文：元卒成孝子。
现代文：陈元终于成为孝子。
English: Chen Yuan finally became a filial son.

古文：乡邑为之谚曰： 父母何在在我庭，化我鳲枭哺所生。 
现代文：乡里流行这样一句谚语： 父母何在在我庭，化我鸱枭哺所生。 
English: There is a popular saying in the countryside: "If my parents are not in my garden, I will not be born."

古文：时考城令河内王涣，政尚严猛，闻览以德化人，署为主簿。
现代文：这时，考城令河内王涣，为政主张严猛，听说仇览用德化人，任用他为主簿。
English: At this time, Cao Chengling, the ruler of Hanoi, was a fierce advocate of politics. He was rumored to have a vendetta against Dehua, and appointed him as the head of the book.

古文：谓览曰： 主簿闻陈元之过，不罪而化之，得无少鹰鹯之志邪？ 
现代文：对仇览说： 你知道陈元的过错，不处理他，可能少了一点鹰隼的手段吧。 
English: To the enemies, he said: You know Chen Yuan's fault, if you don't deal with him, you may have lost a little means of eagle hunting.

古文：览曰： 以为鹰鹯，不若鸾凤。 
现代文：仇览说 ：做鹰隼，不如做鸾凤。 
English: The enemy said: "It is better to be an eagle than a phoenix."

古文：涣谢遣曰： 枳棘非鸾凤所栖，百里岂大贤之路？
现代文：王涣遣送他说 ：枳棘不是鸾凤栖身的地方，我这小小的县里难道是大贤施展才华之所？
English: Wang Qian sent him a message saying: "Qianqian is not a place for Qianfeng to live. Is my small county a place for great talents to display their talents?

古文：今日太学曳长裾，飞名誉，皆主簿后耳。
现代文：现在太学拖着长袍，飞名誉，都是主簿后来人啊！ 
English: Now, too many students are dragging robes and flying fame, and they are all latecomers to the main book!

古文：以一月奉为资，勉卒景行。 
现代文：把一个月俸金送给他，勉励他终成高尚的德行。
English: Give him a month's salary and encourage him to become a virtuous person.

古文：览入太学。
现代文：仇览入太学。
English: Kuchien entered the Imperial Academy of Sciences.

古文：时，诸生同郡符融有高名，与览比宇，宾客盈室。
现代文：这时诸生同郡人符融有大名，与仇览邻居，宾客满室。
English: At this time, all the residents of the county are in harmony with the county people. There are daimyo, neighbors with enmity, and guests full of rooms.

古文：览常自守，不与融言。
现代文：仇览常自整饬，不与符融说话。
English: Envy is often self-correcting and does not speak with harmony.

古文：融观其容止，心独奇之，乃谓曰： 与先生同郡壤，邻房牖。
现代文：符融看了仇览的一举一动，心里觉得这个人有点奇怪，于是对仇览说 ：与先生同乡，又是邻居。
English: He watched Hunchan's every move and thought that this man was a bit strange, so he said to Hunchan, "I'm from the same town as you, and we're neighbors.

古文：今京师英雄四集，志士交结之秋，虽务经常，守之何因？ 
现代文：今京师英雄四集，是有志气的人交结的时候，虽说讲求经学，何必这样固执呢？ 
English: Now, when ambitious people come together, why do they have to be so stubborn when it comes to studying the scriptures?

古文：览乃正色曰： 天子修设太学，岂但使人游谈其中！ 
现代文：仇览正色说： 天子设立太学，难道仅仅是为了让人们在这里游谈的吗？ 
English: Qiu Yan Zheng said: Did the Son of Heaven set up Taigaku just to let people talk here?

古文：高揖而去，不复与言。
现代文：长长地作揖而去，不再与他说话了。
English: I walked away in a huff and never spoke to him again.

古文：后融以告郭林宗，林宗因与融赍刺就房谒之，遂请留宿。
现代文：后来符融把这件事告诉了郭林宗，林宗因与符融拿着名片去拜谒仇览，仇览留了他们住宿。
English: Later, Fu Rong told this to Guo Lin Zong. Lin Zong took the business card with Fu Rong to pay homage to Qian Qian, and Qian Qian let them stay.

古文：林宗嗟叹，下床为拜。
现代文：郭林宗嗟叹不止，下床为拜。
English: Guo Linzong sighed more than once and got out of bed to pray.

古文：览学毕归乡里，州郡并请，皆以疾辞。
现代文：仇览学完回乡里，州郡都请他去，仇览托病辞不去。
English: After completing his studies, he returned to his hometown. The state and county both invited him to visit, but he declined, citing illness.

古文：虽在宴居，必以礼自整。
现代文：虽平日家居，也一定以礼要求。
English: Although it is a home on weekdays, it is also required to be polite.

古文：妻子有过，辄免冠自责。
现代文：妻子有过，常摘去帽子自责。
English: My wife has had it, she often takes off her hat and blames herself.

古文：妻子庭谢，候览冠，乃敢升堂。
现代文：妻子庭谢，等候仇览戴上帽子，才敢登堂。
English: His wife, Ting Xie, waited for him to put on his hat before daring to enter the courtroom.

古文：家人莫见喜怒声色之异。
现代文：家里人没有见喜怒声色的怪异。
English: No one in the family noticed the bizarre outburst.

古文：后征方正，遇疾而卒。
现代文：后征方正，遇病死。
English: After conscription, Fang Zheng fell ill and died.

古文：三子皆有文史才，少子玄，最知名。
现代文：三子都有文史才华。少子仇玄，最有名。
English: All three sons were talented in literature and history. The youngest son, Chugen, was the most famous.

古文：童恢字汉宗，琅邪姑幕人也。
现代文：◆童恢传，童恢字汉宗，琅笽郡姑慕幕人。
English: ◆Tong Wei Chuan, Tong Wei Zi Han Zong, Gong County Aunt of the Shogun.

古文：父仲玉，遭玉凶荒，倾家赈恤，九族乡里赖全者以百数。
现代文：父亲童仲玉，碰上凶荒年岁，把全部家产拿出来赈救，九族和乡里的人靠他全活的以百计。
English: When his father, Tong Zhongyu, fell on hard times, he took out all of his family's property to save them. The people of the nine ethnic groups and the countryside depended on him for their survival.

古文：仲玉早卒。
现代文：童仲玉很早就死了。
English: Tong Zhongyu died very early.

古文：恢少仕州郡为吏，司徒杨赐闻其执法廉平，乃辟之。
现代文：童恢年少时在州郡为吏，司徒杨赐知道他执法公平，于是征召他。
English: When Tong Hui was a young man, he was an official in the prefecture and county, and the magistrate Yang Zi knew that he would enforce the law fairly, so he conscripted him.

古文：乃赐被劾当免，掾属悉投刺去，恢独诣阙争之。
现代文：杨赐被弹劾应该免职时，他的部属都抛弃他走了，只有童恢一个人去朝廷为杨赐争辩。
English: When Yang Jie was impeached and should have been removed from office, his subordinates all abandoned him and left. Only Tong Wei went to the imperial court to argue for Yang Jie.

古文：乃得理，掾属悉归府，恢杖策而逝。
现代文：杨赐的案子得到平反，那些部属又统统回来了，童恢却驱马而去。
English: Yang Qi's case was vindicated, those subordinates all returned, but Tong Wei drove away.

古文：由是论者归美。
现代文：因此舆论称赞他。
English: That is why public opinion praises him.

古文：复辟公府，除不其令。
现代文：再被征入公府，授不其令。
English: He was then conscripted into the public service, but never received his orders.

古文：吏人有犯违禁法，辄随方晓示。若吏称其职，人行善事者，皆赐以酒肴之礼，以劝励之。
现代文：县吏及百姓有犯法禁的就随时教育；如果官吏称职的，百姓中有人做了好事的，都赏赐酒肴，以奖励劝免他们。
English: The county officials and the people will educate those who have violated the law at any time; if the officials are competent and some of the people have done good deeds, they will be rewarded with alcohol and food to reward and dissuade them.

古文：耕织种收，皆有条章。
现代文：耕田纺织等生产事业，都有规章。
English: Farming, textile and other production businesses are all subject to regulations.

古文：一境清静，牢狱连年无囚。
现代文：全境清静，牢狱连年空空如也，没有一个囚犯。
English: The whole area is quiet, the prison has been empty for years, there is not a single prisoner.

古文：比县流人归化，徙居二万余户。
现代文：邻县的流亡人口都来归附，迁居的二万多户。
English: The exiled population of the neighboring counties have all come to join, and more than twenty thousand households have been relocated.

古文：民尝为虎所害，乃设槛捕之，生获二虎。
现代文：老百姓常遭虎害，设栏捕虎，活捉了两只老虎。
English: Ordinary people are often harmed by tigers, set up a fence to catch tigers, and caught two tigers alive.

古文：恢闻而出，咒虎曰： 天生万物，唯人为贵。
现代文：童恢出来骂虎道： 天生万物，只有人最贵。
English: Tong Wei came out and scolded the tiger: All things are born, only human beings are the most precious.

古文：虎狼当食六畜，而残暴于人。
现代文：虎狼应当吃马牛羊鸡犬豕六畜，你竟残暴害人。
English: Tigers and wolves should eat horses, cattle, sheep, chickens, dogs, and other animals, yet you brutally harm people.

古文：王法杀人者伤，伤人则论法。
现代文：王法，杀了人的处死，伤了人的治罪。
English: According to the king's law, those who kill people should be put to death, and those who injure people should be punished.

古文：汝若是杀人者，当垂头服罪；自知非者，当号呼称冤。 
现代文：你们如果是杀了人的，应当低头认罪；自己认为没有的，应当呼号称冤。 
English: If you have killed someone, you should bow your heads and confess; if you think you have not, you should cry out for justice.

古文：一虎低头闭目，状如震惧，即时杀之。
现代文：一虎低头闭目，露出震惊恐惧的样子，马上杀了。
English: One tiger lowered its head and closed its eyes, showing shock and fear, and immediately killed it.

古文：其一视恢鸣吼，踊跃自奋，遂令放释。
现代文：另外的那只老虎，望着童恢吼叫，跳跃不止，童恢命令放了。
English: The other tiger, looking at Tong Wei, roared and jumped more and more. Tong Wei gave the order to release it.

古文：吏人为之歌颂。
现代文：县吏和百姓歌颂他。
English: The county officials and the people sang his praises.

古文：青州举尤异，迁丹阳太守，暴疾而卒。
现代文：青州荐举他的优异，升丹阳太守，得暴疾死。
English: Qingzhou recommended him and promoted him to Danyang Daju, but he died of a violent illness.

古文：弟翊字汉文，名高于恢，宰府先辟之。
现代文：弟弟童翊字汉文，名气比童恢大，宰府先辟举他。
English: His younger brother, Tong Xizhe, who is more famous than Tong, was the first to be named by the imperial court.

古文：翊阳喑不肯仕，及恢被命，乃就孝廉，除须昌长。
现代文：童翊因病不能说话，不肯出仕。童恢奉命后，才就孝廉，授须昌长。
English: Due to illness, Tong Hui was unable to speak and refused to serve. It was only after Tong Hui was ordered to do so that he became a filial son and was given the title of Shuchanglong.

古文：化有异政，吏人生为立碑。
现代文：教化有特殊的成绩，县吏和百姓生为立碑。
English: The indoctrination had special achievements, and the county officials and the people were born as a monument.

古文：闻举将丧，弃官归。
现代文：听说举荐者将死，弃官归。
English: I heard that the person who recommended him will die and resign.

古文：后举茂才，不就。卒于家。
现代文：后来被举为茂才，不就，死在家里。
English: Later, he was raised to the rank of Maozai, or rather, died at home.

古文：赞曰： 政界张急，理善亨鲜。
现代文：赞曰：施政最怕过严，治理得当犹如煮小鱼那样容易。
English: Zang said: "The worst thing to do in governance is to be too strict. Governing properly is as easy as cooking a small fish."

古文：推忠以及，众瘼自蠲。
现代文：将忠恕推己及人，许多弊病自然得到消除。
English: If you extend your loyalty to others, many ills will naturally be eliminated.

古文：一夫得情，千室鸣统。
现代文：一个人把握民情，上千家弹琴和乐。
English: One person grasps the people's sentiment, thousands of families play the piano and music.

古文：怀我风爱，永载遗贤。
现代文：怀念他们的仁爱，将前代的贤人永远记载。
English: Remembering their benevolence, the sages of the previous generation will be recorded forever.

