古文：张弘策庾域郑绍叔吕僧珍张弘策，字真简，范阳方城人，文献皇后之从父弟也。
现代文：张弘策字真简，范阳方城人，是文献皇后的堂弟。
English: Zhang Hongze Zi Zhenjian, Fan Yang Fang Chengren, is the cousin of the Queen of Literature.

古文：幼以孝闻。
现代文：从小以孝顺而出名。
English: He was known for his filial piety since childhood.

古文：母尝有疾，五日不食，弘策亦不食。
现代文：他母亲曾生病，连续五天不能吃饭，弘策也不吃不喝。
English: His mother fell ill and was unable to eat for five days in a row, leaving Hiromasa unable to eat or drink.

古文：母强为进粥，乃食母所余。
现代文：母亲勉强喝了点粥，他才吃了母亲剩下的粥。
English: He only ate the rest of his mother's porridge after she had reluctantly drunk some of it.

古文：遭母忧，三年不食盐菜，几至灭性。
现代文：母亲去世后，他三年不吃有盐的菜，几乎危及生命。
English: After his mother's death, he did not eat salted food for three years, which was almost life-threatening.

古文：兄弟友爱，不忍暂离，虽各有室，常同卧起，世比之姜肱兄弟。
现代文：他们兄弟之间极为友爱，不忍暂时的别离，虽各有家室，却经常同榻而眠，世人都把他们比作姜肱兄弟。
English: Their brothers are extremely affectionate with each other and cannot bear to be separated for a while. Although they each have their own families, they often sleep together. People compare them to Jiang Chen's brothers.

古文：起家齐邵陵王国常侍，迁奉朝请、西中郎江夏王行参军。
现代文：起家担任齐邵陵王国常侍，迁奉朝请、西中郎江夏王行参军。
English: He started his career as a regular attendant of the Kingdom of Qi Shao Ling, and was transferred to the Imperial Court to invite the West Middle Lord Jiang Xia Wang Xing to join the army.

古文：弘策与高祖年相辈，幼见亲狎，恒随高祖游处。
现代文：张弘策年龄跟高祖相近，幼年时亲近狎昵。经常跟随高祖一同玩耍。
English: Zhang Hongze is close in age to Gao Zu, and they were very close when they were young. They often played with Gao Zu.

古文：每入室，常觉有云烟气，体辄肃然，弘策由此特敬高祖。
现代文：每当进到屋裹，常觉得有云烟缭绕，不由得肃然起敬，由此弘策特别敬重高祖。
English: Whenever you enter the house, you often feel that there is a cloud of smoke, and you can't help but be awed, which is why Hiromasa has a special respect for Gaozu.

古文：建武末，弘策从高祖宿，酒酣，徙席星下，语及时事。弘策因问高祖曰： 纬象云何？
现代文：齐建武末年，弘策跟从高祖一起住宿，一次痛饮之后，将酒席移到屋外边饮边聊，谈到当时的政事，弘策就问高祖说： 天上星象怎么说?
English: At the end of Qi Jianwu's life, Hongtao and Gaozu stayed together. After a heavy drinking session, they moved the banquet to an outdoor area to drink and talk. When it came to politics at the time, Hongtao asked Gaozu, "What do the stars in the sky say?"

古文：国家故当无恙？ 
现代文：国家应当不会有灾难? 
English: Should there be no disasters in the country?

古文：高祖曰： 其可言乎？ 
现代文：高祖说： 难道还用说吗? 
English: Gaozu said, "Is it really necessary to say it?

古文：弘策因曰： 请言其兆。 
现代文：弘策又说： 请谀谈将要发生动乱的先兆吧。 
English: Hiromasa also said: Let's talk about the precursors of unrest.

古文：高祖曰： 汉北有失地气，浙东有急兵祥。
现代文：高祖说： 漠北一带有失地气，浙东有突发战乱的预兆。
English: Gao Zu said: The northern part of the desert has a feeling of losing ground, and the eastern part of Zhejiang has signs of a sudden war.

古文：今冬初，魏必动；若动则亡汉北。
现代文：今年冬初，北魏军队必将南侵；如果真的这样，我们将会失去汉北的领土。
English: At the beginning of this winter, the Northern Wei army will certainly invade the south; if this is true, we will lose the territory of North Han.

古文：帝今久疾，多异议，万一伺衅，稽部且乘机而作，是亦无成，徒自驱除耳。
现代文：皇上现在长期患病，朝廷上下意见多不统一，万一有可乘之机，稽部必定乘机起来造反，但这班人必定不能成事，衹不过是自取灭亡罢了。
English: The emperor has been ill for a long time now, and the opinions of the imperial court are not uniform. If there is an opportunity, the inspection department will certainly take the opportunity to rebel, but this group of people will not be able to accomplish anything. They are just self-destructing.

古文：明年都邑有乱，死人过于乱麻，齐之历数，自兹亡矣。
现代文：明年都城建康必有动乱，死人会麻还多，南齐政权的历数，必定从此灭亡。
English: Next year, there will be turmoil in the capital Jiankang, there will be more deaths, and the record number of the Nanqi regime will surely perish from now on.

古文：梁、楚、汉当有英雄兴。 
现代文：梁、楚、漠逭一带会有英雄产生。 
English: There will be heroes in Liang, Chu and Mo Shan.

古文：弘策曰： 英雄今何在？
现代文：弘策说： 这个英雄现在何处?
English: Hiromasa said, "Where is this hero now?"

古文：为已富贵，为在草茅？ 
现代文：是富贵之人还是身处草庐荒郊? 
English: Is it a rich person or is it in a grassy wasteland?

古文：高祖笑曰： 光武有云： 安知非仆？  弘策起曰： 今夜之言，是天意也。请定君臣之分。 
现代文：高祖笑着回答： 东汉光武帝曾经说过， 这个天子难道不可能是我吗 ? 弘策起身恭敬地说： 今夜之言正是天意，请求我们从此定下君臣之分。 
English: Gaozu replied with a smile: Emperor Guangwu of the Eastern Han Dynasty once said, "Isn't it possible that this son of heaven is me?" Hiromasa stood up and respectfully said, "Tonight's words are the will of heaven, and I ask that we henceforth determine who is a prince and who is a subject."

古文：高祖曰： 舅欲效邓晨乎？ 
现代文：高祖说： 舅舅你要仿效邓晨吗? 
English: Gao Zu said: Uncle, do you want to emulate Deng Chen?

古文：是冬，魏军寇新野，高祖将兵为援，且受密旨，仍代曹虎为雍州。
现代文：遣年冬天，北魏军队进犯新野，高祖领兵前去救援，并接受齐明帝密旨，代替曹虎为雍州刺史。
English: In the winter of the Year of the Dragon, the Northern Wei army invaded Shinno, Gaozu led the army to rescue, and accepted the secret order of Emperor Qiming to replace Cao Hu to write the history of Yongzhou.

古文：弘策闻之心喜，谓高祖曰： 夜中之言，独当验矣。 
现代文：弘策听到这个消息后，心中暗喜，对高祖说： 前些日子夜襄所说的话，独当应验了。 
English: After hearing this news, Hiromasa was overjoyed and said to Gaozu, "What you said the other night has come true.

古文：高祖笑曰： 且勿多言。 
现代文：高祖笑着说： 暂且不要多说。 
English: Gaozu smiled and said, "For the time being, don't say too much.

古文：弘策从高祖西行，仍参帷幄，身亲军役，不惮辛苦。
现代文：弘策随从高祖西行，仍在军中运筹帷幄，事必躬亲，不辞辛苦。
English: Hongze followed Gao Zu westward, and was still in the army, making plans, attending to everything, and working hard.

古文：五年秋，明帝崩，遗诏以高祖为雍州刺史，乃表弘策为录事参军，带襄阳令。
现代文：永泰元年秋，齐明帝崩，遣诏任命高祖为雍州刺史，高祖表弘策为录事参军，带襄阳令。
English: In the autumn of the first year of the Yongtai Dynasty, Emperor Qiming passed away, and Gaozu was appointed as the historian of Yongzhou by the imperial edict, and Gaozu was enlisted in the army by the imperial edict.

古文：高祖睹海内方乱，有匡济之心，密为储备，谋猷所及，惟弘策而已。
现代文：高祖目睹国内兵乱四起，就有匡时济世之心，并秘密进行物资储备，给高祖出谋划策的，衹有弘策一人。
English: Gao Zu witnessed four domestic military disturbances, and he had the heart of benefiting the world at the right time, and secretly carried out material reserves. Gao Zu was advised by only one person, Yu Yihong.

古文：时长沙宣武王罢益州还，仍为西中郎长史，行郢州事。
现代文：当时长沙宣武王被免去益州之职回到京城，仍担任西中郎长史，行郢州事。
English: At that time, King Xuanwu of Changsha was relieved of the post of Yizhou and returned to Beijing. He still served as the West Middle Lord Changshi and conducted the affairs of Yizhou.

古文：高祖使弘策到郢，陈计于宣武王，语在《高祖纪》。
现代文：高祖派遣弘策到郢州，向宣武王献计，说的话记录在《高祖纪》中。
English: Gaozu sent his emissary to Bozhou to present a plan to King Xuanwu, and his words were recorded in the Gaozu Chronicle.

古文：弘策因说王曰： 昔周室既衰，诸侯力争，齐桓盖中人耳，遂能一匡九合，民到于今称之。
现代文：弘策劝宣武王说： 昔日周王朝日渐衰落，诸侯争霸，齐桓公衹是中等之人，却能一匡天下九合诸侯，人们至今仍在称颂他。
English: He advised King Xuanwu that: In the past, the Zhou Dynasty was in a state of gradual decline, and the princes were competing for supremacy. King Qi Huan was a mediocre person, but he was able to conquer the world's nine concordant princes. People still praise him to this day.

古文：齐德告微，四海方乱，苍生之命，会应有主。
现代文：如今齐国德运衰微，四方动荡不安，天下百姓的命运，应当有入主宰。
English: Today, with the decline of Qi Guo De Rong and the instability in the four directions, the fate of the people of the world should be dominated by Ying Rong.

古文：以郢州居中流之要，雍部有戎马之饶，卿兄弟英武，当今无敌，虎据两州，参分天下，纠合义兵，为百姓请命，废昏立明，易于反掌。
现代文：郢州位居长江中游，是江中要冲，况且雍州兵强马壮，您又兄弟英武，天下无敌。如果藉此而虎据两州，三分天下，纠合义军，为百姓解除疾苦，废除昏君另立明主，简直易如反掌。
English: Zhangzhou is located in the middle reaches of the Yangtze River, and it is a strategic point in the middle of the river. Moreover, the soldiers of Yongzhou are strong and powerful, and you are brothers and mighty, invincible in the world. If you use this to entangle the rebels in two states, three points in the world, relieve the suffering of the people, and abolish the dark lord, it is easy as pie.

古文：如此，则桓、文之业可成，不世之功可建。
现代文：如果这样，就可成就像齐桓公、晋文公一样的千秋霸业，建立绝世之功勋。
English: If this is the case, he will be able to achieve the same great achievements as Prince Qihuan and Prince Jinwen, and establish a world-class achievement.

古文：无为竖子所欺，取笑身后。
现代文：也不至于被小人所欺负，为后人所取笑。
English: Nor will they be bullied by villains and made fun of by posterity.

古文：雍州揣之已熟，愿善图之。 
现代文：我们觉得目前时机已成熟，愿大王您早作打算。 
English: We feel that the time is now ripe for you, Your Majesty, to act.

古文：王颇不怿而无以拒也。
现代文：宣武王听后很不高兴却无法反驳。
English: Xuanwu Wang was very unhappy after hearing this, but he could not refute it.

古文：义师将起，高祖夜召弘策、吕僧珍入宅定议，旦乃发兵，以弘策为辅国将军、军主，领万人督后部军事。
现代文：将要起义之前，高祖连夜召见弘策、吕僧珍入宅商议对策，第二天早上就发兵，任命弘策为辅国将军、军主，带领一万人马都督后部军事。
English: Before the uprising was about to take place, Gaozu summoned Hongtao and Lv Sozhen to his house overnight to discuss countermeasures. The next morning, he sent troops and appointed Hongtao as the general of the auxiliary state and the commander of the army, leading ten thousand soldiers to the rear.

古文：西台建，为步兵校尉，迁车骑谘议参军。
现代文：亩尘王在江陵称帝即位后，任命弘策为步兵校尉，迁车骑谘议参军。
English: After Mu Chen Wang ascended to the throne in Gangneung, he appointed Hongtao as an infantry lieutenant and advised him to join the army.

古文：及郢城平，萧颖达、杨公则诸将皆欲顿军夏口，高祖以为宜乘势长驱，直指京邑，以计语弘策，弘策与高祖意合。
现代文：郢城被攻克后，萧颖达、提公则等诸位将领都想把军队驻扎在夏口，高祖则认为应当乘胜前进，直驱建康，将此计划告诉至继，至继非常赞同直担的意见。
English: After Lucheng was conquered, Xiao Yingda, Ti Gongzi and other generals all wanted to station the army in Xiakou. Gao Zu believed that it was necessary to take advantage of the victory and go straight to Jiankang. He told this plan to his successors, who very much agreed with the idea of taking direct responsibility.

古文：又访宁远将军庾域，域又同。
现代文：又征求宁远将军尘域的意见，庾域也赞成高祖。
English: It also solicited the opinions of the Ningyuan general Ducheng, and Ducheng also agreed with Gao Zu.

古文：乃命众军即日上道，沿江至建康，凡矶、浦、村落，军行宿次、立顿处所，弘策逆为图测，皆在目中。
现代文：高祖便命令众路大军即日就开拔上路，沿长江至建康，凡是矶、浦、村落，军队行军途中可以住宿、停留的地方，弘策早已画成地图，一目了然。
English: Gao Zu then ordered the army to set out on the road the same day. They marched along the Yangtze River to Jiankang. All the islets, ponds, villages, and places where the army could stay and stay during the march had already been drawn into a map, which was clear at a glance.

古文：义师至新林，王茂、曹景宗等于大航方战，高祖遣弘策持节劳勉，众咸奋厉。
现代文：义军到达新林，王茂、曹景宗等人正与敌军在大航交战，高祖派遣弘策持节前去慰劳，众人都受到极大鼓舞。
English: The rebel army arrived in Xinlin, Wang Mao, Cao Jingzong and others were fighting with the enemy army in Dahuang, Gao Zu dispatched Hong Zhe to the festival to comfort the laborers, and everyone was greatly encouraged.

古文：是日，仍破硃雀军。
现代文：这一天，攻破朱雀守军。
English: On this day, the Suzaku defenders were defeated.

古文：高祖入顿石头城，弘策屯门禁卫，引接士类，多全免。
现代文：高祖坐镇石头城，弘策领兵防守城门，担任警戒，亲自接待士人，大多获得保全。
English: Gaozu sat in the town of Stone Town, led the troops to defend the city gate, served as a guard, personally received scholars, and most of them were preserved.

古文：城平，高祖遣弘策与吕僧珍先入清宫，封检府库。
现代文：建康城被攻克后，高祖派弘策和吕僧珍先进城清理皇宫，封存了府库。
English: After Jiankang City was conquered, Gao Zu sent Hongzhe and Lv Sozhen to the advanced city to clean up the imperial palace and seal the prefectural treasury.

古文：于时城内珍宝委积，弘策申勒部曲，秋毫无犯。
现代文：其时，宫城中奇珍异宾到处都是，弘策对部下严加管束，做到秋毫无犯。
English: At that time, strange and unusual guests were everywhere in Miyagi, and Hiromasa strictly controlled his subordinates to ensure that there were no crimes.

古文：迁卫尉卿，加给事中。
现代文：迁卫尉卿，加给事中。
English: Lord Jianwei, added to the case.

古文：天监初，加散骑常侍，洮阳县侯，邑二千二百户。
现代文：天监初年，加散骑常侍，洮阳县侯，食邑一千二百户。
English: In the first year of the Heaven's Supervisor, he added a horseback riding attendant, the lord of Fenyang County, and 1,200 households in food villages.

古文：弘策尽忠奉上，知无不为，交友故旧，随才荐拔，搢绅皆趋焉。
现代文：弘策事奉皇上尽心尽职，知无不为，他对故交旧友都能各按其才给予举荐提拔，各地官宦都争相投靠于他。
English: He served the emperor diligently and conscientiously, and he knew how to do everything. He could recommend and promote his old friends according to their talents. Officials and officials from all over the country were eager to rely on him.

古文：时东昏余党初逢赦令，多未自安，数百人因运荻炬束仗，得入南北掖作乱，烧神虎门、总章观。
现代文：当时束昏侯的余党刚被赦免，许多人仍然感到不安，其中几百人藉运送芦苇火把之机，进入南北掖门暴动作乱，放火焚烧了神虎门、总章观。
English: At that time, the dazed Yu Party had just been pardoned, and many people were still uneasy. Several hundred of them used the opportunity to transport reeds and torches to enter the North and South Gate to riot and set fire to the Gate of the Gods and the General Chapter.

古文：前军司马吕僧珍直殿内，以宿卫兵拒破之，盗分入卫尉府，弘策方救火，盗潜后害之，时年四十七。
现代文：前军司马吕僧珍正在殿内当值，率领宿卫兵击败乱军，贼人分兵进入卫尉府，弘策当时正指挥众人救火，贼兵潜伏到他后面将其杀害，死时年龄四十七岁。
English: The former military commander Maru Sozhen was on duty in the hall, leading the guards to defeat the rebels, and a detachment of thieves entered the guards' house. At that time, Hiromasa was commanding everyone to fight the fire, and the thieves hid behind him and killed him. He was forty-seven years old at the time of his death.

古文：高祖深恸惜焉。
现代文：高祖为他的遇害深感痛惜。
English: Gaozu deeply regrets his death.

古文：给第一区，衣一袭，钱十万，布百匹，蜡二百斤。
现代文：赐给官邸一座，衣服一套，钱十万，布一百匹，蜡二百斤。
English: He gave the official residence a cow, a set of clothes, one hundred thousand in money, one hundred horses of cloth, and two hundred pounds of wax.

古文：诏曰： 亡从舅卫尉，虑发所忽，殒身祅竖。
现代文：颁布诏书说： 已故从舅卫尉，因一时疏忽，丧身于盗贼之手。
English: The imperial edict said: "The late Lieutenant of the Imperial Guards, due to momentary negligence, lost his life at the hands of a thief.

古文：其情理清贞，器识淹济，自籓升朝，契阔夷阻。
现代文：他性情清白坚贞，器量见识渊深而美好，我朝建立以来，他辛勤劳苦，历尽险阻。
English: His disposition is pure and steadfast, his insight is profound and beautiful, and since the founding of our country, he has worked hard and overcome all difficulties.

古文：加外氏凋衰，飨尝屡绝，兴感《渭阳》，情寄斯在。
现代文：外祖父家衰败没落，飨尝之祭经常断绝，而他常寄情于《渭阳》一诗，以表甥舅之情。
English: His maternal grandfather's family had fallen into decline, and the feast of feasting was often interrupted. Instead, he often sent a poem, "Burying the Sun," to express his feelings for his cousin.

古文：方赖忠勋，翼宣寡薄，报效无征，永言增恸。
现代文：正当依靠他建功立业，辅佐圣朝之时，他却突然丧命殒逝，以致无法报答他的恩德，实在令人感到无限的悲哀。
English: While relying on him to make contributions and support the Holy Dynasty, he suddenly passed away, unable to repay his kindness, which is truly saddening.

古文：可赠散骑常侍、车骑将军。
现代文：可以追赠他为散骑常侍、车骑将军。
English: He can be given posthumously as a strolling equestrian and a carriage-riding general.

古文：给鼓吹一部。
现代文：给鼓吹乐队一部。
English: Part of the trumpet band.

古文：谥曰愍。 
现代文：滥号为愍。 
English: His nickname is.

古文：弘策为人宽厚通率，笃旧故。
现代文：强弘策为人宽厚旷达而又坦率，深念亲朋故旧。
English: Qiang Hongze is a generous and open-minded person, who deeply remembers his relatives and friends.

古文：及居隆重，不以贵势自高。
现代文：他在朝中担任高官，位居隆重，但他从不以有权势而自视清高。
English: He served as a high-ranking official in the imperial court and occupied a grand position, but he never regarded himself as powerful.

古文：故人宾客，礼接如布衣时。
现代文：接待故人宾客十分周到热情，仍然像从前当老百姓时一样。
English: The reception of the deceased guests was very thoughtful and enthusiastic, still like when they were ordinary people.

古文：禄赐皆散之亲友。
现代文：所接受的俸禄赏赐都随即分送给亲友。
English: All the salary rewards received were immediately distributed to relatives and friends.

古文：及其遇害，莫不痛惜焉。
现代文：他遇害后，没有人不为他痛心惋惜。
English: After he was killed, no one could help but feel sorry for him.

古文：子缅嗣，别有传。
现代文：他儿子张缅继承爵位，另外有传。
English: His son Zhang Bain inherited the title, and there is another legend.

古文：庾域，字司大，新野人。
现代文：庾域字司大，新野人。
English: Zhi Shi Da, a new wild man, was born in this area.

古文：长沙宣武王为梁州，以为录事参军，带华阳太守。
现代文：长沙宣武王为梁州刺史时，任命他为录事参军，带华阳太守。
English: When King Xuanwu of Changsha was writing the history of Liangzhou, he appointed him to join the army, taking Huayang Taishu with him.

古文：时魏军攻围南郑，州有空仓数十所，域封题指示将士云： 此中粟皆满，足支二年，但努力坚守。 
现代文：当时北魏军队围攻南郑，州中有数十个空粮仓，庾域将库门贴上封条，告诉将士们说： 这些粮仓中都装满了粮食，足够支用二年，你们衹管努力坚守。 
English: At that time, the Northern Wei army besieged Nan Zheng. There were dozens of empty grain silos in the prefecture. Yan Wei sealed the doors of the silos and told the soldiers: "These grain silos are full of grain, enough to last for two years. You must work hard to hold on."

古文：众心以安。
现代文：这样，军心才得以安定。
English: In this way, military morale could be stabilized.

古文：虏退，以功拜羽林监，迁南中郎记室参军。
现代文：敌兵撤退后，以其功授羽林监，迁南中郎记室参军。
English: After the enemy retreated, he was awarded the title of "Uebayashi no kami" (superintendent of forests) and transferred to the office of "Nanchu-ro" (middle steward) to join the army.

古文：永元末，高祖起兵，遣书招域。
现代文：查永元末年，高祖起兵，发信征召庾域前去。
English: At the end of the first year of the Cha Yong, Gao Zu raised an army and sent a letter to call for recruits to go to Shiji.

古文：西台建，以为宁朔将军，领行选，从高祖东下。
现代文：南康王在江陵称帝即位后，任命他为宁朔将军，领行选，随从高祖沿江东下。
English: After King Nankang ascended to the throne in Gangneung, he appointed him as the general of Ningshuo, led the election, and followed Gao Zu along the east of the river.

古文：师次杨口，和帝遣御史中丞宗夬衔命劳军。
现代文：军队驻扎在杨旦，壬瞳派御史中丞塞皇领命前去犒劳大军。
English: The army was stationed in Yangdan, and Emperor Jin sent Emperor Shizhongjo to lead the army.

古文：域乃讽夬曰： 黄钺未加，非所以总率侯伯。 
现代文：座球婉言对塞去说： 皇上还没有授予直担黄锁，这样无法统率各路军队。 
English: "The emperor has not yet granted the direct charge of the Yellow Lock, so it is impossible to lead all the armies.

古文：夬反西台，即授高祖黄钺。
现代文：宗央返回江陵将逭一情况告诉了和帝，和帝就授予高祖皇帝所用的黄绒。
English: Zongyang returned to Gangneung and told Emperor He of the situation, and Emperor He awarded Emperor Gao the yellow velvet used.

古文：萧颖胄既都督中外诸军事，论者谓高祖应致笺，域争不听，乃止。
现代文：萧颖胄统领中央地方各项军事事务后，左右的人都劝直坦应致函王堕，厘塑静谏说不应接受此建议，高祖才作罢。
English: After Xiao Yingqian took charge of various military affairs in the central region, people on both sides urged Zhi Tan to send a letter to Wang Pu, and Li Shoujing said that this suggestion should not be accepted. Gao Zu finally gave up.

古文：郢城平。域及张弘策议与高祖意合，即命众军便下。
现代文：郢城被攻克后，庾域和张弘策的想法跟高祖相同，当即命令各路大军沿江东下，直取建康。
English: After Lucheng was conquered, the thoughts of Lucheng and Zhang Hongze were the same as Gao Zu. They immediately ordered all armies to go east along the river and directly attack Jiankang.

古文：每献谋画，多被纳用。
现代文：庾域每次所进献的谋略，多被直担采用。
English: Most of the strategies that have been proposed in each of these areas have been directly adopted.

古文：霸府初开，以为谘议参军。
现代文：直担霸业初就，任命他为谘议参军。
English: Directly in charge of the bully at the beginning of the year, he was appointed as a consultant to join the army.

古文：天监初，封广牧县子，后军司马。
现代文：初年，庐球被封为广牧县子，后军司马。
English: In the first year, Yanqiu was named the son of Guangmu County, and later became the son of Sima.

古文：出为宁朔将军、巴西、梓潼二郡太守。
现代文：出为宁朔将军、巴西梓潼二郡太守。
English: He became the general of Ningshuo and the governor of the second county of Zizhou, Brazil.

古文：梁州长史夏侯道迁举州叛降魏，魏骑将袭巴西，域固守百余日，城中粮尽，将士皆龁草食土，死者太半，无有离心。
现代文：梁州长史夏侯道迁举州反叛朝廷投降韭魏，韭魏兵马侵袭旦酉，厘继据城固守一百多天，城中粮尽，全军将士只好以青草、泥土充饥，饿死的人超过大半，但全军上下毫不动摇。
English: The governor of Liang Province, Shixia Houdao, moved his province to rebel against the imperial court and surrender to the Wei Dynasty. The Wei Dynasty's soldiers and horses invaded Danzhou, which led to the city holding out for more than a hundred days. There was no food in the city, and the soldiers of the whole army had to use grass and soil to satisfy their hunger. More than half of the people died of starvation, but the whole army did not waver.

古文：魏军退，诏增封二百户，进爵为伯。
现代文：北魏军队撤退后，朝廷颁诏增封尘域食邑二百户，晋升为伯爵。
English: After the withdrawal of the Northern Wei army, the imperial court issued an edict to increase the number of households in the food villages in the Dust Region by 200, and promoted him to count.

古文：六年，卒于郡。
现代文：天监六年，卒于任职的州郡。
English: Tian Jian was six years old and died in the county where he served.

古文：郑绍叔，字仲明，荥阳开封人也。世居寿阳。
现代文：郑绍叔字仲明，荥阳开封人，世代定居在寿阳。
English: Zheng Shao's uncle Zi Zhongming, a native of Shenyang and Kaifeng, settled in Shouyang for generations.

古文：祖琨，宋高平太守。
现代文：祖父郑琨，曾任南朝宋高平太守。
English: His grandfather, Zheng Qi, was once the regent of Song Gaoping of the Southern Dynasty.

古文：绍叔少孤贫。
现代文：绍叔从小生活孤苦贫困。
English: Uncle Shao has been living in poverty since he was a child.

古文：年二十余，为安豊令，居县有能名。
现代文：二十多岁时，为塞丰县令，在任期间以能干出名。
English: When he was in his twenties, he was the governor of Saifeng County. During his term of office, he was famous for his ability.

古文：本州召补主簿，转治中从事史。
现代文：本州召补他为主簿，辅治中从事史。
English: He was called up by Honshu to be the chief accountant, and engaged in history during his time as an assistant governor.

古文：时刺史萧诞以弟谌诛，台遣收兵卒至，左右莫不惊散，绍叔闻难，独驰赴焉。
现代文：当时刺史萧诞的弟弟萧谌被朝廷诛杀，朝廷派兵前来收捕萧诞，兵马突然来到，萧诞的左右亲信全都惊慌失措，四散而逃，衹有鄞钮抠听说刺史有难，飞马赶赴州郡。
English: At that time, Xiao Yu, the younger brother of the assassin, Xiao Shi, was killed by the imperial court. The imperial court sent soldiers to arrest Xiao Yu. The soldiers and horses suddenly arrived. Xiao Yu's right and left cronies were all panicked and fled in all directions. Hearing that the assassination was difficult, Fei Ma rushed to the county.

古文：诞死，侍送丧柩，众咸称之。
现代文：萧诞死后，又亲自护送灵柩，众人都称颂他的忠诚。
English: After Xiao's death, he personally escorted the coffin, and everyone praised his loyalty.

古文：到京师，司空徐孝嗣见而异之，曰： 祖逖之流也。 
现代文：到京师后，司空徐孝嗣见到他后惊异地说： 他是祖逖之类的人啊。 
English: After he arrived in Beijing to teach, Siku Xu Xiaozhi was surprised to see him and said, "He's a kind of ancestor."

古文：高祖临司州，命为中兵参军，领长流，因是厚自结附。
现代文：高祖到司州后，任命郑绍叔为中兵参军，领长流，此后他更加依附于高祖。
English: After Gaozu arrived in Sizhou, he appointed Zheng Shao as the middle soldier to join the army, leading the long stream, after which he became more attached to Gaozu.

古文：高祖罢州还京师，谢遣宾客，绍叔独固请愿留。
现代文：高祖被免去司州之职准备归还京师，便谢遣宾客僚属，惟独绍叔坚决请求留下。
English: Gao Zu was relieved of the post of prefectural governor to prepare for the return of the capital division, and then sent guests and staff, but Uncle Shao firmly requested to stay.

古文：高祖谓曰： 卿才幸自有用，我今未能相益，宜更思他涂。 
现代文：高祖对他说： 您的才干自然会受到重用，但是我现在不能对你提携，您应当另谋出路。 
English: Gaozu said to him, "Your talent will naturally be put to good use, but I can't partner with you now. You should find another way out."

古文：绍叔曰： 委质有在，义无二心。 
现代文：绍叔说： 臣已委身于君，决无二心。 
English: Uncle Shao said, "I have committed myself to you, and I have no second thoughts.

古文：高祖固不许，于是乃还寿阳。
现代文：高祖还是坚持不留下他，之后他只好回到寿阳。
English: Gaozu still insisted on not leaving him behind, after which he had to return to Shouyang.

古文：刺史萧遥昌苦引绍叔，终不受命。
现代文：刺史萧遥昌极力想引用绍叔，但他始终固辞不受。
English: Historian Xiao Yuchang tried his best to quote Uncle Shao, but he was always refused.

古文：遥昌怒，将囚之，救解得免。
现代文：萧遥昌大怒，要将他囚禁起来，后被人解救而得免。
English: Xiao Yaochang was so angry that he wanted to imprison him, but he was rescued and spared.

古文：及高祖为雍州刺史，绍叔间道西归，补宁蛮长史、扶风太守。
现代文：到高祖为雍州刺史时，绍叔从偏僻的小路西归雍州，补宁蛮长史、扶风太守。
English: When Gao Zu was writing the history of Yongzhou, Uncle Shao returned to Yongzhou from a remote path to the west, making up for the long history of Ning and being the governor of Fufeng.

古文：东昏既害朝宰，颇疑高祖。
现代文：东昏侯杀害了好几位朝廷大臣后，又对高祖颇为猜疑。
English: After several imperial ministers were killed by Dongdimou, he became suspicious of Gaozu.

古文：绍叔兄植为东昏直后，东昏遣至雍州，托以候绍叔，实潜使为刺客。
现代文：郑绍叔的哥哥郑植是东昏侯的侍卫人员，东昏侯派他去雍州，假托去看望绍叔，实际上是暗中让他去当刺客。
English: Uncle Zheng Shao's brother, Zheng Zhi, was an attendant of Dongdimou. Dongdimou sent him to Yongzhou under the pretense of visiting Uncle Shao, but in reality he secretly asked him to be an assassin.

古文：绍叔知之，密以白高祖。
现代文：绍叔知道这一情况后，就密报高祖，让他有所准备。
English: After Uncle Shao learned of this situation, he secretly informed Gao Zu and let him prepare.

古文：植既至，高祖于绍叔处置酒宴之，戏植曰： 朝廷遣卿见图，今日闲宴，是见取良会也。 
现代文：郑植到达雍州后，高祖在绍叔的住处设宴招待他，戏谵他说： 朝廷派遣阁下来打我的主意，今日便宴，正是您取我性命的好机会啊。 
English: After Zheng Zhi arrived in Yongzhou, Gaozu held a banquet at the residence of Uncle Shao to invite him, jokingly saying: "The Imperial Court has sent you to attack my idea, and today's banquet is a good opportunity for you to take my life."

古文：宾主大笑。
现代文：宾主双方大笑。
English: Both hosts burst out laughing.

古文：令植登临城隍，周观府署，士卒、器械、舟舻、战马，莫不富实。
现代文：高祖让郑植登上城墙，仔细观看府署，但见士卒、器械、舟船、战马，都很富实。
English: Gaozu asked Zheng Zhi to climb the city wall and carefully watch the government offices, but the soldiers, equipment, ships, and horses were all very rich.

古文：植退谓绍叔曰： 雍州实力，未易图也。 
现代文：郑植回来后对绍叔说： 雍州实力强大，确实不容易对付。 
English: After Zheng Zhi returned, he said to Uncle Shao: Yongzhou is powerful, and it is really not easy to deal with.

古文：绍叔曰： 兄还，具为天子言之。
现代文：绍叔说： 哥哥您回去后，将遣襄的情况详细地禀告天子。
English: Uncle Shao said, "Brother, when you return, you will report the details of your brother's departure to Heavenly Son.

古文：兄若取雍州，绍叔请以此众一战。 
现代文：哥哥如果来攻取雍州，我这当弟弟的就率领这些兵士跟你决一死战。 
English: If my brother comes to conquer Yongzhou, I, as a younger brother, will lead these soldiers to fight you to the death.

古文：送兄于南岘，相持恸哭而别。
现代文：绍叔一直把哥哥送到南岘，最后抱头痛哭而别。
English: Uncle Shao kept sending his brother to Nanlu, and finally they hugged each other and cried bitterly.

古文：义师起，为冠军将军，改骁骑将军，侍从东下江州，留绍叔监州事，督江、湘二州粮运，事无阙乏。
现代文：高祖率师起义后，任命绍叔为冠军将军，改骁骑将军，随从高祖束下江州，江州被攻克后，留下绍叔监管州中事务，都督江、湘二州的粮运，使束征大军的粮食不致缺乏。
English: After Gao Zu led his division in the uprising, he appointed Shao Shu as the champion general and changed him to a cavalry general. He followed Gao Shu to Jiangzhou. After Jiangzhou was conquered, he left Shao Shu to supervise the affairs of the middle of the state and the grain transportation of the two states of Jiangsu and Hunan, so that the conscript army would not lack grain.

古文：天监初，入为卫尉卿。
现代文：天监初年，入为卫尉卿。
English: In the first year of the post, he was promoted to the rank of Lieutenant of the Imperial Guards.

古文：绍叔忠于事上，外所闻知，纤毫无隐。
现代文：郑绍叔事奉皇上忠心耿耿，凡在外面听么，都对皇上没有丝毫的隐瞒。
English: Uncle Zheng Shao served the emperor loyally. If you listen to the outside world, there is nothing hidden from the emperor.

古文：每为高祖言事，善则曰： 臣愚不及，此皆圣主之策。 
现代文：每次向高祖汇报事情，成效显著的，就说 下臣才学浅陋，这些成绩都是圣上您英明决策的结果。 
English: Every time you report something to Gaozhu, if the results are remarkable, you should say that your vassal's learning is shallow. These achievements are the result of your wise decision-making.

古文：其不善，则曰： 臣虑出浅短，以为其事当如是，殆以此误朝廷，臣之罪深矣。 
现代文：如果出现失误，就说： 下臣见识短浅，本以为这件事应当如此，几乎因此而贻误朝廷大事，臣之罪遇实在不轻。 
English: If there is a mistake, say: The vassal was short-sighted and thought the matter should be as it was, and almost caused a delay in the imperial event. The vassal's crime is really serious.

古文：高祖甚亲信之。
现代文：高祖越发亲近信任他。
English: Gaozhu grew closer and closer to him and trusted him.

古文：母忧去职。
现代文：因母亲去世而辞官。
English: Resigned after his mother's death.

古文：绍叔有至性，高祖常使人节其哭。
现代文：绍叔天性孝顺，高祖常常派人前去劝他节哀。
English: Shao Shu was naturally filial, and Gao Zu often sent people to persuade him to mourn.

古文：顷之，起为冠军将军、右军司马，封营道县侯，邑千户。
现代文：随后，起为冠军将军、右军司马，封为营道县侯，食邑一千户。
English: Subsequently, he was promoted to champion general, right army Sima, and was appointed as the county magistrate of Yingdao County, with a thousand households in his hometown.

古文：俄复为卫尉卿，加冠军将军。
现代文：不久复为卫尉卿，加冠军将军。
English: He was soon promoted to Lieutenant-Commander of the Guards, and later to General of the Horse.

古文：以营道县户凋弊，改封东兴县侯，邑如故。
现代文：由于营道县户衰减，改封束兴县侯，食邑照旧。
English: Due to the decline of households in Yingdao County, the county seat was changed to Sokxing County, and the food village remained the same.

古文：初，绍叔少失父，事母及祖母以孝闻，奉兄恭谨。
现代文：当初，郑绍叔从小失去父亲，以事奉母亲、祖母十分孝顺而闻名，对待兄长恭敬而又谨慎。
English: At first, Uncle Zheng Shao lost his father when he was a child. He was known to be very filial to his mother and grandmother, and treated his brother respectfully and cautiously.

古文：及居显要，禄赐所得及四方贡遗，悉归之兄室。
现代文：在朝廷担任显要官职以后，所得到的俸禄、赏赐以及四方进贡、馈赠的礼物，全都送到哥哥家裹。
English: After he held a high-ranking official position in the imperial court, the salary and rewards he received, as well as the tributes and gifts from the four quarters, were all sent to his brother's house.

古文：三年，魏军围合肥，绍叔以本号督众军镇东关，事平，复为卫尉。
现代文：天监三年，北魏军队围攻合肥，郑绍叔以本号督领众军镇守束关，战事平息后，复为卫尉。
English: In the third year of Tianjun, the Northern Wei army besieged Hefei, and Zheng Shaoxu led the army to guard Shukuan. After the war subsided, he was reinstated as a guard lieutenant.

古文：既而义阳为魏所陷，司州移镇关南。
现代文：不久义阳被北魏军队攻陷，遂将司州治所迁移到关南。
English: Soon after, Yiyang was conquered by the Northern Wei army, and the Sizhou government moved to Guannan.

古文：四年，以绍叔为使持节、征虏将军、司州刺史。
现代文：天监四年，任命郑绍叔为使持节、征虏将军、司州刺史。
English: In the fourth year of the Heavenly Supervisor, Uncle Zheng Shao was appointed as the envoy of the festival, the conscript general, and the secretary of state.

古文：绍叔创立城隍，缮修兵器，广田积谷，招纳流民，百姓安之。
现代文：绍叔到任以后，筑城挖壕，修缮兵器，增广农田，积储粮食，招集各地流民，百姓得以安居乐业。
English: After Uncle Shao took office, he built a city, dug trenches, repaired weapons, expanded farmland, accumulated grain, and called up displaced people from all over the country, so that the people could live and work in peace.

古文：性颇矜躁，以权势自居，然能倾心接物，多所荐举，士类亦以此归之。
现代文：绍叔性情颇好夸耀而急躁，以权势而自居；但还能倾心待人，较多推荐举用有识之士，文人、士大夫们也都因此而归附于他。
English: Shao Shifu was boastful and impetuous, boasting of his power; however, he was also kind to others, and recommended more people with insight. For this reason, writers and scholars also attached themselves to him.

古文：六年，征为左将军，加通直散骑常侍，领司、豫二州大中正。
现代文：玉监六年，郑绍叔被征为左卫将军，加通直散骑常侍，领司、豫二州大中正。
English: During the six years of the Jade Emperor's reign, Uncle Zheng Shao was conscripted as a general of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards, and he was also made an equerry, a leader, and a member of the Central Committee of the Second State University of Henan.

古文：绍叔至家疾笃。诏于宅拜授，舆载还府，中使医药，一日数至。
现代文：绍叔到家后病重，高祖下诏就在其住宅拜授官职，然后用车子载回州府。高祖亲派宦官送去医药，一天多达数次。
English: After Uncle Shao arrived home, he was seriously ill. Gao Zu gave him an official post in his house, and then took him back to the state capital by car. Gao Zu's relatives sent eunuchs to deliver medicine, as many as several times a day.

古文：七年，卒于府舍，时年四十五。
现代文：天监七年，绍叔卒于官邸，时年四十五岁。
English: In the seventh year of Tianjun, Shao Shu passed away at the official residence, at the age of forty-five.

古文：高祖将临其殡，绍叔宅巷狭陋，不容舆驾，乃止。
现代文：直坦准备亲临吊唁，但因钮超住宅所处的街巷狭窄简陋，容不下皇帝的车驾，只好作罢。
English: Naotan prepared to pay his condolences in person, but had to give it up because the streets and lanes where Niu Chao's residence was located were narrow and simple, and could not accommodate the emperor's chauffeur.

古文：诏曰： 追往念功，前王所笃；在诚惟旧，异代同规。
现代文：高祖颁韶说： 追忆往事缅怀功勋，这是先王所重视的；真心诚意思念故人，历代同规。
English: Gao Zu said: Recalling the past and remembering the merits, this is what the former king attaches importance to; sincerely remembering the deceased, the same throughout the ages.

古文：通直散骑常侍、右卫将军、东兴县开国侯绍叔，立身清正，奉上忠恪，契阔籓朝，情绩显著。
现代文：通直散骑常侍、左卫将军、东兴县开国侯绍叔，立身处世清正廉明，事奉皇上忠诚恭谨，辛勤创业，成绩显著。
English: Tongzhi Sanzhi, General Zuo, and Dongxing County founder Hou Shao, were upright and honest, served the emperor loyally and respectfully, worked hard to start a business, and achieved remarkable results.

古文：爰及义始，实立茂勋，作牧疆境，效彰所莅。
现代文：起义之初，他功勋卓越，驻守疆境，成效卓著。
English: At the beginning of the uprising, he performed outstanding feats, guarded the border, and achieved outstanding results.

古文：方申任寄，协赞心膂；奄至殒丧，伤痛于怀。
现代文：正当朝廷委以重任，身处要职辅佐皇上之时，忽然丧命殒逝，真是让人悲伤哀痛。
English: Just when the Imperial Household Committee was carrying out an important task, when he was an important assistant to the emperor, he suddenly died, which was really sad and sad.

古文：宜加优典，隆兹宠命。
现代文：应当为他举行盛大葬礼，使加恩特赐的任命更加隆重。
English: A grand funeral should be held for him to add grandeur to the appointment bestowed by Garne.

古文：可赠散骑常侍、护军将军，给鼓吹一部，东园秘器，朝服一具，衣一袭，凶事所须，随由资给。
现代文：可追赠散骑常侍、护军将军，赐给鼓吹乐队一部，东园秘器，朝服一套，衣一袭，丧事所需费用，都由朝廷供给。
English: The Imperial Court will provide a retiring equerry, a general of the escort, a part of the trumpet band, the East Garden's secret utensils, a set of imperial robes, a suit of clothes, and the expenses required for the funeral.

古文：谥曰忠。 
现代文：谧号为忠。 
English: His nickname is Zhong.

古文：绍叔卒后，高祖尝潸然谓朝臣曰： 郑绍叔立志忠烈，善则称君，过则归己，当今殆无其比。 
现代文：郑绍叔去世后，直塑曾伤心地对朝臣们说： 塑钮拯立志忠烈，如果是好事，就把功劳归结于君主；如果有过错，就把责任归结于自身，当今世上大概没有人能与之相比了。 
English: After the death of Uncle Zheng Shao, Zhishuo once said sadly to the courtiers: Zhishuo, you are loyal, if it is a good thing, you will attribute the credit to the monarch; if you are at fault, you will attribute the responsibility to yourself, and there is probably no one in the world today who can compare with it.

古文：其见赏惜如此。
现代文：可见高祖极其赞赏惋惜他。
English: It can be seen that Gaozu was extremely appreciative and felt sorry for him.

古文：子贞嗣。
现代文：他的儿子张贞继承其爵位。
English: His son Zhang Zhen succeeded to his title.

古文：吕僧珍，字元瑜，东平范人也。世居广陵。
现代文：吕僧珍字元瑜，东平范县人，世代居住在广陵。
English: Lv Sozhen Zi Yuan Yu, a Dongping Fan County resident, has lived in Guangling for generations.

古文：起自寒贱。
现代文：出生于寒微之家。
English: He was born into a family of farmers.

古文：始童儿时，从师学，有相工历观诸生，指僧珍谓博士曰： 此有奇声，封侯相也。 
现代文：童年时代，跟从老师学习，有个相命先生看了所有学生后，指着僧珍对博士说： 此童有非同寻常的声音，从相术来看是封侯的相貌。 
English: In my childhood, when I was learning from a teacher, there was a fortune-teller who, after looking at all the students, pointed to the monk Zhen and said to the doctor: This child has an unusual voice, and from the point of view of physiognomy, he has the appearance of a prince.

古文：年二十余，依宋丹阳尹刘秉，秉诛后，事太祖文皇为门下书佐。
现代文：二十多岁时，投靠宋丹阳尹刘秉，刘秉被诛杀后，僧珍事奉太祖文皇为门下书佐。
English: When he was in his twenties, he took refuge with Song Danyang Yin Liu Bing. After Liu Bing was beaten to death, the monk Zhen served the great ancestor Emperor Wen as a subordinate assistant.

古文：身长七尺五寸，容貌甚伟。
现代文：僧珍身高七尺五寸，容貌魁梧奇伟。
English: Monk Zhen is seven feet five inches tall, with a burly appearance.

古文：在同类中少所亵狎，曹辈皆敬之。
现代文：在他同辈人中行为举止极为严肃、庄重，官署裹的人都非常尊敬他。
English: Among his peers, he behaves very seriously and solemnly, and people in the government respect him very much.

古文：太祖为豫州刺史，以为典签，带蒙令，居官称职。
现代文：太祖为豫州刺史时，任命僧珍为典签，带蒙县县令，任官期间极为称职。
English: When the great-grandfather was writing the history of Yuzhou, he appointed the monk Zhen as the signature, with the county order of Mengxian County, and he was extremely competent during his tenure.

古文：太祖迁领军，补主簿。
现代文：当太祖迁任领军后，僧珍被补为主簿。
English: When the great-grandfather was transferred to lead the army, the monk Zhen was added as the main book.

古文：妖贼唐瑀寇东阳，太祖率众东讨，使僧珍知行军众局事。
现代文：叛贼唐璃进犯束阳，太祖率军前往东边讨伐，派僧珍主持行军众局事。
English: The traitor Tangli invaded Sokyang, the great ancestor led the army to the east to fight, and sent the monk Zhen to preside over the march.

古文：僧珍宅在建阳门东，自受命当行，每日由建阳门道，不过私室，太祖益以此知之。
现代文：僧珍家住在建阳门束面，自从受命任职以来，每天路经建阳门，却从不顺道回家，太祖因此更加赏识他。
English: Monk Zhen Jia lived in Jianyangmen Sokmen. Since he was appointed to the post, he passed through Jianyangmen every day, but he never went home by the way. Therefore, the great-grandfather appreciated him more.

古文：为丹阳尹，复命为郡督邮。
现代文：任命他为丹阳尹，又任命为郡督邮。
English: He appointed him as Danyang Yin, and also appointed him as the county postmaster.

古文：齐随王子隆出为荆州刺史，齐武以僧珍为子隆防阁，从之镇。
现代文：齐随王子隆出为荆州刺史，齐武帝任命僧珍为子隆防合，跟随子隆镇守荆州。
English: Qi followed Prince Long as the ruler of Jingzhou, and Emperor Qiwu appointed the monk Zhen as the governor of Zilong, and followed Zilong as the governor of Jingzhou.

古文：永明九年，雍州刺史王奂反，敕遣僧珍隶平北将军曹虎西为典签，带新城令。
现代文：永明十一年，雍州刺史王奂反叛朝廷，朝廷派遣僧珍隶属平北将军曹虎，到西边担任典签，带新城县令。
English: In the eleventh year of the Yongming era, the Yongzhou prince Wang Zhi rebelled against the imperial court. The imperial court dispatched the monk Zhen, who was subordinate to the general Cao Hu of the North, to the west to serve as a signer and bring the Xincheng County edict.

古文：魏军寇沔北，司空陈显达出讨，一见异之，因屏人呼上座，谓曰： 卿有贵相，后当不见减，努力为之。 
现代文：北魏军队进犯沔北，司空陈颢达出兵征讨，一见到僧珍就感到十分惊奇，便屏退左右呼他上座，对他说： 你有贵人之相，后也不会减少，你应当多加努力。 
English: The Northern Wei army invaded the north of Shandong, and the governor Chen Bingda sent soldiers to investigate. As soon as he saw the monk Zhen, he was very surprised. He called him to the seat and said to him: You have the appearance of a noble person, and it will not decrease later. You should make more efforts.

古文：建武二年，魏大举南侵，五道并进。
现代文：齐建武二年，北魏军队兵分五路齐头并进，大举南侵。
English: In the second year of Qi Jianwu, the soldiers of the Northern Wei army advanced in five directions simultaneously, invading the south in a big way.

古文：高祖率师援义阳，僧珍从在军中。
现代文：高祖领军援救义阳，僧珍跟随高祖同在军中。
English: Gao Zu led the army to rescue Yiyang, and Sozhen followed Gao Zu in the army.

古文：长沙宣武王时为梁州刺史。魏围守连月，间谍所在不通，义阳与雍州路断。
现代文：长沙宣武王当时为梁州刺史，北魏军队的围攻持续好几个月，派出去的间谍不能回报消息，义阳与雍州两地之间交通断绝。
English: At that time, King Xuanwu of Changsha was making history for Liangzhou. The siege of the Northern Wei army lasted for several months. The spies sent out could not return messages. Communication between Yiyang and Yongzhou was cut off.

古文：高祖欲遣使至襄阳，求梁州问，众皆惮，莫敢行，僧珍固请充使，即日单舸上道。
现代文：高祖想要派遣使者前往襄阳，探听梁州方面的音信，众人都感到害怕，不敢前去，惟独僧珍坚决请求愿意充当使者，即日就只身乘船上路了。
English: Gaozhu wanted to send an envoy to Xiangyang to listen for news from Liangzhou. Everyone was afraid and did not dare to go. However, Sozhen firmly requested to act as an envoy, and that day he left on a boat.

古文：既至襄阳，督遣援军，且获宣武王书而反，高祖甚嘉之。
现代文：到了襄阳后。督促派遣援军，并且带回了宣武王的书信，高祖对他十分赞赏。
English: After arriving in Yangyang, Gaozu urged the dispatch of reinforcements and brought back a letter from King Xuanwu. Gaozu was very appreciative of him.

古文：事宁，补羽林监。
现代文：战事平息后，僧珍补羽林监。
English: After the war subsided, the monk Zhen made up the forest supervisor.

古文：东昏即位，司空徐孝嗣管朝政，欲与共事，僧珍揣不久安，竟弗往。
现代文：东昏即位，司空徐孝嗣掌管朝政，想要吕僧珍跟他一起共事，仅趁估计他不久将会垮台，就不前往。
English: As Emperor Dongwu ascended the throne, Empress Dowager Xu Xiaozhi took charge of the imperial government, and wanted Lu Sonzhen to work with him. However, taking advantage of the fact that he would soon fall from power, Lu Sonzhen did not go.

古文：时高祖已临雍州，僧珍固求西归，得补邔令。
现代文：当时高祖已到雍州任刺史，僧珍坚决请求调回西部，结果被任命为县县令。
English: At that time, Gaozu had gone to Yongzhou to serve as a historian, and Sozhen firmly requested to be transferred back to the west. As a result, he was appointed as the county magistrate.

古文：既至，高祖命为中兵参军，委以心膂。
现代文：到任后，高祖任命他为中兵参军，视之为心腹。
English: After taking office, Gaozu appointed him as a middle-ranking soldier to join the army, and regarded him as a confidant.

古文：僧珍阴养死士，归之者甚众。
现代文：僧珍暗中蓄养勇士，有许多人归附于他。
English: The monk Zhen secretly cultivated warriors, and many people were attached to him.

古文：高祖颇招武猛，士庶响从，会者万余人，因命按行城西空地，将起数千间屋，以为止舍，多伐材竹，沈于檀溪，积茅盖若山阜，皆不之用。
现代文：高祖也在征召武猛之士，士人百姓都纷纷响应跟从高祖，一时间会集了一万多人，便命令部属巡察城西的荒地，将在那裹建造几千间房屋做临时住所，并砍伐很多木材、竹子，沉到檀溪襄，又收割了许多茅草，堆积如山，却又都不使用这些东西。
English: Gaozu was also recruiting brave warriors. The warriors and common people all responded to follow Gaozu. More than 10,000 people gathered at one time. He ordered his subordinates to inspect the wasteland west of the city, where they would build thousands of houses as temporary residences, and cut down a lot of wood and bamboo to sink into the sand dunes. They also harvested a lot of thatch, piled up like a mountain, but they did not use these things.

古文：僧珍独悟其旨，亦私具橹数百张。
现代文：祇有僧珍领悟到高祖这样做的意图，也在私下裹造了几百张橹。
English: Only one monk, Zhen, realized Gao Zu's intention to do so, and he also secretly wrapped hundreds of cocoons.

古文：义兵起，高祖夜召僧珍及张弘策定议，明旦乃会众发兵，悉取檀溪材竹，装为艛舰，葺之以茅，并立办。
现代文：当各地义兵举事反齐时，高祖在夜裹召集吕僧珍和张弘策共同商议计策。第二天早晨就集合部队，把檀溪中的木材、竹子都捞取上来，制造成楼船战舰，用茅草把它们全都遮盖起来，这些事没多久就办好了。
English: The next morning, Gao Zu gathered his troops, fished up all the wood and bamboo in the sandalwood creek, made them into a warship, and covered them all with thatch, and the whole thing was done in no time.

古文：众军将发，诸将果争橹，僧珍乃出先所具者，每船付二张，争者乃息。
现代文：大军将要出发时，各将领果然争要船橹，吕僧珍就拿出他事先准备好的船橹，每艘船发给两张，争抢才子息。
English: When the great army was about to set out, the generals fought for the ship's anchor. Lv Sozhen took out the anchor he had prepared in advance, and each ship was given two, competing for the prize.

古文：高祖以僧珍为辅国将军、步兵校尉，出入卧内，宣通意旨。
现代文：高祖任命僧珍为辅国将军、步兵校尉，出入高祖内室，传达高祖旨意。
English: Gaozu appointed Sozhen as an auxiliary national general and infantry lieutenant, and he went in and out of Gaozu's inner room to convey Gaozu's will.

古文：师及郢城，僧珍率所领顿偃月垒，俄又进据骑城。
现代文：大军抵达郢城，僧珍率领军队屯驻偃月垒，不久又进发占据了骑城。
English: The large army arrived in Lucheng, and the monk Zhen led the army to stay in the Lucheng fortress, and soon they went to occupy the riding city.

古文：郢州平，高祖进僧珍为前锋大将军。
现代文：郢州被攻克后，高祖进僧珍为前锋。
English: After Bozhou was conquered, Gaozu Jinxianzhen became the striker.

古文：大军次江宁，高祖令僧珍与王茂率精兵先登赤鼻逻。
现代文：大军临时驻扎在江宁，高祖命令僧珍与王茂带领精兵强将率先登上赤鼻逻。
English: The large army was temporarily stationed in Jiangning, and Gaozu ordered the monks Zhen and Wang Mao to lead the elite soldiers to take the lead in climbing the Red Nose.

古文：其日，东昏将李居士与众来战，僧珍等要击，大破之。
现代文：这一天，束昏侯的将领李居士率军前来交战，僧珍等从半路截击，大败敌军。
English: On this day, the general Li Jushi, who was in a daze, led the army to fight, and Sozhen and others intercepted from the middle of the road, defeating the enemy army.

古文：乃与茂进军于白板桥筑垒，垒立，茂移顿越城，僧珍独守白板。
现代文：于是与王茂一起进军白板桥构筑营垒，营垒建成后，王茂把驻地转移到越城，僧珍仍然留守白板桥。
English: So, together with Wang Mao, they marched to the White Board Bridge to build a camp. After the camp was completed, Wang Mao moved his residence to Yuecheng, while Sozhen remained at the White Board Bridge.

古文：李居士密觇知众少，率锐卒万人，直来薄城。
现代文：李居士窥探到吕僧珍的兵力少，就率领精兵一万人直向前来，逼近吕僧珍的营垒。
English: Li Guosi spied that Lv Sozhen's army was small, so he led ten thousand elite soldiers straight forward and approached Lv Sozhen's camp.

古文：僧珍谓将士曰： 今力既不敌，不可与战；亦勿遥射，须至堑里，当并力破之。
现代文：吕僧珍对将士们说： 我们兵力少，不可轻易出战；也不要远距离放箭，须等待敌兵到了我们的沟堑裹面后，再合力打败他们。 
English: Lv Sozhen said to his generals: We are short of troops, so we should not go to war easily. Also, we should not fire arrows from a long distance. We must wait for the enemy soldiers to come to our gully and then defeat them with joint efforts.

古文：俄而皆越堑拔栅，僧珍分人上城，矢石俱发，自率马步三百人出其后，守隅者复逾城而下，内外齐击，居士应时奔散，获其器甲不可胜计。
现代文：不一会儿，李居士的军队都越过了堑壕，拔掉栅栏，遣时，吕僧珍派人分批上城，箭石一起向敌兵发射，自己则亲率骑兵、步兵三百人绕到敌人的背后，而城上守城的兵士又越城而下，内外夹击，李居士即刻溃败而逃，吕僧珍部缴获的各种器甲不可胜数。
English: In a short time, Li Guosi's army had all crossed the trench and pulled down the fence. When the time came, Lv Sozhen sent people up to the city in batches, firing arrows and stones at the enemy soldiers. He personally led 300 cavalry and infantry around to the back of the enemy, while the soldiers defending the city on the top of the city went down over the city and clamped inside and outside. Li Guosi was immediately defeated and fled, and the various armors captured by Lv Sozhen were countless.

古文：僧珍又进据越城。
现代文：僧珍又率部进据越城。
English: Sozhen and his followers marched into Yuecheng.

古文：东昏大将王珍国列车为营，背淮而阵。
现代文：东昏侯的大将王珍国把战车排列起来作为营地，背靠淮水布列阵势，以作背水一战。
English: Wang Zhenguo, the general of Dongdimou, lined up the chariots as a camp, and laid out the positions with their backs to the Huai Shui River, so as to fight against the backwash.

古文：王茂等众军击之，僧珍纵火车焚其营。
现代文：王茂等人率领各路大军攻击王珍国，僧珍又派兵用火车焚烧了敌方的营地。
English: Wang Mao and others led large armies to attack Wang Zhen's country, and Zhen sent soldiers to burn the enemy's camp with a train.

古文：即日瓦解。
现代文：王珍国的军队即就土崩瓦解丁。
English: Wang Zhenguo's army collapsed and disintegrated.

古文：建康城平，高祖命僧珍率所领先入清宫，与张弘策封检府库，即日以本官带南彭城太守，迁给事黄门侍郎，领虎贲中郎将。
现代文：建康城被攻克后，高祖命令吕僧珍率领部属先进去清理宫中财物，他跟张弘策一起封检了府库，即日以本宫带南彭城太守，迁给事黄门侍郎，领虎贲中郎将。
English: After Jiankang Castle was conquered, Gaozu ordered Lü Sozhen to lead his subordinates to go ahead to clean up the palace's property. He and Zhang Hongze inspected the treasury together, and on the same day, they took the palace and the governor of Nan Pengcheng, and transferred it to the Yellow Gate attendant and the leader of the tiger.

古文：高祖受禅，以为冠军将军、前军司马，封平固县侯，邑一千二百户。
现代文：高祖受禅登基后，任命吕僧珍为冠军将军、前军司马，封为平固县侯，食邑一千二百户。
English: After Emperor Gaozhu was enthroned, he appointed Lv Sozhen as champion general and former military secretary Ma, and made him the lord of Pinggu County with 1,200 households.

古文：寻迁给事中、右卫将军。
现代文：不久迁给事中、右卫将军。
English: It was soon transferred to the General of the Right Division.

古文：顷之，转左卫将军，加散骑常侍，入直秘书省，总知宿卫。
现代文：不久，转左卫将军，加散骑常侍，入宫在秘书省当值，统领知宿卫。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to General of the Left Division of the Guards, and he was given the additional post of Cavalryman, and he entered the palace to be on duty in the Secretary's Office, leading the Chishu-guards.

古文：天监四年冬，大举北伐，自是军机多事，僧珍昼直中书省，夜还秘书。
现代文：天监四年冬天，梁军大举北伐，自此军中事务繁多，僧珍白天在中书省值班，晚上回到秘书省。
English: In the winter of the fourth year of Tianjun, Liang's army launched a large-scale northern expedition. Since then, there have been many affairs in the army. Sozhen was on duty at the Chinese Literature Department during the day, and returned to the Secretary Department in the evening.

古文：五年夏，又命僧珍率羽林劲勇出梁城。
现代文：天监五年夏天，高祖又命僧珍率领勇猛的羽林军出征梁城。
English: In the summer of the fifth year of Tianjun, Gao Zu also ordered the monk Zhen to lead the brave Ulin Army to go to Liangcheng.

古文：其年冬旋军，以本官领太子中庶子。
现代文：逭一年冬天回师，以本官领太子中庶子。
English: In the winter of the same year, he returned to his master and became the official leader of the prince's younger illegitimate son.

古文：僧珍去家久，表求拜墓。高祖欲荣之，使为本州，乃授使持节、平北将军、南兗州刺史。
现代文：僧珍离家日久，上表请求回乡拜墓，高祖想让他荣归故里，就破例让他到本州当官，就授予他使持节、平北将军、南兖州刺史。
English: Monk Zhen had been away from home for a long time, and the above table requested him to return to his hometown to visit the tomb. Gao Zu wanted him to return to his hometown, so he made an exception to let him go to Honshu to be an official, and awarded him the Envoyship Festival, the General of Pingbei, and the Sashishi of Nanluozhou.

古文：僧珍在任，平心率下，不私亲戚。
现代文：僧珍在任上为官公正无私，以身作则，不为亲戚谋取私利。
English: During his term of office, he was a fair and selfless official, setting an example by not seeking personal gain for his relatives.

古文：从父兄子先以贩葱为业，僧珍既至，乃弃业欲求州官。
现代文：他的堂兄、堂侄原先以贩葱为职业，僧珍到任后，便抛弃旧业，想在州府裹求得一官半职。
English: His cousin used to be an onion peddler, but after he was appointed to the post, he gave up his old job and tried to get a part-time post in the state government.

古文：僧珍曰： 吾荷国重恩，无以报效，汝等自有常分，岂可妄求叨越，但当速反葱肆耳。 
现代文：僧珍对他们说： 我身负皇上隆恩，祇怕无法报效国家，你们自有本分，怎可妄求非分之职，还是赶快回到葱铺去吧。 
English: Monk Zhen said to them: I bear the emperor's long-suffering, I am afraid I cannot serve the country, you have your own duty, how can you seek a non-ranked position, or just go back to the onion shop.

古文：僧珍旧宅在市北，前有督邮廨，乡人咸劝徒廨以益其宅。
现代文：僧珍的旧宅在街市的北面，宅前是督邮的官署，乡人都劝僧珍把这个官署迁往别处，以便扩大其宅院。
English: Sozhen's old house is on the north side of the market. In front of the house is the post office. The villagers advised Sozhen to move the post office to another place in order to expand his house.

古文：僧珍怒曰： 督邮官廨也，置立以来，便在此地，岂可徙之益吾私宅！ 
现代文：僧珍气愤地说： 督邮是国家的衙门，自从设置以来，一直就在此地，怎么可以迁往别处用以扩建我的私宅呢! 
English: Monk Zhen said angrily: The post office is the gateway to the country. Since it was set up, it has always been in this place. How can I move elsewhere to expand my private home?

古文：姊适于氏，住在市西，小屋临路，与列肆杂处，僧珍常导从卤簿到其宅，不以为耻。
现代文：僧珍的姐姐嫁给于氏，住在市场的西面，小屋紧挨着大路，跟街上的商铺杂处在一起，僧珍常在仪仗队的前导或后卫随从下顺路到她的住处。从来不以为耻。
English: Sang-jin's sister is married to Mr. Yu and lives on the west side of the market. The cottage is right next to the main road, together with the shops on the street. Sang-jin often follows the honor guard's lead or guard down the road to her place of residence. She is never ashamed.

古文：在州百日，征为领军将军，寻加散骑常侍，给鼓吹一部，直秘书省如先。
现代文：担任州官一百多天后，征为领军将军，不久加散骑常侍，赐给鼓吹乐队一部，像先前一样在秘书省当值。
English: After more than a hundred days as a state official, he was conscripted as a leading general, soon joined by a cavalryman, given a part of the propaganda band, and, as before, was on duty in the Secretariat.

古文：僧珍有大勋，任总心膂，恩遇隆密，莫与为比。
现代文：吕僧珍立有大功，在朝廷肩负重任，所受皇上的恩遇没有人能与之相比。
English: Lv Sozhen has made great contributions and shouldered heavy responsibilities in the imperial court. No one can compare with the grace he received from the emperor.

古文：性甚恭慎，当直禁中，盛暑不敢解衣。
现代文：他性情谦恭而谨慎，在宫禁中当值时，连盛暑也不敢解开衣襟。
English: He was a modest and cautious person. When he was on duty during the imperial ban, he did not dare to take off his coat even in the heat of the day.

古文：每侍御座，屏气鞠躬，果食未尝举箸。
现代文：每当陪侍皇上，常屏气鞠躬十分恭敬，对案上的糖面果食从来不敢用筷子去夹。
English: Whenever he accompanies the emperor, he often bows with bated breath, he is very respectful, and he never dares to use chopsticks to clip the candied fruit on the case.

古文：尝因醉后，取一柑食之。
现代文：曾因喝醉以后吃了一个柑橘。
English: He once ate a citrus after getting drunk.

古文：高祖笑谓曰： 便是大有所进。 
现代文：高祖笑着对他说： 你今天算是吃得最多了。 
English: Gaozu smiled and said to him, "You've eaten the most today.

古文：禄俸之外，又月给钱十万；其余赐赉不绝于时。
现代文：除了俸禄之外，高祖每月又赏给他钱十万；经常还有其他的赏赐。
English: In addition to his salary, Gaozu also gave him a monthly allowance of 100,000; there were often other rewards as well.

古文：十年，疾病，车驾临幸，中使医药，日有数四。
现代文：天监十年，僧珍病重，高祖亲临慰问，并派宦官送医送药，一天有多次。
English: Ten years after the establishment of Heaven's Guardianship, Monk Zhen fell seriously ill. Gao Zu personally came to offer condolences and sent an eunuch to send a doctor to deliver medicine. This happened several times a day.

古文：僧珍语亲旧曰： 吾昔在蒙县，热病发黄，当时必谓不济，主上见语， 卿有富贵相，必当不死，寻应自差 ，俄而果愈。
现代文：僧珍对亲近故人说： 昔日我在蒙县时，因得热病而全身发黄，当时觉得一定不能康复了，主上见到我后说， 你有富贵之相，必定不会死，很快就会自愈 ，不久后果然痊愈。
English: Monk Zhen said to those who were close to the deceased: In the past, when I was in Meng County, I was feverish and my whole body turned yellow. At that time, I felt that I would not be able to recover. After seeing me, the Lord said, You have a rich appearance, you will not die, you will soon recover, and you will soon recover.

古文：今已富贵而复发黄，所苦与昔正同，必不复起矣。 
现代文：现在我已得富贵而又得病，全身发黄，所受之苦与前次正好相同，我一定再也起不来了。 
English: Now that I have become rich and ill, my whole body is yellow, the suffering is exactly the same as before, I will never get up again.

古文：竟如其言。
现代文：果如其言。
English: In the end, he did as he said.

古文：卒于领军府舍，时年五十八。
现代文：死于领军府舍，当时五十八岁。
English: He was fifty-eight years old at the time of his death in the leader's residence.

古文：高祖即日临殡，诏曰： 思旧笃终，前王令典；追荣加等，列代通规。
现代文：高祖即日亲临吊唁，颁诏说： 思念故人的笃终礼制，是前王所留下的美好仪式；为死者追赠荣誉、爵位，历代同规。
English: On the same day, Gaozu came in person to offer condolences, and issued an imperial edict saying, "The mourning ceremony for the deceased is a beautiful ritual left behind by the former king; honours and titles are awarded to the deceased, and it has been the same throughout the ages.

古文：散骑常侍、领军将军、平固县开国侯僧珍，器思淹通，识宇详济，竭忠尽礼，知无不为。
现代文：已故散骑常侍、领军将军、平固县开国侯僧珍，器度弘广通达，风度奇伟、见识广博，他竭尽忠诚礼仪，对朝廷政务知无不为。
English: The late Sanzhishi, the leading general of the army and the founder of Pinggu County, the priest Zhen, had a wide range of skills, a wonderful demeanor, and a wide range of knowledge. He tried his best to be loyal to the etiquette and knew everything about the government affairs of the imperial court.

古文：与朕契阔，情兼屯泰。
现代文：与朕一起辛勤创业，从来不顾自身安危。
English: He worked hard to start a business with me and never worried about his own safety.

古文：大业初构，茂勋克举。
现代文：工业初建，他的功勋才得到奖赏。
English: Industry was just beginning to be built, and he was the first to be rewarded for his services.

古文：及居禁卫，朝夕尽诚。
现代文：在宫廷裹与朕朝夕相处，忠心耿耿。
English: In the palace, he was with me morning and evening, and he was loyal to me.

古文：方参任台槐，式隆朝寄；奄致丧逝，伤恸于怀。
现代文：正当身任宰辅之职，肩负朝廷重担之时，忽然丧命硕逝，使人满怀悲痛。
English: When he was holding the post of deputy governor and shouldering the heavy burden of the imperial court, he died suddenly, leaving people full of grief.

古文：宜加优典，以隆宠命。
现代文：应当举行盛大的葬礼，使加恩特赐的任命更加隆重。
English: There should be a grand funeral to add to the grandeur of Garn's appointment.

古文：可赠骠骑将军、开府仪同三司，常侍、鼓吹、侯如故。
现代文：可追赠骠骑将军、开府仪同三司，常侍、鼓吹乐队、侯爵照样不变。
English: He can be posthumously awarded the post of General of the Horse, the Kaifu Rite and the three offices, and the regular attendants, the trumpet band and the marquis will remain unchanged.

古文：给东园秘器，朝服一具，衣一袭，丧事所须，随由备办。
现代文：赐给束园秘器，朝服一套，衣一袭，丧事所需要的东西，都给予置办。
English: He gave Shu Yuan secret utensils, a set of morning dress, a set of clothes, and all the things needed for the funeral.

古文：谥曰忠敬侯。 
现代文：诺号为忠敬侯。 
English: His posthumous name is Zhongjinghou.

古文：高祖痛惜之，言为流涕。
现代文：高祖为他的去世深感痛惜，一说到他就伤心落泪。
English: Gaozu deeply regretted his death, and burst into tears as soon as he spoke about it.

古文：长子峻早卒，峻子淡嗣。
现代文：僧珍的长子吕峻早年去世，吕峻的儿子吕淡继承爵位。
English: Monk Zhen's eldest son, Lü Jun, died at an early age, and Lü Jun's son, Lü Tan, inherited the title.

古文：陈吏部尚书姚察曰：张弘策敦厚慎密，吕僧珍恪勤匪懈，郑绍叔忠诚亮荩，缔构王业，三子皆有力焉。
现代文：陈吏部尚书姚察说：张弘策诚朴宽厚，言行谨慎严密，吕僧珍趁恭敬勤恳，毫不懈怠，郑绍叔忠心耿耿、死而后已。缔造王业，这三个人全都尽心尽力。
English: "Zhang Hongze was sincere, simple and generous, and his words and deeds were prudent and strict. Lu Sanzhen was respectful and diligent, and never slacked. Zheng Shaoshu was loyal and died. All three of them made every effort to create Wangye.

古文：僧珍之肃恭禁省，绍叔之造膝诡辞，盖识为臣之节矣。
现代文：僧珍的庄重恭敬，绍叔的肺腑之言，都应认为是当臣子所应具有的气节。
English: The solemn respect of the monk Zhen and the heartfelt speech of Uncle Shao should be considered as the qualities that a minister should have.

