古文：昔者黄宗，质始好信，作自为象，方四面，傅一心，四达自中，前参后参，左参右参，践位履参，是以能为天下宗。
现代文：远古时代的黄帝以守道为根本，以讲求诚信为美德。他对天地四方可以洞察秋毫，在即位时还要谦谨地向三方礼让，所以他能成为天下人取法的榜样。
English: In ancient times, the Yellow Emperor took the principle of keeping the way as the foundation and the virtue of seeking honesty as the virtue. He could have insight into the four directions of heaven and earth, and he had to be modest and courteous to the three parties when he ascended the throne, so he could become a role model for people around the world.

古文：吾受命于天，定位于地，成名于人。
现代文：他在即位时说： 我的德行是禀赋于天，即帝之位是受意于大地，功业建成乃得力于人心。
English: When he ascended the throne, he said: My virtue is endowed by heaven, that is, the throne of the emperor is intended by the earth, and the work is built by the power of the people.

古文：唯余一人德乃配天，乃立王、三公，立国置君、三卿。
现代文：因为我一人的德行可以配天地，所以可以代表上天在人间置天子、封建国家、设立诸侯并分别为他们配置三公、三卿等各级官吏。
English: Because I alone can match heaven and earth in virtue, I can, on behalf of heaven, set up heavenly sons, feudal states, princes, and assign officials at all levels such as three princes and three nobles to them.

古文：数日、历月、计岁，以当日月之行。
现代文：我通过对日、月、年的筹算制定了历法，使之合乎日、月的运行规律。
English: By calculating the day, month and year, I worked out a calendar so that it would conform to the laws of the day and month.

古文：吾允地广裕，类天大明。
现代文：我的美德如地一样广大，如天一样清明。
English: My virtue is as broad as the earth and as clear as the sky.

古文：吾畏天、爱地、亲民，立无命，执虚信。
现代文：我谨畏上天，敬爱大地，爱护人民，立身行事以天命为本，执守道本，立心诚信。
English: I fear heaven, love the earth, and care for the people. I will act in accordance with God's will, adhere to the Tao, and uphold integrity.

古文：吾爱民而民不亡，吾爱地而地不荒，吾受民而民不死。
现代文：我谨畏天命所以上天保佑我，我敬爱大地所以土地不荒废，我爱护人民所以人民不会饥饿疲劳而流于死亡。
English: I fear God's will more than God's blessing. I love the earth, so the land will not be wasted. I love and care for the people, so the people will not die of hunger and fatigue.

古文：吾位不失。
现代文：因为这些，所以我能永守帝位不会失去。
English: Because of these, I can keep the throne forever without losing it.

古文：吾苟能亲亲而兴贤，吾不遗亦至矣。
现代文：我如果再能做到眷爱亲属、起用贤人而屏退不贤，那么就可以说功德圆满无缺憾了。 
English: If I can love my relatives and appoint wise men and reject unwise ones, then I can say that my merits are complete.

