古文：木怪下窦宽吴偃董观京洛士人江叟
现代文：木怪下窦宽吴偃董观京洛士人江叟
English: The wood monster, Dou Guang, Wu Xuan, Dong Guan, Jingluo people, Jiang Xuan

古文：花卉怪龙蛇草鲜卑女蕨蛇芥虫崔玄微
现代文：花卉怪龙蛇草鲜卑女蕨蛇芥虫崔玄微
English: Flowers, monsters, dragons, snakes, grasses, despicable women, boa constrictors, vipers, mustard worms, Cui Xuanwei

古文：木怪下
现代文：木怪下
English: Under the tree monster

古文：窦宽
现代文：窦宽
English: Dou wide

古文：唐扶风窦宽者家于梁山，太和八年秋，自大理评事解县推盐使判官罢职退归，因治园屋。
现代文：唐朝扶风县人窦宽家在梁山。太和八年秋，他罢职回乡，因为要修造宅院，让家仆砍除一棵树。
English: In the autumn of the eighth year of the Taiwa era, he resigned from his post and returned to his hometown, because he wanted to build a mansion and had his servants cut down a tree.

古文：命家仆伐一树，既伐而有血滂溜，汪然注地，食顷而尽。宽异之，且知为怪。由是闭门绝人事。
现代文：砍完之后有血流出，汪在地上一大片，一顿饭的工夫便没了。窦宽惊异，认为这是怪，从此便闭门不出，拒绝一切人事往来。
English: After the chopping, blood flowed out, leaving a large mess on the ground, and the time for a meal was lost. Dou Kuan was surprised and thought it was strange. From then on, he closed the door and refused all personnel contacts.

古文：至明年冬十一月，郑注李训反，宽与注连，遂诛死于左禁军中。
现代文：到了第二年冬十一月，郑注和李训造反，窦宽与郑注连坐，就被诛死在左禁军中。
English: In the winter of the following year, in November, Zheng Shou and Li Xun rebelled, and Dou Kuan, who sat together with Zheng Shou, was strangled to death by the Left Forbidden Army.

古文：吴偃
现代文：吴偃
English: Wu Gan

古文：有厉泉县民吴偃家于田野间。
现代文：有一个叫吴偃的厉泉县山民，家在田野之间。
English: There is a mountaineer in Lixuan County named Wu Yao, whose home is nestled among the fields.

古文：有一女十岁余。
现代文：他有个十来岁的女儿。
English: He has a teenage daughter.

古文：一夕，忽遁去，莫知所往。
现代文：一天，女儿忽然没了，不知她到哪去了。
English: One day, my daughter suddenly disappeared, and I don't know where she went.

古文：后数余日，偃梦其父谓偃曰： 汝女今在东北隅，盖木神为祟。 
现代文：过了几天，吴偃梦见他的父亲对他说： 你的女儿在东北角，大概是木神作怪。 
English: A few days later, Wu Gan dreamed that his father said to him, "Your daughter is in the northeast corner. It's probably the work of the wood god."

古文：偃惊而寤。
现代文：吴偃被惊醒了。
English: Wu Yao was startled awake.

古文：至明日，即於东北隅穷其迹，果闻有呼吟之声。
现代文：到了第二天，就到东北角彻底地查找踪迹，果然听到呼喊呻吟的声音。
English: On the second day, I went to the northeast corner to thoroughly search for traces, and indeed heard the sound of shouting and moaning.

古文：偃视之，见其女在一穴内。
现代文：吴偃一看，是女儿在一个洞穴里。
English: Wu Yao saw that it was her daughter in a cave.

古文：口甚小，然其中稍宽敞。
现代文：洞穴的口很小，然而里边稍微宽敞。
English: The mouth of the cave is small, but the inside is somewhat spacious.

古文：傍有古槐木，盘根极大。
现代文：旁边有一棵老槐树，盘根极大。
English: Next to it there is an old elm tree with extremely tangled roots.

古文：于是挈之而归，然兀若沈醉者。
现代文：于是他就把女儿领回家来。但是女儿呆呵呵地就像喝醉了似的。
English: So he brought her home, but she was as dazed as if she had been drinking.

古文：会有李道士至，偃请符术呵禁。
现代文：赶上有一个道士来到，吴偃就请道士用符术整治。
English: When a Taoist arrived, Wu Gan asked the Taoist to rectify the situation with magic.

古文：其女忽瞬而语曰： 地东北有槐木，木有神，引某自树腹空入地下穴内，故某病。 
现代文：那女孩忽然睁开眼睛说： 地东北有一棵大槐树，槐树有神，拉着我从树肚子里走进地下的洞穴内，所以我就病了。 
English: The girl suddenly opened her eyes and said, "In the northeastern part of the country, there is a big eucalyptus tree. The eucalyptus tree has a spirit, and it pulled me out of the tree's belly and into an underground cave. That's why I got sick."

古文：于是伐其树。
现代文：于是就砍掉了那棵大槐树。
English: So he cut down the big elm tree.

古文：后数日，女病始愈。
现代文：几天后，女孩的病才好。
English: A few days later, the girl's illness was cured.

古文：董观
现代文：董观
English: Dong Guan

古文：有董观者尝为僧，居于太原佛寺。
现代文：有一个叫董观的人，曾经当过和尚，居住在太原的佛寺。
English: There was a man named Dong Guan who had once been a monk and lived in a Buddhist temple in Taiyuan.

古文：太和七年夏，与其表弟王生南游荆楚，后将入长安。
现代文：太和七年夏天，董观和他表弟王生向南到荆楚一带旅游，然后将去长安。
English: In the summer of the seventh year of Tahe, Dong Guan and his cousin Wang Sheng traveled south to the Jingchu area, and then went to Chang'an.

古文：道至商於。一夕，舍山馆中。
现代文：一天，二人来到商於，就在山馆中住下。
English: One day, the two came to the market and stayed in the pavilion.

古文：王生既寐，观独未寝。忽见一物出烛下，既而掩其烛。
现代文：晚上，王生已经睡下，董观忽然看见一个东西出现在烛光下。接着那东西就去遮住那烛光。
English: In the evening, when Wang Sheng had already fallen asleep, Dong Guan suddenly saw something appear under the candlelight. Then that thing went to cover the candlelight.

古文：状类人手而无指。
现代文：伸出来的东西像人手，但是没指。
English: The protruding thing looks like a human hand, but there is no finger.

古文：细视，烛影外若有物，观急呼王生。
现代文：仔细看，烛影外像有个什么东西。董观慌忙喊王生。
English: Look closely, there seems to be something outside the candle's shadow. Dong Guan hurriedly called Wang Sheng.

古文：生起，其手遂去。
现代文：王生刚起来，那两只手便散去。
English: As soon as Wang Sheng got up, those two hands scattered.

古文：观谓王曰： 慎无寝，魅当再来。 
现代文：董观对王生说： 小心，不要睡觉。那鬼怪还会再来。 
English: Dong Guan said to Wang Sheng: Be careful, don't sleep. That ghost will come again.

古文：因持挺而坐伺之。良久，王生曰： 魅安在？
现代文：于是他就抱着棍子坐着等候。很久，王生说： 鬼怪在哪？
English: So he sat with his stick and waited. For a long time, Wang Sheng said: Where is the ghost?

古文：兄妄矣？ 
现代文：你真荒唐！ 
English: You're being ridiculous!

古文：既就寝。
现代文：就又睡下。
English: and went back to sleep.

古文：顷之，有一物长五尺余，蔽烛而立，无手及面目。
现代文：不一会儿，有一个五尺多长的东西，遮蔽着烛光站在那里，没有手也没有面目。
English: In a moment there was something more than five feet long, standing in the candlelight, without hands or face.

古文：观益恐，又呼王生。
现代文：董观更害怕了，又喊王生。
English: Dong Guan was even more scared and called Wang Sheng again.

古文：生怒不起。
现代文：王生生气不起来。
English: Wang Sheng couldn't get angry.

古文：观因以挺椹其首，其躯若草所穿。
现代文：董观就用棍子捅那鬼怪的头，鬼怪的身躯就像用草穿的，棍子便一下子捅了进去。
English: Dong Guan hit the head of the ghost with a stick. The ghost's body was like it was made of grass, and the stick went right into it.

古文：挺亦随入其中，而力取不可得。
现代文：但是拽不回来了。那鬼怪马上退去。
English: But the tug does not come back. The ghost immediately leaves.

古文：俄乃退去。观虑又来，迨晓不敢寝。
现代文：董观担心鬼怪再来，直到天亮没敢睡。
English: Worried that the ghost would come again, Dong Guan did not dare to sleep until dawn.

古文：明日，访馆吏。
现代文：天亮之后，问馆吏。
English: After dawn, ask a librarian for directions.

古文：吏曰： 此西数里有古杉，常为魅，疑即所见也。 
现代文：馆吏说： 从这往西几里，有一棵老杉树，常常闹鬼，你看到的可能就是那东西。 
English: The curator said: A few miles to the west from here, there is an old cedar tree that is often haunted. What you see may be that thing.

古文：即与观及王生径寻，果见古杉，有挺贯其柯叶间。
现代文：于是馆吏、董观、王生三人一起向西寻来，果然看见一棵老杉树，有一根棍子横穿在枝叶之间。
English: So the three of them, the librarian, Dong Guan, and Wang Sheng, searched together to the west, and indeed saw an old cedar tree with a stick sticking through the branches and leaves.

古文：吏曰： 人言此为妖且久，未尝见其真。今则信矣。 
现代文：馆吏说： 人们说这棵树作妖很久了，我却不曾真见过，这回我可信了。 
English: The curator said, "People have been saying that this tree is a demon for a long time, but I have never actually seen it. This time I believe it.

古文：急取斧，尽伐去之。
现代文：急忙取来斧子，把杉树彻底砍去。
English: He quickly fetched an axe and chopped down the cedar tree completely.

古文：京洛士人
现代文：京洛士人
English: The people of Kyoto

古文：京洛间，有士人子弟失其姓名。
现代文：京洛间，有一个士人子弟，笔者不知道他叫什么名字。
English: In Kyoto, there is a scholar's son, the author does not know his name.

古文：素善雕镂。
现代文：只知道他素善雕镂。
English: All I know is that he is good at carving swords.

古文：因行他邑山路，见一大槐树荫蔽数亩，其根旁瘤瘿如数斗瓮者四焉，思欲取之。
现代文：有一次，他走在外地山路上，看到一棵大槐树树荫遮地好几亩，树根旁边长了四个瓮那么大的大瘤子，他就想要弄到手。
English: Once, when he was walking on a mountain road in a foreign country, he saw a large eucalyptus tree shade several acres of land. Next to the tree's root grew four large bumps the size of earthworms, and he wanted to get his hands on them.

古文：人力且少，又无斧锯之属，约回日采取之。
现代文：但是人力太少，又没有斧锯之类的东西，打算先回去，以后再来收取。
English: But there is too little manpower, and there is no such thing as an axe saw. They plan to go back first and collect it later.

古文：恐为人先采，乃于衣篑中，取纸数张，割为钱，系之于树瘤上。
现代文：怕被别人先采了去，就从衣篑里取出几张纸，割成纸钱，系在树的瘤子上。
English: Afraid that someone else would pick it up first, he took out a few pieces of paper from the closet, cut them into paper money, and tied them to the tree's bumps.

古文：意者欲为神树，不敢采伐也。
现代文：意思是说这是一棵神树，不敢采伐它。
English: It means that this is a sacred tree and we dare not cut it down.

古文：既舍去，数月而还。
现代文：他离开几个月以后才回来，带来了大量的人力和斧锯什么的，要砍伐大槐树。
English: He left after a few months and came back with a lot of manpower and axes and saws to cut down the big birch trees.

古文：大率人夫并刀斧，欲伐之，至此树侧，乃见画图影，旁挂纸钱实繁，复有以香醮奠之处。士人笑曰： 村人无知信此，可惑也。 
现代文：来到树前，竟看到一张图画上画着这棵大槐树，旁边挂着许许多多纸钱，还有烧香上供祭祀的地方。这个士人大笑说： 村野之人无知，居然相信这事儿！胡涂啊！ 
English: When he came to the tree, he actually saw a picture of this big eucalyptus tree, with a lot of paper money hanging next to it, and a place to burn incense for sacrifice. The scholar laughed loudly and said, "People in the village are so ignorant that they actually believe this! What nonsense!

古文：乃命斧伐之次，忽见紫衣神在旁，容色屹然，叱仆曰： 无伐此木。 
现代文：紫衣神的神色严肃。
English: The purple-robed god looked grave.

古文：士人进曰： 吾昔行次，见槐瘤，欲取之。
现代文：他呵斥那些仆人说： 不要砍这棵树！ 
English: He said to his servants, "Don't cut down the tree!"

古文：以无斧锯，恐人采之，故权以纸钱占护耳。
现代文：士人走上前去说： 我以前走到这，看到了槐树瘤，想要采取，因为没有斧锯，又怕被别人采去，所以权且用纸钱占护着它。
English: The scholar stepped forward and said: I used to walk here, saw the elm tumor, wanted to take it, because there was no axe saw, and I was afraid of being taken by others, so I used paper money to occupy and protect it.

古文：本无神也，君何止遏？ 
现代文：它本来没神，你为什么还不让呢？ 
English: It didn't have a god in the first place, so why didn't you let it go?

古文：神曰： 始者君权以纸钱系树之后，咸曰神树，能致祸福，相与祈祀。
现代文：神说： 当初你权且把纸钱系到树上之后，人们都说有神，能消灾降福，一齐来祈祀。
English: God said, "In the beginning, after you tied the paper money to the tree, people said that there is a god who can eliminate disasters and bring blessings, so they came together to pray.

古文：冥司遂以某职受享酹。
现代文：冥间就把我派来享用祭奠。
English: The netherworld sent me here to enjoy the memorial dance.

古文：今有神也，何言无之？
现代文：现在有神了！怎么能说没神？
English: Now there is a God! How can you say there is no God?

古文：若必欲伐之，祸甚至矣。 
现代文：如果你一定要砍伐它，灾难马上就到！ 
English: If you must cut it down, disaster is imminent!

古文：士人不听。
现代文：士人不听。
English: The nobles would not listen.

古文：神曰： 君取此何用？ 
现代文：神说： 你要这东西有什么用？ 
English: God said, "What do you want with it?"

古文：客曰： 要雕刻为器耳。 
现代文：士人说： 要雕刻一件什么器物。 
English: The scholar said, "What kind of object should I carve?"

古文：神曰： 若尔，可以善价赎之乎。 客曰： 可 。
现代文：神说： 要是这样的话，可以用一个公道的价钱把它赎回来吗？ 士人说： 可以。 
English: God said, "In that case, can I buy it back at a fair price?" The man said, "Yes."

古文：神曰： 所须几何？ 
现代文：神说： 你要多少？ 
English: God said, "How much do you want?"

古文：士人曰： 可遗百千。 
现代文：士人说： 可给我一百千。 
English: The man said, "I'll take a hundred thousand."

古文：神曰： 今奉百绢。
现代文：神说： 现在我给你一百匹绢。
English: God said, "Now I will give you a hundred donkeys.

古文：于前五里有坏坟，绢在其中。
现代文：在前边五里的地方有一个坏坟墓，绢就在那墓中。
English: There is a bad grave five miles ahead, and the dragonfly is in that grave.

古文：如不得者，即复此相见。 
现代文：如果拿不到绢，就再回来见我。 
English: If you don't get it, come back and see me.

古文：士人遂至坏坟中，果得绢，一无欠焉。
现代文：士人来到坏坟墓一看，果然有绢，一匹也不少。
English: When the scholar came to the bad tomb, he saw that there was indeed a donkey, not a few.

古文：江叟
现代文：江叟
English: Jiangxi Province

古文：开成中，有江叟者多读道书，广寻方术，善吹笛。
现代文：开成年中，有一个叫江叟的人，读了许多道家的书，广泛地寻求方术，还善于吹笛子。
English: In his early adulthood, there was a man named Jiang Qi, who read many Taoist books, extensively searched for methods, and was also good at playing the flute.

古文：往来多在永乐县灵仙阁。
现代文：他来来去去，多半喜欢在永乐县的灵仙阁停留。
English: He comes and goes, and mostly likes to stay at Lingxiange in Yongle County.

古文：时沈饮酒。
现代文：时常耽于饮酒。
English: Frequently indulges in alcohol.

古文：适阌乡，至盘豆馆东官道大槐树下醉寝。
现代文：他到阌乡去，走到盘豆馆东官道大槐树下醉在那里睡着了，直到夜将尽时他才略微清醒一些。
English: He went to Handan Township, walked under the big eucalyptus tree on Dongguan Road of Panzu Pavilion, got drunk and fell asleep there. He didn't wake up until the end of the night.

古文：及夜艾稍醒，闻一巨物行声，举步甚重。
现代文：他听到一个庞然大物走路的声音。那东西迈步很重。
English: He heard the sound of a huge creature walking. It was striding heavily.

古文：叟暗窥之，见一人崔嵬高数丈，至槐侧坐，而以毛手扪叟曰： 我意是树畔锄儿，乃瓮边毕卓耳。 
现代文：他偷偷地窥视。看见一个高达数丈的巨人。巨人来到大槐树旁边坐下，用毛茸茸的大手摸着江叟说： 我以为是个铲地的，却原来是个醉鬼！ 
English: He peered furtively. He saw a giant several meters tall. The giant came and sat down next to the big birch tree. With his big hairy hands, he touched Jiang Chen and said, "I thought he was a shoveler, but he turned out to be a drunkard!"

古文：遂敲大树数声曰： 可报荆馆中二郎来省大兄。 
现代文：于是他把大树敲了几下，说道： 可以报告说，荆馆中的二郎来探望大哥。 
English: So he knocked on the tree a few times and said, "I can report that the second son of Jing Pavilion has come to visit the eldest brother."

古文：大槐乃语云： 劳弟相访。 
现代文：大槐树就说道： 有劳老弟了！ 
English: The big birch tree said, "It's time to get to work, brother!"

古文：似闻槐树上，有人下来与语。
现代文：似乎听到大槐树上有人下来与巨人说话。
English: It was as if someone had come down from the big elm tree to talk to the giant.

古文：须臾，饮酌之声交作。
现代文：片刻之间，饮酌的声音频频响起。
English: For a few moments, the sound of drinking rings out.

古文：荆山槐曰： 大兄何年抛却两京道上槐王耳。 
现代文：荆山槐说： 老兄哪一年抛弃两京道上槐王的地位呢？ 
English: Jing Shanzhao said, "Brother, in which year did you give up your position as the king of the two capitals?"

古文：大槐曰： 我三甲子，当弃此位。 
现代文：大槐树说： 我一百八十岁的时候，该放弃此位。 
English: The big birch tree said: When I am one hundred and eighty years old, I should give up this post.

古文：荆山槐曰： 大兄不知老之将至，犹顾此位。直须至火入空心，膏流节断，而方知退。
现代文：荆山槐说： 大哥不知道老之将至，还如此顾忌此位，简直要到了火入空心，膏流节断的地步知道隐退。
English: Jing Shanzhao said, "My elder brother did not know that old age was approaching, and he was so afraid of this position that he almost retreated to the point of burning into the hollow and cutting off the flow.

古文：大是无厌之士。
现代文：可真是个无厌之士。
English: He's really a tireless worker.

古文：何不如今因其震霆，自拔于道，必得为材用之木，构大厦之梁栋，尚存得重重碎锦，片片真花。
现代文：为什么不现在就借着那震霆之力，自拔于官道？那样一定能成为有材用的树木，成为建筑高楼大厦栋梁。这样做，尚可留住重重的碎锦，片片的真花。
English: Why not now, by the power of that tremor, pull yourself out of the official path? That way, you will definitely be able to become trees with material, become the beams of high-rise buildings. In doing so, you can still retain a lot of brocade, pieces of real flowers.

古文：岂他日作朽蠹之薪，同入爨为煨烬耳？ 
现代文：哪能等到他日做朽烂虫蠹的烧柴，同入灶坑烧成灰烬呢？ 
English: How can he wait for the day when he will be like rotten wood that is burned with worms, which is thrown into the furnace and reduced to ashes?

古文：大槐曰： 雀鼠尚贪生，吾焉能办此事邪？ 
现代文：大槐树说： 鸟雀老鼠尚且贪生，我哪能办这样的事呢？ 
English: The big birch tree said, "Birds, sparrows and mice are greedy for life. How can I do such a thing?

古文：槐曰： 老兄不足与语。 
现代文：荆山槐说： 老兄啊，我不屑和你谈下去了！ 
English: Jing Shanzhao said, "Brother, I don't care to continue talking to you!

古文：告别而去。
现代文：于是荆山槐告别而去。
English: So Jing Shanzhao said goodbye and left.

古文：及明，叟方起。
现代文：到了天明，江叟才起来。
English: It was not until dawn that Jiang Chen got up.

古文：数日，至阌乡荆山中，见庭槐森耸，枝干扶疏，近欲十围，如附神物。
现代文：又走了几天，来到阌乡荆山之中。他看到庭中的一棵大槐树森森然高耸云端，枝干四布，葱茏茂密，将近十围粗细，宛如有神灵附着其上。
English: After a few more days of walking, he came to the middle of the Jing Mountains in the town of Handan. He saw a large eucalyptus tree in the garden, towering high above the clouds, with four branches, lush green foliage, nearly ten circumferences thick and thin, as if there were gods attached to it.

古文：遂伺其夜，以酒脯奠之云： 某昨夜，闻槐神与盘豆官道大槐王论语云云某卧其侧，并历历记其说。
现代文：于是他就等到夜里，用酒肉祭奠它，说道： 我昨天听到槐神您与盘豆官道大槐王论谈。我躺在一边，清楚地记得您的谈话。
English: So he waited until night, and offered it up as a sacrifice of meat and wine, saying, "Yesterday, I heard you and Panzu, the king of Chinese medicine, having a discussion. I was lying on my side, and I clearly remember your conversation.

古文：今请树神与我言语。 
现代文：现在请槐神您和我谈谈好吗？ 
English: Now, will you please talk to me, God?

古文：槐曰： 感子厚意，当有何求？
现代文：槐树说： 你的诚意令人感动。
English: Eucalyptus said: Your sincerity is touching.

古文：殊不知尔夜烂醉于道，夫乃子邪！ 
现代文：你说有什么要求吧？没想到那夜里烂醉在道上的就是你！ 
English: Do you have any requests? I didn't think it was you who was drunk on the road that night!

古文：叟曰： 某一生好道，但不逢其师。
现代文：江叟说： 我一生喜欢道教，只是没遇上好老师。
English: Jiang Wei said: I have always liked Taoism, but I have never met a good teacher.

古文：树神有灵，乞为指教。使学道有处，当必奉酬。 
现代文：树神您有神灵，求您多多指教，让我有学道的去处，必当重谢。 
English: Tree God, you have a spirit, please give me more advice, so that I have a place to learn Tao, I will be grateful.

古文：槐神曰： 子但入荆山，寻鲍仙师。脱得见之，或水陆之间，必获一处度世。
现代文：槐神说： 你只管到荆山去，寻找鲍仙师，如果能找到，或者水中或者陆上，一定能学到一样度世的本领。
English: Hao Shen said: You only need to go to Jing Mountain and look for Bao Xian Shi. If you can find him, either in the water or on land, you will definitely be able to learn the same skill of transcending the world.

古文：盖感子之请。慎勿泄吾言也。
现代文：这完全是有感于你的请求，千万不要把我的话泄露出去。
English: This is entirely at your request, so please don't leak my words.

古文：君不忆华表告老狐，祸及余矣。 
现代文：你不记得华表把话告诉了老狐狸，灾祸都殃及到我了！ 
English: Don't you remember what Hua table said to the old fox, all the disasters have come to me!

古文：叟感谢之。
现代文：江叟很感谢他。
English: Jiang Chen is very grateful to him.

古文：明日，遂入荆山，缘岩循水，果访鲍仙师。
现代文：第二天就进到荆山中，爬过一重重山，涉过一道道水，果然访到了鲍仙师。
English: The next day, he went into the middle of the Jing Mountain, climbed over a heavy mountain, waded through a path of water, and finally visited Bao Xianshi.

古文：即匍匐而礼之。
现代文：江叟就匍匐在地上行礼。
English: Jiang Chen bowed to the ground.

古文：师曰： 子何以知吾而来师也？
现代文：仙师说： 你是怎么知道我而来拜我为师的呢？
English: The sorcerer said: How did you know that I had come to worship my teacher?

古文：须实言之。 
现代文：必须照实说！ 
English: We must tell it like it is!

古文：叟不敢隐，具陈荆山馆之树神言也。
现代文：江叟不敢隐瞒，详细地陈述了荆山馆的树神是怎么说的。
English: Jiang Wei did not dare to conceal it, and described in detail what the tree god of the Jingshan Pavilion said.

古文：仙师曰： 小鬼焉敢专辄指人。 
现代文：仙师说： 小鬼怎么敢专擅地指教别人！ 
English: The sorcerer said: "How dare the little devil be so expert at instructing others!

古文：未能大段诛之，且飞符残其一枝。
现代文：不能大段大段地诛杀槐神，仙师将飞符把它的一个树枝弄残。
English: Unable to kill the dragon god in a large-scale battle, the sorcerer used a flying arrow to cripple one of its branches.

古文：叟拜乞免。
现代文：江叟跪拜，请求饶过槐神。
English: Jiang Chen knelt down and begged for mercy.

古文：仙师曰： 今不诛，后当继有来者。 
现代文：仙师说： 现在不杀它，以后可能继续有人前来。 
English: The sorcerer said, "If you don't kill it now, someone else may come along later."

古文：遂谓叟曰： 子有何能？一一陈之。 
现代文：于是就对江叟说： 你有什么本事，一样一样地说给我听。 
English: So he said to Jiang Chen, "What skills do you have? Tell me in the same way.

古文：叟曰： 好道，癖于吹笛。 
现代文：江叟说： 我喜欢道教，吹笛子成癖。 
English: Jiang Wei said: I like Taoism, and I am addicted to playing the flute.

古文：仙师因令取笛而吹之。
现代文：仙师就让他取出笛子吹吹。
English: The sorcerer asked him to take out the flute and play it.

古文：仙师叹曰： 子之艺至矣。但所吹者，枯竹笛耳。
现代文：吹完了，仙师叹道： 你吹笛子的技艺已经到家了，只是你吹的是一管竹笛。
English: When he had finished playing the flute, the sorcerer sighed, "Your flute-playing skills have reached home, but you are playing a bamboo flute.

古文：吾今赠子玉笛，乃荆山之尤者。
现代文：我现在送给你一管玉笛，是荆山中最好的。
English: I am now giving you a jade flute, which is the best in Jing Mountain.

古文：但如常笛吹之。三年，当召洞中龙矣。
现代文：只要你象吹平常的笛子那么吹上三年，就能召来洞中龙了。
English: As long as you play like an ordinary flute for three years, you will be able to summon the dragon in the cave.

古文：龙既出，必衔明月之珠而赠子。
现代文：龙出来之后，一定会衔一颗照月之珠赠送给你。
English: After the dragon comes out, he will surely give you a moonbeam.

古文：子得之，当用醍醐煎之三日。
现代文：你得到珠子之后，应该用醍醐煎它三天。
English: After you get the bead, you should fry it with daigo for three days.

古文：凡小龙已脑疼矣。
现代文：这时候凡是小龙已经脑袋疼了。
English: By this time, Xiao Long's head was already aching.

古文：盖相感使其然也。
现代文：是互相感应使他们这样的。
English: It's the interaction that makes them that way.

古文：小龙必持化水丹而赎其珠也。
现代文：小龙一定会拿着化水丹来赎那颗珍珠。
English: Xiao Long will definitely take the hookah to redeem the pearl.

古文：子得当吞之，便为水仙，亦不减万岁。
现代文：你得到化水丹应该吞下去，那就成了水仙，少说也活一万岁。
English: If you get hookworm, you should swallow it, and it will turn into narcissus, or at least live for ten thousand years.

古文：无烦吾之药也。
现代文：这就不用麻烦我给你弄药了。
English: Then you don't have to worry about me getting you medicine.

古文：盖子有琴高之相耳。
现代文：你有琴高那样的福相啊！ 
English: You have the same good fortune as Kinko!

古文：仙师遂出玉笛与之。
现代文：仙师就拿出玉笛来给他。
English: The sorcerer took out a jade flute and gave it to him.

古文：叟曰： 玉笛与竹笛何异？ 
现代文：江叟说： 玉笛和竹笛有什么不同？ 
English: Jiang Yu said: What is the difference between the jade flute and the bamboo flute?

古文：师曰： 竹者青也，与龙色相类，能肖之吟，龙不为怪也。玉者白也，与龙相克，忽听其吟，龙怪也，所以来观之。
现代文：仙师说： 竹子的是青色，和龙的颜色类似，能吹得很像龙吟，龙也不以为怪；玉的是白色，和龙相克，忽然听到龙吟，龙就感到奇怪，所以就出来观看。
English: The sage said: The bamboo is blue, similar to the color of the dragon, and can be blown like a dragon, so the dragon is not surprised; the jade is white, similar to the dragon, and the dragon feels strange when he suddenly hears the dragon singing, so he comes out to watch.

古文：感召之有能变耳。
现代文：把它感召出来才能有办法改变它。
English: You have to call it out to be able to change it.

古文：义出于玄。 
现代文：这道理出之于天。 
English: This principle comes from the heavens.

古文：叟受教乃去。
现代文：江叟受教之后便离去。
English: After Jiang Chen received the teachings, he left.

古文：后三年，方得其音律。
现代文：吹了三年之后，才得到音律。
English: It took him three years to get the melody.

古文：后因之岳阳，刺史李虞馆之。
现代文：后来就到了岳阳，刺史李虞留他住下。
English: Later, he came to Yueyang, where he was allowed to stay by Li Yu.

古文：时大旱，叟因出笛，夜于圣善寺经楼上吹。
现代文：当时天大旱，他就拿出笛子来，夜间到圣善寺经楼上吹。
English: At that time, the weather was very dry, so he took out his flute and went to Shuzenji to play upstairs at night.

古文：果洞庭之渚，龙飞出而降。
现代文：果然，洞庭湖的小岛上，龙飞出来落下，驾着云雾围绕在经楼前后，各不一样。
English: Sure enough, on the small island of Dongting Lake, the dragon flew out and fell, driving the clouds around the front and back of the tower, each different.

古文：云绕其楼者不一，遂有老龙，果衔珠赠叟。
现代文：于是有一条老龙，果然衔来珠子赠给江叟。
English: As a result, an old dragon came to present the beads to Jiang Chen.

古文：叟得之，依其言而熬之二昼。果有龙化为人，持一小药合，有化水丹，匍匐请赎其珠。
现代文：江叟得了珠，依照鲍仙师的话把它熬了三天，果然有一条龙变成人，拿着一个小药盒，盒里装着化水丹，匍匐着请求赎回那颗珠子。
English: Jiang Xuan got the bead, boiled it for three days according to the words of Bao Xianshi, and sure enough, a dragon turned into a man, holding a small medicine box containing the pesticide, and begging to redeem the bead.

古文：叟乃持合而与之珠，饵其药，遂变童颜。入水不濡。
现代文：江叟就拿到药盒而给他珠子。然后，江叟把化水丹吃下去。于是江叟的老脸变童颜，入水不湿。
English: Jiang Chen took the pill box and gave him a bead. Then, Jiang Chen ate the bicarbonate of soda. As a result, Jiang Chen's old face turned into a child's face, and the water did not get wet.

古文：凡天下洞穴，无不历览。
现代文：凡是天下的洞穴，他没有不去游览的。
English: He didn't have to visit every cave in the world.

古文：后居于衡阳，容发如旧耳。
现代文：后来他住到了衡阳，容颜毛发如旧。
English: Later, he lived in Hengyang. His face and hair were the same as before.

古文：花卉怪
现代文：花卉怪
English: The Flower Monster

古文：龙蛇草
现代文：龙蛇草
English: Dragon Snake Grass

古文：后汉灵帝中平年夏，陈留郡济阳济阴，冤句离狐，城皋阳武，城郭路边生草，悉备龙蛇鸟兽之形。
现代文：后汉灵帝中平年夏，陈留郡的济阳、济阴、冤句、离狐、城皋、阳武等地，城郭的路边长草。这些草全都有龙、蛇、鸟、兽的形状。
English: After the Han Dynasty, in the summer of the middle of the year, there were long grasses on the roadside of the castle in Jiyang, Jiyin, Guanzhu, Lixing, Chenghuang, Yangwu and other places in Chenlu County. These grasses all have the shape of dragons, snakes, birds and beasts.

古文：《续汉志》曰： 其状五色，毛羽头目足翅皆具。
现代文：《续汉志》中说： 它的形状分五色，毛羽、头、眼、脚、翅膀全都具备。
English: "Continuation of Han Zhi" says: Its shape is divided into five colors, and it has feathers, head, eyes, feet, and wings.

古文：或作人形，操持弓弩，牛马万物之状。 
现代文：有的所人的形状，手拿着弓弩。牛马万物各种形状都有。
English: Some have the shape of a man, holding a bow and arrow in their hands. Cows, horses, and all things have various shapes.

古文：是岁，黑山贼张牛角等十余辈并起抄掠，后兄何进秉权，汉遂微弱。
现代文：这一年，黑山贼张牛角等十多人一同起来抄抢掠夺。皇后的哥哥何进执掌大权，汉室就微弱了。
English: That year, more than ten people, including the Montenegrin thief Zhang Niuquan, got together to loot and plunder. The queen's brother He Jin held the power, and the Han family was weak.

古文：又董卓起兵焚烧宫阙之应。
现代文：又应了董卓起兵焚烧京城的事。
English: It was also in response to Dong Zhuo raising an army and burning the capital city.

古文：鲜卑女
现代文：鲜卑女
English: The fresh-faced whore

古文：晋有士人，买得鲜卑女名怀顺。
现代文：晋时有一个士人，买了一名鲜卑女子，名叫怀顺。
English: In the Jin Dynasty, there was a scholar who bought a humble woman named Huai Shun.

古文：自说其姑女为赤苋所魅。
现代文：怀顺自己说她姑妈的女儿被一棵赤苋菜精迷住了。
English: Huai Shun herself said that her aunt's daughter was captivated by a red chive essence.

古文：始见一丈夫容质姘净，著赤衣，自云家在侧北。
现代文：当初看见来了一位漂亮的成年男子，男子说他家住在侧北。
English: At first he saw a handsome adult man, who said that his family lived in the northern part of the province.

古文：女于是恒歌谣自得。
现代文：那女孩从此便经常哼唱小曲，很是自得的样子。
English: From then on, the girl often hummed a little tune, very self-satisfied.

古文：每至将夕，辄结束去屋后。
现代文：每到天将黑的时候，她总是穿戴整齐到屋后去。
English: Whenever it gets dark, she always goes to the back of the house fully dressed.

古文：其家伺候，唯见有一株赤苋，女手指环挂其苋茎。
现代文：她家里派人窥视，只看见有一棵赤苋菜，女孩的手指环挂在苋菜的茎上。
English: Her family sent someone to take a look, but all they saw was a red leek with the girl's finger ring hanging from the stem.

古文：芟之而女号泣，经宿遂死焉。
现代文：割除那苋菜，女孩就号哭。经过一夜，女孩就死了。
English: Cut out the leek, the girl cried. After one night, the girl died.

古文：蕨蛇
现代文：蕨蛇
English: Boa constrictor

古文：太尉郗鉴镇丹阳也，曾出猎。
现代文：太尉郗鉴镇守丹阳，有一天出去打猎。
English: Captain Yu Jian, the town guard of Danyang, went out hunting one day.

古文：时二月中，蕨始生。
现代文：当时正是二月中旬，蕨菜刚长出来。
English: It was mid-February, and the leeks had just sprouted.

古文：有一甲士折食一茎，即觉心中潭潭欲吐。因归家。
现代文：有一名甲士随手折下一茎蕨菜吃，吃完就觉得心里想吐，于是就回到家里。
English: A warrior broke off a stalk of leek and ate it. After eating, he felt like he wanted to vomit, so he went home.

古文：仍成心腹疼痛。
现代文：回家之后仍然心腹疼痛。
English: When I got home, I was still in a lot of pain.

古文：经半年许，忽大吐，吐一赤蛇长尺余。
现代文：经过半年左右，忽然间大吐一场，吐出一条一尺多长的赤蛇。
English: After about half a year, he suddenly vomited violently, spitting out a red snake more than a foot long.

古文：尚动摇。
现代文：蛇还会摇动。
English: The snake also wiggles.

古文：乃挂于檐前，蛇渐焦。
现代文：于是就把蛇挂到房檐下，蛇渐渐变干。
English: So he hung the snake under the eaves, and it gradually dried out.

古文：经宿视之，乃是一茎蕨耳，犹昔之所食也。
现代文：经过一宿之后再看，原来是一棵蕨菜，还是从前吃的时候那样子。
English: After an overnight stay, I looked again, and it turned out to be a leek, just like when I used to eat it.

古文：病遂差。
现代文：于是病就好了。
English: As a result, the illness was cured.

古文：芥虫
现代文：芥虫
English: Roundworm

古文：五岭春夏率皆霪水，晴日既少，涉秋入冬方止。
现代文：五岭一带春夏季一般都多雨，晴天的时候少，秋末冬初才停止。
English: The Wuling area is generally rainy in spring and summer, less so in sunny weather, and only stops in late autumn and early winter.

古文：凡物皆易蠹败，萠胶毡罽，无逾年者。
现代文：由于阴雨绵绵，什么东西都容易生虫子变坏。各种物品，没有超过一年的。
English: Due to the continuous rain, everything is prone to worms and deterioration. All kinds of items, no more than a year old.

古文：尝买芥菜置壁下，忘食。
现代文：曾经有人买了一些芥菜放在墙下，忘了吃它，几天之后生了虫子。
English: Someone once bought some mustard greens, put them under the wall, forgot to eat them, and a few days later worms were born.

古文：数日皆生四足，有首尾，能行走，大如螳螂，但腰身细长耳。
现代文：那虫子四条腿，有头有尾，能行走，大小有如螳螂，只是腰身细长一些罢了。
English: The insect has four legs, a head and a tail, can walk, and is about the size of a cockroach, except that it has a slender waist.

古文：崔玄微
现代文：崔玄微
English: Cui Xuanwei

古文：唐天宝中，处士崔玄微洛东有宅。
现代文：唐天宝年中，处士崔玄微在洛东有一处宅院。
English: In the middle of the Tang Dynasty, the official Cui Xuanwei had a mansion in the east of Luodong.

古文：耽道，饵术及茯苓三十载。
现代文：他沉溺于道家学说，服用术和茯苓三十年。
English: He was addicted to the Taoist teachings, taking the jujube and ginger for thirty years.

古文：因药尽，领僮仆辈入嵩山采芝，一年方回。
现代文：因为药已用尽，他就领着僮仆们深入嵩山采灵芝。一年之后才回来。
English: Because the medicine was exhausted, he led his servants deep into the Songshan Mountains to collect reishi mushrooms. He did not return until a year later.

古文：宅中无人，蒿莱满院。
现代文：宅中没人居住，蒿草满院。
English: No one lives in the house, and the yard is full of weeds.

古文：三更后，有一青衣云： 君在院中也，今欲与一两女伴过，至上东门表姨处，暂借此歇。可乎？ 
现代文：当时正是春天的夜晚，风清月朗，晚风宜人，他就没有睡，单独呆在一个院子里。家人没事是不到这院里来的，三更天之后，有一个婢女来说： 您在院里呢！我现在想要和一两个女伴过去，到东门表姨那里去，想暂借这地方歇一歇，可以吗？ 
English: It was a spring evening, the wind was light and the evening breeze was pleasant, he did not sleep, he stayed alone in a courtyard. His family did not come to this courtyard without any problems. Three days later, a maid said: You are in the courtyard! I now want to go with one or two female companions, to go to Aunt Dongmen, I want to borrow this place for a break, is it okay?

古文：玄微许之。
现代文：崔玄微答应了。
English: Cui Xuanwei agreed.

古文：须臾，乃有十余人，青衣引入。
现代文：不一会儿，就有十多个人由那婢女领进来。
English: In a short time, more than ten people were brought in by the maid.

古文：有绿裳者前曰： 某姓杨。 
现代文：有一个穿绿衣裳的上前说： 我姓杨。 
English: One of them, dressed in green, came forward and said, "My name is Yang.

古文：指一人，曰 李氏 。
现代文：她指着一人说： 她姓李。 
English: Pointing to one, she said: Her surname is Li.

古文：又一人，曰 陶氏 。
现代文：又指一人，说姓陶。
English: He also pointed to another person and said his surname was Tao.

古文：又指一绯小女，曰 姓石名阿措 。
现代文：又指一个红色小女子说： 她姓石名阿措。 
English: He also pointed to a little red-haired girl and said, "Her last name is Ishiina Atso."

古文：各有侍女辈。
现代文：她们各有自己的侍女。
English: They each have their own maid.

古文：玄微相见毕，乃坐于月下，问行出之由。
现代文：崔玄微与她们相见完毕，就坐到月下，问她们出来的原因。
English: After meeting with them, Cui Xuanwei sat under the moon and asked them why they came out.

古文：对曰： 欲到封十八姨。数日云欲来相看，不得，今夕众往看之。 
现代文：回答说，她们要到封十八姨那去，封十八姨几天前说想要来看她们，没来成，今晚她们大伙去看她。
English: They replied that they wanted to go to Auntie Fong's. Auntie Fong said a few days ago that she wanted to come and see them, but she didn't make it, and tonight they were all going to see her.

古文：坐未定，门外报封家姨来也。
现代文：还没全坐稳，门外报告说封家姨来了。
English: Before everyone had settled down, there was a report outside the door that Auntie Feng had arrived.

古文：坐皆惊喜出迎。
现代文：在坐的都惊喜地跑出去迎接。
English: Everyone who was sitting there was surprised and ran out to greet them.

古文：杨氏云： 主人甚贤，只此从容不恶，诸亦未胜于此也。 
现代文：杨氏说： 这家的主人很好，只这从从容容不令人厌恶，其它地方就比不上这。 
English: Mr. Yang said, "The owner of this place is very nice, but this is the only place that is not disgusting. Other places can't compare to this."

古文：玄微又出见封氏。
现代文：崔玄微又出来见过封氏。
English: Cui Xuanwei came out again and saw Mr. Fong.

古文：言词冷冷。有林下风气。
现代文：封氏的言辞清冷冷峻，有林下的风气。
English: Mr. Fong's words are clear, cold, and have an under-the-woods atmosphere.

古文：遂揖入坐。
现代文：于是大家相揖入座。
English: So they all sat down together.

古文：色皆殊绝，满座芳香，馥馥袭人。
现代文：众女子都是殊绝姿色，满座芳香，馥馥袭人。
English: All of the women are exceptionally beautiful, fragrant and seductive.

古文：诸人命酒，各歌以送之。
现代文：酒席摆上，开始饮酒。酒间，唱歌互赠。
English: The banquet is set up and the drinking begins. Between drinks, songs are exchanged.

古文：玄微志其二焉。
现代文：崔玄微记得其中的两首歌。
English: Cui Xuan faintly remembers two of the songs.

古文：有红裳人与白衣送酒，歌曰： 皎洁玉颜胜白雪，况乃当年对芳月。
现代文：一首是有一个红衣裳的给一个白衣裳的送酒，唱道： 皎玉颜胜白雪，况乃当年对芳月。
English: One song is about a man in a red dress giving wine to a woman in a white dress, singing: 玉颜胜白雪, and another is about Fang Yue.

古文：沉吟不敢怨春风，自叹容华暗消歇。 
现代文：沉吟不敢怨春风，自叹容华暗消歇。 
English: The brooding dare not complain about the spring breeze, and the self-deprecating countenance is fading away.

古文：又白衣人送酒，歌曰： 绛衣披拂露盈盈，淡染胭脂一朵轻。
现代文：另一首是白衣人给红衣人送酒，唱道： 绛衣披拂露盈盈，淡染胭脂一朵轻。
English: Another song is about a man in white giving a bottle of wine to a man in red. The song goes: The man in white is wearing a bright red shirt, and the man in red is wearing a light blue shirt.

古文：自恨红颜留不住，莫怨春风道薄情。 
现代文：自恨红颜留不住，莫怨春风道薄情。 
English: Self-hatred can't keep the rosy cheeks away, and there's no reason to be resentful of the Spring Festival.

古文：至十八姨持盏，性颇轻佻，翻酒汗阿措衣。
现代文：到了十八姨端起酒杯，她的情性很轻佻，把酒弄到了阿措身上。
English: When the 18th aunt raised her wine glass, she was very frivolous and spilled the wine on Atco.

古文：阿措作色曰： 诸人即奉求，余即不知奉求耳。 
现代文：阿措生气地说： 每个人都是双手捧着酒杯走到跟前请人家喝，论到我怎么就不能捧着给我呢？ 
English: Atso said angrily, "Everyone holds a glass with both hands when they walk up to someone to ask for a drink. As for me, why can't I hold it out to them?"

古文：拂衣而起。
现代文：说完，她拂衣而起。
English: With that, she brushed off her clothes.

古文：十八姨曰： 小女弄酒 。
现代文：十八姨说： 这孩子耍酒疯呢！ 
English: The 18-year-old said: "This kid is going crazy with alcohol!

古文：皆起。至门外别。
现代文：大家都起来，到了门外相别。
English: Everyone got up and said goodbye outside the door.

古文：十八姨南去。
现代文：十八姨往南去。
English: Eighteen aunts went south.

古文：诸人西入苑中而别。
现代文：其他人往西进到园中而各自别去。
English: Others went west into the park and left separately.

古文：玄微亦不知异。
现代文：崔玄微也不知有什么异常。
English: Cui Xuanwei didn't know what was wrong.

古文：明夜又来云： 欲往十八姨处。 
现代文：第二天晚上她们又来，说，要到十八姨那去。
English: The next evening they came again and said that they wanted to go to their aunt.

古文：阿措怒曰： 何用更去封妪舍，有事只求处士，不知可乎？ 
现代文：阿措生气道： 何必还到封老婆子那里去！有事只求求这位处士，不知可不可以？ 
English: Atso said angrily, "Why do you have to go back to the old woman! If you need anything, just ask this clerk. I don't know if it's okay?"

古文：阿措又言曰： 诸侣皆住苑中，每岁多被恶风所挠，居止不安，常求十八姨相庇。
现代文：阿措又说道： 各位伙伴都住在园中，每年都多次被恶风抓挠，居止不安，常常求十八姨庇护。
English: Atso also said: All the partners live in the garden, and every year they are repeatedly scratched by the bad wind, they are uneasy to stay, and often seek the shelter of eighteen aunts.

古文：昨阿措不能依回，应难取力。
现代文：昨天我没能依顺她，应该很难借上她的力了。
English: I couldn't follow her yesterday, so it's going to be hard to borrow from her.

古文：处士倘不阻见庇，亦有微报耳。 
现代文：处士如果能庇护我们，我们也会有所报答的。 
English: If the officials can protect us, we will repay them.

古文：玄微曰： 某有何力，得及诸女？ 
现代文：崔玄微说： 我有什么能力，能保护到各位女子？ 
English: Cui Xuanwei said: What ability do I have to protect you women?

古文：阿措曰： 但处士每岁岁日，与作一朱幡，上图日月五星之文，于苑东立之，则免难矣。
现代文：阿措说： 只要处士每年过年的这一天，给我们做一面红色旗，旗上画上日头月亮和五星，送到园东立起来，就能免除我们的灾难。
English: Atso said: As long as the officials make a red flag for us on the day of the New Year every year, with the sun, moon and five stars painted on it, and send it to the east of the garden to stand up, we can be spared from disaster.

古文：今岁已过，但请至此月二十一日，平旦微有东风，即立之。庶夫免患也。 
现代文：现在年已经过了，只请你到了这个月的二十一日，天亮的时候微有东风，就立上，也许可以免除祸患。 
English: Now that the year has passed, I only ask you to stand up on the 21st day of this month, when there is a slight east wind at dawn, and you may be able to avoid the disaster.

古文：玄微许之。
现代文：崔玄微答应下来。
English: Cui Xuanwei agreed.

古文：乃齐声谢曰： 不敢忘德。 
现代文：众女子一齐致谢说： 不敢忘记处士的恩德。 
English: All the women together expressed their gratitude, saying, "I dare not forget the kindness of the clerk."

古文：拜而去。
现代文：说完便行礼而去。
English: After saying this, he bowed and left.

古文：玄微于月中随而送之。逾苑墙，乃入苑中，各失所在。
现代文：崔玄微在月光里跟随在她们后边相送，见她们越过园墙，走进园中，各不知去向。
English: Cui Xuanwei followed behind them in the moonlight to see them off. He saw them cross the garden wall and enter the garden. They didn't know where they were going.

古文：依其言，至此日立幡。
现代文：崔玄微按照她们的说法，到了这天便把旗立了起来。
English: According to them, Cui Xuanwei raised the flag on this day.

古文：是日东风振地，自洛南折树飞沙，而苑中繁花不动。
现代文：这一天东风振地，从洛南开始，折树飞沙，但是园子里的繁花不摇不动。
English: On this day, the east wind shook the earth, starting from Lonan, the trees broke and the sand flew, but the flowers in the garden did not shake.

古文：玄微乃悟。
现代文：崔玄微这才恍然大悟。
English: Cui Xuanwei suddenly realized this.

古文：诸女曰姓杨李陶，及衣服颜色之异，皆众花之精也。
现代文：众女子说姓杨，姓李，姓陶，以及她们的衣服颜色不同，从中可以看出她们是各种花精。
English: The women said their surnames were Yang, Li and Tao, and the different colors of their clothes showed that they were various flower essences.

古文：绯衣名阿措，即安石榴也。封十八姨，乃风神也。
现代文：穿红衣名阿措的，就是安石榴；封十八姨，就是枫树神。
English: The red-clothed deity named Atso is the pomegranate god; the eighteenth aunt of Feng is the maple god.

古文：后数夜，杨氏辈复至愧谢。
现代文：后来过了几日，一天夜里杨氏等人又来了，是来致谢的。
English: A few days later, one night, Mr. Yang and others came again, to say thank you.

古文：各裹桃李花数斗，劝崔生服之，可延年却老。
现代文：她们各裹桃李花数斗，劝崔玄微服用，说可以延年却老。
English: They each wrapped several buckets of peach and plum blossoms, and advised Cui Xuanwei to take them, saying that they could prolong their life but still grow old.

古文：愿长如此住卫护某等，亦可致长生。
现代文：她们希望崔玄微长住下去并且经常卫护她们，那样崔玄微也可以长生不老。
English: They hope that Cui Xuanwei will live a long time and always protect them, so that Cui Xuanwei can also live forever.

古文：至元和初，玄微犹在，可称年三十许人。
现代文：到了元和年初，崔玄微还健在，看上去，可称为三十来岁的人。
English: By the end of the Yuan Dynasty and the beginning of the year, Cui Xuanwei was still alive, and looked like a man in his thirties.

古文：又尊贤坊田弘正宅，中门外有紫牡丹成树，发花千余朵。花盛时，每月夜，有小人五六，长尺余，游于花上。
现代文：另外，尊贤坊田弘正的宅院里，中门外一株紫牡丹长成树，开花一千多朵，花盛时，每个有月色的夜晚，就能看见有五六个仆人，一个个身长一尺多，在花上游玩。
English: In addition, in the courtyard of Tian Hongzheng, a revered scholar, a purple peony grows into a tree outside the middle gate, with more than a thousand flowers. When the flowers are in full bloom, every moonlit night, you can see five or six servants, each more than a foot long, playing on the flowers.

古文：如此七八年。人将掩之，辄失所在。
现代文：如此七八年的光景，人们要突然逮住他们的时候，便各失所在，不知哪儿去了。
English: It's been like this for seven or eight years, and when people want to suddenly catch them, they lose their bearings and don't know where they are.

