古文：齐助楚攻秦，取曲沃。
现代文：齐国帮助楚国进攻秦国，夺取了曲沃。
English: Qi helped Chu to attack Qin and capture Quwo.

古文：其后，秦欲伐齐，齐、楚之交善，惠王患之，谓张仪曰： 吾欲伐齐，齐、楚方欢，子为寡人虑之，奈何? 
现代文：后来秦国打算攻打齐国，齐国、楚国关系友好，秦惠王感到十分忧虑，秦惠王对张仪说： 我打算发兵攻打齐国，不过当下齐国、楚国关系融洽，您为我考虑一下，该怎么办？ 
English: Later, Qin intended to attack Qi, and Qi and Chu had a friendly relationship. Qin Hui Wang was very worried. Qin Hui Wang said to Zhang Yi, "I plan to send troops to attack Qi, but at the moment, Qi and Chu have a harmonious relationship. Please consider for me, what should I do?"

古文：张仪曰： 王其为臣约车并币，臣请试之。 
现代文：张仪说： 请大王为臣准备车马和钱物，让臣去试一下。 
English: Zhang Yi said, "Please ask the king to prepare a chariot, horse and money for me, and let me try it."

古文：张仪南见楚王曰： 弊邑之王所说甚者，无大大王；唯仪之所甚愿为臣者，亦无大大王。
现代文：张仪南行去见楚王，对楚王说： 敝国国君最敬重的人，莫过于大王您了；我张仪唯一想做的臣子，也莫过于成为大王您的臣子。
English: Zhang Yi went south to meet King Chu, and said to King Chu: "There is no one I respect more than you, the great king. The only thing I want to do as Zhang Yi's vassal is to become your vassal.

古文：弊邑之王所甚憎者，亦无先齐王；唯仪之甚憎者，亦无大齐王。
现代文：敝国国君最厌恶的人，莫过于齐王了；我张仪唯一憎恨的人，也莫过于齐王了。 
English: The most detested person by the king of the country is the king of Qi; the only person I hate is the king of Qi.

古文：今齐之罪，其于弊邑之王甚厚，弊邑欲伐之，而大国与之欢，是以弊邑之王不得事令，而仪不得为臣也。
现代文：如今齐国罪最为深重，敝国想攻打齐国，而贵国和齐国关系融洽，所以敝国的君主无法为您效劳，我也无法成为您的臣子。
English: Now, the crime of Qi is the most serious. My country wants to attack Qi, and your country and Qi have a harmonious relationship. Therefore, the monarch of my country cannot serve you, and I cannot become your vassal.

古文：大王苟能闭关绝齐，臣请使秦王献商於之地，方六百里。
现代文：如果大王能关闭齐、楚边界，并和齐国断交，我请示秦王献上方圆六百里的商於之地。
English: If the Great King can close the border between Qi and Chu and break off diplomatic relations with Qi, I ask the King of Qin to offer the land of Shang, which has a radius of 600 miles.

古文：若此，齐必弱，齐弱则必为王役矣。
现代文：如若如此，齐国必定会被削弱，就一定会受大王您的差遣了。
English: If this is the case, the State of Qi will certainly be weakened, and it will certainly be dispatched by Your Majesty.

古文：则是北弱齐，西德于秦，而私商於之地以为利也，则此一计而三利俱至。 
现代文：这样一来，楚国既在北边削弱了齐国，又在西方讨好了秦国，而商於之地也归了楚国，这样一个计策就使楚国得到了三个好处。 
English: In this way, Chu not only weakened Qi in the north, but also pleased Qin in the west, and the merchants in the west also belonged to Chu. Such a strategy brought three benefits to Chu.

古文：楚王大说，宣言之于朝廷，曰： 不穀得商於之田，方六百里。 
现代文：楚王非常高兴，在朝中向群臣宣布，说： 我得到了商之地，方圆六百里。 
English: King Chu was very happy and announced to his courtiers in the middle of the court, saying, "I have obtained a trading place with a radius of six hundred miles."

古文：群臣闻见者毕贺，陈轸后见，独不贺。
现代文：群臣听了怀王的宣布，都一致向怀王道贺，惟独客卿陈轸最后才来晋见，而且根本不向怀王道贺。
English: After listening to King Huai's announcement, the courtiers all congratulated King Huai in unison. However, the only one who did not congratulate King Huai at all was the guest of honor, Chen Xi, who only came to see him at the end.

古文：楚王曰： 不穀不烦一兵，不伤一人，而得商於之地六百里，寡人自以为智矣!诸士大夫皆贺，子独不贺，何也? 
现代文：这时怀王就很诧异的问： 寡人不发一卒，没有伤亡一名将士，就得到商、于六百里土地，寡人认为这非常明智，朝中文武百官都向寡人道贺，偏只有贤卿一人不道贺，这是为什么？ 
English: At this time, King Huai was very surprised and asked: If no one sends a pawn, and no soldier is killed or injured, then they will get a merchant and a land of six hundred miles. Some people think this is very wise. Hundreds of military officials in the DPRK and China have congratulated a few people, but only one wise man did not congratulate. Why is this?

古文：陈轸对曰： 臣见商於之地不可得，而患必至也，故不敢妄贺。 
现代文：陈轸回答说： 因为我认为，大王不但得不到商、于六百里，反而会招来祸患，所以臣才不敢随便向大王道贺。 
English: Chen Yao replied, "Because I believe that the great king will not only fail to get the merchant, but will cause trouble in the six hundred miles, so the vassal did not dare to congratulate the great king.

古文：王曰： 何也? 
现代文：怀王问： 什么道理呢？ 
English: Chu Huai Wangzi: Why?

古文：对曰： 夫秦所以重王者，以王有齐也。
现代文：陈轸回答说： 秦王所以重视大王的原因，是因为有齐国这样一个强大盟邦。
English: Chen Yao replied, "The reason why King Qin attaches importance to the Great King is because of a powerful ally like Qi.

古文：今地未可得而齐先绝，是楚孤也，秦又何重孤国?
现代文：如今秦国还没把地割给大王，大王就跟齐国断绝邦交，如此就会使楚国陷于孤立状态，秦国又怎会重视一个孤立无援的国家呢？
English: Now Qin has not yet ceded the land to the great king, and the great king has broken off diplomatic relations with Qi. This will cause Chu to fall into an isolated state. How can Qin pay attention to an isolated country?

古文：且先出地绝齐，秦计必弗为也。先绝齐后责地，且必受欺于张仪。
现代文：何况如果先让秦国割让土地，楚国再来跟齐断绝邦交，秦国必不肯这样做；要是楚国先跟齐国断交，然后再向秦要求割让土地，那么必然遭到张仪欺骗而得不到土地。
English: Moreover, if Qin ceded the land first, and Chu followed suit by breaking off diplomatic relations with Qi, Qin would certainly refuse to do so; if Chu broke off diplomatic relations with Qi first, and then asked Qin to cede the land, it would inevitably be deceived by Zhang Yi and would not get the land.

古文：受欺于张仪，王必惋之。是西生秦患，北绝齐交，则两国兵必至矣。 
现代文：受了张仪的欺骗，以后大王必然懊悔万分；结果是西面惹出秦国的祸患，北面切断了齐国的后援，这样秦、齐两国的兵都将进攻楚国。 
English: After being deceived by Zhang Yi, the great king must have regretted a lot; the result was that the west side caused the disaster of Qin, and the north side cut off the support of Qi, so that the soldiers of Qin and Qi would attack Chu.

古文：楚王不听，曰： 吾事善矣!子其弭口无言，以待吾事。 
现代文：楚王不听从，说： 我的事已经办妥当了，你就闭口，不要再多说，你就等待寡人的吧！ 
English: King Chu didn't listen and said, "My business has been handled properly, so shut up and don't talk any more. Just wait for someone else!"

古文：楚王使人绝齐，使者未来，又重绝之。
现代文：于是怀王就派使者前往齐国宣布跟齐断绝邦交，还没等第一个绝交使者回来，楚王竟急着第二次派人去与齐国绝交。
English: As a result, King Huai sent an envoy to Qi to announce the severance of diplomatic relations with Qi. Before the first envoy to sever diplomatic relations returned, King Chu was in a hurry to send a second envoy to sever diplomatic relations with Qi.

古文：张仪反，秦使人使齐，齐、秦之交阴合。
现代文：张仪回到秦国之后，秦王就赶紧派使者前往齐国游说，秦齐的盟约暗暗缔结成功。
English: After Zhang Yi returned to Qin, the Qin king quickly sent an envoy to Qin to lobby, and the Qin-Qi alliance was secretly concluded successfully.

古文：楚因使一将军受地于秦。张仪至，称病不朝。楚王曰： 张子以寡人不绝齐乎? 
现代文：果然不出陈轸所料，当楚国一名将军去秦国接收土地时，张仪竟然装病不上朝，楚怀王说： 张仪以为寡人不是诚心跟齐国断交吗？ 
English: As Chen Yao had expected, when a general from the State of Chu went to the State of Qin to receive land, Zhang Yi pretended to be ill and did not go to the court. The King of Chu Hui said, "Zhang Yi, don't you think some people are sincere in breaking off diplomatic relations with the State of Qi?"

古文：乃使勇士往詈齐王。张仪知楚绝齐也，乃出见使者曰： 从某至某，广从六里。 
现代文：于是楚怀王就派了一名勇士前去齐国骂齐王，张仪在证实楚齐确实断交以后，才勉强出来接见楚国的索土使臣，说： 敝国赠送贵国的土地，是从某地到某地，方圆总共是六里。 
English: As a result, King Chuhuai sent a warrior to Qi to scold King Qi. Only after Zhang Yi confirmed that Chuqi had indeed severed diplomatic relations did he reluctantly come out to meet the Soto envoys of Chu, saying: "The land given to your country is from a certain place to a certain place, with a total radius of six miles.

古文：使者曰： 臣闻六百里，不闻六里。 
现代文：楚国使者很谅讶的说： 臣只听说是六百里，却没有听说是六里。 
English: The envoy of the State of Chu was very surprised and said: The minister only heard that it was six hundred miles, but he did not hear that it was six miles.

古文：仪曰： 仪固以小人，安得六百里? 
现代文：张仪赶紧郑重其事的巧辩说： 我张仪在秦国只不过是一个微不足道的小官，哪有答应六百里的权利？ 
English: Zhang Yi hastened to solemnly argue: I, Zhang Yi, am nothing more than an insignificant minor official in Qin. Who has the right to promise six hundred li?

古文：使者反报楚王，楚王大怒，欲兴师伐秦。
现代文：楚国使节回国报告楚怀王以后，楚王大怒，就准备发兵去攻打秦国。
English: After the envoys of the State of Chu returned to report to King Chu Huai, the King of Chu was furious and prepared to send an army to attack the State of Qin.

古文：陈轸曰： 臣可以言乎? 王曰： 可矣。 
现代文：这时陈轸走到楚王面前表示： 现在我可以说话了吗？ 怀王说： 可以。 
English: At this time, Chen Xi walked up to King Chu and said, "Can I speak now?" King Huai said, "Yes."

古文：轸曰： 伐秦非计也，王不如因而赂之一名都，与之伐齐，是我亡于秦而取偿于齐也。楚国不尚全事。
现代文：于是陈轸说： 楚国发兵去攻打秦国，绝对不是一个好办法。大王不如趁此机会，不但不向秦国要求商、于六百里里土地，反而再送给秦一个有名的城池，目的是跟秦连兵伐齐，如此或许可以把损失在秦国手里的再从齐国得回来，这不就等于楚国没有损失吗？
English: Therefore, Chen Zhe said: It is definitely not a good idea for Chu to send troops to attack Qin. The great king should take this opportunity not only to request merchants and 600 miles of land from Qin, but also to send a famous castle to Qin. The purpose is to be equal to Qin's company of soldiers. In this way, it may be possible to recover the losses in the hands of Qin from Qi. Isn't this equal to the loss of Chu?

古文：王今已绝齐，而责欺于秦，是吾合齐、秦之交也，固必大伤。 
现代文：大王既然已经跟齐国断绝关系，又去责备秦国，岂不是等于在加强秦、齐两国的邦交吗，真是这样的话，楚国必受大害！ 
English: Since the great king has broken off relations with the state of Qi and has gone to reproach the state of Qin, isn't it tantamount to strengthening the diplomatic relations between the two countries of Qin and Qi? If this is really the case, the state of Chu will suffer great harm!

古文：楚王不听，遂举兵伐秦。
现代文：可惜楚怀王仍然没有采纳陈轸的忠谏，而是照原定计划发兵北去攻打秦国。
English: Unfortunately, King Chu Huai still did not accept Chen Xi's loyal vassal, but sent his troops north to attack Qin as originally planned.

古文：秦与齐合，韩氏从之。楚兵大败于杜陵。
现代文：秦、齐两国组成联合阵线，同时韩国也加入了他的军事同盟，结果楚军被三国联军在杜陵打得惨败。
English: The two countries of Qin and Qi formed a joint front, and South Korea also joined his military alliance. As a result, the Chu army was soundly defeated by the three-nation coalition in Duling.

古文：故楚之土壤士民非削弱，仅以救亡者，计失于陈轸，过听于张仪。
现代文：可见，楚国的土地并非不大，而人民也并非比其他诸侯软弱，但是之所以会弄得几乎要亡国的惨境，就是因为楚王没有采纳陈轸的正确建议，而过分听信张仪的谎言。
English: It can be seen that the land of Chu is not small, and the people are not weaker than other lords. However, the reason why the country was almost destroyed was because the King of Chu did not adopt the correct advice of Chen Xi, but listened excessively to the lies of Zhang Yi.

