古文：廉俭陆绩齐明帝甄彬高允崔光长孙道生唐玄宗肃宗卢怀慎李勉
现代文：廉俭陆绩齐明帝甄彬高允崔光长孙道生唐玄宗肃宗卢怀慎李勉
English: Qiming Emperor Zhenbin Gaoyun Choe Kwang Changsun Daosheng Tang Xuan Zong Su Zong Lu Huai Sheng Li Tsuen

古文：杜黄裳阳城郑余庆郑浣文宗夏侯孜裴坦温琏仲庭预
现代文：杜黄裳阳城郑余庆郑浣文宗夏侯孜裴坦温琏仲庭预
English: Du Huang Xiangyang City Zheng Yuqing Zheng Rong Wenzong Xia Hou Zhe Pei Tan Wenqian Zhong Court Pretrial

古文：吝啬汉世老人沈峻李崇南阳人夏侯处信柳庆夏侯彪郑仁凯邓祐韦庄王叟王锷裴璩归登
现代文：吝啬汉世老人沈峻李崇南阳人夏侯处信柳庆夏侯彪郑仁凯邓祐韦庄王叟王锷裴璩归登
English: The miserly Han dynasty old man Shenjun Li Chong Nanyang people Xia Hou Office Xin Liu Qing Xia Hou Biao Zheng Ren Kai Deng Yu Wei Zhuang Wang Yao Wang Yao Pei Yao returned to the throne

古文：廉俭
现代文：廉俭
English: Frugality

古文：陆绩
现代文：陆绩
English: Achievements abroad

古文：吴陆绩为郁林郡守，罢秩，泛海而归。不载宝货，舟轻，用巨石重之。人号郁林石。
现代文：吴陆绩当郁林太守，任期满了以后渡海回家，没有带什么财宝，船太轻了，只好将一块巨大的石头装到船上压船，人们都将这块石头叫做郁林石。
English: When Wu Luqi was the governor of Yulin, after his term of office was over, he sailed home without bringing any treasure. The ship was too light, so he had to load a huge stone onto the ship to weigh it down. People called this stone Yulin Stone.

古文：齐明帝
现代文：齐明帝
English: Emperor Qiming

古文：齐明帝尝饮食，捉竹箸，谓卫尉应昭光曰：卿解我用竹箸意否？
现代文：齐明帝在一次吃饭的时候，拿着竹筷子对卫尉应昭光说：你理解我使用竹筷子的意思吗？
English: During a meal, Emperor Qiming held bamboo chopsticks and said to the guard lieutenant Ying Zhaoguang: "Do you understand what I mean by using bamboo chopsticks?

古文：答曰：昔夏禹衣恶，往诰流言。象箸豢腴，先哲垂诫。
现代文：应昭光回答说：当初夏禹的衣服穿的平常，他针对流言说，生活过于舒适，使用象牙筷子，会导致腐化的风气。
English: Ying Zhaoguang replied: At the beginning, Xia Yu's clothes were ordinary. In response to the rumors, he said that life was too comfortable and the use of ivory chopsticks would lead to a corrupt culture.

古文：今睿情冲素，还风反古。太平之迹，唯竹箸而已。
现代文：这是古代的贤人对我们的告诫，如今皇帝你明智地提倡俭朴，发扬古代圣贤的遗风，太平盛世，只有用竹筷子了。
English: This is the ancient sage's admonition to us. Now, Emperor, you are wisely advocating frugality and carrying forward the ancient sage's legacy. In times of peace and prosperity, only bamboo chopsticks can be used.

古文：甄彬
现代文：甄彬
English: Zhenbin

古文：齐有甄彬者，有器业。
现代文：齐朝的时候有个叫甄彬的人，有高尚的品质和出色的才能。
English: During the Qi Dynasty, there was a man named Zhenbin, who had noble qualities and outstanding talents.

古文：尝以一束苎，于荆州长沙西库质钱。后赎苎，于束中得金五两，以手巾裹之。
现代文：他有一次用一束苎麻到荆州长沙西库作抵押换了一些钱用，后来拿钱去赎苎麻，回来后在麻里发现用一条手巾包着的五两金子。
English: He once used a bunch of nettles to go to the governor of Jing Province, Shaxikou, to pledge some money. Later, he took the money to redeem the nettles, and when he returned, he found fifty-two pieces of gold wrapped in a hand towel in the nettles.

古文：彬得金，送还西库。
现代文：甄彬将金子送还西库。
English: Zhenbin sent the gold back to the West Bank.

古文：道人大惊曰：近有人以金质钱，时忽遽，不记录。檀越乃能见归，恐古今未之有也。
现代文：管理西库的和尚非常吃惊地说：近来有人用金子抵押换钱。因为匆忙，没有记清放到什么地方了，施主拾到后，还能送还，这恐怕是从古到今都没有的事情。
English: The monk in charge of the Western Bank was very surprised and said, "Recently, someone used gold to exchange money. Because they were in a hurry, they didn't remember where they had put it. When the donor found it, they were able to return it, which is probably something that hasn't happened since ancient times."

古文：辄以金之半仰酬，往复十余，坚然不受。
现代文：和尚特意将一半金子还给他作为酬谢，两个人推辞往复了十多次，甄彬坚决不肯接受。
English: The monk specifically returned half of the gold to him as a reward. The two men exchanged their resignations more than ten times, and Zhenbin resolutely refused to accept.

古文：因咏曰：五月披羊裘负薪，岂拾遗者也？
现代文：和尚赞叹地说：五月天气仍然穿着皮袄背柴草的人，竟然是拾金不昧的君子！
English: The monk said admiringly, "In May weather, people who are still wearing fur coats with firewood on the back are actually gentlemen who do not hesitate to pick up gold!

古文：彬后为郫令，将行，辞太祖。时同列五人，上诫以廉慎。
现代文：后来甄彬被任命为郫县县令，将要去上任之前，去向太祖皇帝辞行，同时去辞行的一共有五位官员。
English: Later, Zhenbin was appointed as the county magistrate of Jixian County. Before he took office, he would resign to the Emperor Taizu, and a total of five officials would resign at the same time.

古文：至于彬，独曰：卿昔有还金之美，故不复以此诫也。
现代文：太祖皇帝告诫一定要注意保持廉洁，唯独对甄彬说：你昔日有还金的美名，所以对你就不用嘱咐这句话了。
English: The great-grandfather emperor cautioned that care must be taken to maintain integrity, but said to Zhenbin: You used to have a reputation for repaying money, so you don't need to be told this.

古文：高允
现代文：高允
English: Gao Yun

古文：后魏高允字伯恭，燕太尉中郎韬之子。
现代文：北魏有个人叫高允，字叫伯恭，是燕太尉中郎韬的儿子。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, there was a man named Gao Yun, also known as Bao Qiong, who was the son of Yan Taifu Lt. Col. Lang Yao.

古文：早有奇度，博通经史。
现代文：他从小就有非凡的胸怀，熟读经史。
English: Ever since he was a child, he had an extraordinary mind and was well-versed in scripture and history.

古文：神中，与范阳卢玄、赵郡李灵、博陵崔鉴等，以贤俊之胄，同被诏征，拜中书侍郎领著作，与崔浩同撰书。
现代文：神中年，他和范阳的卢玄，赵郡的李灵，博陵的崔鉴等人一起，以贵族子弟的身份被朝廷录用，被任命为书侍郎领著作，同崔浩一起撰写书籍。
English: In his middle age, he and Lu Xuan of Fanyang, Li Ling of Zhao County, Cui Jian of Boling and others were hired by the imperial court as the sons of aristocrats, appointed as bookkeepers, and wrote books together with Cui Hao.

古文：及浩遇害，以允忠直不苟，特见原宥。
现代文：等到崔浩遇害，因为高允素来忠诚正直，所以被宽恕。
English: Wait until Cui Hao is killed, because Gao Yun has always been loyal and honest, so he was forgiven.

古文：性清俭，虽累居显贵，而志同贫贱。
现代文：高允清廉俭朴，虽然多次担任重要官职，但性格同贫贱的时候一样。
English: Gao Yunqing is frugal and thrifty. Although he has held important official positions many times, his character is the same as when he was poor.

古文：高宗幸其宅，唯草屋数间，布被袍，厨中盐菜而已。
现代文：皇帝到他的家里，见他家只有几间草房，几床布棉被，和几件半新的袍子，厨房里只有咸菜。
English: The emperor went to his home and saw that his home only had a few grass huts, a few beds with cotton quilts, and a few half-new robes. The kitchen contained only pickled vegetables.

古文：帝叹息曰：古之清贫，岂有此乎？
现代文：皇帝感叹着说：从古以来清贫的官员没有超过这样的。
English: The emperor sighed and said, "Since ancient times, there has never been a more destitute official than this.

古文：赐之粟帛。
现代文：于是赏给他一些布匹和粮食。
English: So they gave him some cloth and food.

古文：崔光
现代文：崔光
English: Cui Guang

古文：后魏自太和迁都之后，国家殷富，库藏盈溢，钱绢露积于廊庑间，不可校数。
现代文：北魏自从在太和年间迁移了国都以后，国家丰足。国库里的物品多得快要装不下了，走廊和房屋之间的露天场地，也堆满了钱币和布匹，东西多得无法清点。
English: Since the Northern Wei Dynasty moved the capital in the Taichung era, the country has been plentiful. The items in the treasury are almost too much to contain, and the open space between the corridor and the house is also full of coins and cloth, and there are too many things to count.

古文：太后赐百姓负绢，任意自量，朝臣莫不称力而去。
现代文：太后决定将多余的布匹赏给百官，让每个人按照自己的力气往回拿。官员们都按照自己的能力，拿上布匹回去了。
English: The empress dowager decided to reward the hundred officials with the extra cloth, and let everyone take it back according to their own strength. The officials all took the cloth and went back according to their ability.

古文：唯章武王融与陈留侯李崇负绢过任，蹶倒伤踝。
现代文：只有章武王融和陈留侯李崇，因为拿得太多而跌倒扭伤了踝骨。
English: Only Zhang Wu Wang Rong and Chen Liu Hou Li Chong fell and sprained their ankles because they took too much.

古文：太后即不与之，令其空出。时人笑焉。侍中崔光止取两匹。太后问曰：侍中何少？
现代文：太后决定不给他俩布匹了，让他们两个人空着手回去了，遭到了人们的耻笑，侍中崔光只拿了两匹布，太后问他：侍中为什么拿得这样少？
English: The empress dowager decided not to give them two cloths, so the two of them went back empty-handed, which was met with derision by the people. The chambermaid, Cui Guang, only took two cloths. The empress dowager asked him: Why did the chambermaid take so little?

古文：对曰：臣有两手，唯堪两匹，所获多矣。
现代文：崔光回答说：我只有两只手，所以只能拿两匹，这已经够多的了。
English: Cui Guang replied: I only have two hands, so I can only hold two horses, which is already enough.

古文：朝贵服其清廉。
现代文：朝中的人们都佩服他的清正廉洁。
English: The people of the dynasty admired his honesty and integrity.

古文：长孙道生
现代文：长孙道生
English: The eldest grandson, Dosho

古文：司空上党王长孙道生，代人，性忠谨俭素。虽为三公，而居处卑陋。
现代文：司空上党王长孙道生是代国人，他具有忠诚、谨慎、勤劳、朴素的美德，虽然位居三公这样最高官职，但是住宅却非常简陋。
English: The Secretary of the Air Force, the top party king, the eldest grandson of Tao Sheng, is the representative of the country. He has the virtues of loyalty, prudence, hard work, and simplicity. Although he holds the highest official position such as the three kings, his house is very simple.

古文：出镇之后，子颇加修葺。
现代文：他离开京城去办理公务以后，他的儿子将住宅重新装修了。
English: After he left the capital to attend to business, his son redecorated the house.

古文：及还叹曰：吾为宰相，无以报国，负乘是惧。
现代文：长孙道生回来以后感叹着说：我身为宰相，没有报效国家，很惭愧担任这么重要的职务。
English: After his return, his eldest grandson, Michio, lamented: "As prime minister, I have not served the country, and I am ashamed to hold such an important position.

古文：昔霍去病以匈奴未灭，无用宅为。
现代文：昔日汉朝抗击匈奴入侵的名将霍去病曾经说过，匈奴没有消灭，不修建府第。
English: In the past, the famous general of the Han Dynasty against the invasion of the Xiongnu, Huo Deyi, once said that the Xiongnu had not been eliminated and did not build the capital.

古文：今强寇尚游魂漠北，吾岂可安坐华美乎？
现代文：如今敌人还在北面的沙漠地带出没，我怎么能追求安逸舒适呢？
English: Now that the enemy is still in the desert to the north, how can I pursue comfort?

古文：乃令毁之。时人比之晏婴焉。唐玄宗
现代文：唐肃宗作太子的时候，经常陪着皇帝玄宗吃饭。
English: When Emperor Suizong of Tang Dynasty was crown prince, he often dined with Emperor Xuanzong.

古文：肃宗为太子时，常侍膳。
现代文：有一次御膳房准备了熟肉。
English: On one occasion, the dining room was prepared with cooked meat.

古文：尚食置熟俎，有羊臂臑，上顾使太子割。肃宗既割，余污漫在手，以饼洁之，上熟视不怿。
现代文：其中有熟羊腿。皇帝让肃宗把羊腿分割开来，肃宗便将羊腿割开，然后他用饼将手上沾满的羊油擦下去，皇帝看了不高兴。
English: Among them was a cooked leg of mutton. The emperor asked Su Zong to cut the leg of mutton into pieces. Su Zong cut the leg of mutton, and then he rubbed his hands full of mutton fat with a cake. The emperor looked displeased.

古文：肃宗举饼啖之，上甚悦。谓太子曰：福当如是爱惜。
现代文：肃宗擦完手将饼吃了，皇帝非常满意，对肃宗说：幸福的生活应当爱惜。
English: After Su Zong wiped his hands and ate the cake, the emperor was very satisfied and said to Su Zong: A happy life should be cherished.

古文：肃宗
现代文：肃宗
English: Suizong

古文：韩择木奏贺肃宗节俭，妓乐无绮绣之饰，饮食无珍馐之具。
现代文：韩择木称赞肃宗皇帝节约俭朴，歌女跳舞的时候没有华丽的衣服和装饰，饮食不吃山珍海味。
English: Han Zhi Mu praised Emperor Su Zong for his frugality and thriftiness. When the singers danced, they did not wear ornate clothes and decorations, and they did not eat mountain and sea delicacies.

古文：上因出衣袖以示之，曰：朕此三浣矣。
现代文：皇帝因此而伸出衣袖给他看，说：我这件龙袍已经洗过三次了。
English: For this reason, the emperor stretched out his sleeve to show him and said, "I have washed this dragon robe three times.

古文：卢怀慎
现代文：卢怀慎
English: Lu Huaixin

古文：唐卢怀慎，清慎贞素，不营资产。器用屋室，皆极俭陋。
现代文：唐朝的卢怀慎清正廉洁，不搜刮钱财，他的住宅和家里的陈设用具都非常简陋。
English: Lu Huai-Shen of the Tang Dynasty was upright and incorruptible, and did not scrounge for money. His residence and household furnishings were very simple.

古文：既贵，妻拿不免饥寒。而于故人亲戚，散施甚厚。
现代文：当官以后身份高贵，妻子和儿女仍免不了经常挨饿受冻，但是他对待亲戚朋友却非常大方。
English: After he became a high-ranking official, his wife and children still often suffered from hunger and cold, but he treated his relatives and friends very generously.

古文：为黄门侍郎，在东都掌选事，奉身之具，才一布囊耳。
现代文：他在东都负责选拔官吏的重要公务，可是随身的行李只是一只布口袋。
English: He was in charge of the important business of selecting officials in Dongdu, but his carry-on luggage was just a cloth bag.

古文：后为黄门监，兼吏部尚书。
现代文：后来他担任黄门监兼吏部尚书期间，病了很长时间。
English: Later, when he served as Yellow Gate Supervisor and Secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, he was ill for a long time.

古文：卧病既久，宋璟、卢从愿常相与访焉。
现代文：宋璟和卢从愿经常去探望他。
English: Song Tao and Lu would like to visit him often.

古文：怀慎卧于弊箦单席，门无帘箔，每风雨至，则以席蔽焉。
现代文：卢怀慎躺在一张薄薄的破竹席上，门上连个门帘也没有，遇到刮风下雨，只好用席子遮挡。
English: Lu Huaixin lay on a thin, broken bamboo mat. There was not even a curtain on the door. When it was windy and rainy, he had to use the mat to shield himself.

古文：常器重璟及从愿，见之甚喜，留连永日，命设食。有蒸豆两瓯，菜数茎而已。
现代文：卢怀慎平素很器重宋璟和卢从愿，看到他们俩来了，心里非常高兴，留他们呆了很长时间，并叫家里人准备饭菜，端上来的只有两瓦盆蒸豆和几根青菜，此外什么也没有。
English: Lu Huaixinping was very fond of Song Tao and Lu Congnian. He was very happy to see them come. He stayed with them for a long time and asked his family members to prepare the meal. They only served two-watt pot of steamed beans and a few green vegetables, and nothing else.

古文：此外翛然无办。因持二人手谓曰：二公当出入为藩辅，圣上求理甚切，然享国岁久，近者稍倦于勤，当有小人乘此而进。
现代文：卢怀慎握着宋璟和卢从愿两个人的手说：你们两个人一定会当官治理国家，皇帝寻求人才和治理国家的策略很急迫。但是统治的时间长了，皇帝身边的大臣就会稍稍有所懈怠，这时就会有小人乘机接近讨好皇帝，你们两个人一定要记住。
English: Lu Huaixin held the hands of Song Tao and Lu Congzhi and said, "You two will surely govern the country as officials. The emperor's search for talent and the strategy of governing the country are urgent. However, if the reign is long, the ministers around the emperor will slacken slightly. At this time, there will be villains who will take the opportunity to get close to the emperor. You two must remember.

古文：君其志之。
现代文：过了没几天，卢怀慎就死了，他在病危的时候，曾经写了一个报告，向皇帝推荐宋璟、卢从愿、李杰和李朝隐。皇帝看了报告，对他更加惋惜。
English: A few days later, Lu Huaishen died. When he was critically ill, he had written a report recommending Song Tao, Lu Congyan, Li Jie and Li Chaoying to the emperor. The emperor read the report and felt even more sorry for him.

古文：不数日而终。疾既笃，因手疏荐宋景、卢从愿、李杰、李朝隐。
现代文：安葬卢怀慎的时候，因为他平时没有积蓄，所以只好叫一个老仆人做了一锅粥给帮助办理丧事的人吃。
English: When Lu Huaixin was buried, because he usually had no savings, he had to ask an old servant to make a pot of porridge for the mourners.

古文：上览其表，益加悼惜。既殁，家无留储，唯苍头自鬻，以给丧事。
现代文：皇帝到城南打猎，来到一片破旧的房舍之间，有一户人家简陋的院子里，似乎正在举行什么仪式，便派人骑马去询问，那人回来报告说：那里在举行卢怀慎死亡两周年的祭礼，正在吃斋饭。
English: The emperor went hunting in the south of the city. He came to a dilapidated area between houses. In the courtyard of a poor family, it seemed that some kind of ceremony was taking place. He sent a man on horseback to inquire. The man came back and reported that a festival was being held there to mark the second anniversary of Lu Huai-Shen's death, and that they were eating fast food.

古文：上因为罢猎。悯其贫匮，即以缣帛赠之。
现代文：皇帝对卢怀慎家里的贫穷非常怜悯，停止了打猎，派人送去一些布匹。
English: The emperor was very sympathetic to the poverty of Lu Huaixin's family, stopped hunting, and sent someone to send some cloths.

古文：又云：卢怀慎无疾暴卒。夫人崔氏，止其儿女号哭。曰：公命未尽，我得知之。
现代文：另一种说法是：卢怀慎没病突然死了，他的夫人崔氏不让女儿哭喊，对他说：你们的父亲没死，我知道。
English: Another version is: Lu Huaixin did not suddenly die of illness, his wife Cui did not let her daughter cry and said to him: Your father is not dead, I know.

古文：公清俭而洁廉，蹇进而谦退。四方赂遗，毫发不留。
现代文：你父亲清正廉洁，不争名利，谦虚退让，各地赠送的东西，他一点也不肯接受。
English: Your father is pure and honest, does not compete for fame and fortune, is humble and yielding, and does not want to accept anything that is given to him from other places.

古文：与张说同时为相，今纳货山积，其人尚在。而奢俭之报，岂虚也哉。
现代文：他与张说同时当宰相，如今张说收受的钱物堆积如山，人还活着，而奢侈和勤俭的报应怎么会是虚假的呢？
English: He and Zhang said that they were prime ministers at the same time, and now Zhang said that the money and goods received are piled up, people are still alive, and how can the reward of luxury and thrift be false?

古文：及宵分，公复生。左右以夫人之言启陈。怀慎曰：理固不同。冥司有三十炉。日夕为说鼓铸横财。我无一焉，恶可并哉！
现代文：到了夜间，卢怀慎又活了，左右的人将夫人的话告诉了他，卢怀慎说：道理不一样，阴间冥司有三十座火炉，日夜用烧烤的酷刑来惩罚不义的横财的人，而没有一座是为我准备的，我在阴间的罪过已经免除了。
English: At night, Lu Huaishen came back to life. The people around him told him what his wife had said. Lu Huaishen said, "The reason is different. There are thirty ovens in the netherworld, and they use the torture of grilling day and night to punish the unjustly rich. But none of them were prepared for me. My sins in the netherworld have been absolved."

古文：言讫复绝。
现代文：说完又死了。
English: And then he died again.

古文：李勉
现代文：李勉
English: Comrade Li Tsuen

古文：天宝中，有书生旅次宋州。时李勉少年贫苦，与一书生同店。而不旬日，书生疾作，遂至不救。临绝语勉曰：某家住洪州，将于北都求官。于此得疾且死，其命也。
现代文：天宝年间，有个书生住在宋州旅店，当时李勉很贫穷，与这个书生住在同一个旅店，然而不到十天，书生得了重病，无法医治，临死前书生对李勉说：我家住在洪州，准备到北都去谋求官职，没想到在这里得病就要死了，这就是命啊！
English: During the Tianbao era, there was a scholar who lived in an inn in Songzhou. At that time, Li Qun was very poor and lived in the same inn with this scholar. However, less than ten days later, the scholar fell seriously ill and could not be cured. Before his death, the scholar said to Li Qun: My family lives in Hongzhou, and I am preparing to go to Beijing to seek a government post. I did not expect to get sick and die here. This is life!

古文：因出囊金百两遗勉。曰：某之仆使，无知有此者，足下为我毕死事，余金奉之。
现代文：说完从口袋里拿出一百两黄金交给李勉说：我的奴仆们不知道我带了这些金子，请你拿它为我办理丧事，剩下的金子送给你。
English: Having said this, he took out one hundred and two gold coins from his pocket and handed them to Li Mian and said, "My servants do not know that I have brought this gold, please take it to pay for my funeral and give the rest of the gold to you."

古文：勉许为办事，余金乃密置于墓中而同葬焉。
现代文：李勉安葬了他，但剩下的金子却秘密地放在墓中，一起掩埋了。
English: Li Mian buried him peacefully, but the rest of the gold was secretly placed in the grave and buried together.

古文：后数年，勉尉开封，书生兄弟赍洪牒来，而累金寻生行止。至宋州，知李为主丧事，专诣开封，诘金之所。
现代文：过了许多年以后，李勉当上了开封县尉。书生的哥哥写信打听书生和金子的下落，到了宋州，知道是李勉为书生办理的丧事，便专程赶到开封，询问金子的下落。
English: Many years later, Li Min became the Kaifeng County Lieutenant. Shusen's brother wrote to inquire about the whereabouts of Shusen and the gold. When he arrived in Songzhou, he knew that it was Li Min who handled Shusen's funeral, so he made a special trip to Kaifeng to inquire about the whereabouts of the gold.

古文：勉请假至墓所，出金付焉。
现代文：李勉请假来到埋葬书生的坟墓前，取出金子交给了书生的哥哥。
English: Li Mian asked for leave and came to the grave where Shousheng was buried. He took out the gold and handed it to Shousheng's brother.

古文：杜黄裳
现代文：杜黄裳
English: Du Huangxiao

古文：李师古跋扈，惮杜黄裳为相，未敢失礼。乃命一干吏，寄钱数千绳，并毡车子一乘，亦近直千缗。
现代文：李师古专横暴戾，欺上压下，但是对杜黄裳却有所顾忌，不敢无礼，他命令一个能干的差人，准备了几千贯钱和一辆价值上千贯的车子，送给杜黄裳。
English: Li Shigu was tyrannical and violent, deceiving and oppressing, but he had scruples about Du Huangcheng and did not dare to be rude. He ordered a capable policeman to prepare several thousand yuan and a car worth thousands of yuan to give to Du Huangcheng.

古文：使者未敢遽送。乃于宅门伺候累日。有绿舆自宅出，从婢二人，皆青衣褴褛。
现代文：这个差人没敢立即送去，而是先到杜黄裳家的门外观察了几天，一次他看到从宅院里抬出一顶绿色的轿子，后面跟了两个穿着破旧的黑色衣服的婢女。
English: The policeman did not dare to send them immediately, but first went to the door of Du Huangxiang's home to observe for a few days. Once he saw a green palanquin being carried out of the courtyard, followed by two maids in shabby black clothes.

古文：问何人，曰：相公夫人。
现代文：他问旁边的人轿子里是什么人？
English: He asked the person next to him who was in the sedan.

古文：使者遽归，以白师古。
现代文：旁边的人告诉他是宰相夫人，差人急忙回去，将情况告诉了李师古。
English: The person next to him told him that she was the prime minister's wife. The police officer hurried back and told Li Shigu about the situation.

古文：师古乃折其谋，终身不敢失节。
现代文：于是李师古放弃了贿赂杜黄裳的计划，终生不敢对杜黄裳失礼。
English: As a result, Li Shigu gave up the plan to bribe Du Huangxiang, and never dared to be rude to Du Huangxiang.

古文：阳城
现代文：阳城
English: Yangcheng

古文：阳道州城，未尝有蓄积，唯所服用不可阙者。
现代文：道州有个叫阳城的人，家里没有积攒钱财，但是也不缺少吃穿和用的东西。
English: There is a man named Yangcheng in Daozhou. His family doesn't have a lot of money, but they don't lack things to eat, wear, and use.

古文：客称某物可佳可爱，阳辄喜，举而授之。
现代文：他家的门客如果说喜欢什么东西，他总是愉快地送给门客钱，让门客去买。
English: If his customers said they liked something, he was always happy to give them money to buy it.

古文：有陈苌者，候其出始请月俸，常往称其钱帛之美，月有获焉。
现代文：有个叫陈苌的人，经常等他出来的时候同他要每月的生活费，常常可以从他那里拿到钱物，几乎每个月都有收获。
English: There is a man named Chen Qi, who often waits for him to come out and asks him for monthly living expenses. He can often get money and things from him, and almost every month there is a harvest.

古文：城之为朝士也，家苦贪，常以木枕布衾，质钱数万，人争取之。
现代文：阳城身为朝廷官员，家里却很清贫，他经常拿木枕和棉被换钱达几万文，人们都争着购买。
English: Yangcheng was an official of the imperial court, but his family was very poor. He often exchanged wooden pillows and cotton quilts for tens of thousands of money, and people were competing to buy them.

古文：郑余庆
现代文：郑余庆
English: Zheng Yuqing

古文：郑余庆，清俭有重德。
现代文：郑余庆清廉俭朴品德高尚。
English: Zheng Yuqing is clean, frugal, simple and virtuous.

古文：一日，忽召亲朋官数人会食，众皆惊。
现代文：有一次。他忽然请一些与他关系比较好的官员吃饭，大家都感到很奇怪。
English: Once, he suddenly invited some officials with whom he had a good relationship to dinner, and everyone felt very strange.

古文：朝僚以故相望重，皆凌晨诣之。
现代文：他的威望很高，大家都很尊敬他，所以凌晨就赶来了。
English: His prestige is very high, everyone respects him, so he arrived early in the morning.

古文：至日高，余庆方出。闲话移时，诸人皆嚣然。
现代文：等到太阳很高了，郑余庆才出来，说了很长时间闲话，大家都急躁起来。
English: When the sun was high, Zheng Yuqing came out and gossiped for a long time, making everyone impatient.

古文：余庆呼左右曰：处分厨家，烂蒸去毛，莫拗折项。
现代文：郑余庆对仆人说：去告诉厨师，要蒸烂去毛，别折断了脖子。
English: Zheng Yuqing said to the servant, "Go and tell the cook to steam away the hair, don't break your neck."

古文：诸人相顾，以为必蒸鹅鸭之类。
现代文：大家相互交换眼色，以为一定是清蒸鹅、鸭一类的菜。
English: Everyone exchanged glances with each other, thinking it must be a dish like steamed goose or duck.

古文：逡巡，舁台盘出，酱醋亦极香新。
现代文：一会儿，摆上桌子，放上餐具，酱和醋也都很新鲜很香。
English: After a while, the table is set, the utensils are placed, and the sauce and vinegar are also fresh and fragrant.

古文：良久就餐，每人前下粟米饭一碗，蒸胡芦一枚。
现代文：等到吃饭，每人面前只有一碗米饭和一枚蒸葫芦。
English: When it's time to eat, everyone has only a bowl of rice and a steamed gourd in front of them.

古文：相国餐美，诸人强进而罢。
现代文：宰相吃得很香，大家勉强吃了下去。
English: The prime minister's meal was very delicious, and everyone ate it reluctantly.

古文：郑浣
现代文：郑浣
English: Zheng Wei

古文：郑浣以俭素自居。尹河南日，有从父昆弟之孙自覃怀来谒者，力农自赡，未尝干谒。
现代文：郑浣以勤俭朴素要求自己，他出任河南尹的这一天，他叔父家里的兄弟的孙子从覃怀来找他。
English: On the day he took office as the governor of Henan Province, the grandson of his uncle's brother came to visit him.

古文：拜揖甚野，束带亦古。浣子之弟仆御，皆笑其疏质，而浣独怜之。问其所欲。
现代文：他这个孙子在家乡务农，没有见过世面，不懂礼节，衣服的式样很落后，郑浣的儿子和仆人都嘲笑他粗俗。只有郑浣可怜他，问他有什么要求。
English: This grandson of his worked as a farmer in his hometown. He had never seen the outside world, did not know etiquette, and his clothes were of a very backward style. Zheng Yao's sons and servants all laughed at him for his vulgarity. Only Zheng Yao pitied him and asked him what he wanted.

古文：则曰：某为本邑，以民侍之久矣，思得承乏一尉，乃锦游乡里也。
现代文：他说：我长期在家乡作老百姓，想要当一名县尉，那样便可以衣锦还乡了。
English: He said, "I have been a commoner in my hometown for a long time, and I want to be a prefectural lieutenant, so that I can return to my hometown as a brocade.

古文：浣然之。
现代文：郑浣答应了他的要求。
English: Zheng Rong agreed to his request.

古文：而浣之清誉重德，为时所归。或书于郡守，犹臂之使指也。
现代文：郑浣为官很重视清廉的名声，为了办成这件事，便给郡守写信，这对于他就像胳膊带动手指一样运用自如，不费什么劲。
English: As an official, Zheng Rong attaches great importance to the reputation of integrity. In order to accomplish this, he wrote a letter to the county magistrate, which was as easy for him to use as his arm moving his fingers, without any effort.

古文：郑孙将去前一日，召甥侄与之会食。
现代文：就在他的孙子要去任职的前一天，郑浣将这个孙子找来和外甥以及侄子等家里人一起吃饭。
English: Just one day before his grandson was to take up his post, Zheng Rong invited his grandson to have dinner with his nephew and other family members.

古文：有蒸饼，郑孙去其皮而后食之，浣大嗟怒。
现代文：吃的饭有蒸饼，这个孙子将饼皮扒掉，只吃里面的瓤。
English: The meal included steamed biscuits. The grandson peeled off the crusts and ate only the maggots inside.

古文：谓曰：皮之与中，何以异也？仆尝病浇态讹俗，骄侈自奉，思得以还淳反朴，敦厚风俗。是犹怜子力田弊衣，必能知艰于稼穑，奈何嚣浮甚于五侯家绮纨乳臭儿耶？
现代文：郑浣见了又叹息又生气，对他说；饼皮和里面有什么区别，你竟然有这样轻浮狡诈的毛病，如此奢侈浪费，你应该保持淳朴的风俗习惯，我可怜你在家乡穿着破衣服出力务农，以为你一定会懂得种庄稼的辛苦，没想到你却轻浮得超过诸侯贵族家的绔绔子弟。
English: When Zheng Yi saw this, he sighed and became angry. He said to him, "What's the difference between the inside and the outside of the pie crust? You have the fault of being so frivolous and cunning, so extravagant and wasteful. You should maintain simple customs and habits. I pity you for working hard at farming in your hometown wearing ragged clothes. I thought you must understand the hard work of planting crops. I didn't expect you to be more frivolous than the sons and daughters of aristocrats."

古文：因引手请所弃者。
现代文：说完让他将扔掉的饼皮捡起来。
English: After that, he asked him to pick up the discarded crust.

古文：郑孙错愕失据，器而奉之。
现代文：这个孙子惊慌失措。将饼皮捡起来递给郑浣，郑浣接过来全都吃了。
English: The grandson panicked. He picked up the crust and handed it to Zheng Yao, who took it and ate it all.

古文：浣尽食之，遂揖归宾闼，赠五缣而遣之。
现代文：然后郑浣将这个孙子送回客房，送给他一些布匹，让他回家乡去了。
English: Zheng Yi then sent the grandson back to the guest room, gave him some cloth, and let him go back to his hometown.

古文：文宗
现代文：文宗
English: Wenzong

古文：文宗命中使宣两军中尉及诸司使内官等，不许着纱穀绫罗巾。
现代文：文宗皇帝命令中使通知两军中尉以及诸司使内的官员，一律不准戴值钱的纱穀绫罗头巾。
English: In the order of Emperor Wenzong, the envoy informed the lieutenants of the two armies and the officials within the envoys that they were not allowed to wear valuable gauze scarves.

古文：其后驸马韦处仁见，巾夹罗巾以进。
现代文：命令发下去以后，驸马韦处仁来朝见皇帝，戴着昂贵的头巾走了进来。
English: After the order was issued, Zouma Wei Duanren came to see the emperor, wearing an expensive headscarf.

古文：上曰：本慕卿门户清素，故俯从选尚。
现代文：皇帝对他说：本来因为你的家庭正直朴素，所以才挑选你作驸马。
English: The emperor said to him, "It was because of the honesty and simplicity of your family that you were chosen to be a groom.

古文：如此巾服，从他诸戚为之，卿不须为也。
现代文：这样昂贵的头巾和衣服，允许别的亲戚穿戴，你不许穿用。
English: Other relatives are allowed to wear such expensive headscarves and clothes, but you are not allowed to wear them.

古文：夏侯孜
现代文：夏侯孜
English: Xia Houzhi

古文：夏侯孜为左拾遗，尝着绿桂管布衫朝谒。
现代文：夏侯孜当左拾遗，他曾经有一次穿着桂郡产的绿色的粗布衣服去见皇帝。
English: He once went to see the emperor wearing a green coarse cloth from Gui County.

古文：开成中，文宗无忌讳，好文。
现代文：开成年间，文宗皇帝没有什么规矩和忌讳，只是爱好文学。
English: In his early adulthood, Emperor Wenzong had no rules or taboos, just a love of literature.

古文：问孜衫何太粗涩，具以桂布为对。此布厚，可以欺寒。
现代文：他问夏侯孜所穿的衣服为什么那么低劣粗俗，夏侯孜告诉皇帝，这是桂郡产的粗布。并且说这种布厚，可以御寒。
English: He asked Xia Houzhe why the clothes he was wearing were so inferior and vulgar. Xia Houzhe told the emperor that it was a coarse cloth from Gui County, and said that this kind of cloth was thick and could keep out the cold.

古文：他日，上问宰臣：朕察拾遗夏侯孜，必贞介之士。
现代文：过了几天以后，皇帝对宰相说：我观察左拾遗夏侯孜一定是个正直可靠的人。
English: A few days later, the emperor said to the prime minister, "I have observed Zuoqiu Xia Houzhe must be an honest and reliable person.

古文：宰臣具以密行，今之颜冉。
现代文：宰相秘密调查夏侯孜的言行，称赞夏侯孜是今天的颜冉。
English: The prime minister secretly investigated Xia Houzhe's words and deeds, and praised Xia Houzhe is today's Yan Ran.

古文：上嗟叹久之，亦效著桂管布。满朝皆仿效之，此布为之贵也。
现代文：皇帝赞叹很久，也学着穿起了桂郡产的粗布做的衣服，满朝官员全都仿效起来，这种粗布因此而抬高了价钱。
English: The emperor admired it for a long time, and also learned to wear clothes made of coarse cloth from Gui County. All officials throughout the dynasty followed suit, and this coarse cloth thus raised the price.

古文：裴坦
现代文：裴坦
English: Peytan

古文：杨收、段文昌皆以孤进贵为宰相，率爱奢侈。
现代文：杨收和段文昌都是宰相，他们两人都喜欢豪华舒适的奢侈生活。
English: Yang Jie and Duan Wenchang are both prime ministers, and both of them like luxurious and comfortable luxury life.

古文：杨收女适裴坦长子，资装丰厚，什器多用金银。
现代文：杨收的女儿嫁给了裴坦的大儿子，陪嫁的财物非常丰厚，日常用具大多是金银做成的。
English: Yang Jie's daughter married the eldest son of Pei Tan. The bride's belongings were very rich, and most of the daily utensils were made of gold and silver.

古文：而坦尚俭，闻之不乐。
现代文：而裴坦提倡节俭，知道了很不高兴。
English: Pétain, on the other hand, advocated frugality and was very unhappy when he found out.

古文：一日，与其妻及儿女宴饮，台上用碟盛果实，坦欣然，既视其器内，有以犀为饰者，坦盛怒，遽推倒茶台，拂袖而出。
现代文：一天，裴坦和妻子儿女一起吃饭，桌子上有用碟子装着水果，裴坦很高兴。但是当他看到碟子里面有犀角做的装饰时，非常生气，立即将桌子推倒了，然后拂袖而去。
English: One day, Petan was having dinner with his wife and children. There was a plate on the table with fruit. Petan was happy, but when he saw the rhinoceros horn decoration on the plate, he was very angry. He immediately pushed the table down and walked away.

古文：乃曰：破我家也。
现代文：一边走一边说：这是在败坏我的家风啊？
English: As he walked along, he said: "Is this corrupting my family tradition?

古文：他日，收果以纳赂，竟至不令。
现代文：后来，杨收果然因为收受贿赂，竟至不得善终。
English: Later, Yang Hui was sentenced to death for accepting bribes.

古文：宜哉！
现代文：太应该了！
English: How appropriate!

古文：温琏
现代文：温琏
English: Warm lettuce

古文：幽州从事温琏，燕人也，以儒学著称，与瀛王冯道幼相善。
现代文：幽州从事温琏是燕国那个地方的人，是个著名的学者，他与瀛王冯道幼的关系很好。
English: Yuzhou is engaged in the study of Wen Zang, who is a famous scholar in that part of Yan Guo. He has a good relationship with the king of Zang, Feng Daoyu.

古文：曾经兵乱，有卖漆灯椸于市者，琏以为铁也，遂数钱买之。
现代文：在兵荒马乱的时候，有个人在市场上卖涂了漆的灯架。温琏以为是铁制的，花了很少一点钱便买了回去。
English: During the Warring States period, a man was selling lacquered lamp stands in the market. Thinking they were made of iron, Wen Qi spent a little money to buy them back.

古文：累日，家人用然膏烛，因拂试，乃知银也。
现代文：过了几天以后，家里人准备用这个灯架点蜡烛，擦拭的时候发现这个灯架原来是银制的。
English: A few days later, the family was preparing to use the lamp stand to light candles. When they wiped it off, they discovered that the lamp stand was originally made of silver.

古文：大小观之，靡不欣喜。
现代文：家里的人都来观看，没有不高兴的。
English: Everyone in the family came to watch, and no one was unhappy.

古文：唯琏悯然曰：非义之物，安可宝之。
现代文：只有温琏不以为然地说：不义之财，怎么能当做宝贝？
English: Only Wen Qi said disapprovingly: "How can ill-gotten wealth be used as treasure?

古文：遂访其卖主而还之。
现代文：于是他找到当初卖灯架的人，将灯架还了回去。
English: So he found the person who originally sold the lamp stand and returned it.

古文：彼曰：某自不识珍奇，鬻于街肆。郎中厚加酬直，非强买也，不敢复收。
现代文：卖主说：我自己都不知道它是银的，拿到市场出售，你给足了钱，并不是强买去的，我不敢收回来。
English: The seller said, "I didn't even know it was silver. I got it from the market and sold it. You gave me enough money. I didn't force you to buy it. I don't dare to take it back."

古文：琏固还之，乃拜受而去。别卖四五万，将其半以谢之。
现代文：温琏坚持还给他，卖主表示感谢以后将灯架拿到别处卖了四五万文钱。然后拿出其中的一半准备酬谢温琏。
English: Wen Wei insisted on returning it to him, and the seller thanked him and then took the lamp stand to another place and sold it for 450,000 yuan. Then he took out half of it to prepare to reward Wen Wei.

古文：琏终不纳，遂施于僧寺，用饰佛像，冀祝琏之寿也。
现代文：温琏坚决不收，卖主便将钱施舍给佛寺，用以装饰佛像，以祝愿增加温琏的寿命。
English: The vendor then donated the money to a Buddhist temple to be used to decorate a Buddha statue, in the hope of increasing the lifespan of the dog.

古文：当时远近罔不推腹，以其有仁人之行。后官至尚书侍郎卒。
现代文：远近的人们没有不佩服温琏的，认为他讲仁义，后来温琏当官到尚书侍郎而死。
English: People near and far did not fail to admire Wen Qi, believing that he preached benevolence and righteousness. Later, Wen Qi, a high-ranking official, went to Shang Shuzhirong and died.

古文：仲庭预
现代文：仲庭预
English: Nakaniwa-pre

古文：旧蜀嘉王召一经业孝廉仲庭预，令教授诸子。
现代文：旧蜀的嘉王找了一名学识渊博，忠孝廉洁的人叫作仲庭预，让他来教授自己的几个儿子。
English: King Jia of old Shu found a learned, loyal and honest man called Zhongting Pre, and asked him to teach his sons.

古文：庭预虽通坟典，常厄饥寒。
现代文：仲庭预虽然熟读古书，但是仍然贪穷得经常挨饿受冻，他来嘉王家里，对他也没狠恭敬。
English: Although he was familiar with ancient books, he was still so poor that he often went hungry and suffered from cold. When he came to Jia Wang's home, he did not treat him with respect.

古文：至门下，亦未甚礼。时方凝寒，正以旧火炉送学院。
现代文：当时天气刚刚转冷，嘉王派人将一只旧火炉送到学校给仲庭预取暖。
English: At that time, the weather had just turned cold, and Jiahuang sent someone to bring an old stove to the school to preheat the courtyard.

古文：庭预方独坐太息，以箸拨灰。俄灰中得一双金火箸，遽求谒见王。
现代文：仲庭预在炉子旁边坐下来休息，并用铁筷子拨弄炉子里的灰，从炉灰里发现了一双金子制成的火筷子。
English: He sat down next to the stove to rest, and used iron chopsticks to stir the ashes in the stove. From the ashes, he found a pair of fire chopsticks made of gold.

古文：王曰：贫穷之士见吾，必有所求。
现代文：他立刻去求见嘉五，嘉王说：贫穷的人来找我，必然有什么要求。
English: He immediately went to see Jia Wu. Jia Wang said, "Poor people come to me, they must have something to ask for."

古文：命告庭预曰：见为制衣。
现代文：叫人告诉仲庭预说，正在为他制做新衣服。
English: He asked someone to tell the court that new clothes were being made for him.

古文：庭预白曰：非斯意。
现代文：仲庭预辩白说：我来不是这个意思。
English: At the preliminary hearing, the judge said, "That's not what I meant.

古文：嘉王素乐神仙，多采方术，恐其别有所长，勉强而见。
现代文：嘉王历来想要成为神仙，多方寻求长生不老的方法，怀疑仲庭预有什么特殊的本领，勉强接见了他。
English: King Jia has always wanted to become a god, and has searched for a way to achieve immortality in many ways. He suspected that Zhongting had some special ability, and reluctantly received him.

古文：庭预遽出金火箸，陈其本末。
现代文：仲庭预将金筷子拿了出来，讲述了发现它的过程。
English: Nakaniwa brought out the gold chopsticks and described the process of finding them.

古文：王曰：吾家失此物已十年，吾子得之，还以相示，真有古人之风。
现代文：嘉王说：我们家里丢失这双金火筷子已经有十年了，你今天得到，还能送还，真有古人君子的风格！
English: Jiahuang said, "It's been ten years since our family lost this pair of golden fire chopsticks. You can get them today and still return them. You really have the style of an ancient gentleman!"

古文：赠钱十万，衣一袭，米麦三十石。
现代文：随后，他赏给仲庭预十万文钱，一套衣服，三十石米麦。
English: Subsequently, he rewarded Zhongting with an advance of 100,000 yuan, a set of clothes, and 30 kilos of rice.

古文：竟以宾介相遇，礼待甚厚，荐授荣州录事参军。
现代文：从这以后他对待仲庭预如贵宾，后来又推荐任命仲庭预为荣州录事参军。
English: From then on, he treated Zhongting Pre as an honored guest, and later recommended the appointment of Zhongting Pre as a member of the Rongzhou Record to join the army.

古文：吝啬
现代文：吝啬
English: miserly

古文：汉世老人
现代文：汉世老人
English: Hanseatic old man

古文：汉世有人，年老无子，家富，性俭啬。
现代文：汉朝的时候有个老头，没有儿子。家里非常有钱，但是他非常俭朴吝啬，吃的穿的都很简单节省。
English: During the Han Dynasty, there was an old man who had no son. His family was very rich, but he was very frugal and stingy. Everything he ate and wore was simple and economical.

古文：恶衣蔬食，侵晨而起，侵夜而息，营理产业，聚敛无厌，而不敢自用。
现代文：他每天天不亮就起来，快到半夜才睡觉，细心经营自己的产业，积攒钱财从不满足，自己也舍不得花费。
English: He gets up every day before dawn, sleeps until nearly midnight, carefully manages his own industry, is never satisfied with accumulating money, and is reluctant to spend.

古文：或人从之求丐者，不得已而入内，取钱十，自堂而出，随步辄减。比至于外，才余半在。
现代文：如果有人向他乞讨，他又推辞不了时，便到屋里取十文钱，然后往外走，边走边减少准备送人的钱的数目，等到走出门去，只剩下一半了。
English: If someone begged him and he could not refuse, he would go into the house and take ten coins and then go out, reducing the amount of money he was going to give away as he went. By the time he walked out the door, only half of it was left.

古文：闭目以授乞者。
现代文：他心疼地闭着眼睛将钱交给乞丐。
English: He closed his eyes in anguish as he handed the money to the beggar.

古文：寻复嘱云：我倾家赡君，慎勿他说，复相效而来。
现代文：反复叮嘱说：我将家里的钱都拿来给了你，你千万不要对别人说。
English: He repeatedly told her: "I brought all the money from home and gave it to you. You must not tell anyone."

古文：老人俄死，田宅没官，货财充于内帑矣。
现代文：以至乞丐们仿效着都来向我要钱。老头不久便死了。他的田地房屋被官府没收，钱则上缴了国库。
English: The old man soon died. His farm and house were confiscated by the government, and the money was handed over to the treasury.

古文：沈峻
现代文：沈峻
English: 沈峻

古文：吴沈峻，字叔山，有名誉而性俭吝。
现代文：吴国的沈峻，字叫叔山。他有名誉地位，但很吝啬。
English: Shenjun of Wuzhong is called Shushan. He has a reputation and status, but he is very stingy.

古文：张温使蜀，与峻别。
现代文：张温出使蜀国。
English: Zhang Wen sent an envoy to Shu.

古文：峻入内良久，出语温曰：向择一端布，欲以送卿，而无粗者。
现代文：临行前向沈峻告别，沈峻走进里屋很久，出来后对张温说：我想找一块布料送给你，但是没有找到一块质量差的粗布。
English: Before leaving, he said goodbye to Shen Jun. Shen Jun walked into the inner room for a long time, and said to Zhang Wen after coming out: "I want to find a piece of cloth to give you, but I haven't found a piece of poor quality rough cloth.

古文：温嘉其无隐。
现代文：张温称赞他诚实不加隐瞒。
English: Zhang Wen praised him for his honesty.

古文：又尝经太湖岸上，使从者取盐水。
现代文：还有一次沈峻经过太湖岸边，叫随行的人去取盐水。
English: On another occasion, Shenjun passed by the shore of Lake Taihu and asked the people accompanying him to fetch some salt water.

古文：已而恨多，敕令还减之。
现代文：过一会儿他觉得多了，叫人逐渐减少。
English: After a while he felt it was too much, so he tapered off.

古文：寻以自愧曰：此吾天性也。
现代文：他惭愧地说：这是我的天性啊！
English: Embarrassed, he said: "It's my nature!

古文：又说曰，姚彪与张温俱至武昌，遇吴兴沈珩。守风粮尽，遣人从彪贷盐一百斛。
现代文：还有人说，姚彪和张温都来到武昌，碰到了吴兴的沈珩，守风粮尽，派人向姚彪借一百斛，也就是一千斗盐。
English: It is also said that both Yao Biao and Zhang Wen came to Wuchang and met with Wu Xing's Shen Yao. When the guard ran out of food, he sent someone to borrow 100 baht from Yao Biao, that is, 1,000 barrels of salt.

古文：彪性峻直，得书不答。方与温谈论。
现代文：姚彪性格耿直，接到借盐的书信以后没有立即答复，继续与张温说话。
English: Yao Biao is a straightforward person. He did not reply immediately after receiving the letter of borrowing salt, and continued to talk with Zhang Wen.

古文：良久，呼左右：倒百斛盐著江中。
现代文：过了好一会儿，才对左右的人说：往江中倒一百斛盐。
English: After a while, he said to the people around him, "Pour a hundred measures of salt into the river."

古文：谓温曰：明吾不惜，惜所与耳。
现代文：然后又对张温说：盐我并不可惜，可惜的是给他。
English: Then he said to Zhang Wen: I am not sorry for the salt, but I am sorry for giving it to him.

古文：沈珩弟峻，有名誉而性俭吝。
现代文：沈珩的弟弟沈峻有名声，只是太吝啬了。
English: Shen Yao's younger brother, Shen Jun, has a reputation for being stingy.

古文：李崇
现代文：李崇
English: Li Chong

古文：后魏高阳王雍，性奢豪，嗜食味，厚自奉养，一食必以数百万钱为限，海陆珍羞，方丈于前。
现代文：后魏高阳王雍，性格大方豪爽。他非常喜好美食，生活奢侈，每一顿饭都要花费几万文钱，山珍海味摆满桌子。
English: After the Wei Dynasty, Gaoyang Wangyong had a generous and heroic personality. He was very fond of food and lived a luxurious life. Every meal cost tens of thousands of yuan, and the table was full of mountain and sea delicacies.

古文：陈留候李崇谓人曰：高阳一食，敌我千日。
现代文：陈留侯李崇对别人说：高阳王雍吃一顿饭所花的钱，够我一千天用的了。
English: Chen Liu Hou and Li Chong said to others: The money spent by Gaoyang Wang Yong to eat a meal is enough for me to use for a thousand days.

古文：崇为尚书令仪同三司，亦富倾天下僮仆千人，而性多俭吝，恶衣粗食，食常无肉，止有韭茹韭菹。
现代文：李崇的官职是尚书令仪同三司，也富裕为天下少有，家里的书僮和仆人多达一千多人，但是他非常吝啬，吃的和穿的都很俭朴。他很少吃肉，平时只吃炒韭菜和腌韭菜。
English: Li Chong's official position was Shang Shuling Yi Tong San Si, and he was also one of the world's few wealthy people. There were more than a thousand servants and scholars in his family, but he was very stingy, and he ate and dressed very frugally. He rarely ate meat, and usually only ate stir-fried pickles and pickles.

古文：崇家客李元祐语人云：李令公一食十八种。
现代文：李崇家的食客李元祐对别人说：李崇一顿饭要吃十八个菜。
English: Li Yuanyu, a diner at Li Chong's house, said to others: Li Chong needs to eat eighteen dishes for a meal.

古文：人问其故。
现代文：人们问都有什么菜。
English: People are asking what's on the menu.

古文：元祐曰：二韭十八。
现代文：李元祐回答说：二韭十八。
English: Li Yuan Rong replied, "Two hundred and eighteen."

古文：闻者大笑。
现代文：听的人都大笑起来。
English: Everyone in the audience burst out laughing.

古文：南阳人
现代文：南阳人
English: Nanyang people

古文：南阳有人，为生奥博，性殊俭吝。
现代文：南阳有一个人，生来就深藏广蓄，非常吝啬。
English: There was a man in Nanyang who was born with a deep reserve and was very stingy.

古文：冬至日，女婿谒之，乃设一铜瓶酒，数脔獐肉。
现代文：冬至那一天，他的女婿来了，他只准备了一铜瓶酒，几片獐子肉。
English: On the day of the winter solstice, his son-in-law came. He had only prepared a copper bottle of wine and a few pieces of hazelnut meat.

古文：婿恨其单率，一举尽之。
现代文：女婿恨他准备的食物太少，太简单，端起铜瓶一口就喝干了。
English: His son-in-law hated that the food he prepared was too little and too simple. He would take a sip from a copper bottle and drink it dry.

古文：主人愕然，俯仰命益。如此者再。
现代文：他非常惊讶，不得已又倒了一瓶酒，如此这样添了好几次酒。
English: He was so surprised that he had to pour another bottle of wine, and so on and so forth.

古文：退而责其女曰：某郎好酒，故汝常贫。
现代文：他生气地责备女儿说：你丈夫好喝酒，所以你们贫穷。
English: He angrily scolded his daughter, saying, "Your husband is a drunkard, and that is why you are poor."

古文：及其死后，诸子争财，逐兄杀之。
现代文：等到他死了以后，几个儿子争夺财产，将哥哥杀了。
English: After his death, several sons fought over the property and killed their brother.

古文：夏侯处信
现代文：夏侯处信
English: Letter from the summer residence

古文：唐夏侯处信为荆州长史，有宾过之。
现代文：夏侯处信是荆州的长史。一天有客人来，夏侯处信命令仆人准备饭菜。
English: One day, a guest came, and Xia Hou Shenshin ordered his servants to prepare the meal.

古文：处信命仆作食，仆附耳语曰：溲几许面？信曰：两人二升即可矣。
现代文：仆人趴在他耳朵旁问需要和多少面，夏侯处信说：两个人二升就可以了。
English: The servant leaned over his ear and asked how many noodles he needed. Xia Hou's assistant replied: "Two people and two liters is enough."

古文：仆入，久不出。
现代文：仆人进去以后，很久没有出来。
English: The servant went in and did not come out for a long time.

古文：宾以事告去，信遽呼仆。
现代文：客人因为有事先走了，夏侯处信急忙喊仆人。
English: Since the guests had left early, Xia Houxuan hurriedly called his servants.

古文：仆曰：已溲讫。
现代文：仆人说：面已经和完了。
English: The servant said, "The meal is ready."

古文：信鸣指曰：大异事！
现代文：夏侯处信指着仆人生气地说：真是怪事。
English: Pointing angrily at the servant, Xia Hou Dexin said, "This is really strange.

古文：良久乃曰：可总燔作饼，吾公退食之。
现代文：过了一会他又说：可以全都烤成饼。等我办完公事以后回去吃。
English: After a while he added: "You can bake them all into cakes. I'll go back and eat them when I've finished my work."

古文：凡市易，必经手乃授直。识者鄙之。
现代文：凡是上街买东西，都必须是他亲自付钱，认识他的人都瞧不起他。
English: He has to pay for everything he buys on the street, and everyone who knows him looks down on him.

古文：柳庆
现代文：柳庆
English: Liu Qing

古文：广州录事参军柳庆，独居一室。器用食物，并致卧内。奴有私取盐一撮者，庆鞭之见血。
现代文：广州的录事参军叫柳庆，他自己单独住一个房间，所用的东西和吃的食物都放在卧室里，有个仆人私自拿了一小撮盐，柳庆将他用鞭子抽得浑身是血。
English: Liu Qing, a military conscript from Guangzhou, lived alone in a room. Everything he used and the food he ate was kept in his bedroom. A servant took a pinch of salt from him, and Liu Qing whipped him until he was covered in blood.

古文：夏侯彪夏侯彪，夏月食饮生虫，在下未曾历口。
现代文：有个人名叫夏侯彪，夏天吃的食物生了虫子，他一口还没吃过，因为送客人出门时。
English: There is a man named Xia Hou Biao. The food he ate in the summer gave birth to worms. He hasn't eaten a bite since he saw his guests off.

古文：尝送客出门，奴盗食脔肉。彪还觉之，大怒，乃捉蝇与食，令呕出之。
现代文：仆人偷吃了一片肉，他回来发觉后非常生气，便捉来苍蝇给仆人吃，让仆人把吃的肉呕吐出来。
English: The servant stole a piece of meat. When he came back, he found that the crow was very angry. He caught a fly and gave it to the servant to eat, and let the servant vomit out the eaten meat.

古文：郑仁凯郑仁凯为密州刺史，有小奴告以履穿。
现代文：郑仁凯郑仁凯为密州刺史，有小奴告以履穿。
English: Zheng Renkai Zheng Renkai is a legend in the state of Michigan.

古文：凯曰： 阿翁为汝经营鞋。 
现代文：凯曰：阿翁为汝经营鞋。
English: Kai said, "Awong manages shoes for you.

古文：有顷，门夫着新鞋者至，凯厅前树上有鴷窠，遗门夫上树取其子。
现代文：有顷，门夫着新鞋者至，凯厅前树上有鴷窠，遗门夫上树取其子。
English: One day, the porter arrived with new shoes. There was a thistle on the tree in front of the hall. The porter went up the tree to fetch his son.

古文：门夫脱鞋而缘之，凯令奴著鞋而去。
现代文：门夫脱鞋而缘之，凯令奴著鞋而去。
English: The doorman took off his shoes and left, and the porter took off his shoes and left.

古文：门夫竟至徒跣。
现代文：门夫竟至徒跣。
English: The doorman was even beaten to death.

古文：凯有德色。
现代文：凯有德色。
English: Kae is virtuous.

古文：邓祐
现代文：邓祐
English: Deng Yu

古文：安南都护邓祐，韶州人，家巨富。
现代文：安南都护邓祐是韶州人，家里非常富有，有奴婢上千人。
English: Deng Yu, the tutelary of Annan, was from Zhangzhou. His family was very rich, with more than a thousand slaves.

古文：孙子将一鸭私用，祐以擅破家资，鞭二十。
现代文：家里的好吃的他都留着自己吃，接待客人时也不肯拿出来。他的孙子私自吃了一只鸭子，邓祐以擅自破坏家产处置。打了他孙子二十鞭子。
English: He kept all the good food at home for himself and refused to take it out when receiving guests. His grandson ate a duck without permission, and Deng Yu disposed of it by destroying the family property. He gave his grandson twenty lashes.

古文：韦庄
现代文：韦庄
English: Weizhuang

古文：韦庄颇读书，数米而炊，称薪而爨。
现代文：韦庄书读得很多，但却吝啬得要数米做饭，称柴烧火。
English: Wei Zhuang read a lot of books, but he was so stingy that he had to cook with a few grains of rice and burn firewood.

古文：炙少一脔而觉之。
现代文：烤熟的肉如果少了一片，他立即就能觉查出来。
English: If a piece of grilled meat is missing, he can detect it immediately.

古文：一子八岁而卒，妻敛以时服。庄剥取，以故席裹尸。
现代文：他八岁的儿子死了，妻子准备让儿子穿着平时穿的衣服埋葬，韦庄却将衣服剥了下来。
English: His eight-year-old son died, and his wife wanted him to be buried in his regular clothes, but Wei Zhuang stripped off his clothes.

古文：殡讫，擎其席而归。
现代文：他用一领旧席子将儿子的尸体裹了出去，掩埋完儿子，他又将席子拿了回来。
English: He wrapped his son's body in an old mat and took it back after burying him.

古文：其忆念也，呜咽不自胜，唯悭吝耳。
现代文：他想念儿子痛哭不止，只是太吝啬了。
English: He misses his son and weeps endlessly, but he is too stingy.

古文：王叟
现代文：王叟
English: Wang Yao

古文：天宝中，相州王叟者，家邺城。富有财，唯夫与妻，更无儿女。
现代文：天宝年间，相州有一个老王头，家住在邺城，非常有钱，没儿没女，只有夫妻二人。
English: During the Tianbao era, there was an old king in Xiangzhou. His family lived in Lucheng. They were very rich. They had no son or daughter, only a husband and wife.

古文：积粟近至万斛，而夫妻俭啬颇甚，常食陈物，才以充肠，不求丰厚。
现代文：他家里积攒的粮食有近万斛，但是夫妻俩生活得非常俭朴吝啬，经常以剩饭剩菜充饥。
English: His family has accumulated nearly 10,000 tons of grain, but the couple live very frugally and miserly, often feeding their hunger with leftovers.

古文：庄宅尤广，客二百余户。
现代文：他庄园里的房屋很多，有二百多家佃户。
English: There are many houses on his estate, with more than two hundred tenants.

古文：叟尝巡行客坊，忽见一客方食，盘餐丰盛，叟问其业。
现代文：有一天，老王头散步走到旅店，忽然发现一个客人正在吃饭，桌子上摆的饭菜很丰盛。老王头问客人是干什么的。
English: One day, Lao Wang Tou took a walk to the inn and suddenly found a guest eating. The food on the table was plentiful. Lao Wang Tou asked the guest what he was doing.

古文：客云：唯卖杂粉香药而已。
现代文：客人回答说：只是卖杂粉香药的。
English: The guest replied, "I only sell powdered incense."

古文：叟疑其作贼，问汝有几财而衣食过丰也？
现代文：老头怀疑他做贼，又问他说：你有多少钱，吃的穿的这样好？
English: The old man suspected him of being a thief, and asked him: "How much money do you have, and do you eat and dress so well?"

古文：此人云：唯有五千之本，逐日食利，但存其本，不望其余。
现代文：这个人说：只有五千文的本钱，每天吃掉利钱，保留本钱不动，不想积攒更多的钱。
English: This person said: I only have 5,000 yuan of capital. I eat up interest every day, keep the capital intact, and do not want to accumulate more money.

古文：故衣食常得足耳。叟遂大悟，归谓妻曰：彼人小得其利，便以充身，可谓达理。
现代文：回去以后对妻子说：他只用得的那一点利钱，便生活得很好，可以说是明白道理。
English: After returning home, he said to his wife, "The little bit of money that he only needed, he lived very well, which can be said to be a clear reason.

古文：吾今积财巨万，而衣食陈败，又无子息，将以遗谁？
现代文：我们如今积攒财物好几万，而吃的穿的都不好，又没有儿女，将来留给谁？
English: Today, we have accumulated tens of thousands of dollars in wealth, but our food and clothing are not good, and we have no children. Who will we leave it to in the future?

古文：遂发仓库，广市珍好，恣其食味。
现代文：于是他打开仓库，挑好的用，大吃大喝起来。
English: So he opened the storeroom, picked out the good ones, and began to eat and drink.

古文：不数日，夫妻俱梦为人所录，枷鏁禁系，鞭挞俱至，云：此人妄破军粮。
现代文：没过几天，夫妻两个人都作了一个同样的梦，被人抓了起来。戴上枷锁，遭受鞭打，一个人说：此人胆敢糟蹋军粮。
English: A few days later, both husband and wife had the same dream. They were arrested, put in shackles and whipped. One of them said, "This man dared to waste army rations."

古文：觉后数年，夫妻并卒。
现代文：几年以后。夫妻一同死了。
English: A few years later, the couple died together.

古文：官军围安庆绪于相州，尽发其廪，以供军焉。
现代文：朝廷的军队围困安庆绪在相州，打开老王头的粮仓，充作了军粮。
English: The imperial army besieged Anqingxu in Xiangzhou, opened the old king's granary, and used it as military rations.

古文：王锷
现代文：王锷
English: Wang Yao

古文：王锷累任大镇，财货成积。
现代文：王锷连续担任几任镇守一方的大官，积攒了很多钱财。
English: Wang Qian served as a high-ranking official of several town guards in succession, and accumulated a lot of money.

古文：有旧客，谕以积而能散之义。
现代文：有一个老朋友，对他讲了应该将多余的钱救济别人的道理。
English: An old friend once told him that he should use his extra money to help others.

古文：后数日，复见锷。
现代文：过了几天这个人见到王锷。
English: A few days later, this person saw Wang Xuan.

古文：锷曰：前所见戒，诚如公言，已大散矣。
现代文：王锷对他说：你上次告诫我的话，我已经按照去做了，将大部分钱财分散接济了别人。
English: Wang Yao said to him, "I have done what you told me last time, and I have distributed most of my money to help others.

古文：客请问其名，锷曰：诸男各与万贯，女婿各与千贯矣。裴璩
现代文：这个人问王锷都接济谁了。王锷说：几个儿子每人一万贯，女婿每人一千贯。裴璩
English: The man asked Wang Yao who he was supporting. Wang Yao said, "I have several sons who each receive ten thousand cranes, and a son-in-law who each receives one thousand cranes.

古文：裴司徒璩，性靳啬。廉问江西日，凡什器图障，皆新其制，闲屋贮之，未尝施用。
现代文：司徒裴璩，性格非常吝啬，他察访江西的时候，家庭应用的各种器具，全都是新做的，他都放在闲屋里存放起来。
English: When he visited Jiangxi Province, all kinds of household appliances were brand new, and he stored them in his spare room.

古文：每有宴会，即于朝士家借之。归登
现代文：每次请人吃饭，他不用自己的餐具桌椅，而是到别的官员的家里去借。归登
English: Every time he invites someone to dinner, he does not use his own tableware and chairs, but borrows them from another official's home.

古文：归登尚书，性甚吝啬。常烂一羊脾，旋割旋啖，封其残者。
现代文：尚书归登非常吝啬，常煮一个羊脾，自己边割边吃，剩下的封存起来。
English: Shang Shuguiden was very stingy. He often boiled a sheep's spleen, cut it up and ate it, and stored the rest.

古文：一日，登妻误于封处割食，登不见元封，大怒其内。由是没身不食肉。
现代文：一天他的妻子将羊脾割下一点吃了，他不见了封记，对妻子大发脾气，从那以后，他再也舍不得吃肉了。
English: One day, his wife cut off a bit of the sheep's spleen and ate it. He lost his seal and lost his temper with his wife. Since then, he could no longer bear to eat meat.

古文：登每浴，必屏左右。
现代文：归登每次洗澡，必须叫左右的人都退出去。
English: Every time I take a shower, I have to ask everyone on my right and left to leave.

古文：或有自外窥之，乃巨龟也。
现代文：有的人从外面偷看，发现他原来是一只大乌龟。
English: Some people peeked from outside and found that he was originally a large turtle.

