古文：张子房东方朔王乔周隐遥刘商
现代文：张子房东方朔王乔周隐遥刘商
English: Zhang Zifang Oriental King Qiao Zhou Yin Yao Liu Shang

古文：张子房
现代文：张子房
English: Zhang Zifu

古文：张子房，名良，韩国人也，避地于南阳，徙居于沛，后为沛国人焉。
现代文：张良字子房，韩国人，因为逃避战乱来到河南南阳，后来又搬到沛国，就算是沛国人了。
English: Zhang Liangzi Zifang, a Korean, came to Nanyang, Henan Province, to escape the war, and later moved to Pei Province.

古文：童幼时，过下邳圯桥，风雪方甚，遇一老叟，着乌巾，黄单衣。
现代文：他小的时候，有一次到下邳，他经过沂水圯桥，当时是风雪正猛的冬天，他遇见了一个穿黄单衣系黑头巾的老人。
English: When he was a child, once when he was in Jiaozuo, he passed by the Lishui Bridge. At that time, it was a snowy winter, and he met an old man wearing a yellow singlet and a black turban.

古文：坠履于桥下，目子房曰： 孺子为我取之。 
现代文：老人故意把自己的鞋扔到桥下，看着张良说： 小子，到桥下把我的鞋捡回来！ 
English: The old man deliberately threw his shoes under the bridge, looked at Zhang Liang and said: Kid, go under the bridge and pick up my shoes!

古文：子房无倦色，下桥取履以进。
现代文：张良没有丝毫怨言，跑到桥下把鞋拾上来给老人。
English: Zhang Liang did not complain at all. He ran under the bridge to pick up the shoes and give them to the old man.

古文：老叟引足以纳之，子房神意愈恭。
现代文：老人没有接过鞋，却伸着脚让张良给穿上，张良就恭恭敬敬地把鞋给老人穿上了。
English: The old man did not take the shoes, but stretched out his foot to let Zhang Liang put them on. Zhang Liang respectfully put the shoes on the old man.

古文：叟笑曰： 孺子可教也。
现代文：老人笑笑说： 你这孩子可以做我的学生了。
English: The old man smiled and said: Your child can be my student.

古文：明旦来此，当有所教。 
现代文：明天早上你还到这儿来，我将会教给你一些什么。 
English: Come back here tomorrow morning and I'll teach you something.

古文：子房昧爽至，叟已在矣。
现代文：张良天不明就赶到桥上，见老人已经坐在那里了。
English: Zhang Liang Tian rushed to the bridge and saw the old man already sitting there.

古文：曰： 期而后至，未可传道。 
现代文：老人说： 你比我来得晚，今天不能教你什么。 
English: The old man said, "You came here later than me, so I can't teach you anything today.

古文：如是者三，子房先至，亦无倦怠。
现代文：这样让张良白跑了三次，第三次张良终于比老人先来到桥上。
English: In this way, Zhang Liangbai ran three times. On the third time, Zhang Liang finally came to the bridge ahead of the old man.

古文：老叟喜，以书授之曰： 读此当为帝王师。
现代文：这次老人高兴了，送给张良一部书并说， 你读通了这部书就能给帝王当军师了。
English: This time, the old man was pleased and gave Zhang Liang a book and said, "If you read this book thoroughly, you will be able to be the emperor's strategist."

古文：若复求吾，乃谷城山下黄石也。 
现代文：以后如果再找我，我是谷城山下的黄石公。 
English: If you come looking for me again in the future, I'll be the Yellowstone Lord under the Valley City Mountains.

古文：子房读其书，能应机权变，佐汉祖定天下。
现代文：张良回去后钻研那本书，掌握了在政治和军事斗争中的各种应变策略，后来他辅佐汉高祖刘邦统一了天下。
English: After Zhang Liang returned, he studied the book and mastered various contingency strategies in political and military struggles. Later, he assisted Han Gao's ancestor Liu Bang in unifying the world.

古文：后人谓其书为黄石公书。
现代文：后代把老人给他的那部书称为 黄石公书 。
English: Later generations called the book given to him by the old man the Yellowstone Book.

古文：修之于身，能炼气绝力，轻身羽化。
现代文：按照这部书中的教导去修养自身，能达到聚炼起极大的力气，使身子像羽毛般轻捷。
English: If you cultivate yourself according to the teachings in this book, you will be able to gather and refine great strength, making your body as light as a feather.

古文：与绮里季、东园公、甪里先生、夏黄公，为云霞之交。
现代文：张良和当时著名的道家绮里季、东园公、甪里先生、夏黄公，成为修心学道的好朋友。
English: Zhang Liang became good friends with the famous Daoists of the time, Gong Liji, Dong Yuan Gong, Gong Li Sensei, and Xia Huang Gong.

古文：汉初，遇四五小儿路上群戏，一儿曰： 着青裙，入天门，揖金母，拜木公。 
现代文：汉代初年，张良有一次遇见四五个小孩在道边玩耍，一个小孩唱着一首童谣道： 着青裙，入天门，揖金母，拜木公。 
English: In the first year of the Han Dynasty, Zhang Liang once met four or five children playing on the side of the road. One child was singing a nursery rhyme: Wearing a blue dress, entering the Heaven's Gate, wearing a gold braid, and worshipping the Wood God.

古文：时人莫知之，子房知之，往拜之曰： 此东王公之玉童也。
现代文：人们当时不明白这歌谣的意思，但张良一听就懂了，就向那孩子拜礼说： 我知道你就是东王公的玉童。
English: At that time, people did not understand the meaning of this ballad, but Zhang Liang understood it as soon as he heard it. He bowed to the child and said, "I know that you are the golden child of the Eastern Prince."

古文：所谓金母者，西王母也；木公者，东王公也。
现代文：你唱的金母就是西王母，木公就是东王父。
English: The gold mother you sing about is the west king's mother, and the wood god is the east king's father.

古文：此二元尊，乃阴阳之父母，天地之本源，化生万灵，育养群品。
现代文：这两位元始天尊是阴阳的父母，天地的起源，是他俩化生出世上万物和生灵。
English: These two primordial deities are the parents of yin and yang, the origin of heaven and earth. They are the two who gave birth to all things and beings in the world.

古文：木公为男仙之主，金母为女仙之宗。
现代文：木公是男仙的主宰，西王母是女仙的首领。
English: Mokong is the leader of the male immortals, and Xiwangmu is the leader of the female immortals.

古文：长生飞化之士，升天之初，先觐金母，后谒木公，然后升三清，朝太上矣。
现代文：修道成仙的人，刚升天后先拜见西王母，后拜见东王父，然后才能升入玉清、太清、上清这三清的仙界，朝见天帝。
English: Those who practice and become immortals, after ascending to heaven, first visit the mother of the Western King, then the father of the Eastern King, and only then can they ascend to the three heavenly realms of the Jade, Tai, and Upper Qing dynasties, and meet the emperor.

古文：此歌乃玉童教世人拜王公而揖王母也。 
现代文：那歌谣就是玉童让世上的人礼拜东王父和西王母的。 
English: That ballad was made by Tamado to make people in the world worship the East King Father and the West Queen Mother.

古文：子房佐汉，封留侯，为大司徒。解形于世，葬于龙首原。
现代文：张良辅佐汉室，被封为留侯，任大司徒，死后葬在龙首原。
English: Zhang Liangfu assisted Han's wife, was given the title of Remainder, and was appointed as the chief disciple. After his death, he was buried in Longshouyuan.

古文：赤眉之乱，人发其墓，但见黄石枕，化而飞去，若流星焉。
现代文：汉末赤眉起义时，张良的墓被掘开，只见棺木中一个黄石枕头突然腾空飞去，像流星一样一闪即逝。
English: At the time of the Red Eyebrows Uprising at the end of the Han Dynasty, Zhang Liang's tomb was dug open, only to see a yellow stone pillow in the coffin suddenly fly away, flashing like a meteor.

古文：不见其尸形衣冠，得素书一篇及兵略数章。
现代文：棺木中根本没有张良的尸骨和衣帽，只有写在素绢上的文章和几篇论述战术的文章。
English: Zhang Liang's bones and cap were not in the coffin at all, only an article written on a plain cloth and several articles on tactics.

古文：子房登仙，位为太玄童子，常从老君于太清之中。
现代文：张良成仙以后，作了天宫的童子，常跟随太上老君在天界遨游。
English: After Zhang Liang became an immortal, he became a child of the Heavenly Palace, and often followed the Lady Lao Jun to travel in the heavenly world.

古文：其孙道陵得道，朝昆仑之夕，子房往焉。
现代文：他的孙子张道陵也得了道，朝拜昆仑山时，张良去看望了他。
English: His grandson, Zhang Daoling, also became a Taoist. Zhang Liang visited him when he was paying homage to Mount Kunlun.

古文：东方朔
现代文：东方朔
English: Dongfangshuo

古文：东方朔，小名曼倩。
现代文：东方朔的小名叫曼倩。
English: Dongfang Shuo's nickname is Mandao.

古文：父张氏，名夷，字少平；母田氏。
现代文：父亲叫张夷，字和平，母亲是田氏。
English: His father's name was Zhang Yi, and his mother's was Tian.

古文：夷年二百岁，顿若童子。
现代文：父亲张夷活到二百岁时面貌仍像儿童。
English: His father, Zhang Yi, lived to be 200 years old and still looked like a child.

古文：朔出三日而田氏死，死时汉景帝三年也。
现代文：东方朔出生三天后，母亲田氏死了，这时是汉景帝三年。
English: Three days after Dongfang Shuo was born, his mother Tian died. At this time, Emperor Han Jing was three years old.

古文：邻母拾朔养之，时东方始明，因以姓焉。
现代文：一邻家妇女抱养了东方朔，这时东方刚刚发白，就用 东方 作了他的姓。
English: A woman from a neighboring family took care of Dongfang Shuo. At that time, Dongfang had just turned white, so he used Dongfang as his surname.

古文：年三岁，天下秘识，一览暗诵于口，恒指挥天上空中独语。
现代文：东方朔三岁时，只要看见天下任何经书秘文，看一遍就能背诵出来，还常常指着空中自言自语。
English: When Dongfang was three years old, as long as he saw any secret scripture in the world, he could recite it after reading it once. He often pointed to the sky and talked to himself.

古文：邻母忽失朔，累月暂归，母笞之。
现代文：有一次，养母忽然发现东方朔不见了，过了一个多月才回来，养母就鞭打了他一顿。
English: Once, the foster mother suddenly discovered that Dongfang Shuo was missing. After more than a month, he did not return, and the foster mother whipped him.

古文：后复去，经年乃归。
现代文：后来东方朔又出走了，过了一年才回来。
English: Later, Dongfang Shuo ran away again, only to return a year later.

古文：母见之大惊曰： 汝行经年一归，何以慰吾？ 
现代文：养母看见他大吃一惊说： 你走了一年，怎么能让我不担心呢？ 
English: His adoptive mother was shocked to see him and said, "You've been gone for a year, how can you make me not worry?

古文：朔曰： 儿暂之紫泥之海，有紫水污衣，仍过虞泉湔浣，朝发中还，何言经年乎？ 
现代文：东方朔说： 儿子我不过到紫泥海玩了一天，海里的紫水弄脏了我的衣服，我又到虞泉洗了洗，早上去的中午就回来了，怎么说我去了一年呢？ 
English: Dongfang Shuo said, "My son, I went to the Purple Mud Sea to play for a day. The purple water in the sea stained my clothes. I also went to the Yuquan Spring to wash. I went there in the morning and came back at noon. How can I say I went there for a year?"

古文：母又问曰： 汝悉经何国？ 
现代文：养母就问： 你都去过什么国？ 
English: The foster mother asked: What countries have you been to?

古文：朔曰： 儿湔衣竟，暂息冥都崇台，一寤眠，王公啗儿以丹栗霞浆，儿食之既多，饱闷几死，乃饮玄天黄露半合。
现代文：东方朔说： 我洗罢衣服，在冥间的崇台休息，睡了一小觉，冥间的王公给我吃红色的栗子，喝玉露琼浆，把我差点撑死了，就又给我喝了半杯九天上的黄露。
English: Dongfang Shuo said: I washed my clothes, rested on the pedestal of the underworld, and slept for a short time. The prince of the underworld gave me red chestnuts to eat, and jade dew to drink. I almost died, so he gave me half a cup of the yellow dew of the nine heavens.

古文：即醒，还遇一苍虎息于路，初儿骑虎而还，打捶过痛，虎啮儿脚伤。 
现代文：我醒了，回来的路上我遇见了一只黑色的老虎，就骑上它往回走。因为我着急赶路使劲捶打那老虎，老虎把我的脚都咬伤了。 
English: I woke up, and on my way back I met a black tiger, so I rode back on it. Because I was in a hurry, I beat the tiger hard, and the tiger bit my feet.

古文：母便悲嗟，乃裂青布裳裹之。
现代文：养母一听心里很难过，就撕下一块青衣裳布给东方朔包扎脚伤。
English: When the foster mother heard this, she felt very sad and tore off a piece of blue cloth to bandage Dongfang Shuo's foot wound.

古文：朔复去家万里，见一枯树，脱布挂树，布化为龙，因名其地为 布龙泽 。
现代文：后来东方朔又出走，离家一万里，看见一株枯死的树，就把养母裹在他脚上的布挂在了树上，那布立刻化成了一条龙，后人就把那地方叫 布龙泽 。
English: Later, Dongfang Shuo ran away again, ten thousand miles away from home, and when he saw a dead tree, he hung the cloth wrapped around his foster mother's feet on the tree. The cloth immediately turned into a dragon, and later generations called the place Bronze.

古文：朔以元封中，游鸿濛之泽，忽遇母采桑于白海之滨。
现代文：汉武帝元封年间，到宇宙未分天地时的大湖上游玩，忽然看见他的母亲田氏在白海边上采桑叶。
English: During the reign of Emperor Hanwu in the Yuan Dynasty, he went to the Great Lake at the time when the universe was undivided to play, and suddenly saw his mother Tian picking mulberry leaves on the edge of the White Sea.

古文：俄而有黄眉翁，指母以语朔曰： 昔为我妻，托形为太白之精。
现代文：这时忽然有一个黄眉毛老人来到面前，对东方朔说： 她从前是我的妻子，是太白星神转生到世上。
English: At this time, an old man with yellow eyebrows suddenly appeared in front of Dongfang Shuo and said, "She used to be my wife. She was the reincarnation of the White Star God.

古文：今汝亦此星之精也。
现代文：现在，你也是太白星的精灵了。
English: Now you, too, are the genie of the white star.

古文：吾却食吞气，已九十余年，目中童子，皆有青光，能见幽隐之物。
现代文：我不吃五谷吞气修炼，已经九十多年，两只眼睛的瞳孔里可以射出青光，能看见阴暗地方隐藏的东西。
English: It has been more than 90 years since I stopped eating grain and swallowing air for cultivation. The pupils of my two eyes can emit blue light, and I can see things hidden in dark places.

古文：三千年一返骨洗髓，二千年一剥皮伐毛，吾生来已三洗髓五伐毛矣。 
现代文：我三千年换一次骨骼和骨髓，两千年褪一次皮除一次毛发，我已经三次换骨五次脱皮了。 
English: I change my bones and bone marrow once every three thousand years, I shed my skin once every two thousand years, except for my hair, I have changed my bones three times and shed my skin five times.

古文：朔既长，仕汉武帝为太中大夫。
现代文：东方朔长大后，在汉武帝朝中任太中大夫。
English: After Dongfang Shuo grew up, he was appointed to the post of Taizhong Doctor in the Han Dynasty.

古文：武帝暮年，好仙术，与朔狎昵。
现代文：汉武帝晚年时爱好道家成仙之术，和东方朔很亲近。
English: In his later years, Emperor Hanwu was fond of the Taoist Art of Becoming Immortal, and was very close to Dongfang Shuo.

古文：一日谓朔曰： 吾欲使爱幸者不老，可乎？ 
现代文：一天他对东方朔说： 我想让我喜欢的人长生不老，能不能做到呢？ 
English: One day he said to Dongfang Shuo: I want the person I like to live forever, can I do it?

古文：朔曰： 臣能之。 
现代文：东方朔说： 我能使陛下做到。 
English: Dongfang Shuo said, "I can make Your Majesty do it."

古文：帝曰： 服何药？ 
现代文：汉武帝问： 须要服什么药呢？ 
English: Han Wudi asked: What medicine do you need to take?

古文：曰： 东北地有芝草，西南有春生之鱼。 
现代文：东方朔说： 东北地方有灵芝草，西南地方有春生的鱼，这都是可以使人长生的东西。 
English: Dongfang Shuo said: There is reishi grass in the northeastern region, and spring fish in the southwestern region. These are all things that can make people live longer.

古文：帝曰： 何知之？ 
现代文：武帝问： 你怎么知道的？ 
English: Emperor Wu asked: How did you know?

古文：曰： 三足乌欲下地食此草，羲和以手掩乌目，不许下，畏其食此草也。
现代文：东方朔说： 三只脚的太阳神鸟曾下地想吃这种芝草，羲和氏用手捂住了三足乌的眼睛，不准它飞下来，怕它吃灵芝草。
English: Dongfang Shuo said: The three-legged sun god bird once came down to eat this sesame grass. Mr. Zou He covered the eyes of the three-legged owl with his hand and did not allow it to fly down, for fear that it would eat the reishi grass.

古文：鸟兽食此，即美闷不能动。 
现代文：鸟兽如果吃了灵芝草，就会麻木得不会动了。 
English: If birds and beasts eat Ganoderma lucidum, they will become so numb that they cannot move.

古文：问曰： 子何知之？ 
现代文：武帝问： 你怎么知道的呢？ 
English: Emperor Wu asked: How did you know?

古文：朔曰： 小儿时掘井，陷落井下，数十年无所托。有人引臣往取此草，乃隔红泉不得渡。其人与臣一只履，臣乃乘履泛泉，得而食之。
现代文：东方朔说： 我小时挖井不小心摔到井底下，几十年上不来，有个人就领着我去拿灵芝草，但隔着一条红水河渡不过去，那人脱下一只鞋给了我，我就把鞋当作船，乘着它过了河摘到灵芝草吃了。
English: Dongfang Shuo said: I accidentally fell down a well when I was digging a well. I didn't come up for decades. A man led me to get reishi grass, but I couldn't cross a red water river. The man took off one shoe and gave it to me. I used the shoe as a boat and rode it across the river to pick reishi grass and eat it.

古文：其国人皆织珠玉为簟，要臣入云韍之幕，设玄珉雕枕，刻镂为日月云雷之状，亦曰 镂空枕 ，亦曰 玄雕枕 。
现代文：这个国里的人都用珍珠白玉串成席子，他们让我进入云霞作成的帐幕里，让我躺在墨玉雕成的枕头上，枕头上刻着日月云雷的图案，这种枕头叫 镂空枕 ，也叫 玄雕枕 。
English: The people of this country use pearls and white jade to make mats. They let me enter the tent made by Yunxia, and let me lie on a pillow carved with ink jade. The pillow is engraved with a pattern of the sun, moon and clouds. This pillow is called a hollow pillow, also called a carved pillow.

古文：又荐毫之珍褥，以百之毫织为褥。
现代文：又给我铺上毛作的贵重的褥子，是用一百只的毛织成的。
English: And they made me cover myself with fine linen, woven with a hundred yarns of wool.

古文：此毫褥而冷，常以夏日舒之，因名 柔毫水藻之褥 。
现代文：这种褥子很凉，常常是夏天才铺它，所以叫作 柔毫水藻褥 。
English: This kind of braid is very cool, and it is often spread in the summer, so it is called "soft algae braid."

古文：臣举手试之，恐水湿席，定视乃光也。 
现代文：我用手摸了摸，以为是水把褥子弄湿了，仔细一看，才知道褥子上是一层光。 
English: I touched it with my hand and thought it was water that had wet the roller, but when I took a closer look, I realized that there was a layer of light on the roller.

古文：其后武帝寝于灵光殿，召朔于青绮窗绨绔幕下，问朔曰： 汉年运火德统，以何精何瑞为祥？ 
现代文：有一次汉武帝在灵光殿休息，把东方朔召到寝宫绮窗的丝绸帐前，向他请教道： 汉朝皇室以阴阳五行中的 火德 为命运的主宰，那么，依你看皇室中要奉祀什么神灵来庇佑呢？
English: On one occasion, Emperor Wu of Han rested in the Hall of Light and called Dongfang Shuo to the silk curtain of the bedroom window and asked him: "The Han dynasty royal family takes the fire virtue in the five elements of yin and yang as the master of fate. So, in your opinion, what deities should be worshipped in the royal family for protection?

古文：朔对曰： 臣尝游昊然之墟，在长安之东，过扶桑七万里，有云山。
现代文：皇室的符信应该采用珪、璧、琮、璋、瑾这五种吉祥物中的哪一种呢？ 东方朔说： 我曾游过西方天界的峡谷，在长安东面，离扶桑国还有七万里，那里有个云山。
English: Which one of the five mascots should be used for the imperial family's seal? Dongfang Shuo said: I once swam through the canyon of the western sky, in the east of Chang'an, there are still seventy thousand miles from Fusang, where there is a cloud mountain.

古文：山顶有井，云从井中出。若土德则黄云，火德则赤云，金德则白云，水德则黑云。 
现代文：云山顶上有一口井，云都是从井里升起来的，云的颜色和主宰世上帝王的 五行 的德运完全符合。如果帝王是土德，井中就升起黄色云；是金德，就升起白云；是火德，就升起红云；是水德，就升起黑云。 
English: There is a well on the top of Yunshan Mountain. The clouds all rise from the well. The color of the clouds is in complete accordance with the five elements of the god king who rules the world. If the emperor is of the earth element, yellow clouds will rise from the well; if he is of the gold element, white clouds will rise from the well; if he is of the fire element, red clouds will rise from the well; if he is of the water element, black clouds will rise from the well.

古文：帝深信之。
现代文：武帝听后很信服。
English: Emperor Wu was very convinced after listening.

古文：太初二年，朔从西那邪国还，得声风木十枝，以献帝。
现代文：太初二年，东方朔从西方的那邪国回来，带来十枝 声风木 献给武帝。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Wu, Dongfang Shuo returned from the evil country in the west, bringing with him ten acacia trees, which he dedicated to Emperor Wu.

古文：长九尺，大如指。此木出因洹之水，则禹贡所谓 因桓 是来。
现代文：这种树枝有九尺长，手指那么粗，这种 声风木 产自西方 因霄国 的河边，由于因霄国的人善于长啸，所以树木也能发出声音。这就是《尚书》中《禹贡》一章中所记的 因桓 的来历。
English: The branches of this tree are nine feet long and the fingers are so thick. This sound wind tree is produced by the riverside of the western country of Yinxiao. Since the people of Yinxiao are good at making sounds, the trees can also make sounds. This is the origin of Yinhuan, which is recorded in the chapter "Yugong" in "Shangshu."

古文：即其源也，出甜波，上有紫燕黄鹄集其间。
现代文：因霄国的河水的源头是很甜的水，水边树上面聚集飞翔着紫燕和黄鹄等鸟类。
English: Because the source of the river in Xiao Guo is very sweet water, birds such as the purple swallow and the yellow warbler gather on the trees along the water's edge.

古文：实如细珠，风吹珠如玉声，因以为名。
现代文：这种 声风木 结的果实像小珍珠，风一吹就发出珠玉的声音，所以叫 声风木 。
English: The fruits of this sonorous wind tree are like small pearls. When the wind blows, they emit a jewel-like sound, which is why they are called sonorous wind trees.

古文：帝以枝遍赐群臣，年百岁者颁赐。
现代文：武帝把风声木的树枝赏给大臣们，只有年过百岁的大臣才赏给。
English: Emperor Wu gave the branches of the wind-sounding tree to his ministers, but only to those who were over 100 years old.

古文：此人有疾，枝则有汗，将死者枝则折。
现代文：如果这位大臣得了病，树枝自己就会渗出水珠，如果这位大臣快死了，树枝自己就会折断。
English: If the minister falls ill, the branch itself will ooze water droplets, if the minister is about to die, the branch itself will break.

古文：昔老聃在周二千七百年，此枝未汗；洪崖先生，尧时年已三千岁，此枝亦未一折。
现代文：古时老子在周朝活了二千七百岁，那树枝从来没有渗出过水珠。还有仙人洪崖先生在尧帝时已经三千岁了，树枝也没折断过。
English: In ancient times, Laozi lived for twenty-seven hundred years in the Zhou Dynasty, and the branch never oozed water beads. There was also a hermit, Mr. Hongya, who was three thousand years old in the time of Emperor Xuan, and the branch never broke.

古文：帝乃赐朔，朔曰： 臣见此枝三遍枯死，死而复生，何翅汗折而已？
现代文：武帝就赏给东方朔一枝 声风木 ，东方朔说： 我已经看见这树枝枯死了三次，但又死而复活了，岂止是渗水出汗和折断呢？
English: Emperor Wu rewarded Dongfang Shuo with a branch of the wind tree. Dongfang Shuo said, "I have seen this branch wither and die three times, but it died and came back to life. Isn't it just water seepage, perspiration and breaking?

古文：语曰： 年末年，枝忽汗。 
现代文：一个人的寿数不到一半，那树枝就不会渗水出汗。
English: A person's lifespan is less than half, that branch will not seep and sweat.

古文：此木五千岁一湿，万岁一枯也。 
现代文：这种树五千年渗一次汗珠，一万年才枯一次。 
English: This tree sweats once in five thousand years, and withers only once in ten thousand years.

古文：帝以为然。
现代文：武帝很相信东方朔的解释。
English: Emperor Wu believed Dongfang Shuo's explanation.

古文：又天汉二年，帝升苍龙馆，思仙术，召诸方士，言远国遐乡之事。
现代文：天汉二年，武帝移住苍龙馆，非常渴望成仙得道，就召集了不少懂道术的方士，让他们讲述远方国家的奇闻轶事。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, Emperor Wu moved to the Soryu Pavilion. He was very eager to become a Taoist, so he gathered a lot of sages who understood Taoism and asked them to tell strange anecdotes about distant countries.

古文：唯朔下席操笔疏曰： 臣游北极，至镜火山，日月所不照，有龙衔火，以照山四极。
现代文：这时只有东方朔离开坐位写了一道奏章呈给武帝说： 我曾去过北极的镜火山，那里太阳月亮都照不到，只有龙口衔着灯烛照亮山的四极。
English: At this time, only Dongfang Shuo left his seat and wrote a piece of music to present to Emperor Wu, saying: I have been to the mirror volcano in the Arctic, where the sun and moon do not shine, only the dragon's mouth holds a candle to illuminate the four poles of the mountain.

古文：亦有园囿池苑，皆植异草木。
现代文：山上也有园林池塘，种植了很多奇花异草。
English: There are also garden ponds on the mountain, and many strange flowers and plants have been planted.

古文：有明茎草。如金灯，折为烛，照见鬼物形。
现代文：有一种明茎草，长得像金灯，把这种草折下来点燃，能照见鬼魅。
English: There is a kind of bright-stemmed grass that looks like a golden lamp. If you break this grass down and light it, you can see ghosts.

古文：仙人宁封，尝以此草然于夜，朝见腹内外有光，亦名 洞腹草 。
现代文：有位神仙叫宁封，曾在夜晚点燃了一根这种草，可以照见肚子里的五脏，所以叫它 洞腹草 。
English: There was a god named Ningfeng, who lit a stick of this grass at night, and you could see the five internal organs in the stomach, so he called it "Cave Belly Grass."

古文：帝剉此草为苏，以涂明云之观，夜坐此观，即不加烛，亦名 照魅草 。
现代文：如果皇帝把这种草割下来剁碎作成染料，涂在明云观的墙上，夜里坐在观内就不用点灯了，所以这种草也叫 照魅草 。
English: If the emperor cut and chopped this grass to make dye and painted it on the wall of the Mingyun Temple, he would not have to light a lamp when he sat in the temple at night, so this grass is also called "Illuminating Grass."

古文：采以籍足，则入水不沉。 
现代文：如果把这种草垫在脚下，就能入水不沉没。 
English: If you put this grass mat under your feet, you can wade into the water without sinking.

古文：朔又尝东游吉云之地，得神马一匹，高九尺。
现代文：东方朔还曾经游历过五色祥云升起的地方，得到一匹神马，有九尺高。
English: Dongfang Shuo also traveled to the place where the five-colored auspicious clouds rose, and obtained a divine horse, nine feet high.

古文：帝问朔何兽，曰： 王母乘云光辇，以适东王公之舍，税此马于芝田，东王公怒，弃此马于清津天岸。
现代文：武帝问这是个什么神兽，东方朔说， 当初西王母乘坐着云光宝车去看望东王父，把驾车的马解开，它到东王父的灵芝田里，东王父大怒，把马赶到天河岸边。
English: Emperor Wu asked what kind of divine beast it was, and Dongfang Shuo said, "At the beginning, the West King's mother rode to visit the East King's father in a magnificent car, and untied the horse driving the car. It went to the East King's father's Lingzhi field. The East King's father was furious and drove the horse to the bank of the Tianhe River.

古文：臣至王公坛，因骑而反。
现代文：正好我那时去朝拜东王父，就骑着那匹马往回返。
English: It just so happened that I went to pay homage to King Dong's father at that time, and I rode back on that horse.

古文：绕日三匝，此马入汉关，关门犹未掩。
现代文：这马绕着太阳转了三圈然后奔向汉关时，关门还没闭。
English: When the horse circled the sun three times and ran to Hankou, the gate was still open.

古文：臣于马上睡，不觉还至。 
现代文：我在马上睡了一觉，不知不觉就回到了家。 
English: I immediately fell asleep and unknowingly returned home.

古文：帝曰： 其名云何？ 朔曰： 因事为名，名 步景驹 。 
现代文：武帝问马叫什么名字，东方朔回答： 按它的情况起名，叫 步影驹 。 
English: Emperor Wu asked what the horse's name was, and Dongfang Shuo replied: According to its condition, it was named Bu Yingjun.

古文：朔曰： 自驭之如驽马蹇驴耳。 
现代文：并说： 这马来到世间后，我再骑它的时候，却和劣马笨驴一样的又慢又迟钝了。
English: And he said, This horse came into the world, and when I rode him again, he was as slow and sluggish as a bad horse or a stupid donkey.

古文：朔曰： 臣有吉云草千顷，种于九景山东，二千年一花，明年应生，臣走往刈之，以秣马，马立不饥。 
现代文：我在五色祥云升起的地方种了一千顷的草，草地在九景山的东边，两千年开一次话，明年就到时候了，我去把那草割来喂马，马就不会再饿了。 
English: I planted a thousand hectares of grass in the place where the five-colored auspicious cloud rises. The grassland is on the east side of Jiujing Mountain. Once in two thousand years, it will be time next year. I will cut the grass to feed the horse, and the horse will no longer be hungry.

古文：朔曰： 臣至东极，过吉云之泽。 
现代文：东方朔又说： 我曾到过东方的极地，经过了吉云之泽。 
English: Dongfang Shuo also said: I have been to the eastern pole and passed through Jiyun Zhao.

古文：帝曰： 何为吉云？ 
现代文：武帝问， 什么叫吉云？ 
English: Emperor Wu asked, what is Ji Yun?

古文：曰： 其国常以云气占凶吉，若有喜庆之事，则满宜云起，五色照人。
现代文：东方朔说： 吉云国里常用云的颜色来预卜吉凶。如果将要有吉庆的事，满屋就会升起五色祥云，光彩照人。
English: Dongfang Shuo said: In the land of auspicious clouds, the colors of clouds are commonly used to predict auspicious and inauspicious events. If there will be an auspicious event, the house will be full of five-colored auspicious clouds, shining brightly.

古文：着于草树，皆成五色露，露味皆甘。 
现代文：这五色吉云如果落在花草树木上，就会变成五色露珠，露的味道十分甘甜。 
English: If these five-colored auspicious clouds fall on flowers and trees, they will turn into five-colored dewdrops. The dewdrops have a very sweet taste.

古文：帝曰： 吉云五露可得否？ 
现代文：武帝问： 这吉云和五色露你能弄些来吗？ 
English: Emperor Wu asked: Can you get some of this Jiyun and Five-Colored Dew?

古文：曰： 臣负吉云草以备马，此立可得，日可三二往。 
现代文：东方朔说： 我割来吉云草把马喂饱后，骑上马去就可以弄来，一天可以来回两三趟呢。 
English: Dongfang Shuo said, "After I cut the Jiyun grass to feed my horse, I can get it when I get on the horse. I can go back and forth two or three times a day."

古文：乃东走，至夕而还，得玄白青黄露，盛以青琉璃，各受五合，授帝。
现代文：于是东方朔就骑上神马往东走，晚上就赶回来了，弄来了黑、白、青、黄四种颜色的露水，装在青色的琉璃杯中，每个杯中装了半升献给武帝。
English: So Dongfang Shuo rode the divine horse to the east and returned in the evening. He brought four colors of dew, black, white, blue and yellow, and placed them in blue glass cups. Each cup contained half a liter, which was dedicated to Emperor Wu.

古文：帝遍赐群臣，其得之者，老者皆少，疾者皆除也。
现代文：武帝把五色露赏给大臣们，大臣们喝下了露水，老人都变成了少年，有病的都立刻痊愈了。
English: Emperor Wu gave the five-colored dew to the ministers. The ministers drank the dew, the old men turned into boys, and the sick were immediately healed.

古文：又武帝常见彗星，朔折 指星木 以授帝，帝指彗星，应时星没，时人莫之测也。
现代文：汉武帝有一次看见天空出现了彗星，东方朔就折了一根 指星木 给了武帝，武帝拿它向天上一指，彗星立刻就消失了，当时的人都不知道是怎么回事。
English: Emperor Hanwu once saw a comet appear in the sky. Dongfang Shuo folded a finger tree and gave it to Emperor Wu. Emperor Wu held it up to the sky and the comet immediately disappeared. At the time, no one knew what had happened.

古文：朔又善啸，每曼声长啸，辄尘落漫飞。
现代文：东方朔善于高声长啸，每当他长啸时，会震得尘土漫天飞。
English: Dongfang Shuo is good at high-pitched whistling. Whenever he whistles, the dust flies everywhere.

古文：朔未死时，谓同舍郎曰： 天下人无能知朔，知朔者唯太王公耳。 
现代文：东方朔没死时曾对和他一起作官的朋友说： 天下人谁也不了解我东方朔，只有太王公知道我。 
English: When Dongfang Shuo was still alive, he said to a friend who was an official with him: No one in the world knows me Dongfang Shuo, only the great prince knows me.

古文：朔卒后，武帝得此语，即召太王公问之曰： 尔知东方朔乎？ 
现代文：东方朔死后，武帝就召来太王公问他， 你了解东方朔吗？ 
English: After the death of Dongfang Shuo, Emperor Wu summoned King Taigong to ask him, do you know Dongfang Shuo?

古文：公对曰： 不知。 
现代文：太王公说： 我不了解。 
English: The great prince said: I don't understand.

古文： 公何所能？ 
现代文：武帝问： 你有什么特长呢？ 
English: Emperor Wu asked: What are your strengths?

古文：曰： 颇善星历。 
现代文：太王公说， 我对星宿历法有研究。 
English: "I have been studying the sidereal calendar," he said.

古文：帝问 诸星皆具在否？ 
现代文：武帝问他： 天上的星宿都在吗？ 
English: Emperor Wu asked him: Are all the stars in the sky moving?

古文：曰： 诸星具，独不见岁星十八年，今复见耳。 
现代文：回答说， 诸星都在，只有木星失去了十八年，现在又出现了。 
English: He replied that all the stars were there, except Jupiter, which had been lost for eighteen years and had now reappeared.

古文：帝仰天叹曰： 东方朔生在朕旁十八年，而不知是岁星哉。 
现代文：武帝仰天叹息说： 东方朔在我身边十八年，我竟不知道他就是木星啊！ 
English: Emperor Wu sighed and said, "Dongfang Shuo has been by my side for eighteen years, but I didn't know he was Jupiter!

古文：惨然不乐。
现代文：心里很难过。
English: I feel very sad.

古文：其余事迹，多散在别卷，此不备载。
现代文：东方朔其余的事在别的书中都有记载，这里就不多写了。
English: The rest of Dongfangshuo's deeds are recorded in other books, but not much has been written about it here.

古文：王乔
现代文：王乔
English: Wang Qiao

古文：王乔，河东人也，汉显宗时为叶令。
现代文：王乔是河东郡人，汉显宗时任南阳郡叶县县令。
English: Wang Qiao was from Hedong County, while Han Xianzong was the county magistrate of Ye County, Nanyang County.

古文：有神术，每月朔望，常诣京朝。
现代文：王乔有仙人的道术，每个月的初一十五就到京城朝见皇帝。
English: Wang Qiao had the Taoism of a hermit, and went to the capital to see the emperor on the 15th day of every month.

古文：帝怪其来数，而不见车骑，密令太史伺望之。
现代文：皇帝因为他进京太勤而奇怪，而且他每次来时即不骑马也不乘车，就密令太史官偷偷察看。
English: The emperor was surprised because he was so diligent in entering Beijing, and every time he came, he did not ride a horse or take a car, he secretly ordered the official to secretly inspect.

古文：言临至，必有双凫从东南飞来。
现代文：太史官察看后向皇帝奏报说， 王乔每次到京城来时，准有一对野鸭子飞来。 
English: After inspecting it, the official historian reported to the emperor that every time Wang Qiao came to Beijing, a pair of wild ducks would certainly fly in.

古文：于是候凫至，举罗张之，但得一舄焉，乃四年时所赐尚书官属履也。
现代文：皇帝就派人等野鸭子再飞来时张网捕捉，结果网里捕到的是一双鞋子，这鞋还是汉显宗四年时赏给尚书的那双鞋。
English: The emperor sent someone to wait for the wild duck to fly and then catch it with a net. As a result, a pair of shoes was caught in the net. These shoes were the same pair of shoes that Han Xianzong gave to Shang Shu when he was four years old.

古文：每当朝时，叶县门下鼓，不击自鸣，闻于京师。
现代文：每次王乔来朝见时，叶县县衙门前的堂鼓就会不敲自响，鼓声可以传到京城。
English: Every time Wang Qiao comes to see the emperor, the drums in front of the Ye County Courthouse will beat spontaneously, and the drums can be heard all the way to Beijing.

古文：后天忽下玉棺于庭前，吏人推排，终不摇动。
现代文：后来，有一天忽然从空中降下一具玉石棺材，停在大堂院里。县衙的官员们一起推挪那口玉棺，玉棺一点也不动。
English: Later, one day, a jade sarcophagus suddenly descended from the sky and stopped in the courtyard. The officials of the county government moved the jade coffin together. The jade coffin did not move at all.

古文：乔曰： 天帝欲召我也。 
现代文：王乔就说， 这是天帝要召我去呢。 
English: Wang Qiao said, "This is because the Heavenly Emperor wants to call me."

古文：乃沐浴服饵，卧棺中，盖便立复。
现代文：于是王乔就洗了澡吃了药，自己躺进玉棺中。他一躺进去，棺盖就自动盖上了。
English: So Wang Qiao took a shower, took some medicine, and lay down in the jade coffin. As soon as he lay down, the coffin lid automatically closed.

古文：宿昔乃葬城东，土自成坟。
现代文：然后大家把玉棺埋在城东，玉棺入土后，泥土自动堆成了坟墓。
English: Then everyone buried the jade coffin in the east of the city. After the jade coffin was buried, the soil automatically piled up into a grave.

古文：其夕，县中牛羊皆流汗喘乏，人莫知之。
现代文：这天夜里，叶县的牛羊都流汗气喘，不知是怎么回事。
English: That night, all the cattle and sheep in Ye County were sweating and panting. I don't know what happened.

古文：百姓为立庙，号 叶君祠 ，祷无不应，远近尊崇。
现代文：百姓立了庙，叫 叶君祠 ，祈祷求告都很灵验，远近的人都很信服崇敬。
English: The people built a temple, called Ye Jun Temple. The prayers and appeals were very effective, and people from far and near were convinced and revered.

古文：帝诏迎取其鼓，置都亭下，略无复声。
现代文：皇帝让人把堂鼓迎进京城放在城外都亭中，鼓再也没响过。
English: The emperor had the drums brought into the capital and placed in a pavilion outside the city. The drums never sounded again.

古文：或云： 即古仙人王乔也，示变化之迹于世耳。 
现代文：有人说他就是古时的仙人王乔，来向世人显示神仙变化的功力。周隐遥
English: Some people say that he is the ancient immortal King Qiao, who came to show the world the power of the immortals. Zhou Yingyao

