古文：费忠虎妇稽胡碧石鼋啮虎李徵天宝选人
现代文：费忠虎妇稽胡碧石鼋啮虎李徵天宝选人
English: Feizhong Tiger Woman, Hu Bijie Stone, Zhao Tiger, Li Zheng Tianbao Selected People

古文：费忠
现代文：费忠
English: Feizhong

古文：费州蛮人，举族姓费氏。
现代文：费州的蛮人，整族都姓费。
English: The whole tribe of savages in Florida are surnamed Fee.

古文：境多虎暴，俗皆楼居以避之。
现代文：那地方被老虎害的人很多，一般人家都是盖楼而居，以避免虎害。
English: There are many people who have been harmed by tigers in that place, and most people build houses to avoid being harmed by tigers.

古文：开元中，狄光嗣为刺史，其孙博望生于官舍。
现代文：开元年中，狄光嗣是刺史。他的孙子狄博望在官舍出生。
English: In the middle of the first year of the new year, Di Guangzhi was appointed to the post of chief historian. His grandson, Di Bohang, was born in the official residence.

古文：博望乳母婿费忠劲勇能射，尝自州负米还家，山路见阻，不觉日暮。
现代文：狄博望乳母的丈夫费忠英勇善射，有一天他扛着米从州往家走，山路难走，不知不觉就黑了天。
English: Dibo looked at the nanny's husband Feizhong, who was brave and good at shooting. One day, he was carrying rice from the state to his home. The mountain road was difficult to walk, and the sky turned dark without him noticing.

古文：前程尚三十余里，忠惧不免，以所持刃，刈薪数束，敲石取火，焚之自守。
现代文：离家还有三十多里的路程，费忠不免有些害怕。他用带在身边的刀，割了几捆柴，敲石头取火，点起火堆守在那里。
English: More than thirty miles away from home, Feizhong was a little scared. He used the knife he carried with him to cut several bundles of firewood, knock stones to start a fire, light a fire and keep it there.

古文：须臾，闻虎之声，震动林薮。
现代文：不一会儿，他听到了虎的声音。虎声震得林木丛都在发抖。
English: Soon, he heard the tiger's voice, which made the forest tremble.

古文：忠以头巾冒米袋，腰带束之，立于火光之下，挺身上大树。顷之，四虎同至，望见米袋。
现代文：费忠把自己的头巾盖在米袋子上，又把自己的腰带系在米袋子上，让米袋子象个人似的站在火光之下。他自己挺身上了大树，顷刻之间，四只老虎一块来到。
English: Feizhong pulled his hood over the rice bag, tied his belt to it, and made the rice bag stand under the light of the fire like a person. He stood up on the tree, and in an instant, four tigers came.

古文：大虎前蹶，既知非人，相顾默然。
现代文：望见米袋之后，那一只最大的老虎一下子跳过去，一看不见人，便默默相视，无可奈何。
English: After seeing the bag of rice, the biggest tiger jumped over, and as soon as he couldn't see anyone, he looked at each other in silence, helpless.

古文：次虎引二子去，大虎独留火所。
现代文：稍小一点的那只老虎领着两只虎崽离去，大虎独自留在火堆旁。
English: The slightly smaller tiger led the two cubs away, leaving the big tiger alone by the fire.

古文：忽尔脱皮，是一老人，枕手而寐。
现代文：大老虎突然把皮脱掉，变成一位老人，枕着手睡起觉来。
English: The big tiger suddenly took off his skin and turned into an old man, falling asleep with his head on his pillow.

古文：忠素劲捷，心颇轻之，乃徐下树扼其喉，以刀拟头。
现代文：费忠素来力大敏捷，心中对这位老头很没瞧起。他慢慢从树上下来，一下子掐住了老头的喉咙，用刀抵住老头的脖子。
English: Fei Zhong has always been very strong and agile, and he did not look up to this old man in his heart. He slowly came down from the tree, suddenly choked the old man's throat, and used a knife to resist the old man's neck.

古文：老人乞命，忠缚其手而诘问之，云是北村费老，被罚为虎，天曹有日历令食人，今夜合食费忠，故候其人。
现代文：老人求他饶命。费忠把老头的双手绑起来，然后开始盘问他。他说他是北村的老费头，被罚当老虎，天上的官署有日历命令他吃人，今夜应该吃费忠，所以就等着费忠来。
English: The old man begged him to spare his life. Feizhong tied up the old man's hands, and then began to interrogate him. He said that he was the old feizhong of Kitamura, was punished as a tiger, the heavenly government office had a calendar to order him to eat people, tonight he should eat Feizhong, so he waited for Feizhong to come.

古文：适来正值米袋，意甚郁怏，留此须其复来耳，不意为君所执。
现代文：刚才来正遇上米袋，心中很是不快，留在这里等他再来，没想到让你捉住了。
English: Just now, I came across a rice bag, and I felt very unhappy. I stayed here and waited for him to come again. I didn't expect to be caught by you.

古文：如不信，可于我腰边看日历，当知之。
现代文：要是不信，你可以看看我腰边的日历，看看就知道了。
English: If you don't believe me, just look at the calendar around my waist and you'll see.

古文：忠观历毕。问 何以救我？ 
现代文：费忠看完了日历，问道： 怎么做才能救我？ 
English: Feizhong finished reading the calendar and asked, "What can I do to save myself?"

古文：答曰： 若有同姓名人，亦可相代。
现代文：老头说： 如果有姓名相同的人，也可以顶替。
English: The old man said, "If there is someone with the same name as you, you can replace him.

古文：异时事觉，我当为受罚，不过十日饥饿耳。 忠云： 今有南村费忠，可代我否？ 
现代文：以后事情暴露了，我得受罚，不过只罚挨饿十天罢了。 费忠说： 现在南村也有个费忠，他可以替我吗？ 
English: Later, the matter came to light, and I had to be punished, but I was only punished by being starved for ten days. Feizhong said: Now there is also a Feizhong in Nancun, can he replace me?

古文：老人许之。
现代文：老人答应了。
English: The old man agreed.

古文：忠先持其皮上树杪，然后下解老人。
现代文：费忠先拿着他的皮爬到树上，把皮绑到树梢上，然后再下来解放老头。
English: Feizhong first climbed up the tree with his hide, tied the hide to the treetops, and then came down to free the old man.

古文：老人曰： 君第牢缚其身附树，我若入皮，则不相识，脱闻吼落地，必当被食。事理则然，非负约也。 
现代文：老头说： 你只管把自己牢牢地绑在树上。我要是进入虎皮，就不认识你了，如果你听到虎啸就掉下来，一定得让我吃掉，事情就是这样，并不是我不守约。 
English: The old man said, "Just tie yourself firmly to the tree. If I get into the tiger's skin, I won't recognize you. If you fall down when you hear the tiger's roar, I'll have to eat you. That's how it is. It's not that I'm not keeping my promise.

古文：忠与诀，上树，掷皮还之。
现代文：费忠和他告别，爬到树上去，把皮扔下来还给他。
English: Feizhong bids him farewell, climbs up the tree and throws the skin down to him.

古文：老人得皮，从后脚入，复形之后，大吼数十声，乃去。
现代文：老头接过皮去，从后脚进入，恢复了虎的样子之后，大吼大叫了几十声，就离去了。
English: The old man took the pelt from the camel, entered from the hind foot, and after recovering the appearance of a tiger, roared and shouted dozens of times, and then left.

古文：忠得还家。
现代文：费忠回到家中。
English: Feizhong returned home.

古文：数日，南村费忠锄地遇啖也。
现代文：几天后，南村的费忠锄地时遇上虎被吃了。
English: A few days later, Nancun's Fei Zhong was eaten by a tiger.

古文：虎妇
现代文：虎妇
English: Tiger Woman

古文：唐开元中，有虎取人家女为妻，于深山结室而居。经二载，其妇不之觉。
现代文：唐开元年间，有一只老虎娶了一个人家的女儿为妻，在深山里盖房子居住，过去两年，那女人也没发觉丈夫是只老虎。
English: In the first year of the Tang Dynasty, a tiger married a man's daughter and built a house deep in the mountains to live in. In the past two years, the woman did not even realize that her husband was a tiger.

古文：后忽有二客携酒而至，便于室中群饮。
现代文：后来忽然有一天，来了两位客人。客人自己带着酒，就与丈夫聚饮起来。
English: Then suddenly one day, two guests arrived. The guests brought their own wine and started drinking with her husband.

古文：戒其妇云： 此客稍异，慎无窥觑。 
现代文：丈夫警告她说： 这两位朋友与别人不太一样，你可千万不要偷着看他们！ 
English: Her husband warned her: "These two friends are different from others, you mustn't sneak a look at them!"

古文：须臾皆醉眠，妇女往视，悉虎也。心大惊骇，而不敢言。
现代文：不多时他们全喝醉了睡在那里。她去一看，全是老虎，心中大吃一惊，却不敢说出来。
English: Not infrequently, they were all drunk and sleeping there. When she went to have a look, she saw that they were all tigers, and she was taken aback, but did not dare to speak out.

古文：久之，虎复为人形，还谓妇曰： 得无窥乎？ 
现代文：过了一些时候，虎又恢复成人样，回来问她道： 你大概偷看了吧？ 
English: After some time, the tiger regained its human form and came back to ask her, "You must have peeked, right?"

古文：妇言初不敢离此。
现代文：她说她根本就不敢离开半步。
English: She says she doesn't dare leave the village.

古文：后忽云思家，愿一归觐。
现代文：后来她忽然说想家，想回去看看。
English: Then she suddenly felt homesick and wanted to go back.

古文：经十日，夫将酒肉与妇偕行，渐到妻家，遇深水，妇人先渡。
现代文：十天之后，丈夫带着酒肉和她一块回娘家。将要走到娘家的时候，遇到一道深水，妻子先过去了。
English: Ten days later, the husband returned to his daughter's house with her, carrying wine and meat. When he was about to walk to his daughter's house, he encountered a deep river, and his wife passed by first.

古文：虎方褰衣，妇戏云： 卿背后何得有虎尾出？ 
现代文：丈夫脱衣服的时候，妻子戏耍地说： 你身后怎么有一条虎尾巴伸出来呢？ 
English: While her husband was undressing, his wife said playfully, "How come there's a tiger's tail sticking out behind you?"

古文：虎大惭，遂不渡水，因尔疾驰不返。
现代文：虎很羞惭，于是就不渡水，回头奔入深山，再没有回来。
English: The tiger was very ashamed, so he did not cross the water, ran back into the mountains, and never came back.

古文：稽胡
现代文：稽胡
English: Bihou

古文：慈州稽胡者以弋猎为业。
现代文：慈州有个叫稽胡的人以打猎为生。
English: In Cizhou, there is a man named Jinghu who makes a living from hunting.

古文：唐开元末，逐鹿深山。
现代文：唐开元年末，他在深山追赶一头鹿。
English: At the end of the first year of the Tang Dynasty, he was chasing a deer in the mountains.

古文：鹿急走投一室，室中有道士，朱衣凭案而坐。
现代文：鹿跑得很急投入一室。室中有一位道士。道士穿着红衣服靠桌案坐着。
English: The deer ran very quickly into a room. There was a Taoist monk in the room. The monk was wearing a red robe and was sitting at a table.

古文：见胡惊愕，问其来由。
现代文：他见了稽胡感到惊愕，问稽胡是怎么来的。
English: He was surprised to see Jinghu and asked how Jinghu came to be.

古文：胡具言姓名，云： 适逐一鹿，不觉深入，辞谢冲突。 
现代文：稽胡首先详细地通报了自己姓名住址，然后说： 刚才我追赶一头鹿，不知不觉就跑到你屋里来，请谅解我的冒失。 
English: Qiu Hu first informed his name and address in detail, and then said: Just now, I chased a deer and unknowingly ran into your house. Please forgive my impertinence.

古文：道士谓胡曰： 我是虎王，天帝令我主施诸虎之食，一切兽各有对，无枉也。
现代文：道士对稽胡说： 我是虎王，天帝命令我主管老虎们的吃饭问题。一切野兽都有各自的被吃对象，没有冤枉的。
English: The Taoist priest said to Jing Hu, "I am the king of tigers. The Heavenly Emperor ordered me to be in charge of the tigers' meal. All beasts have their own objects to be eaten, and no one is wronged.

古文：适闻汝称姓名，合为吾食。
现代文：刚才听你说出你的姓名，你应该被我吃。 
English: I just heard you say your name. I should eat you.

古文：案头有朱笔及杯兼簿籍，因开簿以示胡。
现代文：桌案上有笔、杯和簿籍。道士顺手就打开簿子给稽胡看。
English: There is a pen, a cup and a ledger on the desk. The Taoist monk opens the ledger to read it.

古文：胡战惧良久，固求释放。
现代文：稽胡看了，吓得战栗了好长时间，苦苦地要求放了他。
English: After watching the performance, he was so scared that he shivered for a long time, and painstakingly asked for his release.

古文：道士云： 吾不惜放汝，天命如此。
现代文：道士说： 不是我不放你，天命如此，又能怎样呢？
English: The spiritualist said, "It's not that I won't let you go, it's fate, so what can I do?

古文：为之奈何？
现代文：如果放了你，我就失去一顿饭。
English: If I let you go, I'll lose a meal.

古文：若放汝，便失我一食。
现代文：不过你既然遇到我，我就一定要想法救你。 
English: But since you have met me, I must think of a way to save you.

古文：汝既相遇，必为取免。 
现代文：过了一会又说： 明天你可以做一个草人，把你自己的衣服给草人穿上。
English: After a while he said, "Tomorrow you can be a grasshopper and put your own clothes on the grasshopper."

古文：久之乃云： 明日可作草人，以己衣服之，及猪血三斗、绢一匹，持与俱来。 
现代文：再准备三斗猪血，一匹绢。
English: Then prepare three buckets of pig's blood and a donkey.

古文：或当得免。
现代文：把这些东西一块拿来，也许能得救。 
English: Get these things together and we might be able to save them.

古文：胡迟回未去，见群虎来朝，道士处分所食，遂各散去。
现代文：稽胡迟疑未决的时候，看到一群老虎前来朝拜道士。道士把吃的分给它们，它们便各自散去。
English: When he was still hesitating, he saw a group of tigers come to pay homage to the Taoist. The Taoist gave them their share of food, and they dispersed.

古文：胡寻再拜而还。
现代文：稽胡不久也下拜告还。
English: He soon returned the compliment.

古文：翌日，乃持物以诣。
现代文：第二天，他就带着那些东西来到道士这里。
English: The next day, he came to the priest with those things.

古文：道士笑曰： 尔能有信，故为佳士。 
现代文：道士笑着说： 你能守信用，所以是好样的。 
English: The Taoist laughed and said: You can keep your word, so you are a good person.

古文：因令胡立草人庭中，置猪血于其侧。
现代文：于是就让稽胡把草人立在院子里，把猪血放在草人一侧。
English: Therefore, he asked Ji Hu to set up the straw man in the yard and put the pig's blood on the side of the straw man.

古文：出庭仰视胡，大嗥吼数四，向树跳跃。
现代文：然后让稽胡上树。道士在下边望着他爬到十丈高的时候说： 停在那儿就行了。可以用绢把身子绑到树上，不然，恐怕掉下来。 
English: The Taoist looked down at him as he climbed to the tenth floor and said, "Just stop there. You can tie your body to the tree with ropes, otherwise, I'm afraid you'll fall."

古文：知胡不可得，乃攫草人，掷高数丈。
现代文：随即他便回到房中，变成一只老虎，来到院子里仰视着稽胡，大声吼叫了几声，向着树上跳跃。
English: Then he went back to his room, turned into a tiger, came to the courtyard, looked up at Jinghu, roared loudly a few times, and jumped up into the trees.

古文：往食猪血尽，入房复为道士。
现代文：知道吃不到稽胡，便抓过草人，抛起几丈高，然后去吃那猪血。
English: Knowing that he would not be able to eat the pig's blood, he grabbed a grasshopper, tossed it several feet high, and then went to eat the pig's blood.

古文：谓胡曰： 可速下来。 
现代文：吃光猪血，进屋又变成道士，出来对稽胡说： 可以赶快下来了！ 
English: Eat all the pig's blood, enter the house and turn into a Taoist, come out and say to the acolyte: You can hurry down!

古文：胡下再拜。
现代文：稽胡下来行再拜礼。
English: Bow down and worship again.

古文：便以朱笔勾胡名，于是免难。
现代文：老道便用朱笔勾掉稽胡的姓名。于是稽胡的一场大难免除了。
English: Lao Dao then crossed out Jinghu's name with a red pen. As a result, Jinghu was spared a great hardship.

古文：碧石
现代文：碧石
English: Blue stone

古文：开元末，渝州多虎暴。设机阱，恒未得之。
现代文：开元年末，渝州多次发生老虎吃人的事，设了有机关的陷阱，总也没有捉到它。
English: At the end of the first year of the year, there were many incidents of tigers eating people in Yuzhou. Traps were set up by the authorities, but they never caught it.

古文：月夕，人有登树候望，见一伥鬼如七八岁小儿，无衣轻行，通身碧色，来发其机。
现代文：一个有月光的夜晚，有一个人爬到树上去望，见有一个伥鬼，就象一个七八岁的小男孩，光着身子轻手轻脚地行走。他全身是碧色的，来到陷阱便发现那里边的机关。
English: One moonlit night, a man climbed a tree to look up and saw a ghostly figure, like a seven- or eight-year-old boy, walking barefoot and light-footed. His whole body was blue, and when he came to the trap, he found the apparatus there.

古文：及过，人又下树正之。
现代文：等他走过，树上的这个人又下来重新装好机关。
English: As he passed, the man in the tree came down to re-set the machine.

古文：须臾，一虎径来，为陷机所中而死。
现代文：不一会儿，一只老虎径直走来，被陷入陷阱而死。
English: Moments later, a tiger walked straight into the trap and died.

古文：久之，小儿行哭而返，因入虎口。
现代文：不一会儿，小男孩哭着走回来，就进到老虎的口中。
English: After a while, the little boy came back crying and walked into the tiger's mouth.

古文：及明开视，有碧石大如鸡子在虎喉焉。
现代文：等到天明打开陷阱一看，有鸡蛋大的一块碧玉卡在老虎的喉咙里。
English: When Tianming opened the trap, an egg-sized piece of jasper stuck in the tiger's throat.

古文：鼋啮虎
现代文：鼋啮虎
English: 虎

古文：天宝七载，宣城郡江中鼋出，虎搏之，鼋啮虎二疮。
现代文：天宝七年，宣城郡江里的一个鼋爬上岸来，老虎见了就扑过去咬它。
English: In the seventh year of Tianbao, a tadpole in the river in Xuancheng County crawled ashore. When the tiger saw it, it pounced and bit it.

古文：虎怒，拔鼋之首。
现代文：它把虎咬伤了两处。老虎大怒，就拔下了鼋的脑袋。
English: It bit the tiger in two places, and the tiger, enraged, tore off the baboon's head.

古文：而虎疮甚，亦死。
现代文：但是虎因为伤得太厉害，也死了。
English: But the tiger was too badly injured and died.

古文：李徵
现代文：李徵
English: Li Zheng

古文：陇西李徵，皇族子，家于虢略。
现代文：陇西的李徵，是皇族的后代，家住在虢略。
English: Li Zheng from Shaanxi is a descendant of the imperial family and lives in Luoyang.

古文：微少博学，善属文。弱冠从州府贡焉，时号名士。
现代文：李徵小时候学识渊博，善于写文章，二十岁就得到州府的推荐，当时被称为名士。
English: When Li Zheng was a child, he was very knowledgeable and good at writing articles. At the age of 20, he was recommended by the state government and was called a celebrity.

古文：天宝十载春于尚书右丞杨没榜下登进士第。
现代文：天宝十年春，他在尚书右丞相杨没主考下考中进士。
English: In the spring of the tenth year of Tianbao, he was promoted to the junior high school in the examination of Yang Miao, Minister of the Right of Shangshu.

古文：后数年，调补江南尉。
现代文：几年后，被调补任了江南尉。
English: A few years later, he was transferred to the position of Jiangnan Lieutenant.

古文：徵性疏逸，恃才倨傲，不能屈迹卑僚。尝郁郁不乐。
现代文：李徵性情疏远隐逸，恃才孤傲，不能屈从于卑劣的官吏，常常郁郁不乐，闷不作声。
English: Li Zheng's temperament is distant and secluded, he is arrogant and arrogant, he cannot succumb to despicable officials, and he is often depressed and silent.

古文：每同舍会，既酣，顾谓其群官曰： 生乃与君等为伍耶！ 
现代文：每次与同僚聚会，酒酣之后，他就看着这群官吏说： 我竟然与你们为伍了吗？ 
English: Every time he met with his colleagues, after drinking, he would look at the group of officials and say: "Am I actually in your company?

古文：其僚佐咸嫉之。
现代文：他的同僚都嫉恨他。
English: His colleagues are jealous of him.

古文：及谢秩，则退归闭门，不与人通者近岁余。
现代文：等到卸了任，他就回到家里，闭门不与任何人来往。
English: When he left office, he went home and shut himself away from everyone.

古文：后迫衣食，乃具妆东游吴楚之间，以干郡国长吏。
现代文：一年多以后，他家的衣食不保，他就准备了一些衣物东游吴楚之间，向郡国长吏求取资助。
English: More than a year later, his family's food and clothing were not secure, so he prepared some clothes and traveled east to Wu Chu to solicit funding from the county magistrate.

古文：吴楚人闻其声固久矣。及至，皆开馆以俟之。
现代文：吴楚一带的人听到他的名声本来已经很久了，等到他到了，人家都大开着馆门等着他。
English: People in the Wuchu area had heard of his fame for a long time, and when he arrived, people were waiting for him with the doors wide open.

古文：宴游极欢。
现代文：对他招待得特别殷勤，他宴游极欢。
English: He was treated with great hospitality and enjoyed the trip immensely.

古文：将去，悉厚遗以实其囊橐。
现代文：临走的时候，给他优厚的馈赠都填满他的口袋。
English: When he is about to leave, give him a generous gift that will fill his pockets.

古文：徵在吴楚且周岁，所获馈遗甚多。
现代文：他在吴楚将近一年，得到的馈赠特别多。
English: He has been in Wuchu for nearly a year and has received a particularly large number of gifts.

古文：西归虢略。未至，舍于汝坟逆旅中。忽被疾发狂，鞭捶仆者。仆者不胜其苦。
现代文：回虢略的路上，住在汝坟的旅店中，他忽然得病发狂，鞭打他的仆从，打得仆从无法忍受。
English: On his way back, while staying at the Inn of the Dead, he suddenly fell ill and went mad, whipping his servants until they could bear it no longer.

古文：如是旬余，疾益甚。
现代文：这样过了十几天，病情更重。
English: After a dozen days of this, his condition worsened.

古文：无何，夜狂走，莫知其适。
现代文：不久，他夜里狂跑，没有人知道他到哪儿去了。
English: Soon he was running wild in the night, and no one knew where he had gone.

古文：家僮迹其去而伺之，尽一月而徵竟不回。
现代文：家僮循着他跑走的方向找他，等着他。一个月过去了，他也没回来。
English: The family followed the direction he ran, looking for him and waiting for him. A month passed, and he did not return.

古文：于是仆者驱其乘马，挈其囊橐而远遁去。
现代文：于是，仆人骑上他的马，带着他的财物远远地逃走了。
English: So the servant mounted his horse and fled far away with his goods.

古文：至明年，陈郡袁傪以监察御史奉诏使岭南，乘传至商于界。
现代文：到了第二年，陈郡袁傪以监察御史的身份奉诏出使岭南，乘坐驿站的车马来到商于地界。
English: In the second year, Chen County Yuan Qi, as the inspector of imperial history, sent an envoy to Lingnan by imperial edict, and took a carriage and horse from the station to Shangyujie.

古文：晨将发，其驿者白曰： 道有虎暴而食人，故过于此者，非昼而莫敢进。
现代文：早晨要出发的时候，驿站的官吏解释说： 路上有虎，而且吃人，所以从这儿过的人，不是白天没有敢走的。
English: When it was time to leave in the morning, the officials at the station explained: There are tigers on the road, and they eat people, so people who pass through here are not afraid to walk during the day.

古文：今尚早，愿且驻车，决不可前。 
现代文：现在还早，请在这儿多住一会儿，决不可现在就走。 
English: It's still early. Please stay here a little longer. You mustn't leave now.

古文：傪怒曰： 我天子使，众骑极多，山泽之兽能为害耶？ 
现代文：袁傪生气地说： 我是天子的使者，人马这么多，山泽里的野兽能怎样？ 
English: Yuan Xuan said angrily, "I am the messenger of the Son of Heaven. There are so many people and horses, how can there be wild animals in the mountains?

古文：遂命驾去。
现代文：于是他命令立即出发。
English: So he ordered an immediate departure.

古文：行未尽一里，果有一虎自草中突出。
现代文：走了不到一里，果然有一只老虎从草丛中突然跳出。
English: After walking for less than a mile, a tiger suddenly jumped out of the grass.

古文：傪惊甚。
现代文：袁傪非常吃惊。
English: Yuan Qi was very surprised.

古文：俄而虎匿身草中，人声而言曰： 异乎哉，几伤我故人也！ 
现代文：很快，虎又藏身回草丛里了。那虎用人的声音说道： 奇怪呀，差点伤了我的老朋友！ 
English: Soon the tiger was back in the grass, and the tiger said in a man's voice, "How strange, I almost hurt my old friend!"

古文：傪聆其音似李徵。
现代文：袁傪听那声音象李徵。
English: Yuan Qi listened to that voice as if it were a song.

古文：傪昔与徵同登进士第，分极深，别有年矣。忽闻其语，既惊且异，而莫测焉。
现代文：袁傪和李徵同时登进士第，两个人的交情极深，离别有些年头了，忽然听到他的话，既惊讶又奇怪，而且没法推测。
English: Yuan Yu and Li Zheng were both promoted to the rank of scholar at the same time. The two had a very deep friendship. It had been several years since they had parted. Hearing his words all of a sudden was both surprising and strange, and it was impossible to guess.

古文：遂问曰： 子为谁？
现代文：于是就问道： 你是谁？
English: Then he asked, "Who are you?"

古文：得非故人陇西子乎？ 
现代文：莫非是老友陇西子吗？ 
English: Could it be his old friend, Shun Shishi?

古文：虎呻吟数声，若嗟泣之状。已而谓傪曰： 我李徵也。君幸少留，与我一语。 
现代文：虎呻吟几声，象嗟叹哭泣的样子，然后对袁傪说： 我是李徵，希望你少等一下，和我说几句话。 
English: The tiger moaned a few times, as if crying, and then said to Yuan Qi: I am Li Qian, I hope you can wait a bit and say a few words to me.

古文：傪即降骑。因问曰： 李君，李君，何为而至是也？ 
现代文：袁傪从马上下来，问道： 李兄啊李兄，因为什么而至此呢？ 
English: Yuan Qi got down from the horse and asked: Brother Li, Brother Li, what brought you here?

古文：虎曰： 我自与足下别，音问旷阻且久矣。
现代文：虎说： 我自从和你分手，音信远隔很久了，你没有什么变化吧？
English: The tiger said, "Since I broke up with you, I haven't heard from you for a long time. Haven't you changed?

古文：幸喜得无恙乎，今又去何适？
现代文：现在这是要到哪儿去？
English: Now where is this going?

古文：向者见君，有二吏驱而前，驿隶挈印囊以导。庸非为御史而出使乎？ 
现代文：刚才见到你，有两个官吏骑马在前，驿站的官吏拿着印口袋引导，难道是当了御史而出使外地吗？ 
English: When I saw you just now, there were two officials on horseback in front of you, and the officials from the post office were leading the way with their stamped bags. Was it just a coincidence that you were heading out on an overseas mission?

古文：傪曰： 近者幸得备御史之列，今乃使岭南。 
现代文：袁傪说： 最近有幸被列入御史之列，现在这是出使岭南。 
English: Yuan Qi said: Recently, I had the honor of being included in the list of imperial history, and now this is an envoy to Lingnan.

古文：虎曰： 吾子以文学立身，位登朝序，可谓盛矣。况宪台清峻，分乣百揆，圣明慎择，尤异于人。
现代文：虎说： 你是以文学立身的，位登朝廷的殿堂，可谓昌盛旺达了，况且你一向清廉高尚，尽职尽责英明谨慎，特别与众不同。
English: The tiger said: You are based on literature, and you have ascended to the palace of the imperial court, which can be said to be a prosperous Wanda. Moreover, you have always been clean, noble, conscientious, wise and prudent, and you are particularly different.

古文：心喜故人居此地，甚可贺。 
现代文：我很高兴我的老朋友居于这等地位，很值得庆贺。 
English: I'm delighted that my old friend is in this position and it's great to celebrate.

古文：傪曰： 往者吾与执事同年成名，交契深密，异于常友。
现代文：袁傪说： 以前我和你同时成名，交情甚厚，不同于一般的朋友。
English: Yuan Qi said, "Before, I became famous at the same time as you, and our friendship is very close, which is different from that of ordinary friends.

古文：自声容间阻，时去如流，想望风仪，心目俱断。
现代文：自从分离，时间象流水一样过去了，想企望你的风度和仪容，真是望眼欲穿。
English: Since the separation, time has passed like water, and I long to see your demeanor and appearance.

古文：不意今日，获君念旧之言。
现代文：没想到今天在这里听到你的念旧之言。
English: I didn't expect to hear your nostalgic words here today.

古文：虽然，执事何为不我见，而自匿于草莽中？
现代文：既然这样，那么你为什么不见我呢？为什么要躲藏在草莽之中？
English: In that case, why don't you see me? Why hide in the brush?

古文：故人之分，岂当如是耶？ 虎曰： 我今不为人矣，安得见君乎？ 
现代文：咱们是老朋友的情分，难道应该这样吗？ 虎说： 我现在已经不是人了，怎么能见你呢？ 
English: We are old friends, isn't that how it should be? The tiger said, "I am no longer human, so how can I see you?

古文：傪即诘其事。
现代文：袁傪便诘问是怎么回事。
English: Yuan Yibin asked what was going on.

古文：虎曰： 我前身客吴楚，去岁方还。道次汝坟，忽婴疾发狂走山谷中。
现代文：虎说： 我以前客居吴楚，去年才回来，途中住在汝坟，忽然有病发狂跑到山谷之中，不久就用左右手着地走路。
English: The tiger said, "I used to live in Wu Chu as a guest, and only came back last year. On the way, I stayed in Rubei. Suddenly, I got sick and ran wildly into the valley. Soon, I was walking with my left and right hands.

古文：俄以左右手据地而步，自是觉心愈狠，力愈倍。
现代文：从此我觉得心更狠了，力气更大了。看看胳膊和大腿，已经长出毛来了。
English: Since then, I feel my heart is stronger and I have more strength. Look at my arms and thighs, they have grown hair.

古文：及视其肱髀，则有厘毛生焉。又见冕衣而行于道者、负而奔者、翼而翱者、毳而驰者，则欲得而啖之。既至汉阴南，以饥肠所迫，值一人腯然其肌，因擒以咀之立尽。由此率以为常。
现代文：看到穿着衣服戴着帽子在道上走的，看到背负东西奔走的，看到长着翅膀飞翔的，看到长有羽毛奔驰的，我就想吃下他，到了汉阴南，因为饥肠所迫，碰上一个人很肥，就把他捉住吃了。从此就习以为常。
English: When I saw someone wearing clothes and a hat walking on the road, when I saw someone running with something on their back, when I saw someone with wings flying, when I saw someone with feathers running, I wanted to eat him. When I got to the south of Hanyin, I was so hungry that when I met someone who was very fat, I grabbed him and ate him. From then on, I got used to it.

古文：非不念妻孥，思朋友，直以行负神祗，一日化为异兽，有腼于人，故分不见矣。
现代文：不是不想念妻子儿女，不是不思念朋友，只因为行为有负神祗，一旦变成野兽，有愧于人，所以就不见了。
English: It's not that they don't miss their wives and children, it's not that they don't miss their friends, it's just that their actions are against the gods, and once they turn into beasts, they are unworthy of human beings, so they disappear.

古文：嗟夫！
现代文：天哪！
English: Oh, my God!

古文：我与君同年登第，交契素厚，今日执天宪，耀亲友，而我匿身林薮，永谢人寰，跃而吁天，俯而泣地，身毁不用。是果命乎？ 
现代文：我和你同年登第，交情向来很厚，今天你执管王法，荣耀亲友，而我藏身草木之间，永不能见人，跳起来呼天，俯下去哭地，身毁无用，这果真是命吗？ 
English: I ascended to the throne in the same year as you, and our friendship has always been very strong. Today, you administer the royal law and honor your relatives and friends, while I hide among the plants and trees, can never see anyone, jump up and shout to the sky, bend down and cry, and am useless. Is this really life?

古文：因呼吟咨嗟，殆不自胜，遂泣。
现代文：于是他就呻吟感叹，几乎不能自胜，于是就哭泣。
English: Then he moaned and groaned, almost unable to contain himself, and wept.

古文：傪且问曰： 君今既为异类，何尚能人言耶？ 
现代文：袁傪问道： 你现在既然是异类，为什么还能说人话呢？ 
English: Yuan Qi asked, "Since you are an outlier now, why can you still talk like a human?

古文：虎曰： 我今形变而心甚悟，故有摚突。
现代文：虎说： 我现在样子变了，心里还特别明白。
English: The tiger said, "My appearance has changed now, and I still have a special understanding in my heart.

古文：以悚以恨，难尽道耳。
现代文：所以有些唐突，又怕又恨，很难全说出来。
English: So it's a bit abrupt, scary and hateful, and it's hard to say it all.

古文：幸故人念我，深恕我无状之咎，亦其愿也。
现代文：幸亏老朋友想着我，深深谅解我莫可名状的罪过，也是一种希望。
English: Fortunately, an old friend thinks of me, deeply understands my inexcusable sins, and is also a hope.

古文：然君自南方回车，我再值君，必当昧其平生耳。
现代文：但是你从南方回来的时候，我再遇上你，一定会不认识你了。
English: But when you come back from the south, if I meet you again, I won't recognize you.

古文：此时视君之躯，犹吾机上一物。君亦宜严其警从以备之，无使成我之罪，取笑于士君子。 
现代文：那时候看你的躯体，就象我要猎获的一个东西，你也应该严加防备，不要促成我的犯罪，让世人取笑。 
English: At that time, looking at your body, just like something I want to hunt, you should also be on your guard, do not contribute to my crime, let the world laugh.

古文：又曰： 我与君真忘形之友也，而我将有所托，其可乎？ 
现代文：又说： 我和你是真正的忘形之交，我将求你办一件事，不知是不是可以？ 
English: He also said, "You and I are real friends. I'm going to ask you to do something. I don't know if it's possible.

古文：傪曰： 平昔故人，安有不可哉？
现代文：袁傪说： 多年的老朋友，哪有不可的呢？
English: Yuan Qi said, "An old friend of many years, what is there not to like?

古文：恨未知何如事，愿尽教之。 虎曰： 君不许我，我何敢言？
现代文：是什么事，你尽管说！ 虎说： 你还没答应，我怎么敢说。
English: What's the matter, you say! The tiger said: You haven't promised, how dare I say.

古文：今既许我，岂有隐耶？
现代文：现在既然已经答应了，难道还能隐瞒吗？
English: Now that you've said yes, how can you hide it?

古文：初我于逆旅中，为疾发狂。既入荒山，而仆者驱我乘马衣囊悉逃去。
现代文：当初我在客栈里，有病发狂，跑进荒山，两仆人骑着我的马带着我的财物逃去。
English: When I was in the inn, sick and delirious, I ran into the barren hills, and two servants mounted my horse and fled with my belongings.

古文：吾妻孥尚在虢略，岂念我化为异类乎？
现代文：我的妻子儿女还在虢略，哪能想到我变成异类了呢？
English: My wife and children are still missing, how can I think that I have become an outlier?

古文：君若自南回，为赍书访妻子，但云我已死，无言今日事。
现代文：你要是从南方回来，给我捎个信给我的妻子，只说我已经死了，不要说今天的事。
English: If you come back from the south, write to my wife and tell her that I am dead, and not to speak of today.

古文：幸记之！ 
现代文：希望你记住。 
English: I hope you remember that.

古文：又曰： 吾于人世且无资业，有子尚稚，固难自谋。
现代文：又说： 我在人世间没有资财，有个儿子还年幼，实在难以自谋生路。
English: He also said, "I don't have any wealth in this world. I have a young son, and it's really hard to make a living on my own.

古文：君位列周行，素秉夙义，昔日之分，岂他人能右哉？必望念其孤弱，时赈其乏，无使殍死于道途，亦恩之大者。 
现代文：你位列仕宦的行列，一向主持正义，昔日的情分哪是他人能比的，一定希望你念他孤弱，时常资助他几个钱，以免让他饿死在路上，也就是对我大恩大德了。 
English: You are in the ranks of the nobles, you have always presided over justice, the feelings of the past are incomparable to others, I must hope that you think he is lonely and weak, and often help him with a few money, so as not to let him starve to death on the road, which is a great favor to me.

古文：言已又悲泣。
现代文：说完，又是一阵悲泣。
English: After that, there was another burst of tears.

古文：傪亦泣曰： 傪与足下休戚同焉，然则足下子亦傪子也。当力副厚命，又何虞其不至哉？ 
现代文：袁傪也哭泣着说： 我和你休戚与共，那么你的儿子也就是我的儿子，应当尽全力，怎么还能担心我做不到呢？ 
English: Yuan Qi also cried and said: I sympathize with you, so your son, who is also my son, should do his best. How can I still worry that I can't do it?

古文：虎曰： 我有旧文数十篇未行于代，虽有遗稿，尽皆散落，君为我传录，诚不敢列人之阈，然亦贵传于子孙也。 
现代文：虎说： 我有旧文章几十篇没有留行于世上，虽然有过遗稿，但是都散失了。你给我传录一下，实在不敢列入名家的行列，但是希望能传给子孙。 
English: The tiger said, "I have dozens of old articles that have not been passed on to the world. Although there were leftover manuscripts, they have all been lost. If you give me a biography, I really do not dare to be included in the ranks of famous people, but I hope to pass it on to my children and grandchildren."

古文：傪即呼仆命笔，随其口书，近二十章。文甚高，理甚远。
现代文：袁傪就喊仆从拿来笔墨，随着虎的口述作记录。近二十章，文品很高，道理深远。
English: Yuan Xuan then called his servant to bring pen and ink to record the tiger's dictation. Nearly twenty chapters, the literature is very high, and the reason is far-reaching.

古文：与君永诀，异途之恨，何可言哉？ 
现代文：袁傪读后赞叹再三。虎说： 这是我平生的真实情感，哪敢希望它传世呢？ 
English: After reading it, Yuan Qi repeatedly praised it. The tiger said, "This is the true emotion of my life. How dare I hope that it will be passed down to the next generation?"

古文：傪亦与之叙别，久而方去。
现代文：又说： 你奉王命乘坐驿站车马，应该是特别奔忙的，现在耽搁了这么久，诚惶诚恐。
English: He also said, "You have been ordered by the king to ride a stagecoach. You must have been very busy. Now that you have been delayed for so long, you must be very worried.

古文：傪自南回，遂专命持书及摚赙之礼，寄于徵子。
现代文：和你永别，异途的遗憾，怎么说得完呢？ 袁傪从南方回来，就专门派人把书信和办丧事的礼物送给李徵的儿子。
English: How can I say goodbye to you forever, the regret of a long journey? When Yuan Xuan returned from the south, he specially sent someone to send letters and funeral gifts to Li Qim's son.

古文：月余，徵子自虢略来京诣傪门，求先人之柩。
现代文：一个多月以后，李徵的儿子从虢略来到京城拜访袁傪，要找他父亲的灵柩。
English: More than a month later, Li Zheng's son came from Guili to visit Yuan Zheng in Beijing to look for his father's coffin.

古文：傪不得已，具疏其事。
现代文：袁傪没有办法，就详细地述说了这件事。
English: At a loss for words, Yuan Qi recounted the incident in detail.

古文：后傪以己俸均给徵妻子，免饥冻焉。
现代文：以后袁傪从自己的俸禄中拿出一部分给李徵的妻子儿女，以免他们的饥寒之苦。
English: From then on, Yuan Xuan gave a portion of his salary to Li Zhao's wife and children to prevent them from suffering from cold and hunger.

古文：傪后官至兵部侍郎。
现代文：袁傪后来官做到兵部侍郎。
English: Yuan Shao was later promoted to the position of the military commissary.

古文：天宝选人
现代文：天宝选人
English: Tianbao selects people

古文：天宝年中，有选人入京，路行日暮，投一村僧房求宿。
现代文：天宝年间，有一个候选的官员入京，这一天走到天色很晚，就到一个村子的僧房去求宿。
English: During the Tenpo era, there was a candidate official who went to Beijing. He arrived very late on this day and went to a monk's house in a village to ask for lodging.

古文：僧不在。时已昏黑，他去不得，遂就榻假宿，鞍马置于别室。
现代文：和尚不在，当时天已经昏黑，不能另找别的地方了，于是就在和尚的床上睡下了。
English: The monk was not there, it was already dark and there was nowhere else to go, so he fell asleep on the monk's bed.

古文：迟明将发，偶巡行院内。至院后破屋中，忽见一女子。
现代文：鞍马放在另一间屋里。天要亮的时候，将要出发，偶然在院子里巡行，来到院后的破屋中，忽然看到一位女子。
English: The saddle-horse was put in another room. When it was almost dawn, they were about to set out, and happened to pass through the courtyard. When they came to the ruined house behind the courtyard, they suddenly saw a woman.

古文：年十七八，容色甚丽。
现代文：这女子十七八岁，容色非常美丽。
English: The woman was 17 or 18 years old and very beautiful.

古文：盖虎皮。
现代文：她盖着虎皮，正在熟睡。
English: She is covered with a tiger skin and is fast asleep.

古文：熟寝之次，此人乃徐行，掣虎皮藏之。女子觉，甚惊惧，因而为妻。
现代文：此人就慢慢走过去，拽虎皮藏起来。女子醒了之后，非常惊惧，因而做了这人的妻子。
English: The man slowly walked over, pulled the tiger skin and hid it. When the woman woke up, she was so frightened that she became the man's wife.

古文：问其所以，乃言逃难，至此藏伏。
现代文：这人问她为什么如此，她说是因为逃难来到这里，离家已经很远。
English: The man asked her why, and she said it was because she had come here as a refugee and was far away from home.

古文：去家已远，载之别乘，赴选。
现代文：这人就让她另骑一匹马，和他一起进京赴选。
English: The man asked her to ride another horse and go with him to Beijing to vote.

古文：选既就，又与同之官。
现代文：选就之后，又共同赴任为官。
English: After being elected, they both went to work as officials.

古文：数年秩满，生子数人。
现代文：几年后任期已满，她给他生了好几个儿子。
English: A few years later, when his term of office was over, she bore him several sons.

古文：一日俱行，复至前宿处。
现代文：这一天他们一起走路，又来到以前借宿的地方。
English: On this day, they walked together and came to the place where they used to stay.

古文：僧有在者，延纳而宿。
现代文：和尚把他们迎纳进去，住了一宿。
English: The monk took them in and they stayed the night.

古文：明日，未发间，因笑语妻曰： 君岂不记余与君初相见处耶？ 
现代文：第二天，出发之前，那人笑着对妻子说： 你是不是还记得我和你初次相见的地方呢？ 
English: The next day, before leaving, the man smiled and said to his wife, "Do you remember where I met you for the first time?

古文：妻怒曰： 某本非人类，偶尔为君所收，有子数人。能不见嫌，敢且同处。
现代文：妻子生气地说： 我本来不是人类，偶尔被你收去，有了好几个儿子，能不嫌我，和我共同生活。
English: My wife said angrily, "I am not a human being, I have been taken in by you from time to time, I have several sons, can you not dislike me and live with me?

古文：今如见耻，岂徒为语耳？
现代文：现在你却耻笑我，难道只是说说而已吗？
English: Now you're laughing at me. Was it just talk?

古文：还我故衣，从我所适。 
现代文：你还给我以前的衣服，让我到我要去的地方。 
English: You give me back my old clothes and let me go where I want.

古文：此人方谢以过言，然妻怒不已，索故衣转急。
现代文：此人这才道歉说自己说了过头话。然而妻子怒气不消，要原先的衣服要得更急。
English: The man then apologised, saying he had spoken out of turn, but his wife was still furious and demanded the original dress back even more urgently.

古文：此人度不可制，乃曰： 君衣在北屋间，自往取。 
现代文：此人估计不可制止她，就说： 你的衣服在北屋里，自己去取吧！ 
English: The man thought he couldn't stop her, so he said, "Your clothes are in the north room, go get them yourself!"

古文：女人大怒，目如电光，猖狂入北屋间寻觅虎皮，披之于体。跳跃数步，已成巨虎，哮吼回顾，望林而往。
现代文：女人大怒，双目射出电光，疯狂地跑到北屋，翻出虎皮披到自己身上，跳跃几步，变成一只大虎，咆哮几声，向山林奔去。
English: The woman flew into a rage, her eyes flashed with lightning, she ran frantically to the north house, turned out the tiger skin and put it on herself, jumped a few steps, turned into a big tiger, roared a few times, and ran to the mountains and forests.

古文：此人惊惧，收子而行。
现代文：此人非常害怕，领着孩子上路而去。
English: The man was very scared and led the child away.

