古文：十有二年春，周公出奔晋。
现代文：十二年春季，周公楚自己出逃到晋国。
English: In the spring of the 12th year, Zhou Gongchu himself fled to Jin Province.

古文：夏，公会晋侯、卫侯于琐泽。
现代文：夏季，成功于晋侯、卫侯在琐泽会见。
English: In the summer, Succes met with Jin and Wei princes in Zuozhe.

古文：秋，晋人败狄于交刚。冬十月。
现代文：秋季，晋国人在交刚打败了狄人。冬季十月，无事。
English: In autumn, the Jin people defeated the Di people in Jia Gang. In winter, in October, nothing happened.

古文：十二年春，王使以周公之难来告。
现代文：十二年春季，周简王的使者来鲁国通告周公楚的祸难事件。
English: In the spring of the twelfth year, the envoy of King Zhou Jian came to Lu to announce the calamity of Zhou Gongchu.

古文：书曰： 周公出奔晋。 
现代文：《春秋》记载说 周公出奔晋 。
English: "Spring and Autumn" records that Zhou Gong left for Jinshan.

古文：凡自周无出，周公自出故也。
现代文：凡是从周朝外逃的不能叫做 出 ，周公楚自己出逃，所以才用 出 字。
English: Anyone who fled from the Zhou Dynasty cannot be called a "defector"; Zhou himself fled, which is why the word "defector" is used.

古文：宋华元克合晋、楚之成。
现代文：宋国华元完成了晋、楚两国的和好。
English: Hua Yuan of Song completed the reconciliation of Jin and Chu.

古文：夏五月，晋士燮会楚公子罢、许偃。
现代文：夏季，五月，晋国士燮会见楚国公子罢、许偃。
English: In the summer, in May, the prince of Jin met with the prince of Chu.

古文：癸亥，盟于宋西门之外，曰： 凡晋、楚无相加戎，好恶同之，同恤菑危，备救凶患。
现代文：初四日，在宋国西门之外结盟，说： 凡是晋、楚两国，不要互相以兵戎相见，要好恶相同，一起救济灾难危亡，救援饥荒祸患。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, they made an alliance outside the western gate of Song, saying, "The two countries of Jin and Chu should not fight against each other, but should have the same likes and dislikes, and jointly relieve the disaster of peril and rescue the famine disaster."

古文：若有害楚，则晋伐之。在晋，楚亦如之。
现代文：如果有危害楚国的，晋国就攻打它；对晋国，楚国也是这样做。
English: If there is any harm to Chu, Jin will attack it; for Jin, Chu will do the same.

古文：交贽往来，道路无壅，谋其不协，而讨不庭。
现代文：两国使者往来，道路不要阻塞，协商不和，讨伐背叛。
English: Envoys of the two countries should not obstruct the road to and from each other, negotiate and discord, and fight and betray.

古文：有渝此盟，明神殛之，俾队其师，无克胙国。 
现代文：谁要违背盟约，神灵就要诛杀，使他军队颠覆，不能保佑国家。 
English: If anyone violates the covenant, the gods will fight and kill him, and his army will be overthrown, and he will not be able to bless the country.

古文：郑伯如晋听成，会于琐泽，成故也。
现代文：郑成公去到晋国听受和约，和诸侯在琐泽会见，这是由于晋、楚和好的缘故。
English: Zheng Chenggong went to Jin to listen to the peace treaty, and met with the princes in Zuozhe. This was due to the good rapprochement between Jin and Chu.

古文：狄人间宋之盟以侵晋，而不设备。
现代文：狄人乘宋国促成的结盟会这一空隙攻打晋国，但又不设防备。
English: Di people took advantage of the alliance promoted by the Song Dynasty to attack Jin Province, but they did not set up defenses.

古文：晋郤至如楚聘，且涖盟。
现代文：晋国郤至到楚国聘问，同时参加盟约。
English: The Jin Emperor came to consult with the Chu Emperor, and at the same time they entered into a treaty.

古文：楚子享之，子反相，为地室而县焉。
现代文：楚共王设享礼招待他，子反作为相礼者，在地下室悬挂乐器。
English: The King of Chu set up a feast to invite him, and Ziban, as the celebrant, hung musical instruments in the basement.

古文：郤至将登，金奏作于下，惊而走出。
现代文：郤至将要登堂，下面击钟又击鼓，惊慌地退了出来。
English: When he was about to enter the hall, the bells and drums started to beat, and he panicked and left.

古文：子反曰： 日云莫矣，寡君须矣，吾子其入也！ 
现代文：子反说： 时间不早了，寡君等着呢，您还是进去吧！ 
English: The son countered: It's getting late, the widower is waiting, you should still go in!

古文：宾曰： 君不忘先君之好，施及下臣，贶之以大礼，重之以备乐。如天之福，两君相见，何以代此？
现代文：客人说： 贵国君王不忘记先君的友好，加之于下臣，赐给下臣以重大的礼仪，又加上钟鼓音乐，如果上天降福，两国国君相见，还能用什么礼节来代替这个呢？
English: The guest said, "Your majesty does not forget the friendship of your predecessors, and in addition to your vassals, you bestow on your vassals great etiquette, together with the music of the bells and drums. If, heaven forfend, the two sovereigns meet, what other etiquette can be used in place of this?

古文：下臣不敢。 
现代文：下臣不敢当。 
English: A vassal would not dare.

古文：子反曰： 如天之福，两君相见，无亦唯是一矢以相加遗，焉用乐？
现代文：子反说： 如果上天降福，两国国君相见，也只能用一支箭彼此相赠，哪里还用奏乐？
English: The son retorted: "If heaven bestows a blessing and the two sovereigns meet, they can only present each other with an arrow. Where else would they use music?

古文：寡君须矣，吾子其入也！ 
现代文：寡君等着呢，您还是进去吧！ 
English: The widower is waiting, why don't you go in?

古文：宾曰： 若让之以一矢，祸之大者，其何福之为？
现代文：当天下大治的时候，诸侯在完成天子使命的闲暇之时，就互相朝见，在这时就有享、宴的礼仪。
English: When the world was at peace, and the lords were at leisure to fulfill their divine mission, they would see each other in the morning. At this time, there was the etiquette of feasting.

古文：世之治也，诸侯閒于天子之事，则相朝也，于是乎有享宴之礼。
现代文：享礼用来教导恭敬节俭，宴礼用来表示慈爱恩惠。恭敬节俭用来推行礼仪，而慈爱恩惠则用来施行政教。
English: Reverence is used to teach reverence and frugality, feasting is used to show kindness and benevolence, reverence and frugality are used to promote etiquette, and kindness and benevolence are used to teach administration.

古文：享以训共俭，宴以示慈惠，共俭以行礼，而慈惠以布政，政以礼成，民是以息，百官承事，朝而不夕，此公侯之所以扞城其民也。故《诗》曰： 赳赳武夫，公侯干城。 
现代文：政教用礼仪来完成，百姓因此得到休息。百官承受政事，白天朝见晚上就不再朝见，这就是公侯所用来捍卫他们百姓的措施，所以《诗》说： 雄赳赳的武士，是公侯的捍卫。 
English: Government and education are accomplished by means of etiquette, so that the people can have a rest. Hundreds of officials are responsible for government affairs, and they see each other during the day and no longer see each other at night. This is the measure used by the princes to defend their people. Therefore, the "Poem" says: The brave warrior is the defense of the princes.

古文：及其乱也，诸侯贪冒，侵欲不忌，争寻常以尽其民，略其武夫，以为己腹心股肱爪牙。
现代文：等到它动乱的时候，诸侯贪婪，侵占欲望已无所顾忌，为争夺尺寸之地而驱使百姓致于死亡，收取他的武士，作为自己的心腹、股肱、爪牙。
English: By the time it was in turmoil, the lords' greed and desire to take over had no scruples, driving the people to death in order to compete for land, and taking his warriors as their confidants, henchmen, and minions.

古文：故《诗》曰： 赳赳武夫，公侯腹心。 
现代文：所以《诗》说： 雄赳赳的武士，是公侯的心腹。 
English: Therefore, the "Poem" says: The brave samurai is the prince's favorite.

古文：天下有道，则公侯能为民干城，而制其腹心。
现代文：天下有道，那么公侯就能做百姓的捍卫，而控制他的心腹。
English: If there is a way under heaven, then the prince will be able to defend the people and control his confidant.

古文：乱则反之。
现代文：动乱时，就反过来。
English: In times of turmoil, it's the other way around.

古文：今吾子之言，乱之道也，不可以为法。
现代文：现在您的话，是动乱之道，不能用来作为法则。
English: Now your words are the way of turmoil and cannot be used as a rule.

古文：然吾子，主也，至敢不从？ 
现代文：然而您，是主人，至岂敢不听从？ 
English: But you, master, how dare you disobey?

古文：遂入，卒事。
现代文：于是就进去，把事情办完。
English: So I went in and got it done.

古文：归以语范文子。
现代文：郤至回去把情况告诉范文子。
English: When I got back, I told Fan Wenzi about the situation.

古文：文子曰： 无礼必食言，吾死无日矣夫！ 
现代文：文子说： 无礼，必然说话不算话，我们离开死日不远了。 
English: Fumiko said, "It's impolite, it's inevitable that words don't count, we're not far from the day we die."

古文：冬，楚公子罢如晋聘，且涖盟。十二月，晋侯及楚公子罢盟于赤棘。
现代文：冬季，楚国公子罢去到晋国聘问，同时参加结盟，十二月，晋厉公和楚公子罢在赤棘结盟。
English: In winter, the prince of Chu went to Jin to ask for advice, and at the same time to join the alliance. In December, the prince of Jin and the prince of Chu made an alliance at the Red Thorn.

