古文：传曰： 思心之不，是谓不圣，厥咎，厥罚恒风，厥极凶短折。
现代文：传上说： 思考问题不宽宏，就不算圣明，就愚昧无知，就罚长久刮风，就疲困短命。
English: Legend has it: If you don't have a broad mind, you won't be a saint; if you don't have a broad mind, you won't be wise; if you don't have a broad mind, you won't be wise; if you don't have a broad mind, you won't be wise; if you don't have a broad mind, you won't be wise; if you don't have a broad mind, you won't be wise; if you don't have a broad mind, you won't be wise; if you don't have a broad mind, you won't be wise; if you don't have a

古文：时则有脂夜之妖，时则有华孽，时则有牛祸，时则有心腹之疴，时则有黄眚黄祥，时则有金木水火沴土。 
现代文：就会经常有脂妖与夜妖出现，经常有环绕日月的光晕，经常有牛祸，经常有要害之病，经常有黄病吉凶的征兆，经常有五行妖孽出现。 
English: There will often be grease devils and night devils, there will often be halos around the sun and moon, there will often be cattle accidents, there will often be fatal diseases, there will often be auspicious signs of yellow fever, and there will often be five evil spirits.

古文： 思心之不，是谓不圣。 
现代文： 思考问题不宽宏，就不算圣明。 
English: Thinking about the problem is not magnanimous, it is not sacred.

古文：思心者，心思虑也；宽也。
现代文：思考问题，就是心在思索考虑；睿，就是度量宽宏。
English: To consider a matter is to be thoughtful; to be wise is to be magnanimous.

古文：孔子曰： 居上不宽，吾何以观之哉！ 
现代文：孔子说： 居上位的人度量不宽宏，让我怎样去看他行为的好歹内！ 
English: Confucius said: The man at the top is not magnanimous, let me see how he behaves!

古文：言上不宽大包容臣下，则不能居圣位。
现代文：是说居上位的人度量不宽宏不能包容臣的过错，就不能高居圣人之位。
English: That is to say, if a person in a higher position is not magnanimous and cannot tolerate the faults of his subordinates, he cannot occupy the position of a saint.

古文：貌言视听，以心为主，四者皆失，则区无识，故其咎也。
现代文：视听不实，以主观意念为主，功、名、德、权都会丢失，就昏昧识别不清，因而就愚昧无知。
English: If the audio-visual is not true and is based on subjective ideas, the merits, reputation, virtue and power will be lost, and the recognition will be blurred and unclear, resulting in ignorance.

古文：雨旱寒奥，亦以风为本，四气皆乱，故其罚常风也。
现代文：风雨干旱寒冷温暖，也以风为根本，四时阴阳变化、冷热温暖都乱了套。所以受常风的处罚。
English: Wind and rain, drought, cold and warm, are also based on wind. At four o'clock, the change of yin and yang, hot and cold, and warmth are all out of order. Therefore, it is punished by the wind.

古文：常风伤物，故其极凶短折也。
现代文：常风伤害万物，所以极凶短命。
English: The common wind harms all things, so it is extremely short-lived.

古文：伤人曰凶，禽兽曰短，草木曰折。
现代文：伤人为凶，禽兽为短，草木为折。
English: Wounds to people are called fierce, wounds to animals are called short, and wounds to plants and trees are called broken.

古文：一曰，凶，夭也；兄丧弟曰短，父丧子曰折。
现代文：一说，凶，天也；兄丧弟为短，父丧子为折。
English: One said, "It is heaven that is evil. An elder brother who has lost a younger brother is called short, and a father who has lost a son is called broken."

古文：在人腹中，肥而包裹心者脂也，心区则冥晦，故有脂夜之妖。
现代文：人在腹中，肥胖而且包裹心者是脂肪，思想愚昧，就不明事理，所以就有脂妖与夜妖出现。
English: When a person is in the belly, fat and the one who wraps the heart is fat, the thought is stupid, it is unreasonable, so the fat demon and the night demon appear.

古文：一曰，有脂物而夜为妖，若脂水夜污人衣，淫之象也。
现代文：一说，有脂物夜降为妖，如果脂水夜降污染了衣物，就是淫乱的象征。
English: One said that if grease falls at night, it is a demon, and if grease and water fall at night and contaminate clothing, it is a symbol of immorality.

古文：一曰，夜妖者，云风并起而杳冥，故与常风同象也。
现代文：一说，夜妖者，云风并起而夜幽暗，就与常风是同样的象征。
English: One said that the night demon is the cloud and wind that appear at the same time, but the darkness is unknown, so it has the same signs as the wind.

古文：温而风则生螟，有裸虫之孽。
现代文：天气温暖风吹则生害虫，有裸虫这种妖孽。
English: When the weather is warm and the wind blows, pests are born, and there is a witchcraft such as naked worms.

古文：刘向以为于《易》， 巽 为风为木，卦在三月、四月，继阳而治，主木之华实。
现代文：刘向以为在《易。巽》中为风为木，卦在三月四月，继阳治理，主管木的开花结果。
English: Liu Xiang thought that the wind was the tree in "Yi. Zhai," and the Gua was in March and April, following the sun's governance, and was in charge of the tree's flowering results.

古文：风气盛，至秋冬木复华，故有华孽。
现代文：风气旺盛，至秋冬树木又开花，所以有花妖。
English: The atmosphere is exuberant, and the trees bloom again in autumn and winter, so there are flower fairies.

古文：一曰，地气盛则秋冬复华。
现代文：一说，地气旺盛则秋冬又开花。
English: According to one theory, if the earth's atmosphere is vigorous, the cacti will bloom again in autumn and winter.

古文：一曰，华者色也，土为内事，为女孽也。
现代文：一日，花者色也，土代表宫内的事，是为女妖。在《易。
English: One day, the flower, the color, and the earth, representing the things in the palace, are for the she-devil.

古文：于《易》， 坤 为土为牛，牛大而心不能思虑，思心气毁，故有牛祸。
现代文：坤》中为土为牛，牛粗心大意而不能思虑，思心气毁，就有牛大量死亡的祸患。
English: In "Kun," the soil is the cow, the cow is careless and careless and can not think, and the mind is destroyed, there is a large number of cattle deaths.

古文：一曰，牛多死及为怪，亦是也。
现代文：一说，牛大量死亡便继续为鬼，也正确。
English: It is also correct to say that many cattle die and become yokai.

古文：及人，则多病心腹者，故有心腹之疴。
现代文：说到人，如果多病在要害处，就在要害处有怪异之病。
English: When it comes to people, if there is a lot of disease at the critical point, there will be a strange disease at the critical point.

古文：土色黄，故有黄眚黄祥。
现代文：土为黄色，就有黄病吉凶的征兆。
English: The soil color is yellow, so there are yellow disasters and yellow auspicious signs.

古文：凡思心伤者病土气，土气病则金木水火沴之，故曰： 时则有金木水火沴土 。
现代文：凡是思考问题受损伤的则得五行疾，五行病就有五种妖孽出现。所以说 经常有五行妖孽出现 。
English: Anyone who is impaired in thinking about problems will suffer from the Five Elemental Diseases, and five kinds of evil spirits will appear as a result of the Five Elemental Diseases. Therefore, the Five Elemental Evil Spirits often appear.

古文：不言， 惟 而独曰 时则有 者，非一冲气所沴，明其异大也，其极曰凶短折，顺之，其福曰考终命。
现代文：不说 思虑 而独说 时则有 者，就不是一种冲撞灾害的不祥之气，了解它的变异是一大事。其极点就是短命夭折，顺其理，就可以长寿。
English: It is not a kind of ominous atmosphere of colliding disasters, and it is a big deal to understand its variation. Its extreme is short-lived premature death, and it is logical that you can live a long life.

古文：刘歆思心传曰时则有裸虫之孽，谓螟之属也。
现代文：刘歆《思，传》上说，经常有裸虫这种妖孽，就属于一种害虫。
English: Liu Wei said in "Shu, Chuan" that the witchcraft of naked worms is a kind of pest.

古文：庶征之常风，刘向以为《春秋》无其应。
现代文：平常征兆起的常风，刘向以为《春秋》上没有这种应验。
English: Liu Xiang thought that "Spring and Autumn" did not have this kind of fulfillment.

古文：釐公十六年 正月，六鶂退蜚，过宋都 。
现代文：僖公十六年 正月，有六只鶂回飞经过宋国都城。 
English: In the first month of the 16th year of King Min, six cormorants flew back past the capital city of Song.

古文：《左氏传》曰： 风也 。
现代文：《左氏传》上说 风也 。
English: In "The Tale of Zuo," it is said that the wind also blows.

古文：刘歆以为风发于它所，至宋而高，鶂高蜚而逢之，则退。
现代文：刘歆以为风从别处吹来，风到宋都而高起，鶂鸟因高飞相逢，便退回。
English: Liu Yao thought that the wind was blowing from elsewhere, the wind rose to the Song capital, and the storks flew high, so they flew back.

古文：经以见者为文，故记退蜚；传以实应着，言风，常风之罚也。
现代文：经上记文，就记作退飞；传上真地记下，说是风，是常风的处罚。
English: If it is written down, it is recorded as a retreat; if it is transmitted and recorded, it is said to be the wind, it is the punishment of the wind.

古文：象宋襄公区自用，不容臣下，逆司马子鱼之谏，而与强楚争盟，后六年为楚所执，应六鶂之数云。
现代文：如宋襄公愚昧自以为是，不宽容臣下，不听司马子鱼的规劝，与强国楚国争盟，过了六年就被楚国控制，应验了六鲵的说法。
English: For example, Song Xianggong was foolish and self-righteous, intolerant of his subjects, did not listen to Sima Ziyu's exhortation, and competed with the powerful state of Chu for alliance. After six years, he was controlled by Chu, fulfilling the saying of the Six Dynasties.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 潜龙勿用，众逆同志，至德乃潜，厥异风。
现代文：京房《易传》上说： 潜龙不为世用，违背众多同一志向的人，最高尚的道德就被潜匿起来，就有怪异的风。
English: Jing Fang said in "Easy Biography": The hidden dragon is not for worldly use, and many people who violate the same ambition, the noblest morality will be hidden, and there will be a strange wind.

古文：其风也。行不解物，不长，雨小而伤。
现代文：这种怪风，不管吹到哪里物品也不会被解散，不长久。雨小而使物受损。
English: This kind of freak wind, no matter where it blows, things will not be dissolved, not for long. The rain is small and causes damage to things.

古文：政悖德隐兹谓乱，厥风先风不雨。
现代文：政治逆乱道德潜匿就更加的动荡不安，其怪风衹风不雨，大风骤起，毁掉房屋折断树木。
English: Political upheaval, moral ambiguity, and lurking instability have made the situation even more precarious, with freak winds, no rain, and sudden gales destroying houses and snapping trees.

古文：大风暴起，发屋折木，守义不进兹谓耄，厥风与云俱起，折五谷茎。
现代文：坚守义礼不被重用就越发耄耋，那怪风与云同起，五谷根茎被折断。
English: The more they insisted that the offerings were not to be reused, the angrier they became. The strange wind rose with the clouds, and the grain rhizomes were broken.

古文：臣易上政，兹谓不顺，厥风大发屋。赋敛不理兹谓祸，厥风绝经纬，止即温，温即虫。
现代文：臣改变了皇上的策略，就称为不顺，怪风大作摧毁了房屋，田赋不顺就是祸，其风就会灭绝常规之道。风止而气温升高，气温升高就会发生虫害。
English: If a vassal changes the emperor's strategy, it is called bad luck. If a freak wind destroys a house, it is a disaster. If the fields are not in good condition, it is a disaster. If the wind dies down and the temperature rises, insect pests will occur.

古文：侯专封兹谓不统，厥风疾，而树不摇，谷不成。
现代文：专封侯王称为不统一，这样就会风疾，而树不摇，五谷就不熟。
English: The feudal lord is not unified, so there will be wind and disease, and if the tree does not shake, the grain is not ripe.

古文：辟不思道利，兹谓无泽，厥风不摇木，旱无云，伤禾。
现代文：天子不思考利于下，便无恩泽，风不摇木，天旱无云，就会损伤禾苗。
English: If the Son of Heaven does not think about what is beneficial, there will be no reward. If the wind does not shake the trees, if there is no drought, there will be damage to the seedlings.

古文：公常于利兹谓乱，厥风微而温，生虫蝗，害五谷。
现代文：上爵经常为自己谋利就称作动乱，其风微弱而温暖，就生蝗虫，伤害五谷。
English: Court nobles often pay attention to the wind, which is called "chaos." Its wind is weak and gentle, and it brings insects and locusts to harm crops.

古文：弃正作淫兹谓惑，厥风温，螟虫起，害有益人之物。
现代文：忘记了政教专肆淫乱就称作迷惑不清，其风温暖，蝗虫四起，伤害有益于人的东西。
English: Forgetting that the political and religious dictatorship indulges in sexual promiscuity is called confusion, its wind is warm, locusts are everywhere, and it harms things that are beneficial to people.

古文：侯不朝兹谓叛，厥风无恒。地变赤而杀人。 
现代文：王侯不上朝就会叛乱，其风不正常，地变赤而杀害人。 
English: If the prince does not go to the court, he will rebel, his wind is not normal, the earth turns red and kills people.

古文：文帝二年六月，淮南王都寿春大风毁民室，杀人。
现代文：文帝二年六月，淮南王建都寿春时大风摧毁民房，死了人。
English: In June of the second year of Emperor Wen's reign, a gale destroyed houses in the spring in Wangjiantu, Huainan Province, and people died.

古文：刘向以为，是岁南越反，攻淮南边，淮南王长破之，后年入朝，杀汉故丞相壁阳侯，上赦之，归聚奸人谋逆乱，自称东帝，见异不寤，后迁于蜀，道死。
现代文：刘向以为造一年南越反叛，攻打淮南边境，淮南王刘长战胜了他，过了两年入朝时，杀汉前丞相辟阳侯，皇帝赦免了他，回来聚集奸人阴谋叛乱，自称束帝，见到异象仍不醒悟，后被迁徙到蜀地，途中死在厩地。
English: Liu Xiang thought he could create a year-long South Vietnam rebellion and attack the Huainan border. The King of Huainan, Liu Chang, defeated him. Two years later, when he entered the imperial court, he killed the former Han prime minister, Biyang Hou, and the emperor pardoned him. He returned to gather traitors to plot a rebellion, calling himself Emperor Zogu. He still did not wake up when he saw the vision, and was later moved to Shu Di. He died in a stable on the way.

古文：文帝五年，吴暴风雨，坏城官府民室。
现代文：文帝五年，吴国出现了暴风雨，毁坏了城墙、官府和民房。
English: In Emperor Wen's fifth year, there was a storm in Wu, which destroyed the city walls, government offices and houses.

古文：时吴王濞谋为逆乱，天戒数见，终不改寤，后卒诛灭。
现代文：这时吴王刘濞阴谋叛乱，上天警戒数次，终不改悟，最后被诛灭。
English: At this time, the king of Wu, Liu Bei, plotted a rebellion and was warned several times by heaven, but he did not change his mind and was finally destroyed.

古文：五年十月，楚王都彭城大风从东南来，毁市门，杀人。
现代文：文帝五年十月，楚王建都彭城时大风从东南方吹来，摧坏了市肆之门，死了人。
English: In October of Emperor Wen's fifth year, when King Chu was building the capital of Pengcheng, a strong wind blew from the southeast, destroying the gates of the city and killing people.

古文：是月王戊初嗣立，后坐淫削国，与吴王谋反，刑谏者。
现代文：这个月王刘戊刚被封王，后因淫乱而被削国，与吴王谋反，处死规劝他的人。
English: This month, King Liu Wugang was crowned king. Later, he was stripped of his kingdom for adultery. He plotted a rebellion against King Wu, and those who tried to dissuade him were executed.

古文：吴在楚东南，天戒若曰，勿与吴为恶，将败市朝。
现代文：吴国在楚国的东南，上天警戒像是说，不要与吴国作恶，将会败于争名争利的地方。
English: The State of Wu is in the southeast of the State of Chu. Heaven's warning seems to say, "Do not do evil with the State of Wu. You will be defeated in the competition for fame and profit."

古文：王戊不寤，卒随吴亡。
现代文：王刘戊不醒悟，终于随同吴国灭亡，
English: King Liu Wu did not wake up, and finally went down with the Wu Kingdom.

古文：昭帝元凤元年，燕王都蓟大风雨，拔宫中树七围以上十六枚，坏城楼。
现代文：昭帝元凤元年，燕王建都蓟县时遇上大风雨，拔起宫中七围以上粗的树十六棵，摧毁了城楼。
English: In the first year of Emperor Zhao Yuanfeng's reign, when Yan Wang was building the capital of Yunnan County, he encountered heavy wind and rain, uprooted sixteen trees with a diameter of more than seven circumferences in the palace, and destroyed the castle tower.

古文：燕王旦不寤，谋反发觉，卒伏其辜。
现代文：燕王刘旦不醒悟，谋反时被发觉，终于罪有应得。
English: Yan Wang Liu Dan did not wake up, was discovered when plotting a rebellion, and finally deserved the crime.

古文：釐公十五年 九月己卯晦，震夷伯之庙 。
现代文：僖公十五年 九月己卯晦，巨雷震动了夷伯的庙堂 。
English: In the fifteenth year of King Min, the month of September had already passed, and a thunderstorm shook the temple of Yibo.

古文：刘向以为，晦，暝也；震，雷也。
现代文：刘向以为晦，是夜晚；震，是巨雷。
English: Liu Xiang thought it was night; the earthquake was thunder.

古文：夷伯，世大夫，正昼雷，其庙独冥。
现代文：夷伯是世大夫，大白天有雷，惟独这庙变暗。
English: Ippo is the world's doctor, there is thunder in broad daylight, but this temple is dark.

古文：天戒若曰。勿使大夫世官，将专事暝晦。
现代文：上天好像警戒说，不要让大夫代代为官，将独掌朝政而昏昧。
English: The heavens seem to be warning us not to let the doctor take office on our behalf, and not to be dazzled by ruling the country single-handed.

古文：明年，公子季友卒，果世官，政在季氏。
现代文：过了一年，公子季友去世，果然亡于世官的位上，国政在季氏手裹。
English: A year later, Koji Kiyotomo passed away. He died on the throne of a world official, and national politics was in Kiyotomo's hands.

古文：至成公十六年 六月甲午晦 ，正昼皆暝，阴为阳，臣制君也。
现代文：到了成公十六年 六月甲午晦时 ，正值白天却全是一片昏暗，这是阴为阳，臣控制君。
English: In the sixteenth year of Chenggong, at the end of the afternoon of June, it was daytime, but it was all dark. This is yin and yang, vassal control.

古文：成公不寤，其冬季氏杀公子偃。
现代文：成公不醒悟，这年冬天季氏杀了公子偃。
English: Chenggong did not wake up, and this winter Ji killed Gongzihong.

古文：季氏萌于釐公，大于成公，此其应也。
现代文：季氏从僖公起就开始萌生奸心，到了成公时奸心更大，造就是应验。
English: Ji's treachery began to germinate from the time he was a commoner. When he became a commoner, his treachery was even greater, and his dream came true.

古文：董仲舒以为，夷伯，季氏之孚也，陪臣不当有庙。
现代文：董仲舒认为夷伯，是季氏所信任的臣下，陪臣不应当有庙堂。
English: Dong Zhongshu believed that Yibo was a trusted vassal of the Ji clan, and a vassal should not have a temple.

古文：震者，雷也，晦暝，雷击其庙，明当绝去僭差之类也。
现代文：震是巨雷，昏暗，是巨雷震动了这庙堂，应当明白要断绝这种超越身份的事。
English: The earthquake was a thunderbolt, dimly, it was a thunderbolt that shook this temple, it should be clear to break this transcending identity.

古文：向又以为此皆所谓夜妖者也。
现代文：刘向又以为，这都是所谓的夜妖。
English: Liu Xiang also thought that these were all so-called night demons.

古文：刘歆以为《春秋》及朔言朔，及晦言晦，人道所不及，则天震之。
现代文：刘歆以为《春秋》上所说，到了初一就说初一，到了月末一天就说月末一天，人的道德规范如达不到，天就有巨雷。
English: Liu Wei thought that "Spring and Autumn" said that when it comes to the first day of the month, it should be the first day of the month, and when it comes to the last day of the month, it should be the last day of the month. If people's moral standards are not met, there will be thunder in the sky.

古文：展氏有隐慝，故天加诛于其祖夷伯之庙以谴告之也。
现代文：展氏有别人不知的恶迹，所以上天诛罚他的祖先夷伯的庙堂是在于谴责告诫他。
English: Mr. Zhan had some bad deeds that others didn't know about, so the temple of his ancestor Heibo, who was punished by heaven, was to condemn and admonish him.

古文：成公十六年 六月甲午晦，晋侯及楚子、郑伯战于鄢陵 。
现代文：成公十六年 六月甲午晦，晋侯和楚子、郑伯战于鄢陵 。
English: On the eve of the first day of the sixth month of the 16th year of Chenggong, Jin Hou, Chu Zi and Zheng Bo fought in Fuling.

古文：皆月晦云。
现代文：都是月末。
English: It's always at the end of the month.

古文：隐公五年 秋，螟 。
现代文：隐公五年 秋天，发生了螟虫灾害 。
English: In the autumn of the 5th year of the Emperor's reign, the aphid disaster occurred.

古文：董仲舒、刘向以为时公观渔于棠，贪利之应也。
现代文：董仲舒、刘向以为当时隐公在鲁国棠地观看打鱼掠夺骗取的事，这是贪利的应验。
English: Dong Zhongshu and Liu Xiang thought that at that time, the hidden prince was watching the fish-hunting, plundering and deception in Lu Guotang, which was the fulfillment of greed.

古文：刘歆以为又逆臧釐伯之谏，贪利区，以生裸虫之孽也。
现代文：刘歆以为又违背了臧厘伯的规劝，利令智昏，就生裸虫这种妖孽。
English: Liu Yao thought that he had once again violated the advice of Zili Bo, and that the profit made him stupid, so he gave birth to the witchcraft of naked worms.

古文：八年 九月，螟 。
现代文：八年 九月，发生了螟虫灾害 。
English: In September of the same year, the aphid disaster occurred.

古文：时郑伯以邴将易许田，有贪利心。
现代文：这时郑伯用邴地交换许田，有贪利的思想。
English: At this time, Zheng Bo used the ploughed land to exchange the fields, with the idea of greed.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 臣安禄兹谓贪，厥灾虫，虫食根。
现代文：京房《易传》上说： 做官的安于俸禄就称作贪，就发生虫灾，虫吃禾苗的根。
English: Jing Fang said in "I Chuan": An official's dependence on salary is called greed, and insect plagues occur. Insects eat the roots of grass seedlings.

古文：德无常兹谓烦，虫食叶。
现代文：道德变化无常就称作烦杂，虫就吃掉禾苗的叶子。
English: Virtue cannot be kept up for long. It is a nuisance to have to call out, and the insects eat the leaves.

古文：不绌无德，虫食本。
现代文：不贬斥无道德的人，虫就吃掉禾苗的根。
English: Do not disparage those who have no virtue. Worms eat away the stem and roots.

古文：与东作争，兹谓不时，虫食节。
现代文：与东方的许田作争，就会失掉农时，虫就吃掉禾苗的节。
English: If you fight with the eastern fields, you will lose the farming time, and the insects will eat the seeds of the seedlings.

古文：蔽恶生孽，虫食心。 
现代文：遮盖罪恶，虫就吃掉禾苗的心。 
English: Darkness and evil beget witchcraft, and worms devour the heart.

古文：严公六年 秋，螟 。
现代文：严公六年 秋天，发生了螟虫灾害 。
English: In the autumn of the sixth year of Yan Gong, the aphid disaster occurred.

古文：董仲舒、刘向以为，先是，卫侯朔出奔齐，齐侯会诸侯纳朔，许诸侯赂。齐人归卫宝，鲁受之，贪利应也。
现代文：董仲舒、刘向以为先是卫侯朔奔逃，齐侯会合诸侯接纳朔，允许给诸侯国贿赂，齐人归送从卫得来的珍宝，鲁人接受了，这是贪利的应验。
English: Dong Zhongshu and Liu Xiang thought that Wei was the first to run away, Qi Hou met with the princes and accepted them, and allowed them to bribe the princes. Qi people returned the precious treasure from Wei, and Lu people accepted it. This was the fulfillment of greed.

古文：文帝后六年秋，螟。
现代文：文帝后六年秋，发生了螟虫灾害。
English: In the autumn of the sixth year after Emperor Wen, the aphid disaster occurred.

古文：是岁，匈奴大入上郡、云中，烽火通长安，遣三将军屯边，三将军屯京师。
现代文：这一年匈奴攻入上郡、云中，烽火通到长安，派遣三位将军驻扎边境，三位将军驻扎京师。
English: In that year, the Huns invaded Shang County and Yunzhong, and set fire to Chang'an, dispatching three generals to garrison the border and three generals to garrison the Beijing Division.

古文：宣公三年， 郊牛之口伤，改卜牛，牛死 。
现代文：宣公三年， 郊祭用的牛口有伤，更改卜牛，牛死 。
English: In the three years since the proclamation of the new year, the ox used in the suburban festival has a wound on its muzzle, it is changed to a divination ox, and the ox dies.

古文：刘向以为近牛祸也。
现代文：刘向以为接近牛祸。
English: Liu Xiang thought a cow accident was about to happen.

古文：是时，宣公与公子遂谋共杀子赤而立，又以丧娶，区昏乱。
现代文：这时宣公与公子遂共谋杀死子赤自己即位，又以丧制未除而娶妻，真是昏昧无礼。
English: At this time, Xuan Gong and his son-in-law jointly murdered the dead son-in-law and took the throne themselves, and married his wife without removing the mourning period, which was really vague and disrespectful.

古文：乱成于口，幸有季文子得免于祸，天犹恶之，生则不飨其祀，死则灾燔其庙。
现代文：乱必定是从口出，幸有季文子得免于祸，天还厌恶，生时不愿飨其祀，死时便烧了这个庙堂。
English: The chaos must have come from the mouth, fortunately, Ji Wenzi was spared from the disaster, the heavens were disgusted, he did not want to worship him when he was alive, and he burned this temple when he died.

古文：董仲舒指略同。
现代文：与董仲舒所指略同。
English: This is similar to what Dong Zhongshu pointed out.

古文：秦孝文王五年，斿朐衍，有献五足牛者。
现代文：秦孝文王五年，到朐衍游玩时，有人献出五只脚的牛。
English: In the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Qin Xiaowen, when he was on a trip to Suiyan, someone offered him a five-legged cow.

古文：刘向以为近牛祸也。
现代文：刘向以为要发生牛祸了。
English: Liu Xiang thought a cow accident was about to happen.

古文：先是，文惠王初都咸阳，广大宫室，南临渭，北临泾，思心失，逆土气。
现代文：先是文惠王刚定都咸阳，扩大宫室，南临渭水，北临泾水，思考问题欠妥当，违背地气。
English: First, King Wenhui decided to move the capital to Xianyang and expand the palace to the south and the north, which was inappropriate and against the spirit of the country.

古文：足者，止也，戒秦建止著泰，将致危亡。
现代文：足就是止，告诫秦扩建太过奢侈，将会导致危亡。
English: The foot is the stop, admonish Qin expansion is too extravagant, will lead to peril.

古文：秦遂不改，至于离官三百，复起阿房，未成而亡。
现代文：秦国始终不改，以致离宫三百，又起阿房，还未建成国家就灭亡了。
English: The Qin state never changed, so much so that it left the palace three hundred years ago, and then moved to Afang. It perished before the country was built.

古文：一日，牛以力为人用，足所以行也。
现代文：一说，牛的力气为人用，用足行走。
English: He said, "Cow's strength can be used by humans. They can walk with their feet."

古文：其后秦大用民力转输，起负海至北边，天下叛之。
现代文：以后秦大肆用民力转运输送，白背向海的地方至北边，天下反叛他。
English: After that, Qin Daisho used people's power to transfer and transport, and the country rebelled against him from the north to the place where Bai turned his back to the sea.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 兴繇役，夺民时，厥妖牛生五足 。
现代文：京房《易传》上曰： 兴徭役，夺民时，其妖牛生五足。 
English: In the Kyobo "I Chuan" there is a saying: When he was in power and conquered the people, his yakitori cow had five legs.

古文：景帝中六年，梁孝王田北山，有献牛，足上出背上。
现代文：景帝中六年，梁孝王在北山打猎，有献牛的，牛足长在背上。
English: In the sixth year of Emperor Jing's middle school, Liang Xiaowang went hunting in the North Mountain. There was a cow offering, and the cow's foot was on his back.

古文：刘向以为近牛祸。
现代文：型血以为这近似牛祸。
English: The blood type is thought to be a close relative of the cow disease.

古文：先是，孝王骄奢，起苑方三百里，宫馆阁道相连三十余里。
现代文：先是耋王骄奢，兴建游乐田猎的场所三百里，宫馆阁道相连三十余里。
English: First of all, it was the arrogance of King Gong, who built 300 miles of pleasure hunting grounds, and more than 30 miles of palace pavilion roads.

古文：纳于邪臣羊胜之计，欲求为汉嗣，刺杀议臣爰盎，事发，负斧归死。
现代文：采纳邪臣差媵的计策，欲求继嗣汉位，刺杀议臣袁盎，事被发觉，负斧请死。
English: Adopted the strategy of the evil minister Zhaojun, desired to succeed to the Han throne, assassinated the influential minister Yuan Ang, the matter was discovered, and he was sentenced to death.

古文：既退归国，犹有恨心，内则思虑乱，外则土功过制，故牛祸作。
现代文：退归封地后，心中仍然怀有仇恨，内则思虑愚蒙，外则筑城超过帝制，所以才会有牛祸发生。
English: After returning to the fiefdom, they still harbored hatred in their hearts. On the one hand, they were stupid, and on the other hand, they built a city that exceeded the imperial system. This is why the cow accident occurred.

古文：足而出于背，下奸上之象也。
现代文：牛背上长足，这是下犯上的象征。
English: The long foot on the cow's back is a symbol of the fall into sin.

古文：犹不能自解，发疾暴死，又凶短之极也。
现代文：仍然不能白悟，而发病暴死，这是因欲杀人而短命。
English: Still can't make sense of it, and the onset of sudden death, this is because of the desire to kill and short life.

古文：《左氏传》昭公二十一年春，周景王将铸无射钟，泠州鸠曰： 王其以心疾死乎！
现代文：《左氏传》昭公二十一年春，周景王要铸造一座无射钟，泠州鸠说： 大王大概要因心脏得病而死吧!
English: In the spring of the twenty-first year of King Zhaogong's reign, Zhou Jing Wang wanted to cast a non-shooting bell, and Quzhou Yao said: The great king will probably die of a heart disease!

古文：夫天子省风以作乐，小者不窕，大者不槬。
现代文：天子省察风俗作乐以移恶风恶俗，小的细而不满，大的宽而不入。
English: The Son of Heaven inspects customs and makes music to remove evil customs. The small ones are fine but not satisfied, and the big ones are wide but do not enter.

古文：槬则不容，心是以感，感实生疾。
现代文：凯就是心不堪容，因此有感，有感于是生疾病。
English: Kai is unbearable, so there is a feeling, there is a feeling, so there is a disease.

古文：今钟槬矣，王心弗堪，其能久乎？ 
现代文：而今钟横大而不能入，王心不能忍受，能长久吗？ 
English: But this clock is too big to enter, the king's heart can't bear it, can it last?

古文：刘向以为，是时景王好听淫声，適庶不明，思心霿乱，明年以心疾崩，近心腹之疴，凶短之极者也。
现代文：刘向以为造时景王好听淫乱之声，继嗣嫡庶不明，思虑昏乱，过一年因心病崩，近似心腹之病，未成年就夭折了。
English: Liu Xiang thought that King Jing liked to listen to the voice of adultery, the heir was unknown, his thoughts were confused, and after a year he died of a heart disease, a disease similar to that of a confidant, and died as a minor.

古文：昭二十年春，鲁叔孙昭子聘于宋，元公与燕，饮酒乐，语相泣也。
现代文：昭公二十五年春，鲁国叔孙昭子娶妻于宋国，元公和他宴饮作乐，说话的时候两人相对哭泣。
English: In the spring of the 25th year of Zhaogong's reign, Lu's great-uncle Zhaozi married his wife in Song. Yuan Gong and Zhaogong had a banquet and made music. When they spoke, they both cried.

古文：乐祁佐，告人曰： 今兹君与叔孙其皆死乎！
现代文：乐祁助宴礼，告人说： 今宋元公与叔孙大概都会死吧！
English: Le Yao assisted at the banquet and said, "Now both Song Yuan Gong and his grandchild will probably die!"

古文：五闻之，哀乐而乐哀，皆丧心也。心之精爽，是谓魂魄，魂魄去之，何以能久？ 
现代文：我听到这件事，可乐而反哀，可哀而反乐，心理都失常了情的精爽，就是魂魄，魂魄丢了，怎能活得长久呢? 
English: When I heard about this, I felt happy and sad at the same time, sad and happy at the same time. My mental state was out of kilter. The essence of love is the soul. If you lose your soul, how can you live long?

古文：冬十月，叔孙昭子死；十一月，宋元公卒。
现代文：这年十月，叔孙昭子死了；十一月，宋元公也死了。
English: In October of that year, his great-uncle Akiko died; in November, Song Yuan Gong also died.

古文：昭帝元凤元年九月，燕有黄鼠衔其尾舞王宫端门中，往视之，鼠舞如故。
现代文：昭帝元凤元年九月，燕国有黄鼠衔着尾巴在王宫端门中跳舞，前去看它们，黄鼠仍舞个不停。
English: In September of the first year of Emperor Zhao's reign, the weasels of the state of Yan danced with their tails in the middle of the gate of the royal palace. I went to see them, and the weasels were still dancing.

古文：王使夫人以酒脯祠，鼠舞不休，夜死。
现代文：王让夫人用酒和干肉去祈祷，黄鼠仍不停舞，到夜间就死了。
English: The king asked his wife to pray with wine and dried meat, but the weasel continued to dance and died in the night.

古文：黄祥也。
现代文：黄鼠乃吉凶的征兆。
English: The weasel is a sign of good or bad luck.

古文：时，燕刺王旦谋反将败，死亡象也。
现代文：这时燕剌王刘旦谋反将要失败，死亡的象征。
English: At this time, the tern king Liu Dan rebellion will fail, a symbol of death.

古文：其月，发觉伏辜。
现代文：当月，被发觉伏罪。
English: That month, he was found guilty of sedition.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 诛不原情，厥妖鼠舞门。 
现代文：京房《易传》上说： 诛杀不讲情谊，其妖鼠就舞于端门。 
English: Jing Fang said in "I Chuan": "Fighting is not about friendship, its demon rat dances at the end of the door."

古文：成帝建始元年四月辛丑夜，西北有如火光。壬寅晨，大风从西北起，云气赤黄，四塞天下，终日夜下著地者黄土尘也。
现代文：成帝建始元年四月辛丑夜，西北方向像有火光，壬寅早晨，大风从西北刮起，云气赤黄色，布满天下，从晨至夜落下地的都是黄尘土。
English: In April of the first year of Emperor Chengzong's reign, it was a dark and gloomy night, and the northwest direction was like a firelight. In the morning of the second month of the year, a strong wind blew from the northwest, and the clouds were reddish-yellow and covered the whole world. From morning to night, the earth was covered with yellow dust.

古文：是岁，帝元舅大司马大将军王凤始用事；又封凤母弟崇为安成侯，食邑万户；庶弟谭等五人赐爵关内侯，食邑三千户。
现代文：造一年，帝元舅大司马大将军王凤开始执政；又封王凤母弟崇为安成侯，食邑万户；庶弟谭等五人赐予爵位关内侯，封地三千户。
English: One year later, Emperor Yuan's uncle, Grand Master Ma Da Gen. Wang Feng, began to govern; Wang Feng's mother and younger brother, Chong, were made An Cheng Hou (安成侯), with food for ten thousand households; five people, including the younger brother Tan, were given the title of Guan Nei Hou (关内侯), with three thousand households as fiefs.

古文：复益封凤五千户，悉封谭等为列侯，是为五侯。
现代文：又增封王凤五千户，全部封谭等为列侯，这就是五侯。
English: Another five thousand households of Wang Feng were added, and all of them were enfeoffed as vassals, which is the five vassals.

古文：哀帝即位，封外属丁氏、傅氏、周氏、郑氏凡六人为列侯。
现代文：哀帝即位，封外家的亲属丁氏、傅氏、周氏、郑氏共六人为列侯。
English: Emperor Ai ascended to the throne, and a total of six relatives of foreign emperors, the Ding, Fu, Zhou, and Zheng families, became vassals.

古文：杨宣对曰： 五侯封日，天气赤黄，丁、傅复然。
现代文：杨宣对皇上说： 封五侯的那天，天气赤黄，丁、傅又这样。
English: Yang Xuan said to the emperor: "On the day of the fencing of the Five Provinces, the weather was red and yellow, and Ding and Fu were like this.

古文：此殆爵土过制，伤乱土气之祥也。 
现代文：这大概是封爵赐地的过分，伤乱了土气的吉兆了吧。 
English: This is probably the result of the excessive amount of land given out in the form of knighthoods, which has disrupted the auspicious signs of the local spirit.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 经称 观其生 ，言大臣之义，当观贤人，知其性行，推而贡之，否则为闻善不与，兹谓不知，厥异黄，厥咎聋，厥灾不嗣。
现代文：京房《易传》上说： 经上称作 观其生，是说大臣的礼仪，应当察看是不是贤人，知道他的禀性与行为，然后推荐进助于朝廷，不然听到贤人而不推荐，等于不知道，便出现异黄，便成为聋子，便灾祸不断。
English: Jing Fang said in "I Chuan": The sutra is called "watching his birth," which means that the etiquette of the minister should be to see if he is a wise man, know his stubbornness and behavior, and then recommend him to the imperial court. Otherwise, if he hears a wise man and does not recommend him, it is equivalent to not knowing, and then he will appear yellow and become deaf, and then the disaster will continue.

古文：黄者，日上黄光不散如火然，有黄浊气四塞天下。
现代文：黄者，是太阳的黄光不散如火一样，有黄浊气布满天下。
English: If it is yellow, it is because the yellow light of the sun does not disperse like fire, and there is a jaundiced atmosphere all over the world.

古文：蔽贤绝道，故灾异至绝世也。
现代文：埋没贤人断绝道义，所以灾异可达到弃绝人世的地步。
English: Buried sages cut off morality, so disasters can reach the point of abandoning the mortal world.

古文：经曰 良马逐 。逐，进也，言大臣得贤者谋，当显进其人，否则为下相攘善，兹谓盗明，厥咎亦不嗣，至于身家绝。 
现代文：经亡说 良马逐，逐，进的意思，是说大臣得到贤人的谋策，要显扬推荐这个人，不然就是下臣互相排挤善良，造就是盗取贤明，其灾祸不断，以至于身遭杀戮家嗣断绝。 
English: The meaning of the saying "Good horses go, go, go" after death is that the minister has received the wise man's strategy and should recommend this person. Otherwise, the subordinates will push out the good from each other, and the creation will be the theft of the wise, and its scourge will continue, so that the body will be killed and the heir will be cut off.

古文：史记周幽王二年，周三川皆震。
现代文：历史记载周幽王二年，周的泾、渭、洛三地都有地震。
English: History records that in the second year of King Zhou Youwang, there were earthquakes in the three regions of Zhou including Handan, Handan and Luo.

古文：刘向以为金木水火沴土者也。
现代文：刘向以为这是金木水火克上。
English: Liu Xiang thought it was a coincidence.

古文：伯阳甫曰： 周将亡矣！
现代文：伯阳甫说： 周即将灭亡了！
English: Bo Yangfu said: Zhou is about to perish!

古文：天地之气不过其序，若过其序，民乱之也。
现代文：天地之气不能超越它的顺序；如果超越了顺序，人民就会起来暴乱。
English: The spirit of heaven and earth cannot transcend its order; if it does, the people will rise up in revolt.

古文：阳伏而不能出，阴迫而不能升，于是有地震。
现代文：阳气伏而不能升出，这是阴迫阳而不能升出，在这个时候就有地震。
English: The yang is latent and cannot come out, the yin is oppressive and cannot rise, and then there are earthquakes.

古文：今三川实震，是阳失其所而填阴也。
现代文：而今三!地震，是阳失其道被阴所填而不能升出。
English: Earthquakes now occur in the Mikawa region because the yang air has left its original position and has been pushed down by the yin air.

古文：阳失而在阴，原必塞；原塞，国必亡。
现代文：阳失其道而在阴，水源必塞；水源塞，国必亡。
English: If the yang qi is not above but below the yin qi, the water source will definitely be blocked, the water source will be blocked, and the country will definitely perish.

古文：夫水，土演而民用也；土无所演，而民乏财用，不亡何待？
现代文：这水引出了土气而人民无所用；土气无所引，而民缺乏财用，国不亡还待何时?
English: This water has brought out the native spirit, but the people have no use for it; the native spirit has nothing to do with it, but the people lack financial resources. How long will the country survive?

古文：昔伊、洛竭而夏亡，河竭而商亡，今周德如二代之季，其原又塞，塞必竭；川竭，山必崩。
现代文：从前伊雒干涸而夏朝灭亡，黄河水干涸而商朝灭亡，现今周朝的道德犹如夏商的未年，这水源又塞，水源塞必定干涸；水干涸，山必定崩溃。
English: In the past, the Ili River dried up and the Xia Dynasty perished, the Yellow River dried up and the Shang Dynasty perished, and now the morality of the Zhou Dynasty is like the last year of the Xia Dynasty. This water source is blocked, and the water source will surely dry up; the water is dried up, and the mountain will surely collapse.

古文：夫国必依山川，山崩川竭，亡之征也。
现代文：国家必定依靠山川，山崩川竭，是国家灭亡的征兆。
English: The country must rely on mountains and rivers, and the collapse of mountains and rivers is a sign of the country's demise.

古文：若国亡，不过十年，数之纪也。 
现代文：如若国家亡了，过不了十年，命运也就到尽头了。 
English: If the country perishes, in less than ten years, our fate will also be over.

古文：是岁，三川竭，岐山崩。
现代文：这一年三干涸，岐山崩溃。
English: This year, the three dried up and Qishan collapsed.

古文：刘向以为，阳失在阴者，谓火气来煎枯水，故川竭也。
现代文：刘向以为阳失道为阴所填，是说火气把水煎熬干枯了，所以川也因之干涸。
English: Liu Xiang thought that the sun's lost path was filled by the yin, which meant that the fire had dried up the water, so the river had also dried up.

古文：山川连体，下竭上崩，事势然也。
现代文：山和川连体，下边干涸而上边崩溃，这是大势所趋。
English: Mountains and rivers are connected, the lower side dries up and the upper side collapses. This is the general trend.

古文：时，幽王暴虐，妄诛伐，不听谏，迷于褒姒，废其正后，废后之父申侯与犬戎共攻杀幽王。
现代文：当时周幽王暴虐无道，乱杀无辜，不听贤人谏言，整日迷恋于褒姒，废掉正后，废后的父亲申侯联合犬戎一起攻杀幽王。
English: At that time, Zhou Youwang was a ruthless tyrant, killing innocents indiscriminately, not listening to the wise men's advice, obsessed with Bo Ye all day long, abolishing Zhenghou, and abolishing Zhenghou's father Shen Hou and his dog Rong together to attack and kill Youwang.

古文：一曰，其在天文，水为辰星，辰星为蛮夷。
现代文：一说，这是天文，水是辰星，辰星是蛮夷。
English: One said, "This is astronomy, water is the star, the star is the barbarian."

古文：月食辰星，国以女亡。
现代文：月吃掉辰星，国就因为女亡。
English: If the moon eats the star, the country will die because of the woman.

古文：幽王之败，女乱其内，夷攻其外。
现代文：幽王的失败，是因女乱其内，夷攻其外。
English: The failure of Yu Wang is due to the female chaos within, and the attack from the outside.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 君臣相背，厥异名水绝。 
现代文：京房《易传》上说： 君臣相背，它的灾异就叫作水断绝。 
English: Kyofusa said in "Ekiden": When a prince and a minister turn their backs on each other, the disaster is called "water severance."

古文：文公九年 九月癸酉，地震 。
现代文：文公九年 九月癸酉，地震 。
English: In September of the ninth year of the Bunko era, an earthquake occurred.

古文：刘向以为，先是时，齐桓、晋文、鲁釐二伯贤君新没，周襄王失道，楚穆王杀父，诸侯皆不肖，权倾天下，天戒若曰，臣下强盛者将动为害。
现代文：刘向以为从前这个时候，齐桓、晋文二霸与鲁厘公贤君刚刚死亡，周襄王失掉为君之道，楚穆王杀了他的父亲成王，诸侯都不正派，在下阴谋争权，上天警戒说，如果臣下强盛将常常为害。
English: Liu Xiang thought that at this time in the past, Qi Huan, Jinwen Erba and Luli Gongxianjun had just died, Zhou Xiang Wang lost his way to become the king, King Chumu killed his father Chengwang, the princes were not decent, they were plotting to fight for power, and heaven warned that if the vassals were strong, they would often be harmed.

古文：后宋、鲁、晋、莒、郑、陈、齐皆杀君。
现代文：后来宋、鲁、晋、莒、郑、陈、齐都杀了他们的君王。
English: Later, Song, Lu, Jin, Yao, Zheng, Chen and Qi all killed their kings.

古文：诸震，略皆从董仲舒说也。
现代文：所有地震，大略都同意董仲舒的说法。
English: All earthquakes generally agree with Dong Zhongshu's statement.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 臣事虽正，专必震，其震，于水则波，于木则摇，于屋则瓦落。
现代文：京房《易传》上说： 众民办事虽然端正，而帝侯独断专行也必然要地震，如果地震，水就起伏不平，树就动摇不止，就会房倒屋塌。
English: Jing Fang said in "Easy Biography": Although all the people's affairs are correct, and the prince's arbitrary action is bound to cause an earthquake. If there is an earthquake, the water will be uneven, the tree will continue to shake, and the house will collapse.

古文：大经在辟而易臣，兹谓阴动，厥震摇政宫。
现代文：常规是国君不正而更换臣，于此阴气动，其地震动摇政宫。
English: It is customary for the sovereign to replace his vassals in an improper manner, and in this case, the political palace was shaken.

古文：大经摇政，兹谓不阴，厥震摇山，山出涌水。
现代文：常规摇政，是因为不阴，其地震摇山，山出水涌。
English: The conventional shaking of the government is because it is not cloudy, its earthquake shaking the mountain, mountain out of the water.

古文：嗣子无德专禄，兹谓不顺，厥震动兵陵，涌水出。 
现代文：嗣位的儿子没有道德专吃俸禄，此为不顺，其地震动摇丘陵，涌水而出。 
English: The son of the heir to the throne does not have the morality to eat only the salary, this is not good, the earthquake shakes the hills, the water gushes out.

古文：襄公十六年 五月甲子，地震 。
现代文：襄公十六年 五月甲子，地震 。
English: In May of the 16th year of Xianggong, there was an earthquake in Jiazi.

古文：刘向以为，先是鸡泽之会，诸侯盟，大夫又盟。
现代文：刘向以为先是鸡泽的会盟，诸侯结盟，大夫又结盟。
English: Liu Xiang thought that the first was the alliance of the chickens, the alliance of the princes, and the alliance of the doctors.

古文：是岁三月，诸侯为溴梁之会，而大夫独相与盟。五月，地震矣。
现代文：这年三月，诸侯将在溴梁会盟，而大夫却单独会盟，五月就地震了。
English: In March of this year, the lords will be in the bromeliad alliance, but the doctor will be in a separate alliance, and in May there will be an earthquake.

古文：其后，崔氏专齐，栾盈乱晋，良霄倾郑，阍杀吴子，燕逐其君，楚灭陈、蔡。
现代文：这以后崔氏独揽齐国政权，乐盈叛乱于晋，良霄颠覆了郑国，看门的人杀了吴子，燕国人赶走了他们的君主，楚灭亡了陈、蔡。
English: After this, the Cui clan took over the power of Qi, Le Ying rebelled in Jin, Liang Xiao overthrew Zheng, the gatekeepers killed Wu Zi, the Yan people drove out their monarchs, and Chu destroyed Chen and Cai.

古文：昭公十九年 五月己卯，地震 。
现代文：昭公十九年 五月己卯，地震 。
English: In May of the same year, there was an earthquake.

古文：刘向以为，是时季氏将有逐君之变。
现代文：刘向以为这时季氏将有驱逐君王的事变。
English: Liu Xiang thought that at this time, the Ji clan would have a change of ousting the king.

古文：其后，宋三臣、曹会皆以地叛，蔡、莒逐其君，吴败中国杀二君。
现代文：这以后宋国的三臣、曹会都从当地叛乱，蔡、莒赶走了君主，吴打败了中原诸国，杀了二君。
English: After this, the three ministers and Cao Hui of Song rebelled from the local area, Cai and Zhai drove away the monarch, Wu defeated the Central Plains countries and killed the two princes.

古文：二十三年 八月乙末，地震 。
现代文：二十三年 八月乙未，地震 。
English: 23rd August, earthquake.

古文：刘向以为，是时周景王崩，刘、单立王子猛，尹氏立子朝。
现代文：刘向以为造时周景王去世，刘、单立王子猛，尹氏立子朝。
English: Liu Xiang believed that King Zhou Jing died at the time of construction, Liu and Shan established Prince Meng, and the Yin Dynasty established the Zi Dynasty.

古文：其后，季氏逐昭公，黑肱叛邾，吴杀其君僚，宋五大夫、晋二大夫皆以地叛。
现代文：这以后季氏赶走了昭公，黑肱反叛了邾国，吴国杀了他的君王僚，宋五位大夫、晋二位大夫皆从当地叛乱。
English: After this, the Ji clan drove out the Zhaogong, the Black Kite rebelled against the State of Yao, the State of Wu killed his royal colleagues, and the five doctors of the Song Dynasty and the two doctors of the Jin Dynasty all rebelled from the local area.

古文：哀公三年 四月甲午，地震 。
现代文：哀公三年 四月甲午，地震 。
English: Three years of mourning April 1st, earthquake.

古文：刘向以为，是时诸侯皆信邪臣，莫能用仲尼，盗杀蔡侯、齐陈乞弑君。
现代文：刘向以为这时诸侯都相信奸臣，不用仲尼，盗杀蔡侯，齐国的陈乞弑君。
English: Liu Xiang thought that at this time, the princes all believed the treacherous vassal, and did not need Zhongni to steal and kill Cai Hou and Chen Qianjun of Qi.

古文：惠帝二年正月，地震陇西，厌四百余家。
现代文：惠帝二年正月，陇西发生了地震，压死四百余人家。
English: In the first month of the second year of Huidi, an earthquake occurred in Shaanxi, crushing more than 400 people to death.

古文：武帝征和二年八月癸亥，地震，厌杀人。
现代文：武帝征和二年八月癸亥，发生地震，也压死了人。
English: In August of the second year of Emperor Wu's reign, there was an earthquake, and people were crushed to death.

古文：宣帝本始四年四月壬寅，地震河南以东四十九郡，北海琅邪坏祖宗庙城郭，杀六千余人。
现代文：宣帝本始四年四月壬寅，河南以束四十九郡发生地震，北海琅邪震坏了祖宗庙和城郭，死了六千余人。
English: In April of the 4th year of Emperor Xuan Zi's reign, an earthquake occurred in 49 counties in Henan Province. The earthquake damaged the ancestral temple and the castle, and more than 6,000 people died.

古文：元帝永兴三年冬，地震。
现代文：元帝永光三年冬天，发生地震。
English: In the winter of the third year of Emperor Yongguang, an earthquake occurred.

古文：绥和二年九月丙辰，地震，自京师至北边郡国三十余坏城郭，凡杀四百一十五人。
现代文：绥和二年九月丙辰，发生地震，自京师至北边郡国损坏三十多座城郭，共压死四百一十五人。
English: In September of the 2nd year of the Heian period, an earthquake occurred, and more than 30 castles were damaged from Beijing to the northern counties, and a total of 415 people were crushed to death.

古文：釐公十四年 秋八月辛卯，沙麓崩 。
现代文：僖公十四年 秋八月辛卯，沙麓崩塌 。
English: In the autumn and August of the 14th year of King Min, the foot of the sand collapsed.

古文：《穀梁传》曰： 林属于山曰麓，沙其名也 。
现代文：《谷梁传》上说： 林和山相连叫作麓，沙是它的名字。 
English: "The Legend of Gu Liang" said: "The forest and the mountain together are called the foot, and the sand is its name.

古文：刘向以为臣下背叛，散落不事上之象也。
现代文：刘向以为臣下背叛，是散落不事帝王的象征。
English: Liu Xiang thought that his vassals had betrayed him, which was a symbol of the emperor's scattering.

古文：先是，齐桓行伯道，会诸侯，事周室。
现代文：先是齐桓行霸道，会盟诸侯，侍奉周室。
English: At first, he was a domineering ruler, a member of the nobility, and a servant of the imperial court.

古文：管仲既死，桓德日衰，天戒若曰，伯道将废，诸侯散落。政逮大夫，陪臣执命，臣下不事上矣。
现代文：管仲死后，齐桓公原来的道德曰渐衰微，上天警戒像是说，霸业将废落诸侯散落，政令不因大夫，陪臣执掌政令，臣下不事奉天子。
English: After the death of Guanzhong, the original morality of Prince Qi Huan was said to be gradually declining, and the warning from heaven seemed to say that the hegemony would be abolished and the lords would be scattered, the government order would not be due to the doctor, the vassal would be in charge of the government order, and the vassal would not serve the son of heaven.

古文：桓公不寤，天子蔽晦。
现代文：桓公没有醒悟，天子昏昧不明。
English: Prince Kan did not come to his senses, and it is not clear why the divine son was in a daze.

古文：及齐桓死，天下散而从楚。
现代文：到齐桓公死后，天下散落而顺从了楚国。
English: After the death of Prince Qi Huan, the whole country scattered and submitted to Chu.

古文：王札子杀二大夫，晋败天子之师，莫能征讨，从是陵迟。
现代文：王札子杀了召伯、毛伯二大夫，晋国打败了天子的军队，天子不能征讨，从这就衰落了。
English: Wang Fuzi killed Zhao Bo and Mao Bo, the two chiefs, and Jin Province defeated Tianzi's army. Tianzi could not be conquered, and the decline began.

古文：《公羊》以为，沙麓，河上邑也。
现代文：《公羊》上记载的沙麓崩塌，是黄河上的城邑。
English: The collapse of the sandy foothills recorded in "The Ram" is the beginning of a city on the Yellow River.

古文：董仲舒说略同。
现代文：董仲舒说的与此略同。
English: This is similar to what Dong Zhongshu said.

古文：一曰，河，大川象；齐，大国；桓德衰，伯道将移于晋文，故河为徙也。
现代文：一说，黄河，是大!的象征，齐国，是大国；桓公道德日衰，霸道将转移到晋文公，所以黄河将要改道。
English: The first said that the Yellow River is a symbol of big! and that Qi is a big country; the moral standards of the Han Dynasty are declining, and the tyranny will be transferred to the Jin Dynasty, so the Yellow River will change its course.

古文：《左氏》以为，沙麓，晋地；沙，山名也；地震而麓崩，不书震，举重者也。
现代文：《左氏》上以为沙麓是晋国土地；沙，是山名；地震而麓崩，不记载地震，这是举其重要而记。
English: "Zao Shi" thought that the foot of the sand was the land of Jin; sand was the name of the mountain; the earthquake and the collapse of the foot did not record the earthquake, which was important to mention.

古文：伯阳甫所谓 国必依山川，山崩川竭，亡之征也；不过十年，数之纪也。 
现代文：伯阳甫所说 国家必依山川，如山崩溃干涸，这是国家灭亡的象征；没过十年，纪年就不再延续了 。
English: As Bo Yangfu said, the country must rely on the mountains and rivers, such as the collapse of mountains and drying up, which is a symbol of the country's demise; in less than ten years, the era will no longer continue.

古文：至二十四年，晋怀公杀于高梁。
现代文：到了二十四年，晋怀公被杀于高梁。
English: Twenty-four years later, Prince Jinhuai was killed in Gaoliang.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 小人剥庐，厥妖山崩，兹谓阴乘阳，弱胜强。 
现代文：京房《易传》上说： 小人夺人荫庇之所，它的凶兆是山崩塌，造就是阴战胜阳，弱盛于强。 
English: Jing Fang said in "I Chuan": The villain seizes the place where people shelter in the shade. Its omen is the collapse of the mountain. The creation is the victory of yin over yang. Weakness prevails over strength.

古文：成公五年 夏，梁山崩 。
现代文：成公五年 夏天，梁山崩塌 。
English: In the summer of the fifth year of his reign, Mount Liang collapsed.

古文：《穀梁传》曰河三日不流，晋君帅群臣而哭之，乃流。
现代文：《谷梁传》上说壅塞黄河河道三日不流，晋君率领群臣为此哭泣，造才流通。
English: "Guliangzhuan" said that the Yellow River was blocked for three days and did not flow. Jin Jun led his ministers to cry about this, and the talent flowed.

古文：刘向以为，山，阳，君也；水，阴，民也。天戒若曰，君道崩坏，下乱，百姓将失其所矣。
现代文：刘向以为山代表阳，是君的象征，水代表阴，是民的象征，上天像是警戒说，为君的道德败坏了，在下的就乱，百姓将失去他们所依靠的。
English: Liu Xiang thought that the mountain represented the yang and was the symbol of the prince, the water represented the yin and was the symbol of the people, and the heaven was like a warning saying that the morality of the prince was corrupt, the people would be in chaos, and the people would lose what they relied on.

古文：哭然后流，丧亡象也。
现代文：哭然后流通，这是丧家亡国的象征。
English: Cry and then circulate, this is a symbol of the loss of home and country.

古文：梁山在晋地，自晋始而及天下也。
现代文：梁山在晋地，从晋开始而遍及天下。
English: Liangshan is in Jin, and from the beginning of Jin, it has spread throughout the world.

古文：后晋暴杀三卿，厉公以弑。
现代文：后来晋残酷地杀了三卿，而厉公也被杀。
English: Later, Jin brutally killed the three nobles, and Liguo was also killed.

古文：溴梁之会，天下大夫皆执国政，其后孙、甯出卫献，三家逐鲁昭，单、尹乱王室。
现代文：溴梁的会盟。天下大夫都执国政，打这以后，孙林父、宁殖到卫献公处，三家逐赶鲁昭公，单、尹乱了王室。
English: Bromliang's alliance. All the world's doctors began to govern the country. After this, Sun Lin's father and Ning Xuan went to Wei Xian's office, the three families followed Lu Zhaogong, and Shan and Yin disrupted the royal family.

古文：董仲舒说略同。
现代文：这些与董仲舒说的略同。
English: This is similar to what Dong Zhongshu said.

古文：刘歆以为，梁山，晋望也；崩，崩也。
现代文：刘歆以为梁山，是晋国望祭的地方；山崩是渐渐地崩溃的象征。
English: Liu Yao thought that Liangshan was a place of worship in Jin; the landslide was a symbol of gradual collapse.

古文：古者三代命祀，祭不越望，吉凶祸福，不是过也。
现代文：上古三代祭祀神，祭祀不超过望，吉凶祸福，不会超过这些。
English: The three ancient deities were worshipped for generations, and the sacrifices did not exceed expectations, nor did they exceed good luck, bad luck, misfortune, or fortune.

古文：国主山川，山崩川竭，亡之征也，美恶周必复。
现代文：山川是国家的根本，山崩溃!干涸，是国家灭亡的象征，美和恶的循环必定反复。
English: Mountains and rivers are the foundation of a country. If a mountain collapses and dries up, it is a symbol of the country's demise. The cycle of beauty and evil is bound to repeat itself.

古文：是岁，岁在鹑火，至十七年复在鹑火，栾书、中行偃杀厉公而立悼公。
现代文：造一年岁在鹑火，至十七年又重复在鹑火，乐书、中行偃杀了厉公而立悼公。
English: It was made in a bonfire at the age of one year, and repeated in a bonfire in the seventeenth year. Musicians and middle-ranking officials killed Li Gong and stood up to mourn him.

古文：高后二年正月，武都山崩，杀七百六十人，地震至八月乃止。
现代文：高后二年正月，武都发生山崩，死了七百六十人，地震到八月才停止。
English: In the first month of the second year after graduation, a landslide occurred in Wudu, killing seven hundred and sixty people. The earthquake did not stop until August.

古文：文帝元年四月，齐、楚地山二十九所同日俱大发水，溃出。刘向以为，近水沴土也。
现代文：文帝元年四月，齐、楚两地的山有二十九处同时发大水，洪水涌出，刘向以为这近似水克土。
English: In April of the first year of Emperor Wen's reign, there were 29 places in the mountains of Qi and Chu that were flooded at the same time, and floods poured out. Liu Xiang thought that this was similar to water and soil.

古文：天戒若曰，勿整齐、楚之君，今失制度，将为乱。
现代文：上天像是警戒说，不要盛过齐、楚的君主，今失掉法令礼俗，将要生乱。
English: Heaven is like a warning, saying, "Don't overdo it, Emperor Chu. If you lose your laws and customs now, there will be a riot."

古文：后十六年，帝庶兄齐悼惠王之孙文王则薨，无子，帝分齐地，立悼惠王庶子六人皆为王。
现代文：过了十六年，帝的庶兄齐悼惠王的孙子文王刘则去世，没有儿子，帝分离齐地，立悼惠王庶子六人都为王。
English: Sixteen years later, the emperor's brother-in-law and Hui Wang's grandson, King Wen Liu, died without a son, and the emperor was separated from Hui Wang. All six of Hui Wang's sons became kings.

古文：贾谊、晁错谏，以为违古制，恐为乱。
现代文：贾谊、晁错直言规劝，以为这是违背古代法制礼俗的，恐怕要生乱。
English: Jia Youyi and Zou Youyi's forthright exhortation, considering it to be contrary to the ancient legal system, etiquette and customs, is likely to lead to unrest.

古文：至景帝三年，齐、楚七国起兵百余万，汉皆破之。
现代文：到了景帝三年，齐楚七国起兵百余万，汉把他们都打败了。
English: In the third year of King Jing's reign, the Han dynasty defeated more than a million soldiers from seven countries.

古文：春秋四国同日灾，汉七国同日众山溃，咸被其害，不畏天威之明效也。
现代文：春秋宋、卫、陈、郑四国同曰受灾，汉七国众山同曰溃塌，都受了它的害，这是不听天威的明显效应。
English: The four countries of Spring, Autumn, Song, Wei, Chen and Zheng suffered from the disaster on the same day, and the mountains of the seven countries of Han collapsed on the same day. They were all harmed by it. This is a clear effect of not listening to the will of heaven.

古文：成帝河平三年二月丙戌，犍为柏江山崩，捐江山崩，皆江水，江水逆流坏城，杀十三人，地震积二十一日，百二十四动。
现代文：成帝河三年二月丙戌，犍为柏江两地的山崩塌，捐江的山也崩塌，江水都被壅塞，江水倒流毁坏了城市，死了十三人，地震达二十一天，震动一百二十四次。
English: In February of the third year of the Chengdi River, the mountains on both sides of the Bai River collapsed, and the mountains that fed the river also collapsed. The river water was blocked, and the backwash of the river water destroyed the city. Thirteen people died, the earthquake lasted for 21 days, and there were 124 tremors.

古文：元延三年正月丙寅，蜀郡岷山崩，壅江，江水逆流，三日乃通。
现代文：元延三年正月丙寅日，蜀岷山崩塌，江被堵塞，江水倒流，三日才通流。
English: On the third day of the first month of the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, Mount Shu collapsed, the river was blocked, the river water flowed backwards, and it took three days to flow.

古文：刘向以为，周时岐山崩，三川竭，而幽王亡。
现代文：刘向以为周时岐山崩塌，三!干涸，而幽王灭亡。
English: Liu Xiang thought that Zhou Qishan collapsed, three! dried up, and Yu Wang perished.

古文：岐山者，周所兴也。
现代文：岐山，是周所兴起的地方。
English: Qishan is the place where the Zhou Dynasty arose.

古文：汉家本起于蜀、汉，今所起之地山崩川竭，星孛又及摄提、大角，从参至辰，殆必亡矣。
现代文：汉家本来兴起于蜀汉，而今所兴起的地方山崩塌川干涸，星又长及摄提、大角二星，是从参星出发到辰星的，恐怕要亡国了。
English: The Han Dynasty originally arose in Shuhan, but now the place where it arose, the mountains have collapsed, the rivers have dried up, the stars are long and long, and the two great horns are two stars. If you set out from the star to the star, I am afraid you will lose your country.

古文：其后，三世之嗣，王莽篡位。
现代文：这之后三世就断了嗣位，王莽篡夺了王位。
English: After that, the third generation abdicated and Wang Mang usurped the throne.

古文：传曰： 皇之不极，是谓不建，厥咎眊，厥罚恒阴，厥极弱。
现代文：传上说： 君王如果不中正，就不能建树君王的道德，眼睛就会不明，惩罚就是长久阴暗。就会极端暗弱。
English: According to legend, if a king is not upright, he will not be able to build a king's morality, his eyes will be unclear, and his punishment will be long-term gloom. He will be extremely weak.

古文：时则有射妖，时则有龙蛇之孽，时则有马祸，时则有下人伐上之疴，时则有日月乱行，星辰逆行。 
现代文：有时就有射妖，有时就有龙蛇之孽，有时就有马祸，有时就有下人攻杀君上的祸患，有时就曰月乱行，星辰逆行。 
English: Sometimes there is shooting demons, sometimes there is the evil of dragons and snakes, sometimes there is horse trouble, sometimes there is the evil of people attacking and killing princes, sometimes it is said that the moon is chaotic and the stars are retrograde.

古文： 皇之不极，是谓不建 ，皇，君也。
现代文： 皇之不极，是谓不建 ，皇，就是君王。
English: "Imperial" means "unconstructed," and "emperor" means "king."

古文：极，中；建，立也。
现代文：极，中正的意思；建，树立道德的意思。
English: "Ji" means extreme, "Zhongzheng" means moderate, and "Ji" means to establish morality.

古文：人君貌言视听思心五事皆失，不得其中，则不能立万事，失在眊悖，故其咎眊也。
现代文：做为人君，如果貌言视听思心五事都有过失，就做不到中正，这样就不能曰理万机，其失就在于昏愤不清，这是他眼睛不明的原因。
English: As a human being, if the appearance, speech, sight, hearing, and mind all have faults, it is impossible to do the middle, so it can not be said to be rational. Its loss lies in the confusion, which is the reason why his eyes are unclear.

古文：王者自下承天理物。
现代文：作为君王自下要承奉天道理万事。
English: Monarchs have a divine mandate to rule over all things.

古文：云起于山，而弥于天；天气乱，故其罚常阴也。
现代文：云起于山中，而弥漫在天上；天气动荡不定，这是其罚星常阴的原因。
English: The clouds rise in the mountains and pervade the sky; the weather is unstable, which is the reason for its cloudy skies.

古文：一曰，上失中，则下强盛而蔽君明也。
现代文：一说，君王失了中正，下边强盛而掩蔽了君王的英明。
English: One said, "The king has lost his center, and his strength has overshadowed his wisdom."

古文：《易》曰 亢龙有悔，贵而亡位，高而亡民，贤人在下位而亡辅 ，如此，则君有南面之尊，而亡一人之助，故其极弱也。
现代文：《易》上说： 骄傲自满有悔，身份贵的人会失掉王位，地位高的人要失掉人民，贤人在下位就不能辅佐 ，如果这样，那么君王被得到南面的尊严，而得不到一人的帮助，所以就很微弱了。
English: "Yi" said: "Pride and complacency lead to regret. A person of high status will lose the throne, a person of high status will lose the people, and a person of wisdom cannot assist in a lower position. If this is the case, then the king will be given the dignity of the south, but will not be able to get the help of one person, so it will be very weak.

古文：盛阳动进轻疾。
现代文：盛阳一动就会得小病。
English: Shengyang is running fast.

古文：礼，春而大射，以顺阳气。
现代文：按照礼，春天要祭祀，与群臣射猎，用以理顺阳气。
English: According to the etiquette, in the spring, the heavenly son needs to be sacrificed and perform the shooting ceremony to conform to the yang.

古文：上微弱则下奋动，故有射妖。
现代文：君王微弱而臣下振奋，所以有射妖。
English: The king is weak and his subjects are excited, so there is a shooting demon.

古文：《易》曰 云从龙 ，又曰 龙蛇之蛰，以存身也 。
现代文：《易》上说 云从龙 ，又说 龙蛇有蛰伏的时候，用来保存自身 。
English: "Yi" said that "clouds come from dragons" and that "dragons and snakes are used to preserve themselves when there is a hibernation."

古文：阴气动，故有龙蛇之孽。
现代文：阴气动，就有龙蛇之妖。
English: Yin moves, so there are dragon and snake spells.

古文：于《易》， 乾 为君为马，马任用而强力，君气毁，故有马祸。
现代文：在《易》，《干》象征君和马，马任用而力强，君气毁，就有马祸。
English: In "Yi," "Gan" symbolizes you and the horse. The horse is appointed and strong, and if you lose your temper, there will be horse trouble.

古文：一曰，马多死及为怪。亦是也。
现代文：一说，马死的多与怪有关，就是这个意思。
English: When I say that most horse deaths are related to freaks, that's what I mean.

古文：君乱且弱，人之所叛，天之所去，不有明王之诛，则有篡弑之祸，故有下人伐上之疴。
现代文：为君的昏乱无能，人民的叛乱，上天的疏远，不是有英明君王来诛杀他，就有篡位弑君的祸患，所以有百姓讨伐君王之祸。
English: Because of the prince's confusion and incompetence, the people's rebellion, and the alienation of heaven, if there is not a wise prince to fight and kill him, there will be the evil of usurping the throne and usurping the prince, so there will be the evil of the people fighting and fighting the prince.

古文：凡君道伤者病天气，不言五行沴天，而曰 日月乱行，星辰逆行 者，为若下不敢沴天，犹《春秋》曰 王师败绩于贸戎 ，不言败之者，以自败为文，尊尊之意也。
现代文：大凡君王之道受到损伤就出现异常的天气，不说五行害天，而说 曰月乱行，星辰逆行 这个问题，如若下民不敢轻视天子，就像《春秋》上说的 帝王的军队溃败于贸戎 ，不说败给谁，而是以自败为文，这是维护帝王至尊的意思。
English: If the path of the great king is damaged, abnormal weather will occur. Not to mention the five elements that harm the weather, but to say that the moon is disorderly and the stars are retrograde. This problem, if the people do not dare to despise the Son of Heaven, is like the "Spring and Autumn" saying that the emperor's army was defeated in the trade war. It does not say who was defeated, but it is based on self-defeat. This is the meaning of safeguarding the emperor's supreme dignity.

古文：刘歆皇极传曰，有下体生上之疴。
现代文：刘歆《皇极传》上说有下肢生在背上的怪异。
English: Liu Wei said in "The Legend of the Emperor" that there is a strange phenomenon of the lower limbs growing on the back.

古文：说以为下人伐上，天诛已成，不得复为疴云。
现代文：是说百姓讨伐帝王，这是上天诛伐已定，不得再发生怪异。
English: It is said that the people will fight against the emperor. This has been decreed by heaven, and there must be no more strange occurrences.

古文：皇极之常，阴，刘向以为，《春秋》亡其应。
现代文：帝王统治的准则常阴，刘向以为《春秋》上没有反应。
English: The principle of imperial rule is ever-changing, and Liu Xiang thought that there was no reaction to "Spring and Autumn."

古文：一曰，久阴不雨是也。
现代文：一说，这是久阴不雨的关系。
English: First of all, this is a long-term relationship.

古文：刘歆以为，自属常阴。
现代文：刘歆以为这是自属常阴。
English: Liu Yao thought that this was his own Changyin.

古文：昭帝元平元年四月崩，亡嗣，立昌邑王贺。
现代文：昭帝元平元年四月去世，没有后嗣，立昌邑王刘贺为帝。
English: Zhao Emperor Yuanping died in April of the first year of the year, without an heir, and Liu He, the king of Changyi, became emperor.

古文：贺即位，天阴，昼夜不见日月。
现代文：刘贺即位后，天阴，昼夜不见日月。
English: After Liu He ascended the throne, the sky was overcast, and the sun and moon did not appear day and night.

古文：贺欲出，光禄大夫夏侯胜当车谏曰： 天久阴而不雨，臣下有谋上者，陛下欲何之，贺怒，缚胜以属吏，吏白大将军霍光。
现代文：刘贺想出游，光禄大夫夏侯胜挡住车规劝说： 天久阴不雨，臣下将有谋害皇上的，陛下想到何处去？ 刘贺听此极为愤怒，立即绑缚了夏侯胜并把他交给官吏，吏把这件事告诉了大将军霍光。
English: Liu He wanted to go on a trip, Guanglu doctor Xia Hou Sheng blocked the car and persuaded him: It's been cloudy and rainy for a long time, the vassals will plot to kill the emperor, where does His Majesty want to go? Liu He was extremely angry to hear this, immediately tied up Xia Hou Sheng and handed him over to the officials, the officials told the matter to the general Huo Guang.

古文：光时与车骑将军张安世谋欲废贺。
现代文：霍光当时与车骑将军张安世谋划欲废掉刘贺。
English: At that time, Huo Guang plotted with the cavalry general Zhang Anshi to abolish Liu He.

古文：光让安世，以为泄语，安世实不泄，召问胜。
现代文：霍光谴责安世，以为他泄露了此事，安实未曾泄露，就召问夏侯胜。
English: Huo Guang condemned An Shih, thinking that he had leaked the matter, but An Shih had not leaked it, and summoned Xia Hou Sheng.

古文：胜上《洪范五行传》曰：  皇之不极，厥罚常阴，时则有下人伐上。 
现代文：夏侯胜献上《洪范五行传》说：  皇上治理国家的准则不存在了，它的天罚就是常阴，就经常发生臣下攻杀君王的事。 
English: Xia Hou Sheng presented "The Legend of Hong Fan Wujing" and said: The emperor's principle of governing the country no longer exists, and its divine punishment is always in the shade, so it often happens that his vassals attack and kill the monarch.

古文：不敢察察言，故云臣下有谋。 
现代文：不敢分析辨明，所以说臣下将有阴谋。 
English: They do not dare to analyze and identify, so they say that there will be a conspiracy among their subjects.

古文：光、安世读之，大惊，以此益重经术士。
现代文：霍光、安世读了它，大为震惊，从此更加重视经学术士。
English: Huo Guang and An Shih read it and were greatly shocked. From then on, they paid more attention to the academic degree.

古文：后数日，卒共废贺，此常阴之明效也。
现代文：过了数日终于一起废掉了刘贺，这就是常阴明显的效应。
English: After a few days, Liu He was finally abolished together, which is the obvious effect of Changyin.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 有蜺、蒙、雾。
现代文：京房《易传》上说： 有霓、蒙、雾。
English: Kyobo said in "I Chuan": There are thunderstorms, clouds, and fog.

古文：雾，上下合也。
现代文：雾，即水蒸气遇冷凝结成细微水点上下结合成云烟状。
English: Fog, i.e. water vapour, condenses into fine water droplets when it cools, which then coalesce into clouds of smoke.

古文：蒙，如尘云。
现代文：蒙，曰光不明如尘云。
English: Meng, said the light is unclear, such as dust clouds.

古文：蜺，日旁气也。
现代文：霓，霓虹日光照的气。
English: The neon glow of the sun's rays.

古文：其占曰：后妃有专，蜺再重，赤而专，至冲旱。
现代文：对此进行占卜说：后妃有独断专行的行为，如若霓虹五月再重现，赤虹且专，到十一月就要大旱。
English: The divination said: the empress dowager has arbitrary behavior, for example, if the neon reappears in May, the red rainbow is also exclusive, and there will be a drought in November.

古文：妻不壹顺，黑蜺四背，又曰蜺双出日中。妻以贵高夫，兹谓擅阳，蜺四方，日光不阳，解而温。
现代文：为妻不是诚心诚意恭顺，出现的征兆就是黑色的霓虹布满太阳四周，白色霓虹双双从曰中现出，妻子的高贵高于丈夫，造就是占有了阳气，霓虹照射四方，口光不温暖明亮，至阳气解散始才温暖。
English: For the wife is not sincere and obedient, the signs of appearance are that the black neon is all around the sun, the white neon appears from the middle of the day, the wife's nobility is higher than the husband's, the building is occupied by the yang, the neon is irradiated in all directions, the halo is not warm and bright, and it is only warm when the yang dissolves.

古文：内取兹谓禽，蜺如禽，在日旁。
现代文：人君在内淫乱于骨肉犹如禽兽，霓虹如禽鸟，飞聚在太阳旁。
English: Human beings are like beasts, profligate in their flesh and bones. Neon is like a bird, flying and gathering around the sun.

古文：以尊降妃，兹谓薄嗣，蜺直而塞，六辰乃除，夜星见而赤。
现代文：这都是敬重那些被贬抑的妃子，都没有后嗣，虹霓直仰向天空，这样六辰可除，夜星可见而为赤色。
English: It's all about respecting those downtrodden concubines who have no heirs. The rainbow looks straight up to the sky, so the six hours can be removed, and the night star can be seen and is red.

古文：女不变始，兹谓乘夫，蜺白在日侧，黑蜺果之，气正直。
现代文：女因丈夫而高贵，最终不变，霓虹呈白色出现在曰侧，黑色霓虹进行干扰，气体端正。
English: The woman is noble because of her husband, ultimately unchanged, the white neon appears on the day side, the black neon interferes, and the gas is correct.

古文：妻不顺正，兹谓擅阳，蜺中窥贯而外专。夫妻不严兹谓媟，蜺与日会。
现代文：妻广不和顺端正，就叫作独专阳性，蜕虹中间像管窥一样贯通但外面形成一团：夫妻不互相尊重就是轻侮，出现霓虹与曰相会的现象。
English: If the wife is not in harmony with the husband, it is called a single-specialized masculine, and the neons pass through the middle like a pipe, but form a group outside: if the husband and wife do not respect each other, it is a slight, and there is a phenomenon of neons meeting each other.

古文：妇人擅国兹谓顷，蜺白贯日中，赤蜺四背。
现代文：妇女专权国政就会倾覆邦国，出现霓呈白色贯穿曰中，赤霓布满太阳四周。
English: An all-female government would overturn the state, and there would be a white haze throughout the middle of the day and a red haze all around the sun.

古文：適不答兹谓不次，蜺直在左，蜺交在左。
现代文：嫡妻有承顺之心，不见丈夫的回报就是不正常，霓当临在左边，或贯通在右边。
English: If the legitimate wife has the heart of obedience, it is not normal if she does not see the return of her husband. She should be present on the left side, or penetrate on the right side.

古文：取于不专，兹谓危嗣，蜺抱日两未及。
现代文：聚合在于不专，造就造成继嗣的危险，霓虹抱曰没有赶上。
English: Convergence lies in incompleteness, creating the danger of creating successors, and neon hugging is said to have not caught up.

古文：君淫外兹谓亡，蜺气左日交于外。
现代文：君如淫乱在外就等于外逃，霓气在太阳左边贯通于外。
English: If you fornicate outside, it is tantamount to running away. The miasma penetrates outside on the left side of the sun.

古文：取不达兹谓不知，蜺白夺明而大温，温而雨。
现代文：聚合不通达事理就是没有交好，霓呈白色夺去太阳光辉，天气就温暖，温暖就落雨。
English: The reason why the aggregation does not work is that there is no friendship, the white color of the cocoon takes away the sun's radiance, the weather is warm, and the rain falls when it is warm.

古文：尊卑不别兹谓媟，蜺三出三已，三辰除，除则日出且雨。
现代文：尊卑不分就是不恭，霓三次出现，三次没落，三次出现，从寅时至辰时，曰月星皆隐藏，隐藏就日出而且下雨。
English: Irrespective of superiority or inferiority, it is disrespectful. The dragonfly appears three times, descends three times, and appears three times. From the hour of the tiger to the hour of the hour, the moon and stars are all hidden, and when they are hidden, the sun rises and it rains.

古文：臣私禄及亲，兹谓罔辟，厥异蒙，其蒙先大温，已蒙起，日不见。
现代文：臣下私自给亲友俸禄就破坏丫君王的纲常，就会有异常的昏暗，这种昏暗先是高温，当暗已开始，太阳就不会出现。
English: If a vassal undermines the regimen of a monarch by privately giving a stipend to relatives and friends, there will be abnormal darkness. This darkness is first of all caused by high temperatures. When darkness has already begun, the sun will not appear.

古文：行善不请于上，兹谓作福，蒙一日五起五解。
现代文：做善事不用请示上一级，这就可以富贵寿考，昏暗一天五次兴起，五次消散!
English: You don't have to ask the next level to do good deeds, this can enrich your life, and the gloom will rise five times a day and dissipate five times!

古文：辟不下谋，臣辟异道，兹谓不见，上蒙下雾，风三变而俱解。
现代文：昏暗的君王不与臣下筹划计谋，臣和君王不同一道路，这就是见解不统一。就会出上面昏暗下面有雾的现象。教化三变而都没定型。
English: A dim-witted ruler does not plan and strategize with his vassals, and the vassal and the ruler do not have the same path, that is, the views are not unified. There will be a phenomenon of dim above and foggy below. The three changes of enlightenment are not stereotyped.

古文：立嗣子疑，兹谓动欲，蒙示，日不明。
现代文：立儿子继嗣王位迷惑不定，造就叫做动欲，要出现昏暗而使太阳不明的现象。
English: The son-in-law's succession to the throne is confused and uncertain, creating a phenomenon called "motion sickness," which causes the sun to appear dim and unclear.

古文：德不序，兹谓不聪，蒙，日不明，温而民病。
现代文：德道紊乱就是听觉不灵。要出现太阳昏暗不明的现象，气温而百姓得病。
English: To have moral disorder is to be hard of hearing, to have the sun dim and unclear, the temperature high and the people sick.

古文：德不试，空言禄，兹谓主窳臣夭，蒙起而白。
现代文：德不用，空谈俸禄，就是君主昏暗，用人不按次第，昏暗出现并呈白色。
English: Virtue does not need, empty talk about salary, that is, the monarch is dim, the employer does not follow the order, dimly appears and is white.

古文：君乐逸人，兹谓放，蒙，日青，黑云夹日，左右前后行过日。
现代文：君王喜欢放纵的人，造就是所谓放荡，太阳昏暗呈青色，黑云夹持太阳，前后左右越过太阳。
English: The sun is dim and blue, black clouds hold the sun, and pass around the sun back and forth.

古文：公不任职，兹谓怙禄，蒙三日，又大风五日，蒙不解。
现代文：公卿不称职，造就是所谓白吃俸禄，将会昏暗三日，还会刮大风五日，昏暗仍不解散。
English: The Lord Chancellor is not up to the job, he is a so-called freeloader, it will be dark for three days, there will be a gale for five days, and the darkness will not lift.

古文：利邪以食，兹谓闭上，蒙大起，白云如山行蔽日。
现代文：利于邪气为食，造就是所谓闭塞君王，将会有大昏暗产生，白云如山一样流动并遮蔽日。
English: It is conducive to the evil spirit to feed on, and the creation is the so-called occlusion king. There will be great darkness, and the white cloud will flow like a mountain and cover the sun.

古文：公惧不言道，兹谓闭下，蒙大起，日不见，若雨不雨，至十二日解，而有大云蔽日。
现代文：公卿恐惧不说道德法则，造就是愚弄百姓，将会有大昏暗产生，不见太阳，仿佛下雨又不下雨，过了十二日才散，而仍有大云蔽。
English: The nobles fear not the moral law, for to make it is to make fools of the people. A great darkness will arise, the sun will not be seen, it will be as if it were raining and not raining, and it will take twelve days to disperse, but there will still be a great cloud.

古文：禄生于下，兹谓诬君，蒙微而小雨，已乃大雨。
现代文：俸禄由下面的人把握，造就是欺君，将有小规模昏暗并下小雨，不久又大雨。
English: The salary is grasped by the people below, making is cheating, there will be small-scale dimness and light rain, and soon there will be heavy rain.

古文：下相攘善，兹谓盗明，蒙黄浊。
现代文：下面的人竞相争能，造就是所谓窃取英明，将会出现昏暗黄浊。
English: The people below compete for energy, which is called stealing wisdom, and there will be dimness and jaundice.

古文：下陈功，求于上，兹谓不知，蒙，微而赤，风鸣条，解复蒙。
现代文：臣下上言自己的功劳，有求于上，这是不明智，天空将会微昏而现赤色，风吹树枝发声，散开后又出现昏暗。
English: It is unwise for a vassal to claim credit for his own work. The sky will dim and turn red, the wind will blow the branches into sound, and they will disperse and turn dark again.

古文：下专列，兹谓分威，蒙而日不得明。
现代文：臣下独专刑法，造就是瓜分君王的权势，天空将会昏暗而太阳不得照明。
English: The creation of a vassal autocracy is to divide the power of the monarch. The sky will be dark and the sun will not shine.

古文：大臣厌小臣，兹谓蔽，蒙微，日不明，若解不解，大风发，赤云起而蔽日。
现代文：大臣压制小臣造就是遮蔽，天空将微昏而太阳不明，像是散开又不散开，大风吹起，升起红色的云而蔽曰。
English: If a minister suppresses a minor minister, it is called shading. The sky will be dimmed and the sun will be unclear, as if it is scattered and not scattered, a strong wind will blow, and a red cloud will rise and cover it.

古文：众不恶恶，兹谓闭，蒙，尊卦用事，三日而起，日不见。
现代文：众人不厌恶邪恶造就蔽塞，蒙云，这是《干》《坤》用事，三而起，太阳都看不见。
English: People are not averse to the evil of creating obstruction and clouding. This is the use of "dry" and "kim," and the sun can not be seen from three directions.

古文：漏言亡喜，兹谓下厝用，蒙微，日无光，有雨云，雨不降。
现代文：不听群臣的话，吉庆就消失，这就是下臣无所措置。昏云微弱，太阳无光，天空有雨云，而雨不降。
English: If you don't listen to your vassals, prosperity will disappear. That's because your vassals don't take any measures. The clouds are faint, the sun is not shining, there are rain clouds in the sky, but no rain falls.

古文：废忠惑佞，兹谓亡，蒙，天先清而暴，蒙微而日不明。
现代文：废忠贞被佞臣所惑就要亡国，昏云，天空先是清澈而突然暴风雨来临，昏云微弱而不明。
English: If a loyal subject is deceived by a vassal, the country will be ruined. The sky is clear at first, but suddenly a storm comes. The clouds are faint and unclear.

古文：有逸民，兹谓不明，蒙浊，夺日光。
现代文：有避世隐居的人造就是不英明，天阴混润，夺走了日光。
English: It is unwise to have a man-made retreat, the sky is cloudy, and the sun is taken away.

古文：公不任职，兹谓不绌，蒙白，三辰止，则日青，青而寒，寒必雨。
现代文：公卿不称职，造就是不足，昏云白色，三辰天明为止，停止后太阳为青色，青色天变寒，寒必定下雨。
English: The nobles are incompetent, the buildings are inadequate, the clouds are white, the sun is blue until three o'clock in the morning, after stopping, the sun is blue, the blue sky becomes cold, and the cold must rain.

古文：忠臣进善君不试，兹谓遏，蒙，先小雨，雨已蒙起，微而日不明。
现代文：忠臣进善言，君王不听，造就是所谓阻塞，天空昏暗，先下小雨，雨已停止，天空微暗太阳不明。
English: A loyal subject makes a good suggestion, but the king does not listen. The result is a so-called blockage. The sky is dark, light rain falls first, the rain has stopped, the sky is slightly dark, and the sun is unknown.

古文：惑众在位，兹谓覆国，蒙微而日不明，一温一寒，风扬尘。
现代文：惑乱在位的众人，造就要颠覆国家，昏云微弱而日不明，一暖一寒，大风扬尘。
English: To confuse the people in power is to subvert the country, the clouds are faint and the day is unknown, it is warm and cold, and the wind is blowing dust.

古文：知佞厚之，兹谓庳，蒙甚而温。
现代文：明知奸佞反而厚待，这就是见识短，昏云深厚而气温高。
English: Knowing that the traitor will be treated well, this is short-sightedness, thick clouds and high temperatures.

古文：君臣故弼，兹谓悖，厥灾雨雾，风拔木，乱五谷，已而大雾。
现代文：君王和臣下互相不信任，造就要悖乱。它的灾害是有风有雨有雾，风拔掉树木，毁乱了五谷，随即大雾。
English: Its disasters are wind, rain, and fog. The wind uproots trees and disrupts crops, followed by heavy fog.

古文：庶正蔽恶，兹谓生孽灾，厥异雾。 
现代文：庶正掩盖罪恶，造就要发生妖孽灾害，便有怪异的大雾。 
English: When evil is being covered up, when there is a witchcraft disaster, there is a strange fog.

古文：此皆阴云之类云。
现代文：这都是阴云方面的情况。
English: It's a cloudy situation.

古文：严公十八年 秋，有蜮 。
现代文：严公十八年 秋天，有蜮 。
English: In the autumn of the eighteenth year of Yan Gong, there was a thunderstorm.

古文：刘向以为蜮生南越。
现代文：刘向以为蜮生长在南越。
English: Liu Xiang thought the lettuce was grown in South Vietnam.

古文：越地多妇人，男女同川，淫女为主，乱气所在，故圣人名之曰蜮。
现代文：越地多妇人，男女同在一条河裹，淫乱的妇女为主，是动荡的乱气所生，所以圣人称之为蜮。
English: There are many women in Yueji. Men and women are together in a river, and the women are mainly promiscuous. They are born from the turbulent and chaotic atmosphere. That is why the sages called them baboons.

古文：蜮犹惑也，在水旁，能射人，射人有处，甚者至死。
现代文：蜮可使入迷乱，它生长在水旁，能含沙射人，射到人的要害处，严重的能使人致死。
English: Dragonfly can cause confusion, it grows near water, can contain sand and shoot people, shoot people to the point of harm, serious can cause death.

古文：南方谓之短弧，近射妖，死亡之象也。
现代文：南方称作短弧，近似射妖，是死亡的象征。
English: The south is called the short arc, similar to shooting demons, and is a symbol of death.

古文：时严将取齐之淫女，故蜮至。
现代文：这时严公将要娶齐国的淫女，因此有蜮到来。
English: At this time, Yan Gong was going to marry a prostitute from Qi, so there was a flood coming.

古文：天戒若曰，勿取齐女，将生淫惑篡弑之祸。
现代文：上天像是警戒说，不要娶齐女，否则将会发生淫惑篡弑的灾祸。
English: Heaven is like a warning saying, don't marry the same woman, otherwise the evil of seduction and usurpation will occur.

古文：严不寤，遂取之。
现代文：严公仍不醒悟，于是就娶了齐女。
English: Yan Gong still did not wake up, so he married Qi Niu.

古文：入后淫于二叔，二叔以死，两子见弑，夫人亦诛。
现代文：娶来以后跟管、蔡二叔淫乱，二叔因此而死，两个儿子被弑，夫人也被诛。
English: After getting married, she had an affair with her supervisor, Cai Ershun. As a result, Cai Ershun died, her two sons were arrested, and her husband was also arrested.

古文：刘歆以为，蜮，盛暑所生，非自越来也。
现代文：刘歆以为蜮，是盛暑天所生，不是从南越来的。
English: Liu Yao thought that the grasshopper was born in the heat of the day and did not come from South Vietnam.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 忠臣进善君不试，厥咎国生蜮。 
现代文：京房《易传》上说： 忠臣进善言君王不听，其国就生蜮灾。 
English: Kyofusa said in "Ekiden": If a loyal vassal does not listen to the king's good advice, disaster will befall his country.

古文：史记鲁哀公时，有隼集于陈廷而死，楛矢贯之，石，长尺有咫。
现代文：历史上记载鲁哀公时，有惊鸟聚集于陈国朝廷而死，是楛箭射穿了它，石署，长有一尺八寸。
English: According to historical records, at the time of King Lu Aigong, a frightened bird gathered at the imperial court of the State of Chen and died. It was a crossbow arrow that pierced it. It was made of stone and was one foot eight inches long.

古文：陈闵公使使问仲尼，仲尼曰： 隼之来远矣！
现代文：陈闵公派使者去问仲尼，仲尼说： 鹅乌来的地方很远啊!
English: Chen Yigong sent an envoy to ask Zhong Ni. Zhong Ni said, "The place where the goose came from is very far away!

古文：昔武王克商，通道百蛮，使各以方物来贡，肃慎贡楛矢，石长尺有咫。
现代文：从前武王战胜了商，通道达百蛮，使他们各自拿当地的土产来进贡，肃慎进贡楛箭，石努长一尺八寸。
English: Once upon a time, King Wu defeated the merchants, and there were hundreds of passages, so that they each paid tribute with local produce, and Shushan paid tribute with arrowheads, and the stone was one foot and eight inches long.

古文：先王分异姓以远方职，使毋忘服，故分陈以肃慎矢。 
现代文：先王分不同姓的从远方贡赋，使他们不要忘了臣服，所以把肃慎进贡的楛箭分给陈国。 
English: The previous king divided the tribute from afar among different surnames so that they would not forget to submit, so he divided the arrows of the solemn tribute to Chen Guo.

古文：试求之故府，果得之。
现代文：试着在旧府寻找楛箭，果然找到了。
English: Chen Yigong listened and asked someone to look for it in the warehouse that used to collect tributes from all sides, and indeed found this arrow.

古文：刘向以为，隼近黑祥，贪暴类也；矢贯之，近射妖也；死于廷，国亡表也。
现代文：刘向以为骛鸟近似黑祥，是一种暴戾贪婪的乌；用楛箭射穿了，近似射妖一样；死在朝廷，是国家灭亡的标志。
English: Liu Xiang thought that the stork was similar to the black stork, a violent and greedy bird; it was shot through with a crossbow arrow, similar to shooting a demon; death in the imperial court was a sign of the country's demise.

古文：象陈眊乱，不服事周，而行贪暴，将致远夷之祸，为所灭也。
现代文：象征陈王年老昏乱，不向周朝进贡，却从事贪暴之事，将招致远夷的祸患，被它们所灭。
English: It symbolizes that Chen Wang is old and confused, does not pay tribute to the Zhou Dynasty, but engages in corruption, and will incur the misfortunes of the Far East and be destroyed by them.

古文：是时，中国齐、晋，南夷吴、楚为强，陈交晋不亲，附楚不固，数被二国之祸。
现代文：这时中原齐晋、南夷吴楚最强，陈与晋相交并不亲近，依附楚国也不牢固，数次遭受两国的祸患。
English: At this time, Zhongyuan Qi Jin and Nanyi Wu Chu were the strongest, Chen and Jin were not close to each other, and their attachment to Chu was not strong, and they suffered from the misfortunes of the two countries several times.

古文：后楚有白公之乱，陈乘而侵之，卒为楚所灭。
现代文：后来楚国有白公的叛乱，陈国乘机侵犯，终于被楚国灭亡。
English: Later, Baigong rebelled in the State of Chu, and the State of Chen took advantage of the opportunity to invade, and was finally destroyed by the State of Chu.

古文：史记夏后氏之衰，有二龙止于夏廷，而言 余，褒之二君也 。
现代文：历史上记载夏后氏的衰亡，有两条龙停在夏的朝廷，而且说 我，是裹国的两君王 。
English: History records the decline and fall of the Xiaowu clan. Two dragons stopped at Xia's court and said, "I am the two kings of the country."

古文：夏帝卜杀之，去之，止之，莫吉；卜请其漦而藏之，乃吉。
现代文：夏帝卜卦问是杀了它、驱逐它，还是拘留它，都不吉利；又卜卦将它吐的沫收藏起来，这样就吉利了。
English: Xia Di Bu Gua asked whether it was unlucky to kill it, expel it, or detain it; and Bu Gua collected the foam it vomited, so it was lucky.

古文：于是布币策告之。
现代文：于是奠币礼读策辞而告之。
English: As a result, it was announced that the coin-laying ceremony would be followed by the reading of a speech.

古文：龙亡而漦在，乃椟去之。
现代文：龙逃走而涎沫还在，于是藏在匣中。
English: The dragon fled, but the foam was still there, so it was hidden in the box.

古文：其后夏亡，传椟于殷、周，三代莫发，至厉王末，发而观之，漦流于廷，不可除也。
现代文：这以后夏灭亡，把匣传给殷周，三代都未曾掀开，到厉王末年，掀开观看，沫流到朝廷上，怎么也除不掉。
English: After this, Xia died and passed the box to Yin Zhou, and the three generations did not open it. In the last years of King Li, they opened it to watch, and the foam flowed to the imperial court and could not be removed.

古文：厉王使妇人裸而噪之，漦化为玄鼋，入后宫。
现代文：厉王使妇人裸体喧闸，涎沫变为黑蜥蜴，进入后宫。
English: King Li made the woman strip naked, and the foam turned into a black lizard and entered the harem.

古文：处妾遇之而孕。生子，惧而弃之。
现代文：宫中还是处女的妾遇上便怀了孕，生了一个孩子，她感到害怕就把她给丢了。
English: When his virgin concubine became pregnant and gave birth to a son, he was afraid to lose her.

古文：宣王立，女童谣曰： 檿弧萁服，实亡周国。 
现代文：宣王即位，有女童谣说： 山桑所制的弓和用萁草编织的箭袋，实为周国要灭亡。 
English: When King Xuan came to the throne, there was a girl's ballad that said, "The bow made of mountain mulberry and the quiver woven with rushes are really the reason why Zhou's country is about to perish."

古文：后有夫妇鬻是器者，宣王使执而之。
现代文：后来有夫妇卖这种器物，宣王派人拘捕并羞辱了他们。
English: Later, a couple who sold such items were arrested and humiliated by the king.

古文：既去，见处妾所弃妖子，闻其夜号，哀而收之，遂亡奔褒。
现代文：他们离开后，见到那位还是处女的妾所抛弃的妖子，夜裹听见她的哭声，怜悯她将其收养，于是就逃到褒国。
English: After they left, they saw the demon child abandoned by the still-virgin concubine, heard her cries at night, pitied her for adopting it, and fled to Bao Province.

古文：后褒人有罪，入妖子以赎，是以褒姒，幽王见而爱之，生子伯服。
现代文：后来褒人有罪，就用妖子赎回褒人，造就是褒姒，幽王看见爱上了她，生了儿子伯服。
English: Later, Bao Ren was found guilty, so he used a demon to redeem Bao Ren, and created Bao Ren. When Yu Wang saw Bao Ren, he fell in love with her and had a son, Bao Fu.

古文：王废申后及太子宜咎，而立褒姒、伯服代之。
现代文：王废掉了申后及太子宜咎，而立褒姒、伯服以替废掉的申后、宜咎。
English: The king abolished the post of petitioner and the crown prince, and set up the post of praiseworthy and noble to replace the abolished post of petitioner and the post of petitioner.

古文：废后之父申侯与缯西畎戎共攻杀幽王。
现代文：废后的父亲申侯与缯西畎戎一同攻打并杀了幽王。
English: After the abdication, Shen Hou, the father of the queen, attacked and killed Yu Wang together with Gong Xi and Gong Rong.

古文：《诗》曰： 赫赫宗周，褒姒灭之。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 宗周赫赫势大，被褒姒减了。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: Zong Zhou He He was very powerful, but he was demoted.

古文：刘向以为，夏后季世，周之幽、厉，皆乱逆天，故有龙鼋之怪，近龙蛇孽也。
现代文：刘向以为夏后衰世，周的幽、厉，都惑乱逆天，所以有龙龟之怪，近似龙蛇妖孽。
English: Liu Xiang thought that Xiao Hou would die, and Zhou Yutong and Lihong would be bewildered and rebel against heaven, so there was a dragon and turtle monster, similar to the dragon and snake witchcraft.

古文：漦，血也，一曰沫也。
现代文：牦，即血，一说是沫。
English: The pus, which is blood, is foam.

古文：檿弧，桑弓也。
现代文：滦弧，即桑弓。
English: Arc, that is, the mulberry bow.

古文：萁服，盖以萁草为箭服，近射妖也。
现代文：萁服，大概是萁草做的箭套，近射妖孽。
English: A skeleton costume, probably an arrow cover made of rushes, and a close-range sorceress.

古文：女童谣者，祸将生于女，国以兵寇亡也。
现代文：女童谣是表明灾祸将由女人带来，国家因战争而灭亡了。
English: The nursery rhyme is to indicate that the calamity will be brought about by a woman, and the country will be destroyed by war.

古文：《左氏传》昭公十九年，龙斗于郑时门之外洧渊。
现代文：《左氏传》上记载昭公一卜九年，有龙在郑国时门外洧渊相斗。
English: "The Legend of Zuo" records that in the ninth year of Zhaogong, dragons were fighting outside the gate of Zheng.

古文：刘向以为近龙孽也。
现代文：刘向以为近似龙孽。
English: Liu Xiang thought it was similar to dragon's blood.

古文：郑以小国摄于晋、楚之间，重以强吴、郑当其冲，不能修德，将斗三国，以自危亡。
现代文：郑是小国夹处在晋国和楚国之间，再加上强大的吴国，郑国首当其冲，不能修养德行，将与三国相争斗，这是自取灭亡。
English: Zheng is a small country sandwiched between Jin and Chu, coupled with the powerful Wu, Zheng is the first to bear the brunt, unable to cultivate virtue, and will fight with the three countries, which is self-defeating.

古文：是时，子产任政，内惠于民，外善辞令，以交三国，郑卒亡患，能以德消变之效也。
现代文：这时子产执掌政权，对内宽厚仁爱对待人民，对外使用好的外交辞令，以此与三国相交，郑国终于没有外患，造就是能用德消除变故的效验。
English: At this time, the Zi family held power, treated the people with kindness and benevolence towards the inside, and used good diplomatic words to the outside world, in order to communicate with the three countries. Zheng finally had no foreign diseases, which was the test of being able to use virtue to eliminate misfortune.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 众心不安，厥妖龙斗。 
现代文：京房《易传》上说： 群众心里不安定，出现的妖孽是龙相斗。 
English: Kyobo said in "I Chuan": The masses are mentally unstable, and the witchcraft that emerges is a dragon fight.

古文：惠帝二年正月癸酉旦，有两龙见于兰陵廷东里温陵井中，至乙亥夜去。
现代文：惠帝二年正月癸酉早晨，有两龙出现在兰陵廷束里温陵的井中，到乙亥夜才离去。
English: On the morning of the first day of the second year of Hui Di, two dragons appeared in the well of Lanling Tingzhu Li Wenling, and did not leave until the night of Yihai.

古文：刘向以为，龙贵象而困于庶人井中，象诸侯将有幽执之祸。
现代文：刘向以为龙是富贵的象征却困在平民百姓的井中，造象征诸侯将有被囚禁的灾祸。
English: Liu Xiang thought that the dragon was a symbol of wealth, but it was trapped in the well of the common people. The creation of a symbol of the princes would have the disaster of being imprisoned.

古文：其后吕太后幽杀三赵王，诸吕亦终诛灭。
现代文：这以后吕太后拘禁杀了三个趟王，而最后所有的吕家也被诛灭。
English: After this, Empress Dowager Lyu detained and killed three successive kings, and finally all the Lyu family were exterminated.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 有德遭害，厥妖龙见井中。 
现代文：京房《易传》上说： 有道德的人遭陷害，其妖龙就出现在井中。 
English: Jing Fang said in "I Chuan": When a moral person is framed, his evil dragon appears in the well.

古文：又曰： 行刑暴恶，黑龙从井出。
现代文：又说： 执行刑法暴恶的，黑龙就从井中出来。 
English: He also said, "When the criminal law is brutally enforced, a black dragon will come out of the well."

古文：《左氏传》鲁严公时有内蛇与外蛇斗郑南门中，内蛇死。
现代文：《左氏传》记载鲁严公时城内的蛇与城外的蛇相斗于郑国的城南门，城内的蛇被咬死。
English: "The Legend of Zuo" records that during the reign of Lu Yan, the snakes inside the city fought with the snakes outside the city at the south gate of the city in Zheng, and the snakes inside the city were bitten to death.

古文：刘向以为近蛇孽也。
现代文：刘向以为是近似蛇的妖孽。
English: Liu Xiang thought it was similar to a snake demon.

古文：先是，郑厉公劫相祭仲而逐兄昭公代立。
现代文：这以前郑厉公劫持宰相祭仲赶走兄长昭公而自己即位。
English: Prior to this, Zheng Liguang kidnapped the prime minister, Saizhong, drove away his brother, Zhaokong, and ascended to the throne himself.

古文：后厉公出奔，昭公复入。
现代文：后来厉公逃往国外，昭公回国。
English: Later, Liguang fled abroad, and Zhaogong returned to China.

古文：死，弟子仪代立。
现代文：昭公死后，弟子仪即位。
English: After the death of Shokong, his disciple Yi came to the throne.

古文：厉公自外劫大夫傅瑕，使僇子仪。
现代文：厉公在外劫持大夫傅瑕，派他杀子仪。
English: Rigong abducted Dr. Fu Keh outside and sent him to kill Zi Gang.

古文：此外蛇杀内蛇之象也。
现代文：这是外蛇杀内蛇的象征。
English: This is a symbol of the outer snake killing the inner snake.

古文：蛇死六年，而厉公立。
现代文：蛇死了六年，而厉公即位。
English: The snake died six years later, and Liguo ascended the throne.

古文：严公闻之，问申繻曰： 犹有妖乎？ 
现代文：严公听到造事，问申编说： 还有妖吗? 
English: When Yan Gong heard about this, he asked Shen, "Are there still demons?

古文：对曰： 人之所忌，其气炎以取之，妖由人兴也。
现代文：回答说： 人所以忌讳的，是用他的气焰来索取，妖是由人兴起来的。
English: And he answered, A man reproveth his neighbour, and a devil taketh him up.

古文：人无衅焉，妖不自作。
现代文：人没有征兆，妖不会自己兴起。
English: People don't have signs, and demons don't arise on their own.

古文：人弃常，故有妖。 
现代文：人抛弃了常态，所以才有妖。 
English: People have abandoned normalcy, that's why there are demons.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 立嗣子疑，厥妖蛇居国门斗。 
现代文：京房《易传》上说： 怀疑自己的儿子继嗣，其妖蛇才在国门相斗。 
English: Kyofusa said in "Ekiden": "He who doubts his own son's succession, his demons and snakes only fight each other at the gate of the country."

古文：《左氏传》文公十六年夏，有蛇自泉宫出，入于国，如先君之数。
现代文：《左氏传》记载文公十六年夏天，有蛇从泉宫爬出，进入国中，好像先君的气数。
English: "The Legend of Zuo" records that in the summer of the sixteenth year of King Wen, a snake crawled out of the Spring Palace and entered the country, as if it were the ancestor's spirit.

古文：刘向以为近蛇孽也。
现代文：刘向以为近似蛇妖。
English: Liu Xiang thought it was similar to a snake demon.

古文：泉宫在囿中，公母姜氏尝居之，蛇从之出，象宫将不居也。
现代文：泉宫在苑囿裹边，文公的母亲姜氏曾住过，蛇从裹边出来，象征这宫不能居住了。
English: The spring palace is on the edge of the garden, where Wengong's mother, Jiang, once lived. The snake emerges from the edge, symbolizing that the palace is uninhabitable.

古文：《诗》曰： 维虺维蛇，女子之祥。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 蛇和虺，这是女子吉祥的象征。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "The snake and the stork, this is a woman's auspicious symbol.

古文：又蛇入国，国将有女忧也。
现代文：蛇进入国中，国内将有女人的祸患，就像先君的气数。
English: If a snake enters the country, the country will have the scourge of women, just like the previous ruler.

古文：如先君之数者，公母将薨象也。秋，公母薨。
现代文：是文公母亲将死的征兆。秋天，文公母亲去世。
English: It was a sign that Wengong's mother was about to die. In the autumn, Wengong's mother passed away.

古文：公恶之，乃毁泉台。
现代文：文公非常厌恶蛇，于是毁掉了泉台。
English: Wenguang hated snakes so much that he destroyed the spring.

古文：夫妖孽应行而自见，非见而为害也。
现代文：大凡妖孽是相应人的行为出现的，不是出现就造成灾害的。
English: The great evil of witchcraft is the appearance of the corresponding human behavior, not the appearance of causing disasters.

古文：文不改行循正，共御厥罚，而作非礼，以重其过。
现代文：文公不改正行为遵守正道，不是恭敬地对待蛇的惩罚，而是去做不合规范的事，这样过错就加重了。
English: If the literati and the public do not correct their behavior and keep to the right path, it is not a punishment to treat snakes with respect, but to do things that are not in accordance with the norms, and this will aggravate the fault.

古文：后二年薨，公子遂杀文之二子恶、视，而立宣公。
现代文：过了两年文公去世，公子遂杀了文公的两个儿子恶、视，而立宣公。
English: After two years, Fumiko died, and the prince killed Fumiko's two sons, Kiso and So, and installed Fumiko.

古文：文公夫人大归于齐。
现代文：文公夫人又回到齐国母家。
English: Lady Wengong returned to her mother's home in Qi Province.

古文：武帝太始四年七月，赵有蛇从郭外入，与邑中蛇斗孝文庙下，邑中蛇死。
现代文：武帝太始四年七月，赵国有蛇从城外爬入，与城内蛇相斗在孝文庙内，城内蛇死。
English: In July of Emperor Wu's first four years, Zhao's state-owned snakes crawled in from outside the city and fought with the city's snakes in the Xiaowen Temple. The city's snakes died.

古文：后二年秋，有卫太子事，事自赵人江充起。
现代文：过了两年的秋天，就有卫太子的事发生，事从赵人江充引起。
English: After two years of autumn, there was the matter of Prince Wei, which was caused by Zhao Renjiangchong.

古文：《左氏传》定公十年，宋公子地有白马驷，公嬖向魋欲之，公取而朱其尾鬣以予之。
现代文：《左氏传》上记载定公十年，宋公子地有四匹白马，定公宠爱的向魃想要这些马，定公取来这些马，把尾毛染成红色后送给丫他。
English: "The Legend of Zuo" records that in the tenth year of Ding Gong, there were four white horses in Song Gongzi's land. Ding Gong's beloved Xiang Yao wanted these horses, Ding Gong took these horses, dyed the tail hair red and sent them to him.

古文：地怒，使其徒抶魋而夺之。
现代文：地非常愤怒，派他的党徒鞭打向魃并把马夺了回来。
English: Enraged, he sent his followers to whip the mule and recapture the horse.

古文：魋惧将走，公闭门而泣之，目尽肿。
现代文：向魃害怕便跑了，公为此闭门而哭，眼都哭肿了。
English: Xiang Yao was scared and ran away. He was crying because the door was closed, and his eyes were swollen from crying.

古文：公弟辰谓地曰： 子为君礼，不过出竟，君必止子 。
现代文：公的弟弟辰向地说： 见君怒而逃走，这是为臣的礼，君必定劝阻你。 
English: The prince's younger brother, Tatsu, said to him, "Seeing you fly into a rage and run away, this is the courtesy of a vassal. You will surely dissuade you.

古文：地出奔陈，公弗止。
现代文：地逃到陈国，公不阻止。
English: He fled to Chen Province and the authorities did nothing to stop him.

古文：辰为之请，不听。
现代文：辰为此请求，公不听。
English: The public did not listen to Tatsu's request.

古文：辰曰： 是我廷吾兄也，吾以国人出，君谁与处？ 
现代文：辰说： 是我欺骗了我哥哥，我带领国人外出，您将与谁相处呢? 
English: Tatsu said, "It was I who deceived my brother, I who led our compatriots out. Who will you get along with?

古文：遂与其徒出奔陈。
现代文：于是与徒众逃到陈国。
English: So he fled with his disciples to the land of Chen.

古文：明年，俱入于萧以叛，大为宋患，近马祸也。
现代文：第二年全到宋国的萧地叛国，成为宋国的大患，近似马祸。
English: In the second year, all of them went to the Song Dynasty's Xiaodi to commit treason, which became a serious problem for the Song Dynasty, similar to the horse plague.

古文：史记秦孝公二十一年有马生人，昭王二十年牡马生子而死。
现代文：历史上记载秦孝公二十一年有一马生下一个人，昭王二十年雄马生子而死。
English: History records that in the 21st year of Qin Xiaogong's reign, a horse gave birth to a man, and in the 20th year of Zhao Wang's reign, a stallion gave birth to a son and died.

古文：刘向以为皆马祸也。
现代文：刘向以为这都是马祸。
English: Liu Xiang thought it was a horse accident.

古文：孝公始用商君攻守之法，东侵诸侯，至于昭王，用兵弥烈。
现代文：孝公开始用商君攻守的办法，向东侵略诸侯，到了昭王时候，用兵更加剧烈。
English: Xiaogong began to use merchants to attack and defend, invading the princes to the east. By the time of King Zhao, the use of soldiers was more drastic.

古文：其象将以兵革抗极成功，而还自害也。
现代文：遣象征率兵取得成功，而最终给自己造成祸害。
English: Sending soldiers meant success, but in the end it brought disaster to themselves.

古文：牡马非生类，妄生而死，犹秦恃力强得天下，而还自灭之象也。
现代文：雄马是不能生育的，乱生就要死亡，像秦国依仗自己的强大得天下一样，而最终要自己灭亡的情景。
English: A male horse cannot give birth, and if it is born out of wedlock, it will die, just like the Qin Dynasty, which relied on its own strength to conquer the world, and eventually led to its own demise.

古文：一曰，诸畜生非其类，子孙必有非其姓者，至于始皇，果吕不韦子。
现代文：一说，各种畜生所生养的不是同类的话，子孙必有不是他的姓氏的，至于秦始皇，果然是吕不韦的儿子。
English: First, he said that if all kinds of animals are not born and raised by the same kind, then there must be descendants who do not have his surname. As for Qin Shihuang, he was indeed the son of Lü Buwei.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 方伯分威，厥妖牡马生子。
现代文：京房《易传》上说： 一方诸侯分权，它的妖孽就是雄马生子。
English: Kyobo said in "I Chuan": On the other hand, the separation of powers among the lords, its evil is the birth of a male horse.

古文：亡天子，诸侯相伐，厥妖马生人。 
现代文：灭亡天子，诸侯互相攻伐，它的妖孽就是妖马生人。 
English: The son of heaven perishes, princes fight each other, and its sorceries are monsters, horses, and humans.

古文：文帝十二年，有马生角于吴，角在耳前，上乡。
现代文：文帝十二年，吴国有马生角，角在耳前，向上长。
English: In the twelfth year of Emperor Wen, horses were born with horns in front of their ears, which grew upwards.

古文：右角长三寸，左角长二寸，皆大二寸。
现代文：右角长三寸，左角长二寸，都是二寸粗。
English: The right corner is three inches long, the left corner is two inches long, and both are two inches thick.

古文：刘向以为马不当生角，犹吴不当举兵乡上也。
现代文：刘向以为马不应当长角，就像吴国不应兴兵向上一样。
English: Liu Xiang thought that horses should not have long horns, just as the State of Wu should not raise an army.

古文：是时，吴王濞封有四郡五十余城，内怀骄恣，变见于外，天戒早矣。
现代文：这时，吴王刘濞封地有四郡五十余，心怀骄傲，变节的心已表现出来，上天早有警戒。
English: At this time, there were more than 50 counties in the four counties of the fiefdom of King Liu of Wu. He was proud, and the spirit of defection had already manifested itself. Heaven was on the alert.

古文：王不寤，后卒举兵，诛灭。
现代文：吴王不醒悟，后来终于兴兵，被诛减。
English: King Wu did not wake up, and later finally raised an army and was defeated.

古文：京房《易传》曰。 臣易上，政不顺，厥妖马生角，兹谓贤士不足。 
现代文：京房《易传》上说： 臣轻慢皇帝，政务就不会顺利，出现的妖孽就是马生角，造就是所谓的贤人足。 
English: Kyofang said in "I Chuan": "If a vassal disdains the emperor, the government affairs will not go smoothly. The sorcery that appears is horse horn, and the creation is the so-called wise man's foot."

古文：又曰： 天子亲伐，马生角。 
现代文：又说： 天子亲自讨伐，马就生角。 
English: He also said, "The Son of Heaven will personally go out to fight, and Horse's Horn will come out."

古文：成帝绥和二年二月，大厩马生角，在左耳前，围长各二寸。
现代文：成帝绥和二年二月，大马房的一匹马长出角，在左耳前，围粗各二寸。
English: In February of the second year of Emperor Chengdu's reign, a horse in the large stable grew horns, in front of the left ear, with a circumference of two inches.

古文：是时，王莽为大司马，害上之萌自此始矣。
现代文：这时王莽正当大司马，谋害皇上的念头从此就开始了。
English: At this time, Wang Mang was the grand steward, and the idea of assassinating the emperor began.

古文：哀帝建平二年，定襄牡马生驹，三足，随君饮食，太守以闻，马，国之武用，三足，不任用之象也。
现代文：哀帝建平二年，定襄公有一匹雄马生驹，有三条腿，跟随群马饮食，太守上报此事。马，是国家用来打仗，三条腿，是不能任用的象征。
English: In the second year of Emperor Qianping's reign, Emperor Dingxiang had a three-legged stallion that followed the herd in eating and drinking. The emperor reported the matter to the emperor. Horses are used by the country to fight wars, and three legs are a symbol that cannot be named.

古文：后侍中董贤年二十二为大司马，居上公之位，天下不宗。
现代文：后来侍中董贤年二十二岁，为大司马，居上公的地位，天下人都不信奉崇仰。
English: Later, the twenty-two-year-old attendant, Dong Xian, was the grand steward, holding the status of the highest official, and was revered by the people of the world.

古文：哀帝暴崩，成帝母王太后召弟子新都侯王莽入，收贤印绶，贤恐，自杀，莽因代之，并诛外家丁、傅。
现代文：哀帝突然去世，成帝母王太后召来侄子新都侯王莽，收了董贤的印绶，董贤害怕而自杀，王莽就乘机取代了他，并诛杀外戚丁、傅。
English: Emperor Chengdu's mother, the Empress Dowager Wang Mang, summoned her nephew, the new capital lord Wang Mang, and received Dong Xian's seal. Dong Xian was afraid and committed suicide, and Wang Mang took the opportunity to replace him, and killed his foreign relatives Ding and Fu.

古文：又废哀帝傅皇后，令自杀，发掘帝祖母傅太后、母丁太后陵，更以庶人葬之。
现代文：又废除哀帝傅皇后，令她自杀，挖掘皇帝祖母傅太后、母丁太后的陵墓，换以平民礼来埋葬。
English: He also abolished the Emperor Fu Empress, made her commit suicide, and dug up the mausoleums of the Emperor's grandmother, Empress Fu, and his mother, Empress Ding, replacing them with a commoner's funeral.

古文：辜及至尊，大臣微弱之祸也。
现代文：罪遇连累至尊的人，这是大臣们软弱无能所造成的祸患。
English: It is the malady of feeble ministers that brings down the most exalted.

古文：文公十一年， 败狄于咸 。
现代文：文公十一年， 在鲁国的咸地打败了狄人 。
English: In the eleventh year of King Wen, he defeated the Di people in the salty land of Lu.

古文：《穀梁》、《公羊传》曰，长狄兄弟三人，一者之鲁，一者之齐，一者之晋。
现代文：《谷梁》、《公羊传》上说，长狄兄弟三人，一人到鲁国，一人到齐国，一人到晋国。
English: According to "Gu Liang" and "The Story of the Ram," there were three Chang Di brothers, one went to Lu, one to Qi, and one to Jin.

古文：皆杀之，身横九亩；断其首而载之，眉见于轼。何以书？
现代文：都被杀了，曝尸九亩；砍下他们的头放在车上，眼眉从车前的横木中可以看到。
English: They had all been killed, and their bodies were spread out over nine acres; their heads had been cut off and placed on the truck, their eyebrows visible through the crossbeam in front of the truck.

古文：记异也。
现代文：为什么这样记载呢?
English: Why is it recorded this way?

古文：刘向以为，是时周室衰微，三国为大，可责者也。
现代文：所记不同而已。刘向认为这时周室衰微，鲁、齐、晋三国最强大，这是应当责备的。
English: Liu Xiang thought it was reprehensible that at this time, Zhou was in decline, while Lu, Qi, and Jin were the most powerful of the three states.

古文：天戒若曰，不行礼义，大为夷狄之行，将致危亡。
现代文：上天像是警戒说，这种不合理义的行为，超过了夷狄之行，将会导致国家的危亡。
English: Heaven seemed to warn that such an unreasonable act, more than the actions of the heathen, would lead to the peril of the country.

古文：其后三国皆有篡弑之祸，近下人伐上之疴也。
现代文：此后，三国都有篡位杀君的祸患，这近似下人伐上的怪异。
English: Since then, all three countries have suffered from the scourge of usurpation, which is similar to the strange phenomenon of subjugation.

古文：刘歆以为人变，属黄样。
现代文：刘歆以为这是人的变化，有吉有凶。
English: Liu Yao thought that this was a change in people, with both good and bad sides.

古文：一曰，属裸虫之孽。
现代文：一说，这是属于无足爬虫的妖孽。
English: One said it was the spell of a legless reptile.

古文：一曰，天地之性人为贵，凡人为变，皆属皇极下人伐上之疴云。
现代文：又一说，天地间的特性人是宝贵的，凡是人为的变化，都属于皇极下人伐上的怪异。
English: Another said that the characteristics of people in heaven and earth are precious, and all man-made changes belong to the strangeness of human beings.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 君暴乱，疾有道，厥妖长狄入国。 
现代文：京房《易传》上说： 君主暴乱，憎恨有道的，出现的妖异是长狄入国。 
English: Jing Fang said in "Easy Biography": Monarchs are rebellious, hatred is virtuous, and the monster that appears is Chang Di's entry into the country.

古文：又曰： 丰其屋，下独苦。长狄生，世主虏。 
现代文：又说： 把自己的屋子弄得豪华，下面的百姓独苦，这样就出现长狄，国主受掳。 
English: He also said: "Make your own house luxurious, and the people below will only suffer. In this way, there will be long suffering, and the lord of the country will be captured."

古文：史记秦始皇帝二十六年，有大人长五丈，足履六尺，皆夷狄服，凡十二人，见于监洮。
现代文：历史上记载秦始帝二十六年，有巨人高五丈，穿的鞋有六尺长，都穿夷狄衣服，共十二人，出现在临洮县。
English: According to historical records, in the 26th year of the reign of Emperor Qin Shihuang, a giant five meters tall, wearing shoes six feet long, and dressed in barbarian clothes, a total of 12 people, appeared in Linyi County.

古文：天戒若曰，勿大为夷狄之行，将受其祸。
现代文：上天像是警戒说，不要大肆从事夷狄的行为，否则将要受到它的祸患。
English: Heaven is like a warning, saying, "Don't indulge in the behavior of the heathen, or you will suffer its calamity."

古文：是岁，始皇初并六国，反喜以为瑞，销天下兵器，作金人十二以象之。
现代文：这一年始皇刚吞并了六国，反而高兴地以为是吉祥的征兆，销毁天下兵器，作十二金人以象征吉祥。
English: In this year, the first emperor had just annexed six countries, but happily thought it was an auspicious sign, destroyed the world's weapons, and made twelve gold people to symbolize good luck.

古文：遂自贤圣，燔《诗》、《书》，坑儒士；奢淫暴虐，务欲广地；南戍五岭，北筑长城，以备胡、越；堑山填谷，西起临洮，东至辽东，径数千里。
现代文：从此就白以为圣贤，焚烧《诗》《书》，坑埋儒士；奢侈暴虐，以扩大土地为要务；南面派兵驻守五岭，北筑长城，以防胡越，堑山填谷，西起临洮，束至辽东，径直数千里。
English: From then on, they thought that they were saints and burned "Poems" and "Books" and buried Confucianists; they were extravagant and tyrannical, with the expansion of land as the most important task; they stationed soldiers in the south to guard the Five Mountains, built the Great Wall in the north to prevent Hu Yue, filled valleys in Lushan, started from Linfen in the west, and stretched to Liaodong, thousands of miles in length.

古文：故大人见于临洮，明祸乱之起。
现代文：所以巨人出现在临洮，说明祸乱将要发生了。
English: So the appearance of the giant in Linyi indicates that the calamity is about to happen.

古文：后十四年而秦亡，亡自戍卒陈胜发。
现代文：遇了十四年秦国灭亡，亡在戍卒陈胜的兴起。
English: Fourteen years have passed since the fall of Qin and the rise of Chen Sheng.

古文：史记魏襄王十三年，魏有女子化为丈夫。
现代文：历史上记载魏襄王十三年，魏国有一女子变化为男人。
English: According to historical records, in the 13th year of the reign of King Xiang of Wei, a woman in Wei changed into a man.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 女子化为丈夫，兹谓阴昌，贱人为王；丈夫化为女子，兹谓阴胜，厥咎亡。 
现代文：京房《易传》上说： 女子变化为男人，这就是阴昌盛，贱人可以为王；男人变为女人，造就是阴过盛，它的惩罚就是死亡。 
English: Jing Fang said in "I Chuan" that: A woman changes into a man, this is Yin Chang Sheng, a hussy can be a king; a man changes into a woman, creation is Yin over Sheng, and its punishment is death.

古文：一曰，男化为女，宫刑滥也；女化为男，妇政行也。
现代文：一说，男人变为女人，这是宫刑太滥；女人变为男人，是妇政实行的原因。
English: One said that when a man turns into a woman, it is too much of a palace punishment; when a woman turns into a man, it is the reason for the implementation of women's rights.

古文：哀帝建平中，豫章有男子化为女子，嫁为人妇，生一子，长安陈凤言此阳变为阴，将亡继嗣，自相生之象。
现代文：哀帝建平年间，豫章有一男子变为女子，出嫁为人妇，生一儿子。长安陈凤说这是阳变为阴，将没有继嗣，这是自己相互生育的象征。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jianping, a man in Yuzhang became a woman, married a woman, and had a son. Chang'an Chen Feng said that this was the sun turning into the shade, and that there would be no heir. This was a symbol of their mutual birth.

古文：一曰，嫁为人妇生一子者，将复一世乃绝。
现代文：一说，出嫁为人妇生一子的，衹能再传一世。
English: One said, "If you are married and have a child, you can pass it on for another lifetime."

古文：哀帝建平四年四月，山阳方与女子田无啬生子。
现代文：哀帝建平四年四月，山阳的方与县有一女子田无啬生一子。
English: In April of the fourth year of Emperor Jianping's reign, a woman named Tian Muxi gave birth to a son in Sanyang's Fang County.

古文：先未生二月，兒啼腹中，乃生，不举，葬之陌上，三日，人过闻啼声，母掘收养。
现代文：在生前两个月，子在腹中啼哭，到生下来，没有活，把他葬在田间小道，三天后，人经过听到哭声，母又挖掘出来收养。
English: In the first two months of life, the son cried in his stomach. When he was born, he was not alive and was buried in a field path. Three days later, people heard his cries and his mother dug him up again to adopt him.

古文：平帝元始元年二月，朔方广牧女子赵春病死，敛棺积六日，出在棺外，自言见失死父，曰： 年二十七，不当死。 
现代文：平帝元始元年二月，朔方的广牧县有一女子赵春病死，入殓已过六天，她出现在棺材外，白说看见丈夫死了的父亲，说： 我二十七岁，不应当死。 
English: In February of the first year of the Pingdi era, a woman, Zhao Chun, died of illness in Guangmu County, Shuofang. Six days after she was buried, she appeared outside the coffin, saying that she saw her husband's dead father and said: I am twenty-seven years old, I should not die.

古文：太守谭以闻。
现代文：太守谭上报此事。
English: Governor Tan reported the matter.

古文：京房《易传》曰：  干父之蛊，有子，考亡咎 。
现代文：京房《易传》上说：  子能纠正父亲的过错，这才是真正的儿子，所以父亲死后不追究罪过。
English: Kyofang said in "I Chuan": A son can correct his father's mistakes, this is the true son, so the father will not be prosecuted after his death.

古文：子三年不改父道，思慕不皇，亦重见先人之非，不则为私，厥妖人死复生。 
现代文：儿子三年不改变父亲的行为，如衹思慕而无所变易，这等于重现先人的罪过，这不仅是为私，而是妖人死而复生。 
English: If a son does not change his father's behavior for three years, if he yearns and yearns and nothing changes, this is tantamount to recreating the sins of the ancestors. This is not only for me, but for the resurrection of the dead.

古文：一曰，至阴为阳，下人为上。
现代文：一说，阴到极点就变为阳，在下位的人也可变为上位。
English: It is said that when yin reaches its peak, it turns into yang, and those who are lower can also become higher.

古文：六月，长安女子有生兒，两头异颈面相乡，四臂共匈俱前乡，上有目长二寸所。
现代文：六月，长安有一女子生了儿子，两个头两个颈，脸面向着一个方向，四臂共同长在胸部都向着前方，屁股上长着两寸长的眼睛。
English: In June, a woman in Chang'an gave birth to a son with two heads and two necks, his face facing the same direction, his four arms growing together in front of his chest, and two-inch-long eyes on his buttocks.

古文：京房《易传》曰：  睽孤，见豕负涂 ，厥妖人生两头。
现代文：京房《易传》上说：  形状怪异，出现猪背负泥土，出现的妖异是人生两个头。
English: Jing Fang said in "Easy Biography": The shape is strange, there is a pig carrying dirt on its back, and the monster that appears is the two heads of life.

古文：下相攘善，妖亦同。
现代文：下面的相排斥善良，出现的妖异也如此。
English: The lower phase repels the good, and so does the appearance of the evil.

古文：人若六畜首目在下，兹谓亡上，正将变更。
现代文：人如果像六畜，头和眼睛在下，为上的将要灭亡，正要易人。
English: If a man be like six beasts, having his head and his eyes on the bottom, but his head on the top, he will come to his end, but he will be changed.

古文：凡妖之作，以谴失正，各象其类。
现代文：大凡妖孽的发生，是谴责失掉正教，各象征着它的一类。
English: The occurrence of the Great Plague is condemned as the loss of Orthodoxy, each symbolizing a type of it.

古文：二首，下不壹也；足多，所任邪也；足少，下不胜任，或不任下也。
现代文：两个头，下面就不能专一；足多，表示所做的事就不正；足少，表示下面的人就不称职，或者不使用下面的人。
English: Two heads, the lower one cannot be single-minded; too many feet, indicating that what has been done is improper; too few feet, indicating that the person below is incompetent, or does not use the person below.

古文：凡下体生于上，不敬也；上体生于下，媟渎也；生非其类，淫乱也；人生而大，上速成也；生而能言，好虚也。
现代文：大凡下体生在上面，这是不敬；上体生在下面，这是轻慢；生的不是本类，这是淫乱造成的；人生下来就大，这是迅速成长；生下来就会说话，这是好务虚。
English: When the lower body is born above, it is irreverent; when the upper body is born below, it is contemptuous; when it is born out of its own kind, it is the result of sexual immorality; when it is born large, it grows rapidly; when it is born able to speak, it is virtuous.

古文：群妖推此类，不改乃成凶也。 
现代文：群妖以此类推，如果不改就会不吉利。 
English: If you don't change it, it will be unlucky.

古文：景帝二年九月，胶东下密人年七十余，生角，角有毛。
现代文：景帝二年九月，胶束下密一位七十多岁的人，头上生角，角上有毛。
English: In September of the second year of King Jing's reign, a 70-plus-year-old man with horns on his head and hair on his horns was found under a micellar bunch.

古文：时胶东、胶西、济南、齐四王有举兵反谋，谋由吴王濞起，连楚、赵，凡七国。
现代文：当时，胶东、胶西、济南、齐四王有兴兵造的阴谋。阴谋是吴王刘濞发起的，串连了楚、趟，共七国。
English: At that time, the four kings of Jiaodong, Jiaoxi, Jinan and Qi conspired to build up their armies. The conspiracy was initiated by the king of Wu, Liu Bei, and involved Chu and Wei, a total of seven countries.

古文：下密，县居四齐之中；角，兵象，上乡者也；老人，吴王象也。
现代文：下密，县居四齐中间；生角，是兴兵造的象征，方向是对帝王的；老人，是象征吴王；年七十，是象征七国。
English: Xiaomi, the county seat, is in the middle of the four counties; the horn of life, is a symbol of military construction, the direction is towards the emperor; the old man, is a symbol of King Wu; 70 years old, is a symbol of the seven countries.

古文：年七十，七国象也。天戒若曰，人不当生角，犹诸侯不当举兵以乡京师也；祸从老人生，七国俱败云。
现代文：上天警戒好像是说：人不应当生角，就像诸侯不应兴兵向着京师一样；祸从老人生，七国都会失败的。
English: Heaven's warning seems to say: people should not make a fuss, just as the princes should not raise an army against the Beijing division; the seven countries will fail because of the old life.

古文：诸侯不寤。明年，吴王先起，诸侯从之，七国俱灭。
现代文：诸侯并不醒悟，过了一年，吴王率先起兵，诸侯响应，七国都灭亡了。
English: The lords did not wake up. A year later, King Wu took the lead in raising an army, the lords responded, and the seven kingdoms were destroyed.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 冢宰专政，厥妖人生角。 
现代文：京房《易传》上说： 冢宰独揽政权，出现的妖孽就是人生角。 
English: Kyofusa said in "Ekiden" that: "Kozai monopolized the power, and the evil that emerged was the corner of life.

古文：成帝建始三年十月丁未，京师相惊，言大水至。
现代文：成帝建始三年十月丁未，京师的人们相互惊恐，说大水要来了。
English: In October of the third year after the founding of the Qing Dynasty, the people of Beijing were terrified of each other, saying that the flood was coming.

古文：渭水上小女陈持弓年九岁，走入横城门，入未央宫尚方掖门，殿门门卫户者莫见，至句盾禁中而觉得。
现代文：渭水的质上有,女陈持弓年九岁，走进横城门，又入未央宫尚方掖门，殿门守门的警卫都未看见，直到少府办公的地方才被发现。
English: According to the quality of the water, the nine-year-old woman Chen, holding a bow, walked into the side gate, and then entered the Shangfang gate of the Weiyang Palace. The guards guarding the gate did not see her, and she was not discovered until she was in the office of the shofu.

古文：民以水相惊者，阴气盛也。
现代文：百姓因大水将至相互惊恐造件事，说明阴气强盛。
English: Due to the heavy water, the people will be scared of each other and create incidents, indicating that the gloomy atmosphere is strong.

古文：小女而入宫殿中者，下人将因女宠而居有宫室之象也。
现代文：小女进入宫殿这件事，足下等人将因有受宠爱的女子而居宫室的象征。
English: The little maiden's entrance into the palace will be seen by those below as a symbol of the palace chamber because of the presence of the favored maiden.

古文：名曰持弓，有似周家檿孤之祥。
现代文：她名叫持弓，就像周家亡于餍弧的征兆。
English: Her name is "Bow-holding," just like the sign of Zhou family's death in the bow and arrow.

古文：《易》曰： 弧矢之利，以威天下。 
现代文：《易经》上说： 弓箭的锐利，可以使天下敬畏。 
English: "I Ching" said: "The sharpness of the bow and arrow can make the world fear.

古文：是时，帝母王太后弟凤始为上将，秉国政，天知其后将威天下而入宫室，故象先见也。
现代文：这时皇帝母亲王太后的弟弟王凤刚为上将，掌秉国政，上天知道造以后将要威震天下而入宫室，所以征兆先出现。
English: At this time, Wang Fenggang, the younger brother of the emperor's mother, the empress dowager, was a general and in charge of state affairs. Heaven knows that after he was created, he would enter the imperial palace and shake the world, so the signs appeared first.

古文：其后，王氏兄弟父子五侯秉权，至莽卒篡天下，盖陈氏之后云。
现代文：这以后，王氏兄弟父子成为五侯执掌大权，直到王莽篡夺天下为止，这都是陈持弓以后的事。
English: After this, the Wang brothers, father and son, became the five princes to hold power, until Wang Mang usurped the world. This was all after Chen held the bow.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 妖言动众，兹谓不信，路将亡人，司马死。 
现代文：京房《易传》上说： 妖言蛊惑大众，这是没有诚信，路上将有死人，司马官将亡。 
English: Kyobo said in "Ekiden": "It is not honest to deceive the public with magical sayings. There will be dead people on the road, and the steward will die."

古文：成帝绥和二年八月庚申，郑通里男子王褒，衣绛衣小冠，带剑入北司马门殿东门，上前殿，入非常室中，解帷组结佩之，招前殿署长业等曰： 天帝令我居此。 
现代文：成帝绥和二年八月庚申，郑县通里有一男子王裹，身穿红衣头戴小帽，佩带宝剑进入北司马门又入殿的束门，上前殿，进入非常室中，解下系帷幔的绶带佩在身上，招呼前殿署长业等说： 天帝让我居住在此处。 
English: At the enthronement of Emperor Cheng and in August of the second year of the reign of Emperor Goshen, there was a man named Wang Wai in Tongli, Zheng County. He was dressed in a red robe and wore a small cap. He entered the North Sima Gate and the entrance gate of the temple with a sword. He went up to the front hall and entered the emergency room. He took off the umbilical cord attached to the curtain and put it on his body. He greeted the director of the front hall and said, "God let me live here."

古文：业等收缚考问，褒故公车大谁卒，病狂易，不自知入宫状，下狱死。
现代文：业等人将他拘捕捆绑起来进行拷打审问，王裹足前公车大谁卒，因病而变为精神不止常，不知自己闯进宫中，被关进大狱判死刑。
English: Ye and others arrested and tied him up for torture and interrogation. Wang wrapped his feet in the front of the bus, and became mentally unstable due to illness. He did not know that he had broken into the palace, and was sentenced to death in prison.

古文：是时，王莽为大司马，哀帝即位，莽乞骸骨就第，天知其必不退，故因是而见象也。
现代文：这时王莽为大司马，哀帝即位时，王莽请求退休还乡，仁天明知他是不会退休的，所以因此而显现征兆。
English: At this time, Wang Mang was the chief steed. When Emperor Ming came to the throne, Wang Mang asked to retire and return to his hometown. Rintian knew that he would not retire, so there were signs.

古文：姓名章服甚明，径上前殿路寝，入室取组而佩之，称天帝命，然时人莫察。
现代文：从姓名章服来看就很明白了，径直到前殿天子的正堂，进入室内就取绶带佩在身上，自称天帝的命令，然而当时的人并没省察此事。
English: It is clear from the names, insignia, and clothing. They walked all the way to the main hall of the Anterior Hall of Heavenly Sons, and when they entered the room, they took the umbilical cord and put it on their bodies, claiming to be the order of the Heavenly Emperor. However, the people at that time did not reflect on this matter.

古文：后莽就国，天之冤之，哀帝征莽还京师。
现代文：后来王莽执掌国政，天下人认为王褒冤屈，哀帝又征召王莽回还京师。
English: Later, Wang Mang presided over the national politics, and people around the world believed that Wang had redressed the grievances, and the emperor called Wang Mang back to Beijing.

古文：明年，帝崩，莽复为大司马，因是而篡国。
现代文：第二年哀帝死，王莽又为大司马，并由此而篡夺国位。
English: The following year, Emperor Miao died, and Wang Mang became the grand steward again, thereby usurping the throne.

古文：哀帝建平四年正月，民惊走，持稿或一枚，传相付与，曰行诏筹。
现代文：哀帝建平四年正月，有百姓受惊逃走，手持一枚麻杆或禾杆，相互传诉转告，说皇帝要运行诏筹。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of Emperor Jianping's reign, some people panicked and ran away, holding a hemp pole or a straw pole, and told each other that the emperor wanted to carry out the imperial edict.

古文：道中相过逢多至千数，或被发徒践，或夜折关，或逾墙入，或乘车骑奔驰，以置驿传行，经历郡国二十六，至京师。
现代文：道路上相遇的人多至数千，有的披着发赤着脚，有的夜里拆毁关口，有的逾墙而入，有的乘车骑马奔驰，靠设置驿站传行，经历郡国二十六个，才到了京师。
English: As many as thousands of people met on the road, some of them barefoot with their hair in a ponytail, some of them tearing down the gate at night, some of them breaking through the wall, some of them riding in a horse-drawn carriage, passing through 26 counties by setting up a post station, and finally arriving in Beijing.

古文：其夏，京师郡国民聚会里巷阡陌，设张博具，歌舞祠西王母。
现代文：这一年夏天，京师郡国民众聚会里巷阡陌，摆设开展博戏的器具，唱歌跳舞祭祠西王母。
English: In the summer of that year, the people of Jingshi County gathered in the alley, decorated with musical instruments, and sang and danced at the West Wangmu Shrine.

古文：又传书曰： 母告百姓，佩此书者不死。
现代文：还有传书上说： 西王母告百姓，佩带此书的人可以不死。
English: There is also a handwritten message saying: "The Queen of the West told the people that those who wear this book can not die."

古文：不信我言，视门枢下，当有白发。 
现代文：如不相信我说的，可看门枢下面，当有白发。 
English: If you don't believe me, look under the latch for grey hair.

古文：至秋止。
现代文：此事到了秋天才停止。
English: The affair only came to a halt in the autumn.

古文：是时，帝祖母傅太后骄，与政事，故杜鄴对曰： 《春秋》灾异，以指象为言语。
现代文：这时皇帝的祖母傅太后骄横，干预政事，因而杜邺对答皇上说： 《春秋》上说的异常灾害。
English: At this time, the emperor's grandmother, the Empress Dowager Fu, became arrogant and interfered in political affairs, so Du Juan said to the emperor: "The unusual disasters mentioned in Spring and Autumn."

古文：筹，所以纪数。
现代文：是根据现象说的。
English: It's based on a phenomenon.

古文：民，阴，水类也。
现代文：筹算，是用来记载数目的，庶民，属于阴陆水类。
English: The calculation is used to record the number of ordinary people, and belongs to the category of surface water.

古文：水以东流为顺走，而西行，反类逆上。
现代文：水向东流是顺流，如果向西流，这是违反了常类逆上的象征。
English: If the water flows to the east, it is a downstream flow. If it flows to the west, it is a symbol of a violation of the normal type of upstream flow.

古文：象数度放溢，妄以相予，违忤民心之应也。
现代文：数次放逐溢出的现象，还妄自认为相互赞许，其实是违背民心的应验。
English: The phenomenon of several expulsions overflowing, and the delusion of mutual approval, is actually a fulfillment contrary to the people's will.

古文：西王母，妇人之称。
现代文：西王母，是妇人的称呼。
English: The Queen of the West is a woman's title.

古文：博弈，男子之事。
现代文：下棋，是男广的事。
English: Playing chess is a man's game.

古文：于街巷阡陌，明离内，与疆外。
现代文：居住在街巷阡陌的人，显明离于阑门，预防外疆。
English: People who live in the streets and alleys of Shimo are clearly separated from the gate, preventing the outside world.

古文：临事盘乐。炕阳之意。
现代文：临事祇图安乐，缺乏恩泽之心。
English: The adjutant wants to be happy, but lacks a grateful heart.

古文：白发，衰年之象，体尊性弱，难理易乱。
现代文：头发白了，这是衰老的象征，身体尊贵，性情软弱，不易治理容易生乱。
English: Gray hair, which is a symbol of aging, dignified body, weak temperament, difficult to manage and prone to disorder.

古文：门，人之所由；枢，其要也。
现代文：门，是供人来往的，枢，是门的要害之处。
English: The door is for people to come and go, and the pivot is the key to the door.

古文：居人之所由，制持其要也。其明甚著。
现代文：居住在人所经由的地方，是掌握了他的要害了，这道理是很明显的。
English: It is evident that he who dwells in a place through which a man passes is master of his fate.

古文：今外家丁、傅并侍帷幄，布于列位，有罪恶者不坐辜罚，亡功能者毕受官爵。
现代文：现今，外戚丁家、傅家一并侍奉在宫室，分布在列卿的位置，有罪恶的人不获罪惩处，没有功劳和能力的却终生享受宫爵。
English: Today, the Ding family and the Fu family, both maternal relatives, serve in the palace together, and are distributed in the position of lords and queens. People who commit crimes are not punished, but without merit and ability, they enjoy the title of prince for life.

古文：皇甫、三桓，诗人所刺，《春秋》所讥，亡以甚此。
现代文：皇甫、三桓，受到诗人的讽刺，《春秋》的讥笑，没有比这更突出的了。
English: The emperors and the three kings were satirized by poets, and the mockery of "Spring and Autumn" is no more prominent than this.

古文：指象昭昭，以觉圣朝，奈何不应！ 
现代文：所指的象征极为明显，用来使圣朝省悟，奈何没有反应! 
English: The symbol referred to is extremely obvious, used to make the Holy See reflect, but there is no reaction!

古文：后哀帝崩，成帝母王太后临朝，王莽为大司马，诛灭丁、傅。
现代文：后来哀帝去世，成帝的母亲王太后当朝处理国事，王莽为大司马，诛灭了丁、傅。
English: Later, Emperor Ai died, Emperor Chengdi's mother, Empress Dowager Wang, was in charge of state affairs, and Wang Mang was the chief steward, eliminating Ding and Fu.

古文：一曰丁、傅所乱者小，此异乃王太后、莽之应云。
现代文：一说丁、傅所乱是小事，这种变异乃是王太后、王莽的应验。
English: It is said that the chaos caused by Ding and Fu is a trivial matter, and this variation is the fulfillment of the empress dowager and Wang Mang.

