古文：皇甫诞，字玄虑，安定乌氏人也。
现代文：○皇甫诞皇甫诞字玄虑，是安定乌氏人。
English: ○The Emperor's BirthdayThe Emperor's Birthday character "玄虑" is a member of the Stable Wu clan.

古文：祖和，魏胶州刺史。
现代文：他的祖父皇甫和，是西魏的胶州刺史。
English: His grandfather, Emperor Fuhe, was the Jiaozhou chief of the Western Wei Dynasty.

古文：父璠，周隋州刺史。
现代文：父亲皇甫王番，任北周隋州刺史。
English: His father, Emperor Fuwangban, was appointed as the Northern Zhou and Suizhou Provincial Historian.

古文：诞少刚毅，有器局。
现代文：皇甫诞年少时，禀性刚毅，有器度。
English: When the Imperial Father was young, he was stubborn and strong-willed.

古文：周毕王引为仓曹参军。
现代文：北周毕王召引他作仓曹参军。
English: The Northern Zhou Bi King summoned him to join the army as a Cang Cao.

古文：高祖受禅，为兵部侍郎。
现代文：高祖文帝即位以后，皇甫诞作了兵部侍郎。
English: After Emperor Gaozowen ascended the throne, the emperor's father-in-law became a military aide.

古文：数年，出为鲁州长史。
现代文：几年后，出京城作鲁州长史。
English: A few years later, he went to Beijing to write a history of the governorship of Lu.

古文：开皇中，复入为比部、刑部二曹侍郎，俱有能名。
现代文：开皇年间，又回到朝中作比部、刑部侍郎，都有贤能的名声。
English: During the Emperor's reign, he returned to the court to serve as Hibu and Gyobu, both of which had a reputation for virtue.

古文：迁治书侍御史，朝臣无不肃惮。
现代文：后调任治书侍御史，朝臣无不对他恭敬而又畏惧。
English: Later, he was transferred to the post of chief secretary to the Emperor, and courtiers were both respectful and afraid of him.

古文：上以百姓多流亡，令诞为河南道大使以检括之。
现代文：高祖因为百姓流亡很多，派皇甫诞任河南道大使，以约束流民，使他们遵守法度。
English: Because there were many people in exile, Gaozu sent Emperor Fu Zeng to be the ambassador of Henan Province to restrain the exiles and make them abide by the law.

古文：及还，奏事称旨，上甚悦，令判大理少卿。
现代文：到返朝后，所奏之事符合高祖的旨意，高祖很高兴，让他兼任大理寺少卿。
English: After returning to the Imperial Court, what he played was in accordance with Gaozu's wishes. Gaozu was so pleased that he made him concurrently the junior chief priest of Dali Temple.

古文：明年，迁尚书右丞，俄以母忧去职。
现代文：第二年，升任尚书右丞。不久，因母亲去世而辞职。
English: The following year, he was promoted to the post of Shoshuu-jo. Soon after, he resigned due to the death of his mother.

古文：未期，起令视事。
现代文：丧期未满，又奉命到职上任。
English: Less than a year later, the imperial court asked him to resume his duties.

古文：寻转尚书左丞。
现代文：不久，转任尚书左丞。
English: Soon, he was transferred to the post of Shoshu-zojo.

古文：时汉王谅为并州总管，朝廷盛选僚佐，前后长史、司马，皆一时名士。
现代文：当时，汉王杨谅为并州总管，朝廷广泛选拔人才当他的辅佐，前后任长史、司马的，都是当时的名士。
English: At that time, the Han king Yang Peng was the chief administrator of the unified state, and the imperial court extensively selected talents to be his assistant. Those who served as Changshi and Sima before and after were all famous people at that time.

古文：上以诞公方著称，拜并州总管司马，总府政事，一以谘之，谅甚敬焉。
现代文：高祖因皇甫诞以公平正直著称，封他做并州总管司马，总管并州府政事，凡事都要征求他的意见，汉王很敬重他。
English: Gaozhu was famous for his fairness and honesty. He was appointed as the head of the provincial government and the head of the provincial government, and his opinion was sought in all matters. The king of Han respected him very much.

古文：及炀帝即位，征谅入朝，谅用谘议王頍之谋，发兵作乱。
现代文：到炀帝即位，召汉王入朝，杨谅采纳谘议官王支页的计谋，发兵作乱。
English: When Emperor Shun ascended the throne, he called Han Wang to join the imperial court, and Yang Peng adopted the strategy of the advisory officer Wang Shifang and sent troops to create turmoil.

古文：诞数谏止，谅不纳。
现代文：皇甫诞屡次谏阻，杨谅都不采纳。
English: Empress Dowager Cixi repeatedly resisted, and Yang Piao did not accept.

古文：诞因流涕曰： 窃料大王兵资，无敌京师者，加以君臣位定，逆顺势殊，士马虽精，难以取胜。
现代文：皇甫诞流着泪说： 我料想汉王您的兵器物资，没有哪一样能抵挡京师军队的。加上君臣的名份已定，谋反和拥护朝廷的情况不同，你兵马虽精，也难以取胜。
English: With tears streaming down his face, the imperial father-in-law said, "I thought, Han Wang, none of your weapons and materials can resist the army of the Beijing Division. In addition, the names of the monarchs and ministers have been decided, and the situation of plotting a rebellion and supporting the imperial court is different. Although your soldiers and horses are fine, it is difficult to win.

古文：愿王奉诏入朝，守臣子之节，必有松、乔之寿，累代之荣。
现代文：希望您奉命入朝，恪守臣子的节操，一定会有赤松子和王子乔的长寿，几代人的荣华。
English: I hope that you will be ordered to enter the imperial court, abide by the discipline of a courtier, and will certainly have the longevity of Akamatsu and Prince Joe, and the glory of several generations.

古文：如更迁延，陷身叛逆，一挂刑书，为布衣黔首不可得也。
现代文：如果再拖延，身陷叛逆，到时一上刑书，想做平民百姓也不可能了。
English: If we delay any longer, if we are caught in the act of rebellion, and if we receive a criminal record at that time, it will be impossible to want to be a commoner.

古文：愿察区区之心，思万全之计，敢以死请。 
现代文：希望王爷您体察我的苦心，想一个万全之计，我斗胆冒死请求。 
English: I hope you can appreciate my painstaking efforts and think of a perfect solution. I dare to make a request.

古文：谅怒而囚之。
现代文：汉王大怒，囚禁了皇甫诞。
English: The Han king was furious and imprisoned the emperor.

古文：及杨素将至，谅屯清源以拒之。
现代文：后来杨素将至，杨谅屯兵在清源抵挡。
English: Later, Yang Su arrived, and Yang Piao's troops resisted in Qingyuan.

古文：谅主簿豆卢毓出诞于狱，相与协谋，闭城拒谅。
现代文：汉王的主簿豆庐毓放皇甫诞出了囚牢，与他合谋，关闭城门，不让杨谅入城。
English: The Han king's chief advisor, Emperor Fang Fang, created the prison, conspired with him, closed the city gates, and did not allow Yang Qian to enter the city.

古文：谅袭击破之，并抗节而遇害。
现代文：杨谅袭破城池，二人都守节而死。
English: Yang Yuanzhong attacked and broke through the city, and both of them died while observing the festival.

古文：帝以诞亡身徇国，嘉悼者久之，下诏曰： 褒显名节，有国通规，加等饰终，抑惟令典。
现代文：炀帝因皇甫诞以身殉国，为嘉奖并悼念他，专门下了一道诏书，追赠柱国，封弘义公，谥号明。皇甫诞的儿子无逸继承了爵位。
English: Emperor Qian was martyred for the sake of Emperor Fu, and in order to commend and mourn him, he specifically issued an edict, posthumously awarded the pillar state, sealed Hiroyoshi, and gave him the posthumous name Ming. The son of Emperor Fu inherited the title of nobility.

