古文：贞观初，太宗谓侍臣曰： 人有明珠，莫不贵重。若以弹雀，岂非可惜？
现代文：贞观初年，太宗皇帝对侍臣们说： 人们手中有一颗明珠，没有不视之为宝贵的，如果拿去弹射鸟雀，这难道不是很可惜吗？
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong said to his courtiers: People have a pearl in their hands, and they do not regard it as precious. If they use it to eject birds and sparrows, wouldn't it be a pity?

古文：况人之性命甚于明珠，见金钱财帛不惧刑网，径即受纳，乃是不惜性命。
现代文：何况人的性命比明珠珍贵，见到金银钱帛不惧怕法律的惩罚，立即直接收受，这就是不爱惜性命。
English: Moreover, human life is more precious than pearls. When you see gold, silver, and money, do not fear the punishment of the law, immediately and directly accept it. This is not cherishing life.

古文：明珠是身外之物，尚不可弹雀，何况性命之重，乃以博财物耶？
现代文：明珠是身外之物，尚且不能拿去弹射鸟雀，何况更加珍贵的性命，怎么能用它来换取财物呢？
English: The pearl is something external to the body, yet it cannot be used to catapult birds and finches, not to mention the more precious life, how can it be used to exchange property?

古文：群臣若能备尽忠直，益国利人，则官爵立至。
现代文：群臣如果能够全力竭尽忠诚正直，有益于国家，利于百姓，那么官职爵位立即就可以得到。
English: If the ministers can do their best to be loyal and honest, beneficial to the country and the people, then the official title of knighthood can be obtained immediately.

古文：皆不能以此道求荣，遂妄受财物，赃贿既露，其身亦殒，实可为笑。
现代文：一律不能用这种受贿的手段求取荣华富贵，随便就收受财物。赃物贿赂暴露以后，自身也将受到损害，确实是可笑的。
English: No one can use this kind of bribery to seek glory and wealth, and casually accept property. After the stolen goods and bribery are exposed, they will also be damaged, which is really ridiculous.

古文：帝王亦然。恣情放逸，劳役无度，信任群小，疏远忠正，有一于此，岂不灭亡？
现代文：帝王也是这样，任性放纵，无限度地征用劳役，信任小人，疏远忠诚正直的人，犯有其中一件事，岂能不灭亡？
English: The same is true of emperors. Willful indulgence, unlimited requisition of labor, trust in villains, alienation of loyal and honest people, guilty of one of these things, can they not perish?

古文：隋炀帝奢侈自贤，身死匹夫之手，亦为可笑。 
现代文：隋炀帝奢侈而自认为贤能，自身死在一介匹夫手里，也是很可笑的。 
English: It is also ridiculous that Emperor Sui and Qin was extravagant and considered himself to be virtuous, and died at the hands of a peer.

古文：贞观二年，太宗谓侍臣曰： 朕尝谓贪人不解爱财也。
现代文：贞观二年，唐太宗对侍臣说： 我曾经说过，贪婪的人不知道如何爱惜财物。
English: In the second year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to his attendant: I once said that greedy people do not know how to cherish possessions.

古文：至如内外官五品以上，禄秩优厚，一年所得，其数自多。
现代文：像五品以上的官员，他们高官厚禄，一年所得的财物，数目非常大。
English: Like officials with five or more pins, they are high-ranking officials with high salaries, and the amount of property they earn in a year is very large.

古文：若受人财贿，不过数万。
现代文：如果接受别人的贿赂，数目不过几万。
English: If you accept someone else's bribe, the amount is only tens of thousands.

古文：一朝彰露，禄秩削夺，此岂是解爱财物？
现代文：然而，一旦丑行暴露，就会被革去官职和俸禄，这样做，哪里是爱惜钱财呢？
English: However, once the misdeeds are exposed, they will be stripped of their official posts and salaries. In this way, where is the love of money?

古文：规小得而大失者也。
现代文：他们是因小失大，得不偿失。
English: They have lost much for little, and gained nothing in return.

古文：昔公仪休性嗜鱼，而不受人鱼，其鱼长存。
现代文：过去，鲁国的丞相公仪休很喜欢吃鱼，但从不接受别人进献的鱼，因此他得以长期享受鱼的美味。
English: In the past, the prime minister of the State of Lu, Gongyi Xiu, liked to eat fish very much, but he never accepted fish offered by others, so he was able to enjoy the deliciousness of fish for a long time.

古文：且为主贪，必丧其国；为臣贪，必亡其身。
现代文：国君贪婪，必定亡国，臣子贪婪，必定丧命。
English: If the sovereign is greedy, the country is sure to perish; if the vassal is greedy, his life is sure to be lost.

古文：《诗》云： 大风有隧，贪人败类。 
现代文：《诗经》上写道： 大风刮得迅猛，贪心的人败坏家族。 
English: It is written in the Book of Songs: The wind blows furiously, and the greedy destroy families.

古文：固非谬言也。
现代文：所言不虚啊！
English: What you say is true!

古文：昔秦惠王欲伐蜀，不知其径，乃刻五石牛，置金其后，蜀人见之，以为牛能便金。
现代文：过去，秦惠王要攻打蜀国，但不熟悉蜀国的道路，于是，他叫人刻了五斗石牛，并把金子放在石头身后。蜀国人看见了，以为石牛可以屙金子。
English: In the past, King Qin Hui wanted to attack Shu, but he was not familiar with the roads in Shu. Therefore, he had people carve five stone oxen and put the gold behind the stones. The people of Shu saw this and thought that the stone oxen could extract gold.

古文：蜀王使五丁力士拖牛入蜀，道成。
现代文：蜀王便叫五个大力士把石牛拖到蜀国去，由秦入蜀的道路就这样开辟出来了。
English: The king of Shu then called five strong men to drag the stone ox to Shu, and the road from Qin to Shu was thus opened up.

古文：秦师随而伐之，蜀国遂亡。
现代文：于是，秦国大军尾随而至，灭掉了蜀国。
English: As a result, the Qin army followed and destroyed Shu.

古文：汉大司农田延年赃贿三千万，事觉自死。
现代文：汉代，大司农田延年接受贿赂三千万，事发他自杀身亡。
English: During the Han Dynasty, the head of the Department of Farmland accepted a bribe of 30 million yuan. He committed suicide.

古文：如此之流，何可胜记！
现代文：这样的例子，不胜枚举。
English: There are many examples of this.

古文：朕今以蜀王为元龟，卿等亦须以延年为覆辙也。
现代文：我现在以蜀王为警戒，你们也要把田延年当做前车之鉴。 
English: I am now taking Shu Wang as a warning, and you should also take Tian Yan Nian as a precedent.

古文：贞观四年，太宗谓公卿曰： 朕终日孜孜，非但忧怜百姓，亦欲使卿等长守富贵。
现代文：贞观四年，太宗对公卿说： 朕整天都不敢懈怠，不但忧念爱惜百姓，也想让你们能够长守富贵。
English: In the fourth year of Zhenguan, Taizong said to the nobles: I dare not slack off all day long. I not only care about the people, but also want you to be able to stay rich and noble.

古文：天非不高，地非不厚，朕常兢兢业业，以畏天地。
现代文：天非不高，地非不厚，朕长久以来小心谨慎以敬畏天地。
English: The sky is not low, the earth is not thick, I have long been careful to fear the sky and the earth.

古文：卿等若能小心奉法，常如朕畏天地，非但百姓安宁，自身常得欢乐。
现代文：你们如果能小心遵守法令，总是像朕敬畏天地那样，这样不但百姓安宁，自己也可常得快乐。
English: If you can carefully abide by the laws, you will always fear heaven and earth, just as I do. In this way, not only will the people be peaceful, but you will also often be happy.

古文：古人云： 贤者多财损其志，愚者多财生其过。 
现代文：古人说： 贤者多财损其志，愚者多财生其过。 
English: The ancients said: A wise man loses his aspiration if he has too much money, and a foolish man loses his aspiration if he has too much money.

古文：此言可为深诫。
现代文：这话可以深以为戒。
English: This can be a serious warning.

古文：若徇私贪浊，非止坏公法，损百姓，纵事未发闻，中心岂不常惧？
现代文：如果徇私贪污，不但是破坏国法，伤害百姓，即使事情没有败露，心中怎能不常怀恐惧呢？
English: If selfishness and corruption not only violate the laws of the country, but also hurt the people, even if the matter is not revealed, how can we not always have fear in our hearts?

古文：恐惧既多，亦有因而致死。
现代文：恐惧多了也有因此而导致死亡的。
English: There was a lot of fear, which also led to deaths.

古文：大丈夫岂得苟贪财物，以害及身命，使子孙每怀愧耻耶？
现代文：大丈夫岂能为了贪求财物，而害了自己的身家性命，使子孙总是蒙受羞耻呢？
English: Shall a man leave his father, and his mother, and his wife, and his children, and his brethren, and his father's brethren, and his brethren, and his father's brethren, and his father's brethren, and his mother's brethren, and his father's brethren?

古文：卿等宜深思此言。 
现代文：你们应当深刻地思考这些话。 
English: You should think deeply about these words.

古文：贞观六年，右卫将军陈万福自九成宫赴京，违法取驿家麸数石。
现代文：贞观六年，右卫将军陈万福从九成宫去京城，他在驿站人家处违法取得几担麦麸。
English: In the sixth year of Zhenguan, Chen Manfu, the right guard general, went to Beijing from Jiu Chenggong Palace. He illegally obtained several loads of wheat straw from the post office.

古文：太宗赐其麸，令自负出以耻之。
现代文：唐太宗知道后，就把这些麦麸赐给他，让他自己背出宫，以此来羞辱他。
English: When Emperor Taizong learned of this, he humiliated him by giving him the straw and making him carry it out of the palace.

古文：贞观十年，治书侍御史权万纪上言： 宣、饶二州诸山大有银坑，采之极是利益，每岁可得钱数百万贯。 
现代文：贞观十年，治书侍御史权万纪上书说： 宣州、饶州的大山里埋藏有银矿，如果把它们开采出来，可获得极大的收益，每年可向朝廷上缴钱数百万贯。 
English: In the 10th year of Zhenguan, the secretary of the imperial court, Quan Wanji, wrote: There are silver mines buried in the mountains of Xuanzhou and Raozhou. If they are mined, they can earn great profits and can pay millions of yuan to the imperial court every year.

古文：太宗曰： 朕贵为天子，是事无所少之。惟须纳嘉言，进善事，有益于百姓者。
现代文：唐太宗说： 我贵为天子，这样的事知道得很多，现在，我需要的只是对老百姓有益的忠言，推行善事。
English: Tang Taizong said, "I am the son of Heaven, and I know a lot about such things. Now, all I need is to give good advice to the people and do good deeds.

古文：且国家剩得数百万贯钱，何如得一有才行人？不见卿推贤进善之事，又不能按举不法，震肃权豪，惟道税鬻银坑以为利益。
现代文：国家增加数百万的收益，又有什么用呢？你不推举贤能，表彰善事，也不揭发奸邪之人，肃清豪强，只知道上奏银矿这些有关实利的事情。
English: What use is it for the state to increase its income by millions? You don't promote talent, commend good deeds, expose traitors, and purge the powerful. All you know is to play up silver mines and other things related to real profits.

古文：昔尧、舜抵璧于山林，投珠于渊谷，由是崇名美号，见称千载。
现代文：过去，尧舜把美玉扔进山林，把宝珠沉没于深渊，赢得了高尚的美名，流芳千古。
English: In the past, the dragonfly threw the gem into the mountain forest, sank the pearl into the abyss, and won a noble reputation that has been passed down for thousands of years.

古文：后汉桓、灵二帝好利贱义，为近代庸暗之主。
现代文：后汉时，桓帝、灵帝重利轻义，是近世有名的昏聩之君。
English: In the later Han Dynasty, Emperor Kuan and Emperor Ling emphasized profit and lightness, and was a famous dim-witted ruler in modern times.

古文：卿遂欲将我比桓、灵耶？ 
现代文：你这样做，是要把我与桓帝、灵帝相比吗？ 
English: Are you doing this to compare me to Emperor Kan and Emperor Ling?

古文：是日敕放令万纪还第。
现代文：就在这一天，他下令将权万纪削官为民。
English: On this very day, he ordered that all power and discipline be taken away from officials and given to the people.

古文：贞观十六年，太宗谓侍臣曰： 古人云 鸟栖于林，犹恐其不高，复巢于木末；鱼藏于水，犹恐其不深，复穴于窟下。
现代文：贞观十六年，太宗对侍臣说： 古人说： 飞鸟栖息于树林，唯恐树木不高，所以筑巢于树木的顶端；鱼藏于水中，唯恐水不深，所以穴居于水底洞穴中。
English: In the 16th year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong said to his courtiers: The ancients said: Birds live in the forest, but fear that the trees are not tall, so they build nests at the top of the trees; fish hide in the water, but fear that the water is not deep, so they live in underwater caves.

古文：然而为人所获者，皆由贪饵故也。 
现代文：然而能被人们所捕获的，都是因为贪饵的缘故。 
English: However, what can be caught by humans is due to greed.

古文：今人臣受任，居高位，食厚禄，当须履忠正，蹈公清，则无灾害，长守富贵矣。
现代文：现在大臣受任命，居高位，食厚禄，应当要履行忠诚正直，遵循清廉无私，这样才能没有灾祸，长守富贵啊！
English: Now that ministers are appointed, hold high positions, and receive generous salaries, they should be loyal, honest, and unselfish, so that there will be no disasters and they will remain rich and noble!

古文：古人云： 祸福无门，惟人所召。 
现代文：古人说： 祸福无门，惟人所召。 
English: The ancients said: "There is no gate for good or evil, except that which man calls for."

古文：然陷其身者，皆为贪冒财利，与夫鱼鸟何以异哉？
现代文：那些以身试法的，都是因为贪图财利，这与那些鱼鸟有什么不同呢？
English: Those who put the Fa to the test are motivated by greed. How are they different from those fish and birds?

古文：卿等宜思此语为鉴诫。 
现代文：你们应当好好想想这些话，作为借鉴和告诫。 
English: You should think about these words as a lesson and a warning.

