古文：山涛，字巨源，河内怀人也。
现代文：山涛字巨源，河内怀人。
English: The mountains are called Jiuyuan, and Hanoi is called Huaiyin.

古文：父曜，宛句令。
现代文：父亲山曜是宛句令。
English: Father's day is Saturday.

古文：涛早孤，居贫，少有器量，介然不群。
现代文：山涛早年丧父，家境贫困，年少时有器量，独特不群。
English: Shantao lost his father at an early age, his family was poor, he was resourceful when he was young, and he was unique.

古文：性好《庄》《老》，每隐身自晦。
现代文：喜好《庄子》《老子》，常隐身不显其才能。
English: He likes "Zhuang Zi" and "Lao Zi," and often hides without showing his talent.

古文：与嵇康、吕安善，后遇阮籍，便为竹林之交，著忘言之契。康后坐事，临诛，谓子绍曰： 巨源在，汝不孤矣。 
现代文：与嵇康、吕安有交情，后来遇到阮籍，建立了竹林之交而为竹林七贤，有了不必开口彼此就心领神会的默契。嵇康后来获罪，临刑前，对儿子嵇绍说： 有巨源在，你就不是孤儿。 
English: He had a friendship with Yu Kang and Lu An. Later, he met Ruan Ji, established a friendship with the bamboo grove and became the seven sages of the bamboo grove. They had a tacit understanding that they did not need to open their mouths to understand each other. Yu Kang was later convicted. Before his execution, he said to his son Yu Sha: If you have a great source, you are not an orphan.

古文：涛年四十，始为郡主簿、功曹、上计掾。
现代文：山涛四十岁，初任郡主簿、功曹、上计掾。
English: Shantao was forty years old. He was the first county magistrate, gong cao, and jang keo.

古文：举孝廉，州辟部河南从事。
现代文：被推举为孝廉，州裹召他任部河南从事。
English: He was elected as a filial piety, and the state called him to serve as the head of Henan Province.

古文：与石鉴共宿，涛夜起蹴鉴曰： 今为何等时而眠邪！
现代文：与石鉴住在一起，山涛夜裹起来推醒石鉴说： 现在是什么时候还睡呀!
English: Living together with Shi Jian, the mountain night wrapped up to wake up Shi Jian said: Now is when to sleep!

古文：知太傅卧何意？ 
现代文：你知道太傅称病是什么用意吗? 
English: Do you know what Taifu prepared for his illness?

古文：鉴曰： 宰相三不朝，与尺一令归第，卿何虑也！ 
现代文：石鉴说： 宰相三次不上朝，就下诏书让他回家，你担什么心呢! 
English: Shi Jian said, "If the prime minister does not go to the imperial court three times, you should issue an edict to let him go home. What are you worried about?"

古文：涛曰： 咄！石生无事马蹄间邪！ 
现代文：山涛说： 唉石先生在战乱中会没有危险吗! 
English: Shantao said: Alas, Mr. Shi, will there be no danger in the war!

古文：投传而去。
现代文：扔下符信就离去了。
English: He threw down his papers and left.

古文：未二年，果有曹爽之事，遂隐身不交世务。
现代文：不到两年，果然有了曹爽之变，于是隐身不再参与世事。
English: Less than two years later, Cao Shuang's transformation was complete, and he no longer participated in the world incognito.

古文：与宣穆后有中表亲，是以见景帝。
现代文：舆宣穆后是中表亲，因此见到景帝。
English: Muxuan Muguo was a middle cousin, so he met Emperor Jing.

古文：帝曰： 吕望欲仕邪？ 
现代文：景帝说： 吕望想做官吗? 
English: Emperor Jing said, "Does Lvang want to be an official?

古文：命司隶举秀才，除郎中。
现代文：命令司隶推举他为秀才，任郎中。
English: He ordered his subordinates to promote him as a talented person and to appoint him as a junior vassal.

古文：转骠骑将军王昶从事中郎。
现代文：转任骠骑将军王昶从事中郎。
English: He was transferred to the post of cavalry general, and engaged in horseback riding.

古文：久之，拜赵国相，迁尚书吏部郎。
现代文：很久后，官拜赵国相。升任尚书吏部郎。
English: A long time later, Zhao was promoted to the post of Minister of State, and was promoted to the post of Secretary of the Ministry of Education.

古文：文帝与涛书曰： 足下在事清明，雅操迈时。
现代文：文帝给山涛书信说： 你办事清廉高明，文雅的品行超出世人。
English: Emperor Wen wrote a letter to Shantao, saying, "Your work is pure and noble, and your gentle behavior surpasses that of the world.

古文：念多所乏，今致钱二十万、谷二百斛。 
现代文：考虑到你各种用品缺乏，今天送上钱二十万、谷物二百斛。 
English: Taking into account your lack of various supplies, today I am sending you 200,000 yuan in money and 200 baht in grain.

古文：魏帝尝赐景帝春服，帝以赐涛。
现代文：魏帝曾赐给景帝春服，景帝转赐给山涛。
English: Emperor Wei once gave Emperor Jing the spring uniform, and Emperor Jing gave it to Shantao.

古文：又以母老，并赐藜杖一枚。
现代文：又因为母亲年老，一并赐给他藜杖一把。
English: And because his mother was old, he was also given a cane.

古文：晚与尚书和逌交，又与钟会、裴秀并申款昵。
现代文：晚年与尚书和逌交往，又和钟会、裴秀诚恳亲密相待。
English: In his later years, he kept in touch with Shang Shuxu and Yao Yao, and also treated Zhonghui and Pei Xiuzheng with sincere intimacy.

古文：以二人居势争权，涛平心处中，各得其所，而俱无恨焉。
现代文：由于他俩居高官争权力，山涛心平气和处在他们当中，各得其所，而都没有遗憾。
English: As they are both high-ranking officials vying for power, Shantao is at peace with them, each in their own place, and have no regrets.

古文：迁大将军从事中郎。
现代文：升任大将军从事中郎。
English: He was promoted to general and worked as a middle manager.

古文：钟会作乱于蜀，而文帝将西征。
现代文：钟盒在蜀作乱，而塞童将西征。
English: Bell Box is making trouble in Shu, while Saido is marching west.

古文：时魏氏诸王公并在鄴，帝谓涛曰： 西偏吾自了之，后事深以委卿。 
现代文：当时魏氏诸位王公都在邺，文帝对山涛说： 西边的事我自行解决，后方的事就全委托你了。 
English: At that time, all the princes of the Wei Dynasty were in the palace, and Emperor Wen said to Shantao: I will solve the matters in the west on my own, and the matters in the rear are all entrusted to you.

古文：以本官行军司马，给亲兵五百人，镇鄴。
现代文：以本官代理行军司马，给亲兵五百人，镇守邺。
English: With his own officer acting as the marching steward, he gave five hundred soldiers to his own soldiers, and the town was garrisoned.

古文：咸熙初，封新沓子。
现代文：咸熙初年，被封为新沓子。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Xianxi, he was awarded the title of "new mule."

古文：转相国左长史，典统别营。
现代文：转任相国左长史，统管别营。
English: He was transferred to the post of Sakoku Sakochoshi (Minister of the Left) and put in charge of another battalion.

古文：时帝以涛乡闾宿望，命太子拜之。
现代文：当时皇帝因为山涛在乡间有名望，命太子参拜他。
English: At that time, the emperor was famous in the countryside because of the mountains, and the crown prince paid homage to him.

古文：帝以齐王攸继景帝后，素又重攸，尝问裴秀曰： 大将军开建未遂，吾但承奉后事耳。
现代文：皇帝以齐王司马攸继嗣景帝，又一向器重司马攸，曾问裴秀说： 大将军创建大业未能如愿，我仅继承了他身后的事罢了。
English: The emperor asked Pei Xiu about the succession of Qi King Sima You, the successor of Emperor Jing, who had always respected Sima You. He said: The great general did not succeed in creating a great cause, I only inherited what he left behind.

古文：故立攸，将归功于兄，何如？ 
现代文：因而立司马攸，将归功于兄长，可否? 
English: Therefore, the establishment of Sima You, will be attributed to the elder brother, is it possible?

古文：秀以为不可，又以问涛。
现代文：裴昼认为不行，又以此事询问山涛。
English: Pei Rong didn't think it was possible, so he asked Shantao about it.

古文：涛对曰： 废长立少，违礼不祥。
现代文：山涛回答说： 废长立少，违礼不祥。
English: Shantao replied, "Waste is not good, and disrespect is not good.

古文：国之安危，恆必由之。 
现代文：国家的安危，常由此而起。 
English: The security of the country often depends on it.

古文：太子位于是乃定。
现代文：太子人选于是确定。
English: The choice of the crown prince was then decided.

古文：太子亲拜谢涛。
现代文：太子亲自拜谢山涛。
English: The crown prince personally thanked the mountain.

古文：及武帝受禅，以涛守大鸿胪，护送陈留王诣鄴。
现代文：武帝接受惮让后，让山涛为守大鸿胪，护送陈留王去鄴。
English: After Emperor Wu accepted the abdication, he allowed the mountains to guard Dahongpo and escorted Chen Liuwang to the capital.

古文：泰始初，加奉车都尉，进爵新沓伯。
现代文：泰始初年，加授奉车都尉，进爵新沓迫。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizhi, he was awarded the additional title of Fengche Duifeng, and was promoted to the peerage of Xinzhuang.

古文：及羊祜执政，时人欲危裴秀，涛正色保持之。
现代文：羊祜执政，当时的人想排挤墓垂，山涛严正地维护他。
English: At that time, the people wanted to oust the grave-digger, and the mountains and rivers rigorously defended him.

古文：由是失权臣意，出为冀州刺史，加宁远将军。
现代文：因此违背了权臣的心意，出京任冀州刺史，加宁远将军。
English: Therefore, he went against the will of the powerful vassal and went to Beijing to serve as the governor of Jizhou Province and the general of Kaningyuan.

古文：冀州俗薄，无相推毂。
现代文：冀州风俗鄙薄，不相互推荐。
English: Jizhou customs are despicable and do not recommend each other.

古文：涛甄拔隐屈，搜访贤才，旌命三十余人，皆显名当时。
现代文：山边甄别选拔隐士及受屈者，搜求访问贤才，表扬征召三十多人，都在当时出了名。
English: The selection of hermits and sufferers by the mountainside, the search for visiting sages, and the recruitment of more than 30 people were all famous at that time.

古文：人怀慕尚，风俗颇革。
现代文：人们开始崇尚贤能，风俗有了改变。
English: People began to worship virtue, and customs began to change.

古文：转北中郎将，督鄴城守事。
现代文：转任北中郎将，督邺城防守事。
English: He was transferred to the position of Kitanakura shogun, and was put in charge of the defense of the castle.

古文：入为侍中，迁尚书。
现代文：入朝任侍中，改任尚书。
English: Entered the imperial court as a chamberlain, and was transferred to the position of court scribe.

古文：以母老辞职，诏曰： 君虽乃心在于色养，然职有上下，旦夕不废医药，且当割情，以隆在公。 
现代文：因母亲年老辞职，韶书说： 你虽然把心思用在孝敬上，但职务有上下之分，早晚又医药不断，应当割舍亲情，使一心为公之风兴盛。 
English: Due to his mother's resignation due to old age, the imperial edict said: Although you put your heart and soul into filial piety, your duties are divided into higher and lower levels, and sooner or later you will have to take medicine. You should give up your family ties so that the spirit of one-hearted service to the public will flourish.

古文：涛心求退，表疏数十上，久乃见听。
现代文：山涛一心请求辞职，数十次上表，很长时间才被接受。
English: Shantao single-mindedly asked for his resignation, submitted it dozens of times, and it took a long time for it to be accepted.

古文：除议郎，帝以涛清俭无以供养，特给日契，加赐床帐茵褥。
现代文：授为议郎，皇帝因为山边清廉俭朴难以供养，特地给他每天供给的凭证，加赐床帐席褥。
English: The emperor gave him a certificate of daily supply, and also gave him a bed, table and chair, as it was difficult to provide for him due to the mountain's cleanliness and frugality.

古文：礼秩崇重，时莫为比。
现代文：礼节俸禄又高又重，当时没人能比。
English: The salary for etiquette was high and heavy, and at that time no one could match it.

古文：后除太常卿，以疾不就。
现代文：后来任太常卿，因为有病不赴任。
English: Later, he was appointed First Secretary of the Central Military Commission, but did not take up the post due to illness.

古文：会遭母丧，归乡里。
现代文：母亲去世，回到家乡。
English: After his mother's death, he returned to his hometown.

古文：涛年逾耳顺，居丧过礼，负土成坟，手植松柏。
现代文：玺萤年过六十岁，服丧超过礼制，背土成坟，亲手种下松柏。
English: Luo Huo is over sixty years old, his mourning exceeds the etiquette, his back turns into a grave, and he plants conifers with his own hands.

古文：诏曰： 吾所共致化者，官人之职是也。
现代文：韶书说： 舆我共同完成教化的，是统治众人的官职。
English: The imperial edict said: It is the government's duty to govern all the people so that they can be educated together.

古文：方今风欲陵迟，人心进动，宜崇明好恶，镇以退让。
现代文：如今风俗衰败，人心动荡，应该申明好恶，怎能用退让来压抑自己。
English: Nowadays, customs are decaying and people's hearts are in turmoil. We should declare our likes and dislikes. How can we use concessions to suppress ourselves?

古文：山太常虽尚居谅闇，情在难夺，方今务殷，何得遂其志邪！
现代文：山太常虽然还在服丧，人情难于违背，但如今事多，岂能顺遂他的心愿呢!
English: Although the mountain is too often still in mourning, human feelings are difficult to violate, but now there are many things, will he be able to fulfill his wish?

古文：其以涛为吏部尚书。 
现代文：任命山迈为吏部尚书。 
English: Shanmai was appointed as the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：涛辞以丧病，章表恳切。
现代文：山涛以丧事疾病为由推辞，上表言辞恳切。
English: Shantao declined the offer on the grounds that he was suffering from a fatal illness.

古文：会元皇后崩，遂扶兴还洛。
现代文：遇元皇后去世，才乘车回到洛阳。
English: After the death of Empress Yuan, he returned to Luoyang by car.

古文：逼迫诏命，自力就职。
现代文：由于韶令的逼迫，自己才就职。
English: As a result of the persecution of the imperial edict, he took office.

古文：前后选举，周遍内外，而并得其才。
现代文：先后选用官吏，遍及朝廷内外，而都任用有才之人。
English: Officials were chosen successively, both inside and outside the imperial court, and talented people were appointed.

古文：咸宁初，转太子少傅，加散骑常侍；除尚书仆射，加侍中，领吏部。
现代文：咸宁初年，转任太子少傅，加散骑常侍；任尚书仆射，加侍中，兼管吏部。
English: In the first year of Xianning, he was transferred to the position of the prince's junior tutor, and was also appointed as a non-commissioned officer; he was also appointed as a clerk, a junior attendant, and was also in charge of the administrative department.

古文：固辞以老疾，上表陈情。
现代文：以年老有病为由坚决推辞，上表陈述病情。
English: On the grounds of old age and illness, he firmly refused, and the above table describes his condition.

古文：章表数十上，久不摄职，为左丞白褒所奏。
现代文：上表几十次，很久不赴任，被左丞白褒奏劾。
English: He was impeached dozens of times for not going to his post for a long time, by the left-leaning White Party.

古文：帝曰： 涛以病自闻，但不听之耳。
现代文：皇帝说： 山涛说自己有病，是我没听从他罢了。
English: The emperor said, "Shantao said he was ill, but I didn't listen to him.

古文：使涛坐执铨衡则可，何必上下邪！
现代文：让山涛安坐执掌官吏铨选就是了，何必在乎上下呢不要问罪。 
English: Let the mountains and rivers sit peacefully, and let the officials in charge be elected. Why should you care about the upper and lower levels? Don't ask about guilt.

古文：不得有所问。 涛不自安，表谢曰： 古之王道，正直而已。
现代文：山涛自己心中不安，上表谢罪说： 古代的王道，讲究的是正直。
English: Uneasy in his heart, Shantao said, "The ancient royal way is to be honest."

古文：陛下不可以一老臣为加曲私，臣亦何必屡陈日月。
现代文：陛下不能因为一个老臣而加以偏私，我又有什么心情屡次面对曰月呢。
English: His Majesty cannot be partial because of an old minister. What kind of mood would I be in if I had to face Saigo again and again?

古文：乞如所表，以章典刑。 
现代文：请求按照上表所说的，以申明典章法制。 
English: The request, as stated in the above table, is to affirm the rule of law.

古文：帝再手诏曰： 白褒奏君甚妄，所以不即推，直不喜凶赫耳。
现代文：皇帝再次下诏说： 白褒弹劾你很是荒谬，我之所以不立即推究他，是因为不愿意让不吉利的事张扬罢了。
English: The emperor issued another edict, saying, "It is absurd to accuse you of being a fraud. The reason why I did not investigate him immediately was because I did not want to make the unfortunate matter public.

古文：君之明度，岂当介意邪！
现代文：你的心胸，怎能介意此事!
English: Your heart, how can you mind this!

古文：便当摄职，令断章表也。 
现代文：应该赴任，让奏章不再出现。 
English: He should take up his post so that the play chapter does not appear again.

古文：涛志必欲退，因发从弟妇丧，辄还外舍。
现代文：山涛坚决退让，乘着为堂弟媳妇发丧，就回到外宅。
English: Shantao resolutely conceded and, taking advantage of the funeral for his cousin's daughter-in-law, returned to the villa.

古文：诏曰： 山仆射近日暂出，遂以微苦未还，岂吾侧席之意。
现代文：诏书说： 山仆射近日暂时出行，接着因为稍有病痛没能回来，这不是我对待贤臣的心意。
English: The edict said: "It is not my intention to treat the wise minister, since Yamabusa recently traveled temporarily and then was unable to return due to a slight illness.

古文：其遣丞掾奉诏谕旨，若体力故未平康者，便以舆车舆还寺舍。 
现代文：派遣丞掾奉韶宣读旨意，如果是体力没有康复的话，就用车接他回官舍。 
English: If he does not recover physically, he will be picked up by car and taken back to his official residence.

古文：涛辞不获已，乃起视事。
现代文：山涛推辞不掉，开始就任理政。
English: Unable to get rid of Shantao's refusal, he began to assume the post of government.

古文：涛再居选职十有余年，每一官缺，辄启拟数人，诏旨有所向，然后显奏，随帝意所欲为先。
现代文：山涛再次任铨选官吏的职务十多年，每一官缺员，就拟定几个人，诏书有了意向，然后公开奏报，顺着皇帝的心意决定用人的先后。
English: For more than ten years, Shantao was reappointed as an election official. For each vacancy, several people were drafted. The imperial edict had an intention, and then it was publicly reported, and the order of employment was decided according to the emperor's will.

古文：故帝之所用，或非举首，众情不察，以涛轻重任意。
现代文：因此皇帝所任用的人，有的不是首先被举荐的人，众人心中不清楚，认为山涛选人轻重任意。
English: Therefore, the people appointed by the emperor, some of whom were not the first to be recommended, were not clear in the minds of the people, and they thought that the selection of people was arbitrary.

古文：或谮之于帝，故帝手诏戒涛曰： 夫用人惟才，不遗疏远单贱，天下便化矣。 
现代文：有人到皇帝那裹说他的坏话，因此皇帝下手韶告诫山涛说： 用人惟才，不遣漏疏远贫贱之人，天下就太平了。 
English: Some people went to the emperor to speak ill of him, so the emperor issued a warning to the mountains and said: Employ only talented people, do not alienate the poor, and the world will be peaceful.

古文：而涛行之自若，一年之后众情乃寝。
现代文：而山涛仍然那样做，一年之后大家的埋怨才平息。
English: But the mountain range still did that, and a year later everyone's complaints subsided.

古文：涛所奏甄拔人物，各为题目，时称《山公启事》。
现代文：山涛奏请甄别选拔的奏章，各自立了题目，当时称《山公启事》。
English: Shantao Symphony asked the orchestra to screen and select the movements, and each of them set a theme, which was called "Sangong Notice" at that time.

古文：涛中立于朝，晚值后党专权，不欲任杨氏，多有讽谏，帝虽悟而不能改。
现代文：山涛在朝做官任要职，晚年遇上后党专权，不想任用杨氏，山涛多次劝谏，皇帝虽然明白却不能改。
English: Shantao held an important position as an official in the imperial court. In his later years, when he encountered the post-party dictatorship, he did not want to appoint the Yang family. Shantao persuaded him many times. Although the emperor understood this, he could not change it.

古文：后以年衰疾笃，上疏告退曰： 臣年垂八十，救命旦夕，若有毫末之益，岂遗力于圣时，迫以老耄，不复任事。
现代文：后来因为年老体衰病重，上疏告退说： 我年近八十岁，每天在保命，如果稍有精力，我岂会在这圣明的时代不出力。被年老所迫，不再任职。
English: Later, because of his old age and serious illness, the superintendent resigned, saying: "I am nearly eighty years old, and I am saving my life every day. If I had a little energy, I would not be able to do my best in this sacred age. I am forced by old age to no longer serve.

古文：今四海休息，天下思化，从而静之，百姓自正。
现代文：如今四海休养生息，天下思慕教化，使他们清静，百姓自然归于正道。
English: Nowadays, the four seas are resting and recuperating, the whole world is yearning for enlightenment, so that they are calm, and the people naturally return to the right path.

古文：但当崇风尚教以敦之耳，陛下亦复何事。
现代文：衹要崇尚风俗教化来敦促他们而已，陛下还有什么事可做。
English: Your Majesty has nothing else to do but to urge them on in the name of morality and enlightenment.

古文：臣耳目聋瞑，不能自励。
现代文：我耳聋眼花，不能自励。
English: I'm deaf and blind, I can't motivate myself.

古文：君臣父子，其间无文，是以直陈愚情，乞听所请。 
现代文：君臣父子，没必要掩饰，因此陈述我的想法，乞求听从我的请求。 
English: Sovereign father and son, there is no need to disguise, so I state my thoughts, begging to listen to my request.

古文：乃免冠徒跣，上还印绶。
现代文：于是脱下官服，上交印绶。
English: He then took off his official uniform and handed over his official seal.

古文：君不深识往心而以小疾求退，岂所望于君邪！
现代文：诏书说： 天下事多，加上呈厘刚被平定，百事草创，应当共同尽心推行教化。
English: The edict said: There are a lot of things going on in the world, coupled with the fact that Chengdu and Lijiang have just been pacified, and many things have been created, we should work together to carry out enlightenment.

古文：朕犹侧席，未得垂拱，君亦何得高尚其事乎！当崇至公，勿复为虚饰之烦。 
现代文：你不记以往而因小病请求退职，难道是我所期待的我尚且在等待贤臣，不能百事不管，你怎能不委屈自己而效力呢应当推崇至公，不要再上表请求告退。 
English: You do not remember the past and ask for retirement due to minor illness. Is this what I expected? I am still waiting for a wise man, I cannot ignore everything. How can you work without harming yourself? You should be respected by the public, do not ask to resign again.

古文：涛苦表请退，诏又不许。
现代文：山涛苦苦上表请求退休，诏书又不许。
English: The mountains and rivers are struggling to request retirement on the table, and the imperial rescript is not allowed.

古文：尚书令卫瓘奏： 涛以微苦，久不视职。
现代文：尚书令堑堕上奏： 山涛因为小病，长期不就职。
English: Shang Shuling's poem "Falling Down" begins: Due to a minor illness, Shantao has not taken up his post for a long time.

古文：手诏频烦，犹未顺旨。
现代文：皇上频频下手韶，仍不听从。
English: The emperor was frequently handcuffed, but still did not obey.

古文：参议以为无专节之尚，违在公之义。
现代文：臣认为这是没有节操，违背了一心为公之义。
English: The vassal considered this to be unprincipled and a violation of the principle of one-hearted justice.

古文：若实沈笃，亦不宜居位。
现代文：如果真是病重，也不宜身居高位。
English: If you're really seriously ill, you shouldn't be in a high position.

古文：可免涛官。 
现代文：可以免去山涛的官职。 
English: He can be relieved of his post.

古文：中诏瓘曰： 涛以德素为朝之望，而常深退让，至于恳切。
现代文：下韶书给蛮堕说： 山涛德行一向为朝廷所重，而常深切地退让，十分恳切。
English: The next imperial edict to the barbarians said: Mountain virtue has always been the focus of the imperial court, and often deeply conceded, very earnestly.

古文：故比有诏，欲必夺其志，以匡辅不逮。
现代文：因此接连有诏书，务必改变他的想法，来辅佐朝廷。
English: Therefore, imperial edicts were issued one after another, urging him to change his mind and come to the aid of the imperial court.

古文：主者既不思明诏旨，而反深加诋案。亏崇贤之风，以重吾不德，何以示远近邪！ 
现代文：主事的人既不弄清韶书旨意，反而深加诋毁，损害了崇敬贤人的风气，从而加重了我没有美德的名声，怎么向远近示范呢! 
English: The person in charge did not clarify the will of the book, but instead deeply discredited it, damaging the tradition of revering sages, thus increasing my reputation for having no virtue. How can I demonstrate this to those near and far?

古文：涛不得已，又起视事。
现代文：山涛不得已，又上任理事。
English: As a last resort, Shantao took up the post of director again.

古文：太康初，迁右仆射，加光禄大夫，侍中、掌选如故。
现代文：太康初年，升任右仆射，加光禄大夫，侍中、掌管铨选的职位依旧。
English: In the first year of Taikang, he was promoted to the position of the right-hand man, and the position of the second-in-command and the person in charge of the selection remained the same.

古文：涛以老疾固辞，手诏曰： 君以道德为世模表，况自先帝识君远意。
现代文：山涛因为年老有病坚决推辞，皇帝下手韶说： 你以道德成为世人的楷模，况且从先帝起就欣赏你远大的志向。
English: Shantao resolutely refused because of his old age and illness, and the emperor shook his hand and said: You have become a model for the world with your morality, and moreover, I have appreciated your lofty aspirations since the last emperor.

古文：吾将倚君以穆风俗，何乃欲舍远朝政，独高其志耶！吾之至怀故不足以喻乎，何来言至恳切也。
现代文：我将仰仗你来使风俗清明，为什么想远离朝政，而仅使自己的志向高洁呢我至诚之心情难道还不足以让你明白吗，为什么还要推辞呢。
English: I will rely on you to make the customs clear, why do you want to stay away from the imperial government, but only to make your own aspirations noble? Is my sincerity not enough for you to understand, why should I refuse?

古文：且当以时自力，深副至望。
现代文：应当及时奋发，满足期望。
English: Efforts should be made in time to meet expectations.

古文：君不降志，朕不安席。 
现代文：你不收回推辞之心，我不能安卧。 
English: If you don't retract your refusal, I won't be able to sleep.

古文：涛又上表固让，不许。
现代文：山涛又上表坚决推辞，不允许。
English: Shantao again issued a firm refusal, saying it would not be allowed.

古文：吴平之后，帝诏天下罢军役，示海内大安，州郡悉去兵，大郡置武吏百人，小郡五十人。
现代文：吴平定后，皇帝下诏书停止军役，以示天下太平，州郡全部撤去军队，大郡设置一百名武吏，小郡五十人。
English: After the pacification of Wu, the emperor issued an edict to stop military service to show that the world was at peace. All troops were removed from counties and prefectures, and 100 military officials were set up in large counties and 50 in small counties.

古文：帝尝讲武于宣武场，涛时有疾，诏乘步辇从。
现代文：皇帝曾在宣武场讲武，山涛当时有病，下韶书让他乘轿子跟从。
English: The emperor once gave a speech on martial arts at a martial arts demonstration. Shantao was ill at the time, so the emperor asked him to accompany him in a palanquin.

古文：因与卢钦论用兵之本，以为不宜去州郡武备，其论甚精。
现代文：于是与卢钦议论用兵之道，认为不该撤去州郡的武备，他的言论很精当。
English: He then discussed the use of troops with Lu Qin and believed that the armed forces of the prefectures and counties should not be withdrawn. His remarks were very accurate.

古文：于时咸以涛不学孙、吴，而暗与之合。
现代文：当时都认为山辽不学彊膑、呈垄，而暗中与他们相合。
English: At that time, it was believed that the mountains and the rivers did not learn from each other, but formed a ridge, and secretly coincided with each other.

古文：帝称之曰： 天下名言也。 
现代文：皇帝称赞他说： 这是天下名言。 
English: The emperor praised him, saying, "This is a famous saying in the world.

古文：而不能用。
现代文：然而不被采纳。
English: However, it was not adopted.

古文：及永宁之后，屡有变难，寇贼猋起，郡国皆以无备不能制，天下遂以大乱，如涛言焉。
现代文：丞窒之后，屡次发生战乱，盗贼突起，郡国都因为没有武备而不能抵御，天下由此大乱，正如山涛所说的那样。
English: After the war, there were repeated wars, thieves emerged, counties and countries could not resist because they did not have weapons, and the world was in turmoil, as Shantao said.

古文：后拜司徒，涛复固让。 
现代文：后来任司徒，量盏又坚决推让。
English: Later, he was appointed as a magistrate, but he resolutely refused.

古文：诏曰： 郡年耆德茂，朝之硕老，是以授君台辅之位。而远崇克让，至于反覆，良用于邑。
现代文：诏书说： 你德高望重，是朝中有名望的元老，因此授予你宰相的高位，而过于退让，以至于反复多次，确实令人难过。
English: The imperial rescript said: You are highly respected for your virtue, and you are a famous elder of the dynasty, so it is really sad to give you the high position of prime minister, but it is too much to give up, so that it is repeated many times.

古文：君当终始朝政，翼辅朕躬。 
现代文：你应该始终效力于朝政，辅佐我。 
English: You should always work for the imperial government and assist me.

古文：涛又表曰： 臣事天朝三十余年，卒无毫厘以崇大化。
现代文：山涛又上表说： 我为本朝服务三十多年，最终没能对发扬教化做出丝毫贡献。
English: Shantao also said on the table: I have been serving this country for more than thirty years, and in the end I have not been able to make any contribution to the development of enlightenment.

古文：陛下私臣无已，猥授三司。
现代文：陛下无限地偏向我，授我三司的职位。
English: Your Majesty has infinitely favored me by giving me the position of the Third Division.

古文：臣闻德薄位高，力少任重，上有折足之凶，下有庙门之咎，愿陛下垂累世之恩，乞臣骸骨。
现代文：我听说德薄官高，能力小担重任，上有不能胜任而败坏国事的凶险，下会给家族带来灾祸。愿陛下赐我几代之恩，乞求让我告老还乡。 
English: I have heard that officials with high morals and low ability are burdened with heavy responsibilities, and that there is a grave danger of incompetence and corruption of state affairs, which will bring disaster to the family. May His Majesty grant me the grace of several generations and beg me to return to my hometown.

古文：诏曰： 君翼赞朝政，保乂皇家，匡佐之勋，朕所倚赖。
现代文：诏书说： 你辅助朝政，安定皇室，匡佐的功勋，是我所依赖的。
English: The imperial edict said: I rely on the merits of your assistance to the imperial government, the stability of the imperial family, and the achievements of Kuanzo.

古文：司徒之职，实掌帮教，故用敬授，以答群望。
现代文：司徒这个职位，实际上掌管国家教化，因此敬授予你，来满足大家的期望。
English: The position of the Magistrate, who is actually in charge of the nation's education, has been bestowed upon you to meet the expectations of all.

古文：岂宜冲让以自抑损邪！ 
现代文：怎能用退让来压抑贬损自己呢! 
English: How can you use concessions to suppress and belittle yourself!

古文：已敕断章表，使者乃卧加章绶。
现代文：下令不再让他上奏章后，派人在山涛病榻上加授印章绶带。
English: After ordering him not to play the seal again, he sent someone to add the seal ribbon to Shan Tao's sickbed.

古文：涛曰： 垂没之人，岂可污官府乎！ 
现代文：山涛说： 快死了的人，怎么能玷污官府呢! 
English: Shantao said, "How can a man who is about to die defile the government?"

古文：舆疾归家。
现代文：带病乘车回家。
English: I took a sick ride home.

古文：以太康四年薨，时年七十九，诏赐东园秘器、朝服一具、衣一袭、钱五十万、布百匹，以供丧事，策赠司徒，蜜印紫绶，侍中貂蝉，新沓伯蜜印青硃绶，祭以太牢，谥曰康。
现代文：在太康四年去世，时年七十九岁。下韶赐他高贵棺木、朝服一套、衣一套、钱五十万、布百匹，作丧事之用，下策书迫赠他为司徒，赐蜜印紫绶，侍中貂蝉，新沓伯蜜印青朱绶，用太牢祭祀，谧号康。
English: Taikang died four years later, at the age of seventy-nine. The lower echelon gave him a noble coffin, a set of imperial robes, a set of clothes, half a million in money, and a hundred pieces of cloth for use in the funeral. The lower echelon forced him to be a disciple. He was given the honey-stamped purple dragonfly, the attendant cicada, and the new eunuch honey-stamped blue cicada. He was sacrificed in the dungeon. His posthumous name was Kang.

古文：将葬，赐钱四十万、布百匹。
现代文：将要下葬，赐钱四十万、布百匹。
English: He will be buried with 400,000 yuan in cash and 100 pieces of cloth.

古文：左长史范晷等上言： 涛旧第屋十间，子孙不相容。 
现代文：左长史范晷等人对皇上说： 山涛的旧宅第有十间房，子孙住不下。 
English: Zuo Changshi Fan Rong and others said to the emperor: Shantao's old house has ten rooms, and his descendants can't live there.

古文：帝为之立室。
现代文：皇帝为之建造房屋。
English: The emperor built a house for him.

古文：初，涛布衣家贫，谓妻韩氏曰： 忍饥寒，我后当作三公，但不知卿堪公夫人不耳！ 
现代文：起初，山涛是平民，家中贫困，对妻子韩氐说： 忍耐饥寒，我以后将做三公，不知道你能否当公夫人! 
English: At first, Shantao was a commoner, his family was poor, and he said to his wife Han Zheng: "Endure hunger and cold, I will be the third prince in the future, I don't know if you can be a princess!"

古文：及居荣贵，贞慎俭约，虽爵同千乘，而无嫔媵。
现代文：荣华富贵以后，忠诚谨慎俭约，虽然爵位如同诸侯，然而没有纳妾。
English: After the glory and wealth, loyalty, prudence and thrift, although the title of nobility is similar to that of a vassal, but there is no concubine.

古文：禄赐俸秩，散之亲故。
现代文：俸禄赏赐，散发给了亲朋故旧。
English: Rewarded with salary, it was distributed to relatives and friends.

古文：初，陈郡袁毅尝为鬲令，贪浊而赂遗公卿，以求虚誉，亦遗涛丝百斤，涛不欲异于时，受而藏于阁上。
现代文：起初，陈郡人袁毅曾任鬲令，贪污而且贿赂公卿，以此求得虚名，也送给山涛一百斤丝，山涛不愿异于时人，接受了丝而收藏在阁楼上。
English: At the beginning, Yuan Yi, a native of Chen County, had served as a magistrate, corrupting and bribing nobles, in order to gain a false reputation. He also gave Shantao one hundred jin of silk. Shantao did not want to be different from the people at that time, and accepted the silk and stored it in the attic.

古文：后毅事露，槛车送廷尉，凡所以赂，皆见推检。
现代文：后来袁毅的事败露，被押入槛车交付廷尉，凡是接受贿赂的人，都受到追究。
English: Later, Yuan Yi's affair was exposed. He was pushed into a carriage and handed over to a court official. All those who accepted bribes were investigated.

古文：涛乃取丝付吏，积年尘埃，印封如初。
现代文：山涛便取出丝交给官吏，多年的尘埃堆积，印封都没开启。
English: Shan Tao then took out the silk and handed it to the officials. Years of dust accumulated, and the seals were not opened.

古文：涛饮酒至八斗方醉，帝欲试之，乃以酒八斗饮涛，而密益其酒，涛极本量而止。
现代文：山涛喝酒喝到八斗方醉，皇帝想试试他，准备了八斗酒让他喝，而暗中又增添他的酒，山涛喝到自己的极量就不再喝了。
English: The Emperor wanted to test him, so he prepared eight barrels of wine for him to drink, and secretly added to his wine. The Mountain Goat drank to his limit and then stopped drinking.

古文：有五子：该、淳、允、谟、简。
现代文：有五个儿子：山该、山淳、山允、山谟、山简。
English: They had five sons: Yamakai, Yamajun, Yamayun, Yamamo, and Yamajane.

古文：该字伯伦，嗣父爵，仕至并州刺史、太子左率，赠长水校尉。
现代文：山该字伯伦，继承父亲的爵位，官作到并州刺史、太子左率，追赠长水校尉。
English: Yamagata Bollen, inheriting his father's title, was appointed to the post of provincial governor, crown prince, and was posthumously awarded the rank of Chosui school captain.

古文：该子玮字彦祖，翊军校尉。
现代文：山该的儿子山璋字彦祖，任翊军校尉。
English: Yamaga's son, Yamazaki Aza Hikozu, became a lieutenant in the Shinsengumi.

古文：次子世回，吏部郎、散骑常侍。
现代文：次子山世回，任吏部郎、散骑常侍。
English: The second son, Yamashiro, was appointed to the position of Ritsuburo and the position of Sanzhi no Tsunesamurai.

古文：淳字子玄，不仕，允字叔真，奉车都尉，并少尪病，形甚短小，而聪敏过人。
现代文：山淳字子玄，不做官，山允字叔真，任奉车都尉，两人都有驼背之疾，个子也很矮，然而聪明过人。
English: Mountain Junji Zi Xuan, not an official, and Mountain Yunji Shulzhen, a lieutenant in charge of a cart, both have a hunchback and are short, but they are very smart.

古文：武帝闻而欲见之，涛不敢辞，以问于允。
现代文：武帝听说后想见他们，山涛不敢拒绝，去问山允。
English: After hearing this, Emperor Wu wanted to see them. Shantao did not dare to refuse, so he went to ask Shanyong.

古文：允自以尪陋，不肯行。
现代文：山允自认为驼背个子矮，不肯去。
English: Yamayoshi refused to go because he thought the hunchback was short.

古文：涛以为胜己，乃表曰： 臣二子尪病，宜绝人事，不敢受诏。 
现代文：山涛认为他们胜过自己，于是上表说： 我两个儿子体弱多病，不与人来往，不敢接受诏命。 
English: Shantao thought that they were better than themselves, so the above table said: My two sons are weak and sickly, do not socialize with others, and dare not accept the imperial edict.

古文：谟字季长，明惠有才智，官至司空掾。
现代文：山谟字季长，聪慧有才智，官作到司空掾。
English: He was a long-serving member of the Sanmu clan, intelligent and talented, and rose through the ranks to become a magistrate.

古文：简字季伦。
现代文：山简字季伦。
English: Mountain shorthand Ji Lun.

古文：性温雅，有父风，年二十余，涛不之知也。
现代文：性情温文尔雅，有父亲的风度，年龄二十多岁，山涛不了解他。
English: He is mild-mannered, has a father's demeanor, and is in his twenties. The mountains don't know him.

古文：简叹曰： 吾年几三十，而不为家公所知！ 
现代文：山简叹息说： 我快三十岁了，而不被家父了解! 
English: Mountain Jane sighed and said: I'm almost thirty years old, but my father doesn't understand me!

古文：后与谯国嵇绍、氵市郡刘谟、弘农杨准齐名。
现代文：后来与谯国人嵇绍、沛郡人刘谟、弘农人杨准都有名望。
English: Later, he had a reputation as the leader of Gongshao, Pei County, Liu Moo, Hongnong, and Yang Jun.

古文：初为太子舍人，累迁太子庶子、黄门郎，出为青州刺史。
现代文：起初任太子舍人，多次升官任太子庶子、黄门郎，出任青州刺史。
English: At first, he served as the prince's son-in-law, and was promoted several times to serve as the prince's illegitimate son, Huangmenro, and served as the governor of Qingzhou.

古文：征拜侍中，顷之，转尚书。
现代文：召入朝为侍中，不久，转任尚书。
English: He was called to the Imperial Court as a chamberlain, and soon he was transferred to Shoshu.

古文：历镇军将军、荆州刺史，领南蛮校尉，不行，复拜尚书。
现代文：历任镇军将军、荆州刺史，兼南蛮校尉，未赴任，又任尚书。
English: Successive township army generals, Jingzhou stabbing history, and Nanban school captain, did not go to office, but also served as Shangshu.

古文：光熙初，转吏部尚书。
现代文：光熙初年，转任吏部尚书。
English: In the first year of Guangxi Dynasty, he was transferred to the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：永嘉初，出为雍州刺史、镇西将军。
现代文：永嘉初年，出任雍州刺史、镇西将军。
English: In the first year of Yongjia, he served as Yongzhou chief historian and Zhenxi general.

古文：征为尚书左仆射，领吏部。
现代文：召入朝任尚书左仆射，兼管吏部。
English: He was called to the imperial court to serve as Shoshu's second-in-command and second-in-command.

古文：简欲令朝臣各举所知，以广得才之路。
现代文：山简想让朝廷大臣各自推举自己所了解的人，以此广求人才。
English: Yamazane wanted the ministers of the Imperial Court to nominate people they knew, in order to recruit talent.

古文：上疏曰： 臣以为自古兴替，实在官人；苟得其才，则无物不理。
现代文：上疏说： 我认为自古以来的兴衰，在于用人；得到了适当的人才，就能治理好国家。
English: Shang Shu said: I think that the rise and fall since ancient times lies in the employment of people; if you get the right talent, you can govern the country well.

古文：《书》言： 知人则哲，惟帝难之。 
现代文：《尚书》说 知人善任，帝王所难 。
English: "Shangshu" said that it is difficult for emperors to make good friends.

古文：唐、虞之盛，元恺登庸；周室之隆，济济多士。
现代文：唐虞的兴盛，是有好的辅佐大臣；周室的兴隆，是因为人才济济。
English: Tang Yu's prosperity was due to a good assistant minister; Zhou's prosperity was due to a wealth of talent.

古文：秦、汉已来，风雅渐丧。
现代文：秦汉以来，教化逐渐衰败。
English: Since the Qin and Han dynasties, enlightenment gradually declined.

古文：至于后汉，女君临朝，尊官大位，出于阿保，斯乱之始也。
现代文：到了后汉，女主临朝，尊贵的官位，出自左右幸臣，这是乱的开始。
English: In the Later Han Dynasty, empresses of the Lintong Dynasty, noble official positions, came from the right and left ministers, which was the beginning of the chaos.

古文：是以郭泰、许劭之伦，明清议于草野；陈蕃、李固之徒，守忠节于朝廷。
现代文：因此郭泰、许劭一类人，在民间发表高论；陈蕃、李固一类人，在朝廷坚守忠节。
English: Therefore, people such as Guo Tai and Xu Xi published lofty opinions among the common people, while people such as Chen Xi and Li Gu adhered to the Loyalty Festival in the imperial court.

古文：然后君臣名节，古今遗典，可得而言。
现代文：这样君臣的名节，古今遗留下来的典章，得以流传。
English: In this way, the famous festivals of kings and ministers, the ancient and modern left-over awards, have been able to spread.

古文：自初平之元，讫于建安之末，三十年中，万姓流散，死亡略尽，斯乱之极也。
现代文：从初千年开始，到建安末年。三十年中，百姓流散，死亡逃散贻尽，这是战乱到了极点。
English: From the beginning of the first millennium to the end of the construction of Jianan, in the past 30 years, the people have been scattered, and the death and escape have been exhausted. This is the war chaos to the extreme.

古文：世祖武皇帝应天顺人，受禅于魏，泰始之初，躬亲万机，佐命之臣，咸皆率职。
现代文：世祖武皇帝顺应天命人心，接受魏的禅让，泰始初年，日理万机，辅佐大臣，都能奉行职事。
English: Emperor Wu, the forefather of the world, followed the dictates of fate and accepted Wei's concessions, and in the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizhi, he was able to carry out his duties as an assistant minister.

古文：时黄门侍郎王恂、庾纯始于太极东堂听政，评尚书奏事，多论刑狱，不论选举。
现代文：当时黄门侍郎王恂、庾纯开始在太极束堂听政，评议尚书奏报，一般是议论刑法，不议论选举。
English: At that time, Huangmen's attendants Wang Qi and Haochun began to listen to politics in the Taiji Hall, commenting on Shang Shuxiao Bao, generally discussing criminal law, not discussing elections.

古文：臣以为不先所难，而辨其所易。
现代文：我认为这是不先弄清难事，而弄清容易的事。
English: I think it's a matter of not figuring out the hard things first, but figuring out the easy things.

古文：陛下初临万国，人思尽诚，每于听政之日，命公卿大臣先议选举，各言所见后进俊才、乡邑尤异、才堪任用者，皆以名奏，主者随缺先叙。
现代文：陛下刚开始治理天下，人心欲竭尽忠诚，每当在听政的日子裹，命令公卿大臣先议论选举，各自说出自己所见到的后辈英才、乡邑中的出众者、有才能可以任用的人，把名字都奏报上来，主事的人根据缺员情况优先叙用。
English: His Majesty had just begun to govern the world, and his heart yearned to be as loyal as possible. Whenever he was in the middle of a day of listening to politics, he ordered the nobles and ministers to discuss the election first, and each of them said what they had seen of the younger generation, the outstanding people in the townships, and the talented people who could be appointed. They all submitted their names to the newspaper, and the person in charge was given priority according to the vacancy situation.

古文：是爵人于朝，与众共之之义也。 
现代文：这是授人官职，舆众人共同决定的办法。 
English: This is a method of appointing people to official positions that is jointly decided by all members of society.

古文：朝廷从之。
现代文：朝廷依从了他。
English: The court followed his advice.

古文：永嘉三年，出为征南将军、都督荆、湘、交、广四州诸军事、假节，镇襄阳。
现代文：永嘉三年，出任征南将军、都督荆湘交广四州诸军事、假节，镇守襄阳。
English: In the third year of Yongjia, he served as the general of the Southern Expedition, the governor of Jing and Hunan Provinces, the military of the four provinces of Guangxi, the festival, and the town guard of Xiangyang.

古文：于时四方寇乱，天下分崩，王威不振，朝野危惧。
现代文：那时四方作乱，天下分裂，君威不振，朝廷内外忧惧。
English: At that time, the four quarters were in turmoil, the world was divided, the monarch's authority was weak, and there was fear inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：简优游卒岁，唯酒是耽。
现代文：山简终年悠闲自得，沉迷于饮酒。
English: All year round, Yamazane is laid-back and indulges in drinking.

古文：诸习氏，荆土豪族，有佳园池，简每出嬉游，多之池上，置酒辄醉，名之曰高阳池。
现代文：习氏，是荆地的豪族，有优美的园林水池，山简每逢出外娱乐游玩，大多去池上，设酒喝醉，命名水池为高阳池。
English: The Xi clan is a powerful family in Jing, with a beautiful garden pool. Whenever the Shan Jian family went out for recreation, they mostly went to the pool, drank wine and got drunk, and named the pool Gaoyang Pool.

古文：时有童兒歌曰： 山公出何许，往至高阳池。
现代文：当时有儿歌唱道： 山公何处去，去了高阳池。
English: At that time, there was a children's song: Wherever the mountain lord went, he went to Goyangchi.

古文：日夕倒载归，酩酊无所知。
现代文：天黑躺倒归，大醉无所知。
English: It's dark and I'm lying on my back, drunk and clueless.

古文：时时能骑马，倒著白接。
现代文：有时能骑马，倒戴白头巾。
English: Sometimes he can ride a horse and wear a white turban backwards.

古文：举鞭问葛疆：何如并州兒？ 疆家在并州，简爱将也。
现代文：举鞭问葛疆： 可比并州儿? ，葛疆的家在并州，是山简喜爱的将领。
English: Raising a whip to ask GeJiang: Is it comparable to Bozhou?, GeJiang's home is in Bozhou, and he is ShanJian's favorite general.

古文：寻加督宁、益军事。
现代文：不久加督宁、益军事。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to lieutenant colonel and promoted to major general.

古文：时刘聪入寇，京师危逼。
现代文：当时刘聪入侵，京师受到威胁。
English: At that time, Liu Cong invaded and Beijing Division was threatened.

古文：简遣督护王万率师赴难，次于涅阳，为宛城贼王如所破，遂婴城自守。
现代文：山简派遣督护王万率领军队去解救，屯兵涅阳，被宛城敌人王如打败，于是护城自守。
English: Shan Jian dispatched the overseer Wang Wan to lead the army to rescue, and the soldiers were defeated by Wang Ru, the enemy of Wancheng, so the overseer defended himself.

古文：及洛阳陷没，简又为贼严嶷所逼，乃迁于夏口。
现代文：洛阳陷落，山简又被敌人严嶷逼迫，于是迁到夏口。
English: Luoyang fell, and Shan Jian was severely persecuted by the enemy, so he moved to Xia Kou.

古文：招纳流亡，江、汉归附。
现代文：招纳流亡的人，江汉人归附。
English: Those who recruit exiles, Jiang Han people will be attached.

古文：时华轶以江州作难，或劝简讨之。
现代文：当时华轶在江州作乱，有人劝山简讨伐他。
English: At that time, Hua Wei was making trouble in Jiangzhou, and someone advised Shan Jian to fight him.

古文：简曰： 与彦夏旧友，为之惆怅。
现代文：山简说： 与彦夏是老朋友，我为他惆怅。
English: Yamazaki said, "I've been friends with Hikonatsu for a long time, and I'm rooting for him.

古文：简岂利人之机，以为功伐乎！ 
现代文：山简怎能讨伐朋友，为自己捞取功劳呢! 
English: How can Mountain Jane fight her friends and take credit for herself!

古文：其笃厚如此。
现代文：他的敦厚就是这样。
English: That's just how he is.

古文：时乐府伶人避难，多奔沔汉，宴会之日，僚佐或劝奏之。
现代文：当时乐府艺人避难，大多跑到沔漠，宴会时，手下人有的劝说奏乐。
English: At that time, the artists of the Music Academy took refuge, most of them went to the desert, and some of their subordinates persuaded them to play music during the banquet.

古文：简曰： 社稷倾覆，不能匡救，有晋之罪人也，何作乐之有！ 
现代文：山简说： 国家颠覆，不能匡正救难，是晋的罪人，怎能作乐! 
English: Shan Jian said: The country is subverted, it cannot be rectified and saved, it is Jin's sinner, how can it make music!

古文：因流涕慷慨，坐者咸愧焉。
现代文：由此流泪感叹，在座的人都感到羞愧。
English: Tears flowed as a result, and everyone present felt ashamed.

古文：年六十卒，追赠征南大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：死时六十岁，追赠征南大将军、仪同三司。
English: He was sixty years old at the time of his death, and was posthumously awarded the title of General of the South Korean People's Army and the Third Division of the Korean People's Army.

古文：子遐。
现代文：儿子山遐。
English: His son, Yamazaki.

古文：遐字彦林，为余姚令。
现代文：山遐字彦林，任余姚令。
English: Yamazaki character Hikobayashi, appointed by Yu Yao.

古文：时江左初基，法禁宽弛，豪族多挟藏户口，以为私附。
现代文：当时江左刚奠定基业，法律禁令宽松，豪族大多隐藏人户，作为私家的奴仆。
English: At that time, Jiang Zuo had just laid the foundation, the legal ban was loose, and most of the powerful families hid their people as slaves of the private sector.

古文：遐绳以峻法，到县八旬，出口万余。
现代文：山遐用严峻的法律约束他们，到县襄八十天，查出被隐藏人户一万多。
English: Yamazaki used strict laws to restrain them, and after 80 days in the county, more than 10,000 hidden households were found.

古文：县人虞喜以藏户当弃市，遐欲绳喜。
现代文：县裹人虞喜因为该判弃尸于市的罪，山遐想要对虞喜绳之以法。
English: Yamazaki wants to bring Yuki to justice for the crime of abandoning a corpse in the city.

古文：诸豪强莫不切齿于遐，言于执事，以喜有高节，不宜屈辱。
现代文：众豪强没有不对山遐咬牙切齿的，对管事的人说，因为虞喜有高尚的节操，不应受屈辱。
English: All the mighty men, who had not gritted their teeth against the hawthorn, said to the steward, "Because Yu Xi has noble self-restraint, he should not be humiliated."

古文：又以遐辄造县舍，遂陷其罪。
现代文：又因为业遐擅自建造县官署，便罗织罪名陷害他。
English: Also, because he built a county government office without authorization, charges were fabricated to frame him.

古文：遐与会稽内史何充笺： 乞留百日，穷翦捕逃，退而就罪，无恨也。 
现代文：山遐给会稽内史何充去信说： 请求留下我一百天，彻底消灭逃犯，然后离任伏罪，就没有遗憾了。 
English: Yamazaki sent a letter to He Shong, the internal historian of the Audit Commission, saying, "If you ask me to stay for a hundred days, completely eliminate the fugitives, and then leave the post of ambush, there will be no regret."

古文：充申理，不能得。
现代文：何充申述道理，未成功。
English: He unsuccessfully appealed the verdict.

古文：竟坐免官。
现代文：山遐终于坐罪免官。
English: Yamazaki was finally exonerated.

古文：后为东阳太守，为政严猛。
现代文：后任东阳太守，为政严厉。
English: He later became the governor of Dongyang and was very strict in his politics.

古文：康帝诏曰： 东阳顷来竟囚，每多入重。
现代文：康帝下韶书说： 东陨近来全是囚犯，经常是犯有重罪。
English: The imperial edict issued by Emperor Kangxi said: "The Eastern Meteorites are all prisoners these days, and they often commit serious crimes.

古文：岂郡多罪人，将捶楚所求，莫能自固邪！ 
现代文：难道郡裹罪人多，不用刑罚，就不能自守! 
English: Are there so many criminals in the county that they can't defend themselves without punishment?

古文：遐处之自若，郡境肃然。
现代文：山遐坦然对待，郡内整肃。
English: The hawthorns were treated with equanimity, and the county was cleaned up.

古文：卒于官。
现代文：死在官任上。
English: He died in office.

古文：史臣曰：若夫居官以洁其务，欲以启天下之方，事亲以终其身，将以劝天下之俗，非山公之具美，其孰能与于此者哉！
现代文：史臣曰：如果说做官能廉洁，是想要开天下的风气；事奉亲人能有始有终，将会劝勉天下风俗，要不是山公做到两全其美，又有谁能做到呢!
English: Shichen said, "If you say that doing sensuality and integrity is to open up the world's customs; if serving relatives can have a beginning and an end, it will encourage the world's customs. If not the mountain god to do the best of both worlds, who can do it!

古文：自东京丧乱，吏曹湮灭，西园有三公之钱，蒲陶有一州之任，贪饕方驾，寺署斯满。
现代文：自从东京战乱，官吏逃亡，西园有三公的钱财，蒲陶有一州之任，贪婪横行，官署便又人满为患。
English: Since the war in Tokyo, government officials have fled, the West Garden has three kings' money, Putao has a state responsibility, greed is rampant, and government offices are overcrowded.

古文：时移三代，世历九王，拜谢私庭，此焉成俗。
现代文：时间推移到三代，世代经历九王，拜官谢爵于私庭，成为风俗。
English: The time has passed to three generations, the generation has experienced nine kings, and it has become a custom to pay tribute to officials in the private court.

古文：若乃余风稍殄，理或可言。
现代文：如果遗留下的风气稍有消灭，在道理上或许值得一说。
English: If there is a slight loss of heritage, it may be worth saying in principle.

古文：委以铨综，则群情自抑；通乎鱼水，则专用生疑。
现代文：掌握考核选举的权力，群情自会抑制；沟通鱼水关系，专权就会被怀疑。
English: Grasp the power of assessment and election, and group feelings will be suppressed; communicate the relationship between fish and water, and the exclusive power will be suspected.

古文：将矫前失，归诸后正，惠绝臣名，恩驰天口，世称《山公启事》者，岂斯之谓欤！
现代文：矫正先前的过失，是为了以后，封赐不给贤臣，能言善辩者受恩，世上称道《山公启事》的，难道说的就是如此!
English: The correction of previous mistakes is for the sake of the future, the bestowal is not given to the wise men, the one who can speak well is favored, and the world praises the "Mountain Publicity," is that what is said?

古文：若卢子家之前代，何足算也。
现代文：像卢子家那样的前代人，又算得了什么呢。
English: What did the previous generation, like the Lutz family, achieve?

古文：王戎，字濬冲，琅邪临沂人也。
现代文：王戎，字濬冲，琅邪临沂人。
English: Wang Rong, Zi Xuchong, Zi Yanzhong.

古文：祖雄，幽州刺史。
现代文：祖父王雄，是幽业刺史。
English: His grandfather, Wang Xiong, was a famous poet.

古文：父浑，凉州刺史、贞陵亭侯。
现代文：父亲王浑，是凉州刺史、贞陵亭侯。
English: His father, Wang Hun, was the prince of Zhishi and Zhenglingting in Liangzhou.

古文：戎幼而颖悟，神彩秀彻。
现代文：王戎年幼聪明，神采飞扬。
English: Wang Rong is young and clever, and his spirit is soaring.

古文：视日不眩，裴楷见而目之曰： 戎眼灿灿，如岩下电。 
现代文：看太阳眼睛不花，裴揩发现后看着他说： 王戎眼有光芒，像山崖下的电光。 
English: Looking at the sun doesn't hurt the eyes, Pei Yao found it and looked at him and said: Wang Rong's eyes have a glow, like the electric light under the cliff.

古文：年六七岁，于宣武场观戏，猛兽在槛中虓吼震地，众皆奔走，戎独立不动，神色自若。
现代文：六七岁时，在宣武场看戏，猛兽在栅栏中吼声震地，众人都吓跑了，王戎一人站在那裹不动，神色镇定。
English: When he was six or seven years old, he was watching a play at the martial arts stadium. A ferocious beast was howling in the fence. Everyone was scared away. Wang Rong stood there alone, motionless and calm.

古文：魏明帝于阁上见而奇之。
现代文：魏明帝在合上见到而称奇。
English: Wei Mingdi was surprised to see it at the end.

古文：又尝与群兒嬉于道侧，见李树多实，等辈兢趣之，戎独不往。
现代文：又曾舆一群儿童在路旁玩耍，见到李子树上有很多果实，大家争着去摘，惟独王戎不去。
English: Once upon a time, a group of children were playing on the side of the road. They saw a lot of fruit on the plum tree, and everyone tried to pick it, except Wang Rong.

古文：或问其故，其曰： 树在道边而多子，必苦李也。 
现代文：有人间他原因，王戎说： 树在路边而长满果实，必定是苦李。 
English: When asked why, Wang Rong said, "If a tree grows by the roadside and is full of fruit, it must be bitter plum.

古文：取之信然。
现代文：摘到后果然是苦的。
English: The consequences are of course painful.

古文：阮籍与浑为友。
现代文：阮与浑是朋友。
English: Nguyen and Hung are friends.

古文：戎年十五，随浑在郎舍。
现代文：王戎十五岁时，跟随父亲王浑在郎舍。
English: When Wang Rong was fifteen years old, he followed his father, Wang Hun, to his uncle's house.

古文：戎少籍二十岁，而籍与之交。
现代文：王戎比阮籍年轻二十岁，而阮籍与他结交。
English: Wang Rong is 20 years younger than Nguyen Quoc, who befriended him.

古文：籍每适浑，俄顷辄去，过视戎，良久然后出。
现代文：阮籍每次去王浑处，一会儿就走，去看王戎，很久才出来。
English: Every time Ruan Qi went to Wang Hun's place, he would leave in a moment to go see Wang Rong, and it would be a long time before he came out.

古文：谓浑曰： 濬冲清赏，非卿伦也。共卿言，不如共阿戎谈。 
现代文：阮籍对王浑说： 浚冲清洁高尚，非你可比，与你说话，不如与阿戎交谈。 
English: Nguyn Quc said to Wang Hun: "Dredging is clean and noble. It is not comparable to you. It is better to talk to A Rong than to talk to you."

古文：及浑卒于凉州，故吏赙赠数百万，戎辞而不受，由是显名。
现代文：等到王浑死在凉州，旧交之官吏赠送几百万钱，王戎推辞不接受，因此名声远扬。
English: When Wang Hun died in Liangzhou, the officials who were his old friends gave him millions of money. Wang Rong did not accept his resignation, and his reputation spread far and wide.

古文：为人短小，任率不修威仪，善发谈端，赏其要会。
现代文：身材矮小，直率不重威仪，善于出题清谈，能得清谈要领。
English: He is short in stature, straightforward and not overbearing. He is good at asking questions and having a clear conversation, and is able to get to the crux of the matter.

古文：朝贤尝上巳礻契洛，或问王济曰： 昨游有何言谈？ 
现代文：朝中贤臣曾在上巳日游宴于洛，有人问王济说： 昨天出游有什么言谈? 
English: The wise men of the imperial court once held a banquet in Luo during the last emperor's trip to Japan. Someone asked Wang Jie: "What did you talk about on your trip yesterday?"

古文：济曰： 张华善说《史》《汉》；裴頠论前言往行，衮衮可听；王戎谈子房、季札之间，超然玄著。 
现代文：王济说： 张华善于谈《史记》《漠书》；裴顿论从前的言行，娓娓动听；王戎谈论子房、季札，超脱玄妙。 
English: Wang Ji said: Zhang Hua is good at talking about "Histories" and "The Book of the Desert"; Peyton's talk about past words and deeds is charming; Wang Rong's talk about Zibo and Ji Fuda is transcendent and mysterious.

古文：其为识鉴者所赏如此。
现代文：王戎就是如此被有识之士赏识。
English: This is how Wang Rong is appreciated by people of insight.

古文：戎尝与阮籍饮，时兗州刺史刘昶字公荣在坐，籍以酒少，酌不及昶，昶无恨色。
现代文：王戎曾与医箠饮酒，当时童丛刺史塑幽字公茔在座，阮籍因为酒少，不给刘昶斟酒，刘昶没有遣憾的样子。
English: Wang Rong had been drinking with the doctor. At that time, Tong Cong Jian Shi Shou Yu Zi Gong Yao was present. Because of the lack of wine, Ruan Qui did not pour wine for Liu Yao. Liu Yao did not look sorry.

古文：戎异之，他日问籍曰： 彼何如人也？ 
现代文：王戎感到奇怪，有一天问阮籍说： 他是怎么样的人? 
English: Wang Rong felt strange and one day asked Nguyen Quan: "What kind of person is he?

古文：答曰： 胜公荣，不可不与饮；若减公荣，则不敢不共饮；惟公荣可不与饮。 
现代文：回答说： 胜过公荣的人，不能不和他一起饮酒；如果不如公荣，就不敢不一同饮酒；惟独公荣可以不和他一同饮酒。 
English: He replied: "He who is more honorable than the honorable man should not refuse to drink with him; he who is less honorable than the honorable man should not refuse to drink with him; only the honorable man should refuse to drink with him."

古文：戎每与籍为竹林之游，戎尝后至。
现代文：王为常与垦趱作竹林之游，王戎曾后到。
English: Wang Weizong often went to the bamboo forest with his son, Wang Rong, and Wang Rong came later.

古文：籍曰： 俗物已复来败人意。 
现代文：医签说： 俗人又来败坏我的兴致。 
English: The doctor's note said: "The layman has come again to spoil my enjoyment.

古文：戎笑曰： 卿辈意亦复易败耳！
现代文：王戎笑着说： 你的兴致也太容易败坏了! 
English: Wang Rong said with a smile: Your enthusiasm is too easily spoiled!

古文：钟会伐蜀，过与戎别，问计将安出。
现代文：钟会讨伐蜀，路过时与王戎告别，间有何计策。
English: The bell will fight against Shu, and Wang Rong will say goodbye when passing by. What is the strategy?

古文：戎曰： 道家有言， 为而不恃 ，非成功难，保之难也。 
现代文：王戎说： 道家有这样的话， 做而不居功，建功不难，保住功业就难了。 
English: Wang Rong said, "In Taoism, there is such a thing as doing without taking credit. It is not difficult to build credit, but it is difficult to keep credit.

古文：及会败，议者以为知言。
现代文：等到钟会失败，议论的人认为这是有见解的言论。
English: When the bell failed, the debaters thought it was an insightful statement.

古文：袭父爵，辟相国掾，历吏部黄门郎、散骑常侍、河东太守、荆州刺史，坐遣吏修园宅，应免官，诏以赎论。
现代文：继承父亲的爵位，被征用为相国掾，历任吏部黄门郎、散骑常侍、河东太守、荆州刺史，犯了派人修园宅的罪，应免去官职，韶书命令按赎罪论处。
English: Heir to his father's title, he was requisitioned as a peer of the state, the successive officials Huangmen Lang, Zangjie Changzhu, Hedong Dazhong, Jingzhou Zhishi, he committed the crime of sending people to repair the garden house, he should be removed from office, and the imperial edict ordered him to be punished according to the atonement theory.

古文：迁豫州刺史，加建威将军，受诏伐吴。
现代文：改任豫州刺史，加建威将军，接受诏令伐吴。
English: He was appointed as the governor of Yuzhou and the general of Jianwei, and received the imperial command to attack Wu.

古文：戎遣参军罗尚、刘乔领前锋，进攻武昌，吴将杨雍、孙述、江夏太守刘朗各率众诣戎降。
现代文：王戎派参军罗尚、刘乔任前锋，进攻武昌，吴将杨雍、孙述、江夏太守刘朗各自率军队到王戎那裹投降。
English: Wang Rong sent Luo Shang and Liu Qiao to join the army as forwards to attack Wuchang, and Wu sent Yang Yong, Sun Su and Liu Lang, the governor of Jiangxia, to lead the army to Wang Rongna to surrender.

古文：戎督大军临江，吴牙门将孟泰以蕲春、邾二县降。
现代文：王戎督统大军到了临江，吴牙门将孟泰率蕲春、邾两县投降。
English: Wang Rongdu led the army to Linjiang, and Wuya's commander Meng Tai led the two counties of Hunchun and Handan to surrender.

古文：吴平，进爵安丰侯，增邑六千户，赐绢六千匹。
现代文：吴被平定，进爵为安丰县侯，增加食邑六千户，赐绢六千匹。
English: Wu was pacified and ennobled as the lord of Anfeng County, with an increase of 6,000 households and 6,000 yakitori.

古文：戎渡江，绥慰新附，宣扬威惠。
现代文：王戎渡过江，安抚新归附的人，恩威并举。
English: Wang Rong crossed the river, appeased the newly annexed people, and showed grace.

古文：吴光禄勋石伟方直，不容皓朝，称疾归家。
现代文：星光禄勋互伟正直，不被遝壁所容，称病回家。
English: Xing Guanglu, who was honored for his great honesty, was not tolerated by the walls and said he was sick and wanted to go home.

古文：戎嘉其清节，表荐之。
现代文：王戎嘉奖他的节操，上表举荐他。
English: Wang Rong commended him for his self-restraint and recommended him for the award.

古文：诏拜伟为议郎，以二千石禄终其身。
现代文：诏书任互伟为议郎，让他终身享有二千石的俸禄。
English: The imperial edict appointed Juwei as the councilor, allowing him to enjoy a lifetime salary of two thousand koku.

古文：荆土悦服。
现代文：荆地人心悦归服。
English: The people of Jing are happy to submit.

古文：征为侍中。
现代文：召王戎为侍中。
English: Wang Rong was summoned as a chamberlain.

古文：南郡太守刘肇赂戎筒中细布五十端，为司隶所纠，以知而未纳，故得不坐，然议者尤之。
现代文：南郡太守刘肇用五十端筒中细布贿赂王戎，被司隶纠劾，由于知道但没接受，所以没有论罪，然而议论的人指责他。
English: Liu Zhao, the governor of Nan County, was accused of bribing Wang Rong with a piece of cloth in a 50-centimeter cylinder. Since he knew but did not accept, he did not plead guilty. However, those who argued accused him.

古文：帝谓朝臣曰： 戎之为行，岂怀私苟得，正当不欲为异耳！ 
现代文：皇帝对朝臣说： 王戎的行为，难道是怀有私心贪得吗?而是不愿做异于他人的事罢了! 
English: The emperor said to his courtier: Is Wang Rong's behavior motivated by selfish greed? Rather, he just does not want to do things that are different from others!

古文：帝虽以是言释之，然为清慎者所鄙，由是损名。
现代文：皇帝虽然以这样的话解释，然而被清廉的人所鄙视，王戎由此损害了名声。
English: Although the emperor explained in this way, he was despised by the innocent, and Wang Rong's reputation was damaged.

古文：戎在职虽无殊能，而庶绩修理。
现代文：王戎任职虽然没有特殊才能，但治理有方。
English: Although Wang Rong has no special talent, he is a good manager.

古文：后迁光禄勋、吏部尚书，以母忧去职。
现代文：后来升任光禄勋、吏部尚书，因母亲丧事离职。
English: Later, he was promoted to the post of Guanglu Xun and the post of the Secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, but left the post due to the death of his mother.

古文：性至孝，不拘礼制，饮酒食肉，或观弈棋，而容貌毁悴，杖然后起。
现代文：生陆极孝，不拘于礼法，喝酒吃肉，或看人下棋，然而容貌憔悴，拄着木杖才能站起。
English: He was a very filial son. He did not care about etiquette. He would drink alcohol, eat meat, or watch people play chess. However, he had a gaunt appearance and had to hold a cane to stand up.

古文：裴頠往吊之，谓人曰： 若使一恸能伤人，濬冲不免灭性之讥也。 
现代文：裴顿去吊唁，对人说： 如果悲痛伤及人身，浚冲免不了受到居丧而灭性的批评。 
English: Payton offered his condolences, saying, "When you're grieving and you're hurting, you're going to get some negative criticism.

古文：时和峤亦居父丧，以礼法自持，量米而食，哀毁不逾于戎。
现代文：当时和崤也在为父亲服丧，用礼法约束自己，吃饭限量，但哀伤没有超过王戎。
English: At that time, He Rong was also mourning for his father, restraining himself with etiquette and eating only as much as possible, but his grief did not exceed Wang Rong's.

古文：帝谓刘毅曰： 和峤毁顿过礼，使人忧之。 
现代文：皇帝对刘毅说： 和崤哀伤超过礼制，让人为他担忧。 
English: The emperor said to Liu Yi: "Wang Yao's grief exceeds the etiquette, which makes people worry about him.

古文：毅曰： 峤虽寝苫食粥，乃生孝耳。
现代文：刘毅说： 和崤虽然睡草席吃稀饭，但不过是生孝。
English: Liu Yi said: Although He Yao ate porridge at the sleeping grass seat, it was just filial piety.

古文：至于王戎，所谓死孝，陛下当先忧之。 
现代文：至于王戎，那是所谓的死孝，陛下该先为王戎担忧。 
English: As for Wang Rong, that is the so-called filial piety. Your Majesty should worry about Wang Rong first.

古文：戎先有吐疾，居丧增甚。
现代文：王戎先前有呕吐的疾病，居丧呕吐更重。
English: Wang Rong previously had a vomiting disease, and his vomiting was more severe after the funeral.

古文：帝遣医疗之，并赐药物，又断宾客。
现代文：皇帝派医生为他治病，并赐给他药物，又断了宾客。
English: The emperor sent a doctor to treat him, and gave him medicine, and cut off the guest.

古文：杨骏执政，拜太子太傅。
现代文：杨骏执政，任王戎为太子太傅。
English: Yang Hui was in power and appointed Wang Rong as the crown prince.

古文：骏诛之后，东安公繇专断刑赏，威震外内。
现代文：杨骏被诛以后，束安公司马繇一人决定赏赐刑罚，威势震慑朝廷内外。
English: After the arrest of Yang Jie, Ma Jie of the Sokan Company alone decided to award the punishment, which shocked the imperial court and beyond.

古文：戎诫繇曰： 大事之后，宜深远之。 
现代文：王戎告诫司马繇说： 大事之后，应作长远考虑。 
English: Wang Rong admonished Sima Yu, saying: After a major event, long-term considerations should be made.

古文：繇不从，果得罪。
现代文：司马繇不听从，果然获罪。
English: Sima Yao disobeyed and was found guilty.

古文：转中书令，加光禄大夫，给恩信五十人。
现代文：王戎转任中书令，加光禄大夫，给亲信五十人。
English: Wang Rong was transferred to the post of middle secretary, and Jia Guanglu to the post of doctor, and 50 people were given to his close confidants.

古文：迁尚书左仆射，领吏部。
现代文：升任尚书左仆射，兼管吏部。
English: He was promoted to the position of Shang Shuxi's left-hand man and concurrently in charge of the personnel department.

古文：戎始为甲午制，凡选举皆先治百姓，然后授用。
现代文：王戎开始推行甲午制时，凡选举官吏先去治理百姓，然后授职任用。
English: When Wang Rong began to implement the first-past-the-post system, all elected officials first went to govern the people, and then were appointed.

古文：司隶傅咸奏戎，曰： 《书》称 三载考绩，三考黜陟幽明 。
现代文：司隶傅咸上奏指责王戎，说： 《尚书》说 三年考察政绩，三次考察决定贤愚升降 。
English: Sifu Fu Xian accused Wang Rong, saying: "The Shangshu says that three years of inspection of political achievements, three inspections decide the promotion and demotion of the wise and the foolish.

古文：今内外群官，居职未期而戎奏还，既未定其优劣，且送故迎新，相望道路，巧诈由生，伤农害政。
现代文：如今朝廷内外的官吏，在职不满一年而王戎就奏请他们回朝，既没确定他们的优劣，而且送旧官迎新官，新旧道路相望，由此而产生奸巧欺诈，伤农害政。
English: Nowadays, officials inside and outside the imperial court have been in office for less than a year, and Wang Rong wrote to them to invite them back to the imperial court, without determining their merits and demerits, and sending old officials to meet new officials, new and old roads facing each other, resulting in treachery and fraud, harming farmers and harming politics.

古文：戎不仰依尧舜典谟，而驱动浮华，亏败风俗，非徒无益，乃有大损。
现代文：王戎不依尧舜的典章，却驱动浮华，伤风败俗，不仅没有益处，反而大有损害。
English: Wang Rong doesn't adhere to the rules of etiquette, but he drives pomposity and violates customs, which is not only unhelpful, but also very harmful.

古文：宜免戎官，以敦风俗。 
现代文：应该免去王戎的官职，以敦厚风俗。 
English: Wang Rong should be relieved of his official position, and should follow a dignified custom.

古文：戎与贾、郭通亲，竟得不坐。
现代文：王戎与贾、郭是姻亲，终于没有获罪。
English: Wang Rong and Jia and Guo are in-laws, but they were not convicted.

古文：寻转司徒。
现代文：不久转任司徒。
English: He was soon transferred to Stuto.

古文：以王政将圮，苟媚取容，属愍怀太子之废，竟无一言匡谏。
现代文：因为统治将要崩溃，于是苟且谄媚以取皇上欢心，愍怀太子被废，始终没有一句话匡正劝谏。
English: Because his reign was about to collapse, he tried to please the emperor with flattery. The crown prince was dethroned, but there was never a word of correction or advice.

古文：裴頠，戎之婿也，頠诛，戎坐免官。
现代文：裴缜，是王戎的女婿，裴顿被杀，王戎坐罪被免官。
English: Pei Xuan, Wang Rong's son-in-law, was killed, and Wang Rong was removed from office on trumped up charges.

古文：齐王冏起义，孙秀禄戎于城内，赵王伦子欲取戎为军司。
现代文：齐王司马同起义，孙秀在城内囚禁了王戎，赵王司马伦的儿子想任王戎马军司。
English: The king of Qi, Sima Tong, revolted, Sun Xiu imprisoned Wang Rong in the city, and the son of Zhao Wang Sima Lun wanted to appoint Wang Rong Ma as military commander.

古文：博士王繇曰： 濬冲谲诈多端，安肯为少年用？ 
现代文：博士王繇说： 浚冲谲诈多端，怎么肯为年轻人效力? 
English: Dr. Wang Yao said: "Dredging up all kinds of scams, how can it be effective for young people?

古文：乃止。
现代文：便打消了这个念头。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：惠帝反宫，以戎为尚书令。
现代文：惠帝返回宫中。任命王戎为尚书令。
English: Emperor Hui returned to the palace. He appointed Wang Rong as Shang Shuling.

古文：既而河间王颙遣使就说成都王颖，将诛齐王冏。
现代文：此后河间王司马颐派人到成都王司马颖那裹游说，将要讨伐齐王司马冈。
English: After that, Kawama Wang Sima Yao sent people to Chengdu Wang Sima Yingna to lobby, and they were going to fight against Qi Wang Sima Gang.

古文：檄书至，冏谓戎曰： 孙秀作逆，天子幽逼。
现代文：讨伐文书到了，司马网对王戎说： 孙秀作乱，天子被幽禁。
English: When the crusade document arrived, Sima Net said to Wang Rong: Sun Xiu made a disturbance, and Tianzi was imprisoned.

古文：孤纠合义兵，扫除元恶，臣子之节，信著神明。
现代文：我纠集义兵，扫除首恶，臣子的节操，显现于神明。
English: I gather the volunteers, sweep away the chief evil, the discipline of the vassals, and appear in the gods.

古文：二王听谗，造构大难，当赖忠谋，以和不协。
现代文：二王听信谗言，造成大难，我该依赖忠臣良谋，来调和矛盾。
English: The two kings listened to the advice and caused great difficulties. I should rely on the good advice of loyal subjects to reconcile the contradictions.

古文：卿其善为我筹之。 
现代文：请你用心为我筹划此事。 
English: Please plan this for me with all your heart.

古文：戎曰： 公首举义众，匡定大业，开辟以来，未始有也。
现代文：王戎说： 公首先举义，匡正安定大业，立国以来，从未有遇。
English: Wang Rong said: Since the founding of the country, there has never been a time when the public has been the first to call for righteousness, rectification and stability.

古文：然论功报尝，不及有劳，朝野失望，人怀贰志。
现代文：然而论功行赏，没有遍及有功劳的人，朝廷内外失望，人有二心。
English: However, when it comes to the reward for meritorious deeds, there are not enough people with meritorious deeds. People inside and outside the imperial court are disappointed. People are ambivalent.

古文：今二王带甲百万，其锋不可当，若以王就第，不失故爵。
现代文：如今二王带兵百万，势不可挡，如果以王的身份回家，不会失去以往的爵位。
English: Now that the two kings are leading millions of soldiers, they are unstoppable. If they return home as kings, they will not lose their previous titles.

古文：委权崇让，此求安之计也。 
现代文：交出权力崇尚谦让，这是求安定的办法。 
English: Handing over power advocates modesty, which is a way to seek stability.

古文：冏谋臣葛怒曰： 汉魏以来，王公就第，宁有得保妻子乎！
现代文：司马同的谋臣葛旗发怒说： 汉魏以来，王公回家，难道有能保住妻子儿女的吗!
English: Sima Tong's adviser Ge Qi said angrily, "Since the Han and Wei Dynasties, when kings and queens return home, is there anyone who can protect their wives and children?

古文：议者可斩。 
现代文：发这种议论的人可以杀掉。 
English: People who talk like that can be killed.

古文：于是百官震悚，戎伪药发堕厕，得不及祸。
现代文：于是百官恐惧，王戎装作药性发作掉入厕所，因而未遭杀害。
English: As a result, the officials were terrified. Wang Rong pretended to have a drug-induced seizure and fell into the toilet, which prevented him from being killed.

古文：戎以晋室方乱，慕蘧伯玉之为人，与时舒卷，无蹇谔之节。
现代文：王戎因为晋室正处于战乱，羡慕蘧伯玉的为人，顺随形势屈伸，没有忠正的节操。
English: Wang Rong, because Jin's court was in a state of war, envied Zou Bo-yu's character. He flexed and flexed according to the situation, and did not have the discipline of loyalty.

古文：自经典选，未尝进寒素，退虚名，但与时浮沈，户调门选而已。
现代文：自从主管选举，从未任用过门第卑微的平民，也没有贬退遇徒有虚名的官吏，而是顺随时局而浮沉，在官吏内迁转举荐而已。
English: Since the election of the supervisor, there has never been an appointment of a low-ranking civilian, nor has there been a demotion of officials with fictitious names. Instead, they have floated and sunk in accordance with the situation, and have only been transferred and recommended within the ranks of officials.

古文：寻拜司徒，虽位总鼎司，而委事僚采。
现代文：不久任司徒，虽然官位极高，但把政事交给同僚。
English: He soon became a magistrate, and although he held a very high official rank, he left political affairs to his colleagues.

古文：间乘小马，从便门而出游，见者不知其三公也。
现代文：有时骑着小马，从便门出游，见到他的人不知道他是三公。
English: Sometimes he rides a pony and goes out of town on a horse-drawn carriage. People who see him do not know that he is the Third Prince.

古文：故吏多至大官，道路相遇辄避之。
现代文：原来的下属多作了大官，在道路上相遇王戎就避开。
English: Many of his former subordinates became high-ranking officials, and Wang Rong avoided them when they met on the road.

古文：性好兴利，广收八方园田水碓，周遍天下。
现代文：生性喜好谋利，广收八方的园田及水力磨坊，遍及天下。
English: Their natural inclination is to make a profit, and they collect garden plots and water-powered mills from all over the world.

古文：积实聚钱，不知纪极，每自执牙筹，昼夜算计，恆若不足。
现代文：积聚钱物，贪得无厌，往往拿着筹码，昼夜算计，总觉不够。
English: Accumulating money and goods, insatiable greed, often holding chips, calculating day and night, always feeling inadequate.

古文：而又俭啬，不自奉养，天下人谓之膏肓之疾。
现代文：而又吝啬，不顾及自己的身体，天下人说他是病入膏盲。
English: But he is also miserly, disregarding his own body, and the world says that he is terminally ill.

古文：女适裴頠，贷钱数万，久而未还。
现代文：女儿嫁给裴顿，向王戎借钱几万，很久未还。
English: His daughter married Payton and borrowed tens of thousands of dollars from Wang Rong, which she did not pay back for a long time.

古文：女后归宁，戎色不悦，女遽还直，然后乃欢。
现代文：女儿后来回家，王戎脸色不好看，女儿急忙还了钱，逭才有了笑脸。
English: Later, when her daughter came home, Wang Rong did not look good. Her daughter hurriedly returned the money, and only then did she have a smile on her face.

古文：从子将婚，戎遣其一单衣，婚讫而更责取。
现代文：侄儿将结婚，王戎送他一件单衣，婚事办完又要了回来。
English: Wang Rong gave his nephew, who was about to get married, a singlet. After the wedding, he asked for it back.

古文：家有好李，常出货之，恐人得种，恆钻其核。
现代文：家中有好李子，常拿出去卖，恐怕别人得到种子，总是钻坏果核。
English: I have good plums at home. I often take them out to sell. I'm afraid someone else will get the seeds. I always drill out the bad core.

古文：以此获讥于世。
现代文：因此在世上受到嘲笑。
English: That is why it is ridiculed around the world.

古文：其后从帝北伐，王师败绩于荡阴，戎复诣鄴，随帝还洛阳。
现代文：以后跟从皇帝北伐，王室军队在荡阴打了败仗，王戎又去了邺，随皇帝回洛阳。
English: Later, he followed the emperor to the Northern Expedition. The royal army was defeated in the shade, and Wang Rong went to Handan and returned to Luoyang with the emperor.

古文：车驾之西迁也，戎出奔于郏。
现代文：皇帝西迁时，王戎出奔到郏。
English: When the emperor moved to the west, Wang Rong fled to Shunde.

古文：在危难之间，亲接锋刃，谈笑自若，未尝有惧容。
现代文：在危难时期，亲自作战，谈笑自如，从未有惧怕的样子。
English: In times of crisis, he fought personally, talked and laughed freely, and never looked afraid.

古文：时召亲宾，欢娱永日。
现代文：时常召集亲朋宾客，终日欢娱。
English: Family and friends are often invited to join in the fun throughout the day.

古文：永兴二年，薨于郏县，时年七十二，谥曰元。
现代文：永兴二年，在郏县去世，时年七十二岁，谧号元。
English: In the second year of Yongxing, he died in Handan County, at the age of seventy-two, with the surname Yuan.

古文：戎有人伦鉴识，尝目山涛如璞玉浑金，人皆钦其宝，莫知名其器；王衍神姿高彻，如瑶林琼树，自然是风尘表物。
现代文：王戎善于鉴别人才，曾把山涛看作是没有雕琢的玉没有分剖的金，人们都敬重他的宝贵，但不知怎样形容他的才能；王衍神韵姿容高雅纯洁，像瑶林琼树，自然是世俗以外的人物。
English: Wang Rong is good at judging other people's talents. He once regarded Shan Tao as a jade without carving and gold without cutting. People respect his preciousness, but do not know how to describe his talent. Wang Yan Shen Yun is elegant and pure in appearance, like Yulin Qiongshu, and is naturally a person outside the world.

古文：谓裴頠拙于用长，荀勖工于用短，陈道宁纟畟纟畟如束长竿。
现代文：说裴颁不善于发挥自己的长处，而荀勖善于弥补自己的短处，陈道宁挺拔如长竿。
English: Saying that Pei Zi is not good at exerting his strengths, while Zou is good at making up for his weaknesses, Chen Daoning is as upright as a long pole.

古文：族弟敦有高名，戎恶之。
现代文：同族弟弟王敦有名望，王戎厌恶他。
English: Wang Rong's younger brother Wang Dun is famous, but Wang Rong detests him.

古文：敦每候戎，辄托疾不见。
现代文：王敦每次等着见王戎，王戎就推托有病不见。
English: Every time Wang Dun waited to see Wang Rong, Wang Rong would pretend to be ill and disappear.

古文：敦后果为逆乱。
现代文：王敦后来果然叛逆作乱。
English: Wang Dun later rebelled and started a riot.

古文：其鉴尝先见如此。
现代文：王戎的鉴别力和先见之明就像这样。
English: Wang Rong's discernment and foresight are like this.

古文：尝经黄公酒垆下过，顾谓后车客曰： 吾昔与嵇叔夜、阮嗣宗酣暢于此，竹林之游亦预其末。
现代文：曾经路过黄公酒炉，回头对后面车上的客人说： 我过去与嵇叔夜、阮嗣宗在这襄畅饮，竹林之游我也曾参加。
English: He once passed by the Huang Gong wine kiln and turned to the guests in the car behind him and said: I used to have a drink here with Uncle Gong and Uncle Ruan, and I also took part in the bamboo forest tour.

古文：自嵇、阮云亡，吾便为时之所羁绁。
现代文：自从嵇、阮故去，我就被时事束缚。
English: I've been caught up in current affairs ever since Hao and Ruan passed away.

古文：今日视之虽近，邈若山河！ 
现代文：今天看这一切虽近在眼前，但却好像远隔山河! 
English: Looking at all this today, although it is right in front of our eyes, it seems so far away!

古文：初，孙秀为琅邪郡吏，求品于乡议。
现代文：当初，孙秀任琅邪郡吏，让乡大夫评议。
English: At first, Sun Xiu was appointed as the county official of Yuya County, and let the township doctor make a comment.

古文：戎从弟衍将不许，戎劝品之。
现代文：王戎的堂弟王衍打算不答应，王戎劝他给孙秀品评。
English: Wang Yan, Wang Rong's cousin, was not going to agree, but Wang Rong persuaded him to give Sun Xiu a review.

古文：及秀得志，朝士有宿怨者皆被诛，而戎、衍获济焉。
现代文：孙秀得志后，朝中官员与他有宿怨的都被杀害，而王戎、王衍却从孙秀那裹得到好处。
English: After Sun Xiu's death, all the officials in the court and the central government who had a grudge against him were killed, but Wang Rong and Wang Yan benefited from Sun Xiu's influence.

古文：子万，有美名。
现代文：儿子王万，有好名声。
English: His son, Wang Wan, has a good reputation.

古文：少而大肥，戎令食穅，而肥愈甚。
现代文：年少而肥胖，王戎让他吃糠而他肥胖得更厉害。
English: Young and fat, Wang Rong made him eat grasshoppers and he got even fatter.

古文：年十九卒。
现代文：十九岁死。
English: He died at the age of 19.

古文：有庶子兴，戎所不齿。
现代文：有庶子王兴，王戎瞧不起他。
English: He had an illegitimate son, Wang Xing, whom Wang Rong despised.

古文：以从弟阳平太守愔子为嗣。
现代文：让堂弟阳平太守王情的儿子继嗣。
English: Let his cousin Yang Ping, the son of the de facto ruler Wang Rong, succeed him.

古文：衍字夷甫，神情明秀，风姿详雅。
现代文：王衍字夷甫，神情明净秀美，安详高雅。
English: Wang Yan's character, Yifu, has a clear and beautiful demeanor, serene and elegant.

古文：总角尝造山涛，涛嗟叹良久，既去，目而送之曰： 何物老妪，生宁馨兒！
现代文：童年时曾拜访山涛，山涛感叹了很久，王衍走了，山涛目送他说： 什么老妇人，生了这么个儿子!
English: When he was a child, he visited Shantao. Shantao sighed for a long time. Wang Yan left. Shantao looked at him and said, "What an old woman, to have given birth to such a son!

古文：然误天下苍生者，未必非此人也。 
现代文：耽误天下百姓的，未必不是这个人。 
English: It is not necessarily this man who is delaying the people of the world.

古文：父乂，为平北将军，常有公事，使行人列上，不时报。
现代文：父亲王义，是干北将军，常有公事，派人列出，不定时上报。
English: His father, Wang Yi, was a general in the Northern Expeditionary Force. He often had business to attend to, and would send someone to make a list and report it at irregular times.

古文：衍年十四，时在京师，造仆射羊祜，申陈事状，辞甚清辩。
现代文：王衍十四岁，当时在京师，去仆射羊枯那裹，申述事情，言辞很是清楚明辩。
English: Wang Yan was fourteen years old. He was studying in Beijing at the time. He went to the Sheep and Goat Game to report the incident. His words were very clear and explicit.

古文：祜名德贵重，而衍幼年无屈下之色，众咸异之。
现代文：羊祜名声德行很重，而王衍年纪虽小却没有委屈于人下的样子，众人都感到惊异。
English: Goats are reputed to be very virtuous, and although Wang Yan is young, he has not been wronged by others. Everyone was surprised.

古文：杨骏欲以女妻焉，衍耻之，遂阳狂自免。
现代文：杨骏想把女儿嫁给他，王衍以此为耻，便装疯免去此事。
English: Yang Hui wanted to marry his daughter to him, but Wang Yan was ashamed of this and pretended to be mad to get out of it.

古文：武帝闻其名，问戎曰： 夷甫当世谁比？ 
现代文：武帝听说他的名声，问王戎说： 夷甫在当世可以与谁相比? 
English: When Emperor Wu heard of his reputation, he asked Wang Rong, "To whom can Ipho be compared in this world?

古文：戎曰： 未见其比，当从古人中求之。 
现代文：王戎说： 没见到可以和他相比的人，应从古人中寻求。 
English: Wang Rong said, "I haven't seen anyone who can be compared to him, we should look for him among the ancients."

古文：泰始八年，诏举奇才可以安边者，衍初好论从横之术，故尚书卢钦举为辽东太守。
现代文：泰始八年，下韶让推举有奇才可以安定边境的人，王街起初喜好谈论纵横之说，因此尚书卢敛推举他作辽塞太守。
English: At the beginning of the eighth year of the Tai Dynasty, the Lower Ying Dynasty asked Wang Jie to nominate a person who had the ability to stabilize the border. At first, Wang Jie liked to talk about the vertical and horizontal, so Shang Shulu was reluctant to nominate him as the governor of Liaosai.

古文：不就，于是口不论世事，唯雅咏玄虚而已。
现代文：不赴任，于是不谈论世事，惟作诗清谈而已。
English: If you don't go to work, you don't talk about the world, you just write poetry.

古文：尝因宴集，为族人所怒，举累掷其面。
现代文：曾因为宴饮相聚，惹怒了族人，举起木盘扔到他脸上。
English: Once, he angered the tribesmen by holding a banquet, and they held up a wooden plate and threw it in his face.

古文：衍初无言，引王导共载而去。
现代文：王衍起初不说话，叫上王遵同车离去。
English: Wang Yan did not speak at first, but told Shang Wang Zun to leave with the cart.

古文：然心不能平，在车中揽镜自照，谓导曰： 尔看吾目光乃在牛背上矣。 
现代文：然而心中不平，在车中拿起镜子照自己，对王导说： 你看我的目光却在牛背上。 
English: However, he felt uneasy. In the car, he picked up a mirror and looked at himself. He said to Wang Du: "You see, my eyes are on the cow's back."

古文：父卒于北平，送故甚厚，为亲识之所借贷，因以舍之。
现代文：父亲死在北平，丧事送赠很多，亲友向他借贷，就施舍给他们。
English: When my father died in Peiping, there were a lot of funeral gifts. Relatives and friends borrowed money from him and gave it to them.

古文：数年之间，家资罄尽，出就洛城西田园而居焉。后为太子舍人，还尚书郎。
现代文：几年之间，家产耗尽，到洛城西田园居住。后来任太子舍人，升任尚书郎。
English: Within a few years, his family's resources were exhausted, and he went to live in a rural area west of Los Angeles. Later, he was appointed the prince's chamberlain and was promoted to Shoshiro.

古文：出补元城令，终日清谈，而县务亦理。
现代文：出京补任元城令，终日清谈，然而县中政务也得到处理。
English: He went to Beijing to fill the post of Yuancheng, and talked all day long. However, the county government affairs were also dealt with.

古文：入为中庶子、黄门侍郎。
现代文：召入任中庶子、黄门侍郎。
English: His illegitimate son, Huangmen Zhi Rong, was called to the post.

古文：魏正始中，何晏、王弼等祖述《老》《庄》，立论以为： 天地万物皆以无为本。
现代文：魏正始年间，何晏、王弼等人开始论述《老》《庄》，立论认为： 天地万物都以无为本。
English: At the beginning of the Wei Dynasty, He Zhen and Wang Zhen et al. began to discuss "Lao" and "Zhuang" and established the theory that: Everything in heaven and earth is based on nothing.

古文：无也者，开物成务，无往不存者也。
现代文：所谓无，通晓万物之理而成功，无处不存在。
English: The so-called nothing, which succeeds by knowing the reason of all things, does not exist anywhere.

古文：阴阳恃以化生，万物恃以成形，贤者恃以成德，不肖恃以免身。
现代文：阴阳靠它变化产生，万物靠它成形，贤人靠它成就德行，不贤的人靠它免难保身。
English: Yin and yang rely on it to change, all things rely on it to take shape, wise people rely on it to achieve virtue, and unwise people rely on it to protect themselves.

古文：故无之为用，无爵而贵矣。 
现代文：因此无的作用，没有爵位而宝贵。 
English: So it's worthless without a title.

古文：衍甚重之。
现代文：王衍很重视逭一言论。
English: Wang Yan attaches great importance to Xi Jinping's speech.

古文：惟裴頠以为非，著论以讥之，而衍处之自若。
现代文：而裴题认为不对，著述理论批判，王衍对待批判若无其事。
English: But Pei Tie thought it was wrong, criticizing the theory of writing, and Wang Yan treated the criticism as nothing.

古文：衍既有盛才美貌，明悟若神，常自比子贡。
现代文：王堑既有高才美貌，而又聪明如神，常自比王贡。
English: Wang Yao was not only talented and beautiful, but also smart as a god. He often compared himself to Wang Gong.

古文：兼声名藉甚，倾动当世。妙善玄言，唯谈《老》《庄》为事。
现代文：再加上名声极高，在当时极有影响。善于谈玄，把《老》《庄》作为话题。
English: In addition, he had a very high reputation and was very influential at the time. He was good at talking about the occult, using "Lao" and "Zhuang" as topics.

古文：每捉玉柄麈尾，与手同色。
现代文：常常手拿玉柄拂麈，与手同色。
English: He often holds a whisk with a bead handle, which is the same color as his hands.

古文：义理有所不安，随即改更，世号 口中雌黄。 
现代文：义理有觉得不合适的地方，立刻更改，世上号称 口中雌黄 。
English: If there is anything that Giri feels is not appropriate, she will change it immediately. She is known as a "bitch" in the world.

古文：朝野翕然，谓之 一世龙门 矣。
现代文：朝廷内外异口同声，说他是 一世龙门 。
English: People both inside and outside the Imperial Court spoke with one voice, saying that he was the first Dragon Gate.

古文：累居显职，后进之士，莫不景慕放效。
现代文：连续出任显赫官职，后来做官的人，没有不仰慕效法的。
English: There is no one who has successively held a prominent official post and later served as an official who does not admire and emulate him.

古文：选举登朝，皆以为称首。
现代文：选举上朝，都以他为首。
English: In the last election, he was the top vote-getter.

古文：矜高浮诞，遂成风俗焉。
现代文：高傲虚浮怪诞，于是成了风俗。
English: Arrogant, vain and grotesque, it became a custom.

古文：衍尝丧幼子，山简吊之。
现代文：王衍曾死了幼子，山个去吊唁。
English: When Wang Yan's infant son died, everyone went to mourn him.

古文：衍悲不自胜，简曰： 孩抱中物，何至于此！ 
现代文：玉堑悲伤不能自持，山个说： 怀抱的幼儿，何至于如此悲伤! 
English: Tamakazura couldn't contain her sadness, and the mountain said, "A child in your arms, why are you so sad?

古文：衍曰： 圣人忘情，最下不及于情。
现代文：王衍说： 圣人忘情，最下者不及于情。
English: Wang Yan said: A saint forgets his feelings, but the lowest of the low is incapable of feeling.

古文：然则情之所钟，正在我辈。 
现代文：而情之所钟，正在我这类人。 
English: But it's people like me that make it so special.

古文：简服其言，更为之恸。
现代文：山简佩服他的话，更为悲痛。
English: Mountain Jane admired his words, even more sad.

古文：衍妻郭氏，贾后之亲，藉中宫之势，刚愎贪戾，聚敛无厌，好干预人事，衍患之而不能禁。
现代文：王衍的妻子郭氏，是贾后的亲戚，凭内宫的势力，刚愎贪暴，聚敛不知满足，喜好干预人事，王衍忧虑却不能禁止。
English: Wang Yan's wife, the Guo clan, is a relative of Empress Jia. With the power of the Inner Court, she is stubborn and corrupt. She does not know how to be satisfied, and likes to interfere in personnel affairs. However, Wang Yan's worries cannot be banned.

古文：时有乡人幽州刺史李阳，京师大侠也，郭氏素惮也。
现代文：当时有同乡人幽州刺史李阳，是京师的大侠，郭氏一向怕他。
English: At that time, there was a fellow villager from Yuzhou, Li Yang, who was a great hero in Beijing. Guo had always been afraid of him.

古文：衍谓郭曰： 非但我言卿不可，李阳亦谓不可。 
现代文：王衍对郭氏说： 不但是我说你不对，李阳也说不对。 
English: Wang Yan said to Guo: Not only did I say you were wrong, Li Yang also said you were wrong.

古文：郭氏为之小损。
现代文：郭氏为此稍加收敛。
English: For this reason, Mr. Guo is a bit more restrained.

古文：衍疾郭之贪鄙，故口未尝言钱。
现代文：王衍憎恶郭氏的贪婪卑劣，因此从不提钱。
English: Wang Yan detested Guo's greed and meanness, so he never mentioned money.

古文：郭欲试之，令婢以钱绕床，使不得行。
现代文：郭氏想试试他，令婢女用钱绕床，使王衍无法走动。
English: Mr. Guo wanted to test him, so he had his servant put money around the bed to make Wang Yan unable to move.

古文：衍晨起见钱，谓婢曰： 举阿堵物却！ 
现代文：王衍早晨起来见到钱，对婢女说： 拿这些东西下去! 
English: When Wang Yan got up in the morning and saw the money, he said to his maid, "Take these things downstairs!"

古文：其措意如此。
现代文：他的心意就是这样。
English: That's what he's thinking.

古文：后历北军中候、中领军、尚书令。
现代文：后来历任北军中候、中领军、尚书令。
English: Later, the successive Northern Army middle-ranking officers, middle-ranking leaders, and Shang Shuling.

古文：女为愍怀太子妃，太子为贾后所诬，衍惧祸，自表离婚。
现代文：女儿是愍怀太子的妃子，太子受买后诬陷，王衍怕惹来灾祸，自己上表请求离婚。
English: The daughter is the concubine of the prince in her arms, the prince is framed after being bought, Wang Yan is afraid of causing a disaster, and he asks for a divorce.

古文：贾后既废，有司奏衍，曰： 衍与司徒梁王肜书，写呈皇太子手与妃及衍书，陈见诬见状。
现代文：贾后被废后，有关官吏弹劾王衍，说： 王衍给司徒梁王司马肜写信，转呈皇太子给妃子及王衍的亲笔信，陈述被诬陷的情况。
English: After Jia Guo was deposed, the relevant officials impeached Wang Yan, saying: Wang Yan wrote a letter to Szeto Liang Wang Sima Qian and forwarded the crown prince's personal letter to his wife and Wang Yan, stating the situation of being framed.

古文：肜等伏读，辞旨恳恻。
现代文：司马肜等读了信，内容恳切真诚。
English: Sima Ye and others read the letter, the content is earnest and sincere.

古文：衍备位大臣，应以议责也。
现代文：王衍身居大臣之位，应根据义理自律。
English: Wang Yan, as a minister, should be self-disciplined according to the principle of justice.

古文：太子被诬得罪，衍不能守死善道，即求离婚。
现代文：太子被诬陷获罪，王衍不能以死固守善道，却要求离婚。
English: The prince was framed and found guilty. Wang Yan could not stick to the virtuous path with his life, but he asked for a divorce.

古文：得太子手书，隐蔽不出。
现代文：得到太子的亲笔信，隐藏不拿出来。
English: If you get a letter from the crown prince, hide it, don't show it.

古文：志在苟免，无忠蹇之操。
现代文：在于苟且免难，没有忠诚节操。
English: There is no such thing as loyalty and self-restraint in the face of adversity.

古文：宜加显责，以厉臣节。
现代文：应加以重罚，以激励人臣的节操。
English: They should be severely punished to encourage officials to be more frugal.

古文：可禁锢终身。 
现代文：可以终身禁锢。 听从。
English: You can go to jail for life.

古文：从之。衍素轻赵王伦之为人。
现代文：王衍一向轻视趟王司马伦的为人。
English: Wang Yan has always despised Wang Simaren as a person.

古文：及伦篡位，衍阳狂斫婢以自免。
现代文：司马伦篡位后，王衍装疯砍杀奴婢来免难。
English: After Sima Lun usurped the throne, Wang Yan pretended to be mad and killed slaves to avoid trouble.

古文：及伦诛，拜河南尹，转尚书，又为中书令。
现代文：司马伦被诛后，王衍官拜河南尹，转任尚书，又任中书令。
English: After Sima Lun was taken into custody, Wang Yan paid homage to Henan Yin as an official, and was transferred to the post of Shang Shu, and was also appointed to the post of Zhong Shu Ling.

古文：时齐王乂有匡复之功，而专权自恣，公卿皆为之拜，衍独长揖焉。
现代文：当时齐王司马同有恢复皇室的功劳，因而专权自任，公卿都对他行拜礼，惟独王衍对他行拱手礼。
English: At that time, King Sima of Qi also had the merit of restoring the royal family, so the exclusive power was self-appointed. The nobles all bowed to him, but only Wang Yan bowed to him.

古文：以病去官。
现代文：因病辞去官职。
English: He resigned from his post due to illness.

古文：成都王颖以衍为中军师，累迁尚书仆射，领吏部，后拜尚书令、司空、司徒。
现代文：成都王司马颖任命王衍为中军师，多次升官任尚书仆射，兼管吏部，后来官拜尚书令、司空、司徒。
English: Chengdu Wang Sima Ying appointed Wang Yan as a Chinese military instructor, and he was promoted several times to the post of Shang Shuxu Puxi, and also in charge of the personnel department. Later, he was promoted to the post of Shang Shuling, Sikuo, and Sito.

古文：衍虽居宰辅之重，不以经国为念，而思自全之计。
现代文：王衍虽然官居三公要位，不把治国当作大事，而想着自我保全。
English: Although Wang Yan holds the three most important positions, he does not regard governing the country as an important matter, but thinks about self-preservation.

古文：说东海王越曰： 中国已乱，当赖方伯，宜得文武兼资以任之。 
现代文：劝东海王司马越说： 中原已经乱了，应当依赖地方长官，应该选文武兼备的人任用为地方长官。 
English: He advised the king of the East China Sea, Sima Yue, saying, "The Central Plains is already in chaos, we should rely on local governors, and we should choose people who are both literate and armed and appoint them as local governors.

古文：乃以弟澄为荆州，族弟敦为青州。
现代文：便用弟王澄任荆州刺史，族弟王敦任青州刺史。
English: He then appointed his younger brother Wang Cheng as the governor of Jingzhou and his younger brother Wang Dun as the governor of Qingzhou.

古文：因谓澄、敦曰： 荆州有江、汉之固，青州有负海之险，卿二人在外，而吾留此，足以为三窟矣。 
现代文：对王澄、王敦说： 荆州有江汉的险要，青州有靠海的险阻，你二人在外，而我留在这裹，足以算作狡兔三窟。 
English: To Wang Cheng and Wang Dun, he said: Jingzhou has the peril of the Han River, Qingzhou has the peril of the sea, you two are outside, and I stay here, it is enough to be counted as three caves.

古文：识者鄙之。
现代文：有识之士鄙视王衍。
English: People with insight despise Wang Yan.

古文：及石勒、王弥寇京师，以衍都督征讨诸军事、持节、假黄钺以距之。
现代文：石勒、王弥进犯京师，任命王衍为都督征讨诸军事、持节、假黄锁来迎击敌人。
English: Shi Le and Wang Ya invaded the capital and appointed Wang Yan as the governor of the capital to recruit military personnel, hold festivals and fake yellow locks to meet the enemy.

古文：衍使前将军曹武、左卫将军王景等击贼，退之，获其辎重。
现代文：王衍派前将军萱武、左卫将军工基等迎击敌军，打退他们，缴获他们的辎重。
English: Wang Yan sent the former general Zou Wu and the left guard general Gong Ji to meet the enemy forces, repel them and capture their baggage.

古文：迁太尉，尚书令如故。
现代文：升任太尉，尚书令的职位依旧。
English: He was promoted to the rank of captain, but his position as Shang Shuling remained the same.

古文：封武陵侯，辞封不受。
现代文：封他为武陵侯，推辞不接受封爵。
English: He was given the title of Lord of Wuling, but refused to accept a peerage.

古文：时洛阳危逼，多欲迁都以避其难，而衍独卖车牛以安众心。
现代文：当时洛阳危急，多数人想迁都来避难，而惟独王衍卖掉车牛来安定众人的心。
English: At that time, Luoyang was in a critical situation, and most people wanted to move the capital to take refuge, but only Wang Yan sold the cattle to stabilize the hearts of the people.

古文：越之讨苟晞也，衍以太尉为太傅军司。
现代文：司马越在讨伐苟晞时，王衍以太尉的身份出任太傅军司。
English: When Sima Yue was at war with Goguryeo, Wang Yan served as the Tai Fu military commander as the Tai Fu lieutenant.

古文：及越薨，众共推为元帅。
现代文：司马越去世，众人推举王衍为元帅。
English: Sima Yue died, and the people elected Wang Yan as marshal.

古文：衍以贼寇锋起，惧不敢当。
现代文：王衍因为盗匪四处兴起，害怕而不敢担当。
English: Wang Yan did not dare to take charge because he was afraid of bandits springing up everywhere.

古文：辞曰： 吾少无宦情，随牒推移，遂至于此。
现代文：推辞说： 我年少时没有做官的欲望，随着选补官吏，到了今天的官位。
English: The rebuttal said: When I was young, I had no desire to be an official, but with the election of additional officials, I have reached today's official position.

古文：今日之事，安可以非才处之。 
现代文：如今的事，怎么能用不具备才能的人来充任呢。 
English: In this day and age, how can you fill a position with someone who doesn't have the talent?

古文：俄而举军为石勒所破，勒呼王公，与之相见，问衍以晋故。
现代文：不久全军被石勒打败，石勒呼唤王公，和他相见，向王衍询问晋旧事。
English: Soon, the whole army was defeated by Shi Le. Shi Le called Wang Gong to meet him and asked Wang Yan about Jin's past.

古文：衍为陈祸败之由，云计不在己。
现代文：王衍为他陈述失败的缘由，说计谋不是他出的。
English: Wang Yan stated the reason for his failure, saying that he did not come up with the scheme.

古文：勒甚悦之，与语移日。
现代文：石勒很喜欢王衍，跟他谈了一整天。
English: Shi Ler liked Wang Yan very much and talked to him for a whole day.

古文：衍自说少不豫事，欲求自免，因劝勒称尊号。
现代文：王衍自称不参与国事，想求得自身免难，于是劝石勒称帝。
English: Wang Yan claimed not to be involved in state affairs and wanted to save himself from trouble, so he persuaded Shiller to proclaim himself emperor.

古文：勒怒曰： 君名盖四海，身居重任，少壮登朝，至于白首，何得言不豫世事邪！
现代文：石勒发怒说： 你远近闻名，身居重任，年轻时入朝为官，直到头发变白，怎能说是不参与国事呢!
English: Shi Le said angrily, "You are famous far and wide, you have a heavy responsibility, you entered the imperial court as an official when you were young, until your hair turned white, how can you say that you do not participate in state affairs!

古文：破坏天下，正是君罪。 
现代文：破坏天下，正是你的罪状。 
English: Destroying the world is exactly what you are guilty of.

古文：使左右扶出。
现代文：叫左右的人扶他出去。
English: He asked the people around him to help him out.

古文：谓其党孔苌曰： 吾行天下多矣，未尝见如此人，当可活不？ 
现代文：石勒对他的同党孔苌说： 我走遍天下，从没见过这样的人，该不该留他一命呢? 
English: Shi Le said to his party comrade Kong Ye: I have traveled all over the world and have never seen such a person. Should I let him live?

古文：苌曰： 彼晋之三公，必不为我尽力，又何足贵乎！ 
现代文：孔苌说： 他是晋的三公，必定不会为我们尽力，又有什么可用的呢! 
English: Confucius said, "He is the Third Prince of Jin, he will certainly not do his best for us, and what is there to use?

古文：勒曰： 要不可加以锋刃也。 
现代文：石勒说： 但不能对他使用刀杀。 
English: "But you can't kill him with a knife," Mr. Shiller said.

古文：使人夜排墙填杀之。
现代文：派人在夜裹推倒墙壁把他压死。
English: They sent someone at night to tear down the walls and crush him to death.

古文：衍将死，顾而言曰： 呜呼！
现代文：王衍临死时，回头对人说： 唉!
English: When Wang Yan was about to die, he turned around and said to the people: Alas!

古文：吾曹虽不如古人，向若不祖尚浮虚，戮力以匡天下，犹可不至今日。 
现代文：我虽不如古人，假如不崇尚虚浮，一心匡救天下，还可以不至于到今天这样的地步。 
English: Although I am not as good as the ancients, if I do not worship vanity and save the world with one heart, I can still not reach today's level.

古文：时年五十六。
现代文：时年五十六岁。
English: He was fifty-six years old.

古文：衍俊秀有令望，希心玄远，未尝语利。
现代文：王衍俊秀有好名声，追求玄奥幽远，未曾谈利。
English: Wang Yanjunxiu has a good reputation, pursues the profound and remote, and has never talked about profit.

古文：王敦过江，常称之曰： 夷甫处众中，如珠玉在瓦石间。 
现代文：王敦过江，常称赞他说： 夷甫处在众人中，好像珠玉在瓦石中间。 
English: Wang Dun crossed the river and often praised him, saying: "Yifu is in the middle of the crowd, like a jewel in the middle of a pebble.

古文：顾恺之作画赞，亦称衍岩岩清峙，壁立千仞。
现代文：顾恺之作画赞，也称赞王衍巍巍清高，屹立于万丈山崖。
English: Gu Gu's painting praise, also praised Wang Yan's clear and high, standing on the cliff of Mount Manzhoul.

古文：其为人所尚如此。
现代文：他就是这样被人崇尚。
English: That's how he's revered.

古文：子玄，字眉子，少慕简旷，亦有俊才，与卫玠齐名。
现代文：儿子王玄，字眉子，年少时追求旷达，也有出众的才能，和卫阶有同样的名声。
English: Wang Xuan's son, Zha Meizi, had the same reputation as Wei Zhuang, as he was a young man who pursued expansion and had outstanding talent.

古文：荀籓用为陈留太守，屯尉氏。
现代文：荀藩任用他为陈留太守，屯守在尉氏。
English: He was appointed as Chen Liu Taishu by the Yan clan, and was the highest-ranking officer in the clan.

古文：玄素名家，有豪气，荒弊之时，人情不附，将赴祖逖，为盗所害焉。
现代文：王玄是名家，有豪气，荒乱时期，不依附于人情，将要投奔祖逖时，被强盗杀害。
English: Wang Xuan is a famous family. He has a strong spirit. During the turbulent times, he did not cling to human feelings. When he was about to go to his ancestral home, he was killed by robbers.

古文：澄字平子。
现代文：王澄字平子。
English: Wang Cheng is called Heishi.

古文：生而警悟，虽未能言，见人举动，便识其意。
现代文：幼年机敏聪慧，虽然不能说话，但看见别人的举动，就知道他的意思。
English: As a child, he was quick-witted and clever. Although he could not speak, he knew what others meant when he saw their actions.

古文：衍妻郭性贪鄙，欲令婢路上担粪。
现代文：王衍的妻子郭氏生性贪婪，想让婢女在路上担粪。
English: Wang Yan's wife, Guo Shi, was greedy by nature and wanted her maid to carry the manure on the road.

古文：澄年十四，谏郭以为不可。
现代文：王澄当时十四岁，劝告郭氏说不能那样做。
English: Wang Cheng, who was 14 at the time, advised Guo not to do that.

古文：郭大怒，谓澄曰： 昔夫人临终，以小郎属新妇，不以新妇属小郎。 
现代文：郭氏大怒，对王澄说： 过去夫人临终前，把你嘱托给我，而不是把我嘱托给你。 
English: Mr. Guo was furious and said to Wang Cheng, "Before your late wife passed away, she entrusted you to me, but she did not entrust me to you.

古文：因捉其衣裾，将杖之。
现代文：于是拉住他的衣襟，要用棍子打他。
English: And he took him by the scruff of the neck, and would have smitten him with his rod.

古文：澄争得脱，逾窗而走。
现代文：王澄挣脱，跳窗逃跑。
English: Wang Cheng broke free and jumped out of the window to escape.

古文：衍有重名于世，时人许以人伦之鉴。
现代文：王衍在世上名气大，当时的人把他比作辨别人的品行的镜子。
English: Wang Yan was famous in the world, and people at that time likened him to a mirror for judging the conduct of others.

古文：尤重澄及王敦、庾敳，尝为天下人士目曰： 阿平第一，子嵩第二，处仲第三。 
现代文：王衍尤其看重王澄及王敦、庾敖，曾为天下人品评说： 阿平第一，子嵩第二，处仲第三。 
English: Wang Yan paid special attention to Wang Cheng, Wang Dun, and Zou, and once said that they were the best in the world: Aping first, Zi Song second, and Shuzhong third.

古文：澄尝谓衍曰： 兄形似道，而神锋太俊。 
现代文：王澄曾对王衍说： 兄长外形似道家，而神采气概超人。 
English: Wang Cheng once said to Wang Yan: "My elder brother looks like a Taoist, and his energy is almost superhuman.

古文：衍曰： 诚不如卿落落穆穆然也。 
现代文：王衍说： 的确不如你洒脱温和。 
English: Wang Yan said, "It's true that I'm not as easygoing and gentle as you.

古文：澄由是显名。
现代文：王澄因此名声显赫。
English: As a result, Wang Cheng became famous.

古文：有经澄所题目者，衍不复有言，辄云 已经平子矣 。
现代文：有经过王澄品评的人，王衍不再发表看法，就说 已经经过平子了 。
English: People who have been evaluated by Wang Cheng, Wang Yan no longer express their views, they say that they have already passed through Ping Zi.

古文：少历显位，累迁成都王颖从事中郎。
现代文：年少即历任显要官位，逐步升官为成都王司马颖的从事中郎。
English: At a young age, he successively held important official positions, and was gradually promoted to the position of Chengdu Wang Sima Ying's middle-ranking official.

古文：颖嬖竖孟玖谮杀陆机兄弟，天下切齿。
现代文：司马颖的宠臣孟玖诬告而杀害陆机兄弟，天下人愤恨。
English: Sima Ying's favorite Meng Wei falsely accused and killed the land machine brothers, and the world was outraged.

古文：澄发玖私奸，劝颖杀玖，颖乃诛之，士庶莫不称善。
现代文：王澄揭发孟玖的隐情，劝司马颖杀掉孟玖，司马颖于是杀了孟玖，官吏百姓都叫好。
English: Wang Cheng revealed Meng Yao's secret, and persuaded Sima Ying to kill Meng Yao. Sima Ying then killed Meng Yao, and the officials and people all cheered.

古文：及颖败，东海王越请为司空长史。
现代文：等到司马颖失败，束海王司马越请他任司空长史。
English: After Sima Ying's defeat, Sima Yue, the king of Sokai, invited him to be the first governor of Siku.

古文：以迎大驾勋，封南乡侯。
现代文：因为迎奉皇帝的功勋，封为南乡侯。
English: Because of his meritorious service to the emperor, he was given the title of Nanxiangwu.

古文：迁建威将军、雍州刺史，不之职。
现代文：转任建威将军、雍州刺史，不就职。
English: He was transferred to the posts of General Jian Wei and Yongzhou Jishi, but did not take office.

古文：时王敦、谢鲲、庾敳、阮修皆为衍所亲善，号为四友，而亦与澄狎，又有光逸、胡毋辅之等亦豫焉。
现代文：当时王敦、谢馄、庾故、阮脩都是王衍的好友，号称四友，而也和王澄游乐，又有光逸、胡毋辅之等人也参与其中。
English: At that time, Wang Dun, Xie Qian, Xuan Xie, and Ruan Qian were all close friends of Wang Yan, known as the four friends, and also played with Wang Cheng, and there were also people such as Guangyi and Hu Bei.

古文：酣宴纵诞，穷欢极娱。
现代文：饮酒放浪，极尽欢娱。
English: Drinking and carousing, partying to the max.

古文：惠帝末，衍白越以澄为荆州刺史、持节、都督，领南蛮校尉，敦为青州。
现代文：惠帝末年，王衍对司马越说任命王澄为荆州刺史、持节、都督，兼南蛮校尉，王敦任青州刺史。
English: At the end of Emperor Hui's reign, Wang Yan told Sima Yue that he had appointed Wang Cheng as the governor of Jingzhou, and Wang Dun as the governor of Qingzhou.

古文：衍因问以方略，敦曰： 当临事制变，不可豫论。 
现代文：王衍于是向王敦间治政之法，王敦说： 应临事制定对策，不能事先论定。 
English: Wang Yan then told Wang Dun about the rules of governance, and Wang Dun said: It is necessary to formulate countermeasures on an ad hoc basis, and they cannot be discussed in advance.

古文：澄辞义锋出，算略无方，一坐嗟服。
现代文：王澄的言辞锋芒毕露，计谋出奇，在座的人都叹服。
English: Wang Cheng's sharp-tongued words and surprising stratagems left everyone present in awe.

古文：澄将之镇，送者倾朝。
现代文：王澄将去赴任，满朝的人为他送行。
English: Wang Cheng is going to take up his post, and the people of the Manchu Dynasty are going to see him off.

古文：澄见树上鹊巢，便脱衣上树，探而弄之，神气萧然，傍若无人。
现代文：王澄看到树上的鹊巢，就脱衣上树，逗弄幼鸟，神情悠然，旁若无人。
English: When Wang Cheng saw the stork's nest in the tree, he stripped off his clothes and climbed up the tree to tease the young birds. He looked relaxed, as if no one was around.

古文：刘琨谓澄曰： 卿形虽散朗，而内实动侠，以此处世，难得其死。 
现代文：刘琨对王澄说： 你外表虽然洒脱，而内心却仗义而想有所作为，这样处世，难得寿终正寝。 
English: Liu Wei said to Wang Cheng: Although you are outwardly free and easy-going, your heart wants to do something for the sake of righteousness. If you live in this way, it is rare for your life to end in death.

古文：澄默然不答。
现代文：王澄沉默不答。
English: Wang Cheng remained silent and did not answer.

古文：澄既至镇，日夜纵酒，不亲庶事，虽寇戎急务，亦不以在怀。
现代文：王澄到达任所以后，日夜放纵饮酒，不料理政务，即便是军情要事，也不放在心上。
English: After Wang Cheng arrived at the office, he indulged in drinking day and night, and did not take government affairs, even military affairs, to heart.

古文：擢顺阳人郭舒于寒悴之中，以为别驾，委以州府。
现代文：提拔贫寒的顺阳人郭舒，任命他为别驾，把州事交给他。
English: Guo Shu, a poor person from Shunyang, was promoted and appointed as the second-in-command, and state affairs were handed over to him.

古文：时京师危逼，澄率众军，将赴国难，而飘风折其节柱。
现代文：当时京城危急，王澄率领众军，将奔赴国难，而一阵风吹断了节柱。
English: At that time, the capital was in a critical situation. Wang Cheng, leading the army, would rush to the national disaster, and a gust of wind broke the column.

古文：会王如寇襄阳，澄前锋至宜城，遣使诣山简，为如党严嶷所获。
现代文：正赶上王如进攻襄阳，王澄的先锋到达宜城，派人到山简处，被王如的同伙严嶷抓到。
English: Just in time for Wang Ru's attack on Yangyang, Wang Cheng's vanguard reached Yicheng, sent people to the Shanzhen place, and was caught by Wang Ru's accomplice Yan Yan.

古文：嶷伪使人从襄阳来而问之曰： 襄阳拔未？ 
现代文：严嶷假装派人从襄阳来问他： 襄阳攻下了吗? 
English: Yan Xuan pretended to send someone from Xiangyang to ask him: Has Xiangyang been conquered?

古文：答云： 昨旦破城，已获山简。 
现代文：回答说： 昨天清晨攻破城池，已获山简。 
English: He replied, "Yesterday morning, we broke through the city and captured the mountain.

古文：乃阴缓澄使，令得亡去。
现代文：于是故意放松对王澄的使节的看管，让他得以逃跑。
English: So they deliberately loosened the supervision of Wang Cheng's envoy, allowing him to escape.

古文：澄闻襄阳陷，以为信然，散众而还。
现代文：王澄听说襄阳陷落，以为是真的，解散军众返回。
English: Wang Cheng heard about the fall of Xiangyang, thought it was true, disbanded the army and returned.

古文：既而耻之，托粮运不赡，委罪长史蒋俊而斩之，竟不能进。
现代文：过后又以不能救助襄阳为耻，以粮食运送不及时为由，把罪名加在长史蒋俊身上并杀了他，终究不能前进。
English: Later, he was ashamed of not being able to save Xiangyang, and on the grounds that the grain delivery was not timely, he put the blame on Changshi Jiangjun and killed him. After all, he could not move forward.

古文：巴蜀流人散在荆、湘者，与土人忿争，遂杀县令，屯聚乐乡。
现代文：巴蜀流亡在荆湘的人，与当地人结怨争斗，杀了县令，屯聚在乐乡。
English: The people of Bashu who were exiled in Jingxiang quarreled with the local people, killed the county magistrate, and gathered in Lexiang.

古文：澄使成都内史王机讨之。
现代文：王澄派成都内史王机讨伐他们。
English: Wang Cheng dispatched the Chengdu Inner History Bureau to fight them.

古文：贼请降，澄伪许之，既而袭之于宠洲，以其妻子为赏，沈八千余人于江中。
现代文：贼请求投降，王澄假意答应，然后在宠洲偷袭他们，用他们的妻儿作赏，把八千多人沉入江中。
English: The thieves asked to surrender, Wang Cheng pretended to agree, and then attacked them in Zhaozhou, using their wives and children as a reward, sinking more than eight thousand people into the river.

古文：于是益、梁流人四五万家一时俱反，推杜弢为主，南破零桂，东掠武昌，败王机于巴陵。
现代文：于是在益梁流亡的四五万家一时间都反，推选杜殁为首领，南破零桂，东掠武昌，在巴陵打败王机。
English: Therefore, the 450,000 families in exile in Yiliang all rebelled at the same time, elected Du Xi as the leader, broke the south of Guizhou, raided Wuchang in the east, and defeated the king machine in Baling.

古文：澄亦无忧惧之意，但与机日夜纵酒，投壶博戏，数十局俱起。
现代文：王澄还不担忧，而与王机日夜畅饮，投壶游戏，几十局后才一同作罢。
English: Wang Cheng is not worried yet, and he and Wang Ji have been drinking and playing pot games day and night, and only stopped playing together after dozens of games.

古文：杀富人李才，取其家资以赐郭舒。
现代文：杀富人李才，把他的家产拿来赐给郭舒。
English: He killed the rich man Li Cai and took his property to give to Guo Shu.

古文：南平太守应詹骤谏，不纳。
现代文：南平太守应詹多次劝谏，不采纳。
English: The Nanping Empress Dowager should listen to Zhan's many persuasions and not adopt it.

古文：于是上下离心，内外怨叛。
现代文：于是上下离心，内外抱怨反叛。
English: As a result, the upper and lower centrifuges complained of internal and external rebellion.

古文：澄望实虽损，犹傲然自得。
现代文：王澄的威望受损，却还傲慢自得。
English: Wang Cheng's prestige was damaged, but he was still arrogant.

古文：后出军击杜弢，次于作塘。
现代文：后来出兵攻打杜殁，驻屯作塘。
English: Later, troops were dispatched to attack the Cuckoos, and they settled in Tromso.

古文：山简参军王冲叛于豫州，自称荆州刺史。
现代文：山简的参军王冲在豫州叛变，自称豫州刺史。
English: Wang Chong, a member of the Shanjan army, mutinied in Yuzhou and claimed to be a historian of Yuzhou.

古文：澄惧，使杜蕤守江陵。
现代文：王澄恐惧，派杜蕤守江陵。
English: Wang Cheng was afraid and sent Du Xi to guard Jiangling.

古文：澄迁于孱陵，寻奔沓中。
现代文：王澄转移到孱陵，不久跑到沓中。
English: Wang Cheng was transferred to Fuling, and soon went to Shanzhong.

古文：郭舒谏曰： 使君临州，虽无异政，未失众心。
现代文：郭舒劝谏说： 你到州裹，虽然没有特别的政绩，但未失民心。
English: Guo Shu advised Zou saying, "You have come to the prefecture, and although you have no special political achievements, you have not lost the hearts of the people.

古文：今西收华容向义之兵，足以擒此小丑，奈何自弃。 
现代文：如果向西接收华容举义之军，足以捉住那个小丑，为什么自暴自弃。 
English: If it is enough to receive the army of Huarong to the west, it is enough to catch that clown, why give up.

古文：澄不能从。
现代文：王澄不听。
English: Wang Cheng did not listen.

古文：初，澄命武陵诸郡同讨杜弢，天门太守扈瑰次于益阳。
现代文：当初，王澄命令武陵几个郡一同讨伐杜殁，天门太守扈瓖在益阳。
English: At first, Wang Cheng ordered several counties in Wuling to fight the cuckoo together. Tianmen Taishu was in Yiyang.

古文：武陵内史武察为其郡夷所害，瑰以孤军引还。
现代文：武陵内史武察被郡中的夷人杀害，扈瓖率孤军收兵。
English: Wuling Naishi Wucha was killed by the barbarians in the county, and he led a lone army to recruit soldiers.

古文：澄怒，以杜曾代瑰。
现代文：王澄发怒，让杜曾代替扈瓖。
English: Wang Cheng became angry and asked Du Zeng to replace Zou.

古文：夷袁遂，瑰故吏也，托为瑰报仇，遂举兵逐曾，自称平晋将军。
现代文：夷人袁遂，是扈瓖以前的属吏，以为扈瓖报仇为名，举兵驱逐杜曾，自称平晋将军。
English: The barbarian Yuan Sui, a former subordinate of Zou, thought that Zou was taking revenge, raised an army to expel Du Zeng, and called himself the general of Pingjin.

古文：澄使司马毌丘邈讨之，为遂所败。
现代文：王澄派司马母丘邈讨伐他，被袁遂打败。
English: Wang Cheng sent Sima Mu Qiuqi to fight him and was defeated by Yuan Sui.

古文：会元帝征澄为军谘祭酒，于是赴召。
现代文：接着元帝征召王澄任军谘祭酒，于是赴任。
English: Next, Emperor Yuan summoned Wang Chengren to advise the army on the sacrificial wine, and then he took office.

古文：时王敦为江州，镇豫章，澄过诣敦。
现代文：当时王敦就职于江州，镇守豫章，王澄去拜访王敦。
English: At that time, Wang Dun was working in Jiangzhou, the town guard of Yuzhang, Wang Cheng went to visit Wang Dun.

古文：澄夙有盛名，出于敦右，士庶莫不倾慕之。
现代文：王澄素有名望，名气在王敦之上，官吏百姓没有不倾慕他的。
English: Wang Chengsu was famous, and his reputation was higher than that of Wang Dun. The officials and the people adored him.

古文：兼勇力绝人，素为敦所惮，澄犹以旧意侮敦。
现代文：再加上他勇气超人，王敦一向怕他，王澄仍像过去那样侮辱王敦。
English: Coupled with his superhuman courage, Wang Dun has always been afraid of him. Wang Cheng still insults Wang Dun as he did in the past.

古文：敦益忿怒，请澄入宿，阴欲杀之。
现代文：王敦更加忿怒，请王澄留宿，暗中想杀他。
English: Wang Dun became even angrier, asked Wang Cheng to stay with him, and secretly wanted to kill him.

古文：而澄左右有二十绝人，持铁马鞭为卫，澄手尝捉玉枕以自防，故敦未之得发。
现代文：而王澄身边有二十人，拿着铁马鞭守卫，王澄常握着玉枕来自我防卫，因此王敦未能下手。
English: However, there were twenty people around Wang Cheng, holding an iron horse whip to guard him. Wang Cheng often held a jade pillow to defend himself, so Wang Dun was unable to attack.

古文：后敦赐澄左右酒，皆醉，借玉枕观之。
现代文：后来王敦赏赐王澄的手下人喝酒，都醉了，又借玉枕观看。
English: Later, Wang Dun rewarded Wang Cheng's subordinates with alcohol, and they all got drunk, and borrowed a jade pillow to watch.

古文：因下床而谓澄曰： 何与杜弢通信？ 
现代文：下床对王澄说： 为什么跟杜搜通信? 
English: After getting out of bed, he said to Wang Cheng, "Why are you corresponding with Du Sou?

古文：澄曰： 事自可验。 
现代文：王澄说： 事情可以澄清。 
English: Wang Cheng said: Things can be clarified.

古文：敦欲入内，澄手引敦衣，至于绝带。
现代文：王敦要进去，王澄手拉王敦的衣服，以至于拉断了衣带。
English: When Wang Dun wanted to go in, Wang Cheng tugged at Wang Dun's clothes with his hand, so much so that he broke his belt.

古文：乃登于梁，因骂敦曰： 行事如此，殃将及焉。 
现代文：王澄登上房梁，骂王敦说： 这样做，灾祸就要到了。 
English: Wang Cheng climbed onto the beam of the house and scolded Wang Dun, saying, "If you do this, disaster will come."

古文：敦令力士路戎搤杀之，时年四十四，载尸还其家。
现代文：王敦命令武士路戎捉住王澄杀掉，时年四十四岁，用车拉着尸体送回家。
English: Wang Dun ordered the samurai Lu Rong to capture and kill Wang Cheng, who was forty-four years old at the time, and sent him home in a car with the corpse.

古文：刘琨闻澄之死，叹曰： 澄自取之。 
现代文：刘琨听说了王澄的死讯，叹息说： 王澄是自找的。 
English: Liu Wei heard the news of Wang Cheng's death and said with a sigh: Wang Cheng was looking for himself.

古文：及敦平，澄故吏佐著作郎桓稚上表理澄，请加赠谥。
现代文：平定王敦后，王澄的旧官吏佐着作郎桓稚上表议论王澄，请求加赠谧号。
English: After Wang Dun was subdued, Wang Cheng's former officials, together with Wang Cheng's nephew, went public to discuss Wang Cheng and request that he be given a posthumous name.

古文：诏复澄本官，谥曰宪。
现代文：诏书恢复王澄本来的官位，谧号宪。
English: The imperial edict reinstated Wang Cheng's original official rank, and his posthumous title was changed to constitutional.

古文：长子詹，早卒。
现代文：长子王詹，死得早。
English: The eldest son, Wang Zhan, died early.

古文：次子徽，右军司马。
现代文：次子王徽，任右军司马。
English: The second son, Wang Hui, became the right-hand army secretary.

古文：郭舒，字稚行。
现代文：郭舒字稚行。
English: Guo Shuzi is childish.

古文：幼请其母从师，岁余便归，粗识大义。
现代文：年幼时请求他母亲拜师求学，一年多后回来，学到了些知识。
English: When he was young, he asked his mother to let him study with a teacher. He came back more than a year later and learned some knowledge.

古文：乡人少府范晷、宗人武陵太守郭景，咸称舒当为后来之秀，终成国器。
现代文：同乡人少府范昼、同族人亘宣医太守垫基，都称赞整堑长大后将成为俊杰，成为国家的梁柱。
English: His fellow villagers, Shao Fu Fan Rong, and his compatriot, Wu Xuan Yi Taishou Jia Ji, all praised the young man, saying that when he grows up, he will become a good man and a pillar of the country.

古文：始为领军校尉，坐擅放司马彪，系廷尉，世多义之。
现代文：开始任领军校尉，犯了擅自放走司马彪之罪，交廷尉治罪，世人多认为郭舒仗义。
English: He started as a leading army lieutenant, he committed the crime of letting Sima Biao go without permission, and he was punished by the court. The world mostly thinks that Guo Shudong is righteous.

古文：刺史夏侯含辟为西曹，转主簿。
现代文：刺史夏侯含任用他为西曹，转任主簿。
English: He was appointed to the position of chief secretary by the ruler of Shishi, Xia Houhan.

古文：含坐事，舒自系理含，事得释。
现代文：夏侯含因事犯罪，郭舒捆绑自己舄夏侯含申辩，事情得到解释。
English: Xia Houhan was convicted of a crime, Guo Shu tied himself to Xia Houhan's defense, and the matter was explained.

古文：刺史宗岱命为治中，丧母去职。
现代文：刺史宗岱任命他为治中，因母亲去世离职。
English: Zengshi Zonglu appointed him as a middle-ranking official, but he resigned due to his mother's death.

古文：刘弘牧荆州，引为治中。
现代文：刘弘掌管荆州，召他为治中。
English: Liu Hong was in charge of Jingzhou and called him to the middle of the administration.

古文：弘卒，舒率将士推弘子璠为主，讨逆贼郭劢。灭之，保全一州。
现代文：刘坠死，垫堑率领将士推举玺区的儿子玺隧为首领，讨伐叛逆者郭勘，消灭了他，保全了一州。
English: Liu fell to his death, and Matan led the generals to promote the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son.

古文：王澄闻其名，引为别驾。
现代文：王澄知道整蟹的名声，召他为别驾。
English: Wang Cheng knew the reputation of the whole crab, and summoned him as a special guest.

古文：澄终日酣饮，不以众务在意，舒常切谏之。
现代文：王澄整天痛饮，不把政务放在心上，郭舒常恳切地劝告他。
English: Guo Shuzhong earnestly advised Wang Cheng to drink heavily all day and not to take government affairs to heart.

古文：及天下大乱，又劝澄修德养威，保完州境。
现代文：等到天下大乱，又劝王澄加强修养，树立威望，保全州境。
English: Wait until the world is in turmoil, and advise Wang Cheng to strengthen self-cultivation, establish prestige, and protect the state border.

古文：澄以为乱自京都起，非复一州所能匡御，虽不能从，然重其忠亮。
现代文：王澄认为乱从京都引起，不是一个州能匡正抵御的，虽不能听从郭舒，但看重他的忠诚。
English: Wang Cheng believed that the turmoil was caused by Kyoto and that no state could resist it. Although he could not listen to Guo Shu, he valued his loyalty.

古文：荆土士人宗庾廞尝因酒忤澄，澄怒，叱左右棒廞。
现代文：荆州本地士人宗厂曾因为饮酒得罪了王还，王澄发怒，命令左右棒打塞毖。
English: Jingzhou local scholar Zongfang had offended Wang Yao by drinking alcohol. Wang Cheng became angry and ordered him to beat Wang Yao with a stick left and right.

古文：舒厉色谓左右曰： 使君过醉，汝辈何敢妄动！ 
现代文：轻登神色严厉地对左右说： 刺史喝得太多了，你们这些人怎敢妄动! 
English: Light-headed and stern-faced, he said to the left and right, "Tashi has drunk too much, how dare you people make any sudden moves!

古文：澄恚曰： 别驾狂邪，诳言我醉！ 
现代文：王澄发怒说： 别驾太狂了，胡说我醉了! 
English: Wang Cheng said angrily, "Don't drive like a maniac and say I'm drunk!

古文：因遣掐其鼻，灸其眉头，舒跪而受之。
现代文：于是让人掐他的鼻子，烫他的眉头，郭堑跪而忍受。
English: As a result, people poked his nose, scalded his eyebrows, and Guo Gan knelt down and endured.

古文：澄意少释，而廞遂得免。
现代文：王澄的怒气渐消，而塞毖终于免于祸患。
English: Wang Cheng's anger gradually dissipated, and Sai Ye finally escaped the disaster.

古文：澄之奔败也，以舒领南郡。
现代文：王澄失败逃奔时，任命郭舒兼管南郡。
English: When Wang Cheng failed to escape, he appointed Guo Shu to take charge of Nan County.

古文：澄又欲将舒东下，舒曰： 舒为万里纪纲，不能匡正，令使君奔亡，不忍渡江。 
现代文：王澄又想让郭舒向东撤，郭舒说： 我万里而治，不能匡正乱世，使得刺史逃奔，我不忍心渡江。 
English: Wang Cheng also wanted Guo Shu to withdraw to the east. Guo Shu said, "I have to travel thousands of miles, I can't rectify the chaotic world, I can't bear to cross the river.

古文：乃留屯沌口，采稆湖泽以自给。
现代文：于是留守沌日，在湖泽中采集稆以自给。
English: As a result, he stayed in Chaoshi and collected trout in the lake to support himself.

古文：乡人盗食舒牛，事觉，来谢。
现代文：乡下人偷吃了塑筮的牛，事情被发觉，偷牛人来谢罪。
English: A villager stole a cow with a plastic yoke. The matter was discovered, and the cow thief apologized.

古文：舒曰： 卿饥，所以食牛耳，余肉可共啖之。 
现代文：塑舒说： 你饥饿，所以吃牛，剩下的肉可以一起吃。 
English: Shuxu said, "You are hungry, so eat the cow. The rest of the meat can be eaten together."

古文：世以此服其弘量。
现代文：世人因此佩服郭舒的宽宏大量。
English: The world therefore admires Guo Shu's magnanimity.

古文：舒少与杜曾厚，曾尝召之，不往，曾衔之。
现代文：郭舒年轻时与杜曾交情深厚，杜曾曾经征召郭舒，郭舒不去，杜曾怨恨他。
English: When Guo Shu was young, he had a deep friendship with Du Zeng. Du Zeng once conscripted Guo Shu, Guo Shu refused to go, and Du Zeng resented him.

古文：至是，澄又转舒为顺阳太守，曾密遣兵袭舒，遁逃得免。
现代文：到逭时，王澄又转任郭舒为顺阳太守，杜曾秘密派兵袭击郭舒，郭舒逃跑免于灾难。
English: At the end of the year, Wang Cheng was transferred to Guo Shu as the governor of Shunyang. Du Zeng secretly sent troops to attack Guo Shu, and Guo Shu escaped from the disaster.

古文：王敦召为参军，转从事中郎。
现代文：王敦召他任参军，转任从事中郎。
English: Wang Dun called him to join the army, and he was transferred to work as a middle-ranking soldier.

古文：襄阳都督周访卒，敦遣舒监襄阳军。
现代文：襄阳都督周访死，王敦派郭舒监襄阳军。
English: The Yangyang governor Zhou Qi died, and Wang Dun sent Guo Shu to supervise the Yangyang army.

古文：甘卓至，乃还。朝廷征舒为右丞，敦留不遣。
现代文：甘卓到，才离开，朝廷征召郭舒为右丞，王敦留住他不让走。
English: When Gan Zhuo arrived, he did not leave. The imperial court conscripted Guo Shu as the right-hand man, Wang Dun kept him and did not let him go.

古文：敦谋为逆，舒谏不从，使守武昌。
现代文：王敦谋反，郭舒劝谏不听，派郭舒守武昌。
English: Wang Dun plotted a rebellion, Guo Shu advised him not to listen, and sent Guo Shu to defend Wuchang.

古文：荆州别驾宗澹忌舒才能，数谮之于王暠。
现代文：荆州别驾宗澹忌妒郭舒的才能，多次在王虞面前说郭舒的坏话。
English: Jealous of Guo Shu's talent, Jingzhou Biejie Zonglu repeatedly spoke ill of Guo Shu in front of Wang Yu.

古文：暠疑舒与甘卓同谋，密以白敦，敦不受。
现代文：王虞怀疑郭舒与甘卓同谋，秘密告诉王敦，王敦不信。
English: Wang Yu suspected Guo Shu of being an accomplice of Gan Zhuo and secretly told Wang Dun, but Wang Dun did not believe him.

古文：高官督护缪坦尝请武昌城西地为营，太守乐凯言于敦曰： 百姓久买此地，种菜自赡，不宜夺之。 
现代文：高官督护缪坦曾请求武昌城西的土地设营，太守乐凯对王敦说： 百姓买这块地很久了，种菜养活自己，不宜夺走。 
English: A high-ranking official, Guo Muitan, had requested the land west of Wuchang to set up a camp. Taishu Lekai said to Wang Dun: The people have bought this land for a long time. They grow vegetables to feed themselves. It is not appropriate to take it away.

古文：敦大怒曰： 王处仲不来江湖，当有武昌地不，而人云是我地邪！ 
现代文：王敦大怒说： 我王处仲不来江湖，会有武昌吗，而人们说造就是我的土地! 
English: Wang Dun said angrily, "I can't get along with my king, will there be a Wuchang, and people say that Zou is my land!"

古文：凯惧，不敢言。
现代文：乐凯恐惧，不敢说话。
English: Lokai is afraid and doesn't dare to speak.

古文：舒曰： 公听舒一言。 
现代文：郭舒说： 请你听我一句话。 
English: Guo Shu said, "Please listen to me.

古文：敦曰： 平子以卿病狂，故掐鼻灸眉头，旧疢复发邪！ 
现代文：王敦说： 平子因你病狂，所以掐你的鼻子烫你的眉头，你旧病复发了吧! 
English: Wang Dun said: Hirako is mad at you because of your illness, so she pinched your nose and scalded your eyebrows. Has your old illness returned?

古文：舒曰： 古之狂也直，周昌、汲黯、硃云不狂也。
现代文：郭舒说： 古代的狂就是耿直，周昌、汲黯、朱云其实不狂。
English: Guo Shu said: The ancient madman was Geng Zhi, but Zhou Chang, Kuching and Zhu Yun were actually not mad.

古文：昔尧立诽谤之木，舜置敢谏之鼓，然后事无枉纵。
现代文：从前尧立下诽谤之木，舜设置敢谏之鼓，这样以后事情就没有偏差了。
English: Once upon a time, the tree of slander was set up, and the gong of defamation was set up, so that things would not deviate in the future.

古文：公为胜尧、舜邪？
现代文：你的行为超过了尧舜吗?
English: Are your actions above reproach?

古文：乃逆折舒，使不得言。何与古人相远！ 
现代文：怎能阻止我，不让我说话，为什么与古人差那么远! 
English: How can you stop me, not let me speak, why are you so far from the ancients!

古文：敦曰： 卿欲何言？ 
现代文：王敦说： 你想说什么? 
English: Wang Dun said: What do you want to say?

古文：舒曰： 缪坦可谓小人，疑误视听，夺人私地，以强陵弱。
现代文：说： 可以说是小人，扰乱视听，夺走别人家土地，以强欺弱。
English: Said: It can be said to be a villain, disrupting audio-visual, taking away other people's land, and bullying the weak.

古文：晏子称：君曰其可，臣献其否，以成其可。
现代文：晏子说：君说可以，臣说不行，然后可行。
English: The mule said, "If you say it's possible, but the vassal says it's impossible, then it's possible."

古文：是以舒等不敢不言。 
现代文：因而我不敢不说。 
English: So I'm not afraid to say it.

古文：敦即使还地，众咸壮之。
现代文：王墓于是派人归还土地，人们都称赞他。
English: Wang Cao then sent someone to return the land, and people praised him.

古文：敦重舒公亮，给赐转丰，数诣其家。
现代文：王敦器重郭舒光明正大，赏赐变得丰厚，数次去郭舒的家。
English: Wang Dunji stressed that Guo Shu was bright and upright, and the rewards became plentiful. He went to Guo Shu's home several times.

古文：表为梁州刺史。
现代文：上表任用他为梁州刺史。
English: The above table appoints him as the leader of Liangzhou.

古文：病卒。
现代文：病死。
English: He died of illness.

古文：乐广，字彦辅，南阳淯阳人也。
现代文：乐广字彦辅，南阳清阳人。
English: Le Guang character Hikosuke, Nanyang Qingyang people.

古文：父方，参魏征西将军夏侯玄军事。
现代文：父亲乐方，参塑征西将军夏圭玄军事。
English: His father, Lefang, took part in the military parade of General Xia Gui Xuan.

古文：广时年八岁，玄常见广在路，因呼与语，还谓方曰： 向见广神姿郎彻，当为名士。
现代文：乐广当时八岁，夏候玄曾在路上见到乐广，于是叫过来跟他说话，回来后对乐方说： 见到乐广神情爽朗通脱，将成为名士。
English: Le Guang was eight years old at the time. Xia Houxuan had seen Le Guang on the road, so he called him over to talk to him. After returning, he said to Le Fang: Seeing Le Guang's cheerful and relaxed demeanor, he will become a celebrity.

古文：卿家虽贫，可令专学，必能兴卿门户也。 
现代文：你家虽然贫寒，可以让他专心求学，必定能振兴你家。 
English: Although your family is poor, you can let him concentrate on his studies, which will surely revitalize your family.

古文：方早卒。广孤贫，侨居山阳，寒素为业，人无知者。
现代文：乐方死得早，乐广丧父贫困，侨居在山阳，清苦勤学，没有人知道他。
English: Le Fang died early, Le Guang lost his father to poverty, lived in the mountains and studied hard, and no one knew him.

古文：性冲约，有远识，寡嗜欲，与物无竞。
现代文：性情淡泊，有远见，少欲望，与世无争。
English: Temperament light-hearted, far-sighted, less desire, no quarrel with the world.

古文：尤善谈论，每以约言析理，以厌人之心，其所不知，默如也。
现代文：尤其善于清谈，常用简单的话说明道理，让人心服，他所不了解的事，则保持沉默。
English: He is especially good at plain talk, often using simple words to explain the truth, convincing people, and remaining silent about things he does not understand.

古文：裴楷尝引广共谈，自夕申旦，雅相钦挹，叹曰： 我所不如也。 
现代文：裴楷曾请乐广一起清谈，从晚上到天明，互相钦佩谦让，感叹说： 我不如他。 
English: Pei Kai once invited Le Guang to have a clear talk with him. From evening to dawn, they admired each other's modesty, and lamented: I am not as good as him.

古文：王戎为荆州刺史，闻广为夏侯玄所尝，乃举为秀才。
现代文：王戎任荆州刺史，听说乐广被夏侯玄赞赏，就推举他为秀才。
English: Wang Rong was appointed as the chief historian of Jingzhou. When he heard that Le Guang was appreciated by Xia Houxuan, he nominated him as an outstanding talent.

古文：楷又荐广于贾充，遂辟太尉掾，转太子舍人。
现代文：裴楷又把乐广推荐给买充，于是征用为太尉掾，转任太子舍人。
English: Pei Kai also recommended Le Guang to Maicheng, so he was requisitioned as Taifeng and transferred to the position of Prince.

古文：尚书令卫瓘，朝之耆旧，逮与魏正始中诸名士谈论，见广而奇之，曰： 自昔诸贤既没，常恐微言将绝，而今乃复闻斯言于君矣。 
现代文：尚书令卫璀，是朝中元老，与魏正始年间一些名士清谈，见到乐广而称奇，说： 自从以往的贤人们去世，常担心精深的言论将灭绝，而今天又从你那裹听到了这样的言论。 
English: Shang Shuling Weihong, a senior statesman of the Joseon Dynasty, had a clear talk with some celebrities in the early years of the Wei Dynasty. He was surprised to see Leguang and said: "Since the wise men of the past have passed away, I have often feared that profound speech would become extinct, and today I heard such speech from you.

古文：命诸子造焉，曰： 此人之水镜，见之莹然，若披云雾而睹青天也。 
现代文：命自己的儿子登门求教，说： 他的明鉴爽朗，见到他会心明眼亮，就像拨开云雾而看到青天。 
English: He ordered his son to go to the door to seek advice, saying: His bright eyes are bright, and seeing him is like clearing away the clouds and seeing the blue sky.

古文：王衍自言： 与人语甚简至，及见广，便觉己之烦。 
现代文：王衍自己说： 我跟别人说话很简约，等我见到乐广，就发觉自己的话太多。 
English: Wang Yan himself said: I speak very simply with others, and when I see Le Guang, I find myself talking too much.

古文：其为识者所叹美如此。
现代文：乐广就是这样被有识之士赞美。
English: This is how Leguang has been praised by people of insight.

古文：出补元城令，迁中书侍郎，转太子中庶子，累迁侍中、河南尹。
现代文：出朝补任元城令，升任中书侍郎，转任太子中庶子，逐渐升为侍中、河南尹。
English: He was appointed to the post of Yuancheng, promoted to the post of Chushushijiro, transferred to the post of Prince's middle son, and gradually rose to the post of Samurai middle son, Henan Yin.

古文：广善清言而不长于笔，将让尹，请潘岳为表。
现代文：乐广善于清谈而不善于写作，将辞去河南尹，请潘岳作表。
English: Le Guang is good at talking, but not good at writing. He will resign from Henan Yin and ask Pan Yue to make a watch.

古文：岳曰： 当得君意。 
现代文：潘岳说： 应告诉我你的意思。 
English: Pan Yue said: You should tell me what you mean.

古文：广乃作二百句语，述己之志。
现代文：乐广说了二百句话，述说自己的心志。
English: Le Guang said two hundred sentences, describing his heart.

古文：岳因取次比，便成名笔。
现代文：潘岳于是根据先后，写出了名篇。
English: Pan Yue then wrote the famous story according to the sequence.

古文：时人咸云： 若广不假岳之笔，岳不取广之旨，无以成斯美也。 
现代文：当时的人都说： 如果乐广不藉助潘岳的笔，潘岳不取乐广的意思，成就不了遣件美事。 
English: People at that time said: If Le Guang does not use the help of Pan Yue's pen, Pan Yue does not take the meaning of Le Guang, it will not be able to achieve a beautiful thing.

古文：尝有亲客，久阔不复来，广问其故，答曰： 前在坐，蒙赐酒，方欲饮，见杯中有蛇，意甚恶之，既饮而疾。 
现代文：曾经有客人，久别不曾来，乐广问其中原因，回答说： 以前在座时，承蒙赐酒，正要喝。看到杯中有蛇，很厌恶，喝酒后就病了。 
English: There was once a guest who had not been here for a long time. Le Guang asked the reason for this and replied: "When I was here before, I was given wine and was about to drink it. I was disgusted to see a snake in the glass and became ill after drinking it.

古文：于时河南听事壁上有角，漆画作蛇，广意杯中蛇即角影也。
现代文：那时河南府厅事墙壁上有角，漆画如蛇，乐广想杯中的蛇是角的影子。
English: At that time, there were horns on the wall of the Henan Government Office, the lacquer painting was like a snake, and Le Guang thought that the snake in the cup was the shadow of the horn.

古文：复置酒于前处，谓客曰： 酒中复有所见不？ 
现代文：又在以前的地方摆酒，对客人说： 酒中还有你看见过的东西吗? 
English: He also put the wine in the same place as before and said to the guests: Is there anything else in the wine that you have seen?

古文：答曰： 所见如初。 
现代文：回答说： 和以前看到的一样。 
English: He replied: "The same as I saw before."

古文：广乃告其所以，客豁然意解，沈疴顿愈。
现代文：乐广于是告诉客人原因，客人一下子明白了，老毛病顿时就好了。
English: Le Guang then told the guest the reason, the guest immediately understood, and the old problem was instantly cured.

古文：卫玠总角时，尝问广梦，广云是想。
现代文：卫阶未成年时，曾间乐广什么是梦，乐广说是想。
English: When Wei Jia was a minor, once upon a time, Le Guang said that what is a dream is a wish.

古文：玠曰： 神形所不接而梦，岂是想邪！ 
现代文：卫阶说： 精神脱离形体而作梦，难道是想吗! 
English: Wei said, "The spirit dreams out of the body. Is it a dream?

古文：广曰： 因也。 
现代文：乐广说： 此是因。 
English: Le Guang said: This is the reason.

古文：玠思之经月不得，遂以成疾。
现代文：卫玢想了一个月仍不明白，于是得了病。
English: Wei Wei thought about it for a month and still didn't understand, so he got sick.

古文：广闻故，命驾为剖析之，玠病即愈。
现代文：乐广听说病因，驾车去为卫阶剖析，卫阶的病就好了。
English: Le Guang heard about the cause of the disease and drove to analyze Wei Zhuang. Wei Zhuang's illness was cured.

古文：广叹曰： 此贤胸中当必无膏肓之疾！ 
现代文：兽瞳赞叹说： 这位贤人胸中必定没有难于医治的病! 
English: Beast Eyes said in admiration, "This wise man must not have any diseases in his chest that are difficult to cure!"

古文：广所在为政，无当时功誉，然每去职，遗爱为人所思。
现代文：乐广在所从政的地方，没有得到功劳赞誉，然而每次离去后，留下的爱心被人们怀念。
English: In the places where he was in politics, Le Guang did not receive any credit or praise. However, every time he left, the love he left behind was missed by people.

古文：凡所论人，必先称其所长，则所短不言而自见矣。
现代文：凡是评论别人，必定先称赞别人的长处，短处不说也就清楚了。
English: Anyone who comments on others must first praise the strengths of others, and it is clear without saying the shortcomings.

古文：人有过，先尽弘恕，然后善恶自彰矣。
现代文：人有过失，先尽量宽恕，然后善恶就自己明了。
English: People are at fault, first try to forgive, and then understand good and evil for themselves.

古文：广与王衍俱宅心事外，名重于时。
现代文：乐广舆王衍都把心思放在世事之外，在当时名气重大。
English: Both Le Guang and Wang Yan put their minds outside of worldly affairs, and their fame was great at the time.

古文：故天下言风流者，谓王、乐为称首焉。
现代文：因此天下人谈论风流人物，认为应以王衙、乐广为首。
English: Therefore, people around the world talk about fashionable people and think that Wang Xi and Le Guang should be the leaders.

古文：少与弘农杨准相善。
现代文：年少时与弘农杨准友善。
English: When he was young, he was friendly with Hongnong Yangjun.

古文：准之二子曰乔曰髦，皆知名于世。
现代文：杨准的两个儿子叫杨乔和杨髦，在世上都知名。
English: Yang Jun's two sons, Yang Qiao and Yang Xiang, are well-known in the world.

古文：准使先诣裴頠，頠性弘方，爱乔有高韵。
现代文：杨准让儿子先去拜访裴愿，裴顿性格宽厚方正，爱杨乔有风度。
English: Yang Jun let his son go to visit Pei Zhen first. Pei Tong is a generous and upright person, and loves Yang Qiao for his good manners.

古文：谓准曰： 乔当及卿，髦少减也。 
现代文：对杨准说： 杨乔将赶上你，杨髦稍差。 
English: He said to Yang Jun, "Yang Qiao will catch up with you, Yang Xiang is a little behind.

古文：又使诣广，广性清淳，爱髦有神检。
现代文：又让他们拜访乐广，乐广性格清淳，爱杨鬃有神韵。
English: He also let them visit LeGuang. LeGuang's personality is pure and honest, and he loves Yang Mi with verve.

古文：谓准曰： 乔自及卿，然髦亦清出。 
现代文：对杨准说： 杨乔可以赶上你，然而杨髦也会清静超脱。 
English: To Yang Jun, he said: Yang Qiao can catch up with you, but Yang Xiang will also be calm and detached.

古文：准笑曰： 我二兒之优劣，乃裴、乐之优劣也。 
现代文：杨准笑着说： 我两个儿子的优劣，正是裴、乐的优劣。 
English: Yang Jun said with a smile: The strengths and weaknesses of my two sons are the strengths and weaknesses of Pei and Le.

古文：论者以为乔虽有高韵，而神检不足，乐为得之矣。
现代文：评论的人认为杨乔虽然有超人的风范，但神韵不足，乐广是为论说精当。
English: Commentators believe that although Yang Qiao has a superhuman demeanor, he lacks verve, and Le Guang is a good debater.

古文：是时王澄、胡毋辅之等，皆亦任放为达，或至裸体者。
现代文：那时王澄、胡毋辅之等人，也都把放任当作通达，有的甚至裸体。
English: At that time, people such as Wang Cheng and Hu Nezuo also regarded laissez-faire as a way out, and some were even naked.

古文：广闻而笑曰： 名教内自有乐地，何必乃尔！ 
现代文：乐广听后笑着说： 名教之内自有让人欢乐的地方，何必如此! 
English: After listening, Le Guang smiled and said: There is a place for people to have fun within Meikyo, why not!

古文：其居才爱物，动有理中，皆此类也。
现代文：他爱惜人才，举动符合礼法，都是像这一类情况。
English: He cherishes talent, acts in accordance with etiquette, and is like this kind of situation.

古文：值世道多虞，朝章紊乱，清己中立，任诚保素而已。
现代文：正值世道不安定，朝廷法度混乱，自己坚持中立，诚信清白而已。
English: At a time when the world was unstable and the imperial court was in disarray, he insisted on his neutrality and integrity.

古文：时人莫有见其际焉。
现代文：当时人很难知其心胸。
English: At that time, it was hard to know what was in a person's heart.

古文：先是河南官舍多妖怪，前尹多不敢处正寝，广居之不疑。
现代文：在这以前河南官舍多妖怪，前任河南尹大多不敢住在正屋，乐广住下不害怕。
English: Before this, Henan officials had more than one specter, the former Henan Yin mostly dared not live in the main house, and Le Guang was not afraid to live.

古文：尝外户自闭，左右皆惊，广独自若。
现代文：有一次外面大门自己关上，左右都惊恐，衹有乐广镇定自若。
English: Once, when the outer gate closed by itself, both sides were alarmed, but Zou Yueguang remained calm.

古文：顾见墙有孔，使人掘墙，得狸而杀之，其怪亦绝。
现代文：看见墙上有洞，派人挖墙，抓到狐狸杀掉，怪异之事也就消失了。
English: Seeing a hole in the wall, they sent someone to dig through the wall, catch the fox and kill it, and the strange thing disappeared.

古文：愍怀太子之废也，诏故臣不得辞送，众官不胜愤叹，皆冒禁拜辞。
现代文：愍怀太子被废时，诏令旧臣不许辞别送行，官员们十分愤恨，都冒着禁令去辞行。
English: When Prince Zou Huai was deposed, the old minister was ordered by the emperor not to resign, and the officials were so angry that they risked the ban to resign.

古文：司隶校尉满奋敕河南中部收缚拜者送狱，广即便解遣。
现代文：司隶校尉满奋令河南中部捕捉送行的人送到狱中，乐广又放走了他们。
English: Captain Sili ordered the central Henan Province to catch and send the deportees to prison, and Leguang released them.

古文：众人代广危惧。
现代文：众人替乐广担心。
English: Everyone is worried about Le Guang.

古文：孙琰说贾谧曰： 前以太子罪恶，有斯废黜，其臣不惧严诏，冒罪而送。
现代文：孙琰劝贾谧说： 以前因为太子的罪恶，有这样的废黜，他的臣下不怕严厉的禁令，冒罪送别。
English: Sun Yat-sen advised Jia Yu, saying: In the past, because of the prince's sins, there was such a dethronement, his vassals were not afraid of a severe ban, and sent him away.

古文：今若系之，是彰太子之善，不如释去。 
现代文：如果抓捕他们，是张扬太子的好处，不如放走他们。 
English: If arresting them is to promote the interests of the crown prince, it is better to let them go.

古文：谧然其言，广故得不坐。
现代文：买谧认为他说得对，乐广因而没有获罪。
English: The buyer thought that he was right, and Le Guang was not convicted.

古文：迁吏部尚书左仆射，后东安王繇当为仆射，转广为右仆射，领吏部，代王戎为尚书令，始戎荐广，而终践其位，时人美之。
现代文：升任吏部尚书左仆射，后来束安王司马繇应当为仆射，改任乐广为右仆射，领吏部，代王戎为尚书令。起初王戎推荐乐广，最终代替了自己的位置，当时的人称赞逭件事。
English: Wang Rong recommended Le Guang to replace him, and eventually he took his place. People at the time praised the move.

古文：成都王颖，广之婿也，及与长沙王乂遘难，而广既处朝望，群小谗谤之。
现代文：成都王司马颖，是乐广的女婿，长沙王司马义发难时，乐广已身处朝廷重位，一些小人诽谤他。
English: Chengdu Wang Sima Ying was the son-in-law of Le Guang. When Changsha Wang Sima Yi was in trouble, Le Guang was already in a high-ranking position in the imperial court. Some villains slandered him.

古文：乂以问广，广神色不变，徐答曰： 广岂以五男易一女。 
现代文：司马义拿此事问乐广，乐广神色不变，慢慢回答说： 我怎能用五男换一女。 
English: Sima Yi asked Le Guang about this. Le Guang's expression remained unchanged, and he slowly replied: "How can I exchange five sons for one daughter?"

古文：乂犹以为疑，广竟以忧卒。
现代文：司马义仍旧疑虑，乐广最终因忧虑而死。
English: Sima Yi still had doubts, and Le Guang finally died of worry.

古文：荀籓闻广之不免也，为之流涕。
现代文：荀藩听说乐广未能免祸，为他落泪。
English: When the Shan clan heard that Le Guang was not spared from the disaster, they shed tears for him.

古文：三子：凯、肇、谟。
现代文：有三个儿子：乐凯、乐肇、乐谌。
English: They have three sons: Lekai, Lezhao and Lejun.

古文：凯字弘绪，大司马齐王掾，参骠骑军事。
现代文：乐凯字弘绪，任大司马齐王掾，参骠骑军事。
English: Lekai character Hongxu, appointed as the chief secretary of Maqi Wangye, joined the cavalry.

古文：肇字弘茂，太傅东海王掾。
现代文：乐肇字弘茂，任太傅束海王掾。
English: Le Zhaozhou's character, Hongmao, was named Taifu, and his role was played by Sokai Wang Yao.

古文：洛阳陷，兄弟相携南渡江。
现代文：洛阳陷落，兄弟一同南渡长江。
English: Luoyang fell and the brothers traveled south to the Yangtze River.

古文：谟字弘范，征虏将军、吴郡内史。
现代文：乐谟字弘范，任征虏将军、吴郡内史。
English: Le Moo, surnamed Hong Fan, was appointed as a conscript general, and the history of Wu County was written.

古文：史臣曰：汉相清静，见机于旷务；周史清虚，不嫌于尸禄。
现代文：史臣曰：汉相清静，无为而治；周相清虚，受禄而不务政事。
English: Shichen said: Han Xiang is quiet and does not do anything; Zhou Xiang is quiet and does not do politics.

古文：岂台揆之任，有异于常班者欤！
现代文：难道三公宰相的任用，与一般官员不同吗!
English: Isn't the appointment of the three prime ministers different from that of ordinary officials?

古文：濬冲善发谈端，夷甫仰希方外，登槐庭之显列，顾漆圆而高视。
现代文：浚冲善于清谈，夷甫崇尚道家，登上三公的显赫之位，学老庄而高远。
English: Dredging is good at clear talk, Yifu advocates Taoism, ascends to the prominent position of the Three Princes, and is a long-standing scholar.

古文：彼既凭虚，朝章已乱。
现代文：他们信奉虚无，朝纲混乱。
English: They believe in nothingness and chaos.

古文：戎则取容于世，旁委货财；衍则自保其身，宁论宗稷？
现代文：王戎讨好别人以求安身，积蓄财物；王衍则自保其身，难道还能顾及国家吗?
English: Wang Rong pleases others to seek peace of mind and accumulates wealth; Wang Yan protects himself, but can he also take care of the country?

古文：及三方构乱，六戎藉手，犬羊之侣，锋镝如云。
现代文：三方战乱，外族插手，羌狄人马，兵器如云。
English: The three sides are at war, the foreigners are meddling, the Chinese and Indians are jostling, and the weapons are like clouds.

古文：夷甫区区焉，佞彼凶渠，以求容贷，颓墙之陨，犹有礼也。
现代文：夷直小人，谄媚凶恶，以求宽容，推墙压死，还算是礼遇。
English: It is still considered polite to flatter the villain, charm the vicious, seek tolerance, and push the wall to crush the dead.

古文：平子肆情傲物，对镜难堪，终失厥生，自贻伊败。
现代文：平子纵情傲物，承受不了美名，最终丢了性命，自取灭亡。
English: Hirako indulged in pride, could not bear the fame, and eventually lost his life, taking his own life.

古文：且夫衣服表容，珪璋范德，声移宫羽，采照山华，布武有章，立言成训。
现代文：衣服修饰仪容，珪璋规范道德，声韵符合礼乐，神采映照山华，立武有理，立言成训。
English: Clothes embellish the appearance, etiquette standardizes morality, vocal rhyme conforms to liturgy, the spirit is reflected in the mountains, the martial arts are reasonable, and the words are trained.

古文：澄之箕踞，不已甚矣。
现代文：王澄的傲慢，太过分了。
English: Wang Cheng's arrogance is too much.

古文：若乃解衵登枝，裸形扪鹊，以此为达，谓之高致，轻薄是效，风流讵及。
现代文：如果解衣爬树，裸身抓鹊，以此为通达，认为这是高雅的情趣，那么轻薄的人会效仿，伤风败俗。
English: If undressed climbing a tree, naked scratching the cocoon, with this as a guide, that this is an elegant pleasure, then light-skinned people will follow suit, breaking the custom.

古文：道睽将圣，事乖跰指，操情独往，自夭其生者焉。
现代文：道德败坏至极怪事相接，独往独来，自己断送了生命。
English: Morally corrupt to the extreme, strange things come one after another, one after another, and they end their own lives.

古文：昔晏婴哭庄公之尸，乐令解愍怀之客，岂闻伯夷之风欤，懦夫能立志者也。
现代文：往昔晏婴为庄公伏尸痛哭，而今乐令释放愍怀的追随者，是受伯夷的影响吧，软弱的人也可以立志。
English: In the past, infants cried bitterly for the dead body of Zhuang Gong, but now the followers of Le Ling's release are influenced by Bo Yi. Weak people can also aspire.

古文：赞曰：晋家求士，乃构仙台，陵云切汉，山叟知材。
现代文：赞曰：晋朝访求贤人隐士，构筑仙台，高入云霄，山皇知才。
English: Zang said: "Visiting the Jin Dynasty to seek sages and hermits, building Sendai, soaring into the sky, the mountain emperor's wisdom."

古文：濬冲居鼎，谈优务劣。
现代文：王濬身居高位，好清谈而不务实。
English: Wang Hui is in a high position, so he is good at talking but not pragmatic.

古文：夷甫两顾，退求三穴。
现代文：首鼠两端，狡兔三窟。
English: The two ends of the head rat, the three caves of the cunning rabbit.

古文：神乱当年，忠乖曩列。
现代文：扰乱当世，不忠于人。
English: Disturbing the world, being disloyal to others.

古文：平子陵侮，多于用拙。
现代文：芒王凌侮贤人，多用小人。
English: Mang Wang Ling insults wise men, but uses villains more often.

古文：乐令披云，高天澄彻。
现代文：碧验拨开云雾，蓝天清澄。
English: The clouds and fog have been cleared by Bixian, and the blue sky is clear.

