古文：献明皇后贺氏，东部大人野干女也。
现代文：献明皇后贺氏，是东部大人野干的女儿。
English: Ms. He, the Empress of Xianming, is the daughter of the Eastern Emperor Nogan.

古文：少以容仪选入东宫，生道武。
现代文：年轻时因容貌仪表端庄秀美而被选进东宫侍候太子。生下了道武帝。
English: When she was young, she was chosen to enter the East Palace to wait for the crown prince because of her dignified and beautiful appearance. She gave birth to Emperor Daowu.

古文：苻洛之内侮也，后与道武及故臣吏避难北徙。
现代文：当苻洛入侵时，皇后和道武帝带着旧臣民官吏们逃难北迁。
English: When Shiloh invaded, the empress and Emperor Daowu fled north with their former subjects and officials.

古文：俄而高车来抄掠，后乘车避贼而南，中路失道，乃仰天曰： 国家胤胄岂正尔绝灭也！
现代文：走不多时，高车人出来拦路抢劫，皇后的车驾为避开强盗而转向南驰，走到半路时，车轴脱落。皇后便对天长叹说 ：国家和帝王后裔难道就这样灭绝了吗？
English: When they were not far away, the high-rollers came out to block the road and rob the car. The queen's car turned south to avoid the robbers, and when she was halfway there, the axle fell off. The queen then sighed to the Lord of Heaven: Is this how the country and the descendants of the emperor died out?

古文：惟神灵扶助。 
现代文：请神灵保佑。 
English: May the gods bless you.

古文：遂驰，轮正不倾。
现代文：于是，车驾又继续奔驰而不倾倒。
English: As a result, the vehicle continued to drive without tipping over.

古文：行百余里，至七个山南而免难。
现代文：南行一百多里路，到达七个山的南面，才避免受害。
English: They had to travel more than a hundred miles south to reach the south side of the seven mountains to avoid being harmed.

古文：后刘显使人将害帝，帝姑为显弟亢掞妻，知之，密以告后。
现代文：后来刘显准备让人来杀害道武帝。道武帝的姑姑是刘显弟弟亢瞛的妻子，她得知后偷偷地告诉贺氏。
English: Later, Liu Xian planned to have someone kill Emperor Daowu. Emperor Daowu's aunt, who was the wife of Liu Xian's younger brother Zou, secretly told He after she found out.

古文：梁眷亦来告难。
现代文：梁眷也前来报告这件事。
English: Liang's relatives also came forward to report the incident.

古文：后乃令帝去之。
现代文：贺氏便让道武帝赶快离开。
English: He asked Emperor Daowu to leave immediately.

古文：后夜饮显醉，向晨，故惊厩中群马，使起视马，后泣谓曰： 吾诸子始皆在此，今尽亡失，汝等谁杀之？ 
现代文：当晚，贺氏夜里设宴招待刘显，把他灌得大醉，清晨时，她故意把马厩中的马弄得惊恐不安，然后让刘显起来看马，皇后哭着说： 我的几个儿子原来都在这里，现在都不见踪影了？你们是谁把他们杀害的？ 
English: That night, He held a banquet in the evening to entertain Liu Xian, and got him very drunk. In the morning, she purposely frightened the horses in the stables, and then asked Liu Xian to look at the horses. The queen cried and said: My sons were all here, but now they are gone? Who killed them?

古文：故显使不急追。
现代文：她故意大闹，使得刘显没法派人去把他们追回。
English: She deliberately made a fuss so that Liu Xian couldn't send someone to get them back.

古文：道武得至贺兰部，群情未甚归附。后从弟外朝大人悦举部随从，供奉尽礼。
现代文：道武帝逃到了贺兰部落以后，开始时人们并不怎么听从他，皇后的堂弟外朝大人贺悦带着本部人马听从道武帝调遣，尽心尽力地侍奉他。
English: After Emperor Daowu fled to the Horan tribe, people did not listen to him very much at the beginning. The queen's cousin, He Yue, an adult of the Outer Court, followed Emperor Daowu's instructions with his staff and served him with all his heart.

古文：显怒，将害后，后奔亢掞家，匿神车中三日。
现代文：刘显知道以后大怒，准备杀死贺氏。贺氏逃到亢瞛家里，躲在神车中呆了三天。
English: Liu Xian knew that he would be furious and prepared to kill Mr. He. Mr. He fled to Ms. Zou's home and hid in the magic carriage for three days.

古文：亢掞举室请救，乃得免。
现代文：亢瞛全家都向刘显请求，这才免于被杀。
English: The whole family begged Liu Xian to save them from being killed.

古文：会刘显部乱，始得亡归。
现代文：正好刘显的部落发生内乱，贺氏才乘机逃回。
English: Just as Liu Xian's tribe was experiencing civil unrest, He took the opportunity to flee back.

古文：後后弟染干忌道武之得人心，举兵围逼行宫。
现代文：后来皇后的弟弟染干十分嫉妒道武帝很得人心，便带兵前来包围行宫。
English: Later, Empress Dowager's younger brother, Zeng Gan, was so jealous of Emperor Daowu's popularity that he brought soldiers to encircle the imperial palace.

古文：后出谓染干曰： 汝等今安所置我，而欲杀吾子也？ 
现代文：皇后出来对染干说 ：你们打算把我置于何地？竟然想要杀害我的儿子？ 
English: The queen came out and said to them, "Where do you intend to put me, that you should kill my son?"

古文：染干惭而去。
现代文：染干十分惭愧地离开了。
English: Somesho left very ashamed.

古文：后后少子秦王觚使于燕，慕容垂止之。
现代文：后来，皇后的小儿子秦王觚出使燕国，慕容垂把他留在燕国。
English: Later, the queen's youngest son, Qin Wang Rong, sent an envoy to Yan Province, but Murong Du left him in Yan Province.

古文：葬于广宁磨笄山，俗谓之鸣鸡山，太后遗志也。
现代文：贺皇后因儿子没有回来，忧虑和思念过度而生病。皇始元年病故。
English: Because her son did not return, Empress He became ill from excessive worry and longing. She passed away in the first year of the Emperor's reign.

古文：依惠太后故事，别立寝庙，置守陵二百家，树碑颂德。文成文明皇后冯氏，长乐信都人也。
现代文：便把她附葬于盛乐的金陵。后来又追加尊谥号，配飨祭祀。文成文明皇后冯氏，长乐信都人。
English: She was then buried alongside him in the Golden Mausoleum in Shengle. Later, the names of the deceased were added to the names of the deceased to accompany the wreath-laying ceremony. Ms. Feng, the Empress of the Wencheng Civilization, was from Shengdu, Changle.

古文：父朗，秦、雍二州刺史、西城郡公。
现代文：父亲冯朗原是秦、雍二州的刺史、西城郡公。
English: His father, Feng Lang, was originally a member of the Qin and Yong dynasties and the governor of Xicheng County.

古文：母乐浪王氏。
现代文：母亲是乐浪郡王氏。
English: His mother was a member of the Wang clan from Lelang County.

古文：后生于长安，有神光之异。
现代文：冯氏出生于长安，诞生时，满屋有神光。
English: Mr. Feng was born in Chang'an. When he was born, the whole house was filled with divine light.

古文：朗坐事诛，后遂入宫。太武左昭仪，后之姑也，雅有母德抚养教训。
现代文：冯朗因犯法而被杀，冯氏便入了宫，太武帝的左昭仪是冯氏的姑姑，她品德高尚，善于抚养和教育孩子。
English: When Feng Lang was killed for breaking the law, the Feng clan entered the palace. Zuo Zhaoyi, the aunt of Emperor Taibu, was the aunt of the Feng clan. She was virtuous and good at raising and educating children.

古文：年十四，文成践极，以选为贵人，后立为皇后。
现代文：冯氏十四岁时，文成帝继位，把她选为贵人，后来又立为皇后。
English: When Ms. Feng was fourteen years old, Emperor Wencheng succeeded to the throne, selected her as a noblewoman, and later made her the empress.

古文：文成崩，故事国有大丧，三日后御服器物一以烧焚，百官及中宫皆号泣而临之。
现代文：文成帝去世时，按照惯例，皇帝驾崩，三天后凡皇帝生前所使用的衣物等各种用品全部烧毁，焚烧时文武百官以及宫中的嫔妃都亲临现场哭泣。
English: When Emperor Wencheng died, in accordance with the usual practice, the emperor passed away, and three days later all the clothes and other supplies used by the emperor were burned. When they were burned, all the military officials and concubines in the palace came to the scene to cry.

古文：后悲叫自投火，左右救之，良久乃苏。
现代文：皇后冯氏来后大哭着跳进火堆中，左右随从急忙把她救出，过了很久才苏醒过来。
English: After the arrival of Empress Feng, she cried loudly and jumped into the fire, and her attendants rushed to rescue her. It took her a long time to wake up.

古文：献文即位，尊为皇太后。
现代文：献文帝即位后，尊封她为皇太后。
English: After Emperor Xianwen ascended the throne, she was given the title of empress dowager.

古文：丞相乙浑谋逆，献文年十二，居于谅闇，太后密定大策，诛浑，遂临朝听政。
现代文：丞相乙浑企图篡政，当时，献文帝只有十二岁，又正是居丧期间，太后暗中定下计策，杀了乙浑，便亲自临朝听政。
English: At that time, Emperor Xianwen was only twelve years old, and it was during the period of mourning. The empress dowager secretly decided on a strategy, killed Yihun, and personally went to the imperial court to listen to politics.

古文：及孝文生，太后躬亲抚养。是后罢令不听政事。
现代文：当孝文帝出生之后，太后又亲自抚养教育，此后才不再处理政务。
English: When Emperor Xiaowen was born, the empress dowager personally raised and educated him, after which she no longer handled government affairs.

古文：太后行不正，内宠李弈，献文因事诛之。
现代文：太后举止不端正，在内宫私通李弈，献文帝找了个罪名把李弈杀掉了。
English: The empress dowager behaved improperly and fornicated with Li Yi in the inner palace. Emperor Xianwen found a crime and killed Li Yi.

古文：太后不得意，遂害帝。
现代文：太后很不高兴，便害死了献文帝。
English: The empress dowager was very displeased and had Emperor Xianwen killed.

古文：承明元年，尊曰太皇太后，复临朝听政。
现代文：承明元年，孝文帝尊封冯氏为太皇太后，她再度临朝听政。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, Emperor Xiaowen honored Feng as the great empress dowager, and she again came to the imperial court to listen to politics.

古文：后性聪达。自入宫掖，粗学书计；及登尊极，省决万机。
现代文：太后为人聪明而通达，自从进入宫中后，略学了一些书和计算。当她身居尊位临朝听政时，能很好地处理各种国家大事，日理万机。
English: The empress dowager is a clever and accomplished person. Since she entered the palace, she has learned a few books and calculations. When she was in the position of listening to the government, she was able to deal with various national affairs well.

古文：孝文诏罢鹰师曹，以其地为太后立报德佛寺。
现代文：孝文帝下诏废除鹰师曹，并用这块土地替太皇太后建起了一座报德佛寺。
English: Emperor Xiaowen issued an edict abolishing the eagle teacher, and used this land to build a Buddhist temple for the Empress Dowager.

古文：太后与孝文游于方山，顾川阜有终焉之志。
现代文：太后和孝文帝出游方山的时候，看到那里的山川以后，有死后葬在那里的想法。
English: When the Empress Dowager and Emperor Xiaowen were on a trip to Fangshan, after seeing the mountains and rivers there, they had the idea of being buried there after death.

古文：因谓群臣曰： 舜葬苍梧，二妃不从，岂必远祔山陵，然后为贵哉？
现代文：她便对众臣们说： 舜帝埋葬在苍梧山，娥皇和女英二妃并没有从葬。何必一定要远远合葬于山陵，然后才说明是显贵的呢？
English: She then said to her courtiers: Emperor Xizong was buried on Cangwu Mountain, but Empress E and Empress Dowager Cixi were not. Why do they have to be buried together far away in a mountain mausoleum before they can be said to be distinguished?

古文：吾百岁后，神其安此。 
现代文：我万年之后，就安葬在这里吧！ 
English: Let me be buried here after ten thousand years!

古文：孝文乃诏有司营建寿陵于方山，又起永固石室，将终为清庙焉。
现代文：孝文帝便传旨让有关部门在方山为太皇太后修建寿陵，又建造了永固石室，准备作为太皇太后去世后的祭庙。
English: Emperor Xiaowen then sent an order to the relevant departments to build a mausoleum for the great empress dowager in Fangshan, and built the Yonggu Stone Room to prepare it as a temple after the death of the great empress dowager.

古文：太和五年起作，八年而成，刊石立碑，颂太后功德。
现代文：太和五年兴建，八年建成，并在这里刻石立碑，赞颂太皇太后的功德。
English: It was built in five years and completed in eight years, and a stone monument was carved here to praise the merits of the Empress Dowager.

古文：太后以帝富于春秋，乃作《劝戒歌》三百余章，又作《皇诰》十八篇，文多不载。
现代文：太皇太后因觉得孝文帝年轻，便写下了《劝戒歌》三百多章，又写了《皇诰》十八篇，这些文章后来大多没有流传下来。
English: The Empress Dowager felt that Emperor Xiaowen was too young, so she wrote down more than 300 chapters of the "Song of Exhortation" and 18 articles of the "Imperial Rescript," most of which were not passed down.

古文：太后立文宣王庙于长安，又立思燕佛图于龙城，皆刊石立碑。
现代文：太后在长安建了一座文宣王庙，又在龙城建《思燕佛图》，都刻石立碑。
English: The empress dowager built a temple of King Wenxuan in Chang'an and "Siyan Buddha" in Longcheng, both of which are inscribed on stone monuments.

古文：太后又制，内属五庙之孙、外戚六亲缌麻，皆受复除。
现代文：太后又制定，凡是皇家亲属，五代以上的皇孙，外戚六亲中着缌麻服以上的远亲等，一律除去爵禄。
English: The empress dowager also stipulated that all royal relatives, grandchildren of the emperor of more than five generations, and distant relatives of more than six relatives wearing nettle clothes, etc. would all be removed from the peerage.

古文：性俭素，不好华饰，躬御缦绘而已。
现代文：她喜欢勤俭朴素，不爱穿用华美的服饰，身上穿的不过是没有文采的缦缯而已。
English: She likes to be frugal and simple, and does not like to wear ornate clothing. What she wears on her body is nothing more than a shabby rag.

古文：宰人上膳，案裁径尺，羞膳滋味，减于故事十分之八。
现代文：厨夫送饭菜，木案只有一尺宽长，各种食物的品种，比过去减少十分之八。
English: Cooks deliver meals, wooden cases are only a foot wide and long, and the variety of food is eight-tenths less than in the past.

古文：太后尝以体不安，服庵闾子，宰人昏而进粥，有蜒在焉，后举匕得之。帝时侍侧，大怒，将加极罚，太后笑而释之。
现代文：有一次太后身体不适，服用盭闾子，厨夫天黑时才送粥来，上面有蜓，太后用勺子舀时发现了，孝文帝正在一旁侍候，大为恼怒，准备把厨夫处以极刑，太皇太后却只是笑了笑把厨夫放了。
English: On one occasion, the Empress Dowager was unwell and was taking lice. The cook only brought the porridge when it was dark, and it had lice on it. When the Empress Dowager spooned it, she discovered that Emperor Xiaowen was waiting on the sidelines, very angry, and was about to execute the cook. The Empress Dowager, however, just smiled and let the cook go.

古文：自太后临朝专政，孝文雅性孝谨，不欲参决；事无巨细，一禀于太后。
现代文：自从太后临朝听政以后，孝文帝一向十分恭谨和孝顺，所以就不参与决定政事，不论事情大小，全部禀告太后处置。
English: Ever since the Empress Dowager Lin came to listen to politics, Emperor Xiaowen has always been very respectful and filial, so he does not participate in deciding political affairs, regardless of the size of the matter, and reports everything to the Empress Dowager.

古文：太后多智，猜忍，能行大事；杀戮赏罚，决之俄顷，多有不关帝者。是以威福兼作，震动内外。
现代文：太皇太后很有智谋，但性格多疑而狠毒，能处理各种大事，杀戮赏罚，她当即作出决定，许多事皇帝并不知道，她以刑罚和奖赏同时兼用，朝内外都十分震惊。
English: The empress dowager was very resourceful, but her character was suspicious and vicious. She was able to handle all kinds of major events, kill rewards and punishments. She immediately made a decision. The emperor did not know many things. She used both punishment and reward at the same time. Both inside and outside the court were very shocked.

古文：故杞道德、王遇、张祐、苻承祖等拔自微阉，岁中而至王公。
现代文：因此杞道德、王遇、张、苻承祖等从小太监出身，一年之间便被封为王公的爵位。
English: Therefore, Zou Daode, Wang Yu, Zhang, Zou Chengzu, etc. were born as eunuchs, and were given the title of prince within a year.

古文：王睿出入卧内，数年便为宰辅。赏赍千万亿计，金书铁券，许以不死之诏。
现代文：王睿又出入于太皇太后的内室，几年间就成了宰相，赏赐的东西以千万亿计算，赐给金书铁券，下诏应许不追究他的死罪。
English: Wang Rui also entered and left the inner chamber of the great empress dowager, and in a few years he became the prime minister. The rewards were calculated in quadrillions of yuan, he was given gold and iron certificates, and promised not to pursue his capital crime.

古文：李冲以器能受任，亦由见宠帏幄，密加锡赍，不可胜数。
现代文：李冲因器度和才能而受重用，也由于内室受宠爱，暗中给予的赏赐，难以计算。
English: It is difficult to calculate the rewards secretly given to Li Chong, who was highly regarded for his cunning and talent, and was also favored by the inner chamber.

古文：后性严明，假有宠侍，亦无所纵。
现代文：太皇太后生性严明，如果有恃宠而不法的，她也毫不留情。
English: The empress dowager is strict by nature, and she will show no mercy if there is any favoritism.

古文：左右纤介之愆，动加棰楚，多至百余，少亦数十。
现代文：左右侍从有小的失误，动则以木棍严打，多的打一百多下，少的也打几十棍。
English: The attendants on the left and right made small mistakes, and the leader beat them severely with a wooden stick, more than a hundred times, and a few dozen sticks.

古文：然性不宿憾，寻亦待之如初；或因此更加富贵，是以人人怀于利欲，至死而不思退。
现代文：不过她从不记存在心，不久便又像过去一样对待他们，有的人甚至得到富贵，所以人人都怀有利欲之心，至死也不想离开。
English: But she never remembered that in her heart, and soon she treated them as she had in the past, and some of them even became rich, so that everyone had a desire for gain and did not want to leave until death.

古文：太后曾与孝文幸灵泉池，宴群臣及蕃国使人、诸方渠帅，各令为其方舞。
现代文：太皇太后曾经和孝文帝前往灵泉池，设宴招待群臣和外国使者、各方的首领，让他们演出各地的舞蹈。
English: The Empress Dowager used to go to the Lingquan Pool with Emperor Xiaowen and host a banquet to invite ministers and foreign envoys, leaders of all parties, and let them perform dances from all over the country.

古文：孝文上寿，太后忻然作歌，帝亦和歌，遂命群臣各言其志，于是和歌者九十人。太后外礼人望，元丕、游明根等颁赐金帛舆马；每至褒美睿等，皆引丕参之，以示无私。
现代文：孝文帝向太皇太后祝寿，太后高兴地即席作歌，孝文帝也作和歌。于是又让群臣各自赋诗言志，应和作歌者多达九十人，太后又特别礼遇那些德高望重的人，元丕、游明根等人都得到金帛车马的赏赐，她每次要表彰王睿又等人时，都让元丕参加意见，以表示她没有私心。
English: Emperor Xiaowen wished the Empress Dowager a happy birthday, and the Empress Dowager happily composed a song, and Emperor Xiaowen also composed a waka. Therefore, he also asked the courtiers to give their own poems and sayings, and up to ninety people should be the songwriters. The Empress Dowager also gave special courtesy to those who were highly respected. Yuan Xuan, Yu Minggen and others were rewarded with gold-plated chariots and horses. Every time she wanted to commend Wang Rui and others, she asked Yuan Xuan to participate in the opinion, to show that she had no selfishness.

古文：又自以过失，惧人议己，小有疑忌，便见诛戮。
现代文：她又自知自己有过错，怕别人议论自己，所以只要对别人有一点疑忌，便立即把那人杀掉。
English: She also knows that she is at fault, she is afraid that others will talk about her, so as long as there is a little doubt about others, she will immediately kill that person.

古文：迄后之崩，孝文不知所生。
现代文：直到太皇太后死去，孝文帝一直不知道自己的生身母亲是谁。
English: Until the death of the great empress dowager, Emperor Xiaowen never knew who his biological mother was.

古文：至如李、李惠之徒，猜嫌覆灭者十余家，死者数百人，率多枉滥，天下冤之。
现代文：至于像李讠斤、李惠这类人，因为受到猜疑而招致全家被灭绝的有十多家，死去几百人，其中大多是被冤枉而滥杀的无辜，所以天下人都替他们感到冤枉。
English: As for people like Li Shujin and Li Hui, more than a dozen of their entire families were exterminated because of suspicion, and hundreds of people died, most of whom were innocent people who were wrongfully killed, so the whole world felt wronged for them.

古文：十四年，崩于太和殿，年四十九。
现代文：太和十四年，太皇太后死于太和殿，当年四十九岁。
English: In the 14th year of the Taiwa era, the empress dowager died in the Taiwa palace at the age of 49.

古文：其日有雄雉集于太华殿。
现代文：当天有雄雉聚集在太华殿。
English: On the same day, male baboons gathered at the Taihua Palace.

古文：帝酌饮不入口五日，毁慕过礼。
现代文：孝文帝伤心得五天内滴水不进。
English: Emperor Xiaowen was so heartbroken that he was bedridden for five days.

古文：谥曰文明太皇太后。
现代文：谥号为文明太皇太后。
English: Her nickname was Bunmei, the Great Empress Dowager.

古文：葬于永固陵，日中而反，虞于鉴玄殿。
现代文：把她安葬在永固陵，中午时葬毕，在鉴玄殿中设祭。
English: She was buried in the Yonggu Mausoleum at noon, and a memorial service was held in the Hall of Remembrance.

古文：照仪规为内主，谮构百端，寻废后为庶人。后贞谨有德操，遂为练行尼，后终于瑶光佛寺。
现代文：孝文帝因伤心过度而消瘦身体欠安，三年之间断绝酒肉。当初，孝文帝对太皇太后很孝顺，便在永固陵的东北角一里多地为自己修建了坟墓，打算自己死后也瞻望得到太皇太后。当迁都洛阳以后，他才又表示以鏶西作为自己死后的陵园，而把方山的空坟名为万年堂。
English: Emperor Xiaowen lost weight and health due to excessive grief, and he stopped eating meat and drinking alcohol for three years. At the beginning, Emperor Xiaowen was very filial to the Empress Dowager. He built a tomb for himself more than a mile away in the northeast corner of Yonggu Mausoleum, intending to visit the Empress Dowager after his death. After he moved the capital to Luoyang, he said that he would use the west of Shaanxi Province as his cemetery after his death, and named the empty tomb in Fangshan as the Hall of Immortality.

古文：孝文幽皇后亦冯熙女。母曰常氏。
现代文：孝文帝幽皇后也是太师冯熙的女儿，她的母亲姓常，原本出身低贱，但得到冯熙的宠爱。
English: Empress Xiaowen Tiyu is also the daughter of Grandmaster Feng Xi. Her mother's surname is Chang, originally from a lowly background, but she was favored by Feng Xi.

古文：本贱微，得幸于熙，熙元妃公主薨后，遂主家事。生后与北平公夙。
现代文：冯熙的元妃公主死后，常氏便主持家事。生有幽皇后和北平公冯夙。
English: After the death of Princess Yuanfei of Fengxi, Mr. Chang presided over the family affairs. Queen Yu and Beiping Gong Fengyao were born.

古文：文明太皇太后欲家世贵宠，乃简熙二女，俱入掖庭，时年十四。
现代文：文明太皇太后想要让娘家一门代代显贵受宠，便挑选了冯熙的两个女儿一起进入皇宫，这时，幽皇后只有十四岁。
English: When Empress Dowager Yu was only 14 years old, she chose two of Feng Xi's daughters to enter the imperial palace with her in order to make her daughter's family be favored by dignitaries for generations.

古文：其一早卒。
现代文：其中的一个女儿很早就死去了。
English: One of their daughters died long ago.

古文：后有姿媚，偏见爱幸。
现代文：幽皇后妩媚多姿，所以特别受到宠爱。
English: Empress Yu is charming and multi-faceted, which is why she is especially loved.

古文：未几，疾病。太后乃遣还家为尼，帝犹留念焉。
现代文：不久，幽皇后得了病，太后便把她送回家当尼姑，可是孝文帝依然十分想念她。
English: Soon after, Empress Yu fell ill, and the empress dowager sent her home to be a nun, but Emperor Xiaowen still missed her very much.

古文：岁余而太后崩，帝服终，颇存访之。
现代文：过了一年多，太皇太后去世了，孝文帝服丧期满后，便存心再寻访幽皇后。
English: After more than a year, the great empress dowager passed away, and after the mourning period of Emperor Xiaowen, he deliberately visited Empress Yu again.

古文：又闻后素疹痊除，遣阉官双三念玺书劳问，遂迎赴洛阳。
现代文：他听说幽皇后过去的疾病已经痊愈，便立即派宦官双三念送去诏书表示慰问，同时便将她迎往洛阳。
English: When he heard that Empress Yu's past illness had been cured, he immediately sent eunuch Shuang Sannen to send an imperial decree to express his condolences, and at the same time he welcomed her to Luoyang.

古文：及至，宠爱过本初。
现代文：到皇宫后，孝文帝对她的宠爱超过了当初。
English: After arriving at the Imperial Palace, Emperor Xiaowen became more fond of her than at first.

古文：当夕，宫人稀复进见。
现代文：此后，宫妃们便很少得到孝文帝的召见了。
English: After that, empresses rarely received an audience with Emperor Xiaowen.

古文：拜为左昭仪，後立为皇后。
现代文：于是，孝文帝封她为左昭仪，后来又被立为皇后。
English: As a result, Emperor Xiaowen made her Zuo Zhaoyi, and later she was made empress.

古文：帝频岁南征，后遂与中官高菩萨私乱。
现代文：孝文帝连年南征，皇后便和中朝官高菩萨有私情。
English: Emperor Xiaowen had been marching south for years, and the empress fell in love with Gao Bodhisattva, an official of the Chinese court.

古文：及帝在汝南不豫，后便公然丑恣，中常侍双蒙等为其心腹。
现代文：待孝文帝在汝南得病后，皇后便公然显露丑态。中常侍双蒙等一帮人是她的心腹。
English: After Emperor Xiaowen fell ill in the south of the country, the empress openly showed her ugliness. A group of people, including Vice-Regent Shuang Meng, were her confidants.

古文：是时彭城公主，宋王刘昶子妇也，年少嫠居。
现代文：当时有彭城公主，原是宋王刘昶的媳妇，年纪很轻就寡居在家。
English: At that time, there was Princess Pengcheng, who was the daughter-in-law of Song King Liu Bei, and she was widowed at a very young age.

古文：北平公冯夙，后之周母弟也。后求婚于孝文，孝文许之。
现代文：北平公冯夙是皇后的同母所生的弟弟，皇后便向孝文皇帝请求将彭城公主嫁给冯夙，孝文帝答应了。
English: Prince Feng Xuan of Beiping was the younger brother born of the same mother as the empress. The empress then asked Emperor Xiaowen to marry Princess Pengcheng to Feng Xuan. Emperor Xiaowen agreed.

古文：公主志不愿，后欲强之，婚有日矣。
现代文：可是彭城公主不愿意，皇后便想强迫她听从，成亲的日期也将到了。
English: However, Princess Pengcheng did not want to do so, so the queen tried to force her to obey, and the date for the wedding was set.

古文：公主密与侍婢及僮从十余人，乘轻车，冒霖雨，赴悬瓠，奉谒孝文，自陈本意。因言后与菩萨乱状。
现代文：彭城公主秘密地和她的侍婢和僮仆随从十多人，乘着轻车，冒着大雨前往悬瓠，拜见孝文帝，诉说了自己的心思，同时又揭发了皇后和高菩萨在宫中淫乱的丑事。
English: Princess Pengcheng secretly accompanied by more than ten attendants, including her maids, maidservants and footmen, took a light car and braved the heavy rain to visit Emperor Xiaowen, told him her thoughts, and at the same time exposed the scandal of the adultery of the empress and Gao Bodhisattva in the palace.

古文：帝闻，因骇愕，未之信，而秘匿之。
现代文：孝文帝听后，十分吃惊，也并未十分相信，只是把她们藏了起来。
English: Upon hearing this, Emperor Xiaowen was very surprised and did not fully believe, but simply hid them.

古文：此后后渐忧惧。与母常氏求托女巫，祷厌孝文疾不起；一旦得如文明太后辅少主称命者，赏报不赀。
现代文：此后，皇后逐渐感到忧虑和恐惧，于是便和母亲常氏一起求托女巫，祈祷用巫术让孝文帝一病不起，如果有朝一日能像文明太后那样辅佐少主临朝受命的话，赏赐无限。
English: After that, the empress gradually felt worried and afraid, so she and her mother, Changji, together with the witch, prayed to use witchcraft to make Emperor Xiaowen sick, and if one day she could assist the young lord to the imperial court as the Empress Dowager, the reward would be infinite.

古文：又取三牲，宫中祆祠，假言祈福，专为左道。
现代文：她又取来三牲，到宫中设礻夭教祠，假说是为皇帝祈福，实际上是在用妖术。
English: She also brought three sacrificial animals to the palace to set up a shrine for the dead, supposedly to pray for the emperor, but in fact she was using magic.

古文：母常或自诣宫中，或遣侍婢与相报答。
现代文：她的母亲常氏有时自己亲往宫中，有时派遣侍婢互通消息。
English: Her mother, Tsuneuji, sometimes went to the Imperial Palace herself, and sometimes sent servants to exchange information.

古文：帝至洛，执问菩萨、双蒙等，具得情状。
现代文：孝文帝回到洛阳后，抓住高菩萨和双蒙等进行审问，详情一一问明。
English: After Emperor Xiaowen returned to Luoyang, he arrested Gao Bodhisattva and Shuang Meng and interrogated them. The details were clarified one by one.

古文：帝以疾卧含温室，夜引后，并列菩萨等于户外。
现代文：孝文帝因病躺在含温室，夜间，令人带皇后来，并让高菩萨等人站在门外。
English: Emperor Xiaowen was lying in a greenhouse due to illness, and at night, people brought the emperor back, and let Gao Bodhisattva and others stand outside the door.

古文：后临入，令搜衣中，称有寸刃便斩。
现代文：皇后临入室时，又让人搜查她的衣服，并说只要发现有一寸长的小刀便将她立即斩首。
English: When the queen entered the room, she had her clothes searched and was told that if they found a knife just one inch long, she would be beheaded immediately.

古文：后顿首泣谢，乃赐坐东楹，去御筵二丈余。
现代文：皇后跪在地上叩头哭着请罪。孝文帝这才赐座于东楹下，离御座二丈多远。
English: The empress kneeled on the ground, prostrated herself and wept, and asked for forgiveness. It was only then that Emperor Xiaowen gave her the throne under the eastern yoke, two steps away from the throne.

古文：孝文令菩萨等陈状，又让后曰： 汝有妖术，可具言之。 
现代文：孝文帝命令高菩萨等自己供出罪行。随后又责备皇后说： 你不是有妖术吗，可详细说来。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen ordered Gao Bodhisattva and others to confess their crimes, and then scolded the empress, saying, "Don't you have magic? Let's talk about it in detail."

古文：后乞屏左右，有所密状。
现代文：皇后请求让左右的人退下，以保守秘密。
English: The Queen asked for those on either side to step back to protect the secret.

古文：孝文敕中常侍悉出，唯令长秋卿白整在侧，取卫直刀拄之。
现代文：孝文帝便让中常侍们都退出，只叫长秋卿白整站在一旁，拿着一把护卫用的长刀拄在地上。
English: Emperor Xiaowen then asked all the regular attendants to withdraw, only to have Chang Qiuqing Bai Jie stand by, holding a long knife used as an escort and stabbing it into the ground.

古文：后犹不言。
现代文：皇后还是不肯说。
English: The queen still wouldn't say.

古文：孝文乃以绵坚塞整耳，自小语再三呼整，无所应，乃令后言。
现代文：孝文帝便用丝绵塞紧白整的双耳，自己小声地喊着白整，连喊几声，白整没有回应，这才命令皇后说出详情。
English: Emperor Xiaowen then tightly plugged Bai Jie's ears with silk. He shouted to Bai Jie in a low voice, shouting several times in succession. Bai Jie did not respond, so he ordered the queen to tell the details.

古文：事隐，人莫知之。
现代文：所以这些事便隐藏住了，没有人知道。
English: So these things are hidden, and no one knows.

古文：高祖乃唤彭城、北海二王令入坐，言： 昔是汝嫂，今便他人，但入勿避。 
现代文：高祖又喊彭城、北海二王，让他们入座，并说： 她过去是你们的嫂嫂，从今以后便是别人了，你们只管进来，不必回避。 
English: Gao Zu also called Pengcheng and the two kings of the North Sea to let them sit down, and said: She used to be your sister-in-law, but from now on she is someone else. You just have to come in, you don't have to avoid her.

古文：又曰： 此老妪欲白刃插我肋上，可穷问本未，勿有所难。 
现代文：接着又说 ：这个老妖婆想把白刀子插进我的肋上，你们可以追查清事情本末，不必有什么觉得为难的。 
English: Then he added: "This old witch wants to stick a white knife into my ribs. You can track down and clear up the matter, there is no need to feel embarrassed.

古文：又云： 冯家女不能复相废逐，且使在宫中空坐，有心乃能自死，汝等勿谓吾犹有情也。 
现代文：最后又说 ：冯家的女儿不能再接连废逐了，暂且让她在宫中空坐，如果她有心就会自己寻死的，你们不要以为我还念有旧情。 
English: Finally, he said, "The Feng family's daughter can no longer be banished one after another. Let her sit empty in the palace for the time being. If she has a heart, she will seek her own death. Don't think that I still have old feelings."

古文：帝素至孝，犹以文明太后故，未行废。
现代文：孝文帝为人十分孝顺，也因为文明太后的缘故，所以没有废掉皇后。
English: Emperor Xiaowen was a very dutiful person, and he did not abolish the empress for the sake of the civilized empress.

古文：二王出，乃赐后辞死诀，再拜稽首涕泣。
现代文：两位王爷出宫以后，孝文帝便赐皇后以死别的话语，皇后再次跪拜叩首，哭泣不已。
English: After the two princes left the palace, Emperor Xiaowen gave the empress his parting words. The empress again knelt down, bowed her head, and wept.

古文：及入宫后，帝命中官有问于后，后骂曰： 我天子妇，当面对，岂令汝传也！ 
现代文：皇后入宫以后，孝文帝让中官向皇后问话，皇后便破口大骂说： 我是皇帝之妻，只能当面和皇帝答话，岂能让你们来传话！ 
English: After the empress entered the palace, Emperor Xiaowen asked the lieutenant general to ask the empress a question, and the empress burst into a tirade, saying, "I am the emperor's wife, I can only answer the emperor face to face, how can I let you send a message!

古文：帝怒，敕后母常入，示与后状，常挞之百余乃止。
现代文：孝文帝大怒，便令皇后的母亲常氏入宫，告诉她皇后的无礼的情况，常氏痛打皇后一百多下才停手。
English: Emperor Xiaowen was so angry that he ordered the queen's mother, the Lady Chang, into the palace to tell her about the queen's rudeness. The Lady Chang beat the queen more than a hundred times before she stopped.

古文：帝寻南伐，且留京师。
现代文：孝文帝不久又南征，皇后留在京城。
English: Emperor Xiaowen soon marched south again, but the empress remained in the capital.

古文：虽以罪失宠，而夫人嫔妾奉之如法。
现代文：她虽然因有罪而失宠，可是那些夫人嫔妾们仍然按礼法来侍奉她。
English: Although she had fallen from grace through her crimes, those ladies and concubines still served her according to proper etiquette.

古文：唯令世宗在东宫，无朝谒之事。
现代文：孝文帝只是传令世宗留住东宫，不要去朝拜皇后。
English: Emperor Xiaowen only ordered Shizong to stay in the East Palace and not to go and worship the empress.

古文：帝疾甚，谓彭城王勰曰： 后宫久乖阴德，自绝于天，吾死后可赐自尽别宫，葬以后礼，庶掩冯门之大过。 
现代文：孝文帝病重时，对彭城王勰说： 后宫的那个人早就失去德行，自绝于天，我死后可以赐她自尽于别宫，葬以皇后的礼节，这样大概可以遮掩冯家的大过失。 
English: When Emperor Xiaowen was gravely ill, he said to Wang Yao of Pengcheng: "That person in the harem lost virtue long ago and committed suicide. When I die, I can have her commit suicide in another palace and be buried with the etiquette of an empress. In this way, I can probably cover up the great mistake of the Feng family."

古文：帝崩，梓宫达鲁阳，乃行遗诏。
现代文：孝文帝死后，灵柩运到鲁阳时，才传下皇帝的遗诏。
English: After the death of Emperor Xiaowen, when the casket was transported to Luyang, the emperor's will was passed down.

古文：北海王详奉宣遗旨，长秋卿白整等入授后药。
现代文：北海王详奉着遗诏宣读，长秋卿白整等入宫将毒药交给皇后。
English: The King of the North Sea read out his will in detail, and Chang Qiuqing Bai Zhengyi waited for him to enter the palace to give the poison to the empress.

古文：后走呼，不肯引决，曰： 官岂有此也！是此诸王辈杀我耳。 
现代文：皇后边跑边哭喊着，不肯自尽，并说 ：皇帝哪会有这种遗诏，分明是诸王们想杀我罢了！ 
English: The queen cried and screamed as she ran. She did not want to commit suicide, and said, "How could the emperor have made such a will? Clearly, the kings only wanted to kill me!"

古文：整等执持强之，乃含椒而尽。
现代文：白整等人抓住她，并强行将毒药灌入，皇后这才含药而亡。
English: Bai Zhengyi and others grabbed her and forced poison into her, and the queen died from the poison.

古文：梓宫次洛南，咸阳王禧等知审死，相视曰： 若无遗诏，我兄弟亦当作计去之。
现代文：当灵柩运至洛南时，咸阳王禧等知道皇后确已死去，相互注视着说 ：如果没有遗诏，我们兄弟也自当以计除去。
English: When the coffin was transported to Luonan, Xianyang Wang Xi and others knew that the empress had indeed died, and they looked at each other and said: If there is no will, our brothers should remove it themselves.

古文：由是在洛二十余年，皇子全育者唯明帝而已。宣武灵皇后胡氏，安定临泾人，司徒国珍女也。
现代文：岂能让这种丧失德行的妇人来主宰天下，残杀我们呢？ 于是，谥为 幽皇后 ，葬入长陵墓中。宣武灵皇后胡氏，安定临泾人，司徒胡国珍的女儿。
English: Can we allow such a woman bereft of virtue to rule the world and kill us? Therefore, she was buried in the Long Mausoleum as the Empress Yu. She was the daughter of the Empress Wu of Xuanwuling, the daughter of the Empress Hu of Hu, the daughter of the Empress Wang of Linyi, and the daughter of the Empress Wu Guozhen.

古文：母皇甫氏，产后之日，赤光四照。
现代文：母亲皇甫氏，产下胡氏后，红光四射。
English: After giving birth to Hu, his mother, the Empress Fu, was radiant.

古文：京兆山北县有赵胡者，善于卜相，国珍问之，胡云： 贤女有大贵之表，方为天地母，生天地主，勿过三人知也。 
现代文：京兆山北县有个叫赵胡的人，善于占卜和相术，胡国珍把他请来卜相，以定吉凶。赵胡说： 贤女有大贵的仪表，四方为天地之母，能生下天地之主，这事不要让第三个人知道。 
English: There was a man named Zhao Hu in Beixian County, Jingzhaoshan, who was good at divination and fortune-telling. Hu Guozhen invited him to tell fortunes. Zhao Hu said: A virtuous woman has a noble appearance, is the mother of heaven and earth, and can give birth to the Lord of heaven and earth. Don't let a third person know about this.

古文：后姑为尼，颇能讲道。
现代文：胡氏的姑姑当尼姑，颇善于讲道。
English: Mr. Hu's aunt was a nun who was quite good at preaching.

古文：宣武初，入讲禁中。积岁，讽左右称后有姿行。
现代文：宣武初年，她进入宫中讲道，过了一年多，她向身边听她讲道的人称赞胡氏的美容和德行。
English: In the first year of Xuanwu, she entered the palace to preach. After more than a year, she praised Hu's beauty and virtue to the people around her.

古文：帝闻之，乃召入掖庭，为充华世妇。
现代文：皇帝听到以后，便将胡氏召进宫来，作为充华世妇。
English: When the emperor heard of this, he summoned Hu to the palace to act as Chunhua's concubine.

古文：而椒庭之中，以国旧制，相与祈祝，皆愿生诸王、公主，不愿生太子。
现代文：而当时皇帝的后妃们中，由于国家原来的规定，她们都向神礻氏祷告，只愿生的是一般亲王和公主们，不愿生太子。
English: However, among the emperors' concubines at that time, due to the original regulations of the country, they all prayed to Shennong, and only wanted to give birth to ordinary princes and princesses, and did not want to give birth to princes.

古文：唯后每称： 夫人等言，何缘畏一身之死而令皇家不育冢嫡也？ 
现代文：只有胡氏总是说： 我听了众夫人讲的话，怎么能因为怕一身之死而使皇家不能生养太子呢？ 
English: Only Mr. Hu always said, "I have listened to what all the ladies have said. How can the royal family not produce a crown prince because they are afraid of dying alone?"

古文：明帝在孕，同列犹以故事相恐，劝为诸计。
现代文：当她怀明帝后，同伴还把以前的那些旧事说给她听，让她惊恐不安，还劝她想些别的办法。
English: When she remembered the emperor, her companion also told her the old stories of the past, made her frightened and uneasy, and advised her to think of other ways.

古文：后固意确然，幽夜独誓，但使所怀是男，次第当长子，子生，身死不辞。
现代文：胡氏却一心一意在夜间独自发誓，但愿自己所怀的是个男孩，按次序是皇帝的长子，儿子生下后，自己身死也不推辞。
English: Mr. Hu, on the other hand, vowed in the middle of the night, all alone, that he hoped the child he was carrying would be a boy, the emperor's eldest son in order, and that he would not refuse to die after his son was born.

古文：既诞明帝，进为充华嫔。
现代文：当生下明帝后，被晋封为充华嫔。
English: When Emperor Ming was born, he was given the title of Zonghua Zong.

古文：先是，宣武频丧皇子，自以年长，深加慎护，为择乳保，皆取良家宜子者，养于别宫，皇后及充华皆莫得而抚视焉。
现代文：以前，宣武帝接连死去皇子，如今已年纪大了，所以特别注意加以保护，替儿子挑选乳母，从好人家里挑选善于抚育孩子的人，把皇子养在别的宫中，皇后和充华都没有办法看到和抚养。
English: In the past, Emperor Xuanwu had a succession of dead princes, but now he is old, so he paid special attention to protecting him. He selected a nanny for his son, selected a person who was good at raising children from a good family, and raised the prince in another palace. Neither the queen nor Zhuanghua could see and raise him.

古文：及明帝践阼，尊后为皇太妃，后尊为皇太后。
现代文：当魏明帝继位后，尊封胡氏为皇太妃，后又尊称皇太后。
English: When Emperor Wei Ming succeeded to the throne, she was given the title of Empress Dowager and later the title of Empress Dowager.

古文：临朝听政，犹曰殿下，下令行事。
现代文：临朝听政时，先时还称 殿下 ，下令行事。
English: When he listened to politics in the imperial court, he also called himself "Your Highness" and gave orders.

古文：后改令称诏，群臣上书曰陛下，自称曰朕。
现代文：后来把 令 改称为 诏 ，群臣上书时称为 陛下 ，自称为 朕 。
English: Later, the order was renamed the edict, the ministers referred to themselves as "your majesty" and referred to themselves as "we."

古文：太后以明帝冲幼，未堪亲祭，欲傍《周礼》夫人与君交献之义，代行祭礼。
现代文：太后又因明帝年幼，不能亲自主持祭祀，便想依照《周礼》中所说的夫人和国君交替献祭的礼节，代替皇帝主持祭礼。
English: The empress dowager also wanted to preside over the festival in place of the emperor in accordance with the etiquette of alternating between the wife and the sovereign in the "Weekly Rituals" because Emperor Ming was too young to personally preside over the ritual.

古文：礼官博议以为不可，而太后欲以帏幔自鄣，观三公行事。
现代文：礼官们广加议论后认为不行。而太后便想用帏幔遮住身子，以亲自观看三公们是怎样进行祭祀的。
English: After much discussion, the etiquette officials decided that this was unacceptable, and the empress dowager wanted to cover herself with a veil in order to see for herself how the three princes performed the ritual.

古文：重问侍中崔光，光便据汉和熹邓后荐祭故事。
现代文：她又再次询问侍中崔光，崔光便列举当年东汉的和熹邓太后曾主持祭礼的故事。
English: She again asked the chambermaid, Cui Guang, who then recounted the story of how the Dowager Empress Dowager Deng of the Eastern Han Dynasty presided over the festival.

古文：太后大悦，遂摄行初祀。
现代文：太后听了十分高兴，便代行初次祭祀大典。
English: The empress dowager was very pleased to hear this, and performed the first grand ritual on his behalf.

古文：太后性聪悟，多才艺，姑既为尼，幼相依托，略得佛经大义。
现代文：太后本性聪明，善于领悟，多才多艺，她的姑姑是尼姑，她自幼依托姑姑教诲，也能大略知道佛经的要义。
English: The empress dowager is naturally intelligent, good at comprehension, and versatile. Her aunt is a nun, and she has relied on her aunt's teachings since she was a child, and she can also know the gist of Buddhist scriptures.

古文：亲览万机，手笔断决。
现代文：亲理万机时，都是亲手握笔决定事理的。
English: When it comes to taking care of things personally, it's all about taking matters into one's own hands.

古文：幸西林园法流堂，命侍臣射，不能者罚之。
现代文：她前去西林园法流堂时，让侍卫臣子们射箭玩，射不好的就处罚。
English: When she went to the West Forest Garden Falun Hall, she let the bodyguards and retainers play archery. If they did not shoot well, they would be punished.

古文：又自射针孔，中之，大悦，赐左右布帛有差。
现代文：她自己亲射针孔，一射而中，十分高兴，便赏赐左右随从布帛，多少不等。
English: She shoots a pinhole herself, hits it, is very happy, and then rewards the left and right follower cloths, how many vary.

古文：先是，太后敕造申讼车，时御焉。
现代文：又在早些时候，她就下诏让人制作申讼车，经常乘坐在上面。
English: Earlier, she had ordered a carriage to be made for her, and she often sat on it.

古文：出自云龙大司马门，从宫西北，入自千秋门，以纳冤讼。
现代文：由云龙大司马门出宫，沿着宫廷西北方行走，从千秋门进宫，沿途听人申冤和接受诉讼。
English: He went out of the palace through the Ma Gate of the Grand Master of the Yunlong Emperor, walked along the northwest of the palace, and entered the palace through the Qianqiu Gate. Along the way, he listened to people's grievances and accepted lawsuits.

古文：又亲策孝、秀、州郡计吏于朝堂。
现代文：又亲自在朝堂上考试孝廉、秀才和各州郡的会计。
English: He also personally examined the accountants of the states and counties in the morning hall.

古文：太后与明帝幸华林园，宴群臣于都亭曲水，令王公以下赋七言诗。
现代文：太后和魏明帝前往华林园时，在都亭曲水宴请群臣，让王公以下各官员赋七言诗。
English: When the Empress Dowager and Emperor Ming of Wei went to the Waring Garden, they invited a group of courtiers to a banquet at the Du Pavilion, and asked the officials from the prince down to perform a seven-character poem.

古文：太后诗曰： 化光造物含气贞。 明帝诗曰： 恭己无为赖慈英。 
现代文：太后诗句是 化光造物含气贞 ，明帝诗句是 恭己无为赖慈英 。
English: The empress dowager's poem is "Transmuting light into creation, containing qi and chastity," and the emperor Ming's poem is "Respecting oneself, doing nothing, relying on benevolence."

古文：王公以下赐帛有差。
现代文：赏赐王公以下官员布帛，数量不等。
English: Officials below the rank of prince were rewarded with cloth bags, the number of which varied.

古文：太后父薨，百僚表请公除，太后不许。
现代文：太后的父亲去世，百官上表请求皇太后因公而除服，太后不肯。
English: When the Empress Dowager's father passed away, hundreds of officials petitioned the Empress Dowager to remove her clothes for official reasons, but the Empress Dowager refused.

古文：寻幸永宁寺，观建刹于九级之基，僧尼士女赴者数万人。
现代文：不久便前往永宁寺，在九级台基上观看修建寺庙，僧人、尼姑和男男女女前去观看的多达几万人。
English: Soon they went to Yongning Temple to watch the construction of the temple on the nine-level foundation. Tens of thousands of monks, nuns and men and women came to watch.

古文：及改葬文昭高后，太后不欲令明帝主事，乃自为丧主。
现代文：当改葬文昭高皇后时，太后也不想让魏明帝主持丧事，便自己亲自主丧。
English: When the funeral of Empress Wenzhao Gao was rescheduled, the empress dowager did not want Emperor Wei Ming to preside over the funeral, so she conducted the funeral herself.

古文：出至终宁陵，亲奠遣事，还哭于太极殿，至于讫事，皆自主焉。
现代文：她出行前来到终宁陵，亲自祭奠，分派各种事务，回来后在太极殿哭祭，直至事毕，都是她一人做主。
English: Before her trip, she came to the Mausoleum of Zhenning, personally paid tribute, and assigned various affairs. After returning, she held a wailing ceremony in the Taiji Hall, and until the event was over, she was the sole decision-maker.

古文：后幸嵩高山，夫人、九嫔、公主以下从者数百人，升于顶中。
现代文：后来她又驾幸嵩山，随同前往的夫人、九嫔、公主等以下侍从几百人，她一直登到嵩山山顶。
English: Later, she also drove to the top of Songshan Mountain, accompanied by several hundred attendants, including her wife, nine concubines, and a princess. She climbed all the way to the top of Songshan Mountain.

古文：废诸淫祀，而胡天神不在其例。
现代文：她宣布废除各种不合经典礼仪的祭祀，但胡天神不在废除之列。
English: She announced the abolition of all kinds of non-classical rituals, but Hu Tianjin is not included in the abolition.

古文：寻幸阙口温水，登鸡头山，自射象牙簪，一发中之，敕示文武。
现代文：不久又前往伊阙口的温泉，登上鸡头山，亲手射象牙簪子，一发而中，便下令让文武官员传看。
English: Not long after, he went to the hot springs in Ilukou, climbed the Jitou Mountain, and shot ivory dice with his own hands. As soon as he hit the target, he ordered the military and civilian officials to pass it on.

古文：时太后逼幸清河王怿，淫乱肆情，为天下所恶。
现代文：当时，胡太后强迫清河王怿跟她私通，大肆淫乱，为天下人所厌恶。
English: At that time, the Empress Dowager Hu forced Wang Yao of Qinghe to commit adultery with her, which was detested by the people of the world.

古文：领军元叉、长秋卿刘腾等奉明帝于显阳殿，幽太后于北宫，于禁中杀怿。
现代文：领军元叉、长秋卿刘腾等人奏请魏明帝在显阳殿主持国政，将胡太后幽禁在北宫，并在宫中杀掉清河王怿。
English: The leader of the army, Yuan Zha, the Long Autumn Emperor Liu Teng, and others asked Emperor Wei Ming to preside over state affairs in the Xianyang Palace, to imprison the Empress Dowager Hu in the North Palace, and to kill the Qinghe Wang Yao in the palace.

古文：其后太后从子都统僧敬与备身左右张车渠等数十人谋杀叉，复奉太后临朝。
现代文：后来，胡太后的侄子都统胡僧敬和备身左右随从张车渠等几十人策划杀元叉，重新请胡太后临朝听政。
English: Later, dozens of people, including Emperor Hu's nephew, Emperor Du Tong, Emperor Hu's monk, Emperor Jing, and Zhang Cheqiu's attendants, plotted to assassinate Yuan Zhao, and again invited Emperor Hu to come to the imperial court to listen to politics.

古文：事不克，僧敬坐徙边，车渠等死，胡氏多免黜。
现代文：但事情没有成功，胡僧敬判罪流放边疆，车渠等人被处死，胡家当官的人大多被免职。
English: However, things did not work out. Hu Sangjing was sentenced to exile to the frontier, Chequan and others were executed, and most of the Hu family officials were removed from office.

古文：后明帝朝太后于西林园，宴文武侍臣，饮至日夕，叉乃起至太后前自陈，外云太后欲害己及腾。
现代文：后来，魏明帝在西林园朝见胡太后，并宴请文武侍卫大臣，一直喝到黄昏时，元叉便起身来到胡太后面前陈诉，说外面有人传言，讲太后想加害自己和刘腾。
English: Later, when Wei Mingdi met the Empress Dowager Hu in the morning in the West Forest Garden, and had a banquet with Wenwu, the Minister of the Imperial Guard, and drank until dusk, Yuan Zha got up and came to the Empress Dowager Hu to make a complaint, saying that there were rumors outside that the Empress Dowager wanted to harm herself and Liu Teng.

古文：太后答云： 无此语。 
现代文：胡太后回答 ：没有这回事。 
English: Empress Dowager Hu replied, "There is no such thing."

古文：遂至于极昏。
现代文：于是欢宴直至深夜。
English: The party went on until late into the night.

古文：太后乃起执明帝手下堂，言： 母子不聚久，今暮共一宿，诸大臣送我入。 
现代文：太后便站起来拉着魏明帝的手走到堂下，对他说： 母子相会时间不长，今晚共聚一宿，请诸位大臣送我入内。 
English: The empress dowager then stood up, took Wei Mingdi's hand and led him down to the hall. She said to him, "The meeting time between mother and son is not long. Tonight we will spend the night together. I would like to ask the ministers to escort me inside."

古文：太后与帝向东北小阁，左卫将军奚康生谋杀叉不果。
现代文：太后便和明帝一起走向东北处的小阁房，左卫将军奚康生企图谋杀元叉，不能得手。
English: The empress dowager then went with Emperor Ming to the small attic in the northeast, and the left guard general, Yan Kangsheng, attempted to murder Yuan Zha, but was unsuccessful.

古文：自刘腾死，叉又宽怠，太后与明帝及高阳王雍为计，解叉领军。
现代文：自从刘腾死后，元叉便比较放松警戒，太后便跟明帝以及高阳王雍一起定计，解除了元叉领军的职务。
English: After Liu Teng's death, Yuan Shikai relaxed his vigilance, and the Empress Dowager, together with Emperor Ming and Emperor Goyang, decided to relieve Yuan Shikai of his duties as leader of the army.

古文：太后复临朝，大赦改元。
现代文：太后又临朝听政。宣布大赦天下，并更改年号。
English: The empress dowager also came to the imperial court to listen to the government. She declared a general amnesty and changed the era name.

古文：自是朝政疏缓，威恩不立，天下牧守，所在贪婪。
现代文：从此以后，朝政松散，缺乏权威，全国地方官员，都贪得无厌。
English: From then on, the imperial government was loose and lacked authority, and local officials across the country were insatiably greedy.

古文：郑俨污乱宫掖，势倾海内；李神轨、徐纥并见亲侍，一二年中，位总禁要。
现代文：郑俨在宫廷中淫乱，权势遍及全国。李神轨、徐纥都被看成心腹侍从，一二年内，担任了宫廷中最显耀的官职。
English: Zheng Qi was promiscuous in the court, and his influence spread throughout the country. Li Shenlu and Xu Qi were both seen as loyal attendants, and within a year or two, they held the most illustrious official positions in the court.

古文：手握王爵，轻重在心，宣淫于朝，为四方之所秽。
现代文：他们手中掌握着王侯的封爵，赏赐的轻重，完全随心所欲，更兼淫乱之风遍及朝廷，为四方民众所唾骂。
English: They hold in their hands the knighthoods of princes, and the weight of rewards is entirely at their whim. What's more, the wind of immorality pervades the imperial court and is reviled by the people in all directions.

古文：文武解体，所在乱逆，土崩鱼烂，由于此矣。
现代文：于是，文武官员无所约束，到处发生叛乱的事件，土崩瓦解的过程由此开始。
English: As a result, civil and military officials were unrestrained, rebellions occurred everywhere, and the process of the country's collapse began.

古文：僧敬又因聚集亲族，遂涕泣谏曰： 陛下母仪海内，岂宜轻脱如此！ 
现代文：胡僧敬便又聚集所有亲属，流着泪向胡太后进谏说： 陛下是天下母亲的榜样，怎么能够这样轻率地为所欲为呢！ 
English: Hu Xiangjing then gathered all his relatives and, with tears streaming down his face, said to the Empress Dowager Hu, "Your Majesty is a role model for the mothers of the world. How can you do whatever you want so carelessly?"

古文：太后大怒，自是不召僧敬。
现代文：胡太后听后，大为恼怒，从此再也不召见胡僧敬。
English: After listening to this, the Empress Dowager Wu was very angry, and never invited Hu Seng Kei again.

古文：内为朋党，防弊耳目，明帝所亲幸者，太后多以事害焉。
现代文：宫廷内部也各自结为朋党，为了防备对方的耳目，凡是魏明帝所亲信的人，胡太后大多找个理由便加以杀害。
English: Within the court, they also formed their own cronies. In order to prevent the other side's eyes and ears, all those who were trusted by Emperor Wei Ming were mostly killed by Empress Dowager Hu after finding a reason.

古文：有蜜多道人，能胡语，帝置于左右。
现代文：有一位叫蜜多道人的，能够讲胡人的话语，明帝把他做为左右亲随。
English: There was a man called Medo Daojin, who could speak the language of the Hu people. Emperor Ming treated him as a close follower.

古文：太后虑其传致消息，三月三日，于城南大巷中杀之，方悬赏募贼。
现代文：胡太后担心他会传递消息，便在三月三日这天把他杀死在城南的大巷子里，然后又假惺惺地张贴悬赏贼犯的布告。
English: Empress Dowager Hu was worried that he would pass on the news, so on March 3, she killed him in the alley south of the city, and then falsely posted a notice offering a reward for the thief.

古文：又于禁中杀领左右、鸿胪少卿谷会、绍达，并帝所亲也。
现代文：又在宫中杀了分领左右、鸿胪少卿谷会和绍达，他们也都是皇帝的亲信。
English: In the palace, he also killed the branch leaders of the Left and Right Divisions, as well as Hung Yan, Shao Jing, Gu Hui, and Sau Da, all of whom were also close confidants of the emperor.

古文：母子之间，嫌隙屡起。
现代文：于是，母子之间，猜疑、嫌隙多次产生。
English: As a result, between mother and son, suspicions and rifts have arisen many times.

古文：郑俨虑祸，乃与太后计，因潘嫔生女，妄言皇子，便大赦，为武泰元年，复阴行鸩毒。
现代文：郑俨害怕会遭受祸患，便和胡太后设计，当潘嫔生女儿时，对外却传言说生了位皇子，便下令大赦天下，改年号为武泰元年，然后便暗地下鸩毒。
English: Fearing that he would suffer a calamity, Zheng Yao and Empress Dowager Hu devised a plan. When Pan Yao gave birth to a daughter, the outside world heard a rumor that a prince had been born. Zheng Yao ordered a general amnesty, changed the year to the first year of Wu Tai, and then secretly poisoned.

古文：其年二月，明帝暴崩，乃奉潘嫔女，言太子即位。
现代文：这年二月，魏明帝突然死去，便把潘嫔的女儿抱出来，说是皇太子即位。
English: In February of that year, Emperor Wei Mingdi died suddenly, and he took out Pan Xuan's daughter and said that it was the crown prince's enthronement.

古文：经数日，见人心已安，始言潘嫔本实生女，今宜更择嗣君，遂立临洮王子钊为主，年始二、三岁，天下愕然。
现代文：过了几天，看见人心已经安定，这才说出潘嫔原来生的是个女儿，如今应当另外选择国君。于是，便立临洮王的儿子元钊为帝，年纪只有两三岁，天下人都十分吃惊。
English: After a few days, when he saw that the hearts of the people had stabilized, he said that Pan Xuan had originally been born a daughter, and now they should choose another sovereign. Therefore, he made the Linyi king's son, Yuan Xuan, emperor, who was only two or three years old, and the whole world was very surprised.

古文：及尔硃荣称兵度河，太后尽召明帝六宫，皆令入道，太后亦自落发。
现代文：当尔朱荣宣布领兵渡黄河时，胡太后把明帝六宫的宫妃宫女集合起来，下令让她们都皈依佛教，太后自己也削发为尼。
English: When Er Zhu Rong announced that he was leading an army across the Yellow River, Empress Dowager Hu gathered together the concubines of the six palaces of Emperor Ming and ordered them all to convert to Buddhism. The Empress Dowager herself also became a nun.

古文：荣遣骑拘送太后及幼主于河阴。
现代文：尔朱荣派骑兵把太后和小皇帝抓起来送往河阴。
English: Er Zhurong sent cavalry to arrest the empress dowager and the little emperor and sent them to Huayin.

古文：太后对荣多所陈说，荣拂衣而起。
现代文：太后对尔朱荣反复陈说，尔朱荣生气地拂衣而起。
English: The empress dowager repeatedly said to Le Zhu Rong, and Le Zhu Rong angrily whipped off her clothes.

古文：帝见立，乃纳为后。
现代文：太后和小皇帝都被同时沉入河中。
English: The empress dowager and the little emperor both sank into the river at the same time.

古文：及帝西幸关中，降为彭城王韶妃。文帝文皇后乙弗氏，河南洛阳人也。
现代文：太后的妹妹冯翊君在双灵寺把她收葬了。魏武帝时，才以皇后的礼节把她重新安葬，并追加谥号为 灵 。文帝文皇后乙弗氏，河南洛阳人。
English: The empress dowager's younger sister, Feng Yijun, buried her in the Shuangling Temple. It was only during the reign of Emperor Wu of Wei that she was reburied according to the etiquette of an empress, with the additional title of "Ling." Emperor Wen, Empress Yifu, a native of Luoyang, Henan.

古文：其先世为吐谷浑渠帅，居青海，号青海王。
现代文：她的祖先是吐谷浑的首领，世居青海，号称青海王。
English: Her ancestor was the chief of the Tugu Hun, who lived in Qinghai and was known as the King of Qinghai.

古文：凉州平，后之高祖莫瑰拥部落入附，拜定州刺史，封西平公。
现代文：凉州归降后，乙弗氏的高祖父莫瞔领着全部落人归顺朝廷，被任命为定州刺史，封爵西平公。
English: After the fall of Liangzhou, the great-great-grandfather of the Yifu clan, Mo Yan, led all the fallen people to surrender to the imperial court and was appointed as the governor of Dingzhou and knighted as Xiping.

古文：自莫瑰后，三世尚公主，女乃多为王妃，甚见贵重。
现代文：从莫瞔以后，他家连续子孙三代娶魏国公主为妻，而莫瞔家的女子也大多成为王妃，在朝廷很受尊重。
English: After Mogi, three successive generations of his descendants married princesses of Wei, and most of Mogi's women became princesses and were highly respected in the imperial court.

古文：父瑗，仪同三司、兗州刺史。
现代文：乙弗氏的父亲名瑗，官仪同三司、兖州刺史。
English: Mr. Yifu's father was a famous general, and his official title was the same as that of the Third Division, and he was also the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：母淮阳长公主，孝文之第四女也。
现代文：母亲是淮阳长公主，孝文帝的第四位女儿。
English: Her mother was Huaiyang First Princess, the fourth daughter of Emperor Xiaowen.

古文：后美容仪，少言笑，年数岁，父母异之，指示诸亲曰： 生女何妨也。
现代文：乙弗氏长得仪表秀美，很少说话和发笑，几岁的时候，她父母就觉得很奇特，便指着她对亲戚们说： 养女儿有什么关系？
English: When she was a few years old, her parents thought she was very strange and pointed her out to their relatives, saying: "What does it matter if you have a daughter?

古文：若此者，实胜男。 
现代文：如果像这个，实在胜于生男孩。 
English: If it's like this, it's better than having a boy.

古文：年十六，文帝纳为妃。
现代文：十六岁时，魏文帝把她选为妃子。
English: At the age of sixteen, Emperor Weiwen selected her as his concubine.

古文：及帝即位，以大统元年册为皇后。
现代文：文帝即位时，在大统元年把她册封为皇后。
English: When Emperor Wen ascended the throne, she was crowned empress in the first year of the Great Reunification.

古文：后性好节俭，蔬食故衣，珠玉罗绮绝于服玩。
现代文：皇后本性喜欢节俭，吃一般蔬菜粮食，穿旧衣服，珍珠美玉绫罗绸缎从不穿戴。
English: The queen's nature likes to be frugal, eating ordinary vegetable food, wearing old clothes, and never wearing pearl and jade brocade.

古文：又仁恕不为嫉妒之心，帝益重之。
现代文：为人仁慈，宽宏大量，毫无嫉妒之心，因而皇帝更加看重她。
English: She was kind, generous and without jealousy, which made the emperor value her even more.

古文：生男女十二人，多早夭，唯太子及武都王戊存焉。
现代文：共生了男女孩子十二人，大多过早夭折，只有太子和武都王戊活了下来。
English: They had twelve children together, mostly prematurely died, only the prince and King Wu survived.

古文：时新都关中，务欲东讨，蠕蠕寇边，未遑北伐，故帝结婚以抚之。
现代文：当时因新迁都于关中，全力准备东征，蠕蠕却屡次侵犯北方边境，但一时又无暇北伐，所以皇帝采取和蠕蠕结亲的办法以安抚。
English: At that time, due to the new relocation of the capital to Guanzhong, all efforts were made to prepare for the eastward march, but the Cree repeatedly violated the northern border, but there was no time for the northward march, so the emperor adopted the method of making a relative with the Cree to appease.

古文：于是更纳悼后，命后逊居别宫，出家为尼。
现代文：因此，文帝又和悼皇后成婚，让乙弗氏降居别宫，出家为尼。
English: As a result, Emperor Wen married Empress Mu again, and had the Yifu clan move to another palace and become nuns.

古文：悼后犹怀猜忌，复徙后居秦州，依子秦州刺史武都王。
现代文：可是，悼皇后对魏文帝仍心存怀疑，便只得把文皇后迁居秦州，住在她儿子秦州刺史、武都王戊那里。
English: However, the mourning empress still had doubts about Wei Wendi, so she had to move the Empress Wen to Qinzhou, where she lived with her sons Qinzhou Zhishi and Wudu Wang Wu.

古文：帝虽限大计，恩好不忘，后密令养发，有追还之意。
现代文：文帝虽是迫于国家大计，但对文皇后旧情不忘，后来曾暗暗地下令让文皇后蓄留头发，有请她回宫的想法。
English: Although Emperor Wen was forced to do so by the state's grand plan, he did not forget his old feelings for Empress Wen. Later, he secretly ordered Empress Wen to grow her hair and had the idea of inviting her back to the palace.

古文：然事秘禁，外无知者。
现代文：可是这事秘密禁传，外部并无人知道。
English: However, it was a secret and no one outside knew about it.

古文：六年春，蠕蠕举国度河，前驱已过夏，颇有言虏为悼后之故兴比役。
现代文：六年春天，蠕蠕人又企图南渡黄河，前驱部队已过了夏州，外边颇有传言说蠕蠕南下入侵完全是因为悼皇后的缘故。
English: In the spring of the sixth year, the Cree attempted to cross the Yellow River to the south again. The advance troops had already passed Xiazhou. There were quite a few rumors that the Cree's invasion to the south was entirely due to the mourning of the empress.

古文：帝曰： 岂有百万之众为一女子举也？
现代文：文帝说 ：怎么会有百万大军为一个女子而发兵呢？
English: Emperor Wen said, "How can there be a million-strong army for one woman?"

古文：虽然，致此物论，朕亦何颜以见将帅邪！ 
现代文：虽然如此，遭致这样的议论，我又有什么面目来见将帅们呢？ 
English: Nevertheless, having been subjected to such a discussion, what face do I have to show to the generals?

古文：乃遣中常侍曹宠赍手敕令后自尽。
现代文：于是派中常侍曹宠赐手敕让文皇后自尽。
English: Therefore, the emperor sent his favorite attendant to handcuff the Empress Wen and let her commit suicide.

古文：后奉敕，挥泪谓宠曰： 愿至尊享千万岁，天下康宁，死无恨也。 
现代文：皇后接令，流着泪对曹宠说： 我只愿皇上活到千万岁，天下太平，虽死而无恨！ 
English: Receiving the order, the empress said to Cao Zhao with tears streaming down her face, "I only wish the emperor could live to be ten million years old, the world would be at peace, and there would be no hatred in death!"

古文：因命武都王前，与之决。
现代文：便让武都王前来，和他诀别。
English: So he asked King Wu Du to come and bid him farewell.

古文：遗语皇太子，辞皆凄怆，因恸哭久之。
现代文：又留下话给皇太子，言辞十分凄怆，她痛哭了许久。
English: She also left a message for the Crown Prince. The words were very sad, and she cried for a long time.

古文：侍御咸垂涕失声，莫能仰视。
现代文：侍御们都失声痛哭，不敢抬头看视。
English: The attendants were all in tears and did not dare to look up.

古文：召僧设供，令侍婢数十人出家，手中落发。
现代文：她又喊来僧人陈设供佛器具，让几十位侍婢出家，亲手给她们剪去头发。
English: She also called for monks to set up Buddhist utensils, ordained dozens of maidservants and maidservants, and cut off their hair with their own hands.

古文：事毕，乃入室，引被自覆而崩，年三十一。
现代文：办完后，便进入室内，拿被自压而死。享年三十一岁。
English: After finishing, he went inside and died of self-inflicted pressure. He was thirty-one years old.

古文：凿麦积崖为龛而葬，神柩将入，有二丛云先入龛中，顷之一灭一出，后号寂陵。
现代文：朝廷开凿麦积崖石龛安葬她，灵柩将送入石龛时，有两团云团先飘入龛内，过一会一团消亡另一团飘出。后来把这石龛号为寂陵。
English: The imperial court dug a stone niche in the cliff of wheat and buried her. When the coffin was brought into the stone niche, two clouds floated into the coffin first, and after a while, one cloud disappeared and another cloud floated out. Later, this stone niche was called the lonely mausoleum.

古文：及文帝山陵毕，手书云，万岁后欲令兵配飨。
现代文：当魏文帝建好自己陵墓后，亲手书写万年之后将文皇后配祭。
English: When Emperor Weiwen built his own mausoleum, he wrote with his own hand, and ten thousand years later, the Empress Wen became the sacrificial offering.

古文：公卿乃议追谥曰文皇后，祔于太庙。
现代文：公卿大臣们便提议追封谥号为 文皇后 ，附祭于太庙。
English: The court nobles and ministers then proposed that she be posthumously given the posthumous title of Empress Moon and enshrined in the Imperial Temple.

古文：废帝时，合葬于永陵。
现代文：废帝时，合葬于永陵。
English: When the emperor was deposed, they were buried together in Yongling.

