古文：黄帝问曰：人身非常温也，非常热也，为之热而烦满者，何也？
现代文：黄帝道：有的人身体不是正常的体温，总是感到非常热，由于这种热而感到非常烦躁不安，这是什么原因呢？
English: Huang Di said: Some people's body temperature is not normal, they always feel very hot, and because of this heat, they feel very irritable and uneasy. What is the reason for this?

古文：伯对曰：阴气少而阳气胜，故热而烦满也。
现代文：岐伯回答说：这是由于阴气少而阳气胜，所以发热而烦闷。
English: Qi Bo replied, "This is due to the fact that the yin qi is less and the yang qi is more, so it is hot and troublesome.

古文：帝曰：人身非衣寒也，中非有寒气也，寒从中生者何？
现代文：黄帝说：有的人穿的衣服并不单薄，也没有为寒邪所中，却总觉得寒气从身体内部而生，这是什么原因呢？
English: Huang Di said: Some people wear clothes that are not too thin, and they are not in the cold, but they always feel that the cold comes from inside the body. What is the reason for this?

古文：岐伯曰：是人多痹气也。阳气少，阴气多，故身寒如从水中出。
现代文：岐伯说：是由于这种人多气机阻痹不通，阳气少而阴气多，所以经常感觉身体发冷，像从冷水中出来一样。
English: Qi Bo said: Due to the fact that such a large number of people obstruct the flow of qi, there is less yang and more yin, so I often feel cold, like coming out of cold water.

古文：帝曰：人有四肢热，逢风寒如炙如火者，何也？
现代文：黄帝说：有的人四肢发热，一遇到风寒，便觉得身如热火熏炙一样，这是什么原因呢？
English: Huang Di said: Some people's limbs are hot, and when they encounter wind and cold, they feel like they are hot. What is the reason for this?

古文：岐伯曰：是人者，阴气虚，阳气盛。
现代文：岐伯说：这种人多是因为素体阴气虚而阳气胜。
English: Qi Bo said: This kind of person is mostly due to the fact that the yang qi is stronger than the yin qi.

古文：四肢者阳也，两阳相得而阴气虚少，少水不能灭盛火，而阳独治。
现代文：四肢属阳，风邪也属阳，属阳的四肢感受属阳的风邪，是两阳相并，则阳气更加亢盛，阳气益盛则阴气日益虚少，至衰少的阴气不能熄灭旺盛的阳火，形成了阳气独旺的局面。
English: The limbs are yang, the wind evil is also yang, the limbs of yang feel the wind evil of yang. If the two yang phases are the same, then the yang is more prosperous, the yang is more prosperous, and the yin is less and less, and the waning yin cannot extinguish the vigorous yang fire, forming a yang-dominant situation.

古文：独治者，不能生长也，独胜而止耳。
现代文：现阳气独旺，阴气便不能生长，因阳气独生而生机停止。
English: Now the yang is predominant, and the yin cannot grow, because the yang is predominant, and life ceases.

古文：逢风而如炙如火者，是人当肉烁也。
现代文：所以这种四肢逢风而热的如炙如火的，其人必然肌肉逐渐消瘦干枯，病名为 肉烁 。
English: Therefore, this kind of limbs are hot as fire when exposed to the wind, and the person's muscles must gradually become thin and dry, and the disease is called "flesh flicker."

古文：帝曰：人有身寒，汤火不能热，厚衣不能温，然不冻栗，是为何病？
现代文：黄帝说：有的人身体寒凉，虽进热水、烤火不能使之热，多穿衣服也不能使之温，但却并不感到恶寒战栗，这是什么病呢？
English: Huang Di said, "Some people have a cold body, although they can't make it hot by hot water or fire, and they can't make it warm by wearing more clothes, but they don't feel chills and shivers. What kind of disease is this?

古文：岐伯曰：是人者，素肾气胜，以水为事，太阳气衰，肾脂枯不长，一水不能胜两火。
现代文：岐伯说：这种人平素即肾水之气盛，又经常接近水湿，致水寒之气偏盛，而太阳之阳气偏衰，则肾精由于得不到阳气的温暖而枯竭不能生长。
English: Qi Bo said: This kind of nephrin, that is, the qi content of kidney water, is often close to water and moisture, the qi content of water-induced cold is partial, and the yang of the sun is partial, then the nephrin can not grow because it can not get the warmth of the yang.

古文：肾者水也，而生于骨，肾不生，则髓不能满，故寒甚至骨也。
现代文：肾是水脏，主生长骨髓，肾阴精不能生长则骨髓不能充满，因此就会寒冷至骨。
English: Kidney is a water organ, the main growth is bone marrow. If the nephron does not grow, the bone marrow cannot be filled, so it will be cold to the bone.

古文：所以不能冻栗者，肝一阳也，心二阳也，肾孤脏也，一水不能胜二火，故不能冻栗，病名曰骨痹，是人当挛节也。
现代文：其所以不会出现恶寒战栗的情况，是因为肝是一阳，心是二阳，独阴的肾水，胜不过心、肝的君火和相火，所以虽寒冷，但不战栗，这种病叫 骨痹 ，病人必骨节拘挛。
English: That is why there is no shivering due to chills, because the liver is one sun, the heart is two suns, and the kidney fluid of one yin is no better than the heart and liver's king fire and phase fire, so although it is cold, it does not shiver. This disease is called osteomyelitis, and the patient must be very careful.

古文：帝曰：人之肉苛者，虽近衣絮，犹尚苛也，是谓何疾？
现代文：黄帝说：有的人患有 肉苛 ，感觉皮肉麻木沉重，虽穿上棉衣，仍然如故，这是什么病呢？
English: Huang Di said: Some people suffer from fleshlessness, they feel numbness and heaviness in the skin. Although they put on cotton clothes, they are still the same. What kind of disease is this?

古文：岐伯曰：荣气虚，卫气实也。
现代文：岐伯说：这是由于营气和卫气都虚弱所致。
English: Qi Bo said: This is due to the weakness of the camp spirit and the spirit of the guard.

古文：荣气虚则不仁，卫气虚则不用，荣卫俱虚，则不仁且不用，肉如故也。
现代文：营气虚弱则皮肉麻木不仁，卫气虚弱就会出现肢体不能举动，如果营气、卫气都虚弱，就会出现皮肉既麻木不仁又不能举动沉重。
English: If the camp spirit is weak, the flesh will be numb and insensitive, and if the spirit is weak, the limbs will be unable to move. If the camp spirit and the spirit are both weak, the flesh will be numb and insensitive and unable to move.

古文：人身与志不相有，曰死。
现代文：如果出现人的形体与五脏的神志不能相互为用，就要死亡。
English: If it appears that the human form and the divine spirit of the five viscera cannot be used for each other, it will die.

古文：帝曰：人有逆气不得卧而息有音者，有不得卧而息无音者，有起居如故而息有音者，有得卧行而喘者，有不得卧不能行而喘者，有不得卧卧而喘者，皆何脏使然？
现代文：黄帝说：人病气逆，有的不能安卧而呼吸有声；有的不能安卧而呼吸无声；有的起居如常而呼吸有声；有的能够安卧，行动则气喘；有的不能安卧，也不能行动而气喘；有的不能安卧，卧则气喘。是哪些脏腑发病，使之这样呢？
English: Huangdi said: Some people have bad breath, some can't lie still and breathe noisily; some can't lie still and breathe noiselessly; some can't lie still and breathe noisily; some can lie still and breathe noisily; some can't lie still and can't move and breathe noisily; some can't lie still and can't move and breathe noisily; some can't lie still and breathe noisily. What are the internal organs that cause this?

古文：愿闻其故。
现代文：我想知道是什么缘故。
English: I want to know why.

古文：岐伯曰：不得卧而息有音者，是阳明之逆也。
现代文：岐伯说：不能安卧而呼吸有声的，是足阳明胃经脉之气上逆。
English: Qi Bo said: If you can't lie down and have noisy breathing, it's because the meridians of your feet and stomach are out of alignment.

古文：足三阳者下行，今逆而上行，故息有音也。
现代文：足三阳的经脉，从头到足，都是下行的，现在足阳明经脉之气上逆而行，所以呼吸不利而有声。
English: The meridians of the three suns of the feet, from head to toe, are all descending. Now the meridians of the suns of the feet are moving backwards on the air, so breathing is unfavorable and noisy.

古文：阳明者，胃脉也，胃者，六府之海，其气亦下行，阳明逆，不得从其道，故不得卧也。
现代文：阳明是胃脉，胃是六腑之海，胃气亦以下行为顺，若阳明经脉之气逆，胃气便不得循常道而下行，所以不能平卧。
English: Yangming is the stomach vein, the stomach is the sea of six folds, and the gastric qi also follows the following behavior. If the qi of the yangming meridian is reversed, the gastric qi will not follow the normal path and go down, so it cannot lie flat.

古文：《下经》曰： 胃不和，则卧不安。 
现代文：《下经》曾说： 胃不和则卧不安。 
English: "Lower Sutra" once said: "If the stomach is not in harmony, it is uneasy to lie down."

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：就是这个意思。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：夫起居如故而息有音者，此肺之络脉逆也。络脉不得随经上下，故留经而不行。
现代文：若起居如常而呼吸有声的，这是由于肺之脉络不顺，络脉不能随着经脉之气上下运行，故其气留置于经脉而不行于络脉。
English: If you get up as usual and breathe noisily, it is because the pulmonary vasculature is out of kilter. The vasculature cannot move up and down with the qi of the meridians, so the qi stays in the meridians and not in the meridians.

古文：络脉之病人也微，故起居如故而息有音也。
现代文：但络脉生病是比较轻微的，所以虽呼吸不利有声，但起居如常。
English: However, the illness of the vas deferens is relatively mild, so although the breathing is noisy, the living is as usual.

古文：夫不得卧，卧则喘者，是水气之客也。
现代文：若不能安卧，卧则气喘的，是由于水气侵犯所致。
English: If you can not lie down, lying down is short of breath, it is caused by water and gas intrusion.

古文：夫水者，循津液而流也。
现代文：水气是循着津液流行的道路而流动的。
English: The water vapor follows the path of the tsunami.

古文：肾者水脏，主津液，主卧与喘也。帝曰：善。
现代文：肾是水脏，主持津液，如肾病不能主水，水气上逆而犯肺，则人即不能平卧而气喘。黄帝说：好。
English: The kidney is a water organ, and it presides over the fluid. If the kidney disease can't be the main water, and the water vapor inversely attacks the lungs, then the person can't lie flat and gasp for breath. Huang Di said: Good.

