古文：起阏逢涒滩，尽强圉大渊献，凡四年
现代文：起，止，一共四年。晋明帝太宁二年
English: a total of four years. Emperor Jimmings reign lasted for two years.

古文：肃宗明皇帝下太宁二年春，正月，王敦诬周嵩、周莛与李脱谋为不轨，收嵩、莛于军中，杀之；遣参军贺鸾就沈充于吴，尽杀周札诸兄子；进兵袭会稽，札拒战而死。
现代文：春季，正月，王敦诬陷周嵩、周与李脱勾结，密谋不轨，因而收捕二人，杀害于军中。又派参军贺鸾到吴地找沈充，把周札所有兄长的儿子尽数杀死，随即进兵攻袭会稽，周札抵抗战死。
English: In the spring, in the first month, Wang Dun framed Zhou Song, Zhou and Li De as colluding and plotting, and thus arrested two people and killed them in the army. He also sent the army He Xuan to Wudi to find Shen Chong and killed as many sons of all the brothers of Zhou Za as possible. Then the soldiers attacked the meeting, and Zhou Za died in the battle.

古文：后赵将兵都尉石瞻寇下邳、彭城，取东莞、东海，刘遐退保泗口。
现代文：后赵的将兵都尉石瞻侵犯下邳、彭城，攻取东莞、东海，刘遐退保泗口。
English: Later, Zhao's general and lieutenant Shi Zhan invaded Hsiaocheng and Pengcheng, captured Dongguan and Donghai, and Liu Bei retreated to Baohengkou.

古文：司州刺史石生击赵河南太守尹平于新安，斩之，掠五千馀户而归。
现代文：后赵司州刺史石生攻击在新安的前赵河南太守尹平，将他斩首，劫掠民众五千多户返回。
English: Later, Zhao Shizhou stabbed Shi Sheng to attack the former Zhao Henan governor Yin Ping in Xin'an, beheaded him, and robbed more than 5,000 households.

古文：自是二赵构隙，日相攻掠，河东、弘农之间，民不聊生矣。
现代文：自此以后，前赵与后赵结怨成仇，经常互相攻伐劫掠，河东、弘农之间，民不聊生。
English: Since then, the former Zhao and the latter Zhao have been bitter enemies, often attacking and robbing each other, and the people of Hedong and Hongnong are not happy.

古文：石生寇许、颍，俘获万计；攻郭诵于阳翟，诵与战，大破之，生退守康城。
现代文：又进攻在阳翟的郭诵。郭诵与石生交战，重创石生所部，石生退走保守康城。
English: He also attacked the impotent Guo Qiao. Guo Qiao fought with Shisheng, heavily damaged Shisheng's headquarters, and Shisheng retreated to the conservative Kangcheng.

古文：后赵汲郡内史石聪闻生败，驰救之，进攻司州刺史李矩、颍川太守郭默，皆破之。
现代文：后赵汲郡内史石聪听说石生战败，奔驰救援，进攻司州刺史李矩和颍川太守郭默，均获胜。
English: Later, Shi Cong, the county historian of Zhaoqi County, heard that Shisheng was defeated, Benzi came to the rescue, and attacked Li Rui, the county historian of Shizhou, and Guo Mo, the governor of Luochuan, both of whom won.

古文：成主雄，后任氏无子，有妾子十馀人，雄立其兄荡之子班为太子，使任后母之。
现代文：成汉主李雄的皇后任氏无子，妾妃所生的儿子有十多人。李雄册立自己兄长李荡的儿子李班为太子，让任后作他的养母。
English: Emperor Chenghan's master Li Xiong's empress Ren had no children, but more than ten sons were born to her concubines. Li Xiong made Li Bang, the son of his brother Li Xuan, the crown prince, and made her his foster mother.

古文：群臣请立诸子，雄曰： 吾兄，先帝之嫡统，有奇材大功，事垂克而早世，朕常悼之。
现代文：群臣请求在妾妃所生的子嗣中选立太子，李雄说： 我的兄长是先帝的嫡亲后裔，具有奇才和大功，当帝业即将成功时英年早逝，朕时常悼念他。
English: Li Xiong said: My brother was the legitimate descendant of the former emperor, with great talent and great merit. When the imperial career was about to succeed, he died young. I often mourn him.

古文：且班仁孝好学，必能负荷先烈。 
现代文：况且李班仁孝好学，一定会继承祖先的功业。 
English: Moreover, Li Banrenxiao is eager to learn and will surely inherit the work of his ancestors.

古文：太傅骧、司徒王达谏曰： 先王立嗣必子者，所以明定分而防篡夺也。
现代文：太傅李骧、司徒王达劝谏说： 先王们之所以必定从自己的儿子中选立继承人，为的是彰明固定不变的分位，防止篡权夺位。
English: Daifu Li Yao and Daifu Szu Wangta advised him: The reason why the previous kings had to choose an heir from among their sons was to highlight the fixed and unchanging position and to prevent usurpation.

古文：宋宣公、吴馀祭，足以观矣。 
现代文：看宋宣公和吴国余祭的先例，就足以今人知晓。 
English: Looking at the precedents of Song Xuan Gong and Wu Guoyu Festival, it is enough for modern people to know.

古文：雄不听。
现代文：李雄不听。
English: Li Xiong did not listen.

古文：骧退而流涕曰： 乱自此始矣！ 
现代文：李骧退下后流着眼泪说： 祸乱由此发端了。 
English: After Li Yao retreated, he shed tears and said, "This is how the calamity began."

古文：班为人谦恭下士，动遵礼法，雄每有大议，辄令豫之。
现代文：李班为人谦恭下士，行动遵循礼法，李雄只要有重大决策，总是让他参与。
English: Li Ban is a humble and respectful corporal, and his actions follow the etiquette. Li Xiong always lets him participate in major decisions.

古文：夏，五月，甲申，张茂疾病，执世子骏手泣曰： 吾家世以孝友忠顺著称，今虽天下大乱，汝奉承之，不可失也。 
现代文：夏季，五月，甲申，张茂病重，拉着王世子张骏的手哭泣说： 我家世代以孝友忠顺著称于世，如今虽然天下大乱，但你必须继承家族遗风，不可或失。 
English: In the summer, in May, Jiashen, Zhang Mao was seriously ill, and he took the hand of Wang Shizhi's son Zhang Xi and wept, saying: My family's generation is famous in the world for its filial piety and loyalty. Although the world is in turmoil, you must inherit the family legacy. You must not lose it.

古文：且下令曰： 吾官非王命，苟以集事，岂敢荣之！
现代文：并且下令说： 我的官职本非朝廷任命，为顺应事变而苟且自任，怎能以此为荣！
English: And he ordered: "My official position was not originally appointed by the imperial court, but I took it upon myself to respond to events, how can I be proud of that!

古文：死之日，当以白帢入棺，勿以朝服敛。 
现代文：我死的时候，应当戴着白色便帽入棺，不要用朝服殡殓。 
English: When I die, I should be put in a coffin wearing a white cap, and not be buried in a royal robe.

古文：是日，薨。
现代文：这天，张茂故去。
English: On this day, Zhang Mao passed away.

古文：愍帝使者史淑在姑臧，左长史汜祎、右长史马谟等使淑拜骏大将军、凉州牧、西平公，赦其境内。
现代文：愍帝时的使者史淑留居在姑臧，左长史、右长史马谟等让史淑授予张骏大将军、凉州牧、西平公，赦免境内罪犯。
English: Emperor Qian's emissary, Shi Shu, stayed in Guzheng. Left Long Shi, Right Long Shi Mamo, and others asked Shi Shu to award Zhang Ye, Liangzhou Mu, and Xiping Gong, and to pardon criminals within the territory.

古文：前赵主曜遣使赠茂太宰，谥曰成烈王。拜骏上大将军、凉州牧、凉王。
现代文：前赵主刘曜派遣使者赠给张茂太宰的名号，谥号为成烈王；授张骏为上大将军、凉州牧、凉王。
English: Former Zhao ruler Liu You sent an envoy to present Zhang Maozai with the title of grand vizier. His posthumous name was Cheng Lie Wang; Zhang Li was given the titles of Shangda General, Liangzhou Patriarch, and Liang Wang.

古文：王敦疾甚，矫诏拜王应为武卫将军以自副，以王含为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：王敦病情加剧，矫称诏令任命王应为武卫将军，做自己的副职，任命王含为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: Wang Dun's illness worsened, and the pretentious imperial edict appointed Wang Ying as General of the Imperial Guards, to be his deputy, and appointed Wang Han as General of the Cavalry, Kefu Yi and the Three Departments.

古文：钱凤谓敦曰： 脱有不讳，便当以后事付应邪？ 
现代文：钱凤对王敦说： 倘若您有不幸，是否将把身后之事托付王应？ 
English: Qian Feng said to Wang Dun: If you have misfortune, will you entrust Wang Ying to take care of you?

古文：敦曰： 非常之事，非常人所能为。
现代文：王敦说： 非常之事，不是平常的人所能够胜任的。
English: Wang Dun said, "This is an extraordinary matter, which is beyond the ability of ordinary people.

古文：且应年少，岂堪大事！
现代文：何况王应年轻，哪能承担大事！
English: What's more, Wang Ying is young, how can he take on such a big responsibility!

古文：我死之后，莫若释兵散众，归身朝廷，保全门户，上计也；退还武昌，收兵自守，贡献不废，中计也；及吾尚存，悉众而下，万一侥幸，下计也。 
现代文：我死以后，不如放下武器、遣散兵众，归顺朝廷，以保全宗族门户，这是上策；退回到武昌，集中军队谨慎自守，给朝廷贡献的物品无所缺废，这是中策；乘我还活着的时候，发遣所有的兵力攻打京城，寄希望于侥幸取胜，这是下策。 
English: After my death, it would be better to lay down arms, disband the troops, and surrender to the imperial court in order to preserve the clan portal. This is the best strategy. Returning to Wuchang, concentrating the army to carefully defend themselves, and contributing all the goods to the imperial court, this is the middle strategy. While I am still alive, I will send all the troops to attack the capital, hoping to win by chance. This is the next strategy.

古文：凤谓其党曰： 公之下计，乃上策也。 
现代文：钱凤对其党羽说： 王公所谓下策，其实正是上策。 
English: Qian Feng said to his followers: Wang Gong's so-called lower policy is actually the upper policy.

古文：遂与沈充定谋，俟敦死即作乱。
现代文：于是与沈充谋议商定，等王敦一死便作乱。
English: Therefore, it was agreed with Shen Chong that they would make a disturbance as soon as Wang Dun died.

古文：又以宿卫尚多，奏令三番休二。
现代文：又认为宿卫士卒太多，奏令停值三分之二。
English: It was also considered that there were too many innkeepers, and two-thirds of the value of the order was suspended.

古文：初，帝亲任中书令温峤，敦恶之，请峤为左司马。
现代文：当初，明帝亲近信任中书令温峤，王敦不满，请准温峤出任左司马。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Ming was close to and trusted Zhongshu Ling Wenqi, but Wang Dun was dissatisfied and asked Wenqi to be appointed as the Left Sima.

古文：峤乃缪为勤敬，综其府事，时进密谋以附其欲。
现代文：温峤便假装勤勉恭敬，治理王敦府事，时常私下出些主意来附合王敦的欲望。
English: Wen Xuan then pretended to be diligent and respectful, managed Wang Dun's affairs, and often privately came up with some ideas to satisfy Wang Dun's desires.

古文：深结钱凤，为之声誉，每曰： 钱世仪精神满腹。 
现代文：又与钱凤结为深交，为钱凤扬名，常常说： 钱凤满身活力。 
English: He also formed a close friendship with Qian Feng and became famous for Qian Feng. He often said: Qian Feng is full of vigor.

古文：峤素有藻鉴之名，凤甚悦，深与峤结好。
现代文：温峤素来有善于知人、褒奖后进的美名，钱凤甚为喜悦，尽力与温峤结好。
English: Wen Xuan has always had a reputation for being good at getting to know people and rewarding latecomers. Qian Feng was very pleased and tried her best to make friends with Wen Xuan.

古文：会丹杨尹缺，峤言于敦曰： 京尹咽喉之地，公宜自选其才，恐朝廷用人，或不尽理。 敦然之，问峤： 谁可者？ 峤曰： 愚谓无如钱凤。 
现代文：钱凤也推举温峤，温峤佯装推辞。
English: Qian Feng also promoted Wen Jiabao, and Wen Jiabao pretended to resign.

古文：凤亦推峤，峤伪辞之，敦不听，六月，表峤为丹杨尹，且使觇伺朝廷。
现代文：王敦不听。六月，王敦上表奏请温峤任丹杨尹，并且让他窥察朝廷动向。
English: Wang Dun did not listen. In June, Wang Dun asked Wen Jiabao to appoint Danyang Yin, and let him spy on the movement of the imperial court.

古文：峤恐既去而钱凤于后间止之，因敦饯别，峤起行酒，至凤，凤未及饮，峤伪醉，以手版击凤帻坠，作色曰： 钱凤何人，温太真行酒而敢不饮！ 
现代文：温峤惟恐自己走后钱凤再离间挑拔加以制止，便借王敦设宴饯别之机，起身祝酒，来到钱凤面前，钱凤还没来得及饮酒，温峤佯装酒醉，用手版击落钱凤的头巾，脸色一变说： 钱凤你是什么样的人，我温太真祝酒你胆敢不喝？ 
English: Wenyi, fearing that Qianfeng would try to drive a wedge between them again after he left, took advantage of Wang Dun's opportunity to give a farewell banquet, got up to make a toast, and came to Qianfeng. Qianfeng did not have time to drink. Wenyi pretended to be drunk and knocked off Qianfeng's headscarf with a hand-held plate. His face changed and he said: Qianfeng, what kind of person are you? I am too warm to make a toast. Do you dare not drink?

古文：敦以为醉，两释之。
现代文：王敦以为温峤醉了，把双方劝解开。
English: Wang Dun thought that Wen Jiabao was drunk and persuaded the two sides to disengage.

古文：峤临去，与敦别，涕泗横流，出阁复入者再三。
现代文：温峤临行时，向王敦道别，眼泪、鼻涕横流，先后三次出门以后又回来。
English: When Wen Kun was about to leave, he said goodbye to Wang Dun, with tears and snot streaming down his face. He went out three times and then came back.

古文：行后，凤谓敦曰： 峤于朝廷甚密，而与庾亮深交，未可信也。 
现代文：温峤走后，钱凤对王敦说： 温峤与朝廷关系极为密切，并且与庾亮有深交，此人不能信任。 
English: After Wen Rong left, Qian Feng said to Wang Dun: Wen Rong has a very close relationship with the imperial court, and has a deep friendship with Yu Liang. This person cannot be trusted.

古文：敦曰： 太真昨醉，小加声色，何得便尔相谗！ 
现代文：王敦说： 温峤昨天酒醉，对你稍有失敬，你怎么能马上就这样诋毁他呢！ 
English: Wang Dun said, "Wen Yao was drunk yesterday and slightly disrespected you. How can you immediately slander him like this!

古文：峤至建康，尽以敦逆谋告帝，请先为之备，又与庚亮共画讨敦之谋。
现代文：温峤到达建康后，把王敦作乱的图谋原原本本告诉了明帝，请求事先有所防备。又和庾亮共同筹划讨伐王敦的谋略。
English: After Wen Xuan arrived in Jiankang, he told Emperor Ming of Wang Dun's plan to create a disturbance, requesting that precautions be taken in advance. He also planned a strategy to fight Wang Dun with Xuan Liang.

古文：敦闻之，大怒曰： 吾乃为小物所欺！ 
现代文：王敦听说后，勃然大怒，说： 我竟然被这个小东西欺骗！ 
English: Upon hearing this, Wang Dun flew into a rage, saying, "I was actually deceived by this little thing!

古文：与司徒导书曰： 太真别来几日，作如此事！
现代文：便写信给司徒王导说： 温峤离开几天，竟然做出这种事！
English: He then wrote to the Rector of St. Peter's saying, "Wen Yao left for a few days and did such a thing!

古文：当募人生致之，自拔其舌。 
现代文：我要找人把他活捉来，亲自拔除他的舌头。 
English: I want someone to take him alive and pull out his tongue myself.

古文：帝将讨敦，以问光禄勋应詹，詹劝成之，帝意遂决。
现代文：明帝将要征讨王敦，就此事征询光禄勋应詹的意见，应詹表示赞同，明帝于是坚定了决心。
English: Emperor Ming is going to solicit Wang Dun, consult the opinion of Guanglu Xun and Ying Zhan on this matter, and Ying Zhan agrees, so Emperor Ming has strengthened his resolve.

古文：丁卯，加司徒导大都督、领扬州刺史，以温峤都督东安北部诸军事，与右将军卞敦守石头，应詹为护军将军、都督前锋及硃雀桥南诸军事，郗鉴行卫将军、都督从驾诸军事，庾亮领左卫将军，以吏部尚书卞壸行中军将军。
现代文：丁卯，授予司徒王导大都督、兼领扬州刺史，任命温峤都督东安北部诸军事，和右将军卞敦同守石头；任应詹为护军将军、都督前锋及朱雀桥南诸军事；任郗鉴行卫将军都督扈从御驾诸军事。又让庾亮领左卫将军职，让吏部尚书卞任行中军将军职。
English: Dingwu, conferred on King Sidu to guide the grand governor and concurrently lead the history of Yangzhou, appointed Wenqi as the military governor of the northern part of Dong'an, and the right general Shoudun to guard the stone; appointed Zhan as the military general of the guard, the vanguard of the governor and the south of the Suzaku Bridge; appointed Shujian as the military general of the guard, and the military general of the left guard. And let Shuliang lead the left guard, and let the official Shang Shujian serve as the military general of the central army.

古文：郗鉴以为军号无益事实，固辞不受，请召临淮太守苏峻、兗州刺史刘遐同讨敦。
现代文：郗鉴认为有军制上的名号于实际情况无益，坚持辞谢不受，请求征召临淮太守苏峻、兖州刺史刘遐共同讨伐王敦。
English: Zou Jian thought that it was not beneficial to have a military name in the actual situation, insisted that he would not accept the resignation, and requested the conscription of Su Jun, the governor of Linhuai, and Liu Ye, the governor of Zhangzhou, to jointly fight Wang Dun.

古文：诏征峻、遐及徐州刺史王邃、豫州刺史祖约、广陵太守陶瞻等入卫京师。
现代文：明帝于是下诏征召苏峻、刘遐以及徐州刺史王邃、豫州刺史祖约、广陵太守陶瞻等入京师护卫。
English: The Ming Emperor then issued an edict to conscript Su Jun, Liu Ye, as well as Xuzhou Zishi Wang Ye, Yuzhou Zishi Zuyo, Guangling Taishu Tao Zhan and others to escort the division into Beijing.

古文：帝屯于中堂。
现代文：明帝屯军于中堂之地。
English: The Ming Emperor's garrison was located in Zhongtang.

古文：司徒导闻敦疾笃，帅子弟为敦发哀，众以为敦信死，咸有奋志。
现代文：司徒王导听说王敦重病不治，便带领王氏子弟为王敦发丧，大家以为王敦确实死了，都有奋战的士气。
English: Upon hearing of Wang Dun's death from a serious illness, the leader of the King's Men led the children of the Wang clan in mourning for Wang Dun. Everyone thought that Wang Dun had indeed died, and they all had the morale to fight on.

古文：于是尚书腾诏下敦府，列敦罪恶曰： 敦辄立兄息以自承代，未有宰相继体而不由王命者也。
现代文：于是尚书传送诏令到王敦的幕府，罗列王敦的罪恶说： 王敦专断地扶立兄长的儿子继承自己，从来没有宰相的继承人却不由君王任命的。
English: So Shangshu sent a decree to Wang Dun's shogunate, enumerating Wang Dun's sins, saying: Wang Dun arbitrarily appointed his brother's son to succeed him, and there has never been a successor to the prime minister who was not appointed by the king.

古文：顽凶相奖，无所顾忌；志骋凶丑，以窥神器。
现代文：这真是凶顽之徒相互奖掖，无所顾忌；志向凶残丑恶，窥视国家政权。
English: This is truly a vicious group of people who reward each other and have no scruples; aspire to cruelty and ugliness, and spy on the state power.

古文：天不长奸，敦以陨毙；凤承凶宄，弥复煽逆。今遣司徒导等虎旅三万，十道并进；平西将军邃等精锐三万，水陆齐势；朕亲统诸军，讨凤之罪。
现代文：幸好上天不让奸恶之人长寿，王敦因而毙命；钱凤既已奉承奸凶之人，又再煽动作乱，现在派遣司徒王导等率领猛虎般的军队三万人，诸路并进；平西将军王邃等率精兵三万，水陆齐发；朕亲自统领各路大军，讨伐钱凤的罪恶。
English: Fortunately, God does not allow evil-doers to live long, so Wang Dunmo was killed; Qian Feng had already flattered evil-doers and instigated chaos, so now he sent Sitou Wang Du and others to lead a tiger-like army of 30,000 people, marching along all roads; Pingxi General Wang Xi and others led 30,000 elite soldiers, marching on land and sea; I personally led the army of all roads to fight against Qian Feng's evil.

古文：有能杀凤送首，封五千户侯。
现代文：有谁能够杀死钱凤将首级送来，封为五千户候。
English: If anyone can kill Qian Feng, they will send the head to be sealed for five thousand households.

古文：诸文武为敦所授用者，一无所问，无或猜嫌，以取诛灭。
现代文：各文武官员即使是由王敦任用的，朕也一概不加过问，你们不要心存猜忌和隔阂，以至于自取诛灭。
English: Even if the civil and military officials are appointed by Wang Dun, I will not question them at all. You should not harbor suspicions and estrangement, so as to destroy yourselves.

古文：敦之将士，从敦弥年，违离家室，朕甚愍之。
现代文：王敦的将士们跟随王敦多年，远离家室，朕非常怜悯。
English: Wang Dun's soldiers have followed Wang Dun for many years, far away from their families. I feel very sorry for them.

古文：其单丁在军，皆遣归家，终身不调；其馀皆与假三年，休讫还台，当与宿卫同例三番。 
现代文：凡是独生子从军的，都遣返回家，终身不再征用。其余的人都给假三年。休假期满回到朝廷后，都将与宿卫的士卒一样，按三分之二的比例轮休。 
English: All those whose only child is in the military will be repatriated home and will no longer be conscripted for life. The rest of them will be given a three-year leave. After returning to the imperial court after the leave, they will take a two-thirds rotation like the guards.

古文：敦见诏，甚怒，而病转笃，不能自将；将举兵伐京师，使记室郭璞筮之，璞曰： 无成。 
现代文：王郭见到诏书，十分震怒，但因病情愈加沉重，自己不能任将出战。将要发兵攻打京师以前，让记室郭璞占卦，郭璞说： 事情不会成功。 
English: When Wang Guo saw the edict, he was very angry, but because of his increasingly serious illness, he could not be sent to fight. Before he was going to send troops to attack the Beijing Division, he asked the secretary Guo Jie to take charge. Guo Jie said: Things will not succeed.

古文：敦素疑璞助温峤、庾亮，及闻卦凶，乃问璞曰： 卿更筮吾寿几何？ 
现代文：王敦历来怀疑郭璞在帮助温峤、庾亮，等到听说卦呈凶兆，便问郭璞说： 你再算算我的寿命还有多长？ 
English: Wang Dun had always suspected that Guo Gan was helping Wen Xuan and Xuan Liang. When he heard that Guo Gan was a bad omen, he asked Guo Gan, "How long do you think I have left to live?"

古文：璞曰： 思向卦，明公起事，必祸不久。若住武昌，寿不可测。 
现代文：郭璞说： 由刚才的卦象推算，明公如果起兵，灾祸必定不久将至；如果仍旧住在武昌，享年长不可测。 
English: Guo Wei said: Judging from the prediction just now, if Ming Gong raises an army, disaster will surely come soon; if he still lives in Wuchang, his age will be unpredictable.

古文：敦大怒曰： 卿寿几何？ 
现代文：王敦大怒，说： 你的命多长？ 
English: Wang Dun was furious and said: "How long will your life be?

古文：曰： 命尽今日日中。 
现代文：敦璞回答说 今天正午毕命。 
English: Dunyao replied that he would die at noon today.

古文：敦乃收璞，斩之。
现代文：王敦于是拘捕郭璞，将他斩首。
English: Wang Dun then arrested Guo Gan and beheaded him.

古文：敦使钱凤及冠军将军邓岳、前将军周抚等帅众向京师。
现代文：王郭让钱凤和冠军将军邓岳、前将军周抚等率领士众向京师进发。
English: Wang Guo ordered Qian Feng, champion general Deng Yue and former general Zhou Fu to lead the soldiers to the capital.

古文：王含谓敦曰： 此乃家事，吾当自行。 
现代文：王含对王敦说： 这本是我们王家的事，我应当亲自去。 
English: Wang Han said to Wang Dun: This is a matter for our royal family, I should go myself.

古文：于是以含为元帅。
现代文：王敦便任命王含为全军的主帅。
English: Wang Dun then appointed Wang Han as the commander of the whole army.

古文：凤等问曰： 事克之日，天子云何？ 
现代文：钱凤等人问道： 事成之日，把天子怎么办？ 
English: Qian Feng and others asked: On the day of the event, what will you do with Tianzi?

古文：敦曰： 尚未南郊，何得称天子！
现代文：王敦说： 还没南郊祭天，哪能够称天子！
English: Wang Dun said: There is no Nanjiao Tian Festival yet, how can it be called Tianzi!

古文：便尽卿兵势，保护东海王及裴妃而已。 
现代文：只管出动你们所有的兵力，保护东海王和裴妃而已。 
English: Just send out all your troops to protect the East Sea King and Princess Pei.

古文：乃上疏，以诛奸臣温峤等为名。
现代文：于是以诛杀奸臣温峤等人为由，给明帝上疏。
English: Therefore, on the grounds that he had killed the treacherous vassal Wen Xuan and others, he gave Ming Emperor Shang Shu.

古文：秋，七月，壬申朔，王含等水陆五万奄至江宁南岸，人情恟惧。
现代文：秋季，七月，壬申朔，王含等水军、步卒共五万人涌至江宁秦淮河南岸，京城人心惶惶。
English: In the autumn, in July, a total of 50,000 sailors and marines, including Jinshen Shuo and Wang Han, flocked to the south bank of the Qinhuai River in Jiangning, causing panic in Beijing.

古文：温峤移屯水北，烧硃雀桁以挫其锋，含等不得渡。
现代文：温峤移兵驻屯河北岸，烧毁了朱雀桁用以暂挫敌方锋头。王含等人无法渡河。
English: On the north bank of the Tunhe River, Wen Xuan's troops stationed there burned down the Suzak girder to temporarily frustrate the enemy's vanguard. Wang Han and others were unable to cross the river.

古文：帝欲新将兵击之，闻桥已绝，大怒。
现代文：明帝想亲自领兵攻击，听说渡桥已断，勃然大怒。
English: Emperor Ming wanted to personally lead the attack, and when he heard that the bridge had been broken, he flew into a rage.

古文：峤曰： 今宿卫寡弱，征兵未至，若贼豕突，危及社稷，宗庙且恐不保，何爱一桥乎！ 
现代文：温峤说： 现在宿卫的士卒人数少、体力弱，征召的援军没到，如果让敌寇窜入，将会危及朝廷，那时连祖先的宗庙恐怕都难保，何必吝啬一座桥呢！ 
English: Wen Wei said: At present, the number of guards is small and weak, and the reinforcements have not arrived. If the enemy invades, it will endanger the imperial court. At that time, even the ancestral temple may be difficult to protect. Why be stingy with a bridge!

古文：司徒导遗含书曰： 近承大将军困笃，或云已有不讳。
现代文：司徒王导送信给王含说： 近来听说大将军王敦病重垂危，有人说已遇不幸。
English: Wang Gang sent a message to Wang Han, saying, "Recently, I heard that General Wang Dun is seriously ill and in danger of dying. Some people say that he has met with misfortune.

古文：寻知钱凤大严，欲肆奸逆；谓兄当抑制不逞，还蕃武昌，今乃与犬羊俱下。
现代文：不久知道钱凤大加戒严，想肆行奸逆不道之事。我认为兄长应当抑制他们，不使其得逞，所以应回军藩守武昌，现在却与愚昧无知之人一同前来。
English: I soon learned that Qian Feng wanted to commit treason, and I thought that my brother should restrain them and not let them succeed, so I should return to the military domain to guard Wuchang, but now I came with the ignorant people.

古文：兄之此举，谓可得如大将军昔年之事乎？
现代文：兄长这种举动，是以为能做成如同大将军当年所做的事吗？
English: Does the elder brother think that this kind of action can accomplish what the great general did that year?

古文：昔年佞臣乱朝，人怀不宁，如导之徒，心思外济。今则不然。
现代文：当初佞臣败坏朝政，人心不平，像我这样的人，也心存外念，现在则不同。
English: In the beginning, it was the vassals who corrupted the government, and people were upset. People like me also harbored ulterior motives, but things are different now.

古文：大将军来屯于湖，渐失人心，君子危怖，百姓劳弊。
现代文：大将军自从前来屯军于湖，便逐渐失去民心，正直的君子感到危险和恐惧，百姓劳累疲敝。
English: Ever since the great general came to set up his army at the lake, he gradually lost the hearts of the people. Honest gentlemen felt danger and fear, and the people were exhausted.

古文：临终之日，委重安期；安期断乳几日？
现代文：临终之时，将重任委托给王应，王应断奶才有几天？
English: On his deathbed, he entrusted the important task to Wang Ying. How many days will it be before Wang Ying is weaned?

古文：又于时望，便可袭宰相之迹邪？
现代文：再说凭他当时名望，就能承袭宰相的职位吗？
English: Moreover, given his reputation at the time, would he be able to succeed to the post of prime minister?

古文：自开辟以来，颇有宰相以孺子为之者乎？
现代文：自从天地开辟以来，可有宰相的职位让孺子小儿担任的？
English: Since the creation of the world, has there ever been a prime minister's position that was held by a child of a mule?

古文：诸有耳者，皆知将为禅代，非人臣之事也。
现代文：凡是有耳听说此事的人，都知道将要进行的这种禅代，不是为人臣子者所当做的。
English: Anyone who has ears to hear will know that the kind of meditation that is about to take place is not something that should be done by someone who is a courtier.

古文：先帝中兴，遗爱在民；圣主聪明，德洽朝野。
现代文：先帝中兴国家，遗留惠爱在民间；当今圣主耳聪目明，恩德遍于朝野。
English: The previous emperor revived the country, leaving a legacy of benevolence among the people; today, the Holy Lord is sharp-eyed and benevolent all over the country.

古文：兄乃欲妄萌逆节，凡在人臣，谁不愤叹！
现代文：兄长却想轻妄的启衅作乱，凡据有人臣之位的，谁不为此愤慨！
English: My brother, on the other hand, wanted to provoke disorder in a reckless manner. Anyone who holds the position of a vassal should be indignant about this!

古文：导门户小大受国厚恩，今日之事，明目张胆，为六军之首，宁为忠臣而死，不为无赖而生矣！ 
现代文：王导一门老小蒙受国家的厚恩大德，今天此事，我明目张胆地出任六军统帅，宁肯身为忠臣战死，也不愿当一个无赖苟活！ 
English: Wang Du, a member of an old family, has been greatly blessed by the country. Today, I am brazenly serving as the commander of the Sixth Army. I would rather die as a loyal subject than live as a scoundrel!

古文：含不答。
现代文：王含不答复。
English: Wang Han did not reply.

古文：或以为 王含、钱凤众力百倍，苑城小而不固，宜及军势未成，大驾自出拒战 。
现代文：有人认为： 王含、钱凤的军队人数和战斗力都要强出百倍。苑城既小又不坚固，应当乘敌军强势未成之时，皇帝大驾亲自出城抗敌。 
English: Some people think: Wang Han and Qian Feng's armies should be a hundred times stronger in terms of numbers and combat effectiveness. Yuancheng is small and not strong, so the emperor should take advantage of the enemy's strength and go out of the city to resist the enemy.

古文：郗鉴曰： 群逆纵逸，势不可当，可以谋屈，难以力竞。
现代文：郗鉴说： 乱党来势恣纵，势不可当；只能靠计谋取胜，难以力敌。
English: Hao Jian said: The disorderly party comes from an arbitrary situation, and the situation cannot be dealt with; it can only rely on stratagems to win, and it is difficult to defeat the enemy.

古文：且含等号令不一，抄盗相寻，吏民惩往年暴掠，皆人自为守。
现代文：况且王含等人军令不齐，劫掠不断，官吏民众有鉴于往年被凶暴地掠夺资财，人人都自行守备。
English: Moreover, Wang Han's and others' military orders were not uniform, and the looting continued. In view of the fact that officials and the public had been violently plundered in previous years, everyone was on their own.

古文：乘逆顺之势，何忧不克！
现代文：只要利用顺逆的情势，何愁不能克敌！
English: As long as you take advantage of the favorable and unfavorable situation, you will not be able to defeat the enemy!

古文：且贼无经略远图，惟恃豕突一战；旷日持久，必启义士之心，令智力得展。
现代文：再说敌寇毫无谋略和长远设想，只靠盲目奔突一战；旷日持久，必定会启导义士的心神，使他们的智慧和力量得以施展。
English: Moreover, the enemy raiders have no strategy or long-term vision, and only rely on blindly rushing into a battle; prolonged, it will surely enlighten the hearts and minds of the righteous, so that their wisdom and strength can be exerted.

古文：今以此弱力敌彼强寇，决胜负于一朝，定成败于呼吸。万一蹉跌，虽有申胥之徒，义存投袂，何补于既往哉！ 
现代文：现在如果以这样弱小的力量与强敌抗衡，期望一朝决定胜负，瞬间判别成败，万一有所闪失，即使有申包胥这样的人愿意赴难救援，于既成事实又有什么补益呢！ 
English: Now, if we use such a weak force to compete with a strong enemy, expecting to decide the winner and loser at once, and judge success and failure at a moment's notice, even if someone like Shen Baozhen is willing to go to the rescue, what is the benefit of the accomplished fact?

古文：帝乃止。
现代文：明帝这才罢休。
English: Emperor Wu then gave up.

古文：帝帅诸军出屯南皇堂。
现代文：明帝统领各军出城屯驻南皇堂。
English: Emperor Ming led the troops out of the city and stationed them in the South Imperial Palace.

古文：癸酉夜，募壮士，遣将军段秀、中军司马曹浑等帅甲卒千人渡水，掩其未备。
现代文：癸酉夜间，招募勇士，派将军段秀、中军司马曹浑等率领甲士千人渡秦淮河，攻其不备。
English: During the night, he recruited warriors and sent General Duan Xiu, the Chinese army chief Ma Caohun, and others to cross the Qin Huai River with a thousand soldiers.

古文：平旦，战于越城，大破之，斩其前锋将何康。
现代文：清晨，在越城与敌交战，大胜，斩杀其前锋将领何康。
English: In the early morning, he fought with the enemy in Yuecheng, won a great victory, and killed his forward general He Kang.

古文：秀，匹磾之弟也。
现代文：段秀即段匹的兄弟。
English: Duan Xiu is the brother of Duan Pi.

古文：敦闻含败，大怒曰： 我兄，老婢耳！门户衰。世事去矣！ 
现代文：王郭听说王含战败，勃然大怒说： 我这个兄长只是个老奴婢，门户衰落，大事完了！ 
English: When Wang Guo heard that Wang Han had been defeated, he flew into a rage and said, "This brother of mine is just an old slave, the portal is fading, the big event is over!"

古文：顾谓参军吕宝曰： 我当力行。 。
现代文：回头对参军吕宝说： 我要尽力起行， 随即用力起来，因气力困乏，只好又躺下。
English: He turned back to Lubao, who was joining the army, and said, "I'll do my best to get started. I'll push myself to get up, and then I'll have to lie down again because I'm exhausted."

古文：因作势而起，困乏，复卧，乃谓其舅少府羊鉴及王应曰： 我死，应便即位，先立朝廷百官，然后营葬事。 
现代文：于是对自己的舅父、少府羊鉴和王应说： 我死后王应立即即帝位，先设立朝廷百官，然后再安排葬事。 
English: So he said to his uncles, Shaofu Yangjian and Wang Ying: After my death, the king should immediately take the throne, first establish the imperial officials, and then arrange the funeral.

古文：敦寻卒，应秘不发丧，裹尸以席，蜡涂其外，埋于厅事中，与诸葛瑶等日夜纵酒淫乐。
现代文：王敦不久即死，王应隐瞒不公布死讯，用席子包裹尸身，外面涂蜡，埋在议事厅中，和诸葛瑶等人日夜纵酒淫乐。
English: Wang Dun died soon after, and Wang Ying concealed the news of his death from the public, wrapped his corpse in a mat, coated it with wax, and buried it in the council hall, where he and Zhuge Li and others drank and had sex day and night.

古文：帝使吴兴沈桢说沈充，许以为司空。
现代文：明帝让吴兴人沈桢劝说沈充倒戈，许诺让他出任司空。
English: Emperor Ming asked Wu Xingren to persuade Shen Qi to defect to Shen Chong, promising to make him the second-in-command.

古文：充曰： 三司具瞻之重，岂吾所任！
现代文：沈充说： 三司是众人共同敬仰的要职，岂是我所能胜任的！
English: Shen Chong said, "The Third Division is an important post that is respected by everyone. Am I really up to the job?"

古文：币厚言甘，古人所畏也。
现代文：礼重言甜，正是古人所畏惧的。
English: Reverence is exactly what the ancients feared.

古文：且丈夫共事，终始当同，岂可中道改易，人谁容我乎！ 
现代文：况且大丈夫与人共事，便应始终同心，怎能中途改弦易辙，他人谁还能容我！ 
English: Moreover, it's okay to work with people, you should always be of the same mind, how can you change course halfway, who else can tolerate me!

古文：遂举兵趣建康。
现代文：随即发兵奔赴建康。
English: The army was immediately dispatched to Jiankang.

古文：宗正卿虞潭以疾归会稽，闻之，起兵馀姚以讨充，帝以潭领会稽内史。
现代文：宗正卿虞潭因病回家乡会稽，听说此事，从馀姚起兵讨伐沈充。明帝任命虞潭兼领会稽内史。
English: Zong Zhengqing Yu Tan returned home due to illness and heard about the incident, and from Yuyao he raised an army to fight Shenchong. Emperor Ming appointed Yu Tan to also understand the internal history of the audit.

古文：前安东将军刘超、宣城内史钟雅皆起兵以讨充。
现代文：前安东将军刘超、容城内史钟雅也都起兵征讨沈充。
English: Former Anton general Liu Chao and Yongcheng's Shi Zhongya also raised an army to recruit Shenchong.

古文：义兴人周蹇杀王敦所署太守刘芳，平西将军祖约逐敦所署淮南太守任台。
现代文：义兴人周蹇杀死王敦任命的太守刘芳，平西将军祖约赶走了王敦任命的淮南太守任台。
English: Zhou Xing, a philanthropist, killed Liu Fang, the eunuch appointed by Wang Dun, and the Pingxi general Zhu You drove away the Huainan eunuch appointed by Wang Dun.

古文：沈充帅众万馀人与王含军合，司马顾飏说充曰： 今举大事，而天子已扼其咽喉，锋摧气沮，相持日久，必致祸败。
现代文：沈充率士卒一万多人与王含的军队会合，司马顾向沈充献策说： 现在开始起事，但天子已扼守住咽喉要地，锐气受挫，士气沮落，相持日久，必然招致失败。
English: Shen Zheng led more than 10,000 soldiers to meet with Wang Han's army, and Sima Gu offered Shen Zheng a strategy, saying: "Now the uprising begins, but Tian Zi has already held the key areas, the spirit is frustrated, the morale is depressed, and the confrontation lasts for a long time, inevitably leading to failure.

古文：今若决破栅塘，因湖水以灌京邑，乘水势，纵舟师以攻之，此上策也；藉初至之锐，并东、西军之力，十道俱进，众寡过倍，理必摧陷，中策也；转祸为福，召钱凤计事，因斩之以降，下策也。 
现代文：如果现在破栅栏、开决河塘，借湖水淹灌京城，乘着水势动用水军进攻，这是上策；倘若凭借大军刚刚到达的锐气，集中东、西两路军队的力量，诸路同时并进，我众敌寡，悬殊一倍以上，按情理必会摧毁敌军，这是中策；以召请钱凤议事为名，乘机将他斩首，归降朝廷，可以转祸为福，这是下策。 
English: If we now break through the fence, break through the river ditch, use the lake water to flood the capital city, and take advantage of the water potential to attack with the water army, this is the best strategy; if, with the sharpness of the great army that has just arrived, we concentrate the strength of the eastern and western armies, and all the roads go forward at the same time, our enemies are few, the disparity is more than doubled, and it is reasonable that the enemy army will be destroyed, this is the middle strategy; in the name of summoning Qianfeng for deliberation, take the opportunity to behead him and surrender to the court, can turn misfortune into blessing, this is

古文：充皆不能用，飏逃归于吴。
现代文：但沈充均不采用，顾便逃回吴郡。
English: However, neither of these was adopted, and Gu fled back to Wuxi County.

古文：丁亥，刘遐、苏峻等帅精卒万人至，帝夜见，劳之，赐将士各有差。
现代文：丁亥，刘遐、苏峻等率领精兵万人到达建康，明帝夜间召见并犒劳他们，将士们各按等秩均有赏赐。
English: Ding Hai, Liu Ye, Su Jun and others led tens of thousands of elite soldiers to Jiankang. Emperor Ming summoned them at night and rewarded them. The soldiers were rewarded according to their rank.

古文：沈充、钱凤欲因北军初到疲困击之，乙未夜，充、凤从竹格渚渡淮。护军将军应詹、建威将军赵胤等拒战，不利，充、凤至宣阳门，拔栅，将战，刘遐、苏峻自南塘横击，大破之，赴水死者三千人。
现代文：沈充、钱凤想乘着北方军队刚到疲困之机进行攻击，乙未夜，沈充、钱凤从竹格渚渡过秦淮河，护军将军应詹、建威将军赵胤等人抵抗失利，沈充和钱凤攻至宣阳门，拔除防御栅栏，正要攻战，刘遐、苏峻从南塘侧面攻击，重创沈充、钱凤军队，渡河溺死的达三千多人。
English: Shen Chong and Qian Feng wanted to take advantage of the fatigue of the northern army to attack. On the eve of the second day, Shen Chong and Qian Feng crossed the Qinhuai River from Zhugezhuang. The escort generals Ying Zhan and Jian Wei general Zhao Yan and others resisted the defeat. Shen Chong and Qian Feng attacked the Xuanyang Gate, pulled down the defensive fence, and were about to attack. Liu Bei and Su Jun attacked from the side of the Nantang, severely damaged the Shen Chong and Qian Feng army, and drowned more than three thousand people crossing the river.

古文：遐又破沈充于青溪。
现代文：刘遐后来又在青溪战败沈充。
English: Liu Bei was later defeated by Shen Chong in Qingxi.

古文：寻阳太守周光闻敦举兵，帅千馀人来赴。既至，求见敦。王应辞以疾。
现代文：寻阳太守周光听说王敦起兵，率一千多人赶来，到达后求见王敦，被王应以病重为名拒绝。
English: Upon hearing that Wang Dun had raised an army, Zhou Guang, the Yang di-Pertuan Agong, arrived with more than a thousand men. Upon arrival, he asked to see Wang Dun, but was refused by Wang Ying on the grounds that he was seriously ill.

古文：光退曰： 今我远来而不得见，公其死乎！ 
现代文：周光退下后说： 现在我远道而来却见不到王敦，他大概已经死了吧！ 
English: After Zhou Guang retreated, he said: Now I have come a long way but I can't see Wang Dun, he is probably dead!

古文：遽见其兄抚曰： 王公已死，兄何为与钱凤作贼！ 
现代文：急忙会见其兄长周抚，说： 王公已经死了，你何必和钱凤同作叛贼！ 
English: He hurried to meet his elder brother, Zhou Fu, and said: "The prince is dead, why do you have to be a traitor with Qian Feng!"

古文：众皆愕然。
现代文：众人都很惊愕。
English: Everyone was stunned.

古文：丙申，王含等烧营夜遁。
现代文：丙申，王含等人烧毁营帐，连夜遁逃。
English: Bishen, Wang Han and others burned down the camp and fled in the night.

古文：丁酉，帝还宫，大赦，惟敦党不原。
现代文：丁酉，明帝回到皇宫，大赦天下罪犯，惟有王敦的党羽不在赦宥之列。
English: Ding Xuan, Emperor Ming returned to the palace and pardoned all the criminals in the world, except for Wang Dun's followers who were not pardoned.

古文：命庾亮督苏峻等追沈充于吴兴，温峤督刘遐等追王含、钱凤于江宁，分命诸将追其党与。
现代文：命令庾亮督察苏峻等人追袭逃到吴兴的沈充，令温峤督察刘遐等人追击逃往江宁的王含、钱凤，又分别令各位将领追捕王敦死党。
English: He ordered Gu Liang's inspector Su Jun and others to pursue Shencong, who had fled to Wuxing, ordered Wenqi's inspector Liu Qi and others to pursue Wang Han and Qian Feng, who had fled to Jiangning, and ordered the generals to pursue Wang Dun's dead party separately.

古文：刘遐军人颇纵虏掠，峤责之曰： 天道助顺，故王含剿绝，岂可因乱为乱也！ 
现代文：刘遐部下军人不少大肆虏掠，温峤斥责他说： 天理是赞助顺应天道的人，所以王含被剿灭，怎么能乘机作乱呢！ 
English: Many of Liu Bei's subordinate soldiers plundered and pillaged, and Wen Qi rebuked him, saying: Heaven is the sponsor of those who follow the heavenly way, so Wang Han was annihilated, how could he take advantage of the opportunity to make trouble!

古文：遐惶恐拜谢。
现代文：刘遐惊惶恐惧，下拜谢罪。
English: Liu Ye panicked and feared, bowed down and repented.

古文：王含欲奔荆州，王应曰： 不如江州。 
现代文：王含想逃奔荆州，王应说： 不如去江州。 
English: Wang Han wanted to run away to Jingzhou, Wang Ying said: It is better to go to Jiangzhou.

古文：含曰： 大将军平素与江州云何，而欲归之？ 
现代文：王含说： 大将军王敦以往与江州王彬的关系怎样，你想到那儿去？ 
English: Wang Han said: How was the relationship between General Wang Dun and Jiangzhou Wang Bin in the past, do you want to go there?

古文：应曰： 此乃所以宜归也。
现代文：王应说： 这是因为到那里合适。
English: And the king said, Because that is the right place.

古文：江州当人强盛时，能立同异，此非常人所及，今睹困厄，必有愍恻之心。
现代文：江州的王彬在他人强盛的时候，敢于坚持不同立场，这不是一般人能比得上的；现在看到他人遭受困厄，也必定会有恻隐之心。
English: Wang Bin of Jiangzhou dared to hold a different position when others were prosperous, which is not comparable to the average person; now, when he sees others suffer hardships, he will certainly have a compassionate heart.

古文：荆州守文，岂能意外行事邪！ 
现代文：荆州的王舒循规蹈距，哪能超出常规行事呢！ 
English: Jingzhou's Wang Shu follows the rules. How can he act outside the norm?

古文：含不从，遂奔荆州。
现代文：王含不听，于是逃奔荆州。
English: Wang Han did not listen, so he fled to Jingzhou.

古文：王舒遣军迎之，沉含父子于江。
现代文：王舒派军队相迎，将王含、王应父子沉入江中溺死。
English: Wang Shuxi sent troops to meet them and drowned Wang Han and Wang Ying in the river.

古文：王彬闻应当来，密具舟以侍之；不至，深以为恨。
现代文：王彬听说王应要来，秘密准备小船等候。王应没来，王彬为此深感遗憾。
English: Wang Bin heard that Wang Ying was coming and secretly prepared a small boat to wait for him. Wang Ying did not come, which Wang Bin deeply regretted.

古文：钱凤走至阖庐洲，周光斩之，诣阙自赎。
现代文：钱凤逃到阖庐州，周光将他斩首，自己赴朝廷请求赎罪。
English: Qian Feng fled to Zhangzhou, Zhou Guang beheaded him and went to the imperial court to ask for atonement.

古文：沈充走失道，误入故将吴儒家。儒诱充内重壁中，因笑谓充曰： 三千户侯矣！ 
现代文：沈充逃跑时迷路，错误地来到自己旧部将吴儒家，吴儒诱使沈充进入墙中夹层，于是笑着对沈充说： 我可以被封为三千户侯了！ 
English: When Shen Chong was running away, he lost his way and mistakenly came to the home of his old minister, Wu Ru. Wu Ru lured Shen Chong into the middle of the wall, and then said to Shen Chong with a smile: I can be made a prince of three thousand households!

古文：充曰： 尔以义存我，我家必厚报汝。
现代文：沈充说： 你如果顾及往日情义保全我，我家必定会从厚报答你。
English: Shen Chong said: If you take into account the past and protect me, my family will surely reward you.

古文：若以利杀我，我死，汝族灭矣。 
现代文：你如果为了私利杀我，我死以后，你的家族也将灭绝。 
English: If you kill me for personal gain, your family will also be annihilated after my death.

古文：儒遂杀之，传首建康。
现代文：吴儒于是杀死沈充，把首级传送到建康。
English: Wu Ru then killed Shen Cheng and sent his head to Jian Kang.

古文：敦党悉平。
现代文：王敦的党徒至此全部平定。
English: Wang Dun's followers have all been subdued.

古文：充子劲当坐诛，乡人钱举匿之，得免；其后劲竟灭吴氏。
现代文：沈充的儿子沈劲应当连坐受诛，同乡钱举把他藏匿起来，因此幸免。后来，沈劲终于灭绝了吴氏全族。
English: Shen Zhen, the son of Shen Zheng, was supposed to be executed, but his fellow villagers hid him with money and he was spared. Later, Shen Zhen finally exterminated the entire Wu clan.

古文：有司发王敦瘗，出尸，焚其衣冠，跽而斩之。与沈充首同悬于南桁。
现代文：朝廷官吏挖开王敦瘗埋地，拉出尸体，焚毁身上所穿衣寇，摆成跪姿斩首，和沈充的首级一同悬挂在南桁。
English: The court officials dug up the burial ground of Wang Dunjun, pulled out the corpse, burned the clothes he was wearing, and beheaded him in a kneeling position. His head was hung on the south girdle together with the head of Shencong.

古文：郗鉴言于帝曰： 前朝诛杨骏等，皆先极官刑，后听私殡。
现代文：郗鉴对明帝说： 以往朝廷诛戮杨骏等人，都是先施加官方的刑罚，然后听任私人殡葬。
English: Hao Jian said to Emperor Ming: In the past, when the imperial court killed Yang Jie and others, they first imposed official punishments, and then allowed private funerals.

古文：臣以为王诛加于上，私义行于下，宜听敦家收葬，于义为弘。 
现代文：我认为王法诛戮表现公理，私人情义则体现私交，应该听任王敦的家属收葬，在道义上更为弘大。 
English: In my opinion, Wang Fahui's death is a manifestation of justice, while private circumstances are a reflection of personal friendship. It is morally more noble to allow Wang Dun's family members to bury him.

古文：帝许之。
现代文：明帝同意。
English: Emperor Daowu agreed.

古文：司徒导等皆以讨敦功受封赏。
现代文：司徒王导等人都因征讨王敦有功，各自受到封赏。
English: Wang Tuo and others were rewarded for their contribution to the capture of Wang Dun.

古文：周抚与邓岳俱亡，周光欲资给其兄而取岳。
现代文：周抚和邓岳一同逃亡，周光想资助自己的兄长，只将邓岳抓获。
English: Zhou Fu and Deng Yue fled together. Zhou Guang wanted to support his brother, but only caught Deng Yue.

古文：抚怒曰： 我与伯山同亡，何不先斩我！ 
现代文：周抚发怒说： 我和邓伯山一同逃亡，你为什么不先杀我！ 
English: Zhou Fuzhi said angrily, "I fled with Dunboshan, why don't you kill me first!"

古文：会岳至，抚出门遥谓之曰： 何不速去！
现代文：恰巧邓岳到来，周抚出门远远地对他说： 你还不赶快离开！
English: Just as Deng Yue arrived, Zhou Fuzhou went out and said to him from a distance: "Don't leave so quickly!

古文：今骨肉尚欲相危，况他人乎！ 
现代文：现在连亲骨肉都将加害，何况他人呢！ 
English: Now even relatives will be harmed, not to mention others!

古文：岳回舟而走，与抚共入西阳蛮中。
现代文：邓岳掉转船头而逃，与周抚共同隐匿于西阳蛮中。
English: Deng Yue turned the bow of the ship and fled, hiding with Zhou Fuzhi in the middle of Xiyang.

古文：明年，诏原敦党，抚、岳出首，得免死禁锢。
现代文：第二年，明帝下诏赦免王敦的门党，周抚、邓岳出来自首，得以免去一死，但被禁锢。
English: The following year, Emperor Ming issued an edict pardoning Wang Dun's followers, and Zhou Fu and Deng Yue came out to surrender. They were spared death, but were imprisoned.

古文：故吴内史张茂妻陆氏，倾家产，帅茂部曲为先登以讨沈充，报其夫仇。
现代文：原吴内史张茂的妻子陆氏，倾其家财，率领张茂的部曲充当先锋，讨伐沈充，以报夫仇。
English: Lu, the wife of the former Wu Nei Shi Zhang Mao, poured her family fortune into leading Zhang Mao's troops as a vanguard to fight Shen Chong and avenge her husband's death.

古文：充败，陆氏诣阙上书，为茂谢不克之责；诏赠茂太仆。
现代文：沈充失败后，陆氏到朝廷上书，为张茂剖辩临敌不胜的罪责，明帝下诏赠给张茂太仆的官衔。
English: After the failure of Shenchong, Lu went to the imperial court to submit a letter, arguing the invincible guilt of Zhang Mao, and the Ming Emperor gave Zhang Mao the official title of the servant.

古文：有司奏： 王彬等敦之亲族，皆当除名。 
现代文：有关部门奏报说： 王敦的亲族王彬等人，都应当去职除名。 
English: Relevant departments reported: Wang Dong's relatives Wang Bin and others should be dismissed and removed from their posts.

古文：诏曰： 司徒导以大义灭亲，犹将百世宥之，况彬等皆公之近亲乎！ 
现代文：明帝下诏说： 司徒王导大义灭亲，尚且将世代宽宥他与王敦的兄弟身份，何况王彬等都是王导的近亲呢！ 
English: Emperor Ming issued an edict saying, "Situ Wangdu killed his relatives for the sake of justice, yet he and Wang Dun's brotherhood will be forgiven for generations. What's more, Wang Bin and others are Wangdu's close relatives!

古文：悉无所问。
现代文：于是全部不加查问。
English: As a result, everything went unquestioned.

古文：有诏： 王敦纲纪除名，参佐禁锢 温峤上疏曰： 王敦刚愎不仁，忍行杀戮，朝廷所不能制，骨肉所不能谏；处其朝者，恒惧危亡，故人士结舌，道路以目，诚贤人君子道穷数尽，遵养时晦之辰也。原其私心，岂遑晏处！
现代文：明帝下诏说： 王敦的重要党羽革职除名，其余僚属禁锢不用。 温峤上疏说： 王敦刚愎自负，不讲仁义，残暴杀戮，朝廷无法制约，亲朋不能谏止。在他幕府中的人，长期畏惧危亡，所以人人闭口不言，行路侧目，实在是贤人君子道义终结、时运乖背，只能静待其恶贯满盈的时候，推究他们的内心，怎么可能安然处之！
English: Emperor Ming issued an edict saying: Wang Dun's important party and revolutionary posts should be removed, and the rest of his colleagues should be imprisoned. On the other hand, Emperor Wen said: Wang Dun's arrogance, disregard for benevolence and justice, and brutal killings cannot be controlled by the imperial court, and cannot be stopped by his relatives and friends. The people in his shogunate have long been afraid of death, so everyone is silent and looks sideways. This is truly the end of the morality of a wise man and gentleman, and bad luck. We can only wait for the time when his evil is complete, and investigate their hearts. How is it possible to live in peace!

古文：如陆玩、刘胤、郭璞之徒常与臣言，备知之矣。
现代文：诸如陆玩、刘胤、郭璞等人经常和我交谈，所以我所知甚详。
English: People like Lu Yanyin, Liu Yin, Guo Qi and others often talk to me, so I know everything about them.

古文：必其赞导凶悖，自当正以典刑；如其枉陷奸党，谓宜施之宽贷。
现代文：确实是助纣为虐或诱导作乱的人，自然应当依据典刑严惩不贷；如果是迫不得已，沦为奸党的人，我认为应该加以宽宥。
English: Those who actually aided and abetted the oppressors or instigated the disturbances should naturally be severely punished according to the law; those who were forced to become ruffians should be pardoned, in my opinion.

古文：臣以玩等之诚，闻于圣听，当受同贼之责；苟默而不言，实负其心，惟陛下仁圣裁之！ 
现代文：我将陆玩等人的真实情况，禀报圣上听闻，或许应当承受与贼党同流合污的罪责，但如果默默不言，实在有负于他们的用心。希望陛下依据仁义之道裁决！ 
English: Perhaps I should bear the guilt of colluding with the kleptocrats by divulging the truth about Lu Yu and the others, but if I remain silent, I would be betraying their intentions. I hope that His Majesty will rule according to the principles of benevolence and righteousness!

古文：郗鉴以为先王立君臣之教，贵于伏节死义。
现代文：郗鉴认为先王设置有关君臣关系的教义，可贵的是严守节操，为义献身。
English: Zou Jian believed that the former king set up the doctrine of the relationship between monarchs and subjects, and what was valuable was to strictly abide by the discipline and devote oneself to righteousness.

古文：王敦佐吏，虽多逼迫，然进不能止其逆谋，退不能脱身远遁，准之前训，宜加义责。
现代文：王敦的佐吏虽然许多是受到逼迫，然而既不能制止王敦叛逆的阴谋，又不能脱身远远离开，依照以往的典则，应该按君臣大义加以责罚。
English: Although many of Wang Dun's aides-de-camp were persecuted, they could neither stop Wang Dun's treasonous plot nor escape far away. According to the previous rules, they should be punished according to the great justice of kings and ministers.

古文：帝卒从峤议。
现代文：明帝最终听从了温峤的意见。
English: Emperor Ming eventually followed the advice of Emperor Wen.

古文：冬，十月，以司徒导为太保、领司徒，加殊礼，西阳王羕领太尉，应詹为江州刺史，刘遐为徐州刺史，代王邃镇淮阴，苏峻为历阳内史，加庾亮护军将军，温峤前将军。
现代文：冬季，十月，任司徒王导为太保，兼领司徒职，以特殊礼仪相待。令西阳王司马兼领太尉职，任应詹为江州刺史，任刘遐为徐州刺史，代替王邃镇守淮阴，任苏峻为历阳内史，授予庾亮护军将军，温峤前将军。
English: In the winter, in October, Wang Xizhong appointed Wang Xizhong as Tai Bao and concurrently held the post of Tai Bao, and treated him with special etiquette. Wang Xizhong also appointed Wang Xizhong as Tai Bao and concurrently held the post of Tai Bao. Wang Xizhong appointed Wang Xizhong as Tai Bao and concurrently held the post of Tai Bao. Wang Xizhong appointed Wang Xizhong as Tai Bao and concurrently held the post of Tai Bao. Wang Xizhong appointed Wang Xizhong as Tai Bao and concurrently held the post of Tai Bao.

古文：导固辞不受。
现代文：王导坚辞不受封职。
English: Wang Du refused to accept the appointment.

古文：应詹至江州，吏民未安，詹抚而怀之，莫不悦服。
现代文：应詹到江州后，官吏百姓不安定，应詹抚慰怀柔，众人莫不悦服。
English: After Ying Zhan arrived in Jiangzhou, the officials and people were unstable, Ying Zhan comforted and consoled, and everyone was delighted.

古文：十二月，凉州将辛晏据枹罕，不服，张骏将讨之。
现代文：十二月，凉州将领辛晏占据罕县，不听从张骏号令，张骏准备讨伐他。
English: In December, the Liangzhou general Xin Zheng occupied Han County and disobeyed Zhang Ye's order. Zhang Ye prepared to fight him.

古文：从事刘庆谏曰： 霸王之师，必须天时、人事相得，然后乃起。
现代文：从事刘庆劝谏说： 霸王的军队，必须占有天时、人事，然后才能出动。
English: Liu Qingxuan, who is engaged in Liu Qingxuan, said: The overlord's army must occupy the sky, time and personnel before it can be dispatched.

古文：辛晏凶狂安忍，其亡可必；标何以饥年大举，盛寒攻城乎！ 
现代文：辛晏凶狂残忍，必定败亡，何必在饥荒的年份大举兴兵，在严寒的时节攻城呢！ 
English: Harsh, fierce, and cruel, it is sure to be defeated. Why should they raise a large army in a year of famine, and attack the city in the cold season?

古文：骏乃止。
现代文：张骏这才作罢。
English: Zhang Ye had to give it up.

古文：骏遣参军王骘聘于赵，赵主曜谓之曰： 贵州款诚和好，卿能保之乎？ 
现代文：张骏派参军王骘交聘前赵，前赵主刘曜对王骘说： 贵州竭诚与我和好，你能保证这一点吗？ 
English: Zhang Ye sent Wang Ye to join the army, and Liu You, the former Zhao, said to Wang Ye: Guizhou is wholeheartedly with me, can you guarantee this?

古文：骘曰： 不能。 
现代文：王骘说： 不能。 
English: Wang Yao said, "I can't."

古文：侍中徐邈曰： 君来结好，而云不能保，何也？ 
现代文：侍中徐邈说： 你来与我国结好，却又说不能保证，为什么？ 
English: Waiter Xu Wei said: You come to make peace with our country, but you say you can't guarantee it, why?

古文：骘曰： 齐桓贯泽之盟，忧心兢兢，诸侯不召自至；葵丘之会，振而矜之，叛者九国。
现代文：王骘说： 齐桓公在贯泽与别国盟会，忧心忡忡，诸侯不等召请自己前来。等到葵丘盟会时，自恃功高，盛气凌人，结果有九国叛盟。
English: Wang Yao said: "Qi Kuan Gong held a league meeting with other countries in Jianzhe. He was worried, and the lords did not wait to invite him to come. When it came to the league meeting in Kwai Chuk, he boasted of his great achievements and was overbearing. As a result, there were nine countries that betrayed the alliance.

古文：是岁，代王贺傉始亲国政，以诸部多未服，乃筑城于东木根山，徙居之。
现代文：赵国的教化，如果长久与今日相似，我可以担保，如果政教衰微，连身边的变化都不能觉察，又何况鄙州呢！ 
English: If the indoctrination of Zhao Guo remains similar to today for a long time, I can guarantee that if politics and religion decline, we won't even be able to detect the changes around us, let alone the country!

古文：肃宗明皇帝下太宁三年
现代文：刘曜说： 这是凉州的贤人君子，凉州择选使者可以说适得其人。 
English: Liu You said: This is a wise man and gentleman from Liangzhou. Liangzhou's chosen messenger can be said to be a suitable person.

古文：春，二月，张骏承元帝凶问，大临三日。
现代文：于是厚礼相待，送王骘返回。这年，代王贺开始亲政，因为下属各部大多不服号令，便在东木根山修筑城堡，移居那里。太宁三年
English: As a result, they treated each other with great courtesy and sent Wang Ye back. In this year, Wang He began to govern personally, because most of the subordinate ministries did not obey the order, they built a castle in East Mugen Mountain and moved there. Taining three years

古文：会黄龙见嘉泉，汜祎等请改年以章休祥，骏不许。
现代文：春季，二月，张骏禀受元帝死讯，隆重哀吊三天。正逢嘉泉出现黄龙，等人请求改年号以彰显吉祥，张骏不同意。
English: In the spring, in February, Zhang Ye received the news of the death of Emperor Yuan and held a grand mourning for three days. At the same time, Huanglong appeared in Jiaquan, and others requested to change the year name to highlight the auspicious. Zhang Ye did not agree.

古文：辛晏以枹罕降，骏复收河南之地。
现代文：辛晏献交罕请降，张骏又收复了黄河以南失地。
English: Xinlu was forced to surrender, and Zhangye regained the lost territory south of the Yellow River.

古文：赠故谯王承、甘卓、戴渊、周顗、虞望、郭璞、王澄等官。
现代文：明帝追赠已故的谯王司马、甘卓、戴渊、周、虞望、郭璞、王澄等人官衔。
English: Emperor Ming posthumously bestowed official ranks on the late Gong Wang Sima, Gan Zhuo, Dai Yuan, Zhou, Yu Wang, Guo Wei, Wang Cheng and others.

古文：周札故吏为札讼冤，尚书卞壸议，以为： 札守石头，开门延寇，不当赠谥。 
现代文：周札的旧僚属为周札申辨冤屈，尚书卞壶评议认为： 周札守备石头，开门接纳敌寇，不应当追赠谥号。 
English: Zhou Fata's former colleagues are Zhou Fata's grievances, and Shang Shuxuanhu's review believes that: Zhou Fata guards the stone, opens the door to accept the enemy, and should not be awarded the nickname.

古文：司徒导以为： 往年之事，敦奸逆未彰，自臣等有识以上，皆所未悟，与札无异；既悟其奸，札便以身许国，寻取枭夷。
现代文：司徒王导认为： 往年之事，王敦的奸逆行为尚不显明，从我们这些有识之士开始，都未能察觉，与周札没有什么不同。觉察王敦的奸逆之后，周札便为国献身，不久导致被杀。
English: Wang Zuo said: In previous years, Wang Dun's treasonous behavior was not obvious, and even those of us with insight did not notice it. It was no different from Zhou Zha. After noticing Wang Dun's treason, Zhou Zha dedicated himself to the country, which soon led to his death.

古文：臣谓宜与周、戴同例。 
现代文：我认为应当与周、戴渊同样对待。 
English: I think he should be treated the same as Zhou and Dai Yuan.

古文：郗鉴以为： 周、戴死节，周札延寇，事异赏均，何以劝沮！
现代文：郗鉴则认为： 周、戴渊因守节而死，周札延引敌寇，如果行事不同而赏赐均等，怎么能劝善沮恶！
English: Hao Jian, on the other hand, thought: Zhou and Dai Yuan died because of observing the festival, Zhou Zata Yan led the enemy invaders, if they act differently and reward equally, how can they persuade the good and discourage the bad!

古文：如司徒议，谓往年有识以上皆与札无异，则谯王、周、戴皆应受责，何赠谥之有！
现代文：按司徒的评论，说往年从有识之士开始都与周札没有区别，那么谯王、周、戴渊都应当承受罪责，有什么理由追赠谥号！
English: According to Szeto's comments, there is no difference between the previous years from the beginning of the insightful people and Zhou Fata, then King Zhai, Zhou and Daiyuan should all bear the blame, what is the reason for the posthumous award of the nickname!

古文：今三臣既褒，则札宜受贬明矣。 
现代文：现在既然褒扬三位，那么周札应当受贬责就很明显了。 
English: Now that the three players have been praised, it is clear that Zhou Fata should be criticized.

古文：导曰： 札与谯王、周、戴，虽所见有异同，皆人臣之节也。 
现代文：王导说： 周札和谯王、周、戴渊，虽然表现形式不尽相同，但都是尽人臣的节操。 
English: Wang Du said: Although the forms of expression of Zhou Fuda, Zhao Wang, Zhou and Dai Yuan are different, they are all devoted to the discipline of their subordinates.

古文：鉴曰： 敦之逆谋，履霜日久，缘札开门，令王师不振。
现代文：郗鉴说： 王敦的叛逆阴谋，历时长久，由于周札的开门延引，致使朝廷军队一蹶不振。
English: Hao Jian said: Wang Dun's treasonous plot lasted for a long time. Due to the delay in the opening of the gate, the imperial army suffered a setback.

古文：若敦前者之举，义同桓、文，则先帝可为幽、厉邪！ 
现代文：如果王敦过去的作为，道义上与齐桓公、晋文公相似，那么先帝不就成了周幽王、周厉王了吗！ 
English: If Wang Dun's past deeds were morally similar to those of Prince Qi Huan and Prince Jinwen, then wouldn't the former emperor have become King Zhou Yu and King Zhou Li?

古文：然卒用导议，赠札卫尉。
现代文：虽然如此，明帝最终还是采用了王导的意见，追赠周札卫尉官衔。
English: In spite of this, Emperor Ming eventually adopted Wang Du's opinion and posthumously awarded Zhou the title of Lieutenant of the Guards.

古文：后赵王勒加宇文乞得归官爵，使之击慕容廆。
现代文：后赵王石勒授予宇文乞得归官爵，让他攻击慕容。
English: Afterward, Zhao Wangshile awarded Yuwen with a peerage, allowing him to attack Murong.

古文：廆遣世子皝、索头、段国共击之，以辽东相裴嶷为右翼，慕容仁为左翼。
现代文：慕容派遣世子慕容和索头、段国共同抗击，以辽东相裴嶷为右翼，慕容仁为左翼。
English: Murong dispatched his son Murong, Sok Tou and Duan Guo to fight together, with Liaodong Minister Pei Yao on the right and Murong Ren on the left.

古文：乞得归据浇水以拒皝，遣兄子悉拔雄拒仁。
现代文：宇文乞得归占据浇水拒抗慕容，派兄长子之子宇文悉拔雄抵御慕容仁。
English: Uwen begged Gui to occupy the watering place to resist Murong, and sent his elder brother's son, Uwen, to resist Murong.

古文：仁击悉拔雄，斩之；乘胜与皝攻乞得归，大破之。
现代文：慕容仁攻击宇文悉拔雄，将他斩杀，乘胜和慕容合力攻击宇文乞得归，大败敌军。
English: Murongren attacked Uwen and killed him. With the victory, he and Murong jointly attacked Uwen and defeated the enemy.

古文：乞得归弃军走，皝、仁进入其国城，使轻兵追乞得归，过其国三百馀里而还，尽获其国重器，畜产以百万计，民之降附者数万。
现代文：宇文乞得归丢下军队逃跑，慕容、慕容仁进入他的都城，派轻兵追袭宇文乞得归，越过国界三百多里才返回，尽数获得其国家的重宝，数以百万的畜产，归降的人民有数万。
English: Uwen Begged Gui left his army and fled, Murong and Murongren entered his capital, sent light soldiers to pursue Uwen Begged Gui, crossed the national border for more than three hundred miles before returning, and tried their best to obtain their country's treasure, millions of livestock, and tens of thousands of people returned.

古文：三月，段末柸卒，弟牙立。
现代文：三月，段末故去，弟段牙继立。
English: In March, Duan Mei passed away, and his younger brother Duan Ya succeeded him.

古文：戊辰，立皇子衍为太子，大赦。
现代文：戊辰，明帝立皇子司马衍为皇太子，大赦天下。
English: The Emperor of the Ming Dynasty made Sima Yan, the son of Emperor Wu, the crown prince, and pardoned him.

古文：赵主曜立皇后刘氏。
现代文：前赵主刘曜册立皇后刘氏。
English: Former Zhao Lord Liu Youzhuang established the Empress Liu clan.

古文：北羌王盆句除附于赵，后赵将石佗自雁门出上郡袭之，俘三千落，获牛、马、羊百馀万而归。
现代文：北羌王盆句除归附前赵，后赵将领石佗从雁门经上郡攻击他，俘虏三千多部落，劫获牛、马、羊一百多万头返回。
English: In addition to the former Zhao who was annexed by the Northern Wei Dynasty, the latter Zhao general Shijie attacked him from the Wild Goose Gate through the upper county, captured more than three thousand tribes, and returned with more than one million heads of cattle, horses and sheep.

古文：赵主曜遣中山王岳追之，曜屯于富平，为岳声援。岳与石佗战于河滨，斩之，后赵兵死者六千馀人，岳悉收所虏而归。
现代文：前赵主刘曜派中山王刘岳追袭，刘曜屯军富平作为声援，刘岳与石佗在黄河沿岸交战，石佗被杀，后赵兵士死亡六千多人，刘岳全数夺回被石佗俘获的人员畜产返回。
English: Former Zhao Lord Liu Yue sent Zhongshan King Liu Yue to pursue, Liu Youtun's army Fuping as solidarity, Liu Yue and Shijiazhuang fought along the Yellow River, Shijiazhuang was killed, more than six thousand soldiers died after Zhao, Liu Yue recaptured all the personnel captured by Shijiazhuang and returned livestock.

古文：杨难敌袭仇池，克之，执田崧，立之于前，左右令崧拜。崧瞋目叱之曰： 氐狗！
现代文：杨难敌攻取仇池，抓获田崧，带到面前。左右侍从命令田崧跪拜，田崧瞪着眼睛斥骂说： 你们这些氐族狗！
English: Yang Rong's enemy captured the enemy pond, captured Tian Yao, and brought him before him. The attendants ordered Tian Yao to kneel, and Tian Yao scolded them with his eyes wide open, saying, "You Dong dogs!

古文：安有天子牧伯而向贼拜乎！ 
现代文：哪有身为天子大员却向叛贼跪拜的！ 
English: How can anyone be a member of the heavenly body and yet bow down to a traitor!

古文：难敌字谓之曰： 子岱，吾当与子共定大业，子忠于刘氏，岂不能忠于我乎！ 
现代文：杨难敌对他说： 田子岱，我将和你共同建立国家大业，你能忠于刘氏，怎么不能忠于我呢！ 
English: Yang Nan was hostile to him and said: Tian Zixuan, I will work with you to build a great national cause. If you can be loyal to Mr. Liu, why can't you be loyal to me?

古文：崧厉色大言曰： 贼氐，汝本奴才，何谓大业！
现代文：田崧厉色高声说： 氐族贼子，你本为奴才，谈什么大业！
English: Tian Yao said in a loud voice: Son of a Dong thief, you are originally a slave, talk about a great career!

古文：我宁为赵鬼，不为汝臣！ 
现代文：我宁愿作赵国的死鬼，不作你的臣下。 
English: I'd rather be a dead ghost in Zhao than your vassal.

古文：顾排一人，夺其剑，前刺难敌，不中，难敌杀之。
现代文：回身推开一人，夺下他的剑，向前刺击杨难敌，没有刺中，被杨难敌所杀。
English: He turned around and pushed one of them away, took his sword, and stabbed Yang Rongfei in the front. Yang Rongfei did not hit him, and he was killed.

古文：都尉鲁潜以许昌叛，降于后赵。
现代文：晋都尉鲁潜占据许昌反叛，投降后赵。
English: Jin general Lu Qian occupied Xu Chang and rebelled, and Zhao surrendered.

古文：夏，四月，后赵将石瞻攻兗州刺史檀斌于邹山，杀之。
现代文：夏季四月，后赵将领石瞻攻袭在邹山的兖州刺史檀斌，檀斌被杀。
English: In the summer of April, Zhao Zhaozhong attacked Shizhu in Shaoshan to assassinate Danbin, and Danbin was killed.

古文：后赵西夷中郎将王腾袭杀并州刺史崔琨、上党内史王昚据并州降赵。
现代文：后赵的西夷中郎将王腾杀死并州刺史崔琨、上党内史王，占据并州，投降前赵。
English: Afterward, Zhao's Xiyizhongro killed Wang Teng and annexed the state of Shizhi Cuiqi, the king of Shizhi in the upper party, occupied the annexed state, and surrendered to Zhao.

古文：五月，以陶侃为征西大将军、都督荆、湘、雍、梁四州诸军事、荆州刺史，荆州士女相庆。
现代文：五月，朝廷任命陶侃为征西大将军，都督荆、湘、雍、梁四州军事，荆州刺史，荆州的男女百姓交相庆贺。
English: In May, the imperial court appointed Tao Kan as the general of the Western Expedition, the military governor of Jing, Hunan, Yong and Liang four states, the history of Jingzhou, and the celebration of the male and female people of Jingzhou.

古文：侃性聪敏恭勤，终日敛膝危坐，军府众事，检摄无遗，未尝少闲。
现代文：陶侃性情聪明敏锐、恭敬勤奋，整日盘膝正襟危坐，对军府中众多事务检视督察，无所遗漏，没有一刻闲暇。
English: Tao Kan's disposition is smart, keen, respectful and diligent. He sits on his hands and knees all day, inspecting and inspecting many affairs in the military government, leaving nothing out, and having no spare time.

古文：常语人曰： 大禹圣人，乃惜寸阴；至于众人，当惜分阴，岂可但逸游荒醉！生无益于时，死无闻于后，是自弃也！ 
现代文：他常常对人说： 大禹这样的圣人，尚且珍惜每寸光阴，至于一般人，应当珍惜每分光阴。怎能只求逸游沉醉，活着对时世毫无贡献，死后默默无闻，这是自暴自弃！ 
English: He often said to people: A saint like Dayu still treasures every inch of his time, but as for ordinary people, they should cherish every minute of their time. How can they only seek to wander and be intoxicated, live without contributing to the times, and die in obscurity? This is self-defeating!

古文：诸参佐或以谈戏废事者，命取其酒器、蒲博之具，悉投之于江，将吏则加鞭扑，曰： 樗蒲者，牧猪奴戏耳！
现代文：众多参佐幕僚中有的因谈笑博戏荒废正务，陶侃命人收取他们的酒具和博用器，全都投弃江中，将吏们则加以鞭责，说： 樗这种游戏不过是放猪的奴仆们玩的！
English: Some of the numerous advisers and staff members abandoned their duties for the sake of fun and games. Tao Qian ordered the people to collect their drinking utensils and utensils, all of which were thrown into the river. The generals scolded them, saying: "This game is just played by the servants of the pigs!

古文：老、庄浮华，非先王之法言，不益实用。
现代文：老子、庄子崇尚浮华，并非先王可以作典则的言论，不利于实用。
English: Lao Zi and Zhuo Zi advocated pompousness, which is not a statement that the first king can make a rule, and is not conducive to practical use.

古文：君子当正其威仪，何有蓬头跣足，自谓宏达耶！ 
现代文：君子应当威仪整肃，怎能蓬头、光足，却自以为宏达呢！ 
English: A gentleman should be dignified and sober. How can he go bareheaded and barefoot, yet think he is great!

古文：有奉馈者，必问其所由，若力作所致，虽微必喜，慰赐参倍；若非理得之，则切厉诃辱，还其所馈。
现代文：有人奉献馈赠，陶侃一定要询问来路，如果是靠自己的劳作所得，即使价值微薄也一定喜欢，慰勉还赐的物品超出三倍。如果不是正道所得，则严辞厉色呵斥羞辱，拒绝不受。
English: If someone gives a gift, Tao Kan must inquire about the source, if it is income from one's own labor, even if the value is meager, it must be liked, and the items given as consolation exceed three times. If it is not legitimate income, it will sternly reject humiliation and refuse to accept it.

古文：尝出游，见人持一把未熟稻，侃问： 用此何为？ 
现代文：有一次陶侃出游，看见有人手持一把未成熟的稻子，陶侃问： 你拿来干什么？ 
English: Once, when Tao Kan was on a trip and saw someone holding a handful of immature rice, Tao Kan asked: What are you doing with it?

古文：人云： 行道所见，聊取之耳。 
现代文：那人说： 走路时看到的，随便摘下来而已。 
English: The man said: "I saw it when I was walking, I just took it off.

古文：侃大怒曰： 汝既不佃，而戏贼人稻！ 
现代文：陶侃大怒，说： 你既然不亲自劳作，却随便毁坏他人的稻子拿来玩！ 
English: Tao was furious and said, "Since you don't do any work yourself, you just destroy other people's rice and play with it!

古文：执而鞭之。
现代文：随即抓住此人鞭打。
English: He then grabbed the man and whipped him.

古文：是以百姓勤于农作，家给人足。
现代文：因此百姓辛勤耕作，家资不缺，人人丰足。
English: Therefore, the people are hard at work, there is no shortage of family resources, and everyone is well-off.

古文：尝造船，其木屑竹头，侃皆令籍而掌之，人咸不解所以。
现代文：陶侃曾经造船，剩下的木屑和竹头，都令人登录并且掌管，大家都不明白有何用。
English: Tao Kan used to be a shipbuilder. The remaining wood chips and bamboo are registered and managed by others. No one knows what they are used for.

古文：后正会，积雪始晴，听事前馀雪犹湿，乃以木屑布地。
现代文：后来元旦群臣朝会，正逢积雪后开始放晴，厅堂前面残留的积雪仍然潮湿，于是用木屑铺洒在地上。
English: Later, on New Year's Day, when the group of courtiers gathered for the imperial court, it was just after the snow began to clear, and the remaining snow in front of the hall was still wet, so it was sprinkled on the ground with wood chips.

古文：及桓温伐蜀，又以侃所贮竹头作丁装船。
现代文：等到桓温攻伐蜀地时，又用陶侃所贮存的竹头作隼钉装配船只。
English: When Kuanwen invaded Shunde, he used the bamboo sticks stored by Tao Kan to make rivets and assemble ships.

古文：其综理微密，皆此类也。
现代文：陶侃治理事务的仔细和缜密，一向如此。
English: It has always been the case that Tao Kan manages his affairs carefully and meticulously.

古文：后赵将石生屯洛阳，寇掠河南，司州刺史李矩、颍川太守郭默军数败，又乏食，乃遣使附于赵。
现代文：后赵将领石生屯兵洛阳，侵犯并劫掠黄河以南地区，司州刺史李矩、颍川太守郭默的军队多次战败，又缺乏军粮，于是派使者请求依附前赵。
English: Later, Zhao led the Shisheng garrison to Luoyang, invaded and plundered the area south of the Yellow River, and the army of the governor of Shizhou, Li Rui, and the governor of Luochuan, Guo Mo, was defeated many times and lacked military food, so he sent an envoy to request adherence to the former Zhao.

古文：赵主曜使中山王岳将兵万五千人趣孟津，镇东将军呼延谟帅荆、司之众自崤、渑而东，欲会矩、默共攻石生。
现代文：前赵主刘曜派中山王刘岳率领士兵一万五千人赶赴孟津，派镇东将军呼延谟率领荆州、司州的士众从崤山、渑水向东进发，想会合李矩、郭默共同进攻石生。
English: Former Zhao Lord Liu You sent Zhongshan King Liu Yue to drive to Mengjin with 15,000 soldiers, and sent Zhendong General Huyan Moo to lead the Jingzhou and Shizhou soldiers from Lushan and Surabaya to the east, hoping to meet Li Rui and Guo Mo to jointly attack Shisheng.

古文：岳克孟津、石梁二戍。斩获五千馀级，进围石生于金墉。
现代文：刘岳攻克孟津戍、石梁戍，斩获首级五千多，又进军把石生围困在金墉。
English: Liu Yue conquered Mengjinlu and Shilianglu, and gained more than five thousand first-class soldiers. He also marched to besiege Shisheng in Jinlu.

古文：后赵中山公虎帅步骑四万，入自成皋关，与岳战于洛西。岳兵败，中流矢，退保石梁。
现代文：后赵的中山公石虎率领步、骑兵四万人从成皋关入内，与刘岳在洛水以西交战，刘岳战败，被流箭射中，于是后退保守石梁。
English: Later, Zhao's Zhongshan Gong Shihu led the way, and 40,000 cavalrymen entered from Chengyu Pass, and fought with Liu Yue in the west of Luoshui. Liu Yue was defeated and was shot by a stream of arrows, so he retreated to protect Shi Liang.

古文：虎作堑栅环之，遏绝内外。
现代文：石虎设置沟壕和栅栏把石梁四面围住，使内外隔绝。
English: Shihu set up trenches and fences to surround the stone beams on all sides, isolating the inside and outside.

古文：岳众饥甚，杀马食之。
现代文：刘岳的士众饿极，杀掉战马充食。
English: Liu Yue's soldiers were so hungry that they killed horses to eat.

古文：虎又击呼延谟，斩之。
现代文：石虎又进攻呼延谟并杀了他。
English: The stone tiger attacked Huanmu again and killed him.

古文：曜自将兵救岳，虎帅骑三万逆战。
现代文：刘曜亲自领军救援刘岳，石虎率骑兵三万迎击。
English: Liu You personally led the army to rescue Liu Yue, and Shi Hu led 30,000 cavalry to meet the attack.

古文：赵前军将军刘黑击虎将石聪于八特阪，大破之。
现代文：前赵的前军将军刘黑攻击驻守八特阪的石虎部将石聪，大败石聪的军队。
English: Liu Hei, the former general of Zhao's former army, attacked and defeated the army of Shi Cong, the commander of the Stone Tiger Division stationed in Hachitehan.

古文：曜屯于金谷，夜，军中无故大惊，士卒奔溃，乃退屯渑池。
现代文：刘曜屯兵于金谷，夜间军中突然无故大惊乱，士卒奔逃溃散，于是退军驻屯渑池。
English: Liu Yang was garrisoned in Jingu. During the night, there was a sudden and unexplained panic in the army. The soldiers fled and dispersed. He then withdrew to his garrison in Dianchi.

古文：夜，又惊溃，遂归长安。
现代文：到了夜间军中再次惊乱溃散，刘曜便回归长安。
English: At night, the army was once again shocked and dispersed, and Liu You returned to Chang'an.

古文：六月，虎拔石梁，禽岳及其将佐八十馀人，氐、羌三千馀人，皆送襄国，坑其士卒九千人。
现代文：六月，石虎攻取石梁，擒获刘岳及其将佐八十多人及氐族、羌族士众三千多人，都押送到襄国，并坑杀刘岳士兵九千人。
English: In June, the Shih Tigers captured Shiliang and captured Liu Yue and more than eighty of his generals, as well as more than three thousand soldiers of the Yao and Shan ethnic groups. They were all sent to Xiangguo and killed nine thousand soldiers of Liu Yue.

古文：遂攻王腾于并州，执腾，杀之，坑其士卒七千馀人。
现代文：石虎随即又进攻驻守并州的王腾，擒获并杀了他，坑杀其士兵七千多人。
English: Shihu immediately attacked Wang Teng, who was stationed in Nianzhou, captured and killed him, and killed more than seven thousand of his soldiers.

古文：曜还长安，素服郊次，哭，七日乃入城，因愤恚成疾。
现代文：刘曜回到长安，穿上素服停驻郊外哭吊，七天后才进城，由于愤懑染病。
English: Liu You returned to Chang'an, put on his plain clothes and stayed in the suburbs crying and hanging, and only entered the city seven days later, due to his anger and illness.

古文：郭默复为石聪所败，弃妻子南奔建康。
现代文：郭默又被石聪战败，丢下妻子儿女向南逃回建康。
English: Guo Mo was again defeated by Shi Cong, left his wife and children and fled south to Jiankang.

古文：李矩将士阴谋叛降后赵，矩不能讨，亦帅众南归。
现代文：李矩的将士私下密谋背叛投降后赵，李矩无力镇压，也率众人南归。
English: After Zhao surrendered, Li Rui's soldiers secretly plotted to betray him. Li Rui was powerless to suppress them, and he also led everyone to return to the south.

古文：众皆道亡，惟郭诵等百馀人随之；卒于鲁阳。
现代文：手下士众在途中纷纷逃亡，只有郭诵等一百多人跟随他，结果死在鲁阳。
English: All of his subordinates fled en route, except for Guo Xie, who was followed by more than a hundred people. As a result, he died in Luyang.

古文：矩长史崔宣帅其馀众二千降于后赵。
现代文：李矩的长史崔宣率领其余士卒二千人投降后赵。
English: After the surrender of Zhao, Li Rui's eldest son, Cui Xuan, led the remaining two thousand soldiers.

古文：于是司、豫、徐、兗之地，率皆入于后赵，以淮为境矣。
现代文：这样司州、豫州、徐州、兖州地区全部归入后赵，与东晋以淮水为界。
English: In this way, the Sizhou, Yuzhou, Xuzhou, and Zhangzhou regions were all included in Hou Zhao, and the East Jin was bounded by Huai Shui.

古文：赵主曜以永安王胤为大司马、大单于，徙封南阳王，置单于台于渭城，其左、右贤王以下，皆以胡、羯、鲜卑、氐、羌豪桀为之。
现代文：前赵主刘曜任命永安王刘胤为大司马、大单于，改封南阳王，在渭城设置单于台，左、右贤王以下，都由匈奴、羯族、鲜卑族、氐族和羌族的豪杰之士充任。
English: Former Zhao Lord Liu You appointed Yong'an King Liu Yin as the chief steward and the grand steward, and changed his title to Nanyang King, and set up a steward in Shicheng. Below the left and right wise kings, the heroes of the Xiongnu, the Yi, the Xianbei, the Yi and the Yi were in charge.

古文：秋，七月，辛未，以尚书令郗鉴为车骑将军、都督徐、兗、青三州诸军事、兗州刺史，镇广陵。
现代文：秋季，七月，辛未，朝廷任命尚书令郗鉴为车骑将军，都督徐、兖、青三州军事，兖州刺史，镇守广陵。
English: In the autumn, in July, Xinwei, the imperial court appointed Shang Shuling as the cavalry general, the military governor of the three states of Xu, Handan and Qing, the governor of Zhangzhou, and the town guard of Guangling.

古文：闰月，以尚书左仆射荀松为光禄大夫、录尚书事，尚书邓攸为左仆射。
现代文：闰月，任尚书左仆射荀松为光禄大夫、录尚书事，尚书邓攸为左仆射。
English: In the leap month, Shangshu's left-hand man, Sha Yansong, was appointed as the doctor of Guanglu and recorded Shangshu's affairs, and Shangshu's left-hand man, Deng You, was appointed as Sha's left-hand man.

古文：右卫将军虞胤，元敬皇后之弟也，与左卫将军南顿王宗俱为帝所亲任，典禁兵，直殿内，多聚勇士以为羽翼；王导、庾亮皆忌之，颇以为言，帝待之愈厚，宫门管钥，皆以委之。
现代文：右卫将军虞胤，是元帝元敬皇后的兄弟，与左卫将军、南顿王司马宗都是明帝宠信的人，执掌禁兵，在宫殿内当值，招纳许多勇士为自己的羽翼。王导、庾亮都忌惮他们，经常为此向明帝进言，明帝对他们却更加厚待，宫门的锁钥，都交给他们掌管。
English: Yu Yan, the right guard general, was a brother of the former emperor Yuan Qianqian, and Chuang, the left guard general, and Nantong Wang Sima Zong were all favorites of the Ming emperor. They held the forbidden soldiers, were on duty in the palace, and recruited many warriors as their own wings. Wang Du and Lu Liang were afraid of them, and often spoke to the Ming emperor for this reason. However, the Ming emperor treated them more generously, and the keys of the palace gate were handed over to them.

古文：帝寝疾，亮夜有所表，从宗求钥；宗不与，叱亮使曰： 此汝家门户邪！ 
现代文：明帝病重卧床，庾亮夜间有上表呈送，到司马宗那里要钥匙，司马宗不给，叱骂庾亮派来的人说： 这里是你家的门户吗？ 
English: Emperor Ming was gravely ill in bed. At night, Luo Liang was presented with the table. He went to Sima Zong to ask for the key, but Sima Zong refused to give it. He scolded the person sent by Luo Liang and said, "Is this the entrance to your home?"

古文：亮益忿之。
现代文：庾亮更加怨怒。
English: The chanting became more angry.

古文：及帝疾笃，不欲见人，群臣无得进者。
现代文：等到明帝病重，不想见人，大臣们无人能进见。
English: When Emperor Ming was gravely ill and did not want to see anyone, no ministers were allowed to see him.

古文：亮疑宗、胤及宗兄西阳王羕有异谋，排闼入升御床，见帝流涕，言羕与宗等谋废大臣，自求辅政，请黜之；帝不纳。
现代文：庾亮怀疑司马宗、虞胤以及司马宗兄长西阳王司马另有图谋，推门进宫登上御床，见到明帝时流着眼泪，述说司马和司马宗等人谋议废黜大臣，自己请求辅佐朝廷，要求废黜他们，明帝未采纳。
English: Xing Liang suspected that Sima Zong, Yu Yin and Sima Zong's elder brother Xiyang Wang Sima had other plans. He pushed the door into the palace and climbed onto the throne. When he saw Emperor Ming, he shed tears and said that Sima and Sima Zong and others were plotting to depose the minister. He asked for assistance from the court and asked to depose them, but Emperor Ming did not accept.

古文：壬午，帝引太宰羕、司徒导、尚书令卞壸、车骑将军郗鉴、护军将军庾亮、领军将军陆晔、丹杨尹温峤，并受遗诏辅太子，更入殿将兵直宿；复拜壸右将军，亮中书令，晔录尚书事。
现代文：壬午，明帝延请太宰司马、司徒王导、尚书令、车骑将军郗鉴、护军将军庾亮、领军将军陆晔、丹杨尹温峤，共同奉受遗诏辅佐太子，轮番入殿领兵当值宿卫。又授予卞为右将军，庾亮为中书令，陆晔录尚书事。
English: In the morning of the second day of the third month, Emperor Ming extended an invitation to Dazai Sima, King Sidu, Shang Shuling, Chariot and Cavalry General Zou Jian, Escort General Zou Liang, Leading Army General Lu Wei, and Tanyang Yin Wenqi, and jointly honored the Prince's will, and took turns to enter the palace to lead the soldiers on duty as guards. He also awarded Zou as Right General, Zou Liang as Middle Shuling, and Lu Wei as Shang Shuling.

古文：丁亥，降遗诏。戊子，帝崩。
现代文：丁亥，颁布遗诏，戊子，明帝驾崩。
English: Dinghai, promulgated the last will and testament, Wu Zi, Emperor Ming passed away.

古文：帝明敏有机断，故能以弱制强，诛剪逆臣，克复大业。
现代文：明帝明智敏捷，遇事有决断，所以能以弱制强，诛灭逆臣，光复国家大业。
English: Emperor Ming was quick-witted and decisive in the face of adversity, so he was able to use weakness to control strength, annihilate rebellious ministers, and restore the great cause of the country.

古文：己丑，太子即皇帝位，生五年矣。
现代文：己丑，皇太子即帝位，时年五岁。
English: He was five years old when he ascended the throne as the crown prince.

古文：君臣进玺，司徒导以疾不至。
现代文：群臣进献国玺，司徒王导因病未到。
English: The group of courtiers went to present the imperial scepter, but King Sitoro did not come due to illness.

古文：卞壸正色于朝曰： 王公岂社稷之臣邪！
现代文：卞壶在朝上表情端庄严肃地说： 王公难道是关系国家安危的大臣吗！
English: With a dignified and serious expression, Zou Jiao said to the emperor, "Is Wang Gong really the minister in charge of the country's security?

古文：大行在殡，嗣皇未立，宁是人臣辞疾之时也！ 
现代文：先帝停柩未葬，继位的皇帝未立，这难道是臣子以有病为由辞谢不到的时候吗！ 
English: The former emperor has not yet been buried, and the emperor to succeed him has not yet been established. Is this the time for courtiers to resign on the grounds of illness?

古文：导闻之，舆疾而至。
现代文：王导听说后，抱病登车赶到。
English: After hearing the news, Wang Du got on the train despite his illness.

古文：大赦，增文武位二等，尊庾后为皇太后。
现代文：大赦天下，提升文武官员二级职位，尊庾皇后为皇太后。
English: He granted amnesty to the whole country, promoted civil and military officials to second-level positions, and made Empress Zongya the empress dowager.

古文：群臣以帝幼冲，奏请太后依汉和熹皇后故事；太后辞让数四，乃从之。
现代文：大臣们因成帝年幼，奏请太后按汉代和熹皇后旧例临朝听政，太后先后四次辞让，随后同意了。
English: Due to Emperor Cheng's young age, the ministers asked the empress dowager to listen to politics in accordance with the old practice of the Han Dynasty and Empress Dowager Zhou. The empress dowager resigned four times in succession, and then agreed.

古文：秋，九月，癸卯，太后临朝称制。
现代文：秋季，九月，癸卯，太后临朝听政。
English: In the autumn, in September, the Empress Dowager Lin came to listen to the government.

古文：以司徒导录尚书事，与中书令庾亮、尚书令卞壸参辅朝政，然事之大要皆决于亮。
现代文：任司徒王导录尚书事，和中书令庾亮、尚书令卞壶辅佐朝政，然而政事的要旨都由庾亮裁决。
English: According to the Guidebook of the King of Siddhars, Siddhars are in charge of the affairs of the state, and are responsible for the government of the state, but the decisions of the government are made by Siddhars.

古文：加郗鉴车骑大将军，陆晔左光禄大夫，皆开府仪同三司。
现代文：又授予郗鉴车骑大将军、陆晔为左光禄大夫，都是开府仪同三司。
English: He was also awarded the title of General of the Horse Cavalry, and Lu Wei was awarded the title of Doctor of the Left Hand, both of which are the same as the three divisions of the Kaifu ceremony.

古文：以南顿王宗为骠骑将军，虞胤为大宗正。
现代文：任南顿王司马宗为骠骑将军，虞胤为大宗正。
English: Sima Zong, the king of Nantong, was appointed as the cavalry general, and Yu Ying as the grand marshal.

古文：尚书召乐广子谟为郡中正，庾珉族人怡为廷尉评，谟、怡各称父命不就。
现代文：尚书召任乐广之子乐谟为郡中王，召庾珉的同族人庾怡为廷尉评，乐谟和庾怡各以父命为由不接受。
English: Shang Shu summoned Ren Leguang's son Le Moo to be the king of the county, and summoned his compatriot Jie Yi to be a courtier. Both Le Moo and Jie Yi refused on the grounds of their father's orders.

古文：卞壸奏曰： 人无非父而生，职无非事而立，有父必有命，居职必有悔。
现代文：卞壶奏上说： 人没有无父而出生的，职位也没有无事而设立的；有父亲就必然会有父亲的指令，任职就必然要忧愁操心。
English: "A man is not born without a father, and a position is not created without a reason; if there is a father, there must be a father's order, and if there is a post, there must be sorrow and worry.

古文：有家各私其子，则为王者无民，君臣之道废矣。
现代文：如果每一个家庭都把孩子视作私产，那么作君王的就没有了臣民，君臣之间的道义也就没有了。
English: If every family regards its children as its private property, then the ruler would have no subjects, and there would be no morality between the ruler and his subjects.

古文：乐广、庾珉受宠圣世，身非己有，况及后嗣而可专哉！
现代文：乐广、庾珉曾经在圣世受到宠信，身体已经不是个人私有的了，何况到了他们的后嗣身上，怎么可以私人专占呢！
English: Le Guang and Zou were once favored in the holy world. Their bodies are no longer private, let alone their heirs. How can they be private?

古文：所居之职，若顺夫群心，则战戍者之父母皆当命子以不处也。 
现代文：所任命的职务，如果顺从每个人的私心，那么参与战争、戍守的人的父母，都会命令自己的孩子不赴职的。 
English: If the appointed positions were subordinate to everyone's selfishness, then the parents of those who participated in the war and stayed behind would order their children not to go to work.

古文：谟、怡不得已，各就职。
现代文：乐谟和庾怡不得已，各自赴职。
English: As a last resort, Le Mu and Zou Yi went to work separately.

古文：辛丑，葬明帝于武平陵。
现代文：辛丑，明帝入葬武平陵。
English: On the 11th day, Emperor Mingdian was buried in Wuping Mausoleum.

古文：冬，十一月，癸巳朔，日有食之。
现代文：冬季，十一月，癸巳朔，出现日食。
English: In winter, in November, at the turn of the year, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：慕容廆与段氏方睦，为段牙谋，使之徙都；牙从之，即去令支，国人不乐。
现代文：慕容与段氏和睦，为段牙谋划，让他迁都。段牙听从了，便离开令支，国内人都不乐意。
English: Murong made peace with Duan and planned for Duan to move the capital. Duan obeyed and left the Rongzhi branch, which displeased the local people.

古文：段疾陆眷之孙辽欲夺其位，以徙都为牙罪，十二月，帅国人攻牙，杀之，自立。
现代文：段疾陆眷的孙子段辽想篡夺段牙之位，便以迁都作为段牙的罪名，十二月，率领国人攻击段牙。段牙被杀，段辽自立为王。
English: Duan's grandson Duan Liao wanted to usurp Duan Zha's position, so he accused Duan Zha of moving the capital. In December, he led the Chinese people to attack Duan Zha. Duan Zha was killed, and Duan Liao became king.

古文：段氏自务勿尘以来，日益强盛，其地西接渔阳，东界辽水，所统胡、晋三万馀户，控弦四五万骑。
现代文：段氏自从务勿尘以来，日益强盛，占地西接渔阳，东面以辽水为界，所统领的胡人、晋人有三万多户，能拉弓射箭的骑兵有四五万人。
English: Since Duan's death, the Duan clan has grown stronger and stronger. It occupies the land to the west of Yuyang and the east of Liaoshui. There are more than 30,000 households of Hu people and Jin people under its command, and there are 450,000 cavalrymen who can draw bows and shoot arrows.

古文：荆州刺史陶侃以宁州刺史王坚不能御寇，是岁，表零陵太守南阳尹奉为宁州刺史以代之。
现代文：荆州刺史陶侃因为宁州刺史王坚不能抵御敌寇，这年，上表荐举零陵太守，南阳人尹奉为宁州刺史，以取代王坚。
English: Because Wang Jian, the Ling Shi of Ningzhou, was not able to resist the enemy, Tao Kan, the Ling Shi of Jingzhou, recommended the appointment of Ziling Taishu, the Nanyang man Yin Bong, as the Ling Shi of Ningzhou to replace Wang Jian.

古文：先是，王逊在宁州，蛮酋梁水太守爨量、益州太守李逖，皆叛附于成。逊讨之不能克。
现代文：早先，王逊任职宁州时，蛮夷首领、梁水太守爨量、益州太守李逖都背叛朝廷，归附成汉，王逊进讨，不能取胜。
English: Earlier, when Wang Xun was in charge of Ningzhou, the leader of the barbarians, Liang Shui, the grand marshal of Yunnan, and Yi Zhou, the grand marshal of Yunnan, both betrayed the imperial court and attached themselves to Chenghan. Wang Xun tried to negotiate, but he could not win.

古文：奉至州，重募徼外夷刺爨量，杀之，谕降李逖，州境遂安。
现代文：尹奉到宁州后，重金聘募境外夷人刺杀爨量成功，又劝谕李逖归降，于是州内安定。
English: After Yin Bong arrived in Ningzhou, he successfully raised a large amount of money to hire and recruit foreign barbarians to assassinate him. He also advised Li Qian to surrender, and the state became stable.

古文：代王贺傉卒，弟纥那立。
现代文：代王拓跋贺死，弟拓跋纥那继立。
English: King Tuoba died, and his younger brother Tuoba Jina succeeded him.

古文：显宗成皇帝上之上
现代文：显宗成皇帝上之上
English: Emperor Hsien Tsung-cheng

古文：肃宗明皇帝下咸和元年
现代文：晋成帝咸和元年
English: Promoted to Emperor Haman in the first year of the Heian period

古文：春，二月，大赦，改元。
现代文：春季，二月，大赦天下，改年号为咸和。
English: Spring, February, amnesty for the world, change the year to Xianhe.

古文：赵以汝南五咸为太尉、录尚书事，光禄太夫刘绥为大司徒，卜泰为大司空。
现代文：前赵任汝南王刘咸为太尉、录尚书事，任光禄大夫刘绥为大司徒，卜泰为大司空。
English: Liu Xian, the former King of Southern Zhao, was the first lieutenant and recorded the records, Liu Yao, the doctor of Guanglu, was the chief disciple, and Bu Tai was the chief disciple.

古文：刘后疾病，赵主曜问所欲言，刘氏泣曰： 妾幼鞠于叔父昶，愿陛下贵之。
现代文：刘后病重，前赵主刘曜问她还有什么话想说，刘后哭泣着说： 我自幼由叔父刘昶养大，希望陛下能重用他。
English: Liu Hou was seriously ill. Former Zhao master Liu You asked her what else she wanted to say. Liu Hou cried and said, "I was raised by my uncle Liu Ye since I was a child. I hope Your Majesty can use him again."

古文：叔父皑之女芳有德色，愿以备后宫。 
现代文：叔父刘皑的女儿刘芳品德和容颜都很出色，希望让她充备后宫。 
English: Uncle Liu Yao's daughter Liu Fang's character and appearance are both excellent, and he hopes to have her complete his harem.

古文：言终而卒。
现代文：言终即死。
English: And then he died.

古文：曜以昶为侍中、大司徒、录尚书事，立芳为皇后；寻又以昶为太保。
现代文：刘曜任刘昶为侍中、大司徒、录尚书事，册立刘芳为皇后。不久又任刘昶为太保。
English: Liu Yu appointed Liu Ye as a chamberlain, grand steward, recorded the imperial edict, and made Liu Fang the empress. Soon after, he appointed Liu Ye as the imperial bodyguard.

古文：三月，后赵主勒夜微行检察诸营卫，赍金帛以赂门者，求出。
现代文：三月，后赵王石勒夜间微服出行，检视察看各营帐守卫，他拿着金帛去送给守门人，请求出门。
English: In March, after Zhao Wangshile took off his nightly light clothing to travel and inspect the guards of each camp, he took the golden scepter to the gatekeeper and asked to go out.

古文：永昌门候王假欲收捕之，从者至，乃止。
现代文：永昌门守令王假要拘捕他，因随从人员到来才停手。
English: The Yongchang gatekeeper ordered Wang Fai to arrest him, but he only stopped when his entourage arrived.

古文：旦，召假，以为振忠都尉，爵关内侯。
现代文：清晨，石勒召见王假，任命他为振忠都尉，赐给关内侯的爵位。
English: Early in the morning, Shi Le summoned Wang Hui, appointed him as Lieutenant of Zhenzhong, and gave him the title of Marquis of Guanai.

古文：勒召记室参军徐光，光醉不至，黜为牙门。
现代文：石勒召见记室参军徐光，徐光因酒醉未到，被贬职为牙门。
English: Shi Ler summoned Xu Guang, a member of the military, to the records office. Xu Guang did not arrive because he was drunk, and was demoted to the position of dentist.

古文：光侍直，有愠色，勒怒，并其妻子囚之。
现代文：徐光当值侍卫时，面带怨怒的容色，石勒发怒，将他连同妻子儿女一起囚禁起来。
English: When Xu Guang was on duty as an attendant, he had a grumpy look on his face. Shi Le was angry and imprisoned him together with his wife and children.

古文：夏，四月，后赵将石生寇汝南，执内史祖济。
现代文：夏季，四月，后赵将领石生侵犯汝南，执获汝南内史祖济。
English: In the summer, in April, Zhao's general Shisheng invaded the south of the country and captured Zhuji in the south of the country.

古文：六月，癸亥，泉陵公刘遐卒。
现代文：六月，癸亥，泉陵公刘遐死。
English: In June, in the Year of the Boar, Liu Xuan, the Prince of Quanling, died.

古文：癸酉，以车骑大将军郗鉴领徐州刺史；征虏将军郭默为北中郎将、监淮北诸军事，领遐部曲。
现代文：癸酉，任命车骑大将军郗鉴兼领徐州刺史，任征虏将军郭默为北中郎将、监察淮北军务，统领刘遐的部曲。
English: , appointed the cavalry general 鉴 to lead the history of Xuzhou, and appointed the conscript general Guo Miao to be the commander of the north, supervise the military affairs of Huaibei, and lead the part of Liu Bei.

古文：遐子肇尚幼，遐妹夫田防及故将史迭等不乐他属，共以肇袭遐故位而叛。
现代文：刘遐之子刘肇年龄还小，刘遐的妹夫田防及刘遐的旧将史迭等人不愿归属他人，共同让刘肇承袭刘遐的旧位，而后反叛。
English: Liu Zhaohui's son Liu Zhaohui was still young, Liu Zhaohui's brother-in-law Tian Bo and Liu Zhaohui's former general Shidie and others did not want to belong to others, and jointly let Liu Zhaohui inherit Liu Zhaohui's old position, and then rebelled.

古文：临淮太守刘矫掩袭遐营，斩防等。
现代文：临淮太守刘矫偷袭刘遐的军营，杀死田防等人。
English: Emperor Linhuai's eunuch Liu Jiao attacked Liu Ye's camp, killing Tian Bo and others.

古文：遐妻，邵续女也，骁果有父风。
现代文：刘遐的妻子是邵续的女儿，骁勇果敢，颇有父亲遗风。
English: Liu Yao's wife is the daughter of Shao Zhai. She is brave and daring, and has quite a bit of her father's legacy.

古文：遐尝为后赵所围，妻单将数骑，拔遐出于万众之中。
现代文：刘遐曾经被后赵围困，刘遐妻子一人带领数骑，从万众之中把刘遐救出。
English: Liu Yao was once besieged by Hou Zhao. Liu Yao's wife led several horsemen to rescue Liu Yao from the crowd.

古文：及田防等欲作乱，遐妻止之，不从，乃密起火，烧甲仗都尽，故防等卒败。
现代文：等到田防等人打算作乱，刘遐妻子制止他们，他们不听，于是刘遐妻子暗地里点火，把铠甲兵仗全都烧光，所以田防等人很快失败。
English: When Tian Bao and others planned to start a riot, Liu Ye's wife tried to stop them, but they did not listen, so Liu Ye's wife secretly lit a fire and burned out all the armored soldiers, so Tian Bao and others soon failed.

古文：诏以肇袭遐爵。
现代文：成帝下诏让刘肇承袭刘遐的爵位。
English: Emperor Cheng decreed that Liu Zhao should succeed to the title of Liu Xuan.

古文：司徒导称疾不朝，而私送郗鉴。
现代文：司徒王导称病不上朝，却私下送别郗鉴。
English: King Sidu said that he would not ascend to the throne due to his illness, but he sent his farewell letter to Gong Jian in private.

古文：卞壸奏 导亏法从私，无大臣之节，请免官。 
现代文：卞壶上奏说： 王导破坏朝法以遂私欲，丧失了大臣的操守，请免除他的官职。 
English: It was said at the top of the eulogy: Wang Du destroyed the imperial law with his selfish desires and lost the minister's integrity. Please relieve him of his official post.

古文：虽事寝不行，举朝惮之。
现代文：虽然此事中止未实行，但满朝大臣都为此畏惧卞壶。
English: Although the suspension of the matter was not implemented, the ministers of the Manchurian dynasty were afraid of the kettle.

古文：壸俭素廉絜，裁断切直，当官干实，性不弘裕，不肯苟同时好，故为诸名士所少。
现代文：卞壶俭朴廉洁，对事物的裁断贴切、直率，任官实干，性格不宽容，不肯随随便便趋同时尚，所以受到各位名士的贬责。
English: He was frugal, simple and incorruptible, his judgment of things was accurate and straightforward, he was a hard worker, his character was intolerant, and he did not want to casually become a contemporary, so he was scolded by celebrities.

古文：阮孚谓之曰： 卿常无闲泰，如含瓦石，不亦劳乎！ 
现代文：阮孚对他说： 您常常没有闲暇舒泰的时候，好像嘴含瓦石，不是也很劳累吗？ 
English: Ruan Fu said to him: When you often have no leisure time, your mouth seems to be full of gravel, aren't you also very tired?

古文：壸曰： 诸君子以道德恢弘，风流相尚，执鄙吝者，非壸而谁！ 
现代文：卞壶说： 名位君子以道德恢弘博大、风流倜傥互相崇尚，那么表现庸俗、贪鄙的人，不是我还能是谁！ 
English: The gourd said, "Eminent gentlemen respect each other by virtue of their moral magnificence and broad-mindedness, while vulgar and greedy people are not who I am!

古文：时贵游子弟多慕王澄、谢鲲为放达，壸厉色于朝曰： 悖礼伤教，罪莫大焉；中朝倾覆，实由于此。 
现代文：当时游闲贵族子弟大多仰慕王澄、谢鲲的为人，学为放达不经，卞壶在朝中严辞厉色地说： 违背礼义、有伤教化，没有比这更大的罪过了，本朝中途倾覆，实在是由此而起。 
English: At that time, most of the children of the idle aristocrats admired Wang Cheng and Xie Tong as people, and thought that learning was not enough. In the court, Gong Jiu said sternly: "There is no greater sin than violating etiquette and injuring education. The midway overthrow of this dynasty really started from this."

古文：欲奏推之，王导、庾亮不听，乃止。
现代文：他想奏请据情治他们的罪，王导、庾亮不听，于是作罢。
English: He wanted to plead with them to deal with their crimes according to the situation, but Wang Du and Xuan Liang didn't listen, so he gave up.

古文：成人讨越巂斯叟，破之。
现代文：成汉人征讨越隽人斯臾，战败了他。
English: The Chenghan people fought against the Yueyuan people and defeated them.

古文：秋，七月，癸丑，观阳烈侯应詹卒。
现代文：秋季，七月，癸丑，观阳烈侯应詹故去。
English: In autumn, in July, when the weather is gloomy, the Guanyang Martyrs go to the past.

古文：初，王导辅政，以宽和得众。
现代文：当初，王导辅佐朝政，因宽和赢得人心。
English: At first, Wang Yaduosuke, an aide to the imperial court, won the hearts and minds of the people because of his broad-mindedness.

古文：及庾亮用事，任法裁物，颇失人心。
现代文：等到庾亮主持政事，依法断事，颇失人心。
English: Wait until Gong Liang presides over political affairs and makes decisions in accordance with the law, and the people will lose heart.

古文：豫州刺史祖约，自以辈不后郗、卞，而不豫顾命，又望开府复不得，及诸表请多不见许，遂怀怨望。
现代文：豫州刺史祖约，自认为名望和年辈都不比郗鉴、卞壶差，却未能参与明帝遗命，又希望能得开府之号，也未能实现，再加上许多上表辞请大多不获允准，于是心怀怨恨。
English: Yu Zhou Shishi Zuo, who believed that his fame and seniority were no worse than that of Yu Jian and Yu Jian, failed to participate in the Ming Emperor's last will and testament, and hoped to get the name of the capital, but failed to achieve it. In addition, many of the above expressions were mostly not allowed, so he harbored resentment.

古文：及遗诏褒进大臣，又不及约与陶侃，二人皆疑庾亮删之。
现代文：等到明帝遗诏褒扬和提拔大臣，又没有祖约和陶侃，二人都怀疑是庚亮删除己名。
English: When Emperor Ming's last will and testament praised and promoted the minister, and there was no ancestor's agreement or tao jian, both suspected that Geng Liang was the one who deleted his name.

古文：历阳内史苏峻，有功于国，威望渐著，有锐卒万人，器械甚精，朝廷以江外寄之；而峻颇怀骄溢，有轻朝廷之志，招纳亡命，众力日多，皆仰食县官，运漕相属，稍不如意，辄肆忿言。
现代文：历阳内史苏峻，对国家有功，威望日渐显赫，拥有精兵万人，军械很精良，朝廷把长江以外地区交付给他治理。但苏峻颇有骄纵之心，轻视朝廷，招纳亡命徒，人数日渐增多，都靠国家供给生活物资，陆运、水运络绎不绝，稍不如意，就肆无忌惮地斥骂。
English: Su Jun, a historian in Liyang, has made great contributions to the country, and his prestige is increasingly prominent. He has 10,000 elite soldiers and sophisticated military equipment. The imperial court entrusted him with the governance of regions outside the Yangtze River. However, Su Jun has a rather proud heart, despises the imperial court, recruits outlaws, and the number is increasing day by day. They all rely on the state to supply living materials. Land transportation and water transportation are endless. If they are not satisfied, they will shamelessly scold them.

古文：亮既疑峻、约，又畏侃之得众，八月，以丹杨尹温峤为都督江州诸军事、江州刺史，镇武昌；尚书仆射五舒为会稽内史，以广声援；又修石头以备之。
现代文：庾亮既怀疑苏峻、祖约的忠诚，又惧怕陶侃的深得人心，八月，任命丹杨尹温峤为都督江州诸军事、江州刺史，镇守武昌。任尚书仆射王舒为会稽内史，用以扩大声援。又修石头城防备他们。
English: Xingliang not only doubted the loyalty of Su Jun and Zuyo, but also feared the popularity of Tao Kan. In August, he appointed Danyang Yin Wenjun as the governor of Jiangzhou Military, Jiangzhou History, and the town guard of Wuchang. He appointed Shang Shubao Shaowang Shu as the internal history of the association to expand solidarity. He also built a stone city to guard against them.

古文：丹杨尹阮孚以太后临朝，政出舅族，谓所亲曰： 今江东创业尚浅，主幼时艰，庾亮年少，德信未孚，以吾观之，乱将作矣。 
现代文：丹杨尹阮孚因为太后临朝听政，政事由皇帝的母舅一族把持，对自己亲信的人说： 如今江东朝廷创业的时间不长，君主年幼，时世艰难，庾亮年轻，德行和信誉却未能使人信服，在我看来，祸乱将要发生了。 
English: Because the empress dowager was attending the imperial court to listen to the government, and the government affairs were controlled by the emperor's maternal uncle's family, Danyang Yin Ruanfu said to his close confidants: Nowadays, the Jiangdong imperial court has not been established for a long time. The monarch is young, the times are difficult, and he is bright and young. However, his virtue and credibility are not convincing. In my opinion, a disaster is about to happen.

古文：遂求出为广州刺史。
现代文：于是自请出任广州刺史。
English: As a result, he volunteered to serve as the mayor of Guangzhou.

古文：孚，咸之子也。
现代文：阮孚即阮咸的儿子。
English: Nguyn Phúc was the son of Nguyn Tháng.

古文：冬，十月，立帝母弟岳为吴王。
现代文：冬季，十月，立成帝母后的弟弟庾岳为吴王。
English: In the winter, in October, the younger brother of Emperor Ritsuko, Shingaku, became the King of Wu.

古文：南顿王宗自以失职怨望，又素与苏峻善，庾亮欲诛之，宗亦欲废执政。
现代文：南顿王司马宗自认为不该丢失官职，心怀怨恨，平素又与苏峻交好，庾亮想杀他，司马宗也想废黜庾亮，自己执政。
English: Sima Zong, the king of Nantong, thought that he should not lose his official position, harbored resentment, and was always friends with Su Jun. Yu Liang wanted to kill him, and Sima Zong also wanted to depose Yu Liang and govern himself.

古文：御史中丞钟雅劾宗谋反，亮使右卫将军赵胤收之。
现代文：御史中丞钟雅弹劾司马宗谋反，庾亮派右卫将军赵胤拘捕司马宗。
English: Goshi Chujo Zhongya impeached Sima Zong for plotting a rebellion, and Yan Liang sent Right Guard General Zhao Yan to arrest Sima Zong.

古文：宗以兵拒战，为胤所杀，贬其族为马氏，三子绰、超、演皆废为庶人。
现代文：司马宗领兵抵抗，被赵胤所杀，家族被贬黜改姓马氏，三个儿子司马绰、司马超和司马演，都被贬为庶人。
English: Sima Zong led the resistance and was killed by Zhao Yin. The family was degraded and changed its surname to Ma. The three sons, Sima Zhuo, Sima Chao and Sima Yuan, were all degraded to commoners.

古文：免太宰西阳王羕，降封弋阳县王，大宗正虞胤左迁桂阳太守。
现代文：又免除西阳王司马太宰职务，降低封爵为弋阳县王，大宗正虞胤被降职为桂阳太守。
English: In addition, Sima Dazai, the king of Xiyang, was relieved of his duties, his title was reduced to that of the king of Shiyang County, and Daizong Zhengyuyin was demoted to the position of the governor of Guiyang.

古文：宗，宗室近属；羕，先帝保傅。亮一旦剪黜，由是失远近之心。
现代文：司马宗是皇室近亲，司马则是先帝的太保、太傅，庾亮轻易地杀戮和废黜他们，由此更加失去众人之心。
English: Sima Zong was a close relative of the imperial family, while Sima was the former emperor's grand tutor and great tutor. Liang Liang easily killed and deposed them, thus losing the hearts of the people even more.

古文：宗党卞阐亡奔苏峻，亮符峻送阐，峻保匿不与。
现代文：司马宗党羽卞阐逃奔苏峻，庾亮发下朝廷符令让苏峻把卞阐送来，苏峻藏匿保护，不交给朝廷。
English: Sima Zong's party fled to Su Shun, and issued an imperial order to let Su Shun send them to Su Shun. Su Shun hid and protected them, and did not hand them over to the imperial court.

古文：宗之死也，帝不之知，久之，帝问亮曰： 常日白头公何在？ 
现代文：司马宗之死，成帝不知道，过了许久，成帝问庾亮说： 往常的那个白头公在什么地方？ 
English: Sima Zong's death, Emperor Cheng did not know the reason. After a long time, Emperor Cheng asked Xuan Liang: "Where is the usual white-haired prince?"

古文：亮对以谋反伏诛。
现代文：庾亮回答说因谋反已经伏诛。
English: Hao Liang replied that he had been arrested for plotting rebellion.

古文：帝泣曰： 舅言人作贼，便杀之；人言舅作贼，当如何！ 
现代文：成帝哭泣着说： 舅父说他人是叛贼，就轻易地杀了他。如果别人说舅父是叛贼，该怎么办？ 
English: Emperor Cheng wept and said, "If my uncle says someone is a traitor, he can easily kill him. If someone says my uncle is a traitor, what should I do?

古文：亮惧，变色。
现代文：庾亮恐惧变色。
English: Zhao Liang was so scared that his face even changed color.

古文：赵将黄秀等寇酂，顺阳太守魏该帅众奔襄阳。
现代文：前赵将领黄秀等侵犯县，顺阳太守魏该帅士众逃奔襄阳。
English: Former Zhao general Huang Xiu and others invaded the county, and Shunyang's ruler Wei fled to Xiangyang.

古文：后赵王勒用程遐之谋，营鄴宫，使世子弘镇鄴，配禁兵万人，车骑所统五十四营悉配之，以骁骑将军领门臣祭酒王阳专统六夷以辅之。
现代文：后赵王石勒用程遐的计谋，营建邺地宫室，让王世子石弘镇守邺，配备禁兵万人，车骑将军所统领的五十四营全部配署在那里，并让骠绮将军兼门臣祭酒王阳专门统领六夷辅佐石弘。
English: Later, Zhao Wang Shile used Cheng Yao's stratagem to build a palace room in Handan, let the king's heir, Shi Hongzhen, guard Handan, equipped with 10,000 forbidden soldiers, and all 54 battalions commanded by the cavalry general were stationed there, and let the general of Handan and the disciple of the sacrificial wine, Wang Yang, specially command the Li Yi auxiliary Sasa Shihong.

古文：中山公虎自以功多，无去鄴之意，及修三台，迁其家室，虎由是怨程遐。
现代文：中山公石虎自认为功劳多，没有离开邺地的意思，等到修筑三台，让石虎家迁移，石虎因此怨恨程遐。
English: Zhongshan Gong Shihu considered himself to have done more than his share of work, and had no intention of leaving Handan. He waited until the three towers were built, so that Shihu's family could move. As a result, Shihu resented Cheng Yao.

古文：十一月，后赵石聪攻寿春，祖约屡表请救，朝廷不为出兵。
现代文：十一月，后赵石聪进攻寿春，祖约屡次上表请求救援，朝廷不出兵。
English: In November, after Zhao Shicong attacked Shuchun, Zuyou repeatedly petitioned for rescue, but the imperial court did not send troops.

古文：聪遂进寇逡遒、阜陵，杀掠五千馀人。
现代文：石聪便侵犯逡遒、阜陵，杀死、掠夺五千多人。
English: Shi Cong then invaded Handan and Fulin, killing and plundering more than five thousand people.

古文：建康大震，诏加司徒导大司马、假黄钺、都督中外诸军事以御之，军于江宁。
现代文：建康为此大为震惊，朝廷下诏授司徒王导大司马、假黄、都督中外诸军事来抵御石聪，驻军在江宁。
English: Jiankang was greatly shocked by this, and the imperial court issued an imperial edict instructing the King of the Sithu to lead the great Sima, the false Huang, and the military governors from all over the world to resist Shi Cong and garrison the troops in Jiangning.

古文：苏峻遣其将韩晃击石聪，走之，导解大司马。
现代文：苏峻派部将韩晃进击石聪，将他赶走，王导解除大司马职务。
English: The Su Jun faction sent Han Xing to attack Shicong and drive him away, and Wang Du relieved him of his duties as grand steward.

古文：朝议又欲作涂塘以遏胡寇，祖约曰： 是弃我也！ 
现代文：朝廷议论又想兴修涂塘，用以阻遏胡夷寇掠，祖约说： 这是弃我不顾！ 
English: The imperial court discussed and wanted to build a ditch to stop the Hui raiders from raiding, and the father said, "This is out of my control!

古文：益怀愤恚。
现代文：更加心怀愤恚。
English: They're more angry.

古文：十二月，济岷太守刘闿等杀下邳内史夏侯嘉，以下邳叛，降于后赵。
现代文：十二月，济岷太守刘等人杀死下邳内史夏侯嘉，占据下邳反叛，投降后赵。
English: In December, Liu, the governor-general of Jizhou, and others killed Xia Houjia, a member of the Lower Yangtze, occupied the Lower Yangtze, rebelled, and surrendered to Zhao.

古文：石瞻攻河南太守王瞻于邾，拔之。
现代文：石瞻进攻在邾地的河南太守王瞻，攻了下来。
English: Shi Zhan attacked Wang Zhan, the governor of Henan Province in Shunde, and defeated him.

古文：彭城内史刘续复据兰陵石城，石瞻攻拔之。
现代文：彭城内史刘续再次占据兰陵的石城，石瞻又攻取了石城。
English: Pengcheng Inner History Liu continued to occupy Lanling's Shicheng again, and Shizhu also captured Shicheng.

古文：后赵王勒以牙门将王波为记室参军，典定九流，始立秀、孝试经之制。
现代文：后赵王石勒任命牙门将王波为记室参军，典掌评定九流高下，开始设立秀才、孝廉考试经策的制度。
English: Later, Zhao Wangshile appointed the goalkeeper Wang Bo to join the army as a recorder, and began to set up a system of talent and filial piety examinations.

古文：张竣畏赵人之逼，是岁，徙陇西、南安民二千馀家于姑臧，又遣修好于成，以书劝成主雄去尊号，称籓于晋。
现代文：张骏畏惧赵人的逼迫，这年，由陇西、南安迁徙民众二千多家到姑臧，又派使者和成汉修好，写信劝成汉主李雄除去皇帝尊号，成为东晋的藩臣。
English: Zhang Ye was afraid of the Zhao people's persecution. In that year, more than two thousand people migrated from Shaanxi and Nan'an to Gushan. He also sent an envoy to Chenghan to make peace and write a letter to persuade the lord of Chenghan, Li Xiong, to remove the title of emperor and become a vassal of the Eastern Jin Dynasty.

古文：雄复书曰： 吾过为士大夫所推，然本无心于帝王，思为晋室元功之臣，扫除氛埃；而晋室陵迟，德声不振，引领东望，有年月矣。
现代文：李雄复信说： 我过分地被士大夫们推举，但我自己本来无心当帝王，想成为晋皇帝的首功大臣，扫除世间的妖气和尘埃；但晋王室国运衰微，恩泽和声望不振，我翘首东望晋王室，已经有些年月了。
English: Li Xiong replied to the letter, "I was over-promoted by the scholars and magistrates, but I myself had no intention of becoming the emperor. I wanted to become the first meritorious minister of the Jin emperor and sweep away the evil spirits and dust of the world. However, the Jin royal family's national fortune was declining, and its favor and reputation were not strong. I have been looking forward to the Jin royal family for some years.

古文：会获来贶，情在暗至，有何已已。 
现代文：正巧接获您的赐札，情理与我心中所想暗合，还有什么可疑虑的呢。 
English: It just so happens that I have received your letter of recommendation, and the circumstances coincide with my heart's desire. What other doubts do I have?

古文：自是聘使相继。
现代文：从此相互使者交聘不断。
English: Since then, the exchange of envoys has continued.

古文：肃宗明皇帝下咸和二年
现代文：咸和二年
English: The second year of the Hamon period

古文：春，正月，硃提太守杨术与成将罗恒战于台登，兵败，术死。
现代文：春季，正月，朱提太守杨术和成汉将领罗恒在台登交战，杨术兵败身死。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, Yang Jiu, the Zhu Di Empress, and Luo Heng, the general of Chenghan, fought in Taitung. Yang Jiu died in the battle.

古文：夏五月，甲申朔，日有食之。
现代文：夏季，五月，甲申朔，出现日食。
English: Summer, May, Jiaxing New Year, solar eclipse.

古文：赵武卫将军刘朗帅骑三万袭杨难敌于仇池，弗克，掠三千馀户而归。
现代文：前赵的武卫将军刘朗率领骑兵三万人攻袭在仇池的杨难敌，不能取胜，劫掠民众三千多户返回。
English: Liu Lang, the former Wuwei general of Zhao, led 30,000 cavalry to attack the Yang difficult enemy in Qiuchi, could not win, robbed more than 3,000 households and returned.

古文：张竣闻赵兵为后赵所败，乃去赵官爵，复称晋大将军、凉州牧，遣武威太守窦涛、金城太守张阆、武兴太守辛岩、扬烈将军宋辑等帅众数万，东会韩璞，攻掠赵秦州诸郡。
现代文：张骏听说前赵军队被后赵击败，于是自废前赵官爵，恢复称用晋朝大将军、凉州牧的名号，派武威太守窦涛、金城太守张阆、武兴太守辛岩、扬烈将军宋辑等人率兵众数万人，会同韩璞攻掠前赵的秦州诸郡。
English: Zhang Ye heard that the former Zhao army was defeated by the latter Zhao, so he abolished the former Zhao official title, resumed the title of Jin Dynasty general and Liangzhou herdsman, and sent Wu Wei to be the governor of Dou Tao, Jincheng governor of Zhang Ye, Wu Xing to be the governor of Xinyan, Yang Rong general Song Ji and others to lead tens of thousands of soldiers, and together with Han Ye to attack and plunder the former Zhao's Qinzhou counties.

古文：赵南阳王胤将兵击之，屯狄道。枹罕护军辛晏告急。
现代文：前赵南阳王刘胤率兵攻击，屯军狄道，罕护军辛晏告急。
English: The former Zhao Nanyang King Liu Yan led the troops to attack, and the garrison troops of Di Dao and the Han protection troops of Xin Zhe were in a hurry.

古文：秋，骏使韩璞、辛岩救之。璞进度沃干岭。岩欲速战，璞曰： 夏末以来，日星数有变，不可轻动。
现代文：秋季，张骏派韩璞、辛岩救援辛晏，韩璞越过沃干岭，辛岩想速战速决，韩璞说： 夏末以来，太阳、星辰之象多次变化，不能轻举妄动。
English: In autumn, Zhang Ye sent Han Zheng and Xin Yan to rescue Xin Zheng. Han Zheng crossed the Wogan Mountains, and Xin Yan wanted to make a quick decision. Han Zheng said: Since the end of summer, the sun and the stars have changed many times, and it is not possible to act rashly.

古文：且曜与石勒相攻，胤必不能久与我相守也。 
现代文：况且刘曜正在和石勒互相攻击，刘胤必定不能长久地和我们在此相持。 
English: Moreover, Liu You and Shi Le are attacking each other. Liu Yin will not be able to hold out with us for long.

古文：与胤夹洮相持七十馀日。
现代文：与刘胤隔着洮水相持七十多天。
English: He and Liu Tan held each other across Surabaya for more than seventy days.

古文：冬，十月，璞遣辛岩督运于金城，胤闻之，曰： 韩璞之众，十倍于吾。吾粮不多，难以持久。
现代文：冬季，十月，韩璞派辛岩从金城督运军粮，刘胤听说此事，说： 韩璞的兵众超过我方十倍，我们军粮不多，难以持久。
English: In winter, in October, Han Yu sent Xin Yan to supervise the transportation of military supplies from Jincheng. Liu Yin heard about this and said: Han Yu's army is ten times larger than ours. Our military supplies are not much, and it is difficult to last.

古文：今虏分兵运粮，天授我也。
现代文：现在敌虏分兵运粮，这是天赐良机。
English: Now the enemy detachment is transporting grain. This is a heaven-sent opportunity.

古文：若败辛岩，璞等自溃 。
现代文：如果击败辛岩，韩璞等人不战自溃。 
English: If Xinyan is defeated, Han Yu and others will be defeated without a fight.

古文：乃帅骑三千袭岩于沃干岭，败之，遂前逼璞营，璞众大溃。胤乘胜追奔，济河，攻拔令居，斩首二万级，进据振武，河西大骇。
现代文：于是率领骑兵三千突袭到达沃干岭的辛岩，辛岩战败，刘胤随即前逼韩璞军营，韩璞兵众大多溃逃，刘胤乘胜追袭败逃的兵众，渡过黄河，攻取了令居，斩首二万级，进而占据振武。河西为之大为惊骇。
English: As a result, he led three thousand cavalrymen to raid Xinyan in Davao Ganling. Xinyan was defeated, and Liu Yinyan immediately forced Han Yu's military camp. Most of Han Yu's soldiers fled. Liu Yinyan took advantage of the victory to pursue the defeated soldiers, crossed the Yellow River, captured Lingju, beheaded twenty thousand, and then occupied Zhenwu. Hexi was greatly shocked.

古文：张阆、辛晏帅其众数万降赵，骏遂失河南之地。
现代文：张阆、辛晏率士众数万人投降前赵，张骏于是失去黄河以南的地域。
English: Zhang Ye and Xin Ye led tens of thousands of soldiers to surrender to Zhao, and Zhang Ye lost the area south of the Yellow River.

古文：庾亮以苏峻在历阳，终为祸乱，欲下诏征之，访于司徒导。
现代文：庾亮认为苏峻在历阳，终将造成祸乱，想下诏征召他进京，为此征徇王导的意见。
English: Xing Liang thought that Su Jun's presence in Liyang would eventually cause a disaster, and wanted to issue an edict to summon him to Beijing. To this end, he sought the opinion of Xing Wangdu.

古文：导曰： 峻猜险，必不奉诏，不若且苞容之。 
现代文：王导说： 苏峻猜疑阴险，必定不会奉诏前来，不如暂且容忍他。 
English: Wang Du said: Su Jun's suspicion is insidious, and he will certainly not come with an order. It is better to tolerate him for the time being.

古文：亮言于朝曰： 峻狼子野心，终必为乱。
现代文：庾亮在朝中说： 苏峻狼子野心，最终必会作乱。
English: Hao Liang said in the morning: Su Jun wolf ambition, will eventually cause chaos.

古文：今日征之，纵不顺命，为祸犹浅；若复经年，不可复制，犹七国之于汉也。 
现代文：今天征召他，纵然他不听从上命，造成的祸乱也还不大。如果再过些年，就无法再制服他，这就如同汉时的七国对朝廷一样。 
English: If he is conscripted today, even if he does not obey the order from above, the disaster caused is still not great. If it takes a few more years, it will no longer be possible to subdue him, just as the Seven Kingdoms of Han Dynasty did to the imperial court.

古文：朝臣无敢难者，独光禄大夫卞壸争之曰： 峻拥强兵，逼近京邑，路不终朝。一旦有变，易为蹉跌，宜深思之！ 
现代文：朝臣无人敢诘难，只有光禄大夫卞壶争辩说： 苏峻拥有强大的军力，又靠近京城，路途用不了一个早上便可到达，一旦发生变乱，容易出差错，应当深思熟虑。 
English: None of the courtiers dared to challenge him, but only Doctor Guanglu argued: Su Jun has a strong military force, and is close to the capital. The road can be reached in less than a morning. In the event of a disturbance, it is easy to make mistakes and should be carefully considered.

古文：亮不从。
现代文：庾亮不听。
English: Tao Liang did not agree with Sun's opinion.

古文：壸知必败，与温峤书曰： 元规召峻意定，此国之大事。
现代文：卞壶知道庾亮必会失败，写信给温峤说： 庾亮征召苏峻的主意已定，这是国家的大事。
English: Knowing that Gong Liang would certainly fail, Gong Jug wrote to Wen Zheng saying: Gong Liang's idea of conscripting Su Jun has been decided. This is an important matter for the country.

古文：峻已出狂意，而召之，是更速其祸也，必纵毒蠚以向朝廷。
现代文：苏峻已表现出骄狂的样子，如果征召他，这是加速祸乱的到来，他必定会挺起毒刺面对朝廷。
English: Su Jun has already shown his arrogance. If he is conscripted, it will speed up the arrival of the calamity. He will certainly stand up and confront the imperial court.

古文：朝廷威虽盛，不知果可擒不；王公亦同此情。
现代文：朝廷的威力虽然强盛，但不知道果真能擒获他否，王导也同有此意。
English: Although the power of the imperial court is strong, it is not known whether he can really be captured, and Wang Du also has the same intention.

古文：吾与之争甚恳切，不能如之何。
现代文：我与庾亮争辩十分恳切，但不能拿他怎么样。
English: I argued very earnestly with Hao Liang, but I couldn't do anything to him.

古文：本出足下以为外援，而今更恨足下在外，不得相与共谏止之，或当相从耳。 
现代文：我本来想让足下在外任官作为外援，现在反而恨足下在外，不能与你一同谏止他，我或许会追从你的。 
English: I had originally wanted to have my foot sent abroad as foreign aid, but now I hate it. I can't stop him with you, I might follow you.

古文：峤亦累书止亮。
现代文：温峤也多次写信劝阻庾亮。
English: Wen Jiabao has also written several times to dissuade Gong Liang.

古文：举朝以为不可，亮皆不听。
现代文：满朝大臣都认为此事不可，庾亮全然不听。
English: All the ministers of the court thought that this was unacceptable, and Huan Liang did not listen at all.

古文：峻闻之，遣司马何仍诣亮曰： 讨贼外任，远近惟命，至于内辅，实非所堪。 
现代文：苏峻听说此事，派司马何仍见庾亮，说： 征讨贼寇，在外任职，无论远近我都唯命是从。至于在朝内辅政，实在不是我能胜任的。 
English: When Su Jun heard about this, he sent Sima He to see if the situation was still clear, saying, "I am willing to obey any order, no matter how far or near it is, when it comes to recruiting thieves and robbers and serving abroad. As for supporting the government within the imperial court, I am really not competent.

古文：亮不许，召北中郎将郭默为后将军、领屯骑校尉，司徒右长史庾冰为吴国内史，皆将兵以备峻。
现代文：庾亮不允许，征召北中郎将郭默为后将军、兼领屯骑校尉，任司徒右长史庾冰为吴国内史，都统领军队防备苏峻。
English: Xing Liang didn't allow it, so he conscripted the Northern Middle Lord Guo Mo to be the rear admiral and the leader of the cavalry, and appointed the Chief of the Right Division Shi Bing to be the governor of Wu, both of whom led the army to defend against Su Jun.

古文：冰，亮之弟也。
现代文：庾冰即庾亮的兄弟。
English: Ice is the brother of snow.

古文：于是下优诏，征峻为大司农，加散骑常侍，位特进，以弟逸代领部曲。
现代文：于是颁下礼遇优厚的诏书，征召苏峻为大司农、授予散骑常侍，赐位特进。让苏峻兄弟苏逸代领属下部曲。
English: As a result, an imperial edict was issued with generous courtesies, summoning Su Junmao to be the grand secretary of farmers, awarding him the status of horseback riding attendant, and giving him a special promotion.

古文：峻上表曰： 昔明皇帝亲执臣手，使臣北讨胡寇。
现代文：苏峻上表说： 昔日明皇帝拉着下臣之手，让我北伐胡寇。
English: Su Jun said on the table: Once upon a time, Emperor Ming took the hand of his vassal and let me go on the Northern Expedition.

古文：今中原未靖，臣何敢即安！
现代文：如今中原尚未平定，我怎敢贪图安逸！
English: Now that the Central Plains have not been pacified, how dare I crave comfort!

古文：乞补青州界一荒郡，以展鹰犬之用。 
现代文：乞求给我青州界内的一个荒远州郡，让我得以施展朝廷鹰犬的作用。 
English: I beg you to give me a desolate county within the borders of Qingzhou, so that I can play the role of the imperial eagle dog.

古文：复不许。
现代文：又不获同意。
English: Again, no consent was given.

古文：峻严装将赴召，犹豫未决。
现代文：苏峻整装准备赴召，但又犹豫不决。
English: Su Jun readied himself for the call-up, but hesitated.

古文：参军任让谓峻曰： 将军求处荒郡而不见许，事势如此，恐无生路，不如勒兵自守。 
现代文：参军任让对苏峻说： 将军您请求处居荒郡都不获允许，事情已发展到这样，恐怕已无生路，不如领兵自守。 
English: Ren Zheng, who joined the army, said to Su Jun: General, your request to live in a barren county is not allowed. Things have developed to such an extent that I am afraid there is no way out. It is better to lead the soldiers to defend themselves.

古文：阜陵令匡术亦劝峻反，峻遂不应命。
现代文：阜陵令匡术也劝苏峻造反，苏峻便不应从诏令。
English: Fu Ling Ling Ling Kuang Shu also advised Su Jun to rebel, and Su Jun should not follow the edict.

古文：温峤闻之，即欲帅众下卫建康，三吴亦欲起义兵；亮并不听，而报峤书曰： 吾忧西陲，过于历阳，足下无过雷池一步也。 
现代文：温峤听说此事，立即想率士众下赴建康防卫，三吴之地也想出动义兵，庾亮都不同意。却写信告诉温峤说： 我对西陲安危的忧虑，要超过对历阳苏峻的忧虑，足下不要越过雷池一步。 
English: Upon hearing of this, Wen Xuan immediately wanted to lead his soldiers to build a defense of Kham, and the land of Sanwu also wanted to mobilise volunteers, but Liang Liang did not agree. However, he wrote to Wen Xuan, saying: "My concern for the safety of Xicheng should exceed my concern for Liyang and Suzun, and I should not step over the lightning pond.

古文：朝廷遣使谕峻，峻曰： 台下云我欲反，岂得活邪！
现代文：朝廷派使者面谕苏峻，苏峻说： 朝廷大臣说我要造反，我哪有活命呢！
English: The imperial court sent an envoy to speak to Su Jun, and Su Jun said: The minister of the imperial court said that I wanted to rebel, but how can I live?

古文：我宁山头望廷尉，不能廷尉望山头。
现代文：我宁肯由山头观望廷尉，不能由朝廷回望山头。
English: I would rather look at the palace from the top of the mountain than look back at the mountain from the palace.

古文：往者国家危如累卵，非我不济；狡兔既死，猎犬宜烹。
现代文：以住国家危如累卵，无我不行。现在狡兔已死，猎犬就该烹食了。
English: The country is in danger, and I can't do without me. Now that the rabbit is dead, it's time for the hound to cook.

古文：但当死报造谋者耳！ 
现代文：我就是死也要向出谋者报仇！ 
English: Even if I die, I will take revenge on the plotters!

古文：峻知祖约怨朝廷，乃遣参军徐会推崇约，请共讨庾亮。
现代文：苏峻知道祖约怨恨朝廷，于是派参军徐会拥戴祖约，请求共同讨伐庾亮。
English: Su Jun knew that Zuyo resented the imperial court, so Xu, who was sent to join the army, would support Zuyo and request a joint crusade against Goryeo.

古文：约大喜，其从子智、衍并劝成之。
现代文：祖约大为高兴，侄子祖智、祖衍也一同劝说促成。
English: ZuYo was very happy, and his nephews ZuZhi and ZuYan also helped to persuade him.

古文：谯国内史桓宣谓智曰： 本以强胡未灭，将戮力讨之。
现代文：谯国内史桓宣对祖智说： 本来因为强大的胡寇未灭，准备同心合力征讨。
English: Domestic historian Kuan Xuan said to Zu Zhi: Originally, because the powerful Huko had not died out, they were ready to work together to fight.

古文：使君若欲为雄霸，何不助国讨峻，则威名自举。
现代文：使君如果想成就雄霸的功业，为何不帮助国家讨伐苏峻，这样威名自然确立。
English: If you want to achieve the cause of hegemony, why not help the country to fight against the Soviet Union, so the prestige is naturally established.

古文：今乃与峻俱反，此安得久乎！ 
现代文：现在却和苏峻一同谋反，这哪能长久呢！ 
English: Now, however, they are plotting a rebellion together with Su Jun. How can this last long?

古文：智不从。
现代文：祖智不听。
English: Zuchi didn't listen.

古文：宣诣约请见，约知其欲谏，拒而不内。
现代文：桓宣到祖约处求见，祖约知道他想劝谏，拒而不见。
English: Kuan Xuan went to the ancestor's place to see him. The ancestor knew that he wanted to persuade him, but refused to see him.

古文：宣遂绝约，不与之同。
现代文：桓宣于是与祖约断绝关系，不和他同流合污。
English: As a result, Kanzen severed ties with his ancestor, refusing to go down the same path as him.

古文：十一月，约遣兄子沛内史涣、女婿淮南太守许柳以兵会峻。
现代文：十一月，祖约派兄长之子、沛内史祖涣，女婿、淮南太守许柳带兵与苏峻会合。
English: In November, Zhu Yu sent his elder brother's son, Pei Neishi Zu Xi, his son-in-law, Huainan's eunuch Xu Liu, and soldiers to meet with Su Jun.

古文：逖妻，柳之姊也，固谏，不从。
现代文：祖逖的妻子是许柳的姐姐，一再劝谏，祖约不听。
English: Zhu Xi's wife was Xu Liu's sister, and she repeatedly urged Zhu Xi not to listen to Zhu Xi.

古文：诏复以卞壸为尚书令、领右卫将军，以会稽内史王舒行扬州刺史事，吴兴太守虞潭督三吴等诸郡军事。
现代文：朝廷下诏重新任命卞壶为尚书令、兼领右卫将军，让会稽内史王舒代行扬州刺史职务，吴兴太守虞潭督察三吴等郡的军事。
English: The Imperial Court issued an edict to reappoint Zou Jiao as Shang Shuling and concurrently as the leader of the Right Guard General, to have the internal auditor Wang Shu perform the duties of Yangzhou's secretary, and to have Wu Xingta guard Yu Tan and inspect the military of Sam Wu and other counties.

古文：尚书左丞孔坦、司徒司马丹杨陶回言于王导，请 及峻未至，急断阜陵，守江西当利诸口，彼少我众，一战决矣。
现代文：尚书左丞孔坦、司徒司马丹杨人陶回向王导进言，请求 乘苏峻未到之时，急速截断阜陵的通路，把守长江以西当利等路口，敌寡我众，一战即可决胜。
English: Shang Shuzhu Zuoxing (尚書左丞), Kong Tan (孔坦) and Szeto Sima Dan (司徒司馬丹), Yang Rintao (杨人陶) returned to Wang Du for further advice, requesting that when Su Jun (乘苏峻) did not arrive, they should quickly cut off the access to the Fu Ling Mausoleum and guard the junctions such as Dangli (当利) to the west of the Yangtze River. We were outnumbered and could win a decisive victory in a single battle.

古文：若峻未来，可往逼其城。
现代文：如果苏峻还未到，可以进军威逼其城。
English: If Su Jun has not yet arrived, you can march into the city to force it.

古文：今不先往，峻必先至，峻至则人心危骇，难与战矣。
现代文：如果现在不先行前往，苏峻必会先行到达，苏峻一旦到达，那么人心危惧惊骇，就难以与他交战了。
English: If we don't go ahead now, Su Jun will surely arrive first. Once Su Jun arrives, people will be afraid and shocked, and it will be difficult to fight him.

古文：此时不可失也。 
现代文：这种时机不能失去。 
English: This is an opportunity that must not be lost.

古文：导然之，庾亮不从。
现代文：王导认为很对，庾亮却不听从。
English: Wang Du thought it was quite right, but Yan Liang didn't listen.

古文：十二月，辛亥，苏峻使其将韩晃、张健等袭陷姑孰，取盐米，亮方悔之。
现代文：十二月，辛亥，苏峻派部将韩晃、张健等人攻陷姑孰，夺取食盐粮米，庾亮这才后悔。
English: In December, Xinhai, Su Jun faction led Han Xing, Zhang Jian and others to invade Guzheng, seize salt grain rice, and regret it.

古文：壬子，彭城王雄、章武王休叛奔峻。
现代文：壬子，彭城王司马雄、章武王司马休背叛朝廷，投奔苏峻。
English: Jinzi, Pengcheng Wang Sima Xiong, Zhangwu Wang Sima Xiu betrayed the imperial court and joined Su Jun.

古文：雄，释之子也。
现代文：司马雄是司马释的儿子。
English: Sima Xiong is the son of Sima Xie.

古文：庚申，京师戒严，假庾亮节，都督征讨诸军事；以左卫将军赵胤为历阳太守，使左将军司马流将兵据慈湖以拒峻。
现代文：庚申，京城戒严，授庾亮符节，都督征讨军事事务，任左卫将军赵胤为历阳太守，让左将军司马流领兵据守慈湖抵御苏峻。
English: Goshun, the capital was placed under martial law, the Lantern Festival was held, and the governor was summoned to discuss military affairs. The left guard general Zhao Yan was appointed as the governor of Liyang, and the left general Sima Liu led the troops to defend Cihu against Su Jun.

古文：以前射声校尉刘超为左卫将军，侍中褚翜典征讨军事。
现代文：又任前射声校尉刘超为左卫将军，侍中褚执掌征讨军事。
English: Liu Chao, a former gunnery lieutenant, was also appointed as the left guard general, and the chamberlain was in charge of military recruitment.

古文：亮使弟翼以白衣领数百人备石头。
现代文：庾亮让兄弟庾翼以平民身份统领数百人守备石头。
English: Zou Liang let his brother Zou Ying lead hundreds of people to guard the stone as a civilian.

古文：丙寅，徙琅邪王昱为会稽王，吴王岳为琅邪王。
现代文：丙寅，成帝改封琅邪王司马昱为会稽王，改封吴王司马岳为琅邪王。
English: Cui Yin, Emperor Cheng changed the title of the Evil King Sima Yu to the King of the Association, and changed the title of the Wu King Sima Yue to the Evil King.

古文：宣城内史桓彝欲起兵以赴朝廷，其长史裨惠以郡兵寡弱，山民易扰，谓宜且按甲以待之。
现代文：宣城内史桓彝想起兵赴朝廷之难，他的长史裨惠认为郡内兵员既少且弱，山地居民经常骚扰，应当暂且按兵不动等待时机。
English: Xuancheng's internal historian, Huanqian, recalled the difficulties of sending soldiers to the imperial court. His long-term benefit was that the soldiers in the county were few and weak, often harassed by mountain residents, and should temporarily wait for the opportunity.

古文：彝厉色曰：  见无礼于其君者，若鹰鹯之逐鸟雀。 
现代文：桓彝脸色严厉地说：  见到对君王无礼的人，要像鹰追逐鸟雀一样对待他。 
English: "If you see someone who is disrespectful to the king, you should treat him like an eagle chasing a sparrow," said Kanen sternly.

古文：今社稷危逼，义无宴安。 
现代文：现在国家危急紧迫，按道义不能安处。 
English: Now the country is in a critical and urgent situation, and it is morally impossible to be complacent.

古文：辛未，彝进屯芜湖。
现代文：辛未，桓彝进兵屯驻芜湖。
English: Xinwei, Huanqin soldiers stationed in Wuhu.

古文：韩晃击破之，因进攻宣城，彝退保广德，晃大掠诸县而还。
现代文：韩晃击败桓彝，乘势进攻宣城。桓彝退走保守广德，韩晃大肆劫掠各县，然后还军。
English: Han Xing defeated Huan Yao and took advantage of the situation to attack Xuancheng. Huan Yao retreated to the conservative Guangde, Han Xing looted the counties, and then returned to the army.

古文：徐州刺史郗鉴欲帅所领赴难，诏以北寇，不许。
现代文：徐州刺史郗鉴想率领所部赴国难，朝廷下诏以北边寇贼不宁为由，不同意。
English: Xuzhou Zhishihong led the party to go to the country, but the imperial court disagreed, citing the reluctance of the northern bandits.

古文：是岁，后赵中山公虎击代王纥那，战于句注陉北；纥那兵败，徙都大宁以避之。
现代文：这一年，后赵中山公石虎攻击代王拓跋纥那，双方战于句注山陉北，拓跋纥那战败，迁都至大宁以避敌祸。
English: In this year, after Zhao Zhongshan's stone tiger attacked the king of Tuobao, the two sides fought in the north of the mountain, Tuobao was defeated, and the capital was moved to Daning to avoid the enemy's misfortune.

古文：代王郁律之子翳槐居于其舅贺兰部，纥那遣使求之，贺兰大人蔼头拥护不遣。
现代文：代王拓跋郁律之子拓跋翳槐居住在舅父的贺兰部，拓跋纥那派使者要他，贺兰大人蔼头卫护着不让走。
English: The son of the reigning king, Tuoba Yu Lu, lived in his uncle's Horan section. Tuoba Yu Lu sent an envoy to ask for him, but Horan was too kind to let him go.

古文：纥那与宇文部共击蔼头，不克。
现代文：拓跋纥那和宇文部共同攻击蔼头，不能取胜。
English: Tuoba Jina and the Ministry of Education and Culture jointly attacked Aizhong, but could not win.

