古文：晋时，东平冯孝将为广州太守。
现代文：晋朝时，东平有一个人叫冯孝，将要去任广州太守。
English: During the Jin Dynasty, there was a man in Dongping named Feng Xiao, who was going to be the governor of Guangzhou.

古文：儿名马子，年二十余，独卧厩中，夜梦见一女子，年十八九，言： 我是前太守北海徐玄方女，不幸早亡。亡来今已四年，为鬼所枉杀。
现代文：他的儿子名字叫马子，年龄二十来岁。有一天马子独自在马棚里睡着了，夜间在梦中见到一个女子，年龄十八九岁。那女子说： 我是前任太守北海人徐玄方的女儿，不幸早早夭折，死亡至今已经有四年了，是鬼把我冤杀的。
English: His son's name was Ma Zi. He was in his twenties. One day, Ma Zi fell asleep alone in his stable. During the night, in his dream, he saw a woman, aged eighteen or nineteen. The woman said, "I am the daughter of the former governor of the North Sea, Xu Xuanfang. Unfortunately, I died prematurely. It has been four years since my death. A ghost killed me unjustly."

古文：案生录，当八十余，听我更生，要当有依马子乃得生活，又应为君妻。
现代文：按阴间生死簿的记录，我应该活到八十来岁。如果我听凭生死簿的记录再活过来，就要依靠遇到一个叫马子的人才能生还，还要成为这个人的妻子。
English: According to the records of the book of life and death in the underworld, I should live to the age of eighty. If I were to live again according to the records of the book of life and death, I would have to meet a man named Ma Zi in order to survive, and I would have to become this man's wife.

古文：能从所委，见救活不？ 马子答曰： 可尔。 乃与马子克期当出。
现代文：你能够答应我的托付，把我给救活吗？ 马子回答道： 可以。 
English: Can you accept my commission and save my life? Ma Zi replied, "Yes."

古文：至期日，床前地，头发正与地平，令人扫去，则愈分明，始悟是所梦见者。
现代文：于是。
English: And so it happened.

古文：遂屏除左右人，便渐渐额出，次头面出，又次肩项形体顿出。
现代文：她就与马子定下了把她救出阴间的日期。到了商定的那天，马子在床前发现有头发正好嵌在地平面里，就叫人来扫去，头发却越扫越分明，他才顿时想起这是自己所梦见的那个女子的头发。
English: She set a date with Ma Zi to rescue her from the underworld. On the agreed day, Ma Zi found a hair in front of the bed just embedded in the ground. He asked someone to sweep it away, but the hair became clearer and clearer. He suddenly remembered that it was the hair of the woman he had dreamed about.

古文：马子便令坐对榻上，陈说语言，奇妙非常。
现代文：于是他就叫左右的人离开房间，地上就渐渐地显露出了那女子的前额，随后显露出头部面容，接着又显露出双肩、颈项和整个身躯。
English: So he ordered everyone to leave the room, and gradually the woman's forehead appeared on the floor, then her head, then her shoulders, her neck and her entire body.

古文：遂与马子寝息。每诫云： 我尚虚尔。 即问何时得出，答曰： 出当得本命生日，尚未至。 遂往厩中，言语声音，人皆闻之。
现代文：马子就让她在对面的矮床上坐着，那女子诉说的话语，非常神奇美妙。于是那女子就同马子一起睡觉休息，还反复告诫马子说： 我现在还只是一个虚幻的人。 马子随即问她什么时候能够走出阴间，那女子回答说： 要等到我的生日那天才能出来，现在还没有到时间。 于是那女子就到马棚里去了，她说话的声音，马子的家人都听见了。
English: So the woman slept and rested with the horse, and repeatedly admonished the horse, saying, "I am still only an imaginary person." The horse immediately asked her when she would be able to come out of the underworld, and the woman replied, "I can't come out until my birthday, and it's not time yet." So the woman went to the stable, and her voice was heard by the horse's family.

古文：女计生日至，乃具教马子出己养之方法，语毕辞去。
现代文：那女子计算自己的生日到了，就把自己如何出来和养护的方法全部教给马子，交代完毕之后就辞别而去。
English: When the woman calculated that her birthday had arrived, she taught Ma Zi how to get out and how to take care of herself. After the exchange, she left.

古文：马子从其言，至日，以丹雄鸡一只，黍饭一盘，清酒一升，醊其丧前，去厩十余步。
现代文：马子依照那女子的交代，到了女子的生日这天，用一只红公鸡、一盘黄黏小米饭、一升清酒，在她埋葬的坟前也就是离马棚十来步的地方祭祀。
English: According to the woman's account, on the day of the woman's birthday, Ma Zi sacrificed a red rooster, a plate of yellow glutinous millet rice, and a liter of sake in front of the grave where she was buried, which was about ten steps from the stable.

古文：祭讫，掘棺出，开视，女身体貌全如故。
现代文：祭祀仪式完成后，挖出棺材，打开一看那女子的身体容貌完全和生前一样。
English: After the sacrificial ceremony was completed, the coffin was dug out, and when it was opened, the woman's physical appearance was exactly the same as when she was alive.

古文：徐徐抱出，著毡帐中，唯心下微暖，口有气息。
现代文：马子慢慢地把她抱出来，安置在毡帐中，此时她的心口下有微弱的体温，嘴里有了气息。
English: Ma Zi slowly took her out and placed her in the cradle, at this time she had a slight body temperature under her heart and breath in her mouth.

古文：令婢四人守养护之。常以青羊乳汁沥其两眼，渐渐能开，口能咽粥，既而能语。
现代文：马子叫四个婢女守护和养护那女子，时常用青羊的乳汁滴在她的双眼上，她的眼睛就渐渐地可以睁开了，嘴里也能喝稀粥了，进而能够说话了。
English: Ma Zi called four maidservants to watch over and protect the woman. They used to drip the milk of green sheep on her eyes. Gradually, her eyes were able to open, and she was able to drink gruel in her mouth, and then she was able to speak.

古文：二百日中，持杖起行，一期之后，颜色肌肤气力悉复如常，乃遣报徐氏，上下尽来。
现代文：这样经过了二百天，那女子就能够手持拐杖起来行走了。经过一年之后，那女子的脸色、肌肤、气力全都恢复了正常。
English: After 200 days, the woman was able to walk with crutches, and after a year, her complexion, skin and strength had all returned to normal.

古文：选吉日下礼，聘为夫妇。生二儿一女：长男字元庆，永嘉初，为秘书郎中；小男字敬度，作太傅掾；女适济南刘子彦，征士延世之孙云。
现代文：于是马子就派家人把情况告知徐家，徐家上下所有人全都来到马子家，选择良辰吉日下了聘礼定了亲，两人结为了夫妻，他们生育了两个儿子和一个女儿，长子名叫元庆，在永嘉初年官至秘书郎中；次子名叫敬度，官至太傅掾；女儿嫁给了济南的刘子彦，据说他是不愿意应朝廷征召去当官的征士刘延世的孙子。
English: As a result, Ma Zi sent his family members to inform the Xu family of the situation. Everyone in the Xu family came to Ma Zi's house, chose Liang Chenji, and the two became husband and wife. They gave birth to two sons and a daughter. The eldest son, named Yuan Qing, was the first-year official and secretary in Yongjia; the second son was named Jing Du, and the official was Taifu Yao; the daughter married Liu Zihang of Jinan, who was said to be the grandson of the conscript Liu Yanshi, who did not want to be conscripted by the imperial court.

古文：干宝字令升，其先新蔡人。
现代文：干宝，字令升，其祖先是新蔡县人。
English: Gan Bao, his ancestor was from Xin Cai County.

古文：父莹，有嬖妾。
现代文：他的父亲干莹，有一个很宠爱的小妾。
English: His father, Gan Ying, had a favorite concubine.

古文：母至妒，宝父葬时，因生推婢著藏中。
现代文：他的母亲对此非常嫉妒，在干宝的父亲去世下葬的时候，因此而把这个小妾推进墓坑活埋了。
English: His mother was so jealous that when Ganbao's father died and was buried, she pushed the concubine into the grave and buried her alive.

古文：宝兄弟年小，不之审也。
现代文：干宝和兄弟们那时年纪都很小，没有留意到这事。
English: Gan Bao and his brothers were too young at the time to notice.

古文：经十年而母丧，开墓，见其妾伏棺上，衣服如生。
现代文：过了十年之后干宝的母亲去世，打开父亲的坟墓合葬进去，却看见父亲的小妾伏在棺材上，所穿的衣服还与生前一样。
English: After ten years, Gan Bao's mother died. She opened her father's grave and buried him, but saw her father's concubine lying on the coffin, still wearing the same clothes as before.

古文：就视犹暖，渐渐有气息。舆还家，终日而苏。
现代文：干宝上前探视发觉她的身子还有体温，渐渐地又有了气息，就用车子把她运回家，过了一整天就苏醒了过来。
English: Gan Bao went to visit her and found that her body still had body temperature and gradually regained her breath. He transported her home by car, and she woke up after a whole day.

古文：云宝父常致饮食，与之寝接，恩情如生。
现代文：小妾说在坟墓里干宝的父亲经常给她饮食吃，与她一起睡觉拥抱，恩爱之情和生前一样。
English: The concubine said that in the grave, Ganbao's father often gave her food and drink, slept with her, hugged her, and the affection was the same as before his death.

古文：家中吉凶，辄语之，校之悉验。
现代文：家中所发生的吉利和不吉利的事情，小妾都一一说得出来，检验起来都很灵验。
English: The concubine was able to tell every single one of the auspicious and inauspicious things that happened at home, and was very good at checking them.

古文：平复数年后，方卒。
现代文：小妾平稳康复了数年后才去世。
English: The concubine made a steady recovery for several years before passing away.

古文：宝兄尝病气绝，积日不冷。后遂寤，云见天地间鬼神事，如梦觉，不自知死。
现代文：干宝的哥哥也曾患病气绝身亡，但身体多日不凉，后来又活过来了，他说看到了天地之间鬼神的事情。他就像从睡梦中醒来，自己不知道曾经死过。
English: Ganbao's brother also died of illness, but his body did not feel cold for many days, and later he came back to life. He said that he saw things between heaven and earth. It was as if he woke up from a dream and did not know that he had died.

古文：襄阳李除，中时气死。
现代文：襄阳郡有个叫李除的人，染上了时气病死去了。
English: In Xiangyang County, there was a man named Li Jie, who contracted and died of jet lag.

古文：其父守尸。至于三更，崛然起坐，抟妇臂上金钏甚遽。
现代文：他的妻子为他守灵，到了三更时分，他突然坐了起来，飞快地夺取妻子手臂上的金手镯。
English: His wife kept vigil for him, and at three o'clock he suddenly sat up and quickly snatched the gold bracelet from his wife's arm.

古文：父因助脱，既手执之，还死。
现代文：妻子因此急忙脱掉手镯，虽然他手握着了手镯，但又死过去了。
English: As a result, his wife hastily took off the handcuffs, and although he held the handcuffs, he died again.

古文：妇伺察之，至晓，心中更暖，渐渐得苏。
现代文：妻子守候观察丈夫，刚到天亮时，丈夫的心口变得暖和起来，渐渐地得以苏醒。
English: The wife waited to observe her husband, and just before dawn, her husband's heart became warm and he gradually woke up.

古文：既活，云： 为吏将去，比伴甚多，见有行货得免者，乃许吏金钏。
现代文：丈夫既已活了过来，对妻子说： 我被鬼卒带去阴间，那里与我同样的人很多。我看见有的人贿赂鬼卒得以免死，就许诺把金手镯送给鬼卒。
English: After the husband had come back to life, he said to his wife: "I was taken to the underworld by the devil's pawn, where there are many people like me. I saw that some people bribed the devil's pawn to avoid death, so I promised to give the gold bracelet to the devil's pawn.

古文：吏令还，故归取以与吏。
现代文：鬼卒答应我生还，所以我就回来拿金手镯送给了鬼卒。
English: The devil promised to let me live, so I came back to get the gold bracelet and gave it to the devil.

古文：吏得钏，便放令还。
现代文：鬼卒得到了金手镯，就把我放了回来。
English: When the devil got the golden handcuffs, he let me back in.

古文：见吏取钏去。 后数日，不知犹在妇衣内。
现代文：我看见鬼卒得了金手镯后就离开了。 以后的几天里，丈夫不知道金手镯还在妻子的衣袋里。
English: I saw the ghost get the gold bracelet and leave, and for the next few days, the husband didn't know the gold bracelet was still in his wife's pocket.

古文：妇不敢复著，依事咒埋。
现代文：但妻子不敢再戴上它，就依照丈夫讲述的事发誓把金手镯埋掉了。
English: But the wife did not dare to put it on again, and she swore to bury the gold bracelet according to the story told by her husband.

古文：发棺视之，女体已生肉，姿颜如故，右脚有履，左脚无也。自尔之后遂死，肉烂不得生矣。 万恨之心，当复何言！ 涕泣而别。
现代文：郑茂患病死亡，已经殓完了尸体放进了棺材，还没有下葬。忽然他的妻子以及家人都梦见郑茂在说： 我还不应该死亡，只不过是偶然胸闷憋断了气而已，可以打开棺材把我弄出来，把烧热的车釭用来热敷我的头顶。 家人照着做了之后，他果然就活过来了。
English: Zheng Mao died of illness. His body had already been embalmed and placed in a coffin, but had not yet been buried. Suddenly, his wife and family all dreamed of Zheng Mao saying, "I shouldn't be dead yet, it's just that I accidentally choked to death. You can open the coffin to get me out, and use the hot chariot to apply heat to the top of my head." After his family did the same, he did indeed come back to life.

古文：魏时，寻阳县北山中蛮人有术，能使人化作虎。毛色爪牙，悉如真虎。
现代文：魏朝时期，寻阳县北山中的土著人有一种法术，能把人变成老虎，其皮毛、花纹、爪子和虎牙，都与真老虎一样。
English: During the Wei Dynasty, the aborigines of Beishanzhong, Huanyang County, had a spell that could turn people into tigers. Their fur, patterns, claws and fangs were all the same as real tigers.

古文：乡人周眕有一奴，使入山伐薪。
现代文：乡里一个叫周畛的人有一个奴仆，被主人派进山中打柴。
English: In the countryside, a man named Zhou Qi had a servant who was sent into the mountains by his master to collect firewood.

古文：奴有妇及妹，亦与俱行。
现代文：这个奴仆有妻子和一个妹妹，也与他一同进山去。
English: The servant had a wife and a sister, who also went into the hills with him.

古文：既至山，奴语二人云： 汝且上高树，视我所为。 如其言。
现代文：进入山中，奴仆就对她们两人说： 你们暂且爬到高大的树上去，看我所做的行为。 
English: When they came to the mountain, the servant said to the two women, "Climb up the tree to see what I have done."

古文：既而入草，须臾，见一大黄斑虎从草中出，奋迅吼唤，甚可畏怖。二人大骇。
现代文：两人就按照他的话爬上了树，奴仆随即钻进了草丛之中。不一会儿，只见一只大黄斑纹老虎从草丛中窜了出来，凶猛快捷大声吼啸，让人非常恐惧害怕，她们两人惊恐万状。
English: The two of them climbed up the tree as he had told them, and the servant immediately went into the bushes. After a while, they saw a big yellow-striped tiger burst out of the bushes, roaring loudly and ferociously. It was very frightening, and the two of them were terrified.

古文：良久还草中，少时，复还为人，语二人云： 归家慎勿道。 后遂向等辈说之。
现代文：老虎过了好一会儿才回到草丛中去，不一会变回人形。奴仆对她们两人说： 回到家中切不可对别人说这事。 但后来她们还是向同辈人说出了这事。
English: After a while, the tiger went back into the grass and soon turned into a doll. The servants said to the two of them, "When you go back home, you must not tell anyone about this," but later they still told their peers about it.

古文：周寻得知，乃以醇酒饮之，令熟醉。
现代文：周畛很快就知道了，就用烈酒叫奴仆喝，使奴仆喝得烂醉。
English: Zhou Yao soon found out, so he used strong liquor to make the slaves drink, and they became very drunk.

古文：使人解其衣服及身体，事事详悉，了无他异。
现代文：周畛叫人解开奴仆的衣服直至赤身裸体，对其所有的衣服和身体各部位仔细察看，没有发现一点异常。
English: Zhou Yao ordered the servant's clothes to be unzipped until he was naked, and all of his clothes and body parts were carefully examined, and nothing unusual was found.

古文：唯于髻发中得一纸，画作大虎，虎边有符，周密取录之。
现代文：唯一在奴仆的发髻中发现一张纸，上面画有老虎，老虎旁边有符咒，周畛偷偷拿去抄录下来。
English: The only thing that was found was a piece of paper in the servant's bun, with a tiger drawn on it and a charm next to the tiger, which Zhou Ye secretly took and copied down.

古文：奴既醒，唤问之。
现代文：奴仆醒来后，周畛就叫来盘问。
English: After the servant woke up, Zhou Ye called him in for questioning.

古文：见事已露，遂具说本末云： 先尝于蛮中告籴，有蛮师云有此术，乃以三尺布，数升米糈，一赤雄鸡，一升酒，授得此法。 
现代文：奴仆见事情已经暴露，于是才说出了来龙去脉： 以前我曾经在土著人中去买粮食，有个土著法师说有这种法术。于是我就用三尺布、数升祭神的精米、一只红公鸡、一升酒，换得他传授了这种法术。 
English: When the slave saw that the matter had been exposed, he told the story: In the past, I went to buy grain from the indigenous people, and an indigenous magician said that there was such a spell. So I exchanged three feet of cloth, several liters of polished rice, a red rooster, and a liter of wine for him to teach him this spell.

古文：魏清河宋士宗母，以黄初中夏天于浴室里浴，遣家中子女阖户。
现代文：魏朝时期清河国人宋士宗的母亲，于黄初年间的一个夏天在浴室里洗澡，叫家中的儿女们把门窗都关上。
English: The mother of Song Shizong, a citizen of Qinghe during the Wei Dynasty, was taking a bath in the bathroom one summer during the first year of the Yellow Emperor, and asked her children to close the doors and windows.

古文：家人于壁穿中，窥见浴盆中有大鼋。
现代文：家人通过墙壁上的小孔窥视，看见浴盆的水中有一只很大的鳖。
English: Peering through a small hole in the wall, the family saw a large toad in the water of the tub.

古文：遂开户，大小悉入，了不与人相承当。先著银钗犹在头上。
现代文：于是就打开房门，全家老少一同走进房间，只看见浴盆中的母亲已完全不是人的模样，只是原先的银钗还插戴在头上。
English: Then he opened the door, and the whole family, old and young, entered the room together, only to see that the mother in the tub was no longer human at all, only the original silver ingot was still stuck on her head.

古文：相与守之涕泣，无可奈何。
现代文：全家人你看我我看你守着浴盆哭泣，不知道怎么办。
English: The whole family You look at me I look at you holding the tub and crying, not knowing what to do.

古文：出外去，甚驶，逐之不可及，便入水。
现代文：变成大鳖的母亲爬到屋外去，走得很急速，全家人都追赶不上，大鳖就进入了河水中。
English: The mother, who had turned into a great egret, crawled outside and walked very quickly. The whole family couldn't keep up, and the great egret ended up in the river.

古文：后数日，忽还。巡行舍宅，如平生，了无所言而去。
现代文：几天之后，大鳖忽然回来，围绕着房屋住宅边走边看，就像往常一样，什么话都没有说就离开了。
English: A few days later, the stork suddenly returned, walked around the house, looked at it and, as usual, left without saying anything.

古文：时人谓士宗应行丧，士宗以母形虽变，而生理尚存，竟不治丧。
现代文：当时的人们都说宋士宗应该举办丧礼，而宋士宗以母亲身形虽然改变但生命还存在为由，就是不举办丧礼。
English: At that time, people said that Song Shizong should hold a funeral, but Song Shizong did not hold a funeral on the grounds that although his mother's body had changed, she was still alive.

古文：与江夏黄母相似。
现代文：这件事与江夏郡一个黄姓人的母亲很相似。
English: This case is very similar to that of the mother of a person surnamed Huang in Jiangxia County.

