古文：陈亮，字同父，婺州永康人。
现代文：陈亮字同父，婺州永康人。
English: Chen Liangzhe's father, Yongkang people from Zhangzhou.

古文：生而目光有芒，为人才气超迈，喜谈兵，论议风生，下笔数千言立就。
现代文：陈亮出生时，目有光芒，成人后，才气超凡。陈亮喜欢谈论兵事，且思维敏捷，论议风生，数千言的文章可一挥而就。
English: When Chen Liang was born, his eyes were bright, and when he became an adult, his talent was extraordinary. Chen Liang likes to talk about military affairs, and his thinking is quick, his discussion style is lively, and he can write thousands of words in a single stroke.

古文：尝考古人用兵成败之迹，著《酌古论》。
现代文：陈亮曾经用心考察古人用兵成败之得失，并著有《酌古论》。
English: Chen Liang once attentively examined the gains and losses of the ancients in the use of soldiers, and wrote "Ancient Dispute."

古文：郡守周葵得之，相与论难，奇之，曰： 他日国士也。 请为上客。
现代文：郡守周葵读此书后，主动与陈亮商讨，从而发现了陈亮的才华，他预言不久的将来，陈亮定为国士，于是将陈亮请为府中上客。
English: After reading this book, County Governor Zhou Kwai took the initiative to discuss with Chen Liang, thus discovering Chen Liang's talent. He predicted that in the near future, Chen Liang would be designated as a national hero, so he invited Chen Liang to be a guest in the government.

古文：及葵为执政，朝士白事，必指令揖亮，因得交一时豪俊，尽其议论。
现代文：后来周葵担任执政，凡遇朝士禀事，必令其拜会陈亮，陈亮因得结交一时之俊杰，并可以淋漓尽致地发表自己的议论。
English: Later, when Zhou Kwai was in power, whenever there was an anecdote about a courtier, he would have him visit Chen Liang. Chen Liang was able to make a good friend for a while, and he could express his own arguments vividly.

古文：因授以《中庸》、《大学》，曰： 读此可精性命之说。 遂受而尽心焉。
现代文：周葵还将《中庸》、《大学》荐与陈亮，说： 读此书，可以精通有关性命之学说。 陈亮接受此书后，经过研究而达到极高的造诣。
English: Zhou Kui also recommended "Middle Way" and "University" to Chen Liang, saying, "Reading this book, you can master the theory of life."

古文：隆兴初，与金人约和，天下忻然幸得苏息，独亮持不可。
现代文：隆兴初年，宋与金议和，天下之人虽有悲伤之情，但也只好无奈地认可这个事实。
English: In the early years of prosperity, Song and Jin discussed peace. Although people all over the world were sad, they had no choice but to recognize this fact.

古文：婺州方以解头荐，因上《中兴五论》，奏入，不报。已而退修于家，学者多归之，益力学著书者十年。
现代文：然而，只有陈亮不以为然。他在获乡试第一名后，向朝廷上《中兴五论》，未受重视，之后，陈亮退修于家，许多学士都聚其门下。他在家中讲学著书达十年之久。
English: However, only Chen Liang was unconvinced. After he won the first place in the township examination, he submitted "Five Opinions on ZTE" to the court, which was not taken seriously. After that, Chen Liang retired to his home, and many bachelors gathered under his door. He lectured and wrote books at home for ten years.

古文：先是，亮尝圜视钱塘，喟然叹曰： 城可灌尔！ 盖以地下于西湖也。
现代文：起初，陈亮曾环视钱塘江水，并发出感叹 ：城可灌也。 因为钱塘之地下水与西湖相连。
English: At first, Chen Liang looked around the water of Qiantang River and sighed, "The city can also be flooded, because the groundwater of Qiantang is connected to the West Lake."

古文：至是，当淳熙五年，孝宗即位盖十七年矣。亮更名同，诣阙上书曰：
现代文：淳熙五年，孝宗即位已有十七年之久，陈亮改名陈同，并赴朝廷上书曰：
English: In the fifth year of Chunxi, seventeen years after the enthronement of Emperor Xiaozong, Chen Liang changed his name to Chen Tong, and went to the imperial court to write:

古文：臣惟中国天地之正气也，天命所钟也，人心所会也，衣冠礼乐所萃也，百代帝王之所相承也。
现代文： 我认为，中原地区是天地集正气孕育而成的，是天命钟爱、人心所向的地方，是典章制度礼乐文化汇集的地方，历朝帝王借以代代相传。
English: I believe that the Central Plains region is the birthplace of heaven and earth, the birthplace of righteousness, the beloved place of fate, the place to which people's hearts are drawn, and the place where the ceremonial system and ritual music culture are gathered. The emperors throughout the ages have passed it down from generation to generation.

古文：挈中国衣冠礼乐而寓之偏方，虽天命人心犹有所系，然岂以是为可久安而无事也！
现代文：虽然把中原地区丰富的典章制度和礼乐文化简单地移植到偏远的蛮荒之地，从表面上看天命与人心似乎有所依托了，难道这样一来，就真的可以长期相安无事了吗？
English: Although the rich ceremonial system and ritual music culture of the Central Plains have been simply transplanted to a remote, wild place, on the surface it seems that the fate of the heavens and the hearts of the people are supported, can this really lead to long-term peace and tranquility?

古文：天地之正气郁遏而久不得骋，必将有所发泄，而天命人心，固非偏方所可久系也。
现代文：天地的正气，因为遭到遏制而长久得不到施展，一定会找到合适的机会将要发挥其威力；而天命和人心，本来就不能长久地委系在偏远的蛮荒之地。
English: The righteous energy of heaven and earth, which has been restrained and has not been able to exert itself for a long time, will surely find a suitable opportunity to exert its power; and the destiny of heaven and earth and the hearts of the people cannot be bound for a long time in a remote wilderness.

古文：国家二百年太平之基，三代之所无也；二圣北狩之痛，汉、唐之所未有也。
现代文： 国家拥有二百年太平之基础，这是三代所不及的，徽、钦二帝被俘之痛，也是汉、唐所不曾有的。
English: The country has the foundation of two hundred years of peace, which is unmatched by three generations. The pain of Emperor Hui and Emperor Qin being captured is also unprecedented in the Han Dynasty and the Tang Dynasty.

古文：方南渡之初，君臣上下痛心疾首，誓不与之俱生，卒能以奔败之余，而胜百战之敌。
现代文：遥想南渡之初，君臣上下皆痛心疾首同仇敌忾，誓不与金贼共存，因而能够于奔败之际而战胜强悍之敌。
English: At the beginning of his journey to the south, it is said that all the princes and courtiers swore not to co-exist with the gold thieves, and thus they were able to defeat the powerful enemy when they were on the verge of defeat.

古文：及秦桧倡邪议以沮之，忠臣义士斥死南方，而天下之气惰矣。
现代文：至秦桧倡邪议以阻抗金行动，大批忠臣义士屈死南方，而天下之刚气因此而怠惰了。
English: At the time of Qin Hui's instigation of evil thoughts with the action of resisting money, a large number of loyal subjects and righteous people succumbed to the south, and the world's rigid spirit became lazy as a result.

古文：三十年之余，虽西北流寓皆抱孙长息于东南，而君父之大仇一切不复关念，自非海陵送死淮南，亦不知兵戈为何事也。
现代文：三十多年来，虽然从西北、中原迁移东南的人们尚在苟且为生，但对君父之大仇也已淡忘了。自非金海陵送死淮南，也不知道兵戈为何等事物。
English: For more than 30 years, although the people who migrated from the northwest and the Central Plains to the southeast are still struggling to make a living, they have also forgotten the great enmity against the king's father. Since Jin Hailing did not send death to Huainan, they do not know what the war was about.

古文：况望其愤故国之耻，而相率以发一矢哉！
现代文：更不谈期望他们能愤故国之耻，而同心协力执戈放箭了。
English: Not to mention the expectation that they would be outraged by the shame of their homeland, and that they would work together to carry out their mission.

古文：丙午、丁未之变，距今尚以为远，而海陵之祸，盖陛下即位之前一年也。
现代文： 如果说靖康之耻业已久远的话，那么，海陵之祸则发生在陛下即位前一年。
English: If the shame of Jingkang has been around for a long time, then the Hailing disaster occurred a year before His Majesty's accession to the throne.

古文：独陛下奋不自顾，志于殄灭，而天下之人安然如无事。
现代文：只有陛下一个奋不自顾，发誓要重振国威，但天下之人安然自得，若无其事，且发一些奇谈怪论，认为陛下好大喜功，不计后果。
English: Only His Majesty took matters into his own hands and vowed to revive the national prestige, but people all over the world were complacent, if nothing happened, and made some bizarre talk, thinking that His Majesty was very pleased with the achievement and did not care about the consequences.

古文：时方口议腹非，以陛下为喜功名而不恤后患，虽陛下亦不能以崇高之势而独胜之，隐忍以至于今，又十有七年矣。昔春秋时，君臣父子相戕杀之祸，举一世皆安之。
现代文：在这种情势下，作为皇帝陛下也不能以崇高之势去力挽狂澜，只得隐忍于今，其间经历了十七年。 春秋时期，君臣父子之间有相互戕杀之祸，但整个社会尚为安定。
English: Under such circumstances, His Majesty, as the emperor, could not use his sublime power to turn the tide, but had to endure the present situation, during which he has experienced seventeen years. During the Spring and Autumn Period, there was a scourge of fighting between princes and ministers, but the whole society was still stable.

古文：而孔子独以为三纲既绝，则人道遂为禽兽，皇皇奔走，义不能以一朝安。然卒于无所遇，而发其志于《春秋》之书，犹能以惧乱臣贼子。
现代文：但孔子独以为，三纲既已不复存在，则人也异化而为禽兽了。孔子为此奔走呼号，却始终找不到共鸣之声，因而立志写《春秋》，希望以此书扼制乱臣贼子。
English: However, Confucius himself thought that since the three principles no longer existed, people had become alienated and turned into beasts. Confucius ran around shouting for this, but he never found a resonant voice, so he decided to write "Spring and Autumn," hoping to use this book to strangle the ruffian thief.

古文：今举一世而忘君父之大仇，此岂人道所可安乎？
现代文：现今社会淡忘君父之仇，此非长治久安之道。
English: In today's society, forgetting your father's revenge is not the way to long-term peace and stability.

古文：使学者知学孔子之道，当道陛下以有为，决不沮陛下以苟安也。
现代文：应使学者学习孔子之道，陛下应有所作为，而不是苟安无为。
English: Scholars should be made to learn the way of Confucius, and His Majesty should do something instead of doing nothing.

古文：南师之不出，于今几年矣，岂无一豪杰之能自奋哉？
现代文：南师之不出击，于今有多年了，难道是没有一位豪杰能勇于担此重任吗？
English: It has been many years since the South Division did not attack, is there not a hero who can be brave enough to take on this important task?

古文：其势必有时而发泄矣。
现代文：不是的。因为豪杰要有所表现也必须选择一定的时机。
English: No. Because if a great player wants to perform, he has to choose the right moment.

古文：苟国家不能起而承之，必将有承之者矣。
现代文：如果国家不能主动奋起抗敌，一旦时机成熟，必将由豪杰自觉起来抗敌。
English: If the country cannot take the initiative to rise up against the enemy, once the time is ripe, it will be the heroes who will consciously rise up against the enemy.

古文：不可恃衣冠礼乐之旧，祖宗积累之深，以为天命人心可以安坐而久系也。 皇天无亲，惟德是辅。民心无常，惟惠之怀 。
现代文：朝廷不可仗恃有衣冠礼乐之文明，祖宗积累之深基，就以为可以久赖天命人心而居安无事。 皇天无亲，惟德是辅，民心无常，惟惠之怀 。
English: The imperial court should not rely on the civilization of clothing, ceremonial music, and the deep foundation accumulated by the ancestors, thinking that it can rely on the will of heaven for a long time and live in peace. The emperor has no relatives, but virtue is supplementary, the people's heart is impermanent, but the heart of benefit.

古文：自三代圣人皆知其为甚可畏也。
现代文：自三代以来的圣人都非常清楚这个道理。
English: The sages since three generations have been very clear about this.

古文：春秋之末，齐、晋、秦、楚皆衰，吴、越起于小邦，遂伯诸侯。
现代文： 春秋之末，齐、晋、秦、楚皆衰落了，而吴、越之国兴于小邦，一度处于主宰其他诸侯的地位。
English: At the end of the Spring and Autumn Period, Qi, Jin, Qin and Chu all declined, while Wu and Yue flourished as small states and once dominated other states.

古文：黄池之会，孔子所甚痛也，可以明中国之无人矣。
现代文：黄池之会，孔子感到甚为痛心，因为它似乎表明中原国家无能人。
English: Confucius was very saddened by the Huangchi meeting, because it seemed to indicate that the Central Plains countries were incompetent.

古文：此今世儒者之所未讲也。
现代文：这是现今儒者所不谈的事情。
English: This is something that today's Confucians do not talk about.

古文：今金源之植根既久，不可以一举而遂灭；国家之大势未张，不可以一朝而大举。
现代文：现在金朝根基已固，我们不可能轻易将其消灭，而且国家也没有在这方面做充分的准备，也不可轻率地大举出击。
English: Now that the foundation of the Kim dynasty is solid, we cannot easily destroy it, and the country has not made sufficient preparations in this regard, nor can we rashly launch a large-scale attack.

古文：而人情皆便于通和者，劝陛下积财养兵，以待时也。
现代文：劝陛下积财养兵，以待时机。
English: Advise His Majesty to accumulate wealth and raise soldiers to wait for the right time.

古文：臣以为通和者，所以成上下之苟安，而为妄庸两售之地，宜其为人情之所甚便也。
现代文：臣以为，通和之约，造成上下之人的苟安心态，两次割地之举，也为人们所首肯。
English: The vassal thought that the peace treaty caused the uneasy state of the people above and below, and the move to cut the land twice was also approved by the people.

古文：自和好之成十有余年，凡今日之指画方略者，他日将用之以坐筹也；今日之击球射雕者，他日将用之以决胜也。府库充满，无非财也；介胄鲜明，无非兵也。使兵端一开，则其迹败矣。
现代文：宋金和议，至今已有十多年，凡今日之筹划方略者，他日因老迈只能运筹帷幄，而今日纨绔少年，他日将用以决战疆场，府库充盈，无非财也，介胄鲜明，无非兵也，假使发生战争，我方必败无疑。
English: Song and Jin have been discussing peace for more than ten years. Today's planners are too old to do anything but plan. But today's young people will be used to fight the decisive battle. The government treasury is full of money, and there is no shortage of talent and soldiers. If there is a war, our side will undoubtedly lose.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：而朝廷方幸一旦之无事，庸愚龌龊之人皆得以守格令、行文书，以奉陛下之使令，而陛下亦幸其易制而无他也。徒使度外之士摈弃而不得骋，日月蹉跎而老将至矣。
现代文：因为人才只有使用才知道是否有能力。坐谈能力是不足以依恃的。军备到用时才知够不够，平常装满府库不足仗恃。陛下此时庆幸无事，庸俗吏员都可以当官号令，执行陛下使命，而陛下也认为这些人好使唤，致使许多有才之士不能施展其才能，随着岁月流逝，他们就将老而无奈了。
English: Because talent can only be used to know whether it is capable. The ability to sit and talk is not enough. Armaments only know enough when they are used, usually filling the treasury is not enough. At this time, His Majesty is fortunate to have nothing to do, and vulgar officials can be used to carry out His Majesty's mission, and His Majesty also believes that these people are easy to use, so that many talented people can not exert their talents, and as the years pass, they will be old and helpless.

古文：臣故曰：通和者，所以成上下之苟安，而为妄庸两售之地也。
现代文：臣因此说：通和之约，造成上下之人的苟安心态，也使割地之举变得顺理成章。
English: Therefore, the minister said: the agreement of reconciliation has caused the uneasy state of the people above and below, and has also made the move to divide the land become a matter of course.

古文：东晋百年之间，南北未尝通和也，故其臣东西驰骋，多可用之才。
现代文： 东晋百年之间，南北之间不曾通和议，所以其大臣将领能东西驰骋，涌现了许多可用之才。
English: In the East Jin Dynasty, there was no peace between the north and the south for a hundred years. Therefore, its ministers were able to travel from east to west, and many useful talents emerged.

古文：今和好一不通，朝野之论常如敌兵之在境，惟恐其不得和也，虽陛下亦不得而不和矣。
现代文：现在，如果不通和好，人们总有敌兵压境的感觉，因而唯恐通和被破坏。即便是陛下，也不得不顺应这种潮流。
English: Now, if there is no reconciliation, people always have the feeling that the enemy is on the verge of conquering, so they are afraid of being conquered and destroyed. Even His Majesty has to conform to this trend.

古文：昔者金人草居野处，往来无常，能使人不知所备，而兵无日不可出也。
现代文：过去金人草居野处，往来无常，使我方不知如何戒备。它可随时出兵骚扰我方。
English: In the past, when the golden grass was living in the field, the traffic was erratic, so that we did not know how to be alert. It could send troops to harass us at any time.

古文：今也城郭宫室、政教号令，一切不异于中国，点兵聚粮，文移往反，动涉岁月。
现代文：现在情况不同了，金朝城郭宫室，政教号令皆同于中国，点兵聚粮，文书往返，动则需相当长的时间，若一方有警，也能引起三方骚动。
English: Now the situation is different. The castle and palace of the Kim dynasty, the political and religious orders are all the same as in China. It takes a long time to move troops, gather grain, and send and receive documents. If one side has police, it can also cause turmoil in the three sides.

古文：胜之不可保，纣之百克而卒无后。 晋、楚之弭兵于宋也，子罕以为： 兵所以威不轨而昭文德也，圣人以兴，乱人以废，废兴存亡昏明之术，皆兵之由也。
现代文：国君还时常训戒士兵说：胜利不可常保，纣王虽战功卓著，但因其忘乎所以，最终也落得丧命无后的下场。 后来，晋、楚休战于宋国，子罕认为 ：战争能威镇邪恶而维护文德，圣人能很好地利用它，而乱臣总是因惧怕而废弃它，这一兴一废之间，能展示出存亡昏明之心术。如一味舍弃战争，就是一种毁道和欺蒙诸侯的行为。 
English: The sovereign also often admonished the soldiers, saying, "Victory cannot be permanently guaranteed. Although the war effort was outstanding, the warlord, because of his forgetfulness, eventually ended up with no chance of survival." Later, when Jin and Chu made a truce in Song, Zi Han thought, "War can overcome evil and maintain morality. A sage can make good use of it, but a ruffian always abandons it out of fear. Between this success and failure, it can show the art of surviving death and darkness. If one gives up war, it is an act of destroying the way and deceiving the princes.

古文：而求去之，是以诬道蔽诸侯也。 夫人心之不可惰，兵威之不可废，故虽成、康太平，犹有所谓四征不庭、张皇六师者，此李沆所以深不愿真宗皇帝之与辽和亲也。况南北角立之时，而废兵以惰人心，使之安于忘君父之大仇，而置中国于度外，徒以便妄庸之人，则执事者之失策亦甚矣。
现代文：人心是不能骄惰的，军威是不可废弃的，故虽成、康拥有太平之世，仍保留有所谓四征不庭、张皇六师。这也就是李沆极力反对真宗与辽议和的原因所在。况且现今南北成抗衡之势，如废兵以惰人心，使人们安于忘记君父之大仇，而置中原大地于不顾，就只能投合昏庸之人的意愿，执政者之失策将因此而更加严重。
English: The human heart cannot be proud, and military power cannot be discarded. Therefore, although Chengdu and Kandy have a peaceful world, they still retain the so-called four-sentences-and-six-divisions. This is the reason why Li Qiye vigorously opposed the peace of Zhenzong and Liao Wei. Moreover, today's north-south rivalry, such as the abolition of soldiers with a lazy heart, so that people can forget the great enemy of the prince's father, and ignore the Central Plains, can only meet the wishes of the deluded, and the mistakes of the rulers will be more serious.

古文：陛下何不明大义而慨然与金绝也？
现代文：陛下为什么不能倡明大义，而断然与金决裂呢？
English: Why can't His Majesty advocate the greater good and break with Kim?

古文：贬损乘舆，却御正殿，痛自克责，誓必复仇，以励群臣，以振天下之气，以动中原之心，虽未出兵，而人心不敢惰矣。东西驰骋，而人才出矣。盈虚相补，而兵食见矣。
现代文： 贬损车驾，坐正殿，陛下当痛自悔责，发誓复仇，以此激励群臣，振作天下之士气，鼓舞中原之人心。如此一来，虽未出兵，而人心不敢自惰了；东征西讨，就会涌现大批人才，盈虚相辅，军粮就有了保证。
English: His majesty repented bitterly and swore to take revenge for the derogatory car ride and sitting in the main hall, in order to inspire the courtiers, boost the morale of the world, and encourage the hearts of the people in the Central Plains. In this way, although the troops have not been sent out, the hearts of the people will not dare to be lazy; the eastward and westward campaigns will bring forth a large number of talents, complement each other, and the military food will be guaranteed.

古文：是云合响应之势，而非可安坐所致也。
现代文：那些狂妄之辞就会不攻自破，懦庸之人就会不斥而自退。有才之人纷纷而出，只待陛下起用。云合响应之形势，非安坐可以得来。
English: Those arrogant words will not be broken, and cowardly people will not be repelled and retreat. Talented people will come out one after another, only to be used by His Majesty. The situation of clouded response can be obtained without sitting down.

古文：臣请为陛下陈国家立国之本末，而开今日大有为之略；论天下形势之消长，而决今日大有为之机，惟陛下幸听之。
现代文：臣请为陛下陈说国家立国之本末，且策划今日大有为之方略，论述天下形势之消长，而提出今日大有为之机谋，愿陛下细听之。
English: Minister, please present for His Majesty the fundamentals of the founding of the country, and plan today's grand strategy, discuss the ups and downs of the situation in the world, and propose today's grand strategy. May His Majesty listen to it carefully.

古文：唐自肃、代以后，上失其柄，藩镇自相雄长，擅其土地人民，用其甲兵财赋，官爵惟其所命，而人才亦各尽心于其所事，卒以成君弱臣强、正统数易之祸。
现代文： 唐朝自肃宗、代宗之后，朝廷渐渐失去权柄，而藩镇割据势力大长，他们专有土地和人民，自用甲兵财赋。官爵由其自命，致使许多人才尽心为其效命，终于造成一种君弱臣强、正统数易之祸乱。
English: After the Tang Dynasty's Suizong and Daizong, the imperial court gradually lost its power, while the provinces and towns gained more and more power. They had their own land and people, and used their own armored soldiers and wealth. The officials and nobles were appointed by themselves, causing many talented people to serve them wholeheartedly. Finally, it caused a kind of calamity of a weak ruler and strong subjects, and the orthodoxy was changed several times.

古文：艺祖皇帝一兴，而四方次第平定，藩镇拱手以趋约束，使列郡各得自达于京师。以京官权知，三年一易，财归于漕司，而兵各归于郡。
现代文：宋太祖当朝后，四方诸国被先后平定，节度使也自愿接受朝廷统制。各州郡也直接受制于京师，以京官权知其事，且规定三年一换官，地方财税，统收于漕司，而兵士各归于郡县。
English: After the reign of Emperor Song Taizu, the countries in the four directions were successively pacified, and the imperial envoys also voluntarily accepted the control system of the imperial court. The states and counties were also directly controlled by the Beijing division, with the authority of the Beijing official knowing the matter, and it was stipulated that the officials would be changed every three years, and the local taxes and fees would be collected in the division, and the soldiers would each belong to the county.

古文：朝廷以一纸下郡国，如臂之使指，无有留难。
现代文：朝廷以一纸之令下于郡国，如臂之使指，莫敢有违。
English: The imperial court issued an order on a piece of paper to the county, as if it were an imposition. Don't dare to go against it.

古文：自筦库微职，必命于朝廷，而天下之势一矣。
现代文：凡小官微职，概由朝廷任命，天下之势遂归一统。
English: All minor officials and minor posts were appointed by the imperial court, and the power of the country was finally unified.

古文：故京师尝宿重兵以为固，而郡国亦各有禁军，无非天子所以自守其地也。
现代文：京师重地，以重兵把守，郡国也各有禁军，此乃天子使其自守其地的方法。
English: Beijing is heavily fortified and heavily guarded, and each county and province has its own forbidden army. This is God's way of letting them defend themselves.

古文：兵皆天子之兵，财皆天子之财，官皆天子之官，民皆天子之民，纪纲总摄，法令明备，郡县不得以一事自专也。
现代文：兵皆天子之兵，财皆天子之财，官皆天子之官，民皆天子之民，纲纪总揽，法令明备，郡县不得以一事自专。
English: Soldiers are the soldiers of the Son of Heaven, wealth is the wealth of the Son of Heaven, officials are the officials of the Son of Heaven, and people are the people of the Son of Heaven. Discipline is comprehensive, laws and regulations are clear, and counties must not be self-sufficient in one thing.

古文：士以尺度而取，官以资格而进，不求度外之奇才，不慕绝世之隽功。
现代文：士以标准录取，官以资格晋升，不求意外之奇才，不慕绝世之奇功。
English: Scholars are admitted on the basis of standards, officials are promoted on the basis of qualifications, and they do not seek unexpected talents, nor do they yearn for extraordinary feats.

古文：天子蚤夜忧勤于其上，以义理廉耻婴士大夫之心，以仁义公恕厚斯民之生，举天下皆由于规矩准绳之中，而二百年太平之基从此而立。
现代文：天子昼夜忧勤于其上，以义礼廉耻正士大夫之心，以仁义公恕厚百姓之生，全天下皆处于规矩准绳之中，因而才奠定了二百年太平之基。
English: The Son of Heaven worked on it day and night, with the heart of a righteous, honest, and upright man, and with the heart of a benevolent, honest, and righteous man, and with the heart of a righteous, honest, and upright man, and with the heart of a righteous, honest, and upright man, and with the heart of a righteous, honest, and upright man, and with the heart of a righteous, honest, and upright man, and with the heart of a righteous, honest, and upright man, and with the heart of a righteous, honest, and upright man, and with the heart of a righteous, honest, and upright man, and with the heart of a righteous, honest,

古文：然契丹遂得以猖狂恣睢，与中国抗衡，俨然为南北两朝，而头目手足浑然无别。
现代文： 然而契丹遂得以猖狂放肆，敢与中国抗衡，俨然是南北两朝，而无主从之区别。
English: However, the Khitans were finally able to be reckless and dare to compete with China, as if there were two dynasties, North and South, with no difference between the ruler and the ruled.

古文：微澶渊一战，则中国之势浸微，根本虽厚而不可立矣。
现代文：小小澶渊一战，中国之势力被削弱，根本虽厚而不可稳立。
English: In the First World War, China's power was weakened, and although it was strong, it was not stable.

古文：故庆历增币之事，富弼以为朝廷之大耻，而终身不敢自论其劳。
现代文：因此，庆历年间增加对契丹的岁币一事，富弼认为是朝廷之奇耻大辱，因而终身不敢自论功劳。
English: Therefore, the fact that the annual tribute to Khitan was increased during the celebration of the calendar was considered by Fuxi to be a great disgrace to the imperial court, so he did not dare to talk about his merits for life.

古文：盖契丹征令，是主上之操也；天子供贡，是臣下之礼也。
现代文：因为契丹下征令，是主子的威风，天子供贡，乃臣下之礼节也。
English: Because the command under Khitan is the authority of the master, the heavenly tribute, but also the etiquette of the vassal.

古文：契丹之所以卒胜中国者，其积有渐也。
现代文：契丹之所以能取胜中国，是其力量长期积蓄的结果。
English: The reason why the Khitan was able to defeat China is the result of its long-term accumulation of power.

古文：立国之初，其势固必至此。
现代文：它在立国之初，势力的发展就显现出征兆。
English: At the beginning of the founding of the country, it showed signs of the development of its power.

古文：故我祖宗常严庙堂而尊大臣，宽郡县而重守令。
现代文：为此，我祖宗皇帝常严庙堂而尊重大臣，常宽郡县而重信守令。
English: For this reason, my ancestor Emperor Jang Yan respected the ministers, and Jang Kuan respected the orders.

古文：于文法之内，未尝折困天下之富商巨室；于格律之外，有以容奖天下之英伟奇杰，皆所以助立国之势，而为不虞之备也。
现代文：在法度之内，不曾为难天下之富商大贾，在常规之外，大力褒奖天下之英俊豪杰，这些措施有助于造成立国之大势，能够防备内外忧患的出现。
English: Within the bounds of the law, it was not difficult for the world's richest businessmen to rise to the top, and outside the norm, the world's handsome heroes were vigorously praised. These measures helped create the momentum for the founding of the country and could prevent the emergence of internal and external troubles.

古文：庆历诸臣亦尝愤中国之势不振矣，而其大要，则使群臣争进其说，更法易令，而庙堂轻矣；严按察之权，邀功生事，而郡县又轻矣。
现代文： 庆历年间，诸大臣也曾愤中国之大势不振，然而，其新政举措使群臣争相发表自己的观点，法令也为之变易，这样一来，朝廷就失去了威严；另外，加重按察使的权力，使之邀功生事，便又降减了郡县的地位。
English: During the Qingli years, ministers were also angry at China's sluggish momentum. However, his New Deal measures caused ministers to compete to express their own views, and the laws were also changed. As a result, the imperial court lost its majesty. In addition, increasing the power of inspectors and making them make contributions reduced the status of counties.

古文：岂惟于立国之势无所助，又从而朘削之，虽微章得象、陈执中以排沮其事，亦安得而不自沮哉！独其破去旧例，以不次用人，而劝农桑，务宽大，为有合于因革之宜，而其大要已非矣。
现代文：虽然章得象、陈执中等人对之有所阻止，但因他们本身无所主张，无所建树，也难免遭他人的排挤与弹劾。庆历新政中，有关破除旧例、不拘一格选用人才、劝农桑、务宽大等措施有合理的因素，但其主要的改革思路和措施是错误的。
English: Although people such as Zhang Dexiang and Chen Zixu have prevented it, because they themselves have nothing to advocate and nothing to build, they are also inevitably excluded and impeached by others. In the celebration of the New Deal, there are reasonable factors related to measures such as abolishing old practices, selecting talents in an eclectic manner, persuading farmers, and being lenient, but its main reform ideas and measures are wrong.

古文：此所以不能洗契丹平视中国之耻，而卒发神宗皇帝之大愤也。
现代文：这也就是它不能洗契丹平视中国之耻，枉费仁宗皇帝一片苦心的原因所在。
English: This is also the reason why it could not wash the shame of Qidan's looking down on China, and why Emperor Renzong's efforts were in vain.

古文：王安石以正法度之说，首合圣意，而其实则欲籍天下之兵尽归于朝廷，别行教阅以为强也；括郡县之利尽入于朝廷，别行封桩以为富也。
现代文： 王安石以正法度之说，迎合圣意，但其变法的实质是要收天下之兵尽归朝廷，另行教练以达强兵之目的；是要括郡县之利尽入朝廷，别行度算以达富国之目的。
English: Wang Anshi said that it was to meet the holy will, but the essence of his change was to collect all the soldiers in the world and return them to the imperial court, and to train others to achieve the goal of strong soldiers; it was to collect all the profits from counties and counties and bring them to the imperial court, and to achieve the goal of a rich country.

古文：青苗之政，惟恐富民之不困也；均输之法，惟恐商贾之不折也。
现代文：其青苗之法，唯恐富民之不困乏；均输之法，唯恐商贾之不损折。
English: The method of its young seedlings, lest the rich people are not poor; the method of losing all, lest the merchants are not lost.

古文：罪无大小，动辄兴狱，而士大夫缄口畏罪矣。西、北两边致使内臣经画，而豪杰耻于为役矣。徒使神宗皇帝见兵财之数既多，锐然南北征伐，卒乖圣意，而天下之势实未尝振也。
现代文：罪无大小，动则兴狱，士大夫因畏罪只好缄口不言；西北两边军政皆委派其亲信统辖，豪杰英伟因而耻于受其役使，王安石的聚敛措施使神宗皇帝误以为兵财之数巨大，遂毅然决定南北征伐，结果不仅圣意不能实现，天下之势也毫无振兴。
English: No crime is too big or too small, the punishment is imprisonment, and the magistrate has no choice but to hold his tongue for fear of committing a crime; the military and political leaders on both sides of the northwest have appointed their cronies to govern, and the heroes and heroes are ashamed to be served by them. Wang Anshi's concentration measures made Emperor Shenzong mistakenly believe that the number of soldiers and wealth was huge, so he resolutely decided to invade the north and south. As a result, not only could the sacred will not be realized, but there was no revitalization of the situation in the world.

古文：彼盖不知朝廷立国之势，正患文为之太密，事权之太分，郡县太轻于下而委琐不足恃，兵财太关于上而重迟不易举。
现代文：王安石的错误在于：他不知道朝廷之所以没有立国之势，症结在于文法太密，事权太分，郡县太轻于下而委琐不足依恃，兵财太集于上而重迟不易举发。
English: Wang Anshi's mistake was that he did not know that the reason why the imperial court did not have the power to establish the country was that the grammar was too dense, the power was too great, the counties were too light compared to the lower levels, and there were not enough subordinates, and the military wealth was too concentrated at the top, and it was too late to raise it.

古文：祖宗惟用前四者以助其势，而安石竭之不遗余力，不知立国之本末者，真不足以谋国也。
现代文：神宗误用上述四点以助其势，而王安石也竭之不遗余力。所以说，不知立国之本末者，真不足以谋国也。
English: Shenzong misused the above four points to help its momentum, and Wang Anshi also spared no effort. Therefore, those who do not know the basics of founding a country are really not enough to seek a country.

古文：元祐、绍圣一反一复，而卒为金人侵侮之资，尚何望其振中国以威四裔哉？
现代文：元、绍圣一反一复，正好为金人侵侮于我提供了帮助和机会，哪里还能指望其能振兴中国以威慑四方呢？
English: Yuan and Shaosheng have repeatedly provided help and opportunities for the Kim people to abuse me. How can we expect them to revitalize China by deterring the Quartet?

古文：南渡以来，大抵遵祖宗之旧，虽微有因革增损，不足为轻重有无。如赵鼎诸臣，固已不究变通之理，况秦桧尽取而沮毁之，忍耻事仇，饰太平于一隅以为欺，其罪可胜诛哉！
现代文： 南渡以来，朝廷大抵遵循祖宗之旧法和遗训，虽小有因革增损，但无关举足轻重，如赵鼎等人本来就不懂变通之理，秦桧更无耻事仇，矫饰太平，欺瞒君臣，其罪可杀。
English: Since arriving in the south, the imperial court has mostly followed the old laws and teachings of the ancestors. Although there are some minor changes, they are not significant. For example, Zhao Ding and others do not understand the principle of flexibility. Qin Hui is even more shameless in his vendettas, pretensions of peace, and deception of princes and ministers. His crime is murderable.

古文：陛下愤王业之屈于一隅，励志复仇，不免籍天下之兵以为强，括郡县之利以为富。
现代文：陛下愤王业之屈辱于东南一隅，厉志复仇，难免想凭借天下之兵以为强盛，想搜括郡县之利以达富裕。
English: His Majesty was angry at the humiliation of Wangye in the southeast corner, and he wanted to take revenge. It was inevitable that he wanted to be strong by relying on the soldiers of the world, and he wanted to collect the profits of counties and counties to become rich.

古文：加惠百姓，而富人无五年之积；不重征税，而大商无巨万之藏，国势日以困竭。
现代文：加惠百姓，而使富人无五年之积蓄，不重征税，而使大商无巨万之家藏，国势也日益困竭。
English: In addition to benefiting the people, the rich do not have five years of savings, do not pay heavy taxes, and the big businessmen do not have huge amounts of money, and the national situation is also increasingly exhausted.

古文：臣恐尺籍之兵，府库之财，不足以支一旦之用也。
现代文：臣担心尺籍之兵，府库之财，不足以支危急之用。
English: The vassal worried that the soldiers of the rank and file and the wealth of the prefectural treasury would not be enough to support the emergency.

古文：陛下蚤朝晏罢，冀中兴日月之功，而以绳墨取人，以文法涖事；圣断裁制中外，而大臣充位，胥吏坐行条令，而百司逃责，人才日以阘茸。
现代文：陛下日思夜想，期达中兴日月之功，以纯墨取士，以文法处事，圣断裁制于朝野，而大臣空有其名，胥吏只知坐行条令，官僚机构相互推诿责任，致使人才变得日益卑微和卑鄙。
English: His Majesty thinks day and night, hoping to achieve the greatest success in the future. He uses pure ink to select officials, and grammar to handle affairs. Decision-making is controlled by the court and the field, while ministers have empty names, bureaucrats only know how to make rules, and bureaucracies shirk their responsibilities. As a result, talent has become increasingly lowly and despicable.

古文：臣恐程文之士，资格之官，不足当度外之用也。
现代文：臣以为靠文取士，依资格升官，不足以受重用。
English: The vassal thought that it was not enough to rely on the literati to be promoted according to their qualifications.

古文：艺祖经画天下之大略，太宗已不能尽用，今其遗意，岂无望于陛下也！陛下苟推原其意而行之，可以开社稷数百年之基，而况于复故物乎！不然，维持之具既穷，臣恐祖宗之积累亦不足恃也。
现代文：当初太祖制定天下之大政方针，到太宗时已不能全然应用。陛下如能依太祖之意行事，即可开社稷数百年之基础，如果不是这样，便难以维持社稷国家，臣担心祖宗留下的积累也要失去了。
English: In the beginning, the great-grandfather established the world's major political policies, but by the time of the Emperor, they could not be fully applied. If His Majesty can act in accordance with the wishes of the great-grandfather, he can lay the foundation for hundreds of years. If this is not the case, it will be difficult to maintain the socialist country, and he is worried that the accumulation left by his ancestors will be lost.

古文：陛下试令臣毕陈于前，则今日大有为之略必知所处矣。
现代文：陛下如听臣之建议，则能知晓今日大有为的方略了。
English: Your Majesty, if you listen to the advice of your ministers, will know how to make today a great success.

古文：夫吴、蜀天地之偏气，钱塘又吴之一隅。当唐之衰，钱镠以闾巷之雄，起王其地，自以不能独立，常朝事中国以为重。及我宋受命，禘尽以其家入京师，而自献其土。
现代文： 五代时的吴国与蜀国皆禀天地之偏气，钱塘更为吴国之一角，唐朝衰落时，钱艫在此地潜心经略，终于建立了吴越国，因为他认为吴国较小，不可能完全独立，所以常朝事于中原大国，宋朝建立后，其子钱亻叔以其家入开封，并主动献出国土。
English: During the Five Dynasties, both the State of Wu and the State of Shu were the most powerful countries in the world. Qiantang was a corner of the State of Wu. During the decline of the Tang Dynasty, Qianlong concentrated on the management of this place and finally established the State of Wuyue. Because he thought that the State of Wu was small and could not be completely independent, he often dealt with the Central Plains countries. After the establishment of the Song Dynasty, his son Qianlong's uncle entered Kaifeng with his family and took the initiative to donate land.

古文：故钱塘终始五代，被兵最少，而二百年之间，人物日以繁盛，遂甲于东南。
现代文：因此，钱塘之地在五代时遭兵难最少，因而在宋立国后的二百年间，此地的人物日益繁盛，终于独领东南之风骚。
English: Therefore, the land of Qiantang suffered the least military difficulties in the Five Dynasties, so in the two hundred years after the founding of the Song Dynasty, the people in this place became increasingly prosperous, and finally dominated the Southeastern style.

古文：及建炎、绍兴之间，为岳飞所驻之地，当时论者，固已疑其不足以张形势而事恢复矣。
现代文：到了建炎、绍兴年间，钱塘曾为六军所驻之地。当时就有人认为钱塘之地不足以扩张形势而图恢复大业，而秦桧却于此扩充官僚机构以展礼乐。
English: During the Jianyan and Shaoxing eras, Qiantang was once the location of the Sixth Army. At that time, some people thought that Qiantang was not enough to expand the situation and tried to resume the great cause, but Qin Hui expanded the bureaucracy here to perform ceremonial music.

古文：秦桧又从而备百司庶府，以讲礼乐于其中，其风俗固已华靡，士大夫又从而治园囿台榭，以乐其生于干戈之余，上下晏安，而钱塘为乐国矣。一隙之地，本不足以容万乘，而镇压且五十年，山川之气盖亦发泄而无余矣。
现代文：其实，钱塘这个地方的风俗本来就崇尚华靡，加之士大夫再建园囿台榭，以乐其生于干戈之际，上下晏安，终使钱塘成为小小乐园。弹丸之地本不足以容万乘，而坐镇且五十年，所以钱塘的山川之气业已消耗殆尽。
English: In fact, the customs of this place in Qiantang were originally advocating pomp and circumstance. Dr. Kazushi rebuilt the garden and the pagoda, with the pleasure of being born on the occasion of the battle, and finally made Qiantang a small paradise. The land of the projectile was not enough to accommodate 10,000 people, but it has been in the town for 50 years, so the mountains and rivers of Qiantang have been exhausted.

古文：故谷粟、桑麻、丝枲之利，岁耗于一岁，禽兽、鱼鳖、草木之生，日微于一日，而上下不以为异也。
现代文：其谷粟、桑麻丝之利，一年不如一年，禽兽、鱼鳖、草木之生，一天不如一天，而上下之人皆不以为异。
English: The yield of corn millet and mulberry silk is not as good as one year, and the growth of animals, fish, and plants is not as good as one day, and people at all levels are no different.

古文：公卿将相，大抵多江、浙、闽、蜀之人，而人才亦日以凡下，场屋之士以十万数，而文墨小异，已足以称雄于其间矣。
现代文：公卿将相大多为江、浙、闽、蜀之人，而人才也日益枯竭。官场之士以十万数，而文墨小有成就也足以称雄其间。
English: Most of the court nobles are from Jiangsu, Zhejiang, Fujian and Shandong, and talent is also increasingly depleted. There are hundreds of thousands of officials, and minor achievements in literature and art are enough to be outstanding among them.

古文：陛下据钱塘已耗之气，用闽、浙日衰之士，而欲鼓东南习安脆弱之众，北向以争中原，臣是以知其难也。
现代文：陛下据钱塘已衰之气，用闽、浙日衰之士，而想鼓动东南苟安脆弱之众，向北恢复中原，这将是十分困难的事情。
English: It will be very difficult for His Majesty to encourage the vulnerable people in southeastern Guo'an to restore the Central Plains to the north by using the weak people in Qiantang and the weak people in Zhejiang and Japan.

古文：荆、襄之地，在春秋时，楚用以虎视齐、晋，而齐、晋不能屈也。
现代文： 荆州、襄阳之地，在春秋时，楚国据此以虎视齐国和晋国，而齐、晋不能屈服。
English: In the land of Jingzhou and Yangyang, during the Spring and Autumn Period, the State of Chu regarded the State of Qi and the State of Jin as tigers, and the State of Qi and the State of Jin could not yield.

古文：及战国之际，独能与秦争帝。
现代文：及战国之际，独能与秦国争雄。
English: On the occasion of the Warring States period, it was able to compete with Qin.

古文：其后三百余年，而光武起于南阳，同时共事，往往多南阳故人。
现代文：其后三百年，光武帝兴起于南阳，与之共事的大多为南阳故人。
English: Three hundred years later, Emperor Guangwu arose in Nanyang, and most of those who worked with him were the deceased people of Nanyang.

古文：又二百余年，遂为三国交据之地，诸葛亮由此起辅先主，荆楚之士从之如云，而汉氏赖以复存于蜀；周瑜、鲁肃、吕蒙、陆逊、陆抗、邓艾、羊祜皆以其地显名。
现代文：又过了二百多年，荆、襄遂为三国交据之地。诸葛亮由此起辅刘备，荆楚之士从者如云，而刘备赖以复存于蜀；周瑜、鲁肃、吕蒙、陆逊、陆抗、邓艾、羊祜等人皆以其地闻名。
English: More than two hundred years later, Jing and Xiang finally became the place where the three countries signed a treaty. Zhuge Liang supplemented Liu Bei from this, the men of Jing Chu followed him like a cloud, and Liu Bei Lai survived in Shu; Zhou Yu, Lu Su, Liumeng, Lu Xun, Lu Anti, Deng Ai, Yang Xuan and others are all famous for their land.

古文：又百余年，而晋氏南渡，荆、雍常雄于东南，而东南往往倚以为强，梁竟以此代齐。
现代文：再过百余年，晋氏南渡，荆、襄常雄于东南，而东南也往往倚之以为强，萧梁竟以此地而替代齐国。
English: More than a hundred years later, when the Jin clan went to the south, Jing and Xiang Changxiong went to the southeast, and the southeast was often thought to be stronger, but Xiao Liang actually used this place to replace Qi.

古文：及其气发泄无余，而隋、唐以来，遂为偏方下州。
现代文：待荆、襄之气消耗无余时，隋、唐以来它便成为偏方下州。
English: Since the Sui and Tang Dynasties, it has become the provincial capital of Shimonoseki when the energy of Jing and Xiang is exhausted.

古文：五代之际，高氏独常臣事诸国。
现代文：五代之际，高氏独常臣事诸国。
English: At the time of the fifth generation, the Gao clan was the most powerful in the country.

古文：况至于建炎、绍兴之际，群盗出没于其间，而被祸尤极，以迄于今，虽南北分画交据，往往又置于不足用，民食无所从出，而兵不可由此而进。议者或以为忧，而不知其势之足用也。
现代文：本朝二百年之间，荆、襄降为荒落之邦。北连许、汝二州，人烟稀少，土产卑薄，有名之人可谓寥若晨星。建炎、绍兴之际，群盗出没其间，而横遭践踏，到如今，此地虽为宋、金分划交据，但往往不被看重。因为粮食不能由此产生，军队也不可据此而推进，议者也许以此为忧，而不知其势足可利用。
English: Between the two hundred years of this dynasty, Jing and Xiang fell into a state of desolation. Bei Lian Xu and Yu Er Zhou are sparsely populated, the local products are humble, and famous people are as rare as the morning star. At the time of Jian Yan and Shaoxing, the bandits came out of nowhere and were trampled on. To this day, although this place is a Song and gold award certificate, it is often not valued. Because food cannot be produced from it, and the army cannot advance according to it, the negotiators may be worried about this, and do not know if they can use their full potential.

古文：其地虽要为偏方，然未有偏方之气五六百年而不发泄者，况其东通吴会，西连巴蜀，南极湖湘，北控关洛，左右伸缩，皆足以为进取之机。
现代文：臣以为，荆、襄之地虽为偏方，然而，没有偏方之气五、六百年都不发泄的情况，何况其东通吴地，西连巴蜀，南及湖湘，北控关洛，左右伸缩，皆足以为进取之用。
English: The minister thought that although the Jing and Xiang regions were deviating, they would not vent their deviating energy for five or six hundred years, not to mention that the eastward passage of Wudi, the westward passage of Bashu, the south and Hunan, the northward control of Guanluo, and the left and right expansion and contraction were all sufficient for the purpose of advancement.

古文：今诚能开垦其地，洗濯其人，以发泄其气而用之，使足以接关洛之气，则可以争衡于中国矣，是亦形势消长之常数也。
现代文：现今如能开垦其地，洗新其人，以发泄其气而用之，使足以接关洛之气，则可以争衡于中国了。荆、襄之地是形势消长的关键所在。
English: Today, if we can reclaim our land, train new people, use it to vent our anger, and make it enough to absorb the anger of Guanluo, then we can compete in China. The land of Jing and Xiang is the key to the development of the situation.

古文：陛下慨然移都建业，百司庶府皆从草创，军国之仪皆从简略，又作行宫于武昌，以示不敢宁居之意。常以江、淮之师为金人侵轶之备，而精择一人之沈鸷有谋、开豁无他者，委以荆、襄之任，宽其文法，听其废置，抚摩振厉于三数年之间，则国家之势成矣。
现代文： 陛下应慨然移都建业，官僚机构皆从草创，军国之仪皆从简略，又做行宫于武昌，以示不敢安居建业之意；平常以江、淮之军防备金人入侵，而精心挑选一位有勇有谋、有胆有识之人，委以经略荆、襄之重任，宽其文法，听其废置，励精图治三、五年，则国家之势有望形成。
English: His majesty should move the capital to build a career. Bureaucracies are from scratch, military rituals are from abbreviation, and the palace is in Wuchang to show the intention of not daring to live in peace and build a career. Usually, the army of the River and the Huai River is used to prevent the invasion of the Jin people, but if a brave and resourceful, courageous and knowledgeable person is carefully selected, entrusted with the heavy responsibility of the Jing and the Xiang, broadens his grammar, listens to his waste, and works hard for three or five years, then the national trend is expected to form.

古文：石晋失卢龙一道，以成开运之祸，盖丙午、丁未岁也。
现代文： 石晋丧失卢龙，酿成开运之祸，太祖皇帝起初从郭太祖征讨，最终平定了天下。
English: Shi Jin lost Lulong, which led to the calamity of the start of the operation. Emperor Taizu first conquered from Guo Taizu, and finally leveled the world.

古文：其后契丹以甲辰败于澶渊，而丁未、戊申之间，真宗皇帝东封西祀，以告太平，盖本朝极盛之时也。
现代文：其后，契丹在甲辰败于澶渊，而大中祥符年间，真宗皇帝东封泰山，西祀汾阴，以告太平，为本朝极盛之时。
English: After that, Khitan was defeated in Jia Chen by Qian Yuan, and during the years of the Great Middle Xiangfu, Emperor Zhenzong of the East fenced Taishan, and the West worshiped Qian Yin, and proclaimed Taiping, which was the peak of this dynasty.

古文：又六十年，而神宗皇帝实以丁未岁即位，国家之事于此一变矣。又六十年丙午、丁未，遂为靖康之祸。
现代文：又过六十年，神宗皇帝以丁未岁即位，国家之形势开始改变，又过六十年，丙午、丁未，遂为靖康之祸。
English: Sixty years later, Emperor Shenzong ascended to the throne at the age of 20, and the situation of the country began to change. Sixty years later, Emperor Jing and Emperor Ding Wei became the scourge of Jingkang.

古文：天独启陛下于是年，而又启陛下以北向复仇之志。
现代文：也是在祸临之年，天降大任于陛下，且启发陛下北向复仇之志。
English: It was also the year of calamity, when the heavens fell heavily on His Majesty, and inspired His Majesty with a desire for revenge against the North.

古文：臣不佞，自少有驱驰四方之志，尝数至行都，人物如林，其论皆不足以起人意，臣是以知陛下大有为之志孤矣。
现代文：今天距靖康之祸仅有十年。天道六十年一变，陛下当努力以应其变，不可苟安以磋砣岁月。 臣非奸佞，从小有驰骋四方之志，曾多次到行都。行都虽有人物如林，但其议论皆不足以启发人意，臣由此感到陛下有为之志无人理会。
English: Today, only ten years have passed since the calamity of Jingkang. The course of heaven changes every sixty years, and His Majesty should make efforts to adapt to the changes, and should not rest on his laurels. I am not a traitor, and I have had the desire to travel to the four directions since I was a child. I have been to Xingdu many times. Although Xingdu is full of people, their discussions are not enough to inspire people, so I feel that His Majesty has a desire to do something, but no one is paying attention.

古文：辛卯、壬辰之间，始退而穷天地造化之初，考古今沿革之变，以推极皇帝王伯之道，而得汉、魏、晋、唐长短之由，天人之际昭昭然可考而知也。
现代文：辛卯、壬辰之间，始退而穷天地造化之源，考古今沿革之变，以推及皇帝王伯之道，而得汉、魏、晋、唐长短之由，天人之际昭昭然可考而知矣。
English: Between Xinwu and Renchen, the source of the creation of heaven and earth began to recede and became poor. The changes in the archaeology of today's evolution have promoted the path of Emperor Wang Bo, and the reasons for the growth of Han, Wei, Jin, and Tang are clearly known.

古文：始悟今世之儒士自以为得正心诚意之学者，皆风痹不知痛痒之人也。举一世安于君父之仇，而方低头拱手以谈性命，不知何者谓之性命乎？
现代文：开始觉悟到，今世自以为得正心诚意之学的儒士，实际上都是些风痹不知痛痒者，举国上下安于君父之仇，而这些儒士还在那里拱手作揖空谈性命，真不知何者谓之性命。
English: I began to realize that the modern-day Confucianists, who think they are righteous and sincere, are actually a bunch of spoiled brats who don't know what it's like. The whole country is at peace with their father's revenge, and these Confucianists are still there making empty talk about life. I really don't know what life is.

古文：陛下接之而不任以事，臣于是服陛下之仁。又悟今世之才臣自以为得富国强兵之术者，皆狂惑以肆叫呼之人也。不以暇时谋究立国之本末，而方扬眉伸气以论富强，不知何者谓之富强乎？
现代文：陛下容纳他们但不任用他们，臣因此而佩服陛下之仁；今世自以为懂富国强兵之术的所谓才臣，实际都是些狂妄蛊惑之人，他们平时不讲究立国之本末，而喜欢信口开河阔论富强，真不知何者谓之富强。
English: His Majesty accommodates them but does not appoint them, and the vassals therefore admire His Majesty's benevolence; the so-called talented vassals who think they understand the art of a rich country and strong army in this world are actually arrogant demagogues, who usually do not pay attention to the foundation of the country, but like to talk about wealth and strength. I really do not know what is wealth and strength.

古文：陛下察之而不敢尽用，臣于是服陛下之明。
现代文：陛下洞察他们而不尽用他们，臣因此而佩服陛下之明。
English: Your Majesty sees them, but does not use them to the full, and for this I admire your Majesty's wisdom.

古文：陛下诚令臣毕陈于前，岂惟臣区区之愿，将天地之神、祖宗之灵，实与闻之。
现代文：陛下励志复仇足以感天命，笃于仁爱足以收民心，而拥有仁明更足以照临群臣偏极之论，此可谓百代之明君。
English: His majesty inspired revenge enough to feel the fate of heaven, adhered to benevolence enough to win the hearts of the people, and possessed benevolence more than enough to follow the polarization theory of the courtiers, which can be described as the bright prince of a hundred generations.

古文：书奏，孝宗赫然震动，欲榜朝堂以励群臣，用种放故事，召令上殿，将擢用之。
现代文：然而到现在，皇帝陛下委任庸人，笼络小儒，以拖延大有为之岁月，臣因此不胜愤懑，也就不顾卑贱而进献愚策了。 陈亮上奏后，孝宗皇帝赫然震动，打算将其奏章张贴于朝堂，以励群臣，并仿用种放受召之旧事，召陈亮上殿，准备起用陈亮。
English: However, up to now, His Majesty the Emperor has appointed mediocrities, enticed lesser scholars, and procrastinated for a long time. As a result, the vassals are very angry, and they have made foolish plans in spite of their lowliness. After Chen Liang's performance, Emperor Xiaozong was shocked, and planned to post his performance in the imperial hall to encourage his vassals, and to call Chen Liang to the palace, imitating the old practice of being summoned.

古文：左右大臣莫知所为，惟曾觌知之，将见亮，亮耻之，逾垣而逃。
现代文：左右大臣不知如何是好，唯曾觌理解陈亮，并想会见陈亮。因曾觌名声不好，故陈亮耻于见他，最后越墙而逃。
English: The left and right ministers did not know what to do, but Zeng Yao understood Chen Liang and wanted to meet Chen Liang. Because Zeng Yao's reputation was not good, Chen Liang was ashamed to see him, and finally fled across the wall.

古文：觌以其不诣己，不悦。大臣尤恶其直言无讳，交沮之，乃有都堂审察之命。
现代文：曾觌因陈亮拒见自己，显得很不高兴，其他大臣特别厌恶陈亮的直言不讳，因而交相沮抑陈亮，乃有都堂审查之命。
English: Zeng Rong was very unhappy because Chen Liang refused to see him. Other ministers were particularly disgusted by Chen Liang's outspokenness, so they discouraged Chen Liang from communicating with each other, which was the order of the review.

古文：宰相临以上旨，问所欲言，皆落落不少贬，又不合。
现代文：宰相按皇上旨意，找陈亮询问情况，因话不投机而产生隔阂。
English: The prime minister, according to the emperor's will, asked Chen Liang to inquire about the situation, and because he did not speculate, there was a gap.

古文：待命十日，再诣阙上书曰：
现代文：陈亮待命十日，再次赴朝上书曰：
English: Chen Liang was on standby on the 10th, and again went to the DPRK to submit a letter, saying:

古文：恭惟皇帝陛下厉志复仇，不肯即安于一隅，是有大功于社稷也。
现代文： 恭惟皇帝陛下励志复仇，不肯即安东南一隅，是有大功于国家的。
English: It is a great service to the country that His Majesty the Emperor was inspired to take revenge, and refused to retreat to the south-east corner of Andong.

古文：然坐钱塘浮侈之隅以图中原，则非其地；用东南习安之众以行进取，则非其人。
现代文：然而，钱塘为浮华奢侈之角落，如欲据此以图恢复中原是十分困难的，加之东南之民多安于现状，如欲依靠他们以图进取则更不容易。
English: However, Qiantang is a corner of pomp and luxury, and it is very difficult to restore the Central Plains based on this. In addition, the people in the southeast are more comfortable with the status quo, and it is even more difficult to rely on them to advance.

古文：财止于府库，则不足以通天下之有无；兵止于尺籍，则不足以兼天下之勇怯。
现代文：财止于府库，则不足以通天下有无，兵止于尺籍，则不足以兼天下之勇怯。
English: If finances stop at the government treasury, it is not enough to know whether there is anything in the world, and if soldiers stop at the rank and file, it is not enough to be the bravest in the world.

古文：是以迁延之计遂行，而陛下大有为之志乖矣。
现代文：由此而产生了拖延之计，陛下原有之宏略大志也变样了。
English: Hence the procrastination, and the alteration of His Majesty's original design.

古文：此臣所以不胜忠愤，斋沐裁书，献之阙下，愿得望见颜色，陈国家立国之本末，而开大有为之略；论天下形势之消长，而决大有为之机，务合于艺祖经画天下之本旨。
现代文：臣对此种状况不胜忧愤，因而虔诚做书，献于庙堂，希望能当面向皇帝陛下陈述立国之本末，而开大有为之方略；论天下形势之消长，而定大有为之机谋，力求符合太祖经略天下之本意。
English: The vassal was deeply saddened and angered by this situation, so he piously wrote a book and dedicated it to the temple, hoping to present to His Majesty the Emperor the reasons for the founding of the country, but with a great strategy; on the long-term situation of the world, but with a great strategy, and strive to meet the original intention of the great-grandfather.

古文：然待命八日，未有闻焉。
现代文：然而，臣待命八日，未得如愿以偿。
English: However, the vassal waited for eight days and did not get what he wanted.

古文：臣恐天下豪杰有以测陛下之意向，而云合响应之势不得而成矣。
现代文：臣担心天下豪杰胡乱猜测陛下之意向，从而影响云合响应之大势的形成。 
English: The vassal worried that the world's heroes would make wild guesses about his majesty's intentions, thus affecting the formation of the general trend of unison response.

古文：又上书曰：
现代文：陈亮又上书说：
English: He later added:

古文：臣妄意国家维持之具，至今日而穷，而艺祖皇帝经画天下之大指，犹可恃以长久，苟推原其意而变通之，则恢复不足为矣。
现代文： 臣臆想国家维持之计，至今已日见困穷，而太祖皇帝所制定的大政方针，至今犹可恃以长久，如能依其本意变通行事，则恢复大业不足为奇。
English: It is not surprising that the minister's plan to maintain the country has been increasingly impoverished, while the grand policy formulated by the great-grandfather emperor has been able to last for a long time. If he can act flexibly according to his original intention, it is not surprising to resume the great cause.

古文：然而变通之道有三：有可以迁延数十年之策，有可以为百五六十年之计，有可以复开数百年之基。
现代文：然而变通之道有三种：有可以拖延数十年之策；有可以为一百五、六十年之计；有可以复开数百年之机。
English: However, there are three alternatives: there is a strategy that can be delayed for decades; there is a strategy that can be used for one hundred and fifty or sixty years; there is an opportunity to reopen for hundreds of years.

古文：事势昭然而效见殊绝，非陛下聪明度越百代，决不能一一以听之。
现代文：形势明朗而效果非常，非陛下聪明超越百代不能达成。
English: The situation is clear and the effect is very good. It cannot be achieved without His Majesty's wisdom to surpass a hundred generations.

古文：臣不敢泄之大臣之前，而大臣拱手称旨以问，臣亦姑取其大体之可言者三事以答之。
现代文：臣不敢泄机于大臣面前，然大臣们拱手称旨求问，臣只好取其大体之可言者三事以答之。
English: The vassal did not dare to waste his time in front of the minister, but the ministers gave up asking questions, and the vassal had to answer with three things he could say.

古文：其一曰：二圣北狩之痛，盖国家之大耻，而天下之公愤也。
现代文： 其一曰：徽、钦二帝被俘之痛，乃国家之奇耻大辱，曾引起天下之人的公愤。
English: The first was: the pain of Hui and Qin II being captured was a great humiliation for the country and aroused the public indignation of the whole world.

古文：五十年之余，虽天下之气销铄颓堕，不复知仇耻之当念，正在主上与二三大臣振作其气，以泄其愤，使人人如报私仇，此《春秋》书卫人杀州吁之意也。
现代文：五十多年来，虽然天下之气渐渐颓堕，不再牢记奇耻大辱，但陛下当与大臣共同振作其精神，以发泄其仇恨，使人人如报私仇，此乃《春秋》写卫人杀州吁之用意所在。
English: For more than 50 years, although the world's morale has gradually fallen, and no longer remembers the great shame, His Majesty should work with the minister to cheer up his spirit, to vent his hatred, and to make everyone like revenge. This is the intention of "Spring and Autumn" to write the guardian to kill the state.

古文：其二曰：国家之规模，使天下奉规矩准绳以从事，群臣救过之不给，而何暇展布四体以求济度外之功哉！
现代文： 其二曰：国家之气候，是使天下人循规蹈矩以行事，群臣只求无过，哪有心思施展才华求意外之功呢？
English: The second is: the climate of the country is to make the people of the world follow the rules and act accordingly. The ministers only ask for no fault. Who has the heart to display talent and seek unexpected results?

古文：其三曰：艺祖皇帝用天下之士人，以易武臣之任事者，故本朝以儒立国。而儒道之振，独优于前代。
现代文： 其三曰：太祖皇帝用天下之士人，取重文轻武的策略，所以本朝是以儒立国，儒道之振兴，独优于前代。
English: The third day: the great-grandfather emperor used the world's scholars, taking the strategy of emphasizing literature and light martial arts, so this dynasty was founded on the basis of Confucianism and the revitalization of Confucianism, which was superior to the previous generation.

古文：今天下之士熟烂委靡，诚可厌恶，正在主上与二三大臣反其道以教之，作其气而养之，使临事不至乏才，随才皆足有用，则立国之规模不至戾艺祖之本旨，而东西驰骋以定祸乱，不必专在武臣也。
现代文：今天下之士萎靡不振，实在令人厌恶，陛下当与大臣们反其道而教之，使其振作，一旦有急，便不至于缺乏人才，这样做也不违背太祖之本意，而东西驰骋以定祸乱，也不必专靠武臣了。
English: It is really disgusting that today's subordinates are languishing. Your Majesty should teach them the opposite of the ministers and cheer them up. If there is a hurry, there will be no lack of talent. Doing so does not contradict the original intention of the great-grandfathers, and it is not necessary to rely exclusively on the vassals.

古文：臣所以为大臣论者，其略如此。
现代文： 臣所以为大臣论者，其意大致如此。 
English: This is roughly the meaning of why a vassal is a minister theorist.

古文：书既上，帝欲官之，亮笑曰： 吾欲为社稷开数百年之基，宁用以博一官乎！ 亟渡江而归。
现代文：陈亮上书后，皇帝打算起用他，但他笑着说： 我上书是为了国家的长治久安，而非为了博取一官半职。 遂很快渡江而归。
English: After Chen Liang submitted his letter, the emperor planned to appoint him, but he smiled and said, "I submitted my letter for the sake of the long-term peace and stability of the country, not for the sake of gaining an official post.

古文：日落魄醉酒，与邑之狂士饮，醉中戏为大言，言涉犯上。
现代文：归家后，陈亮整天落魄醉酒，与乡邑之狂士长饮不止，醉酒后说些大话胡话，有犯上之嫌。
English: After returning home, Chen Liang spent the whole day in a drunken stupor, drinking more and more with the crazies in the village. After getting drunk, he said some big nonsense, which was a crime.

古文：一士欲中亮，以其事首刑部。
现代文：有一士想陷害陈亮，将其醉酒之后所说的话密报刑部。
English: One of them wanted to frame Chen Liang and report his drunken words to the criminal investigation department.

古文：侍郎何澹尝为考试官，黜亮，亮不平，语数侵澹，澹闻而嗛之，即缴状以闻。
现代文：刑部侍郎何澹曾为考官，没有录取陈亮，陈亮愤愤不平，所以多次骂过何澹，何澹因此怀恨在心，当他得到密报后，即立案审查。
English: He Yao, a clerk of the Criminal Investigation Department, was once an examiner, but did not admit Chen Liang. Chen Liang was indignant, so he repeatedly scolded He Yao. Therefore, He Yao held a grudge. When he received a secret report, he immediately filed a case review.

古文：事下大理，笞掠亮无完肤，诬服为不轨。
现代文：陈亮因而入狱，被打得体无完肤，落了个图谋不轨的罪名。
English: As a result, Chen Liang went to prison, was beaten to a pulp, and was convicted of conspiracy.

古文：事闻，孝宗知为亮，尝阴遣左右廉知其事，及奏入取旨，帝曰： 秀才醉后妄言，何罪之有！ 划其牍于地，亮遂得免。
现代文：孝宗得知这一情况后，曾密遣左右查访其事。及奏入取旨时，孝宗说： 秀才醉后妄言，何罪之有？ 并抛其牍于地，陈亮遂得免罪。
English: After learning of this situation, Xiaozong sent envoys to the left and right to investigate the matter. When the report was received, Xiaozong said: What is the crime of a talented person making a false statement after getting drunk? And threw it on the ground, Chen Liang was acquitted.

古文：居无何，亮家僮杀人于境，适被杀者尝辱亮父次尹，其家疑事由亮。
现代文：陈亮住在家里不多久，其家僮犯杀人之罪，恰巧被杀者曾经侮辱陈亮的父亲陈次尹，因而怀疑为陈亮的指使。
English: Chen Liang hadn't lived in the house for long. His family was accused of committing a murder. It just so happened that the murdered man had insulted Chen Liang's father, Chen Ziyin, and was therefore suspected of being Chen Liang's instigator.

古文：闻于官，笞榜僮，死而复苏者数，不服。
现代文：此事告于官府后，家僮被打得死去活来，反复数次，仍不服。
English: After the matter was reported to the government, Iechi was beaten to death, repeatedly several times, still not satisfied.

古文：又囚亮父于州狱。
现代文：陈亮也被囚于州监狱。
English: Chen Liang is also incarcerated in a state prison.

古文：而属台官论亮情重，下大理。
现代文：属台官言陈亮罪情严重，移陈亮于大理寺。
English: Chen Liang, a Taiwanese official, was found guilty of serious crimes and was transferred to Dali Temple.

古文：时丞相淮知帝欲生亮，而辛弃疾、罗点素高亮才，援之尤力，复得不死。
现代文：当时的丞相察觉皇帝有救亮之心，加之辛弃疾、罗点称赞陈亮有才，所以竭力护佑陈亮，陈亮再次免于一死。
English: The chancellor at that time noticed that the emperor had the heart to save Chen Liang, and in addition to the hardships of abandoning the disease, Luo Dian praised Chen Liang for his talent, so he tried his best to protect Chen Liang, and Chen Liang was once again spared from death.

古文：亮自以豪侠屡遭大狱，归家益厉志读书，所学益博。
现代文：陈亮屡遭大狱后，归家励志读书，所学十分广博。
English: After Chen Liang was repeatedly imprisoned, he returned home to study. He learned a lot.

古文：其学自孟子后惟推王通，尝曰： 研穷义理之精微，辨析古今之同异，原心于秒忽，较礼于分寸，以积累为工，以涵养为正，睟面盎背，则于诸儒诚有愧焉。
现代文：其学自孟子后惟推崇王通。他曾说： 研究义理之精微，以辨析古今之同异于分秒尺寸之间，推心论礼，以积累为工，以涵养为正，憔悴面容，弯腰驼背，则于诸儒诚有愧疚。
English: He once said: To study the subtleties of logic, to analyze the similarities and differences between the past and the present and the size of a minute and a second, to reason about etiquette, to accumulate as work, to cultivate as positive, to be thin-faced, and to be hunched over, is to be ashamed of Confucianism.

古文：至于堂堂之陈，正正之旗，风雨云雷交发而并至，龙蛇虎豹变现而出没，推倒一世之智勇，开拓万古之心胸，自谓差有一日之长。 亮意盖指朱熹、吕祖谦等云。
现代文：至于堂堂之陈，正正之旗，风雨雷电交发而并至，龙蛇虎豹变幻而出没，推倒一世之智勇，开拓万古之心胸，自以为尚欠火候。 陈亮之意大概是指朱熹、吕祖谦等云。
English: As for Chen Doudang, Zheng Zheng's banner, wind, rain, lightning and electricity come together, dragons, snakes, tigers and leopards change and disappear, overthrow the wisdom and courage of the first generation, open up the heart of the ages, and think that they still lack fire.

古文：高宗崩，金遣使来吊，简慢。
现代文：宋高宗驾崩后，金朝遣使前来吊唁，但金使态度傲慢，不以礼对宋。
English: After the death of Song Gaozong, the Kim dynasty sent an envoy to offer condolences, but the envoy was arrogant and did not treat Song with courtesy.

古文：而光宗由潜邸判临安府，亮感孝宗之知，至金陵视形势，复上疏曰：
现代文：光宗由旧宅判临安府，陈亮感孝宗之知遇，赴金陵视察形势。之后，陈亮上疏说：
English: Guangzong judged Lin'an Prefecture from the old house, Chen Liang felt the wisdom of Xiaozong and went to Jinling to inspect the situation. After that, Chen Liang said:

古文：有非常之人，然后可以建非常之功。
现代文： 有非常之人才，然后可以建立非常之功业。
English: If you have great talent, then you can build a great business.

古文：求非常之功，而用常才、出常计、举常事以应之者，不待知者而后知其不济也。秦桧以和误国二十余年，而天下之气索然无余矣。
现代文：要建非常之功，而只用一般人才，拟平常之计划，做平常之事情，是不能达到目的的。 秦桧以通和于金而误国二十余年，天下之精气已索然无余。
English: It is necessary to build a great achievement, but it is impossible to achieve the goal by using only ordinary talents, making ordinary plans, and doing ordinary things.Qin Hui has misled the country for more than 20 years with money and money, and the spirit of the world has no more than enough.

古文：高宗皇帝春秋既高，陛下不欲大举，惊动慈颜，抑心俯首，以致色养，圣孝之盛，书册之所未有也。
现代文：陛下慨然有削平宇内之志，已有二十余年，天下之士始知奋斗方向，其有功于社稷者，可谓数说不尽。高宗皇帝年迈时，陛下不想大举北伐，以免惊动高宗慈颜，只能压抑心思，俯首敬老。陛下孝道之盛，可谓史无前例。
English: It has been more than 20 years since His Majesty had the dream of leveling the world. The people of the world have begun to know the direction of struggle, and there are countless people who have contributed to society. When Emperor Gaozong was old, His Majesty did not want to make a large-scale northern expedition, so as not to alarm Gaozong's beautiful face, but could only suppress his thoughts and bow his head in respect for the elderly. His Majesty's filial piety is unprecedented.

古文：今者高宗既已祔庙，天下之英雄豪杰皆仰首以观陛下之举动，陛下其忍使二十年间所以作天下之气者，一旦而复索然乎？
现代文：现在，高宗皇帝已经驾崩，天下之英雄皆仰首以观陛下之举动，陛下隐忍仇恨二十年，且积聚了天下之精气，能够在顷刻间消失吗？
English: Now that Emperor Gaozong has passed away, the world's heroes are all looking up to see His Majesty's actions. His Majesty has endured hatred for twenty years, and has accumulated the world's essence. Can it disappear in an instant?

古文：天下不可以坐取也，兵不可以常胜也，驱驰运动又非年高德尊者之所宜也。
现代文： 天下是不可能坐着等来的，军队也不可能只胜不败，驰骋奔战不宜于年高德尊之人。
English: It is impossible for the world to sit and wait, and it is impossible for the army to be invincible. It is not suitable for people with high moral standards to gallop into battle.

古文：东宫居曰监国，行曰抚军，陛下何以不于此时而命东宫为抚军大将军，岁巡建业，使之兼统诸司，尽护诸将，置长史、司马以专其劳，而陛下于宅忧之余，运用人才，均调天下，以应无穷之变？此肃宗所以命广平王之故事也。
现代文：太子居内为监国，行外曰抚军，陛下为什么不在此时册命太子为抚军大将军呢？让他巡视建业，兼统诸司，尽护诸将，设置长史司马以专其劳；而陛下在宫廷操制人才，协调天下，以不变应万变，这就是肃宗册命广平王之原因所在。
English: The crown prince is the overseer of the country when he is at home, and the general of the army when he is abroad. Why did His Majesty not appoint the crown prince as the general of the army at this time? Let him inspect the construction, supervise the departments, protect the generals, and set up the chief historian to do his best; while His Majesty controls the talents at the court, coordinates the world, and adapts to the ever-changing world. This is the reason for the appointment of King Guangping.

古文：高宗与金有父兄之仇，生不能以报之，则死必有望于子孙，何忍以升遐之哀告诸仇哉！
现代文： 高宗与金朝有父兄之仇，生时不能报仇，则死时必寄望于子孙。
English: Gao Zong and the Kim dynasty have a father-brother feud. If you cannot take revenge when you are alive, you must hope for your children and grandchildren when you die.

古文：遗留、报谢，三使继遣，金帛宝货，千两连发。而金人仅以一使，如临小邦，哀祭之辞寂寥简慢，义士仁人痛切心骨，岂以陛下之圣明智勇而能忍之乎！
现代文：现在，宋对金礼义有加，且不断奉送金帛宝货；而金朝在高宗驾崩后，仅派一使前来吊唁，其使来后，态度傲慢，如临小邦，所致之哀悼之辞也寥寥数语，且不恭不敬，仁人义士对此痛切心骨，岂能因陛下圣明智勇而咽下这口气呢？
English: Now, Song has been generous to Kim Rongil, and has constantly sent gold and precious goods to him; while the Kim dynasty, after the death of Gao Zong, sent only one envoy to offer condolences. After his envoy came, the attitude was arrogant, like Lin Xiaogang, and the words of condolence were few, and they were not respectful. The benevolent and righteous man was heartbroken about this. Can he swallow this breath because of His Majesty's wisdom and courage?

古文：陛下倘以大义为当正，抚军之言为可行，则当先经理建业而后使临之。
现代文： 陛下若以大义为正道，以抚军之言为可行，就应当先经营建业，然后派太子亲临此地。
English: If Your Majesty takes the Great Righteousness as the right path and the words of Fuzhuang as feasible, you should first carry out construction and then send the prince to this place in person.

古文：纵今岁未为北举之谋，而为经理建康之计，以振动天下而与金绝，陛下之初志亦庶几于少伸矣！
现代文：今年底策划北伐之谋，为了经营好建业，振作天下之士气，陛下当与金决裂。如此一来，陛下的复仇之志将很快得以实现。
English: At the end of this year, in order to plan the Northern Expedition, to manage the construction industry well, and to boost the morale of the world, His Majesty should break with Kim. In this way, His Majesty's desire for revenge will soon be realized.

古文：陛下试一听臣，用其喜怒哀乐之权鼓动天下。
现代文：希望陛下能听一听臣的意见，用其喜怒哀乐之权来鼓动天下。 
English: I hope that His Majesty will listen to the opinions of his listeners and use his power of emotions to encourage the world.

古文：大略欲激孝宗恢复，而是时孝宗将内禅，不报。由是在廷交怒，以为狂怪。
现代文：陈亮这篇奏疏的用意在于刺激孝宗恢复信心，而此时孝宗将内禅光宗，陈亮的意见被搁置一旁，朝廷中许多人将陈亮视为狂怪。
English: The intention of Chen Liang's report was to stimulate the restoration of confidence in Xiaozong, but at this time, Xiaozong would meditate, Chen Liang's opinions were put aside, and many in the imperial court regarded Chen Liang as a freak.

古文：先是，乡人会宴，末胡椒特置亮羹胾中，盖村俚敬待异礼也。
现代文：先是，乡人会宴，特置胡椒于陈亮面前的盘碗中，这是其对待怪异之人的一种方法。
English: First of all, the villagers' banquet, specially placed pepper in a bowl in front of Chen Liang, this is one of the ways to treat strange people.

古文：同坐者归而暴死，疑食异味有毒，已入大理。
现代文：宴后，与陈亮同坐一起的人回家后突然暴死，人们怀疑死者是吃了有毒的食物，遂报官备案。
English: After the banquet, a person who was sitting with Chen Liang suddenly died after returning home. People suspected that the deceased had eaten poisoned food, so the reporter filed a case.

古文：会吕兴、何念四殴吕天济且死，恨曰： 陈上舍使杀我。 县令王恬实其事，台官谕监司选酷吏讯问，无所得，取入大理，众意必死。
现代文：当时，吕兴、何念四殴打吕天济将死。吕天济恨曰 ：陈亮指使他们杀我。 县令王恬认为有此事，台官指使监司选酷吏刑讯逼供，但终无所获，陈亮被移往大理寺，众人都以为陈亮必死无疑。
English: At that time, Lv Xing and He Nian four beat Lv Tianji to death. Lv Tianji said with hatred: Chen Liang ordered them to kill me. The county magistrate Wang Qian thought that there was a matter, the Taiwan official ordered the supervisor to select a cruel official to force a confession, but in the end nothing was achieved, Chen Liang was moved to Dali Temple, and everyone thought that Chen Liang would undoubtedly die.

古文：少卿郑汝谐阅其单辞，大异曰： 此天下奇材也。
现代文：少卿郑汝谐在看了陈亮的辩词之后，惊奇地说： 陈亮乃天下奇才。
English: After watching Chen Liang's speech, Shaoqing Zheng Ruchun said in surprise: Chen Liang is a great genius.

古文：国家若无罪而杀士，上干天和，下伤国脉矣。 力言于光宗，遂得免。
现代文：国家如果杀无罪之士，就将上干天和，下伤国脉。 并且极力陈说于光宗，在光宗的干预下，陈亮遂死里逃生。
English: If the state kills an innocent person, it will shake the heavens and the earth, and hurt the country's core. And he tried his best to persuade Guangzong, and under the intervention of Guangzong, Chen Liang finally escaped death.

古文：未几，光宗策进士，问以礼乐刑政之要，亮以君道、师道对，且曰： 臣窃叹陛下之于寿皇莅政二十有八年之间，宁有一政一事之不在圣怀？而问安视寝之余，所以察辞而观色，因此而得彼者其端甚众，亦既得其机要而见诸施行矣。
现代文：不久，光宗策考进士，问以礼乐刑政之要义，陈亮以君道师道对答，说 ：臣下以为陛下在孝宗皇帝当政的二十八年时间里，无时不在为父皇分忧解难，而问安视寝之余，察言观色，了解到父皇的心思及抱负甚多，并将重大方针身体力行，哪里仅仅是一周看望父皇四次做给京城人看的呢？ 
English: Not long after, Guangzong Zheke, an advanced scholar, asked about the essence of the criminal government with ritual music, and Chen Liang answered with the way of the monarch, saying: His subjects thought that during the twenty-eight years of Emperor Xiaozong's reign, His Majesty was always there to solve the problems of his father, but he asked An to watch his father's thoughts and ambitions while he was sleeping. He understood that there were many thoughts and ambitions of his father, and he would carry out the important policies. Why did he only visit his father four times a week to show them to the people of Beijing?

古文：岂徒一月四朝而以为京邑之美观也哉！ 时光宗不朝重华宫，群臣更进迭谏，皆不听，得亮策，乃大喜，以为善处父子之间。
现代文：当时，光宗因不朝拜皇华宫，正受到群臣进谏，光宗十分反感。陈亮的答卷让光宗喜不自禁，因为陈亮认为光宗是善处父子关系的。
English: At that time, because he did not worship at the Imperial Palace, Mitsumune was being bullied by courtiers. Mitsumune was very disgusted. Chen Liang's answer sheet made Mitsumune happy, because Chen Liang thought that Mitsumune had a good father-son relationship.

古文：奏名第三，御笔擢第一。
现代文：本来陈亮获进士策考第三名，但光宗因偏爱这份答卷，将其擢升第一名，后来光宗得知第一名为陈亮，大喜曰： 朕之眼力果然不错。 
English: Originally, Chen Liang won the third place in the entrance examination, but Guangzong preferred this answer sheet and promoted it to the first place. Later, Guangzong learned that the first name was Chen Liang. He was overjoyed and said: My eyesight is really good.

古文：既知为亮，则大喜曰： 朕擢果不谬。 孝宗在南内，宁宗在东宫，闻知皆喜，故赐第告词曰： 尔蚤以艺文首贤能之书，旋以论奏动慈宸之听。
现代文：孝宗在南内，光宗在东宫，闻陈亮获第一名，皆感欢喜，所以赐第告词说 ：你早以艺文首贤能之书，后以论奏动圣上之听，亲阅答卷，嘉奖其一贯所为，擢置进士第一，此乃上天有意遗留于朕也。 
English: Xiaozong in the south, Guangzong in the east, and Chen Liang in the first place were all happy, so he gave the first speech, saying: You have long ago used the book of virtues of the art of literature, and then moved the sacred audience with the discussion, read the answer sheet, praised his consistent actions, and promoted him to the first place. This is God's intention to bequeath to me.

古文：亲阅大对，嘉其渊源，擢置举首，殆天留以遗朕也。 授佥书建康府判官厅公事。未至官，一夕，卒。
现代文：之后，陈亮被授佥书建康府判官厅公事，还未到任，即突然去世。
English: After that, Chen Liang was awarded the honorary title of Shijian Kangfu Magistrate's Office, but he died suddenly before taking office.

古文：亮之既第而归也，弟充迎拜于境，相对感泣。
现代文：陈亮中进士第回家的时候，其弟陈充前来迎拜，兄弟俩相拥而泣。
English: When Chen Liang, a junior high school student, came home for the first time, his younger brother Chen Chong came to greet him. The two brothers hugged each other and cried.

古文：亮曰： 使吾他日而贵，泽首逮汝，死之日，各以命服见先人于地下足矣。 闻者悲伤其意。
现代文：陈亮对弟说 ：假如将来有一天我富贵了，当首先报恩于你，我死的时候也可使先人含笑九泉了。 听者感到黯然神伤。
English: Chen Liang said to his brother, "If one day I become rich, I will repay your kindness first, and when I die, I will be able to make the ancestors smile.

古文：然志存经济，重许可，人人见其肺肝。
现代文：陈亮一生志存经济，讲求信义，与人肝胆相见。
English: Chen Liang has been economical all his life, seeking credibility, and meeting people's needs.

古文：与人言，必本于君臣父子之义，虽为布衣，荐士恐弗及。
现代文：与人交谈，必本于君臣父子之义，虽为布衣，却积极推荐人才。
English: When conversing with people, it must be based on the principle of father and son, although it is a cloth, it actively recommends talents.

古文：家仅中产，畸人寒士衣食之，久不衰。
现代文：陈亮家境一般，但见奇人寒士就接济衣食，一直坚持这样做。
English: Chen Liang's family background is average, but he has always insisted on giving food and clothing to those who are cold.

古文：卒之后，吏部侍郎叶适请于朝，命补一子官，非故典也。
现代文：他去世后，吏部侍郎叶适奏请朝廷，破例命补陈亮一子为官。
English: After his death, Ye Suetong, an attendant of the cadre department, asked the imperial court to make an exception and appoint Chen Liang's son as an official.

古文：端平初，谥文毅，更与一子官。
现代文：端平初年，赐陈亮谥号曰 文毅 ，又提拔其一子为官。
English: In the first year of Duanping, he gave Chen Liang the nickname "Wen Yi" and promoted one of his sons to an official position.

古文：郑樵，字渔仲，兴化军莆田人。
现代文：郑樵字渔仲，兴化军莆田人。
English: Zheng Yuanzhong, a fisherman, and a member of the Xinghua Army.

古文：好著书，不为文章，自负不下刘向、杨雄。
现代文：喜欢著书，不爱写单篇文章。郑樵颇为自负，认为自己不比汉代刘向、扬雄差。
English: He likes to write books, but does not like to write a single article. Zheng Yao is quite conceited and thinks that he is no worse than Liu Xiang and Yang Xiong in the Han Dynasty.

古文：居夹漈山，谢绝人事。
现代文：他常年居在夹氵祭山，过了三十年远离社会人世的艰苦生活。
English: He has been living in Jianye Mountain for many years, and has lived a hard life away from society for thirty years.

古文：久之，乃游名山大川，搜奇访古，遇藏书家，必借留读尽乃去。
现代文：后来，他开始游历名山大川，并着意搜集奇风异俗的材料，考察古迹历史沿革。
English: Later, he began to travel to famous mountains and rivers, and deliberately collected materials of strange customs and examined the historical development of monuments.

古文：赵鼎、张浚而下皆器之。
现代文：旅途中，凡是遇到藏书之家，必然会借宿于此家，直到把人家所藏的可读之书读完才离开。
English: On their journey, any crows that come across a house with a collection of books will inevitably take up residence in this house, and will not leave until they have finished reading the readable books that are hidden in the house.

古文：初为经旨，礼乐、文字、天文、地理、虫鱼、草木、方书之学，皆有论辨，绍兴十九年上之，诏藏秘府。樵归，益厉所学，从者二百余人。
现代文：当时，包括宰相赵鼎、张浚在内的士大夫们都十分器重敬仰郑樵。郑樵对六经、诸子百家很感兴趣。于礼乐、文字、天文、地理、虫鱼、草木、方书之学皆有研究，他将自己研究所得撰成书稿，于宋高宗绍兴十九年上呈朝廷，皇帝下诏将其书藏于秘书府，郑樵因此更加奋发学习和研究，二百多人拜他为师，听他讲学。
English: At that time, scholars and doctors, including the prime ministers Zhao Ding and Zhang Jun, all had great respect for Zheng He. Zheng He was very interested in the Six Classics and hundreds of schools. He studied music, letters, astronomy, geography, worms, plants and trees, and calligraphy. He had to compile his research into a book manuscript, and presented it to the imperial court in Song Gaozong Shaoxing 19 years ago. The emperor stored his book in the secretary's office. As a result, Zheng He made more efforts to study and research. More than 200 people worshiped him as a teacher and listened to his lectures.

古文：以侍讲王纶、贺允中荐，得召对，因言班固以来历代为史之非。
现代文：由于侍讲卫纶、贺允中的推荐，郑樵被皇帝召见。他向皇帝陈述了自东汉班固以来历代撰著史书的种种弊端。
English: As a result of the recommendation of the attendant lecturer Weiqi and He Yunzhong, Zheng Qi was summoned by the emperor. He stated to the emperor the various drawbacks of writing history books since the East Han Banggu.

古文：帝曰： 闻卿名久矣，敷陈古学，自成一家，何相见之晚耶？ 授右迪功郎、礼、兵部架阁，以御史叶义问劾之，改监潭州南岳庙，给札归抄所著《通志》。
现代文：皇帝说 ：朕早就听说你的名字，你能够潜心钻研古学，且自成一家，值得称道，为什么与你相见这么晚呢？ 
English: The emperor said, "I have long heard of your name. It is commendable that you have been able to devote yourself to the study of antiquity and become a member of your own family. Why did I meet you so late?

古文：书成，入为枢密院编修官，寻兼摄检详诸房文学。
现代文：遂授郑樵右迪功郎、礼兵部架阁。后为御史叶义问所弹劾，改监潭州南岳庙。
English: He was awarded the title of Zheng Xuan Yu Di Gong Lang and Li Heibu Jia Ge. Later, he was impeached by the Imperial Historian Ye Yiwu and became the overseer of the Nangyue Temple in Tan Prefecture.

古文：请修金正隆官制，比附中国秩序，因求入秘书省翻阅书籍。未几，又坐言者寝其事。
现代文：绍兴二十九年，郑樵开始动笔写《通志》，二年后完成，入为枢密院编修官，不久兼摄检详诸房文字，请修金朝正隆官制，因要与宋朝官制相参照，所以请求进入秘书省查阅书籍，不久，又因言官议论获罪，此事停罢。
English: In the 29th year of Shaoxing, Zheng Qi began to write "Tong Zhi" and completed it two years later. He was appointed as an editor of the Privy Council. Soon, he also photographed and examined the detailed texts of the rooms. He requested that the official system of the Jin Dynasty be revised. Since he wanted to compare it with the official system of the Song Dynasty, he requested to enter the Ministry of Secretaries to check the books. Soon, he was convicted for talking about officials, and the matter was stopped.

古文：金人之犯边也，樵言岁星分在宋，金主将自毙，后果然。
现代文：金军入侵宋朝时，郑樵说岁星分布在宋方，金朝皇帝将死，后果如其言。
English: When the Jin army invaded the Song Dynasty, Zheng Qi said that the stars of the year were distributed in the Song side, the emperor of the Jin Dynasty would die, and the consequences were as he said.

古文：高宗幸建康，命以《通志》进，会病卒，年五十九，学者称夹氵祭先生。
现代文：宋高宗巡幸建康，命郑樵进呈所著之《通志》，郑樵就在这个时候病故，终年五十九岁，学者将其称为 夹氵祭先生 。
English: Song Gaozong went on a pilgrimage to Jiankang, and ordered Zheng Jianjin to present the book "General History." Zheng Jian passed away at this time, at the age of fifty-nine. Scholars call him "Mr. Jiankang Festival."

古文：樵好为考证伦类之学，成书虽多，大抵博学而寡要。
现代文：郑樵喜欢从事分门别类的考证工作，所著的书虽然很宏富，但大多没有多少创见。
English: Zheng Yao likes to engage in classification and other types of reference work. Although the books he has written are very rich, most of them are not very creative.

古文：平生甘枯淡，乐施与，独切切于仕进，识者以是少之。
现代文：他一生不怕艰苦枯淡，乐于施予他人，但内心对入仕做官极有兴趣，可以说孜孜以求。
English: He is not afraid of hardships and hardships in his life, and is willing to give to others, but he is very interested in becoming an official, and can be said to be diligently seeking.

古文：引疾乞去，不许。
现代文：这一点曾招来不少微词。
English: This has attracted a lot of criticism.

