古文：解缙黄淮胡广金幼孜胡俨解缙，字大绅，吉水人。
现代文：解缙，字大绅，吉水人。
English: Zhaozhuang, the great gentleman, and Jishui people.

古文：祖子元，为元安福州判官。兵乱，守义死。
现代文：祖父解子元，是元朝安福州判官，遭逢兵乱，他守义而死。
English: His grandfather, Gezi Yuan, was a magistrate of Anfu Prefecture in the Yuan Dynasty. He was caught in a military conflict and died defending justice.

古文：父开，太祖尝召见论元事。欲官之，辞去。
现代文：父亲解开，太祖曾召见他谈论元朝之事，想给他授官，解开推辞而去。
English: My father untied it, the great-grandfather had summoned him to talk about the Yuan Dynasty, wanted to give him a post, untied it and left.

古文：缙幼颖敏，洪武二十一年举进士。授中书庶吉士，甚见爱重，常侍帝前。
现代文：解缙自小聪颖，洪武二十一年，考中进士，被授为中书庶吉士，甚得太祖爱重，常在皇上跟前侍候。
English: In the 21st year of Hongwu's reign, he was awarded the Junior High School Entrance Examination and the Junior High School Certificate of Merit. He was very fond of his grandfather and often waited in front of the emperor.

古文：一日，帝在大庖西室，谕缙： 朕与尔义则君臣，恩犹父子，当知无不言。 
现代文：一天，太祖在御厨西室，对解缙说 ：朕与你从大义上说是君臣，而恩同父子，你对朕应当知无不言。 
English: One day, the great-great-grandfather was in the west room of the kitchen, and he said to the eunuch, "I and you say that you are a prince and a vassal, but I am a father and a son, and you should know everything about me.

古文：缙即日上封事万言，略曰：
现代文：解缙即日就密封上万言书，大略是说：
English: On the very day of the resolution, a 10,000-word document was sealed, roughly saying:

古文：臣闻令数改则民疑，刑太繁则民玩。
现代文： 臣听说政令数改则百姓有疑虑，用刑太繁则百姓会轻视法律。
English: The minister heard that the people have doubts about the number of decrees to reform the law, and if the use of punishment is too extensive, the people will despise the law.

古文：国初至今，将二十载，无几时不变之法，无一日无过之人。
现代文：从建国到现在，将近二十年了，却没有长期不变的法令，也不见哪一天有人不犯错误。
English: From the founding of the country to the present, nearly twenty years have passed, but there is no long-term unchanging decree, and there is no day when someone does not make a mistake.

古文：尝闻陛下震怒，锄根剪蔓，诛其奸逆矣。未闻褒一大善，赏延于世，复及其乡，终始如一者也。
现代文：我曾听说陛下发雷霆之怒，斩草除根，诛除奸逆之徒，却没听说褒扬一个大好人，对其奖赏延及后世，免除其家乡的赋税徭役，并且始终如一地这样做。
English: I have heard of His Majesty's thunderous wrath, uprooting and uprooting the traitors, but I have not heard of praising a great man, extending his reward to future generations, exempting his hometown from paying taxes, and doing so consistently.

古文：臣见陛下好观《说苑》、《韵府》杂书与所谓《道德经》、《心经》者，臣窃谓甚非所宜也。
现代文： 臣见陛下喜欢看《说苑》、《韵府》等杂书和所谓的《道德经》、《心经》，臣私下以为这很不合适。
English: The vassal saw that His Majesty liked to read miscellaneous books such as "Say Yuan" and "Rhyme Palace" and the so-called "Moral Sutra" and "Heart Sutra." The vassal privately thought that this was very inappropriate.

古文：《说苑》出于刘向，多战国纵横之论；《韵府》出元之阴氏，抄辑秽芜，略无可采。
现代文：《说苑》出于刘向之手，多是战国时期纵横家的言论。《韵府》出于元代的阴氏之手，编辑得很杂乱，几乎没什么可取之处。
English: "Saying Garden" was written by Liu Xiang, and is mostly the speech of the warring states period. "Rhyme Palace" was written by Yin in the Yuan Dynasty, the editing is very messy, and there is almost nothing to recommend it.

古文：陛下若喜其便于检阅，则愿集一二志士儒英，臣请得执笔随其后，上溯唐、虞、夏、商、周、孔，下及关、闽、濂、洛。根实精明，随事类别，勒成一经，上接经史，岂非太平制作之一端欤？
现代文：陛下如果看中它们便于检阅，则臣愿意集中一两名有志的儒学英才，臣并请执笔随他们之后，上溯唐、虞、夏、商、周、孔，下到张载的关学、朱熹的闽学、周敦颐的濂学、二程的洛学，阐明其渊源和思想学说，依事编类，汇成一经，上接于经书史籍，这岂不是太平时期文化工作的一件大事吗？
English: Your Majesty, if you find them easy to read, I would like to gather one or two aspiring Confucian scholars. I would also like to ask you to follow them and write down the history of Tang, Yu, Xia, Shang, Zhou, and Kong, and go down to Zhangzai's Guan School, Zhu Xi's Zou School, Zhou Dun Zou's Zou School, and Ercheng's Luo School, and clarify their origins and ideological doctrines. According to the classification of events, compile a scripture, and upload it to the books of scripture and history. Isn't this a big event in the cultural work of the Taiping period?

古文：又今《六经》残缺。《礼记》出于汉儒，踳驳尤甚，宜及时删改。
现代文：另外，现在《六经》残缺，《礼记》出于汉代儒生之手，讹误驳杂尤为严重，应该及时删改。
English: In addition, the "Six Classics" is now incomplete, and the "Book of Rites" was written by a Han-dynasty Confucian scholar, and the errors are particularly serious, and should be deleted and amended in a timely manner.

古文：访求审乐之儒，大备百王之典，作乐书一经以惠万世。
现代文：应访求精于乐理的儒士，广备百王典礼用乐，写定《乐书》一经，使万世受益。
English: The Confucian scholars who were good at music theory, prepared a wide range of music for the ceremony of the Hundred Kings, and wrote down the "Music Book" to benefit the world.

古文：尊祀伏羲、神农、黄帝、尧、舜、禹、汤、文、武、皋陶、伊尹、太公、周公、稷、契、夷、益、傅说、箕子于太学。
现代文：在太学中尊祀伏羲、神农、黄帝、尧、舜、禹、汤、文、武、皋陶、伊尹、太公、周公、稷、契、夷、益、傅说、箕子。
English: In Taigaku, Fuxi, Shennong, Huangdi, Yao, Yao, Yu, Tang, Wen, Wu, Jintao, Yi Yin, Taigong, Zhou, Yao, Qi, Yi, Yi, Fu, and Zizi are revered.

古文：孔子则自天子达于庶人，通祀以为先师，而以颜、曾、子思、孟子配。
现代文：对于孔子，则从天子到普通百姓，都将他奉祀为先师，而以颜渊、曾参、子思、孟子配享。
English: For Confucius, from the heavenly son to the ordinary people, they all worshiped him as the forerunner, and shared Yan Yuan, Zeng San, Zisi, and Mencius.

古文：自闵子以下，各祭于其乡。
现代文：从闵子以下的先贤，各在其家乡祭祀他们。
English: The sages from the time of Jushi and below were worshipped in their hometowns.

古文：鲁之阙里，仍建叔梁纥庙，赠以王爵，以颜路、曾昽、孔鲤配。
现代文：在山东阙里，仍建叔梁纥庙，赠予他王爵，以颜路、曾皙、孔鲤配享。
English: In Shandong Province, the Shu Liangyu Temple was still built, and he was given a peerage, with Yanlu, Zengyu, and Kongyu as his attendants.

古文：一洗历代之因仍，肇起天朝之文献，岂不盛哉！
现代文：一改历代的旧制，开创天朝的文献，岂不是一大盛事？
English: Wouldn't it be a great event to change the old system of all ages and create the literature of the Heavenly Dynasty?

古文：若夫祀天宜复扫地之规，尊祖宜备七庙之制。
现代文： 至于祭天应该恢复扫地之规，尊祖应该备齐七庙之制。
English: As for the festival, the rule of sweeping the ground should be restored, and the ancestors should prepare a system of seven temples.

古文：奉天不宜为筵宴之所，文渊未备夫馆阁之隆。
现代文：奉天殿不应做筵宴的场所，文渊阁还未完备作为馆阁之隆。
English: The Bongten Hall should not be used as a place for banquets, and the Wen Yuan Pavilion is not yet complete as a pavilion.

古文：太常非俗乐之可肄，官妓非人道之所为。
现代文：太常寺不是研习俗乐的地方，设立官妓也不是人道之所为。
English: Taizhoji Temple is not a place to study folk music, and the establishment of courtesans is not a humane act.

古文：禁绝倡优，易置寺阉。
现代文：应禁绝倡优，改设宦官机构。
English: It should be forbidden to advocate excellence, and eunuch institutions should be established instead.

古文：执戟陛墀，皆为吉士；虎贲趣马，悉用俊良。
现代文：持戟阶前的卫士，都选用英美之士；驱马护驾的勇士，都挑选俊良之才。
English: The guards in front of the palanquin were all chosen from the British and Americans; the warriors driving the horses and escorting the chariot were all chosen from the handsome talents.

古文：除山泽之禁税，蠲务镇之征商。
现代文：废除山林川泽的禁税，蠲免市镇贸易的征税。
English: The prohibition of taxes on mountains, forests and rivers will be abolished, and the taxation of municipal trade will be exempted.

古文：木辂朴居，而土木之工勿起；布垦荒田，而四裔之地勿贪。
现代文：乘木车居简室，不大兴土木工程；垦野地开荒田，不贪取邻族土地。
English: They live in cabins with wooden carriages and do not do much in the way of civil engineering; they cultivate barren fields and do not covet the land of their neighbors.

古文：释、老之壮者驱之，俾复于人伦；经咒之妄者火之，俾绝其欺诳。
现代文：将壮健的僧侣道士驱出，使他们恢复人伦生活；将荒谬的经书符咒焚毁，以杜绝它们欺骗惑乱。
English: Expel the powerful monks and Taoists and restore their ethical life; burn the absurd scriptures and curses to prevent them from deceiving and confusing.

古文：绝鬼巫，破淫祀，省冗官，减细县。痛惩法外之威刑，永革京城之工役。
现代文：禁绝鬼巫，破除不合礼法的祭祀；裁省冗官，并省却人少地狭的郡县；严惩法律以外的威刑，永远革除京城的工役。
English: The ban on ghosts and witches, the elimination of sacrificial rites that are not in accordance with etiquette and law; the reduction of redundant officials in provinces, and the elimination of counties with few people; the severe punishment of intimidation outside the law, and the permanent elimination of laborers in Beijing.

古文：流十年而听复，杖八十以无加。
现代文：流放十年后听任回乡，杖打八十即不再加刑。
English: After ten years of exile, he was allowed to return to his hometown, and the punishment was no longer increased if he was caned eighty times.

古文：妇女非帷薄不修，毋令逮系；大臣有过恶当诛，不宜加辱。
现代文：妇女除非闺门不修，不能逮捕；大臣犯有罪行当诛，不能侮辱。
English: A woman cannot be arrested unless she is a slut; a minister cannot be insulted unless he has committed a crime.

古文：治历明时，授民作事，但申播植之宜，何用建除之谬。
现代文：编历法以申明时令，方便百姓生活劳作，只需说明何时适于种植，何必说明这样做或不那样做的原因。
English: The calendar method is to declare the season and facilitate the people's life and work. It is only necessary to explain when it is suitable for planting, and why it is necessary to explain the reasons for doing so or not doing so.

古文：所宜著者，日月之行，星辰之次。
现代文：所应当记入历法的，是日月的运行，星辰的位置。
English: What should be recorded in the calendar is the movement of the sun and moon, the position of the stars.

古文：仰观俯察，事合逆顺。七政之齐，正此类也。
现代文：仰观天象，俯察地理，万事符合自然规律，日月五星七政整齐，正是如此。
English: Looking up at the celestial bodies, looking down at the geography, everything conforms to the laws of nature, the sun, the moon, the five stars and the seven political systems are all in order. This is exactly the case.

古文：近年以来，台纲不肃。以刑名轻重为能事，以问囚多寡为勋劳，甚非所以励清要、长风采也。
现代文： 近年以来，纲纪不严，专以刑罚轻重为能事，以审案多少定功劳，这很不符合为政清廉、颂扬风俗的宗旨。
English: In recent years, the system of discipline has been lax, focusing on the severity of punishments and giving more or less credit to judges. This is not in line with the goal of making politics clean and praising customs.

古文：御史纠弹，皆承密旨。每闻上有赦宥，则必故为执持。意谓如此，则上恩愈重。
现代文：御史的纠察弹劾，都上承皇上密旨，每听说皇上要赦免罪犯，他们便故意持反对意见，以为这样做便更得皇上重视。
English: The pickets and impeachments of imperial history were all carried out in accordance with the emperor's secret order. Whenever they heard that the emperor wanted to pardon criminals, they deliberately held opposing views, thinking that doing so would gain more attention from the emperor.

古文：此皆小人趋媚效劳之细术，陛下何不肝胆而镜照之哉？
现代文：这都是小人献媚效劳的伎俩，陛下为什么不能做到心中雪亮呢？
English: This is all a trick of the villain to flatter and serve. Why can't His Majesty have a pure heart?

古文：陛下进人不择贤否，授职不量重轻。
现代文： 陛下用人不论贤明与否，授职不分轻重高低。
English: His Majesty employs people, whether they are wise or not, and bestows positions on them, regardless of their importance.

古文：建不为君用之法，所谓取之尽锱铢；置朋奸倚法之条，所谓用之如泥沙。
现代文：设立不为君王所用的制度，此所谓取之尽锱铢；制定能被奸党借用的法律，此所谓用之如泥沙。
English: To establish a system that is not for the use of kings is called exhausting; to establish a law that can be borrowed by the corrupt party is called using it like sand.

古文：监生进士，经明行修，而多屈于下僚；孝廉人材，冥蹈瞽趋，而或布于朝省。
现代文：监生和进士，通晓经书又有修养，却多屈居为下级官吏；孝廉等人才，昏庸愚昧不知所以，却有些充任部院官员。
English: The probationers and young scholars are well-versed in scriptures and cultivated, but most of them are relegated to lower-level officials; talents such as filial piety, ignorance and stupidity do not know why, but some are appointed as ministry and academy officials.

古文：椎埋嚚悍之夫，阘茸下愚之辈。朝捐刀镊，暮拥冠裳。左弃筐箧，右绾组符。
现代文：杀人埋尸的凶悍之夫，品格卑鄙的愚蠢之辈，早上刚放下刀镊，晚上便穿上冠裳，左手放下筐箧，右手便绾起组符。
English: The fierce husband of a murderer who buries corpses, and the foolish men of mean character, in the morning just put down the knife and sickle, in the evening they put on the crown, in the left hand they put down the basket and sickle, and in the right hand they pick up the hammers.

古文：是故贤者羞为之等列，庸人悉习其风流。
现代文：所以贤者羞于与他们同列一等，而庸人都仿效他们的处世方法。
English: So the wise are ashamed to be classed with them, and the vulgar imitate their manners.

古文：以贪婪苟免为得计，以廉洁受刑为饰辞。
现代文：他们以贪婪苟免为得计，以廉洁受刑为饰辞。
English: They use greed as a strategy to get off scot-free, and they use being punished for their integrity as an excuse.

古文：出于吏部者无贤否之分，入于刑部者无枉直之判。
现代文：出于吏部为官的没有贤否之分，入于刑部受审的没有枉直之判。
English: There is no merit or demerit point for those who are officials of the Criminal Investigation Department, and there is no unjustified sentence for those who are tried by the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：天下皆谓陛下任喜怒为生杀，而不知皆臣下之乏忠良也。
现代文：以至于天下的人都以为陛下是凭喜怒情绪而定生杀，却不知这都是由于臣下缺乏忠良之人的原因。
English: So much so that people all over the world thought that His Majesty was determined to live and die by his emotions of joy and anger, but they did not know that this was all due to the lack of loyal people among his subjects.

古文：古者善恶，乡邻必记。
现代文： 古代凡善恶之事，乡邻必记下来。
English: All the good and evil deeds of ancient times must be recorded by the villagers.

古文：今虽有申明旌善之举，而无党庠乡学之规。互知之法虽严，训告之方未备。
现代文：如今虽然有申明表彰善事之举，却没有乡里学校之规；互相监督之法虽严，训导劝告之法未备。
English: Nowadays, although there are affirmations to commend good deeds, there is no village school regulation; although the law of mutual supervision is strict, the law of discipline and advice is not prepared.

古文：臣欲求古人治家之礼，睦邻之法，若古蓝田吕氏之《乡约》，今义门郑氏之家范，布之天下。
现代文：臣想访求古人治家之礼、睦邻之法，像古代蓝田吕氏的《乡约》、今世义门郑氏的《家范》，颁布于天下。
English: The vassal wanted to visit and ask the ancients for the etiquette of family management and the law of good-neighborliness, like the "Countryside Covenant" of the ancient Lantian Lu and the "Family Standard" of the present-day Yimeng Zheng, which were promulgated throughout the world.

古文：世臣大族，率先以劝，旌之复之，为民表帅。将见作新于变，至于比屋可封不难矣。
现代文：世臣大族，率先根据它们来劝导乡族，朝廷进行表彰和奖励，让他们为百姓做表率，这样将会见到除旧立新的景象，而要做到人人皆贤、比屋可封已不难了。
English: The great vassals of the world will take the lead in persuading the villagers according to them, and the imperial court will commend and reward them, so that they can set an example for the people. In this way, we will see the scene of removing the old and establishing the new, and it is not difficult to achieve everyone is virtuous and the villa can be sealed.

古文：陛下天资至高，合于道微。
现代文： 陛下天资很高，合于道微。
English: His Majesty is highly gifted and well-suited to the Buddhist path.

古文：神怪妄诞，臣知陛下洞瞩之矣。
现代文：神怪荒诞之事，臣知道陛下已洞察它们了。
English: In matters of the supernatural and the fantastic, I know that Your Majesty has seen through them.

古文：然犹不免所谓神道设教者，臣谓不必然也。
现代文：但还不免有所谓神道设教的举措，臣以为不必这样。
English: However, there were also moves to introduce so-called Shinto teachings, which the vassal thought unnecessary.

古文：一统之舆图已定矣，一时之人心已服矣，一切之奸雄已慴矣。
现代文：一统之舆图已经定了，一时之人心已经屈服了，一切之奸雄也已慑服了。
English: The unified public opinion has been determined, the momentary human heart has yielded, and all the villains have been deterred.

古文：天无变灾，民无患害。圣躬康宁，圣子圣孙继继绳绳。所谓得真符者矣。
现代文：上天没有灾变，百姓没有患害，圣躬康健，圣子圣孙继继绳绳，此所谓得真符者矣。
English: There is no calamity in heaven, there is no harm to the people, the saints are healthy, the holy sons and grandsons are succeeding the rope, this is the so-called true match.

古文：何必兴师以取宝为名，谕众以神仙为征应也哉。
现代文：何必兴师以取宝为名，对人民说以神仙为征应呢？
English: Why does Xing Shi take treasure as his name, and say to the people that gods and immortals are his reward?

古文：臣观地有盛衰，物有盈虚，而商税之征，率皆定额。
现代文： 臣观地有盛衰，物有盈虚，而所征的商税，却都是定额。
English: There are ups and downs in the view of subjects, and there are gains and losses, but the commercial taxes levied are all fixed amounts.

古文：是使其或盈也，奸黠得以侵欺；其歉也，良善困于补纳。
现代文：这就使贸易兴盛时，奸猾之徒得以侵欺；而生意不好时，良善之辈困于补纳。
English: This enables the crafty to cheat when trade is good, and the virtuous to compensate when trade is bad.

古文：夏税一也，而茶椒有粮，果丝有税。
现代文：夏税是统一的，而茶叶辣椒要征粮，水果蚕丝也有税。
English: The summer tax is unified, while tea and chili peppers are subject to grain levies, and there is also a tax on fruit silk.

古文：既税于所产之地，又税于所过之津，何其夺民之利至于如此之密也！
现代文：既在产地征税，又在所经过的关津征税，怎么夺民之利竟是如此严重呢？
English: How can it be so serious to deprive the people of their profits by levying taxes both at the place of origin and at the customs checkpoints?

古文：且多贫下之家，不免抛荒之咎。
现代文：而且百姓多是贫下之家，遇到这种情况便不免抛荒之祸。
English: Moreover, most of the people are from poor families, and when they encounter this situation, they cannot avoid the scourge of abandonment.

古文：今日之土地，无前日之生植；而今日之征聚，有前日之税粮。
现代文：今日之田地，没有前日之产量，而今日之征取，仍照前日之税额。
English: Today's fields do not have the previous day's output, and today's collection is still according to the previous day's tax amount.

古文：或卖产以供税，产去而税存；或赔办以当役，役重而民困。
现代文：有些不得不卖掉产业以交税，而产业已失税额仍在；有的赔财来免徭役，但徭役过重以至于百姓受困。
English: Some had to sell their properties to pay the tax, but the lost property tax is still there; some lost money to be exempted from corvee, but the corvee was so heavy that the people were trapped.

古文：土田之高下不均，起科之轻重无别。膏腴而税反轻，瘠卤而税反重。
现代文：土地之肥瘦高下不均，而起科之轻重却没有差别；膏腴之地税额反而较轻，瘠卤之地税额反倒较重。
English: The fatness and thinness of the land varies from high to low, but there is no difference in the weight of the starting technology; the tax amount of the land of the anointed is lighter, but the tax amount of the land of the anointed is heavier.

古文：欲拯困而革其弊，莫若行授田均田之法，兼行常平义仓之举。
现代文：要想拯救民困而革除这些弊端，莫如实行授田均田之法，兼而实行常平义仓之举。
English: In order to save the people from poverty and eliminate these drawbacks, it is necessary to implement the law of granting land and equalizing land, and at the same time implement the move of Jangpyeong Yikang.

古文：积之以渐，至有九年之食无难者。臣闻仲尼曰： 王公设险以守其国。 
现代文：这样发展下去，国家便不难有九年之储粮了。 臣听孔子说过： 王公设险以守其国。 
English: If this kind of development continues, it will not be difficult for the country to have a grain reserve of nine years.The minister heard Confucius say: "The king takes risks to protect his country.

古文：近世狃于晏安，堕名城，销锋镝，禁兵讳武，以为太平。
现代文：近世习于天下无事，便毁坏名城，销毁锋镝，禁革兵政，讳言武事，以为是天下太平。
English: In modern times, learning that there was nothing wrong with the world, they destroyed famous cities, destroyed frontiers, banned the military government of the Red Army, and kept silent about military affairs, thinking that the world was peaceful.

古文：一旦有不测之虞，连城望风而靡。
现代文：一旦发生不测之虞，便连城望风披靡。
English: Once there is a risk of an accident, even the city watchman is invincible.

古文：及今宜敕有司整葺，宽之以岁月，守之以里胥，额设弓手，兼教民兵。
现代文：如今宜敕令有关官员进行整治，宽至一年，用里胥负责守卫，配以弓箭手，兼教民兵。
English: Now it is appropriate to order the relevant officials to carry out the rectification, up to one year wide, with the village guard responsible for guarding, equipped with archers, and also teaching the militia.

古文：开武举以收天下之英雄，广乡校以延天下之俊乂。
现代文：开创武举以网罗天下之英雄，广设乡校以延揽天下之俊才。
English: to create martial arts to attract the world's heroes, and to set up rural schools to attract the world's talents.

古文：古时多有书院学田，贡士有庄，义田有族，皆宜兴复而广益之。
现代文：古时多有书院和学田，村庄有贡士，宗族有义田，这些都宜恢复并加以推广。
English: In ancient times, there were many colleges and school fields, villages had gongs, and clans had yidans. All of these should be restored and promoted.

古文：夫罪人不孥，罚弗及嗣。
现代文： 给人加罪不应罪及子女，惩罚不宜连及后代。
English: It is not right to add crimes to people and their children, and punishments should not be passed on to future generations.

古文：连坐起于秦法，孥戮本于伪书。
现代文：连坐起于秦代的法律，诛杀子女本于伪书。
English: The laws of the Qin Dynasty, the killing of children, were based on forged books.

古文：今之为善者妻子未必蒙荣，有过者里胥必陷其罪。
现代文：当今为善的人的妻子儿女未必得蒙恩荣，而有过失的里胥小吏必一并给他们加罪。
English: The wives and children of today's do-gooders may not be glorified, but the guilty petty officials will add to their guilt.

古文：况律以人伦为重，而有给配妇女之条，听之于不义，则又何取夫节义哉。
现代文：况且法律以人伦为重，而法律又有将妇女配给功臣之条，听任他们已不义，则又怎样要求她们保持节义呢？
English: Moreover, the law places great importance on human relations, and the law allocates women to meritorious soldiers, and it is unjust to let them go, so how can they be required to maintain righteousness?

古文：此风化之所由也。孔子曰： 名不正则言不顺。 
现代文：这是风俗转变之原因。 孔子说： 名不正则言不顺。 
English: This is the reason for the change in customs.Confucius said: "If the name is not right, the words are not right."

古文：尚书、侍郎，内侍也，而以加于六卿；郎中、员外，内职也，而以名于六属。
现代文：尚书、侍郎，本是内宫官名，而今却用来命名六卿。郎中、员外郎，也是宫内职名，而今也用来命名六卿属官。
English: Shangshu (尚書) and jirao (侍郎) used to be the official names of the Imperial Household, but now they are used to name the six nobles. Langzhong (郎中) and jiangairo (员外郎) are also the official names of the Imperial Household, but now they are also used to name the six nobles' subordinate officials.

古文：御史词臣，所以居宠台阁；郡守县令，不应回避乡邦。
现代文：御史是词臣，设立它是为了尊宠台阁；郡守和县令，不应回避乡邦。
English: The goshi is a courtier, and it was established to honor the favorite cabinet; the county governor and county magistrate should not avoid the hometown.

古文：同寅协恭，相倡以礼。
现代文：同处为官的人应恭敬和善，相待以礼。
English: Those who work as officials in the same place should be respectful and kind and treat each other with courtesy.

古文：而今内外百司捶楚属官，甚于奴隶。
现代文：而当今内外百司鞭打属官，甚于奴隶。
English: But today, there are hundreds of whipping officials at home and abroad, even more than slaves.

古文：是使柔懦之徒，荡无廉耻，进退奔趋，肌肤不保。
现代文：这就使柔懦之徒，荡然没有羞耻之心，进退奔趋，肌肤不保。
English: This makes the cowardly coward, without shame, rush forward and backward, and the skin is not protected.

古文：甚非所以长孝行、励节义也。
现代文：这样做很不符合长孝行、励节义的宗旨。
English: Doing so is very inconsistent with the purpose of filial piety and encouragement.

古文：臣以为自今非犯罪恶解官，笞杖之刑勿用。催科督厉，小有过差，蒲鞭示辱，亦足惩矣。
现代文：臣以为从今以后，不是犯有罪恶被撤职的，不用笞杖之刑，催税督察，小有差错，跪下受鞭示辱，也足以惩罚他了。
English: The minister thought that from now on, if someone was removed from his post without committing a crime, he would not need to be punished with a cane. If a tax inspector made a small mistake, he would be punished by kneeling down and receiving a whip.

古文：臣但知罄竭愚衷，急于陈献，略无次序，惟陛下幸垂鉴焉。
现代文： 臣但知竭尽愚衷，急于陈献，略无次序，望陛下幸垂鉴之。 
English: Vassal Danzhi exhausted all his ingenuity, eager to present, slightly out of order, I hope His Majesty will learn from it.

古文：书奏，帝称其才。
现代文：该书上奏后，皇上称赞他的才华。
English: After the book was published, the emperor praised his talent.

古文：已，复献《太平十策》，文多不录。
现代文：后来，解缙又献上《太平十策》，但内容多，此处不载。
English: Later, he also presented the "Ten Peaceful Measures," but there are many contents, which are not included here.

古文：缙尝入兵部索皂隶，语嫚。
现代文：解缙曾入兵部索要奴隶，出言不逊。
English: Xie Jun once joined the military and demanded a slave, which was an outrageous statement.

古文：尚书沈溍以闻。
现代文：尚书沈潜报告皇上。
English: Shangshu's sinking report is ready, Your Majesty.

古文：帝曰： 缙以冗散自恣耶。 
现代文：皇上说 ：解缙敢玩世而放恣吗？ 
English: The emperor said, "Does the emperor dare to play with the world and act arbitrarily?"

古文：命改为御史。
现代文：命改任他为御史。
English: He was appointed to the position of goshi.

古文：韩国公李善长得罪死，缙代郎中王国用草疏白其冤。
现代文：韩国公李善长得罪被诛，解缙代郎中王国用起草奏疏为他鸣冤。
English: South Korean public official Ri Son Gwon was arrested for a crime, and the king's son-in-law used the drafting of a report to avenge him.

古文：又为同官夏长文草疏，劾都御史袁泰。
现代文：他还为同官夏长文起草奏疏，弹劾都御史袁泰。
English: He also drafted a report for his colleague Xia Changwen to impeach Yuan Tai, the governor of the capital.

古文：泰深衔之。
现代文：袁泰非常恨他。
English: Yuan Tai hated him very much.

古文：时近臣父皆得入觐。
现代文：当时近臣之父都得入宫觐见皇上。
English: At that time, the fathers of close retainers had to go to the Imperial Palace to see the Emperor.

古文：缙父开至，帝谓曰： 大器晚成，若以而子归，益令进学，后十年来，大用未晚也。 
现代文：解缙的父亲解开到后，皇上对他说： 大器晚成，你带你的儿子回去，令他进一步学习，十年后再来，大用未晚也。 
English: After his father arrived, the emperor said to him, "You are a late bloomer. You should take your son back and let him study further. Come back in ten years. It's not too late."

古文：归八年，太祖崩，缙入临京师。
现代文：解缙回家后八年，太祖驾崩，解缙入京向太祖遗体哭哀。
English: Eight years after Xie Jun returned home, his grandfather passed away, and Xie Jun went to Beijing to mourn his grandfather's body.

古文：有司劾缙违诏旨，且母丧未葬，父年九十，不当舍以行。
现代文：有关官员弹劾解缙违背诏旨，而且他母亲去世未葬，父亲年已九十，不应当舍弃他们而出行。
English: The officials concerned should not abandon the impeachment and dismissal of the imperial edict in violation of the imperial edict, and his mother's death has not been buried, and his father is 90 years old.

古文：谪河州卫吏。
现代文：解缙被贬为河州卫吏。
English: He was demoted to the position of Hezhou Guardsman.

古文：时礼部侍郎董伦方为惠帝所信任，缙因寓书于伦曰： 缙率易狂愚，无所避忌，数上封事，所言分封势重，万一不幸，必有厉长、吴濞之虞。
现代文：当时礼部侍郎董伦正受惠帝信任，解缙便寄信给董伦说： 我解缙直率轻狂，无所避忌，多次上封言事，所说的是分封之势太重，万一不幸有事，必有汉代厉王刘长、吴王刘濞之忧。
English: At that time, the etiquette attendant, Dong Lun, was trusted by Emperor Hui, and the eulogist sent a letter to Dong Lun, saying: I am a straightforward and frivolous eulogist, with no scruples, and I have made many eulogies. What I have said is that the power of division is too heavy. In case of misfortune, there must be the worries of Liu Chang, the king of the Han Dynasty, and Liu Ye, the king of Wu.

古文：冉阝哈术来归，钦承顾问，谓宜待之有礼，稍忤机权，其徒必贰。
现代文：冉阝哈术来归附，我蒙皇上顾问，说应待之以礼，如果稍微触忤机权，他的属下必然反叛。
English: I was advised by the emperor's adviser that I should be polite, and that if I touched the power of the scepter, his subordinates would inevitably rebel.

古文：此类非一，颇皆亿中。
现代文：这种事情不止一项，都在我的意料之中。
English: More than one of these things has come to pass, all of them within my expectations.

古文：又尝为王国用草谏书，言韩国事，为詹徽所疾，欲中以危法。
现代文：我又曾为王国用起草进谏之书，论韩国公之事，为詹徽所恨，想致我于重罪。
English: I also used to draft the imperial edict for the kingdom, on Korean public affairs, which was hated by Zhan Hui, who wanted to make me a felon.

古文：伏蒙圣恩，申之慰谕，重以镪赐，令以十年著述，冠带来廷。
现代文：我伏蒙圣恩劝慰，还赐给钱币，令回家用十年时间著述，然后冠带来朝廷。
English: I was consoled by the grace of God, given money, and told to go home and spend ten years writing, and then take the crown to the imperial court.

古文：《元史》舛误，承命改修，及踵成《宋书》，删定《礼经》，凡例皆已留中。
现代文：《元史》有阙误，我奉命改修，后来又编成《宋书》，删定《礼经》，这些书的凡例都已留在宫中。
English: There was a mistake in the "Original History," I was ordered to revise it, and later compiled it into the "Song Book" and deleted the "Rituals." The examples of these books have been left in the palace.

古文：奉亲之暇，杜门纂述，渐有次第，洊将八载。
现代文：我在家奉亲之暇，杜门著述，逐渐有了次第，再有八年，便可成功。
English: In my spare time at home with relatives, I gradually got the hang of writing, and in another eight years, I would be successful.

古文：宾天之讣忽闻，痛切欲绝。
现代文：突然听到惊天之讣，我痛切欲绝。
English: When I suddenly heard the shocking news, I was distraught.

古文：母丧在殡，未遑安厝。家有九十之亲，倚门望思，皆不暇恋。冀一拜山陵，陨泪九土。
现代文：母丧在殡，还来不及安葬，家有年已九十的父亲，倚门望思，这些我都无暇顾念，只望一拜山陵，洒泪九土。
English: My mother is at a funeral, and it's too late to bury her. My father, who is 90 years old, is at home, leaning on the door and looking at me. I don't have time to think about these things. I just look at the mountains and mausoleums and shed tears.

古文：何图诖误，蒙恩远行。
现代文：哪想到被误解而失官，蒙圣恩远行。
English: Who would have thought that being misunderstood and losing one's position would lead to a long journey with God's grace.

古文：扬、粤之人，不耐寒暑，复多疾病。俯仰奔趋，伍于吏卒，诚不堪忍。
现代文：扬、粤地区的人，不耐寒暑，况且我又多病，俯仰奔走，与吏卒为伍，诚不堪忍受。
English: People in Yang and Guangdong regions do not tolerate cold and heat, and I am also sickly, running up and down, and being in the company of officials, which is unbearable.

古文：昼夜涕泣，恒惧不测。负平生之心，抱万古之痛。
现代文：我昼夜涕泣，总怕有不测之灾，致使负平生之志，抱万古之恨。
English: I cry day and night, always afraid of an unforeseen disaster, resulting in a negative life-long aspiration, embracing the hatred of the ages.

古文：是以数鸣知感。
现代文：所以我多次发出受知之叹。
English: That's why I've sighed with relief so many times.

古文：冀还京师，得望天颜，或遂南还，父子相见，即更生之日也。 
现代文：我希望能回到京师，得以见到皇上天颜，或者能南返，父子相见，那时将是我再生之日。 
English: I hope that I will be able to return to Beijing and see the emperor's face, or that I will be able to return to the south and see my father and son. That will be the day of my rebirth.

古文：伦乃荐缙，召为翰林待诏。
现代文：董伦于是推荐解缙，皇上召他为翰林待诏。
English: Therefore, Dong Lun recommended to solve the riddle, and the emperor summoned him to wait for the imperial edict.

古文：成祖入京师，擢侍读。命与黄淮、杨士奇、胡广、金幼孜、杨荣、胡俨并直文渊阁，预机务。
现代文：成祖入京师后，解缙升为侍读，受命与黄淮、杨士奇、胡广、金幼孜、杨荣、胡俨一起在文渊阁当值，参预机务。
English: After Cheng Zu entered Beijing as a teacher, he was promoted to an attendant, and was ordered to be on duty at Wenyuan Pavilion with Huang Huai, Yang Shichi, Hu Guang, Jin Yuzi, Yang Rong, and Hu Yao, and participate in the preparatory work.

古文：内阁预机务自此始。
现代文：内阁参预机务自此而始。
English: This was the beginning of the Cabinet participation mechanism.

古文：寻进侍读学士，奉命总裁《太祖实录》及《列女传》。
现代文：不久解缙进升为侍读学士，奉命任《太祖实录》和《列女传》总裁。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to attendant bachelor, and was appointed president of "Grandfather's Record" and "Women's Biography."

古文：书成，赐银币。
现代文：书成之后，他受赐银币。
English: After the book was written, he was given a silver coin.

古文：永乐二年，皇太子立，进缙翰林学士兼右春坊大学士。
现代文：永乐二年，皇太子立，解缙升为翰林学士兼右春坊大学士。
English: In the second year of Yongle, the crown prince was established, and he was promoted to Hanlin Baccalaureate and Right Spring University.

古文：帝尝召缙等曰： 尔七人朝夕左右，朕嘉尔勤慎，时言之宫中。
现代文：皇上曾召见解缙等人，说： 你们七人朝夕在朕左右，朕嘉奖你们的勤苦和谨慎，时常在宫中说起你们。
English: The emperor once summoned the seven wise men and said, "You seven are around me morning and evening. I commend you for your diligence and prudence, and often speak of you in the palace.

古文：恒情，慎初易，保终难，愿共勉焉。 
现代文：慎始易而保终难，这是常理。愿我们一起共勉。 
English: It is common sense that it is easier to be prudent at the beginning than to be safe at the end. May we all strive together.

古文：因各赐五品服，命七人命妇朝皇后于柔仪殿，后劳赐备至。
现代文：并给各人赐给五品官服，命七人的命妇到柔仪殿朝见皇后，皇后慰劳了她们并给予赏赐。
English: He also gave each of them a five-rank official uniform and ordered the seven widows to come to see the Empress in the morning at the Jiuyi Hall. The Empress consoled them and gave them a reward.

古文：又以立春日赐缙等金绮衣，与尚书埒。
现代文：皇上还在立春之日赐给解缙等人金绮衣，所赐与尚书相等。
English: On the day of the first day of spring, the emperor also gave gold embroidered robes to Ge Ying and others, which was equal to Shang Shu.

古文：缙等入谢，帝曰： 代言之司，机密所系，且旦夕侍朕，裨益不在尚书下也。 
现代文：解缙等人入朝推辞，皇上说： 代言机构是机密所系，况且你们旦夕侍候朕，对朕的帮助实不在尚书之下。 
English: The emperor said: "The endorsement agency is a confidential one, and besides, you wait for me day and night, and your help to me is really not in the books."

古文：一日，帝御奉天门，谕六科诸臣直言，因顾缙等曰： 王、魏之风，世不多有。
现代文：一天，皇上御临奉天门，传谕六科诸臣进直言，并回头对解缙等人说： 王导、魏征进谏之风，世不多有。
English: One day, the emperor appeared at the gate of heaven, and sent forth the six sciences to the courtiers, and he turned to the scholars and said, "There are not many people in the world like Wang Du and Wei Zheng.

古文：若使进言者无所惧，听言者无所忤，天下何患不治？
现代文：如果使进言的人无所畏惧，听言的人不怕忤逆，何患天下不治？
English: If you make the speaker fearless and the listener fearless, what is there to fear?

古文：朕与尔等共勉之。 
现代文：朕与你们共勉之。 
English: I am with you all the way.

古文：其年秋，胡俨出为祭酒，缙等六人从容献纳。帝尝虚己以听。
现代文：这年秋，胡俨出任祭酒，解缙等六人从容向皇上献言，皇上常常虚怀接受。
English: In the autumn of that year, six people, including Hu Yao, who served as the sacrificial wine, and Xie Yao, gave a speech to the emperor, which the emperor often accepted in vain.

古文：缙少登朝，才高，任事直前，表里洞达。
现代文：解缙少年登朝，才智至高，凡事都敢上前答对，表里洞达。
English: Zhaozhou boy ascended to the throne, talent is supreme, everything dares to come forward and answer correctly, and the inside and outside are clear.

古文：引拔士类，有一善称之不容口。
现代文：他引荐士人，只要有某一方面的长处，总要加以称赞。
English: He recommended that scholars should always be praised as long as they have certain strengths.

古文：然好臧否，无顾忌，廷臣多害其宠。
现代文：但他好品评人物，无所顾忌，廷臣多忌妒他受宠。
English: But he liked to praise people and had no scruples, and courtiers envied him for being favored.

古文：又以定储议，为汉王高煦所忌，遂致败。
现代文：后来因在议定太子问题上为汉王朱高煦所忌，终于致败。
English: Later, because of the Han King Zhu Gaozhang's objection to the issue of the agreed-upon crown prince, it was finally defeated.

古文：先是，储位未定，淇国公邱福言汉王有功，宜立。帝密问缙。
现代文：原先，太子未定，淇国公丘福说汉王有功，应立他为太子。
English: Originally, the crown prince was undecided, but Qi Guogong Qufu said that Han Wang had made great contributions, and he should be made crown prince.

古文：缙称： 皇长子仁孝，天下归心。 
现代文：皇上密问解缙，解缙说： 皇长子仁孝，天下归心。 
English: The emperor asked Ge Ying, and Ge Ying said, "The emperor's eldest son, Nintaka, has won the hearts of the people.

古文：帝不应。
现代文：皇上没有反应。
English: Gaozu did not answer.

古文：缙又顿首曰： 好圣孙。 
现代文：解缙又叩头说道 ：好圣孙。 
English: He bowed his head and said, "Good grandson."

古文：谓宣宗也。
现代文：圣孙指宣宗。
English: Sun Tzu's The Art of War.

古文：帝颔之。太子遂定。
现代文：皇上点了点头，这样太子便定了下来。
English: The emperor nodded his head, and so the prince agreed.

古文：高煦由是深恨缙。
现代文：朱高煦由此深恨解缙。
English: As a result, Zhu Gaozhen hated to solve the riddle.

古文：会大发兵讨安南，缙谏。
现代文：正值大发兵讨伐安南，解缙谏阻。
English: It is time to send a large number of troops to fight Annan and resolve the resistance.

古文：不听。卒平之，置郡县。
现代文：皇上不听，最后讨平了安南，设置郡县管理。
English: The emperor did not listen, and finally settled with Annan, setting up county management.

古文：而太子既立，又时时失帝意。高煦宠益隆，礼秩逾嫡。
现代文：而太子建立以后，又时常有失皇上心意，由此朱高煦更加受宠，礼仪等级超过了嫡子。
English: But after the establishment of the prince, he often lost the emperor's heart, which made Zhu Gaojun more favored, and his etiquette level exceeded that of his legitimate son.

古文：缙又谏曰： 是启争也，不可。 
现代文：解缙又进谏说 ：这样做会引发争端，不可。 
English: Xie Yao and Jin Yao said, "Doing this will cause a dispute, so it must not be done."

古文：帝怒，谓其离间骨肉，恩礼浸衰。
现代文：皇上火了，说他离间骨肉，解缙所受的恩宠便渐衰了。
English: The emperor was enraged, saying that he had torn the flesh from the bones, and the favor he had received from the emperor was fading away.

古文：四年，赐黄淮等五人二品纱罗衣，而不及缙。
现代文：四年赐给黄淮等五人二品纱罗衣，解缙没有份。
English: In four years, five people, including Huang Huai, were given second-class saris and robes, but they did not have a share of the dowry.

古文：久之，福等议稍稍传达外廷，高煦遂谮缙泄禁中语。
现代文：后来，丘福等人的意见稍稍传到外廷，朱高煦于是诬陷解缙泄露宫中语。
English: Later, the opinions of Chufu and others were slightly spread to the outer court, and Zhu Gaozhen was then framed for leaking the palace Chinese language.

古文：明年，缙坐廷试读卷不公，谪广西布政司参议。
现代文：第二年，解缙被判廷试读阅卷子不公，贬任广西布政司参议。
English: The following year, he was sentenced by the court for unfair trial reading and was demoted to the position of the political secretary of Guangxi Province.

古文：既行，礼部郎中李至刚言缙怨望，改交阯，命督饷化州。
现代文：解缙出行后，礼部郎中李至刚说他心怀怨望，被改到交趾，命他在化州督饷。
English: After the trip, Li Zhigang, a member of the Rectification Department, said that he harbored a grudge, was changed to a comrade, and ordered him to be the governor of Huazhou.

古文：永乐八年，缙奏事入京，值帝北征，缙谒皇太子而还。
现代文：永乐八年，解缙因奏事入京，正值皇上北征，解缙拜见皇太子后返回。
English: In the eighth year of Yongle, Xie Ye went to Beijing for a report, just as the emperor went on the Northern Expedition, and Xie Ye returned after meeting the crown prince.

古文：汉王言缙伺上出，私觐太子，径归，无人臣礼。
现代文：汉王便说解缙看准皇上出行，私谒太子，径直返回，没有人臣之礼。
English: The Han king then said that he would like to see the emperor go on a trip, and I, the crown prince, would return directly, without the courtesy of a vassal.

古文：帝震怒。
现代文：皇上震怒。
English: The Emperor was furious.

古文：缙时方偕检讨王偁道广东，览山川，上疏请凿赣江通南北。
现代文：解缙当时正偕同检讨王翶取道广东，游览山川，上疏请开凿赣江勾通南北。
English: At that time, the solution was to discuss with Wang Xuan the way to Guangdong, to visit the mountains and rivers, and to request the excavation of the Lijiang River from the north to the south.

古文：奏至，逮缙下诏狱，拷掠备至。词连大理丞汤宗，宗人府经历高得抃，中允李贯，赞善王汝玉，编修朱纮，检讨蒋骥、潘畿、萧引高并及至刚，皆下狱。
现代文：奏书传到后，解缙被逮入诏狱，拷打备至，还牵连到大理寺丞汤宗、宗人府经历高得、中允李贯、赞善王汝玉、编修朱、检讨蒋骥、潘畿、萧引高以及李至刚，将他们全部投进监狱。
English: After the report was delivered, he was arrested and sent to the imperial prison, where he was tortured. He was also implicated with Tang Zong of Dali Temple, Gao De of Zongrenfu, Li Gang of Zhongyun, Wang Ruyu of Zanzan, Zhu Xiu of Henan, Jiang Wei, Pangui, Xiao Ying Gao and Li Zhigang, and all of them were thrown into prison.

古文：汝玉、贯、纮、引高、得抃皆瘐死。
现代文：王汝玉、李贯、萧引高、高得都死于狱中。
English: Wang Ryuyu, Li Gang, Xiao Qian Gao and Gao De all died in prison.

古文：十三年，锦衣卫帅纪纲上囚籍，帝见缙姓名曰： 缙犹在耶？ 
现代文：十三年，锦衣卫统帅纪纲呈上囚犯名册，皇上见到解缙的名字，便说： 解缙还在世吗？ 
English: In the thirteenth year, the commander-in-chief of the Jin Yi Wei, Ji Gang, submitted a prisoner roster. When the emperor saw the name of Xie Xuan, he said: Is Xie Xuan still alive?

古文：纲遂醉缙酒，埋积雪中，立死。年四十七。
现代文：纪纲于是用酒将解缙灌醉，埋在雪中。解缙立死，终年四十七岁。
English: Therefore, Ji Gang intoxicated Xie Yao with wine and buried him in the snow. Xie Yao died at the age of forty-seven.

古文：籍其家，妻子宗族徙辽东。
现代文：将其抄家，妻儿宗族都迁到辽东。
English: His home was raided and his wife and children moved to Liaodong.

古文：方缙居翰林时，内官张兴恃宠笞人左顺门外，缙叱之，兴敛手退。
现代文：解缙在翰林院时，宦官张兴恃宠在左顺门外打人，解缙呵斥他，张兴敛手而退。
English: When Zhang Xing was in Hanlin Courthouse, the eunuch Zhang Xingzhuang hit someone outside the left door, Zhang Xing rebuked him, and Zhang Xing retreated.

古文：帝尝书廷臣名，命缙各疏其短长。
现代文：皇上曾写出廷臣姓名，命解缙各述其优缺点。
English: The emperor once wrote down the names of his courtiers and ordered them to describe their strengths and weaknesses.

古文：缙言： 蹇义天资厚重，中无定见。
现代文：解缙说： 蹇义天资厚重，但胸无主意。
English: Xie Yao said: "Xi Yi is a man of great talent, but he has no idea.

古文：夏原吉有德量，不远小人。
现代文：夏原吉有德量，但不远小人。
English: Natsuhara Yoshitaka is a virtuous man, but he is far from being a villain.

古文：刘俊有才干，不知顾义。
现代文：刘俊有才干，但不知顾及道义。
English: Liu Jun is talented, but he does not care about morality.

古文：郑赐可谓君子，颇短于才。
现代文：郑赐可谓君子，但才华不高。
English: Zheng Qi can be described as a gentleman, but his talent is not high.

古文：李至刚诞而附势，虽才不端。
现代文：李至刚放荡而附势，虽有才而品行不端。
English: Li Zhigang indulged in debauchery and took advantage of his power. Although he was talented, he behaved improperly.

古文：黄福秉心易直，确有执守。
现代文：黄福秉性率直，为人确有原则。
English: Huang Fu is straightforward and principled.

古文：陈瑛刻于用法，尚能持廉。
现代文：陈瑛用法严厉，尚能持廉。
English: Chen Ying's usage is strict, but it can still be kept clean.

古文：宋礼戆直而苛，人怨不恤。
现代文：宋礼戆直而苛刻，不理会别人的怨愤。
English: Song Li is direct and harsh, and ignores the resentment of others.

古文：陈洽疏通警敏，亦不失正。
现代文：陈洽通达警敏，也不失正直。
English: Chen Jiaotong is alert and alert, but also honest.

古文：方宾簿书之才，驵侩之心。 
现代文：方宾是公文之才，牙商之心。 
English: Fang Bin is a talented writer and a dentist at heart.

古文：帝以付太子，太子因问尹昌隆、王汝玉。
现代文：皇上将这番话交给太子，太子便问起尹昌隆、王汝玉。
English: The emperor relayed these words to the prince, who then asked about Yin Changlong and Wang Ryuyu.

古文：缙对曰： 昌隆君子而量不弘。汝玉文翰不易得，惜有市心耳。 
现代文：解缙说 ：昌隆君子但度量不大；汝玉文翰之才难得，可惜有市侩心态。 
English: The commentary said, "Changlong is a gentleman, but he is not very meticulous; it is rare to have the talent of Yu Yuwenhan, but unfortunately he has the mentality of a philistine."

古文：后仁宗即位，出缙所疏示杨士奇曰： 人言缙狂，观所论列，皆有定见，不狂也。 
现代文：后来仁宗即位，将解缙的这番评论出示给杨士奇，说道： 人们说解缙狂，但看他的这番论列，都有见地，不狂也。 
English: Later, when Emperor Nanzong ascended to the throne, he showed Yang Shichi this commentary by Xie Qian and said: People say that Xie Qian is crazy, but looking at this series of his arguments, they are insightful and not crazy.

古文：诏归缙妻子宗族。
现代文：下诏放回解缙的妻儿宗族。
English: The family of the wife and child who were released from house arrest will be released.

古文：缙初与胡广同侍成祖宴。
现代文：解缙当初曾与胡广一同陪成祖入宴。
English: At the beginning, he and Hu Guang accompanied Chengzu to the banquet.

古文：帝曰： 尔二人生同里，长同学，仕同官。
现代文：皇上说 ：你们两人生同里、长同学、仕同官。
English: The emperor said, "You two have lived in the same village, been classmates for a long time, and served in the same government.

古文：缙有子，广可以女妻之。 
现代文：解缙有个儿子，胡广可以将女儿嫁给他为妻。 
English: He has a son, and Hu Guang can marry his daughter to him.

古文：广顿首曰： 臣妻方娠，未卜男女。 
现代文：胡广叩头说道 ：臣的妻子正怀孕，还不知是男是女呢？ 
English: Hu Guang kowtowed and said, "The minister's wife is pregnant, and we still don't know if it's a boy or a girl?"

古文：帝笑曰： 定女矣。 
现代文：皇上笑说 ：肯定是女啦。 
English: The Emperor laughed and said, "It must be a woman."

古文：已而果生女，遂约婚。
现代文：后来果然生的是女儿，两家遂定下婚约。
English: Later, a daughter was born, and the two families set a wedding date.

古文：缙败，子祯亮徙辽东，广欲离婚。
现代文：解缙败后，儿子祯亮被迁到辽东，胡广想解除婚约。
English: After the defeat of the Qing Dynasty, his son Zou Liang was moved to Liaodong, and Hu Guang wanted to cancel the marriage contract.

古文：女截耳誓曰： 薄命之婚，皇上主之，大人面承之，有死无二。 
现代文：他的女儿割下耳朵发誓说： 女儿薄命之婚，是皇上做主，而大人也当面应承了的，女儿死无二心。 
English: His daughter cut off her ear and swore: "The emperor was the one who decided on my daughter's ill-fated marriage, and the adults also agreed to it in person. My daughter had no second thoughts.

古文：及赦还，卒归祯亮。
现代文：祯亮被赦回后，她终于嫁给了祯亮。
English: After Gong Liang was pardoned, she finally married Gong Liang.

古文：正统元年八月，诏还所籍家产。
现代文：正统元年八月诏令归还所抄没的家产。
English: In August of the first year of orthodoxy, the imperial edict ordered the return of confiscated family property.

古文：成化元年，复缙官，赠朝议大夫。
现代文：成化元年，恢复解缙的官衔，赠朝议大夫。
English: In the first year of the Chenghua era, he was restored to the official title of magistrate, and was given the title of doctor of the Imperial Court.

古文：黄淮，字宗豫，永嘉人。
现代文：黄淮，字宗豫，永嘉人。
English: Huang Huai, Zha Zong Yu, Yong Jia Ren.

古文：父性，方国珍据温州，遁迹避伪命。
现代文：父黄性，方国珍占据温州时，他遁迹逃避方国珍的伪任命。
English: Huang's father, when Fang Guozhen occupied Wenzhou, he tried to evade Fang Guozhen's pseudo-appointment.

古文：淮举洪武末进士，授中书舍人。
现代文：黄淮考中洪武末年进士，被授予中书舍人。
English: In the final year of the Huanghuai Examination, Hongwu was awarded the title of Senior Scholar.

古文：成祖即位，召对称旨，命与解缙常立御榻左，备顾问。
现代文：成祖即位后，黄淮应诏对答时很合成祖之意，命他与解缙常站在御榻之左，备顾问。
English: After Emperor Chengzu ascended to the throne, Huang Huai, in his reply to the imperial edict, was very much in line with Emperor Chengzu's wishes, and ordered him and Emperor Xie to always stand on the left side of Emperor Chengzu's throne, ready to advise him.

古文：或至夜分，帝就寝，犹赐坐榻前语，机密重务悉预闻。
现代文：有时到了深夜，皇上就寝了，还给两人赐坐在榻前交谈。因此黄淮对机密重务都得参预知道。
English: Sometimes, late at night, the emperor went to bed, and the two were allowed to sit in front of the bed and talk. Therefore, Huang Huai had to know in advance about confidential matters.

古文：既而与缙等六人并直文渊阁，改翰林编修，进侍读。
现代文：后来他与解缙等六人并在文渊阁当值，改任翰林编修，又进升侍读。
English: Later, he and six others, including Xie Jun, were on duty at Wen Yuange, and were reassigned to the position of editor of Hanlin, and then promoted to attendant.

古文：议立太子，淮请立嫡以长。
现代文：议立太子时，黄淮请立嫡要立长。
English: When discussing the establishment of the crown prince, Huang Huai asked the patriarch to establish the chief.

古文：太子立，迁左庶子兼侍读。
现代文：太子建立后，黄淮升为左庶子兼侍读。
English: After the establishment of the prince, Huang Huai-sheng became the left illegitimate son and attendant.

古文：永乐五年，解缙黜，淮进右春坊大学士。
现代文：永乐五年，解缙被黜退，黄淮进升为右春坊大学士。
English: In Yongle's fifth year, he was forced to retire, and Huang Huai was promoted to the Right Spring University.

古文：明年与胡广、金幼孜、杨荣、杨士奇同辅导太孙。
现代文：第二年他与胡广、金幼孜、杨荣、杨士奇共同辅导太孙。
English: In the second year, he and Hu Guang, Jin Yuzi, Yang Rong and Yang Shiqi jointly tutored the great-grandson.

古文：七年，帝北巡，命淮及蹇义、金忠、杨士奇辅皇太子监国。
现代文：七年，皇上北巡，命黄淮和蹇义、金忠、杨士奇辅佐皇太子监国。
English: In the seventh year, when the emperor was on a tour of the north, he ordered Huang Huaihe, Jinyi, Jin Zhong and Yang Shizhi to assist the crown prince in supervising the country.

古文：十一年，再北巡，仍留守。
现代文：十一年皇上再次北巡，黄淮仍留守。
English: In the eleventh year of the emperor's second tour of the north, Huang Huai remained behind.

古文：明年，帝征瓦剌还，太子遣使迎稍缓，帝重入高煦谮，悉征东宫官属下诏狱，淮及杨溥、金问皆坐系十年。
现代文：第二年，皇上征瓦剌回来时，太子遣使者迎接稍迟，皇上又听信朱高煦的诬陷，将东宫属官全部投进诏狱，黄淮和杨溥、金问都被关了十年。
English: In the second year, when the emperor returned from collecting tiles, the prince's envoy was a little late to meet him. The emperor also believed Zhu Gaozhen's frame-up and put all the officials belonging to the East Palace into the imperial prison. Huang Huai, Yang Qian and Jin Qian were all imprisoned for ten years.

古文：仁宗即位，复官。
现代文：仁宗即位后，给黄淮复官。
English: After Emperor Renzong ascended to the throne, Huang Huai was reinstated.

古文：寻擢为通政使，兼武英殿大学士，与杨荣、金幼孜、杨士奇同掌内制。
现代文：不久黄淮升为通政使，兼武英殿大学士，与杨荣、金幼孜、杨士奇同掌内制。
English: Soon after, Huang Huai-sheng was promoted to the post of political envoy, and also became a scholar of the Wuying Palace University, together with Yang Rong, Jin Yuzi, and Yang Shichi.

古文：丁母忧，乞终制。不许。
现代文：后遭母丧，黄淮请回家守孝，皇上不许。
English: After his mother's death, Huang Huai was asked to return home to be a filial son, but the emperor would not allow it.

古文：明年，进少保、户部尚书，兼大学士如故。
现代文：第二年进升黄淮为少保、户部尚书，仍兼大学士。
English: In the second year, Huang Huai was promoted to Shao Bao, Hubei Shangshu, and was still a college scholar.

古文：仁宗崩，太子在南京。
现代文：仁宗逝世时，太子在南京。
English: At the time of Ninsong's death, the prince was in Nanjing.

古文：汉王久蓄异志，中外疑惧，淮忧危呕血。
现代文：汉王久蓄异志，中外疑惧，黄淮因忧患危局而吐血。
English: Han Wang had a long-cherished dream and was feared by China and the rest of the world, while Huang Huai vomited blood due to his worries about the dangerous situation.

古文：宣德元年，帝亲征乐安，命淮居守。
现代文：宣德元年，皇上亲征乐安，命黄淮留守。
English: In the first year of the Xuande era, the emperor personally recruited Le An, leaving Huang Huai behind.

古文：明年以疾乞休，许之。
现代文：第二年黄淮因病请求退休，皇上批准了。
English: The following year, Huang Huai requested to retire due to illness, and the emperor approved.

古文：父性年九十，奉养甚欢。
现代文：父亲黄性年已九十，黄淮奉养甚欢。
English: His father, Huang Shixing, is 90 years old, and Huang Huai is very fond of him.

古文：及性卒，赐葬祭，淮诣阙谢。
现代文：黄性去世后，皇上赐葬祭，黄淮入宫谢恩。
English: After the death of Huang Xing, the emperor gave a funeral, and Huang Huai entered the palace to express his gratitude.

古文：值灯时，赐游西苑，诏乘肩舆登万岁山。
现代文：正值灯节，皇上赐许他游西苑，诏令他乘肩舆登万岁山。
English: At the time of the Lantern Festival, the emperor gave him permission to visit Xiyuan and ordered him to climb Mount Wanli on his shoulders.

古文：命主会试，比辞归，饯之太液池，帝为长歌送之，且曰： 朕生日，卿其复来。 
现代文：还命他主持会试。到他辞归时，皇上在太液池为他饯行，还作长歌送给他，并且说 ：朕生日时，卿再来。 
English: He was also ordered to preside over the audition. By the time of his resignation, the emperor was walking for him in Taiyuchi Pond. He also made a long song and gave it to him, saying, "On my birthday, my lord, come again."

古文：明年入贺。
现代文：第二年黄淮入京庆贺。
English: The second year, Huang Huai entered Beijing to celebrate.

古文：英宗立，再入朝。
现代文：英宗即位时，黄淮再次入朝。
English: When Emperor Yingzong ascended the throne, Huang Huai re-entered the imperial court.

古文：正统十四年六月卒。年八十三，谥文简。
现代文：他于正统十四年六月去世，终年八十三岁，谥号文简。
English: He died in June of the 14th year of orthodoxy, at the age of 83, with the posthumous name Wen Jian.

古文：淮性明果，达于治体。
现代文：黄淮性格明辨果断，长于把握事情的根本。
English: Huang Huai's character is discerning and decisive, and he is good at grasping the essence of things.

古文：永乐中，长沙妖人李法良反。
现代文：永乐年间，长沙妖人李法良造反。
English: During the Yongle era, the Changsha demon Li Farang rebelled.

古文：仁宗方监国，命丰城侯李彬讨之。
现代文：当时仁宗正在监国，命丰城侯李彬讨伐李法良。
English: At that time, Renzong was supervising the country, and he ordered the lord of Fengcheng, Li Bin, to fight against Li Far Liang.

古文：汉王忌太子有功，诡言彬不可用。
现代文：汉王妒忌太子有功，诡称李彬不能委用。
English: The king of Han was jealous of the prince's achievements and said Li Bin could not be appointed.

古文：淮曰： 彬，老将，必能灭贼，愿急遣。 
现代文：黄淮说： 李彬是老将，必能消灭贼人，愿殿下从速派他去。 
English: Huang Huai said: Li Bin is a veteran, he will surely be able to eliminate the thieves. May His Royal Highness send him there immediately.

古文：彬卒擒法良。
现代文：李彬后来擒获了李法良。
English: Li Bin later captured Li Fariang.

古文：又时有告党逆者。淮言于帝曰： 洪武末年已有敕禁，不宜复理。 
现代文：当时常有人告发结党谋逆，黄淮对皇上说： 洪武末年对此已有敕令禁止，不宜再处理。 
English: At that time, people often accused him of plotting a coup. Huang Huai said to the emperor, "In the last years of Hongwu's reign, this was already prohibited by imperial edict, and it is not appropriate to deal with it any further.

古文：吏部追论 靖难 兵起时，南人官北地不即归附者，当编戍。
现代文：吏部追论 靖难 兵起之时，在北方当官不马上归附的南方人，应当编列遣去戍边。
English: The cadres should pursue the theory that the Southern officials who did not immediately surrender to the Northern officials at the time of the military uprising should be sent to Fuzhou.

古文：淮曰： 如是，恐示人不广。 
现代文：黄淮说 ：如果这么做，恐怕被人看作心胸狭窄。 
English: Huang Huai said: If you do this, I am afraid you will be seen as narrow-minded.

古文：帝皆从之。
现代文：皇上都听从了。
English: Taizong all adopted it.

古文：阿鲁台归款，请得役属吐蕃诸部。求朝廷刻金作誓词，磨其金酒中，饮诸酋长以盟。
现代文：阿鲁台来归附，请得以统治吐蕃各部，他求朝廷作誓词刻在金片上，然后将金片磨入酒中，与各部酋长饮酒盟誓。
English: He asked the imperial court to engrave the oath on a piece of gold, and then grind the piece of gold into the wine, and drink the oath with the chiefs of each department.

古文：众议欲许之。
现代文：众人的意见想答应他。
English: Many people wanted to agree with him.

古文：淮曰： 彼势分则易制，一则难图矣。 
现代文：黄淮说： 他们势分则容易控制，统一则难以图取。 
English: Huang Huai said: Their potential distribution is easy to control, but unification is difficult to obtain.

古文：帝顾左右曰： 黄淮论事，如立高冈，无远不见。 
现代文：皇上对左右的人说 ：黄淮论事，就如站在高山之山，无远不见。 
English: The emperor said to the people around him, "When Huang Huai talks about things, it is as if he is standing on a mountain peak.

古文：西域僧大宝法王来朝，帝将刻玉印赐之，以璞示淮。
现代文：西域僧人大宝法王来朝见，皇上将要刻玉印赐给他，先将璞拿给黄淮看。
English: Dabao Fa Wang, a monk from the western region, came to see the emperor. The emperor was going to give him the engraved jade seal and show it to Huang Huai first.

古文：淮曰： 朝廷赐诸番制敕，用 敕命 、 广运 二宝。
现代文：黄淮说 ：朝廷赐给各番部的制敕，都用 敕命 和 广运 二宝。
English: Huang Huai said: The imperial court gave the command to all the guards, and they all used the two treasures of "sacrifice" and "victory."

古文：今此玉较大，非所以示远人、尊朝廷。 
现代文：现这块玉比它们还大，这样做不能示远人、尊朝廷。 
English: Now this piece of jade is even bigger than they are. This cannot be done to show respect to the imperial court.

古文：帝嘉纳。
现代文：皇上赞赏地采纳了他的意见。
English: Xuanzong praised it and adopted it.

古文：其献替类如此。
现代文：黄淮的贡献大多如此。
English: Most of Huang Huai's contributions are like this.

古文：然量颇隘。同列有小过，辄以闻。
现代文：但他气量颇小，同僚有小错，常汇报皇上。
English: However, he was rather short-tempered, and his colleagues often reported minor mistakes to the Emperor.

古文：或谓解缙之谪，淮有力焉。
现代文：有人认为解缙之被贬，黄淮从中起了作用。
English: Some people believe that Huang Huai played a role in the demotion of Xie Jizhi.

古文：其见疏于宣宗也，亦谓杨荣言 淮病瘵，能染人 云。
现代文：他后来被宣宗疏远，也有人认为是杨荣说他有病，会传染给他人。
English: He was later alienated by Xuanzong, and some people thought that Yang Rong was saying that he was sick and would infect others.

古文：胡广，字光大，吉水人。
现代文：胡广，字光大，吉水人。
English: Hu Guang, the characters are large, and the characters are from Jishui.

古文：父子祺，名寿昌，以字行。
现代文：父亲胡子祺，名寿昌，以字行。
English: His father, a mustachioed man named Shuchang, was a famous calligrapher.

古文：陈友谅陷吉安，太祖遣兵复之，将杀胁从者千余人。
现代文：陈友谅攻陷吉安时，太祖派兵将其收复，将要杀死一千余名胁从人员。
English: When Chen Youzhen invaded Ji'an, Taizu sent troops to recapture it, and was about to kill more than a thousand subordinates.

古文：子祺走谒帅，力言不可，得免。
现代文：胡子祺跑去谒见统帅，极力说不可这么做，使他们都得免死。
English: The bearded man ran to see the general and begged him not to do it, so that they would not die.

古文：洪武三年，以文学选为御史，上书请都关中。
现代文：洪武三年，他以文学之才被选为御史，上书请求定都关中。
English: In the third year of Hongwu's reign, he was selected as imperial historian on the basis of his literary talent, and his request to submit a letter to the emperor was denied.

古文：帝称善，遣太子巡视陕西。后以太子薨，不果。
现代文：皇上赞赏他的建议，派太子巡视陕西，后因太子去世，此计划没有实现。
English: The emperor appreciated his suggestion and sent the prince to inspect Shaanxi, but this plan did not come to fruition due to the prince's death.

古文：子祺出为广西按察佥事，改知彭州。
现代文：子祺出任广西按察佥事，后改任彭州知州。
English: Zibo was appointed as the leader of Guangxi, and later he was appointed as the leader of Pengzhou.

古文：所至平冤狱，毁淫祀，修废堰，民甚德之。
现代文：他所到之处平反冤狱，推毁淫祠，修复废堰，人民很感激他。
English: Everywhere he went, he rehabilitated unjust prisons, demolished temples of prostitution, and repaired weirs. The people were very grateful to him.

古文：迁延平知府，卒于任。
现代文：后来他升任延平府知府，死于任上。
English: Later, he was promoted to the post of Yanping prefectural governor and died in office.

古文：广，其次子也。建文二年，廷试。时方讨燕，广对策有 亲藩陆梁，人心摇动 语，帝亲擢广第一，赐名靖，授翰林修撰。
现代文：胡广是他的次子，建文二年廷试时，当时正讨伐燕王，胡广在对策中有 亲藩跋扈，人心摇动 一语，皇上亲自提他为第一名，赐名靖，授予他为翰林修撰。
English: Hu Guang was his second son. At the time of the second year of Jianwen's imperial examination, he was fighting against Yan Wang. Hu Guang's countermeasures were pro-Han, and his words shook people's hearts. The emperor personally nominated him for the first place, gave him the name Jing, and awarded him the title of Hanlin Shuxian.

古文：成祖即位，广偕解缙迎附。擢侍讲，改侍读，复名广。迁右春坊右庶子。
现代文：成祖即位，胡广偕同解缙去迎接并归附，被升为侍讲，又改为侍读，恢复胡广之名，升为右春坊右庶子。
English: Chengzu ascended to the throne, Hu Guangyao went to meet and join him, was promoted to attendant speaker, and changed to attendant reader, restored Hu Guangyao's name, and was promoted to the right spring boy's right bastard.

古文：永乐五年，进翰林学士，兼左春坊大学士。
现代文：永乐五年，他进升为翰林学士，兼左春坊大学士。
English: In Yongle's fifth year, he was promoted to Hanlin Scholar and ZuoChunFang Scholar.

古文：帝北征，与杨荣、金幼孜从。
现代文：皇上北征时，他与杨荣、金幼孜从征。
English: When the emperor went on the Northern Expedition, he went with Yang Rong and Jin Yuzi.

古文：数召对帐殿，或至夜分。
现代文：他多次被召到帐殿回答问题，有时达到深夜。
English: He was repeatedly called to the counting house to answer questions, sometimes late into the night.

古文：过山川厄塞，立马议论，行或稍后，辄遣骑四出求索。
现代文：经过山川险塞时，与皇上立马议论，有时他走得稍后，皇上常遣骑兵四出寻找。
English: When passing through mountain and river bottlenecks, he would talk to the emperor on horseback. Sometimes he would walk a little later, and the emperor would often send out cavalry to look for him.

古文：尝失道，脱衣乘骣马渡河，水没马及腰以上，帝顾劳良苦。
现代文：有一次他迷了路，他脱掉衣服骑着没加鞍的马渡过河流，皇上慰劳良苦。
English: Once he lost his way, he took off his clothes and rode an unsaddled horse across the river. The emperor consoled him for his hard work.

古文：广善书，每勒石，皆命书之。
现代文：胡广擅长书法，每有刻碑，皇上都命他书写。
English: Hu Guang was good at calligraphy. Whenever there was a monument, the emperor ordered him to write.

古文：十二年再北征，皇长孙从，命广与荣、幼孜军中讲经史。
现代文：十二年，皇上再度北征，皇长孙也从征，命胡广和杨荣、金幼孜在军中给皇长孙讲解经史。
English: In the 12th year, the emperor went on the Northern Expedition again, and the emperor's eldest grandson also went on the expedition. He ordered Hu Guang, Yang Rong and Jin Yuzi to explain the history of scripture to the emperor's eldest grandson in the army.

古文：十四年，进文渊阁大学士，兼职如故。
现代文：十四年，胡广进升文渊阁大学士，仍兼前职。
English: Fourteen years later, Hu Guangjin was promoted to Bachelor of Arts at Yuange University, still holding his previous position.

古文：帝征乌思藏僧作法会，为高帝、高后荐福，言见诸祥异。
现代文：皇上征召乌思藏僧人做法会，为高帝和高后荐福，说见到他们所显现的各种福佑和灵异。
English: The emperor summoned the Wuxi Tibetan Monk Practice Group to recommend blessings for Emperor Gao and Empress Gao, saying that they had seen all kinds of blessings and miracles.

古文：广乃献《圣孝瑞应颂》，帝缀为佛曲，令宫中歌舞之。
现代文：胡广于是献上《圣孝瑞应颂》。皇上给它谱上佛曲，令宫中歌唱和编舞。
English: Hu Guang then presented the "Song of St. Xiao Rui." The emperor gave it a Buddhist melody and ordered the palace to sing and choreograph.

古文：礼部郎中周讷请封禅，广言其不可，遂不许。
现代文：礼部郎中周讷请封禅，胡广说不可，皇上便没有批准。
English: Zhou Ne, a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies, asked for the seal of Zen, but Hu Guang said it was not possible, and the emperor did not approve.

古文：广上《却封禅颂》，帝益亲爱之。
现代文：胡广献上《却封禅颂》，皇上更加亲爱他。
English: Hu Guang presented the "Zen Song" to the emperor, and the emperor loved him even more.

古文：广性缜密。帝前所言及所治职务，出未尝告人。
现代文：胡广性格缜密，他在皇上面前所说的话以及他所处理的事务，出宫后从不曾告诉他人。
English: Hu Guang was a meticulous person. He never told others what he said in front of the emperor and what he dealt with after he left the palace.

古文：时人以方汉胡广。
现代文：当时人们把他比作汉代的胡广。
English: At that time, people compared him to Hu Guang in the Han Dynasty.

古文：然颇能持大体。
现代文：不过他颇能持大体。
English: But he's pretty good at keeping things in perspective.

古文：奔母丧还朝，帝问百姓安否。
现代文：奔母丧回朝后，皇上问他百姓生活是否安定。
English: After returning to the imperial court following his mother's death, the emperor asked the common people whether their lives were stable.

古文：对曰： 安，但郡县穷治建文时奸党，株及支亲，为民厉。 
现代文：胡广回答说 ：安定。但郡县长官究治建文时期的奸党，株连到旁支亲属，成为百姓的祸害。 
English: Hu Guang replied, "It is stable. However, when the county and prefectural governors investigated and dealt with the traitors in the Jianwen period, they found their relatives in other branches and became a scourge to the people.

古文：帝纳其言。
现代文：皇上采纳了他的意见。
English: The emperor accepted Zou's suggestion.

古文：十六年五月卒，年四十九。
现代文：十六年五月胡广去世，终年四十九岁。
English: Hu Guang died in May, 166, at the age of 49.

古文：赠礼部尚书，谥文穆。
现代文：赠予他礼部尚书，谥号文穆。
English: He was presented with a copy of the Book of Etiquette and given the posthumous name Wen Mu.

古文：文臣得谥，自广始。
现代文：文臣获得谥号自胡广而始。
English: Wencheng got his nickname from Hu Guang.

古文：丧还，过南京，太子为致祭。
现代文：遗体运回时，经过南京，太子为他致祭。
English: When the body was transported back, it passed through Nanjing, and the crown prince offered a sacrifice for him.

古文：明年，官其子穜翰林检讨。
现代文：第二年授予他的儿子胡銼为翰林检讨。
English: The following year, his son Hu Yao was awarded the Hanlin Prize.

古文：仁宗立，加赠广少师。
现代文：仁宗即位后，加赠胡广为少师。
English: After the enthronement of Rinzong, Hu Guang was given the title of Junior Teacher.

古文：金幼孜，名善，以字行，新淦人。
现代文：金幼孜，名善，以字行，新淦人。
English: Jin Yuzi, famous for his kindness, wrote in calligraphy, and became a Shinran person.

古文：建文二年进士。
现代文：建文二年中进士。
English: Jianwen 2nd year, junior high school graduate.

古文：授户科给事中。
现代文：后被授予户科给事中。
English: He was awarded a degree in home economics.

古文：成祖即位，改翰林检讨，与解缙等同直文渊阁，迁侍讲。
现代文：成祖即位后，改任翰林检讨，与解缙等人同在文渊阁当值，再升为侍讲。
English: After the enthronement of Cheng Zu, he was reassigned to the Hanlin Review, and was on duty at the Wen Yuan Pavilion with others, and then promoted to the assistant lecturer.

古文：时翰林坊局臣讲书东宫，皆先具经义，阁臣阅正，呈帝览，乃进讲。
现代文：当时，翰林院和坊局之臣在东宫讲书，都先要准备所讲的经义，由阁臣阅正后，呈皇上批览，然后才得进讲。
English: At that time, the courtiers of the Hanlin Academy and the Buddhist Affairs Bureau lectured in the East Palace, and they had to prepare the sutras first. After the courtiers read the sutras, they presented them to the emperor for approval, and then they had to proceed with the lecture.

古文：解缙《书》，杨士奇《易》，胡广《诗》，幼孜《春秋》，因进《春秋要旨》三卷。
现代文：解缙讲《书经》，杨士奇讲《易经》，胡广讲《诗经》，幼孜讲《春秋经》，幼孜借此呈上《春秋要旨》三卷。
English: Xie Zheng spoke about the "Book of Songs," Yang Shiqi spoke about the "Book of Changes," Hu Guang spoke about the "Song of Songs," Yu Ze spoke about the "Spring and Autumn Classic," and Yu Ze used this to present the "Spring and Autumn Essentials" in three volumes.

古文：永乐五年，迁右谕德兼侍讲，因谕吏部，直内阁诸臣胡广、金幼孜等考满，勿改他任。
现代文：永乐五年，进升幼孜为右谕德兼侍讲，并传谕吏部，说在内阁当值的胡广、金幼孜等人已任满，不要改作他任。
English: In the fifth year of the Yongle Emperor, Jin Sheng Yu Ze became the right-hand man and the assistant speaker, and told the officials that Hu Guang and Jin Yu Ze, who were currently in the cabinet, had completed their term of office and should not be reassigned to other positions.

古文：七年从幸北京。
现代文：七年，幼孜随从皇上到北京。
English: Seven years later, he followed the emperor to Beijing.

古文：明年北征，幼孜与广、荣扈行，驾驻清水源，有泉涌出。
现代文：第二年北征，幼孜与胡广、杨荣随行。圣驾驻扎在清水源，有泉水涌出。
English: In the second year of the Northern Expedition, Yu Ze accompanied Hu Guang and Yang Rong. The holy driver was stationed at the clear water source, with spring water gushing out.

古文：幼孜献铭，荣献诗，皆劳以上尊。
现代文：幼孜献上铭，杨荣献上诗，皇上都以最高等级给予慰劳。
English: Yanzi presented an epitaph, Yang Rong presented a poem, and the emperor gave the highest level of consolation.

古文：帝重幼孜文学，所过山川要害，辄命记之。
现代文：皇上敬重幼孜的文学才华，所过山川要害，总命他加以记载。
English: The emperor respected Yuanzi's literary talent, and ordered him to record the important points of the mountains and rivers.

古文：幼孜据鞍起草立就。
现代文：幼孜就在马鞍上当场起草。
English: 幼孜 was drafted on the spot in the saddle.

古文：使自瓦剌来，帝召幼孜等傍舆行，言敌中事，亲倚甚。
现代文：使者从瓦剌来，皇上召幼孜等人傍车舆而行，谈论敌方之事，对他很亲信和倚重。
English: An envoy came from Wawu, and the emperor called Yuzi and others to walk alongside the car and talk about the enemy's affairs. They were very close to him and relied on him.

古文：尝与广、荣及侍郎金纯失道陷谷中。
现代文：他曾与胡广、杨荣和侍郎金纯迷路陷在山谷中。
English: He once got lost in a valley with Hu Guang, Yang Rong and his servant Jin Chun.

古文：暮夜，幼孜坠马，广、纯去不顾。荣为结鞍行，行又辄坠，荣乘以己骑，明日始达行在所。
现代文：天黑时，幼孜从马上掉下来，胡广、金纯去而不顾，杨荣为他结鞍再行，走了一会儿幼孜又掉下来，杨荣便将自己的马让给他骑，第二天才到达行在所。
English: When it was dark, the youth fell off his horse. Hu Guang and Jin Chun rode away without paying attention. Yang Rong saddled him and went on. After walking for a while, the youth fell off again. Yang Rong then let him ride his horse, and the next day he arrived at the spot.

古文：是夜，帝遣使十余辈迹荣、幼孜，不获。
现代文：那个晚上，皇上派出十几名使者追寻杨荣和幼孜，但都没有找到。
English: That night, the emperor sent more than a dozen emissaries to look for Yang Rong and his son, but they were not found.

古文：比至，帝喜动颜色。
现代文：他们回来后，皇上非常高兴。
English: When they returned, the emperor was very happy.

古文：自后北征皆从，所撰有北征前、后二《录》。
现代文：此后每次北征，幼孜都随从，他还写下了《北征前录》和《后录》。
English: After that, every Northern Expedition, Yu Ze followed, and he also wrote the "Northern Expedition Preface" and "Postscript."

古文：十二年命与广、荣等纂《五经四书性理大全》，迁翰林学士。十八年与荣并进文渊阁大学士。
现代文：十二年他受命与胡广、杨荣等人编纂《五经》和《四书》、《性理大全》，升为翰林学士，十八年他与杨荣一起升为文渊阁大学士。
English: In 2012, he was ordered to compile the "Five Classics" and "Four Books" and the "Compendium of Sexuality" with Hu Guang, Yang Rong and others, and was promoted to Hanlin Scholar. In 2018, he and Yang Rong were promoted to Bunyugaku University Scholar.

古文：二十二年从北征，中道兵疲。
现代文：二十二年幼孜随从皇上北征，途中士兵疲惫，皇上向群臣问对策，没有人敢回答。
English: At the age of twenty-two, he accompanied the emperor on the Northern Expedition. On the way, the soldiers were exhausted. The emperor asked his ministers for countermeasures, but no one dared to answer.

古文：帝以问群臣，莫敢对，惟幼孜言不宜深入，不听。
现代文：只有幼孜说不宜深入，皇上不听。
English: However, the Emperor did not listen to Yuzhe, who said that it was not appropriate to go deeper.

古文：次开平，帝谓荣、幼孜曰： 朕梦神人语上帝好生者再，是何祥也？ 
现代文：到达开平时，皇上对杨荣、幼孜说 ：朕梦见神人两次说上天好生，这是什么兆头？ 
English: When they arrived at Kaiping, the emperor said to Yang Rong and Yang Zi: I dreamed that the godman said twice that it was good to be born, what is this sign?

古文：荣、幼孜对曰： 陛下此举，固在除暴安民。
现代文：杨荣、幼孜回答说： 陛下此举，固在于除暴安民。
English: Yang Rong and Yu Ze replied: Your Majesty, this move is firmly based on eliminating violence and ensuring the safety of the people.

古文：然火炎昆冈，玉石俱毁，惟陛下留意。 
现代文：但火烧昆仑，玉石俱焚，望陛下留意。 
English: However, Kunlun is on fire, and the jade is on fire. Your Majesty should pay attention.

古文：帝然之，即命草诏，招谕诸部。
现代文：皇上同意他们的意见，当即命他们起草诏书，诏谕各个部落。
English: The emperor agreed with their opinion and immediately ordered them to draft an edict to be issued to all tribes.

古文：还军至榆木川，帝崩。秘不发丧。
现代文：军队回到榆木川时，皇上驾崩，秘不发丧。
English: When the army returned to the Beech River, the emperor had died, and there was no secret mourning.

古文：荣讣京师，幼孜护梓宫归。
现代文：杨荣到京师报丧，幼孜护梓宫返回。
English: Yang Rong went to Beijing to report the death of his teacher, and then returned to Yuzhe to take care of Zi Gong.

古文：仁宗即位，拜户部右侍郎兼文渊阁大学士。
现代文：仁宗即位，幼孜被任为户部右侍郎兼文渊阁大学士。
English: When Emperor Ninsong ascended the throne, he was appointed as the right hand man of the household and a scholar of Bunyukaku University.

古文：寻加太子少保兼武英殿大学士。
现代文：不久加封为太子少保兼武英殿大学士。
English: He was soon given the additional title of Prince's Junior Bodyguard and a member of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：是年十月命幼孜、荣、士奇会录罪囚于承天门外。
现代文：这一年十月命幼孜、杨荣、杨士奇在承天门外一起审查并记录囚犯的罪状。
English: In October of that year, Meiyu Ze, Yang Rong, and Yang Shiqi reviewed and recorded the prisoners' criminal records together outside Chengdian Gate.

古文：诏法司，录重囚必会三学士，委寄益隆。
现代文：皇上还下诏给法司，审查重案囚犯必须会同这三位学士一起办，皇上对他们的委任更重了。
English: The emperor also issued an edict to the legal department that the review of prisoners with serious crimes must be carried out together with these three bachelors, and the emperor's appointment of them was even more important.

古文：帝御西角门阅廷臣制诰，顾三学士曰： 汝三人及蹇、夏二尚书，皆先帝旧臣，朕方倚以自辅。
现代文：皇上御临西角门阅览廷臣的制诰，对三学士说： 你们三人和蹇义、夏原吉两位尚书，都是先帝旧臣，朕正靠你们来辅佐。
English: When the Emperor came to the West Angle Gate to read the imperial edicts of the courtiers, he said to the three scholars: You three, together with Shunyi and Xia Yuanji, are the former vassals of the former emperor, and I am relying on you to assist me.

古文：尝见前代人主恶闻直言，虽素所亲信，亦畏威顺旨，缄默取容。
现代文：朕曾见前代君主不喜欢听直言，虽是一向所亲近的人，也因为惧怕君主之威而顺从君主的旨意，缄默不言以讨好君主。
English: I have seen that the previous monarch did not like to hear straight talk. Although he was always a close person, he also obeyed the monarch's will because he was afraid of the monarch's authority. He kept silent to please the monarch.

古文：贤良之臣，言不见听，退而杜口。
现代文：贤良之臣，所言不被采纳，便会退而闭口。
English: A virtuous vassal, if what he says is not accepted, will retreat and shut his mouth.

古文：幼孜等顿首称谢。
现代文：朕与诸位爱卿应当引以为戒。 幼孜等人叩头致谢。
English: I and all of you who love the Lord should take this as a warning.

古文：洪熙元年进礼部尚书兼大学士、学士如故，并给三俸。
现代文：洪熙元年幼孜进升为礼部尚书，仍兼大学士、学士，并支给三职俸禄。
English: At a young age, Hong Xiuyuan was promoted to be a member of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, and he was also awarded a bachelor's degree and a bachelor's degree, as well as a three-year salary.

古文：寻乞归省母。
现代文：幼孜不久请求回家探母。
English: The toddler soon asked to go home to check on her mother.

古文：明年，母卒。
现代文：第二年，他母亲去世。
English: The following year, his mother died.

古文：宣宗立，诏起复，修两朝实录，充总裁官。
现代文：宣宗即位后，诏令幼孜出来任职，修撰两朝实录，充任总裁官。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xuan Zong, Zhao Lingyu took office, compiled a record of the two dynasties, and served as the president.

古文：三年持节宁夏，册庆府郡王妃。
现代文：宣德三年，幼孜持节到宁夏，册封庆府郡王妃。
English: In the third year of Xuande, she went to Ningxia to celebrate the Youth Day, and was awarded the title of Queen of Qingfu County.

古文：所过询兵民疾苦，还奏之。帝嘉纳焉。
现代文：他所经过的地方，都询问士兵和百姓疾苦，回来后上奏皇上，皇上都嘉许并采纳了。
English: Everywhere he went, he asked about the soldiers' and people's hardships. When he came back, he appealed to the emperor. The emperor commended him and adopted him.

古文：从巡边，度鸡鸣山。帝曰： 唐太宗恃其英武征辽，尝过此山。 
现代文：随从皇上巡边，度过鸡鸣山时，皇上说 ：唐太宗仗着其英武征辽时，曾经过此山。 
English: When following the emperor on a tour and passing through Jining Mountain, the emperor said: Tang Taizong once passed through this mountain when he led his army to conquer Liao Yu.

古文：幼孜对曰： 太宗寻悔此役，故建悯忠阁。 
现代文：幼孜回答说 ：太宗不久便后悔这一战役，所以修建了悯忠阁。 
English: Yanzi replied: Emperor Taizong soon regretted this battle, so he built the Compassionate Pavilion.

古文：帝曰： 此山崩于元顺帝时，为元亡征。 
现代文：皇上说 ：此山在元顺帝时崩塌了，成为元朝灭亡的征兆。 
English: The emperor said, "This mountain collapsed during the reign of Emperor Yuan Shun, and became a sign of the demise of the Yuan Dynasty."

古文：对曰： 顺帝亡国之主，虽山不崩，国亦必亡。 
现代文：幼孜回答说 ：顺帝是亡国之主，就是山不崩，国也必亡。 
English: Yanzi replied, "Shun Di is the lord of the doomed country. Even if the mountain does not collapse, the country will also perish."

古文：宣德六年十二月卒。年六十四。
现代文：宣德六年十二月幼孜去世，终年六十四岁。
English: Xuan De passed away in December of the sixth year, at the age of 64.

古文：赠少保，谥文靖。
现代文：赠少保，谥文靖。
English: He was given the title of Junior Public Security Officer, and his name was Shou Wenjing.

古文：幼孜简易静默，宽裕有容。
现代文：幼孜为人平易，沉默寡言，心胸开阔。
English: In his youth, he was a simple, taciturn man with an open mind.

古文：眷遇虽隆，而自处益谦。
现代文：虽很受皇上宠信，但他自己更加谦虚。
English: Although he was much favoured by the Emperor, he himself was more modest.

古文：名其宴居之室曰 退庵 。
现代文：他给自己起居之室命名为 退庵 。
English: He named his living room "the hermitage."

古文：疾革时，家人嘱请身后恩，不听，曰： 此君子所耻也。 
现代文：他病重时，家人嘱咐他请求身后之恩，但幼孜不听。他说 ：这种做法是君子所耻的行为。 
English: When he was gravely ill, his family told him to ask for forgiveness, but he didn't listen, saying: "Such an act is a disgrace for a gentleman."

古文：胡俨，字若思，南昌人。
现代文：胡俨，字若思，南昌人。
English: Hu Wei, Zha Ru Si, Nanchang people.

古文：少嗜学，于天文、地理、律历、医卜无不究览。
现代文：从小十分好学，对天文、地理、律历、医学、占卜方面的书籍，无不博览。
English: He was very eager to learn from an early age, and was well-versed in books on astronomy, geography, the legal calendar, medicine, and divination.

古文：洪武中以举人授华亭教谕，能以师道自任。
现代文：洪武年间，他以举人身份被授予华亭县教谕，能以师道自任。
English: During the Hongwu era, he was awarded the title of Huating County Teacher, and was allowed to teach independently.

古文：母忧，服除，改长垣，乞便地就养，复改余干。
现代文：母亲去世，他守孝期满后，改到长垣任教谕，请求给予便地养家，后又改到余干县任职。
English: After his mother died and his filial piety period expired, he was transferred to Nagagaki as a teacher and asked to be given a convenient place to raise his family. Later, he was transferred to Yugan County.

古文：学官许乞便地自俨始。
现代文：批准学官请求便地即是从胡俨开始。
English: The approval of the request of the academic officer is convenient from the beginning.

古文：建文元年，荐授桐城知县。
现代文：建文元年他受推荐任为桐城县知县。
English: In the first year of the Jianwen era, he was recommended to be appointed as the prefect of Tongcheng County.

古文：凿桐陂水，溉田为民利。
现代文：他主持开凿桐陂水，灌溉田地，使百姓获利。
English: He presided over the excavation of Tonglu water, irrigated fields, and made the people profit.

古文：县有虎伤人。俨斋沐告于神，虎遁去。
现代文：县境有虎伤人，胡俨斋戒沐浴后向神灵祷告，老虎便逃走了。
English: In the county, there was a tiger that injured someone. After fasting and bathing and praying to the gods, the tiger ran away.

古文：桐人祀之朱邑祠。
现代文：桐城县人把他供祀在朱邑祠。
English: The people of Tongcheng County offered him for worship at the Zhuyi Shrine.

古文：四年，副都御史练子宁荐于朝曰： 俨学足达天人，智足资帷幄。 
现代文：四年，副都御史练子宁把他推荐给朝廷，说： 胡俨具有的知识足以通达天人，他的才智足以参佐帷幄。 
English: In the fourth year, the vice-governor of the capital, Renshi Ning, recommended him to the imperial court, saying: "Hu Yao's knowledge is enough to reach the gods, and his intelligence is enough to consult the curtain.

古文：比召至，燕师已渡江。
现代文：等他被召来时，燕王的部队已渡过了长江。
English: By the time he was summoned, Yan Wang's troops had already crossed the Yangtze River.

古文：成祖即位，曰： 俨知天文，其令钦天监试。 
现代文：成祖即位后，说： 胡俨懂得天文，就让钦天监考考他。 
English: After Chengzu ascended the throne, he said: Hu Yao knows astronomy, so let Qingtian supervise and examine him.

古文：既试，奏俨实通象纬、气候之学。
现代文：考完之后，钦天监官员上奏说胡俨确实通象纬、气候之学。
English: After the examination, an official from the Qin Heavenly Supervision Bureau said that Hu Yao was indeed familiar with the study of meteorology and climatology.

古文：寻又以解缙荐，授翰林检讨，与缙等俱直文渊阁，迁侍讲，进左庶子。
现代文：不久又因解缙的推荐，授予胡俨翰林检讨之职，与解缙等人一同在文渊阁当值。升为侍讲，再升为左庶子。
English: Soon after, on the recommendation of Xie Jun, Hu Xuanhanlin was awarded the position of reviewer, and he was on duty at Wenyuan Pavilion together with Xie Jun and others. He was promoted to attendant lecturer, and then to left illegitimate son.

古文：父丧，起复。
现代文：父亲去世，守孝期满后胡俨又出来任职。
English: After his father's death and the expiration of the period of filial piety, Hu Yao took up his post again.

古文：俨在阁，承顾问，尝不欲先人，然少戆。
现代文：胡俨在内阁时，受皇上顾问，他从不与人争先，但稍嫌戆直。
English: When Hu Yao was in the cabinet, he was advised by the emperor. He never competed with others, but he was a bit arrogant.

古文：永乐二年九月，拜国子监祭酒，遂不预机务。
现代文：永乐二年九月，他被任为国子监祭酒，便不再参预机务。
English: In September of the second year of Yongle, he was appointed as the son of the country to supervise the sacrificial wine, and then he no longer participated in the preparation.

古文：时用法严峻，国子生托事告归者坐戍边。
现代文：当时国子监用法严峻，国子生请事假回家的，也被判戍边。
English: At that time, the use of Kuniko supervisors was severe, and Kuniko students who took time off to go home were also sentenced to detention.

古文：俨至，即奏除之。
现代文：胡俨到任后，立即上奏废除了这条规定。
English: After Hu Jintao took office, he immediately abolished this regulation.

古文：七年，帝幸北京，召俨赴行在。
现代文：七年，皇上幸临北京，召胡俨到行在所。
English: In the seventh year, the emperor was fortunate enough to visit Beijing and summoned Hu Yao to the palace.

古文：明年北征，命以祭酒兼侍讲，掌翰林院事，辅皇太孙留守北京。
现代文：第二年北征，命胡俨以祭酒兼侍讲，掌管翰林院事务。辅佐皇太孙留守北京。
English: In the second year of the Northern Expedition, Hu Yao was ordered to be the sacrificial wine and attendant speaker, in charge of the affairs of the Hanlin Academy. He assisted the Emperor's grandson to stay in Beijing.

古文：十九年，改北京国子监祭酒。
现代文：十九年胡俨改任北京国子监祭酒。
English: In nineteen years, Hu Yao was appointed as the Beijing Guozi Supervisor of Sacrificial Wine.

古文：当是时，海内混一，垂五十年。帝方内兴礼乐，外怀要荒，公卿大夫彬彬多文学之士。
现代文：当时，海内统一已近五十年，皇上正内兴礼乐，外怀要荒之地，公卿大夫彬彬然多是文学之士。
English: At that time, it had been nearly 50 years since the unification of China. The emperor was promoting ceremonial music at home, and the country was in turmoil abroad. The noble doctor Bin Rintao was a man of literature.

古文：俨馆阁宿儒，朝廷大著作多出其手，重修《太祖实录》、《永乐大典》、《天下图志》皆充总裁官。
现代文：胡俨作为馆阁宿儒，朝廷大著多出自他之手，重修《太祖实录》、《永乐大典》、《天下图志》，他都担任总裁官。
English: Hu Yao, as a scholar-in-residence, was the author of most of the great works of the imperial court. He revised "The Ancestor's Record," "The Great Book of Yongle" and "The Map of the World" and served as the president.

古文：居国学二十余年，以身率教，动有师法。
现代文：他主持国学二十余年，以身率教，一行一动都有师法。
English: He has presided over the study of Chinese classics for more than 20 years, teaching with his own body, and has a teaching method in every line and every movement.

古文：洪熙改元，以疾乞休，仁宗赐敕奖劳，进太子宾客，仍兼祭酒。
现代文：洪熙改元后，他以病请求退休，仁宗赐给敕书，奖励慰劳他，进升他为太子宾客，仍兼祭酒。
English: After the reform of the Yuan Dynasty, Hong Xi asked to retire due to illness, and Rinzong gave him a letter of commendation, rewarded him for his hard work, promoted him to the position of the prince's guest, and still served him sacrificial wine.

古文：致仕，复其子孙。
现代文：他退休后，朝廷免除他子孙的赋税徭役。
English: After he retired, the imperial court exempted his children and grandchildren from paying taxes.

古文：宣宗即位，以礼部侍郎召，辞归。
现代文：宣宗即位后，以礼部侍郎之衔召胡俨，胡俨推辞归家。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xuanzong, Hu Yao was summoned with the title of the attendant of the ceremonial department. Hu Yao declined and returned home.

古文：家居二十年，方岳重臣咸待以师礼。
现代文：在家二十年，方岳重臣都以师礼对待他。
English: During his 20 years at home, Fang Yue's senior ministers treated him with great courtesy.

古文：俨与言，未尝及私。
现代文：胡俨与他们交谈，从不曾说到他个人的事。
English: When Hu Yao talked to them, he never talked about his personal affairs.

古文：自处淡泊，岁时衣食才给。
现代文：他自处淡泊，岁时的衣食才刚够需要。
English: He slept rough everywhere and only had enough food and clothing when he was old enough to need it.

古文：初为湖广考官，得杨溥文，大异之，题其上曰： 必能为董子之正言，而不为公孙之阿曲。 
现代文：当初他任湖广考官时，看到杨溥的文章，非常惊异，在其上题写道 ：此文作者必能为董子之正言，而不为公孙之阿曲。 
English: At the beginning, when he was an examiner in Hukang, he was very surprised to see Yang Xuan's article, and wrote in the title: "The author of this article must be able to say what Dong Zi said, not what his grandson said."

古文：世以为知人。
现代文：世人都认为他知人。
English: Everyone thinks they know him.

古文：正统八年八月卒，年八十三。
现代文：正统八年八月他去世，终年八十三岁。
English: He died in August of the eighth year of his reign at the age of eighty-three.

