古文：周愿刘禹锡袁德师李程杨虞卿沈亚之张祜交广客卢肇章孝标南卓王智兴卢发裴休冯衮邻夫关图杨玄翼裴庆余赵崇郑光业
现代文：周愿刘禹锡袁德师李程杨虞卿沈亚之张祜交广客卢肇章孝标南卓王智兴卢发裴休冯衮邻夫关图杨玄翼裴庆余赵崇郑光业
English: Zhou Xian Liu Yu Xi Yuan De's disciple Li Cheng Yang Yu Jing Shen Ya's Zhang Ye's diplomacy Guang Ke Lu Zhaozhang Xiaobian Nan Zhuo Wang Zhixing Lu Fa Pei Xiu Feng Ye's neighbor Guan Tu Yang Xuan Ying Pei Qing Yu Zhao Chong Zheng Guangye

古文：周愿
现代文：周愿
English: Zhou Rong

古文：唐周愿，尝奉使魏州，节度使田季安引之连辔。
现代文：唐朝人周愿，曾奉命出使魏州。魏州节度使田季安去为他引路，他们把马缰连起来并驾齐驱。
English: Zhou Zhan of the Tang Dynasty was once ordered to send an envoy to Weizhou. During the Weizhou Festival, he asked Tian Ji'an to lead the way for him. They tied their horses together and rode side by side.

古文：路见一驴极肥，季安指示愿曰：此物大王世充。
现代文：路上见到一头驴很肥壮，田季安指给周愿看并说道：此物大于王世充。
English: On the way, he saw a very fat donkey. Tian Ji'an pointed it out to Zhou Xiang and said, "This thing is bigger than Wang Shichong."

古文：应声答曰：总是小窦建德。
现代文：周愿应声答道：总是小于窦建德吧！
English: Zhou Jian replied: "Always less than Dou Jiande!"

古文：李巽性严毅，不好戏笑。
现代文：李巽的性格严肃冷酷，不好戏笑。
English: Li Yao's personality is serious and cold, and he is not good at jokes.

古文：时愿知河西盐铁留事，将至。李戒从事曰：周生好谐谑，忝僭无礼。幸诸贤稍庄以待之。
现代文：当时周愿被任命为河西盐铁留事，当周愿快要到来的时候，李巽告诫佐官们说：周愿这个人喜好戏谑，而且羞辱人不分长幼不讲礼仪，希望各位要庄重严肃地对待他。
English: At that time, Zhou Jian was appointed as the secretary of the Henan Salt and Iron Company. When Zhou Jian was about to arrive, Li Xi cautioned the adjutants, saying: Zhou Jian is a person who likes to joke and humiliate people, regardless of whether they are old or young, and does not speak of etiquette. I hope you will treat him solemnly and seriously.

古文：及愿至，数燕。李公寒温外，不与之言，周亦无由得发。
现代文：等周愿来到之后，多次宴会，李巽都是除见面寒暄几句外，再不与说话，因而周愿也没有得到能引发他开玩笑的缘由。
English: After Zhou Jian arrived, many times at the banquet, Li Yao did not talk to him except for a few words of meet and greet, so Zhou Jian did not get the reason that could trigger his joke.

古文：一日，馔亲宾，愿亦预焉。
现代文：一天李巽宴请亲友，周愿也来参加。
English: One day, Li Yao invited relatives and friends to a banquet. Zhou Rong also came to attend.

古文：李公有故人子弟来投，落拓不事。遍问旧别墅及家童有技者。图书有名者。
现代文：当时李巽的一个老朋友的儿子来到了他家，此人放浪而没有正事，李便打听他家旧有别墅以及有技艺的家童、有名的图画书籍等情况，都说已经卖掉了。
English: At that time, the son of an old friend of Li Yao came to his home. This person was a vagabond without a real job. Li then inquired about the situation of his family's old villa, as well as skilled children and famous picture books. They all said that they had been sold.

古文：悉云货却。李责曰：未官家贫，产业从货，何至书籍古画店彼除？
现代文：李巽责备他道：还没有作官，家境又穷，财产应依据情况而买卖，你哪里到了书籍古画都卖掉不要了的地步？
English: Li Yao scolded him, "You haven't been an official yet, your family is poor, and property should be bought and sold according to the situation. When did you get to the point where you sold all your books and ancient paintings?

古文：惆怅久之。复问一曰：有一本虞永兴手书《尚书》，此又在否？
现代文：说后一直很怅惘不悦，过了一会儿又问：有一部虞永兴手书本《尚书》，此书还在吧？
English: After saying this, he was still very uncomfortable. After a while, he asked again, "There is a book written by Gu Yongxing, "Shangshu." Is this book still around?"

古文：某人惭惧，不敢言货，云：暂将典钱。
现代文：那个人惭愧而又有些惧怕，不敢说卖了，便说：暂时典当成钱了。
English: The man, ashamed and a little afraid, did not dare to say that he had sold it, but said, "I have pawned it for the time being and it has become money."

古文：愿忽言曰：此《尚书》大迍厄。
现代文：周愿忽然说道：这是《尚书》的一大劫难！
English: Zhou Zhen suddenly said: This is a great calamity of "Shang Shu"!

古文：都忘先拒其诙谐是，遂问曰：《尚书》何迍？
现代文：人们都忘记了先前要提防他戏谑的事，于是有人问道：《尚书》有什么劫难？
English: People had forgotten to beware of his jokes, so someone asked: "What's the doom of Shang Shu?"

古文：愿曰：已遭《尧典》、《舜典》之苦，此而即典。
现代文：周愿道：已经遭受《尧典》、《舜典》的苦难，这个人又给典了。
English: Zhou Jian said, "He has already suffered the hardships of "Shu Dian" and "Shu Dian," and this person has been punished again.

古文：李之颜大开，自更不舍。
现代文：李巽笑颜大开。从此再不与他离开。
English: Li Yao smiled broadly. From now on, she would never leave with him.

古文：又陆长源以旧德为宣武军行军司马，韩愈为巡官，同在使幕。
现代文：又陆长源凭借先人的功德为宣武军行军司马，韩愈为巡官，他们同时在一个幕府中任职共事。
English: In addition, Lu Changyuan, by virtue of the merits of his predecessors, became the Sima of the military march of the propaganda army, and Han Yu became the inspector. They also worked together in a shogunate.

古文：或讥年辈相悬，愿曰：大虫老鼠，俱为十二属，何怪之有？
现代文：有的人讥笑他们的年龄辈份相差太悬殊，周愿道：老虎和老鼠，还同为十二属相呢，这有什么奇怪的？
English: Some people scoffed at the disparity in their ages. Zhou Xian said, "Tigers and mice are also the same as the twelve genera. What's so strange about that?"

古文：旬日布于长安。
现代文：此事十来天便传遍了长安。
English: The news spread all over Chang'an in the next ten days.

古文：刘禹锡
现代文：刘禹锡
English: Liu Yuxi

古文：唐刘禹锡牧连州，替高寓。
现代文：唐朝人刘禹锡被任命为连州刺史，接替了高寓。
English: Liu Yuxi, a Tang Dynasty person, was appointed as Lianzhou chief historian, succeeding Gao Yu.

古文：寓后入羽林将军，自京附书曰：以承眷，辄举目代矣。
现代文：高寓后来到皇帝的卫军羽林军当上了将军，他从京城捎来信说：已经接受你的关照，我在这里就以遥望而代以致谢了。
English: Gaofei later became a general in the Emperor's Guard, the Wu Lin Army. He received a letter from Beijing saying, "I have accepted your care. I am here to express my gratitude by looking into the distance."

古文：刘答书云：昔有一话，曾有老妪山行，见大虫羸然跬步而不进，若伤其足。
现代文：刘向锡回信说：过去有这么一段故事，说曾有一个老妇在山里走路，看见一只大老虎身体十分瘦弱。迈着小步而难以行走。像是脚上受了伤。
English: Liu Xiangxing wrote back, "There was a story in the past about an old woman who was walking in the mountains when she saw a big tiger that was very thin. It took small steps and was difficult to walk. It looked like it had injured its foot.

古文：妪目之，而虎遂自举足以示妪，乃有芒刺在掌，因为拔之。俄奋迅阚吼而愧其恩。
现代文：老妇举目去看时，那老虎竟抬起足而告示于她，原来有一根芒刺扎在它的脚掌上，于是给它拔掉，那虎立刻振作奔跑起来并长啸一声以感谢老妇的恩情。
English: When the old woman raised her eyes to look, the tiger actually lifted her foot and announced to her that there was a thorn stuck in the sole of her foot, so she pulled it out. The tiger immediately got up and ran and gave a long roar to thank the old woman's kindness.

古文：自后掷麋、鹿、狐、兔于庭，日无缺焉。
现代文：从自以后便经常把麋、鹿、狐、兔等抛进老妇的院子里，没有一天不来的。
English: Since then, he has often thrown badgers, deer, foxes, rabbits, etc. into the old woman's yard, and not a day goes by without them coming.

古文：妪登垣视之，乃前伤虎也。
现代文：老妇登上墙头观察，乃是从前那只受伤的老虎所为。
English: The old woman climbed onto the wall to observe, which was done by the previously injured tiger.

古文：因为亲族具言其事，而心异之。
现代文：因而老妇对亲戚族人都说了这件事，他们心里也都感到奇怪。
English: So the old woman told all her relatives about it, and they were all amazed.

古文：一旦，忽掷一死人，血肉狼藉，妪乃被村胥诃捕。
现代文：一天早晨，突然抛进来一个死人，血肉模糊，于是老妇被村吏呵斥拘捕。
English: One morning, a dead man was suddenly thrown in, flesh and blood blurred, so the old woman was arrested by the village officials.

古文：妪具说其由，始得释缚。
现代文：老妇详细地说明了缘由，才被释放。
English: She was released after giving a detailed account of what happened.

古文：妪乃登垣，伺其虎至而语曰： 感矣，叩头大王，已后更莫抛死人来也。
现代文：于是老妇又登上墙头，等那只老虎再来时说道： 感谢你了，我给大王叩头了，以后千万再不能把死人抛进来了！ 
English: So the old woman climbed up the wall again, and when the tiger came again, she said: "Thank you, I have bowed to the great king, and I will never again throw a dead man in here!"

古文：袁德师
现代文：袁德师
English: Yuan De

古文：唐汝南袁德师，故给事高之子。
现代文：唐朝汝南人袁德师，是已故给事中袁高的儿子。
English: Yuan De Shi, a man from the south of the Tang Dynasty, was the son of the late Yuan Gao.

古文：尝于东都买得娄师德故园地，起书楼。洛人语曰：昔日娄师德园，今乃袁德师楼。
现代文：他曾在东都洛阳买下了娄师德的旧园地，并在园中盖起了书楼，洛阳人便说道：昔日娄师德园，今乃袁德师楼。
English: He once bought the former garden of Yuan Shide in Luoyang, the eastern capital, and built a library in the garden. The people of Luoyang said: "Yuan Shide's garden in the past is now Yuan Shide's building."

古文：李程
现代文：李程
English: Li Cheng

古文：唐刘禹锡云：李二十六丞相程善谑，为夏口日，有客辞焉。李曰： 且更三两日。
现代文：唐朝人刘禹锡说：丞相李程很喜好开玩笑，在夏口时，有一个客人来辞别，李程说： 再住两三天吧。
English: Liu Yuxi, a Tang Dynasty person, said: "The prime minister Li Cheng likes to joke. When he was in Xiakou, a guest came to say goodbye. Li Cheng said: Let's stay another two or three days."

古文：客曰： 业已行矣，舟船已在汉口。
现代文：客人说： 已经走了，船已经到了汉口。
English: The guest said: They have already left, the ship has arrived in Hankou.

古文：李曰： 但相信住，那汉口不足信。
现代文：李程说： 我只相信能停留下来，那汉口是不足相信的。
English: Li Cheng said, "I only believe that I can stay here. Hankou is not enough to believe.

古文：其客胡卢掩口而退。
现代文：那个客人捂嘴笑着离去。
English: The guest left, smirking.

古文：又因与堂弟丞相留守石投店酒饮，石收头子，乣者罚之。石曰： 何罚之有？ 
现代文：又有一次，李程与他的堂弟李石在酒肆以掷骰子赌输赢的办法饮酒，李石刚把骰子取在手，监酒人就要罚他喝酒，李石道： 为什么要罚我？ 
English: On another occasion, Li Cheng and his cousin Li Shih were drinking alcohol at a liquor store by throwing dice to win. As soon as Li Shih picked up the dice, the bartender was going to punish him for drinking. Li Shih said, "Why punish me?

古文：程曰： 汝忙闹时，把他堂印将去，又何辞焉？ 
现代文：李程道： 你趁大家在忙乱时，把他的堂印偷了去，还有什么可说的？ 
English: Li Cheng said: You took advantage of everyone's busy time and stole his stamp. What else can I say?

古文：酒家谓重四为堂印，盖讥石。
现代文：酒店中把骰子掷为双重的四个点称为堂印，他是以此来嘲弄李石的。
English: In the hotel, he mocked Li Shi by calling the four dots of the double throw of the dice as "Douyin."

古文：太和九年冬，朝廷有事之际，而登庸用也。
现代文：太和九年冬，当朝廷逼上重大事件之时，李程被选拔重用。
English: In the winter of 1909, when the imperial court was forced to deal with a major incident, Li Cheng was selected for heavy use.

古文：杨虞卿
现代文：杨虞卿
English: Yang Yuqing

古文：唐郎中张又新，与虔州杨虞卿，齐名友善。
现代文：唐朝的郎中张又新，与虔州的杨虞卿，是出了名的好朋友。
English: Zhang Yatxin, a retainer of the Tang Dynasty, and Yang Yuqing of Kenzhou, were famously good friends.

古文：杨妻李氏，即鄜相女，有德无容。
现代文：杨虞卿的妻子李氏是鄜相的女儿，品德好但相貌很丑。
English: Yang Yuqing's wife, Li, is the daughter of Yan Xiang. She is virtuous but ugly.

古文：杨未尝介意，敬待特甚。
现代文：杨虞卿从不介意，对她相敬如宾。
English: Yang Yuqing never minded, and treated her with great respect.

古文：张尝语杨曰：我年少成美名，不忧仕矣。
现代文：张又新曾对杨虞卿说：我年轻时就成了名，不担忧做官的事了。
English: Zhang Yanshin once said to Yang Yuqing: I became famous when I was young, and I don't worry about being an official.

古文：唯得美室，平生之望斯足。
现代文：唯有能得到一个漂亮的媳妇，那么平生的愿望就都满足了。
English: If only he could get a beautiful daughter-in-law, then his lifelong wish would be fulfilled.

古文：杨曰：必求是，但与我同好，定谐君心。
现代文：杨虞卿道：一定要争取这样。只要与我志同道合，一定会让你称心的。
English: Yang Yuqing said, "We must strive for this. As long as you are like-minded with me, you will surely be satisfied."

古文：张深信之。
现代文：张又新深信他的话。
English: Zhang Yaxin is convinced of his words.

古文：既婚，殊不惬心。杨秉笏触之曰：君何太痴！
现代文：可是张又新完婚之后，很不满意，杨虞卿用笏板触了触他说：你何必太傻。
English: However, after Zhang married again, he was very dissatisfied. Yang Yuqing touched him with a cutting board and said, "Why are you so stupid?"

古文：言之数四。张不胜其忿，回应之曰：与君无间，以情告君。君误我如是，何为痴？
现代文：对他说过三、四次，张又新仍十分气恨，回答他说：我和你亲密无间，我把真情告诉你，你竟这样误会我，请问什么叫太傻？
English: Having said this to him three or four times, Zhang Yixin was still very angry, and replied to him, "I am very close to you. I am telling you the truth. How could you misunderstand me like this? What is too stupid?

古文：杨于是历数求名从宦之由，曰：岂不与君皆同耶？
现代文：于是杨虞卿从头至尾述说了他们求名作官的经历，之后说道：我难道不是和你相同的吗？
English: So Yang Yuqing recounted from the beginning to the end their experience of seeking a title as an official, and then said: Aren't I the same as you?

古文：曰：然。
现代文：张又新说：是的。
English: The general said yes.

古文：然则我得丑妇，君讵不同耶？
现代文：杨虞卿接着说道：然而我得到的是丑媳妇，这你就与我不同了。
English: Yang Yuqing continued, "However, I got an ugly daughter-in-law, so you are different from me.

古文：张色解，问：君室何如我？
现代文：张又新的脸色已缓解。杨虞卿再问道：你的媳妇和我的媳妇比较起来怎么样？
English: Zhang Yuxin's new complexion has eased. Yang Yuqing then asked: How does your daughter-in-law compare to my daughter-in-law?

古文：曰：特甚。
现代文：张又新。漂亮很多。
English: It's brand new. It's very beautiful.

古文：张大笑，遂如初。
现代文：此时张又新高兴得大笑起来，于是又恢复到当初的样子。
English: At this point, Zhang burst out laughing with joy, and then returned to his original appearance.

古文：张既成家，乃为诗曰：牡丹一朵直千金，将谓从来色最深。
现代文：张又新有了一个和美的家庭，于是写诗道：牡丹一朵直千金，将谓从来色最深。
English: Zhang Yuxin had a harmonious family, so he wrote a poem: A peony is worth a thousand gold coins. It is said that the peony has the deepest color.

古文：今日满栏开似雪，一生辜负看花心。
现代文：今日满栏开似雪，一生辜负看花心。
English: Today, the column is full of snow, and I will live up to my heart's desire.

古文：沈亚之
现代文：沈亚之
English: Shen Yazhi

古文：唐沈亚之常客游，为小辈所试，曰：某改令，书俗各两句： 伐木丁丁，鸟鸣嘤嘤。
现代文：唐朝人沈亚之经常到外地游历，有一次被小青年考问试探，那晚生说：我们来改诗，雅俗各两句。伐木丁丁，鸟鸣嘤嘤。
English: Shen Yazhi, a member of the Tang Dynasty, often traveled abroad. Once, he was put to the test by a young man. That night, he said, "Let's revise a poem, two lines each from the classical and the vernacular. Wood chopping, birds chirping."

古文：东行西行，遇饭遇羹。
现代文：东行西行，遇饭遇羹。
English: Eastbound and westbound, meet meal, meet soup.

古文：亚之答曰：如切如磋，如琢如磨。
现代文：沈亚之酬答道：如切如磋，如琢如磨。
English: Shen Yazhi's reward replied, "If you do your best, you will succeed."

古文：欺客打妇，不当娄罗。
现代文：欺客打妇，不当娄罗张祜
English: Bully beats woman, improperly beats Luo Zhangye

古文：张祜唐张祜客淮南幕中。
现代文：唐朝人张祜客居于淮南节度使的幕府中。
English: Zhang Jike, a member of the Tang Dynasty, lived in the shogunate of Huainan.

古文：赴宴，时舍人杜牧为御使，座有妓人索骰子赌酒。牧微吟曰：骰子逡巡裹手拈，无因得见玉纤纤。
现代文：有一次他去赴宴，那时杜牧还只是御使，当时宴席中有个妓女在掷色子赌酒，杜牧轻轻吟道：骰子逡巡裹手拈，无因得见玉纤纤。
English: Once he went to a banquet, when Dumu was still just an envoy, when there was a prostitute at the banquet throwing dice and gambling, Dumu gently intoned: "The dice are spinning around the bracelet, there is no reason to see the jade fibers.

古文：祜应声答曰：但知报道金钗落，仿佛还应路指尖。
现代文：张祜随声答道：但知报道金钗落，仿佛还应路指尖。
English: Zhang Ye replied in unison, "But knowing about the fall of the Golden Calf, it seems like I should know my way around."

古文：祜未识白居易。白刺史苏州，始来谒。
现代文：张祜未见过白居易，白居易出任苏州刺史，来淮南使府拜访，才得相见。
English: Zhang Qian had never met Bai Juyi before. Bai Juyi was appointed as the first governor of Suzhou and came to visit the embassy of Huainan Province. Only then did they meet.

古文：才相见，白谓曰：久钦藉甚，尝记得右款头诗。
现代文：白居易对张祜说：久仰你的大名，还记得你的右款头诗。
English: Bai Juyi said to Zhang Ye: I have long heard of your daimyo, and I still remember your right-hand poem.

古文：祜愕然曰：舍人何所谓？
现代文：张祜愕然，道：舍人所言是指什么？
English: Zhang Ye was stunned and said, "What do you mean by'rejectionist'?"

古文：白曰： 鸳鸯钿带抛何处。孔雀罗衫付阿谁？ 
现代文：白居易道：鸳鸯钿带抛何处，孔雀罗衫付阿谁？
English: Bai Juyi: Where to throw the umbilical cord, and who is responsible for the peacock shirt?

古文：非款头何邪？
现代文：这不是款头诗是什么？
English: Isn't that what the opening verse is about?

古文：张微笑，仰而答之曰：祜亦尝记得舍人目连变。
现代文：张祜微微一笑，仰首而回答他道：我也曾记得舍人写的目连变诗。
English: Zhang Ye smiled faintly, raised his head and answered him, "I also remember a poem about changing one's mind that was written by someone else.

古文：白曰：何也？
现代文：白居易道：什么？
English: Bai Juyi: What?

古文：曰： 上穷碧落下黄泉，两处茫茫皆不见。
现代文：张祜道：上穷碧落下黄泉，两处茫茫皆不见。
English: Zhang Xuandao: the top is poor, the bottom is hell, and the two places are nowhere to be seen.

古文：非目连变何邪？
现代文：这不是目连变又是什么呢？
English: It's not a case of mistaken identity, so what is it?

古文：遂欢宴竟日。
现代文：于是二人高高兴兴地摆宴饮酒，一直到晚上。
English: So the two of them happily feasted and drank until the evening.

古文：赵公令狐绹镇维扬，祜常预狎宴。公因熟视祜，改令曰：上水船，风太急。帆下人，须好立。
现代文：赵公令狐绹镇守维扬时，张祜常常到那里去饮酒取乐，因而令狐绹对张祜很熟悉。有一次令狐绹让张祜改令，令狐绹先出小令道：上水船，风太急，帆下人，须好立。
English: When Zhao Gongling was guarding the town of Foxtail Town, Zhang Ye often went there to drink and have fun, which made Foxtail very familiar with Zhang Ye. On one occasion, he ordered Foxtail to let Zhang Ye change the order, so that Foxtail would be the first to issue a small order: the ship is sailing, the wind is too fast, the sail is down, and it is necessary to stand well.

古文：祜答曰：上水船，船底破。好看客，莫倚柁。
现代文：张祜对答道：上水船，船底破，好看客，莫倚柁。
English: Zhang Ye replied: A ship on the water, the bottom of the ship is broken, it's good to see the guests, there's nothing to be afraid of.

古文：交广客
现代文：交广客
English: Cross-strait tourism

古文：交广间游客，各求馆帖。
现代文：来交广一带游历的客人，都要求能有到馆舍下榻的帖子。
English: Guests who come to travel around the area of Jiaoguang all ask for a postcard to stay at the guesthouse.

古文：所至迎接甚厚，赆路每处十千。
现代文：因为那里招待得很好，临走还要给路费钱十千。
English: Because the hospitality there was very good, and I had to pay ten thousand for travel expenses before I left.

古文：广帅卢钧深知其弊。
现代文：广帅卢钧深知其中的舞弊行为。
English: Guangshai Lu Wei was well aware of the fraud.

古文：凡求馆帖者，皆云：累路馆驿，供菜饭而已。
现代文：凡索要馆帖的人都说：路经这里的人很多，只供给大家吃喝而已。
English: Everyone who asked for a table at the restaurant said, "There are a lot of people passing through here. We only serve food and drink to everyone."

古文：有客赍帖到驿，驿司依帖供讫，客不发。
现代文：有位游客带着帖子来到驿站，驿站的人依据数目认为已经花费完时，那位客人仍不走。
English: A tourist came to the post office with a post, and when the person at the post office thought that it had been spent according to the number, the guest still did not leave.

古文：驿吏曰：恐后更有使客，前驿又远，此非宿处。
现代文：驿站的小官吏道：你该走了，可能后面还有客人要来。前边的驿站又很远，这里你不能住了。
English: The petty official at the station said, "It's time for you to leave, there may be guests coming later. The station ahead is very far away, you can't stay here."

古文：客曰：食帖如何处分？
现代文：客人说：食帖如何处理？
English: Guest: How do you deal with the mess?

古文：吏曰：供菜饭而已。
现代文：驿吏说：供菜饭而已。
English: The magistrate said, "It's just for cooking rice."

古文：客曰：菜饭供了，还我 而已 来。
现代文：客人说：菜饭供了，还我 而已 来吧。
English: The guest said, "The food is ready, give it back to me, come on."

古文：驿吏相顾，莫知所为。
现代文：驿吏两眼发怔，不知是咋回事。
English: I don't know what's going on.

古文：客又迫促，无计，吏问曰：不知 而已 。
现代文：客人又催促，驿吏仍无办法，于是问道：不知道 而已 是什么。
English: The guest urged him again, but the usher was still unable to do anything, so he asked: "I don't know, but what is it?"

古文：曰：大于驴，小于骡。
现代文：客人说：大于驴，小于骡。
English: The guest said: Bigger than a donkey, smaller than a donkey.

古文：若无可供，但还我价直。驿吏问：每一 而已 。
现代文：如果你没有可以给我的，可按价还我钱。驿吏问：每一个 而已 价值多少？
English: If you don't have anything to give me, you can give me my money back according to the price.

古文：客曰：三五千。
现代文：客人说：三五千。
English: The guest said, "Three or five thousand."

古文：驿吏逐敛送耳。卢肇
现代文：驿吏只好按数奉送。卢肇
English: The officials had to be sent according to the number. Lu Zhaozhou

古文：唐卢肇初举，先达或问所来。
现代文：唐人卢肇刚中举时，前辈问他是什么地方人。
English: When Lu Zhaogang, a Chinese, was in junior high school, his seniors asked him what kind of local people he was.

古文：肇曰：某袁民也。
现代文：卢肇说：我是袁州人。
English: Lu Zhao said: I am from Yuanzhou.

古文：或曰：袁州出举人邪？
现代文：有人说：袁州出举人啊！
English: Some people say: Yuanzhou is the best!

古文：肇曰：袁州出举人，亦犹沅江出鳖甲，九肋者盖稀矣。
现代文：卢肇说：袁州出举人，也如沅江出鳖甲一样，九肋型的世间稀少。
English: Lu Zhao said: People from Yuanzhou are just like people from Lijiang, and people with nine ribs are rare in the world.

古文：又肇就江西解试，为试官末送。肇有启事谢曰：巨鳌屃赑，首冠蓬山。
现代文：卢肇到江西参加解试，考官将他排在后边，卢肇申言谢道：巨鳌屃赑，数第一的是蓬山。
English: Lu Zhao went to Jiangxi to participate in the examination. The examiner put him at the back. Lu Zhao said thankfully: "Giant dragonfly, the number one is Pengshan."

古文：试官谓之曰：某昨限以人数挤排，虽获申展，深惭名第奉浼。焉得翻有首冠蓬山之谓？
现代文：考官对他说：昨日因人数太多而受局限，虽也让你获得展示才能的机会，但很为你的名次落后而感到疚愧并请能谅解，怎么你还会有首冠蓬山之说呢？
English: The examiner said to him: "Yesterday, due to the limited number of people, although you were given the opportunity to demonstrate your talent, you are very guilty of falling behind in your ranking, and please understand, how can you still have the first crown of Pengshan?

古文：肇曰：必知明公垂问。
现代文：卢肇道：我知您会这样问的。
English: Luzhao: I knew you would ask this.

古文：大凡顽石处上，巨鳌载之。
现代文：大凡石碑在上，总是有巨鳌在下面驮着它。
English: On top of the great stone monument, there is always a giant centipede under it.

古文：岂非首冠邪？
现代文：这难道不是第一吗？
English: Isn't that a first?

古文：一座闻之大笑。
现代文：在座的人听到后大笑。
English: Those present burst into laughter on hearing this.

古文：章孝标
现代文：章孝标
English: Zhang Xiaobian

古文：唐章孝标及第后，寄淮南李绅诗曰：及第全胜十政官，金汤渡了出长安。
现代文：唐人章孝标考中进士后，给淮南的李绅寄去一首诗：及第全胜十政官，金汤镀了出长安。
English: After the Tang people Zhang Xiao entered the middle school entrance examination, he sent a poem to Li Sheng of Huainan: And the tenth political officer won the first place, and Chang'an was plated with gold.

古文：马头渐入扬州郭，为报时人洗眼看。
现代文：马头渐入扬州郭，为报时人洗眼看。
English: The horse's head gradually entered Yangzhou Guo, washing the eyes of the reporter.

古文：绅亟以一绝答之曰：假金只用真金镀，若是真金不镀金。
现代文：李绅立即以一首绝句回答他道：假金只用真金镀，若是真金不镀金。
English: Li Sheng immediately answered him with a final sentence: fake gold is only plated with real gold, if it is real gold, it is not plated.

古文：十载长安得一第，何须空腹用高心。
现代文：十载长安得一第，何须空腹用高心。
English: Ten years of long-term peace and stability have been achieved, so why do we need to be hungry with a high heart.

古文：南卓
现代文：南卓
English: Nan Zhuo

古文：唐郎中南卓，与李修古亲表昆弟。
现代文：唐朝时有个郎中叫南卓，与李修古是亲表兄弟。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was a vassal named Nan Zhuo, who was a first cousin of Li Xiu Gu.

古文：李性迂僻，卓常轻之。
现代文：李修古性格迂腐孤僻，南卓很轻蔑他。
English: Li Xiu Gu's character is pedantic and solitary, and Nanzhuo despises him.

古文：李俄授许州从事，奏官敕下，时许帅方大宴，忽递到开角，有卓与李书。
现代文：李修古很快被授为许州从事，奏官传下诏书，许州的长官正在宴请李修古时，忽然传来了南卓写给李修古的信。
English: Li Xiu Gu was soon assigned to work in Huzhou, and an imperial edict was issued by the imperial secretary. While the governor of Huzhou was entertaining Li Xiu Gu, a letter written by Nanzhuo to Li Xiu Gu suddenly arrived.

古文：遂执书喜白帅曰：某与卓二十三表兄弟，多蒙相轻。今日某忝为尚书宾幕，又奏署敕下，遽与某书，大奇。
现代文：李修古拿着信很高兴地对长官说：我与南卓表兄弟，多亏他对我的轻视，今日才愧为尚书宾幕，又有皇上的诏令下，他立即给我写来信，让人很奇怪。
English: Li Xiu Gu took the letter and happily said to the commander: My cousin Nanzhuo and I, thanks to his disdain for me, are only worthy of being the guest of honor today, and under the imperial decree, he immediately wrote a letter to me, which is very strange.

古文：及启缄云：即日卓老不死，生见李修古上除因。
现代文：等到打开信一看，上写道：有幸南卓未死，活着看见李修古做了官。
English: When the letter was opened, it read: Fortunately, Nanzhuo did not die, and lived to see Li Xiu Gu become an official.

古文：帅请书看，合座大笑。李修古惭甚。
现代文：许州长官拿过信来看。满座人都大笑，李修古觉得心里很不安。
English: Governor Xu took the letter and read it. The whole audience laughed, and Li Xiu Gu felt very uneasy.

古文：王智兴
现代文：王智兴
English: Wang Zhixing

古文：唐王智兴带使侍中，罢镇归京。
现代文：唐人王智兴是带节度使侍中，罢任回到京城。
English: Wang Zhixing, a Chinese, was appointed as a courtier with ceremonial duties and returned to the capital.

古文：亲戚间有以选事求智兴论荐，固不允。
现代文：亲戚之中便有人让他帮助推荐作官，王智兴坚辞不答应。
English: One of his relatives asked him to help recommend an official, but Wang Zhixing refused.

古文：遂请致一函与吏部侍郎。
现代文：于是又请他给吏部侍郎写封信。
English: He then asked him to write a letter to the secretary of the personnel department.

古文：吏部印尾状云：选人名衔谨领讫。
现代文：不久在一份吏部公文的末尾写道：选人的名衔已收到。
English: Soon after, he wrote at the end of an official document from the personnel department: "The title of the candidate has been received.

古文：智兴曰：不如侍中也有用处。
现代文：智兴感叹道：不知道侍中也有用处！
English: Chixing exclaimed, "I didn't know that a chambermaid could also be useful!"

古文：卢发
现代文：卢发
English: Lofa Town

古文：唐中书令白敏中镇荆南，杜蕴廉问长沙，请从事卢发致聘焉。
现代文：唐朝的中书令白敏中镇守荆南时，杜蕴廉有意去长沙做官，白敏中便让从事卢发致聘书。
English: When Bai Minzhong, the town guard of Jingnan, was appointed by the Tang Dynasty, Du Yunlian intended to go to Changsha to work as an official, and Bai Minzhong gave him a letter of appointment to work in Lufa.

古文：发酒酣傲睨。
现代文：卢发此时酒至酣处，对杜蕴廉流露出傲视情绪。
English: At this time, Lu Fa had drunk too much wine and showed arrogance towards Du Yun Lian.

古文：公少不怿，因改著词令曰：十姓胡中第六胡，也曾金阁掌洪炉。
现代文：白敏中对此不悦，于是作诗让他改。白敏中吟道：十姓胡中第六胡。也曾金阁掌洪炉。
English: Bai Minzhong was not happy about this, so he asked him to change the poem. Bai Minzhong chant: Ten surnames Hu, middle name Hu, sixth name Hu. He also worked at the Golden Pavilion.

古文：少年从事夸门地，莫向樽前气色粗。
现代文：少年从事夸门地，莫向樽前气色粗。
English: The boy is engaged in boasting, he should not look coarse in front of the barrel.

古文：发答曰：十姓胡中第六胡，文章官职胜崔卢。
现代文：卢发答诗道：十姓胡中第六胡，文章官职胜崔卢。
English: Lu Fa replied with a poem: "Ten surnames, one middle name, six surnames, and one official title are better than Cui Lu."

古文：暂来关外分忧寄，不称宾筵语气粗。
现代文：暂来关外分忧寄，不称宾筵语气粗。
English: Temporarily coming to Guanzhong for the purpose of sending condolences is not considered a rude gesture.

古文：公极欢而罢。
现代文：白敏中很高兴，这事才算作罢。
English: Bai Minzhong was very happy, and that was that.

古文：裴休
现代文：裴休
English: Pei Xiu

古文：曲江池本秦时岂洲。
现代文：曲江池所在地秦朝时叫岂州。
English: The location of Qujiang Pond was called Wuzhou during the Qin Dynasty.

古文：唐开元中，疏凿为胜境。
现代文：唐朝开元年间，疏通开掘为风景名胜之地。
English: During the first year of the Tang Dynasty, the dredging excavation became a place of scenic beauty.

古文：南即紫云楼芙蓉苑，西即杏园、慈恩寺。
现代文：南面是紫云楼、芙蓉苑，西面是杏园、慈恩寺。
English: To the south are the Ziyun Building and Hibiscus Garden, and to the west are the Apricot Garden and Cien Temple.

古文：花卉环周，烟水明媚，都人游赏。
现代文：花草环绕，水色明媚，都城的人都来游玩观赏。
English: Surrounded by flowers and plants, the water color is bright, and people from the capital come to play and watch.

古文：盛于中和上巳节。
现代文：最盛大的是中和上巳节这天。
English: The grandest is the Mid-Autumn Festival and the Mid-Autumn Festival.

古文：即锡宴臣僚，会于山亭，赐太常教坊乐。
现代文：皇上要赐宴臣僚，聚会于山亭，还要赐与大常教坊的音乐赏听。
English: The emperor wants to give banquets to his ministers, gatherings in mountain pavilions, and the music of the Daijo Kyobo to enjoy.

古文：池备彩舟，唯宰相、三使、北省官翰林学士登焉。
现代文：池中备有彩船，只有宰相、三使、中书门下两省及翰林学士等大官才可登临。
English: The pond is stocked with colored boats, and only high-ranking officials such as the prime minister, the three envoys, the two provinces under the Chinese Academy of Letters, and the Hanlin Scholar can visit.

古文：倾动皇州，以为盛观。
现代文：整个皇宫的人几乎都要来游，十分盛观。
English: People from all over the Imperial Palace came to see the parade, which was a great spectacle.

古文：裴休廉察宣城，未离京，值曲江池荷花盛发，同省阁名士游赏。
现代文：裴休此时正欲廉察宣城，还未离开京城，又正值曲江池荷花盛开之时，便与省阁的名流们同来游赏。
English: At this time, Pei Xiu was on his way to inspect Xuancheng, and before leaving Beijing, when the lotus flowers of Qujiang Pond were in full bloom, he came to visit with the famous people of the provincial pavilion.

古文：自慈恩寺，各屏左右，随以小仆，步至紫云楼。
现代文：从慈恩寺起，他们丢下随从，只带着小仆，步行到紫云楼。
English: From Cien Temple, they left their entourage behind and, with only their servants, walked to Ziyun Building.

古文：见数人坐于水滨，裴与朝士憩其旁。
现代文：见有几个人正坐在池水边上，裴休便与同僚们也坐于他们旁边休息。
English: Seeing several people sitting on the edge of the pool, Pei Xiu and his colleagues also sat next to them to rest.

古文：中有黄衣半酣，轩昂自若，指诸人笑语轻脱。
现代文：那几个人中有个穿黄衣服人已酒至半醉，显示出一种气度不凡的神态，指责其他人谈笑轻佻，裴休心里有些不平。
English: One of the yellow-clad men was already half-drunk, displaying an unusual demeanor and accusing the others of being frivolous. Pei Xiu felt a little uneasy.

古文：裴意稍不平，揖而问之：吾贤所任何官？率尔对曰：喏，郎不敢，新授宣州广德令。
现代文：拱手行礼问道：请问你任什么官职？对方轻率地回答说：喏，郎可不敢，郎是新任的宣州广德县令。
English: He bowed his head and asked, "What official position do you hold, please?" The other party flippantly replied, "Oh, I wouldn't dare, my husband is the newly appointed county magistrate of Guangde County, Xuanzhou."

古文：反问裴曰：押衙所任何职？
现代文：并反问裴休道：押衙担任什么职务？
English: He also asked Pei Xiu Dao: What position does the overseer hold?

古文：裴效之曰：喏，郎不敢，新授宣州观察使。
现代文：裴休仿效那人道：喏，郎不敢，刚任宣州观察使。
English: Pei Xiu followed the example of that man:,郎不敢,刚任宣州观察使.

古文：于是狼狈而走，同座亦皆奔散。
现代文：那人于是狼狈而去，与他在一起的人也都四散而走。
English: And the man was afraid, and went away, and they that were with him were scattered abroad.

古文：朝士抚掌大笑。
现代文：裴休的同僚们都击掌大笑。
English: Pei Xiu's colleagues all clapped their hands and laughed.

古文：不数日，布于京华。
现代文：不多天，便传遍了京城。
English: Within a few days, the rumor spread throughout the capital.

古文：后于铨司访之，云：有广德令请换罗江矣。
现代文：后来被吏部执掌铨选的人查到此人，说：这个广德县令已请求调换到罗江去了。
English: Later, the person in charge of the selection of the cadre department investigated this person and said: This Guangde County order has been requested to be transferred to Luojiang.

古文：宣皇在藩邸闻是说，与诸王每为戏谈。
现代文：宣宗在做藩王时听到这一笑话，也常常以这种方式与亲王们开玩笑。
English: When he was the lord of the domain, Xuanzong heard this joke and often joked with the princes in this way.

古文：其后龙飞，裴入相。
现代文：后来登基做了皇帝，裴休做了宰相。
English: Later, he ascended to the throne as emperor, and Pei Xiu became prime minister.

古文：因书麻制，回谓枢近曰：喏，郎不敢，新授中书门下平章事矣。
现代文：因书写诏书，也对枢密使回答说：喏，郎不敢，我是新任的中书门下平章事。
English: Because of writing the imperial edict, he also replied to the envoy: "Don't you dare, I am a newly appointed member of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：冯衮
现代文：冯衮
English: Feng Xuan

古文：唐冯衮牧苏州，江外优佚，暇日多纵饮博。
现代文：唐人冯衮任苏州牧时，江外很富足安逸，闲暇时间多用来纵酒赌博。
English: When the Tang Dynasty's Feng Xuan was in charge of Suzhou, Jiangwai was very affluent and comfortable, and his leisure time was mostly spent drinking and gambling.

古文：因会宾僚掷卢，冯突胜，以所得均遗一座，乃吟曰：八尺台盘照面新，千金一掷斗精神。
现代文：一天，又与宾朋僚属们赌，冯衮大胜，就把所赢的钱都送给同座的人，吟诗道：八尺台盘照面新，千金一掷斗精神。
English: One day, he gambled with his friends and colleagues and won big, so he gave all the money he won to his seatmates, singing: The eight-foot table is shiny and new, and it's worth every penny.

古文：合是赌时须赌取，不妨回首乞闲人。
现代文：合是赌时须赌取，不妨回道乞闲人。
English: When meeting is a gamble, you have to take a gamble. You may as well go back to begging.

古文：更因饮酣，戏酒妓。
现代文：更因为酒醉，戏耍陪酒的歌伎。
English: What's more, because he was drunk, he played a drinking game of kabuki.

古文：而军倅留情，索然无绪。
现代文：而他的副手因却于情面，表现出索然无绪的样子。
English: His deputy, on the other hand, appeared emotionally drained.

古文：冯眄之曰：老夫过戏，无能为也。
现代文：冯衮斜看他一眼道：老夫只是过于戏耍，其实已没什么能力了。
English: Feng Li gave him a sidelong glance and said, "The old man is just being too playful. In fact, he doesn't have much ability anymore."

古文：倅敛袵而谢。
现代文：副职忙整衣道歉。
English: The deputy apologized for being too busy getting dressed.

古文：因吟曰：醉眼从伊百度斜，是他家属是他家。
现代文：于是他又吟诗道：醉眼从伊百度斜，是他家属是他家。
English: So he chanted: "Drunken eyes from Ibaidu slope, his family is his family."

古文：低声向道人知也，隔坐刚抛豆蔻花。
现代文：低声向道人知也，隔坐刚抛豆寇花。
English: Low-voiced to the way people know, sitting apart, just throwing beans and flowers.

古文：邻夫
现代文：邻夫
English: Neighbour

古文：有睹邻人夫妇相谐和者，夫自外归，见妇吹火，乃赠诗曰：吹火朱唇动，添薪玉腕斜。
现代文：有人见到邻居夫妇相处十分和睦。丈夫从外面回来，看见媳妇正在吹火做饭，便赠了一首诗：吹火朱唇动，添薪玉腕斜。
English: Someone saw a neighbor couple getting along very harmoniously. When the husband came back from outside and saw his daughter-in-law was blowing fire to cook, he gave her a poem: "When you blow fire, your lips move like vermilion, but when you add wood, your arms are crooked like jade."

古文：遥看烟里面，大似雾中花。
现代文：遥看烟里面，大似雾中花。
English: Looking at the inside of the smoke remotely, it looks like a flower in the fog.

古文：其妻亦候夫归，告之曰：每见邻人夫妇，极甚多情。
现代文：有一回这人正巧也在等自己的丈夫回来，等丈夫回来之后，妻子告诉他说：我经常看见咱们邻居那对夫妇感情很深。
English: On one occasion, the man happened to be waiting for his husband to return, and when he did, his wife told him: "I often see our neighbours and they are a very affectionate couple.

古文：适来夫见妇吹火，作诗咏之。
现代文：刚才丈夫回来，正巧见媳妇吹火，便作了首诗赞美她。
English: Just now, when her husband returned, he happened to see his daughter-in-law lighting a fire, so he composed a poem to praise her.

古文：君岂不能学也？
现代文：你为何不能学学人家？
English: Why can't you learn from others?

古文：夫曰：彼诗道何语？
现代文：丈夫问：他的诗说些什么话？
English: The husband asked: What does his poem say?

古文：乃诵之。
现代文：妻子便背诵了给他听。
English: His wife recited it to him.

古文：夫曰：君当吹火，为别制之。
现代文：丈夫说：这有什么，你也吹火，我另外为你作一首。
English: The husband said: "What's this, you also blow fire, I'll make another song for you."

古文：妻亦效吹，乃为诗曰：吹火青唇动，添薪黑腕斜。
现代文：妻子一听便效仿邻居媳妇去吹火，于是丈夫作诗道：吹火青唇动，添薪黑腕斜。
English: Upon hearing this, the wife followed the example of the neighbor's daughter-in-law and went to blow out the fire, whereupon the husband wrote a poem: "When you blow out the fire, your lips turn blue and your hands turn black."

古文：遥看烟里面，恰似鸠盘茶。
现代文：遥看烟里面，恰似鸠盘茶。
English: Watching the smoke from afar, it looks just like a bowl of tea.

古文：关图
现代文：关图
English: Guantao

古文：唐荆州，衣冠薮泽，每岁解送举人，多不成名，号曰天荒解。
现代文：唐代时的荆州，人材荟萃，每次选送去应试的举人，多不成功名，被称作天荒解。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Jingzhou was a hotbed of talent, and every time a candidate was sent to take an exam, most of them were unsuccessful. It was known as the "Day of Absurdity."

古文：刘蜕以荆州解及第，号为 破天荒 。
现代文：刘蜕是由荆州选送而考中进士的，号称破天荒。
English: Liu Wei was selected and sent by Jingzhou to enter the junior high school entrance examination. It is said to be unprecedented.

古文：尔来关图、常翛、皆荆人也，率有高文，连登上科。
现代文：尔后的关图、常翛，皆为荆州人氏，相继都有好文章，连连登上科。
English: Later, Guantao and Changyao, both from Jingzhou, successively had good articles and successively entered the science.

古文：图即戎校之子，及第归乡，都押衙辈为其张筵。
现代文：关图只是一个地位很低的军人的儿子。关图中选回来，都府的押衙小吏们为他大摆筵席。
English: Guan Tu was just the son of a low-ranking soldier. Guan Tu was chosen to return, and the officials of the prefectural government held a grand banquet for him.

古文：乃指盘上酱瓯，戏老校曰：要校卒为者。
现代文：关图指着盘上的酱盆戏耍一老校道：要校卒为者。
English: Guan Tu points to the saucepan on the plate and plays an old school trick: he wants to be a school graduate.

古文：席人大噱。关图妻，即常翛妹，才思妇也，有《祭夫文》行于世。
现代文：那人却端了杯醋递过去说：这就是 校卒为者 。在座的人无不大笑。关图的妻室就是常翛的妹妹，是个很有才气的女子。后来有祭悼丈夫的文章流传于世。
English: The man, however, brought out a glass of vinegar and handed it over, saying: "This is the school graduate." Everyone present laughed. Guantu's wife was the younger sister of Tsuneaki, a very talented woman. Later, an article was written about her husband's death.

古文：杨玄翼
现代文：杨玄翼
English: Composed by Yang Xuanyi

古文：唐咸通中，杨玄翼怒举子车服太盛，欲令骑驴。
现代文：唐代咸通年间，杨玄翼对举子们乘车装饰和穿戴太奢华很生气，想要下令让他们骑驴。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Yang Xuanqiang was very angry with his sons for decorating and dressing too luxuriously, and wanted to order them to ride a donkey.

古文：时有诗曰：今年诏下尽骑驴，紫轴绯毡满九衢。
现代文：当时有诗写道：今年诏下尽骑驴，紫轴绯毡满九衢。
English: At that time, there was a poem that read: "This year, I will ride a donkey as much as I can, and I will ride a donkey nine times as far as I can."

古文：清瘦儿郎犹自可，就中愁杀郑昌图。
现代文：清瘦儿郎犹自可，就中愁杀郑昌图。
English: Some people scoffed that this year's Emperor's point winners were all donkey riders, and the streets were full of them. The skinny ones were okay, but the great ones like Zheng Changtu would be worried to death.

古文：裴庆余
现代文：裴庆余
English: Bae Qingyu

古文：唐裴庆余，咸通末，佐北门李蔚淮南幕。
现代文：唐代咸通末年，裴庆余在淮南使府为羽林将军李蔚的幕僚。
English: At the end of the Tang Dynasty, Pei Qingyu was an aide-de-camp to General Li Wei in the Huainan Legation.

古文：常游江。
现代文：他们常到江中去游玩。
English: They often go to the middle of the river to play.

古文：舟子刺船，误以篙竹溅水，湿妓人衣。
现代文：一次船夫撑船时，使篙不慎，溅起水滴，湿了歌妓的衣掌。
English: Once, when the boatman was paddling, he made the oar inadvertently splash water droplets, which wet the geisha's palms.

古文：蔚为之色变。
现代文：李蔚因此脸色大变。
English: As a result, Li Wei's face changed dramatically.

古文：庆余遽请彩笺，纪一绝曰：满额蛾黄金缕衣，翠翘浮动玉钗垂。
现代文：裴庆余急忙拿来彩笺，记下一首绝句：满额蛾黄金缕衣，翠翘浮动玉钗垂。
English: Pei Qingyu hurriedly took the colored pencils and wrote down a final sentence: full-fronted moth golden wisp, emerald floating jade pendant.

古文：从教水溅罗裙湿，知道巫山行雨归。
现代文：从教水溅罗裙湿，知道巫山行雨归。
English: From teaching water splashing Luo skirt wet, know Wushan rain return.

古文：蔚览之极欢谑，命宴者传之。
现代文：李蔚看后很觉欢快有滋味儿，于是命宴席上的人传看。
English: After watching it, Li Wei felt very happy and enjoyed it, so she ordered the people at the banquet to watch it.

古文：赵崇
现代文：赵崇
English: Zhao Chong

古文：虽卢氏衣冠之盛，而累代未尝知举。
现代文：卢氏虽然人才济济，但历代从未执掌过科举之事。
English: Although the Lu family is rich in talent, it has never been in charge of the imperial examinations.

古文：乾符中，卢携在中书，以宗人无掌文柄者，乃擢群从陕虢观察使卢渥，司礼闱。
现代文：乾符中期，卢携任职中书省，因宗人之中没有执掌以文章取士的权利的人，便选拔了陕虢观察使卢渥，并让他主持礼部的会考。
English: In the middle of the Heian period, Lu Wu served as the Minister of Literature in China. Since there was no one among the patriarchs who had the right to select scholars by essays, he selected Lu Wu, an observer from Shaanxi Province, and asked him to preside over the examination of the ceremonial department.

古文：是年秋，黄巢犯阙，僖皇播迁，举人星迸。
现代文：可是这年秋天，黄巢进攻京城，唐僖宗不得不流离迁徙，来应试的举人也四散而去。
English: However, in the autumn of that year, the Yellow Nest attacked Beijing, and Tang Xizong had to move away. The examiners who came to take the exam also dispersed.

古文：迨复京都，裴贽连知三举，渥有羡色。
现代文：然而等到重新回到京城，裴贽接连三次职掌科举考试之事，卢渥很羡慕。
English: However, when he came back to Beijing, Luwo was very envious of Pei's success in passing three consecutive exams.

古文：赵崇戏之曰：阁下所谓 出腹不生养主司 也。
现代文：赵崇对他戏言道：阁下，这就是所说的出腹不生养主司 啊。
English: Zhao Chong jokingly said to him, "Your Excellency, this is what is meant by the saying that one should not have a baby out of wedlock."

古文：郑光业
现代文：郑光业
English: Zheng Guangye

古文：郑光业，中表间有同人试者。
现代文：郑光业的表兄弟中，有一同参加科举考试的。
English: Among Zheng Guangye's cousins, one of them participated in the imperial examinations.

古文：时举子率以白纸糊案子，光业潜纪之曰：新糊案子，其白如银。入试出试。千春万春。
现代文：当时规定应试的举子都要用白纸糊上卷子的姓名，光业在暗中记道：新糊案子，其白如银，入试出试，千春万春。
English: At that time, it was stipulated that the names of the candidates taking the exam should be pasted on the roll with white paper, and Guangye secretly remembered: the newly pasted case is as white as silver, and the entrance examination and the exam are ever-changing.

古文：光业弟兄，共有一巨皮箱。
现代文：光业兄弟共用一个大皮箱。
English: The brothers share a large suitcase.

古文：凡同人投献，词有可嗤者，即投其中，号苦海。
现代文：举子之中，凡是写出具有讽刺可笑之类的诗文。就投进箱里，称这箱叫苦海。
English: During the performance, anyone who wrote a poem that was satirical or ridiculous was thrown into a box, which was called the Bitter Sea.

古文：昆季或从容，用资谐戏。
现代文：兄弟之中，闲暇时看看这些诗文，用以达到诙谐嘲戏的效果。
English: Among brothers, look at these verses at leisure to achieve the effect of witty mockery.

古文：即命二仆。舁苦海于前，人阅一编，皆极欢而罢。
现代文：于是叫两个仆人把苦海抬到大家面前，每人都从头至尾阅读一遍，都感到十分欢悦。
English: Then he ordered two servants to bring the sea of bitterness before them, and each of them read it from the beginning to the end with great joy.

古文：光业常言及第之岁，策试夜。一同人突入试铺。
现代文：郑光业还常常讲起中举那年的事，有一天晚上，正准备考试，突然有一个举子走进他住的房间。
English: Zheng Guangye also often talked about the year of the junior high school entrance examination. One evening, when he was preparing for the examination, a junior high school student suddenly walked into his room.

古文：为吴语，谓光业曰：必先必先，可以相容否？
现代文：那人讲吴语，对光业说：必先必先，可以让我住在这里吗？
English: The man, who spoke Wu, said to Guangye: "First things first, can I live here?

古文：光业为辍半铺之地。
现代文：光业为他让出半铺。
English: Mitsuie gave up half the shop for him.

古文：又曰：必先必先，谘仗取一杓水？
现代文：那人又道：必先必先，请问能不能给我取一杓子水来？
English: The man also said, "I have to go first. Could you please fetch me a pail of water?"

古文：亦为取之。
现代文：光业也给他取来。
English: Hikari fetched it for him as well.

古文：又曰：便干托煎一碗茶，得否？
现代文：又道。那就再请你给冲一碗茶，可以吗？
English: Again. Then can I ask you to make me a bowl of tea?

古文：欣然与烹煎。
现代文：光业又欣然为他冲上茶。
English: Guangye also gladly made tea for him.

古文：居二日，光业状元及第，其人首贡一启，颇叙一宵之素。
现代文：住了两天之后，光业考中了状元，那个人首先向他送上一封贺札，整整倾述了一夜的情谊。
English: After staying for two days, Guangye won the exam, and the person first sent him a congratulatory card, describing the whole night's friendship.

古文：略曰：既蒙取水，又使煎茶。
现代文：主要是说，那天晚上请你给打水，又让你给冲茶。
English: Mainly, that night I asked you to fetch water and make tea.

古文：当时不识贵人，凡夫肉眼。
现代文：当时不识贵人，真是凡夫肉眼。
English: At that time, I didn't know any nobles. I was just an ordinary person with the naked eye.

古文：今日俄为后进，穷相骨头。
现代文：今天短暂之间我就成了个落后的人，一身穷相贱骨头。
English: Today, in a short period of time, I have become a backward person, a poor man.

