古文：冯熙，字晋昌，长乐信都人，文明太后之兄也。
现代文：冯熙字晋昌，长乐信都人，文明太后的哥哥。
English: Feng Xi Zi Jinchang, a native of Changle Xindu, was the elder brother of the Empress Dowager Wenming.

古文：祖文通，语在《海夷传》。
现代文：祖冯文通，记在《海夷传》。
English: Zu Feng Wentong, recorded in "Haiyi Biography."

古文：世祖平辽海，熙父朗内徒，官至秦雍二州刺史、辽西郡公，坐事诛。
现代文：世祖平定辽海，冯熙父亲冯朗内迁，官做到秦、雍二州刺史、辽西郡公，因犯事被诛杀。
English: The founder of the dynasty conquered Liaohai, Feng Xi's father, Feng Lang, moved inland, and became an official in Qin, Yong Erzhou, Zhishi, and Liaoxi County. He was beaten to death for his crimes.

古文：文明太后临朝，追赠假黄钺、太宰、燕宣王，立庙长安。
现代文：文明太后掌握朝政，追赠为假黄钺、太宰、燕宣王，在长安立庙。
English: The Empress Dowager Civility ruled the Lin Dynasty, posthumously bestowed the fake Huang Di, enjoyed the Dazai Festival, bestowed a peerage on Yan Xuan Wang, and built a temple in Chang'an.

古文：熙生于长安，为姚氏魏母所养。
现代文：冯熙生于长安，被魏母姚氏所抚养。
English: Feng Xisheng was born in Chang'an and raised by Yao's Wei mother.

古文：以叔父乐陵公邈因战入蠕蠕，魏母携熙逃避至氐羌中抚育。
现代文：他的叔父乐陵公冯邈因为战争进入蠕蠕境内，魏母也携带冯熙逃避到氐、羌部落中养育他。
English: Because of the war, his uncle, Le Ling Gong Feng Xi, entered the territory of Dem Dem, and his Wei mother also carried Feng Xi to escape and raised him in the tribe of Yao and Yao.

古文：年十二，好弓马，有勇干，氐羌皆归附之。
现代文：冯熙长到十二岁，喜好弓箭马匹，很有勇力干才，氐、羌人都归附于他。
English: Feng Xi grew up to be twelve years old. He was fond of bows and arrows and horses. He was very brave and talented. Both the Yao and the Xiong were attached to him.

古文：魏母见其如此，将还长安。
现代文：魏母看到这种情况，准备返回长安。
English: Wei's mother saw this and prepared to return to Chang'an.

古文：始就博士学问，从师受《孝经》、《论语》，好阴阳兵法。
现代文：入长安之后，冯熙才开始读书，从师学《孝经》、《论语》，喜好阴阳兵法。
English: After moving to Chang'an, Feng Xi began to study. He learned "The Book of Filial Piety" and "The Analects" from his teacher, and was fond of the Yin and Yang method of warfare.

古文：及长，游华阴、河东二郡间。
现代文：长大之后，游历华阴、河东二郡之间。
English: After growing up, he traveled between Huayin and the two counties of Hedong.

古文：性泛爱，不拘小节，人无士庶，来则纳之。
现代文：天性博爱，不拘小节，来者不问是官是民，一律接待。
English: They have a wide range of hobbies, and regardless of the small etiquette, whether they are officials or ordinary people, they come to make friends.

古文：熙姑先入掖庭，为世祖左昭仪。
现代文：冯熙的姑姑先入后宫，为世祖左昭仪。
English: Feng Xi's aunt was the first to enter the harem, the ancestor Zuo Zhaoyi.

古文：妹为高宗文成帝后，即文明太后也。
现代文：他妹妹成为高宗文成帝皇后，即文明太后。
English: His sister became the empress of Emperor Gao Zongwencheng, that is, the empress dowager of civilization.

古文：使人外访，知熙所在，征赴京师，拜冠军将军，赐爵肥如侯。
现代文：皇帝派人外访，打听到冯熙下落，便征召入都，拜授冠军将军，赐爵肥如侯。
English: The emperor sent someone to pay a foreign visit, and upon learning of Feng Xi's whereabouts, summoned him to the capital, awarded him the title of champion general, and bestowed a peerage on him.

古文：尚恭宗女博陵长公主，拜驸马都尉。
现代文：与恭宗女儿博陵长公主成亲，拜授驸马都尉。
English: He married the eldest daughter of King Gongzong, Princess Boling, and was given the title of Lieutenant of the Horse.

古文：出为定州刺史，进爵昌黎王。
现代文：出任定州刺史，晋爵昌黎王。
English: He was appointed as the governor of Dingzhou when he went to Beijing, and was given the title of the King of Changli.

古文：显祖即位，为太傅，累拜内都大官。
现代文：显祖即位，任太傅，累拜内都大官。
English: Emperor Xianzu ascended to the throne, appointed Taifu, and became the highest-ranking official in the Inner Capital.

古文：高祖即位，文明太后临朝，王公贵人登进者众。
现代文：高祖即位，文明太后临朝听政，王公贵人登官晋爵者人数众多。
English: Gao Zu ascended to the throne, the Empress Dowager Lintong listened to the government, and a large number of princes and noblemen were promoted to the peerage.

古文：高祖乃承旨皇太后，以熙为侍中、太师、中书监、领秘书事。
现代文：高祖于是受太后之命，任命冯熙为侍中、太师、中书监、领管秘书事。
English: Gaozu was then ordered by the empress dowager to appoint Feng Xi as a chamberlain, teacher, librarian, and secretary.

古文：熙以频履师傅，又中宫之宠，为群情所骇，心不自安，乞转外任。
现代文：冯熙以自己频频履任师傅等职，又受内宫宠幸，被世人瞩目，心中常常惶惶不安，乞求朝廷转为外任。
English: Because Feng Xi frequently held the posts of Grand Master and Grand Master, and because he was favored by the Chinese Imperial Court, he shocked everyone and was uneasy in his heart, and asked to be reassigned to a position outside the palace.

古文：文明太后亦以为然。
现代文：文明太后也认为很对。
English: The empress dowager of civilization also thought it was right.

古文：于是除车骑大将军、开府、都督、洛州刺史，侍中、太师如故。
现代文：于是除任车骑大将军、开府、都督、洛州刺史，侍中、太师的官职照旧。
English: As a result, the positions of general of chariot and cavalry, governor of Kaifu, governor of the capital, and governor of Lozhou, as well as the positions of chamberlains and grand masters, remained unchanged.

古文：洛阳虽经破乱，而旧《三字石经》宛然犹在，至熙与常伯夫相继为州，废毁分用，大至颓落。
现代文：洛阳城虽然经受破坏混乱，而旧《三字石经》依然还在，到冯熙与常伯夫相继治理，废毁分用，石经大为颓败衰落。
English: Although Luoyang City has suffered destruction and chaos, the old "Three-character Stone Sutra" is still there. It was managed by Feng Xi and Chang Bof successively, and the waste and destruction were used separately. The Stone Sutra was greatly defeated and declined.

古文：熙为政不能仁厚，而信佛法，自出家财，在诸州镇建佛图精舍，合七十二处，写一十六部一切经。
现代文：冯熙理政不能常怀仁厚之心，却信奉佛法，自己分出家财，在众多州镇建起豪华佛庙，总计七十二处，书写十六部一切经。
English: Feng Xirizheng could not always have a benevolent heart, but he believed in Buddhism, allocated his own family wealth, built luxurious Buddhist temples in many counties and towns, a total of 72 places, and wrote 16 copies of all scriptures.

古文：延致名德沙门，日与讲论，精勤不倦，所费亦不赀。
现代文：招引有名望的和尚，日日与他讲经，精研经义，勤勉不倦，费用不薄。
English: Invite a famous monk, daily lecture with him, study the sutras, diligent and tireless, the cost is not thin.

古文：而在诸州营塔寺多在高山秀阜，伤杀人牛。
现代文：而诸州营造的塔庙多处高山秀川，伤杀人牛。
English: However, many pagodas and temples built in various prefectures are located in high mountains and rivers, injuring and killing cattle.

古文：有沙门劝止之，熙曰： 成就后，人唯见佛图，焉知杀人牛也。 
现代文：有的佛徒劝阻他这样做，冯熙说： 造成之后，人们只见佛图，哪还知道杀人牛的事呢？ 
English: Some monks tried to dissuade Feng Xi. Feng Xi said, "After it was built, people only saw the stupa and the temple. How could they know that they had harmed the people and the oxen?

古文：其北邙寺碑文，中书侍郎贾元寿之词。
现代文：其北邙寺的碑文，是中书侍郎贾元寿拟的文词。
English: The inscription of Beilun Temple is a text written by Jia Yuan Shouqi, the attendant of Chinese literature.

古文：高祖频登北邙寺，亲读碑文，称为佳作。
现代文：高祖频频登临北邙寺，亲读碑文，称赞其为文中佳作。
English: Gao Zu frequently visited Beilun Temple, read the inscription in person, and praised it as an excellent work.

古文：熙为州，因事取人子女为奴婢，有容色者幸之为妾，有子女数十人。号为贪纵。
现代文：冯熙任州职，因事征集民间子女为奴婢，其中稍有姿色的便被他娶为妾。冯熙有子女数十人，都有贪纵之名。
English: Feng Xi served as a state official, and because of this, he recruited the children of common people to be his slaves. If any of them were slightly attractive, he married them as concubines. Feng Xi had dozens of children, all of whom were known to be greedy.

古文：后求入朝，授内都大官，太师如故。
现代文：后来冯熙请求入朝廷，授内都大官，太师官职仍旧。
English: Later, Feng Xi requested to enter the imperial court and was awarded the title of Inner Capital Grand Official, but the position of Grand Master remained.

古文：熙事魏母孝谨，如事所生。
现代文：冯熙侍奉魏母孝顺谨慎，就像服侍生母一样。
English: Feng Xi served the Wei mother with filial piety and respect, just like he served his own mother.

古文：魏母卒，乃散发徒跣，水浆不入口三日。
现代文：魏母去世，他披头散发，光着脚，号哭终日，不吃不喝达三天之久。
English: After Wei Mu's death, Feng Xi wore a head scarf, went barefoot and did not touch a drop of water for three days.

古文：诏不听服，熙表求依赵氏之孤。
现代文：皇诏不准他离职服丧，冯熙上表请求皇上依照赵氏之孤的做法。
English: The imperial edict did not allow him to leave his post to attend the funeral, and Feng Xi made a request to the emperor to follow the lonely practice of the Zhao clan.

古文：高祖以熙情难夺，听服齐衰期。
现代文：高祖因冯熙哀情衷衷，很难说服，只好让他静心服丧。
English: Gaozhu was heartbroken for Feng Xi, and it was difficult to convince him, so he had no choice but to meditate on his grief.

古文：后以例降，改封京兆郡公。
现代文：后来以朝例降职，改封京兆郡公。
English: Later, due to custom, his title was lowered, and he was renamed Keicho County Governor.

古文：高祖纳其女为后，曰： 《白虎通》云：王所不臣，数有三焉。
现代文：高祖娶冯熙的女儿为皇后，说： 《白虎通》说：王所不以为臣，有三种情况。
English: Gao Zu married the daughter of Feng Xi as his empress, saying: "The White Tiger Pass" said: The king does not consider the vassal, there are three situations.

古文：妻之父母，抑言其一。
现代文：妻的父母，即其一种。
English: The wife's parents is one such case.

古文：此所谓供承宗庙，不欲夺私心。
现代文：这说的是供承宗庙不要夺去私心。
English: This is to flatter the successor of the ancestral temple, not to force personal feelings.

古文：然吾季著于《春秋》，无臣证于往牒；既许通体之一，用开至尊之敬。比长秋配极，阴政既敷，未闻有司陈奏斯式，可诏太师辍臣从礼。 
现代文：但我朝著于《春秋》，无臣证于以往案牒，今天既然允许相通体式之一，用开至尊之敬，等皇后配极，阴政既敷，却没有有关部门陈奏这个格式，可诏让太师冯熙停止臣子从君的礼节。 
English: However, in the light of "Spring and Autumn" and the absence of vassal certificates in previous cases, today, since one of the common forms is allowed, using the highest respect, such as the empress's matching pole, and the negative government is in place, but there is no relevant department to play this format, it is possible to order Grand Master Feng Xi to stop the etiquette of the vassal from the prince.

古文：又勒集书造仪付外。
现代文：又令人发布告示，宣告于外。
English: Also inscribed in the book is the etiquette for delivery outside the palace.

古文：高祖前后纳熙三女，二为后，一为左昭仪。
现代文：高祖前后娶了冯熙三个女儿，二人为皇后，一人为左昭仪。
English: Gao Zu married three daughters of Feng Xi, two of them were empresses and one was Zuo Zhaoyi.

古文：由是冯氏宠贵益隆，赏赐累巨万。
现代文：从此冯氏家族得到的宠贵更加隆重，皇帝赏赐累积至巨万。
English: Therefore, the favors of the Feng surname are more plentiful, and the accumulated rewards are many tens of thousands.

古文：高祖每诏熙上书不臣，入朝不拜。
现代文：高祖每每下诏让冯熙上书不行臣礼，入朝不拜皇帝。
English: Gao Zu issued an edict to Feng Xi that he should not perform courtesies and not bow to the emperor when he entered the court.

古文：熙上书如旧。
现代文：冯熙上书依然依照臣子礼节。
English: Feng Xi still submitted the letter in accordance with the courtier's etiquette.

古文：熙于后遇疾，绵寝四载。
现代文：冯熙后来生病，卧床四年。
English: Feng Xi later fell ill and was bedridden for four years.

古文：诏遣医问，道路相望，车驾亦数临幸焉。
现代文：皇帝派人问候、遣医诊断，常常道路之上，车马不绝，皇帝也数次前去看望冯熙。
English: The emperor sent greetings, sent doctors to diagnose, often on the road, horses and carts, the emperor also went to visit Feng Xi several times.

古文：将迁洛，高祖亲与熙别，见其困笃，歔欷流涕。
现代文：将迁出洛阳，高祖亲自与冯熙作别，看到他病重，唏嘘叹惜，流涕不已。
English: When Gao Zu was about to move out of Luoyang, he personally bid farewell to Feng Xi. Seeing that he was seriously ill, Gao Zu lamented and wept.

古文：密敕宕昌公王遇曰： 太师万一，即可监护丧事。 
现代文：皇帝暗地指示宕昌公王遇说： 太师假如万一去世，你便监护丧事。 
English: The emperor secretly instructed Prince Tang Chang to say, "In the unlikely event that the Grandmaster dies, you will be in charge of the funeral.

古文：十九年，薨于代。
现代文：十九年，在代州逝世。
English: In the 19th year of the Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowen's reign, Feng Xi died.

古文：车驾在淮南，留台表闻，还至徐州乃举哀。
现代文：当时，皇帝车驾在淮南，得到冯熙逝世的消息，到了徐州便举哀。
English: At that time, the emperor was driving in Huainan, received the news of Feng Xi's death, and went to Xuzhou to mourn.

古文：为制缌服，诏有司豫办凶仪，并开魏京之墓，令公主之柩俱向伊洛。
现代文：为此制作丧服，诏令有关部门安排丧礼仪式，并且打开魏朝京中之墓，让公主的灵柩全都头朝伊水、洛水方向。
English: To this end, funeral clothes were made, the relevant departments were ordered to arrange the funeral ceremony, and the tomb of the Wei Dynasty in Beijing was opened, so that the princess's casket would all face the direction of Yishui and Luoshui.

古文：凡所营送，皆公家为备。
现代文：凡是营送之资，都是公家提供费用。
English: All the construction of the property needed for transportation is carried out by the state.

古文：又敕代给彩帛前后六千匹，以供凶用。
现代文：皇帝又下诏令代州提供彩帛前后达六千匹，供给丧用。
English: The emperor also issued a decree ordering Daizhou to provide up to six thousand horses, and the supply was lost.

古文：皇后诣代都赴哭，太子恂亦赴代哭吊。
现代文：皇后亲往代郡哭丧，太子元恂也赴代吊哭。
English: The empress has been going to Weeping Spirit for generations, and Prince Mototsune has also been going to Weeping Festival for generations.

古文：将葬，赠假黄钺、侍中、都督十州诸军事、大司马、太尉、冀州刺史，加黄屋左纛，备九锡，前后部羽葆鼓吹，皆依晋太宰、安平献王故事。
现代文：准备下葬时，朝廷赠他假黄钺、侍中、都督十州诸军事、大司马、太尉、冀州刺史，加授黄屋左旗，备九锡，前后部羽葆鼓吹，一切都按照晋太宰、安平献王当时例式办理。
English: When he was being prepared for burial, the imperial court presented him with a fake yellow scepter, a chamberlain, the military governors of ten states, a grand steward, a lieutenant, and the history of Jizhou, and awarded him the left banner of the Yellow House, prepared nine scepters, and had the front and back feathers of the scepter trumpeted. Everything was handled according to the then-standard procedure for the presentation of the king by Jin Dazai and Anping.

古文：有司奏谥，诏曰： 可以威强恢远曰 武 ，奉谥于公。 
现代文：有关部门上奏请谥号，皇帝下诏说： 可以威强广远称 武 ，奉献这个谥号给冯公。 
English: The relevant departments requested the nickname, and the emperor issued an edict saying: You can call yourself the mighty and far-reaching Wu, dedicating this nickname to Feng Gong.

古文：柩至洛七里涧，高祖服衰往迎，叩灵悲恸而拜焉。
现代文：冯熙灵柩到洛阳七里涧，高祖丧服前往迎灵，头叩灵柩，悲恸欲绝，拜揖再三。
English: Feng Xiling went to Luoyang for seven miles, Gao Zu's funeral clothes went to meet the spirit, head-knocked the spirit, saddened the spirit, and worshipped the spirit repeatedly.

古文：葬日，送临墓所，亲作志铭。
现代文：下葬那天，又亲临墓地，亲自书写墓志铭。
English: On the day of the burial, he went to the cemetery to write the epitaph himself.

古文：主生二子，诞、修。
现代文：冯熙生了两个儿子，冯诞、冯修。
English: Feng Xi gave birth to two sons, Feng Xuan and Feng Xiu.

