古文：太宗幸宫，顾谓宫臣曰： 顷来王业稍可，非无酒食，而唐突卿等宴会者，朕初有此孙，故相就为乐耳。 
现代文：燕王李忠，字正本，后宫刘氏生，高宗的长子。高宗初当太子的时候，刘氏生李忠，并在弘教殿宴请宫僚。祖父唐太宗亲临，环视宫臣们说道： 近来王业日渐振兴，尽管酒食准备不周，还是冒昧地请卿等赴宴，乃因朕有了孙儿，故请大家一起乐一乐。 
English: Yan Wang Li Zhong, the original, the harem Liu Shisheng, the eldest son of Gao Zong. When Gao Zong first became the prince, Liu Shisheng Li Zhong, and invited courtiers to a banquet at the Hongjiao Palace. Grandfather Tang Taizong came in person, looked around the courtiers and said: Recently, Wangye has been gradually revitalized, although the wine and food are not well prepared, I took the liberty of inviting you to the banquet, but because I have a grandchild, I invite you all to have fun together.

古文：太宗酒酣起舞，以属群臣，在位于是遍舞，尽日而罢，赐物有差。
现代文：太宗酒酣起舞，又属目群臣，于是群臣遍舞，尽日而罢，凡参加宴乐者均有所赐。
English: Tai Zong made a toast and danced, and he was a member of a group of ministers, so the ministers danced all day long, and everyone who participated in the banquet was given something.

古文：贞观二十年，封为陈王。
现代文：贞观二十年，李忠封为陈王。
English: After twenty years of chastity, Li Zhongfeng became the king of Chen.

古文：永徽元年，拜雍州牧。
现代文：永徽元年，李忠任雍州牧。
English: In the first year of Yonghui, Li Zhong was appointed as Yongzhou herdsman.

古文：时王皇后无子，其舅中书令柳奭说后谋立忠为皇太子，以忠母贱，冀其亲己，后然之。
现代文：当时，王皇后无子，其舅中书令柳劝说王皇后谋划立李忠为太子，因李忠母出身下贱，希望李忠能亲己，后来同意了。
English: At that time, Empress Wang had no son, and her uncle Zhongshu Lingliang persuaded Empress Wang to plan to make Li Zhong the crown prince. Since Li Zhong's mother was from a lowly background, he hoped that Li Zhong could be himself, and later agreed.

古文：奭与尚书右仆射褚遂良、侍中韩瑗讽、太尉长孙无忌、右仆射于志宁等，固请立忠为储后，高宗许之。
现代文：柳与尚书右仆射褚遂良、侍中韩瑗婉言相告于太尉长孙无忌、左仆射于志宁等，坚持请求立李忠为太子，高宗同意了。
English: Liu and Shangshu's right-hand man, Shao Suiliang, and the middle-ranking attendant, Han Zheng, sent a courteous message to the first lieutenant, Sun Moo-hyun, and the left-hand man, Shao Shih-ning, insisting that Li Zhong be made the prince, and Gao Zong agreed.

古文：三年，立忠为皇太子，大赦天下，五品已上子为父后者赐勋一级。
现代文：永徽三年，立李忠为太子，大赦天下，五品以上子为父后的赐勋一级。
English: In the third year of Yonghui, Li Zhong was established as the prince, the world was amnestied, and the sons with five or more prizes were awarded the first level after their fathers.

古文：六年，加元服，制大辟罪已下并降一等，大酺三日。
现代文：永徽六年，加冠，下旨凡死刑罪以下的并降一等，赐臣民饮酒作乐三日。
English: In the sixth year of Yonghui, the crown was added, and it was decreed that all crimes below the death penalty would be reduced by one grade, and the subjects would be given three days to drink alcohol and have fun.

古文：踵武延陵，故常安矣。宁可反植枝干，久易位于天庭；倒袭衣裳，使违方于震位？
现代文：那年，王皇后被废，武则天所生的皇子李弘才三岁，礼部尚书许敬宗迎合上意上疏道 ：伏惟陛下法制，典章千古，含育万邦，立皇后，母仪天下。既而皇后生子，合处东宫为太子。
English: In that year, the Empress Wang was abolished, and the prince Li Hong, who was born of Wu Zetian, was only three years old. The Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies was still written by Xu Jingzong and catered to the Shanghai-Italy-Shanghai Road: His Majesty's legal system, ancient ceremonies, universal education, the establishment of the empress, the mother of the world. Even though the queen had a child, he was the prince in the East Palace.

古文：蠢尔黎庶，云谁系心？
现代文：而今之太子，素非嫡子 认为是反植枝干，倒袭裳衣。
English: However, the current crown prince, who is illegitimate, is considered to be anti-establishment and has reversed the dress code.

古文：垂裕后昆，将何播美？ 高宗从之。显庆元年，废忠为梁王，授梁州都督，赐实封二千户，物二万段，甲第一区。
现代文：高宗看了，同意他的意见，显庆元年，高宗废李忠太子，封为梁王，授梁州都督，赐实封千户，五色绸二万段甲北一区。
English: Gao Zong read it and agreed with his opinion. In the first year of Huanqing, Gao Zong abolished Prince Li Zhong, made him the King of Liang, gave him the governorship of Liang Province, granted him a thousand households, and 20,000 pieces of five-colored silk to Beibei District.

古文：其年，转房州刺史。
现代文：那年又转任户州刺史。
English: That year, he was transferred to the post of Huzhou chief historian.

古文：忠年渐长大，常恐不自安，或私衣妇人之服，以备刺客。
现代文：李忠年龄渐大，常常惊恐不自安，有时偷偷穿妇人的衣服，来防备刺客。
English: As Li Zhong grew older, he often felt scared and insecure, and sometimes secretly wore women's clothes to ward off assassins.

古文：又数有妖梦，常自占卜。
现代文：又经常有妖梦，常常自己占卜。
English: In addition, they often have demonic dreams and often do their own divination.

古文：事发，五年，废为庶人，徙居黔州，囚于承乾之故宅。
现代文：后来事发，显庆五年，被废为庶人。迁徙到黔州居住，囚于承乾的故宅。
English: Later, the incident occurred, and after five years of celebration, he was abolished as a commoner. He migrated to Zhangzhou to live, and was imprisoned in the former house of Chengxian.

古文：麟德元年，又诬忠与西台侍御上官仪、宦者王伏胜谋反，赐死于流所，年二十二，无子。
现代文：麟德元年，又诬告李忠与西台侍郎上官仪、宦官王伏胜谋反，赐死于黔州住所，死时年仅二十二岁，无子。
English: In the first year of Lingde, he also falsely accused Li Zhong of plotting a rebellion with the eunuch Wang Fusheng, who was the eunuch of the Western Wei Dynasty, and died at his residence in Zhangzhou. He was only 22 years old at the time of his death and had no children.

古文：年六岁，永徽二年，封雍王，寻授雍州牧。
现代文：上官仪等伏法受诛。第二年，皇太子弘上表请收葬李忠骸骨，得到同意。神龙初年，追封燕王，赠太尉，扬州大都督。
English: The next year, the Crown Prince Hiroshi made a request to bury the skeleton of Li Zhong, which was approved. In the first year of the Dragon God, he was given the title of Prince of Yan, given the rank of captain, and became the Yangzhou Grand Governor.

古文：素节能日诵古诗赋五百余言，受业于学十徐齐聃，精勤不倦，高宗甚爱之。
现代文：许王素节，萧淑妃生，高宗第四子。永徽二年，年六岁而受封为雍王，受雍州牧。素节能日诵古诗五百余言，授业于学士徐齐联，精勤好学不倦，高宗很爱他。
English: Xu Wang Su Jie, the son of Xiao Shu Fei, was the fourth son of Gao Zong. He was named the King of Yonghu at the age of six in the second year of Yonghu, and became the shepherd of Yongzhou. He could recite more than 500 ancient poems every day, and was educated by the bachelor Xu Qilian. He was diligent and eager to learn, and Gao Zong loved him very much.

古文：又转岐州刺史。年十二，改封郇王。
现代文：后又任岐州刺史，年十二岁，改封郇王。
English: Later, he was appointed as the governor of Qizhou, and at the age of twelve, he was given the title of Shao Wang.

古文：初，则天未为皇后也，与素节母萧淑妃争宠，递相谮毁。
现代文：当初，武则天还不是皇后，与素节的母亲萧淑妃争宠，相互谮毁。
English: At the beginning, Wu Zetian was not yet the empress, and he and Su Jie's mother, Xiao Shu Fei, competed for favor and destroyed each other.

古文：六年，则天立为皇后后，淑妃竟为则天所谮毁，幽辱而杀之。
现代文：永徽六年，武则天立为皇后后，萧淑妃被武则天谮毁，幽禁侮辱而被杀。
English: In the sixth year of Yonghui, after Wu Zetian was established as empress, Xiao Shufei was destroyed by Wu Zetian, imprisoned and killed.

古文：素节尤被谗嫉，出为申州刺史。
现代文：素节尤其被武则天嫉妒并时时向高宗进谗言，调为申州刺史。
English: Su Jie, in particular, was envied by Wu Zetian and constantly criticized Gao Zong, and was transferred to the history of Shenzhou.

古文：乾封初，下敕曰： 素节既旧疾患，宜不须入朝。 
现代文：乾封初年，高宗下敕 ：素节既有旧疾病，宜不须入朝。 
English: In the first year of Qianfeng, Gao Zong issued the following edict: Since Su Jie had an old disease, it was better not to enter the imperial court.

古文：而素节实无疾。
现代文：但素节实际上并无疾病。
English: But there is actually no disease associated with the knotweed.

古文：素节自以久乖朝觐，遂著《忠孝论》以见意，词多不载。
现代文：素节自己因长久未去朝见，于是写了《忠孝论》来表意。
English: Su Jie himself did not go to see the emperor for a long time, so he wrote "On Fidelity and Filial Piety" to express his opinion.

古文：时王府仓曹参军张柬之因使潜封此论以进，则天见之，逾不悦，诬以赃贿，降封鄱阳郡王，仍于袁州安置。
现代文：当时王府会曹参军张柬之便暗将《忠孝论》进上，武则天见了，更加不高兴，诬陷素节受贿，降封鄱阳郡王，还是在袁州安置。
English: At that time, the king's palace secretly promoted the "Loyalty and Filial Piety" to Cao Sangjun Zhang Khamzhi, and Wu Zetian was even more unhappy, accusing Su Jie of taking bribes, downgrading the title of King of Poyang County, and resettling him in Yuanzhou.

古文：仪凤二年，禁锢终身，又改于岳州安置。
现代文：仪凤二年，禁锢终身，又改迁到岳州安置。
English: Yifeng two years, life imprisonment, and relocated to Yuezhou resettlement.

古文：永隆元年，转岳州刺史，后改封葛王。
现代文：永隆元年，转任岳州刺史，后又改封葛王。
English: In the first year of Yonglong, he was transferred to the post of Yuezhou Sashishi, and later changed his title to Ge Wang.

古文：则天称制，又进封许王，累除舒州刺史。
现代文：武则天临朝，又晋封许王，任舒州刺史。
English: Wu Zetian was appointed to the imperial court, and was also promoted to King Xu, and was appointed as the governor of Shuzhou.

古文：天授中，与上金同被诬告，追赴都。
现代文：天授年中，他与泽王上金同被诬告，追赴京都。
English: In the middle of the year of the Consecration of Heaven, he was falsely accused together with Ze Wang Shangjin and was chased to Kyoto.

古文：临发州，闻有遭丧哭者，谓左右曰： 病死何由可得，更何须哭！ 
现代文：临启程时，素节听有遭丧哭啼的声音，他对左右的人说： 病死都难得到，何须哭！ 
English: On the eve of departure, Su Jie heard the sound of mourners crying. He said to the people around him: It is difficult to get sick or die, why cry!

古文：行至都城南龙门驿，被缢死，年四十三，则天令以庶人礼葬之。
现代文：行至京都南龙门驿，被缢死，年四十三岁，武则天命令以庶人礼安葬。
English: He went to Kyoto's South Dragon Gate and was strangled to death at the age of forty-three. Emperor Wu Zetian ordered that he be buried with commoner's rites.

古文：中宗即位，追封许王，赠开府仪同三司、许州刺史，仍以礼改葬，陪于乾陵。
现代文：中宗即位，追封许王，赠开府仪同三司、许州刺史，以礼改葬，陪于乾陵。
English: Emperor Zhongzong ascended to the throne, enthroned Emperor Xu, presented Emperor Xu with the Imperial Regalia, the Three Offices, and the State Seal of Xu Province, and was buried with full state honors, accompanied by Emperor Qianling.

古文：素节被杀之时，子瑛、琬、玑、易等九人并为则天所杀，惟少子琳、瓘、璆、钦古以年小，特令长禁雷州。
现代文：素节被杀时，他的儿子李瑛、李琬、李玑、李王易等九人并为武则天所杀，只有少子琳、馞、霮、钦古因年小，特令长期禁闭在雷州。
English: When Su Jie was killed, nine of his sons, including Li Ying, Li Yu, Li Xuan and Li Wang Yi, were also killed by Wu Zetian. Only Xiao Zilin, Yao, Yao and Qingu were sentenced to long-term confinement in Leizhou due to their young age.

古文：璆友弟聪敏，闻善若惊，宗子中有一善，无不荐拔，故宗枝居省闼者，多是璆之所举。
现代文：中宗复唐，在神龙初年，封馞为嗣许王。开元初年封琳为嗣越王，以继越王之后；封霮为嗣泽王，以继伯父泽王上金之后。
English: In the first year of Shenlong, the first year of the restoration of the Tang Dynasty in China, Fong Yao was the heir of King Xu. In the first year of the founding of the Republic of China, Fong Lin was the heir of King Yue, succeeding King Yue; Fong Yao was the heir of King Ze, succeeding his uncle King Ze Shangjin.

古文：九载卒，赠江陵大都督。孝敬皇帝弘，高宗第五子也。永徽四年，封代王。
现代文：孝敬皇帝李弘，是高宗的第五个儿子，武则天生。永徽四年，封为代王。
English: Li Hong, the emperor of filial piety, was the fifth son of Gaozong, born Wu Zetian. He was enthroned as the acting king in Yonghui for four years.

古文：显庆元年，立为皇太子，大赦改元。
现代文：显庆元年，立为皇太子，大赦天下改元。
English: In the first year of Xianqing, he was established as the crown prince, and the country was amnestied to change the era.

古文：弘尝受《春秋左氏传》于率更令郭瑜，至楚子商臣之事，废卷而叹曰： 此事臣子所不忍闻，经籍圣人垂训，何故书此？ 
现代文：李弘曾从率更令郭瑜学习《春秋》、《左传》，讲到楚子和商臣的事，掩卷叹道： 这种事臣子所不忍听，本来经籍是圣人的垂训，怎么会记下这些事呢？ 
English: Li Hong had led Guo Yu to study "Spring and Autumn" and "Zhuan" and talked about Chu Zi and merchant ministers, sighing as he closed the book: This kind of thing is unbearable for a minister to hear. Originally, the scriptures were the teachings of saints. How could they write down these things?

古文：瑜对曰： 孔子修《春秋》，义荐褒贬，故善恶必书。
现代文：郭瑜答道： 孔子修《春秋》，义存褒贬，所以善恶必书。
English: Guo Yu replied, "Confucius wrote "Spring and Autumn" and praised and criticized, so good and evil must be written.

古文：褒善以示代，贬恶以诫后，故使商臣之恶，显于千载。 
现代文：褒扬善来向后代示范，贬斥恶来向后代警戒。所以使商臣之恶，显露千年万载。 
English: Praise the good to demonstrate to future generations, denounce the evil to warn future generations. Therefore, the evil of merchants has been revealed for thousands of years.

古文：太子曰： 非唯口不可道，故亦耳不忍闻，请改读余书。 
现代文：太子道： 这种事不仅是口不可道，就是耳也不忍闻，请改读其他的书。 
English: Taizi said, "This kind of thing is not only unspeakable, but also unbearable to listen to. Please read other books."

古文：瑜再拜贺曰： 里名胜母，曾子不入；邑号朝歌，墨子回车。
现代文：郭瑜二拜而贺道 ：里巷名为胜母，曾子不入；到名为朝歌的县邑，墨子回车。
English: Guo Yu bowed twice and gave a congratulatory speech: the lane was named Shengmu, and Zengzi could not enter; he went to the county town named Chaoga, and Mozi returned to the car.

古文：殿下诚孝冥资，睿情天发，凶悖之迹，黜于视听。循奉德音，实深庆跃。
现代文：殿下实在是天生的孝心，性情出自天然，凶悖之迹，不视不听，循奉德音，实在很值得庆贺。
English: His Royal Highness is really born with filial piety, his temperament is natural, he is fierce, he does not see or hear, he follows virtue, it is really worth celebrating.

古文：臣闻安上理人，莫善于礼，非礼无以事天地之神，非礼无以辨君臣之位，故先王重焉。孔子曰： 不学《礼》，无以立。 
现代文：臣闻安于上理的人，莫有什么能比礼更好的，非礼无以事天地之神，非礼无以辨君臣之位，所以先代的帝王都重视礼，孔子说： 不学礼无以立。 
English: There is nothing better than etiquette for those who are at peace with the truth. The gods of heaven and earth do not need etiquette, and the positions of kings and ministers cannot be distinguished by etiquette. That is why the emperors of the past all valued etiquette. Confucius said, "You cannot stand without learning etiquette."

古文：请停《春秋》而读《礼记》。 
现代文：请停《春秋》而读《礼记》。 
English: Please stop reading "Spring and Autumn" and read "Rituals."

古文：太子从之。
现代文：太子听从。
English: The prince obeyed.

古文：龙朔元年，命中书令、太子宾客许敬宗，侍中兼太子右庶子许圉师，中书侍郎上官仪，太子中舍人杨思俭等于文思殿博采古今文集，摘其英词丽句，以类相从，勒成五百卷，名曰《瑶山玉彩》，表上之。制赐物三万段，敬宗已下加级、赐帛有差。
现代文：龙朔元年，命令中书令、太子宾客许敬宗、侍中兼太子右庶子许圉师、中书侍郎上官仪、太子中舍人杨思俭等到文思殿博采古今文集，摘出其中的佳词美句，分类编辑，汇集成五百卷，书为《瑶山玉彩》，呈报皇上，皇上赐五色绸三万段，许敬宗以下加级，赐帛有等。
English: In the first year of Long Shuo, he ordered the middle secretary, the prince's guest, Xu Jingzong, the chamberlain and the prince's right illegitimate son, Xu Yanshi, the middle secretary and the official, and the prince's middle servant, Yang Sijian, to go to the Wensi Hall to collect the ancient and modern collections, extract the good words and sentences, classify and edit, and integrate them into five hundred volumes. The book was "Lushan Jade," and it was presented to the emperor. The emperor gave 30,000 pieces of five-color silk, and Xu Jingzong was given a higher grade.

古文：总章元年二月，亲释菜司成馆，因请赠颜回太子少师，曾参太子少保，高宗并从之。
现代文：总章元年二月，举行入学的释乐礼，建成学馆，因此请求赠颜回太子少师，曾参太子少保。高宗都同意了。
English: In February of the first year of the General Chapter, an entrance ceremony was held to celebrate the completion of the school, so he asked to be given back to the prince's apprentice, who had attended the prince's apprentice. Gaozong agreed.

古文：时有敕，征边辽军人逃亡限内不首及更有逃亡者，身并处斩，家口没官。
现代文：当时有命令，凡应征到辽边境的军人中逃亡者在限期不自首以及其后的逃亡者，一律处斩，家口没官。
English: At that time, there was an order that any of the soldiers conscripted to the Liao border who did not surrender within the time limit, as well as subsequent escapees, would all be executed, and their families would have no official status.

古文：太子上表谏曰： 窃闻所司以背军之人，身久不出，家口皆拟没官。
现代文：太子上表提意见道 ：我听说有司对背逃之军人，长时不出自首，家口都将没官。
English: The crown prince raised his hand on the table and said, "I heard that there is a department for defecting soldiers, and they won't surrender for a long time, and their families will all lose their positions."

古文：若不及傔，及不因战亡，即同队之人，兼合有罪。
现代文：由于军法极严，士卒不因战亡的，同队之人，兼受牵连有罪。
English: Due to the extremely strict military law, if a soldier is not killed in battle, his teammates are also guilty of implication.

古文：遂有无故死失，多注为逃。
现代文：于是有无故死亡或失散的，多注明为逃亡。
English: Therefore, those who died or were separated without reason are mostly indicated as escapees.

古文：军旅之中，不暇勘当，直据队司通状，将作真逃，家口令总没官，论情实可哀愍。
现代文：军旅之中，又无法一一核查。直据下面的报告，都做真逃，家口都要没入官。论情实可哀悯。
English: According to the following report, all of them made a real escape, and all of their family members were forced to join the government. The situation is really pitiful.

古文：《书》曰： 与其杀不辜，宁失不经。 
现代文：《尚书》道 ：与其杀无辜，宁可失不经。 
English: The scripture says, "It is better to err on the side of caution than to kill an innocent person."

古文：伏愿逃亡之家，免其配没。 
现代文：伏愿逃亡者之家，免其配没。 
English: Fuxian fugitive's home, exempt from confiscation.

古文：制从之。咸亨二年，驾幸东都，留太子于京师监国。
现代文：咸亨二年，高宗到东都洛阳，留太子在京中监管国政。
English: In the second year of Xianheng, Gao Zong went to Luoyang, the eastern capital, and Prince Ru Rui supervised state affairs in Beijing.

古文：时属大旱，关中饥乏，令取廓下兵士粮视之，见有食榆皮蓬实者，乃令家令等各给米使足。
现代文：当时正遇大旱，关中饥乏，太子下令取廊下兵士粮食，见有的吃的是榆皮蓬实，于是命令主管仓谷饮食的太子家令发足廊下士卒的粮食。
English: At that time, there was a severe drought and famine in Guanzhong. The prince ordered to take food from the soldiers in the corridor. Some of them were eating fluffy mink, so he ordered the prince who was in charge of food in Canggu to distribute food to the corporals in the corridor.

古文：是时戴至德、张文瓘兼左庶子，与右庶子萧德昭同为辅弼，太子多疾病，庶政皆决于至德等。
现代文：这时戴至德、张文馞兼右庶子，与右庶子肖德昭一同辅弼太子，太子多疾病，一般政务都由戴至德等定夺。
English: At this time, Dai Zhide and Zhang Wenyi were concurrently the right illegitimate son, and together with the right illegitimate son Xiao Dezhao, they assisted the crown prince. The crown prince was often ill, and general government affairs were decided by Dai Zhide and others.

古文：时义阳、宣城二公主以母得罪，幽于掖庭，太子见之惊恻，遽奏请令出降。
现代文：当时，义阳、宣城二公主因母亲获罪，幽禁于掖庭，太子看见很是同情，便上奏请放出她们。
English: At that time, two princesses, Yiyang and Xuancheng, were imprisoned in the imperial court because their mother had been convicted of a crime. Seeing that the prince was very sympathetic, he appealed for their release.

古文：又请以同州沙苑地分借贫人。
现代文：又请求以同州沙苑地分借给穷人。
English: He also asked for the allocation of Sha Yuan land in Tongzhou to be lent to the poor.

古文：诏并许之。
现代文：高宗都同意了。
English: Gao Zong agreed.

古文：又召诣东都，纳右卫将军裴居道女为妃。
现代文：高宗又下旨太子到东都洛阳，娶右卫将军裴居道之女为妃。
English: Gao Zong also ordered the crown prince to go to Luoyang, the eastern capital, and marry the daughter of General Pei Ju Dao, the commander of the Right Division, as his wife.

古文：所司奏以白雁为贽，适会苑中获白雁，高宗喜曰： 汉获硃雁，遂为乐府；今获白雁，得为婚贽。彼礼但成谣颂，此礼便首人伦，异代相望，我无惭德也。 
现代文：有司上奏获得罕见的白雁作为贽礼，高宗大喜道： 汉获朱雁，遂为乐府；今获白雁，得为婚贽，彼礼但成谣颂，此礼便首人伦，异代相望，我无惭愧。 
English: There was a scene in which a high-ranking musician received a rare white goose as a wedding gift, and Gao Zong was overjoyed: Han won a red goose, and became the ruler of music; now I won a white goose, and it will be my wedding gift, but my gift will become a legend. This gift is the first of its kind, and I am looking forward to it for generations to come. I am not ashamed.

古文：父熙载，贞观中为尚书左丞。
现代文：裴氏很守妇礼，高宗曾对侍臣说： 东宫内政，我无忧矣。 
English: Bae was very protective of his wife, and Gaozong once said to a courtier, "In the internal affairs of the Eastern Palace, I have no worries."

古文：居道以女为太子妃，则天时，历位纳言、内史、太子少保，封翼国公。
现代文：上元二年，太子从幸合璧宫，不久去世，享年二十四岁。高宗很是悲痛，因太子慈惠爱亲足以称得上孝，死而不忘君足以称得上敬，故谥号为孝敬皇帝。
English: In the 2nd year of the 1st century, the crown prince passed away at the age of 24. Gaozong was very sad, because the prince's benevolence and affection were enough to be called filial piety, and not forgetting the prince after his death was enough to be called reverence. Therefore, his posthumous name was the emperor of filial piety.

古文：载初元年春，为酷吏所陷，下狱死。章怀太子贤，字明允，高宗第六子也。
现代文：那一年，太子葬于缑氏县景山的恭陵，葬制以天子之礼，百官三十六日穿丧服。高宗亲自做《睿又德纪》，并自己书写，刻在石上，树立于陵侧。章怀太子李贤，字明允，是唐高宗的第六子，武则天生。
English: In that year, Prince Gaozong was buried in the Gong Mausoleum in Jingshan, Jinshi County. The funeral rites were conducted according to the custom of the heavenly sons, and all the officials wore mourning clothes on the 36th day. Gaozong personally made the "Wisdom and Virtue," and wrote it himself, engraved it on the stone, and set it up on the side of the mausoleum. Zhang Huai's Prince Li Xian, whose name was Ming Yun, was the sixth son of Tang Gaozong, and Wu Ze was born naturally.

古文：永徽六年，封潞王。
现代文：唐高宗永徽六年，封为潞王。
English: Tang Gaozong Yonghui was six years old when he was crowned the King of Gong.

古文：显庆元年，迁授岐州刺史。
现代文：显庆元年，迁任岐州刺史。
English: In the first year of Xianqing, he was transferred to the post of Qizhou chief historian.

古文：其年，加雍州牧、幽州都督。
现代文：那一年，又加官职为雍州牧、雍州都督。
English: That year, he was promoted to the posts of Yongzhou herdsman and Yongzhou governor.

古文：时始出阁，容止端雅，深为高宗所嗟赏。
现代文：此时，他才开始到封地就职，容颜举止，端庄典雅，很为高宗嗟赏。
English: At this time, he began to take office in the fief, his appearance and demeanor were dignified and elegant, which was highly appreciated by Gaozong.

古文：高宗尝谓司空李勣曰： 此兒已读得《尚书》、《礼记》、《论语》，诵古诗赋复十余篇，暂经领览，遂即不忘。
现代文：高宗曾对司空李责力说： 这个孩子已经读了《尚书》、《礼记》、《论语》，背诵古诗赋十多篇，一看就能领会，也不忘记。
English: Gao Zong once said to Siku Li Rongli: This child has read "Shang Shu," "Li Ji" and "Analects" and recited more than ten ancient poems, and can understand and remember them at a glance.

古文：我曾遣读《论语》，至 贤贤易色 ，遂再三覆诵。
现代文：我曾叫他读《论语》，他读到 贤贤易色 ，就再三诵读。
English: I once asked him to read the Analects of Confucius, and when he got to "Xianxian" (贤贤易色), he read it again and again.

古文：我问何为如此，乃言性爱此言。
现代文：我问为什么反复读，他说自己内心特别爱这句话。
English: I asked him why he read it repeatedly, and he said that he especially loved this sentence in his heart.

古文：方知夙成聪敏，出自天性。 
现代文：这才知这孩子本性就聪敏，出自天性。 
English: It was only then that I realized that this child was naturally intelligent, by nature.

古文：龙朔元年，徙封沛王，加扬州都督、兼左武卫大将军，雍州牧如故。
现代文：龙朔元年，徙封沛王，加扬州都督，兼左武卫大将军，仍任雍州牧。
English: In the first year of Long Shuo, King Yifeng Pei, the governor of Kayan State, and General Zuowei, still served as Yongzhou herdsman.

古文：二年，加扬州大都督。
现代文：龙朔二年，加扬州大都督。
English: In the second year of Long Shuo, he became the Grand Governor of Kayan State.

古文：麟德二年，加右卫大将军。
现代文：麟德二年，又加右卫大将军官职。
English: In Lin De's second year, he was promoted to the post of U-Marshal.

古文：咸亨三年，改名德，徙封雍王，授凉州大都督，雍州牧、右卫大将军如故，食实封一千户。
现代文：咸亨三年，他改名李德，徙封雍王，授凉州大都督、雍州牧、右卫大将军，实封一千户。
English: In the third year of Xianheng, he changed his name to Li De, moved his fief to Yong Wang, and was awarded the title of the Grand Governor of Liangzhou, the Yongzhou Pastoral, and the General of the Right Division of the Middle Palace Guards, with a real estate of one thousand households.

古文：上元元年，又依旧名贤。
现代文：上元元年，又依旧名贤。
English: In the first year of Shangyuan, he was still a great sage.

古文：上元二上，孝敬皇帝薨。
现代文：上元二年，孝敬皇帝死。
English: In the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, Emperor Xiaojing died.

古文：其年六月，立为皇太子，大赦天下，寻令监国。
现代文：那年六月，贤立为太子，大赦天下，不久就让他留守京城监国。
English: In June of that year, he was enthroned as crown prince and granted amnesty to the whole world. Soon, he was allowed to stay in the capital to supervise the country.

古文：贤处事明审，为时论所称。
现代文：贤处理政务明审，被众论所称扬。
English: He was praised by the public for his judicious handling of government affairs.

古文：仪凤元年，手敕褒之曰： 皇太子贤自顷监国，留心政要。抚字之道，既尽于哀矜；刑纲所施，务存于审察。
现代文：仪凤元年，唐高宗亲笔下诏表扬贤： 皇太子贤，自留守监国以来的不长时间内，留心政务，抚爱百姓，在怜悯爱护上尽心；在刑法所施细审详察上用力。
English: In the first year of the Yi and Feng Dynasties, Tang Gaozong personally wrote an edict praising Yang Xian: Crown Prince Xian, in the short time since he has been in prison, has paid attention to government affairs, caressed the people, devoted himself to compassion and love, and exerted himself in the detailed examination of criminal law.

古文：加以听览余暇，专精坟典。往圣遗编，咸窥壶奥；先王策府，备讨菁华。
现代文：再加之政务之余，专心精研圣人经典，都能领会深意；先王所藏书册，都能研讨精华。
English: In addition to government affairs, they can understand the deep meaning by concentrating on studying the classics of saints; they can study the essence of the books collected by the former king.

古文：好善载彰，作贞斯在，家国之寄，深副所怀。可赐物五百段。 
现代文：好善正直，是国家的希望，深副我所怀。可赐杂色绢帛五百段。 
English: Goodness and honesty are the hope of the country, and I deeply cherish them. I can give five hundred dan to a person of mixed color.

古文：贤又招集当时学者太子左庶子张大安、洗马刘讷言、洛州司户格希玄、学士许叔牙成玄一史藏诸周宝宁等，注范晔《后汉书》，表上之，赐物三万段，仍以其书付秘阁。
现代文：太子贤又招集当时学者太子左庶子张大安，洗马刘纳言，洛州司户格希元，学士许叔牙、成玄一、史藏诘、周宝宁等注范晔《后汉书》，书成上呈，其书存放在秘阁收藏。
English: Prince Xian also invited scholars of the time, Prince Zuo's son-in-law Zhang Da'an, Shima Liu Na'yan, Luo Zhou's tutor Gu Xi Yuan, and scholars Xu Shuga, Cheng Xuan Yi, Shi Zangqi, Zhou Bao Ning, etc. to annotate "Post-Han Shu." The book was presented on completion, and the book was stored in the secret collection.

古文：时正议大夫明崇俨以符劾之术为则天所任使，密称 英王状类太宗 。
现代文：当时，正议大夫明崇俨凭符咒之术被武则天所任用，密称 英王外貌很像唐太宗 。
English: At that time, the presiding doctor, Ming Chongzhen, was appointed by Wu Zetian with the help of a magic spell, and secretly said that the appearance of the king was very similar to that of Tang Taizong.

古文：又宫人潜议云 贤是后姊韩国夫人所生 ，贤亦自疑惧。
现代文：宫中人又私下议论： 太子贤是皇后的姐姐韩国夫人所生 ，贤自己也怀疑恐惧。
English: Privately, people in the palace were also discussing: Prince Hyon was born to the queen's sister, the Korean lady, and Hyon himself suspected fear.

古文：则天又尝为贤撰《少阳政范》及《孝子传》以赐之，仍数作书以责让贤，贤逾不自安。
现代文：武则天又曾为太子贤撰写了《少阳政范》及《孝王传》来赐给他，还多次写文来责备太子贤，贤更加不自安。
English: Wu Zetian also wrote "Shaoyang Zhengfan" and "The Biography of Xiao Wang" for Prince Xian to give to him, and also wrote many times to reproach Prince Xian, and Xian was even more uneasy.

古文：调露二年，崇俨为盗所杀，则天疑贤所为。
现代文：调露二年，明崇俨被盗所杀，武则天怀疑是太子贤所为。
English: Two years later, Ming Chongyi was stolen and killed, and Wu Zetian suspected that it was the work of Prince Xian.

古文：俄使人发其阴谋事，诏令中书侍郎薛元超、黄门侍郎裴炎、御史大夫高智周与法官推鞫之，于东宫马坊搜得皁甲数百领，乃废贤为庶人，幽于别所。
现代文：不久便使人揭发这一阴谋事件，下诏令中书侍郎薛元超、黄门侍郎裴炎、御史大夫高智周与法官来审讯太子贤，并在东宫马坊搜得白十甲数百领，这样就把太子贤废为庶人，幽禁于别所。
English: Soon, the conspiracy was exposed, and an edict was issued ordering the chancellors Xue Yuanchao, Huangmen waiter Pei Yan, and imperial secretary Gao Zhizhou to interrogate Prince Xian with a judge, and hundreds of white collars were found in the East Palace's horse stables, thus turning Prince Xian into a commoner and confining him elsewhere.

古文：永淳二年，迁于巴州。
现代文：永淳二年，李贤被迁到巴州。
English: In the second year of Yongjun, Li Xian was transferred to Bazhou.

古文：文明元年，则天临朝，令左金吾将军丘神勣往巴州检校贤宅，以备外虞。
现代文：文明元年，唐睿宗登位，武则天临朝垂帘听政，令左金吾将军丘神责力往巴州检查李贤的住宅，来防备发生不测的事件。
English: In the first year of the civilization, Tang Ruizong ascended to the throne, Wu Zetian ascended to the throne to listen to the government, and ordered Zuo Kingu General Qiu Shen to inspect Li Xian's residence in Bazhou to prevent unforeseen events.

古文：神勣遂闭于别室，逼令自杀，年三十二。
现代文：丘神责力把李贤关闭于一室，逼令他自杀。李贤当时三十三岁。
English: The deity ordered Li Xian, who was 33 years old at the time, to lock himself in a room and commit suicide.

古文：则天举哀于显福门，贬神勣为叠州刺史，追封贤为雍王。
现代文：武则天在显庆门举哀，贬丘神责力为叠州刺史，追封李贤为雍王。
English: Wu Zetian held a mourning ceremony at the Xianqing Gate, and Dechuqiu Shen Ruling Force was appointed as the scribe of the State of Yaxu, and Li Xian was appointed as the King of Yong.

古文：神龙初，追赠司徒，仍遣使迎其丧柩，陪葬于乾陵。
现代文：唐中宗李显登位，神龙初年，追赠李贤司徒，并遣使到巴州迎回李贤的灵柩，陪葬于乾陵。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Shenlong, Li Xian, a member of the Tang dynasty, was posthumously awarded the title of Li Xian, and sent to Bazhou to welcome back Li Xian's coffin, which was buried in the Qianling Mausoleum.

古文：睿宗践祚，又追赠皇太子，谥曰章怀。
现代文：唐睿宗登位，又追赠李贤为皇太子，谥号章怀。
English: Tang Ruizong ascended the throne, and posthumously presented Li Xian as the crown prince, with the posthumous name Zhang Huai.

古文：有三子：光顺、守礼、守义。
现代文：李贤有三子，李光顺、李守礼、李守义。
English: Li Xian had three sons, Li Guangshun, Li Shouli and Li Shouyi.

古文：中宗四男：章庶人生懿德太子重润，后宫生庶人重福、节愍太子重俊、殇帝重茂。懿德太子重润，中宗长子也。
现代文：光顺在天授年间封安乐郡王，不久被杀害。守义文明二年，封为犍为郡王，垂拱四年，徙封永安郡王，不久病死。守礼授太子洗马，封嗣雍王。懿德太子重润，韦氏生，中宗长子。
English: Guangshun was given the title of Anle County King in the year of the Consecration of Heaven, and was killed soon after. Shou Yi Kunming was given the title of Shun County King in the second year of the Consecration of Heaven, and died in the fourth year of the Consecration of Heaven, and was given the title of Yongan County King, and died soon after. Shou Li was given the title of Prince Saima, and became the heir of King Yong. Prince Shude was born in Wei, and was the eldest son of Emperor Zhongzong.

古文：本名重照，以避则天讳，故改焉。
现代文：本名重照，为了避武则天之讳，所以改为重润。
English: His real name was Josho, but he changed it to Jyurun in order to avoid the stigma associated with martial arts.

古文：开耀二年，中宗为皇太子，生重润于东宫内殿，高宗甚悦。及月满，大赦天下，改元为永淳。
现代文：开耀二年，中宗为皇太子，生重润于东宫殿内。祖父高宗很是高兴，到满月，大赦天下，改元为永淳。
English: In the first two years of his reign, Chuzong was crown prince, and Shurun was born in the East Palace. Grandfather Gaozong was very happy, and by the full moon, he was pardoned and the era was changed to Yongjun.

古文：是岁，立为皇太孙，开府置官属。
现代文：这一年，重润立为皇太孙，开府置官属。
English: In this year, Chongrun was appointed as the grandchild of the emperor, and the government was established.

古文：及中宗迁于房州，其府坐废。
现代文：到中宗被其亲母武则天迁到房州，重润府也废除。
English: By the time Zhongzong was moved to Fangzhou by his mother Wu Zetian, Chongrunfu was also abolished.

古文：圣历初，中宗为皇太子，封为邵王。
现代文：圣历初年，中宗又为皇太子，重润封为邵王。
English: In the first year of the sacred calendar, Zhongzong was crown prince, and Chongrun was crowned King Shao.

古文：大足元年，为人所构，与其妹永泰郡主、婿魏王武延基等窃议张易之兄弟何得恣入宫中，则天令杖杀，时年十九。
现代文：大足元年，被人诬陷构罪，罪名是与他的妹妹永泰郡主、婿魏王武延基等私下议论张易之兄弟何得恣意出入内宫，被武则天杖杀，死时年仅十九岁。
English: In the first year of Dashu, he was framed for the crime of having a private discussion with his sister, Princess Yongtai, and his son-in-law, Wei King Wu Yanji, about why Zhang Yi's brother was allowed to enter and leave the inner palace at will. He was killed by Wu Ze Tianjie, and was only 19 years old at the time of his death.

古文：重润风神俊朗，早以孝友知名，既死非其罪，大为当时所悼惜。
现代文：重润风神俊朗，早以孝友知名，既死于非罪，大为当时人们所悼惜。
English: Chongrun Feng Sheng Junlang, who was already known for his filial piety, was greatly mourned by the people at the time, even though he died in a non-criminal way.

古文：中宗即位，追赠皇太子，谥曰懿德，陪葬乾陵。仍为聘国子监丞裴粹亡女为冥婚，与之合葬。
现代文：中宗即位，追赠皇太子，谥号曰懿德，陪葬乾陵，又聘国子监丞裴粹亡女为冥婚，与重润合葬。
English: Zhongzong ascended the throne, posthumously crowned the crown prince, whose posthumous name was Yu De, and accompanied the burial of Qianling. He also hired the son-in-law of the state, Fei Qi, to marry his dead daughter, and buried her together with Chongrun.

古文：又赠永泰郡主为公主，令备礼改葬，仍号其墓为陵焉。
现代文：又追赠永泰郡主为公主，下令备礼改葬，仍称她的墓为陵。
English: He also posthumously designated Princess Yongtai as a princess, ordered preparations for a ceremonial reburial, and still called her tomb a mausoleum.

古文：庶人重福，中宗第二子也。
现代文：庶人重福，为后宫生，中宗第二子。
English: A commoner, Chifuku was born in the harem and was the second son of Chuzo.

古文：初封唐昌王，圣历三年，徙封平恩王。
现代文：初封为唐昌王。圣历三年，改封平恩王。
English: He was first given the title of Tang Chang Wang. Three years later, he was given the title of Ping'en Wang.

古文：长安四年，进封谯王，历迁国子祭酒、左散骑常侍。
现代文：长安四年，晋封谯王，历任国子祭酒、左散骑常侍。
English: In the fourth year of the Chang'an era, he was promoted to Shao Wang, and successively served as Kuniko's sacrificial wine and Zuo Sanzhi's regular attendant.

古文：神龙初，为韦庶人所谮，云与张易之兄弟潜构成重润之罪，由是左授濮州员外刺史，转均州，司防守，不许视事。
现代文：神龙初年，中宗复唐，重福被韦庶人所诬陷，说重福与张易之兄弟私谋，构成兄重润的罪名，因此降为濮州员外刺史，转到均州，设虚位，不许视事。
English: In the first year of the Holy Dragon, when the Chinese restored the Tang Dynasty, Shifu was framed by Wei's vassals, saying that Shifu and Zhang Yi's brother conspired to frame his brother, so he was demoted to the status of a member of the State Council, transferred to the State Council, set up a false position, and was not allowed to watch the case.

古文：景龙三年，中宗亲祀南郊，大赦天下，流人并放还。
现代文：景云三年，中宗亲自到南郊祭祀，并大赦天下，流放人都放还。
English: In the third year of Jingyun, Zhongzong personally went to the southern suburbs to offer sacrifices, and amnestied the world, and the exiles were released.

古文：重福不得归京师，尤深郁怏，上表自陈曰： 臣闻功同赏异，则劳臣疑；罪均刑殊，则百姓惑。
现代文：但重福不准归京都，他很是忧郁，上表自陈说： 臣闻功相同赏相异，则劳臣疑；罪相等刑相异，则百姓惑。
English: However, Shifuku was not allowed to return to Kyoto. He was very depressed. The above table from Chen said: "If a minister hears that the same merit is rewarded differently, then the laborer is suspicious; if the crime is equal and the punishment is different, then the people are confused."

古文：伏惟陛下德侔造化，明齐日月，恩及飞鸟，惠加走兽。
现代文：伏惟陛下德等天地生光，明与日月一样，恩及飞鸟，惠加走兽。
English: For His Majesty, virtue is like the light of the heavens and the earth, as bright as the sun and the moon, benefiting birds and beasts.

古文：近者焚柴展礼，郊祀上玄，万物沾恺悌之仁，六合承旷荡之泽。事无轻重，咸赦除之。
现代文：近来，焚柴展札，郊祀上天，万物皆被仁爱，六合均承恩泽，犯事无论轻重，都赦免。
English: Recently, firewood has been exhibited, the suburbs have been worshipped, all things have been loved, the six counties have received grace, and all crimes, no matter how serious, have been pardoned.

古文：苍生并得赦除，赤子偏加摈弃，皇天平分之道；固此乎？
现代文：苍生并得赦除。只有您的儿子却加摈弃，皇天平分之道，本来就是这样的吗？
English: Your son is the only one who has renounced the way of Heaven, is this the way it should be?

古文：天下之人，闻者为臣流涕。况陛下慈念，岂不愍臣恓惶？
现代文：天下之人，听到这种情况都为臣流涕；况陛下慈念，哪有不怜悯臣忄西惶的呢？
English: People all over the world, when they hear of such a situation, feel sorry for the vassal; moreover, considering His Majesty's mercy, is there anyone who does not feel sorry for the vassal?

古文：伏望舍臣罪愆，许臣朝谒。
现代文：伏望赦臣之罪，允许臣朝谒。
English: Fushin pardoned the crime of the vassal and allowed the vassal to go to the Imperial Court.

古文：傥得一仰云陛，再睹陛圣颜，虽没九泉，实为万足。
现代文：倘得一仰云陛，再见圣颜，虽死九泉，实为万足。
English: If you have to go up to the clouds, goodbye to the Holy Face, even if you die, it is enough.

古文：重投荒徼，亦所甘心。 
现代文：重投荒境，亦所甘心。 
English: I am willing to return to the wasteland.

古文：表奏不报。
现代文：表奏未能上报。
English: The performance was not reported.

古文：及韦庶人临朝，遽令左屯卫大将军赵承恩以兵五百人就均州守卫重福。
现代文：到韦庶人临朝掌权，就令左屯卫将军赵承恩带兵五百人到均州看守重福。
English: When Wei's vassals took power in the Lin Dynasty, they ordered General Zhao Cheng'en of the Left Tun Guards to take 500 soldiers to Junzhou to guard Jufu.

古文：俄而韦氏伏诛，睿宗即位，又转集州刺史。
现代文：不久，韦氏伏诛，睿宗即位，又转任集州刺史。
English: Soon, Wei Fuxi and Ruizong ascended to the throne, and he was transferred to the post of Jizhou chief historian.

古文：未及行，洛阳人张灵均进计于重福曰： 大王地居嫡长，自合继为天子。
现代文：未上任，洛阳人张灵均向重福献计说 ：大王是中宗的嫡长子，自应即天子之位。
English: Before he took office, Zhang Ling, a Luoyang resident, presented a plan to Shifu, saying, "The great king is the eldest legitimate son of the Middle Sect, and should be the son of heaven.

古文：相王虽有讨平韦氏功，安可越次而居大位！
现代文：相王虽有讨平韦氏的功劳，怎么可以越位居上呢！
English: Although King Si has the merit of leveling Wei, how can he be ahead of the game?

古文：昔汉诛诸吕，犹迎代王，今东都百官士庶，皆愿王来。
现代文：过去汉诛诸吕迎代王；今东都的百官士庶，都希望王来。
English: In the past, the Han Dynasty welcomed the king; now, the hundreds of officials in Dongdu all hope that the king will come.

古文：王若潜行直诣洛阳，亦是从天上落，遣人袭杀留守，即拥兵西据陕州，东下河北，此天下可图也。 
现代文：王若暗中去东都洛阳，如从天而降，派人杀掉留守，就领兵西据陕州，东下黄河，这样天下可图。 
English: If the king secretly went to the eastern capital Luoyang, if he descended from the sky and sent people to kill those left behind, he would lead the troops west to Shaanxi and east to the Yellow River.

古文：初，景龙三年，郑愔自吏部侍郎出为江州司马，便道诣重福阴相结托。
现代文：当初，景龙三年时，郑忄音从吏部侍郎外调江州司马，便去找重福，暗中勾结。
English: At the beginning, when Jinglong was three years old, Zheng Rongyin transferred Jiangzhou Sima from the secretary of the personnel department, then went to find Jiefu and secretly colluded with him.

古文：至是又与灵均通传动静，亦密遣使劝重福构逆，预推尊重福为天子，温王重茂为皇太弟，自署为左丞相。
现代文：到此时郑忄音又与张灵均沟通信息，也秘密派人劝重福造反，准备推尊重福为天子，温王重茂为皇太弟，自任为左丞相。
English: At this time, Zheng Rongyin communicated information with Zhang Lingjun again, and also secretly sent people to persuade Shigefu to rebel, preparing to promote respect for Fu as the son of heaven, Wen Wang Shigemo as the emperor's younger brother, and himself as the minister of the left.

古文：重福乃遣家臣王道先赴东都，潜募勇敢之士，重福遽自均州诈乘驿与灵均继进。
现代文：重福就遣家臣王道先赶到东都，暗中招募勇士。重福就从均州假称乘驿与灵均进发。
English: In response, Shigefuku sent his vassal Wang Dou to Dongdu first to secretly recruit warriors. Shigefuku set out from Gyeongju, pretending to ride a donkey with Lingjun.

古文：王道始至东都，俄有泄其谋者，洛州司马崔日知捕获其党数十人。
现代文：王道到东都不久，阴谋就有人泄漏，洛州司马崔日知捕获他的党羽数十人。
English: Not long after Wang Dao arrived in the east, someone leaked the plot, and dozens of his followers were captured by Lozhou Sima Cui Zhizhi.

古文：经闻重福至，王道等率众随重福径取左右屯营兵作乱，将至天津桥，愿从者已数百人，皆执持器仗，助其威势。
现代文：不久听说重福到了东都，王道等率众随重福径直取左右屯营兵叛乱，将到天津桥时，跟从的人已有数百人，都手拿武器，助其威势。
English: Soon after, he heard that Shigefuku had arrived in the eastern capital. Wang Dao and others led the crowd to follow Shigefuku's path and directly led the left and right camp soldiers to rebel. By the time he arrived at Tianjin Bridge, there were already hundreds of people following him, all holding weapons and helping him wield power.

古文：侍御史李邕先诣左掖门，令闭关拒守。又至右屯营号令云： 重福虽先帝之子，已得罪于先帝，今者无故入城，必是作乱。
现代文：侍御史李邕先到左掖门，命令闭关拒守，又到右屯营中号令： 重福虽然是先帝之子，已得罪于先帝，现在无故入城，必是作乱。
English: Li Yan, the chamberlain of Shi, went to Zuoying Gate first and ordered the gate to be closed, and then went to the right camp and ordered: Although Shifu is the son of the former emperor, he has sinned against the former emperor. If he enters the city without any reason, he will surely cause a disturbance.

古文：君等皆委质圣朝，宜尽诚节，立功立事，以取富贵。 
现代文：君等皆受职圣朝，应尽诚节，立功立事，以取富贵。 
English: All of you have been appointed to the Holy Temple. You should be sincere, make meritorious deeds, and strive to be rich and noble.

古文：有顷，重福果来夺右屯营，坚壁不动，营中矢射如雨。
现代文：过了一会儿，重福果然来夺右屯营，右屯营坚守不动，营中箭矢如雨。
English: After a while, Shifu did indeed come to capture the right camp, the right camp stood firm, and it was raining arrows in the camp.

古文：便趣大臣掖门，拟取留守，遇门闭，遂纵火以烧城门。
现代文：重福又趋左掖门，准备攻取留守，但门紧紧关闭，他又纵火烧城门。
English: Again, Shigefu went to the left gate of the castle, preparing to capture the remaining guards, but the gate was tightly closed, and he set fire to the gate.

古文：虽人所共弃，邦有常刑，我非不慈，尔自招咎。且闻其故，有恻于怀。
现代文：此时左屯兵又来救护，重福计尽，出上东门而逃遁，躲藏在山谷中。
English: At this time, the left garrison soldiers came to the rescue again, and the heavy fortune was exhausted. They went out of the east gate and fled, hiding in the valley.

古文：昔刘长既殁，楚英遂殒，以礼收葬，抑惟旧章，屈法申恩，宜仍旧宠。可以三品礼葬。 
现代文：第二日，东都留守裴谈等出兵搜索，重福窘迫，自投漕河而死，被碎尸示众三日，时年三十一岁。睿宗下诏，说重福自绝于天，但屈法申恩，因兄弟情，以三品礼安葬。
English: On the second day, Dongdu stayed at Pei to discuss and send out troops to search. Due to the pressure of heavy fortune, he threw himself into the Caohe River and died. His crushed body was shown to the public on the third day, when he was 31 years old. Ruizong issued an edict, saying that heavy fortune had renounced himself to heaven, but Qu Fa Shen En, because of brotherly love, was buried with a three-course meal.

古文：节愍太子重俊，中宗第三子也。
现代文：节愍太子李重俊，后宫生，中宗第三子。
English: The third son of the Chuseok Emperor, Prince Lee Chung-joon, was born in the palace.

古文：圣历元年，封义兴郡王。
现代文：圣历元年，封义兴郡王。
English: In the first year of the sacred calendar, he was given the title of Yixing County King.

古文：长安中，累授卫尉员外少卿。
现代文：长安年中，授卫尉员外少卿。
English: In the middle of the Chang'an era, he was promoted to the rank of Lieutenant of the Imperial Guards and promoted to the rank of Junior Secretary.

古文：神龙初，封卫王，拜洛州牧，赐实封千户，寻迁左卫大将军，兼遥授扬州大都督。
现代文：神龙初年，封卫王，拜洛州牧，赐实封千户，不久迁任左卫大将军兼任不亲自到职的扬州大都督。
English: In the first year of the Dragon Dynasty, King Fong Wei, the patriarch of Bailuo, bestowed thousands of households with real fiefs. He was soon transferred to the position of General of the Left Division of the Middle Palace Guards and concurrently served as Yangzhou's grand governor, a position he did not personally assume.

古文：二年秋，立为皇太子。
现代文：神龙二年秋，立为皇太子。
English: In the autumn of the second year of the Dragon God, he became crown prince.

古文：重俊性虽明果，未有贤师傅，举事多不法。
现代文：重俊性情虽明白果断，但没有贤德的老师教导，举止多不法。
English: Although Chongjun's disposition is clear and decisive, he has not been taught by a virtuous teacher, and his behavior is more illegal.

古文：俄以秘书监杨璬、太常卿武崇训并为太子宾客。璬等皆主婿年少，唯以蹴鞠猥戏取狎于重俊，竟无调护之意。
现代文：又因为秘书监杨王敫、太常卿武崇训一起做太子宾客，杨王敫等都是主上的女婿，年少，只会以踢毛毽等无聊的玩耍来取乐于重俊，竟无调教维护之意。
English: In addition, because Yang Wangjun, the secretary-supervisor, and Wu Chongxun, the grand secretary, were the prince's guests together, Yang Wangjun, who was the lord's son-in-law, was young, and could only amuse Shigetoshi by playing silly games such as kicking the felt, but had no intention of correcting or protecting him.

古文：左庶子姚珽数上疏谏诤，右庶子平贞慎又献《孝经议》、《养德传》以讽，重俊皆优纳焉。
现代文：左庶子姚王廷多次上疏提意见，右庶子平贞慎又献《孝经议》、《养德传》来教化感动他，重俊都不放在心上。
English: Yao Wangting, the left illegitimate son, repeatedly raised his opinions, and Ping Zhengshen, the right illegitimate son, also presented "Filial Piety" and "Cultivation of Virtue" to enlighten and move him. Chongjun did not pay attention to them.

古文：时武三思得幸中宫，深忌重俊。
现代文：当时，武三思在宫中得宠，很是忌讳重俊。
English: At that time, Wu Sansi was favored in the palace, and it was taboo for him to be a senior official.

古文：三思子崇训尚安乐公主，常教公主凌忽重俊，以其非韦氏所生，常呼之为奴。
现代文：武三思的儿子武崇训娶安乐公主为妻，常常教公主凌辱戏耍重俊，因他不是韦氏所生，常喊他为奴。
English: Wu Sanxi's son, Wu Chongxun, married Princess Anle, and often taught the princess to humiliate and play Shigejun, because he was not born of Wei, and often called him a slave.

古文：或劝公主请废重俊为王，自立为皇太女，重俊不胜忿恨。
现代文：有人劝公主请皇上废重俊为王，自立为皇太女。重俊不胜忿恨。
English: Someone advised the princess to ask the emperor to depose Shigetoshi as king and become the crown princess herself. Shigetoshi was furious.

古文：三年七月，率左羽林大将军李多祚、右羽林将军李思冲、李承况、独孤祎之、沙吒忠义等，矫制发左右羽林兵及千骑三百余人，杀三思及崇训于其第，并杀党与十余人。
现代文：三年七月，重俊率左羽林大将军李多祚、右羽林军李思冲、李承况、独孤之、沙吒忠义等，假托朝令调动左右羽林兵及千骑三百余人，杀武三思和武崇训于他们家中，同时杀其党羽十余人。
English: In July of the third year, Chongjun led the left feather forest general Li Daojun, the right feather forest army Li Sichong, Li Chengzhang, Duolongzhi, Shajing Zhongyi, etc., and mobilized the left and right feather forest soldiers and more than three hundred thousand horsemen under the pretext of the imperial order, killed Wu Sanxi and Wu Chongxun in their homes, and killed more than ten of their party feather.

古文：又令左金吾大将军成王千里分兵守宫城诸门，自率兵趋肃章门，斩关而入，求韦庶人及安乐公主所在。又以昭容上官氏素与三思奸通，扣閤索之。
现代文：又命令左金吾大将军成王千里分兵把守宫城所有城门，亲自率兵赶到肃章门，斩关而入，寻找韦庶人和安乐公主，又以昭容上官氏一向与武三思通奸，扣阁索求。
English: He also ordered Zuo Kingu's general, Chengwang Qianli, to guard all the gates of the palace city, and personally led the soldiers to Suizhang Gate to enter the gate to search for Wei's commoner and Princess Anle. He also demanded that Zhao Rong, a high-ranking official, commit adultery with Wu Sanshi and be locked up.

古文：韦庶人及公主遽拥帝驰赴玄武门楼，召左羽林将军刘仁景等，令率留军飞骑及百余人于楼下列守。
现代文：韦庶人及公主就护着皇帝奔向玄武门楼，召左羽林军将军刘仁景等，命令他率领留军飞骑及百余人在楼下列守。
English: Wei Shih-chung and the princess rushed to the Xuanwu Gate Tower to protect the emperor, and summoned Liu Renjing, the general of the Left Feather Forest Army, and ordered him to lead the remaining troops and more than a hundred people to guard the building.

古文：俄而多祚等兵至，欲突玄武门楼，宿卫者拒之；不得进。
现代文：不一会儿，李多祚等的军队到来，想冲上玄武门楼，宿卫的士兵坚守，不能进。
English: Soon after, the army of Li Duoxuan and others arrived and wanted to rush up to the Xuanwu Gate Tower. The soldiers of the innkeeper held fast and could not enter.

古文：帝据槛呼多祚等所将千骑，谓曰： 汝并是我爪牙，何故作逆？
现代文：中宗在楼上据槛向李多祚所带领的千骑喊话： 你们都是我的卫士，为什么反叛？
English: On the upper floor, Zhongzong stood on the threshold and shouted to the thousand horsemen led by Li Duoxuan: You are all my guards, why do you rebel?

古文：若能归顺，斩多祚等，与汝富贵。 
现代文：如果能归顺，斩李多祚等，我给你富贵。 
English: If you are able to surrender, cut off more than you can eat, and so on, I will make you rich.

古文：于是千骑王欢喜等倒戈，斩多祚及李承况、独孤祎之、沙吒忠义等于楼下，余党遂溃散。
现代文：在这种情况下，千骑王欢喜等倒戈，斩李多祚及李承况、独孤之、沙吒忠义等于楼下，余党于是溃散。
English: Under these circumstances, Chunjie Wang Huanxi and others defected, killing Li Duojun and Li Shengquan, alone and alone, and Shajian Zhongyi was downstairs, and the rest of the party was dispersed.

古文：重俊既败，率其属百余骑趋肃章门，奔终南山。
现代文：重俊既败，率领百余骑奔肃章门，逃向终南山。
English: After the defeat, Chongjun led more than a hundred horsemen to the Suizhang Gate and fled to the final Nanshan.

古文：帝令长上果毅赵思慎率轻骑追之。
现代文：皇上令长上果毅赵思慎率轻骑追赶。
English: The imperial commanding officer Shang Guoyi Zhao Shisheng lightly rode to catch up.

古文：重俊至雩县西十余里，骑不能属，唯从奴数人。会日暮憩林下，为左右所杀。
现代文：重俊到县西十余里，部下不从命，只有奴数人跟随，此时正日暮，他们在林中休息，被左右的所杀。
English: Chongjun went more than ten miles to the west of the county. His subordinates did not follow his orders, only a few of them followed. At this time, it was dusk. They were resting in the forest and were killed by the left and right.

古文：制今枭首于朝，又献之于太庙，并以祭三思、崇训尸柩。
现代文：皇上令枭首级于朝，又献于太庙，并以重俊的首级祭武三思、武崇训的灵柩。
English: The Emperor ordered that the headstone be placed in the Imperial Palace, and it was also dedicated to the Imperial Temple. The headstone of Shigetoshi was used as the casket for the first-class festival of Wu Sanshi and Wu Chongxun.

古文：睿宗即位，下制曰： 朕闻曾氏之孝也，慈亲惑于疑听；赵虏之族也，明主哀而望思。历考前闻，率由旧典。
现代文：睿宗即位，下令： 历考前闻，率由旧章。
English: Emperor Ruizong ascended to the throne, and ordered that the old chapter should be revised.

古文：今四凶咸服，十起何追，方申赤军之冤，以纾黄泉之痛。
现代文：重俊，本是大行皇帝之子，皇太子。过去被谗言嫉妒所困惑，连斧钺也不顾，轻盗甲兵，才造成诛夷，实令人悲痛惋惜。今四凶俱服，正应申赤军之冤，来解黄泉之痛。
English: Chongjun, originally the son of Emperor Da Xing, the crown prince. In the past, he was puzzled by jealousy, and did not even care about the axe and pickaxe, and only caused the theft of armored soldiers, which is really sad and regrettable. Now the four villains are united, and they are responding to the misfortune of the Red Army, to solve the pain of the hell.

古文：可赠皇太子。 
现代文：可赠皇太子。 
English: You can get the crown prince as a gift.

古文：谥曰节愍，陪葬定陵。
现代文：给重俊谥号为节愍，陪葬定陵。
English: He was given the posthumous name of Shigetoshi, and was buried with him in his mausoleum.

古文：一子宗晖，开元初封湖阳郡王。
现代文：一子宗晖，开元初年唐玄宗封他为河阳郡王。
English: The first son, Zong Yao, was crowned King of Kheyang County by Emperor Xuanzong in the first year of the first millennium.

