古文：吕思诚吕思诚，字仲实，平定州人。
现代文：吕思诚字仲实，平定州人。
English: Lv Shicheng's character is down-to-earth, a citizen of Pingding County.

古文：六世祖宗礼，金进士，辽州司户。
现代文：六世祖名吕宗礼，是金时的进士，辽州司户。
English: The sixth-generation ancestor's name is Lü Zonglei. He was a member of the Jin Dynasty and the governor of Liaozhou.

古文：宗礼生仲堪，亦举进士。
现代文：宗礼生仲堪，也是进士。
English: Sorei's student, Nakakane, is also a graduate.

古文：仲堪生时敏，时敏生钊，为千夫长，死国事。
现代文：仲堪生时敏，时敏生钊，为千夫长，死于国事。
English: He was a chieftain of a thousand, and died in the service of the state.

古文：钊生德成，德成生允，卒平定知州致仕，思诚父也。
现代文：钊生德成，德成生允，任平定知州，辞官退隐后逝世，吕允就是思诚的父亲。
English: Zeng Sheng, De Cheng Sheng Yun, Ren Pingding Chizhou, resigned and died after retirement, Lu Yun is the father of Sincere.

古文：母冯氏，梦一丈夫，乌巾、白襕衫、红鞓束带，趋而揖曰： 我文昌星也。 及寤，思诚生，目有神光，见者异之。及长，从萧学治经。
现代文：思诚出世后，目有神光，凡见到他的人都感奇异。
English: After Sincere was born, his eyes sparkled, and everyone who saw him was amazed.

古文：已而入国子学为陪堂生，试国子伴读，中其选。
现代文：长大后跟随萧学治经。不久进入国子学当陪堂生，考试国子伴读，中选。
English: After growing up, he followed Xiao Xuecheng to study the classics. Soon, he entered the Kuniko school as a chaperone, and passed the exam as a Kuniko chaperone, and was selected.

古文：擢泰定元年进士第，授同知辽州事，未赴。
现代文：泰定元年中进士第，授同知辽州知事，因母丧未赴任，改任景州县尹。
English: In the middle of the first year of the Taiding era, he was awarded the title of the governor of Liaozhou, but he did not take office due to his mother's death, and was appointed as the Yin of Jingzhou County.

古文：丁内艰。改景州蓚县尹。差民户为三等，均其徭役；刻孔子象，令社学祀事；每岁春行田，树畜勤敏者，赏以农器，人争趋事，地无遗力。民石安儿等，流离积年，至是，闻风复业。印识文簿，畀社长藏之，季月报县，不孝弟、不事生业者，悉书之，罚其输作。
现代文：将平民差役分为三等，平均其徭役；刻孔子像，命社学祭祀；每年春季开犁，对植树养畜勤敏者，赏以农器，人们争着务农，因而所有土地都被开垦利用。平民石安儿等，流离多年，听说此情后复业。又印制文簿，赐与社长保管，按季报县，不孝顺父母，不友爱兄弟，不参加生产劳动者，都记在文簿上，罚他们服役运输。
English: The civil servants were divided into three classes, with the average being the overseer; a statue of Confucius was carved, and a social science sacrifice was ordered; the fields were replanted every spring, and those who were diligent in planting trees and raising livestock were rewarded with agricultural tools. People competed for agricultural work, so all the land was replanted and used. Civilians such as Shi An'er, who had been displaced for many years, resumed their careers after hearing about this situation. They also printed a workbook and gave it to the president for safekeeping. According to the quarterly report of the county, those who were not filial to their parents, did not love their brothers, and

古文：胥吏至社者，何人用饮食若干，多者责偿其直。
现代文：胥吏到社中去，了解何人，饮食多少，多用者要求按价付款。
English: The clerk went to the company to find out how many people were there, how much food and drink there was, and if there was more than one person, they demanded payment according to the price.

古文：思诚怜其贫，令为媒互人以养之。
现代文：狡猾豪民篡改姓名而享有职田的，这种弊端思诚都加以清除。天历年间因用兵，而预先向富民贷钞，令制造军器。
English: If the cunning rich people changed their names and enjoyed the field of work, this kind of evil thought should be eliminated. During the years of natural calamity, because of the use of soldiers, they borrowed money from the rich people in advance and ordered the manufacture of military equipment.

古文：天旱，道士持青蛇，曰卢师谷小青，谓龙也，祷之即雨。思诚以其惑人，杀蛇，逐道士，雨亦随至，遂有年。
现代文：由于一切都事先有所准备，故不扰民。翟彝自从他的祖父因河南战乱被掠为奴隶，每年按成年男子缴粟，可免劳役。思诚知道彝努力学习，召来他的主人订立协约，用三十石粟赎身，并代他输纳，彝成为良民。天旱，道士持青蛇说是卢师谷小青，是龙，祈祷即可下雨。思诚因他迷惑众人，杀了蛇，驱逐了道士，随之也下了雨，有了丰年。
English: Since everything was prepared in advance, he did not disturb the people. Ever since his grandfather was taken as a slave due to the war in Henan, he paid a millet every year as an adult man and was exempt from labor service. Shicheng knew that he studied hard, called his master to conclude an agreement, redeemed himself with thirty koku of millet, and accepted it on his behalf, and became a good citizen. In the drought, the Taoist holding a green snake said that Lu Shigu was a small green, was a dragon, and it could rain if he prayed. Shicheng because he confused everyone, killed the snake, expelled the Taoist, it also rained, and there was

古文：县多淫祠，动以百余计，刑牲以祭者无虚日，思诚悉命毁之，唯存江都相董仲舒祠。
现代文：县里淫祠有百余座，每天都杀牲祭祀，思诚命令全都摧毁，只保存了江都相董仲舒祠。
English: There are more than a hundred temples in the county, and every day there are animal sacrifices. Shicheng ordered all of them to be destroyed, and only Jiangdu's Dong Zhongshu Temple was preserved.

古文：擢翰林国史院检阅官，俄升编修。
现代文：提拔为翰林国史院检阅官，不久又升编修。
English: He was promoted to inspector of the Hanlin Academy of National History, and was soon promoted to editor.

古文：文宗在奎章阁，有旨取国史阅之，左右舁匮以往，院长贰无敢言。
现代文：文宗在奎章阁，传旨取国史阅览，左右把书柜抬去，国史院正副院长等无人敢说。
English: Wenzong is in the Kuizhang Pavilion, the order is to read the national history, and the bookcases are carried to the left and right. No one dares to say anything about the president and vice president of the National History Academy.

古文：思诚在末僚，独跪阁下争曰： 国史纪当代人君善恶，自古天子无观阅之者。 
现代文：思诚位在同僚之末，却敢于跪下说 ：国史记载当代人君的善恶，自古以来的天子都是不看的。 
English: Shicheng was at the end of his colleagues, but he dared to kneel down and say: National history records the good and evil of contemporary people, and since ancient times, heavenly beings have not seen it.

古文：事遂寝。
现代文：文宗也就不要求看了。
English: So it was stopped.

古文：寻擢国子监丞，升司业，拜监察御史。
现代文：不久先后任国子监丞、司业、监察御史。
English: Soon after, he was appointed Kuniko chancellor, secretary of education, and inspector of history.

古文：与斡玉伦徒等劾中书平章政事彻里帖木儿变乱朝政，章上，留中不下，思诚纳印绶殿前，遂出佥广西廉访司事。
现代文：与斡玉伦徒等弹劾中书平章政事彻里帖木儿变乱朝政。
English: In the impeachment of the procurator Yulentu and other procurators, the political affairs of Pingzhang and Cherili Timur led to chaos in the government of the dynasty.

古文：巡行郡县，土官有于元帅者，恃势鱼肉人，恐事觉，阴遣其子迓思诚于道。思诚缚之，悉发其阴私，痛惩其罪，一道震肃。
现代文：奏章呈上，皇帝扣押，不批示处理。思诚在殿前接受印绶，就出任广西廉访司佥事，巡察各郡县。土官中有于元帅，仗势鱼肉百姓，恐怕被发现，暗中遣其子在途中迎接思诚，思诚将他逮捕，揭发其全部阴谋，严惩其罪，全道受到震动和整治。
English: After the report was submitted, the emperor detained and disposed of it without instructions. When Shicheng received the seal of approval in front of the palace, he took up the post of Guangxi Liangzhi Jianji and inspected all counties. Among the local officials, there was a marshal, a powerful fish and meat people, and he was afraid of being discovered. He secretly sent his son to meet Shicheng on the way. Shicheng arrested him, exposed all his plots, severely punished his crimes, and the whole province was shaken and rectified.

古文：移浙西。
现代文：调浙西。
English: To the west of Zhejiang Province.

古文：达识帖睦迩时为南台御史大夫，与江浙省臣有隙，嗾思诚劾之，思诚曰： 吾为天子耳目，不为台臣鹰犬也。 
现代文：当时达识帖睦迩任南台御史大夫，与江浙省不和，鼓动思诚弹劾，思诚说 ：我是天子的耳目，不是台臣的鹰犬。 
English: At that time, Dakeichijo Mutsuhiro was appointed as the chief historian of Nantai, and he was at odds with Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province, and he encouraged the impeachment of Shicheng. Shicheng said: I am the eyes and ears of the Son of Heaven, not the eagle dog of the Taiwanese.

古文：不听。
现代文：不听。
English: The emperor does not allow it.

古文：已而闻行省平章左吉贪墨，浙民多怨之，思诚奏疏其罪，流之海南。
现代文：其后得知行省平章左吉贪污受贿，浙民多怨恨他，思诚上奏其罪，流放到海南。
English: After that, it was learned that the governor of the province, Ping Zhangsaji, was corrupt and took bribes. The people of Zhejiang mostly resented him, and Shicheng confessed to his crime and was exiled to Hainan.

古文：复召为国子司业，迁中书左司员外郎。
现代文：再次召回京任国子司业，升中书左司员外郎。
English: He was once again called back to Kyoto to serve as Kuniko no Tsukasa, and Gairo was promoted to Chushiso no Tsukasa.

古文：盗杀河南省臣，以伪檄呼廉访使段辅入行省事，及事败，诖误者三十余人，将置于法，思诚言于朝，皆释之。
现代文：强盗杀害了河南省臣，以伪造的檄文说廉访使段辅入行省之事，待到阴谋失败，受牵连的有三十多人，都将受法律制裁。思诚向朝廷说明情形，把他们都释放了。
English: The robbers killed a Henan provincial official, and used a forged forged forged document to say that the unlicensed envoy Duan Fu had entered the province. When the plot failed, more than thirty people were implicated, all of whom would be subject to legal sanctions. Shicheng explained the situation to the imperial court and released them all.

古文：升左司郎中。
现代文：升左司郎中。
English: He was promoted to Sasasiro Junior High School.

古文：思诚素刚直，人多嫉之，遂以言罢。
现代文：思诚平时为人刚直，人们多嫉妒他，因进谏触怒皇帝而罢官。
English: People envied him, and he was dismissed from his post for angering the emperor.

古文：起为右司郎中，拜刑部尚书。
现代文：起用为右司郎中，拜刑部尚书。
English: He was appointed to the post of junior assistant to the Right Division of the Ministry of Justice, and became a member of the Penal Correction Department.

古文：科举复行，与佥书枢密院事韩镛为御试读卷官。
现代文：科举恢复后，与佥书枢密院事韩镛为御试读卷官。
English: After the resumption of the imperial examinations, Han Min, the secretary of the Privy Council of the Imperial Academy of Sciences, was appointed as the examiner.

古文：改礼部尚书，御史台奏为治书侍御史，总裁辽、金、宋三史，升侍御史，枢密院奏为副使，御史台留为侍御史。
现代文：改任礼部尚书，御史台奏为治书侍御史，总裁辽、金、宋三史，升侍御史，枢密院奏为副使，而御史台留为侍御史。
English: He was transferred to the Ministry of Ceremonies as the Grand Historian, the Grand Historian as the Secretary of the Grand Historian, the Presidents Liao, Jin and Song as the Three Grand Historians, the Grand Historian as the Vice-President of the Grand Historian, the Privy Councillor as the Vice-Envoy of the Grand Historian, and the Grand Historian as the Grand Historian.

古文：会平章政事巩卜班不法，监察御史劾之，御史大夫也先帖木儿曰： 姑徐之。 
现代文：适逢平章政事巩卜班犯法，监察御史弹劾，御史大夫也先帖木儿说： 暂且等待。 
English: At the right time, when the Pingzhang Political Affairs Gongbu Team broke the law and supervised the impeachment of the goshi, the goshi doctor also said first: Wait for the time being.

古文：思诚趣入奏，巩卜班罢。
现代文：思诚急入奏，巩卜班被罢官。
English: Shicheng was hurriedly brought in, and Gongbai was dismissed.

古文：大夫衔思诚，将谋挤之，思诚即谒告。朝廷知思诚无他，迁河东廉访使。
现代文：大夫恨思诚，要排挤他，思诚称病请假回家，朝廷知道思诚无他意，调任河东廉访使。
English: The doctor hated Shicheng and wanted to push him out. Shicheng called in sick to go home. The court knew that Shicheng had no other intention, and transferred him to the post of the low-level envoy to Hedong.

古文：未几，召为集贤侍讲学士，兼国子祭酒，出为湖广行省参知政事，诸生抗疏留之，不可。
现代文：不久，召为集贤侍讲学士，兼国子祭酒，出京任湖广行省参知政事，诸生上疏挽留，未得许可。
English: Not long after, he was called to be a lecturer and scholar for the collection of virtuous attendants, as well as the son of the country, and he went to Beijing to serve as the governor of Hunan Province, and he remained there for the rest of his life without permission.

古文：道中授湖北廉访使，入拜中书参知政事，升左丞，转御史中丞。
现代文：途中授湖北廉访使，进京拜为中书参知政事，升右丞，转御史中丞。
English: On the way, he was awarded the title of Hubei Liang's envoy, and went to Beijing to serve as the Vice-Minister of the Central Government, promoted to Vice-Minister of the Right, and then to Vice-Minister of the Central Government.

古文：劾奏清道官不尽职，罢之。
现代文：弹劾清道官不尽职，罢官。
English: Impeachment of Qing officials for dereliction of duty, and dismissal.

古文：再任左丞、知经筵事，提调国子监，兼翰林学士承旨、知制诰兼修国史，加荣禄大夫，总裁后妃、功臣传，会粹《六条政类》，帝赐玉带，眷顾弥笃。
现代文：再任左丞，知经筵事，提调国子监，兼翰林学士承旨、知制诰兼修国史，加荣禄大夫，总裁《后妃传》、《功臣传》，会集《六条政类》，帝赐以玉带，对他依恋日深。
English: He was reappointed to the position of the left-hand man, he was appointed to the position of the scholar, he was appointed to the position of the state's son inspector, he was also appointed to the position of the scholar of Hanlin, he was also appointed to the position of the scholar, he was also appointed to the position of the scholar, he was also appointed to the position of the scholar, he was also appointed to the position of the scholar, he was also appointed to the position of the scholar, he was also appointed to the position of the scholar, he was also appointed to the position of the scholar, he was also appointed to the position of the scholar, he was also appointed to the

古文：又为枢密副使，仍知经筵事，复为中书左丞。
现代文：又任枢密副使，仍知经筵事，再任中书左丞。
English: He also served as a Privy Vice-Minister, and was reappointed to the post of Chushuzasojo.

古文：御史大夫纳麟，诬参政孔思立受赇事，或欲连中思诚，纳麟曰： 吕左丞素有廉声，难以及之。 
现代文：御史大夫纳麟，诬告参政孔思立受贿，有人想以此牵连思诚，纳麟说 ：吕左丞一向有廉洁之声誉，要涉及他是很难的。 
English: The chief historian, Narin, falsely accused the politician Kong Sili of taking bribes. Some people wanted to implicate Sincere in this way. Narin said: Lyu Zu Rong has always had a reputation for integrity, and it is difficult to implicate him.

古文：遂止。
现代文：于是作罢。
English: So he stopped short of killing him.

古文：拜集贤学士，仍兼国子祭酒。
现代文：授集贤学士，仍兼国子祭酒。
English: He was awarded the title of "Professor of Virtue" and was also awarded the Kuniko Matsuri Sake.

古文：吏部尚书契哲笃、左司都事武祺等，建言更钞法，以楮币一贯文省权铜钱一千文为母，铜钱为子，命廷臣集议。
现代文：吏部尚书亻契哲笃、左司都事武祺等，建议变更钞法，以面值一千文的楮币为母，铜钱为子，命朝廷大臣聚集议论。
English: Shang Shuxu of the Personnel Department, Qi Jeduc and Zuo Jizhi Wujing of the Left Division proposed to change the banknote law, taking the 1,000-cents denomination as the mother and the copper money as the son, and ordered the ministers of the Imperial Court to gather for discussion.

古文：思诚曰： 中统、至元自有母子，上料为母，下料为子，譬之蒙古人以汉人子为后，皆人类也，尚终为汉人之子，岂有故纸为父而立铜为子者乎？ 
现代文：思诚不同意，认为哪有以故纸为父而立铜为子的？
English: Shicheng disagreed, arguing that who would take paper as the father and copper as the son?

古文：一座咸笑。
现代文：满座皆笑。
English: The entire auditorium bursts into laughter.

古文：思诚又曰： 钱钞用法，见为一致，以虚换实也。
现代文：思诚又说： 钱钞用法，看起来一致，只是以虚换实。
English: Sincere also said: The usage of banknotes seems to be the same, but it is just an illusion.

古文：今历代钱、至正钱、中统钞、至元钞、交钞分为五项，虑下民知之，藏其实而弃其虚，恐不利于国家也。 
现代文：现在历代的钱、至正钱、中统钞、至元钞、交钞共五项，恐怕百姓知道，藏其实而弃其虚，不利于国家。 
English: Now, there are five kinds of money, namely, the money of all ages, the genuine money, the mid-level banknotes, the up-to-dollar banknotes, and the banknotes for payment. I am afraid that the people know that it is not good for the country to hide the truth and abandon the falsehood.

古文：契哲笃曰： 至元钞多伪，故更之尔。 
现代文：亻契哲笃说： 至元钞很多伪造，所以才变更。 
English: "There are a lot of counterfeits of yuan banknotes, that's why they were changed," Mr. Shanqi said.

古文：思诚曰： 至元钞非伪，人为伪尔。
现代文：思诚说： 至元钞并不伪，是人为的伪。
English: Shicheng said: The yuan banknote is not fake, it is an artificial fake.

古文：交钞若出，亦为伪者矣。
现代文：交钞如果出现，也就成为伪钞了。
English: If banknotes are handed over, they will be counterfeit.

古文：且至元钞犹故戚也，家之童奴且识之；交钞犹新戚也，虽不敢不亲，人未识也，其伪反滋多尔。
现代文：况且至元钞就像是老亲戚，家中的儿童、奴仆都认识；交钞就像是新亲戚，虽然不敢不亲，可是人们并不认识，其伪反而会更多。
English: Moreover, the yuan banknotes are like old relatives, and the children and servants in the family all know them; the banknotes are like new relatives, although they dare not be unkind, but people do not know them, and there will be more counterfeits.

古文：况祖宗之成宪，其可轻改哉！ 
现代文：况且祖宗的规定，是不可轻易改变的。 
English: Moreover, the rules of the ancestors cannot be easily changed.

古文：契哲笃曰： 祖宗法弊，亦可改矣。 
现代文：亻契哲笃说： 祖宗之法有弊端，也可以改。 
English: "There are drawbacks to the ancestral law, and it can be changed," he said.

古文：思诚曰： 汝辈更法，又欲上诬世皇，是汝与世皇争高下也。
现代文：思诚说： 你们变法，又要上诬世皇，是你与世皇争高下。
English: Shicheng said: You have changed the law and want to become the world's emperor. You are competing with the world's emperor.

古文：且自世皇以来，诸帝皆谥曰孝，改其成宪，可谓孝乎？ 
现代文：而且自世皇以来，诸位皇帝都劝人行孝，改其成规，能说是孝么？ 
English: Moreover, since the time of the world emperors, all emperors have exhorted people to practice filial piety, turning it into a norm. Can it be said to be filial piety?

古文：契哲笃曰： 钱钞兼行何如？ 
现代文：亻契哲笃说： 钱钞用时流通如何？ 
English: "How is the circulation of banknotes when they are in use?

古文：思诚曰： 钱钞兼行，轻重不伦，何者为母，何者为子？汝不通古今，道听而途说，何足行哉！ 
现代文：思诚说： 钱钞同时流通，轻重不分，哪个是母，哪个是子，你不懂古今，道听途说，怎么能行？ 
English: Shicheng said: banknotes circulate at the same time, regardless of weight, which is the mother, which is the child, you do not understand the past and the present, hearsay, how can it work?

古文：契哲笃忿曰： 我等策既不可行，公有何策？ 
现代文：亻契哲笃气愤地说 ：我们的策略既不可行，公有何策？ 
English: "Our strategy is not feasible, so what is the government's strategy?

古文：思诚曰： 我有三字策曰：行不得！行不得！ 
现代文：思诚说： 我有三字策：行不得！行不得！ 
English: Sincere said: I have a three-word policy: impossible! impossible!

古文：丞相脱脱见思诚言直，颇狐疑未决。
现代文：丞相脱脱看到思诚之话爽直，对更行钞法犹豫不定。
English: When the prime minister saw that Sincere's words were sincere, he hesitated to change the banknote law.

古文：御史大夫也先帖木儿独曰： 吕祭酒之言亦有是者，但不当在庙堂上大声历色尔。 
现代文：只有御史大夫也先帖木儿说 ：吕祭酒之言也有对的，但不应在庙堂之上大声厉色。 
English: Only the chief historian said to Timur first, "The saying of the wine offering is also right, but it should not be drunk in a loud voice above the temple.

古文：已而监察御史承望风旨，劾思诚狂妄，夺其诰命并所赐玉带，复左迁湖广行省左丞，遣太医院宣使秦初即其家迫遣之。
现代文：事后监察御史得到皇帝的暗示，弹劾思诚狂妄，夺其诰命和所赐玉带，又调任行省左丞，派遣太医院宣使秦初立即到他的家中强迫成行。
English: After the event, the inspector of imperial history got a hint from the emperor, impeached Shicheng's arrogance, took his life and the jade belt he had given, and transferred him to the governor of the province, and dispatched the Tai Hospital to urge Qin Chu to immediately go to his home and force him to go.

古文：初窘辱之，不遗余力，思诚不为动。
现代文：秦初不遗余力地窘辱他，思诚并不害怕。
English: At first, Qin spared no effort to humiliate him, but Shicheng was not afraid.

古文：贻书参议龚伯遂曰： 去年许可用为河南左丞，今年吕思诚为湖广左丞，世事至此，足下得无动心乎？ 
现代文：给参议龚伯遂留信说 ：去年许可用为河南左丞，今年吕思诚为湖广左丞，世道如此，足下能不动心么？ 
English: He then left a letter for the councillor Zou Bo, saying: Last year, the permission was used for Henan Zuo Rong, and this year Lu Sichen is Hukang Zuo Rong. This is the way of the world, can you not move your feet?

古文：抵武昌城下，语诸将曰： 贼据城与诸君相持经久，必不知吾为此来，出其不意，可以入城。 
现代文：到达武昌城下，对诸将说： 贼人据城与各位相持很久，必然不知道我为此而来，出其不意，可以进城。 
English: Arriving at the foot of Wuchang Castle, he said to the generals: "Thieves have been in the city for a long time, and they must not know that I have come for this purpose. Unexpectedly, they can enter the city."

古文：遂行。诸将不获已，随其后，竟不烦转斗而入。
现代文：就开始入城，诸将不得已，跟随其后，竟然未经战斗而进城。
English: They began to enter the city, and the generals, as a last resort, followed them and entered the city without a fight.

古文：询其故，贼仓卒无备。尽惊走。
现代文：问其原故，因为贼仓猝无准备，都被惊走。
English: When asked why, they were all taken aback by the sudden unpreparedness of the thieves.

古文：思诚乃大会军民官吏告之曰： 贼去，示吾弱也，规将复来。 
现代文：思诚于是召军民开会，告诉他们说 ：贼走了，向我们表明他们弱，估计还将再来。 
English: Sincere then called a meeting of the military and the people and told them: "The thieves have left, they have shown us that they are weak, and it is expected that they will come again."

古文：于是申号令，戒职事，修器械，葺城郭，明部伍，先谋自守，徐议出征。
现代文：于是发号令，戒备职事，修器械，整城郭，整顿军队，先考虑守城，再计划出征。
English: Therefore, an order was issued to prepare for duty, repair equipment, clean up the city, reorganize the army, first consider defending the city, and then plan to go to war.

古文：苗军暴横，侵辱省宪，思诚正色叱之曰： 若等能杀吕左丞乎？ 
现代文：苗军横暴，侵犯侮辱行省长官，思诚厉声厉色申斥说： 你们能杀吕左丞么？ 
English: Miao troops were violent, violated and insulted the governor of the province, and Shicheng strongly rebuked them, saying: Can you kill Lü Zu Rong?

古文：自是无敢复至。
现代文：从此苗军不敢再来。
English: From then on, the Miao army did not dare to come back.

古文：曾未数日，召还，复为中书左丞。
现代文：未过几天，召还京师，复任中书左丞。
English: A few days later, he was recalled to the capital division and reinstated as Chushizojo.

古文：思诚去二日，城复陷。
现代文：思诚走了两天，城再陷。
English: Sincere walked for two days, and the city fell again.

古文：移光禄大夫、大司农。
现代文：思诚转任光禄大夫、大司农。
English: Shicheng was transferred to the posts of Guanglu Doctor and Senior Secretary of Agriculture.

古文：俄得疾，以至正十七年三月十七日卒，年六十有五。
现代文：于至正十七年三月十七日病逝，终年六十五岁。
English: He died of illness on March 17, 1867, at the age of sixty-five.

古文：思诚气宇凝定，素以劲拔闻，不为势利所屈。
现代文：思诚气质持重，素以刚直闻名，不为势利所屈服。
English: Shicheng has a strong temperament and is known for his straightforwardness and not giving in to snobbery.

古文：三为祭酒，一法许衡之旧，诸生从化，后多为名士。
现代文：曾三任祭酒，一贯效法许衡，随从的后生，后来大多成为名士。
English: Once three-time sacrificial wine, always follow the example of Xu Heng, the follower's offspring, and later most of them become celebrities.

古文：尝病古注疏太繁，魏了翁删之太简，将约其中以成书，不果。
现代文：曾批评古书注释太繁，而魏了翁删后又太简，准备取古注中一部分编成书，可惜这事没有做完。
English: He once criticized the annotation of ancient books as being too complicated, while Wei Lvong deleted it and said that it was too simple. He planned to compile a part of the ancient annotation into a book, but unfortunately this was not done.

古文：有文集若干卷、《两汉通纪》若干卷。
现代文：有文集若干卷，《两汉通纪》若干卷。
English: There are several volumes of anthologies, and several volumes of "Two Han Dynasty Chronicles."

古文：谥忠肃。
现代文：谥号忠肃。
English: His posthumous name is Chunsu.

古文：汪泽民汪泽民，字叔志，徽之婺源州人，宋端明殿学士藻之七世孙也。
现代文：汪泽民字叔志，徽之婺源州人，宋端明殿学士藻之七世孙。
English: He is the seventh generation grandchild of Wang Zemin, the great-uncle of Wang Zemin, the great-grandson of Wang Zemin, the great-grandson of Wang Zemin, the great-grandson of Wang Zemin, the great-grandson of Wang Zemin, the great-grandson of Wang Zemin, the great-grandson of Wang Zemin, the great-grandson of Wang Zemin.

古文：少警悟，家贫力学，既长，遂通诸经。
现代文：年少时敏捷聪悟，家境贫困而能刻苦学习，长大后通晓各种经书。
English: When he was young, he was quick and clever. His family was poor, but he was able to study hard. When he grew up, he was familiar with all kinds of scriptures.

古文：延祐初，以《春秋》中乡贡，上礼部，下第，授宁国路儒学正。
现代文：延祐初年，以《春秋》中乡贡，礼部会试则落第，授宁国路儒学正。
English: In the first year of Yan Yu, with "Spring and Autumn" in Zhongxiang Gong, he failed the examination of the etiquette club, and was awarded the title of Confucian scholar of Ningguo Road.

古文：五年，遂登进士第，授承事郎、同知岳州路平江州事。
现代文：五年，登进士及第，授承事郎、同知岳州路平江州事。
English: In the fifth year, he was promoted to the first and the second, awarded to the secretary's brother, Tongzhi Yuezhou Road, Pingjiang County.

古文：以母年八十，上书愿夺所授官一等或二等，得近地以便养，不允。
现代文：因母亲年高八十，上书愿降所授之官一或二等，到离家乡近处做官，以便奉养母亲，未允。
English: Due to her mother's advanced age of 80, she wrote a letter expressing her wish to be demoted to the first or second grade of the official rank, and to work as an official near her hometown in order to support her mother, but this was not granted.

古文：南归奉母之官。
现代文：只得南归把母亲接来一起去上任。
English: Nan Gui had to bring his mother to work with him.

古文：州民李氏，以赀雄，其弟死，妻誓不他适，兄利其财，嗾族人诬妇以奸事。狱成而泽民至，察知其枉，为直之。
现代文：州民李氏，极富，其弟死，妻誓不改嫁，兄贪其财，唆使族人诬蔑弟媳通奸，这案判定后泽民才到任，他察知其冤，为之昭雪。
English: The Li family of the state, extremely rich, his brother died, his wife swore not to remarry, his brother was greedy for his wealth, incited the tribesmen to slander his sister-in-law's adultery, this case was decided after Zemen came to office, he sensed his wrongdoing and cleared it up.

古文：会朝廷征江南包银，府檄泽民分辨，民不扰而事集。
现代文：适逢朝廷征江南包银，府行文书给泽民，要他办理，泽民设法，既不侵扰百姓，又把这事办成。
English: At a time when the imperial court was requisitioning silver in bundles from the southern part of the Yangtze River, the government sent a document to Zemin, asking him to handle the matter. Zemin tried his best not to disturb the people, but to get the job done.

古文：寻迁南安路总管府推官。
现代文：不久迁南安路总管府推官。
English: He was soon transferred to the Nan'an Road General Administration Office.

古文：镇守万户朵儿赤，持官府短长，郡吏王甲，殴伤属县长官，诉郡，同僚畏朵儿赤，托故不视事，泽民独捕甲，系之狱。
现代文：镇守万户朵儿赤，仗势欺侮官府，郡吏王甲，殴伤属县长官，还到郡控诉，同僚畏朵儿赤，托故不管，只有泽民捕甲，关进监狱。
English: Town watchman Wanyu Doruka, bullying the government, county official Wang Jia, beaten by the county governor, also went to the county to complain, colleagues feared Doruka, regardless of the reason, only Zemin caught Jia and put him in prison.

古文：朵儿赤赂巡按御史，受甲家人诉，欲出之，泽民正色与辨，御史沮怍，夜竟去，乃卒罪王甲。
现代文：朵儿赤贿赂巡按御史，受理王甲的家人控诉，释放王甲。泽民正色与他辩论，御史惭愧失色，夜间竟走了，终于办了王甲的罪。
English: Doll red bribe patrol press Wang Jia, accept Wang Jia's family complaint, release Wang Jia. Zemin Zhengxue debated with him, Wang Jia was ashamed and lost his color, but he actually left at night, and finally dealt with Wang Jia's crime.

古文：潮州府判官钱珍，以奸淫事杀推官梁楫，事连广东廉访副使刘珍，坐系者二百余人，省府官凡六委官鞫问，皆顾忌淹延弗能白，复檄泽民谳之，狱立具，人服其明。
现代文：潮州府判官钱珍，以奸淫事杀推官梁楫，牵连广东廉访副使刘安仁，株连二百多人，省府官中有六次委官审问，都顾忌拖延，不能弄清，又行文泽民审问，判了钱珍的罪，人服其英明。
English: Qian Zhen, the judge of Chaozhou government, killed Liang Jun, the judge, for adultery, implicated Liu Anren, the vice-envoy of the Guangdong Anti-Corruption Commission, and more than 200 people, and six of the provincial government officials were interrogated, but they were reluctant to delay and could not find out. They also conducted the Wen Ze Min interrogation and convicted Qian Zhen, and people were convinced of his wisdom.

古文：迁信州路总管府推官。
现代文：调任信州路总管府推官。
English: He was transferred to the Shinshu Road General Administration Office.

古文：丁母忧，服除，授平江路总管府推官。
现代文：母丧，孝满，授平江路总管府推官。
English: Mother's death, filial piety, awarded the post of the chief administrator of Pingjiang Road.

古文：有僧净广，与他僧有憾，久绝往来，一日，邀广饮，广弟子急欲得师财，且苦其棰楚，潜往它僧所杀之。
现代文：有个叫净广的僧人，与另一僧有怨恨，久不往来，一天，他邀净广饮酒，广的弟子急于得到师傅之财，同时又苦于师傅的杖刑，于是暗中前往将净广杀死，第二天报官，邀广饮酒的僧人经不住拷打而被迫招供。
English: There was a monk named Ching Guang, who had a grudge against another monk and had not been in contact with him for a long time. One day, he invited Ching Guang to drink alcohol. Ching's disciple was eager to get the master's wealth, and at the same time suffered from the master's cane punishment, so he secretly went to kill Ching Guang. The next day, the reporter reported that the monk who invited Ching to drink alcohol could not withstand the torture and was forced to confess.

古文：明日诉官，它僧不胜考掠，乃诬服，三经审录，词无异，结案等报。泽民取行凶刀视之，刀上有铁工姓名，召工问之，乃其弟子刀也，一讯吐实，即械之而出他僧，人惊以为神。
现代文：经多次审问，供词不变，结案待报。泽民取行凶刀察看，刀上有铁工姓名，召工询问，是弟子的刀，一问就吐露了实情，人们吃惊以为他是神。
English: After many interrogations, the confession did not change, and the case was closed to be reported. Zemin took the murderous sword to inspect it. The ironworker's name was on the sword, and the summoner asked if it was the disciple's sword. When asked, he revealed the truth. People were surprised and thought he was a god.

古文：调济宁路兖州知州，孔子后衍圣公袭封职三品，泽民建议，以谓宜升其品秩，以示褒崇宣圣之意，廷议从之。
现代文：调济宁路兖州知州。孔子之后，袭封衍圣公，官阶三品。泽民认为应提升其品秩，以表示褒崇宣圣之意，朝廷议后同意。
English: After Confucius, he succeeded to the title of Yuan Sheng Gong, with three official ranks. Zemin thought that his rank should be upgraded to show his admiration for the idea of proclaiming a saint, and the Imperial Court agreed after deliberation.

古文：至正三年，朝廷修辽、金、宋史，召泽民赴阙，除国子司业，与修史。
现代文：至正三年朝廷修《辽史》、《金史》、《宋史》，召泽民赴任，授予国子司业，参与修史。
English: In the third year of the Taisho era, the imperial court revised the "History of Liao," "History of Jin" and "History of Song," called Ze Min to take office, awarded him the post of Secretary of State, and participated in the revision of history.

古文：书成，迁集贤直学士，阶太中大夫。
现代文：书成，调迁集贤直学士，官阶为大中大夫。
English: He was promoted to the rank of a junior high school doctor.

古文：未两月，即移书告老。大学士和尚曰： 集贤、翰林，实养老尊贤之地，先生何为遽去？愿少留，以副上意。 
现代文：不到两个月，就上书告老回乡，大学士和尚说： 集贤、翰林，实际是养老尊贤之地，先生为何要这么快就走；望少留，以符合皇上之意。 
English: Less than two months later, he sent a letter to his hometown to announce his retirement. The university scholar and monk said, "Jixian, Hanlin, is actually a place for the elderly to honor their elders. Why do you want to leave so soon? I want to stay a little longer to meet the emperor's wishes."

古文：泽民曰： 以布衣叨荣三品，志愿足矣。 
现代文：泽民说 ：以贫穷寒士叨光获三品之荣，志愿已足。 
English: Zemin said, "It is not enough to be a poor, cold-hearted person to win the honor of receiving three prizes.

古文：遂以嘉议大夫、礼部尚书致仕。
现代文：就以嘉议大夫、礼部尚书辞官退隐。
English: He retired from the priesthood with a letter of resignation from the post of doctor of commendation and the ministry of etiquette.

古文：既归田里，与门生故人相往返嬉游，超然若忘世者。
现代文：回到家乡以后与学生、好友往来游乐，超脱像忘了世事。
English: After returning to his hometown, he went on outings with students and friends and forgot about the world.

古文：十五年，蕲黄贼陷徽州，时泽民居宣州。
现代文：十五年，蕲黄反元义军陷落徽州，当时泽民居住宣州。
English: In the 15th year of the Heian period, when the rebels of the Yellow and Yuan Dynasties occupied Huizhou, Ze Min was living in Xuanzhou.

古文：已而贼来犯宣州，江东廉访使道童雅重泽民，日就之询守御计，城得无虞。
现代文：不久义军进攻宣州，江东廉访使道童访泽民，求得守城御敌之计，城得安全。
English: Soon after, the rebels attacked Xuanzhou. Jiangdong Liangzhu sent Tao Tong to visit Zemin to find a way to defend the city against the enemy, and the city was safe.

古文：明年，长枪军琐南班等叛，来寇城，或劝泽民去，泽民曰： 我虽无官守，故受国厚恩，临危爱死，非臣子节。 
现代文：第二年，长枪军琐南班等叛变，来劫城，有人劝泽民离开这儿。泽民说 ：我虽无官职，曾受到国家厚恩，临危怕死，非臣子之节操。 
English: The following year, the Zonan Battalion of the Long Rifle Corps mutinied and came to loot the city, and someone advised Zemin to leave.Zemen said: Although I have no official position, I have been favored by the state, I am afraid of death in the face of danger, and I am not a vassal.

古文：留不去，凡战斗筹画，多泽民参决之，累败贼兵。
现代文：留下未走，凡是战斗的谋划，大多是泽民参与决策，累败敌兵。
English: When it comes to battle planning, it is mostly Zemin who participates in decision-making and defeats the enemy soldiers.

古文：既而寇益众，城陷，泽民为所执。使之降，大骂不屈，遂遇害，年七十。
现代文：后来敌兵增多，城陷，泽民被捉，要他降，他大骂不屈，于是遇害，终年七十岁。
English: Later, the number of enemy soldiers increased, the city fell, and Zemin was captured. They wanted him to surrender, but he swore at them and refused to give in, so he was killed. He was seventy years old.

古文：事闻，赠资善大夫、江浙行中书省左丞，追封谯国郡公，谥文节。
现代文：朝廷闻知，赠资善大夫、江浙行中书省左丞，追封谯国郡公，谥号文节。
English: The imperial court heard about him, and he was given the titles of Zhen Dafu, Jiang Zhe Xing Zhongshuo Zuo Zheng, Sui Guo Guo Guo Guo, and his posthumous name was Wen Jie.

古文：干文传干文传，字寿道，平江人。
现代文：干文传字寿道，平江人。
English: He was a native of Pingjiang.

古文：祖宗显，宋承信郎。
现代文：祖父干宗显，是宋朝承信郎。
English: His grandfather, Gan Zongxian, was the Song Dynasty's Cheng Xin Lang.

古文：父雷龙，乡贡进士。
现代文：父亲干雷龙，是乡贡进士。
English: His father, Gan Lei Long, was a township gongjin.

古文：宗显之先世以武弁入官，而力教其子以文易武，故雷龙两举进士，宋亡，不及仕。
现代文：宗显的祖辈以武弁入官，而尽力教其子以文代武，所以雷龙是两次中举的进士，宋亡，未能做官。
English: The ancestors of Zongxian entered the government with Wu Ben, but they tried their best to teach their son to use Wen to replace Wu, so Lei Long was twice a junior high school student, Song died, and was unable to become an official.

古文：及生文传，乃名今名以期之。
现代文：待生文传，于是取今天之名，以示期望。
English: Therefore, the name of today was chosen to show the expectation.

古文：文传少嗜学，十岁能属文，未冠，已有声誉，用举者为吴及金坛两县学教谕、饶州慈湖书院山长。
现代文：文传幼年就好学，十岁能写文章，不到二十岁，已有较好的声誉，吴及金坛两县县学教谕、饶州慈湖书院山长都推举任用他。
English: Wenchuan was good at learning at an early age, could write articles at the age of ten, and had a good reputation by the age of twenty. Wu and Jintan, the two counties' education commissioners, and the president of the Cihu Academy in Raozhou all nominated and appointed him.

古文：仁守诏举进士，文传首登延祐二年乙科，授同知昌国州事，累迁长洲、乌程两县尹，升婺源知州，又知吴江州。
现代文：仁宗下诏实行科举，文传登延祐二年乙科进士第一，授同知昌国州事，后迁长州、乌程两县县尹，升婺源、吴江州知州。
English: Under Emperor Renzong, the imperial edict was issued to carry out the imperial examinations, and in the second year of Yan Yu's reign, Wen Chuan Deng Zhou was awarded the first place in the second subject of the imperial examinations, and was also awarded the first place in the second subject of the second subject of the second subject of the second subject of the second subject of the second subject of the second subject of the second subject of the second subject of the second subject of the second subject of the second subject of the second subject of the second subject.

古文：文传长于治剧，所至俱有善政。
现代文：文传善于处理繁难的事，在他为官的地方，政事都办得很好。
English: Wenchuan is good at dealing with difficult matters, and where he is in charge, government affairs are well managed.

古文：自其始至昌国，即能柔之以恩信，于是海岛之民，虽顽犷不易治，至有剽掠海中若化外然者，亦为之变俗。
现代文：开始到昌国，就能用恩信安抚百姓，海岛之民，虽强悍粗野，不易治理，甚至还有人像外国人一样在海中行劫，而文传却改变这种风俗。
English: When he arrived in Changguo, he was able to appease the people with his kindness. Although the people of the island were tough and rough, they were not easy to govern. There were even people who robbed in the sea like foreigners, but the legend changed this custom.

古文：初，长官强愎自恣，文传推诚以待之，久乃自屈服。
现代文：以往的长官是强愎放纵，文传则以诚相待，时间久了，他们终于自行屈服。
English: In the past, the officials were strong-willed and indulgent, while the literati treated each other with sincerity. After a long time, they finally succumbed on their own.

古文：盐场官方倚转运司势，虐使州民，家业破荡，文传语同列曰： 吾属受天子命，以牧此民，可坐视而弗之救乎！ 
现代文：盐场官方依仗转运司之势力，虐待州民，使他们家业破产。文传对同僚说 ：我们这辈人受天子之命，治理这些人民，可以坐视不救么？ 
English: The salt factory official, relying on the power of the transportation department, abused the people of the state and made their family business bankrupt. Wenchuan said to his colleagues: Our generation is commanded by the Son of Heaven to govern these people, can we just sit back and watch?

古文：乃亟为陈理，上官莫能夺，民赖以免。
现代文：于是极力陈述道理，上级不能驳倒，人民免遭虐待。
English: So they tried their best to present the truth, the superior could not refute it, and the people were spared from abuse.

古文：长洲为文传乡邑，文传徙榻公署，无事未尝辄出，而亲旧莫敢通私谒。
现代文：长洲是文传的家乡，文传移居公署后，无事很少出去，而亲戚故旧都不敢私自去见他。
English: Changzhou is Wenchuan's hometown. After Wenchuan moved to the public security bureau, he rarely went out for anything, and his relatives did not dare to go to see him privately.

古文：会创行助役法，凡民田百亩，令以三亩入官，为受役者之助。
现代文：适逢创行助役法，凡民之有田百亩的，须以三亩入官，以资助受役的人。
English: This coincided with the introduction of the Auxiliary Servant Law. Anyone with 100 mu of farmland was required to contribute 3 mu to the government in order to subsidize the servicemen.

古文：文传既专任其县事，而行省又以无锡州及华亭、上海两县之事诿焉。
现代文：文传既然专任该县之事，而行省又以无锡州及华亭、上海两县之事委托于他。
English: According to the legend, since he was exclusively in charge of the county, the province entrusted him with the affairs of Wuxi, Huating and Shanghai counties.

古文：文传谕豪家大姓，以腴田来归，而中人之家，自是不病于役。
现代文：他告知豪富，把肥沃之地田交官，而中等人家不再因役而困苦。
English: He told the rich and affluent to hand over their fertile lands to the government, while the middle class would no longer be burdened by service.

古文：其在乌程，有富民张甲之妻王，无子，张纳一妾于外，生子，未晬，王诱妾以儿来，寻逐妾，杀儿焚之。
现代文：他在乌程时，有富民张甲之妻王氏，无子，张在外纳妾，生子，未满周岁，王诱妾抱儿来，随即赶走妾，杀死婴儿，焚其尸体。
English: When he was on his way to Wuchang, Wang, the wife of Zhang Jia, a rich man, had no child, Zhang had a concubine abroad, and Wang had a child under the age of one. Wang lured the concubine to hold the child, then drove away the concubine, killed the baby, and burned the corpse.

古文：文传闻而发其事，得死儿余骨，王厚贿妾之父母，买邻家儿为妾所生，儿初不死。
现代文：文传得知此事，获得死儿余骨。王氏厚贿妾的父母，买邻家之儿做妾所生。文传令妾抱儿喂其乳，儿啼哭不吃，妾之父母吐实情。
English: When Wenchuan learned of this, he obtained the remains of the dead child. The Wang family bribed the parents of the concubine to buy the child of a neighboring family to be born as a concubine. Wenchuan ordered the concubine to hold the child and feed its milk, the child cried and did not eat, and the parents of the concubine told the truth.

古文：文传令妾抱儿乳之，儿啼不就乳，妾之父母吐实，乃呼邻妇至，儿见之，跃入其怀，乳之即饮，王遂伏辜。
现代文：于是，叫邻家妇人来，儿见她，跃入怀中，给他乳即吸。
English: So he called a neighbor woman, and when he saw her, he leapt into her arms and gave her milk to drink.

古文：丹徒县民有二弟共杀其姊者，狱久不决，浙西廉访司俾文传鞫之，既得其情，其母乞贷二子命，为终养计，文传谓二人所承有轻重，以首从论，则为首者当死，司官从之。
现代文：王氏只得认罪。丹徒县有兄弟二人共同杀害其姊，久久不能判决，浙西廉访司使文传审问，得到案情之后，其母为二子求饶，从养老考虑，文传说二人罪有轻有重，分别首恶与胁从，则为首的当处死，司官遵命执行。
English: Wang only had to plead guilty. In Dantu County, two brothers jointly killed their sister, and for a long time they could not be sentenced. The West Zhejiang Independent Investigation Department sent Wen Chuan to interrogate them. After getting the facts of the case, his mother begged for mercy for the two sons. From the perspective of old age, Wen Chuan said that the two had minor and serious crimes, respectively the first evil and coercion, and the first one should be put to death. The magistrate complied with the order.

古文：婺源之俗，男女婚聘后，富则渝其约，有育其女至老死不嫁者；亲丧，贫则不举，有停其柩累数世不葬者。
现代文：婺源乡俗，男女婚聘后，富了就毁约，有的生女至老死不嫁；父母死了，家穷不能办丧事，有的停柩数世不葬。
English: According to local customs, when a man and a woman get married, if they get rich, they will break the contract. Some women will not get married until they die of old age; when their parents die, the poor family cannot hold a funeral, and some will not be buried for several generations.

古文：文传下车，即召其耆老，使以礼训告之，阅三月而婚丧俱毕。
现代文：文传下车，召乡中耆老，让他们以礼训告诉大众，三个月后，婚丧之事都按礼训备办。
English: Wenchuan got out of the car, called the village elders, and asked them to tell the public with etiquette. Three months later, the wedding and funeral were prepared according to etiquette.

古文：宋大儒朱熹，上世居婺源，故业为豪民所占，子孙诉于有司，莫能直，文传谕其民以理，不烦穷治而悉归之。
现代文：宋大儒朱熹，祖居婺源，祖上家产被豪民占有，子孙向有司控告，未能判处，文传对其民讲理，未经审理就全部归还。
English: Zhu Xi, the great sage of the Song Dynasty, his ancestral residence, and his ancestral property were occupied by wealthy people. His children and grandchildren complained to the magistrate, but were not sentenced. Wenchuan reasoned with his people, and returned everything without a trial.

古文：复募好义者，即其故宅基建祠，俾朱氏世守焉。
现代文：又向好义者募捐，在其故宅基地上建祠，使朱氏世代守之。
English: He also solicited donations from well-wishers and built a shrine on the site of his former residence, which has been preserved by the Zhu family for generations.

古文：有富民江丙，出游京师，娶娼女张为妇，江既客死，张走数千里，返其柩以葬，前妻之子因苦之，既而杀之，瘗其尸山谷间。
现代文：有富民江丙，游览京师，娶娼妓张氏为妻，江离家死于外地，张奔走数千里，运回其棺到老家安葬。前妻之子觉得葬父是件苦事，不久就将张杀死，抛其尸于山谷中。
English: There was a rich man, Jiang He, who visited Beijing and married a prostitute named Zhang. Jiang died away from home, and Zhang traveled thousands of miles to bring his coffin back to his hometown for burial. The son of his ex-wife thought it was a hard job to bury his father, so he soon killed Zhang and dumped his body in the valley.

古文：官司知之，利其贿不问，文传乃发其事，而论如法。
现代文：官司知道后，因受贿不问，文传揭发了这件事，给以法办。
English: After the court found out, because the bribe was accepted without question, the matter was exposed by the media, and legal action was taken.

古文：文传莅官，其所设施多此类，故其治行往往为诸州县最。
现代文：文传任官，他的设施大多如此，所以他的政绩往往是诸州县中最好的。
English: Wenchuan appointed officials, his facilities are mostly so, so his political performance is often the best in Zhuzhou County.

古文：韩镛时佥浙西廉访司事，作《乌程谣》以纪其绩，论者谓其有古循吏之风。
现代文：韩镛当时任浙西廉访司佥事，写《乌程谣》记述其事，评论者认为文传有古代循吏的作风。
English: At that time, Han Zheng was the West Zhejiang Liangcheng, and wrote "Ucheng Rumors" to record the story. The commentator thought that the story had the style of ancient officials.

古文：至正三年，召赴阙，承诏预修《宋史》，书成，赏赉优渥，仍有旨四品以下各进一官。
现代文：至正三年，奉召赴朝廷任职，奉诏予修《宋史》，书成，奖赏优厚，四品以下者各进一官。
English: In the third year of the Taisho era, he was called to the imperial court to serve, and was ordered to revise "Song History," which was written and rewarded generously. Those with four or less awards were each promoted to a higher rank.

古文：擢文传集贤待制。
现代文：提升文传为集贤待制。
English: The promotion of literary biographies to a merit-based system.

古文：亡何，以嘉议大夫、礼部尚书致仕。
现代文：不久，以嘉议大夫、礼部尚书退隐。
English: Soon after, he retired from the priesthood with the titles of Doctor of the Congregation and Reverend.

古文：卒，年七十八。
现代文：终年七十八岁。
English: He died shortly afterwards, aged 78.

古文：文传气貌充伟，识度凝远，喜接引后进，考试江浙、江西乡闱，所取士后多知名。
现代文：文传长得魁伟，行为稳重，见识深远，喜欢接济和引导后生，江浙、江西乡考中的后生多知其名。
English: He has a great literary pedigree, steady behavior, far-reaching knowledge, and likes to help and guide the younger generation. The younger generation of Jiangsu, Zhejiang and Jiangxi townships in the middle of the examination know his name.

古文：为文务雅正，不事浮藻，其于政事为尤长云。
现代文：写文章力求雅正，不求浮藻，处理政事尤其见长。
English: Strive to be elegant in writing articles, do not seek floating algae, and are particularly good at dealing with political affairs.

古文：韩镛韩镛，字伯高，济南人。
现代文：韩镛字伯高，济南人。
English: Hanzhong Zi Baigao, from Jinan.

古文：延祐五年中进士第，授将仕郎、翰林国史院编修官，寻迁集贤都事。
现代文：延祐五年中进士，授予将仕郎、翰林国史编修官。不久，调迁集贤都事。
English: He was promoted to junior high school in the fifth year of the Enyu era, and was awarded the title of Shosheiro (general servant) and Kanrin (editor of national history).

古文：泰定四年，转国子博士，俄拜监察御史。
现代文：泰定四年调任国子博士，不久又拜监察御史。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Taiding, he was transferred to the position of Dr. Kuniko, and shortly after that, he was appointed as the inspector of imperial history.

古文：当时由进士入官者仅百之一，由吏致位显要者常十之九。
现代文：当时由进士入官的仅百分之一，由吏升至地位显要的人常占十分之九。
English: At that time, only one percent of the officers were promoted from the rank of sergeant to the rank of officer, and nine out of ten were promoted from the rank of officer to a prominent position.

古文：帝乃欲以中书参议傅岩起为吏部尚书，镛上言： 吏部掌天下铨衡，岩起从吏入官，乌足尽知天下贤才。
现代文：帝要以中书参议傅岩起为吏部尚书，镛奏于皇上说： 吏部管天下选举之事，岩起从吏入官，怎能知道天下的贤才。
English: The emperor wanted to appoint Fu Yanqi, a member of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC), as the Secretary of the General Staff. He said to the emperor: "The General Staff is in charge of the election of the whole country. How can I know the wise men of the world when I started as an official?"

古文：况尚书秩三品，岩起累官四品耳，于法亦不得升。 
现代文：何况尚书官列为三品，而岩起官为四品，按法规也不能升。 
English: What's more, Shang Shokan is classified as three products, while Iwaki is classified as four products, and cannot be upgraded according to regulations.

古文：制可其奏。
现代文：天子允其奏。
English: God willing, it will succeed.

古文：天历元年，除佥浙西廉访司事，击奸暴，黜贪墨，而特举乌程县尹干文传治行为诸县最，所至郡县，为之肃然。
现代文：天历元年，授浙西廉访司佥事，打击豪强暴徒，罢免贪赃，特别推举乌程县尹干文传的政绩是诸县之最，所到的郡县，对他都极尊敬。
English: In the first year of the calendar, the political achievements of Yin Gan Wenshuan of Wuching County, who was awarded the title of the most visited official in western Zhejiang, cracked down on violent thugs, and dismissed corrupt officials, and was specially elected, were the highest among all counties. All counties he visited had great respect for him.

古文：二年，转江浙财赋副总管。
现代文：二年，转江浙财赋副总管。
English: Two years later, he was transferred to the post of deputy director of Jiangsu and Zhejiang Finance.

古文：至正二年，除翰林侍讲学士，既而拜侍御史，以刚介为时所忌，言事者诬劾其赃私，乃罢去。
现代文：至顺元年拜国子司业，不久迁南行台治书侍御史。顺帝初年，历任宣徽及枢密院佥事，至正二年，授翰林侍讲学士，不久又拜任侍御史。因刚直被当时所忌，有人诬劾他贪赃，因而被罢官。
English: In the first year of Emperor Shun's reign, he was awarded the title of Imperial Prince, and shortly after that, he moved south to govern Taiwan. In the first year of Emperor Shun's reign, he was awarded the titles of Imperial Prince and Privy Councillor. In the second year of Emperor Shun's reign, he was awarded the title of Imperial Prince, and shortly after that, he was appointed as Imperial Prince. He was accused of corruption, and was removed from office.

古文：五年，台臣辨其诬，遂复起参议中书省事。
现代文：五年，台臣弄清他的冤案，再起用他为中书省参议。
English: Five years later, the Taizhen clarified his grievance, and he was reappointed as the counselor of the Chinese Ministry of Education.

古文：七年，朝廷慎选守令，参知政事魏中立言于帝： 当今必欲得贤守令，无加镛者。 
现代文：七年，朝廷慎选守令，参知政事魏中立对皇帝说： 当今要得到贤德的守令，没有再比镛好的了。 
English: In the seventh year, the imperial court carefully selected the guarding order, and Wei Zhonglian, the party secretary of the political affairs, said to the emperor: Today, if you want to get a virtuous guarding order, there is nothing better than the yakitori.

古文：帝乃特署镛姓名，授饶州路总管。
现代文：帝特别写下镛的姓名，授饶州路总管。
English: The emperor specially wrote down the name of Yao, and gave it to the general manager of Raozhou Road.

古文：饶之为俗尚鬼，有觉山庙者，自昔为妖以祸福人，为盗贼者事之尤至，将为盗，必卜之。
现代文：饶地习俗崇尚鬼，有个觉山庙，很久以来就是妖怪祸福骗人的地方，盗贼尤其信它，将行盗时，必去求卜。
English: Rao customs advocate ghosts, there is a Jue Shan Temple, which has long been a place where monsters, misfortune and fortune deceive people. Thieves especially believe in it, and when they are going to steal, they must go to pray.

古文：镛至，即撤其祠宇，沉土偶人于江。
现代文：镛到那里后，就将它拆毁。将泥偶沉于江中。
English: When he got there, he tore it down and sank the clay figurine in the river.

古文：凡境内淫祠有不合祀典者，皆毁之。人初大骇，已而皆叹服。
现代文：凡境内滥设的祠庙全都拆毁。开始时人们都大惊，不久都叹服。
English: All temples and shrines that had been built without permission in the territory were demolished. At first, people were shocked, but soon they were all impressed.

古文：镛知民可教，俾俊秀入学宫，求宿儒学行俱尊者，列为《五经》师，旦望必幅巾深衣以谒先圣，月必考订课试，以示劝励。
现代文：镛知道百姓可以教，使俊秀之人入学宫，聘儒学中品学兼优的人，任讲《五经》的老师，每月初一、十五一定头戴儒士头巾身穿士大夫服装向先圣孔子谒拜。每月进行考试，以表示劝学严格。
English: He knew that the common people could teach, so he enrolled talented people in the imperial palace, hired people with excellent grades in Confucianism, allowed teachers to teach the "Five Classics," and on the first and fifteenth day of every month, he wore a Confucian headscarf and dressed in a scholar's costume to worship Confucius. Examinations were held every month to show that he was strict in persuading people to study.

古文：每治政之暇，必延见其师生，与之讲讨经义，由是人人自力于学，而饶之以科第进者，视他郡为多。
现代文：每当理政闲暇，一定邀见师生，与他们讲讨经义，因此，大家都努力学习，因而饶州之地从科举考中者，比他郡人多。
English: Whenever Li Zheng is at leisure, he is sure to invite teachers and students to meet and discuss with them. Therefore, everyone works hard to study, so there are more people in Raozhou who are in the middle of the entrance examination than other counties.

古文：镛居官廨，自奉淡泊，僚属亦皆化之。
现代文：镛居官府，自己生活淡泊，僚属们也受感化。
English: They live in government offices, their own lives are dull, and their colleagues are also influenced by them.

古文：先是，朝使至外郡者，官府奉之甚侈，一不厌其所欲，即衔之，往往腾谤于朝，其出使于饶者，镛延见郡舍中，供以粝饭，退皆无有后言。
现代文：早先，朝廷使者到外地去，官府进献很多，一旦不能满足其所欲，就要怨恨，往往在朝廷诽谤，而对出使到饶州的使臣，镛在官舍中接见，供给粗食，走后也没有说什么的。
English: In the past, when imperial envoys went to foreign countries, the government made a lot of contributions. If they couldn't get what they wanted, they resented them and often slandered them in the imperial court. However, when the envoys were sent to Raozhou, they were received in the official residence and provided with coarse food, but nothing was said after they left.

古文：其后有旨以织币脆薄，遣使笞行省臣及诸郡长吏。
现代文：后来有旨说织币脆而薄，遣使臣去对省臣及各郡长吏施以笞刑。
English: Later, there was a rumor that the woven coins were brittle and thin, and an envoy was sent to punish provincial officials and county governors with flogging.

古文：独镛无预。
现代文：唯独与镛无关。
English: But it has nothing to do with cormorants.

古文：镛治政，虽细事，其详密多类此。
现代文：镛治理政事，尽管是小事，其细心都是如此。
English: This is true of his careful handling of government affairs, even if they are minor matters.

古文：十年，拜中书参知政事。
现代文：十年，拜中书参知政事。
English: Ten years later, Bai Zhongshu was appointed to the post of governor.

古文：十一年，丞相脱脱在位，而龚伯璲辈方用事，朝廷悉议更张，镛有言，不见听。
现代文：十一年，丞相脱脱在位，而龚伯遂之流正当权，朝廷都议论改革，不听镛之言。
English: In the eleventh year, the prime minister was removed from the throne, and the imperial court discussed reform, but did not listen to his words.

古文：人或以镛优于治郡，而执政非其所长，遂出为甘肃行省参知政事。
现代文：人们以为镛优于治郡，而管理大政非其所长，就让他出任甘肃行省参知政事。
English: People thought that he was better than the county magistrate, but he was not the director of the administration and politics, so he was appointed to the position of the Gansu provincial governor.

古文：及脱脱罢，用事者悉诛，而镛又独免祸。
现代文：待脱脱离任，当权的大臣都被杀，只有镛免了祸。
English: After he was removed from office, the ministers in power were all killed, and only he was spared.

古文：乃迁西行台中丞，殁于官。
现代文：调迁任西行台中丞，逝于任中。
English: He was transferred to the post of Saigyo Taichujo, and died while in office.

古文：李稷李稷，字孟豳，滕州人。
现代文：李稷字孟豳，滕州人。
English: Li Zhe, Meng Zhe, a native of Tengzhou.

古文：稷幼颖敏，八岁能记诵经史。
现代文：幼年聪明，思维敏捷。八岁能记诵经史。
English: Children are smart and quick-thinking. They can memorize and recite scriptures at the age of eight.

古文：从其父官袁州，师夏镇，又从官铅山，师方回孙。
现代文：跟随在袁州做官的父亲时，拜夏镇为师，又随父至铅山拜方回孙为师。
English: When he followed his father, who was an official in Yuanzhou, he learned from Baisha Town, and then he followed his father to Lead Mountain to learn from Baifang and Huizhong.

古文：镇、回孙皆名进士，长于《春秋》，稷兼得其传。
现代文：镇、回孙都是著名的进士，长于《春秋》，李稷兼得他们各方面的教导。
English: Zhen and Hui Sun are both famous scholars. They are better than "Spring and Autumn," and Li Qiye has learned from them in all aspects.

古文：泰定四年，中进士第，授淇州判官。
现代文：泰定四年中进士，授予淇州判官。
English: Tai Ding was promoted to a scholar in four years, and was awarded the title of judge of Qizhou.

古文：淇当要冲，稷至，能理其剧。
现代文：淇地当要冲，稷至后，能治理繁多的事务。
English: It can manage a wide range of affairs when it is time to rush and when it is time to wait.

古文：岁大饥，告于朝堂以赈之，民获以苏。
现代文：该年饥荒，禀告朝廷赈济，民获救，元气复苏。
English: In that year, there was a famine, and the people appealed to the imperial court for aid. They were rescued and their spirits revived.

古文：游民尚安儿，饮博亡赖，稷疑其为非，督弓兵擒之，果盗邻村王甲家财，与其党五人俱伏辜。
现代文：游民尚安儿是个无赖之徒，饮酒赌博，稷怀疑他为非作歹，令弓兵逮捕他，果然他偷盗邻村王甲的东西，与其同党五人皆伏罪。
English: The wanderer, Shang An'er, was a ruffian who drank and gambled. When he was suspected of doing something wrong, he ordered the archers to arrest him. As it turned out, he had stolen something from the neighboring village of Wang Jia, and all five of his party members were arrested.

古文：调海陵县丞，亦有能声。
现代文：调任海陵县丞，也因善于治理政务而有名声。
English: He was transferred to the position of Hailing County magistrate, and was also famous for his ability to manage government affairs.

古文：入为翰林国史院编修官，擢御史台照磨。
现代文：进京任翰林国史院编修官，提拔为御史台照磨。
English: Entered Beijing as an editor-in-chief of the Hanlin Academy of National History, and was promoted to the position of chief historian.

古文：至正初，出为江南行台监察御史，迁都事，又入为监察御史。
现代文：至正初年，出任江南行省监察御史，迁调都事，又进京任监察御史。
English: In the first year of the Taisho era, he served as the inspector-general of the south of the Yangtze River, was transferred to the capital, and then went to Beijing as the inspector-general.

古文：劾奏阉宦高龙卜恃赖恩私，侵挠朝政，擅作威福，交通时相，请谒公行，为国基祸，乞加窜逐，以正邦刑。
现代文：弹劾宦官高龙卜依仗皇恩，干扰朝政，作威作福，交接宰相托请求见，为国家的祸根，请求放逐出宫廷，以正国法。
English: The impeachment of eunuch Gao Longbu, relying on the imperial favor, interfering in the government of the dynasty, acting as a tyrant and a blessing, requesting to see the prime minister, and being the bane of the country, requesting to be expelled from the court, to be the law of the land.

古文：章上，流高龙卜于征东。
现代文：奏章上，流放高龙卜于征东。
English: In the score, Gao Longbu is exiled to conquer the East.

古文：又言： 御史封事，须至御前开拆，以防壅蔽之患。
现代文：又说： 御史上书奏事，须到御前开拆，以防蒙蔽之患。
English: He also said, "In the matter of the historical record, it is necessary to open and tear it open in front of the emperor in order to prevent the danger of being blinded."

古文：言事官须优加擢用，以开谏诤之路。
现代文：言事官须优加选用，以广开谏诤言路。
English: The speech officials should be well-selected to open up the path of speech.

古文：殿中侍御史、给事中、起居注，须任端人直士，书百司奏请，及帝所可否，月达省台，付史馆，以备纂修之实。 
现代文：殿中侍御史、给事中、起居注，须正直人士任，他们写百司奏请，及帝可否之意，应一个月内到达省台，交付史馆，以备纂修之用。 
English: Honest people should be appointed to serve the Emperor in the palace, and they should write down the Emperor's request and whether or not the Emperor can accept it. They should arrive at the provincial capital within one month and deliver it to the history museum for compilation and revision.

古文：承天护圣寺火，有旨更作，乃上言： 水旱相仍，公私俱乏，不宜妄兴大役。 
现代文：承天护圣寺火灾，皇帝降旨重建，稷启奏说 ：火旱之灾不断，国库和私人都亏乏，不宜随便大兴土木。 
English: After the fire at the Temple of Heaven's Protection, the emperor decreed that it should be rebuilt. He said, "The fire and drought continue, the national treasury and private people are in short supply, and it is not appropriate to carry out large-scale civil engineering.

古文：议遂寝。
现代文：重建承天护圣寺之事终止。
English: The discussion then came to an end.

古文：会朝廷方注意守令，因言： 下县尹多从吏部铨注，或非其才，宜并归省选。
现代文：适逢朝廷正注意守令，稷乘此时机上书说 ：下面的县尹多是从吏部考核输送的，可能并不是人才，应归于省选。
English: At a time when the imperial court was paying attention to keeping its orders, Zou took advantage of this time to write a letter on the plane saying: The following county Yin Duo was transported from the personnel department assessment, may not be a talent, should be attributed to the provincial election.

古文：茶盐铁课，责备长吏，动受刑谴，何以临民，宜分委佐贰。
现代文：茶盐铁的课税，责备长吏，动辄让他们受刑，这叫他们如何去管理百姓，应委任副手辅助。
English: The taxation of tea, salt, and iron, the reproach of officials, and the frequent punishment of them, require that they should appoint deputies to assist them in governing the people.

古文：投下达鲁花赤，蠹政害民，宜为佐贰。 
现代文：投下达鲁花赤，害政害民，应做副手辅助。 
English: Those who cast the red lotus and harm politics and harm the people should serve as deputy assistants.

古文：帝悉可其奏。
现代文：帝皆准其奏。
English: The emperor allowed them to play.

古文：迁中书左司都事，又四迁为户部尚书。
现代文：迁调中书左司都事，又四次迁为户部尚书。
English: He was transferred four times to the Household Division of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：十一年，廷议以中原租税不实，将履亩起税，稷诣都堂言曰： 方今妖寇窃发，民庶流亡，此政一行，是驱民为盗也。 
现代文：十一年，朝廷议论中原地区租税不实，将实行按亩起税，稷到都堂说 ：现在妖寇发生了，庶民流亡，此政一行，是驱民去做盗贼。 
English: In the eleventh year, the imperial court argued that the tax in the Central Plains region was not true and would be implemented according to the tax per mu, and it came to the capital saying: Now the yakuza have occurred, the common people have fled, and this political party is driving the people to become thieves.

古文：相臣是之。
现代文：相臣们认为他说得对。
English: His peers think he is right.

古文：寻参议中书省事，俄迁治书侍御史。
现代文：不久任中书省参议，后调治书侍御史。
English: He was soon appointed as a councillor of the Ministry of Education and Culture, and later he was appointed as the Minister of Education and Culture.

古文：十二年，从丞相脱脱出师征徐州，徐既平，谒告归滕州，迁曾祖父以下十七丧，序昭穆以葬，敕赐碑树焉。
现代文：十二年随丞相脱脱出师征讨徐州。平定叛乱后，告假返归滕州，迁葬曾祖父以下十七位丧者，按父子远近安葬，朝廷赐碑树立。
English: In the twelfth year, he followed the chancellor to recruit Xuzhou. After quelling the rebellion, he returned to Tengzhou on leave, moved the funeral of seventeen mourners from his great-grandfather onwards, buried them according to the distance between father and son, and erected a monument given by the court.

古文：既而召为詹事丞，除侍御史，俄迁中书参知政事。
现代文：不久召为詹事丞，升侍御史，不久迁中书参知政事。
English: He was soon called Zhan Zhi Rong, promoted to the position of imperial secretary of history, and soon moved to the position of vice-minister of politics.

古文：皇太子受册，摄大礼使，遂除枢密副使。
现代文：皇太子受封，稷代理管大礼的职务，就授予枢密副使。
English: When the crown prince is enthroned, the post of acting regent is given to the deputy minister of the privy council.

古文：帝躬祀郊庙，摄太常少卿，寻复为侍御史，又为中书参知政事，俄升资善大夫、御史中丞，寻特加荣禄大夫。
现代文：帝亲自在郊庙祭祀，稷代理太常少卿，不久复任侍御史，又任中书参知政事，不久升资善大夫、御史中丞，不久特加荣禄大夫。
English: The emperor himself held a religious service in the suburb temple, and was appointed acting Taizang Shaoqing, and soon he was reappointed as the attendant of the imperial historian, and also appointed as the middle secretary of the government, and soon he was promoted to the senior doctor, the middle secretary of the imperial historian, and soon he was promoted to the senior doctor of the imperial historian.

古文：至正十九年，丁母忧，两起复，为陕西行省左丞、枢密副使，乞终制，不起。
现代文：至正十九年，母丧。两次起任为陕西行省左丞、枢密副使，请求守满三年孝，不要起用。
English: In the 19th year of the Heian period, after his mother's death, he was twice appointed to the post of provincial commissar of Shaanxi and vice-minister of the privy council. He requested that he should not be appointed until he had completed three years of filial piety.

古文：服阕，命为大都路总管，兼大兴府尹，除副詹事。
现代文：服孝期满，命为大都路总管，兼大兴府尹，授副詹事。
English: At the end of the period of filial piety, he was appointed as the general manager of Datu Road, concurrently Daxingfu Yin, and awarded the deputy Zhanji.

古文：二十四年，出为陕西行台中丞，未行，改山东廉访使。
现代文：二十四年，出任山西行台中丞，未上任，又改任山东廉访使。
English: In 1924, he assumed the post of Shanxi Guotai Junior Middle Officer, but before taking up the post, he was reassigned to the post of Shandong Independent Envoy.

古文：得疾，上章致仕，还京师。卒，年六十一。
现代文：因病上书辞官，回京师。去世时六十一岁。
English: Due to illness, he returned to Beijing to teach calligraphy. He was 61 years old at the time of his death.

古文：赠推忠赞理正宪功臣、集贤大学士、荣禄大夫、柱国，追封齐国公，谥文穆。
现代文：赠推忠赞理正宪功臣、集贤大学士、荣禄大夫、柱国，追封齐国公，谥号文穆。
English: He was awarded the title of "Qi Guo Guo Guo" (Qi Guo Guo Guo) and the posthumous title of "Wen Mu" (Wen Mu).

古文：稷为人孝友恭俭，廉慎忠勤，处家严而有则，与人交，一以诚恪，尤笃于乡党朋友之谊。中丞任择善、陈思谦既没，皆抚其遗孤，人以是多之。
现代文：稷为人尊老爱幼，谦恭俭让，廉洁谨慎，忠君勤奋，处家事严谨而有规范，与人交往，一贯以诚恪守，尤其忠于故乡朋友的友谊，中丞任择善、陈思谦去世后，稷抚养了他们的遗孤，因此人多称赞他。
English: Zou respected elders and loved children, was humble and frugal, honest and prudent, loyal and diligent, dealt with family affairs in a strict and standardized manner, interacted with people, always adhered to sincerity, and was especially loyal to the friendship of friends in his hometown. After the death of Chen Siqian, Zou raised their orphans, so many people praised him.

古文：出入台省者二十年，始卒无疵，为时名卿云。
现代文：出入台省二十年，始终无任何疵点，是当时著名公卿。
English: He had been in and out of Taiwan Province for twenty years, without any blemish, and was a famous courtier at the time.

古文：盖苗盖苗，字耘夫，大名元城人。幼聪敏好学，善记诵，及弱冠，游学四方，艺业大进。
现代文：盖苗字耘夫，大名元城人，幼年聪明，思维敏捷好学，善于记诵，二十岁游学四方，学业大有长进。
English: Gai Miao Zhiwu, a famous man from Yuancheng, was clever at a young age, quick-thinking and eager to learn, good at memorizing and reciting, traveled to four places to study at the age of twenty, and made great progress in his studies.

古文：延祐五年，登进士第，授济宁路单州判官。
现代文：延祐五年授济宁路单州判官。
English: He was awarded the Jining Road Shanzhou Magistrate for five years.

古文：州多系囚，苗请疏决之。知州以为囚数已上，部使者未报，不可决。
现代文：州狱中囚徒太多，苗请求审理处决，知州认为囚犯人数已上报，刑部的使者未通知，不可处决。
English: There were too many prisoners in the state prison, Miao requested a hearing on the execution, Zhizhou believed that the number of prisoners had been reported, and the criminal department's envoy had not been notified, and could not be executed.

古文：苗曰： 设使者有问，请身任其责。 
现代文：苗说： 假如使者有疑问，由我负责。 
English: Miao said, "If the envoy has any questions, I'll take care of it."

古文：知州乃勉从之，使者果阅牍而去。
现代文：知州只得同意，而使者来看看档案就走了。
English: Chizhou had to agree, and the emissary went to look at the file and left.

古文：岁饥，白郡府，未有以应。会他邑亦以告，郡府遣苗至户部以请，户部难之，苗伏中书堂下，出糠饼以示曰： 济宁民率食此，况不得此食者尤多，岂可坐视不救乎！ 
现代文：这年饥荒，呈报郡府，没有答复，不久其他邑也告急，郡府遣苗到户部请求救济，户部为难，苗伏于中书堂下，拿出糠饼说： 济宁百姓都吃这个，何况连这种饼子也吃不到的还多得很，难道见死不救么？ 
English: This year's famine was reported to the county government, but there was no response. Soon, other towns were also in a hurry. The county government sent seedlings to the household department to request relief. The household department was in trouble. Miao, crouching under the middle school hall, took out a cake and said, "The people of Jining all eat this, and what's more, there are still a lot of people who can't even eat this kind of cake. Can't you see that you can't be saved?

古文：因泣下，时宰大悟，凡被灾者，咸获赈焉。
现代文：说完泪下，宰臣恍然大悟，凡受灾的都得到赈济。
English: After saying this, with tears in his eyes, Zaisen suddenly realized that everyone affected by the disaster would receive relief.

古文：有官粟五百石陈腐，以借诸民，期秋熟还官。
现代文：有五百担陈腐的官粟，借给百姓，秋熟时偿还。
English: There are five hundred tons of stale official millet, lent to the people, to be repaid when ripe.

古文：及秋，郡责偿甚急，部使者将责知州，苗曰： 官粟实苗所贳，今民饥不能偿，苗请代还。 
现代文：秋熟时，郡里要求偿还很急，户部的使者怪罪知州，苗说： 官粟实际是我借出去的，现在百姓饥饿不能偿还，苗请求代还。 
English: At the time of autumn ripening, the county demanded repayment very urgently. The emissary of the household department blamed Chizhou. Miao said: I actually lent out the official poppy. Now the people are starving and cannot repay it. Miao requested to return it.

古文：使者乃已其责。
现代文：使者也就不再责备了。
English: And the messenger ceased to rebuke.

古文：单州税粮，岁输馆陶仓，距单五百余里，载驮担负，民甚苦之，春犹未足。
现代文：单州税粮，每年都要运送到馆陶仓库，距单州五百余里，百姓肩挑背驮，非常之苦，直至春季，还不能运完。
English: Every year, the tax grain from Shanzhou is transported to the Museum of Ceramics warehouse, more than 500 miles away from Shanzhou. It is very difficult for the people to carry it, and it can not be completed until the spring.

古文：是秋，馆陶大熟，苗先期令民籴粟仓下，十月初，仓券已至，省民力什之五。
现代文：这年秋季，馆陶丰收，苗提前让百姓在仓库近处买下粮食，十月初，仓库券已到，民力节省十分之五。
English: In the autumn of this year, the rich harvest of Guantao began, and the seedlings allowed the people to buy grain near the warehouse in advance. At the beginning of October, the warehouse voucher had arrived, saving five-tenths of the people's power.

古文：辟御史台掾，除山东廉访司经历，历礼部主事，擢江南行台监察御史。
现代文：朝廷召苗任御史台辅佐，拜山东廉访司经历，任礼部主事，提升为江南行台监察御史。
English: The imperial court appointed Miao Miao as the assistant of the Imperial Historian's Office, and he was promoted to the position of the inspector of the Imperial Historian's Office in the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：建言严武备以备不虞，简兵卒以壮国势，全功臣以隆大体，惜官爵以清铨选，考实行以抑奔竞，明赏罚以杜奸欺，计利害以孚民情，去民贼以崇礼节。
现代文：建议整饬武备，以备预料不到的事发生，精简兵卒，以壮国威，保全功臣以隆盛国之大体，珍惜官爵以澄清吏治，考核实际行为以抑制为名为利而奔走竞争，明令赏罚以杜绝欺诈行为，讲清利害以示信于民，清除民贼以尊崇国家礼节。
English: It is suggested that the armed forces should be reorganized to prepare for unforeseen events, the soldiers should be streamlined to strengthen the national prestige, the heroes should be preserved to ensure the prosperity of the country as a whole, the officials and nobles should be cherished to clarify the leadership, the actual behavior should be evaluated to restrain and benefit the competition, the rewards and punishments should be made clear to prevent fraudulent behavior, the interests should be clarified to show faith in the people, and the thieves should be eliminated to respect the national etiquette.

古文：皆切于时务，公论韪之。
现代文：所有这些，都切中当时国计民生的需要，公论对此都称善。
English: All of these were in line with the needs of the national economy and people's livelihood at that time, and the public opinion praised them.

古文：天历初，文宗诏以建康潜邸为佛寺，务穷壮丽，毁民居七十余家，仍以御史大夫督其役。
现代文：天历初年，文宗下诏，以他在建康即位前的住所为佛寺，要求建造得极端壮丽，需毁居民住宅七十余家，让御史大夫负责监督此项修建工程。
English: In the first year of the calendar, Emperor Wenzong issued an edict that his residence before the enthronement of Emperor Jiankang should be used as a Buddhist temple, demanding that it be built to an extremely magnificent standard, that more than seventy residences should be destroyed, and that the Grand Historian should be put in charge of overseeing the construction project.

古文：苗上封事曰： 臣闻使民以时，使臣以礼，自古未有不由斯道而致隆平者。
现代文：苗上奏文章说 ：臣听说使用百姓要适时，使用臣子要按礼节，自古以来没有不是依这条道路而达到社会兴旺和安定的。
English: Miao Shangso's article said: "The minister heard that the use of the people should be timely, and the use of the minister should be in accordance with etiquette. Since ancient times, it has not been possible to achieve social prosperity and stability without following this path.

古文：陛下龙潜建业之时，居民困于供给，幸而获睹今日之运，百姓跂足举首，以望非常之恩。
现代文：陛下即位前居住建业之时，居民供给困难，幸能见到今日之昌盛，百姓踮脚翘首盼望得到格外的恩典。
English: When His Majesty was living and building before his accession to the throne, the supply of residents was difficult. Fortunately, we can see today's prosperity, and the people are stomping their feet and looking forward to receiving special grace.

古文：今夺农时以创佛寺，又废民居，使之家破产荡，岂圣人御天下之道乎？
现代文：现在要违农时而建佛寺，又要毁民宅，使他们破家荡产，这是圣人治理天下的方略么？
English: Now they want to build a Buddhist temple against the farmers, and destroy people's houses, so that they go bankrupt. Is this the strategy of a saint to govern the world?

古文：昔汉高帝兴于丰、沛，为复两县，光武中兴南阳，免税三年，既不务此，而隆重佛氏，何以满斯民之望哉！
现代文：昔日汉高祖兴兵于丰、沛，为两县免除赋税，光武帝中兴南阳免税三年。如今不这样做，而要将佛寺看重，怎样满足百姓的希望呢？
English: In the past, Emperor Gaozong of the Han Dynasty exempted the two counties of Yufeng and Pei from paying taxes, and Emperor Guangwu exempted Nanyang from paying taxes for three years. Today, instead of doing this, we should value Buddhist temples. How can we satisfy the hopes of the people?

古文：且佛以慈悲为心，方便为教，今尊佛氏而害生民，无乃违其方便之教乎？
现代文：况且佛以慈悲为心，方便为教，今天要尊佛而害百姓，不是违背佛家的方便之教了么？
English: Moreover, the Buddha took compassion as his heart and convenience as his teaching. Today, we should respect the Buddha and harm the people. Isn't this a violation of the convenience teaching of the Buddhists?

古文：台臣职专纠察，表正百司，今乃委以修缮之役，岂其礼哉？ 
现代文：台臣的职责是专管纠察，表扬或纠正百官，现在委托他修缮的任务，符合礼的要求么？ 
English: The duty of a Taiwanese minister is to be in charge of picketing, praising or correcting officials. Is the task of repairing entrusted to him now in line with the requirements of etiquette?

古文：书奏，御史大夫果免督役。
现代文：奏章上后，果然免去御史大夫监督修缮的任务。
English: After the publication of the score, the task of supervising the repair by the Imperial Historian was indeed exempted.

古文：入为监察御史。
现代文：入朝任监察御史。
English: Entered the Imperial Court as Inspector-General of History.

古文：文宗幸护国仁王寺，泛舟玉泉，苗进曰： 今频年不登，边隅不靖，政当恐惧修省，何暇逸游，以临不测之渊乎？ 
现代文：文宗驾临护国仁王寺，泛舟玉泉，苗进言说 ：现已几年农田收成不好，边境又不安定，处理政事应该谨慎，要修身反省，哪有闲暇游逸，以此面对不测之渊？ 
English: Wenzong drove to Guojin Wang Temple, the boat ride to Jade Spring, and Miao Jinyan said, "For several years now, the farmland harvest has been poor, the border is unstable, the handling of political affairs should be cautious, and self-cultivation and reflection should be carried out. Is there any leisure time to face the abyss of the unforeseen?

古文：帝嘉纳之，赐以对衣上尊，即日还宫。
现代文：帝高兴地采纳了这个意见，赐予对衣和美酒，当天回宫。
English: The emperor happily accepted this suggestion, bestowed the matching clothes and wine, and returned to the palace the same day.

古文：台臣拟苗佥淮东廉访司事，以闻，帝曰： 仍留盖御史，朕欲闻其谠言也。 
现代文：台臣让苗任淮东廉访司之事启奏皇上，帝说： 仍然留下盖御史，朕要听听他正直善良的话。 
English: The Taiwanese minister let Miao Ren Huadong Lian visit the emperor, and the emperor said: I still want to listen to his honest and kind words.

古文：以丁外艰去，免丧，除太禧宗禋院都事。
现代文：盖苗因父丧回乡，免于服丧，任太禧院都事。
English: Because of his father's death, Gai Miao returned to his hometown and was exempted from mourning. He was assigned to work at the Imperial Palace.

古文：中书檄苗行视河道，还言： 河口淤塞，今苟不治，后日必为中原大患。 
现代文：中书行文令苗视察河道，他视察回来说： 河道口淤塞，现在如不治理，日后必定是中原的大患。 
English: He inspected the river and said, "If we do not control the silting at the mouth of the river, it will be a big problem in the Central Plains in the future."

古文：都水难之，事遂寝。
现代文：但疏浚河道的事并未办成。
English: However, the dredging of the river has not been completed.

古文：至正初，用荐者知亳州，修学宫，完州廨。
现代文：至元元年，任亳州知州时，修建学宫和州官署。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, when he was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou, he built a school palace and a state government office.

古文：有豪强占民田为己业，民五十余人诉于苗，苗讯治之，豪民咸自引服。
现代文：有豪强霸占民田归己，民五十余人向苗控告，苗进行审讯，豪民都服。
English: A powerful tyrant took over the people's farmland and turned it over to himself. More than 50 people complained to Miao, Miao held a trial, and the powerful people all complied.

古文：苗曰： 尔等罪甚重，然吾观皆有改过意。 遂从轻议。
现代文：苗说： 你们的罪很重，然而看到你们有改过之意，就从轻发落。 
English: Miao said, "Your sins are very serious. However, when I saw that you had the intention to make amends, I let you off lightly.

古文：至元四年，起为左司都事，在左司仅十八日，凡决数百事。
现代文：后至元四年出任左司都事，在左司仅十八天，就解决处理事情数百件。
English: In the first four years after the founding of the People's Republic of China, he served as the Secretary of the Left for Capital Affairs. In just 18 days, he resolved and handled hundreds of cases.

古文：丁内忧，宰相惜其去，重赙之。
现代文：因母丧，宰相不忍他离去，重重地给了他一笔治丧费。
English: Due to his mother's death, the prime minister could not bear for him to leave and gave him a large sum of money for funeral expenses.

古文：至正二年，起为户部郎中，俄擢御史台都事，御史大夫欲以故人居言路，苗曰： 非其才也。 
现代文：至正二年，起任户部郎中，不久提拔为御史台都事，御史大夫欲以其故友为谏官，苗说： 他无谏官之才。 
English: In the second year of the Taisho era, he was appointed as a junior member of the household department, and was soon promoted to the head of the history department. The chief historian wanted to make his old friend a eunuch, and Miao said, "He does not have the talent to be a eunuch."

古文：大夫不悦而起，其晚，邀至私第以谢，人两贤之。
现代文：大夫不高兴地站起来走了。当晚邀他到家中道歉，人们称他们为贤良。
English: Unhappy, the doctor got up and left. That night, he was invited to his home to apologize. People called them virtuous.

古文：出为山东廉访副使。
现代文：出任山东廉访副使。
English: He was appointed as the deputy envoy of Shandong Clean Visit.

古文：益都、淄、莱地旧称产金，朝廷建一府六所综其事，民岁买金以输官，至是六十年矣。民有忤其官长意，辄谓所居地有金矿，掘地及泉而后止。猾吏为奸利，莫敢谁何。
现代文：益都、淄、莱原是产金之地，朝廷建一府六所总管其事，民每天要买金交给官府，至此已六十年了，如果民有对官长不恭，就说他住的地方有金矿，掘地至出泉水为止，狡猾之吏从中渔利，谁也不敢说。
English: Yiwu, Handan and Laiyuan are gold-producing areas. The imperial court has built six head offices to be in charge of their affairs. The people have to buy gold every day to give to the government. It has been sixty years. If the people are disrespectful to the officials, they will say that there is a gold mine where he lives, digging the ground until the spring water comes out, and the cunning officials will profit from it. No one dares to say.

古文：苗建言罢之。
现代文：苗提出意见后作罢。
English: After Miao put forward his opinions, it was abandoned.

古文：三年，入为户部侍郎。
现代文：三年，入朝任户部侍郎。
English: Three years later, he entered the imperial court as a retainer of the household.

古文：四年，由都水监迁刑部尚书。
现代文：四年，由都水监调任刑部尚书。
English: Four years later, he was transferred from the Metropolitan Water Supervisor to the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：初，盗杀河南省宪官，延坐五百余家，已有诏除首罪外，余从原宥。
现代文：当初，盗贼杀河南省长官，株连五百余户，皇上已下诏：除罪首外，其余赦罪。
English: At first, the thieves killed the governor of Henan Province, and more than five hundred households were affected. The emperor had issued an edict: In addition to the criminal, the rest would be pardoned.

古文：至是，宰臣追复欲尽诛戮，苗坚持不可。御史趣具狱，苗曰： 肆赦复杀，在法所无，御史独宜劾苗，其敢累朝廷之宽仁乎！ 
现代文：到这时，宰臣又要全都处死，苗坚持不可，御史很快立案，苗说 ：赦罪人又要杀他在法律上是没有的，御史只弹劾我盖苗，怎敢损害朝廷的宽厚仁爱！ 
English: At this time, the Vice-Minister also wanted to execute all of them. Miao could not insist, and the Imperial Historian quickly filed a case. Miao said, "There is no legal basis for pardoning a criminal and then killing him. The Imperial Historian only impeached me, Gai Miao. How dare he damage the generous benevolence of the Imperial Court!"

古文：卒用苗议，罢之。
现代文：终于依从了苗的意见。
English: He finally followed Miao's advice.

古文：出为山东廉访使，民饥为盗，所在群聚，乃上救荒弭盗十二事，劾宣慰使骫骳不法者。
现代文：出任山东廉访使，民因饥而为盗，并到处聚集成群，他上书朝廷提出救荒以消除盗贼的十二条建议，弹劾宣慰使枉法行为。
English: He was appointed as the Shandong Corrupt Envoy. People were stealing because of hunger and gathered in groups everywhere. He submitted a letter to the imperial court to propose twelve suggestions to relieve the famine and eliminate the thieves. He was impeached for preaching consolation and committing illegal acts.

古文：有司援例欲征苗所得职田，苗曰： 年荒民困，吾无以救，尚忍征敛以肥己耶！ 
现代文：官府按例要为苗征收所得职田的赋税，苗说 ：年荒民困，我没有办法救他们，还忍心征敛来肥自己么！ 
English: As usual, the government wants to collect the tax on Miao's income from the labor field. Miao said: "The people are in dire straits. I have no way to save them. Do I still have the heart to collect taxes to enrich myself?"

古文：辄命已之。同僚皆无敢取。召参议中书省事。
现代文：就命停征，同僚们都没有一个敢去征田的，召入朝任参议中书省事。
English: On his orders, the conscription was suspended, and none of his colleagues dared to go to requisition the fields, so he was called into the Council of Elders to mediate.

古文：五年，出为陕西行台侍御史，迁陕西行省参知政事。
现代文：五年，出任陕西行台侍御史，迁陕西省参知政事。
English: In five years, he served as the governor of Shaanxi Province and the governor of Taiwan, and moved to Shaanxi Province.

古文：六年，复入为治书侍御史，升侍御史，寻拜中书参知政事、同知经筵事。
现代文：六年，再进京任治书侍御史，升侍御史，不久拜中书参知政事、同知经筵事。
English: Six years later, he returned to Beijing and was appointed to the post of secretary of the Imperial Household Agency, and was promoted to the post of secretary of the Imperial Household Agency. Soon after, he was appointed to the post of chushushinsansanchisangisangisangisangisangisangisangisangisangisangisangisangisangisangisangisangisangisangisangisangisangisangisangisangisangisangisangisangisangisangisangisangisangisangisangisangisangisangisangisangisangisangisangisangisangisangisangisang

古文：大臣以两京驰道狭隘，奏毁民田庐广之，已遣使督有司治之矣，苗执曰： 驰道创自至元初，何今日独为隘乎！ 
现代文：大臣以两京之间的驰道狭窄，启奏皇上要毁民田扩宽，已派遣使臣监督有司办理，苗坚持说： 驰道始创于至元初年，为何只在今天感到狭窄？ 
English: The minister pointed out that the road between the two capitals was narrow and said that the emperor wanted to destroy and expand the people's fields. He had sent an envoy to supervise the process. Miao insisted: The road was created in the first year of the Yuan Dynasty. Why do you only feel it is narrow today?

古文：力辩，乃罢。
现代文：他力争才作罢。
English: He's just trying to get by.

古文：又欲宿卫士悉出为郡长官，俾以养贫，苗议曰： 郡长所以牧民，岂养贫之地哉？
现代文：朝廷欲以卫士官出任郡之长官，使他们能养贫，苗议论说 ：郡长是治理百姓的，并不是养贫之地。
English: The imperial court wanted to appoint guardsmen as county governors, so that they could alleviate poverty. Miao argued: county governors govern the people, and are not there to alleviate poverty.

古文：果有不能自存，赐之钱可也。
现代文：果然有不能生存的，赐予他们钱就可以了。
English: Of course, there are people who can't survive, so just give them money.

古文：若任郡寄，必择贤才而后可。 
现代文：如任郡长官也必然选择贤才。 这件事也作罢。
English: If you are a county magistrate, you are bound to choose a wise man, so let it be.

古文：于是时相顾谓僚佐曰： 所以引盖君至枢机者，欲其相助也，乃每事相抗，何耶？今后有公务，毋白参政。 
现代文：朝廷又要以万贯钞给予角抵者，苗说 ：多处地方报告饥荒，受不到赈济抚恤，角抵的人有何功劳，获此重赏？ 宰相对左右僚臣说 ：之所以引荐盖君来参与机务，是要他当助手，奈何每件事都相抗，这是为何？今后有公务，不要告诉他。 
English: The imperial court also wanted to give million-yuan banknotes to those who arrived at the corner, Miao said: many localities reported famine and did not receive relief subsidies. What was the merit of those who arrived at the corner and received this reward? The prime minister said to his left and right ministers: the reason for introducing Gaijun to participate in the mechanism was to have him as an assistant, but why do they oppose everything? In the future, if you have official duties, don't tell him.

古文：苗叹曰： 猥以非才，待罪执政，中书之事，皆当与闻，今宰相言若此，不退何俟？ 
现代文：苗叹息说 ：我本不才，待罪执政，中书之事，都应知道，今宰相既这么说，不退隐，待何时？ 
English: Miao sighed and said, "I'm not good at this, I want to stay in power until I'm convicted of a crime. I should know everything about the book. Now that the prime minister has said this, I won't retire, when will I stay?"

古文：将引去，而适有旨拜江南行台御史中丞。然宰臣怒苗终不解，比至，即除甘肃行省左丞，时苗已致仕归田里矣。时宰复奏旨趣赴任，苗舁疾就道。至镇，即上言： 西土诸王，为国藩屏，赐赉虽有常制，而有司牵于文法，遂使恩泽不以时及，有匮乏之忧，大非隆亲厚本之意。 
现代文：将隐退，适巧有旨授江南行台御史中丞，然而宰丞对苗气愤始终不减，而将他改任甘肃行省左丞，这时苗已辞官归田，宰丞又上奏请皇帝命苗迅速去甘肃赴任，苗带病启程，到任后，即上奏文说： 西土诸王，为国家的藩属和屏障，赏赐虽有规定，而官府拘泥于成法，因而使恩泽不能及时，有匮乏的忧虑，很不符隆亲厚本的意思。 
English: Miao will retire, coincidentally, there is a will to be awarded to the south of the Yangtze River to go to Taiwan, but Zaicheng is still angry with Miao, and changes him to Gansu to go to the left of the province. At this time, Miao has resigned and returned to the field. Zaicheng also appealed to the emperor to order Miao to quickly go to Gansu to take office. Miao took ill and set off. After taking office, the appeal said: The kings of the West, as the country's vassals and barriers, reward although there are regulations, but the government is sticking to the law, so that the grace is not timely

古文：又言： 甘肃每岁中粮，奸弊百端，请以粮钞兼给，则军民咸利矣。 
现代文：又说： 甘肃每年的钱粮，弊端百出，请求以粮、钞兼给，则军民都能得利。 
English: He also said: Gansu's annual grain allowance is full of drawbacks. If you ask for both grain and banknotes, both the military and the people can benefit.

古文：朝廷从之。
现代文：朝廷同意。
English: The court followed his advice.

古文：迁陕西行御史台中丞。到官数日，即上疏乞骸骨，还乡里。明年卒，年五十八。
现代文：迁调陕西御史台中丞，到任数日就上疏请求辞官归里。第二年逝世，终年五十八岁。
English: He was transferred to the position of Shaanxi Provincial Historian, and a few days after taking office, he asked to resign and return to his hometown. He died the following year, at the age of fifty-eight.

古文：赠摅诚赞治功臣、中书左丞、上护军，追封魏国公，谥文献。
现代文：赠摅诚赞治功臣、中书左丞、上护军，追封魏国公、谥号文献。
English: He was presented with the titles of Zhencheng Zanzhi Gongshu, Zhongshu Zu Rong, Shangguo Jun, and was posthumously awarded the title of Wei Guogong.

古文：苗学术淳正，性孝友，喜施与，置义田以赡宗族。
现代文：苗学术纯正，生性孝顺父母，忠于朋友，乐于施舍，购置义田以赡养宗族。
English: Miao are academically pure, naturally filial to their parents, loyal to their friends, willing to give alms, and purchase Yoshida to support their family.

古文：平居恂恂谦谨，及至遇事，张目敢言，虽经挫折，无少回挠，有古遗直之风焉。
现代文：平时谦恭谨慎，在遇到事情时，敢于直言，虽遇挫折，很少退却。大有古代正直之遗风。
English: In ordinary times, he is humble and prudent. When confronted with a situation, he dares to speak his mind. Although he encounters setbacks, he rarely retreats. There is a great legacy of ancient honesty.

