古文：齐侯妻之，甚善焉。
现代文：齐桓公把女儿嫁给重耳为妻，待重耳很好。
English: Lord Qi Kuan married his daughter to Shigeyur, and Shigeyur was very pleased.

古文：有马二十乘，将死于齐而已矣。
现代文：重耳有马八十匹，便打算老死在齐国了。
English: With eighty horses at his disposal, he planned to die an old man in Qi.

古文：曰： 民生安乐，谁知其他？ 
现代文：他说： 人生就是为了享乐，谁还去管别的什么呢？ 
English: He said: "Life is for enjoyment, who cares about anything else?

古文：桓公卒，孝公即位。
现代文：齐桓公死后，孝公即位。
English: After the death of Prince Qi Huan, Prince Xiao ascended the throne.

古文：诸侯叛齐。
现代文：这时，诸侯都纷纷背叛齐国。
English: At this time, the lords all betrayed Qi.

古文：子犯知齐之不可以动，而知文公之安齐而有终焉之志也，欲行，而患之，与从者谋于桑下。
现代文：狐偃知道齐国不可能帮助重耳返国执政，也晓得重耳已安于留在齐国，并准备老死在此的想法，打算离开齐国，又担心重耳不肯走，于是就和随从重耳一起逃亡的人在桑树下商量这件事。
English: Knowing that it was impossible for Qi to help Jie Er return to power, and also knowing that Jie Er was content to stay in Qi and was prepared to die here, planning to leave Qi, and fearing that Jie Er would not leave, Foxtel discussed the matter under the mulberry tree with the people who had fled with Jie Er.

古文：蚕妾在焉，莫知其在也。
现代文：齐国宫中一个养蚕的小妾正好在树上采桑叶，但谁也没有发觉她。
English: A concubine raising silkworms in the Qigong Palace happened to be picking mulberry leaves on a tree, but no one noticed her.

古文：妾告姜氏，姜氏杀之，而言于公子曰： 从者将以子行，其闻之者吾以除之矣。
现代文：小妾报告了姜氏，姜氏怕泄露消息，便把她杀了，然后对公子重耳说： 你的随从想要同你一起离开齐国，那个偷听到这事的人我已经杀掉了。
English: The concubine reported to Mr. Jiang. Mr. Jiang was afraid that the news would be leaked, so he killed her, and then said to the prince: Your retinue wants to leave Qi with you. I have killed the person who overheard this.

古文：子必从之，不可以贰，贰无成命。
现代文：你一定要听他们的，不能犹豫不决，遇事犹豫不决，就不能成就天命。
English: You must listen to them, you can't be indecisive, if you are indecisive, you can't fulfill your destiny.

古文：《诗》云： 上帝临女，无贰尔心。 
现代文：《诗》上说： 上天暗中保佑着你，你心里千万不能迟疑不决。 
English: "Poetry" said: Heaven has secretly blessed you, and you must not hesitate in your heart.

古文：先王其知之矣，贰将可乎？
现代文：武王知道天命，因此能成大事，犹豫不决怎么能行呢？
English: King Wu knows the fate of heaven, so he can achieve great things. How can he hesitate?

古文：子去晋难而极于此。
现代文：你因晋国有危难而来到这里。
English: You came here because of the crisis in Jin Province.

古文：自子之行，晋无宁岁，民无成君。
现代文：自从你离开以后，晋国没有安宁的岁月，百姓也没有一个稳定的国君。
English: Since you left, there have been no peaceful years in Jin, and the people have not had a stable ruler.

古文：天未丧晋，无异公子，有晋国者，非子而谁？
现代文：上天还没有要晋国灭亡，晋献公也再没有其他的公子了。能得到晋国的，不是你还有谁？
English: Heaven has not yet decided to destroy Jin, and there are no other noble sons of Jin. Who else can get Jin but you?

古文：子其勉之！
现代文：希望你好好努力！
English: I hope you work hard!

古文：上帝临子，贰必有咎。 
现代文：上天在保佑你，迟疑不决一定会惹祸遭殃。 
English: Heaven is blessing you. Hesitation and indecision are sure to bring misfortune.

古文：公子曰： 吾不动矣，必死于此。 
现代文：公子说： 我是不会被人说动的了，一定要老死在这里。 
English: He said, "I won't be moved by anyone, I'll die here."

古文：姜曰： 不然。
现代文：姜氏说： 这样不对。
English: Mr. Jiang said, "This is not right.

古文：《周诗》曰： 莘莘征夫，每怀靡及。 
现代文：《周诗》上说： 那些风尘仆仆的行人，时常惦念着自己要办的事，唯恐来不及把事情办好。 
English: "Zhou Shi" said: Those people who are the servants of the wind and dust are always thinking about what they want to do, in case they don't have time to do it well.

古文：夙夜征行，不遑启处，犹惧无及。
现代文：昼夜奔忙在道路上，连一会儿安坐休息的工夫也没有，这样尚且还怕来不及。
English: Rushing on the road day and night, there is no time to sit down and rest for a while, and it is too late to do so.

古文：况其顺身纵欲怀安，将何及矣！
现代文：更何况那些随意放纵嗜欲、贪恋安逸的人，将怎么来得及呢？
English: Moreover, how will those who indulge their desires and crave for comfort be able to do so?

古文：人不求及，其能及乎？
现代文：一个人不追求及时完成大业，又怎么能达到目的呢？
English: If one does not pursue the timely completion of the great cause, how can one achieve the goal?

古文：日月不处，人谁获安？
现代文：日月如梭，时光不停，一个人哪能只想获得安逸呢？
English: The sun and the moon are constantly moving, time is incessant, how can a person only want to be comfortable?

古文：西方之书有之曰： 怀与安，实疚大事。 
现代文：周书上有句话说： 贪图享乐和安逸，是要败坏大事的。 
English: There is a saying in Zhou's book: "Craving for pleasure and ease is to ruin a great thing."

古文：《郑诗》云： 仲可怀也，人之多言，亦可畏也。 
现代文：《郑诗》上说： 仲子令我思念，外人的闲话也可畏啊。 
English: "Zheng Shi" said: "Nakako makes me miss you, and gossip from outsiders can be scary."

古文：昔管敬仲育言，小妾闻之，曰： 畏威知疾，民之上也。
现代文：以前管仲说的话，小妾也曾听到过。他说： 如果一个人像害怕疾病一样地敬畏天威，是人中的最上者。
English: The concubine had also heard what Guanzhong had said before. He said, "If a person fears the divine power as much as he fears illness, he is the best of people."

古文：从怀如流，民之下也。
现代文：只知道眷恋私欲随大流，是人中的最下者。
English: They only know that those who are attached to their lusts and follow the crowd are the lowest of people.

古文：见怀思威，民之中也。
现代文：看到可眷恋的事物，就想起天威的可畏，是中等人。
English: If you see something you can fall in love with, you will think of the awesome power of heaven. You are an average person.

古文：畏威如疾，乃能威民。
现代文：只有敬畏天威如害怕疾病一样，才能树立权威，统治人民。
English: Only by fearing heaven, just as we fear disease, can we establish authority and rule the people.

古文：威在民上，弗畏有刑。
现代文：有声威才能居于民上，对天威无所畏惧，则将受到惩罚。
English: You can only live among the people if you have authority. If you have no fear of heaven's authority, you will be punished.

古文：从怀如流，去威远矣，故谓之下。
现代文：只知贪恋私欲随大流，那离建立声威就很远了，因此说是人中的最下者。
English: But he who follows the crowd in covetousness and lust is far from being a man of renown; for this reason he is called the lowest of men.

古文：其在辟也，吾从中也。
现代文：照以上引喻的话来看，我是愿做中等人的。
English: According to the above quotation, I am willing to be a middle man.

古文：《郑诗》之言，吾其从之。 
现代文：《郑诗》上所说的话，我是愿意遵从的。 
English: I am willing to follow what is said in "Zhengshi."

古文：此大夫管仲之所以纪纲齐国，裨辅先君而成霸者也。
现代文：这就是大夫管仲所以能够治理齐国，辅佐先君成就霸业的原因。
English: This is the reason why Dr. Guanzhong was able to govern Qi Province, and assisted the Ancestor to achieve hegemony.

古文：子而弃之，不亦难乎？
现代文：现在你要丢弃它，不是太难于成大事了吗？
English: Now you want to discard it, isn't it too difficult to become great?

古文：齐国之政败矣，晋之无道久矣，从者之谋忠矣，时日及矣，公子几矣。
现代文：齐国的政治已经衰败了，晋君的无道已经很久了，你随从的谋虑够忠心的了，时候到了，公子得晋国的日子近了。
English: The politics of Qi has decayed, and Jin Jun has been without a path for a long time. The advice of your followers is loyal enough. The time has come, and the day for the prince to enter Jin is near.

古文：君国可以济百姓，而释之者，非人也。
现代文：你去当晋国的国君，可以解救百姓，如果放弃这事业，那简直不算人了。
English: If you become the ruler of Jin, you can save the people. If you give up this cause, you are nothing.

古文：败不可处，时不可失，忠不可弃，怀不可从，子必速行。
现代文：齐国的政治败坏不宜久居，有利的时机不可错过，你的追随者的一片忠诚不可丢弃，眼前的安逸不可贪恋，你一定要赶快离开齐国。
English: The political corruption of Qi should not linger, the favorable opportunity should not be missed, the loyalty of your followers should not be discarded, the immediate comfort should not be coveted, you must leave Qi quickly.

古文：吾闻晋之始封也，岁在大火，阏伯之星也，实纪商人。
现代文：我听说，晋国最初受封的时候，那年岁星正在大火星的位置，也就是阏伯的星辰，实际上记录着商朝的命运。
English: I heard that when Jin Province was first sealed, the year star was in the position of the great Mars, that is, the star of Zibo, actually recording the fate of the Shang Dynasty.

古文：商之飨国三十一王。
现代文：商代享有天下，一共传了三十一位国君。
English: The Shang Dynasty enjoyed the world, and a total of thirty-one sovereigns were passed down.

古文：瞽史之纪曰： 唐叔之世，将如商数。 
现代文：乐师和史官的记载说： 唐叔的后裔享有晋国，将同商代国君的数目一样。 
English: Musicians and historians record: The descendants of Uncle Tang will enjoy the same number of crowns as the Shang kings.

古文：今未半也。
现代文：现在还不到一半。
English: Now it's less than half.

古文：乱不长世，公子唯子，子必有晋。
现代文：晋国纷乱的局面不会长久下去，公子中只有你还在，你肯定能得到晋国。
English: The tumultuous situation in Jin Province will not continue for long. You are the only one of the nobles still alive, and you will surely be promoted to Jin Province.

古文：若何怀安？ 
现代文：为什么还要贪恋眼前的安逸呢？ 
English: Why do you still want to be greedy for immediate comfort?

古文：遂行。
现代文：于是继续前行。
English: So he went to Qi Province without hesitation.

