古文：人生性命当富贵者，初禀自然之气，养育长大，富贵之命效矣。
现代文：人生下来性与命该富贵的，在最初禀受自然之气时就决定了，经抚养培育长大之后，富贵的命才得到证实。
English: The richness of a person's nature and life is decided at the very beginning, when he or she first receives the breath of nature. The richness of a person's life is only confirmed after he or she has been raised and nurtured.

古文：文王得赤雀，武王得白鱼赤乌。儒者论之，以为雀则文王受命，鱼乌则武王受命；文、武受命於天，天用雀与鱼乌命授之也。
现代文：周文王得到赤雀，周武王得到白鱼、赤乌鸦，儒者判定，认为赤雀就是文王受天命的象征，白鱼、赤乌鸦就是武王得天命的象征。周文王、周武王受命于上天，上天就用赤雀与白鱼、赤乌鸦把命授给他们。
English: The Confucians judged that the egret was the symbol of King Wen's receiving the Mandate of Heaven, and the white fish and red crow were the symbols of King Wu's receiving the Mandate of Heaven. King Wen of Zhou and King Wu of Zhou were commanded by Heaven, and Heaven gave them the Mandate of Heaven with the egret, the white fish and the red crow.

古文：天用赤雀命文王，文王不受，天复用鱼乌命武王也。
现代文：上天用赤雀授命给文王，文王不接受；上天才又用白鱼、赤乌鸦授命给武王。
English: Heaven gave King Wen the order to use the sparrow, but King Wen did not accept the crow; Heaven also gave King Wu the order to use the white fish and the red crow.

古文：若此者，谓本无命於天，修己行善，善行闻天，天乃授以帝王之命也，故雀与鱼乌，天使为王之命也。王所奉以行诛者也。
现代文：照这样说来，原本就不从上天受命，是靠修养自己德行做好事，做好事使上天知道，上天才授给帝王的命。所以赤雀、白鱼、赤乌鸦的出现，是上天让他们成为帝王的象征，是武王奉命进行讨伐的根据。
English: According to this, originally they did not receive orders from heaven, but by cultivating their own virtue and doing good deeds, and by doing good deeds so that heaven would know, God only gave the emperor's life. Therefore, the appearance of the sparrowhawk, the white fish, and the red crow was God's way of making them a symbol of the emperor, and was the basis for King Wu's crusade.

古文：如实论之，非命也。
现代文：按照实情分析，这不是天命。
English: On the balance of probabilities, this is not fate.

古文：命，谓初所禀得而生也。
现代文：天命，是说最初承受自然之气而产生的。
English: Mandate of Heaven means that it was originally created by the force of nature.

古文：人生受性，则受命矣。
现代文：人生下来得到性时，也就得到了命。
English: When you get sex at the end of your life, you get life.

古文：性命俱禀，同时并得，非先禀性，後乃受命也。
现代文：性与命一起禀受，同时得到，不是先禀受性，然后才授予命。
English: Suffering and life go together. It is not first suffering and then life.

古文：何以明之？
现代文：用什么来证明呢？
English: How do you prove it?

古文：弃事尧为司马，居稷官，故为后稷。
现代文：弃侍奉尧做了司马，当了稷官，所以称为后稷。
English: He abandoned his position as a servant and became a steward and eunuch, which is why he was called Hou Yu.

古文：曾孙公刘居邰，後徙居邠。
现代文：后稷的曾孙公刘住在邰，后来迁居到邠。
English: Houyi's great-grandson Liu lived in Handan, and later moved to Handan.

古文：後孙古公亶甫三子：太伯、仲雍、季历，季历生文王昌。
现代文：其后孙古公亶甫有三个儿子太伯、仲雍和季历。季历生得周文王姬昌。
English: Later, Sun Gukong Rongfu had three sons, Taibo, Zhong Yong, and Ji Lai, who was born Zhou Wenwang Ji Chang.

古文：昌在襁褓之中，圣瑞见矣。
现代文：姬昌还是婴儿时，他要成为圣人的吉兆就已经呈现了。
English: When Ji Chang was still a baby, the auspicious sign that he would become a saint was already present.

古文：故古公曰： 我世当有兴者，其在昌乎！ 
现代文：所以古公亶甫说： 当今应该有兴盛发达的人，大概就在姬昌身上吧！ 
English: Therefore, Gu Gongfu said: Today, there should be a prosperous and developed person, probably in the person of Ji Chang!

古文：於是太伯知之，乃辞之吴，文身断发，以让王季。
现代文：当时太伯知道了，于是离家到吴，纹身剪发，以便让季历称王。
English: At that time, the uncle knew, so he left home to Wu, tattooed and cut his hair, in order to make the calendar king.

古文：文王受命，谓此时也，天命在人本矣，太王古公见之早也。
现代文：周文王禀受天命，说就是这个时候，其实禀受天命是在人刚生下来的时候，所以周太王古公亶甫早就知晓了。
English: Zhou Wenwang said that it was at this time that he received the Mandate of Heaven. In fact, it was when a person was just born that he received the Mandate of Heaven, so Zhou Taiwang Gu Gongfu already knew about it.

古文：此犹为未，文王在母身之中已受命也。
现代文：这样说还不够，应该说文王是在他母亲的身体之中就已经禀受天命了。
English: It is not enough to say this, it should be said that King Wen was already in his mother's body and received his destiny.

古文：王者一受命，内以为性，外以为体。
现代文：当王的人一旦禀受天命，在内成为性，在外成为形体。
English: Once a king is chosen by God, he becomes a sex inside and a body outside.

古文：体者，面辅骨法，生而禀之。
现代文：形体，是指面部容貌与骨胳的形状，人生下来的时候就已经禀气形成了。
English: The body refers to the facial appearance and the shape of the bones, which are already formed when a person is born.

古文：吏秩百石以上，王侯以下，郎将大夫，以至元士，外及刺史太守，居禄秩之吏，禀富贵之命，生而有表见於面，故许负、姑布子卿辄见其验。
现代文：官吏俸禄在一年百石以上，王侯以下，郎，将、大夫直到元士，地方到刺史、太守，只要是吃俸禄的官吏，都禀受了富贵的命，生下来在面部就会有征兆呈现，所以姓许的妇女，姑布子卿常常看出他们的应验之处。
English: Government officials with a salary of more than 100 koku a year, princes and below, lords, generals, doctors up to the rank of genshi, local governors up to sashimi and daimyos, as long as they are government officials with a salary, they have all received a rich life. When they are born, there will be signs on their faces. Therefore, women with surnames such as Xu and Guzixi often see their fulfillment.

古文：仕者随秩迁转，迁转之人，或至公卿，命禄尊贵，位望高大。
现代文：当官的按次升迁，升迁的人，有的做到三公九卿，命尊禄贵，官高名大。
English: Officials are promoted according to their ranks, and some of those who are promoted reach the ranks of three dukes and nine lords. Their lives are precious, and their official positions are high and prestigious.

古文：王者尊贵之率，高大之最也。
现代文：王是命尊贵之首，官最高名望最大。
English: The king is the first to be honored in life, and the highest office has the greatest reputation.

古文：生有高大之命，其时身有尊贵之奇，古公知之，见四乳之怪也。
现代文：人天生有官高名大的命，那初生时身体就会有尊贵的奇异之处。古公知道姬昌有尊贵的命，是见他有四个乳头奇怪现象。
English: People are born with a high-ranking and prestigious life, and when they are first born, their bodies will have a noble and strange place. The ancient lord knew that Ji Chang had a noble life when he saw that he had four nipples.

古文：夫四乳，圣人证也，在母身中，禀天圣命，岂长大之後，修行道德，四乳乃生？
现代文：文王长有四个乳头，是圣人的征兆。他原在母亲身体中，就禀受了上天作圣人的命，哪里是长大之后修道行德，四个乳头才长出来的？
English: King Wenchong has four nipples, which is a sign of a saint. He was originally in his mother's body, and he received God's command to be a saint. Where is the monasticism after growing up, and where did the four nipples grow?

古文：以四乳论望羊，亦知为胎之时已受之矣。
现代文：以文王有四个乳头谈到武王眼高能看见头顶太阳，也就知道在怀胎的时候，他们已经禀受天命形成了。
English: King Ewen had four nipples, and King Wu's eyes could see the sun above his head, so he knew that when he was pregnant, they had been formed by the will of heaven.

古文：刘媪息於大泽，梦与神遇，遂生高祖，此时已受命也。
现代文：刘媪在大泽边休息，梦见与神仙交媾，于是生下汉高祖，可见交媾的时候就已经禀受天命了。
English: Liu Ye rested by the Ozawa River and dreamed of having sexual intercourse with a god. As a result, he gave birth to the founder of the Han Dynasty. It can be seen that he had already received God's command when he had sexual intercourse.

古文：光武生於济阳宫，夜半无火，内中光明。
现代文：汉光武帝在济阳宫出生，半夜里没有灯火，宫中却大放光明。
English: Emperor Han Guangwu was born in Jiyang Palace. There were no lights in the middle of the night, but the palace was ablaze with light.

古文：军下卒苏永谓公曹史充兰曰： 此吉事也，毋多言！ 
现代文：军下卒对功曹史充兰说： 这是吉利的事情，不要多说。 
English: A soldier said to Gong Cao Shicheng Lan: This is a matter of good luck, don't say more.

古文：此时已受命。
现代文：这时汉光武帝已禀受天命了。
English: At this time, Emperor Han Guangwu had already accepted his destiny.

古文：独谓文王、武王得赤雀、鱼乌乃受命，非也。
现代文：只说文王、武王分别得到赤雀、白鱼、赤鸟鸦之后才禀受天命，是不对的。
English: It is not correct to say that King Wen and King Wu received their heavenly destinies only after they had obtained respectively a baby bird, a white fish, and a red crow.

古文：上天壹命，王者乃兴，不复更命也。
现代文：上天授一次命，帝王就兴起，于是不再另外授命。
English: Once God gives an order, the emperor arises, and no other orders are given.

古文：得富贵大命，自起王矣。
现代文：得到大富大贵的命，自然就会兴起做王。
English: If you get a rich and noble life, you will naturally rise to be a king.

古文：何以验之？
现代文：用什么来证明呢？
English: What proof do you have?

古文：富家之翁，资累千金。生有富骨，治生积货，至於年老，成为富翁矣。
现代文：富家的老翁，财物聚累得很富裕，生来就有富贵之骨，一生治理生计积累货物，直到年老，成为富翁。
English: The old man of a rich family is very rich in the accumulation of wealth. He was born with the bones of wealth. He manages his livelihood and accumulates goods throughout his life until he is old and becomes a rich man.

古文：夫王者，天下之翁也，禀命定於身中，犹鸟之别雄雌於卵壳之中也。
现代文：帝王，是天下之父，他禀承的命在娘胎里就决定了，好像鸟在蛋壳中已经决定了雄雌。
English: The emperor is the father of the world, and the life of his heir is decided in the womb of his daughter, as if a bird has decided the male and female in the eggshell.

古文：卵壳孕而雌雄生，日月至而骨节强，强则雄，自率将雌。
现代文：鸟在蛋壳里孕育而雌雄产生，阳光照耀使骨节刚强，雄的刚强就自然要率领雌的。
English: Birds are incubated in eggshells and male and female are produced. The sun shines and makes the bones strong. The male's strength naturally leads the female's.

古文：雄非生长之後，或教使为雄，然後乃敢将雌，此气性刚强自为之矣。
现代文：雄的并不是出生长大之后有什么东西指点使它们成为雄性，然后才敢于率领雌性，这是气形成的性刚强自然造成的。
English: Males are not born and grow up, something tells them to become males, and then they dare to lead females. This is a natural result of the sexual rigidity formed by qi.

古文：夫王者，天下之雄也，其命当王。
现代文：帝王，天下杰出的雄性，他的命该当帝王。
English: Emperor, the world's outstanding male, his life should be emperor.

古文：王命定於怀妊，犹富贵骨生，鸟雄卵成也。
现代文：帝王的命在怀孕时已决定了，就像人的富贵之骨生来就有，雄鸟在蛋中已形成一样。
English: The life of a king is decided at the time of conception, just as the bones of a man's wealth are laid down at birth, and the male bird is formed in the egg.

古文：非唯人，鸟也，万物皆然。
现代文：不仅人、鸟是这样，万物也都是这样。
English: This is true not only of people and birds, but also of all things.

古文：草木生於实核，出土为栽蘖，稍生茎叶，成为长短巨细，皆有实核。
现代文：草木从种子里长出，出土后成为幼苗、嫩芽，逐渐长出茎与叶，长得长短粗细各不相同，这都是由种子决定的。
English: Grasses and trees grow from seeds. After being unearthed, they become seedlings and shoots. Gradually, stems and leaves grow. They grow in different lengths and thicknesses, which are all determined by the seeds.

古文：王者，长巨之最也。
现代文：帝王，好比草木中的最高最粗的。
English: The emperor is like the tallest and thickest of plants.

古文：硃草之茎如针，紫芝之栽如豆，成为瑞矣。
现代文：朱草的茎像针一样细，紫芝的幼苗像豆一样小的时候，就已经成为吉祥物了。
English: When the stem of vermilion grass is as thin as a needle, and the seedlings of purple grass are as small as beans, they have become mascots.

古文：王者禀气而生，亦犹此也。
现代文：帝王禀受自然之气出生的时候，也就像它们一样了。
English: Emperor cockroaches are just like them when they are born by the force of nature.

