古文：昔者昊英之世，以代木杀兽，人民少而木兽多，黄帝之世，不麛不卵，官无供备之民，死不得用椁。
现代文：过去昊英氏统治的时代，允许民众伐木、捕杀野兽，那是因为当时民众少而树、野兽多。黄帝的时候，不让人们捕杀幼小的野兽，不让人们吃鸟蛋，官吏没有供自己使唤的奴仆，死了不能用棺材埋葬。
English: In the past, during the reign of Hao Ying, the people were allowed to cut down trees and kill wild animals, because there were fewer people and more trees and wild animals. During the time of the Yellow Emperor, people were not allowed to kill small wild animals, people were not allowed to eat bird eggs, officials did not have servants to serve them, and they could not be buried in a coffin when they died.

古文：事不同，皆王者，时异也。
现代文：昊英、黄帝做的事不一样，却都称王于天下，这是因为时代不同。
English: Hao Ying and the Yellow Emperor did different things, but they were both called kings in the world. This is because the times were different.

古文：神农之世，男耕而食，妇织而衣；刑政不用而治，甲兵不起而王。
现代文：神农时，男人耕种而使人人有饭吃，女人织布让人们有衣裳穿；不使用刑法和政令而天下安定，不用军队就能称王天下。
English: In the time of Shennong, men cultivated so that everyone could have food to eat, women wove cloth so that people could have clothes to wear; the world was stable without the use of criminal law and government decrees, and the world could be called a king without an army.

古文：神农既没，以强胜弱，以众暴寡，故黄帝作为君臣上下之义、义子兄弟之礼、夫妇妃匹之合，内行刀锯，外用甲兵。故时变也。
现代文：神农死后，人们开始以强凌弱，以多欺少。因此黄帝制定了关于君臣和上下级之间的道德准则，父子、兄弟间的礼仪，夫妻之间的婚配原则。对内使用刑罚，对外用军队征伐，同样是因为时代变了。
English: After the death of Shennong, people began to use force to bully the weak, and to deceive the few with the many. Therefore, the Yellow Emperor formulated a moral code for the relationship between the monarch and the subordinates, the etiquette between father and son, brothers and sisters, and the marriage principle between husband and wife. The use of criminal punishment at home and the use of troops to conquer abroad are also due to the change of the times.

古文：由此观之，神农非高于黄帝也，然其名尊者，以适于时也。
现代文：由此看来神农并不是比黄帝高明，可是他的名声却更尊贵，这是因为他顺应了时代变化。
English: From this point of view, Shennong is not more brilliant than the Yellow Emperor, but his reputation is more honorable, because he conformed to the changes of the times.

古文：故以战去战，虽战可也；以杀去杀，虽杀可也；以刑去刑，虽重刑可也。
现代文：因此用战争消灭战争，虽然进行战争也是可以的；用杀戮消除杀戮，虽然杀了人也是可以的；用刑罚消灭刑罚，虽然加重刑事罚也是可以的。
English: Therefore, the use of war to eliminate war, although it is also possible to carry out war; the use of killing to eliminate killing, although it is also possible to kill people; the use of punishment to eliminate punishment, although it is also possible to increase criminal punishment.

古文：昔之能制天下者，必先制其民者也；能胜强敌者，必先胜其民者也。
现代文：过去能控制天下的人，一定是首先制服他的民众的人；能够战胜强敌的人，也一定是首先制服他的民众的人。
English: In the past, the one who could control the world must be the first to subdue his people; the one who can defeat a strong enemy must also be the first to subdue his people.

古文：故胜民之本在制民，若冶于金、陶于土也。本不坚，则民如飞鸟禽兽，其孰能制之？
现代文：因此制服民众的根本在于控制民众，就像冶炼工人对黄金冶炼的控制，制陶工人对泥土的使用一样，根本不坚固，民众就像飞鸟和野兽，有谁能控制他们呢？
English: Therefore, the essence of subduing the people is to control the people, just as the smelter's control of gold smelting and the potter's use of clay are not solid at all, the people are like birds and beasts, who can control them?

古文：民本，法也。
现代文：治理民众的根本方式是实行法治。
English: The fundamental way to govern the people is to implement the rule of law.

古文：故善治者塞民以法，而名地作矣。
现代文：因此善于治理国家的人，就是用法律来遏制民众，而名声和土地就都增加了。
English: Therefore, those who are good at governing the country use the law to restrain the people, and fame and land have increased.

古文：名尊地广，以至王者，何故？
现代文：君主的名声尊贵、土地广阔，最后称王天下，是什么缘故呢？
English: What is the reason why the reputation of the monarch is noble, the land is vast, and finally he is called the king of the world?

古文：名卑地削，以至于亡者，何故？
现代文：是因为总打胜仗。名望低微，土地面积减少，甚至最后灭亡，又是什么原因呢？
English: Is it because they always win battles? What is the reason for their low reputation, shrinking land area, and even their eventual demise?

古文：战罢者也。
现代文：因为总是战败。
English: Because they always lose.

古文：不胜而王、不败而亡者，自古及今未尝有也，民勇者，战胜；民不勇者，战败。
现代文：打仗不胜而称王天下，打仗失败而不灭亡的国家，自古至今也未曾有过。民众作战勇敢，打仗就会获胜；民众作战不勇敢，就会失败。
English: From ancient times to the present, there has never been a country that won the world without winning the war, nor a country that lost the war without perishing. If the people fight bravely, the war will be won; if the people do not fight bravely, they will fail.

古文：能壹民于战者，民勇；不能壹民于战者，民不勇，圣王见王之致于兵也，故举国而责之于兵。
现代文：能让民众专心作战的君主，民众打仗就勇敢；不能使民众专心作战的君主，民众打仗就不勇敢。圣明的君主看见称王天下的功业只能在战功中获得，所以要求全国的民众当兵。
English: A monarch who can make the people concentrate on fighting, the people will be brave in war; a monarch who cannot make the people concentrate on fighting, the people will not be brave in war. The holy monarch saw that the merits of the king can only be obtained in war, so he asked the people of the whole country to be soldiers.

古文：入其国，观其治，兵用者强。
现代文：走进一个国家，观察这个国家的治理方法，军队被充分运用国家就强大。
English: If you go into a country and observe the way it is governed, if the army is used to the full, the country is strong.

古文：奚以知民之见用者也？
现代文：凭什么知道民众被君主使用了呢？
English: How do the people know that they are being used by the monarch?

古文：民之见战也，如饿狼之见肉，则民用矣。
现代文：那就是民众看见打仗，就像饥饿的狼看见了肉一样，那么民众就被使用了。
English: That is, the people see war, just as a hungry wolf sees meat, so the people are used.

古文：凡战者，民之所恶也。能使民乐战者王。
现代文：一般来说，战争是民众讨厌的东西，能让民众喜欢去打仗的君主就称王天下。
English: Generally speaking, war is something that the people hate, and a monarch who can make the people like to go to war is called a king.

古文：强国之民，父遗其子，史遗其弟，妻遗其夫，皆曰： 不得，无返！ 
现代文：强大国家的民众，父亲送他的儿子去当兵，哥哥送他的弟弟去当兵，妻子送她的丈夫去当兵，他们都说： 不获胜就不要回来！ 
English: People of a powerful country, a father sends his son to be a soldier, a brother sends his brother to be a soldier, a wife sends her husband to be a soldier, and they all say: If you don't win, don't come back!

古文：又曰： 失法离令，若死，我死。乡治之。行间无所逃，迁徙无所入。 
现代文：又说： 不遵守法律，违抗了命令，你死，我也得死，乡里会治我们的罪，军队中又没有地方逃，就是跑回家，我们要搬迁也没有地方可去。 
English: He also said: If you disobey the law and disobey orders, if you die, I will also die, the village will punish us for our crimes, and there is no place to escape in the army, that is, to run home, we have to relocate and there is no place to go.

古文：行间之治，连以五，辨之以章，束之以令。
现代文：军队的管理办法是将五个人编成一伍，实行连坐，用标记来区分他们，用军令来束缚他们。
English: The management method of the army is to form five people into a group, carry out joint sitting, use signs to distinguish them, and use military orders to restrain them.

古文：拙无所处，罢无所生。
现代文：逃走了也没有地方居住，失败了就没有活路。
English: If you run away, there is no place to live. If you fail, there is no way out.

古文：是以三军之众，从令如流，死而不旋踵。
现代文：所以三军的将士听众军令就像流水一样，战死也不后退。 
English: Therefore, the soldiers of the three armies listen to the military orders like running water, and the battle dead do not retreat.

古文：国之乱也，非其法乱也，非法不用也。
现代文：国家治理混乱，不是因为它的法度混乱，也不是因为法度被废弃不用。
English: State governance is in disarray, not because its legal system is in disarray, nor because the legal system has been abandoned.

古文：国皆有法，而无使法必行之法。
现代文：国家都有法律，但却没有让法律一定实行的办法。
English: Countries have laws, but they don't have the means to enforce them.

古文：国皆有禁奸邪、刑盗贼之法，而无使奸邪、盗贼必得之法，为奸邪、盗贼者死刑，而奸邪、盗贼不止者，不必得。
现代文：国家虽有禁止邪恶犯罪，对盗贼处以刑法的法令，但却没有使邪恶、盗贼一定能捕获的办法。作邪恶之事、偷盗的人要处死刑，可是犯奸、偷盗的现象却不断发生，这是由于做了坏事不一定能被抓住。
English: Although the state has laws prohibiting evil crimes and punishing thieves according to the criminal law, there is no way to ensure that evil and thieves can be caught. People who do evil things and steal should be sentenced to death, but the phenomenon of treason and theft continues to occur. This is because doing bad things can not necessarily be caught.

古文：必得而尚有奸邪、盗贼者，刑轻也，刑轻者，不得诛也；必得者，刑者众也。
现代文：就是一定能抓住却仍有邪恶、偷盗的事发生，这是因为刑法轻的原因。刑法轻，不能成功地处治犯罪；假如能捕获，受刑罚处治的人就多。
English: This is because the criminal law is light. The criminal law is light and cannot successfully punish crimes; if they can be caught, there will be more people who will be punished.

古文：故善治者，刑不善而不赏善，故不刑而民善。不刑而民善，刑重也。
现代文：所以善于治理国家的人，只处罚不守法的人，不奖赏善良而守法的民众，因此，不用刑罚民众也善良守法。是因为刑罚重了。
English: Therefore, those who are good at governing the country only punish those who do not abide by the law, and do not reward the people who are good and abide by the law. Therefore, the people are also good and abide by the law without punishment. Because the punishment is heavy.

古文：刑重者，民不敢犯，故无刑也；而民莫敢为非，是一国皆善也，故不赏善而民善。
现代文：刑罚重，民众不敢触犯刑法，因此也就没有刑罚；民众没有谁敢做不该做的事，这时全国的民众都守法。因此，不奖赏守法的良善人而民众都善良。
English: When the punishment is severe, the people do not dare to violate the criminal law, so there is no punishment; when there is no one who dares to do what should not be done, the people of the whole country abide by the law. Therefore, the good people who abide by the law are not rewarded, but the people are kind.

古文：赏善之不可也，犹赏不盗。
现代文：不可以奖赏善良的人，就像不能奖赏盗贼一样。
English: Good people should not be rewarded, just as thieves should not be rewarded.

古文：故善治者，使跖可信，而况伯夷乎？
现代文：因此，善于治理国家的人，能使像跖一样的人变得诚实可信，而何况像伯夷这样的人了？
English: Therefore, can a person who is good at governing the country make a person like Yao honest and trustworthy, let alone a person like Bo Yi?

古文：不能治者，使伯夷可疑，而况跖乎？
现代文：不会治理国家的人，即使是像伯夷一样的高洁之士也可疑，更何况跖了？
English: People who can't govern a country, even a noble person like Bo Yi, can be suspect, let alone disgraced?

古文：势不能为奸，虽跖可信也；势得为奸，虽伯夷可疑也。
现代文：假如形势使人不能做坏事，即使是跖一样的人也可以信赖；假如形势能让人做坏事，即使是伯夷一样的高洁的人也可疑。
English: If the situation makes it impossible to do bad things, even a person like a baboon can be trusted; if the situation makes it possible to do bad things, even a noble person like Bo Yi can be doubted.

古文：国或重治，或重乱。
现代文：国家或者是治理的更好，或者是治理的更乱。
English: Countries are either better governed or more chaotic.

古文：明主在上，所举必贤，则法可在贤。
现代文：英明的君主处在国君的地位上，它所选用的人一定有贤德的才能，那么法令便掌握在贤德的人手中。
English: A wise prince is in the position of a sovereign, and the person he chooses must have virtuous talents, so the decree is in the hands of a virtuous person.

古文：法可在贤，则法在下，不肖不敢为非，是谓重治。
现代文：法令掌握在贤德的人手中，那么法度就能在下面实行，不贤德的人就不敢做坏事，这就叫治上加治。
English: Laws and ordinances are in the hands of virtuous people, then the laws and ordinances can be implemented below, and people who are not virtuous will not dare to do bad things. This is called the rule of law.

古文：不明主在上，所举必不肖，国无明法，不肖者敢为非，是谓重乱。
现代文：不英明的君主处在国君的位置上，它所选用的一定都是不贤德的人，国家就不会有严明的法令，不贤德的人就敢做坏事，这就叫乱上加乱。
English: When an unwise ruler is in the position of the sovereign, all the people he chooses must be unethical. The country will not have strict laws, and unethical people will dare to do bad things. This is chaos on top of chaos.

古文：兵或重强。或重弱，民固欲战，又不得不战，是谓重强。
现代文：军队或者是强上加强，或者是弱上加弱，民众本来想要打仗，又不能不去打仗，这就叫弱上加弱，即更弱。
English: An army is either stronger and stronger, or weaker and weaker. If the people want to go to war, but cannot avoid going to war, this is called weak and weaker, i.e. weaker.

古文：同固不欲战，又得无战，是谓重弱。明主不滥富贵其臣。所谓富者，非粟米珠玉也？
现代文：英明的国君不能毫无节制地使他的臣子们富贵。所说的富，不是指的粮食珠玉吗？
English: A wise ruler cannot make his subjects rich without restraint. Doesn't the word "rich" refer to grain jewels?

古文：所谓贵者，非爵位官职也？
现代文：所说的贵，不是指的爵位官职吗？
English: When you say expensive, don't you mean titles and offices?

古文：废法作私爵禄之，富贵。
现代文：废弃法律变成个人做主，赐给臣子爵位和俸禄，那么臣子们便富贵了。
English: Abolish the law and make it up to the individual, give vassals a viscountcy and a stipend, and the vassals will be rich.

古文：凡人主德行非出人也，知非出人也，勇力非过人也。
现代文：一般说来，君主的品德行为不是高于所有的人，智慧也不是都能超出所有的人，勇敢、力量也不是超出所有的人。
English: Generally speaking, the monarch's moral behavior is not superior to all people, wisdom is not superior to all people, and courage and strength are not superior to all people.

古文：然民虽有圣知，弗敢我谋；勇力，弗敢我杀；虽众，不敢胜其主；虽民至亿万之数，县重赏而民不敢争，行罚而民不敢怨者，法也。
现代文：可是，民众即使有不寻常的智慧，也不敢谋求君主的地位；有勇敢和力量，也不敢弑杀君主；即使民众人数多，也不敢凌驾在他的君主之上；即使民众的人数达到亿万人的数目，可是，只要君主摆出优厚的奖赏而民众也不敢争抢，实行刑罚而民众也不敢怨恨，这是因为有了法度。
English: However, even if the people have unusual wisdom, they dare not seek the position of the monarch; if they have courage and strength, they dare not kill the monarch; even if the people are numerous, they dare not surpass their monarch; even if the number of people reaches the number of hundreds of millions, but as long as the monarch puts up a good reward and the people dare not compete, and the punishment is imposed and the people dare not resent, this is because of the law.

古文：国乱者，民多私义；兵弱者，民多私勇。
现代文：国家混乱，是由于民众多考虑个人之间的情义；军队的力量弱，是因为民众多追求个人间的斗勇。
English: The chaos of the country is due to the fact that the people think more about the situation between individuals; the strength of the army is weak because the people pursue more personal bravery.

古文：则削国之所以取爵禄者多涂；亡国之欲，贱爵轻禄。
现代文：那么在实力削弱的国家获取爵位、俸禄的途径就有许多；使国家灭亡的风气，是因为民众看不起爵位，轻视俸禄。
English: Then there are many ways to obtain a title and salary in a country that is weakening; the culture that causes the country's demise is because the people despise titles and salaries.

古文：不作而食，不战而荣，无爵而尊，无禄而富，无官而长，此之谓奸民。
现代文：不劳动有饭吃，不打仗有荣誉，没有爵位照样尊贵，没有俸禄照样富有，没有官职照样有威风，这就叫做奸民。
English: If you do not work, you can eat, if you do not fight, you have honor, if you do not have a title, you are still honorable, if you do not have a salary, you are still rich, and if you do not have an official position, you still have prestige, this is called a traitor.

古文：所谓 治主无忠臣，慈父无孝子 ，欲无善言，皆以法相司也，命相正也。
现代文：所说的 善于治国的君主身边没有忠臣，慈爱的父亲身边没有孝顺的儿子 ，这是因为英明的君主不想听好听的恭维话，都使用法律使大臣互相监督，用命令让大臣互相纠正。
English: It is said that a good ruler does not have a loyal subject at his side, and a loving father does not have a dutiful son at his side. This is because a wise ruler does not want to listen to flattering words, and uses laws to make ministers supervise each other, and orders to make ministers correct each other.

古文：不能独为非，而莫与人为非。
现代文：这样的话，臣民们就不能单独做坏事，也不能同别人一块做坏事。
English: In this way, the subjects cannot do bad things alone, nor can they do bad things with others.

古文：所谓富者，入多而出寡。
现代文：所说的富有，是进的多处地少。
English: What is meant by being rich is to get more from less.

古文：衣服有制，饮食有节，则出寡矣。
现代文：穿衣有限制，吃的喝的都有节制，那么支出的就少。
English: There are restrictions on what you can wear and what you can eat and drink, so you spend less.

古文：女事尽于内，男事尽于外，则入多矣。
现代文：妇女在家中尽量做自己该做的事，男人在外面做自己该做的事，那么收入就多。
English: Women do what they have to do at home as much as possible, and men do what they have to do outside, so there is more income.

古文：所谓明者，无所不见，则群臣不敢为奸，百姓不敢为非。
现代文：所说的英明君主，是指君主没有什么地方看不到，那么大臣就不敢做不该做的事，民众就不敢为非作歹。
English: The so-called wise monarch means that there is no place where the monarch cannot see, so the minister does not dare to do what should not be done, and the people do not dare to do evil.

古文：是以人主处匡床之上，听丝竹之声，而无下治。
现代文：所以，君主坐在安适的床上，听着弦乐器和管乐器奏出的乐曲，而天下便治理好了。
English: So the monarch sits on a comfortable bed, listens to the music played by stringed instruments and wind instruments, and the world is governed.

古文：所谓明者，使众不得不为。
现代文：所说的英明君主，它能使民众不能不按法令去做事。
English: The so-called wise monarch, it can make the people can not not do things according to the law.

古文：所谓强者，天下胜。
现代文：所说的强大君主，使治天下人都被他制服了。
English: The so-called powerful monarch, who ruled the world, was subdued by him.

古文：天下胜，是故合力。
现代文：因此才能聚合天下人的力量。
English: This is the reason why the power of the people of the world can be brought together.

古文：是以勇强不敢为暴，圣知不敢为诈而虚用；兼天下之众，莫敢不为其所好而辟其所恶。
现代文：所以强悍的人不敢暴乱，圣明聪慧的人不敢做欺诈的事情，并凭借空洞的说教被君主选用；拥有全天下的人，没有谁敢不做君主所喜欢的事，而回避君主所讨厌的。
English: Therefore, the strong do not dare to rebel, the holy and the wise do not dare to commit fraud, and are elected by the monarch on the basis of empty sermons; no one who owns the whole world dares not to do what the monarch likes, but avoids what the monarch hates.

古文：所谓强者，使勇力不得不为己用。
现代文：所说强大的君主，使指他能使有勇力的人不得不为自己所用。
English: The mighty prince, it is said, has the power to compel the brave to his service.

古文：其志足，天下益之；不足，天下说之。恃天下者，天下去之；自恃者，得天下。
现代文：他统一天下的理想能实现，天下的人都愿意辅佐他；他的理想如不能实现，天下的人也喜欢他。依靠天下的人，天下的人就会抛弃他；自己依靠自己的人，才能得到天下。
English: If his ideal of unifying the world can be realized, people all over the world will be willing to support him; if his ideal cannot be realized, people all over the world will also like him. If he relies on people all over the world, people all over the world will abandon him; if he relies on his own people, he can gain the world.

古文：得天下者，先自得者也；能胜强敌者，先自胜者也。
现代文：得到天下的君主，首先是要自己得到自己的人；能战胜强大的敌人，首先自己能战胜自己。
English: If you want to be the ruler of the world, you must first get your own people; if you can defeat a powerful enemy, you must first be able to defeat yourself.

古文：圣人知必然之理、必为之时势，故为必治之政，战必勇之民，行必听之令。
现代文：圣明的人懂得社会一定会那样发展的道理，一定要顺应时代发展的形势，因此制定一定能把国家治理好的法令，使用战必胜的民众，下达民众一定能听从的命令。
English: Wise people understand the principle that society must develop in that way, and must conform to the situation of the development of the times. Therefore, they must formulate laws that can definitely govern the country well, use the people who are sure to win the war, and issue orders that the people can definitely obey.

古文：是以兵出而无敌，令行而天下服从。
现代文：所以军队出发打仗便会无敌于天下，君主的命令一下达天下便会服从。
English: Therefore, when the army sets out to fight, it will be invincible in the world, and when the monarch's order reaches the world, it will be obeyed.

古文：黄鹄之飞，一举千里，有必飞之备也；丽丽、巨巨，日走千里，有必走之势也；虎、豹、熊、罴，鸷而无敌，有必胜之理也。
现代文：黄鹄飞翔，一飞便是上千里，这是因为它具备一定能飞行千里的翅膀。丽丽、巨巨这样的良马能一天跑一千里远，这是因为它们具备一天能奔跑一千里的本领。虎、豹、熊、罴，生性凶残而无敌于天下，是因为它们有一定能战胜其他野兽的能力。
English: Yellow Kites fly for thousands of miles, because they have wings that can fly for thousands of miles. Horses like Lili and Jiu Jiu can run for thousands of miles a day, because they have the ability to run for thousands of miles a day. Tigers, leopards, bears, and baboons are naturally ferocious and invincible because they have the ability to defeat other beasts.

古文：圣人见本然之政，知必然之理，故其制民也，如以高下制水，如以燥湿制火。
现代文：圣人能发现社会本当如此发展的政治准则，明白社会一定那样发展的规律，所以他统治民众，就像利用高低的地势控制水流一样，又像用易燃物品的干湿来控制火一样。
English: The sage is able to discover the political principle of how society really develops, and understands the law of how society must develop, so he rules the people, just as he uses the high and low terrain to control the flow of water, and just as he uses the dryness and wetness of flammable materials to control fire.

古文：故曰：仁者能仁于人，而不能使人仁；义者能爱于人，而不能使人爱。
现代文：所以说,讲求仁慈的人能够对别人仁慈却不能使别人仁慈；讲求道义的人能够爱别人，却不能使别人相爱。
English: Therefore, a person who preaches kindness can be kind to others but cannot make others kind; a person who preaches morality can love others but cannot make others love each other.

古文：是以知仁义之不足以治天下也。
现代文：因此，懂得仁慈、道义的人不足以治理天下。
English: Therefore, people who understand kindness and morality are not enough to govern the world.

古文：圣人有必信之性，又有使天下不得不信之法。
现代文：圣人有一定让天下人信任的品德，又具有让天下人不能不信任的办法。
English: A saint has certain qualities that make people around the world trust him, and he also has ways that make people around the world trust him.

古文：所谓义者，为人臣忠，为人子孝，少长有礼，男女有别；非其义也，饿不苟食，死不苟生。
现代文：这里所说的道义，是说作为臣子定要有忠心，做儿子一定有孝心，长幼之间有礼节，男女之间要有别。如果不合乎道义，就是饿死也不能苟且吃饭，死了也不能苟且偷生。
English: The morality mentioned here is that as a vassal, one must have loyalty, as a son, one must have filial piety, there must be etiquette between elders and children, and there must be a difference between men and women. If it is not in accordance with morality, it is not possible to starve to death without eating, and it is not possible to die without living.

古文：此乃有法之常也。
现代文：这些不过是有法律国家的平常之事。
English: These are normal things in a country with the rule of law.

古文：圣王者不贵义而贵法，法必明，令必行，则已矣。
现代文：因此，圣明的帝王不重视道义而重视法律，而且法律必定要平明，君主的命令一定要贯彻执行，那就可以了。
English: Therefore, the holy emperor does not attach importance to morality, but to the law, and the law must be clear, and the monarch's orders must be implemented, that's fine.

