古文：高闾，字阎士，渔阳雍奴人也。
现代文：高闾字阎士，渔阳雍奴人。
English: Gao Yaoji is a Yanshi, and Yuyang is a Yongnu.

古文：五世祖原，晋安北将军、上谷太守、关中侯，有碑在蓟中。
现代文：五世祖高原，在晋朝任安北将军、上谷太守、关中侯，蓟中有记载他事迹的碑。
English: The fifth generation ancestor, Kogen, served as Anbei general, Kamitani governor, and Guanzhong governor during the Jin Dynasty. There is a monument in the moat that records his deeds.

古文：祖雅，少有令名，位州别驾。
现代文：他的祖父高雅，从小就有美好的声誉，曾任州的别驾。
English: His grandfather Gao Yao, who had a good reputation since he was a child, was once the governor of the state.

古文：父洪，字季愿，位陈留王从事中郎。
现代文：父亲名洪，字季愿，任陈留王从事中郎。
English: His father, Meihong (名洪) and his father's name, Jiwang (季愿), appointed Chen Liuwang to be the middle son.

古文：闾贵，乃赠幽州刺史、固安贞子。
现代文：高闾贵显之后，被追赠为幽州刺史、固安贞子。
English: After Gao Jun Guixian, she was posthumously given to Yuzhou Shishi and Guan Sadako.

古文：闾早孤，少好学，博综经史，下笔成章。
现代文：高闾很早就成为孤儿，但他自幼好学，知识渊博，精通经史典籍，下笔成章。
English: Gao Yao became an orphan very early, but he was eager to learn from a young age, knowledgeable, well-versed in classics, and his next chapter was written.

古文：少为车子，送租至平城，修剌诣崔浩。
现代文：年青时曾当过车夫，有一次他送租到平城时，自己写了个名帖前去拜见崔浩。
English: When he was young, he worked as a driver. Once, when he was delivering a lease to Pingcheng, he wrote a famous letter to go and meet Cui Hao.

古文：浩与语奇之，使为谢中书监表。
现代文：崔浩和他交谈以后大为惊奇，便让他代写了一份辞谢中书监的表文。
English: After talking with him, Cui Hao was very surprised and asked him to write a resignation letter for the librarian.

古文：明日，浩历租车过，驻马呼闾，诸车子皆惊。
现代文：第二天，崔浩从送租车前经过时，停下马来喊高闾的名字，那些车夫们都十分吃惊。
English: The next day, when Cui Hao was passing in front of a taxi, he stopped his horse to call Gao Yao's name. The drivers were very surprised.

古文：闾本名驴，浩乃改为闾，而字焉，由是知名。
现代文：高闾原名驴，崔浩便替他改为闾，同时取了表字，于是高闾有了名气。
English: Gao Yao's original name was "Donkey," but Cui Hao changed it to "Donkey" and took the Chinese character "表" at the same time. As a result, Gao Yao became famous.

古文：和平末，为中书侍郎。
现代文：和平末年，任中书侍郎。
English: At the end of the Heian period, he was appointed to the post of secretary.

古文：文成崩，乙浑擅权，内外危惧，文明太后临朝诛浑，引闾与中书令高允入禁中参决大政，赐爵安乐子。
现代文：北魏文成帝驾崩时，乙浑专权把持朝政，朝廷内外，惊恐不安。文明皇后临朝听政，杀乙浑，召高闾和中书令高允进入宫中参与处置国家大政，赐给他爵号为安乐子。
English: When Emperor Wencheng of Northern Wei died, the Yigong dictatorship took control of the imperial government, causing panic and anxiety both inside and outside the imperial court. The civilized Empress Lin listened to the government, killed Yigong, summoned Gao Jun and Zhongshu Ling Gao Yun to enter the palace to participate in the handling of national affairs, and gave him the title of Anle Zi.

古文：与镇南大将军尉元南赴徐州，以功进爵为侯。
现代文：后来他和镇南大将军尉元领军队南下徐州，因军功而被晋封为侯爵。
English: Later, he and Captain Zhenan led the army south to Xuzhou, and was promoted to marquis for his military service.

古文：献文即位，徙崇光宫，闾表上《至德颂》。
现代文：献文帝传位后，高闾被改为崇光宫侍御。高闾向皇帝上《至德颂》。
English: After Emperor Xianwen was enthroned, Gao Yao was changed to the attendant of the Chongguang Palace. Gao Yao wrote "A Tribute to Virtue" to the emperor.

古文：高允以闾文章富逸，举以自代，遂为献文所知，参论政事。
现代文：高允认为高闾的文章富有文采和气势，因而推荐他代替自己，于是他便被献文帝所了解，让他参与议论朝政大事。
English: Gao Yun thought that Gao Yao's article was rich in literary style and momentum, so he recommended him to replace himself, so he was understood by Emperor Xianwen and let him participate in the discussion of the political events of the dynasty.

古文：永明初，为中书令、给事中，委以机密。
现代文：承明初年，任中书令，给事中，常委派他处置机密要事。
English: In the first year of his appointment, the Standing Committee assigned him to deal with confidential and important matters.

古文：文明太后甚重闾，诏令书檄碑铭赞颂皆其文也。
现代文：文明皇后十分看重高闾，所有诏书、命令、书信、檄文，碑、铭、赞、颂等各种文字都是他写的。
English: The Empress of Civilization highly valued Gao Yao. He wrote all the edicts, orders, letters, edicts, monuments, inscriptions, praises, and eulogies.

古文：太和三年，出师讨淮北，闾表谏，陈四疑，请时速返旆。
现代文：太和三年，朝廷派兵征讨淮北，高闾上表劝谏，指出有四方面的疑难问题，请求尽快回军。
English: In the third year of the Taihe era, the imperial court sent soldiers to enlist in Huaibei, and Gao Gan went to the front to persuade them, pointing out that there were four difficult issues and requesting them to return to the army as soon as possible.

古文：文明太后曰： 六军电发，有若摧朽，何虑四难也。 
现代文：文明皇后说： 六军出发，如惊雷电闪，势同摧枯拉朽，何必担心有四难题呢？ 
English: The Empress of Civilization said, "When the six armies set out, it will be like a thunderbolt. Why worry about the four difficulties?

古文：迁尚书、中书监。
现代文：他被升为尚书、中书监。
English: He was promoted to Shangshu (尚書) and Zhongshuo (中書监).

古文：淮南王他奏求依旧断禄，闾表以为若不班禄，则贪者肆其奸情，清者不能自保，诏从闾议。
现代文：淮南王他上表请求朝廷依照旧例断绝官吏的食禄，高闾认为如果不赏赐食禄的话，那些贪官就有借口任意为非作歹，而清廉的官吏就难以维持。
English: King Huainan made the above request to the imperial court to cut off the food allowance of officials in accordance with the old practice. Gao Wei believed that if the food allowance was not awarded, those corrupt officials would have an excuse to commit crimes arbitrarily, and it would be difficult to maintain clean officials.

古文：孝文又引见王公以下于皇信堂，令辩忠佞。
现代文：朝廷传旨依照高闾的建议办。孝文帝又召见王公以下的大臣聚集在皇信堂，让他们辩论有关忠和奸的区别。
English: The imperial edict was issued in accordance with Gao Yao's suggestion. Emperor Xiaowen also summoned the ministers below the prince to gather at the Emperor's Court to debate the difference between loyalty and treachery.

古文：闾曰： 佞者饰知以行事，忠者发心以附道，譬如玉石，皦然可知。 
现代文：高闾说 ：奸佞的人装出很有智谋的样子欺骗别人和办事，忠贞的人出于内心符合正道行事，这就像美玉和石头，可以清楚地区分出来。 
English: Gao Yao said, "A dishonest person pretends to be very clever to deceive others and do things, while a loyal person acts in accordance with the right path from the bottom of his heart. This is like gems and stones, which can be clearly distinguished.

古文：帝曰： 玉石同体而异名，忠佞异名而同理。
现代文：皇帝说 ：美玉和白石是同一物体而名字不同，忠贞和奸佞是名称不同却同出一理。
English: The emperor said, "Beauty Jade and White Stone are the same object but have different names. Loyalty and Treachery are different names but have the same meaning.

古文：求之于同，则得其所以异；寻之于异，则失其所以同。
现代文：寻求它们相同的地方便可以看出差异之处；如果只寻找差异点则往往失掉它们的共同点。
English: If you look for their similarities, you can see their differences; if you only look for their differences, you tend to miss their commonalities.

古文：出处同异之间，交换忠佞之境，岂是皦然易明哉？
现代文：因此，这种出处的同和异，表现出来的忠贞或奸佞，哪里那么容易区分清楚呢？
English: Where, then, is this identity of origin, this fidelity or treachery, so easily distinguished?

古文：或有托佞以成忠，或有假忠以饰佞，如楚之子綦，后事虽忠，初非佞也？ 
现代文：有的先伪装成奸佞然而却为实现其忠贞，有的装扮成忠贞来掩饰其奸佞。就像过去楚国的子綦，后来的事情证明他是忠臣，然而他起初的表现难道不是奸佞的吗？ 
English: Some disguised themselves as traitors in order to prove their loyalty, while others disguised themselves as loyalists in order to conceal their treachery. For example, in the past, the son of Chu, later events proved that he was a loyalist, but wasn't his initial behavior that of a traitor?

古文：闾曰： 子綦谏楚，初虽随述，终致忠言，此适欲几谏，非为佞也。
现代文：高闾说： 子綦在楚王面前劝谏，起初虽然顺着国君的话讲，但最终却进行忠告，这是先顺其欲好而后伺机劝谏，不能视为奸佞的表现。
English: Gao Yao said: Zi Yao advised Zi Yao in front of King Chu. At first, although he followed the words of the sovereign, he eventually advised Zi Yao. This is to follow his wishes first and then wait for an opportunity to advise Zi Yao. It cannot be regarded as a manifestation of treachery.

古文：子綦若不设初权，后忠无由得显。 
现代文：子綦如果不是权宜应变的话，后来的忠也就无从显示出来了。 
English: If Zi Xuan was not an expedient contingency, the later loyalty could not be shown.

古文：帝善闾对。
现代文：皇帝赞许高闾的应对。
English: The emperor praised Gao Jun's response.

古文：后上表曰：
现代文：后来，他上奏表说：
English: Later, at the podium, he said:

古文：臣闻为国之道，其要有五：一曰文德，二曰武功，三曰法度，四曰防固，五曰刑赏。
现代文： 我所知的治国之道，重要的有五方面，一是文德，二是武功，三是法度，四是防固，五是刑赏。
English: As far as I know, there are five important aspects to the way of governing a country. First, there is virtue, second is martial arts, third is law, fourth is defense, and fifth is punishment and reward.

古文：故远人不服，则修文德以来之；荒狡放命，则播武功以威之；人未知战，则制法度以齐之；暴敌轻侵，则设防固以御之；临事制胜，则明赏罚以劝之。
现代文：所以远方之民不顺服，便要修文德使他来归顺；荒远的狡诈之徒违抗命令，便播扬武威来镇服；人民不懂得作战之法，就要制定法律来加以整治；强敌轻易入侵，就要设立防御牢固的工事来抵御；遇到变故而克敌制胜，就严明赏罚制度加以激励。
English: Therefore, if the people in faraway places disobey, they should cultivate morality to make them submit; if the cunning people in faraway places disobey orders, they should propagate military might to subdue them; if the people do not know the law of war, they should formulate laws to rectify it; if a strong enemy invades easily, they should establish a strong defense to resist it; if they overcome the enemy and win, they should be encouraged by a strict reward and punishment system.

古文：用能辟国宁方，征伐四克。
现代文：这样就能够开辟国土，安定四方，战无不克。
English: In this way, we will be able to open up the country, maintain stability in all directions, and win every battle.

古文：北狄悍愚，同于禽兽，所长者野战，所短者攻城。若以狄之所短，夺其所长，则虽众不能成患，虽来不能内逼。
现代文：北方狄寇，凶悍愚昧，如同禽兽，所专长者在于野战，所缺陷的在于攻城，如果能利用北狄的缺点，去掉他的专长，那么人数再多也不能成为祸患，虽即使前来也难以入侵内地。
English: North Dicko, fierce and stupid, is like an animal. His expertise is in field warfare, but his defect is in attacking cities. If North Dicko's shortcomings can be used to eliminate his expertise, then no number of people can become a disaster, although it is difficult to invade the inland even if they come.

古文：又狄散居野泽，随逐水草，战则与室家并至，奔则与畜牧俱逃。
现代文：况且北狄散居于荒野草泽之中，随着水草地而迁徙，作战时便全家同来，逃窜时带着牲畜而去。
English: Moreover, the Bei Di lived scattered in the wilderness and grasslands, migrating with the water and grasslands. When fighting, the whole family came together, and when fleeing, they took their livestock with them.

古文：是以古人伐北方，攘其侵掠而已。
现代文：所以自古以来讨伐北方，只挡其入侵和掳掠而已。
English: Therefore, since ancient times, the crusade against the north has only prevented its invasion and plunder.

古文：历代为边患者，良以倏忽无常故也。
现代文：历代所以成为边患的原因，在于他们出没无常的缘故。
English: The reason why they have been a problem in previous generations is that they have been around for a long time.

古文：六镇势分，倍众不斗，互相围逼，难以制之。
现代文：六镇分兵把守，敌人众多便难于应战，敌人逐个包围进逼，我军难以制服。
English: Six towns are guarded by detachments of soldiers, and it is difficult to fight against a large number of enemies. The enemies are encircled one by one, and it is difficult to subdue our army.

古文：昔周命南仲，城彼朔方，赵灵、秦始，长城是筑；汉之孝武，踵其前事。
现代文：古代周王命令南仲筑城北方；赵武灵王、秦始皇，修筑长城；汉孝武帝继承前代事业。
English: In ancient times, King Zhou ordered Nan Zhong to build the northern part of the city; King Zhao Wuling and Emperor Qin Shihuang built the Great Wall; Emperor Han Xiaowu inherited the previous generation's cause.

古文：此四代之君，皆帝王之雄杰，所以同此役者，非智术之不长，兵众之不足，乃防狄之要事，理宜然也。
现代文：这四代的国君，都是帝王中的雄杰之才。他们之所以共同采取这一措施，并非没有过人的智谋，或兵力的不足，而因为这实在是防御北狄最重要的办法，是理所当然的事情。
English: These four generations of sovereigns, all of them emperors of outstanding talent, have jointly taken this measure, not without extraordinary ingenuity, or lack of military strength, but because this is really the most important way to defend northern Tibet, it is a matter of course.

古文：今故宜于六镇之北筑长城，以御北虏，虽有暂劳之勤，乃有永逸之益。
现代文： 如今应当在六镇的北边修筑长城，以抵御北寇，虽然有暂时的劳苦，却有永逸的效果。
English: Now the Great Wall should be built on the north side of the six towns to resist the northern invaders. Although there is temporary labor, it has a lasting effect.

古文：即于要害，往往开门，造小城于其侧，因施却敌，多置弓弩。
现代文：靠近要害的地方，往往开有城门，在城门边建造小城，因地制宜安排退敌之策，多设弓弩。
English: In places close to the key, there are often open gates, and a small city is built next to the gate. According to local conditions, strategies for retreating from the enemy are arranged, and bows and arrows are often set up.

古文：狄来，有城可守，有兵可捍。
现代文：狄人入侵，有城可守，有兵可战。
English: If the Di people invade, we have a city to defend and soldiers to fight.

古文：既不攻城，野掠无获，草尽则走，终始必惩。
现代文：敌既无法攻城，野外抢掠一无所获，草料尽必定退走，终究受到惩罚。
English: Since the enemy was unable to attack the city, nothing was gained by looting in the field, and they had to retreat when they ran out of fodder, they were eventually punished.

古文：又宜发近州武勇四万人，及京师二万人，合六万人，为武士；于苑内立征北大将军府，选忠勇有志干者以充其选。下置官属，分为三军：二万人专习弓射，二万人专习刀楯，二万人专习骑槊。
现代文：又应当从附近各州选招有勇力的壮士四万人，加上京都二万人，合计六万人，作为武士，在御苑内设立征北大将军府，选拔忠心勇敢而又有志向才能的人作为主将，下设官员属吏，分为三军，两万人专门练习射箭，两万人专门练习使用刀盾，两万人专门练习骑马用槊。
English: In addition, it is necessary to recruit up to 40,000 brave men from the neighboring prefectures, plus 20,000 from Kyoto, for a total of 60,000 samurai, establish the General Headquarters of the Northern Expeditionary Army in the Imperial Garden, select a loyal, brave and ambitious person as the commander, set up subordinate officials, divide into three armies, 20,000 people specifically practice archery, 20,000 people specifically practice using swords and shields, and 20,000 people specifically practice riding horses with halberds.

古文：修立战场，十日一习。
现代文：修建战场，十天一演习。
English: The construction of the battlefield, every ten days an exercise.

古文：采诸葛亮八阵之法，为平地御敌之方，使其解兵革之宜，识旌旗之节。
现代文：采用诸葛亮八阵图的阵法，作为平地抵御敌人的方略，让他们都明了如何更好地使用兵革器械，懂得接受旌旗的节制指挥。
English: Adopting the array method of Zhuge Liang's eight-position map as a strategy to resist the enemy on a flat ground, so that they all understand how to better use military equipment and know how to accept the restrained command of the banner.

古文：兵器精坚，必堪御寇。
现代文：兵器精锐坚固，必定能够战胜敌人。
English: The weapons are elite and sturdy, and will surely be able to defeat the enemy.

古文：使将有定兵，兵有常主，上下相信，昼夜如一。
现代文：让将领有固定的兵士，兵士有长期的主帅，上下相互信任，昼夜完全一致。
English: Let the general have a fixed number of soldiers, the soldiers have a long-term manager, and the upper and lower levels trust each other, and the day and night are completely consistent.

古文：七月，发六郡兵万人，各备戎作之具，敕台北诸屯仓库，随近往来，俱送北镇。
现代文：七月间，征召六郡士兵万人，各带攻战器具，令台省以北各屯仓库，就近造粮，全部送往北镇。
English: In July, ten thousand soldiers from six counties were conscripted, each with offensive equipment, and all were sent to Beizhen from warehouses in the north of Taiwan Province to make grain.

古文：至八月，征北部率所镇，与六镇之兵，直至碛南，扬威漠北。
现代文：到八月，征北大将军府率领三军，和六镇之兵一起直至漠南，扬军威于漠北。
English: By August, the General Headquarters of the Northern Expeditionary Force led the three armies, together with the soldiers from six towns, to the south of the desert. Yang's army was powerful in the north of the desert.

古文：狄若来拒，与决战；若其不来，然后散分其地，以筑长城。
现代文：狄人如来对抗，就和他决战，如果不来，就分散各地，以修筑长城。
English: If the Di people come to fight, they will fight him decisively. If they do not come, they will disperse to various regions to build the Great Wall.

古文：计六镇，东西不过千里，若一夫一月之功当二步之地，三百人三里，三千人三十里，三万人三百里，则千里之地，强弱相兼，计十万人一月必就。
现代文：估计六镇东西长不过千里，如果一人一月能筑三步长，一百人就是三里长，一千人三十里，一万人三百里，那么千里的长度，强弱互助，估计十万人一个月时间就能建成。
English: It is estimated that the length of the six towns from east to west is only thousands of miles. If one person can build three steps in a month, a hundred people will be three miles long, one thousand and thirty miles, and ten thousand and three hundred miles, then the length of a thousand miles, strong and weak mutual assistance, it is estimated that one hundred thousand people can be built in a month.

古文：军粮一月，不足为多，人怀永逸，劳而无怨。
现代文：一个月的军粮，不算太多，人人抱着一劳永逸的想法，辛苦点也没有怨言。
English: One month's ration is not too much, everyone is holding on to the idea of once and for all, and there are no complaints about the hard work.

古文：计筑长城，其利有五：罢游防之苦，其利一也；北部放牧，无抄掠之患，其利二也；登城观敌，以逸待劳，其利三也；省境防之虞，息无时之备，其利四也；岁常游运，永得不匮，其利五也。
现代文： 我合计修筑长城，有五项好处：免去巡游的艰辛，是一利；北部放牧民众，不再受狄人抢掠的祸害，是二利；登城以观察敌人动向，以逸待劳，是三利；减少边境防卫的失误，停息无时无刻的防备，是四利；长年可以巡逻运输，永不匮乏，这是五利。 
English: In total, there are five benefits of building the Great Wall: one benefit is to avoid the hardships of the camel patrol; two benefits are for the herding people in the north to no longer suffer the scourge of the Di people's looting; three benefits are to go to the city to observe the enemy's movement and wait for labor; four benefits are to reduce the mistakes of border defense and stop the all-the-time preparation; five benefits are to be able to patrol and transport for a long time and never lack.

古文：孝文诏曰： 比当与卿面论。 
现代文：孝文帝传旨说 ：到时候我将和你当面讨论。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen sent a message saying, "I will discuss this with you face to face at the right time."

古文：又诏闾为书问蠕蠕。
现代文：皇帝又令高闾写国书慰问蠕蠕。
English: The emperor also ordered Gao Jun to write a national letter of condolence.

古文：时蠕蠕国有丧而书不叙凶事。
现代文：当时蠕蠕国有丧事而国书中没有写到。
English: At that time, there was a state funeral in the country of Cm Cm, but it was not written in the state book.

古文：帝曰： 卿职典文辞，不论彼之凶事，若知而不作，罪在灼然；若情思不至，应谢所任。 
现代文：皇帝问 ：你的职责是撰写文辞，可是不提及他国中的丧事，如果是明知却不写，罪责十分明显，如果疏忽没有想到，应当是失职了。 
English: The emperor asked: Your duty is to write a speech, but you do not mention the funeral in another country. If you know but do not write, the guilt is very obvious. If you do not think about it, it should be a dereliction of duty.

古文：对曰： 昔蠕蠕主敦崇和亲，其子屡犯边境，如臣愚见，谓不宜吊。 
现代文：高闾说 ：以前的蠕蠕国君淳厚敬重，和我国和亲，而今他的儿子屡次侵犯边境，以臣愚见，认为不宜吊问。 
English: Gao Yao said, "In the past, we had great respect for and were close to our country, but now that his son has repeatedly violated the border, it is foolish to think that it is not appropriate to question him."

古文：帝曰： 敬其父则子悦，敬其君则臣悦，卿云不合吊慰，是何言欤？ 
现代文：孝文帝说 ：敬重父亲儿子就高兴，敬重国君臣子也会高兴，你说不应该吊丧和安慰，这是什么话呢？ 
English: Emperor Xiaowen said, "If you respect your father and son, you will be happy, and if you respect your sovereign and vassal, you will also be happy. You say that there should be no mourning or consolation. What is this saying?

古文：闾遂免冠谢罪。
现代文：高闾便摘下帽子谢罪。
English: Gao Yao took off his hat to apologize.

古文：帝曰： 蠕蠕使牟提，小心恭慎，同行疾其敦厚，恐其还北，必被谤诬。
现代文：文帝说 ：蠕蠕的使者牟提，小心谨慎谦恭。同来的人认为他太忠厚而很不满意，我担心他回北方后，一定会受到诽谤。
English: Emperor Wen said, "Mutti, the messenger of Cthulhu, be cautious and courteous. The people who came with him thought that he was too loyal and very dissatisfied. I am afraid that he will be slandered when he returns to the north."

古文：昔刘准使殷灵诞，每禁下人不为非礼事，及还，果被谮诉，以致极刑。
现代文：以前刘准的使者殷灵诞，总是禁止他手下随从，不许做不合礼节的事情，当他回去后，果然被人中伤，遭到极刑。
English: In the past, Liu Jun's emissary, Yin Lingxue, always forbade his men to follow him and not to do anything unseemly. When he returned, he was indeed slandered and subjected to capital punishment.

古文：今书可明牟提忠于其国，使蠕蠕主知之。 
现代文：如今这封国书可以证明牟提是忠于国家的，要让蠕蠕国君知道这一点。 
English: Now, this state letter can prove that Muti is loyal to the state, and let the king know this.

古文：是年冬至，大飨群官，孝文亲舞于太后前，群臣皆舞。
现代文：这年冬至，皇帝大宴群臣，孝文帝亲自在太后面前起舞，群臣也跟着起舞。
English: On the winter solstice of that year, Emperor Xiaowen himself danced in front of the empress dowager at a grand banquet for the emperor's retainers, and the retainers also danced.

古文：帝乃长歌，仍率群臣再拜上寿。
现代文：皇帝又唱起歌，仍旧率领群臣向太后再次祝寿。
English: The emperor sang again, still leading the courtiers to wish the empress dowager another happy birthday.

古文：闾进曰： 臣闻大夫行孝，行合一家；诸侯行孝，声著一国；天子行孝，德被四海。
现代文：高闾说 ：臣下听说，大夫行孝，和睦一家；诸侯行孝，名传一国；天子行孝，德及四海。
English: Gao Yao said, "My subjects have heard that if a doctor shows filial piety, the family will be in harmony; if a vassal shows filial piety, his name will spread throughout the country; if a heavenly son shows filial piety, his virtue will spread to the four corners of the earth."

古文：今陛下敦行孝道，臣等不胜庆踊，谨上千万岁寿。 
现代文：如今陛下笃行孝道，下臣等不胜欢欣鼓舞，谨祝皇上千万岁福寿！ 
English: Now that His Majesty has thoroughly practiced filial piety, his vassals are overjoyed and encouraged. I would like to wish the Emperor a long and happy life!

古文：帝大悦。
现代文：皇帝听后十分高兴。
English: The emperor was very happy to hear this.

古文：又议政于皇信堂，闾曰： 伏思太皇太后十八条之令，及仰寻圣朝所行，事周于百揆，愿终成其事。 
现代文：又有一次在皇信堂商议朝政时，高闾说： 我深思太皇太后所立的十八条法令，以及追寻圣朝以来所实行过的各种法制，事事都考虑得十分周到，希望皇上能照此行事。 
English: On another occasion, when the imperial government was being discussed in the Emperor's Hall, Gao Wei said, "I have thought deeply about the eighteen decrees issued by the Empress Dowager, as well as the various legal systems that have been implemented since the Holy Dynasty. Everything has been carefully considered, and I hope that the Emperor will act accordingly."

古文：帝曰： 刑法者，王道所用。
现代文：孝文帝说 ：刑法是推行王道所必须的。
English: Emperor Xiaowen said: Criminal law is necessary to promote the royal way.

古文：何者为法？
现代文：但什么是法？
English: But what is the law?

古文：何者为刑？
现代文：什么是刑？
English: What is the penalty?

古文：施行之日，何先何后？ 
现代文：执行的时候，谁先谁后？ 
English: When it comes to execution, who comes first?

古文：对曰： 刑制之会，轨物齐众，谓之法；犯违制约，致之于宪，谓之刑。
现代文：高闾回答说： 创立各种制度，以法度和礼制治理民众，这就是法；违犯制度和纪律，必须用法令条文来追究，就叫刑。
English: Gao Wei replied: To create various systems and to govern the people with legality and etiquette, this is the law; the violation system and discipline must be investigated with the provisions of laws and regulations, which is called punishment.

古文：然则法必先施，刑必后著。 
现代文：那么法必须首先施行，然后用刑。 
English: Then the law must be enforced first, and then the punishment.

古文：帝曰： 《论语》称：冉子退朝，孔子曰： 何晏也？ 
现代文：文帝说 ：《论语》中称：冉有退朝，孔子问 ：怎么这样晚？ 
English: Wen Di said: "The Analects of Confucius" said: "Ran Yu retreated to the dynasty. Confucius asked: "Why so late?"

古文：曰： 有政。 
现代文：冉有说 ：有政务。 
English: Ran You said: There are government affairs.

古文：子曰： 其事也，如其有政，虽不吾以，吾其与闻之。 
现代文：孔子说 ：不过是事务罢了，如果是政务，虽然我不曾参与，但我也会听说的。 
English: Confucius said, "It is only a matter of business. If it were a matter of government, although I did not participate, I would have heard about it."

古文：何者为政？
现代文：什么是政？
English: What is politics?

古文：何者为事？ 
现代文：什么是事？ 
English: What's going on?

古文：对曰： 政者，上之所行；事者，下之所综。 
现代文：高闾回答说： 政，是皇上所施行的；事，是臣下所处置的。 
English: Gao Yao replied, "Politics is carried out by the emperor; affairs are handled by his vassals.

古文：后诏闾与太常采雅乐以营金石。
现代文：后来又令高闾和太常卿共同收集雅乐以演奏。
English: Later, Gao Jun and Tai Changqing were ordered to collect and perform classical music together.

古文：又领广陵王师，出除镇南将军、相州刺史。
现代文：又带领广陵王的军队，出任镇南将军、相州刺史。
English: He also led the army of Guangling Wang and served as the general of Zhenan and the governor of Xiangzhou.

古文：以参定律令之勤，赐布帛粟牛马等。
现代文：他因有参加制定法律条令的劳绩，被赐予布帛和牛马等物。
English: He was given cloth, oxen and horses for his participation in the formulation of laws and regulations.

古文：迁都洛阳，闾表谏，言迁有十损，必不获已，请迁于鄴。帝颇嫌之。
现代文：迁都洛阳时，高闾曾上表劝谏，认为迁都有十个方面损失，如果非迁不可，请迁往邺城，孝文帝对此颇为不快。
English: When the capital was moved to Luoyang, Gao Wei advised Emperor Xiaowen that there were ten aspects of loss in moving the capital, and if it was necessary, Emperor Xiaowen was not happy about it.

古文：雍州刺史曹武据襄阳请降，车驾亲幸悬瓠。
现代文：雍州刺史曹武以他所统领的襄阳前来归降，皇帝亲自驾幸悬瓠。
English: The Yongzhou assassin Cao Wu came to Yangyang to surrender, with the emperor himself leading the procession.

古文：闾表谏：洛阳草创，武既不遣质任，必非诚心，帝不纳。
现代文：高闾上表进谏说 ：洛阳正是草创时期，曹武既然没有派来人质，必定不是真正归降。 
English: Gao Gan said to Zhang Jinjun: Luoyang was the period of pioneering, since Cao Wu did not send hostages, it must not be a real surrender.

古文：武果虚诈，诸将皆无功而还。
现代文：皇帝不采纳，曹武果然诈降，所有将领都无功而回。
English: The emperor did not accept it, and Cao Wu did indeed abdicate, and all the generals returned without success.

古文：车驾还幸石济，闾朝于行宫。
现代文：当皇帝返回石济时，高闾在行宫朝见。
English: When the emperor returned to Shiji, Gao Jun met him at the imperial palace.

古文：帝谓曰： 朕往年之意，不欲决征。
现代文：孝文帝说： 我原来的想法，并不是一定要出征。
English: Xiaowen Di said: My original idea was not necessarily to go to war.

古文：但兵士已集，恐为幽王之失，不容中止，遂至淮南。
现代文：但是兵马已经集合待命，我恐怕会像周幽王那样失误，所以没有中止这次行动，来到淮南。
English: But the soldiers and horses had already assembled and were on standby. I was afraid that I would make the same mistake as Zhou Yuwang, so I did not stop the operation and came to Huainan.

古文：而彼诸将并列州镇，至无所获，实由晚一月日故耳。 
现代文：对方将所有将领据守各州镇，所以一无所获。这实在是晚一个月出兵的缘故。 
English: The other side garrisoned all the generals in each state town, so nothing was gained. This was really due to the fact that the troops were sent out a month late.

古文：闾曰： 古攻战法，倍则攻之，十则围之。
现代文：高闾说： 自古攻城作战，兵力倍于对方就可以进攻，十倍于对方就把城团团围住。
English: Gao Wei said: Since ancient times, when attacking a city, an army with twice the strength of the other side can attack, and an army with ten times the strength of the other side can surround the city.

古文：圣驾亲征，诚应大捷，所以无大获，良由兵少故也。
现代文：皇上亲征，本应大获全胜，所以没有收获，实在是兵力太少的缘故。
English: The emperor's personal enlistment was supposed to be a complete victory, so there was no harvest, but it was really due to too few troops.

古文：今京邑甫尔，庶事造创，愿陛下当从容伊、瀍，使德被四海。 
现代文：如今京城初就，诸事均在草创时期，愿陛下从容经营京都，使德泽播于四海。 
English: Now that the capital is newly built, everything is in the pioneering period. May His Majesty manage Kyoto calmly and make virtue spread to the four seas.

古文：帝曰： 愿从容伊、瀍，实亦不少，但未获耳。 
现代文：皇帝说： 我也愿意从容经营伊洛氵廛高涧一带，事已不少，但尚未有大的收获。 
English: The emperor said: I am also willing to calmly manage the Iluo-Gaoshan area. A lot has happened, but there has not yet been a big harvest.

古文：闾曰： 司马相如临终，恨不封禅。
现代文：高闾说 ：司马相如临终前，还抱恨于未能参加封禅的大典。
English: Takahata said, "Sima Sang was on his deathbed, and he still held a grudge for not being able to attend the grand ceremony of the enthronement.

古文：今虽江介不宾，然中州地略以尽平，岂可圣明之辰，而阙盛礼？ 
现代文：如今虽江表一带未归顺，但中州地区已经讨平，怎么能在这样圣明的时候而缺少盛大的典礼呢？ 
English: Nowadays, although the area around the Yangtze River has not been converted, but the Zhongzhou region has been leveled, how can there be a lack of grand ceremony at such a holy time?

古文：帝曰： 荆扬未一，岂得如卿言也？ 
现代文：孝文帝说 ：荆扬一带还未统一，怎么就能照你所说的那样举行盛典呢？ 
English: Emperor Xiaowen said, "Jingyang and the surrounding areas have not yet been unified, so how can you hold a grand ceremony as you said?"

古文：闾以江南非中国，且三代之境，亦不能远。
现代文：高闾回答说，江南一带并不是古代所说的中国，况且夏、商、周三代的疆土，也并不很广大。
English: Gao Wei replied that the area around the south of the Yangtze River was not China as it was called in ancient times. Moreover, the territory of Xia, Shang and San dynasties was not very vast.

古文：帝曰： 淮海惟扬州，荆及衡阳惟荆州，此非近中国乎？ 
现代文：皇帝说： 从淮海至东海是扬州，从荆山至衡阳是荆州，这些不都近在中国吗？ 
English: The emperor said, "From Huaihai to the East Sea is Yangzhou, and from Jingshan to Hengyang is Jingzhou. Aren't they all close to China?"

古文：及车驾至鄴，孝文频幸其州馆，下诏褒扬之。
现代文：当皇帝来到邺城时，多次亲往高闾的府中，同时下诏表彰他。
English: When the emperor came to Lucheng, he personally went to Gao Jun's residence many times, and issued an edict to commend him.

古文：闾每请本州以自效，诏曰： 闾以悬车之年，方求衣锦。知进忘退，有尘谦德，可降号平北将军。
现代文：高闾多次请求领本州人马报效朝廷，皇帝下诏说： 高闾已到退休之年，本应请求衣锦还乡，但他只知进取而不考虑退路，有世人谦逊的美德，可封号为平北将军。
English: Gao Jiong repeatedly requested to lead the people of Honshu to serve the imperial court, and the emperor issued a decree saying: Gao Jiong has reached the age of retirement, and should have requested the brocade to return to his hometown, but he only knows how to advance without considering the way out, and has the virtue of humility of the world, and can be given the title of Pingbei General.

古文：朝之老成，宜遂情愿，徙授幽州刺史，令存劝兼行，恩法并举。 
现代文：他是朝中的老臣，理应顺其心愿，迁任幽州刺史，让他存恤和劝慰同行，恩惠和法律并用。 
English: He is an old minister of the imperial court, and it is only natural that he should follow his heart's desire and be transferred to the post of Yuzhou magistrate, so that he can have mercy and comfort his colleagues, and use both grace and law.

古文：闾以诸州罢从事，依府置参军，于政体不便，表宜复旧。帝不悦。
现代文：高闾认为各州去掉从事官员而依照府的建制置参军，和政体不相合，便上表请求恢复旧制，孝文帝不高兴。
English: Emperor Gao Rong thought that it was not compatible with the form of government for each prefecture to remove the officials engaged in the military and have them join the army in accordance with the prefectural system, so he requested that the old system be restored. Emperor Xiaowen was not happy.

古文：岁余，表求致仕，优答不许。
现代文：一年多后，他上表请求辞职，皇帝以好话安慰，不听请求。
English: More than a year later, he went to the table and asked for his resignation. The emperor consoled him with kind words, but did not listen to his request.

古文：征为太常卿，频表陈逊，不听。
现代文：又召回任太常卿，高闾多次上表辞谢，但也不得许可。
English: Ren Taizongqing was also recalled, and Gao Yao repeatedly expressed his thanks, but was not allowed to do so.

古文：又车驾南讨汉阳，闾上表谏求回师，帝不纳。
现代文：皇帝亲征汉阳，高闾又上表劝谏，请求回军，皇帝不采纳。
English: The emperor personally led the army to conquer Hanyang, and Gao Gan went to the emperor to plead with him to return to the army, but the emperor did not accept his plea.

古文：汉阳平，赐闾玺书，闾上表陈谢。
现代文：汉阳讨平后，皇帝送诏书给高闾，高闾上表称谢。
English: After Hanyang was leveled, the emperor sent an imperial edict to Gao Gan, and Gao Gan expressed his thanks on the table.

古文：宣武践阼，闾累表逊位，优诏授光禄大夫，金章紫绶；使吏部尚书邢峦就家拜授。
现代文：宣武继位后，高闾多次上表请求让位。皇帝以优诏授予光禄大夫，金制的印章和紫色的绶带，由吏部尚书邢峦亲自送往高闾家中拜授。
English: After proclaiming Wu's succession, Gao Gan repeatedly petitioned to abdicate. The emperor awarded Dr. Guanglu with an imperial edict, a gold seal and a purple ribbon, which were personally sent to Gao Gan's home by Shang Shuxuan.

古文：及辞，引见东堂，赐以肴羞，访之大政。
现代文：高闾前往辞谢，皇帝在东堂接见他，赐给他佳美的食物，向他请教治国大政。
English: Gao Yao went to thank him for his resignation. The emperor received him in the East Hall, gave him delicious food, and asked him for advice on governing the country.

古文：以其先朝儒旧，告老求归，帝为之流涕。
现代文：他以自己是先朝的老臣，再次请求告老归田，皇帝感动得流下泪来。
English: The emperor was moved to tears as he once again asked to return to the imperial court, saying that he was a veteran minister of the previous dynasty.

古文：优诏赐安车、几杖、舆马、绘彩、衣服、布帛，事从丰厚。
现代文：于是传旨赐给他安车、几杖、马匹、锦缎、衣服、布匹等，样样十分丰厚。
English: So he gave him a wagon, a few sticks, horses, brocade, clothes, cloth, etc. The samples were very rich.

古文：百寮饯之，犹群公之祖二疏也。
现代文：百官都设宴为他饯行，就如同当年汉宣帝的众公卿为功成身退的疏广叔侄送行一样。
English: All the dignitaries held a banquet for him, just as the nobles of Emperor Han Xuan used to send off their nephews and uncles from Shuguang, who had retired for their achievements.

古文：闾进陟北芒，上《望阙表》以示恋慕之诚。
现代文：当高闾路过北芒山时，又派人奏上《望阙表》，以示恋恋不舍和仰慕的真情。
English: When Gao Yao was passing the Beimanshan Mountain, he also sent someone to play "The Watch of Gao Yao" to show the true feelings of love and admiration.

古文：卒于家，谥文贞。
现代文：后来他死在家中，谥号为文贞。
English: He later died at home, with the nickname Wen Zhen.

古文：闾好为文章，集四十卷。
现代文：高闾喜欢写文章，有文集四十卷。
English: Gao Wei likes to write articles and has a collection of forty volumes.

古文：其文亦高允之流，后称二高，为当时所服。
现代文：他的文章也和高允同流，后人把他们合称为 二高 ，都是为当时人所信服的。
English: His articles were also in the same vein as Gao Yun's, and later generations referred to them collectively as the "two highs," which were believed by people at the time.

古文：闾强果敢直谏，其在私室，言裁闻耳；及于朝廷广众之中，则谈论锋起，人莫能敌。
现代文：高闾性情刚强，敢于直谏。他在自己私房，讲话时声音很轻，耳朵刚能听到；可是当他在朝廷广众之中时，谈论起来，却劲头十足，人们都难以和他对抗。
English: Gao Gan has a strong temperament and dares to be direct. When he is in his private room, his voice is very soft and his ears can just hear; but when he is in the court's public, he is full of vigor when he talks, and it is difficult for people to confront him.

古文：孝文以其文雅之美，每优礼之。
现代文：孝文帝喜爱他文辞优美，经常给他以优厚的礼遇。
English: Emperor Xiaowen liked his elegant speech and often gave him generous courtesies.

古文：然贪褊矜慢。
现代文：可是他贪财，心胸狭小而又自傲。
English: But he is greedy, narrow-minded and arrogant.

古文：初在中书，好詈辱诸博士。
现代文：他在中书省时，喜欢辱骂各位博士。
English: When he was at the Ministry of Education and Culture, he liked to abuse doctors.

古文：学生百余人，有所干求者，无不受其贿。
现代文：他的学生一百多人，凡是有事求他，他都收受贿赂。
English: He has more than a hundred students, and he accepts bribes whenever they ask him for something.

古文：及老为二州，乃更廉俭自谨，有良牧之誉。
现代文：可是到年老当两地州刺史时，却特别清廉自我约束，有好官的称誉。
English: However, when he was old, when the two prefectures made history, he was particularly clean and self-disciplined, and had the reputation of a good official.

古文：子元昌袭爵，位辽西、博陵二郡太守。
现代文：他儿子高元昌承袭了爵位，曾任辽西、博陵太守。
English: His son, Gao Yuanchang, inherited the title and served as the governor of Liaoxi and Boling.

古文：性能多食，一饭至三升乃饱。
现代文：高闾的弟弟名悦，专心致志喜好读书，声名好于高闾，但早就去世了。
English: Gao Yao's younger brother, Meiyue, was a dedicated student with a penchant for reading. He had a better reputation than Gao Yao, but he passed away long ago.

古文：卒，无后。刘延明，燉煌人也。
现代文：刘延明是敦煌人。
English: Liu Yanming is from Dunhuang.

古文：父宝，字子玉，以儒学称。
现代文：父亲名宝，字子玉。以精通儒学而著称。
English: Her father's prized possession, a jade figurine. She is known for her mastery of Confucianism.

古文：延明年十四，就博士郭瑀。
现代文：刘延明十四岁时，就学于博士郭蠫家。
English: When Liu Yanming was fourteen years old, he studied under Dr. Guo Xingjia.

古文：瑀弟子五百余人，通经业者八十余人。
现代文：郭蠫有学生五百多人，其中精通经典的有八十多人。
English: Guo Jun has more than five hundred students, of which more than eighty are proficient in classics.

古文：瑀有女始笄，妙选良偶，有心于延明。
现代文：郭蠫有个女儿刚刚成年，他想挑选好的女婿，便想到了刘延明。
English: Guo Wei has a daughter who has just come of age. He wanted to choose a good son-in-law and thought of Liu Yanming.

古文：遂别设一席，谓弟子曰： 吾有一女，欲觅一快女婿，谁坐此席者，吾当婚焉。 
现代文：于是，他特地设一个席位，对弟子们说： 我有一位女儿，想找位好女婿，谁来坐这个席位，我就让女儿和他成婚。 
English: So he set up a special seat and said to his disciples: I have a daughter and I want to find a good son-in-law. Whoever takes this seat, I will let my daughter marry him.

古文：延明遂奋衣坐，神志湛然曰： 延明其人也。 
现代文：刘延明立即振衣入座，神情庄重地说 ：刘延明就是您要找的人啊！ 
English: Liu Yanming immediately changed his clothes and sat down, solemnly said: Liu Yanming is the person you are looking for!

古文：瑀遂以女妻之。
现代文：郭蠫把女儿嫁给他。
English: Guo Yao married his daughter to him.

古文：延明后隐居酒泉，不应州郡命，弟子受业者五百余人。
现代文：刘延明后来隐居在酒泉，不肯接受州郡的举荐，跟从他读书的学生有五百多人。
English: Liu Yanming later lived in seclusion in Jiuquan, refusing to accept the recommendation of the state and county, with more than five hundred students following him.

古文：凉武昭王征为儒林祭酒、从事中郎。
现代文：凉国武昭王征召他为儒林祭酒、从事中郎。
English: King Takeaki of Ryōgoku summoned him to serve as a cupbearer at the Jūrins' festival.

古文：昭王好尚文典，书史穿落者，亲自补葺。
现代文：昭王喜爱文章书籍，书、史中有破损脱落的，他亲自加以修补。
English: Zhao Wang likes literature and books. If a book or a piece of history is damaged and falls off, he will repair it himself.

古文：延明时侍侧，请代其事。
现代文：刘延明当时侍奉一旁，便请求代替武昭王做这些事情。
English: Liu Yanming, who was serving on the sidelines at the time, asked to do these things in place of King Wu Zhaohong.

古文：王曰： 躬自执者，欲人重此典籍。
现代文：武昭王说： 我所以亲自来做，是要人们珍重这些典籍。
English: Wu Zhao Wang said, "The reason why I personally came to do this is that I want people to treasure these classics.

古文：吾与卿相遇，何异孔明之会玄德。 
现代文：我和您有幸相遇，跟刘玄德遇孔明有什么差别。 
English: I'm lucky to have met you. What's the difference between meeting Liu Xuande and meeting Confucius?

古文：迁抚夷护军，虽有政务，手不释卷。
现代文：后升为抚夷护军，虽然政务繁忙，但手不释卷。
English: Later, he was promoted to the Fuxi Garrison. Although he was busy with government affairs, his hands were tied.

古文：昭王曰： 卿注记篇籍，以烛继昼，白日且然，夜可休息。 
现代文：昭王对他说： 您为书籍注疏，以烛光继续白天的工作，白天还可以，晚上应当休息。 
English: Zhao Wang said to him, "You should write notes for books, and continue your work during the day by candlelight. You can still work during the day, and you should rest at night.

古文：延明曰： 朝闻道，夕死可矣，不知老之将至，孔圣称焉。
现代文：刘延明回答 ： 早晨听到道，晚上死去也就甘心了，不知很快就到老年 ，这些话是孔圣人所说的。
English: Liu Yanming replied, "Hearing the Tao in the morning, I am willing to die in the evening, I don't know if I will soon reach old age, these words are said by the sage Kong.

古文：延明何人斯，敢不如此。 
现代文：我刘延明是哪种人，敢不这样去做吗？ 
English: What kind of person am I, Liu Yanming? Do I dare not to do this?

古文：延明以三史文繁，著《略记》百三十篇、八十四卷，《燉煌实录》二十卷，《方言》三卷，《靖恭堂铭》一卷，注《周易》、《韩子》、《人物志》、《黄石公三略》行于世。
现代文：刘延明觉得三种史书文字太多，便写成《略记》一百三十篇，八十四卷，《敦煌实录》二十卷，《方言》三卷，《靖恭堂铭》一卷，注《周易》、《韩非子》、《人物志》、《黄石公三略》等在社会上流行。
English: Liu Yanming felt that there were too many words in the three kinds of history books, so he wrote "A Brief History" with one hundred and thirty chapters and eighty-four volumes, "A Record of Dunhuang" with twenty volumes, "Dialects" with three volumes, "Jing Kyeong Doming" with one volume, and "Zhou Yi," "Han Feizi," "Character Biography," "A Brief History of Huangshi" and so on, which became popular in the society.

古文：蒙逊平酒泉，拜秘书郎，专管注记。
现代文：蒙逊讨平酒泉后，拜封刘延明为秘书郎，专门负责书籍的注记。
English: After Meng Song leveled Jiuquan, he appointed Liu Yanming as his secretary, specifically responsible for the annotation of books.

古文：筑陆沈观于西苑，躬往礼焉，号玄处先生。
现代文：并建了一座陆沈观在西苑，亲自前往礼敬，赐号为玄处先生。
English: He also built a statue of Lu Shenguan in the West Courtyard, and went to pay his respects in person, giving his name as Mr. Xuanshuang.

古文：学徒数百，月致羊酒。
现代文：当时有学生几百人，每月给他送来牛羊和美酒。
English: At that time, there were several hundred students, who sent him cattle, sheep and wine every month.

古文：牧犍尊为国师，亲自致拜；命官属以下，皆北面受业。
现代文：牧犍把刘延明尊封为国师，亲自对他礼拜，并命令所有官员，都北面受教。
English: The herdsman designated Liu Yanming as the national teacher, personally worshiped him, and ordered all officials to learn from him.

古文：时同郡索敞、阴兴为助教，并以文学见称，每巾衣而入。
现代文：当时，同郡的索敞、阴兴给他当助教，他们都以擅长文学而著称，他们经常巾衣整齐而入。
English: At that time, the county's Sochang and Yinxing gave him a teaching assistant. They were both famous for being good at literature, and they often entered neatly dressed.

古文：太武平凉州，士庶东迁，夙闻其名，拜乐平王从事中郎。
现代文：太武帝讨平凉州，带着士民东迁。他一向听说刘延明的名声，便封他为乐平王从事中郎。
English: Taiwu Emperor tried to pacify Liangzhou and moved eastward with his nobles and people. He had always heard of Liu Yanming's reputation, so he appointed him as the middle-man of the King of Leping.

古文：太武诏诸年七十已上，听留本乡，一子扶养。延明时老矣，在姑臧岁余，思乡而返，至凉州西四百里谷窟，疾卒。
现代文：后来太武帝下诏，凡年纪七十年以上的，可以让他们留在本乡，有一位儿子在身边抚养，当时刘延明年老，住在姑臧一年多后，因想念故乡便回去了。当他走到凉州西面四百里地的韭谷窟时，因病而死去。
English: Later, Emperor Taowu decreed that anyone over the age of seventy could stay in their hometown and have a son to raise. At that time, Liu Yan became an old man. After living in Gushan for more than a year, he went back because he missed his hometown. When he went to Shugu Cave, four hundred miles west of Liangzhou, he died of illness.

古文：太和十四年，尚书李冲奏：延明河右硕儒，今子孙沈屈，未有禄润；贤者子孙，宜蒙显异。
现代文：太和十四年，尚书李冲上奏孝文帝说，刘延明原是河西的大儒，可是如今子孙沉沦下层，没有禄位，像这样贤人的子孙，理应受到格外恩遇。
English: In the 14th year of the Taihe era, Shangshu Li Chong Shang played the role of Xiaowen Emperor and said that Liu Yanming was originally a great scholar in Hexi, but now his descendants have sunk to the lower class and have no position. The descendants of such a wise man should be treated with special favor.

古文：于是除其一子为郢州云阳令。
现代文：于是朝廷让他的一个儿子出任郢州云阳县令。
English: As a result, the imperial court appointed one of his sons as the governor of Yunyang County in Zhangzhou.

古文：正光三年，太保崔光奏曰： 故乐平王从事中郎燉煌刘延明，著业凉城，遗文在兹。
现代文：正光三年，太保崔光上奏说： 已故的乐平王从事中郎敦煌刘延明，著书于凉城，现遗文在此。
English: In the third year of Zheng Guang's reign, the eunuch Cui Guang said: The late King Leping engaged in the middle-ranking Dunhuang Liu Yanming, wrote books in Liangcheng, and his remains are here.

古文：如或愆衅，当蒙数世之宥。况乃维祖逮孙，相去未远，而令久沦皁隶，不获收异，儒学之士，所为窃叹。
现代文：即使有一些失误，也应当有几代人可以被赦免，何况从祖父到孙子，相距不远，却让他们久沦下层，身为贱役，没有得到照顾，使儒学之士都为之暗暗叹息。
English: Even if there are some mistakes, there should be several generations that can be pardoned, not to mention from grandfather to grandson, not far apart, but they have long been relegated to the lower class, as a lowly servant, and have not been taken care of, so that Confucian scholars are all secretly sighing.

古文：乞敕尚书，推检所属，甄免碎役，敦化厉俗，于是乎在。 
现代文：请传令尚书，查出他的遗属，免去各种杂役，以此来督促和化解不良的风俗。 
English: Please send a letter to Shang Zheng, find out his surviving relatives, and remove all kinds of attendants, so as to supervise and resolve bad customs.

古文：诏曰： 太保启陈，深合劝善，其孙等三家，特可听免。 
现代文：皇帝下诏说： 太保所奏，深合劝人为善之道，刘延明的孙子等三家，特别给予免除杂役。 
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict saying: Three families, including the grandchild of Liu Yanming, who had been played by Taibo and deeply persuaded to do good deeds, were specially exempted from miscellaneous service.

古文：河西人以为荣。
现代文：河西人都以此感到荣耀。
English: The people of Hexi all feel honored by this.

