古文：括字存中，以父任为沭阳主簿。
现代文：沈括，字存中，钱塘人，因为父荫得官为沭阳主簿。
English: Shen Kuo, in the middle of the word memory, Qiantang people, because his father's shadow was the main book of Shenyang.

古文：县依沐水，乃职方氏所书 浸曰沂、沭 者，故迹漫为污泽，括新其二坊，疏水为百渠九堰，以播节原委，得上田七千顷。
现代文：沭阳县靠着沭水，是职方氏所写的 水泽叫沂水、沭水 的地方。早先的河道漫衍为停滞不流的污泽，沈括重新修筑二堤，疏浚水流为一百条水渠九个水坝，用来分导和节制沭水的主流和支流，得到上等好田七千顷。
English: Shiyang County, which is adjacent to Lishui, is the place where the Mizawa is called Lishui and Lishui, written by Mr. Shikifang. The earlier river was a stagnant sludge, and two levees were rebuilt, and the dredged water flow was one hundred canals and nine dams, which were used to divert and control the main stream and tributaries of Lishui, resulting in seven thousand hectares of high-grade good fields.

古文：擢进士第，编校昭文书籍，为馆阁校勘，删定三司条例。
现代文：考中进士后，沈括被派去编集校对昭文馆的书籍，担任馆阁校勘，删定三司条例。
English: After passing the junior high school entrance examination, Shen Kuo was sent to compile and proofread the books of the Shouwen Library, serve as the librarian, and delete the regulations of the three departments.

古文：故事，三岁郊丘之制，有司按籍而行，藏其副，吏沿以干利。
现代文：按照惯例，皇帝每三年一次往圜丘祭祀天地的礼仪，是由有关机构按照典籍记载安排进行，他们把副本收藏起来，吏员往往借着举行祭祀仪式而谋取私利。
English: According to the usual practice, the emperor went to Mengqiu every three years to offer sacrifices to the heavens and the earth. The rituals were arranged by the relevant agencies according to the records of the classics. They collected the copies, and the officials often sought personal gain by holding the sacrificial rituals.

古文：坛下张幔，距城数里为园囿，植采木、刻鸟兽绵络其间。
现代文：祭坛下张设帐幕，在距离皇城数里的地方修建园林，竖立起五彩的木头，把雕刻好的飞鸟走兽绵延不断地放置在林木之间。
English: Tents were set up under the altar, gardens were built a few miles from the imperial city, colorful trees were erected, and carved birds and beasts were placed endlessly between the trees.

古文：将事之夕，法驾临观，御端门、陈仗卫以阅严警，游幸登赏，类非斋祠所宜。乘舆一器，而百工侍役者六七十辈。
现代文：将要举行祭祀的前夕，皇帝亲自前来观赏，登上端门，陈列仪仗卫队以检阅他们的威严警戒，游览赏玩，这些都不是斋戒祭祀时所应有的现象、皇帝使用的一个器物，就需要六七十名工匠制作。
English: On the eve of the sacrificial rites to be held, the emperor himself came to watch, boarded the gate, displayed the honor guard to review their solemn vigilance, and toured and enjoyed. These are not phenomena that should be observed during the fasting and sacrificial rites. A vessel used by the emperor requires sixty or seventy craftsmen to make.

古文：括考礼沿革，为书曰《南郊式》。即诏令点检事务，执新式从事，所省万计，神宗称善。
现代文：沈括考察了南郊大礼的历史沿革，撰写了一本书叫《南郊式》，于是皇帝降诏命令他掌管郊祀的事务，按照新礼仪办事，所节省的费用数以万计，神宗十分满意。
English: Shen Guan examined the historical development of the Southern Suburbs Grand Rite and wrote a book called "Southern Suburbs Style." The emperor then issued an edict ordering him to take charge of the affairs of the suburban shrines and to act in accordance with the new etiquette. The cost savings amounted to tens of thousands, and Shen Zong was very satisfied.

古文：迁太子中允、检正中书刑房、提举司天监，日官皆市井庸贩，法象图器，大抵漫不知。
现代文：升任太子中允、检正中书刑房、提举司天监，当时的日官都是庸庸碌碌的人，对于天文现象、天体图象及天文仪器，几乎全然不知。
English: The day officials at that time were mediocre people who were promoted to the position of prince's middle assistant, the position of chief inspector of the middle school, and the position of chief astronomer. They were almost completely ignorant of astronomical phenomena, celestial images, and astronomical instruments.

古文：括始置浑仪、景表、五壶浮漏，招卫朴造新历，募天下上太史占书，杂用士人，分方技科为五，后皆施用。
现代文：沈括开始设置浑仪、景表、五壶浮漏，召请卫朴修造新的历法，向全国各地征集太史用的观测天象的书籍，在司天监里参杂使用读书人，把方技科分为五项，这些办法后来都被采用施行。
English: Shen Kuo began to set up the Hun instrument, the scene table, and the five jars of floating spouts, called on Wei and Pak to build a new calendar, collected books on astronomical observation from all over the country, used readers in the astronomical observatory, and divided the technical subjects into five, all of which were later adopted and implemented.

古文：加史馆检讨。
现代文：加官为史馆检讨。
English: The addition of the post is subject to review by the museum.

古文：淮南饥，遣括察访，发常平钱粟，疏沟渎，治废田，以救水患。
现代文：淮南发生饥荒，朝廷派遣沈括前去巡察。他发放常平仓的钱和粮食，疏通河渠，修治荒废的农田，以此来消除水灾造成的破坏。
English: When a famine occurred in Huainan, the imperial court sent Shen Kuang to inspect the situation. He distributed money and grain from storehouses that had been closed, cleared canals, and repaired abandoned farmland in order to eliminate the damage caused by the flood.

古文：迁集贤校理，察访两浙农田水利，迁太常丞、同修起居注。
现代文：升任集贤校理，巡察两浙地区的农田水利情况，升任太常丞、同修起居注。
English: He was promoted to the position of Jixian's supervisor, inspected the situation of farmland and water conservancy in the two Zhejiang regions, and was promoted to the position of Tai Changzheng, a fellow practitioner.

古文：时大籍民车，人未谕县官意，相扌延为忧；又市易司患蜀盐之不禁，欲尽实私井而辇解池盐给之。
现代文：当时朝廷大规模地登记民间车辆，人们不了解朝廷的用意，都引以为忧；市易司又担忧四川禁止不了私贩井盐，打算把四川的私井全部填实封住而运解池的盐去供应。
English: At that time, the imperial court was registering private vehicles on a large scale, and people were worried that they did not understand the intentions of the imperial court; the city Yizi was also worried that Sichuan could not ban the private sale of well salt, and planned to fill and seal all the private wells in Sichuan and supply the salt from the brine tank.

古文：言者论二事如织，皆不省，括侍帝侧，帝顾曰： 卿知籍车乎？ 曰： 知之。 帝曰： 何如？ 对曰： 敢问欲何用？ 帝曰： 北边以马取胜，非车不足以当之。 括曰： 车战之利，见于历世。
现代文：如今民间的载重车笨重庞大，每天走不了三十里路，因此人们把它叫作太平车，只能够在太平的日子用用罢了。 
English: Nowadays, people's trucks are bulky and huge, and they can't travel thirty miles a day. Therefore, people call it a peace car, and it can only be used on a peaceful day.

古文：然古人所谓兵车者，轻车也，五御折旋，利于捷速。
现代文：神宗高兴地说： 别人都没有说到这些话，我要好好考虑。 
English: Shenzong said happily, "No one else has said these words, so I have to think about it carefully."

古文：今之民间辎车重大，日不能三十里，故世谓之太平车，但可施于无事之日尔。 帝喜曰： 人言无及此者，朕当思之。 遂问蜀盐事，对曰： 一切实私井而运解盐，使一出于官售，诚善。然患万、戎、泸间夷界小井尤多，不可猝绝也，势须列候加警，臣恐得不足偿费。 帝颔之。
现代文：于是又问他川盐的事，沈括回答说： 把所有的私井都填塞封掉而运去解池的盐，使盐全部都由官府发售，固然好。但是忠州、万州、戎州、泸州一带少数民族地区的小盐井很多，不可能一下子禁绝，势必要在这个地区加强警戒，这样的话我怕所得不足以偿所费。 神宗点头同意。
English: He then asked him about the salt in the river, to which Shen replied: It would be good to fill and seal all the private wells and transport the salt to the digester, so that all the salt could be sold by the government. However, there are many small salt wells in the ethnic minority areas around Chungju, Wanzhou, Eonju, and Jeonju. It is impossible to ban them all at once, and it is necessary to strengthen vigilance in this area. In this case, I am afraid that the income will not be enough to cover the expenses. Shen Zong nodded in agreement.

古文：明日，二事俱寝。
现代文：第二天，这二件事都停止实施了。
English: The next day, both were suspended.

古文：擢知制诰，兼通进、银台司，自中允至是才三月。
现代文：提升为知制诰，兼管通进、银台司，沈括从任太子中允到知制诰才三个月的时间。
English: He was promoted to the position of Chisei Shoko, concurrently in charge of Tongjin and the Bank of Taiwan. It took only three months for Shen Kuo to rise from the position of crown prince to the position of Chisei Shoko.

古文：为河北西路察访使。
现代文：任河北西路察访使。
English: He served as an envoy to inspect the western route of Hebei Province.

古文：先是，银冶，转运司置官收其利，括言： 近宝则国贫，其势必然；人众则囊橐奸伪何以检颐？
现代文：以前的惯例，凡有银冶之处，转运使就设置官员收取银冶的息钱。沈括说 ：靠近宝藏就会使国家贫穷，这是必然的事；靠近宝藏的人多了，那么窝藏的奸伪之徒怎样检查出来呢？
English: According to the previous practice, wherever there was silver, officials were set up to collect the interest of silver. Shen Guo said: close to the treasure will make the country poor, this is an inevitable thing; there are more people close to the treasure, so how to check out the hiding fraudsters?

古文：朝廷岁遗契丹银数千万，以其非北方所有，故重而利之。
现代文：朝廷每年送给契丹数十万两银子，因为它不是北方所有的东西，所以他们看重它而认为获得它是有利的。
English: The royal court gives hundreds of thousands of taels of silver to the Khitan each year, because it is not everything in the north, so they value it and consider it advantageous to acquire it.

古文：昔日银城县、银坊城皆没于彼，使其知凿山之利，则中国之币益轻，何赖岁饷，邻衅将自兹始矣。 
现代文：过去的银城县、银坊城都已被他们侵占，假如使他们知道开凿矿山的好处，那么中国的岁币更加要被他们看轻了，还有什么东西可以每年送给他们，边境争端将要从这里开始了。 
English: In the past, Yincheng County and Yinfang City have been occupied by them. If they are made aware of the benefits of digging mines, then they will look down on China's old money even more. What else can be given to them every year? The border dispute will begin from here.

古文：时赋近畿户出马备边，民以为病，括言： 北地多马而人习骑战，犹中国之工强弩也。
现代文：当时朝廷要京城附近地区的百姓每户出马充作赋税以保卫边境，百姓把这当作灾难。沈括说 ：北方地区马多而且人们熟悉骑马作战，好比是中国擅长强弩。
English: At that time, the imperial court asked every household in the area near the capital to contribute a horse as a tax to defend the border, and the people regarded this as a disaster.Shen Kuo said: There are many horses in the northern region and people are familiar with horse riding, as if China is good at strong horses.

古文：今舍我之长技，强所不能，何以取胜。 又边人习兵，唯以挽强定最，而未必能贯革，谓宜以射远入坚为法。
现代文：如今舍弃我们擅长的技艺，勉强去做不擅长的事，怎么能够取得胜利。 另外边境地区的人练习打仗，只以拉开弓的强度来确定高下，但未必能射穿皮革，沈括说应该以射出远近的距离和射入硬物的程度作为考核的标准。
English: Now, how can we win if we give up the skills we are good at and do things we are not good at? In addition, people in the border areas practice fighting, only using the strength of the bow to determine the height, but may not be able to shoot through the leather. Shen Guo said that the distance from far and near and the degree of penetration into hard objects should be used as assessment standards.

古文：如是者三十一事，诏皆可之。
现代文：沈括提出类似的意见三十一件，皇帝降诏都同意实行。
English: Shen Kuo put forward thirty-one similar opinions, all of which the emperor agreed to implement.

古文：辽萧禧来理河东黄嵬地，留馆不肯辞，曰： 必得请而后反。 帝遣括往聘。
现代文：辽国的萧禧来处理河东黄嵬一带地界分划的问题，留在馆舍不肯辞去，说： 我一定要达到目的才能返回。 
English: Xiao Xiyi from Liaoning Province came to deal with the issue of the demarcation of the territorial boundaries in the Huangpi area of Hedong. He stayed at the museum and refused to resign, saying: I must achieve my goal before I can return.

古文：括诣枢密院阅故牍，得顷岁所议疆地书，指古长城为境，今所争盖三十里远，表论之。
现代文：神宗派遣沈括出使辽国。沈括到枢密院查阅以前的档案文件，查找到当年商定边境的文件，文件指定以古代的长城作为边界，而现在所争的地方与长城相距三十里远，于是上表阐明了这件事。
English: Shen Zong sent Shen Kuo as an envoy to Liao. Shen Kuo went to the Privy Council to check the previous archival documents and found the document on the border agreed upon that year. The document designated the ancient Great Wall as the border, but the disputed place is now thirty miles away from the Great Wall, so the above table clarified the matter.

古文：帝以休日开天章阁召对，喜曰： 大臣殊不究本末，几误国事。 命以画图示禧，禧议始屈。
现代文：神宗在休假日打开天章阁召见沈括答对，高兴地说 ：大臣们根本不去探究事情的原委，差一点误了国家大事。 神宗命令把地图拿给萧禧看，萧禧这才感到理屈。
English: On his day off, Shenzong opened the Heavenly Chapter House to summon Shen Biao to answer the question, and happily said: The ministers did not go to investigate the original commission of the matter at all, and almost missed the national event. Shenzong ordered to show the map to Xiao Xi, which made Xiao Xi feel logical.

古文：赐括白金千两使行。
现代文：神宗赐给沈括白金一千两，让他出使辽国。
English: Shenzong gave Shen Kuo a thousand taels of platinum and sent him to Liao.

古文：至契丹庭，契丹相杨益戒来就议，括得地讼之籍数十，预使吏士诵之，益戒有所问，则顾吏举以答。
现代文：他到了契丹宫廷，契丹宰相杨益戒来同他面议。沈括找到争论地界的各种书信档案数十件，预先让幕僚和吏员背熟它，杨益戒有问题提出，沈括就回头让吏员列举所得档案回答。
English: He arrived at the Khitan court, and the Khitan prime minister, Yang Yikai, came to meet him for discussion. Shen Guo found dozens of letters and files of various kinds that disputed the territorial boundaries, and had the staff and officials familiarize themselves with them in advance. Yang Yikai asked questions, and Shen Guo turned back and asked the officials to list the received files and answer.

古文：他日复问，亦如之。
现代文：另一天再问，还是同样回答。
English: Ask me again the next day and I'll give you the same answer.

古文：益戒无以应，谩曰： 数里之地不忍，而轻绝好乎？ 括曰： 师直为壮，曲为老。
现代文：杨益戒无言可对，傲慢地说： 几里土地都不忍心，难道忍心轻率地断绝友好关系吗？ 沈括回答说 ：军队以正义为强大，以理屈为衰弱。
English: Yang Yijie was speechless and said haughtily, "A few miles of land cannot be tolerated, can it be tolerated to rashly break off friendly relations?" Shen Guan replied, "The army is strong with justice, and weak with reasoning."

古文：今北朝弃先君之大信，以威用其民，非我朝之不利也。 凡六会，契丹知不可夺，遂舍黄嵬而以天池请。
现代文：现在你们北朝抛弃你们以前皇帝的重大信誓，用暴力役使人民，这对我们南朝没有什么不利。 总共会谈了六次，契丹知道沈括不会屈服，于是丢开黄嵬不谈而只要求将天池地区划归他们。
English: Now that you, the Northern Dynasty, have abandoned the solemn oaths of your former emperors and used violence to subjugate the people, there is nothing unfavorable to us, the Southern Dynasty. After a total of six meetings, the Khitan knew that Shen Kuo would not give in, so he did not talk about Huang Kuo and only demanded that the Tianchi region be assigned to them.

古文：括乃还，在道图其山川险易迂直，风俗之纯庞，人情之向背，为《使契丹图抄》上之。
现代文：于是沈括起程回国，他在路上画下沿途山川的险峻平缓迂回顺直，风俗的纯朴和复杂，人情的向背，撰修成《使契丹图抄》一书献给朝廷。
English: Therefore, Shen Kuo set out to return to China. On the way, he drew the steep and gentle detours of the mountains and rivers along the way, the simplicity and complexity of the customs, and the backwardness of the people's feelings, and compiled it into a book "Make Khitan Map" dedicated to the imperial court.

古文：拜翰林学士、权三司使。
现代文：朝廷任命他为翰林学士、权三司使。
English: The imperial court appointed him as a scholar of Hanlin and an envoy of the three departments of power.

古文：尝白事丞相府，吴充问曰： 自免役令下，民之诋訾者今未衰也，是果于民何如？ 括曰： 以为不便者，特士大夫与邑居之人习于复除者尔，无足恤也。
现代文：沈括曾经到丞相府汇报事情，吴充问他说 ：自从免役令颁布以后，百姓对它的诋毁攻击至今没有减少。
English: Shen Kuo once went to the prime minister's office to report the situation. Wu Zhen asked him: "Since the exemption order was issued, the people's slanderous attacks on it have not decreased.

古文：独微户本无力役，而亦使出钱，则为可念。
现代文：免役法究竟对百姓怎么样？ 沈括说 ：认为不方便的，只是士大夫和城市中习惯于免除服役的人，这不必顾虑。
English: What does the exemption from military service law really mean for the people? Shen Quan said: It is only the magistrates and people in the city who are used to being exempt from military service who think it is inconvenient. There is no need to worry about this.

古文：若悉弛之，使一无所预，则善矣。 充然其说，表行之。
现代文：只是有些贫穷寒微人家本来规定不服力役的，现在也要他们出钱，那是应该考虑的。如果对这些人全部放宽，完全不收他们的钱，就好了。 吴充认为他说得对，上表朝廷施行了这项建议。
English: However, it should be considered that some poor and humble people, who were originally exempted from forced labor, are now required to pay money. It would be better if these people were completely exempted and their money was not collected at all. Wu Chong thought that he was right, and the imperial court implemented this suggestion.

古文：蔡确论括首鼠乖刺，阴害司农法，以集贤院学士知宣州，明年，复龙图阁待制、知审官院，又出知青州，未行，改延州。
现代文：蔡确抨击沈括对免役法的言行前后反复不同，暗中妨害司农法，沈括以集贤院学士出任宣州知州。第二年，复职龙图阁待制、知审官院，又被派遣出任青州知州，还没有去上任，改任延州知州。
English: Cai Jizhen criticized Shen Kuo's words and deeds on the exemption from military service law, which were repeatedly different, and secretly interfered with the Department of Agricultural Law. Shen Kuo served as Xuanzhou Zhizhou with a bachelor's degree from Jixian Academy. In the second year, he was reinstated as Longtu Pavilion, and was sent to serve as Qingzhou Zhizhou. Before he took office, he was reassigned to Yanzhou Zhizhou.

古文：至镇，悉以别赐钱为酒，命廛市良家子驰射角胜，有轶群之能者，自起酌酒以劳之，边人欢激，执弓傅矢，唯恐不得进。
现代文：到了延州，沈括以朝廷额外赐给的钱买来酒，命令街市百姓中清白人家的子弟比赛骑马射箭以分高下。有超群出众才能的人，沈括亲自起身酌酒慰劳他，边境上的百姓欢悦激动，拿着弓箭，唯恐不能参加比赛。
English: When he arrived in Yanzhou, Shen Kuo used the extra money given by the imperial court to buy wine and ordered the children of the middle-class and white families in the city to compete in horse archery. People with outstanding talents, Shen Kuo personally got up to drink wine to comfort him, and the people on the border were excited, holding bows and arrows, lest they could not participate in the competition.

古文：越岁，得彻札超乘者千余，皆补中军义从，威声雄他府。
现代文：过了一年，沈括挑选到能射穿箭靶、飞身上车的人一千多名，都补充到中军做志愿兵，因此延州军队的声威超过了其他州府。
English: After a year, Shen Guo selected more than a thousand people who could shoot through the target and fly on the vehicle, and they were all added to the Chinese army as volunteers. Therefore, the prestige of the Yanzhou army exceeded that of other state capitals.

古文：以副总管种谔西讨援银、宥功，加龙图阁学士。
现代文：由于副总管种谔讨伐西夏攻下银州、宥州有功，沈括加官为龙图阁学士。
English: As the vice-commander-in-charge, he was instrumental in the conquest of Yinzhou and Yuzhou in Western Xia, he was awarded the title of Longtu Ge bachelor.

古文：朝廷出宿卫之师来戍，赏赉至再而不及镇兵。
现代文：朝廷派出守卫京城的禁军到边境驻防，两次赏赐他们也没有赏赐地方军队。
English: The imperial court sent the imperial army guarding the capital to the border to garrison, and twice rewarded them and did not reward local troops.

古文：括以为卫兵虽重，而无岁不战者，镇兵也。
现代文：沈括认为京城的卫兵虽然重要，但是没有一年不战斗的军队则是地方守军。
English: Shen Kuo believes that although the guards of the capital are important, the army that does not fight for a year is the local guard.

古文：今不均若是，且召乱。
现代文：如果像现在这样赏赐不均，会引起变乱。
English: If the rewards are as unequal as they are now, it will cause turmoil.

古文：乃藏敕书，而矫制赐缗钱数万，以驿闻。
现代文：于是藏起敕书，假托朝廷命令赐给地方军队钱几万缗，并通过驿站上报朝廷。
English: So he hid the imperial edict, gave tens of thousands of baht to the local army under the pretext of the imperial order, and reported it to the imperial court through the post.

古文：诏报之曰： 此右府颁行之失，非卿察事机，必扰军政。 自是，事不暇请者，皆得专之。
现代文：神宗降诏答复他说 ：这是枢密院颁布赏赐时的失误。如果不是你看到事情的要害，必然会扰乱军政。 从此以后，事情来不及请示报告的，沈括都可以自己作主处理。
English: Shenzong Dengzhao replied to him, "This is the mistake of the Privy Council when it issued the reward. If you do not see the crux of the matter, it will inevitably disrupt the military government. From now on, the matter is too late to ask for a report, and you can handle it yourself.

古文：蕃汉将士自皇城使以降，许承制补授。
现代文：少数民族和汉族将士从皇城使以下的官职，允许沈括以朝廷的名义补授。
English: Ethnic minorities and Han soldiers were transferred from the imperial capital to the following official positions, allowing Shen Guo to give supplementary instruction in the name of the imperial court.

古文：谔师次五原，值大雪，粮饷不继，殿直刘归仁率众南奔，士卒二万人皆溃入塞，居民怖骇。
现代文：种谔军队来到五原，正遇下大雪，粮饷没有及时运到，殿直刘归仁率领部下向南奔逃，士兵三万多人都溃散入塞，当地居民十分恐慌。
English: When the seed-ploughing troops came to Wuhuan, it was snowing heavily, and the grain was not delivered in time. General Liu Guiren led his subordinates to flee to the south, and more than 30,000 soldiers scattered into the mountains. The local residents were very panicked.

古文：括出东郊饯河东归师，得奔者数千，问曰： 副都总管遣汝归取粮，主者为何人？ 曰： 在后。 即谕令各归屯。
现代文：沈括出城在东郊用酒食接待回来的河东军队，得到逃回来的士兵几千人，问他们说： 副都总管派你们回来取粮食，为首的人是谁呢？ 士兵回答说 ：在后面。 沈括便命令他们各回兵营去。
English: Shen Kuo went out of the city to the eastern suburbs to receive the returning troops from Hedong with wine and food. He received several thousand soldiers who had escaped and asked them, "The vice-governor has ordered you to return to get grain. Who is the leader?" The soldiers replied, "He's in the back." Shen Kuo then ordered them to go back to their barracks.

古文：及暮，至者八百，未旬日，溃卒尽还。
现代文：到了晚上，又到了八百人，不到十天，溃散的士兵全部回来了。
English: In the evening, another eight hundred soldiers arrived. In less than ten days, all the scattered soldiers returned.

古文：括出按兵，归仁至，括曰： 汝归取粮，何以不持军符？ 归仁不能对，斩以狗。
现代文：沈括出去巡察部队，刘归仁来见，沈括说 ：你回来取粮食，为什么不拿军符？ 刘归仁无言以对，沈括将他斩首示众。
English: Shen Guofeng went out to inspect the troops, Liu Guiren came to see him, Shen Guofeng said: You came back to get grain, why don't you take a military badge? Liu Guiren was speechless, Shen Guofeng beheaded him for the public to see.

古文：经数日，帝使内侍刘惟简来诘叛者，具以对。
现代文：过了几天，神宗派内侍刘惟简来查问叛乱的人，沈括把处理的情况报告了朝廷。
English: A few days later, Liu Weizhong, an attendant of the Jinshong sect, came to interrogate the rebels and reported the situation to the imperial court.

古文：大将景思谊、曲珍拔夏人磨崖葭芦浮图城，括议筑石堡以临西夏，而给事中徐禧来，禧欲先城永乐。
现代文：大将景思谊、曲珍攻克西夏的磨崖、葭芦、浮图城，沈括建议修筑石堡城来对付西夏，但是给事中徐禧来到，他要先修建永乐城。
English: Generals Jing Siyi and Qu Zhen conquered the cliff, gourd and floating city of the Western Xia, and proposed to build a stone castle to deal with the Western Xia. However, Xu Xiyi came in the middle of the matter, and he wanted to build Yongle City first.

古文：诏禧护诸将往筑，令括移府并塞，以济军用。
现代文：皇帝降诏要徐禧总领将领们前去筑城，命令沈括把他的帅府移到边界，以便接济军用物资和救援。
English: The emperor decreed that General Xu Xiyi and his generals should go and build the city, and ordered Shen Guo to move his headquarters to the border in order to receive military supplies and relief.

古文：已而禧败没，括以夏人袭绥德，先往救之。不能援永乐，坐谪均州团练副使。
现代文：不久徐禧失败战死，沈括因为西夏军队袭击绥德，而先去援救绥德，不能去援救永乐城，因而被贬为筠州团练副使。
English: Soon after, Xu Xiyi was defeated and died in battle. Because the Western Xia army attacked Shunde, Shen Guo went to rescue Shunde first, but could not rescue Yongle City. As a result, he was demoted to the deputy envoy of the Zhangzhou Rehearsal Corps.

古文：元祐初，徙秀州，继以光禄少卿分司，居润八年卒，年六十五。
现代文：元初年，改任秀州团练副使，接着任光禄少卿分司，在润州居住八年后去世，终年六十五岁。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was reappointed as the deputy envoy of Shuzhou Reunification, and then as the subdivision of Guanglu Shaoqing. He lived in Runzhou for eight years and died at the age of sixty-five.

古文：括博学善文，于天文、方志、律历、音乐、医药、卜算，无所不通，皆有所论著。
现代文：沈括学识广博，善于写文章，对于天文、方志、律历、音乐、医药、卜算，没有不通晓的，都有著作论述。
English: Shen Kuo had a broad knowledge and was good at writing articles. He had written treatises on astronomy, the Fang Zhi, the Legal Calendar, music, medicine, and divination.

古文：又纪平日与宾客言者为《笔谈》，多载朝廷故实、耆旧出处，传于世。
现代文：他又把平时当宾客谈论的事记录下来编成《笔谈》一书，大多记载朝廷中的典故事实，故旧老臣的进退，流传于世。
English: He also recorded the things that he usually talked about when he was a guest and compiled them into a book, "Pen Talk." Most of them recorded the facts of the classics in the imperial court, so the progress and retreat of the old minister was passed down to the world.

