古文：西南夷君长以什数，夜郎最大；其西靡莫之属以什数，滇最大；自滇以北君长以什数，邛都最大：此皆魋结，耕田，有邑聚。其外西自同师以东，北至楪榆，名为巂、昆明，皆编发，随畜迁徙，毋常处，毋君长，地方可数千里。
现代文：这些夷国的人都头梳椎髻，耕种田地，有聚居在一起的城镇和村落。他们以外的地方，西边从同师往东，直到北边的楪榆，称为嶲和昆明，这里的人们把头发盘在头上，随着放牧的牲畜到处迁徙，没有固定的居住之地，也没有长帅，他们活动的地方有几千里。
English: These barbarians combed their hair with a comb, cultivated the fields, and had towns and villages where they lived together. Outside of them, in the west, from the same division to the east, to the north of the country, known as Kunming and Kunming, the people here put their hair on their heads and migrate everywhere with the grazing livestock. There is no fixed place of residence, and there is no leader. Their activities cover thousands of miles.

古文：自巂以东北，君长以什数，徙、筰都最大；自筰以东北，君长以什数，厓駹最大。
现代文：从嶲往东北去，君长多得要用十来计算，其中徙和筰都势力最大。从筰往东北去，君长多得要用十来计算，其中冉駹的势力最大。
English: To go from Shandong to the northeast, the number of princes should be counted by ten, of which Yu and Shandong have the greatest influence. To go from Shandong to the northeast, the number of princes should be counted by ten, of which Ran is the most powerful.

古文：其俗或士箸，或移徙，在蜀之西。
现代文：他们的风俗是，有的是土著之民，有的是移徙之民，都在蜀郡的西边。
English: Their customs, some indigenous and some migratory, are all on the west side of Shu County.

古文：自厓駹以东北，君长以什数，白马最大，皆氐类也。
现代文：从冉駹往东北去，君长多得要用十来计算，其中白马的势力最大，都是氐族的同类。
English: From Rancheng to the northeast, the number of princes should be counted by ten, among which the White Horse has the greatest influence. They are all of the same kind as the Yi people.

古文：此皆巴蜀西南外蛮夷也。
现代文：这些都是巴郡、蜀郡西南以外的蛮夷。
English: These are all barbarians outside the southwest of Ba County and Shu County.

古文：始楚威王时，使将军庄蹻将兵循江上，略巴、黔中以西。
现代文：当初在楚威王时，派将军庄蹻率领军队沿着长江而上，攻取了巴郡、蜀郡和黔中郡以西的地方。
English: When he was the king of Chuwei, he sent the general Zhuang Zang to lead the army along the Yangtze River and conquered the areas west of Ba County, Shu County and Luzhong County.

古文：庄蹻者，故楚庄王苗裔也。
现代文：庄蹻是从前的楚庄王的后代子孙。
English: Zhuangzhuang is the descendant of the former King of Chu Zhuang.

古文：蹻至滇池，方三百里，旁平地，肥饶数千里，以兵威定属楚。
现代文：庄蹻到达滇池，这里方圆三百里，旁边都是平地，肥沃富饶的地方有几千里。
English: Zhuangzi arrived at Dianchi, here is a radius of three hundred miles, next to it are flatlands, and there are thousands of miles of fertile and rich places.

古文：欲归报，会秦击夺楚巴、黔中郡，道塞不通，因还，以其众王滇，变服，从其俗，以长之。
现代文：庄蹻依靠他的军队的威势平定了这个地方，让他隶属楚国。庄蹻想回楚国报告这情况，正赶上秦国攻打并夺取了楚国巴郡、黔中郡，道路被阻隔而不能通过，因而又回到滇池，借助他的军队做了滇王，改换服式，顺从当地习俗，因此当了滇人的统治者。
English: Zhuang Hui relied on the might of his army to pacify this place and subordinate it to Chu. Zhuang Hui wanted to return to Chu to report the situation. He was just in time for Qin to attack and capture the Ba County and the Yuzhong County of Chu. The road was blocked and could not be passed. Therefore, he returned to Dianchi. With the help of his army, he became the king of Yunnan, changed his clothing style, and obeyed local customs. Therefore, he became the ruler of Yunnan.

古文：秦时常頞略通五尺道，诸此国颇置吏焉。
现代文：秦朝时，常頞曾大略地开通了五尺道，并在这些国家设置了一些官吏。
English: During the Qin Dynasty, Changyu had roughly opened the Five-Foot Road and set up some officials in these countries.

古文：十馀岁，秦灭。
现代文：过了十几年，秦朝灭亡了。
English: After more than ten years, the Qin Dynasty fell.

古文：及汉兴，皆弃此国而开蜀故徼。
现代文：等到汉朝建立了，把这些国家都丢弃了，而将蜀郡的原来的边界当作关塞。
English: After the establishment of the Han Dynasty, these countries were discarded, and the original border of Shu County was used as a barrier.

古文：巴蜀民或窃出商贾，取其筰马、僰僮、髦牛，以此巴蜀殷富。
现代文：巴郡和蜀郡百姓中的有些人偷着出塞作买卖，换取筰国的马，僰国的僮仆与牦牛，因此巴、蜀两郡特别富有。
English: Some of the people in Ba County and Shu County stole money to buy and sell in exchange for horses, yakitori and yakitori, making Ba and Shu counties particularly rich.

古文：建元六年，大行王恢击东越，东越杀王郢以报。
现代文：汉武帝建元六年，大行王恢攻打东越，东越人杀死东越王郢而向汉朝报告。
English: In the sixth year of Emperor Jianyuan of the Han Dynasty, Da Xing Wang Wei attacked East Vietnam, and the East Vietnamese killed the East Vietnamese Wang Yao and reported it to the Han Dynasty.

古文：恢因兵威使番阳令唐蒙风指晓南越。
现代文：王恢凭借兵威派番阳令唐蒙把汉朝出兵的意旨委婉地告诉了南越。
English: By virtue of his military prowess, Wang Hui sent Panyang to tell Tang Meng about the intention of the Han Dynasty to send troops to South Vietnam.

古文：南越食蒙蜀枸酱，蒙问所从来，曰 道西北牂柯，牂柯江广数里，出番禺城下 。
现代文：南越拿蜀郡出产的杞酱给唐蒙吃，唐蒙询问从何处得来，南越说： 取道西北牂柯江而来，牂柯江宽度有几里，流过番禺城下。 
English: South Vietnam gave Tang Meng dipping sauce made in Shu County to eat. Tang Meng asked where it came from. South Vietnam said, "We came from the northwest along the Xing Ke River. The Xing Ke River is several miles wide and flows under Panyu City."

古文：蒙归至长安，问蜀贾人，贾人曰： 独蜀出枸酱，多持窃出市夜郎。
现代文：唐蒙回到长安，询问蜀郡商人，商人说： 只有蜀郡出产枸酱，很多人偷偷拿着出去和夜郎做交易。
English: Tang Meng returned to Chang'an and asked a merchant from Shu County. The merchant said, "Only Shu County produces dipping sauce. Many people secretly go out to do business with Yelang.

古文：夜郎者，临牂柯江，江广百馀步，足以行船。
现代文：夜郎紧靠牂柯江，江面宽数百步，完全可以行船。
English: Yelang is close to the Shike River. The river is several hundred paces wide and is perfectly navigable.

古文：南越以财物役属夜郎，西至同师，然亦不能臣使也。 
现代文：南越想用财物使夜郎归属自己，可是他的势力直达西边的同师，也没能把夜郎象臣下那样加以役使。 
English: Nan Yue wanted to use his wealth to make Yelang belong to him, but his power reached all the way to the west, and he was not able to use Yelang as a vassal.

古文：蒙乃上书说上曰： 南越王黄屋左纛，地东西万馀里，名为外臣，实一州主也。
现代文：唐蒙就上书皇上说： 南越王乘坐黄屋之车，车上插着左纛之旗，他的土地东西一万多里，名义上是外臣，实际上是一州之主。
English: Tang Meng wrote to the emperor and said: The king of South Vietnam rode in Huangya's car with Zuo Xi's flag on the car, his land was more than ten thousand miles from east to west, he was nominally a foreign minister, but in fact he was the ruler of a province.

古文：今以长沙、豫章往，水道多绝，难行。
现代文：如今从长沙和豫章郡前去，水路多半被阻绝，难以前行。
English: Nowadays, if you go from Changsha and Yuzhang County, the waterways are mostly blocked, making it difficult to travel.

古文：窃闻夜郎所有精兵，可得十馀万，浮船牂柯江，出其不意，此制越一奇也。
现代文：我私下听说夜郎所拥有的精兵能有十多万，乘船沿牂柯江而下，乘其没注意而加以攻击，这是制服南越的一条奇计。
English: I heard in private that Yelang could have more than a hundred thousand elite soldiers. He would take a boat down the Shinko River and attack them without their noticing. This was a cunning plan to subdue South Vietnam.

古文：诚以汉之彊，巴蜀之饶，通夜郎道，为置吏，易甚。 
现代文：如果真能用汉朝的强大，巴蜀的富饶，打通前往夜郎的道路，在那里设置官吏，是很容易的。 
English: If we can really use the power of the Han Dynasty and the wealth of Bashu to open the road to Yelang, it will be easy to set up officials there.

古文：上许之。乃拜蒙为郎中将，将千人，食重万馀人，从巴蜀筰关入，遂见夜郎侯多同。
现代文：汉武帝同意唐蒙的主张，就任命他为郎中将，率领一千大军，以及负责粮食、辎重的人员一万多人，从巴符关进入夜郎，于是会见了夜郎侯多同。
English: Emperor Hanwu agreed with Tang Meng's proposal and appointed him as a vice-commander, leading a thousand-strong army, as well as more than ten thousand people responsible for grain and baggage. He entered Yelang from Bafuguan and met with Yelang Hou Datong.

古文：蒙厚赐，喻以威德，约为置吏，使其子为令。
现代文：唐蒙给了他很多赏赐，又用汉王朝的武威和恩德开导他，约定给他们设置官吏，让他的儿子当相当于县令的官长。
English: Tang Meng gave him many rewards, and enlightened him with the martial prowess and benevolence of the Han Dynasty. He agreed to set up officials for them, and let his son be the equivalent of the county magistrate.

古文：夜郎旁小邑皆贪汉缯帛，以为汉道险，终不能有也，乃且听蒙约。
现代文：夜郎旁边小城镇的人们都贪图汉朝的丝绸布帛，心中认为汉朝到夜郎的道路险阻，终究不能占有自己，就暂且接受了唐蒙的盟约。
English: The people in the small towns around Yelang coveted the Han Dynasty's silk cloth. They thought that the Han Dynasty's road to Yelang was a dangerous one. After all, they could not occupy themselves, so they temporarily accepted the Tang and Mongolian covenant.

古文：还报，乃以为犍为郡。
现代文：唐蒙回到京城向皇上报告，皇上就把夜郎改设为犍为郡。
English: Tang Meng returned to the capital to report to the emperor, and the emperor changed the name of Yelang to Shibei County.

古文：发巴蜀卒治道，自僰道指牂柯江。
现代文：这以后就调遣巴、蜀两郡的兵士修筑道路，从僰直修到牂柯江。
English: After that, soldiers from Ba County and Shu County were dispatched to build a road from Shanzhi to Shike River.

古文：蜀人司马相如亦言西夷邛、筰可置郡。使相如以郎中将往喻，皆如南夷，为置一都尉，十馀县，属蜀。
现代文：蜀郡人司马相如也向皇帝说西夷的邛、筰可以设郡，皇帝就派司马相如用郎中将的身份前去西夷，明白地告诉他们，朝廷将按南夷的方式对待他们，给他们设置一个都尉、十几个县，归属于蜀郡。
English: Sima Xiangru, a man from Shu County, also told the emperor that the Xiyi cadet and cadets could set up a county. The emperor sent Sima Xiangru to Xiyi as a lieutenant general to tell them clearly that the imperial court would treat them in the same way as the Nanyi cadet and assign them a captain and more than a dozen counties belonging to Shu County.

古文：当是时，巴蜀四郡通西南夷道，戍转相饟。
现代文：在这个时候，巴郡、蜀郡、广汉郡、汉中郡开通西南夷的道路，戍边的士卒、运送物资和军粮的人很多。
English: At this time, Ba County, Shu County, Guanghan County and Hanzhong County opened the road to Southwest Yili, and there were a lot of soldiers and people transporting materials and military food in Lijiang.

古文：数岁，道不通，士罢饿离湿死者甚众；西南夷又数反，发兵兴击，秏费无功。
现代文：过了几年，道路也没修通，士卒疲惫饥饿，遭受潮湿，死了很多人。西南夷又屡次造反，调遣军队去攻打，耗费钱财和人力，却没有尘嚣。
English: After a few years, the road was not completed, the soldiers were tired and hungry, suffered from dampness, and many people died. Southwest Yi rebelled again and again, dispatched troops to attack, spent money and manpower, but there was no dust.

古文：上患之，使公孙弘往视问焉。
现代文：皇上忧虑此事，便派公孙弘去亲自观察询问。
English: The emperor was worried about this and sent Gongsun Hong to personally observe and inquire.

古文：还对，言其不便。
现代文：公孙弘回京禀告皇上，声称不利。
English: His great-grandson Hong returned to Beijing to report to the emperor, claiming that he was disadvantaged.

古文：及弘为御史大夫，是时方筑朔方以据河逐胡，弘因数言西南夷害，可且罢，专力事匈奴。
现代文：等到公孙弘当了御史大夫，这时汉朝正修筑朔方郡城，以便凭借黄河驱逐匈奴，公孙弘乘机屡次陈说开发西南夷的害处，因此可暂时停止开发活动，集中力量对付匈奴。
English: When Gongsun Hong became the chief historian, the Han Dynasty was building the county seat of Shuofang in order to expel the Xiongnu by means of the Yellow River. Gongsun Hong took the opportunity to repeatedly explain the harm of developing the Southwest Yiwu, so he could temporarily stop development activities and concentrate on dealing with the Xiongnu.

古文：上罢西夷，独置南夷夜郎两县一都尉，稍令犍为自葆就。
现代文：皇上下令停止对西夷的活动，只在南夷的夜郎设置两县和一都尉，命令犍为郡保全自己，并逐渐完善自己的郡县体制。
English: The emperor issued an order to stop the activities against Xiyi, and only set up two counties and one captain in the Yelang of Nanyi, ordering the county to protect itself and gradually improve its county system.

古文：及元狩元年，博望侯张骞使大夏来，言居大夏时见蜀布、邛竹、杖，使问所从来，曰 从东南身毒国，可数千里，得蜀贾人市 。
现代文：待到汉武帝元狩元年，博望侯张骞出使大夏国归来后，说他呆在大夏时曾经看到过蜀郡出产的布帛，邛都的竹杖，让人询问这些东西的来历，回答的人说： 从东南边的身毒国弄来的，从这儿到那里的路途有数千里，可以和蜀地的商人做买卖。 
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Hanwu, after the return of the envoy to Daxia from Zhang Xuanlong, he said that when he was in Daxia, he had seen the cloth produced in Shu County and the bamboo cane of Shudu. People asked about the origin of these things, and the person who answered said: It was brought from the poisonous country in the southeast, and there are thousands of miles between here and there. You can do business with merchants in Shu.

古文：或闻邛西可二千里有身毒国。
现代文：有人听说邛地以西大约二千里处有个身毒国。
English: Some people have heard that there is a poisonous country about two thousand miles west of the Badlands.

古文：骞因盛言大夏在汉西南，慕中国，患匈奴隔其道，诚通蜀，身毒国道便近，有利无害。
现代文：张骞乘机大谈大夏在汉朝西南方，仰慕中国，忧虑匈奴阻隔他们与中国的交通要道，假若能开通蜀地的道路，身毒国的路既方便又近，对汉朝有利无害。
English: Zhang Ye took the opportunity to talk about the summer in the southwest of the Han Dynasty, admired China, and worried that the Xiongnu blocked the important communication route between them and China. If the road to Shu could be opened, the road to the poisoned country would be convenient and close, which would be beneficial and harmless to the Han Dynasty.

古文：於是天子乃令王然于、柏始昌、吕越人等，使间出西夷西，指求身毒国。
现代文：于是汉武帝就命令王然于、柏始昌、吕越人等，让他们寻找捷径从西夷的西边出发，去寻找身毒国。
English: As a result, Emperor Hanwu ordered Wang Ran Yu, Bao Shichang, and the people of Lv Yue to find a shortcut and set out from the west of Xiyi to find the poisoned country.

古文：至滇，滇王尝羌乃留，为求道西十馀辈。
现代文：他们到达滇国，滇王尝羌就留下了他们，并为他们派出十多批到西边去寻找道路的人。
English: When they arrived in the kingdom of Shao, the king of Shao left them alone and sent more than ten groups of people to the west to find a way.

古文：岁馀，皆闭昆明，莫能通身毒国。
现代文：过了一年多，寻路的人们全被昆明国所阻拦，没能通往身毒国。
English: After more than a year, the people who were looking for a way were all blocked by Kunming and were unable to get to the poisoned country.

古文：滇王与汉使者言曰： 汉孰与我大？ 
现代文：滇王同汉朝使者说道： 汉朝和我们滇国相比，哪个大？ 
English: The king said to the envoy of the Han Dynasty: Compared with our country, which is greater?

古文：及夜郎侯亦然。
现代文：汉朝使者到达夜郎，夜郎也提出了这样的问题。
English: The Han Dynasty emissary arrived at Yelang, and Yelang also raised such a question.

古文：以道不通故，各自以为一州主，不知汉广大。
现代文：这是因为道路不通的缘故，各自以为自己是一州之主，不知道汉朝的辽阔。
English: This is because of the impassable roads, each thought he was the master of a state, and did not know the vastness of the Han Dynasty.

古文：使者还，因盛言滇大国，足事亲附。
现代文：汉朝使者回到京城，于是极力陈说滇是大国，值得让他们亲近和归附汉朝。
English: The emissaries of the Han Dynasty returned to Beijing, whereupon they tried their best to make the case that Yunnan was a great power, and that it was worthwhile for them to be close to and attached to the Han Dynasty.

古文：天子注意焉。
现代文：汉武帝对这事留心了。
English: Emperor Han Wu took notice of this.

古文：及至南越反，上使驰义侯因犍为发南夷兵。
现代文：等到南越造反时，皇上派驰义侯用犍为郡的名义调遣南夷的军队。
English: When the South Vietnamese rebelled, the emperor dispatched troops from Nanyi under the name of Chi Yi Hou and Ho for County.

古文：且兰君恐远行，旁国虏其老弱，乃与其众反，杀使者及犍为太守。
现代文：且兰君害怕他的军队远行后，旁边的国家会乘机虏掠他的老弱百姓，于是就同他的军队谋反，杀了汉朝使者和犍为郡的太守。
English: And Lanjun was afraid that after his army traveled far, the neighboring countries would take the opportunity to plunder his weak people, so he plotted a rebellion with his army and killed the Han Dynasty envoy and the county's governor.

古文：汉乃发巴蜀罪人尝击南越者八校尉击破之。
现代文：汉朝就调动巴郡和蜀郡原想去攻打南越的八个校尉，率领被赦从军的罪犯去攻打且兰，把它平定了。
English: The Han Dynasty mobilized eight captains from Ba County and Shu County, who had originally wanted to attack South Vietnam, and led the criminals who had been pardoned from the army to attack Quy Nhon and pacified it.

古文：会越已破，汉八校尉不下，即引兵还，行诛头兰。
现代文：正赶上南越已被攻破，汉朝的八个校尉尚末沿牂柯江南下，就领兵撤回，在行军中诛杀了头兰。
English: Just in time to catch up with South Vietnam has been broken, the Han Dynasty's eight captain Shangmue down south along the Shinko River, he led the troops to withdraw, in the march killed Tauran.

古文：头兰，常隔滇道者也。
现代文：头兰是经常阻隔汉朝与滇国交通道路的国家。
English: Toulan was a country that often blocked the traffic routes between the Han Dynasty and the Han Dynasty.

古文：已平头兰，遂平南夷为牂柯郡。
现代文：头兰被平定后，就平定了南夷，在那儿设置了牂柯郡。
English: After Toulan was subdued, Nanyi was subdued, and Shinko County was established there.

古文：夜郎侯始倚南越，南越已灭，会还诛反者，夜郎遂入朝。
现代文：夜郎侯开始依南越，南越被消灭后，正赶上汉军回来诛杀反叛者，夜郎侯就到汉朝京城朝见皇上。
English: Yelanghou began to rely on South Vietnam. After South Vietnam was wiped out, he was just in time for the Chinese army to come back and kill the rebels. Yelanghou went to the Han Dynasty Capital of Beijing to see the emperor.

古文：上以为夜郎王。
现代文：汉武帝封他为夜郎王。
English: Emperor Hanwu made him the Nightingale King.

古文：南越破後，及汉诛且兰、邛君，并杀筰侯，厓駹皆振恐，请臣置吏。
现代文：南越破灭之后，以及汉朝诛杀且兰君、邛君，并且杀了筰侯，冉、駹都震惊恐慌，便向汉朝请求称臣，为他们设置官吏。
English: After the collapse of South Vietnam, and the Han Dynasty's killing of Lanjun and Yaojun, as well as the killing of Yanhou, Ran and Yao were shocked and panicked, and they asked the Han Dynasty to commend them and set up officials for them.

古文：乃以邛都为越巂郡，筰都为沈犁郡，厓駹为汶山郡，广汉西白马为武都郡。
现代文：汉朝就把邛都设置为越嶲郡，筰都设置为沈犁郡，冉、駹设置为沦山郡，广汉西边的白马设置为武都郡。
English: During the Han Dynasty, Shandong was set up as Yuexiu County, Shandong was set up as Shenyuan County, Ran and Shandong were set up as Nanshan County, and Baima on the west side of Guanghan was set up as Wudu County.

古文：上使王然于以越破及诛南夷兵威风喻滇王入朝。
现代文：皇上派王然于利用破南越及诛杀南夷君长的兵威，委婉劝告滇王前来朝见天子。
English: The emperor sent Wang Ran to take advantage of the military power of defeating South Vietnam and killing the Nanyi monarchs, and gently advised the king to come to see the emperor.

古文：滇王者，其众数万人，其旁东北有劳浸、靡莫，皆同姓相扶，未肯听。
现代文：滇王有军队数万人，他旁边东北方有劳浸和靡莫，都和滇王同姓，相互依靠，不肯听从劝告。
English: King Yao had an army of tens of thousands, and next to him in the northeast were Laobiao and Miao Miao, both of whom had the same surname as King Yao. They relied on each other and refused to listen to advice.

古文：劳浸、靡莫数侵犯使者吏卒。
现代文：劳浸、靡莫多次触犯汉朝使者和官兵。
English: Through hard work, he repeatedly offended the envoys and officers and soldiers of the Han Dynasty.

古文：元封二年，天子发巴蜀兵击灭劳浸、靡莫，以兵临滇。
现代文：汉武帝元封二年，天子调动巴郡和蜀郡的军队攻打并消灭了劳浸和靡莫，大军逼近滇国。
English: In the second year of Emperor Hanwu's reign, Emperor Tianzi mobilized the armies of Ba County and Shu County to attack and annihilate Laobiao and Miao Mo, and the large army approached Shandong Province.

古文：滇王始首善，以故弗诛。
现代文：滇王开始就对汉朝怀有善意，因此没有被诛杀。
English: Shao Wang had good intentions towards the Han Dynasty from the beginning, so he was not killed.

古文：滇王离难西南夷，举国降，请置吏入朝。
现代文：滇王于是离开西夷，率领全国向汉朝投降，请求为他们设置官吏，并进京朝见汉武帝。
English: King Gong then left Xiyi, led the whole country to surrender to the Han Dynasty, requested that officials be set up for them, and went to Beijing to see Emperor Han.

古文：於是以为益州郡，赐滇王王印，复长其民。
现代文：于是汉朝就把滇国设置为益州郡，赐给滇王王印，仍然统治他的百姓。
English: As a result, the Han Dynasty set up the State of Yao as Yizhou County and gave the King of Yao the King's Seal, still ruling over his people.

古文：西南夷君长以百数，独夜郎、滇受王印。
现代文：西南夷的君长数以百计，只有夜郎、滇的君长接受了王印。
English: There are hundreds of kings and queens in Xiannanyi, but only the kings and queens of Yelang and Handan accepted the royal seal.

古文：滇小邑，最宠焉。
现代文：滇是个小国，最受汉朝宠爱。
English: Handan is a small country, the most favored by the Han Dynasty.

古文：太史公曰：楚之先岂有天禄哉？
现代文：太史公说：楚国的祖先难道有上天赐给的禄位吗？
English: Taishikong said, "Did the ancestors of the state of Chu really have the positions given to them by heaven?

古文：在周为文王师，封楚。及周之衰，地称五千里。
现代文：在周朝时，他们的先祖鬻熊当了周文王的老师，后来的熊绎又被周成王封到楚蛮之地而立国。等到周朝衰微之时，楚国领土号称五千里。
English: During the Zhou Dynasty, their ancestor, Raccoon, became the teacher of King Zhou Wenzhong, and later, Xiong Yu, was appointed by King Zhou to the land of Chu and founded the country. By the time of the decline of the Zhou Dynasty, the territory of Chu was known to be five thousand miles.

古文：秦灭诸候，唯楚苗裔尚有滇王。
现代文：秦国灭亡诸侯，唯独楚国的后代子孙还有滇王存在。
English: After the fall of Qin, all the princes died, but the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants

古文：汉诛西南夷，国多灭矣，唯滇复为宠王。
现代文：汉朝诛杀西南夷，那里的国家多半被消灭，只有滇王又受到汉天子的宠爱。
English: The Han Dynasty fought and killed the Southwestern Yi, and most of the countries there were destroyed. Only the King of Qi was favored by the Emperor of Han.

古文：然南夷之端，见枸酱番禺，大夏杖、邛竹。
现代文：但是平定南夷的开始，是在番禺见到了枸酱，在大夏看到了邛竹杖。
English: However, the beginning of the pacification of Nanyi was in Panyu, where they saw the dipping sauce, and in Daxia, where they saw the bamboo cane.

古文：西夷後揃，剽分二方，卒为七郡。
现代文：西夷后来被分割，分成西、南两方，最后被汉王分设为七个郡。
English: Xiyi was later divided into West and South, and finally divided into seven counties by the Han king.

