古文：天地定位，祀遍群神，六宗既禋，三望咸秩，甘雨和风，是生黍稷，兆民所仰，美报兴焉！
现代文：开天辟地以来，各种神灵都受到祭祀。天地诸神既受尊祀，名山大川都按一定次序致祭。于是风调雨顺，各种谷物生长起来。由于亿万民众的仰赖，便对神灵作美好的报答。
English: Since the heavens and the earth were created, all kinds of deities have been worshipped. The gods of heaven and earth have been worshipped, and the famous mountains and rivers have been sacrificed in a certain order. Therefore, the wind and rain have been favorable, and various grains have grown. Due to the reliance of hundreds of millions of people, they have made a beautiful reward for the gods.

古文：牺盛惟馨，本于明德，祝史陈信，资乎文辞。
现代文：但供献馨香的祭品，要以光明的道德为根本；祝史陈说诚信，就必须以文辞为凭借。
English: However, to offer a sacrifice of incense, it is necessary to take bright morality as the foundation; to wish history to speak of integrity, it is necessary to rely on literature.

古文：昔伊耆始蜡，以祭八神。
现代文：相传古代的神农氏，开始在岁末祭祀有关农事的八种神灵。
English: According to legend, the ancient Shinnong clan began to sacrifice eight kinds of gods related to agriculture at the end of the year.

古文：其辞云∶ 土反其宅，水归其壑，昆虫毋作，草木归其泽。 
现代文：他的祭辞说： 泥土返回自己的位置吧，水也归还到山壑间去，危害庄稼的昆虫不要兴起，草木归生于薮泽中去！ 
English: His sermon said: Let the soil return to its place, let the water return to the mountains, let the insects that harm the crops not arise, and let the plants be born in the rain!

古文：则上皇祝文，爰在兹矣！
现代文：这就是上古皇帝的祝文了。
English: This is the ancient emperor's congratulatory letter.

古文：舜之祠田云∶ 荷此长耜，耕彼南亩，四海俱有。 
现代文：虞舜在春天的祭田辞中说： 扛着长耜，在南亩农田上努力耕作，四海之人都有穿有吃。 
English: In his speech at the spring festival, Yu Yao said: "Carrying a long pole and working hard on the southern mu of farmland, people all over the world have food and clothing.

古文：利民之志，颇形于言矣。
现代文：为民谋利的思想，已表现在言辞中了。
English: The idea of benefiting the people has manifested itself in rhetoric.

古文：至于商履，圣敬日跻，玄牡告天，以万方罪己，即郊禋之词也；素车祷旱，以六事责躬，则雩禜之文也。
现代文：到了商汤，德行一天一天高起来。他用黑色的牛来祭告上天，把四面八方之人的罪过，都归在自己一人身上。这就是他的祭天之词。商汤还曾驾着毫无装饰的车马，去祷求免于旱灾，列举六种过失来责备自己。这就是他求雨的祝文。
English: When he arrived in Shangtang, his virtue increased day by day. He used a black ox to make an offering to the heavens, blaming the sins of people in all directions on himself alone. This is his word of sacrifice to the heavens. Shangtang also drove an unadorned chariot and horse to pray for relief from drought, listing six faults to reproach himself. This is his congratulatory letter for rain.

古文：及周之大祝，掌六祝之辞。是以 庶物咸生 ，陈于天地之郊； 旁作穆穆 ，唱于迎日之拜； 夙兴夜处 ，言于礻付庙之祝； 多福无疆 ，布于少牢之馈；宜社类祃，莫不有文：所以寅虔于神祇，严恭于宗庙也。
现代文：到周代的太祝，掌管 顺祝 、 年祝 等六种祝辞，用 万物齐生 等话来祭天祭地；用 光明普照 等话来拜迎日出；用 早起晚睡 等话，祝告于祖孙合庙的祭祀；用 多福无疆 等话，写进祭祖献食的祷辞；此外，即使是出师打仗时的祭天祭地，也没有不用祝文的。
English: There are six kinds of greetings, such as the Zhou dynasty's Tai Zhu, who is in charge of the Shun Zhu, the New Year's Greetings, and so on. They use words such as "All things are of equal birth" to offer heaven and earth; they use words such as "Brightly shining" to worship the sunrise; they use words such as "Early rising and late going to bed" to wish for the sacrificial rites of the ancestral temple; they use words such as "Many blessings without borders" to write the prayers for offering food to the ancestors; in addition, even when they go out to fight, there is no place to offer heaven and earth without

古文：自春秋以下，黩祀谄祭，祝币史辞，靡神不至。
现代文：这些都是为了对神灵表示虔诚，对祖先表示恭敬。春秋以后，亵黩讨好神灵的祭祀多起来，以致祭礼祝文，无神不至。
English: All of this was done to show piety to the gods and respect for the ancestors. After the Spring and Autumn Period, the number of sacrificial rites to appease the gods increased, so that there was no shortage of offerings to the gods.

古文：至于张老贺室，致祷于歌哭之美。
现代文：如晋国大夫张老庆贺赵武建成新房子，有祝他长久安居于此的祷词。
English: For example, when Zhang Lao, a doctor from Jin Province, congratulated Zhao Wu on the completion of his new house, there was a prayer to wish him a long and peaceful life here.

古文：蒯聩临战，获祐于筋骨之请：虽造次颠沛，必于祝矣。
现代文：卫公子蒯瞶身临战场，还作了请求祖先保佑勿伤筋骨的祈祷。
English: Defending himself on the battlefield, he also made a prayer asking the ancestors to bless him and not to hurt his bones.

古文：若夫《楚辞·招魂》，可谓祝辞之组丽者也。
现代文：可见即使在十分仓促和困难的情况下，也是要用祝祷的。至于《楚辞·招魂》，可说是祝辞最早讲究文采的作品。
English: It can be seen that even in a very hasty and difficult situation, it is necessary to use a blessing. As for "Chuchih·Zhuxun," it can be said to be the earliest work that emphasizes the literary style of the blessing.

古文：汉之群祀，肃其百礼，既总硕儒之义，亦参方士之术。
现代文：到汉代的各种祭祀，对所有的礼仪都很重视。汉代帝王一方面搜集儒家的议论，一方面又采纳方士的办法。
English: By the Han Dynasty, all kinds of rituals attached great importance to all etiquette. On the one hand, the Han Dynasty emperors collected the arguments of Confucianism, and on the other hand, they adopted the methods of the magicians.

古文：所以秘祝移过，异于成汤之心，侲子驱疫，同乎越巫之祝：礼失之渐也。
现代文：于是内宫秘祝，遇有灾变，就祝祷把降罪转移到臣下或百姓身上，和商汤王把万方罪过归于自己的用意完全不同。又如汉代用侲子击鼓驱疫，简直就和越巫骗人的说法相同。
English: Therefore, the secret wish of the Inner Court, in the event of a cataclysm, is to pray for the transfer of the crime to the subjects or the people, which is completely different from the intention of the merchant Tang Wang to attribute the sins of the world to himself. Also, as the Han Dynasty used drums to drive out the plague, it is almost the same as the saying that the witch deceived people.

古文：至如黄帝有祝邪之文，东方朔有骂鬼之书，于是后之谴咒，务于善骂。
现代文：春秋以来的祝祀已经变质了。相传黄帝有对白泽兽的 祝邪之文 ，东方朔写过 骂鬼之书 ，于是后来的谴责咒文，就极力追求善于责骂。
English: Since the Spring and Autumn Period, the rituals have deteriorated. It is said that the Yellow Emperor had a wish for evil against the Baizhe Beast, and the Eastern Emperor wrote a book of curses, so the later condemned spells tried their best to be good at scolding.

古文：唯陈思《诘咎》，裁以正义矣。
现代文：只有曹植的《诰咎文》，才是正确的谴责咒文。
English: Only Cao Zhi's "Condemnation" is a correct condemnation spell.

古文：若乃礼之祭祝，事止告飨；而中代祭文，兼赞言行。
现代文：又如《仪礼》中所讲祭祀死者的祝辞，其内容只是告请死者来享受祭品；到汉魏时的祭文，就同时还要赞美死者生前的言行。
English: Also, as in the "Ceremony," the content of the eulogy of the deceased is only to invite the deceased to enjoy the offerings; in the Han and Wei dynasties, the eulogy should also praise the words and deeds of the deceased.

古文：祭而兼赞，盖引伸而作也。
现代文：祭文中兼用赞辞，是从祭文的意义引伸出来的。
English: The use of praise in the ritual is derived from the meaning of the ritual.

古文：又汉代山陵，哀策流文；周丧盛姬，内史执策。然则策本书赠，因哀而为文也。
现代文：此外，汉代的帝王陵墓，还有关于迁移帝王灵柩的哀策文流传下来；周穆王的妃子盛姬死后，有 内史主持策命 的记载。 策 原只是写明送葬之物，为了表达哀伤之情才写成文的。
English: In addition, the imperial tombs of the Han Dynasty, as well as the lamentation about the relocation of the imperial coffin, have been passed down; after the death of King Zhou Mu's concubine Sheng Ji, there is a record of the internal history presiding over the funeral.

古文：是以义同于诔，而文实告神，诔首而哀末，颂体而视仪，太祝所读，固祝之文者也。
现代文：所以，哀策的内容和诔有相同之处，而这种哀文主要是禀告神灵的。它从赞扬死者的事迹开始，最后表达对死者的哀悼；内容上用近于 颂 的文体，却以 祝 文的形式来表达。所以，汉代太祝所读的哀策，其实就是同代祝文的发展。
English: Therefore, the content of the lamentation is similar to that of the eulogy, and this lamentation is mainly an obituary of the gods. It begins by praising the deeds of the deceased, and finally expresses condolences to the deceased; the content is in a style close to the eulogy, but it is expressed in the form of a blessing. Therefore, the lamentation read by the Han Dynasty eulogy is actually the development of the contemporary eulogy.

古文：凡群言发华，而降神务实，修辞立诚，在于无愧。
现代文：各种文章都表现出一定的文采，用于降神的祝文则要求朴实。祝辞的写作必须真诚，要于内心无所惭愧。
English: All kinds of articles show a certain literary style, but the congratulatory messages for the gods require simplicity. The writing of congratulations must be sincere, and there must be nothing to be ashamed of in the heart.

古文：祈祷之式，必诚以敬；祭奠之楷，宜恭且哀：此其大较也。
现代文：祈祷文的格式，须诚恳而恭敬；祭奠文的格式，应恭敬而哀伤。这就是写祝祷文的大致要求。
English: The format of a prayer must be sincere and respectful; the format of a memorial should be respectful and sorrowful. This is the general requirement for writing a prayer.

古文：班固之祀涿山，祈祷之诚敬也；潘岳之祭庾妇，祭奠之恭哀也：举汇而求，昭然可鉴矣。
现代文：如班固的《涿邪山祝文》，就是诚敬的祈祷文；潘岳的《为诸妇祭庾新妇文》，就是恭哀的奠祭文。
English: For example, Ban Gu's "Celebration of the Evil Mountain" is a sincere prayer; Pan Yue's "Celebration of Women" is a respectful offering.

古文：盟者，明也。
现代文：列举这些同类作品加以研究，其特点是显而易见的。
English: Enumerate these similar works and study them. Their characteristics are obvious.

古文：骍旄白马，珠盘玉敦，陈辞乎方明之下，祝告于神明者也。
现代文： 盟 的意思就是 明 。用赤色的牛、白色的马，盛放在珠玉为饰的祭器中，祝告于神像前的文辞，就是 盟 。
English: The meaning of Meng is Ming. With red cattle and white horses, placed in a sacrificial vessel adorned with jewels, and celebrated in front of the god statue, is Meng.

古文：在昔三王，诅盟不及，时有要誓，结言而退。
现代文：早在夏、商、周三代时的帝王，没有盟誓，有时须要约誓，用一定语言约定就分开。
English: The emperors of the Xia, Shang and Zhou dynasties did not swear oaths as early as the Xia, Shang and Zhou dynasties, and sometimes they had to swear oaths and use a certain language to agree to separate.

古文：周衰屡盟，以及要劫，始之以曹沫，终之以毛遂。
现代文：到周代衰弱之后，就经常进行盟誓了；其流弊所致，竟出现要挟、强制的手段。开始是鲁国曹沫迫使齐桓公订盟，后来有赵国毛遂要挟楚王订盟。
English: After the weakening of the Zhou Dynasty, oaths were often made; as a result of its abuses, there were even threats and coercive means. First, Lu Cao Miao forced Qi Kuan Gong to sign an alliance, and later, Zhao Guomo threatened Chu Wang to sign an alliance.

古文：及秦昭盟夷，设黄龙之诅；汉祖建侯，定山河之誓。
现代文：到秦昭襄王和南夷所订盟约，用珍异的 黄龙 表示决不侵犯夷人；汉高祖分封诸王侯的誓辞，用山河不变之意来寄望诸侯保持长久。
English: When King Qin Zhaoxiang signed a treaty with the Southern Yi, he used a rare yellow dragon to express that he would never encroach on the Yi people; the oaths of the princes of the Han Dynasty used the unchanging meaning of mountains and rivers to hope that the princes would remain long.

古文：然义存则克终，道废则渝始，崇替在人，祝何预焉？
现代文：但任何盟誓，只有坚持道义才能贯彻到底，道义不存，就会改变原来的盟誓。可见国家的盛衰，事在人为，盟祝之辞有何相干？
English: However, any oath can only be carried out to the end by adhering to morality, and if morality does not exist, it will change the original oath. It can be seen that the rise and fall of the country is man-made, what is the relevance of the oath?

古文：若夫臧洪歃辞，气截云蜺；刘琨铁誓，精贯霏霜；而无补于汉晋，反为仇雠。
现代文：如汉未臧洪在讨伐董卓时的《酸枣盟辞》，真是气断长虹；晋代刘琨的《与段匹磾盟文》，也写得意志坚贞。但他们的誓辞，不仅未能挽救汉、晋的灭亡，当初订盟的双方后来反而成为仇敌。
English: For example, Han Wei Hong's "Sour Date Pledge" in the fight against Dong Zhuo was really a decisive victory; the Jin Dynasty Liu Bei's "Pledge to Duan Pi" was also written with a firm will. However, their oaths not only failed to save the destruction of Han and Jin, but the two sides that originally signed the alliance later became enemies.

古文：故知信不由衷，盟无益也。
现代文：由此可见，信誓之辞如不出自真心诚意，订了盟也是毫无用处的。
English: Thus, it can be seen that if the words of the oath do not come from the sincerity of the heart, it is useless to make an alliance.

古文：夫盟之大体，必序危机，奖忠孝，共存亡，戮心力，祈幽灵以取鉴，指九天以为正，感激以立诚，切至以敷辞，此其所同也。
现代文： 盟 这种文体的主要特点，是必须叙述有关危急情况，奖励忠孝的品德，约定同生共死，要求合力同心，请求神灵来监视，指上天来作证，以激动之情来确立诚意，并用恳切的意思来写成盟辞，这就是它的共同点。
English: Covenant The main characteristics of this style are that it must describe the critical situation, reward the virtue of loyalty and filial piety, agree to live and die together, require joint efforts, ask the gods to monitor, point to heaven to testify, establish sincerity with excitement, and write a covenant with a sincere meaning, which is its common point.

古文：然非辞之难，处辞为难。
现代文：但 盟 这种文体，不在文辞难写，而难在用实际行动来对待所写之辞。
English: However, this kind of style is not difficult to write in words, but difficult to treat the written words with practical actions.

古文：后之君子，宜存殷鉴。忠信可矣，无恃神焉。
现代文：对于后来的盟誓者，这是值得引以为鉴的；讲求忠信就行了，不要依靠神灵！总结：
English: For those who take the oath later, this is worth learning from; just ask for loyalty, don't rely on the gods!

古文：赞曰∶毖祀钦明，祝史惟谈。
现代文：慎重的祭祀基于祭祀者自己的道德，祝史的职责主要是写祝辞。
English: Discreet rituals are based on the morality of the worshippers themselves, and the duties of the celebrant are mainly to write a congratulatory message.

古文：立诚在肃，修辞必甘。
现代文：道德的实诚在于严肃，祝盟的文辞必须写得美善。
English: The sincerity of morality lies in seriousness, and the words of congratulation must be written beautifully.

古文：季代弥饰，绚言朱蓝，神之来格，所贵无惭。
现代文：晋代以后更重文饰，祝盟就写得华丽多采。
English: After the Jin Dynasty, more emphasis was placed on the decoration, and the congratulatory messages were written in a more ornate style.

