古文：孝景皇帝，文帝太子也。
现代文：汉景帝，是汉文帝的太子。
English: Emperor Han Jing was the crown prince of Emperor Hanwen.

古文：母曰窦皇后。
现代文：母亲是窦皇后。
English: His mother was Empress Dou.

古文：后七年六月，文帝崩。
现代文：后元七年六月，文帝驾崩。
English: In June of the seventh year after the Yuan Dynasty, Emperor Wen passed away.

古文：丁未，太子即皇帝位，尊皇太后薄氏曰太皇太后，皇后曰皇太后。
现代文：六月九日，太子继承帝位，尊皇太后薄氏为太皇太后，尊母后窦氏为皇太后。
English: On June 9, the crown prince succeeded to the imperial throne. His mother, Empress Dowager Bo, became the Grand Empress Dowager, and his mother, Empress Dowager Dou, became the Empress Dowager.

古文：九月，有星孛于西方。
现代文：九月，有彗星出现于西方。
English: In September, a comet appeared in the west.

古文：元年冬十月，诏曰： 盖闻古者祖有功而宗有德，制礼乐各有由。
现代文：景帝元年冬十月，皇上下诏书说： 朕常听闻古代取得天下的祖先有功，治天下的祖宗有德，制礼作乐也就各有由来。
English: In the winter and October of the first year of the reign of Emperor Jing, the imperial edict said: I have often heard that in ancient times, the ancestors who gained the world had merits, the ancestors who ruled the world had virtues, and the ceremonial music also had its own origin.

古文：歌者，所以发德也；舞者，所以明功也。
现代文：歌唱，是用来赞颂盛德；舞蹈，是用来表达丰功的。
English: Singing is used to praise virtue; dancing is used to express merit.

古文：高庙酎，奏《武德》、《文始》《五行》之舞。
现代文：祭祀高祖庙，奏《武德》、《文始》、《五行》之舞。
English: A ceremony was held in honor of the Gaozhu Temple, and dances from "Wu De," "Wen Shi," and "Wu Xing" were performed.

古文：孝惠庙酎，奏《文始》、《五行》之舞。
现代文：祭祀惠帝庙，奏《文始》、《五行》之舞。
English: A ritual is held at Huidi Temple, and the dances from "The Beginning of the Text" and "The Five Elements" are performed.

古文：孝文皇帝临天下，通关梁，不异远方；除诽谤，去肉刑，赏赐长老，收恤孤独，以遂群生；减耆欲，不受献，罪人不帑，不诛亡罪，不私其利也；除宫刑，出美人，重绝人之世也。
现代文：文帝君临天下，政通人和，远近如一；除去诽谤君上之罪，停止肉刑，赏赐年高德劭的人，抚恤孤独无依的人，尽量达到臣民的愿望；节制嗜好欲望，不受奉献物品，不株连罪人的妻与子，不让无罪的人蒙受冤屈，严于律己而执法公正无私；废除宫刑，遣返宫中美女，以免其后继无人。
English: When Emperor Wen came to the world, the statesman and the statesman were one and the same; he eliminated the crime of slandering the emperor, stopped corporal punishment, rewarded those who were of high moral character, treated those who were lonely and helpless, and tried to achieve the wishes of his subjects; he restrained his addictive desires, did not accept consecrated items, did not associate with the wives and children of sinners, and did not allow innocent people to suffer grievances. He was strict with himself and enforced the law fairly and unselfishly; he abolished palace punishment and repatriated the beautiful women in the palace, so that there would be no one to succeed him.

古文：朕既不敏，弗能胜识。
现代文：朕生性愚钝，对父皇的功德还不能全部知晓。
English: I am stupid by nature and do not yet know all the merits of my father, the emperor.

古文：此皆上世之所不及，而孝文皇帝亲行之。
现代文：仅上述几点，也是古代的圣帝贤王未能尽行，而文皇帝都全部付之实施。
English: The above-mentioned points are the only ones that the ancient holy emperor Xianwang failed to carry out, while the Emperor Wen implemented all of them.

古文：德厚侔天地，利泽施四海，靡不获福。
现代文：可谓盛德配于天地，恩泽普及四海，人人都蒙受福祉。
English: It can be said that virtue is worthy of heaven and earth, grace is spread all over the world, and everyone is well-off.

古文：明象乎日月，而庙乐不称，朕甚惧焉。
现代文：其圣明如日月经天，而祭祀的乐舞却与之不太相称，朕深感不安。
English: I am deeply troubled by the fact that its sanctity is as sacred as the sun and the moon, but the sacrificial music and dance are not quite commensurate with it.

古文：其为孝文皇帝庙为《昭德》这舞，以明休德。
现代文：为此，应为文皇帝庙作《昭德》之舞，以彰明其美德。
English: To this end, the dance of "Zhao De" should be performed for Emperor Wen's temple to highlight its virtues.

古文：然后祖宗之功德，施于万世，永永无穷，朕甚嘉之。
现代文：这样，祖宗的功德才能传于万世，永远无穷，朕也就无限欣慰了。
English: In this way, the merits of the ancestors can be passed on to all generations, forever endless, and I am infinitely gratified.

古文：其与丞相、列侯、中二千石、礼官具礼仪奏。 
现代文：望丞相、列侯、中二千石、礼官提出具体的礼仪方案上奏。 
English: The minister, the vassal, the vassal of 2,000 koku, and the etiquette officer proposed a specific etiquette plan.

古文：丞相臣嘉等奏曰： 陛下永思孝道，立《昭德》之舞以明孝文皇帝之盛德，皆臣嘉等愚所不及。
现代文：丞相申屠嘉等奏道： 陛下永思孝道，立昭德之舞以彰明孝文皇帝的盛德，这是臣等的认识所不及的。
English: The chancellor Shen Tu Jia and others sang: His Majesty always thinks of filial piety, and established the dance of virtue to highlight the emperor's great virtue of filial piety, which is beyond the understanding of his subjects.

古文：臣谨议：世功莫大于高皇帝，德莫盛于孝文皇帝。
现代文：臣谨议：开国之功莫大于高皇帝，仁德之盛莫大于文皇帝。
English: The courtiers respectfully suggested that nothing could have done more to found the country than Emperor Gao, and nothing could have been more benevolent than Emperor Wen.

古文：高皇帝庙宜为帝者太祖之庙，孝文皇帝庙宜为帝者太宗之庙。
现代文：因此高皇帝庙应为帝家的太祖庙，文皇帝庙应为帝家的太宗庙。
English: Therefore, Emperor Gao's temple should be the imperial ancestor's temple, and Emperor Wen's temple should be the imperial ancestor's temple.

古文：天子宜世世献祖宗之庙。
现代文：汉家天子应世代祭奠祖宗之庙。
English: The world should be a temple of sacrificial ancestors for generations to come.

古文：郡国诸侯宜各为孝文皇帝立太宗之庙。
现代文：郡国诸侯应各为文帝立太宗之庙。
English: The princes of all counties and states should build a grand temple for Emperor Xiaowen.

古文：诸侯王、列侯使者侍祠天子所献祖宗之庙。请宣布天下。 
现代文：各侯王、列侯派使者到京都临祭宗庙。请宣布于天下。 
English: Each lord and vassal sent an emissary to the Kyoto Rinzai Temple. Please announce it to the world.

古文：制曰 可 。
现代文：景帝表示 同意 。
English: Emperor Jing agreed.

古文：春正月，诏曰： 间者岁比不登，民多乏食，夭绝天年，朕甚痛之。
现代文：春季正月。下诏说： 近年来年景不好，百姓很多缺粮，有的饥饿致死，朕深为痛惜。
English: In the first month of spring, the following edict said: In recent years, the economic situation has not been good, many people are short of food, and some have died of starvation. I deeply regret this.

古文：郡国或硗狭，无所农桑系畜；或地饶广，荐草莽，水泉利，而不得徙。
现代文：有些郡国土地瘠薄不毛，无法发展农桑；而有些郡国则土地广阔，牧草深茂，水利条件优越，却不能移民开发。
English: Some counties have thin and barren land and cannot develop agricultural mulberry; while some counties have vast land, lush pastures, and superior water conservancy conditions, but cannot be developed by immigrants.

古文：其议民欲徙宽大地者，听之。 夏四月，赦天下。赐民爵一级。
现代文：为此，可以鼓励地力瘠薄之区的人民自由地移居到土地广阔而肥沃的地方去。 夏四月，大赦天下，赐民爵位一级。
English: To this end, the people in areas with limited land resources can be encouraged to freely migrate to places with vast and fertile land.

古文：遣御史大夫青翟至代下与匈奴和亲。
现代文：派遣御史大夫青翟到代下与匈奴和亲。
English: Dispatching the imperial historian Seong-soo to make peace with the Xiongnu.

古文：五月，令田半租。
现代文：五月，诏农田减租一半。
English: In May, the government reduced the rent of farmland by half.

古文：秋七月，诏曰： 吏受所监临，以饮食免，重；受财物，贱买贵卖，论轻。
现代文：秋七月，下诏说： 当今法律对于主管官吏因接受下属宴请即予削职的处分过重，而对于接受财物、贱买贵卖以牟取暴利的惩治则过轻。
English: In the autumn of July, the next emperor said: Today's law is too heavy for the punishment of the responsible officials for accepting the subordinates' banquet, but too light for the punishment of accepting property, buying and selling at a low price to make windfall profits.

古文：廷尉与丞相更议著令。 
现代文：望廷尉与丞相重新制定律条。 
English: Prince-elector and chancellor re-enacted the precepts.

古文：廷尉信谨与丞相议曰： 吏及诸有秩受其官属所监、所治、所行、所将，其与饮食，计偿费，勿论。
现代文：廷尉信和丞相申屠嘉议定新律如下： 官吏及有爵级的文官武将，凡是接受其下属机构与个人的宴请的，要按价偿还，免予处分。
English: The courtier Xin and the prime minister Shen Tu Jia agreed on the new law as follows: Government officials and civilian generals with knighthoods, who accept banquets from their subordinate organizations and individuals, must reimburse the price and are exempt from punishment.

古文：它物，若买故贱，卖故贵，皆坐臧为盗，没入臧县官。
现代文：凡是饮食以外的物品，若利用职权压价买进，抬价卖出，按盗窃赃物查处，没收入官。
English: For all items other than food and drink, if they use their authority to buy at a lower price and sell at a higher price, they will be investigated and punished as stolen goods. There will be no revenue officer.

古文：吏迁徙免罢，受其故官属所将监治送财物，夺爵为士伍，免之。
现代文：官吏在调动与罢免时，接受原来的下级的赠送财物的，削去爵位，并予罢免。
English: When a government official is transferred or removed from office, if he accepts gifts of property from his former subordinates, his title shall be removed and he shall be removed from office.

古文：无爵，罚金二斤，令没入所受。
现代文：没有爵位的，罚金二斤，并没收所受财物。
English: Without a title, a fine of two pounds, and confiscation of property received.

古文：有能捕告，畀其所受臧。 
现代文：有能举报者，以所没受的赃物进行奖赏。 
English: Those who are able to report the theft will be rewarded with the stolen goods they did not receive.

古文：二年冬十二月，有星孛于西南。
现代文：景帝二年冬十二月，有彗星出现于西南。
English: In the winter of December of the second year of King Jing's reign, a comet appeared in the southwest.

古文：令天下男子年二十始傅。
现代文：下令天下男子年满二十的就可任官员助理。
English: Ordered that all men over the age of twenty could be appointed as assistant officials.

古文：春三月，立皇子德为河间王，阏为临江王，馀为淮阳王，非为汝南王，彭祖为广川王，发为长沙王。
现代文：春三月，封皇子德为河间王、皇子阏为临江王、皇子余为淮阳王、皇子非为汝南王、皇子彭祖为广川王、皇子发为长沙王。
English: In the spring and March, Prince Fongde was the king of Hema, Prince Yu was the king of Linjiang, Prince Yu was the king of Huaiyang, Prince Fei was the king of Runan, Prince Pengzu was the king of Guangchuan, and Prince Fa was the king of Changsha.

古文：夏四月壬午，太皇太后崩。
现代文：夏四月二十五日，太皇太后驾崩。
English: On the 25th day of the 4th month in summer, the great empress dowager passed away.

古文：六月，丞相嘉薨。
现代文：六月，丞相申屠嘉去世。
English: In June, Vice-Minister Shin Tujia passed away.

古文：封故相国萧何孙系为列侯。
现代文：封前相国萧何之孙萧系为列侯。
English: The son of Xiao He, the previous vassal, Xiao Yu, was a vassal.

古文：秋，与匈奴和亲。
现代文：秋，与匈奴和亲。
English: Autumn makes peace with the Xiongnu.

古文：三年冬十二月，诏曰： 襄平侯嘉子恢说不孝，谋反，欲以杀嘉，大逆无道。
现代文：景帝三年冬十二月，下诏说： 襄平侯纪嘉之子恢说不孝，企图谋反，并欲杀嘉，实为大逆不道。
English: In the winter of December of the third year of King Jing's reign, the following edict was issued: "Xiangping Hou Ji Jia's son once said that he was not a filial son, attempted to rebel, and wanted to kill Jia, which was indeed a great treason.

古文：其赦嘉为襄平侯，及妻子当坐者复故爵。论恢说及妻子如法。 
现代文：现赦免纪嘉仍为襄平侯，凡按法其妻子应连坐的都恢复原爵级，而对恢说及其妻子都处决。 
English: Ji Jia is now pardoned, but he is still Xiangping marquis. All those whose wives should sit together according to the law are restored to the original peerage, while Huai and his wife are executed.

古文：春正月，淮阳王宫正殿灾。
现代文：春正月，淮阳王宫正殿发生火灾。
English: In the first month of spring, a fire broke out in the main hall of the Huaiyang Royal Palace.

古文：吴王濞、胶西王卬、楚王戊、赵王遂、济南王辟光、菑川王贤、胶东王雄渠皆举兵反。
现代文：吴王刘濞、胶西王刘卬、楚王刘戊、赵王刘遂、济南王刘辟光、淄川王刘贤、胶东王刘雄渠联合举兵造反。
English: King of Wu Liu Ye, King of Jiaoxi Liu Ye, King of Chu Liu Wu, King of Zhao Liu Sui, King of Jinan Liu Biguang, King of Sichuan Liu Xian, and King of Jiaodong Liu Xiongqiu jointly raised an army to rebel.

古文：大赦天下。
现代文：景帝下令大赦天下。
English: Amnesty for the whole world.

古文：遣太尉亚夫、大将军窦婴将兵击之。
现代文：遣太尉周亚夫、大将军窦婴领兵征讨。
English: Second Lieutenant Zhou Yafu and General Dou Ying led the conscription.

古文：斩御史大夫晁错以谢七国。
现代文：斩建议削藩以免形成尾大不掉之势的御史大夫晁错以安抚发动叛乱的七国。
English: Mishi no daifu, who had proposed to abolish the domains to avoid the formation of a situation in which there was no way out, made a mistake in order to appease the seven countries that launched the rebellion.

古文：二月壬子晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：二月初一日，出现日偏食。
English: On the first day of February, a partial solar eclipse occurred.

古文：诸将破七国，斩首十余万级。
现代文：周亚夫、窦婴所指挥的各路将士打败七国叛军，斩首十余万颗。
English: The soldiers led by Zhou Yafu and Dou Ying defeated the rebels of the Seven Kingdoms and beheaded more than 100,000 people.

古文：追斩吴王濞于丹徒。
现代文：追斩吴王濞于丹徒。
English: Chasing and beheading Wu Wangyao in Dantu.

古文：胶西王卬、楚王戊、赵王遂、济南王辟光、菑川王贤、胶东王雄渠皆自杀。
现代文：胶西王卬、楚王戊、赵王遂、济南王辟光、淄川王贤、胶东王雄渠都自杀了。
English: Jiaoxi Wang Yao, Chu Wang Wu, Zhao Wang Sui, Jinan Wang Biguang, Xichuan Wang Xian, and Jiaodong Wang Xiongqiu all committed suicide.

古文：夏六月，诏曰： 乃者吴王濞等为逆，起兵相胁，诖误吏民，吏民不得已。
现代文：夏六月，景帝下诏说： 以往吴王濞等造反作乱，兴兵威胁朝廷，欺蒙吏民，吏民不得已而相从。
English: In the summer of June, Emperor Jing issued an edict saying: In the past, Wu Wangye and others rebelled and made trouble, raised an army to threaten the imperial court, deceived the officials and the people, and the officials and the people had no choice but to follow.

古文：今濞等已灭，吏民当坐濞等及逋逃亡军者，皆赦之。
现代文：今刘濞等已经被消灭，对受蒙蔽的吏民及逃亡的士卒不追究连坐之律，一律赦免。
English: Now that Liu Xuan and others have been eliminated, officials and citizens who were deceived and fugitive officials will not be prosecuted and will all be pardoned.

古文：楚元王子艺等与濞等为逆，朕不忍加法，除其籍，毋令污宗室。 
现代文：楚元王之子刘艺参与刘濞等的叛乱，朕不忍绳之以法，将其逐出王室族谱，以免玷污宗室。 
English: Liu Yi, the son of King Chu Yuan, participated in the rebellion of Liu Ye and others. I cannot bear to bring him to justice and expel him from the royal family tree, so as not to tarnish the royal family.

古文：立平陆侯刘礼为楚王，续元王后。
现代文：封平陆侯刘礼为楚王，以继承元王之后。
English: Liu Li, the land lord of Fenping, became the king of Chu, after inheriting the former king.

古文：立皇子端为胶西王，胜为中山王。赐民爵一级。
现代文：立皇子刘端为胶西王，刘胜为中山王，赏赐民爵位一级。
English: The crown prince Liu Duan was appointed King of Jiaoxi, and Liu Sheng was appointed King of Zhongshan, and was awarded the first class of people's title.

古文：四年春，复置诸关用传出入。
现代文：四年春，恢复在各关口检查出入证件。
English: In the spring of the fourth year, the inspection of entry and exit certificates was resumed at each checkpoint.

古文：夏四月己巳，立皇子荣为皇太子，彻为胶东王。
现代文：夏四月二十一日，立皇子刘荣为皇太子，刘彻为胶东王。
English: On the 21st day of the 4th month of summer, Prince Liu Rong was appointed as the crown prince, and Liu Che as the King of Jiaodong.

古文：六月，赦天下，赐民爵一级。
现代文：六月，大赦天下，赏赐百姓爵位一级。
English: In June, he was pardoned and given a first-class title.

古文：秋七月，临江王阏薨。
现代文：秋七月，临江王刘阏去世。
English: In autumn and July, the King of Linjiang, Liu Ye, passed away.

古文：十月戊戌晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：十月三十日，出现日偏食。
English: On October 30, a partial solar eclipse occurred.

古文：五年春正月，作阳陵邑。
现代文：景帝五年春，兴建阳陵邑。
English: In the spring of the fifth year of King Jing's reign, Yangling-eup was built.

古文：夏，募民徙阳陵，赐钱二十万。
现代文：夏季，招募百姓移居阳陵，并赐钱二十万。
English: In the summer, he recruited people to move to Yangling and gave them 200,000 yuan.

古文：遣公主嫁匈奴单于。
现代文：选派公主嫁于匈奴单于。
English: The selected princess married into the Hun dynasty.

古文：六年冬十二月，雷，霖雨。
现代文：六年冬十二月，雷鸣、暴雨。
English: In the winter of December of the sixth year, thunder and torrential rain.

古文：秋九月，皇后薄氏废。
现代文：秋季九月，皇后薄氏被废。
English: In September of autumn, Empress Bo was deposed.

古文：七年冬十一月庚寅晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：七年冬十一月三十日，出现日偏食。
English: A partial solar eclipse occurred on November 30th in the winter of 1997.

古文：春正月，废皇太子荣为临江王。
现代文：春正月，废皇太子荣为临江王。
English: In the first month of spring, the former crown prince became the king of Linjiang.

古文：二月，罢太尉官。
现代文：二月，罢设太尉官。
English: In February, he was promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：夏四月乙巳，立皇后王氏。
现代文：夏四月十七日，立皇后王氏。
English: On the 17th day of the 4th month of the summer, the Empress Wang clan was established.

古文：丁巳，立胶东王彻为皇太子。
现代文：四月二十九日，立胶东王刘彻为皇太子。
English: On April 29, Liu Che, the King of Jiaodong, became crown prince.

古文：赐民为父后者爵一级。
现代文：赐百姓中为父亲的继承人的爵位一级。
English: He gave the first rank of nobility to his father's heir among the common people.

古文：中元年夏四月，赦天下，赐民爵一级。封故御史大夫周苛、周昌孙子为列侯。
现代文：中元年夏四月，大赦天下，赏赐臣民爵位一级，封故御史大夫周苛、周昌的孙子为列侯。
English: In April of the summer of the first century, the emperor pardoned the whole country and rewarded the subjects with a first-class knighthood, and the grandson of the late Imperial Historian Zhou Cao and Zhou Chang was made a vassal.

古文：二年春二月，令诸侯王薨、列侯初封及之国，大鸿胪奏谥、诔、策。
现代文：二年春二月，景帝下令：各侯王去世，派列侯到他的封国进行吊唁，由大鸿胪奏其行迹，朝廷赐予谥号与哀策诔文。
English: In the spring and February of the second year, Emperor Jing ordered: the death of each feudal lord, sent the feudal lords to his vassal state for condolences, played his deeds by the great giant, and the imperial court granted the imperial seal and condolence letter.

古文：列侯薨及诸侯太傅初除之官，大行奏谥、诔、策。
现代文：列侯去世，派诸侯太傅作为吊丧官员进行吊唁，由大行人奏其行迹，朝廷赐予哀策诔文。
English: When the prince died, he sent the prince's daifu as a mourning official to offer condolences, and the dignitaries recounted his deeds, and the imperial court gave him a condolence letter.

古文：王薨，遣光禄大夫吊襚、祠、赗，视丧事，因立嗣子。
现代文：秦王去世，派光禄大夫去进行吊唁并赠送衣冠冥具，主持追悼活动，确立王嗣。
English: When King Qin passed away, he sent Dr. Guanglu to offer condolences and gifts of clothing, crowns, and other items, preside over memorial activities, and establish a royal heir.

古文：列侯薨，遣太中大夫吊祠，视丧事，因立嗣。
现代文：列侯去世，派大中大夫到灵堂吊祭，主持追悼活动，确立嗣子。
English: When the prince died, he sent a junior high school teacher to the chapel to hold a memorial service, preside over memorial activities, and establish an heir.

古文：其葬，国得发民挽丧、穿、复土，治坟无过三百人毕事。
现代文：以上的王侯去世，征发民工车免引灵车，开凿墓穴。而治坟不得超过三百个劳动日。
English: After the death of the above-mentioned princes, the request for the issuance of a non-traction hearse and the excavation of the grave. And the grave should not exceed three hundred working days.

古文：匈奴入燕。
现代文：匈奴进入燕地。
English: The Xiongnu entered the Swallow's Land.

古文：改磔曰弃市，勿复磔。
现代文：改对死刑的分尸为弃市，废除分尸之法。
English: The act of dismembering the corpse of a person sentenced to death shall be abolished.

古文：三月，临江王荣坐侵太宗庙地，征诣中尉，自杀。
现代文：三月，临江王刘荣犯有侵犯太宗庙地之罪，中尉予以拘捕，刘荣自杀。
English: In March, the king of Linjiang, Liu Rong, was found guilty of encroaching on the temple grounds of the Taizong. He was arrested by a lieutenant, and Liu Rong committed suicide.

古文：夏四月，有星孛于西北。
现代文：夏四月，西北天空出现彗星。
English: Summer In April, a comet appeared in the northwest sky.

古文：立皇子越为广川王，寄为胶东王。
现代文：立皇子刘越为广川王，刘寄为胶东王。
English: The crown prince Liu Yue became the king of Guangchuan, and Liu Ying became the king of Jiaodong.

古文：秋七月，更郡守为太守，郡尉为都尉。
现代文：秋季七月，改称郡守为太守，郡尉为都尉。
English: In the autumn of July, the title of county governor was changed to governor and the title of county lieutenant to captain.

古文：九月，封故楚、赵傅、相、内史前死事者四人子皆为列侯。
现代文：九月，因原楚相张尚、太傅赵夷吾、赵相建德、内史王悍四人各谏其王不能谋反，而被其王所杀，现封四人之子为列侯。
English: In September, because the four former princes of Chu, Zhang Shang, Taifu Zhao Yiwu, Zhao Xiang Jiande, and Neishi Wang Han, each believed that their kings could not rebel, they were killed by their kings, and the sons of the four were made princes.

古文：甲戌晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：七月三十日，出现日偏食。
English: On July 30, a partial solar eclipse occurred.

古文：三年冬十一月，罢诸侯御史大夫官。
现代文：三年冬十一月，下令不再设置诸侯御史大夫官。
English: In November of the winter of the third year, it was ordered that the post of vassal shifu would no longer be set up.

古文：春正月，皇太后崩。
现代文：春季正月，皇太后去世。
English: In the first month of spring, the Empress Dowager passed away.

古文：夏，旱，禁酤酒。
现代文：夏旱，禁止卖酒。
English: Due to the summer drought, the sale of alcohol is prohibited.

古文：戊戌晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：秋九月，西北天空出现彗星。九月三十日，出现日偏食。
English: In autumn and September, a comet appeared in the northwest sky. On September 30, a partial solar eclipse occurred.

古文：立皇子乘为清河王。
现代文：封皇子刘乘为清河王。
English: Liu Xuan, the prince of Fong, became the king of Qinghe.

古文：四年春三月，起德阳宫。
现代文：四年春季三月，修建德阳宫。
English: In March of the spring of the fourth year, the Deyang Palace was built.

古文：御史大夫绾奏禁马高五尺九寸以上，齿未平，不得出关。
现代文：御史大夫卫绾上奏：禁止体高在五尺九寸以上年龄在十年以下的高头大马运往关外。
English: Imperial Historian Dr. Wei Wei's report: It is forbidden to transport tall horses with a height of more than five feet nine inches and an age of less than ten years to Guanzhong.

古文：夏，蝗。
现代文：夏季，发生蝗灾。
English: In summer, locust plagues occur.

古文：秋，赦徒作阳陵者死罪；欲腐者，许之。
现代文：秋，下令服劳役的犯人愿去修筑阳陵的、死囚愿意服宫刑的，均可应允。
English: In the autumn, prisoners ordered to perform labor service who wish to go to build a mausoleum, and death row prisoners who wish to serve a palace sentence, can all agree.

古文：十月戊午，日有蚀之。
现代文：十月二十六日，出现日偏食。
English: On October 26th, a partial solar eclipse occurred.

古文：五年夏，立皇子舜为常山王。
现代文：中元五年夏季，立皇子刘舜为常山王。
English: In the summer of the 5th year of the Middle Ages, Prince Liu Bei was appointed King of Changshan.

古文：六月，赦天下，赐民爵一级。
现代文：六月，大赦天下，赐民爵一级。
English: In June, he was pardoned and given a first-class title.

古文：秋八月己酉，未央宫东阙灾。
现代文：秋八月二十二日，未央宫东阙火灾。
English: On the 22nd day of the 8th month of autumn, there was a fire in the east wing of the Summer Palace.

古文：更名诸侯丞相为相。
现代文：改诸侯丞相的职务为相。
English: He changed the position of vassal minister to that of minister.

古文：九月，诏曰： 法令度量，所以禁暴止邪也。
现代文：九月，景帝下诏说： 法令与度量，是用以禁暴止邪的。
English: In September, Emperor Jing issued an edict saying: "Orders and measures are used to prohibit violence and stop evil.

古文：狱，人之大命，死者不可复生。
现代文：刑狱，是决定人的生死的，死者不能复生。
English: Imprisonment determines whether a person lives or dies. The dead cannot be brought back to life.

古文：吏或不奉法令，以货赂为市，朋党比周，以苛为察，以刻为明，令亡罪者失职，朕甚怜之。
现代文：有的官吏不执行法令，贪赃枉法，结党营私，狼狈为奸。以威逼迫其供认，以严酷决断案情，以致无辜者蒙受不白之冤，朕深为同情。
English: I deeply sympathize with officials who do not enforce laws and regulations, engage in corrupt practices, form partisan groups, and collude with each other. They use intimidation to coerce confessions, and use harsh sentences to decide cases, causing innocent people to suffer unjustly.

古文：有罪者不伏罪，奸法为暴，甚亡谓也。
现代文：有罪者不伏罪，如是因奸法横行，那另当别论。
English: It is a different matter if the guilty do not confess their crimes, for example, if they commit adultery.

古文：诸狱疑，若虽文致于法而于人心不厌者，辄谳之。 
现代文：而对于疑难案件，即使可以引用律条进行判处而人心却不服的，就应予进行复审与合议。 
English: As for difficult cases, even if it is possible to use legal rules to make a judgment, if the people are not satisfied, it should be reviewed and discussed.

古文：六年冬十月，行幸雍，郊五畤。
现代文：年冬十月，皇帝驾临雍地，祭祀天地五帝。
English: In the winter of October, the emperor came to Yongdi to offer sacrifices to the Five Emperors of Heaven and Earth.

古文：十二月，改诸官名。
现代文：十二月，改诸官官名。
English: In December, the names of officials were changed.

古文：定铸钱伪黄金弃市律。
现代文：公布铸造伪黄金货币者处以极刑的律条。
English: promulgated the rule that those who minted fake gold coins would be punished with capital punishment.

古文：春三月，雨雪。
现代文：春三月，下雪。
English: Spring in March, snowing.

古文：夏四月，梁王薨。分梁为五国，立孝王子五人皆为王。
现代文：夏四月，梁王去世，分梁为五国，梁孝王的五个儿子都封为王。
English: In the summer of April, King Liang died. Liang was divided into five kingdoms, and the five sons of King Liang Xiao Wang were all crowned as kings.

古文：五月，诏曰： 夫吏者，民之师也。
现代文：五月，皇帝下诏说： 官员，是为百姓做表率的。
English: In May, the emperor issued an edict saying, "Officials must set an example for the people.

古文：车驾、衣服宜称。
现代文：衣服车驾应与自身职位相称。
English: Dress and conduct themselves in a manner befitting their position.

古文：吏六百石以上，皆长吏也。亡度者、或不吏服出入闾里，与民亡异。
现代文：职位在六百石以上，都是主要官员，其中不注意为民表率的人不穿着官服，出入于闾巷里，与普通百姓无异。
English: The posts are above 600 koku, and they are all major officials. Among them, those who do not pay attention to being a model citizen do not wear official uniforms, and go in and out of the lane, which is no different from ordinary people.

古文：令长吏二千石车朱两轓；千石至六百石朱左轓。
现代文：现在规定，长吏二千石的车驾两侧屏障为红色，千石至六百石的车驾左侧屏障为红色。
English: It is now stipulated that the barrier on both sides of the chieftain's vehicle up to 2,000 koku is red, and the barrier on the left side of the vehicle from 1,000 koku to 600 koku is red.

古文：车骑从者不称其官衣服、下吏出入闾巷亡吏体者，二千石上其官属，三辅举不如法令者，皆上丞相御史请之。 
现代文：凡车骑与随从人员的衣冠与其身份不相称的，一般官员出入闾巷有失体统的，二千石的上报其主管部门，三辅一一一主管爵位的中尉及左右内史要查举不遵守吏体的，由丞相与御史提出处理意见。 
English: If the robes and crowns of the chariot riders and their attendants are not commensurate with their status, if it is unseemly for ordinary officials to enter and leave the gong alley, if the 2,000 koku is reported to their competent department, if the three assistants, the lieutenant in charge of the peerage, and the left and right internal historians are to be investigated for non-compliance with the officials, the prime minister and the chief historian shall put forward the handling opinions.

古文：先是，吏多军功，车、服尚轻，故为设禁，又惟酷吏奉宪失中，乃诏有司减笞法，定棰令。
现代文：原先是官吏多有军功，车驾衣冠以轻便为主。所以特下此禁令。又担心酷吏断狱失于严酷，就向司法部门下达了减笞法、定瞷令。
English: Originally, many government officials had military merit, and driving a car was considered to be light and convenient. Therefore, this ban was specially issued. Also, fearing that the harsh punishment of prison officials would be too harsh, the judicial department issued a reduction law and a ruling order.

古文：语在《刑法志》。
现代文：其具体内容载在《刑法志》。
English: For the transcript, see the book "Criminal Law."

古文：六月，匈奴入雁门，至武泉，入上郡，取苑马。吏卒战死者二千人。
现代文：六月，匈奴入侵雁门，到武泉，进入上郡，掠取牧马场的马匹，汉军将士战死者达二千余人。
English: In June, the Xiongnu invaded Yanmen, went to Wuquan, entered Shang County, and plundered horses from the ranch. More than two thousand Han soldiers were killed.

古文：秋七月，辛亥晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：秋季七月三十日，出现日偏食。
English: In autumn, a partial solar eclipse occurred on July 30.

古文：后元年春正月，诏曰： 狱，重事也。人有智愚，官有上下。
现代文：后元元年春正月，下诏说： 刑狱，是重要的事，人有智愚不同，官有高下之分。
English: In the first month of spring after the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, the following edict said: Imprisonment is an important matter, people are different in wisdom and stupidity, and officials have higher and lower points.

古文：狱疑者谳有司，有司所不能决，移廷尉。
现代文：对于疑狱先由各级执法部门进行评议，如果不能决断，就上交廷尉。
English: The law enforcement departments at all levels will discuss the suspected prisoners, and if they cannot reach a decision, the case will be referred to a court lieutenant.

古文：有令谳而后不当，谳者不为失。
现代文：对依法进行评议即使结论不当，也不由评议者承担过失。
English: If a review is conducted in accordance with the law, even if the conclusion is improper, the reviewer shall not be liable for negligence.

古文：欲令治狱者务先宽。 
现代文：意图是要求治狱者应先从宽考虑。 
English: The intention is that prisoners should first be considered for clemency.

古文：三月，赦天下，赐民爵一级，中二千石、诸侯相爵右庶长。
现代文：三月，大赦天下，赏赐民爵位一级，中二千石与诸侯相爵以右庶长。
English: In March, he was pardoned by the emperor and given a first-class title of nobility, with 2,000 koku in the middle and the title of the second-in-command to the right of the marquis.

古文：夏，大酺五日，民得酤酒。
现代文：夏，全国欢宴五天，民间可以买卖酒浆。
English: In summer, the national feast lasts for five days, and people can buy and sell wine.

古文：五月，地震。
现代文：五月，发生地震。
English: In May, there was an earthquake.

古文：秋七月乙巳晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：秋季七月三十日，出现日偏食。
English: In autumn, a partial solar eclipse occurred on July 30.

古文：条侯周亚夫下狱死。
现代文：条侯周亚夫下狱，死于狱中。
English: Zhou Yafu was released from prison and died in prison.

古文：二年冬十月，省彻侯之国。
现代文：二年冬十月，下命撤销列侯一定要到封国去的规定。
English: In October of the following winter, he was ordered to revoke the rule that vassals must go to the fief.

古文：春，匈奴入雁门，太守冯敬与战死。
现代文：春，匈奴入侵雁门，雁门太守冯敬战死。
English: In the spring, the Xiongnu invaded the Wild Goose Gate. Feng Jing, the warden of the Wild Goose Gate, died in battle.

古文：发车骑材官屯。
现代文：朝廷派车骑材官屯守雁门。
English: The imperial court sent officials to guard the Wild Goose Gate.

古文：春，以岁不登，禁内郡食马粟，没入之。
现代文：春，由于年景歉收，禁止内郡用粮食喂马，违者没收其马。
English: In the spring, due to the poor harvest, it was forbidden to feed horses with grain in the county, and violators had their horses confiscated.

古文：夏四月，诏曰： 雕文刻镂，伤农事者也；锦绣纂组，害女红者也。
现代文：夏季四月，下诏说： 雕文刻镂，消耗人力会伤害农事；追求锦绣华服，劳力费时会有害女红。
English: In the summer, in April, the following edict was issued: Engraving and carving are out of fashion, and the consumption of manpower will harm agricultural work; the pursuit of embroidered clothes, and the labor cost will be harmful to women.

古文：农事伤则饥之本也，女红害则寒之原也。
现代文：农事受损就会导致饥荒，女红受扰就会影响纺织生产而产生冻寒。
English: Damage to agriculture will lead to famine, disturbance of the female crimson will affect textile production and produce freezing cold.

古文：夫饥寒并至，而能亡为非者寡矣。
现代文：一旦饥寒交迫，而不能为非作歹的很少见。
English: It's rare to see someone who can't do wrong when they're hungry and cold.

古文：朕亲耕，后亲桑，以奉宗庙粢盛、祭服，为天下先；不受献，减太官，省徭赋，欲天下务农蚕，素有畜积，以备灾害。
现代文：朕亲自耕种，皇后亲自种蚕桑，以奉宗庙祭祀的所需，为天下做出榜样；朕不收奉献，减少冗员，降低徭赋，是希望天下重视农桑，积贮粮帛，以备灾荒。
English: I personally cultivate, and the empress personally grows silkworm mulberry, in order to serve as an example for the world in terms of what is needed for temple worship; I do not accept donations, reduce redundancy, and reduce endowment, in the hope that the world will attach importance to agricultural mulberry, accumulate grain reserves, and prepare for disasters.

古文：强毋攘弱，众毋暴寡；老耆以寿终，幼孤得遂长。
现代文：不准以强取弱，以众欺寡，让老者能安享晚年，让幼者顺利成长。
English: It is not allowed to take advantage of the weak by force or the weak by the many, so that the elderly can enjoy their old age safely and the young can grow up smoothly.

古文：今，岁或不登，民食颇寡，其咎安在？
现代文：今年粮食歉收，民食不足，问题出在哪里？
English: This year's poor grain harvest, the shortage of food for the people, where does the problem come from?

古文：或诈伪为吏，吏以货赂为市，渔夺百姓，侵牟万民。
现代文：有些诈伪官吏，公开贪污受贿，鱼肉百姓，侵吞民脂民膏。
English: Some fraudulent officials openly embezzle and accept bribes, prey on the people, and devour the people's fat and cream.

古文：县丞，长吏也，奸法与盗盗，甚无谓也。
现代文：县丞，本是地方主要官员，有的知法犯法，为盗贼勾结，这是不能容许的。
English: The county magistrate was originally a major local official, but some of them knowingly broke the law and colluded with thieves. This is unacceptable.

古文：其令二千石各修其职；不事官职、耗乱者，丞相以闻，请其罪。
现代文：现命令吏二千石者各履行其职责，凡疏于职守与渎职害民者，丞相都应上报，并予以惩处。
English: It is now ordered that officials of 2,000 koku each perform their duties, and all those who neglect their duties and abuse their duties to the detriment of the people should be reported to the prime minister and punished.

古文：布告天下，使明知朕意。 
现代文：特此布告天下，使明知朕意。 
English: Announce it to the whole world, so that people will know my will.

古文：五月，诏曰： 人不患其不知，患其为诈也；不患其不勇，患其为暴也；不患其不富，患其亡厌也。
现代文：五月，下诏书说： 不必担心某人不智，要担心的是他弄虚作假；不必担心某人不勇，要担心的是他逞强施暴；不必担心某人不富，要担心的是他见利忘义贪得无厌。
English: In May, the next imperial edict said: Don't worry that someone is not wise, worry that he is deceitful; don't worry that someone is not brave, worry that he is violent; don't worry that someone is not rich, worry that he is greedy.

古文：其唯廉士，寡欲易足。
现代文：只有廉洁之人，淡泊自甘，欲望易足。
English: Only those who are incorruptible are indifferent and self-indulgent, and their desires are fickle.

古文：今訾算十以上乃得官，廉士算不必众。
现代文：原规定有资产十万方可为官，而对廉洁的人就不应如此要求。
English: Originally, it was stipulated that only those with assets of 100,000 yuan could become officials, and this should not be required of incorruptible people.

古文：有市籍不得官，无訾又不得官，朕甚愍之。
现代文：如按原规定商人有钱不得为官，廉士无钱不能为官，这就导致廉士无进身之路，朕甚为惋惜。
English: If, according to the original regulations, businessmen with money are not allowed to become officials, and corrupt officials without money are not allowed to become officials, this will lead to corrupt officials having no way to advance, which I very much regret.

古文：訾算四得官，亡令廉士久失职，贪夫长利。 
现代文：现下令：有资产四万即可为官，以免使廉洁之士不得其职，而让贪夫久据其位。 
English: Now it has been decreed that anyone with assets of 40,000 can become an official, so as not to deprive the honest of their position and allow the corrupt to remain in power.

古文：秋，大旱。
现代文：秋季，大旱。
English: In autumn, there is a big drought.

古文：三年春正月，诏曰： 农，天下之本也。
现代文：后元三年春正月，下诏说： 农业，是天下的根本。
English: In the first month of the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, the following edict was issued: Agriculture is the foundation of the world.

古文：黄金、珠玉，饥不可食，寒不可衣，以为币用，不识其终始。
现代文：黄金珠玉，饥不可食，寒不可衣，用它和货币以通有无，又无法识别与使用。
English: Gold is a precious stone, which cannot be eaten when hungry and cannot be worn when cold. It can be used as money, but it cannot be recognized and used.

古文：间岁或不登，意为末者众，农民寡也。
现代文：今年有时收成不好，朕认为是从事商业的人过多，而从事农业的人过少。
English: Sometimes the harvest is not good this year. I think there are too many people engaged in business and too few people engaged in agriculture.

古文：其令郡国务劝农桑，益种树，可得衣食物。
现代文：现特令郡国务必要劝励农民从事农桑，多植树，可以丰衣足食。
English: Now, the county government has issued a special order to encourage farmers to engage in agricultural mulberry, plant more trees, and have enough food and clothing.

古文：吏发民若取庸采黄金、珠玉者，坐臧为盗。
现代文：如有官吏用其资财雇佣民力开采黄金珠玉的，以盗赃论处。
English: If any government official uses his wealth to hire people to mine gold and precious stones, he will be dealt with as a thief.

古文：二千石听者，与同罪。 
现代文：吏二千石者对此不进行查究者，与其同罪。 
English: An official with a salary of two thousand koku who does not investigate this is guilty of the same crime.

古文：皇太子冠，赐民为父后者爵一级。
现代文：皇太子行冠礼，赏赐百姓中为父亲继承人的爵位一级。
English: The crown prince performed a coronation, awarding the first level of the peerage to the father's heir among the people.

古文：甲子，帝崩于未央宫。
现代文：正月二十七日，景帝于未央宫逝世。
English: On the 27th day of the first month, Emperor Jing died at the Miao Palace.

古文：遗诏赐诸侯王、列侯马二驷，吏二千石黄金二斤，吏民户百钱。
现代文：遗诏赐各侯王、列侯马八匹。吏二千石者黄金二斤，其他吏民每户百钱。
English: The imperial edict gave eight horses to each feudal lord and vassal lord. Officials with 2,000 koku were given 2 jin of gold, while other officials and commoners received 100 sen per household.

古文：出宫人归其家，复终身。
现代文：遣散宫人各归其家，免除终身徭役。
English: The dismissed palace staff will return to their respective homes, and will be exempted from serving as palace guards for life.

古文：二月癸酉，葬阳陵。
现代文：二月六日，葬于阳陵。
English: On February 6, he was buried in Yangling.

古文：赞曰：孔子称 斯民，三代之所以直道而行也 ，信哉！
现代文：班固评论：孔子说 今时的人，也能像夏、商、周三代时一样直道而行。 这是十分正确的。
English: Comment by Banggu: Confucius said that people of today can also walk in a straight line just like the Xia, Shang and Zhou dynasties, which is very true.

古文：周、秦之敝，罔密文峻，而奸轨不胜。
现代文：周、秦的弊端，是法网严密而律令苛峻，但触法犯罪的仍不可胜数。
English: The drawback of Zhou and Qin is that the legal network is strict and the laws are harsh, but there are still countless crimes that violate the law.

古文：汉兴，扫除烦苛，与民休息。
现代文：汉朝兴起，扫除繁苛，使百姓休养生息。
English: The rise of the Han Dynasty swept away the hardships and enabled the people to recuperate.

古文：至于孝文，加之以恭俭，孝景遵业，五六十载之间，至于移风易俗，黎民醇厚。
现代文：至于汉文帝，加之以恭俭，景帝遵循前业，五六十年之间，就做到了移风易俗，民风淳朴。
English: As for Emperor Hanwen, in addition to being respectful and frugal, Emperor Jing followed his previous career, and between the fifties and sixties, he succeeded in changing the customs and customs, and the folk style was simple.

古文：周云成、康，汉言文、景，美矣！
现代文：周朝赞美成康，汉代称道文景，多么美好的盛世啊！
English: The Zhou Dynasty praised Chengkang, the Han Dynasty praised Dao Wenjing, what a wonderful golden age!

