古文：胡藩，字道序，豫章南昌人也。祖随，散骑常侍。
现代文：胡藩字道序，豫章南昌人，他祖父胡随，官至散骑常侍。
English: His grandfather, Hu Sui, was a high-ranking official and a knight errant.

古文：父仲任，治书侍御史。
现代文：父亲胡仲任，官至治书侍御史。
English: His father, Hu Zhongren, was a high-ranking official who served the Emperor.

古文：籓少孤，居丧以毁称。
现代文：胡藩很小便死了父母，在丧事期间非常悲痛，以此著名。
English: Hu Han was very young when his parents died, and he is famous for being very sad during the funeral.

古文：太守韩伯见之，谓籓叔尚书少广曰： 卿此侄当以义烈成名。 
现代文：太守韩伯看见他，对他的叔父尚书胡少广说： 你的这个侄儿一定会以义气成名。 
English: When the grand marshal Han Bo saw him, he said to his uncle Shang Shuxu Hu Shao Guang, "This nephew of yours is sure to become famous for his righteousness."

古文：州府辟召，不就。须二弟冠婚毕，乃参郗恢征虏军事。
现代文：本州本府征调他，他没有应任，等待两个弟弟结婚后，他才当郗恢的征虏军事。
English: He was drafted by his home prefecture, but he did not take up the post. He waited for his two younger brothers to get married before he became a full-fledged conscript.

古文：时殷仲堪为荆州刺史，籓外兄罗企生为仲堪参军，籓请假还，过江陵省企生。
现代文：当时殷仲堪当荆州刺史，胡藩的舅兄罗企生当仲堪的参军，胡藩请假回家，经过江陵，探望企生。
English: At that time, Yin Zhongkang was a member of the Jingzhou Shishi, and Luo Qisheng, the uncle of Hu Han, was a member of the army. Hu Han took a leave of absence to go home, passing through Jiangling to visit Qisheng.

古文：仲堪要籓相见，接待甚厚。
现代文：殷仲堪邀请胡藩相见，接待他很隆重。
English: Yin Zhongkang invited Hu to meet him, and received him with great pomp.

古文：籓因说仲堪曰： 桓玄意趣不常，每怏怏于失职。节下崇待太过，非将来之计也。 
现代文：胡藩趁便劝说殷仲堪： 桓玄意气不凡，每每不满于他的职务，足下对他太好，恐怕不利于将来。 
English: Hu Han took the opportunity to persuade Yin Zhongkan: Huan Xuan's spirit is extraordinary, he is always dissatisfied with his duties, and his subordinates are too kind to him, which may not be good for the future.

古文：仲堪色不悦。
现代文：仲堪脸上顿时露出不愉快的神色。
English: A look of displeasure suddenly appeared on Nakakan's face.

古文：籓退而谓企生曰： 倒戈授人，必至之祸。
现代文：胡藩退回对罗企生说： 倒着战戈给人一定会招致大祸。
English: Hu Han retreated and said to Luo Qisheng, "Fighting back to back will surely bring about a big disaster."

古文：若不早规去就，后悔无及。 
现代文：如果不早点打算避开，后悔就来不及了。 
English: If you don't plan to avoid it early, you'll regret it later.

古文：玄自夏口袭仲堪，籓参玄后军军事。
现代文：桓玄从夏口袭击殷仲堪，胡藩当桓玄的参后军军事。
English: Huan Xuan attacked Yin Zhongkan from Xiakou, and the Hu clan followed Huan Xuan's army.

古文：仲堪败，企生果以附从及祸。
现代文：殷仲堪失败，罗企生果然因为跟从殷仲堪而遇到灾难。
English: Yin Zhongkan failed, Luo Qisheng really suffered a calamity because of following him.

古文：籓转参太尉、大将军、相国军事。
现代文：胡藩则转任参太尉、大将军和相国军事。
English: Hu Han, on the other hand, was promoted to the positions of senior lieutenant, general, and military officer of the same country.

古文：义旗起，玄战败将出奔，籓于南掖门捉玄马控，曰： 今羽林射手犹有八百，皆是义故西人，一旦舍此，欲归可复得乎？ 
现代文：刘裕的起义开始，桓玄被击败准备出逃，胡藩在南掖门拉住桓玄的马缰绳说： 今日羽林射箭能手还有八百人，他们都是桓家老部下，又是西楚人氏，一旦不利用他们，想回去哪有什么可能呢？ 
English: At the beginning of Liu Yu's uprising, when Huan Xuan was defeated and preparing to flee, the Hu clan tightened the reins of Huan Xuan's horse at the South Gate and said: Today, there are still eight hundred skilled archery shooters in Huanlin. They are all the old men of the Huan family and the West Chu people. If you don't use them, what is the possibility of going back?

古文：玄直以马鞭指天而已，于是奔散相失。
现代文：桓玄只用马鞭指着天说天命而已。于是胡藩和桓玄逃散分开。
English: Kuan Xuan only pointed to the sky with a horsewhip to say that it was fate. Therefore, the Hu clan and Kuan Xuan fled and separated.

古文：追及玄于芜湖，玄见籓，喜谓张须无曰： 卿州故为多士，今乃复见王叔治。 
现代文：他到芜湖追赶上桓玄，桓玄看见胡藩，高兴地对张须无说： 你们州本来很多义士，今日又见到王叔治。 
English: He went to Lugu Lake to catch up with Huan Xuan. When Huan Xuan saw the Hu clan, he happily said to Zhang Xumu: There are many righteous people in your state, and today I saw Wang Shuji again.

古文：桑落之战，籓舰被烧，全铠入水潜行三十许步，方得登岸。
现代文：桑落州战役中，胡藩的船被烧，他穿着一身铠甲潜入水中行走三十余步，才得登岸。
English: During the Battle of Sangluozhou, Hu Han's ship was burned, and he had to walk more than 30 steps in armor before he could get ashore.

古文：义军既迫，不复得西，乃还家。
现代文：起义军逼近，胡藩不能向西，于是回家。
English: As the insurgents approached, the Hu clan could not go west, so they returned home.

古文：高祖素闻籓直言于殷氏，又为玄尽节，召为员外散骑侍郎，参军军事。
现代文：高祖一向听说胡藩对殷仲堪讲真话，又为桓玄尽忠，召他为员外散骑侍郎、参镇军军事。
English: Gaozu had always heard that the Hu clan told the truth to Yin Zhongkan, and was loyal to Kuan Xuan, calling him a non-commissioned officer, horseback riding attendant, and member of the town's military.

古文：从征鲜卑，贼屯聚临朐，籓言于高祖曰： 贼屯军城外，留守必寡，今往取其城，而斩其旗帜，此韩信所以克赵也。 
现代文：胡藩随同征讨南燕慕容越，敌人屯驻临朐，胡藩对高祖说： 敌人屯兵城外，留下的守兵必然很少，现在前往攻城，敌兵看见城池陷落，必定一下子逃散，这也是韩信击败赵兵的法子。 
English: The Hu clan accompanied the enlistment of Nanyan Murong Yue, and the enemy stationed in Linyi. The Hu clan said to Gao Zu: The enemy stationed soldiers outside the city, and there must be few guards left. Now they are going to attack the city. When the enemy soldiers saw the city fall, they must have fled at once. This is also the way of Han Xin defeating Zhao soldiers.

古文：高祖乃遣檀韶与籓等潜往，既至，即克其城。贼见城陷，一时奔走，还保广固累月。
现代文：高祖于是派檀韶和胡藩暗中前进，宋军一到，便攻下临朐城，燕兵一时间逃跑，回保广固城几个月。
English: Gaozu then sent Danzhao and the Hu clan to advance secretly. As soon as the Song army arrived, they captured Linyi City. Yan soldiers immediately fled, and Guanggu City was protected for several months.

古文：将拔之夜，佐史并集，忽有鸟大如鹅，苍黑色，飞入高祖帐里，众皆骇愕，以为不祥。
现代文：广固将攻拔的夜晚，宋军将佐都在座，突然有一只像鹅一样的青黑色的大乌鸦，飞入高祖的军帐，众人都非常惊骇，以为是不祥之兆。
English: On the night of Guanggu's attack, Song general Zuo was present. Suddenly, a large blue-black crow, like a goose, flew into Gao Zu's military account. Everyone was very shocked and thought it was an ominous sign.

古文：籓起贺曰： 苍黑者，胡虏之色，胡虏归我，大吉之祥也。 
现代文：胡藩上前祝贺道： 青黑的颜色，正是胡人的颜色，胡人投降我们，这正是大吉的征兆。 
English: The Hu clan came forward to congratulate him and said, "The blue and black color is the color of the Hu people. The Hu people have surrendered to us. This is the sign of great success."

古文：明旦，攻城，陷之。
现代文：第二天早晨，宋军攻城，拔下了广固。
English: The next morning, the Song army attacked the city and took Guanggu.

古文：从讨卢循于左里，频战有功，封吴平县五等子，除正员郎。
现代文：胡藩又随同讨伐在左里的卢循，连续战斗都有军功，被封为吴平县五等子爵，任正员郎。
English: Hu Han also accompanied the crusade against Lu Xun in Zuoli, and had military achievements in continuous battles. He was named the fifth viscount of Wuping County, and was appointed to the post of vice-governor.

古文：寻转宁远将军、鄱阳太守。
现代文：不久转任宁远将军、鄱阳太守。
English: He was soon transferred to the post of Ningyuan general and the governor of Shenyang.

古文：从伐刘毅。
现代文：胡藩又随同讨伐刘毅。
English: The Hu clan also followed Liu Yi's crusade.

古文：毅初当之荆州，表求东道还京辞墓，去都数十里，不过拜阙。
现代文：刘毅当初到荆州，上表请求走东面回到京口，辞别先人庐墓，离都城几十里，不到皇宫拜谒而过。
English: When Liu Yi first came to Jingzhou, he asked the above table to go east to return to Jingkou, to bid farewell to his ancestors' tombs, dozens of miles away from the capital, and not to visit the imperial palace.

古文：高祖出倪塘会之。
现代文：高祖到倪塘会见刘毅。
English: Gaozu went to Niitang to meet with Liu Yi.

古文：籓劝于坐杀毅，高祖不从。
现代文：胡藩劝高祖在会见中杀了刘毅，高祖没同意。
English: The Hu clan advised Gao Zu to kill Liu Yi during the meeting, but Gao Zu did not agree.

古文：至是谓籓曰： 昔从卿倪塘之谋，无今举也。 
现代文：高祖到这时对胡藩说： 当年如果听从你在倪塘的计策，就不需要今日的行动了。 
English: At this time, Gaozu said to Hu Han: If you had followed your strategy in Niitang back then, there would be no need for today's action.

古文：又从征司马休之。复为参军，加建武将军，领游军于江津。
现代文：胡藩又随同征伐司马休之，再当参军，加号建武将军，在江津一带率领游军。
English: Hu Han also went along with the expedition to subjugate Ma Xiu, and then joined the army, adding the title of General Jianwu and leading the expeditionary force in the Jiangjin area.

古文：徐逵之败没，高祖怒甚，即日于马头岸渡江，而江津岸峭，壁立数丈，休之临岸置阵，无由可登。
现代文：徐逵之败亡，高祖非常愤怒，当天便在马头岸渡长江，但江岸险峭，耸立几丈高，司马休之在岸边布阵，官军无法上岸。
English: After the defeat of Xu Xi, Gao Zu was very angry. On the same day, he crossed the Yangtze River at Ma Tou, but the riverbank was dangerous and towered several feet high. Sima Xiu was on the shore, and the government army could not get ashore.

古文：高祖呼籓令上，籓有疑色，高祖奋怒，命左右录来，欲斩之。
现代文：高祖叫胡藩马上上岸，胡藩有些犹豫，高祖更加愤怒，叫左右的人把胡藩捆来，想将他斩首。
English: Gaozu told the Hu clan to get ashore immediately. The Hu clan hesitated a little, but Gaozu was even angrier. He ordered the people on his right and left to tie up the Hu clan and wanted to behead him.

古文：籓不受命，顾曰： 籓宁前死耳！ 
现代文：胡藩不接受砍头的军令，回过头来说： 胡藩宁愿上前战死！ 
English: The Hu clan did not accept the military order to cut off heads, and turned around and said: The Hu clan would rather go forward and die in battle!

古文：以刀头穿岸，少容脚指，于是径上，随之者稍多。
现代文：他用刀头凿岸壁，稍微能容脚掌，于是直接登上，随他上岸的人稍稍多起来。
English: With the point of his knife, he chiseled away at the quay wall, leaving just enough room for his feet, so he boarded directly, and a few more people followed him ashore.

古文：既得登岸，殊死战，贼不能当，引退。因而乘之，一时奔散。
现代文：官军登岸之后，都拼死奋战，司马休之的部队挡不住，只好退却，官兵乘机追击，司马氏部队瞬间逃散。
English: After the government troops disembarked, they all fought to the death. Sima Xiuqi's troops could not be stopped and had to retreat. The officers and soldiers took the opportunity to pursue, and Sima's troops immediately fled.

古文：高祖伐羌，假籓宁朔将军，参太尉军事，统别军。
现代文：高祖征讨后秦姚泓，暂任胡藩为宁朔将军、参太尉军事，统率一支独立的部队。
English: After the conquest of Gaozu, Qin Yaoqi temporarily appointed Hu Han as the general of Ningshuo and the military officer, leading an independent force.

古文：至河东，暴风漂籓重舰渡北岸，索虏牵得此舰，取其器物。
现代文：到河东，大风把胡藩的船只吹到北岸，魏人牵住这些船只，拿取其中的器物。
English: To the east of the river, the strong winds blew the ships of the Hu clan to the north shore, and the Wei people held on to these ships and took the objects from them.

古文：籓气厉心愤，率左右十二人，乘小船径往河北。
现代文：胡藩非常愤怒，带身边十二人，乘小船直驶河北。
English: Hu Han was so angry that he took twelve people with him and sailed straight to Hebei in a small boat.

古文：贼骑五六百见籓来，并笑之。
现代文：敌人骑兵五六百看见胡藩都笑他胆大。
English: When the five or six hundred enemy cavalrymen saw Hu, they all laughed at his audacity.

古文：籓素善射，登岸射，贼应弦而倒者十许人，贼皆奔退，悉收所失而反。
现代文：胡藩向来会射箭，登上河岸便射击敌人，敌人应声而倒的有十来人，其他的人便连忙奔逃，胡藩把失落的船只物品全部收回。
English: The Hu clan has always been able to shoot arrows. When they reached the riverbank, they shot at the enemy. About ten of the enemy fell to the ground at the sound of the enemy's shots. The rest of the enemy fled in a hurry. The Hu clan recovered all of the lost ship's goods.

古文：又遣籓及硃超石等追索虏于半城，虏骑数重，籓及超石所领皆割配新军，不盈五千，率厉力战，大破之。
现代文：刘裕又派胡藩和朱超石等人追击在半城的魏人，魏人骑兵几层包围宋兵，胡藩和朱超石带的都是刚分配的新兵，不满五百人，但他们率兵激战，大败敌军。
English: Liu Yu also sent the Hu clan and Zhu Chaoishi and others to pursue the Wei people in the middle of the city. The Wei cavalry surrounded the Song soldiers in several layers. The Hu clan and Zhu Chaoishi were newly assigned recruits, less than 500 people, but they led the soldiers in a fierce battle and defeated the enemy army.

古文：又与超石等击姚业于蒲坂，超石失利退还，籓收超石成舍资实，徐行而反，业不敢追。
现代文：又和朱超石等人进击在蒲坂的姚业，朱超石败而退回。胡藩收集朱超石丢下的器械物资，慢慢地退回，姚业不敢追击。
English: In addition, he and Zhu Chaoishi and others attacked Yao Ye in Busan, Zhu Chaoishi was defeated and retreated. The Hu clan collected the equipment and materials left by Zhu Chaoishi and slowly retreated, Yao Ye did not dare to pursue.

古文：高祖还彭城，参相国军事。
现代文：高祖回到彭城，胡藩当参相国军事。
English: Gao Zu returned to Pengcheng, and the Hu clan participated in the national military.

古文：时卢循余党与苏淫贼大相聚结，以为始兴相。
现代文：当时卢循余党和苏淫等亡命徒相互勾结，用苏淫为始兴相。
English: At that time, Lu Xunyu's party and the outlaws such as Su Huan colluded with each other, using Su Huan as the starting point.

古文：论平司马休之及广固功，封阳山县男，食邑五百户。
现代文：高祖因平定打败司马休之和攻广固的功劳，封胡藩为阳山县男，食邑五百户。
English: Gaozu was awarded the title of Yangshan County's man for defeating Sima Xiu and conquering Guanggu, and 500 households in the county were provided with food.

古文：少帝景平元年，坐守东府，开掖门，免官，寻复其职。
现代文：少帝景平元年，胡藩因为防守东府，擅自打开边门，被免去官职，不久又恢复他的职位。
English: In the first year of the reign of the young Emperor Jingping, Hu Han was dismissed from his post because he opened a gate without authorization to defend Dongfu. He was soon reinstated.

古文：元嘉四年，迁建武将军、江夏内史。
现代文：元嘉四年胡藩迁任建武将军、江夏内史。
English: In the 4th year of Yuan Jia, the Hu clan was relocated and Jiang Xia Nishi was appointed as General Jianwu.

古文：七年，征为游击将军。
现代文：七年被征调为游击将军。
English: For seven years he was conscripted as a guerrilla general.

古文：到彦之北伐，南兗州刺史长沙王义欣进据彭城，籓出戍广陵，行府州事。
现代文：到彦之北伐，南兖州刺史、长沙王刘义欣进据彭城，胡藩出外戍守广陵，代管州府事务。
English: After the Northern Expedition led by Zhu Yan, the history of Southern Luzhou was written, and Liu Yixin, the king of Changsha, entered Pengcheng, and the Hu clan went abroad to guard Guangling and take charge of the affairs of the state capital.

古文：转太子左卫率。
现代文：又转任太子左卫帅。
English: He was also transferred to the position of the Crown Prince Left Guard.

古文：十年，卒，时年六十二，谥曰壮侯。
现代文：十年，胡藩逝世，享年六十二岁，被谥为壮侯。
English: Ten years later, Hu Han died at the age of sixty-two, and was crowned Grand Prince.

古文：传国至齐受禅，国除。垣护之，字彦宗，略阳桓道人也。
现代文：胡藩非正妻生的儿子有六十人，多数不遵守法纪。垣护之字彦宗，略阳桓道人。
English: There are sixty sons of illegitimate wives in the Hu clan, most of whom do not follow the law and discipline.

古文：祖敞，仕苻氏，为长乐国郎中令。
现代文：祖父垣敞，在苻坚的先秦作官，当长乐国郎中令。
English: His grandfather, Kakidamari, was a pre-Qin official in Shujian and served as the second-in-command to Chōraku no Kuniro.

古文：慕容德入青州，以敞为车骑长史。
现代文：慕荣德进入青州，用垣敞为车骑长史。
English: Mu Rongde entered Qingzhou, and he had a long history of riding on the wall.

古文：德兄子超袭伪位，伯父遵、父苗复见委任。遵为尚书，苗京兆太守。
现代文：慕荣德的哥哥的儿子慕荣超继承慕荣德的伪帝位。垣护之的伯父垣遵、父亲垣苗再被委用，垣遵当尚书、垣苗当京兆太守。
English: Mu Rong Chao, the son of Mu Rongde's elder brother, succeeded to Mu Rongde's pseudo-imperial throne. The uncle of Kakigome, Kakizuna, and the father, Kakimea, were re-appointed, Kakizuna as Shangshu, and Kakimea as Kyocho Taishu.

古文：高祖围广固，遵、苗逾城归降，并以为太尉行参军。
现代文：高祖围攻广固，垣遵、垣苗越城投降，高祖都把他们任为太尉行参军。
English: Gaozhu besieged Guanggu, and Kakizun and Kakimea surrendered Yuecheng. Gaozhu appointed them all as Taijun to join the army.

古文：太祖元嘉中，遵为员外散骑常侍，苗屯骑校尉。
现代文：太祖元嘉年中，垣遵当员外散骑常侍，垣苗为屯骑校尉。
English: In the middle of the great ancestor Yuan Jia's reign, Zong Zong served as a non-commissioned officer, and Zong Miao was a non-commissioned officer.

古文：护之少倜傥，不拘小节，形状短陋，而气干强果。
现代文：垣护之少时潇洒不俗、不拘小节，身材矮小，相貌丑陋，但气概过人，果敢能干。
English: At a young age, Kego was a dashing and unconventional young man. He was short in stature and ugly in appearance, but he was extremely courageous and capable.

古文：从高祖征司马休之，为世子中军府长史，兼行参军。
现代文：他随从高祖征讨司马休之，当世子中军府长史，兼行参军。
English: He followed Gao Zu's expedition to subjugate Sima Xiu, who was the military governor at the time, and also joined the army.

古文：永初中，补奉朝请。
现代文：永初年中，补任奉朝请。
English: In the middle of the first half of the year, I was asked to take on the additional post of minister to the emperor.

古文：元嘉初，为殿中将军。随到彦之北伐，彦之将回师，护之为书谏曰： 外闻节下欲回师反旆，窃所不同。
现代文：元嘉初年，当殿中将军，随同到彦之北伐，彦之将要退兵，护之写信劝谏说： 外面传说足下想回军返国，我有不同的看法。
English: In the first year of Yuan Jia, when the general of the palace, accompanied to the northward march of Yan Zi, Yan Zi was about to retire, and Guo Zi wrote a letter to persuade him, saying: There is a rumor that Yan Zi wants to return to the army and return to the country. I have a different opinion.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：残虏畏威，望风奔迸，八载侵地，不战克复。
现代文：残余的敌人怕我们，望风而逃，八年来侵占我们的地盘，不经战斗便收复了。
English: The remnants of the enemy were afraid of us and fled before the wind. They occupied our territory for eight years, but regained it without a fight.

古文：方当长驱朔漠，穷扫遗丑，况乃自送，无假远劳。
现代文：我们应该长驱漠北，穷追残余的胡虏。况且他们自动送死，不需我们远远地攻击。
English: We should drive to the north of the desert and hunt down the remaining Khuruls. Moreover, they will die of their own accord, without us having to attack them from far away.

古文：宜使竺灵秀速进滑台助硃修之固守，节下大军进拟河北，则牢、洛游魂，自然奔退。
现代文：应该叫竺灵秀快速前进到滑台帮助朱修之固守，足下的大军前抵黄河以北，那虎牢、洛阳一带的敌人，自然退逃。
English: He should have ordered Gong Lingxiu to quickly advance to the slide to help Zhu Xiu's adherence. The army under his feet arrived north of the Yellow River, and the enemy in the tiger's stronghold and Luoyang area naturally retreated.

古文：且昔人有连年攻战，失众乏粮者，犹张胆争前，莫肯轻退。
现代文：当年有人连年作战，损兵折将，粮食缺乏，仍然放胆前行，不肯轻易退却。
English: At that time, there were people who fought for years on end, lost soldiers, and lacked food, but still dared to move forward and refused to retreat easily.

古文：况今青州丰穰，济漕流通，士马饱逸，威力无损。
现代文：况且今年青州丰收，济河漕运流通，士兵吃得饱，战马养得好，威力没有受到损伤。
English: Moreover, Qingzhou had a bumper harvest this year, the Jihe River was navigable, the soldiers were well-fed, the war horses were well-kept, and the horse's strength was not damaged.

古文：若空弃滑台，坐丧成业，岂是朝廷受任之旨。 
现代文：如果丢弃滑台，白白地丧失已成功业，怎能符合朝廷给你的旨意呢？ 
English: If you discard the slide and lose your successful career in vain, how can you comply with the will of the court?

古文：彦之不纳，散败而归。
现代文：到彦之没有采纳这个意见，败逃而归。
English: However, Kazuhiko did not accept this opinion and ran away.

古文：太祖闻而善之，以补江夏王义恭征北行参军、北高平太守。
现代文：太祖听说垣护之进谏之事，很是称赞。用垣护之补任为江夏王刘义恭的北行参军、北高平太守。
English: When the great-grandfather heard about the accession of Kikugo, he was very complimentary. He used Kikugo as a substitute to join the northern army of Liu Yigong, the king of Jiangxia, and to become the governor of Northern Gaoping.

古文：以载禁物系尚方，久之蒙宥。
现代文：因为偷运被禁止的物品，垣护之被逮捕入狱，不久被释放。
English: He was arrested and jailed for smuggling prohibited goods, but was soon released.

古文：又补衡阳王义季征北长流参军，迁宣威将军、钟离太守。
现代文：又补任衡阳王刘义季征北长流参军，迁任宣威将军、钟离太守。
English: In addition, Liu Yizi, the king of Hengyang, was appointed to join the army of the Northern Changlian Conquest, and was transferred to the post of General Xuan Wei and Governor of Zhongli.

古文：随王玄谟入河，玄谟攻滑台，护之百舸为前锋，进据石济；石济在滑台西南百二十里。
现代文：垣护之随同王玄谟进入黄河，王玄谟进攻滑台，垣护之的一百多只军舰作先锋，进据石济戍垒。石济在滑台西南一百二十里处。
English: He followed Wang Xuanmu into the Yellow River, and Wang Xuanmu attacked the slipway. More than a hundred warships led by him advanced to the fortress of Shijie, 120 miles southwest of the slipway.

古文：及虏救至，又驰书劝玄谟急攻，曰： 昔武皇攻广固，死没者亦众。
现代文：到魏国援兵快到时，垣护之又派人带信给王玄谟，叫他马上进攻，说： 当年武帝进攻广固，死伤也很多。
English: When reinforcements from Wei were about to arrive, he sent a letter to Wang Xuanmu, telling him to attack immediately, saying: "In that year, Emperor Wu attacked widely, and there were many deaths and injuries.

古文：况事殊曩日，岂得计士众伤疲，愿以屠城为急。 不从。
现代文：况且目前情势与当年不同，怎么能过多地考虑士兵的伤亡。我希望尽快攻下该城。 王玄谟没听从。
English: Moreover, the current situation is different from that year, how can I think too much about the casualties of soldiers. I hope to capture the city as soon as possible. Wang Xuanmu did not listen.

古文：玄谟败退，不暇报护之。
现代文：玄谟败北，没时间报知垣护之。
English: With the defeat of Xuanmu, there was no time to report to Chigaki for protection.

古文：护之闻知，而虏悉已牵玄谟水军大艚，连以铁锁三重断河，欲以绝护之还路。
现代文：垣护之听说，魏兵已把王玄谟的水兵大船全部用铁链连住，布成三道，截断黄河，想堵住垣护之的退路。
English: He had heard that the Wei soldiers had chained together all of Wang Xuanmu's large naval vessels into three lines, cutting off the Yellow River and blocking his escape route.

古文：河水迅急，护之中流而下，每至铁锁，以长柯斧断之，虏不能禁。
现代文：此时，黄河水流很急，垣护之从河流中飞速东下，每遇铁链，便用长柄巨斧砍断，敌人挡不住。
English: At this time, the Yellow River was flowing very fast, and the fence was flying from the middle of the river to the east. Whenever a chain was encountered, it was cut with a long-handled giant ax, and the enemy could not stop it.

古文：唯失一舸，余舸并全。
现代文：垣护之只丢下一只小船，其余战船都完好无损。
English: Only a small boat was left behind, the rest of the warships were undamaged.

古文：留戍靡沟城。
现代文：他留下戍守靡沟城。
English: He was left in charge of Meitou Castle.

古文：还为江夏王义恭骠骑户曹参军，戍淮阴。
现代文：回来后，当江夏王刘义恭骠骑户曹参军，戍守淮阴。
English: After returning, when Liu Yigong, the king of Jiangxia, sent Cao, the cavalryman, to join the army, he stayed in Huaiyin.

古文：加建武将军，领济北太守。
现代文：加号建武将军，兼领洛北太守。
English: He was given the additional title of General Jianwu and concurrently held the position of Northern Governor of Luo.

古文：率二千人复随张永攻确磝，先据委栗津。
现代文：他率二千人再随张永进攻石高石敖。先占据委粟津。
English: With Zhang Yong, he and his two thousand men attacked Shigao Shizhao. First, they occupied Ouozu.

古文：虏杜道俊与伪尚书伏连来援确磝，护之拒之，贼因引军东去。
现代文：敌人杜道鯭和尚书伏连来援助，垣护之拒击敌人，敌人于是退兵向东。
English: The enemy Du Daojun and the monk Shufu Lian came to help, and the enemy refused to attack the enemy, so the enemy retreated to the east.

古文：萧思话遣护之迎军至梁山，伪尚书韩元兴率精骑卒至，护之依险拒战，斩其都军长史，甲首数十，贼乃退。
现代文：萧思话派垣护之到梁山迎接大军，敌人尚书韩元兴率领精兵突然袭来，垣护之凭借险要的地势抵抗，杀敌都军长史，兵士几千人，敌人才退。
English: Xiao Siwei sent Qi Guo Zhi to Liangshan to meet the great army, the enemy Shangshu Han Yuanxing led the elite soldiers suddenly attacked, Qi Guo Zhi by virtue of the critical terrain resistance, killed the enemy capital army long history, several thousand soldiers, the enemy only retreated.

古文：思话将引还，诳护之云： 沈庆之救军垂至，可急于济口立桥。 
现代文：萧思话准备退回，骗垣护之说： 沈庆之救兵将至，应该马上在济口建桥。 
English: As Xiao Si prepared to turn back, Liugaki Muzhi said, "Shenqing's rescuers are coming, we should immediately build a bridge in Jikou."

古文：护之揣知其意，即分遣白丁。
现代文：垣护之知道萧思话的真意，马上分派百姓建桥。
English: Knowing the true meaning of Xiao Si's words, he immediately dispatched people to build a bridge.

古文：思话复令度河戍乞活堡以防追军。
现代文：萧思话再派他渡过黄河戍守乞活堡，防守魏人追兵。
English: Xiao Si then sent him across the Yellow River to guard the Beggar's Fort, guarding the Wei pursuit.

古文：三十年春，太祖崩，迁屯历下。
现代文：元嘉三十年春天，太祖被杀，垣护之回兵屯驻历下。
English: In the spring of the 30th year of Yuan Jia, his great-grandfather was killed, and his returnees were stationed under him.

古文：闻世祖入讨，率所领驰赴，上嘉之，以为督冀州青州之济南乐安太原三郡诸军事、宁远将军、冀州刺史。
现代文：听说世祖入京讨伐元凶刘邵。垣护之带领部下连忙回援，世祖很赞赏。用他当冀州、青州的济南、乐安、太原三郡诸军事、宁远将军、冀州刺史。
English: Heard that the ancestor went to Beijing to fight against Liu Shao, the main culprit. The subordinates under the leadership of Keigo rushed to help, and the ancestor was very appreciative. He used him as the military commander of Jizhou, Jinan of Qingzhou, Le'an, the three counties of Taiyuan, the general of Ningyuan, and the historian of Jizhou.

古文：孝建元年，南郡王义宣反，兗州刺史徐遗宝，护之妻弟也。远相连结，与护之书，劝使同逆。
现代文：孝建元年，南郡王刘义宣造反。兖州刺史徐遗宝是垣护之的舅兄，远远地相互连结，写信给垣护之，劝他拥戴刘义宣。
English: In the first year of Xiao Jian, the king of Nan County, Liu Yixuan, rebelled. Xu Yibao, the governor of Zhangzhou, was the uncle of Kakigome. They were distantly related and wrote to Kakigome to persuade him to support Liu Yixuan.

古文：护之驰使以闻。
现代文：垣护之派人把这事告诉世祖。
English: The people sent by the guardian of the fence told the patriarch about this.

古文：遗宝时戍湖陆，护之留子恭祖守历城，自率步骑袭遗宝。道经邹山，破其别戍。
现代文：遗宝当时戍守湖陆，垣护之留下儿子垣恭祖戍守历城，亲自率步兵和骑兵袭击徐遗宝，路过邹山，袭败徐遗宝的分支戍城部队。
English: At that time, Xie Bao was in charge of Hulun. His son, Qigong Zu, who was left by Qigong, was in charge of Licheng. He personally led the infantry and cavalry to attack Xu Yibao, passed through Lushan, and defeated Xu Yibao's branch of Licheng troops.

古文：未至湖陆六十里，遗宝焚城西走。
现代文：到湖陆约六十里处，徐遗宝烧城西逃。
English: At about sixty miles from the lake to the mainland, Xu Yibao fled to the west.

古文：衮土既定，征为游击将军。随沈庆之等击鲁爽，加辅国将军。
现代文：兖州平定，垣护之被调为游击将军，随同沈庆之等进击鲁爽，加号辅国将军。
English: Bozhou was pacified, and Keigo was transferred to be a guerrilla general. Together with Shen Qingzhi and others, he attacked Rushuang and became a general of the auxiliary state.

古文：义宣率大众至梁山，与王玄谟相持。
现代文：刘义宣率大兵抵达梁山，和王玄谟相僵持。
English: Liu Yixuan and his soldiers arrived at Liangshan and confronted Wang Xuanmu.

古文：柳元景率护之及护之弟询之、柳叔仁、郑琨等诸军，出镇新亭。
现代文：柳元景率领垣护之及其弟弟垣询之、柳叔仁、郑琨等部队出镇新亭。
English: Liu Yuanjing led the troops led by his younger brother, Guo Zhiqi, Liu Shujin, Zheng Yao and other troops out of Xinting.

古文：玄谟见贼强盛，遣司马管法济求救甚急。
现代文：王玄谟看见敌人很强盛，派司马管法济求援，非常急迫。
English: When Wang Xuanmu saw that the enemy was very strong, he sent Sima Guan Fa Ji to ask for help. It was very urgent.

古文：上遣元景等进据南州，护之水军先发。
现代文：世祖派柳元景等人进据南州，垣护之的水兵先行。
English: The ancestor sent Liu Yuanjing and others to Nanzhou, and the sailors from the rearguard marched ahead.

古文：贼遣将庞法起率众袭姑孰，适值护之、郑琨等至，奋击，大破之，斩获及投水死略尽。
现代文：敌人派将领庞法起率兵袭击姑孰，恰遇垣护之、郑琨等人来了。垣护之等奋勇攻击，大败敌兵，杀死很多敌人，其余都跳水被淹死。
English: The enemy sent the general Pang Fa to attack Gulu with his soldiers, and it just so happened that Fong Guozhi, Zheng Yao and others came. Fong Guozhi and others bravely attacked, defeated the enemy soldiers, killed many enemies, and the rest were drowned in the water.

古文：玄谟驰信告元景曰： 西城不守，唯余东城，众寡相悬，请退还姑孰，更议进取。 
现代文：王玄谟又派人告诉柳元景说： 西城守不住，只剩下东城。敌众我寡，非常悬殊。我请求退还姑孰，再谈进攻。 
English: Wang Xuanmu also sent someone to tell Liu Yuanjing: "The west city cannot be defended, only the east city is left. I have few enemies, and there is a great disparity. I request the return of the guzheng, and then we will talk about the attack."

古文：元景不许，将悉众赴救，护之劝分军援之。
现代文：柳元景不答应，带领所有的兵马前来赴救。垣护之劝元景分兵援助，元景同意他的计策。
English: Liu Yuanjing did not agree, and led all the soldiers and horses to come to the rescue. Qi Guo advised Yuanjing to send troops to help, and Yuanjing agreed to his plan.

古文：元景然其计，乃以精兵配护之赴梁山。及战，护之见贼舟舰累沓，谓玄谟曰： 今当以火平之。 
现代文：于是把精兵配给垣护之，抵达梁山。到战斗爆发，垣护之看到敌人船舰连接，对王玄谟说： 现在应该以火焚烧敌人船舰。 
English: When the battle broke out, he saw the enemy ships lined up and said to Wang Xuan Mu, "Now we should burn the enemy ships with fire."

古文：即使队主张谈等烧贼舰，风猛水急，贼军以此奔散。
现代文：便马上派队长张谈等烧燃敌人船只。风很大，火很急，敌人因此逃散。
English: He immediately sent captain Zhang Dan and others to burn the enemy ships. The wind was very strong and the fire was very fast, so the enemy fled.

古文：梁山平，护之率军追讨，会硃修之已平江陵，至寻阳而还。
现代文：梁山平定，垣护之率兵追时，恰会朱修之已平定江陵，到寻阳便返回了。
English: When Liangshan was pacified and pursued by the soldiers led by Qi Guo, Chu Xiu of Cha Hui had already pacified Gangneung and returned to Xuanyang.

古文：迁督徐衮二州豫州之梁郡诸军事、宁朔将军、徐州刺史，封益阳县侯。食邑千户。
现代文：垣护之迁任督徐、兖二州和豫州的梁郡诸军事、宁朔将军、徐州刺史，封爵益阳县侯，食邑一千户。
English: The military of Liang County, Ningshuo General, Xuzhou Shishi, the lord of Yiyang County, and a thousand households in Shiyan County were transferred to the military governor of Xu, Xun Erzhou and Yuzhou.

古文：弟询之，骁敢有气力，元凶夙闻其名，以副辅国将军张柬。
现代文：他的弟弟垣询之，骁勇有力气。刘邵一向听说这个名声，叫垣询之作辅国将军张柬的副将。
English: Liu Shao had always heard that his younger brother, Gao Yingzhi, had a reputation for being brave and powerful, and that Gao Yingzhi was the vice-commander of the auxiliary general Zhang Xiaolu.

古文：时张超首行大逆，亦领军隶柬。
现代文：当时张超最先向文帝开刀，也带兵属于张柬管辖。
English: At that time, Zhang Chao was the first to attack Emperor Wen, and he also led troops under the jurisdiction of Zhang Jia.

古文：询之规杀之，虑柬不同，柬宿有此志，又未测询之同否，互相观察。
现代文：垣询之想杀张超，担心张柬不同意。其实张柬内心也有这个打算，但又不知垣询之的真心，互相暗中观察。
English: Kakizuchiyo wants to kill Zhang Chao, and is worried that Zhang Kham does not agree. In fact, Zhang Kham also has this intention in his heart, but he does not know Kakizuchiyo's true heart, and they secretly observe each other.

古文：会超来论事，柬色动，询之觉之，即共定谋，遣信召超。
现代文：恰会张超来议事情。张柬颜色有变，垣询之觉察到了，便共同商议对策，派人召来张超。
English: Zhang Chao happened to come to discuss the matter. Zhang Kam's color had changed, and when he noticed the inquiry, they jointly discussed countermeasures and sent someone to summon Zhang Chao.

古文：超疑之不至，改宿他所。
现代文：张超怀疑，不来，改住其他地方。
English: Zhang Chao was skeptical. If he didn't come, he would live somewhere else.

古文：询之不知其移，径斫之，杀其仆于床，因与柬南奔。
现代文：垣询之不知张超已迁移别处，直接到张超的住处杀他。结果只在张超的床上杀了他的仆人，于是只好和张柬南逃。
English: Zhang Chao had moved to another place, so they went directly to Zhang Chao's residence to kill him. As a result, they only killed his servant on Zhang Chao's bed, so they had to flee south with Zhang Kham.

古文：柬溺淮死，询之得至。
现代文：张柬落入秦淮河淹毙。垣询之保住性命。
English: Zhang Kham fell into the Qinhuai River and drowned. He was saved by Guan Ying.

古文：时世祖已即位，以为积弩将军。
现代文：当时世祖已登位称帝，用垣询之当积弩将军。
English: At that time, the ancestor had ascended to the throne and became emperor, and he was appointed as the general of Jiechi.

古文：梁山之役力战，为流矢所中。死，追赠冀州刺史。
现代文：梁山之战，垣询之奋战不顾，被飞箭射中，死了，被追认为冀州刺史。
English: In the Battle of Liangshan, despite the strenuous battle, he was shot by an arrow, died, and was pursued as the history of Jizhou.

古文：二年，护之坐论功挟私，免官。
现代文：二年，垣护之因为仗着有功而报私仇，被免去官职。
English: Two years later, he was removed from his post because he took personal revenge on the basis of merit.

古文：复为游击将军。
现代文：后又再当游击将军。
English: Later he became a guerrilla general again.

古文：俄迁大司马，辅国将军，领南东海太守。
现代文：不久，迁任大司马、辅国将军，领南东海太守。
English: Soon, he was transferred to the post of grand steward and general of the auxiliary province, and became the governor of the South East China Sea.

古文：未拜，复督青冀二州诸军事、宁远将军、青冀二州刺史，镇历城。
现代文：还未赴任，再当督青、冀二州诸军事、宁远将军、青冀二州刺史，镇守历城。
English: Before taking office, he served as the military governor of Qinghai and Hebei, the general of Ningyuan, the chief historian of Qinghai and Hebei, and the town guard of Licheng.

古文：明年，进号宁朔将军。进督徐州之东莞东安二郡军事。
现代文：第二年，加号宁朔将军，督徐州的东莞和东安二郡诸军事。
English: In the second year, the general of Ningshuo, the governor of Dongguan and the two counties of Dong'an of Xuzhou joined the military.

古文：世祖以历下要害，欲移青州并镇历城。
现代文：世祖认为历下是要害之地，想迁移青州治所共同镇守历城，朝廷建议不一。
English: The ancestor believed that Lixing was a dangerous place, and wanted to relocate the Qingzhou government to jointly guard Lixing, but the imperial court had different suggestions.

古文：议者多异。护之曰： 青州北有河、济，又多陂泽，非虏所向。
现代文：垣护之说： 青州北有黄河济水，又有很多草陂沼泽，不是敌人想进攻的地方。
English: "North of Qingzhou, the Yellow River provides water and there are many grassy marshes. These are not places that the enemy wants to attack.

古文：每来寇掠，必由历城，二州并镇，此经远之略也。
现代文：他们每次来侵略，必经历城。两州同时镇守于此，这是长远的计策。
English: Every time they come to invade, they have to go through the city. The two states simultaneously defend themselves here, which is a long-term strategy.

古文：北又近河，归顺者易，近息民患，远申王威，安边之上计也。 
现代文：北边又邻近黄河，归顺投诚的人比较容易。近则消除人民的祸患，远则扬国家的威风，这是安定边防的妙计。 
English: The north side is also close to the Yellow River, and it is relatively easy for those who have surrendered to the truth. Recently, the people's misfortunes have been eliminated, and the country's prestige has been raised far away. This is a brilliant plan for stable border defense.

古文：由是遂定。
现代文：于是这个决定才被确定下来。
English: It's been settled ever since.

古文：大明三年，征为右卫将军，还，于道闻司空竟陵王诞于广陵反叛，护之即率部曲受车骑大将军沈庆之节度。
现代文：大明三年，垣护之被调任右卫将军。还京路上听说司空竟陵王刘诞反叛，垣护之马上率部下接受车骑大将军沈庆之指挥。
English: In the third year of the Ming Dynasty, Kikimori was transferred to the post of General of the Right Division. On the way to Beijing, he heard that Siku had rebelled against the Emperor Liu Xizhong. Kikimori immediately led his subordinates to accept the command of the General of the Cavalry Shen Qing.

古文：事平，转西阳王子尚抚军司马、临淮太守。
现代文：刘诞被消灭后，垣护之转任西阳王刘子尚抚军司马、临淮太守。
English: After Liu Xizhao was eliminated, Guo Zhi was transferred to the position of Siyang King Liu Zi Shang Fu's military commander and Lin Huai's grand marshal.

古文：明年，出为使持节、督豫司二州诸军事、辅国将军、豫州刺史、淮南太守。
现代文：第二年出外当使持节、督豫司二州诸军事、辅国将军、豫州刺史、淮南太守。
English: In the second year, when he went abroad to hold the festival, he supervised the military of the two states, the general of the auxiliary state, the governor of Yuzhou, and the governor of Huainan.

古文：复隶沈庆之伐西阳蛮。
现代文：再隶属沈庆之讨伐西阳蛮。
English: Then it was subordinated to Shen Qing's campaign against Xiyang Manchu.

古文：护之所莅多聚敛，贿货充积。
现代文：护之所到任地，喜欢搜刮民财，钱物充满。
English: When the guardianship office arrives at the assigned place, it likes to collect people's money, and it is full of money.

古文：七年，坐下狱，免官。
现代文：七年，因此被投到监狱，免去官职。
English: Seven years later, he was thrown into prison and dismissed from his post.

古文：明年，复起为太中大夫。未拜，其年卒，时年七十，谥曰壮侯。
现代文：第二年，再起任为太中大夫，还未到任，当年去世，享年七十岁，被谥为壮侯。
English: The following year, he was reappointed to the post of Grand Vice Admiral, but died before taking up the post, at the age of seventy, and was posthumously crowned as the crown prince.

古文：前废帝永光元年，追赠冠军将军、豫州刺史。
现代文：前废帝永光元年，被追认为冠军将军、豫州刺史。
English: In the first year of the former emperor Yongguang, he was regarded as the champion general and the history of Yuzhou.

古文：子承祖嗣。承祖卒，子显宗嗣。
现代文：他的儿子垣承祖继承爵位，承祖去世，儿子垣显宗继位。
English: His son, Kaki Shōzō, succeeded to the title, and when Shōzō died, his son, Kaki Hidemune, succeeded to the throne.

古文：齐受禅，国除。
现代文：齐国建立，封爵被取消。
English: The State of Qi was established, and the title of nobility was abolished.

古文：护之次子恭祖，勇果有父风。
现代文：护之的次子恭祖，勇毅果敢，有父亲的遗风。
English: Gong Zu, the second son of the tutelary deity, is courageous and has his father's legacy.

古文：太宗泰始初，以军功为梁、南秦二州刺史。
现代文：太宗泰始初年，因战功当上了梁、南秦二州刺史。
English: In the first year of Taizong Taishi, he was awarded the title of "Liang" and "Nanqin Erzhou" for his military exploits.

