古文：内外两教，本为一体，渐积为异，深浅不同。
现代文：内外两教佛教与儒家，本来互为一体，经过逐渐的演变，两者就有了差异，境界的深与浅有所不同。
English: Buddhism and Confucianism, two religions at home and abroad, were originally one and the same. After gradual evolution, the two have become different, and the depth and shallowness of the boundary are different.

古文：内典初门，设五种禁，外典仁、义、礼、智、信，皆与之符。
现代文：佛教经典的初学门径，设有五种禁戒；儒家经典中所强调的仁、义、礼、智、信这种德行，都与五禁相符合。
English: In the Buddhist classics, there are five kinds of prohibitions for beginners; the virtues of benevolence, righteousness, propriety, wisdom, and faith emphasized in the Confucian classics are all consistent with the five prohibitions.

古文：仁者，不杀之禁也；义者，不盗之禁也；礼者，不邪之禁也；智者，不酒之禁也；信者，不妄之禁也。
现代文：仁，就是不杀生的警戒；义，就是不偷盗的禁戒；礼，就是不邪恶的禁戒；智，就是不酗酒的警戒；信，就是不虚妄的禁戒。
English: Benevolence is the vigilance not to kill; righteousness is the abstinence from stealing; courtesy is the abstinence from evil; wisdom is the abstinence from drunkenness; and faith is the abstinence from falsehood.

古文：至如畋狩军旅，燕享刑罚，因民之性，不可卒除，就为之节，使不淫滥尔。
现代文：至於像打猎、作战、宴饮、刑罚等，这些则是顺随人类的本性，不能急忙废除，只好就此加以节制，使它们不至於泛滥成灾。
English: As for things like hunting, fighting, feasting, and punishment, these are in accordance with human nature and cannot be hastily abolished, but must be controlled so that they do not become rampant.

古文：归周、孔而背释宗，何其迷也！
现代文：既然尊崇周公、孔子之道，为什么要违背佛教的教义呢？
English: Since they respect Zhou Gong and the way of Confucius, why should they go against the teachings of Buddhism?

古文：释三曰： 开辟已来，不善人多而善人少，何由悉责其精洁乎？
现代文：这是多么糊涂啊！对于第三种指责，我解释如下：自盘古开天辟地有了人类以来，就是坏人多好人少，哪里能要求每一位僧人都是清白高尚的呢？
English: For the third accusation, I explain as follows: since the dawn of mankind, there have been more bad people and fewer good people. How can we expect every monk to be pure and noble?

古文：见有名僧向行，异而不说；若睹凡僧流俗，便生非毁。
现代文：有些人看见名僧高尚的德行，都放在一旁不说，但只要见到了几个僧人伤风败俗，就指责非议谤毁。
English: Some people don't care about the virtuous deeds of famous monks, but if they see a few monks breaking the rules, they criticize and slander them.

古文：且学者之不勤，岂教者之为过？
现代文：况且，接受教育的人不勤勉，难道还是教育者的错吗？
English: Moreover, is it the educator's fault that the educated are not diligent?

古文：俗僧之学经律，何异世人之学《诗》、《礼》？
现代文：庸俗的僧人学习佛经，又跟士人学习《诗经》、《礼记》有什么两样？
English: What is the difference between a vulgar monk studying Buddhist scriptures and a scholar studying "The Book of Songs" and "The Book of Rites"?

古文：以《诗》、《礼》之教，格朝廷之人，略无全行者；以经律之禁，格出家之辈，而独责无犯哉？
现代文：用《诗经》、《礼记》中所要求的标准去衡量朝廷中的大官员，恐怕没有几个是符合的吧。
English: Using the standards required in "The Book of Songs" and "The Book of Rites" to measure the great officials in the imperial court, I am afraid that only a few would meet them.

古文：且阙行之臣，犹求禄位；毁禁之侣，何惭供养乎？
现代文：同样的，用佛经的戒律衡量出家人，怎么能惟独要求他们不能违犯戒律呢？而那些品德很差的官员，还依然能获取高官厚禄，犯了禁律的僧尼，坐享供养又有什么可惭愧的呢？
English: In the same way, if one measures one's family members by the precepts of the Buddhist scriptures, how can one only require them not to violate the precepts? And those officials with poor moral character can still obtain high-ranking and rich rewards, and monks and nuns who have violated the prohibitions have nothing to be ashamed of in enjoying the offerings?

古文：其於戒行，自当有犯。
现代文：对于所规定的行为规范，人们自然会偶尔违反。
English: It is natural for people to occasionally violate prescribed norms of behavior.

古文：一披法服，已堕僧数，岁中所计，斋讲诵持比诸白衣，犹不啻山海也。
现代文：出家人一披上法衣，一年到头吃斋念佛，比起世俗人的修养来说，又岂止是高山与深海的差距？
English: Monastics put on the cassock and fast and chant the Buddha's name all year round. Compared to the cultivation of worldly people, isn't this just the difference between the high mountains and the deep sea?

古文：形体虽死，精神犹存。
现代文：人的形体虽然死去，但精神依然存在。
English: The human body dies, but the spirit lives on.

古文：人生在世，望於后身似不相属；及其殁后，则与前身似犹老少朝夕耳。
现代文：人活在这个世界上，觉得自己与来世没有什么关系，等到死后，似乎生前与死后毫不相干，等到死后，才发现自己与前世的关系就像老人与小孩、早晨与晚上一般关系密切。
English: People live in this world and feel that they have nothing to do with the next life. When they die, it seems that they had nothing to do with their previous life. When they die, they find that they have a close relationship with their previous life, like an old man and a child, morning and evening.

古文：世有魂神，示现梦想，或降童妾，或感妻孥，求索饮食，征须福祜，亦为不少矣。
现代文：世上有死者的灵魂会出现在活人的梦中，有的托梦给仆童、小妾，有的托梦给妻子、儿女，向他们讨求饮食，乞求福祜，这一类的事情也是不少的。
English: In the world, the souls of the dead appear in the dreams of the living. Some of them dream of their servants and concubines, while others dream of their wives and children. They ask them for food and blessings, and there are many such things.

古文：今人贫贱疾苦，莫不怨尤前世不修功业。
现代文：现在有人看到自己一辈子贫贱痛苦，无不怨恨前世没有修好功德的。
English: Nowadays, some people see themselves as poor and miserable for the rest of their lives, and all of them resent the fact that they did not do a good job in their previous lives.

古文：以此而论，安可不为之作地乎？
现代文：从这一点来说，生前怎么能不好好修功德，为来世的灵魂开辟一片安乐之地呢？
English: From this point of view, how can one not cultivate one's merits during one's lifetime and open up a place of peace for one's soul in the next life?

古文：夫有子孙，自是天地间一苍生耳，何预身事，而乃爱护，遗其基址。
现代文：一个人有子孙，他们也只不过是天地间的普通百姓，相互间有什么关系？尚且要尽心加以爱护，将家业留传给他们。
English: If a person has children and grandchildren, they are just ordinary people in heaven and earth. What is the relationship between them? Moreover, they should be loved with all their hearts and the family business should be passed down to them.

古文：况於已之神爽，顿欲弃之哉？
现代文：何况对于自己的灵魂，怎能轻易舍弃不顾呢？
English: Moreover, how can one easily disregard one's own soul?

古文：凡夫蒙蔽，不见未来，故言彼生与今非一体耳
现代文：凡夫俗子愚昧无知以致于蒙蔽了双眼，无法预见来世，所以就说来生和今生不是一体。
English: People are so stupid and ignorant that their eyes are blinded and they cannot foresee the next life, so they say that the next life and this life are not one.

古文：世有痴人，不识仁义，不知富贵并由天命。
现代文：世上有一种痴人，不懂得仁义，也不知道富贵皆由天命。
English: There is a kind of idiot in the world who does not understand benevolence and righteousness, and does not know that wealth and riches are all determined by fate.

古文：为子娶妇，恨其生资不足，倚作舅始之尊，蛇虺其性，毒口加诬，不识忌讳，骂辱妇之父母，却成教妇不孝己身，不顾他恨。
现代文：为儿子娶媳妇，恨媳妇的嫁妆太少，仗著自己当公婆的尊贵身份，心性如毒蝎，对媳妇恶意辱骂，不懂得忌讳，甚至谩骂侮辱媳妇的父母，这反而是教媳妇不孝自己，也不顾她的怨恨。
English: Marrying a daughter-in-law for his son, hating the daughter-in-law's dowry for being too small, relying on his noble status as a father-in-law, having a poisonous heart, maliciously insulting the daughter-in-law, not knowing the taboo, and even insulting the daughter-in-law's parents, which, on the other hand, teaches the daughter-in-law to be unfilial to herself, regardless of her resentment.

古文：但怜己之子女，不爱己之儿妇。
现代文：只知道疼爱自己的子女，不知道爱护自己的儿媳。
English: I only know how to love my children, but I don't know how to love my daughter-in-law.

古文：如此之人，阴纪其过，鬼夺其算。
现代文：像这种人，阴间地府会把他的罪过记录下来，鬼神也会减掉他的寿命。
English: Like this kind of person, the underworld will record his sins, and the ghosts and gods will also reduce his lifespan.

古文：慎不可与为邻，何况交结乎？
现代文：千万不可与这种人为邻居，更何况与这种人交朋友呢？
English: How can you have such a person as a neighbor, let alone a friend?

古文：避之哉！
现代文：还是躲他远点吧！
English: Just stay away from him!

