古文：李成梁麻贵
现代文：李成梁，字汝契。
English: Li Chengliang, from the character Ruqi.

古文：李成梁，字汝契。高祖英自朝鲜内附，授世铁岭卫指挥佥事，遂家焉。
现代文：他的高祖父李英从朝鲜来归附，授给他世世代代做铁岭卫指挥佥事的职位，于是定居下来。
English: His great-great-grandfather, Li Ying, came from North Korea and was granted the position of commander of the Tieling Garrison, which he held for generations, and settled down.

古文：成梁英毅骁健，有大将才。
现代文：李成梁刚毅英勇，有大将的才干。
English: Li Chengliang is brave and has the ability of a general.

古文：家贫，不能袭职，年四十犹为诸生。
现代文：家境贫寒，不能远道赴京城继承职位，四十岁时还是诸生。
English: His family was poor, so he couldn't travel far to the capital to take over the position. At the age of forty, he was still a mere mortal.

古文：巡按御史器之，资入京，乃得袭。
现代文：巡抚御史器重他，资助他到京城，才得以继承职位。
English: He was supported by the governor of the imperial archives to go to the capital before he could succeed to the post.

古文：积功为辽东险山参将。
现代文：累积战功做到辽东险山参将。
English: Accumulated military exploits have made him Liaodong Jianshan's top general.

古文：隆庆元年，士蛮大入永平。
现代文：隆庆元年，土蛮大举进攻永平。
English: In the first year of the Longqing era, the barbarians launched a large-scale attack on Yongping.

古文：成梁赴援有功，进副总兵，仍守险山。寻协守辽阳。
现代文：李成梁前往救援有功，提升为副总兵。不久又协助防守辽阳。
English: Li Chengliang went to the rescue and was promoted to deputy commander-in-chief. Soon he assisted in the defense of Liaoyang.

古文：三年四月，张摆失等屯塞下，成梁迎击斩之，歼其卒百六十有奇。
现代文：隆庆三年四月，张摆失等屯兵塞下，李成梁迎击，杀死了他，歼灭他的部属一百六十多人。
English: In April of the third year of Longqing, when Zhang Shibao and other soldiers were defeated, Li Chengliang counterattacked, killed him, and annihilated more than 160 of his subordinates.

古文：馀众远徙，遂空其地。
现代文：其余的人迁移到远处，那地方就空了下来。
English: The rest of the people migrated far away, and the place became empty.

古文：录功，进秩一等。
现代文：记录功绩，提升一等官级。
English: Record achievements, promoted to the first-class official level.

古文：四年九月，辛爱大入辽东。
现代文：隆庆四年九月，辛爱大举入侵辽东。
English: In September of the fourth year of Longqing, Xin Ai launched a large-scale invasion of Liaodong.

古文：总兵官王治道战死，擢成梁署都督佥事代之。
现代文：总兵官王治道战死了，提拔李成梁为都督佥事代替王治道。
English: The commander-in-chief Wang Zhidou died in the battle, and Li Chengliang was promoted to the post of governor-general in place of Wang Zhidou.

古文：当是时，俺答虽款塞，而插汉部长土蛮与从父黑石炭，弟委正、大委正，从弟暖兔、拱兔，子卜言台周，从子黄台吉势方强。
现代文：在这个时候，俺答虽然到达边塞，而插汉部首领土蛮跟他叔叔黑石炭，弟弟委正、大委正、堂弟暖兔、拱兔，儿子卜言台周，侄子黄强吉势力正值强盛时期。
English: At this time, although I had arrived at the border fortress, the territory of the head of the Han Chinese Department was quite different from that of his uncle, Black Coal, his younger brother, Commissar-General, Commissar-General, his cousins, Warm Bunny and Arch-Bunny, his son, Buyan Tai Zhou, and his nephew, Huang Qiangji, whose power was at its peak.

古文：泰宁部长速把亥、炒花，朵颜部长董狐狸、长昂佐之。
现代文：奉宁部首领速把亥，朵颜部首领董狐狸、长昂辅助他们。
English: The leader of the Fengning Department quickly took Hai, and the leaders of the Duoyan Department, Dong Fox and Chang'an, assisted them.

古文：东则王杲、王兀堂、清佳砮、杨吉砮之属，亦时窥塞下。
现代文：东面则有王杲、王兀堂、清佳纈、杨吉纈等部属，也时时窥伺塞下。
English: On the east side, there are subordinates such as Wang Xi, Wang Xitang, Qing Jiayu, Yang Jiayu, etc., and they also peep down from time to time.

古文：十年之间，殷尚质、杨照、王治道三大将皆战死。
现代文：在十年的时间里，殷尚质、杨照、王治道三位大将都战死沙场。
English: In the span of ten years, three generals, Yin Shangjie, Yang Zhao, and Wang Zhidou, all died in battle.

古文：成梁乃大修戎备，甄拔将校，收召四方健儿，给以厚饩，用为选锋。
现代文：李成梁于是大规模地整治军备，选拔将校，召收四方的健儿，重赏他们，任用他们为先锋。
English: Li Chengliang then carried out a large-scale reorganization of armaments, selected officers, recruited veterans from the four quarters, rewarded them, and appointed them as pioneers.

古文：军声始振。
现代文：军队的声威才开始振作起来。
English: The army's morale was beginning to perk up.

古文：明年五月，敌犯盘山驿，指挥苏成勋击走之。
现代文：第二年五月，敌人进犯盘山驿，指挥苏成勋打跑了他们。
English: In May of the following year, the enemy attacked Panshanlu, and Su Chengxun led the troops to fight and drive them away.

古文：无何，土蛮大入。成梁遇于卓山，麾副将赵完等夹击，断其首尾。
现代文：不久，土蛮大举入侵，李成梁在卓山与敌人相遇，指挥副将赵完等人两面夹击敌人，拦腰截断，使敌人不能相应。
English: Soon, the barbarians invaded in a big way. Li Chengliang met the enemy in Zhuoshan. Command Vice Admiral Zhao Wan and others attacked the enemy on both sides, intercepted and cut off, so that the enemy could not respond.

古文：乘胜抵巢，馘部长二人，斩首五百八十余级。
现代文：李成梁乘胜直抵敌老巢，杀死二名部落首领，斩首五百八十余级。
English: Li Chengliang took advantage of the victory and went straight to the enemy's lair, killing two tribal leaders and beheading more than 580 people.

古文：进署都督同知，世荫千户。
现代文：提升代理都督同知，荫封李成梁世代为千户。
English: The promotion of the acting governor is the same, and the shadow of Li Chengliang's generation is thousands of households.

古文：又明年十月，土蛮六百骑营旧辽阳北河，去边二百余里，俟众集大举，成梁击走之。
现代文：又过了一年的十月，土蛮六百名骑兵在旧辽阳北河扎营，离边境二百余里，等大部队到达后大举进攻，李成梁将其击退。
English: A year later, in October, six hundred cavalrymen camped at Beihe in old Liaoyang, more than two hundred miles from the border. After the arrival of a large force, they launched a large-scale attack, which Li Chengliang repelled.

古文：万历元年，又击走之前屯。
现代文：万历元年，又追击敌人到前屯。
English: In the first year of Wanli, he chased the enemy to Qiantun.

古文：已，又破走之铁岭镇西诸堡。
现代文：此后，又击破铁岭镇西各堡，将敌人赶走。
English: After that, they broke through the fortifications west of Tieling Town and drove the enemy away.

古文：增秩二等。
现代文：增加李成梁二级官阶。
English: Li Chengliang's second-level official rank was increased.

古文：朵颜兀鲁思罕以四千骑毁墙入，成梁御却之。
现代文：朵颜兀鲁思罕率领四千骑兵破墙而入，李成梁打退了他们。
English: Lu Sihan led four thousand cavalry to break through the wall, and Li Chengliang drove them back.

古文：建州都指挥王杲故与抚顺通马市。
现代文：建州指挥王杲原先跟抚顺互通马市。
English: Jianzhou's conductor, Wang Qian, used to go horse-riding with Fushun.

古文：及是，诱杀备御裴承祖，成梁谋讨之。
现代文：到这时，引诱杀害了备御裴承祖，李成梁计划讨伐他。
English: By this time, he had seduced and killed Emperor Bi, and Li Chengliang planned to fight him.

古文：明年十月，杲复大举入。成梁檄副将杨腾、游击王惟屏分屯要害，而令参将曹簠挑战。
现代文：第二年十月，王杲又大举入侵，李成梁传令副将杨腾、游击王惟屏分兵驻守军事要地，而命令参将曹前去挑战。
English: In October of the following year, Wang Hui launched another large-scale invasion. Li Chengliang sent a messenger to order Vice Admiral Yang Teng and the guerrilla Wang Wei Ping to garrison the military stronghold, and ordered Senior General Cao to challenge.

古文：诸军四面起，敌大奔，尽聚杲寨。
现代文：各军从四面包围敌人，敌人狼狈逃窜，全都聚集到王杲的寨子里。
English: All the armies surrounded the enemy on all sides, and the enemy fled in disarray, all of them gathered in Wang Yao's stockade.

古文：寨地高，杲深沟坚垒以自固。
现代文：寨子地势高亢，王杲挖深沟筑坚垒来加固防守。
English: The perimeter of the stockade was high, and Wang Xi dug a deep ditch to build a stronghold to strengthen the defense.

古文：成梁用火器攻之，破数栅，矢石雨下。
现代文：李成梁用火器攻打，破坏了几个栅栏，石头箭头如同下雨一般。
English: Li Chengliang attacked with firearms, destroyed several fences, and the stone arrows fell like rain.

古文：把总于志文、秦得倚先登，诸将继之。
现代文：把总于志文、秦得倚率先登入，各将领紧随其后。
English: General Yu Zhiwen and Qin Deren were the first to enter, followed by the generals.

古文：杲走高台，射杀志文。
现代文：王杲逃往高台，放箭射死于志文。
English: Wang Yao fled to the plateau and died in Zhivun after shooting an arrow.

古文：会大风起，纵火焚之，先后斩馘千一百余级，毁其营垒而还。
现代文：正好赶上起大风，纵火烧敌营，先后斩首一千一百余级，平毁了敌人的营防，然后回师。
English: Just in time for the wind to pick up, he set fire to the enemy camp, beheaded more than 1,100 soldiers, destroyed the enemy's camp, and then returned to his division.

古文：进左都督，世荫都指挥同知。
现代文：提升为左都督，世世代代荫封为都指挥同知。
English: He was promoted to the position of Zuo Tudoku, and for generations, he was a close friend of the shinpu, the commander of the capital.

古文：杲大创，不能军，走匿阿哈纳寨。曹簠勒精骑往，杲走南关。
现代文：王杲受到重大打击，已组织不起军队，躲进阿哈纳的营寨，曹率领精锐骑兵前往，王杲逃跑到南关。
English: Wang Hui was dealt a major blow and was no longer able to organize an army, so he hid in the camp of Ahan. Cao led the elite cavalry to the camp, and Wang Hui fled to Nanguan.

古文：都督王台执以献，斩之。
现代文：都督王台抓住他，并将他上交，李成梁将他斩首。
English: Governor Wang Tai caught him and handed him over to Li Chengliang, who beheaded him.

古文：三年春，土蛮犯长勇堡，击败之。
现代文：万历三年春天，土蛮侵犯长勇堡，被打败了。
English: In the spring of the third year of Wanli, the barbarians invaded Changyong Fortress and were defeated.

古文：其冬，炒花大会黑石炭、黄台吉、卜言台周、以儿邓、暖兔、拱兔、堵剌儿等二万余骑，从平虏堡南掠。
现代文：这年冬天，炒花大会黑石炭、黄台吉、卜言台周、以儿邓、暖兔、拱兔、堵刺儿等部二万多骑兵，从平虏堡向南一路抢劫。
English: In the winter of that year, more than 20,000 cavalrymen from the Black Coal, Yellow Taiji, Buyan Tai Zhou, Yiren Deng, Warm Rabbit, Arched Rabbit, and Blocked Thorns Divisions of the Stir-fried Flower Festival looted from Pingru Fort all the way to the south.

古文：副将曹簠驰击，遂转掠沈阳。
现代文：副将曹飞奔前往迎击，于是调转方向掠夺沈阳。
English: Vice-commander Cao Feibeng went to meet the attack, so he changed the direction to plunder Shenyang.

古文：见城外列营，乃据西北高墩。
现代文：看到城外排列着营防，敌人就占据了西北高墩。
English: Seeing the camp defences lined up outside the city, the enemy occupied north-west Gaocheng.

古文：成梁邀战，发火器。敌大溃，弃辎重走。
现代文：李成梁向敌人挑战，发射火器，敌人溃败，丢弃辎重逃跑了。
English: Li Chengliang challenged the enemy, fired a firearm, the enemy was routed, abandoned the baggage and fled.

古文：追至河沟，乘胜渡河，击斩以千计。
现代文：李成梁追赶敌人到河沟，乘胜渡河，杀死敌人数以千计。
English: Li Chengliang chased the enemy to the ditch, took advantage of the victory to cross the river, and killed thousands of enemies.

古文：加太子太保，世荫锦衣千户。
现代文：加封李成梁为太子太保，世代荫封为锦衣千户。
English: The additional seal of Li Chengliang is the crown prince Taibo, and the generational shadow seal is the brocade thousand households.

古文：明年，黑石炭、大委正营大清堡边外，谋锦、义。
现代文：第二年，黑石炭、大委正在大清堡边外扎营，图谋锦州、义州。
English: In the following year, the Black Coal and the Grand Committee were encamped on the outskirts of Dajing Fort, plotting against Jinzhou and Yizhou.

古文：成梁率选锋驰二百里，逼其营，攻破之。
现代文：李成梁率领先锋急行军二百里，迫近敌营，攻占了它。
English: Li Chengliang led the Fengxu marching army 200 miles ahead, approaching the enemy camp and capturing it.

古文：杀部长四人，获级六十有奇。
现代文：杀死首领四人，斩首六十多级。
English: He killed four chiefs and beheaded more than sixty.

古文：五年五月，士蛮复入，联营河东，而遣零骑西掠。
现代文：万历五年五月，土蛮再次入侵，在河东连营扎寨，而派散骑向西抢劫。
English: In May of the fifth year of Wanli, the barbarians invaded again, camped in the east of the river, and sent out horsemen to rob the west.

古文：成梁掩其巢，得利而还。
现代文：李成梁摧毁了敌人的老巢，凯旋而归。
English: Li Chengliang destroyed the enemy's nest and returned home in triumph.

古文：明年正月，速把亥纠土蛮大入，营劈山。
现代文：第二年正月，速亥儿纠集土蛮大举入侵，在劈山扎营。
English: In the first month of the second year, a large-scale incursion was made by the land-dwellers, and they camped in the mountains.

古文：成梁驰至丁字泊，敌方分骑绕墙入。
现代文：李成梁赶到丁字泊，敌人正分派骑兵绕墙入城。
English: Li Chengliang rushed to Dingzhipo. The enemy was dispatching cavalry to enter the city around the wall.

古文：成梁夜出塞二百里，捣破劈山营，获级四百三十，馘其长五人。
现代文：李成梁夜晚出塞二百里，捣毁劈山营，斩首四百三十级，杀死五名敌人首领。
English: Li Chengliang marched 200 miles at night, destroyed a mountain camp, beheaded 430 people, and killed five enemy leaders.

古文：加太保，世荫本卫指挥使。
现代文：加封李成梁为太保，世代荫封为本卫指挥使。
English: The additional seal of Li Chengliang is Taibo, and the generational shadow seal is the Hongwei conductor.

古文：三月，游击陶承喾击敌长定堡，献馘四百七十有奇。
现代文：三月，游击陶承喾在长定堡打败敌人，献俘四百七十多人。
English: In March, the guerrilla fighter Tao Chengyu defeated the enemy at Changding Fort and took more than 470 prisoners.

古文：帝已告谢郊庙，大行赏赉，荫成梁世指挥佥事。
现代文：皇帝在郊庙告天谢祖之后，大张旗鼓地进行赏赐，荫封李成梁世代担任指挥佥事。
English: After the emperor gave thanks to God in the suburban temple, he gave the award with great fanfare, and Li Chengliang's generation served as the conductor.

古文：有言所杀乃土蛮部曲，因盗牛羊事觉，惧罪来归，承喾掩杀之。
现代文：有人说各将所杀的只是土蛮的部曲，因为偷盗牛羊被发觉，害怕处罚于是前来归附，陶承喾把他们杀死了。
English: Some people say that what the generals killed was just a barbaric episode. Because the theft of cattle and sheep was discovered, they were afraid of punishment, so they came to surrender, and Tao Chengyu killed them.

古文：给事中光懋因请治承喾杀降罪，御史勘如懋言。
现代文：给事中光懋于是请求皇帝追究陶承喾杀害已投降的敌人的罪行，御史调查的情况跟光懋所说的一致。
English: In the middle of the matter, Guangyao then asked the emperor to investigate Tao Chengyao for the crime of killing an enemy who had surrendered. The situation of the historical investigation is consistent with what Guangyao said.

古文：兵部尚书方逢时，督抚梁梦龙、周咏先与承喾同叙功，力为解。
现代文：兵部尚书方逢时，督抚梁梦龙、周咏先跟陶承喾一起被授予功勋，极力为陶承喾辩解。
English: When there was a need, the commander of the military department, Shangshu Fang, the superintendent Liang Menglong, Zhou Yuxian and Tao Chengyu were awarded the merit together, and they tried their best to defend Tao Chengyu.

古文：卒如御史奏，尽夺诸臣恩命。
现代文：最终还是像御史陈奏的那样，全部收回了对各将的赏赐。
English: In the end, the rewards for the generals were all taken back, just like the story of Chen Zhao.

古文：六月，敌犯镇静堡，复击退之。
现代文：六月，敌人进犯镇静堡，又打退了他们。
English: In June, the enemy attacked Fort Tranquility and drove them back.

古文：十二月，速把亥、炒花、暖兔、拱兔会土蛮黄台吉，大、小委正，卜儿亥，慌忽太等三万余骑壁辽河，攻东昌堡，深入至耀州。
现代文：十二月，速把亥、炒花、暖兔、拱兔会集土蛮黄台吉，大、小委正，卜儿亥，慌忽太等部三万多骑兵从辽河进攻东昌堡，深入到耀州。
English: In December, more than 30,000 cavalrymen from the departments of Hai, Fried Flowers, Warm Rabbits, and Arch Rabbits quickly attacked Dongchang Fort from the Liaohe River and penetrated into Yaozhou.

古文：成梁遣诸将分屯要害以遏之，而亲提锐卒，出塞二百余里，直捣圜山。
现代文：李成梁派遣各将分别驻守要害地带来阻止敌人，而自己亲自率领精锐部队，出塞二百多里，直捣圜山。
English: Li Chengliang dispatched generals to garrison key locations to deter the enemy, while he personally led elite troops more than two hundred miles out of Tibet and straight into Shaoshan.

古文：斩首八百四十，及其长九人，获马千二百匹。
现代文：斩首八百四十，以及首领九人，缴获马一千二百匹。
English: They beheaded eight hundred and forty men and nine chieftains, and captured twelve hundred horses.

古文：敌闻之，皆仓皇走出塞。
现代文：敌人听到这个消息，都仓惶逃跑到塞外去了。
English: When the enemy heard the news, they all ran away in a panic.

古文：论功，封宁远伯，岁禄八百石。
现代文：论功行赏，封李成梁为宁远伯，每年领取八百石俸禄。
English: In terms of reward for meritorious service, Li Chengliang was awarded the title of Ningyuan Bo and received an annual stipend of 800 koku.

古文：是时，土蛮数求贡市，关吏不许，大恨。
现代文：这时，土蛮多次要求上贡和进行双边贸易，关吏不同意，土蛮非常痛恨。
English: At this time, the Turkomans repeatedly demanded tribute and bilateral trade. The customs officers did not agree, and the Turkomans hated it very much.

古文：七年十月，复以四万骑自前屯锦川营深入。
现代文：万历七年十月又用四万骑兵从前屯锦川营深入内地。
English: In October of the seventh year of Wanli, 40,000 cavalrymen were sent from the former Jinchuan camp deep into the inland.

古文：成梁命诸将坚壁，自督参将杨粟等遏其冲。
现代文：李成梁命令各将坚守，自己率领参将杨粟等人遏止敌人先头部队。
English: Li Chengliang ordered his generals to stand firm, and he himself led the commander Yang Mao and others to stop the enemy's vanguard.

古文：会戚继光亦来援，敌遂退。
现代文：正好戚继光也赶来增援，敌人于是退却了。
English: Just in time, Qi Jiguang also arrived to reinforce, and the enemy then retreated.

古文：俄又与速把亥合壁红土城，声言入海州，而分兵入锦、义。
现代文：不久土蛮又跟速把亥在红土城联合安营，扬言要入侵海州，而分派部队入侵锦州、义州。
English: Not long after that, the barbarians quickly encamped the boars in Red Earth City, threatening to invade Haizhou, and dispatched troops to invade Jinzhou and Yizhou.

古文：成梁逾塞二百余里，直抵红土城，击败之，获首功四百七十有奇。
现代文：李成梁出塞二百多里，直达红土城，打败敌人，斩首及俘虏四百七十多人。
English: Li Chengliang went more than two hundred miles out of Tibet, straight to Red Earth City, defeated the enemy, beheaded and captured more than 470 people.

古文：迤东都督王兀堂故通市宽奠，后参将徐国辅弟国臣强抑市价，兀堂乃与赵锁罗骨数遣零骑侵边。
现代文：迤东都督王兀堂原来在宽奠和内地做交易，后来参将徐国辅的弟弟徐国臣强行压低市价，王兀堂于是跟赵锁罗骨多次派遣散骑侵扰边境。
English: Wang Bingtang, the governor of Shandong Province, originally traded with the mainland in Kuan Dian. Later, Xu Guoqin, the younger brother of Xu Guofei, forced down the market price. Wang Bingtang and Zhao Zhaoluo repeatedly sent horsemen to invade the border.

古文：明年三月，以六百骑犯叆阳及黄冈岭，指挥王宗义战死。
现代文：第二年三月王兀堂率六百骑兵进犯阳和黄冈岭，指挥王宗义阵亡。
English: In March of the following year, Wang Bingtang led six hundred cavalrymen into Guoyang and Huanggang Mountains, and commander Wang Zongyi was killed in action.

古文：复以千余骑从永奠入，成梁击走之。追出塞二百里。
现代文：王兀堂又率一千多骑从永奠入侵，李成梁打跑他们，并追击到塞外二百里远。
English: Wang Bingtang led more than a thousand horsemen to invade from Yongding. Li Chengliang fought them off and chased them 200 miles away.

古文：敌以骑卒拒，而步卒登山鼓噪。
现代文：敌人用骑兵抵抗，而派步兵登山呐喊助威。
English: The enemy resisted with cavalry, but sent infantry up the mountain to shout encouragement.

古文：成梁大败之，斩首七百五十，尽毁其营垒。
现代文：李成梁大败敌人，斩首七百五十，把敌人的营防堡垒全部摧毁了。
English: Li Chengliang decisively defeated the enemy, beheaded seven hundred and fifty, and destroyed all the enemy's camps and fortifications.

古文：捷闻，并录红土城功，予成梁世袭。
现代文：捷报传来，并记录红土城的战功，给予李成梁世袭做官。
English: The victorious report came, and the war exploits of Hongducheng were recorded, and Li Chengliang was given a hereditary post.

古文：其秋，兀堂复犯宽奠，副将姚大节击破之。
现代文：这年秋天，王兀堂又进犯宽奠，副将姚大节打败敌人。
English: In the autumn of that year, Wang Bingtang attacked Guangyin again, and Vice Admiral Yao Datong defeated the enemy.

古文：兀堂由是不振。
现代文：王兀堂从此一蹶不振。
English: Wang Bingtang has been in a slump ever since.

古文：土蛮数侵边不得志，忿甚，益征诸部兵分犯锦、义及右屯、大凌河。
现代文：土蛮多次侵犯边境都没有得逞，非常忿怒，加倍征集各部兵分头进犯锦州、义州以及右屯、大凌河。
English: The barbarians repeatedly violated the border without success, and they were very angry. They doubled the recruitment of soldiers from various departments to invade Jinzhou, Yizhou, as well as Uton and Dalinghe.

古文：以城堡坚，不可克，而成梁及蓟镇兵亦集，乃引去。
现代文：因为城堡坚固，攻克不下，加上李成梁和蓟镇部队也集合了，土蛮于是引兵离去。
English: Because the castle was strong and impregnable, and Li Chengliang and the troops from Handan had also gathered, the barbarians led the troops away.

古文：无何，复以二万余骑从大镇堡入攻锦州。
现代文：不久，土蛮又率二万多骑兵从大镇堡入侵锦州。
English: Soon, the barbarians invaded Jinzhou from Dacheng Fort with more than 20,000 cavalry.

古文：参将熊朝臣固守，而遣部将周之望、王应荣出战，颇有斩获。
现代文：参将熊朝臣固守，而派遣部将周之望、王应荣出战，很有战绩。
English: Vice-commander Xiong Ason held fast, while dispatching commanders Zhou Zhimang and Wang Ying Rong took part in the battle, achieving great results.

古文：矢尽，皆战死。
现代文：最后箭射完了，全部阵亡了。
English: In the end, the arrows were fired and everyone was killed.

古文：敌乃分掠小凌河、松山、杏山。
现代文：敌人于是分头掠夺小凌河、松山、杏山。
English: As a result, the enemy split up and plundered Xiaolinghe, Matsuyama, and Anshan.

古文：成梁驰援，始出境。
现代文：李成梁前往救援，敌人才退出国境。
English: Li Chengliang went to the rescue, and the enemy withdrew from the border.

古文：九年正月，土蛮复与黑石炭，大、小委正，卜言台周，脑毛大，黄台吉，以儿邓，暖兔，拱兔，炒户儿聚兵塞下，谋入广宁。
现代文：万历九年正月，土蛮又跟黑石炭，大、小委正，卜言台周、脑毛大、黄台吉，以儿邓、暖兔、拱兔、炒户儿在塞下聚积部队，阴谋入侵广宁。
English: In the first month of the ninth year of the Wanli era, the barbarians again gathered troops with the black coal, the large and small committee leaders, the soothsayer Taizhou, the great brain, Huang Taiji, the son of Deng, the warm rabbit, the arch rabbit, and the fried household under the plug, and conspired to invade Guangning.

古文：成梁帅轻骑从大宁堡出。
现代文：李成梁率领轻骑兵从大宁堡出发。
English: Li Chengliang led the light cavalry from Daming Fort.

古文：去塞四百余里，至袄郎兔大战。
现代文：离边塞四百多里，到达袄郎兔与敌人大战。
English: More than four hundred miles away from the border fortress, he arrived at the War Rabbit and the enemy war.

古文：自辰迄未，敌不支，败走。
现代文：从上午辰时打到下午未时，敌人支持不住，败逃了。
English: From the early morning to the late afternoon, the enemy could not be supported and fled in defeat.

古文：官军将还，敌来追。
现代文：官军准备返回，敌人来追击。
English: The government troops are preparing to return, and the enemy is chasing them.

古文：成梁逆击，且战且行。
现代文：李成梁迎击敌人，一边打一边走。
English: Li Chengliang faced the enemy and walked while fighting.

古文：先后斩首三百四十，及其长八人。
现代文：前后斩首三百四十级，以及八名头目。
English: Three hundred and forty heads were decapitated, as well as eight leaders.

古文：录功，增岁禄百石，世荫一等。
现代文：记录功绩，增加每年的俸禄一百石，增加世代的荫封一等。
English: Record the merits, increase the annual salary by 100 koku, and increase the first-class shadow envelope of the generation.

古文：四月，黑石炭、以儿邓、小歹青、卜言兔入辽阳。
现代文：四月，黑石炭、以儿邓、小歹青、卜言兔入侵沈阳。
English: In April, Black Coal, Yidang, Xiaogangqing, and Bujianhu invaded Shenyang.

古文：副将曹簠追至长安堡，遇伏，失千总陈鹏以下三百十七人，马死者四百六十匹，遂大掠人畜而去。
现代文：副将曹追到长安堡，遭遇埋伏，损失千总陈鹏以下三百十七人。损失战马四百六十匹，敌人于是大肆抢劫人畜，然后离去。
English: Vice-commander Cao chased to Chang'an Fort, encountered an ambush, lost three hundred and seventeen people under the thousand general Chen Peng, lost four hundred and sixty horses, the enemy then looted people and animals, and then left.

古文：簠等下吏，成梁不问。
现代文：曹等人下狱，没有涉及到李成梁。
English: The release of Cao and others from prison did not involve Li Chengliang.

古文：十月，土蛮复连速把亥等十余万骑攻围广宁，不克，转掠团山堡、盘山驿及十三山驿，攻义州。
现代文：十月，土蛮又联合速把亥等十多万骑兵围攻广宁，没有攻克，转而经过团山堡、盘山驿以及十三山驿，攻打义州。
English: In October, more than one hundred thousand cavalrymen, including Hai, were quickly assembled by the barbarians to besiege Guangning. They did not conquer it, but instead passed through Tuanshan Fort, Panshan Fort, and Juzhoushan Fort to attack Yizhou.

古文：成梁御却之。
现代文：李成梁打退了他们。
English: Li Chengliang beat them back.

古文：十年三月，速把亥率弟炒花、子卜言兔入犯义州。
现代文：万历十年三月，速把亥率领弟弟炒花、儿子卜言兔入侵义州。
English: In March of the tenth year of Wanli, Hai led his brother, Fried Flowers, and his son, Buyan, to invade Yizhou.

古文：成梁御之镇夷堡，设伏待之。
现代文：李成梁在镇夷堡设防，布下阵势等待敌人。
English: Li Chengliang set up fortifications in Zhenyi Fort and waited for the enemy.

古文：速把亥入，参将李平胡射中其胁，坠马，苍头李有名前斩之。
现代文：速把亥进入埋伏圈，参将李平胡射中他的胸部，从马上掉下来，士兵李有名赶上前杀死了他。
English: He quickly led Hai into the ambush circle, and the commander Li Pinghu shot him in the chest. He fell off his horse, and the soldier Li Mingyuan caught up with him and killed him.

古文：寇大奔，追馘百余级。
现代文：敌人狼狈逃窜，斩首一百多级。
English: The enemy fled in panic and beheaded more than a hundred soldiers.

古文：炒花等恸哭去。
现代文：炒花等人痛哭着离开了。
English: Fried flowers and others left in tears.

古文：速把亥为辽左患二十年，至是死。帝大喜，诏赐甲第京师，世荫锦衣指挥使。
现代文：速把亥祸害辽东二十年，此时被杀，皇帝非常高兴，下诏赐给李成梁在京师的高级住宅，世代荫封为锦衣指挥使。
English: He was killed at this time, the emperor was very happy, and the next edict was given to Li Chengliang's high-class residence in Beijing, and the generational seal was the brocade commander.

古文：初，王杲死，其子阿台走依王台长子虎儿罕。
现代文：当初，王杲死，他的儿子阿台投奔王台的大儿子虎儿罕。
English: At first, Wang Xuan died, and his son Atai defected to Wang Tai's eldest son, Toran.

古文：以王台献其父，尝欲报之。
现代文：因为王台把他的父亲交给了朝廷，阿台曾想报仇。
English: Because Wang Tai handed over his father to the imperial court, Atai wanted to take revenge.

古文：王台死，虎儿罕势衰，阿台遂附北关合攻虎儿罕。
现代文：王台死后，虎儿罕势力衰弱，阿台于是依附北关联合攻击虎儿罕。
English: After the death of Wang Tai, the power of Gorehan weakened, and Attai then joined forces with Beiguan to attack Gorehan.

古文：又数犯孤山、汛河。
现代文：又多次进犯孤山、汛河。
English: They also repeatedly attacked Loushan and Luohe.

古文：成梁出塞，遇于曹子谷，斩首一千有奇，获马五百。
现代文：李成梁出塞，和敌人在曹子谷遭遇，斩首一千多级，缴获马五百匹。
English: Li Chengliang went out of the fortress and encountered the enemy in Cao Zi Valley. He beheaded more than a thousand people and captured five hundred horses.

古文：阿台复纠阿海连兵入，抵沈阳城南浑河，大掠去。
现代文：阿台又纠集阿海，联合兵力入侵，抵达沈阳城南的浑河，大肆抢劫一番然后离开了。
English: Atai also gathered Ahai, a joint invasion force, arrived in Hunhe, south of Shenyang, looted a lot and then left.

古文：成梁从抚顺出塞百余里，火攻古勒塞，射死阿台。
现代文：李成梁从抚顺出塞一百多里，火攻古勒要塞，射死阿台。
English: Li Chengliang traveled more than a hundred miles from Fushun to attack the Guler fortress, and shot and killed Atai.

古文：连破阿海寨，击杀之，献馘二千三百。
现代文：接连攻破阿海的兵营，攻击他们，献敌首级二千三百人。
English: He broke through the camp of the Achaeans, attacked them, and killed 2,300 of them.

古文：杲部遂灭。
现代文：王杲部从此被消灭。
English: Wang Xibe has since been eliminated.

古文：录功，增岁禄百石，世荫指挥佥事。
现代文：记录功绩，增加每年俸禄一百石，世代荫封为指挥佥事。
English: Record achievements, increase the annual salary of one hundred koku, generation shadow seal as a conductor's anecdote.

古文：北关清佳砮、杨吉砮素仇南关。
现代文：北关清佳纈、杨吉纈向来仇视南关。
English: Beiguan's Qing Jiayu and Yang Jizhe have always been hostile to Nanguan.

古文：王台没，屡侵台季子猛骨孛罗，且藉土蛮、暖兔、慌忽太兵侵边境。
现代文：王台被消灭后，多次侵犯王台的小儿子猛骨孛罗，还凭借土蛮、暖兔、慌忽太的兵力侵犯边境。
English: After Wang Tai was eliminated, he repeatedly invaded Wang Tai's youngest son, Meng Jiao Luo, and also invaded the border with the help of barbarians, warmongers, and panicky soldiers.

古文：其年十二月，巡抚李松使备御霍九皋许之贡市。
现代文：这一年的十二月，巡抚李松派备御霍九皋同意他们上贡并进行互市。
English: In December of the same year, the inspector Li Song sent Bei Mi Huo Jiuqi to agree to their tribute and exchange market.

古文：清佳砮、杨吉砮率二千余骑诣镇北关谒。
现代文：清佳纈、杨吉纈率领二千多骑兵到镇北关朝见。
English: Qing Jiaxuan and Yang Jizhe led more than two thousand cavalrymen to the town of Beiguan to meet the emperor.

古文：松、九皋见其兵盛，谯让之，则以三百骑入。
现代文：李松、霍九皋看到他们兵力大，斥责他们，准许他们派三百骑兵入关。
English: When Li Song and Huo Jiuyong saw that they had a large number of soldiers, they scolded them and allowed them to send three hundred cavalry into the pass.

古文：松先伏甲于旁，约二人不受抚则炮举甲起。
现代文：李松先在关旁埋伏甲兵，约定如果二人不接受招抚就放炮出击。
English: Li Song first ambushed the armored soldiers next to the gate, and agreed to fire a cannon if the two did not accept the invitation.

古文：顷之，二人抵关，据鞍不逊，松叱之，九皋麾使下，其徒遽拔刀击九皋，并杀侍卒十余人。
现代文：不久，二人抵达镇北关，骑在马上很不礼貌，李松斥责他们，霍九皋叫他们下马，他们的部下突然拔刀杀死霍九皋，并且杀害士兵十多人。
English: Soon, the two arrived at the town of Beiguan. Riding on a horse was very impolite. Li Song reprimanded them. Huo Jiuyong ordered them to dismount. Their subordinates suddenly pulled out a knife to kill Huo Jiuyong and killed more than ten soldiers.

古文：于是军中炮鸣，伏尽起，击斩二人并其从骑，与清佳砮子兀孙孛罗、杨吉砮子哈儿哈麻尽歼焉。
现代文：于是军中大炮轰鸣，埋伏的甲兵出击，斩杀清佳纈、杨吉纈和随从的骑兵，清佳纈的儿子兀孛罗、杨吉纈的儿子哈儿哈麻全部被歼灭。
English: As a result, the cannons in the army roared, and the ambushed armored soldiers attacked and killed Qing Jiaqi, Yang Jiaqi and the accompanying cavalry. Qing Jiaqi's son Jiao Luo and Yang Jiaqi's son Har Hama were all annihilated.

古文：成梁闻炮，急出塞，击其留骑，斩首千五百有奇。
现代文：李成梁听到炮声，急忙出塞，攻击留在关外的骑兵，斩首一千五百多人。
English: Li Chengliang heard the cannon, rushed out of the city, attacked the cavalry left outside the pass, and beheaded more than 1,500 people.

古文：余众刑白马，攒刀，誓永受约束，乃旋师。
现代文：其余的人杀死白马祭天，把刀收集在一起，发誓永远接受约束，李成梁于是凯旋。
English: The rest of the people killed the white horse, gathered their swords together, and swore to be bound forever. Li Chengliang then made a triumphant return.

古文：录功，增岁禄二百石，改前荫指挥佥事为锦衣卫指挥使。
现代文：记录功劳，增加每年的俸禄二百石，改以前荫封指挥佥事为锦衣卫指挥使。
English: Record the merits, increase the annual salary to 200 koku, and change the former commander of the shadow seal to the commander of the brocade guard.

古文：方成梁之出塞也，炒花等以数万骑入蒲河及大宁堡。
现代文：正当李成梁出塞时，炒花等人率几万骑兵入侵蒲河和大宁堡。
English: While Li Chengliang was on his way out of the country, Fried Flower and others led tens of thousands of cavalry to invade Puhe and Danying Fort.

古文：将士防御六日，始出塞。
现代文：将士防御了六天，敌人才出塞。
English: The soldiers defended themselves for six days before the enemy withdrew.

古文：十三年二月，把兔儿欲报父速把亥之怨，偕从父炒花、姑婿花大纠西部以儿邓等以数万骑入掠沈阳。
现代文：万历十二年二月，把兔儿想为父亲速把亥报仇，跟叔叔炒花、姑婿花大一起纠集西部以儿邓等人率领数万名骑兵进攻沈阳。
English: In February of the 12th year of the Wanli calendar, the rabbit wanted to avenge his father's quick victory over the boar, and together with his uncle and brother-in-law, he gathered tens of thousands of cavalry to attack Shenyang.

古文：既退，驻牧辽河，声犯开原、铁岭。
现代文：撤退之后，在辽河放牧，声称进犯开原、铁岭。
English: After the retreat, they grazed in Liaohe and claimed to have attacked Kaibuan and Tieling.

古文：成梁与巡抚李松潜为浮桥济师，逾塞百五十里，疾掩其帐。
现代文：李成梁和巡抚李松偷偷架设浮桥渡过部队，出塞一百五十里，迅猛扑向敌帐篷。
English: Li Chengliang and the inspector Li Song secretly set up a pontoon bridge to cross the troops, and rushed to the enemy tent.

古文：寇已先觉，整众逆战。
现代文：敌人先已发觉了，整顿部队迎战。
English: The enemy had already been spotted, and the rectification troops went into battle.

古文：成梁为叠阵，亲督前阵击，而松以后阵继之，斩首八百有奇。
现代文：李成梁布置垒阵，亲自统领前阵攻击，李松率后阵连续进攻，斩首八百多人。
English: Li Chengliang set up a defensive line and personally led the front-line attack, while Li Song led the rear-line continuous attack, beheading more than 800 people.

古文：捷闻，增岁禄百石，改荫锦衣指挥使为都指挥使。
现代文：捷报传来，增加每年俸禄一百石，改荫封锦衣卫指挥使为都指挥使。
English: The news came that the annual salary would be increased by 100 koku, and the post of commander of the Imperial Guards would be changed to that of commander of the capital.

古文：其年五月，敌犯沈阳，伏精骑塞下，诱官军。
现代文：这年五月，敌人侵犯沈阳，在塞下埋伏精锐骑兵，引诱官军。
English: In May of that year, the enemy invaded Shenyang, ambushed the elite cavalry under the blockade, and lured the government army.

古文：游击韩元功追袭之，败死。
现代文：游击韩元功追击敌人，战败牺牲了。
English: The guerrilla Han Yuan Gong chased the enemy and was defeated and killed.

古文：闰九月，诸部长复犯蒲河，杀裨将数人，大剽掠，而西部银灯亦窥辽、沈。
现代文：闰九月，各部头领又侵犯蒲河，杀死副将数人，大肆抢劫，而西部银灯也在窥伺辽阳、沈阳。
English: In September, the leaders of various ministries invaded Puhe again, killed several vice generals, and looted extensively, while the Western Silver Lanterns were also spying on Liaoyang and Shenyang.

古文：成梁令部将李平胡出塞三百五十里，捣破银灯营，斩首一百八级。
现代文：李成梁命令部将李平胡出塞三百五十里，捣毁银灯大营，斩首一百零八级。
English: Li Chengliang ordered his troops to march Li Pinghu 350 miles, destroy the Silver Lantern Battalion, and behead 108 cadres.

古文：诸部长闻之，始引去。
现代文：各部头领听到这消息，才引兵离去。
English: When the heads of the various ministries heard the news, they withdrew their troops.

古文：十四年二月，士蛮部长一克灰正纠把兔儿、炒花、花大等三万骑，约土蛮诸子共驰辽阳挟赏。
现代文：万历十四年二月，土蛮部首领一克灰正纠集把兔儿、炒花、花大等三万骑兵，约请土蛮各子一起前往沈阳要挟赏赐。
English: In February of the 14th year of the Wanli calendar, the leader of the barbarian department, Ikke Haizheng, gathered thirty thousand cavalrymen, including rabbits, fried flowers, and flowers, and invited each barbarian to go to Shenyang together to demand a reward.

古文：成梁侦得之，率副将杨燮，参将李宁、李兴、孙守廉以轻骑出镇边堡。
现代文：李成梁侦察得知后，率领副将杨燮，参将李宁、李兴、孙守廉以轻骑出镇远堡。
English: After Li Chengliang's reconnaissance learned of this, he led Vice-General Yang Jie, and Vice-Generals Li Ning, Li Xing, and Sun Shulian out of Zhenyuan Fort on horseback.

古文：昼伏夜行二百余里，至可可毋林。
现代文：白天埋伏，晚上行军二百多里，到达可可毋林。
English: Ambush during the day, march more than two hundred miles in the evening, and reach the cocoa grove.

古文：大风雷，敌不觉。
现代文：刮起了大风，电闪雷鸣，敌人没有察觉。
English: There was a strong wind, lightning and thunder, but the enemy did not notice.

古文：既至，风日晴朗，敌大惊，发矢如雨。
现代文：到达之后，风息雷止，天气晴朗，敌人发现后惊慌失措，纷纷射箭如同下雨一般，众将士冒死冲锋陷阵。
English: After arriving, the wind died down, the weather was fine, the enemy panicked after being discovered, archery was fired in succession as if it were raining, and the soldiers risked their lives to charge.

古文：将士冒死陷阵，获首功九百，斩其长二十四人。其年十月，敌七八万骑犯镇夷诸堡，阅五日始去。
现代文：斩首九百人，杀死头领二十四人。这年十月，敌人七、八万骑兵进犯镇夷各堡，过了五天才离去。
English: He beheaded nine hundred people and killed twenty-four leaders. In October of that year, seventy to eighty thousand enemy cavalry invaded the fortress of Zhenyi, and only left five days later.

古文：十五年春，东西部连营入犯。
现代文：万历十五年春天，东、西部联合侵犯。
English: In the spring of the 15th year of Wanli, East and West jointly invaded.

古文：其秋八月，复以七八万骑犯镇夷堡。
现代文：秋天的八月，又以七、八万骑兵侵犯镇夷堡。
English: In the autumn, in August, another seven to eighty thousand cavalrymen invaded Zhenyi Fort.

古文：十月，把汉大成纠土蛮十万骑由镇夷、大清二堡入，数日始出。
现代文：十月，把汉大成纠集土蛮十万骑兵从镇夷、二清二堡进入内地，九天之后才离境。
English: In October, Han Dacheng gathered 100,000 cavalrymen from Zhenyi and Erqing into the inland, and left the country nine days later.

古文：北关既被创，后清佳砮子卜寨与杨吉砮子那林孛罗渐强盛，数与南关虎儿罕子歹商构兵。
现代文：北关遭受打击后，不久清佳纈的儿子那林孛罗又逐渐强盛起来，多次跟南关虎儿罕的儿子歹商打仗。
English: After Beiguan suffered a blow, soon the son of Qing Jiaqi, Narimurao, gradually became strong again, and fought many times with the son of Nanguan Huerhan, a gangster.

古文：成梁以南关势弱，谋讨北关以辅翊之。
现代文：李成梁看南关势力较弱，计划讨伐北关来扶持南关。
English: Li Chengliang saw that the forces in Nanguan were weak, and planned to attack Nanguan to support Nanguan.

古文：明年五月，率师直捣其巢。
现代文：第二年五月率领军队直捣北关巢穴。
English: In May of the following year, he led the army to storm the Beiguan lair.

古文：卜寨走，与那林孛罗合，凭城守。
现代文：卜寨逃跑，跟那林孛罗汇合，依靠城池固守。
English: Buzhai fled, joined with Narimala, and relied on the city to hold fast.

古文：城四重，攻之不下。
现代文：城墙有四重，攻克不下。
English: The city wall is four-layered and impenetrable.

古文：用巨炮击之，碎其外郛，遂拔二城，斩馘五百余级。
现代文：李成梁用巨炮轰击，打破了外郭城，于是攻占了二城，斩首五百多人。
English: Li Chengliang bombarded with a huge cannon, broke the outer city, then captured two cities and beheaded more than five hundred people.

古文：卜寨等请降，设誓不复叛，乃班师。
现代文：卜寨等人请求投降，发誓不再叛乱，李成梁于是回师。
English: Buzhai and others asked for surrender and swore not to rebel again, so Li Chengliang returned to his division.

古文：十七年三月，敌犯义州，复入太平堡，把总朱永寿等一军尽没。
现代文：万历十七年三月，敌人侵犯义州，又入侵太平堡，把总朱永寿等全军覆没。
English: In March of the 17th year of Wanli, the enemy invaded Yizhou and Taiping Fort, annihilating the entire army, including General Zhu Yongshou.

古文：九月，脑毛大合白洪大、长昂三万骑复犯平虏堡，备御李有年、把总冯文升皆战死，成梁选锋没者数百人。
现代文：九月，脑毛大联合白洪大、长昂共三万骑兵又进犯平虏堡，备御李有年、把总冯文升都战死了，李成梁的数百多先锋全部阵亡。
English: In September, Zeng Mao Da combined with Baikong Da and Chang'an, a total of thirty thousand cavalry, and attacked Pingru Fort, and killed the general Feng Wensheng, and all of Li Chengliang's hundreds of vanguards were killed.

古文：敌大掠沈阳蒲河、榆林，八日始去。
现代文：敌人大肆抢劫沈阳蒲河、榆林，过了八天才离去。
English: The enemy plundered Shenyang, Puhe and Yulin, and left after eight days.

古文：明年二月，卜言台周，黄台吉，大、小委正结西部叉汉塔塔儿五万余骑复深入辽、沈、海、盖。
现代文：第二年二月，卜言台周，黄吉台，大、小委正联合西部又汉塔塔儿五万多骑兵又一次深入辽阳、沈阳、海州、盖平。
English: In February of the following year, more than fifty thousand cavalrymen from Bukantai Zhou, Huangjitai, the Grand Committee and the Small Committee were once again in Liaoyang, Shenyang, Haizhou and Geiping.

古文：成梁潜遣兵出塞袭之，遇伏，死者千人。
现代文：李成梁偷偷派兵出塞袭击敌人，中了埋伏，死了一千人。
English: Li Chengliang secretly sent troops out of Tibet to attack the enemy, was ambushed, and a thousand people died.

古文：成梁乃报首功二百八十，得增禄荫。
现代文：李成梁却报功说斩首一百八十，得以增官封子。
English: Li Chengliang, however, claimed credit for beheading one hundred and eighty, and was able to increase the number of officials.

古文：土蛮族弟士墨台猪借西部青把都、恰不慎及长昂、滚兔十万骑深入海州。
现代文：土蛮的族弟土墨台猪借西部青把都、恰不慎和长昂、滚兔十万骑兵深入到海州。
English: The barbarian's younger brother, the Tu Mo Tai Hog, took advantage of the western youth to take the lead, and the hundred thousand cavalrymen of the Cao Cao, Chang'an and Rolling Rabbit penetrated deep into Haizhou.

古文：成梁不敢击，纵掠数日而去。
现代文：李成梁不敢迎击，敌人沿路抢劫数天才离去。
English: Li Chengliang did not dare to counterattack, and the enemy robbed along the road for several days before leaving.

古文：十九年闰三月，成梁乘给事侯先春阅视，谋邀捣巢功，使副将李宁等出镇夷堡潜袭板升，杀二百八十人。
现代文：十九年闰三月，李成梁乘给事中侯先春检阅巡视部队的机会，计划捣毁敌人的老巢以邀功行赏，派副将李宁等人出镇堡偷袭敌部居住地，杀敌二百八十人。
English: In the intercalary March of the 19th year, Li Chengliang took the opportunity to review the patrol force in the middle of the Spring Festival, planned to destroy the enemy's nest to invite and reward, and sent Vice Admiral Li Ning and others out of the town to raid the enemy's residence, killing 280 people.

古文：师还遇敌，死者数千人。
现代文：部队返回途中和敌人遭遇，死亡数千人。
English: On their way back, the troops encountered the enemy, and thousands of people died.

古文：成梁及总督蹇达不以闻。
现代文：李成梁和总督蹇达不报告这件事。
English: Lee Sung-ryong and Governor Sundar do not report the incident.

古文：巡按御史胡克俭尽发其先后欺罔状，语多侵政府。
现代文：巡按御史胡克俭将李成梁前后的欺骗行为全部揭发，语言多涉及到政府的弊端。
English: Investigating magistrate Shi Hu Ke Jian revealed all of Li Chengliang's deceptive behavior before and after, and the language mostly involved the government's shortcomings.

古文：疏虽不行，成梁由是不安于位。
现代文：这道奏疏虽然没有执行，但李成梁从此不再安心于本职工作了。
English: Although this was not carried out, Li Chengliang no longer felt secure in his job.

古文：及先春还朝，诋尤力，帝意颇动。
现代文：等侯先春回到朝廷，诋毁他更加不遗余力，皇帝很有些动摇。
English: When Hou Xianchun returned to the imperial court, he spared no effort to discredit him, and the emperor was somewhat shaken.

古文：成梁再疏辞疾，言者亦踵至。
现代文：李成梁两次上疏借口疾病辞职，其他人也跟着替他说情。
English: Li Chengliang resigned twice on the pretext of illness, and others followed suit to intercede for him.

古文：其年十一月，帝竟从御史张鹤鸣言，解成梁任，以宁远伯奉朝请。
现代文：这年十一月，皇帝最终听了御史张鹤鸣的话，解除李成梁的职务，以宁远伯的身份到朝廷拜见皇上。
English: In November of that year, the emperor finally listened to the words of the imperial historian Zhang Huanming, relieved Li Chengliang of his duties, and went to the imperial court to meet the emperor as Ningyuan Bo.

古文：明年，哱拜反宁夏，御史梅国桢请用成梁，给事中王德完持不可，乃寝。
现代文：第二年，継拜在宁夏反叛，御史梅国桢请求起用李成梁，给事中王德完坚持不同意，这事也就平息了。
English: In the second year, Sui Bai led a rebellion in Ningxia, and the governor of Shimei Province requested the appointment of Li Chengliang, but Wang Deguan insisted that he did not agree, and the matter was settled.

古文：成梁镇辽二十二年，先后奏大捷者十，帝辄祭告郊庙，受廷臣贺，蟒衣金缯岁赐稠叠。
现代文：李成梁镇守辽东二十二年，先后取得十余次大胜仗，皇帝每次都到郊庙祭告祖先，接受廷臣的祝贺，每年赏赐的蟒衣金缯多如山积。
English: In the 22 years that Li Chengliang was in charge of Liaodong, he won more than a dozen major victories. Each time, the emperor went to the suburban temple to pay homage to his ancestors and receive congratulations from courtiers. Every year, he was rewarded with mountains of gold brooches.

古文：边帅武功之盛，二百年来未有也。
现代文：边帅武功的盛大，是二百年来从未有过的。
English: There has never been such a grand display of martial arts skills by a border guard in the past 200 years.

古文：其始锐意封拜，师出必捷，威振绝域。已而位望益隆，子弟尽列崇阶，仆隶无不荣显。
现代文：李成梁在刚开始时，锐意进取，一心想封官拜爵，每次出兵都一定取得胜利，声威远播异域，不久地位声望日益升高，儿子兄弟都到朝廷做官，连奴仆都很显贵而荣华。
English: At the beginning, Li Chengliang was determined to forge ahead. He wanted to be given the title of prince. Every time he sent troops, he was sure to win. His fame spread far and wide. Soon, his status and reputation were increasing. His sons and brothers all became officials in the imperial court. Even his servants were noble and glorious.

古文：贵极而骄，奢侈无度。
现代文：李成梁贵极而骄，放纵奢侈没有限度。
English: Li Chengliang is extremely precious and arrogant, indulging in luxury without limit.

古文：军赀、马价、盐课、市赏，岁干没不赀，全辽商民之利尽笼入己。
现代文：军用物资、马匹价钱、盐业税收、交易赏金，每年侵吞公家财物不计其数。整个辽东商人的利益全部收为己有。
English: Military supplies, horse prices, salt industry taxes, trading bounties, and the number of embezzled public assets are countless every year. The profits of the entire Liaodong merchants have all been collected.

古文：以是灌输权门，结纳朝士，中外要人，无不饱其重赇，为之左右。
现代文：拿这些钱财去贿赂政府权贵、巴结朝廷重臣，朝廷内外的要人的腰包没有不被李成梁塞得满满的，全都甘心为他效劳。
English: Li Chengliang bribed government dignitaries and court dignitaries with this money. The wallets of important people inside and outside the court were stuffed with Li Chengliang's money, and they were all willing to serve him.

古文：每一奏捷，内自阁部，外自督抚而下，大者进官荫子，小亦增俸赉金。
现代文：每一次报告胜利，朝廷内从内阁，朝廷外从督抚以下，大官升官荫子，小官也增俸赏钱。
English: Each time a report was successful, it was promoted from the cabinet within the imperial court, and from superintendent and below outside the imperial court. Senior officials were promoted to higher posts, and junior officials were rewarded with higher salaries.

古文：恩施优渥，震耀当世。
现代文：李成梁所受恩惠的优厚程度，是当世无双的。
English: There is no equal in the world in terms of the amount of favors Li Chengliang received.

古文：而其战功率在塞外，易为缘饰。
现代文：但他的战功都是在塞外取得的，很容易粉饰。
English: But his war exploits were all made outside of the country, and it's easy to whitewash them.

古文：若敌入内地，则以坚壁清野为词，拥兵观望；甚或掩败为功，杀良民冒级。
现代文：假若敌人进入内地，李成梁就借口坚壁清野，拥兵观望，甚至有时还掩盖失败当作战功，滥杀良民冒充首级。
English: If the enemy enters the mainland, Li Chengliang will use the excuse of a strong wall and a clear field, support the soldiers to wait and see, and even sometimes cover up the failure as a combat achievement, and indiscriminately kill good people to pretend to be the head.

古文：阁部共为蒙蔽，督抚、监司稍忤意，辄排去之，不得举其法。
现代文：内阁和各部都被他蒙蔽，督抚、监司稍有冒犯的意图，就排斥赶走他们，法律也就得不到伸张。
English: The cabinet and all ministries have been hoodwinked by him. If supervisors and supervisors have the slightest intention of offending, they will be ostracized and driven away, and the law will not be enforced.

古文：先后巡按陈登云、许守恩廉得其杀降冒功状，拟论奏之，为巡抚李松、顾养谦所沮止。
现代文：先后担任过巡抚的陈登云、许守恩经考查得知李成梁杀降敌冒充军功的情形，准备上报追究这事，被巡抚李松、顾养谦阻止了。
English: Chen Dengyun and Xu Shouen, who had served as supervisors, learned through investigation that Li Chengliang killed and degraded the enemy and passed it off as military merit. They were going to report and investigate this matter, but they were stopped by supervisors Li Song and Gu Yaoqian.

古文：既而物议沸腾，御史朱应毂、给事中任应徵、佥事李琯交章抨击。
现代文：不久议论沸沸扬扬，御史朱应毂、给事中任应征、佥事李轮流抨击他。
English: Before long, the debate raged on, with Zhu Yingjun, Zhi Zhongren, and An Zhi Li taking turns to criticize him.

古文：事颇有迹，卒赖奥援，反诘责言者。
现代文：事情很有些迹象，李成梁最终依靠别人的暗中支持，反而指责那些揭发他的人。
English: There are strong indications that Mr. Lee ultimately relied on the tacit support of others, while blaming those who exposed him.

古文：及申时行、许国、王锡爵相继谢政，成梁失内主，遂以去位。
现代文：等到申时行、许国、王锡爵相继离开政坛，李成梁失去朝廷里为他撑腰的人，也就离职了。
English: When Shin Shih-hong, Xu Guo and Wang Xizhe left the political arena one after another, Li Chengliang lost his supporters in the imperial court and left office.

古文：成梁诸战功率藉健儿。
现代文：李成梁各战功都依靠健儿。
English: All of Li Chengliang's war exploits depended on his ability.

古文：其后健儿李平胡、李宁、李兴、秦得倚、孙守廉辈皆富贵，拥专城。
现代文：此后健儿李平胡、李宁、李兴、秦得倚、孙守廉都富贵了，拥有专门的城池。
English: Since then, Jian'er Li Pinghu, Li Ning, Li Xing, Qin Derui and Sun Shulian have all become rich and have their own castles.

古文：暮气难振，又转相掊克，士马萧耗。
现代文：暮气沉沉，难以振作，又转而竞相用苛捐杂税剥削人民，人马都消耗掉了。
English: With a gloomy mood, it is difficult to cheer up, and they turn to competing to exploit the people with heavy taxes and surcharges. The people and horses have all been consumed.

古文：迨成梁去辽，十年之间更易八帅，边备益弛。
现代文：等到李成梁离开辽东后，十年之间换了八个主帅，边境防备日益松弛了。
English: By the time Li Chengliang left Liaodong, eight coaches had been replaced in ten years, and border defenses had become increasingly lax.

古文：二十九年八月，马林获罪。
现代文：万历二十九年八月，马林被定罪。
English: On August 29, Marin was convicted.

古文：大学士沈一贯言成梁虽老，尚堪将兵。
现代文：大学士沈一贯说李成梁年纪虽然老了，但还可以统帅部队。
English: Shen, a university scholar, has always said that although Li Chengliang is old, he can still command the troops.

古文：乃命再镇辽东，年已七十有六矣。
现代文：于是命令李成梁再次镇守辽东，已经七十六岁了。
English: So he ordered Li Chengliang, who was already seventy-six years old, to defend Liaodong again.

古文：是时，土蛮、长昂及把兔儿已死，寇钞渐稀。
现代文：这时，土蛮、长昂和把兔儿已经死了，敌人的掠夺渐渐稀少。
English: At this time, the barbarian, Chang'an and the rabbit were already dead, and the enemy's plunder was becoming scarce.

古文：而开原、广宁之前复开马、木二市。
现代文：而开原、广宁此前重开马匹、木材二个交易市场。
English: Kaiyuan and Guangning previously reopened two trading markets for horses and timber.

古文：诸部耽市赏利，争就款。以故成梁复镇八年，辽左少事。
现代文：各部贪图交易所带来的利益，争相前来求和归附，所以李成梁再次镇守辽东的八年，辽东平安无事。
English: The ministries coveted the profits brought by the map exchange and scrambled to come to seek reconciliation, so Li Chengliang once again defended Liaodong for eight years, and Liaodong was safe.

古文：以阅视叙劳，加至太傅。
现代文：因为检阅巡视军队有功，加封到太傅。
English: He was awarded the title of Taifu for his contribution to the inspection of the troops.

古文：当万历初元时，兵部侍郎汪道昆阅边，成梁献议移建孤山堡于张其哈剌佃，险山堡于宽佃，沿江新安四堡于长佃、长岭诸处，仍以孤山、险山二参将戍之，可拓地七八百里，益收耕牧之利。
现代文：在万历初年的时候，兵部侍郎汪道昆检阅边境，李成梁建议将孤山堡移到张其哈剌曲，将险山堡移到宽佃，将沿江新安四堡移到长佃、长岭各处，仍然派二个参将驻守孤山、险山，这样可以开拓土地七、八百里，甚至还可以获得耕种、放牧所带来的收益。
English: In the first year of the Wanli era, when Wang Daokun, the secretary of the Military Department, inspected the border, Li Chengliang suggested that the Lone Mountain Fort should be moved to Zhangjiakou, the Perilous Mountain Fort should be moved to Kuancheng, and the four forts along the Xin'an River should be moved to Chang'an and various places in Changling. He still sent two generals to guard Lone Mountain and Perilous Mountain. In this way, seven or eight hundred miles of land could be developed, and even the benefits brought by farming and grazing could be obtained.

古文：道昆上于朝，报可。
现代文：汪道昆回到朝廷报告，皇帝同意了。
English: Wang Daokun reported back to the imperial court, and the emperor agreed.

古文：自是生聚日繁，至六万四千余户。
现代文：从此之后居民点日益增多，达到六万四千多户。
English: Since then, the number of residential areas has been increasing, reaching more than 64,000 households.

古文：及三十四年，成梁以地孤悬难守，与督、抚蹇达、赵楫建议弃之，尽徙居民于内地。
现代文：到万历三十四年，李成梁认为这里孤立难守，跟督，抚蹇达、赵楫商量放弃它们，将居民全部迁往内地。
English: In the thirty-fourth year of Wanli, Li Chengliang thought that it was difficult to defend the isolation here, and discussed with the governor, Fuzhunda and Zhao Wei to abandon them and move all the residents to the mainland.

古文：居民恋家室，则以大军驱迫之，死者狼籍。
现代文：居民爱恋自己的故土，不肯搬迁，李成梁就派大军驱赶、逼迫他们，被打死的人到处都是。
English: The residents loved their homeland and refused to move, so Li Chengliang sent a large army to drive them out and persecute them. The people who were killed were everywhere.

古文：成梁等反以招复逃人功，增秩受赏。
现代文：李成梁反而把他们当作招抚而又逃跑的敌人，向朝廷邀功，增官受赏。
English: Li Chengliang, on the other hand, treated them as enemies who had been pandered to and then fled. He asked the imperial court for credit and was rewarded with a promotion.

古文：兵科给事中宋一韩力言弃地非策。
现代文：兵科给事中宋一韩极力说放弃土地并非良策。
English: In the case of military science, Song Yihan insisted that it was not a good idea to give up land.

古文：巡按御史熊廷弼勘奏如一韩言，一韩复连章极论。
现代文：巡按御史熊廷弼调查的结果跟宋一韩所说的一样，宋一韩又接连上疏极力追究。
English: The results of the investigation conducted by the inspector, Xiong Tingtao, were the same as those mentioned by Song Yi Han, and Song Yi Han continued to pursue the matter vigorously.

古文：帝素眷成梁，悉留中不下。
现代文：皇帝一向喜欢李成梁，将奏疏全都扣压了不下达朝臣。
English: The emperor has always liked Li Chengliang, and he has kept all the courtiers under control.

古文：久之卒，年九十。
现代文：很久之后李成梁才去世，终年九十岁。
English: It was not until much later that Li Chengliang passed away, at the age of 90.

古文：弟成材，参将。
现代文：他的弟弟李成材，是一名参将。
English: His younger brother, Li Chengzai, is a general.

古文：子如松、如柏、如桢、如樟、如梅皆总兵官；如梓、如梧、如桂、如楠亦皆至参将。
现代文：儿子李如松、李如柏、李如桢、李如樟、李如梅都是总兵官；李如梓、李如梧、李如桂、李如楠也当上了参将。
English: His sons Li Ruzong, Li Rubei, Li Ruzhu, Li Ruzhuan and Li Rumei were all general officers; Li Ruzi, Li Ruguo, Li Rugui and Li Runan also became general officers.

古文：如松，字子茂，成梁长子。
现代文：李如松，字子茂，是李成梁的长子。
English: Li Ruzong, also known as Zizi Mao, is the eldest son of Li Chengliang.

古文：以父荫为都指挥同知，充宁远伯勋卫。
现代文：因为父亲的战功荫封为都指挥同知，充当宁远伯勋卫。
English: Because of his father's war exploits, he was a comrade-in-arms with the commander of the capital, and served as a guard of honor for Ningyuan.

古文：骁果敢战，少从父谙兵机。
现代文：李如松骁勇刚强，敢于作战，小时候跟父亲熟悉兵机。
English: Li Ruzhongqian is brave and strong, dares to fight, and was familiar with military aircraft with his father when he was a child.

古文：再迁署都督佥事，为神机营右副将。
现代文：再次提升代理都督佥事，担任神机营右副将。
English: He was once again promoted to acting governor of Anji, serving as the right vice-commander of the Shenji Battalion.

古文：万历十一年，出为山西总兵官。
现代文：万历十一年派出担任山西总兵官。
English: In the eleventh year of the Wanli era, he was sent to serve as the Shanxi chief military officer.

古文：给事中黄道瞻等数言如松父子不当并居重镇，大学士申时行请保全之，乃召佥书右府。
现代文：给事中黄道瞻等人几次说李如松父子不应当都驻守军事重镇，大学士申时行请求皇上保全他，于是召回李如松担任佥书右府。
English: During the incident, Huang Daozhan and others said several times that Li Rousong and his son should not be stationed in a military stronghold. The university magistrate petitioned the emperor to protect him, so Li Rousong was recalled to serve as the right-hand government of the imperial rescript.

古文：寻提督京城巡捕。
现代文：不久提督京城巡捕。
English: Soon, Admiral Keijo went on patrol.

古文：给事中邵庶尝劾如松及其弟副总兵如柏不法，且请稍抑，以全终始，不纳。
现代文：给事中邵庶曾弹劾李如松和他的弟弟李如柏违法，并且请求皇上稍稍压制他们，以求他善始善终，皇帝没有接受。
English: During the incident, Shao Shiao had impeached Li Rousong and his brother Li Rubei for breaking the law, and asked the emperor to suppress them a little, so that he would have a good beginning and a good end. The emperor did not accept.

古文：十五年，复以总兵官镇宣府。
现代文：十五年又以总兵官镇守宣府。
English: Fifteen years later, he became the commander-in-chief of Xuanfu.

古文：巡抚许守谦阅操，如松引坐与并。
现代文：巡抚许守谦检阅士兵的操练情况，李如松拉他一起坐下。
English: The governor, Xu Shouqian, reviewed the soldiers' training, and Li Ruzong pulled him to sit down with him.

古文：参政王学书却之，语不相下，几攘臂。
现代文：参政王学书推辞不接受，闹得不可开交，几乎挥拳打了起来。
English: Sanzheng Wang Xuanshu did not accept the refusal, and the quarrel was so intense that they almost came to blows.

古文：巡按御史王之栋因劾如松骄横，并诋学书，帝为两夺其俸。
现代文：巡按御史王之栋于是弹劾李如松骄横，并且批评王学书，皇帝剥夺了他们二人的俸禄。
English: The inspector, Wang Zhidong, accused Li Ruzong of arrogance and criticized Wang Xuanshu, and the emperor deprived both of them of their salaries.

古文：已复被论，给事中叶初春请改调之，乃命与山西李迎恩更镇。
现代文：不久，恢复李如松的俸禄，给事中叶初春请求皇上调动他的职位，于是命令李如松跟山西李迎恩对调。
English: Soon, Li Rousong's salary was restored, and in the early spring of the middle of the year, he asked the emperor to transfer his position, so he ordered Li Rousong to be transferred to Shanxi Li Ying'en.

古文：其后，军政拾遗，给事中阅视，数遭论劾。
现代文：此后，军政纠察，给事中视察军政，都多次弹劾他。
English: Since then, the military and political pickets and the military and political inspectors have repeatedly impeached him.

古文：帝终眷之，不为动，召佥书中府。
现代文：皇帝始终喜欢他而不为所动，召回为佥书中府。
English: The emperor, who had always liked him, was unimpressed and recalled him to the capital.

古文：二十年，哱拜反宁夏，御史梅国桢荐如松大将才，其弟如梅、如樟并年少英杰，宜令讨贼。
现代文：万历二十年，継拜在宁夏反叛，御史梅国桢推举李如松有大将的才干，他的弟弟李如梅、李如樟都是少年英杰，应该命令他们去讨伐强盗。
English: Twenty years have passed, successive worshippers rebelled in Ningxia, and Goshmei Guozhang nominated Li Rusong as having the talent of a general. His younger brothers Li Rumei and Li Rugao are young heroes, and they should be ordered to fight against robbers.

古文：乃命如松为提督陕西讨逆军务总兵官，即以国桢监之。
现代文：于是命令李如松为提督陕西讨逆军务总兵官，就派梅国桢监军。
English: Therefore, he ordered Li Rousong to act as the admiral of Shaanxi Province to oppose the military commander-in-chief, and sent Mei Guozhong to supervise the troops.

古文：武臣有提督，自如松始也。
现代文：武臣担任提督是从李如松开始的。
English: The post of Admiral of the Imperial Japanese Navy was first held by Ri Rusong.

古文：已命尽统辽东、宣府、大同、山西诸道援军。六月抵宁夏。
现代文：已命令李如松统领辽东、宣府、大同、山西各路援军，六月抵达宁夏。
English: Li Rusong was ordered to lead reinforcements from Liaodong, Xuanfu, Datong and Shanxi, arriving in Ningxia in June.

古文：如松以权任既重，不欲受总督制，事辄专行。
现代文：李如松认为自己职权很大，不想受总督的管制，遇到事情就自己独断专行。
English: Li Rusong believes that he has great authority and does not want to be controlled by the governor. When things come up, he will act on his own.

古文：兵科许弘纲等以为非制，尚书石星亦言如松敕书受督臣节度，不得自专，帝乃下诏申饬。
现代文：兵科许弘纲等人认为李如松违反制度，尚书石星也说李如松按诏书应受总督节度，不得自行其是，皇帝于是下诏申饬。
English: The military scholar Xu Honggang and others believed that Li Rusong violated the system. Shang Shuxi Xing also said that Li Rusong should be subject to the governor's edict according to the edict, and should not be allowed to do as he pleases. The emperor then issued an edict.

古文：先是，诸将董一奎、麻贵等数攻城不下。
现代文：在这之前，诸将董一元、麻贵等人多次攻城不下。
English: Prior to this, generals such as Dong Iyuan and Magui repeatedly besieged the city.

古文：如松至，攻益力。
现代文：李如松到达后，更加猛烈地攻城。
English: After Li Rusong arrived, he attacked the city even more fiercely.

古文：用布囊三万，实以土，践之登，为炮石所却。
现代文：用三万只大布袋，填满土，垒砌起来登城，被炮石打垮了。
English: With thirty thousand large cloth bags, filled with soil, they built a wall and went up to the city, which was destroyed by cannon stones.

古文：如樟夜攀云梯上，不克。
现代文：李如樟夜晚攀登云梯攻城，不能奏效。
English: Li Ruzhen's nighttime climb up the ladder to attack the city did not work.

古文：游击龚子敬提苗兵攻南关，如松乘势将登，亦不克，乃决策水攻。
现代文：游击龚子敬率领苗兵攻打南关，李如松准备乘机登城，也不能奏效，于是决心用水攻。
English: Miao soldiers led by guerrilla Miao Zi Jing attacked Nanguan, Li Rusong was ready to take advantage of the opportunity to go to the city, but it did not work, so he decided to attack with water.

古文：拜窘，遣养子克力盖往勾套寇，如松令部将李宁追斩之。
现代文：継拜处境困迫，派遣养子克力盖前往勾结河套的盗贼，李如松命令部将李宁把他追杀了。
English: Succumbing to the difficult situation, Li Ruzong sent his adopted son, Keligai, to go to the thieves who had colluded with Hetao. Li Ruzong ordered the commander Li Ning to chase him down and kill him.

古文：已，套寇以万余骑至张亮堡。
现代文：此后，河套盗贼一万多骑兵到达张亮堡。
English: After that, more than ten thousand cavalrymen of the Hetao Thieves arrived at Zhangliang Fort.

古文：如松力战，手斩士卒畏缩者，寇竟败去。
现代文：李如松奋力作战，亲手杀死畏缩不前的士兵，敌人最终败逃了。
English: Li Ruzong fought hard and killed the cowering soldiers with his own hands. The enemy eventually fled in defeat.

古文：水侵北关，城崩。
现代文：大水冲淹北关，城墙崩塌。
English: Big water flooded Beiguan, and the city wall collapsed.

古文：如松及萧如薰等佯击北关诱贼，而潜以锐师袭南关，攀云梯而上。
现代文：李如松和萧和薰等在北关佯攻以吸引敌人，却偷偷地派精锐部队袭击南关，攀登云梯攻城。
English: Li Rousong, Xiao Hequan and others made a surprise attack on the north gate to attract the enemy, but secretly sent elite troops to attack the south gate, climbing the ladder to attack the city.

古文：拜及子承恩自斩叛党刘东旸、许朝乞贷死。
现代文：口孛拜和他的儿子承恩杀死叛党刘东，许朝乞求免死。
English: Zhou Yibai and his son Cheng En killed the rebel Liu Dong, and Xu pleaded with the emperor to spare his life.

古文：于是如松先登，如薰及麻贵、刘承嗣等继之，尽灭拜族。
现代文：于是李如松先登城，萧如薰和麻贵、刘承嗣等人紧随其后，全歼継拜一族。
English: As a result, Li Ruzong went to the city first, followed by Xiao Ruxuan, He Magui, Liu Chengzhi and others, and the whole family was annihilated.

古文：录功，进都督，世荫锦衣指挥同知。
现代文：记录功绩，提升为都督，世代荫封锦衣指挥同知。
English: Recorded achievements, promoted to the governor, generational shadow seal brocade conductor friend.

古文：会朝鲜倭患棘，诏如松提督蓟、辽、保定、山东诸军，克期东征。
现代文：正好赶上倭寇猖獗，下诏命令李如松提督蓟、辽、保定、山东各军，限期东征。
English: Just in time for the rampant wokou, Li Ruzong issued an imperial edict ordering the armies of Admiral Zou, Liao, Baoding, and Shandong to set out for the East for a limited time.

古文：弟如柏、如梅并率师援剿。
现代文：他的弟弟李如柏、李如梅一起率部支援助剿。
English: His younger brothers, Li Rubei and Li Rumei, led the branch to help.

古文：如松新立功，气益骄，与经略宋应昌不相下。
现代文：李如松刚刚立了战功，更加骄横，跟经略宋应昌争执不下。
English: Li Rousong had just won the war, and he was even more arrogant. He couldn't help quarreling with Jingliang Song Yingchang.

古文：故事，大帅初见督师，甲胄庭谒，出易冠带，始加礼貌。如松用监司谒督抚仪，素服侧坐而已。
现代文：按照过去惯例，大帅第一次参见督师，应身着甲胄当庭拜见，出门更换帽子和衣带，这是对人恭敬有礼，李如松用监司拜见督抚的礼仪，只是穿着平常衣服侧坐一旁而已。
English: According to the past practice, when a grand marshal sees an inspector for the first time, he should meet him in court wearing armor and go out to change his hat and belt. This is respectful and courteous to people. Li Rousong used the etiquette of the inspector to meet the inspector, but he just sat on the side wearing ordinary clothes.

古文：十二月，如松至军，沈惟敬自倭归，言倭酋行长愿封，请退平壤迄西，以大同江为界。
现代文：十二月，李如松抵达部队，沈惟敬从日本回国，说日本首领行长愿意受封，请求明军退到平壤以西，双方以大同江为界。
English: In December, Ri Rusong arrived at the army, Shen Weijing returned from Japan, said that the Japanese leader, the governor, was willing to be sealed, and asked the Ming army to retreat to the west of Pyongyang, with the Datong River as the boundary between the two sides.

古文：如松叱惟敬憸邪，欲斩之。
现代文：李如松大声呵斥沈惟敬奸邪，想把他斩首。
English: Li Rousong shouted at Shen Wei for worshipping evil spirits and wanted to behead him.

古文：参谋李应试曰： 藉惟敬绐倭封，而阴袭之，奇计也。 
现代文：参谋李应试说： 利用沈惟敬哄骗日本授封，而我军偷偷地袭击他们，这是一条奇计。 
English: Staff officer Li Yingtuo said: It is a strange scheme to use Shen Wei Jing to trick Japan into granting the title, while our army secretly attacks them.

古文：如松以为然，乃置惟敬于营，誓师渡江。
现代文：李如松很赞成，就把沈惟敬安置在军营里，并誓师渡江。
English: Li Rousong was very much in favour, so he placed Shen Weijing in a military camp and vowed to teach him how to cross the river.

古文：二十一年正月四日，师次肃宁馆。
现代文：万历二十一年正月四月，军队驻扎肃宁馆。
English: In April of the first month of the 21st year of Wanli, the army was stationed at Suning Pavilion.

古文：行长以为封使将至，遣牙将二十人来迎，如松檄游击李宁生缚之。
现代文：行长以为是授封的使者将要到达，派遣二十名牙将出来迎接，李如松传令游击李宁活捉了他们。
English: The governor thought that the emissary of the conferment was about to arrive, and sent twenty tuskers to meet him. Li Rousong sent a message to the guerrilla Li Ning, who captured them alive.

古文：倭猝起格斗，仅获三人，余走还。
现代文：日本人突然反抗，只捉住了三人，其余的都逃回去了。
English: The Japanese suddenly rebelled, only three were captured, the rest fled back.

古文：行长大骇，复遣所亲信小西飞来谒，如松慰遣之。
现代文：行长大感惊骇，又派遣亲信小西飞来朝见，李如松安慰他一番又把他送走了。
English: The governor was shocked and sent his close friend Xiao Xi to fly to see him in the morning. Li Rousong comforted him first and then sent him away.

古文：六日，次平壤。
现代文：六日，进驻平壤。
English: On the 6th, it was stationed in Pyongyang.

古文：行长犹以为封使也，踔风月楼以待，群倭花衣夹道迎。
现代文：行长还以为是授封的使者，站在风月楼等待，众日本人身穿花衣服夹道欢迎。
English: The governor also thought that he was an envoy for the conferment of the title, and stood waiting in the Fengyue Building. Many Japanese people in fancy dress welcomed him.

古文：如松分布诸军，抵平壤城，诸将逡巡未入，形大露，倭悉登陴拒守。
现代文：李如松分派各军，抵达平壤城，各将来回巡逻没有入城，形迹暴露，日本人全部登上城墙拒守。
English: Ri Ryong Song dispatched his armies and arrived at Pyongyang City. Each patrol failed to enter the city, leaving their tracks exposed. The Japanese all boarded the city wall and refused to defend it.

古文：是夜，袭如柏营，击却之。
现代文：这天夜晚，袭击李如柏兵营，被打退了。
English: That night, an attack on Li Rubao's barracks was repulsed.

古文：明旦，如松下令诸军无割首级，攻围缺东面。
现代文：第二天早晨，李如松下令各军不要割首级，攻城时只攻三面而留下东面不围攻。
English: The next morning, Li Rusong ordered the troops not to cut their heads, and only attack three sides when attacking the city, leaving the east side unbesieged.

古文：以倭素易朝鲜军，令副将祖承训诡为其装，潜伏西南。
现代文：因为日本人一向轻视朝鲜军，李如松命令祖承训穿上朝鲜军的伪装，偷偷埋伏在西南。
English: Because the Japanese had always despised the Korean army, Ri Rusong ordered Zu Chengxun to disguise himself as a Korean soldier and secretly ambush them in the southwest.

古文：令游击吴惟忠攻迄北牡丹峰。而如松亲提大军直抵城下，攻其东南。
现代文：命令游击吴惟忠攻打平壤以北的牡丹峰，而李如松率领大军直抵平壤城下，攻打东南面。
English: He ordered the guerrilla Wu Weizhong to attack the Peony Peak north of Pyongyang, while Li Ruzong led a large army straight to the city of Pyongyang and attacked the southeast.

古文：倭炮矢如雨，军少却。
现代文：敌人炮箭犹如雨下，我军稍稍后退。
English: The enemy's cannons and arrows fell like rain, and our army retreated a little.

古文：如松斩先退者以徇。
现代文：李如松杀死退却的士兵来示众。
English: Li Rousong killed a retreating soldier to show off.

古文：募死士，援钩梯直上。
现代文：召募敢死队，攀援钩梯直接上城。
English: Calling up death squads, climbing the ladder directly to the city.

古文：倭方轻南面朝鲜军，承训等乃卸装露明甲。
现代文：日军正在轻视南面的朝鲜军，祖承训等人于是脱去伪装露出明军的铠甲。
English: The Japanese army was belittling the Korean army in the south, so Zu Chengxun and others took off their camouflage to reveal the armor of the Ming army.

古文：倭大惊，急分兵捍拒，如松已督副将杨元等军自小西门先登，如柏等亦从大西门入。
现代文：日军大惊，急忙分兵抵抗，李如松已率领副将杨元等军从小西门先登城，李如柏等人也从大西门进城。
English: The Japanese army was shocked and hastily formed a detachment to resist. Li Ruzong led the vice-commander Yang Yuan and other troops to enter the city first from the Small West Gate, and Li Rubei and others also entered the city from the Big West Gate.

古文：火器并发，烟焰蔽空。
现代文：各种火器一齐放射，火焰蔽空。
English: All kinds of firearms are radiating at the same time, and the flames are covering the sky.

古文：惟忠中炮伤胸，犹奋呼督战。
现代文：吴惟忠中炮胸部受伤，还在高喊着督战。
English: Wu Weizhong was wounded in the chest and was still shouting for battle.

古文：如松马毙于炮，易马驰，堕堑，跃而上，麾兵益进。
现代文：李如松的坐骑被炮击毙，换了匹马冲锋，掉进战壕里，战马一跃而上，李如松挥师猛攻。
English: Li Rousong's mount was killed by a cannon, he changed horses and charged, fell into a trench, his warhorse leapt up, and Li Rousong launched a fierce attack.

古文：将士无不一当百，遂克之。
现代文：将士无不以一当百，于是攻克了平壤。
English: The generals were outnumbered one hundred to one, so they conquered Pyongyang.

古文：获首功千二百有奇。
现代文：斩首一千二百多级。
English: beheaded more than 1,200 times.

古文：倭退保风月楼。
现代文：日军退保风月楼。
English: The Japanese retreating to Fengyue Lou.

古文：夜半，行长渡大同江，遁还龙山。
现代文：半夜，行长渡过大同江，逃回龙山。
English: At midnight, the governor crossed the Datong River and fled back to Longshan.

古文：宁及参将查大受率精卒三千潜伏东江间道，复斩级三百六十。
现代文：李宁和参将查大受率领精兵三千人埋伏在东江小路旁，又斩首三百六十。
English: Li Ning and Sang Zha Da Rong led 3,000 elite soldiers to lie in ambush along the Dongjiang side road, and beheaded 360 people.

古文：乘胜逐北。十九日，如柏遂复开城。所失黄海、平安、京畿、江源四道并复。
现代文：乘胜追击逃敌，十九日，李如柏收复开城，失陷的黄海、平安、京畿、江源四道也一起收复了。
English: Taking advantage of the victory to pursue the fleeing enemy, on the 19th, Li Rubei recovered Kaesong, and the four provinces of the Yellow Sea, Pingan, Gyeonggi, and Jiangyuan that had been lost were also recovered.

古文：酋清正据咸镜，亦遁还王京。
现代文：敌军头目清正据守咸诡，也逃回王京。
English: The leader of the enemy army, Qing Zheng, also fled back to Wangjing.

古文：官军既连胜，有轻敌心。
现代文：官军接连取得胜利，产生了轻敌心理。
English: The government army won victories one after another, giving rise to a mentality of taking the enemy lightly.

古文：二十七日再进师。
现代文：二十七日再进军。
English: March again on the 27th.

古文：朝鲜人以贼弃王京告。
现代文：朝鲜人报告敌人已放弃王京。
English: The North Koreans reported that the enemy had abandoned Wangjing.

古文：如松信之，将轻骑趋碧蹄馆。距王京三十里，猝遇倭，围数重。
现代文：李如松相信了，率领轻骑直奔碧蹄馆，离王京三十里，突然与敌军遭遇，被敌人重重包围。
English: Li Rusong believed it, and led the light cavalry straight to Bijie Pavilion, thirty miles from Wangjing, where he suddenly encountered the enemy army and was surrounded by the enemy.

古文：如松督部下鏖战。
现代文：李如松率部下鏖战。
English: Li Rousong led his subordinates into battle.

古文：一金甲倭搏如松急，指挥李有声殊死救，被杀。
现代文：一个穿着金甲的日本兵飞速扑向李如松，指挥李有声拼死相救，被杀死。
English: A Japanese soldier wearing a golden armor quickly pounced on Li Rousong, and the commander Li Youcong desperately tried to save him and was killed.

古文：如柏、宁等奋前夹击，如梅射金甲倭坠马，杨元兵亦至，斫重围入，倭乃退，官军丧失甚多。
现代文：李如柏、李宁等人奋力上前两边夹击，李如梅一箭将金甲兵射下马来，杨元也领兵到了，冲入重围，敌人才退却，官军死伤惨重。
English: Li Rubei, Li Ning and others fought their way to the front and clamped down on both sides. Li Rumei shot down the golden armored soldiers with an arrow. Yang Yuan also led the soldiers to the front, rushed into the heavy siege, and the enemy only retreated. The government army suffered heavy casualties.

古文：会天久雨，骑入稻畦中不得逞。
现代文：正好赶上阴雨连绵，骑兵陷入稻田发挥不了作用。
English: Just in time for the continuous rain, the cavalry gets stuck in the rice paddies and cannot play a role.

古文：倭背岳山，面汉水，联营城中，广树飞楼，箭炮不绝，官军乃退驻开城。
现代文：日军背靠岳山，面临汉水，在城中连营扎寨，广泛树立飞楼，不停地放箭发炮，官军于是退守开城。
English: The Japanese army backed by Yue Mountain, facing the Han River, encamped in the city, set up a wide fly tower, and kept firing arrows and cannons. The government army then retreated to Kaesong.

古文：二月既望，谍报倭以二十万众入寇。
现代文：二月十五日，间谍报告日军以二十万人来犯。
English: On February 15, spies reported that the Japanese army had arrived with 200,000 men.

古文：如松令元军平壤，扼大同江，接饷道；如柏等军宝山诸处为声援；大受军临津；留宁、承训军开城；而身自东西调度。
现代文：李如松命令杨元驻守平壤，扼守大同江，接通粮食运输线；李如柏等部驻守宝山各处作为声援；祖大受驻守临津；留下李宁、祖承训驻守开城；而李如松亲自从东西两方面调度指挥。
English: Li Rusong ordered Yang Yuan to be stationed in Pyongyang, guard the Datong River, and connect grain transportation lines; Li Rubei and other departments stationed in various parts of Baoshan as solidarity; Zu Da was stationed in Linjin; Li Ning and Zu Chengxun were stationed in Kaesong; and Li Rusong personally dispatched and commanded from the east and west.

古文：闻倭将平秀嘉据龙山仓，积粟数十万，密令大受率死士从间焚之。倭遂乏食。
现代文：听说日军将领平秀嘉据守龙山粮仓，堆积了数十万石粮食，密令祖大受率领敢死队从小路去放火焚烧了粮仓，于是倭人缺乏粮食。
English: It is said that the Japanese general, Taira no Hideyoshi, guarded the Longshan granary and amassed hundreds of thousands of koku of grain. He secretly ordered a death squad, led by Zu Daiju, to set fire to the granary from a side road. As a result, the Wa people were short of grain.

古文：初，官军捷平壤，锋锐甚，不复问封贡事。
现代文：当初，官军平壤告捷，兵锋锐利，不再过问授封纳贡的事情。
English: At first, the government army won a victory in Pyongyang, the soldiers were sharp, and they no longer asked about the awarding of tribute.

古文：及碧蹄败衄，如松气大索，应昌、如松急欲休息，而倭亦刍粮并绝，且惩平壤之败，有归志，于是惟敬款议复行。
现代文：等到兵挫碧蹄，李如松意气大为萧索，宋应昌、李如松很想休兵，而日军也粮草断绝，加上平壤之败记忆犹新，也产生了归国的念头，于是沈惟敬招抚的建议又开始盛行。
English: By the time of the defeat, Ri Rusong's morale was low, Song Yingchang and Ri Rusong wanted to take a leave of absence, and the Japanese army was exhausted. With the memory of the defeat in Pyongyang still fresh, they also had the idea of returning to the country, so Shen Wei Kei's suggestion began to prevail again.

古文：四月十八日，倭弃王京遁，如松与应昌入城，遣兵渡汉江尾倭后，将击其惰归。
现代文：四月十八日，日军放弃王京逃跑，李如松和宋应昌进入王京城，派兵渡汉江尾随敌后，准备攻击掉队的日军。
English: On April 18, the Japanese army abandoned Wangjing and fled. Li Rousong and Song Yingchang entered Wangjing City and sent soldiers across the Han River to follow the enemy and prepare to attack the Japanese army that had fallen behind.

古文：倭步步为营，分番迭休，官军不敢击。
现代文：日军步步为营，轮番休息，官军不敢攻击。
English: The Japanese army marched step by step, taking turns to rest, and the government army did not dare to attack.

古文：倭乃结营釜山，为久留计。
现代文：日军于是在釜山扎营，作为长期留守的打算。
English: The Japanese then encamped in Busan, intending to stay for a long time.

古文：时兵部尚书石星力主封贡，议撤兵，独留刘綎拒守。
现代文：这时兵部尚书石星极力主张授封纳贡、建议撤兵，只派刘彳廷留守。
English: At this time, the Military Department's Shang Shuxi Shi Xing strongly advocated the award of tribute and suggested the withdrawal of troops, and only sent Liu Bingting to stay behind.

古文：如松乃以十二月班师。
现代文：李如松于是在十二月班师回朝。
English: Li Rousong returned to the North in December.

古文：论功，加太子太保，增岁禄百石。
现代文：论功行赏，加封李如松为太子太保，增加每岁俸禄一百石。
English: In terms of reward for meritorious service, Li Rousong was awarded the title of Crown Prince, and his annual salary was increased by one hundred koku.

古文：言者诋其和亲辱国，屡攻击之。帝不问。
现代文：有人诋毁李如松和亲辱国，多次攻击他，皇帝置之不理。
English: Some people slandered Li Rusong and his relatives for insulting the country and attacked him many times, but the emperor ignored them.

古文：二十五年冬，辽东总兵董一元罢，廷推者三，中旨特用如松。
现代文：万历二十五年冬天，辽东总兵董一元被罢免，朝廷三次推举李如松，传旨特别任用李如松。
English: In the winter of the 25th year of Wanli, Liaodong general soldier Dong Yiyuan was dismissed, the imperial court nominated Li Rousong three times, and Li Rousong was specially appointed.

古文：言路复交章力争，帝置不报。
现代文：言官又轮流上疏极力争论，皇帝也置之不理。
English: The courtiers took turns to argue furiously, and the emperor ignored them.

古文：成梁诸子，如松最果敢，有父风，其次称如梅。
现代文：李如松感激皇帝的知遇之恩，更加意气奋发。
English: Li Rusong was grateful for the emperor's kindness, and became even more spirited.

古文：然躁动，非大将才，独杨镐深信。
现代文：第二年四月，土蛮进犯辽东，李如松率领轻骑远行军直捣敌人的老巢，中敌人埋伏力战阵亡。
English: In April of the following year, the barbarians invaded Liaodong, and Li Rousong led the light cavalry to march to the enemy's lair, where he was killed in an ambush.

古文：后复倚任其兄如柏，卒以致败。
现代文：皇帝悲痛地悼念他，命令让他穿好衣帽运回去埋葬，赠封少保、宁远伯，建立祠堂，谥号忠烈。
English: The emperor mourned him with grief and ordered that he be dressed and carried back for burial. He was awarded the titles of Shao Bao and Ningyuan Bo, and a shrine was built in his honor. His posthumous name was Zhong Lie.

古文：麻贵，大同右卫人。
现代文：麻贵，山西大同右卫人。
English: Magui, the right guard of Shanxi University.

古文：父禄，嘉靖中为大同参将，从镇帅刘汉袭板升，大获。
现代文：父亲麻禄，嘉靖年间担任大同参将，跟着镇帅刘汉袭击塞外敌人居屋，大获全胜。
English: His father, Maru, served as a general of the Great Patriotic War during the Jiajing era, and followed the commander Liu Han to attack the foreign enemy's house, and won a great victory.

古文：俺答围右卫，禄与副将尚表固守，乘间击斩其部长，寇乃引退。
现代文：俺答包围右卫，麻禄与副将尚表固守，乘间隙杀死了敌人的部长，敌人这才撤退。
English: We responded by encircling the right guard, while Maru and his second-in-command remained steadfast, taking advantage of the gap to kill the enemy's minister. Only then did the enemy retreat.

古文：辛爱犯京东，禄以宣府副总兵入卫，与子游击锦并有却敌功。
现代文：辛爱进犯京城东境，麻禄以宣府副总兵的身份入京护卫，和儿子游击官麻锦一起立下了退敌的战功。
English: Sin Ai attacked the eastern border of the capital, and Maru went to the capital as an escort in the capacity of vice-commander-in-chief of the Imperial General Staff, and together with his son, the guerrilla officer Makin, achieved the feat of defeating the enemy.

古文：贵由舍人从军，积功至都指挥佥事，充宣府游击将军。
现代文：麻贵由舍人从军，积累战功至都指挥佥事，充任宣府游击将军。
English: Magui served in the army with his subordinates, amassed military exploits, commanded everywhere, and served as the guerrilla general of Xuanwu.

古文：隆庆中，迁大同新平堡参将。寇大入，掠山阴、怀仁、应州。
现代文：隆庆年间，提升为大同新平堡参将，敌人大举进犯，掠夺山阴、怀仁、应州。
English: During the Longqing period, he was promoted to the general of Datong Xinping Fortress, and the enemy made a large-scale attack, plundering Shanyin, Huairen and Yingzhou.

古文：将吏并获罪，独贵与兄副将锦拒战有功，受赏。
现代文：地方将官多由此获罪，唯独麻贵和兄长副将麻锦拒敌有功，受到奖赏。
English: Most of the local generals were punished for this, but only Maki and his elder brother, Vice Admiral Maki, were rewarded for their service against the enemy.

古文：万历初，再迁大同副总兵。
现代文：万历初年，再提升为大同副总兵。
English: In the first year of Wanli, he was promoted to Datong deputy general.

古文：十年冬，以都督佥事充宁夏总兵官。
现代文：万历十年冬天，以都督佥事的身份充任宁夏总兵官。
English: In the winter of the tenth year of Wanli, he was appointed as the general officer of Ningxia in the capacity of the governor.

古文：无何，徙镇大同。
现代文：没有多久，将司令部迁往大同镇守。
English: It didn't take long to move the headquarters to Datong Town.

古文：时诸部纳款久，撦力克袭封顺义王，奉中国益虔。
现代文：这时各部朝贡求和为时日久，奢力克世袭封为顺义王，事奉中国更加虔诚。
English: At this time, it took a long time for the various parts of the court to pay tribute to the emperor, and they were more pious in their service to China.

古文：贵频以安边劳蒙赐赉。
现代文：麻贵经常因安抚边境有功劳而蒙受赏赐。
English: Magee was often rewarded for his efforts to pacify the frontier.

古文：十九年，为阅视少卿曾乾亨所劾，谪戍边。
现代文：万历十九年，被阅视少卿曾乾亨弹劾，贬职发配边地。
English: In the 19th year of Wanli, Zeng Qianheng was impeached, demoted and demoted.

古文：明年，宁夏哱拜反。
现代文：第二年，宁夏継拜反叛。
English: The following year, Ningxia followed suit and rebelled.

古文：廷议贵健将知兵，且多畜家丁，乃起戍中为副将，总兵讨贼。
现代文：廷议麻贵是一名健将，善于用兵，而且供养了很多的家丁，于是起用为防地副将，统帅部队讨伐敌人。
English: Ting Zi Magui was a strong general, good at using soldiers, and provided a lot of family members, so he was appointed as the vice-general of defense and the commander of the troops to fight the enemy.

古文：屡攻城不克。
现代文：多次攻城都无法取胜。
English: Repeated assaults on the city have failed to bring victory.

古文：其五月，哱拜以套寇五百骑围平虏堡，贵选精卒三百间道驰却之。
现代文：这一年五月，継拜用五百名河套骑兵围攻平虏堡，麻贵挑选精锐士兵三百人从小路急行军打退了敌人。
English: In May of that year, Suibai besieged Pingrubo Castle with five hundred horsemen from Hetao, and Magui selected three hundred elite soldiers to beat back the enemy with a rapid march from a small road.

古文：俄以总督魏学曾命抚著力兔、银定、宰僧于横城，啖以重利，皆不应，贵乃还攻城。
现代文：不久以总督魏学曾的命令在横城招抚著力兔、银定、宰僧。许给他们重利，他们都不答应，麻贵于是回兵攻城。
English: Soon, by order of the governor Wei Xuecheng, he invited Dang Liguo, Yin Ding, and Zai Zang in Hengcheng. He promised them heavy profits, but they did not agree, so Magui returned to attack the city.

古文：宁夏总兵董一奎攻其南，固原总兵李昫攻其西，故总兵刘承嗣攻其北，牛秉忠攻其东，贵以游兵主策应。
现代文：宁夏总兵董一奎攻城南，固原总兵李日句攻城西，原总兵刘承嗣攻城北，牛秉忠攻城东，麻贵率游兵负责策应。
English: Ningxia general Dong Yikkui attacked the south of the city, Guyuan general Li Nikku attacked the west of the city, former general Liu Chengzhi attacked the north of the city, Niu Bingzhong attacked the east of the city, and Ma Gui led the guerrillas responsible for the response.

古文：哱拜自北门出战，将往勾套部，贵逐之入城，别遣将马孔英、麻承诏等击套寇援兵，俘斩百二十人。
现代文：継拜从北门出战，准备前往勾结河套部，麻贵将他赶入城内，另派部将马孔英、麻承诏等人攻打河套的增援部队，俘杀一百二十人。
English: He left for the battle from the north gate, preparing to go to collude with the Hetao unit, and Magui drove him into the city. In addition, he sent Ma Kongying, Ma Chengzhao and others to attack the reinforcement force of Hetao, and captured one hundred and twenty people.

古文：拜初与套部深相结，诸部长称之为王。
现代文：継拜当初与河套部极力勾结，各部长都称継拜为王。
English: At first, Tsugubei tried his best to collude with Hetaibu, and all the ministers called Tsugubei the king.

古文：日坐著力兔帐中，主筹画，至是不敢复出。
现代文：每天坐在著力兔的帐中，负责筹划，到这时已不敢再出来了。
English: Every day I sat in the middle of the pack, responsible for planning, and by this time I didn't dare to come out again.

古文：俄朝命萧如薰代董一奎，尽将诸道援兵，以贵为副。
现代文：不久朝廷任命萧如薰代替董一奎，统领各路援兵，任命麻贵为副手。
English: Soon after, the imperial court appointed Xiao Ruxuan to replace Dong Yikui, to lead the reinforcements, and appointed Ma Gui as his deputy.

古文：而李如松军亦至，攻益急。
现代文：而李如松部也到达了，攻打更加激烈。
English: But Li Ru Songbu also arrived, and the attack was more intense.

古文：贼奉黄金、绣蟒于卜失兔等，请急徇灵州，先据下马关，沮饷道。
现代文：敌人拿黄金、绣蟒给卜失兔等人，请求他们赶快派兵巡行灵州，先占据下马关，阻塞粮道。
English: The enemy gave gold and embroidered cocoons to Bu Kuo and others, asking them to quickly send troops to patrol Lingzhou, first occupy the lower horse pass, and block the grain route.

古文：卜失兔与庄秃赖果合兵犯定边，而宰僧从花马池西沙湃入。
现代文：卜失兔和庄秃赖果然联兵进犯定边，而宰僧从花马池以西的沙湃进入。
English: Buttu and Zhuang Bailai marched together to set up a perimeter, and the slaughtering monk entered from the sand to the west of the flower pond.

古文：贵迎击，挫宰僧于石沟。
现代文：麻贵迎击，在石沟挫败宰僧。
English: Mage faces the attack and defeats the slaughtering monk in the stone ditch.

古文：会董一元捣土昧巢，诸部长俱解去。
现代文：恰好董一元捣毁土蛮老巢，各部长都解兵离去。
English: It just so happened that Dong Yi Yuan destroyed the old nest of the barbarians, and all the ministers disbanded and left.

古文：贼复乞援于著力兔，拥众大入。
现代文：敌人又向著力兔乞求救援，著力兔率部大举进犯。
English: The enemy again begged for help from the rabbit, and the rabbit led a large-scale attack.

古文：如松率劲骑迎战张亮堡，自卯迄巳，敌锐甚。
现代文：李如松率精锐骑兵在张亮堡迎战，从卯时到巳时，敌人十分锐利。
English: Li Ruzong led the elite cavalry to fight at Zhangliang Fort. From dusk to dawn, the enemy was very sharp.

古文：会贵及李如樟等兵至，夹击之，寇乃却。
现代文：正好麻贵及李如樟等部赶到，两边夹击，敌人才退却。
English: Just as Magui and Li Rugao arrived, the two sides clashed, and the enemy retreated.

古文：逐北至贺兰山，获首级百二十余。
现代文：追击败敌直到贺兰山，斩获首级一百二十余。
English: He chased and defeated the enemy all the way to Helan Mountain, gaining more than 120 first-class points.

古文：持示贼，贼益汹惧。
现代文：拿这些首级向敌人示众，敌人更加恐惧不安。
English: Take these heads and show them to the enemy, and the enemy will be even more afraid.

古文：无何城破，贼尽平。
现代文：不久城破，叛贼全部被平定。
English: Soon the city was breached and the rebels were all subdued.

古文：贵以功增秩，子予。
现代文：麻贵因战功增加官阶，给予荫封。
English: Because of his war service, Magui was given a higher official rank and a higher title.

古文：寻擢总兵官，镇守延绥。
现代文：不久提拔为总兵官，镇守延绥。
English: He was soon promoted to the rank of general and became the town guard of Yancheng.

古文：二十二年七月，卜失兔纠诸部深入定边，营张春井。
现代文：万历二十二年七月，卜失兔纠集各部深入到定边，在张春井扎营。
English: In July of the 22nd year of Wanli, Bu Luoxin gathered all the departments deep into Dingbian and set up camp in Zhang Chunjing.

古文：贵乘虚捣其帐于套中，斩首二百五十有奇。
现代文：麻贵乘敌人内部空虚，直捣河套敌人营帐。斩首二百五十多级。
English: Magui took advantage of the enemy's internal emptiness and went straight to the enemy's camp. He beheaded more than 250 people.

古文：还自宁塞，复邀其零骑。
现代文：麻贵从宁塞回兵，又迎击敌人的零散骑兵。
English: Magui returned from Ningsai and met the enemy's scattered cavalry.

古文：会寇留内地久，转掠至下马关。
现代文：适逢敌人久留内地，辗转掠夺直到下马关。
English: At the right time, the enemy stayed inland for a long time, looting and pillaging until they left Maguan.

古文：宁夏总兵萧如薰不能御，总督叶梦熊急檄贵赴援。
现代文：宁夏总兵萧如薰抵挡不住，总督叶梦熊火速传令麻贵前往增援。
English: Xiao Ruxuan, the commander-in-chief of Ningxia, could not resist, and Governor Ye Mengxiong quickly ordered Magui to go for reinforcement.

古文：督副将萧如兰等连战晒马台、薛家洼，斩首二百三十有奇，获畜产万五千。
现代文：麻贵率副将萧如兰等人连战日丽马台、薛家洼，斩首二百三十多级，缴获牲畜物产一万五千。
English: Mage Gui led Vice-General Xiao Rulan and others to attack Limatai and Xuejiahua on the second day of the war, beheading more than 230 people and seizing 15,000 livestock and goods.

古文：帝为告庙宣捷，进署都督同知，予世荫。
现代文：皇帝为此祭告祖庙宣扬大捷，提升麻贵署都督同知，给予世代荫封。
English: To this end, the emperor told the ancestral temple to promote the great victory, promoted the maguire department to the same level as the governor, and gave the generational shadow seal.

古文：明年，卜失兔复入塞，掠八日而还。
现代文：第二年，卜失兔又犯边塞，抢掠了八天后才回兵。
English: The following year, Bu Luoxin again violated the border, looting and pillaging for eight days before returning to the army.

古文：顺义王撦力克约之纳款，不从，复拟大入。
现代文：顺义王奢力克与他相约求和，卜失兔不听，又准备大举入边。
English: Shunyi Wang Shuxialik made an appointment with him to seek peace, but he did not listen, and he was ready to intervene.

古文：贵勒兵万五千人：游击阎逢时等出红山为中军，参将师以律等出高家堡、神木、孤山为左军，参将孙朝梁等出定边、安边、平山为右军，而自以大军当一面。
现代文：麻贵统兵一万五千人，游击阎逢时等出红山为中军，参将师以律等出高家堡、神木、孤山为左军，参将孙朝梁等出定边、安边、平山为右军，而自己率领大军独当一面。
English: Ma Gui led an army of fifteen thousand soldiers. When the guerrilla war broke out, he led the Red Mountain as the central army, the general officers Yi Li and Gao Jiabao, Shenmu and Lone Mountain as the left army, and the general officers Sun Chaoliang and Dingbian, Anbian and Hirayama as the right army, and he led the large army alone.

古文：衔枚疾趋，逾塞六十里。
现代文：衔杖急进，出塞六十里。
English: The cane rushes in, the plug is sixty miles away.

古文：寇莫知所防，大溃。
现代文：敌人不知道防范，大败。
English: If the enemy does not know how to take precautions, it will be a big defeat.

古文：俘斩四百有奇，获马驼牛羊千五百。
现代文：俘虏四百多人，缴获马驼牛羊一千五百头。
English: More than 400 people were taken prisoner, and 1,500 horses, camels, cattle and sheep were captured.

古文：再进秩，予荫。
现代文：再次提升官阶，给予荫封。
English: He was once again promoted to a higher rank and given a shinpu.

古文：寻以病归。
现代文：不久因病回家。
English: He soon returned home due to illness.

古文：二十五年，日本封事败，起贵备倭总兵官，赴朝鲜。
现代文：万历二十五年，日本受封失败，起用麻贵为备倭总兵官，奔赴朝鲜。
English: In the 25th year of Wanli, Japan failed to receive the imperial title, appointed Magui as the chief military officer of Japan, and rushed to Korea.

古文：已，加提督，尽统南北诸军。
现代文：不久，加封为提督，统领南北各军。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to admiral and took command of all the armies in the north and south.

古文：贵驰至王京，倭已入庆州，据闲山岛，围南原。
现代文：麻贵快马赶到王京，倭寇已经进入庆州，占据闲山岛，包围南原。
English: The Magui horses have arrived in Wangjing, and the wako have entered Gyeongju, occupied Idle Mountain Island, and encircled Nanwon.

古文：守将杨元遁，全州守将陈愚衷亦遁，倭乘势逼王京。
现代文：守将杨元逃跑，全州守将陈愚衷也逃跑了，倭寇乘机直逼王京。
English: Yang Yuan, the garrison commander, fled, and Chen Gucheng, the garrison commander of the whole state, also fled. The wokou took the opportunity to directly attack Wangjing.

古文：贵别遣副将解生守稷山，朝鲜亦令都体察使李元翼出忠清道遮贼锋。
现代文：麻贵另外派遣副将解生守稷山，朝鲜也命令都体察使李元翼出忠清道拦击敌前锋。
English: In addition, Magui dispatched Vice Admiral Jie Sheng to guard Lushan. North Korea also ordered Du Jie to send Li Yuanyi out of Zhongqing Road to intercept the enemy forwards.

古文：生颇有斩获功，参将彭友德亦破贼青山。
现代文：解生颇有斩获的功劳，参将彭友德也在青山击破敌人。
English: Shen Sheng had quite a lot of achievements, and the general Peng Youde also defeated the enemy in Aoyama.

古文：倭将行长退屯井邑，清正还庆州。
现代文：倭寇将领行长退守井邑，清正还兵庆州。
English: The wokou generals led by the governor retreated to Jing-eup, and Qing Zheng returned to Jingqing Prefecture.

古文：经略邢玠、经理杨镐先后至，分兵三协：左李如梅，右李芳春、解生，中高策。
现代文：经略邢、经理杨镐后到，分兵三协：左边为李如梅，右边为李芳春、解生，中间为高策。
English: After a slight delay, manager Yang Zhen arrived, and the detachment of the Three Associations: on the left was Li Rumei, on the right was Li Fangchun and Ge Sheng, and in the middle was Gao Zhe.

古文：贵与镐督左右协兵专攻清正。
现代文：麻贵与杨镐率左右二协兵力专门攻打清正。
English: Magui and Yang Hui led the left and right forces of the Second CPPCC to attack Qingzheng.

古文：策驻宜宁，东援两协，西扼行长。
现代文：高策驻守宜宁，向东援助两协，向西扼制行长。
English: Gao Zhe stationed in Yining, to the east to assist the two associations, to the west to restrain the president.

古文：诸军至庆州，倭悉退屯蔚山，如梅诱败之。
现代文：各军到庆州，倭寇全都退守蔚山，李如梅引诱敌人深入并将他们击败。
English: All the armies went to Gyeongju, the wako all retreated to Ulsan, and Ri Rumei lured the enemy deep into the mountains and defeated them.

古文：清正退保岛山，筑三砦自固。
现代文：清正退保岛山，筑三砦自守。
English: Qing Zheng retreated to Mount Baojima and built three forts to defend himself.

古文：游击茅国器率死士拔其砦，斩馘六百五十，诸军遂进围其城。
现代文：游击茅国器率敢死队拔取敌砦，斩首六百五十级，各军于是进围岛山城。
English: The guerrilla Mao Guoqi led the death squads to take the enemy fort, beheaded six hundred and fifty, and the armies then entered the besieged island mountain city.

古文：城新筑以石，坚甚，将士仰攻多死。
现代文：岛山城刚用石筑成，很坚固，将士仰攻死亡很大。
English: Shimayama Castle was just built with stone, it is very strong, and it is very difficult for soldiers to die.

古文：围十日，倭袭败生兵。
现代文：包围了十天，倭寇突然袭击并击败解生部。
English: After ten days of encirclement, the wako suddenly attacked and defeated the relief division.

古文：明年正月二日，行长来援，九将兵俱溃。
现代文：第二年正月二日，行长来增援，明朝九将之兵都被击溃。
English: On the second day of the first month of the second year, the governor came to reinforce, and the soldiers of the Ming Dynasty and the Nine Generals were all defeated.

古文：贼张旗帜江上，镐大惧，仓皇撤师，以捷奏。
现代文：敌人在江上树立旗帜，杨镐非常害怕，仓惶撤军，却向朝廷报捷。
English: The enemy set up a flag on the river. Yang Xuan was very scared and withdrew in a panic, but reported his success to the imperial court.

古文：既而败状闻，帝罢镐，责贵以功赎。
现代文：不久失败的情形传来，皇帝罢免杨镐，责令麻贵立功赎罪。
English: Soon after, news of the defeat came, and the emperor dismissed Yang Xuan and ordered Ma Gui to make meritorious deeds to atone for his sins.

古文：与刘綎、陈璘、董一元分四路。
现代文：麻贵与刘纟廷、陈瞞、董一元分兵四路。
English: Magui and Liu Bingding, Chen Zhe, and Dong Yiyuan split into four groups.

古文：贵居东，当清正，数战有功。
现代文：麻贵居东，抵挡清正，多次战斗，都有战功。
English: Mage Gui lived in the east, resisted Qing Zheng, fought many times, and had war exploits.

古文：会平秀吉死，官军益力攻。
现代文：正好平秀吉死，官军更加努力进攻。
English: Just as TAIRA no Hideyoshi died, the government army attacked even harder.

古文：十一月，清正先遁，贵遂入岛山、西浦，诸路共俘斩二千二百有奇。
现代文：十一月，清正先逃跑，麻贵于是进入岛山、西浦各路，共俘毙二千二百多人。
English: In November, Qing Zheng fled first, and Magui then entered the streets of Shima-shan and Xipur, capturing and killing more than 2,200 people in total.

古文：明年三月，旋师。进右都督，予世荫。
现代文：第二年二月，率师凯旋，提升右都督，给予世代荫封。
English: In February of the following year, he led his division in a triumphant return, was promoted to right-hand governor, and was given the generational shinpaku.

古文：三十八年，命贵镇辽东。
现代文：万历三十八年命麻贵镇守辽东。
English: In the 38th year of his life, Magui became the town guard of Liaodong.

古文：泰宁炒花素桀骜，九子各将兵，他部宰赛、暖兔又助之。
现代文：泰宁炒花一向桀骜不驯，九个儿子各自都带有部队，其他部宰赛、暖兔又帮助他。
English: Taining Fried Flowers has always been unruly, and each of his nine sons has his own troops. Other departments, such as Zaisei and Wenzhuang, also help him.

古文：边将畏战，但以增岁赏为事，寇益无所忌。
现代文：边将害怕打仗，只是用增加岁赏银安抚他们，贼寇更加无所顾忌。
English: The generals are afraid to fight, but appease them by increasing the reward money, and the thieves and robbers are even more reckless.

古文：明年，临边要赏，将士出不意击之，拔营遁，徙额力素居焉。
现代文：第二年，贼寇到边防要赏银，将士出其不意地袭击他们，贼寇拔营逃跑，迁往额力素定居。
English: In the second year, the bandits went to the border guard to be rewarded with silver. The soldiers attacked them unexpectedly, and the bandits fled the camp and moved to settle in Fulishu.

古文：其地忽天鸣地震，炒花惊惧，再徙渡老河，去边几四百里，其第三子色特哂之，南移可可毋林，伺隙入犯。
现代文：这地方忽然打雷地震，炒花惊恐不已，又迁渡老河，离边防几乎有四百里，炒花的第三个儿子色特讥笑他，并南移可可毋林，伺机进犯内地。
English: This place was suddenly hit by a thunderous earthquake, and the Fried Flowers were terrified. They moved to Laohu, almost four hundred miles away from the border. The third son of the Fried Flowers, Shite, mocked him, and moved south to the cocoa forest, waiting to invade the mainland.

古文：贵伏兵败之，追北至白云山，斩馘三百四十有奇。
现代文：麻贵设伏兵打败他，追击逃敌直至白云山，斩首三百四十多人。
English: Magui set an ambush to defeat him and chased the fleeing enemy all the way to Mount Baiyun, beheading more than 340 people.

古文：色特愤，谋复仇。纠宰赛、以儿邓，皆不应。
现代文：色特很气愤，阴谋复仇，纠集宰赛、以儿邓，都不答应他。
English: Sert was very angry, plotted revenge, and entangled Zaisei and Yiren Deng, but they did not agree to him.

古文：乃东纠卜言顾、伯要儿，西纠哈剌汉乃蛮，合犯清河，皆溃。
现代文：色特于是东面纠集卜言顾伯要儿，西面纠集哈剌汉乃蛮，联兵进犯清河，都被打得大败。
English: As a result, the eastern faction of the Sui and Tang forces gathered around Buyan Gu, the western faction gathered around Harbin Han, and the allied forces attacked Qinghe. They were all soundly defeated.

古文：以儿邓等惧，代炒花求款，边境乃宁。
现代文：以儿邓等人害怕了，代表炒花求和，边境由此得以安宁。
English: Yier Deng and others were afraid, and the representatives of the fried flowers sued for peace, and the border was thus pacified.

古文：明年，插汉虎墩兔以三万骑入掠穆家堡。
现代文：次年，插汉虎墩兔率三万骑兵进入穆家堡抢掠。
English: The following year, 30,000 cavalrymen entered Mujia Castle to loot it.

古文：御之，败去。
现代文：麻贵打败了他们。
English: Magee defeated them.

古文：其夏，贵引病乞罢，诏乘传归。
现代文：这年夏天，麻贵称病乞求辞职，皇帝下诏让他乘驿车回家。
English: In the summer of that year, Magui claimed to be ill and begged to resign. The emperor ordered him to take a carriage home.

古文：贵果毅骁捷，善用兵，东西并著功伐。
现代文：麻贵刚毅矫健、灵活，善于用兵，在东西两边都立下战功。
English: Magui Gongyi is vigorous, flexible, good at using soldiers, and has made great achievements in both the East and the West.

古文：先后承特赐者七，锡世荫者六。
现代文：先后得到七次特别赏赐，六次赐给他世代荫封。
English: He has received seven special awards in succession, and six times he has been given the generational shadow seal.

古文：及殁，予祭葬。
现代文：等麻贵死后，给予他祭葬。
English: After Magui's death, he was given a ceremonial funeral.

古文：麻氏多将才。
现代文：麻氏多将才。
English: Mr. Aso is more than a general.

古文：人以方铁岭李氏，曰 东李西麻 。
现代文：人们将麻氏比拟铁岭李氏，称为 东李西麻 。
English: People compare Mr. Ma to Mr. Li of Tieling and call him East Li and West Ma.

