古文：韩重公孙达鲜于冀卢充谈生陈蕃刘照张汉植范丹费季周式陈阿登
现代文：韩重公孙达鲜于冀卢充谈生陈蕃刘照张汉植范丹费季周式陈阿登
English: Han Chonggong, Sun Dacun, who was born in Jilu, was a talkative student, Chen Yao, Liu Zhao, Zhang Han, Fan Dan, Fei Ji, Zhou Shi, Chen Aden

古文：韩重
现代文：韩重
English: Han Chung

古文：吴王夫差，小女曰玉，年十八。
现代文：吴王夫差有个小女儿叫玉，十八岁。
English: Wu Wangfusha has a little daughter named Jade, 18 years old.

古文：童子韩重，年十九。
现代文：韩重是个十九岁的英俊少年，吴玉很喜欢他。
English: Han Chong is a handsome nineteen-year-old boy, and Wu Yu likes him very much.

古文：玉悦之，私交信问，许为之妻。
现代文：两个人瞒着父母先是互通书信后来就私订终身。
English: The two of them first exchanged letters without telling their parents, and then made a lifelong private appointment.

古文：重学于齐鲁之间，属其父母使求婚。
现代文：韩重到齐鲁读书，就请自己的父母到吴王那里去求婚。
English: When Han Chong went to study in Qilu, he invited his parents to go to King Wu to propose marriage.

古文：王怒不与。玉结气死，葬阊门外。
现代文：吴王一听大怒，不同意这婚事，玉心气郁结而死，埋在了皇宫南门外。
English: Upon hearing this, King Wu flew into a rage and did not agree to the marriage. Jade Heart died of depression and was buried outside the south gate of the imperial palace.

古文：三年重归，问其父母，父母曰：王大怒，玉结气死，已葬矣。
现代文：三年后韩重回来，问父母，父母说，去求婚吴王大怒不许，玉中气郁结而死，已经埋葬了。
English: Three years later, Han Chou returned and asked his parents. His parents said that Wu Wang was not allowed to propose marriage. Yu Zhong died of depression and was buried.

古文：重哭泣哀恸，具牲币往吊。
现代文：韩重一听痛哭失声，带着纸钱祭品到玉墓前祭吊。
English: Han Chung lost his voice in tears and took paper money offerings to the front of the jade tomb.

古文：玉从墓侧表形见，谓重曰：昔尔行之后，令二亲从王相求，谓必克从大愿。
现代文：玉从墓侧现形，对韩重说，当初你走之后，让你的父母来议婚，我原来想一定会实现咱们美好的心愿。
English: Jade appeared from the side of the grave and said to Han Chung, "At first, after you left, I wanted your parents to come and propose marriage. I thought we would definitely realize our beautiful wish.

古文：不图别后，遭命奈何。玉左顾宛颈而歌曰，南山有乌，北山张罗。
现代文：没想到却遭到如此悲惨的下场啊！说罢，悲痛地唱道：南山有鸟，北山张罗。
English: I didn't expect to meet such a tragic end! Say it aloud, sing it with sorrow: There are birds on the south mountain, and there is chaos on the north mountain.

古文：志欲从君，谗言孔多。
现代文：志欲从君，谗言孔多。
English: Aspiration comes from you, criticism from Kondo.

古文：悲结生疾，没命黄垆。
现代文：悲结生疾。没命黄垆。
English: Tragedy leads to disease. Death leads to jaundice.

古文：命之不造，冤如之何？
现代文：命之不造，冤如之何？
English: If you don't make a living, what's the point?

古文：羽族之长，名为凤凰。
现代文：羽族之长，名为凤凰。
English: The head of the feather clan is called the phoenix.

古文：一日失雄，三年感伤。
现代文：一日失雄，三年感伤。
English: One day of loss, three years of sadness.

古文：虽有众鸟，不为匹双。
现代文：虽有众鸟，不为匹双。
English: Though there are many birds, they are no match.

古文：故见鄙姿，逢君辉光。
现代文：故见鄙姿，逢君辉光。
English: When you are despised, you shine.

古文：身远心近，何尝暂忘。
现代文：身远心近，何尝暂忘！
English: Keep your heart close, but don't forget it!

古文：歌毕。歔欷泣流，不能自胜。
现代文：唱完后，涕泪交流哭得控制不住自己，并要求韩重和她一起回到墓中去。
English: After the song, Han Chung cried uncontrollably and asked Han Chung to go back to the grave with her.

古文：要重还冢，重曰：死生异道，惧有尤俧，不敢承命。
现代文：韩重说，阴阳两界不能相通，怕后果更惨。不敢随玉去。
English: Han Chung said that the two worlds of yin and yang cannot be connected, fearing that the consequences would be even worse. He did not dare to follow the ball.

古文：玉曰：死生异路，吾亦知之。
现代文：玉说，死生异路我也知道，可是我们今天分别后，就再也见不到了。
English: Jade said, "I also know about the crossroads of life and death, but after we part today, I will never see you again."

古文：然一别永无后期，子将畏我为鬼而祸子乎？
现代文：你是不是怕我是鬼会伤害你？没想到我对你一片赤诚，却得不到你的信任。
English: Are you afraid that I'm a ghost and will hurt you? I didn't expect to be so sincere with you, but I can't get your trust.

古文：欲诚所奉。
现代文：韩重被她的真情感动，就和玉一起走进墓中。
English: Han Chung, moved by her true feelings, walks into the grave with Jade.

古文：宁不相信？
现代文：玉和韩重宴饮欢聚了三天三夜，像夫妻一样。
English: Jade and Han feasted for three days and three nights, like a married couple.

古文：愿郎自爱，若至吾家，致敬大王。重既出，遂诣王自说其事，王大怒曰：吾女既死，而重造讹言，以玷秽亡灵。
现代文：韩重临走时，玉拿出一个直径有一寸大的明珠相赠，并说，我现在一切都被毁了，也没有和你生聚的可能，还有什么可说的呢，唯愿你多多珍重吧。如果能到我家去，就把这个明珠给我父王看看。韩重回来后，去见吴王，说出了他和玉相见的经过。吴王一听大怒说，我女儿已经死，你编这套谎话来骗我，玷污了我女儿的亡灵。
English: When Han Chung was about to leave, Jade took out a pearl with a diameter of one inch and presented it to him. She said, "Now that everything has been destroyed and there is no possibility of getting together with you, what else can I say? I wish you would treasure it. If you can go to my home, show this pearl to my father, the king." After Han Chung returned, he went to see King Wu and told him the story of how he and Jade met. King Wu was furious and said, "My daughter is dead. You made up all these lies to deceive me and defiled my daughter's soul."

古文：此不过发冢取物，托以鬼神。
现代文：这明珠只不过是你盗墓得来的，假托什么鬼神？
English: This pearl is just something you got by robbing a grave. What ghosts and gods are behind it?

古文：欲收重，重脱走，至玉墓所诉玉。
现代文：说着就要把韩重抓起来，韩重赶快逃掉了，又到玉的墓前诉说这事。
English: While talking, Han Chung was about to be arrested. Han Chung quickly escaped and went to Jade's grave to report the matter.

古文：玉曰：无忧，今归白王。
现代文：玉说，你别愁，我这就直接去告诉父王。
English: Jade said, "Don't worry, I'll go and tell my father directly."

古文：玉妆梳忽见，王惊愕悲喜，问曰：尔何缘生。
现代文：玉梳妆得整整齐齐，忽然在吴王面前现形，吴王十分惊异，悲喜交加地问，女儿是怎么死而复活的？
English: Jade combed neatly, suddenly appeared in front of the king of Wu, the king of Wu was very surprised and asked with mixed feelings, how did his daughter die and come back to life?

古文：玉跪而言曰：昔诸生韩重来求玉，大王不许。今名毁义绝，自致身亡。
现代文：玉跪下说，从前书生韩重来求婚，父王不许，如今我名各俱毁，已经死了。
English: Jade knelt down and said, "Once upon a time, a student named Han Chong came to ask for my hand in marriage, but my father did not allow it. Now my name is ruined and I am dead."

古文：重从远还，闻玉已死，故赍牲币，诣冢吊唁。
现代文：韩重从远方归来，听说女儿已死，带着祭品到我的坟上祭吊。
English: Han Chung returned from far away, heard that his daughter had died, and brought offerings to my grave.

古文：感其笃终，辄与相见。因以珠遗之，不为发冢，愿勿推治。
现代文：女儿感激他的真情，就和他相见，并把明珠赠给他，这不是他盗墓所得，请父王不要惩治他吧。
English: The daughter, grateful for his sincerity, met him and gave him the pearl. This was not the result of his grave robbery. Please, Father, don't punish him.

古文：夫人闻之，出而抱之，正如烟然。
现代文：这时吴王夫人听见了跑出来一把抱住女儿，然而玉却像一股青烟般消失了。
English: At this time, Mrs. Wu Wang heard and ran out to embrace her daughter, but Jade disappeared like a puff of blue smoke.

古文：公孙达
现代文：公孙达
English: Gongsun Da

古文：任城公孙达，甘露中，陈郡卒官，将敛，儿及郡吏数十人临丧。
现代文：任城的公孙达在甘露年间死在陈郡的任上。将要入敛时，他的几个儿子和郡里的官员参加葬礼。
English: Rencheng's great-grandson, Da, died in office in Chen County in the Neolithic period, and several of his sons and county officials attended the funeral when he was about to be enthroned.

古文：达五岁儿，忽作灵语，音声如父，呵众人哭止。因呼诸子，以次教诫。
现代文：公孙达有个五岁的儿子忽然用公孙达的声音说起话来，先是命儿子们不要再哭，然后对儿子们一个个进行教导嘱咐。
English: Gongsunda's five-year-old son suddenly began to speak in Gongsunda's voice, first ordering his sons not to cry, and then instructing his sons one by one.

古文：儿等悲哀不能自胜，及慰勉之曰：四时之运，犹有始终。
现代文：几个儿子都悲伤得不能控制自己，公孙达就安慰勉励说，一年四季的运行还有始有终。
English: Several sons were so sad that they could not control themselves. Gongsunda consoled and encouraged them, saying that the four seasons of the year still had a beginning and an end.

古文：人修短殊，谁不致此？
现代文：人不论是寿长寿短谁能不死？
English: Whether a person is long-lived or short-lived, who can not die?

古文：语千余言，皆合文章。
现代文：说了上千字的话，记下来都是文章。
English: If you say a thousand words, it's an article when you write it down.

古文：儿又问曰：人亡皆无所知，唯大人聪明殊特，有神灵耶？
现代文：儿子们又问。人死后都没有知道，是不是因为父亲你特殊聪明，才有神灵呢？
English: The sons also asked, "When people die, they don't know, is it because your father was particularly clever that there is a god?"

古文：答曰：鬼神之事，非尔所知也。
现代文：回答说，鬼神的事，不该你们知道。
English: And he said unto them, It is not for you to know the things of the spirit.

古文：因索纸笔作书，辞义满纸，投地遂绝。
现代文：说罢就要了纸笔写起来，写了满满一张纸，然后才扑在地上断了气。
English: As soon as I said it, I started to write with a pen and paper, wrote a full sheet of paper, and then I threw myself on the ground and passed out.

古文：鲜于冀
现代文：鲜于冀
English: Rare in Ji Province

古文：后汉建武二年，西河鲜于冀为清河太守，作公廨。未就而亡。
现代文：后汉建武二年，西河的鲜于冀就任清河太守，上任后修造公事房舍，没盖完就死了。
English: Two years after the founding of the Han Dynasty, Xihe's Sheng Yu Ji took office as the governor of Qinghe. After taking office, he repaired public buildings, but died before they were completed.

古文：后守赵高，计功用二百万，王官黄秉、功曹刘适言四百万钱。
现代文：继任的太守赵高向上面呈报说鲜于冀办这工程费用是二百万，王官黄秉、功曹刘适则说化了四百万。
English: The succeeding governor Zhao Gao reported above that the cost of this project was 2 million yuan, while the royal officials Huang Bing and Gong Cao Liu Shi said that it was 4 million yuan.

古文：冀乃鬼见，白日导从入府。与高及秉等，对共计校，定为适秉所割匿。
现代文：鲜于冀就突然现形，大白天的带着人进了太守府，和黄秉等人一笔笔地对帐查工程费用，断定是黄秉等虚报贪污了工程费。
English: Sooner than Hebei suddenly appeared, brought people into the Governor's Office in broad daylight, and audited the project costs with Huang Bing and others. It was determined that Huang Bing and others had falsely reported and embezzled the project costs.

古文：冀乃书表自理，其略言：高贵尚小节。亩垄之人，而踞遗类。
现代文：鲜于冀就自己写了奏章向朝廷申诉。奏章中大致说，高贵的人更重视小节，而种田的俗人才见便宜就贪。
English: Little more than a year later, he wrote a petition to the imperial court. In the petition, it was said that the nobles paid more attention to the small section, while the common people who farmed were greedy for cheapness.

古文：研密失机。婢妾其性，媚世求显，偷窃狠鄙。
现代文：然而他们毕竟是婢妾一类的小人，再周密的谋划也有漏洞。
English: However, after all, they are slaves and concubines, and there are loopholes in their careful planning.

古文：有辱天官，易讥负乘，诚高之谓。
现代文：他们这种卑鄙的贪污偷窍行为辱没了皇上的器重，也让人们笑话他们不配担任这样的公职。
English: Their dastardly acts of corruption and thievery dishonored the emperor and made people laugh at their unworthiness to hold such a public office.

古文：臣不胜鬼言，谨因千里驿闻，付高上之。
现代文：如果真如黄秉刘适等人说是我花了那么多钱，那么我现在虽然作了鬼也要申辩。现在我把我的奏章通过千里驿使呈交皇上，请赵高替我上奏。
English: If it is true, as Huang Bing, Liu Si and others say, that I spent so much money, then even though I have become a ghost, I still have to defend myself. Now I am sending my score to the emperor by courier, and I ask Zhao Gao to play it for me.

古文：便西北去三十里。车马皆灭，不复见。
现代文：写完奏章，就坐上车奔西北方三十多里而去，后来就不见了。
English: After he finished writing the score, he got into a car and drove more than 30 miles northwest, and then he disappeared.

古文：秉等皆伏地物故，高以状闻。
现代文：黄秉等人竟伏在地上死去。
English: Huang Bing and the others lay down on the ground to die.

古文：诏下，还冀西河田宅妻子焉，兼为差代，以弥冥中之讼。
现代文：赵高把鲜于冀的奏章呈给皇帝，皇帝下诏发还了被没收的鲜于冀在河西的庄园田宅和充为官婢的妻子，并委官去接任工作，以安抚阴间来的这场官司。
English: Zhao Gao presented the imperial rescript to the emperor, and the emperor issued an edict to return the confiscated manor house and farmhouse in Hexi and the wife who was used as an official's maid, and to appoint an official to take over the work in order to appease the lawsuit that came from the underworld.

古文：卢充
现代文：卢充
English: Luzhong

古文：卢充，范阳人。
现代文：卢充是范阳人。
English: Lu Chong is from Fanyang.

古文：家西三十里，有崔少府墓。
现代文：家西边三十里，有座崔少府墓。
English: Thirty miles to the west of my home, there is a tomb of Choi Shoofu.

古文：充年二十。冬至一日，出宅西猎，射獐中之，獐倒而起，充逐之。
现代文：卢充二十岁那年，冬至的一天去家的西边打猎，射中了一头獐子。獐子倒了又爬起来跑掉，卢充就追。
English: When he was twenty years old, on the day of the winter solstice, he went hunting on the west side of his home and shot a mule. The mule fell down, got up and ran away, and he chased after it.

古文：不觉忽见道北一里许，高门瓦屋，四周有如府舍。
现代文：追到道北一里多的地方，獐子不见了，却见一排高门瓦房，象是很阔的人家。
English: He chased it to a place more than a kilometer north of the province, the mule was gone, but he saw a row of high-gate tile houses, like a very spacious home.

古文：不复见獐，门中一铃下，唱客前，有一人投一袱新衣，曰：府君以遗郎。
现代文：大门的门铃下有个人大声说，请贵客住前来。并给了卢充一套新衣说，我家府君让我给的。
English: A man rang the doorbell at the front gate and said loudly, "We would like to invite a distinguished guest to stay with us." He also gave Lu Chen a new set of clothes, saying, "The head of my family asked me to give it to you."

古文：充着讫进见，少府语充曰：尊府君不以仆门鄙陋，近得书，为君索小女为婚，故相迎耳。
现代文：卢充穿好衣服进了院，见了主人少府，少府说，令尊不嫌我家门第不高，最近来信，为你聘我的女儿为婚，所以特地把你接来了。
English: Lu Chong put on his clothes and entered the courtyard, where he met his host, Shofu. Shofu said, "I'm sorry, but I'm not from a high-ranking family. Recently, I received a letter inviting you to marry my daughter. That's why I specifically brought you here."

古文：便以书示充。父亡时。
现代文：说罢就拿出卢充父亲的书信给他看。
English: As soon as you say it, take out the letter from Lu Chong's father and show it to him.

古文：充虽小，然已识父手迹。
现代文：卢充父亲去世时，卢充尽管还小，但已能认得父亲的手迹。
English: At the time of his father's death, Lu Chong, although still young, could already recognize his father's handwriting.

古文：即欷歔无复辞免。
现代文：看到父亲的亲笔信，卢充十分难过，就不能推辞了。
English: Seeing his father's handwritten letter, Lu Chong was very sad and could not refuse.

古文：便敕内，卢郎已来，便可使女妆严，即就东廊。
现代文：崔少府就向里面说，卢郎已到，快让女儿好好梳妆到东廊去。
English: Cui Shaofu said to the inside, Lulang has arrived, quickly let her daughter dress up and go to the east corridor.

古文：至黄昏。
现代文：黄昏时，里面说已梳妆好了。
English: At dusk, it said it had finished dressing.

古文：内白女郎妆严毕，崔语充：君可至东廊。即至，女已下车，立席头，却共拜，时为三日。
现代文：崔少府就让卢充也到东廊去。卢充到时，崔女已经下车，站在桌子前，两人拜堂成婚。
English: Cui Shaofu asked Lu Chun to go to the east corridor as well. When Lu Chun arrived, Cui Nian had already got off the bus and was standing in front of the table. The two got married.

古文：给食三日毕，崔谓充曰：君可归。
现代文：卢充在崔府呆了三天后，少府对卢充说，你可以回去了。
English: After Ruchun stayed in Cui Prefecture for three days, the mayor said to Ruchun, "You can go back."

古文：女生男，当以相还，无相疑，生女当留养。
现代文：我女儿如果生男孩，会把孩子送去，如是生女孩，就留在我这里。
English: If my daughter gives birth to a boy, she will send the child away, but if she gives birth to a girl, she will stay with me.

古文：敕内严车送客。
现代文：你不要有怀疑。说完就命派车送客。
English: You don't have to be suspicious. Once you've said that, send a car to see the guest off.

古文：充便辞出，崔送至中门，执手涕零。
现代文：卢充告辞，崔少府送到中门，握住卢充的手哭了。
English: Lu Chun said goodbye, Cui Shaofu was sent to the middle gate, holding Lu Chun's hand and crying.

古文：出门见一犊车，驾青衣。又见本所着衣及弓箭，故在门外。
现代文：出门看见一个仆人驾着一辆牛车，又见门外放着自己穿的衣服和弓箭。
English: And when he was gone out, he saw a young man driving a chariot; and his raiment, and his bow, and his arrows, were within the door.

古文：寻遣传教将一人捉袱衣与充。相问曰：姻缘始尔，别甚怅恨。
现代文：崔女也叫人拿来一套衣服送给卢充，说，我俩姻缘刚开始，就分别了，心里很难过。
English: Ms. Cui also asked someone to bring a set of clothes to give to Mr. Lu, saying, "We were separated at the beginning of our marriage, and I feel very sad.

古文：今故致衣一袭，被褥自副。
现代文：赠你这件衣服和一套被褥做纪念吧。
English: Let me give you this dress and a set of bedding as a souvenir.

古文：充上车，去如电逝，须臾至家。
现代文：卢充上了车，车快如闪电，不一会儿就到了家。
English: Lu filled up the car, the car was as fast as lightning, and soon arrived at home.

古文：母见，问其故，充悉以状对。
现代文：卢充母亲问他怎么回事，他就说了详情。
English: When Luchun's mother asked him what had happened, he gave her the details.

古文：别后四年三月，充临水戏，忽见傍有犊车，乍沉乍浮，既而上岸，同坐皆见。
现代文：和崔氏女分别四年零三个月后，有一天卢充在河里游水，忽然看见不远处有一辆牛车，一会儿沉没一会又浮起，一会儿牛车上了岸。和卢充一起玩的人都看见了。
English: Four years and three months after separating from Cui's daughter, one day Lu Chong was swimming in the river when he suddenly saw an ox cart not far away. The ox cart sank for a while, then rose again, and then came ashore. Everyone who played with Lu Chong saw it.

古文：而充往开其车后户，见崔氏女与三岁男共载。
现代文：卢充跑过去打开牛车的后门，见崔氏女抱着一个三岁的男孩。
English: Lu Chong ran over to open the back door of the cart and saw Cui's daughter holding a three-year-old boy.

古文：女抱儿以还充，又与金碗，并赠诗曰：煌煌灵芝质，光丽何猗猗。
现代文：崔氏女把儿子交给卢充，同时给他一个金碗，还赠了一首诗：煌煌灵芝质，光丽何猗猗。
English: Cui's daughter gave her son to Lu Chong, and at the same time gave him a golden bowl, and also presented him with a poem: "Glory, glory, Ganoderma lucidum."

古文：华艳当时显，嘉异表神奇。
现代文：华艳当时显，嘉异表神奇。
English: The gorgeousness was obvious at the time, and the Jiaying watch was magical.

古文：含英未及秀，中夏罹霜萎。
现代文：含英未及秀，中夏罹霜萎。
English: In the middle of summer, the frost withers the young shoots.

古文：荣耀长幽灭，世路永无施。
现代文：荣耀长幽灭，世路永无施。
English: Glory is fleeting, and the world will never be the same.

古文：不悟阴阳运，哲人忽来仪。
现代文：不悟阴阳运。哲人忽来仪。
English: Without enlightenment, yin and yang are unattainable. The philosopher suddenly becomes an instrument.

古文：今时一别后，何得重会时？
现代文：今时一别后，何得重会时。
English: After this time apart, what a time to meet again.

古文：充取儿碗及诗，忽然不见。
现代文：卢充接过金碗、儿子和诗后，崔氏女突然消失了。
English: After Lu Chun took over the golden bowl, son and poem, Cui's daughter suddenly disappeared.

古文：充后乘车入市卖碗，冀有识者。
现代文：卢充后来就坐着车到街上去卖碗。希望能有认识这碗的人。
English: Lu Chong later drove to the streets to sell the bowl, hoping that someone would recognize it.

古文：有一婢识此，还白大家曰：市中见一人乘车，卖崔氏女郎棺中碗。
现代文：果然一个女仆认出了这碗，她立刻跑回去对女主人说，在街上看见一个人坐着车，卖崔氏女棺材中的金碗。
English: Sure enough, a maid recognized the bowl and immediately ran back to tell her mistress that she had seen a man in a car on the street selling the golden bowl from the coffin of Cui's daughter.

古文：大家既崔氏亲姨母也。遣儿视之，果如婢言。
现代文：女主人正是崔氏女的亲姨，她立刻派儿子到街上看，果然和女仆说的一样。
English: The hostess was the aunt of Cui's daughter, and she immediately sent her son to the street to look, and he did exactly what the maid said.

古文：乃上车叙姓名，语充曰：昔我姨嫁少府，女未出而亡，家亲痛之，赠一金碗著棺中。
现代文：儿子到车上和卢充说，当年我姨嫁给崔少府，崔少府的女儿没出嫁就死了，家里人都很悲痛，赠了一个金碗给她陪葬。
English: When my son got to the car, he said to Lu Chong, "That year, my aunt married Cui Shaofu. Cui Shaofu's daughter died without getting married. The family was very sad and gave her a gold bowl to accompany her funeral."

古文：可说得碗本末。
现代文：你能告诉我你得到这金碗的经过吗？
English: Can you tell me how you got this golden bowl?

古文：充以事对，此儿亦为悲咽，赍还白母。
现代文：卢充就如实说了。儿子也十分悲痛，回家对母亲说了。
English: Lu Chong told the truth. His son was also very sad and went home to tell his mother.

古文：母即令诣充家迎儿还。诸亲悉集，儿有崔氏之状，又复似充貌。
现代文：母亲就让到卢充家迎接孩子回来，亲戚都来看望，见那孩子长得既像崔氏又象卢充。
English: The mother sent her to meet the child at the Luzhong home, and relatives came to visit, and saw that the child looked like both the Cui family and Luzhong.

古文：儿碗俱验，姨母曰：我外甥也，即字温休。
现代文：孩子和金碗都验证了。崔氏女的姨妈说，这就是我的外甥孙了。就给起名叫卢温休。
English: Both the child and the golden bowl were verified. Cui's daughter's aunt said, "This is my grandnephew," and named him Lu Wenxiu.

古文：温休者，是幽婚也。
现代文：温休的意思是纪念阴阳通婚。
English: Wenzhou means to commemorate the marriage of yin and yang.

古文：遂成令器，历郡守。
现代文：后来卢温休果然成了大器，当上了郡守。
English: Later, Lu Wenxiu became a great man and became the county magistrate.

古文：子孙冠盖相承至今，其后植字干，有名天下。
现代文：他的子孙辈辈作官，一直传到现在，卢充有一个后代叫卢植，字叫干，是个名传天下的人。
English: His descendants have been officials for generations and have been passed down to the present. Lu Chong has a descendant named Lu Zhi, literally "dry," who is a famous person.

古文：谈生
现代文：谈生
English: Talk about life

古文：谈生者，年四十，无妇，常感激读书。
现代文：谈生四十岁还没有娶妻，平时就是发奋读书。
English: At the age of forty, he still hasn't married a wife, so he usually spends his time reading.

古文：忽夜半有女子，可年十五六，姿颜服饰。
现代文：有一天半夜有个十五六岁的女子来找谈生。
English: One night in the middle of the night, a fifteen- or sixteen-year-old girl came to chat.

古文：天下无双，来就生为夫妇。
现代文：这女子容貌称得上绝代佳人，主动要求作谈生的妻子。
English: This woman's appearance is worthy of being called a great beauty, and she actively asked to be the wife of the protagonist.

古文：乃言：我与人不同，勿以火照我也。三年之后，方可照。
现代文：女子说，我和人不一样，请不要用灯火照我，三年后才可以照。
English: The woman said, "I'm not like other people. Please don't shine a light on me. You can only shine it on me after three years."

古文：为夫妻，生一儿，已二岁。
现代文：他们结合后生了一个儿子，儿子已经两岁。
English: They had a son together, who is now two years old.

古文：不能忍，夜伺其寝后，盗照视之，其腰上已生肉如人，腰下但有枯骨。
现代文：谈生忍不住好奇心，夜里等女子睡着了，偷偷点灯看她，只见她腰以上已经长出和活人一样的肉了，但腰以下还有白骨。
English: He couldn't help but be curious. At night, when the woman was asleep, he secretly lit a lamp and looked at her. All he could see was that her flesh above the waist had grown to be the same as that of a living person, but below the waist there was still white bone.

古文：妇觉，遂言曰：君负我，我垂生矣，何不能忍一岁而竟相照也？
现代文：女子惊醒后发觉谈生偷照自己，说，你辜负了我。我就要复活了，你怎么就不能再忍一年而用灯光照我呢？
English: After the woman woke up, she found that she had been talking about life and shining a light on herself, saying, "You have failed me. I am going to be resurrected, why can't you bear it for another year and shine a light on me?"

古文：生辞谢。涕泣不可复止，云：与君虽大义永离，然顾念我儿。若贫不能自偕活者。
现代文：谈生急忙赔罪，女子仍哭个不停说，我和你只能永别了，只是惦念我们的儿子，你以后如果穷得养活不了他，就暂时交给我。
English: Talking about life and hastily making amends, the woman still cried and kept saying, I can only say goodbye to you forever, but I miss our son. If you are too poor to feed him in the future, give him to me temporarily.

古文：暂随我去，方遗君物。
现代文：我也准备送你些东西。
English: I'm also going to give you something.

古文：生随之去，入华堂，室宇器物不凡。
现代文：谈生随女子来到一座华贵的屋中，见屋中陈设装饰不同凡人。
English: Talk about life with a woman came to a luxurious house, see the decoration of the house different from ordinary people.

古文：以一珠袍与之曰：可以自给。
现代文：女子拿了一件缀着珍珠的袍子赠给谈生说，卖了这袍子就可维持生活。
English: The woman took a robe adorned with pearls and gave it to Tatchou, saying that by selling this robe she would be able to make a living.

古文：裂取生衣裾，留之而去。
现代文：临分别时，女子撕下了谈生一块衣裳下摆留作纪念。
English: On the eve of their separation, the woman tore off a piece of her underwear to keep as a souvenir.

古文：后生持袍诣市，睢阳王家买之，得钱千万。
现代文：后来谈生到市场上卖珠袍，被睢阳王家的人买去，得钱千万。
English: Later, Tong Sheng went to the market to sell a beaded robe, which was bought by a member of the Shanyang royal family, and made tens of thousands of dollars.

古文：王识之曰：是我女袍，此必发墓。
现代文：睢阳王一看，竟是自己死去的女儿的袍子，就把谈生抓来拷问为什么盗墓。
English: When King Shenyang saw that it was actually the robe of his own dead daughter, he took her alive and tortured her to find out why she had robbed the tomb.

古文：乃取拷之。
现代文：谈生就实话实说了。
English: I told the truth about my life.

古文：生具以实对，王犹不信。乃视女塚，塚完如故。
现代文：睢阳王仍不信，就到女儿坟上去看，见坟墓完好如初。
English: King Shenyang still didn't believe, so he went to his daughter's grave to have a look, and saw that the grave was as good as ever.

古文：发视之，果棺盖下得衣裾。
现代文：再打开墓穴看，果然在棺盖下发现了谈生的一块衣摆。
English: When the grave was opened again, a pendant was found under the coffin lid.

古文：呼其儿，正类王女，王乃信之。即召谈生，复赐遗衣，以为主婿。
现代文：后来又看谈生的儿子，果然长得像自己女儿，睢阳王才相信了，又把谈生请来，把珠袍还给了他，认他为公主的女婿。
English: Later, when he saw that Dang Sheng's son really looked like his own daughter, King Fenyang believed him. He invited Dang Sheng again, gave him back his jeweled robe, and recognized him as the princess' son-in-law.

古文：表其儿以为侍中。
现代文：后来又上表给朝廷，赐给谈生的儿子侍中的官衔。
English: Later, it was presented to the imperial court, and the official title of chamberlain was given to the son of the chatterer.

古文：陈蕃
现代文：陈蕃
English: Chen Yao

古文：陈蕃微时，尝行宿主人黄申家。
现代文：陈蕃寒微时，有一次出门投宿在黄申家。
English: When Chen Yao was in his twilight years, he once went to stay at Huang Sheng's home.

古文：申妇夜产，蕃不知。
现代文：黄申的妻子夜里生孩子，陈蕃并不知道。
English: Huang Shen's wife gave birth to a child in the night, but Chen Yao did not know.

古文：夜三更。
现代文：睡到半夜忽听有人敲门。
English: You sleep until midnight and suddenly hear someone knocking on your door.

古文：有扣门者，久许，闻里有人应云：门里有人，不可前。
现代文：半天才听得门里有人应道，门里有人，别从前门进，从后门走。
English: It took me half a day to hear someone answer the door, someone at the door, don't go through the front door, go through the back door.

古文：相告云：从后门往。俄闻往者还，门内者问之：见何儿？
现代文：不一会那叫门的人回来了，门里的人问，看见个什么孩子？
English: A moment later the man who had called at the door came back. The man inside the door asked, "What child do you see?"

古文：名何？
现代文：叫什么名？
English: What's his name?

古文：当几岁？
现代文：能活到多大？
English: How long can you live?

古文：还者云：是男，名阿权，当十五岁。
现代文：门外的人说，是个男孩，叫阿奴，能活到十五岁。
English: People outside the door said it was a boy, called Anu, who would live to be 15.

古文：又问曰：后当若为死？
现代文：又问，将来是怎么死的？
English: He also asked how he would die in the future.

古文：答曰：为人作屋，落地死。
现代文：回答说，帮助人盖房子，摔死的。
English: He replied that he had helped someone build a house and had fallen to his death.

古文：蕃闻而不信。
现代文：陈蕃听见了但不相信。
English: Chen Yao heard but did not believe it.

古文：后十五年，为豫章太守，遣吏征问，昔儿阿奴所在。
现代文：十五年后，陈蕃当了豫章太守，派官员去查问，那个叫阿奴的孩子现在何处。
English: Fifteen years later, when Chen Xi became the governor of Yuzhang, he sent officials to inquire about the whereabouts of the child named Anu.

古文：家云，助东家作屋，堕楝亡没。
现代文：他家人说，帮着东家盖房，从房梁上掉下来摔死了。
English: His family says he was helping his landlord build a house when he fell from a beam and died.

古文：刘照
现代文：刘照
English: Liu Zhao

古文：刘照，建安中，为河间太守。
现代文：刘照在建安年间，任河间府太守。
English: During the Jianan era, Liu Zhao served as the governor of Kawama Prefecture.

古文：妇亡。
现代文：他的妻子死了。
English: His wife is dead.

古文：埋棺于府园中。
现代文：棺材埋在府后花园里。
English: The coffin was buried in the garden behind the house.

古文：遭黄巾贼，照委郡走。
现代文：后来黄中造反，刘照扔下一切逃跑了。
English: Later, Huang Zhong rebelled and Liu Zhao left everything behind and ran away.

古文：后太守至，夜梦见一妇人往就之。
现代文：继任的太守到任后，夜里梦见一个女人来和他同房。
English: After succeeding to the position of Taishu Ryo, he dreamed at night that a woman came to share his room.

古文：后又遗一双锁，太守不能名。妇曰：此萎蕤锁也，以金缕相连，屈申在人，实珍物。
现代文：临走时送给新太守一个双锁，太守不知这锁叫什么名，女人说这个锁叫萎蕤，中间用金链相连，可屈可伸，是一件宝物。
English: As he was about to leave, he gave the new lady-in-waiting a double lock. The lady-in-waiting did not know what the name of this lock was, but the woman said that it was called a withered lock. It was connected in the middle with a gold chain and could be bent or stretched. It was a treasure.

古文：吾方当去，故以相别，慎无告人。
现代文：我要走了，以它做为离别纪念，千万不要对人说。
English: I'm leaving, use it as a parting memento, don't tell anyone.

古文：后二十日。照遣儿迎丧。守乃悟云云。儿见锁感动，不能自胜。
现代文：过了二十天，刘照派儿子迎运他妻子的棺材，新任太守才恍然大悟，并把锁给刘照的儿子看，儿子看见母亲的随葬珍宝，心里十分悲痛。
English: Twenty days later, Liu Zhao sent his son to pick up his wife's coffin. Only then did the new governor suddenly come to his senses, and showed the lock to Liu Zhao's son, who was heartbroken to see his mother's buried treasures.

古文：张汉植
现代文：张汉植
English: Zhang Hanzhi

古文：陈国张汉植，至南阳，从京兆尹延叔坚，学《左氏传》。
现代文：陈国的张汉植，到南阳去跟京北尹延叔坚学习《左传》。
English: Zhang Han Zhi from Chen Guo went to Nanyang to study "Zhuan" with Yin Yan Shujian from Beijing.

古文：行后数月，鬼物持其妹，为之扬言曰：我病死，丧在陌上。
现代文：他走了几个月以后，一个鬼怪附在了他妹妹的身上，以张汉植的口气说，我病死在大道上，经常饥寒交加。
English: A few months after he left, a specter attached itself to his sister, and he said in the tone of Zhang Han Zhi, I died of illness on the avenue, often suffering from cold and hunger.

古文：常苦饥寒，操一三量不借，挂屋后楮上。
现代文：咱家的秤没有外借，挂在那屋后楮树上。
English: Our scales, which are not on loan, hang on the elm tree behind the house.

古文：傅子方送我五百钱，在北牖下。
现代文：傅子方送我五百钱，放在北窗下，忘了拿了。
English: Fu Zi Fang gave me five hundred yuan. I put it under the north window and forgot to take it.

古文：皆望取之。
现代文：又买了一头小牛，买卖契约放在书箱里。
English: He also bought a calf and put the sales contract in a bookcase.

古文：又买李幼牛一头，本券在书箧中。
现代文：家里的人按着他说的去找，果然都在。
English: The people in the house followed his instructions to look for him, and sure enough, they were all there.

古文：往索，悉如其言，妇尚不知有此。
现代文：张汉植的妻子都不知道这些事。妹妹刚回娘家来，不可能知道这些事。
English: Zhang Han Zhi's wife didn't know about these things, and her younger sister couldn't have known since she had just come back to her daughter's house.

古文：妹新归宁，非其所及。家人哀伤，益以为审。
现代文：家人得知张汉植的死讯十分悲痛，更加信以为真。
English: Family members were very sad to learn of Zhang Hanzhi's death, and believed it to be true.

古文：父母兄弟，椎结迎丧。
现代文：全家穿着丧服拄着哭丧棒出门去找张汉植的尸体。
English: The whole family, wearing mourning clothes and wailing, went out to look for Zhang Han Zhi's body.

古文：去精舍数里，遇汉植与诸生相随。
现代文：没想到在离学馆几里的地方，竟遇见张汉植和同学们在一起。
English: I did not expect to meet Zhang Han Zhi and his classmates a few miles away from the school.

古文：汉植顾见家人，怪其如此。
现代文：汉植看家里人这样穿戴，十分惊奇。
English: Han Zhi was very surprised to see his family members dressed like this.

古文：家见汉植。良以为鬼也。
现代文：家里人看见汉植，则以为是见了鬼了。
English: When the family saw Han Zhi, they thought they had seen a ghost.

古文：惝恍有间，汉植乃前，为父说其本末如此。
现代文：双方愣了半天，汉植的父亲说清情况，大家才知道是鬼怪搞的鬼。
English: Both sides were stunned for half a day, Han Zhi's father clarified the situation, and everyone knew that it was the ghost of a ghost.

古文：范丹
现代文：范丹
English: Fan Dan

古文：陈留外黄范丹，字史云，少为尉从佐，使檄谒督邮。
现代文：陈留郡当外黄官的范丹，字史云，年轻时给县尉当个小随从官。
English: Fan Dan, surnamed Shi Yun, who was a foreign Huang official in Chenliu County, was a minor subordinate officer to the county lieutenant when he was young.

古文：丹有志节，自恚为斯役小吏。
现代文：有一次，派他去给督邮送公文。
English: On one occasion, he was sent to mail an official document to the governor.

古文：及于陈留大泽中，杀所乘马，捐弃官帻，诈逢劫者。
现代文：范丹少有大志，气愤自己当个为人驱使的小官，走到陈留大泽时，把所骑的马杀掉，把官家的头巾也扔了，假称是被强盗打劫了。
English: Fan Dan had few ambitions and was angry at being a petty official driven by others. When he got to Chen Liu Daze, he killed the horse he was riding and threw away the official's turban, pretending to have been robbed by robbers.

古文：有神下其家曰：我史云也。为劫人所杀，疾取我衣于陈留大泽中，家取得一帻。
现代文：有个神怪向他家里人说，我就是范丹，被强盗杀死，快到陈留大泽来取我的衣物。
English: A spirit told his family, "I am Fan Dan. I was killed by a robber. Come to Chenliu Daze for my clothes."

古文：丹随之南郡，转入三辅。
现代文：家人赶到，只找到一块头巾。
English: Family members arrived to find only a headscarf.

古文：从英贤游学。十三年乃归。家人不复识焉。
现代文：后来范丹去了南郡，又转到三辅，跟一些大学问家学习，过了十三年才回家，家里人都不认识他了。
English: Later, Fan Dan went to Nan County, and then transferred to Sanfu, and studied with some university students. It took him 13 years to return home, and his family did not know him anymore.

古文：陈留人高其志行，及殁。号曰贞节先生。
现代文：陈留人赞赏他的志气，死后，称他为贞节先生。
English: Chen Ruimin appreciated his ambition, and after his death, called him Mr. Zhengjie.

古文：费季
现代文：费季
English: Fee Season

古文：吴人费季，客贾数年。
现代文：费季是吴地人，在外经商好几年。
English: Feizi is from Wuxi and has been doing business abroad for several years.

古文：时道多劫，妻常忧之。
现代文：当时路上强盗很多，他的妻子十分担心。
English: There were a lot of robbers on the road at that time, and his wife was very worried.

古文：季与同辈旅宿庐山下，各相问去家几时，季曰：吾去家已数年。
现代文：有一次费季和几个同伴住在庐山下的旅店中，大家互相问离家多久了，季费说，我离家已好几年。
English: Once upon a time, Ji Fei and a few companions were staying in a hotel at the foot of Shaoshan Mountain. When they asked each other how long they had been away from home, Ji Fei said, "I have been away from home for several years."

古文：临来，与妻别，就求金钗以行，欲观其志，当与吾否耳。
现代文：出发时和我妻子告别时，我向她要她头上的金钗。我的意思是看看她对我感情好不好，如果给我就是对我好。
English: When I said goodbye to my wife as we were leaving, I asked her for the gold chain on her head. I meant to see if she felt good about me, and if she gave it to me, it would be good for me.

古文：得钗。仍以著户楣上。
现代文：她给了我金钗，我就偷偷把钗放在门框上面。
English: She gave me a gold chain, and I secretly put it on the door frame.

古文：临发忘道。此钗故当在户上也。
现代文：临走时，我忘了拿，这只钗应该还在门框上。
English: I forgot to take it with me when I left, and it must still be on the door frame.

古文：尔夕。妻梦季曰：吾行遇盗，死已二年。
现代文：这天夜晚，费季的妻子梦见贾季对她说，我在路上遇见强盗，已死了二年。
English: That night, Fethi's wife dreamed that he told her, "I met a robber on the road, and I've been dead for two years."

古文：可往取之。妻觉，揣钗得之。
现代文：如果不信我的话，我向你要了金钗后就放在门框上，你可以去取来，就知道我是真的死了。
English: If you don't believe me, I asked you for a gold chain and put it on the door frame. You can go and get it and you will know that I am really dead.

古文：家遂发丧，后一年余，季行来归还。周式
现代文：妻子惊醒后，果然在门框上找到了钗，家里就办了丧事。然而过了一年多，费季却回来了。周式
English: After his wife woke up, she found a skeleton on the door frame, and the family held a funeral. However, more than a year later, Feizi returned.

古文：汉下邳周式。尝至东海。
现代文：汉代下邳人周式，一次到东海去。
English: During the Han Dynasty, people went to the East Sea at least once a week.

古文：道逢一吏。持一卷书，求寄载。
现代文：在半路上遇到了一个官吏，拿着一卷书，请周式给他带着。
English: On the way, he met an official who was carrying a book and asked him to take it with him.

古文：行十余里，谓式曰：吾暂有所过，留书寄君船中。
现代文：一同走了十几里后，官吏说，我暂时有点事，先把书寄放在你船里，但你千万不要看那书。
English: After walking more than ten miles together, the official said, "I have a temporary problem. First, I will send the book to your ship, but you must not read that book."

古文：慎勿发之。去后，式盗发视书，皆诸死人录，下条有式名。
现代文：官吏走后，周式忍不住打开书看，见那上面记的都是死人的名字，在后面竟也有自己的名。
English: After the officials left, Zhou Xicheng couldn't help but open the book to see that all the names written on it were the names of dead people, but in the back he also had his own name.

古文：须臾吏还，式犹视书，吏怒曰：故以相告，何忽视之？
现代文：不大会儿官吏回来了，看见周式在偷看书，大怒说，告诉你不要看，怎么不听！
English: Not long after, the official came back, saw Zhou Xicheng peeking at the book, and said angrily, "I told you not to look, why didn't you listen!"

古文：式扣头流血，良久曰：感卿远相载，此书不可除。卿今日已去，还家，三年勿出门，可得度也。
现代文：周式把头都磕出了血。过了半天官吏说，感谢你替我带着这本书，但你的名字是抹不掉的，你今天回家后，三年之内不要出门，你就可以躲过去不死了。
English: After half a day, the official said, "Thank you for carrying this book for me, but your name can't be erased. If you go home today, don't go out for three years, you can hide and not die."

古文：勿道见吾书。
现代文：但你千万不要说看过我的书。
English: But you mustn't say you've read my book.

古文：式还不出，已二年余，家皆怪之。
现代文：周式回到家后，坚持不出门。已经过了两年了，家里人都十分奇怪。
English: When Zhou Shi returned home, he insisted on not leaving the house. It had been two years, and everyone in the family was very strange.

古文：邻人卒亡，父怒，使往吊之，式不得止。
现代文：这时有个邻居去世，周式的父亲让他去吊唁。如果不去父亲就大怒，只好出门去了。
English: At this time, a neighbor passed away, and Zhou's father asked him to go and offer condolences. If he didn't go to his father, he was furious and had to leave the house.

古文：适出门，便见此吏，吏曰：吾令汝三年勿出，而今出门，知复奈何？
现代文：周式刚一出门，就碰见了那个官吏。官吏说，叫你三年别出门，你不听出门了，这就没办法了。
English: As soon as Zhou Xicheng left the house, he met the official. The official said, "I told you not to leave the house for three years, but you didn't listen, so there's nothing I can do."

古文：吾求不见，连相为得鞭杖。
现代文：因为我没把你抓到阴府，我受了好几次鞭打。
English: Because I didn't take you to the underworld, I was whipped several times.

古文：今已见汝，无可奈何，后三日日中，当相取也。
现代文：现在我既然看见你，只能把你带走了。三天后中午，我会来接你。
English: Now that I've seen you, I can only take you away. I'll pick you up at noon three days later.

古文：式还涕泣，具道如此。
现代文：周式回到家里，哭诉了这件事，他父亲不信。
English: Zhou returned home in tears and told his father about the incident, but his father did not believe him.

古文：父故不信，母昼夜与相守涕泣，至三日日中时，见来取，便死。
现代文：他母亲昼夜守在周式身边哭。三天后的中午，周式果然死去。
English: His mother stood by his side crying day and night. Three days later, at noon, Zhou Shikai died.

古文：陈阿登
现代文：陈阿登
English: Chen Arden

古文：汉会稽句章人，至东野还。暮不及门，见路傍小屋然火，因投宿。
现代文：汉代会稽县的句章有个人到东城外回来，晚上没到家时，看见路旁小屋里生着火，就进去投宿。
English: According to the Han Dynasty Audit County, a person came back from Dongcheng. When he did not get home in the evening, he saw a fire in a roadside hut and went to stay there.

古文：至，有一少女，不欲与丈夫共宿，呼邻家女自伴。
现代文：进屋后，是一个少女，因为不愿和丈夫同住找来了邻居的女孩一起作伴。
English: After entering the house, it was a girl who, because she did not want to live with her husband, found a neighbor girl to be her companion.

古文：夜共弹箜篌，歌曰：连绵葛上藤，一缓复一絙。
现代文：夜里她们一起弹箜篌，边弹边唱，连绵葛上藤，一缓复一絙。
English: At night, they play the cymbals together, singing as they play. They play the cymbals in succession, one cymbals at a time.

古文：汝欲知我姓，姓陈名阿登。
现代文：汝欲知我姓，姓陈名阿登。
English: You want to know my surname, my surname is Chen, my name is Arden.

古文：明至东郭外。有卖食母在肆中。此人寄坐。因说昨所见。
现代文：第二天这人到城外，在一个卖饭的小馆里坐下，对卖饭的女人说了昨晚的事。
English: The next day, the man went outside the city, sat down in a small restaurant that sold meals, and told the woman selling meals about the previous night.

古文：母惊曰：此是我女，近亡，葬于郭外尔。
现代文：那女人大吃一惊说，那就是我的女儿，最近死了，已埋在城外了。
English: The woman was shocked and said, "That's my daughter, she died recently and is buried outside the city."

