古文：李叔卿杨道和石勒虢州人封元则僧道宣苏践言狄仁杰偃师雷斗
现代文：李叔卿杨道和石勒虢州人封元则僧道宣苏践言狄仁杰偃师雷斗
English: Li Shujing Yang Dao and Shi Le Bozhou's Feng Yuan Zi's monk Dao Xuan Su's sermon Di Renjie's disciple Lei Dou

古文：漳泉界包超张须弥蔡希闵徐景先欧阳忽雷宣州王干华亭堰典李师道李鄘徐誗
现代文：漳泉界包超张须弥蔡希闵徐景先欧阳忽雷宣州王干华亭堰典李师道李鄘徐誗
English: 

古文：李叔卿
现代文：李叔卿
English: Li Shuxing

古文：汉河南李叔卿，为郡工曹，应孝廉。
现代文：汉代河南有个叫李叔卿的人，是郡府的工曹，被举荐为 孝廉 。
English: In Henan in the Han Dynasty, there was a man named Li Shujing, who was a county engineer and was recommended as a filial son.

古文：同辈疾之，宣言曰： 叔卿妻寡妹。 
现代文：同事们忌妒他，散布流言说叔卿和他寡居的妹妹通奸，因此没有资格得到 孝廉 的名衔。
English: Colleagues envied him, spreading rumours that he had committed adultery with his widowed sister and was therefore ineligible for the title of filial son.

古文：以故不得应孝廉之目，叔卿遂闭门不出。
现代文：于是叔卿便闭门不出。
English: As a result, the uncle did not come out of the closet.

古文：妹悲愤，乃诣府门自经，叔卿亦自杀，以明无私，既而家人葬之。
现代文：他的妹妹非常悲愤，就到官府门前自缢。接着，叔卿也自杀了，以表明自己没有做见不得人的事。
English: His sister was so distraught that she hanged herself in front of the government office, and then his uncle also committed suicide to show that he had not done anything shameful.

古文：后霹雳，遂击杀所疾者，以置叔卿之墓。
现代文：不久，家里人就把他们埋葬了。有一天，霹雳大作，把造谣中伤叔卿的人击死，并将这人的尸体抛在叔卿的坟墓旁。
English: Soon, the family buried them. One day, in a fit of rage, he killed the person who had slandered his uncle and left his body next to his uncle's grave.

古文：所震之家，收葬其尸。葬毕。又发其冢。
现代文：其家属将他收葬。埋葬完毕，这个人的坟墓又被霹雳击开了。
English: His family took him to be buried, and when the burial was over, the man's grave was opened with a pickaxe.

古文：杨道和
现代文：杨道和
English: Yang Daowu

古文：晋扶风杨道和，夏于田中，值雷雨，至桑树下。
现代文：晋代扶风有个叫杨道和的人，夏天在田里劳动，正赶上雷雨，便到桑树下躲避。
English: In Fufeng, Jin Dynasty, there was a man named Yang Daohe who worked in the fields in the summer. He was just in time for a thunderstorm, so he took shelter under a mulberry tree.

古文：霹雳下击之，道和以锄格，折其肱，遂落地不得去。
现代文：霹雳来击他，他便用锄头与它格斗，并将其胳膊打断。那霹雳随即落到地上不能逃走。
English: When the badger came to attack him, he fought it off with his hoe and broke its arm. The badger then fell to the ground and was unable to get away.

古文：唇如丹，目如镜，毛角长三尺余。
现代文：它的嘴唇象丹砂一样红，眼睛似镜子一样亮，头上的两只角有三尺多长，长着毛。
English: Its lips are as red as cinnamon, its eyes as bright as mirrors, and the two horns on its head are more than three feet long and hairy.

古文：状如六畜，头似猕猴。
现代文：它的身子非驴非马，头象猕猴。
English: Its body is neither a donkey nor a horse, and its head resembles that of a macaque.

古文：石勒
现代文：石勒
English: Shearer

古文：后赵石勒时，暴风大雨雷雹。建德殿端门、襄国市西门倒。杀五人。
现代文：晋及十六国时，后赵石勒当政年间，暴雨大风雷雹成灾，使建德殿的端门和襄国市西门倒塌，砸死五个人。
English: When Jin conquered the Sixteen Kingdoms, during the reign of Zhao Shile, torrential rains, gales and thunderstorms caused the collapse of the front gate of Jiande Hall and the west gate of Xiangguo City, killing five people.

古文：雹起西河介山，大如鸡子，平地三尺，洿下丈余。行人禽兽，死者万数。
现代文：雹灾发生于西河介山，鸡蛋般大小，平地积三尺多厚，低洼处过丈，致使行人及飞禽走兽被砸死数以万计。
English: The hailstorm occurred in the Saihe Mountain, the size of an egg, the flat area is more than three feet thick, and the low-lying area is too high, resulting in tens of thousands of pedestrians and birds and animals being killed.

古文：历千余里，树木摧折，禾稼荡然。
现代文：在千余里范围内，树木被折断摧毁，禾苗庄稼荡然无存。
English: Within a radius of more than a thousand miles, trees were snapped and destroyed, and grass seedling crops were wiped out.

古文：勒问徐光，曰： 去年不禁寒食，介推帝乡之神也，故有此灾。
现代文：石勒问徐光这是为什么？徐光回答说： 去年寒食节那天，没有按老规矩禁火寒食；而介之推乃帝乡之神，因此才有这场灾祸。 
English: Shi Ler asked Xu Guang why this was? Xu Guang replied: On the day of the cold food festival last year, there was no ban on fire and cold food according to the old rules; and the mediator was the god of the emperor's hometown, so there was this disaster.

古文：虢州人
现代文：虢州人
English: People from Zhangzhou

古文：唐虢州有兄弟析居，共分堂宇。
现代文：唐代虢州有兄弟二人分家后，各住在老屋的一头。
English: There were two brothers in Bozhou in the Tang Dynasty who, after splitting up, each lived at one end of an old house.

古文：至显庆元年夏夜，雷震烈风可畏。
现代文：显庆元年夏天的一个夜晚，狂风霹雳骤起，令人生畏。
English: On a summer night in the first year of Xianqing, a fierce wind suddenly arose, which was daunting.

古文：其兄甚惧，欲于弟舍避之，将去复止。
现代文：哥哥非常害怕，想去弟弟房间躲避，可刚一起身又止住脚步。
English: The older brother was very scared and wanted to go to his brother's room to hide, but he just stopped walking.

古文：庭槐大可数围，枝条甚茂，拔其根茎。
现代文：原来门前十几步远处有一个大长坑，暴风雨把住房连同他的全家十一口人卷进大坑内，全都摔死了。
English: Originally, there was a large pit a dozen steps away in front of the door. The storm swept the house into the pit, together with his entire family of eleven people, and they all fell to their deaths.

古文：洪纤俱尽，遂失所在，终寻不得。
现代文：拔除之处，全是大坑，数千件大小家用器物，全被卷入坑中，一件也未剩下，只有墙壁没有动。
English: The excavated areas are all large pits. Thousands of household items, large and small, have all been sucked into the pits. Not a single item remains, only the walls have not moved.

古文：先是一年，其妻见树有羊，但共怪之，后遂遭此变。
现代文：院内有一棵大槐树，需几个人才能围拢，枝条非常繁茂，也被连根带叶拔走，最终也未找到。事情发生的前一年，他的妻子看见树上有只羊，只是觉得奇怪，后来就遇到了这场变故。
English: In the yard there is a large elm tree, it takes several people to surround it, the branches are very lush, it was also pulled up by the roots and leaves, and eventually it was not found. The year before the incident, his wife saw a sheep on the tree, she just thought it was strange, and then she encountered this change.

古文：而弟所居，但拔露椽瓦，有似人拆之，余无所损。
现代文：而弟弟所住的房屋，只是露出了椽子和瓦，象被人拆过一样，其他一点也没有受到损坏。
English: His brother's house, on the other hand, showed only rafters and shingles, as if it had been demolished. Nothing else was damaged.

古文：有子卫士，在京番直，刺史于立政奏之，敕放子还，仍赐物三十件。
现代文：他有一个儿子在京城服役担住宿卫，刺史于立政上奏了这件事，皇帝下诏放其子回家，还赐给三十件物品。
English: He had a son who served as a bodyguard in the capital, and the incident played a role in the formation of the new government. The emperor ordered his son to return home and gave him 30 items.

古文：时桓思绪为司功，亲检其事。
现代文：当时桓思绪做司功，亲自处理了这件事。
English: At that time, Huan Sixu was the Secretary of the Communist Party of China, and he personally handled the matter.

古文：封元则
现代文：封元则
English: Huan Yuan Zi

古文：唐封元则，渤海长河人。
现代文：唐代有个封元则，是渤海郡长河人。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a Fong Yuan Zi, who was from Changhe, Bohai County.

古文：显庆中，为光禄寺太官掌膳。
现代文：显庆年间，他给光禄寺大官掌管膳食。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xianqing, he served meals to the high officials of the Guanglu Temple.

古文：时于阗王来朝，食料余羊，凡数十百口，王并托元则送僧寺长生。元则乃窃令屠家烹货收直。
现代文：正值于阗王前来朝拜，用做膳食的羊剩余有近百只。于阗王委托元则把它们送给寺里的僧人饲养，元则却偷偷地让人宰杀、烹制，收取钱财。
English: It was the time when King Min came to pay homage, and there were nearly a hundred sheep left over to be used for food. The man who was entrusted by King Min gave them to the monks in the temple to raise, but the man secretly had them slaughtered, cooked, and collected money.

古文：龙朔元年夏六月，洛阳大雨，雷震杀元则于宣仁门外街中，折其项，血流洒地。观者盈衢，莫不惊愕。
现代文：龙朔元年六月，洛阳大雨滂沱，雷电把封元则击死在宣仁门外的大街上，他的脖子断了，血流遍地，看热闹的人挤满了大街，没有不感到惊愕的。
English: In June of the first year of the Long Shuo, Luoyang was hit by heavy rain, and the thunder and lightning killed Feng Yuan on the street outside Xuanren Gate. His neck was broken, blood flowed everywhere, and people crowded the street to watch the fun. I was stunned.

古文：僧道宣
现代文：僧道宣
English: The monk Dosen

古文：唐刘禹锡云，道宣持律第一。
现代文：唐代刘禹锡讲：道宣执戒律最严。
English: Liu Yuxi preached in the Tang Dynasty: The strictest precepts of Taoism have been carried out.

古文：忽一旦，霹雳绕户外不绝。
现代文：忽然有一天，霹雳在道宣的屋外绕来绕去，响声不断。
English: All of a sudden, one day, the cicadas were running around outside Daoxuan's house, making a lot of noise.

古文：宣曰： 我持律更无所犯，若有宿业，则不知之。 
现代文：道宣说： 我坚守戒律没有发生违犯之事；但有没有前生的罪业，就不知道了。 
English: Dao Xuan said, "I have adhered to the precepts, and there has been no violation; however, I don't know if I have any previous life's bad karma.

古文：于是褫三衣于户外，谓有蛟螭凭焉。
现代文：于是便脱下三件衣服放到屋外，说蛟龙可以在里面躲藏。
English: So he took off three pieces of clothing and put them outside, saying that the dragon could hide inside.

古文：衣出而声不已，宣乃视其十指甲，有一点如油麻者，在右手小指上。疑之，乃出于隔子孔中，一震而失半指。
现代文：但衣服送出之后，霹雳声仍然不止。道宣观看自己的十个手指甲，只见在右手的小指上有一个象芝麻似的小黑点，颇为疑惑，就把那手指从窗户眼中伸出，结果一声霹雳，小手指被震掉半截。
English: However, after the clothes were sent out, the beeping continued. Dao Xuan looked at his ten fingernails and saw a small black spot like a sesame seed on the little finger of his right hand. He was quite suspicious, so he held the finger out of the window. The result was a beep, and the little finger was shaken off by half.

古文：黑点是蛟龙之藏处也。
现代文：原来那黑点是蛟龙的藏身之处啊。
English: Originally, that black dot was the dragon's hiding place.

古文：禹锡曰： 在龙亦尤善求避地之所矣，而终不免。
现代文：刘禹锡说： 尽管蛟龙特别善于寻找躲避之处，但最后还是不能幸免。
English: Liu Yuxi said: Although dragonflies are particularly good at finding hiding places, they can't escape in the end.

古文：则一切分定，岂可逃乎？ 
现代文：这一切都是由早已注定的，怎么能够逃脱呢？ 
English: It's all predetermined, how can you escape?

古文：苏践言
现代文：苏践言
English: Su Zhenyan

古文：司礼寺苏践言，左相温国公良嗣之长子，居于嘉善里。
现代文：司礼寺苏践言，是左丞相温国公苏良嗣的长子，住在嘉善里。
English: Su Zhengyan of Sirei Temple is the eldest son of the Minister of the Left, Su Liangzi, who lives in Jiashan.

古文：永昌年六月，与其弟崇光府录事参军践义，退朝还第。
现代文：唐代永昌年间六月的一天，践言与其在崇光府任录事参军的弟弟践义一起退朝回府。
English: On a day in June during the Yongchang period of the Tang Dynasty, Shouyan and his younger brother, Shouyi, who had joined the army after being posted to Su Guangfu, returned to the capital.

古文：弘道观东，猝遇暴雨。震雷电光，来绕践言等马，回旋甚急，雷声亦在其侧。
现代文：行至弘道观的东面，突然遇到暴雨，雷鸣电闪，在他们身前马后隆隆作响，一声紧似一声，半晌才停。
English: They went to the east side of Hongdao View, and suddenly encountered torrential rain, thunder and lightning, rumbling in front of them and behind them, one sound closely resembling another, and only half stopped.

古文：有顷方散。其年九月，元肃言与赵怀节谋逆，践言妻妾并被缧絏数月，仍各解职。
现代文：这一年九月，元肃言和赵怀节谋反，践言和妻妾们一起被关押数月，还被解除了职务。
English: In September of that year, Yuan Shugen and Zhao Huaijie plotted a rebellion, and Shugen was imprisoned for several months together with his wives and concubines, and was also relieved of his duties.

古文：及良嗣薨，并放流荒裔。
现代文：父亲死后，他们全家又被流放到了边远的地方。
English: After his father's death, the whole family was exiled to a remote area.

古文：狄仁杰
现代文：狄仁杰
English: Di Renjie

古文：唐代州西十余里，有大槐，震雷所击，中裂数丈。雷公夹于树间，吼如霆震。
现代文：唐时代州西面十多里处有一株大槐树，被雷所击，中间裂开好几丈长的口子，将雷公夹于其间，疼得它吼声如雷。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was a large eucalyptus tree more than ten miles to the west of the prefecture. It was struck by lightning and split open in the middle, trapping Lei Gong in the middle. It was so painful that it roared like thunder.

古文：时狄仁杰为都督，宾从往观。
现代文：当时狄仁杰任都督，带着宾客和随从前去观看。
English: At that time, Di Renjie was the governor, and he took guests and his entourage to watch.

古文：欲至其所，众皆披靡，无敢进者。仁杰单骑劲进，迫而问之。乃云： 树有乖龙，所由令我逐之。落势不堪，为树所夹。若相救者，当厚报德。 
现代文：靠近大树后问雷公这是怎么回事，雷公回答说： 树里有个孽龙，上官让我把它赶走；但因我击下的位置不佳，被树夹住了，如果能够将我救出，我一定重重地报答你的恩德。 
English: After getting close to the tree, he asked Lei Gong what was going on. Lei Gong replied, "There is an evil dragon in the tree. The superior officer asked me to chase it away. However, because of the poor location of my shot, I got caught in the tree. If you can rescue me, I will surely repay your kindness."

古文：仁杰命锯匠破树，方得出，其后吉凶必先报命。
现代文：仁杰让木匠把树锯开，雷公才得以解脱。从此之后，凡有吉凶祸福之事，他都预先向狄仁杰报告。
English: Rinchen Dorjee Rinpoche asked the carpenter to saw the tree, and it was only then that Lei Gong was able to free himself. From then on, he reported to Di Rinchen Dorjee Rinpoche in advance about all auspicious, evil, and fortunate events.

古文：偃师
现代文：偃师
English: Division

古文：唐元和元年六月，偃师县柏李村，震雷于民家。地裂，阔丈余，长十五里，测无底。
现代文：唐代元和元年六月，在偃师县的柏李村，雷电击中了老百姓的家，地裂开了一丈多宽，十五里长，探测不到底。
English: In June of the first year of the Yuan and the first year of the Tang Dynasty, in the village of Bai Li in Jinshi County, lightning struck the homes of ordinary people, cracking the ground more than a yard wide and fifteen miles long, and it could not be detected to the bottom.

古文：所裂之处，井厕相通；所冲之墓。棺出地。亦不知所由也。
现代文：凡是裂开之处，水井和厕所相连通；受到冲击的坟地，棺木都被掀到了地面上，也不知道是什么原因。
English: Wherever there are cracks, wells and toilets are connected; cemeteries that have been hit, coffins have been lifted to the ground, and it is not known why.

古文：雷斗
现代文：雷斗
English: Lei Dou

古文：唐开元末，雷州有雷公与鲸斗。
现代文：唐代开元末年，在雷州发生了雷公与鲸格斗的事。
English: At the end of the first year of the Tang Dynasty, there was a fight between Lei Gong and a whale in Leizhou.

古文：鲸身出水上，雷公数十，在空中上下。
现代文：鲸的身体跃出水面，雷公有好几十个，在天空中上下翻腾。
English: The body of the whale leapt out of the water, and there were dozens of cormorants, tossing up and down in the sky.

古文：或纵火，或诟击，七日方罢。
现代文：有的施放雷火，有的边骂边打，经过七天才结束。
English: Some set off firecrackers, while others swore and fought, and it took seven days to end.

古文：海边居人往看，不知二者何胜，但见海水正赤。
现代文：在海边的居民都前去观看，不知它们谁取得了胜利，只是看到海水都变成了红色。
English: Residents along the coast went to watch, not knowing who had won, only to see the water turn red.

古文：漳泉界
现代文：漳泉界
English: 泉界

古文：唐开元中，漳泉二州，分疆界不均，互讼于台者，制使不能断。
现代文：唐代开元年间，漳州和泉州因为疆界划分不均而诉讼到府台，制置使不能判定此案。
English: During the first year of the Tang Dynasty, Bozhou and Quanzhou brought a lawsuit to the prefectural government because of the unequal division of the border, and the system made it impossible to decide the case.

古文：迨数年，辞理纷乱，终莫之决。
现代文：等到几年之后，这案子越来越乱，最终也没有个结果。
English: As the years went by, the case became more and more convoluted, and ultimately, inconclusive.

古文：于是州官焚香，告于天地山川，以祈神应。
现代文：于是，二州官便焚香祷告，祈求天地山川之神给予回答。
English: As a result, officials from the two states lit incense and prayed, asking for an answer from the God of heaven, earth, mountains and rivers.

古文：俄而雷雨大至，霹雳一声，崖壁中裂。
现代文：不久大雷雨来到，霹雳一声，将悬崖峭壁从中间劈裂。
English: A thunderstorm soon arrived and split the cliff in half with a loud bang.

古文：所竞之地，拓为一迳。高千尺，深仅五里，因为官道。
现代文：裂开之处，开辟出一条小路，有一千多尺高，只有五里深，因而将其作为一条官道。
English: The crack opened up a path that was more than a thousand feet high and only five miles deep, making it an official trail.

古文：壁中有古篆六行，二十四字，皆广数尺。虽约此为界，人莫能识。
现代文：峭壁上有六行古篆字，一共二十四个，每个都有好几尺长，二州虽以此为界，但那些字无人能识。
English: On the cliff there are six lines of ancient characters, a total of twenty-four, each several feet long. Although this is the border between the two states, no one can read those characters.

古文：贞元初，流人李协辩之曰： 漳泉两州，分地太平。
现代文：贞元初年，流亡在外的李协辨认出这些字，说是： 漳泉两州，分地太平。
English: In the first year of Zhengyuan, Li Xie, who was in exile, recognized these words and said: "The two states of Quanquan are separated by Taiping."

古文：永安龙溪，山高气清。
现代文：永安龙溪，山高气清。
English: Yongan Longxi, the mountain is high and the air is clear.

古文：千年不惑，万古作程。 
现代文：千年不惑，万古作程。 
English: A thousand years is no time at all.

古文：所云永安龙溪者，两郡界首乡名也。
现代文：这上面所说的永安、龙溪，就是两州交界处第一乡的名字啊。
English: The above-mentioned Yong'an and Longxi are the names of the first townships at the junction of the two states.

古文：包超
现代文：包超
English: 包超

古文：唐安丰尉裴翾，士淹孙也。
现代文：唐代安丰县尉裴翾，是裴士淹的孙子。
English: Pei Xuan, a lieutenant of Anfeng County in the Tang Dynasty, was the grandson of Pei Shizhuan.

古文：云：玄宗尝冬月，诏山人包超，令致雷声。
现代文：他说，玄宗皇帝曾经在农历十一月里，召见山人包超，让他引来雷声。
English: He said that Emperor Xuanzong once summoned the mountain man Baochao in November of the lunar calendar and asked him to bring thunder.

古文：对曰： 来日午当有雷。 
现代文：包超回答说： 明天中午应该有雷。 
English: Baochao replied, "There should be thunder at noon tomorrow.

古文：遂令高力士监之。
现代文：于是，玄宗命令高力士前去监督。
English: As a result, Xuanzong ordered Gao Lixin to go and supervise.

古文：一夕，醮式行法，及明至巳，曾无纤翳。
现代文：一天傍晚，包超开始祭祀、祈祷，施行法术，一直到天亮又近中午，天空仍然没一丝云彩。
English: One evening, Bao Chao began to worship, pray, and perform spells, and until dawn and close to noon, the sky was still without a trace of cloud.

古文：力士惧之。
现代文：高力士十分担心。
English: Kolisi is very worried.

古文：超曰： 将军视南山，当有黑气如盘矣。 
现代文：包超说： 将军请往南山看，那里应当有黑气盘旋不散啊。 
English: Baochao said, "General, please look at Nanshan Mountain. There should be a dark atmosphere hovering there.

古文：力士望之，如其言。
现代文：高力士望去，果然正象他说的那样。
English: Gollum looked away, and it was just as he had said.

古文：有顷风起，黑气弥漫，疾雷数声。
现代文：不一会刮起风，黑云扩散开来，响起几声霹雳。
English: Soon the wind picks up, the dark clouds spread out, and a few crickets chirp.

古文：上令随哥舒翰西征，每阵尝得胜风。
现代文：后来皇帝命令包超跟随哥舒翰征讨西方，每仗都取得了胜利。
English: Later, the emperor ordered Baochao to follow Goshukhan to conquer the West, and he won every battle.

古文：张须弥
现代文：张须弥
English: Zhang Shuya

古文：唐上元中，滁州全椒人苍督张须弥，县遣送牲诣州。
现代文：唐代上元年间，滁州府全椒县仓督叫张须弥。一次，县官派遣他押送牲畜去滁州，山路崎岖难行。
English: In the first year of the Tang Dynasty, Zhang Shuya was the warehouse superintendent of Quanzhou Prefecture's Quanzhou County. Once, the county official sent him to escort livestock to Quanzhou. The mountain road was rugged and difficult to travel.

古文：山路险阻，淮南多有义堂及井，用庇行人。
现代文：淮南一带很多地方都有不收费的房屋和水井，用来庇护过往的行人，故将这种房屋称为义堂。
English: In many places around Huainan, there are houses and wells that do not charge fees, which are used to shelter passing pedestrians. Therefore, these houses are called yidang.

古文：日暮暴雨，须弥与沙门子邻，同入义堂。
现代文：太阳落山时下起了暴雨，须弥和佛门弟子们一起进了义堂。
English: When the sun went down, it rained heavily. Sumi and his Buddhist disciples entered the hall of righteousness together.

古文：须弥驱驮人王老，于雨中收驴。
现代文：须弥督促赶驮子的王老汉冒雨把驴圈起来。
English: Sumi urged Wang Laohan, who was driving the mule, to circle the donkey in the rain.

古文：顷之，闻云中有声堕地，忽见村女九人。共扶一车。
现代文：有顷，听见云里有声音落在地上，王老汉忽然看见九个乡村女子共扶着一辆车。
English: Suddenly, Wang Laohan heard a voice from the clouds falling to the ground. Suddenly, he saw nine village women driving a car.

古文：王有女阿推，死已半岁，亦在车所。
现代文：他有个女儿叫阿推，死了已经半年，竟然也站在车子旁边！
English: He had a daughter called Adi, who had been dead for half a year, and she was even standing next to the car!

古文：见王悲喜，问母妹家事，靡所不至。
现代文：见到王老汉，她悲喜交加，便询问母亲和妹妹等家里的事情，没有她问不到的。
English: When she saw Wang Laohan, she was overcome with sadness and joy, and asked about her mother and sister and other things at home. There was nothing she couldn't ask.

古文：其徒促之乃去。
现代文：和她一起的人再三催促，她才离去。
English: Those with her repeatedly urged her to leave.

古文：初扶车渐上，有云拥蔽，因作雷声，方知是雷车。
现代文：她刚刚扶住车子，那车子就渐渐升起，有云在周围遮蔽，并发出响雷声，才知道是雷车。
English: As soon as she held on to the car, it began to rise, obscured by the clouds around it, and let out a thunderous roar before she realized it was a mine cart.

古文：蔡希闵
现代文：蔡希闵
English: Cai Xichen

古文：唐蔡希闵，家在东都。
现代文：唐代有个叫蔡希闵的人，家住东都洛阳。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a person named Cai Xizhao who lived in Luoyang, the eastern capital.

古文：暑夜，兄弟数十人会于厅。忽大雨，雷电晦瞑。
现代文：一个天气炎热的夜晚，他们兄弟数十人聚在厅前，忽然下起了大雨，雷鸣电闪一片昏暗。
English: On a hot night, dozens of their brothers gathered in front of the hall. Suddenly, there was a heavy rain, thunder and lightning, and everything was dark.

古文：堕一物于庭，作飒飒声。
现代文：这时，天上掉下一个东西落在院子里，飒飒作响。
English: At that moment, something fell from the sky and landed in the courtyard, making a banging sound.

古文：命火视之，乃妇人也，衣黄紬裙布衫，言语不通，遂目为天女。
现代文：希闵让人拿来灯火观看，原来竟是一个妇人，穿着黄绸子做的裙衫，说话听不懂，于是便把她视为天上来的仙女。
English: She had a lamp brought to her, and when she saw that it was a woman in a yellow silk dress who could not understand her, she thought she was a fairy from the sky.

古文：后五六年，能汉语。问其乡国，不之知。
现代文：五六年之后，她懂得了汉语，可问起她的故国家乡来，仍一无所知。
English: Fifty-six years later, she understands Chinese, but she still knows nothing about her hometown.

古文：但云： 本乡食粳米，无碗器，用柳箱贮饭而食之。 竟不知是何国人。
现代文：只是说她的老家吃粳米，没有碗，用柳木制成的容器盛饭吃，竟然不知道是哪国人。
English: She just said that people in her hometown eat glutinous rice, they don't have bowls, they use containers made of willow to eat their meals, and she didn't even know who they were.

古文：初在本国，夜出，为雷取上，俄堕希闵庭中。
现代文：她说，当年她在自己家里，夜晚出门时被雷抓上天空，俄顷掉落在希闵家院子里。
English: She said that when she was in her own home, she was caught by lightning in the sky when she went out at night, and the lightning fell in the courtyard of the Hefei family.

古文：徐景先
现代文：徐景先
English: Xu Jingsian

古文：唐徐景先，有弟阿四，顽嚚纵佚，每诲辱之。
现代文：唐代有个叫徐景先的人，他有个弟弟叫阿四，遇顽凶暴，放荡无羁。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a man named Xu Jingxian. He had a younger brother named Ah Si, who was violent and debauched.

古文：而母加爱念，曲为申解，因厉声应答。
现代文：每当景先开导他时都要骂他一顿。可他的母亲却倍加溺爱之，曲意为他申辩。因此，他对母亲也一点不客气。
English: Whenever Jingcheng enlightened him, he would scold him. However, his mother doted on him and pleaded for him. Therefore, he was not at all polite to his mother.

古文：云雷奄至，曳景先于云中。
现代文：一天，雷雨突然而至，把徐景先拽到空中。
English: One day, a thunderstorm suddenly arrived, dragging Xu Jing into the air.

古文：有主者，左右数十人。
现代文：有个主持人，还有几十人随从，开始责问训斥他。
English: A moderator, flanked by dozens of others, began to berate him.

古文：诃诘。景先答曰： 缘弟不调，供养有缺，所心诟辱。
现代文：景先回答说： 由于弟弟不听教导，在供养母亲方面做得很差，所以我感到耻辱。
English: Jingxian replied, "I feel humiliated because my younger brother does not listen to instructions and does a poor job of supporting his mother.

古文：母命释之，非当詈母。 
现代文：母亲总是原谅他，我有气，但也不当骂母亲。 
English: My mother always forgives him. I get angry, but I don't abuse my mother.

古文：主者不识其言。寻一青衣。自空跃下，为景先对。
现代文：主持人听不懂他的话，随即有一婢女从空中跳下，与景先对话。
English: The host couldn't understand what he was saying, so a maid jumped out of the air and started a conversation with him.

古文：曰： 若尔放去，至家，可答一辩。
现代文：她说： 如果放你回去，到家之后可写一申辩词。
English: She said, "If you are released, you can write a defense statement when you get home.

古文：钉东壁上，吾自令取之。 
现代文：钉在东面墙壁，我自有办法取它。 
English: It's nailed to the east wall. I'll get it myself.

古文：遂排景先堕舍前池中，出水，了无所损。
现代文：于是把景先推落入房前水池中。出水后，他一点损伤也没有。
English: As a result, the scene was pushed into the pond in front of the house. After getting out of the water, he was not injured at all.

古文：求纸答辩，钉东壁，果风至而辩亡。
现代文：他找纸写好答辩词，钉在东墙上。果然一阵风刮来，那申辩词就不见了。
English: He found a piece of paper to write a reply and pinned it to the east wall. Sure enough, a gust of wind came and the reply was gone.

古文：欧阳忽雷
现代文：欧阳忽雷
English: Ouyang Hu Lei

古文：唐欧阳忽雷者，本名绍，桂阳人，劲健，勇于战斗。
现代文：唐代有个人叫欧阳忽雷，本名叫绍，桂阳人氏，强健有力，善于打斗。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a man called Ouyang Huulei, whose real name was Shao, Gui Yangren. He was strong and powerful, and good at fighting.

古文：尝为郡将，有名，任雷州长史。
现代文：曾经当过郡府的武官，有名气，后任雷州长史。
English: He was once a military attaché of the county government, famous, and later became the governor of Lei Prefecture.

古文：馆于州城西偏，前临大池，尝出云气，居者多死。
现代文：他的寓所坐落在州城的西面，对面有个大池塘，经常溢出云气，在这居住的人死了不少。
English: His apartment is located on the west side of the state capital, across from a large pond, often overflowing with clouds, and many people who live here have died.

古文：绍至，处之不疑。
现代文：欧阳绍来此之后，毫不迟疑地治理它。
English: After Ouyang Shao came here, he ruled it without hesitation.

古文：令人以度测水深浅，别穿巨壑，深广类是。
现代文：他让人测量水的深度，又开辟出一大片洼地，深和宽都和那个大池塘一样；然后，把大池塘里的水放出。
English: He had the depth of the water measured, and a large depression was made, as deep and as wide as the big pond, and then the water in the big pond was let out.

古文：既成，引决水，于是云兴，天地晦冥，雷电大至，火光属地。
现代文：于是黑云滚滚而来，天地一片昏暗，雷鸣电闪，火光连地。
English: As a result, dark clouds rolled in, the sky and the earth were darkened, thunder and lightning flashed, and fires blazed.

古文：绍率其徒二十余人，持弓矢排锵，与雷师战。
现代文：欧阳绍带领部下二十多人，拉弓射箭，与雷公交战。
English: Ouyang Shao led more than twenty of his subordinates, drew a bow and arrows, and fought with the thunder bus.

古文：长四五尺，无头目。斫刺不伤，蠕蠕然。
现代文：从里面抓出一条象蚕的蛇，四五尺长，没有头和眼睛，砍刺均不伤，仍然在蠕动。
English: From inside, they pulled out a silkworm-like snake, four or five feet long, without a head or eyes, and still wriggling.

古文：仍杵为粉。而服之至尽。
现代文：拿来大锅用油煎炸也不死，最后放在铁水里才焦糊。欧阳绍把它捣成粉末，全部喝了进去。
English: Taking a large pot to fry the cucumber in oil did not kill it, and finally it was put in molten iron before it was scorched. Ouyang Shao pounded it into powder and drank it all.

古文：南人因呼绍为忽雷。
现代文：因此，南方人称欧阳绍为欧阳忽雷。
English: Therefore, the southerners called Ouyang Shao as Ouyang Hu Lei.

古文：宣州
现代文：宣州
English: Xuanzhou

古文：唐贞元年，宣州忽大雷雨，一物堕地，猪首，手足各两指，执一赤蛇啮之。
现代文：唐代贞元年间，宣州忽然下了一场大雷雨。一个东西落到地上，长着猪头，手脚各有两个指头，在抓着一条红蛇吃。
English: During the Zhengyuan period of the Tang Dynasty, a thunderstorm suddenly hit Xuanzhou. An object fell to the ground, it had a pig's head, two fingers on each hand and foot, and it was eating a red snake.

古文：俄顷云暗而失，时皆图而传之。
现代文：不一会儿，云变暗了，这东西也不见了，当时有人画成图传扬这件事。
English: Soon after, the clouds darkened and the object disappeared, as someone drew a picture to spread the word.

古文：王干
现代文：王干
English: Wang Gan

古文：唐贞元初，郑州王干，有胆勇。
现代文：唐代贞元初年，郑州有个人叫王干，胆大而勇猛。
English: In the first year of Zhenyuan of the Tang Dynasty, there was a man in Zhengzhou named Wang Gan, who was bold and brave.

古文：夏中作田，忽暴雷雨，因入蚕室中避之。
现代文：夏天中午他正在田里劳作，忽然来了大雷雨，因此进入蚕房躲避。
English: At midday in the summer, he was working in the fields when a heavy thunderstorm suddenly came, so he went into the silkworm house to take shelter.

古文：有顷，雷电入室中，黑气陡暗。
现代文：不一会儿，雷电射入室内，一团黑气，天地顿时昏暗起来。
English: In a short time, lightning shot into the room, creating a black cloud, and the world suddenly became dark.

古文：干遂掩户，荷锄乱击。
现代文：王干急忙关上房门，拿起锄头到处乱打。
English: Wang Gan hurriedly closed the door of the room, picked up the hoe and beat it around.

古文：雷声渐小，云气亦敛。
现代文：雷声逐渐变小，云气也收敛了。
English: The thunder gradually diminished, and the clouds gathered.

古文：干大呼，击之不已。
现代文：王干大声呼喊，仍不停地打。
English: Wang Gan shouted loudly and continued to fight.

古文：气复如半床，已至如盘。忽然堕地，变为慰斗折刀小折足铛焉。
现代文：云气渐渐变得像半张床那么大，又变成盘子那么大，最后忽然堕地，变为熨斗、折刀、断腿小锅等物。
English: The cloud gradually became as big as half a bed, then as big as a plate, and finally, it suddenly fell to the ground and turned into an iron, a folding knife, a leg-breaking pan, and so on.

古文：华亭堰典
现代文：华亭堰典
English: Huating Weir

古文：唐贞元中，华亭县界村堰典，妻与人私，又于邻家盗一手巾。
现代文：唐代贞元年间，华亭县界村有个叫堰典的人，其妻子与人私通，又偷了邻居的一条手巾。
English: During the Zhengyuan period of the Tang Dynasty, there was a man named Yan Dian in Jiecun, Huating County, whose wife had an adulterous affair and stole a handkerchief from a neighbor.

古文：邻知觉，至典家寻觅。
现代文：邻居知道了，到堰典家里寻找。
English: A neighbor found out and went to Yan Dian's home to look for him.

古文：典与妻共讳诟骂，此人冤愤，乃报曰： 汝妻与他人私，又盗物。仍共讳骂，神道岂容汝乎？ 
现代文：堰典和妻子都不承认并辱骂他，他感到冤屈愤怒，于是就对堰典说： 你妻子和别人私通，又偷东西，你们还都不认帐并且骂人，上天怎么能容忍你们呢？ 
English: Both he and his wife disowned and abused him. He felt wronged and angry, so he said to him, "Your wife has committed adultery and stolen, and you still disown and abuse her. How can Heaven tolerate you?"

古文：典曰： 我妻的不奸私盗物，如汝所说，遣我一家为天霹。 
现代文：堰典说： 我妻子没有和别人通奸也没偷东西！如果象你说的那样，让我们全家遭雷击！ 
English: The seer said, "My wife did not commit adultery, nor did she steal. If what you say is true, our whole family will be struck by lightning!"

古文：既各散已。
现代文：然后各自散去。
English: Then everyone dispersed.

古文：至夜，大风雨，雷震怒，击破典屋，典及妻男女五六人并死。
现代文：到了晚上，大风雨来了，霹雳震怒，击破了堰典家的房屋，他们夫妻及家人男女五六口全被劈死了。
English: In the evening, a heavy wind and rain came, the hailstones were so fierce that they broke through the house of the Yan family, and the husband and wife and five or six members of the family were all killed.

古文：至明，雨尤未歇，邻人但见此家屋倒，火烧不已。
现代文：到天亮时，雨还未停，邻居见他家房倒屋塌，大火燃烧不止。
English: By dawn, the rain had not stopped, and the neighbor saw his house collapse, and the fire continued to burn.

古文：众共火中搜出，觅得典及妻，皆烧如燃烛状。
现代文：便在火中搜寻，找到堰典和他妻子的尸体，都烧成了点燃的蜡烛状。
English: They searched through the fire and found the bodies of both him and his wife, burned to the shape of a lit candle.

古文：为礼拜，求乞不更烧之，火方自熄。
现代文：邻居急忙跪礼求拜，祈求不要再烧他们，火才自己熄灭。
English: Neighbours rushed to their knees to pray that they would not be burned again, and the fire went out of its own accord.

古文：典肋上题字云： 痴人保妻贞将家口质。 
现代文：堰典的肋上写着这样一行字：傻子想保妻子贞操的名声，拿全家人的性命作抵押。 
English: On the rib of the codex was written the following line: "A fool who wants to preserve the reputation of his wife's chastity mortgages the lives of his entire family."

古文：妻肋上书： 行奸仍盗。 
现代文：他妻子的肋上写道： 与人通奸并偷东西。
English: On his wife's rib it was written: "Committed adultery and theft."

古文：告县检视，远近咸知。
现代文：邻居报告到县里来验尸，弄得远近皆知。
English: A neighbor reported to the county for an autopsy, and the news spread far and wide.

古文：吴越闻震死者非少，有牛及鳝鱼树木等。
现代文：听说吴越一带被雷震死的人不少，还有牛、鳝鱼和树木等。
English: I heard that many people were killed by lightning in the Wuyue area, as well as cattle, eels and trees.

古文：为雷击死者，皆闻于县辩识。
现代文：被雷震死者的家属，听说此事后都到县里辩白。
English: After hearing about this, the families of those who were killed by the lightning all went to the county to plead their case.

古文：或曰： 人则有过，天杀可也。牛及树木鱼等，岂有罪恶而杀之耶？ 
现代文：有的说：人若有过错，老天杀他是可以的；但牛和树木、鱼之类，难道也有罪恶而该杀么？
English: Some said, "If a man is at fault, it is all right for God to kill him; but cows, trees, fish, and the like, are they also sinful and should be killed?"

古文：又有弑君弑父杀害非理者，天何不诛？
现代文：另外，还有杀害君王、杀害父亲和无故杀人的，老天为什么不杀死他们呢？
English: In addition, there are those who kill kings, fathers, and people without reason. Why doesn't God kill them?

古文：请为略说。
现代文：请给大概地讲讲这个道理。
English: Please explain this to us in general terms.

古文：洞庭子曰：昔夏帝武乙，射天而震死。晋臣王导，寝柏而移灾。斯则列于史籍矣。
现代文：洞庭子说：当年夏帝武乙，因射天而被雷震死；晋代大臣王导，因卧在柏树上而躲避了灾祸，这些都记载于史书典籍中。
English: Dongtingzi said: That year, Emperor Wuyi of Xia was killed by lightning after shooting into the sky, and Wang Du, the Minister of the Jin Dynasty, avoided disaster by lying on a cypress tree. These are all recorded in the history books.

古文：至于牛鱼，以穿踏田地，水伤害禾苗也。
现代文：至于牛鱼等，在水田里穿来穿去，践踏不已，伤害了禾苗啊。
English: As for the cattle and fish, they went through the paddy fields and trampled on the plants, damaging the seedlings.

古文：或曰，水所损亦微，何罚之大？
现代文：又有人说：水所损害的很小，为什么惩罚得这么重？
English: Another said: "The water damage is very small, why is the punishment so heavy?

古文：对曰：五谷者，万人命也，国之宝重，天故诛之，以诫于人。
现代文：回答说：五谷是百姓的命根子，是国家最重要的财宝，因此上天要杀死它们，以此告诫人们。
English: He replied: "Cereals are the lifeblood of the people and the most important treasure of the country. Therefore, God wants to kill them as a warning to the people."

古文：树木之类，龙藏于中，神既取龙，遂损树木耳。
现代文：至于树木之类，龙藏身其中，天神既然要杀死龙，就必然损害树木呀。
English: As for trees and the like, dragons hide in them. Since the gods want to kill the dragons, they must damage the trees.

古文：天道悬远，垂教及人，委曲有情，不可一概。
现代文：天之道深奥高远，教训下面的人，事情的来龙去脉都有情理，不可以一概而论。
English: The way of heaven is profound and far-reaching, and the people below the teachings have a sense of the ins and outs of things, and cannot be generalized.

古文：余曾见漳泉故事。
现代文：你可曾听到过漳泉的故事吗？
English: Have you ever heard the story of the spring?

古文：漳泉接境，县南龙溪，界域不分，古来争竞不决。
现代文：漳泉二州边界相连，县南面的龙溪，边界划分不清，自古以来争而不决。
English: The borders of the two counties are connected, and Longxi, in the south of the county, has an unclear border, which has been disputed since ancient times.

古文：万里不惑，千秋作程。
现代文：有一年，忽然一阵霹雳，将峭壁劈裂，上刻： 漳泉两州，分地太平。
English: One year, a sudden hailstorm split the cliff, inscribed above: 泉两州,分地太平.

古文：南安龙溪，山高气清。 
现代文：南安龙溪，山高气清。
English: Nan'an Longxi, the mountain is high and the air is clear.

古文：其文今犹可识。
现代文：万里不惑，千秋作程。 
English: Don't get confused, it's a never ending process.

古文：天之教令，其可惑哉！
现代文：这些文字现在还可以辩认。上天的意志，难道是可以疑惑的吗？
English: These letters can still be recognized today. Is it possible to doubt God's will?

古文：且《论语》云：迅雷风烈必变。
现代文：而且《论语》中也说： 迅雷风烈必变。 
English: Moreover, it is also said in the Analects: A whirlwind is bound to change.

古文：又《礼记》曰：若有疾风迅雷甚雨，则必变。
现代文：还有《礼记》说： 若有疾风迅雷甚雨，则必变。
English: Also, "Li Ji" said: If there is a gale, thunder and heavy rain, it is bound to change.

古文：虽夜必兴，衣服冠而坐。
现代文：纵然在夜间也必须起来，和衣戴冠而坐。 
English: Even in the night he must rise and sit clothed and crowned.

古文：又曰： 洊雷震，君子以恐惧修省。 
现代文：又说： 反反复复的雷震，君子们应当感到震惊而不断地反省自己。 
English: He also said, "Gentlemen should be shocked by the repeated thunderous shocks and constantly reflect on themselves.

古文：夫圣人奉天教，岂妄说哉！
现代文：孔圣人是根据天意教诲我们的，难道是瞎说吗？
English: Is it nonsense to say that Confucius taught us according to God's will?

古文：今所以为之言者，序述耳。因为不尔，岂足悲哉！
现代文：现在之所以讲这些，说说而已；因为不这样，难道不是很悲哀的吗？
English: Isn't it sad that we're talking about this now, because it's just talk, because it's not true?

古文：夫然弑君弑父杀害无辜，人间法自有刑戮，岂可以区区之意，而责恢恢之网者欤。李师道
现代文：何况杀害君王、父亲及无辜的人，有人间法律对他们进行惩治。我们怎么能够以个人的怀疑去指责疏而不漏的天网呢？李师道
English: Not to mention the killing of kings, fathers, and innocent people, for which there are human laws to punish them. How can we use our personal suspicions to accuse the negligent Skynet?

古文：唐元和中，李师道据青齐，蓄兵勇锐，地广千里，储积数百万，不贡不觐。
现代文：唐代元和年间，李师道占据青、齐二州，屯集了大批骁勇精锐的兵马，地广千里，蓄积金银数百万两，不向朝廷纳贡，也不进京朝见皇帝。
English: During the Tang Dynasty's Yuan and Wu Dynasties, Li Shidao occupied Qing and Qi two states, assembled a large number of brave and elite soldiers and horses, traveled thousands of miles, accumulated millions of gold and silver, did not pay tribute to the imperial court, and did not enter Beijing to see the emperor.

古文：宪宗命将讨之，王师不利。
现代文：宪宗皇帝派军队讨伐他，结果却打了败仗。
English: Emperor Xianzong sent troops to fight him, but they were defeated.

古文：而师道益骄，乃建新宫，拟天子正殿，卜日而居。
现代文：而李师道从此越发骄横，甚至模仿皇宫正殿的样子建造宫殿，卜算吉日搬进去居住。
English: From then on, Li Shidao became more and more arrogant. He even built a palace imitating the appearance of the main hall of the imperial palace, and moved into it on the auspicious day.

古文：是夕云物遽晦，风雷如撼，遂为震击倾圮。
现代文：当天傍晚，乌云骤起，天地昏暗，狂风霹雳撼天动地，结果把这座宫殿震塌了。
English: In the evening of the same day, dark clouds suddenly rose, the sky and the earth were darkened, and a fierce wind shook the heavens and the earth. As a result, the palace collapsed.

古文：俄复继以天火，了无遗者。
现代文：不一会儿又燃起天火，燃得片瓦无存。
English: A short while later, the sky fire ignited again, burning all the tiles.

古文：青齐人相顾语曰： 为人臣而逆其君者，祸固宜矣；今谪见于天，安可逃其戾乎？ 
现代文：青齐二州的百姓奔走相告说： 臣子背叛君主，自然要遭此灾祸；现在天已经怪罪下来，怎么能逃脱惩罚呢？ 
English: The people of the two states of Qing and Qi rushed to tell each other: If a courtier betrays the monarch, he will naturally suffer this calamity; now that the sky has been blamed, how can he escape punishment?

古文：旬余，师道果诛死。
现代文：过了十多天，李师道真的被杀死了。
English: After more than ten days, Li Shidao was really killed.

古文：李鄘
现代文：李鄘
English: Lee Min Ho

古文：唐李鄘，北都介休县民。
现代文：唐代有个叫李鄘的人，是北都介休县的平民。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a man named Li Qian, who was a commoner from Jiu County in the north of the country.

古文：送解牒，夜止晋祠宇下。
现代文：一天他解送文书，夜里住在晋祠内。
English: One day he was delivering documents, and at night he lived in the Jin ancestral hall.

古文：夜半，闻人叩门云： 介休王暂借霹雳车，某日至介休收麦。 
现代文：半夜，听见有人敲门说： ，介休王要临时借用霹雳车，某天到介休来收麦子。 
English: In the middle of the night, he heard someone knock on his door and say, "King Jiexiu wants to temporarily borrow a mule cart and come to Jiexiu one day to collect wheat."

古文：良久，有人应曰： 大王传语，霹雳车正忙，不及借。 
现代文：过了很久，有人回答说： 大王让我转告你，霹雳车现在正忙，不能借。 
English: After a long time, someone answered: "Let me tell you, the forklift is busy right now, and I can't borrow it.

古文：其人再三借之。
现代文：那人再三要借。
English: The man kept asking to borrow it.

古文：遂见五六人秉烛，自庙后出，介山使者亦自门骑而入。
现代文：于是，就见五六个人拿着蜡烛从庙后走出来，介山使者也骑着马自门而入。
English: As a result, five or six people were seen coming out from behind the temple holding candles, and the messenger from Mount Kaishan also rode in through the door.

古文：数人共持一物，如幢，扛上环缀旗幡，授与骑者曰： 可点领。 
现代文：好多人共同抬着一件东西，象仪仗用的旗子，旗杆上环缀旗幡。他们将其交给骑马的那位使者，并说： 清点一下你就可以拿走。 
English: A number of people were carrying something like a ceremonial flag, with a banner around the pole, and they gave it to the messenger on horseback, saying, "Take it away after you have counted it."

古文：骑即数其幡，凡十八叶，每叶有光如电起。
现代文：使者数数这些旗幡，共十八面，每一面都闪闪发光，象放电一样。
English: The envoy counted the banners, eighteen in all, each one glittering like an electric discharge.

古文：民遂遍报邻村，令速收麦，将有大风雨，悉不之信，乃自收刈。
现代文：李把此事告诉了邻村百姓，让他们赶紧收麦，不久将有大风雨。人们都不相信，李鄘就独自收割。
English: Li told the villagers in the neighboring village about this, telling them to hurry up and harvest the wheat, as there would soon be a big storm. People didn't believe it, and Li Xuan ended up harvesting all by herself.

古文：至日，民率亲戚，据高阜，候天色。
现代文：第二天，李鄘带领亲属站在高高的土山上，等待天色。
English: The next day, Li Yao and his relatives stood on a high dirt hill, waiting for the sky to clear.

古文：乃午，介山上有云气，如窑烟，须臾蔽天，注雨如绠，风吼雷震，凡损麦千余顷。
现代文：到了中午，介山上出现了云气，象窑里冒出的烟，一会儿就布满了天空，随即大雨倾盆，风吼电闪，共损坏麦子一千多顷。
English: At noon, clouds appeared on the mountain, like smoke from a kiln, and soon filled the sky, followed by heavy rain, wind and lightning, damaging more than a thousand hectares of wheat.

古文：数村以民为妖，讼之。
现代文：不少村民认为李鄘是妖人，向官府告他。
English: Many villagers believed that Li Yao was a demon and reported him to the government.

古文：工部员外郎张周封亲睹其推案。
现代文：工部员外郎张周封亲自见到县官断这件案子。
English: Zhang Zhoufeng, a member of the engineering department, personally saw the county official dismiss the case.

古文：徐誗
现代文：徐誗
English: Xu Jun

古文：唐润州延陵县茅山界，元和春，大风雨。
现代文：唐代，润州府延陵县有个叫茅山界的地方。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was a place called Mao Shan Jie in Yanling County, Rongzhou Prefecture.

古文：堕一鬼，身二丈余，黑色，面如猪首，角五六尺，肉翅丈余，豹尾。
现代文：元和年春天，在一阵狂风暴雨中，从天上掉下个怪物，身长二丈多，黑色，脸象猪头，角长五六尺，肉质的翅膀一丈多，长着豹子尾。
English: In the spring of the Yuan and He years, in the midst of a violent storm, a monster fell from the sky, more than two meters tall, black, face like a pig's head, horns five or six feet long, fleshy wings more than one meter long, with a leopard's tail.

古文：又有半服绛裩，豹皮缠腰，手足两爪皆金色。
现代文：它穿着红裤子，腰间缠豹皮，手脚和爪子全是金色。
English: He was wearing red trousers, leopard skin around his waist, and his hands, feet and paws were all gold.

古文：执赤蛇，足踏之，瞪目欲食，其声如雷。
现代文：它抓着一条红蛇，用脚踩住，瞪着眼睛要吃蛇，声音如雷。
English: It clutched a red snake, trod on it with its foot, stared at the snake to eat it, and made a thunderous noise.

古文：田人徐誗，忽见惊走，闻县。
现代文：种田人徐誗见状，转身就跑。
English: When the farmer Xu Wei saw the situation, he turned around and ran.

古文：寻邑令亲往睹焉，因令图写。
现代文：这事很快就报到县里。县令立即亲自前往观看，并令人把它画下来。
English: The matter was soon reported to the prefectural government. The prefectural governor immediately went to see it in person and had it painted down.

古文：寻复雷雨，翼之而去。
现代文：一会儿又来了雷雨，那怪物便展开翅膀飞走了。
English: A moment later, there was another thunderstorm, and the monster spread its wings and flew away.

