古文：蠕蠕匈奴宇文莫槐徒何段就六眷高车蠕蠕姓郁久闾氏。
现代文：蠕蠕姓郁久闾氏。始自神元皇帝末年，劫掠的骑兵得到一奴，发际刚和眉毛平齐，忘掉了原来的姓名，他的主人给他取姓叫 木骨闾 。
English: Beginning in the last years of Emperor Jingu, a raiding cavalryman acquired a slave with a hairline and eyebrows so straight that he forgot his original name. His master gave him the surname Mokotsu.

古文：始神元之末，掠骑有得一奴，发始齐眉，忘本姓名，其主字之曰木骨闾。 木骨闾 者，首秃也。 木骨闾 与 郁久闾 声相近，故后子孙因以为氏。
现代文：木骨闾是 秃头 的意思。 木骨闾 和 郁久闾 声音近似，所以后世子孙用它作为姓氏。
English: Mokotsubo means bald head. Mokotsubo and Ikukyubo sound similar, so later generations used it as a surname.

古文：木骨闾既壮，免奴为骑卒。
现代文：木骨闾已经壮年，免去奴隶身份做骑兵。
English: The half-timbered yakitori has come of age, freed from the slavery of being a cavalryman.

古文：穆帝时，坐后期当斩，亡匿广漠谿谷间，收合逋逃，得百余人，依纯突邻部。
现代文：穆帝的时候，因犯罪当斩，逃亡藏匿在广漠溪谷中间，收聚逃亡，得到百余人，依附纯突邻部。
English: At the time of Mu Di, he was executed for a crime, fled and hid in the middle of a vast desert valley, gathered and fled, gained more than a hundred people, and adhered to the pure protruding neighboring part.

古文：木骨闾死，子车鹿会雄健，始有部众，自号柔然。
现代文：木骨闾死了，儿子车鹿会勇武有力，开始有了部众，自称 柔然 。
English: The wooden skeleton died, and the son, Chelu Deer, became brave and powerful, and began to have a group of followers, calling himself "Juren."

古文：后太武以其无知，状类于虫，故改其号为蠕蠕。
现代文：后来太武帝因他们无知，形象与虫类似，因此改变他们的称号作 蠕蠕 。
English: Later, Emperor Taowu changed their name to "Wormworms" because of their ignorance and resemblance to worms.

古文：车鹿会既为部帅，岁贡马畜、貂豽皮。
现代文：车鹿会已经成为部帅，每年进贡马畜、貂豸内皮。
English: The Deer Carriage Association has become the head of the department, and pays tribute to horses and donkeys every year.

古文：冬则徙度漠南，夏则还居漠北。
现代文：冬天就移居漠南，夏天则归居漠北。
English: They migrate to the south of the desert in winter and return to the north of the desert in summer.

古文：车鹿会死，子吐奴傀立。
现代文：车鹿会死了，儿子吐奴傀立。
English: The car deer will die, and the son will become a toad.

古文：吐奴傀死，子跋提立。
现代文：吐奴傀死了，儿子跋提立。
English: Tu Niu Guo is dead, his son is alive.

古文：跋提死，子地粟袁立。
现代文：跋提死了，儿子地粟袁立。
English: Babut is dead, and his son, Ji Mou Yuan Li, is gone.

古文：地粟袁死，其部分为二。
现代文：地粟袁死了，他的部众分为两部分。
English: Ji Mou Yuan died, and his followers split into two groups.

古文：地粟袁长子匹候跋继父，居东边；次子缊纥提，别居西边。
现代文：地粟袁长子匹候跋承继父亲，居住东边；次子纥提，另居西边。
English: Ji Mou Yuan's eldest son, Pi Wu, succeeded his father and lived in the east; his second son, Qi Ti, lived in the west.

古文：及昭成崩，缊纥提附卫辰而贰于魏。
现代文：到昭成帝驾崩，纥提归附卫辰而对魏有贰心。
English: After the death of Emperor Zhaocheng, Zang Ti returned to Wei Chen and had a grudge against Wei Zang.

古文：魏登国中讨之，蠕蠕移部遁走，追之及于大碛南床山下，大破之，虏其半部。
现代文：魏登国年间讨伐他，蠕蠕移部逃走。追赶到达大漠南床山下，打得他们大败，俘虏他们一半部卒。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wei, he fought against them, and the creeping troops fled. He chased them to the foot of the mountain in the southern part of the desert, defeated them, and captured half of their soldiers.

古文：匹候跋及部帅屋击，各收余落遁走。
现代文：匹候跋和部帅屋击，各自收聚余部逃走。
English: The horse-drawn carriage and the chauffeur-driven carriage hit, and they each gathered the rest and fled.

古文：遣长孙嵩及长孙肥追之，度碛。
现代文：派遣长孙嵩和长孙肥追赶，越过大漠。
English: He sent his eldest son, Song, and his eldest son, Fei, to catch up and cross the desert.

古文：嵩至平望川，大破屋击，禽之，斩以徇。
现代文：长孙嵩到达平望川，大败屋击，将其擒获、斩首示众。
English: When the eldest grandson, Song, arrived at Pingwang River, he was defeated, captured, and beheaded in public.

古文：肥至涿邪山，及匹候跋，举落请降。
现代文：长孙肥到达涿邪山，追上匹候跋，整个部落请降。
English: The eldest grandson, Fei, arrived at Shanzhai Mountain, caught up with the horse and carriage, and the whole tribe descended.

古文：获缊纥提子曷多汗及曷多汗兄诰归之、社仑、斛律等，并宗党数百人，分配诸部。
现代文：俘获纥提儿子多汗和曷多汗兄诰归之、社山仑、斛律等，以及宗族乡党数百人，分配到各部。
English: They captured Shanti's son Dokhan and Shido Khan's elder brothers, Rongguizhi, Sheshanlun and Balut, as well as hundreds of members of the clan and township party, and distributed them to various ministries.

古文：缊纥提西遁，将归卫辰。
现代文：纥提西逃，将要归附卫辰。
English: 提西逃, will be attached to WeiChen.

古文：道武追之至跋那山，缊纥提复降，道武抚慰如旧。
现代文：道武帝追赶他到跋那山，纥提再次归降，道武帝仍像过去一样抚慰他。
English: Emperor Daowu chased him to Banya Mountain, where he surrendered again. Emperor Daowu still consoled him as before.

古文：九年，曷多汗与社仑率部众弃其父西走，长孙肥轻骑追之，至上郡跋那山，斩曷多汗，尽殆其众，社仑数人奔匹候跋，匹候跋处之南鄙，去其庭五百里，令其子四人监之。
现代文：九年，曷多汗和社山仑率领部众抛弃父亲西走，长孙肥轻骑追赶，到达上郡跋那山，斩杀曷多汗，他的部众全部杀死。社山仑数人奔匹候跋，匹候跋让他们待在南疆，离宫廷五百里，令他的四个儿子监管。
English: In the ninth year, Shedu Khan and Sheshan Lun led their followers to abandon their father and go west. The eldest grandson, Fei Qianqian, chased them and reached the upper county of Banya Mountain. He killed Shedu Khan and all of his followers. Several people from Sheshan Lun ran to join him. He let them stay in southern Xinjiang, 500 miles away from the court, and ordered his four sons to supervise them.

古文：既而社仑率其私属，执匹候跋四子而叛，袭匹候跋。
现代文：不久，社山仑率领他的私属，捉住匹候跋四个儿子并背叛、袭击匹候跋。
English: Soon after, Sheshan Lun led his retainers to capture the four sons of Pihowataw and betrayed and attacked Pihowataw.

古文：诸子收余众，亡依高车斛律部。
现代文：其余的儿子收聚余众，逃亡依附高车斛律部。
English: The rest of the sons gathered the rest of the people and fled with Gao Chejun's legal department.

古文：社仑凶狡有权变，月余，乃释匹候跋，归其诸子，欲聚而歼之。
现代文：社山仑凶恶狡猾且有权变，五月有余，就释放了匹候跋，让他和儿子们归于一处，想聚歼他们。
English: The social mountain is ferocious, cunning and has the power to change. In May, he released the pony, let him and his sons gather in one place, and wanted to gather them.

古文：密举兵袭匹候跋，杀匹候跋。
现代文：秘密发兵袭击匹候跋，杀掉匹候跋。
English: Secretly send troops to attack the horse-drawn carriage and kill the horse-drawn carriage.

古文：子启拔、吴颉等十五人，归于道武。
现代文：儿子启拔、吴颉等十五人归附道武。
English: Fifteen people, including his sons Kai Ba and Wu Hao, joined Daowu.

古文：社仑既杀匹候跋，惧王师讨之，乃掠五原以西诸部，北度大漠。
现代文：社山仑山经杀了匹候跋，害怕王师讨伐，于是就劫掠五原以西各部，向北越过大汉。
English: Sheshan Lunshan killed a horse-drawn carriage and was afraid of Wang Shih's crusade, so he plundered all parts west of the Five Plains and crossed the Great Wall to the north.

古文：道武以拔、颉为安远将军，平棘侯。
现代文：道武帝让启拔、吴颉做安远将军、平棘侯。
English: Emperor Daowu had him promoted, and Wu Xi became General Anyuan and Prince Pingxian.

古文：社仑与姚兴和亲，道武遣材官将军和突袭黜弗、素古延诸部，社仑遣骑素古延，突逆击破之。
现代文：社山仑与姚兴和亲，道武帝派材官将军和突袭击黜弗、素古延各部，社山仑派骑兵救援素古延，和突迎击打败了他们。
English: Sheshan Lun made peace with Yao Xing, and Emperor Daowu sent generals and raiders to attack Su Fu and Sukoyan. Sheshan Lun sent cavalry to rescue Sukoyan, and defeated them with a surprise attack.

古文：社仑远遁漠北，侵高车，深入其地，遂并诸部，凶势益振。
现代文：社山仑远逃到漠北，侵入高车，并深入到腹地，于是兼并了各部，凶势更加振作。
English: Sheshan Lun fled as far as the north of the desert, invaded Gaochao, and penetrated deep into the hinterland, whereupon it annexed all the provinces, and became even more ferocious.

古文：北徙弱洛水，始立军法；千人为军，军置将一人；百人为幢，幢置帅一人。
现代文：向北移到弱洛水，开始制定军法：千人为军，军设置将一人；百人为幢，幢设帅一人。
English: He moved north to Weak Luoshui and began to formulate the military law: a thousand people constitute an army, and a general constitutes an army; a hundred people constitute a block, and a commander constitutes a block.

古文：先登者赐以虏获，退懦者以石击首杀之，或临时垂挞。
现代文：先上的人赏赐虏获物，怯懦的人用石头击头杀死，或事情发生时捶打鞭挞。
English: The leaders reward the captives with booty, the cowards kill them with stones, or beat and whip them if the occasion arises.

古文：无文记，将帅以羊屎粗讨兵数，后颇知刻木为记。
现代文：没有文记，将帅用羊屎粗略统计兵数，后来略微懂得刻木为记。
English: There is no written record, the commander-in-chief used sheep dung to roughly count the number of soldiers, and later slightly knew how to carve wood as a record.

古文：其西北有匈奴余种，国尤富强，部帅日拔也稽举兵击社仑。
现代文：他们的西北有匈奴遗留的种族，国家特别富强，部帅日拔也稽举兵攻打社山仑。
English: In their northwest, there is a race left over by the Huns, the country is particularly rich and strong, and the commander, Hibat, has also raised an army to attack Sheshanlun.

古文：逆战于頞根河，大破之。
现代文：迎战于安页根河，大败他们。
English: We met them at Anzhale River and defeated them.

古文：后尽为社仑所并。
现代文：后来全部被社山仑吞并。
English: Later, all of them were absorbed by Shashanlun.

古文：号为强盛，随水草畜牧。
现代文：社山仑号称强盛，追随水草畜牧。
English: Sheshanlun is known to be prosperous and follows aquatic animal husbandry.

古文：其西则焉耆之地，东则朝鲜之地，北则渡沙漠，穷瀚海，南则临大碛。
现代文：他的西边是焉耆的地盘，东面是朝鲜的地界，向北越过沙漠，直到瀚海，南面则濒临大漠。
English: To the west it is bordered by China, to the east by North Korea, to the north by the desert and the open sea, and to the south by the desert.

古文：其常所会庭，敦煌、张掖之北。
现代文：他们平常会见的地方，在敦煌、张掖的北面。
English: They usually meet in Dunhuang, north of Zhangye.

古文：小国皆苦其寇抄，羁縻附之。
现代文：小国都被他们的侵犯抢掠所苦，笼络归附他们。
English: All the small countries suffered from their invasion and plunder, and were forced to join them.

古文：于是自号豆代可汗。
现代文：于是自称豆代可汗。
English: As a result, he called himself Mameshiro Khan.

古文：豆代，犹魏言驾驭开张也；可汗，犹魏言皇帝也。
现代文：豆代，如同汉语控制开拓；可汗，就是汉语皇帝的意思。
English: "Tamashiro" means control and development in Chinese, and "Khan" means emperor in Chinese.

古文：蠕蠕之俗，君及大臣因其行能，即为称号，若中国立谥。
现代文：蠕蠕的习俗，君主和大臣依据他的品行才能，定出称号，像中国的立谥。
English: It is a time-honored custom for monarchs and ministers to choose a title for a person based on his or her moral qualities, similar to China's ranking system.

古文：既死之后，不复追称。
现代文：已经死亡以后，不再追加称号。
English: Once a person has died, there will be no additional title.

古文：道武谓尚书崔宏曰： 蠕蠕之人，昔来号为顽嚣，每来抄掠，驾牸牛奔遁，驱犍牛随之，牸牛伏不能前。
现代文：道武帝对尚书崔宏说： 蠕蠕这类人，从来就被称为凶暴而无忠信，每次来抢掠，驾母牛奔，驱赶犍牛跟随。
English: Emperor Daowu said to Shangshu Cui Hong: People like Cui Hong have always been called ferocious and disloyal. Every time they come, they loot, drive cows, and chase snails.

古文：异部人有教其以犍牛易之来者，蠕蠕曰： 其母尚不能行，而况其子！ 
现代文：母牛趴下不能前行，别部的人教给他们用犍牛替代母牛，蠕蠕说： 它的母亲尚不能行走，何况那个儿子？ 
English: The cow could not walk on its hind legs, so someone from another department taught them to replace the cow with a snail. "Its mother can't walk yet, and what about that son?" said the worm.

古文：终于不易，遂为敌所虏。
现代文：最终还是不换。于是被敌人俘虏。
English: In the end, he did not change, and was captured by the enemy.

古文：今社仑学中国，立法，置战阵，卒成边害。
现代文：现在社山仑学中国，立法，设置战阵，很快成为边境的祸患。
English: Now that society is learning from China, legislating, setting up battle fronts, it will soon become a scourge on the border.

古文：道家言 圣人生，大盗起 ，信矣。 
现代文：道家说 圣人生，大盗起 ，没错。 
English: Taoists say that a saint's life begins with theft, and that's true.

古文：天兴五年，社仑闻道武征姚兴，遂犯塞，入自参合陂，南至豺山及善无北泽。
现代文：天兴五年，社山仑听说道武帝征伐姚兴，于是就侵犯边塞，从参合陂进入，南到豺山和善无北边的水泽。
English: In the fifth year of Tianxing, Sheshan Lun heard that Emperor Wu had conquered Yaoxing, so he invaded the border fortress, entered from Shenghe, and there was no Mizusawa on the north side from the south to Sheshan.

古文：时遣常山王遵以万骑追之，不及。
现代文：当时派常山王遵率领万骑追赶，没追上。
English: At that time, he sent Wang Zun of Changshan to lead thousands of horsemen to chase after them, but they did not catch up.

古文：天赐中，社仑从弟悦代、大那等谋杀社仑而立大那。
现代文：天赐年间，社山仑的从弟悦代、大那等人谋划杀掉社山仑而立大那。
English: During the year of God's blessing, Sheshanlun's followers, such as his younger brother Etsudai and Dana, plotted to kill Sheshanlun and establish Dana.

古文：发觉，大那等来奔，以大那为冠军将军、西平侯，悦代为越骑校尉、易阳子。
现代文：被发觉，大那等人来投北魏，让大那做冠军将军、西平侯，悦代做越骑校尉、易阳子。
English: It was discovered that Dana and others came to vote for the Northern Wei Dynasty, making Dana the champion general, Xi Pinghou, and Yue Dai the Yue riding captain, Yi Yangzi.

古文：三年夏，社仑寇边。
现代文：三年夏，社山仑进犯边关。
English: In the summer of the third year, Sheshan Lun invaded the border.

古文：永兴元年冬，又犯塞。
现代文：永兴元年冬天，又侵犯边塞。
English: In the winter of the first year of Yongxing, it invaded the border fortress again.

古文：二年，明元讨之，社仑遁走，道死。
现代文：二年，明元帝征讨他，社山仑逃走，死在路上。
English: Two years later, Emperor Mingyuan tried to recruit him, but he ran away and died on the road.

古文：其子度拔年少，未能御众，部落立社仑弟斛律，号蔼苦盖可汗，魏言姿质美好也。
现代文：他的儿子度拔年少，不能统御部众，部落立社山仑的弟弟斛律，号 蔼苦盖可汗 ，汉语是 资质美好 。
English: His son, Du Bi, was too young to rule the people, and the younger brother of the founder of the tribe, Shan Lun, was named Bao Lu. He was nicknamed "Ai Kui Kahn" and his Chinese was "good."

古文：斛律北并贺术也骨国，东破譬历辰部落。
现代文：斛律吞并了北边的贺术也骨国，打败东面的譬历辰部落。
English: The Hailu absorbed the Hechu Yao Kingdom in the north and defeated the Li Lichen Tribe in the east.

古文：三年，斛律宗人悦侯咄牴干等百数十人来降。
现代文：三年，斛律宗人悦侯屈触干等一百几十人来归降。
English: In three years, more than a hundred people, including the founder of the Li Li sect, Yue Hou and Qu Zhigang, came to surrender.

古文：斛律畏威自守，不敢南侵，北边安静。
现代文：斛律畏惧威势而自守，不敢向南侵犯。北部边界安宁。
English: The Pelican Law is afraid of the power and defends itself, not daring to invade the south. The northern border is peaceful.

古文：神瑞元年，与冯跋和媵亲，跋娉斛律女为妻，将为交婚。
现代文：神瑞元年与冯跋和亲，冯跋聘斛律的女儿为妻，将要交婚。
English: In the first year of Shen Rui's reign, he made peace with Feng Biao, and Feng Biao married the daughter of Yao Rui. They are going to get married.

古文：斛律长兄子步鹿真谓斛律曰： 女小远适，忧思生疾，可遣大臣树黎、勿地延等女为媵。 
现代文：斛律长兄的儿子步鹿真对斛律说： 女儿年少远嫁，忧思而生病，可派大臣树黎、勿地延等人的女儿为媵。 
English: Bu Lu Zhen, the son of Ba Lu's eldest brother, said to Ba Lu: "If your daughter marries young and far away, and is worried and sick, you can send the daughters of ministers such as Shu Li and Mody Yan to be your wives.

古文：斛律不许。
现代文：斛律不准许。
English: Singing is not permitted.

古文：步鹿真出，谓树黎等曰： 斛律欲令汝女为媵，远至他国。 
现代文：步鹿真出来，对树黎等人说 ：斛律想让你们的女儿做媵，远到他国。 
English: Bu Degu really came out and said to Shuli and the others: "Gong Li wants your daughter to be a nanny, far away to another country.

古文：黎遂共结谋，令勇士夜就斛律穹庐后，伺其出执之，与女俱嫔于和龙。
现代文：树黎就和他共同勾结谋划，令勇士夜里靠近斛律穹庐后面，等他出来抓住他，把他和他的女儿一同嫁到和龙。
English: So the tree and the dragon conspired together, and at night they made the warrior draw near to the back of the dragon's cave, and waited for him to come out, so that they could catch him and marry him and his daughter to the dragon.

古文：乃立步鹿真。
现代文：于是立步鹿真。
English: And so Deerslayer was born.

古文：步鹿真立，委政树黎。
现代文：步鹿真立，把政事委托树黎。
English: Bu Lu Zhen Li entrusted the government affairs to Shuli.

古文：初，高车叱洛侯者，叛其渠帅，导社仑破诸部落，社仑德之，以为大人。
现代文：当初，高车叱洛侯，背叛他的首领，引导社山仑攻破各个部落，社山仑感激他，让他做部落首领。
English: At first, Gao Che rebuked Luo Hou, betrayed his leader, and guided Sheshan Lun to conquer various tribes. Sheshan Lun was grateful to him and let him be the leader of the tribe.

古文：步鹿真与社仑子社拔共至叱洛侯家，淫其少妻。
现代文：步鹿真和社山仑的儿子社拔一同到叱洛侯家，奸淫了他年轻的妻子。
English: Bu Lu Zhen and Sheshan Lun's son, Shebat, went to Zhelokhou's home together and raped his young wife.

古文：少妻告步鹿真，叱洛侯欲举大檀为主，遗大檀金马勒为信。
现代文：年轻的妻子告发了步鹿真，叱洛侯想推举大檀做首领，赠给大檀全金马勒作为信物。
English: The young wife denounced Bu Dezhen, scolded Luo Hou for wanting to promote Dadan as the leader, and presented Dadan with a gold horse as a token.

古文：步鹿真闻之，归发八千骑往围，叱洛侯焚其珍宝，自刎而死。
现代文：步鹿真听说了这件事，返回发出八千骑兵去包围，叱洛侯烧掉他的珍宝，自刎而死。
English: Bu Degu really heard about this and returned to send out eight thousand cavalry to surround, scolded Luo Hou to burn his treasure and hanged himself to death.

古文：步鹿真遂掩大檀。大檀发军执步鹿真及社拔，绞杀之，乃自立。
现代文：步鹿真于是偷袭大檀，大檀发兵捉住步鹿真和社拔，绞杀了他们，于是自立。
English: Bu Deacon then attacked Datan, Datan sent soldiers to catch Bu Deacon and Sheba, strangled them, and then became independent.

古文：大檀者，社仑季父仆浑之子，先统别部镇于西界，能得众心，国人推戴之，号牟汗纥升盖可汗，魏言制胜也。
现代文：大檀是社山仑季父仆浑之子，以前统率别的部落镇守在西界，能获得众人之心，国人拥戴他，号 牟汗纥升盖可汗 。汉语是 制胜 。
English: Datan was the son of Sheshan Lunji's father, Hudhun, who had previously led other tribal towns in the Western Regions. He was able to win the hearts of the people, and the people of the country embraced him. His nickname was "Mukhan" (牟汗) and "Shanggei" (升盖) Khan. The Chinese word for victory is "victory."

古文：斛律父子既至和龙，冯跋封为上谷侯。
现代文：斛律父子已经到达和龙，冯跋封他为上谷侯。
English: Pei Lu and his son have arrived in Hailong, and Feng Baofeng has made him the lord of Shanggu.

古文：大檀率众南徙犯塞，明元亲讨之，大檀惧而遁走。
现代文：大檀率领部众南移侵犯边塞，明元帝亲自征讨，大檀惊恐逃走。
English: Datan led the troops to move south to invade the border fortress, Mingyuan Emperor personally collected, Datan panicked and fled.

古文：遣山阳侯奚斤等追之，遇寒雪，士众冻死及堕指者十二三。
现代文：派山阳侯奚斤等追赶，遇到寒天大雪，士众冻死和冻掉指头的十分之二三。
English: He sent Shanyang Hou Rongjin and others to catch up, encountered cold weather and heavy snow, and the scholars froze to death and froze two-thirds of their fingers.

古文：及明元崩，太武即位，大檀闻而大喜，始光元年秋，乃寇云中。
现代文：到明元帝驾崩，太武帝即位，大檀听到大为高兴，始光元年秋天，就进犯云中。
English: When Emperor Mingyuan passed away and Emperor Taibu ascended to the throne, Datan was very happy to hear it. In the autumn of the first year of the year, he attacked the clouds.

古文：太武亲讨之，三日二夜至云中。大檀骑围太武五十余重，骑逼，马首相次如堵焉。
现代文：太武帝亲自征讨，三天两夜到达云中，大檀的骑兵围住太武帝五十多层，骑兵逼近，马头顺次排列像墙一样。
English: Emperor Taowu personally led the expedition and arrived in the middle of the clouds in three days and two nights. The cavalry surrounded Emperor Taowu more than fifty stories high, the cavalry approached, and the horses' heads lined up like a wall.

古文：士卒大惧。
现代文：士兵大为惊恐。
English: The soldiers were terrified.

古文：太武颜色自若，众情乃安。
现代文：太武脸色自如，众人的情绪安定下来。
English: Taiwu looked at ease, and everyone's moods calmed down.

古文：先是，大檀弟大那与社仑争国，败而来奔。
现代文：此前，大檀的弟弟大那和社山仑争夺国家，失败而来投奔。
English: Previously, Datan's younger brother, Dana, had been competing for the country with Sheshan Lun, and defected when he failed.

古文：大檀以大那子于陟斤为部帅。
现代文：大檀让大那的儿子於陟斤做部帅。
English: Datan asked Datan's son to be the captain of the club.

古文：军士射于陟斤杀之，大檀恐，乃还。
现代文：军士射杀於陟斤，大檀惊恐，这才返还。
English: The sergeant shot him in the shin, and he was so frightened that he returned it.

古文：二年，太武大举征之，东西五道并进。
现代文：二年，太武帝出动大军征讨，东西五路并进。
English: In the second year, Emperor Taibu sent out a large army to collect taxes, and the east and west marched five ways.

古文：平阳王长孙翰等从黑漠；汝阴公长孙道生从白黑两漠间；车驾从中道；东平公娥清次西，从栗园；宜城王奚斤、将军安原等西道，从尔寒山。
现代文：平阳王长孙翰等人从黑漠；汝阴公长孙道生从白黑两漠之间；太武帝从中路。东平公娥清靠近西路，从栗园；宜城王奚斤、将军安原等西路，从尔寒山。
English: King Pingyang Chosun Han and others came from the Black Desert; King Ruyin Chosun Daosheng came from between the White and Black Deserts; Emperor Taivu came from the Middle Road; King Dongping Gong'e Qing, who was close to the West Road, came from the Chestnut Garden; King Yicheng Shujin, General An Yuan and others came from the West Road, and came from Mount Ercan.

古文：诸军至漠南，舍辎重，轻骑赍十五日粮，绝漠讨之。
现代文：各军到达漠南，舍弃辎重，轻骑携带十五日粮食，穿过沙漠征讨。
English: Each army arrived in the south of the desert, abandoned their baggage, rode lightly to carry fifteen days of grain, and went through the desert to fight.

古文：大檀部落骇惊，北走。
现代文：大檀部落惊慌害怕，向北逃走。
English: Panicked and afraid, the Datan tribe fled north.

古文：神蒨元年八月，大檀遣子将骑万余入塞，杀掠边人而走，附国高车追击破之。
现代文：神瞏元年八月，大檀派儿子率骑兵万余进入边塞，杀掠边人就跑，附国高车追击打败了他。
English: In August of the first year of the Jin Dynasty, Datan sent his son to lead more than 10,000 cavalry into the border fortress, killed and robbed the border people and ran away. He was defeated by the pursuit of the attached national high-speed train.

古文：自广宁还，追之不及。
现代文：魏主从广宁返回，没有追上。
English: Wei Lord returned from Guangning and did not catch up.

古文：二年四月，太武练兵于南郊，将袭大檀。
现代文：二年四月，太武帝在南郊练兵，准备袭击大檀。
English: In April of the second year, Emperor Taivu trained soldiers in the southern suburbs, preparing to attack Datan.

古文：公卿大臣皆不愿，术士张深、徐辩以天文说止帝，帝从崔浩计而行。
现代文：公卿大臣都不愿意，术士张深、徐辩用天象劝说阻止太武帝，帝依从崔浩的计策行事。
English: The Kugyo and ministers were not willing to do so, so the magicians Zhang Shen and Xu Yan used celestial objects to persuade Emperor Taivu to stop, and the emperor acted according to Cui Hao's strategy.

古文：会江南使还，称宋文欲犯河南，谓行人曰： 汝疾还告魏主，归我河南地，即当罢兵；不然，尽我将士之力。 
现代文：适逢江南的使者返回，说宋文要进犯河南，对行人说： 你们赶快回去告诉魏主，归还我河南的地方，就会罢兵；不然，竭尽我将士的力量攻打。 
English: When the emissaries from the south of the Yangtze River returned, they said that Song and Wen were about to invade Henan. They said to the passers-by: "You should hurry back and tell the Wei Lord to return my place in Henan, and then we will disband; otherwise, we will attack to the best of our ability."

古文：帝闻而大笑，告公卿曰： 龟鳖小竖，自救不暇，何能为也？
现代文：帝听后大笑，告诉公卿说： 龟鳖小竖，自救不暇，能有什么作为？
English: After listening, the emperor laughed loudly and told the nobleman: "Little turtle, you can't help yourself, what can you do?

古文：就使能来，若不先灭蠕蠕，便是坐待寇至，腹背受敌，非上策也。
现代文：即使这样，如不先灭掉蠕蠕，就是坐等敌人到来，腹背受敌，不是上策。
English: Even so, if you do not eliminate the creep first, it is not the best strategy to wait for the enemy to arrive and suffer from the enemy.

古文：吾行决矣！ 
现代文：我的行动决定了！ 
English: My action is decided!

古文：于是车驾出东道，向黑山；平阳王长孙翰从西道，向大娥山。同会贼庭。
现代文：于是太武帝出兵东路，向黑山；平阳王长孙翰从西路，向大娥山；共同会合在贼寇都庭。
English: As a result, Emperor Taowu sent troops to the East Road, towards Montenegro; the King of Pingyang, Sun Yat-sen, came from the West Road, towards Mount Dae; they met together in the Thieves' Capital.

古文：五月，次于沙漠南，舍辎重轻袭之。
现代文：五月驻扎在沙漠南，舍弃辎重轻骑突袭。
English: In May, he was stationed in the southern desert, abandoning his heavy pack for a light cavalry raid.

古文：至栗水，大檀众西奔。
现代文：到达栗水，大檀的部众西逃。
English: Arriving at Kurisui, the large group of sandalwood fled west.

古文：弟匹黎先典东落，将赴大檀，遇翰军，翰纵骑击之，杀其大人数百。
现代文：弟弟匹黎先前掌管东边的部落，将要到大檀那儿，遇到长孙翰军队，翰纵骑攻击，杀掉他们的大人数百。
English: His younger brother Piri, who had previously been in charge of the tribe on the east, was about to go to Dattan, where he would meet the army of the eldest son, Han, who would attack on horseback, killing hundreds of them.

古文：大檀闻之震怖，将其族党，焚烧庐舍，绝迹西走，莫知所至。
现代文：大檀听到后震惊恐怖，带领他的宗族乡党，烧掉庐舍，向西逃走，不见人迹，不知所至。
English: After hearing the news, Datan was shocked and horrified. He led his clan and township party to burn down their homestead and flee to the west, leaving no trace and not knowing where to go.

古文：于是国落四散，窜伏山谷，畜产布野，无人收视。
现代文：于是国落四散，逃窜藏匿在山谷中，畜产遍布野外，无人收容看顾。
English: As a result, the country was scattered, escaped baboons hid in the valley, livestock was all over the field, and there was no one to take care of them.

古文：太武缘栗水西行，过汉将窦宪故垒。
现代文：太武帝沿栗水西行，过汉将窦宪的旧堡垒。
English: The Taiwu Emperor traveled west along the Chestnut River, passing the old fortress of the Han general Dou Xian.

古文：六月，车驾次于菟园水，去平城三千七百余里。
现代文：六月，帝驻扎在菟园水，离平城三千七百余里。
English: In June, the emperor was stationed in Ganyuanshui, more than 3,700 miles away from Pingcheng.

古文：分军搜讨，东至瀚海，西接张掖水，北度燕然山，东西五千余里，南北三千里。
现代文：分军搜索，东到瀚海，西至张掖水，北越过燕然山，东西五千余里，南北三千里。
English: The detachment searched as far as the vast sea in the east, Zhangshui in the west, and Yanran Mountain in the north, covering more than 5,000 miles from east to west and 3,000 miles from north to south.

古文：高车诸部杀大檀种类前后归降三十余万，俘获首虏及戎马百余万匹。
现代文：高车各部杀大檀种族先后归降三十余万，俘获敌酋和戎马百余万匹。
English: The various departments of the high-speed railway killed more than 300,000 of the great dan race successively, and captured more than one million enemy chiefs and horses.

古文：八月，太武闻东部高车屯巳尼陂，人畜甚众，去官军千余里，遂遣左仆射安原等往讨之。
现代文：八月，太武帝听说东部高车驻在已尼陂，人畜很多，离官军千余里，就派左仆射安原等人去讨伐他们。
English: In August, Emperor Taivu heard that the Eastern Highlanders were stationed in Yan'niu, that there were many people and animals, and that they were more than a thousand miles away from the official army, so he sent his left-hand man, Sha'an Yuan, and others to fight them.

古文：暨巳尼陂，高车诸部望军降者数十万。
现代文：到达已尼陂，高车各部听说官军到来就投降的人数十万。
English: By the time they arrived, hundreds of thousands of people had already surrendered when the various departments of Gaocheng heard that the government army had arrived.

古文：大檀部落衰弱，因发疾而死。
现代文：大檀部落衰弱，大檀因疾病发作而死。
English: The great dan tribe became weak, and the great dan died from the onset of the disease.

古文：子吴提立，号敕连可汗，魏言神圣也。
现代文：儿子吴提立，号 敕连可汗 ，汉语是 神圣 。
English: His son, Wu Dili, is called Qilian Khan, which means "sacred" in Chinese.

古文：四年，遣使朝献。
现代文：四年，派使者朝见进贡。
English: Four years later, he sent an envoy to the Imperial Court to collect tribute.

古文：先是，北鄙候骑获吴提南偏逻者二十余人，太武赐之衣服，遣归。
现代文：此前，北部边界的侦察骑兵俘获吴提南部军队的巡逻士兵二十多人，太武帝赏赐给他们衣服，遣返回去。
English: Previously, the reconnaissance cavalry on the northern border had captured more than twenty patrolling soldiers from the southern army of Wu Ti. Emperor Taibu gave them clothes and sent them back.

古文：吴提上下感德，故朝贡焉。
现代文：吴提上下感恩戴德，因此朝见进贡。
English: Wu Tizhong is grateful and grateful, so the tribute is paid in the morning.

古文：帝厚宾其使而遣之。
现代文：帝用客礼厚待使者而让他回去。
English: The emperor treated the envoy with courtesy and allowed him to return.

古文：延和三年二月，以吴提尚西海公主，又遣使者纳吴提妹为夫人，又进为左昭仪。
现代文：延和三年二月，因吴提娶西公主为妻，又派使者纳吴提的妹妹为夫人，又提升为左昭仪。
English: In February of the third year of Yanhe, because Wu Ti married Princess Xi as his wife, he also sent an emissary to take Na Wu Ti's sister as his wife, and promoted her to Zuo Zhaoyi.

古文：吴提遣其兄秃鹿傀及左右数百人来朝，献马二千匹。
现代文：吴提派他的兄长秃鹿傀和左右数百人来朝见，献马二千匹。
English: Wu Ti sent his elder brother, Bald Deer Stooge, and several hundred people to the imperial court to offer two thousand horses.

古文：帝大悦，班赐甚厚。
现代文：帝大为高兴，赏赐很多。
English: The emperor was delighted and gave him many gifts.

古文：至太延二年，乃绝和犯塞，四年，车驾幸五原，遂征之。
现代文：到太延二年就断绝和平，进犯边塞。四年，太武帝巡视五原，就征讨他们。
English: Two years later, Tai Yan broke the peace and attacked the border fortresses. Four years later, Emperor Ta Mu inspected the Five Plains and collected them.

古文：乐平王丕、河东公贺多罗督十五将出东道，永昌王健、宜都王穆寿督十五将出西道，车驾出中道。
现代文：乐平王丕、河东公贺多罗率领十五员将出兵东路，永昌王健、宜都王穆寿率领十五员将出兵西路，太武帝出兵中路。
English: Leping Wang Qian and Hedong Gong Hedoro will lead fifteen soldiers to the east road, Yongchang Wang Jian and Yidu King Mu Shou will lead fifteen soldiers to the west road, and Taiwu Emperor will lead soldiers to the middle road.

古文：至浚稽山，分中道复为二道，陈留王崇从大泽向涿邪山，车驾从浚稽北向天山。
现代文：到达浚稽山，中路再分两路，陈留王崇从大泽向涿邪山，太武帝从浚稽北向天山。
English: Arriving at Junchi Mountain, the middle path is divided into two paths, Chen Liu Wang Chong from Osawa to Shanzhai Mountain, and Taiwu Emperor from Junchi North to Tianshan.

古文：西登子阜，刻石记行，不见蠕蠕而还。
现代文：西行登子阜山，刻石记行，不见蠕蠕而返。
English: I went west to climb Mt.Fuji. I wrote it on a stone, but I did not return.

古文：时漠北大旱，无水草，军马多死。
现代文：当时漠北大旱，没有水草，军马多死亡。
English: At that time, there was a severe drought in the north of the country, there was no water and grass, and many horses died.

古文：五年，车驾西伐沮渠牧犍，宜都王穆寿辅景穆居守，长乐王嵇敬、建宁王崇二万人镇漠南，以备蠕蠕。
现代文：五年，太武帝西伐沮渠牧犍，宜都王穆寿辅佐景穆留守，长乐王嵇敬、建宁王崇两万人镇守漠南，防备蠕蠕。
English: In the fifth year, Emperor Taowu went to the west to cut off the channels for herdsmen, King Mu Shou of Yidu and his assistant King Sa Jing Mu stayed behind, and King Yu Jing of Changle and King Chong of Jianning, with 20,000 men between them, guarded the southern part of the desert to guard against the creeping locusts.

古文：吴提果犯塞。寿素不设备，贼至七介山，京邑大骇，争奔中城。
现代文：吴提果然进犯边塞，穆寿一向不设防务，贼寇到达七介山，京邑大为惊骇，争相奔向中城。
English: Wu Ti successfully attacked the border fortress, Mu Shou never set up defenses, the bandits reached Qixia Mountain, Beijing was greatly alarmed, and rushed to the middle of the city.

古文：司空长孙道生拒之于吐颓山。
现代文：司空长孙道生在吐颓山抵御他们。
English: Sun Daosheng, the chief of the Civil Aviation Bureau, resisted them in the Tubaoshan Mountains.

古文：吴提之寇也，留其兄乞列归与北镇诸军相守，敬、崇等破乞列归于阴山之北，获乞列归。
现代文：吴提这次侵犯，留下他的兄长乞列归和北镇各军守卫，敬、崇等人在阴山北面打败乞列归，俘获了他。
English: Wu Ti invaded this time, leaving his brother, Qian Liguo, and the troops of Beizhen to guard. Jing, Chong and others defeated Qian Liguo on the north side of Yin Mountain and captured him.

古文：叹曰： 沮渠陷我也！ 
现代文：他叹息说： 沮渠害了我啊！ 
English: He sighed and said: "The depression has ruined me!

古文：获其伯父他吾无鹿胡及其将帅五百人，斩首万余级。
现代文：俘获了他的伯父他吾无鹿胡和他的将帅五百人，斩首万余级。
English: He captured his uncle, Tawamuzhuhu, and 500 of his generals, beheading more than 10,000 of them.

古文：吴提闻而遁走，道生追之，至于漠南而还。
现代文：吴提听到就逃走，道生追赶，到达漠南而返。
English: When Wu Ti heard this, he ran away. Tao Sheng chased after him and arrived in the southern desert.

古文：真君四年，车驾幸漠南，分军为四道：乐安王范、建宁王崇各统十五将出东道，乐平王丕督十五将出西道，车驾出中道，中山王辰领十五将为中军后继。
现代文：太平真君四年太武帝巡视漠南，分军队为四路：乐安王范、建宁王崇各率十五员将出兵东路，东平王丕率十五员将出兵西路，太武帝出兵中路，中山王辰率十五员将做中军后继。
English: In the four years of Taiping Zhenjun, Emperor Taibu patrolled the south of the desert, dividing the army into four routes: Le'an Wang Fan and Jianning Wang Chong each led fifteen soldiers to the east, Dongping Wang Yao led fifteen soldiers to the west, Emperor Taibu led soldiers to the middle, and Zhongshan Wang Chen led fifteen soldiers to follow the Chinese army.

古文：车贺至鹿浑谷，与贼相遇。
现代文：太武帝到达鹿军谷，和贼寇相遇。
English: Emperor Taibu arrived at the Deer Valley and met with the bandits.

古文：吴提遁走，追至頞根河击破之。
现代文：吴提逃走，追到安页根河打败了他。
English: Wu Ti ran away and chased him to Anzhaligen River and defeated him.

古文：车驾至石水而还。
现代文：太武帝到石水而返。
English: Emperor Taibu went to Shisui and came back.

古文：五年，复幸漠南，欲袭吴提，吴提远遁，乃止。
现代文：五年，再次巡视漠南，想要袭击吴提，吴提远远逃走了，就停止了。
English: Five years later, he made another inspection to the south of the desert and wanted to attack Wu Ti, but Wu Ti had fled far away, so he stopped.

古文：吴提死，子吐贺真立，号处可汗，魏言唯也。
现代文：吴提死了，儿子吐贺真立，号 处可汗 ，汉语是 思虑 。
English: Wu Ti is dead, his son is Toga Zhenli, his name is Duan Khan, and his Chinese name is Si Shen.

古文：十年正月，车贺北伐，高凉王那出东道，略阳王羯兒出西道，车驾与景穆自中道出涿邪山。
现代文：十年正月，太武帝北伐，高凉王那出兵东路，略阳王羯儿出兵西路，太武帝和景穆从中路出兵涿邪山。
English: In the first month of the tenth year, the Northern Expedition of the Taiwu Emperor, the Eastern Expedition of the Gaoliang Wangna, the Western Expedition of the Liangyang Wang Qian Er, and the Middle Expedition of the Taiwu Emperor and Jingmu.

古文：吐贺真别部帅尔绵他拔等率千余家来降。
现代文：吐贺真别支部帅尔绵他拔等率千余家来归降。
English: More than a thousand families from the branch of the Toka Zhenbei faction have come to surrender.

古文：是时，军行数千里，吐贺真新立，恐惧远遁。
现代文：此时，军队行数千里，吐贺真新立，感到恐惧，远远逃走了。
English: At this time, the army was thousands of miles away, and he felt fear and fled far away.

古文：九月，车驾北伐，高凉王出东道，略阳王羯兒出中道，与诸军期会于地弗池。
现代文：九月太武帝北伐，高凉王那出兵东路，略阳王羯儿出兵中路，和各军约期聚集在地弗池。
English: In September, the Northern Expedition of Emperor Taivu, the Eastern Expedition of Gaoliang Wangna, and the Middle Expedition of Liangyang Wang Qian'er, gathered at the Jifu Pond for an appointment with each army.

古文：吐贺真悉国精锐，军资甚盛，围那数十重。
现代文：吐贺真全国精锐，军需众多，包围拓跋那数十层。
English: The Toka clan was truly the elite of the whole country, with a large number of mercenaries, and they surrounded the tens of layers of the Tuoba.

古文：那掘长围坚守，相持数日。
现代文：拓跋那挖掘长圩坚守，相持数日。
English: After the excavation of Tuoba, Nagatoro held out for several days.

古文：吐贺真数挑战辄不利，以那众少而固，疑大军将至，解围夜遁。
现代文：吐贺真几次挑战总是不利，因拓跋那人少而固守，吐贺真怀疑大军将要到达，解除包围夜逃。
English: Several challenges are always unfavorable for Togazane. Due to the small number of people, Togazane sticks to it. Togazane suspects that a large army is about to arrive, breaks the siege and flees at night.

古文：那引军追之，九日九夜，吐贺真益惧，弃辎重，逾穹隆岭远遁。
现代文：拓跋那率军追赶，九日九夜，吐贺真更加恐惧，丢弃辎重，越过穹隆岭远逃。
English: Tuoba led the army in pursuit. For nine days and nine nights, Tugazhen was even more afraid. He abandoned his baggage and fled across the ridge.

古文：那收其辎重，引军还，与车驾会于广泽。
现代文：拓跋那收取辎重，率军返回，和太武帝在广泽会合。
English: Takubana collected the booty, led the army back, and met with Emperor Taivu in Guangze.

古文：略阳王羯兒尽收其人户、畜产百余万。
现代文：略阳王羯儿将其人户、百余万畜产全数收容。
English: Liaoyang Wangfei has completely shut down all of its human households and more than one million livestock.

古文：自是，吐贺真遂单弱，远窜，边疆息警矣。
现代文：从此，吐贺真就孤单薄弱，远远逃窜，边疆停止报警。
English: From then on, he was alone and weak, fleeing far away, and the frontier stopped alerting the police.

古文：太安四年，车驾北征，骑十万，车十五万两，旌旗千里，遂渡大漠。
现代文：太安四年，帝征伐北方，骑十万，车十五万辆旌旗千里，于是越过大漠。
English: In the four years of Taian, the emperor conquered the north, riding a hundred thousand, driving a hundred and fifty thousand vehicles, flying a thousand flags, and then crossing the desert.

古文：吐贺真远遁，其莫弗乌硃驾颓率众数千落来降，乃刊石记功而还。
现代文：吐贺真远逃，他的莫弗乌朱驾颓率领部众几千来归降，就刻石记功而返。
English: He fled far away. He led thousands of troops to surrender, and returned with a record of achievement.

古文：太武征伐之后，意存休息；蠕蠕亦怖威北窜，不敢复南。
现代文：太武帝征伐以后，有休战的想法；蠕蠕也惊惧威势，向北逃窜，不敢再往南。
English: After Emperor Taiwu's conquest, there was an idea of a truce; Cormac was also alarmed by the threat and fled north, not daring to go further south.

古文：和平五年，吐贺真死，子予成立，号受罗部真可汗，魏言惠也。
现代文：和平五年吐贺真死了，儿子予成立，号 受罗部真可汗 ，汉语是 恩惠 。
English: In the fifth year of peace, Toga Zhen died, and his son was established. His name was Luo Bu Zhen Khan, and his Chinese name was "Gong Hui."

古文：自称永康元年。
现代文：自称永康元年。
English: He called himself Yongkang in the first year.

古文：率部侵塞，北镇游军大破其众。
现代文：率部众侵犯边塞，北镇的游动军队大败他的部众。
English: He led his followers to invade the border fortress, and Beizhen's roving army defeated his followers.

古文：皇兴四年，予成犯塞，车驾北讨，京兆王子推、东阳公元丕督诸军出西道，任城王云等督军出东道，汝阴王赐、济南公罗乌拔督军为前锋，陇西王源贺督诸军为后继。
现代文：皇兴四年，予成侵犯边塞，帝向北征讨，京兆王子推、东阳公元丕率各军出兵西路，任城王云等率军出兵东路，汝阴王赐、济南公罗乌拔率军做先锋，陇西王源贺率各军做后继。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Xing, Yu Cheng invaded the border fortress, the emperor went to the north to fight, Jing Zhao Prince pushed, Dongyang A.D. led the army to the west, Ren Chengwangyun led the army to the east, Ru Yin Wang Zi, Jinan Gong Luo Uba led the army to be the vanguard, and Shaanxi King Yuan He led the army to be the successor.

古文：诸将会车驾于女水之滨，献文亲誓众，诏诸将曰： 用兵在奇，不在众也。
现代文：各将军和皇帝会合在女水边，献文帝亲自告诫将士，对各将下诏说 ：用兵在出人意外，不在人多。
English: The generals and the emperor met at the waterside, and Emperor Xianwen personally admonished the generals, saying to the generals: "The use of soldiers should be unexpected, and not too many."

古文：卿等但为朕力战，方略已在朕心。 
现代文：卿等只管为朕努力作战，计谋策略已在朕的心中。 
English: Sirs, just fight hard for me. The strategy is already in my mind.

古文：乃选精兵五千人挑战，多设奇兵以惑之，虏众奔溃，逐北三十余里，斩首五万级，降者万余人，戎马器械，不可称计。
现代文：于是挑选五千精兵挑战，设许多奇兵迷惑他们，敌方部众奔逃溃散，官军向北追赶三十余里，斩首五万级，投降的万余人，戎马器械，无法称量统计。
English: So he selected five thousand elite soldiers to challenge, set up many strange soldiers to confuse them, the enemy fled and dispersed, the official army chased north for more than thirty miles, beheaded fifty thousand, surrendered more than ten thousand people, army horse equipment, can not be weighed and counted.

古文：旬有九日，往返六千余里。
现代文：一旬又九天，往返六千余里。
English: It took nine days and a round trip of more than six thousand miles.

古文：改女水曰武川，遂作《北征颂》，刊石纪功。
现代文：改女水叫武川，于是作《北征颂》，刻石记功。
English: He changed his name to Takekawa, and wrote "Hoku Seisho" (Song of the Northern Expedition), inscribing his achievements in stone.

古文：延兴五年，予成求通婚聘，有司以予成数犯边塞，请绝其使，发兵讨之。
现代文：延兴五年予成请求通婚聘。有司因予成屡次进犯边塞，请拒绝他的使者，出兵讨伐。
English: In the fifth year of Yanxing, Youcheng made a request for marriage. Since Youcheng had repeatedly attacked the border fortress, the emperor asked Youcheng to reject his envoy and send troops to fight.

古文：帝曰： 蠕蠕譬若禽兽，贪而亡义，朕要当以信诚待物，不可抑绝也。
现代文：皇帝说： 蠕蠕好似禽兽，贪婪无义，朕要用信诚待人，不可遏止拒绝。
English: The emperor said, "Creeps are like beasts, and greed is senseless. I must treat people with faith and sincerity, and I cannot stop rejecting them.

古文：予成知悔前非，遣使请和，求结姻援，安可孤其款意？ 
现代文：予成对前错知道悔恨，派使者请求和解，要求缔结姻亲，怎么可以辜负他的诚意？ 
English: How could he betray his sincerity when he had shown remorse, sent an envoy to ask for reconciliation, and requested the conclusion of a marriage contract?

古文：乃诏报曰： 所论婚事，今始一反，寻览事理，未允厥中。
现代文：于是下诏答复说 ：所谈的婚事，现在才返回一次，探寻事理，其中未妥。
English: Then the next emperor replied, "The matter of marriage, which we discussed, has only now come back to me once, to investigate the cause, and it is not appropriate.

古文：夫男而下女，爻象所明，初婚之吉，敦崇礼聘，君子所以重人伦之本。
现代文：男人下聘女人，爻象已明示，初婚的吉利在厚重礼聘，君子因此重视人伦这个根本。
English: A man hires a woman, and it has been made clear that the auspiciousness of the first marriage is in the heavy ceremonial hire, so the gentleman attaches importance to the fundamental of human relations.

古文：不敬其初，令终难矣。 
现代文：不敬重初始，让他有始有终就难了。 
English: If you don't respect the beginning, it's hard to let him have the beginning and the end.

古文：予成怀谲诈，终献文世，更不求婚。
现代文：予成常心怀欺诈，到献文世终结，再不求婚。
English: Yucheng always intended to cheat, and did not propose marriage again until the end of his life.

古文：太和元年四月，遣莫何去汾比拔等来献良马、貂裘。
现代文：太和元年四月，派莫何去汾比拔等人来进献良马、貂裘。
English: In April of the first year of the Taisho era, I couldn't help but go to see the parade of people who came to present good horses and horses.

古文：比拔等称： 伏承天朝珍宝华丽甚积，求一观之。 
现代文：比拔等人说： 伏承天朝的珍宝华丽，聚积很多，请求一看。 
English: Bibaa and others said, "The treasures of the Fuzheng Dynasty are gorgeous, and they have accumulated a lot. Please take a look."

古文：乃敕有司，出御府珍玩、金玉、文绣、器物，御厩文马、奇禽、异兽及人间所宜用者，列之京肆，令其历观焉。
现代文：于是命有司取出御府的珍玩、金玉、文绣、器物，御厩的文马、奇禽、异兽和世间应用的，陈列京肆，让他逐个观看。
English: So he ordered a steward to take out the imperial palace's rare toys, gold and jewels, paintings, embroideries, and utensils, as well as the imperial stables' horses, exotic birds, exotic beasts, and worldly goods, and display them in the imperial palace for him to see one by one.

古文：比拔见之，自相谓曰： 大国富丽，一生所未见也。 
现代文：比拔见了，自语道： 大国富丽，一生所未见啊。 
English: When he saw the comparison, he said to himself: Great country, rich and beautiful, never seen before in my life.

古文：二年二月，又遣比拔等朝贡，寻复请婚焉。
现代文：二年二月，又派比拔等朝见进贡，再次寻求请予通婚。
English: In February of the second year, he sent Bibi Bao and others to pay tribute to the Imperial Court, and again sought to ask for a mixed marriage.

古文：孝文志在招纳，许之。
现代文：孝文帝志在招纳，同意了他。
English: Xiaowen Dizhi was recruiting and agreed with him.

古文：予成虽岁贡不绝，而款约不著，婚事亦停。
现代文：予成虽然每年进贡不断，可是诚意约请不明显，婚事也就停了。
English: Although the annual tribute continued, the sincerity of the invitation was not obvious, and the marriage was stopped.

古文：九年，予成死，子豆仑立，号伏古敦可汗，魏言恆也。
现代文：九年予成死了，儿子豆山仑立，号 伏古主敦可汗 。汉语是 永恒 。
English: Nine years ago, Youcheng died, and his son, Doushan Lunli, took the name of the ancient ruler, Tun Khan. The Chinese word for this is "eternity."

古文：自称太平元年。
现代文：自称太平元年。
English: He claimed to be born in the first year of the Taiping Dynasty.

古文：豆仑性残暴好杀。
现代文：豆山仑性情残暴好杀。
English: Doushanren has a cruel disposition and likes to kill.

古文：其名臣侯医垔、石洛候数以忠言谏之，又劝与魏通和，勿侵中国。
现代文：他的名臣侯鏲篟、石洛候屡次忠言劝谏，又劝他和魏交往和好，不要侵犯中国。
English: His famous vassals Hou Yi and Shi Luo repeatedly advised and persuaded him, and also advised him to make peace with Wei and not to invade China.

古文：豆仑怒，诬石洛候谋反，杀之，夷其三族。
现代文：豆山仑发怒，诬陷石洛候谋反，杀了他，并灭了他的三族。
English: In a rage, Doushan Lun framed Shi Luo for plotting a rebellion, killed him, and exterminated his three clans.

古文：十六年八月，孝文遣阳平王颐、左仆射陆睿并为都督，领军斛律桓等十二将七万骑讨豆仑。
现代文：十六年八月，孝文帝派阳平王颐、左仆射陆睿又同为都督，领军斛律桓等十二员将七万骑兵讨伐豆山仑。
English: In August of the 16th year, Emperor Xiaowen sent Yang Ping Wangjun and his left-hand man Sha Lu Rui, both of whom were also governors of the capital, to lead 70,000 cavalrymen to fight against Doushanlun.

古文：部内高车阿伏至罗率众十余万西走，自立为主。
现代文：部落内高车阿伏至罗率部众十余万西去，自立为首领。
English: Within the tribe, Gao Che Avu Zi Luo led more than a hundred thousand people to the west and became the leader.

古文：豆仑与叔父那盖为二道追之。
现代文：豆山仑和叔父那盖分两路追赶。
English: Doushan Lun and his uncle Nagae chased him in two different directions.

古文：豆仑出自浚稽山北而西，那盖出自金山。
现代文：豆山仑从浚稽山北出兵向西，那盖从金山出兵。
English: Doushanlun sent troops from the north of Junchi Mountain to the west, and Nagae sent troops from Jinshan Mountain.

古文：豆仑频为阿伏至罗所败，那盖累有胜捷。
现代文：豆山仑多次被阿伏至罗打败，那盖数次胜利。
English: Doushan Lun was repeatedly defeated by Avu Zhi Luo, and Nagae won several times.

古文：四人咸以那盖为天所助，欲推那盖为主。
现代文：国人都认为那盖有天佑助，想拥推那盖做首领。
English: The countrymen all thought that Nagaie had divine help, and wanted to promote Nagaie as their leader.

古文：那盖不从，众强之。
现代文：那盖不听从，部众竭力拥推。
English: Naga didn't listen, and the club members tried their best to support him.

古文：那盖曰： 我为臣不可，焉能为主？ 
现代文：那盖说： 我做臣还不行，怎么能做首领？ 
English: Nagai said, "I'm not good enough to be a vassal, how can I be a leader?"

古文：众乃杀豆仑母子，以尸示那盖，乃袭位。
现代文：部众就杀掉豆山仑母子，把尸首让那盖看，这才继位。
English: The members of the council then killed the mother and son of Doushanlun, and showed the corpse to Nagai, who then succeeded to the throne.

古文：那盖号候其伏代库者可汗，魏言悦乐也。
现代文：那盖号 候其伏代库者可汗 ，汉语是 欢乐 。
English: Nagaigo is waiting for his viceroy, the khan, and the Chinese word for this is "joy."

古文：自称太安元年。
现代文：自称太安元年。
English: In the first year of the Taian era.

古文：那盖死，子伏图立，号他汗可汗，魏言绪也。
现代文：那盖死了，儿子伏图立，号 他汗可汗 ，汉语是 前人留下的事业 。
English: Nagae is dead, his son Voturi is called Tarkhan Khan, and Chinese is a cause left behind by the predecessors.

古文：自称始平元年。
现代文：自称始平元年。
English: He claims to have been born in the first year of the Heian period.

古文：正始三年，伏图遣使纥奚勿六跋朝献，请求通和。
现代文：正始三年，伏图派使者纥奚勿六跋朝见进献，请求交往和好。
English: At the beginning of the third year, Votu sent an emissary to the Six Dynasties to make an offering to the Emperor, asking for friendship and reconciliation.

古文：宣武不报其使，诏有司敕勿六跋曰： 蠕蠕远祖社仑是大魏叛臣，往者包容，暂时通使。
现代文：宣武帝不答复他的使者，下诏有司告诉勿六跋说 ：蠕蠕远祖社山仑是大魏叛臣，以前容忍，暂时交往使者。
English: Emperor Xuanwu did not reply to his envoy, and under the imperial edict, Yushi told Bai Rubao: "Your distant ancestor, Sheshan Lun, was a traitor to the Great Wei Dynasty, and he was tolerated before, and he temporarily met with the envoy.

古文：今蠕蠕衰微，有损畴日；大魏之德，方隆周、汉，跨据中原，指清八表。
现代文：现在蠕蠕衰微，失去了往日；大魏的德行，隆盛可与周、汉相比，据有中原，平定八方之外。
English: Now, the Wei dynasty is waning and has lost its past; the Wei dynasty's virtue and prosperity can be compared to that of the Zhou and Han dynasties, with the exception of the Central Plains and the Eight Provinces.

古文：正以江南未平，权宽北略。
现代文：正因江南未平定，暂且放宽北部疆界。
English: It is precisely because the southern part of the Yangtze River has not been pacified that the northern border has been temporarily relaxed.

古文：通和之事，未容相许。
现代文：交往和好的事，不能准许。
English: Socializing and making friends should not be allowed.

古文：若修蕃礼，款诚昭著者，当不孤尔也。 
现代文：如修治藩国礼仪，诚意显著，当不会辜负你们。 
English: If you practice the etiquette of the domain and the country, your sincerity will be remarkable, and you will not be disappointed.

古文：永平元年，伏图又遣勿六跋奉函书一封，并献貂裘。
现代文：永平元年，伏图又派勿六跋，奉上函书一封，并进献貂裘。
English: In the first year of the Yongping era, Futu also sent six letters, one letter was sent, and a gift of gourds was presented.

古文：宣武不纳，依前喻遣。
现代文：宣武帝不受，依照前次晓谕遣返。
English: Emperor Xuanwu did not accept, and they were repatriated in accordance with the previous edict.

古文：伏图西征高车，为高车王弥俄突所杀。子丑奴立，号豆罗伏拔豆伐可汗，魏言彰制也，自称建昌元年。
现代文：伏图向西征伐高车，被高车王弥俄突杀死，儿子丑奴立，号 豆罗伏拔豆伐可汗 ，汉语是 制度显明 。自称建昌元年。
English: Votu went west to conquer Gaochang, was killed by Gaochang King Mirotong, and his son, Ugly Slave, became known as Durovbua Dewa Khan, which in Chinese means "the system is clear." He claimed to be the first year of Jianchang.

古文：永平四年九月，丑奴遣沙门洪宣奉献珠像。
现代文：永平四年九月，丑奴派沙门洪宣奉献珠象。
English: In September of the 4th year of Yongping, the villain sent Shamen Hongxuan to dedicate the pearl elephant.

古文：延昌三年冬，宣武遣骁骑将军马义舒使于丑奴，未发而崩，事遂停寝。
现代文：延昌三年冬，宣武帝派骁骑将军马义舒出使到丑奴，还未出发，皇帝驾崩，事情于是就停止了。
English: In the winter of the third year of Yanchang, Emperor Xuanwu sent General Ma Yishu on horseback as an envoy to the Ugly Slave, but before he set out, the emperor died, and the matter was stopped.

古文：丑奴壮健，善用兵。
现代文：丑奴壮健，善于用兵。
English: Ugly and strong, he is good at using soldiers.

古文：四年，遣使俟斤尉比建朝贡。
现代文：四年派遣使者俟斤尉比建朝见进贡。
English: In four years, he sent an envoy, Xing Jinyi, to pay tribute to the Emperor Bi Jian.

古文：熙平元年，西征高车大破之，禽其主弥俄突，杀之，尽并叛者，国遂强盛。
现代文：熙平元年，向西征伐高车大败他们，擒获首领弥俄突，杀掉，全数吞并背叛的人，国家就强盛起来。
English: In the first year of Heiping, the westward expedition of Gao Che defeated them, captured and killed the leader Mi Yutu, and swallowed up all the traitors, and the country became strong.

古文：二年，又遣使俟斤尉比建、纥奚勿六跋、巩顾礼等朝贡。
现代文：二年又派使者俟斤尉比建、纥奚勿六跋、巩顾礼等朝见进贡。
English: In the second year, he sent envoys such as Xing Jinyi Bi Jian, Xing Bailuo, Gong Gu Li and others to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：神龟元年二月，明帝临显阳殿，引顾礼等二十人于殿下，遣中书舍人徐纥宣诏，让以蠕蠕蕃礼不备之意。
现代文：神龟元年二月，明帝到显阳殿，引领顾礼等二十人到殿下，派中书舍人徐纥宣读诏书，责备蠕蠕蕃国礼仪不完备。
English: In February of the first year of Jingu, Emperor Ming went to the Xianyang Palace, led Gu Li and twenty others to the palace, and sent Xu Xi, a Chinese scholar, to read the imperial edict, reproaching Emperor Wurm for the imperfection of the national etiquette.

古文：初，豆仑之死也，那盖为主，伏图纳豆仑之妻候吕陵氏，生丑奴、阿那环等六人。
现代文：当初，豆山仑死时，那盖做首领，伏图娶豆山仑的妻子侯吕陵氏为妻，生丑奴、阿那瞔等六人。
English: At first, when Dousanlun died, Nagae was the leader, and Fotu married Dousanlun's wife, Hou Luling, and there were six of them, including Hokushu and Ananyan.

古文：丑奴立后，忽亡一子，字祖惠，求募不能得。
现代文：丑奴继立后，忽然丢失一子，字祖惠，寻找征求不能得到。
English: After Ugly Slave was established, it suddenly lost one son, Zha Zu Hui, and was unable to find and solicit any more.

古文：有屋引副升牟妻是豆浑地万，年二十许，为医巫，假托神鬼，先常为丑奴所信，出入去来。
现代文：屋引副升牟的妻子是豆浑地万，年龄二十多岁，是个医巫，假托神鬼，先前被丑奴所信任，出入去来。
English: The wife of Yakuhiki's deputy, Shomu, is a woman in her twenties. She is a witch doctor, pretending to be a god, and was previously trusted by the ugly slave. She comes and goes.

古文：乃言： 此兒今在天上，我能呼得。 
现代文：于是说： 此儿现在天上，我能呼到。 
English: Then he said, "Here it is in the sky, I can smell it."

古文：丑奴母子欣悦。
现代文：丑奴母子欣慰欢喜。
English: Ugly mother and ugly son rejoice.

古文：后岁仲秋，在大泽中施帐屋，斋洁七日，祈请天神。
现代文：次年中秋，在大泽中设帐屋，斋洁七日，祈请天神。
English: In the mid-autumn of the following year, they set up a tent in Osawa, fasted for seven days, and prayed to Tenjin.

古文：经一宿，祖惠忽在帐中，自云恆在天上。
现代文：过了一夜，祖惠忽然出现在帐中，自己说一直在天上。
English: After one night, Zu Hui suddenly appeared in the ledger, saying that he had been in heaven.

古文：丑奴母子抱之悲喜，大会国人，号地万为圣女，纳为可贺敦。
现代文：丑奴母子抱住他又悲又喜，大宴国人，给地万加号为圣女，纳她做可贺敦。
English: Ugly mother and son hugged him in sorrow and joy, the great banquet of the countrymen, gave the land of Vanga the name of the saint, and made her Khotan.

古文：授夫副升牟爵位，赐牛、马、羊三千头。
现代文：授予她丈夫副升牟爵位，赏赐牛、马、羊三千头。
English: She awarded her husband the title of vice-emperor and rewarded him with 3,000 head of cattle, horses and sheep.

古文：地万既挟左道，亦是有姿色，丑奴甚加重爱，信用其言，乱其国政。
现代文：地万既有左道旁门，也有姿色，丑奴更加看重和喜爱，相信采纳她的言谈，惑乱国政。
English: Ji Man not only has a left-hand side door, but also has a good appearance. Ugly slaves are more valued and loved, and they believe that they can adopt her words and confuse national politics.

古文：如是积岁，祖惠年长，其母问之。祖惠言： 我恆在地万家，不尝上天。
现代文：如此多年，祖惠岁数大了，他母亲问他，祖惠说 ：我一直在地万家，不曾上天。
English: After so many years, when Zu Hui was old and his mother asked him about it, Zu Hui said, "I have been to thousands of homes, but I have never been to heaven."

古文：上天者，地万教也。 
现代文：上天是地万教给我的。 
English: Heaven has taught me so much.

古文：其母具以状告丑奴。
现代文：他母亲把情形全都告诉了丑奴。
English: His mother told the ugly one the whole story.

古文：丑奴言地万悬鉴远事，不可不信，勿用谗言也。
现代文：丑奴说地万预称鉴知久远的事，不能不信，不要相信谗言。
English: The villain says that the earth is predestined to know long-term things, can not be disbelieved, do not believe the gossip.

古文：既而地万恐惧，谮祖惠于丑奴，丑奴阴杀之。
现代文：不久地万恐惧，向丑奴诬陷祖惠，丑奴暗中杀了祖惠。
English: Before long, fear gripped everyone, the villain framed Zou Hui, and the villain secretly killed Zou Hui.

古文：正光初，丑奴母遣莫何去汾李具列等绞杀地万。
现代文：正光初，丑奴母亲派莫何去汾、李具列等人绞杀了地万。
English: At the dawn of the 21st century, the mother of the villain sent Mo He to strangle, and Li Gu Lian and others strangled Ji Man.

古文：丑奴怒，欲诛具列等。
现代文：丑奴发怒，要杀具列等。
English: The ugly one got angry and wanted to kill the tool queue.

古文：又阿至罗侵丑奴，丑奴击之，军败还，为母与其大臣所杀，立丑奴弟阿那瑰为主。
现代文：又阿至罗进犯丑奴，丑奴进攻，军队打败仗回来了，被他母亲和大臣杀死，立丑奴弟弟阿那瞔做首领。
English: Again, A Zhi Luo invaded the villain, the villain attacked, the army defeated the war and returned, was killed by his mother and minister, and set up the villain's brother Anaxagoras as the leader.

古文：阿那瑰立经十日，其族兄俊力发示发率众数万以伐，阿那瑰战败，将弟乙居伐轻骑南走归魏。
现代文：阿那瞔继立过了十天，他的族兄俟力发示发率部众数万来讨伐，阿那瞔战败，带领弟弟乙居伐轻骑向南逃走归魏。
English: Ten days after Antao's enthronement, his elder brother Han Li sent tens of thousands of troops to fight against him. Antao was defeated, and he led his younger brother Yi Jiafa on horseback to flee south and return to Wei.

古文：阿那瑰母候吕陵氏及其二弟寻为示发所杀，而阿那瑰未之知也。
现代文：阿那瞔的母亲侯吕陵氏和她的二弟不久被示发杀掉，可是阿那瞔不知道。
English: Anahit's mother, Hou Luling, and her younger brother were soon killed, but Anahit did not know why.

古文：九月，阿那瑰将至，明帝遣兼侍中陆希道为使主，兼散骑常侍孟威为使副，迎劳近畿。
现代文：九月，阿那瞔将要到来，明帝派兼侍中陆希道为主使，兼散骑常侍孟威为副使，在近畿迎接慰劳。
English: In September, Anaxagoras was about to arrive. The Ming emperor sent Zhonglu Xi Dao, who also served as the chief envoy, and Meng Wei, who also served as the deputy envoy, to the Kinki region to offer consolation.

古文：使司空公、京兆王继至北中，侍中崔光、黄门郎元纂在近郊，并申宴劳，引至阙下。
现代文：让司空公、京光王继到北中，侍中崔光、黄门郎元纂在近郊，同样再三宴请，引领他到朝廷。
English: Let Siku and Keiko go to the North Middle School, and let Choe Kwang, the chamberlain, and Huangmen Lang, the founder, stay in the suburbs, and invite him to the imperial court again and again.

古文：十月，明帝临显阳殿，引从五品已上清官、皇宗、籓国使客等，列于殿庭。
现代文：十月，明帝到显阳殿，带领从五品以上清官、皇宗、藩国的使客等，排列在殿庭。
English: In October, Emperor Ming went to the Hsien Yang Palace, leading the envoys of the Qing officials, the imperial family, and the feudal lords from the Fifth Rank and above, who were lined up in the palace courtyard.

古文：王公已下及阿那瑰等入就庭中，北面。
现代文：王公以下和阿那瞔等进入在庭中就位，面朝北。
English: The prince and Anaxagoras enter and take their places in the court, facing north.

古文：位定，谒者引王公已下升殿，阿那瑰位于籓王之下，又引特命之官及阿那瑰弟并二叔升，位于群官之下。
现代文：位置站定，谒者引领王公以下登殿，阿那瞔位置在藩王之下，又引领特命的官吏和阿那瞔的弟弟和二叔登殿，位置在群官之下。
English: The position is fixed, and the person leading the prince leads the prince and below to the palace, Anahata position is under the king of the domain, and leads the specially appointed officials and Anahata's younger brother and second uncle to the palace, the position is under the group officials.

古文：遣中书舍人曹道宣诏劳问。
现代文：派中书舍人曹道宣读诏书慰劳问候。
English: Cao Dao, a Chinese scholar, was sent to read the imperial edict of condolence and greetings.

古文：阿那瑰启云： 陛下优隆，命臣弟、叔等升殿预会。
现代文：阿那瞔启奏道 ：陛下优待隆重，命臣弟、叔等登殿参与会见。
English: Anaximenes: Your majesty has treated me favorably, and my closest vassals and uncles have come to the palace to participate in the meeting.

古文：但臣有从兄，在北之日，官高于二叔，乞命升殿。 
现代文：但是臣有从兄，在北边的时候，官位高于二叔，请求命他登殿。 
English: However, a vassal had a subordinate brother who, when he was in the north, had a higher official rank than his second uncle, and requested that he be allowed to enter the palace.

古文：诏听之，乃位于阿那瑰弟之下，二叔之上。
现代文：下诏听从，位置就在阿那瞔弟弟之下、二叔之上。
English: He obeyed the lower edict, and his position was just below Anaxun's younger brother and above his second uncle.

古文：宴将罢，阿那瑰执所启立于座后。
现代文：宴会即将结束，阿那瞔拿着启奏的表章站立在座位后面。
English: The banquet is coming to an end, and Anaxagoras is standing behind the seats, holding the insignia of the opening ceremony.

古文：诏遣舍人常景问所欲言。
现代文：帝命派舍人常景问他想说什么。
English: The emperor sent an envoy to ask Changjing what he wanted to say.

古文：阿那瑰求诣帝前，诏引之。
现代文：阿那瞔请求到皇帝面前，帝下令领他上前。
English: Anaxagoras requested to appear before the emperor, and the emperor ordered him to be brought forward.

古文：阿那瑰再拜跽曰： 臣先世源由，出于大魏。 
现代文：阿那瞔再拜长跪说： 臣的先世源由，出于大魏。 
English: Anaxagoras kneeled again and said, "The origin of my ancestors is from the Great Wei Dynasty.

古文：诏曰： 朕已具知。 
现代文：帝说： 朕已经全知道了。 
English: The emperor said, "I already know everything.

古文：阿那瑰起而言曰： 臣之先，逐草放牧，遂居漠北。 
现代文：阿那瞔站起说道： 臣的祖先随水草放牧，于是居住漠北。 
English: Anaxagoras stood up and said: My ancestors grazed with water plants, so they lived in the desert.

古文：诏曰： 卿言未尽，可具陈之。 
现代文：帝说： 卿的话未说完，可再具体陈述。 
English: The emperor said, "Sir, you have not finished your speech, you can make a more specific statement.

古文：阿那瑰又言曰： 臣祖先已来，世居北土，虽复隔越山津，而乃恭心慕化，未能时宣者，正以高车悖逆，臣国扰攘，不暇遣使以宜远诚。
现代文：阿那瞔又说道： 臣的祖先以来，世居住北土，虽然隔越重重山河，却恭顺之心仰慕教化，未能当时宣示正是因为高车违乱忤逆，臣的国家混乱，无暇派使者来宣示远方之人的诚意。
English: Anaxagoras also said: Since my ancestors, the world has been living in the north, although separated by mountains and rivers, they were obedient and admired enlightenment. They could not declare it at that time precisely because of the chaos of the country, and there was no time to send an envoy to proclaim the sincerity of the distant people.

古文：自顷年已前，渐定高车，及臣兄为主，故遣巩顾礼等使来大魏，实欲虔修籓礼。
现代文：从近年以前，逐渐平定高车，到臣兄做首领，因此派巩顾礼等使者来大魏，确实想修治藩国的礼仪。
English: From recent years ago, he gradually subdued Takenaka and made his vassal the leader. Therefore, he sent envoys such as Gong Gu Li to Wei, and he really wanted to improve the etiquette of the domain.

古文：是以曹道芝北使之日，臣与主兄，即遣大臣五人，拜受诏命。
现代文：所以曹道芝出使北方时，臣和做首领的兄长，就派大臣五人，拜受了诏命。
English: Therefore, when Cao Daozhi sent an envoy to the north, the vassal and the elder brother, who was the leader, sent five ministers and received the imperial command.

古文：臣兄弟本心，未及上彻。
现代文：臣兄弟的本意，未来得及通达皇上。
English: The intention of the vassal brothers was to gain access to the emperor in the future.

古文：但高车从而侵暴，中有奸臣，因乱作逆，杀臣兄，立臣为主。
现代文：但是高车从而侵犯凌暴，国中有奸臣，趁混乱做叛逆，杀了臣兄，立臣做首领。
English: However, Gao Che thus violated the tyranny, there were treacherous vassals in the country, took advantage of the chaos to rebel, killed the vassal brother, and made the vassal the leader.

古文：裁过旬日，臣以陛下恩慈如天，是故仓卒轻身投国，归命陛下。 
现代文：才过十天，臣因陛下恩慈如天，因此仓促空身投奔国家，归来听命陛下。 
English: Just ten days later, the minister, moved by His Majesty's graciousness, rushed to the country and returned to obey His Majesty's command.

古文：诏曰： 具卿所陈，理犹未尽，可更言之。 
现代文：皇帝说： 卿陈述具体，但理还没说完，可以再说。 
English: The emperor said, "Your Excellency has made a specific statement, but you haven't finished your reason, you can say it again."

古文：阿那瑰再拜受诏，起而言曰： 臣以家难，轻来投阙，老母在彼，万里分张，本国臣人，皆已迸散。
现代文：阿那瞔再拜接受诏命，站起来说道： 臣因家难，空身来投陛下，老母亲还在那里，离别万里，本国的臣下人民，都已经走散。
English: Anaxuan bowed again to accept the imperial command, stood up and said: "Due to family difficulties, my vassal has come empty-handed to vote for your majesty. My old mother is still there. We are separated by thousands of miles, and my country's vassal people have all dispersed.

古文：陛下隆恩，有过天地，求乞兵马，还向本国，诛翦叛逆，收集亡散。陛下慈念，赐借兵马，老母若在，得生相见，以申母子之恩；如其死也，即得报雠，以雪大耻。
现代文：陛下隆厚的恩情超过天地，乞求派出兵马，返回本国，消灭叛逆，收集逃散的人，陛下出于慈爱的关心，赐借给兵马，老母亲如还在世，能够活着见面，申述母子恩情；如果死了，则能够报仇，洗雪大耻。
English: His majesty's bountiful mercy surpasses heaven and earth, and he begs to send soldiers and horses to return to the motherland, eliminate the rebellion, and collect the fugitives. His majesty, out of loving concern, lends the soldiers and horses. If the old mother is still alive, she can meet and recount the mother and son's kindness; if she is dead, she can take revenge and wash away the great shame.

古文：臣当统临余人，奉事陛下，四时之贡，不敢阙绝。
现代文：臣当统领余人，奉事陛下，四季的贡物，不敢缺少断绝。
English: The vassals lead the rest of the people, serve His Majesty, pay tribute to the four seasons, and do not dare to lack severance.

古文：陛下圣颜难睹，敢不披陈？
现代文：陛下的圣颜难得看见，怎敢不披露述说？
English: It is rare to see His Majesty's holy face, how dare you not disclose it?

古文：但所欲言者，口不能尽言。
现代文：只是想说的，嘴不能全都说出。
English: I just want to say something, but my mouth can't say it all.

古文：别有辞启，谨以仰呈，原垂昭览。 
现代文：另有言词启奏，谨把它仰呈皇帝，希望得到明鉴。 
English: In addition, there is an opening speech, which I would like to present to the emperor in the hope that it will be clearly understood.

古文：仍以启付舍人常景，具以奏闻。
现代文：仍旧把启奏交付舍人常景，把它全部上奏使皇帝知道。
English: He still entrusted the opening music to Shenren Changjing, and played it all for the emperor to know.

古文：寻封阿那瑰朔方郡公、蠕蠕王，赐以衣冕，加之轺、盖，禄从仪卫，同于戚籓。
现代文：不久封阿那瞔为朔方郡公，蠕蠕王。赐给他衣冕，加赐给他轺、盖，俸禄照从仪卫，和贵戚藩国相同。
English: Anaximenes was soon given the title of county governor of Shuofang and king of Cnidus. He was given a crown, a scepter, and a cap, and his salary was the same as that of the nobles of the province.

古文：十二月，明帝以阿那瑰国无定主，思还绥集，占请切至，诏议之。
现代文：十二月，明帝因阿那瞔国无定主，思念返回安抚聚集余人，启奏请求极为迫切，就下诏议论此事。
English: In December, the Ming Emperor, with the Anasazi nation still undecided, longed to return to pacify the remaining people gathered, and the request to open the concert was extremely urgent. He issued an edict to discuss the matter.

古文：时朝臣意有同异，或言听还，或言不可。
现代文：当时朝臣的意见有同有异，有的说听从返还，有的说不可。
English: At that time, the opinions of courtiers were mixed, with some saying that the return should be obeyed, and others saying that it should not.

古文：领军元叉为宰相，阿那瑰私以金百斤货之，遂归北。
现代文：领军元叉为宰相，阿那瞔私下用金百斤贿赂他，于是同意返归北方。
English: The leader of the army, Yuan Zha, was the prime minister. Anaxagoras secretly bribed him with a hundred kilos of gold, so he agreed to return to the north.

古文：二年正月，阿那瑰等五十四人请辞，明帝临西堂，引见阿那瑰及其叔伯兄弟五人，升阶赐坐，遣中书舍人穆弼宣劳。阿那瑰等拜辞。
现代文：二年正月，阿那瞔等五十四人请求辞行，明帝到西堂，引见阿那瞔和他的叔兄弟五人，登阶赐坐，派中书舍人穆弼宣示慰劳，阿那瞔等人拜辞。
English: In the first month of the second year, Anaxagoras and fifty-four others requested to resign. Emperor Ming went to the West Hall, introduced Anaxagoras and his five uncles, seated them on the steps, sent the scholar Mu Xi to express his condolences, and Anaxagoras and others bowed their heads.

古文：诏赐阿那瑰细明光人马铠一具，铁人马铠六具，露丝银缠槊二张并白眊，赤漆槊十张并白眊，黑漆槊十张并幡，露丝弓二张并箭，硃漆柘弓六张并箭，黑漆弓十张并箭，赤漆楯幡并刀，黑漆楯六幡并刀，赤漆鼓角二十具，五色锦被二领，黄被褥三十具，私府绣袍一领并帽，内者绯纳袄一领、绯袍二十领并帽，内者杂彩千段，绯纳小口袴褶一具内中宛具，紫纳大口袴褶一具内中宛具，百子帐十八具，黄布幕六张，新乾饭一百石，麦八石，榛五石，铜乌錥四枚、柔铁乌錥二枚各受二斛。黑漆竹榼四枚各受五升，婢二口，父草马五百疋，驼百二十头，牸牛一百头，羊五千口，硃画盘器十合，粟二十万石，至镇给之。
现代文：下诏赏赐阿那瞔细明光人马铠一具，铁人马铠六具，露丝银缠槊二张和白目毛，赤漆槊十张和白目毛，黑漆槊十张和幡，露丝弓二张和箭，朱漆柘弓六张和箭，黑漆弓十张和箭，赤漆盾六幡和刀，黑漆盾六幡和刀，赤漆鼓角二十具，五色锦被二领，黄纟由被褥三十具，私府绣袍一领和帽子，内者绯纳袄一领、绯袍二十领和帽子，内者杂彩千段，绯纳小口裤褶一具内中宛具，紫纳大口裤褶一具内中宛具，百子帐十八具，黄布幕六张，新干粮一百石，麦八石，榛五石，铜乌钅育四枚、柔铁乌钅育二枚，各受二斛，黑漆竹木盍四枚各受五升，婢二口，公马草马五百匹，驼一百二十头，母牛一百头，羊五千口，朱画盘器十合，粟二十万石，到达镇守时给予。
English: The following edict rewarded Anaxun with one fine bright-colored horse, six iron-colored horses, two silver-covered and white-eyed horses, ten red-lacquered and white-eyed horses, ten black-lacquered and white-haired horses, two rosy bows and arrows, six red-lacquered and red-haired arrows, ten black-lacquered bows and arrows, six red-lacquered shields and swords, six red-lacquered and black-lacquered shields and swords, twenty red-lacquered drum horns, two five-colored brocades, thirty yellow

古文：诏侍中崔光、黄门元纂，郭外劳遣。
现代文：诏令侍中崔光、黄门元纂，城外慰劳遣返。
English: The imperial edict ordered the chamberlains Cui Guang and Huang Men Yuan Zuo to be repatriated outside the city for forced labor.

古文：阿那瑰来奔之后，其从父兄俟力发婆罗门率数万人入讨示发，破之。
现代文：阿那瞔来投奔以后，他的从父兄弟俟力发婆罗门率领数万人进入讨伐示发，打败了他。
English: After Ananda came to take refuge, his paternal half-brother Hanifat Brahman led tens of thousands of people into a crusade against Shiva and defeated him.

古文：示发走奔地豆干，为其所杀。推婆罗门为主，号弥偶可社句可汗，魏言安静也。
现代文：示发逃跑投奔地豆干，被他杀掉，推举婆罗门做首领，号 弥偶可社句可汗 ，汉语是 安静 。
English: Shifa ran away and went to ground beans, was killed by him, and promoted Brahman to be the leader. His nickname was "Khan," and his Chinese name was "Quiet."

古文：时安北将军、怀朔镇将杨钧表： 传闻彼人已立主，是阿那瑰同堂兄弟。
现代文：当时安北将军、怀朔镇将杨钧上表： 传说那些人已立首领，是阿那瞔同堂兄弟。
English: At that time, the general of Anbei, Wai Shuo Town, put Yang Xuan on the table: Legend has it that those people have set up leaders and are cousins of Anaxun.

古文：夷人兽心，已相君长，恐未肯以杀兄之人，郊迎其弟。轻往虚反，徒损国威。
现代文：夷人兽心，已经选择了君长，恐怕未必肯用杀兄的人，在郊外迎接他的弟弟，白白往返一趟，只会损害国威。
English: The barbarian has already chosen the ruler, but he may not be willing to use the man who killed his brother to meet his brother in the suburbs. A round trip in vain will only damage the national prestige.

古文：自非广加兵众，无以送其入北。 
现代文：除非增加兵众，否则没法把他送进北方。 
English: There's no way to get him to the north without more troops.

古文：二月，明帝诏旧经蠕蠕，使者牒云具仁往，喻婆罗门迎阿那瑰复籓之意。
现代文：二月，明帝诏令以前到过蠕蠕的使者牒云具仁前往，晓谕婆罗门迎接阿那瞔恢复藩国之意。
English: In February, Emperor Ming decreed that the emissary Cho Yun Guren, who had previously been to Humen, should go there to tell the brahman to welcome Anaximander's intention to restore the domain.

古文：婆罗门殊自骄慢，无逊避之心，责具仁礼敬，具仁执节不屈。
现代文：婆罗门自己特别骄横傲慢，无逊位避让之心，要求具仁以合乎礼仪的举动表示尊崇，具仁坚守节操不屈服。
English: The brahman himself is particularly arrogant and haughty, with an indomitable spirit of concession, demanding that the guren show respect by behaving in accordance with etiquette, and that the guren adhere to discipline and not give in.

古文：婆罗门遣大官莫何去汾、俟斤丘升头六人，将兵二千随具仁迎阿那瑰。
现代文：婆罗门派大官莫何去汾、俟斤丘升头六人带兵两千跟随具仁迎接阿那瞔。
English: The brahmins sent a high-ranking official to meet Ananda, and six men from Jinkinkaku Shoto led two thousand soldiers to meet Ananda.

古文：五月，具仁还镇，论彼事势。
现代文：五月，具仁回到镇守，谈论那里的事态趋势。
English: In May, Gu Ren returned to the town guard to discuss the trend of events there.

古文：阿那瑰虑不敢入，表求还京。
现代文：阿那瞔有顾虑不敢进入，上表请求回京。
English: Anaximenes was afraid to enter, and sent a request to return to the capital.

古文：会婆罗门为高车所逐，率十部落诣凉州归降。
现代文：适逢婆罗门被高车追逐，率领十个部落到凉州归降。
English: At the right time, Brahman was chased by a chariot and led ten tribes to Liangzhou to surrender.

古文：于是蠕蠕数万，相率迎阿那瑰。
现代文：于是蠕蠕数万人，相继迎接阿那瞔。
English: As a result, tens of thousands of people flocked to welcome Anas in succession.

古文：七月，阿那瑰启云： 投化阿那瑰蠕蠕元退社、浑河旃等二人，以今月二十六日到镇，云国土大乱，姓姓别住，迭相抄掠，当今北人，鹄望待拯。
现代文：七月，阿那瞔启奏说： 投顺归化的阿那瞔蠕蠕元退社、浑河旃等二人，在本月二十六月到镇守，国土大乱，各姓分别驻扎，互相劫掠，现在的北人，引颈翘望等待拯救。
English: In July, Ananyan Qisong said: "Two people, Ananyan Qim Qiu Yuan Rong and Hunhe Qin, who were naturalized and resigned from the company, came to the town guard on June 26 of this month. The country was in turmoil. Each family was stationed separately and plundered each other. Now the northerners are looking forward to waiting for salvation.

古文：今乞依前恩，赐给精兵一万，还令督率领，送臣碛北，抚定荒人。
现代文：现乞请依照前恩，赐给精兵一万，仍令督将率领，送臣到大碛北，抚慰安定荒远之人。
English: Now, I beg you to grant the elite soldiers ten thousand in accordance with the previous grace, and still let the governor lead them and send them to the north of Daguang to comfort the stable and desolate people.

古文：脱蒙所请，事必克济。 
现代文：如承蒙获请，事情必然能够成功。 
English: If you accept our invitation, things will surely work out.

古文：诏付尚书、门下博议。
现代文：下诏交付尚书、门下广泛议论。
English: The imperial edict was issued to deliver the imperial edict, and it was widely discussed.

古文：八月，诏兼散骑常侍王遵业驰驿宣旨慰喻阿那瑰，并申赐赉。
现代文：八月，诏令兼散骑常侍王遵业驱马到站宣读圣旨，安慰开导阿那瞔，并重复赏赐。
English: In August, the imperial edict and horseback riding attendant, King Zunye, drove his horse to the station to read the edict, comfort and enlighten Anahit, and repeated the reward.

古文：九月，蠕蠕后主俟匿伐来奔怀朔镇，阿那瑰兄也，列称规望乞军，并请阿那瑰。
现代文：九月，蠕蠕后主俟匿伐来投奔怀朔镇，是阿那瞔的兄长，依次称述期望、乞请军兵，并请阿那瞔。
English: In September, Cree Cree's eldest son, Anasazi's elder brother, Cree Cree's second-eldest son, Cree Cree's second-eldest son, Cree Cree's third-oldest son, Cree Cree's second-oldest son, Cree Cree's third-oldest son, Cree Cree's second-oldest son, Cree Cree's second-oldest son, Cree Cree's second-oldest son, Cree Cree's second-oldest son, Cree's second-oldest son, Cree's third-oldest son,

古文：十月，录尚书事高阳王雍、尚书令李崇、侍中侯刚、尚书左仆射元钦、侍中元叉、侍中安丰王延明、吏部尚书元修义、尚书李彦、给事黄门侍郎元纂、给事黄门侍郎张烈、给事黄门侍序卢同等奏曰： 窃闻汉立南北单于，晋有东西之称，皆所以相维御难，为国籓篱。
现代文：十月，录尚书事高阳王雍、尚书令李崇、侍中侯刚、尚书左仆射元钦、侍中元叉、侍中安丰王延明、吏部尚书元修义、尚书李彦、给事黄门侍郎张烈、给事黄门侍郎卢同等人启奏道 ：听说汉代设立南北单于，晋有东西的称呼，都是为了互相维系抵御国难而成为国家屏障。
English: In October, the following people were recorded: Gaoyang Wang Yong, Shang Shuling Li Chong, Chamberlain Hou Gang, Shang Shuling's left-hand servant Sha Yuanqin, Chamberlain Yuan Zha, Chamberlain Anfeng Wang Yanming, Staff Officer Shang Shuling, Shang Shuling's Li Yan, Yellow Gate Chamberlain Zhang Lie, Yellow Gate Chamberlain Lu, and the like.

古文：今臣等参议，以为怀朔镇北，土名无结山吐若奚泉，敦煌北西海郡，即汉、晋旧鄣，二处宽平，原野弥沃。
现代文：现臣等参与谋议，认为怀朔镇北，地名无结山吐若奚泉，敦煌北西海郡，就是汉晋旧时要塞，两地宽阔平坦，原野更加肥沃。
English: The current ministers and others participated in the deliberation, believing that the north of Waishuo Town, the place name Mujing Mountain, Tujia Spring, and the north of Dunhuang, Xihai County, were the old fortresses of the Han Dynasty. The two places were wide and flat, and the fields were more fertile.

古文：阿那瑰宜置西吐若奚泉，婆罗门宜置西海郡。各令总率部落，收离聚散。
现代文：阿那瞔应放置在西吐若奚泉，婆罗门应该放置在西海郡，命各人统率部落，收聚离散的人。
English: Ananda should be placed in West Tujiaquan, and Brahman should be placed in West Hai County, and each of them should be ordered to lead the tribe and gather the scattered people.

古文：其爵号及资给所须，唯恩裁处。
现代文：他们的爵号和供给所需，希望皇恩裁定处理。
English: Their titles and supplies are needed, and it is hoped that the royal decree will be dealt with.

古文：彼臣下之官，任其旧俗。
现代文：他的臣下官员，听任他们原来的习惯。
English: His subordinate officials were left to their old habits.

古文：阿那瑰所居既是境外，宜少优遣，以示威刑。
现代文：阿那瞔居住的已是境外，恩惠应少，表示刑法严厉。
English: Anas has been living outside the country, so the leniency should be less, indicating that the criminal law is more severe.

古文：计沃野、怀朔、武川镇各差二百人，令当镇军主监率，给其粮仗，送至前所。
现代文：计划沃野、怀朔、武川镇各差派二百人，命令当镇军主监督统率，供给粮食兵器，送到前面的地方。
English: He planned to send two hundred men to each of the towns of Wouno, Waisaku, and Wuchuan, and ordered the town's military chief to supervise and lead, supply grain weapons, and send them to the front.

古文：仍于彼为其造构，功就听还。
现代文：仍旧在那里为他们建造屋宇，功德成就积聚。
English: He is still there, building houses for them and accumulating merit.

古文：诸于北来在婆罗门前投化者，令州镇上佐，准程给粮，送诣怀朔阿那瑰，镇与使人，量给食禀；在京馆者，任其去留。
现代文：所有从北来的婆罗门的投顺归化的人，命令州镇上佐，按路程供给粮食，送到怀朔阿那瞔那里。镇使用人，按量给予食粮；在京师馆舍的人，听凭自己去留。
English: All the naturalized followers of the brahmin from the north were ordered by the commander of the state town to provide grain along the way and send it to Waisho Ananda. The town servants were given food in accordance with the amount; those who were in the Beijing Teacher's House were allowed to stay on their own.

古文：阿那瑰草创，先无储积，请给朔州麻子乾饭二千斛，官驼运送。
现代文：阿那瞔草创时期，先前没有储备积存，请求给予朔州麻子干粮二千斛，官驼运送。
English: At the time of the creation of the Anas grass, there were no reserves previously accumulated, and it was requested that two thousand catties of Shuozhou poppy seed dry grain be given and transported by camel.

古文：婆罗门居于四海，既是境内，资卫不得同之。
现代文：婆罗门居住西海，已是境内，资用兵卫不能同于阿那瞔。
English: The brahman who lives in the West Sea is already within the territory, and the armed guards cannot be the same as Ananda.

古文：阿那瑰等新造籓屏，宜各遣使持节驰驿，先诣慰喻，并委经略。 
现代文：阿那瞔等新到藩国，应各派使者持节驱马到驿站，先去慰问开导，并且委托他们治理。 
English: When Anaxagoras and others were new to the domain, they should have sent emissaries to drive the horses to the post, first to offer condolences and enlightenment, and then to entrust them with governance.

古文：明帝从之。
现代文：明帝依从。
English: Emperor Ming complied.

古文：十二月，诏安西将军、廷尉元洪超兼尚书行台，诣敦煌安置婆罗门。
现代文：十二月，诏令安西将军、廷尉元洪超兼任尚书行台，到敦煌安置婆罗门。
English: In December, the emperor ordered General Anxi and the imperial lieutenant Yuan Hongchao to concurrently serve as Shang Shujangdai and relocate Brahman to Dunhuang.

古文：婆罗门寻与部众谋叛投嚈哒。
现代文：婆罗门不久就和部众谋划叛变投靠口厌哒。
English: The brahman soon became fed up with his subordinates plotting a mutiny.

古文：嚈哒三妻，皆婆罗门姊妹也。
现代文：口厌哒三个妻子，都是婆罗门的姐妹。
English: All three wives are sisters of Brahman.

古文：仍为州军所讨，禽之。
现代文：但被州军讨伐，擒获。
English: However, it was intercepted and captured by the state army.

古文：三年十二月，阿那瑰上表，乞粟以为田种。
现代文：三年十二月，阿那瞔上表，请求给予粟米作为田种。
English: In December of the third year, Anaju petitioned to be given maize as a field crop.

古文：诏给万石。
现代文：诏令给予万石。
English: The imperial edict gave him 10,000 koku.

古文：四年，阿那瑰众大饥。入塞寇抄。
现代文：四年，阿那瞔部众遇到大饥荒，进入边塞侵犯劫掠。
English: In the fourth year, the Anasazi people encountered a great famine and entered the frontier fortress to invade and plunder.

古文：明帝诏尚书左丞元孚兼行台尚书，持节喻之，孚见阿那瑰。
现代文：明帝诏令尚书左丞元孚兼任行台尚书，出使晓谕他。元孚见到阿那瞔，被他捉住。
English: Emperor Ming decreed that Shangshu Zuojo, Yuan Fu, would also serve as Yangdai Shangshu, and sent an envoy to tell him. Yuan Fu saw Anaxun and was captured by him.

古文：为其所执。以孚自随，驱掠良口二千并公私驿马、牛羊数十万北遁，谢孚放还。
现代文：让元孚自己跟随，驱赶劫掠良民二千和公私驿马、牛羊数十万向北逃走，后谢过元孚把他放还。
English: Let Yuan Fu himself follow, drive away two thousand robbed and plundered people and hundreds of thousands of horses, cattle and sheep to the north, and then thank Yuan Fu for releasing him.

古文：诏骠骑大将军、尚书令李崇等率骑十万讨之，出塞三千余里，至瀚海，不及而还。
现代文：帝诏令骠骑大将军、尚书令李崇等人率领骑兵十万讨伐，出塞三千多里，到达瀚海，没有追上而返回。
English: Emperor Zhao ordered his cavalry generals, Shang Shuling, Li Chong and others to lead the cavalry in a hundred thousand crusade, travel more than three thousand miles from the fortress, reach the open sea, and return without catching up.

古文：俟匿伐至洛阳，明帝临西堂引见之。
现代文：俟匿伐到洛阳，明帝到西堂接见他们。
English: They stayed in Luoyang, and Emperor Ming went to Xidang to meet them.

古文：五年，婆罗门死于洛南之馆，诏赠使持节、镇西将军、秦州刺史、广牧公。
现代文：五年，婆罗门死在洛南的馆舍，诏令赠予使持节、镇西将军、秦州刺史、广牧公。
English: In the fifth year, Brahman died in the mansion in Lonan, and the edict was given to the envoys, Zhenxi General, Qinzhou Jishi, and Guangmu Gong.

古文：是岁，沃野镇人破六韩拔陵反，诸镇相应。
现代文：这年，沃野镇人破六韩拔陵造反，各镇响应。
English: This year, the people of Wo-yeon Town broke the rebellion of the six Koreas to pull down the mausoleum, and all towns responded.

古文：孝昌元年春，阿那瑰率众讨之。
现代文：孝昌元年春天，阿那瞔率领部众讨伐他们。
English: In the spring of the first year of Xiaochang, Anaxun led the troops to fight them.

古文：诏遣牒云具仁赍杂物劳赐。
现代文：诏令派牒云具仁携带各色物品慰劳赏赐。
English: The imperial edict ordered the soldiers to carry all kinds of goods as a reward for their hard work.

古文：阿那瑰拜受诏命，勒众十万，从武川镇西向沃野，频战克捷。
现代文：阿那瞔拜受诏命，率众十万，从武川镇向西到沃野，屡次交战获胜。
English: Anabi was ordered by the emperor to lead a hundred thousand people westward from the town of Takekawa to the town of Wouno. He repeatedly won battles.

古文：四月，明帝又遣通直散骑常侍、中书舍人冯俊使阿那瑰，宣劳班赐有差。
现代文：四月明帝又派通直散骑常侍、中书舍人冯鯭出使阿那瞔，慰劳赏赐有区别。
English: In April, Emperor Ming also sent the imperial messenger Anaxun, who was accompanied by the imperial messenger and the Chinese scholar Feng Xuan, and the reward was different.

古文：阿那瑰部落既和，土马稍盛，乃号敕连头兵伐可汗，魏言把揽也。
现代文：阿那瞔部落已经和好，兵马渐渐强盛，于是号称 敕连头兵伐可汗 ，汉语是 把持 。
English: The Anas tribe had already been reconciled, and the soldiers and horses gradually became more powerful, so they became known as the Qilian First Battalion Khan, which is grasping in Chinese.

古文：十月，阿那瑰复遣郁久闾弥娥等朝贡。
现代文：二月，阿那瞔又派郁久闾弥娥等朝见进贡。
English: In February, Anahata sent Ikukyu Shinya and others to pay tribute to the Imperial Court.

古文：三年四月，阿那瑰遣人巩凤景等朝贡。
现代文：三年四月，阿那瞔派使者巩凤景等人朝见进贡。
English: In April of the third year, Anahu sent emissaries such as Gong Fengjing to pay tribute to the Imperial Court.

古文：及还，明帝诏之曰： 北镇群狄，为逆不息，蠕蠕主为国立忠，助加诛讨，言念诚心，无忘寝食。
现代文：到他返回时，明帝召见他说： 北镇的群狄，不断地成为叛逆，蠕蠕主为国立忠，帮助加以诛伐征讨，念及他的诚心，寝食时也不忘。
English: When he returned, Emperor Ming summoned him and said: "The North Town's Gunditra has constantly become rebellious, thinking that the Lord is loyal to the state, helping him to fight and conquer, thinking about his sincerity, and not forgetting when sleeping and eating.

古文：今知停在朔垂，与尔硃荣邻接，其严勒部曲，勿相暴掠。
现代文：现在知道停留在朔边，和朱荣相邻接，要严格管束部曲，不要互相凌暴劫掠。
English: Now I know that if I stay in Shuo's side, adjacent to Zhu Rong, I must strictly control the music, and do not violently rob each other.

古文：又近得蠕蠕主启，更欲为国东讨。
现代文：近来又得到蠕蠕主启奏，更想为国东征。
English: Recently, he has been inspired by the leader of the Communist Party of China, and wants to go to the East for the sake of the country.

古文：但蠕蠕主世居北漠，不宜炎夏，今可且停，听待后敕。 
现代文：但蠕蠕主世代居住北漠，不适应炎热的夏天，现在可以暂时停止，听从等待以后的敕命。 
English: However, the main generation of worms live in the northern desert and are not adapted to the hot summer. Now they can temporarily stop and wait for the next life.

古文：盖朝廷虑其反覆也。
现代文：大概是朝廷考虑到他变化不定。
English: Presumably, the court took into account his erratic behavior.

古文：此后频使朝贡。
现代文：此后使者屡次朝见进贡。
English: After that, the envoy repeatedly paid tribute to the emperor.

古文：建义初，孝庄诏曰： 夫勋高者赏重，德厚者名隆。
现代文：建义初，孝庄帝下诏说： 功勋高的人赏赐重，德行厚的人名声隆。
English: At the beginning of the Jianyi era, Emperor Xiaozhuang issued an edict saying, "Those with high meritorious deeds will be highly rewarded, and those with strong virtues will be highly praised."

古文：蠕蠕主阿那瑰镇卫北籓，御侮朔表，遂使阴山息警，弱水无尘，刊迹狼山，铭名瀚海。
现代文：蠕蠕主阿那瞔镇守保卫北藩，在朔外抵御侵凌，因此使阴山报警停息，弱水无尘，刊迹狼山，铭功瀚海。
English: Ananyuan, the main town of Ananyuan, guarded and defended the northern domain, resisted encroachment outside the county, and thus made the gloomy mountain alarm stop, weak water and no dust, published the wolf mountain, and won the vast sea.

古文：至诚既笃，勋绪莫酬，故宜标以殊礼，何容格以恆式。
现代文：至诚之心坚定，勋业未有实现，因此应用特殊礼仪显示，怎能容许用固定不变的格式来要求。
English: The sincerity of the heart is firm, the merit is unrealized, so the application of special etiquette shows how to tolerate the requirement of a fixed and unchanging format.

古文：自今以后，赞拜不言名，上书不称臣。 
现代文：从今以后，赞拜不用称名，上书不必称臣。 
English: From now on, there is no need to praise the name, and there is no need to praise the minister in the letter.

古文：太昌元年六月，阿那瑰遣乌勾兰树升伐等朝贡，并为长子请尚公主。
现代文：太昌元年六月，阿那瞔派乌勾兰树升伐等朝见进贡，并为长子要求娶公主为妻。
English: In June of the first year of Taichang, Anaxuan sent tribute to the imperial court, such as the cutting of the black currant tree, and asked for the eldest son to marry the princess.

古文：永熙二年四月，孝武诏以范阳王诲之长女琅邪公主许之，未及成婚，帝入关。
现代文：永熙二年四月，孝武帝下诏让范阳王海的长女琅笽公主许嫁，没来得及成婚，孝武帝进入潼关内。
English: In April of the second year of Yongxi, Emperor Xiaowu issued an edict to allow Fan Yang Wanghai's eldest daughter, Princess Zou, to marry. Before she could marry, Emperor Xiaowu entered Shaoguan.

古文：东、西魏竞结阿那瑰为婚好。
现代文：东、西魏竞相与阿那瞔结为婚好。
English: The Eastern and Western Wei dynasties competed with each other to marry Anaxue.

古文：西魏文帝乃以孝武时舍人元翌女称为化政公主，妻阿那瑰兄弟塔寒，又自纳阿那瑰女为后，加以金帛诱之。
现代文：西魏文帝就让孝武帝时舍人元翌的女儿称为化政公主，嫁与阿那瞔兄弟塔寒为妻，自己又纳阿那瞔女儿为后，加上用金帛诱导。
English: Emperor Wen of the Western Wei Dynasty asked Emperor Xiaowu to name the daughter of Emperor Renren's successor as Princess Huazheng, to marry Ananyu's brother Takan as his wife, and to marry Ananyu's daughter as his concubine, and to induce her with a golden scepter.

古文：阿那瑰遂留东魏使元整，不报信命。
现代文：阿那瞔就留下东魏使者元整，不答复使者带来的音信。
English: Anaxuan left the Eastern Wei emissary, Yuan Zheng, and did not reply to the message brought by the emissary.

古文：后遂率众度河，又废后为言，文帝不得已，遂敕废后自杀。
现代文：后来就率众渡河，以废后为借口，文帝不得已，就敕命废后自杀。
English: Later, he led the crowd to cross the river, using the waste as an excuse, and Emperor Wen had no choice but to commit suicide after losing his life.

古文：元象元年五月，阿那瑰掠幽州范阳，南至易水。
现代文：元象元年五月，阿那瞔掠夺幽州范阳，南到易水。
English: In May of the first year of Yuan Xiang, Anahu plundered Yuzhou and Fanyang, and went as far south as Yishui.

古文：九月，又掠肆州秀容，至于三推。
现代文：九月，又抢掠肆州秀容，到达三推。
English: In September, he robbed Zhouzhou Xiurong again, reaching the third push.

古文：又杀元整，转谋侵害。
现代文：又杀掉元整，转而图谋侵犯。
English: He also killed Yuan Zheng, and then plotted to invade.

古文：东魏乃囚阿那瑰使温豆拔等。
现代文：东魏于是囚禁阿那瞔使者温豆拔等人。
English: The Eastern Wei Dynasty then imprisoned Anas's emissary, Wen Douba, and others.

古文：祖武以阿那瑰凶狡，将抚怀之，乃遣其使人龙无驹北还，以通温豆拔等音问。
现代文：神武因阿那瞔凶残狡猾，打算抚慰怀柔他，就遣返阿那瞔的使者龙无驹北还，来通达温豆拔等人的消息。
English: Because of Anakin's ferocious cunning, Shenwu, intending to appease Huairou, sent Anakin's messenger Long Wujing to the north to get news of Wenzubao and the others.

古文：始阿那瑰杀元整，亦谓温豆拔等不存，既见无驹，微怀感愧。
现代文：当初阿那瞔杀元整，也说温豆拔等人不在世了，见到无驹，略微怀有感愧之情。
English: At first, Anaxuan killed Yuancheng, and also said that Wenzuba and others were no longer alive. Seeing this, he felt slightly ashamed.

古文：兴和二年春，复遣龙无驹等朝贡东魏。然犹未款诚。
现代文：兴和二年春天，又派龙无驹到东魏朝见进贡，然而还是没有诚恳之意。
English: In the spring of the 2nd year of Xinghe, Long Wuxuan was also sent to the East Wei Dynasty to pay tribute, but there was still no sincere intention.

古文：阿那瑰女妻文帝者遇疾死，齐神武因遣相府功曹参军张徽纂使于阿那瑰，间说之。
现代文：阿那瞔的嫁给文帝为妻的女儿得疾病死了，齐神武派相府功曹参军张徽纂到阿那瞔出使，离间游说他。
English: Anaxagoras's daughter, who was married to Emperor Wen, died of an illness. Zhang Huizong, the military commander of the Qishenwu faction, sent an envoy to Anaxagoras to persuade him to leave.

古文：云文帝及周文既害孝武，又杀阿那瑰之女，妄以疏属假公主之号，嫁彼为亲。
现代文：说文帝和周文既害死孝武帝，又杀了阿那瞔的女儿，胡乱用关系疏远的亲属借用公主的名号，嫁给他为妻。
English: It is said that Emperor Wen and Zhou Wen both killed Emperor Xiaowu, and also killed Anaxia's daughter, and used distant relatives to borrow the name of the princess and marry him.

古文：又阿那瑰度河西讨时，周文烧草，使其马饥，不得南进，此其逆诈反覆难信之状。
现代文：又说阿那瞔渡河向西征讨时，周文烧了草料，使他的战马饥饿，不能向南推进，这就是他们悖逆奸诈变化无常难以相信的形象。
English: He also said that when Ananyan was crossing the river to the west for the expedition, Zhou Wen burned the grass and starved his horses so that they could not advance southward. This is the unbelievable image of their disobedience, treachery and fickleness.

古文：又论东魏正统所在，言其往者破亡归命，魏朝保护，得存其国，以大义示之。
现代文：又说东魏是正统的所在，说阿那瞔败亡归顺，魏朝保护，得以保存自己的国家，用大义来教导他。
English: He also said that the Eastern Wei Dynasty was the place of orthodoxy, said that Anaxun was defeated and surrendered, protected by the Wei Dynasty, was able to preserve his country, and taught him with great righteousness.

古文：兼诈阿那瑰云：近有赤铺步落坚胡行于河西，为蠕蠕主所获。
现代文：同时又骗阿那瞔说 ：近来有赤铺步落坚胡在河西行动，被蠕蠕主俘获。
English: At the same time, he also lied to Ananyan, saying: Recently, there was a red puffer fish in action in the west of the river, which was captured by the creep.

古文：云蠕蠕主问之： 汝从高王？为从黑獭？ 
现代文：据说蠕蠕主问他： 你听从高王，还是听从黑獭？ 
English: It is said that the demon lord asked him, "Do you listen to Gao Wang, or do you listen to the black dragonfly?"

古文：一人言从黑獭，蠕蠕主杀之；二人言从高王，蠕蠕主放遣。
现代文：一个人说听从黑獭，蠕蠕主杀了他；两个人说听从高主，蠕蠕主放回。
English: One man said, "Obey the blackbird," and the worm master killed him; two men said, "Obey the high master," and the worm master let them go.

古文：此即蠕蠕主存大国宿昔仁义。
现代文：这就是蠕蠕主思念大国以往的仁义。
English: This is the mentality of thinking about the benevolence of great powers in the past.

古文：彼女既见害，欺诈相待，不仁不信，宜见讨伐。
现代文：他的女儿已经被害，他们欺瞒诈骗待你，不仁不信，应该被讨伐。
English: His daughter has been victimized, they have treated you with deceit and deception, with no mercy, and they should be fought.

古文：且守逆一方，未知归顺，朝廷亦欲加诛。
现代文：况且坚持叛逆的一方，不知归顺，朝廷也要加以诛罚。
English: Moreover, if the rebellious party persists and does not surrender, the imperial court will also punish it.

古文：彼若深念旧恩，以存和睦，当以天子懿亲公主结成姻媾，为遣兵将，伐彼叛臣，为蠕蠕主雪耻报恶。
现代文：他如深切怀念以往的恩情，保存和睦，应和天子的至亲公主结成婚姻，因此派遣兵将，讨伐那些叛臣，为蠕蠕主雪耻报仇。 
English: If he deeply misses his past kindness and preserves harmony, he should marry the princess who is a close relative of the son of heaven. Therefore, he will send soldiers to fight those traitors and avenge the disgrace of his lord.

古文：徽纂既申齐神武意，阿那瑰乃召其大臣与议之，便归诚于东魏。
现代文：张徽纂已经申述了齐神武的意思，阿那瞔召集他的大臣共同商议，就对东魏诚心归顺。
English: Zhang Huizhong had already stated the meaning of Qi Shenwu, Anaxun summoned his ministers to discuss together, and they surrendered to the East Wei sincerity.

古文：遣其俟利、莫何莫缘游大力等朝贡，因为其子庵罗辰请婚。
现代文：派其俟利、莫何莫缘游大力等朝见进贡，借此为他儿子庵罗辰求婚。
English: He sent gifts to the Imperial Court, such as money and power, to his son, An Luo Chen, to ask him to marry him.

古文：静帝诏兼散骑常侍太府卿罗念、兼通直散骑常侍中书舍人穆景相等使于阿那瑰。
现代文：静帝诏令兼散骑常侍太府卿罗念、兼通直散骑常侍中书舍人穆景相等到阿那瞔出使。
English: Emperor Jing issued an imperial decree to dispatch envoys to Anahaku from Luo Nian, who was also a knight-errant, and Mu Jingsong, who was also a knight-errant and a scholar.

古文：八月，阿那瑰遣莫何去折豆浑十升等朝贡，复因求婚。
现代文：八月，阿那瞔派莫何去折豆浑十升等朝见进贡，再次借机求婚。
English: In August, Anas did not hesitate to send ten liters of bean curd and other tributes to the Imperial Court, taking the opportunity to propose marriage again.

古文：齐神武请遂其意，以招四远。
现代文：齐神武请求满足他的意愿，来招抚四方边远之人。
English: Qi Shenwu asked that his wishes be fulfilled and that he be allowed to reach out to people in remote areas.

古文：诏以常山王骘妹乐安公主许之，改封为兰陵郡长公主。
现代文：下诏让常山王骘的妹妹乐安公主许嫁，改封为兰陵郡长公主。
English: He issued a decree to allow Princess Le'an, the younger sister of King Ye of Changshan, to marry, and changed her title to Lanling County Chief Princess.

古文：十二月，阿那瑰复遣折豆浑十升诣东魏请婚。
现代文：十二月，阿那瞔又派折豆浑十升到东魏请求结婚。
English: In December, Anaxun sent another ten shillings of bean curd to the Eastern Wei Dynasty to ask for marriage.

古文：三年四月，阿那瑰遣吐豆登郁久闾譬浑、俊利莫何折豆常侯烦等奉马千疋，以为聘礼，请迎公主。
现代文：三年四月，阿那瞔派吐登郁久闾譬浑、俟利莫何折豆浑侯烦等奉献马千匹，作为聘礼，请求迎娶公主。
English: In April of the third year, Anaxuan sent thousands of horses to Tangden Ikukyu, and requested to marry the princess as an engagement gift.

古文：诏兼宗正卿元寿、兼太常卿孟韶等送公主自晋阳北迈，资用器物，齐神武亲自经纪，咸出丰氵屋。
现代文：诏令兼宗正卿元寿、兼太常卿孟韶等送公主从晋阳北进，资用器物，齐神武亲自料理，陪嫁都很丰厚优渥。
English: Emperor Zhao decreed that Emperor Zongzheng and Empress Dowager Zongzheng should send the princess from Jinyang to Beijin, and Qi Shenwu personally cooked for the princess, and the bridesmaids were all rich and elegant.

古文：阿那瑰遣其吐豆登郁久闾匿伏、俊利阿夷普掘、蒱提弃之伏等迎公主于新城之南。
现代文：阿那瞔派他的吐豆登郁久闾匿伏、俟利阿夷普掘、提弃之伏等到新城南迎娶公主。
English: Anaximenes sent his spit-beans to the south of the new city to marry the princess.

古文：六月，齐神武虑阿那瑰难信，又以国事加重，躬送公主于楼烦之北，接劳其使，每皆隆厚。
现代文：六月，齐神武考虑阿那瞔难以相信，又借国事加重为由，亲自送公主到达楼烦的北面，接待慰劳他的使节，每次都很隆重丰厚。
English: In June, Qi Shenwu thought it was hard to believe that Anaxun was dead, and took advantage of the aggravation of national affairs as a reason to personally send the princess to the north side of the troubled building and receive the envoys who comforted him. Each time was very grand and rich.

古文：阿那瑰大喜，自是朝贡东魏相寻。
现代文：阿那瞔大喜，从此连续朝见进贡东魏。
English: Anaxun was overjoyed, and from then on, the East Wei dynasty continued to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：四年，阿那瑰请以其孙女号邻和公主妻齐神武第九子长广公湛，静帝诏为婚焉。
现代文：四年，阿那瞔请求把自己的孙女号邻和公主嫁给齐神武第九个儿子长广公湛，静帝下诏结为婚姻。
English: In the fourth year, Anaxun requested that his granddaughter, the neighboring princess, marry the ninth son of Qi Shenwu, Changguang Gongtan, and Emperor Jing issued an edict for the marriage.

古文：阿那瑰遣其吐豆登郁久闾譬掘、俊利莫何游大刀送女于晋阳。
现代文：阿那瞔派他的吐登郁久闾譬掘、俟利莫何游大力送孙女到晋阳。
English: Anaximenes sent his tutors, Ikukyu, Faiqiu, and Limei, to vigorously send his granddaughter to Jinyang.

古文：武定四年，阿那瑰有爱女，号为公主，以齐神武威德日盛，又请致之，静帝闻而诏神武纳之。
现代文：武定四年，阿那瞔有一爱女，号为公主，又因齐神武威德日盛一日，又请求纳入，静帝听到就诏令神武纳她。
English: In the fourth year of Wuding, Anaxia had a beloved daughter, called Princess, and also requested to be included because the god Qi, the god of military valor, was in full bloom. Upon hearing this, Emperor Jing ordered the god to accept her.

古文：阿那瑰遣其吐豆发郁久闾汗拔姻姬等送女于晋阳。
现代文：阿那瞔派他的吐豆发郁久闾汗拔姻姬等送女到晋阳。
English: Anaximenes sent his long-haired and sweaty daughter-in-law to Jinyang.

古文：自此东魏边塞无事，至于武定末，使贡相寻。
现代文：从此东魏边塞无事，到武定末年使者连续进贡。
English: From then on, there was nothing to worry about on the Eastern Wei border, and the envoys continued to pay tribute until the end of Wuding.

古文：始阿那瑰初复其国，尽礼朝廷。
现代文：当初阿那瞔恢复自己国家时，对朝廷竭尽礼仪。
English: At first, when Anaxagoras restored his country, he was very polite to the imperial court.

古文：明帝之后，中原丧乱，未能外略，阿那瑰统率北方，颇为强盛，稍敢骄大，礼敬颇阙，遣使朝贡，不复称臣。
现代文：明帝以后，中原死丧祸乱，未能对外巡行。阿那瞔统率北方，很是强盛，渐渐敢于骄傲自大，礼仪恭敬很是缺乏，派使者朝见进贡，不再称臣。
English: After the Ming Dynasty, the Central Plains was plagued by death and disaster, and it was not possible to go on a foreign tour. Anaxagoras led the north, was very strong, gradually dared to be proud and arrogant, and lacked etiquette and respect. He sent emissaries to pay tribute to the imperial court, and no longer praised his subordinates.

古文：天平以来，逾自踞慢。
现代文：天平以来，更加踞傲怠慢。
English: Since Tianping, it has become more arrogant and neglectful.

古文：汝阳王暹之为秦州也，遣其典签齐人淳于覃使于阿那瑰。
现代文：汝阳王暹掌管秦州时，派他的典签齐人淳于覃出使阿那瞔。
English: When King Ruyang of Siam was in charge of Qin State, he sent his envoy, Qi Ren, to dispatch the envoy Anaxuan.

古文：遂留之，亲宠任事。
现代文：于是留下了他，亲信宠爱，委任职事。
English: So he was left behind, loved by his cronies and serving on the committee.

古文：阿那瑰因入洛阳，心慕中国，立官号，僭拟王者，遂有侍中、黄门之属。
现代文：阿那瞔因此进入洛阳，心中羡慕中国，设立官位称号，超越本分地比照王者，于是就有了侍中、黄门这类属官。
English: Therefore, Anaxun entered Luoyang, envied China in his heart, set up official titles, and surpassed his duty to compare with the king, so there were subordinate officials such as chamberlains and yellow doors.

古文：以覃为秘书监、黄门郎，掌其文墨。
现代文：让淳于覃做秘书监、黄门郎，掌管文墨的事情。
English: Let Jun Yuxuan do the secretarial supervision, Huangmenro, in charge of the literary and artistic affairs.

古文：覃教阿那瑰，转至不逊，每奉国书，邻敌抗礼。
现代文：淳于覃教育阿那瞔，转而变为不再谦卑，每次进奉国书，和邻近的对等国以平等之礼相待。
English: Junyu educated Anah, and changed into no longer being humble, each time presenting the national anthem, and treating neighboring peer countries with equal courtesy.

古文：及齐受东魏禅，亦岁时往来不绝。
现代文：到齐接受东魏禅让后，也一年四季往来不断。
English: After arriving at the same time to accept the East Wei Zen Concession, they also continued to visit each other all year round.

古文：天保三年，阿那瑰为突厥所破，自杀。
现代文：天保三年，阿那瞔被突厥打败，自杀。
English: In the third year of the Tenpo era, Anaxuan was defeated by the Turks and committed suicide.

古文：其太子庵罗辰及瑰从弟登注俟利、登注子库提，并拥众奔齐。
现代文：太子庵罗辰和的从弟登注俟利、登注的儿子库提，和拥护他们的部众投齐。
English: Prince Ioan Roczen and his followers, his brother Don Chul-ri and Don Chul-ri's son Kut-i, as well as the ministers who supported them, joined in.

古文：其余众立注次子铁伐为主。
现代文：其余部众立登注次子铁伐为首领。
English: The rest of the troops were led by Tetsuo, the second son of Denchu.

古文：四年，齐文宣送登注及子库提还北。
现代文：四年，齐文宣帝送登注和儿子库提返回北方。
English: Four years later, Emperor Qimen sent Dengzhu and his son Kuti back to the north.

古文：铁伐寻为契丹所杀，其国人仍立登注为主。
现代文：铁伐不久被契丹杀死，他的国人仍然立登注做首领。
English: Tiebao was soon killed by the Khitan, but his compatriots still made Dengzhu their leader.

古文：又为大人阿富提等所杀，其国人复立库提为主。
现代文：又被大人阿富提等杀掉，国人又立库提做首领。
English: They were also killed by adults such as Afuti, and the local people appointed Kuti as their leader.

古文：是岁，复为突厥所攻，举国奔齐。
现代文：这年，又被突厥进攻，全国投齐。
English: In the same year, it was attacked by the Turks again, and the whole country surrendered.

古文：文宣乃北讨突厥，迎纳蠕蠕，废其主库提，立阿那瑰子庵罗辰为主，致之马邑川，给其廪饩、缯帛。
现代文：文宣帝于是向北讨伐突厥，迎接收容蠕蠕，废掉首领库提，立阿那瞔儿子庵罗辰做首领，送他到马邑川，供给他粮食、缯帛。
English: Emperor Wenzhong then marched north to fight the Turks, welcomed the arrival of Rong Rong Rong, abolished the leader Kuti, appointed Anaxuan's son, An Luo Chen, as the leader, sent him to Mai River, and provided him with grain and rice.

古文：亲追突厥于朔方，突厥请降，许之而还。
现代文：亲自追赶突厥到朔方，突厥请求投降，准许并返回。
English: He personally chased the Turks to the Shuo side, the Turks requested surrender, permission and returned.

古文：于是蠕蠕贡献不绝。
现代文：于是蠕蠕进贡奉献不断。
English: As a result, donations have been pouring in.

古文：五年三月，庵罗辰叛，文宣亲讨，大破之。
现代文：五年三月，庵罗辰反叛，文宣帝亲自征讨，大败他们。
English: In March of the fifth year, An Luo and Chen rebelled, and Emperor Wenzhong personally defeated them.

古文：庵罗辰父子北遁。
现代文：庵罗辰父子北逃。
English: An Luo-Chen and his son fled north.

古文：四月，寇肆州。
现代文：四月，侵犯肆州。
English: In April, it invaded Wuzhou.

古文：帝自晋阳讨之，至恆州黄瓜堆，虏散走。
现代文：文宣帝从晋阳讨伐，到达恒州黄瓜堆，敌军四散跑开。
English: Emperor Wenzhong marched from Jinyang and arrived at the cucumber heap in Hengzhou. The enemy troops scattered and ran away.

古文：时大军已还。帝麾下千余骑，遇蠕蠕别部数万，四面围逼。
现代文：当时大军已经返回，文宣帝手下有千余骑兵，遇到蠕蠕的别支部落数万人，四面围逼。
English: At that time, the great army had already returned, with more than a thousand cavalrymen under the command of Emperor Wenzhong, and tens of thousands of people from other tribes who had encountered the Cree, surrounding them on all sides.

古文：帝神色自若，指画形势，虏众披靡，遂纵兵溃围而出。
现代文：文宣帝神色自如，指点形势，敌众惊慌溃败如随风倒伏，于是驱兵从溃乱的包围中冲出。
English: Emperor Wenxuan looked at ease, pointed out the situation, the enemy panicked and fell like the wind, so he drove the soldiers out of the encirclement.

古文：虏退走，追击之，伏尸二十五里，获庵罗辰妻子及生口三万余人。
现代文：敌人退走，追击他们，尸体倒地二十五里，俘获庵罗辰妻、子和活口三万余人。
English: The enemy retreated and pursued them, the bodies fell twenty-five miles to the ground, and more than thirty thousand people were captured alive, including the wife and children of An Luo Chen.

古文：五月，帝又北讨蠕蠕，大破之。
现代文：五月，文宣帝又向北讨伐蠕蠕，大败他们。
English: In May, Emperor Wenzhong marched north again to fight the Cumans and defeated them.

古文：六月，蠕蠕帅部众东徙，将南侵，帝帅轻骑于金川下邀击，蠕蠕闻而远遁。
现代文：六月，蠕蠕率部东移，打算南侵，文宣帝率轻骑在金川下阻击，蠕蠕听到就远远逃走了。
English: In June, the Cormorants moved eastward, intending to invade the south. Emperor Wenzhong led a light cavalry force to block them at the foot of the Jinchuan River. Hearing this, the Cormorants fled far away.

古文：六年六月，文宣又亲讨蠕蠕。
现代文：六年六月，文宣帝又亲自征讨蠕蠕。
English: In June of the sixth year, Emperor Wenzhong personally went to collect the money.

古文：七月，帝顿白道，留辎重，亲率轻骑五千追蠕蠕，躬犯矢石，频大破之，遂至沃野，大获而还。
现代文：七月，文宣帝停宿白道，留下辎重，亲自率轻骑五千追赶蠕蠕，亲自冒着弓矢石头，屡次大败他们，接着追到沃野，大胜而回。
English: In July, Emperor Wenxuan stopped at Baidoa, leaving behind the baggage train. He personally led five thousand light horsemen to chase down the Creeps. He personally braved bows and arrows and stones, repeatedly defeated them, and then chased them to Wuye, and returned with a great victory.

古文：是时，蠕蠕既累为突厥所破，以西魏恭帝二年，遂率部千余家奔关中。
现代文：此时，蠕蠕已经几次被突厥打败，在西魏恭帝二年，就率部千余家奔关中。
English: At this time, Cm Cm had already been defeated several times by the Turks, and in the second year of the Western Wei Dynasty, he led more than a thousand families to rush the pass.

古文：突厥既恃兵强，又藉西魏和好，恐其遗类依凭大国，使驿相继，请尽杀以甘心。
现代文：突厥既凭借兵力强大，又借助与西魏和好，恐怕他们留下的人依靠大国，继续驿站传书，请求全部杀掉才心甘。
English: The Turks, not only by virtue of their strong military power, but also by virtue of their reconciliation with the Western Wei Dynasty, I am afraid that the people they left behind will rely on the great powers, continue to send station letters, and request to kill them all.

古文：俊毒其目而杀之，坑其徒三千余人。
现代文：周文商议后准许了，于是就拘禁蠕蠕主以下三千多人交付突厥使者，在青门外斩首。
English: After deliberation, Zhou Wen gave permission, and then handed over more than three thousand people below the leader to the Turkic emissaries and beheaded them outside the Qingmen Gate.

古文：高车，盖古赤狄之余种也。
现代文：未成丁男子以下的免死，都分配给王公家族。高车是古代赤狄残留的种族。
English: Immortals below the rank of unmade men were all assigned to the Wanggong family. The Gaochao were a remnant race of the ancient Red Di.

古文：初号为狄历，北方以为高车、丁零。
现代文：起初号为狄历，北方认为是敕勒，华夏认为是高车、丁零。
English: At first, the number was Di, the north thought it was Mule, and China thought it was Gao Che, Ding Zi.

古文：其语略与匈奴同而时有小异。
现代文：它的语言大致和匈奴语相同，而时常有小的不同。
English: Its language is roughly the same as the Hunnic language, but there are often small differences.

古文：或云：其先匈奴甥也。
现代文：有人说他们的祖先是匈奴的外甥。
English: Some say that their ancestor was the nephew of the Xiongnu.

古文：其种有狄氏、袁纥氏、斛律氏、解批氏、护骨氏、异奇斤氏。
现代文：那些种族有狄氏、袁纥氏、斛律氏、解批氏、护骨氏、异奇斤氏。
English: Those races include the Di clan, the Yuan Xi clan, the Yao Lu clan, the Liang Bi clan, the Bao Guo clan, and the Yi Qijin clan.

古文：俗云：匈奴单于生二女，姿容甚美，国人皆以为神。
现代文：通俗的说法是：匈奴单于生有二女，姿容特别漂亮，国人都认为是神仙。
English: The popular saying is that the Xiongnu had two daughters in a single birth, and their appearance was particularly beautiful, and the Chinese people thought they were gods.

古文：单于曰： 吾有此女，安可配人？
现代文：单于说 ：我有这样的女儿，怎么能许配凡人？
English: Just saying: I have such a daughter, how can I marry an ordinary person?

古文：将以与天。 
现代文：将把她们交给上天。 
English: They will be handed over to God.

古文：乃于国北无人之地筑高台，置二女其上曰： 请天自迎之。 
现代文：于是就在国北无人地方建一高台，把二女放置在那上面说： 请上天自己迎娶她们。 
English: So he built a high place in the north of the country, where there was no one, and placed the two girls on it and said, "Please ask the heavens to marry them."

古文：经三年，其母欲迎之。
现代文：过了三年，她们的母亲想接回来。
English: Three years later, their mother wants them back.

古文：单于曰： 不可，未彻之间耳。 
现代文：单于说： 不可以。上天迎娶的日期未满。 
English: She simply said, "No. God's wedding date has not yet passed."

古文：复一年，乃有一老狼，昼夜守台嗥呼，因穿台下为空穴，经时不去。
现代文：又过一年，有一老狼，昼夜守着高台嚎叫，因此把台下刨穿成了空穴，长时间不离开。
English: After another year, there was an old wolf, howling day and night, guarding the high platform, so he dug a hole under the platform and did not leave it for a long time.

古文：其小女曰： 吾父处我于此，欲以与天，而今狼来，或是神物，无使之然。 
现代文：小女儿说： 我父亲把我放在这里，想把我们给上天，如今狼来了，或许是神物，上天让它这样的。 
English: The little daughter said, "My father put me here to give us to the sky, and now the wolf has come, perhaps a divine being, and the sky has let it happen."

古文：将下就之。
现代文：就要下去接近它。
English: I'm going to go down and get close to it.

古文：其姊夫惊曰： 此是畜生，无乃辱父母？ 
现代文：她的姐姐大为吃惊地说： 这是畜生，不是辱没了父母吗？ 
English: Her sister was shocked and said, "This is a beast, isn't he a disgrace to his parents?"

古文：妹不从，下为狼妻而产子。
现代文：妹妹不听，下台成为狼的妻子并且生育了子女。
English: The sister did not listen, stepped down to become the wolf's wife and gave birth to children.

古文：后遂滋繁成国。
现代文：后来就滋生繁衍成了国家。
English: Later, it became a country.

古文：故其人好引声长歌，又似狼嗥。
现代文：所以那些人喜欢引声长歌，又像狼嚎。
English: That's why those people like to sing long songs and howl like a wolf.

古文：无都统大帅，当种各有君长。
现代文：没有统领的主帅，种族各有君长。
English: There is no commander-in-chief, each race has its monarchs.

古文：为性粗猛，党类同心，至于寇难，翕然相依。
现代文：性格粗猛，亲族种类同心，到了遭受敌人侵犯的灾难时相互依靠聚合。
English: They are rough and tough, kindred spirits, and rely on each other in times of adversity.

古文：斗无行阵，头别冲突，乍出乍入，不能坚战。
现代文：战斗没有行列阵形，单人个别突前冲击，忽出忽入，不能坚持战斗。
English: There is no line formation in the battle, the single individual rushes forward, rushes out and rushes in, and cannot persist in the battle.

古文：其俗，蹲踞亵黩，无所忌避。
现代文：他们的习俗：蹲踞姿式不雅，无所避让忌讳。
English: Their customs: squatting in a crouching position is not elegant, and there is no avoiding the taboo.

古文：婚姻用牛马纳聘以为荣，结言既定，男党营车阑马，令女党恣取上马，袒乘出阑，马主立阑外，振手惊马，不坠者即取之，坠则更取，数满乃止。
现代文：婚姻中把牛马作纳娶聘礼当作荣耀，结婚的约言已定以后，男人们环绕着车围驱马，让女人们随意取用上等好马，袒衣乘马冲出栅栏。马的主人站在栅栏外，拍手惊马，不落下的就娶，落马的更换取用，数额满员为止。
English: In marriage, it is considered an honor to offer a dowry of oxen and horses as a betrothal gift. After the marriage contract has been set, the men drive the horses around the car, let the women use the best horses at will, and the mule rushes out of the fence. The owner of the horse stands outside the fence, claps his hands and frightens the horse, marries it without falling off, and replaces the fallen horse, until the amount is full.

古文：俗无谷，不作酒。
现代文：土俗不种谷，不制作酒。
English: Local customs do not plant cereals and do not make wine.

古文：迎妇之日，男女相将，振马酪熟肉节解。
现代文：迎娶新妇那天，男女相扶持，拿着马酪、截肢体分解骨节的熟肉。
English: On the day of the bride's wedding, men and women support each other, holding marmalade and amputated limbs to break down the cooked meat.

古文：主人延宾，亦无行位，穹庐前丛坐，饮宴终日，复留其宿。
现代文：主人延请宾客，也没有行列位置，穹庐前面聚集坐下，饮宴到日落，并留他们住宿。
English: The host invites the guests, but there is no place in the queue, they gather in front of the dome, sit down, feast until sunset, and leave them to stay.

古文：明日，将妇归。
现代文：第二天，带领新妇回去。
English: The next day, take the bride home.

古文：既而夫党还入其家马群，极取良马，父母弟兄虽惜，终无言者。
现代文：不久，夫家返回进入女家马群，尽取良马，父亲弟兄虽然吝惜，最终无人说话。
English: Soon, the husband's family returned to the women's herd of horses and tried their best to get a good horse. Although the father and brothers were grudging, in the end no one spoke.

古文：颇讳取寡妇，而优怜之。
现代文：颇忌讳娶寡妇，却优待可怜她。
English: It is shameful for a man to marry a widow, but it is better to show mercy to her.

古文：其畜产自有记识，虽阑纵在野，终无妄取。
现代文：她的畜产自有记号，虽然围拦或在野外，但无人妄自取用。
English: Her livestock has its own mark, although it is encircled or in the field, but no one takes it from her.

古文：俗不清洁，喜致震霆。
现代文：习俗不爱清洁，喜欢招致震霆。
English: Customs don't like to be clean, they like to be shocking.

古文：每震，则叫呼射天而弃之移去。
现代文：每震，就呼叫射天并弃置移去。
English: With each quake, it would call out to the sky and move away.

古文：来岁秋，马肥，复相率候于震所，埋羖羊，燃火拔刀，女巫祝说，似如中国祓除，而群队驰马旋绕，百匝乃止。
现代文：来年秋天，马肥壮，又接连等候在震的地方，埋黑色公羊，燃火拔刀，女巫祝祷诉说，好像中国的除凶去邪的仪式。群队骑马奔驰围绕旋转，百圈才停止。
English: In the autumn of the coming year, the horses are fat and strong, and they wait in succession at the place of the earthquake, burying black rams, lighting fires, drawing swords, and witches reciting prayers. It is like the Chinese ritual of getting rid of evil spirits. The groups of horse-drawn carriages rotate around, and only stop after a hundred laps.

古文：人持一束柳桋回，竖之，以乳酪灌焉。
现代文：每人拿一束柳、木夷回去，种上它，用乳酪浇灌。
English: Each of them took a bunch of willow and poplar back home, planted it and watered it with cheese.

古文：妇人以皮裹羊骸，戴之首上，萦屈发鬓而缀之，有似轩冕。
现代文：妇人用皮革包裹羊的骸骨，戴在头上，屈折萦绕在头发鬓角并连缀，好像高起的冕冠。
English: The woman wraps the lamb's skeleton in leather and puts it on her head, twisting it around her hair and tying it up like a high crown.

古文：其死亡葬送，掘地作坎，坐尸于中，张臂引弓，佩刀挟槊，无异于生，而露坎不掩。
现代文：死亡葬送，地作坑穴，把尸体放在坑里，张臂引弓，佩刀挟矛，与活时没区别，并且露着坑穴不掩埋。
English: The dead are buried, the ground is made into a pit, the body is placed in the pit, the arm is extended to guide the bow, the sword is carried, and the spear is carried, which is no different from the living, and the pit is exposed and not buried.

古文：时有震死及疫疠，则为之祈福；若安全无他，则为报赛。
现代文：常常有震死和疫疠而死的，就为他祈求福祉；如安全没有其他，就为他们举行祭祀。
English: For those who die, often from shock or disease, prayers are said for their well-being; if nothing else, sacrifices are made for their safety.

古文：多杀杂畜，烧骨以燎，走马绕旋，多者数百匝。
现代文：要杀许多的各种牲畜，烧骨头来祭祀，跑马绕旋，多的数百圈。
English: They had to kill many different kinds of livestock, burn bones for sacrifice, and run horses around and around, many hundreds of laps.

古文：男女无小大，皆集会。
现代文：男女不分小大，都要集会。
English: Both men and women, young and old, should gather.

古文：平吉之人，则歌舞作乐；死丧之家，则悲吟哭泣。
现代文：平安吉祥的人就歌舞奏乐，死丧的人家就悲吟哭泣。
English: Peaceful and auspicious people sing, dance and play music, and the families of the dead mourn and weep.

古文：其迁徙随水草，衣皮食肉，牛、羊畜产，尽与蠕蠕同。
现代文：他们随着水草迁移，穿皮吃肉，牛羊畜产都和蠕蠕相同。
English: They migrate with aquatic plants, eat meat through their skins, and their cattle, sheep and livestock production is the same as that of worms.

古文：唯车轮高大，辐数至多。
现代文：只是车轮高大，辐条数目很多。
English: It's just that the wheels are tall and there are a lot of spokes.

古文：徙于鹿浑海西北百余里，部落强大，常与蠕蠕为敌，亦每侵盗于魏。
现代文：迁移到鹿浑海西北百余里后，部落强大，常常和蠕蠕为敌，也每每向魏侵犯盗取。
English: After migrating to more than a hundred miles northwest of the Deer Mud Sea, the tribe became powerful, often making enemies with the Cree, and also encroaching on and stealing from the Wei.

古文：魏道武袭之，大破其诸部。
现代文：魏道武帝袭击他们，大败他们的各个部落。
English: Emperor Wei Daowu attacked them and defeated their various tribes.

古文：后道武复度弱洛水，西行至鹿浑海，停驾简轻骑，西北行百余里，袭破之，虏获生口、牛马羊二十余万。
现代文：后来道武帝又渡过弱洛水，向西走到鹿浑海，停下人马挑选轻骑，向西北奔百余里，突袭打败了他们，俘获活口、牛马羊二十余万。
English: Later, Emperor Daowu crossed the weak Luoshui again, walked westward to the Deer Mud Sea, stopped the people and horses to choose a light horse, ran more than a hundred miles to the northwest, defeated them in a surprise attack, and captured more than 200,000 live cattle, cattle, horses and sheep.

古文：复讨其余种于狼山，大破之。
现代文：又在狼山讨伐他的残留种族，大败他们。
English: He also fought the remnants of his race in the Wolf Mountain and defeated them.

古文：车驾北巡，分命诸将为东西二道，道武亲勒六军从中道，自驳髯水西北，徇略其部，诸军同时云合，破其杂种三十余落。
现代文：皇帝北巡，命各将分为东西两路，道武帝亲自率领六军从中路，从马交髯水西北，巡视自己的部曲，各军同时会合，打败他们的杂乱部落三十余个。
English: When the emperor was on his northern tour, he ordered that each army be divided into two routes, east and west. Emperor Daowu personally led the six armies from the middle route, from Ma Jiao to the northwest of Surabaya, to inspect their own section. The armies met at the same time and defeated more than 30 of their cluttered tribes.

古文：卫王仪别督诸将从西北绝漠千余里，复破其遗迸七部。
现代文：卫王仪另外率各将从西北越过千余里沙漠，又打败他们的遗留散落的七部。
English: In addition, Wei Wang Yi will lead each of them to cross more than a thousand miles of desert from the northwest, and defeat their remaining scattered seven parts.

古文：于是高车大惧，诸部震骇。
现代文：于是高车大为恐惧，各部都震惊害怕。
English: As a result, there was great fear of high-speed trains, and all ministries were shocked and afraid.

古文：道武自牛川南引，大校猎，以高车为围，骑徒遮列，周七百余里，聚杂兽于其中，因驱至平城，即以高车众起鹿苑，南因台阴，北距长城，东包白登，属之西山。
现代文：道武帝从牛川向南延伸，大规模地围圈、猎取野兽，把高车作围猎目标，骑兵步兵列队遮拦，环绕七百余里，把各种野兽聚集在里面，于是驱赶到平城，就让高车部众建造鹿苑，南面沿着台阴，北边到长城，东面包围白登，连着西山。
English: Emperor Daowu extended from the Niu River to the south, enclosing and hunting wild beasts on a large scale, making the carts the target of hunting, and the cavalry and infantry lined up to block them, encircling more than seven hundred miles, gathering all kinds of wild beasts inside, and then drove them to Pingcheng, and let the high carriage department build a deer park, along the Taiyin to the south, to the Great Wall to the north, and to the east, surrounded by the Bai Deng, and connected to the West Mountain.

古文：寻而高车侄利曷莫弗敕力犍率其九百余落内附，拜敕力犍为扬威将军，置司马、参军，赐谷二万斛。
现代文：不久，高车侄利曷莫弗敕力犍率领他的九百余落归附，封敕力犍为扬威将军，设置司马、参军，赐给谷二万斛。
English: Not long after, Gao Che's nephew Lijun Mofu Lijun, led by his more than nine hundred followers, annexed it, sealed Lijun Lijun as General Yang Wei, set up a Sima, joined the army, and gave the valley twenty thousand baht.

古文：后高车解批莫弗幡豆建复率其部三十余落内附，亦拜为威远将军，置司马、参军，赐衣服，岁给廪食。
现代文：后来高车解批莫弗幡豆建又率领他的部众三十余落归附，也封为威远将军，设置司马、参军，赐给衣服，每年供给粮食。
English: Later, Gao Che was pardoned by Mofu Hata Dojian, and he led more than 30 of his subordinates to annexation. He was also named General Wiyuan, set up Sima, joined the army, gave clothes, and supplied grain every year.

古文：蠕蠕社仑破败之后，收拾部落，转徙广漠之北，侵入高车之地。
现代文：蠕蠕社山仑败亡以后，收拾部落，转移迁徙到广阔沙漠的北边，侵入高车的地盘。
English: After the mountain defeat of the Creep Creep Society, the tribe was cleaned up, moved to the north of the vast desert, and invaded the territory of the high cart.

古文：斛律部帅倍侯利患之，曰： 新仑新集，兵贫马少，易与耳！ 
现代文：斛律部首领倍侯利担忧这件事，说： 社山仑刚刚集聚，兵马贫乏缺少，打他很容易啊！ 
English: The head of the justice department, Beholi, worried about this, saying: The social mountain just gathered, the soldiers and horses are poor and lacking, it is easy to beat him!

古文：乃举众掩击，入其国落。
现代文：于是部众全数出击，进入他们的国落。
English: As a result, all members of the club went on the offensive and entered their homeland.

古文：高车昧利，不顾后患，分其庐室，妻其妇女，安息寝卧不起。
现代文：高车贪图利益，不顾后患，分掉他们的庐室，把妇女作为老婆，安稳休息，躺卧不起。
English: Gaochuan coveted profit, disregarded the consequences, separated their confinement rooms, treated women as wives, rested safely, and lay down.

古文：社仑登高望见，乃招集亡散得千人，晨振杀之，走而脱者十二三。
现代文：社山仑登高看见，就召集逃散部众，得到千人，早晨突袭杀死他们，逃脱的十分之二三。
English: When he saw the social mountain climbing high, he gathered the scattered followers, got a thousand people, raided them in the morning and killed them, and two-thirds of the tenth escaped.

古文：倍侯利遂奔魏，赐爵孟都公。
现代文：倍侯利于是投奔魏，赐给爵位是孟都公。
English: Behouli then fled to Wei and was given the title of Mengdu Gong.

古文：侯利质直，勇健过人，奋戈陷阵，有异于众。北方人善用五十蓍筮吉凶，每中，故得亲幸，赏赐丰厚，命其少子曷堂内侍。
现代文：他就是这样使众人信服。善于用五十蓍草占卜凶吉，每每得中，所以得到信任宠幸，赏赐丰厚，命他的小儿子曷堂入内侍奉。
English: This is how he convinced the people. He was good at divining bad luck with fifty reeds, and every time he got it right, so he was trusted, favored, and richly rewarded. He ordered his youngest son, Shido, to enter the inner service.

古文：及倍侯利卒，道武悼惜，葬以魏礼，谥曰忠壮王。
现代文：到倍侯利死时，道武帝哀悼惋惜，按魏礼埋葬，加谥号为忠壮王。
English: When Beholi died, Emperor Daowu mourned and mourned, buried him according to the Wei ritual, and gave him the posthumous title of Zhongzhuang Wang.

古文：后诏将军伊谓帅二万骑北袭高车余种袁纥乌，频破之。
现代文：后来诏令将军伊谓率二万骑兵向北袭击高车残留种族袁纥乌，屡次打败他们。
English: Later, he ordered General Itzue to send 20,000 cavalry north to attack the Gaochu remnant race, the Yuanwu, and repeatedly defeated them.

古文：道武时，分散诸部，唯高车以类粗犷，不任使役，故得别为部落。
现代文：道武帝时，分散到各部，只有高车因种族粗犷，不听役使，所以能另外成为一个部落。
English: During the reign of Emperor Daowu, they were dispersed to various provinces. Only the Takacs, because of their rugged ethnicity, did not obey orders, so they were able to become a separate tribe.

古文：后太武征蠕蠕，破之而还。
现代文：后来太武帝征讨蠕蠕，打败他们后返回。
English: Later, Emperor Taowu went to fight against the Cormorants, defeated them and then returned.

古文：至漠南，闻高车东部在巳尼陂，人畜甚众，去官军千余里，将遣左仆射安原等讨之。
现代文：到达漠南，听说高车东边部落在已尼陂，人畜很多，离官军千余里，打算派左仆射安原等征讨。
English: Arriving in the south of the desert, he heard that the tribes to the east of Gaocheng had been defeated, that there were many people and animals, that the government army was more than a thousand miles away, and that he planned to send his left-hand man, Sha'an Yuan, and others to fight.

古文：司徒长孙翰、尚书令刘洁等谏，太武不听。
现代文：司徒长孙翰、尚书令刘洁等劝谏，太武帝不听。
English: Emperor Taowu did not listen to the advice of Sun Han, the head of the Great Stupa, and Liu Jie, the commandant of the Great Stupa.

古文：乃遣原等并发新附高车合万骑，至于巳尼陂，高车诸部望军而降者数十万落，获马牛羊亦百余万，皆徙置漠南千里之地。
现代文：就派安原等并发付新归附的高车计万骑，到达已尼陂，高车各部看见官军就投降的数十万落，缴获牛羊也有百余万，都移置在漠南千里的地域上。
English: He dispatched Anyuan and others and paid the newly-attached carts a total of 10,000 cavalrymen. When they arrived in Niamey, the departments of the carts saw hundreds of thousands of villages surrendered by the government army, and more than one million cattle and sheep were captured. They were all relocated to a region thousands of miles south of the desert.

古文：乘高车，逐水草，畜牧蕃息，数年之后，渐知粒食，岁致献贡。
现代文：乘坐大车辆，追逐水草畜牧繁衍生息，数年以后，知道食用粮食，每年奉献贡品。
English: Take a large vehicle, chase the aquatic plants and animal husbandry, and after a few years, know the edible grain, and pay tribute every year.

古文：由是国家马及牛、羊遂至于贱，氈皮委积。
现代文：因此国家的马和牛羊竟至很便宜，毡皮堆积。
English: As a result, the country's horses, cattle and sheep have become so cheap that their hides are piling up.

古文：文成时，五部高车合聚祭天，众至数万，大会走马，杀牲游绕，歌吟忻忻。
现代文：文成帝时，高车五个部落会聚祭天，人众达数万，跑马大聚会，杀牲游绕，欢歌吟唱欣喜得意。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wencheng, the five tribes of Gaochu gathered to offer sacrifices to heaven, with tens of thousands of people. They had a large gathering of horses, roamed around killing animals, and sang songs with joy.

古文：其俗称自前世以来，无盛于此会。
现代文：他们普通人说从前世以来，没有比这个会更盛大的。
English: These ordinary people say that since their previous lives, there has never been a meeting more grand than this.

古文：车驾临幸，莫不忻悦。
现代文：皇帝到达巡幸，没有一个不高兴欢喜的。
English: When the emperor arrived for his inspection tour, no one was unhappy.

古文：后孝文召高车之众，随车贺南讨，高车不愿南行，遂推袁纥树者为主，相率北叛，游践金陵。
现代文：后来孝文帝召集高车部众，随皇帝向南征讨，高车不愿向南走，于是推举袁纥树者做首领，接连背叛，游动的踪迹到达金陵。
English: Later, Emperor Xiaowen called together Gao Che's followers to follow the emperor to the south to fight. Gao Che did not want to go south, so he chose Yuan Shuxu as his leader. They betrayed each other one after another, and the trail of betrayal reached Jinling.

古文：都督宇文福追讨，大败而还。
现代文：都督宇文福追赶讨伐，大败而回。
English: The governor of the capital, Umenfuku, pursued the crusade, but was defeated and turned back.

古文：又诏平北将军、江阳王继为都督讨之。
现代文：又诏令平北将军、江阳王继为都督讨伐他们。
English: He also ordered General Pingbei and King Jiangyang to fight against them as the capital.

古文：继先遣人慰劳树者。树者入蠕蠕。
现代文：继先派人慰劳树者，树者进入蠕蠕。
English: People were successively sent to comfort those who were working on the trees, and those who were working on the trees went into a frenzy.

古文：高车之族又有十二姓：一曰泣伏利氏，二曰吐卢氏，三曰乙旃氏，四曰大连氏，五曰窟贺氏，六曰达薄氏，七曰阿仑氏，八曰莫允氏，九曰俟分氏，十曰副伏罗氏，十一曰乞袁氏，十二曰右叔沛氏。
现代文：不久后悔了，接连投降。高车这个族又有十二姓：一叫泣伏利氏，二叫吐卢氏，三叫乙旃氏，四叫大连氏，五叫窟贺氏，六叫达薄氏，七叫阿山仑氏，八叫莫允氏，九叫俟分氏，十叫副伏罗氏，十一叫乞袁氏，十二叫右叔沛氏。
English: Soon he regretted and surrendered one after another. There are twelve surnames in this family of Gao Che: the first is called Weeping Fuli, the second is called Tu Lu, the third is called Acetylene, the fourth is called Dalian, the fifth is called Gu He, the sixth is called Da Bo, the seventh is called Ashan Lun, the eighth is called Mo Yun, the ninth is called Shubun, the tenth is called Deputy Furo, the eleventh is called Kian Yuan, and the twelfth is called Right Uncle Pei.

