古文：黄帝问曰：诊要何如。
现代文：黄帝问道：诊病的重要关键是什么？
English: Huang Di asked: What is the important key to diagnosis?

古文：岐伯对曰：正月二月，天气始方，地气始发，人气在肝。
现代文：岐伯回答说：重要点在于天、地、人相互之间的关系。
English: Qibo replied: The important point is the relationship between heaven, earth and man.

古文：三月四月，天气正方，地气定发，人气在脾。五月六月，天气盛，地气高，人气在头。七月八月，阴气始杀，人气在肺。九月十月，阴气始冰，地气始闭，人气在心。十一月十二月，冰复，地气合，人气在肾。
现代文：如正月、二月，天气开始有一种生发的气象，地气也开始萌动，这时候的人气在肝；三月、四月，天气正当旺盛，地气也正是华茂而欲结实，这时候的人气在心；五月、六月，天气盛极，地气上升，这时候的人气在脾；七月、八月，阴气开始上升，天地之气肃杀，这时候的人气在胃；九月、十月，阴气渐盛，开始冰冻，地气也随着闭藏，这时候的人气在肺；十一月、十二月，冰冻更甚，地气完全密藏，这时候的人气在肾。
English: For example, in the first month and February, the weather begins to have a kind of meteorological phenomenon, and the earth's atmosphere also begins to germinate. At this time, the popularity is in the liver; in March and April, the weather is justly vigorous, and the earth's atmosphere is also luxuriant and wants to be solid. At this time, the popularity is in the heart; in May and June, the weather is at its peak, the earth's atmosphere rises, and at this time, the popularity is in the spleen; in July and August, the yin begins to rise, and the heaven and earth's atmosphere dies, and at this time, the popularity is

古文：故春刺散俞，及与分理，血出而止，甚者传气，间者环也。夏刺络俞，见血而止，尽气闭环，痛病必下。
现代文：由于人气与天地之气皆随顺阴阳之升沉，所以春天的刺法，应刺经脉俞穴，及于分肉腠理，使之出血而止，如病比较重的应久留其针，其气传布以后才出针，较轻的可暂留其针，静候经气循环一周，就可以出针了。夏天的刺法，应刺孙络的俞穴，使其出血而止，使邪气尽去，就以手指扪闭其针孔，静待其气行一周之时出针，凡有痛病，必退下而愈。
English: Since the popularity and the qi of heaven and earth rise and fall with the rise and fall of yin and yang, the pricking method in spring should be to prick the acupoints of the meridians and the meridians to stop the bleeding. If the disease is severe, the needle should be left for a long time, and the needle should be released only after the qi has spread. If the disease is light, the needle can be left for a while, and it can be released after waiting for the qi to circulate for one week. The pricking method in summer should be to prick the acupoints of the sunroof to stop the bleeding and let the evil

古文：秋刺皮肤，循理，上下同法，神变而止。
现代文：秋天的刺法应刺皮肤，顺着肌肉之分理而刺，不论上部或下部，同样用这个方法，观察其神色转变而止。
English: Autumn prick should be pricked on the skin, along the muscle division and prick, regardless of the upper or lower part, also use this method to observe its change in appearance.

古文：冬刺俞窍于分理，甚者直下，间者散下。
现代文：冬天的刺法应深取俞窍于分理之间，病重的可直刺深入，较轻的，可从左右上下散布其针，而稍宜缓下。
English: Winter acupuncture should take acupressure points deep between points, the sick can be directly stabbed deeply, the lighter can spread its needles from the left and right, and it is better to slow down slightly.

古文：春夏秋冬，各有所刺，法其所在。
现代文：春夏秋冬，各有所宜的刺法，须根据气之所在，而确定刺的部位。
English: Spring, summer, autumn and winter each have their own way of pricking, and it is necessary to determine the part of the prick according to the location of the qi.

古文：春刺夏分，脉乱气微，入淫骨髓，病不能愈，令人不嗜食，又且少气。
现代文：如果春天刺了夏天的部位，伤了心气，可使脉乱而气微弱，邪气反而深入，浸淫于骨髓之间病就很难治愈，心火微弱，火不生土，使人不思饮食，而且少气。
English: If the spring pricks the summer part and hurts the spirit, it can make the pulse chaotic and the spirit weak. On the other hand, the evil spirit is deep. If it infiltrates between the bone marrow, the disease is difficult to cure. The heart is weak, the fire does not grow soil, people do not think about food and drink, and there is little spirit.

古文：春刺秋分，筋挛逆气，环为咳嗽，病不愈，令人时惊，又且哭。
现代文：春天刺了秋天的部位，伤了肺气，春病在肝，发为筋挛，邪气因误刺而环周于肺，则又发为咳嗽，病不能愈，肝气伤，将使人时惊，肺气伤，且又使人欲哭。
English: Spring pricks the autumn parts, injuring the lung qi, spring sickness in the liver, resulting in muscle cramps, evil qi due to mis-prick and surround the lungs, then it turns into a cough, the disease can not be cured, liver qi injury, will make people shocked, lung qi injury, and also make people want to cry.

古文：春刺冬分，邪气着脏，令人胀，病不愈，又且欲言语。
现代文：春天刺了冬天的部位，伤了肾气，以致邪气深着于内脏，使人胀满，其病不但不愈，肝气日伤，而且使人多欲言语。
English: Spring pricks the winter part, injures the kidney qi, so that the evil qi is deep in the viscera, causing the person to swell up. The disease not only does not go away, but the liver qi sunburns, and makes the person want to talk more.

古文：夏刺春分，病不愈，令人解堕。
现代文：夏天刺了春天的部位，伤了肝气，病不能愈，反而使人精力倦怠。
English: Summer pricked the spring part, hurt the liver, the disease can not be cured, but it makes people tired.

古文：夏刺秋分，病不愈，令人心中欲无言，惕惕如人将捕之。
现代文：夏天刺了秋天的部位，伤了肺气，病不能愈，反而使人肺气伤而声不出，心中不欲言，肺金受伤，肾失其母，故虚而自恐，终日惊慌好像将被逮捕的样子。
English: Summer has pricked the autumn part, hurt the lungs, the disease can not be cured, but it makes the lungs hurt and not speak, the heart does not want to speak, the lung is injured, the kidney has lost its mother, so it is empty and afraid, panicking all day as if it will be arrested.

古文：夏刺冬分，病不愈，令人少气，时欲怒。
现代文：夏天刺了冬天的部位，伤了肾气，病不能愈，反而使精不化气而少气，水不涵木而时常要发怒。
English: Summer has pricked the winter parts, hurt the kidney qi, the disease can not be cured, but the spirit does not turn into gas and less gas, the water does not block the wood and often has to be angry.

古文：秋刺春分，病不已，令人惕然，欲有所为，起而忘之。
现代文：秋天刺了春天的部位，伤了肝气，病不能愈，反而使人血气上逆，惕然不宁，且又善忘。
English: Autumn has pricked the parts of spring, hurt the liver, and the disease can not be cured. Instead, it makes people angry, restless, and forgetful.

古文：秋刺夏分，病不已，令人益嗜卧，又且善梦。
现代文：秋天刺了夏天的部位，伤了心气，病不能愈，心气伤，火不生土，反而使人嗜卧，心不藏神，又且多梦。
English: Autumn pricks the summer parts, hurts the heart, the disease can not be healed, the heart is hurt, the fire does not grow soil, but makes people sleepy, the heart does not hide God, and more dreams.

古文：秋刺冬分，病不已，令人洒洒时寒。
现代文：秋天刺了冬天的部位，伤了肾气，病不能愈，使人肾不闭藏，血气内散，时时发冷。
English: Autumn pricks the winter parts, injures the kidney qi, the disease cannot be cured, makes the kidneys not close, the blood gas is dispersed, and it is cold all the time.

古文：冬刺春分，病不已，令人欲卧不能眠，眠而有见。
现代文：冬天刺了春天的部位，伤了肝气，病不能愈，肝气少，魂不藏，使人困倦而又不得安眠，即便得眠，睡中常梦见怪异的事物。
English: Winter pricked the spring parts, hurt the liver qi, the disease can not be cured, the liver qi is small, the soul can not hide, make people sleepy but can not sleep, even if they sleep, they often dream of strange things in their sleep.

古文：冬刺夏分，病不愈，气上，发为诸痹。
现代文：冬天刺了夏天的部位，伤了心气，病不能愈，反使人脉气发泄，而邪气闭痹于脉，发为诸痹证。
English: Winter has pricked the summer part, hurt the heart, the disease can not be cured, but let the human pulse vent, and the evil spirit is closed in the pulse, resulting in paralysis.

古文：冬刺秋分，病不已，令人善渴。
现代文：冬天刺了秋天的部位，伤了肺气，病不能愈，化源受伤，使人常常作渴。
English: Winter pricked the autumn parts, hurt the lungs, the disease can not be cured, the source of injury, people often thirsty.

古文：凡刺胸腹者，必避五脏。
现代文：凡于胸腹之间用针刺，必须注意避免刺伤了五脏。
English: When using needles between the chest and abdomen, care must be taken to avoid stabbing the internal organs.

古文：中心者环死；中脾者，五日死；中肾者七日死；中肺者五日死；中鬲者皆为伤中，其病虽愈，不过一岁必死。
现代文：假如中伤了心脏，经气环身一周便死；假如中伤了肝脏，五日便死；假如中伤了脾脏，五日便死；假如中伤了肾脏，七日便死；假如中伤了肺脏，五日便死；假如中伤隔膜的，皆为伤中，当时病虽然似乎好些，但不过一年其人必死。
English: If you injure the heart, you will die within a week; if you injure the liver, you will die within five days; if you injure the spleen, you will die within five days; if you injure the kidney, you will die within seven days; if you injure the lung, you will die within five days; if you injure the diaphragm, you will die within a year.

古文：刺避五脏者，知逆从也。
现代文：刺胸腹注意避免中伤五脏，主要是要知道下针的逆从。
English: When pricking the chest and abdomen, pay attention to avoid injuring the five viscera. The main thing is to know the opposite direction of the needle.

古文：所谓从者，鬲与脾肾之处，不知者反之。
现代文：所谓从，就是要明白膈和脾肾等处，应该避开；如不知其部位不能避开，就会刺伤五脏，那就是逆了。
English: The so-called from is to understand that the umbilicus and spleen and kidney and other places should be avoided; if you don't know that its parts can't be avoided, it will stab the internal organs, that's the opposite.

古文：刺胸腹者，必以布憿着之，乃从单布上刺。
现代文：凡刺胸腹部位，应先用单布覆盖其处，然后从单布上进刺。
English: If you prick your chest or abdomen, first cover the area with a piece of cloth, and then prick from the cloth.

古文：刺之不愈复刺。
现代文：如果刺之不愈，可以再刺，这样就不会把五脏刺伤了。
English: If the sting does not heal, it can be re-stung, so that it does not sting the internal organs.

古文：刺针必肃，刺肿摇针，经刺勿摇，此刺之道也。
现代文：在用针刺治病的时候，必须注意安静严肃，以候其气；如刺脓肿的病，可以用摇针手法以出脓血；如刺经脉的病，就不要摇针。这是刺法的一般规矩。
English: When treating a disease with acupuncture, you must be quiet and serious, and wait for the patient's breath; if the disease is an abscess, you can use the shaking needle technique to get blood; if the disease is a stabbing vein, do not shake the needle. This is the general rule of acupuncture.

古文：帝曰：愿闻十二经脉之终奈何？
现代文：黄帝问道：请告诉我使十二经脉衰绝的情况是怎样的呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked, "Please tell me what is the reason for the decline of the twelve meridians?"

古文：岐伯曰：太阳之脉，其终也，戴眼、反折、瘛瘲，其色白，绝汗乃出，出则死矣。
现代文：岐伯回答说：太阳经脉衰绝的时候，病人两目上视，身背反弓，手足抽搐、口眼歪斜，面色发白，出绝汗，绝汗一出就会死亡。
English: Qi Bo replied: "When the sun's meridian is fading, the patient's eyes will look up, his back will arch backwards, his hands and feet will twitch, his mouth and eyes will be crooked, his complexion will turn white, and he will break into a sweat. If he breaks into a sweat, he will die."

古文：少阳终者，耳聋，百节皆纵，目睘绝系。绝系一日半死，其死也，色先青，白乃死矣。
现代文：少阳经脉衰绝的时候，病人耳聋，遍体骨节松懈，两目直视如惊，到了目珠不转，一日半便要死了；临死的时候，面色先见青色，再由青色变为白色，就死亡了。
English: When the young yang's meridians are fading, the patient is deaf, the body is slack at the bone joints, the eyes look straight ahead in shock, and if the eyeballs do not turn, he will die in a day and a half; when he is about to die, his face will turn blue first, and then from blue to white, he will die.

古文：阳明终者，口目动作，善惊妄言，色黄，其上下经盛，不仁则终矣。
现代文：阳明经脉衰绝的时候，病人口眼牵引歪斜而困动，时发惊惕，言语胡乱失常，面色发黄，其经脉上下所过的部分，都表现出盛燥的症状，由盛燥而渐至肌肉麻木不仁，便要死亡了。
English: When the yang-ming meridian decays, the patient's eyes are drawn askew and distressed, he is startled at times, his speech is erratic, his complexion is yellow, and the parts of his meridian that pass up and down all show symptoms of dryness. From dryness to muscle numbness, he will die.

古文：少阴终者，面黑齿长而垢，腹胀闭，上下不通而终矣。
现代文：少阴经脉衰绝的时候，病人面色发黑，牙龈收缩而牙齿似乎变长，并积满污垢，腹部胀闭，上下不相通，便要死亡了。
English: When the inferior vas deferens, the patient's complexion darkens, the gums contract and the teeth seem to lengthen and become filled with dirt, the abdomen swells and closes, the upper and lower are not connected, and he is about to die.

古文：太阴终者，腹胀闭，不得息，善噫善呕，呕则逆，逆则面赤，不逆则上下不通，不通则面黑，皮毛焦而终矣。
现代文：太阴经脉衰绝的时候，腹胀闭塞，呼吸不利，常欲嗳气，并且呕吐，呕则气上逆，气上逆则面赤，假如气不上逆，又变为上下不通，不通则面色发黑，皮毛枯樵而死了。
English: When the yin and yang meridians decay, the abdomen is bloated and obstructed, breathing is unfavorable, the body is often short of breath, and vomiting occurs. When vomiting occurs, the body is out of breath, and when the body is out of breath, the face is red. If the body is not out of breath, the face becomes stiff, and when the body is out of breath, the face turns black, and the fur becomes withered and dies.

古文：厥阴终者，中热嗌干，善溺心烦，甚则舌卷，卵上缩而终矣。
现代文：厥阴经脉衰绝的时候，病人胸中发热，咽喉干燥，时时小便，心胸烦躁，渐至舌卷，睾丸上缩，便要死亡了。
English: When the jueyin menses are fading, the patient will have fever in the chest, dry throat, frequent urination, irritable heart, tongue curl, and testicle shrinkage, and will die.

古文：此十二经之所败也。
现代文：以上就是十二经脉衰绝败坏的症候。
English: The above are the symptoms of the decay of the twelve meridians.

