古文：显宗成皇帝上之下咸和三年
现代文：起，止，一共四年。晋成帝咸和三年
English: a total of four years. He was promoted to Emperor Haman three years later.

古文：春，正月，温峤入救建康，军于寻阳。
现代文：春季，正月，温峤来救援建康，屯军寻阳。
English: In spring, in the first month of the year, Wen Xuan came to rescue Jiankang, and the garrison troops went in search of the sun.

古文：韩晃袭司马流于慈湖；流素懦怯，将战，食炙不知口处，兵败而死。
现代文：韩晃偷袭在慈湖的司马流，司马流素来怯懦，临战时吓得吃烤肉不知道往嘴里放，结果兵败身死。
English: Han Xiao sneak attacked Sima Liu in Cixi Lake. Sima Liu is a coward by nature. He was too scared to eat grilled meat before the battle, so he put it in his mouth. As a result, the soldier lost his life.

古文：丁未，苏峻帅祖涣、许柳等众二万人，济自横江，登牛渚，军于陵口。
现代文：丁未，苏峻带领祖涣、许柳等士众二万人，渡过横江，登上牛渚，屯军于陵口。
English: In Dingwei, Su Jun led 20,000 soldiers, including Zu Xi and Xu Liu, across the Hengjiang River and onto the Niuzhu, leading the troops to Lingkou.

古文：台兵御之，屡败。
现代文：朝廷军队抵抗屡败。
English: The imperial army's resistance was repeatedly defeated.

古文：二月，庚戌，峻至蒋陵覆舟山。
现代文：二月，庚戌，苏峻到达蒋陵的覆丹山。
English: In February, Geng Xuan and Su Jun arrived at Loudan Mountain, the site of Jiang's tomb.

古文：陶回谓庾亮曰： 峻知石头有重戍，不敢直下，必向小丹杨南道步来；宜伏兵邀之，可一战擒也。 
现代文：陶回对庾亮说： 苏峻知道石头有重兵戍守，不敢直接前来，必定从小丹杨南道徒步前来，应当埋伏兵众截击，可以一战擒获。 
English: Tao Hui said to Yao Liang: Su Jun knew that the stone was heavily guarded and did not dare to come directly. He must have come on foot from Xiao Danyang South Road. He should have intercepted the ambushed soldiers and could have been captured in one battle.

古文：亮不从。
现代文：庾亮不听。
English: Tao Liang did not agree with Sun's opinion.

古文：峻果自小丹杨来，迷失道，夜行，无复部分。
现代文：苏峻果然从小丹杨前来，因迷路，夜间赶行，军队各部混乱。
English: Su Jun did indeed come from Xiao Danyang. Because he got lost, he had to drive at night, and the army departments were in chaos.

古文：亮闻，乃悔之。
现代文：庾亮听说后才感后悔。
English: Xing Liang felt regret only after hearing about it.

古文：朝士以京邑危逼，多遣家人入东避难，左卫将军刘超独迁妻孥入居宫内。
现代文：朝廷士人因京城危急紧迫，大多遣走家人向东避难，只有左卫将军刘超却把妻子儿女迁居宫内。
English: Due to the critical situation in the capital, most of the imperial courtiers sent their families to the east for refuge. Only the Left Guard General Liu Chao moved his wife and children to the palace.

古文：诏以卞壸都督大桁东诸军事，与侍中钟雅帅郭默、赵胤等军及峻战于西陵。
现代文：朝廷下诏让卞壶都督大桁以东军事事务，与侍中钟雅率领郭默、赵胤等人的军队与苏峻在西陵交战。
English: The imperial court decreed that the military affairs east of Dajia should be handled by the governor of Jiuyuan, and the army led by the chamberlain Zhongya, Guo Mei, Zhao Yan and others fought against Su Jun in Xiling.

古文：壸等大败，死伤以千数。
现代文：卞壶等人大败，死伤数以千计。
English: Zou Jue and others were soundly defeated, and thousands of people were killed and injured.

古文：丙辰，峻攻青溪栅，卞壸帅诸军拒击，不能禁。
现代文：丙辰，苏峻进攻青溪栅，卞壶率领各路部队拒敌，无法阻止其攻势。
English: Bing Chen, Su Jun attacked Qingxi Grate, and Zou Jiu led all the troops to resist the enemy, unable to stop their offensive.

古文：峻因风纵火，烧台省及诸营寺署，一时荡尽。
现代文：苏峻乘风势纵火，烧毁朝廷的台省及诸营寺官署，一时间荡然无存。
English: Su Jun took advantage of the situation and set fire to the palace's Taiwan Province and the government offices of the various temples, which were destroyed in no time at all.

古文：壸背痈新愈，创犹未合，力疾帅左右苦战而死；二子眕、盱随父后，亦赴敌而死。
现代文：卞壶背部的痈肿刚好，伤口尚未愈合，支撑着身体率领左右侍卫苦战至死，两个儿子卞和卞盱跟随在父亲身后，也赴敌战死。
English: The abscess on the back of the gourd is just right, the wound has not yet healed, supporting the body and leading the left and right guards to fight to the death. The two sons, Zou and Zou, followed behind their father and also went to the enemy and died.

古文：其母抚尸哭曰： 父为忠臣，子为孝子，夫何恨乎！ 
现代文：他们的母亲抚摸着尸体痛哭说： 父亲是忠臣，儿子是孝子，还有什么遗憾呢！ 
English: Their mother, stroking the bodies and crying bitterly, said, "The father is a loyal subject, the son is a filial son, what other regrets can there be!"

古文：丹杨尹羊曼勒兵守云龙门，与黄门侍郎周导、庐江太守陶瞻皆战死。
现代文：丹杨尹羊曼领兵戍守云龙门，和黄门侍郎周导、庐江太守陶瞻都战死。
English: Danyang Yangyin Yangman, who led the troops and guarded the Cloud Dragon Gate, and Huangmen waiter Zhou Du, and Lijiang governor Tao Zhan all died in the battle.

古文：庾亮帅众将陈于宣阳门内，未及成列，士众皆弃甲走，亮与弟怿、条、翼及郭默、赵胤俱奔寻阳。
现代文：庾亮帅士众准备在宣阳门内结阵，还没来得及排成队列，士众都弃甲逃跑，庾亮和兄弟庾怿、庾条、庾翼及敦默、赵胤都逃奔寻阳。
English: Xuan Liang's handsome men were preparing to line up inside Xuan Yang's gate, but before they could form a queue, they all abandoned their armor and fled. Xuan Liang and his brothers Zou, Zou Zi, Zou Ying, Dun Miao, and Zhao Yan all fled to find Yang.

古文：将行，顾谓钟雅曰： 后事深以相委。 
现代文：临走时回头对钟雅说： 以后的事情深深拜托了。 
English: When she was about to leave, she turned back to Zhong Ya and said, "I'm sorry for what happened later.

古文：雅曰： 栋折榱崩，谁之咎也！ 
现代文：钟雅说： 户梁折断，屋椽崩毁，这是谁的过失呢！ 
English: Zhongya said, "The beams of the house are broken, the eaves are collapsed, whose fault is this?

古文：亮曰： 今日之事，不容复言。 
现代文：庾亮说： 今天此事，不容再说。 
English: Hao Liang said, "It is no longer acceptable to talk about this today.

古文：亮乘小船，乱兵相剥掠；亮左右射贼，误中柁工，应弦而倒。
现代文：庾亮乘坐小船，乱兵竞相掠夺抢劫，庾亮的左右侍从用箭射敌，结果误中船上舵手，应声倒仆。
English: Zhi Liang rode on a small boat, the soldiers raced to plunder the loot, Zhi Liang's left and right attendants shot the enemy with arrows, and the result was that the helmsman on the boat was hit by mistake.

古文：船上咸失色欲散，亮不动，徐曰： 此手何可使著贼！ 
现代文：船上人都大惊失色，准备逃散。庾亮安坐不动，缓缓地说： 这种手法怎么能让他射中寇贼呢！ 
English: Everyone on board was shocked and ready to run away. Xiang Liang sat still and said slowly: How can this method make him shoot the robber!

古文：众乃安。
现代文：大家这才安定。
English: This is the only way for everyone to be stable.

古文：峻兵入台城，司徒导谓侍中褚翜曰： 至尊当御正殿，君可启令速出。 
现代文：苏峻的军队进入台城，司徒王导对侍中褚说： 皇上应当在正殿，你可发令让他急速出来。 
English: When Sushun's army entered Taicheng, King Stut's guide said to the chamberlain: "The emperor should be in the main hall, you can order him to come out quickly."

古文：翜即入上閤，躬自抱帝登太极前殿；导及光禄大夫陆晔、荀崧、尚书张闿共登御床，拥卫帝。
现代文：褚立即进入内室，亲自抱着成帝登上太极前殿。王导及光禄大夫陆晔、荀崧、尚书张一同登上御床，护卫成帝。
English: Yao immediately entered the inner room and personally carried Emperor Chengdu up to the front hall of the Taiji Temple. Wang Du and Guanglu doctors Lu Wei, Yao Wei and Shang Shuzhang climbed onto the throne together to escort Emperor Chengdu.

古文：以刘超为右卫将军，使与钟雅、褚翜侍立左右，太常孔愉朝服守宗庙。
现代文：任刘超为右卫将军，让他和钟雅、褚侍立在左右，太常孔愉则穿着朝服守护宗庙。
English: Appointed Liu Chao as the right guard general, let him and Zhongya and Zou waiters stand on the right and left, and Taizhang Kongyu is wearing a morning suit to guard the ancestral temple.

古文：时百官奔散，殿省萧然。
现代文：当时百官逃奔离散，宫殿、朝省悄然无声。
English: At that time, hundreds of officials fled and dispersed, and the palace and the imperial court were silent.

古文：峻兵既入，叱褚翜令下翜正立不动，呵之曰： 苏冠军来觐至尊，军人岂得侵逼！ 
现代文：苏峻的兵众进来后，叱令褚让他退开。褚正立不动，呵斥他们说： 苏峻来觐见皇上，军人岂能侵犯逼近！ 
English: When Su Jun's soldiers came in, they scolded him and told him to move away. He stood still and shouted at them: "If Su Jun comes to see the emperor, how can the soldiers encroach and approach!

古文：由是峻兵不敢上殿，突入后宫，宫人及太后左右侍人皆见掠夺。
现代文：因此苏峻的士兵不敢上殿，冲进后宫，宫女及太后的左右侍人都被掠夺。
English: As a result, Su Jun's soldiers did not dare to enter the palace and stormed into the harem. The palace maids and the empress's attendants on both sides were plundered.

古文：峻兵驱役百官，光禄勋王彬等皆被捶挞，令负提登蒋山。
现代文：苏峻的士兵驱赶百官服劳役，光禄勋王彬等都被棍捶鞭挞，命令他们担着担子登蒋山。
English: Su Jun's soldiers drove out hundreds of officials to serve as laborers, and Guanglu Xun Wang Bin and others were clubbed and whipped, and ordered them to carry the burden up Mount Jiang.

古文：裸剥士女，皆以坏席苦苫草自鄣，无草者坐地以土自覆；哀号之声，震动内外。
现代文：又剥光成年男女的衣物，这些人都用破席或苫草自相遮掩，没有草席的人就坐在地上用土把自己身体盖住，哀哭号叫的声音，震荡于京城内外。
English: They also stripped naked men and women of their clothes. These people covered themselves with straw mats or rushes. Those who didn't have straw mats sat on the ground and covered themselves with dirt. The sound of wailing and crying reverberated in and outside the capital.

古文：初，姑孰既陷，尚书左丞孔坦谓人曰： 观峻之势，必破台城，自非战士，不须戎服。 
现代文：当初，姑孰被攻陷之后，尚书左丞孔坦对人说： 看苏峻的势头，必定会攻破台城，我从来不是士兵，不需要军服。 
English: At first, after the fall of Guzheng, Shangshu Zuoxiao Kontan said to people: "Looking at the momentum of Su Jun, I will surely break through Taicheng. I have never been a soldier and do not need a military uniform.

古文：及台城陷，戎服者多死，白衣者无他。
现代文：等到台城被攻陷，穿军服的人大多死亡，不着军服者倒没什么。
English: By the time Taichung fell, most of the people in uniform were dead, while those without uniforms were left with nothing.

古文：时官有布二十万匹，金银五千斤，钱亿万，绢数万匹，他物称是，峻尽费之；太官惟有烧馀米数石以供御膳。
现代文：当时官府拥有布匹二十万匹，金银五千斤，钱亿万，绢数万匹，其他物品价值与此相当，苏峻尽数耗费光，掌管皇帝饮食的太官只有用大火烧剩下的数石粮米，以供成帝御膳。
English: At that time, the government owned 200,000 pieces of cloth, up to 5,000 kg of gold and silver, hundreds of millions of money, tens of thousands of horses, and other items of similar value. Su Jun exhausted all his resources, and the eunuch in charge of the emperor's diet had to use fire to burn the remaining several kilos of grain and rice for the emperor's meal.

古文：或谓钟雅曰： 君性亮直，必不容于寇仇，盍早为之计！ 
现代文：有人对钟雅说： 你禀性诚信坦直，必定不被寇仇所容，何不早作打算。 
English: Someone said to Zhongya: You are honest and straightforward, you will not be tolerated by the enemy, why not make plans early.

古文：雅曰： 国乱不能匡，君危不能济，各遁逃以求免，何以为臣！ 
现代文：钟雅说： 国家的祸乱不能匡正，君王的危殆不能挽救，各自遁逃以求免祸，这还怎么当人臣呢！ 
English: Zhong Ya said, "The national calamity cannot be rectified, the king's peril cannot be saved, and everyone is running away to avoid the calamity. How can this be a courtier!

古文：丁巳，峻称诏大赦，惟庾亮兄弟不在原例。
现代文：丁巳，苏峻矫称诏令大赦天下，惟有庾亮兄弟不在赦免之列。
English: Ding Si, Su Jun pretentiously claimed that the edict granted amnesty to the whole world, but the Yu Liang brothers were not included in the amnesty.

古文：以王导有德望，犹使以本官居己之右。
现代文：认为王导素有德行和名望，还让他保持原职，位居自己之上。
English: He believed that Wang Duoduo was full of virtue and fame, and allowed him to keep his original position, ranking him higher than himself.

古文：祖约为侍中、太尉、尚书令，峻自为骠骑将军、录尚书事，许柳为丹杨尹，马雄为左卫将军，祖涣为骁骑将军。
现代文：祖约任侍中、太尉、尚书令，苏峻自任骠骑将军、录尚书事，许柳任丹杨尹，马雄任左卫将军，祖涣任骁骑将军。
English: Zu Yu served as a chamberlain, captain, and imperial secretary, Su Jun himself served as a cavalry general and recorded imperial correspondence, Xu Liu served as Danyang Yin, Ma Xiong served as a left guard general, and Zu Yu served as a cavalry general.

古文：弋阳王羕诣峻，称述峻功，峻复以羕为西阳王、太宰、录尚书事。
现代文：弋阳王司马拜见苏峻，称述苏峻的功德，苏峻又让司马当西阳王、太宰、录尚书事。
English: Sima, the king of Shiyang, paid a visit to Su Jun, praised and recounted Su Jun's merits, and Su Jun also made Sima the king of Xiyang, the grand vizier, and recorded his records.

古文：峻遣兵攻吴国内史庾冰，冰不能御，弃郡奔会稽，至浙江，峻购之甚急。
现代文：苏峻派兵进攻吴国内史庾冰，庾冰抵挡不住，放弃郡国逃奔会稽。到浙江时，苏峻重赏搜捕他，十分急迫。
English: Su Jun sent troops to attack Shi Bing in Wuzhong. Bing Bing could not resist and gave up the county to escape. When he arrived in Zhejiang, Su Jun was very anxious to find and arrest him.

古文：吴铃下卒引冰入船，以蘧蒢覆之，呤啸鼓枻，溯流而去。
现代文：吴国的侍从、门卒带领庾冰进船，把他用芦席覆盖起来，呤啸着摇动船浆，逆流而上。
English: The attendants and porters of the State of Wu led Yu Bing into the ship, covered him with reed mats, and rode the boat against the current.

古文：每逢逻所，辄以杖叩船曰： 何处觅庾冰，庚冰正在此。 
现代文：每逢遇到巡查哨所，就用杖叩击船身说： 何处寻觅庾冰？庾冰就在这里。 
English: Whenever he came across a patrol post, he would beat the hull of the boat with his cane and say: "Where can I find hail? The hail is right here."

古文：人以为醉，不疑之，冰仅免。
现代文：众人认为他喝醉了，毫不怀疑，庾冰因此幸免。
English: People thought he was drunk, and there is no doubt that Shun Bing was spared.

古文：峻以侍中蔡谟为吴国内史。
现代文：苏峻让侍中蔡谟出任吴国内史。
English: Su Jun appointed the chamberlain, Cai Mu, to be in charge of Wu's domestic history.

古文：温峤闻建康不守，号恸；人有候之者，悲哭相对。
现代文：温峤听说建康失守，号啕痛哭。有人前往探问，也是相对悲泣。
English: When Wen Wei heard that Jiankang was defeated, he cried bitterly. When someone went to investigate, he was also relatively sad.

古文：庾亮至寻阳，宣太后诏，以峤为骠骑将军、开府仪同三司，又加徐州刺史郗鉴司空。
现代文：庾亮到寻阳后宣谕太后诏令，任温峤为骠骑将军、开府仪同三司，又授予徐州刺史郗鉴为司空。
English: After Xingliang arrived at Xingyang, the Empress Dowager's edict was issued, appointing Wen Qi as the general of the cavalry, Kaifu Yi and the three departments, and awarding Xuzhou Zhishi and Jian Jian as the secretary of the sky.

古文：峤曰： 今日当以灭贼为急，未有功而先拜官，将何以示天下！ 
现代文：温峤说： 今天应当首先翦灭叛贼，尚未建功却先授官，还怎么示范天下！ 
English: Wen Jiabao said, "Today, we should first annihilate the traitors. They have not done any meritorious work yet, but they have been promoted first. How can we show the world!

古文：遂不受。峤素重亮，亮虽奔败，峤愈推奉之，分兵给亮。
现代文：于是推辞不接受，温峤素来看重庾亮，庾亮虽然战败奔逃，温峤却更加推重奉承他，分出部分兵力交给庾亮。
English: As a result, he did not accept the resignation, and Wen Xiuxin gave more importance to Huan Liang. Although Huan Liang was defeated and fled, Wen Xiuxin flattered him more and allocated part of the troops to Huan Liang.

古文：后赵大赦，改元太和。
现代文：后赵实行大赦，改年号为太和。
English: After the amnesty, Zhao changed his name to Taihe.

古文：三月，丙子，庾太后以忧崩。
现代文：三月，丙子，庾太后因忧愁驾崩。
English: In March, the Empress Dowager Cixi died of grief.

古文：苏峻南屯于湖。
现代文：苏峻向南屯兵于湖。
English: Su Jun marched south to garrison the lake.

古文：夏，四月，后赵将石堪攻宛，南阳太守王国降之；遂进攻祖约军于淮上。
现代文：夏季，四月，后赵将领石堪攻宛，南阳太守王国投降；石堪随即进攻驻于淮水岸边的祖约。
English: In the summer, in April, after Zhao's general Shih Kan attacked, the Nanyang Emperor's kingdom surrendered; Shih Kan then attacked Zuyo, which was stationed on the shore of Huai Shui.

古文：约将陈光起兵攻约，约左右阎秃，貌类约，光谓为约而擒之。
现代文：祖约部将陈光发兵攻击祖约，祖约的侍从闫秃，相貌与祖约相像，陈光以为是祖约，把他擒获，祖约越墙逃脱。
English: The Ancestral Contract Department sent Chen Guang's soldiers to attack Ancestral Contract. An attendant of Ancestral Contract was bald and looked like Ancestral Contract. Chen Guang thought it was Ancestral Contract and captured him. Ancestral Contract escaped over the wall.

古文：约逾垣获免，光奔后赵。
现代文：陈光逃奔后赵。
English: Zhao after Chen Guang fled.

古文：壬申，葬明穆皇后于武平陵。
现代文：壬申，明穆皇后入葬武平陵。
English: On the 24th, Empress Mingmu was buried in Wuping Mausoleum.

古文：庾亮、温峤将起兵讨苏峻，而道路断绝，不知建康声闻。
现代文：庾亮、温峤准备起兵讨伐苏峻，但道路阻断，不知道建康的消息。
English: Yan Liang and Wen Wei are preparing to raise an army to fight against Su Jun, but the road is blocked, and they do not know the news of Jiankang.

古文：会南阳范汪至寻阳，言 峻政令不壹，贪暴纵横，灭亡已兆，虽强易弱，朝廷有倒悬之急，宜时进讨。 
现代文：适逢南阳人范汪到寻阳，说： 苏峻政令混乱不一，贪婪强暴，肆无忌惮，已显现出灭亡的征兆，虽然暂时强大，但很容易转化为弱小，朝廷到了千钧一发的危急时刻，应当及时进攻讨伐。 
English: Fan Wang, a person from Nanyang, came to Xuanyang at the right time and said: The Su Juns political order is chaotic, greedy, violent and unscrupulous. It has already shown signs of perishing. Although it is temporarily strong, it can easily be transformed into weak. The imperial court has reached a critical moment, and it should timely attack and crusade.

古文：峤深纳之。
现代文：温峤深以为然。
English: Wen Jiabao was deeply convinced.

古文：亮辟汪参护军事。
现代文：庾亮征召范汪为参护军事。
English: Xing Liang conscripted Fan Wang as a military escort.

古文：亮、峤互相推为盟主，峤从弟充曰： 陶征西位重兵强，宜共推之。 
现代文：庾亮、温峤相互推举对方为盟主，温峤的堂弟温充说： 陶侃职位重要，兵力强盛，应当共同推举他为盟主。 
English: Yan Liang and Wen Qi mutually elected each other as the leader of the alliance. Wen Qi's cousin Wen Chong said, "Tao Qian's position is important and his army is strong. They should jointly elect him as the leader of the alliance."

古文：峤乃遣督护王愆期诣荆州，邀陶侃与之同赴国难。
现代文：温峤便派遣督护王愆期到荆州，邀请陶侃和自己同赴国难。
English: Wen Rong then sent the overseer of Wang Rong to Jingzhou, inviting Tao Kan and himself to go to the country together.

古文：侃犹以不豫顾命为恨，答曰： 吾疆场外将，不敢越局。 
现代文：陶侃仍然因为未能参与接受遗诏怀恨在心，回答说： 我是守戍边疆的将领，不敢逾越职分。 
English: Tao Kan, still holding a grudge for not being able to participate in the acceptance of the last will and testament, replied: I am a general guarding the border, I dare not exceed my duties.

古文：峤屡说，不能回；乃顺侃意，遣使谓之曰： 仁公且守，仆当先下。 
现代文：温峤多次劝说，不能使他回心转意。温峤于是顺应陶侃的心意，派使者对他说： 仁公暂且按兵不动，我当先行进讨。 
English: Wen Rong persuaded him many times, but he could not change his mind. Therefore, Wen Rong obeyed Tao Kan's wishes and sent an envoy to him, saying, "Ren Gong should not move his troops for the time being. I should advance the discussion first."

古文：使者去已二日，平南参军荥阳毛宝别使还，闻之，说峤曰： 凡举大事，当与天下共之。
现代文：使者出发已有两天，平南参军荥阳人毛宝出使别处归来，听说此事，劝说温峤说： 凡是干大事，应当和天下人共同参与。
English: It had been two days since the envoys set off. Mao Bao, a Pingnan soldier from Shenyang, who had been sent on a mission elsewhere, heard about this and persuaded Wen Qi to say: Whenever you do something big, you should participate with the rest of the world.

古文：师克在和，不宜异同。
现代文：军队取胜在于和同，不应当有所别异。
English: The victory of the army lies in harmony, and there should be no difference.

古文：假令可疑，犹当外示不觉，况自为携贰邪！
现代文：即使有可疑之处，尚且应当对外表现出无所察觉，何况是自己显露离心呢！
English: Even if there is something suspicious, you should still show the outside world that you are not aware of anything, not to mention that you are revealing your own eccentricity!

古文：宜急追信改书，言必应俱进；若不及前信，当更遣使。 
现代文：应当急速追回信使改写书信，说明一定要相互应从，共同进发。如果赶不上先前的信使，应当重新派遣使者。 
English: The messenger should be quickly retrieved to rewrite the letter, explaining that it must correspond with each other and go forward together. If the previous messenger does not catch up, the messenger should be sent again.

古文：峤意悟，即追使者，改书；侃果许之，遣督护龚登帅兵诣峤。
现代文：温峤心中醒悟，当即追回使者改写书信，陶侃果然应许，派督护龚登率军见温峤。
English: Wen Rong's heart awakened, and he immediately retrieved the messenger to rewrite the letter. Tao Kan indeed promised, and sent the inspector to lead the army to see Wen Rong.

古文：峤有众七千，于是列上尚书，陈祖约、苏峻罪状，移告征镇，洒泣登舟。
现代文：温峤有士众七千人，于是列名上呈尚书，陈述祖约、苏峻的罪状，传告各地方长官，洒泪登上战船。
English: There were seven thousand people in Wenchuan, so they submitted a petition listing the names, stated the guilt of Zuyo and Su Jun, and told the local governors, and boarded the warship with tears.

古文：陶侃复追龚登还。
现代文：陶侃又召龚登回来。
English: Tao Kan also called Zou Deng back.

古文：峤遗侃书曰： 夫军有进而无退，可增而不可减。
现代文：温峤给陶侃写信说： 军队能进不能退，能增多而不能减少。
English: Wen Rong wrote a letter to Tao Kan saying: The army can advance or retreat, it can increase but not decrease.

古文：近已移檄远近，言于盟府，刻后月半大举，诸郡军并在路次，惟须仁公军至，便齐进耳。
现代文：近来已经将檄文传播于远近，呈告您的盟府，约定下一次半月时分大举兴兵，各郡军队都已上路，只等您的军队到达，便一同进发了。
English: Recently, the message has been spread far and wide, and it has been reported to your Mengfu, and it has been agreed to raise a large number of troops in the next half month. The county armies have all embarked on the road. Just waiting for your army to arrive, they will march together.

古文：仁公今召军还，疑惑远近，成败之由，将在于此。
现代文：您现在把军队召回，使远近之人感到疑惑，成败的根由便将决定于此。
English: If you call back the troops now, and throw doubt into the minds of the people near and far, success or failure will depend on it.

古文：仆才轻任重，实凭仁公笃爱，远禀成规；至于首启戎行，不敢有辞，仆与仁公，如首尾相卫，脣齿相依也。
现代文：我才能浅薄却责任重大，实在需要凭仗您的厚爱，遥遵您的成规。至于说到率先启行充当先锋，我不敢有二话，我与您如同首尾相卫、唇齿相依。
English: My talent is shallow, but my responsibility is great. I really need to rely on your love and follow your rules. As for being the first to set off as a pioneer, I dare not say two words. I am with you as if we are neck and neck, lips and teeth.

古文：恐或者不达高旨，将谓仁公缓于讨贼，此声难追。
现代文：惟恐有人不理解您高深的意旨，将会认为您不急于讨伐叛贼，这种舆论一旦形成则难以弥补。
English: For fear that some people do not understand your lofty intention, will think that you are not eager to fight the traitors, once this public opinion is formed, it is difficult to make up for it.

古文：仆与仁公并受方岳之任，安危休戚，理既同之。
现代文：我和您都担负着地方统帅的职责，安危休戚，按理应当共同承受。
English: You and I are both responsible for the duties of the local commander-in-chief, and we should bear it together.

古文：且自顷之顾，绸缪往来，情深义重，一旦有急，亦望仁公悉众见救，况社稷之难乎！
现代文：况且自从最近交往以来，来往频繁，情深义重，一旦有急难，也希望您率兵相救，何况是国家的危难呢！
English: Moreover, since our recent contact, we have had frequent visits, and our feelings are deep and meaningful. In the event of an emergency, I would also hope that you would lead an army to rescue us, let alone a national emergency!

古文：今日之忧，岂惟仆一州，文武莫不翘企。
现代文：今天的忧患，岂只是我这一州，文武百官谁不对您企足翘首期待？
English: Today's sorrow, is it just my state, civil and military officials who do not expect you to stand up?

古文：假令此州不守，约、峻树置官长于此，荆楚西逼强胡，东接逆贼，因之以饥馑，将来之危，乃当甚于此州之今日也。
现代文：假使此州保不住，祖约、苏峻在此设置官长，荆楚西部临近强大的胡寇，东部与叛贼相临，再加上连年饥馑，将来的危殆，就会远远超过此州的今天。
English: If this state cannot be saved, if Zuyo and Su Jun set up officials here, if the western part of Jingchu is close to the powerful Huko, and the eastern part is close to the traitors, coupled with the famine for years, the future will be far more dangerous than this state today.

古文：仁公进当为大晋之忠臣，参桓、文之功；退当以慈父之情，雪爱子之痛。
现代文：您进，当会成为大晋的忠臣，与齐桓公、晋文公的功绩相匹；退，则应当以慈父的情爱，去雪爱子被杀的痛楚。
English: If you enter, you will become a loyal vassal of the Great Jin, and match the achievements of King Qi Huan and King Jinwen; if you leave, you should, with the love of a father, go to the snow and the pain of your beloved son being killed.

古文：今约、峻凶逆无道，痛感天地，人心齐壹，咸皆切齿。
现代文：如今祖约、苏峻凶逆无道，造成的罪孽震动天地，人心一致，都切齿痛恨。
English: Today, the patriarchs of the Old Testament and the Soviet Union are evil and wicked, and the sins they have caused shake the heavens and the earth. People's hearts are united, and they all hate each other with bitter hatred.

古文：今之进讨，若以石投卵耳；苟复召兵还，是为败于几成也。
现代文：现在的进攻讨伐，犹如以石投卵罢了。倘若再召回军队，这是在几乎成功之时自己制造失败。
English: The current offensive is a stone's throw away, and if the army is called back, it will be a self-inflicted defeat at a time when it was almost a success.

古文：愿深察所陈！ 
现代文：期望能深切体察我所说的这一切。 
English: Looking forward to digging deeper into everything I've said.

古文：王愆期谓侃曰： 苏峻，豺狼也，如得遂志，四海虽广，公宁有容足之地乎！ 
现代文：王愆期对陶侃说： 苏峻是豺狼，如果让他得志，天下虽大，您难道能有立足之地吗！ 
English: Wang Xizhi said to Tao Kan: Su Jun is a jackal. If you let him succeed, even though the world is big, can you have a foothold?

古文：侃深感悟，即戎服登舟；瞻丧至不临，昼夜兼道而进。
现代文：陶侃深深感悟，当即穿上作战服装登船。儿子陶瞻的丧礼也不参加，日夜兼行赶来。
English: Deeply moved, Tao Kan immediately put on his combat clothes and boarded the ship. He did not attend his son Tao Zhan's funeral, but came both day and night.

古文：郗鉴在广陵，城孤粮少，逼近胡寇，人无固志。
现代文：郗鉴在广陵，孤城缺粮，挨近胡寇，人心不稳。
English: 鉴 in Guangling, Lucheng is short of grain, close to Huko, people's hearts are unstable.

古文：得诏书，即流涕誓众，入赴国难，将士争奋。
现代文：得到诏书后，当即流着眼泪誓师，来赴国难，将士们人人奋勇争先。
English: After receiving the imperial edict, they immediately swore with tears that they would go to the country, and they all fought bravely for the first place.

古文：遣将军夏侯长等间行谓温峤曰： 或闻贼欲挟天子东入会稽，当先立营垒，屯据要害，既防其越逸，又断贼粮运，然后清野坚壁以待贼。
现代文：郗鉴派将军夏侯长等微行前来对温峤说： 有人听说叛贼准备挟迫天子向东到会稽，应当事先设立营帐壁垒，占据要害之地，即可防止他逃逸，又能切断叛贼的粮食运输，然后再坚壁清野，坐待叛贼。
English: Zou Jian sent General Xia Houchang and other minor officials to come to Wen Xuan and said: Some people have heard that the traitors are preparing to blackmail Tianzi to the east to the meeting. It is necessary to set up camp barriers in advance and occupy the critical place, which can prevent him from escaping, and can cut off the traitors' grain transportation, and then fortify the wall and clear the field to wait for the traitors.

古文：贼攻城不拔，野无所掠，东道既断，粮运自绝，必自溃矣。 
现代文：叛贼攻城不能取胜，旷野又无所劫掠，东边的道路既然阻断，粮米输运自然断绝，必定不战自溃。 
English: The rebels can't win if they attack the city, and there's nothing to loot in the wilderness. Since the road to the east is blocked and the transportation of grain and rice is naturally cut off, they're bound to defeat themselves without a fight.

古文：峤深以为然。
现代文：温峤认为很对。
English: Wen Wei Po thought it was right.

古文：五月，陶侃帅众至寻阳。
现代文：五月，陶侃率领士众到达寻阳。
English: In May, Tao Kan led the warriors to arrive at Xuanyang.

古文：议者咸谓侃欲诛庾亮以谢天下；亮甚惧，用温峤计，诣侃拜谢。
现代文：论者都说陶侃准备诛杀庾亮向天下人谢罪，庾亮甚为恐惧，便采用温峤的计谋，去见陶侃叩拜谢罪。
English: The commentators all said that Tao Kan was preparing to kill Xiang Liang for thanking people for their sins. Xiang Liang was very afraid, so he used a gentle trick to see Tao Kan and worship Xie Sin.

古文：侃惊，止之曰： 庾元规乃拜陶士行邪！ 
现代文：陶侃大吃一惊，制止他说： 庾元规竟然来叩拜我吗！ 
English: Taken aback, Tao Kan stopped him and said, "Huan Yuanbi actually came to bow to me!

古文：亮引咎自责，风止可观，侃不觉释然，曰： 君侯修石头以拟老子，今日反见求邪！ 
现代文：庾亮援引过错，自我责备，风度举止很不错，陶侃不知不觉放心开怀，说： 您当年缮修石头城来对付老夫，今天倒反来见我有所求吗！ 
English: Hao Liang cited mistakes, self-reproach, good manners, Tao Kan unconsciously felt relieved and happy, saying: You repaired the stone city to deal with the old man, but today you want to see me!

古文：即与之谈宴终日，遂与亮、峤同趣建康。
现代文：随即和他谈笑宴饮一整天，便与庾亮、温峤一同赶赴建康。
English: He then spent the whole day talking, laughing and drinking with him, and then rushed to Jiankang together with Liang Liang and Wen Yao.

古文：戎卒四万，旌旗七百馀里，钲鼓之声，震于远近。
现代文：共有士卒四万人，旌旗延绵七百多里，钲鼓之声震动遐迩。
English: There were a total of 40,000 soldiers and officers, the national flag stretched for more than 700 miles, and the sound of the gongs and drums shook the countryside.

古文：苏峻闻西方兵起，用参军贾宁计，自姑孰还据石头，分兵以拒侃等。
现代文：苏峻听说西方起兵，采纳参军贾宁的计谋，从姑孰返回占据石头，分兵抗拒陶侃等人。
English: Su Jun heard that the West raised an army, adopted the strategy of Janning to join the army, returned from Guzhen to occupy the stone, and divided the army to resist Tao Kan and others.

古文：乙未，峻逼迁帝于石头。司徒导固争，不从。
现代文：乙未，苏峻逼迫成帝迁居石头，司徒王导极力争辩，苏峻不听。
English: Twice, Su Jun forced Emperor Cheng Rong to move to a stone house. King Sidu tried to argue with Su Jun, but Su Jun would not listen.

古文：帝哀泣升车，宫中恸哭。
现代文：成帝哀哭着登上车舆，宫中一片恸哭。
English: Emperor Cheng wept as he boarded the carriage, and the palace was in tears.

古文：时天大雨，道路泥泞，刘超、钟雅步侍左右。峻给马，不肯乘，而悲哀慷慨。
现代文：当时天下大雨，道路泥泞，刘超、钟雅徒步侍从于左右，苏峻给他们马匹也不肯乘坐，悲哀慷慨。
English: At that time, it was raining heavily, and the roads were muddy. Liu Chao and Zhongya accompanied them on foot, and Su Jun did not want to ride their horses, which was sad and generous.

古文：峻闻而恶之，然未敢杀也。
现代文：苏峻听说后憎恶于心，但没敢杀害。
English: Su Jun hated it in his heart after hearing about it, but he didn't dare to kill it.

古文：以其亲信许方等补司马督、殿中监，外托宿卫，内实防御超等。
现代文：苏峻让亲信许方等人补任司马督、殿中监等职，对外说是宿卫，对内其实是防备刘超等人。
English: Su Jun allowed his close confidant Xu Fang and others to fill the positions of Sima Du and palace middle supervisor. To the outside world, it was a bodyguard, but to the inside, it was actually a guard against Liu Chao and others.

古文：峻以仓屋为帝宫，日来帝前肆丑言。
现代文：苏峻用库房作为成帝宫室，每天在成帝面前大放厥词。
English: Su Jun used the storeroom as Emperor Cheng's palace room, and made grand speeches in front of Emperor Cheng every day.

古文：刘超、钟雅与右光禄大夫荀崧、金紫光禄大夫华恒、尚书荀邃、侍中丁潭侍从，不离帝侧。
现代文：刘超、钟雅和右光禄大夫荀崧、金紫光禄大夫华恒、尚书荀邃、侍中丁潭侍卫随从，不离成帝左右。
English: Liu Chao, Zhong Ya and Uguanglu Dr. Zhou, Jin Zi Guanglu Dr. Hua Heng, Shang Shuxu Zhou, and the attendant Ding Tan, were always around Emperor Chengdu.

古文：时饥馑，米贵，峻问遗，超一无所受，缱绻朝夕，臣节愈恭；虽居幽厄之中，超犹启帝，授《孝经》、《论语》。
现代文：当时因饥馑米价昂贵，苏峻赠送问慰，刘超纤毫不受。
English: At that time, due to the high price of rice due to famine, Su Jun offered condolences, but Liu Chaoqi did not accept them.

古文：峻使左光禄大夫陆晔守留台，逼近居民，尽聚之后苑；使匡术守苑城。
现代文：朝夕不离成帝身边，行臣子礼节愈加恭谨。虽然处于困厄之中，刘超仍然为成帝启蒙，讲授《孝经》和《论语》。苏峻让左光禄大夫陆晔守卫禁城，逼迫居民全部聚居在后苑，让匡术据守苑城。
English: In the morning and evening, he did not leave the side of Emperor Cheng, and the etiquette of the courtiers became more and more respectful. Although he was in trouble, Liu Chao still enlightened Emperor Cheng, lecturing on "Filial Piety" and "Analects." Su Jun had the doctor of the Left Guanglu School, Lu Xun, guard the Forbidden City, forcing all the residents to live together in the backyard, and let Kuang Shu guard the garden city.

古文：尚书左丞孔坦奔陶侃，侃以为长史。
现代文：尚书左丞孔坦投奔陶侃，陶侃任他为长史。
English: Shang Shuzhu Zuorong Kong Tan voted for Tao Kan, and Tao Kan has been with him for a long time.

古文：初，苏峻遣尚书张闿权督东军，司徒导密令以太后诏谕三吴吏士，使起义兵救天子。
现代文：当初，苏峻派尚书张暂时督察东部军事，司徒王导密令他用太后诏书谕示三吴的官吏士民，让他们发动义兵救天子。
English: At first, Su Jun sent Shang Shuzhang to temporarily supervise the eastern military, and the King of Sidu guided the secret and ordered him to use the Empress Dowager's edict to instruct the officials, judges and people of Sanwu to mobilize volunteers to save Tianzi.

古文：会稽内史王舒以庾冰行奋武将军，使将兵一万，西渡浙江。于是吴兴太守虞潭、吴国内史蔡谟、前义兴太守顾从等皆举兵应之。
现代文：会稽内史王舒让庾冰任行奋武将军职，领兵一万人，向西渡过浙江，于是吴兴太守虞潭、吴国内史蔡谟、原义兴太守顾众等人都发兵响应。
English: Wang Shu, the auditor of the internal history of the association, appointed Yu Bing to serve as a fighting general, led ten thousand soldiers, and crossed Zhejiang to the west. Therefore, Wu Xingtao, the governor of Yu Tan, Wu Jiaozhong Shi Cai Mu, and Yuan Yixingtao, the governor of Gu Zongzhu, all sent troops in response.

古文：潭母孙氏谓谭曰： 汝当舍生取义，勿以吾老为累！ 
现代文：虞潭母亲孙氏对虞潭说： 你应当舍生取义，不要因我年老受拖累。 
English: Yu Tan's mother, Ms. Sun, said to Yu Tan, "You should sacrifice your life for righteousness. Don't be burdened by my old age.

古文：尽遣其家僮从军，鬻其环珮以为军资。
现代文：尽数遣送自己的家僮从军，典卖自己的耳环佩玉作为军资。
English: He sent as many of his family members as possible to join the army, and sold his earrings and beads as war booty.

古文：谟以庾冰当还旧任，即去郡以让冰。
现代文：蔡谟认为庾冰应当恢复吴国内史的旧职，便离开吴国，把职位让给庾冰。
English: Cai Mu thought that Yu Bing should resume his old post of Wuxi Domestic History, so he left Wuxi and gave the post to Yu Bing.

古文：苏峻闻东方兵起，遣其将管商、张健、弘徽等拒之；虞潭等与战，互有胜负，未能得前。
现代文：苏峻听说东方起兵，派部将管商、张健、弘徽等拒敌。虞潭等人和他们交战，互有胜负，不能前进。
English: Su Jun heard that Dongfang raised an army, and the faction of Guanzhong, Zhang Jian, Honghui and others refused the enemy. Yu Tan and others fought with them, and there was mutual victory and defeat, and they could not advance.

古文：陶侃、温峤军于茄子浦；峤以南兵习水，苏峻兵便步，令将士： 有上岸者死！ 
现代文：陶侃、温峤屯军于茄子浦。温峤因南方士兵熟悉水战，而苏峻的士卒则以步战见长，便下令： 将士有上岸的处死！ 
English: As the Southern soldiers were familiar with water battles, and the Su Jun soldiers excelled at foot battles, Emperor Taokan and Emperor Wenxuan ordered: "Soldiers who go ashore are to be executed!"

古文：会峻送米万斛馈祖约，约遣司马桓抚等迎之。
现代文：适逢苏峻赠送粮米一万斛给祖约，祖约派司马桓抚等人相迎。
English: It coincided with Su Jun's gift of 10,000 baht of grain and rice to Zuyo, and Zuyo sent Sima Huanfu and others to welcome him.

古文：毛宝帅千人为峤前锋，告其众曰： 兵法： 军令有所不从 ，岂可视贼可击，不上岸击之邪！ 
现代文：毛宝率领一千人当温峤的先锋，告谕士兵说： 兵法说： 军令有所不从 ，怎能眼见可以攻击叛贼，却不上岸攻击呢！ 
English: Mao Bao led a thousand people to be the vanguard of the warm-up, and told the soldiers: The military law says: If the military order is not obeyed, how can you see with your eyes that you can attack the traitors, but not attack the shore!

古文：乃擅往袭抚，悉获其米，斩获万计，约由是饥乏。
现代文：于是擅自前往偷袭桓抚，尽数劫获粮米，斩首万人左右，祖约军队因此饥饿缺粮。
English: As a result, he made an unauthorized raid on Huanfu, plundered as much grain and rice as possible, and beheaded about 10,000 people. As a result, Zuyo's army was starving and short of grain.

古文：峤表宝为庐江太守。
现代文：温峤上表推荐毛宝任庐江太守。
English: On the above table, Mao Bao was recommended to be appointed as the governor of the Li River.

古文：陶侃表王舒监浙东军事，虞潭监浙西军事，郗鉴都督扬州八郡诸军事，令舒、潭皆受鉴节度。
现代文：陶侃表荐王舒监察浙东军事，虞潭监察浙西军事，郗鉴都督扬州八郡诸军事，令王舒、虞潭都听从郗鉴的调度。
English: Tao Kan recommended Wang Shu to supervise the military of East Zhejiang, Yu Tan to supervise the military of West Zhejiang, and Zou Jian as the military governor of eight counties in Yangzhou, so that Wang Shu and Yu Tan all obeyed the dispatch of Zou Jian.

古文：鉴帅众渡江，与侃等会与于茄子浦，雍州刺史魏该亦以兵会之。
现代文：郗鉴率士兵渡过长江，与陶侃等在茄子浦会合。雍州刺史魏该也领兵相会。
English: The soldiers led by Zou Jian crossed the Yangtze River and met with Tao Kan and others in Aubergine Pool. The leader of Yongzhou, Zi Shi Wei, also met with the soldiers.

古文：丙辰，侃等舟师直指石头，至于蔡洲，侃屯查浦，峤屯沙门浦。
现代文：丙辰，陶侃等人的水军直指石头，到达蔡州。陶侃屯军查浦，温峤屯军沙门浦。
English: The naval forces of Xing Chen, Tao Kan and others headed straight for the stone and arrived in Caizhou. Tao Kan's army camped at Cha Pu, and Wen Xi's army camped at Shamen Pu.

古文：峻登烽火楼，望见士众之盛，有惧色，谓左右曰： 吾本知温峤能得众也。 
现代文：苏峻登上烽火楼，望见敌方士众之多，面有惧色，对左右侍从说： 我本来就知道温峤能得众心。 
English: When Su Jun ascended the Bonfire Tower and saw the large number of enemy soldiers, he was afraid and said to the attendants on his right and left: I knew that Wen Jiabao could win the hearts of the people.

古文：庾亮遣督护王彰击峻党张曜，反为所败。
现代文：庾亮派督护王彰突袭苏峻的门党张曜，反而被张曜击败。
English: Yan Liang sent the overseer and protector Wang Chang to make a surprise attack on Su Jun's gate party Zhang You, but he was defeated by Zhang You.

古文：亮送节传以谢侃，侃答曰： 古人三败，君侯始二；当今事急，不宜数尔。 
现代文：庾亮送去符节向陶侃谢罪，陶侃回答说： 古人曾三次遭败，您才有二次。不过当今形势急迫，不能次次这样。 
English: Xing Liang sent a festival of charms to thank Tao Kan for his sin, and Tao Kan replied: The ancients were defeated three times, you have only been defeated twice. However, today's situation is urgent, it can't be like this next time.

古文：亮司马陈郡殷融诣侃谢曰： 将军为此，非融等所裁。 
现代文：庾亮的司马、陈郡人殷融去见陶侃谢罪说： 这是庾将军造成的，不是我们出的主意。 
English: The bright Sima and Chen County people went to see Tao Kan Xie Sin and said: This was caused by General Zou, not our idea.

古文：王彰至曰： 彰自为之，将军不知也。 
现代文：王彰来后则说：这是我自己造成的，庾将军不知道。 
English: After Wang Zhang arrived, he said, "I caused this myself. General Zou doesn't know about it."

古文：侃曰： 昔殷融为君子，王彰为小人；今王彰为君子，殷融为小人。 
现代文：陶侃说： 过去殷融是君子，王彰是小人；现在王彰是君子，殷融则是小人了。 
English: Tao Kan said: In the past, Yin Rong was a gentleman and Wang Chang was a villain; now Wang Chang is a gentleman and Yin Rong is a villain.

古文：宣城内史桓彝，闻京城不守，慷慨流涕，进屯泾县。
现代文：宣城内史桓彝听说京城失守，慷慨流泪，进军屯驻泾县。
English: After hearing that the capital had been lost, Shih Huan-tao, who lived in Xuancheng, burst into tears and went to stay in Jixian.

古文：时州郡多遣使降苏峻，裨惠复劝彝宜且与通使，以纾交至之祸。
现代文：当时州郡大多派使者向苏峻投降，裨惠又劝桓彝，应当暂且与苏峻通使，以舒缓将会交至而来的灾祸。
English: At that time, most of the prefectures and counties sent envoys to surrender to Su Jun, and advised Huan Qi that he should temporarily communicate with Su Jun to alleviate the disaster that would come.

古文：彝曰： 吾受国厚恩，义在致死，焉能忍耻与逆臣通问！
现代文：桓彝说： 我蒙受国家的重恩，按道义应当效死。怎能忍受耻辱和逆臣通使问慰！
English: Kanzen said, "I have received a great favor from the state, and according to morality, I should die an honorable death. How can I bear the shame and the consolation sent by a traitorous minister!"

古文：如其不济，此则命也。 
现代文：如果事情不能成功，这就是命了。 
English: If things don't work out, that's life.

古文：彝遣将军俞纵守兰石，峻遣其将韩晃攻之。纵将败，左右劝纵退军。
现代文：桓彝派将军俞纵驻守兰石，苏峻派部将韩晃攻击，俞纵将要战败，左右侍从劝俞纵退军。
English: The general of the Huanqin faction stationed in Lanshi, the Su Jun faction attacked Han Xiao, the Huanqin faction was about to be defeated, and the left and right attendants advised the Huanqin faction to withdraw.

古文：纵曰： 吾受桓侯厚恩，当以死报。
现代文：俞纵说： 我蒙受桓公厚恩，应当以死报答。
English: He said, "I have received great favors from King Kan, and I should repay them with my death."

古文：吾之不可负桓侯，犹桓侯之不负国也。 
现代文：我不能辜负桓公，犹如桓公不辜负国家。 
English: I cannot live up to Prince Kan, just as Prince Kan cannot live up to the country.

古文：遂力战而死。
现代文：于是力战而死。
English: So he fought hard until he was killed.

古文：晃进军攻彝，六月，城陷，执彝，杀之。
现代文：韩晃进军攻打桓彝，六月，城被攻破，桓彝被擒获，遇害。
English: Han Xing marched into the city to attack Huanqiu. In June, the city was defeated and Huanqiu was captured and killed.

古文：诸军初至石头，即欲决战，陶侃曰： 贼众方盛，难与争锋，当以岁月，智计破之。 
现代文：各路军队刚到石头，就想和苏峻决战。陶侃说： 叛贼气势正盛，难以与之争锋。应当待以时日，用智谋战败他。 
English: As soon as the various armies arrived at Stone, they wanted to fight a decisive battle with Su Jun. Tao Kan said: The traitor is in full swing, it is difficult to compete with him. It is necessary to wait for a while and use wisdom to defeat him.

古文：既而屡战无功，监军部将李根请筑白石垒，侃从之。夜筑垒，至晓而成。
现代文：此后，多次交战无所建树，监军部将李根请求修筑白石垒，获陶侃同意后，连夜筑垒，至天明即成。
English: After that, there were many battles, but nothing was built. The superintendent of the military department, Li Gen, requested the construction of a white stone wall. After obtaining the consent of Tao Kan, the wall was built overnight, and it was completed by dawn.

古文：闻峻军严声，诸将咸惧其来攻。孔坦曰： 不然。
现代文：传来苏峻军队击鼓整队的声音，众将都惧怕他们前来攻击。孔坦说： 不会。
English: The sound of a whole regiment of Su Jun's army drumming was heard, and all the generals were afraid that they would come to attack.

古文：若峻攻垒，必须东北风急，令我水军不得往救；今天清静，贼必不来。
现代文：如果苏峻进攻白石垒，必须等待东北风大，使我方水军无法来救。今天天晴无风，贼寇必定不来。
English: If Su Jun attacks Shiroishi Bastion, we must wait for the northeast wind to blow, so that our navy can not come to the rescue. Today it is fine and there is no wind, the thief will not come.

古文：所以严者，必遣军出江乘，掠京口以东矣。 
现代文：他们之所以整队，一定是派军队由江乘出击，攻掠京口以东地区。 
English: They must have sent troops to attack from the river to attack and plunder the area east of Kyoguchi.

古文：已而果然。
现代文：结果果真如此。
English: Afterward, it really was like that.

古文：侃使庾亮以二千人守白石，峻帅步骑万馀四面攻之，不克。
现代文：陶侃派庾亮率二千人据守白石，苏峻率步兵、骑兵一万多人四面围攻，未能攻克。
English: Tao Kan sent two thousand soldiers to defend Baishi, Su Jun led more than ten thousand infantry and cavalry to besiege on all sides, but failed to conquer.

古文：王舒、虞潭等数与峻兵战，不利。孔坦曰： 本不须召郗公，遂使东门无限。
现代文：王舒、虞潭等多次与苏峻军队接战失利，孔坦说： 本来不必要召来郗鉴，结果使东门失去防卫。
English: Wang Shu, Yu Tan and others repeatedly fought against Su Jun's army and lost. Kong Tan said: Originally, it was unnecessary to call in Yu Yan, and as a result, the East Gate lost its defense.

古文：今宜遣还，虽晚，犹胜不也。 
现代文：现在应当派遣他回军，虽然晚点，还是胜过不去。 
English: It was time to send him back to the army, but it was better late than never.

古文：侃乃令鉴与后将军郭默还据京口，立大业、曲阿、庱亭三垒以分峻之兵势，使郭默守大业。
现代文：陶侃便令郗鉴和后将军郭默回军占据京口，建立大业、曲阿、亭三座壁垒，使苏峻兵力分散。让敦默据守大业。
English: Tao Kan then ordered the general Guo Mo Hui and the general Guo Jian to occupy the capital, build three barriers, namely, Daye, Qua, and Ting, to disperse Su Jun's forces, and let Dun Mo defend Daye.

古文：壬辰，魏该卒。
现代文：壬辰，魏该去世。
English: Imjin, Wei passed away.

古文：祖约遣祖涣、桓抚袭湓口。陶侃闻之，将自击之。
现代文：祖约派祖涣、桓抚偷袭湓口，陶侃听说后，准备亲自领军回击。
English: Zuyo sent Zuyu and Kanfu to sneak attack Hukou. After hearing this, Tao Kan prepared to personally lead the army to fight back.

古文：毛宝曰： 义军恃公，公不可动，宝请讨之。 
现代文：毛宝说： 义军恃仗您领导，您不能出动，我请求去征讨。 
English: Mao Bao said, "The rebel army is led by you. You can't go out to fight. I request you to go out to fight.

古文：侃从之。
现代文：陶侃同意了。
English: Tao followed his advice.

古文：涣、抚过皖，因攻谯国内史桓宣。
现代文：祖涣、桓抚经过皖，顺势攻击谯国内史桓宣。
English: Zu Xi and Kuan Fu passed by, and then attacked the Domestic Historian Kuan Xuan.

古文：宝往救之，为涣、抚所败。
现代文：毛宝前往救援，被祖涣、桓抚打败。
English: Mao Bao went to the rescue, but was defeated by Zu Xi and Huan Fuzong.

古文：箭贯宝髀，彻鞍，宝使人蹋鞍拔箭，血流满靴。
现代文：敌箭射穿毛宝髀骨，插在马鞍上，毛宝让人用脚踏住马鞍拔箭，血流满靴。
English: The enemy's arrow pierced Mao Bao's shinbone and stuck it in the saddle. Mao Bao asked someone to step on the saddle with his foot to pull out the arrow. His shoes were full of blood.

古文：还击涣、抚，破走之，宣乃得出，归于温峤。
现代文：毛宝回头攻击祖涣、桓抚，把他们打败逃跑，桓宣这才得以脱困，归依温峤。
English: Mao Bao turned back and attacked Zu Xi and Kuan Fu, defeating them and fleeing. It was only then that Kuan Xuan was able to get out of the predicament and return to Wenzhou.

古文：宝进攻祖约军于东关，拔合肥戍，会峤召之，复归石头。
现代文：毛宝攻击在东关的祖约军队，攻取合肥戍。适逢温峤召请他，又回归石头。
English: Mao Bao attacked Zuyo's army in Dongguan and captured Hefei Ying. When Wen Xi called him, he returned to the stone.

古文：祖约诸将阴与后赵通谋，许为内应。
现代文：祖约手下诸位将领私下与后赵勾结，许诺充当内应。
English: The generals under Zuyo's command secretly colluded with Hou Zhao and promised to serve as his inner circle.

古文：后赵将石聪，石堪引兵济淮，攻寿春。
现代文：后赵将领石聪、石堪领兵渡过淮水，进攻寿春。
English: Afterward, Zhao sent generals Shicong and Shikan to lead the soldiers across Huai Shui and attack Shuchun.

古文：秋，七月，约众溃，奔历阳，聪等虏寿春二万馀户而归。
现代文：秋季，七月，祖约的士众溃逃，投奔历阳。石聪等掳掠寿春民众二万多户返回。
English: In the autumn, in July, the priests of Zuyo fled and went to Liyang. Shi Cong and more than twenty thousand families of the abducted Shouchun people returned.

古文：后赵中山公虎帅众四万自轵关西入，击赵河东。应之者五十馀县，遂进攻蒲阪。
现代文：后赵中山公石虎率士众四万人从轵关西进，攻击前赵的河东，有五十多个县应从，石虎于是进攻蒲阪。
English: Later, Zhao Zhongshan's general Shihu led 40,000 soldiers from Shiguan westward, and attacked Zhao's east of the river. More than 50 counties should follow, so Shihu attacked Pusan.

古文：赵主曜遣河间王述发氐、羌之众屯秦州以备张骏、杨难敌，自将中外精锐水陆诸军以救蒲阪，自卫关北济；虎惧，引退。
现代文：前赵主刘曜派河间王刘述调遣氐族、羌族士众屯驻在秦州，防备张骏和杨难敌，自己率领中外精锐的水、陆各军救援蒲阪，从卫关北渡黄河。
English: Former Zhao Lord Liu You sent King Liu Xiu of the River Kingdom to dispatch the Yi people and the Yi people to stay in Qinzhou to guard against Zhangye and Yang difficult enemies, and he led the elite Chinese and foreign water and land forces to rescue Busan and cross the Yellow River from the north of Weiguan.

古文：曜追之，八月，及于高候，与虎战，大破之，斩石瞻；枕尸二百馀里，收其资仗亿计，虎奔朝歌。
现代文：石虎畏惧，率军退走，刘曜追击。八月，在高候追上石虎，与石虎交战，石虎大败，石瞻被杀，尸体枕籍达二百多里，刘曜缴获的军资上亿。石虎逃奔朝歌。
English: In August, he caught up with the stone tiger in Gaohu, fought with the stone tiger, the stone tiger was defeated, the stone tiger was killed, the body pillow was more than two hundred li, and the military assets seized by Liu You were hundreds of millions. The stone tiger fled to the morning song.

古文：曜济自大阳，攻石生于金墉，决千金堨以灌之。分遣诸将攻汲郡、河内，后赵荥阳太守尹矩、野王太守张进等皆降之。
现代文：刘曜从大阳渡过黄河，攻击驻守金墉的石生，开决千金的蓄水淹灌他们，又分别派遣诸将进攻汲郡、河内，后赵的荥阳太守尹矩、野王太守张进等都归降刘曜。
English: Liu You crossed the Yellow River from Dayang and attacked Shisheng stationed in Jinyuan, flooding them with thousands of dollars worth of water. He also separately dispatched generals to attack Cu County and Hanoi, after which Zhao's Fenyang Taishu Yin Rui and Wild King Taishu Zhang Jin all surrendered to Liu You.

古文：襄国大震。
现代文：襄国大为震惊。
English: Xiang Guo was shocked.

古文：张骏治兵，欲乘虚袭长安。
现代文：张骏整备军队，想乘虚偷袭长安。
English: Zhang Ye readied his army and wanted to take advantage of the situation to secretly attack Chang'an.

古文：理曹郎中索询谏曰： 刘曜虽东征，其子胤守长安，未易轻也。
现代文：理曹郎中索询劝谏说： 刘曜虽然东征，他儿子刘胤防守长安，不能轻视。
English: Li Cao Lang said: Although Liu You went to the East, his son Liu Yin defended Chang'an, which should not be taken lightly.

古文：借使小有所获，彼若释东方之图，还与我校；祸难之期，未可量也 骏乃止。
现代文：即使小有所获，但如果刘曜放弃对东方的图谋，回军与我方较量，祸难临头的时候就难以预测了。 
English: Even if there are some small gains, if Liu You abandons his plans for the East and returns to fight against us, it will be difficult to predict when disaster will strike.

古文：苏峻腹心路永、匡术、贾宁闻祖约败，恐事不济，劝峻尽诛司徒导等诸大臣，更树腹心；峻雅敬导，不许。
现代文：张骏这才罢休。苏峻的心腹路永、匡术、贾宁听说祖约败绩，惟恐事情不能成功，劝苏峻尽数杀死司徒王导等各位大臣，另外安置自己的心腹。
English: Zhang Xuan finally gave up. When Su Jun's inner circle Yong, Kuangshu, and Janning heard of Zuyo's defeat, fearing that the matter would not succeed, they advised Su Jun to kill all the ministers such as Szu Wangdu as much as possible, and to install their own henchmen.

古文：永等更贰于峻，导使参军袁耽潜诱永归顺。
现代文：但苏峻素来敬重王导，不同意杀害他，路永等人便对苏峻怀有二心。王导让参军袁耽私下引诱路永，让他归顺朝廷。
English: However, Su Jun had always respected Wang Du and did not agree to kill him, so Lu Yong and others harbored doubts about Su Jun. Wang Du had Yuan Tan, who had joined the army, secretly seduce Lu Yong and make him submit to the imperial court.

古文：九月，戊申，导携二子与永皆奔白石。
现代文：九月，戊申，王导携同两个儿子和路永一同逃奔白石垒。
English: In September, Wang Du, along with his two sons and Lu Yong, escaped from the White Stone Bastion.

古文：耽，涣之曾孙也。
现代文：袁耽即袁涣的曾孙。
English: Yuan Tan is the great-grandson of Yuan Shao.

古文：陶侃、温峤等与苏峻久相持不决，峻分遣诸将东西攻掠，所向多捷，人情忄匈惧。
现代文：陶侃、温峤等人与苏峻长久相持不下，苏峻分别派遣多员将领向东、向西攻伐劫掠，多所获胜，一时人心恐惧不宁。
English: Tao Kan, Wen Qi and others could not stand against Su Jun for a long time. Su Jun sent many generals to the east and west respectively to attack and plunder, and many won. For a while, the people were afraid and restless.

古文：朝士之奔西军者皆曰： 峻狡黠有胆决，其徒骁勇，所向无敌。
现代文：朝廷士人逃到西军的都说： 苏峻狡黠而有胆识，士卒骁勇，所向无敌。
English: The imperial courtiers who fled to the Western Army all said: Su Jun is cunning and courageous, his soldiers are brave, and they are invincible.

古文：若天讨有罪，则峻终灭亡；止以人事言之，未易除也。 
现代文：倘若上天能讨伐有罪之人，那么他终将灭亡。如果只从人事方面来说，则不易翦除。 
English: If God can strike down a guilty man, he will eventually perish, but if it is only a personal matter, it is not easy to get rid of him.

古文：温峤怒曰： 诸君怯懦，乃更誉贼！ 
现代文：温峤发怒说： 这是你们自己怯懦，却去称颂叛贼！ 
English: Wen Xuan said angrily, "It is your own cowardice to praise a traitor!"

古文：及累战不胜，峤亦惮之。
现代文：等到多次交战不胜，温峤也心有忌惮。
English: After many battles without victory, Wen Xuan was also wary.

古文：峤军食尽，贷于陶侃。
现代文：温峤的军队粮尽，向陶侃借粮。
English: When his army ran out of food, he borrowed grain from Tao Kan.

古文：侃怒曰： 使君前云不忧无良将及兵食，惟欲得老仆为主耳。
现代文：陶侃发怒说： 你过去说不愁没有良将和军粮，只是想让我出任盟主罢了。
English: Tao Kan said angrily, "You said in the past that you didn't mind not having good generals and military rations, you just wanted me to serve as commander-in-chief.

古文：今数战皆北，良将安在！
现代文：如今数战皆败，良将在哪里！
English: Now that we have lost several battles, where is the future!

古文：荆州接胡、蜀二虏，当备不虞；若复无食，仆便欲西归，更思良算。徐来殄贼，不为晚也。 
现代文：荆州与胡夷、蜀汉二敌接壤，应当对突发之事有所防备，如果再无军粮，我就想西归，重新考虑更好的办法，慢慢再来除灭叛贼，也不算晚。 
English: Since Jingzhou borders Hui and Shuhan, the two enemies, it should be prepared for emergencies. If there is no more military food, I would like to return to the west, reconsider a better way, and slowly come back to eliminate the traitors. It is not too late.

古文：峤曰： 凡师克在和，古之善教也。
现代文：温峤说： 凡是军队取胜，贵在协同，这是古人的成功经验。
English: Wen Jiabao said, "Whenever an army wins, you should cooperate with it. This is the successful experience of the ancients.

古文：光武之济昆阳，曹公之拔官渡，以寡敌众，杖义故也。
现代文：汉光武帝横渡昆阳，曹操官渡取胜，以寡敌众，是因为凭仗道义的力量。
English: Han Guangwu Emperor crossed Kunyang, Cao Cao won the victory, with a large number of enemies, because of the strength of morality.

古文：峻、约小竖，凶逆滔天，何忧不灭！
现代文：苏峻、祖约这种小子，凶逆的罪行滔天，何愁不灭！
English: Such boys as Su Jun and Zu Yotang have committed heinous crimes, what a pity!

古文：峻骤胜而骄，自谓无前，今挑之战，可一鼓而擒也。奈何舍垂立之功，设进退之计乎！
现代文：苏峻因屡次取胜而骄傲，自认为所向无敌，现今向他挑战，便可一鼓作气将他擒获，怎么能放弃马上便可获得的成功，作退却的打算呢！
English: Su Jun was proud of his repeated victories. He thought he was invincible. If he challenged him now, he could capture him with a single blow. How could he give up the immediate success and plan to retreat?

古文：且天子幽逼，社稷危殆，乃四海臣子肝脑涂地之日。
现代文：况且天子遭到幽禁、逼迫，国家危殆，这正是天下的臣子们肝脑涂地以图报效的时候。
English: Moreover, the emperor was under confinement and persecution, and the country was in danger. This was precisely the time when the courtiers of the world were eager to repay the favor.

古文：峤等与公并受国恩，事若克济，则臣主同祚；如其不捷，当灰身以谢先帝耳。
现代文：我们和您都蒙受国家的恩惠，事情如果能成功，便可君臣同享国家的福运；如不能获胜，则应当粉身碎骨以报答先帝。
English: Both we and you have been blessed by the state. If the matter succeeds, then the monarch and the ministers can share the good fortune of the country; if it does not succeed, then they should repay the former emperor by shattering their bones.

古文：今之事势，义无旋踵，譬如骑虎，安可中下哉！
现代文：当今之事，已经义无反顾，犹如骑虎，怎能中途跳下呢！
English: In today's world, there is no turning back. It's like riding a tiger. How can you jump off in the middle?

古文：公若违众独返，人心必沮；沮众败事，义旗将回指于公矣。 
现代文：您如果违背众人心愿独自返回，人心必定沮丧，人心沮丧必败，那时义军的大旗将回过头来指向您了。 
English: If you go back alone against the wishes of the people, the people will be dismayed, the people will be dismayed and defeated, and then the banner of the rebels will turn back to you.

古文：毛宝言于峤曰： 下官能留陶公。 乃往说侃曰： 公本应镇芜湖，为南北势援，前既已下，势不可还。
现代文：毛宝对温峤说： 我能让陶公留下 ，于是去劝陶侃说： 您本应镇守芜湖，作为南北军队的后援，先前既然已经来此，按情势就不能回头。
English: Mao Bao said to Wen Qi: I can let Tao Gong stay, so I went to persuade Tao Kan and said: You should have guarded Wuhu, as a backup for the North and South armies. Since you have come here before, according to the situation, you cannot turn back.

古文：且军政有进无退，非直整齐三军，示众必死而已，亦谓退无所据，终至灭亡。
现代文：何况军事规则有进无退，不只是说整肃三军，向士众显示必死的信念，也是说后退无所仰仗，终将至于灭亡。
English: What's more, there is no retreat without advance in military rules. It's not just a matter of purging the three armies and showing the soldiers the conviction that they must die. It's also a matter of retreating with nothing to fall back on, which will eventually lead to their demise.

古文：往者杜弢非不强盛，公竟灭之，何至于峻，独不可破邪！
现代文：过去杜并非不强盛，您最终将他翦灭，怎么到了苏峻头上，偏偏不能战胜他呢！
English: In the past, Du was not without strength, you finally annihilated him, how did you get to Su Jun's head, but you could not defeat him!

古文：贼亦畏死，非皆勇健，公可试与宝兵，使上岸断贼资粮。若宝不立效，然后公去，人心不恨矣。 
现代文：叛贼也是怕死的，并非个个勇健，您可以试着交给我一些士兵，让我上岸去断绝叛贼的军资口粮，如果我不能建立战功，然后您再离开，众人心中便不会遗憾了。 
English: The rebels are also afraid of death, not all of them are brave. You can try to give me some soldiers, let me go ashore to cut off the rebels' military rations. If I can't build a war record, and then you leave, there will be no regret in the hearts of the people.

古文：侃然之，加宝督护而遣之。
现代文：陶侃答应了他，授予毛宝督护，派他前去。
English: Tao Kan agreed to his request, awarded Mao Bao the title of "supervisor and protector" and sent him on his way.

古文：竟陵太守李阳说侃曰： 今大事若不济，公虽有粟，安得而食诸！ 
现代文：竟陵太守李阳劝说陶侃道： 现在如果大事不成功，您虽有粮米，怎能吃得上呢！ 
English: After all, Li Yang, the governor of the Mausoleum, persuaded Tao Kan to say: Now, if the great event does not succeed, even though you have grain and rice, how can you eat it!

古文：侃乃分米五万石以饷峤军。
现代文：陶侃便发出五万石粮米赠送给温峤军队。
English: Tao Kan then issued a gift of fifty thousand koku of grain and rice to the Onmyo army.

古文：毛宝烧峻句容、湖孰积聚，峻军乏食，侃遂留不去。
现代文：毛宝烧毁苏峻在句容、湖孰的军备积蓄，苏峻军队缺粮，陶侃便留下未离开。
English: Mao Bao burned Su Jun's armament savings in Jujong and Hubei, Su Jun's army was short of grain, and Tao Kan left without leaving.

古文：张健、韩晃等急攻大业；垒中乏水，人饮粪汁。
现代文：张健、韩晃等猛攻大业，壁垒中缺水，众人饮用粪水。
English: Zhang Jian, Han Ao and others stormed the Great Wall. There was a shortage of water in the barriers, and everyone was drinking excrement.

古文：郭默惧，潜突围出外，留兵守之。
现代文：郭默恐惧，悄悄突围而出，留下士兵据守。
English: Guo Mo was afraid and quietly broke out of the encirclement, leaving the soldiers to defend themselves.

古文：郗鉴在京口，军士闻之皆失色。
现代文：郗鉴在京口，军士们听说后都吃惊失色。
English: The soldiers were shocked when they heard that the examination was being held in the capital.

古文：参军曹纳曰： 大业，京口之扞蔽也，一旦不守，则贼兵径至，不可当也。
现代文：参军曹纳说： 大业是京口的屏障，一旦失守，那么贼兵便可直接到此，无法阻挡。
English: Sgt. Cao Na said: Daye is the barrier of Jingkou. Once it is lost, the bandits can come here directly and cannot be stopped.

古文：请还广陵，以俟后举。 
现代文：请求退回广陵，以待后举。 
English: The request was sent back to Guangling for further consideration.

古文：鉴大会僚佐，责纳曰： 吾受先帝顾托之重，正复捐躯九泉，不足报塞。
现代文：郗鉴大会僚属佐吏，斥责曹纳说： 我禀受先帝顾命托孤的重任，正思即使捐躯于九泉之下，也不足为报。
English: He rebuked Cao Na, who was an aide-de-camp of the general secretary, saying, "I was entrusted with the important task of guarding the emperor's life, and I was thinking that even if I died under the nine springs, it would not be enough.

古文：今强寇在近，众心危逼，君腹心之佐，而生长异端，当何以帅先义众，镇壹三军邪！ 
现代文：如今强寇在旁，众心危惧紧张，你是我的心腹佐吏，却滋生异端，我还怎么统帅，引导义士，镇摄号令三军呢！ 
English: Now, a powerful robber is at my side, everyone's hearts are worried and tense. You are my trusted advisor, yet you breed heresy. How can I be the commander, guide the righteous, and order the three armies with the town's signal?

古文：将斩之，久乃得释。
现代文：郗鉴准备将曹纳斩首，许久才释免。
English: Gong Jian was preparing to behead Cao Na, and it was a long time before he was released.

古文：陶侃将救大业，长史殷羡曰： 吾兵不习步战，救大业而不捷，则大事去矣。
现代文：陶侃准备救援大业，长史殷羡说： 我方士兵不熟悉陆战，如果救援大业不能取胜，那么大事便完了。
English: As Tao Kan prepared for the great rescue mission, Changshi Yin envied him and said: Our soldiers are not familiar with land warfare. If the great rescue mission cannot win, then the great event is over.

古文：不如急攻石头，则大业自解。 
现代文：不如猛攻石头，那么大业之围自然会解除。 
English: It is better to storm the stone, then the siege of the cause will naturally be lifted.

古文：侃从之。
现代文：陶听从了他的建议。
English: Tao followed his advice.

古文：羡，融之兄也。
现代文：殷羡即殷融的兄长。
English: Envy is the brother of conciliation.

古文：庚午，侃督水军向石头。
现代文：庚午，陶侃督领水军开赴石头。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Tao Qiandu led the navy to the stone.

古文：庾亮、温峤、赵胤帅步兵万人从白石南上，欲挑战。
现代文：庾亮、温峤、赵胤率领步兵万人从白石垒向南，准备挑战。
English: Zou Liang, Wen Xuan and Zhao Yan led 10,000 infantrymen from Baishi Fort to the south to prepare for the challenge.

古文：峻将八千人逆战，遣其子硕及其将匡孝分兵先薄赵胤军，败之。
现代文：苏峻统帅八千人迎战，派儿子苏硕和部将匡孝分军先行逼近赵胤军队，将其打败。
English: General Su Jun, with eight thousand men, sent his son Su Shuo and his subordinate, General Kuang Xiao, to defeat Zhao Yin's army.

古文：峻方劳其将士，乘醉望见胤走，曰： 孝能破贼，我更不如邪！ 
现代文：苏峻当时正在犒劳将士，乘着醉意远远望见赵胤败逃，说： 匡孝能败敌，我反倒不如他吗！ 
English: At that time, Su Jun was rewarding the hard work of the generals, and with his intoxication, he saw Zhao Yan's defeat and escape from far away, saying: If Kuang Xiao can defeat the enemy, am I not as good as him!

古文：因舍其众，与数骑北下突陈，不得入，将回趋白木陂；马踬，侃部将彭世、李千等投之以矛，峻坠马；斩首，脔割之，焚其骨，三军皆称万岁。
现代文：于是撇下士众，和数名骑兵向北突击敌阵，但无法突破，准备回身奔向白木陂时，坐骑失足颠踬，陶侃的部将彭世、李千等用矛投射，苏峻坠落马下，被斩首，剐割肢体，骨骸被焚烧，三军将士都高呼万岁。
English: So he left his soldiers and several cavalrymen to storm the enemy line to the north, but they were unable to break through. When he was about to turn around and run to the white wooden raft, his horse lost its footing and jolted. Tao Kan's commanders, Peng Shih and Li Qian, projected with spears. Su Jun fell under his horse, was beheaded, his limbs were castrated, and his bones were burned. All three soldiers shouted "Long live!"

古文：馀众大溃。
现代文：苏峻余部大败。
English: Su Jun's remaining division suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：峻司马任让等共立峻弟逸为主，闭城自守。
现代文：苏峻的司马任让等人共同推立苏峻兄弟苏逸为主公，关闭城门自守。
English: Su Jun's Sima Ren Zhan and others jointly promoted Su Jun's brother Su Yat as the lord, closed the city gate and defended themselves.

古文：温峤乃立行台，布告远近，凡故吏二千石以下，皆令赴台，于是至者云集。
现代文：温峤便没立行台，宣告晓谕远近，凡是朝廷原任官吏爵禄在二千石以下的，都传令他们赶赴行台报到，于是到达的人有如云集。
English: Wen Xuan did not set up a platform for the procession, but announced that the oracle was far and near, and that all the former officials of the imperial court whose income was less than two thousand koku were ordered to rush to the platform to report their arrival. As a result, the people who arrived were like a swarm.

古文：韩晃闻峻死，引兵趣石头。
现代文：韩晃听说苏峻已死，领兵奔赴石头。
English: When Han Akira heard that Su Jun had died, he led his soldiers to the stone.

古文：管商、弘徽攻庱亭垒，督护李闳、轻车长史滕含击破之。
现代文：管商、弘徽攻打亭壁垒，被督护李闳、轻车长史滕含击败。
English: Guan Shang and Hong Hui attacked the pavilion barriers, and were defeated by the superintendent Li Yu and the head of the light vehicle, Sten Han.

古文：含，修之孙也。
现代文：滕含即滕的孙子。
English: Tenghan is Teng's grandson.

古文：商走诣庾亮降，馀众皆归张健。
现代文：管商逃奔到庾亮处投降，其余士众都归从张健。
English: The steward ran away to a higher place to surrender, and the rest of the soldiers all followed Zhang Jian.

古文：冬，十一月，后赵王勒欲自将救洛阳，僚佐程遐等固谏曰： 刘曜悬军千里，势不支久。
现代文：冬季，十一月，后赵王石勒想自己率兵救援洛阳，僚佐程遐等极力劝谏说： 刘曜孤军深入千里之外，势必不能持久。
English: In the winter, in November, after Zhao Wangshile wanted to lead his own troops to rescue Luoyang, his colleague Jia Chengyu and others tried their best to persuade him, saying: Liu You's lone army is thousands of miles away and is bound to be short-lived.

古文：大王不宜亲动，动无万全。 
现代文：大王不应当亲自出动，一旦出动难保万全。 
English: The great king should not personally send out, once sent out, it is difficult to guarantee everything.

古文：勒大怒，按剑叱遐等出。
现代文：石勒大怒，手按佩剑呵叱程遐等人出去。
English: Shi Le flew into a rage, pressed his sword in his hand and scolded Cheng Yao and the others to go out.

古文：乃赦徐光，召而谓之曰： 刘曜乘一战之胜，围守洛阳，庸人之情皆谓其锋不可当。
现代文：于是赦免徐光的罪过，把他召来对他说： 刘曜凭借一仗的胜利，围攻并占据洛阳，庸人的想法都说他的锋芒不可抵挡。
English: So he pardoned Xu Guang's sin and summoned him to say to him: Liu You, by virtue of the victory of a battle, besieged and occupied Luoyang. The mediocre thought that his edge was irresistible.

古文：曜带甲十万，攻一城而百日不克，帅老卒怠，以我初锐击之，可一战而擒也。
现代文：刘曜带领十万甲士，攻打一座城池却一百天不能取胜，军队疲惫、士卒懈怠，用我方精锐的生力军攻击，一战便可擒获他。
English: Liu You led a hundred thousand soldiers, attacked a city but could not win for a hundred days. The army was tired and the soldiers were slack. With the attack of our elite troops, he could be captured in one battle.

古文：若洛阳不守，曜必送死冀州，自河已北，席卷而来，吾事去矣。
现代文：如果洛阳失守，刘曜必定会进攻冀州，由黄河北边席卷而来，我们就完了。
English: If Luoyang is lost, Liu You will certainly attack Jizhou, sweeping in from the north side of the Yellow River, and we are finished.

古文：程遐等不欲吾行，卿以为何如？ 
现代文：程遐等人不想让我去，您以为怎么样？ 
English: Cheng Yu and others don't want me to go. What do you think?

古文：对曰： 刘曜乘高候之势，不能进临襄国，更守金墉，此其无能为可知也。
现代文：徐光回答说： 刘曜乘着在高候战胜石虎的势头，不能进军逼迫襄国，反而据守金墉，由此可知他不会有什么作为。
English: Xu Guang replied, "Liu You, riding on the momentum of defeating Shih Hu in Gaohu, can't march into and force Xiang Guo, but instead defends Jinyu, from which we can see that he won't do anything.

古文：以大王威略临之，彼必望旗奔败。
现代文：凭着大王您的威风胆略进逼他，他必定是望风败逃。
English: If you use your great king's authority to push him, he will surely try to escape.

古文：平定天下，在今一举，不可失也。 
现代文：平定天下，就在今天这一战，时机不能错过。 
English: To pacify the world, just today's battle, the opportunity can not be missed.

古文：勒笑曰： 光言是也。 
现代文：石勒笑着说： 你说的对。 
English: Shi Ler said with a smile: You are right.

古文：乃使内外戒严，有谏者斩。
现代文：于是让宫室内外戒严，有敢于劝谏的斩首。
English: As a result, martial law was imposed inside and outside the palace, and those who dared to dissuade him were beheaded.

古文：命石堪、石聪及豫州刺史桃豹等各统见众会荥阳；中山公虎进据石门，勒自统步骑四万趣金墉，济自大堨。
现代文：命令石堪、石聪和豫州刺史桃豹等各自统领现有士众会聚荥阳，又令中山公石虎进军占据石门，石勒自己率步、骑兵四万人赶赴金墉，从大渡过黄河。
English: He ordered Shi Kan, Shi Cong and Yu Zhou Zhi Shi Taobao to each lead the existing community of scholars to gather in Fenyang. He also ordered Zhongshan Gong Shihu to march to occupy Shimen. Shi Le himself led 40,000 cavalrymen to Jinlu and crossed the Yellow River from Dadu.

古文：勒谓徐光曰： 曜盛兵成皋关，上策也；阻洛水，其次也；坐守洛阳，此成擒耳。 
现代文：石勒对徐光说： 刘曜如果屯军于成皋关，这是上策，其次当在洛水设阻。坐守洛阳，等于束手就擒。 
English: Shi Ler said to Xu Guang, "If Liu Yang's army arrives at Chenghuaguan, this is the best strategy. Secondly, he should set up a barrier at Luoshui. If he stays in Luoyang, it is tantamount to tying his hands.

古文：十二月，乙亥，后赵诸军集于成皋，步卒六万，骑二万七千。
现代文：十二月，乙亥，后赵各军会集成皋，有步兵六万人，骑兵二万七千人。
English: In December, after the Yihai and Zhao Dynasties, the armies were consolidated into a single army of 60,000 infantrymen and 27,000 cavalrymen.

古文：勒见赵无守兵，大喜，举手指天，复加额，曰： 天也！ 
现代文：石勒见前赵无兵把守，大为喜悦，用手指天随后又拍着额头说： 这是天意！ 
English: When Shi Ler saw that Zhao had no soldiers to guard him, he was overjoyed. He pointed to the heavens with his finger, then patted his forehead and said, "This is God's will!"

古文：卷甲衔枚，诡道兼行，出于巩、訾之间。
现代文：便命令士卒脱下重甲，马匹衔枚噤声，从隐秘的小道日夜兼行，由巩县和訾县之间穿出。
English: He then ordered the soldiers to take off their heavy armor and the horses to gallop from a secret path, both day and night, between Gongxian and Jixian.

古文：赵主曜专与嬖臣饮博，不抚士卒；左右或谏，曜怒，以为妖言，斩之。
现代文：前赵主刘曜只顾与宠爱的嬖臣饮酒博戏，不体恤士兵。身边人有的加以劝谏，刘曜发怒，认为是妖言，将谏者斩首。
English: Former Zhao Lord Liu You only cared about drinking and gambling with his favorite vassals, and did not have any sympathy for soldiers. Some people around him advised him to drink, but Liu You got angry, thought it was a curse, and beheaded the drinker.

古文：闻勒已济河，始议增荥阳戍，杜黄马关。
现代文：直到听说石勒已经渡河，这才商议增强荥阳戍守的力量，关闭黄马关。
English: It was not until they heard that Shile had crossed the river that they discussed strengthening the power of the Fenyang garrison and closing Huangma Pass.

古文：俄而洛水候者与后赵前锋交战，擒羯送之。曜问： 大胡自来邪？
现代文：不久在洛水巡逻的士兵与后赵的前锋交战，捉住羯族俘虏送来，刘曜问他： 石勒自己来了吗？
English: Soon after, soldiers on patrol in Luoshui fought with Hou Zhao's vanguard, captured and sent the Yao prisoners, and Liu You asked him: Did Shi Le himself come?

古文：其众几何？ 
现代文：有多少士众？ 
English: How many monks are there?

古文：羯曰： 王自来，军势甚盛。 
现代文：回答说： 大王亲自前来，军势极甚。 
English: And he answered, The great king himself is coming with a great army.

古文：曜色变，使摄金墉之围，陈于洛西，众十馀万，南北十馀里。
现代文：刘曜色变，让军队解除对金墉的围守，在洛水西面布阵，有士众十多万，南北延绵十多里。
English: Liu Yoxing changed his mind and allowed the army to lift the siege of Jinyu, and set up a garrison on the west side of Luoshui, with more than one hundred thousand soldiers, stretching more than ten miles from north to south.

古文：勒望见，益喜，谓左右曰： 可以贺我矣！ 
现代文：石勒远远望见，更加高兴，对侍从左右的人说： 可以祝贺我了。 
English: Shi Le could see far away and was even happier. He said to the attendants on his right and left, "You can congratulate me now."

古文：勒帅步骑四万入洛阳城。
现代文：石勒率领步、骑兵四万人进入洛阳城。
English: Led by Shi Le, 40,000 cavalrymen entered Luoyang City.

古文：己卯，中山公虎引步卒三万自城北而西，攻赵中军，石堪、石聪等各以精骑八千自城西而北，击赵前锋，大战于西阳门。
现代文：己卯，中山公石虎带领步兵三万人从城北向西，进攻前赵中军，石堪、石聪等各带精锐骑兵八千人从城西向北，进攻前赵的前锋，在西阳门展开激烈的战斗。
English: At the same time, Zhongshan Gong Shihu led 30,000 infantrymen from the north of the city to the west to attack the former Zhao Chinese army, and Shikan, Shicong and other elite cavalry of eight thousand each from the west of the city to the north to attack the front of Zhao, and launched a fierce battle at Xiyangmen.

古文：勒躬贯甲胃，出自阊阖门，夹击之。
现代文：石勒身穿甲胄，从阊阖门出城，夹击敌军。
English: Wearing armor, Shi Le went out of the city through the gate and attacked the enemy.

古文：曜少而嗜酒，末年尤甚；将战，饮酒数斗。
现代文：刘曜自少年便爱喝酒，年老后尤为嗜酒，临战前，饮酒数斗。
English: Liu Yow has been fond of drinking since he was a boy. He is particularly fond of drinking in his old age. Before the war, he drank several bottles of wine.

古文：常乘赤马无故停顿，乃乘小马。
现代文：平常乘坐的红马无缘无故地低首蜷足，于是改乘小马。
English: The red horse he usually rides hunches his shoulders for no reason, so he rides a pony instead.

古文：比出，复饮酒斗馀。
现代文：等到出发时，又饮酒一斗多。
English: When it was time to leave, I drank another bottle of wine.

古文：至西阳门，挥陈就平。石堪因而乘之，赵兵大溃。
现代文：到了西阳门，指挥军阵向平坦处移动，石堪乘势攻击，前赵士兵大部溃逃。
English: At the Xiyang Gate, the commanding army moved to a flat place, Shikan took advantage of the situation to attack, and most of the former Zhao soldiers fled.

古文：曜昏醉退走，马陷石渠，坠于冰上，被疮十馀，通中者三，为堪所执。
现代文：刘曜酒醉昏昏，往后退逃，战马在石渠失足，把刘曜摔在冰上，受伤十多处，有三处伤及内腑，被石堪执获。
English: Liu You, drunk and dizzy, fled backwards. The horse lost its footing in the stone canal and threw Liu You onto the ice, injuring him in more than ten places. He suffered internal injuries in three places and was captured by the stone cane.

古文：勒遂大破赵兵，斩首五万馀级。
现代文：石勒于是大败前赵军队，斩首五万多级。
English: Shi Le then defeated the former Zhao army, beheading more than fifty thousand.

古文：下令曰： 所欲擒者一人耳，今已获之。其敕将士抑锋止锐，纵其归命之路。 
现代文：下令说： 我想抓获的只有一个人，此人现已被擒，特敕令将士停止攻击，给他们留下归顺投降的道路。 
English: The order said: I want to capture only one person, this person has now been captured, I specifically ordered the soldiers to stop the attack, leaving them a way to surrender.

古文：曜见勒，曰： 石王，颇忆重门之盟否？ 
现代文：刘曜见到石勒，说： 石王，还能想起我们在重门的结盟吗？ 
English: Liu You saw Shi Le and said: Shi Wang, can you still remember our alliance at the heavy gate?

古文：勒使徐光谓之曰： 今日之事，天使其然，复云何邪！ 
现代文：石勒让徐光对刘曜说： 今天的事情出于天意，还有什么可说的！ 
English: Shi Le asked Xu Guang to say to Liu You: Today's event is due to God's will, what else can I say!

古文：乙酉，勒班师。
现代文：乙酉，石勒班师回京。
English: Acetylene, Shi Le Ban Shi returned to Beijing.

古文：使征东将军石邃将兵卫送曜。
现代文：让征东将军石邃带兵护送刘曜。
English: Let the East Conquering General Shi Xi take soldiers to escort Liu You.

古文：邃，虎之子也。
现代文：石邃即石虎的儿子。
English: Shi Yan is the son of Shi Hu.

古文：曜疮甚，载以马舆，使医李永与同载。
现代文：刘曜伤势严重，坐着马车，让医师李永和他同车。
English: Liu Yow was seriously injured. He sat in a carriage and asked doctor Li Yong to ride with him.

古文：己亥，至襄国，舍曜于永丰小城，给其妓妾，严兵围守。
现代文：己亥，回到襄国，让刘曜居住在永丰小城，供给他妓妾，严兵围守。
English: Ji Hai, returned to Xiangguo, let Liu You live in Yongfeng Town, provided him with prostitutes, and surrounded him with soldiers.

古文：遣刘岳、刘震等从男女盛服以见之，曜曰： 吾谓卿等久为灰土，石王仁厚，乃全宥至今邪！
现代文：又派刘岳、刘震等族内男女人等穿上盛服见刘曜。刘曜说： 我以为你们早就化为灰土了，石王仁厚，竟然一直保全宥护你们到今天！
English: He also sent Liu Yue, Liu Zhen and other male and female members of the tribe to put on ceremonial clothes to see Liu You. Liu You said: I thought you had long been reduced to ashes, Shi Wang Ren Hou, but you have been preserved and protected to this day!

古文：我杀石佗，愧之多矣。今日之祸，自其分耳。 
现代文：我杀死石佗，长期以来心中有愧，今日的灾祸，是对我的报应。 
English: For a long time, I have felt guilty for killing the stone egret. Today's disaster is my retribution.

古文：留宴终日而去。
现代文：留他们宴饮终日，才让他们离开。
English: Let them feast all day before letting them go.

古文：勒使曜与其太子熙书，谕令速降；曜但敕熙与诸大臣 匡维社稷，勿以吾易意也。 勒见而恶之，久之，乃杀曜。
现代文：石勒让刘曜给太子刘熙写信，谕令他急速归降。刘曜却只要求刘熙和各位大臣 匡扶维护国家，不要因我改变心意 ，石勒见信后憎恶刘曜，过了许久，便杀死刘曜。
English: Shi Le asked Liu You to write a letter to Prince Liu Xi, ordering him to quickly surrender. However, Liu You only asked Liu Xi and the ministers to support and defend the country, and not to change their minds because of me. Shi Le hated Liu You after seeing the letter. After a long time, he killed Liu You.

古文：是岁，成汉献王骧卒，其子征东将军寿以丧还成都。
现代文：这年，成汉的汉献王李骧死，他的儿子、征东将军李寿因父丧返回成都。
English: In the same year, Chenghan's Han Xian Wang Li Xi died, and his son, Eastern Expeditionary General Li Shou, returned to Chengdu because of his father's death.

古文：成主雄以李玝为征北将军、梁州刺史，代寿屯晋寿。
现代文：成汉主李雄任李为征北将军、梁州刺史，代替李寿驻屯晋寿。
English: Li Xiong, the ruler of the Han Dynasty, appointed Li to be the general of the Northern Expedition and Liangzhou to be the general of the Northern Expedition, and stationed in Jinzhou in place of Li Shou.

古文：显宗成皇帝上之下咸和四年
现代文：咸和四年
English: The four years of Haman and Wo

古文：春，正月，光禄大夫陆晔及弟尚书左仆射玩说匡术，以苑城附于西军；百官皆赴之，推晔督宫城军事。
现代文：春季，正月，光禄大夫陆晔和兄弟、尚书左仆射陆玩劝说匡术，献出苑城归附西军，百官都赶来，推举陆晔督察攻城军事。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, Guanglu's doctor, Lu Xuan, his brother and Shangshu's left-hand man, Shailu, played the game of persuasion and gave up Yuancheng to the Western army. Hundreds of officials came to nominate Lu Xuan as the military inspector to attack the city.

古文：陶侃命毛宝守南城，邓岳守西城。
现代文：陶侃令毛宝戍守苑城的南城，邓岳戍守西沉。
English: Tao Kan ordered Mao Bao to guard the southern part of Yuancheng, and Deng Yue to guard the western part.

古文：右卫将军齐超、侍中钟雅与建康令管旆等谋奉帝出赴西军；事泄，苏逸使其将平原任让将兵入宫收超、雅。
现代文：右卫将军刘超、侍中钟雅和建康令管等筹划侍奉成帝逃出石头投奔西军，事情泄露后，苏逸让部将平原人任让带兵入宫拘捕刘超、钟雅。
English: Liu Chao, the right guard general, Zhong Ya, the chamberlain, and Jian Kang, the commander-in-chief, and others who had planned to serve Emperor Cheng escaped from the stone and joined the Western army. After the matter was leaked, Su Yizhong allowed the plainsmen to bring soldiers into the palace to arrest Liu Chao and Zhong Ya.

古文：帝抱持悲泣曰： 还我侍中、右卫！ 
现代文：成帝抱着他们悲声哭泣说： 还我侍中和右卫！ 
English: Emperor Cheng held them in his arms, weeping with grief, and said, "Return my second-in-command and right guard!"

古文：让夺而杀之。
现代文：任让夺过他们杀之。
English: Let them kill him.

古文：初，让少无行，太常华恒为本州大中正，黜其品。
现代文：当初，任让年少时没有德行，太常华恒任州中的大中正，贬黜他的品流。
English: At the beginning, Ren Zheng had no virtue when he was young, and he was a junior high school student of the middle school of the middle school of the middle school of the middle school of the middle school.

古文：及让为苏峻将，乘势多所诛杀，见恒辄恭敬，不敢纵暴。
现代文：等到任让任苏峻部将，仗势多所诛杀，但见到华恒就很恭敬，不敢放任暴行。
English: By the time Ren Zhen, Ren Su, and Shun Bu arrived, there had been many battles, but when he saw Hua Heng, he was very respectful and did not dare to allow violence.

古文：及钟、刘之死，苏逸欲并杀恒，让尽心救卫，恒乃得免。
现代文：等钟雅、刘超死时，苏逸想连同华恒一同处死，任让尽心救护，华恒才得以幸免。
English: When Zhongya and Liu Chao died, Su Yizhong wanted to execute them together with Hua Heng, but Hu Heng was spared only because he was saved by Su Yizhong.

古文：冠军将军赵胤遣部将甘苗击祖约于历阳，戊辰，约夜帅左右数百人奔后赵，其将牵腾帅众出降。
现代文：冠军将军赵胤派部将甘苗在历阳攻击祖约，戊辰，祖约乘夜率左右侍从几百人投奔后赵，部将牵腾率众出城投降。
English: The champion general Zhao Yan sent his troops to attack Zuyo in Liyang and Wuchen. Zuyo took advantage of the night to lead hundreds of attendants to rush to Zhao, and the troops led everyone out of the city to surrender.

古文：苏逸、苏硕、韩晃并力攻台城，焚太极东堂及秘阁，毛宝登城，射杀数十人。
现代文：苏逸、苏硕、韩晃合力进攻台城，焚毁了太极东堂和秘阁，毛宝登上城墙，射死几十人。
English: Su Yat, Su Shuo, and Han Huan jointly attacked Taicheng, burned down the Taiji East Hall and the Secret Pavilion, and Mao Bao climbed the city wall and shot dozens of people.

古文：晃谓宝曰： 君名勇果，何不出斗？ 
现代文：韩晃对毛宝说： 你以勇猛果敢闻名，为何不出来斗斗？ 
English: Han Aki said to Mao Bao: You are famous for your bravery and courage, why don't you come out to fight?

古文：宝曰： 君名健将，何不入斗？ 
现代文：毛宝说： 你号称是英勇善战的将领，为何不进来斗斗？ 
English: Mao Bao said, "You claim to be a brave and warlike general, why don't you come and fight?

古文：晃笑而退。
现代文：韩晃含笑退还。
English: Han Akira laughs and hands it back.

古文：赵太子熙闻赵主曜被擒，大惧，与南阳王胤谋西保秦州。
现代文：前赵太子刘熙听说前赵主刘曜被擒，大为恐惧，和南阳王刘胤商议，准备向西保守秦州。
English: When the former Zhao prince Liu Xi heard that the former Zhao lord Liu You had been arrested, he was terrified. He discussed with Liu Yan, the king of Nanyang, and prepared to move west to the conservative state of Qin.

古文：尚书胡勋曰： 今虽丧君，境土尚完，将士不叛，且当并力拒之；力不能拒，走未晚也。 
现代文：尚书胡勋说： 如今虽然丧失君王，但国土仍然完整，将士也未叛离，暂且应当集中力量抵御敌军。力有不支时再逃也不晚。 
English: Shangshu Hu Xun said: Although we have lost the king, the country is still intact, and the soldiers have not defected. For the time being, we should concentrate our strength on resisting the enemy army. It is not too late to escape if we have the strength.

古文：胤怒，以为沮众，斩之，遂帅百官奔上邽，诸征镇亦皆弃所守从之，关中大乱。
现代文：刘胤发怒，认为这是扰乱人心，将他斩首，随后率领文武百官逃奔上。各地方官员也都放弃自己镇守的地方跟从，关中大乱。
English: Liu Yan was furious, thinking that this was disturbing people's hearts, beheaded him, and then led hundreds of officers and men to flee. All local officials also abandoned their towns to follow, and there was a great disturbance in Guanzhong.

古文：将军蒋英、辛恕拥众数十万据长安，遣使降后赵，后赵遣石生帅洛阳之众赴之。
现代文：将军蒋英、辛恕拥有士众数十万人据守长安，派使者向后赵请降，后赵派石生率领在洛阳的士众前往长安。
English: Generals Jiang Ying and Xin Shou, who had hundreds of thousands of soldiers guarding Chang'an, sent an envoy to Zhao to ask him to surrender, after which Zhao sent Shisheng to lead the soldiers in Luoyang to Chang'an.

古文：二月，丙戌，诸军攻石头。
现代文：二月，丙戌，各路军队进攻石头。
English: In February, troops from all directions attacked Shishi.

古文：建成长史滕含击苏逸，大破之。苏硕帅骁勇数百，渡准而战，温峤击斩之。
现代文：建威长史滕含重创苏逸，苏硕率领骁勇士卒数百人渡过秦淮河作战，被温峤击败斩杀。
English: Jian Wei, Chang Sten and Su Yat were seriously injured, Su Shuo led hundreds of warriors across the Qin Huai River to fight, and was defeated and killed by Wen Hui.

古文：韩晃等惧，以其众就张健于曲阿，门隘不得出，更相蹈藉，死者万数。
现代文：韩晃等人恐惧，带着部众前往曲阿依附张健，门道狭窄不便进出，士卒互相踩踏，死者上万。
English: Han Akira and others were afraid, and took their followers to Qu'a to follow Zhang Jian. The entrance was narrow and it was difficult to get in and out. The soldiers trampled on each other, and there were tens of thousands of deaths.

古文：西军获苏逸，斩之。
现代文：西军擒获苏逸，将他斩首。
English: The Western Army captured Su Yat and beheaded him.

古文：滕含部将曹据抱帝奔温峤船，群臣见帝，顿首号泣请罪。
现代文：滕含部将曹据抱着成帝逃到温峤船上，群臣见到皇帝，叩头至地号泣请罪。
English: Tenghan fled with Emperor Cao to the Wenqi ship. When the courtiers saw the emperor, they bowed to the ground and begged for forgiveness.

古文：杀西阳王羕，并其二子播、充、孙崧及彭城王雄。
现代文：随即杀死西阳王司马、其子司马播、司马充、其孙司马崧以及彭城王司马雄。
English: He then killed Xiyang Wang Sima, his sons Sima Bo, Sima Chong, his grandson Sima Yao, and Pengcheng Wang Sima Xiong.

古文：陶侃与任让有旧，为请其死。
现代文：陶侃和任让有旧交，为他求情免死。
English: Tao Kan and Ren Zheng had an old friend, and they pleaded for him to be spared death.

古文：帝曰： 是杀吾侍中、右卫者，不可赦也。 
现代文：成帝说： 此人杀害了我的侍中钟雅和右卫将军刘超，罪不可恕。 
English: Emperor Cheng said: This man killed my equerry Zhong Ya and the right guard general Liu Chao, the crime is unforgivable.

古文：乃杀之。
现代文：于是杀死任让。
English: Then he killed him.

古文：司徒导入石头，令取故节，陶侃笑曰： 苏武节似不如是。 
现代文：司徒王导进入石头，让人取出他的旧有符节，侃笑着说： 苏武的符节好像不如你这个。 
English: Szeto Wang led into the stone, let people take out his old rune, laughed and said: Suwu's rune seems to be inferior to yours.

古文：导有惭色。
现代文：王导面有愧色。
English: Wang Guimen is ashamed.

古文：丁亥，大赦。
现代文：丁亥，大赦天下。
English: On the 14th, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：张健疑弘徽等贰于己，皆杀之，帅舟师自延陵将入吴兴。
现代文：张健怀疑弘徽等人背叛自己，将他们全部杀死，率领水军从延陵准备进入吴兴。
English: Zhang Jian suspected that Honghui and others had betrayed him, killed them all, and led the navy from Yanling to prepare to enter Wuxing.

古文：乙未，扬烈将军王允之与战，大破之，获男女万馀口。
现代文：乙未，扬烈将军王允之与张健交战，重创张健的军队，俘虏男女一万多人。
English: Two years later, the Yangli general Wang Yunzhi fought against Zhang Jian, inflicting heavy losses on Zhang Jian's army and capturing more than ten thousand men and women.

古文：健复与韩晃、马雄等轻军西趋故鄣，郗鉴遣军李闳追之，及于平陵山，皆斩之。
现代文：张健又和韩晃、马雄等人西奔故鄣，郗鉴派参军李闳追击，在平陵山追上他们，张健等人全部被杀。
English: Zhang Jian and Han Ao, Ma Xiong and others rushed to the scene of the accident. Zou Jian sent soldiers to pursue Li Qian and caught up with them in the Pingling Mountains. Zhang Jian and others were all killed.

古文：是时宫阙灰烬，以建平园为宫。
现代文：此时建康的宫阙化为灰烬，用建平园权充宫室。
English: At this time, Jiankang's palace was reduced to ashes, and Jianping Garden was used to fill the palace room.

古文：温峤欲迁都豫章，三吴之豪请都会稽，二论纷纭未决。
现代文：温峤想迁都至豫章，三吴的豪杰们请求迁都会稽，纷纷纭纭未有决断。
English: Wen Xuan wanted to move the capital to Yuzhang, the heroes of Sanwu requested to move the capital, but there was no decision.

古文：司徒导曰： 孙仲谋、刘玄德俱言： 建康，王者之宅。 古之帝王，不必以丰俭移都。
现代文：司徒王导说： 孙权、刘备都说 建康是帝王的宅府 ，古代的帝王，不一定因为物品的丰俭迁都。
English: Szu Wang said: Sun Quan and Liu Bei both said that Jiankang was the emperor's residence, the ancient emperor, not necessarily because of the abundance of goods.

古文：苟务本节用，何忧凋弊！
现代文：只要务本节用，还愁什么暂时的凋弊！
English: As long as we stick to this section, we don't have to worry about any temporary setbacks!

古文：若农事不修，则乐土为墟矣。
现代文：如果不认真从事农作，那么乐土也会变成荒墟。
English: If we do not seriously engage in farming, then the Promised Land will also become a wasteland.

古文：且北寇游魂，伺我之隙，一旦示弱，窜于蛮越，求之望实，惧非良计。
现代文：况且北方的寇贼游魂，在窥测我们的可乘之机，一旦表现出虚弱，奔窜至蛮越之地，无论从声名和实际考虑，都不是好办法。
English: Moreover, the bandits in the north are on the prowl, spying on our opportunities, and once they show weakness, they will rush to the brink, which is not a good way, both from the perspective of reputation and practical considerations.

古文：今特宜镇之以静，群情自安。 
现代文：现在只该保持宁静，人心自然安宁。 
English: The only thing to do now is to remain calm. People's minds will naturally be at peace.

古文：由是不复徙都。
现代文：因此不再迁都。
English: Therefore, the capital will not be moved again.

古文：以褚翜为丹杨尹。时兵火之后，民物凋残，翜收集散亡，京邑遂安。
现代文：朝廷让褚出任丹杨尹，当时正是遭兵火之后，人口物品凋残，褚收扰召集散失的人口，京城这才安定。
English: The imperial court appointed Danyang Yin to be the governor. At that time, it was precisely after the war that the population and goods were left behind, and it was only after the city was disturbed and the dispersed population was gathered that the capital was stabilized.

古文：壬寅，以湘州并荆州。
现代文：壬寅，晋将湘州并入荆州。
English: On the 29th, Xiangzhou was merged into Jingzhou.

古文：三月，壬子，论平苏峻功，以陶侃为侍中、太尉，封长沙郡公，加都督交、广、宁州诸军事；郗鉴为侍中、司空、南昌县公；温峤为骠骑将军、开府仪同三司，加散骑常侍、始安郡公；陆晔进爵江陵公；自馀赐爵侯、伯、子、男者甚众。
现代文：三月，壬子，评议平定苏峻的功绩，任陶侃为侍中、太尉，封长沙郡公，加授都督交州、广州、宁州诸军事；郗鉴为侍中、司空、南昌县公；温峤为骠骑将军、开府仪同三司，加授散骑常侍、始安郡公；陆晔进爵为江陵公；其余赐封爵位为侯、伯、子、男的很多。
English: In March, Renzi reviewed the achievements of Su Jun, and appointed Tao Kan as a chamberlain, lieutenant, and vassal of Changsha County, and awarded the military governor of Jiaozhou, Guangzhou, and Ningzhou; Gao Jian as a chamberlain, cadet, and vassal of Nanchang County; Wen Xuan as a cavalry general, Kaifu Yi and three divisions, and awarded a cavalry officer, and a vassal of Shi'an County; Lu Hao Jin Jie as a vassal of Jiangling County; and the rest were given the titles of marquess, lord, son, and son.

古文：卞壸及二子眕、盱、醒彝、刘超、钟雅、羊曼、陶瞻，皆加赠谥。
现代文：卞壶及二子卞、卞盱、桓彝、刘超、钟雅、羊曼、陶瞻，都追赐谥号。
English: Zou Jian and his two sons Zou, Zou, Huan Zou, Liu Chao, Zhong Ya, Yang Man, and Tao Zhan were all awarded the honorary title of Zou.

古文：路永、匡术、贾宁，皆苏峻之党也；峻未败，永等去峻归朝廷，王导欲赏以官爵。
现代文：路永、匡术、贾宁，都是苏峻旧党，苏峻没有败亡时，路永等人叛离苏峻归附朝廷。
English: Lu Yong, Kuangshu, and Janning were all members of the old party of Su Shun. When Su Shun was not defeated, Lu Yong and others defected from Su Shun and joined the imperial court.

古文：温峤曰： 永等皆峻之腹心，首为乱阶，罪莫大焉。
现代文：王导想赏给他们官爵，温峤说： 路永等人都是苏峻的心腹，首先参与并导致祸乱的，没有比这更大的罪过了。
English: Wang Dao wanted to award them the title of nobility, Wen Qi said: Lu Yong and others are the heart of Su Jun, the first to participate and lead to the disaster, there is no greater sin than this.

古文：晚虽改悟，未足以赎前罪；得全首领，为幸多矣，岂可复褒宠之哉！ 
现代文：后来虽然觉悟改正，但不足以全赎以往的罪孽，能够保全首级，已经是很大的侥幸了，怎能再褒扬宠爱他们呢！ 
English: Later, although the awareness was corrected, it was not enough to fully atone for the sins of the past, and it was already a great fluke to be able to preserve the heads, how can we praise and cherish them again!

古文：导乃止。
现代文：王导这才停止。
English: Only then did Wang Du stop.

古文：陶侃以江陵偏远，移镇巴陵。
现代文：陶侃因为江陵偏远，移居镇守巴陵。
English: Because of the remoteness of Gangneung, Tao Kan moved to the town of Paling.

古文：朝议欲留温峤辅政，峤以王导先帝所任，固辞还籓；又以京邑荒残，资用不给，乃留资蓄，具器用，而后旋于武昌。
现代文：朝廷中商议想留温峤辅佐国政，温峤认为王导是先帝任命的人选，坚决辞绝，归还藩所。他又因京城荒凉残破，缺乏资用，于是留下物资储蓄，供给器物用品，然后回到武昌。
English: In the imperial court, there was a discussion about whether to keep Wang Dao as a vice-premier in charge of state affairs. Wang Dao thought that Wang Dao was the person appointed by the former emperor, so he resolutely refused and returned the domain. Due to the desolation and ruin of Beijing and the lack of funds, he left behind material savings, supplied utensils and supplies, and then returned to Wuchang.

古文：帝之出石头也，庾亮见帝，稽颡哽咽，诏亮与大臣俱升御座。
现代文：成帝由石头脱困时，庾亮见到成帝，叩首哽咽。成帝下诏让庾亮和大臣们都登上御座。
English: When Emperor Cheng made it out of the stone, Luo Liang saw Emperor Cheng and was stunned. Emperor Cheng gave the order for Luo Liang and the ministers to ascend the throne.

古文：明日，亮复泥首谢罪，乞骸骨，欲阖门投窜山海。
现代文：第二天，庾亮再次叩头至地请罪，乞求免去自己职位，想全家投身于山海之中隐居。
English: The next day, Hao Liang again bowed down and pleaded guilty, begged to be relieved of his position, and wanted to devote himself to the whole family and live in seclusion in the mountains and seas.

古文：帝遣尚书、侍中手诏慰喻曰： 此社稷之难，非舅之责也。 
现代文：成帝派尚书、侍中拿手写诏书安慰劝谕他说： 这是国家的灾难，不是娘舅的责任。 
English: Emperor Cheng sent Shang Shu, an attendant skilled in handwriting imperial edicts, to console and advise him, saying, "This is a national calamity, and it is not the responsibility of my uncle.

古文：亮上疏自陈： 祖约、苏峻纵肆凶逆，罪由臣发，寸斩屠戮，不足以谢七庙之灵，塞四海之责。
现代文：庾亮上书自己陈述说： 祖约、苏峻肆行凶逆之事，罪过由我引发，即便寸寸斩割屠戮，也不足以向七庙的神灵谢罪，不足以平息天下人的责难。
English: Zou Liang's petition stated that: "The sins of Zuyo and Su Jun were caused by me. Even if I were to slaughter them, it would not be enough to thank the deities of the seven temples, nor would it be enough to appease the condemnation of the world.

古文：朝廷复何理齿臣于人次，臣亦何颜自次于人理！
现代文：朝廷又有什么道理再将我与他人相提并论，我又有什么脸面跻身于人伦呢！
English: What is the reason for the imperial court to compare me with others, and what face do I have among people!

古文：愿陛下虽垂宽宥，全其首领；犹宜弃之，任其自存自没，则天下粗知劝戒之纲矣。 
现代文：希望陛下即便是赐降宽宥，保全我的头颅也就行了，对我还是应当抛弃不顾，让我自生自灭，那么天下人便能粗知劝善罚恶的纲要了。 
English: I hope that even if Your Majesty were to grant me a pardon and spare my life, it would still be enough to spare my head. I should still be abandoned and left to fend for myself, so that the world would be able to know the outline of how to advise good and punish evil.

古文：优诏不许。
现代文：成帝下诏劝慰，不同意。
English: Emperor Cheng issued an imperial edict of consolation, but they did not agree.

古文：亮又欲遁逃山海，自暨阳东出；诏有司录夺舟船。
现代文：庾亮又想遁逃于山水之间，从暨阳出发向东，成帝下诏让负责官员扣夺舟船。
English: Xiang Liang also wanted to escape between the mountains and rivers, and set out from Jiyang to the east. Emperor Cheng issued an edict to let the responsible officials seize the boat.

古文：亮乃求外镇自效，出为都督豫州、扬州之江西、宣城诸军事、豫州刺史，领宣城内史，镇芜湖。
现代文：庾亮便请求外出镇守效力，出任都督豫州、扬州地段长江以西、宣城诸军事、豫州刺史，兼领宣城内史，镇守芜湖。
English: Zou Liang then requested to serve as an out-of-town guardian, and served as the governor of Yuzhou and the Yangzhou region west of the Yangtze River, proclaiming the city to the military and the history of Yuzhou, and also leading the history of the city, and guarding Wuhu.

古文：陶侃、温峤之讨苏峻也，移檄征、镇，使各引兵入援。
现代文：陶侃、温峤征讨苏峻时，传布檄文给各地方官员，让他们各自领兵前来援助。
English: When Su Qun was being discussed by Tao Kan and Wen Kun, they spread the message to all local officials, asking them to bring their own soldiers to help.

古文：湘州刺史益阳侯卞敦拥兵不赴，又不给军粮，遣督护将数百人随大军而已，朝野莫不怪叹。
现代文：湘州刺史、益阳侯卞敦拥兵不前，又不供给军粮，只是派督护带领几百人跟随大军而已，朝野人士莫不奇怪、惊叹。
English: Shishi of Honshu and Hou Xudun of Yiyang did not advance in support of the troops, nor did they supply military rations, but only sent overseers and guards to lead several hundred people to follow the large army. The people of the court and the field were surprised and amazed.

古文：及峻平，陶侃奏敦阻军，顾望不赴国难，请槛车收付廷尉。
现代文：等到苏峻被平定，陶侃奏议卞敦阻碍军务，持观望态度不赴国难，请求用槛车拘捕送交廷尉治罪。
English: After Su Jun was subdued, Tao Kan played the role of an obstructionist to hinder military affairs, took a wait-and-see attitude and did not go to the country, and requested that he be arrested and sent to the court for punishment.

古文：王导以丧乱之后，宜加宽宥，转敦安南将军、广州刺史；病不赴，征为光禄大夫、领少府。
现代文：王导认为在丧乱之后，应该表现宽宥，转任卞敦为安南将军、广州刺史。卞敦因病不能赴任，征召为光禄大夫、兼领少府职。
English: Wang Du believed that after the turmoil, it was necessary to show mercy, and he transferred the post of Jotun to General Annan and the post of Guangzhou historian. Jotun was unable to take up the post due to illness, and was conscripted as a doctor of Guanglu and concurrently held the post of minor prefect.

古文：敦忧愧而卒，追赠本官，加散骑常侍，谥曰敬。
现代文：卞敦忧愁愧疚而死，追赠原先官职，授予散骑常侍，谥号 敬 。
English: Zhaodong died of sorrow and guilt, and was posthumously given his former official position, and was awarded the title of errant equerry, and the nickname "Jing."

古文：臣光曰： 庾亮以外戚辅政，首发祸机，国破君危，窜身苟免；卞敦位列方镇，兵粮俱足，朝廷颠覆，坐观胜负。人臣之罪，孰大于此！
现代文：臣司马光曰：庾亮以外戚的身份辅佐朝政，首先引发祸端，国家毁坏、君主危殆，自己却逃窜以求苟免；卞敦位列方镇大员，兵员和粮食都很充足，朝廷倾覆之时，却坐观胜负；人臣的罪过，哪有比这更大的！
English: Sima Guang, a courtier, said: "Huan Liang's status as a non-relative aiding the government of the dynasty first caused the disaster, the country was destroyed, the monarch was in danger, but he fled to seek forgiveness; Huan Dun was a member of Fangzhen, soldiers and food were plentiful, but when the imperial court was overthrown, he stood by and watched; the sin of a courtier is greater than this!

古文：既不能明正典刑，又以宠禄报之，晋室无政，亦可知矣。
现代文：但朝廷对他们既不能运用典刑彰明罪过，还用宠信爵禄回报，晋成帝无国政可言，由此也可知晓了。
English: However, the imperial court could not use the punishment to show their guilt, but also rewarded them with the favor of the emperor, and the emperor could not be said to have a national policy, which also made it clear.

古文：任是责者，岂非王导乎！
现代文：应当承担这种责任的人，难道不是王导吗！
English: Shouldn't the person who should bear this responsibility be Wang Duan?

古文：徙高密王纮为彭城王。
现代文：成帝改封高密王司马为彭城王。
English: Emperor Cheng changed the title of Gaomi Wang Sima to Pengcheng King.

古文：纮，雄之弟也。
现代文：司马即司马雄的兄弟。
English: Sima is Sima Xiong's brother.

古文：夏，四月，乙未，始安忠武公温峤卒，葬于豫章。
现代文：夏季，四月，乙未，始安忠武公温峤故去，葬在豫章。
English: In the summer, in April, in the middle of the year, in the beginning of the year, in the beginning of the year, in the beginning of the year, in the beginning of the year, in the beginning of the year, in the beginning of the year, in the beginning of the year, in the beginning of the year, in the middle of the year, in the middle of the year, in the middle of the year, in the middle of the year, in the middle of the year, in the middle of the year, in the middle of the year, in the middle of the year.

古文：朝廷欲为之造大墓于元、明二帝陵之北，太尉侃上表曰： 峤忠诚著于圣世，勋义感于人神。使亡而有知，岂乐今日劳费之事！
现代文：朝廷想在元帝、明帝的陵墓北边为他建造大墓，太尉陶侃上表说： 温峤的忠诚著称于圣世，功勋节义让人神感动，假如人死有知，难道会为今天这种劳民伤财的事情高兴吗！
English: The imperial court wanted to build a large tomb for him on the north side of the mausoleums of Emperor Yuan and Emperor Ming. Captain Tao said, "Wen Xuan's loyalty is famous in the holy world, and his feats of valor have touched people's hearts. If people knew how to die, wouldn't they be happy about this kind of thing that hurts people's wealth today?"

古文：愿陛下慈恩，停其移葬。 
现代文：希望陛下慈爱有恩，停止移葬之事。 
English: I hope that His Majesty will be merciful and stop the relocation.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：成帝下诏听从了他的意见。
English: He complied.

古文：以平南军司刘胤为江州刺史。
现代文：朝廷任命平南军司刘胤为江州刺史。
English: The imperial court appointed Liu Yan, the military commander of Pingnan, as the crown prince of Jiangzhou.

古文：陶侃、郗鉴皆言胤非方伯才，司徒导不从。
现代文：陶侃、郗鉴都说刘胤不具有方面大员的才能，司徒王导不听。
English: Both Tao Kan and Hao Jian said that Liu Yin did not have the talent of a member of the Party Central Committee, and that Wang Shuo did not listen to him.

古文：或谓导子悦曰： 今大难之后，纪纲弛顿。自江陵至于建康三千馀里，流民万计，布在江州。
现代文：有人对王导的儿子王悦说： 如今是大难之后，国家的纲纪弛懈不振，从江陵到建康的三千多里间，流民数以万计，散布在江州。
English: Someone said to Wang Yue, the son of Wang Yue, the son of Wang Yue: Today, after the Great Calamity, the discipline of the country is sluggish. From Jiangling to Jiankang, more than three thousand miles, tens of thousands of displaced people are scattered in Jiangzhou.

古文：江州，国之南籓，要害之地，而胤以忲侈之性，卧而对之，不有外变，必有内患矣。 
现代文：江州是国家的南部屏障，要害之地，而刘胤以自己喜好奢侈的性格，横卧室内懒散地对待政事，即使没有外部的事变，也必有内患。 
English: Jiangzhou is the southern barrier of the country, the key place, and Liu Yin, with his character of liking luxury, lazily treats political affairs in his bedroom. Even if there is no external incident, there must be internal problems.

古文：悦曰： 此温平南之意也。 
现代文：王悦说： 这是温峤的意思。 
English: Wang Yue said: This is the meaning of Wen Xuan.

古文：秋，八月，赵南阳王胤帅众数万自上邽趣长安，陇东、武都、安定、新平、北地、扶风、始平诸郡戎、夏皆起兵应之。
现代文：秋季，八月，前赵南阳王刘胤率数万士众由上奔赴长安，陇东、武都、安定、新平、北地、扶风、始平各郡的戎狄及华夏族都起兵应从。
English: In the autumn, in August, the former Zhao Nanyang King Liu Yan led tens of thousands of soldiers from Shangcheng to Chang'an, and the Yongdi and Huaxia ethnic groups from the counties of Shandong, Wudu, Stability, Xinping, Hebei, Fufeng, and Xiping all joined the army.

古文：胤军于仲桥；石生婴城自守，后赵中山公虎帅骑二万救之。
现代文：刘胤屯军于仲桥，石生环城自守，后赵令中山公石虎率骑兵二万人救援。
English: Liu Yan's army was stationed at Zhongqiao, Shisheng ringed the city to defend itself, after which Zhao ordered Zhongshan Gong Shigu to lead 20,000 cavalrymen to rescue.

古文：九月，虎大破赵兵于义渠，胤奔还上邽。
现代文：九月，石虎在义渠大败前赵军队，刘胤逃归上。
English: In September, before the great defeat of Shihu in Yichuan, Zhao's army, Liu Yan fled and returned.

古文：虎乘胜追击，枕尸千里。
现代文：石虎乘胜追击，尸体枕籍千里。
English: The stone tiger chased after it with victory, and the corpse traveled thousands of miles.

古文：上邽溃，虎执赵太子熙、南阳王胤及其将王公卿校以下三千馀人，皆杀之，徙其台省文武、关东流民、秦雍大族九千馀人于襄国；又坑五郡屠各五千馀人于洛阳。
现代文：上被攻破，石虎擒获前赵太子刘熙、南阳王刘胤及其将军、郡王、公卿、校尉以下三千多人，全数杀害。把前赵朝廷的文武官员、关东流民、秦州和雍州的大族九千多人迁徙到襄国，又在洛阳坑杀五郡的屠各部人众五千多。
English: The former Zhao prince Liu Xi and the Nanyang king Liu Yin, as well as their generals, county kings, court nobles, and lieutenants, were all killed. More than 9,000 civil and military officials of the former Zhao court, Guandong exiles, Qin and Yongzhou tribesmen were relocated to Xiangguo, and more than 5,000 people from the five counties of Tu were killed in Luoyang pit.

古文：进攻集木且羌于河西，克之，俘获数万，秦、陇悉平。
现代文：石虎进攻河西羌族的集木且部，获胜后俘虏数万人，秦州、陇西全部平定。
English: Shihu attacked the Jimu Kebe of the Qiang people in Hexi, and captured tens of thousands of people after the victory. Qinzhou and Shaanxi were all pacified.

古文：氐王蒲洪、羌酋姚戈仲俱降于虎，虎表洪监六夷军事，弋仲为六夷左都督。
现代文：氐族王蒲洪、羌族首领姚弋仲都归降石虎。石虎上表荐举蒲洪监察六夷军事，姚弋仲任六夷左都督。
English: The king of the Yi people, Pu Hong, and the leader of the Yi people, Yao Xizhong, both fell to the Stone Tiger. The Stone Tiger recommended that Pu Hong supervise the Liushi military, and Yao Xizhong was appointed the left governor of the Liushi.

古文：徙氐、羌十五万落于司、冀州。
现代文：把氐族和羌族的十五万村落居民迁徙到司州和冀州。
English: moved 150,000 villagers of the Yao and Shan ethnic groups to Sizhou and Jizhou.

古文：初，陇西鲜卑乞伏述延居于苑川，侵并邻部，士马强盛。
现代文：当初，陇西的鲜卑族乞伏述延部居住在苑川，侵犯吞并邻近部落，人马强盛。
English: At first, the Xianbei people of western Shaanxi Province lived in Yuanchuan, invaded and annexed neighboring tribes, and prospered.

古文：及赵亡，述延惧，迁于麦田。
现代文：等到前赵灭亡，乞伏述延畏惧，迁至麦田。
English: Before Zhao's death, he moved to a wheat field.

古文：述延卒，子傉大寒立；傉大寒立；大寒卒，子司繁立。
现代文：乞伏述延死后，儿子乞伏大寒继立；乞伏大寒死后，儿子乞伏司繁继立。
English: After the death of Kuibushi Yan, his son Kuibushi Daikan succeeded him; after the death of Kuibushi Daikan, his son Kuibushi Shiharu succeeded him.

古文：江州刺史刘胤矜豪日甚，专务商贩，殖财百万，纵酒耽乐，不恤政事。
现代文：江州刺史刘胤崇尚豪奢的作风日益严重，专门从事商业贩运，聚敛家财百万，纵情于饮酒作乐，不问政事。
English: Jiangzhou poet Liu Yan's style of advocating luxury is becoming more and more serious. He specializes in commercial trafficking, accumulates millions of family wealth, indulges in drinking and entertainment, and does not care about politics.

古文：冬，十二月，诏征后将军郭默为右军将军。
现代文：冬季，十二月，成帝下诏征召后将军郭默为右军将军。
English: In the winter, in December, the general Guo Mo became the general of the right army after he was conscripted by Emperor Chengdu.

古文：默乐为边将，不愿宿卫，以情诉于胤。
现代文：敦默乐于出任戍边将领，不愿意在京宿卫，把自己的心意告诉了刘胤。
English: Dunmo was happy to serve as the general of the Lop County, but he did not want to be the guard of the capital, and he told Liu Yin about his intentions.

古文：胤曰： 此非小人之所及也。 
现代文：刘胤说： 这不是我所能干预的。 
English: Liu Yin said: This is not something I can interfere with.

古文：默将赴召，求资于胤，胤不与，默由是怨胤。
现代文：郭默将要赴召进京，向刘胤请求资助，刘胤不给，郭默由此怨恨刘胤。
English: Guo Mo will be summoned to Beijing to request funding from Liu Yin, but Liu Yin will not give it, and Guo Mo will resent Liu Yin.

古文：胤长史张满等素轻默，或倮露见之，默常切齿。
现代文：刘胤的长史张满等人素来轻视郭默，有时赤裸着身体见郭默，郭默经常恨之切齿。
English: Zhang Man and others have always despised Guo Mo, sometimes seeing him naked, and Guo Mo has always hated him.

古文：腊日，胤饷默豚酒，默对信投之水中。
现代文：腊日，刘胤赠送郭默小猪和酒，郭默当着使者的面把物品扔到水中。
English: On the last day, Liu Tan presented Guo Mo with a piglet and wine. Guo Mo threw the items into the water in front of the messenger.

古文：会有司奏： 今朝廷空竭，百官无禄，惟资江州运漕，而胤商旅继路，以私废公，请免胤官。 
现代文：适逢主管官员奏称： 如今朝廷府库空竭，百官没有俸禄，只是借助于江州的漕运。而刘胤的商旅不绝于路，因私利废弃公事；请求免除刘胤官职。 
English: At the same time, the responsible official made a report saying: Nowadays, the imperial treasury is depleted, and hundreds of officials have no salary, but only rely on Jiangzhou's rowing transport. And Liu Yin's business travel does not stop on the road, abandoning public affairs for self-interest; request to exempt Liu Yin from official duties.

古文：书下，胤不即归罪，方自申理。
现代文：奏事下发朝廷评议，刘胤没有惭愧认罪，他自己还在申辩冤屈。
English: The Imperial Court issued a comment on the case. Liu Yin was not ashamed to plead guilty, and he was still defending his grievances.

古文：侨人盖肫掠人女为妻，张满使还其家，肫不从，而谓郭默曰： 刘江州不受免，密有异图，与张满等日夜计议，惟忌郭侯一人，欲先除之。 
现代文：有寄寓他地的侨人盖肫，强抢民女为妻，张满让盖肫送女回家，盖肫不听，却对郭默说： 刘胤不服从免官的命令，秘密地有所图谋，和张满等人日夜策划，只是忌惮您一人，准备先除掉您。 
English: There was an overseas Chinese, Gai Yan, who was lodging in another place, and he forcibly took a common woman as his wife. Zhang Man asked Gai Yan to send his daughter home. Gai Yan did not listen, but said to Guo Mo: Liu Yin did not obey the order of dismissal, secretly plotted, and planned with Zhang Man and others day and night, but he was afraid of you alone and prepared to get rid of you first.

古文：默以为然，帅其徒候旦门开袭胤。
现代文：郭默信以为然，率领自己的门党等到早上门开时袭击刘胤。
English: Guo Muxin thought so and led his gang to wait until the door opened in the morning to attack Liu Yin.

古文：胤将吏欲拒默，默呵之曰： 我被诏有所讨，动者诛三族！ 
现代文：刘胤手下的将吏准备抵抗，郭默呵叱他们说： 我禀受诏书讨伐有罪之人，敢妄动者诛灭三族！ 
English: The generals under Liu Yan's command prepared to resist, and Guo Miao scolded them, saying, "I have received the edict to crack down on the guilty, and anyone who dares to make a move will be annihilated by the Three Kingdoms!"

古文：遂入至内寝，牵胤下，斩之；出，取胤僚佐张满等，诬以大逆，悉斩之。
现代文：随即进入到寝室，把刘胤拉下床后斩首。出屋后又抓获刘胤的僚佐张满等人，诬陷他们谋反，全部斩首。
English: He then went into the bedroom, pulled Liu Tan out of bed and beheaded him. After leaving the house, he captured Liu Tan's aide Zhang Man and others, framed them for plotting a rebellion, and beheaded them all.

古文：传胤首于京师，诈作诏书，宣示内外。
现代文：郭默将刘胤的首级传送到京师，诈写诏书宣示内外。
English: Guo Mei sent Liu Yin's severed head to the capital, and fraudulently wrote an imperial edict to announce it both at home and abroad.

古文：掠胤女及诸妾并金宝还船，初云下都，既而停胤故府。
现代文：又掠取刘胤的女儿和各位侍妾，连同金银珠宝一起带回船上。起初说要回返京城，不久停留在刘胤旧府。
English: They also plundered Liu Yin's daughter and all her attendants and concubines, and brought them back to the ship together with gold, silver and jewels. At first, they said they wanted to return to Beijing, but soon they stayed in Liu Yin's old residence.

古文：招引谯国内史桓宣，宣固守不从。
现代文：郭默招引谯国内史桓宣，桓宣坚守驻地，不从命。
English: Guo Mei invited the local historian, Huan Xuan, to stay at the residence, but Huan Xuan did not follow his orders.

古文：是岁，贺兰部及诸大人共立拓跋翳槐为代王，代王纥那奔宇文部。
现代文：这年，贺兰部及诸位大人头领共同推立拓拔翳槐为代王，代王拓拔纥那逃奔宇文部。
English: That year, the leaders of the Helan Club and all the adults jointly promoted Tuoba Shun as the acting king, and the acting king, Tuoba Shun, fled to the University Club.

古文：翳槐遣其弟什翼犍质于赵以请和。
现代文：拓拔翳槐派兄弟拓拔什翼犍到后赵作人质，请求和好。
English: After the arrival of the brothers of the Tuoba faction, the Tuoba Shifeng faction, Zhao became a hostage and asked for reconciliation.

古文：河南王吐延，雄勇多猜忌，羌酋姜聪刺之；吐延不抽剑，召其将纥扢泥，使辅其子叶延，保于白兰，抽剑而死。
现代文：河南王吐延，雄壮勇敢但多有猜忌，羌族首领姜聪刺杀他，剑入体内。吐延不拔剑，召部将纥，让他辅佐自己的儿子叶延，保守白兰，然后拔剑而死。
English: The king of Henan, Tuyan, was strong and brave, but full of suspicions. The leader of the Yi people, Jiang Cong, stabbed him to death and plunged a sword into his body. Tuyan did not draw his sword, but summoned the general Zou, asking him to assist his son, Ye Yan, to guard the brandy, and then to draw his sword and die.

古文：叶延孝而好学，以为礼 公孙之子得以王父字为氏 ，乃自号其国曰吐谷浑。
现代文：叶延孝顺好学，认为按照礼义： 公孙的儿子可以用王父的字为姓氏 ，于是自取国号叫吐谷浑。
English: Ye Yanxiao was a good student and thought that according to the etiquette: the grandson's son could use the king's father's name as his surname, so he chose the country name of Tuyugun.

古文：显宗成皇帝上之下咸和五年春，正月，刘胤首至建康。
现代文：咸和五年春季，正月，刘胤的首级送到建康。
English: In the spring of the fifth year of Haman and the first month of the year, Liu Yin's head was sent to Jian Kang.

古文：司徒导以郭默骁勇难制，己亥，大赦，枭胤首于大航，以默为江州刺史。
现代文：司徒王导因为郭默骁勇，难以控制，己亥，大赦天下，把刘胤首级悬挂在大航示众，任郭默为江州刺史。
English: Because of Guo Meizhong's courage, it was difficult to control him, and he pardoned himself and pardoned the world, and hung Liu Yan's head in the grand voyage to show the public, and appointed Guo Meizhong as the history of Jiangzhou.

古文：太尉侃闻之，投袂起曰： 此必诈也。 
现代文：太尉陶侃听说此事，袖子一甩站起来说： 这必定有诈。 
English: When Captain Tao Kan heard about this, he stood up with his sleeves rolled up and said, "This must be a trick.

古文：即将兵讨之。
现代文：随即要率兵征讨郭默。
English: He immediately wanted to lead soldiers to recruit Guo Miao.

古文：默遣使送妓妾及绢，并写中诏呈侃。
现代文：郭默派使者送交妓妾和绢物，并写密诏呈送给陶侃。
English: Guo Mo sent an envoy to deliver the prostitutes and stolen goods, and wrote a secret edict to present to Tao Kan.

古文：参佐多谏曰： 默不被诏，岂敢为此！
现代文：陶侃的僚佐大多劝谏说： 郭默不禀受诏令，怎敢干这样事！
English: Most of Tao Kan's colleagues advised him, saying, "Since Guo Mo is not bound by the imperial edict, how dare he do such a thing!

古文：若欲进军，宜待诏报。 
现代文：如想进军，应该等待诏书。 
English: If you want to march, you should wait for the imperial edict.

古文：侃厉色曰： 国家年幼，诏令不出胸怀。
现代文：陶侃神色严厉地说： 国家的君主年幼，诏令并非出于己意。
English: Looking stern, Tao Kan said: The monarch of the country is young, and the edict is not out of his own will.

古文：刘胤为朝廷所礼，虽方任非才，何缘猥加极刑！
现代文：刘胤被朝廷所重用，虽然所任非才，但为何胡乱遭到极刑处罚！
English: Liu Yan was reused by the imperial court. Although he was not a talented person, why was he arbitrarily punished with capital punishment?

古文：郭默恃勇，所在贪暴；以大难新除，禁网宽简，欲因际会骋其从横耳！ 
现代文：郭默恃仗骁勇，任职行事贪婪横暴，因国家大难刚刚平定，朝廷法令纲纪宽松简略，想乘机肆行无忌罢了！ 
English: Guo Meizhong fought bravely, acted greedily and violently in office, because the national catastrophe had just been quelled, the imperial court decrees were loose and simple, and there was nothing to be done if he wanted to take advantage of the opportunity!

古文：发使上表言状，且与导书曰： 郭默杀方州即用为方州，害宰相便为宰相乎？ 
现代文：便派使者上表陈述郭默罪状，并且给王导写信说： 郭默杀死地方长官就任用他为地方长官，如果害死宰相是不是就要任用他为宰相呢？ 
English: He then sent an envoy to the table to state Guo Mo's guilt, and wrote a letter to Wang Du, saying: Guo Mo killed the local governor and appointed him as the local governor. If he killed the prime minister, should he be appointed as the prime minister?

古文：导乃收胤首，答侃书曰： 默据上流之势，加有船舰成资，故苞含隐忍，使有其地，朝廷得以潜严；俟足下军到，风发相赴，岂非遵养时晦以定大事者邪！ 
现代文：王导这才收起刘胤的首级，给陶侃复信说： 郭默占据长江上游的有利地势，再加上有舰船为其所用，所以包涵忍耐，让他占据那地方，朝廷因此得以秘密戒备。等足下大军到达，风驰赴敌，这难道不是暂且顺从，等待时机再定大事的策略吗！ 
English: It was only then that Wang Du collected Liu Yin's severed head and wrote back to Tao Kan, saying: Guo Mo occupies a favorable position in the upper reaches of the Yangtze River. Coupled with the fact that there is a ship for him to use, he has the patience to let him occupy that place, so the court can be secretly guarded. When the army arrives and the wind rushes to the enemy, isn't this a strategy of temporarily obeying and waiting for the time to decide big things!

古文：侃笑曰： 是乃遵养时贼也！ 
现代文：陶侃笑着说： 这的确是对此贼屈从的策略。 
English: Tao Kan said with a smile: This is indeed a strategy of submission to this thief.

古文：豫州刺史庾亮亦请讨默。
现代文：豫州刺史庾亮也请求征讨郭默。
English: Guo Miao was also requested to be recruited by the Yuzhou assassin Shi Xiliang.

古文：诏加亮征讨都督，帅步骑二万往与侃会。
现代文：成帝下诏授予庾亮征讨都督，率领步、骑兵二万人去与陶侃会合。
English: Emperor Cheng issued an imperial edict awarding Xing Liang the conquest of the capital, and he led 20,000 soldiers and cavalry to meet with Tao Kan.

古文：西阳太守邓岳、武昌太守刘诩皆疑桓宣与默同。
现代文：西阳太守邓岳、武昌太守刘翊都怀疑桓宣与郭默同谋。
English: The governor of Xiyang, Deng Yue, and the governor of Wuchang, Liu Ye, both suspected Huan Xuan and Guo Mo of complicity.

古文：豫州西曹王随曰： 宣尚不附祖约，岂肯同郭默邪！ 
现代文：豫州西曹王随说： 桓宣连祖约尚且不肯附从，怎肯与郭默同谋呢！ 
English: West Cao Wang of Yuzhou then said, "Huan Xuan Lian Zu has made an agreement, but he still refuses to follow it. How can he conspire with Guo Mo?"

古文：岳、诩遣随诣宣观之，随说宣曰： 明府心虽不尔，无以自明，惟有以贤子付随耳！ 
现代文：邓岳、刘翊派王随到桓宣处观察他的动向，王随劝说桓宣道： 您心中虽然不是这样想，但却无从证明自己，只有把您的儿子交给我。 
English: Deng Yue and Liu Ye sent Wang to accompany them to Huan Xuan's office to observe his movements. Wang persuaded Huan Xuan and said, "Although you don't think so in your heart, you can't prove yourself. You can only give your son to me."

古文：宣乃遣其子戎与随俱迎陶侃。
现代文：桓宣便派儿子桓戎和王随一块儿迎接陶侃。
English: Kansun then sent his sons, Kaneru and Wang, to accompany him to meet Tokan.

古文：侃辟戎为扌彖，上宣为武昌太守。
现代文：陶侃征任桓戎为自己的僚属，上表举荐桓宣任武昌太守。
English: Tao Kan appointed Huan Rong as his subordinate, and recommended Huan Xuan as the governor of Wuchang.

古文：二月，后赵群臣请后赵王勒即皇帝位；勒乃称大赵天王，行皇帝事。
现代文：二月，后赵的群臣请求后赵王石勒即帝位，石勒便号称大赵天王，行施皇帝的事务。
English: In February, at the request of Zhao Zhao's vassals, Zhao Wang Shile ascended to the throne. Shile then became known as the Great Zhao Heavenly King and carried out the emperor's affairs.

古文：立妃刘氏为王后，世子弘为太子。
现代文：又立妃子刘氏为王后，世子石弘为太子。
English: He also appointed his daughter-in-law Liu as queen and his heir Ishihiro as crown prince.

古文：以其子宏为骠骑大将军、都督中外诸军事、大单于，封秦王；斌为左卫将军，封太原王；恢为辅国将军，封南阳王。
现代文：任儿子石宏为骠骑大将军、都督中外军事、大单于，封为秦王；石斌为左卫将军，封为太原王；石恢为辅国将军，封为南阳王。
English: His son, Shi Hong, was named General of the Cavalry, the military governor of both China and foreign countries, and was given the title King of Qin; his son, Shi Bin, was named General of the Left Guards, and was given the title King of Taiyuan; and his son, Shi Hui, was named General of the Auxiliary Provinces, and was given the title King of Nanyang.

古文：以中山公虎为太尉、尚书令，进爵为王；虎子邃为冀州刺史，封齐王；宣为左将军；挺为侍中，封梁王。
现代文：任中山公石虎为太尉、尚书令，进升爵位为王；任石虎的儿子石邃为冀州刺史，封为齐王；石宣为左将军；石挺为侍中，封为梁王。
English: Shi Hu, a member of the Zhongshan clan, was promoted to the rank of captain and secretary, and promoted to the title of king; his son, Shi Xuan, was appointed as the governor of Jizhou Province and given the title of King of Qi; Shi Xuan was appointed as the left general; and Shi Ting was appointed as the chamberlain and given the title of King of Liang.

古文：又封石生为河东王，石堪为彭城王。
现代文：又封石生为河东王，封石堪为彭城王。
English: He was also named the King of Hedong and the King of Pengcheng.

古文：以左长史郭敖为尚书左仆射，右长史程遐为右仆射、领吏部尚书，左司马夔安、右司马郭殷、从事中郎李凤、前郎中令裴宪，皆为尚书，参军事徐光为中书令、领秘书监。
现代文：让左长史郭敖任尚书左仆射，右长史程遐任右仆射、兼领吏部尚书。左司马夔安、右司马郭殷、从事中郎李凤、前郎中令裴宪，都任为尚书；参军事徐光为中书令、领秘书监。
English: Let the left chief Shi Guoqi be appointed as the left footman of Shangshu, and the right chief Shi Chengqi be appointed as the right footman of Shangshu, and also the leader of the personnel department. The left secretary Ma Junan, the right secretary Ma Guoyin, the middle son Li Feng, and the former middle son Pei Xian, were all appointed as Shangshu; the military Xu Guang was the middle secretary and the leader of the secretary.

古文：自馀文武，封拜各有差。
现代文：其余的文武官员，拜官封爵各有差等。
English: The rest of the civil and military officials, officials and knighthoods are all different.

古文：中山王虎怒，私谓齐王邃曰： 主上自都襄国以来，端拱仰成，以吾身当矢石，二十馀年，南擒刘岳，北走索头，东平齐、鲁，西定秦、雍，克十有三州。
现代文：中山公石虎发怒，私下对齐王石邃说： 主上自从建都襄国以来，端身拱手，坐享其成，靠着我身当箭石，冲锋陷阵。二十多年来，在南方擒获刘岳，在北方赶跑索头，向东平定齐、鲁之地，向西平定秦州、雍州，攻克十三座州郡。
English: Zhongshan Lord Shihu became angry and said privately to King Qi Shihong: "Since the founding of the capital city of Xiangguo, the Lord has stood by and enjoyed its success, relying on me to be the arrowhead and charge into battle. For more than 20 years, Liu Yue has been captured in the south, in the north he has been chasing the rope, in the east he has conquered Qi and Lu, in the west he has conquered Qin and Yongzhou, and he has conquered 13 counties.

古文：成大赵之业者，我也；大单于当以授我，今乃以与黄吻婢儿，念之令人气塞，不能寝食！
现代文：成就大赵功业的是我，大单于的称号应当授予我，现在却给了奴婢所生的黄吻小儿，想起来令人气愤，寝食难安！
English: I am the one who has accomplished the great Zhao Gong, the title of the great single crane should be awarded to me, but now it has been given to the yellow-kissed child born of slaves, it is infuriating to think about, it is difficult to sleep and eat!

古文：待主上晏驾之后，不足复留种也。 
现代文：等到主上驾崩之后，我不会再让他活命。 
English: I won't let him live until the Lord is dead.

古文：程遐言于勒曰： 天下粗定，当显明逆顺，故汉高祖赦季布，斩丁公。
现代文：程遐对石勒说： 天下大体平定，应当彰明善恶顺逆，所以汉高祖赦免季布，斩杀丁公。
English: Cheng Yao said to Shi Le: The world has been generally pacified. Good and evil should be made clear. Therefore, Han Gao Zu pardoned Ji Bu and killed Ding Gong.

古文：大王自起兵以来，见忠于其君者辄褒之，背叛不臣者辄诛之，此天下所以归盛德也。
现代文：大王自从起兵以来，见到忠于自己君主的人就褒扬他，见到背叛主上不尽臣节的人就诛杀他，这正是天下人之所以归从盛德的原因。
English: Ever since the Great King raised an army, when he saw someone who was loyal to his monarch, he praised him, and when he saw someone who betrayed the Lord and did not fulfill his vassalage, he killed him. This is the reason why people around the world follow Shengde.

古文：今祖约犹存，臣窃惑之。 
现代文：现在祖约还活着，我私下为此迷惑不解。 
English: Now that my father is still alive, I am privately puzzled by this.

古文：安西将军姚弋仲亦以为言。
现代文：安西将军姚弋仲也这样说。
English: Anxi General Yao Xizhong also said this.

古文：勒乃收约，并其亲属中外百馀人悉诛之，妻妾儿女分赐诸胡。
现代文：石勒便拘捕祖约，连同他的亲属门人等一百多人全部诛杀，妻妾和儿女则分赐给诸胡人。
English: Shi Le then arrested Zhu Yao, and together with more than one hundred of his relatives and retainers, he killed them all. His wife, concubine and children were given to Zhu Hu.

古文：初，祖逖有胡奴曰王安，逖甚爱之。
现代文：当初，祖逖有胡族奴仆，叫做王安，祖逖十分宠爱他。
English: At the beginning, Zhu Xi had a Hu slave named Wang An, whom he loved very much.

古文：在雍丘，谓安曰： 石勒是汝种类，吾亦无在尔一人。 
现代文：在雍丘时对王安说： 石勒与你是同一种族，我也不在乎你一个人。 
English: When he was in Yongqiu, he said to Wang An: Shi Le is the same race as you, and I don't care about you alone.

古文：厚资送而遣之。
现代文：送给他丰厚的资财遣送他回去。
English: Send him back with a hefty bill.

古文：安以勇干，仕赵，为左卫将军。
现代文：王安因为勇敢能干，在后赵做官，任左卫将军。
English: Because of his bravery and ability, Wang An became an official after Zhao and was appointed General of the Left Division.

古文：及约之诛，安叹曰： 岂可使祖土稚无后乎？ 
现代文：等到祖约伏诛时，王安叹息说： 我怎能让祖逖绝后呢！ 
English: When the time came for her father to be hanged, Wang An sighed and said, "How can I let my father die?"

古文：乃往就市观刑。
现代文：于是前往街市观看行刑。
English: So they went to the market to watch the execution.

古文：逖庶子道重，始十岁，安窃取以归，匿之，变服为沙门。
现代文：祖逖姬妾所生的儿子祖道重，年方十岁，王安悄悄救出他带回家，把他藏匿起来，为他改换服装装作出家人。
English: Zu Doushong, the ten-year-old son of Zu Yingji's concubine, was quietly rescued by Wang An, who took him home, hid him, and changed his clothes to make him a member of the family.

古文：及石氏亡，道重复归江南。
现代文：到石氏灭亡后，祖道重重新回归江南。
English: After the demise of the Shishi clan, the ancestral way returned to the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：郭默欲南据豫章，会太尉侃兵至，默出战，不利，入城固守，聚米为垒，以示有馀。
现代文：郭默想向南占据豫章，适逢太尉陶侃的军队到达，郭默出战不利，进城固守，用米堆成垒堡，显示自己粮食有余。
English: Guo Meizhong wanted to occupy Yuzhang to the south, when the army of Lieutenant Tao Kan arrived, Guo Meizhong was unfavorably out of the war, entered the city and held fast, using piles of rice to form a bastion, showing that he had more than enough grain.

古文：侃筑土山临之。
现代文：陶侃修筑土山对着他。
English: Tao Kan built a mound of earth in front of him.

古文：三月，庾亮兵至湓口，诸军大集。
现代文：三月，庾亮的军队到达湓口，各路军队会齐。
English: In March, the brilliant army arrived at the Hukou, and all the armies came together.

古文：夏，五月，乙卯，默将宋侯缚默父子出降。
现代文：夏季，五月，乙卯，郭默部将宋侯捆绑着郭默父子出城投降。
English: In the summer, in May, Guo Meibe tied up Song Hou and took Guo Mei and his son out of the city to surrender.

古文：侃斩默于军门，传首建康，同党死者四十人。
现代文：陶侃在军门将郭默斩首，把首级传送到建康，同党被处死的有四十人。
English: Tao Kan beheaded the military gatekeeper Guo Mei and sent the head to Jiankang. Forty people from the same party were executed.

古文：诏以侃都督江州，领刺史；以邓岳督交、广诸军事，领广州刺史。
现代文：朝廷下诏让陶侃都督江州，兼领刺史，让邓岳督察交州、广州诸军事，兼领广州刺史。
English: The imperial court decreed that Tao Kan, the governor of Jiangzhou, should also lead the military history, and that Deng Yue, the inspector of Jiaozhou and Guangzhou, should also lead the military history of Guangzhou.

古文：侃还巴陵，因移镇武昌。
现代文：陶侃回到巴陵，接着迁移镇守武昌。
English: Tao Kan returned to Baling and then moved to Wuchang.

古文：庾亮还芜湖，辞爵赏不受。
现代文：庾亮回到芜湖，拒绝接受爵禄赏赐。
English: Zou Liang returned to Wuhu and refused to accept the peerage.

古文：赵将刘征帅众数千，浮海抄东南诸县，杀南沙都尉许儒。
现代文：后赵的将领刘徵率领数千士众，渡海抢掠东南各县，杀死南沙都尉许儒。
English: Later, Zhao's general Liu Qian led thousands of soldiers to cross the sea and plunder the southeastern counties, killing the Nansha captain Xu Ru.

古文：张骏因前赵之亡，复收河南地，至于狄道，置五屯护军，与赵分境。
现代文：张骏乘着前赵的灭亡，又收复黄河以南的失地，直至狄道，设置五屯护军，与后赵接壤。
English: Zhang Ye took advantage of the death of the former Zhao and recovered the lost territory south of the Yellow River, until Di Dao, set up a five-town protection force, and bordered the former Zhao.

古文：六月，赵遣鸿胪孟毅拜骏征西大将军、凉州牧，加九锡。
现代文：六月，后赵派鸿胪孟毅授予张骏征西大将军、凉州牧、赐给九锡的礼遇。
English: In June, the late Zhao sent Hongyu Mengyi to confer the courtesy to Zhang Xizheng, the Western General, Liangzhou Mu, and Jiuxi.

古文：骏耻为之臣，不受，留毅不遣。
现代文：张骏把做后赵的臣子看作耻辱，不接受封职，扣留孟毅不遣返。
English: Zhang Ye regarded it as a disgrace to be Zhao's vassal, did not accept the appointment, and did not repatriate Meng Yi.

古文：初，丁零翟斌，世居康居，后徙中国，至是入朝于赵；赵以斌为句町王。
现代文：当初，丁零人翟斌世代居住在康居，后来迁入中原，至此时前来后赵朝见，后赵让翟斌当句町王。
English: At first, Ding Zili's generation lived in Kangju, and later moved to Zhongyuan. At this time, Zhao Zhao came to see, and Zhao Zhaobin became the king of the town.

古文：赵群臣固请正尊号，秋，九月，赵王勒即皇帝位。
现代文：后赵群臣坚持请求石勒扶正皇帝尊号，秋季，九月，后赵王石勒即帝位。
English: Later, Zhao Qunchen persistently requested Shiller to help the emperor honor his name. In the autumn and September, Zhao Wang Shiller ascended to the throne.

古文：大赦，改元建平。
现代文：大赦天下，改年号为建平。
English: The country was amnestied, and the year was changed to Jianping.

古文：文武封进各有差。
现代文：文武官员封职擢升，各有等秩。
English: The civil and military officials were promoted to higher posts, each with the same rank.

古文：立其妻刘氏为皇后，太子弘为皇太子。
现代文：册立妻子刘氏为皇后，太子石弘为皇太子。
English: His wife, Liu, was proclaimed empress, and his son, Ishihiro, crown prince.

古文：弘好属文，亲敬儒素。
现代文：石弘喜好写文章，为人亲近敬礼儒雅之士。
English: Ishihiro likes to write articles and is a congenial person.

古文：勒谓徐光曰： 大雅愔愔，殊不似将家子。 
现代文：石勒对徐光说： 石弘和悦安闲，全然不像将军世家的儿子。 
English: Shi Ler said to Xu Guang: Shi Hong and Yue Anyi are nothing like the sons of generals.

古文：光曰： 汉祖以马上取天下，孝文以玄默守之。圣人之后，必有胜残去杀者，天之道也。 
现代文：徐光说： 汉高祖靠马上的功绩夺取天下，汉文帝凭仗沉静无为巩固天下，圣人的后代，必定有使凶暴之徒化为善，因而可以废除刑戮的人，这是上天的规律。 
English: Xu Guang said: Emperor Gaozu of the Han Dynasty conquered the world by virtue of his immediate achievements, Emperor Wen of the Han Dynasty consolidated the world by virtue of his calm and inaction, and the descendants of the saints must have turned the violent into the good, thus abolishing the torturers. This is the law of heaven.

古文：勒甚悦。
现代文：石勒十分高兴。
English: Shearer is delighted.

古文：光因说曰： 皇太子仁孝温恭，中山王雄暴多诈，陛下一旦不讳，臣恐社稷非太子所有也。
现代文：徐光趁势劝说他： 皇太子仁孝温恭，而中山公却雄暴多诈，陛下一旦辞世，我怕国家就不是太子所能据有的了。
English: Xu Guang took advantage of the situation to persuade him: The crown prince is benevolent, filial and mild-mannered, while Zhongshan Gong is violent and deceitful. Once His Majesty passes away, I am afraid that the country will not be what the prince can rely on.

古文：宜渐夺中山王权，使太子早参朝政。 
现代文：应该逐渐减少中山公的权势，让太子早些参与国政。 
English: The power of Prince Nakayama should be gradually reduced, and the crown prince should be allowed to participate in national politics at an earlier stage.

古文：勒心然之，而未能从。
现代文：石勒心中同意，但未能照办。
English: Shearer agreed in his heart, but failed to follow through.

古文：赵荆州监军郭敬寇襄阳。
现代文：后赵荆州监军郭敬侵犯襄阳。
English: After that, Zhao Jingzhou's military inspector Guo Jing invaded Yangyang.

古文：南中郎将周抚监沔北军事，屯襄阳。
现代文：晋的南中郎将周抚监察沔北军事，屯军襄阳。
English: Jin's Southern Middle Lord Zhou Fuzi oversaw the military in northern Shandong and the military in Xiangyang.

古文：赵主勒以驿书敕敬退屯樊城，使之偃藏旗帜，寂若无人，曰： 彼若使人观察，则告之曰： 汝宜自爱坚守，后七八日，大骑将至，相策，不复得走矣。  
现代文：后赵国主石勒以邮驿传书的形式敕告郭敬后退屯军樊城，让他将旗帜收卷藏起，寂静如同无人。石勒说： 他们如果派人观察，便告诉他说： 你应当自我珍爱坚固防守，再过七八天，骑兵大军就将到达，和我们相互策应，你们再也逃不掉了。  
English: Later, the Lord of Zhao, Shi Le, sent a letter by post to Guo Jing, telling him to withdraw his troops from Shicheng. He asked him to roll up the flag and hide it. The silence was like no one was there. Shi Le said: If they sent someone to observe, they would tell him: You should cherish yourself and defend yourself firmly. In seven or eight days, the cavalry army will arrive, and we will coordinate with each other. You can no longer escape.

古文：敬使人浴马于津，周而复始，昼夜不绝。
现代文：郭敬让人到渡口洗马，周而复始，昼夜不断。
English: Guo Jing had people go to the ferry to wash the horses, and this went on and on, day and night.

古文：侦者还以告周抚，抚以为赵兵大至，惧，奔武昌。
现代文：密探回去告诉周抚，周抚以为后赵大军到达，心中恐惧，逃奔武昌。
English: The spy went back and told Zhou Fuzhi. Zhou Fuzhi thought that Zhao's army had arrived, but he was afraid and fled to Wuchang.

古文：敬入襄阳，中州流民悉降于赵；魏该弟遐帅其部众自石城降敬。
现代文：郭敬进入襄阳，中州的流民全部归降后赵。魏该的兄弟魏遐率领部众从石城投降郭敬。
English: Guo Jing entered Xiangyang, and all the exiles in Zhongzhou returned to Zhao. Wei Jia's brother Wei Wei led the troops from Shicheng to surrender to Guo Jing.

古文：敬毁襄阳城，迁其民于沔北，城樊城以戍之。
现代文：郭敬毁坏襄阳城，把居民迁到沔水以北，在樊城修筑城堡戍守。
English: Guo Jing destroyed Xiangyang City, moved the residents to the north of Surabaya, and built a castle in Surabaya to defend it.

古文：赵以敬为荆州刺史。
现代文：后赵让郭敬任荆州刺史。
English: Later, Zhao allowed Guo Jing to become the ruler of Jingzhou.

古文：周抚坐免官。
现代文：周抚坐罪被免官。
English: Zhou Fuzhi was removed from office for the crime of sedition.

古文：休屠王羌叛赵，赵河东王生击破之，羌奔凉州。
现代文：休屠王石羌背叛后赵，河东王石生攻破他，石羌逃奔凉州。
English: After the betrayal of Xu Tuo Wang Shisheng, Zhao and Hedong Wang Shisheng defeated him, and Shisheng fled to Liangzhou.

古文：西平公骏惧，遣孟毅还，使其长史马诜称臣入贡于赵。
现代文：西平公张骏恐惧，遣返孟毅，让自己的长史马诜向后赵称臣进贡。
English: Xiping Gong Zhang Rong was afraid and repatriated Meng Yi, leaving his eldest son Shima Rong to collect tribute from Zhao.

古文：更造新宫。
现代文：建康重新建造新的皇宫。
English: Jiankang rebuilt a new imperial palace.

古文：甲辰，徙乐成王钦为河间王，封彭城王纮子浚为高密王。
现代文：甲辰，晋改封乐成王司马钦为河间王，封彭城王司马的儿子司马俊为高密王。
English: At the time of Jia Chen, Sima Qin, King of Lecheng, was promoted to King of Hema, and Sima Jun, the son of Sima, King of Pengcheng, was promoted to King of Gaomi.

古文：冬，十月，成大将军寿督征南将军费黑等攻巴东建平，拔之。
现代文：冬季，十月，成汉的大将军李寿督察征南将军费黑等人攻取巴东的建平。
English: In the winter, in October, the great general of Chenghan, Inspector Li Shou, the general Fei Hei and others conquered the Jianping of Badong.

古文：巴东太守杨谦、监军毌丘奥退保宜都。
现代文：巴东太守扬谦、监军丘奥退走保守宜都。
English: Yang Qian, the governor of Badong, and Qiu Ao, the overseer of the army, retreated to the conservative Yidu.

古文：显宗成皇帝上之下咸和六年春，正月，赵刘征复寇娄县，掠武进，郗鉴击却之。三月，壬戌朔，日有食之。
现代文：咸和六年春季，正月，后赵刘徵又侵犯娄县，劫掠武进县，郗鉴将其击退。三月，壬戌朔，出现日食。
English: In the spring of the sixth year of the Heian period, in the first month, Zhao Liuzhen invaded and plundered Wujin County, which was repulsed by Shujian. In March, in the second month of the Heian period, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：夏，赵主勒如鄴，将营新宫；廷尉上党续咸苦谏，勒怒，欲斩之。
现代文：夏季，后赵国主石勒到邺，准备营建新的宫室。廷尉、上党人续咸苦苦劝谏，石勒发怒，要将他斩首。
English: In the summer, after the Lord of Zhao, Shi Le, came to Shao, he was preparing to build a new palace. The courtier and the upper party members continued to work hard to persuade Shao. Shi Le was angry and wanted to behead him.

古文：中书令徐光曰： 咸言不可用，亦当容之，奈何一旦以直言斩列卿乎！ 
现代文：中书令徐光说： 即便续咸的话不能听从，也应当宽容他，怎么能因为一时直言便斩杀列卿呢！ 
English: Xu Guang said in the middle of the letter: Even if you can't listen to the words of Heng Xian, you should also be tolerant of him. How can you kill a noble because of a moment's blunt speech!

古文：勒叹曰： 为人君，不得自专如是乎！
现代文：石勒叹息说： 作为君主，如此不能自己决断吗！
English: Stone sighed and said: As a monarch, can't you decide for yourself?

古文：匹夫家赀满百匹，犹欲市宅，况富有四海乎！
现代文：寻常百姓家资达到一百匹，还想买住宅，何况我富有四海呢？
English: Ordinary people have a hundred cows and still want to buy a house, and what's more, I'm rich.

古文：此宫终当营之，且敕停作，以成吾直臣之气。 
现代文：这宫殿终究是要营建的，我暂且下令停止建造，用以成全我的耿直大臣的正气。 
English: After all, this palace is to be built, and I have temporarily ordered to stop the construction in order to fulfill the righteousness of my Minister Geng Zhi.

古文：因赐咸绢百匹，稻百斛。
现代文：于是赐给续咸绢一百匹，稻米一百斛。
English: And he gave him a hundred cucumbers and a hundred measures of rice.

古文：又诏公卿以下岁举贤良方正，仍令举人得更相荐引，以广求贤之路。
现代文：又下诏让公卿以下官吏荐举贤良方正之士，并且命令被荐举的人交相推荐援引，用以开拓求贤的途径。
English: He also issued an edict that officials below the rank of noblemen should recommend the promotion of virtuous and upright people, and ordered those who were recommended to be promoted to recommend and refer to each other, so as to open up avenues for the pursuit of virtue.

古文：起明堂、辟雍、灵台于襄国城西。
现代文：在襄国城西建起明堂、辟雍、灵台。
English: In the west of the city of Xiangguo, the Ming Hall, Biyong and Lingtai were built.

古文：秋，七月，成大将军寿攻阴平、武都，杨难敌降之。
现代文：秋季，七月，成汉的大将军李寿进攻阴平、武都，杨难敌投降。
English: In the autumn, in July, the great general Li Shou of Chenghan attacked Yinping and Wudu, and Yang was forced to surrender.

古文：九月，赵主勒复营鄴宫，以洛阳为南都，置行台。
现代文：九月，后赵国主石勒又营建邺城宫室。把洛阳作为南都，设置行台。
English: In September, Zhao Guozhong Shi Le also built the Shicheng Palace Room. Luoyang was set up as the southern capital.

古文：冬，蒸祭太庙，诏归胙于司徒导，且命无下拜；导辞疾不敢当。
现代文：冬季，冬祭太庙，成帝下诏把祭祀剩下的胙肉送给王导，并且令他不用下拜谢恩，王导以有病为由推辞不敢承受。
English: In winter, at the winter festival of the Great Temple, Emperor Cheng decreed that the remaining meat of the sacrificial offering be given to Wang Du, and that he should not have to offer thanks. Wang Du did not dare to refuse on the grounds that he was ill.

古文：初，帝即位冲幼，每见导必拜，与导手诏则云 惶恐言 ，中书作诏则曰 敬问 。
现代文：当初，成帝即位时年纪幼小，每次见到王导必下拜，给王导的手诏则说： 惶恐而言 ，中书写的诏书则说： 敬问 。
English: At first, when Emperor Cheng Rong ascended the throne, he was very young. Every time he saw Wang Dao, he would bow down. The handwritten message to Wang Dao said, "In terms of fear," while the Chinese-written message said, "Respectfully ask."

古文：有司议： 元会日，帝应敬导不？ 
现代文：负责官员议论说： 元旦大会群臣时，圣上应当礼敬王导吗？ 
English: The official in charge argued: When the New Year's Day general assembly of ministers comes, should the sacred reverence Wang Du?

古文：博士郭熙、杜援议，以为： 礼无拜臣之文，谓宜除敬。 
现代文：博士郭熙、杜援评议，认为： 礼书没有君王拜大臣的记载，我们认为应当免除礼敬。 
English: Dr. Guo Xi and Du Yuan commented, saying: There is no record of the king bowing to the minister in the protocol, we believe that the courtesy should be exempted.

古文：侍中冯怀议，以为： 天子临辟雍，拜三老，况先帝师傅！
现代文：侍中冯怀评议，认为： 天子驾临辟雍，拜见三老，何况是先帝的太师太傅？
English: Feng Huai, a chamberlain, commented, saying, "The Son of Heaven has come to the Yong Dynasty to visit the Three Elders, and what's more, the former emperor's great master?

古文：谓宜尽敬。 
现代文：我以为应当备加礼敬。 
English: I think it should be treated with the utmost respect.

古文：侍中荀弈议，以为： 三朝之首，宜明君臣之体，则不应敬。若他日小会，自可尽礼。 
现代文：侍中荀奕评议，认为： 元旦是一年中朝会中的第一次，应当显明君臣各自的身份，因此不应当礼敬，如果是另外日子的小朝会，自然可以备加礼敬。 
English: Zou Yi, a chamberlain, commented that: New Year's Day is the first time of the year in the imperial court, and it should show the identity of the monarchs and ministers, so it should not be polite. If it is a small imperial court on another day, it can naturally be prepared with courtesy.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：成帝下诏顺从他的意见。
English: He complied.

古文：弈，组之子也。
现代文：荀奕即荀组的儿子。
English: He is the son of the group's star.

古文：慕容廆遣使与太尉陶侃笺，劝以兴兵北伐，共清中原。
现代文：慕容派使者送信给太尉陶侃，劝他起兵北伐，共同廓清中原。
English: Murong sent an envoy to Taifu Tao Kan to persuade him to start the Northern Expedition and jointly clear the Central Plains.

古文：僚属宋该等共议，以 廆立功一隅，位卑任重，等差无别，不足以镇华、夷，宜表请进廆官爵。 
现代文：慕容的僚属宋该等人共同评议，认为 慕容在边陲一隅建立功业，职位卑微，责任重大，等秩未加区别，不足以镇摄华夏和胡夷，应当上表请求提升慕容的官爵。 
English: Murong's colleagues, including Song Gui and others, jointly commented that Murong built his career in a corner of the borderlands, his position was humble, his responsibility was great, his rank was undifferentiated, and it was not enough to take care of Huaxia and Huyi. It should be requested to upgrade Murong's official title.

古文：参军韩恒驳曰： 夫立功者患信义不著，不患名位不高。
现代文：参军韩恒批驳说： 建立功绩的人忧虑的是诚信、道义不彰明，不忧虑名位不高。
English: Han Heng Bi, who joined the army, refuted that: People who establish merit are worried about honesty, morality is not clear, and they are not worried about their reputation is not high.

古文：桓、文有匡复之功，不先求礼命以令诸侯。
现代文：齐桓公、晋文公有匡扶天下的功绩，也没有事先要求天子按礼制加以任命来号令诸侯。
English: Prince Qi Kuan and Prince Jinwen had the merit of supporting the world, and they did not ask the emperor to appoint princes according to the etiquette beforehand.

古文：宜缮甲兵，除群凶，功成之后，九锡自至。
现代文：应当修缮甲胄、兵器，除灭群凶，功成之后，九锡的礼遇自会得到。
English: It is necessary to repair armor and weapons, and to exterminate evil-doers. After success, Jiuxi's courtesy will come naturally.

古文：比于邀君以求宠，不亦荣乎！ 
现代文：这比起求君主要宠爱，不也光荣些吗！ 
English: Is this not more honourable than seeking the favour of the sovereign?

古文：廆不悦，出恒为新昌令。
现代文：慕容不高兴，让韩恒出任新昌令。
English: Murong was not happy and let Han Heng take the post of Xinchang.

古文：于是东夷校尉封抽等疏上侃府，请封廆为燕王，行大将军事。
现代文：于是东夷校尉封抽等人写疏文上奏陶侃幕府，请求封慕容为燕王，摄行大将军事。
English: As a result, Captain Toei Fong Yu and others wrote an epistle to the shogunate, requesting that Fong Murong be crowned as the King of Swallows, and that he be given the title of General of the Military.

古文：侃复书曰： 夫功成进爵，古之成制也。
现代文：陶侃回信说： 功业成就加官进爵，这是古人的固有制度。
English: Tao Kan replied in a letter, saying: It is an inherent system of the ancients to promote officials to knighthoods based on their achievements.

古文：车骑虽未能为官摧勒，然忠义竭诚；今腾笺上听，可不、迟速，当在天台也。 
现代文：车骑将军慕容虽未能为朝廷摧毁石勒，但忠诚仁义，尽心尽力。现在我把疏文禀报给圣上，同不同意，授官早晚，应当由朝廷决定。 
English: Although the cavalry general Murong failed to destroy Shiloh for the imperial court, he was loyal, benevolent and did his best. Now that I have reported Shouwen to the emperor, I do not agree with him. The imperial court should decide on the awarding of the post sooner or later.

