古文：袁彖孔稚珪刘绘袁彖，字伟才，陈郡阳夏人也。
现代文：袁彖字伟才，陈郡阳夏人。
English: Yuan Shao Zi Wei Cai, Chen County Yang Xia Ren.

古文：祖洵，吴郡太守。
现代文：祖父袁洵是吴郡太守。
English: Yuan Qi's grandfather was the governor of Wu County.

古文：父觊，武陵太守。
现代文：父亲袁觊是武陵太守。
English: Yuan Qi's father was the governor of Wuling.

古文：彖少有风气，好属文及玄言。
现代文：袁彖年轻时便有风采气度，喜好写文章和谈论玄理。
English: When he was young, Yuan Qi had a graceful demeanor and liked to write articles and talk about metaphysics.

古文：举秀才，历诸王府参军，不就。
现代文：被举荐为秀才，各王府要择取他为参军，他不肯就任。
English: He was recommended as an outstanding talent, and all the royal courts wanted to select him to join the army, but he refused to take up the post.

古文：觊临终与兄顗书曰： 史公才识可嘉，足懋先基矣。 
现代文：袁觊临终时写给兄长袁颢的信中说： 史公文才学识可嘉，完全能够使祖宗基业繁盛起来。 
English: In a letter to his elder brother Yuan Shao, Yuan Shao wrote at the time of his death: "His knowledge of history and literature is commendable, and he is fully capable of making the ancestral inheritance flourish.

古文：史公，彖之小字也。
现代文：史公是袁彖的小名。
English: Shigong is a nickname for Yuan Shao.

古文：服未阕，顗在雍州起事见诛，宋明帝投顗尸江中，不听敛葬。
现代文：袁彖守父丧还未满三年，袁颉便在雍州起事被杀，宋明帝将袁颢的尸体抛进长江中，不允许家人收殓安葬。
English: Less than three years after the death of his father, Yuan Shou was killed in an uprising in Yongzhou. Emperor Song Ming threw Yuan Shou's body into the Yangtze River and did not allow his family to receive him for burial.

古文：彖与旧奴一人，微服潜行求尸，四十余日乃得，密瘗石头后岗，身自负土。
现代文：袁彖便与原先的一位仆人改穿平民服装，偷偷地去寻找尸体，找了四十多天才找到，于是便亲自背土，将袁颢秘密地埋葬在石头城的后山岗上。
English: Yuan Qi and one of his former servants disguised themselves in civilian clothes and secretly went to look for the body. It took more than forty days to find it, so he secretly buried Yuan Qi on the hill behind Stone Town.

古文：怀其文集，未尝离身。
现代文：他身边一直藏着伯父的文集，从没有离过身。
English: He always carried his collection in his arms and never left his body.

古文：明帝崩后，乃改葬顗。
现代文：明帝驾崩以后，才将袁颢改葬。
English: It was only after the death of Emperor Ming that Yuan Shikang was reburied.

古文：从叔司徒粲、外舅征西将军蔡兴宗并器之。
现代文：袁彖的堂叔司徒袁粲、岳父征西将军蔡兴宗都很器重他。
English: Yuan Shun's uncle and cousin, Yuan Shun, and his father-in-law, General Cai Xingzong of the Western Expedition, both held him in high esteem.

古文：除安成王征虏参军，主簿，尚书殿中郎，出为庐陵内史，豫州治中，太祖太傅相国主簿，秘书丞。
现代文：后来，袁彖官拜安成王征虏参军，主簿，尚书殿中郎，又出任庐陵内史，豫州治中，齐太祖的太傅相国主簿，秘书丞。
English: Later, Yuan Xuan official Bai Ancheng recruited soldiers to join the army, chief accountant, Shang Shudong middle-ranking official, and also served as the head of the history department of the imperial mausoleum, the middle-ranking official of the administration of Yuzhou, the chief accountant of the imperial ancestor of Qi, and the secretary of the imperial secretary.

古文：议驳国史，檀超以《天文志》纪纬序位度，《五行志》载当时详沴，二篇所记，事用相悬，日蚀为灾，宜居《五行》。
现代文：当时，对历朝国史进行评议，辨正是非得失。檀超认为，《天文志》记载星象及其位置次序，《五行志》记录当时的祥瑞灾异，二《志》所载的事实及用途都有差别，日食是一种灾异，应当放进《五行志》中。
English: At that time, the national history of the successive dynasties was discussed, and it was necessary to distinguish the gains and losses. Dan Chao believed that "Astronomy" recorded the stars and their position order, and "Five Elements" recorded the auspiciousness and calamity at that time. The facts and uses contained in the two "Elements" were different. The solar eclipse was a calamity, and it should be put into "Five Elements."

古文：超欲立处士传。
现代文：檀超又想立处士传。
English: Dan Chao also wants to set up an official biography.

古文：彖曰： 夫事关业用，方得列其名行。
现代文：袁彖蜕： 衹有那些与国家大业有关联的起过作用的人物，才能够在国史中记录其姓名事迹。
English: Yuan Qi: Only those who have played a role in connection with the great cause of the country can record their names and deeds in national history.

古文：今栖遁之士，排斥皇王，陵轹将相，此偏介之行，不可长风移俗，故迁书未传，班史莫编。
现代文：现今那些孤栖隐遁之士，排斥帝王，欺凌将相，这是偏颇特立的行为，不能够助长这种风气，改变社会风俗，所以司马迁的《史记》没有为之立传，班固的《汉书》也没有将他们编写进去。
English: Today, those who live in seclusion, reject the emperor, and bully the generals, are biased and eccentric behaviors. They cannot promote this culture and change social customs. Therefore, Sima Qian's "History" did not establish a legend for them, and Bangu's "Chinese Book" did not include them.

古文：一介之善，无缘顿略，宜列其姓业，附出他篇。 
现代文：如果确有一些好的行迹，无法舍弃省略的话，那也应当把他们的姓名业绩，附录在别的篇章中。 
English: If there are indeed some good deeds that cannot be omitted, then their names and deeds should also be appended in another chapter.

古文：迁始兴王友，固辞。
现代文：朝廷调任袁彖为始兴王府友，他坚决推辞不去。
English: The imperial court transferred Yuan Xuan to be Shixing Wangfu's friend, but he resolutely refused to go.

古文：太祖使吏部尚书何戢宣旨令就。
现代文：齐太祖派吏部尚书何戢向他宣布旨意命他就职。
English: Emperor Qizong sent Shangshu He to announce his will to him and ordered him to take up the post.

古文：迁中书郎，兼太子中庶子。
现代文：后升为中书郎，兼太子中庶子。
English: He was later promoted to chushiro (junior secretary), and also became the prince's junior illegitimate son.

古文：又以中书兼御史中丞。
现代文：又以中书兼御史中丞。
English: He also served as chusho and goshi chujo.

古文：转黄门郎，兼中丞如故。
现代文：转官为黄门郎，照旧兼御史中丞。
English: He was transferred to the post of Hwang Mun-ro, but continued to serve as Goshi Chujo.

古文：坐弹谢超宗简奏依违，免官。
现代文：因弹劾谢超宗的奏章模棱两可，被罢免官职。
English: Because of the impeachment, Xie Chao Zong hesitated to write a report and was dismissed.

古文：寻补安西谘议、南平内史。
现代文：不久袁彖又补为安西谘议、南平内史。
English: Soon after, Yuan Qi was appointed to the Anxi Advisory Committee and the Nanping Internal History Committee.

古文：除黄门，未拜，仍转长史、南郡内史，行荆州事。
现代文：任黄门郎，但没有正式拜授，仍调任为长史、南郡内史，暂时代理荆州刺史的职务。
English: He was appointed as Huangmenlang, but he was not officially conferred, he was still transferred to the position of Changshi, Nan County History, and temporarily Li Jingzhou History.

古文：还为太子中庶子。本州大中正。出为冠军将军、监吴兴郡事。
现代文：回京后任太子中庶子，本州大中正又出任冠军将军、监吴兴郡事。
English: After returning to Beijing, he served as an illegitimate son of the middle son of the crown prince, and also served as a champion general and supervisor of Wu Xing County.

古文：彖性刚，尝以微言忤世祖，又与王晏不协。
现代文：袁彖性格刚强，曾经用寓意深远的言辞触犯了齐世祖，又与王晏不和。
English: Yuan Shao had a strong character. He once offended Qi Shizuo with far-reaching words, and was at odds with Wang Shao.

古文：世祖在便殿，用金柄刀子治瓜，晏在侧曰： 外间有金刀之言，恐不宜用此物。 
现代文：齐世祖在别殿用金柄刀切瓜，王晏在旁边说： 外面流传着金刀的说法，恐怕不适宜用这种东西。 
English: Qi Shizhu used a gold-handled knife to cut melons in the hall of residence. Wang Yao said next to him: There is a saying about a golden knife, but I'm afraid it's not appropriate to use such a thing.

古文：世祖愕然。穷问所以。
现代文：齐世祖很惊讶，追问事情的根源。
English: Qi Shizu was very surprised and asked the root of the matter.

古文：晏曰： 袁彖为臣说之。 
现代文：王晏说： 这是袁彖告诉我的。 
English: Wang Yao said: This is what Yuan Yao told me.

古文：上衔怒良久，彖到郡，坐过用禄钱，免官付东冶。
现代文：世祖对此大怒，怀恨在心，很久都不得消释。袁彖在郡任职，因预支了俸禄钱，被罢免官职交给束冶县处治。
English: The ancestor was furious about this and held a grudge against him, which could not be erased for a long time. Yuan Qi served in the county, and because he advanced the salary money, he was removed from his post and handed over to Sokye County.

古文：世祖游孙陵，望东冶，曰： 中有一好贵囚。 
现代文：后齐世祖游孙陵，望着东冶县说： 那裹有一位很高贵的囚犯。 
English: After the Qizhe ancestors visited the Sun Mausoleum, they looked at Dongye County and said: There is a noble prisoner there.

古文：数日，专驾与朝巨幸冶，履行库藏，因宴饮，赐囚徒酒肉，敕见彖与语，明日释之。
现代文：过了几天，齐世祖与朝臣们一起巡幸到东冶，对府库实行了检查，举行宴会时，顺便赏给囚徒们一些酒肉，敕命召见袁彖与他交谈，第二天便释放了他。
English: A few days later, Qi Shizu and his courtiers made a tour to Dongye, inspected the government treasury, gave some meat and wine to the prisoners during a banquet, summoned Yuan Qi to talk with him, and released him the next day.

古文：寻白衣行南徐州事，司徒谘议，卫军长史，迁侍中。
现代文：不久袁彖便以平民身份暂时代行南徐州事务，后任司徒谘议，卫军长史，升为侍中。
English: Soon after, Yuan Shun temporarily took charge of the Southern Xuzhou affairs as a commoner, and later served as an advisor to the tutor, the head of the Guards, and rose to the rank of chamberlain.

古文：彖形体充腴，有异于众。
现代文：袁彖体态肥胖，与众不同。
English: Yuan Qi's physique is fat and different from others.

古文：每从车驾射雉在郊野，数人推扶乃能徒步。
现代文：每次跟随齐世祖到郊外去射野鸡，都要让好几个人相帮着扶持，才能徒步行走。
English: Every time I follow Qi Shizuo to the suburbs to shoot pheasants, I have to get several people to help and support each other before I can walk on foot.

古文：幼而母卒，养于伯母王氏，事之如亲。
现代文：他幼年时母亲便去世了，由伯母王氏抚养他，后来他侍奉王氏如同亲生母亲。
English: His mother died when he was young, and he was raised by his aunt Wang. Later, he served Wang like his own mother.

古文：闺门中甚有孝义。
现代文：他的妻子也很有孝心。
English: His wife is also very filial.

古文：隆昌元年，卒。年四十八。
现代文：袁彖在隆昌元年去世，享年四十八岁。
English: Yuan Qi died in the first year of Longchang, at the age of forty-eight.

古文：谥靖子。
现代文：谧靖子。
English: Her nickname was Yasuko.

古文：孔稚珪，字德璋，会稽山阴人也。
现代文：孔稚珪字德璋，会稽山阴人。
English: Confucius, Zhuge Liang, Zhuge Liang.

古文：祖道隆，位侍中。
现代文：祖父孔道隆位居侍中。
English: His grandfather, Kong Dorong, was an attendant.

古文：父灵产，泰始中罢晋安太守。
现代文：父亲孔灵产，在泰始年间，被罢免了晋安太守的官职。
English: His father, Kong Lingzang, was removed from his official position as the eunuch of Jinan during the reign of Emperor Taishi.

古文：有隐遁之怀，于禹井山立馆，事道精笃，吉日于静屋四向朝拜，涕泗滂沲。
现代文：他有退隐的念头，在区差量设立馆舍，精心诚笃地信奉道教。每逢吉日，便在静室中向四面朝拜，而且泪流如雨。
English: He had the idea of retreating into seclusion, set up a house in the area, and faithfully practiced Taoism. Every auspicious day, he would bow to all sides in the seclusion room, and his tears would fall like rain.

古文：东出过钱塘北郭，辄于舟中遥拜杜子恭墓，自此至都，东向坐，不敢背侧。
现代文：东行去京师，路过钱塘北城，便在船上对着杜子恭的墓遥相朝拜。自此以后一直到京都，他都是面朝束坐着，不敢稍微侧面或背向东方。
English: On his way east to Kyoto, he passed through the northern city of Qiantang, and on the boat he paid homage to the tomb of Du Ziqiang. From then on, all the way to Kyoto, he sat with his face to the east, not daring to look sideways or back to the east.

古文：元徽中，为中散、太中大夫。
现代文：宋无徽年间，他任中散、太中大夫。
English: During the Song Dynasty, he served as Zhongsan and Taizhong Doctor.

古文：颇解星文，好术数。
现代文：他比较能知晓星象，喜好方术。
English: He is relatively able to know the stars, and is fond of magic.

古文：太祖辅政，沈攸之起兵，灵产密白太祖曰： 攸之兵众虽强，以天时冥数而观，无能为也。 
现代文：齐太祖辅佐宋政时，沈攸之起兵，孔灵产秘密地告诉齐太祖说： 沈攸之兵势虽然很强盛，但从天时术数来看，他不会有大的作为。 
English: When the Emperor of Qi assisted the Song Dynasty, and Shen Yue raised an army, Kong Lingzang secretly told the Emperor of Qi that: Although Shen Yue's army was very strong, judging from the number of operations, he would not be able to do much.

古文：太祖验其言，擢迁光禄大夫。
现代文：齐太祖要证实他的话，提拔他做光禄大夫。
English: Qi Taizu wanted to confirm his words and promoted him to the post of Guanglu Doctor.

古文：以簏盛灵产上灵台，令其占候。饷灵产白羽扇、素隐几，曰： 君性好古，故遗君古物。 
现代文：用大竹筐装着孔灵产抬上灵台，命令他以天象变化来占卜，并送给他白羽扇、素隐几，说： 你喜爱古代的事物，所以就赠送几件古物给你。 
English: With a large bamboo basket, he carried the spiritual product of Kong to the altar, ordered him to use the celestial changes to divine, and gave him a white feather fan and a Suyin table, saying: You love ancient things, so I will give you a few antiques.

古文：稚珪少学涉，有美誉。
现代文：孔稚珪年轻时便涉猎各种学术学问，有很高的声誉。
English: When he was young, Kong Zhiqin dabbled in various academic studies and had a high reputation.

古文：太守王僧虔见而重之，引为主簿。
现代文：太守王僧虔见了他很是器重，用他作主簿。
English: The abbot Wang Zengqian saw that he was very valuable and used him as the main book.

古文：州举秀才。
现代文：州府又推举他为秀才。
English: He was a standout in the state's junior high.

古文：解褐宋安成王车骑法曹行参军，转尚书殿中郎。
现代文：初任宋安成王车骑法曹行参军，转官为尚书殿中郎。
English: The first-appointed Song Ancheng Wang Che Cai Fa Cao joined the army, and was transferred to the post of Vice-Minister of the Imperial Household.

古文：太祖为骠骑，以稚珪有文翰，取为记室参军，与江淹对掌辞笔。
现代文：齐太祖萧道成任骠骑将军时，认为孔稚珪很会写文章，所以录用他为记室参军，与江淹一道掌管各种公文的草拟。
English: When Xiao Daodu, the great ancestor of the Qi Dynasty, became a general, he thought that Kong Zhiyao was very good at writing articles, so he hired him to join the army as a recorder, and together with Jiang Dun, he was in charge of drafting various official documents.

古文：迁正员郎，中书郎，尚书左丞。
现代文：又升任为正员郎，中书郎，尚书左丞。
English: He was also promoted to Shokanro, Chushiro, and Shoshuzojo.

古文：父忧去官，与兄仲智还居父山舍。
现代文：由于为父亲服丧而辞去官职，与兄长孔仲智回乡居住在父亲的山房中。
English: As he resigned from his government post to attend his father's funeral, he returned to his hometown to live in his father's mountain house with his elder brother Kong Zhongzhi.

古文：仲智妾李氏骄妒无礼，稚珪白太守王敬则杀之。
现代文：孔仲智的小妾李氏性格骄横嫉妒，不讲礼节，孔稚珪告诉太守王敬则把她杀掉。
English: Kong Zhongzhi's concubine Li's character is arrogant and jealous, and does not speak of etiquette. Kong Zhiqi told the governor Wang Jing to kill her.

古文：服阕，为司徒从事中郎，州治中，别驾，从事史，本郡中正。
现代文：丧服期满，孔稚珪任司徒从事中郎，州治中，别驾，从事史，本郡中正。
English: At the end of the mourning period, Kong Wuzhong appointed Sito to be the middle-ranking official, the middle-ranking official of the state, the middle-ranking official of the county, and the middle-ranking official of the county.

古文：永明七年，转骁骑将军，复领左丞。
现代文：永明七年，孔延珪转官为骁骑将军，又兼领左丞。
English: In the seventh year of the Yongming era, Kong Yanxuan was transferred to the post of general of cavalry, and he also held the post of secretary of the left.

古文：迁黄门郎，左丞如故。
现代文：升为黄门郎，照旧领左丞。
English: He was promoted to the position of hwangmenro, and as before, he was assigned to the left of shojo.

古文：转太子中庶子，廷尉。
现代文：调任太子中庶子，廷尉。
English: Transferred to the Prince's younger illegitimate son, a courtier.

古文：江左相承用晋世张、杜律二十卷，世祖留心法令，数讯囚徒，诏狱官详正旧注。
现代文：江束之地一直承用晋朝张斐、杜预所注的律法二十卷。齐世祖很留心于律法条令，好几次亲自审讯囚犯，他诏命狱官对旧注详加考订。
English: The twenty volumes of the law inscribed by Zhang Fei and Du Yu during the Jin Dynasty have been used in Jiangsu Province. Qi Shizuo was very attentive to the laws and regulations, and he personally interrogated prisoners several times. He ordered the prison officials to revise the old notes.

古文：先是七年，尚书删定郎王植撰定律章表奏之，曰： 臣寻《晋律》，文简辞约，旨通大纲，事之所质，取断难释。
现代文：早在永明七年，尚书删定郎王撞便编写好律法上奏，说： 我探究了《晋律》，它文辞简约，内容仅是些法律纲要，由于条文过于质朴，难以正确地判断解释。
English: As early as in the seventh year of the Yongming era, Shangshu edited and corrected the "Lang Wang Qian" and then compiled the "Law of the Jin Dynasty." He said, "I explored the "Law of the Jin Dynasty." Its wording is concise, the content is only a legal outline, and because the provisions are too simple, it is difficult to judge and interpret correctly.

古文：张斐、杜预同注一章，而生杀永殊。
现代文：张斐与杜预即使注解同一章节，其取舍也常常不相同。
English: Even if Zhang Fei and Du Yun annotate the same chapter, their choices are often different.

古文：自晋泰始以来，唯斟酌参用。
现代文：从晋朝泰始年间以来，只好参考选用。
English: From the beginning of the Jin Dynasty to the beginning of the Tai Dynasty, it had to be chosen by reference.

古文：是则吏挟威福之势，民怀不对之怨，所以温舒献辞于失政，绛侯忼慨而兴叹。
现代文：这样一来，官吏们便可倚仗权势作威作福，百姓们心怀不满，产生怨恨。所以王温舒上奏的辞章缺少律令的依据，便引发了缝堡凰攰的慷慨叹息。
English: As a result, the officials could rely on their power to do good, and the people were dissatisfied and resentful. Therefore, the words played by Wang Wenshu lacked the basis of the rite, which caused the generous sigh of the castle.

古文：皇运革祚，道冠前王，陛下绍兴，光开帝业。
现代文：天命革新，国运远超前王，陛下继兴，开创辉煌的帝业。
English: With the innovation of the Mandate of Heaven, the national fortune far exceeded that of the previous king, and his majesty continued to prosper, creating a brilliant empire.

古文：下车之痛，每恻上仁，满堂之悲，有矜圣思。
现代文：大禹看见囚徒，下车讯问后而感伤，是表示君主行仁政的恻隐之心，那满堂悲痛的人们，是希望获得圣上的怜悯。
English: When Dayu saw the prisoners, he got off the train, and after questioning them, he felt sad. This showed the compassionate heart of the monarch, and the grief-stricken people in the hall were hoping to receive divine mercy.

古文：爰发德音，删正刑律，敕臣集定张杜二注。
现代文：陛下发出了仁德的声音，要删节订正刑法律令，敕命我汇集选定张斐、杜预二家的注释。
English: His Majesty sent out a benevolent voice, to abridge and revise the Criminal Law Decree, and I tried my best to compile the selected Zhang Fei and Du Yu's two commentaries.

古文：谨砺愚蒙，尽思详撰，削其烦害，录其允衷。
现代文：于是我便磨砺我愚蒙的眼光使它变得锐利一些，竭尽心力详细编撰，删削掉繁杂不妥的，收录公允得体的。
English: So I sharpened my dull eyes and tried my best to compile it in detail, cut out the complicated and inappropriate parts, and make it fair and decent.

古文：取张注七百三十一条，杜注七百九十一条。
现代文：取张注七百三十一条，杜注七百九十一条。
English: Take Zhang Note 731 and Du Note 791.

古文：或二家两释，于义乃备者，又取一百七条。
现代文：对于二家注释不同，但意义都比较完备的，取用了一百零七条。
English: For two different commentaries, but the meaning is relatively complete, one hundred and seven articles were used.

古文：其注相同者，取一百三条。
现代文：对于二家注释相同的，取用了一百零三条。
English: For two companies with the same comment, 103 articles were used.

古文：集为一书。凡一千五百三十二条，为二十卷。
现代文：将这些汇集成书，总共有一千七百三十二条，分为二十卷。
English: And he gathered them together into a book, in all, a thousand seven hundred and thirty-two, and he divided it into twenty volumes.

古文：请付外详校，擿其违谬。 
现代文：请交付外廷详加校订，挑剔出错误来。 
English: Kong Wei requested to deliver detailed proofs to the outside world, and picked out the unreasonable parts.

古文：从之。
现代文：齐世祖听从了他的建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：于是公卿八座参议，考正旧注。
现代文：于是让尚书令、仆射及六曹尚书等八座公卿共同评议，考证旧注。
English: As a result, eight court nobles, including Shang Shuling, Puxia and Liuzhao Shangshu, were allowed to jointly review and examine the old note.

古文：有轻重处，竟陵王子良下意，多使从轻。
现代文：对于同一罪名处罚有轻重不同的地方，竟陵王萧子良主张，大多数取用从轻发落的条款。
English: Where there is a difference in the severity of punishment for the same crime, Xiao Ziliang, the king of mausoleums, actually advocated that most of them should use the terms of leniency.

古文：其中朝议不能断者，制旨平决。
现代文：其中如果有朝议不能决断的地方，则请皇上下旨决定。
English: If there is a place that cannot be decided by the Imperial Court, the Emperor is requested to make a decision.

古文：至九年，稚珪上表曰：臣闻匠万物者以绳墨为正，驭大国者以法理为本。
现代文：到永明九年，孔稚珪上表说：我听说制造万物的匠人是以绳墨作为标准的，统治大国的君主应当以法理作为根本。
English: In the ninth year of the Yongming era, Confucius said, "I have heard that the craftsman who makes all things uses rope and ink as the standard, and the monarch who rules a great country should take the principle of law as the foundation.

古文：是以古之圣王，临朝思理，远防邪萌，深杜奸渐，莫不资法理以成化，明刑赏以树功者也。
现代文：因此古代的圣明君王，临朝思治，远远地防止邪恶的产生，深切地杜绝邪恶的蔓延，无不凭藉法律来教化百姓，明定刑赏来收取功效。
English: Therefore, the ancient sage kings, who thought about ruling from the imperial court, tried to prevent the emergence of evil from afar and prevent the spread of evil from afar. They used the law to enlighten the people and the punishment reward to collect the effect.

古文：伏惟陛下蹑历登皇，乘图践帝，天地更筑，日月再张，五礼裂而复缝，六乐穨而爰缉。
现代文：陛下顺应天象运行的次序，登上了皇帝的宝座，天地再造，日月重光，断裂的五礼又被缝合，散乱的六乐又被连接在一起。
English: His Majesty followed the order of the celestial movement and ascended to the throne of the emperor. Heaven and earth were re-created, the sun and moon were re-illuminated, the broken five rites were sewn together again, and the scattered six joys were connected together again.

古文：乃发德音，下明诏，降恤刑之文，申慎罚之典，敕臣与公卿八座共删注律。
现代文：于是发布仁德之音，颁布明诏，降下体恤民情、用刑慎而不滥的条文，重申必须郑重处理诉讼，不得轻率判罚的典章，敕命臣等与公卿八座共同删注法律。
English: Therefore, he issued a benevolent decree, promulgated a clear edict, lowered the provisions of sympathizing with the people's feelings, using punishment cautiously but not excessively, reiterated that litigation must be handled solemnly, and the award of punishment must not be made lightly, and the eight laws were jointly deleted and annotated by the ministers of state and the nobles.

古文：谨奉圣旨，谘审司徒臣子良，禀受成规，创立条绪。
现代文：臣等谨奉圣旨，咨询了司徒萧子良，接受了成规，创立了条文体例。
English: In accordance with the sacred will of the Emperor, the ministers consulted the scholar Xiao Ziliang, accepted the established rules, and created the style of the article.

古文：使兼监臣宋躬、兼平臣王植等抄撰同异，定其去取。
现代文：让我兼监宋躬、兼平王植等人一同抄录编撰法律条文的异同，并确定取舍。
English: Let me and Supervisor Song Mu, and Supervisor Ping Wang Zhi and others together transcribe and compile the differences and similarities of legal provisions, and determine the trade-offs.

古文：详议八座，裁正大司马臣嶷。
现代文：然后经过八座公卿的详细讨论，由大司马萧嶷最后裁决。
English: Then, after detailed discussions among the eight noblemen, the final decision was made by the Grand Master Ma Xiaohui.

古文：其中洪疑大议，众论相背者，圣照玄览，断自天笔。始就成立《律文》二十卷，《录叙》一卷，凡二十一卷。
现代文：其中有些重大的条款，众臣对它的讨论出现很大的分歧，则由陛下观览后作最终的决断。这样才寓成了《律文》二十卷，《录叙》一卷，共二十一卷。
English: Some of the most important clauses, on which there was great disagreement among the courtiers, were reviewed by His Majesty, who made the final decision. This is how the twenty volumes of the "Laws" and one volume of the "Records" were incorporated, for a total of twenty-one volumes.

古文：今以奏闻，请付外施用，宣下四海。
现代文：现在把它上奏给陛下，请交付给外廷实施采用，并向全国宣告。
English: Now it is reported to His Majesty, please submit it to the court for implementation and adoption, and announce it to the whole country.

古文：臣又闻老子、仲尼曰： 古之听狱者，求所以生之；今之听狱者，求所以杀之。 
现代文：我又听老子、孔子说过： 古时处理诉讼的人，追求的是如何使被讼者活着；现在判断诉讼的人，追求的是怎样把他杀掉。 
English: I also heard Lao Tzu and Confucius say: In ancient times, people who handled lawsuits pursued how to keep the litigant alive; people who judge lawsuits now pursue how to kill him.

古文： 与其杀不辜，宁失有罪。 
现代文： 与其滥杀无辜，还不如让罪犯漏网。 
English: It is better to let the guilty go free than to kill the innocent.

古文：是则断狱之职，自古所难矣。
现代文：这就是说，判断诉讼这一职责，自古以来就是很难担负的。
English: That is to say, the responsibility of judging the lawsuit has been difficult to bear since ancient times.

古文：今律文虽定，必须用之；用失其平，不异无律。
现代文：现在法律条文虽已制定，但还必须认真执行它；如果执行得不公正，则与没有法律是一样的。
English: Now that the text of the law has been drawn up, it must be implemented conscientiously; if it is implemented unjustly, it is the same as if there were no law.

古文：律书精细，文约例广，疑似相倾，故误相乱，一乖其纲，枉滥横起。
现代文：法律文书非常精细，条文简要例案很多，有些看起来相似而实际上有抵触，执行起来便容易混乱。
English: Legal documents are very detailed, and there are many examples of concise provisions. Some of them look similar but actually conflict, and it is easy for them to be confused when implemented.

古文：法吏无解，既多谬僻，监司不习，无以相断，则法书徒明于帙里，冤魂犹结于狱中。
现代文：一旦违背了其根本大纲，就会产生很多冤假错案。狱吏不很明白，已经发生了很多错误，监察人员又不学习法律，也无法断明，那样律法书衹是白白地陈放在书套之中，而狱内已到处是冤魂了。
English: Once its basic outline is violated, there will be a lot of unjust, false and wrong cases. The prison officers do not understand very well, many mistakes have already occurred, and the supervisors do not study the law and cannot judge, so the law books are put in the bookcases in vain, and the prison is full of ghosts.

古文：今府州郡县千有余狱，如令一狱岁枉一人，则一年之中，枉死千余矣。
现代文：现在全国各州郡县有一千多所监狱，假如一座监狱一年冤死一个人，那么一年之中，全国便会有一千多人冤死。
English: Now there are more than a thousand prisons in every state, county and county in the country. If one prison has one wrongful death a year, then in a year, there will be more than a thousand wrongful deaths across the country.

古文：冤毒之死，上干和气，圣明所急，不可不防。
现代文：遭冤枉受荼毒而死，就会冲犯祥和之气，这是圣上所急需考虑的，不可不防备。
English: If someone dies after being unjustly persecuted, it will offend the spirit of peace. This is an urgent matter for the saints to consider, and they must be on their guard.

古文：致此之由，又非但律吏之咎，列邑之宰亦乱其经。
现代文：造成这种状况的原因，又不仅仅是狱官的过错，各位州郡县的主管官员，也往往会使法纪混乱。
English: The reason for this situation is not only the fault of the prison officers, but also the officials in charge of each state, county and county, which often leads to confusion in legal discipline.

古文：或以军勋余力，或以劳吏暮齿，犷情浊气，忍并生灵，昏心狠态，吞剥氓物，虐理残其命，曲文被其罪，冤积之兴，复缘斯发。
现代文：或倚仗着军功余威，或凭藉为官的资格老年限长，态度蛮横，气势汹汹，心狠手辣，残忍地草营生灵，贪婪地侵吞民物，伤天害理地摧残性命，歪曲事实强加给人罪名，冤狱的兴起，就是由这些人所引发的。
English: It was these people who initiated the rise of unjust prisons, either by relying on their military exploits, or by virtue of their qualifications as officials, who were given long sentences for old age, who were insolent, aggressive, and cruel-hearted, who cruelly preyed on living beings, greedily devoured people's belongings, cruelly destroyed lives, and distorted facts to impose criminal charges on people.

古文：狱吏虽良，不能为用。
现代文：狱吏即使良善，也不能有所作为。
English: Prison officers, even if they are good, cannot make a difference.

古文：使于公哭于边城，孝妇冤于遐外。陛下虽欲宥之，其已血溅九泉矣。
现代文：所以束海孝妇冤死于远地，使于定国大哭于边城。陛下即使想要赦免他们，但他们已血溅九泉之下了。
English: Therefore, Sokkai and his wife died unjustly in a distant land, causing Yu Dingguo to weep loudly in the border town. Even if His Majesty wanted to pardon them, their blood was already spilled.

古文：寻古之名流，多有法学。
现代文：探究古代的著名人物，大多有法律方面的学问。
English: Explore the famous figures of ancient times, most of them have legal knowledge.

古文：故释之、定国，声光汉台；元常、文惠，绩映魏阁。
现代文：所以张释之、于定国都声名光耀于汉朝；钟繇、高柔的业绩辉映在魏国。
English: Therefore, Zhang Xizhi and Yu Ding Guo both gained fame and glory in the Han Dynasty; Zhong Xi and Gao Ju's achievements were reflected in the Wei Dynasty.

古文：今之士子，莫肯为业，纵有习者，世议所轻。
现代文：现在的读书人都不肯学习法律，即使有懂得法律知识的，也被世人所轻视。
English: Today's readers are not willing to learn the law, and even those who understand legal knowledge are despised by the world.

古文：良由空勤永岁，不逢一朝之赏，积学当年，终为闾伍所蚩。
现代文：遣实在是因为即使勤奋学习多年，不但得不到一点奖赏，反而被乡里人所讥笑。
English: This is because even if you study hard for many years, you will not only not get any reward, but will be ridiculed by the villagers.

古文：将恐此书永坠下走之手矣。
现代文：恐怕这些法律文书将会永远落入那些贱役者手中了。
English: I am afraid that these legal documents will forever fall into the hands of those lowlifes.

古文：今若弘其爵赏，开其劝慕，课业宦流，班习胄子；拔其精究，使处内局，简其才良，以居外仕；方岳咸选其能，邑长并擢其术：则皋繇之谟，指掌可致；杜郑之业，郁焉何远！
现代文：现在如果对学习法律者大加奖赏，以鼓励劝导人们都来学习法律，并用法律知识来考楼官员，教育官宦贵族的子弟；选拔精通法律的人在中央政府任职，成绩优良的出任地方长官。无论是方面大员，还是郡县官吏，都从懂得法律、有断狱才能的人中选拔，那么皋繇施政的谋略便可轻易地实现，杜预、郑众的业绩，也很快能够繁盛光大。
English: Now, if we greatly reward those who study law, encourage and persuade people to study law, and use legal knowledge to test officials, education officials, and children of aristocrats; select people who are proficient in law to serve in the central government, and those with excellent results to serve as local governors. Whether it is the members of the Provincial People's Congress, or county and county officials, they are selected from people who understand the law and have the ability to break out of prison, then the strategy of governance can be easily realized, and the performance of Du Yuan and Zheng Zhong will soon flourish.

古文：然后奸邪无所逃其刑，恶吏不能藏其诈，如身手之相驱，若弦栝之相接矣。
现代文：此后，奸邪之人难逃刑律的惩罚，凶恶之吏也不能徇私舞弊了，这样政治的协调就像身手相驱动，弓弦与箭栝紧密相扣了。
English: From then on, traitors could not escape the punishment of the criminal law, and evil officials could not engage in self-dealing and malpractice. Such political coordination was like being driven by body and hand, and the bowstring and the arrowhead were closely linked.

古文：臣以疏短，谬司大理。陛下发自圣衷，忧矜刑网，御廷奉训，远照民瘼。
现代文：我才疏学浅，却执掌审理刑狱的重任陛下发自内心，担忧怜悯百姓身陷刑网，朝廷承受圣训，要体家人民的疾苦。
English: I am a slow learner, but His Majesty, who is entrusted with the heavy responsibility of overseeing the trial of prisoners, is acting from the bottom of his heart, worrying and pitying the people who are trapped in the prison net, the imperial court is bearing the sacred teachings, and he wants to experience the sufferings of the people.

古文：臣谨仰述天官，伏奏云陛。
现代文：我因此远述历代吏治之事，上奏给陛下。
English: For this reason, I have recounted the history of government by officials throughout the ages and submitted it to Your Majesty.

古文：所奏缪允者，宜写律上，国学置律学助教，依《五经》例，国子生有欲读者，策试上过高第，即便擢用，使处法职，以劝士流。
现代文：我所奏的这些，如果承蒙陛下认可，便应当写进条律之中。国学要依照《五经》博士的惯例，设置教授律学的助教，太学生想要就读者，策试要超过一般的科举，及第合格者，立即提拔任用，使他们身居执法者的职位，以此来鼓励读书人攻读律学。
English: What I have said, if approved by Your Majesty, should be written into the regulations. In accordance with the practice of the doctors of the "Five Classics," the study of Chinese classics should set up a teaching assistant to teach jurisprudence, students who want to be readers should take more than the general examination, and those who pass the examination should be immediately promoted to the position of law enforcers to encourage readers to study jurisprudence.

古文：诏报从纳，事竟不施行。
现代文：诏书答覆说听从孔稚珪的建议，但最终却没有施行。
English: The imperial rescript replied that it would follow Kong Zhiyao's suggestion, but in the end it was not implemented.

古文：转御史中丞，迁骠骑长史，辅国将军。
现代文：转官为御史中丞，迁骠骑长史，辅国将军。
English: He was transferred to the post of goshi chujo (middle-ranked officer in the imperial court) and transferred to the post of kishi choshi (commander-in-chief of cavalry) and vice-governor-general.

古文：建武初，迁冠军将军、平西长史、南郡太守。
现代文：建武初年，又调任冠军将军、平西长史、南郡太守。
English: In the first year of Jianwu, he was also transferred to Champion General, Pingxi Changshi, and Nan County Governor.

古文：稚珪以虏连岁南侵，征役不息，百姓死伤。
现代文：孔稚珪因为北魏连年来不断南侵，征战不止，百姓死伤很多。
English: Because of the Northern Wei Dynasty's continuous invasion of the south for many years, there were more and more wars, and many people were killed and injured.

古文：乃上表曰：匈奴为患，自古而然，虽三代智勇，两汉权奇，算略之要，二涂而已。
现代文：于是上表说：匈奴为中原祸患，自古以来就是如此。考察三代、两漠对付的策略，无论是斗智斗勇，还是讲权宜奇变，从大要上讲，无非是二种途径而已。
English: Therefore, the above table said: The Xiongnu is the scourge of the Central Plains, and it has been so since ancient times. Examining the strategies for dealing with the three generations and the two deserts, whether it is a battle of wisdom and courage, or whether it is a matter of right and wrong, in general, there are only two ways.

古文：一则铁马风驰，奋威沙漠；二则轻车出使，通驿虏庭。
现代文：一是铁马金戈，风驰电扫，扬威于沙漠；二是轻车简从，派官员出使虏庭，修好讲和。
English: One is the iron horse jingo, the wind sweeps the electric sweeper, and it exerts authority in the desert; the other is the light car jianzi, and it sends officials to the court to repair the peace talks.

古文：榷而言之，优劣可睹。
现代文：衹要对比斟出一下，二者的优劣便可看得很清楚。
English: If you compare the two, you can see the advantages and disadvantages very clearly.

古文：今之议者，咸以丈夫之气耻居物下，况我天威，宁可先屈？
现代文：现今的发高论者，都认为大丈夫气概以居于人下为耻辱，何况我朝上国天威。怎可先向北虏屈服?
English: Today's high-flying theorists all think that it is a disgrace to live below the people, not to mention that I am the ruler of the country. How can I succumb to the north?

古文：吴、楚劲猛，带甲百万，截彼鲸鲵，何往不碎？
现代文：我们吴楚之地有强劲勇猛、装备精良的士兵百万之众，要去斩杀那如鲸鱿般凶狠之敌，哪次出击不是让他们粉身碎骨?
English: In the land of Wu Chu, we have a million strong, brave and well-equipped soldiers. If we want to kill an enemy as ferocious as a whale, what sort of attack would not cause them to be crushed?

古文：请和示弱，非国计也。
现代文：请求和议，显示软弱，不是国家大计。
English: Appealing and negotiating is a sign of weakness, not statesmanship.

古文：臣以为戎狄兽性，本非人伦，鸱鸣狼踞，不足喜怒，蜂目虿尾，何关美恶。
现代文：我认为，戎狄之人性似野兽，原本不属于人类。他们说话像鸥蹲踞似狼，分不清喜怒哀乐；眼睛像蜂四肢似蝎，谈不上美貌丑恶。
English: I think that the human nature of the soldiers is like a beast, which does not belong to human beings. They speak like crickets, like wolves, and cannot distinguish between emotions; their eyes are like bees, their limbs are like scorpions, and there is no beauty or ugliness.

古文：唯宜胜之以深权，制之以远罝，弘之以大度，处之以蝥贼。
现代文：衹应当用高深的权谋去战胜他们制伏他们，以蟊贼看待他们，对他们宽宏大度。
English: You should use profound power strategies to defeat them and subdue them, view them as traitors, and be magnanimous to them.

古文：岂足肆天下之忿，捐苍生之命，发雷电之怒，争虫鸟之气！
现代文：怎能够放任无穷的忿恨，爆发如雷电般的怒火，抛弃无数苍生的性命，去争如虫鸟一样小小的意气。
English: How is it possible to indulge in boundless resentment, to fly into a thunderbolt of rage, to throw away the lives of countless sentient beings, to fight with a spirit as small as a worm?

古文：百战百胜，不足称雄，横尸千里，无益上国。
现代文：即使百战百胜，也不足以称雄于天下，而横尸千里，对我国更是毫无益处。
English: Even if there are a hundred victories in a hundred battles, it is not enough to dominate the world, and there are a thousand corpses, which is of no benefit to our country.

古文：而蚁聚蚕攒，穷诛不尽，马足毛群，难与竞逐。
现代文：而且戎狄之人众多，像蚂蚁蜂类那样聚合，像马足兽毛那样密集，穷追猛打也诛杀不尽，很难和他们竞争。
English: Moreover, there are a lot of people in the army, like ants and bees, like horses and beasts, and it is difficult to compete with them.

古文：汉高横威海表，窘迫长围；孝文国富刑清，事屈陵辱；宣帝抚纳安静，朔马不惊；光武卑辞厚礼，寒山无霭。
现代文：汉高祖扬威于天下，也曾陷入被匈奴围困在白登的窘迫境地；汉文帝国家充实刑政清明，多次受到匈奴的侵扰欺凌，也衹委曲地采取守势；漠宣帝对匈奴羌人采取安抚招降的政策，使边境安静，连朔方之马都不受惊吓；汉光武帝言辞谦卑，赐以厚礼，与匈奴讲和，所以边塞没有战争烟尘。
English: Emperor Gaozu of the Han Dynasty, who was renowned throughout the world, was also trapped in the predicament of being besieged by the Xiongnu in Baden; the Han Empire had a clear criminal policy and was repeatedly harassed and bullied by the Xiongnu, but also took a defensive position; Emperor Mu Xuan adopted a policy of appeasing and inviting the surrender of the Xiongnu, so that the border was quiet, and even the horses of Shuo Fang were not frightened; Emperor Han Guangwu was humble in his speech, gave a gift, and made peace with the Xiongnu, so there was no smoke of war at the border.

古文：是两京四主，英济中区，输宝货以结和，遣宗女以通好，长辔远驭，子孙是赖，岂不欲战，惜民命也。
现代文：这两汉四位皇帝，英明拯济中原，输送宝物，派遣宗族女子，舆匈奴通好和亲，用长鞭驾驭着远方狄戎，给后世子孙托福。
English: These two Han and four emperors, the wise saviors of the Central Plains, transported treasures, sent clan women, communicated with the Xiongnu, and drove the distant Di Rong with a long whip to give future generations TOEFL.

古文：唯汉武藉五世之资，承六合之富，骄心奢志，大事匈奴。
现代文：衹有汉武帝凭藉着五世基业的资本，继承了天下的财富，心性骄傲，奢望过度，大肆征伐匈奴。
English: Emperor Hanwu inherited the wealth of the world with the capital of the fifth generation foundation, and he was proud and over-ambitious in conquering the Xiongnu.

古文：遂连兵积岁，转战千里，长驱瀚海，饮马龙城，虽斩获名王，屠走凶羯，而汉之器甲十亡其九。
现代文：于是便连年用兵，转战千里，长驱沙漠瀚海，饮马于龙城，虽然斩杀俘获了匈奴的名王，赶跑了凶恶的羯人，但汉朝的士卒也损失了十分之九。
English: As a result, soldiers were used year after year, traveling thousands of miles to fight, driving the desert to the vast sea, and drinking horse in Longcheng. Although they killed and captured the famous king of the Xiongnu and drove away the vicious Xiongnu, the Han Dynasty's soldiers also lost nine-tenths.

古文：故卫霍出关，千队不反，贰师入漠，百旅顿降，李广败于前锋，李陵没于后阵，其余奔北，不可胜数。
现代文：所以卫青、霍去病出征关外，有上千支部队不能回返；贰师将军李广率兵进沙漠，有上百支部队投降敌人。前有李广战败于阵前，后有李陵迫降于敌营，至于其余奔逃败北之人，更是不计其数。
English: Therefore, Wei Qing and Huo were sick and went to fight outside of Guanzhong, and there were thousands of troops who could not return; the divisional general Li Guang led the troops into the desert, and hundreds of troops surrendered to the enemy. First, Li Guang was defeated at the front, and then Li Ling was forced to surrender to the enemy camp. As for the rest of the people who fled to the north, they are countless.

古文：遂使国储空悬，户口减半。好战之功，其利安在？战不及和，相去何若？
现代文：因此使得国库空虚，人口减半，喜欢战争，其功利又在哪裹战不如和，其结果相差多么远啊!
English: Therefore, the treasury is empty, the population has been halved, war is favored, and what is its utility? War is not as good as reconciliation, and the results are so far apart!

古文：自西朝不纲，东晋迁鼎，群胡沸乱，羌狄交横，荆棘攒于陵庙，豺虎咆于宫闱，山渊反覆，黔首涂地，逼迫崩腾，开辟未有。
现代文：自从西朝纲纪毁坏，东晋南迁，群胡差狄，纷纷扰乱横暴于中原，使祖宗陵庙荆棘丛生，豺狼虎豹在宫廷咆哮，山川被颠倒翻覆，人民遭受荼毒，肝脑涂地，局势动荡不安、急迫危险，是天地开辟以来从未有过的。
English: Ever since the Western Dynasties were destroyed, the Eastern Jin Dynasty moved southward, and the barbarian hordes rampaged across the Central Plains, causing the ancestral mausoleums to grow thick with thorns, the jackals and leopards roared in the court, the mountains and rivers were turned upside down and overturned, and the people were poisoned and brainwashed, the situation has never been so turbulent and dangerous since the creation of heaven and earth.

古文：是时得失，略不稍陈。
现代文：那时的得失状况，这襄省略不再陈述。
English: The situation of gains and losses at that time, this omission is no longer stated.

古文：近至元嘉，多年无事，末路不量，复挑强敌。
现代文：近至宋朝元嘉年间，多年没有战事，不料元嘉末年，不白量力，又向强敌挑起战争。
English: During the Song Dynasty and Yuan Jia Dynasty, there was no war for many years. However, at the end of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, they tried their best to provoke a war against a strong enemy.

古文：遂乃连城覆徙，虏马饮江，青、徐之际，草木为人耳。
现代文：于是一座座城池被倾覆，改属敌人，北魏之兵饮马长江，青州、徐州之地，人民流离散失，衹剩草木了。
English: As a result, city after city was overturned and turned over to the enemy, and the soldiers of the Northern Wei Dynasty drank the Yangtze River, the land of Qingzhou and Xuzhou, the people were displaced and dispersed, and the grass and trees were left.

古文：建元之初，胡尘犯塞；永明之始，复结通和，十余年间，边候且息。
现代文：齐建元初期，还有胡虏侵犯边塞，自永明年开始，又通结和好，十多年来，边境暂时安静无事。
English: In the early Qi Jianyuan, there was also the invasion of the border fortress by the Khuriks. Since the beginning of Yongjing, they have made peace again. For more than ten years, the border has been temporarily quiet.

古文：陛下张天造历，驾日登皇，声雷宇宙，势压河岳。
现代文：陛下再造帝业，登上皇位，声威如雷贯宇宙，势镇山河。
English: His Majesty rebuilt the empire, ascended the throne, and his fame spread like thunder throughout the universe, conquering mountains and rivers.

古文：而封豕残魂，未屠剑首，长蛇余喘，偷窥外甸，烽亭不静，五载于斯。
现代文：但敌虏像苟延残喘的大猪长蛇，未遭刀剑的屠宰，还在窥伺着边地。战争烽烟不息，到现在已经五年了。
English: But the enemy is like a lingering boar snake, not slaughtered by the sword, still lurking on the periphery. The war has been raging for five years now.

古文：昔岁蚁坏，瘘食樊、汉，今兹虫毒，浸淫未已。
现代文：去年虫灾，使樊城、汉中一带，大受损害，今年这虫灾更是到处蔓延不止。
English: Last year's insect infestation caused great damage to Fucheng and the Hanzhong area, and this year's infestation is spreading everywhere.

古文：兴师十万，日费千金，五岁之费，宁可赀计。
现代文：兴兵十万，每曰花费在千金以上，五年的费用加在一起，怎么能计算得清。
English: The cost of raising an army is one hundred thousand, the cost of each day is more than one thousand, and the cost of five years can not be calculated clearly.

古文：陛下何惜匹马之驿，百金之赂，数行之诏，诱此凶顽，使河塞息肩，关境全命，蓄甲养民，以观彼弊？
现代文：陛下何必吝惜，衹消派一位使者，带着价值百金的礼物，简略的诏书，去诱使凶顽的敌人讲和，使关河边塞能够休养生息，保全百姓，积蓄精锐，以等待敌虏自我衰败之时，再图进取。
English: Why should His Majesty begrudge sending an envoy with a gift worth a hundred gold, a brief edict, to entice the fierce enemy to make peace, so that the Guanhe border fortress can recuperate, preserve the people, and accumulate the elite, so as to wait for the enemy's self-decline, and then try to advance.

古文：我策若行，则为不世之福；若不从命，不过如战失一队耳。
现代文：我的计策如果施行成功，那就是非凡的幸运福气了；如果敌虏不肯听命讲和，也衹不过像战时损失一小队人马而已。
English: If I succeed in carrying out my plan, it will be an extraordinary stroke of luck; if the enemy refuses to obey my order to make peace, it will be no more than the loss of a small group of men and horses in wartime.

古文：或云 遣使不受，则为辱命 。
现代文：或许有人会说 派出使臣而敌方不接受和谈，那就是辱没了使命 。
English: Some people may say that if you send an envoy and the enemy does not accept peace talks, then you have dishonored your mission.

古文：夫以天下为量者，不计细耻；以四海为任者，宁顾小节？
现代文：大凡胸怀天下，以四海为己任的人，是不会去计较微小的耻辱，顾全小节的。
English: Those who have the world in their hearts and the four seas as their responsibility will not care about the slightest humiliation, but will take care of the details.

古文：一城之没，尚不足惜；一使不反，曾何取惭？
现代文：一座城池陷入敌手，尚且不值得惋惜；一位使臣不回来，又有什么惭愧的?
English: If a city falls into the hands of the enemy, it is not to be regretted; if an ambassador does not return, what is there to be ashamed of?

古文：且我以权取贵，得我略行，何嫌其耻？
现代文：况且我用权变之计谋取重大的利益，是按照自己的策略行事，怎么能认为这是耻辱?
English: Moreover, how can I regard it as a disgrace that I used the coup as a means to gain significant benefits, and acted according to my own strategy?

古文：所谓尺蠖之屈，以求伸也。
现代文：这就像尺蠖虫一样，先屈而后伸，屈是为了求得伸。
English: It's like a tapeworm, it bends and stretches, and it bends to stretch.

古文：臣不言遣使必得和，自有可和之理；犹如欲战不必胜，而有可胜之机耳。
现代文：我并不是说派遣使臣就一定能够取得和议，但总会有可以讲和的道理；这就好像战争不一定能取胜，但总会有取胜的机会一样啊。
English: I'm not saying that sending an envoy will necessarily lead to peace talks, but there will always be a reason to talk about peace; it's like a war can't necessarily be won, but there will always be a chance to win.

古文：今宜早发大军，广张兵势，征犀甲于岷峨，命楼船于浦海。
现代文：现在应当早早地派出大军，大大地扩张兵力威势，西从岷山、峨嵋，束到沿海地区，征集犀甲、楼船等各种军备物资。
English: It is time to dispatch a large army at an early date, greatly expand the strength of the army, and collect various armament materials such as armor and ships from Lushan and Emei in the west to the coastal areas.

古文：使自青徂豫，候骑星罗，沿江入汉，云阵万里。
现代文：使得自青州至豫州，我们的侦察骑兵像繁星一样密布，沿着畏江至汉水，我们的阵地像云一样遮盖万里。
English: As a result, from Qingzhou to Yuzhou, our reconnaissance cavalry was as thickly spread as the stars, and along the Wei River to the Han River, our positions covered thousands of miles like clouds.

古文：据险要以夺其魂，断粮道以折其胆，多设疑兵，使精销而计乱，固列金汤，使神茹而虑屈。
现代文：据守险要，断其粮道，以挫其锐气，使它失魂丧胆；多设疑兵，把阵地修建得像金城汤池那样坚固，使他们智穷力竭，无计可施。
English: According to the guarding and risking, cut off their food supply, so as to frustrate their spirit and make them lose heart; set up more suspicious soldiers and build the position as solid as the golden city pond, so that they are exhausted and have nothing to do.

古文：然后发衷诏，驰轻驿，辩辞重币，陈列吉凶。
现代文：然后颁发真诚的诏书，派一名能言善辩的使者，带着厚重的礼物，驾车前去。向他们陈述吉凶祸福。
English: Then he issues a sincere edict and sends a well-spoken messenger with a heavy gift to drive to them and tell them the good, bad, and the ugly.

古文：北虏顽而爱奇，贪而好货，畏我之威，喜我之赂，畏威喜赂，愿和必矣。
现代文：北魏人生性贪婪，喜欢奇货异实，一方面畏惧我们的威势，一方面又贪图我们的贿赂，既畏威又喜赂，所以必定愿意讲和。
English: People in the Northern Wei Dynasty were greedy by nature and liked exotic goods. On the one hand, they were afraid of our might, and on the other hand, they coveted our bribes. They both feared and liked to bribe, so they must be willing to make peace.

古文：陛下用臣之启，行臣之计，何忧玉门之下，而无款塞之胡哉？
现代文：陛下采用我的表奏，施行我谋划的计策，何愁玉门关下，没有叩关要求通好的胡人呢?
English: Your Majesty has adopted my tactics and implemented the strategies I have planned. Why worry about the gate being closed, when there is no one to knock on it and demand that it be opened?

古文：彼之言战既殷勤，臣之言和亦慊阔。
现代文：那些主战的人说得是那么地恳切，我主和似嫌迂阔。
English: Those who are at war speak so earnestly, my lord, and seem so broad-minded.

古文：伏愿察两涂之利害，检二事之多少，圣照玄省，灼然可断。所表谬奏，希下之朝省，使同博议。
现代文：希望陛下考察二种途径的利害得失，所花费的人力物力各是多少，以陛下圣智之明玄思之妙，定能明显地作出判断我上奏的这些意见，希望陛卜能下达到朝廷台省，使这些中央重臣们一同参与商议。
English: I hope that Your Majesty will examine the advantages and disadvantages of the two ways, and how much manpower and material resources are spent on each. With Your Majesty's wisdom, subtlety and wisdom, you will be able to clearly judge these opinions I have presented. I hope that Your Majesty can reach the Imperial Household Ministry and make these central ministers participate in the discussion.

古文：臣谬荷殊恩，奉佐侯岳，敢肆瞽直，伏奏千里。
现代文：我承蒙陛下的特别恩遇，奉命辅佐方镇大员，因此才敢放任自己的愚忠耿直，从千里之外奏上章表。
English: Thanks to His Majesty's special favor, I was ordered to assist the mayor of Safang Town, so I dared to let go of my foolish loyalty and play the chapter from thousands of miles away.

古文：帝不纳。
现代文：齐明帝没有采纳孔稚珪的意见。
English: The emperor would not accept it.

古文：徵侍中，不行，留本任。
现代文：征聘他为侍中，不成，仍留任原职。
English: He was recruited as an attendant, but was not successful, and remained in his original post.

古文：稚珪风韵清疏，好文咏，饮酒七八斗。
现代文：孔稚珪风度气韵清静疏阔，爱好文学歌咏，能饮七八斗酒。
English: Kongzhiqin's demeanor is quiet and broad, he loves literature and poetry, and can drink seven or eight barrels of wine.

古文：与外兄张融情趣相得，又与琅邪王思远、庐江何点、点弟胤并款交。
现代文：与表兄张融情趣相投，又与琅邪人工思远、龃人锤及伺墨的弟弟何胤都是交情深厚的朋友。
English: He and his cousin, Zhang Rong, share the same interests, and he is also close friends with Zou Yizhong, Zou Renhammer, and his younger brother, He Yan.

古文：不乐世务，居宅盛营山水，凭几独酌，傍无杂事。
现代文：他不喜欢操心时务，居住的宅院裹建造了很多假山池塘，常常独自一人倚靠在小桌旁饮酒，而不管身边的杂事。
English: He doesn't like to worry about current affairs. He lives in a mansion surrounded by man-made mountains and ponds, and often sits alone at a small table drinking alcohol, oblivious to the goings-on around him.

古文：门庭之内，草莱不剪，中有蛙鸣，或问之曰： 欲为陈蕃乎？ 
现代文：庭院中野草丛生也不修剪，经常有青蛙的叫声。有人间他说： 你想做速董吗? 
English: The thick weeds in the courtyard are not trimmed, and there are often the cries of frogs. Someone said to him: "Do you want to be a speed director?

古文：稚珪笑曰： 我以此当两部鼓吹，何必期效仲举。 
现代文：孔坦主笑着说： 我把这些青蛙的岛叫当作是两部鼓吹乐，何必期望去仿效陈仲举。 
English: Master Kong Tan said with a smile, "I regard these Island of Frogs as two pieces of propaganda music. Why should I expect to emulate Chen Zhongji?

古文：永元元年，为都官尚书，迁太子詹事，加散骑常侍。
现代文：东昏侯永元元年，为都官尚书，转迁为太子詹事，加散骑常侍。
English: In the first year of the Eastern Twilight Prince Yongyuan, he was the official of the capital, Shangshu, and was transferred to the Prince Zhanji, and he was added to the loose riding of the regular attendants.

古文：三年，稚珪疾，东昏屏除，以床舆走，因此疾甚，遂卒。年五十五。
现代文：永元三年，孔稚珪得了重病，东昏侯要斥退他，于是便用卧车载着让他走，因此加剧了病情，于是去世，享年五十五岁。
English: In the third year of the Yongyuan era, Kongzhi Yao fell seriously ill. Dongwu Hou wanted to expel him, so he let him go with a sleeping car, which aggravated his illness. He died at the age of fifty-five.

古文：赠金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：追赠为金紫光禄大夫。
English: The official street presented to Dr. Jin Zi Guanglu.

古文：刘绘，字士章，彭城人，太常悛弟也。
现代文：刘绘字士章，彭城人，是太常卿刘毯的弟弟。
English: Liu Zhaizhang, a native of Pengcheng, was the younger brother of the Grand Duke Liu Bei.

古文：父勔，宋末权贵，门多人客，使绘与之共语，应接流畅。
现代文：父亲刘劻，是宋末的权贵，家中有很多客人来拜访，他让刘绘和他们交谈，应答很流畅。
English: His father, Liu Wei, was a powerful person at the end of the Song Dynasty. Many guests came to visit the family. He asked Liu Wei to talk to them, and the response was very smooth.

古文：勔喜曰： 汝后若束带立朝，可与宾客言矣。 
现代文：刘劻高兴地说： 你如果穿着礼服站立在朝廷上，就可以和贵宾交谈了。 
English: Liu Ye said happily, "If you wear a formal dress and stand in front of the imperial court, you will be able to talk with the guests of honor."

古文：解褐著作郎，太祖太尉行参军。
现代文：初任著作郎，齐太祖的太尉行参军。
English: The first author's son, the first lieutenant of Qi Taizu, went to join the army.

古文：太祖见而叹曰： 刘公为不亡也。 
现代文：太祖见到他而赞叹说： 刘劻没有死啊。 
English: When the great-grandfather saw him, he marveled and said: Liu Ye is not dead.

古文：豫章王嶷为江州，以绘为左军主簿，随镇江陵，转镇西外兵曹参军，骠骑主簿。
现代文：豫章王萧嶷任江州刺史，以刘绘作左军主簿。跟随他镇守江陵，又调任镇西外兵曹参军，骠骑主簿。
English: Yu Zhang Wang Xiaohui was appointed to record the history of Jiangzhou, with Liu Peng as the left army's main book. He followed him to defend Jiangling, and was also transferred to Zhenxi Foreign Infantry Cao to join the army, and was the main book of the cavalry.

古文：绘聪警有文义，善隶书，数被赏召，进对华敏，僚吏之中，见遇莫及。
现代文：刘绘聪明机警有文思，善于隶书，多次被萧嶷召去，受到奖赏。他回答问题文辞华美思路敏捷，受到的恩遇在同僚之中，没有谁能比得上他。
English: Liu Ping is a clever and quick-witted policeman, good at writing, and has been repeatedly summoned by Xiao Yu and rewarded. He answers questions with a beautiful and quick mind. Among his colleagues, there is no one who can match him.

古文：琅邪王诩为功曹，以吏能自进。
现代文：琅邪人王翔为功曹，因为有为官的才能而受到进用。
English: The villain Wang Xiang was a meritorious person, and was promoted because he had the talent to be an official.

古文：嶷谓僚佐曰： 吾虽不能得应嗣陈蕃，然阁下自有二骥也。 
现代文：萧嶷对同僚官佐们说： 我虽不能够继承取得陈蕃那么大的名声，但属下也还有二匹良骥啊。 
English: Xiao Yao said to his fellow officers: Although I can't inherit the great reputation of Chen Yao, I still have two good horses under me.

古文：复为司空记室录事，转太子洗马，大司马谘议，领录事。
现代文：刘绘又任司空记室录事，转任太子洗马，大司马谘议，兼领绿事。
English: Liu Miao also served as the secretary of the space recording room, transferred to the prince to wash the horse, the chief secretary to consult the horse, and also led the green thing.

古文：时豫章王嶷与文惠太子以年秩不同，物论谓宫、府有疑，绘苦求外出，为南康相。
现代文：当时，豫章王萧嶷与文惠太子因为辈分不同，舆论认为束宫与朝府间各存疑心，于是刘绘苦苦请求出任外官，被命为南康相。
English: At that time, because Prince Yuanzhang Wang Xiaoqi and Prince Wen Hui were from different generations, the public opinion believed that there was suspicion between the imperial court and the imperial court, so Liu Miao painstakingly requested to be appointed as a foreign minister and was appointed as the South Korean Minister of Health.

古文：郡事之暇，专意讲说。
现代文：治理郡事的空暇时间，他便专心讲学。
English: In his spare time, when he was in charge of county affairs, he concentrated on lecturing.

古文：上左右陈洪请假南还，问绘在郡何似？
现代文：皇帝近侍陈洪请假探亲从南方回到京城，武帝问刘绘在郡中干些什么?
English: The emperor's aide-de-camp Chen Hong asked for leave to visit relatives from the south and returned to Beijing. Emperor Wu asked Liu Miao what he was doing in the county.

古文：既而间之曰： 南康是三州喉舌，应须治干。岂可以年少讲学处之邪？ 
现代文：停了一会儿武帝又说： 南康郡是三州咽喉要道，应当让干练的人才去治理，怎么可以让一位年纪鞋好讲学的人去担任逭一职务呢? 
English: After pausing for a moment, Emperor Wu said: Nankang County is the choke point of the three states. It should be governed by capable people. How can an old man who is good at lecturing be allowed to hold such a position?

古文：征还为安陆王护军司马，转中书郎，掌诏诰。
现代文：召回刘绘，任安陆王护军司马，调任中书郎，掌管诏诰。
English: Liu Peng was recalled, appointed as the secretary of Anlu Wang Guo Jun, transferred to the post of middle school teacher, and in charge of the imperial edict.

古文：敕助国子祭酒何胤撰治礼仪。
现代文：朝廷敕命辅助国子祭酒何胤整理编撰礼仪。
English: The Imperial Court decreed that the Kuniko-sacrifice wine should be used to compile the etiquette.

古文：永明末，京邑人士盛为文章谈义，皆凑竟陵王西邸。
现代文：永明末年，京都的读书人盛典写文章、谈吐议论，都聚集在竟陵王的西邸。
English: In the last years of the Yongming era, Kyoto's readers gathered at the western residence of Emperor Jingling to write essays, talk and discuss.

古文：绘为后进领袖，机悟多能。
现代文：刘绘是年轻后学者的首领，他机敏善于领会别人的意图，有多方面的才能。
English: Liu Bing is the leader of the young scholars. He is quick to understand the intentions of others and has many talents.

古文：时张融、周颙并有言工，融音旨缓韵，颙辞致绮捷，绘之言吐，又顿挫有风气。
现代文：当时张融、周颐都很有言谈的技巧，退融音调缓慢语意清晰，周颐语辞华美出言快捷。刘绘的谈吐，抑扬顿挫，别有风韵。
English: At that time, both Zhang Rong and Zhou Qian were very skillful in speech. The fading tone was slow, the meaning was clear, and Zhou Qian's speech was beautiful and quick. Liu Peng's speech, iambic and abrupt, had a special charm.

古文：时人为之语曰： 刘绘贴宅，别开一门。 
现代文：时人评论他说： 刘绘贴近房宅，又另开一条门径。 
English: People commented on him at the time, saying: "Liu Bing is close to the house, and he has opened another doorway.

古文：言在二家之中也。
现代文：说是刘绘的谈吐在张、周二人之间。
English: The conversation between Zhang and Zhou is said to have been drawn by Liu.

古文：鱼复侯子响诛后，豫章王嶷欲求葬之，召绘言其事，使为表。
现代文：鱼复侯萧王飨被杀后，豫章工萧嶷想要安葬他，召来窒噬告诉这件事，让他写份奏章。
English: After the murder of Xiao Wangyuan, the fish restorer, Xiao Ying, who wanted to bury him, summoned Xiao Ying to tell him about the matter and asked him to write a report.

古文：绘求纸笔，须臾便成。
现代文：刘绘要他拿来纸张笔墨，不多一会儿便写成了。
English: Liu Ping asked him to bring a piece of paper, pen and ink, and he finished writing it in no time.

古文：嶷惟足八字，云 提携鞠养，俯见成人。 
现代文：萧嶷衹补充了八个字 提携鞠养，俯见成人 。
English: Xiao Yao added eight words: "Tie up and nurture, look down on adults."

古文：乃叹曰： 祢衡何以过此。 
现代文：于是赞叹说： 弥衡怎能超过他呢! 
English: Then he said with admiration: "How can Aihira surpass him?"

古文：后北虏使来，绘以辞辩，敕接虏使。
现代文：后北魏使臣到来，刘绘由于很能辩说，所以被敕命接待北魏使臣。
English: After the arrival of the Northern Wei envoys, Liu Meng was forced to receive the Northern Wei envoys because he could argue very well.

古文：事毕，当撰《语辞》。
现代文：事情完毕之后，照例要编写《语辞》。
English: After everything is over, as usual, we have to write the "Dictionary."

古文：绘谓人曰： 无论润色未易，但得我语亦难矣。 
现代文：刘绘对别人说： 无论怎样润色都不是件容易的事，要符合我说话的语言韵味是很困难的。 
English: Liu Peng said to others: No matter how you polish it, it is not an easy thing to do. It is very difficult to match the charm of the language I speak.

古文：事兄悛恭谨，与人语，呼为 使君 。
现代文：刘绘事奉兄长刘悛很是恭谨，与别人说话，说到兄长时也称为 使君 。
English: Liu Bing is very respectful when he serves his elder brother, and speaks to others. When he speaks of his elder brother, he is also called the minister.

古文：隆昌中，悛坐罪将见诛，绘伏阙请代兄死，高宗辅政，救解之。
现代文：隆昌年间，刘悛犯罪将被处死，刘绘俯伏在宫门前请求代替兄长去死，高宗萧鸾当时辅佐朝政，解救了他。
English: During the Longchang era, Liu Bei was to be executed for his crimes. Liu Bing prostrated himself in front of the palace gate and asked to die in place of his brother. Gao Zong Xiaoqi, who was an assistant to the imperial government at the time, rescued him.

古文：引为镇军长史，转黄门郎。
现代文：并召他担任镇军长史，转官黄门郎。
English: He also called him to serve as the town's military chief historian, changing his title to Huangmenro.

古文：高宗为骠骑，以绘为辅国将军，谘议，领录事，典笔翰。
现代文：高宗萧鸾任骠骑将军，以刘绘为辅国将军，谘议，领录事，掌管各种文书。
English: Gao Zongxiao served as the cavalry general, with Liu Pu as the adjutant general, consulted, led the recording, and took charge of all kinds of documents.

古文：高宗即位，迁太子中庶子，出为宁朔将军、抚军长史。
现代文：高宗即位，刘绘调任太子中庶子，出任宁朔将军、抚军长史。
English: Gao Zong ascended to the throne, and Liu Miao was transferred to the position of the prince's middle child, serving as the general of Ningshuo and the commander of the army.

古文：安陆王宝晊为湘州，以绘为冠军长史、长沙内史，行湘州事，将军如故。
现代文：安陆王萧宝侄任湘州刺史，以刘绘做冠军长史、长沙内史，代理湘州事务，将军照旧。
English: An Lu Wang Xiao Bao's nephew was appointed as the Hunan governor, with Liu Peng as the champion of Changshi and Changsha history, acting for Hunan affairs, and the general remained as before.

古文：宝晊妃，悛女也。
现代文：萧宝晅的妃子是刘悛的女儿。
English: Xiao Baojun's concubine was Liu Ye's daughter.

古文：宝晊爱其侍婢，绘夺取，具以启闻，宝晊以为恨，与绘不协。
现代文：萧宝晅爱恋她的侍婢，刘绘却把侍婢抢夺过来，并将这些全都告诉给皇上，萧宝晅因此非常恨刘绘，与他不和。
English: Xiao Baojun loved her maidservants and maidservants, but Liu Miao snatched the maidservants and maidservants and told all this to the emperor. Therefore, Xiao Baojun hated Liu Miao very much and did not get along with him.

古文：遭母丧去官。
现代文：刘绘因遭母丧而离职。
English: Liu Bing left his post due to the death of his mother.

古文：有至性，持丧墓下三年，食粗粝。
现代文：他生性孝道。在墓地守丧三年，吃粗劣的饭食。
English: He was born with filial piety. He held a three-year vigil at the cemetery and ate poor quality food.

古文：服阕，为宁朔将军、晋安王征北长史、南东海太守，行南徐州事。
现代文：服完丧，又任宁朔将军、晋安王征北长史、南束海太守，代理南徐州事务。
English: After the funeral, he was appointed as Ningshuo General, Jinan Wang Zheng Bei Changshi, and Nan Sokhai Taishu, acting for the affairs of South Xuzhou.

古文：绘虽豪侠，常恶武事，雅善博射，未尝跨马。
现代文：刘绘虽然性格豪爽侠义，但很厌恶武事，喜欢博射这类文雅的游戏，他从来没有骑马征战。
English: Although Liu Peng is a heroic and chivalrous character, he abhors martial arts and likes elegant games such as shooting. He has never ridden a horse into battle.

古文：兄悛之亡，朝议赠平北将军、雍州刺史，诏书已出，绘请尚书令徐孝嗣改之。
现代文：兄长刘悛死后，廷议要追赠平北将军、雍州刺史，诏书已经发下，刘绘请尚书令徐孝嗣把它改掉。
English: After the death of his elder brother Liu Bei, the imperial court proposed to posthumously bestow the titles of Pingbei General and Yongzhou Prince. The imperial decree had already been issued, and Liu Bei asked Shang Shu to order Xu Xiaozhi to change it.

古文：及梁王义师起，朝廷以绘为持节、督雍梁南北秦四州郢州之竟陵司州之随郡诸军事、辅国将军、领宁蛮校尉、雍州刺史。
现代文：及至梁王义师兴起，朝廷以刘绘为持节，督雍、梁、南秦、北秦四州及郢州之竟陵、司州之随郡诸军事，辅国将军，领宁蛮校尉，雍州刺史。
English: Until the rise of Liang Wang Yishi, the imperial court held Liu Peng as a festival, and the governor of Yong, Liang, South Qin, North Qin, the four states and Zhangzhou, the military of the county, the general of the auxiliary state, the captain of the Ningban, and the Yongzhou stabbed history.

古文：固让不就。
现代文：刘绘坚决推让不肯就职。
English: Liu Bing resolutely refused to take up the post.

古文：众以朝廷昏乱，为之寒心，绘终不受，东昏改用张欣泰。
现代文：大家都认为刘绘是因为朝廷政治昏乱，深感心灰意冷，所以才始终不肯接受这一任命。束昏侯于是改用张欣泰来担任这个职务。
English: It is generally believed that Liu Gan refused to accept the appointment because he was disheartened by the political turmoil in the imperial court, and he was so disheartened that he decided to appoint Zhang Xintai instead.

古文：绘转建安王车骑长史，行府国事。
现代文：刘绘调任建安王车骑长史，代行藩国事务。
English: Liu Miao was transferred to the post of Jian'an King's Chariot Rider, acting on behalf of the affairs of the domain.

古文：义师围城，南兖州刺史张稷总城内军事，与会情款异常，将谋废立，闲语累夜。
现代文：梁王义师包围了建康城，南兖州刺史张稷总管城内军事，他与刘绘交情非常深厚，准备谋划废立大事，便接连几夜和刘绘交谈。
English: Liang Wang Yishi encircled Jiankang City, and Zhang Ye, the general manager of the military in the city, was in charge of the military in the southern part of Zhangzhou. He had a very deep friendship with Liu Miao. When he was preparing to plan the abolition of the city, he talked with Liu Miao for several nights.

古文：东昏殒，城内遣绘及国子博士范云等送首诣梁王于石头，转大司马从事中郎。
现代文：束昏侯被杀，城内派刘绘及国子博士范云等人把束昏侯的首级送到石头戍梁王萧衍处。刘绘调任大司马从事中郎。
English: When Sok Dou Hou was killed, the city sent Liu Miao and Dr. Guo Zi Fan Yun and others to take Sok Dou Hou's head to the Stone Palace of Liang Wang Xiaoyan. Liu Miao was transferred to the Grand Steward to be the middle man.

古文：中兴二年，卒。年四十五。
现代文：和帝中兴二年，刘绘去世，享年四十五岁。
English: In the second year of Emperor Zhongxing, Liu Miao died at the age of forty-five.

古文：绘撰《能书人名》，自云善飞白，言论之际，颇好矜诩。
现代文：刘绘撰写《能书人名》，自己说很善于飞白笔法，言谈之间，颇爱矜持夸耀。
English: Liu Peng wrote "Nengshu Renmei" and said that he was very good at the flying white brush method. When talking, he was rather reserved and boastful.

古文：弟瑱，字士温。
现代文：弟萧瑱，字士温。
English: Xiao Yu's younger brother, surnamed Shiwen.

古文：好文章，饮酒奢逸，不吝财物。荥阳毛惠远善画马，瑱善画妇人，世并为第一。
现代文：喜爱文学辞章，酒量非常大，不贪图财物荥阳人工蛊远善于画马，刘蔓善于画女人，人们把他俩并列第一。
English: He likes literary phrases, drinks a lot of alcohol, is not greedy for wealth, is good at painting horses, and is good at painting women. People rank them both first.

古文：官至吏部郎。
现代文：他官至吏部郎。
English: He was a high-ranking bureaucrat.

古文：先绘卒。
现代文：比窒噬早死。
English: He died before Liu Biao.

古文：史臣曰：刑礼相望，劝戒之道。浅识言治，莫辩后先，故宰世之堤防，御民之羁绊。
现代文：史臣曰：刑与礼看似相对，一是劝善的法则，一是戒恶的法规，从最浅显的道理上说，它们都是治理世事的方法，是不分先后的，所以它们都是统治者防乱的堤坝，束缚百姓的绳索。
English: Shichen said: Punishment and etiquette seem to be opposite, one is the law of persuasion, the other is the law of refraining from evil. From the most obvious reason, they are all methods of governing the world, regardless of the first and the last, so they are all dykes for the rulers to prevent disorder, and ropes to bind the people.

古文：端简为政，贵在画一，轻重屡易，手足无从。
现代文：为政最正确简练的办法，就是公平划一，如果忽轻忽重，多次改变，就会叫人无所适从。
English: The most correct and concise way of doing politics is to be fair and uniform. If you change things from one thing to another, you will be bewildered.

古文：律令之本，文约旨旷，据典行罚，各用情求。
现代文：法律条令的根本，在于文词简约而内容丰富；按照实际情况，依据法典施行处罚。
English: The essence of the legal regulation is that the text is concise and rich in content; according to the actual situation, the punishment is imposed according to the code.

古文：舒惨之意既殊，宽猛之利亦异，辞有出没，义生增损。旧尹之事，政非一途，后主所是，即为成用。
现代文：由于文辞有所出入，因而含义便会有所增减，造就造成判罚的尺度有宽松舒缓与严猛残酷的不同。因为治理的方法不止一种，而前代治狱者审判的案例，衹要后代主管者认可，便往往援引采用。
English: Due to the discrepancy in the wording, the meaning will increase or decrease, resulting in a difference in the scale of the sentence. Because there is more than one way to govern, and the cases of the previous jailer's trial, in order to be recognized by future generations of supervisors, they often cite and adopt.

古文：张弛代积，稍至迁讹。
现代文：这一紧一松一严一宽，经过历代的累积，法律条文就会逐渐产生讹误。
English: This tightness, looseness, strictness and breadth, through the accumulation of successive generations, the legal provisions will gradually produce errors.

古文：故刑开二门，法有两路，刀笔之态深，舞弄之风起。
现代文：所以同一刑法就形成了不同的标准，于是刀笔之吏便藉机售奸，兴起了徇私舞弊、弄虚作假的风气。
English: Therefore, different standards have been formed for the same criminal law, so the officials with knives and pens have taken advantage of the opportunity to commit adultery, and a culture of self-serving fraud and deception has arisen.

古文：承喜怒之机隙，挟千金之奸利，剪韭复生，宁失有罪，抱木牢户，未必非冤。
现代文：禀承上司喜怒好恶的态度，伺机获取千金之重的奸利。那些被判死罪的人能够再生，并不是他们没有犯罪，而身戴木枷囚禁牢狱的人，未必不是受冤屈者。
English: Those who have been sentenced to death can be reincarnated, but this does not mean that they have not committed a crime, and those who are imprisoned in shackles are not necessarily wronged.

古文：下吏上司，文簿从事，辩声察色，莫用矜府，申枉理谳，急不在躬，案法随科，幸无咎悔。
现代文：下吏和厂司之间，仅凭公文行事，没有谁会去精心审察案情；申理枉曲，平议案件，并不是治狱者的当务之急，衹须依据法律去判罚，也就不会有什么罪殃。
English: Between the subordinate officers and the plant manager, who only act on the basis of official documents, no one will go to carefully examine the circumstances of the case; it is not the top priority of the jailer to argue and discuss the case, and there is no need to punish according to the law, and there will be no crime.

古文：至于郡县亲民，百务萌始，以情矜过，曾不待狱，以律定罪，无细非衍。
现代文：至于那些治理百姓的郡守县令们，有繁多的事务需要处理，如果按情理去顾惜百姓，就不必送交狱官审理，若是按照律令定罪，那么再轻的处罚也是因为其有罪。
English: As for those county magistrates who govern the people, there are many matters that need to be dealt with. If they take care of the people according to the circumstances, they do not have to be sent to the prison officer for trial. If they are convicted according to the law, then the lighter the punishment is because of their guilt.

古文：盖由网密宪烦，文理相背。
现代文：由于纲罗太密法典太繁，所以往往造成法律条文与情理的互相矛盾。
English: Due to the complexity of the Code of Criminal Procedure, it often leads to contradictions between the legal provisions and the circumstances.

古文：夫惩耻难穷，盗贼长有，欲求猛胜，事在或然，扫墓高门，为利孰远。
现代文：人世间盗贼总会有的，要都给予惩罚是难以穷尽的。想用严猛的刑法求得实效，按情理或许是这样，要扫除高官豪门的淆乱法律，取得实效也就为期不远。
English: There will always be thieves in the world, and it is inexhaustible to punish them all. If you want to use strict criminal law to achieve practical results, it may be reasonable. If you want to sweep away the confused laws of high-ranking officials and powerful families, it is not far away to achieve practical results.

古文：故永明定律，多用优宽，治物不患仁心，见累于弘厚；为令贵在必行，而恶其舛杂也。赞曰：袁徇厥戚，犹子为情。
现代文：凡律令最重要的是一定施行，最可恨的是条文的错乱烦杂。赞曰：袁彖徇私情而埋葬亲戚，犹可体谅他作为人子的孝情。
English: The most important thing in all laws and regulations is to implement them, and the most detestable thing is the confusion and complexity of the provisions. Praise: Yuan Qi buried his relatives out of selfishness, but you can understand his filial piety as a son of man.

古文：稚珪夷远，奏谏罢兵。
现代文：孔稚珪性格平和清疏，但能够上表劝谏罢兵。
English: Confucius was a peaceful and simple man, but he was able to persuade soldiers to go on strike.

古文：士章机悟，立行砥名。
现代文：刘士章机敏聪悟，能树立良好的行为砥砺自己的名声。
English: Liu Shizhang is quick-witted and intelligent, and can establish good behavior and burnish his reputation.

