古文：肃宗子建宁王倓性英果，有才略。
现代文：原文唐肃宗的三子建宁王李倓为人英明果决，有雄才大略。
English: The third son of Tang Su Zong, Jianning Wang Lijun, was a man of wisdom and determination, with great talent.

古文：从上自马嵬北行，兵众寡弱，屡逢寇盗，倓自选骁勇，居上前后，血战以卫上。
现代文：李倓亲自挑选骁勇的士兵在肃宗身边护卫，拼死保卫肃宗安全。肃宗有时不能按时吃上饭，李倓悲伤不能自已，为军中上下所赞赏。
English: Li Yu personally selected brave soldiers to escort Su Zong around and fight to the death to protect Su Zong's safety. Sometimes Su Zong could not eat his meal on time, and Li Yu could not help but be sad, which was appreciated by the army.

古文：上或过时未食，倓悲泣不自胜，军中皆属目向之，上欲以倓为天下兵马元帅，使统诸将东征，李泌曰： 建宁诚元帅才；然广平，兄也，若建宁功成，岂使广平为吴太伯乎？ 
现代文：因此肃宗想封李倓为天下兵马大元帅，让他统领诸将东征。李泌说： 建宁王确实有元帅之才；然而广平王李俶毕竟是长兄，如果建宁王战功显赫，难道要让广平王成为第二个吴太伯吗？ 
English: Therefore, Su Zong wanted to appoint Li Xi as the grand marshal of the world's soldiers and horses, and let him lead the generals to the east. Li Xiu said: King Jianning really has the talent of a marshal; however, King Guangping Li Xi is, after all, the eldest brother. If King Jianning's war exploits are outstanding, should King Guangping become the second Wu Tai Bo?

古文：上曰： 广平，冢嗣也，何必以元帅为重？ 
现代文：肃宗说： 广平王是嫡长子，以后的皇位继承人，如何还需要去担当元帅之职来巩固自己的地位呢？ 
English: Su Zong said: King Guangping is the eldest legitimate son and the future heir to the throne, how can he still need to take on the post of marshal to consolidate his position?

古文：泌曰： 广平未正位东宫，今天下艰难，众心所属，在于元帅，若建宁大功既成，陛下虽欲不以为储副，同立功者其肯已乎？
现代文：李泌说： 广平王尚未正式立为太子，现在国家艰难，众人心之所系都在元帅身上。如果建宁王立下大功，陛下即使不想立他做继承人，但是同他一起立下汗马功劳的人难道肯善罢甘休吗？
English: Li Xiu said: King Guangping has not yet been officially appointed as the crown prince, the country is in a difficult situation, and everyone's heart is in the marshal. If King Jianning has made great contributions, even if His Majesty does not want to appoint him as the heir, will those who have made great contributions together with him be willing to give up?

古文：太宗、太上皇即其事也。 
现代文：太宗与太上皇之事就是最好的例子。 
English: The case of Emperor Taizong and Empress Dowager Zhou is the best example.

古文：上乃以广平王俶为天下兵马元帅，诸将皆以属焉。
现代文：于是，肃宗任命广平王李俶为天下兵马元帅，要求诸将都服从他的号令。
English: As a result, Su Zong appointed Guangping Wang Lijun as the world's marshal of soldiers and horses, demanding that all generals obey his orders.

古文：倓闻之，谢泌曰： 此固倓之心也。 
现代文：李倓听到这件事，向李泌致谢说： 您这样做正符合我的心意。 
English: When Li Qiye heard about this, he thanked Li Xiu and said, "What you have done is in line with my heart.

