古文：前废帝前废帝讳子业，小字法师，孝武帝长子也。
现代文：前废帝号子业，小字法师，孝武帝长子。
English: The former emperor's illegitimate son, Xiaozha Mage, is the eldest son of Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：元嘉二十六年正月甲申生。
现代文：元嘉二十六年正月十四日出生。
English: Yuan Jia was born on the 14th day of the first month of the 26th year.

古文：世祖镇寻阳，子业留京邑。
现代文：世祖镇守寻阳，子业留在京城。
English: The founder of the town was looking for the sun, while his son stayed in the capital.

古文：四年，讲《孝经》于崇正殿。七年，加元服。
现代文：世祖即皇位后，立子业为皇太子。大明二年，住进东宫。四年，在崇正殿讲解《孝经》。七年，举行冠礼。
English: In the second year of the Ming Dynasty, he moved into the East Palace. In the fourth year, he gave a lecture on the "Book of Filial Piety" at the Chongzheng Hall. In the seventh year, the crowning ceremony was held.

古文：八年闰王月庚申，世祖崩，其日，太子即皇帝位。
现代文：大明八年闰五月十六日，世祖驾崩，同日，太子即位。
English: On the 16th day of the 5th month of the 8th year of the Ming Dynasty, the ancestor passed away, and on the same day, the crown prince ascended the throne.

古文：大赦天下。
现代文：大赦天下。
English: Amnesty for the whole world.

古文：太宰江夏王义恭解尚书令，加中书监，骠骑大将军柳元景加尚书令。
现代文：免去太宰江夏王义恭尚书令职务，加封为中书监，骠骑大将军柳元景任尚书令。
English: Dazai Jiangxia Wang Yigong was relieved of his duties as the chief scrivener, and he was given the additional title of the chief scrivener, while the commander of the cavalry, General Liu Yuanjing, was appointed as the chief scrivener.

古文：甲子，置录尚书，太宰江夏王义恭录尚书事。
现代文：十九日，设置录尚书、太宰江夏王义恭任录尚书事。
English: On the 19th, Dazai Jiangxia Wang Yigong was assigned to record the records.

古文：骠骑大将军柳元景加开府仪同三司。
现代文：骠骑大将军柳元景加封为开府仪同三司。
English: General Liu Yuanqing, the commander of the imperial cavalry, was appointed as the third secretary of the Kaifu ceremony.

古文：凡曲令密文，繁而伤治，关市僦税，事施一时，而奸吏舞文，妄兴威福，加以气纬舛玄，偏颇滋甚。宜其宽徭轻宪，以救民切。御府诸署，事不须广，雕文篆刻，无施于今。
现代文：应轻徭薄赋，救民疾苦。御府各署，不要多事，雕梁画栋一律禁止。
English: It is necessary to be frivolous, to save people's suffering. Government departments, do not do too much, carving beams and painting buildings are all prohibited.

古文：悉宜并省，以酬氓愿。
现代文：尽量减省，以合民意。
English: Try to save as much as possible to conform to public opinion.

古文：籓王贸货，壹皆禁断。
现代文：藩王之间贸易一律禁止。
English: All trade between the lords of the domain was prohibited.

古文：外便具条以闻。 
现代文：外地逐条下达。 
English: It will be issued on an article-by-article basis.

古文：戊寅，以豫州之淮南郡复为南梁郡，复分宣城还置淮南郡。
现代文：九日，将豫州的淮南郡又改为南梁郡，从宣城划出一部分设置淮南郡。
English: On the 9th, Huainan County of Yuzhou was changed to Nanliang County, and a part of Xuancheng was set up as Huainan County.

古文：庚辰，以南海太守袁昙远为广州刺史。
现代文：十三日，任命南海太守袁云远为广州刺史。
English: On the 13th, Yuan Yunyuan, the governor of the South China Sea, was appointed as the chief historian of Guangzhou.

古文：秋七月己亥，镇军将军、雍州刺史晋安王子勋改为江州刺史，中护军宗悫为安西将军、雍州刺史，镇北将军、徐州刺史湘东王讳为护军将军，中军将军义阳王昶为征北将军、徐州刺史。
现代文：秋七月六日，镇军将军、雍州刺史晋安王子勋改任江州刺史，中护军宗悫任安西将军、雍州刺史，镇北将军、徐州刺史湘东王任护军将军，中军将军义阳王昶任征北将军、徐州刺史。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of autumn, the general of the Zhenjun Army and the prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of

古文：庚戌，婆皇国遣使献方物。
现代文：十二日，婆皇国派使者来进献特产。
English: On the 12th, the mother country sent an envoy to bring in special products.

古文：崇皇太后曰太皇太后，皇后曰皇太后。
现代文：尊皇太后为太皇太后，皇后为皇太后。
English: The respected empress dowager is the great empress dowager, and the empress is the empress dowager.

古文：乙卯，罢南北二驰道。
现代文：二十日，废南北二驰道。
English: On the 20th, the north-south two-lane road was abandoned.

古文：孝建以来所改制度，还依元嘉。
现代文：孝建以来所改变的元嘉年间的制度，重新恢复。
English: The system of the Yuan and Jia dynasties, which had been changed since the time of Xiaojian, was restored.

古文：丙辰，追崇献妃为皇后。
现代文：十九日，追尊献妃为献皇后。
English: On the 19th, the statue was dedicated to the queen.

古文：新安王子鸾为青、冀二州刺史。
现代文：二十二日，抚军将军、南徐州刺史新安王子鸾兼任司徒。八月九日，领军将军王玄谟任镇北将军、青冀二州刺史。
English: On the 22nd, the general of the Fuzhou army and the governor of South Xuzhou Province, Xin'an Prince, also served as the governor. On August 9th, the leading general, Wang Xuanmu, was appointed the general of Zhenbei Province and the governor of the two provinces of Qinghai and Hebei.

古文：己未，以青、冀二州刺史萧惠开为益州刺史。
现代文：十一日，任命青、冀二州刺史萧惠开为益州刺史。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Xiao Huikai, the chief historian of Qing and Hebei, was appointed as the chief historian of Yizhou.

古文：己丑，皇太后崩。
现代文：十四日，皇太后去世。
English: On the 14th, the Empress Dowager passed away.

古文：京师雨水。
现代文：京城发洪水。
English: Flooding in the capital.

古文：庚子，遣御史与官长随宜赈恤。
现代文：二十四日，派御史与地方官员随即赈济。
English: On the 24th, Emperor Taishi and local officials immediately came to help.

古文：九月辛丑，护军将军湘东王讳为领军将军。
现代文：九月五日，护军将军湘东王任领军将军。
English: On September 5, the escort general, Hunan Dongwang, was appointed as the leading general.

古文：癸卯，以尚书左仆射刘遵考为特进、右光禄大夫。乙卯，文穆皇后祔葬景宁陵。
现代文：七日，任命尚书左仆射刘遵考为特进、右光禄大夫，十九日，文穆皇后附葬在景宁陵。
English: On the 7th, Shangshu's left-hand servant Liu Zunka was appointed as the special envoy and the right-hand doctor, and on the 19th, Empress Wenmu was buried in the Jingning Mausoleum.

古文：冬十月甲戌，太常建安王休仁为护军将军。
现代文：冬十月二日，太常建安王休仁担任护军将军。
English: On the 2nd of October in winter, King Jianan of Taizhong took the post of general of the escort.

古文：戊寅，辅国将军宋越为司州刺史。
现代文：十日，辅国将军宗越任司州刺史。
English: On the 10th, Zong Yue, the general of the Auxiliary Province, was appointed as the governor of Shizhou.

古文：庚辰，原除扬、南徐州大明七年逋租。
现代文：十七日，免除扬、南徐州大明七年以前欠的租税。
English: On the 17th, Yang and Nan Xuzhou Daming were exempted from the tax owed seven years ago.

古文：十二月乙酉，以尚书右仆射颜师伯为尚书左仆射。
现代文：十二月二十日，委任尚书右仆射颜师伯为尚书仆射。
English: On December 20th, he appointed Shang Shuxu's right-hand man Shaye Yan as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man.

古文：壬辰，以王畿诸郡为扬州，以扬州为东扬州。
现代文：二十八日，把京城直辖各郡合在一起设立扬州，改原来的扬州为东扬州。
English: On the 28th, the counties directly under the jurisdiction of Beijing were combined to establish Yangzhou, and the original Yangzhou was changed to East Yangzhou.

古文：癸巳，以车骑将军、扬州刺史豫章王子尚为司徒、扬州刺史。
现代文：二十九日，任命车骑将军、扬州刺史豫章王子尚为司徒、扬州刺史。
English: On the 29th, the general of cavalry and cavalry, Yangzhou Zishi Yuanzhang, was appointed the prince of Yangzhou Zishi and Yangzhou Zishi.

古文：去岁及是岁，东诸郡大旱，甚者米一升数百，京邑亦至百余，饿死者十有六七。
现代文：去年和今年，东边各郡大旱，严重的地方一升米卖到几百钱，京城也卖到一百多钱，百分之六、七十的人饿死。
English: Last year and this year, there was a severe drought in the eastern counties. In severe places, a liter of rice was sold for several hundred yuan, and in the capital it was sold for more than one hundred yuan. Sixty to seventy percent of the people died of starvation.

古文：孝建以来，又立钱署铸钱，百姓因此盗铸，钱转伪小，商货不行。
现代文：孝建以来，又设钱署铸钱，百姓乘机偷铸，钱变得轻、小，在商贾中不流通。
English: Since Xiao Jian, the Monetary Authority has been set up to mint money, and the people have taken the opportunity to secretly mint money. Money has become light and small, and is not circulated among merchants.

古文：永光元年春正月乙未朔，改元，大赦天下。
现代文：永光元年春正月初一，改年号。大赦天下。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the first year of Yongguang, the name of the year was changed.

古文：乙巳，省诸州台传。
现代文：二日，撤各州台傅。
English: On the second day, all the states withdrew their chefs.

古文：戊午，以领军将军湘东王讳为卫将军、南豫州刺史，护军将军建安王休仁为领军将军，秘书监山阳王休祐为豫州刺史，左卫将军桂阳王休范为中护军，南豫州刺史寻阳王子房为东扬州刺史。
现代文：三日，任命领军将军湘东王为卫将军、南豫州刺史，护军将军建安王休仁为领军将军，秘书监山阳王休佑为豫州刺史，左卫将军桂阳王休范为中护军，南豫州刺史寻阳王子房为东扬州刺史。
English: On the third day, the leader of the army, Hunan Dongwang, was appointed as the guard general, and the south of Henan Province was appointed as the guard general, the guard general Jianan Wang Xuren was appointed as the leader of the army, the secretary supervisor Shanyang Wang Xiuyou was appointed as the guard general of Henan Province, the left guard general Guiyang Wang Xuan was appointed as the middle guard, and the south of Henan Province was appointed as the guard general of east Yangzhou.

古文：二月丁丑，减州郡县田租之半。
现代文：二月六日，减去州郡县官一半禄田。
English: On February 6, the state, county and prefectural officials were reduced by half.

古文：庚寅，铸二铢钱。
现代文：十五日，铸二铢钱。
English: On the fifteenth day, two shekels of money were minted.

古文：三月甲辰，罢临江郡。
现代文：三月十三日，撤销江郡。
English: On March 13, Jiang County was revoked.

古文：五月己亥，割郢州随郡属雍州。
现代文：五月二十二日，将郢州随郡划给雍州。
English: On May 22, the county of Bozhou was transferred to Yongzhou.

古文：丙午，以后军司马张牧为交州刺史。
现代文：二十五日，任命后军司马张牧为交州刺史。
English: On the 25th, after the appointment of the military secretary, Ma Zhangmu, he was appointed as the governor of Jiaozhou.

古文：六月己巳，左军长史刘道隆为梁、南秦二州刺史。
现代文：六月四日，左军长史刘道隆任梁、南秦二州刺史。
English: On June 4, Liu Daolong, the commander of the Left Army, was appointed as Liang and Nanqin Erzhou.

古文：乙亥，安西将军、雍州刺史宗悫卒。
现代文：十二日，安西将军、雍州刺史宗悫去世。
English: On the 12th, Anxi General and Yongzhou leader Zonglu Zishi passed away.

古文：壬午，卫将军、南豫州刺史湘东王讳改为雍州刺史。
现代文：十四日，调卫将军、南豫州刺史湘东王任雍州刺史。
English: On the 14th, Xiangdong Wang, the commander of the Southern Henan Province and the governor of the Southern Henan Province, was appointed governor of the Southern Henan Province.

古文：尚书令、骠骑大将军柳元景加南豫州刺史。
现代文：尚书令、骠骑大将军柳元景加封为南豫州刺史。
English: General Liu Yuanqing, the commander of the imperial cavalry, was also awarded the title of South Henan Provincial Historian.

古文：秋八月辛酉，越骑校尉戴法兴有罪，赐死。
现代文：秋八月二日，越骑校尉戴法犯罪，被赐死。
English: On the 2nd day of the 8th month of autumn, the Vietcong cavalry captain Dai Fa committed a crime and was sentenced to death.

古文：庚午，以尚书左仆射颜师伯为尚书仆射，吏部尚书王景文为尚书右仆射。
现代文：五日，任命尚书仆射颜师伯为尚书左仆射，吏部尚书王景文为尚书右仆射。
English: On the fifth day, Shang Shuxu's servant, Shayan Shibao, was appointed Shang Shuxu's left-hand servant, and Shang Shuxu's official, Wang Jingwen, was appointed Shang Shuxu's right-hand servant.

古文：癸酉，帝自率宿卫兵，诛太宰江夏王义恭、尚书令、骠骑大将军柳元景、尚书仆射颜师伯、廷尉刘德愿。
现代文：六日，皇上亲率宫廷士卫，杀太宰江夏王义恭、尚书令骠骑大将军柳元景、尚书左仆射颜师伯、廷尉刘德愿。
English: On the sixth day, the emperor's relatives, led by the courtier Wei, killed the grand vizier Jiangxia Wang Yigong, Shang Shuling's cavalry general Liu Yuanqing, Shang Shuling's left-hand servant Sha Yan Shi Bo, and the courtier Liu Deyan.

古文：改元为景和元年，文武赐位二等。
现代文：改年号为景和元年。文武大臣赐爵二等。
English: The name of the year was changed to the 1st year of the Keiwa era. The Minister of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology conferred a second class knighthood.

古文：可甄访郡国，招聘闾部：其有孝性忠节，幽居遁栖，信诚义行，廉正表俗，文敏博识，干事治民，务加旌举，随才引擢。
现代文：任命领军将军建安王休仁为安西将军、雍州刺史，卫将军湘东王为南豫州刺史。九日，司徒、扬州刺史豫章王子尚兼任尚书令，射声校尉沈文秀任青州刺史。左军司马崔道固任冀州刺史。十一日，下诏说： 走访民间，招聘贤才，凡忠孝节义之人，隐居深山诚信之士，廉洁正直能为民师表，文思敏捷，见识丰富，才干突出能治理百姓，这些人一定要褒扬举荐，根据才能大小选用。
English: On the 9th, the leading general Jian'an Wang Xuren was appointed as the general of Anxi, the general of Yongzhou, and the general of Wei, Hunan Dongwang was appointed as the general of South Henan. On the 9th, the general of Sidu and the general of Yangzhou, the prince of Yuzhang, were also appointed as the general, the general of Qingzhou was appointed as the general of Yuzhou, and the general of the left army, the general of Ma Cui Daogu, was appointed as the general of Jizhou. On the 11th, the next edict said: "Visit the people, recruit talents, those who are loyal

古文：庶官克顺，彝伦咸叙。主者精加详括，称朕意焉。 
现代文：不论是平民百姓还是官吏，全都举荐。主事者要认真落实，以称我心愿。 
English: Regardless of whether it is civilians or officials, all are recommended. Those in charge should seriously implement it, which is my heart's desire.

古文：以始兴公沈庆之为太尉，镇北将军、青冀二州刺史王玄谟为领军将军。
现代文：任命始兴公沈庆之为太尉，镇北将军、青冀二州刺史王玄谟为领军将军。
English: He appointed Shi Xing Gong Shen Qing Bin as the first lieutenant, Zhenbei as the general, and Qinghai Zhishu Wang Xuan Mu as the leading general.

古文：庚辰，以石头城为长乐宫，东府城为未央宫。
现代文：十四日，称石头城为长乐宫，东府城为未央宫。
English: On the 14th, Stone Town was called Changle Palace, and Dongfu Town was called Weiyang Palace.

古文：罢东扬州并扬州。
现代文：将东扬州并入扬州。
English: East Yangzhou will be merged into Yangzhou.

古文：甲申，以北邸为建章宫，南第为长杨宫。
现代文：二十日，改北邸为建章宫，南边住所为长扬宫。
English: On the 20th, the northern residence was changed to Jianzhang Palace, and the southern residence to Changyang Palace.

古文：以冠军将军邵陵王子元为湘州刺史。
现代文：委任冠军将军邵陵王子元为湘州刺史。
English: The champion general, Shaoling Wangyuan, was appointed as the history of Hunan Province.

古文：丙戌，原除吴、吴兴、义兴、晋陵、琅邪五郡大明八年以前逋租。
现代文：二十五日，免除吴、吴兴、义兴、晋陵、琅王牙五郡大明八年以前的欠租。
English: On the 25th, the five counties of Wu, Wu Xing, Yixing, Jinling, and Wangya were exempted from rent arrears before the eighth year of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：己丑，复立南北二驰道。
现代文：二十七日，重新设立南北二驰道。
English: On the 27th, the north-south two-lane road was re-established.

古文：九月癸巳，车驾幸湖熟，奏鼓吹。
现代文：九月三日，皇上视察湖熟，乐队奏乐迎接。
English: On September 3rd, the Emperor inspected the lake and was greeted by the orchestra.

古文：戊戌，车驾还宫。
现代文：六日，皇上回宫。
English: On the 23rd, they drove back to the palace.

古文：庚子，以南兗州刺史永嘉王子仁为南徐州刺史，丹阳尹始安王子真为南兗州刺史。
现代文：八日，委任南兖州刺史永嘉王子仁为南徐州刺史，丹阳尹始安王子真为南兖州刺史。
English: On the 8th, Yongjia Prince Ren was appointed as the governor of South Xuzhou and Danyang Prince Yin Shi'an as the governor of South Xuzhou.

古文：辛丑，抚军将军、南徐州刺史新安王子鸾免为庶人，赐死。
现代文：十日，抚军将军、南徐州刺史新安王子鸾被贬为平民，赐死。
English: On the 10th, General Fuzhong and the Prince of Southern Xuzhou Jishi Xin'an were reduced to civilians and sentenced to death.

古文：戊申，以前梁、南秦二州刺史柳元怙复为梁、南秦二州刺史。
现代文：十三日，委任兖州刺史薛安都为平北将军、徐州刺史。十五日，卫将军湘东王加封为开府仪同三司，特进、右光禄大夫刘遵考任安西将军、南豫州刺史。
English: On the 13th, Xue Andu, the governor of Zhangzhou, was appointed as the governor of Pingbei and the governor of Xuzhou; on the 15th, Wang Jafeng, the governor of Hunan, was appointed as the governor of Kaifu, and Liu Zunka, the governor of Anxi and the governor of Nanhu, was appointed as the governor of Anxi and the governor of Nanhu.

古文：己酉，车驾讨征北将军、徐州刺史义阳王昶，内外戒严。
现代文：十八日，御驾亲征北将军、徐州刺史义阳王昶，全国戒严。
English: On the 18th, the generals of the Northern Expedition, Xuzhou Zhishi and Yiyang Wangyao, arrived in person, and the whole country was under martial law.

古文：昶奔于索虏。
现代文：昶逃到索虏。
English: fled to Soryu.

古文：辛亥，右将军、豫州刺史山阳王休祐进号镇西大将军。
现代文：二十三日，右将军、豫州刺史山阳王休佑晋升为镇西大将军。
English: On the 23rd, the Right General, the Henan Provincial Historian, Shanyang Wang Xiu You, was promoted to the Zhenxi Major General.

古文：甲寅，以安西长史袁鳷为雍州刺史。
现代文：二十六日，任命安西长史袁头为雍州刺史。
English: On the 26th, Anxi Governor Yuan Tou was appointed as the Yongzhou Governor.

古文：戊午，以左民尚书刘思考为益州刺史。
现代文：二十八日，委任左民尚书刘思考为益州刺史。
English: On the 28th, he appointed Zuo Min Shangshu Liu Sheng to write the history of Yizhou.

古文：是日解严，车驾幸瓜步。
现代文：同日，解除戒严，皇上视察瓜步。
English: On the same day, martial law was lifted, and the emperor inspected the melons.

古文：开百姓铸钱。
现代文：允许百姓铸钱。
English: Allow people to mint money.

古文：冬十月癸亥，曲赦徐州。
现代文：冬十月八日，赦免徐州。
English: In winter, on October 8, he pardoned Xuzhou.

古文：丙寅，车驾还宫。
现代文：十二日，皇上回宫。
English: On the 12th, the emperor returned to the palace.

古文：以建安休仁为护军将军。
现代文：委任建安王休仁为护军将军。
English: He appointed Jianan Wang Huiren as the general of the escorting army.

古文：己卯，东阳太守王藻下狱死。
现代文：二十一日，东阳太守王藻被投入监狱处死。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Wang Mo, the governor of Dongyang, was thrown into prison and executed.

古文：以宫人谢贵嫔为夫人，加虎贲靸戟，鸾辂龙旂，出警入跸，实新蔡公主也。
现代文：封宫女谢贵嫔为夫人，赐给虎贲革及戟、鸾路龙旆，出入开路清道行人回避，俨然新蔡公主。
English: Xie Guizhen, the woman who sealed the palace, became his wife. She gave him a tiger's pelt and a donkey, and a dragon's pelt for the entrance and exit, and cleared the way for pedestrians to avoid it. She was like a new Princess Cai.

古文：乙酉，以镇北大将军、豫州刺史山阳王休祐为镇军大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：二十七日，任命镇西大将军、豫州刺史山阳王休佑为镇军大将军，开府仪同三司。
English: On the 27th, he appointed Zhenxi Major General and Yuzhou chief historian Shanyang Wang Xiuyou as the major general of the town army, and held the ceremony of opening the town and the three departments.

古文：十一月壬辰，宁朔将军何迈下狱死。
现代文：十一月十二日，宁朔将军休迈被投入监狱处死。
English: On November 12, Ningshuo General Xiumai was thrown into prison and executed.

古文：新除太尉沈庆之薨。
现代文：新任太尉沈庆之去世。
English: The new captain Shen Qingzhi passed away.

古文：壬寅，立皇后路氏，四厢奏乐。
现代文：十九日，立路氏为皇后，四面奏乐恭贺。
English: On the 19th, Lilu was crowned as the empress, and the four sides played music to congratulate her.

古文：赦扬、南徐二州。
现代文：赦免扬州、南徐州。
English: Yangzhou and South Xuzhou were pardoned.

古文：护军将军建王休仁加特进、左光禄大夫。
现代文：护军将军建安王休仁加封为特进、左光禄大夫。
English: Jian'an Wang Xurin, the general of the escorting army, was appointed as a special envoy and the doctor of the Left Guanglu Hospital.

古文：中护军桂阳王休范迁职。
现代文：中护军桂阳王休范升职。
English: Guiyang Wang Xuanfan, a middle-ranking guard, was promoted.

古文：丁未，皇子生，少府刘胜之子也。
现代文：二十二日，皇子出生，实是少府刘胜的儿子。
English: On the 22nd, the prince was born. He was actually the son of Liu Sheng, a minor official.

古文：大赦天下，赃污淫盗，悉皆原除。
现代文：大赦天下。偷盗奸淫者，都免于处罚。
English: There was a general amnesty. Those who stole or committed adultery were exempt from punishment.

古文：赐为父后者爵一级。
现代文：赐天下做父亲的爵一级。
English: Give every father a knighthood.

古文：壬子，以特进、左光禄大夫、护军将军建安王休仁为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：二十七日，任命特进、左光禄大夫、护军将军建安王休仁为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: On the 27th, Jian'an Wang Xuren, a special envoy, doctor of the Left Guanglu, and general of the escorting army, was appointed as the cavalry general and the third secretary of the Kaifu ceremony.

古文：戊午，南平王敬猷、庐陵王敬先、安南侯敬渊并赐死。
现代文：二十九日，南平王敬献、庐陵王敬先、安南侯敬渊全被赐死。
English: On the 29th, Nanping King Jingxian, Fuling King Jingxian, and Annan Prince Jingyuan were all put to death.

古文：时帝凶悖日甚，诛杀相继，内外百司，不保首领。先是讹言云： 湘中出天子。 
现代文：当时皇上一天比一天凶恶，不断杀人，朝廷内外百官，性命不保。起先传言： 湘中出天子。 
English: At that time, the emperor was becoming more and more vicious day by day, constantly killing people, and there were hundreds of officials inside and outside the imperial court, and his life was not safe.

古文：帝将南巡荆、湘二州以厌之。
现代文：皇上将要南巡荆州、湘州，以肃清流言。
English: The emperor will make a southern tour of Jingzhou and Hunan to clear up the rumors.

古文：先欲诛诸叔，然后发引。
现代文：皇上首先想杀各位叔叔，这样就引发了废帝事件爆发。
English: The emperor first wanted to kill your uncles, which triggered the outbreak of the dethronement incident.

古文：太宗与左右阮佃夫、王道隆、李道兒密结帝左右寿寂之、姜产之等十一人，谋共废帝。
现代文：太宗与亲信阮佃夫、王道隆、李道儿，暗地与皇上的亲信寿寂之、姜产之等十一人联络谋划共同废掉皇上。
English: Emperor Taizong and his close confidants Nguyn Xuân Văn, Wang Duolong, and Li Duor secretly contacted eleven of the emperor's close confidants, including Shuxia Zhi and Jiang Sheng, to jointly plot to depose the emperor.

古文：戊午夜，帝于华林园竹堂射鬼。
现代文：三十日夜，皇上到华林园竹林宴射鬼。
English: On the evening of the 30th, the emperor went to the bamboo grove in Hualin Garden to have a banquet and shoot ghosts.

古文：时巫觋云： 此堂有鬼。 
现代文：当时巫师说： 经虚有鬼。 
English: At that time, the sorcerer said, "Through emptiness, there is a ghost."

古文：故帝自射之。
现代文：所以皇上亲自去射。
English: Therefore, the Emperor himself went to shoot.

古文：寿寂之怀刀直入，姜产之为副。
现代文：寿寂之带刀冲进去，姜产之作他的帮手。
English: Shoujia rushes in with a knife, and Jiang is his helper.

古文：帝欲走，寂之追而殒之，时年十七。
现代文：皇上欲逃走，寿寂之追赶并杀了他。皇上时年十七岁。
English: The emperor wanted to run away, but Shoujaku chased him down and killed him. The emperor was seventeen years old at the time.

古文：太皇太后令曰：
现代文：太皇太后下令说：
English: The Empress Dowager ordered:

古文：司徒领护军八座：子业虽曰嫡长，少禀凶毒，不仁不孝，著自髫龀。
现代文： 司徒领护军八座，子业虽说是嫡长子，但少时秉性凶残为人歹毒，不仁不孝，几岁时就表现得很明显。
English: There were eight sets of guards led by Stow, and although Ziyuan was the eldest son, when he was young, he was vicious, unkind, and unfilial, which became apparent when he was a few years old.

古文：孝武弃世，属当辰历。
现代文：孝武帝仙逝，按例由嫡长子即位。
English: Emperor Xiaowu died, and his eldest son ascended the throne.

古文：自梓宫在殡，喜容靦然，天罚重离，欢恣滋甚。
现代文：孝武帝的灵柩还没出宫，他就喜形于色。上天惩罚他们父子俩离别，他却更加高兴。
English: Emperor Xiaowu's coffin had not yet left the palace, and he was beaming with joy. Heaven had punished their father and son for parting, but he was even happier.

古文：逼以内外维持，忍虐未露，而凶惨难抑，一旦肆祸，遂纵戮上宰，殄害辅臣。
现代文：最初慑于宫廷内外的众人的力量，残忍肆虐的本性还没显露出来，但凶恶惨毒的本性难以抑制，一旦肆虐作祸，就杀戮上宰，残害朝廷忠臣。
English: Initially, the power of deterring many people inside and outside the court, the cruel and violent nature has not yet been revealed, but the vicious and cruel nature is difficult to suppress. Once the evil is rampant, it will kill and maim the loyal subjects of the court.

古文：子鸾兄弟，先帝钟爱，含怨既往，枉加屠酷。
现代文：子鸾兄弟，被先帝钟爱，由于以往就怨恨妒嫉在心，乱加屠杀。
English: The Zixuan brothers, who were loved by the former emperor, killed indiscriminately because of their hatred and jealousy in the past.

古文：昶茂亲作捍，横相征讨。
现代文：王昶捍卫国家的栋梁，横加讨伐。
English: Wang Hui defends the pillars of the country and aggressively fights.

古文：新蔡公主逼离夫族，幽置深宫，诡云薨殒。
现代文：逼新蔡公主离开自己的丈夫，并将其幽禁在深宫，谎称她死去。
English: He forced the new Princess Cai to leave her husband and confined her in the Deep Palace, falsely claiming that she was dead.

古文：襄事甫尔，丧礼顿释，昏酣长夜，庶事倾遗。
现代文：丧事一办完，就取消丧礼，通宵作乐，不问朝政。
English: As soon as the funeral is over, they cancel the funeral and play music all night, regardless of the government.

古文：朝贤旧勋，弃若遗土。
现代文：朝中贤士昔日功臣，像粪土一样被抛弃。
English: The sages of the dynasty, the heroes of yesteryear, have been discarded like dung.

古文：管弦不辍，珍羞备膳。詈辱祖考，以为戏谑。行游莫止，淫纵无度。
现代文：天天音乐之声不断，餐餐美味珍馐。辱骂祖父，视作儿戏。游玩无休，淫乐无度。
English: The sound of music is incessant every day, the meals are delicious and rare. Abusing grandfathers is seen as child's play. There is endless play, and there is no end to sexual pleasure.

古文：肆宴园陵，规图发掘。诛剪无辜，籍略妇女。
现代文：在陵园大摆宴席，按图乱发掘，诛杀无辜，占人妇女。
English: In the cemetery grand banquet, according to the plan of random excavation, killing innocent, accounted for women.

古文：建树伪竖，莫知谁息。
现代文：运用小人，真不知是谁的儿子。
English: I don't know whose son he is.

古文：拜嫔立后，庆过恆典。
现代文：封嫔子皇后，庆典铺张超过了历代。
English: The celebration of the enthronement of the Empress Dowager Cixi was more extravagant than any other in history.

古文：宗室密戚，遇若婢仆，鞭捶陵曳，无复尊卑。南平一门，特钟其酷。
现代文：宗室的亲戚，碰到了像遇到奴仆一样，鞭挞凌辱，目无尊长，南平一门，遭受的祸害最大。
English: Nanping's relatives were treated like slaves. They were beaten, humiliated, and had no respect for elders. Nanping's family suffered the most.

古文：反天灭理，显暴万端。
现代文：违背天理的行为太多了。
English: There are too many actions that go against the laws of nature.

古文：苛罚酷令，终无纪极，夏桀、殷辛，未足以譬。
现代文：刑罚残酷，法令苛刻，到了顶点，用夏桀、商纣来比喻都不足以形容他的罪恶。
English: The punishment is cruel, the laws are harsh, and they have reached the peak. To describe his crime with the metaphor of summer and summer is not enough.

古文：阖朝业业，人不自保；百姓遑遑，手足靡厝。
现代文：整个朝廷岌岌可危，人人性命难保，百姓惶恐，手足不知所措。
English: The entire imperial court is in a precarious situation, everyone's life is in danger, the people are terrified, and their hands and feet are at a loss.

古文：行秽禽兽，罪盈三千。
现代文：行如禽兽，罪恶超过三千条。
English: Behaving like animals, there are more than three thousand sins.

古文：高祖之业将泯，七庙之享几绝。
现代文：高祖开创的基业将要毁灭，宗庙的祭祀将要断绝。
English: The foundation created by Gao Zu will be destroyed, and the sacrificial rites of the ancestral temple will be discontinued.

古文：吾老疾沉笃，每规祸鸩，忧煎漏刻，气命无几。
现代文：我年迈病重，每想到他造成的祸害，忧虑难眠。建国以来，从没听说过有这样的暴君。
English: I am old and sick, and I cannot sleep for worrying about the evils he has caused. Since the founding of our country, we have never heard of such a tyrant.

古文：开辟以降，所未尝闻。远近思奋，十室而九。卫将军湘东王体自太祖，天纵英圣，文皇钟爱，宠冠列籓。
现代文： 卫将军湘东王是太祖的亲骨肉，上天给他智慧，在藩王中，文帝对他最宠爱，我早发现了他的圣明睿智。由于义士同心协力，除掉了暴君，社稷再兴，宗庙永固，是人心所向。
English: General Wei, the king of eastern Hunan, was the great-grandfather's own flesh and blood. Heaven gave him wisdom. Among the kings of the domain, Emperor Wen loved him the most. I had already discovered his wisdom and wisdom. Thanks to the concerted efforts of the righteous, the tyrant was eliminated, the social order was revived, and the ancestral temple was eternal. This was what people wanted.

古文：吾早识神睿，特兼常礼。
现代文：湘东王德高望重，人心所向，宜遵照汉朝、晋朝旧例，即皇位，主事人查考旧典籍及时实行。
English: The Hunan King is highly respected for his virtue, and it is advisable to follow the old example of the Han Dynasty and Jin Dynasty, that is, the imperial throne. The person in charge should check the old classics in a timely manner.

古文：当复奈何！当复奈何！
现代文： 残年遭遇这样灾乱，难以忘怀，虽说苟活着实际上就像死了一样，还能怎样呢！
English: In the remaining years, it is hard to forget such a disaster, although being alive is actually like being dead, what else can you do!

古文：葬废帝丹阳秣陵县南郊坛西。
现代文：还能怎样呢？ 将废帝葬在丹阳秣陵县南郊坛西。
English: What else can be done? The deposed emperor will be buried in the south suburb of Danyang, Fuling County.

古文：帝幼而狷急，在东宫每为世祖所责。世祖西巡，子业启参承起居，书迹不谨，上诘让之。
现代文：废帝幼时就狂狷急躁，当太子时就常常被世祖斥责，世祖西巡，废帝前往问候，由于书写不认真，世祖责骂他。
English: When Emperor Wudi was a child, he was wild and impetuous. When he was crown prince, he was often rebuked by the patriarch. When the patriarch was on a tour to the West, Emperor Wudi went to greet him. Since he was not serious about writing, the patriarch scolded him.

古文：子业启事陈谢，上又答曰： 书不长进，此是一条耳。
现代文：废帝谢罪，世祖又说： 读书不长进，这是一条罪过。
English: After the emperor was dethroned, the patriarch said, "It is a sin not to make progress in reading."

古文：闻汝素都懈怠，狷戾日甚，何以顽固乃尔邪！ 
现代文：听说你一向懈怠，一天比一天凶恶，怎么发展成了这个样子！ 
English: I've heard that you've always been a slacker, getting more vicious by the day, how did you develop into this!

古文：初践阼，受玺绂，悖然无哀容。
现代文：废帝刚即位，接受玉玺，一丝愁容也没有。
English: The deposed emperor had just ascended the throne and accepted the imperial scepter, without a trace of sorrow.

古文：始犹难诸大臣及戴法兴等，既杀法兴，诸大臣莫不震慑。
现代文：刚开始还惧怕各大臣和戴法兴等人，杀了法兴后，大臣们莫不恐惧，于是又杀众大臣。
English: At the beginning, they were still afraid of the ministers and Dai Faxing and others. After killing Faxing, the ministers were not afraid, so they killed the ministers.

古文：于是又诛群公，元凯以下，皆被殴捶牵曳。
现代文：元凯以下，都被殴打过。
English: Everyone from Yuan Kai on down has been beaten.

古文：内外危惧，殿省骚然。
现代文：朝廷内外人人惶恐，京城骚动。
English: Everyone inside and outside the imperial court was terrified, and the capital was in turmoil.

古文：初太后疾笃，遣呼帝。
现代文：当初太后病重时，派人叫废帝。
English: When the empress dowager was gravely ill, someone was sent to summon the deposed emperor.

古文：帝曰： 病人间多鬼，可畏，那可往。 
现代文：废帝说： 病人身边多鬼，可怕，哪能去。 
English: Emperor Wudi said: There are many ghosts around the patient, it's scary, where can I go?

古文：太后怒，语侍者： 将刀来，破我腹，那得生如此宁馨兒！ 
现代文：太后大怒，对侍者： 拿刀来，把我肚子剖开，怎么生了这样一个好儿子！ 
English: The empress dowager was furious and said to the waiter: Take a knife and cut open my stomach. How did you give birth to such a good son!

古文：及太后崩后数日，帝梦太后谓之曰： 汝不孝不仁，本无人君之相。
现代文：太后仙逝后过了几天，废帝梦见太后对他说： 你不孝不仁，本来就无人君之相。
English: A few days after the death of the Empress Dowager Immortal, Emperor Gao dreamed that the Empress Dowager said to him, "You are not filial and not kind, and there is no one like you."

古文：子尚愚悖如此，亦非运祚所及。
现代文：子尚也像你一样愚笨无德，也不是皇位的传人。
English: His son is just as stupid and worthless as you are, and he is not the heir to the throne.

古文：孝武险虐灭道，怨结人神，兒子虽多，并无天命。
现代文：孝武帝违背道德肆虐妄为，得罪了神灵，儿子虽多，并无一人能继承大业。
English: Emperor Xiaowu violated the moral standards and abused his power. He offended the gods. Although he had many sons, none of them could succeed him.

古文：大运所归，应还文帝之子。 
现代文：皇位应还给文帝之子。 
English: The throne should be returned to Emperor Wen's son.

古文：其后湘东王绍位，果文帝子也。
现代文：后来湘东王即位，果然是文帝的儿子。
English: Later, the king of Shandong ascended to the throne, and he was indeed the son of Emperor Wen.

古文：故帝聚诸叔京邑，虑在外为患。
现代文：因此废帝曾将所有的叔叔集中到京城，担心他们在外地造反。
English: Therefore, the deposed emperor once concentrated all the uncles in the capital, fearing that they would rebel in other places.

古文：山阴公主淫恣过度，谓帝曰： 妾与陛下，虽男女有殊，俱托体先帝。
现代文：山阴公主淫乐无度，曾对废帝说： 我与陛下，虽是男女有别，但都是先帝的骨肉。
English: Princess San'in was excessively lustful and once said to the deposed emperor: Although there is a difference between men and women, both I and Your Majesty are the flesh and blood of the former emperor.

古文：陛下六宫万数，而妾唯驸马一人。
现代文：陛下后宫美女数以万计，而我只有驸马一人。
English: There are tens of thousands of beautiful women in His Majesty's harem, but I am only one.

古文：事不均平，一何至此！ 
现代文：事情不公平，怎么到了如此地步呢！ 
English: It's not fair, how did it come to this!

古文：帝乃为主置面首左右三十人；进爵会稽郡长公主，秩同郡王侯，汤沐邑二千户，给鼓吹一部，加班剑二十人。
现代文：废帝就给公主配了面首三十人。并封公主为会稽郡长公主，俸禄同郡王，食汤沐邑二千户，拨给乐队一支，班剑二十人。
English: The deposed emperor gave the princess thirty face masks, appointed her as the county chief princess, the salary was the same as the county king, the soup was distributed to two thousand households, a band was assigned, and there were twenty swordsmen.

古文：帝每出，与朝臣常共陪辇。
现代文：废帝每次外出，公主常与大臣一起陪同。
English: Whenever the deposed emperor went out, the princess was often accompanied by the minister.

古文：主以吏部郎褚渊貌美，就帝请以自侍，帝许之。
现代文：公主因为吏部郎褚渊貌美，请皇上命令褚渊来侍奉她，皇上答应了。
English: The princess asked the emperor to order Shanyuan to serve her because of his good looks, and the emperor agreed.

古文：渊侍主十日，备见逼迫，誓死不回，遂得免。
现代文：褚渊侍奉公主十日，多次被逼迫，誓死不从，就放回来了。
English: Shanyuan served the princess for ten days, was persecuted many times, swore to die, and was released.

古文：帝所幸阉人华愿兒，官至散骑常侍，加将军带郡。
现代文：废帝所宠爱的宦官华愿儿，官至散骑常侍，被加封为将军带郡。
English: The eunuch Hua Jian'er, who was the favorite of the former emperor, was appointed to the post of general with county.

古文：帝少好讲书，颇识古事，自造《世祖诔》及杂篇章，往往有辞采。
现代文：皇上少时好读书，颇知晓古时事情，自己写的《世祖谏》和一些零散文章，颇有文采。
English: When he was young, the emperor liked to read and was quite knowledgeable about ancient times. He wrote his own "Ancestor" and some scattered articles, which were quite literary.

古文：以魏武帝有发丘中郎将、摸金校尉，乃置此二官。
现代文：因为魏武帝设有发丘中郎将、摸金校尉，就设置了这两种官。
English: Because Emperor Weiwu had the generals of the Hairy Hill and the lieutenant of Touching Gold, these two kinds of officials were set up.

古文：以建安王休祐领之。
现代文：由建安王休仁、山阴王休佑兼任。
English: King Jian'an and King San'in also held the position.

古文：其余事迹，分见诸传。
现代文：其余事迹，分别参见各列传。
English: For the rest of his exploits, see the respective biographies.

古文：史臣曰：废帝之事行著于篇。
现代文：史臣说：有关废帝的事迹前面作了记载。
English: Shichen said, "The story of the dethroned emperor has been recorded before.

古文：若夫武王数殷纣之衅，不能挂其万一；霍光书昌邑之过，未足举其毫厘。
现代文：武王所列举商纣的罪恶，不足废帝罪恶的万分之一；霍光所记载的昌邑的过错，不足废帝过错的毫厘。
English: The sins enumerated by King Wu are less than one ten-thousandth of those of the deposed emperor; the faults of Changyi recorded by Huo Guang are less than one ten-thousandth of those of the deposed emperor.

古文：假以中才之君，有一于此，足以霣社残宗，污宫潴庙，况总斯恶以萃一人之体乎！
现代文：一个中等能力的君主，有上面两种中的一种罪过，就足以毁灭社稷、残破宗庙，何况将两种罪恶集中在一个人身上呢？
English: For a middle-ranking monarch, one of the two above-mentioned sins is enough to destroy the community and ruin the ancestral temple, let alone concentrate the two evils on one person.

古文：其得亡，亦为幸矣。
现代文：废帝被杀也是件幸事啊！
English: It is also a blessing that the deposed emperor was killed!

