古文：王戎诣阮籍，时兖州刺吏刘昶字公荣在坐。
现代文：一次王戎去拜访阮籍，当时兖州刺史刘和在坐。
English: Wang Rong once went to visit Nguyn Quc, at that time, the governor of Qung Trn Province, Liu He, was sitting there.

古文：阮谓王曰： 偶有二斗美酒，当与君共饮。
现代文：阮籍对王戎说： 偶然有两斗美酒，应当跟您一起痛饮。
English: Nguyn Quc said to Văn Rng: By chance, there are two barrels of wine, you should drink it with me.

古文：彼公荣者无预焉。 
现代文：那个叫公荣的，没有他的事！ 
English: That guy named Gong Rong, it's none of his business!

古文：二人交觞酬酢，公荣遂不得一杯，而言语谈戏，三人无异。
现代文：两个人就交杯劝饮，公荣始终也没有喝到一杯，却仍然谈笑嬉戏，三个人没有不正常的神色。
English: The two of them exchanged a drink to persuade him to drink, but Gong Rong never got a drink, but they still talked, laughed, and played. The three of them did not look abnormal.

古文：或有问之者，阮曰： 胜公荣者，不得不与饮酒；不如公荣者，不可不与饮酒；唯公荣可不与饮酒。 
现代文：有人问起这事，阮籍说： 胜过公荣的人，不能不跟他喝酒；不如公荣的人，不可以不跟他饮酒；只有公荣，可以不跟他饮酒。 
English: When asked about this, Nguyn Quc said: "If you are more honorable, you can't not drink with him; if you are less honorable, you can't not drink with him; if you are honorable, you can't not drink with him."

古文：此事见戎传，而《世说》为详。
现代文：这件事见于《王戎传》，而《世说新语》里叙述地更详细。
English: The story is told in "Wang Rong Chuan" (王戎传) and is described in more detail in "Seshu Xinyu" (世說新语).

古文：又一事云，公荣与人饮酒，杂秽非类，人或讥之，答曰： 胜公荣者，不可不与饮；不如公荣者，亦不可不与饮；是公荣待客如是，费酒多矣，顾不蒙一杯于人乎？
现代文：又有一件事，说的是公荣跟一个人喝酒，各种各样混杂肮脏的对象都有，跟公荣不是一类人，有人就讥笑他。公荣回答说： 胜过我公荣的人，不能不跟他喝酒；不如我公荣的人，也不能不跟他喝酒；跟我公荣是一类人的人，还是不能不跟他喝酒，因为整天和人共饮而醉。 
English: Another thing is that Gong Rong drank with a person, and there were all kinds of mixed and dirty objects. He was not the same type of person as Gong Rong, and some people mocked him. Gong Rong replied, "A person who is better than my Gong Rong cannot help but drink with him; a person who is not as good as my Gong Rong cannot help but drink with him; a person who is the same type of person as my Gong Rong still cannot help but drink with him, because he is drunk with people all day long."

古文：东坡诗云： 未许低头拜东野，徒言共饮胜公荣。 
现代文：所以苏东坡的诗中说： 未许低头拜东野，徒言共饮胜公荣。 
English: That is why Su Dongpo said in his poem: Do not bow down and worship Higashino, just talk and share victory and glory.

古文：盖用前事也。
现代文：大概就是用的上面所说的典故。
English: This is probably the allusion used above.

