古文：香药茶芜香三名香五名香沉香龙脑香安息香一木五香诃黎勒白豆蔻
现代文：香药茶芜香三名香五名香沉香龙脑香安息香一木五香诃黎勒白豆蔻
English: Incense Tea Incense Three Incense Five Incense Incense Incense Dragon's Brains Incense Incense Wood Incense Five Incense Incense Incense White Bean Incense

古文：穙齐香无石子紫馡阿魏荜拨胡椒阿勃参山薯麻黄荆三棱
现代文：穙齐香无石子紫馡阿魏荜拨胡椒阿勃参山薯麻黄荆三棱
English: Alfalfa, fennel, ginger, stone-free ginger, alfalfa sprouts, parsley sprouts, parsley sprouts, parsley sprouts, parsley sprouts, parsley sprouts, parsley sprouts

古文：服饵
现代文：服饵
English: Clothes hangers

古文：服松脂饵松蕊赐茯苓服茯苓服菖蒲服桂饵柠实服五味子食术
现代文：服松脂饵松蕊赐茯苓服茯苓服菖蒲服桂饵柠实服五味子食术
English: 服松脂松蕊赐服服服蒲服桂檬實服五味子食术

古文：服桃胶服地黄服远志服天门冬饮菊潭水饮甘菊谷水食黄精
现代文：服桃胶服地黄服远志服天门冬饮菊潭水饮甘菊谷水食黄精
English: Clothing peach glue clothing ground yellow clothing distant aspiration clothing Tianmen winter drinking chrysanthemum pool water drinking camomile valley water food yellow essence

古文：香药
现代文：香药
English: Perfume

古文：茶芜香
现代文：茶芜香
English: Camomile tea

古文：燕昭王时，有波弋之国，贡茶芜香。
现代文：燕昭王的时候，有一个波弋国，进贡贡来了茶芜香。
English: In the time of King Yan Zhao, there was a country called Bophu, and tea and musk came as tribute.

古文：若焚着衣，弥月不绝。
现代文：如果把它焚烧，附着到衣服上，一个月之后香气不绝。
English: If you burn it and attach it to your clothes, after a month the fragrance will not go away.

古文：所遇地，土石皆香。
现代文：如果让它与地面接触，土块石头都香。
English: If it is allowed to come into contact with the ground, the soil and stones will be fragrant.

古文：经朽木腐草皆荣秀。
现代文：让它经过朽木腐草，朽木腐草就会枝繁叶茂，吐穗开花。
English: Let it pass through the dead wood and rotten grass, and the dead wood and rotten grass will flourish and bloom.

古文：用薰枯骨，则肌肉再生。
现代文：用它薰枯骨，枯骨上就能再长出肌肉来。
English: Use it to rejuvenate dead bones, and muscles can regrow on the dead bones.

古文：三名香
现代文：三名香
English: Sanmeika

古文：汉雍仲子进南海香物，拜为涪阳尉，时人谓之香尉。
现代文：汉朝雍仲子献南海香物，被封为涪阳尉，当时的人们称他是 香尉 。
English: During the Han Dynasty, Yong Zhongzi offered South Sea perfumes and was given the title of Shenyang lieutenant. At that time, people called him Xiang Yu.

古文：日南郡有香市，商人交易诸香处。
现代文：日南郡有香市，是商人们买卖各种香料的地方。
English: Yuxiang City, Nichinan County, is a place where merchants buy and sell all kinds of spices.

古文：南海郡有村香户，日南郡有千亩香林，名香出其中。
现代文：南海郡有村香户，日南郡有千亩香林，各种名香就出自村香户和香林之中。
English: Nankai County has the village of Kado, and Nichinan County has a thousand mu of incense forests. All kinds of famous incense come from the village of Kado and incense forests.

古文：香州在朱崖郡，洲中出诸异香，往往不知其名。
现代文：朱崖郡有个香州，州中出产各种异香，大都不知道这些异香的名字。
English: Zhuya County is home to Xiangzhou, which produces a variety of exotic fragrances. Most people don't know the names of these exotic fragrances.

古文：千年松香闻十里，亦谓之三香也。
现代文：千年的松香闻十里，也叫它 三香 。
English: The thousand-year-old pine scent can be smelled from ten miles away, and it is also called three scents.

古文：五名香
现代文：五名香
English: Five incense sticks

古文：聚窟洲在西海中。申未，洲上有大树。
现代文：西海中有一个聚窟洲。洲上有一棵大树。
English: In the West Sea, there is a congested island. On the island, there is a large camphor tree.

古文：与枫木相似，而叶香，闻数百里。
现代文：这棵大树与枫树相似，它的叶子有香味，香味能传出几百里远。
English: This big tree is similar to a maple tree. Its leaves have a scent, and the scent can travel hundreds of miles.

古文：名此为返魂树。
现代文：人们给它起了个名字叫 返魂树 。
English: People have given it a name: the Soul Retrieval Tree.

古文：叩其树，树亦能自声。
现代文：用什么东西敲打此树，它能自己发出声音。
English: If you hit this tree with something, it will make a sound on its own.

古文：声如牛吼，闻之者皆心振神骇。
现代文：声音像牛的吼叫声，听到的人都感到心神振骇。
English: The sound was like the bellowing of a cow, and those who heard it were terrified.

古文：伐其根心，于玉釜中煮取汁，更火煎之，如黑饴，可令丸。名曰惊精香，或名之为振灵丸，或名之为返生香，或名之为人鸟精香，或名为却死香。
现代文：砍伐它的根，取根部的中心部分，放到玉釜中煮，取它的液汁，换另火煎熬，熬得像黑色的糖稀，可以做成药丸，名叫 惊精香 ，有的叫它为 振灵丸 ，有的叫它 返生香 ，有的叫它 鸟精香 ，有的叫它 却死香 。
English: Cut down its root, take the central part of the root, boil it in a jade kettle, take its liquid juice, change the heat, boil it like black sugar, and it can be made into a pill, called "Shock Essence," some call it "Charming Pill," some call it "Rebirth Fragrance," some call it "Bird Essence Fragrance," and some call it "Death Fragrance."

古文：一种五名。
现代文：一种香五个名字。
English: One incense has five names.

古文：斯灵物也，香气闻数百里，死尸在地，闻气乃活。
现代文：这是一种灵物啊，香气能闻几百里，死尸在地，闻到它的香气就活了。
English: It's a kind of spiritual object. Its aroma can be smelled hundreds of miles away. Dead bodies lie on the ground, but when you smell its aroma, you come alive.

古文：沉香
现代文：沉香
English: Agarwood

古文：唐太宗问高州首领冯盎云： 卿宅去沉香远近？ 
现代文：唐太宗问高州首领冯盎云： 你家离沉香多远？ 
English: Tang Taizong asked the head of Gaozhou, Feng Angyun: How far is your home from Shen Xiang?

古文：对曰： 宅左右即出香树，然其生者无香，唯朽者始香矣。 
现代文：对方回答说： 我家左右就出香树，但是那些活着的树不香，只有那些朽烂的才有香味。 
English: The other replied: "There are fragrant trees all around my house, but those that are alive do not smell, only those that are rotten have a scent.

古文：龙脑香
现代文：龙脑香
English: Longnian Xiang

古文：龙脑香树，出婆利国。
现代文：龙脑香树，出在婆利国。
English: The camphor tree is native to Borneo.

古文：婆利呼为个不婆律。
现代文：婆利人叫它 个不婆律 。
English: The Bharatiyas call it a bad law.

古文：亦出波斯国。
现代文：波斯国也有这种树。
English: It also comes from Persia.

古文：树高八九丈，大可六七围。
现代文：树高八九丈。大的有六七围粗。
English: The height of the tree is eighty-nine meters. The big one is sixty-seven centimeters thick.

古文：叶圆而背白，无花实。
现代文：叶是圆的，叶的背面发白。此树不开花就结实。
English: The leaves are round, the back of the leaf is whitish. This tree is strong without flowers.

古文：其树有肥有瘦，瘦者出婆律膏。
现代文：树有肥有瘦，瘦的出 婆律膏 。
English: A tree is either fat or thin, and the thin one produces the paste.

古文：香在木心，中断其树，劈取之，膏于树端流出，斫树作坎而承之。
现代文：香料在树的内心，把树截断，劈开，才能取出来。膏是从树顶上流下来的，在树上砍出一个坎儿来接着就可以。
English: The spice is in the heart of the tree, and can only be extracted by cutting and splitting the tree. The paste flows down from the top of the tree, and can be followed by cutting a ridge in the tree.

古文：入药用，别有法。
现代文：入药用，另有用法。
English: It can be used medicinally, or it can be used in other ways.

古文：安息香
现代文：安息香
English: Anshika

古文：安息香树，出波斯国。
现代文：安息香树，出在波斯国。
English: And the tree of the incense of the tabernacle was in the land of Persia.

古文：波斯呼为辟邪。
现代文：波斯叫它为 辟邪 。
English: The Persians called it the "witch's broom."

古文：树长三大，皮色黄黑。
现代文：树高三丈，树皮的颜色黄而黑。
English: The tree is three stories tall, and its bark is yellow and black.

古文：叶有四角，经寒不凋。
现代文：叶有四个角，冬天也不落。
English: The leaves have four corners and do not fall off in winter.

古文：二月开花，黄色，心微碧。
现代文：此树二月开花。花黄色，花心儿微碧。
English: This tree blooms in February. The flowers are yellow, and the center of the flower is slightly blue.

古文：不结实。
现代文：只开花不结果。
English: Flowers bloom but bear no fruit.

古文：刻其叶而其胶如饴，名安息香。
现代文：刻它的叶子，流出像糖稀一样的胶来，名叫 安息香 。
English: Carve its leaves, and out flows a gum like molten sugar, which is called "Anshi Xiang."

古文：六七月坚凝，乃取之。
现代文：六七月的时候，安息香凝结变硬，就取下来。
English: In June and July, when the benzoin condenses and hardens, it is removed.

古文：烧之通神明，辟众恶。
现代文：把它经过焚烧，就可以通神明，辟众邪。
English: If you burn it, you will be able to communicate with the gods and ward off evil.

古文：一木五香
现代文：一木五香
English: Ichiki Gokou

古文：一木五香：根旍檀，节沉，花鸡舌，叶藿，胶薰陆。
现代文：一棵树上出五香：根是 旍檀香 ，节是 沉香 ，花是 鸡舌香 ，叶是 藿香 ，胶是 薰陆香 。
English: There are five kinds of incense on a tree: the root is sandalwood, the knot is agarwood, the flower is rooster's tongue, the leaf is musk, and the gum is lavender incense.

古文：诃黎勒
现代文：诃黎勒
English: Lille

古文：高仙芝伐大食，得诃黎勒，长五六寸。
现代文：高仙芝领兵征伐大食国，得到了诃黎勒，长五六寸。
English: Gao Xianzhi led the army to conquer the big food country, and obtained a dragonfly, five or six inches long.

古文：初置抹肚中，便觉腹痛，因快痢十余行。
现代文：起初放在怀中，便觉得肚子疼，于是一连大便十几次稀屎。
English: At first, when I held him in my arms, I felt pain in my stomach, so I defecated a dozen times in a row.

古文：初谓诃黎勒为祟，因欲弃之。
现代文：他说这是诃黎勒作祟，就想扔掉它。
English: He said it was a trick of the dragonfly and he wanted to throw it away.

古文：以问大食长老，长老云，此物人带，一切病消，痢者出恶物耳。
现代文：他向一位大食的长老请教，长老说，这种东西人带在身上，一切病都会消除，便稀屎便出的是些恶物罢了。
English: He asked an elder who was a big eater for advice. The elder said that if you wear something like this on your body, all diseases will be eliminated, and it's just something bad that comes out when you defecate.

古文：仙芝甚宝惜之。
现代文：高仙芝就特别珍惜诃黎勒。
English: Gao Xianzhi especially cherishes the star anise.

古文：天宝末被诛，遂失所在。
现代文：天宝年末，高仙芝被杀，诃黎勒也就不知去向。
English: At the end of the Tianbao year, Gao Xianzhi was killed, and Zou Lile also did not know where to go.

古文：白豆蔻
现代文：白豆蔻
English: White bean soup

古文：白豆蔻，出加古罗国，呼为多骨。
现代文：白豆蔻，出自加古罗国。他们叫它 多骨 。
English: White cardamom, from the country of Gakuro. They call it "many bones."

古文：形如芭蕉。
现代文：白豆蔻的样子像芭蕉。
English: White cardamom looks like a plantain.

古文：叶似杜若，长八九尺，冬夏不凋。
现代文：叶子像杜若，长八九尺，冬夏不凋。
English: The leaves are like those of the azalea, 89 feet long, and do not wither in winter or summer.

古文：花浅黄色。
现代文：花是浅黄色的。
English: The flowers are pale yellow.

古文：子作朵，如蒲萄。
现代文：它的子实呈朵状，就像葡萄那样。
English: Its fruit is in the shape of a flower, just like a grape.

古文：其子初出，微青，熟则变白。
现代文：果实刚结出的时候，略微呈青色，成熟之后就变成白色。
English: When the fruit is just emerging, it is slightly blue, and after ripening it turns white.

古文：七月采。
现代文：七月收采。
English: Harvesting will begin in July.

古文：穙齐香
现代文：穙齐香
English: Song Qi Xiang

古文：穙齐香，出波斯国，佛林呼为顶勃梨咃。
现代文：穙齐香，出在波斯国，佛林国叫它 顶勃梨咃 。
English: "Ding qi xiang" originated in Persia, and was called "Ding bo lishan" in the country of Flynn.

古文：长一丈，围一尺许。皮青色，薄而极光净。
现代文：它的长度为一丈，围长一尺左右，皮是青色的，皮薄而且光净。
English: Its length is one meter, its girth is about one foot, its skin is blue, its skin is thin and clear.

古文：叶似阿魏，每三叶生于条端。
现代文：它的叶像阿魏叶。每三个叶生在枝条的顶端。
English: Its leaves are like the leaves of the mugwort. Every three leaves grow at the top of the branches.

古文：无花实。
现代文：没有花就结果。
English: Without flowers, there is no result.

古文：西域人常八月伐之。
现代文：西域人常常在八月就把它砍伐了，到了腊月，它就又抽发新的枝条。
English: Westerners often cut it down in August, and by the end of the month, it has sprouted new branches.

古文：致腊月，更抽新条，极滋茂，若不剪除，枯死。七月断其枝，有黄汁，其状如蜜。微有香气。
现代文：枝条极为繁密茂盛，若不剪除，就枯死。七月的时候把它的枝砍断，能流出黄汁，样子像蜜，略有香味。
English: The branches are extremely dense and luxuriant, and if they are not pruned, they will wither and die. When its branches are cut off in July, it can flow out yellow juice, looks like honey, and has a slight fragrance.

古文：入缶，疗百病。
现代文：把这种东西装入瓦器里，治百病。
English: Put this stuff in a clay pot and it cures everything.

古文：无石子
现代文：无石子
English: No stone unturned

古文：无石子，出波斯国。
现代文：无石子，出在波斯国。
English: Without a stone, out in the land of Persia.

古文：波斯呼为摩贼。
现代文：波斯人称它为 摩贼 。
English: The Persians call it the thief.

古文：树长六七丈，围八九尺。
现代文：树高六七丈，围长八九尺。
English: The tree is 67 feet tall and has a circumference of 89 feet.

古文：叶如桃叶而长。
现代文：叶像桃叶但是比桃叶要长。
English: Leaves are like peach leaves but longer.

古文：三月开花，白色，花心微红。
现代文：三月开花，花呈白色，花心略微泛红。
English: Flowering in March, the flowers are white with a slightly reddish centre.

古文：子圆如弹丸，初青，熟乃黄白。
现代文：它的果实是圆形的，像弹丸，刚长出的时候是青色的，成熟之后就是黄白色的了。
English: Its fruit is round, like a projectile, blue when it first emerges, and yellow-white when it matures.

古文：虫食成孔者正熟。
现代文：果实上被虫子咬出孔的，正是成熟的。
English: A fruit is ripe when a worm has bitten a hole in it.

古文：皮无孔者，入药用。
现代文：果皮上没有孔的，入药用。
English: There are no holes in the peel, so it is used medicinally.

古文：其树一年生无石子，一年生跋屡子。
现代文：这种树，一年结无石子，一年结跋屡子。
English: This kind of tree produces no stones in a year, but a lot of seeds in a year.

古文：大如指，长三寸，上有壳。
现代文：跋屡子大如手指，三寸长，上边有一层硬壳。
English: It is as big as a finger, three inches long, and has a hard shell on top.

古文：中仁如栗黄，可啖。
现代文：里边的仁像栗黄，可以吃。
English: The ginseng inside is like chestnuts and can be eaten.

古文：紫馡
现代文：紫馡
English: Violet Wax

古文：紫馡树，出真腊国。
现代文：紫馡树，出在真腊国。
English: Purple eucalyptus, from China.

古文：真腊呼为勒佉。
现代文：真腊人叫它 勒佉 。
English: Genuine Wax people call it "le-wax."

古文：亦出波斯国。
现代文：波斯国也有此树。
English: It also comes from Persia.

古文：树长一丈，枝条郁茂。
现代文：树高一丈，枝条茂密。
English: The tree is tall and has thick branches.

古文：叶似桔，经冬不凋。
现代文：它的叶子像桔叶，冬季也不凋落。
English: Its leaves are like orange leaves and do not fall off in winter.

古文：三月开花，白色，不结子。
现代文：三月开花，花白色，不结子。
English: Blooms in March, white flowers, does not set seed.

古文：天大雾露及雨，沾其树枝条，即出紫馡。
现代文：天有大露、大雾、大雨，滋润它的枝条，就生出紫馡来。
English: The sky has heavy dew, fog and rain, which moistens its branches and produces alfalfa.

古文：波斯国使乌海及沙利深，所说并同。
现代文：波斯国使者乌海及沙利深，说的一样。
English: The Persian envoys, Wuhai and Salihin, said the same thing.

古文：真腊国使折冲都尉沙门陀沙尼拔陀，言蚁运土于树作窠，蚁壤得雨露凝结，而成紫馡。
现代文：真腊国使者折冲都尉沙门陀沙尼拔陀，说蚂蚁运土到树上做窝，土壤受到雨露的滋润而凝结，便成为紫馡。
English: The envoy of the State of Mana, the entrained captain Samanta Sani Bhatta, said that the ants carried soil to the trees to make a nest, the soil was moistened by the rain and condensed, and it became purple.

古文：昆仑国者善，波斯国者次之。
现代文：昆仑国的紫馡最好，波斯国的较差。
English: Kunlun's alfalfa is the best, but Persian's is poor.

古文：阿魏
现代文：阿魏
English: Ah Wei

古文：阿魏，出伽阇那国，即北天竺也。
现代文：阿魏，出在伽阇那国。伽阇那国就是北天竺国。
English: Ai Wei, was born in the country of Gadana. Gadana is the country of the North Star.

古文：伽阇那呼为形虞。
现代文：伽阇那人称阿魏是 形虞 。
English: The people of Gaya called Ai Weiwei a "formal danger."

古文：亦出波斯国。
现代文：这东西也出自波斯国。
English: It also comes from Persia.

古文：波斯呼为阿虞截。
现代文：波斯叫它 阿虞截 。
English: The Persians called it Agyochor.

古文：树长八九丈，皮青黄。
现代文：树高八九丈。树皮青黄色。
English: The tree is 89 meters tall. The bark is blue-yellow.

古文：三月生叶，形似鼠耳。
现代文：三月生叶，叶像老鼠耳朵。
English: March leaves, leaves like mouse ears.

古文：无花实。
现代文：没有花就结果。
English: Without flowers, there is no result.

古文：断其枝，汁出如饴，久乃坚凝。
现代文：把它的枝砍断，会流出糖浆一样的液汁，时间久了便凝结变硬。
English: If you cut off its branches, syrup-like liquid juice will flow out, and after a long time it will condense and harden.

古文：佛林国僧变，所说同。
现代文：佛林国的一个叫变的和尚，说的与此相同。
English: A mendacious monk in the country of Flushing said the same thing.

古文：摩伽陀国僧提婆，言取其汁和米豆屑，合成阿魏。
现代文：摩伽陀国和尚提婆则说，把树汁与米、豆的碎屑和起来，合成了阿魏。
English: In the case of Mogadishu and Shanti Baba, the sap of the tree was combined with rice and bean crumbs to synthesize wormwood.

古文：荜拨
现代文：荜拨
English: 拨

古文：荜拨，出摩伽陀国，呼为荜拨梨。
现代文：荜拨，出在摩伽陀国。本国呼为 荜拨梨 。
English: 拨, originated in the country of Mogadishu. In their home country, they are called 拨梨.

古文：佛林国呼为阿梨诃咃。
现代文：佛林国叫它 阿梨诃咃 。
English: The country of Flint calls it "A-R-I-C-T."

古文：苗长三四尺，茎细如箸，叶似蕺叶，子似桑椹。八月采。
现代文：它的苗高三四尺，茎像筷子那么粗，叶像蕺菜叶，子实像桑椹，八月可采。
English: Its seedlings are three to four feet tall, the stem is as thick as chopsticks, the leaves are like chives, and the fruit is like mulberries. It can be harvested in August.

古文：胡椒
现代文：胡椒
English: Black pepper

古文：胡椒，出摩伽陀国，呼为昧履支。
现代文：胡椒，出自摩伽陀国。他们叫它 昧履支 。
English: Pepper, from the country of Mogadishu. They call it "maduro."

古文：其苗蔓生，茎极柔弱。
现代文：它的苗是蔓生的，茎极其柔弱。
English: Its seedlings are creeping, and the stem is extremely tender.

古文：叶长寸半，有细条，与叶齐。条上结子，两两相对。
现代文：它的叶长一寸半，有细条，和叶一样齐，条上结子实。子实是两两相对的。
English: Its leaves are an inch and a half long, with fine stripes, as even as the leaves, with a fruiting body on the strip. The fruiting body is opposite.

古文：其叶晨开暮合，合则裹其子于叶中。
现代文：它的叶早晨展开，晚上合拢，合拢时就把子实裹在其中。
English: Its leaves open in the morning and close at night, and when it closes, it wraps the seed in it.

古文：子形似汉椒，至芳辣。
现代文：子实的形状像汉椒，特别辣又特别香。
English: The shape of the fruit is like a Chinese pepper, very spicy and very fragrant.

古文：六月采。
现代文：六月开始采。
English: Mining began in June.

古文：今作胡盘肉食，皆用之。
现代文：如今做胡盘肉食，都用胡椒。
English: Nowadays, pepper is used to make meat dishes.

古文：阿勃参
现代文：阿勃参
English: Abhishek

古文：阿勃参，出佛林国。
现代文：阿勃参，出自佛林国。
English: Ah Bozan, from the country of Flint.

古文：长一丈余。
现代文：树高一丈多。
English: The tree is much taller.

古文：皮色青白。
现代文：树皮青白色。
English: The bark is bluish-white.

古文：叶细，两两相对。
现代文：叶子细，两两相对。
English: Leaves thin, opposite in pairs.

古文：花似蔓菁，正黄。
现代文：花像蔓菁花，正黄色。
English: The flowers look like rhododendrons and are bright yellow.

古文：子似胡椒，赤色。
现代文：子实像胡椒，赤色。
English: The pods are like peppercorns, red.

古文：斫其枝，汁如油，以涂癣疥，无不瘳。
现代文：把它的枝砍断，流出油一样浆液，用来涂癣疥一类皮肤病，没有治不好的。
English: Its branches are cut off, and a slurry flows out like oil, which is used to treat skin diseases such as ringworm. There is no incurable disease.

古文：其油极贵，价重于金。
现代文：这种油特别昂贵，价格高于金子。
English: The oil is particularly expensive, costing more than gold.

古文：山薯
现代文：山薯
English: Potato soup

古文：熙穆县里多山薯。
现代文：熙穆县里山薯很多。
English: There are a lot of yamato plants in Himu County.

古文：《本草》云，南山之阴曰署预，消热下气，补五脏。
现代文：《本草》上说，南山北侧产的山薯叫 署预 ，它消热下气，补五脏。
English: "This Grass" said that the yamato produced on the north side of the Nanshan Mountain is called "Department of Precipitation," which can dissipate the heat and replenish the internal organs.

古文：麻黄
现代文：麻黄
English: ephedra

古文：麻黄，茎端开花。
现代文：麻黄，在茎的顶端开花。
English: Ephedra, which blooms at the top of the stem.

古文：花小而黄，簇生。
现代文：花很小，黄色。它是一簇一簇生长的。
English: The flower is small and yellow. It grows in clusters.

古文：子如覆盆，可食。
现代文：子实像覆盆子，可以吃。
English: The pods are like raspberries and can be eaten.

古文：至冬枯死，如草，及春却青。
现代文：到了冬天它就枯死，就像草那样，到了春天就又泛青了。
English: In the winter it withers away, like grass, and in the spring it turns green again.

古文：荆三棱
现代文：荆三棱
English: The Three Corners of the Bush

古文：唐河东裴同父，患腹痛数年，不可忍。
现代文：唐朝时河东人裴同的父亲，患肚子疼病好多年，疼起来就不可忍受。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Pei Tong's father, who was from the east of the river, suffered from stomach pain for many years. The pain was unbearable.

古文：嘱其子曰： 吾死后，必出吾病。 子从之。
现代文：他嘱咐儿子说： 我死后，一定要把病从肚子里拿出来。 
English: He told his son: "When I die, I must get the disease out of my stomach."

古文：出得一物，大如鹿条脯。
现代文：儿子照他的话做了，取出来一样东西，像鹿条脯那么大。
English: My son did as he was told and pulled out something the size of a deer antler.

古文：悬之久干。
现代文：把它悬挂起来，时间久了就干了。
English: You hang it up and it dries after a while.

古文：有客窃之，其坚如骨，削之，文彩焕发。遂以为刀把子，佩之。
现代文：有一位门客把这东西偷了去，见这东西坚硬如骨，用刀一削还焕发纹彩，就把它做成刀把，佩带在身上。
English: A doorkeeper stole it, and when he saw that it was as hard as bone and could be sharpened with a knife, he made it into a handle and wore it on his body.

古文：在路放马，抽刀子割三棱草，坐其上，把尽消成水。
现代文：有一天他在路边放马，抽出刀来割三棱草坐在上面，那刀把便化成水。
English: One day he put his horse on the side of the road, took out his knife to cut the sagebrush, sat on it, and the knife turned into water.

古文：客怪之，回以问同。
现代文：这位门客感到奇怪，就回去问裴同。
English: The doorkeeper felt strange and went back to ask Pei Tong.

古文：同泣，具言之。
现代文：裴同哭了，详细地告诉了他。
English: Pei Tong cried and told him in detail.

古文：后病状同者，服三棱草汁多验。
现代文：后来有病状与裴同父亲相同的，服下三棱草的浆汁，大多都灵验。
English: Later, he had the same condition as Bae Tong's father. He took the syrup of the three-pronged grass, and most of it was effective.

古文：服松脂
现代文：服松脂
English: Clothing made from pine resin

古文：上党有赵瞿者，病癞历年，众治之不愈。
现代文：上党有个叫赵瞿的人，患癞疮病多年，久治不愈。
English: There was a man named Zhao Qi at the upper party. He had suffered from acne for many years, and it took a long time to heal.

古文：垂死，或云，不如及活流弃之，否则后子孙转相注易。
现代文：眼看就要死了，有的人说，不如趁他还活着把他抛弃，不然这病往后一定会传给他的子孙的。
English: Some said that it would be better to abandon him while he was still alive, otherwise the disease would certainly be passed on to his children and grandchildren.

古文：其家乃为赍粮而送之，置山穴中，瞿居穴中。自怨不幸。昼夜悲叹，涕泣经日。
现代文：于是他家里就给他准备了一些行李干粮把它送走了，放在一个山洞里。他居住在山洞里，怨恨自己不幸，昼夜悲叹，整天价哭泣。
English: So his family packed him a few bags of dry food and sent them away, putting them in a cave. He lived in the cave, hating his misfortune, lamenting day and night, and weeping all day long.

古文：有仙人行过穴口而哀之，具问讯焉。
现代文：有一个仙人从山洞外走过，觉得他可怜，就仔细地问他是怎么回事。
English: A hermit passed outside the cave, felt sorry for him, and carefully asked him what was the matter.

古文：瞿知其异人，乃叩头自陈，乞哀于仙人。
现代文：他知道仙人不是等闲之辈，就一边陈说一边叩头，哀求仙人救他。
English: He knew that the hermit was not an idle person, so he bowed down while chanting and begged the hermit to save him.

古文：以囊药赐之，教其服法。
现代文：仙人从囊中取出一种药来给他，教给他服药的方法就走了。
English: The hermit took a medicine from his bag and gave it to him. He showed him how to take the medicine and then left.

古文：瞿服之百许日，愈疮，颜色丰悦，肌肤玉泽。
现代文：他服药服了一百来天，癞疮就好了。面色丰满喜悦，肌肤润泽光滑。
English: He took medicine for a hundred days, and his acne was gone. His face was plump and joyful, and his skin was moist and smooth.

古文：仙人又过视之，瞿谢受更生活之恩，乞丐其方。
现代文：仙人又路过这里来看他，他感谢仙人的救命之恩，同时要求仙人把药方告诉他。
English: The hermit passed by again to see him. He thanked the hermit for saving his life and asked him to tell him the recipe.

古文：仙人告之云，此是松脂耳，此山中更多此物，汝炼之服，可以长生不死。
现代文：仙人告诉他说，他吃的那药，其实就是松脂。这山中松脂很多，如果他能经常服用，可以长生不死。
English: The hermit told him that the medicine he had taken was actually pine resin. There was a lot of pine resin in the mountain, and if he took it regularly, he could live forever.

古文：瞿乃归。
现代文：于是他就回到家里。
English: So he went home.

古文：家人初谓之鬼也，甚惊愕。
现代文：家里人乍见到他还以为他是鬼，特别惊愕。
English: When the family first saw him, they thought he was a ghost and were very surprised.

古文：遂具言状。后服松脂不撤，身体转轻，气力百倍，登高越险，终日不倦。
现代文：他就详细地把事情的来龙去脉向家人述说了一遍。后来他就坚持经常服用松脂。身体渐渐转轻，力气增长百倍，登高越险，终日不知劳累。
English: He recounted the details of the incident to his family. Later, he insisted on taking pine resin regularly. His body gradually became lighter, his strength increased a hundredfold, he climbed higher and higher, and he was exhausted all day long.

古文：年百七十岁，齿不堕，发不白。
现代文：一百七十岁了，牙齿没掉，头发不白。
English: One hundred and seventy years old, teeth not lost, hair not white.

古文：夜卧，忽见屋间有光，大如镜者。
现代文：有一天夜里躺在炕上，忽然看见一个镜子大小能发光的东西。
English: One night, lying on his bed, he suddenly saw something the size of a mirror that emitted light.

古文：以问左右，皆云不见。
现代文：他问别人，别人都说没看见。
English: He asked others and they all said they didn't see it.

古文：久而渐大，一室尽明，如昼日。
现代文：他看见那东西渐渐变大，照得满屋都像白天一样明亮。
English: He saw it grow in size and shine as brightly as day all over the house.

古文：又夜见面上有婇女二人，长二三寸，面目皆具，但为小耳。游戏其口鼻之间。如是且一年。
现代文：头脸面目全具备，只是很小罢了。这两个小女人就在他的鼻口之间游戏玩耍，如此将近一年的时间。
English: He is fully-formed, but very small, and the two little women have been playing games between his nostrils for almost a year.

古文：此女稍长如大人，在侧。
现代文：两个小女人渐渐长得如人大，就在他身侧。
English: Two small women, growing to manhood, are at his side.

古文：又常闻琴瑟之音，欣然独笑。
现代文：他还常常听到弹琴瑟的声音，听后独自大笑。
English: He also often heard the sound of a harpsichord being played and laughed to himself.

古文：在人间二百许年，色如少童。
现代文：他在人间二百来年，脸色有如少年儿童。
English: He had been on earth for two hundred years, and his face was like that of a child.

古文：乃抱犊入山去。
现代文：于是他就抱犊入山而去。
English: So he went into the mountains with his donkey.

古文：必地仙也。
现代文：他一定是个地仙。
English: He must be an earth spirit.

古文：其间闻瞿服松脂如此，于是竞服。
现代文：当地的人听说赵瞿服用松脂竟能如此，于是大家竞相服用。
English: Local people heard that Zhao Yao's use of pine resin could actually do this, so everyone competed to take it.

古文：其多力者，乃车运驴负，誓积之盈室。
现代文：那些人多力大的，就车运驴驮，决心把所有的屋室都装满。
English: The men, who were very strong, decided to fill all the rooms with donkey carts.

古文：服之远者，不过一月，未觉有大益，辄止。
现代文：服用时间较长的，也没过一个月。见没有什么明显的好处就停止了。
English: If you take it for a long time, it won't last a month, and you'll see no obvious benefit and stop taking it.

古文：有志者难得如是也。
现代文：即使是有毅力的也很难做到像赵瞿那样。
English: Even if you have perseverance, it's hard to be like Zhao Yu.

古文：饵松蕊
现代文：饵松蕊
English: Roasted pine needles

古文：《遁甲经》云： 沙土之福，云阳之墟，可以隐居。 
现代文：《遁甲经》上说： 沙土之福，云阳之墟，可以隐居。 
English: In the "Ningka Sutra," it says: "The blessing of the sandy soil, the market of the clouds and sun, can live in seclusion.

古文：云阳氏，古之仙人。
现代文：云阳氏，是古代的一个仙人。
English: Yunyang clan is an ancient hermit.

古文：《方记》曰： 南岳百里有福地，松高一千尺，围即数寻，而蕊甘，仙人可饵。 
现代文：《方记》上说： 离南岳一百里的地方有一块福地，松树高达一千尺，围长就好几寻。而且蕊是甜的，仙人可以吃到。
English: "Fang Ji" said, "There is a piece of land of good fortune about a hundred miles away from Nanyue. The pine trees are a thousand feet tall, and the circumference is only a few feet. Moreover, the stamens are sweet, and can be eaten by hermits.

古文：相传服食炼行之人，采此松膏而服，不苦涩。与诸处松别。
现代文：相传在山中修炼的人，采这松膏服用，不苦不涩，与其它各处的松不同。
English: According to legend, people who cultivate in the mountains take this pine balm, which is not bitter or astringent, unlike pine everywhere else.

古文：赐茯苓
现代文：赐茯苓
English: 赐

古文：沈约谢始安王赐茯苓。
现代文：沈约感谢始安王赐给他茯苓。
English: Shen Yu thanked King Shi'an for giving him the scepter.

古文：一枝重一十二斤八两。
现代文：这一枝茯苓重一十二斤八两。
English: This branch weighs twelve pounds and eight ounces.

古文：有表。
现代文：现存在沈约的表章。
English: The seal of Shen Yotong still exists.

古文：服茯苓
现代文：服茯苓
English: Clothes hangers

古文：任子季，服茯苓十八年，仙人玉女往从之。
现代文：任子季，服用茯苓十八年，仙人玉女都前去跟随他。
English: In the eighteenth year of Ren Zi Ji's reign, the Immortal Princesses all went to follow him.

古文：能隐能彰，不复食谷，炙瘢皆灭，面体玉光。
现代文：他能隐形能现身，不再吃五谷，身上的疮疤都自消自灭，浑身焕发着玉一样的光泽。
English: He can appear invisibly, can no longer eat grain, and the scars on his body are self-eliminating, and his whole body is radiant with a luster like a jade.

古文：服菖蒲
现代文：服菖蒲
English: Wearing a straw hat.

古文：韩众，服菖蒲十三年，身生毛。
现代文：韩众，服用菖蒲十三年，身上长出毛来。
English: Han Zong, who has been taking calamus for 13 years, has hair growing on his body.

古文：日视书万言，皆诵之。
现代文：他一天看书一万言，全能背诵下来。
English: He reads ten thousand words a day and can recite them by heart.

古文：冬袒不寒。
现代文：冬天他将身体袒露在外面也不冷。
English: In winter, he would expose his body to the cold outside.

古文：又菖蒲须生得石上，一寸九节已上，紫花者尤善。
现代文：另外，菖蒲能生长在石头上，一寸九节以上，开紫花的更好。
English: In addition, the iris can grow on stone, more than one inch and nine knots, and it is better to open purple flowers.

古文：服桂
现代文：服桂
English: Fuki Katsura

古文：赵他子，服桂二十一年，毛生，日行五百里，力举千斤。
现代文：赵他子，服用桂花二十一年，身上长毛，日行五百里，力举一千斤。
English: Zhao and his son have been taking osmanthus for twenty-one years, have long hair, travel five hundred miles a day, and lift a thousand pounds.

古文：饵柠实
现代文：饵柠实
English: with coriander and lime

古文：柠木实之赤者，饵之一年，老者还少，令人彻食见鬼。
现代文：红色的柠木子实，食用一年，老人就能返老还童，不食五谷。
English: Red lemongrass seeds, if eaten for one year, can rejuvenate the elderly and prevent them from eating grains.

古文：昔道士梁顷，年七十，乃服之，转更少。
现代文：从前有个叫梁顷的道士，七十岁了才开始服用柠实，变得更年轻了。
English: Once upon a time, there was a Taoist priest named Liang Hao. He started taking limes only when he was seventy years old, and he became younger.

古文：年至百四十岁，能夜书，走及奔马。
现代文：活了一百四十岁。他能夜间写字，跑起来能追上奔马。
English: And he lived a hundred and forty years, and could write by night, and he could run with the swiftest of horses.

古文：入青龙山去。
现代文：后来他进了青龙山而去。
English: Later, he entered Qinglong Mountain and left.

古文：服五味子
现代文：服五味子
English: Fufu Gomiko from

古文：移门子，食服五味子六十年，色如玉女，入水不沾，入火不灼。
现代文：移门子食用五味子六十年，颜色如同玉女，入水不能被湿，入火不能被烧。
English: Shimenzi has been eating goji berries for sixty years. Their color is like that of a lady's hair. They can't be wet in water, and they can't be burned in fire.

古文：食术
现代文：食术
English: Gastronomy

古文：南阳文氏说，其先祖汉末大乱，逃壶山中，饥困欲死，有一人教之食术，云遂不饥。
现代文：南阳一个姓文的人说，他的先祖在汉末大乱的时候逃进壶山中，饿得要死，有一个人教他吃术，于是就不挨饿了。
English: A man surnamed Wen in Nanyang said that his ancestors fled into the Jujube Mountains during the Han Dynasty, starving to death. One person taught him how to eat, so he didn't go hungry.

古文：十年乃来还乡里，颜色更少，气力胜故。
现代文：十年之后他才回乡里，面色显得更年轻了，力气也胜过以前了。
English: Ten years later, he returned to his hometown, looking younger and stronger than before.

古文：自说在山中时，身轻欲跳，登高履险，历日不倦，行冰雪中，了不知寒。
现代文：他自己说在山里的时候，身体轻快得直想蹦高儿，登高履险，一天也不知疲倦。行走在冰雪之中，丝毫不知道冷。
English: He himself said that when he was in the mountains, his body was so light that he wanted to jump up and down, climb up and down, and he was tireless all day. Walking in the ice and snow, he did not know cold at all.

古文：常见一高岩上，有数人对博戏者，有读书者，俯而视之，文氏因闻其相问。
现代文：他曾经看到一座高高的岩崖上，有几个人在上面赌博游戏，有一个读书的俯视下边。姓文的就听到他们在上面问答。
English: He once saw a high cliff, with several people gambling on it, and a reader looking down. He heard them asking questions on it.

古文：言： 此子可呼上否？ 
现代文：一人说： 这人可不可以叫他上来？ 
English: One of them said, "Can this man call him up?"

古文：其一人答： 未可也。 
现代文：另一个答： 不可以。 
English: Another answer: No.

古文：林子明服术十一年，耳长五寸，身轻如飞，能超逾渊谷二丈许。服桃胶
现代文：林子明服用术十一年，耳朵长了五寸，身体轻飘如飞，能超越两丈多宽的深渊大谷。服桃胶
English: It's been eleven years since Lin Ziming underwent surgery. His ears have grown five inches, his body is light as a feather, and he can leap over the wide abyss of the valley.服桃胶

古文：桃胶，以桑木灰渍，服之，百病愈。
现代文：桃胶，用桑木灰淹渍一下，吃了治百病。
English: Peach gum, sprinkled with mulberry ash, and eaten to cure all ills.

古文：久久身有光，在晦夜之地，如月出也。
现代文：吃久了身上有光，在昏暗的地方，也像月亮出来了。
English: After eating for a long time, there is light on the body, and in a dark place, it looks like the moon has come out.

古文：多服之，则可以断谷矣。
现代文：多服用，就可以不吃五谷了。
English: If you take more, you can stop eating grains.

古文：服地黄
现代文：服地黄
English: Hattie Huang

古文：楚子，服地黄八年，夜视有光，手上车弩。
现代文：楚子服用地黄八年，夜里看东西如同有光，手劲也大得胜过车弩。
English: Chu Zi has been taking Dihuang for eight years. At night, he sees things as if there is light, and his strength is also greater than that of a rickshaw.

古文：服远志
现代文：服远志
English: 服遠志

古文：陵阳子仲，服远志二十年，有子二十七人。
现代文：陵阳子仲，服用远志二十年，有儿子二十七个。
English: Lingyang Zizhong, who has been taking Yuan Zhi for 20 years, has 27 sons.

古文：开书所视不忘。
现代文：他打开书，凡是看过的就不忘。
English: When he opens a book, he never forgets what he has read.

古文：服天门冬
现代文：服天门冬
English: Clothing Tianmen winter

古文：杜子微，服天门冬八十年，妾有子百四十人。
现代文：杜子微，服用天门冬八十年，他的妻妾为他生下子女一百四十人。
English: Du Ziwei, taking Tianmen winter for eighty years, his wife and concubine bore him one hundred and forty children.

古文：日行三百里。
现代文：他可以一天走三百里。
English: He can walk three hundred miles a day.

古文：饮菊潭水
现代文：饮菊潭水
English: Drinking chrysanthemum pond water

古文：荆州菊潭，其源旁，芳菊被涯澳，其滋液极甘。
现代文：荆州的菊潭，它的源头旁边，长满了芳香的菊丛。这些菊的滋液特别甜。
English: The chrysanthemum pond in Jingzhou, near its source, is full of fragrant chrysanthemum bushes. The sap of these chrysanthemums is particularly sweet.

古文：深谷中有三十余家，不得穿井，仰饮此水。
现代文：深谷中有三十多户人家，不能挖井，全靠饮用这潭中水。
English: There are more than thirty households in the deep valley. They can't dig a well, so they rely on drinking the water in the pool.

古文：上寿二三百，中寿百余，其七十八十，犹以为夭。
现代文：结果呢，上等寿二三百岁，中等寿一百多岁，七八十岁还认为是夭亡呢。
English: As a result, the highest life expectancy is two to three hundred years old, the average life expectancy is more than one hundred years old, and people in their seventies and eighties are still considered to have died young.

古文：菊能轻身益气，令人久寿，有征。
现代文：菊能令人轻身益气，延年益寿，这就是证明啊。
English: Chrysanthemum can make people feel lighter and more energetic, and prolong life. This is the proof.

古文：饮甘菊谷水
现代文：饮甘菊谷水
English: Drinking chamomile valley water

古文：南阳郦县山中，有甘谷水。
现代文：南阳郦县山中，有甜谷水。
English: In the mountains of Nanyang County, there is sweet valley water.

古文：所以甘者，谷上左右皆生甘菊，菊花堕其中，历世弥久，故水味为变。
现代文：之所以甜的原因是因为谷上左右，全都生长着甘菊。菊花落入谷中，时间久了，所以水味也就变甜了。
English: The reason why it is sweet is because there are camomiles growing all around the valley. The chrysanthemums have fallen into the valley for a long time, so the taste of the water has become sweet.

古文：其临此谷中居民皆不穿井，悉饮甘谷水。
现代文：那些在谷中居住的人家，都不打井，全饮用甜谷水。
English: Those who live in the valley do not have wells, and all drink sweet valley water.

古文：饮者无不考寿，高者百四五十岁，下者不失八九十，无夭年人。
现代文：凡是饮用甜谷水的，没有不长寿的。高的一百四五十岁，低的也不下八九十岁。没有夭亡的。
English: There is no one among those who drink the sweet water of the Nile who will not live a long time; the oldest will be a hundred and forty-five years old, and the youngest will be eighty or ninety years old; none of them will die young.

古文：得此菊力也。
现代文：这都是得力于这些甘菊啊。
English: It's all thanks to these camomiles.

古文：故司空王畅、太尉刘宽、太傅表隗，皆为南阳太守，每到官，常使郦县月送甘谷水四十斛，以为饮食。
现代文：所以，司空王畅、太尉刘宽、太傅袁隗，都做过南阳太守。他们到任之后，都曾让郦县每月送甜谷水四十斛，用来平常饮用。
English: Therefore, Siku Wang Chang, Tai Li Liu Kuan, and Tai Fu Yuan Yao have all served as Nanyang Daju. After they took office, they all asked the county to send them forty catties of sweet corn water every month, which they used for drinking.

古文：此诸公多患风痹及眩冒，皆得愈。
现代文：这几位老大人多患风痹及眩冒之症，全都好了。
English: These elderly people, most of whom suffer from rheumatism and vertigo, have all recovered.

古文：又菊花与薏花相似，直以甘苦别之耳。菊甘而薏苦。
现代文：但是不能得到大益处。像甜谷上的居民，从小生下来便饮用此水了。另外，菊花与薏花相似，只能以甜和苦来区别。菊甜薏苦。
English: But they can't get much benefit. Like the residents of the sweet valley, they have been drinking this water since they were born. In addition, chrysanthemums are similar to camellias, and can only be distinguished by sweetness and bitterness. Chrysanthemums are sweet and bitter.

古文：谚言所谓 苦如薏 也。
现代文：谚语说 苦如薏 。
English: As the saying goes, "A bitter pill to swallow."

古文：今所在有贡菊，但为少耳。
现代文：如今这里有贡菊，只是为数不多。
English: Now there are gongju, but only a few.

古文：率多生于水侧也。
现代文：一般都是生长在水侧的。
English: Worms generally grow on the side of the water.

古文：缑氏山与郦县最多。
现代文：缑氏山和郦县最多。
English: The highest number of cases were reported in Jinshishan and Handan.

古文：仙方所谓 白精、更生、周盈 ，皆一菊，而根茎花实异名。
现代文：仙方所说的 白精、更生、周盈 ，全是一菊，根、茎、花、实不同名称罢了。
English: The Bai Jing, Gang Sheng, and Zhou Ying mentioned by Sen Fang are all a single chrysanthemum, with different names for the root, stem, flower, and seed.

古文：其说甚美。而近来服之者略无效，正由不得真菊也。
现代文：说法确是挺美，近来服用菊花的药效不大，正是因为得不到真正的菊花呀。
English: The saying is indeed quite beautiful. Recently, the efficacy of taking chrysanthemums is not great, precisely because you can't get real chrysanthemums.

古文：夫甘菊谷水，南方气味，亦未足言，而其上居民以延年，况得服好药，安得无益乎？
现代文：甘菊谷水，南方的气味，亦不足多说，但是那些谷上的居民延年益寿，况且又能吃到好药，怎么能没有好处呢？
English: It is not enough to say that the water of the Camomile Valley smells of the south, but how can the inhabitants of the valley live longer and longer and take good medicine without any benefit?

古文：食黄精
现代文：食黄精
English: Food yellow essence

古文：临川有士人，虐遇其所使婢。
现代文：临川有一个士人，虐待他的一位婢女。
English: There was a nobleman in Linchuan who abused one of his maids.

古文：婢不堪其毒，乃逃入山中。
现代文：婢女忍受不了他的虐待，就逃到山中。
English: Unable to bear his mistreatment, the maid fled to the mountains.

古文：久之粮尽，饥甚。
现代文：带的干粮很快便吃光了，饿得厉害。
English: They soon ran out of the dry food they had brought with them and were very hungry.

古文：坐水边，见野草枝叶可爱，即拔取，濯水中，连根食之，甚美。
现代文：她坐在水边，见野草的枝叶十分可爱，就拔了一些，放到水里一洗，连根带叶全都吃下，竟特别好吃。
English: She was sitting by the water's edge, and when she saw that the branches and leaves of the weeds were very lovely, she plucked some, put them in the water and washed them. She ate them all, even the roots and leaves, and they turned out to be particularly delicious.

古文：自是恒食，久之遂不饥，而更轻健。夜息大树下，闻草中兽走，以为虎而惧，因念得上树梢乃佳也。
现代文：夜里休息在大树下，听到草中有野兽奔跑的声音，她认为是老虎，心里十分害怕。于是她想，要是能到树梢上去呆着就好了。
English: Resting under a large tree at night, she was terrified by the sound of a wild animal running in the grass, which she thought was a tiger, and thought she would be better off staying up in the treetops.

古文：正尔念之，而身已在树梢矣。
现代文：她这样一想，身子就不知不觉地已经上了树梢了。
English: With this thought, she had already climbed up to the treetops without noticing.

古文：及晓，又念当下平地，又歘然而下。
现代文：到了早晨，她又想应该回到平地上，身子就飘飘然回到了地上。
English: In the morning, she thought she should go back to the plain, and she floated back to the ground.

古文：自是意有所之，身即飘然而去。
现代文：从此，他心里想到哪儿去，身体就飘然而去。
English: From then on, wherever his mind wanted to go, his body drifted away.

古文：或自一峰之一峰顶，若飞鸟焉。
现代文：有时候从这一山峰到另一山峰，她就像一只飞鸟似的。
English: Sometimes, from peak to peak, she is like a bird.

古文：数岁，其家人伐薪见之，以告其主，使捕之。
现代文：几年以后，那家有人上山砍柴发现了她，就向主人报告了。主人派人捕她。
English: A few years later, someone from the family went up the mountain to cut wood and found her, and reported her to the owner, who sent someone to catch her.

古文：不得。
现代文：捕不到。
English: He can't be caught.

古文：一日，遇其在绝壁下，即以细绳三面围之。
现代文：有一天，见她在一座绝壁之下，就用细绳三面包围她，她一下子就腾上山顶。
English: One day, when he saw her under a cliff, he surrounded her with three loaves of bread and twine, and she immediately soared to the top of the mountain.

古文：俄腾上山顶，其主益骇异，必欲致之。或曰： 此婢也，安有仙骨？
现代文：她的主人更加惊异。下决心非捉住她不可。有人说，她是一个婢女，哪能有仙骨？
English: Her master was even more surprised. He had to make up his mind to catch her. Some people said that she was a maid, so how could she have a fairy bone?

古文：不过得灵药饵之尔。
现代文：只不过吃过一种什么灵药罢了。
English: It's just that I've eaten some kind of elixir.

古文：试以盛馔，多其五味，令甚香美，值其往来之路，观其食之否？ 
现代文：可以做一顿好饭，多准备一些好吃的，让它味道特别香特别美，放到她来往的路上，看她吃不吃。
English: You can make a good meal, prepare some more delicious cucumbers, make it taste particularly fragrant and beautiful, put it on her way to and from, and see if she likes it.

古文：如其言，果来就食。
现代文：于是就按照这人说的去做了。她果然就吃了。
English: And she did as the man said, and she did eat.

古文：食讫，不复能远去，遂为所擒，具述其故。
现代文：吃完以后就不能再远去了。于是就被捉住了。
English: After eating, he couldn't go any further, so he was caught.

古文：问其所食草之形，即黄精也。
现代文：她详细地述说了前前后后。问她吃的那种草的样子，原来就是黄精。
English: She described the before and after in detail. When asked what the grass she ate looked like, it turned out to be horseradish.

古文：复使之，遂不能得。
现代文：又让她去到那山上，她却到底也没再获得仙气。
English: He made her go to the mountain, but she never regained her fairy spirit.

古文：其婢数年亦卒。
现代文：几年之后她便死了。
English: She died a few years later.

