古文：宗翰宗望宗翰本名粘没喝，汉语讹为粘罕，国相撒改之长子也。年十七，军中服其勇。
现代文：宗翰原名粘没喝，汉语讹误为粘罕，是国相撒改的长子。他十七岁时，军队中都佩服他的勇猛。
English: Zonghan, whose original name means "sticky" in Chinese, is the eldest son of the country's reformist prime minister. When he was 17 years old, the army admired his bravery.

古文：及议伐辽，宗翰与太祖意合。
现代文：商议攻伐辽国的时候，宗翰与太祖的意思相符合。
English: When they discussed attacking Liao Province, Zonghan agreed with the meaning of the great ancestor.

古文：太祖败辽师于境上，获耶律谢十。
现代文：太祖在边境打败辽军，抓住耶律谢十。
English: Taizu defeated the Liao army at the border and captured Ye Lu Xie.

古文：撒改使宗翰及完颜希尹来贺捷，即称帝为贺。
现代文：撒改让宗翰和完颜希尹前来祝贺胜利，就以称帝作为庆贺。
English: The reformers had Zonghan and Ganyan Xiyin come to congratulate the victory, and they celebrated by praising the emperor.

古文：及太宗以下宗室群臣皆劝进，太祖犹谦让。
现代文：太宗属下的宗室群臣都劝说太祖称帝，太祖还在谦让。
English: The imperial family and courtiers under Emperor Taizong all persuaded Emperor Taizu to proclaim himself emperor, but Emperor Taizu was still reluctant to do so.

古文：宗翰与阿离合懑、蒲家奴等进曰： 若不以时建号，无以系天下心。 
现代文：宗翰与阿离合懑、蒲家奴等人进言道： 如果不及时登基建号，就无法维系天下人心。 
English: Zonghan, along with Ah Ying Hao, Pu Jia Nu and others, said, "If we do not build the foundation in time, we will not be able to maintain the hearts of the people of the world."

古文：太祖意乃决。
现代文：太祖的意见才决定下来。
English: The great-grandfather's opinion was the deciding factor.

古文：辽都统耶律讹里朵以二十余万戍边，太祖逆击之，宗翰为右军，大败辽人于达鲁古城。
现代文：辽国都统耶律讹里朵率军兵二十多万人守卫边疆，太祖率军迎击，宗翰做右军，在达鲁古城大败辽军。
English: Liao's capital, Yerutunrido, led more than 200,000 soldiers to guard the border. Taizu led the army to counterattack, Zonghan as the right army, and defeated the Liao army in the ancient city of Daru.

古文：天辅五年四月，宗翰奏曰： 辽主失德，中外离心。
现代文：天辅五年四月，宗翰启奏说： 辽主丧失德性，朝廷内外人心背离。
English: In April of the 5th year of Tianshu, Zonghan Qisong said: Liao Shushi lost his virtue, and the hearts of people inside and outside the imperial court departed from him.

古文：我朝兴师，大业既定，而根本弗除，后必为患。
现代文：我朝兴兵，虽然大业已定，但祸根未除，以后必然成为灾患。
English: Although the great cause has been decided, the root of the evil has not been eliminated, and it will inevitably become a disaster in the future.

古文：今乘其衅，可袭取之。
现代文：现在趁他们的间隙，可以攻袭擒拿。
English: Now, taking advantage of their gap, they can attack Xunna.

古文：天时人事，不可失也。 
现代文：这是天赐良机，可为之事，不能错过。 
English: This is a God-given opportunity, it can be done, and it must not be missed.

古文：太祖然之，即命诸路戒备军事。
现代文：太祖赞同他的话，就下令各路军队预备战争事务。
English: The great-grandfather agreed with his words and ordered all the armies to prepare for war.

古文：五月戊戌，射柳，宴群臣。
现代文：五月五日，举行射柳，宴请群臣。
English: On May 5th, a willow-shooting ceremony was held, and a banquet was held for the ministers.

古文：上顾谓宗翰曰： 今议西征，汝前后计议多合朕意。
现代文：太祖回头对宗翰说： 现在商议西征的事，你前后提出的计划大多投合朕的意思。
English: The great-grandfather turned back to Zonghan and said, "Now that we are discussing the Western Expedition, most of the plans you have proposed are in line with my wishes.

古文：宗室中虽有长于汝者，若谋元帅，无以易汝。
现代文：皇室宗亲中虽然有比你年长的人，如果任命元帅，没人能够替换你。
English: Although there are people in the imperial family who are older than you, if a marshal is appointed, no one will be able to replace you.

古文：汝当治兵，以俟师期。 
现代文：你应当整治军队，等候起兵的日期。 
English: Prepare your troops for the day of battle.

古文：上亲酌酒饮之，且命之釂，解御衣以衣之。
现代文：皇上亲自给他斟酒，命他喝干，并脱下御衣给他穿。
English: The emperor himself poured him wine, ordered him to drink it dry, and took off his robe to dress him.

古文：群臣言时方暑月，乃止。
现代文：群臣说时令刚入暑天，才停了下来。
English: The courtiers said that the season had just entered the hot weather before it stopped.

古文：无何，为移赉勃极烈，副蒲家奴西袭辽帝，不果行。
现代文：不多时，宗翰做了移赉勃极烈，作为蒲家奴的副将向西攻打辽国皇帝，最后没有去成。
English: Not infrequently, Zonghan made a move that was extremely violent. As the deputy of Pu Jia Niu, he attacked the emperor of Liao to the west, but in the end he did not succeed.

古文：十一月，宗翰复请曰： 诸军久驻，人思自奋，马亦壮健，宜乘此时进取中京。 
现代文：十一月，宗翰再次请求说： 各军驻留久了，人们跃跃欲试，马也十分健壮，应当趁这时进取中京。 
English: In November, Zonghan once again requested, "The armies have been stationed for a long time, the people are eager to try, and the horses are very strong. We should take advantage of this time to advance into central Beijing."

古文：群臣言时方寒，太祖不听，竟用宗翰策。
现代文：群臣说气候正寒冷，太祖不听，终于采纳了宗翰的计策。
English: The courtiers said that the weather was cold, but Taizu did not listen and finally adopted Zonghan's strategy.

古文：于是，忽鲁勃极烈杲都统内外诸军，蒲家奴、宗翰、宗干、宗磐副之，宗峻领合紥猛安，皆受金牌，余睹为乡导，取中京实北京。
现代文：于是，忽鲁勃极烈杲统率内外各路军马，蒲家奴、宗翰、宗干、宗磐为副将，宗峻兼任合扎猛安，都接受了金牌，余睹做向导，进攻中京，即北京。
English: As a result, Hulub was so strong that he led all the troops and horses at home and abroad, with Pu Jia Nu, Zong Han, Zong Gan, and Zong Ban as vice generals, and Zong Jun also served as Hezza Meng'an. They all accepted the gold medal and acted as guides to attack Beijing.

古文：既克中京，宗翰率偏师趋北安州，与娄室、徒单绰里合兵，大败奚王霞末，北安遂降。
现代文：攻克中京后，宗翰率部分军队赶赴北安州，与娄室、徒单绰里的军队会合一起，大败奚王霞末，北安州于是投降。
English: After conquering Zhongjing, Zonghan led part of the army to rush to Bei'an Prefecture, and met with the army of Jishu and Tochangzhu, and defeated Shao Wang Xia Mian, and then Bei'an surrendered.

古文：宗翰驻军北安，遣希尹经略近地，获辽护卫耶律习泥烈，乃知辽主猎于鸳鸯泺，杀其子晋王敖鲁斡，众益离心，西北、西南两路兵马皆羸弱，不可用。
现代文：宗翰在北安驻军，派希尹经营附近地区，抓获辽国护卫耶律习泥烈，从而得知辽主在鸳鸯泺狩猎，杀了自己的儿子晋王敖鲁斡，部下人心更加背离，西北、西南两路兵马都很衰弱，不能调用。
English: Zonghan garrisoned troops in North An, sent Xiyin to manage the nearby areas, and captured the Liao escort Yeruxi Mudra. Thus, he learned that the Liao lord hunted in Yunnan and killed his own son Jin Wang Qilu, and his subordinates were even more deviant. The northwest and southwest troops and horses were weak and could not be called.

古文：宗翰使耨碗温都、移刺保报都统杲曰： 辽主穷迫于山西，犹事畋猎，不恤危亡，自杀其子，臣民失望。
现代文：宗翰派耨碗温都、移剌保向都统杲禀报说： 辽主在山西处境危急，却还打猎，不体察危亡，杀死自己的儿子，臣民都很失望。
English: Zonghan dispatched Yuanyuan, Windu, and Ziyu Bao to report to Duodu, saying: Liao Lord is in a critical situation in Shanxi, but he still hunts, does not realize the danger of death, and kills his son. His subjects are very disappointed.

古文：攻取之策，幸速见谕。
现代文：攻取他的计策，希望迅速指示下来。
English: I'm hoping to learn his strategy and get it down to him quickly.

古文：若有异议，此当以偏师讨之。 
现代文：若说有不同建议，这里可以派非主力部队来征伐。 
English: If there are different suggestions, then non-major forces can be sent here to conquer.

古文：杲使奔睹与移刺保同来报曰： 顷奉诏旨，不令便趋山西，当审详徐议。 
现代文：杲派奔睹与移剌保一同回来报告说 ：刚接到圣旨，命令不让即刻赶往山西，要详细察看，慢慢计议。 
English: Zou sent Benzhi to come back with Shifeng Bao and reported: "We have just received the sacred edict, the order is not to rush to Shanxi immediately, we should examine it in detail and discuss it slowly."

古文：当时，宗翰使人报杲，即整众俟兵期。
现代文：当宗翰派人向杲禀报的时候就已经整顿军队，等候起兵日期。
English: When Zonghan sent someone to report to him, he had already reorganized the army and was waiting for the date of the start of the war.

古文：及奔睹至，知杲无意进取，宗翰恐待杲约或失机会，即决策进兵。
现代文：等到余睹来了，才知道杲没有进兵的意思，宗翰恐怕等杲决定下来可能会失去战机，就决计进兵。
English: It wasn't until after the fact that he learned that Zonghan had no intention of joining the army. I'm afraid Zonghan decided to join the army when he thought he might lose his fighter plane.

古文：使移刺保复往报都统曰： 初受命虽未令便取山西，亦许便宜从事。
现代文：他派移剌保再次禀报都统 ：当初接受命令虽然没有让即刻攻打山西，也允许依据情况行事。
English: He sent Yibao to report again to Du Tong: although he initially accepted the order not to attack Shanxi immediately, he was also allowed to act according to the situation.

古文：辽人可取，其势已见，一失机会，后难图矣。
现代文：辽人可以被攻取的形势已经可以看到，一旦失去机会，以后就难办了。
English: The situation that the Liao people can be conquered can already be seen. Once the opportunity is lost, it will be difficult to do in the future.

古文：今已进兵，当与大军会于何地，幸以见报。 
现代文：现在我已经进兵，应当与大军在什么地方会合，希望给以回复。 
English: Now that I have entered the army, I should meet with the army somewhere, and I hope to give a reply.

古文：宗干劝杲当如宗翰策，杲意乃决，约以奚王岭会议。
现代文：宗干劝杲应该听从宗翰的计策，杲才下决心，约定在奚王岭会面商谈。
English: Zongkang advised him that he should follow Zonghan's strategy, and it was only then that Zongkang made up his mind to meet Zongkang Wangling for negotiations.

古文：宗翰至奚王岭，与都统杲会。
现代文：宗翰来到奚王岭，与都统杲会面。
English: Zonghan came to Shao Wangling to meet with Du Tonglu.

古文：杲军出青岭，宗翰军出瓢岭，期于羊城泺会军。
现代文：杲从青岭出兵，宗翰从瓢岭出兵，约定在羊城泺会合。
English: Zou sent troops from Qingling, Zonghan sent troops from Yuling, and they agreed to meet in Yangcheng.

古文：宗翰以精兵六千袭辽主，闻辽主自五院司来拒战，宗翰倍道兼行，一宿而至，辽主遁去。
现代文：宗翰带领精兵六千袭击辽帝，听说辽帝从五院司前来抵抗，宗翰加倍赶路，只走了一夜便到达了，辽主逃跑。
English: Zonghan led six thousand elite soldiers to attack Liao Di. Hearing that Liao Di had come from the Fifth Academy to resist, Zonghan redoubled his speed and arrived after only one night. Liao Jun fled.

古文：乃使希尹等追之。
现代文：宗翰就派希尹等人追击。
English: Zonghan sent Xiyin and others in pursuit.

古文：西京复叛，耿守忠以兵五千来救，至城东四十里，蒲察乌烈、谷赧先击之，斩首千余。
现代文：西京再次反叛，耿守忠带领五千军兵来援救，到了城东四十里的地方，蒲察乌烈、谷赤皮首先攻打他，杀死一千多人。
English: Xijing rebelled again, and Geng Shouzhong led five thousand soldiers to rescue him. When they reached a place forty miles east of the city, Putsaur and Gu Chakpi attacked him first, killing more than a thousand people.

古文：宗翰、宗雄、宗干、宗峻继至，宗翰率麾下自其中冲击之，使余兵去马从旁射之。
现代文：宗翰、宗雄、宗干、宗峻相继赶来，宗翰率部下冲击敌军中部，让其他兵士下马在旁边放箭。
English: Dzongkhan, Dzongxiong, Dzongkhan, and Dzongjun arrived one after another. Dzongkhan led his subordinates to attack the middle of the enemy army, and let other soldiers dismount and shoot arrows nearby.

古文：守忠败走，其众歼焉。
现代文：耿守忠败走，他的众军被歼灭。
English: Geng Shou Zhong was defeated and fled, and his army was annihilated.

古文：宗翰弟紥保迪没于阵。
现代文：宗翰的弟弟扎保迪阵亡。
English: Zonghan's younger brother, Zabodi, was killed in action.

古文：天眷中，赠紥保迪特进云。
现代文：天眷年间，皇上封赠扎保迪为特进。
English: During the years of heaven's favor, the emperor granted Zhabodi a special promotion.

古文：宗翰已抚定西路州县部族，谒上于行在所，遂从上取燕京。
现代文：宗翰平定安抚西路州县部族以后，到君王的驻地前去拜见，随之跟从皇上进攻燕京。
English: After Zonghan pacified and pacified the tribes of West Luzhou County, he went to the king's residence to meet him, and then followed the emperor to attack Yanjing.

古文：燕京平，赐宗翰、希尹、挞懒、耶律余睹金器有差。
现代文：燕京平定后，皇上分别赏给宗翰、希尹、挞懒、耶律余睹等人数量不同的金器。
English: After the subjugation of Yanjing, the emperor separately awarded a different number of gold ware to Zonghan, Xiyin, Zailao, Yelu Yuzhan and others.

古文：太祖既以燕京与宋人，还军次鸳鸯泺，不豫，将归京师。
现代文：太祖已经把燕京给了宋国人，回兵驻扎在鸳鸯泺，身体患病将要回归京师。
English: The great-great-grandfather had already given Yanjing to the Song people, the Hui soldiers were stationed in Handan, and the physically ill would return to Beijing.

古文：以宗翰为都统，昃勃极烈昱、迭勃极烈斡鲁副之，驻军云中。
现代文：任命宗翰为都统，昃勃极烈昱、迭勃极烈斡鲁为副都统，在云中驻军。
English: Zonghan was appointed as the general secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC), and Zibo Jilei and Diibo Jilei Yulong were appointed as vice-general secretaries of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC) and stationed in Yunzhong.

古文：太宗即位，诏宗翰曰： 寄尔以方面，当迁官资者，以便宜除授。 
现代文：太宗即位，下诏书给宗翰说： 把一个地区的大权交给你，有应当升迁官职的人，你可以酌情任命。 
English: When Emperor Taizong ascended the throne, the next imperial edict to Emperor Zonghan said: Give you the power of a region, there are people who should be promoted, you can appoint them at your discretion.

古文：因以空名宣头百道给之。
现代文：因而把一百个宣头的空名额交给了他。
English: As a result, he was given one hundred vacancies for proclamation.

古文：宋人来请割诸城，宗翰报以武、朔二州。宗翰请曰： 宋人不归我叛亡，阻绝燕山往来道路，后必败盟，请勿割山西郡县。 
现代文：宋国人来要求割取城邑，宗翰上报割武、朔两个州，请求道： 宋人不把我军叛逃的人送回来，阻断了燕山的来往道路，以后必定会毁坏盟约，请求不要割让山西郡县。 
English: The Song people came to demand the confiscation of cities and towns, and Zonghan reported on the confiscation of Wuzhou and Shuo two states, and requested: If the Song people do not send back the defectors from our army, blocking the roads to and from Yanshan, they will certainly destroy the covenant in the future, and asked not to cede Shanxi County.

古文：太宗曰： 先皇帝尝许之矣，当与之。 
现代文：太宗说 ：先皇帝曾经许诺过，应该割给他们。 
English: Emperor Taizong said, "The previous emperor had promised to give it to them.

古文：诸将获耶律马哥，宗翰归之京师。
现代文：各将领抓获耶律马哥，宗翰把他带回京师。
English: The generals captured Yerumago, and Zonghan brought him back to the capital.

古文：诏以马七百匹给宗翰军，以田种千石、米七千石赈新附之民。
现代文：皇上下诏书把七百匹马赏给宗翰军队，把一千石粮食种子、七千石大米赈济新归附的民众。
English: The imperial edict awarded 700 horses to Zonghan's army and 1,000 kilos of grain seeds and 7,000 kilos of rice to the newly annexed people.

古文：诏曰： 新附之民，比及农时，度地以居之。 
现代文：诏令说 ：新归附的百姓，等到农忙的时候，划分土地给他们居住。 
English: The edict said: The newly annexed people should wait until the agricultural season is busy to divide the land for them to live on.

古文：宗翰请分宗望、挞懒、石古乃精兵讨诸部。
现代文：宗翰请求分出宗望、挞懒、石古乃的部分精兵征伐各部族。
English: Zonghan requested that some of the elite soldiers from Zongbo, Lazy, and Shigu be sent to conquer each tribe.

古文：诏曰： 宗望军不可分，别以精锐五千给之。 
现代文：皇上诏令说： 宗望的军队不能分出来，另外给他五千精锐兵士。 
English: The Emperor's edict said: Zongwang's army cannot be divided, and he should be given an additional five thousand elite soldiers.

古文：宗翰朝太祖陵，入见上，奏曰： 先皇帝时，山西、南京诸部汉官，军帅皆得承制除授。今南京皆循旧制，惟山西优以朝命。 
现代文：宗翰朝拜太祖陵墓，入殿进见君王，启奏道： 先皇帝在世时，山西、南京各部族的汉人官吏、将帅都得以按皇上的命令任用，现在南京都循守旧制度，只有山西得到朝廷的命令而受到优待。 
English: Dzongkhan paid homage to the tomb of the great-grandfather, entered the hall and met the king, and began to sing: When the former emperor was alive, Han officials and generals of all tribes in Shanxi and Nanjing were able to be appointed according to the emperor's order. Now, South Kyoto follows the old system, and only Shanxi has been given preferential treatment by the order of the imperial court.

古文：诏曰： 一用先皇帝燕京所降诏敕从事，卿等度其勤力而迁授之。 
现代文：皇上诏令说 ：一律依照先皇帝在燕京颁布的圣旨行事，对于你们要根据各人的辛劳功绩提升官职。 
English: The imperial edict said, "All of you should act in accordance with the imperial edict issued by the former emperor in Yanjing. Each of you should be promoted according to your hard work and merits."

古文：宗翰复奏曰： 先皇帝征辽之初，图宋协力夹攻，故许以燕地。
现代文：宗翰又禀奏说 ：先皇帝最初征伐辽国的时候，企望宋国能同力夹攻，因此把燕的土地许给他们。
English: Zonghan also said: When the former emperor first conquered Liao, he hoped that Song could attack together, so he gave them Yan's land.

古文：宋人既盟之后，请加币以求山西诸镇，先皇帝辞其加币。
现代文：宋人订立盟约之后，提出增加钱财来换取山西各镇，先皇帝推辞不让增加钱财。
English: After the Song people signed a covenant, they proposed to increase money and wealth in exchange for the towns of Shanxi. The first emperor refused to allow the increase of money and wealth.

古文：盟书曰： 无容匿逋逃，诱扰边民。 
现代文：盟书上说 ：不窝藏逃犯，引诱侵扰边境居民。 
English: The agreement said: do not harbor fugitives, lure and harass border residents.

古文：今宋数路招纳叛亡，厚以恩赏。
现代文：现在宋国好几个区域招纳叛逃者，犒赏丰厚。
English: At present, several regions of Song Province are recruiting defectors, and the rewards are plentiful.

古文：累疏叛人姓名，索之童贯，尝期以月日，约以哲书，一无所至。
现代文：几次记录下叛逃人的姓名，向童贯索要，并曾经限定日期，写下誓约，但是一无所获。
English: The names of the defectors have been recorded several times, they have been requested from Tong Yan, and they have set a date and written a pledge, but nothing has been achieved.

古文：盟未期年，今已如此，万世守约，其可望乎。
现代文：盟约不到一年，现在已经这样，要万世守约，难道能够指望吗？
English: Less than a year has passed since the signing of the covenant, and now it is like this. Can we expect the covenant to be kept for all eternity?

古文：且西鄙未宁，割付山西诸郡，则诸军失屯据之所，将有经略，或难持久，请姑置勿割。 
现代文：而且西部边疆没有安宁，割让山西各郡，就使各军失去屯据的地方，若以后再有规划，可能难以持久，请陛下姑且保留这些地方，不要割让。 
English: Moreover, there is no peace on the western frontier. If the counties of Shanxi are ceded, it will cause the armies to lose their strongholds. If there are plans in the future, it may be difficult to last. I would like to ask His Majesty to retain these places and not cede them.

古文：上悉如所请。
现代文：皇上全都听从宗翰的请求。
English: The emperors all obeyed Zonghan's request.

古文：上以宗翰破辽，经略夏国奉表称藩，深嘉其功，以马十匹，使宗翰自择二匹，余赐群帅。
现代文：皇上因为宗翰打败辽军，促使夏国献表自称藩属，非常赞赏他的功绩，给了十匹马，让宗翰自己选两匹，其余赐给各个将帅。
English: Because Zonghan defeated the Liao army, the emperor prompted Xia Guo to present a certificate claiming to be a member of the clan, greatly appreciated his achievements, gave ten horses, let Zonghan choose two of his own, and gave the rest to each general.

古文：及斡鲁奏宋不遣岁币户口事，且将渝盟，不可不备。
现代文：后来斡鲁禀报宋国不送岁币户口的事，而且说要改盟约，不能不防备。
English: Later, Lu Xun sent a message to Song Guo not to send the New Year's money to the household, and said that it was necessary to be prepared to change the covenant.

古文：太宗命宗翰取诸路户籍按籍索之。
现代文：太宗命令宗翰取来各路户籍，按籍索讨岁币。
English: Emperor Taizong ordered Zonghan to collect the household registration of each family and to collect the old-age pension according to the household registration.

古文：而阇母再奏宋败盟有状，宗翰、宗望俱请伐宋。
现代文：母再次上奏说宋人有毁坏盟约的行为，宗翰、宗望共同请求攻打宋国。
English: The mother again appealed that the Song people had destroyed the covenant, and Zonghan and Zongwang jointly requested to attack Song.

古文：于是，谙班勃极烈杲领都元帅，居京师，宗翰为左副元帅，自太原路代宋。
现代文：于是，谙班勃极烈杲兼任都元帅，住在京师，宗翰担任左副元帅，从太原路出兵进攻宋国。
English: As a result, Zangban Boji Rong also served as the capital marshal, living in Beijing Division, and Zonghan served as the left deputy marshal, and sent troops to attack Song from Taiyuan Road.

古文：宗翰发自河阴，遂降朔州，克代州，围太原府。
现代文：宗翰从河阴出发，接着使朔州归降，攻克了代州，围困太原府。
English: Zonghan set out from Hexin, then made Shuozhou surrender, conquered Daizhou, and besieged Taiyuan.

古文：宋河东、陕西军四万救太原，败于汾河之北，杀万余人。
现代文：宋国河东、陕西的四万军队援救太原，在汾河的北边战败，被杀死了一万多人。
English: Forty-thousand troops from the eastern Song and Shaanxi dynasties came to the rescue of Taiyuan, but were defeated on the northern side of the Min River, and more than ten thousand people were killed.

古文：宗望自河北趋汴，久不闻问，遂留银术可等围太原，宗翰率师而南。
现代文：宗望从河北赶往汴州，许久听不到消息，于是留下银术可等人围攻太原，宗翰率军南行。
English: Zongwang rushed from Hebei to Bozhou, but did not hear any news for a long time, so he left Yinzhu to wait for others to besiege Taiyuan, and Zonghan led the army south.

古文：天会四年降定诸县及威胜军，下隆德府实潞州。
现代文：天会四年，宗翰平定招降了各县以及威胜军，攻下隆德府，即潞州。
English: In the fourth year of the Heavenly Reunion, Zonghan peacefully recruited and demoted the counties and the victorious army, and conquered Lund Prefecture, that is, Ganzhou.

古文：军至泽州，宋使至军中，始知割三镇讲和事。
现代文：军队到了泽州，宋国使臣来到军营中，宗翰才知道割三镇讲和的事。
English: When the army arrived in Zezhou and the Song envoys came to the military camp, it was only then that Zonghan knew about the peace talks in Wuzhishan.

古文：路允迪以宋割太原诏书来，太原人不受诏。
现代文：路允迪把宋国割让太原的诏书带来，太原人却不接受诏书。
English: Lu Yun Di brought the imperial decree of the Song Dynasty ceding Taiyuan, but the Taiyuan people did not accept the imperial decree.

古文：宗翰取文水及盂县，复留银术可围太原。
现代文：宗翰攻取文水和盂县，又把银术可留下围攻太原。
English: Zonghan captured Wenshui and Jixian, and besieged Taiyuan, leaving the Silver Art behind.

古文：宗翰乃还山西。
现代文：宗翰便返回山西。
English: Zonghan then returned to Shanxi.

古文：宋少帝诱萧仲恭贻书余睹，以兴复辽社稷以动之。
现代文：宋国的少帝诱使萧仲恭写信给余睹，用复兴辽国社稷的话打动他。
English: The young emperor of the Song Dynasty induced Xiao Zhongxiong to write a letter to Yu Jian, and impressed him with the words of reviving the Liao Guo Society.

古文：萧仲恭献其书，诏复伐宋。
现代文：萧仲恭献出了书信，太祖下诏再次攻伐宋国。
English: Xiao Zhongyong presented a letter, and Emperor Taizu issued an edict to invade Song again.

古文：八月，宗翰发自西京。
现代文：八月，宗翰从西京出发。
English: In August, Zonghan set out from West Beijing.

古文：九月丙寅，宗翰克太原，执宋经略使张孝纯等。
现代文：九月三日，宗翰攻克太原，捉住宋国经略使张孝纯等人。
English: On September 3rd, Zonghan conquered Taiyuan and captured Zhang Xiaochun and others, who were Song Guojing's subordinates.

古文：鹘沙虎取平遥，降灵石、介休、孝义诸县。
现代文：鹘沙虎攻取平遥，收降了灵石、介休、孝义等各个县。
English: The Bansha Tigers conquered Pingyao and took over Lingshi, Jieyu, Xiaoyi and other counties.

古文：十一月甲子，宗翰自太原趋汴，降威胜军，克隆德府，遂取泽州。
现代文：十一月三日，宗翰从太原赶往汴京战降了威胜军，攻克隆德府，于是占领泽州。
English: On November 3rd, Zonghan rushed from Taiyuan to Beijing, defeated the victorious army, conquered the Klondorf, and then occupied Zezhou.

古文：撒刺荅等先已破天井关，进逼河阳，破宋兵万人，降其城。
现代文：撒剌答等人已经先攻破天井关，进逼河阳，打败宋兵上万人，收降了宋兵的城邑。
English: Sabao and others had already broken through the ceiling first, pushed into Hebei, defeated tens of thousands of Song soldiers, and captured the towns of Song soldiers.

古文：宗翰攻怀州，克之。
现代文：宗翰进攻怀州，把城攻破。
English: Zonghan attacked Waizhou and broke through the city.

古文：丁亥，渡河。
现代文：二十六日，大军渡过黄河。
English: On the 26th, the great army crossed the Yellow River.

古文：闰月，宗翰至汴，与宗望会兵。
现代文：闰十一月，宗翰到达汴州，与宗望军队会合。
English: In late November, Zonghan arrived in Zhangzhou and met with Zongwang's army.

古文：宋约画河为界，复请修好。
现代文：宋国约定划黄河为界，再次请求讲和修好。
English: Song agreed to demarcate the Yellow River as the boundary, and once again asked for peace and reconciliation.

古文：不克和。
现代文：讲和没有成功。
English: The peace talks did not succeed.

古文：丙辰，银术可等克汴州。
现代文：二十五日，银术可等人攻占汴州。
English: On the 25th, the Silver Art could wait for others to capture Zhangzhou.

古文：辛酉，宋少帝诣军前，舍青城。
现代文：三十日，宋国的少帝来到军队中，舍弃了青城。
English: On the 30th, the young emperor of Song came to the army and abandoned Qingcheng.

古文：十二月癸亥，少帝奏表降。
现代文：十二月二日，少帝呈上奏表投降。
English: On December 2nd, the young emperor submitted his report and surrendered.

古文：诏元帅府曰： 将帅士卒立功者，第其功之高下迁赏之。
现代文：太祖诏令元帅府道 ：对于将帅士卒中立功的人，按他们的功劳高低给予提升奖赏。
English: The great-great-grandfather issued an order to the marshal of the prefectural road: for those who have made great achievements, according to their merits, they will be given a promotion reward.

古文：其殒身行阵，没于王事者，厚恤其家，赐赠官爵务从优厚。 
现代文：对于在战斗中牺牲、为王室大业而死的人，要厚厚地抚恤他们的家眷，封官赠爵务必从优从厚。 
English: For those who sacrificed themselves in battle and died for the royal cause, their families should be treated generously, and the granting of knighthoods must be from the best to the best.

古文：使勖就军中劳赐宗翰、宗望，使皆执其手以劳之。
现代文：皇上派冒力到军中犒劳宗翰、宗望，让他握他们每个人的手以表示慰问。
English: The Emperor took the liberty of sending Zonghan and Zongwang to the army, and asked him to shake the hands of each of them to express his condolences.

古文：五年四月，以宋二主及其宗族四百七十余人及珪璋、宝印、衮冕、车辂、祭器、大乐、灵台、图书，与大军北还。
现代文：天会五年四月，宗翰等人带着宋国两个君主及其宗族四百七十多人，以及王圭璋、宝印、衮冕、车辆、祭器、乐器、灵台、图书等物品，与大军一起北还。
English: In April of the fifth year of the Heaven's Fair, Zonghan and others returned to the north with the great army, carrying the two monarchs of Song and more than 470 members of their families, as well as Wang Guijuan, treasure seals, crowns, vehicles, sacrificial vessels, musical instruments, shrines, books and other items.

古文：七月，赐宗翰铁券，除反逆外，余皆不问，赐与甚厚。
现代文：七月，皇上把铁券赐给宗翰，除了反叛者之外，其他人都不予过问。
English: In July, the emperor gave the iron certificate to Zonghan, and except for the rebels, no one else was questioned.

古文：宗翰奏河北、河东府镇州县请择前资官良能者任之，以安新民。
现代文：另外又给宗翰丰厚的奖赏。宗翰禀奏说河北、河东的府镇州县请求选择以前官吏中能干贤能的人加以任用，以安抚新近归附的民众。
English: In addition, a rich reward was given to Zonghan. Zonghan said that the prefectures, towns and counties of Hebei and Hedong requested to select capable and virtuous people from the former officials to be appointed in order to appease the newly annexed people.

古文：上遣耶律晖等从宗翰行。诏黄龙府路、南路、东京路于所部各选如耶律晖者遣之。
现代文：皇上派耶律晖等人跟宗翰一道去，并诏令黄龙府路、南路、东京路在部属中各选出像耶律晖这样的人派遣同去。
English: The emperor sent Yerutaka and others to go with Zonghan, and ordered Huanglongfu Road, South Road, and Tokyo Road to select people like Yerutaka from their subordinates and send them along.

古文：宗翰遂趋洛阳。
现代文：宗翰赶赴洛阳。
English: Zonghan rushed to Luoyang.

古文：宋董植以兵至郑州，郑州人复叛。
现代文：宋国董植带兵到了郑州，郑州又叛变了。
English: Song Guo Dong Zhi led soldiers to Zhengzhou, and Zhengzhou rebelled again.

古文：宗翰使诸将击董植军，复取郑州。
现代文：宗翰派各将攻击董植的军队，重又占领郑州。
English: Each faction of the Zonghan faction attacked Dong Zhi's army and occupied Zhengzhou again.

古文：遂迁洛阳、襄阳、颍昌、汝、郑、均、房、唐、邓、陈、蔡之民于河北，而遣娄室平陕西州郡。
现代文：之后，宗翰把洛阳、襄阳、颍昌、汝、郑、均、房、唐、邓、陈、蔡等地的居民迁到河北，并派娄室平定陕西州郡。
English: After that, Zonghan moved the residents of Luoyang, Xiangyang, Fuchang, Ru, Zheng, Jun, Fang, Tang, Deng, Chen, Cai and other places to Hebei, and sent the imperial residences to subdue Shaanxi County.

古文：是时河东寇盗尚多，宗翰乃分留将士，夹河屯守，而还师山西。
现代文：这时河东的匪寇盗贼还很多，宗翰就分别留下将士，在河两岸驻守，自己回师山西。
English: At this time, there were still many bandits and thieves in the east of the river, so Zonghan left soldiers separately, stationed on both sides of the river, and went back to Shanxi.

古文：昏德公致书 请立赵氏，奉职修贡，民心必喜，万世利也。 
现代文：昏德公写信来说 ：请把赵氏立为君长，让他奉守职位、治理贡献，民心必定欢喜，这是万世的利益。 
English: Dim Dekong wrote a letter saying: Please make the Zhao clan the ruler, let him observe the position and contribute to governance, the people's heart will surely rejoice, this is the benefit of all ages.

古文：宗翰受其书而不答。
现代文：宗翰收到他的信却没有回复。
English: Zonghan received his letter but did not reply.

古文：康王遣王师正奉表，密以书招诱契彤、汉人。
现代文：康王派遣王师正奉领书表，秘密地写信诱降契丹人和汉人。
English: King Kang sent Wang Shizheng to collect the books and secretly write letters to lure the Khitan and Han people.

古文：获其书奏之。
现代文：这些信被收获来禀奏给太宗。
English: These letters were collected and sent to Taizong.

古文：太宗下诏伐康王。
现代文：太宗下诏讨伐康王。
English: Emperor Taizong issued an edict to subdue King Kang.

古文：河北诸将欲罢陕西兵，并力南伐。
现代文：河北诸将想要停止攻打陕西，而合力南下征伐。
English: The generals of Hebei wanted to stop attacking Shaanxi and join forces to invade the south.

古文：河东诸将不可，曰： 陕西与西夏为邻，事重体大，兵不可罢。 
现代文：河东各将不同意，说： 陕西与西夏是近邻，关系重大，不能收兵。 
English: Each of the provinces in the east of the river disagreed, saying: Shaanxi and Western Xia are close neighbors, and the relationship is important, and it is impossible to recruit soldiers.

古文：宗翰曰： 初与夏约夹攻宋人，而夏人弗应。
现代文：宗翰说 ：当初与西夏国相约夹攻宋人，但西夏没有答应。
English: Zonghan said: At first, there was an agreement with Western Xia to attack the Song people, but Western Xia did not agree.

古文：而耶律大石在西北，交通西夏。
现代文：而耶律大石在西北，和西夏交往。
English: However, Yerut Daishi was in the northwest and associated with Xixia.

古文：吾舍陕西而会师河北，彼必谓我有急难。
现代文：我舍弃陕西而到河北会师，他们必定认为我有急难。
English: When I abandoned Shaanxi to join the army in Hebei, they must have thought I was in a hurry.

古文：河北不足虞，宜先事陕西，略定五路，既弱西夏，然后取宋。 
现代文：河北不值得担忧，就该先对付陕西，平定五路，削弱西夏，然后攻取宋国。 
English: Hebei is not worth worrying about, so we should first deal with Shaanxi, pacify the five provinces, weaken Western Xia, and then conquer Song.

古文：宗翰盖有意于夏人也。议久不决，奏请于上，上曰： 康王构当穷其所往而追之。
现代文：宗翰大概有意向着夏人，商议了很久不能决断，奏请皇上，皇上说 ：对于康王构，应找到他所在的地方而去追击。
English: Zonghan probably deliberately approached Xia Ren, and after long deliberation, unable to come to a decision, appealed to the emperor. The emperor said, "For Kang Wangjie, we should find where he is and go after him."

古文：俟平宋，当立藩辅如张邦昌者。
现代文：等平定宋国，应立像张邦昌那样的人为藩辅。
English: Such as the pacification of the Song Dynasty, people like Zhang Bangchang should be appointed as the assistant of the domain.

古文：陕右之地，亦未可置而不取。 
现代文：陕右地区，也不能放置一旁而不攻取。 
English: The Shaanxi-Hebei region cannot be left aside without being attacked.

古文：于是娄室、蒲察帅师，绳果、婆卢火监战，平陕西。
现代文：于是娄室、蒲察统率军队，绳果、婆卢火监战，攻占陕西。
English: As a result, Shishimuro and Puchadong led the army, and Zhanao and Baloo led the fire brigade to occupy Shaanxi.

古文：银术可守太原，耶律余睹留西京。
现代文：银术可驻守太原，耶律余睹留守西京。
English: Ginjutsu could be stationed in Taiyuan, while Yerutsu remained in Saikyo.

古文：宗翰会东军于黎阳津，遂会睿宗于濮。
现代文：宗翰在黎阳津与东军会合，接着在濮与睿宗会合。
English: Zonghan rendezvoused with the Eastern Army in Liyangjin and then with Ruizong in Handan.

古文：进兵至东平，宋知府权邦彦弃家宵遁，降其城，驻军东平东南五十里。
现代文：进兵到东平，宋朝的知府权邦彦弃家夜逃，宗翰收降东平城，在东平的东南方五十里处驻军。
English: When marching into Dongping, the prefect of the Song Dynasty, Guan Bangyan, abandoned his home and fled at night, while Zonghan retreated to Dongping City and garrisoned his troops fifty miles southeast of Dongping.

古文：复取徐州。
现代文：又攻占徐州。
English: They also captured Xuzhou.

古文：先是，宋人运江、淮金币皆在徐州官库，尽得之，分给诸军。
现代文：在这之前，宋人从长江、淮河运来的金币都在徐州官库，这时，被宗翰全部获得，分给了各军。
English: Before this, the gold coins brought by the Song people from the Yangtze River and the Huai River were all in the Xuzhou government treasury. At this time, they were all obtained by Zonghan and distributed to the armies.

古文：袭庆府来降。
现代文：袭庆府前来归降。
English: They came to Qingfu to surrender.

古文：宋知济南府刘豫以城降于挞懒。
现代文：宋朝知济南府刘豫献出城池向挞懒投降。
English: In the Song Dynasty, Liu Yu of Jinan Province surrendered the city to Lazy.

古文：乃遣拔离速、乌林荅泰欲、马五袭康王于扬州，未至百五十里，马五以五百骑先驰至扬州城下。
现代文：宗翰派拔离速、乌林答泰欲、马五到扬州袭击康王，没走出一百五十里地，马五就带领五百骑兵先到了扬州城下。
English: Zongkhan sent his troops to Yangzhou to attack Kang Wang, and Ma Wu led 500 cavalrymen to the foot of Yangzhou before they had gone 150 miles.

古文：康王闻兵来，已于前一夕渡江矣。
现代文：康王闻听军兵来了，已经在头天渡江。
English: When King Kang heard the soldiers coming, he had already crossed the river the day before.

古文：于是，康王以书请存赵氏社稷。
现代文：这时，康王写信请求保存赵氏社稷。
English: At this time, King Kang wrote a letter requesting the preservation of the Zhao family seal.

古文：先是，康王尝致书元帅府，称 大宋皇帝构致书大金元帅帐前 ，至是乃贬去大号，自称 宋康王赵构谨致书元帅閤下 。
现代文：在此以前，康王曾写信给元帅府，称 大宋皇帝构致书元帅帐前 ，而这时则降下大号，自称 宋康王构谨致书元帅阁下 。
English: Prior to this, Kang Wang had written to the marshal's office, saying that the Great Song Emperor had written to the marshal, but at this time he lowered the capital letter and called himself Song Kang Wang wrote to the marshal.

古文：其四月、七月两书皆然。
现代文：他在四月、七月写的两封信也都是这样。
English: This was also the case with the two letters he wrote in April and July.

古文：元帅府答其书，招之使降。
现代文：元帅府答复了他的信，招他归降。
English: The marshal's office replied to his letter, inviting him to surrender.

古文：于是，挞懒、宗弼、拔离速、马五等分道南伐。
现代文：此时，挞懒、宗弼、拔离速、马五等人分路南伐。
English: At this time, Zou Lazy, Zong Yao, Pu Yao Dao, Ma Wu and others split off and headed south.

古文：宗弼之军渡江取建康，入于杭州。康王入海，阿里、蒲卢浑等自明州行海三百里，追之弗及。
现代文：宗弼的军队渡江攻建康，进入杭州，康王乘船入海，阿里、蒲卢浑等人从明州向海中行了三百里，没有追上康王。
English: Zonglu's army crossed the river to attack Jiankang and entered Hangzhou. Kang Wang took a boat to the sea. Ali, Bulughun and others traveled three hundred miles from Mingzhou to the middle of the sea and did not catch up with Kang Wang.

古文：宗弼乃还。
现代文：宗弼于是回军。
English: So Sōsei returned to the army.

古文：其后宗翰欲用徐文策伐江南，睿宗、宗弼议不合，乃止。
现代文：之后，宗翰想任用徐文谋划征伐江南，睿宗、宗弼商议的意见不相投合，于是作罢。
English: Later, Zonghan wanted to appoint Xu Wen to plan the conquest of the south of the Yangtze River, but the opinions discussed by Ruizong and Zonglu did not coincide, so they abandoned the plan.

古文：语在《刘豫传》。
现代文：这些话记载在《刘豫传》中。
English: These words are recorded in "Liu Yu Chuan."

古文：归德叛，都统大糺里平之。
现代文：归德叛乱，都统大礣里前去将它平息。
English: When there was a rebellion to return to Germany, Du Tong went to Dalian to quell it.

古文：初，太宗以斜也为谙班勃极烈，天会八年，斜也薨，久虚此位。
现代文：起初，太宗封斜也为谙班勃极烈，天会八年，斜也去世，这个职位长时间以来一直空着。
English: At the beginning, Taizong's crown prince, Xiang Xiang, was also extremely powerful. Eight years after the heavenly meeting, Xiang Xiang also died, and this position has been vacant for a long time.

古文：而熙宗宗峻子，太祖嫡孙，宗干等不以言太宗，而太宗亦无立熙宗意。
现代文：熙宗是宗峻的儿子，也是太祖的嫡孙，宗干等人不向太宗提议，而太宗也没有立熙宗的意思。
English: Xizong was the son of Zongjun and the great-grandson of the great-grandfather. Zonggan and others did not propose to the great-grandfather, and the great-grandfather did not intend to establish Xizong.

古文：宗翰朝京师，谓宗干曰： 储嗣虚位颇久，合刺先帝嫡孙，当立，不早定之，恐授非其人。
现代文：宗翰朝进京师，对宗干说： 储嗣的位子空虚了很久，合剌是先帝的嫡孙，应当立他，如果不早定下来，恐怕会授位给不应得到的人。
English: When Zonghan entered Beijing, he said to Zonggan, "The position of the heir has been vacant for a long time. He is the great-grandson of the former emperor. He should be appointed. If it is not decided early, I am afraid the throne will be given to someone who does not deserve it."

古文：宗翰日夜未尝忘此。 
现代文：宗翰日夜不曾忘了这件事。 
English: Day and night, Zonghan never forgot this incident.

古文：遂与宋干、希尹定议，入言于太宗，请之再三。
现代文：于是他与宗干、希尹计议确定，入朝向太宗说了，再三请求恩准。
English: So he discussed the matter with Zongkang and Xiyin and decided to enter the court. He told Emperor Taizong about it and repeatedly asked for permission.

古文：太宗以宗翰等皆大臣，义不可夺，乃从之，遂立熙宗为谙班勃极烈。
现代文：太宗由于宗翰等人都是重臣，道义上不能强夺，于是听从，就立熙宗为谙班勃极烈。
English: Emperor Taizong obeyed because Zonghan and others were senior vassals and could not be taken by force, so he appointed Xiizong to be the leader of the army.

古文：于是，宗翰为国论右勃极烈，兼都元帅。
现代文：由此，宗翰成为国论右勃极烈，兼做都元帅。
English: As a result, Zonghan became a nationalistic right-wing extremist, and also a field marshal.

古文：越千里以袭辽主，诸将皆有畏顾之心，而请期不已。
现代文：熙宗即位后，任命宗翰为太保、尚书令，管三省事，并封他为晋国王。他上书乞求辞官，熙宗不准许。
English: After Emperor Hezong ascended to the throne, he appointed Zonghan as Taiho, Shang Shuling, in charge of the three provinces, and appointed him as the King of Jin. He sent a letter begging for the post, but Emperor Hezong did not allow it.

古文：观其欲置江、淮，专事陕服，当时无有能识其意者。
现代文：天会十四年，宗翰逝世，终年五十八岁。他被追封为周宋国王。
English: In the 14th year of Tianhe, Zonghan died at the age of 58. He was crowned King of Zhou and Song.

古文：甫释干戈，敛衽归朝，以定熙宗之位，精诚之发，孰可掩哉。
现代文：正隆二年，按惯例他被封为金源郡王。大定年间，改赠为秦王，谥号 桓忠 ，纎祭于太祖庙廷。
English: In the second year of Zhenglong, according to the usual practice, he was named the King of Jinyuan County. During the Dading period, he was given the title of King of Qin, the posthumous name of Kuanzhong, and was sacrificed at the ancestral temple.

古文：宗望本名斡鲁补，又作斡离不，太祖第二子也。
现代文：宗望，原名斡鲁补，又叫斡离不，是太祖的第二个儿子。
English: Dzongwang, whose original name was Dzonglu, also known as Dzongli, was the second son of the great-grandfather.

古文：每从太祖征伐，常在左右。
现代文：常常随太祖征伐，跟从在左右。
English: He often went to war with his great-grandfather and followed him around.

古文：都统杲已克中京，宗翰在北安州，获辽护卫习泥烈，知辽主在鸳鸯泺，宗翰请袭之。
现代文：都统杲攻克了中京，宗翰在北安州，抓获辽国护卫习泥烈，得知辽主在鸳鸯泺，宗翰请求奉命去攻袭。
English: All of them conquered Zhongjing, and Zonghan was in Bei'an. He captured the Liao escort Xi Murei, and learned that the Liao Lord was in Shandong. Zonghan requested and was ordered to attack.

古文：杲出青岭，辽兵三百余掠降人家赀。
现代文：杲离开青岭，有三百多辽兵掳掠投降者的家中资产。
English: After leaving Qingling, more than three hundred Liao soldiers plundered the home assets of those who surrendered.

古文：宗望曰： 若生致此辈，可审得辽主所在虚实。 
现代文：宗望说 ：若我抓到这些人，就可以审问出辽主所在地的情况。 
English: Zongwang said, "If I catch these people, I can interrogate them to find out the location of the Liao clan."

古文：遂与宗弼率百骑进。
现代文：于是他与宗弼率上百骑兵进发。
English: So he and Zong Yao led hundreds of cavalry into battle.

古文：骑多罢乏，独与马和尚逐越卢、孛古、野里斯等，留一骑趣后军，即驰击败之，生擒五人。
现代文：骑兵大多疲乏，他独自与马和尚追赶越卢、孛古、野里斯等人，留下一个骑兵去催促后面的军队，于是他们奔驰而来击败敌军，活捉五人。
English: Most of the cavalry were exhausted. He and his horse and monk chased after Yue Lu, Gongu, and Wild Rhys, leaving one cavalryman to urge the army behind, so they galloped to defeat the enemy army and captured five people alive.

古文：因审辽主尚在鸳鸯泺未去无疑也。于是进兵。
现代文：从而审问出辽主还在鸳鸯泺没走，确实无疑，于是才进兵。
English: Thus, the interrogation revealed that the Liao Lord had not left yet, indeed, there was no doubt, so he entered the army.

古文：宗翰倍道兼行，追辽主于五院司，不及。
现代文：宗翰日夜不停加速行进，追赶辽主直到五院司，没有追上。
English: Zonghan kept speeding up day and night, chasing Liao Shuzhu until the Fifth Division, but did not catch up.

古文：娄室等追之至白水泺，辽主走阴山。
现代文：娄室等人追到白水泺，辽主逃往阴山。
English: Shishitsu and the others chased them to Baishui, while Liao fled to Yinshan.

古文：辽秦晋国王捏里自立于燕京。
现代文：辽国的秦晋国王捏里自己在燕京立位。
English: King Qin Jin of the Liao Dynasty himself stood in Yanjing.

古文：新降州部，人心不固，杲使宗望请太祖临军。
现代文：新近归降的州部，人心不稳固，杲派宗望去请太祖亲临军队。
English: The newly-surrendered prefectures were not stable, and the Jurchen sect wanted to invite the great-grandfather to visit the army.

古文：宗望至京师，百官入贺。
现代文：宗望来到京师，百官入朝恭贺。
English: Zongwang came to Beijing, and hundreds of officials came to congratulate him.

古文：上曰： 宗望与十余骑经涉兵寇数千里，可嘉也。 
现代文：皇上说 ：宗望与千余名骑兵跋涉数千里追杀敌寇，应该嘉奖。 
English: The emperor said, "Zongwang should be commended for traveling thousands of miles with more than a thousand cavalrymen to pursue and kill enemy raiders."

古文：上宴群臣，欢甚，宗望奏曰： 今云中新定，诸路辽兵尚数万，辽主尚在阴山、天德之间，而捏里自立于燕京，新降之民，其心未固，是以诸将望陛下幸军中也。 
现代文：皇上宴请群臣，十分欢快。宗望启奏说： 现在云中刚刚平定，各路辽兵还有数万人，辽主还在阴山、天德之间，而捏里却在燕京自立帝号，新归降的民众，人心不稳固，因此诸将期望陛下驾临军中。 
English: The emperor invited his ministers to the banquet, which was very joyful. Zongwang Qisong said: Now the clouds have just been calmed down, there are tens of thousands of Liao soldiers in all directions, the Liao Lord is still between the mountains and the sky, but in the pinch, the Emperor has established himself in Yanjing. The newly surrendered people are not stable in their hearts, so they will expect His Majesty to come to the army.

古文：上曰： 悬军远伐，授以成算，岂能尽合机事。
现代文：皇上说 ：朕挂念军队远征，把已定计划交给你们，又怎么能全部符合战时机遇。
English: The emperor said: I am concerned about the military expedition, and I have given you the plan, but how can it all meet the wartime opportunities.

古文：朕以六月朔启行。 
现代文：朕在六月初启程。 
English: I leave at the beginning of June.

古文：既次大泺西南，果使希尹奏请徙西南招讨司诸部于内地。
现代文：等到了大泺西南地方，杲派希尹奏请把西南招讨司的各部族迁徙到内地。
English: When they arrived in the southwestern region of Dalat, the Yan faction sent Xiyunso to request that the tribes in the southwestern province be relocated to the mainland.

古文：上顾谓群臣曰： 徙诸部人当出何路？ 
现代文：皇上转向群臣问道 ：迁徙各部应走哪条路？ 
English: The Emperor turned to his courtiers and asked: Which way should the emigration departments go?

古文：宗望对曰： 中京残弊，刍粮不给，由上京为宜。
现代文：宗望回答说： 中京残败，粮食供应不上，从上京走为好。
English: Zongwang replied, "Changjing is still in ruins, grain supplies are not available, it is better to go to Shangjing.

古文：然新降之人，遽尔骚动，未降者必皆疑惧。
现代文：然而，新归降的人突然骚动起来，还没归降的人必定都会疑惑恐惧。
English: However, those who have recently surrendered are suddenly agitated, and those who have not yet surrendered are bound to be suspicious and fearful.

古文：劳师害人，所失多矣。 
现代文：劳动军队而又对人有害，损失太多。 
English: The labor army is harmful to people, and there are too many losses.

古文：上京谓临潢府也。
现代文：上京也就是临潢府。
English: Kamigyo is also called Linyi Prefecture.

古文：上乃下其议，命军帅度宜行之。
现代文：皇上于是把宗望的建议传达下去，命令军帅思量在适宜的时候行动。
English: The emperor then passed on the advice of Zongfang and ordered the commander to act at the right time.

古文：上闻辽主在大鱼泺，自将精兵万人袭之。
现代文：君王闻知辽主在大鱼泺，亲自率精兵一万人去袭击。
English: Emperor Wen Zhi Liao personally led ten thousand elite soldiers to attack in Dafeng.

古文：蒲家奴、宗望率兵四千为前锋，昼夜兼行，马多乏，追及辽主于石辇驿，军士至者才千人，辽军余二万五千。
现代文：蒲家奴、宗望率四千军兵做前锋，昼夜兼行，马匹大多疲乏，在石辇驿追上辽主时，军兵才到了一千人，辽军则还有二万五千人。
English: Pu Jia Nu and Zong Wang led 4,000 soldiers as forwards, marching both day and night. Most of the horses were tired. When Shijiazhuang caught up with Liao Zhen, the number of soldiers had only reached 1,000, while the Liao Army still had 25,000 soldiers.

古文：方治营垒，蒲家奴与诸将议。
现代文：正修筑营垒，蒲家奴与诸将商议计策。
English: Camps were being built, and Puchan and the generals were discussing strategies.

古文：余睹曰： 我军未集，人马疲剧，未可战。 
现代文：余睹说： 我军还未齐集，人马十分困乏，不能作战。 
English: A bystander said: Our army has not yet assembled, and the men and horses are very tired and cannot fight.

古文：宗望曰： 今追及辽主而不亟战，日入而遁，则无及。 
现代文：宗望说 ：现在追上了辽主却不及时出击，等太阳落山后他逃掉，就来不及了。 
English: Zongwang said, "I have now caught up with the Liao Lord, but he did not attack in time. When the sun sets and he escapes, it will be too late."

古文：遂战，短兵接，辽兵围之数重，士皆殊死战。
现代文：于是出战，短兵相接，辽兵把他们包围了好几层，士兵都殊死作战。
English: As a result, they went to war, the short soldiers were next to each other, the Liao soldiers surrounded them on several levels, and the soldiers fought to the death.

古文：辽主谓宗望兵少必败，遂与嫔御皆自高阜下平地观战。
现代文：辽主以为宗望兵少必定失败，就与妃嫔们都从高处的土山下到平地来观战。
English: The Liao Lord thought that the small number of Zongwang soldiers would surely fail, so he and his concubines came down from the highlands to the plains to watch the battle.

古文：余睹示诸将曰： 此辽主麾盖也。
现代文：余睹指示给诸将看，说： 这是辽主的旗帜华盖。
English: He showed the flag to the generals and said, "This is the banner of the Liao Lord, Huagai.

古文：若萃而薄之，可以得志。 
现代文：如果聚集起来冲过去，就可以达到目的。 
English: If you gather and rush, you can achieve your goal.

古文：骑兵驰赴之，辽主望见大惊，即遁去，辽兵遂溃。
现代文：骑兵飞驰过去，辽主望见大惊，随即逃走，辽兵跟着溃败。
English: The cavalry galloped past, the Liao lord was shocked and immediately fled, and the Liao soldiers were routed.

古文：宗望等还。
现代文：宗望等人回兵。
English: Munemochi and the others returned to the battlefield.

古文：上曰： 辽主去不远，亟追之。 
现代文：皇上说： 辽主逃得不远，赶快追击。 
English: The emperor said, "The Liao Lord is not far away, let's chase him."

古文：宗望以骑兵千余追之，蒲家奴为后继。
现代文：宗望带一千多骑兵追击，蒲家奴相继其后。
English: Zongwang led more than a thousand cavalry in pursuit, followed by Pu.

古文：太祖已定燕京，斡鲁为都统，宗望副之，袭辽主于阴山、青冢之间。
现代文：太祖已经平定燕京，斡鲁任都统，宗望任副都统，在阴山、青冢之间攻袭辽主。
English: Taizu had already pacified Yanjing, appointed Lu as the general and Zongwang as the deputy general, and attacked Liaozuo between Yinshan and Qingtao.

古文：宗望、娄室、银术可以三千军分路袭之。
现代文：宗望、娄室、银术可带领三千军兵分路进攻。
English: Munemochi, Shishitsu, and Nijutsu could lead three thousand soldiers in a separate attack.

古文：将至青冢，遇泥泞，众不能进。
现代文：快到青冢时，遇到泥泞道路，众军兵不能前进。
English: When approaching Qingcheng, they encountered a muddy road, and the soldiers were unable to advance.

古文：宗望与当海四骑以绳系辽都统林牙大石，使为乡导，直至辽主营。
现代文：宗望与当海的四个骑兵用绳索捆住辽国都统林牙大石，让他做向导，一直来到辽主的营盘。
English: Zongwang and four cavalrymen from Danghai tied Liao's capital Linya Daishi with ropes and let him guide them all the way to Liao's camp.

古文：时辽主往应州，其嫔御诸女见敌兵奄至惊骇欲奔，命骑下执之。
现代文：当时辽主到应州去了，他的各个妃殡一见敌兵将至，都惊恐得要跑，宗望命手下把她们抓住。
English: At that time, Liao's lord went to Yingzhou. When his concubines saw the enemy soldiers approaching, they were so scared that they had to run. Zong's men grabbed them.

古文：有顷，后军至。
现代文：不久，后面的军队到达。
English: Soon after, the rearguard arrived.

古文：辽太叔胡卢瓦妃，国王捏里次妃，辽汉夫人，并其子秦王、许王，女骨欲、余里衍、斡里衍、大奥野、次奥野、赵王妃斡里衍，招讨迪六，详稳六斤，节度使孛迭、赤狗儿皆降。
现代文：辽国的太叔胡卢瓦的妃子，国王捏里的次妃，辽国的汉夫人，以及他们的儿子秦王、许王，女骨欲、余里衍、斡里衍、大奥野、次奥野，赵王妃斡里衍，招讨迪六，详稳六斤，节度使孛迭、赤狗儿等等这些人，全部投降。
English: The concubine of the great uncle Huluwa of Liao, the second concubine of the king Jianli, the Han lady of Liao, and their sons Qin Wang, Xu Wang, the female bone desire, Yu Liyan, Yu Liyan, Da Ouno, Zi Ouno, Zhao Wangfei Yu Liyan, Zhaoyuan, Zhaoyuan, Zhaoyuan, Zhaoyuan, Zhaoyuan, Zhaoyuan, Zhaoyuan, Zhaoyuan, Zhaoyuan, Zhaoyuan, Zhaoyuan, Zhaoyuan, Zhaoyuan, Zhaoyuan, Zha

古文：得车万余乘，惟梁王雅里及其长女乘军乱亡去。娄室、银术可获其左右舆帐。
现代文：缴获车辆一万多乘。只有梁王雅里和他的长女趁军中混乱时逃走，娄室、银术可获得他的左右车帐。
English: More than 10,000 vehicles were captured. Only Liang Wang Yari and his eldest daughter took advantage of the chaos in the army to escape, and Gongshu and Yinzhu could obtain his left and right vehicle tags.

古文：进至扫里门，为书以招辽主。
现代文：军队行进到扫里门，宗望写信招降辽主。
English: The army marched to the gate of Shaoli, and Zongwang wrote a letter to invite Liao Jun to surrender.

古文：辽主自金城来，知其族属皆见俘，率兵五千余决战。
现代文：辽主从金城回来，得知他的族人、部属都被俘虏，率五千多军兵前来决战。
English: Liao Lord returned from Jincheng, learned that his relatives and subordinates were all captured, and led more than five thousand soldiers to fight a decisive battle.

古文：宗望以千兵击败之。
现代文：宗望用一千兵士击败了他。
English: Zongwang defeated him with a thousand soldiers.

古文：辽主相去百步，遁去。
现代文：辽主在相距一百步的地方，逃跑了。
English: Liao Zhen fled at a distance of one hundred paces.

古文：获其子赵王习泥烈及传国玺。
现代文：宗望擒获了辽主的儿子赵王习泥烈从及传国王玺。
English: Zongwangye received the son of Liao Lord, Zhao Wang Xi Murei, as his disciple and the legendary King Zongye.

古文：追二十余里，尽得其从马，而照里、特末、胡巴鲁、背荅别获牧马万四千匹、车八千乘。
现代文：追赶了二十多里路，全部得到了跟从他的马匹，而照里、特末、胡巴鲁、背答另外获得了牧马一万四千匹，车子八千辆。
English: He chased them for more than twenty miles and got all the horses that followed him, while Terri, Termat, Hubaru, and Sobo also got fourteen thousand horses and eight thousand cars.

古文：及献传国玺于行在，太祖曰： 此群臣之功也。 
现代文：把传国玺献到皇上所在的地方，太祖说： 这是群臣的功劳。 
English: After presenting the imperial scepter to the emperor, the great-grandfather said, "This is the merit of the ministers.

古文：遂置玺于怀中，东面恭谢天地，乃大录诸帅功，加赏焉。
现代文：于是把玉玺揣在怀中，面向东方恭敬地拜谢天地，于是认真记录各个将帅的功绩，给予封赏。
English: So he carried the jade scepter in his arms, respectfully bowed to heaven and earth facing the east, and then carefully recorded the merits of each general and gave him a reward.

古文：辽主乃使谋卢瓦持兔钮金印请降。
现代文：辽主于是派谋卢瓦拿着兔钮金印来请求投降。
English: The Liao Lord then sent Luo Wa to take the gold seal of the hare button to request surrender.

古文：宗望受之，视其文，乃 元帅燕国王之印 也。
现代文：宗望接受金印，看上面的文字，乃是 元帅燕国王之印 。
English: Zongwang accepted the golden seal, which, according to the above text, was the seal of the marshal Yan Wang.

古文：宗望复以书招之，谕以石晋北迁事。
现代文：宗望又写信招他来，把石晋北迁的事告诉他。
English: Zongwang also wrote to invite him to come and told him about the relocation of Shijin to the north.

古文：遂使使谕夏国，示以和好，所以沮疑其救辽之心也。
现代文：随后派使臣去告诉夏国，表示和好，由此打消他们援救辽国的犹豫心情。
English: Subsequently, they sent envoys to tell Xia Guo and express reconciliation, thus dispelling their hesitation to rescue Liao Guo.

古文：宗望趋天德，辽耶律慎思降。
现代文：宗望来到天德，辽国的耶律慎思投降。
English: Zongwang came to Tiantai, and Yerut Shensi of Liao surrendered.

古文：及候人吴十回，皆言夏国迎护辽主度大河矣。
现代文：等到候人吴十回来时，都说夏国人迎接并护送辽主渡过大河了。
English: When Wu Xiu, the host, returned, they all said that the Xia people had greeted and escorted the Liao Lord across the great river.

古文：宗望乃传檄夏国曰： 果欲附我，当如前谕，执送辽主。
现代文：宗望就传递檄文给夏国说 ：如果真的想归附我们，就应当按先前的告谕，把辽主押送来。
English: Zongwang sent a message to Xia Guo saying: If you really want to join us, you should follow the previous announcement and escort Liao Zhen here.

古文：若犹疑贰，恐有后悔。 
现代文：假若犹疑背反，恐怕你们会后悔。 
English: If you hesitate, I am afraid you will regret it.

古文：及辽秦王等以俘见太祖，太祖嘉宗望功，以辽蜀国公主余里衍赐之。
现代文：到辽国的秦王等人被俘获来见太祖时，太祖嘉奖宗望的功劳，把辽国的蜀国公主余里衍赏赐给他为妻。
English: When Qin Wang and others from Liao were captured and came to see the great-grandfather, the great-grandfather commended Zongwang's service and gave him the princess of Shu from Liao as his wife.

古文：阇母与张觉战，大败于兔耳山。
现代文：母与张觉作战，在兔耳山大败。
English: My mother fought against Zhang Jue and was defeated at Hun's Ear Mountain.

古文：上使宗望问状，就以阇母军讨张觉，降濒海郡县。
现代文：皇上派宗望探问军情，就带母的军队讨伐张觉，使濒海各郡县投降。
English: The emperor sent Zongwang to inquire about the military situation, and he took his mother's army to fight against Zhang Jue, so that the counties along the coast surrendered.

古文：遂与觉战于南京城东。
现代文：宗望于是和张觉在南京城东交战。
English: So Zongwang fought with Zhang Jue in the eastern part of Nanjing.

古文：觉败，宵遁奔宋，语在《觉传》。
现代文：张觉战败，夜间逃奔宋国，这段事记载在《张觉传》中。
English: Zhang Jue was defeated and fled to Song in the night. This incident is recorded in "The Biography of Zhang Jue."

古文：城中人执觉父及其二子来献，宗望杀之。
现代文：城里的人抓住张觉的父亲和他的两个儿子前来进献，宗望把他们杀掉了。
English: The townspeople seized Zhang Jue's father and his two sons and brought them to Zongwang, where they were killed.

古文：使以诏书宣谕城中张敦固等出降。使使与敦固俱入城收兵仗。
现代文：他让人把诏书宣读给城中的张敦固等人，使他们出城投降，又派使者与张敦固一同入城收缴兵器。
English: He had someone read the edict to Zhang Dungu and others in the city, so that they would leave the city and surrender, and sent an envoy with Zhang Dungu to enter the city to collect weapons.

古文：城中人杀使者，立敦固为都统，劫府库，掠居民，乘城拒守。
现代文：城中的人杀死使者，把张敦固立为都统，洗劫府库，抢掠居民，据城防守。
English: The people in the city killed the envoy, set up Zhang Dungu as the governor of the capital, ransacked the government treasury, robbed the residents, and defended the city.

古文：太宗赏破张觉功及有功将士各有差。
现代文：太宗奖赏宗望战败张觉的功绩以及有功的将士，奖励各有不同。
English: Taizong rewarded the merits of Zongwang's defeat of Zhang Jue as well as meritorious soldiers, with different rewards.

古文：初，张觉奔宋，入于燕京，宗望责宋人纳叛人，且征军粮。
现代文：起初，张觉逃奔宋国，进入燕京，宗望责备宋人收纳反叛之人，并征收军粮。
English: At first, Zhang Jue fled to the Song Dynasty and entered Yanjing. Zongwang reproached the Song Dynasty for taking in rebels and collecting military rations.

古文：久不闻问，宗望欲移书督之，请空名宣头千道，增信牌，安抚新降之民。
现代文：许久听不到消息，宗望要写信去催促，请求赐给一千道空名宣头，增发信牌，安抚新降附的民众。
English: Unable to hear the news for a long time, Zongwang wanted to write a letter to urge, request to give a thousand empty proclamations, increase the number of postcards, and appease the newly annexed people.

古文：诏以 新附长吏职员仍旧。
现代文：皇上下诏 ：新归附的长吏职员照旧。
English: Emperor's edict: The newly annexed officials and clerks will remain as before.

古文：已命诸路转输军粮，勿督于宋。
现代文：已命诸路转运军粮，勿督促宋国。
English: He has ordered all roads to be diverted for the transportation of military grain. Do not urge Song to do so.

古文：给银牌十、空名宣头五十道。
现代文：发给银牌十块、空名宣头五十道。
English: Ten silver medals will be awarded, and 50 points will be given for empty-name announcements.

古文：及迁、润、来、隰四州人徙于渖州者，俟毕农各复其业。 
现代文：至于迁、润、来、隰四州迁徙到沈州的人，等农事完毕恢复其各自原来职业。 
English: As for the people who migrated to Shenzhou from the four prefectures of Nian, Run, Lai and Yan, they will resume their original occupations after completing their agricultural work.

古文：乃诏咸州输粟宗望军。
现代文：又诏令咸州给宗望的军队输送粟米。
English: He also ordered that poppy be delivered to the army in Zamboanga.

古文：张敦固以兵八千分四队出战，大败。
现代文：张敦固派出八千军兵分四队出战，大败。
English: Zhang Dungu sent eight thousand soldiers divided into four teams to fight, and suffered a great defeat.

古文：宗望再三开谕，敦固等曰： 屡尝拒战，不敢遽降。 
现代文：宗望再三传达谕令，张敦固等人说 ：曾经屡次抵抗，不敢就来投降。 
English: Zongwang repeatedly conveyed the edict, Zhang Dungu and others said: I have resisted many times, I dare not surrender.

古文：宗望许其望阙遥拜。
现代文：宗望准许他们对阙门遥遥叩拜。
English: The patriarch allowed them to bow to the throne.

古文：敦固乃开其一门。
现代文：张敦固就打开一扇城门。
English: Zhang Dungu opened a gate.

古文：宗望使阇母奏其事，乃下诏赦南京官民，大小罪皆释之，官职如旧。
现代文：宗望让母上奏这件事，皇上于是下诏赦免南京官民，不论罪责大小全部开释，官员的官职依旧。
English: Zongwang asked his mother to report the matter to the emperor, who then issued an edict pardoning Nanjing officials and citizens. Regardless of the degree of guilt, all officials were absolved, and their official duties remained the same.

古文：别敕有司轻徭赋、劝稼穑，疆场之事，一决于宗望。
现代文：另外下令有关部门减轻徭役赋税、勉励耕种，边疆的事情，一律由宗望决定。
English: In addition, he ordered the relevant departments to reduce taxes on laborers, encourage farming, and all matters related to the frontier should be decided by Zongwang.

古文：又曰： 议索张觉及逋亡户口于宋。
现代文：皇上又说 ：商议要向宋国索要张觉以及逃亡的户口。
English: The emperor also said, "Let's discuss requesting Zhang Jue and the fugitive's hukou from Song."

古文：闻此岁不登，若如旧征敛，恐民匮乏，度其粮数赋之。
现代文：听说近年粮食不丰收，如果依照过去的标准征敛，恐怕民力匮乏，应算计粮食数量来征收赋税。
English: It is said that the grain harvest has been poor in recent years. If the tax is levied according to the standard of the past, I am afraid that there will be a shortage of manpower. The amount of grain should be calculated to collect the tax.

古文：射粮军愿为民者，使复田里。
现代文：射粮军中若有愿意做平民的人，让他们恢复农家身份。
English: If there are people in the Grain-Shooting Army who are willing to be civilians, let them resume their status as farmers.

古文：小大之事关白军帅，无得专达朝廷。 
现代文：大小事情要对军帅讲明，不要擅自上传到朝廷。 
English: It is necessary to clarify the size of the matter to the marshal, and do not upload it to the imperial court without authorization.

古文：诏宗望曰： 选勋贤及有民望者为南京留守，及诸阙员，仍具姓名官阶以闻。 
现代文：皇上下诏书给宗望道 ：选择有功劳、贤能且有民众声望的人担任南京留守和各个空缺官职，要写清姓名官阶报上来。 
English: The Emperor's edict to Zong Wangdao: Select people with merit, ability and popular reputation to serve in Nanjing and various vacant positions, and write their names and ranks clearly.

古文：是时，迁、润、来、隰四州之民保山砦者甚众，宗望乙选良吏招抚。上从之。
现代文：这时，迁、润、来、隰四个州的居民围山护寨的人很多，宗望请求挑选良吏去招抚，皇上应允了。
English: At this time, there were many people from four prefectures, including Mian, Run, Lai and Qian, who surrounded the mountain to protect the village. Zongwang requested that a good official be selected to guide them, and the emperor agreed.

古文：上召宗望赴阙，而阇母克南京，兵执伪都统张敦固杀之，南京平。
现代文：皇上把宗望召进宫。母攻克南京，兵士抓来伪都统张敦固，并杀了他，南京平定。
English: The mother conquered Nanjing, the soldiers captured the pseudo-duke Zhang Dungu and killed him, and Nanjing was pacified.

古文：赴京师。
现代文：母赶奔京师。
English: My mother rushed to the capital.

古文：于是，宗翰请无割山西地与宋，斡鲁亦言之。
现代文：这时，宗翰请求不要把山西地盘割让给宋国，斡鲁也这样讲。
English: At this time, Zonghan requested not to cede the Shanxi territory to Song, and Yanglu also said so.

古文：阇母论奏宋渝盟有验，不可不备。
现代文：母上奏评论说宋国有违背盟约的先例，不能不防备。
English: The mother superior commented that the precedent of the Song state's violation of the covenant was too great, and it was necessary to be on guard.

古文：及宗望还军，上曰： 征岁币于宋，以银二十万两、绢三十万匹分赐尔军及六部东京诸军。 
现代文：等宗望军队回师，皇上说： 向宋国征收岁币，把二十万两白银、三十万匹绢分赐给你的军队以及六部的东京各军。 
English: When Zongwang's army returned to the division, the emperor said: "Collect the annual coins from the Song Dynasty, and give 200,000 silver and 300,000 horsepower to your army and the six Tokyo armies.

古文：宗望至军，宋兵三千自海道来，破九寨，杀马城县戍将节度使度卢斡，取其银牌兵仗及马而去。
现代文：宗望到了军中，有三千宋兵从海路上来，攻破九座营寨，杀死马城县守将节度使度卢斡，夺取了他的银牌、兵器以及战马后离去。
English: When Zongwang arrived at the army, there were three thousand Song soldiers coming from the sea, breaking through nine camps, killing Macheng County Governor Jie Du Du Lu, seizing his silver medal, weapons and horses, and then leaving.

古文：宗望索户口，宋人弗言，且闻童贯、郭药师治军燕山。
现代文：宗望索要户口，宋人不给，而且听说童贯、郭药师在燕山操练军队。
English: Zongwang asked for an account, but Song did not give it, and it was heard that Tongran and Guo Yakushi were training troops in Yanshan.

古文：宗望奏请伐宋曰： 苟不先之，恐为后患。 
现代文：宗望奏请皇上要攻伐宋国，说道： 假如不先平定宋国，恐怕将成为后患。 
English: Zongwangso asked the emperor to invade Song, saying, "If we don't conquer Song first, I'm afraid it will become a problem later."

古文：宗翰亦以为方。
现代文：宗翰也这么说。
English: Zonghan also said so.

古文：故伐宋之策，宗望实启之。
现代文：因此攻伐宋国的策略，其实由宗望开始。
English: Therefore, the strategy of conquering the Song Dynasty actually began with Zongwang.

古文：宗望为南京路都统，阇母副之，自燕山路伐宋。
现代文：宗望任南京路都统，母为副都统，从燕山路去攻打宋国。
English: Zongwang was appointed as the governor of Nanjing Road, and his mother was the deputy governor of Nanjing Road, and they went to attack Song from Yanshan Road.

古文：宗望奏曰： 阇母于臣为叔父，请以阇母为都统，臣监战事。 
现代文：宗望禀奏道 ：母对我来说是叔父，请陛下任命母为都统，让臣监战。 
English: Zongwang Zhao said, "My mother is my uncle. I would like to ask Your Majesty to appoint my mother as a tutor, and let her supervise the war."

古文：上从之。以宗望监阇母、刘彦宗两军战事。
现代文：皇上应允，让宗望监督母、刘彦宗两支军队的战况。
English: The emperor agreed to let Zongwang supervise the war situation of his mother and Liu Yanzong's two armies.

古文：宗望至三河，破郭药师兵四万五千于白河，蒲苋败宋兵三千于古北口，郭药师降。
现代文：宗望来到三河，在白河战败郭药师的四万五千军兵，蒲苋在古北口打败三千宋兵，郭药师投降。
English: Zongwang came to the Three Rivers, defeated 45,000 soldiers of Guo Yajishi in Baihe, and Pu'er defeated 3,000 Song soldiers in Gubeikou, and Guo Yajishi surrendered.

古文：遂取燕山府，尽收其军实，马万匹、甲胄五万、兵七万，州县悉平。
现代文：接着攻取燕山府，全部收缴敌军兵械，以及战马上万匹、铠甲五万副、兵卒七万人，各个州县都被平定。
English: Next, Yanshan Prefecture was captured, and all the enemy's military equipment was confiscated, as well as 10,000 horses, 50,000 suits of armor, and 70,000 soldiers. All prefectures and counties were pacified.

古文：宋中山戍将王彦、刘璧率兵二千来降。
现代文：宋朝的中山守将王彦、刘璧率二千军兵来归降。
English: Song Dynasty's Zhongshan governor Wang Yan and Liu Bi led 2,000 soldiers to surrender.

古文：蒲察、绳果以三百骑遇中山三万人于厄隘之地，力战，死之。
现代文：蒲察、绳果带着三百个骑兵在狭窄险要的地方与中山的三万人相遇，奋力搏斗，结果战死。
English: Pucha, Rope Nuts and three hundred cavalrymen met the thirty thousand people of Zhongshan in a narrow and dangerous place, fought hard, and died as a result.

古文：术烈速、活里改军继至，杀二万余人。
现代文：术烈速、活里改的军队相继赶到，杀死二万多敌兵。
English: The troops arrived in quick succession and killed more than twenty thousand enemy soldiers.

古文：宗望破宋真定兵五千人，遂克信德府，次邯郸。
现代文：宗望打败宋国真定的军兵五千人，于是攻克信德府，驻扎在邯郸。
English: Zongwang defeated 5,000 soldiers of Zhending of the Song Dynasty, and then conquered Shindefu and stationed in Tong.

古文：宋李邺请修旧好。
现代文：宋朝的李邺请求重修旧好。
English: The Song Dynasty's Li Xi requested that the old friendship be restored.

古文：宗望留军中不遣。
现代文：宗望留在军中不派人去回复此事。
English: Zongwang remained in the army and did not send anyone to reply to the matter.

古文：自郭药师降，益知宋之虚实。
现代文：自从郭药师投降以后，我军更加知道宋国的情况虚实。
English: Since the surrender of Guo Yakushi, our army knows more about the situation in Song.

古文：宗望请以为燕京留守。
现代文：宗望请求让郭药师担任燕京留守。
English: Zongwang requested that Guo Yakushi stay in Yanjing.

古文：及董才降，益知宋之地里。
现代文：到董才投降之后，我军更加了解宋国的地理状况。
English: After the surrender of Dong Cai, our army had a better understanding of the geography of Song.

古文：宗望请任以军事。
现代文：宗望请求让董才执管军中事务。
English: Zongwang requested that Dongcai be put in charge of military affairs.

古文：太宗俱赐姓完颜氏，皆给以金牌。
现代文：太宗赏赐他们都姓完颜氏，并把金牌交付给他们。
English: Emperor Taizong rewarded them all with the surname of Guan Yan and presented them with the gold medal.

古文：四年正月己巳，诸军渡河，取滑州。
现代文：天会四年正月三日，各路军队渡过黄河，攻取滑州。
English: On the 3rd day of the 1st month of the 4th year of the Heian period, the armies of all directions crossed the Yellow River and captured Namsan.

古文：使吴孝民入汴，以诏书问纳平州张觉事，令执送童贯、谭积、詹度，以黄河为界，纳质奉贡。
现代文：宗望派吴孝民进入汴州，拿诏书询问收纳平州张觉的事情，命令他们把童贯、谭稹、詹度押送过来，以黄河为界限，留下人质交纳贡奉。
English: Zongwang sent Wu Xiaomin to enter Bozhou with an imperial edict to inquire about the detention of Pingzhou Zhang Jue, and ordered them to escort Tongran, Tan Xuan and Zhandu to the Yellow River, leaving the hostages to pay tribute.

古文：癸酉，诸军围汴。
现代文：七日，各路军队围攻汴州。
English: On the seventh day, large armies besieged Suijing.

古文：宋少帝请为伯侄国，效质纳地，增岁币请和。
现代文：宋朝少帝请求做伯侄国，献出人质，割让土地，增交岁币，请求讲和。
English: The young emperor of the Song Dynasty asked to be Bo's nephew, offered hostages, ceded land, increased the annual payment, and asked for peace.

古文：遂割太原、中山、河间三镇，书用伯侄礼，以康王构、太宰张邦昌为质。
现代文：于是宋朝割让了太原、中山、河间三镇，写信使用伯侄礼节，把康王赵构、太宰张邦昌作为人质。
English: As a result, the Song Dynasty ceded the three towns of Taiyuan, Zhongshan, and Hema, and sent letters using the nephew etiquette, taking Kang Wang Zhao Jie and Dazai Zhang Bangchang as hostages.

古文：沈晦以哲书、三镇地图至军中，发币割地一依定约，语在宋事中。
现代文：沈晦带着誓约文书、三镇地图来到军中，交纳岁币、割让土地都依照订立的盟约去做，这些记载在关于宋国的篇章中。
English: Shen Wei came to the army with the oath document and the map of the three towns, and paid the land tax and ceded the land in accordance with the concluded treaty. These records are in the chapter on Song.

古文：二月丁酉朔，与宋平，退军孟阳。
现代文：二月初一，与宋朝讲和，撤退到孟阳。
English: On the first day of February, he made peace with the Song Dynasty and retreated to Mengyang.

古文：是夜，姚平仲兵四十万来袭。
现代文：当天夜晚，姚平仲的四十万军兵前来偷袭。
English: In the evening of the same day, Yao Pingzhong's 400,000 soldiers came to attack.

古文：候骑觉之，分遣诸将迎击，大破平仲军，复进攻汴城，问举兵之状。
现代文：侦察的骑兵发觉，宗望分派诸将迎击，大败姚仲平的军队，再次进攻汴州城，质问他们起兵的罪状。
English: The scouting cavalry discovered that Zongwang dispatched generals to meet the attack, defeated Yao Zhongping's army, attacked Zhangzhou City again, and questioned them about the crime of raising an army.

古文：少帝大恐，使宇文虚中来辨曰： 初不知其事，且将加罪其人。 
现代文：少帝十分恐慌，派宇文虚中前来申辩说： 当初不知道这事，而且现在就要治他的罪。 
English: The young emperor was very panicked, and sent Yu Wenju to come and plead: I did not know about this at the beginning, and now I am going to punish him for his crime.

古文：宗望辍弗攻，改肃王枢为质，康王构遣归。
现代文：宗望停下不再进攻，改把肃王赵枢当作人质，把康王赵构放回去。
English: Zongwang stopped and no longer attacked, but instead took Su Wang Zhaozhu as a hostage and sent Kang Wang Zhaozhu back.

古文：师还，河北两镇不下，遂分兵讨之。
现代文：军队返回时，河北两镇攻不下来，宗望于是分派军队去征讨。
English: When the army returned, the two towns in Hebei could not be conquered, so Zongwang sent troops to conquer them.

古文：宗望罢常胜军，给还燕人田业，命将士分屯安肃、雄、霸、广信之境。
现代文：宗望撤消了常胜军，还给燕人田中产业，命将士分别屯驻在安肃、雄、霸、广信等州境内。
English: Zongwang revoked the ever-victorious army, returned Tianzhong industry to Yanren, and stationed commanders in Ansu, Yung, Ba, and Guangxin provinces respectively.

古文：宗望还山西。
现代文：宗望回到山西。
English: Zongwang returned to Shanxi.

古文：未几。为右副元帅，有功将士迁赏有差。
现代文：不久，他担任了右副元帅，有功的将士分别受到不同的提升奖赏。
English: Soon, he served as the right deputy marshal, and meritorious soldiers received different promotion awards.

古文：顷之，宋少帝以书诱余睹，肃仲恭献其书，诏复伐宋。
现代文：过了没多长时间，宋朝的少帝写信劝诱余睹，萧仲恭把这封信献出来，太宗诏令再次征伐宋朝。
English: After a short period of time, the young emperor of the Song Dynasty wrote a letter to persuade Yu Xiu, Xiao Zhongyan presented this letter, and the Emperor issued an order to invade the Song Dynasty again.

古文：八月，宗望会诸将，发自保州。
现代文：八月，宗望会集各将领，从保州出发。
English: In August, Zongwang gathered all the generals and set out from Bozhou.

古文：耶律铎破敌兵三万于雄州，杀万余人。
现代文：耶律铎在雄州打败三万敌兵，杀死一万多人。
English: In Xiongzhou, Yerutong defeated 30,000 enemy soldiers and killed more than 10,000 people.

古文：那野败宋军七千于中山。
现代文：那野在中山打败七千宋军。
English: Nano defeated 7,000 Song troops in Zhongshan.

古文：高六、董才破宋兵三千于广信。
现代文：高六、董才在广信战败三千宋兵。
English: High six, Dong Cai defeated three thousand Song soldiers in Guangxin.

古文：宋种师闵军四万人驻井陉，宗望大破之，遂取天威军。
现代文：宋朝种师闵的军队四万人驻守井陉，宗望把他们杀得大败，夺取了天威军。
English: Forty thousand soldiers of the Song Dynasty's Zong Shizhao were stationed in Jingyao. Zongwang defeated them and captured the Tianwei Army.

古文：东还，遂克真定，杀知府李邈，得户三万，降五县。
现代文：东向回师，又攻克真定，杀掉知府李邈，得到户口三万，收降了五个县。
English: Dongxiang returned to the division, and conquered Zhending, killed the prefectural governor Li Yan, obtained 30,000 hukou, and won back five counties.

古文：遂自真定趋汴。
现代文：随后从真定赶赴汴州。
English: They then rushed from Jinding to Zhangzhou.

古文：十一月戊辰，宗望至河上，降魏县。
现代文：十一月七日，宗望到达黄河边上，降伏魏县。
English: On November 7, Zongwang reached the edge of the Yellow River and surrendered Wei County.

古文：诸军渡河，留诸将分出大名之境。
现代文：各路军队渡河，留下诸将分别从大名地区出发。
English: Troops from all directions crossed the river, leaving the generals to set out separately from the daimyo region.

古文：降临河县，至大名县，德清军、开德府，皆克之。
现代文：收降临河县后，行至大名县，德清军、开德府都被攻克。
English: After arriving in He County, he went to Daming County, where the German and Qing armies and Kide Prefecture were all conquered.

古文：阿里刮以骑兵三千先趋汴，破宋军六千于路。
现代文：阿里刮带领三千骑兵先赶奔汴州，在路上打败宋军六千人。
English: Ali scraped and led three thousand cavalry to rush to Luzhou first, defeating six thousand Song troops on the road.

古文：取胙城，抵汴城下，覆宋兵千人，擒数将。
现代文：夺下胙城，抵达汴州城下，消灭上千宋兵，活捉了数员宋将。
English: They captured the city of Handan and arrived at the city of Handan, eliminating thousands of Song soldiers and capturing several Song generals alive.

古文：宗望至汴，分遣诸将遏宋援兵，奔睹、那野、赛刺、台实连破宋援兵。
现代文：宗望赶到汴州，分派诸将阻挡宋朝的援兵，奔睹、那野、赛剌、台实接连战败宋国援兵。
English: Zongwang rushed to Bozhou and dispatched generals to block the reinforcements of the Song Dynasty, and the reinforcements of the Song Dynasty were defeated successively by Benshan, Nano, Saiyu and Taishin.

古文：闰月壬辰朔，宋兵一万出自汴城来战。
现代文：闰十一月一日，宋兵一万人从汴城中出来作战。
English: On the first day of November, ten thousand Song soldiers came out to fight.

古文：宗望选劲勇五千，使当海、忽鲁、雏鹘失击败之。
现代文：宗望选出强劲勇士五千人，派当海、忽鲁、雏鹘失击败了宋兵。
English: Zongwang selected five thousand strong warriors and sent them to Tanghai, Kulu, and Jiaozhou to defeat the Song soldiers.

古文：癸巳，宗翰自太原会军于汴。
现代文：二日，宗翰从太原到汴州会集军队。
English: On the second day, Zonghan gathered troops from Taiyuan to Zhangzhou.

古文：丙辰，克汴州。
现代文：二十五日，攻占汴州。
English: On the 25th, they captured Zhangzhou.

古文：辛酉，宋少帝诣军前。
现代文：三十日，宋少帝来到军前。
English: On the 30th, Song Shao Di came to the front.

古文：十二月癸亥，宋帝奉表降。
现代文：十二月二日，少帝上表奏请投降。
English: On December 2nd, the young emperor asked for surrender.

古文：上使勖就军中劳赐宗翰、宗望，使皆执其手以劳之。
现代文：皇上派勖到军中犒赏宗翰、宗望，让勖握他们的手以表示慰劳。
English: The emperor sent his emissaries to the army to praise Zonghan and Zongwang, and asked them to shake their hands as a sign of consolation.

古文：五年四月，以宋二主及其宗族四百七十余人，及珪璋、宝印、衮冕、车辂、祭器、大乐、灵台、图书，与大军北还。
现代文：天会五年四月，宗望等人带着宋朝的两个君主及其宗族四百七十多人，以及皀璋、宝印、衮冕、车辆、祭器、大乐、灵台、图书，与大军北还。
English: In April of the 5th year of the Heavenly Assembly, Zongwang and others took the two monarchs of the Song Dynasty and more than 470 members of their families, as well as the imperial seal, crown, vehicles, sacrificial vessels, great music, spiritual platform, books, and the army to Beiyao.

古文：宗望乃分诸将镇守河北。
现代文：宗望分派诸将镇守河北。
English: Munemochi dispatched generals to guard Hebei.

古文：董才降广信军及旁近县镇。
现代文：董才收降了广信军以及附近的县镇。
English: Dong Cai defeated the Guangxin Army and the nearby counties and towns.

古文：宗望乃西上凉陉。
现代文：宗望于是往西到凉陉去。
English: So Zongwang went west to Liangyao.

古文：诏宗望曰： 自河之北，今既分画，重念其民见城邑有被残者，遂阻命坚守，其申谕招辑安全之。
现代文：皇上诏令宗望道 ：自黄河以北，现在已经划开，深念有的百姓因为见城池被摧残才抗拒命令进行坚守，传下指令要招集他们给予安抚保全。
English: Emperor's edict to Zongwang said: From the north of the Yellow River, it has now been drawn, and some people who are deeply concerned have resisted the order to hold fast because they saw the city destroyed. An order was issued to summon them to give pacification and preservation.

古文：傥坚执不移，自当致讨。
现代文：倘若坚持不改，自然就要进行征讨。
English: If they do not change, they will naturally be subject to a levy.

古文：若诸军敢利于俘掠，辄肆毁荡者，当底于罚。 
现代文：如果各军中有人敢于俘虏掠夺获取私利，肆意毁坏，应当受到惩罚。 
English: If anyone in any army dares to plunder captives for personal gain and wantonly destroy, he should be punished.

古文：是月，宗望薨。
现代文：当月，宗望逝世。
English: That month, Zongwang passed away.

古文：天会十三年，封魏王。
现代文：天会十三年，他被封为魏王。
English: In the thirteenth year of the Heavenly Reunion, he was named the King of Wei.

古文：皇统三年，进许国王，又徙封晋国王。
现代文：皇统三年，他被进封为许国王，又改封为晋国王。
English: In the third year of imperial rule, he was given the title of Xu King, and then changed his title to Jin King.

古文：天德二年，赠太师，加辽燕国王，配享太宗庙廷。
现代文：天德二年，受赠为太师，加封为辽燕国王，纎祭于太宗庙廷。
English: In the second year of Tiande, he was given the title of Grand Master and the additional title of King of Liao Yan, and made a sacrificial offering at the Taijong Temple.

古文：正隆二年，例降封。
现代文：正隆二年，被依例降低封号。
English: In the second year of Zhenglong, the seal was lowered as usual.

古文：大定三年，改封宋王，谥桓肃。
现代文：大定三年，改封为宋王，谥号 桓肃 。
English: In the third year of Dading, he changed his title to King Song and his posthumous name to Kansu.

古文：子齐、京、文。
现代文：宗望的儿子是齐、京、文。
English: The sons of Munemochi were Qi, Kyo, and Wen.

