古文：宗元饶司马申毛喜蔡徵
现代文：宗元饶，南郡江陵人。
English: Zongyuan Rao, from Gangneung, South County.

古文：宗元饶，南郡江陵人也。
现代文：少年时好学，以孝敬长辈闻名。
English: He was eager to learn as a young boy and was known for his filial piety towards his elders.

古文：少好学，以孝敬闻。仕梁世，解褐本州主簿，迁征南府行参军，仍转外兵参军。
现代文：任官于梁代，初任本州主簿，改任征南府行参军，又转任外兵参军。
English: He was appointed to the post in Liang's time, first as the chief accountant of Honshu, then as a conscript to join the army in Nanfu, and then as a foreign soldier.

古文：及司徒王僧辩幕府初建，元饶与沛国刘师知同为主簿。
现代文：到司徒王僧辩幕府初建，宗元饶与沛国刘师知同为主簿。
English: It is said that the monk King Sitoru argued against the early establishment of the shogunate, and that Sogenrao and Liu Shizhichi of Paiguo were the main authors.

古文：高祖受禅，除晋陵令。
现代文：高祖受禅，任晋陵令。
English: Gao Zu accepted Zen and was appointed to the post of Jinling.

古文：入为尚书功论郎。
现代文：入为尚书功论郎。
English: He became a critic of the merits of Shang's writings.

古文：使齐还，为廷尉正。
现代文：出使齐回还，任廷尉正。
English: The envoys all returned, and the court lieutenant was appointed.

古文：迁太仆卿，领本邑大中正，中书通事舍人。
现代文：改任太仆卿，领本邑大中正，中书通事舍人。
English: He was reappointed to the position of the Great Servant of the Emperor, the leader of the Imperial Court, and the senior middle-ranking official. He resigned from the position of the General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee.

古文：寻转廷尉卿，加通直散骑常侍，兼尚书左丞。
现代文：不久转廷尉卿，加通直散骑常侍，兼尚书左丞。
English: He was soon promoted to the rank of court lieutenant, and became a regular attendant of Katong Zhishan riding, and also a junior secretary of Shangshu.

古文：时高宗初即位，军国务广，事无巨细，一以咨之，台省号为称职。
现代文：此时高宗初就位，军事国事繁多，事无巨细，都要咨询他，台省认为他称职。
English: At this time, Gao Zongchu took office, and there were many military affairs of state, and no matter how big or small, he had to be consulted. Taiwan Province considered him competent.

古文：迁御史中丞，知五礼事。
现代文：改任御史中丞，知五礼事。
English: He was reassigned to the position of Goshi chujo, and remained in the position for five years.

古文：时合州刺史陈裦赃污狼藉，遣使就渚敛鱼，又于六郡乞米，百姓甚苦之。
现代文：此时合州刺史陈衰贪污名声恶劣，派人在河中小洲收鱼，又在六郡讨米，百姓极为受苦。
English: At this time, the people of Hezhou, with a bad reputation for corruption and corruption, sent people to collect fish in the river and the peninsula, and to collect rice in the six counties, and the people suffered greatly.

古文：元饶劾奏曰： 臣闻建旟求瘼，实寄廉平，褰帷恤隐，本资仁恕。
现代文：元饶弹劾上奏道： 臣听闻，竖起绘有鸟的旗访求百姓病苦，实是寄于廉洁平等，撩帷帐安置隐者，本以此体现仁爱宽恕。
English: At the impeachment of Yuan Rao, he said: I heard that the minister erected a banner with a bird on it to appeal to the people's sufferings. In fact, it was for the sake of honesty and equality, and the curtain was put up to accommodate the hermit. This was to reflect the benevolence and forgiveness.

古文：如或贪污是肆，征赋无厌，天网虽疏，兹焉弗漏。
现代文：如果贪污放肆，征收赋税没有限度，天网虽疏，这方面也不能漏。
English: If corruption is unbridled, there is no limit to the collection of taxes. Although the sky net is sparse, this aspect cannot be omitted.

古文：谨案钟陵县开国侯、合州刺史臣褵，因藉多幸，预逢抽擢，爵由恩被，官以私加，无德无功，坐尸荣贵。
现代文：钟陵县开国侯、合州刺史陈衰，凭藉幸运，预先逢着提拔，爵位由皇恩赐舆，官位又私下加给，无德无功，纯粹是不干事而享受荣华富贵。
English: The founding lord of Jongneung County and the founder of Hezhou, Chen Sheng, by virtue of luck, was promoted in advance, the title of nobility was bestowed on her by the emperor, and the official position was given to her privately. There was no virtue or merit, and she was purely an unofficial and enjoyed the glory and wealth.

古文：谯、肥之地，久沦非所，皇威克复，物仰仁风。
现代文：谯、肥之地，长久沦陷，非我之所，皇威用武力收复，众人仰慕仁义之风。
English: The fertile land, long fallen, is no place for me. Imperial power was restored by force, and people admire the benevolent and righteous style.

古文：新邦用轻，弥俟宽惠，应斯作牧，其寄尤重。
现代文：新邦用轻，更待宽惠，应在此统治，对它的寄望尤其重。
English: The new state is not so much to be used as to be favoured. It is here that it should be governed, and hopes for it are particularly high.

古文：爰降曲恩，祖行宣室，亲承规诲，事等言提。
现代文：于是便降下恩惠，将祖宗之行宣教于室，亲自承受规矩教诲，凡事等待言辞提醒。
English: As a result, he gave his blessing, preached the ancestor's lineage to his family, personally received the rules and regulations, and waited for the words to remind him of everything.

古文：虽廉洁之怀，诚无素蓄，而禀兹严训，可以厉精。
现代文：虽然平时确实没有内蓄廉洁之心，但禀承这些严训，可以励精图治。
English: Although it is true that there is no innate desire to be honest in ordinary times, it is possible to persevere in these strict disciplines.

古文：遂乃擅行赋敛，专肆贪取，求粟不厌，愧王沉之出赈，征鱼无限，异羊续之悬枯，置以严科，实惟明宪。
现代文：可是他却擅自征收赋敛，专门肆意贪图掠取，求粟米不止，其行为同王沉出赈相比要惭愧，他征收鱼没有限制，与羊续为官廉洁更不同，必须置他以严律，才能使宪法严明。
English: However, he levied taxes and levied taxes without authorization. He was especially greedy and wanted to plunder. He asked for more than corn. His behavior was shameful compared to that of a king who sinks his fins. He levied fish without restriction. He was even more incorruptible than a shepherd. He must be subject to strict rules in order to make the constitution clear.

古文：臣等参议，请依旨免褵所应复除官，其应禁锢及后选左降本资，悉依免官之法。 
现代文：臣等参议，请依照皇旨免去陈衰所应再任之官职，凡应禁锢及以后降职等，都一律按照免官之法。 
English: Ministers and other advisers, please, in accordance with the imperial edict, remove Chen Qi from the official position to which he should be reappointed, and all those who should be imprisoned and later demoted should be in accordance with the law of dismissal.

古文：遂可其奏。
现代文：皇上允准元饶的上奏。
English: The Emperor gave permission for Genrao to play.

古文：吴兴太守武陵王伯礼，豫章内史南康嗣王方泰，并骄蹇放横，元饶案奏之，皆见削黜。
现代文：吴兴太守武陵王伯礼，豫章内史南康嗣王方泰，均骄横放肆，元饶一并上奏，他们都被削职罢官。
English: Wu Xing Taishu Wuling Wang Bolei, Henan Kangzhi Wang Fangtai, both of whom were arrogant and presumptuous, and Yuan Rao, who played at the same time, were dismissed from their posts.

古文：元饶性公平，善持法，谙晓故事，明练治体，吏有犯法、政不便民及于名教不足者，随事纠正，多所裨益。
现代文：元饶性格公正平和，善于持法，熟悉过往之事，治事明练，官吏中有犯法、政事不便于民、以及于名教不足的，他都会随事而纠正，于事多有裨益。
English: Yuan Rao had a fair and peaceful personality, was good at upholding the law, was familiar with the past, and was experienced in governing affairs. If there were officials who broke the law, or if government affairs were inconvenient for the people, or if there was a shortage of famous scholars, Yuan Rao would correct them at will, which would be beneficial in many cases.

古文：迁贞威将军、南康内史，以秩米三千馀斛助民租课，存问高年，拯救乏绝，百姓甚赖焉。
现代文：改任贞威将军、南康内史，以俸禄三千余斗米帮助百姓交赋税，慰问老年人，拯救缺食之人，百姓极为信赖他。
English: He was transferred to the post of General Zhenwei and the post of the Secretary of the South Kanto region, with a salary of more than three thousand barrels of rice to help the people pay taxes, comfort the elderly, and save the people who were short of food. The people trusted him very much.

古文：以课最入朝，诏加散骑常侍、荆、雍、湘、巴、武五州大中正。
现代文：以考核成绩最佳而入朝，韶令加散骑常侍、荆雍湘巴武五州大中正。
English: He entered the imperial court with the best examination results, and was promoted to the rank of imperial eunuch, sanshi (common equerry) and Jing Yong Xiang Bawu Wuzhou Daizhong Zheng.

古文：寻以本官重领尚书左丞。
现代文：接着以本官重领尚书左丞。
English: Then, I was promoted to Shosho-zojo (second from the left).

古文：又为御史中丞。
现代文：又为御史中丞。
English: He was also a goshi chujo.

古文：历左民尚书、右卫将军、领前将军，迁吏部尚书。
现代文：历任左民尚书、右卫将军、领前将军，改任吏部尚书。
English: Successive left-wing, right-wing, and front-line generals were appointed as officials.

古文：太建十三年卒，时年六十四。
现代文：太建十三年死，其时六十四岁。
English: Tai Jian died thirteen years ago, at the age of sixty-four.

古文：诏赠侍中、金紫光禄大夫，官给丧事。
现代文：韶赠侍中、金紫光禄大夫，官府供给丧事所需。
English: The government provided the necessary supplies for the funeral.

古文：司马申，字季和，河内温人也。
现代文：司马申，字季和，河内郡温人。
English: Sima Shen, Ji He, and Wen Ren of Hanoi County.

古文：祖慧远，梁都水使者。
现代文：祖父司马姜远，梁都水使者。
English: Grandfather Sima Jiangyuan, Liangdu Water Envoy.

古文：父玄通，梁尚书左民郎。
现代文：父亲司马玄通，凿曲尚书左民郎。
English: His father, Sima Xentong, chiseled the music of Shangshu Zuo Minro.

古文：申早有风概，十四便善弈棋，尝随父候吏尚书到溉，时梁州刺史阴子春、领军硃异在焉。
现代文：司马申早年有风采气概，十四岁便善于下棋，曾经随同父亲去问候吏部尚书到溉，其时梁州刺史阴子春、领军硃异同在那襄。
English: In his early years, Sima Shen had a graceful temperament. At the age of fourteen, he was good at playing chess. He once accompanied his father to greet the cadre Shang Shuxu to irrigate. At that time, Liangzhou stabbed Shi Yin Zichun and the leaders of the army were there.

古文：子春素知申，即于坐所呼与为对，申每有妙思，异观而奇之，因引申游处。
现代文：阴子春一向了解量星空，便在坐处呼与他下棋，司马申常有妙思，塞昱观而叹奇，便引旦墨皇游处。
English: Yin Zichun always knew how to measure the starry sky, so he played chess with him at the sitting place. Sima Shen often had ingenious ideas, watched and sighed, and then led the emperor to travel.

古文：梁邵陵王为丹阳尹，以申为主簿。
现代文：梁邵陵王为丹阳尹，以司马申为主簿。
English: Liang Shao Ling Wang is Danyang Yin, with Sima Shen as the main book.

古文：属太清之难，父母俱没，因此自誓，菜食终身。
现代文：值主遣之难，司马申的父母都逝去，他因此发誓，终身食蔬。
English: Sima Shen's parents both passed away, so he vowed to eat vegetables for life.

古文：梁元帝承制，起为开远将军，迁镇西外兵记室参军。
现代文：梁元帝承制，他被起用为开远将军，改任镇西外兵记室参军。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan's heir, he was appointed as the general of Kaiyuan and transferred to the Zhenxi Foreigner Registration Office to join the army.

古文：及侯景寇郢州，申随都督王僧辩据巴陵，每进筹策，皆见行用。
现代文：到侯景犯乱郢州，司马申随都督王僧辩占据旦堕，每次进谏筹划之策，都被采纳运用。
English: When the Marquis Jing Guan ran riot in Bozhou, Sima Shen followed the viceroy Wang Sangye to occupy the capital, and every time the plan for entering the capital was adopted and applied.

古文：僧辩叹曰： 此生要鞬汗马，或非所长，若使抚众守城，必有奇绩。 
现代文：王僧辩叹道： 此生若要策马疆场，或许不是所长，但若派他安抚众人守城，必定会有奇续。 
English: Wang Xiang lamented, "In this life, if you want to stir up trouble, it may not be the commander, but if you send him to pacify the people and defend the city, there will certainly be a series of miracles.

古文：僧辩之讨陆纳也，申在军中，于时贼众奄至，左右披靡，申躬蔽僧辩，蒙楯而前，会裴之横救至，贼乃退，僧辩顾申而笑曰： 仁者必有勇，岂虚言哉！ 
现代文：王僧搓征讨陆钧，司压史在军中，当时贼众突然到来，左右皆溃逃，司马申以身遮蔽王僧峦，持盾向前，恰好裴之横救兵到，贼军才退，王僧辩看着司马申笑着说： 仁者必有勇，这岂是虚言! 
English: Wang Sangye was in the army, when the bandits suddenly arrived, both left and right fled, Simashen covered Wang Sangye with his body, holding a shield forward, just as Pei's side came to the rescue, the bandits retreated, Wang Sangye looked at Simashen and said with a smile: The benevolent must be brave, this is a lie!

古文：除散骑侍郎。
现代文：封散骑侍郎。
English: He is a horse-riding attendant.

古文：绍泰初，迁仪同侯安都从事中郎。
现代文：绍泰初年，改任仪同侯安都从事中郎。
English: In the first year of Shao Tai, he was reassigned to serve as a middle-ranking official alongside Hou An.

古文：高祖受禅，除安东临川王谘议参军。
现代文：高祖受惮，封为安东临川王谘议参军。
English: Gao Zu was shunned and appointed as an adviser to King Andong of Linchuan to join the army.

古文：天嘉三年，迁征北谘议参军，兼廷尉监。
现代文：天嘉三年，改为征北谘议参军，兼廷尉监。
English: In the third year of Tian Jia, it was changed to "soliciting and advising the north to join the army," and also to "commissioning officer of the court."

古文：五年，除镇东谘议参军，兼起部郎。
现代文：五年，任镇东谘议参军，兼起部郎。
English: For five years, he served as the town's eastern advisory councilor to the army, and also served as the town's secretary.

古文：出为戎昭将军、江乘令，甚有治绩。
现代文：出为戎昭将军、江乘令，很有治绩。
English: He served as the general of the Eunso and the governor of the Yangtze River, and was very successful.

古文：入为尚书金部郎。
现代文：入为尚书金部郎。
English: He was promoted to Shosho Kaneburo.

古文：迁左民郎，以公事免。
现代文：改任左民郎，以公事免。
English: He was reassigned to the position of Samiryo, and was exempted from public duties.

古文：太建初，起为贞威将军、征南鄱阳谘议参军。
现代文：太建初年，起用为贞威将军、征南鄱阳王谘议参军。
English: In the first year of Tai Jian, he was appointed as General Zhen Wei, and he consulted with the King of Southern Zhengyang to join the army.

古文：九年，除秣陵令，在职以清能见纪，有白雀巢于县庭。
现代文：太建九年，任秣陵令，在职期间以清明能干见称，有白雀巢于县庭。
English: In the ninth year of the Taijian era, he was appointed as the commander of the Yulin Mausoleum. During his tenure, he was known for his clarity and ability, and there was a white nest in the county court.

古文：秩满，顷之，预东宫宾客，寻兼东宫通事舍人。
现代文：任官期满，不久，预东宫宾客，接着兼东宫通事舍人。
English: At the end of his term of office, he soon became a guest of the East Palace, and then a secretary of the East Palace.

古文：迁员外散骑常侍，舍人如故。
现代文：改任员外散骑常侍，舍人照旧。
English: Outside of the newly-appointed members, the regular attendants rode around, but the regular attendants remained the same.

古文：及叔陵之肆逆也，事既不捷，出据东府，申驰召右卫萧摩诃帅兵先至，追斩之，因入城中，收其府库，后主深嘉之。
现代文：到叔陵作乱时，事情既已不成功，出而占据东府，司马申驰马速召右卫萧摩诃率兵先到，追而斩之，便入城中，没收了叔陵的府库，后主深加嘉奖。
English: At the time of the disturbance at Shuling, the matter had already been unsuccessful, and they came out to occupy Dongfu. Sima Shenzhima quickly summoned the right guard Xiao Maqi and led the soldiers to arrive first, chased and killed him, then entered the city, confiscated Shuling's treasury, and the latter was deeply commended.

古文：以功除太子左卫率，封文招县伯，邑四百户，兼中书通事舍人。
现代文：以功任命司马申为太子左卫率，封为文招县伯，邑四百户，兼中书通事舍人。
English: For his merits, Sima Shen was appointed as the prince of Zuo Wei, and was given the title of Wenzhao County, 400 households in the county, as well as the title of Chinese calligrapher.

古文：寻迁右卫将军，加通直散骑常侍。
现代文：不久改任右卫将军，加通直散骑常侍。
English: He was soon transferred to the post of General of the Right Division, and became a regular attendant.

古文：以疾还第，就加散骑常侍，右卫、舍人如故。
现代文：因患病还府第，就加散骑常侍，右卫、舍人照旧。
English: Due to illness, when he returned to the palace, he was accompanied by a number of equerries, and the guards on the right and left remained as before.

古文：至德四年卒，后主嗟悼久之，下诏曰： 慎终追远，钦若旧则，阖棺定谥，抑乃前典。
现代文：至德四年去世，后主悲悼良久，下诏书道： 慎于终追之远，钦命如遵旧则，盖棺可定谧号，抑或此乃效法前典。
English: When Zhi De passed away four years ago, his successor mourned for a long time, and issued the following edict: "Be careful not to go too far after death. If you follow the old rules, you can choose the name of the coffin, or you can follow the previous code."

古文：故散骑常侍、右卫将军、文招县开国伯申，忠肃在公，清正立己，治繁处约，投躯殉义。
现代文：已故散骑常侍、右卫将军、文招县开国伯司马申，忠诚肃穆于公事，以清明正直立己，整治处理繁杂简约事务，投身殉义。
English: The late samurai horseman, general of the Right Division, and founder of Wenshu County, Bose Mashen, was loyal and serious in public affairs, established himself with clarity and honesty, rectified and dealt with complicated and simple affairs, and devoted himself to martyrdom.

古文：朕任寄情深，方康庶绩，奄然化往，伤恻于怀。
现代文：我对他寄情甚深，才康显功绩，却突然化身而去，令人伤心于怀。
English: I have a deep affection for him. He was able to show his merits, but suddenly incarnated and left. It is heartbreaking.

古文：可赠侍中、护军将军，进爵为侯，增邑为五百户，谥曰忠。
现代文：可赠他侍中、护军将军，进爵为侯，增邑为五百户，谧号为忠。
English: He can be given the titles of Chamberlain and General of the Guard, the title of Marquis, 500 additional villages, and the title of Loyalist.

古文：给朝服一具，衣一袭，克日举哀，丧事所须，随由资给。 
现代文：给朝服一具，衣一袭，限日举行哀事，丧事所需物品，随需要资予。 
English: Give one set of morning dress, one set of clothes, a day of mourning, items needed for the funeral, and funds as needed.

古文：及葬，后主自制志铭，辞情伤切。
现代文：到葬礼之日，后主亲自撰写墓志铭，辞意情感伤心悲切。
English: On the day of the funeral, the godmother personally wrote the epitaph, expressing her sorrow and sadness.

古文：卒章曰： 嗟乎！
现代文：末章道： 啊!天不给人善。
English: At the end of the chapter: Ah! Heaven is not kind to man.

古文：天不与善，歼我良臣。 
现代文：灭我良臣。 
English: Destroy my good minister.

古文：其见幸如此。
现代文：足见受宠信的程度。
English: That's how privileged he is.

古文：申历事三帝，内掌机密，至于仓卒之间，军国大事，指麾断决，无有滞留。
现代文：司马申历事三个皇帝，内掌机密，乃至于仓猝之间，军国大事，指挥决断，都没有滞留的情况。
English: Sima Xian's chronicle of the three emperors, the secret of the palm, and even the suddenness, the military affairs, the command decision, there is no situation of detention.

古文：子琇嗣，官至太子舍人。
现代文：儿子司马璘继承，官至太子舍人。
English: He was succeeded by his son Sima Qian, who held the title of crown prince.

古文：毛喜，字伯武，荥阳阳武人也。
现代文：毛喜，字伯武，荥阳阳武人。
English: Mao Xi, Zhe Bo Wu, Zhe Yang Yangwu Ren.

古文：祖称，梁散骑侍郎。
现代文：祖父垂称，梁朝散骑侍郎。
English: His grandfather is said to have been Liang Chao's horseback riding attendant.

古文：父栖忠，梁尚书比部侍郎、中权司马。
现代文：父亲毛栖忠，梁朝尚书比部侍郎、中权司马。
English: His father was Mao Suizhong, Liang Chao's attendant was Shang Shubebe, and his father was Zhong Quan Sima.

古文：喜少好学，善草隶。
现代文：毛喜少年时好学，善写草书隶书。
English: As a young boy, Mao Xi was eager to learn and good at writing cursive.

古文：起家梁中卫西昌侯行参军，寻迁记室参军。
现代文：起家于梁朝中卫西昌侯行参军，不久改任记室参军。
English: He started his career in the Liang Dynasty when he joined the army as the middle guard of the Xichang Campaign. He was soon assigned to the office of record and joined the army.

古文：高祖素知于喜，及镇京口，命喜与高宗俱往江陵，仍敕高宗曰： 汝至西朝，可谘禀毛喜。 
现代文：高祖一向暸解毛喜，到镇守京口时，命令毛喜与高宗同往江陵，于是下韶给高宗道： 你到西朝，可咨询毛喜。 
English: Gao Zu had always been on the lookout for Mao Xi. When he arrived at the town guard of Jingkou, he ordered Mao Xi and Gao Zong to go to Gangneung together, so he told Gao Zongdao: If you go to the Western Dynasty, you can consult Mao Xi.

古文：喜与高宗同谒梁元帝，即以高宗为领直，喜为尚书功论侍郎。
现代文：毛喜与高宗一同拜谒梁元帝，梁元帝即以高宗为领直，毛喜马尚书功论侍郎。
English: Mao Xi and Gao Zong worshipped Emperor Qian Liangyuan together. Emperor Qian was led by Gao Zong, and Mao Xi was Ma Shang's attendant.

古文：及江陵陷，喜及高宗俱迁关右。
现代文：到江陵陷落，毛喜及高宗都迁居关右。
English: When Gangneung fell, Mao Xi and Gao Zong both moved to Guanzhong.

古文：世祖即位，喜自周还，进和好之策，朝廷乃遣周弘正等通聘。
现代文：世祖登位。毛喜从北周还，进谏和好之策，朝廷于是派周弘正等通聘。
English: The founder ascended to the throne. Mao Xi returned from northern Zhou, a good strategy to promote peace, and the imperial court then sent Zhou Hongzheng and others to recruit.

古文：及高宗反国，喜于郢州奉迎。
现代文：到高宗返国，毛喜在郢州奉迎。
English: When Gaozong returned to China, Mao Xi greeted him in Ganzhou.

古文：又遣喜入关，以家属为请。
现代文：又派毛喜入关，以家属为请。
English: He also sent Mao Xi to Guanzhong, with family members as guests.

古文：周冢宰宇文护执喜手曰： 能结二国之好者，卿也。 
现代文：周冢宰宇文护执毛喜手说： 能结二国之好者，是你啊。 
English: Zhou Rongzai said: You are the one who can unite the two countries.

古文：仍迎柳皇后及后主还。
现代文：于是迎柳皇后及后主还。
English: As a result, Empress Yingliu and her successors were restored to the throne.

古文：天嘉三年至京师，高宗时为骠骑将军，仍以喜为府谘议参军，领中记室。
现代文：天嘉三年到京城，高宗此时为骠骑将军，仍以毛喜为府谘议参军，领中记室。
English: When Tian Jia arrived in Beijing three years later, Gao Zong was the general of the cavalry at this time. He still consulted Mao Xi for the prefecture to join the army, and led the middle office.

古文：府朝文翰，皆喜词也。
现代文：府上朝廷的文书翰墨，都是毛喜所写。
English: All the official documents of the imperial court were written by Mao Zedong.

古文：世祖尝谓高宗曰： 我诸子皆以 伯 为名，汝诸儿宜用 叔 为称。 
现代文：世祖曾对高宗说： 我的儿子们都以 伯 为名，你的儿子们宜以 叔 称之。 
English: The ancestor once said to Gaozong: My sons are all named Bo, and your sons should be called Uncles.

古文：高宗以访于喜，喜即条牒自古名贤杜叔英、虞叔卿等二十馀人以启世祖，世祖称善。
现代文：高宗因此征询毛喜，毛喜即条举谱牒中古代以来的名人贤士杜叔英、虞叔卿等二十多人以呈启世祖，世祖称好。
English: As a result, Gao Zong inquired about Mao Xi. More than 20 people, including famous sages from ancient times such as Du Shuying and Yu Shujing, were included in Mao Xi's genealogy. They presented him as the ancestor of enlightenment, and the ancestor was praised.

古文：世祖崩，废帝冲昧，高宗录尚书辅政，仆射到仲举等知朝望有归，乃矫太后令遣高宗还东府，当时疑惧，无敢措言。
现代文：世祖崩，废壶年幼无知，直塞录尚书辅政，仆射到仲举等知道朝廷的期望都归属于他，便假造太后令派高宗还东府，当时人们疑虑恐惧，不敢发言。
English: Knowing that the expectations of the imperial court all belonged to him, he forged the empress dowager's order to send Gaozong back to the eastern capital. At that time, people were afraid and hesitant to speak out.

古文：喜即驰入，谓高宗曰： 陈有天下日浅，海内未夷，兼国祸并钟，万邦危惧。
现代文：毛喜即驰入，对高宗说： 陈有天下的时日尚少，海内未平定，加上国祸接踵而至，万邦危惧。
English: Mao Xi immediately rushed in and said to Gao Zong: The time for Chen Youyou to rule the world is still short, the country is not yet pacified, and national calamities are coming one after another. All countries are in danger.

古文：皇太后深惟社稷至计，令王入省，方当共康庶绩，比德伊、周。
现代文：皇太后从社稷大业深处考虑，命令您入省，自当共同康显业绩，与伊、周比德。
English: The Empress Dowager, considering from the depths of the great cause of the society, ordered you to enter the province and show your performance together with Yi and Zhou Bide.

古文：今日之言，必非太后之意。
现代文：今之言，必不是太后的意思。
English: What I am saying now is definitely not what the empress dowager meant.

古文：宗社之重，愿加三思。
现代文：宗庙社稷为重，愿你能三思。
English: If you are serious about your ancestral temple, I hope you will think twice.

古文：以喜之愚，须更闻奏，无使奸贼得肆其谋。 
现代文：以我垂直的愚见，须再上奏，不能使奸贼得逞其阴谋。 
English: With my vertical stupidity, I have to play again, I can't let the traitor succeed in his plot.

古文：竟如其策。
现代文：结果就像他的计策所言。
English: The result is just as his strategy says.

古文：右卫将军韩子高始与仲举通谋，其事未发，喜请高宗曰： 宜简选人马，配与子高，并赐铁炭，使修器甲。 
现代文：右卫将军韩王直开始同处里通谋，其时事情未被发觉，垂直奏请直塞说： 宜简选人马，配给韩子高，同时赐舆铁炭，使他们修缮武器盔甲。 
English: Han Wang Zhi, the right guard general, began to conspire with him. At that time, the matter was not discovered. He asked Zhi Zhi to say: It is appropriate to select men and women, distribute them to Han Zi Gao, and at the same time give them charcoal so that they can repair weapons and armor.

古文：高宗惊曰： 子高谋反，即欲收执，何为更如是邪？ 
现代文：高宗惊讶地说： 整王直谋反，就要收执他，为何反而这样做啊? 
English: Gao Zong said in surprise, "If Heiwang is plotting to rebel, it is necessary to arrest him. Why did you do this instead?"

古文：喜答曰： 山陵始毕，边寇尚多，而子高受委前朝，名为杖顺，然甚轻狷，恐不时授首，脱其稽诛，或愆王度。
现代文：垂直答道： 山陵刚崩，边寇尚多，而韩子高受委任于前朝，表面上为服从，然而实际上却非常轻狂，恐怕他不及时顺服，会失脱使他叩首诛杀的时机，这或许会误了王的规度。
English: The vertical replied, "The mountains have just collapsed, there are many border raiders, and Han Zigao was appointed by the previous government. On the surface, he is obedient, but in reality, he is very frivolous. I am afraid that if he does not obey in time, he will miss the opportunity to make him strike, which may be out of the king's control."

古文：宜推心安诱，使不自疑，图之一壮士之力耳。 
现代文：应推心置腹地安心诱使他，使他不会生疑，对付他衹是一壮士之力罢了。 
English: You should seduce him with a heartfelt reassurance so that he will not be suspicious. It is only the strength of a strong man that can deal with him.

古文：高宗深然之，卒行其计。
现代文：高宗深为赞同，最终按他的计策行事。
English: Gao Zongxin agreed and eventually acted according to his plan.

古文：高宗即位，除给事黄门侍郎，兼中书舍人，典军国机密。
现代文：高宗登位，封给事黄门侍郎，兼中书舍人，典掌军国机密。
English: Gao Zong ascended to the throne, and was given the title of Huangmen Zhi Rong, and concurrently the title of Zhongshu Sheng Ren, and was entrusted with the military state secrets.

古文：高宗将议北伐，敕喜撰军制，凡十三条，诏颁天下，文多不载。
现代文：高宗将要商议北伐，令毛喜撰写军事制度条例，共十三条，下诏颁布天下，因文字多不载。
English: Gaozong is going to discuss the Northern Expedition, and order Mao Xi to write the military system regulations, a total of thirteen articles, and issue the following edict to the world, which is not included due to the large number of words.

古文：寻迁太子右卫率、右卫将军。
现代文：不久改任太子右卫率、右卫将军。
English: He was soon appointed to the position of the Prince's Right Guard Leader and the Right Guard General.

古文：以定策功，封东昌县侯，邑五百户。
现代文：因定策有功，封为东昌县侯，邑五百户。
English: Due to the success of the decision-making, he was awarded the title of Dongchang County Mayor, with more than 500 households in the county.

古文：又以本官行江夏、武陵、桂阳三王府国事。
现代文：又以本官职行江夏、武陵、桂阳三王府国事。
English: He was also responsible for the affairs of state of the Three Kingdoms of Jiangxia, Wuling and Guiyang.

古文：太建三年，丁母忧去职，诏追赠喜母庾氏东昌国太夫人，赐布五百匹，钱三十万，官给丧事。
现代文：太建三年，母丧去职，诏书追赠毛喜母亲庾氏东昌国太夫人，赐布五百匹，钱三十万，官给丧事。
English: Three years after the founding of the People's Republic of China, when his mother passed away, Mao Xi's mother, the Dowager Empress Dowager of Dongchang, was posthumously presented with an imperial edict. She was given 500 horses, 300,000 yuan in cash, and an official funeral.

古文：又遣员外散骑常侍杜缅图其墓田，高宗亲与缅案图指画，其见重如此。
现代文：又派员外散骑常侍杜缅图画她的墓田，高宗亲自同杜缅按圃指画，对他重视到如此地步。
English: In addition, Gaozong sent his roving attendant Doumen outside to draw her grave field, and Gaozong himself painted with Doumen according to the pattern, attaching so much importance to him.

古文：寻起为明威将军，右卫、舍人如故。
现代文：接着起用毛喜为明威将军，右卫、舍人照旧。
English: Next, Mao Xi was appointed as Ming Wei's general, and the right guards and guards remained the same.

古文：改授宣远将军、义兴太守。
现代文：改授宣远将军、义兴太守。
English: He was re-awarded the titles of General Xuan Yuan and Governor of Yixing.

古文：寻以本号入为御史中丞。
现代文：不久以本号入为御史中丞。
English: He was soon promoted to goshi chujo with this title.

古文：服阕，加散骑常侍、五兵尚书，参掌选事。
现代文：服丧终了，加散骑常侍、五兵尚书，参掌选事。
English: At the end of the funeral ceremony, the attendants and five soldiers, including the rider and the attendant, participated in the election.

古文：及众军北伐，得淮南地，喜陈安边之术，高宗纳之，即日施行。
现代文：到众军北伐，得淮南地，毛喜陈述安定边地的谋术，高宗采纳了，当日施行。
English: When the Northern Expedition reached Huainan, Mao Xi proposed the strategy of stabilizing the border, which Gao Zong adopted and implemented on the same day.

古文：又问喜曰： 我欲进兵彭、汴，于卿意如何？ 
现代文：高宗又问毛喜说： 我想进兵彭、汴，你的意见如何? 
English: Gao Zong also asked Mao Xi, "I want to enter the army of Peng and Yao, what is your opinion?"

古文：喜对曰： 臣实才非智者，安敢预兆未然。
现代文：毛喜回答说： 我实在才能不属于智慧聪敏者，怎么敢预测尚未发生的事。
English: Mao Xi replied: I am really not a wise and clever person, how dare I predict things that have not yet happened.

古文：窃以淮左新平，边氓未乂，周氏始吞齐国，难与争锋，岂以弊卒疲兵，复加深入。
现代文：我私下以为淮左刚平定，边地草野之民不太平，周氏开始吞并齐国，我们难舆他争锋，怎能以敝卒疲兵，再加深入。
English: Privately, I thought that Huai Zuang had just been pacified, that the people of the grasslands and fields in the border areas were not peaceful, and that Zhou had begun to annex Qi. It was difficult for us to compete with him, and how could we exhaust the troops with a pawn and then go deeper.

古文：且弃舟楫之工，践车骑之地，去长就短，非吴人所便。
现代文：况且弃了舟船的有利，去践踏车骑之地，这是去了长处，就了短处，不是吴人所便利的。
English: Moreover, abandoning the advantage of the boat to trample on the land of the bicycle, this is to go to the advantage, to the disadvantage, not convenient for the Wu people.

古文：臣愚以为不若安民保境，寝兵复约，然后广募英奇，顺时而动，斯久长之术也。 
现代文：我以为不如安定百姓保住境地，停止兵戈，恢复和约，然后广泛招募英才奇士，顺时而动，这是长久的计策。 
English: I thought it would be better to keep the situation stable for the people, stop the war, restore the peace treaty, and then recruit a wide range of talented magicians and move in accordance with the times. This is a long-term strategy.

古文：高宗不从。
现代文：高宗不听从。
English: Gao Zong did not listen.

古文：后吴明彻陷周，高宗谓喜曰： 卿之所言，验于今矣。 
现代文：后吴明彻陷没于北周，高宗对毛喜说： 你所说的话，如今验证了。 
English: After Wu Mingche was trapped in North Zhou, Gaozong said to Mao Xi: What you said has now been verified.

古文：十二年，加侍中。
现代文：太建十二年，加侍中。
English: Ta Jian was 12 years old and a junior chambermaid.

古文：十三年，授散骑常侍、丹阳尹。
现代文：十三年，授散骑常侍、丹阳尹。
English: In the thirteenth year, Danyang Yin, an equestrian, was awarded the title.

古文：迁吏部尚书，常侍如故。
现代文：改任吏部尚书，常侍照旧。
English: He was reappointed to the position of secretary, but retained his position as a regular attendant.

古文：及高宗崩，叔陵构逆，敕中庶子陆琼宣旨，令南北诸军，皆取喜处分。
现代文：到高宗崩，叔陵叛逆，韶中庶子陆琼宣布旨令，命令南北诸军，都听毛喜的处置分配。
English: When Gao Zong passed away and Shuling rebelled, Lu Qiong, the illegitimate son of Gao Zhong, issued an order, ordering the armies of the north and south to listen to Mao Xi's disposition and distribution.

古文：贼平，又加侍中，增封并前九百户。
现代文：贼人被平定，又加封毛喜侍中，增封到九百户。
English: The thieves were subdued, and they were also given the title of Mao Xi Zhi Zhong, increasing their titles to nine hundred households.

古文：至德元年，授信威将军、永嘉内史，加秩中二千石。
现代文：至德元年，授信威将军、永嘉内史，加秩中二千石。
English: By the first year of the Tokugawa Shogunate, General Zushinwei and Nagayoshi Nagayoshi were promoted, and 2,000 koku was added to their ranks.

古文：初，高宗委政于喜，喜亦勤心纳忠，多所匡益，数有谏诤，事并见从，由是十馀年间，江东狭小，遂称全盛。
现代文：当初，高宗委任政事给毛喜，毛喜也勤心纳忠，对政事多有匡益之功，屡有谏静，所言之事高宗都能听从，于是十多年间，狭小的江东开始呈现全盛。
English: At the beginning, Gaozong appointed Mao Xi to the government, and Mao Xi was also diligent in gaining loyalty. He was mostly beneficial to the government, and there was often calmness, and Gaozong could listen to what he said. As a result, in more than ten years, the small Jiangdong began to show its heyday.

古文：唯略地淮北，不纳喜谋，而吴明彻竟败，高宗深悔之，谓袁宪曰： 不用毛喜计，遂令至此，朕之过也。 
现代文：惟有略地淮北，没有采纳毛喜的谋略，而吴明彻最后失败，高宗十分懊悔，对袁宪说： 没有采用毛喜的计谋，于是到今天逭个地步，这是我的遇错。 
English: However, Huai Be did not adopt Mao Xi's strategy, and Wu Ming Che failed in the end. Gao Zong was very remorseful and said to Yuan Xian: I did not adopt Mao Xi's strategy, so I have not made any progress to this day. This is my mistake.

古文：喜既益亲，乃言无回避，而皇太子好酒德，每共幸人为长夜之宴，喜尝为言，高宗以诫太子，太子阴患之，至是稍见疏远。
现代文：毛喜既已更为亲近，于是说话没有什么可回避的，而皇太子喜好饮酒为乐，每每同宠幸之人长夜共宴，毛喜曾为此谏言，高宗以此告诫太子，太子暗暗怀恨在心。至此毛喜被疏远。
English: Since Mochi had become closer, there was nothing to avoid talking about, but the crown prince liked to drink alcohol for fun and have long dinner parties with everyone he liked. Mochi had complained about this, and Takamune warned the prince about it. The prince secretly harbored a grudge. So Mochi was alienated.

古文：初，后主为始兴王所伤，及疮愈而自庆，置酒于后殿，引江总以下，展乐赋诗，醉而命喜。
现代文：起初，后主被始兴王所伤，到疮伤愈合后便自庆，置酒于后殿，引江总以下人，展乐赋诗，后主酒醉后命毛喜赋诗。
English: At first, the dowager was injured by Shih Hsing Wang, and after the wound healed, she celebrated herself, put wine in the back hall, led the total number of people to perform music and poetry, and after the dowager was drunk, she celebrated her life with poetry.

古文：于时山陵初毕，未及逾年，喜见之不怿，欲谏而后主已醉，喜升阶，佯为心疾，仆于阶下，移出省中。
现代文：此时山陵丧事刚完毕，还不过一年，毛喜见此状况不太高兴，想要谏言，而后主此刻已醉，毛喜走上阶石，假装心脏有病，仆倒于阶石下，被抬出宫。
English: At this time, the mountain burial had just ended, it was only a year, Mao Xi saw that this situation was not very happy and wanted to say something, but the queen was drunk at the moment, Mao Xi walked up the steps, pretended to have a heart disease, fell down under the steps, and was carried out of the palace.

古文：后主醒，乃疑之，谓江总曰： 我悔召毛喜，知其无疾，但欲阻我欢宴，非我所为，故奸诈耳。 
现代文：后主酒醒后，怀疑此事，对江总说： 我懊悔召毛喜，知道他没有病，他祇是想劝阻我的欢宴，不赞同我的所为，这是故意使奸诈罢了。 
English: Later, after the host had sobered up, he doubted the matter and said to General Jiang: I regret summoning Mao Xi, I know that he is not ill, he only wanted to dissuade me from the feast, and did not agree with what I did. This was deliberate treachery.

古文：乃与司马申谋曰： 此人负气，吾欲将乞鄱阳兄弟听其报仇，可乎？ 
现代文：于是同司马申商谋道： 此人自负，我想请鄱阳兄弟让他们报仇，可以吗? 
English: So I discussed with Sima Shen: This person is conceited, I would like to ask the Shenyang brothers to let them take revenge, is that okay?

古文：对曰： 终不为官用，愿如圣旨。 
现代文：司马申回答说： 最终不为官所用，愿听从圣旨。 
English: Sima Shen replied, "Ultimately, it is not for the use of officials, and I am willing to obey the sacred will."

古文：傅縡争之曰： 不然。
现代文：傅纬争辩说： 不好。
English: Fu Wei argued: Not good.

古文：若许报仇，欲置先皇何地？ 
现代文：若许言报仇，那将置先皇于何地? 
English: If there is talk of revenge, where will that leave the late emperor?

古文：后主曰： 当乞一小郡，勿令见人事也。 
现代文：后主说： 应当给他一个小郡，不许他参预人事。 
English: The latter said: He should be given a small county and not allowed to participate in the pre-election personnel.

古文：乃以喜为永嘉内史。
现代文：于是命毛喜为永嘉内史。
English: As a result, Yongjia's internal history was a happy one.

古文：喜至郡，不受俸秩，政弘清静，民吏便之。
现代文：毛喜到郡，不接受俸禄，为政宽弘清静，官民便利。
English: When Mao Xi came to the county, he did not accept a salary, which was convenient for the government, the public and the people.

古文：遇豊州刺史章大宝举兵反，郡与豊州相接，而素无备御，喜乃修治城隍，严饰器械。
现代文：逢豊州刺史童主宜举兵造反，郡舆豊州相邻接，而又一向没有防御设施，毛喜便令修治城防，严加整饬兵器军械。
English: Fengzhou and Fengzhou County are adjacent to each other, and there has never been any defense facilities. Mao Xi then ordered the construction of city defenses and the strict rectification of weapons and ordnance.

古文：又遣所部松阳令周磻领千兵援建安。
现代文：又派部下松阳令周硒率领一千兵士援助建安。
English: He also sent his subordinate Songyang to order Zhou Selen to lead a thousand soldiers to aid Jianan.

古文：贼平，授南安内史。
现代文：贼人被平定，毛喜被授卖圭内史。
English: The thieves were subdued, and Mao Xi was given the title of Gui Neishi.

古文：祯明元年，征为光禄大夫，领左骁骑将军。
现代文：擅塱元年，征为光禄大夫，领左骁骑将军。
English: In the first year of the year, he was enlisted as a doctor of Guanglu, leading the left-hand cavalry general.

古文：喜在郡有惠政，乃征入朝，道路追送者数百里。
现代文：毛喜在郡有惠政，于是被征入朝，一路追而送行者长达敷百里。
English: Mao Xi had a favoured position in the county, so he was conscripted into the imperial court, and he had to chase and see off travellers for up to a hundred miles.

古文：其年道病卒，时年七十二。
现代文：逭年在路上生病而死，时年七十二岁。
English: He died of an illness on the road three years later, at the age of 72.

古文：有集十卷。
现代文：有文集十卷。
English: There are ten volumes of anthologies.

古文：子处冲嗣，官至仪同从事中郎、中书侍郎。
现代文：儿子毛处冲继承，官至仪同从事中郎、中书侍郎。
English: He was succeeded by his son, Mao Shuchong, who also served as churo and chushojiro.

古文：蔡徵，字希祥，侍中、中抚军将军景历子也。
现代文：蔡徵，字希祥，侍中、中抚军将军景历的儿子。
English: Cai Zheng, also known as Xixiang, was the son of the general Jing Liguo, who was a chamberlain and a member of the Central Military Commission.

古文：幼聪敏，精识强记。
现代文：幼年聪敏，精于识字，记忆力强。
English: They are bright at an early age, good at reading and writing, and have a strong memory.

古文：年六岁，诣梁吏部尚书河南褚翔，翔字仲举，嗟其颖悟。
现代文：六岁时，拜见梁朝吏部尚书河南褚翔，褚翔字仲举，感叹蔡征聪敏悟性高。
English: At the age of six, he visited Liang Shangshu, the head of the General Staff Department of the Han Dynasty, in Henan Province. He was impressed by Liang Shangshu's ability to read and write Chinese characters, and said that Cai Zhengcong was highly perceptive.

古文：七岁，丁母忧，居丧如成人礼。
现代文：七岁，母丧，服丧如成人礼。
English: Seven years old, mother's funeral, mourning like a rite of passage.

古文：继母刘氏性悍忌，视之不以道，徵供侍益谨，初无怨色。
现代文：继母刘氏性格剽悍残忍，对他不讲道理，蔡征供奉侍候更加谨慎，从来没有怨恨的神色。
English: Stepmother Liu's character is fierce and cruel, unreasonable to him, Cai Zheng is more cautious in serving waiters, and never has a grudge.

古文：徵本名览，景历以为有王祥之性，更名徵，字希祥。
现代文：蔡征本名蔡览，蔡景历以为他有王祥的品性，替他改名蔡征，字希祥。
English: Cai Zheng's real name was Cai Zhan, but Cai Jingli thought he had the character of Wang Xiang, so he changed his name to Cai Zheng, with the character Xixiang.

古文：梁承圣初，高祖为南徐州刺史，召补迎主簿。寻授太学博士。
现代文：梁朝承圣初年，高祖为南徐州刺史，召蔡征为补迎主簿，不久授太学博士。
English: In the first year of the Liang Dynasty, Gao Zu was appointed as the governor of South Xuzhou, called Cai Zheng as the main book, and was soon awarded the doctorate.

古文：天嘉初，迁始兴王府法曹行参军，历外兵参军事、尚书主客郎，所居以干理称。
现代文：天嘉初年，改任始兴王府法曹行参军，历任外兵参军事、尚书主客郎，任职期间以理事干练为人所称道。
English: In the first year of Tianjia, he was reappointed as the legal officer of Shixing Wangfu and joined the army. Successive foreign soldiers participated in the military, and he was the chief guest. During his tenure, he was known for his ability as a director.

古文：太建初，迁太子少傅丞、新安王主簿、通直散骑侍郎、晋安王功曹史、太子中舍人，兼东宫领直，中舍人如故。
现代文：太建初年，改任太子少傅丞、新安王主簿、通直散骑侍郎、晋安王功曹史、太子中舍人，兼东宫领直，中舍人照旧。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taiken, he was appointed as the Prince's Junior Secretary, the Master of the King of Xin'an, the Master of the King of Jin'an, the King of Jin'an's Assistant, the Prince's Assistant, and the Head of the East Palace, while the Assistant remained the same.

古文：丁父忧去职，服阕，袭封新豊县侯，授戎昭将军、镇右新安王谘议参军。
现代文：父丧离职，服丧终了，袭封新丰县侯，授戎昭将军、镇右新安王谘议参军。
English: After the death of his father, he resigned from the post, and after the funeral, he was enthroned as the prince of Xinfeng County, awarded the title of General Zhi Rong Zhao, and advised by Zhen Yu Xin An Wang to join the army.

古文：至德二年，迁廷尉卿，寻为吏部郎。
现代文：至德二年，改任廷尉卿，接着为吏部郎。
English: In the second year of the Tokugawa Shogunate, he was reassigned to the post of Imperial Lieutenant, and then to the post of secretary.

古文：迁太子中庶子、中书舍人，掌诏诰。
现代文：改任太子中庶子、中书舍人，掌韶诰。
English: He was reappointed as the Prince's middle son, the middle son's illegitimate son, the middle son's secretary, and the second son.

古文：寻授左民尚书，与仆射江总知撰五礼事。
现代文：不久授左民尚书，与仆射江总知撰五礼事。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the title of Zuo Min Shang Shu, and compiled the Five Etiquettes with his servant, Jiang Shouchi.

古文：寻加宁远将军。
现代文：接着加宁速将军。
English: Then General Kanin hurried out.

古文：后主器其材干，任寄日重，迁吏部尚书、安右将军，每十日一往东宫，于太子前论述古今得丧及当时政务。
现代文：后主器重他的才干，任用寄望日趋加重。改任吏部尚书、安右将军，每十天去束宫一次，在太子面前论述古今得失和当时的政务。
English: Afterward, the master valued his talent, and the hope of his appointment became more and more serious. He was reassigned to the General Staff, General Shangshu and General An Yu, and went to the Sok Palace once every ten days to discuss the past, present, and future, as well as the government affairs at that time in front of the prince.

古文：又敕以廷尉寺狱，事无大小，取徵议决。
现代文：又韶令廷尉寺狱，事无大小，都采纳蔡征的议论决断。
English: In addition, the imperial commanding officer of the imperial palace and the temple prison adopted Cai Zheng's discussion and decision in all matters, large and small.

古文：俄有敕遣徵收募兵士，自为部曲，徵善抚恤，得物情，旬月之间，众近一万。
现代文：不久有诏派蔡征收募兵士，自为编制，蔡征善于安抚体恤士兵，很得人心，十天一个月之间，士兵已近一万。
English: Soon after, Cai Zheng was sent by the emperor to collect and recruit soldiers, and he organized the army by himself. Cai Zheng was good at appeasing the sympathetic soldiers, and was very popular. Within ten days and one month, there were nearly ten thousand soldiers.

古文：徵位望既重，兼声势熏灼，物议咸忌惮之。
现代文：蔡征地位威望既重，加以声势逼人，众人议论都妒忌惧怕他。
English: Cai Zheng's status and prestige are both weighty, and he has the power to compel people. People are jealous and afraid of him.

古文：寻徙为中书令，将军如故。
现代文：不久转为中书令，将军照旧。
English: It was soon changed to Zhongshirong, and the generals remained as before.

古文：中令清简无事，或云徵有怨言，事闻后主，后主大怒，收夺人马，将诛之，有固谏者获免。
现代文：中书令清简无事，有人说蔡征有怨言，此事传到后主耳中，后主大怒，收夺他的人马，将要杀他，有极力谏静者，使他获免。
English: Some people said that Cai Zheng had a complaint, and the matter was reported to the master. The master was furious, seized his men and horses, and was going to kill him. Some people tried their best to calm him down, so that he was released.

古文：祯明三年，隋军济江，后主以徵有干用，权知中领军。
现代文：祯明三年，隋军过江，后主因蔡征有才干可用，授他权知中领军。
English: In the third year of the Ming Dynasty, the Sui army crossed the Yangtze River. Because Cai Zheng had the ability to lead the army, he was given the power to lead the army.

古文：徵日夜勤苦，备尽心力，后主嘉焉，谓曰 事宁有以相报 。
现代文：蔡征夜辛勤劳苦，尽心尽力，篷主嘉誉他，说道： 事平定后一定有报答。 
English: Cai Zheng worked hard at night, tried his best, and his master praised him, saying: After the matter is settled, there must be a reward.

古文：及决战于钟山南岗，敕徵守宫城西北大营，寻令督众军战事。
现代文：到在钟山南岗决战，命蔡征守宫城西北大营，接着令他督众军战事。
English: In the decisive battle at Zhongshan South Hill, he ordered Cai Zheng to guard the northwest camp of the palace, and then ordered him to supervise the army.

古文：城陷，随例入关。
现代文：城被攻陷，随通例入关。
English: The city was captured, and they entered the pass as usual.

古文：徵美容仪，有口辩，多所详究。
现代文：基征容貌仪态很美，有日辩之才，对事多要详加追究。
English: Ji Zheng's appearance and demeanor are very beautiful. He is a talented debater, and he should be investigated in more detail.

古文：至于士流官宦，皇家戚属，及当朝制度，宪章仪轨，户口风俗，山川土地，问无不对。
现代文：诸如士流官宦，皇家戚属，以及当朝制度，宪章礼仪，户口风俗，山川土地，凡问无所不能对答。
English: Such as the official ranks of officers, royal relatives, as well as the current system, charter etiquette, household customs, mountains and rivers, all questions can be answered.

古文：然性颇便佞进取，不能以退素自业。
现代文：然而生性颇会阿谀逢迎进取，不能以恬退质朴建立自己的业绩。
English: However, it is not natural to build up one's own performance by retreating into simplicity.

古文：初拜吏部尚书，启后主借鼓吹，后主谓所司曰： 鼓吹军乐，有功乃授，蔡徵不自量揆，紊我朝章。然其父景历既有缔构之功，宜且如所启，拜讫即追还。 
现代文：初拜吏部尚书，启奏后主借用鼓吹军乐，后主对所司官说： 鼓吹军乐，有功者才授，蔡征不自量度，搞乱我的朝廷章法，然而他的父亲蔡景历既有缔造之功，应暂且如他所启奏，拜官毕即予追还。 
English: At the beginning of the worship, the clerk borrowed a book from the clerk, and after the opening performance, the master borrowed the drum to play the military music. The master said to the clerk: To play the military music, the meritorious person should be awarded. Cai Zheng did not measure himself, and confused my imperial rules and regulations. However, his father, Cai Jingli, had the merit of creation, and should temporarily play the drum as he did, and the worship would be returned immediately.

古文：徵不修廉隅，皆此类也。
现代文：蔡征不修廉洁之处，都像遣一类。
English: Cai Zheng's incorrigible and dishonest places are all like the first class.

古文：隋文帝闻其敏赡，召见顾问，言辄会旨，然累年不调，久之，除太常丞。
现代文：隋文帝听说蔡征聪敏能干，召见他咨询，言谈中他总能领会旨意，但多年不调，很久，才任命为太常丞。
English: Sui Emperor Wen heard that Cai Zheng Congmin was capable and summoned him for consultation. During the conversation, he was always able to understand the will of the meeting, but it took many years and a long time before he was appointed as Tai Changzheng.

古文：历尚书民部仪曹郎，转给事郎，卒，时年六十七。
现代文：历任尚书民部仪曹郎，转任给事郎后去世，其时六十七岁。
English: He passed away at the age of sixty-seven, after having served as the secretary of the Ministry of People's Affairs.

古文：子翼，治《尚书》，官至司徒属、德教学士。
现代文：儿子蔡翼，治《尚书》，官至司徒属、德教学士。
English: His son, Cai Ying, edited "Shang Shu" and became a government official and a scholar of German language and literature.

古文：入隋，为东宫学士。
现代文：入隋，为束宫学士。
English: He entered the Sui Dynasty and graduated from the Sokun Academy.

古文：史臣曰：宗元饶夙夜匪懈，济务益时。
现代文：史臣曰：宗元饶早晚不懈怠，干理公务有益于时。
English: Shichen said: Sooner or later, Zongyuan Rao will not slack off, and it is beneficial to do business at the right time.

古文：司马申清恪在朝，攻苦立行，加之以忠节，美矣。
现代文：司屋史在朝清廉恪守，攻苦立行，加上忠节，美啊。
English: Siya history in the morning to abide by the integrity, hard work, coupled with loyalty, beauty ah.

古文：毛喜深达事机，匡赞时主。
现代文：垂直深为通达事机，匡益赞助其时之主。
English: Vertical depth is an opportunity to reach things, and Kuang Yi is the main sponsor at that time.

古文：蔡徵聪敏才赡，而擅权自踬，惜哉！
现代文：蔓征聪敏多才，但擅用职权使自己受挫，可惜啊。
English: It's a pity that Mansei, who is intelligent and multi-talented, used his authority to frustrate himself.

