古文：起旃蒙大荒落八月，尽柔兆敦牂，凡一年有奇。
现代文：起旃蒙大荒落八月，尽柔兆敦牂，凡一年有奇。
English: The month of August is usually a bleak one, but every year is different.

古文：齐王下开运二年
现代文：后晋齐王开运二年
English: Two years after King Qi of the Later Jin Dynasty

古文：八月，甲子朔，日有食之。
现代文：八月，甲子朔，出现日食。
English: In August, at the turn of the year, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：丙寅，右仆射兼中书侍郎、同平章事和凝罢守本官。加枢密使、户部尚书冯玉中书侍郎、同平章事，事无大小，悉以委之。
现代文：丙寅，后晋出帝石重贵免去和凝所兼中书侍郎、同平章事之职，保留右仆射原官；枢密使、户部尚书冯玉加官兼中书侍郎、同平章事，朝事无论巨细全都交由冯玉全权处理。
English: Hsin Yin, later promoted to Imperial Prince, was relieved of the post of conciliator, chancellery attendant, and co-equal magistrate, and retained the post of right-hand man of the Emperor's right-hand man; the Privy Councilor, household secretary, Feng Yu Jia, chancellery attendant, and co-equal magistrate, and all the affairs of the imperial court, no matter how large or small, were handled by Feng Yu with full authority.

古文：帝自阳城之捷，谓天下无虞，骄侈益甚。
现代文：出帝自从阳城获胜，认为天下太平，更加骄横奢侈。
English: Since the Emperor's victory in Yangcheng, he thinks that the world is peaceful, and he is more arrogant and extravagant.

古文：四方贡献珍奇，皆归内府。多造器玩，广宫室，崇饰后庭，近朝莫之及。
现代文：各地进贡献上的奇珍异宝，统统归入内府；大量制造器具玩物，扩建宫室，装饰后宫，近来各朝望尘莫及。
English: The treasures and curiosities contributed by various regions have all been included in Naifu; a large number of tools and playthings have been manufactured, palace rooms have been expanded, and harems have been decorated.

古文：作织锦楼以织地衣，用织工数百，期年乃成。又赏赐优伶无度。
现代文：建造织锦楼来编织地毯，征用数百名织工，一年才完成；出帝又毫无节制地赏赐为他歌舞戏谑的艺人。
English: He built the Brocade Building to weave carpets, requisitioned hundreds of weavers, and only completed it in a year; after his accession to the throne, he lavishly rewarded the artists who performed for him.

古文：桑维翰谏曰： 曏者陛下亲御胡寇，战士重伤者，赏不过帛数端。
现代文：大臣桑维翰劝谏道： 过去陛下亲自率兵抗击胡人的进攻，战士受重伤的，也不过赏给数端布帛而已；现在艺人一说一笑合您的心意，就往往赏给十端布帛、上万钱币，还有锦袍、银带。
English: Minister Sang Wai Han advised him: In the past, His Majesty personally led the troops to fight against the Hu people's attack. When soldiers were seriously injured, they were only awarded a few pieces of cloth; now, when artists say and smile what you want, they are often awarded ten pieces of cloth, tens of thousands of coins, as well as a brocade robe and a silver belt.

古文：今优人一谈一笑称旨，往往赐束帛、万钱、锦袍、银带，彼战士见之，能不觖望，曰： 我曹冒白刃，绝筋折骨，曾不如一谈一笑之功乎！ 如此，则士卒解体，陛下谁与卫社稷乎！ 
现代文：这些若让那些战士看见，怎能不抱怨？他们会说： 我们冒着刀锋剑刃，断筋折骨，竟不如人家一说一笑的功劳大呵！ 这样下去，军队就将瓦解，陛下还靠谁来保卫国家呢？ 
English: If these things were shown to those soldiers, how could they not complain? They would say: We have braved the blade of the sword and broken bones, but it is not as great a merit as people say with a smile! If this continues, the army will collapse, and who will Your Majesty rely on to defend the country?

古文：帝不听。
现代文：出帝没有听从。
English: Emperor Xuan did not listen.

古文：冯玉每善承迎帝意，由是益有宠。
现代文：冯玉常常善于迎合出帝的心意，因此越发得到宠信。
English: Feng Yu was often good at pandering to the emperor's wishes, so he was increasingly favored.

古文：尝有疾在家，帝谓诸宰相曰： 自刺史以上，俟冯玉出，乃得除。 
现代文：有一次他在家养病，没有入朝，出帝对各宰相说： 自刺史以上的官职，要等冯玉病好入朝，才能任命。 
English: On one occasion, when he was ill at home and did not enter the imperial court, the emperor said to the prime ministers: Since the official position is higher than that of the crown prince, it is necessary to wait for Feng Yu's illness to get better before entering the imperial court.

古文：其倚任如此。
现代文：对他竟这样信任、重用。
English: For him to be trusted and used in such a way is appalling.

古文：玉乘势弄权，四方赂遗，辐辏其门。由是朝政益坏。
现代文：冯玉仗势玩弄权柄，各地争相贿赂馈赠，门前车马络绎不绝，由此朝政日益败坏。
English: Feng Yuqun played with power and authority, and various regions competed for bribes and gifts, and there was a never-ending stream of chariots and horses in front of the gate. As a result, the imperial government became increasingly corrupt.

古文：唐兵围建州既久，建人离心。
现代文：南唐军队围困建州已久，建州城中人心涣散。
English: The Southern Tang army has been besieging Jianzhou for a long time, and the hearts of the people in Jianzhou are scattered.

古文：或谓董思安： 盍早择去就？ 
现代文：有人对守城将领董思安说： 要及早选择何去何从呵。 
English: Someone said to Dong Si'an, the general of the city's defense, "You should choose where to go and where to go early."

古文：思安曰 吾世事王氏，危而叛之，天下其谁容我！ 
现代文：董思安说： 我世代侍奉王家，到了危难之际背叛他，天下谁还能容我！ 
English: Dong Sian said: I have served the royal family for generations, and betrayed him in a time of crisis. Who in the world can tolerate me!

古文：众感其言，无叛者。
现代文：众人感佩他的话，竟无一人背叛。
English: Everyone admired his words, but no one betrayed him.

古文：丁亥，唐先锋桥道使上元王建封先登，遂克建州，闽主延政降。
现代文：丁亥，南唐军先锋桥道使上元人王建封率先登城，于是攻克建州，闽主王延政投降。
English: Dinghai, the Southern Tang Army's pioneer bridge road made the Shangyuan people Wang Jianfeng take the lead in climbing the city, so he conquered Jianzhou, and the warlord Wang Yanzheng surrendered.

古文：王忠顺战死，董思安整众奔泉州。
现代文：将领王忠顺战死，董思安收拾残部投奔泉州。
English: General Wang Zhongshun was killed in the battle, and Dong Sian gathered up the remnants and fled to Quanzhou.

古文：初，唐兵之来，建人苦王氏之乱与杨思恭之重敛，争伐木开道以迎之。
现代文：当初，南唐军队开来时，建州百姓因苦于闽主王延政的昏乱和杨思恭的横征暴敛，争先砍伐树木开辟道路来迎接南唐军队。
English: At the beginning, when the South Tang army came, the people of Jianzhou, suffering from the confusion of the warlord Wang Yanzheng and the violent recruitment of Yang Sikyong, scrambled to cut down trees to open a road to meet the South Tang army.

古文：及破建州，纵兵大掠，焚宫室庐舍俱尽。
现代文：等南唐军队攻克建州后，竟纵兵大肆抢掠，将王氏宫殿和百姓房屋统统放火烧光。
English: After the Southern Tang army conquered Jianzhou, the soldiers looted the palace of the Wang family and the houses of the people.

古文：是夕，寒雨，冻死者相枕，建人失望。
现代文：当天傍晚寒雨纷飞，冻死的人多得相互枕藉。建州百姓大失所望。
English: In the evening of the same day, cold rain fell, and many people froze to death. The people of Jianzhou were greatly disappointed.

古文：唐主以其有功，皆不问。
现代文：而南唐主李却因其将领破城有功，对这些全不过问。
English: However, the lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty, Li, did not question these at all, because his generals had made great achievements in breaking the city.

古文：汉主杀韶王弘雅。
现代文：南汉主刘晟杀其弟韶王刘弘雅。
English: The Southern Han ruler Liu Xuan killed his younger brother, Liu Hongya.

古文：九月，许文稹以汀州，王继勋以泉州，王继成以漳州，皆降于唐。
现代文：九月，许文稹率汀州、王继勋率泉州、王继成率漳州，向南唐投降。
English: In September, Xu Wenjun led Tingzhou, Wang Jixun led Quanzhou, and Wang Jicheng led Bozhou to surrender to Southern Tang.

古文：唐置永安军于建州。
现代文：南唐在建州设置永安军。
English: Southern Tang set up the Yongan Army in Jianzhou.

古文：丙申，以西京留守兼侍中景延广充北面行营副招讨使。
现代文：丙申，后晋出帝命西京留守兼侍中景延广任北面行营副招讨使。
English: After the Emperor's abdication, Jing Yanguang, who stayed behind in West Beijing and served as an aide-de-camp, served as the deputy recruiting officer for the North Campaign.

古文：殿中监王钦祚权知恒州事。
现代文：殿中监王钦祚暂主管恒州事务。
English: The court chancellor, King Qin Hui, is temporarily in charge of the affairs of Hengzhou.

古文：会乏军储，诏钦祚括籴民粟。
现代文：正值军粮储备缺乏，朝廷诏命他收刮买进民间粮食。
English: At a time when military grain reserves were in short supply, the imperial court ordered him to buy grain from the private sector.

古文：杜威有粟十馀万斛在恒州，钦祚举籍以闻。
现代文：杜威有十几万斛粮食存在恒州，王钦祚将其全部抄没，奏报朝廷。
English: Dewey had more than one hundred thousand mu of grain in Hengzhou, but Wang Qinqian confiscated all of it and reported it to the imperial court.

古文：威大怒，表称： 臣有何罪，钦祚籍没臣粟！ 
现代文：杜威闻知大怒，上表章声称 臣有什么罪？王钦祚竟抄没我的粮食！ 
English: Dewey was furious. The last chapter claimed, "What is the vassal guilty of? Wang Qinqian actually confiscated my grain!"

古文：朝廷为之召钦祚还，仍厚赐威以慰安之。
现代文：朝廷因此将王钦祚从恒州召回，并重赏杜威以示抚慰。
English: As a result, the imperial court recalled Wang Qinqian from Hengzhou and rewarded Dewey as a gesture of consolation.

古文：戊申，置威信军于曹州。
现代文：戊申，在曹州设置威信军。
English: Boshin, set up the prestige army in Caozhou.

古文：遣侍卫马步都指挥使李守贞戍澶州。
现代文：派遣侍卫马步都指挥使李守贞守卫澶州。
English: He dispatched the bodyguard Ma Budu to command Li Shouzhen to guard Zhangzhou.

古文：乙卯，遣彰德节度使张彦泽戍恒州。
现代文：乙卯，派遣彰德节度使张彦泽守卫恒州。
English: Second, Zhang Yanze was dispatched by the Changde Festival to guard Hengzhou.

古文：汉主杀刘思潮、林少强、林少良、何昌延。
现代文：南汉主刘晟杀刘思潮、林少强、林少良、何昌廷。
English: South Han ruler Liu Xuan killed Liu Shichao, Lin Shaoqiang, Lin Shao Liang, and He Changting.

古文：以左仆射王翻尝与高祖谋立弘昌，出为英州刺史，未至，赐死。
现代文：因左仆射王曾与高祖刘策划立越王弘昌为主，贬为英州刺史，人还未曾到英州，又命赐死。
English: Because his left-hand man, King Jia, had plotted with Emperor Gaozhu Liu to establish King Hongchang of Yue as the ruler, he was relegated to the status of a pretender to Yingzhou. No one had ever been to Yingzhou before he was put to death.

古文：内外皆惧不自保。
现代文：内外大臣都人人自危，怕不能保全性命。
English: Both the Minister of the Interior and the Minister of Foreign Affairs are in danger of not being able to save their lives.

古文：冬，十月，癸巳，置镇安军于陈州。
现代文：冬季，十月癸巳，在陈州设置镇安军。
English: In the winter, in October, the Zhen'an Army was set up in Chenzhou.

古文：唐元敬宋太后殂。
现代文：南唐元敬宋太后去世。
English: Empress Dowager Song of the Southern Tang Dynasty passed away.

古文：王延政至金陵，唐主以为羽林大将军。
现代文：闽主王延政到达金陵，南唐主李任命他为羽林大将军。
English: The warlord Wang Yanzheng arrived in Jinling, and the Southern Tang Lord Li appointed him as the grand general of Ulin.

古文：斩杨思恭以谢建人。
现代文：将杨思恭斩首以平建州的民愤。
English: Yang Sikyong was beheaded to appease the anger of the people of Pingjian.

古文：以百胜节度使王崇文为永安节度使。
现代文：任命百胜节度使王崇文为永安节度使。
English: The appointment of Yuxing Festival made Wang Chongwen the Yongan Festival envoy.

古文：崇文治以宽简，建人遂安。
现代文：王崇文为政宽宏、简约，建州百姓于是安定。
English: Wang Chongwen was a magnanimous and concise politician, and the people of Jianzhou were stable.

古文：初，高丽王建用兵吞灭邻国，颇强大，因胡僧袜啰言于高祖曰： 勃海，我婚姻也，其王为契丹所虏，请与朝廷共击取之。 
现代文：当初，高丽王王建发兵吞并灭亡邻国，很强大，胡人僧侣袜因而对后晋高祖石敬瑭说： 勃海是我国的姻亲，它的国王被契丹所俘虏，希望与朝廷共同攻取契丹。 
English: At the beginning, King Jian of Goryeo sent troops to annex and destroy the neighboring country, which was very powerful. As a result, the Hu people's monk Sock said to the post-Jung Gao ancestor Stone Jing Yi: Bo Hai is our country's in-laws. Its king was captured by Khitan, hoping to capture Khitan together with the court.

古文：高祖不报。
现代文：高祖未予答复。
English: Gaozu did not reply.

古文：及帝与契丹为仇，袜啰复言之。
现代文：待后晋出帝和契丹结仇之后，袜又说起这件事。
English: Later, after the emperor and Khitan took revenge, Sock talked about the matter again.

古文：帝欲使高丽扰契丹东边以分其兵势。
现代文：后晋出帝想让高丽骚扰契丹的东边，以分散契丹的兵力。
English: Later, Emperor Jinzhi wanted Koryo to harass the eastern side of Khitan in order to disperse Khitan's forces.

古文：会建卒，子武自称权知国事，上表告丧。
现代文：正在此时，高丽王王建去世了，他的儿子王武自称代理主持国家事务，并向后晋奉上表章报丧。
English: Just at this time, the King of Goryeo, Wang Jian, passed away. His son, Wang Wu, claimed to be the acting head of state affairs, and later reported his death to the emperor.

古文：十一月，戊戌，以武为大义军使、高丽王，遣通事舍人郭仁遇使其国，谕指使击契丹。
现代文：十一月，戊戌，后晋任命王武为大义军使、高丽王，派通事舍人郭仁遇出使高丽，传达旨意让高丽攻击契丹。
English: In November, Emperor Wuzhong and Empress Dowager Jin appointed Wang Wu as the envoy of the Great Patriotic Army and the king of Goryeo, and sent Guo Ren, a mediator, to meet the envoy of Goryeo and convey the will to let Goryeo attack Khitan.

古文：仁遇至其国，见其兵极弱，曏者袜啰之言，特建为夸诞耳，实不敢与契丹为敌。
现代文：郭仁遇来到高丽，发现它的兵力极为衰弱，以前袜所说的话，只是王建夸海口罢了，高丽实际不敢和契丹为敌。
English: Guo Ren happened to come to Koryo and found that its military strength was extremely weak. What Sock had said before was just Wang Jian's boast. Koryo actually did not dare to be enemies with Khitan.

古文：仁遇还，武更以它故为解。
现代文：郭仁遇返回，高丽王王武又以其他理由作解释。
English: When Guo Ren returned, Goryeo's Wang Wangwu gave another explanation.

古文：乙卯，吴越王弘佐诛内都监使杜昭达，己未，诛内牙上统军使明州刺史阚璠。
现代文：乙卯，吴越王钱弘佐诛杀内都监使杜昭达；己未，诛杀内牙上统军使、明州刺史阚。
English: Second, King Qian Hongzhao of Wuyue attacked and killed the Inner Capital Supervisor Du Zhaoda; third, he attacked and killed the Inner Capital Supervisor, Ming Zhi Shi.

古文：昭达，建徽之孙也，与璠皆好货。
现代文：杜昭达是杜建徽的孙子，和阚都贪财。
English: Du Zhaoda is the grandson of Du Jianhui, and both of them are greedy for money.

古文：钱塘富人程昭悦以货结二人，得侍弘佐左右。
现代文：钱塘的富人程昭悦用钱财与二人交结，于是得以在吴越王的身边侍奉。
English: Cheng Zhaoyue, a wealthy man from Qiantang, used his money to make a connection with the two men, and thus was able to serve at Wu Yue Wang's side.

古文：昭悦为人狡佞，王悦之，宠待逾于旧将，璠不能平。
现代文：程昭悦为人狡猾，善谄媚，吴越王喜欢他，对他的宠信厚待超过老将，阚对此愤然不平。
English: Cheng Zhaoyue was a cunning, good-natured and charming person. Wu Yue Wang liked him and treated him with more favor than a veteran. Yan was indignant about this.

古文：昭悦知之，诣璠顿首谢罪，璠责让久之，乃曰： 吾始者决欲杀汝，今既悔过，吾亦释然。 
现代文：程昭悦知道后，就去向阚磕头认错，阚责骂他很久，才说： 我在开始时决意要杀你；现在你已经悔过，我也就不放在心上啦。 
English: After Cheng Zhaoyue knew, she went to Shantou to admit her mistake, and scolded him for a long time before saying: I decided to kill you at the beginning; now that you have repented, I don't care.

古文：昭悦惧，谋去璠。
现代文：程昭悦害怕，谋划除掉阚。
English: Cheng Zhaoyue was afraid and planned to remove the mole.

古文：璠专而愎，国人恶之者众，王亦恶之。
现代文：阚为人专横跋扈、刚愎自用，国人憎恶他的很多。
English: He was a domineering, self-serving tyrant, and many Chinese people hated him.

古文：昭悦欲出璠于外，恐璠觉之，私谓右统军使胡进思曰： 今欲除公及璠各为本州，使璠不疑，可乎？ 
现代文：程昭悦想把阚打发出去作地方官，又怕他察觉，私下对右统军使胡进思说： 现在想任命你和阚各回家乡作官，使阚不生疑心，可以吧？ 
English: Cheng Zhaoyue wanted to send Zhai to be a local official, but fearing that he would notice, she privately said to Hu Jinshi, the envoy of the United Right Forces: Now I want to appoint you and Zhai to be officials in your hometowns, so that Zhai will not be suspicious, is that okay?

古文：进思许之，乃以璠为明州刺史，进思为湖州刺史。
现代文：胡进思同意了。于是任命阚为明州刺史，胡进思为湖州刺史。
English: Hu Jinshi agreed. Therefore, he appointed Zou as the governor of Mingzhou and Hu Jinshi as the governor of Huzhou.

古文：璠怒曰： 出我于外，是弃我也。 
现代文：阚大怒道： 迁我到外地作官，是舍弃我！ 
English: Gao Da Rude said, "Moving me to a foreign country to work as an official is abandoning me!

古文：进思曰： 老兵得大州，幸矣，不行何为！ 
现代文：胡进思劝他说： 老兵得个大州，也算幸运了，不去干什么呢！ 
English: Hu Jinshi advised him, "An old soldier is lucky to get a large state, so why not go for it!

古文：璠乃受命。
现代文：阚才接受了调命。
English: It was only then that Xing accepted the transfer.

古文：既而复以他故留进思。
现代文：不久，程昭悦又用其他理由把胡进思留在京城。
English: Soon after, Cheng Zhaoyue used other reasons to keep Hu Jinshi in Beijing.

古文：内外马步都统军使钱仁俊母，杜昭达之姑也。
现代文：内外马步都统军使钱仁俊的母亲，是杜昭达的姑母。
English: Du Zhaoda's aunt is the mother of Qian Renzhun, the leader of the unified Chinese army.

古文：昭悦因谮璠、昭达谋奉仁俊作乱，下狱锻炼成之。
现代文：程昭悦因而诬陷阚、杜昭达合谋拥奉钱仁俊共同叛乱，将他们抓到狱中罗织罪名而定罪。
English: As a result, Cheng Zhaoyue framed Yu and Du Zhaoda for conspiring to support Qian Renzhun in a joint rebellion, and they were arrested and convicted of conspiracy.

古文：璠、昭达既诛，夺仁俊官，幽于东府。
现代文：阚、杜昭达被杀后，又罢免了钱仁俊的官，并将他囚禁在东府。
English: After Gong and Du Zhaoda were killed, Qian Renjun's officials were dismissed and he was imprisoned in Dongfu.

古文：于是昭悦治阚、杜之党，凡权位与己侔，意所忌者，诛放百馀人，国人畏之侧目。
现代文：于是程昭悦大抓阚和杜昭达的党羽，凡是权力、官位和他相等的、他心里有所顾忌的，被杀、被流放有一百多人，国中人害怕他而不敢正视。
English: As a result, Cheng Zhaoyue and Du Zhaoda's followers were arrested en masse, and more than a hundred people were killed or exiled who had the same power and official position as him, and who had scruples in his heart. People in the country were afraid of him and dared not face him.

古文：胡进思重厚寡言，昭悦以为戆，故独存之。
现代文：胡思进厚道寡言，程昭悦认为他憨厚，所以只留下他。
English: Hu Sijin was kind and reticent, but Cheng Zhaoyue thought he was generous, so she left him alone.

古文：昭悦收仁俊故吏慎温其，使证仁俊之罪，拷掠备至。温其坚守不屈。弘佐嘉之，擢为国官。
现代文：程昭悦抓到钱仁俊原手下官吏慎温其，让他出具伪证证明钱仁俊的罪，百般拷打他；但是慎温其坚贞自守，毫不屈服；钱弘佐赞许他，提拔他为国家官员。
English: Cheng Zhaoyue caught Qian Renshun's former subordinate official Zhenwenqi, made him issue a false certificate to prove Qian Renshun's crime, and tortured him in various ways; but Zhenwenqi was steadfast and did not give in; Qian Hongza praised him and promoted him as a state official.

古文：温其，衢州人也。
现代文：慎温其是衢州人。
English: Shen Wen is from Zhangzhou.

古文：十二月，乙丑，加吴越王弘佐东南面兵马都元帅。
现代文：十二月，乙丑，后晋朝廷加任吴越王钱弘佐为东南面兵马都元帅。
English: In December, the Second Ugly Emperor of the Later Jin Dynasty appointed Wu Yue Wang Qian Hongsa as the Southeastern Terracotta Warriors and Horses Marshal.

古文：辛未，以前中书舍人广晋殷鹏为给事中、枢密直学士。
现代文：辛未，任命前中书舍人广晋人阴鹏为给事中、枢密直学士。
English: Xin Wei, appointed the former Zhongshuo scholar Guang Jin and Yin Peng as the present Zhongshuo, Privy Direct Bachelor.

古文：鹏，冯玉之党也；朝廷每有迁除，玉皆与鹏议之。由是请谒赂遗，充满其门。
现代文：阴鹏是冯玉的党羽，朝廷每当有官员任免升降，冯玉都和阴鹏商议，因此前去求见、进行贿赂的人挤满了家门。
English: Yin Peng was Feng Yu's henchman. Whenever there was an appointment or promotion of an official in the imperial court, Feng Yu would consult with Yin Peng. As a result, the house was crowded with people who came to meet and bribe.

古文：初，帝疾未平，会正旦，枢密使、中书令桑维翰遣女仆入宫起居太后，因问： 皇弟睿近读书否？ 
现代文：当初，后晋出帝的病情还未平复，恰值正月初一，早晨，枢密使、中书令桑维翰派女仆入宫向太后问安，便询问： 皇弟睿近来读书吗？ 
English: At the beginning, Emperor Go-Jin's illness had not yet been cured. It was the first day of the first month of the year. In the morning, the Privy Councilor and the Clerk of the Privy Council, San Weihan, sent a maid into the palace to greet the empress dowager, and then asked: Has Emperor Go-Jin come to study recently?

古文：帝闻之，以告冯玉，玉因谮维翰有废立之志。帝疑之。
现代文：出帝听到，告诉冯玉，冯玉于是诬陷桑维翰有废出帝、立石重睿的异志；出帝听后便对桑维翰产生怀疑。
English: When he heard about the Emperor's abdication, he told Feng Yu. Feng Yu then accused San Weihan of having the ambition of abolishing the Emperor's abdication and standing firm; after hearing about the Emperor's abdication, he had doubts about San Weihan.

古文：李守贞素恶维翰，冯玉、李彦韬与守贞合谋排之，以中书令行开封尹赵莹柔而易制，共荐以代维翰。
现代文：李守贞历来憎恶桑维翰，冯玉、李彦韬与李守贞合谋排挤桑维翰；因中书令代理开封府尹赵莹为人软弱易于控制，他们共同荐举他取代桑维翰。
English: Li Shouzhen has always hated Sang Weihang, and Feng Yu, Li Yanjun and Li Shouzhen conspired to oust Sang Weihang; because the agent of the Chinese edict to open the palace, Yin Zhao Ying, was weak and easy to control, they jointly recommended him to replace Sang Weihang.

古文：丁亥，罢维翰政事，为开封尹。以莹为中书令，李崧为枢密使、守侍中。
现代文：丁亥，罢免桑维翰朝中的职务，让他作开封尹；任命赵莹为中书令，李崧为枢密使兼侍中。
English: Ding Hai, dismissed Sang Weihan from the post of the middle of the dynasty, and let him be the first to open the seal; appointed Zhao Ying as the middle secretary, and Li Wei as the confidential envoy and chamberlain.

古文：维翰遂称足疾，希复朝谒，杜绝宾客。
现代文：桑维翰于是称脚有病，很少再入朝谒见，并谢绝宾客。
English: Sanveighan then said that he had a foot ailment and would rarely attend the hajj, and declined the invitation.

古文：或谓冯玉曰： 桑公元老，今既解其枢务，纵不留之相位，犹当优以大籓，奈何使之尹京，亲猥细之务乎？ 玉曰： 恐其反耳。 
现代文：有人对冯玉说： 桑公是开国元老，现在已经解除他枢密使的职务，纵然不能留在宰相的职位上，也应当优待他任大藩镇的长官，怎能用他作开封尹，亲自去干那些闲杂琐碎的事务呢？ 冯玉说： 怕他造反。 
English: Someone said to Feng Yu: "Mangong is the founding elder of the country, and now he has been relieved of his position as a confidential envoy. Even if he cannot remain in the position of prime minister, he should be treated favorably as the head of a large town. How can he be used as a kaifengyin and personally do those idle and trivial affairs?" Feng Yu said: "I'm afraid he will rebel."

古文：曰： 儒生安能反？ 
现代文：那人说道： 他一个读书的儒生怎能造反！ 
English: The man said: How can he, a Confucian scholar, rebel?

古文：玉曰： 纵不自反，恐其教人耳。 
现代文：冯玉说： 纵然他自己不出头造反，也怕他会教唆别人造反！ 
English: Feng Yu said: Even if he does not start a rebellion himself, I am afraid that he will incite others to rebel!

古文：楚湘阴处士戴偃，为诗多讥刺，楚王希范囚之。天策副都军使丁思瑾上书切谏，希范削其官爵。
现代文：楚国湘阴的隐士戴偃作诗多有讥讽朝廷的意思，楚王马希范把他囚禁起来；天策副都军使丁思瑾上书恳切劝谏，马希范却削除了他的官职爵位。
English: The hermit Dai Xuan of Xiangyin in the State of Chu wrote poems mostly with the intention of ridiculing the imperial court. King Ma Xifan of Chu imprisoned him; the deputy imperial envoy Ding Siyuan wrote to him to earnestly persuade him, but Ma Xifan stripped him of his official title.

古文：唐齐王景达府属谢仲宣言于景达曰： 宋齐丘，先帝布衣之交，今弃之草莱，不厌众心。 
现代文：南唐齐王李景达的府僚谢仲宣向李景达进言道： 宋齐丘是先帝贫微时的老朋友，现在被舍弃在山野，此事难服众心。 
English: Xie Zhongxuan, a government official of Li Jingda, the king of Southern Tang Qi, said to Li Jingda: Song Qiqiu was an old friend of the former emperor when he was poor, and now he is abandoned in the mountains, which is hard to believe.

古文：景达为之言于唐主曰： 齐丘宿望，勿用可也，何必弃之以为名！ 
现代文：李景达为此对南唐主李说： 宋齐丘是老成望重的人，不用他也便罢了，何必以舍弃而让他成名！ 
English: For this reason, Li Jingda said to the Lord of Southern Tang, Li Rong: Song Qiqiu is a man who has been respected for a long time. He does not have to do it, why should he give up and let him become famous!

古文：唐主乃使景达自至青阳召之。
现代文：南唐主于是让李景达亲自到青阳召他。
English: The Lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty then asked Li Jingda to personally go to Qingyang to summon him.

古文：齐王下开运三年
现代文：三年
English: Three years

古文：春，正月，以齐丘为太傅兼中书令，但奉朝请，不预政事。
现代文：春季，正月，南唐主任命宋齐丘为太傅兼中书令，但只奉朝会请召，并不参预政务大事。
English: In the spring, in the first month of the year, the Lord of Southern Tang appointed Song Qiqiu as Taifu and Chushu Rong, but he was only invited by the imperial court and did not participate in the pre-government affairs.

古文：以昭武节度使李建勋为右仆射兼门下侍郎，与中书侍郎冯延己皆同平章事。
现代文：任命昭武节度使李建勋为右仆射兼门下侍郎，与中书侍郎冯延己都为同平章事。
English: The appointment of Shouwu Jiedu made Li Jianxun the right-hand man of Shao and the footman, and Feng Yanji, the footman of Zhongshu, was the same rank.

古文：建勋练习吏事，而懦怯少断。延己工文辞，而狡佞，喜大言，多树朋党。
现代文：李建勋练达谙习官吏事务，但为人懦弱胆小，缺乏决断；冯延己擅长文章辞藻，但为人狡猾，善于谄媚，喜欢说大话，多结纳党羽。
English: Li Jianxun is good at handling official affairs, but he is weak and timid and lacks determination; Feng Yan is good at writing and speaking, but he is cunning, good at flattery, likes to talk big, and accepts more party feathers.

古文：水部郎中高越，上书指延己兄弟过恶，唐主怒，贬越蕲州司士。
现代文：水部郎中高越上书指责冯延己兄弟作恶多端。南唐主发怒，贬谪高越为蕲州司士。
English: Gao Yue, a retainer of the Ministry of Water Resources, wrote a letter accusing Feng Yan's brother of many evil deeds. The Lord of Southern Tang got angry and demoted Gao Yue to the position of the secretary of Zhangzhou.

古文：初，唐主置宣政院于禁中，以翰林学士、给事中常梦锡领之，专典机密，与中书侍郎严续皆忠直无私。
现代文：当初，南唐主在宫禁中设置了宣政院，任命翰林学士、给事中常梦锡主管，专处理国家机要事务，他和中书侍郎严续，都是忠诚正直无私的大臣。
English: At the beginning, the Lord of Southern Tang Dynasty set up the Xuanzheng Academy during the palace ban, and appointed Hanlin Bao, and Zhaozhong Changmenxi as the director to deal with the important affairs of the state. He and Zhongshu Jirong were both loyal, honest and selfless ministers.

古文：唐主谓梦锡曰： 大臣惟严续中立，然无才，恐不胜其党，卿宜左右之。 
现代文：南唐主曾对常梦锡说： 大臣里只有严续保持中立，但是缺乏才能，怕不能抵住朝中的朋党，爱卿应从旁帮助他。 
English: The Lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty once said to Chang Mengxi, "A minister only needs to strictly maintain neutrality, but he lacks talent. If he can't stand up to the party cronies in the central government, Ai Qing should help him from the side."

古文：未几，梦锡罢宣政院，续亦出为池州观察使。
现代文：不久，常梦锡被罢免了宣政院的职务，严续也被放到外地作了池州观察使。
English: Soon after, Chang Mengxi was removed from his post at the Xuan Zheng Yuan, and was also sent abroad to serve as a Chizhou observation envoy.

古文：梦锡于是移疾纵酒，不复预朝廷事。
现代文：常梦锡于是上书称病，日日在家饮酒，不再参预朝廷的事。
English: Chang Mengxi then wrote a letter saying that he was ill, drank alcohol at home every day, and would no longer attend the imperial court.

古文：续，可求之子也。
现代文：严续是严可求的儿子。
English: Yan Zheng is the son that Yan can ask for.

古文：二月，壬戌朔，日有食之。
现代文：二月，壬戌朔，出现日食。
English: In February, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：晋昌节度使兼侍中赵在礼，更历十镇，所至贪暴，家赀为诸帅之最。
现代文：晋昌节度使兼侍中赵在礼，曾历任十个藩镇的节度使，所到之处贪婪残暴，所积家财在各镇将帅中是最多的。
English: Zhao Zaili, Jinchang's ceremonial envoy and aide-de-camp, had served as the ceremonial envoy of ten towns in succession. Wherever he went, he was greedy and cruel, and his accumulated family wealth was the largest among the town generals.

古文：帝利其富，三月，庚申，为皇子镇宁节度使延煦娶其女。
现代文：后晋出帝图他的富有，三月，庚申，为皇子镇宁节度使石延煦娶他的女儿。
English: After he was promoted to emperor, he became rich, and in March, Goshun, for the prince Zhening's festival, made Shi Yanxuan marry his daughter.

古文：在礼自费缗钱十万，县官之费，数倍过之。
现代文：为办此事，赵在礼自己花费了十万缗钱财，而官府花费多出好几倍。
English: In order to do this, Zhao Zaili spent 100,000 baht of his own money, while the government spent several times more.

古文：延煦及弟延宝，皆高祖诸孙，帝养以为子。
现代文：石延煦和弟弟石延宝，都是后晋高祖石敬瑭的孙子，后晋出帝收为自己的养子。
English: Shi Yanjun and his brother, Shi Yanbao, were both the grandchildren of the founder of the Later Jin Dynasty, Shi Jingjun, and were adopted by the Later Jin Dynasty.

古文：唐泉州刺史王继勋致书修好于威武节度使李弘义。
现代文：南唐泉州刺史王继勋写信给威武节度使李弘义，愿两相修好。
English: Wang Jixun, the governor of Quanzhou in southern Tang Dynasty, wrote to Li Hongyi, the military governor of Weiwu, to mend fences.

古文：弘义以泉州故隶威武军，怒其抗礼。
现代文：李弘义认为泉州原隶属于威武军，因王继勋致信用对等礼仪而大怒。
English: Li Hongyi thought that Quanzhou was originally affiliated with the Weiwu army, and was furious because Wang Jixun did not honor the reciprocal etiquette.

古文：夏，四月，遣弟弘通将兵万人伐之。
现代文：夏季，四月，派弟弟李弘通率兵一万人前去讨伐。
English: In the summer, in April, he sent his younger brother, Li Hongtong, to lead ten thousand soldiers to the crusade.

古文：初，朔方节度使冯晖在灵州，留党项酋长拓跋彦超于州下，故诸部不敢为寇，及将罢镇而纵之。
现代文：当初，朔方节度使冯晖驻扎在灵州，并将党项酋长拓跋彦超扣留在州里，所以各部落不敢前来侵掠，到冯晖将离任时，就把拓跋彦超释放了。
English: At first, the Shuo faction stationed Feng Yu in Lingzhou, and detained the party chief Tuoba Yanchao in the state, so the tribes did not dare to invade and plunder. When Feng Yu was about to leave office, he released Tuoba Yanchao.

古文：前彰武节度使王令温代晖镇朔方，不存抚羌、胡，以中国法绳之。羌、胡怨怒，皆叛，竞为寇钞。
现代文：前彰武节度使王令温取代冯晖来镇守朔方，他不去安抚羌人、胡人，却用中原的法度来处置他们，羌人、胡人都颇为怨恨愤怒，争相侵犯抄掠。
English: The former Zhangwu festival made Wang Lingwen replace Feng Qian to guard the Shuo side. He did not appease the Xiong people and Hu people, but used the laws of the Central Plains to deal with them. The Xiong people and Hu people were quite resentful and angry, competing to encroach and plunder.

古文：拓跋彦超、石存、也厮褒三族，共攻灵州，杀令温弟令周。
现代文：拓跋彦超、石存、也厮褒三个部族联合进攻灵州，杀死王令温的弟弟王令周。
English: The three tribes of Tuoba Yanchao, Shi Cun and Ya Ya Bo jointly attacked Lingshou, killing Wang Lingwen's younger brother Wang Lingzhou.

古文：戊午，令温上表告急。
现代文：戊午，王令温向朝廷奉上表章告急。
English: In the afternoon, Wang Lingwen sent an urgent appeal to the imperial court.

古文：泉州都都挥使留从效谓刺史王继勋曰： 李弘通兵势甚盛，士卒以使君赏罚不当，莫肯力战，使君宜避位自省。 
现代文：泉州都指挥使留从效对刺史王继勋说： 李弘通的军队来势很猛，而我们的士兵因您赏罚不公，没有肯卖力作战的，您应该自己引退反省！ 
English: Wang Jixun, the commander of Quanzhou, said to the assassin Shi Wang Jixun: Li Hongtong's army is very strong, and our soldiers are not willing to fight hard because of your unfair rewards and punishments. You should retire and reflect on yourself!

古文：乃废继勋归私第，代领军府事，勒兵击李弘通，大破之。
现代文：于是王继勋被废黜回归家中。留从效代理军府事务，组织军队抗击李弘通，大败敌人。
English: As a result, Wang Jixun was deposed and returned home. He remained as an agent of the military affairs, organized the army to fight against Li Hongtong, and defeated the enemy.

古文：表闻于唐，唐主以从效为泉州刺史，召继勋还金陵，遣将将兵戍泉州。
现代文：上表向南唐朝廷报捷，南唐主任命留从效为泉州刺史，将王继勋召回金陵，另选派将领率兵前去驻守泉州。
English: The table above reported the victory to the Southern Tang Dynasty. The Lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty appointed Wang Jixun as the governor of Quanzhou, recalled Wang Jixun to Jinling, and sent other generals and soldiers to garrison Quanzhou.

古文：徙漳州刺史王继成为和州刺史，汀州刺史许文稹为蕲州刺史。
现代文：调漳州刺史王继成为和州刺史，调汀州刺史许文稹为蕲州刺史。
English: The king of Jingzhou embroidery became the prince of Hezhou embroidery, and the prince of Dingzhou embroidery, Xu Wenjun, became the prince of Jingzhou embroidery.

古文：定州西北二百里有狼山，土人筑堡于山上以避胡寇。
现代文：在定州西北二百里处有座狼山，当地人在山上筑起城堡来躲避胡人的抄掠。
English: Two hundred miles northwest of Dingzhou is Wolf Mountain, where locals built a castle to hide from the Hu people's pillaging.

古文：堡中有佛舍，尼孙深意居之，以妖术惑众，言事颇验，远近信奉之。
现代文：城堡中有佛舍，尼姑孙深意住在里面，用妖诡法术蛊惑众人，预言事情很灵验，远近村民都很信奉她。
English: There is a Buddhist temple in the castle, and the nun, Sun, is determined to live there. She uses witchcraft and magic to bewitch people, and her prophecies are very effective. Villagers near and far believe in her.

古文：中山人孙方简及弟行友，自言深意之侄，不饮酒食肉，事深意甚谨。
现代文：中山人孙方简和弟弟孙行友，自称是孙深意的侄子，不饮酒吃肉，侍奉孙深意很恭谨。
English: Sun Fangjian and his brother Sun Xingyou, who are from Zhongshan, claim to be Sun Shengxin's nephews. They do not drink alcohol or eat meat, and they are very respectful when serving Sun Shengxin.

古文：深意卒，方简嗣行其术，称深意坐化，严饰，事之如生，其徒日兹。
现代文：孙深意死后，孙方简就接着用她的法术，称孙深意是坐化了，将尸体装扮修饰，像在世的时候一样侍奉她。
English: After Sun Shengyi's death, Sun Fangjian continued to use her magic, saying that Sun Shengyi had passed away, dressing up the corpse, and serving her as she did when she was alive.

古文：会晋与契丹绝好，北边赋役烦重，寇盗充斥，民不安其业。
现代文：孙方简的门徒日渐增多。正赶上后晋和契丹绝交，北部边境地区赋役繁多沉重，盗贼遍地丛生，百姓不能安居乐业。
English: The number of disciples of Sun Fangyan is increasing day by day. It is catching up with the end of diplomatic relations between Hojin and Khitan, the northern border areas are heavily fortified, thieves are everywhere, and the people cannot live and work in peace.

古文：方简、行友因帅乡里豪健者，据寺为寨以自保。
现代文：孙方简、孙行友于是率领当地百姓中强健好斗的把寺庙作为兵寨来保护自己。
English: Sun Fangjian and Sun Xingyou then led the local people to use the temple as a fortress to protect themselves.

古文：契丹入寇，方简帅众邀击，颇获其甲兵、牛马、军资，人挈家往依之者益众。
现代文：契丹入侵时，孙方简率领大家迎击，缴获了许多兵器铠甲、牛马等军用物资，人们携家带口前往依附的日益众多。
English: When the Khitan invaded, Sun Fangjian led everyone to counterattack and captured many weapons, armor, horses and other military supplies. There are an increasing number of people taking their families with them.

古文：久之，至千馀家，遂为群盗。
现代文：时间久了，达到一千多家，于是成为了群盗。
English: After a long time, it reached more than a thousand, so it became a group of thieves.

古文：惧为吏所讨，乃归款朝廷。
现代文：因为惧怕官吏征讨，便归顺朝廷。
English: Because they were afraid of being investigated by officials, they submitted to the imperial court.

古文：朝廷亦资其御寇，署东北招收指挥使。
现代文：朝廷也借他们来抵御契丹的入侵，就命其代理东北招收指挥使。
English: The imperial court also borrowed them to resist the invasion of the Khitan, and ordered their agents to recruit commanders in the northeast.

古文：方简时入契丹境钞掠，多所杀获。
现代文：孙方简有时进入契丹境内抄掠，多有斩杀缴获。
English: Sun Fangyan sometimes entered the territory of Khitan to plunder, and many were killed and captured.

古文：既而邀求不已，朝廷小不副其意，则举寨降于契丹，请为乡道以入寇。
现代文：不久向朝廷邀功请赏不止，朝廷稍不如他们的意，他就率全寨投降契丹，并请求作契丹人的向导，深入内地抢掠。
English: Soon he was asking the court for more and more favors, but the court was a little less than they wanted, so he led the whole village to surrender to the Khitan, and asked to be the Khitan's guide, to plunder deep into the interior.

古文：时河北大饥，民饿死者所在以万数，兗、郓、沧、贝之间，盗贼峰起，吏不能禁。
现代文：当时正值河北荒年，百姓饿死的数以万计，兖、郓、沧、贝四州之间，盗贼蜂起，官吏不能禁止。
English: At that time, Hebei was in the midst of a famine. Tens of thousands of people died of starvation. Thieves rose up in the four prefectures of Handan, Handan, Cang and Beizhou. Officials could not stop them.

古文：天雄节度使杜威遣元随军将刘延翰市马于边，方简执之，献于契丹。
现代文：天雄节度使杜威派元随军将领刘延翰到边境一带买马，孙方简抓住他，献给契丹。
English: The festival of Tianxiong made Dewey send Liu Yanhan, a general of Yuan's army, to the border area to buy a horse. Sun Fangyan caught him and dedicated him to Khitan.

古文：延翰逃归，六月，壬戌，至大梁，言 方简欲乘中国凶饥，引契丹入寇，宜为之备。 
现代文：刘延翰逃跑回来，六月壬戌，到达大梁，说： 孙方简想乘中国的大饥荒，勾引契丹人入侵，应该为此作好准备。 
English: Liu Yanhan returned from his escape and arrived in Dalian in June. He said, "Sun Fangyan wants to take advantage of China's great famine to lure the Khitans to invade. We should be prepared for this.

古文：初，朔方节度使冯晖在灵武，得羌、胡心，市马期年，至五千匹，朝廷忌之，徙镇邠州及陕州，入为侍卫步军都指挥使、领河阳节度使。
现代文：当初，朔方节度使冯晖在灵武时，深得羌、胡部族的人心，一年之内作马匹交易，得马五千匹，朝廷对他有顾忌，调他镇守州及陕州，又调入朝中为侍卫步军都指挥使、兼领河阳节度使。
English: At the beginning, Shuo Fang, the military commander of the Qing Dynasty, made Feng Xuan win the hearts and minds of the Wu and Hu tribes when he was in Lingwu. Within a year, he made horse trading and won five thousand horses. The imperial court had misgivings about him and transferred him to Zhouzhou and Shaanxi. He was also transferred to the central government as the commander of the bodyguards and foot soldiers and the leader of the Heyang Military Commander.

古文：晖知朝廷之意，悔离灵武，乃厚事冯玉、李彦韬，求复镇灵州。
现代文：冯晖得知朝廷的用意，后悔离开灵武，于是就殷勤侍奉冯玉、李彦韬，请求再镇守灵州。
English: Feng Yu learned of the intention of the imperial court and regretted leaving Lingwu, so he diligently served Feng Yu and Li Yanjun, and requested to stay in Lingshou again.

古文：朝廷亦以羌、胡方扰，丙寅，复以晖为朔方节度使，将关西兵击羌、胡；以威州刺史药元福为行营马步军都指挥使。
现代文：朝廷也以羌、胡部族正骚扰边境，丙寅再任冯晖为朔方节度使，率领关西兵马攻击羌、胡军队；任命威州刺史药元福为行营马步军都指挥使。
English: The imperial court also pointed out that the Yan and Hu clans were harassing the border, and He Yin re-appointed Feng Qi as the envoy of the Shuo side, and led the Kansai soldiers and horses to attack the Yan and Hu armies; and appointed Wei Zhou's Zhishi Yue Yuanfu as the commander of the marching horse army.

古文：乙丑，定州言契丹勒兵压境。
现代文：乙丑，定州上报朝廷说契丹调遣军队，进逼边境。
English: Second, Dingzhou reported to the imperial court that Khitan dispatched troops to force the border.

古文：诏以天平节度使、侍卫马步都指挥使李守贞为北面行营都部署，义成节度使皇甫遇副之；彰德节度使张彦泽充马军都指挥使兼都虞候，义武节度使蓟人李殷充步军都指挥使兼都排阵使；遣护圣指挥使临清王彦超、太原白延遇以部兵十营诣邢州。
现代文：后晋出帝下诏书，任命天平节度使、侍卫马步都指挥使李守贞为北面行营都部署，义成节度使皇甫遇任副职；彰德节度使张彦泽充马军都指挥使兼都虞候，义武节度使蓟人李殷充任步军都指挥使兼都排阵使；派护圣指挥使临清人王彦超、太原人白延遇率领部兵十营前往邢州。
English: Later, Emperor Jin issued an imperial edict, appointing Tianping to be the commander of the festival, Li Shuzhen to be the commander of the guards and horses, and Li Shuzhen to be the commander of the northern camp, Yicheng to be the deputy commander of the festival, Zhang Yanze to be the commander of the equestrian army and the commander of the capital city, Yiwu to be the commander of the marching army and the commander of the city line, and Linqing to be the commander of the holy guard, Wang Yanchao and Taiyuan to be the commander of the holy guard, and Bai Yanyu to lead ten battalions to Luzhou.

古文：时马军都指挥使、镇安节度使李彦韬方用事，视守贞蔑如也。
现代文：当时，马军都指挥使、镇安节度使李彦韬正执掌权柄，看不起李守贞。
English: At that time, Li Yanxuan was in charge of commanding and dispatching the horse army and enforcing peace and stability, and he looked down on Li Shouzhen.

古文：守贞在外所为，事无大小，彦韬必知之，守贞外虽敬奉而内恨之。
现代文：李守贞在外地的所作所为，无论事情大小，李彦韬都一定知道，李守贞表面虽然尊奉他，但心内很恨他。
English: No matter what Li Shouzhen did in the field, no matter how big or small it was, Li Yanqi must have known that although Li Shouzhen respected him on the surface, he hated him in his heart.

古文：初，唐人既克建州，欲乘胜取福州，唐主不许。
现代文：当初，南唐人攻克建州后，打算乘胜夺取福州，但南唐主不允许。
English: At first, after conquering Jianzhou, the Southern Tang planned to take advantage of the victory to seize Fuzhou, but the Lord of Southern Tang did not allow it.

古文：枢密使陈觉请自往说李弘义，必令入朝。
现代文：枢密使陈觉请求亲自去说服李弘义，一定让他入朝称臣。
English: The confidential envoy asked Chen Jue to personally persuade Li Hongyi to let him enter the court as a courtier.

古文：宋齐丘荐觉才辩，可不烦寸刃，坐致弘义。
现代文：宋齐丘也推荐陈觉口才的雄辩，可以不用刀枪就使李弘义前来归降。
English: Song Qiqiu also recommended the eloquence of Chen Jue's eloquence, which could make Li Hongyi come and surrender without using a knife or gun.

古文：唐主乃拜弘义母、妻皆为国夫人，四弟皆迁官，以觉为福州宣谕使，厚赐弘义金帛。
现代文：南唐主于是封李弘义的母亲、妻子都为国夫人，四个弟弟都升官，派陈觉为福州宣谕使，赏赐李弘义丰厚的金银财物。
English: The Lord of Southern Tang then appointed Li Hongyi's mother and wife as Empresses of the State, promoted his four younger brothers, appointed Chen Jue as the envoy to Fuzhou, and rewarded Li Hongyi with rich gold, silver, and property.

古文：弘义知其谋，见觉，辞色甚倨，待之疏薄。觉不敢言入朝事而还。
现代文：李弘义明白他们的计谋，接见陈觉时，说话、脸色非常傲慢，给他以冷遇，陈觉没敢提入朝归降的事就返回了。
English: Li Hongyi understood their stratagem. When he met Chen Jue, he spoke and looked very arrogant, giving him a cold reception. Chen Jue did not dare to bring up the issue of returning to the North and returned.

古文：秋，七月，河决杨刘，西入莘县，广四十里，自朝城北流。
现代文：秋季，七月，黄河在杨刘决口，向西流入莘县，大水漫漫有四十里宽，从朝城向北流去。
English: In autumn, in July, the Yellow River flows westward into Min County at the Yang Liu Junction. The river is forty miles wide and flows northward from Chaocheng.

古文：有自幽州来者，言赵延寿有意归国。枢密使李崧、冯玉信之，命天雄节度使杜威致书于延寿，具述朝旨，啖以厚利，洛州军将赵行实尝事延寿，遣赍书潜往遗之。
现代文：有从幽州来的人，说赵延寿有意归顺国家，枢密使李崧、冯玉相信了，命令天雄节度使杜威给赵延寿写信，把朝廷的意思讲清楚，用丰厚的财利来引诱。洛州将领赵行实曾在赵延寿手下作过事，派他带上书信偷偷送到幽州去。
English: Some people who came from Yuzhou said that Zhao Yanshou intended to submit to the state, and the confidential envoys Li Yan and Feng Yu believed it. They ordered the Heavenly King Jiedu to make Dewey write to Zhao Yanshou, explain the meaning of the court clearly, and lure him with rich profits. The Loshou general Zhao Xingshi had worked under Zhao Yanshou and sent him to Yuzhou secretly with a letter.

古文：延寿复书言： 久处异域，思归中国。
现代文：赵延寿回信说： 久在异国他乡，很想回中原。
English: Zhao Yanshou wrote back: I have been in a foreign country for a long time, and I really want to go back to the Central Plains.

古文：乞发大军应接，拔身南去。 
现代文：恳求韩廷发大军接应，我将脱身南下。 
English: I implore Han Ting to send a large army to meet me, and I will escape to the south.

古文：辞旨恳密。
现代文：词意恳切真挚。
English: The meaning of the word is earnest and sincere.

古文：朝廷欣然，复遣行实诣延寿，与为期约。
现代文：朝廷很高兴，又派赵行实前去会见赵延寿，与他约定日期。
English: The imperial court was pleased and sent Zhao Xingshi to meet with Zhao Yanshou to set a date.

古文：八月，李守贞言： 与契丹千馀骑遇于长城北，转斗四十里，斩其酋帅解里，拥馀众入水溺死者甚众。 
现代文：八月，李守贞上报： 与契丹一千多骑兵在长城北面相遇，辗转追杀搏斗了四十里，斩杀了他们的首领解里，把其它敌人赶入水中，淹死了很多。 
English: In August, Li Shouzhen reported: I met with more than a thousand cavalrymen of the Khitan on the north side of the Great Wall, chased and fought for forty miles, killed their leader Ge Li, drove other enemies into the water, and drowned many.

古文：丁卯，诏李守贞还屯澶州。
现代文：丁卯，诏命李守贞回兵，驻守澶州。
English: Dingwu issued an imperial edict ordering Li Shouzhen to return to the army and garrison Zhangzhou.

古文：帝既与契丹绝好，数召吐谷浑酋长白承福入朝，宴赐甚厚。
现代文：后晋出帝与契丹绝交后，屡次召吐谷浑的酋长白承福进京入朝，宴会隆重，赏赐丰厚。
English: After the Emperor Jinnu and Khitan cut off diplomatic relations, he repeatedly invited the chief of Tukuhun, Bai Chengfu, to enter Beijing and the imperial court. The banquet was grand and the reward was rich.

古文：承福从帝与契丹战澶州，又与张从恩戍滑州。
现代文：白承福跟随出帝，与契丹在澶州作战，又和张从恩共同守卫滑州。
English: Bai Chengfu followed the emperor, fought against the Khitan in Zhangzhou, and together with Zhang Congun guarded the city of Nanzhou.

古文：属岁大热，遣其部落还太原，畜牧于岚、石之境。
现代文：适值天气酷热，白承福遣送他的部落回到太原，把牲畜放牧在岚、石二州境内。
English: When the weather was extremely hot, Bai Chengfu sent his tribe back to Taiyuan to graze their livestock on the territory of Shandong and Shijiazhuang.

古文：部落多犯法，刘知远无所纵舍。部落知朝廷微弱，且畏知远之严，谋相与遁归故地。
现代文：部落的人经常犯法，刘知远决不放纵；部落知道朝廷衰微，又因害怕刘知远执法的严厉，谋划一起跑回原来的地方。
English: Tribal people often break the law, but Liu Zhiyuan never indulges them; the tribe knows that the imperial court is declining, and because they are afraid of Liu Zhiyuan's strict enforcement of the law, they plan to run back to the original place together.

古文：有白可久者，位亚承福，帅所部先亡归契丹，契丹用为云州观察使，以诱承福。
现代文：有个叫白可久的，地位仅次于白承福，率领自己的队伍最先逃跑，归降了契丹，契丹任命为云州观察使，用此来引诱白承福投降。
English: There was a man named Bai Keguang, whose position was second only to Bai Chengfu, who led his team to be the first to escape and surrender to Khitan. Khitan was appointed as the observation envoy of Yunnan, and used this to lure Bai Chengfu to surrender.

古文：知远与郭威谋曰： 今天下多事，置此属于太原，乃腹心之疾也，不如去之。 
现代文：刘知远和郭威谋划道： 现在天下多事，把吐谷浑部落安置在太原，是心腹之患，不如把它除掉。 
English: Liu Zhiyuan and Guo Wei made a plan: There are many things going on in the world right now, and placing the Tuyuhun tribe in Taiyuan is a headache for them, so it's better to get rid of it.

古文：承福家甚富，饲马用银槽。威劝知远诛之，收其货以赡军。
现代文：白承福家里很富，喂马都用银食槽，郭威劝说刘知远杀死他，没收他的财产用来养军队。
English: Bai Chengfu's family was very rich, and they used a silver trough to feed their horses. Guo Wei persuaded Liu Zhiyuan to kill him and confiscate his property to raise an army.

古文：知远密表： 吐谷浑反覆难保，请迁于内地。 
现代文：刘知远送上密表，称 吐谷浑反覆无常难以担保，请把他们迁往内地。 
English: Liu Zhiyuan sent a confidential form, saying that it was difficult to guarantee the stability of the Tugu River, so please move them to the mainland.

古文：帝遣使发其部落千九百人，分置河阳及诸州。
现代文：后晋出帝派使者将其部落一千九百人分别安置在河阳和其它各州。
English: Later, Emperor Jin dispatched emissaries to resettle the 1,900 members of his tribe in Hayao and other prefectures.

古文：知远遣威诱承福等入居太原城中，因诬承福等五族谋叛，以兵围而杀之，合四百口，籍没其家赀。
现代文：刘知远又让郭威引诱白承福等人住到太原城里，乘机诬陷白承福等五个部族聚谋反叛，用兵包围并杀死了他们四百人，抄没了白承福等的家财。
English: Liu Zhiyuan also let Guo Wei lure Bai Chengfu and others to live in Taiyuan City, took the opportunity to frame Bai Chengfu and other five tribes for plotting a rebellion, surrounded them with soldiers and killed four hundred of them, and confiscated Bai Chengfu's and others' family wealth.

古文：诏褒赏之，吐谷浑由是遂微。
现代文：后晋出帝下诏表彰奖赏他们。吐谷浑部落从此衰微了。
English: Later, Emperor Jinzhi issued an imperial edict to commend and reward them. From then on, the Tugu Hun tribe declined.

古文：濮州刺史慕容彦超坐违法科敛，擅取官麦五百斛造麹，赋与部民。
现代文：濮州刺史慕容彦超因违法征收赋税，擅自取官仓的麦子五百斛造酒，分给部民而犯罪。
English: Murong Yanchao, the governor of Zhangzhou, was convicted of illegally collecting taxes and illegally taking 500 bushels of wheat from the official storehouse to make liquor and distributing it to his subordinates.

古文：李彦韬素与彦超有隙，发其事，罪应死。
现代文：李彦韬历来与慕容彦超有仇隙，揭发了这件事，按罪应斩首。
English: Li Yanqi has always had a grudge against Murong Yanyu, and he exposed the affair. He should be beheaded for his crime.

古文：彦韬趣冯玉使杀之，刘知远上表论救。
现代文：李彦韬催促冯玉杀掉他，刘知远向朝廷上表章辩论营救。
English: Li Yanxuan urged Feng Yu to kill him, and Liu Zhiyuan went to the imperial court to argue for rescue.

古文：李崧曰： 如彦超之罪，今天下籓侯皆有之。若尽其法，恐人人不自安。 
现代文：李崧说： 像慕容彦超的罪，现在各地的藩镇将帅都有，如果都按法处置，怕人人不能安心。 
English: Li Wei said: Like Murong Yanchao's crime, now there are lords and generals all over the country. If they are all dealt with according to the law, I am afraid that everyone will not be at ease.

古文：甲戌，敕免彦超死，削官爵，流房州。
现代文：甲戌，敕免了慕容彦超的死罪，削去他的官职爵位，流放到房州。
English: Armor-plated shields spared Murong Yanchao the death penalty, stripped him of his official title and rank, and exiled him to Fangzhou.

古文：唐陈诲自福州还，至剑州，耻无功，矫诏使侍卫官顾忠召弘义入朝，自称权福州军府事，擅发汀、建、抚、信州兵及戍卒，命建州监军使冯延鲁将之，趣福州迎弘义。
现代文：南唐陈觉从福州返还，到达剑州，他耻于此行未能立功，就假传圣旨，让侍卫官顾忠召李弘义入朝。自称代理福州军府事务，擅自调派汀、建、抚、信四州的军队和守边的士兵，命建州监军使冯延鲁率领，赶赴福州迎接李弘义。
English: The Southern Tang Emperor Chen Jue returned from Fuzhou and arrived in Jianzhou. He was ashamed of not being able to make a contribution on this trip, so he falsely transmitted a sacred edict and asked the bodyguard officer Gu Zhong to summon Li Hongyi to the imperial court. He claimed to be an agent of the Fuzhou Military Government, and without authorization transferred the troops and border-guarding soldiers of the four states of Ting, Jian, Fuzhou and Xinjiang, and ordered Feng Yanlu, the military inspector of Jianzhou, to rush to Fuzhou to meet Li Hongyi.

古文：延鲁先遗弘义书，谕以祸福。
现代文：冯延鲁先给李弘义写了信，说明祸福。
English: Feng Yanlu first wrote a letter to Li Hongyi, explaining the misfortune and good fortune.

古文：弘义复书请战，遣楼船指挥使杨崇保将州师拒之。
现代文：李弘义回信请战，派楼船指挥使杨崇保率州中军队抵御。
English: Li Hongyi replied to the letter with a request for battle, and sent the commander of the mansion ship to make Yang Chongbo lead the middle-level troops in the state to resist.

古文：觉以剑州刺史陈诲为缘江战棹指挥使，表： 福州孤危，旦夕可克。 
现代文：陈觉命剑州刺史陈诲为缘江战棹指挥使，并向朝廷上表： 福州孤立危难，早晚就能攻克。 
English: Chen Jue ordered Jianzhou to assassinate Chen Yu as the commander of the battle of the Yangtze River, and told the imperial court: Fuzhou is isolated and in danger, and will be conquered sooner or later.

古文：唐主以觉专命，甚怒，群臣多言： 兵已傅城下，不可中止，当发兵助之。 
现代文：南唐主因陈觉专命独断，非常愤怒；群臣多说： 军队现在已然分布在福州城下，不能中止，应当发兵助攻。
English: The lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty was very angry because of Chen Jue's arbitrary decision; many courtiers said: The army is already distributed under Fuzhou Castle, it cannot be stopped, and troops should be sent to assist the attack.

古文：丁丑，觉、延鲁败杨崇保于候官，戊寅，乘胜进攻福州西关。
现代文：丁丑，陈觉、冯延鲁在候官打败了杨崇保的军队。戊寅，南唐军队乘胜进攻福州西关。
English: Ding Gou, Chen Jue, and Feng Yanlu defeated Yang Chongbao's army at the candidate. Wu Yin, the South Tang army took advantage of the victory to attack Fuzhou Xiguan.

古文：弘义出击，大破之，执唐左神威指挥使杨匡鄴。
现代文：李弘义出击，大败南唐军，抓获南唐左神威指挥使杨匡邺。
English: Li Hongyi attacked, defeated the Southern Tang Army, and captured Yang Kuangyao, the commander of the Southern Tang Army.

古文：唐主以永安节度使王崇文为东南面都招讨使，以漳泉安抚使、谏议大夫魏岑为东面监军使，延鲁为南面监军使，会兵攻福州，克其外郭。
现代文：南唐主命永安节度使王崇文为东南面都招讨使，命漳泉安抚使、谏议大夫魏岑为东面监军使，冯延鲁为南面监军使，合兵进攻福州，攻克福州的外城。
English: The Southern Tang Dynasty ordered Wang Chongwen to invite envoys from all over the southeast for the Yong'an Festival, and ordered Quanquan to pacify the envoys, Wei Wei as the envoy for the east, and Feng Yanlu as the envoy for the south, to attack Fuzhou and conquer the outer city of Fuzhou.

古文：弘义固守第二城。
现代文：李弘义固守第二道城墙。
English: Li Hongyi held fast to the second wall.

古文：冯晖引兵过旱海，至辉德，糗粮已尽。
现代文：冯晖率兵经过旱海，到达辉德，干粮已尽。
English: Feng Xuan led his soldiers across the dry sea to Huide. The dry grain was exhausted.

古文：拓跋彦超众数万，为三陈，扼要路，据水泉以待之。
现代文：拓跋彦超几万军队列为三个阵，扼守要路，控制水源，严阵以待。
English: Tuoba Yan led more than tens of thousands of troops into three lines, guarding key roads, controlling water sources, and preparing for battle.

古文：军中大惧。
现代文：冯晖军队大为恐慌。
English: Feng Xuan's army panicked.

古文：晖以赂求和于彦超，彦超许之。
现代文：冯晖给拓跋彦超贿赂以求和，拓跋彦超同意。
English: Feng Jun bribed Tuoba to make peace, and Tuoba agreed.

古文：自旦至日中，使者往返数四，兵未解。
现代文：但从早晨到中午，使者往返了多次，对方军队还没有撤退。
English: But from morning to noon, the envoys went back and forth several times, and the opposing army had not yet withdrawn.

古文：药元福曰： 虏知我饥渴，阳许和以困我耳；若至暮，则吾辈成擒矣。
现代文：药元福对冯晖说： 敌人知道我们又饿又渴，假装允和，以此困住我们。如果到了傍晚，那我们就被活捉了。
English: "The enemy knows that we are hungry and thirsty, so they trap us by pretending to be friendly. If it gets to evening, then we will be captured alive," said Yu Yuanfu to Feng Xuan.

古文：今虏虽众，精兵不多，依西山而陈者是也。
现代文：现在敌人虽然多，但精兵并不多，仅是靠西山布阵而已。
English: Now, although there are many enemies, there are not many elite soldiers. They are only setting up their positions on the western mountains.

古文：其馀步卒，不足为患。
现代文：其余的步兵，不足威胁我们。
English: The rest of the infantry, the shortage threatens us.

古文：请公严阵以待我，我以精骑先犯西山兵，小胜则举黄旗，大军合势击之，破之必矣。 
现代文：请您严阵等待我的信号；我率领精锐骑兵先攻击西山下的敌军，如获小胜就举起黄旗，大军再合力攻击，打败敌军是必定的。 
English: Please wait for my signal; I will lead the elite cavalry to attack the enemy army under the West Mountain first. If I win a small victory, I will raise the yellow flag. The large army will then attack together. Defeating the enemy army is inevitable.

古文：乃帅骑先进，用短兵力战。彦超小却，元福举黄旗，晖引兵赴之，彦超大败。
现代文：于是率领骑兵首先冲去，用短刀全力死战；拓跋彦超稍稍退却，药元福就举起黄旗，冯晖率兵赶赴，拓跋彦超被打得大败。
English: Therefore, he led the cavalry to rush first, and fought to the death with a short sword; Tuoba Yanchao retreated slightly, Yueyuan Fu raised the yellow flag, Feng Jun led the soldiers to rush, and Tuoba Yanchao was defeated.

古文：明日，晖入灵州。
现代文：第二天，冯晖率兵进入灵州。
English: The next day, Feng Xuan led his troops into Lingzhou.

古文：九月，契丹三万寇河东。壬辰，刘知远败之于杨武谷，斩首七千级。
现代文：九月，契丹三万兵马侵犯河东；壬辰，刘知远在阳武谷打败了他们，斩首七千人。
English: In September, 30,000 Khitan soldiers invaded the east of the river; in Imjin, Liu Zhiyuan defeated them in Yangwu Valley, beheading seven thousand people.

古文：汉刘思潮等既死，陈道庠内不自安。
现代文：南汉刘思潮等人死后，陈道庠内心不安。
English: After the death of Liu Shichao and others in the Southern Han Dynasty, Chen Daojun was uneasy.

古文：特进邓伸遗之《汉纪》，道庠问其故，伸曰： 憨獠，此书有诛韩信、醢彭越事，宜审读之！ 
现代文：特进邓伸送给他一部《汉纪》，陈道庠问是何原因，邓伸说： 傻瓜！这书里有诛韩信、醢彭越的事，应仔细阅读啊！ 
English: Special Inspector Deng Sheng gave him a copy of the "Han Dynasty." When Chen Daojun asked why, Deng Sheng said: "Fool! This book contains the story of Han Xin and Peng Yue. You should read it carefully!"

古文：汉主闻之，族道庠及伸。
现代文：南汉主听到此事，诛灭陈道庠、邓伸的家族。
English: When the Southern Han heard about this, they annihilated the families of Chen Daojun and Deng Xin.

古文：李弘义自称威武留后，权知闽国事，更名弘达，奉表请命于晋。
现代文：李弘义自称为威武留后，改名李弘达，奉上表章听命于后晋。
English: After Li Hongyi called himself Wei Wu Rui, he changed his name to Li Hongda, and was ordered to serve the Later Jin Dynasty.

古文：甲午，以弘义为威武节度使、同平章事，知闽国事。
现代文：甲午，后晋任命李弘达为威武节度使、同平章事，主持闽国事务。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st day of the 1st month, Emperor Jin appointed Li Hongda as the powerful military envoy of the festival, and presided over the affairs of the country.

古文：张彦泽奏败契丹于定州北，又败之于泰州，斩首二千级。
现代文：张彦泽上奏：在定州以北击败契丹，在泰州再次击败它，共斩首二千人。
English: Zhang Yanze: Defeated Khitan in the north of Dingzhou, defeated it again in Taizhou, and beheaded a total of two thousand people.

古文：辛丑，福州排陈使马捷引唐兵自马牧山拔寨而入，至善化门桥，都指挥使丁彦贞以兵百人拒之。
现代文：辛丑，福州排阵使马捷领南唐军队从马牧山拔寨而入，开到善化门桥，都指挥使丁彦贞率一百名士兵抵抗。
English: Sin ugly, Fuzhou platoon made Ma Jie lead the South Tang army to enter from Ma Mu Shan, drove to Shanhua Gate Bridge, and commanded Ding Yanzhen to lead a hundred soldiers to resist.

古文：弘达退保善化门，外城再重皆为唐兵所据。
现代文：李弘达退守善化门。外城及第二道城都被南唐兵占领。
English: Li Hongda retreated to defend Shanhua Gate. The outer city and the second city were occupied by the Southern Tang soldiers.

古文：弘达更名达，遣使奉表称臣，乞师于吴越。
现代文：李弘达改名李达，派使者向吴越王钱弘佐奉表称臣，乞求救兵。
English: Li Hongda changed his name to Li Da and sent an envoy to Wu Yue King Qian Hongsa to beg for help.

古文：楚王希范知帝好奢靡，屡以珍玩为献，求都元帅。甲辰，以希范为诸道兵马都元帅。
现代文：楚王马希范知道后晋出帝喜好奢侈、华丽，多次献上珍玩宝物，求封为都元帅；甲辰，命马希范为诸道兵马都元帅。
English: King Ma Xifan of Chu knew that Emperor Jintao had a penchant for luxury and opulence, so he repeatedly offered him rare and precious items, asking for the title of Marshal of the Capital; in Jia Chen, Ma Xifan was named Marshal of the Capital of the Three Kingdoms.

古文：丙辰，河决澶州临黄。
现代文：丙辰，黄河在澶州的临黄决口。
English: Bingchen, the Yellow River at Linhuang Jiekou in Ganzhou.

古文：契丹使瀛州刺史刘延祚遗乐寿监军王峦书，请举城内附。且云： 城中契丹兵不满千人，乞朝廷发轻兵袭之，己为内应。
现代文：契丹使瀛州刺史刘延祚给后晋乐寿监军王峦写信，要求率全城归降，并且说： 城中契丹兵不足一千人，请朝廷派轻兵前来袭击，自己为内应。
English: The Khitans asked Liu Yanqi, the governor of Zhangzhou, to write a letter to Wang Hui, the post-Jin military governor of Le, demanding that he lead the entire city to surrender, and saying: There are less than a thousand Khitan soldiers in the city, please ask the court to send light soldiers to attack, and you should do it yourself.

古文：又，今秋多雨，自瓦桥已北，积水无际，契丹主已归牙帐，虽闻关南有变，地远阻水，不能救也。 
现代文：还有，今年秋天雨多，从瓦桥以北，积水漫无边际，契丹主已回牙帐去了，纵然听到关南有突变，路远隔水，也不能前来援救。 
English: Moreover, it rained a lot this autumn. From the north of the tile bridge, the accumulated water is endless. The Khitan master has gone back to his teepee. Even if he hears that there is a sudden change in Guannan, the road is far from the water, and he cannot come to the rescue.

古文：峦与天雄节度使兼中书令杜威屡奏瀛、莫乘此可取，深州刺史慕容迁献《瀛莫图》。
现代文：王峦与天雄节度使兼中书令杜威屡次上奏，认为瀛、莫二州乘这个机会可夺取；深州刺史慕容迁又献上《瀛莫图》。
English: Wang Qian and the Tianxiong festival envoy and the Chinese calligrapher Dewey repeatedly played up, and thought that Zou and Mo Erzhou could seize this opportunity; Shenzhou stabbed Shi Murong Qian and presented "Zou Motu."

古文：冯玉、李崧信以为然，欲发大兵迎赵延寿及延祚。
现代文：冯玉、李崧都信以为真，准备派出大兵迎接赵延寿和刘延祚。
English: Both Feng Yu and Li Yuxin believed this to be true and prepared to send soldiers to meet Zhao Yanshou and Liu Yanzhong.

古文：先是，侍卫马步都指挥使、天平节度使李守贞数将兵过广晋，杜威厚待之，赠金帛甲兵，动以万计。
现代文：早先，侍卫马步都指挥使、天平节度使李守贞屡次领兵经过广晋，杜威接待他很好，赠送他金银兵器铠甲，每次都数以万计。
English: Earlier, the attendant Ma Budu commanded the envoys, and the balance of the festival made Li Shuzhen repeatedly lead the soldiers through Guangjin. Dewey received him very well and presented him with gold and silver weapons and armor, each time tens of thousands.

古文：守贞由是与威亲善。
现代文：李守贞因此和杜威亲近友好。
English: As a result, Li Shouzhen became close friends with Dewey.

古文：守贞入朝，帝劳之曰： 闻卿为将，常费私财以赏战士。 
现代文：李守贞入朝时，后晋出帝慰劳他说： 听说爱卿作为将军，常用自己的钱财赏给战士。 
English: When Li Shouzhen entered the imperial court, Emperor Houjin came out to console him. He said, "I heard that Emperor Ai, as a general, often used his own money and wealth to reward soldiers.

古文：对曰： 此皆杜威尽忠于国，以金帛资臣，臣安敢掠有其美！ 
现代文：答道： 这些都是杜威对国家的忠心，他用金银钱财资助我，我怎么敢掠取他的美德！ 
English: He replied: These are the virtues of Dewey's loyalty to the country, he supported me with money and silver, how dare I plunder his virtues!

古文：因言： 陛下若他日用兵，臣愿与威戮力以清沙漠。 
现代文：于是说： 陛下如果他日用兵，我愿和杜威通力合作肃清沙漠之敌。 
English: Then he said, "Your Majesty, if he uses the army, I am willing to work with Dewey to clear the desert of the enemy."

古文：帝由是亦贤之。
现代文：后晋出帝因此也感到他是个德才兼备的将军。
English: After he was promoted to emperor, he also felt that he was a general with both virtue and talent.

古文：及将北征，帝与冯玉、李崧议，以威为元帅，守贞副之。
现代文：待将要北征时，后晋出帝和冯玉、李崧商议，任命杜威为元帅，李守贞为副帅。
English: When the Northern Expedition was about to begin, Emperor Go-Jin conferred with Feng Yu and Li Xi and appointed Dewey as marshal and Li Shouzhen as deputy marshal.

古文：赵莹私谓冯、李曰： 杜令国戚，贵为将相，而所欲未厌，心常慊慊，岂可复假以兵权！
现代文：赵莹私下对冯、李二人说： 杜威是皇帝的亲戚，又是显贵的将相，但他的欲望还没有满足，心常怀不满之意，怎能再授予他兵权！
English: Zhao Ying privately said to Feng and Li: Dewey is a relative of the emperor and a distinguished general, but his desire has not yet been satisfied, and he is often dissatisfied. How can he be granted military power again?

古文：必若有事北方，不若止任守贞为愈也。 
现代文：如果一定要对北方用兵，不如只委任李守贞一个人为好。 
English: If it is necessary to use troops against the North, it is better to appoint only one person, Li Shouzhen.

古文：不从。
现代文：冯、李二人没有听从。
English: Le Zhu Rong did not listen.

古文：冬，十月，辛未，以威为北面行营都招讨使，以守贞为兵马都监，泰宁节度使安审琦为左右厢都指挥使，武宁节度使符彦卿为马军左厢都指挥使，义成节度使皇甫遇为马军右厢都指挥使，永清节度使梁汉璋为马军都排陈使，前威胜节度使宋彦筠为步军左厢都指挥使，奉国左厢都指挥使王饶为步军右厢都指挥使，洺州团练使薛怀让为先锋都指挥使。
现代文：冬季，十月辛未，命杜威为北面行营都指挥使，命李守贞为兵马都监，泰宁节度使安审琦为左右厢都指挥使，武宁节度使符彦卿为马军左厢都指挥使，义成节度使皇甫遇为马军右厢都指挥使，永清节度使梁汉璋为马军都排阵使，前威胜节度使宋彦筠为步军左厢都指挥使，奉国左厢都指挥使王饶为步军右厢都指挥使，州团练使薛怀让为先锋都指挥使。
English: In the winter, in the middle of October, Du Wei was ordered to be the commander of the northern camp, Li Shuzhen was ordered to be the commander of the soldiers and horses, Taining Festival was ordered to be the commander of the left and right compartments, Wuming Festival was ordered to be the commander of the left compartment of the horse army, Yicheng Festival was ordered to be the commander of the right compartment of the horse army, Yongqing Festival was ordered to be the commander of the horse army, Song Yanyan was ordered to be the commander of the left compartment of the infantry, Fengguo Festival was ordered to be the commander of the left compartment of the infantry, Wang Rao was

古文：仍下敕榜曰： 专发大军，往平黠虏。
现代文：并下达敕榜，写道： 专门调发大军，前往扫平黠虏。
English: He also issued a warning, writing, "A large army has been specially dispatched to sweep away the invaders.

古文：先取瀛、莫，安定关南；次复幽燕，荡平塞北。 
现代文：先取瀛州、莫州，安定关南；其次收复幽燕，扫荡平定塞北。 
English: First, we will take Bozhou and Mozhou, and stabilize the south of Guanzhong; next, we will recover Yuyan, sweep and stabilize the north.

古文：又曰： 有能擒获虏主者，除上镇节度使，赏钱万缗，绢万匹，银万两。 
现代文：又道： 有生擒胡虏君主的，任命上等大镇的节度使，赏赐钱一万缗，绢一万匹，银子一万两。 
English: He also said, "If there is a surviving son of the Khurik monarch, he will appoint a high-ranking official of a large town and reward him with 10,000 baht, 10,000 horses, and 10,000 taels of silver.

古文：时自六月积雨，至是未止，军行及馈运者甚艰苦。
现代文：当时，从六月连日下雨，至此一直没停，行军和运送军粮都很艰苦。
English: At that time, it had rained every day since June, and it had not stopped since then. It was very difficult to march and transport military rations.

古文：唐漳州将林赞尧作乱，杀监军使周承义、剑州刺史陈诲。
现代文：南唐漳州将领林赞尧作乱，杀死监军使周承义、剑州刺史陈诲。
English: Lin Zanzang, the general of Bozhou in southern Tang Dynasty, caused a disturbance and killed the supervising general Zhou Chengyi, and Jianzhou assassinated Chen Ji.

古文：泉州刺史留从效举兵逐赞尧，以泉州裨将董思安权知漳州。
现代文：泉州刺史留从效起兵驱逐林赞尧，派泉州副将董思安代理主持漳州事务。
English: Quanzhou's Vice-Admiral Dong Si'an was sent to take charge of Quanzhou affairs.

古文：唐主以思安为漳州刺史，思安辞以父名章。唐主改漳州为南州，命思安及留从效将州兵会攻福州。
现代文：南唐主命董思安为漳州刺史，思安因父亲名 章 而推辞，南唐主于是改漳州为南州，命董思安和留从效率领州中的军队合攻福州。
English: The Lord of Southern Tang ordered Dong Sian to write the history of Bozhou, but Sian refused to do so because of his father's title. The Lord of Southern Tang then changed Bozhou to Nanzhou, and ordered Dong Sian and the army that remained in the efficiency territory to jointly attack Fuzhou.

古文：庚辰，围之。
现代文：庚辰，包围了福州城。
English: Geng Chen, surrounded Fuzhou City.

古文：福州使者至钱塘，吴越王弘佐召诸将谋之，皆曰： 道险远，难救。 
现代文：福州的使者来到钱塘。吴越王钱弘佐召集众将领商议，都说： 道路又远又险，难以救援。 
English: Envoys from Fuzhou came to Qiantang. King Qian Hongsa of Wuyue called together the generals for discussion, and they all said: The road is far and dangerous, and it is difficult to rescue.

古文：惟内都监使临安水丘昭券以为当救。
现代文：只有内都监使临安人水丘昭券认为应去援救。
English: Only the Inner Capital Supervisor, the Lin'an resident Shuqiu Zhaochen, thought it necessary to go to the rescue.

古文：弘佐曰： 脣亡齿寒，吾为天下元帅，曾不能救邻道，将安用之！
现代文：钱弘佐说： 唇亡齿寒，我作为天下元帅，连邻邦都不能解救，那还有什么用！
English: Qian Hongsa said, "My lips are chapped and my teeth are chilled. As the world's marshal, I can't even save my neighbors, so what's the point!

古文：诸君但乐饱食安坐邪！ 
现代文：你们只高兴吃饱了坐着吗？ 
English: Are you just happy to sit around with your fill?

古文：壬午，遣统军使张筠、赵承泰将兵三万，水陆救福州。
现代文：壬午，派统军使张筠、赵承泰率兵三万人，从水陆两路救援福州。
English: In the morning of the second day of the third month of the lunar calendar, Zhang Jun and Zhao Chengtai, envoys of the United Front, led 30,000 soldiers to rescue Fuzhou from land and water.

古文：先是募兵，久无应者，弘佐命纠之，曰： 纠而为兵者，粮赐减半。 
现代文：此前召募士兵，很长时间也没应募的，钱弘佐命令征集，并说： 凡征集而当兵的发给他的粮食和赏赐减少一半。 
English: Qian Hongzhao ordered the conscription of soldiers who had previously been conscripted but had not been conscripted for a long time, and said, "Whoever conscripts and becomes a soldier, his food and reward will be reduced by half."

古文：明日，应募者云集。
现代文：第二天，应召的人云集而至。
English: The next day, those who answered the call came in droves.

古文：弘佐命昭券专掌用兵，昭券惮程昭悦，以用兵事让之。
现代文：钱弘佐命水丘昭券专管用兵之事，但昭券害怕程昭悦，把用兵的事让给他干。
English: Qian Hongsa ordered Shuqiu Zhaojuan to be in charge of recruiting soldiers, but Zhaojuan was afraid of Cheng Zhaoyue and let him do the recruiting.

古文：弘佐命昭悦掌应援馈运事，而以军谋委元德昭。
现代文：钱弘佐命程昭悦掌管接应后援输送粮食的事务，而把全军的谋略大事委交元德昭。
English: Qian Hongsa ordered Cheng Zhaoyue to take charge of the affairs of receiving reinforcements and transporting grain, and put Yuan Dezhao in charge of the strategic affairs committee of the whole army.

古文：德昭，危仔倡之子也。
现代文：元德昭是危仔倡的儿子。
English: Yuan De Zhao was the son of Wei Zi Yan.

古文：弘佐议铸铁钱以益将士禄赐，其弟牙内都虞候弘亿谏曰： 铸铁钱有八害：新钱既行，旧钱皆流入邻国，一也；可用于吾国而不可用于它国，则商贾不行，百货不通，二也；铜禁至严，民犹盗铸，况家有铛釜，野有铧犁，犯法必多，三也；闽人铸铁钱而乱亡，不足为法，四也；国用幸丰而自示空乏，五也；禄赐有常而无故益之，以启无厌之心，六也；法变而敝，不可遽复，七也； 钱 者国姓，易之不祥，八也。 
现代文：钱弘佐建议铸铁钱以增加将士们的俸禄赏赐，他的弟弟牙内都虞候钱弘亿劝谏道： 铸铁钱有八条害处：新铁钱一发行，旧铜钱都流入邻国，这是第一条；铁钱可在我国使用却不可在他国使用，商人不使用，百货也就不能流通，是第二条；采铜被严格禁止，百姓还有偷偷铸造的，况且每家都有铁锅，地里有铧犁，私铸犯法的必然多，是第三条；闽人铸造铁钱而灭亡，这不值得效法，是第四条；国家财力庆幸很充足，而铸铁钱却是自己显示国库空虚，这是第五条；赐予俸禄本有常数，而无故增加它来诱发贪得无厌之心，是第六条；一旦钱法改变酿成弊端，不能立即恢复，是第七条； 钱 是国姓，改动不吉祥，是第八条。 
English: Qian Hongzhao suggested that cast iron money should be rewarded to increase the salary of generals. His younger brother Yanai Dudu awaited Qian Hongzhuan to advise him: There are eight harms of cast iron money: as soon as new iron money is issued, old copper money will flow into neighboring countries, which is the first article; iron money can be used in our country but cannot be used in other countries, merchants do not use it, and department stores cannot circulate, which is the second article; copper mining is strictly prohibited, the people still secretly cast it, moreover, every house has an iron pot, there are earthworms in the ground, there are inevitably many illegal castings,

古文：弘佐乃止。
现代文：钱弘佐于是作罢。
English: Qian Hongsa then gave up.

古文：杜威、李守贞会兵于广晋而北行。
现代文：杜威、李守贞在广晋会师，然后向北进军。
English: Dewey and Li Shouzhen met in Guangjin and then marched north.

古文：威屡使公主入奏，请益兵，曰： 今深入虏境，必资众力。 
现代文：杜威屡次让公主入宫上奏，请求增兵，他说： 现在深入胡虏的国境，一定要靠大家的力量！ 
English: Dewey repeatedly had the princess come to the palace to plead for more troops, saying, "Now that we are deep into the borders of the Huns, we must rely on everyone's strength!"

古文：由是禁军皆在其麾下，而宿卫空虚。
现代文：因此禁军都归于他的麾下，连宫内的宿值警卫都空虚了。
English: As a result, the Imperial Guard fell under his command, and even the palace's guards were empty.

古文：十一月，丁酉，以李守贞权知幽州行府事。
现代文：十一月，丁酉，派李守贞代理主持幽州行府事务。
English: In November, Ding Hui sent Li Shouzhen to preside over the Yuzhou government affairs.

古文：己亥，杜威等至瀛州，城门洞启，寂若无人，威等不敢进。
现代文：己亥，杜威等人率兵来到瀛州，城门洞开，寂静得像没有人，杜威等人不敢进去。
English: Ji Hai, Dewey and others led the troops to Zhangzhou, the city gate opened, the silence was like no one, Dewey and others did not dare to enter.

古文：闻契丹将高谟翰先已引兵潜出，威遣梁汉璋将二千骑追之，遇契丹于南阳务，败死。
现代文：听说契丹将领高谟翰早已率兵偷偷出城跑了，杜威就派梁汉璋率领二千名骑兵追击，在南阳务与契丹遭遇，梁汉璋战败被杀。
English: Hearing that the Khitan general Gaumkhan had already secretly led his troops out of the city, Dewey sent Liang Hanzhong to lead two thousand cavalry in pursuit, encountering the Khitan in Nanyang. Liang Hanzhong was defeated and killed.

古文：威等闻之，引兵而南。
现代文：杜威等听到这个消息，率兵南下。
English: When Dewey heard the news, he led his troops south.

古文：时束城等数县请降，威等焚其庐舍，掠其妇女而还。
现代文：当时束城等几个县已请求归降，杜威等人焚烧了庐舍，抢掠了那里的妇女而返回。
English: At that time, Sokseong and several other counties had already requested to surrender, and Dewey and others burned down the outhouses, robbed the women there, and returned.

古文：己酉，吴越兵至福州，自罾浦南潜入州城。
现代文：己酉，吴越的军队来到福州，从罾浦以南偷偷进入福州城。
English: At the same time, Wu Yue's army came to Fuzhou and sneaked into Fuzhou City from the south of Ganpu.

古文：唐兵进据东武门，李达与吴越兵共御之，不利。
现代文：而南唐军队又前进占领了东武门，李达和吴越兵共同抵抗，战事不利。
English: However, the Southern Tang army advanced and occupied Dongwu Gate. Li Da and Wu Yue soldiers resisted together, and the war was unfavorable.

古文：自是内外断绝，城中益危。
现代文：从此福州城与外界联系断绝，城里形势更加危急。
English: Since then, Fuzhou City has been cut off from the outside world, and the situation in the city has become even more critical.

古文：唐主遣信州刺史王建封助攻福州。
现代文：南唐主派信州刺史王建封帮助进攻福州。
English: The Lord of Southern Tang Dynasty sent Shinshu Sisi Wang Jianfeng to help attack Fuzhou.

古文：时王崇文虽为元帅，而陈觉、冯延鲁、魏岑争用事，留从效、王建封倔强不用命，各争功，进退不相应。
现代文：当时南唐军中虽然王崇文是元帅，但是陈觉、冯延鲁、魏岑三人争着主事，留从效、王建封二人又倔强不听命令，各自抢功劳，进退行动互不照应。
English: At that time, although Wang Chongwen was a marshal in the Southern Tang Army, Chen Jue, Feng Yanlu, and Wei Wei were three people who were competing for the main task. The two of them, Wang Jianfeng and Chen Jue, were stubborn and did not listen to orders. They each took credit, and did not follow each other's advance and retreat.

古文：由是将士皆解体，故攻城不克。
现代文：因此下面的将士也都人心涣散，所以福州城攻不下来。
English: As a result, the soldiers below were also distracted, so Fuzhou Castle could not be conquered.

古文：唐主以江州观察使杜昌业为吏部尚书，判省事。
现代文：南唐主命江州观察使杜昌业为吏部尚书，主管尚书省事。
English: The Lord of Southern Tang ordered the observation of Jiangzhou to make Du Changye the secretary of the personnel department, and the person in charge of the secretary of the ministry.

古文：先是昌业自兵部尚书判省事，出江州，及还，阅簿籍，抚案叹曰： 未数年，而府库所耗者半，其能久乎！ 
现代文：原先，杜昌业是兵部尚书主管尚书省事，出江州任职。这次回来上任，翻阅帐册簿籍，拍案感叹道： 没几年功夫，府库的积累所消耗已过半，怎么能持久呢！ 
English: Originally, Du Changye was the head of the Ministry of the People's Liberation Army's General Accounting Office, but he had to leave the country to take up the post. This time, he returned to his post, flipped through the account books, and lamented: After a few years of hard work, the accumulation of the prefectural treasury has been consumed by more than half, how can it last!

古文：契丹主大举入寇，自易、定趣恒州。
现代文：契丹主率兵大举入侵，从易州、定州直向恒州。
English: Khitan led a large-scale invasion, from Yizhou and Dingzhou straight to Hengzhou.

古文：杜威等至武强，闻之，将自冀、贝而南。
现代文：杜威等到达武强，听到这个消息，要从贝州、冀州往南走。
English: When Dewey and others arrived in Wuqiang and heard the news, they wanted to go south from Beizhou and Jizhou.

古文：彰德节度使张彦泽时在恒州，引兵会之，言契丹可破之状。威等乃复趣恒州，以彦泽为前锋。
现代文：彰德节度使张彦泽当时在恒州，领兵前去和杜威等人会师，并陈述契丹可以被打败的理由，杜威等又开往恒州，命张彦泽为前锋。
English: The Changde Festival made Zhang Yanze, who was in Hengzhou at the time, lead the troops to join the division with Dewey and others, and state the reasons why the Khitan could be defeated. Dewey and others also went to Hengzhou and ordered Zhang Yanze to be the striker.

古文：甲寅，威等至中度桥，契丹已据桥。彦泽帅骑争之，契丹焚桥而退。
现代文：甲寅，杜威等来到中度桥，但契丹已占领了桥，张彦泽率骑兵前去争夺，契丹兵把桥烧掉退却了。
English: A Yin, Dewey, etc. came to the Middle Bridge, but the Khitan had already occupied the bridge. Zhang Yanzawa led the cavalry to fight for it, and the Khitan soldiers burned the bridge and retreated.

古文：晋兵与契丹夹滹沱而军。
现代文：于是后晋兵马和契丹军队隔着滹沱河驻扎下来。
English: As a result, the Later Jin soldiers and horses and the Khitan army were stationed across the Wei River.

古文：始，契丹见晋军大至，又争桥不胜，恐晋军急渡滹沱，与恒州合势击之，议引兵还。及闻晋军筑垒为持久之计，遂不去。
现代文：开始，契丹人见后晋军队浩浩荡荡开来，前来争桥又没取胜，担心对方会强渡滹沱河，和恒州联合夹击，商议退兵返回；但听到后晋军队已筑起营垒作持久的准备，于是就不退兵了。
English: At first, when the Khitan saw the huge Hojin army coming, they came to fight for the bridge and did not win, fearing that the other side would forcibly cross the Wei River, and the Hengzhou joint attack, they discussed the return of the soldiers; but when they heard that the Hojin army had built a camp for long-term preparation, they did not withdraw.

古文：蜀施州刺史田行皋叛，遣供奉官耿彦珣将兵讨之。
现代文：后蜀施州刺史田行皋反叛，后蜀派供奉官耿彦率兵前去讨伐。
English: After Shu Shizhou rebelled against Shitian Xingye, Shu sent Geng Yan, a tributary official, to lead an army to fight.

古文：杜威虽以贵戚为上将，性懦怯。
现代文：杜威虽然以皇帝亲戚身份担任上将，但生性懦弱胆小。
English: Although Dewey served as an admiral as a relative of the emperor, he was a coward by nature.

古文：偏裨皆节度使，但日相承迎，置酒作乐，罕议军事。
现代文：他手下的将领都是节度使，只是天天奉承迎合，饮酒作乐，很少谈论军事。
English: The generals under his command are all masters of ceremonies, but they flatter and pander every day, drink and make merry, and rarely talk about the military.

古文：磁州刺史兼北面转运使李谷说威及李守贞曰： 今大军去恒州咫尺，烟火相望。
现代文：磁州刺史兼北面转运使李劝说杜威和李守贞道： 现在大军距恒州近在咫尽，彼此的烟火都能望见。
English: The history of the magnetic state and the transportation of the north side made Li persuade Dewey and Li Shouzhen: Now the great army is close to Hengzhou, and the fireworks of each other can be seen.

古文：若多以三股木置水中，积薪布土其上，桥可立成。
现代文：如果把许多三股木放到水中，在上面放上柴草铺上土，桥就立刻架成了。
English: If you put a lot of three-stranded trees in the water, put firewood and grass on top and cover it with soil, the bridge will be built immediately.

古文：密约城中举火相应，夜募壮士斫虏营而入，表里合势，虏必遁逃。 
现代文：再密约城中的守军点起火堆为联络信号，趁夜里组织将士砍断敌虏营盘的栅栏冲进去，里外合兵，胡虏一定败逃。 
English: He then secretly arranged with the defenders in the city to light a bonfire as a signal of contact, and took advantage of the night to organize soldiers to cut through the fence of the enemy's camp and rush in.

古文：诸将皆以为然，独杜威不可，遣谷南至怀、孟督军粮。
现代文：众将领都认为说得对，只有杜威认为不行，派李往南到怀、孟二州督运军粮。
English: All the generals thought it was right, but Dewey thought it was not, and sent Lee south to Huai, Meng and Erzhou to supervise the transportation of military grain.

古文：契丹以大兵当晋军之前，潜遣其将萧翰、通事刘重进将百骑及赢卒，并西山出晋军之后，断晋粮道及归路。
现代文：契丹用大军挡在后晋军队的前面，又悄悄派出将领萧翰、通事刘重进率领一百名骑兵和羸弱的步卒，沿西山出现在后晋军队的后面，切断后晋军的粮道和退路。
English: Khitan used a large army to block the front of the Later Jin army, and quietly sent the generals Xiao Han and Liu Chongjin, who led a hundred cavalry and weak foot soldiers, along the West Mountain to appear behind the Later Jin army, cutting off the Later Jin army's food supply and escape route.

古文：樵采者遇之，尽为所掠；有逸归者，皆称虏众之盛，军中忷惧。
现代文：打柴的樵夫遇到他们，全被抓走了；有逃跑回来的，都说契丹军队的强盛，后晋军中人心惶惶。
English: The woodcutters who came across them were all captured; those who escaped and came back said that the Khitan army was strong, and that everyone in the Hojin army was panicking.

古文：翰等至栾城，城中戍兵千馀人，不觉其至，狼狈降之。
现代文：萧翰等到达了栾城，城中后晋守军有一千多人，没想到敌人来临，慌乱狼狈中全都投降了。
English: Xiao Han and others arrived in Lucheng. There were more than a thousand Hujin defenders in the middle of the city. They did not expect the enemy to come, and they all surrendered in confusion.

古文：契丹获晋民，皆黥其面曰 奉敕不杀 ，纵之南走。运夫在道遇之，皆弃车惊溃。
现代文：契丹抓到的后晋百姓，全都在脸上刺 奉敕不杀 四个字，放他们往南走；运粮的民夫在路上遇见他们，都撂下辎重惊慌溃逃了。
English: All the Hojin people captured by the Khitan had the four words "do not kill" tattooed on their faces, and they were allowed to go south. The people carrying grain met them on the road, and they all panicked and fled.

古文：翰，契丹主之舅也。
现代文：萧翰是契丹主耶律德光的舅舅。
English: Shokhan was the uncle of the Khitan lord Yerudoglu.

古文：十二月，丁巳朔，李谷自书密奏，具言大军危急之势，请车驾幸滑州，遣高行舟、符彦卿扈从，及发兵守澶州、河阳以备虏之奔冲；遣军将关勋走马上之。
现代文：十二月，丁巳朔，李亲自给后晋出帝写上密奏，详细说明后晋大军危急的形势，请皇帝亲临滑州，派高行周、符彦卿扈从，并请派兵守卫澶州、河阳，以防范契丹军队的冲击。派将领关勋快马把密奏送给皇帝。
English: In December, Ding Xishuo, Li personally wrote a secret message to the Emperor of Later Jin, explaining in detail the critical situation of the Later Jin army. He asked the Emperor to come to Slanting and send Gao Xing Zhou and Fu Yanqing to accompany him. He also asked the Emperor to send soldiers to guard Zhangzhou and Heyang to prevent the impact of the Khitan army. He sent General Guan Xun Qiaoma to deliver the secret message to the Emperor.

古文：己未，帝始闻大军屯中度。
现代文：己未，后晋出帝才知道大军驻扎在中度桥的消息。
English: However, Emperor Go-Jin did not know the news of the large army stationed in Zhongdu Bridge until later.

古文：是夕，关勋至。
现代文：这天傍晚，关勋已赶到大梁。
English: That evening, Guan Xun arrived in Daliang.

古文：庚申，杜威奏请益兵，诏悉发守宫禁者得数百人，赴之。
现代文：庚申，杜威上奏章请求增兵，后晋出帝下诏调全部守卫宫禁的几百人，赶往中度桥。
English: Goshun, Dewey made a petition to increase the number of soldiers, and after the Emperor's abdication, all the hundreds of people who were guarding the palace were transferred to Zhongdu Bridge.

古文：又诏发河北及滑、孟、泽、潞刍粮五十万诣军前，督迫严急，所在鼎沸。
现代文：又下诏，调发河北及滑、孟、泽、潞各州粮草五十万送到军营。因为督运时间紧迫，催促严急，各地惊扰沸腾。
English: He also issued an edict to dispatch 500,000 tons of grain and grass to military camps in Hebei, as well as the provinces of Nanning, Meng, Ze and Handan. Because the time for supervising the transportation was tight and the urging was urgent, there was great consternation all over the country.

古文：辛酉，威又遣从者张祚等来告急，祚等还，为契丹所获，自是朝廷与军前声问两不相通。
现代文：辛酉杜威又派遣部下张祚等前去告急，张祚等在回来的途中被契丹抓获。从此，朝廷和军队之间消息不通。
English: Xinjian Duwei also sent his subordinates, such as Zhang Xuan, to express their urgency. Zhang Xuan and others were captured by the Khitan on their way back. Since then, there has been no communication between the court and the army.

古文：时宿卫兵皆在行营，人心懔懔，莫知为计。
现代文：当时宫中的宿卫兵都在行营里，人人心里危惧，不知该怎么办。
English: At that time, the palace guards were all in the camp. Everyone was worried and didn't know what to do.

古文：开封尹桑维翰，以国家危在旦夕，求见帝言事。
现代文：开封尹桑维翰认为国家的存亡已经危在旦夕，请求朝见皇帝、上报情况。
English: Kaifeng Yinsang Weihan believed that the survival of the country was in imminent danger, and requested to see the emperor and report the situation.

古文：帝方在苑中调鹰，辞不见。
现代文：后晋出帝正在御苑里玩弄猎鹰，推辞不见。
English: Emperor Go-Jin is playing with a falcon in the imperial garden, and there is no sign of him.

古文：又诣执政言之，执政不以为然。
现代文：桑维翰又去向执掌权柄的大臣陈述，那些大臣不以为然。
English: Sanveighan went to present his case to the ministers in power, who were not impressed.

古文：退，谓所亲曰： 晋氏不血食矣！ 
现代文：桑维翰退下来，对亲近的人说： 晋氏的宗庙得不到祭祀了！ 
English: San Weihan retreated and said to those close to him: The Jin family temple can no longer receive sacrifices!

古文：帝欲自将北征，李彦韬谏而止。
现代文：后晋出帝要亲自率兵北征，被李彦韬劝谏阻止。
English: Later, Emperor Jin wanted to personally lead the Northern Expedition, but he was dissuaded by Li Yanxuan.

古文：时符彦卿虽任行营职事，帝留之，使戍荆州口。
现代文：当时符彦卿虽然担任行营的职务，后晋出帝把他留下，让他守卫荆州口。
English: At that time, although Fu Yanqing was in charge of the encampment, Emperor Jin left him behind to guard the entrance to Jingzhou.

古文：壬戌，诏以归德节度使高行周为北面都部署，以彦卿副之，共戍澶州；以西京留守景延广戍河阳，且张形势。
现代文：壬戌，下诏命归德节度使高行周为北面都部署，命符彦卿任副职，一起守卫澶州；命西京留守景延广守卫河阳，摆开了迎战的架势。
English: In accordance with the imperial edict, Gao Xing Zhou was ordered to return to Germany, so he was deployed to the north. He ordered Fu Yanqing to serve as his deputy and guard Bozhou together. He ordered Jing Yanguang to stay in the west to guard Heyang, and opened a battle posture.

古文：奉国都指挥使王清言于杜威曰： 今大军去恒州五里，守此何为！
现代文：奉国都指挥使王清向杜威进言道： 现在大军离恒州城只有五里，守在这里干什么！
English: Wang Qing said to Dewey: Now the army is only five miles away from Hengzhou City, what are you doing here?

古文：营孤食尽，势将自溃。
现代文：军营孤立，粮食吃完，必将自己溃败。
English: If the military camp is isolated and runs out of food, it will be defeated.

古文：请以步卒二千为前锋，夺桥开道，公帅诸军继之。得入恒州，则无忧矣。 
现代文：请求率步兵二千为先锋，夺取桥梁，开辟道路，您率领各军紧随其后，能够进入恒州，就没有忧虑了。 
English: Request the rate of two thousand infantry as the vanguard, seize the bridge, open the road, you lead the army followed closely, can enter Hengzhou, there is no worry.

古文：威许诺，遣清与宋彦筠俱进。
现代文：杜威允许了，派王清和宋彦筠一起前进。
English: Dewey allowed it, and sent Wang Qing and Song Yanqi forward together.

古文：清战甚锐，契丹不能支，势小却。诸将请以大军继之，威不许。
现代文：王清作战锐不可当，契丹兵不能支持，稍稍退却；众将领请求立刻派大军随后前进，杜威不允许。
English: Wang Qing could not fight well, the Khitan soldiers could not support him, and they retreated a little; the generals requested that a large army be sent forward immediately, but Dewey did not allow it.

古文：彦筠为契丹所败，浮水抵岸得免，因退走。
现代文：宋彦筠被契丹打败了，自己游回岸边，免于一死。
English: Song Yanqi was defeated by the Khitan and swam back to the shore to save himself from death.

古文：清独帅麾下陈于水北力战，互有杀伤，屡请救于威，威竟不遣一骑助之。
现代文：王清独自率麾下兵士在河北岸布阵奋力作战，两军互有伤亡；王清屡次向杜威求救，杜威竟然不派一骑前去支援。
English: Wang Qing single-handedly led the soldiers under his command to fight hard in the battle on the north shore of Hebei, and the two armies had mutual casualties; Wang Qing repeatedly asked Dewey for help, and Dewey did not even send a cavalry to support.

古文：清谓其众曰： 上将握兵，坐观吾辈困急而不救，此必有异志。
现代文：王清对士兵们说： 上将手握重兵，却坐观我们在困急当中不来救援，他一定有叛变之意。
English: Wang Qing said to the soldiers: "The general is holding the heavy soldiers in his hand, but he is watching us in the middle of a crisis and does not come to our rescue. He must have the intention of mutiny."

古文：吾辈当以死报国耳！ 
现代文：我们应该以死报国！ 
English: We should die for our country!

古文：众感其言，莫有退者。至暮，战不息。
现代文：大家为他的话所感动，没有一人后退的，到了日暮，仍然战斗不息。
English: Everyone was moved by his words. No one backed down, and by nightfall, they were still fighting.

古文：契丹以新兵继之，清及士众尽死。
现代文：契丹又派新的军队前来进攻，王清和士兵们全都战死。
English: Khitan also sent new troops to attack, and Wang Qing and the soldiers all died in the battle.

古文：由是诸军皆夺气。
现代文：从此后晋各军丧失了士气。
English: From then on, the Jin armies lost their morale.

古文：清，洺州人也。
现代文：王清是州人。
English: Wang Qing is from Suzhou.

古文：甲子，契丹遥以兵环晋营，内外断绝，军中食且尽。
现代文：甲子，契丹派兵从远处包围了后晋军营，军营与外界联系断绝了，军中粮食将尽。
English: At the same time, Khitan sent soldiers to surround the Hojin camp from a distance. The camp was cut off from the outside world, and the army was running out of food.

古文：杜威与李守贞、宋彦筠谋降契丹。威潜遣腹心诣契丹牙帐，邀求重赏。
现代文：杜威和李守贞、宋彦筠谋划投降契丹，杜威还暗中派遣了心腹到契丹主的牙帐里，邀功求取重赏。
English: Dewey and Li Shouzhen and Song Yanyu plotted to surrender to the Khitan. Dewey also secretly sent a henchman to the ruler of the Khitan Empire to ask for a reward.

古文：契丹主绐之曰： 赵延寿威望素浅，恐不能帝中国。
现代文：契丹主骗他说： 赵延寿威望素来浅薄，恐怕不能作中原的皇帝。
English: The Khitan lied to him and said: Zhao Yanshou's prestige has always been shallow, and I'm afraid he can't be the emperor of Central Plains.

古文：汝果降者，当以汝为之。 
现代文：你果真能投降，就让你当皇帝。 
English: If you can really surrender, I will make you emperor.

古文：威喜，遂定降计。
现代文：杜威喜欢，于是拟定投降的计划。
English: Dewey liked it and drew up a plan for surrender.

古文：丙寅，伏甲召诸将，出降表示之，使署名。
现代文：丙寅，军帐周围埋伏了全副武装的士兵，召集众将领前来，杜威拿出降表来给他们看，让他们署名。
English: Hsin-Yin, surrounded by heavily armed soldiers, called the generals to come forward. Dewey took out the surrender form to show them and let them sign it.

古文：诸将骇愕，莫敢言者，但唯唯听命。
现代文：众将领惊愕害怕，没有敢说话的，只有 是、是 地听从命令。
English: The generals were stunned and afraid, not daring to speak, but only obediently following orders.

古文：威遣阁门使高勋赍诣契丹，契丹主赐诏慰纳之。
现代文：杜威派门使高勋带降表送给契丹，契丹主赐下诏书抚慰收纳他们。
English: Dewey sent an emissary to have Gao Xun bring down the table and give it to Qidan, and the Qidan lord gave him an edict to appease and accept them.

古文：是日，威悉命军士出陈于外，军士皆踊跃，以为且战，威亲谕之曰： 今食尽涂穷，当与汝曹共求生计。 
现代文：这一天，杜威命全军士兵到营外列阵，军士们十分踊跃，以为就要打仗。杜威亲自告诉他们： 现在粮食吃光无路可走，应和你们一同求取生存的办法。 
English: On this day, Dewey ordered all the soldiers to line up outside the camp. The sergeants were so excited that they thought they were going to fight. Dewey himself told them: Now there is no way to go without food, we should work with you to find a way to survive.

古文：因命释甲。
现代文：于是命令全军放下武装。
English: He then ordered the entire army to lay down their arms.

古文：军士皆恸哭，声振原野。
现代文：军士们都抱头痛哭，哭声振动了原野。
English: The sergeants all hugged their heads and wept bitterly, their cries shaking the field.

古文：威、守贞仍于众中扬言： 主上失德，信任奸邪，猜忌于己。 
现代文：杜威、李守贞还在众人中宣扬： 君主无德，听信任用奸臣小人，猜忌我们。 
English: Dewey and Li Shouzhen also preached among the masses: The monarch is without virtue, listens to and trusts the traitorous villain, and is suspicious of us.

古文：闻者无不切齿。
现代文：听的人没有不咬牙切齿的。
English: There's not a person listening who isn't gritting their teeth.

古文：契丹主遣赵延寿衣赭袍至晋营慰抚士卒，曰： 彼皆汝物也。 
现代文：契丹主派赵延寿身穿赭袍来到后晋营中抚慰士兵，指着赭袍说： 这都将是你的东西。 
English: The Khitan leader sent Zhao Yanshou, dressed in a long robe, to comfort the soldiers in Houjin camp. Pointing to the long robe, he said, "This will all be yours."

古文：杜威以下，皆迎谒于马前，亦以赭袍衣威以示晋军，其实皆戏之耳。
现代文：杜威以下将领都到马前迎接拜见；赵延寿也给杜威穿上赭袍，给后晋将士们看，其实这都是愚弄他们的把戏而已。
English: Generals from Dewey on down came to the horse to greet the horse; Zhao Yanshou also dressed Dewey in a robe and showed it to the Hojin generals. In fact, it was all just a trick to fool them.

古文：以威为太傅，李守贞为司徒。
现代文：契丹任命杜威为太傅，李守贞为司徒。
English: Khitan appointed Dewey as taifu, and Li Shouzhen as sitoru.

古文：威引契丹主至恒州城下，谕顺国节度使王周以己降之状，周亦出降。
现代文：杜威引导契丹主来到恒州城下，告诉顺国节度使王周自己投降的情况，王周也出城投降了。
English: Dewey led the Khitan lord to the city of Hengzhou and told him about the circumstances of the Shun Guo Festival that made Wang Zhou surrender himself. Wang Zhou also left the city and surrendered.

古文：戊辰，契丹主入恒州。
现代文：戊辰，契丹主进入恒州。
English: Wuchen, the Qidan Lord entered Hengzhou.

古文：遣兵袭代州，刺史王晖以城降之。
现代文：又派兵袭击代州，刺史王晖开城投降。
English: He also sent troops to attack Daizhou and forced Wang Rongkai to surrender.

古文：先是契丹屡攻易州，刺史郭璘固守拒之。
现代文：原先，契丹屡次进攻易州，刺史郭死守抗拒。
English: Originally, the Khitan repeatedly attacked Yizhou, but the Zhishiguo stubbornly resisted.

古文：契丹主每过城下，指而叹曰： 吾能吞并天下，而为此人所扼！ 
现代文：契丹主每次经过城下都指着易州城叹道： 我能够吞并天下，却被此人所扼阻！ 
English: Every time the Khitan lord passed under the city, he pointed to the city of Yizhou and sighed: I can absorb the whole world, but I am stifled by this person!

古文：及杜威既降，契丹主遣通事耿崇美至易州，诱谕其众，众皆降，璘不能制，遂为崇美所杀。
现代文：现在杜威已投降，契丹主派通事耿崇美来到易州，诱劝郭的部下，这些人都投降了，郭不能制止，于是被耿崇美杀死。
English: Now that Dewey had surrendered, the Khitan leader sent his agent Geng Chongmei to Yizhou to persuade Guo's subordinates to surrender. Guo could not stop them, so he was killed by Geng Chongmei.

古文：璘，邢州人也。
现代文：郭是邢州人。
English: Guo is from Zhangzhou.

古文：义武节度使李殷，安国留后方太，皆降于契丹。
现代文：义武节度使李殷、安国留后方太，都投降了契丹。
English: As a result of the Boxer Rebellion, Li Yin and Fang Ta, who stayed behind in An Guo, both surrendered to the Khitan.

古文：契丹主以孙方简为义武节度使，麻答为安国节度使，以客省副使马崇祚权知恒州事。
现代文：契丹主任命孙方简为义武节度使，麻为安国节度使，任命客省副使马崇祚代理主持恒州事务。
English: The Khitan ruler appointed Sun Fangyan as the chief envoy of the Yiwu Festival, Ma as the chief envoy of the An Guo Festival, and appointed Ma Chongyong, the vice-envoy of the guest province, to preside over the affairs of Hengzhou.

古文：契丹翰林承旨、吏部尚书张砺言于契丹主曰： 今大辽已得天下，中国将相宜用中国人为之，不宜用北人及左右近习。
现代文：契丹翰林承旨、吏部尚书张砺对契丹主说： 现在大辽已得天下，中原的将相应由中原人来作，不宜用北国人和左右熟悉的人。
English: Khitan leader Hanlin Zongzhi and leader Shangshu Zhangqiu said to the Khitan leader: Now that the Great Liao Dynasty has conquered the world, the Central Plains will be made by the Central Plains people, and it is not appropriate to use the northerners and people who are familiar with the area.

古文：苟政令乖失，则人心不服，虽得之，犹将失之。 
现代文：如果政令失误，就会人心不服，虽然得到了天下，也还会失去。 
English: If the government order is a mistake, people will not be satisfied, and although it has gained the world, it will also lose it.

古文：契丹主不从。
现代文：契丹主不肯听从。
English: The Khitan lord would not listen.

古文：引兵自邢、相而南，杜威将降兵以从。
现代文：契丹主率兵从邢、相二州南下，杜威率降兵跟随。
English: Khitan led his army southward from Shandong and Shandong Province, and Dewey followed with his army.

古文：遣张彦泽将二千骑先取大梁，且抚安吏民，以通事傅住兒为都监。
现代文：契丹主派张彦泽率二千骑兵先去攻取大梁，并且安抚那里的官吏百姓，派通事傅住儿为都监。
English: The Khitan lord sent Zhang Hianzhe and his two thousand cavalry to capture Dailiang first, and to pacify the officials and people there, he sent Tongzhi Fu Jiu'er as the governor of the capital.

古文：杜威之降也，皇甫遇初不预谋。
现代文：杜威投降的事，皇甫遇当初没参预谋划。
English: The Emperor did not take part in the planning of Dewey's surrender.

古文：契丹主欲遣遇先将兵入大梁，遇辞。退，谓所亲曰： 吾位为将相，败不能死，忍复图其主乎！ 
现代文：契丹主要派皇甫遇先率兵进入大梁，他推辞了；退下后对亲信说： 我身为将相，兵败后不能去死，怎能忍心再谋取君主呢！ 
English: Khitan chiefly sent the Empress Dowager to lead the troops into the girders first, but he declined; he retreated and said to his close confidants: I, as a general, cannot die after a military defeat, how can I bear to seek the monarch again!

古文：至平棘，谓从者曰： 吾不食累日矣，何面目复南行！ 
现代文：兵至平棘，对身边跟随人的说： 我已好几天不吃饭了，还有什么面目再往南走啊！ 
English: He went as far as Ping Thorn and said to the people following him: "I haven't eaten for several days, what's the point of going further south!"

古文：遂扼吭而死。
现代文：于是掐住喉咙而死。
English: He then strangled her to death.

古文：张彦泽倍道疾驱，夜度白马津。
现代文：张彦泽日夜兼程飞奔疾驰，夜里渡过白马津。
English: Zhang Yanze drove at high speed day and night, and passed through Baima District at night.

古文：壬申，帝始闻杜威等降。
现代文：壬申，后晋出帝才知道杜威等人已投降。
English: According to Jinshin, it was only after the emperor was crowned that he learned that Dewey and others had surrendered.

古文：是夕，又闻彦泽至滑州，召李崧、冯玉、李彦韬入禁中计事，欲诏刘知远发兵入援。
现代文：当天傍晚，又听说张彦泽已到滑州，就召李崧、冯玉、李彦韬到宫中议事，打算诏命刘知远起兵来援救都城。
English: In the evening of the same day, when he heard that Zhang Yanzhe had arrived in Slate, he summoned Li Xi, Feng Yu and Li Yanzhe to the palace for deliberation, intending to order Liu Zhiyuan to raise an army to rescue the capital.

古文：癸酉，未明，彦泽自封丘门斩关而入，李彦韬帅禁兵五百赴之，不能遏。彦泽顿兵明德门外，城中大扰。
现代文：癸酉，天还没亮，张彦泽已从封丘门破关冲入城中，李彦韬率领禁军五百名前往迎敌，不能阻止，张彦泽在明德门外驻军，城中大乱。
English: Alas, the day had not yet dawned, Zhang Yanzhe had already broken through the gate from the Fengqiu Gate and rushed into the city. Li Yanzhe led the forbidden army of five hundred to meet the enemy. It could not be stopped, Zhang Yanzhe stationed troops outside the Mingde Gate, and the city was in turmoil.

古文：帝于宫中起火，自携剑驱后宫十馀人将赴火，为亲军将薛超所持。
现代文：后晋出帝在宫中放起了火，自己提着宝剑驱赶后宫的十几个人将跳入火中，被亲军将领薛超抱住了。
English: After the Emperor Jintao set fire to the palace, more than a dozen people who drove out the harem with their swords jumped into the fire and were hugged by the pro-army general Xue Chao.

古文：俄而彦泽自宽仁门传契丹主与太后书慰抚之，且召桑维翰、景延广，帝乃命灭火，悉开宫城门。
现代文：一会儿，张彦泽从宽仁门外传进契丹主给太后的书信以示抚慰，并召桑维翰、景延广前来。后晋出帝于是命令灭火，打开所有的宫门。
English: After a while, Zhang Yanze passed a letter from the Khitan lord to the empress dowager from outside the gate of Guangren as a sign of consolation, and called San Weihan and Jing Yanquan to come. The emperor then ordered to extinguish the fire and open all the palace doors.

古文：帝坐苑中，与后妃相聚而泣，召翰林学士范质草降表，自称 孙男臣重贵，祸至神惑，运尽天亡。
现代文：后晋出帝坐在御苑中和后妃们相聚哭泣，召翰林学士范质草拟降表，自称： 孙男臣重贵，祸事来临神鬼迷惑；运数已尽天命灭亡。
English: Later, Emperor Jinnu sat in the imperial garden with his empresses crying together. He called Hanlin, a scholar, to draw up a table of demotion. He said to himself, "Sun Yat-sen is honorable, the calamity has come, the gods and demons are bewildered, and the lucky number has fulfilled its destiny and perished."

古文：今与太后及妻马氏，举族于郊野面缚待罪次。
现代文：现在和太后及妻子冯氏，全族大小都在郊野两手反绑向前排列等待降罪。
English: Now, together with the empress dowager and her wife, the Feng family, the whole family is lined up in the countryside with their hands tied behind their backs, waiting for the sentence to be reduced.

古文：遣男镇宁节度使延煦、威信节度使延宝，奉国宝一、金印三出迎。 
现代文：派儿子镇宁节度使石延煦、威信节度使石延宝，奉上国宝一枚、金印三枚出城迎接。 
English: He sent his sons, Zhenning Jieduo and Weixin Jieduo, to Shiyanluo and Shiyanluo, respectively, and presented them with a national treasure and three gold seals.

古文：太后亦上表称 新妇李氏妾 。
现代文：太后也上表称 新妇李氏妾 。
English: The empress dowager also publicly called the bride a concubine of the Li clan.

古文：傅住兒入宣契丹主命，帝脱黄袍，服素衫，再拜受宣，左右皆掩泣。
现代文：傅住儿入宫内宣示契丹主的命令，后晋出帝脱下黄袍，穿上素色衣衫，再次叩拜听从宣示，宫内左右侍从们都掩面涕泣。
English: Fu Zhu'er entered the palace to announce the order of the Khitan lord, after which the emperor took off his yellow robe, put on a plain shirt, and again bowed to listen to the announcement. The attendants on both sides of the palace hid their faces and wept.

古文：帝使召张彦泽，欲与计事。
现代文：后晋出帝让人召张彦泽来，想和他议事。
English: Later, Emperor Jinzhi sent someone to summon Zhang Hikozawa to discuss the matter with him.

古文：彦泽曰： 臣无面目见陛下。 
现代文：张彦泽说： 臣没脸去见陛下。 
English: Zhang Yanzawa said, "I don't have the face to meet His Majesty."

古文：帝复召之，彦泽微笑不应。
现代文：出帝再次召他去，他只是微笑不答应。
English: Emperor Zedong called him again, but he only smiled and did not answer.

古文：或劝桑维翰逃去。维翰曰： 吾大臣，逃将安之！ 
现代文：有人劝桑维翰逃走，他说： 我是大臣，逃了又往哪里去！ 
English: Someone advised Sanveighan to run away, and he said: "I am a minister. If I run away, where will I go?

古文：坐而俟命。
现代文：静坐待命。
English: Sit tight and stand by.

古文：彦泽以帝命召维翰。维翰至天街，遇李崧，驻马语未毕，有军吏于马前揖维翰赴侍卫司。维翰知不免，顾谓崧曰： 侍中当国，今日国亡，反令维翰死之，何也？ 
现代文：张彦泽以皇帝的命令召桑维翰入宫，桑维翰来到天街时，遇见李崧，停下马来说话未完，就有军吏在马前揖请桑维翰去侍卫司，他知道自己难免一死，回头对李崧说： 您这位侍中主持国政，现在国家灭亡，反而要让我去死，为什么呢？ 
English: Zhang Yanze called San Weihan into the palace by order of the emperor. When San Weihan came to Tian Jie, he met Li Qian. When he stopped his horse to speak, the military officials asked San Weihan to go to the bodyguard. He knew that he would inevitably die. He turned to Li Qian and said: You, the chamberlain, preside over national affairs. Now the country is dying. Instead, you want me to die. Why?

古文：崧有愧色。
现代文：李崧脸上露出惭愧的表情。
English: Li Yao's face showed an expression of shame.

古文：彦泽倨坐见维翰，维翰责之曰： 去年拔公于罪人之中，复领大镇，授以兵权，何乃负恩至此！ 
现代文：张彦泽傲慢地倚坐接见桑维翰，桑维翰指责他道： 去年从罪人之中把你提拔出来，又让你管辖一个大的藩镇，授予你兵权，你怎么能如此负恩！ 
English: Zhang Yanze arrogantly sat down to meet San Wei Han. San Wei Han reproached him, saying: Last year, I promoted you from among the sinners, and let you govern a large town, and granted you military power. How could you be so ungrateful!

古文：彦泽无以应，遣兵守之。
现代文：张彦泽无话可答，派兵看守住桑维翰。
English: Zhang Yanze had nothing to say and sent soldiers to guard Sang Weihan.

古文：宣徽使孟承诲，素以佞巧有宠于帝，至是，帝召承诲，欲与之谋，承诲伏匿不至。张彦泽捕而杀之。
现代文：宣徽使孟承诲一贯以乖巧谄媚受后晋出帝宠信，到这时，后晋出帝召他，想和他商议事情，孟承诲藏匿起来不到；张彦泽把他捉住而杀掉。
English: At this time, Emperor Xuanzang summoned Meng Chengyao and wanted to discuss matters with him. Meng Chengyao could not hide; Zhang Yanzhe caught him and killed him.

古文：彦泽纵兵大掠，贫民乘之，亦争入富室，杀之取其货，二日方止，都城为之一空。
现代文：张彦泽放纵士兵大肆抢掠，贫民趁乱也争着闯入富人家里杀人抢钱财，两天才停止，而都城已经被洗劫一空。
English: Zhang Yanzhe allowed soldiers to loot and pillage, and the poor took advantage of the turmoil to break into rich people's homes to kill and steal money. It took two days to stop, and the capital had been looted.

古文：彦泽所居宝货山积，自谓有功于契丹，昼夜以酒乐自娱，出入骑从常数百人，其旗帜皆题 赤心为主 ，见者笑之。
现代文：张彦泽的住处里钱财宝物堆积如山，他自认为有功于契丹，不分昼夜地饮美酒、听歌乐，纵情娱乐；每次出入跟随的骑兵常有几百名，他的旗帜上都题有 赤心为主 四字，见到的无不耻笑他。
English: Zhang Yanze's residence was piled high with money, wealth and treasures. He considered himself to be of great service to the Khitan. Day and night, he drank fine wine, listened to songs, and indulged in entertainment. He was often accompanied by several hundred cavalry every time he went in and out. His banner was inscribed with the four words "Red Heart for the Lord." People laughed at him when they saw him.

古文：军士擒罪人至前，彦泽不问所犯，但瞋目竖三指，即驱出断其腰领。
现代文：军士抓获罪人押到跟前，他不问所犯何罪，只瞪起眼睛竖起中指，就拉出去腰斩。
English: The sergeant caught the criminal and pushed him forward. He didn't ask what crime he had committed, just stared with his eyes and raised his middle finger. He pulled him out and beheaded him.

古文：彦泽素与阁门使高勋不协，乘醉至其家，杀其叔父及弟，尸诸门首。
现代文：张彦泽素来与门使高勋不融洽，就乘酒醉来到他家，杀死他的叔父和弟弟，陈尸门前。
English: Zhang Yanzhe had always been at odds with the gatekeeper Gao Xun, so he came to his house drunk and killed his uncle and brother in front of the gate.

古文：士民不寒而栗。
现代文：士民见了不寒而。
English: When they saw it, they shuddered.

古文：中书舍人李涛谓人曰： 吾与其逃于沟渎而不免，不若往见之。 
现代文：中书舍人李涛对人说： 我与其逃到水沟里而不免一死，就不如前去见他。 
English: Li Tao, a resident of the Chinese school, said to the man, "Instead of running into the ditch and dying, I'd better go and see him."

古文：乃投刺谒彦泽曰： 上疏请杀太尉人李涛，谨来请死。 
现代文：于是投上名刺谒见张彦泽，说： 上书请杀太尉人李涛，谨来请死。 
English: So he cast his name card to Zhang Yanzawa, saying: "Please kill the captain Li Tao, I would like to die."

古文：彦泽欣然接之，谓涛曰： 舍人今日惧乎？ 
现代文：张彦泽欣然接见了他，问李涛： 你今天害怕了？ 
English: Zhang Yanze was delighted to meet him and asked Li Tao: Are you scared today?

古文：涛曰： 涛今日之惧，亦犹足下昔年之惧也。
现代文：李涛说： 我今天的害怕，就像你当年的害怕一样。
English: Li Tao said: My fear today is the same as your fear back then.

古文：曏使高祖用涛言，事安至此！ 
现代文：过去如果高祖听我李涛的话，事情哪能到这地步！ 
English: In the past, if Gao Zu had listened to me, Li Tao, things wouldn't have come to this!

古文：彦泽大笑，命酒饮之。涛引满而去，旁若无人。
现代文：张彦泽听了放声大笑，命人拿酒来给李涛喝，李涛斟满杯后一饮而尽，然后旁若无人地走了。
English: Zhang Yanze laughed loudly when he heard this, and ordered someone to bring wine for Li Tao to drink. Li Tao filled the glass and drank it all, and then left as if no one was there.

古文：甲戌，张彦泽迁帝于开封府，顷刻不得留，宫中恸哭。
现代文：甲戌，张彦泽把出帝迁往开封府，而且片刻不让停留，宫里大哭。
English: Armor-plated, Zhang Yanze moved the emperor-to-be to Kaifeng, and did not allow him to stay for a moment, and the palace burst into tears.

古文：帝与太后、皇后乘肩舆，宫人、宦者十馀人步从，见者流涕。
现代文：出帝和太后、皇后坐着肩舆，宫人、宦官十几人步行跟随。
English: The outgoing emperor, the empress dowager, and the empress sat on his shoulders, while more than a dozen courtiers and eunuchs followed on foot.

古文：帝悉以内库金珠自随。
现代文：路上见到的人都流下眼泪。
English: People I saw on the road were in tears.

古文：彦泽使人讽之曰： 契丹主至，此物不可匿也。 
现代文：出帝把内库的金银珠宝都随身带走，张彦泽派人规劝他说： 契丹主来时，这些东西无法藏匿。 
English: Zhang Yanze sent someone to persuade him to take all the gold, silver, and jewels out of the imperial treasury with him, saying, "When the Khitan Lord comes, these things cannot be hidden.

古文：帝悉归之，亦分以遗彦泽，彦泽择取其奇货，而封其馀以待契丹。
现代文：出帝将这些财宝都放回内库，也分一部分给张彦泽；张彦泽选取其中的奇珍异宝，封存其余留待契丹。
English: The emperor returned all of these treasures to the treasury, and also gave a portion of them to Zhang Yanzhe; Zhang Yanzhe selected the rarest treasures among them and sealed the rest to be kept for Khitan.

古文：彦泽遣控鹤指挥使李筠以兵守帝，内外不通。
现代文：张彦泽派控鹤指挥使李筠率兵看守出帝，出帝和外界的联系不通。
English: Zhang Yanze sent the commanding officer of the controlling cranes to make Li Jun and his soldiers guard the emperor, and the connection between the emperor and the outside world was not clear.

古文：帝姑乌氏公主赂守门者，入与帝诀，相持而泣，归第自经死。
现代文：出帝的姑姑乌氏公主贿赂看门人，进来与出帝诀别，然后回到家中上吊自杀。
English: The emperor's aunt, Princess Wu, bribed the doorman to come in and say goodbye to the emperor, and then returned home and hanged herself.

古文：帝与太后所上契丹主表章，皆先示彦泽，然后敢发。
现代文：出帝和太后给契丹主所上的表章，都先给张彦泽看过，然后才敢发出。
English: Zhang Yanze first read the seals of the emperor and the empress dowager, which were given to the Khitan lord, before he dared to issue them.

古文：帝使取内库帛数段，主者不与，曰： 此非帝物也。 
现代文：后晋出帝让人取几段内库的丝帛，管库的人不给，说： 这不是你的东西。 
English: Later, Emperor Jintao had someone take a few pieces of silk cocoons from the storeroom, but the person in charge of the storeroom refused to give them to him, saying, "This is not your stuff."

古文：又求酒于李崧，崧亦辞以它故不进。
现代文：又向李崧要酒，李崧也用其它原因推托不送来。
English: He also asked Li Yao for wine, but Li Yao did not send it for other reasons.

古文：又欲见李彦韬，彦韬亦辞不往。帝惆怅久之。
现代文：他又想见李彦韬，李彦韬也推辞不来，出帝为此惆怅了许久。
English: He also wanted to see Li Yanyan, Li Yanyan also refused to come, and the emperor was delayed for a long time.

古文：冯玉佞张彦泽，求自送传国宝，冀契丹复任用。
现代文：冯玉谄媚张彦泽，请求让自己送去传国之宝，希望契丹能再任用他。
English: Feng Yuxuan pleaded with Zhang Yanze to let him send the national treasure, hoping that Khitan could reappoint him.

古文：楚国夫人丁氏，延煦之母也，有美色。
现代文：楚国夫人丁氏，是石延煦的母亲，长得美丽。
English: Mrs. Ding of Chu, the mother of Shi Yanqi, was beautiful.

古文：彦泽使人取之，太后迟回未与。彦泽诟詈，立载之去。
现代文：张彦泽派人去取来，太后迟疑徘徊不肯给，张彦泽大骂，把楚国夫人装上车就走。
English: Zhang Yanze sent someone to fetch it, but the empress dowager hesitated and refused to give it to her. Zhang Yanze cursed loudly and loaded Lady Chu into the car and left.

古文：是夕，彦泽杀桑维翰。以带加颈，白契丹主，云其自经。
现代文：这天傍晚，张彦泽杀了桑维翰，并用带子套在他脖子上，告诉契丹主，说他是上吊自杀。
English: In the evening of the same day, Zhang Yanze killed Sanveehan and put a band around his neck, telling the Khitan lord that he had hanged himself.

古文：契丹主曰： 吾无意杀维翰，何为如是！ 
现代文：契丹主说： 我无意杀桑维翰，他为什么这样！ 
English: The Khitan lord said: I had no intention of killing Sanveikhan, why did he do it!

古文：命厚抚其家。
现代文：命人丰厚地抚恤他的家属。
English: His family was lavishly provided for.

古文：高行周、符彦卿皆诣契丹牙帐降。
现代文：高行周、符彦卿都到契丹主的牙帐投降。
English: Gao Xing Zhou and Fu Yanqing both surrendered to the Khitan lord.

古文：契丹主以阳城之战为彦卿所败，诘之。彦卿曰： 臣当时惟知为晋主竭力，今日死生惟命。 
现代文：契丹主因阳城之战被符彦卿打败，追问符彦卿，彦卿说： 臣当时只知为晋主竭尽全力，今日死生听你决定。 
English: Lord Khitan was defeated by Lord Fuhiko because of the Battle of Yangcheng, and asked Lord Fuhiko about it. Lord Fuhiko said: At that time, I only knew how to do my best for Lord Jin. Today, I am at your mercy.

古文：契丹主笑而释之。
现代文：契丹主一笑而释放了他。
English: The emir smiled and released him.

古文：己卯，延煦、延宝自牙帐还，契丹主赐帝手诏，且遣解里谓帝曰： 孙勿忧，必使汝有啖饭之所。 
现代文：己卯，石延煦、石延宝从牙帐回，契丹主赐给出帝手诏，并派解里前去对出帝说： 孙儿不要担忧，一定让你有吃饭的地方。 
English: When he, Shi Yan Kun and Shi Yan Bao came back from the dentist, the Khitan lord gave the emperor a handshake and sent a messenger to say to the outgoing emperor: "Don't worry, grandson, I'll make sure you have a place to eat."

古文：帝心稍安，上表谢恩。
现代文：出帝心里稍稍安稳，上表谢恩。
English: I feel a little more secure now that I've become emperor, so thank you very much.

古文：契丹以所献传国宝追琢非工，又不与前史相应，疑其非真，以诏书诘帝，使献真者。
现代文：契丹认为所献的传国之宝雕琢不精细，又和前代历史所记不相吻合，怀疑不是真品，下诏书追问出帝，让他献出真宝。
English: Khitan thought that the national treasure presented was not finely carved, and did not coincide with the history of the previous generation. He suspected that it was not a genuine article. In the next imperial edict, he asked the emperor to present the real treasure.

古文：帝奏： 顷王从珂自焚，旧传国宝不知所在，必与之俱烬。
现代文：出帝上奏道： 不久前王从珂自焚时，旧的传国之宝就不知去向，想来一定是和他一起化为灰烬了。
English: "Not long ago, when Wang Congke self-immolated, the old national treasure did not know where to go. It must have turned into ashes with him.

古文：此宝先帝所为，群臣备知。
现代文：这个国宝是先帝所制，众大臣全知道。
English: This national treasure was made by the former emperor, and the ministers all know about it.

古文：臣今日焉敢匿宝！ 
现代文：我在今天哪里还敢藏匿国宝啊！ 
English: Where would I dare to hide a national treasure today!

古文：乃止。
现代文：于是作罢。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：帝闻契丹主将渡河，欲与太后于前途奉迎。张彦泽先奏之，契丹主不许。
现代文：出帝听说契丹主将要渡黄河，想和太后事先到前面迎接；张彦泽事先奏报，契丹主不同意。
English: When Emperor Dezong heard that the Khitan lord was going to cross the Yellow River, he wanted to meet the empress dowager in advance; Zhang Yanze reported in advance, but the Khitan lord did not agree.

古文：有司又欲使帝衔璧牵羊，大臣舆榇，迎于郊外，先具仪注白契丹主，契丹主曰： 吾遣奇兵直取大梁，非受降也。 
现代文：有关官员又想让出帝口衔璧、手牵羊，大臣拉着车上的棺材，到郊外迎接；先将这些仪式告诉契丹主，契丹主说： 我派奇兵直取大梁，不是来受降的。 
English: The officials concerned also wanted to give the emperor the title of the mouth, the hand-holding sheep, and the minister pulling the coffin on the car to meet in the suburbs; first tell these rituals to the Qidan Lord. The Qidan Lord said: I sent the soldiers to take the girders directly, not to accept the surrender.

古文：亦不许。
现代文：也不允许。
English: It's also not allowed.

古文：又诏晋文武群官，一切如故；朝廷制度，并用汉礼。
现代文：又下诏书告诉后晋文武百官，一切都照旧；朝廷制度沿用汉人礼仪。
English: He also issued an imperial edict telling the hundreds of civil and military officials of the Later Jin Dynasty that everything would remain the same; the imperial court system would continue to use Han Chinese etiquette.

古文：有司欲备法驾迎契丹主，契丹主报曰： 吾主擐甲总戎，太常仪卫，未暇施也。 
现代文：有关官署要备法驾去迎接契丹主，契丹主说： 我正戎装披甲，太常仪卫没工夫使用。 
English: The relevant government departments should prepare to drive to meet the Qidan Lord. The Qidan Lord said: I am wearing a military uniform and armor, but I often do not have time to use the gears.

古文：皆却之。
现代文：一概推却了。
English: They were all turned down.

古文：先是契丹主至相州，即遣兵趣河阳捕景延广。
现代文：早先，契丹主来到相州，旋即派兵开往河阳捕捉景延广。
English: Earlier, the Khitan lord came to Sangju and immediately sent troops to capture Jingyuan.

古文：延广苍猝无所逃伏，往见契丹主于封丘。
现代文：景延广仓促之间无处逃跑藏匿，就到封丘去见契丹主。
English: With nowhere to run and nowhere to hide, Jing Yanguang hurriedly went to Fengqiu to meet the Khitan lord.

古文：契丹主诘之曰： 致两主失欢，皆汝所为也。
现代文：契丹主责问他道： 导致两主不和，全是你所干的事！
English: The Khitan lord rebuked him, saying, "It was all your doing that led to the discord between the two lords!

古文：十万横磨剑安在！ 
现代文：你所说的 十万横磨剑 在哪里？ 
English: Where is the 100,000-year-old sword you spoke of?

古文：召乔荣，使相辨证，事凡十条。
现代文：召来乔荣，让他们互相申辩对证，共十件事。
English: Summon Qiao Rong, let them argue and cross-examine each other, a total of ten things.

古文：延广初不服，荣以纸所记语示之，乃服。每服一事，辄授一筹。
现代文：景延广最初不服，乔荣把纸上所记的话给他看，景延广才认服，每承认一件事，就给他一支筹码。
English: Jing Yanguang was not satisfied at first. Qiao Rong showed him the words written on the paper. Jing Yanguang was convinced. For each thing he admitted, he was given a chip.

古文：至八筹，延广但以面伏地请死，乃锁之。
现代文：到第八去支筹码时，景延广只能把脸伏在地上请求死罪，于是把他关押起来。
English: On the eighth chip, Jing Yanguang could only put his face on the ground to plead for the death penalty, so he was arrested.

古文：丙戌晦，百官宿于封禅寺。
现代文：丙戌晦，文武百官在封禅寺住宿。
English: After the war, hundreds of military and civilian officials stayed at Fuzan Temple.

