古文：黄帝问曰：余闻皮有分部，脉有经纪，筋有结络，骨有度量，其所生病各异，别其分部，左右上下，阴阳所在，病之始终，愿闻其道。
现代文：黄帝问道：我听说人的皮肤按十二经而分属不同的部位，经脉有径之经横之纪而纵横有序，筋系于肉连于骨，骨有长短大小，五体所发生的疾病各有不同，如何分辨病灶所在的部位，其病灶部分的左右上下的精确定位，以及其阴阳状况如何，疾病是如何形成并痊愈的，我想听听其中的道理。
English: Huang Di asked: I have heard that the human skin is divided into different parts according to the twelve meridians, the meridians have a path and are ordered vertically and horizontally, the sinews are connected to the flesh and the bones, the bones have length and size, the diseases of the five bodies are different, how to distinguish the part where the lesion is located, the precise positioning of the left and right parts of the lesion, and how the yin and yang condition is, how the disease is formed and cured, I would like to hear the reason.

古文：岐伯对曰：欲知皮部以经脉为纪者，诸经皆然。
现代文：岐伯回答说：要知道皮肤的所属部位，它是以经脉循行部位为纲纪的，各经都是如此。
English: Qibo replied, "To know the part of the skin, it is based on the meridians, and each meridian is the same.

古文：阳明之阳，名曰害蜚。
现代文：阳明经的皮部，名叫 害蜚 。
English: The skin part of the Yangmingjing is called Shentong.

古文：上下同法，视其部中有浮络者，皆阳明之络也。
现代文：手、足阳明经脉的诊法是一样的，诊察它上下分属部位所浮现的络脉，都是属于阳明的络。
English: The diagnosis of the yangming meridians of the hands and feet is the same, and the vas deferens that appear when examining its upper and lower parts belong to the yangming meridians.

古文：其色多青则痛，多黑则痹，黄赤则热，多白则寒，五色皆见，则寒热也。
现代文：它的络脉之色，多青的则是痛证，多黑的则是痹证，多黄红的则是热证，多白的则是寒证，若五色兼见，则是寒热错杂的病。
English: It is the color of the vas deferens. If it is more blue than green, it is a sign of pain. If it is more black than black, it is a sign of paralysis. If it is more yellow than red, it is a sign of heat. If it is more white than white, it is a sign of cold. If it is five colors, it is a mixed disease of cold and heat.

古文：络盛则入客于经，阳主外，阴主内。
现代文：络脉的邪气盛，就会向内传入于经，因为络脉在外属阳，经脉在内属阴。
English: The evil energy of the vas deferens will be transmitted inward to the meridians, because the external vas deferens is yang, and the internal meridians are yin.

古文：少阳之阳，名曰枢持。
现代文：少阳经的皮部，名叫 枢持 。
English: The skin part of the Shoyangjing is called the zhuzhi.

古文：上下同法，视其部中有浮络者，皆少阳之络也。
现代文：手、足少阳经的诊法是一样的，诊察它上下分属部位所浮现的络脉，都是属于少阳的络。
English: The diagnosis method of Shao Yang Ching for hands and feet is the same. When it is diagnosed, the vas deferens that emerge from its upper and lower parts belong to the Shao Yang Ching.

古文：络盛则入客于经，故在阳者主内，在阴者主出，以渗于内。
现代文：络脉的邪气盛，就会向内传入于经，所以邪在阳分则主内传入经脉，邪在阴分则主外出于皮肤，以渗于脏俯募原之间。
English: The evil energy of the vas deferens will be transmitted inward to the meridians, so the evil in the yang point will be transmitted inward to the meridians, and the evil in the yin point will be transmitted outward from the skin, so as to permeate the dirty subduction zone.

古文：诸经皆然。
现代文：各经的内外出入都是如此。
English: This is the case for all entries and exits.

古文：太阳之阳，名曰关枢。
现代文：太阳经的皮部，名叫 关枢 。
English: The part of the skin through which the sun passes is called the junction.

古文：上下同法，视其部中有浮络者，皆太阳之络也。
现代文：手、足太阳经的诊法是一样的，诊察它上下分属部位所浮现的络脉，都是属于太阳的络。
English: The diagnosis of hand and foot heliacalgia is the same. The veins that emerge from the upper and lower parts of it are all the veins of the sun.

古文：络盛则入客于经。
现代文：络脉的邪气盛，就会向内传入于经。
English: The evil energy of the vas deferens will be transmitted to the body of the sutra.

古文：少阴之阴，名曰枢儒。
现代文：少阴经的皮部，名叫 枢儒 。
English: The part of the skin with fewer yin meridians is called the zhu ru.

古文：上下同法，视其部中有浮络者，皆少阴之络也。
现代文：手、足少阴经的诊法是一样的，诊察它上下分属部位所浮现的络脉，都是属于少阴的络。
English: The diagnosis for menarche of the hands and feet is the same. When it is diagnosed, the vas deferens that emerge from its upper and lower parts belong to the menarche of menarche.

古文：络盛则入客于经。其入经也，从阳部注于经；其出者，从阴内注于骨。
现代文：络脉的邪气盛，就会向内传入于经，邪气传入于经，是先从属阳的络脉注入于经，然后从属阴的经脉而出，向内注入于骨部。
English: The evil spirit of the meridians will be transmitted to the meridians from the yang meridians, and then from the yin meridians to the bones.

古文：心主之阴，名曰害肩。
现代文：厥阴经的皮部，名叫 害肩 。
English: The skin part of the Jueyin sutra is called the shoulder.

古文：上下同法，视其部中有浮络者，皆心主之络也。
现代文：手、足厥阴经的诊法是一样的，诊察它上下分属部位所浮现的络，都是属于厥阴的络。
English: The diagnosis method of hand and foot Jue Yin is the same. When it is examined, the networks emerging from its upper and lower parts belong to the network of Jue Yin.

古文：络盛则入客于经。
现代文：络脉的邪气盛，就会向内传入于本经。
English: The evil energy of the vas deferens will be transmitted to the body of the sutra.

古文：太阴之阴，名曰关蛰。
现代文：太阴经的皮部，名叫 关蛰 。
English: The skin part of the lunar calendar, called Guan Zhen.

古文：上下同法，视其部中有浮络者，皆太阴之络也。
现代文：手，足太阴经的诊法是一样的，诊察它上下分属部位所浮现的络，都是属于太阴的络。
English: The diagnosis of the hands and feet being too yin is the same. When it is examined, the webs that emerge from its upper and lower parts are all too yin webs.

古文：络盛则入客于经。
现代文：络脉的邪气盛，就会向内传入于本经。
English: The evil energy of the vas deferens will be transmitted to the body of the sutra.

古文：凡十二经络脉者，皮之部也。
现代文：十二经络在皮肤上所划定的各个部分，就是皮部。
English: The various parts delineated by the twelve meridians on the skin are the dermis.

古文：是故百病之始生也，必先于皮毛。邪中之则腠理开，开则入客于络脉，留而不去，传入于经，留而不去，传入于腑，廪于肠胃。
现代文：因此，百病的发生，必先从皮毛开始，病邪侵入于皮毛则腠理开，腠理开则病邪侵入络脉，留而不去就向内传入于经脉，若再留而不去就传入于腑，聚积于肠胃。
English: Therefore, the occurrence of all diseases must first start from the fur. If the disease invades the fur, it will be purified. If it is purified, the disease will invade the vas deferens. If it is not removed, it will be transmitted to the internal meridians. If it is not removed, it will be transmitted to the gills and accumulate in the intestines and stomach.

古文：邪之始入于皮也，泝然起毫毛，开腠理，其入于络也，则络脉盛色变；其入客于经也，则感虚乃陷下。其留于筋骨之间，寒多则筋挛骨痛；热多则筋弛骨消，肉烁䐃破，毛直而败。
现代文：病邪开始侵犯皮毛时，使人恶寒而毫毛直起，腠理开泄；病邪侵入络脉，则络脉盛满，其色变异常；病邪侵入经脉，是由于经气虚而病邪乃得陷入；病邪留连于筋骨之间，若寒邪盛时则筋挛急骨节疼痛，热邪盛时则筋弛缓，骨软无力，皮肉败坏，毛发枯槁。
English: When the disease begins to invade the fur, it makes people feel chilly and the hair stands straight up, and the skin clears; when the disease invades the vas deferens, the vas deferens is full and its color changes abnormally; when the disease invades the meridians, it is due to the deficiency of qi and the disease is trapped; the disease remains between the bones and muscles, if the cold is strong, the bones and muscles are in pain, and when the heat is strong, the muscles are relaxed, the bones are weak, the skin and flesh are deteriorated, and the hair is withered.

古文：帝曰：夫子言皮之十二部，其生病皆何如？
现代文：黄帝说，您说的皮之十二部，发生的病都是怎样呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "What about the twelve parts of the skin that you mentioned?

古文：岐伯曰：皮者，脉之部也。
现代文：岐伯说：皮肤是络脉分属的部位。
English: Qi Bo said: The skin is the part of the vas deferens.

古文：邪客于皮则腠理开，开则邪入客于络脉，络脉满则注于经脉，经脉满则入舍于腑脏也。
现代文：邪气侵入于皮肤则腠理开泄，腠理开泄则病邪侵入于络脉，络脉的邪气满盛则内注于经脉，经脉的邪气满盛则入留居于腑、脏。
English: When the evil spirit invades the skin, it is excreted, when the evil spirit is excreted, the disease invades the vein, when the vein is full of evil spirit, it is infused into the meridians, and when the vein is full of evil spirit, it enters and remains in the pus and dirt.

古文：故皮者有分部，不与而生大病也。帝曰：善。
现代文：所以说，皮肤有十二经脉分属的部位，若皮肤腠理开泄，就会生大病。黄帝说：好。
English: Therefore, the skin has twelve meridian points, and if the skin is irritated, it will cause serious illness. Huangdi said, "Good."

