古文：士君子之处世，贵能有益於物耳，不徒高谈虚论，左琴右书，以费人君禄位也！
现代文：士君子的处世，贵在能够有益於事物，不能光是高谈阔论，左琴右书，耗费国君主的俸禄官位啊！
English: In the life of a scholar and gentleman, it is important to be able to be beneficial to things, not just talk about things, play the piano, and spend the salary of the monarch.

古文：国之用材，大较不过六事：一则朝廷之臣，取其鉴达治体，经纶博雅；二则文史之臣，取其著述宪章，不忘前古；三则军旅之臣，取其断决有谋，强干习事；四则藩屏之臣，取其明练风俗，清白爱民；五则使命之臣，取其识变从宜，不辱君命；六则兴造之臣，取其程功节费，开略有术：此则皆勤学守行者所能办也。
现代文：国家使用人材，大体不外六个方面：一是朝廷的臣子，用他能通晓治理国家的体制纲要，经纶博雅；二是文史的臣子，用他能撰写典章，不忘古先；三是军旅的臣子，用他能决斯有谋，强干习事；四是藩屏的臣於，用他能熟悉风俗，廉洁爱民；五是使命的臣子，用他能随机应变，不辱君命；六是兴造的臣子，用他能考核工程节省费用，多出主意：这都是勤奋学习、认真工作的人所能办到的。
English: The state uses human resources in roughly six aspects: First, the courtier of the imperial court, using his ability to understand the outline of the system for governing the country, he is elegant; second, the courtier of literature and history, using his ability to write codes, not forgetting the past; third, the courtier of military travel, using his ability to be resourceful and strong in learning; fourth, the courtier of the screen, using his ability to be familiar with customs, honest and loving the people; fifth, the courtier of the mission, using his ability to be flexible, not dishonoring the king's life; sixth, the courtier of construction, using his ability to examine projects, save costs

古文：人性有长短，岂责具美于六涂哉？
现代文：只是人的秉性各有短长，怎可以强求这六个方面都做好呢？
English: However, human nature has its own shortcomings. How can we insist that these six aspects are all done well?

古文：但当皆晓指趣，能守一职，便无愧耳。
现代文：只要对这些都通晓大意，而做好其中的一个方面，也就无所惭愧了。
English: As long as you are familiar with the gist of these, and do a good job in one of them, there is nothing to be ashamed of.

古文：吾见世中文学之士，品藻古今，若指诸掌，及有试用，多无所堪。
现代文：我看现在世上一般的文人，评古论今，好像了若指掌。但真的试用一下，他们又往往不能胜任。
English: It seems to me that the average literati in the world today seem to know everything about commenting on the past and the present, but if you really try, they are often not competent.

古文：居承平之世，不知有丧乱之祸；处庙堂之下，不知有战阵之急；保俸禄之资，不知有耕稼之苦；肆吏民之上，不知有劳役之勤：故难可以应世经务也。
现代文：长时间生活在太平盛世，不知道丧乱的祸害；在朝为官，不知道边地战争的急迫；只知道领取俸禄，不知道百姓种田的辛苦；生活在小吏和百姓的上层，不知道要有辛勤的劳役。所以难以适应社会处理事务。
English: Living for a long time in a time of peace and prosperity, they do not know the scourge of turmoil; working as an official in the government, they do not know the urgency of the war on the frontier; they only know how to receive a salary, but do not know the hard work of the people in farming; living in the upper class of petty officials and the people, they do not know how to have hard labor. Therefore, it is difficult to adapt to society to deal with affairs.

古文：晋朝南渡，优借士族，故江南冠带有才干者，擢为令仆已下尚书郎、中书舍人已上，典掌机要。
现代文：晋朝南渡之后，特别尊重厚待士族，所在江南士族中有才干的人都担任尚书令，左右仆射以下，尚书郎，中书舍人以上的官职，掌管国家的机要。
English: After the Jin Dynasty went to the south, they especially respected and treated the warrior class. The most talented members of the warrior class in the south of the Yangtze River served as Shang Shuling (尚書令), right and left flanking shooters, Shang Shulang (尚書郎), middle schoolers and above, and held important positions in charge of the country.

古文：其馀文义之士。多迂诞浮华，不涉世务，纤微过失，又惜行捶楚，所以处於清高，盖护其短也。
现代文：其他只懂得点文义的士人，大多迂腐荒诞，浮华铺张，不会处理世务，小有过错又舍不得责杖责，因而把他们放在清高的位置上，来掩饰他们的弱点。
English: Other scholars who only know a little about literature and philosophy are mostly pedantic and absurd, flashy and ostentatious, unable to handle worldly affairs, and unwilling to take responsibility for minor mistakes, so they put them in a high position to cover up their weaknesses.

古文：至於台阁令史，主书监帅，诸王签省，并晓习吏用，济办时须，纵有小人之态，皆可鞭枚肃督，故多见委使，盖用其长也。
现代文：至於那些台阁令史，主书，监帅，诸王签省，都对工作通晓熟练，能按需要完成任务，纵使流露出小人的情态，还可以鞭打监督，所以多被委任使用，是要用他们的长处啊。
English: As for those cabinet secretaries, chief secretaries, supervisors, and provincial governors, they are all knowledgeable and skilled in their work, can complete their tasks as needed, and even if they reveal villainous behavior, they can still be whipped and supervised. Therefore, they are mostly appointed and used to use their strengths.

古文：人每不自量，举世怨梁武帝父子爱小人而疏士大夫，此亦眼不能见其睫耳。
现代文：但是人们不懂得其中的道理，全社会的人都认埋怨梁氏父子喜爱小人而疏远了士大夫，这种看法就像眼睛看不见眼睫毛一样看不到自身的短处。
English: But people don't understand the reason. The whole society blames Mr. Liang's father and son for liking villains and alienating the scholar-officials. This view is like the eyes can't see their own shortcomings like the eyelashes.

古文：梁世士大夫，皆尚褒衣博带，大冠高履，出则车舆，入则扶持，郊郭之内，无乘马者。
现代文：梁朝的士大夫，都喜欢穿肥大的衣服，系宽阔的带子，戴高帽子，穿厚底鞋，出门就坐马车或轿子，进屋就有仆人搀扶侍候，无论在城里市郊，都没有骑马的。
English: Liang dynasty officials liked to wear bulky clothes, wide belts, tall hats and thick-soled shoes. When they went out, they rode in carriages or palanquins. When they came home, they were waited on hand and foot by servants. No one rode a horse in or outside the city.

古文：周弘正为宣城王所爱，给一果下马，常服御之，举朝以为放达。至乃尚书郎乘马，则纠劾之。
现代文：宣城王很喜欢周弘正，专门赐他一匹果下马。周经常出门乘骑这匹小马，结果满朝士大夫都认为他的行为狂放不羁，以至于当时尚书郎如果骑马，就会受到弹劾。
English: King Seonjo liked Zhou Hongzhen very much and specially gave him a horse. Zhou often went out to ride this pony, and as a result, Dr. Man Choshi thought that his behavior was wild and uninhibited, so that at that time, if Shang Shuro rode a horse, he would be impeached.

古文：及侯景之乱，肤脆骨柔，不堪行步，体羸气弱，不耐寒暑，坐死仓猝者，往往而然。
现代文：到了侯景之乱的时候，士大夫们皮肤脆嫩，骨头酥软，连路也走不了，体质虚弱，又不能耐受寒冷或酷热。结果仓促之间一命呜呼的，到处都是。
English: By the time of the Houjing Disturbance, the scholar-officials had brittle skin, soft bones, could not even walk, weak constitution, and could not tolerate cold or extreme heat. As a result, there were many who died in a hurry.

古文：建康今王复，性既儒雅，未尝乘骑，见马嘶贲陆梁。莫不震慑，乃谓人曰： 正是虎，何故名为马乎？ 
现代文：建康令王复，性情温文尔雅，从未骑过马，一看见马嘶鸣跳跃，就惊慌害怕，他对人说道： 这是老虎，为什么叫马呢？ 
English: King Jiankang's son, Wang Fu, was mild-mannered and had never ridden a horse. As soon as he saw a horse neighing and jumping, he panicked and was afraid. He said to people: This is a tiger, why is it called a horse?

古文：其风俗至此。
现代文：当时的风气竟然颓废到这种程度。
English: The culture of that time was so decadent.

古文：古人欲知稼穑之艰难，斯盖贵谷务本之道也。
现代文：古人知道耕种的艰难，这大概表现在重视谷物，以农为本的思想方面。
English: The ancients knew the difficulties of farming, which is probably reflected in the emphasis on cereals and the agrarian-oriented ideology.

古文：夫食为民天，民非食不生矣，三日不粒，父子不能相存。
现代文：民以食为天，百姓不吃饭就不能生存。三天不吃饭，就连父子之间也没有力气互相问候。
English: Food is the most important thing for the people, and they cannot survive without eating. If they don't eat for three days, even a father and son won't have the strength to greet each other.

古文：耕种之，休组之，对获之，载积之，打拂之，簸扬之，凡几涉手，而入仓廪，安可轻农事而贵末业哉？江南朝士，因晋中兴，南渡江，卒为羁旅，至今八九世，未有力田，悉资俸禄而食耳。
现代文：一茬庄稼的收获，要耕种，除草，收割，运载，脱粒，扬谷，经过许多道工序，才能收成入仓。如此这样，怎可轻视农事而贵重商业呢在江南为官的士大夫们，因晋朝的中兴，渡江南来，最终寄居此地，至今已有八九代了，还从未下力种过田，全靠俸禄过活。
English: The harvest of a bunch of crops needs to be cultivated, weeded, harvested, transported, threshed, and threshed. After many processes, it can only be harvested and stored. In this way, how can we despise agriculture and value commerce? The officials and magistrates in the south of the Yangtze River, due to the rise of the Jin Dynasty, came to the south of the Yangtze River and eventually settled here. So far, there have been eight or nine generations. They have never worked hard to grow fields and live entirely on salaries.

古文：假令有者，皆信僮仆为之，未尝目观起一拨土，耕一株苗；不知几月当下，几月当收，安识世间馀务乎？
现代文：即使他们占有一些土地，都是靠僮仆们来耕种，自己未见过翻一垄土，种一株苗，不知道该哪个月下种，该哪个月收获，又怎能知晓世上的其他事务呢？
English: Even if they own some land and depend on their servants to cultivate it, if they have never seen how to dig a furrow or plant a seedling, if they do not know which month to plant and which month to harvest, how can they know anything about the rest of the world?

古文：故治官则不了，营家则不办，皆优闲之过也。
现代文：所以他们若做官则不明为官之道，治家则不会经营，这些都是生活优裕闲适所带来的过错啊！
English: Therefore, if they are government officials, they do not know how to be government officials, and if they are family managers, they do not know how to run a business. These are all faults brought about by a life of luxury and leisure!

