古文：二十有一年春，王三月，葬蔡平公。
现代文：二十一年春季，周历三月，安葬蔡平公。
English: In the spring of the twenty-first year, in March of the lunar calendar, Cai Ping Gong was buried.

古文：夏，晋侯使士鞅来聘。
现代文：夏季，晋侯派遣士鞅来鲁国聘问。
English: In the summer, the Jin princes sent envoys to Lu to solicit his services.

古文：宋华亥、向宁、华定自陈入于宋南里以叛。
现代文：宋国的华亥、向宁、华定从陈国进入宋国南里这个地方，领着南里的人叛变。
English: Hua Hai, Xiang Ning, and Huading of Song entered Nanli of Song from Chen and led the people of Nanli to rebel.

古文：秋七月壬午朔，日有食之。
现代文：秋季七月壬午初一这天，有日食发生。
English: In autumn, on the first day of July, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：八月乙亥，叔辄卒。
现代文：八月乙亥日，叔辄去世。
English: In August, on the day of the Chinese lunar new year, my uncle passed away.

古文：冬，蔡侯朱出奔楚。
现代文：冬季，蔡侯逃到楚国。
English: In winter, Cai Hou fled to Chu.

古文：公如晋，至河乃复。
现代文：昭公去到晋国，到达黄河又回来了。
English: Shao Gong went to Jin Province, arrived at the river and came back.

古文：二十一年春，天王将铸无射。
现代文：二十一年春季，周景王准备铸造无射大钟。
English: In the spring of the twenty-first year, Zhou Jingwang prepared to cast a large bell without a chiming.

古文：泠州鸠曰： 王其以心疾死乎？
现代文：泠州鸠说： 天子大概会由于心病而死去吧！
English: Zhangzhou Yao said, "Heavenly Son will probably die of a heart disease!"

古文：夫乐，天子之职也。
现代文：音乐，是天子所主持的。
English: Music is presided over by the heavenly son.

古文：夫音，乐之舆也。而钟，音之器也。
现代文：声音，是音乐的车床，而钟，是发音的器物。
English: Sound is the lathe of music, while the bell is the instrument of articulation.

古文：天子省风以作乐，器以钟之，舆以行之，小者不窕，大者不槬，则和于物。
现代文：天子考察风俗因而制作乐曲，用乐器来汇聚它，用声音来表达它，小的乐器发音不纤细，大的乐器发音不洪亮，那样就使一切事物和谐。
English: The Son of Heaven examines the customs, and then composes music, gathers it with musical instruments, and expresses it with sounds. Small musical instruments do not produce delicate sounds, and large musical instruments do not produce loud sounds. In this way, all things are harmonized.

古文：物和则嘉成。
现代文：一切事物和谐，美好的音乐才能完成。
English: All things must be in harmony before beautiful music can be complete.

古文：故和声入于耳而藏于心，心亿则乐。
现代文：所以和谐的声音进入耳朵而藏在心里，心安就快乐。
English: Therefore, the harmonious sound enters the ear and hides in the heart, and peace of mind is happiness.

古文：窕则不咸，槬则不容，心是以感。感实生疾。
现代文：纤细就不能让四处都听到，洪亮就不能忍受，内心因此感到不安，不安就会生病。
English: If it is too thin, it can't be heard everywhere, and if it is too loud, it can't be tolerated. As a result, the heart feels uneasy, and anxiety can make you sick.

古文：今钟槬矣，王心弗堪，其能久乎？ 
现代文：现在钟声粗大，天子的内心受不住，难道能够长久吗？ 
English: But this clock is too big to enter, the king's heart can't bear it, can it last?

古文：三月，葬蔡平公。
现代文：三月，安葬蔡平公。
English: In March, Cai Ping was buried.

古文：蔡大子朱失位，位在卑。
现代文：蔡国的太子朱没有站在葬礼中应站的位置上，站在下面。
English: Cai Guo's Prince Zhu did not stand where he should have during the funeral, he stood below.

古文：大夫送葬者归，见昭子。
现代文：大夫中送葬的回来，进见昭子。
English: When the doctor came back from the funeral, he went to see Akiko.

古文：昭子问蔡故，以告。昭子叹曰： 蔡其亡乎！
现代文：昭子问蔡国葬礼的事情，送葬的大夫就把当时的情况告诉昭子，昭子叹气说： 蔡国大约要灭亡了吧！
English: When Akiko asked about Cai Guo's funeral, the doctor who conducted the funeral told Akiko about the situation at the time. Akiko sighed and said, "Cai Guo is about to die!

古文：若不亡，是君也必不终。
现代文：如果不灭亡，这个国君一定不得好死。
English: Even if he does not die, this new sovereign will not have a happy ending.

古文：《诗》曰： 不解于位，民之攸塈。 
现代文：《诗》说： 在他的地位上不懈怠，百姓就能够休息。 
English: "Poetry" said: If you do not slacken in his position, the people can rest.

古文：今蔡侯始即位，而適卑，身将从之。 
现代文：现在蔡侯刚刚即位就站到下面去，他自己也将会跟着跨下去的。 
English: Now that Cai Hou has just ascended the throne, he will stand below, and he himself will follow.

古文：夏，晋士鞅来聘，叔孙为政。
现代文：夏季，晋国的士鞅前来聘问，叔孙主持接待。
English: In the summer, scholars from Jin Province came to ask questions, and the uncle and grandson presided over the reception.

古文：季孙欲恶诸晋，使有司以齐鲍国归费之礼为士鞅。
现代文：季孙存心得罪晋国，让官吏用齐国的鲍国回费地的礼节招待士鞅。
English: Ji Sun deliberately offended Jin, and let the officials use the etiquette of Bao Guo and Feidi of Qi to invite the scholars.

古文：士鞅怒曰： 鲍国之位下，其国小，而使鞅从其牢礼，是卑敝邑也。将复诸寡君。 
现代文：士鞅发怒，说： 鲍国的地位低，他的国家小，现在让我接受招待他所用七牢的礼节，这是轻视敝邑，我将要向寡君报告。 
English: The scholar became angry and said, "The status of Bao's country is low, and his country is small. Now let me accept the invitation of the etiquette of the seven dungeons he used. This is despising the county. I will report to the widower."

古文：鲁人恐，加四牢焉，为十一牢。
现代文：鲁国人恐惧，增加四牢，使用了十一牢。
English: The fear of the Lu people led to the addition of four prisons and the use of eleven prisons.

古文：宋华费遂生华貙、华多僚、华登。
现代文：宋国的华费遂生了华貙、华多僚、华登。
English: Song Dynasty's Hua Fei eventually gave birth to Hua Yao, Hua Duoli, and Hua Deng.

古文：貙为少司马，多僚为御士，与貙相恶，乃谮诸公曰： 貙将纳亡人。 
现代文：华貙做少司马，华多僚做御士，与华貙不和，就在宋公面前诬陷说： 华貙打算接纳逃亡的人。 
English: Hua Tuo, as the junior secretary, and Hua Tuo's colleagues, as the imperial guards, did not get along with Hua Tuo, so they framed him in front of Song Gong and said: Hua Tuo intends to accept the fugitive.

古文：亟言之。公曰： 司马以吾故，亡其良子。
现代文：屡次说这些话，宋元公说： 司马由于我的缘故，使他的儿子逃亡。
English: Saying these words again and again, Song Yuan Gong said: Sima made his son run away because of me.

古文：死亡有命，吾不可以再亡之。 
现代文：死和逃亡都是命中注定，我不能让他的儿子再逃亡。 
English: Death and escape are predestined. I can't let his son escape again.

古文：对曰： 君若爱司马，则如亡。
现代文：华多僚回答说： 君王如果爱惜司马，就应当逃亡。
English: Hua Du's colleague replied, "If the king cares for Sima, he should flee."

古文：死如可逃，何远之有？ 
现代文：死如果可以逃避，哪有什么远不远？ 
English: If death can be avoided, what is not far away?

古文：公惧，使侍人召司马之侍人宜僚，饮之酒而使告司马。
现代文：宋元公害怕，让侍者召来司马的侍者宜僚，给他酒喝，让他告诉司马驱逐华貙。
English: Song Yuan Gong was afraid, so he asked the waiter to call Sima's waiter, Yi Liang, to give him wine to drink, and let him tell Sima to expel Hua Jun.

古文：司马叹曰： 必多僚也。
现代文：司马叹气说： 一定是多僚干的。
English: Sima sighed and said: It must have been done by more than one person.

古文：吾有谗子而弗能杀，吾又不死，抑君有命，可若何？ 
现代文：我有一个造谣的儿子而不能杀死他，我又不死，国君有了命令，怎么办？ 
English: I have a son who spreads lies, but I cannot kill him. I will not die. The sovereign has given an order. What should I do?

古文：乃与公谋逐华，将使田孟诸而遣之。
现代文：就和宋元公商量驱逐华貙，准备让他在孟诸打猎时打发他走。
English: He discussed with Song Yuan Gong to expel Hua Tuo and prepared to let him go while Meng Zhu was hunting.

古文：公饮之酒，厚酬之，赐及从者。
现代文：宋元公给他酒喝，厚厚地送给他礼物，还赏赐随行的人。
English: Song Yuan Gong gave him wine to drink, generously gave him gifts, and also rewarded those who accompanied him.

古文：司马亦如之。张匄尤之，曰： 必有故。 
现代文：司马也像宋元公一样，张匄感到奇怪，说： 一定有原因。 
English: Sima also like Song Yuan Gong, Zhang Ye felt strange, said: There must be a reason.

古文：使子皮承宜僚以剑而讯之。宜僚尽以告。张匄欲杀多僚。子皮曰： 司马老矣，登之谓甚，吾又重之，不如亡也。 
现代文：让华貙用剑架在宜僚脖子上追问他，宜僚把话全说出来，张匄想要杀死多僚，华貙说： 司马年老了，华登的逃亡已经很伤他的心，我又加重了他的伤心，不如逃亡。 
English: Let Hua Yu chase him with a sword on Yi Lin's neck. Yi Lin said all the words. Zhang Ye wanted to kill many of his colleagues. Hua Yu said: Sima is old. Walden's escape has already hurt his heart. I have aggravated his grief. It is better to escape.

古文：五月丙申，子皮将见司马而行，则遇多僚御司马而朝。张匄不胜其怒，遂与子皮、臼任、郑翩杀多僚，劫司马以叛，而召亡人。
现代文：五月十四日，华貙准备进见司马以后再走。在朝廷上遇见多僚为司马驾车上朝，张牼不能控制自己的愤怒，就和华貙、臼任、郑翩杀了多僚，劫持了司马叛变，召集逃亡的人。
English: On May 14th, Hua Tuo was preparing to leave after seeing Sima. At the imperial court, he met a number of colleagues driving to the imperial court for Sima. Unable to control his anger, Zhang Tuo, together with Hua Tuo, Usu Ren, and Zheng Pian, killed a number of colleagues, hijacked Sima's mutiny, and gathered those who had fled.

古文：壬寅，华、向入。
现代文：二十日，华氏、向氏回来，乐大心。
English: On the 20th, Mr. Hua and Mr. Xiang came back, happy.

古文：乐大心、豐愆、华御诸横。
现代文：丰愆、华貙在横地抵御他们。
English: Feng Rong and Hua Rong stood up against them.

古文：华氏居卢门，以南里叛。
现代文：华氏住在卢门，领着南里的人叛变。
English: Mr. Fahrenheit lived in Lumen and led the people of Nanli to revolt.

古文：六月庚午，宋城旧鄘及桑林之门而守之。
现代文：六月十九日，宋国修缮旧城和桑林之门用以据守。
English: On June 19th, the Song Dynasty began to repair the old city and the gate of the mulberry forest to defend it.

古文：秋七月壬午朔，日有食之。
现代文：秋季，七月初一，发生日食。
English: In autumn, on the first day of July, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：公问于梓慎曰： 是何物也，祸福何为？ 
现代文：鲁昭公问梓慎说： 这是什么事？是什么样的祸福？ 
English: Lu Zhaogong asked Zi Sheng, "What is this? What kind of misfortune and good fortune is it?

古文：对曰： 二至、二分，日有食之，不为灾。
现代文：梓慎回答说： 冬至夏至、春分秋分，发生日食，不是灾祸。
English: Zi Shen replied: The winter solstice, the summer solstice, the vernal equinox and the autumnal equinox, and the occurrence of a solar eclipse are not disasters.

古文：日月之行也，分，同道也；至，相过也。
现代文：日月的运行，在春分秋分的时候，黄道和赤道交点相同；在夏至冬至的时候，相交点远。
English: During the course of the sun and moon, at the time of the vernal and autumnal equinoxes, the points of intersection of the ecliptic and equator are the same; at the time of the summer solstice and winter solstice, the points of intersection are far apart.

古文：其他月则为灾。阳不克也，故常为水。 
现代文：其他的月分就要发生灾祸，因为阳气不胜，所以常常发生水灾。 
English: In other months, disasters will occur, because the yang is invincible, so floods often occur.

古文：于是叔辄哭日食。昭子曰： 子叔将死，非所哭也。 
现代文：在那个时候叔辄因为发生日食号哭，昭子说： 叔辄快死了，因为这不是他所应该哭的事情。 
English: At that time, my uncle cried because of the solar eclipse, and Akiko said, "My uncle is about to die, because this is not something he should cry about.

古文：八月，叔辄卒。
现代文：八月，叔辄死了。
English: In August, my uncle passed away.

古文：冬十月，华登以吴师救华氏。齐乌枝鸣戍宋。厨人濮曰： 《军志》有之，先人有夺人之心，后人有待其衰。
现代文：冬季，十月，华登率领吴军救援华氏，齐国的乌枝鸣在宋国戍守，厨邑大夫濮说： 《军志》有这样的话： 先发制人可以摧毁敌人士气，后发制人要等到敌人士气衰竭。 
English: In winter, in October, Warden led the Wu Army to rescue Mr. Hua, Wu Zhi Ming of Qi stayed in Song, and Cuisine Doctor Yu said: "Military History" has this to say: The first strike can destroy the enemy's morale, and the second strike must wait until the enemy's morale is exhausted.

古文：盍及其劳且未定也，伐诸。
现代文：何不乘他们疲劳和没有安定而进攻？
English: Why not take advantage of their fatigue and instability and attack?

古文：若入而固，则华氏众矣，悔无及也。 
现代文：如果敌人已经进来而军心安定，华氏的人就多了，我们就后悔不及了。 
English: If the enemy has already entered and the military spirit is stable, there will be more people in Fahrenheit, and we will regret it.

古文：从之。
现代文：乌枝鸣听从了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：丙寅，齐师、宋师败吴师于鸿口，获其二帅公子苦雂、偃州员。
现代文：十七日，齐军、宋军在鸿口击败吴军，俘虏了他们两个将领公子苦雂、偃州员。
English: On the 17th, the Qi Army and the Song Army defeated the Wu Army in Hongkou, and captured their two generals, Prince Kuching and Zhangzhou.

古文：华登帅其馀以败宋师。
现代文：华登率领余部击败宋军。
English: Huaden led the remaining troops to defeat the Song army.

古文：公欲出，厨人濮曰： 吾小人，可藉死而不能送亡君，请待之。 
现代文：宋元公想要逃亡，厨邑大夫濮说： 我是小人，可以为君王死难，而不能护送君王逃亡，请君王等待一下。 
English: When Song Yuan Gong wanted to escape, Cuisine Doctor Yu said: I am a villain, I can die for the king, but I cannot escort the king to escape. Please wait for the king.

古文：乃徇曰： 扬徽者，公徒也。 
现代文：于是就巡行全军说： 挥舞旗帜的，是国君的战士。 
English: So the whole army marched and said: "Those who wave the flag are the soldiers of the sovereign."

古文：众从之。公自扬门见之，下而巡之曰： 国亡君死，二三子之耻也，岂专孤之罪也？ 
现代文：众人按他的话挥舞旗帜，宋元公在扬门上见到这种情况，下城巡视，说： 国家亡，国君死，这是各位的耻辱，岂独是我一人的罪过呢？ 
English: Everyone waved flags according to his words. When Song Yuan Gong saw this on the Yangmen, he went on a tour of the city and said: The country is dead, the king is dead. This is a disgrace for everyone. Is it only my fault?

古文：齐乌枝鸣曰： 用少，莫如齐致死。齐致死，莫如去备。
现代文：齐国的乌枝鸣说： 使用少量的兵力，最好是一起拼命，一起拼命，最好是撤去守备。
English: Wu Zhiming of Qi said, "When using a small number of troops, it is best to work hard together, work hard together, and it is best to withdraw the garrison.

古文：彼多兵矣，请皆用剑。 
现代文：他们的武器多得很，建议我军都用剑和他们作战。 
English: They have a lot of weapons, so it is recommended that our troops fight them with swords.

古文：从之。
现代文：宋公听从了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：华氏北，复即之。厨人濮以裳裹首而荷以走，曰： 得华登矣！ 
现代文：华氏败走，宋军、齐军又追上去，厨邑大夫濮用裙子包着砍下的脑袋，扛在肩上快跑，说： 杀死华登了！ 
English: Hua's army was defeated and fled, but the Song and Qi armies chased after them. Doctor Cuisine wrapped the severed head in her skirt, carried it on her shoulders and ran fast, saying: "I've killed Huaden!"

古文：遂败华氏于新里。翟偻新居于新里，既战，说甲于公而归。
现代文：于是就在新里打败了华氏，翟偻新住在新里，战斗开始以后，到宋元公那里脱下盔甲而归附。
English: So he defeated Fahrenheit in Xinli. Yan Xin lived in Xinli. After the battle began, he took off his armor and joined Song Yuan Gong.

古文：华妵居于公里，亦如之。
现代文：华妵住在公里，也像翟偻新一样。
English: Hua Tuo lives in Kilometre, just like Gong Xin.

古文：十一月癸未，公子城以晋师至。曹翰胡会晋荀吴、齐苑何忌、卫公子朝救宋。丙戌，与华氏战于赭丘。郑翩愿为鹳，其御愿为鹅。子禄御公子城，庄堇为右。干犫御吕封人华豹，张匄为右。
现代文：十一月初四日，公子城带着晋军来到，曹国翰胡会合晋国荀吴、齐国苑何忌、卫国公子朝救援宋国，初七日，和华氏在赭丘作战，郑翩希望摆成鹳阵，他的御者希望摆成鹅阵，子禄为公子城驾御战车，庄堇作为车右，干犫为吕地封人华豹驾御战车，张匄作为车右。
English: On the 4th day of the 11th month of the year, Gongzicheng came with the Jin army. Cao Guoqiang Hu met with Jin Guoqiang Wu, Qi Guo Yuan Ho Boi, and Wei Guoqiang Dang to rescue Song. On the 7th day of the 11th month, he fought with Hua in Shaoqiu. Zheng Lan hoped to form a phalanx, his driver hoped to form a goose phalanx. Ziro drove the chariot for Gongzicheng, Zhuo as the right side of the chariot, and Gan Gan as the right side of the chariot.

古文：相遇，城还。华豹曰： 城也！ 
现代文：两车相遇，公子城退了回去，华豹大喊说： 城啊！ 
English: The two cars meet, the boy retreats back to the city, and the panther shouts: "City!

古文：城怒而反之。将注，豹则关矣。
现代文：公子城发怒，转回来，将要装上箭，而华豹已经拉开了弓。
English: Gongzicheng became angry and turned back. He was about to load the arrows, but the panther had already drawn the bow.

古文：曰： 平公之灵尚辅相余。 
现代文：公子城说： 平公的威灵，还在保佑我！ 
English: Prince Zicheng said: Pingguo's Willingness is still blessing me!

古文：豹射出其间。将注，则又关矣。曰： 不狎，鄙。 
现代文：华豹射箭，穿过公子城和子禄之间，公子城又要装上箭，华豹又已经拉开了弓，公子城说： 不让我还手，卑鄙啊！ 
English: The Chinese leopard was shooting arrows, passing between the boy's town and the child's town, the boy's town had to be loaded with arrows, the Chinese leopard had already pulled the bow, the boy's town said: Don't let me fight back, it's despicable!

古文：抽矢。城射之，殪。张匄抽殳而下，射之，折股。扶伏而击之，折轸。又射之，死。干犫请一矢。城曰： 余言女于君。 
现代文：华豹从弓上抽下箭，公子城一箭射去，把华豹射死，张匄抽出殳下车，公子城一箭射去，射断张匄的腿，张匄爬过来用殳敲断了公子城的车轸，公子城又发了一箭，张匄死去，干犫请求给他一箭，公子城说： 我替你向国君说情。 
English: The panther drew an arrow from his bow, the prince shot an arrow from his bow and killed the panther, Zhang Ye pulled out his shovel and got out of the car, the prince shot an arrow from his bow and broke Zhang Ye's leg, Zhang Ye climbed over and used his shovel to break the shovel of the prince's car, the prince shot another arrow from his bow, Zhang Ye died, Gan Ye asked him to give him an arrow, the prince said: I will intercede for you to the king.

古文：对曰： 不死伍乘，军之大刑也。干刑而从子，君焉用之？
现代文：干犫回答说： 不和战友一起战死，这是犯了军队中的大法，犯了法而跟从您，君王哪里用得着我？
English: Gan Gan replied, "Not to die in battle with your comrades is to violate the great law of the army. If I violate the law and follow you, what use will the king have of me?

古文：子速诸。 
现代文：您快点吧！ 
English: Hurry up and get out!

古文：乃射之，殪。大败华氏，围诸南里。华亥搏膺而呼，见华曰： 吾为栾氏矣。 
现代文：于是公子城就射了他一箭，射死了，宋军、齐军把华氏打得大败，包围南里，华亥拍着胸脯大喊，进见华貙，说： 我们成了晋国的栾氏了。 
English: Therefore, Gongzicheng shot him with an arrow and shot him dead. The Song and Qi armies defeated Huayi and surrounded Nanli. Hua Hai clapped his chest and shouted, "We have become the Shishi of Jin."

古文：曰： 子无我迋，不幸而后亡。 
现代文：华貙说： 您不要吓唬我，碰上倒霉才会死呢。 
English: Hua Tuo said, "Don't scare me. You will only die if you are unlucky."

古文：使华登如楚乞师。华以车十五乘，徒七十人，犯师而出。食于睢上，哭而送之，乃复入。
现代文：派华登到楚国请求出兵，华貙带领战车十五辆，步兵七十人突围而出，在睢水岸边吃饭，哭着送走华登，就再次冲进包围圈。
English: He sent Huaden to Chu to request the dispatch of troops, and Huayu led fifteen chariots and seventy infantrymen to break out of the encirclement, eat on the shore of Surabaya, send off Huaden with tears, and then rush into the encirclement again.

古文：楚薳越帅师将逆华氏。大宰犯谏曰： 诸侯唯宋事其君，今又争国，释君而臣是助，无乃不可乎？ 
现代文：楚国的薳越率领军队打算迎接华氏，太宰犯劝谏说： 诸侯之中惟有宋国的臣下还事奉着国君，现在又争夺国政，丢开国君而帮助臣下，恐怕不可以吧！ 
English: Ying Yue of the State of Chu led an army intending to meet Hua, and the Dazaifu advised him: "Among the princes, only the vassals of the State of Song still serve the sovereign, and now they are also competing for state affairs. I'm afraid it's not right to abandon the sovereign and help the vassals!"

古文：王曰： 而告我也后，既许之矣。 蔡侯朱出奔楚。
现代文：楚平王说： 我对你说晚了，已经答应他们了。 蔡侯朱逃亡到楚国。
English: King Chu Ping said, "I'm too late to tell you, I've already promised them." Cai Houzhu fled to Chu.

古文：费无极取货于东国，而谓蔡人曰： 朱不用命于楚，君王将立东国。若不先从王欲，楚必围蔡。 
现代文：费无极得到东国的财礼，对蔡国人说： 朱不听楚国的命令，君王将要立东国做国君，如果不先顺从君王的愿望，楚国一定包围蔡国。 
English: Having gone to great lengths to obtain the financial gift of the East Kingdom, he said to the people of Tsai: Zhu did not listen to the orders of the State of Chu, the monarch was going to establish the East Kingdom as the sovereign, and if he did not first comply with the monarch's wishes, the State of Chu would certainly encircle the State of Tsai.

古文：蔡人惧，出朱而立东国。朱愬于楚，楚子将讨蔡。
现代文：蔡国人害怕，赶走朱而立了东国，朱向楚国控诉，楚平王准备讨伐蔡国。
English: The people of Cai were afraid, so they drove Zhu away and established Dongguo. Zhu complained to Chu, and King Chuping prepared to attack Cai.

古文：无极曰： 平侯与楚有盟，故封。其子有二心，故废之。
现代文：费无极说： 蔡平侯和楚国有盟约，所以封他，他的儿子有二心，所以废掉他。
English: It was extremely difficult to say: Cai Pinghou had a covenant with the State of Chu, so he should be banned, and his son was of two minds, so he should be abolished.

古文：灵王杀隐大子，其子与君同恶，德君必甚。
现代文：灵王杀了隐太子，隐太子的儿子和君王有共同的仇人，一定会感谢君王。
English: King Ling killed Prince Yin. Prince Yin's son and the king have a common enemy. They will surely thank the king.

古文：又使立之，不亦可乎？
现代文：现在又让他立为国君，不也是可以的吗？
English: Now let him be crowned king, isn't that also okay?

古文：且废寘在君，蔡无他矣。 
现代文：而且废、立的权操在君王手里，蔡国就不会有别的念头了。 
English: Moreover, the power to abolish and establish is in the hands of the monarch, and Cai Guo will have no other thoughts.

古文：公如晋，及河。
现代文：昭公去到晋国，到达黄河。
English: Zhaogong went to Jin Province and arrived at the Yellow River.

古文：鼓叛晋。晋将伐鲜虞，故辞公。
现代文：鼓地背叛晋国，晋国准备进攻鲜虞，所以辞谢了昭公。
English: The drum betrayed Jin, and Jin was about to attack, so Akechi resigned.

