古文：初十日早寒甚。
现代文：初十日早晨很冷。
English: The morning of the 10th was very cold.

古文：出北门，半里，经南门，转而西南上坡。
现代文：从北门出去，走半里，经过南门，转向西南上坡。
English: Go out from the north gate, walk half a mile, pass the south gate, turn to the southwest uphill.

古文：一里，有桥跨溪上，曰南门桥。
现代文：一里，有座桥横跨溪上，名南门桥。
English: One mile, there is a bridge across the stream, the famous South Gate Bridge.

古文：《志》曰承恩。过桥，南上坡，一里，登坡，倚西山南行。三里，其坞自南来，有塔在坞东北山上，乃沿西山南下，半里，抵坞底。又半里，见有水贯坞中，石梁跨其上，是名土桥。
现代文：过了桥，往南上坡，一里，登上坡，靠着西山往南走、三里，山坞从南边伸来，在山坞东北边山上有座塔，于是沿着西山往南下，半里，抵达坞底，又走半里，看见有条河贯穿坞中，石桥横跨河上，这桥名土桥。
English: Crossed the bridge, walked south uphill, one mile, walked uphill, walked south along the West Mountain, three miles, the dock stretched from the south, there was a tower on the mountain northeast of the dock, then walked south along the West Mountain, half a mile, reached the bottom of the dock, walked another half mile, saw a river running through the dock, a stone bridge across the river, this bridge is a famous land bridge.

古文：即姚安水从西南峡中来，向东北峡去，桥北为大姚，桥南为定远，盖以是水为界也。
现代文：河就是姚安府的水从西南边峡谷中流来，向东北边的峡谷流去，桥北属大姚县，桥南属定远县，是以这条河为界。
English: The river is the water of Yao'an that flows from the southwest side of the canyon to the northeast side of the canyon. The bridge belongs to Dayao County in the north and Dingyuan County in the south, and is bounded by this river.

古文：从桥南上坡，有村为定远屯。
现代文：从桥南上坡，有个名定远屯的村庄。
English: From the bridge south uphill, there is a village named Dingyuan Tun.

古文：入峡渐上，一里东转，半里上坡，半里，由坡南转，一里，是为赖山哨。
现代文：进入峡谷逐渐往上走，一里，往东转，半里，上坡，半里，顺坡往南转，一里，到赖山哨。
English: Enter the canyon and gradually walk up, one mile, turn east, half a mile, uphill, half a mile, downhill turn south, one mile, to Lai Shan Sentinel.

古文：于是南下，一里，抵东南坡头。
现代文：于是往南下，一里，抵达东南坡头。
English: So I went south, one mile, and arrived at the southeast slope head.

古文：有岐，南行者为姚安府路，有海子在其东；东行者为赤草峰路。
现代文：有岔路，往南走是去姚安府的路，有片湖泊在路东；往东走是去赤草峰的路。
English: There is a fork in the road. To the south is the road to Yao'an Prefecture, and there is a lake to the east of the road. To the east is the road to the Red Grass Peak.

古文：逾坡东下一里，为赤草峰北村。
现代文：翻过坡往东下一里，是赤草峰北村。
English: A mile to the east across the slope is Akakusa Peak North Village.

古文：由村转南，溯溪行一里，度桥而南，半里，随赤草峰街子南行。
现代文：顺村庄转南，溯溪流走一里，过桥向南走，半里•由赤草峰街子往南行。
English: Turn south along the village, follow the stream for one mile, cross the bridge to the south, and walk half a mile south from the Akakusa peak street.

古文：一里，乃东上山。
现代文：乙里，就往东上山。
English: Second, go east up the mountain.

古文：一里半，逾岭东南下，其东又有坞自西而北，甚遥。
现代文：一里半，翻越岭往东南下，其东部又有山坞从西向北伸去，很遥远。
English: A mile and a half, over the ridge to the southeast, and to the east there is a dock stretching from west to north, very far away.

古文：下坡半里，由西山东麓南行。
现代文：下坡，半里，顺西山东麓往南走。
English: Downhill, half a mile, go south along the eastern foot of the West Mountain.

古文：二里，村落傍溪左右，皆为仡老村。
现代文：二里，看到村落傍靠在溪流左右，都是讫佬村。
English: After two miles, I saw that all the villages along the stream were cormorant villages.

古文：此定远所属。又东一里半，始傍西水岸南行。
现代文：又往东走一里半，开始沿溪水西岸往南行。
English: I walked another mile and a half east and started walking south along the west bank of the stream.

古文：半里，东度小桥，遂由东麓南行。
现代文：半里，往东过小桥，于是顺东麓往南走。
English: Half a mile to the east, over a small bridge, then walk south along the eastern foot of the mountain.

古文：二里至鹿家村后，遂东上山。
现代文：二里到鹿家村的后面，于是往东上山。
English: Two miles to the back of Shika village, so I headed east up the mountain.

古文：山半有岐，路从歧入峡，半里，渡溪东北上。
现代文：山腰上有岔路，从岔路进入峡谷，半里，渡过溪流往东北上。
English: There is a path on the mountainside, from the path into the canyon, half a mile, across the stream to the northeast.

古文：十一日待师未归，看《藏》。
现代文：一里，到达妙峰山德云寺。寺门向西，往南看是烟萝山，背后有梦庵亭。
English: After one mile, you will arrive at Deyun Temple on Myofeng Mountain. The temple gate faces west, looking south is Yairo Mountain, and behind it is Meng'an Pavilion.

古文：宗昘慧大师《西方合论》。十二日饭，仍西下山。
现代文：往后五里、是碧峰庵。十一日等候法师，他没有回来，阅读佛教经典。十二日吃过饭，仍然往西下山。
English: Five miles behind is Bifeng's hermitage. On the eleventh day, while waiting for the mage, he did not return, reading Buddhist classics. On the twelfth day, after eating, he still went down the mountain to the west.

古文：二里，南行。
现代文：二里，往南行。
English: Two miles southbound.

古文：二里，随坞西转。
现代文：二里，随山坞往西转。
English: Go west for two miles, following the dock.

古文：二里，有桥跨溪上，曰梁桥。
现代文：二里，有座桥横跨溪上，名梁桥。
English: Two miles away, there is a bridge across the stream, a famous beam bridge.

古文：度其北，即仡老村尽处也，其水自南来入，路从村西上岭。
现代文：过到桥北，是讫佬村的尽头处，溪水从南边流来，道路从村西上岭。
English: Passing to the north of the bridge, it is the end of the village, the stream flows from the south, the road from the village west of Shangling.

古文：一里半，逾坳西，行岭上。
现代文：一里半，越到山坳西边，在岭上走。
English: Go one and a half miles to the western side of the mountains and walk on the ridge.

古文：半里，有岐从西南下，误从坡下直西。
现代文：半里，有条岔路往西南下去，我错误地从坡上一直往西走。
English: For half a mile, there was a fork in the road heading south-west, and I mistakenly followed the slope all the way west.

古文：半里，乃改从岐西南行。
现代文：半里，才改成顺岔路往西南走。
English: Half a mile later, it was changed to Shunyi Road to the southwest.

古文：半里，渐下转南，又一里，乃南下，半里，抵峡中。
现代文：半里，逐渐往下转南，又一里，于是往南下，半里，抵达峡谷中。
English: Half a mile, gradually turning south, another mile, then south, half a mile, reaching the middle of the canyon.

古文：随峡南去半里，有大路随东峡来，小水随之。
现代文：顺峡谷往南走半里，有条大路从东边的峡谷伸来，小河伴随而来。
English: Half a mile to the south along the canyon, there is a large road stretching from the canyon on the east, accompanied by a small river.

古文：西半里，入南峡。
现代文：往西走半里，进入南边的峡谷。
English: Walk half a mile west into the canyon on the south side.

古文：一里，有池在峡中。又一里半，峡分两岐，从西南者，倚东岭平上。
现代文：一里，峡谷中有一池水 又走一里半，峡谷分成两边，顺西南边的走，靠着东岭平上。
English: After one mile, there was a pool of water in the canyon. After another mile and a half, the canyon was divided into two sides, and I walked along the southwestern side, leaning against the Dongling Plain.

古文：一里，南逾坳。
现代文：一里，往南越过山坳。
English: One mile, south over the mountains.

古文：由坳转而西，始见西坞大开，西南有海子颇大，其南有塔倚西山下。
现代文：顺山坳转向西，才看见西边的山坞十分开阔，西南有片比较大的湖泊，其南有座塔傍靠在西山下。
English: When I turned west along the mountain ridge, I saw that the dock on the west side was very open, there was a relatively large lake in the southwest, and there was a tower next to it in the south under the west mountain.

古文：是即所谓白塔也。乃西南下坡，二里，有村在坡下，曰破寺屯。
现代文：这就是所说的白塔，于是往西南下坡，二里，有村庄在坡下，名破寺屯。
English: This is the so-called white pagoda, so we went downhill to the southwest, two miles, there are villages under the slope, famous temples and towns.

古文：于是从岐直西小路，一里，渡溪。
现代文：从这里顺着一直往西岔的小路走，一里，渡溪流。
English: From here, walk along the path all the way to Xidi, one mile, and cross the stream.

古文：稍西南半里，有一屯当溪中，山绕其北，其前有止水。
现代文：逐渐往西南走半里，有一个村庄位于溪流中间，山环绕在村北，村前有停止不流的水。
English: Gradually walking half a mile to the southwest, there is a village in the middle of the stream, surrounded by mountains to the north of the village, with stagnant water in front of the village.

古文：由其西坡上南行一里，是为海子北堤。
现代文：顺村西边的坡上往南走一里，这里是湖泊的北堤。
English: Walk one mile south on the slope on the west side of Shun village, here is the northern embankment of the lake.

古文：由堤西小路行半里，抵西坡下，是为海口村。
现代文：从堤西的小路走半里，抵达西坡下，这是海口村。
English: Haikou Village can be reached by walking half a mile from the path on the west side of the dike to the bottom of the west slope.

古文：转南，随西山东麓行，名息夷村海子。
现代文：转南，顺西山东麓走，地名是息夷村海子。
English: Turn south and walk along the eastern foot of the West Mountain. The place name is Xi'er Village Haizi.

古文：三里，海子西南尽，有路直抵大山下，半里，为高土官家。
现代文：三里，走到海子酋南尽头，有道路直抵大山下，半里，是高土官家。
English: Three miles away, at the southern end of Haizi County, there is a road that goes straight to the bottom of the mountain. Half a mile away, there is a highland official's house.

古文：由其西南入峡中，上坡一里半，有神庙当坡峡间。
现代文：从他家往西南进入峡谷中，上坡一里半，有座神庙位于坡谷中。
English: From his home to the southwest into the canyon, a mile and a half uphill, there is a temple in the valley.

古文：又上半里，活佛寺临其后。其西大山名龙凤山，又名广木山。
现代文：又上半里，活佛寺对着神庙背后，西边的大山名龙凤山，又名广木山。
English: In the upper half, the Living Buddha Temple faces the back of the temple, and the big mountain in the west is called Longfeng Mountain, also known as Hiroki Mountain.

古文：寺号龙华，僧号寂空。
现代文：寺名是龙华寺，僧人叫寂空。
English: The name of the temple is Longhua Temple, and the monk is named Jakku.

古文：是日下午，寂空留止后轩东厢。
现代文：这天下午，寂空留我住后楼东厢房。
English: That afternoon, I stayed in the east wing of the back building.

古文：其后有深峡下悬，峡外即危峰高峙，庭中药栏花砌甚幽。墙外古梅一株，花甚盛，下临深箐，外映重峦。
现代文：楼背后有下悬的深谷，峡谷外是高高峙立的陡峰，庭院中种有芍药，台阶上放满花，十分幽雅舀墙外有一棵古梅，花很多，下临深谷，外映重峦。
English: Behind the building there is a deep valley hanging down, outside the canyon there is a steep peak standing tall. There are medicinal herbs in the courtyard, the steps are full of flowers, there is an ancient plum tree outside the wall, there are many flowers, next to the deep valley, the appearance is heavy.

古文：是夜先订约订寂空，明晨欲早行，求为早膳。
现代文：这天晚上和寂空事先约定，明天早晨准备一早启程，请求为我们早做饭。
English: That evening, we made a prior appointment with Sako to prepare for an early departure the next morning, and asked him to prepare breakfast for us.

古文：白塔尚在寺东南后支冈上。
现代文：白塔还在寺东南后面的分支山冈上。
English: The white pagoda is still on the branch hill behind the southeastern part of the temple.

古文：冈东有白塔海子，其南西山下，又有阳片海子，其东又有子鸠海子，府城南又有大坝双海子，与息夷村共五海子。
现代文：冈东有白塔海子，其南边的西山下，又有阳片海子，其东又有子鸡海子，姚安府城南又有大坝双海子，加上息夷村海子一共有五个湖泽。
English: There is Baita Haizi in the east of Gandong, Yangpiao Haizi in the south of Xishanxia, Ziqian Haizi in the east, Ziqian Haizi in the south of Yao'an, Dama Shuanghaizi in the south of Chengdu, and Xiyi Village Haizi. There are a total of five lakes.

古文：十三日昧爽起，饭已久待，遂饭而下山。
现代文：十三日天亮起床板做好已经等候了很久，于是吃过饭就下山。
English: On the 13th, I got up at dawn and waited for a long time for the board to be ready, so I went down after eating.

古文：二里，仍出土官家后，遂转南行。
现代文：二里，仍然出到高土官家背后，于是转向南走。
English: After two miles, they still came out behind the high-ranking officials, so they turned south.

古文：一里，过格香桥，有小水自活佛寺后峡中来者，此峡正与白塔之冈，中格而对峙。
现代文：一里，过格香桥，有条小河从活佛寺背后的峡谷中流来，这道峡谷正好把白塔所在的山冈从中分隔形成对峙。
English: A mile away, across the Gexiang Bridge, a small river flows from the canyon behind the Living Buddha Temple. This canyon just separates the mountain from the mountain where the White Pagoda is located, forming a confrontation.

古文：又南二里，有风自西界东突而出，路盘其东垂，则又一海子汇其东南。
现代文：又往南走二里，有冈从西部往东突出，道路环绕其东垂，而且又有一个湖泊汇集在东南。
English: Another two miles to the south, there is a hill protruding from the west to the east, the road around it hanging to the east, and there is another lake gathering in the southeast.

古文：从海子北堤东向行，半里，随堤南转，一里半，抵海子东南尽处，遂东南行。
现代文：顺湖泊北堤向东行，半里，跟着湖堤转南走，一里半，抵达湖泊东南岸尽头处，于是往东南行。
English: Walk east along the lake's north embankment for half a mile, then turn south along the lake's embankment for a mile and a half until you reach the end of the lake's southeastern shore, then walk southeast.

古文：四里，有冈自西而东突，是为龙冈卫，盘冈东皆大聚。
现代文：四里，有冈从西向东突起，这是龙冈卫，围绕在冈东的都是大村落。
English: For four miles, there is a hill rising from west to east. This is Longgangwei, and all around it in the east of the hill are large villages.

古文：半里，过聚东行。
现代文：半里，经过村落往东走。
English: Walk east for half a mile, past the village.

古文：一里，复南。
现代文：一里，又往南走。
English: One mile, then south again.

古文：二里，曲度乾底。
现代文：二里，绕过干枯的冈底。
English: Two miles, around the dry rock bottom.

古文：复南二里，则西山一峰，复突其南，遂渐抵东山，则南北成两界焉。
现代文：又往南二里，而西山的一座峰，又向南突起，于是渐渐伸到东山，就形成南北两边的分界。
English: Another two miles to the south, and a peak on the west mountain rises to the south, and then gradually extends to the east mountain, forming a demarcation between the north and south.

古文：又南五里而入姚安府北门，歇青莲庵。
现代文：又往南五里就进入姚安府城北门，住在青莲庵。
English: Five miles to the south, he entered the north gate of Yao'an City and lived in Qinglian'an.

古文：青莲碑记曰： 东烟萝，西金秀，南青蛉，北曲折。 
现代文：青莲庵中的碑文写着： 东边烟萝山，西边金秀山，南边青岭!北边是曲折。
English: The inscription in the Qinglian hermitage reads: "Yanluo Mountain in the east, Jinshuu Mountain in the west, Qingling in the south! Twists and turns in the north."

古文：姚安府南随峡上一百四十里，镇南州；东逾大山一百四十里，定远县；西逾小坡一百二十里，北随大坞下一百二十里，白盐井。姚安东西两界，皆大山夹抱，郡城当其南，西界最辟，直北二十五里，两界以渐而束，各有支中错如门户焉。
现代文：姚安府往南顺峡谷上一百四十里，是镇南州；往东越过大山一百四十里，是定远县；往西越过小坡一百二十里，往北顺着大坞下一百二十里，是白盐井姚安府东西两边，都有大山环抱，府城位于其南，西边最开阔，直北二十五里，东西两边渐渐受到约束，各边都伸出支脉交错其中，如同门户一样。
English: Yao'an is a town in Nanzhou, 140 miles up the Nanshun Valley; in Dingyuan County, 140 miles to the east across the mountains; 120 miles to the west across the small slope, and 120 miles to the north along the large dock; in Baiyanjing, Yao'an is surrounded by mountains on both the east and west sides. The capital is located in the south, the west side is the most open, and the north is 25 miles. The east and west sides are gradually constrained, and all sides are interlaced with branches, like a portal.

古文：中有小水，西自镇南州界北来，至郡北屡堰为湖，下流绕北峡之门而出，所谓青蛉川也。
现代文：中间有小河，从西边镇南州界北面流来，流到府城北屡屡被堤坝隔成湖泊，下游绕过峡谷北口流出去，是所说的青岭川。
English: There is a small river in the middle, flowing from the west side of the town to the north of the Nanzhou border, flowing to the north of the prefecture, often separated into lakes by dikes, and flowing downstream around the north mouth of the canyon, is the so-called Qingling River.

古文：十四日饭于青莲。
现代文：十四日在青莲庵吃饭。
English: On the 14th, we had dinner at Seiryoan.

古文：日色已高，循城南一里半，为观音寺。
现代文：太阳已经升高，顺城往南走一里半，是观音寺。
English: The sun has risen, and a mile and a half south of the city is Guanyin Temple.

古文：转北过西门，共一里，抵旧西门。
现代文：转北经过西门，一共走一里，抵达老西门。
English: Turn north through the West Gate, walk a total of one mile, and arrive at the Old West Gate.

古文：二里半，抵西麓，是为古寺山，以有古寺在山之东半也，即《志》所称祥龟寺也。
现代文：二里半，抵达西边的山麓，这是古寺山，因为有座古寺在山的东边，就是志书上说的祥龟寺。
English: Two and a half miles, arriving at the foot of the mountain on the west side, this is the ancient temple mountain, because there is an ancient temple on the east side of the mountain, which is the Shogetsu temple mentioned in the book.

古文：二里，逾顶下，其西环坞北口，则羊片湖在焉。
现代文：走二里，翻越山顶而下，山西边环绕着的山坞北口，是羊片湖所在的地方。
English: Walk two miles, climb over the top of the mountain and down. The north entrance of the dock surrounded by the western side of the mountain is where the lamb slice lake is located.

古文：西下一里半，行坞中。
现代文：往西下一里半，在坞中行走。
English: A mile and a half west, walking in the docks.

古文：一里半，有坊当坞中，曰羊片屯。
现代文：一里半，坞中有片住宅，名羊片屯。
English: A mile and a half, there is a piece of housing in the dock, famous sheep piece of town.

古文：西过半里，转南半里，又西南半里，抵小山之麓。
现代文：往西经过屯走半里，转南走半里，又往西南走半里，抵达一座小山之麓。
English: Go west for half a mile past the town, turn south for half a mile, and then go southwest for half a mile, arriving at the foot of a small mountain.

古文：从其南坞西入一里半，又西上一里半，有岐焉：西北者，入山樵牧者所经；西南盘岭者，大道也。
现代文：从山麓南边的山坞往西进去一里半，又往西上一里半，有岔路：西北边的，是进山砍柴放牧的路；西南边环绕山岭的，是大路。
English: From the dock on the south side of the foothills, it is a mile and a half to the west, and another mile and a half to the west. There are two roads: on the northwest side, it is the road into the mountains for cutting firewood and grazing; on the southwest side around the mountains, it is the main road.

古文：盘岭上一里半，逾其顶，是为当波院，而实无寺宇，乃南来之脊，北度而东，为古佛寺大山及大姚西界诸山也。
现代文：盘绕山岭往上走一里半，越过岭顶，这是当波院，而实际上没有寺庙，是从南边延伸来的山脊，往北走向东，形成古佛寺大山和大姚县西部的众山。
English: Winding around the ridge, walking up for a mile and a half and crossing the top of the ridge, this is Dangbo Temple, but in fact there is no temple. It is a ridge extending from the south to the north and east, forming the Great Mountain of the Ancient Buddha Temple and the mountains in the west of Dayao County.

古文：于是西南下二里，有小水南流，随之南入箐。
现代文：于是往西南下二里，有股小水往南流，随水往南进入沟警。
English: As a result, two miles to the southwest, a small stream of water flowed south, following the water south into the ditch.

古文：又东一里半，转而西一里半，峡始开。
现代文：又往东走一里半，转向西走一里半，峡谷才开阔起来。
English: Another mile and a half to the east, and another mile and a half to the west, and the canyon opened up.

古文：稍北盘坳一里，复西南下坡。
现代文：逐渐向北绕山坳一里，又往西南下坡。
English: Gradually head north around the ridge for one mile, and then head southwest downhill.

古文：三里，峡中溪自南而北注，有桥跨之。
现代文：三里，峡谷中的溪水从南向北流，有桥横跨溪流。
English: For three miles, the stream in the canyon flows from south to north, with a bridge spanning the stream.

古文：度桥，遂循西山南向溯水行。
现代文：过桥后，就顺西山往南溯溪水而行。
English: After crossing the bridge, we walked along the West Mountain and followed the stream to the south.

古文：二里，饭于村家。
现代文：二里，在村里的人家吃饭。
English: It's two miles to eat at someone's house in the village.

古文：又南向行二里余，其峡自西来转，水亦从之，于是折而入，是名观音箐。
现代文：又往南走二里多，峡谷转从西边伸来，溪水也跟着转，于是折进去，这里名观音著。
English: I walked more than two miles to the south, the canyon stretched from the west, and the stream followed, so I turned in, and here is the famous Guanyin.

古文：管中止容一水，西溯之入二里，有观音堂，其前堰水甚泓澈，其侧石亦崡岈。
现代文：警中只能容纳一股水，往西溯水进去二里，有座观音堂，堂前堤坝围着的水十分清澈，旁边的山石也很深。
English: The police station can only accommodate one stream of water, and there is a Guanyin Hall two miles to the west. The water around the dike in front of the hall is very clear, and the rocks next to it are very deep.

古文：又西三里，乃南上山，甚峻。
现代文：又往西走三里，于是往南上山，山很陡。
English: I walked another three miles to the west, and then headed south up the mountain, which was very steep.

古文：二里，陟其脊，乃东南下。
现代文：二里，登上山梁，于是往东南下。
English: Two miles, up a mountain ridge, then south-east.

古文：一里，抵峡中，遂循坡西南下，二里，抵景聚桥。
现代文：一里，抵达峡谷中，就顺坡往西南下，二里，到景聚桥。
English: One mile, arrived in the canyon, downhill to the southwest, two miles, to Jingshu Bridge.

古文：桥上有亭，桥下水乃西来小流也。
现代文：桥上有亭，桥下的水是西边流来的小河。
English: There is a pavilion on the bridge, and the water under the bridge is a small river flowing from the west.

古文：过桥三里，是为弥兴，居集甚盛。
现代文：过桥后走三里，到达弥兴，聚居的人家很多。
English: After crossing the bridge, walk three miles to reach Yaxing, where many people live together.

古文：又南半里，转西一里余，有公馆神庙在冈上。
现代文：又往南走半里，转西走一里多，山冈上有公馆和神庙。
English: Another half-mile to the south, and more than a mile to the west, there are mansions and temples on the mountain.

古文：由其前西南半里，转而西，于是连逾三坡，下陟三峡，共九里，有村悬西坡上，是为孙家湾，宿。
现代文：从冈前往西南走半里，转向西，于是接连翻越三道坡，往下穿过三座峡谷，一共走了九里，有个村庄高高坐落在西坡上，这是孙家湾，在这里住宿。
English: From the hill, walk half a mile to the southwest, turn to the west, and then climb three slopes in succession, go down through three canyons, and walk a total of nine miles. There is a village high on the west slope, this is Sunjiawan, where accommodation is available.

古文：十五日昧爽，饭而行，霜寒殊甚。
现代文：十五日天刚亮，吃过饭就出发，霜冻十分寒冷。
English: It was just after dawn on the fifteenth day, and we set out after dinner. The frost was very cold.

古文：南上坡，溯小流入。
现代文：往南上坡，溯小河而入。
English: Go uphill to the south and follow a small stream.

古文：五里，盘一坡，坡下有洞甚束，其东北人家，曰尾苴村。
现代文：五里，绕着一道坡走，坡下有个很狭窄的洞，坡东北有人家，名尾宜村。
English: Five miles, walk around a slope, there is a very narrow hole at the bottom of the slope, there is a house in the northeast of the slope, Nanaogi village.

古文：稍西转南，是为龙马箐。
现代文：逐渐往西、转南，这是龙马著。
English: Gradually turning west and south, this is the work of Longma Cang.

古文：三里，有哨当涧东坡上，是为龙马哨，有哨无人。
现代文：三里，沟涧东边的坡上有哨，这是龙马哨，有哨所而没有人。
English: Three miles away, on the eastern slope of the ravine, there is a sentry post. This is the Longma sentry post. There is a sentry post, but no one is there.

古文：山壑幽阻，溪环石隘，树木深密，一路梅花，幽香时度常常有香味飘过。
现代文：山壑深幽险阻，溪流环绕，崖石狭隘，树木探密，一路上都有梅花，幽香不时地飘来。
English: The mountains are deep and dangerous, the streams are around, the cliffs are narrow, the trees are dense, there are plum blossoms along the way, and the fragrance comes from time to time.

古文：又南一里，随峡转西。
现代文：又往南走一里，顺峡谷转向西。
English: Walk another mile south and turn west along the canyon.

古文：一里，有一峡自南来，甚深隘；一峡自西来。
现代文：一里，有一道峡谷从南边伸来，很深，很窄；一道峡谷从西边伸来。
English: One mile, there is a canyon from the south, very deep, very narrow; a canyon from the west.

古文：仍循北山行西来峡上，一里出峡，乃成坞焉。
现代文：仍然顺着北山行走在西边来的峡谷中，一里走出峡谷，就是山坞。
English: Still walking along the North Mountain, in the canyon coming from the west, one mile out of the canyon is the dock.

古文：西向平下一里，有村当其西，是为大大苴村。西行二里，抵西山下，遂西上坡。
现代文：往西平缓地下一里，有村庄位于坞西，这是大大直村活往西走二里，抵达西山下，于是往西上坡。
English: There is a village located west of the dock, which is a great village to go west for two miles, reach the west of the mountain, and then go west uphill.

古文：半里，逾坳，北下陟坞，西北半里，是为小大苴村。
现代文：半里，越过山坳，往北下穿越山坞，往西北走半里，这里是小大直村。
English: Half a mile, over the mountains, northward through the docks, half a mile to the northwest, here is the small village of Dazhong.

古文：由其南半里，转而北上坡。
现代文：经过村南走半里，转向北上坡匝。
English: After walking half a mile south of the village, turn north uphill.

古文：循西峡行二里，下渡涧中小水，即西上岭，甚峻。
现代文：沿着西边的峡谷走二里，往下渡过沟涧中的小河，立即往西登岭，岭很陡。
English: Walk two miles along the canyon on the west side, go down and cross the small river in the gully, and immediately go to Xidenling, the ridge is very steep.

古文：三里半，逾岭头。
现代文：三里半，翻越岭头。
English: Three and a half miles, over the ridge.

古文：西行脊上，或南峡上，又临北峡，再平再上，三里余，则盘西岭之东，北转二里，逾其脊，此最高处也。
现代文：往西从脊上走，有时顺南边的峡谷上，又对着北边的峡谷，两次走平路两次上坡，走三里多，就绕到西岭的东部，往北转二里，翻越其脊，这是最高的地方。
English: Walk west from the ridge, sometimes along the canyon on the south side, and against the canyon on the north side, walk twice on the flat road and twice uphill, walk more than three miles, then go around to the east of Xiling, turn north for two miles, and climb over its ridge. This is the highest place.

古文：东望烟萝东界尖山，在钱章关者，隐隐连妙峰，而西界南突之山亦见；惟北望活佛寺大山，反为孙家湾后山所隔，不可见。
现代文：往东看烟萝山东边的尖山，在钱章关一带，隐隐约约和妙峰山相连，而西边朝南突起的山也能看见；只有往北看活佛寺大山，反而被孙家湾背后的山所阻隔，不能看到。
English: Looking to the east, the sharp mountain on the east side of Yanluo Mountain, in the Qianzhangguan area, is vaguely connected to Myofeng Mountain, while the mountain protruding to the south in the west can also be seen; only the Living Buddha Temple Mountain can be seen to the north, but it is blocked by the mountain behind Sunjia Bay and cannot be seen.

古文：又西二里，当西突之处，有人守哨焉，是为老虎关哨。
现代文：又往西走二里，位于西边突起的地方，有人在这里守哨，这是老虎关哨。
English: Another two miles to the west, on the western promontory, there is a sentry, the Tiger's Watch.

古文：哨西下半里，行坡间一里半，是为打金庄牌界。
现代文：从哨西往下半里，在坡间走一里半，这是打金庄牌的边界。
English: Half a mile down from the west sentry post, and a mile and a half between the slopes, this is the boundary for playing Jinzhuang cards.

古文：又西一里半，逾坡，又西上一里半，是为绝顶，有公馆，东南之峡，至是始穷。
现代文：又往西走一里半，越过坡，又往西上一里半，这是最高顶，顶上有公馆 东南走向的峡谷，到这里才结束。
English: Another mile and a half to the west, over the slope, another mile and a half to the west, this is the highest peak, there is a mansion on top of the southeast-facing canyon, and it ends here.

古文：其脉自南天申堂后，直北分支来，东度老虎关而北。
现代文：其山脉从南边的天申堂背后，分出支脉一直向北延伸过来，往东越过老虎关向北。
English: Its mountains extend from the south behind Tianshentang, branching off to the north, eastward across the tiger pass to the north.

古文：于是西向稍下，半里，度一坡，半里，逾其巅。
现代文：从这里向西逐渐下，半里，越过一道坡，半里，翻越坡顶。
English: From here, gradually descend to the west, half a mile, cross a slope, half a mile, climb over the top of the slope.

古文：从巅西行一里，遂西望四十里外，层山一重西绕，又高峰一带南环者，皆大脊也，其东有小脊二重内隔，外有远峰二抹西浮有淡淡的两峰影子在西边浮现，不知为点苍为鸡足也。
现代文：从顶上往西走一里，于是往西看四十里以外，一重层叠的山峦往西绕，又有一片高峰往南环，都是大的山脊，大山脊东边，内部分为二重小山脊，外有两抹远峰悬在西边，不知道哪是点苍山、哪是鸡足山。
English: From the top, walk one mile westward, and then look westward for forty miles. There is a stack of mountains to the west, and a high peak to the south. They are all large ridges. On the east side of the large ridge, the inner part is a double small ridge. Outside, there are two distant peaks hanging on the west side. I don't know which is Dot Cangshan and which is Chicken Foot Mountain.

古文：于是西下颇坦，五里下至峡中，是为五里坡，有水自南而北，小石梁跨之。
现代文：从这里往西下，路比较平坦，五里下到峡谷中，这是五里坡，有条河从南向北流，小石桥横跨河上。
English: From here to the west, the road is relatively flat, five miles down to the canyon, this is a five-mile slope, there is a river flowing from south to north, a small stone bridge across the river.

古文：度而西，盘西山南峡入，一里，又蹑坡而上，一里，凌其巅。
现代文：过桥后往西走，盘绕西山南边的峡谷进去，一里，又登坡而上，一里，登上坡顶。
English: After crossing the bridge, walk west, winding around the canyon on the south side of the West Mountain, one mile, and then climb up the slope, one mile, and climb to the top of the slope.

古文：一里半稍下，平行岭上。
现代文：二里半，逐渐往下，在岭上平走。
English: Two-and-a-half miles, gradually descending, leveling out on the ridge.

古文：二里余，西向下，有溪自西南来，北向去，亦石梁跨之，是为普昌河。
现代文：二里多，往西下，有条溪水从西南流来，向北流去，也是石桥横跨溪上，这是普昌河。
English: Two miles to the west, there is a stream flowing from the southwest to the north. There is also a stone bridge across the stream. This is the Puchang River.

古文：西上坡半里，为巡司。
现代文：往西上坡半里，到巡检司。
English: Half a mile uphill to the west, to the Inspection Division.

古文：半里，复上一山脊。
现代文：半里，又登上一道山梁。
English: After half a mile, I climbed another mountain ridge.

古文：由脊西行四里，乃下，一里而抵普淜。
现代文：顺山梁往西走四里，于是下山，一里就抵达普溯。
English: He walked four miles west along the mountain beam, then went down the mountain and arrived at Puyuan after one mile.

古文：十六日由普淜西北行。
现代文：十六日从普泌往西北行。
English: On the 16th, it sailed from Puxi to the northwest.

古文：二里，渡一水，一里，又渡一水，乃西上坡。
现代文：二里，渡过一条河，一里，又渡过一条河，于是往西上坡。
English: Two miles, crossed a river, one mile, crossed another river, and then headed west uphill.

古文：二里，逾坡上，一里，脊上平行，三里，为金鸡庙。
现代文：二里，翻越坡往上走，一里，在脊上平走，三里，到金鸡庙。
English: Two miles, walk up the slope, one mile, walk flat on the ridge, three miles, to the Golden Rooster Temple.

古文：又西二里，为界坊，乃姚州、小云南界。
现代文：又往西走二里，到界坊，是姚州与小云南骚的分界。
English: Another two miles to the west, to Jiefang, is the boundary between Yaozhou and Xiao Yunnan.

古文：又西行岭上五里，至水盆哨，乃西北稍下，即见南界水亦西流，出鼻窗厂而下元江矣。
现代文：又往西在岭上走五里，到水盆哨，于是往西北逐渐下，就看见南部的水也向西流，从鼻窗厂流出去然后注入元江。
English: I walked another five miles westward on the ridge to the water basin, and then gradually down to the northwest, I saw that the water in the south also flowed westward, flowing out of the window factory and then into the Yuanjiang River.

古文：乃随北山临南峡西行。
现代文：予是顺北山而面对南峡往西行。
English: It is recommended to go west along Kitayama facing Minami-kyo.

古文：二里，山坑南坠峡，路随西脊过，有村当脊间，是为水盆铺。
现代文：二里，山坑往南坠入峡谷；道路顺西脊过去，山脊中有一个村庄兮名水盆铺。
English: After two miles, the mountain pit fell south into the canyon; the road went along the west ridge, and there was a village with a famous water basin in the ridge.

古文：盖老龙自西南来，从此脊北度，峙为一峰，其东南又折而南为水盆铺，惟中央一线，南流下元江云，铺西北上有关帝庙，就而作记，听听凭顾仆同行李先去。
现代文：是主峰山脉从西南伸来，顺着这座山脊往北延伸过去，耸立起一座峰，其东南又折转向南为水盆铺，只有中央有一小股水，往南流到元江。水盆铺西北往上有座关帝庙，进庙去写日记，听任顾仆带行李朝前走。
English: It is the main peak of the mountain range stretching from the southwest, extending along the ridge to the north, a peak rises, and its southeast turns south to the water basin. There is only a small stream of water in the center, flowing south to the Yuanjiang River. There is a temple of Guan Di in the northwest of the water basin, go to the temple to write a diary, and let the servants take the luggage forward.

古文：久之，乃随大道西二里，则岭北山下，亦下坠成西向之峡。
现代文：过了很久，才顺大路往西走，二里，在岭北山下，也下坠成往西走向的峡谷。
English: After a long time, I walked west along the main road. Two miles later, at the foot of Lingbei Mountain, I also fell into a canyon heading west.

古文：于是循南峡之顶西径峡北所起尖山，是为青山，至是其西横拖而去。
现代文：从这里顺着南峡的顶上往西越过峡谷北面所耸起的尖山，这是青山，到这里往西横贯过去。
English: From here, follow the crest of the South Gorge westward across the sharp mountain that rises to the north of the canyon, this is Aoyama, and cross westward to here.

古文：于是循南峡之顶西行。
现代文：于是顺着南峡的顶上往西行。
English: So we drove west along the top of the South Gorge.

古文：二里，忽见路北坠峡西去，路由其峡南岭脊行，于是与峡北之尖山，又对峡分流，西注云南，而北下金沙矣。
现代文：二里，忽然看见路北的峡谷向西边坠下去，道路从峡谷南边的岭脊走，于是和峡谷北边的尖山，又峡谷相对，河水分流。水往西流入云南县，而往北流到金沙江。
English: After two miles, I suddenly saw that the canyon to the north of the road fell down to the west, and the road went from the ridge on the south side of the canyon. As a result, the river water flowed against the sharp mountains and canyon on the north side of the canyon. The water flowed into Yunnan County to the west, and flowed north to the Jinsha River.

古文：始知大脊自九鼎南下，至洱海卫城南青华洞东度，又耸而南为水目山，其南又东转为天华山，即云南川坝子南兜之山也。
现代文：才知道主峰山脉从九鼎山往南走，到洱海卫城南面的青华洞向东延伸，又往南耸立为水目山，其南又向东转为天华山，就是云南县坝子南部环绕的山。
English: It was only then that I knew that the main peak of the mountain range extends from Jiuding Mountain to the south, to Qinghua Cave on the south side of the Bohai Sea Acropolis to the east, and to the south it stands as Shuime Mountain, and to the south and east it turns into Tianhua Mountain, which is the mountain surrounded by the southern part of the dam in Yunnan County.

古文：从天华东北转，数起而为沫滂东岭，又东过公馆而度水盆铺，北耸为青山，其形东突而西垂川中，故自打金庄岭望之，仅为北尖峰，而至此又横夹而西。
现代文：从天华山往东北转，多次耸起而形成沫涝东岭，又往东延伸，经过公馆并越过水盆铺，往北耸立为青山，青山形状东边突出而西边垂伸到坝子中，所以从打金庄岭看青山，仅看到北边的尖峰，而到这里又看到向西横向两旁。
English: From Tianhuashan, it turns to the northeast, rises up several times to form the East Ridge of Fo Shan, and extends to the east, passes the residence and crosses the water basin, and rises to the north as the Qingshan Mountain. The shape of the Qingshan Mountain protrudes to the east while the west side extends into the dam. Therefore, when looking at the Qingshan Mountain from the Ta Jinzhuang Ridge, you can only see the spikes on the north side, but here you can see both sides horizontally to the west.

古文：然是山西北二支，皆非大脊也；大脊即从东南水盆哨过脉，遂东南迤逦于天申宫南，又东至沙桥站分脊焉。
现代文：然而这座山西、北两支，都不是主峰山脉；主脉是顺着东南边水盆哨的过脉，于是往东南曲折连绵地延伸到天申堂南，又往东伸到沙桥站分出支脉。
English: However, these two mountain ranges in Shanxi and the north are not the main peak mountains; the main vein runs along the passing vein of the water basin sentry on the southeastern side, so it extends continuously to the southeast to the south of Tianshendong, and extends eastward to the branching branch of Shaqiao Station.

古文：所过水盆哨、铺之南间，相去不过二里，忽度其脊南，又度其脊北，至由峡南岭稍上稍下，西南二里，公馆当其顶。
现代文：我所经过的水盆哨、水盆铺南之间，相距不过二里，却一会越到山脊南面，一会又越过山脊北面，一直到顺峡谷南边的岭渐上渐下，往西南走二里，公馆坐落在岭顶。
English: The distance between the water basin post and the water basin shop south that I passed is only two miles, but it will go to the south of the ridge, and then it will go over the north of the ridge, until the ridge on the south side of Shun Canyon gradually goes up and down, and it will go two miles to the southwest, and the house is located at the top of the ridge.

古文：又西下西上，再从岭脊西行八里，脊自西南来，至此稍突而北，乃转而北缘之。
现代文：又往西上往西下，再顺岭脊往西走八里，岭脊从西南伸来，到这里逐渐向北突起，于是转向北沿岭脊走。
English: Go west up and west down, and then go west along the ridge for eight miles. The ridge extends from the southwest, and here it gradually protrudes to the north, so turn to the north along the ridge.

古文：二里，又西南下，始追及前行行李。
现代文：二里，又往西南下，才追赶上走在前面的担行李人。
English: Two miles, and then down to the south-west, before catching up with the porter who was walking ahead of him.

古文：于是遂出山之西崖，见其西坞大开，于是直下，五里及麓，为沫滂铺。
现代文：于是就从山的西崖走出去，看见西边的山坞十分开阔，从这里直下，五里到达山麓，名沫傍铺。
English: So he walked out from the western cliff of the mountain and saw the dock on the west side of the mountain was very open. From here, he went straight down, five miles to the foot of the mountain, and there was a shop next to it.

古文：西截坞八里，有二石梁东西跨，其下皆涸干，而川水实由之北注。
现代文：往西横穿山坞八里，有两座横跨东西的石桥，桥下都是干枯的，而坝子中的水确实是从桥下往北流。
English: There are two stone bridges spanning the east and west for eight miles across the mountain dock to the west. The water under the bridges is dry, but the water in the dam does flow north from under the bridges.

古文：又西二里，过大水堰塘。
现代文：又往西走二里，经过大水堰塘。
English: Another two miles to the west, past the large weir pond.

古文：堰稍北，复西十里，抵西山下，为小云南驿，宿。
现代文：从堰塘稍稍往北，又往西走十里，抵达西山下，名小云南释，在这里住宿。
English: From the weir pond, we walked a little to the north and then ten miles to the west, and arrived at the foot of the West Mountain, called Xiao Yunnan Xie, where we stayed.

古文：十七日昧爽饭。
现代文：十七日天亮吃饭。
English: On the seventeenth day, we ate at dawn.

古文：询水目寺在其南，遂由岐随山之东麓南行，盘入其西南坞中。
现代文：询间水目寺，在小云南释南面，于是从岔路顺着山东麓往南走，绕进其西南边的坞中。
English: Qianmen Suimei Temple, in the south of the small Yunnan Province, so I walked south from the Kushiro Road along the eastern foot of the mountain and entered the dock on its southwest side.

古文：共五里，有水自山后破峡南出，即洱海卫青海子之流也，是为练场村，村在水西。
现代文：一共走五里，有条河从山后穿过峡谷往南流出，就是洱海卫青海子的水流，这里名练场村，村庄位于河西岸。
English: A total of five miles away, there is a river flowing from the back of the mountain through the canyon to the south, which is the water flow of the Bohai Wei Qinghai Zi. Here is the famous practice site village, the village is located on the west bank of the river.

古文：渡桥西，复沿山而南，一里半，为温泉，其穴西向。
现代文：过桥往西走，又沿着山往南走，一里半，到了温泉，出水的洞口向西。
English: Cross the bridge to the west, then walk south along the mountain for a mile and a half. When you reach the hot springs, head west to the mouth of the cave where the water comes out.

古文：待浴妇，经两时乃浴。
现代文：等沐浴的妇女洗完，过了两个时辰才得以沐浴。
English: After waiting for the bathing women to finish washing, it took two hours for them to be able to bathe.

古文：仍南沿而麓半里，又盘其山之南坞入，有溪自坞东出，即水目之流也，始见水目山高峙于西。
现代文：仍旧往南沿西山脚走半里，又绕进山南面的山坞，有条溪从山坞东边流出，就是水目山的溪流，于是看见水目山高高耸立在西边。
English: He still walked south along the foot of the West Mountain for half a mile, and then went around to the dock on the south side of the mountain. A stream flowed out of the dock on the east side, which was the stream of Mount Mizume, and he saw Mount Mizume standing tall on the west side.

古文：溯水西入，见其西又大开南北之坞。
现代文：溯流往酉进，看到西部又敞开一道南非走向的大山坞。
English: I followed the current to the estuary and saw a large mountain dock open in the west towards South Africa.

古文：横截其间，五里，抵西山麓，有村甚大，曰冉家屯。
现代文：从坞中横穿，五里，抵达西边山麓，有个很大的村庄，名冉家屯。
English: From the dock, five miles across, arriving at the western foot of the mountain, there is a large village, known as Ranjiatun.

古文：由其后西向上山，于是有溪流夹村矣。
现代文：从屯后往西上山，在这里有条溪水流向村两旁。
English: After leaving the town, head west up the hill, where a stream flows past the village on both sides.

古文：西上逾一岭，二里稍下，涉一涧。
现代文：往西上翻越一座岭，二里，逐渐往下走，渡过一道沟涧。
English: Climbing westward over a ridge, two miles, gradually going down, crossing a gully.

古文：其涧自南而北，溯之南上。
现代文：其涧从南往北去，溯涧往南上。
English: Its course is from south to north, and it climbs southward.

古文：山间茶花盛开。
现代文：山间茶花盛开。
English: Camellias are in full bloom in the mountains.

古文：又二里余，为水目寺。
现代文：又走二里多，是水目寺。
English: After another two-mile walk, it was Mizume-dera Temple.

古文：余误从其南大路，几逾岭，遇樵者，转而东北下，半里，入玉皇阁。
现代文：我误从寺南边的大路走，几乎翻过山岭，遇到砍柴的人指点，才转向东北下，半里，走进玉皇阁。
English: I mistakenly walked from the main road on the south side of the temple, almost turned over the mountain, encountered the woodcutter's pointers, and then turned to the northeast, half a mile, and walked into the Jade Emperor Pavilion.

古文：又下，观倒影，又下，过普贤寺，又下，遇行李于灵光寺，遂置于寺中楼上。
现代文：又下，观览倒影，又下，经过普贤寺，又下，在灵光寺看见行李就放在寺中的楼上。
English: And again, viewing the reflection, and again, passing by Fuxian Temple, and again, seeing the luggage in Lingguang Temple, I put it on the upper floor of the temple.

古文：慧然乃西至旧寺访无住，方在上新建住静处，不值。
现代文：于是往西去旧寺拜访无住，正在上面新修的住静处，没有遇到。
English: So I went west to visit the old temple, but I didn't meet anyone living in the newly built residential area above.

古文：旧寺有井，有大香樟，有木犬，有风井，有塔。
现代文：旧寺中有井，有大香樟，有木犬，有风井，有塔。
English: The old temple had a well, a large incense burner, a wooden dog, a wind well, and a tower.

古文：由其后上无影庵，饭于妙忍老僧静室。
现代文：从旧寺背后上无影庵，在妙忍老僧的静室吃饭。
English: From the back of the old temple, we went to the Mujingan hermitage and ate in the seclusion room of the old monk Myojin.

古文：暮过观音阁，观《渊公碑》，乃天开十六年楚州赵祐撰者。
现代文：太阳落山时经过观音阁，观看《渊公碑》，是天开十六年楚州人赵佑撰写的。
English: When the sun sets, go past the Guanyin Pavilion to see the "Yuan Public Monument," which was written by Zhao You, a native of Chuzhou, in the 16th century.

古文：十八日往无住处。
现代文：十八日去无住那里。
English: I went there on the 18th, but didn't stay there.

古文：午过徽僧戒月静室，饭。
现代文：中午拜访徽州僧人戒月的静室，在这里吃饭。
English: At noon, visit the quiet room of Huizhou monks and eat here.

古文：下午，观慧然新楼花卉。
现代文：下午，观看慧然新楼的花卉。
English: In the afternoon, watch the flowers bloom at Hui Ran New Building.

古文：十九日早，雨雪。
现代文：十九日早晨，下雨雪。
English: On the morning of the 19th, it rained and snowed.

古文：无住苦留，因就火僵卧。
现代文：无住苦苦挽留，于是靠近火塘仰卧不起。
English: There was no place to stay, so he lay on his back near the fire.

古文：上午，雨雪倏开，再饭，由山前东北下。
现代文：上午，雨雪突然停了，天放晴，又吃饭，从山前往东北下。
English: In the morning, the rain and snow suddenly stopped, the sky cleared, we had dinner again, and headed from the mountains to the northeast.

古文：五里，下山，过一村。
现代文：五里，下完山，经过一个村庄。
English: Five miles down the mountain, past a village.

古文：北向二里，逾一坡。又二里，过一小海子，其北冈上有数家，曰酒药村。
现代文：向北走二里，越过一道坡，又走二里，经过一个小湖泊，北面冈上有数家人，名酒药村。
English: Walk two miles north, cross a slope, walk another two miles, pass a small lake, there are several families on the north hill, famous liquor village.

古文：一里，越之，乃陟坞循东山北向行。
现代文：一里，越过冈，于是穿过山坞顺东山往北行。
English: One mile, over the hill, then through the dockyard down the east mountain to the north.

古文：五里，即青海子之西南涯也，遂与小云南来之大道遇，于是由青海子西涯西北向行。
现代文：五里，就是青海子的西南边，于是和从小云南骚来的大路相遇，从这里顺青海子西边向西北行。
English: Wuli is the southwest of Qinghai Zi, so it meets the highway coming from Xiao Yunnan Suo. From here, it follows the west side of Qinghai Zi to the northwest.

古文：八里，则南山再突而北，濒于海，路或盘环绕之，或逾之。
现代文：八里，则南山又向北突出，濒临青海子，道路有时盘绕南山，有时翻越南山。
English: After eight miles, Nanshan Mountain protrudes to the north again, on the edge of Qinghai Province. The road sometimes winds around Nanshan Mountain, and sometimes crosses over Nanshan Mountain.

古文：又五里，为狗村铺，坊名瑞禾，馆名清华。
现代文：又走五里，是狗村铺，牌坊名瑞禾，公馆名清华。
English: Another five miles away, is the dog village shop, the signboard name Ruihe, the mansion name Qinghua.

古文：其处北向洱海卫城八里，西向白崖城站四十里。
现代文：此处往北离洱海卫城八里，往西离白崖城站四十里。
English: At this point, it is eight miles north of the Bohai Sea Acropolis and forty miles west of the Baiyacheng Station.

古文：余从西路四里观清华洞。
现代文：我顺西边的路走四里去看清华洞。
English: I walked four miles along the west road to see Qinghua Cave.

古文：洞北有路西过岭，此白崖道；洞南有坞南过脊，此灭渡道。
现代文：洞北有道路往西越过岭，这是去白崖的路；洞南有山坞往南越过山脊，这是去迷渡的路。
English: In the north of the cave, there is a road that crosses the ridge to the west, which is the road to the white cliff; in the south of the cave, there is a dock that crosses the ridge to the south, which is the road to get lost.

古文：余出洞，循西山仍北行，六里，入卫城南门。
现代文：我走出洞，仍然顺西山往北行，六里，进入洱海卫城南门。
English: I walked out of the cave, still heading north along the West Mountain, six miles, and entered the South Gate of the Bohai Acropolis.

古文：顾仆亦至。
现代文：顾仆也到了。
English: The valet has arrived.

古文：出西门宿。
现代文：从西门出去住宿。
English: Go out from the west gate to stay.

