古文：魏夫人
现代文：魏夫人
English: Mrs. Wei

古文：魏夫人者，任城人也。晋司徒剧阳文康公舒之女，名华存，字贤安。
现代文：魏夫人是任城人，是晋朝司徒剧阳文康公魏舒的女儿，名叫华存，字叫贤安。
English: Mrs. Wei is a resident of Rencheng, the daughter of Wei Shu, the Yang Wen Kang Gong of the Jin Dynasty, named Hua Cun, and her Chinese name is Xian An.

古文：幼而好道，静默恭谨。
现代文：她幼年时就好道，性情沉静恭谨。
English: When she was a child, she was good-natured, quiet and respectful.

古文：读庄老，三传五经百氏，无不该览。
现代文：读《老子》、《庄子》以及三传五经百家著作，无不贯通。
English: Reading "Lao Zi" and "Zhuang Zi" as well as the "Three Traditions" and "Five Classics" and hundreds of other works, they are all well-versed.

古文：志慕神仙，味真耽玄。欲求冲举。
现代文：立志向慕神仙，沉溺玄真修仙之道，想要求得飞腾。
English: Determined to worship the gods, indulge in the way of cultivating the gods, and want to ask for flying.

古文：常服胡麻散茯苓丸，吐纳气液，摄生夷静。
现代文：常常服食胡麻散茯苓丸，吐的父母不答应。
English: He often takes sesame seed lozenges, but his parents do not approve.

古文：亲戚往来，一无关见，常欲别居闲处，父母不许。年二十四，强适太保掾南阳刘文，字幼彦。生二子，长曰璞，次曰瑕。
现代文：二十四岁那年，勉强把她嫁给太保掾即南阳的刘文，刘文字叫幼彦。他们生下两个儿子，长子叫刘璞，次子叫刘瑕。
English: At the age of twenty-four, she was reluctantly married off to Liu Wen, also known as Yu Yan, who was a bodyguard in Nanyang. They had two sons, the eldest of whom was named Liu Zhen, and the second son was named Liu Ke.

古文：幼彦后为修武令。
现代文：刘幼彦后来做修武县令。
English: Liu Yuhiko later became the governor of Shouwu County.

古文：夫人心期幽灵，精诚弥笃。
现代文：夫人心期于幽灵，精诚更加深厚。
English: The lady's heart is in the ghost, and her sincerity is more profound.

古文：二子粗立，乃离隔宇室。
现代文：两个儿子刚立事，她就隔离开屋室，另寝斋戒。
English: As soon as her two sons got up, she left the room and went to bed and fasted.

古文：斋于别寝。将逾三月，忽有太极真人安度明、东华大神、方诸青童、扶桑碧阿阳谷神王、景林真人、小有仙女、清虚真人王褒来降。
现代文：将过三个月，忽然有太极真人安度明、东华大神、方诸青童、扶桑碧阿阳谷神王、景林真人、小有仙女、清虚真人王裒来降临。
English: About three months later, suddenly, the Taiji Shingon Andu Ming, Donghua Daishin, Fangzhu Qingdong, Fusang Biayang Valley God King, Jinglin Shingon, Xiao You Fairy, and Qinghu Shingon Wang Yao arrived.

古文：褒谓夫人曰： 闻子密纬真气，注心三清，勤苦至矣。
现代文：王裒对夫人说： 听说你密修真气，专心于三清，勤苦到极点了。
English: Wang Yao said to his wife, "I heard that you have been diligently cultivating true qi, concentrating on Sanqing, and working hard.

古文：扶桑大帝君敕我授子神真之道。 
现代文：扶桑大帝君令我传你神真之道。 
English: Fusang the Great ordered me to teach you the true way of God.

古文：青童君曰： 清虚天王，即汝之师也。 
现代文：青童君说： 清虚天王就是你的老师。 
English: The young boy said, "Qinghu Tianwang is your teacher."

古文：度明曰： 子苦心求道，道今来矣。 
现代文：度明说： 你苦心求道，道今天来了。 
English: Du Ming said: You have been diligently seeking the Way, and the Way has come today.

古文：景林真人曰： 虚皇鉴尔勤感，太极已注子之仙名于玉札矣。
现代文：景林真人说： 虚皇鉴于你辛苦勤奋，太极已经把你的仙名登记在玉札上了。
English: Jinglin Zhen said: Emperor Qiu, in view of your hard work and diligence, Taiji has registered your immortal name on the jade card.

古文：子其勖哉！ 
现代文：你勉力做吧！ 
English: Do your best!

古文：青童君又曰： 子不更闻上道内法晨景玉经者，仙道无缘得成。
现代文：青童君又说： 你不再了解上道内法晨景玉经的话，仙道就无缘得到成功。
English: The young boy also said, "If you no longer understand the Dharma, Morning Glory and Jade Sutra, you will not be able to succeed in the Immortal Realm."

古文：后日当会旸涤山中，尔谨密之。 
现代文：后天当在旸涤山中相会，你谨守这个秘密。 
English: The day after tomorrow, when we meet in the mountains of Nepal, you must keep this secret.

古文：王君乃命侍女华散条、李明兑等，便披云蕴，开玉笈，出《太上宝文》、《八十隐书》、《大洞真丝》、《灵书八道》、《紫度炎光》、《石精金马》、《神真虎文》、《高仙羽玄》等经，凡三十一卷。即手授夫人焉。
现代文：王君就命侍女华散条、李明兑等，拉开云蕴打开玉箱，拿出《太上宝文》、《八素隐书》、《大洞真经》、《灵书八道》、《紫度炎光》、《石精金马》、《神真虎文》、《高仙羽玄》等经，共三十一卷，并亲手交给夫人。
English: On the orders of his attendants, including Hua Sanjie and Li Mingdui, Wang Jun opened the jade box, pulled out the Thirty-one volumes of "The Book of the Empress Dowager," "The Book of the Eight Elements," "The Book of the Great Cave," "The Book of the Eight Spiritual Realms," "The Book of the Violet Flame," "The Book of the Golden Horse," "The Book of the Divine Tiger" and "The Book of the High Immortal Feather," and personally handed them over to his wife.

古文：王君因告曰： 我昔于此学道，遇南极夫人、西城王君，授我宝经三十一卷，行之以成真人，位为小有洞天仙王。
现代文：王君趁此告诉她说： 我从前在这里学道。遇见南极夫人、西城王君，交给我宝经三十一卷，按它奉行而成为真人，职位是小有洞天仙王。
English: Wangjun took this opportunity to tell her, "I used to study the Tao here. I met Lady of the South Pole, King of Xicheng, who gave me thirty-one volumes of the Treasure Sutra, and I became a real person by following it. My position is Xiao Youdong Heavenly King."

古文：令所授者即南极元君、西城王君之本文也。
现代文：令我所传授的经文就是南极之君、西城王君的原文。
English: The text I have been asked to teach is the original text of King of the South Pole, King of the West.

古文：此山洞台，乃清虚之别宫耳。 
现代文：这座山的洞台，乃是清虚的别宫。 
English: The cave platform of this mountain is a pure and empty villa.

古文：于是王君起立北向，执书而祝曰： 太上三元、九星高真、虚微入道，上清玉晨，褒为太帝所敕，使教于魏华存。
现代文：于是王君起立面向北，拿看书而祈祷说： 太上三元、九星高真、虚微入道、上清玉晨，我被太帝所命，使我教授魏华存。
English: Then Wang Jun stood up facing the north, took a book to read and prayed, saying: "Grandmother Shang San Yuan, Nine Star Gao Zhen, Xiao Wei Rong Dao, Shang Qing Yuchen, I was ordered by the Great Emperor to teach Wei Hua Cun.

古文：是月丹良，吉日戊申，谨按宝书。《神金虎文》、《大洞真经》、《八素玉篇》合三十一卷，是褒昔精思于阳明西山，受真人太师紫元夫人书也。
现代文：这个月很好，吉日在戊申，谨按宝书《神金虎文》、《大洞真经》、《八素玉篇》共三十一卷，这是我从前在阳明西山精心思考，接受真人太师紫元夫人的书。
English: This month is very good. It is a lucky day in Wushan. I would like to recommend the 31 volumes of the precious books, "Shen Jin Hu Wen," "Da Dong Zhen Jing" and "Hassu Yu Zhen." This is the book that I carefully considered and accepted the book of Lady Ziyuan, the True Human Daishi, in the West Mountain of Yangming.

古文：华存当谨按明法，以成至真，诵修虚道，长为飞仙。
现代文：华存应当谨按明法，以成为至真，诵修虚道，长做飞仙。
English: Hua Cun should be careful to follow the clear law, so as to become the ultimate truth, chant and practice the empty way, and grow up to be a flying fairy.

古文：有泄我书，族及一门，身为下鬼，塞诸河源，九天有命，敢告华存。 
现代文：如有泄露我书，满门族灭，身为下鬼，把他堵塞到河的源头，九天有令，敢告华存。 
English: If anyone leaks my book, I will exterminate him as a lower ghost, block him to the source of the river, and dare to report him to China.

古文：祝毕，王君又曰： 我受秘诀于紫元君，言听教于师云，此篇当传诸真人，不但我得而已，子今获之，太帝命焉。
现代文：祈祷完毕，王君又说： 我从紫元君那里接受秘诀，从老师那里听到教诲说，此篇该当把它传给真人，不只我得到而已，你今天获得它，是大帝的命令。
English: After the prayer, Wang Jun also said, "I received the secret from Ziyuan Jun, and I heard the instruction from the teacher that this article should be passed on to real people. I'm not the only one who got it, you got it today, it's the emperor's order."

古文：此书自我当七人得之。
现代文：此书从我开始应当七个人得到它。
English: Since I started this book, seven people have received it.

古文：以白玉为简，青玉为字，至华存则为四矣。 
现代文：此书用白玉为简，用青玉为字，至华存就是四个人了。 
English: This book uses the white jade for the jane and the blue jade for the word. There are only four people left in China.

古文：于是景林又授夫人《黄庭内景经》，令昼夜存念。
现代文：于是景林又交给夫人《黄庭内景经》，令夫人昼夜诵念。
English: As a result, Jinglin gave his wife the "Huangting Inner Jingjing" and made her recite it day and night.

古文：读之万遍后，乃能洞观鬼神，安适六府，调和三魂五脏，主华色，反婴孩，乃不死之道也。
现代文：把它读过万遍以后，就能洞察鬼神，使六腑安适，调和三魂五脏，主华色，返回婴孩那样，乃是不死的法术。
English: After reading it ten thousand times, it is an immortal magic to be able to see the ghosts and gods, make the six limbs comfortable, harmonize the three souls and five organs, and return to a baby-like state.

古文：于是四真吟唱，各命玉女，弹琴击钟吹箫，合节而发歌，歌毕，王君乃解摘经中所修之节度，及宝经之指归，行事之口诀诸要备讫，徐乃别去。
现代文：于是四真吟唱，各命玉女弹琴击钟吹箫，合着节拍而歌唱，歌唱完毕，王君就解释指明经中所修的控制办法，以及宝经的内容，行事的口诀等诸要点，详细讲完以后，才慢慢地告别离去。
English: So the Four Immortals sang, and each of the Immortals played the piano, struck the bell and blew the gong, and sang in time with the beat. When the singing was over, the prince explained and pointed out the control methods established in the sutra, as well as the contents of the treasure sutra, the words of conduct, and other important points. After the detailed explanation, he slowly bid farewell and left.

古文：是时太极真人命北寒玉女宋联涓，弹九气之璈，青童命东华玉女烟景珠，击西盈之钟，旸谷神王命神林玉女贾屈廷，吹凤唳之箫，青虚真人命飞玄玉女鲜于虚，拊九合玉节。
现代文：这时，太极真人命北寒玉女宋联涓弹奏九气之璈，青童命东华玉女烟景珠敲击西盈之钟，旸谷神王命神林玉女贾屈庭吹风唳之箫，青虚真人命飞玄玉女鲜于虚拍九合玉节。
English: At this time, the North Cold Jade Woman Song Lianqian played the Nine Airs of the Nine Airs, the East Hua Jade Woman Smoke Bead of the West Ying Bell was struck by the Young Child's Life, the King of the Valley of the Gods Life of the Forest of the Gods Jade Woman Jia Qutian blew the Wind of the Nine Airs of the Nine Airs of the Nine Airs of the Nine Earths, and the Blue Real Life Flying Jade Woman was fresh in the false shot of the Nine Jade Festival.

古文：太极真人发排空之歌，青童吟太霞之曲，神王讽晨启文章，清虚咏驾飚之词，既散后，诸真元君，日夕来降，虽幼彦隔壁，寂然莫如。
现代文：太极真人唱排空之歌，青童吟太霞之曲，神三诵晨启之章，清虚咏驾飚之词，散去以后，诸真元君白天晚上都降临她家，幼彦虽然住在隔壁，却静悄悄地什么也不知道。
English: Taiji real people sing the song of emptiness, young children sing the song of taiga, and gods recite the chapter of the morning, the words of the clear and the empty. After they dispersed, all the real princes came to her house during the day and night. Although he lived next door, he quietly did not know anything.

古文：其后幼彦物故，值天下荒乱，夫人抚养内外，旁救穷乏。
现代文：其后幼彦死了，正值天下荒乱，夫人除了抚养全家内外，还救助贫乏的穷人。
English: After that, Yukihiko died, and at a time when the world was in turmoil, my wife, in addition to raising the whole family, also helped the poor.

古文：亦为真仙默示其兆，知中原将乱，携二子渡江。
现代文：又因为真仙默默暗示给她征兆，夫人知道中原讲乱，就带领二子渡过长江。
English: In addition, because the True Immortal silently gave her a sign, the lady knew that the Central Plains were in turmoil, so she led the two sons across the Yangtze River.

古文：璞为庾亮司马，又为温太真司马，后至安成太守。
现代文：刘璞做庾亮的司马，又任温太真的司马，后来做到安成太守。
English: Liu Ye was the brilliant Sima, and Wen Taizhen was the real Sima, and later became the Ancheng Empress Dowager.

古文：瑕为陶太尉侃从事中郎将。
现代文：刘瑕做太尉陶侃的从事中郎将。
English: Liu Keh as Lieutenant Tao Kan is a middle-ranking officer.

古文：夫人自洛邑达江南，盗寇之中，凡所过处，神明保佑，常果元吉。
现代文：夫人从洛阳到江南，在盗贼之中，凡所经过之处，都有神明保佑，常实现元吉。
English: From Luoyang to the south of the Yangtze River, among the thieves, wherever she passed, she was blessed by the gods and often achieved good fortune.

古文：二子位既成立，夫人因得冥心斋静，累感真灵，修真之益，与日俱进。
现代文：两个儿子地位已经成就，夫人因而得到专心斋戒静修，累次有真灵感应，修行真道的好处，也与日俱增。
English: The status of the two sons has been achieved. As a result, my wife has been able to concentrate on fasting and meditation, and has repeatedly received true inspiration. The benefits of practicing the true way are also increasing day by day.

古文：凡住世八十三年，以晋成帝咸和九年，岁在甲午，王君复与青童、东华君来降，授夫人成药二剂，一曰迁神白骑神散，一曰石精金光化形灵丸。
现代文：夫人在世八十三年，在晋成帝咸和九年，岁在甲午那年，王君又与青童、东华君来降临，交给夫人两剂成药，一种叫迁神白骑神散，一种叫石精金光化形灵丸。
English: In the eighty-third year of his wife's life, in the ninth year of Emperor Jinsheng's reign, and in the first year of Emperor Jiawu's reign, Wang Jun, together with Dong Hua Jun, a young boy, came again and gave his wife two doses of medicine, one called Qian Shen Baiji Shenshan, and one called Shi Jing Jin Guanghua Shaped Magic Pill.

古文：使顿服之，称疾不行。
现代文：让她立刻喝下去，称疾不走。
English: Let her drink it at once and say she can't go on.

古文：凡七日，太乙玄仙遣飚车来迎，夫人乃托剑化形而去，径入阳洛山中，明日，青童君、太极四真人、清虚王君，令夫人清斋五百日，读《大洞真经》，并分别真经要秘，道陵天师又授《明威章奏》、《存祝吏兵符箓之诀》。
现代文：一共七天，太乙玄仙派飚车来迎接，夫人就以剑为假托化形而去，直入阳洛山中，第二天，青童君、太极四真人，清虚王君令夫人请斋五百天，读《大洞真经》，同时分辨真经重要秘诀。道陵真君又给她《明威章奏》、《存祝吏兵符箓之诀》。
English: For a total of seven days, Emperor Taejo sent a carriage to meet her, and she disguised herself with a sword and went straight into the mountains of Yangluo. On the second day, Emperor Taejo, Emperor Taejo and Emperor Qingyu ordered her to fast for five hundred days, read the Daedong Zhengjing, and discern the important secrets of the Zhengjing. Emperor Doling Zhenjun also gave her the Mingwei Zhangso, and the recipe for storing and wishing soldiers.

古文：众真各摽至训，三日而去。
现代文：众真人各自标注重训，三天后才离去。
English: All the real people went to the drill on their own, and only left three days later.

古文：道陵所以遍教委曲者，以夫人在世当为女官祭酒，领职理民故也。
现代文：道陵天师之所以遍教她事情的底细和原委，是因为夫人在世应当做女官祭酒，领职治理百姓的缘故。
English: The reason why Daoling Tenshi repeatedly taught her the details of the matter and the original committee was because the lady should be a court lady in the world and lead the people's governance.

古文：夫人诵经万遍，积十六年，颜如少女，于是龟山九虚太真金母、金阙圣君、南极元君，共迎夫人白日升天。北诣上清宫玉阙之下。
现代文：夫人诵经万遍，累计十六年，容颜像少女一样，于是龟山九虚太真金母、金阙圣君、南极元君共迎夫人白日升天，向北到上清宫玉阙之下。
English: The lady chanted the sutras a million times, for a total of sixteen years, and her face looked like a girl. Therefore, Kameyama Jiuhu Taizhen Jinmu, Jinlu Shengjun, and Antarctic Yuanjun all welcomed the lady to ascend to heaven during the day, and went north to the Jade Pavilion of the Upper Qing Palace.

古文：太微帝君、中央黄老君、三素高元君、太上玉晨太道君、太素三元君、扶桑太帝君、金阙后圣君，各令使者致命，授《天人玉札金文》，位为紫虚元君，领上真司命南岳夫人，比秩仙公，使治天台大霍山洞台中，主下训奉道，教授当为仙者。
现代文：太微帝君、中央黄老君、三素高元君、太上玉晨太道君、太素三元君、扶桑太帝君、金阙后圣君各令使者传达命令，授给夫人《天人玉札金文》，进位为紫虚元君，领上真司命南岳夫人之职，品级比照仙公，使她以天台大霍山洞台中为治所，主管下训奉道，教授应当成仙的人。
English: Emperor Taowu, Emperor Chuanghuang, Emperor San Su, Empress Dowager Jade Chen, Empress Dowager Tai Dao, Empress Dowager Tai Su, Empress Dowager Fusang and Empress Dowager Jin sent envoys to convey orders to bestow upon his wife the "Heavenly Man, Jade Tablet, Golden Text," to promote her to the rank of Empress Ziqiu, to bestow upon her the position of the wife of Emperor Nangue, and to compare her rank to that of the immortals, so that she would be governed by the Tiantai Da Huoshan Cave Middle School, under the supervision of which she would be instructed in the

古文：男曰真人，女曰元君。
现代文：男的叫做真人，女的叫做元君。
English: A man is called a real person, a woman is called a princess.

古文：夫人受锡事毕，王母及金阙圣君、南极元君各去。
现代文：夫人受敕封完毕，王母及金阙圣君、南极元君各自离去。
English: After the wife's enthronement, the Queen Mother, King Jinxuan Shengkun, and King Nanji Yuankun left separately.

古文：使夫人于王屋小有天中，更斋戒二月毕，九微元君、龟山王母、三元夫人众诸真仙，并降于小有清虚上。
现代文：让夫人在王屋小有天中再斋戒两个月完毕，九微元君、龟山王母、三元夫人众位真仙，同时降临小有天清虚之上。
English: Let the lady finish fasting for another two months in the Wangya Xiaoyutian Middle School, and the nine micro-yuan jun, Kameyama Wangmo, and Sanyuan lady, all true immortals, will descend on the Xiaoyutian Qinghu at the same time.

古文：四奏，各命侍女陈钧成之曲，九灵合节，八音灵际，王母击节而歌，三元夫人弹云璈而答歌，余真各歌，须臾司命神仙诸隶属，及南岳迎官并至。
现代文：乐曲四奏，众真仙各命侍女展示钧天成曲，九灵合拍，八音灵际，王母打着拍子唱歌，三元夫人弹着云璈答歌，其余真仙也各自唱了歌，不一会儿，司命神仙的众隶山属，以及南岳迎接的官员同时来到。
English: The four pieces of music were played, and the attendants of each of the immortals showed the heavenly melody, the nine spirits in unison, and the eight-tone spiritual world. The Queen Mother sang with a beat, the three-figure lady played a melody, and the rest of the immortals also sang their own songs. In a short while, the mountain people who were in charge of the immortals, as well as the officials who greeted Nanyue, arrived at the same time.

古文：虎旗龙辇，激耀百里中，王母诸真，乃共与夫人东南而行，俱诣天台霍山台，又便道过句由金坛茅叔申，宴会二日二夕，共适于霍山。
现代文：龙旗龙辇，光彩鲜明照耀百里，王母等众真人，就共同与夫人向东南而行，一起到天台霍山台，又顺便在途中拜访句由金坛茅叔申，宴会二天二夜，共同前往霍山。
English: Longqi Longyu, shining brightly for a hundred miles, the Queen Mother and other real people, together with his wife, went to the southeast, together to the rooftop Huoshan Terrace, and by the way, on the way to visit the golden altar, the banquet lasted for two days and two nights, and they went to Huoshan together.

古文：夫人安驾玉宇，然后各别。
现代文：夫人平安抵达玉室之后，众真人各自离去。
English: After his wife arrived safely in the throne room, all the real people left separately.

古文：初，王君告夫人曰： 学者当去疾除病。 
现代文：当初，王君告诉夫人说： 学道的人应当除去疾病。 
English: At first, Wang Jun told his wife, "Those who study the Tao should get rid of diseases.

古文：因授甘草谷仙方，夫人服之。
现代文：于是传给她甘草各仙方，夫人服食了。
English: So he gave her some licorice root, and she ate it.

古文：夫人能隶书小有王君并传，事甚详悉，又述《黄庭内景注》，叙青精脻饭方。
现代文：夫人能用隶书写小有王君及传，记事很详细全面，又记述了《黄庭内经》的注释，叙述了青精脻饭方。
English: His wife was able to write about Xiao You Wangjun and his biography in Chinese characters, and the records were very detailed and comprehensive. She also recorded the commentary of "Huangting Nai Jing" and described the Qing Jing Yi Meal.

古文：后屡降茅山。
现代文：后来她屡次降临茅山。
English: Later, she repeatedly came to Maoyan.

古文：子璞后至侍中，夫人令璞传法于司徒琅邪王舍人杨羲，护军长史许穆。
现代文：她的儿子刘璞后来官至侍中，夫人命刘璞把法术传给司徒琅琊王的舍人杨羲，护军长史许穆。
English: Her son Liu Ye was later promoted to the position of chamberlain, and his wife ordered Liu Ye to pass on the magic to Yang Ye, a retainer of King Sutu Ye, and the head of the guard, Shi Xu Mu.

古文：穆子玉斧，并皆升仙。
现代文：许穆的儿子许玉斧，也都同时升仙。
English: Xu Mu's son, Xu Yuaxi, was also elevated to the heavenly realm at the same time.

古文：陶贞白真诰所呼南真，即夫人也。
现代文：陶贞白的真诰中所称的南真，就是魏夫人。
English: Nan Zhen, known as Nan Zhen in Tao Zhenbai's Geng Yao, is Lady Wei.

古文：以晋兴宁三年乙丑，降杨家，谓杨君曰： 修道之士，不欲见血肉，见虽避之，不如不见。 
现代文：在晋朝兴宁三年乙丑，夫人降临杨家，对杨君说： 修道的人不想见到血肉，见到了虽然避开它，不如不见。 
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Xingning of the Jin Dynasty, his wife came to the Yang family and said to Yang Jun, "A religious person does not want to see flesh and blood. If you see it, although you should avoid it, it is better not to see it."

古文：又云： 向过东海中，波声如雷。 
现代文：又说： 刚才经过东海中，听到波声如雷。 
English: He also said, "I just passed through the middle of the East China Sea and heard the thunderous sound of waves.

古文：又云： 裴清灵真人锦囊中有《宝神经》，昔从紫微夫人所受，吾亦有是西宫定本，即是玄圃北坛西瑶之上台，天真珍文尽藏其中也。 
现代文：又说 裴清灵真人的锦囊中有《宝神经》，是他从前从紫微夫人那里接受过来的，我也有这书的西宫定本，就在玄圃北坛西瑶的上台，天真珍文全部收藏在其中。 
English: He also said that Bae Ching Ling Zhen's treasure bag contained "Treasure Nerve," which he had received from Lady Zi Wei. I also have the West Palace copy of this book, which is on the stage of the West Pagoda of the North Altar of the Western Pagoda, and all the naive rare books are collected in it.

古文：因授书云： 若夫仰掷云轮，总辔太空，手携宵烟，足陟王庭。
现代文：于是授给杨君说： 至于那仰掷云轮，驰马于太空，手拿宵烟，足登王庭。
English: So he gave it to Yang Jun and said, "As for the cloud-throwing wheel, galloping through space, with a cigarette in hand, and setting foot in the royal court.

古文：身升帝阙，披宝喻吸青，论九玄之逸度，沉万椿之长生，真言玄朗，高谭玉清。
现代文：身升帝宫，披宝衣吸青云，论九玄的逸变，沉万椿的长生，真言玄朗，高谈玉洁。
English: He ascended to the imperial palace, put on a precious robe and sucked in the clouds of youth. He talked about the changes of the Nine Immortals, the eternal life of the Sun King, the profoundness of the Word of God, and spoke highly of Jade Beauty.

古文：今则回灵尘矣，训我弟子，周目五浊，劳神臭腥。
现代文：如今则回灵于尘世，训导我的弟子，环视五浊，劳神于腥臭。
English: Now I am back in the world, teaching my disciples, looking around at the world, and smelling the stench.

古文：子所营者道，研咏者妙。
现代文：你所谋求的是道，所研咏的是妙。
English: What you seek is the way, what you study is the secret.

古文：道妙既得，吾子加之，虑斯荡散，念且慎之。 
现代文：道和妙得到之后，你的道行就增加了，忧虑就荡散了，意念将慎重了。 
English: After attaining the Way and the Miraculous, your practice will increase, your worries will dissipate, and your thoughts will be cautious.

古文：仍云： 河东桐柏山之西头，适崩二百余丈，吾昨与茅权申诣清虚宫，授真仙之籍，得失之事。
现代文：又说： 河东桐柏山的西头，刚才崩塌二百多丈，我昨天与茅叔申去请虚宫，传真仙的名籍和得失的事情。
English: He also said: The west end of Tongbashi Mountain in the east of the river has just collapsed by more than 200 meters. Yesterday, I asked Mao Shuxin to go to the virtual palace and fax the name and address of the immortal.

古文：顿落四十七人，复上者三人耳。
现代文：一下子掉下去四十七个人，上来的仅三个人。
English: Forty-seven men went down at once, and only three came up.

古文：固当洗心虚迈，勤注理尽，心殚意竭，如履冰火，久久如此，仙道亦不隐矣。
现代文：本来应当洗心虚迈，尽力注理竭尽心意，像履冰蹈火那样，长久如此，仙道就不隐晦了。
English: Originally, it was supposed to wash one's mind of vanity, try one's best to concentrate and exhaust one's mind, like walking on ice and walking on fire. As long as this is the case, the fairy tale will not be obscure.

古文：但在庄敬丹到，而绝淫色之念也。
现代文：只在庄敬丹到，就断绝色欲的念头。
English: It was only when Zhuang Jingdan arrived that he gave up the idea of lust.

古文：若抱淫欲之心，行上真之道者，清宫所落，皆此辈也。
现代文：如果抱着淫欲的想法，去修行上真之道，清宫掉落下去的，都是这一类人。
English: If you hold lustful thoughts and go to practice the true way, it is this kind of person who will fall from the palace.

古文：岂止落名生籍，方将被考于三官也。
现代文：那只是从生籍中除名，将被三官考究。
English: That's just being removed from the register of births, and will be investigated by the three authorities.

古文：勉之慎之。
现代文：努力谨慎去做吧。
English: Try to do it carefully.

古文：宗道者贵无邪，栖真者安恬愉，至寂非引顺之主，淡然非教授之匠，故当困烦以领无耳。
现代文：以道为宗的人贵在没有邪念，成为真仙的人安于恬静愉快。静寂到极点并非引导和顺的主旨，淡然也不是教授的造诣，所以应当用困烦来引领虚无。
English: Those who live by the Tao have no evil thoughts, and those who become true immortals are calm and happy. Quietness to the extreme is not the main theme of guidance and harmony, nor is it the accomplishment of a professor, so we should use trouble to lead nothingness.

古文：为道者精则可矣，有精而不勤，能而不专，无益也。
现代文：学道的人心诚就可以了，有诚心而不努力，有能力而不专一，这也是无益的。
English: The sincerity of those who learn the Tao is enough. It is useless to have sincerity without hard work, ability without dedication.

古文：要在吝心消豁，秽念疾开，可以数看东山，勤望三秀，差复益耳。
现代文：要在贪心消除，杂念速散，可以数看东山，勤望三秀，尚还有益。
English: If you want to eliminate greed and dispel distracting thoughts quickly, you can count the number of Dongshan, Dangwang Sanxiu, and there are still benefits.

古文：言者性命之全败，信者得失之关籥。
现代文：说的人性命的全与坏，是信的人得失的关键。
English: The wholeness and fragility of human life is the key to a believer's gain and loss.

古文：张良三期，可谓笃道而明心矣。 
现代文：张良三次约定日期，可以说是诚心于道而表明心意了。 
English: Zhang Liang agreed on the date for the third time, and it can be said that he was sincere and showed his intentions.

古文：又曰： 得道去世，或显或隐。
现代文：又说： 得道离开人世，有的明显有的隐蔽。
English: He also said: Some things are obvious and some things are hidden.

古文：托体遗迹者，道之隐也。
现代文：假托肉体留下痕迹的人，这是隐蔽得道。
English: People who pretend to leave traces on the body, this is a hidden way.

古文：昔有再酣琼液而叩棺，一服刀圭而尸烂。
现代文：从前有人喝两次琼液就进了棺材，服一剂药就成了烂尸。
English: Once upon a time, someone who drank two doses of ginger ale ended up in a coffin, while someone who took one dose of medicine became a rotting corpse.

古文：鹿皮公吞玉华而流虫出户；贾季子咽金液而臭闻百里；黄帝火九鼎于荆山，尚有乔岭之墓；李玉服云散以潜升，犹头足异处；墨狄饮虹丹以没水；宁生服石脑而赴火；务光翦薤以入清冷之泉；柏成纳气而肠胃三腐。
现代文：鹿皮公吞服玉华就有蛆虫从体内流出；贾季子咽下金液尸臭传到百里；黄帝在荆山火烧九鼎之躯，尚有乔岭之墓；李玉服食云散而悄悄成仙，还头足异处；墨狄喝了虹丹而投水；宁生服石脑而赴火；务光翦薤跳进清冷之泉；柏成纳气而肠胃三腐。
English: Deerskin swallowed the yuhua and maggots flowed out of his body; Jia Jizi swallowed the gold liquid and the stench of the corpse spread to a hundred miles; the Yellow Emperor burned the body of Jiuding in the Jingshan fire and still has the tomb of Qiaoling; Li Yu took the food cloud and quietly became a immortal, but his head and feet were different places; Mody drank the hongdan and threw water; Ning Sheng took the stone brain and went to the fire; Wu Guangya jumped into the cold spring; Bai Chengnai and stomach rot.

古文：如此之比，不可胜纪。
现代文：如此之类，不可胜记。
English: You can't win with that kind of thing.

古文：微乎得道，趣舍之迹，固无常矣。 
现代文：隐秘地得道，舍弃的迹像，本来没有一定。 
English: Obtained the Tao in secret, there is no trace of abandonment.

古文：保命君曰： 所谓尸解者，假形而示死，非真死也。 
现代文：保命君说： 所谓尸解，就是假作死的形像给人看，不是真死。 
English: Lifeguard said: The so-called autopsy is to pretend to be the image of death to show people, not true death.

古文：南真曰： 人死必视其形，如生人者，尸解也。
现代文：南真说： 人死了一定要看看他的形体，像活人一样的，就是尸解。
English: Nan Zhen said: When a person dies, it is necessary to look at his body, like a living person, that is, autopsy.

古文：若非尸解之例，死经太阴，暂过三官者，肉脱脉散，血沉灰烂，而五脏自生，骨如玉，七魄营侍，三魂守宅者，或三十年、二十年、十年、三年，当血肉再生，复质成形，必胜于昔日未死之容者，此名炼形。太阴易貌，三官之仙也。 天帝云： 太阴炼身形，胜服九转丹。
现代文：足不青、皮不皱的，也是尸解。目光不落，与生人无异的，是尸解。头发脱落而形体飞了的，是尸解。白天尸解，自然是成仙了。如果不是尸解之例，死后经过太阴暂过三官的，肉落脉散，血沉灰烂，而五脏自生，骨头像玉，七魄守侍，三魂守墓的，有的三十年、二十年、十年、三年，当血肉再生，恢复原来形体，一定胜过从前未死时的容颜，这就叫做炼形。经过太阴改换面貌，就是三官之仙。 天帝说： 太阴炼身形，胜服九转丹。
English: Those whose feet are not blue and skin is not wrinkled are also necropsies. Those whose eyes are not sunken and who are no different from the living are necropsies. Those whose hair has fallen off and whose bodies have flown away are necropsies. Those who are necropsied during the day naturally become immortals. If this is not an example of necropsy, those who, after death, have temporarily lost their three senses, their flesh has fallen apart, their blood has turned grey and lifeless, but their five internal organs are still alive, their bones are like jade, their seven souls are guarding their bodies, and their three souls are guard

古文：形容端且严，面色似灵云，上登太极阙，受书为真人。 
现代文：形容端且严，面色似灵云，上登太极阙，受书为真人。 
English: He is described as being stern and stern, with a face that looks like a genie, and is said to be a real person.

古文：是也。
现代文：说的就是这种情形。
English: That's what this is all about.

古文：若暂游太阴者，太一守尸，三魂营骨，七魄侍肉，胎灵录气，皆数满再生而飞天。
现代文：如果是暂游太阴的，就由太一守尸，三魂造骨，七魄生肉，胎灵制气，都会数满重生而飞天。
English: If it is a temporary visit to Taiyin, it will be reborn and fly to the sky by Taichi Shoushi, three souls making bones, seven souls making flesh, and fetal spirit making gas.

古文：其用他药尸解，非是灵丸者，即不得返故乡。三官执之也，其死而更生者，未殓而失其尸，有形皮存而无者，有衣结不解，衣存而形去者，有发脱而形飞者，有头断已死，乃从一旁出者，皆尸解也。
现代文：那些用其它药尸解，不是吃灵丸的，就不能返回故乡，三官捉拿他，那些死了又活过来，没有殡殓而失其尸体，有形皮存在而又没了的，有衣扣没解衣在而形去了的，有头发脱落而形体飞了的，有头断已死，而人又从别处出现的，这都是尸解。
English: Those who were dissected with other medicines, but not with the elixir, could not return to their hometowns, and the authorities caught them. Those who died and came back to life, whose bodies were lost without a funeral pyre, whose corporeal skins existed but disappeared, whose clothes buttons were there but disappeared without being undressed, whose hair fell out but whose bodies flew away, whose heads were definitely dead, but whose bodies appeared from somewhere else - these are all dissections.

古文：白日解者为上；夜半解者为下；向晚向暮去者，为地下主者。
现代文：白天尸解的为上；半夜尸解的为下；将暮将晚仙去的，为地下主宰者。
English: During the day, the one who dissects the corpse is on top; in the middle of the night, the one who dissects the corpse is on the bottom; the one who will go to the dusk will go to the night fairy, and is the underground ruler.

古文：此得道之差降也。
现代文：这是得道的差异。
English: That's a big difference.

古文：夫人之修道，或灾逼祸生，形坏气亡者，似由多言而守一，多端而期苟免也。
现代文：人们修行道术，有的灾逼祸生，形体破坏气息没有了的，似乎由于多言而固执，多事而期望侥幸啊。
English: People practice Daoism, and some disasters are imminent, and the atmosphere of physical destruction is no longer there. It seems that they are stubborn because of many words, and expect luck because of many things.

古文：是以层巢颓枝而坠落，百胜失于一败，惜乎。
现代文：因此，正如在秃枝上垒层巢而掉落下来，百胜失于一败，可惜呀。
English: Therefore, it is a pity that a hundred victories are lost in one defeat, just as a nest of bastions falls down on a bald branch.

古文：通仙之才，安可为二竖子而致毙耶？
现代文：通仙之才，怎么可以被两个童子就弄死了呢？
English: How could two boys kill a man with the talent of a sorcerer?

古文：智以无涯伤性，心以欲恶荡真，岂若守根静中，牺研三神，弥贯万物，而洞玄镜寂，混然与泥丸为一，而内外均福也。
现代文：智因为没有边际而伤性，心因为好恶而荡真，哪如保守根本静下心来，栖研三神，全部贯通万物，而洞察玄寂，与泥丸混然合为一体，而内外都获得好处。
English: Wisdom is wounding because it has no edge, and the heart is true because of its likes and dislikes, which is like keeping the foundation and calming down the heart, studying the three gods, penetrating all things, and penetrating the darkness, blending with the dirt ball, and gaining benefits both inside and outside.

古文：真人归心于一，任于永信。
现代文：真人把心思归于一处，保持永久诚信。
English: A real man puts his mind in one place and maintains permanent integrity.

古文：心归则正，神和信顺，利真之兆，自然之感。
现代文：心归则正，神和信顺，这是利真的征兆，自然的感应。
English: It is a sign of benefit and truth, a natural response.

古文：无假两际也，若外见察观之气，内有愠结之哂，有如此者，我见其败，未见其立。
现代文：不要两边虚假，如果外现察观之气，而内心又有喜怒郁结，有这种情形的，我预见他一定失败，看不到他成功。
English: Don't be two-faced. If you are observant on the outside, but depressed on the inside, I predict that you will fail. I don't see you succeeding.

古文：地下主者，乃下道之文官。
现代文：地下的主宰者，乃是下品得道者中的文官。
English: The rulers of the underworld are the civil officers of the vulgar.

古文：地下鬼师，乃下道之武官。
现代文：地下鬼师，乃是下品得道者中的武官。
English: The underground ghost division is the military attaché of the vulgar disciples.

古文：文解一百四年一进，武解倍之。
现代文：文解一百零四年一进，武解时间是文解的一倍。
English: The duration of the literary interpretation is one hundred and four years, and the duration of the martial interpretation is twice that of the literary interpretation.

古文：世人勤心于嗜欲，兼味于清正，华目以随世。
现代文：世人专心于嗜好欲望，再加上昏乱而不清正，花了眼而随世。
English: The world's focus on addictive desires, coupled with confusion and lack of clarity, has taken the world by surprise.

古文：畏死而希仙者，皆多武解，尸之最下也。 
现代文：怕死而希望成仙的人，多数都是武解，这是尸解中最下等的了。 
English: Most people who are afraid of death and hope to become immortals are martial artists, which is the lowest level of autopsy.

古文：夫人与众真吟诗曰： 玄感妙象外，和声自相招。
现代文：夫人与众真人吟诗说： 玄感妙像外，和声自相招。
English: Mrs. and all the real people chanting poetry said: "In addition to the mysterious and wonderful images, the harmony is self-inflicted.

古文：灵云郁紫晨，兰风扇绿轺。
现代文：灵云郁紫晨，兰凤扇绿轺。
English: In the morning, the clouds are purple and the orchids and phoenixes are green.

古文：上真宴琼台，邈为地仙标。
现代文：上真宴琼台，邈为地仙标。
English: Shang Zhen feast Qiong Tai, the dragonfly is the landmark.

古文：所期贵远迈，故能秀颖翘。
现代文：所期贵远迈，故能秀颖翘。
English: The project is far-reaching, so it can be outstanding.

古文：玩彼八素翰，道成初不辽。
现代文：玩彼八素翰，道成初不辽。
English: To play him, you have to be smart, and it's not far from the beginning.

古文：人事胡可预，使尔形气消。 
现代文：人事胡可预，使尔形气消。 
English: You can fool around with personnel, but you can't fool the people.

古文：夫人既游江南，遂于抚州并山立静室，又于临汝水西置坛宇。
现代文：夫人游江南之后，就在抚州并山立静室，又在临汝水西设置坛宇。
English: After his wife's trip to the south of the Yangtze River, he built a seclusion room on the side of the mountain in Fuzhou and set up a shrine on the west side of the Linyi River.

古文：岁久芜梗，踪迹殆平。
现代文：后来年久荒芜，踪迹几乎消失了。
English: Later, it fell into disrepair and almost disappeared.

古文：有女道士黄灵徽，年迈八十，貌若婴孺。
现代文：有个女道士叫黄灵微，年纪很大，已经八十岁了，但貌似婴孩。
English: There is a female Taoist named Huang Lingwei. She is very old, already eighty years old, but looks like a baby.

古文：号为花姑，特加修饰，累有灵应。
现代文：她的道号叫做花姑，她特意把魏夫人的静室、坛宇加以修饰，累次都有灵验。
English: Her Taoist name is Hua Gu, and she has specially decorated Mrs. Wei's quiet room and altar, and has been successful time and time again.

古文：夫人亦寓梦以示之，后亦升天。
现代文：魏夫人也借梦境指示她，后来她也升了天。
English: Mrs. Wei also instructed her through a dream, and later she also ascended to heaven.

古文：玄宗教道士蔡伟编入后仙传。
现代文：唐玄宗命道士蔡伟把她编入后仙传。
English: Tang Xuan Zong ordered Taoist Cai Wei to compile her into a posthumous biography.

古文：大历三年戊申，鲁国公颜真卿重加修葺，立碑以纪其事焉。
现代文：大历三年戊申，鲁国公颜真卿把魏夫人修道处重新加以修缮，立碑来纪念其事。
English: In the third year of the lunar calendar, King Yan Zhenqing of the State of Lu repaired the nunnery of Lady Wei and erected a monument to commemorate the event.

