古文：孔子在齐，齐侯出田，招虞人以弓。
现代文：孔子在齐国时，齐侯出去打猎，用旌旗招呼管理山泽的官吏虞人，虞人没来晋见，齐侯派人把他抓了起来。
English: When Confucius was in the State of Qi, Qi Hou went out to hunt, and used a banner to call the officials who managed the mountains and lakes, the Yu people. However, the Yu people did not come to see him, and Qi Hou sent someone to arrest him.

古文：不进，公使执之。对曰： 昔先君之田也，旃以招大夫，弓以招士，皮冠以招虞人。
现代文：虞人说： 从前先君打猎时，用旌旗来招呼大夫，用弓来招呼士，用皮帽来招呼虞人。
English: The statesman said, "In the past, when hunting, you used the banner to call the doctor, the bow to call the warrior, and the cap to call the statesman.

古文：臣不见皮冠，故不敢进。 
现代文：我没看见皮帽，所以不敢晋见。 
English: I didn't see the hat, so I didn't dare to look.

古文：乃舍之。
现代文：齐侯听后就放了他。
English: After hearing this, Qi Hou released him.

古文：孔子闻之，曰： 善哉！
现代文：孔子听到这件事，说： 好啊！
English: When Confucius heard this, he said, "Good!

古文：守道不如守官，君子韪之。 
现代文：遵守道不如遵守职责。 君子都认为说得对。
English: It is better to keep the precepts than to keep one's duty.

古文：齐国书伐鲁，季康子使冉求率左师御之，樊迟为右。 非不能也，不信乎。
现代文：齐国的国书率领军队攻打鲁国，鲁国的季康子派冉求率领左军去抵抗，樊迟率领右军抵抗。
English: Guoshu of Qi led the army to attack Lu, and Ji Kangzi of Lu sent Ran Qi to lead the left army to resist, and Zhi Zi led the right army to resist.

古文：请三刻而逾之。 
现代文：鲁军不敢跨过战壕去迎敌，樊迟对冉求说， 不是他们没有能力抵抗，是因为他们不相信季康子，请您三次发出号令，并带头越过壕沟。 
English: The Lu army did not dare to cross the trench to meet the enemy. They hesitated to say to Ran Cu, not because they did not have the ability to resist, but because they did not believe Ji Kangzi. Please give the order three times and take the lead to cross the trench.

古文：如之，众从之。
现代文：冉求听从了他的话。
English: Ran Qiu obeyed his words.

古文：师入齐军。 齐军遁。 
现代文：士兵们就都跟着过了壕沟，勇敢地冲入齐军，齐军大败。
English: The soldiers all followed the trench, bravely rushed into the Qi army, and the Qi army was defeated.

古文：冉有用戈，故能入焉。
现代文：冉求用的是戈，所以能轻松冲入敌阵。
English: Ran is looking for a fight, so he can easily rush into the enemy lines.

古文：孔子闻之，曰： 义也。 
现代文：孔子听说了这件事，说： 这样符合义。 
English: When Confucius heard about this, he said, "This is in accordance with the law."

古文：既战，季孙谓冉有曰： 子之于战，学之乎？
现代文：仗打完后，季孙问冉求说： 你是学会打仗的呢？
English: After the battle, Ji Sun asked Ran Cui: Did you learn how to fight?

古文：性达之乎？ 
现代文：还是天生就会打仗的呢？ 
English: Or are they born to fight?

古文：对曰： 学之。 
现代文：冉求回答说： 我是学会的。 
English: Ranqiu replied, "I learned it.

古文：季孙曰： 从事孔子，恶乎学？ 
现代文：季孙说： 你跟着孔子，怎能学会打仗呢？ 
English: Ji Sun said: If you follow Confucius, how can you learn how to fight?

古文：冉有曰： 即学之孔子也。
现代文：冉求说： 就是从孔子那里学的。
English: Ran Qiu said, "I learned it from Confucius."

古文：夫孔子者大圣，无不该，文武竝用兼通。
现代文：孔子是圣人，他的知识非常广博，文武并用，相互补充。
English: Confucius is a sage, his knowledge is very extensive, both literary and military, complement each other.

古文：求也适闻其战法，犹未之详也。 
现代文：我也是不久才从他那里学了一点战法，但我学得还不够精。 
English: I also recently learned a bit of martial arts from him, but I didn't learn it well enough.

古文：季孙悦。
现代文：季孙听了很高兴。
English: Ji Sun was very happy to hear this.

古文：樊迟以告孔子，孔子曰： 季孙于是乎可谓悦人之有能矣。 
现代文：樊迟把这事告诉了孔子，孔子说： 季孙还是喜欢有才能的人。 
English: He later told this to Confucius, who said, "Qisun still likes talented people.

古文：南容说、仲孙何忌既除丧，而昭公在外，未之命也。
现代文：南宫说和仲孙何忌为父亲服丧完毕，因当时鲁昭会逃亡在外，没来得及任命他们。
English: Nan Gong said that he and his middle grandson He Boi had completed the funeral for their father, because at that time Lu Zhaoyi had fled abroad and did not have time to appoint them.

古文：定公即位，乃命之。
现代文：鲁定公即位后才任命。
English: He was only appointed after Prince Luding ascended the throne.

古文：辞曰： 先臣有遗命焉，曰：夫礼、人之干也，非礼则无以立。
现代文：他们推辞说： 先父留有遗嘱，说 礼如人的躯干一样，是做人的根本，没有礼则无以自立。 
English: They said, "Our forefather left us a will, saying that etiquette, like the human body, is fundamental to being human. Without etiquette, one cannot stand on one's own.

古文：嘱家老，使命二臣必事孔子而学礼，以定其位。 
现代文：嘱托家里的老人，让他们要求我们必须侍奉孔子，到他那里去学礼，好确定自己的地位。 
English: Ask the elders in the family to demand that we must serve Confucius and go to him to learn the etiquette in order to establish our status.

古文：公许之。
现代文：定公允许了。
English: Sadagimi allowed it.

古文：二子学于孔子，孔子曰： 能补过者，君子也。
现代文：他们因此向孔子学礼，孔子说： 能够弥补过错的人是正人君子。
English: Therefore, they learned from Confucius. Confucius said, "He who can make up for his mistakes is an upright gentleman."

古文：《诗》云： 君子是则是效。 
现代文：《诗经》说 君子是学习的榜样。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says that a gentleman is a model for learning.

古文：孟僖子可则效矣。惩己所病，以诲其嗣。
现代文：孟僖子就是学习的榜样，改正自己过去的缺点，以此来教诲后代。
English: Meng Yanzi is a role model for learning, correcting his past shortcomings, and teaching future generations.

古文：《大雅》所谓 诒厥孙谋，以燕翼子。 
现代文：正如《诗经》所说 遗赠后代好谋略，以保子孙永平安 ，说的正是孟僖子这样的人啊！ 
English: As the "Book of Songs" says, bequeathing to future generations is a good strategy to ensure the eternal peace of our children and grandchildren, which is exactly what people like Meng Yanzi are talking about!

古文：是类也夫！ 卫孙文子得罪于献公，居戚。
现代文：孙文子在卫国担任大夫一职，得罪了卫献公，住在戚地。
English: Sun Wenzi served as a doctor in the defense of the country, offended Wei Xian and lived in a relative's land.

古文：公卒，未葬，文子击钟焉。
现代文：卫献公去世之后还没有安葬，孙文子就敲钟娱乐。
English: After the death of Wei Xianguo, there was still no funeral, so Sun Wenzi rang the bell for entertainment.

古文：延陵季子适晋，过戚，闻之，曰： 异哉！
现代文：延陵季子去晋国时路过戚地，知道这件事情，说： 奇怪啊！
English: When Yanling Qizi went to Jin Province, she passed by her relatives' place, knew about this matter, and said, "How strange!

古文：夫子之在此，犹燕子巢于幕也，惧犹未也，又何乐焉？君又在殡，可乎？ 
现代文：你现如今居住在这里，就好比燕子将窝筑到帷幕上一样危险，害怕还来不及呢，有什么可以高兴的呢？
English: It is as dangerous for you to live here now as it is for a swallow to build its nest in a curtain. It is too late to be afraid. What is there to be happy about?

古文：文子于是终身不听琴瑟。
现代文：国君的灵柩还没殡葬，就能够这样娱乐吗？ 孙文子从今以后就再也没有听过琴瑟。
English: Can the coffin of a sovereign be entertained in this way before it has been buried? From now on, Sun Wenzi never heard the zither again.

古文：孔子闻之，曰： 季子能以义正人，文子能克己服义，可谓善改矣。 
现代文：这件事孔子知道之后说： 季子能够用义来纠正别人的错误，文子为了能够服从义来克制自己，真的是很擅长改正错误啊！ 
English: After knowing this, Confucius said: Ji Zi can use righteousness to correct the mistakes of others, and Wen Zi can restrain himself in order to obey righteousness. He is really good at correcting mistakes!

古文：孔子览《晋志》，晋赵穿杀灵公，赵盾亡，未及山而还。
现代文：孔子阅读晋国的史书，书上记载：晋灵公被晋国的赵穿杀害了，赵盾逃亡在外，国境的山还没有越过就又返回来了。
English: Confucius read the history book of Jin. The book recorded: Jin Ling Gong was killed by Zhao Peng of Jin, Zhao Dun fled abroad, and the mountain of the border had not yet been crossed when he returned.

古文：史书： 赵盾弑君。 
现代文：史书写着 赵盾弑君 。
English: History records that Zhao Dunyao was born.

古文：盾曰： 不然。 
现代文：赵盾说： 不是这样的。 
English: Zhao Dun said, "It's not like that.

古文：史曰： 子为正卿，亡不出境，返不讨贼，非子而谁？ 
现代文：史官说： 你是正卿，逃走了却没有逃出国境，而且逃回来也不是为了讨伐凶手，杀死晋灵公的不是你又会是谁呢？ 赵盾说： 唉！
English: The historian said: You are Zhengqing, you fled but did not escape the border, and you did not flee back to fight the murderer. If you did not kill Jin Linggong, who would? Zhao Dun said: Alas!

古文：盾曰： 呜呼！我之怀矣，自诒伊戚，其我之谓乎？ 
现代文：《诗经》说 由于我的怀念，而给自己招来祸患 ，这说的就是我了。 
English: The "Song of Songs" says that I am the one who has brought misfortune to myself because of my nostalgia.

古文：孔子叹曰： 董狐、古之良史也，书法不隐；赵宣子、古之良大夫也。为法受恶；受恶，惜也。
现代文：孔子叹息说： 董狐，他书写历史实情从来没有隐瞒过。赵宣子，是古代的好大夫啊，由于法度从而蒙受了不好的罪名。
English: Confucius sighed and said, "Dong Foo, he has never concealed the historical facts when writing. Zhao Xuan Zi, a good doctor in ancient times, suffered a bad accusation because of the law.

古文：越境乃免。 
现代文：真的是非常可惜啊！
English: It's a real shame!

古文：郑伐陈，入之，使子产献捷于晋。
现代文：假如越过国境就能够免去罪名了。 郑国攻打陈国，进入了陈国，派子产向晋国奉献战利品。
English: If you cross the border, you can be exonerated. Zheng attacked Chen, entered Chen, and sent the spoils of war to Jin.

古文：晋人问陈之罪焉，子产对曰： 陈亡周之大德，豕恃楚众，冯陵弊邑，是以有往年之告。
现代文：晋人质问陈国的罪状。子产回答说： 陈国忘记了周朝对他的恩德，依仗人多欺凌小国，我国因此而有去年请求攻打陈国的报告。
English: Jinren questioned Chen Guo's guilt. Zi Yuan replied: Chen Guo forgot the Zhou Dynasty's kindness to him and bullied a small country by relying on a large number of people. As a result, our country had a report last year requesting to attack Chen Guo.

古文：未获命，则又有东门之役。
现代文：没有得到贵国允许，反倒有了陈国进攻我国东门的战役。
English: Instead of receiving permission from your country, there was a campaign by Chen Guo to attack the eastern gate of our country.

古文：当陈隧者，井堙木刊，敝邑大惧，天诱其衷，启敝邑心，知其罪，授首于我。用敢献功。 
现代文：陈军经过的路上，水井被填，树木被砍，我们很害怕。幸亏上天开导我们，启发了我们攻打陈国的念头。陈国知道自己的罪过，因而向我们投降，因此敢于奉献战利品。 
English: On the way of Chen's army, wells were filled, trees were cut down, and we were very afraid. Fortunately, the heavens enlightened us and inspired us with the idea of attacking Chen Guo. Chen Guo knew his sin, so he surrendered to us, so he dared to offer the spoils.

古文：晋人曰： 何故侵小？ 
现代文：晋国人又问： 为什么攻打小国？ 
English: The people of Jin also asked: Why attack a small country?

古文：对曰： 先王之命，惟罪所在，各致其辟。
现代文：子产回答说： 根据先王的律令，只要是罪过所在，就要分别给予惩罚。
English: The progeny replied, "According to the king's edict, if there is a crime, it must be punished separately.

古文：且昔天子一圻，列国一同，自是以衰，周之制也。
现代文：况且从前天子的土地方圆千里，诸侯的土地方圆百里，依次递减，这是周朝的制度。
English: What's more, the land of the former emperor was worth a thousand li, and the land of the lords was worth a hundred li, decreasing in turn. This was the system of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：今大国多数圻矣。若无侵小，何以至焉！ 
现代文：现在大国的土地多到方圆数千里，如果没有侵占小国，怎么能达到这地步呢？ 
English: At present, large countries have thousands of miles of territory. How could they have reached this stage if they had not invaded and occupied small countries?

古文：晋人曰： 其辞顺。 
现代文：晋国人说： 他的话顺理成章。 
English: The people of Jin said: His words are logical.

古文：孔子闻之，谓子贡曰： 志有之，言以足志，文以足言。
现代文：孔子知道后，对子贡说： 古书上有这样的话 言语用来表达志向，文采用来增加言语的力量。 
English: After learning this, Confucius said to Zigong: There is a saying in an ancient book: Words are used to express one's aspirations, and sentences are used to increase the power of speech.

古文：不言谁知其志？
现代文：不说话，谁知道你的志向是什么呢？
English: Without talking, who knows what your aspirations are?

古文：言之无文，行之不远。
现代文：语言没有文采，就不能流传久远。
English: If a language does not have a literary style, it cannot be passed on for a long time.

古文：晋为伯，郑入陈，非文辞不为功。
现代文：晋国成为霸主，郑国进入陈国，不是善于辞令就不能成功。
English: If Jin becomes the hegemon and Zheng enters Chen, they cannot succeed unless they are good at rhetoric.

古文：慎辞哉！ 
现代文：你们要谨慎地使用辞令啊。 
English: You have to be careful with your words.

古文：叔孙穆子避难奔齐，宿于庚宗之邑。
现代文：鲁国大夫叔孙穆子逃到齐国避难，住在庚宗这个地方。
English: Dr. Lu's great-uncle and grandson, Mu Zi, fled to Qi Province for refuge and lived in the place of Geng Zong.

古文：庚宗寡妇通焉，而生牛。
现代文：庚宗有个寡妇，叔孙穆子和她私通，生了一个儿子叫牛。
English: Geng Zong had a widow. His uncle and grandson, Mu Zi, had an affair with her and had a son named Niu.

古文：穆子反鲁，以牛为内竖，相家。
现代文：叔孙穆子后来返回鲁国，先让牛当了传令的小官，长大后让他当了家臣。
English: His uncle and grandson, Mu Zi, later returned to the State of Lu. First, he made Niu a minor official of heraldry, and when he grew up, he made him a vassal.

古文：牛谗叔孙二人，杀之。
现代文：牛给叔孙穆子的两个嫡子进谗言，致使二人被杀。
English: Niu insulted the two legitimate sons of his great-uncle Mu Zi, resulting in the two being killed.

古文：叔孙有病，牛不通其馈，不食而死。牛遂辅叔孙庶子昭而立之。
现代文：叔孙穆子生了病，牛不让给他吃饭，最后也被饿死，牛于是拥立叔孙穆子庶出的儿子昭子并辅助他。
English: Mu Zi's great-uncle became ill, and the cow refused to give him food, and eventually starved to death. The cow then adopted the son of Mu Zi's great-uncle, Akiko, and supported him.

古文：昭子既立，朝其家众曰： 竖牛祸叔孙氏，使乱大从，杀适立庶，又披其邑，以求舍罪。罪莫大焉！必速杀之。 
现代文：昭子当政后，召集他的臣仆说： 竖牛祸害叔孙氏，使祸乱一个接着一个，杀害嫡子拥立庶子，又把边邑的地方用来行贿，以求免去罪行，没有比他的罪行再大的了，必须迅速把他杀掉。 
English: After Akiko came to power, he gathered his vassals and said, "There is no greater crime than that of a cowherd who harms his uncles and grandsons, causing calamity after calamity, killing his legitimate son and adopting an illegitimate son, and using the land of a border town to pay bribes in order to avoid punishment. He must be killed quickly."

古文：遂杀竖牛。
现代文：于是杀了竖牛。
English: So he killed the heifer.

古文：孔子曰： 叔孙昭子之不劳，不可能也。
现代文：孔子说： 叔孙昭子不认为竖牛拥立自己是功劳，是因为不可以这样做。
English: Confucius said, "Uncle-grandson Akiko does not think that it is a merit for him to hold up a standing bull, because it is not allowed to do so.

古文：周任有言曰： 为政者不赏私劳，不罚私怨。 
现代文：周任有这样的话： 执政者不奖赏对自己私人有功劳的人，不惩罚对自己有私怨的人。 
English: Zhou Ren had this to say: Rulers do not reward those who have meritorious deeds for themselves, and do not punish those who have personal grudges against themselves.

古文：《诗》云： 有觉德行，四国顺之。 
现代文：《诗经》说： 君子德行正直，四方诸侯顺从。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: A gentleman is upright in his moral conduct, and the lords of the four directions are obedient.

古文：昭子有焉！ 
现代文：昭子就是这样的人。 
English: Akiko is such a person.

