古文：李师中，字诚之，楚丘人。
现代文：李师中字诚之，楚丘人。
English: Li Shizhong Zi Chengzhi, a native of Chuqiu.

古文：年十五，上封事言时政。父纬为泾原都监，夏人十余万犯镇戎，纬帅兵出战，而帅司所遣别将郭志高逗遛不进，诸将以众寡不敌，不敢复出，纬坐责降。
现代文：十五岁时，上书陈述时政，父亲李纬任泾原都监，十多万西夏人进犯镇戎，李纬率领军队出战，但安抚司所派遣的别将郭志高逗留不前进，诸将领因众寡不敌，不敢再出战，李纬因此被责斥降职。
English: At the age of fifteen, he submitted a letter stating the current political situation. His father, Li Wei, served as the governor of Suwon, and more than one hundred thousand Xixia people attacked the town of Rong. Li Wei led the army to war, but Guo Zhigao, who was sent by the pacification department, did not stay and did not advance. The generals were outnumbered and did not dare to go to war again. Li Wei was therefore reprimanded and demoted.

古文：师中诣宰相辩父无罪，时吕夷简为相，诘问不屈，夷简怒，以为非布衣所宜言。
现代文：李师中拜访宰相辩论父亲无罪，当时吕夷简为宰相，责问师中，师中不屈服，吕夷简发怒，认为这不是平民百姓所应该说的。
English: Li Shizhong visited the prime minister to argue that his father was not guilty. At that time, Lü Yizhen was the prime minister, and he scolded Li Shizhong. Li Shizhong did not give in, and Lü Yizhen was angry, thinking that this was not what the common people should say.

古文：对曰： 师中所言，父事也。 由是知名。
现代文：李师中回答说 ：师中所说的，是父亲的事情。 李师中由此出了名。
English: Li Shizhong replied, "What the teacher said was about my father, and Li Shizhong became famous for it.

古文：举进士，鄜延庞籍辟知洛川县。
现代文：李师中考中进士，被延庞籍征召为洛川县知县。
English: Li Shizhong passed the junior high school entrance examination, and was called up by Yan Pang to be the magistrate of Luochuan County.

古文：民有罪，妨其农时者必遣归，令农隙自诣吏。
现代文：百姓犯有罪过，如果妨害农时的必定遣送他回去，命令他农闲时自己去见官吏。
English: If a commoner commits a crime, he must be sent back if he disturbs the farmers, and he must be ordered to go to the officials himself when he is idle.

古文：令当下者榜于民，或召父老谕之。
现代文：应当下达的政令或者向百姓张榜公布，或者召来执掌管理乡里事务的年长者劝谕百姓。
English: The decrees that should be issued should either be posted to the people, or the elders who are in charge of managing rural affairs should be called to advise the people.

古文：租税皆先期而集。
现代文：租谷赋税都提前集中。
English: Rent valley taxes are collected in advance.

古文：民负官茶直十万缗，追系甚众，师中为脱桎梏，语之曰： 公钱无不偿之理，宽与汝期，可乎？ 皆感泣听命。
现代文：百姓欠官茶价值十多万缗，追索拘系了很多人，李师中替他们脱去脚镣手铐，告诉他们说： 公家的钱没有不偿还的理由，给你们宽限期限，可以吗？ 百姓都感动得掉泪而听命。
English: Li Shizhong took off the leg irons and handcuffs for them and told them: There is no reason not to repay the public money, can I give you a grace period? The people were moved to tears and obeyed.

古文：乃令乡置一匮，籍其名，许日输所负，一钱以上辄投之。书簿而去。
现代文：于是命令乡里设置一个柜子，登记他们的名字，许下日期缴纳所欠的钱，一文钱以上都投入柜子里，记载在账簿上而离去。
English: Then he ordered the village to set up a cabinet, register their names, set a date for the payment of the money owed, put more than a penny into the cabinet, record it in the account book and leave.

古文：比终岁，逋者尽足。
现代文：等到年终，欠债的都交足了。
English: By the end of the year, all the debts had been paid in full.

古文：官移诸郡粟于边，已而反之，盛冬大雪，劳且费，至贱售予兼并家。
现代文：官府把诸郡的粟米移于边地，不久回转，时值隆冬，大雪纷飞，劳民而且费钱，有的粟米不得不以最低的价格卖给兼并之家。
English: The government moved the corn from the counties to the periphery, but soon turned around. It was midwinter, there was heavy snowfall, and the laborers were expensive. Some corn had to be sold to the annexation house at the lowest price.

古文：师中令过县愿输者听，躬坐庾门，执契以须，数日，得万斛。
现代文：李师中命令所过县愿意运输的听任其便，亲自坐在仓库门口，手拿契据等待，几天时间，得输万石。
English: Li Shizhong ordered the command post to let anyone who was willing to transport across the county sit at the entrance of the warehouse and wait for a few days with the deed in hand.

古文：使下其法于他县。
现代文：朝廷让其他县仿效他的办法。
English: The court ordered other counties to follow his example.

古文：尝出乡亭，见戎人杂耕，皆兵兴时入中国，人藉其力，往往结为婚姻，久而不归。
现代文：李师中曾经出巡乡亭，看见少数民族百姓混杂耕作，这些人都是战时进入中原，人们借他们的劳力，往往结成婚姻，久而不归。
English: Li Shizhong once went on a tour of rural villages and saw the mixed farming of ethnic minority people. These people all entered the Central Plains during the war. People borrowed their labor, often married, and never returned.

古文：师中言若辈不可杂处，言之经略使，并索旁郡者，徙诸绝塞。
现代文：李师中说这些人不可以与汉民混杂居住，把这一情况告诉经略使，同时搜索邻近郡县的少数民族，把他们迁到极远的边塞。
English: Li Shishi said that these people should not be allowed to live mixed with Han people, and told this to the Minister of Economic Affairs. At the same time, he searched for ethnic minorities in neighboring counties and moved them to a very distant border fortress.

古文：庞籍为枢密副使，荐其才。
现代文：庞籍任枢密副使，推荐李师中的才能。
English: Pang was appointed as the vice-envoy of the Privy Council, recommending the talents of Li Shizhong.

古文：召对，转太子中允、知敷政县，权主管经略司文字。
现代文：皇帝召见应对，转任太子中允、知敷政县，暂代主管经略司文字。
English: The emperor summoned him to respond, and he was transferred to the position of Prince Zhongyong, Zhijie Zhengxian, and the interim head of the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry, Jioji.

古文：夏人以岁赐缓，移边曰： 愿勿逾岁暮。 诏吏报许，师中更牒曰： 如故事。 枢密院劾为擅改制书，师中曰： 所改者郡牒耳，非制也。 朝廷是之，薄其过。
现代文：西夏人以岁赐缓慢为辞，写移文到边郡说： 希望不要超过年底。 诏令官吏回复，李师中改文书说 ：按照过去的成例。 枢密院弹劾他擅自改皇帝制书，李师中说： 所改动的是州郡文书而已，不是皇帝的诏书。 
English: The Western Xia people took the slow pace of the year as an excuse and wrote a transfer to the border county, saying: I hope it will not exceed the end of the year. The official replied, Li Shizhong changed the document and said: According to the past precedent. The Privy Council impeached him for changing the emperor's book making without authorization, Li Shizhong said: What has been changed is only the state and county document, not the emperor's edict.

古文：提点广西刑狱。
现代文：朝廷认为他是对的，减轻他的过错。
English: The court thought he was right and mitigated his fault.

古文：桂州灵渠故通漕，岁久石窒舟滞，师中即焚石，凿而通之。
现代文：李师中曾任提点广西刑狱。桂州灵渠以前通漕运，年岁久了石头阻塞舟船滞留，李师中便焚毁石头，凿通灵渠。
English: Li Shizhong was once appointed as the head of the Guangxi Penitentiary. Guizhou's spiritual canal used to be used for transportation, but over the years, the stones blocked the boats and the boats were stranded. Li Shizhong burned the stones and hewed the channel.

古文：邕管有马军五百，马不能夏，多死。
现代文：邕州管境内有马军五百，马不能过夏天，大多死亡。
English: There were five hundred horse soldiers in the territory under the jurisdiction of Zhangzhou. The horses could not spend the summer, and most of them died.

古文：师中谓地皆险阻，无所事骑，奏罢之。
现代文：李师中认为此地险要崎岖，不适应于骑兵，于是上奏朝廷予以撤销。
English: Li Shizhong thought that this place was too dangerous and not suitable for cavalry, so he appealed to the court to revoke it.

古文：士人补摄官，铨授无法，权在吏。
现代文：有士人补任摄官，铨选授任不按法令，大权操纵在官吏手中。
English: There are nobles to fill the post of procurator, the election and appointment are not in accordance with the law, and the power is manipulated in the hands of officials.

古文：悉记其名，使待除于家。
现代文：师中把他们的名字全记上，使其待任于家。
English: The teacher wrote down all their names and sent them home.

古文：初，邕州萧注、宜州张师正谋启边衅，注欲以所管蛮峒酋豪往讨交阯，云不用朝廷兵食。
现代文：起初，邕州萧注、宜州张师正图谋开启边地事端，萧注打算以所管辖的蛮峒酋豪去征讨交趾，说是不用朝廷军粮。
English: At first, Zhang Zhaozhou and Zhang Shi of Yizhou were plotting to start a border conflict. Xiao Zhaozhou planned to use the barbarian chiefs under his jurisdiction to solicit allies, saying that he did not need the imperial army food.

古文：诏下经略使萧固、转运使宋咸，二人为注所饵，合词称便，而师中至，诏以注奏付之。
现代文：诏书传送给经略使萧固、转运使宋咸，二人为萧注所引诱，共同称便，但李师中到任，诏令把萧注的奏书交付给他。
English: The imperial edict was sent to Xiao Gu, the Minister of Economic Affairs, and Song Xian, the Minister of Transportation and Logistics. The two were lured by Xiao Jie and jointly said that it was convenient, but when Li Shizhong arrived, the imperial edict delivered Xiao Jie's report to him.

古文：师中邀注来，难之曰： 君以酋豪伐交阯，能保必胜乎？ 曰： 不能。 师中曰： 既不能保必胜，脱有败衄，奈何？ 注知不可，遂罢议。
现代文：李师中邀请萧注来，责难他说： 你以酋豪征伐交趾，能保证必胜吗？ 萧注说： 不能。 师中说： 既然不能保证必胜，倘或有失败损伤，怎么办？ 
English: Li Shizhong invited Xiao Jie to come and scolded him, saying, "You are crossing your fingers with a great warlord, can you guarantee a sure victory?" Xiao Jie said, "No." The master said, "Since you cannot guarantee a sure victory, what should you do if there is a defeat or injury?"

古文：会蛮徭申绍泰入追亡者，害巡检宋士尧，注又张皇为骇奏，仁宗为之旰食。
现代文：萧注明白此举不可行，于是撤销了这一建议。恰逢徭人申绍泰入州境追捕逃亡者，杀害巡检宋士尧，萧注又慌张惊奏朝廷，仁宗为之心忧而晚食。
English: Xiao Zhu understood that this move was not feasible, so he revoked this suggestion. It coincided with Shen Shao Tai entering the state border to hunt down fugitives and kill Song Shizhen, a patrol inspector. Xiao Zhu panicked and surprised the court, and Ren Zong was worried and had a late dinner.

古文：师中言无足忧，因劾注邀功生事，掊敛失众心，卒致将率败覆，按法当斩。
现代文：李师中说此事不足为忧，因而弹劾萧注邀功生事，聚敛贪狠失去人心，终于导致将士败覆，依照法律罪当杀头。
English: Li Shishi said that the matter was not enough to worry about, and thus the impeachment of Xiao Zhu invited achievements, gathered greedily lost the hearts of the people, and finally led to the defeat of the generals, and according to the law, the crime of killing.

古文：于是注责泰州安置，并按固、咸，皆坐贬。
现代文：于是萧注被责贬在泰州居住，同时按察萧固、宋咸罪状，二人都因此而被贬官。
English: As a result, Xiao Zhu was ordered to live in Taizhou, while Xiao Gu and Song Xian were investigated for criminal charges. Both were demoted for this reason.

古文：师中摄帅事。
现代文：师中代理广西安抚使事。
English: He was the acting Guangxi pacification envoy.

古文：交阯耀兵于边，声言将入寇。
现代文：交趾在边境炫耀武力，声言将要入侵。
English: They're flexing their muscles at the border, saying they're going to invade.

古文：师中方宴客，饮酒自若，草六榜揭境上，披以其情得，不敢动，即日贡方物。
现代文：师中正在设宴招待客人，饮酒自若，起草六榜在边境上发表，披露事实的真相，交趾就不敢妄动，当天进贡土产。
English: The division is holding a banquet to invite guests, drinking with confidence, drafting six lists to be published on the border, disclosing the truth of the facts, and not daring to act rashly. On the same day, tribute was paid to local products.

古文：绍泰惧，委巢穴遁去。
现代文：申绍泰恐惧，丢弃盘踞的巢穴而逃去。
English: Shen Shaotai was terrified and fled, abandoning the cocoon's nest.

古文：侬智高子宗旦保火峒，众无所属，前将规讨以幸赏，遂固守。
现代文：侬智高的儿子侬宗旦占有火峒，众人无所归属，前方将领贪求征讨的希赏，宗旦于是固守。
English: Nong Zotan, the son of Nong Zhigao, possessed the fiery cauldron, and the people had nowhere to belong. The generals at the front were greedy for the reward, so Nong Zotan held fast.

古文：师中檄谕祸福，立率其族以地降。
现代文：师中檄文谕示祸福，宗旦马上率领其族以地归降。
English: Sotan immediately led his people to surrender.

古文：边人化其德，多画象立祠以事，称为桂州李大夫，不敢名。
现代文：边境的人感化其德，多画像立祠来事奉，称为桂州李大夫，不敢直呼其名。
English: Influenced by the people at the border, he built a small shrine to serve them. He was called Dr. Li of Guizhou, and he did not dare to call his name.

古文：还，知济、兖二州。
现代文：师中回朝廷，任济、兖二州知州。
English: He returned to the imperial court in the middle of the division, and was appointed to the post of minister of finance, and the two states of Zhizhou.

古文：济水堙塞久，师中访故道，自兖城西南启凿之，功未半而去。
现代文：济水很久以来堵塞不通，师中寻访旧河道，从兖城西南开始凿通，工程未完成一半而离任。
English: For a long time, the Jishui River had been blocked and impassable. The division searched for the old river channel and began to excavate it from the southwest of Fucheng. He left the post before half of the project was completed.

古文：迁直史馆、知凤翔府。
现代文：迁任直史馆、凤翔知府。
English: He was transferred to the Jikishi Museum and the Fengxiang Prefecture.

古文：种谔取绥州，师中言： 西夏方入贡，叛状未明，恐彼得以藉口，徒启其衅端也。 鄜延路觇知西夏驻兵绥、银州，檄诸路当牵制，师中疏论牵制之害。
现代文：种谔攻打绥州，师中说： 西夏刚入贡，叛状没有明了，如攻打绥州，恐西夏会以此为借口，开启事端。 延路侦察得知西夏在绥州、银州驻扎军队，檄令各路应予牵制，师中上疏论牵制的危害。
English: The division said, "Xixia has just paid tribute, but the act of rebellion is not clear. If Xixia attacks Xizhou, it is feared that Xixia will use this as an excuse to start an incident." Long-distance reconnaissance learned that Xixia had stationed troops in Xizhou and Yinzhou, and the division ordered that all roads should be blocked. The division discussed the harm of blocking.

古文：时诸将皆请行，师中曰： 不出兵，罪独在帅，非诸将忧也。 既而此举卒罢。
现代文：当时诸将都请求行动，师中说： 不出兵，罪责在主帅一人，不是诸将所忧虑的。 不久此举终被撤销。
English: At that time, the generals all asked for action, and the division said: "If you don't send troops, the guilt lies with the commander alone, not with the generals." This move was eventually revoked.

古文：熙宁初，拜天章阁待制、河东都转运使。
现代文：熙宁初年，师中被任命为天章阁待制、河东都转运使。
English: In the first year of Xining, he was appointed as the divisional envoy to Tianzhangge, and the transfer envoy to Hedongdu.

古文：西人入寇，以师中知秦州。
现代文：西夏人入侵，以师中知秦州。
English: The Xixia people invaded and conquered Qinzhou.

古文：诏赐以《班超传》，师中亦以持重总大体自处。
现代文：诏令赐给他《班超传》，师中也以持重总大体自处。
English: He was given "Banchao Chuan" by imperial decree, and he was also able to do most of the weight-bearing work on his own.

古文：前此多屯重兵于境，寇至则战，婴其锐锋，而内无以遏其入。
现代文：以前这里多在边境上驻屯重兵，敌人到来则投入战斗，挫其锐锋，但内地没有力量遏制敌人的侵入。
English: In the past, heavy troops were stationed on the border here, and when the enemy arrived, they went into battle to defeat their sharp front, but the mainland did not have the power to curb the enemy's invasion.

古文：师中简善守者列塞上，而使善战者中居，令诸城曰： 即寇至，坚壁固守；须其去，出战士尾袭之。 约束既熟，常以取胜。
现代文：师中挑选善于防守的人列于边塞上，而使善战者中居，命令诸城说： 倘若敌人到来，坚壁固守；等敌人离去，则出战尾随袭击。 约束既已熟练，常常以此取胜。
English: Those who were good at defense were selected from the divisions and placed on the ramparts, and those who were good at fighting were placed in the middle, and the cities were ordered to say: "If the enemy comes, hold fast to the wall; when the enemy leaves, go out and follow the attack."

古文：王韶筑渭、泾上下两城，屯兵以胁武胜军，抚纳洮、河诸部。
现代文：王韶筑造渭、泾上下两城，驻扎军队以胁制武胜军，安抚纳款洮、河诸部。
English: Wang Yao built two cities, one upstream and one downstream, and stationed troops to coerce the victorious army and pacify various parts of Nanshan and He.

古文：下师中议，遂言： 今修筑必广发兵，大张声势，及令蕃部纳土，招弓箭手，恐西蕃及洮、河、武胜军部族生疑。
现代文：传送给师中议论，师中就说： 现修筑两城必定扩大征发兵员，大张声势，等到令蕃部纳土归顺，招纳弓箭手，恐怕西蕃及洮、河、武胜军部族生疑。
English: It was sent to the division for discussion, and the division said: Now that the two cities are being built, it is necessary to expand the recruitment of soldiers and make a big noise, and wait until the land in the west is surrendered and archers are recruited, I am afraid that the tribes in the west and the rivers will be suspicious.

古文：今不若先招抚青唐、武胜及洮、河诸族，则西蕃族必乞修城砦，因其所欲，量发兵筑城堡，以示断绝夏人钞略之患，部人必归心。
现代文：现不如先招抚青唐、武胜以及洮、河诸部族，那么西蕃族必定请求修筑城寨，因其所欲，酌量征发兵员修筑城堡，以示断绝西夏人掠夺侵犯的祸患，诸部族人一定归心。
English: Now it is better to first appeal to the Qing Tang, Wusheng, and the Qin and He tribes, then the Xidi people will certainly request the construction of a walled city, and as they wish, they will conscript soldiers to build a castle at their discretion to show that they have broken off the scourge of the Xixia people's plundering and encroachment, and the tribesmen will surely come to their senses.

古文：唐于西域，每得地则建为州，其后皆陷失，以清水为界。
现代文：唐代在西域，每得地则建制为州，后来这些州都失陷了，边界移到清水。
English: In the western region of the Tang Dynasty, every province was established as a prefecture. Later, these prefectures were lost, and the border was moved to Qingshui.

古文：大抵根本之计未实，腹心之患未除，而勤远略、食土地者，未有不如此者。 诏师中罢帅事。
现代文：大抵根本之计没有牢实，腹心之患没有消除，而常常远征、贪图土地的人，没有不是这样的。 诏令师中罢免帅事。
English: In most cases, the fundamental plan is not solid, and the troubles of the vassals have not been eliminated, but this is not the case for those who often go on expeditions and covet land.

古文：韶又请置市易，募人耕缘边旷土，师中奏阻其谋。
现代文：王韶又请求设置市易务，招募人在沿边空旷的土地上耕种，师中上奏阻止他的谋划。
English: Wang Yao also requested the establishment of the municipal government to recruit people to cultivate the open land along the edge of the city, but his plan was thwarted.

古文：王安石方主韶，坐以奏报反覆罪，削职知舒州。
现代文：王安石正支持王韶，师中因以奏报反覆罪，削职为舒州知州。
English: Wang Anshi is supporting Wang Yao, who was demoted to Shuzhou Zhizhou for the crime of repeatedly reporting.

古文：徙洪、登、齐，复待制、知瀛州。
现代文：流放洪、登、齐州，复官待制、瀛州知州。
English: Hong, Deng and Qizhou were exiled, and Zhangzhou and Chizhou were reinstated.

古文：又乞召司马光、苏轼等置左右。
现代文：师中又请求召司马光、苏轼置于左右大臣位。
English: The division also requested that Sima Guang and Su Shi be summoned and placed in the left and right ministerial positions.

古文：师中言时政得失，又自称荐曰： 天生微臣，盖为圣世，有臣如此，陛下其舍诸。 吕惠卿易攵其语，以为罔上，遂贬和州团练副使安置。
现代文：师中言时政得失，又自己称荐说： 天生微臣，以作为圣明之世的辅佐，我既忠贤如此，陛下为什么还要舍弃我呢？ 吕惠卿挑剔他的话，认为是欺罔皇上，于是被贬为和州团练副使并在和州居住。
English: Lu Huicheng criticized his words, considering them to be a mockery of the emperor, and was demoted to the position of deputy envoy of the Hechu Troupe and made to live in Hechu.

古文：还右司郎中，卒，年六十六。
现代文：回朝任右司郎中，去世，终年六十六岁。
English: He returned to the Imperial Court to serve as Utsushiro junior secretary, and passed away at the age of 66.

古文：师中始仕州县，邸状报包拯参知政事，或云朝廷自此多事矣。
现代文：师中开始在州县任官，官府状报包拯任参知政事，有人说朝廷从此要多事了。
English: In middle school, he began to hold positions in prefectures and counties, and was promoted to the post of vice-governor. Some people said that the court would have a lot of things to do from then on.

古文：师中曰： 包公何能为，今鄞县王安石者，眼多白，甚似王敦，他日乱天下，必斯人也。 后二十年，言乃信。
现代文：师中说： 包公怎么会这样做，现鄞县王安石，眼睛白多黑少，很像王敦，将来乱天下的，一定是此人。 二十年后，他的话才被人相信。
English: The teacher said, "How could Bao Gong do such a thing? The present Wang Anshi of Handan County, whose eyes are more white than black, is very much like Wang Dun. In the future, the world will be in turmoil, and it must be this man." Twenty years later, his words were believed.

古文：其志尚甚高，每进见，多陈天人之际、君臣大节，请以进贤退不肖为宰相考课法。
现代文：师中的志尚很高，每次进朝见皇帝，多陈述天人之际、君臣大节，请以进用贤能斥退不肖作为宰相考课法。
English: The ambition of the teacher is still very high. Every time you go to the imperial court to see the emperor, you should make more statements on the occasion of the emperor and the emperor, and on the occasion of the great day of the emperor and the great day of the emperor. Please use the virtuous ability to repel the ugly as the prime minister's examination method.

古文：在官不贵威罚，务以信服人，至明而恕。
现代文：在任时不逞威责罚，务必以信服人，最为明察而且宽恕。
English: When in office, do not dare to punish, must be persuasive, the most clear-sighted and forgiving.

古文：去之日，民拥道遮泣，马不得行。
现代文：离任的那天，百姓拥道暗地流泪，马不能通行。
English: On the day he left office, the people were weeping secretly, and the horses could not pass.

古文：杜衍、范仲淹、富弼皆荐其有王佐才。
现代文：杜衍、范仲淹、富弼都荐举他有王佐的才能。
English: Du Yan, Fan Zhongyun, and Fuxi all recommended that he had the talent of Wang Zuo.

古文：然好为大言，以故不容于时而屡黜，气未尝少衰。
现代文：但他喜欢说大话，因为这个原因不被当时所容忍而多次遭到罢黜，志气却从没有稍有衰沉。
English: But he liked to talk big, because this reason was not tolerated at the time and was dismissed several times, but his spirit never waned a bit.

古文：陆诜，字介夫，余杭人。
现代文：陆诜字介夫，余杭人。
English: Lu Hao Zizhi, Yu Hangren.

古文：进士起家，签书北京判官。
现代文：以进士起家，为北京签书判官。
English: He started his career as a trainee and became a judge for Beijing.

古文：贝州乱，给事不乏兴；贼平，又条治其狱，无滥者。
现代文：贝州叛乱，他供职不曾耽误军用物资的征集和调拨；叛贼平定后，又通达治理狱案，没有滥案。
English: During his service, he did not delay the collection and allocation of military supplies during the Beizhou Rebellion; after the rebels were subdued, he was able to manage the prison case, and there was no abuse case.

古文：加集贤校理、通判秦州。
现代文：加官集贤院校理、秦州通判。
English: He was promoted to the post of the chief judge of Jixian University and the chief judge of Qin State.

古文：范祥城古渭，诜主馈饷，具言： 非中国所恃，而劳师屯戍，且生事。 既而诸羌果怒争，塞下大扰，经二岁乃定。
现代文：范祥在古渭修筑城堡，陆诜负责供应粮饷，陈述说 ：此非中国所依恃，只会白白地劳师屯驻戍守，而且容易惹起事端。 不久诸羌果然发怒争斗，边塞大为惊扰，整整二年才安定下来。
English: Fan Xiang was building a castle in Gushan, and Lu Yao was in charge of supplying grain, stating, "This is not a place for China to take refuge, it will only be occupied by laborers in vain, and it is easy to cause trouble. Before long, Zhu Yao really got angry and fought, the border fortress was very disturbed, and it took two years to settle down.

古文：判太常礼院、吏部南曹，提黠开封县镇。
现代文：任太常礼院判官、吏部南曹，提点开封县镇。
English: He was appointed as a judge of the Court of First Instance and Nanzao of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and raised the point of Kaifeng County Town.

古文：咸平龙骑军皆故群盗，牢廪不时得，殴莅给官，还营不自安，大校柴元煽使乱。
现代文：咸平龙骑军都是以前的群盗，因官府发给的粮食没有按时得到，殴打了到职的给养官，回营房后自己感到不安，大校柴元煽动作乱。
English: The Xianping Dragon Cavalry Army were all former bandits. Due to the fact that they did not receive the grain distributed by the government on time, they beat up the supply officer on duty. After returning to the barracks, they felt uneasy. The college student Chai Yuan instigated the disturbance.

古文：诏诜往视，许元以不死，命取始祸者自赎，众皆帖然。
现代文：诏令陆诜前往观察，答应不治柴元的死罪，命他捉拿最先起祸的人自行赎罪，众人都顺从。
English: The emperor ordered Lu Yao to go to observe, promised not to punish Chai Yuan with the death penalty, and ordered him to catch the first person who caused the disaster to atone for his sins, and everyone obeyed.

古文：提点陕西刑狱。
现代文：提点陕西刑狱。
English: A case in point is the Shaanxi Penitentiary.

古文：时铸钱法坏，议者欲变大钱当一，诜言： 民间素重小铜钱而贱大铁钱，他日以一当三犹轻之，今减令均直，大钱必废。
现代文：当时铸钱法败坏，议论的人打算变大铁钱当作一小铜钱，陆诜说： 民间向来重小铜钱而贱大铁钱，以后以一当三还是轻了，现在减少命令平均其值，大钱必定会废弃。
English: At that time, the minting method was corrupt, and people were discussing the idea of changing large iron money from small copper money to small copper money. Lu Wei said: The people have always valued small copper money more than large iron money. Later, it was still light. Now, it is necessary to reduce the order to average its value, and large money will certainly be abandoned.

古文：请以一当二，则公私所损亡几，而商贾可以通行；兼盗铸者计其直无赢，将必自止。 从之。
现代文：请以一当二，那么公私的损失很小，而且商贾可以通行；加上盗铸钱的人计其值没有赢利，将一定自行停止。 
English: Please take one for two, then the loss of public and private is small, and the merchant can pass; plus the person who steals money calculates its value without profit, and will certainly stop on its own.

古文：徙湖南、北转运使，直集英院，进集贤殿修撰、知桂州。
现代文：朝廷同意了他的意见。移任湖南、北转运使，直集英院，进官集贤殿修撰、知桂州。
English: The imperial court agreed with his opinion. He was transferred to Hunan and North Transshipment Envoy, Zhiji Yingyuan, promoted to Jixianden Shuxian, and Zhiguizhou.

古文：奏言： 邕去桂十八驿，异时经略使未尝行饬武备，臣愿得一往，使群蛮知省大将号令，因以声震南交。 诏可。
现代文：陆诜上奏说： 邕州距离桂州十八驿，以前经略使从没有从事整饬武备，我愿意去一趟，使群蛮知晓大将号令，因而以此声震南交。 
English: Lu Yao said: "Changzhou is 18 kilometers away from Guizhou. Previously, I had never been engaged in military preparations. I am willing to go there to let the barbarians know the general's order, and thus use this sound to shock the South.

古文：自侬徭定后，交人浸骄，守帅常姑息。
现代文：皇上下诏许他南行。自从侬徭平定后，交人日益骄纵，防守的主帅常常对之姑息。
English: The emperor and emperors decreed that he should go south. Since the suppression of Nonglu, Nonglu became more and more arrogant, and the defensive coach often tolerated him.

古文：诜至部，其使者黎顺宗来，偃蹇如故态。
现代文：陆诜到任，群蛮使者黎宗顺来到，态度傲慢如故。
English: When Lu Xun took office, a swarm of envoys from Li Zongshun arrived, with the same arrogant attitude as before.

古文：诜绌其礼，召问折谕，导以所当为，慑伏而去。
现代文：陆诜指出其礼数欠周，召问宗顺反复劝谕，引导他做所应该做的，宗顺因畏惧而屈服离去。
English: Lu Yao pointed out that the number of his eulogies was insufficient, summoned Zong Shun and repeatedly advised and guided him to do what he should do. Zong Shun gave in to fear and left.

古文：诜遂至邕州，集左、右江四十五峒首诣麾下，阅简工丁五万，补置将吏，更铸印给之，军声益张。
现代文：陆诜于是到达邕州，集中左、右江四十五峒首领前来他的旌麾之下，汇聚挑选工丁五万，补置将帅官吏，更换铸印授给他们，军声愈加张大。
English: Lu Wei then arrived in Zhangzhou, and gathered 45 warlords from both sides of the Yangtze River to come under his command. They gathered to select 50,000 workers, replenish the number of generals and officers, and replace the minted seals. The military clamor became louder and louder.

古文：交人滋益恭，遣使入贡。
现代文：交人愈加恭敬，派遣使者入贡。
English: The emperor was even more respectful and sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：召为天章阁待制、知谏院，命张田代之，英宗戒以毋得改诜法。
现代文：陆诜被朝廷召为天章阁待制、知谏院，命张田代替了他以前的职务，英宗告诫张田不得改变陆诜的成法。
English: Lu Xuan was called by the imperial court to be a member of the Tianzhang Court and the Zhisheng Court, and Zhang Tian was appointed to replace him in his previous position. Emperor Yingzong warned Zhang Tian not to change Lu Xuan's law.

古文：道除知延州，趣入觐，帝劳之曰： 卿在岭外，施设无不当者。
现代文：在回朝廷的路上，陆诜被任命为延州知州，赶忙入朝觐见，皇帝慰劳他说： 你在岭外，措施没有不恰当的，延最是当敌要地，现在当务之急将是什么？ 
English: On the way back to the imperial court, Lu Wei was appointed as the Yangzhou Chizhou, and hurried to the imperial court. The emperor consoled him and said: You are outside the Ling, there are no inappropriate measures, Yan is the most important place to be. What will be the top priority now?

古文：鄜延最当敌要，今将何先？ 对曰： 边事难以隃度，未审陛下欲安静邪，将威之也？ 帝曰： 大抵边陲当安静。
现代文：陆诜回答说： 边事难以远估，不知陛下想要安静呢，还是将要威加边塞呢？ 皇帝说 ：大抵边陲之地当要安静。
English: Lu Yao replied, "It is difficult to estimate far-off things. I don't know if Your Majesty wants to be quiet, or if you are going to close the border." The emperor said, "For the most part, the border areas should be quiet."

古文：昨王素为朕言，惟朝廷与帅臣意如此；至如诸将，无不贪功生事者。
现代文：昨日王素对朕说，只有朝廷和帅臣的用意是这样；至于像众将，没有不是贪功生事的。
English: Yesterday, Wang Su said to me that only the imperial court and the handsome ministers had such an intention; as for the generals, they were nothing but greedy.

古文：卿谓何如？ 诜曰： 素言是也。 谅祚寇庆州，以败还，声言益发人骑，且出嫚辞，复攻围大顺城。
现代文：你认为怎么样？ 
English: What do you think?

古文：诜谓由积习致然，不稍加折诮，则国威不立。
现代文：陆诜说 ：王素所说的是对的。 谅祚掠夺庆州，因败归，声言将增发兵马，而且口出倨傲之词，再次围攻大顺城。
English: Lu Yao said, "What Wang Su said is right. You have plundered Gyeongju, and now that you have been defeated, you have announced that you will send more soldiers and horses, and you have spoken words of pride, and you have once again besieged the city of Dashun.

古文：乃留止请时服使者及岁赐，而移宥州问故。
现代文：陆诜认为这是由积习导致的结果，如不稍加挫折责问，那么国家的威严不能树立。
English: Lu Wei believes that this is the result of accumulated practice. If there is not a little frustration, then the dignity of the country cannot be established.

古文：帝喜曰： 固知诜能办此。 谅祚闻之大沮，盘旋不敢入，乃报言： 边吏擅兴兵，今诛之矣。 朝廷遣何次公持诏书谕告，诜以为未可。
现代文：于是停止所请的应时服装、使者以及岁赐，而且移宥州追究谅诈背盟生事的原因。
English: Therefore, the requested clothing, messengers, and gifts for the occasion were stopped, and the state was asked to apologize for the cause of the incident.

古文：明年，又乞留赐冬服及大行遗留二使，而自以帅牒告之故。
现代文：第二年，又请求停派赐冬服以及大行遗留二使，而自己用帅牒告诉停派的原因。
English: In the second year, he also requested the suspension of the group to give winter clothes and the two remaining envoys to Da Xing, and he told the reason for the suspension of the group with a polite ultimatum.

古文：谅祚始因诜谢罪，共贡职。
现代文：谅祚才通过陆诜而谢罪，表示愿继续修职贡。
English: It was only after he was pardoned by Lu Wei that he expressed his willingness to continue to perform his duties.

古文：银州监军嵬名山与其国隙，扣青涧城主种谔求内附，谔以状闻，遂欲因取河南地。
现代文：银州监军嵬名山与其国西夏有隙，求见青涧城主帅种谔请求内附，种谔把情况报告朝廷，于是打算攻取河南地。
English: The supervisor of the Yinzhou army, Zou Mingshan, had a rift with his country, Western Xia, and asked to see the commander of Qingyuan City, Zongyuan. Zongyuan reported the situation to the imperial court, so he planned to conquer Henan.

古文：诜曰： 数万之众纳土容可受，若但以众来，情伪未可知，且安所置之。 戒谔毋妄动。
现代文：陆诜说 ：几万之众纳土可以接受，如果只以众人来，真伪不可知，暂且安所置之。 朝廷告诫种谔不要轻举妄动。
English: Lu Wei said: Tens of thousands of people can be accepted, if only people come, it is unknown whether it is true or not, and it is temporarily placed.The court warned the seed cocoon not to act rashly.

古文：谔持之力，诏诜召谔问状，与转运使薛向议抚纳。
现代文：种谔极力坚持，诏令陆诜召种谔询问情况，与转运使薛向商议招抚招纳。
English: The seed bank strongly insisted, and ordered Lu Hao to call the seed bank to inquire about the situation, and to negotiate with Xue Xue to recruit and recruit.

古文：诜、向言： 名山诚能据横山以捍敌，我以刺史世封之，使自为守，故为中国之利。
现代文：陆诜、薛向说 ：嵬名山如真的能够据横山以捍敌，我封他世袭刺史之职，使其自为守御，可以为中国之利。
English: Lu Yao and Xue Xiang said: "If the famous mountain can really defend itself against the enemy, I will assign him the hereditary position of stabbing history, so that he can defend himself, which can be beneficial to China."

古文：今无益我而轻启西舋，非计也。 乃共画三策，令幕府张穆之入奏，而穆之阴受向指，诡言必可成。
现代文：现无益于我而轻率挑起西边战争，这不是计策。 于是共同图划三种策略，令幕府张穆之入朝上奏，但张穆之暗中受薛向指使，欺诈说一定能够成功。
English: It is of no benefit to me now to rashly provoke a war in the west, this is not a strategy. Therefore, we jointly draw up three strategies to make the shogunate Zhang Muzhi enter the morning, but Zhang Muzhi is secretly instructed by Xue Xiang, and the fraud is certain to succeed.

古文：神宗意诜不协力，徙知秦凤。
现代文：神宗认为陆诜没有同心合力，移知秦、凤州。
English: Shenzong believed that there was no concentric force between Lu and Qin, and transferred knowledge to Qin and Fengzhou.

古文：谔遂发兵取绥州，诜欲理谔不禀节制之状，未及而徙。
现代文：种谔于是发兵攻取绥州，陆诜打算整治种谔不接受约束指挥之罪，没有来得及而移官。
English: Therefore, Zeng Yao sent troops to conquer Zhangzhou. Lu Yao intended to rectify Zeng Yao's crime of not accepting the command of restraint, but he did not have time to move.

古文：诜驰见帝，请弃绥州而上谔罪，帝愈不怿，罢知晋州。
现代文：陆诜驰马见皇帝，请求放弃绥州而上奏种谔的罪状，皇帝更加不高兴，罢陆诜为晋州知州。
English: Lu Qi rode his horse to see the emperor and requested that he give up Zhangzhou and report to the emperor for the crime of sowing discord. The emperor was even more displeased and dismissed Lu Qi to Jinzhou Zhizhou.

古文：既谔抵罪，向、穆之皆坐贬，以诜知真定，改龙图阁学士、知成都。
现代文：不久种谔抵罪，薛向、张穆之都因而被贬官，以陆诜知真定，改任龙图阁学士、知成都。
English: Soon after, Xue Xiang and Zhang Muzhitu were demoted for their guilty pleas, while Lu Xiang and Zhizhen Ding were promoted to Longtu Ge bachelor and Zhicheng Du respectively.

古文：青苗法出，诜言： 蜀峡刀耕火种，民常不足。
现代文：青苗法出笼，陆诜说： 蜀峡之地刀耕火种，百姓衣食常常不足。
English: When the young seedlings method was introduced, Lu Wei said: In the land of Shu Gorge, slash and burn farming is the best, and the people often lack food and clothing.

古文：今省税科折已重，其民轻侈不为储积，脱岁俭不能偿逋，适陷之死地，愿罢四路使者。 诏独置成都府一路。
现代文：现省税科赋折变已重，百姓风俗轻移，轻易不为储蓄积聚之事，倘若年成不好不能偿还欠债，恰好使他们陷入死地，希望撤除四路使者。 诏令独置成都府一路。
English: At present, the province's taxation system has undergone profound changes, and the people's customs have shifted slightly, and it is not easy to accumulate savings. If the year is not good and they cannot repay their debts, they will just fall into a dead end, hoping to remove the four-way envoy.

古文：熙宁三年，卒，年五十九。子师闵。
现代文：熙宁三年，陆诜去世，终年五十九岁，儿子陆师闵。
English: In the third year of Xining, Lu Shizhen passed away, at the age of fifty-nine, his son Lu Shizhen.

