古文：虢之会，诸侯之大夫寻盟未退。
现代文：在虢地召开的盟会上，各诸侯国的大夫们谋求弭兵休战的盟约还未完成，鲁国的季武子就攻伐莒国，占取了郓城。
English: At the alliance meeting held in Handan, the doctors of the various states sought the truce of Handan soldiers, but the agreement was not yet completed. Ji Wuzi of Lu attacked Handan and occupied Handan City.

古文：季武子伐莒取郓，莒人告于会，楚人将以叔孙穆子为戮。晋乐王鲋求货于穆子，曰： 吾为子请于楚 。
现代文：莒国向与会各国控告，楚国主张杀掉鲁国的盟使叔孙穆子。晋国的乐王鲋向叔孙穆子索取贿赂，说： 我可以替你向楚国说情。 
English: Shan State complained to the participating countries, Chu State advocated the killing of Lu's allied envoy, Sun Tzu. Jin's king of music, Zou, demanded a bribe from Sun Tzu, saying, "I can intercede for you with Chu State."

古文：穆子不予。
现代文：叔孙穆子拒绝了。
English: Uncle Sun Mu Zi refused.

古文：梁其胫谓穆子曰： 有货，以卫身也。
现代文：他的家臣梁其胫说： 有财物，是用来保护自己的。
English: His vassal, Liang Qichen, said, "If you have wealth, it is to protect yourself.

古文：出货而可以免，子何爱焉？ 
现代文：拿出财物就可以免去一死，你为什么吝惜呢？ 
English: If you take out your belongings, you can avoid death. Why do you begrudge it?

古文：穆子曰： 非女所知也。
现代文：叔孙穆子说： 你不懂。
English: Uncle Sun Mu Zi said: You don't understand.

古文：承君命以会大事，而国有罪，我以货私免，是我会吾私也。
现代文：我奉国君的命令来参加会盟的大事，现在国家有罪，我却用财物私自免死，这就说明我来会盟只是为了自己的私利。
English: I was ordered by the sovereign to participate in the important affairs of the League. Now the country is guilty, but I used my wealth to save myself from death. This shows that I came to the League only for my own selfish interests.

古文：苟如是，则又可以出货而成私欲乎？
现代文：如果我这样做了，不就还可以拿财物满足自己的私欲吗？
English: If I do this, won't I still be able to satisfy my selfish desires with wealth?

古文：虽可以免，吾其若诸侯之事何？
现代文：虽然我能够免去性命之忧，但今后怎么再从事诸侯国之间的外交呢？
English: Although I could avoid fearing for my life, how could I engage in diplomacy between states in the future?

古文：夫必将或循之，曰： 诸侯之卿有然者故也。 
现代文：一定会有其他人仿效我的行为，说 某国诸侯的卿就这样做过 。
English: There must be others who will imitate my actions, saying, "The lord of a certain country did this."

古文：则我求安身而为诸侯法矣。
现代文：于是我求安身就为诸侯树立了一个行贿免死的榜样。
English: So I asked for peace of mind and set an example for the lords to pay bribes and avoid death.

古文：君子是以患作。作而不衷，将或道之，是昭其不衷也。余非爱货，恶不衷也。
现代文：所以君子担忧行事不正，行事不正，将会导致别人也来仿效，这就更加暴露出他的行事不正。我不是吝惜财货，而是讨厌行事不正啊。
English: Therefore, a gentleman worries about acting improperly, and acting improperly will cause others to follow suit, which further exposes his misconduct. I am not stingy with goods, but I hate to act improperly.

古文：且罪非我之由，为戮何害？ 
现代文：况且罪过不是由我引起，我就是被杀又何害于义？ 
English: Besides, the crime was not caused by me. If I am killed, what harm is it to justice?

古文：楚人乃赦之。
现代文：楚国人于是赦免了叔孙穆子。
English: The people of Chu then pardoned his uncle and grandson.

古文：穆子归，武子劳之，日中不出。
现代文：叔孙穆子回鲁国后，季武子前去慰劳，叔孙穆子到了中午还不肯出来见他。
English: After Mu Zi's uncle and grandson returned to Lu, Ji Wuxi went to comfort them. At noon, Mu Zi's uncle and grandson still refused to come out to see him.

古文：其入曰： 可以出矣。 
现代文：家人说： 可以出门了。 
English: The family said: "We can go out now."

古文：穆子曰： 吾不难为戮，养吾栋也。
现代文：叔孙穆子说： 我连被杀都不当作难事，是为了保住鲁国的栋梁。
English: Uncle Sun Muzi said: I don't even consider being killed as a hardship, it's to preserve the backbone of Lu.

古文：夫栋折而榱崩，吾惧压焉。
现代文：栋梁塌了，椽子也就毁了，我怕被压着。
English: The beams have fallen and the rafters have been destroyed. I'm afraid of being crushed.

古文：故曰虽死于外，而庇宗于内。
现代文：所以说即使死在国外，但庇护了国内的宗室，是值得的。
English: So even if you die abroad, it's worth it to protect your family in China.

古文：可也。今既免大耻，而不忍小忿，可以为能乎？ 
现代文：现在既然免掉了国家灭亡的大耻，却不能忍受个人的小忿，可以这样做吗？ 
English: Now that we have been spared the great shame of the country's demise, but cannot bear a small personal grudge, can we do this?

古文：乃出见之。
现代文：于是出门见季武子。
English: So I went out to see Satoko.

