古文：黄帝问阉冉曰：吾欲布施五正，焉止焉始？
现代文：黄帝问手下的大臣阉冉说：我想通过颁布实施各种政令的方法来治理国家，请问应始于何处、终于何处？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked his minister, Xuan Ran, "I want to govern the country by issuing and implementing various decrees. Where should I start and where should I end?"

古文：对曰：始在于身，中有正度，后及外人。外内交接，乃正于事之所成。
现代文：阉冉回答说：应该始于完善自身，秉执中正公平的法度，然后以法度准量他人，外内交相融洽，就可终于事情的成功。
English: Xuan Ran replied: It should start with perfecting oneself, adhering to the principle of being fair, and then using the principle to measure others. If foreign and domestic relations are harmonious, then things can finally be successful.

古文：黄帝曰：吾既正既静，吾国家愈不定。
现代文：黄帝又问：我自身端正而且宁静寡欲不专行妄为，而我的国家仍然愈发不安定，怎么办呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor also asked, "What should I do if I am upright and peaceful, and my country is becoming more and more unstable?"

古文：若何？对曰：后中实而外正，何患不定？
现代文：阉冉回答说：如果您内心诚实静定而行为端正，还担心国家不能安定吗？
English: He replied, "If you are honest and steady at heart and behave well, are you still worried that the country will not be stable?"

古文：左执规，右执矩，何患天下？
现代文：如果您能秉执法度，还忧虑天下不太平吗？
English: If you can uphold the rule of law, do you still worry that the world is not peaceful?

古文：男女毕迵，何患于国？
现代文：上下同心同德，还操心国家不能治理吗？
English: Are they still worried that the country cannot be governed?

古文：五正既布，以司五明。左右执规，以待逆兵。
现代文：各种政令都颁布以后，分别让不同的职官去执掌落实，您只须掌握着国家的大法，等待着严惩蚩尤就可以了。
English: After all kinds of decrees have been promulgated, let different officials take charge of the implementation. All you have to do is master the country's great law and wait for the severe punishment.

古文：黄帝曰：吾身未自知，若何？
现代文：黄帝说：我现在尚不能充分认识自己，怎么办呢？
English: Huang Di said, "I still can't fully know myself, what should I do?

古文：对曰：后身未自知，乃深伏于渊，以求内刑。
现代文：阉冉回答说：如果您还不能充分认识自己，便可以姑且隐匿起来，先做到自我完善。
English: Xuan Ran replied, "If you don't know yourself well enough, you can hide yourself and perfect yourself first."

古文：内刑已得，后乃自知屈其身。
现代文：自我完善好了，便可以自然有效地克制自己了。
English: Once you have perfected yourself, you can naturally and effectively restrain yourself.

古文：黄帝曰：吾欲屈吾身，屈吾身若何？
现代文：黄帝又问道：我是很希望克制自己的，但这又意味着什么呢？
English: Huang Di also asked: I really hope to restrain myself, but what does this mean?

古文：对曰：道同者，其事同；道异者，其事异。
现代文：阉冉回答说：这就意味着能够根据观点和主张的是否相同，来决定如何去应付。
English: Zhan Ran replied, "This means that we can decide how to deal with each other according to whether or not we have the same views and opinions."

古文：今天下大争，时至矣，后能慎勿争乎？
现代文：当今天下纷争，您能谨慎小心地不去加入这样的纷争吗？
English: When there is strife today, can you be careful not to join such strife?

古文：黄帝曰：勿争若何？
现代文：黄帝说：不加入纷争又意味着什么呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "What does it mean not to get involved in disputes?

古文：对曰：怒者血气也，争者脂肤也。
现代文：阉冉回答说：发怒是内在血气作用的结果，争斗是外在脂肤作用的结果。
English: Xuan Ran replied: Anger is the result of internal blood and gas, and fighting is the result of external fat and skin.

古文：怒若不发，浸廪是为痈疽。
现代文：怒气如果不发散出来，那么蔓延滋长就会发展成疤疮。
English: If anger does not dissipate, it can fester and develop into scars.

古文：后能去四者，枯骨何能争矣。
现代文：您如果能够去掉血、气、脂、肤这四个东西，就会形如枯骨，又如何能够发怒和争斗呢？
English: If you can remove the four things of blood, gas, fat and skin, you will be like dry bones. How can you get angry and fight?

古文：黄帝于是辞其国大夫，上于博望之山，谈卧三年以自求也。
现代文：黄帝听罢，于是告别手下的要臣，来到了博望山，在那里淡然隐居、修心养性以求自我完善。
English: After listening to this, the Yellow Emperor bade farewell to the dignitaries under his command and went to Mount Bohang, where he lived in seclusion and cultivated his mind and character in order to perfect himself.

古文：战哉，阉冉乃上起黄帝曰：可矣。
现代文：三年之后，阉冉来到博望山禀告黄帝说：现在你可以去与蚩尤一决雌雄了。
English: Three years later, Zang Ran came to Bohang Mountain and told the Yellow Emperor: "Now you can go and fight with Qiu You.

古文：夫作争者凶，不争者亦无成功。
现代文：狂妄纷争者不祥，而错过天赐良机的人也决不会成就事功的。
English: Arrogant quarrels are ominous, and those who miss the God-given opportunity will never achieve anything.

古文：何不可矣？
现代文：据此而论，下山决战又有什么不可以的呢？
English: On this basis, what is wrong with going down the mountain for the decisive battle?

古文：黄帝于是出其锵钺，奋其戎兵，身提鼓枹，以遇蚩尤，因而擒之。
现代文：黄帝听罢阉冉的话，于是陈列兵器，激励士卒，亲自击鼓进军，与蚩尤决战于涿鹿并且一战擒获了蚩尤。
English: The Yellow Emperor listened to his words, so he displayed weapons, encouraged his soldiers, personally marched into the army with drums, and fought a decisive battle with Qiu You in Menglu and won Qiu You in the first battle.

古文：帝箸之盟，盟曰：反义逆时，其刑视蚩尤。
现代文：然后黄帝宣盟天下，盟词中说：今后再有违反信义、背逆天时的，会受到与蚩尤相同的惩罚。
English: Then the Yellow Emperor proclaimed a covenant to the whole world, saying in the covenant: In the future, if there is any violation of faith and treason, it will be punished in the same way as Pu You.

古文：反义背宗，其法死亡以穷。
现代文：违反信义而且背叛宗主的，最终都会自食其果，自取灭亡。
English: Anyone who violates the principles of faith and betrays the patriarch will eventually suffer the consequences and perish.

