古文：高祐崔挺高祐，字子集，小名次奴，勃海人也。
现代文：高佑，字子集，小名次奴，渤海人。
English: Gaoyou, character subset, small second-ranked slave, Bohai people.

古文：本名禧，以与咸阳王同名，高祖赐名祐。
现代文：本名禧，因与咸阳王同名，高祖赐名佑。
English: His real name is Xie, because he has the same name as King Xianyang, and was given the name by Gao Zu.

古文：司空允从祖弟也。
现代文：司空高允从祖的弟弟。
English: Siku Gaoyun is the younger brother of the patriarch.

古文：祖展，慕容宝黄门郎，太祖平中山，内徙京师，卒于三都大官。
现代文：祖高展，任为慕容宝的黄门郎，魏太祖平定中山，展迁居京城，卒于三都大官任上。
English: The ancestor Gao Zhan was appointed as Huangmen Lang of Murongbao, Wei Taizu conquered Zhongshan, Zhan moved to Beijing, and died in the post of Sandu Daikan.

古文：父谠，从世祖灭赫连昌，以功拜游击将军，赐爵南皮子。
现代文：父高谠，跟从世祖灭赫连昌，因功拜授游击将军，朝廷赐爵南皮子。
English: His father, Gao Yao, followed his ancestor, Qih Lianchang, and was awarded the title of guerrilla general for his service, while the imperial court bestowed a peerage on Nanpizi.

古文：与崔浩共参著作，迁中书侍郎。
现代文：与崔浩共参著作，迁任中书侍郎。
English: He co-authored a book with Cui Hao and was transferred to the post of junior secretary.

古文：转给事中、冀青二州中正。
现代文：转任给事中，冀青二州中正。
English: In the process of being reassigned, Ji Qing is now a middle school teacher in two states.

古文：假散骑常侍、平东将军、蓚县侯，使高丽。
现代文：假散骑常侍、平东将军、艹修县侯，出使高丽。
English: The fake horseback riding attendant, the general of Pingdong, the governor of Suixiu County, and the envoy of Goryeo.

古文：卒，赠安南将军、冀州刺史、假沧水公，谥曰康。
现代文：去世，赠安南将军、冀州刺史、假沧水公，谥称康。
English: After his death, he gave generals Annan, Jizhou Zhishi, and Fake Cangshui, and called himself Kang.

古文：祐兄祚，袭爵，东青州刺史。
现代文：高佑兄高祚，袭父爵位，为东青州刺史。
English: Gaoyou's older brother Gao Yao, inheriting his father's title, is the history of East Qingzhou.

古文：祐博涉书史，好文字杂说，材性通放，不拘小节。
现代文：高佑广泛涉猎经史，喜好文学杂说，材性通达，不拘小节。
English: Gaoyou extensively dabbles in the history of literature, likes literary miscellany, is well-versed in the material, and does not care about details.

古文：初拜中书学生，转博士、侍郎。
现代文：初拜中书学生，转任中书博士、侍郎。
English: He became a junior high school student for the first time, and was later promoted to junior high school teacher and waiter.

古文：以祐招下邵郡群贼之功，赐爵建康子。
现代文：朝廷又因高佑招顺邵郡群贼之功，朝廷赐爵建康子。
English: In addition, the imperial court awarded Jian Yasuko a peerage for her role in recruiting a group of thieves from Shun Shao County.

古文：高宗末，兗州东郡吏获一异兽，献之京师，时人咸无识者。
现代文：高宗末年，兖州东郡吏获得一只异兽，献给京城，当时人都没有认得的。
English: At the end of Gaozong's life, the officials of the East County of Zhangzhou obtained a strange beast, dedicated to the capital. At that time, no one recognized it.

古文：诏以问祐，祐曰： 此是三吴所出，厥名鲮鲤，余域率无。今我获之，吴楚之地，其有归国者乎？ 
现代文：皇帝下诏询问高佑，高佑说： 这种东西是三吴所出，它的名字叫鲮鲤，其他地方都没有，今天我们得到了它，这不预示着吴楚之地，要归我大魏吗？ 
English: The emperor issued an edict to inquire about Gaoyou, and Gaoyou said, "This kind of thing comes from the Three Kingdoms of Wu. Its name is the dragonfly. It is not found anywhere else. Today, we have obtained it. Doesn't this indicate that the land of Wu Chu will belong to my Great Wei?"

古文：又有人于零丘得玉印一以献。诏以示祐，祐曰： 印上有籀书二字，文曰 宋寿 。
现代文：又有人在零丘得到一枚玉印献给朝廷，帝诏拿给高佑看，高佑说： 印上有籀书二字，文曰 宋寿 。
English: Another person got a jade seal dedicated to the imperial court in the hills. The emperor showed it to Gaoyou, and Gaoyou said: There are two characters of the seal, and the text says Song Shou.

古文：寿者，命也，我获其命，亦是归我之征。 
现代文：寿者，命也，我获其命，也是归我的征兆。 
English: The death of a man is also his life, and the fact that I have his life is also a sign that it belongs to me.

古文：显祖初，刘义隆子义阳王昶来奔，薛安都等以五州降附，时谓祐言有验。
现代文：显祖初年，刘义隆儿子义阳王刘昶奔归魏朝，薛安都等人以五个州降附，当时人都说高佑的话很灵验。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xianzu, Liu Yilong's son, the Prince of Yiyang, Liu Yibeng, returned to the Wei Dynasty, and Xue Andu and others annexed five states. At that time, people said that Gaoyou's words were very effective.

古文：高祖拜秘书令。后与丞李彪等奏曰： 臣等闻典谟兴，话言所以光著；载籍作，成事所以昭扬。
现代文：高祖拜授高佑为秘书令，后来高佑与李彪等人启奏说： 为臣听说典谟作，让人的话语言论得以光著；载籍作，做的事情便能昭扬。
English: Gao Zu gave Gao Yu the order to be secretary, and later Gao Yu and Li Biao and others said: For the minister to hear and listen to Minimo, let people's words and language theories be naked; if you are registered, you can do things.

古文：然则《尚书》者记言之体，《春秋》者录事之辞。
现代文：这样《尚书》成为记言之体，《春秋》便是录事之作。
English: In this way, "Shang Shu" becomes a body of narration, and "Spring and Autumn" is a work of recording.

古文：寻览前志，斯皆言动之实录也。
现代文：查阅以前所流传的志传，都是论言记事的实录也。
English: The biographies that circulated before the inspection were all true accounts of what was said and recorded.

古文：夏殷以前，其文弗具，自周以降，典章备举。
现代文：夏、殷以前，其文字不备。从周代以降，典章备举。
English: Before the Xia and Yin dynasties, there was no written record of it. From the Zhou dynasty onwards, there is a written record of it.

古文：史官之体，文质不同；立书之旨，随时有异。
现代文：史官之作，文质不同；立书意旨，随着不同的时代都有差异。
English: The works of historians vary in style; the intention behind the writing of a book varies with the times.

古文：至若左氏，属词比事，两致并书，可谓存史意，而非全史体。
现代文：至于左氏，记言记事，两致并书，可以称得上是存留史家本意，而不是完整的史书之体。
English: As for Zuo's book, it is more of a record of words and events than a complete history book, and can be said to have preserved the original intention of the historian.

古文：逮司马迁、班固，皆博识大才，论叙今古，曲有条章，虽周达未兼，斯实前史之可言者也。
现代文：到了司马迁、班固，他们两人都是博有才识之人，叙录今古，备在章法，虽然不能说面面俱到，但确实可以称得上是前代史书中的优秀之作了。
English: When it comes to Sima Qian and Bangu, both of them are highly talented people, and the descriptions of ancient and modern times are prepared in chapters and laws. Although it cannot be said to be comprehensive, it can indeed be called an excellent work in the previous history book.

古文：至于后汉、魏、晋咸以放焉。
现代文：至于后汉、魏、晋的史书都可忽略放过。
English: As for the history books of the later Han, Wei and Jin dynasties, they can be ignored.

古文：惟圣朝创制上古，开基《长发》，自始均以后，至于成帝，其间世数久远，是以史弗能传。
现代文：只有我们圣朝创制上古，开帝基于长发，自始均以后，至于成帝，这其间世数久远，所以史书未能传记。
English: Only our Holy Dynasty created the ancient system. The founding of the emperor was based on long hair, and it has been the same since the beginning. As for the emperor, the number of lifetimes is long, so the history book cannot record his biography.

古文：臣等疏陋，忝当史职，披览《国记》，窃有志焉。
现代文：为臣等疏劣陋粗，忝居史职，披览《国记》，私有撰史之意。
English: For the vassals and others, it is vulgar and coarse, and they do not live up to their duties as historians, and they only read the "National Record," which means that they write history privately.

古文：愚谓自王业始基，庶事草创，皇始以降，光宅中土，宜依迁固大体，令事类相从，纪传区别，表志殊贯，如此修缀，事可备尽。
现代文：愚见以为自从王业开始，众事草创，皇始年间以来，光被中土，我们应依参司马迁、班固大致的体制，让事实分类相从，纪传区别，表志分开，像这样修述史书，各类事实都可包括在内了。
English: It is foolish to think that since the beginning of the reign of Wangye, the pioneer of all things, and the beginning of the imperial era, we should follow the general system of Sang Sima Qian and Bang Gu, so that the classification of facts should be consistent, the history should be different, and the table should be separated, and all kinds of facts can be included in the revision of the history book.

古文：伏惟陛下先天开物，洪宣帝命，太皇太后淳曜二仪，惠和王度，声教之所渐洽，风译之所覃加，固已义振前王矣。
现代文：伏惟陛下先天开物，洪宣帝命，太皇太后淳曜乾坤二仪，惠和王度，声教之所渐渐和洽，风泽之所深加，固然已经义振前王了。
English: His Majesty Fubei was born with a gift of prophecy, the Hongxuan Emperor gave the order, the Grand Empress Dowager Junye performed the two rites, Hui and Wangdu were gradually reconciled, and the atmosphere was deepened. Of course, the former king had already received the blessing.

古文：加太和以降，年未一纪，然嘉符祯瑞，备臻于往时；洪功茂德，事萃于曩世。
现代文：加上太和元年以来，年代虽未有三十年，然而嘉符祯瑞，备加完善于往日；洪功茂德，事更精粹于前世。
English: In addition, since the first year of the Taihe era, although the age is less than thirty years, however, Jiafu and Rui have been perfected in the past; Hong Gong and Maode have been more refined in the past life.

古文：会稽伫玉牒之章，岱宗想石记之列。
现代文：会稽藏玉牒之章，泰山想石记之列。
English: It is listed as one of the chapters of the Association for the Preservation of Jade Tablets, and one of the chapters of the Records of Mount Tai.

古文：而秘府策勋，述美未尽。
现代文：而秘府史家记述勋功，却述美未尽。
English: However, the secret government historian's record of meritorious service is incomplete.

古文：将令皇风大猷，或阙而不载；功臣懿绩，或遗而弗传。
现代文：将让皇风大美，或有缺而不载；功臣善绩，或遗而不传。
English: Let the imperial style be great and beautiful, or there will be a lack of it, but it will not be carried; a meritorious deed, or a legacy, will not be passed on.

古文：著作郎已下，请取有才用者，参造国书，如得其人，三年有成矣。
现代文：从著作郎以下，臣请启其中才识俱嘉者，参与撰造国书，如果能够得到人才，史书三年就可修成。
English: From the scribe on down, the minister invited the best and brightest to participate in the compilation of the national history book. If talent could be obtained, the history book could be completed in three years.

古文：然后大明之德功，光于帝篇；圣后之勋业，显于皇策。
现代文：然后大明之德功，光于帝篇；圣后之勋业，显于皇策。
English: Then, the great virtue of the Ming Dynasty was reflected in the Emperor, and the distinguished career of the Holy Empress was reflected in the Emperor's policies.

古文：佐命忠贞之伦，纳言司直之士，咸以备著载籍矣。 
现代文：转命忠贞之伦，纳言司直之士，都会备具载籍了。 
English: Those who are loyal to their families, and those who are loyal to the government, will be ready to be registered.

古文：高祖从之。
现代文：高祖接受了他的意见。
English: Gaozu listened to him.

古文：高祖从容问祐曰： 比水旱不调，五谷不熟，何以止灾而致丰稔？ 
现代文：高祖从容问高佑说： 近来水旱不调，五谷不熟，有什么办法可以防止灾害而获得五谷丰登呢？ 
English: Gao Zu calmly asked Gao You, "Recently, water and drought have not been in balance, and grain is not familiar. What is the way to prevent disasters and obtain grain abundance?"

古文：祐对曰： 昔尧汤之运，不能去阳九之会。陛下道同前圣，其如小旱何？
现代文：高佑回答说： 过去尧、汤之运，也不能去除运数中的九年旱灾，陛下您道同前政，对付眼前的小旱又有什么办法呢？
English: Gaoyou replied, "The bad luck in the past cannot remove the nine-year drought from the number of bad luck. Your majesty, you are following the same path as the previous government. What can you do to deal with the current small drought?

古文：但当旌贤佐政，敬授民时，则灾消穰至矣。 
现代文：只有选拔贤才佐治政事，不干扰老百姓顺时耕作，这样的话就灾消丰至了。 
English: Only the selection of talented people to administer the affairs of state, without interfering with the people's farming at the right time. In such a case, disaster and prosperity will come.

古文：又问止盗之方，祐曰： 昔宋钧树德，害兽不过其乡；卓茂善教，蝗虫不入其境。
现代文：高祖又问他防止奸盗的方法，高佑说： 过去宋均树德，害人之兽都不到他的治域来；卓茂善于教化，蝗虫都不入其境。
English: Gao Zu also asked him how to prevent theft. Gao You said: In the past, Song Junshu was so virtuous that animals that harmed people would not enter his domain; Zhuo Mao was good at enlightenment, and locusts would not enter his territory.

古文：彼盗贼者，人也，苟训之有方，宁不易息。
现代文：盗贼是人，如果我们训教有方，哪有不容易停息的呢。
English: Thieves are human beings. If we train them well, they will not easily stop.

古文：当须宰守贞良，则盗止矣。 
现代文：我以为让宰守们做到贞正良端，那奸盗就会止息了。 
English: I thought that if I could get the overseers to be honest and honorable, the thieving would stop.

古文：祐又上疏云： 今之选举，不采职治之优劣，专简年劳之多少，斯非尽才之谓。
现代文：高佑又上疏说： 现在的选举，不管其人治理见识的优劣，专门追究人年龄劳绩的多少，这不是人尽其才的做法。
English: Gaoyou and Shangsuo said: The current election, regardless of the merits and demerits of its people's governance insights, specifically investigates the number of people's age and performance, which is not the practice of people doing their best.

古文：宜停此薄艺，弃彼朽劳，唯才是举，则官方斯穆。
现代文：我们应该停止专究薄艺，放弃那种无功之劳，惟才是举，那就会使官吏们风气端正。
English: This kind of shallow distinction should be stopped, and those useless years of experience should be abandoned. Only through hard work can officials become honest and upright.

古文：又勋旧之臣，虽年勤可录，而才非抚人者，则可加之以爵赏，不宜委之以方任。
现代文：又有功劳的大臣，虽说其年勤可以著录，但才非抚人，则可以加之以罚赏，不应委之以方伯之任。
English: In addition, a meritorious minister, although his years of service can be recorded, but only if he is not a fudonin, can be punished with a reward, and should not be entrusted with the duty of a kubo.

古文：所谓王者可私人以财，不私人以官者也。 
现代文：这就是所谓王者可以给人以财而表示亲近，而不可私自许诺别人官职以示关系好。 
English: This is what people say: those who are king can use wealth to be humane, but they cannot use their official position to be humane.

古文：高祖皆善之。
现代文：高祖都很推许。
English: The founding fathers were all in favour of it.

古文：加给事中、冀州大中正，余如故。
现代文：加授给事中，冀州大中正，其余官职照旧。
English: Among the additional awards, the vice-president of Jizhou University, and the rest of the official positions are still the same.

古文：时李彪专统著作，祐为令，时相关豫而已。
现代文：当时李彪专统著作之事，高佑为令，不时地关怀写作而已。
English: At that time, the matter of Li Biao's autocratic writings was ordered by Gaoyou, and he only cared about writing from time to time.

古文：出为持节、辅国将军、西兗州刺史，假东光侯，镇滑台。
现代文：出任持节、辅国将军、西兖州刺史、假东光侯，镇守滑台。
English: He served as Jisai, the general of the auxiliary province, the governor of Xishuanzhou, the fake Dongguanghou, and the town guard.

古文：祐以郡国虽有太学，县党宜有黉序，乃县立讲学，党立教学，村立小学。
现代文：高佑以郡国虽有太学，县党也应有学校，于是在县立讲学，党立小学。
English: Gaoyou believed that the county should have a state-owned university, and that there should also be schools in the county and the countryside, so he set up lectures in the county, teaching in the countryside, and a primary school in the village.

古文：又令一家之中，自立一碓，五家之外，共造一井，以供行客，不听妇人寄舂取水。
现代文：又命令，一家之中，自立一碓，五家一起，共造一口井，以便给行人提供食饮，不让妇人舂米打水。
English: He also ordered one family to dig a well on its own, and five families to dig a well together, in order to provide food and drink for pedestrians, and not to allow women to collect rice to draw water.

古文：又设禁贼之方，令五五相保，若盗发则连其坐。初虽似烦碎，后风化大行，寇盗止息。
现代文：又建立起禁止奸贼的办法，令五五相保，如发生盗事则五五连坐，这种方法一开始做起来虽然看起来烦琐，后来却使治安大为好转，寇盗行为都停止了。
English: He also established a method of prohibiting traitors, ordering a 55-year guarantee, and in the event of theft, a 55-year consecutive sentence. Although this method seemed cumbersome at first, it later greatly improved public security and stopped theft.

古文：转宋王刘昶傅。
现代文：转任宋王刘昶师傅。
English: He was transferred to the position of Song Wang Liu Wei Master.

古文：以昔参定律令之勤，赐帛五百匹、粟五百石、马一匹。
现代文：因高佑过去参与律令制定的功劳，朝廷赐帛五百匹、粟五百担、马一匹。
English: Because of Gaoyou's past contribution to the formulation of the ritsuryo code, the imperial court awarded him with five hundred yakitori, five hundred bags of millet, and one horse.

古文：昶以其官旧年耆，雅相祗重，妓妾之属，多以遗之。
现代文：刘昶以其官旧年老，雅相看重，妓女妾婢，也没少给他。
English: Liu Bei valued the elegance of his old officials and concubines, and gave him no less.

古文：拜光禄大夫，傅如故。
现代文：拜授光禄大夫，师傅官职如故。
English: He was awarded the title of Dr. Guanglu, and his position as a teacher remained unchanged.

古文：昶薨后，征为宗正卿，而祐留连彭城，久而不赴。
现代文：刘昶死后，朝廷征拜他为宗正卿，而高佑留连彭城，久不赴任。
English: After Liu Bei's death, the imperial court enlisted him as Zong Zhengqing, but Gao You remained in Pengcheng and did not take up the post for a long time.

古文：亦早亡。祐从父弟次同，永安末，抚军将军、定州刺史。
现代文：于是尚书仆射李冲奏高佑徘徊怠慢于淮、徐，无事拖延朝廷之命，免官三年，以赎其罪。
English: As a result, Shang Shuxu's servant Gaoyou wandered around neglecting Huai and Xu, delaying the order of the imperial court, and was dismissed for three years to atone for his sin.

古文：子乾邕，永熙中，司空公、长乐郡开国公。
现代文：帝下诏免除高佑宗正卿之职，复其官光禄大夫。
English: Emperor Taizong exempted Gao Youzong from the post of Zhengqing and reinstated him as Guanglu Daifu.

古文：乾邕弟敖曹，天平中，司徒公、京兆郡开国公。
现代文：太和二十三年去世。太常卿议谥为炀侯，诏曰： 不遵上命曰 灵 ，可谥曰灵。 
English: Taihe passed away at the age of twenty-three. Taijo-kyo decided to make him a prince, and issued an edict saying, "If you don't follow the order to say 'Spirit,' you can say 'Spirit.'"

古文：崔挺，字双根，博陵安平人也。
现代文：崔挺，字双根，博陵安平人。
English: Cui Ting, the character with two roots, is from Boling Anping.

古文：六世祖赞，魏尚书仆射。
现代文：六世祖崔赞，魏朝任尚书仆射。
English: Zu Cui Zan, the sixth, was a disciple of Wei Shang.

古文：五世祖洪，晋吏部尚书。
现代文：五世祖崔洪，晋代吏部尚书。
English: The fifth-generation ancestor, Cui Hong, was a member of the Jin cadre.

古文：父郁，濮阳太守。
现代文：父亲崔郁，任濮阳太守。
English: His father, Cui Yu, was appointed the governor of Shenyang.

古文：挺幼居丧尽礼。
现代文：崔挺幼年居丧尽全礼节。
English: As a child, Choi Ting lost all manners.

古文：少敦学业，多所览究，推人爱士，州闾亲附焉。
现代文：少年务精学业，读书广泛，推赞别人爱惜人士，州县乡间的人都与他亲近。
English: He is a diligent student, reads widely, praises others and cares about others. People in the state, county and countryside are close to him.

古文：每四时与乡人父老书相存慰，辞旨款备，得者荣之。
现代文：崔挺每年四时都写信给乡人父老，致以问候，措辞亲切，辞意周全，得到他书信的人都觉得很荣耀。
English: Every year at four o'clock, Cui Ting would write to the villagers to send greetings. The words were kind and thoughtful, and everyone who received his letter felt very honored.

古文：三世同居，门有礼让。
现代文：一家之中祖孙三代同居，家中礼让有度。
English: Three generations of grandparents and grandchildren in one family live together, and there is a certain degree of courtesy in the family.

古文：于后频值饥年，家始分析，挺与弟振推让田宅旧资，惟守墓田而已。
现代文：后来频遭饥荒，家中才开始渐渐分出，崔挺与弟弟崔振互相推让田产房产等旧资，崔挺只守着祖坟的祭田而已。
English: Later, frequent famines occurred, and only gradually did the family begin to separate. Choi Ting and his brother Choi Chun pushed old assets such as farmland and real estate to each other, and Choi Ting only guarded the sacrificial field of the ancestral tomb.

古文：家徒壁立，兄弟怡然，手不释卷。
现代文：家中徒有四壁，兄弟却感情融洽，都手不释卷。
English: There are only four walls in the family, but the brothers have a harmonious relationship and are inseparable.

古文：时谷籴踊贵，乡人或有赡者，遗挺，辞让而受，仍亦散之贫困，不为畜积，故乡邑更钦叹焉。
现代文：当时米谷昂贵，乡里百姓如有人给他们送些东西来，崔挺也是推辞再三方才接受，接受之后，仍是分发给贫困人家，自己没留下什么，于是乡间里人更钦佩他们的品质了。
English: At that time, yakitori was expensive. If people in the countryside had something sent to them, Cui Ting would repeatedly decline before accepting it. After accepting it, it was still distributed to poor people's homes, leaving nothing for himself. As a result, people in the countryside admired their quality even more.

古文：举秀才，射策高第，拜中书博士，转中书侍郎。
现代文：被州县推举为秀才，崔挺射策中了好名次，朝廷拜他为中书博士，转任中书侍郎。
English: He was nominated as an outstanding talent by the prefecture, Cui Ting shot a good rank, the court worshiped him as a doctor of Chinese calligraphy, and he was transferred to the position of a waiter of Chinese calligraphy.

古文：以工书，受敕于长安，书文明太后父燕宣王碑，赐爵泰昌子。
现代文：因为他工于书法，受朝廷之命在长安书写文明太后父亲燕宣王碑，朝廷赐他爵号为泰昌子。
English: Because he worked in calligraphy, he was ordered by the imperial court to write the father of the Empress Dowager Yan Xuan Wangbei in Chang'an, and the imperial court gave him the title of Tai Changzi.

古文：转登闻令，迁典属国下大夫。
现代文：转任登闻令，迁任典属国下大夫。
English: He was transferred to the post of deputy chief medical officer of the state.

古文：以参议律令，赐布帛八百匹、谷八百石、马牛各二。
现代文：因他参加讨论国家律令修改，朝廷赐给他布帛八百匹、谷八百担、牛马各二头。
English: Because of his participation in the discussion of the revision of the national laws and regulations, the imperial court gave him eight hundred pieces of cloth, eight hundred carts, and two horses each.

古文：尚书李冲甚重之。
现代文：尚书李冲很器重他。
English: Shangshu Li Chong thinks highly of him.

古文：高祖以挺女为嫔。
现代文：高祖以崔挺的女儿为嫔妃。
English: Gao Zu took Cui Ting's daughter as his bride.

古文：太和十八年，大将军、宋王刘昶南镇彭城，诏假立义将军，为昶府长史，以疾辞免，乃以王肃为长史。
现代文：太和十八年，大将军、宋王刘昶南镇彭城，朝廷下诏让他为假立义将军，任刘昶幕府长史，因为生病他辞官不赴，于是朝廷又让王肃为其长史。
English: In the 18th year of the Taihe era, the great general and Song King Liu Xuan was in the southern town of Pengcheng. The imperial court issued an edict to make him a pseudo-righteous general and appointed Liu Xuan as the chief historian of the shogunate. Because he was ill, he did not go to resign, so the imperial court also let Wang Su serve as the chief historian.

古文：其被寄遇如此。
现代文：朝廷对崔挺的器重也由此可见。
English: The weight of the imperial court on Cui Ting can also be seen from this.

古文：后除昭武将军、光州刺史，威恩并著，风化大行。
现代文：后来，李孝伯又被朝廷提拔为昭武将军、光州刺史，他到州之后，威恩并举，州郡之内，民风大为好转。
English: Later, Li Xiaobo was promoted by the imperial court to Shouwu general and Gwangju governor. After he came to Gwangju, he was also promoted to Vienna, and the people's morale greatly improved in Gwangju County.

古文：十九年，车驾幸兗州，召挺赴行在所。
现代文：太和十九年，皇驾幸临兖州，召请崔挺赴赶行宫。
English: In the 19th year of the Taihe era, the emperor traveled to Linfen and summoned Cui Ting to the palace.

古文：挺既代，即为风雹所毁，于后作，复寻坏，遂莫能立。众以为善化所感。
现代文：等到见了皇帝，礼遇优厚。皇帝又问崔挺治边策略，又问到文章之事。高祖很高兴，对崔挺说： 自与卿分别以来，转眼过了两年，我所写的东西，已结成一集，今天送给你一个副本，你可以不时看看。 
English: When he met the emperor, he was treated with great courtesy. The emperor also asked Choi Ting about the strategy of governing the border, and also asked about the article. Gao Zu was very happy and said to Choi Ting: Since I separated from you, it has been two years. What I have written has been compiled into an episode. Today, I will give you a copy. You can look at it from time to time.

古文：时以犯罪配边者多有逃越，遂立重制：一人犯罪逋亡，合门充役。
现代文：又对侍奉之臣说： 拥有兵权的人如果都是这样，我还有什么可忧虑的呢。 
English: And he said unto his servants, If the men of war be so, wherefore should I be afraid?

古文：挺上书，以为《周书》父子罪不相及。天下善人少，恶人多，以一人犯罪，延及合门。
现代文：李孝伯又还归任光州刺史。当时朝廷送往边地的罪犯有不少逃跑的，于是朝廷立下重条，如有一名罪犯逃走了，罪犯全家充作劳役。崔挺看到这种情况，上书朝廷，认为《周书》中说父子一人犯罪，对方都不受牵连。天下善人少，恶人多，是由一人犯罪，殃及一门所致。
English: At that time, many criminals sent to outlying areas by the imperial court had escaped, so the imperial court set strict rules. If one criminal escaped, the whole family of criminals would be forced to work. Seeing this situation, Cui Ting wrote to the imperial court, arguing that the "Weekly Book" said that if a father and son committed a crime, the other party would not be implicated. There are fewer good people in the world and more evil people, which is caused by one person committing a crime and affecting one family.

古文：司马牛受桓魋之罚，柳下惠婴盗跖之诛，岂不哀哉！
现代文：司马牛受到桓之罚，柳下惠受到盗跖之诛，岂不是很悲哀吗！
English: Isn't it very sad that Sima Niu was punished by Huan, and Liu Shimo Hui was punished by the thief Zhou?

古文：辞甚雅切，高祖纳之。
现代文：崔挺上表的辞意文雅肯切，高祖接受了他的意见。
English: Cui Ting's words were polite and courteous, and Gaozu accepted his opinion.

古文：先是，州内少铁，器用皆求之他境，挺表复铁官，公私有赖。
现代文：在此以前，州中缺少铁原料，所需铁工具都须到别的州去买，崔挺上表请朝廷恢复掌铁官员，以便公家私人都有个凭赖。
English: Prior to this, there was a shortage of iron raw materials in the state, and the necessary iron tools had to be bought from other states. Cui Ting requested the court to reinstate the official in charge of iron, so that both the public and private sectors could rely on it.

古文：诸州中正，本在论人；高祖将辨天下氏族，仍亦访定，乃遥授挺本州大中正。
现代文：各州中正官员，主要负责论评人士，高祖准备辨明国家中各氏族的情况，但仍需查访定夺，于是遥授崔挺任本州大中正。
English: The officials of the Central Committee of the states, mainly responsible for the commentators, Gaozu was ready to identify the situation of the various clans in the country, but still needed to visit and decide, so the distant teacher Cui Ting served as the Central Committee of the state.

古文：掖县有人，年逾九十，板舆造州。
现代文：掖县有个人，年过九十，脚踏板舆来到州治。
English: In Handan County, there is a man in his nineties who has come to govern the county.

古文：自称少曾充使林邑，得一美玉，方尺四寸，甚有光彩，藏之海岛，垂六十岁。
现代文：自称少时曾经充任林邑吏卒，得到一块美玉，四寸见方，很有光彩，自己把它藏在海岛，至今已有将近六十年了。
English: He said that when he was a boy, he had been a Lin County official, and he had obtained a piece of gold, four centimeters square, which was very brilliant. He hid it on the island, and it has been nearly sixty years since.

古文：忻逢明治，今愿奉之。
现代文：今天欣逢清明之治，自己愿意把它奉献官府。
English: Today, I am glad to see the rule of Qingming, and I am willing to dedicate it to the government.

古文：挺曰： 吾虽德谢古人，未能以玉为宝。 
现代文：崔挺说： 我虽然德不比古人，还是不能以此玉为宝。 
English: Cui Ting said: Although I am no better than the ancients, I still can't use this jewel as a treasure.

古文：遣船随取，光润果然。
现代文：崔挺派船随他去取，这块宝石果然光彩照人。
English: Cui Ting sent a ship to fetch it for him, and the jewel was indeed dazzling.

古文：竟不肯受，仍表送京都。
现代文：崔挺不肯接受，上表把玉送到京城。
English: Cui Ting refused to accept it and sent the jade to Beijing.

古文：世宗即位，累表乞还。
现代文：魏世宗即位，崔挺屡屡上表请求回到京城。
English: When Wei Shizong ascended the throne, Cui Ting repeatedly petitioned to return to Beijing.

古文：景明初见代，老幼泣涕追随，缣帛赠送，挺悉不纳。
现代文：景明初年，他的要求得到同意，州中男女，不分老幼全都流着眼泪追随他的车马，纷纷献上绫罗绸缎之类的东西，崔挺全都不肯接受。
English: In the first year of Jingming, his request was approved. All the men and women in the prefecture, regardless of age, followed his carriage with tears and presented things such as silk and satin. Cui Ting refused to accept them all.

古文：散骑常侍赵脩得幸世宗，挺虽同州壤，未尝诣门。
现代文：散骑常侍赵修受到魏世宗的宠幸，崔挺虽然与他同乡，从未登门造访。
English: Zhao Xiu, the strolling equerry, was favored by Wei Shizong. Although Cui Ting was a fellow villager, he never came to visit.

古文：北海王详为司徒、录尚书事，以挺为司马，挺固辞不免。
现代文：北海王元详任司徒、录尚书事，任崔挺为司马，崔挺坚决辞任，但仍推脱不掉。
English: Wang Yuan of the North Sea was appointed as secretary and secretary, Choi Ting was appointed as secretary and secretary, Choi Ting firmly resigned, but still could not be removed.

古文：世人皆叹其屈，而挺处之夷然。
现代文：人们都感叹他这一点没做好，但崔挺却泰然处之。
English: People lamented that he did not do this well, but Cui Ting handled it calmly.

古文：于后详摄选，众人竞称考第，以求迁叙，挺终独无言。
现代文：后来元详主持考选官员的工作，众人竞相称说考第之事，以求元详提拔官职，崔挺始终不说一个字。
English: Later, Yuan detailed presided over the work of the selection of officials, and everyone competed to say the same thing about Cao Di, in order to promote Yuan detailed to an official position, but Cui Ting never said a word.

古文：详曰： 崔光州考级并未加授，宜投一牒，当为申请。
现代文：元详说： 崔光州你的考级并没有上升，你也应该递上一份东西，我理应为你申请。
English: Yuan Diao said: Cui Guangzhou, your examination grade has not risen, you should also submit a thing, I should apply for you.

古文：蘧伯玉耻独为君子，亦何故嘿然？ 
现代文：连蘧伯玉都以独做君子为耻，你为何默不作声？ 
English: Even Zou Bo-yu is ashamed of being a gentleman. Why are you silent?

古文：挺对曰： 阶级是圣朝大例，考课亦国之恆典。
现代文：崔挺回答说： 官阶品级是皇皇圣朝的大事情，考查官吏政绩也是国家恒久法典。
English: Cui Ting replied: The official rank and grade is a big event of the Holy Emperor's reign, and the examination of official and political performance is also a national permanent code.

古文：下官虽惭古贤不伐之美，至于自炫求进，窃以羞之。 
现代文：下官我虽然惭比古代圣贤不夸自己的美德，但对于不顾脸面，自夸求升的人，我认为是件不光荣的事情。 
English: Although I am ashamed to compare myself to the ancient sages who did not boast of their virtues, I think it is a dishonorable thing for those who boast and seek promotion regardless of their face.

古文：详大相称叹。
现代文：元详大为嘉许赞叹。
English: The original details are greatly appreciated and admired.

古文：自为司马，详未曾呼名，常称州号，以示优礼。
现代文：自从崔挺当了他府中司马，元详从未直呼其名，常常称他的州号，以表示优待之礼。
English: Ever since Cui Ting became the Sima of his prefectural government, Yuan Zhe never called him by his first name, but often called him by his prefectural number to show his gratitude for the preferential treatment.

古文：四年卒，时年五十九。
现代文：崔挺景明四年去世，享年五十九岁。
English: Cui Ting Jingming died four years later at the age of fifty-nine.

古文：其年冬，赠辅国将军、幽州刺史，谥曰景。
现代文：这年冬天，朝廷赠他为辅国将军、幽州刺史，谥称景。
English: In the winter of that year, the imperial court presented him with the title of General of the Auxiliary Provinces, Yuzhou Sashih, popularly known as Rongjing.

古文：光州故吏闻凶问，莫不悲感，共铸八尺铜像于城东广因寺，起八关斋，追奉冥福，其遗爱若此。
现代文：光州官吏中是他老部下的，听到噩耗，无人不悲悼怀念他，大家一起铸起一尊八尺高的铜像，立在城东广因寺中，立起八关斋，追奉冥福，崔挺遗爱如此厚重。
English: Among the Gwangju officials who were his old subordinates, when they heard the bad news, no one could help but mourn and remember him. Together, they cast an eight-foot-tall bronze statue, which stood in the city's East Guanyin Temple, and erected eight shrines to pray for the repose of his soul. Cui Ting's legacy is so heavy.

