古文：姚希得，字逢原，一字叔刚，潼川人，嘉定十六年进士。
现代文：姚希得，字逢原，一字叔刚，潼川人。是嘉定十六年的进士。
English: Yao Xide, also known as Fengyuan, is a native of Luchuan. He has been a trainee in Jiading for 16 years.

古文：授小溪主簿，待次三年，朝夕讨论《六经》、诸子百家之言。
现代文：授与小溪县主簿，待次候职三年，每天从早到晚讨论《六经》、诸子百家的学说。
English: Awarded the main book of Xiaoxi County, waiting for the next post for three years, discussing the "Six Classics" and the teachings of hundreds of scholars from morning to night.

古文：调盘石令。
现代文：调任盘石县令。
English: Reassigned to Pan'shek County.

古文：会蜀有兵难，军需调度不扰而集，更调嘉定府司理参军。
现代文：恰逢巴蜀之地有兵灾，军需调度没有遇到什么困难就已调集完毕，更迁调升嘉定府司理参军。
English: At the same time, there was a military disaster in the land of Bashu. The consignee's dispatching was completed without encountering any difficulties, and the secretary of Jiading Prefecture was transferred and promoted to join the army.

古文：改知蒲江县。
现代文：改任蒲江县知县。
English: He was reappointed as the magistrate of Pujiang County.

古文：巨室挟势，邑号难治。
现代文：当地豪绅大户挟势不法，县邑号令不从、难治。
English: It is illegal for the local wealthy gentry to blackmail, and it is difficult to deal with them if they do not obey the orders of the county or town.

古文：希得绥强扶弱，声闻著闻。
现代文：姚希得抑强扶弱，名声闻名遐迩。
English: Yao Xidi suppresses the strong and supports the weak, and his reputation is well-known.

古文：同知枢密院事游似以希得名闻，召审察，迁行在都进奏院，通判太平州，改福州，徒步至候官，吏不知为通判也。
现代文：同知枢密院事游似听到了姚希得的名声，召人核实审查观察，迁升为行在都进奏院，任太平州通判，改任福州，徒步步行到福州治邑候官，当地官吏都不知道他是通判。
English: The same acquaintance of the Privy Council seems to have heard the reputation of Yao Xide, summoned people to verify the review and observation, moved to the line in the capital, was appointed as the general judge of Taiping Prefecture, was appointed to Fuzhou, and walked to Fuzhou, the local officials did not know that he was the general judge.

古文：召为国子监丞，迁太府寺丞，时暂书拟金部文字兼沂靖王府教授。
现代文：姚希得被召任为国子监丞，迁升太府寺臣，当时暂书拟金部文字兼沂靖王府教授。
English: Yao Xide was appointed as the son-in-law of the emperor, promoted to the position of the temple minister of Taifu, and at that time he was also a professor of the Shujing royal palace.

古文：时帝斥逐权奸，收召名德，举朝相庆。
现代文：当时理宗皇上斥逐当权的奸臣，收召有名望的道德之才，整个朝廷都为此庆贺。
English: At that time, Emperor Ritsumo ousted the treacherous vassals in power and recruited renowned moral talents, and the entire court celebrated for this.

古文：希得以为外观形状，似若清明之朝；内察脉息，有类危亡之证。
现代文：姚希得以为，从朝廷的外部观察其形状，好似清明的朝廷；从朝廷的内部观察其运行状况，有如危亡的国家。
English: Yao Xide thought that from the outside of the imperial court, its shape looked like a clear imperial court; from the inside of the imperial court, its operation was like a country in peril.

古文：乃上疏言： 尧、舜、三代之时，无危亡之事，而常喜危亡之言；秦、汉以来，多危亡之事，而常讳危亡之言。
现代文：于是，上奏疏说： 尧、舜、夏、商、周三代的时候，没有危亡的事情，而人们常常喜好危亡的言论；秦、汉以来，有很多危亡的事情，而人们反而经常回避危亡的言论。
English: As a result, Shang Song Zuo said: In the three dynasties of Zhou, Qin, Xia, Shang, there was no danger of death, but people often liked the speech of danger of death; since Qin and Han, there have been many things of danger of death, but people often avoid the speech of danger of death.

古文：夫危亡之事不可有，而危亡之言不可亡。
现代文：然而，危亡的事情不应该有，而危亡的言论倒不应该忘记。
English: However, death threats should not exist, and death threats should not be forgotten.

古文：后世人主乃履危如履坦，讳言如讳病。 又言： 君子非不收召，而意向犹未调一；小人非不斥逐，而根株犹未痛断。
现代文：后代的皇帝是踏在危险的地方却如走在平坦的地方，讳言危亡的事情像讳言病痛一样。 又说： 君子不是不收召，而意向还没有统一；小人不是不斥逐，而根本还没有断绝。
English: The emperors of later generations tread on dangerous ground as if they were walking on level ground, and conceal things that are in danger of dying as if they were a disease. He also said: Nobles are not not called, but their intentions have not yet been unified; villains are not not not expelled, but they have not been cut off at all.

古文：大权若操握，而不能无旁蹊曲迳之疑；大势若更张，而未见有长治久安之道。
现代文：大权假若操握手中，而不能没有旁边小路曲径的疑问；大势假若更改革新，而没有看到长治久安的途径。
English: If the great powers shake hands, they cannot do so without the question of side roads; if the great powers reform, they do not see the way to long-term peace.

古文：廷臣之所讽谏，封囊之所奏陈，非不激切，而陛下固不之罪，亦不之行。
现代文：朝廷大臣们所上的讽议劝谏之言，密封上给皇帝的奏章陈词，并不是不激切，而陛下既不为此加罪，但又未见推行。
English: The tongue-in-cheek exhortations of the ministers of the imperial court, and the written appeal to the emperor on the seal, were not without heat, and His Majesty did not add to the offense, but they were not carried out.

古文：自古甘蹈危亡之机，非独暗主，而明君亦有焉，此臣之所甚惧。
现代文：从古代以来，甘心走危亡的道路，不仅仅是昏君，而且也有明智的君主，这也就是我所感到特别害怕的。
English: What I find particularly frightening is that since ancient times, not only weak monarchs, but also wise ones, have been willing to take the path of peril.

古文：朝廷者，万化之所自出也，实根于人君之一心。
现代文：朝廷，是千变万化的各种事情所出现的地方，实质上是根源于皇帝的心事。
English: The imperial court is a place where ever-changing events take place, which are essentially rooted in the emperor's thoughts.

古文：夫何大明当天，犹有可议者？
现代文：为什么明君有如大白天那么明亮，还有可以议论的呢？
English: Why is it that Ming Jun is as bright as broad daylight, and there is still something to talk about?

古文：内小学之建，人皆知陛下有意建储也。
现代文：宫廷内小学之建，人们都知道陛下是打算建立皇储。
English: It is well known that His Majesty's intention was to establish a crown prince school within the palace.

古文：然岁月逾迈，未睹施行，人心危疑，无所系属。
现代文：然而，岁月年长日久，没有看见施行，人心疑惑，感到危急，没有什么依靠。
English: However, the years have passed, the implementation has not been seen, the people are doubtful, they feel critical, and there is nothing to rely on.

古文：秦、汉而下，嗣不蚤定，事出仓卒，或宫闱出令，或宦寺主谋，或奸臣首议，此皆足以危人之国也。
现代文：自秦、汉以来，太子不早决定的，后来都仓促行事，有的是宫廷的命令，有的是宦官主持设立的，有的是奸臣首先提出来的，这些都足以使国家感到危险。
English: Since the Qin and Han dynasties, princes have not decided early, and later acted hastily. Some were ordered by the court, some were established under the auspices of eunuchs, and some were first proposed by treacherous ministers. These are enough to make the country feel dangerous.

古文：陛下何惮而不蚤定大计？
现代文：陛下有什么担忧还不早定大计呢？
English: Your Majesty, what are you so worried about that you don't have a plan?

古文：邸第之盛，人皆知笃于亲爱也。
现代文：邸第家族的盛况，人们都知道是因为大家特别相亲相爱。
English: The splendour of the first family is known to be due to the fact that they are particularly fond of each other.

古文：然依冯者众，轻视王法，请托之行，捷于影响。
现代文：然而依靠的人很多，他们轻视国家的法律，贿赂、相互包庇的行为，影响很不好。
English: However, there are many people who rely on them, and their contempt for the country's laws, bribery, and acts of mutual concealment have a very bad influence.

古文：杨干，晋侯弟也，乱行于曲梁，而魏绛戮其仆，晋侯始怒而终悔，晋卒以霸。
现代文：杨干，晋侯的弟弟，在曲梁一带胡作非为，而魏绛杀了他的仆人，晋侯起初大怒，但最终后悔，结果，晋国取得了霸主。
English: Yang Gan, the younger brother of Jin Hou, committed crimes in the Qu Liang area, and Wei Xi killed his servant. At first, Jin Hou was furious, but he eventually regretted it. As a result, Jin gained supremacy.

古文：平原君，赵王弟也，不出租税，而赵奢刑其用事者，赵王贤而用之，赵卒以强。
现代文：平原君，赵王的弟弟，不向国家交纳租税，而赵奢对其管事的人按法用刑，赵王以他为贤而重用他，结果，赵国强大起来。
English: Prince Pingyuan, the younger brother of King Zhao, did not pay taxes to the state, and Zhao Shu punished those in charge of him in accordance with the law. King Zhao considered him a wise man and reused him. As a result, the state of Zhao became strong.

古文：皆足以兴人之国也。
现代文：这些都足以使国家兴旺。
English: All this is enough to make the country prosperous.

古文：陛下何为而不少伸国法？
现代文：陛下为什么不稍稍伸张国法？
English: Your Majesty, why not stretch the law of the land a little?

古文：今女冠者流，众所指目；近珰小臣，时窃威福。
现代文：现在，女的为首领，众人指目不满；宦官宠幸小臣们，时常窃取权柄，作威作福。
English: Now, the woman is the leader, the people are dissatisfied; the eunuch favors the ministers, often steals power, and is arrogant.

古文：此皆陛下之心乍明乍晦之所致，岂不谓之危乎？
现代文：这些都是因为陛下一时明白，一时糊涂所造成的，难道还不感到危险吗？
English: All of this was caused by His Majesty's momentary clarity and momentary confusion. Doesn't it feel dangerous?

古文：国有善类，犹人有元气，善类一败一消，元气一病一衰。
现代文：国家有好的人才，好比人有元气，有用的人才一时衰败，一时受损，好比人的元气一时患病，一时衰危。
English: A country with good talent is like a person with vitality. A useful talent may be temporarily weakened or damaged, just as a person's vitality may be temporarily ill or in decline.

古文：善类能几，岂堪数消，沙极则国随之矣。
现代文：好的人才能有多少，哪能经受几次消耗磨损，受损到极点，国家也就随之危险了。
English: How many good people can there be, which can withstand several times of wear and tear, damaged to the extreme, and the country will be in danger.

古文：陛下明于知人，公于用人，固无权奸再用之意。
现代文：陛下清楚地了解别人，公正地使用人才，本来没有再用权奸的打算。
English: His Majesty clearly understands others, uses talent fairly, and originally had no intention of using power.

古文：然道路之人往往窃议，此元祐、绍圣将分之机也。
现代文：然而，不清楚的人们往往暗中议论，这是元、绍圣时期将要分开的预兆。
English: However, people who are not clear often have secret discussions, which is a sign that the Yuan and Shaosheng periods will be separated.

古文：祸根犹伏而未去，不几于安其危乎？ 帝改容曰： 朕决不用史嵩之。 
现代文：祸根还藏着没有除去，难道对此还心安理得而不觉得危险吗？ 理宗皇上脸色都变了，说： 我决不用史嵩之。 
English: The root of the evil still lurks and has not been removed. Can one be at peace with this and not feel in danger? Emperor Ritsun's face changed, and he said, "I will never use Shi Songzhi."

古文：迁知大宗正丞兼权金部郎官。
现代文：姚希得迁知大宗正臣兼权金部郎官。
English: Yao Xidi was transferred to the position of Zhi Daizong's senior vassal and concurrently the vassal of the Ministry of Finance.

古文：李韶以病告，十上疏欲去。
现代文：李韶因病告辞，十次上疏想去职。
English: Li Wei resigned due to illness, and missed going to work for the tenth time.

古文：希得言： 韶有德望，虽以病告，曷若留奉内祠，侍经幄，亦足为朝廷重。 又言： 财用困竭，民生憔悴，移此不急之费，以实军储，以厚民生，敬天莫大于此，岂在崇大宫宇，庄严设像哉！ 又条救钱楮三策，请置惠民局，帝皆以为可行。
现代文：姚希得说： 李韶有善德厚望，虽然因病告辞，何不把他留着侍奉内祠，奉侍经幄，也足以可见朝廷对他的重用。 又说： 朝廷财用很困难，民众痛苦不堪，移用不急需的费用，以充实军事储备，以添补民众的生活，尊敬上天没有什么大于这个，难道这是崇奉、修建宫宇，庄严地设置佛像能够相比的吗？ 又上奏陈述救钱楮的三条策略，请求设置惠民局，皇上都认为可以付诸实施。
English: Yao Xide said, "Li Qianlu has high hopes for virtue and virtue, and although he has resigned due to illness, why not keep him to serve the inner shrine and to serve as the secretary, which is also enough to show the heavy use of the imperial court to him." He also said, "The financial use of the imperial court is very difficult, the people are suffering unbearably, diverting expenses that are not urgently needed to replenish military reserves to supplement the lives of the people, and respecting heaven is nothing greater than this. Is it comparable to worshipping, building palaces, and solemnly setting up Buddha statues? He also reported three strategies for saving money, and requested the establishment of the People

古文：进秘书丞，寻迁著作郎，授江西提举常平。
现代文：姚希得进升秘书丞，不久迁升著作郎，授命江西提举常平官。
English: Yao Xide was promoted to the position of secretary-general, and was soon promoted to the position of writer. He was ordered to be promoted to the position of permanent civil servant in Jiangxi Province.

古文：役法久坏，临川富室有赂吏求免者，希得竟罪之。
现代文：役法早已混乱废弛，临川县有富户贿赂官吏请求免去劳役负担，姚希得竟以此定了他的罪。
English: The labor service law has long been in disarray. A rich family in Linchuan County bribed officials to request exemption from the burden of labor service, but Yao Xi had to use this to convict him.

古文：遂提点刑狱，加直秘阁。
现代文：于是，他被改职提点刑狱，加封直秘阁。
English: As a result, he was transferred to a higher position and given a prison sentence, as well as being placed under house arrest.

古文：未几，加度支员外郎，寻直宝章阁，移治赣州。
现代文：不久，加升度支员外郎。稍后，升直宝章阁，移治赣州。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the rank of sub-commander. Later, he was promoted to the rank of general and moved to Zhangzhou.

古文：盗有伪号 崔太尉 者，据石壁，连结数郡；刘老龙等聚众焚掠，一方绎骚。
现代文：盗贼中有冒充 崔太尉 的人，盘踞石壁，连结几个州郡。刘老龙等聚集众人焚烧、掠夺，一方因此骚动不安。
English: Among the thieves, there was a person who pretended to be Lieutenant Cui. He entrenched a stone wall, connecting several counties. Liu Laolong and others gathered everyone to burn and plunder. As a result, the party was restless.

古文：希得指授方略，不五旬平之。
现代文：姚希得指示授给计谋、策略，不到五十天就平定了他们。
English: Yao Xi had to give instructions to the cunning, strategy, less than fifty days to pacify them.

古文：以直宝谟阁、广西转运判官兼权静江府。
现代文：因此，姚希得升任直宝谟阁、广西转运判官、暂兼任静江府知府。
English: As a result, Yao Xidi was promoted to the post of Zhi Bao Mougou, the judge of Guangxi transshipment, and temporarily served as the governor of Jingjiang.

古文：寻授直徽猷阁、知静江府、主管广西经略安抚司公事兼转运判官。
现代文：不久，授任直徽猷阁、静江府知府，主管广西经略安抚司公事兼转运判官。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the prefectural governor of Zhougu and Jingjiang in Zhihui, and was in charge of the public affairs and transportation adjudicator of the Guangxi Economic Reassurance Division.

古文：母丧，免。
现代文：因服母丧，免职。
English: He was relieved of his duties to attend his mother's funeral.

古文：召为秘书少监兼中书门下省检正诸房公事。
现代文：召为秘书少监兼中书门下省检正诸房公事。
English: He was called to be the secretary of the junior inspector and the provincial inspector of public affairs under the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：入对，言君子小人邪正之辩，且曰： 君子犯颜敢谏，拂陛下之意，退甘家食，此乃为国计，非为身计也。
现代文：入朝应对，议论君子小人、邪恶正义的区别，又说： 君子敢于冒犯皇上劝谏直言，违背陛下的意愿，退职甘心家居而食，这是替国家打算，而不是为自己打算。
English: In response to his accession to the throne, he discussed the difference between a gentleman and a villain, and between evil and justice, and said: A gentleman dares to offend the emperor's advice, goes against his majesty's wishes, and is willing to retire and eat at home. This is for the country, not for himself.

古文：小人自植朋党，挤排正人，甘言佞语，一切顺陛下之意，遂取陛下官爵，此乃为身计，非为国计也。 迁宗正少卿兼国史编修、实录检讨兼权给事中，兼权刑部侍郎、同修国史、实录院同修撰。
现代文：小人好自结朋党，培植势力，排挤正人君子，心甘情愿地说一些假话，一切都顺从陛下的旨意，于是分取陛下的官职爵位，这是替自己打算，而不是为国家打算。 迁升宗正少卿兼国史编修、实录检讨兼权给事中、暂理兼职刑部侍郎、同修国史、实录院同修撰。
English: The villain likes to make friends with the party, cultivates power, pushes out the upright gentleman, willingly tells some lies, everything obeys His Majesty's will, and then takes His Majesty's official title and rank, which is intended for himself, not for the country.

古文：时西方用兵，有为嵩之复出计者，谓非此人不能办。
现代文：当时，西方用兵，有的为史嵩之复出而献计的人，说这事非史嵩之不能办。
English: At that time, the West used soldiers, and some people who made plans for Shi Song's comeback said that this was something that Shi Song could not do.

古文：帝有意再用，知希得必执之，出旨谕意，希得毅然具疏密奏，不报。
现代文：理宗皇上也有意再用他，知道姚希得一定不肯同意，下诏令告示这个意思，姚希得毅然上疏密奏，没有结果。
English: Emperor Rizong also intended to use him again, knowing that Yao Xitou would certainly not agree, and issued a decree to announce this intention. Yao Xitou resolutely went on a sparsely attended recital, with no result.

古文：又缴邓泳予祠之命。
现代文：又收回邓泳给予祠官的任命。
English: He also revoked Deng Yong's appointment as an ancestral hall official.

古文：右正言邵泽、监察御史吴衍、殿中侍御史朱熠相继论罢。
现代文：右正言邵泽、监察御史吴衍、殿中侍御史朱熠相继因上书发表议论而罢免。
English: Shao Ze, the Right Seignior, Wu Yan, the Inspector, and Zhu Xi, the Chamberlain, were successively removed from their posts for their comments on the petition.

古文：久之，以集英殿修撰提点千秋鸿禧观。
现代文：过了一段时间以后，姚希得以集英殿修撰提点千秋鸿禧观。
English: After a period of time, Yao Xi was able to compile the points of the Thousand-Autumn Festival.

古文：未几，依旧职两淮宣抚使司判官，俄加宝谟阁待制，移京西、湖南北、四川。
现代文：不多久，恢复旧职两淮宣抚使司判官，不久，加升宝谟阁待制，移居京西南路、荆湖南路、荆湖北路与四川。
English: Not long after, he resumed his old post as the judge of the two Huaihuai proclamation and envoys. Soon, he was promoted to Baomu Pavilion, and moved to Beijing South West Road, Jinghu South Road, Jinghu North Road and Sichuan.

古文：诏叙复元官。
现代文：诏令恢复原有官职。
English: The imperial edict restored his former official position.

古文：护江陵有功，召为户部侍郎。
现代文：护卫江陵有功，诏命为户部侍郎。
English: Guarding the Gangneung Mausoleum was a great achievement, and he was given the title of Household Attendant.

古文：帝曰： 姚希得才望可为阃帅。 乃进焕章阁待制、知庆元府、沿海制置使，继升敷文阁待制。
现代文：理宗皇上说 ：姚希得的才能可担任京城的将帅。 于是，进升焕章阁待制、任庆元府知府、沿海制置使，接着，升任敷文阁待制。
English: Emperor Rizong said: Yao Xide's talent can serve as the commander of the capital. Therefore, he was promoted to the position of Huan Zhangge, appointed as the governor of Qingyuan, the coastal system, and then promoted to the position of Shikibunge.

古文：诏增沿海舟师，希得为之广募水军，造战舰，蓄粮食，蠲米一万二千石、旧逋一百万。
现代文：诏令增加沿海的船只水兵，姚希得为此广泛募集水军，建造战舰，蓄集粮食，蠲除米一万二千石、旧逋一百万。
English: The emperor issued a decree to increase the number of sailors on ships along the coast. To this end, Yao Xi had to extensively recruit sailors, build warships, accumulate grain, and remove 12,000 koku of rice and 1 million old koku.

古文：去官，库余羡悉以代民输。
现代文：去官以后，官府库藏余羡全部代民众输纳。
English: After he was demoted, the government treasury collected all the money on behalf of the people.

古文：召为工部尚书兼侍读。
现代文：姚希得召为工部尚书兼侍读。
English: Yao Xidi was called to be the secretary and assistant reader of the Ministry of Industry.

古文：创宁江军，自建康、太平至池州列砦置屋二万余间，屯戍七千余人。
现代文：入侍经筵，皇上详细地向他询问庆元之政。以华文阁直学士、沿江制置使任建康府知府、江东安抚使、行宫留守。姚希得巡行于长江之上，慰劳士卒，众人都觉欢乐喜悦。
English: The emperor asked him in detail about the politics of Qingyuan when he became an attendant of the imperial secretary. He was appointed as the governor of Jiankang Prefecture and the pacification envoy of Jiangdong Province with the title of the direct bachelor of Huaweng Pavilion and the riverside system. He was absent from the palace. Yao Xi had to parade on the Yangtze River to comfort the laborers, and everyone felt joy and delight.

古文：帝闻之，一再降诏奖谕。
现代文：溧阳饥荒，打开仓库接济饥民，皇上多次降诏书奖励他。
English: During the famine in Shenyang, he opened a warehouse to help the starving people. The emperor rewarded him with several imperial edicts.

古文：加宝章阁学士，寻加刑部尚书，依旧任兼淮西总领。
现代文：加升宝章阁学士，不久，加升刑部尚书，按照原职兼任淮西总领。
English: He was promoted to Baozhangge bachelor, and soon he was promoted to Shangshu of the Penal Department, and concurrently served as the head of Huaixi Province in accordance with his original position.

古文：景定五年，召为兵部尚书兼侍读。
现代文：景定五年，姚希得召任为兵部尚书兼侍读。
English: In the fifth year of Jingding, Yao Xi was appointed as the secretary and assistant reader of the military department.

古文：乃言用人才、修政事、治兵甲、惜财用四事。
现代文：于是，议论选用人才、修明政务、治理军事、爱惜财用四件事。
English: As a result, four things were discussed: the selection of talent, the clarification of government affairs, the management of the military, and the careful use of funds.

古文：拜端明殿学士、签书枢密院事兼太子宾客。
现代文：拜任为端明殿学士、签书枢密院事兼太子宾客。
English: He was appointed as a member of the Academy of Prince Tomyo, a signatory of the Privy Council, and a guest of the Crown Prince.

古文：公星变，上疏引咎，乞解机务。
现代文：恰逢有彗星变动，上奏疏引咎自责，请求解除机务之要职。
English: Coinciding with the change of the comet, insinuation of negligence, self-blame, and request to relieve the important duties of the machine.

古文：兼权参知政事。
现代文：暂时兼任参知政事。
English: Temporarily concurrently served as a co-governor.

古文：度宗即位，授同知枢密院事兼权参知政事，寻授参知政事。
现代文：度宗即位以后，授予他同知枢密院事兼代理参知政事，不久授予他参知政事职。
English: After Emperor Wuzong ascended the throne, he was awarded the post of Tongzhi Privy Councillor and Acting Councillor of State, and was soon awarded the post of Councillor of State.

古文：以言罢，授资政殿学士、提举洞霄宫。
现代文：因为言论而罢职，授任资政殿学士、提举洞霄宫。
English: He resigned from his post because of his remarks, and was awarded the title of "Bachelor of the House of Councillors" and promoted to the palace of Dongxiao.

古文：起知潭州、湖南安抚使，以疾甚，辞，乃仍旧职奉祠。
现代文：起用为潭州知州、湖南安抚使，因病得厉害，辞职，但仍以旧职奉祠禄官。
English: Appointed as the pacifying envoy of Tanzhou, Chizhou and Hunan, he resigned due to severe illness, but still served as a retired official.

古文：请致仕，诏不许，力请，以资政殿大学士、金紫光禄大夫、依旧潼川郡公致仕。
现代文：请致仕，诏令不许，坚持请求，以资政殿大学士、金紫光禄大夫、依原来潼川郡公致仕。
English: Please send your resignation, it is not allowed by the imperial edict, please persist in your request, and send your resignation with the names of Shiseido University Scholar, Dr. Jin Shiguanglu, and the former governor of Beichuan County.

古文：咸淳五年，卒。
现代文：咸淳五年，死了。
English: Ham Jun, five years old, died.

古文：遗表闻，帝辍朝，赠少保。
现代文：遗表奏上，度宗停止上朝，赠赐少保。
English: After the death of Emperor Wu, Emperor Wuzong ceased to be the emperor and granted him the title of "minor protector."

古文：希得忠亮平实，清俭自将，好引善类，不要虚誉，盖有诵荐于上而其人莫之知者。
现代文：姚希得忠诚，光明正大，平常实在，清廉俭朴，自重，喜好援引有才德的人，不喜欢虚荣美誉，有诵荐于朝廷为官而自己还不知道的。
English: Yao wanted to be loyal, aboveboard, down-to-earth, clean and frugal, self-respecting, liked to invoke talented people, disliked vanity and fame, and had a recommendation for an official in the imperial court that he did not yet know.

古文：广西官署以锦为帟幕，希得曰： 吾起身书生安用此！ 命以缯缬易之。
现代文：广西官署用丝锦作为幕帐，姚希得说： 我出身于一介书生，哪里能用这个！ 指示用缯缬代替锦帛。
English: The Guangxi government office used silk brocade as a curtain, Yao Xide said: I came from a school student, where can I use this! Instructed to use satin instead of brocade.

古文：蜀之亲族姻旧相依者数十家，希得廪之终身，昏丧悉损己力，晚年计口授田，各有差。
现代文：蜀地的亲戚族人依靠他的有几十家，姚希得一生接济他们，婚丧之事全部依靠自己的财力，晚年按人口数授给土地，各有不等。
English: There are dozens of relatives in Shu who depend on him. Yao Xi had to support them all his life. He depended on his own financial resources for his marriage and funeral. In his later years, he was given land according to the number of people.

古文：又数年以寿终。
现代文：所著的书有《续言行录》、《奏稿》、《橘州文集》。
English: He is the author of the books "Prologue," "Playwriting" and "Tangerine State Anthology."

古文：李庭芝，字祥甫。
现代文：李庭芝，字祥甫。
English: Li Tingzhi, alias Xiangfu.

古文：其先汴人，十二世同居，号 义门李氏 ，后徙随之应山县。
现代文：他的祖先是汴京人，十二代祖孙同堂而居，叫作 义门李氏 。后来迁徙到随州应山县。
English: His ancestors were from Beijing, and they lived in the same house for 12 generations. They were called the Yi Men Li clan. Later, they migrated to Suizhou Yingshan County.

古文：金亡，襄、汉被兵，又徙随。
现代文：金国灭亡，襄江、汉水流域地区兵火战乱频仍，又迁徙到随州。
English: After the fall of the Jin dynasty, war raged frequently in the areas of the Yangjiang River and the Han River basin, and people migrated to Suizhou.

古文：然特以武显。
现代文：特别以武艺的名声显赫乡里。
English: Especially in a village famous for its martial arts.

古文：庭芝生时，有芝产屋栋，乡人聚观，以为生男祥也，遂以名之。
现代文：李庭芝出生的时候，在他家的屋梁上生长有灵芝，同乡里人聚集观看，以为是生男孩的吉祥之兆，于是以它作为名字。
English: When Li Tingzhi was born, there was reishi growing on the roof beam of his house. His fellow villagers gathered to watch, thinking it was an auspicious sign for the birth of a boy, so they used it as a name.

古文：少颖异，日能诵数千言，而智识恒出长老之上。
现代文：他少年时特别聪颖，每天能诵读数千个字，而其智慧知识常常出于长者、老者之上。
English: When he was young, he was extremely intelligent, able to recite thousands of words every day, and his wisdom and knowledge were often superior to the elders and the elderly.

古文：王旻守随，庭芝年十八，告其诸父曰： 王公贪而不恤下，下多怨之，随必乱，请徙家德安以避。 诸父勉强从之，未浃旬，旻果为部曲挟之以叛，随民死者甚众。
现代文：王任随州知州，李庭芝当时十八岁，告诉他的各位叔、伯与父亲说： 王贪残而不抚恤下属，下属多有怨言，随州一定会出祸乱，请把家迁徙到德安避祸。 叔、伯与父亲勉强听他的话举家迁徙，迁后不到十天，王果然被他的部曲挟持着发动叛乱，随州民众死的很多。
English: Li Tingzhi, who was 18 years old at the time, told his uncles, brothers-in-law and father: Wang is greedy and cruel and does not support his subordinates. Many of his subordinates complain. Disaster is bound to happen in Suizhou. Please move your family to De'an to avoid disaster. His uncles, brothers-in-law and father reluctantly listened to his words and moved their families. Less than ten days after the move, Wang was indeed held hostage by his brother-in-law and launched a rebellion. Many Suizhou people died.

古文：嘉熙末，江防甚急，庭芝得乡举不行，以策干荆帅孟珙请自效。
现代文：嘉熙末年，长江的防务很是紧急，李庭芝不能得到乡举，以策论上书荆州的将帅孟珙，请求为国效力。
English: In the last years of the Jiaxi Dynasty, the defense of the Yangtze River was very urgent. Li Tingzhi could not get the township promotion, so he asked Meng Wei, the general of Jingzhou, to serve the country.

古文：珙善相人，且夜梦车骑称李尚书谒己，明日庭芝至。
现代文：孟珙善于为人相面，而且晚上又梦见车骑称李尚书来拜谒自己，第二天李庭芝到了。
English: Meng Yao was good at making face-to-face contact with people, and in the evening he dreamt that the chariot rider called Li Shangshu came to pay homage to him, and the next day Li Tingzhi arrived.

古文：珙见其魁伟，顾诸子曰： 吾相人多，无如李生者，其名位当过我。 时四川有警，即以庭芝权施之建始县。
现代文：孟珙见他身材魁伟，回头对他的儿子们说： 我相过的人很多，没有像李庭芝这样的，他的名位将来一定超过我。 当时四川有军务警报，即以李庭芝暂时担任施州的建始县知县。
English: Meng Xuan saw his great stature and turned to his sons and said: I have met many people, but none like Li Tingzhi, and his position will certainly surpass mine in the future. At that time, there was a military alert in Sichuan, that is, Li Tingzhi temporarily served as the prefect of Jianshi County in Shizhou.

古文：庭芝至，训农治兵，选壮士杂官军教之。
现代文：李庭芝到后，训练农民，治理军务，选壮士参杂在官军中教其武艺。
English: After Li Tingzhi arrived, he trained farmers, administered military affairs, and selected able-bodied men to teach their martial arts in the government army.

古文：期年，民皆知战守，善驰逐，无事则植戈而耕，兵至则悉出而战。
现代文：过了一年多，民众都知道如何战、如何守，善于骑马打仗，无事则带着武器耕作，兵寇到了则全部出动与其作战。
English: After more than a year, the people knew how to fight and how to defend themselves, were good at riding horses to fight, cultivated with weapons when nothing happened, and when the soldiers and robbers arrived, they all went out to fight them.

古文：夔帅下其法于所部行之。
现代文：夔州的将帅在他的辖区也推行这个办法。
English: Zhangzhou's commander-in-chief has also implemented this measure in his jurisdiction.

古文：淳祐初始去，举进士，中第。
现代文：淳初年才离开建始县，参加科举考试，录取为进士。
English: It was only in his first year that Jun left Jianshi County to take the entrance examination and was admitted as a scholar.

古文：辟珙幕中，主管机宜文字。
现代文：担任孟珙的幕僚，主管机密、文字事宜。
English: Served as Meng Xuan's staff, in charge of confidential and written matters.

古文：珙卒，遗表举贾似道自代，而荐庭芝于似道，庭芝感珙知己，扶其柩葬之兴国，即弃官归，为珙行三年丧。
现代文：孟珙死后，上遗表举荐贾似道自代其职，而又向贾似道推荐李庭芝。李庭芝感恩孟珙为知己，于是扶送他的棺柩葬于兴国县，随即弃官而归故里，为孟珙服丧三年。
English: After Meng Xuan's death, Jia Xiangdao recommended Li Tingzhi on behalf of himself, and Li Tingzhi recommended Li Tingzhi to Jia Xiangdao. Li Tingzhi was grateful to Meng Xuan as a confidant, so he accompanied Meng Xuan's coffin to be buried in Xingguo County. Li Tingzhi then resigned from his post and returned to his hometown, and mourned for Meng Xuan for three years.

古文：似道镇京湖，起为制置司参议，移镇两淮，与似道议栅清河五河口，增淮南烽百二十。
现代文：贾似道镇守京湖，李庭芝起初担任制置司参议，后来移居镇守两淮，与贾似道议设栅清河五河口，增设淮南烽火台一百二十处。
English: Jiaxiang Road town guards the Beijing Lake, Li Tingzhi initially served as a member of the construction department, and later moved to the town guard of the two Huai, and discussed with Jiaxiang Road to set up the five estuaries of the Jiaqing River and add one hundred and twenty Huainan campfires.

古文：继知濠州，复城荆山以备淮南。
现代文：接着，担任濠州知州，又在荆山设城以备淮南。
English: Next, it served as Chizhou of Bozhou, and set up a city in Jingshan to prepare for Huainan.

古文：皆切中机会。
现代文：都切中机会。
English: It's all about seizing opportunities.

古文：开庆元年，似道宣抚京湖，留庭芝权扬州。
现代文：开庆元年，贾似道担任京湖宣抚使，留李庭芝暂时任扬州知州。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the year, Jia Lian Dao served as the Beijing-Hubei envoy, and Li Tingzhi temporarily served as Yangzhou-Chizhou envoy.

古文：寻以大兵在蜀，奏知峡州，以防蜀江口。
现代文：不久，因为大兵在巴蜀一带，奏请担任峡州知州，以防守巴蜀长江出口。
English: Soon, because the soldiers were in the vicinity of Bashu, they were asked to serve as Chizhou of the Gorges to defend the exit of Bashu from the Yangtze River.

古文：朝廷以赵与为淮南制置，李应庚为参议官。
现代文：朝廷任命赵与担任淮南制置使，李应庚担任参议官。
English: The imperial court appointed Zhao He as the envoy of Huainan Province and Li Ying Geng as the senator.

古文：应庚发两路兵城南城，大暑中暍死者数万。
现代文：李应庚指挥两路兵驻扎南城，大暑中渴死的有几万人。
English: Li Yinggang commanded the two armies stationed in Nancheng, tens of thousands of people died of thirst in the heat.

古文：李璮窥其无谋，夺涟水三城，渡淮夺南城。
现代文：李观察他没有谋略，攻夺涟水三城，渡过淮河攻夺南城。
English: Li observed that he had no strategy, captured the three cities of Surabaya, crossed the Huai River and captured Nancheng.

古文：鄂兵解，庭芝丁母忧去。
现代文：鄂州兵解围，李庭芝服母丧离职。
English: The siege of Ezhou was lifted, and Li Tingzhi left his post in mourning for his mother.

古文：朝议择守扬者，帝曰： 无如李庭芝。 乃夺情主管两淮制置司事。
现代文：朝廷议论选择驻守扬州的将帅，理宗皇帝说： 没有哪个比得上李庭芝。 于是夺情主管两淮制置司事。
English: When the imperial court was discussing the selection of a general to be stationed in Yangzhou, Emperor Rizong said, "There is no one like Li Tingzhi," and the two emperors decided to appoint a steward.

古文：庭芝再破璮兵，杀璮将厉元帅，夷南城而归。
现代文：李庭芝又打败李的军队，杀死李的将帅厉元帅，平定南城而回。
English: Li Tingzhi defeated Li's army again, killed Li's general, Marshal Li, and returned to pacify Nancheng.

古文：明年，复败璮于乔村，破东海、石圃等城。
现代文：第二年，又在乔村打败李，攻下东海、石圃等城邑。
English: The next year, he defeated Li in Qiaoshan and captured Donghai, Shifu and other towns.

古文：又明年，璮降，徙三城民于通、泰之间。
现代文：又第二年，李投降，迁徙三城的民众到通州、泰州之间。
English: The following year, Li surrendered and the people of the three cities migrated to Tongzhou and Taizhou.

古文：又破蕲县，杀守将。
现代文：又攻破蕲县，杀死守将。
English: He also broke through Jixian County and killed the commander.

古文：庭芝初至扬时，扬新遭火，庐舍尽毁。
现代文：李庭芝初到扬州的时候，扬州刚刚遭受水灾，房屋全被烧毁。
English: When Li Tingzhi first arrived in Yangzhou, Yangzhou had just suffered a flood, and all the houses were burned down.

古文：州赖盐为利，而亭户多亡去，公私萧然。
现代文：扬州依靠盐业获得利益，而制盐亭户大多逃走，公私盐业都很萧条。
English: Yangzhou relies on the salt industry to make profits, but most of the salt-making pavilions have fled, and both the public and private salt industries are depressed.

古文：庭芝悉贷民负逋，假钱使为屋，屋成又免其假钱，凡一岁，官民居皆具。
现代文：李庭芝全部贷给民众所负的欠款，借钱给他们修房子，房子做成后又免除了他们所借的钱，共一年，官府民居都修好了。
English: Li Tingzhi loaned all the arrears to the people, lent them money to repair the house, and after the house was completed, he waived the money they borrowed. For a total of one year, the government residences were all repaired.

古文：凿河四十里入金沙余庆场，以省车运。
现代文：开凿运河四十里到金沙、余庆盐场，以节省车费运输。
English: Forty miles of canals were dug to the Jinsha and Yuqing salt fields to save transportation costs.

古文：兼浚他运河，放亭户负盐二百余万。
现代文：同时还疏浚其他运河，放免亭户负盐二百多万。
English: At the same time, other canals were also dredged, releasing more than two million pavilions from negative salt.

古文：亭民无车运之劳，又得免所负，逃者皆来归，盐利大兴。
现代文：产盐户民众没有车运的劳苦，又能够免除所负的盐债，逃出去的人都跑回来了，盐业之利于是迅速兴盛。
English: The people of salt-producing households do not have the drudgery of transportation by car, and they can also be exempted from the salt debt they bear. People who fled have come back, and the profits of the salt industry have flourished rapidly.

古文：始，平山堂瞰扬城，大元兵至，则构望楼其上，张车弩以射城中。
现代文：起初，平山堂鸟瞰扬州城，大元兵至时，就构筑望楼在其上，摆开车弩以射城中。
English: At the beginning, Hirayama-do Hall had a bird's-eye view of Yangzhou City. When the Taiyuan soldiers arrived, they built a watchtower on top of it and set up a car ramp to shoot into the city.

古文：庭芝乃筑大城包之，城中募汴南流民二万人以实之，有诏命为武锐军。
现代文：李庭芝于是修筑高大的城墙围起来，募集汴京以南的流民二万多人充实城中的人口，有诏令命为武锐军。
English: Li Tingzhi then built a high wall to enclose the city, recruited more than twenty thousand exiles south of Beijing to replenish the population in the city, and was ordered by imperial edict to be a warrior army.

古文：又大修学，为诗书、俎豆，与士行习射礼。
现代文：又大修学校，教以《诗》、《书》，做俎豆，与士大夫们修行习射之礼。
English: He also overhauled the school, teaching "Poetry" and "Books" as well as making peas, and practising shooting with the scholars and doctors.

古文：郡中有水旱，即命发廪，不足则以私财振之。
现代文：郡中发生水旱灾荒，即命令打开官库，库藏不足就以自己的私人财产来赈济灾民。
English: When there was a drought in the county, he ordered the government treasury to be opened. When the treasury was insufficient, he used his own private property to help the victims.

古文：扬民德之如父母。
现代文：扬州的民众感恩戴德，敬之如父母。
English: The people of Yangzhou are grateful to him and respect him like a parent.

古文：刘槃自淮南入朝，帝问淮事，槃对曰： 李庭芝老成谨重，军民安之。
现代文：刘从淮南进京入朝，理宗皇帝询问他淮南的事情，刘回答说： 李庭芝老成谨慎，军民相安。
English: Liu entered Beijing from Huainan into the imperial court, Emperor Lizong asked him about Huainan, Liu replied: Li Tingzhi is always cautious, the military and the people are safe.

古文：今边尘不惊，百度具举，皆陛下委任得人之效也。 
现代文：现在边防不感到惊惧，百事都已做好准备，都是陛下委任的人选所取得的成效。 
English: Now the border guards are not alarmed, everything is ready, and all the results have been achieved by the people appointed by His Majesty.

古文：咸淳五年，北兵围襄阳急，夏贵入援，大败虎尾州；范文虎总诸兵再入，又败，文虎以轻舠遁，兵乱，士卒溺汉水死者甚众。
现代文：咸淳五年，北方元兵围攻襄阳，战事紧急，夏贵入援襄阳，大败于虎尾州；范文虎调集各路兵丁再次援襄阳，又被打败，范文虎以轻舟小船得以逃走，兵卒大乱，士卒掉入汉水被溺死者很多。
English: In the fifth year of Xianjun, the Northern Yuan soldiers besieged Xiangyang, the war was urgent, Xia Gui came to the aid of Xiangyang, and was defeated by Hwaozhou; Fan Wenhu mobilized soldiers from all directions to aid Xiangyang again, and was defeated again, Fan Wenhu was able to escape with a small boat, the soldiers were in chaos, and many soldiers fell into the Han water and were drowned.

古文：冬，命庭芝以京湖制置大使督师援襄阳。
现代文：冬天，朝廷命李庭芝以京湖制置大使督师入援襄阳。
English: In winter, the imperial court ordered Li Tingzhi to come to the aid of Xiangyang by setting up an ambassadorial inspector in Jinghu.

古文：文虎闻庭芝至，贻书似道曰： 吾将兵数万入襄阳，一战可平，但无使听命于京阃，事成则功归恩相矣。 似道喜，即除文虎福州观察使，其兵从中制之。
现代文：范文虎听说李庭芝到襄阳，送信给贾似道： 我率兵几万人进攻襄阳，一战即可平敌取胜，只是不要让我听命于京湖制置使，事成则功劳归功于恩相。 贾似道为此高兴，即任命范文虎担任福州观察使，其军队也由他统帅。
English: Fan Wenhu heard that Li Tingzhi had arrived in Xiangyang and sent a message to Jia Liandao: I will lead tens of thousands of soldiers to attack Xiangyang, and I can defeat the enemy in one battle, but don't let me obey the order to set up an envoy in Beijing and Hubei, and if I succeed, I will give credit to Enxiang. Jia Liandao was happy about this, and appointed Fan Wenhu as the Fuzhou observation envoy, and his army was also commanded by him.

古文：文虎日携美妾，走马击球军中为乐。
现代文：范文虎每天带着漂亮的小妾，走马击在军中为乐。
English: Fan Wenhu takes a beautiful concubine with him every day and enjoys galloping in the army.

古文：庭芝屡欲进兵，曰： 吾取旨未至也。 明年六月，汉水溢，文虎不得已始一出师，未至鹿门，中道遁去。
现代文：李庭芝多次想进兵，范文虎回答说 ：我派人取旨令还没回。 第二年六月，汉水泛滥，范文虎不得已才令出兵，军队还没到鹿门，中途就逃走了。
English: Li Tingzhi repeatedly wanted to go into the army, Fan Wenhu replied: I have sent someone to get the order and have not yet returned. In June of the following year, when the Han River was flooded, Fan Wenhu had no choice but to order the dispatch of troops. The army had not yet reached Lu Men, but fled halfway.

古文：庭芝数自劾请代，不允，竟失襄阳。
现代文：李庭芝多次亲自弹劾他请代替其职，没有批准，结果，丧失了襄阳。
English: Li Tingzhi personally impeached him many times to ask him to replace his post, but he did not approve, and as a result, he lost Xiangyang.

古文：陈宜中请诛文虎，似道芘之，止降一官知安庆府，而贬庭芝及部将苏刘义、范友信广南。
现代文：陈宜中请诛杀范文虎，贾似道袒护他，只降了一级担任安庆府知府，而贬谪李庭芝及部将苏刘义、范友信去广南。
English: Chen Yizhong ordered Fan Wenhu to be killed, while Jia Lian Dao protected him. He was only demoted one level to serve as the governor of Anqing Prefecture, while Li Tingzhi and his subordinates, Su Liu Yi and Fan Youxin, were demoted to Guangnan.

古文：庭芝罢居京口。
现代文：李庭芝罢官居于京口。
English: Li Tingzhi retired and moved to Beijing.

古文：未几，大元兵围扬州，制置印应雷暴死，即起庭芝制置两淮。
现代文：不多久，大元兵围攻扬州，制置使印应雷暴死，即起用李庭芝担任两淮制置使。
English: Not long after, the Taiyuan soldiers besieged Yangzhou, and Li Tingzhi was appointed as the commander of the two Huai armies.

古文：庭芝请分淮西夏贵，而己得专力淮东，从之。
现代文：李庭芝请分淮南西路让夏贵率兵防守，而自己能专心防守淮南东路，获得批准。
English: Li Tingzhi requested that Huainan West Road be assigned to Xia Gui to lead the defense, while he could concentrate on defending Huainan East Road, and was approved.

古文：十年，筑清河口，诏以为清河军。
现代文：咸淳十年，筑清河口，诏令为清河军。
English: In the tenth year of Xianjun, he built the Qing estuary, and the imperial edict was issued for the Qing River Army.

古文：十二月，大元兵破鄂，诏天下勤王，庭芝首遣兵为诸道倡。
现代文：十二月，大元的军队攻下鄂州，度宗诏令天下的军队勤王，李庭芝首先派遣军队倡议从命。
English: In December, the Taiyuan army conquered Ezhou, and Emperor Du Zong ordered the armies of the world to be loyal to the king. Li Tingzhi was the first to send troops to follow the order.

古文：德祐元年春，似道兵溃芜湖，沿江诸郡或降或遁，无一人能守者。
现代文：德元年春天，贾似道兵败芜湖，沿长江各州的将帅或降或逃，没有一人能坚守的。
English: In the spring of the first year of the Republic of China, the soldiers of Jiaxing Road defeated Wuhu, and the generals of the states along the Yangtze River either surrendered or fled. No one could hold out.

古文：庭芝率所部郡县城守。
现代文：李庭芝率所部军队坚守郡县城邑。
English: Li Tingzhi led the army of the headquarters to stick to the county towns.

古文：有李虎者持招降榜入扬州，庭芝诛虎，焚其榜。
现代文：李虎拿招降榜到扬州招降，李庭芝杀了李虎，焚毁了招降榜。
English: Li Hu took the promotion and relegation list to Yangzhou for promotion and relegation. Li Tingzhi killed Li Hu and burned the promotion and relegation list.

古文：总制张俊出战，持孟之缙书来招降，庭芝焚书，枭俊五人于市。
现代文：总制张俊出战，拿着孟之缙的书来招降，李庭芝焚烧了招降书，砍下张俊等五人的脑袋示众于市。
English: General Zhang Jun went to fight, holding Meng Zhulong's book to invite surrender, Li Tingzhi burned the invitation letter, and cut off the heads of Zhang Jun and five others to show to the public in the city.

古文：而日调苗再成战其南，许文德战其北，姜才、施忠战其中。
现代文：而后调苗再成在南面作战，许文德在北面作战，姜才、施忠在城中接应防守。
English: Later, Diao Miao and Rencheng fought on the south side, Xu Mende fought on the north side, and Jiang Cai and Shizhong defended the city.

古文：时出金帛牛酒燕犒将士，人人为之死斗。
现代文：当时，拿出黄金、丝帛、牛肉美酒宴请犒劳将士，人人为之死战。
English: At that time, they took out gold, silk cocoons, and beef wine banquets to invite hard-working generals, and everyone fought to the death.

古文：朝廷亦以督府金劳之，加庭芝参知政事。
现代文：朝廷也以督府的金银犒劳士卒，令加升李庭芝参知政事。
English: The imperial court also ordered the promotion of Li Tingzhi to the post of councillor with the gold and silver of the governor's office.

古文：七月，以知枢密院事征入朝，徙夏贵知扬州，贵不至，事遂已。
现代文：七月，以知枢密院事征辟入朝，调夏贵任扬州知州，夏贵没有到扬州，事情于是作罢。
English: In July, the Privy Council of Chizhi was summoned to the court, and Xia Gui was transferred to Yangzhou Chizhou. However, Xia Gui did not come to Yangzhou, so the matter was dropped.

古文：十月，大元丞相伯颜入临安，留元帅阿术军镇江以遏淮兵。
现代文：十月，大元丞相伯颜进入临安，留元帅阿术驻扎镇江以遏阻淮南的军队。
English: In October, the Grand Yuan Minister Bo Yan entered Lin'an, and the Remaining Marshal Ah Shu stationed in Zhenjiang to contain Huainan's army.

古文：阿术攻扬久不拔，乃筑长围困之。
现代文：阿术进攻扬州长久攻不下，于是筑工事长期围困扬州。
English: Yangzhou could not be attacked for a long time, so the construction work besieged Yangzhou for a long time.

古文：冬，城中食尽，死者满道。
现代文：冬天，城中食物吃尽，死的人满街都是。
English: In winter, when the food in the city runs out, the streets are full of dead people.

古文：明年二月，饥益甚，赴濠水死者日数百，道有死者，众争割啖之立尽。
现代文：第二年二月，饥荒更加厉害，赴濠水自杀的人每天几百，路上有死的人，众人都争相割他的肉吃，一会儿就完了。
English: In February of the following year, the famine was even worse. Hundreds of people committed suicide in Surabaya every day. People died on the way. Everyone rushed to cut up his flesh and eat it. It was all over in an instant.

古文：宋亡，谢太后及瀛国公为诏谕之降，庭芝登城曰： 奉诏守城，未闻有诏谕降也。 已而两宫入朝，至瓜州，复诏庭芝曰： 比诏卿纳款，日久未报，岂未悉吾意，尚欲固圉邪？
现代文：宋朝灭亡，谢太后与瀛国公为诏谕劝降，李庭芝登上城墙说： 我奉诏令守城，没有听说有诏谕投降的。 此后，两宫入朝，到瓜洲，又诏令李庭芝说： 近来，诏令你纳钱款，长久没有听到你的回报，难道你不知道我的意思，还是想坚持自为牢圉呢？
English: After the Song Dynasty's demise, Empress Dowager Xie and the Duke of Song issued an edict to persuade Li Tingzhi to surrender. Li Tingzhi climbed onto the city wall and said, "I have been ordered to defend the city according to the edict, but I have not heard of anyone who has surrendered according to the edict." After that, the two palaces entered the imperial court and went to Guazhou. Li Tingzhi also issued an edict saying, "Recently, the edict ordered you to collect money, but I haven't heard back from you for a long time. Don't you know what I mean, or do you want

古文：今吾与嗣君既已臣伏，卿尚为谁守之？ 庭芝不答，命发弩射使者，毙一人，余皆退去。
现代文：现在我与太子都已经臣服于元，你还为谁守扬州呢？ 李庭芝不回答他的话，令发箭弩射杀来使，杀毙一人，其余的人都退走了。
English: Now that I and the prince have surrendered to Yuan, for whom do you still guard Yangzhou? Li Tingzhi did not answer his words, and ordered the archer to shoot, killing one person, and the rest of the people retreated.

古文：姜才出兵夺两宫，不克，复闭城守。
现代文：姜才出兵想夺回两宫，未取胜，又关上城门驻守。
English: Jiang Cai sent troops to recapture the two palaces, but failed to win, and closed the city gates.

古文：三月，夏贵以淮西降，阿术驱降兵至城下以示之，旌旗蔽野，幕客有以言觇庭芝者，庭芝曰： 吾惟一死而已。 阿术使者持诏来招降，庭芝开壁纳使者，斩之，焚诏陴上。
现代文：三月，夏贵以淮南西路地降，阿术驱降兵到扬州城下让他们看，旌旗遍野，幕客中有用语言来试探李庭芝，李庭芝说： 我只有一死而已。 阿术的使者拿着诏令来招降，李庭芝打开门让他进去后，就杀了他，把诏令放在城墙上烧了。
English: In March, Xia Gui landed on the west road of Huainan, and Ah Jiu drove the troops to the foot of Yangzhou Castle to let them see the flag-raising ceremony. The flags were everywhere, and some of the guests used language to test Li Tingzhi. Li Tingzhi said, "I only have one death." Ah Jiu's emissary came to invite him to surrender with a decree. After Li Tingzhi opened the door to let him in, he killed him and burned the decree on the city wall.

古文：已而知淮安州许文德、知盱眙军张思聪、知泗州刘兴祖皆以粮尽降。
现代文：而后，得知淮安州许文德、知盱眙军张思聪、知泗州刘兴祖都因为粮食耗尽而降。
English: Later, it was learned that Huai'an Xu Wende, Zhisheng Jun Zhang Sicong, and Zhisheng Liu Xingzu had all fallen due to grain depletion.

古文：庭芝犹括民间粟以给兵，粟尽，令官人出粟，粟又尽，令将校出粟，杂牛皮、曲糵以给之。兵有烹子而食者，犹日出苦战。
现代文：李庭芝还搜括民间的粮粟以供应军队，粟吃完后，又令官人出粟，粟又被吃尽，又令将校出粟，杂以牛皮、麦一起吃，士兵有煮自己的儿子的肉来吃的，还每天出来苦战。
English: Li Tingzhi also collected the poppy seeds from the people to supply the army. After the poppy seeds were eaten, he made the officials grow the poppy seeds. The poppy seeds were then eaten. He also made the officers grow the poppy seeds and eat them mixed with cowhide and wheat. The soldiers even cooked the flesh of their own sons to eat. They also went out to fight hard every day.

古文：七月，阿术请赦庭芝焚诏之罪，使之降，有诏从之。
现代文：七月，阿术请求赦免李庭芝焚烧诏令的罪行，要求他投降，有诏令一起送来。
English: In July, Ahshu requested that Li Tingzhi be pardoned for the crime of burning the imperial edict, and asked him to surrender. The imperial edict was also sent to him.

古文：庭芝亦不纳。
现代文：李庭芝也不接受。
English: Li Tingzhi did not accept it either.

古文：是月，益王遣使以少保、左丞相召庭芝，庭芝以朱焕守扬，与姜才将兵七千人东入海，至泰州，阿术将兵追围之。
现代文：这个月，益王派遣使者以少保、左丞相的职务召回李庭芝，李庭芝令朱焕驻守扬州，与姜才率兵七千人东进至海，到泰州，阿术率兵围剿他。
English: This month, Yi Wang sent an envoy to recall Li Tingzhi to Yangzhou with the duties of minor protector and minister of the left. Li Tingzhi ordered Zhu Huan to stay in Yangzhou, and marched east to the sea with Jiang Cai and seven thousand soldiers to Taizhou, where Ah Shu and his soldiers surrounded him.

古文：朱焕既以城降，驱庭芝将士妻子至泰州城下，陴将孙贵、胡惟孝等开门降。
现代文：朱焕以城降元，驱逐李庭芝的将士、妻子儿女到泰州城下，副将孙贵、胡惟孝等开门投降。
English: Zhu Huan demoted the capital to the city and expelled Li Tingzhi's soldiers, wives and children to the city of Taizhou. Vice-commanders Sun Gui and Hu Wei Xiao opened the door and surrendered.

古文：庭芝闻变，赴莲池，水浅不得死。
现代文：李庭芝听说有变乱，跳赴莲池，因水浅而没有淹死。
English: Li Tingzhi heard that there was a disturbance, jumped into Lianchi Pond, but did not drown because of the shallow water.

古文：被执至扬州，朱焕请曰： 扬自用兵以来，积骸满野，皆庭芝与才所为，不杀之何俟？ 于是斩之。
现代文：被抓住送到扬州，朱焕请示说： 扬州自从用兵以来，尸骨满地成堆，这都是李庭芝与姜才所造成的，不杀他们还等什么呢？ 
English: Caught and sent to Yangzhou, Zhu Huan pleaded: Yangzhou has been full of piles of corpses since the use of soldiers. This was all caused by Li Tingzhi and Jiang Cai. If you don't kill them, what are you waiting for?

古文：死之日，扬之民皆泣下。
现代文：于是杀了他。死的那天，扬州的民众都伤心地流下了眼泪。
English: So they killed him. On the day of his death, the people of Yangzhou shed tears of sorrow.

古文：有宋应龙者为泰州咨议官，泰守孙良臣之弟舜臣自军中来说降，良臣召应龙与计，应龙极陈国家恩泽，君臣大义，请杀舜臣以戒持二心者，良臣不得已杀之。
现代文：有宋应龙这么一个人为泰州的咨议官，泰州知州孙良臣的弟弟孙舜臣从军中来说降，孙良臣召宋应龙来商量定计，宋应龙特地陈述国家的恩典，君臣之间的大义，请求杀掉孙舜臣以告诫三心二意的人，孙良臣不得已杀了他的弟弟孙舜臣。
English: Song Yinglong was the councilor of Taizhou. Sun Yat-sen, the younger brother of Sun Liang-chen of Taizhou Zhizhou, resigned from the army. Sun Liang-chen called Song Ying-long to discuss the calculation. Song Ying-long specifically stated the grace of the country, the great justice between monarchs and ministers, and asked to kill Sun Yat-sen to admonish the half-hearted. Sun Liang-chen had no choice but to kill his younger brother, Sun Yat-sen.

古文：及泰州降，应龙夫妇自经死。
现代文：到泰州城降，宋应龙夫妇自己上吊而死。
English: In Taizhou, Song Yinglong and his wife hanged themselves.

古文：提刑司谘议褚一正置司高邮，督战被创，没水死。
现代文：提刑司咨议褚一正，置司署于高邮，督战被创，跳水淹死。
English: Yu Yizheng, the director of the Criminal Investigation Department, was located in Gaoyou. He was killed in a duel and drowned in a diving accident.

古文：知兴化县胡拱辰，城破亦死。
现代文：兴化县知县胡拱辰，县城被攻破时也以死报宋。
English: Xinghua County's Zhixian Hu Gongchen, when the county seat was breached, also reported to Song with his death.

