古文：八年春，王正月，公如晋。
现代文：八年春季，周历正月，襄公去到晋国。
English: In the spring of the eighth year, the first month of the lunar calendar, Xiang Gong went to Jin Province.

古文：夏，葬郑僖公。
现代文：夏季，安葬僖公。
English: In the summer, the funeral of Shoko.

古文：郑人侵蔡，获蔡公子燮。
现代文：郑国攻打蔡国，抓住了蔡国公子燮。
English: Zheng Guo attacked Cai Guo and captured Cai Guo's son-in-law.

古文：季孙宿会晋侯、郑伯、齐人、宋人、卫人、邾人于邢丘。
现代文：季孙宿与晋侯、郑伯、齐国人、宋国人、卫国人、邾国人在邢丘会见。
English: Ji Sunjuku met with Jin, Zheng Bo, Qi, Song, Wei, and Wei people in Mengqiu.

古文：公至自晋。
现代文：襄公从晋国回到鲁国。
English: Prince Xiang returned from Jin to Lu.

古文：莒人伐我东鄙。
现代文：莒国人攻打鲁国东面边境。
English: The Qiang people attacked the eastern border of Lu.

古文：秋九月，大雩。
现代文：秋季九月，举行盛大的雩祭求雨。
English: In autumn and September, a large rain-worshipping ceremony was held.

古文：冬，楚公子贞帅师伐郑。
现代文：冬季，楚国公子贞率领军队攻打郑国。
English: In winter, Prince Zhen of Chu led an army to attack Zheng.

古文：晋侯使士匄来聘。
现代文：晋侯派遣士匄来鲁国聘问。
English: The Jin princes dispatched their envoys to Lu to ask questions.

古文：八年春，公如晋朝，且听朝聘之数。
现代文：八年春季，鲁襄公去到晋国朝见，同时听取晋国要求所献财币的数字。
English: In the spring of the eighth year, Lu Xianggong went to the Jin Dynasty to meet with the emperor, and at the same time to listen to the Jin Dynasty's request for the number of coins to be donated.

古文：郑群公子以僖公之死也，谋子驷。
现代文：郑国的公子们由于僖公的死去，谋划杀死子驷。
English: Zheng's nobles plotted to kill Zi Xuan after Zi Xuan's death.

古文：子驷先之。
现代文：子驷先下手。
English: Zi Yan made the first move.

古文：夏四月庚辰，辟杀子狐、子熙、子侯、子丁。
现代文：夏季，四月十二日，假造罪名，杀了子狐、子熙、子侯、子丁。
English: In the summer, on April 12, he fabricated charges and killed Zixu, Zixi, Zihou and Ziding.

古文：孙击、孙恶出奔卫。
现代文：孙击、孙恶逃亡到卫国。
English: Sun Yat-sen and Sun Qian fled to the defense of the country.

古文：庚寅，郑子国、子耳侵蔡，获蔡司马公子燮。
现代文：四月二十二日，郑国的子国、子耳入侵蔡国，俘虏了蔡国司马公子燮。
English: On April 22, Zheng's son and son-in-law invaded Cai and captured Cai's son-in-law Sima.

古文：郑人皆喜，唯子产不顺，曰： 小国无文德，而有武功，祸莫大焉。
现代文：郑国人都高兴，唯独子产不随声附和，说： 小国没有文治却有了武功，没有比这再大的祸患了。
English: All the people of Zheng were happy, except for Zi Xin, who did not follow suit, saying, "There is no greater calamity than a small country that does not have civil government but has military prowess."

古文：楚人来讨，能勿从乎？
现代文：楚国人前来讨伐，能够不顺从他们吗？
English: The people of Chu have come to fight, can we disobey them?

古文：从之，晋师必至。
现代文：顺从楚国，晋国的军队必然来到。
English: If you obey Chu, Jin's army will inevitably come.

古文：晋、楚伐郑，自今郑国，不四五年，弗得宁矣。 
现代文：晋、楚两国进攻郑国，从今以后郑国至少四五年内不得安宁。 
English: Jin and Chu attacked Zheng. From now on, Zheng will not have peace for at least four or five years.

古文：子国怒之曰： 尔何知！
现代文：子国对他发怒说： 你知道什么！
English: Ziguo was angry with him and said, "You know what!

古文：国有大命，而有正卿。童子言焉，将为戮矣。 
现代文：国家有出兵的重大命令，而且有执政的卿在那里，小孩子说这些话，将要被杀的！ 
English: The country has a great order to send troops, and there is a ruling lord there, the children say these words, they will be killed!

古文：五月甲辰，会于邢丘，以命朝聘之数，使诸侯之大夫听命。
现代文：五月初七日，季孙宿和晋悼公、郑简公、齐国人、宋国人、卫国人、邾国人在邢丘会见，由晋国提出朝聘的财礼数字，让诸侯的大夫听取命令。
English: On the 7th day of the 5th month of the year, Ji Sunjuku met with Jin Mui Gong, Zheng Jian Gong, Qi people, Song people, Weiguo people, and Shan people in Mengqiu, and Jin Province proposed the financial and ceremonial figures of the imperial appointment, so that the doctors of the princes could listen to the order.

古文：季孙宿、齐高厚、宋向戌、卫甯殖、邾大夫会之。
现代文：鲁国季孙宿、齐国高厚、宋国向戌、卫国宁殖、邾国大夫参加会见。
English: Ji Sunjuku of the State of Lu, Gao Hou of the State of Qi, Xiang Yao of the State of Song, Ning Xuan of the State of Wei, and the doctor of the State of Yao attended the meeting.

古文：郑伯献捷于会，故亲听命。
现代文：郑简公在这次会上奉献战利品，所以亲自听取命令。
English: Zheng Jian Gong gave a trophy at this meeting, so he listened to the order in person.

古文：大夫不书，尊晋侯也。
现代文：《春秋》没有记载大夫的名字，为的是尊重晋侯。
English: "Spring and Autumn" did not record the doctor's name, in order to respect Jinhou.

古文：莒人伐我东鄙，以疆鄫田。
现代文：莒国人攻打我国东部边境，以划定鄫国土田的疆界。
English: The Chinese attacked the eastern border of our country to delineate the boundaries of the Chinese territory.

古文：秋九月，大雩，旱也。
现代文：秋季九月，举行盛大的雩祭，这是由于天旱。
English: In the autumn, in September, there is a big burnt offering because of the drought.

古文：冬，楚子囊伐郑，讨其侵蔡也。
现代文：冬季，楚国的子囊进攻郑匡，讨伐郑国入侵蔡国。
English: In winter, the Zizuku of Chu attacked Zheng Kuang, and Zheng invaded Cai.

古文：子驷、子国、子耳欲从楚，子孔、子蟜、子展欲待晋。
现代文：子驷、子国、子耳要顺从楚国，子孔、子、子展要等待晋国救援。
English: Zikang, Zikang and Zilang should obey Chu, and Zikang, Zikang and Zichang should wait for Jin's rescue.

古文：子驷曰： 《周诗》有之曰： 俟河之清，人寿几何？
现代文：子驷说： 《周诗》有这样的话： 等待黄河澄清，人的寿命能有几何？
English: Zixuan said: "Zhou Shi" has this saying: Waiting for the Yellow River to clear, how long can a person's life span be?

古文：兆云询多，职竞作罗。 
现代文：占卜太多，等于为自己结成网罗。 
English: Too much divination is like making a snare for oneself.

古文：谋之多族，民之多违，事滋无成。
现代文：跟很多人商量，主意太多，百姓多数不能跟从，事情更难成功。
English: Consult with many people, too many ideas, the majority of people can not follow, things are more difficult to succeed.

古文：民急矣，姑从楚以纾吾民。
现代文：百姓危急了，姑且顺从楚国，以缓和百姓的苦难。
English: The people were in a critical situation, so they submitted to the state of Chu in order to alleviate the suffering of the people.

古文：晋师至，吾又从之。
现代文：晋国军队来到，我们又再顺从他。
English: When the Jin army came, we obeyed him again.

古文：敬共币帛，以待来者，小国之道也。
现代文：恭恭敬敬地供给财货，以等待别人前来，这是小国所应当做的。
English: This is what a small country should do, respectfully supplying goods and services while waiting for others to come.

古文：牺牲玉帛，待于二竟，以待疆者而庇民焉。
现代文：用牺牲玉帛，在两国的边境上等待，以等待强有力的国家来保护百姓。
English: They are waiting on the border of the two countries, waiting for a strong country to protect the people.

古文：寇不为害，民不罢病，不亦可乎？ 
现代文：敌人不为祸害，百姓不疲劳困乏，不也是可以的吗？ 
English: Isn't it possible for the enemy not to be a scourge and for the people not to be tired and weary?

古文：子展曰： 小所以事大，信也。
现代文：子展说： 小国用来事奉大国的，是信用。
English: Zou Zhan said: It is trust that a small country uses to serve a big country.

古文：小国无信，兵乱日至，亡无日矣。
现代文：小国没有信用，战争和祸乱会每天都有，很快就要灭亡了。
English: Small countries have no credibility, war and disaster will occur every day, and they will soon perish.

古文：五会之信，今将背之，虽楚救我，将安用之？
现代文：与晋国五次盟会的条约，如今却打算背弃，虽然楚国救援我国，还有什么用？
English: The treaty with the five times alliance of Jin, but now intends to renege, although Chu rescues our country, what is the use?

古文：亲我无成，鄙我是欲，不可从也。
现代文：楚国的亲近对我国不会有了结果，他们是想把我国作他们的边郡县邑，不能顺从他们。
English: Chu's closeness to our country will not bear fruit. They want to make our country their border county. We cannot obey them.

古文：不如待晋。
现代文：不如等待晋国。
English: Better to wait for Jin.

古文：晋君方明，四军无阙，八卿和睦，必不弃郑。
现代文：晋国的国君正当贤明的时候，四个军完备无缺，八个卿和睦无间，必然不会丢弃郑国。
English: When the sovereign of Jin is just and wise, the four armies are complete and the eight lords are in harmony, and they will not abandon Zheng.

古文：楚师辽远，粮食将尽，必将速归，何患焉？
现代文：楚军距离我们遥远，粮食将要吃完了，一定会很快回去，怕什么？
English: The Chu army is far away from us, the grain will be eaten up, and they will surely go back soon. What are you afraid of?

古文：舍之闻之： 杖莫如信。 
现代文：舍之听说：仗恃不如讲信用。
English: I have heard it said that it is better to trust than to fight.

古文：完守以老楚，杖信以待晋，不亦可乎？ 
现代文：完缮守备以使楚军疲惫，依靠信用以等待晋军，不也是可以的吗？ 
English: Isn't it also possible to make the Chu army tired by completing the defensive preparations, and rely on trust to wait for the advancing army?

古文：子驷曰： 《诗》云： 谋夫孔多，是用不集，发言盈庭，谁敢执其咎？
现代文：子驷说： 《诗》说： 出主意的人很多，因此不能有所成就。发言的人挤满庭院，谁敢承担过错？
English: Zixuan said: "The poem says: There are many people who come up with ideas, so they can't achieve anything. The speakers crowded the courtyard, who dares to bear the fault?

古文：如匪行迈谋，是用不得于道。 请从楚，騑也受其咎。 
现代文：好象一个人一边走路一边还和路人商量，因此一无所得。 请顺从楚国，騑来承担责任。 
English: It's as if a person is walking and talking with passers-by, but getting nothing in return.Please obey the state of Chu and take responsibility.

古文：乃及楚平。使王子伯骈告于晋，曰： 君命敝邑： 修而车赋，儆而师徒，以讨乱略。 
现代文：于是郑国就和楚国讲和，派王子伯骈向晋国报告，说： 君王命令敝邑： 整修你们的战车，使你们的车兵徒兵保持戒备，以讨伐动乱。 
English: So Zheng made peace with Chu, and sent the prince Bo Xun to report to Jin, saying: The king ordered Xiongyi: Refurbish your chariots, and keep your chariot soldiers and foot soldiers on alert to fight the turmoil.

古文：蔡人不从，敝邑之人，不敢宁处，悉索敝赋，以讨于蔡，获司马燮，献于邢丘。
现代文：蔡国人不顺从，敝邑的人不敢贪图安逸，收尽我国的军队，以讨伐蔡国，俘虏了司马燮，奉献于邢丘的盟会上。
English: Cai's compatriots did not obey, and the people of Mengyue did not dare to seek comfort, exhausted our army to fight Cai's country, captured Sima Ying, and dedicated it to the League Meeting of Mengyue.

古文：今楚来讨曰： 女何故称兵于蔡？ 
现代文：现在楚国前来付伐，说： 你们为什么对蔡国用兵？ 
English: Now the state of Chu has come to attack, saying: Why are you using troops against Cai Guo?

古文：焚我郊保，冯陵我城郭。
现代文：焚烧我国郊外的小堡，侵略我国的城郭。
English: They have burned our country's outposts and invaded our citadels.

古文：敝邑之众，夫妇男女，不皇启处，以相救也。
现代文：敝邑的大众，夫妻男女，顾不得休息而互相救援。
English: The general public, husbands and wives, rushed to the rescue of each other.

古文：翦焉倾覆，无所控告。
现代文：国家将要倾覆，没有地方可以控告。
English: The country will be overturned and there will be nowhere to sue.

古文：民死亡者，非其父兄，即其子弟，夫人愁痛，不知所庇。
现代文：百姓死去和逃亡的，不是父兄，就是子弟。人人忧愁悲痛，不知道在哪里可以得到保护。
English: The people who died and fled were either fathers and brothers or their children. Everyone is sad and sorrowful, and does not know where they can get protection.

古文：民知穷困，而受盟于楚，孤也与其二三臣不能禁止。不敢不告。 
现代文：百姓知道毫无办法，只好接受楚国的盟约。我和我的几个臣子不能禁止，不敢不报告。 
English: The people knew there was nothing they could do, so they had no choice but to accept the Treaty of Chu. I and several of my courtiers could not forbid it and dared not fail to report it.

古文：知武子使行人子员对之曰： 君有楚命，亦不使一个行李告于寡君，而即安于楚。
现代文：知武子派行人子员回答说： 君王受到楚国讨伐的命令，也不派一个使者来告诉我，反而立刻屈服于楚国。
English: A member of Chimu's patrol replied, "The king was ordered to attack Chu, but instead of sending an envoy to tell me, he immediately surrendered to Chu."

古文：君之所欲也，谁敢违君。
现代文：君王的愿望，谁敢反对？
English: The king's wishes, who can oppose them?

古文：寡君将帅诸侯以见于城下，唯君图之！ 
现代文：寡君准备率领诸侯和你们在城下相见。请君王考虑一下。 
English: The widower is preparing to lead the lords to meet you at the foot of the castle. Please consider it.

古文：晋范宣子来聘，且拜公之辱，告将用师于郑。
现代文：晋国的范宣子来鲁国聘问，同时拜谢鲁襄公的朝见，告知将出兵郑国。
English: Fan Xuan Zi from Jin Province came to Lu Province for an interview, and at the same time paid a courtesy visit to Xie Lu Xiang, informing him that he would send troops to Zheng Province.

古文：公享之，宣子赋《摽有梅》。
现代文：襄公设享礼招待他，范宣子赋《摽有梅》这首诗。
English: Xiang Gong held a banquet to invite him, and Fan Xuan Zi wrote the poem "The Plum Tree."

古文：季武子曰： 谁敢哉！
现代文：季武子说： 谁敢不及时啊！
English: Ji Takeko said: Who dares not to be on time!

古文：今譬于草木，寡君在君，君之臭味也。
现代文：现在用草木来比喻，寡君之于君王，不过是作为草木散发出来的气味而已。
English: Now, to use the metaphor of plants, what the oligarch is to the monarch is only the scent emitted by the plants.

古文：欢以承命，何时之有？ 
现代文：高高兴兴地接受命令，有什么时间早晚？ 
English: Happy to take orders, what time is it?

古文：武子赋《角弓》。
现代文：季武子赋《角弓》这首诗。
English: The poem "Kakuno-yumi" by Ji Mushi.

古文：宾将出，武子赋《彤弓》。
现代文：客人将要退出，季武子赋《彤弓》这首诗。
English: The guests are about to leave, and the poem "Skeleton Bow" by Ji Mu Zi is playing.

古文：宣子曰： 城濮之役，我先君文公献功于衡雍，受《彤弓》于襄王，以为子孙藏。
现代文：范宣子说： 城濮这一战，我们的先君文公在衡雍奉献战功，在襄王那里接受了红色的弓，作为子孙的宝藏。
English: Fan Xuan Zi said, "Our forefather, Prince Wen, started this battle in Chengdu, and he dedicated his military service in Hengyong. He received a red bow from King Xiang as a treasure for his descendants.

古文：匄也，先君守官之嗣也，敢不承命。 
现代文：匄是先君官员的后代，哪里敢不接受你的命令？ 
English: You are a descendant of the officials of the previous emperor. How dare you not accept your orders?

古文：君子以为知礼。
现代文：君子认为范宣子懂得礼仪。
English: Nobles believed that Fan Xuanzi understood etiquette.

