古文：夫神道阐幽，天命微显，马龙出而大《易》兴，神龟见而《洪范》耀，故《系辞》称 河出图，洛出书，圣人则之 ，斯之谓也。
现代文：根据自然之道可以阐明深奥的事理，使不明显的自然法则明显起来。马龙献出河图就产生了《易经》，神龟献出洛书就产生了《洪范》。《周易·系辞》中所说： 黄河出图，洛水出书，圣人效法它写作了经书。 
English: According to the way of nature, profound matters can be elucidated, and obscure laws of nature can be made clear. Malong presented the river map to produce the "I Ching," and the divine turtle presented the Luo book to produce the "Hong Fan." In the "Zhou Yi · Keji," it is said: The Yellow River produced the map, the Luo water produced the book, and the sage imitated it to write the scripture.

古文：但世夐文隐，好生矫诞，真虽存矣，伪亦凭焉。
现代文：它讲的就是这个道理。但历时久远，有关记载很不清楚，容易产生不实的假托；因此，流传下来的文章保留了真实，也保留了虚假。
English: This is what it says, but it was written over a long period of time, and the records are not very clear, and it is easy to produce false pretexts; therefore, the articles that have been passed down retain the truth and also retain the falsehood.

古文：夫六经彪炳，而纬候稠叠；《孝》、《论》昭晰，而《钩》、《谶》葳蕤。
现代文：儒家六经光彩鲜明，而纬书却十分烦琐；《孝经》、《论语》等已讲的很明晰了，而解说《孝经》、《论语》的谶纬却讲得十分冗长。
English: The six Confucian classics are brilliant and vivid, but the preface is very cumbersome; the "Filial Piety Sutra" and "Analects" are very clear, but the explanation of the "Filial Piety Sutra" and "Analects" is very lengthy.

古文：按经验纬，其伪有四∶盖纬之成经，其犹织综，丝麻不杂，布帛乃成。
现代文：根据经书来检验纬书，有四点证明纬书是伪托的：用纬书来配经书，正和织布一样，必须丝或麻的经线纬线分别配合，才能织成布或帛。
English: According to the scripture to test the weft book, there are four points to prove that the weft book is false: to match the weft book with the weft book, just like the weaving cloth, it is necessary to match the warp and weft lines of silk or hemp separately in order to weave into cloth or cocoon.

古文：今经正纬奇，倍摘千里，其伪一矣。
现代文：现在经书是正常的，纬书却很奇特，二者相背千里。这是证明纬书为伪托的第一点。
English: Now, the Book of Deuteronomy is normal, but the Book of Deuteronomy is very strange, and the two are far apart. This is the first point to prove that the Book of Deuteronomy is a fake.

古文：经显，圣训也；纬隐，神教也。
现代文：经书内容明显，那是因为它用于教化民众；纬书内容隐晦，那是因为用神妙的现象来说明。
English: The scriptures are clear because they are for the edification of the people; they are obscure because they are illustrated by miraculous phenomena.

古文：圣训宜广，神教宜约，而今纬多于经，神理更繁，其伪二矣。
现代文：那么前者的文字篇幅必然要多些，后者的文字篇幅应该少些。但现在却是纬书多于经书，神妙的道理讲得更为繁多。这是证明纬书为伪托的第二点。
English: Therefore, the former text should have more space, while the latter should have less space. However, there are more books of scripture than books of scripture, and the miraculous teachings are more varied. This is the second point that proves that the books of scripture are fabrications.

古文：有命自天，乃称符谶，而八十一篇皆托于孔子，则是尧造绿图，昌制丹书，其伪三矣。
现代文：要有上天所降的旨意，才能说是 符谶 ，可是有人说八十一篇谶纬，全是孔子所作，但纬书中又说唐尧时出现了绿图，周文王时出现了丹书。这是证明纬书为伪托的第三点。
English: It is necessary to have the will sent down from heaven in order to be able to say that it is a fictitious book, but some people say that the eighty-one sutras were all made by Confucius, but it is also said in the book of sutras that a green map appeared in the time of Tang Xi, and a red book appeared in the time of King Zhou Wen. This is the third point to prove that the book of sutras is a fake.

古文：商周以前，图策频见，春秋之末，群经方备，先纬后经，体乖织综，其伪四矣。
现代文：在商周以前，符命占验已大量出现了；但经书是在春秋末年才齐全的。如果是先有纬书而后有经书，这就违背了经纬相织的正常规律。
English: Before Shang Zhou, there had been a large number of fortune-telling tests; however, the scriptures were not complete until the end of spring and autumn. If there is a book of scripture first and then a book of scripture, this violates the normal law of warp and woof.

古文：伪既倍摘，则义异自明，经足训矣，纬何豫焉？
现代文：这是证明纬书为伪托的第四点。伪托的纬书既然违背经书，则经书与纬书的意义不同就很明显了。经书已满可成为后世的准则了，何须纬书参预呢！
English: This is the fourth point to prove that the Book of Deuteronomy is a forgery. Since the forgery of the Book of Deuteronomy contradicts the Bible, the difference in the meaning of the Bible and the Book of Deuteronomy is obvious. The Bible is full of rules for future generations, so why should the Book of Deuteronomy be included?

古文：原夫图箓之见，乃昊天休命，事以瑞圣，义非配经。
现代文：河图、洛书的现世，是上天的美好指令，是为了彰显圣人在世的祥瑞，而不是配合经书。
English: The present world of the river map and the book of love is a beautiful instruction from heaven, in order to highlight the auspiciousness of the saint in the world, rather than to cooperate with the scripture.

古文：故河不出图，夫子有叹，如或可造，无劳喟然。
现代文：因此，孔子在世的时候没有出现河图的天意，孔子才有所感叹，如果可以随意伪造，孔子也就不会如此感慨了。
English: Therefore, when Confucius was alive, the providence of the river map did not appear, and Confucius only sighed. If it could be forged at will, Confucius would not be so moved.

古文：昔康王河图，陈于东序，故知前世符命，历代宝传，仲尼所撰，序录而已。
现代文：昔日周康王把河图供在东边的厢房，由此可知先贤将上天降下的祥瑞看作珍宝，并世代相传，而孔子所编著的文章，只是记叙和收录这些罢了。
English: Once upon a time, King Zhou Kang provided the river map to the eastern wing of the house. From this, it can be seen that the sages regarded the auspiciousness of heaven as a precious treasure and passed it down from generation to generation, while the articles compiled by Confucius were only descriptions and collections of these.

古文：于是伎数之士，附以诡术，或说阴阳，或序灾异，若鸟鸣似语，虫叶成字，篇条滋蔓，必假孔氏，通儒讨核，谓起哀平，东序秘宝，朱紫乱矣。
现代文：于是，那些游方的术士，就将很多言论附于诡异的说法，有的论说阴阳，有的说灾难，有的说鸟像人一样说话，有的说虫子吃树叶而形成了文字，各种说法肆意滋生蔓延，都要假托孔子的著作。通晓儒家学说的人进行审核之后，认为这些纬书都起源于西汉哀帝和平帝的时候，原本被帝王视为珍宝的河图、洛书，最后的结果是真假难辨。
English: As a result, those wandering sorcerers attached a lot of remarks to strange sayings. Some talk about yin and yang, some talk about disaster, some say that birds talk like people, some say that insects eat leaves to form letters, and all kinds of sayings wantonly breed and spread, all of which are based on the writings of Confucius. After examination, people who are familiar with Confucianism believe that these books originated in the time of the Western Han Dynasty's Lai Di and Ping Di, and were originally regarded as precious treasures by the emperor. The final result is that it is difficult to distinguish between true and false.

古文：至于光武之世，笃信斯术。
现代文：东汉光武帝时期，他相信谶纬之术。
English: During the reign of Emperor Guangwu of the Eastern Han Dynasty, he believed in the art of fencing.

古文：风化所靡，学者比肩。
现代文：随着风气传扬开来，谶纬之学的学者比比皆是。
English: With the spread of the culture, scholars of the study of wu wei are everywhere.

古文：沛献集纬以通经，曹褒选谶以定礼，乖道谬典，亦已甚矣。
现代文：沛献收集了众多纬书来通晓经书，曹褒根据遗留的谶书来制定礼仪制度，这种不符合自然大道的行为非常严重。
English: Pei Xian collected a large number of books to understand the scriptures, and Cao Bo developed the etiquette system based on the remaining books. This kind of behavior that does not conform to the natural way is very serious.

古文：是以桓谭疾其虚伪，尹敏戏其浮假，张衡发其僻谬，荀悦明其诡诞：四贤博练，论之精矣。
现代文：所以桓谭痛恨谶纬虚伪，尹敏嘲讽谶纬浮夸，张衡揭发谶纬乖僻谬误，荀悦指明谶纬伪托。这四位贤者学识渊博，论述精深。
English: Therefore, Kuan Tan hated the hypocrisy, Yin Min ridiculed the pomposity, Zhang Heng exposed the absurdity, and Zou Yue pointed out the false support. These four sages are knowledgeable and profound.

古文：若乃羲农轩皞之源，山渎锺律之要，白鱼赤乌之符，黄金紫玉之瑞，事丰奇伟，辞富膏腴，无益经典而有助文章。
现代文：至于伏羲、神农、轩辕、少皞等最早的传说，山水和音乐灵应的会合，白鱼跳到周武王的船上，周武王的屋上火变为赤色的乌鸟，以及深山出现黄银和紫玉等祥瑞，这些内容广泛，事迹奇特，而又辞采丰富，它们对经书虽然没有什么好处，对文章的写作却有一定帮助。
English: As for the earliest legends such as Fuxi, Shennong, Xuanwu and Shaoqin, the meeting of mountain water and music, the white fish jumping into King Zhouwu's boat, the fire on the roof of King Zhouwu turning into a red blackbird, and the deep mountains appearing with gold, silver and purple jade, these are extensive, strange deeds, and rich in words. Although they are of no benefit to the scriptures, they are of some help to the writing of articles.

古文：是以后来辞人，采摭英华。
现代文：所以后来作者，常常采用其中一些精采的描写。
English: So later authors often used some of these brilliant descriptions.

古文：平子恐其迷学，奏令禁绝；仲豫惜其杂真，未许煨燔。
现代文：张衡担心纬书迷惑人们的学习，曾奏请汉帝下令禁绝；荀悦则为其中搀杂一些真的而惋惜，所以他不同意完全烧毁。
English: Zhang Heng was worried that Wei Shu would confuse people's learning and asked the Han Emperor to ban it; Mu Yue regretted that it contained some truths, so he did not agree to burn it completely.

古文：前代配经，故详论焉。
现代文：因为前人用纬书来配合经书，所以有必要详加论述。
English: Because the ancients used the Book of Deuteronomy to supplement the Bible, it is necessary to discuss it in detail.

古文：赞曰∶
现代文：总结：
English: What is this word? Summary:

古文：荣河温洛，是孕图纬。
现代文：光荣的黄河，温暖的洛水，孕育了河图、洛书。
English: The glorious Yellow River and the warm Luo water have given birth to river maps and Luo books.

古文：神宝藏用，理隐文贵。
现代文：这种神圣的珍宝包藏着巨大的用途，它的内容深刻而文辞可贵。
English: This sacred treasure contains vast applications, and its contents are profound and eloquent.

古文：世历二汉，朱紫腾沸。
现代文：可是经过两汉，由于大量的纬书出现而搅乱了经书。
English: However, after the two Han dynasties, due to the emergence of a large number of books, the scriptures were disturbed.

古文：芟夷谲诡，采其雕蔚。
现代文：在文学创作上，剔除其中的虚假诡诈部分，还可吸取一些有用的辞采。
English: In literary creation, removing the false and deceitful parts can also draw some useful lessons.

