古文：起阏逢阉茂，尽柔兆困敦，凡三年。
现代文：起，止，一共三年。晋愍帝建兴二年
English: a total of three years. It took Emperor Jinshan two years to build and

古文：孝愍皇帝下建兴二年春，正月，辛未，有如日陨于地；又有三日相承，出西方而东行。
现代文：春季，正月，辛未，有个像太阳似的东西殒落到地下，又接连出现三个太阳，从西方朝东行。
English: In the spring, the first month, and the middle of the month, something like the sun fell to the ground, and three suns appeared in succession, moving from the west to the east.

古文：丁丑，大赦。
现代文：丁丑，宣布大赦。
English: Ding Chuxi, amnesty to the world.

古文：有流星出牵牛，入紫微，光烛地，坠于平阳北，化为肉，长三十步，广二十七步。
现代文：有流星从牵牛星处出来，进入紫徽星座，星光照亮了地面，后坠落在平阳以北，变成肉，长三十步，宽二十七步。
English: A meteor came out from the Cowherd star and entered the Purple Crest constellation. The starlight illuminated the ground, then fell to the north of Pingyang and turned into meat, 30 paces long and 27 paces wide.

古文：汉主聪恶之，以问公卿。
现代文：汉主刘聪对此感到厌恶，就询问公卿大臣。
English: Liu Cong, the lord of the Han Dynasty, was disgusted by this and asked the noble minister.

古文：陈元达以为： 女宠太盛，亡国之征。 
现代文：陈元达认为是 后宫女宠太多，亡国的征兆 。
English: Chen Yuanda believed that there were too many favorites in the harem, which was a sign of the country's downfall.

古文：聪曰： 此阴阳之理，何关人事！ 
现代文：刘聪说： 这是天象日月运转的道理，与人事有什么相关？ 
English: Liu Cong said: This is the principle of the movement of the celestial sun and moon. How is it related to personnel?

古文：聪后刘氏贤明，聪所为不道，刘氏每规正之。
现代文：刘聪的皇后刘氏很贤慧明达，刘聪做得不符合道理，刘氏每次都规劝让他改正。
English: Mr. Liu, the empress of Liu Cong, is very wise and intelligent. What Liu Cong did was unreasonable, and Mr. Liu persuaded him to correct it every time.

古文：己丑，刘氏卒，谥曰武宣。
现代文：己丑，刘氏去世，谥号为武宣。
English: He was ugly, Mr. Liu died, and his nickname was Wu Xuan.

古文：自是嬖宠竞进，后宫无序矣。
现代文：从此刘聪的宠女爱姬竞相争先，后宫中失去了秩序。
English: From then on, Liu Cong's favorite daughter, Ai Ji, competed for the first place, and order was lost in the harem.

古文：聪置丞相等七公；又置辅汉等十六大将军，各配兵二千，以诸子为之；又置左右司隶，各领户二十馀万，万户置一内史；单于左右辅，各主六夷十万落，万落置一都尉；左、右选曹尚书，并典选举。
现代文：刘聪设置了丞相等七公；又设置辅汉等十六大将军，各配备二千兵士，让他的儿子们来担任；又设置左、右司隶，各辖领二十多万户，每万户设一个内史；又设置单于左右辅，各统领胡、羯、鲜卑、氐、羌、乌丸等六类共十万帐落，每一万帐落设一个都尉；设置左、右选曹尚书，共同负责选举事务。
English: Liu Cong set up seven generals, including the prime minister and the vice-premier; he also set up sixteen generals, including the vice-premier and the vice-general, each with two thousand soldiers, and let his sons serve as generals; he also set up the left and right subordinates, each with more than two hundred thousand households under their jurisdiction, and each ten thousand households set up an internal history; he also set up a total of one hundred thousand accounts in six categories, including the left and right subordinates, each of which was headed by Hu, Zhou, Xianbei, Yao, Yao, and Umar, and each ten thousand accounts set up a captain;

古文：自司隶以下六官，皆位亚仆射。
现代文：从司隶以下的六个官职，地位都仅次于仆射。
English: From the six official positions below the rank of sergeant, the status is second only to the gunner.

古文：以其子粲为丞相、领大将军、录尚书事，进封晋王。
现代文：让自己的儿子刘粲担任丞相、兼大将军、录尚书事，进封为晋王。
English: He had his son Liu Bei serve as chancellor, concurrently as grand general, record the imperial edict, and ascend to the throne.

古文：江都王延年录尚书六条事，汝阴王景为太师，王育为太傅，任顗为太保，马景为大司徒，硃纪为大司空，中山王曜为大司马。
现代文：以江都王刘延年担任录尚书六条事，让汝阴王刘景任太师，王育任太傅，任任太保，马景任大司徒，朱纪任大司空，中山王刘曜任大司马。
English: Liu Yannian, the king of Jiangdu, was appointed to record six things, and Liu Jing, the king of Ruyin, was appointed to be the Grand Master, Wang Yu was appointed to be the Grand Master, Ma Jing was appointed to be the Grand Master, Zhu Ji was appointed to be the Grand Master, and Liu You, the king of Zhongshan, was appointed to be the Grand Master.

古文：壬辰，王子春等及王浚使者至襄国，石勒匿其劲卒、精甲，羸师虚府以示之，北面拜使者而受书。
现代文：壬辰，王子春和王浚的使者到达襄国，石勒把他强壮的兵士、精锐的兵器都藏起来，用老弱残兵空虚的府帐给使者看，郑重地向北拜会使者接受王浚的信。
English: In Imjin, Prince Chun and Wang Jun's envoys arrived in Xiangguo. Shi Le hid his strong soldiers and elite weapons, and showed the envoys the empty mansions of the old and weak soldiers, and solemnly visited the envoys in the north to accept Wang Jun's letter.

古文：浚遗勒麈尾，勒阳不敢执，悬之于壁，朝夕拜之，曰： 我不得见王公，见其所赐，如见公也。 
现代文：王浚送给石勒标志风雅的麈尾，石勒假装不敢拿在手上，而把麈尾悬挂在墙壁上，早晨晚上都恭敬地向它叩拜，说： 我不能见到王公，见他所赐的物品，就像见到他一样。 
English: Wang Jun presented Shiller with an elegant appendix, a symbol of elegance. Shiller pretended not to dare to hold it in his hand, but hung the appendix on the wall, and respectfully bowed to it in the morning and evening, saying: I can't see the prince, see the goods he gave, just like seeing him.

古文：复遣董肇奉表于浚，期以三月中旬亲诣幽州奉上尊号；亦修笺于枣嵩，求并州牧、广平公。
现代文：又派遣董肇向王浚奉交奏表，约定三月中旬亲自到幽州尊奉王浚为帝。又给枣嵩去信，请求担任并州牧、广平公。
English: He also dispatched Dong Zhaozhou to Wang Jun to serve as a composer, and agreed to personally go to Yuzhou in mid-March to honor Wang Jun as the emperor. He also sent a letter to Zaosong, requesting to serve as the provincial governor and Guangping.

古文：勒问浚之政事于王子春，子春曰： 幽州去岁大水，人不粒食，浚积粟百万，不能赈赡，刑政苛酷，赋役殷烦，忠贤内离，夷狄外叛。
现代文：石勒向王子春询问王浚的政事情况，王子春说： 幽州去年发大水，百姓无粮可吃，而王浚囤积了一百多万粟谷，却不赈济灾民，刑罚政令苛刻残酷，赋税劳役征发频繁，忠臣贤士从他身边离开，夷人、狄人也在外面叛离。
English: Shi Le asked Prince Chun about Wang Chun's political situation. Prince Chun said: Yuzhou had a big flood last year, the people had no food to eat, but Wang Chun hoarded more than a million millet, but did not help the victims. The punishment decree was harsh and cruel, the tax and labor service was frequently collected and distributed, the loyal servants and sages left his side, and the barbarians and devils also defected outside.

古文：人皆知其将亡，而浚意气自若，曾无惧心，方更置立台阁，布列百官，自谓汉高、魏武不足比也。 
现代文：人人都知道他将要灭亡，而王浚毫无察觉，若无其事，一点没有惧祸之意，刚刚又重新设置官署，安排文武百官，自以为汉高祖、魏武帝都无法与自己相比。 
English: Everyone knew that he was about to perish, but Wang Jun did not notice anything, if nothing happened, there was no fear of disaster. He had just re-established the government office and arranged a hundred civil and military officials. He thought that the Han Emperor Gaozu and Emperor Weiwu could not compare with himself.

古文：勒抚几笑曰： 王彭祖真可擒也。 
现代文：石勒按着几案笑着说： 王浚确实能够抓到了。 
English: According to several cases, Shiller said with a smile: Wang Jun can indeed be caught.

古文：浚使者还蓟，具言 石勒形势寡弱，款诚无二。 
现代文：王浚派的使者返回蓟地，都说： 石勒目前兵力阵势孤独衰弱，忠诚而无二心。 
English: When the envoys of Wang Jun's faction returned to Handan, they all said: Shi Le's current troop formation is lonely and weak, loyal and single-minded.

古文：浚大悦，益骄怠，不复设备。
现代文：王浚非常高兴，更加骄纵懈怠，不再安排防务。
English: Wang Jun was very happy. He became more arrogant and slack, and no longer arranged for defense.

古文：杨虎掠汉中吏民以奔成，梁州人张咸等起兵逐杨难敌。
现代文：杨虎掳掠汉中的官吏、百姓投奔成汉，梁州人张咸等起兵赶走了杨难敌。
English: Yang Hu captured and plundered officials and people in Han, and they rushed to Chenghan. Zhang Xian from Liangzhou and other soldiers drove away Yang's difficult enemy.

古文：难敌去，咸以其地归成，于是汉嘉、涪陵、汉中之地皆为成有。
现代文：杨难敌离开，张咸把这块地盘送给成汉，这样汉嘉、涪陵、汉中等地，都被成汉所占有。
English: After Yang Rongfei left, Zhang Xian gave this piece of land to Cheng Han. Thus, Han Jia, Fuling, Han and other lands were all occupied by Cheng Han.

古文：成主雄以李凤为梁州刺史，任回为宁州刺史，李恭为荆州刺史。
现代文：成汉主李雄任李凤为梁州刺史，任回为宁州刺史，李恭为荆州刺史。
English: Chenghan master Li Xiong appointed Li Feng as the chief historian of Liangzhou, Ren Hui as the chief historian of Ningzhou, and Li Gong as the chief historian of Jingzhou.

古文：雄虚己好贤，随才授任；命太傅骧养民于内，李凤等招怀于外；刑政宽简，狱无滞囚；兴学校，置史官。
现代文：李雄虚心而喜欢贤能，按照人的才能安排他们职任，让太傅李骧在内管理教化百姓，李凤在外招抚怀柔，刑法政令宽大简明，监狱中没有长期不定罪的囚犯。兴办学校，设置史官。
English: Li Xiong was simple-hearted and liked people of merit. He arranged their positions according to their talents. He let Taifu Li Qian manage the education of the people inside, and Li Feng recruit Huairou outside. The criminal law decrees were generous and concise, and there were no prisoners in prison who had not been convicted for a long time. He established schools and set up historians.

古文：其赋民，男丁岁谷三斛，女丁半之，疾病又半之。
现代文：成汉的赋税、百姓中成年男子每年每人交纳三斛谷，成年女子减半，病人再减半。
English: The tax of Chenghan, the adult men among the people will pay the Samcheok Valley every year, the adult women will be reduced by half, and the patients will be reduced by half.

古文：户调绢不过数丈，绵数两。
现代文：每户的赋仅仅几丈绢，几两绵。
English: Each household has only a few rupees.

古文：事少役希，民多富实，新附者皆给复除。
现代文：事情少劳役很少征发，百姓大多很富裕，新归附的人都免除徭役。
English: There were few things to do, labor service was rarely conscripted, most of the people were very rich, and newly annexed people were exempted from corvee service.

古文：是时天下大乱，而蜀独无事，年谷屡熟，乃至闾门不闭，路不拾遗。
现代文：当时天下大乱，而只有蜀地无事，一年谷物几熟，以至于门户不闭、路不拾遗。
English: At that time, the whole world was in turmoil, and only Shu had nothing to worry about. The grain ripened a few times a year, so much so that the gates were not closed and the roads were not cleared.

古文：汉嘉夷王冲归、硃提审炤、建宁爨畺皆归之。
现代文：汉嘉的夷人首领冲归，朱提的审、建宁的爨都去投靠成汉。
English: Han Jia's leader of the barbarians rushed back, while Zhu Di's Inquisitor and Jian Ning's Donkey both went to Chenghan.

古文：巴郡尝告急，云有晋兵。
现代文：巴郡曾经告急，说出现晋朝军队。
English: Ba County once panicked, saying that the Jin Dynasty army had appeared.

古文：雄曰： 吾常忧琅邪微弱，遂为石勒所灭，以为耿耿，不图乃能举兵，使人欣然。 
现代文：李雄说： 我常常忧虑晋琅邪王势力微弱，很快会被石勒消灭，对此深感忧虑，没有想到他们还能进行军事行动，这使人感到高兴。 
English: Li Xiong said: I was often worried that the Jin and Qiang evil kings were weak and would soon be eliminated by Shi Le, and I was deeply worried about this. I did not think that they could still carry out military operations, which made people feel happy.

古文：然雄朝无仪器，爵位滥溢；吏无禄秩，取给于民；军无部伍，号令不肃；此其所短也。
现代文：但是，李雄朝廷中没有礼仪和品秩，爵位过于冗滥，官吏也没有俸禄的等级，向百姓索取给养。军队也没有队伍建制，号令不够严肃，这些是成汉所欠缺的。
English: However, Li Xiong's court lacked etiquette and rank, titles were too cumbersome, officials did not have a salary grade and solicited supplies from the people, the army did not have a formation, and proclamations were not serious enough, all of which were lacking in Chenghan.

古文：二月，壬寅，以张轨为太尉、凉州牧，封西平郡公；王浚为大司马、都督幽、冀诸军事；荀组为司空、领尚书左仆射兼司隶校尉，行留台事；刘琨为大将军、都督并州诸军事。
现代文：二月，壬寅，晋朝任张轨为太尉、凉州牧，封为平西郡公；任王浚为大司马，都督幽、冀二州诸军事；任荀组为司空。尚书左仆射兼司隶校尉、行留台事；任刘琨为大将军、都督并州诸军事。
English: In February, Minshin, the Jin Dynasty appointed Zhang Rail as the first lieutenant, Liangzhou herdsman, and appointed him as the governor of Pingxi County; appointed Wang Jun as the grand steward, the military governor of Yu and Hebei two states; appointed Yu Gu as the steward of the sky; appointed Shang Shu's left-hand servant, Sha, as the captain of the military governor of Liangzhou, and sent him to Taiwan; appointed Liu Wei as the general, the military governor and the military governor of Hebei two states.

古文：朝廷以张轨老病，拜其子实为副刺史。
现代文：朝廷因为张轨年老有病，任命他儿子张担任副刺史。
English: The imperial court appointed his son Zhang as deputy chief historian because Zhang Zhaoxu was old and ill.

古文：石勒纂严，将袭王浚，而犹豫未发。
现代文：石勒戒严，将要袭击王浚，但犹豫不决没有发兵。
English: Shihle martial law, will attack Wang Jun, but hesitantly did not send troops.

古文：张宾曰： 夫袭人者，当出其不意。今军严经日而不行，岂非畏刘琨及鲜卑、乌桓为吾后患乎？ 
现代文：张宾说：袭击敌人，应该出其不意，现在军队戒严一整天还不出发，莫非是害怕刘琨以及鲜卑人、乌桓人成为我们的后患吗？ 
English: Zhang Bin said, "Attacking the enemy should be taken by surprise. Now the army has been under martial law for a whole day and has not yet set out. Could it be that they are afraid that Liu Bei, the Xianbei people and the Wuhuan people will become our posterity?

古文：勒曰： 然。
现代文：石勒说： 是的，怎么呢？ 
English: Shearer said: "Yes, why not?

古文：为之奈何？ 宾曰： 彼三方智勇无及将军者，将军虽远出，彼必不敢动，且彼未谓将军便能悬军千里取幽州也。
现代文：张宾说： 他们三个方面才智和胆略没有比得上将军您的，将军即使远征，他们也一定不敢妄动，再说他们未必知道将军能够孤军深入一千里而夺取幽州。
English: Zhang Bin said: Their three aspects of intelligence and daring are not comparable to your general. Even if the general goes on an expedition, they will not dare to act rashly. In addition, they may not know that the general can go a thousand miles deep alone and seize Yuzhou.

古文：轻军往返，不出二旬，藉使彼虽有心，比其谋议出师，吾已还矣。
现代文：轻装的军队往返，超不过二十天，假如他们真的有这个想法，等他们商议后出师，我们已回来了。
English: It only takes twenty days for a lightly armed army to travel back and forth, and if they really have this idea, we will be back after they have consulted and sent out a division.

古文：且刘琨、王浚，虽同名晋臣，实为仇敌。
现代文：再说刘琨、王浚，虽然他们名义上同属晋朝的大臣，实际上却是仇敌。
English: Furthermore, Liu Bei and Wang Jun, although they were nominally both ministers of the Jin Dynasty, were actually enemies.

古文：若修笺于琨，送质请和，琨必喜我之服而快浚之亡，终不救浚而袭我也。
现代文：如果我们给刘琨去信，送去人质请求停战，刘琨一定为我们的顺服而高兴，对王浚的灭亡而称快，最终不会为救王浚而袭击我们。
English: If we send a letter to Liu Bei and send hostages to request an armistice, Liu Bei will certainly be pleased with our obedience, rejoice in Wang Jun's death, and ultimately will not attack us to save Wang Jun.

古文：用兵贵神速，勿后时也。 
现代文：用兵贵在神速，不要拖延时间。 
English: Don't delay in using your soldiers.

古文：勒曰： 吾所未了，右候已了之，吾复何疑！ 
现代文：石勒说： 我所没有了却的，右侯已决断，我还有什么可迟疑的呢？ 
English: Shiller said: "What I don't have anymore, the court has already decided, what do I have to hesitate about?

古文：遂以火宵行，至柏人，杀主簿游纶，以其兄统在范阳，恐泄军谋故也。
现代文：于是举火把连夜行军，到达柏人县，杀主簿游纶，这是因为他哥哥游统在范阳，害怕他泄露军情的缘故。
English: So they marched with torches through the night, reached Baer County, and killed the main leader, You Tong, because his brother, You Tong, was in Fanyang, and they were afraid that he would reveal the military situation.

古文：遣使奉笺送质于刘琨，自陈罪恶，请讨浚以自效。
现代文：又派遣使者拿着信笺给刘琨送去人质，自己述列罪恶，请求以讨伐王浚来报效刘琨。
English: He also sent an envoy with a letter to Liu Bei to send the hostages, listing his own crimes and requesting that Wang Jun be killed in return for Liu Bei's services.

古文：琨大喜，移檄州郡，称 己与猗卢方议讨勒，勒走伏无地，求拔幽都以赎罪。
现代文：刘琨大喜过望，向州郡传布檄文，声称： 我与拓跋猗卢正商议讨伐石勒，石勒走投无路，请求用攻克幽都来赎罪。
English: Liu Bei was overjoyed and spread the message to Zhu County, claiming: I and Tuoba Qilu are discussing the conquest of Shiloh. Shiloh is cornered, and I ask you to conquer Yudu to atone for my sins.

古文：今便当遣六修南袭平阳，除僭伪之逆类，降知死之逋羯。顺天副民，翼奉皇家，斯乃曩年积诚灵祐之所致也！ 
现代文：现在应乘便派拓跋六向南袭击平阳，清除伪逆皇帝刘聪，降服知死的逃亡羯人石勒，顺应天意使百姓安定，辅助尊奉皇室，这是多年一直积累的诚心请神灵庇佑的结果。 
English: Now we should take advantage of the opportunity to send the Tuoba Six to attack Pingyang to the south, eliminate the pseudo-rebellious emperor Liu Cong, surrender to the desperate fugitive Shi Le, conform to the will of heaven to stabilize the people, and assist in honoring the royal family. This is the result of many years of accumulated sincerity to ask the gods for protection.

古文：三月，勒军达易水，王浚督护孙纬驰遣白浚，将勒兵拒之，游统禁之。
现代文：三月，石勒的军队到达易水，王浚的督护孙纬急速派人告诉王浚，将要指挥军队阻击石勒，游统制止这个行动。
English: In March, Shile's army arrived at Yishui. Wang Jun's overseer, Sun Wei, quickly sent a man to tell Wang Jun that he would command the army to block Shile, and Yudong would stop this action.

古文：浚将佐皆曰： 胡贪而无信，必有诡计，请击之。 
现代文：王浚的将领参佐都说： 胡人贪婪不讲信用，一定有诡计，请攻打石勒。 
English: Wang Jun's generals and advisers all said: Hu people are greedy and untrustworthy, there must be a trick, please attack Shiller.

古文：浚怒曰： 石公来，正欲奉戴我耳；敢言击者斩！ 
现代文：王浚发怒说： 石公来，正是要尊奉拥戴我，有敢说攻打的人，杀！ 
English: Wang Jun said angrily, "Shi Gong has come to respect and worship me. If anyone dares to attack me, kill him!"

古文：众不敢复言。
现代文：大家都不敢再说。
English: No one dared to say anything.

古文：浚设飨以待之。
现代文：王浚安排宴会准备接待石勒。
English: Wang Jun arranged a banquet to prepare for the reception of Shi Le.

古文：壬申，勒晨至蓟，叱门者开门；犹疑有伏兵，先驱牛羊数千头，声言上礼，实欲塞诸街巷。
现代文：壬申，石勒早晨到蓟城，喝叱守门卫士开门。开门后石勒怀疑有埋伏的军队，就先驱赶几千头牛羊进城，声称是给王浚奉上礼物，实际上想用牛羊堵塞住街巷。
English: Jinshin, Shi Le arrived at Lucheng in the morning and scolded the gatekeeper to open the door. After opening the door, Shi Le suspected that there was an ambush army, and drove thousands of cattle and sheep into the city, claiming to be a gift to Wang Jun, but actually wanted to block the streets with cattle and sheep.

古文：浚始惧，或坐或起。
现代文：王浚这才有些恐惧，坐立不安。
English: This made Wang Jun a little scared and uneasy.

古文：勒既入城，纵兵大掠，浚左右请御之，浚犹不许。
现代文：石勒进入城里后，纵兵抢掠，王浚身边的官员请示防御石勒，王浚还不允许。
English: After Shiller entered the city, the soldiers looted and plundered. The officials around Wang Jun asked for instructions to defend Shiller, but Wang Jun was not allowed.

古文：勒升其听事，浚乃走出堂皇，勒众执之。
现代文：石勒登上中庭，王浚于是走出殿堂，石勒的部众抓住了他。
English: Shi Le boarded the atrium, Wang Jun then walked out of the hall, Shi Le's subordinates caught him.

古文：勒召浚妻，与之并坐，执浚立于前。
现代文：石勒召来王浚的妻子，与她并排坐着，押着王浚站在前面。
English: Shi Le called Wang Jun's wife and sat side by side with her, holding Wang Jun in front.

古文：浚骂曰： 胡奴调乃公，何凶逆如此！ 
现代文：王浚骂道： 胡奴调戏你老子，为什么这样凶恶叛逆！ 
English: Wang Jun scolded: Hu Niu is playing tricks on you, old man, why are you so vicious and rebellious!

古文：勒曰： 公位冠元台，手握强兵，坐观本朝倾覆，曾不救援，乃欲自尊为天子，非凶逆乎！
现代文：石勒说： 您地位高于所有大臣，掌握着强大的军队，却坐视朝廷倾覆，竟不去救援，还想尊自己为天子，难道不是凶恶叛逆吗？
English: Shi Ler said: Your position is higher than that of all ministers, you command a powerful army, yet you sit back and watch the imperial court collapse, yet you do not go to the rescue, and you still want to honor yourself as the son of heaven. Is this not vicious rebellion?

古文：又委任奸贪，残虐百姓，贼害忠良，毒遍燕土，此谁之罪也！ 
现代文：又任用奸诈贪婪的小人，残酷虐待百姓，杀死迫害忠良，祸害遍及整个燕土，这是谁的罪呀！ 
English: He also appointed treacherous and greedy villains, cruelly abused the people, killed and persecuted the faithful, and the scourge spread throughout the entire Yan soil. Who is to blame for this?

古文：使其将王洛生以五百骑先送浚于襄国。浚自投于水，束而出之，斩于襄国市。
现代文：石勒派他的将领王洛生用五百骑兵把王浚押送到襄国，王浚自己投水，兵士们把他捆绑住拉出，在襄国的街市上把他杀了。
English: Shi Le sent his general Wang Lousheng with five hundred cavalrymen to push Wang Jun to Xiangguo. Wang Jun threw himself into the water, the soldiers tied him up, pulled him out, and killed him in the streets of Xiangguo.

古文：勒杀浚麾下精兵万人，浚将佐等争诣军门谢罪，馈赂交错；前尚书裴宪、从事中郎荀绰独不至，勒召而让之曰： 王浚暴虐，孤讨而诛之，诸人皆来庆谢，二君独与之同恶，将何以逃其戮乎！ 
现代文：石勒杀了王浚指挥下的一万精锐兵士。王浚的部将参佐争相到军门请罪，馈赠贿赂交相送来。只有前尚书裴宪、从事中郎荀绰没有到。石勒把他们召来斥责说： 王浚残暴凶虐，我讨伐而诛杀他，大家都来庆贺谢罪，二君偏偏要与他一同作恶，将怎么逃脱杀戮呢？ 
English: Shi Le killed ten thousand elite soldiers under the command of Wang Jun. Wang Jun's subordinates and advisers scrambled to the military gate to plead guilty and send gifts and bribes to each other. Only the former Shang Shu Pei Xian and the former middlemen did not arrive. Shi Le called them to rebuke them and said: Wang Jun is cruel and ferocious, I fought and killed him, everyone came to celebrate and thank him, the two princes want to do evil with him, how will they escape the killing?

古文：对曰： 宪等世仕晋朝，荷其荣禄，浚虽凶粗，犹是晋之籓臣，故宪等从之，不敢有贰。
现代文：他们回答说： 我们几代为晋朝做官，承受着晋朝给予的光荣与俸禄，王浚虽然凶暴粗俗，但仍然是晋朝的藩镇大臣，所以我们跟随他，不敢有二心。
English: They replied: We have been officials for the Jin Dynasty for several generations, and have borne the glory and salary given by the Jin Dynasty. Wang Jun, although he is ferocious and vulgar, is still a minister of the Jin Dynasty, so we follow him and dare not have second thoughts.

古文：明公苟不修德义，专事威刑，则宪等死自其分，又何逃乎！
现代文：您如果不讲究德义，专靠威势刑罚，那么我们死也是自己的本分，又为什么要逃脱呢？
English: If you do not pay attention to virtue and justice, and rely solely on punishment by force, then our death is also our duty, and why should we escape?

古文：请就死。 
现代文：请让我们赴死。 
English: Please let us die.

古文：不拜而出。
现代文：说完不拜辞而昂然出去。
English: If you can't do the service, quit.

古文：勒召而谢之，待以客礼。
现代文：石勒又召他们进来表示道歉，用待客之礼对待他们。
English: Shearer called them in again to apologise, treating them like guests.

古文：绰，勖之孙也。
现代文：荀绰是荀勖的孙子。
English: He is the grandson of Zou Zou.

古文：勒数硃硕、枣嵩等以纳贿乱政，为幽州患，责游统以不忠所事，皆斩之。
现代文：石勒历数朱硕、枣嵩等人收受贿赂搞乱政事，是幽州的祸患；斥责游统任职不忠，把他们都杀了。
English: Shi Le, Zhu Shuo, Zaosong and others who took bribes and disrupted political affairs were the scourge of Yuzhou; he rebuked them for their disloyalty and killed them all.

古文：籍浚将佐、亲戚家赀，皆至巨万，惟裴宪、荀绰止有书百馀帙，盐米各十馀斛而已。
现代文：查抄没收王浚的部将参佐、亲戚的巨额家产，唯独裴宪、荀绰仅有百余套书，盐、米各有十几斛而已。
English: The inspection and confiscation included the huge family assets of Wang Jun's minister, senator, and relatives. However, there were only more than a hundred sets of books for Pei Xian and Gao Cao, and only a dozen bags of salt and rice each.

古文：勒曰： 吾不喜得幽州，喜得二子。 
现代文：石勒说： 我并不因为取得幽州而高兴，而是为得到你们二人感到高兴。 
English: Shearer said: "I'm not happy to get Yuzhou, I'm happy to get you two.

古文：以宪为从事中郎，绰为参军。
现代文：任裴宪为从事中郎、荀绰为参军。
English: He appointed Pei Xian as a middle-ranking official, and Zou Zuo as a member of the army.

古文：分遣流民，各还乡里。
现代文：分别遣送流民，让他们各自回到故乡。
English: Separately deport the displaced persons and let them return to their hometowns separately.

古文：勒停蓟二日，焚浚宫殿，以故尚书燕国刘翰行幽州刺史，戍蓟，置守宰而还。
现代文：石勒在蓟城停留了二天，焚烧了王浚的宫殿，以前尚书燕国人刘翰担任幽州刺史，戍守蓟城，安排了郡县长官后回师。
English: Shi Ler stayed in Lucheng for two days and burned Wang Jun's palace. Liu Han, a native of Shangshuyan, had previously served as the governor of Yuzhou and guarded Lucheng. He arranged for the county magistrate to return later.

古文：孙纬遮击之，勒仅而得免。
现代文：孙纬出兵阻击，石勒仅得以逃脱。
English: Sun Yat-sen sent troops to block the attack, but Shiller was only able to escape.

古文：勒至襄国，遣使奉王浚首献捷于汉，汉以勒为大都督、督陕东诸军事、骠骑大将军、东单于，增封十二郡；勒固辞，受二郡而已。
现代文：石勒回到襄国，派遣使者带着王浚首级向汉报捷。汉任石勒为大都督、都督陕东诸军事、骠骑大将军、东单于，增封十二个郡，石勒坚持推辞，仅仅接受了两个郡罢了。
English: Shi Le returned to Xiangguo and sent an envoy with Wang Jun's head to report the victory to the Han Dynasty. The Han Dynasty appointed Shi Le as the grand governor, the military governor of eastern Shaanxi, the grand cavalry general, and the eastern liaison officer, and added twelve counties. Shi Le insisted on refusing, and only accepted two counties.

古文：刘琨请兵于拓跋猗卢以击汉，会猗卢所部杂胡万馀家谋应石勒，猗卢悉诛之，不果赴琨约。
现代文：刘琨向拓跋猗卢请求军队来攻打汉，正遇到拓跋猗卢所辖的一万多家成分复杂的胡人密谋接应石勒，拓跋猗卢把他们全部杀了，没有赶赴与刘琨所约的行动。
English: Liu Bei requested the army of Tuobao Lu to attack Han, and was encountering more than ten thousand complex Hu people under the jurisdiction of Tuobao Lu who were plotting to take over Shila. Tuobao Lu killed them all and did not rush to the action agreed upon with Liu Bei.

古文：琨知石勒无降意，乃大惧，上表曰： 东北八州，勒灭其七；先朝所授，存者惟臣。
现代文：刘琨得知石勒没有投降的意思，非常害怕，上奏表说： 东北地区八个州，石勒消灭了其中七个，以前晋朝所安排的州牧，只有我留存下来。
English: When Liu Ye learned that Shiller had no intention of surrendering, he was very afraid. He wrote on the report form: Of the eight prefectures in the northeastern region, Shiller has eliminated seven of them. Of the prefectures previously arranged by the Jin Dynasty, only I have survived.

古文：勒据襄国，与臣隔山，朝发夕至，城坞骇惧，虽怀忠愤，力不从愿耳！ 
现代文：石勒占据襄国，与我仅隔一座山，早晨出兵晚上就能到达，各个城堡都震骇惊恐，虽然心怀忠诚与仇恨，但是也力不从心呀！ 
English: Shiller occupies Xiangguo, just a mountain away from me. He sends troops in the morning and can arrive in the evening. Every castle is shocked and terrified. Although he is loyal and hateful, he is powerless!

古文：刘翰不欲从石勒，乃归段匹磾，匹磾遂据蓟城。
现代文：刘翰不想附从石勒，于是投靠段匹，段匹于是便占据了蓟城。
English: Liu Han did not want to follow Shiller, so he relied on Duanpi, and Duanpi then occupied Lucheng.

古文：王浚从事中郎阳裕，耽之兄子也，逃奔令支，依段疾陆眷。
现代文：王浚的从事中郎阳裕是阳哥哥的儿子，逃奔到令支县，依附于段疾陆眷。
English: In the middle of Wang Jun's occupation, Yang Yu, the son of Yang's elder brother, fled to Lingzhi County and attached himself to Duan Zi Lu's family.

古文：会稽硃左车、鲁国孔纂、泰山胡母翼自蓟逃奔昌黎，依慕容廆。
现代文：会稽人朱左车、鲁国人孔纂，泰山人胡母翼等从蓟城逃奔昌黎，依附于慕容。
English: The auditor of the association, Zhu Zuo Che, the Lu people, Kong Zuo, and the Taishan people, Hu Mu Ying, fled from Lucheng to Changli and attached themselves to Murong.

古文：是时中国流民归廆者数万家，廆以冀州人为冀阳郡，豫州人为成周郡，青州人为营丘郡，并州人为唐国郡。
现代文：当时中原投奔慕容的流民有几万家，慕容为冀州人设置冀阳郡，豫州人设置成周郡，青州人设置营丘郡，并州人设置唐国郡。
English: At that time, there were tens of thousands of emigrants from the Central Plains who went to Murong. Murong set up Jiyang County for the Jizhou people, Zhou County for the Henzhou people, Yingqiu County for the Qingzhou people, and Tangguo County for the Suzhou people.

古文：初，王浚以邵续为乐陵太守，屯厌次。
现代文：当初，王浚以邵续任乐陵太守，驻扎在厌次县。
English: At the beginning, Wang Jun appointed Shao Lian as the governor of Le Ling, stationed in Yanqi County.

古文：浚败，续附于石勒，勒以续子乂为督护。
现代文：王浚失败，邵续依附于石勒，石勒以邵续的儿子邵任督护。
English: Wang Jun failed, Shao Cui clung to Shiller, and Shiller appointed Shao Cui's son Shao as supervisor.

古文：浚所署勃海太守东莱刘胤弃郡依续，谓续曰： 凡立大功，必杖大义。
现代文：王浚所管辖的勃海太守东莱人刘胤弃职投奔邵续，对邵续说： 凡是建立大功，一定要依仗大义。
English: Liu Yan, the governor of Donglai in the Bohai Sea, who was under the jurisdiction of Wang Jun, resigned from his post and joined Shao Zhai. He said to Shao Zhai, "Whenever you establish great achievements, you must rely on great righteousness."

古文：君，晋之忠臣，奈何从贼以自污乎！ 
现代文：您是晋朝的忠臣，为什么顺从贼寇玷污自己呢？ 
English: You are a loyal subject of the Jin Dynasty. Why do you defile yourself by obeying the bandits?

古文：会段匹磾以书邀续同归左丞相睿，续从之。
现代文：正好段匹来信邀请邵续一同投靠左丞相司马睿，邵续同意了这个邀请。
English: Just then, a letter arrived from Duanpi inviting Shao Cui to join the leftist chancellor Sima Rui, and Shao Cui agreed to the invitation.

古文：其人皆曰： 今弃勒归匹磾，其如乂何？ 
现代文：他手下的人都说： 现在离弃石勒而投靠段匹，那邵怎么办？ 
English: All of his subordinates said: Now that he has abandoned Shiller in favor of Duanpi, what will Shao do?

古文：续泣曰： 我岂得顾子而为叛臣哉！ 
现代文：邵续哭着说： 我难道能为顾惜儿子而作叛臣吗？ 
English: Shao Fei cried and said, "Can I be a traitor to my son?

古文：杀异议者数人。
现代文：杀了几个持异议的人。
English: killed several dissidents.

古文：勒闻之，杀乂。
现代文：石勒听说后，杀了邵。
English: When Shi Le heard about this, he killed Shao.

古文：续遣刘胤使江东，睿以胤为参军，以续为平原太守。
现代文：邵续派遣刘胤作为使者到江东，司马睿让刘胤担任参军，任邵续为平原太守。
English: Shao Jian sent Liu Yan as an envoy to the east of the Yangtze River, Sima Rui allowed Liu Yan to join the army, and appointed Shao Jian as the governor of the plain.

古文：石勒遣兵围续，匹磾使其弟文鸯救之，勒引去。
现代文：石勒派兵包围邵续，段匹派他弟弟段文鸯救援邵续，石勒带兵离去。
English: Shi Le sent troops to encircle Shao Lian, Duan Pi sent his brother Duan Wenyi to rescue Shao Lian, and Shi Le led his troops away.

古文：襄国大饥，谷二升直银一斤，肉一斤直银一两。
现代文：襄国饥荒严重，二升谷子价值一斤银子，一斤肉价值一两银子。
English: The famine in Xiangguo was severe. Two liters of grain was worth one catty of silver, and one catty of meat was worth one or two silver coins.

古文：杜苾将王真袭陶侃于休障，侃奔滠中。
现代文：杜苾带领王真到林障袭击陶侃，陶侃逃奔滠中。
English: Cuckoo led Wang Zhen to the forest barrier to attack Tao Kan, and Tao Kan fled into the reeds.

古文：周访救侃，击苾兵，破之。
现代文：周访救援陶侃，打败了杜的军队。
English: Zhou Zai rescues Tao Kan and defeats Du's army.

古文：夏，五月，西平武穆公张轨寝疾，遗令： 文武将佐，务安百姓，上思报国，下以宁家。 
现代文：夏季，五月，西平武穆公张轨病危，下达遗令： 文武官员，一定要使百姓安定，一方面报国，一方面宁家。 
English: In the summer, in May, Xiping Wumukong became critically ill and issued a posthumous order: "Civil and military officials, be sure to keep the people stable. On the one hand, serve the country, on the other hand, serve Ningjia."

古文：己丑，轨薨；长史张玺等表世子实摄父位。
现代文：己丑，张轨去世。长史张玺等人表奏张轨的长子张代理他父亲的职务。
English: Zhang Zhaoli, the eldest son of Zhang Zhaoli, died. Zhang Zhaoli, the eldest son of Zhang Zhaoli, represented his father's duties.

古文：汉中山王曜、赵染寇长安。
现代文：汉中山王刘曜、赵染进犯长安。
English: Hanzhong Mountain King Liu You and Zhao Dyeing invaded Chang'an.

古文：六月，曜屯渭汭，染屯新丰，索纟林将兵出拒之。
现代文：六月，刘曜在渭驻扎，赵染在新丰驻扎。索带兵出去阻击。
English: In June, Liu You was stationed in Handan, and Zhao Zhen was stationed in Xinfeng. Zhao led the soldiers to go out to resist.

古文：染有轻纟林之色，长史鲁徽曰： 晋之君臣，自知强弱不敌，将致死于我，不可轻也。 
现代文：赵染有轻视索的表现，长史鲁徽说： 晋朝的君主大臣，自己知道力量悬殊不是对手，将与我们拼命，不能够轻视。 
English: Zhao Zeng has the performance of despising the rope, the head of Shului said: the monarch minister of the Jin Dynasty, he knows that the power disparity is not a rival, will fight with us desperately, can not be despised.

古文：染曰： 以司马模之强，吾取之如拉朽；索纟林小竖，岂能污吾马蹄、刀刃邪！ 
现代文：赵染说： 司马模那么强大，我打败他如同摧枯拉朽。索这小子，难道还能弄脏我的马蹄、刀刃吗？ 
English: Zhao Zhen said: Sima Mo is so powerful, I beat him as if I were beating a dead horse. Can I still dirty my horse's hoof and blade with this boy?

古文：晨，帅轻骑数百逆之，曰： 要当获纟林而后食。 
现代文：早晨，率领几百轻骑兵迎着索的军队而去，说： 抓到索以后再吃饭。 
English: In the morning, he led several hundred light cavalry to meet So's army and said, "We'll eat after we catch So."

古文：纟林与战于城西，染兵败而归，悔曰： 吾不用鲁徽之言以至此，何面目见之！ 
现代文：索与赵染在新丰城西交战，赵染兵败而归。懊悔说： 我不听鲁徽的话以致失败，有什么脸面见他！ 
English: So and Zhao Zhen fought in the west of Xinfengcheng, Zhao Zhen was defeated and returned. Remorse said: I did not listen to Lu Hui's words and failed, what a face to see him!

古文：先命斩徽。徽曰： 将军愚愎以取败，乃复忌前害胜，诛忠良以逞忿，犹有天地，将军其得死于枕席乎！ 
现代文：先命令杀掉鲁徽，鲁徽说： 将军您愚鲁刚愎所以失败，却又忌恨残害在你前面胜过你的人，诛杀忠良以发泄愤恨，天地报应尚在，您难道能有善终吗？ 
English: He gave the order to kill Lu Hui first, and Lu Hui said: "General, you are stupid and stubborn, which is why you failed, but you still hate and harm those who were better than you in the past, and you kill the loyal and the good to vent your anger. Heaven and earth are still in need of retribution. Can you really have a good end?

古文：诏加索纟林骠骑大将军、尚书左仆射、录尚书，承制行事。
现代文：朝廷诏令任命索为骠骑大将军、尚书左仆射、录尚书事，奉制书行事。
English: The Imperial Court issued a decree appointing So as the grand general of the cavalry, the left-hand man of the imperial secretary, the recorder of the imperial secretary, and the official of the imperial secretary.

古文：曜、染复与将军殷凯帅众数万向长安，麹允逆战于冯翊，允败，收兵；夜，袭凯营，凯败死。
现代文：刘曜、赵染又与将军殷凯率领几万军队进发长安，允在冯翊迎战，结果允失败，收兵。夜里，袭击殷凯军营，殷凯失败而死。
English: Liu Yow, Zhao Zhen and General Yin Kai led tens of thousands of troops to Chang'an, and Yun fought in Fengye. As a result, Yun failed and withdrew his troops. At night, he attacked Yin Kai's military camp, and Yin Kai failed and died.

古文：曜乃还攻河内太守郭默于怀，列三屯围之。
现代文：刘曜于是回师到怀县攻打河内太守郭默，屯列三处包围他。
English: Liu You then sent his division back to Huai County to attack the governor of Hanoi, Guo Mo, and encircled him in three places.

古文：默食尽，送妻子为质，请籴于曜；籴毕，复婴城固守。
现代文：郭默粮食吃完了，就把妻儿送到刘曜那里当人质，请求在刘曜处买粮，买完粮食，郭默又关闭四周城门固守。
English: After Guo Mo finished eating the grain, he sent his wife and child to Liu You as hostages, requesting to buy grain from Liu You. After buying the grain, Guo Mo closed the surrounding gates and held fast.

古文：曜怒，沉默妻子于河而攻之。
现代文：刘曜发怒，把郭默的妻儿沉到河中而攻打郭默。
English: Liu Ye became angry and attacked Guo Mo by sinking Guo Mo's wife and child into the river.

古文：默欲投李矩于新郑，矩使其甥郭诵迎之。兵少，不敢进。
现代文：郭默想到新郑投奔李矩，李矩派自己的外甥郭诵去迎接郭默，结果兵少而不敢向前。
English: Guo Miao thought of Xin Zheng's rushing to Li Rui. Li Rui sent his nephew Guo Xie to meet Guo Miao. As a result, Guo Miao had fewer soldiers and did not dare to advance.

古文：会刘琨遣参军张肇帅鲜卑五百馀骑诣长安，道阻不通，还，过矩营，矩说肇，使击汉兵。
现代文：这时刘琨派遣参军张肇带领五百多鲜卑骑兵到长安，因道路不通，正往回走，路过李矩的军营，李矩劝说张肇，让他攻打汉军。
English: At this time, Liu Bei sent Zhang Zhao to join the army to lead more than five hundred fresh cavalry to Chang'an. Because the road was impassable, he was walking back. He passed Li Rui's military camp. Li Rui persuaded Zhang Zhao to let him attack the Chinese army.

古文：汉兵望见鲜卑，不战而走，默遂帅众归矩。
现代文：结果，汉军远远看到鲜卑骑兵，不战而走，这样郭默便率众归了李矩。
English: As a result, the Chinese army saw the lowly cavalrymen far away and left without a fight, so Guo Mei led the crowd to Li Rui.

古文：汉主聪召曜还屯蒲坂。
现代文：汉主刘聪召刘曜回到蒲坂驻扎。
English: Liu Cong, the lord of Han, called Liu You to return to Busan and stay there.

古文：秋，赵染攻北地，麹允拒之，染中弩而死。
现代文：秋季，赵染攻打北地，遭到允阻击，赵染身中弩箭而死。
English: In the autumn, Zhao Zhen attacked the north, but was blocked by Yun. Zhao Zhen was hit by an arrow and died.

古文：石勒始命州郡阅实户口，户出帛二匹，谷二斛。
现代文：石勒开始命令所据各州郡核实户口，每户征收二匹帛、二斛谷。
English: Shi Le began to order the institute to verify the household registration according to each state and county, and each household was levied two horses and two valleys.

古文：冬，十月，以张实为都督凉州诸军事、凉州刺史、西平公。
现代文：冬季，十月，朝廷任张为都督凉州诸军事、凉州刺史、西平公。
English: In winter and October, the imperial court appointed Zhang as the military governor of Liangzhou, the governor of Liangzhou, and the governor of Xiping.

古文：十一月，汉主聪以晋王粲为相国、大单于，总百揆。
现代文：十一月，汉主刘聪任晋王刘粲为相国、大单于，总领文武百官。
English: In November, the Han ruler Liu Cong appointed the Jin king Liu Xuan as a relative of the country, the great single, and the general of the military.

古文：粲少有俊才，自为宰相，骄奢专恣，远贤亲佞，严刻愎谏，国人始恶之。
现代文：刘粲年轻时有杰出的才能，但自从当了宰相后，骄纵奢侈独断专行，疏远贤能亲近奸诈机巧的人，严厉苛刻，一意孤行不听规劝，开始遭到国人的憎恶。
English: Liu Bei had outstanding talent when he was young, but since he became the prime minister, he has been arrogant, extravagant, arbitrary, alienated the virtuous, close to the treacherous and cunning, severe and harsh, and stubbornly refused to listen to persuasion, and began to be hated by the Chinese people.

古文：周勰以其父遗言，因吴人之怨，谋作乱；使吴兴功曹徐馥矫称叔父丞相从事中郎札之命，收合徒众，以讨王导、刁协，豪杰翕然附之，孙皓族人弼亦起兵于广德以应之。
现代文：周勰根据他父亲的遗言，利用吴地士人的怨恨，密谋叛乱。他派吴兴功曹徐馥假称叔父丞相从事中郎周札的命令，收揽聚合部众，来讨伐王导、刁协，江南豪杰纷纷前来归附他，孙皓的族人孙弼也在广德起兵响应他。
English: According to his father's last words, Zhou Kun took advantage of the resentment of the people of Wudi to plot a rebellion. He sent Wu Xinggong Cao Xuqi to pretend that his uncle, the prime minister, was carrying out the orders of the middle-ranking official, Zhou Fuda, to gather members to fight against Wang Du and Zou Xie. The heroes of the south of the Yangtze River came to join him. Sun Kun's relative, Sun Kun, also raised an army in response to him in Guangde.

古文：孝愍皇帝下建兴三年
现代文：建兴三年
English: Three years of construction

古文：春，正月，徐馥杀吴兴太守袁琇，有众数千，欲奉周札为主。
现代文：春季，正月，徐馥杀吴兴太守袁，拥有几千人，想尊奉周札为首领。
English: In the spring, in the first month of the year, Xu Xi killed Wu Xing, the governor of Yuan, who had several thousand people and wanted to honor Zhou Fata as the leader.

古文：札闻之，大惊，以告义兴太守孔侃。
现代文：周札听说后，非常惊恐，把这事告诉了义兴太守孔侃。
English: After hearing this, Zhou Fuda was very alarmed and told this to Yixing's Grand Master Kong Kan.

古文：勰知札意不同，不敢发。
现代文：周勰知道周札的想法不同，不敢冒然举事。
English: Zhou Qi knew that Zhou Fang's thoughts were different, and he dared not take the initiative.

古文：馥党惧，攻馥，杀之；孙弼亦死。
现代文：徐馥的部众害怕，就攻打徐馥，把他杀了，孙弼也被杀死。
English: Xu Yao's subordinates were afraid, so they attacked Xu Yao and killed him. Sun Yao was also killed.

古文：札子续亦聚众应馥，左丞相睿议发兵讨之。
现代文：周札的儿子周续也聚集部众响应徐馥，左丞相司马睿商议发兵讨伐他。
English: Zhou Fata's son, Zhou Lian, also gathered his followers to respond to Xu Xi, and the Minister of the Left, Sima Rui, discussed sending troops to fight him.

古文：王导曰： 今少发兵则不足以平寇，多发兵则根本空虚。
现代文：王导说： 现在派兵少了不足以平定敌寇，派兵多了会使得我们根基空虚。
English: Wang Du said, "Sending fewer troops now is not enough to quell the enemy raiders. Sending more troops will make our foundation empty."

古文：续族弟黄门侍郎莚，忠果有谋，请独使莚往，足以诛续。 
现代文：周续的族弟黄门侍郎周，忠诚果敢有谋略，请派周独自带兵前往，完全能够诛杀周续。 
English: Zhou's younger brother Huangmen Zhi Rong Zhou, loyal, bold and resourceful, please send Zhou to go alone with an army, fully capable of killing Zhou.

古文：睿从之。
现代文：司马睿采纳了这个建议。
English: Sima Rui accepted the suggestion.

古文：莚昼夜兼行，至郡，将入，遇续于门，谓续曰： 当与君共诣孔府君，有所论。 
现代文：周日夜兼程，到了郡城，正要进去，在城门遇到周续，就对周续说： 正要与您一起去拜会府君孔侃，有话要说。 
English: On Sunday evening, after a long journey, they arrived at the county seat and were about to enter when they met Zhou Cui at the city gate. Zhou Cui said to Zhou Cui: "I'm about to go with you to visit the meeting place, Mr. Kong Kan. I have something to say to you."

古文：续不肯入，莚牵逼与俱。
现代文：周续不肯进去，周拉着逼迫他一起去。
English: Zhou Zhe refused to go in, and Zhou Zhe forced him to go with him.

古文：坐定，莚谓孔侃曰： 府君何以置贼在坐？ 
现代文：进去坐定后，周对孔侃说： 您为什么安排乱贼坐下？ 
English: After going in and sitting down, Zhou said to Kong Kan: Why did you arrange for the ruffian to sit down?

古文：续衣中常置刀，即操刀逼莚，莚叱郡传教吴曾格杀之。
现代文：周续的衣服里常常藏着刀，随即拿起刀逼临周，周喝令郡传教吴曾杀了周续。
English: He often hid a knife in Zhou's clothes, and then picked up the knife to force Zhou to kill the county missionary Wu Zengru.

古文：莚因欲诛勰，札不听，委罪于从兄邵而诛之。
现代文：周便想去诛杀周勰，周札不同意，就将罪名加到堂兄周邵身上，把他杀了。
English: Zhou then wanted to fight and kill Zhou Qi, but Zhou Card did not agree, so he added the crime to his cousin Zhou Shao and killed him.

古文：莚不归家省母，遂长驱而去，母狼狈追之。
现代文：周不回家看望母亲，就直接离开了，他的母亲跌跌撞撞地追他。
English: Zhou didn't go home to visit his mother, he just left, and his mother stumbled after him.

古文：睿以札为吴兴太守，莚为太子右卫率。
现代文：司马睿让周札任吴兴太守，周任太子右卫率。
English: Sima Rui appointed Zhou Za as Wu Xing's eunuch and Zhou as the prince's right guard.

古文：以周氏吴之豪望，故不穷治，抚勰如旧。
现代文：因为周氏是吴地的豪门望族，所以并不深究，并像以前一样抚慰周勰。
English: Because the Zhou clan was a wealthy and prestigious family in Wudi, they did not inquire deeply, and soothed Zhou Yao as before.

古文：诏平东将军宋哲屯华阴。
现代文：朝廷诏令平东将军宋哲驻扎在华阴。
English: The imperial court ordered the Pingdong general Song Zhe to be stationed in Huayin.

古文：成主雄立后任氏。
现代文：成汉主李雄把任氏立为皇后。
English: The ruler of the Han Dynasty, Li Xiong, made Ren the empress.

古文：二月，丙子，以琅邪王睿为丞相、大都督、督中外诸军事，南阳王保为相国，荀组为太尉、领豫州牧，刘琨为司空、都督并、冀、幽三州诸军事。
现代文：二月，丙子，朝廷任琅邪王司马睿为丞相、大都督、都督中外诸军事，任南阳王司马保为相国，荀组为太尉、兼豫州牧，任刘琨为司空、都督并、幽、冀三州诸军事。
English: In February, the imperial court appointed Wang Sima Rui as chancellor, grand governor, and military governor of the Middle and Outer Provinces, Wang Sima Bao of Nanyang as a neighboring country, Yu Gui as a lieutenant and governor of Henan Province, and Liu Bei as the military governor of the Three Provinces.

古文：琨辞司空不受。
现代文：刘琨推辞司空的职务，不接受。
English: Liu Wei did not accept the resignation of Sikyong.

古文：南阳王模之败也，都尉陈安往归世子保于秦州，保命安将千馀人讨叛羌，宠待甚厚。
现代文：南阳王司马模失败后，都尉陈安前往秦州把司马模的长子司马保送回，司马保命令陈安率领一千多兵士讨伐叛乱的羌人，对陈安的宠信待遇很深重。
English: After the defeat of Nanyang King Sima Miao, Captain Chen An went to Qinzhou to send Sima Miao's eldest son, Sima Bao, back. Sima Bao ordered Chen An to lead more than a thousand soldiers to fight the rebellious Xiang people, and treated Chen An with great favor.

古文：保将张春疾之，谮安，云有异志，请除之，保不许；春辄伏刺客以刺安。
现代文：司马保的部将张春嫉妒陈安，就诬陷陈安，说陈安有异心，请司马保除掉他，司马保不同意。张春就埋伏了刺客刺杀陈安。
English: Zhang Chun, Sima Bao's subordinate, was jealous of Chen Anru, so he framed Chen An, saying that Chen An had other intentions, and asked Sima Bao to get rid of him. Sima Bao did not agree. Zhang Chun then ambushed the assassin to assassinate Chen An.

古文：安被创，驰还陇城，遣使诣保，贡献不绝。
现代文：陈安被刺伤，纵马驰骋回陇城，派使者到司马保那里，并不断地给司马保进贡献礼。
English: Chen An was stabbed and galloped back to Lucheng on horseback. He sent an envoy to Sima Bao and kept giving him gifts.

古文：诏进拓跋猗卢爵为代王，置官属，食代、常山二郡。
现代文：朝廷诏令进封拓跋猗卢的爵位为代王，设置安排属官，以代郡、常山郡作为封邑。
English: The Imperial Court issued a decree to confer the title of acting king on Tuobao Lu, and set up subordinate officials, with Tuobao County and Changshan County as fief counties.

古文：猗卢请并州从事雁门莫含于刘琨，琨遣之。
现代文：拓跋猗卢向刘琨要并州从事雁门人莫含，刘琨派遣莫含前往。
English: Tuobao Lu asked Liu Bei to annex the state to engage in the Wild Goose Gate, and Liu Bei sent him to the top.

古文：含不欲行，琨曰： 以并州单弱，吾之不材，而能自存于胡、羯之间者，代王之力也。
现代文：莫含不想走，刘琨说： 以并州的势单力薄，我无能而仍能够在胡人、羯人之间生存，完全是靠代王的力量。
English: Although he did not want to leave, Liu Ye said, "The power of the unified state is weak. I am powerless, but I can still survive between the Hu people and the Xiong people. I completely rely on the power of the king."

古文：吾倾身竭赀，以长子为质而奉之者，庶几为朝廷雪大耻也。
现代文：我之所以一心竭尽财产，并拿长子作为人质而对待代王，就是希望也许能够为朝廷洗雪大耻。
English: The reason why I single-mindedly exhausted my assets and took my eldest son as a hostage and treated him as the acting king is that I hoped that I might be able to wash away the disgrace of the imperial court.

古文：卿欲为忠臣，奈何惜共事之小诚，而忘徇国之大节乎？
现代文：你想当忠臣。为什么顾惜能够在一起共事的小小忠诚而忘记为国献身的大节呢？ 
English: You want to be a loyal subject. Why do you cherish the small loyalty of being able to work together and forget the big festival of dedication to the country?

古文：往事大王，为之腹心，乃一州之所赖也。 
现代文：去为代王做事，成为他的心腹，这是全州所依赖的呀。 
English: To work for the king's representative, to be his confidant, this is what the whole state depends on.

古文：含遂行。
现代文：莫含于是走了。
English: Mokhan then left.

古文：猗卢甚重之，常与参大计。
现代文：拓跋猗卢非常重用莫含，常常让他参与制定大计。
English: Tuoba Guolu is very useful, often let him participate in the formulation of the grand plan.

古文：猗卢用法严，国人犯法者，或举部就诛，老幼相携而行，人问： 何之？ 
现代文：拓跋猗卢用法严峻，国人中有犯法的，有时整个部落被处死，这个部落就老幼互相搀扶着前往。有人问： 去哪儿？ 
English: Tuoba and Lu are used in a severe way. Some Chinese people have broken the law, and sometimes the entire tribe has been executed. This tribe is helping each other to go. Someone asked: Where to go?

古文：曰： 往就死。 
现代文：回答说： 去接受死刑。 
English: He replied: "To receive the death penalty."

古文：无一人敢逃匿者。
现代文：没有一人敢逃跑躲藏。
English: No one dared to run and hide.

古文：王敦遣陶侃、甘卓等讨杜弢，前后数十战，弢将士多死，乃请降于丞相睿，睿不许。
现代文：王敦派遣陶侃、甘卓等人讨伐杜，前后几十次战斗，杜的官兵大多战死，就向丞相司马睿请求投降。
English: Wang Dun dispatched Tao Kan, Gan Zhuo and others to fight against Du Quan, and after dozens of battles, most of Du's officers and soldiers died in battle, so he asked the prime minister Sima Rui to surrender.

古文：弢遗南平太守应詹书，自陈昔与詹 共讨乐乡，本同休戚。
现代文：司马睿不同意。杜给南平太守应詹去信，自述过去与应詹 共同讨伐乐乡，本来同喜同愁。
English: Sima Rui disagreed. Du wrote a letter to the governor of Nanping Province, Ying Zhan, and said that he and Ying Zhan had fought together in the past to liberate Le Township. Originally, they shared the same joy and sorrow.

古文：后在湘中，惧死求生，遂相结聚。
现代文：后来在湘中，畏死求生，这才聚众。
English: Later, in Hunan, fearing death and trying to survive, that's when the crowds gathered.

古文：倘以旧交之情，为明枉直，使得输诚盟府，厕列义徒，或北清中原，或西取李雄，以赎前愆，虽死之日，犹生之年也！ 
现代文：假如能够以过去交往的情分，为我说明真情，使我能尽效忠诚，参加列入举义的人们当中，或者北伐清理中原，或者西征攻取李雄，来赎我以前犯的罪过，即使是死的日子，也像是再生之年！ 
English: If I can use my past interactions to illustrate my true feelings, so that I can be as loyal as possible and participate in the people listed as righteous, or the Northern Expedition to clean up the Central Plains, or the Western Expedition to capture Li Xiong, to atone for my previous sins, even the day of death is like a year of rebirth!

古文：詹为启呈其书，且言 弢，益州秀才，素有清望，为乡人所逼。
现代文：应詹替他呈交了这封信，并且说： 杜是益州的秀才，一直享有很好的名望，被乡里人所逼迫才聚众叛乱。
English: Ying Zhan presented the letter on his behalf, and said: Du is a talented person in Yizhou, has always enjoyed a good reputation, and was forced by the villagers to gather people to rebel.

古文：今悔恶归善，宜命使扶纳，以息江、湘之民！ 
现代文：现在悔恶从善，应当派使者去安抚接受他投降，以使江、湘地区的百姓安定。 
English: Now that the evil has turned into good, an envoy should be sent to appease and accept his surrender in order to stabilize the people in the Jiang and Hunan regions.

古文：睿乃使前南海太守王运受弢降，赦其反逆之罪，以弢为巴东监军。
现代文：司马睿就派前南海太守王运去接受杜投降，赦免了杜的叛逆罪行，并任杜为巴东监军。
English: Sima Rui sent the former Nankai governor Wang Yun to accept Du's surrender, pardoned Du's treason, and appointed Du as the inspector of the East Pakistan Army.

古文：弢既受命，诸将犹攻之不已。
现代文：杜接受任命后，各将领却仍然不停地攻打他。
English: After Du accepted the appointment, the generals continued to attack him.

古文：弢不胜愤怒，遂杀运复反，遣其将杜弘、张彦杀临川内史谢擒，遂陷豫章。
现代文：杜非常愤怒，于是杀了王运重新反叛，派他的部将杜弘、张彦杀了临川内史谢，攻陷了豫章。
English: Du was very angry, so he killed Wang Yun for rebelling again, and sent his subordinates Du Hong and Zhang Yan to kill Lin Chuanai Shi Xie and capture Yuzhang.

古文：三月，周访击彦，斩之，弘奔临贺。
现代文：三月，周访攻打张彦，把他杀了，杜弘逃往临贺。
English: In March, Zhou You attacked Zhang Yan and killed him, while Du Hong fled to Linhe.

古文：汉大赦，改元建元。
现代文：汉实行大赦，改年号为建元。
English: Han implemented an amnesty and changed the era name to Jianyuan.

古文：雨血于汉东宫延明殿，太弟乂恶之，以问太傅崔玮、太保许遐。
现代文：汉东宫延明殿降了血雨，太弟刘对此很厌恶，询问太傅崔玮、太保许遐。
English: The blood rain fell on the Yanming Hall of the Han Donggong Palace. Liu, the eldest brother, was disgusted by this, and inquired about Taifu Cui Yao and Taibao Xu Yao.

古文：玮、遐说乂曰： 主上往日以殿下为太弟者，欲以安众心耳；其志在晋王久矣，王公已下莫不希旨附之。
现代文：崔玮、许遐对刘说： 皇上过去让殿下担任太弟是想安定人心罢了。他要让晋王刘粲当皇位继承人的想法已经产生很久了。王公以下的官员没有谁不迎合他的旨意附和他。
English: Cui Zhen and Xu Zhen said to Liu: The emperor only wanted to make His Imperial Highness Liu Zhen the crown prince in the past in order to stabilize the hearts of the people. The idea of making the Jin king Liu Zhen the heir to the throne had been around for a long time. No officials below the prince followed his wishes.

古文：今复以晋王为相国，羽仪威重，逾于东宫，万机之事，无不由之，诸王皆置营兵以为羽翼，事势已去；殿下非徒不得立也，朝夕且有不测之危，不如早为之计。
现代文：现在又让晋王担任相国，仪仗威严庄重，超过了殿下的东宫。国务军政大事，没有不由他决定的，另外亲王们也都安置营兵作为羽翼，殿下继承皇位的趋势已经没有了。殿下非但不能够继承皇位，而且早晚还有不测的危险，不如尽快安排对策。
English: Now, Jin Wang is allowed to serve as the consort of the emperor, with a dignified and solemn ceremony, surpassing the East Palace of His Imperial Highness. There are no national military and political events that are not decided by him. In addition, the princes have also placed soldiers as wings, and the trend of His Imperial Highness's succession to the throne has disappeared. Not only is His Imperial Highness unable to succeed to the throne, but there is also the danger of unforeseen events sooner or later. It is better to arrange countermeasures as soon as possible.

古文：今四卫精兵不减五千，相国轻佻，正烦一刺客耳。
现代文：现在皇宫的禁卫有五千人以上的精锐兵士，相国刘粲轻佻，正可以烦劳一个刺客解决。
English: Now the palace's guards have more than five thousand elite soldiers, and Liu Xuan, the brother-in-law, is able to deal with a troublesome assassin.

古文：大将军无日不出，其营可袭而取；馀王并幼，固易夺也。
现代文：大将军刘敷没有一天不出去，他的军营可以袭击夺取。剩下的亲王都年纪幼小容易解决。
English: General Liu Shiki never goes a day without going out, his military camp can be attacked and captured. The remaining princes are young and easy to solve.

古文：苟殿下有意，二万精兵指顾可得，鼓行入云龙门，宿卫之士，孰不倒戈以迎殿下者！
现代文：如果殿下有心，那么两万精锐兵士举手之劳便可完成，擂鼓走入云龙门，禁卫的兵士，谁能不倒戈来欢迎殿下！
English: If His Royal Highness is willing, then twenty thousand elite soldiers can complete the labor of raising their hands, the gongs and drums walk into the Cloud Dragon Gate, and the soldiers on guard, who can welcome His Royal Highness without defecting!

古文：大司马不虑其为异也。 
现代文：不必忧虑大司马刘曜会有异常举动。 
English: There is no need to worry that Chief Superintendent Ma Liu will behave abnormally on Saturday.

古文：乂弗从。
现代文：刘不同意。
English: Liu disagreed.

古文：东宫舍人荀裕告玮、遐劝乂谋反，汉主聪收玮、遐于诏狱，假以他事杀之。
现代文：东宫舍人荀裕告发崔玮、许遐劝说刘谋反，汉主刘聪把崔玮、许遐拘捕关入专设的监狱，并安上其他罪名杀了。
English: The East Palace's overseer, Zou Yu, denounced Cui Qi and Xu Qi, and persuaded Liu to rebel. The Han ruler, Liu Cong, arrested Cui Qi and Xu Qi, put them in a special prison, and killed them on other charges.

古文：使冠威将军卜抽将兵监守东宫，禁乂不听朝会。
现代文：派冠威将军卜抽带兵监视守卫东宫，软禁刘不许他参加朝会。
English: General Guan Wei sent Bu Zhu with soldiers to monitor and guard the East Palace, and Liu was placed under house arrest and was not allowed to attend the imperial meeting.

古文：乂忧惧不知所为，上表乞为庶人，并除诸子之封，褒美晋王，请以为嗣；抽抑而弗通。
现代文：刘忧愤恐惧不知所措，上表请求贬为庶人，并把儿子们的封爵也全部免去，褒扬赞美晋王刘粲，请求以刘粲为继承人。
English: Liu was overwhelmed with grief, indignation and fear. He asked to be reduced to a commoner, and his sons were all exempted from being knighted. He praised and praised the Jin king Liu Bei, and asked Liu Bei to be his successor.

古文：汉青州刺史曹嶷尽得齐、鲁间郡县，自镇临菑，有众十馀万，临河置戍。
现代文：但卜抽压住没有上报。汉青州刺史曹嶷夺取了齐、鲁地区的全部郡县，自己镇守临，有十多万军队，沿黄河安排戍守。
English: The Han Qingzhou general Cao Wei captured all the counties in Qi and Lu regions, with more than one hundred thousand troops stationed along the Yellow River.

古文：石勒表称： 嶷有专据东方之志，请讨之。 
现代文：石勒上奏表说： 曹嶷有独据东方的想法，请去征讨他。 
English: Shi Le said on the transcript: Cao Pi has the idea of being independent of the East, please go and solicit him.

古文：汉主聪恐勒灭嶷，不可复制，弗许。
现代文：汉主刘聪担心石勒消灭了曹嶷，不能再控制石勒，因此不同意。
English: Liu Cong, the lord of Han, feared that Shi Le had eliminated Cao Pi and could no longer control Shi Le, so he did not agree.

古文：聪纳中护军靳准二女月光、月华，立月光为上皇后，刘贵妃为左皇后，月华为右皇后。
现代文：刘聪娶中护军靳准的两个女儿靳月光、靳月华，把靳月光立为上皇后，把刘贵妃立为左皇后，把靳月华立为右皇后。
English: Liu Cong married the two daughters of the middle-ranking bodyguard Zou Jun, Zou Yue Guang and Zou Yue Hua, and made Zou Yue Guang the upper queen, Liu Guifei the left queen, and Zou Yue Hua the right queen.

古文：左司隶陈元达极谏，以为： 并立三后，非礼也。 
现代文：左司隶陈元达极力劝谏，认为 并立三个皇后，不符合礼 。
English: Chen Yuanda, the Left Secretary, tried his best to dissuade her, saying that it was not proper to have three queens.

古文：聪不悦，以元达为右光禄大夫，外示优崇，实夺其权。
现代文：刘聪很不高兴，让陈元达任右光禄大夫，表面上表示优待提高陈元达的地位，实际上是剥夺他的权力。
English: Liu Cong was very displeased. He appointed Chen Yuanda as the doctor of Uguanglu, ostensibly to improve Chen Yuanda's status, but in fact to deprive him of power.

古文：于是太尉范隆等皆请以位让元达，聪乃复以元达为御史大夫、仪同三司。
现代文：这样，太尉范隆等人都请求以自己的职位让给陈元达，刘聪才又以陈元达任御史大夫，仪同三司。
English: In this way, Lieutenant Fan Long and others all requested to give their positions to Chen Yuanda, and Liu Congcai appointed Chen Yuanda as the chief secretary and the third secretary.

古文：月光有秽行，元达奏之，聪不得已废之，月光惭恚自杀，聪恨元达。
现代文：靳月光行为不端，陈元达奏报了这个情况，刘聪不得已废黜了她，靳月光羞惭愤恨而自杀，刘聪对陈元达也怀恨在心。
English: Zou Yueguang misbehaved, Chen Yuanda reported this situation, Liu Cong had no choice but to depose her, Zou Yueguang was ashamed and angry and committed suicide, Liu Cong also held a grudge against Chen Yuanda.

古文：夏，四月，大赦。
现代文：夏季，四月，晋朝宣布大赦天下。
English: In the summer, in April, there is a general amnesty.

古文：六月，盗发汉霸、杜二陵及薄太后陵，得金帛甚多，朝廷以用度不足，诏收其馀以实内府。
现代文：六月，有盗贼掘开汉霸陵、杜陵以及薄太后陵，得到很多金帛。诏令把剩下的金帛拿回来充实皇宫仓库。
English: In June, thieves dug up the Han Dynasty Mausoleum, the Tu Mausoleum and the Tomb of the Empress Dowager Bo and got a lot of gold ingots. The imperial edict ordered that the remaining gold ingots be brought back to replenish the palace warehouse.

古文：辛巳，大赦。
现代文：辛巳，宣布大赦。
English: It's time for a general amnesty.

古文：汉大司马曜攻上党，八月，癸亥，败刘琨之众于襄垣。
现代文：汉大司马刘曜攻打上党，八月，癸亥，在襄垣打败刘琨的军队。
English: Han Daishi Ma Liu You attacked the party, and in August, He Hai defeated Liu Ye's army in Xiangyuan.

古文：曜欲进攻阳曲，汉主聪遣使谓之曰： 长安未平，宜以为先。 
现代文：刘曜想进攻阳曲，汉主刘聪派使者对他说： 长安还没有平定，应当把攻长安放在前面。 
English: Liu Yowang wanted to attack Yangqu, and the Han Emperor Liu Cong sent an envoy to tell him: Chang'an has not yet been pacified, we should attack Chang'an first.

古文：曜乃还屯蒲坂。
现代文：刘曜就回到蒲坂驻扎。
English: Liu returned to Kamisaka on Saturday and was stationed there.

古文：陶侃与杜弢相攻，弢使王贡出挑战，侃遥谓之曰： 杜弢为益州小吏，盗用库钱，父死不奔丧。
现代文：陶侃与杜互相攻打，杜派王贡出去挑战，陶侃远远地对王贡说： 杜是益州的小官吏，盗用州库中的钱，他父亲死了也不去奔丧。
English: Tao Kan and Du fought against each other. Du sent Wang Gong out to challenge. Tao Kan said to Wang Gong from a distance: Du is a minor official of Yizhou, embezzling money from the state treasury. When his father died, he did not go to mourn.

古文：卿本佳人，何为随之！
现代文：你本来是好人，为什么要跟随他？
English: You're a good person. Why would you follow him?

古文：天下宁有白头贼邪？ 
现代文：天下难道有能够白头到老的贼寇吗？ 
English: Are there any bandits in the world who can live to a ripe old age?

古文：贡初横脚马上，闻侃言，敛容下脚。侃知可动，复遣使谕之，截发为信，贡遂降于侃。
现代文：王贡当初把脚横在马上，听了陶侃的话，面容变严肃，把脚放下来，陶侃知道可以使他动心，就又派遣使者告谕他，并割下头发做为信物，王贡于是向陶侃投降。
English: Wang Gong initially put his foot on the horse, listened to Tao Kan's words, his face became serious, and put his foot down. Tao Kan knew that he could move him, so he sent an envoy to tell him, and cut off his hair as a token. Wang Gong then surrendered to Tao Kan.

古文：弢众溃，遁走，道死。
现代文：杜的军队溃散逃走，他自己也死在路上。
English: Du's army scattered and fled, and he died on the way.

古文：侃与南平太守应詹进克长沙，湘州悉平。
现代文：陶侃与南平太守应詹进军攻克长沙，湘州全部平定。
English: Tao Kan and Nanping Taishu marched into Ying Zhan to conquer Changsha, and all of Hunan was pacified.

古文：丞相睿承制赦其所部，进王敦镇东大将军，加都督江、扬、荆、湘、交、广六州诸军事、江州刺史。
现代文：丞相司马睿按照皇帝的旨意宽赦他的部下，提升王敦为镇东大将军，加授都督江、扬、荆、湘、交、广六州诸军事，江州刺史。
English: In accordance with the emperor's will, the prime minister, Sima Rui, pardoned his subordinates, promoted Wang Dun to the general of Zhendong, and awarded him the military titles of the governor of Jiang, Yang, Jing, Hunan, Jiaotong and Guangzhou, and the history of Jiangzhou.

古文：敦始自选置刺史以下，浸益骄横。
现代文：王敦开始自己选择安排刺史以下的官职，逐渐地更加骄纵蛮横。
English: Wang Dun began to choose and arrange official positions lower than that of the crown prince, and gradually became more arrogant and arrogant.

古文：初，王如之降也，敦从弟稜爱如骁勇，请敦配己麾下。
现代文：初，王如之降也，敦从弟爱如骁勇，请敦配己麾下。
English: At the beginning, Wang Ruzhi stepped down, and Dun followed his younger brother Ai Ruzhuangyong, asking Dun to be his subordinate.

古文：敦曰： 此辈险悍难畜，汝性狷急，不能容养，更成祸端。 
现代文：敦曰： 此辈险悍难畜，汝性狷急，不能容养，更成祸端。 
English: Dun said: This generation is a dangerous and difficult animal, and you are impatient, can not tolerate, and even become a disaster.

古文：稜固请，乃与之。
现代文：固请，乃与之。
English: If you insist, that's fine.

古文：稜置左右，甚加宠遇。
现代文：置左右，甚加宠遇。
English: Left and right, even more favored.

古文：如数与敦诸将角射争斗，稜杖之，如深以为耻。
现代文：如数与敦诸将角射争斗，杖之，如深以为耻。
English: If the number and Dun Zhu will fight the corner shot, the stick, such as deeply ashamed.

古文：及敦潜畜异志，稜每谏之。
现代文：及敦潜畜异志，每谏之。
English: And all of them have the same ambition.

古文：敦怒其异己，密使人激如令杀稜。
现代文：敦怒其异己，密使人激如令杀。
English: Angering his opponents, he incites them to murder.

古文：如因闲宴，请剑舞为欢，稜许之。
现代文：王如趁着宴会空闲，请求舞剑助兴，王棱同意了。
English: Wang Ru took advantage of the free time at the banquet to request a sword dance to add to the fun, and Wang Ren agreed.

古文：如舞剑渐前，稜恶而呵之，如直前杀稜。
现代文：王如舞剑逐渐靠到王棱面前，王棱发怒而呵斥他，王如径直向前刺杀了王棱。
English: Wang Ru gradually leaned in front of Wang Ren with his dancing sword. Wang Ren shouted at him in anger. Wang Ru went straight ahead and stabbed Wang Ren to death.

古文：敦闻之，阳惊，亦捕如诛之。
现代文：王敦听说后,表面震惊，还是逮捕王如并把他杀了。
English: After hearing this, Wang Dun, apparently shocked, still arrested Wang Ruzhong and killed him.

古文：初，朝廷闻张光死，以侍中第五猗为安南将军，监荆、梁、益、宁四州诸军事、荆州刺史，自武关出。
现代文：当初，朝廷听说张光死了，就命侍中第五猗担任安南将军，监荆、梁、益、宁四州诸军事，荆州刺史，从武关出行。
English: At first, when the imperial court heard that Zhang Guang had died, they ordered the fifth eunuch of the middle eunuchs to serve as General Annan, supervise the military in the four states of Jing, Liang, Yik, and Ning, and record the history of Jing, and travel from Wuguan.

古文：杜曾迎猗于襄阳，为兄子娶猗女，遂聚兵万人，与猗分据汉、沔。
现代文：杜曾到襄阳迎接第五猗，并为哥哥的儿子娶了第五猗的女儿，于是聚集了军队一万人，与第五猗分别占据汉水、沔水地区。
English: Du Zeng went to Xiangyang to meet the Fifth Prince and married the Fifth Prince's daughter to his brother's son, so he gathered an army of ten thousand people to occupy the Hanshui and Surabaya regions separately from the Fifth Prince.

古文：陶侃既破杜弢，乘胜进击曾，有轻曾之志。
现代文：陶侃打败杜后，乘胜进军攻打杜曾，有轻视杜曾的想法。
English: Tao Kan defeated Du Hou and used the victory to attack Du Zeng. He had the idea of despising Du Zeng.

古文：司马鲁恬谏曰： 凡战，当先料其将。
现代文：司马鲁恬劝谏说： 凡是战斗，应当先了解双方的将领。
English: Sima Luo advised: In any battle, you should first understand the generals of both sides.

古文：今使君诸将，无及曾者，未易可逼也。 
现代文：现在您的部将，没有比得上杜曾的，不能轻视认为可以逼迫他。 
English: Now your minister, who is no match for Du Zeng, cannot be treated lightly and think that he can be persecuted.

古文：侃不从，进围曾于石城。
现代文：陶侃不接受劝谏，进兵把杜曾包围在石城中。
English: Tao Kan did not accept the advice, and the soldiers surrounded Du Zeng in Shicheng.

古文：曾军多骑兵，密开门突侃陈，出其后，反击之，侃兵死者数百人。
现代文：杜曾的军队骑兵多，偷偷打开城门用骑兵突破陶侃的兵阵，又从陶侃军队的背后，反攻陶侃，陶侃的军队死了几百人。
English: Du Zeng's army had a lot of cavalry, he secretly opened the city gate and used cavalry to break through Tao Kan's army, and from the back of Tao Kan's army, he counterattacked Tao Kan. Hundreds of Tao Kan's army died.

古文：曾将趋顺阳，下马拜侃，告辞而去。
现代文：杜曾将要到顺阳去，于是下马拜陶侃，告辞而离去。
English: Du Zeng was about to go to Shunyang, so he got off the horse, bowed to Tao Qian, said goodbye and left.

古文：时荀崧都督荆州江北诸军事，屯宛，曾引兵围之。崧兵少食尽，欲求救于故吏襄城太守石览。
现代文：当时荀崧任都督荆州江北诸军事，驻守宛城，杜曾带领军队包围了他，荀崧兵少粮尽，想向以前的部下襄城太守石览求救。
English: At that time, he was the military governor of the northern part of the Jingzhou River, stationed in Wancheng. Du Zeng led the army to surround him. The soldiers were short of food and wanted to ask his former subordinate Xiangcheng's governor Shizhang for help.

古文：崧小女灌，年十三，帅勇士数十人，逾城突围夜出，且战且前，遂达览所；又为崧书，求救于南中郎将周访。
现代文：荀崧的小女儿荀灌，十三岁，带领几十个勇士，夜里越过城墙突围出去，边战边向前，终于到达石览处。又替荀崧写信，向南中郎将周访求救。
English: Zou's little daughter, thirteen-year-old Zou Guan, led dozens of warriors to break out of the city walls at night, advance along the battle line, and finally reach the stone viewing place. She also wrote a letter for Zou and sent it to Nan Zhong Lang for help.

古文：访遣子扶帅兵三千，与览共救崧，曾乃遁去。
现代文：周访派儿子周抚带领三千兵士，与石览一起救援荀崧，杜曾这才逃走。
English: Zhou Gui sent his son Zhou Fu to lead three thousand soldiers to rescue the cormorants together with Shizhang, and Du Zeng fled.

古文：曾复致笺于崧，求讨丹水贼以自效，崧许之。
现代文：杜曾又给荀崧去信，请求讨伐丹水县的贼寇来报效，荀崧同意了他。
English: Du Zeng also sent a letter to Yu Yu, asking him to retaliate against the bandits in Danshui County, and Yu Yu agreed.

古文：陶侃遗崧书曰： 杜曾凶狡，所谓 鸱枭食母之物 。此人不死，州土未宁，足下当识吾言！ 
现代文：陶侃给荀崧去信说： 杜曾凶恶狡猾，人们说 鸱枭是吃自己母亲的动物 ，这个人就是这样，他不死，荆州的土地就不会安宁，您应该记住我的话！ 
English: Tao Kan sent a letter to Du Zeng, saying: Du Zeng is vicious and cunning. People say that Du is an animal that eats its own mother. This person is like that. If he does not die, the land of Jingzhou will not be peaceful. You should remember my words!

古文：崧以宛中兵少，藉曾为外援，不从。
现代文：荀崧因为宛城军中兵少，想借杜曾的力量作为外援，没有采纳。
English: Because of the small number of soldiers in the Wancheng army, he wanted to borrow Du Zeng's strength as foreign aid, but it was not adopted.

古文：曾复帅流亡二千馀人围襄阳，数日，不克而还。
现代文：杜曾又带领流亡的二千余人包围襄阳，连续几天，没有攻下来就回师了。
English: Du Zeng again led more than two thousand exiles to encircle Xiangyang. For several days in a row, he returned to the division without attacking it.

古文：王敦嬖人吴兴钱凤，疾陶侃之功，屡毁之。
现代文：王敦所宠信的吴兴人钱凤，嫉妒陶侃的功劳，多次诋毁陶侃。
English: Wang Dun's favorite Wu Xing people Qian Feng, jealous of Tao Kan's achievements, repeatedly slandered Tao Kan.

古文：侃将还江陵，欲诣敦自陈。
现代文：陶侃将要回江陵，想到王敦那儿去陈说解释。
English: Tao Kan was about to return to Gangneung and thought of going to Wang Dun to explain.

古文：硃伺及安定皇甫方回谏曰： 公入必不出。 
现代文：朱伺和安定人皇甫方回劝谏说： 您进去以后就会出不来了。 
English: Zhu Wei and the stable man, the emperor's father-in-law, advised him saying, "If you go in, you will not be able to come out.

古文：侃不从。
现代文：陶侃不听。
English: Tao Kan didn't listen.

古文：既至，敦留侃不遣，左转广州刺史，以其从弟丞相军咨祭酒廙为荆州刺史。
现代文：到了以后，王敦果然扣留住陶侃不放，后来王敦让他降职担任广州刺史，而派自己的堂弟丞相军谘祭酒王任荆州刺史。
English: After arriving, Wang Dun indeed detained Tao Kan and did not let him go. Later, Wang Dun demoted him to serve as the chief historian of Guangzhou, and sent his cousin, the Vice-Minister of War, to serve as the chief historian of Jingzhou.

古文：荆州将吏郑攀、马俊等诣敦，上书留侃，敦怒，不许。
现代文：荆州的武将官吏郑攀、马隽等拜访王敦，给王敦上书，挽留陶侃，王敦发怒，不同意。
English: The generals and officials of Jingzhou, including Zheng Pan and Ma Jun, visited Wang Dun and sent a letter to Wang Dun to detain Tao Kan. Wang Dun was angry and disagreed.

古文：攀等以侃始灭大贼，而更被黜，众情愤惋；又以廙忌戾难事，遂帅其徒三千人屯涢口，西迎杜曾。
现代文：郑攀等人因为陶侃刚刚消灭了大贼寇，却反而被贬黜，大家群情激愤；又因为王猜忌暴戾难以共事，郑攀于是率领部众三千人到口驻扎，向西迎接杜曾。
English: Zheng Pang and others were outraged because Tao Kan had just wiped out the Great Thieves and Robbers, but was instead belittled, and everyone was outraged; and because Wang Chaiyi was violent and difficult to work with, Zheng Pang led the 3,000 people of the department to the entrance and stationed to the west to meet Du Zeng.

古文：涢为攀等所袭，奔于江安。
现代文：王遭到郑攀等人的袭击，投奔到江安县。
English: Wang was attacked by Zheng Pang and others and fled to Jiang'an County.

古文：杜曾与攀等北迎第五猗以拒廙。
现代文：杜曾与郑攀等人又向北迎接第五猗来抵御王。
English: Du Zeng and Zheng Pang and others also went north to meet the fifth army to resist the king.

古文：廙督诸军讨曾，复为曾所败。
现代文：王督率各支军队讨伐杜曾，又被杜曾打败。
English: Wang Guo led all the armies to fight against Du Zeng, and was defeated by Du Zeng.

古文：敦意攀承侃风旨，被甲持矛将杀侃，出而复还者数四。
现代文：王敦猜测郑攀是接受了陶侃暗中劝告的旨意，就身披铠甲手持长矛将要杀陶侃，把陶侃押出来又带进去，来回四次。
English: Wang Dun guessed that Zheng Pan had accepted Tao Kan's unspoken advice. He was going to kill Tao Kan while wearing armor and holding a spear. He pushed Tao Kan out and brought him back in four times.

古文：侃正色曰： 使君雄断，当裁天下，何此不决乎！ 
现代文：陶侃表情严肃地说： 您雄才大略善于决断，应该能够决断天下的大事，为什么这样犹豫不决呢？ 
English: Tao Qian said with a serious expression: Your great talent is very good at making decisions, you should be able to decide the world's major events, why are you so hesitant?

古文：因起如厕。
现代文：说完就站起来向厕所走去。
English: After saying this, he stood up and went to the toilet.

古文：咨议参军梅陶、长史陈颁言于敦曰： 周访与侃亲姻，如左右手，安有断人左手而右手不应者乎！ 
现代文：咨议参军梅陶、长史陈颁对王敦说： 周访与陶侃是姻亲，就像左右手，哪里有截断人的左手而他的右手没有反应的呢？ 
English: Mei Tao and Changshi Chen Zhao, who advised and joined the army, said to Wang Dun: Zhou Qian and Tao Kan are in-laws, just like the right and left hands. Where is the left hand of a person who has been cut off, but his right hand does not respond?

古文：敦意解，乃设盛馔以饯之，侃便夜发，敦引其子瞻为参军。
现代文：王敦于是放弃了猜测，就安排丰盛的宴席为陶侃饯行，陶侃便连夜出发，王敦提拔他的儿子陶瞻担任参军。
English: Wang Dun then gave up his guess and arranged a sumptuous banquet for Tao Kan to accompany him. Tao Kan left overnight, and Wang Dun promoted his son Tao Zhan to join the army.

古文：初，交州刺史顾秘卒，州人以秘子寿领州事。
现代文：当初，交州刺史顾秘去世，州里的人们让顾秘的儿子顾寿代理州政事务。
English: At first, people in Jiaozhou asked Gu Shou, the son of Jiaozhou's ruler Gu Hui, to take over state affairs after Gu Hui's death.

古文：帐下督梁硕起兵攻寿，杀之，硕遂专制交州。
现代文：帐下督梁硕起兵攻打顾寿，把他杀了，梁硕于是独自控制了交州。
English: His subordinate Governor Liang Shuo raised an army to attack Gu Shou and killed him. Liang Shuo then took sole control of Jiaozhou.

古文：王机自以盗据广州，恐王敦讨之，更求交州。
现代文：王机认为自己是窃据广州，担心王敦讨伐，就向王敦请求改到交州任职。
English: Wang Ji thought that he was stealing Guangzhou, and worried about Wang Dun's crusade, he asked Wang Dun to change his post to Jiaozhou.

古文：会杜弘诣机降，敦欲因机以讨硕。乃以降杜弘为机功，转交州刺史。
现代文：正遇到杜弘到王机这里投降。王敦想用王机的力量来讨伐梁硕，就把收降杜弘当作王机的功劳，让他转任交州刺史。
English: Wang Dun wanted to use the power of the king's sword to fight against Liang Shuo, so he took Duhong's surrender as the merit of the king's sword and transferred him to the post of Jiaozhou sashimi.

古文：机至郁林，硕迎前刺史脩则子湛行州事以拒之。
现代文：王机到郁林，梁硕迎来前刺史则的儿子湛担任交州刺史，以抗拒王机。
English: The king moved to Yulin, and Liang Shuo ushered in the son of the former chief historian, Zhan, to serve as the chief historian of Jiaozhou in order to resist the king.

古文：机不得进，乃更与杜弘及广州将温邵、交州秀才刘沈谋复还据广州。
现代文：王机不能进去，就又与杜弘以及广州武将温邵、交州秀才刘沈谋划再回去占据广州。
English: Wang Ji could not go in, so he plotted with Du Hong and the Guangzhou warlord Wen Shao and the Jiaozhou scholar Liu Shen to go back and occupy Guangzhou.

古文：陶侃至始兴，州人皆言宜观察形势，不可轻进。
现代文：陶侃到达始兴，州里的人都说应当观察形势，不能轻率前进。
English: When Tao Kan arrived in Shixing, people in the prefecture said that they should observe the situation and not move forward rashly.

古文：侃不听，直至广州，诸郡县皆已迎机矣。
现代文：陶侃不听，直接到达广州，但广州所辖的各郡县都已经迎奉了王机。
English: Tao Kan did not listen and arrived directly in Guangzhou, but all counties under the jurisdiction of Guangzhou have welcomed the opportunity.

古文：杜弘遣使伪降，侃知其谋，进击弘，破之，遂执刘沈于小桂。遣督护许高讨王机，走之。
现代文：杜弘派使者假装投降，陶侃知道了他的阴谋，上前攻打杜弘，把他打败了，在小桂抓获刘沈，又派遣督护许高讨伐王机，赶跑了王机。
English: Du Hong sent an emissary to pretend to surrender, Tao Kan knew his plot, went forward to attack Du Hong and defeated him, captured Liu Shen in Xiao Gui, and dispatched the overseer Xu Gao to fight Wang Ji and drive away Wang Ji.

古文：机病死于道，高掘其尸，斩之。
现代文：王机在路上病死，许高挖出他的尸体砍下首级。
English: Wang Ji died of illness on the road, and Xu Gao dug up his body and chopped off his head.

古文：诸将皆请乘胜击温邵，侃笑曰： 吾威名已著，何事遣兵！
现代文：部将们都请求乘胜攻打温邵，陶侃笑着说： 我已经显示了威名，还用得着派兵吗？
English: The captains all asked to take advantage of the victory to attack Wen Shao, Tao Kan said with a smile: I have already shown my prestige, do I still need to send troops?

古文：但一函纸自定耳。 
现代文：只需一纸信函自然就平定了。 
English: It only takes a letter to smooth things over.

古文：乃下书谕之。
现代文：就给温邵去信告谕。
English: Just send a letter to Wen Shao.

古文：邵惧而走，追获于始兴。
现代文：温邵因恐惧而逃跑，陶侃的军队在始兴追上并抓获了温邵。
English: Wen Shao fled in fear. Tao Kan's troops caught up with and captured Wen Shao in Shixing.

古文：杜弘诣王敦降，广州遂平。
现代文：杜弘也向王敦投降，广州于是平定。
English: Du Hong also surrendered to Wang Dun, and Guangzhou was then pacified.

古文：侃在广州无事，辄朝运百甓于斋外，暮运于斋内。
现代文：陶侃在广州没有什么事情可做，就每天早晨把一百块砖搬到屋外，黄昏时又搬回到屋斋里。
English: Tao Kan has nothing to do in Guangzhou, so every morning he moves a hundred bricks outside and returns to his house at dusk.

古文：人问其故，答曰： 吾方致力中原，过尔优逸，恐不堪事，故自劳耳。
现代文：有人问他其中的缘故，陶侃回答说： 我正致力于收复中原，现在的生活过于优闲安逸，我担心那时不能够承担工作，所以自己活动活动罢了。 
English: Someone asked him the reason for this, and Tao Kan replied: I am working hard to recover the Central Plains, and my current life is too comfortable. I'm worried that I won't be able to take on work at that time, so I'll just do my own activities.

古文：王敦以杜弘为将，宠任之。
现代文：王敦让杜弘作部将，十分信任地用他。
English: Wang Dun asked Du Hong to be the team captain and used him with full confidence.

古文：九月，汉主聪使大鸿胪赐石勒弓矢，策命勒为陕东伯，得专征伐，拜刺史、将军、守宰，封列候，岁尽集上。汉大司马曜寇北地，诏以麹允为大都督、骠骑将军以御之。
现代文：九月，汉大司马曜寇北地，诏以允为大都督、骠骑将军以御之。
English: In September, the Han Dynasty Grand Master Ma Youqo entered the northern land, and the imperial edict named Yi Yun as the grand governor, and the general of the imperial cavalry took over from him.

古文：冬，十月，以索纟林为尚书仆射、都督宫城诸军事。
现代文：冬，十月，以索为尚书仆射、都督宫城诸军事。
English: In the winter and in October, Iseo was Shosho, Sho, and the military governor of Miyagi.

古文：曜进拔冯翊，太守梁肃奔万年。
现代文：曜进拔冯翊，太守梁肃奔万年。
English: On the morning of the 4th day of the 4th month of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 8th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 14th year of the 14th year of the 15th year of the 15th year of the 15th year

古文：曜转寇上郡，麹允去黄白城，军于灵武，以兵弱，不敢进。
现代文：刘曜转而进犯上郡。允离开黄白城，到灵武驻军，因为兵力微弱，不敢冒然前进。
English: Liu You turned to attack Shang County. He left Huangbai City and garrisoned in Lingwu, but he did not dare to advance because his troops were too weak.

古文：帝屡征兵于丞相保，保左右皆曰： 蝮虵螫手，壮士断腕。
现代文：愍帝多次向丞相司马保征召军队，司马保身边的官员都说： 被蝮蛇咬了手，壮士便截断手腕防止蛇毒蔓延。
English: Emperor Xuan summoned the army to the prime minister, Sima Bao, many times. The officials around Sima Bao all said: When bitten by a boa constrictor, a strong man would cut off his wrist to prevent the snake venom from spreading.

古文：今胡寇方盛，且宜断陇道以观其变。 
现代文：现在胡人贼寇士气正盛，应当暂时截断陇地的道路来观察事态的变化。 
English: Now that the morale of the Hu people is high, it is necessary to temporarily cut off the road to observe the changes in the situation.

古文：从事中郎裴诜曰： 今虵已螫头，头可断乎！ 
现代文：从事中郎裴诜说： 现在蛇已经咬头，头难道也能截断吗？ 
English: "Now that the snake has bitten the head, can the head also be cut off?

古文：保乃以镇军将军胡崧行前锋都督，须诸军集乃发。
现代文：司马保这才以镇军将军胡崧为前锋都督，等各军集中后始进发。
English: It was only then that Sima Bao chose the general of the town army, Hu Yao, as the vanguard governor, and after all the armies were concentrated, they began to advance.

古文：麹允欲奉帝往就保，索纟林曰： 保得天子，必逞其私志。 
现代文：允想护送愍帝到司马保那里，索说： 司马保得到了天子，一定会放纵他自己的私心。 
English: Yun wanted to escort Emperor Gong to Sima Bao, and Suo said, "Sima Bao has gained the Son of Heaven, he will surely indulge his selfishness.

古文：乃止。
现代文：于是就没有动。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：于是自长安以西，不复贡奉朝廷，百官饥乏，采稆以自存。
现代文：这样长安以西的地区，不再进贡尊奉朝廷，朝廷中的文武百官都饥饿困乏，靠采集野生的谷子来生存。
English: As a result, the region west of Chang'an no longer paid tribute to the imperial court. All the civil and military officials in the imperial court were starving and relied on collecting wild millet to survive.

古文：凉州军士张冰得玺，文曰 皇帝行玺 ，献于张实，僚属皆贺。
现代文：凉州军士张冰拾得一方印玺，印文是 皇帝行玺 ，献给了张，僚属们都来祝贺。
English: Liangzhou sergeant Zhang Bing picked up one side of the seal, the seal is the emperor's seal, dedicated to Zhang, colleagues and relatives all came to congratulate.

古文：实曰： 是非人臣所得留。 
现代文：张说： 这不是作臣下的所能留存的。 
English: Zhang said, "This is not what a subject can keep.

古文：遣使归于长安。
现代文：派使者送到长安。
English: Send an envoy to Chang'an.

古文：孝愍皇帝下建兴四年
现代文：建兴四年
English: Four years of construction

古文：春，正月，司徒梁芬议追尊吴王晏，右仆射索纟林等引魏明帝诏以为不可；乃赠太保，谥曰孝。
现代文：春季，正月，司徒梁芬提议追封吴王司马晏尊号，右仆射索等人引用魏明帝的诏书为例，认为不能这样，于是追赠为太保，谥号为孝。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, Stulian Liangfen proposed that Wu King Sima Xizong be posthumously awarded the title, and his right-hand man Shao cited Emperor Wei Ming's edict as an example, saying that this was not possible, so the posthumous award was Taibo, and the posthumous title was Xiao.

古文：汉中常侍王沈、宣怀、中宫仆射郭猗等，皆宠幸用事。
现代文：汉宫宦官中常侍王沈、宣怀，中宫仆射郭猗等人，都受到恩宠信任而掌权。
English: The eunuchs of the Han court, such as the regular attendants Wang Shen and Xuan Huai, and the middle palace servant Sheguo Yao, were all trusted by grace and took power.

古文：汉主聪游宴后宫，或三日不醒，或百日不出；自去冬不视朝，政事一委相国粲，唯杀生、除拜乃使沈等入白之。
现代文：汉主刘聪到后宫游玩宴乐，有时三天不醒，有时一百天都不出后宫。从去年冬天开始不察视朝政，政事全部委交给相国刘粲，只有需判定大臣的生死或升降时才让王沈等人进宫报告。
English: The Han ruler Liu Cong went to the harem to enjoy the banquet, sometimes not waking up for three days, sometimes not leaving the harem for a hundred days. Since last winter, he has not inspected the imperial government, and all the political affairs committees have been handed over to Liu Bei. Only when it is necessary to determine the life or death of a minister or promotion or demotion, Wang Shen and others are allowed to enter the palace to report.

古文：沈等多不白，而自以其私意决之，故勋旧或不叙，而奸佞小人有数日至二千石者。
现代文：而王沈等人多数情况都不报告，而是以自己的想法去决断，所以使得有些建立过功勋的旧臣不被任用，而有些奸诈、谄谀的小人却几天之内就提升到二千石俸禄的高官。
English: On the other hand, Wang Shen and others did not report most of the circumstances, but made decisions based on their own ideas. As a result, some former ministers who had established meritorious service were not appointed, while some treacherous and devious villains were promoted to high-ranking officials with a 2,000-koku stipend within a few days.

古文：军旅岁起，将士无钱帛之赏，而后宫之家，赐及僮仆，动至数千万。
现代文：连年兴兵征战，武将兵士没有一点钱、帛之类的奖赏；而后宫国威，给仆人侍僮的赏赐，一赏便是几千几万。
English: When soldiers are conscripted year after year, the generals and soldiers do not have a bit of money, medals and other rewards; but the prestige of the harem, the reward for the servants and attendants, is tens of thousands.

古文：沈等车服、第舍逾于诸王，子弟中表为守令者三十馀人，皆贪残为民害。
现代文：王沈等人的车乘服饰、府第的规格都超过了亲王们，王沈等人的子弟以及表亲担任郡守县令的有三十多人，而且都贪婪残忍成为百姓的祸害。
English: Wang Shen's and other people's vehicles, clothing, and the size of their homes exceeded that of princes. Wang Shen's and other people's children and cousins have served as county governors and county magistrates for more than 30 people, and all of them are greedy and cruel and have become a scourge to the people.

古文：靳准阖宗谄事之。
现代文：靳准则以全宗族来阿谀奉承地对待王沈等人。
English: Guideline is to treat Wang Shen and others flatteringly with the whole clan.

古文：郭猗与准皆有怨于太弟乂，猗谓相国粲曰： 殿下光文帝之世孙，主上之嫡子，四海莫不属心，奈何欲以天下与太弟乎！
现代文：郭猗与靳准都和太弟刘有仇怨，郭猗对相国刘粲说： 殿下是光文帝刘渊的长孙，皇上的嫡子，四海没有谁不把心寄托在您身上，为什么却想把天下传给太弟呢？
English: Guo Yu and Zou Zhen both had a grudge against his older brother Liu. Guo Yu said to his brother-in-law Liu Yu: Your highness is the eldest grandson of the Guangwen Emperor Liu Yuan, the legitimate son of the emperor. There is no one in the world who would not put their heart into you. Why do you want to pass the world to your older brother?

古文：且臣闻太弟与大将军谋因三月上巳大宴作乱，事成，许以主上为太上皇，大将军为皇太子，又许卫军为大单于。
现代文：况且我听说太弟刘与大将军刘骥密谋趁三月上旬的巳日宴会之机发动叛乱，事情成功，应允以皇上为太上皇，大将军刘骥为皇太子，又应允卫将军刘劢为大单于。
English: Moreover, I heard that the great-grandson Liu and the great-general Liu Xuan conspired to take advantage of the occasion of the feast on the third day in early March to launch a rebellion. The matter was successful, and the emperor was allowed to be the great-grand-emperor, the great-general Liu Xuan was the crown prince, and the general Liu Xuan was allowed to be the great-uncle.

古文：三王处不疑之地，并握重兵，以此举事，无不成者。
现代文：三王都处于不被猜疑的地位，并且掌握着重兵，靠这条件来成就大事，没有不成功的。
English: All three kings are in the position of not being suspected, and have mastered the heavy soldiers, relying on this condition to achieve great things, there is no unsuccessful.

古文：然二王贪一时之利，不顾父兄，事成之后，主上岂有全理？
现代文：但是二王贪图一时的小利，不顾忌父亲、哥哥，他们一旦得逞，皇上怎么有能够保全的道理？
English: But the two kings are greedy for small profits for a while, regardless of their father and brother. Once they succeed, how can the emperor have a reason to preserve?

古文：殿下兄弟，固不待言；东宫、相国、单于，当在武陵兄弟，何肯与人也！
现代文：殿下兄弟，自然更不用说了。这样，东宫、相国、单于这些地位，将属于刘的儿子刘武陵兄弟，怎么肯让给别人呢？
English: Not to mention, of course, the brothers of His Imperial Highness. In this way, the East Palace, the sister country, and these positions alone will belong to Liu's son, Liu Wuling's brothers, how can they be willing to give them to others?

古文：今祸期甚迫，宜早图之。
现代文：现在离出现灾祸的日子已经非常紧迫，应当尽快谋划这件事。
English: Now that the day of the disaster is very close, it is necessary to plan for it as soon as possible.

古文：臣屡言于主上，主上笃于友爱，以臣刀锯之馀，终不之信。愿殿下勿泄，密表其状。
现代文：我多次对皇上说起这件事，可皇上真诚地爱重亲情，因为我是刑余的宦官，终究不能让他相信，希望殿下不要泄露今天的谈话，秘密地表奏刘谋反的情况。
English: I have repeatedly told the emperor about this matter, but the emperor sincerely cherishes his family ties, because I am the eunuch of the rest of the eunuchs, after all, I can't make him believe, I hope that His Royal Highness will not leak today's conversation and secretly play the situation of Liu's rebellion.

古文：殿下倘不信臣，可召大将军从事中郎王皮、卫军司马刘惇，假之恩意，许其归首以问之，必可知也。 
现代文：殿下如果不相信我，可以召来大将军从事中郎王皮、卫军司马刘，给他们以恩德，允许他们自首，再向他们询问，就一定会了解了。 
English: If your highness does not believe me, you can call the general to engage in the middle man Wang Pi and the guard division Ma Liu, give them grace, allow them to surrender, and then ask them, you will certainly understand.

古文：粲许之。
现代文：刘粲同意了。
English: Liu Ye agreed.

古文：猗密谓皮、惇曰： 二王逆状，主上及相国具知之矣，卿同之乎？ 
现代文：郭猗暗自对王皮、刘说： 二王谋反的情况，皇上与相国刘粲都知道了，你们参与了吗？ 
English: Guo Yu secretly said to Wang Pi and Liu: The situation of the two kings plotting a rebellion, the emperor and his countryman Liu Yu all know about it, are you involved?

古文：二人惊曰： 无之。 
现代文：二人惊骇地说： 没有。 
English: Horrified, they both said, "No."

古文：猗曰： 兹事已决，吾怜卿亲旧并见族耳！ 
现代文：郭猗说： 这件事已决定了处理办法，我只是怜悯你们的亲戚朋友都要被灭族罢了！ 
English: Guo Wei said: This matter has already decided on the handling method, I just pity your relatives and friends will all be exterminated!

古文：因歔欷流涕。
现代文：说完抽泣着流泪。
English: As she spoke, she began to sob and shed tears.

古文：二人大惧，叩头求哀。
现代文：二人大为恐惧，连忙磕头哀求。
English: Terrified, the two rushed to beg for mercy.

古文：猗曰： 吾为卿计，卿能用之乎？
现代文：郭猗说： 我替你们考虑，你们能采用吗？
English: Guo Wei said: I will think about it for you, can you adopt it?

古文：相国问卿，卿但云 有之 ；若责卿不先启，卿即云 臣诚负死罪。然仰惟主上宽仁，殿下敦睦，苟言不见信，则陷于诬谮不测之诛，故不敢言也。  
现代文：相国如果问你们，你们只说 有此事 ，如果相国斥责你们不事先启奏，你们就说： 我们的确身负死罪，但是我们只考虑皇上宽厚仁爱、殿下也敦厚温和，如果我们说了而不被相信，就会遭到诬陷挑拨的罪名而被处死，所以不敢说了。  
English: If the other country asks you, you only say that there is a matter, if the other country rebukes you without prelude, you say: We indeed bear the death penalty, but we only consider the emperor's generosity and benevolence, and his highness is also kind and gentle. If we say it and are not believed, we will be framed and executed, so we dare not say it.

古文：皮、惇许诺。
现代文：王皮、刘答应了。
English: Wang Pi and Liu agreed.

古文：粲召问之，二人至不同时，而其辞若一，粲以为信然。
现代文：刘粲召他们询问，两人来的时间不同，但所说的话相同，刘粲就认为刘谋反是真的了。
English: Liu Zhe called them to inquire. The two came at different times, but said the same thing. Liu Zhe thought that Liu Mochang was real.

古文：勒准复说粲曰： 殿下宜自居东宫，以领相国，使天下早有所系。
现代文：靳准又对刘粲说： 殿下应当自己到东宫做皇位继承人，兼任相国，使天下早一点有所寄托。
English: Zou Jun also said to Liu Wei: Your highness should go to the East Palace to be the heir to the throne and concurrently serve as the foreign minister, so that the country can be entrusted with something earlier.

古文：今道路之言，皆云大将军、卫将军欲奉太弟为变，期以季春；若使太弟得天下，殿下无容足之地矣。 
现代文：现在街谈巷议，都说大将军、卫将军想尊奉太弟进行变乱，时间约定为春季三月。如果让太弟得到了天下，那么殿下将没有立足之地了。 
English: Now, the talk on the street is that the great generals and Wei generals want to honor the great-brother to carry out the rebellion, and the time is set for March in the spring. If the great-brother is allowed to take over the world, then His Imperial Highness will have no foothold.

古文：粲曰： 为之奈何？ 
现代文：刘粲说： 怎么办呢？ 
English: Liu Ye said, "What should we do?

古文：准曰： 人告太弟为变，主上必不信。
现代文：靳准说： 有人报告太弟要变乱，皇上一定不会相信。
English: Hao Jun said, "Someone has reported that the younger brother of the emperor wants to start a riot, the emperor will not believe it."

古文：宜缓东宫之禁，使宾客得往来；太弟雅好待士，必不以此为嫌，轻薄小人不能无迎合太弟之意为之谋者。
现代文：应当放开对东宫的监视禁戒，使宾客能够往来出入，太弟高雅喜欢接待士人，一定不怀疑解禁有什么问题。轻薄的小人中不可能没有迎合太弟的心意而为他谋划的人。
English: The ban on surveillance of the East Palace should be lifted, so that guests can come and go. Grandpa Gao Ya likes to receive scholars, and he must not suspect that there is any problem with lifting the ban. It is impossible for a light-skinned dwarf to have someone who does not cater to Grandpa Yao Yao's heart and plan for him.

古文：然后下官为殿下露表其罪，殿下收其宾客与太弟交通者考问之，狱辞既具，则主上无不信之理也。 
现代文：这样以后我替殿下表奏太弟的罪行，殿下把太弟的宾客和与太弟有来往的人拘捕审问，有了狱案的供词以后，那皇上就没有不相信的道理。 
English: After this, I exposed the crimes of my great-uncle on behalf of His Imperial Highness. His Imperial Highness arrested and interrogated my great-uncle's guests and people who had dealings with my great-uncle. With the confession from the prison case, there was no reason for the Emperor not to believe me.

古文：粲乃命卜抽引兵去东宫。
现代文：刘粲于是命令负责监视禁戒东宫的卜抽带兵离开东宫。
English: Liu Bei then ordered the soldiers in charge of monitoring the East Palace to leave the East Palace.

古文：少府陈休、左卫将军卜崇，为人清直，素恶沈等，虽在公座，未尝与语，沈等深疾之。
现代文：少府陈休、左卫将军卜崇，为人清高正直，平素就憎恶王沈等人，即使在公事场合，也未曾说过话。
English: Xiaofu Chen Xiu, General of the Left Division Bu Chong, were high-minded and honest, and they always hated Wang Shen and others. Even in public occasions, they never said a word.

古文：侍中卜干谓休、崇曰： 王沈等势力足以回天地，卿辈自料亲贤孰与窦武、陈蕃？ 
现代文：王沈等人深深地忌恨他们。侍中卜对陈休、卜崇说： 王沈等人的势力完全可以翻天覆地，你们自己料想一下谁有东汉窦武那样与皇帝的亲近关系，谁有东汉陈蕃那样的贤能？ 
English: Wang Shen and others deeply resented them. The attendant Bu said to Chen Xiu and Bu Chong: The power of Wang Shen and others can completely turn the world upside down. Can you imagine who has a close relationship with the emperor like the Eastern Han Dynasty's Dou Wu, and who has the ability like the Eastern Han Dynasty's Chen Qi?

古文：休、崇曰： 吾辈年逾五十，职位已崇，唯欠一死耳！
现代文：陈休、卜崇说： 我们已年过五十，职任地位已经很高了，只缺一死罢了！
English: Chen Xiu and Bu Chong said, "We are over fifty years old, our positions are already high, we only need to die once!"

古文：死于忠义，乃为得所；安能俛首仾眉以事阉竖乎！
现代文：为忠义而死，死得其所。怎么能俯首低眉为阉宦做事呢？
English: To die for one's loyalty is to die well. How can one bow his head and work with a downcast brow?

古文：去矣卜公，勿复有言！ 
现代文：走吧卜公，不要再说了？ 
English: Let's go, Bu Gong, no more talking?

古文：二月，汉主聪出临上秋阁，命收陈休、卜崇及特进綦毋达、太中大夫公彧、尚书王琰、田歆、大司农硃谐并诛之，皆宦官所恶也。
现代文：二月，汉主刘聪从后宫来到上秋阁，命令拘捕陈休、卜崇和特进綦毋达、太中大夫公师、尚书王琰、田歆、大司农朱诞，一起杀了，这些人都是宦官所忌恨的。
English: In February, the Han ruler Liu Cong came to the Last Autumn Palace from the harem and ordered the arrest of Chen Xiu, Bu Chong and Tejin Shun Baotang, Taizhong Doctor Gongshi, Shangshu Wang Yao, Tian Yao, and Daishi Nong Zhu Xue, and killed them together. These people were all hated by the eunuchs.

古文：卜干泣谏曰： 陛下方侧席求贤，而一旦戮卿大夫七人，皆国之忠良，无乃不可乎！
现代文：卜哭着劝谏刘聪说： 陛下正恭敬地召求贤能之士，却一个早晨杀戮七个卿大夫，他们都是国家的忠良，岂不是不可以吗？
English: "Your Majesty is respectfully calling for people of virtue, but to kill seven doctors in one morning, all of whom are loyal to the country, is that not wrong?

古文：藉使休等有罪，陛下不下之有司，暴明其状，天下何从知之！
现代文：即使陈休等人有罪。陛下不把他们下送到有关部门，让他们的罪状暴露清楚，天下从哪儿了解呢？
English: Even if Chen Xiu and others are guilty, if His Majesty does not send them to the relevant departments to make their crimes clear, how will the world know?

古文：诏尚在臣所，未敢宣露，愿陛下熟思之！ 
现代文：诏令还在我那里，没有敢宣布让大家知道，希望陛下能够仔细想一想。 
English: The edict is still with me, I did not dare to make it public, I hope His Majesty will think about it.

古文：因叩头流血。
现代文：说完磕头磕得流了血。
English: Then he hit his head so hard he cracked it.

古文：王沈叱干曰： 卜侍中欲拒诏乎！ 
现代文：王沈喝叱卜说： 卜侍中想抗拒诏令吗？ 
English: Wang Shen rebuked him and said, "Does General Bu want to resist the imperial edict?

古文：聪拂衣而入，免干为庶人。
现代文：刘聪甩着衣袖走进去，罢免卜的官职贬为庶人。
English: Liu Cong walked into the room with his sleeves rolled up, and dismissed Bo from his official position and reduced him to a commoner.

古文：太宰河间王易、大将军勃海王敷、御史大夫陈元达、金紫光禄大夫西河王延等皆诣阙表谏曰： 王沈等矫弄诏旨，欺诬日月，内谄陛下，外佞相国，威权之重，侔于人主，多树奸党，毒流海内。
现代文：太宰河间王刘易、大将军勃海王刘敷、御史大夫陈元达、金紫光禄大夫西河人王延等人都到皇宫上奏表劝谏说： 王沈等人假做圣旨，欺天瞒日，在宫内诌媚陛下，在宫外讨好相国，威势之盛权力之大可以与君主相比。
English: Dazai River King Liu Yi, General Bo Hai King Liu Shiki, Grand Historian Chen Yuan Da, and Golden Purple and Gold Doctor of the West River, Wang Yan, and others all went to the imperial palace to submit a report and advised: Wang Shen and others pretended to be the holy will, deceived the heavens and hid the sun, flattered His Majesty in the palace, and courted the country outside the palace. The grandeur of power can be compared to the monarch.

古文：知休等忠臣，为国尽节，恐发其奸状，故巧为诬陷。
现代文：还培养了很多奸佞党羽，危害遍及海内。他们知道陈休等人是忠臣，始终不渝地为国家尽心尽力，因此害怕陈休等忠臣们揭露他们的奸恶罪行，所以才巧妙地对陈休等进行诬蔑陷害。
English: They knew that Chen Xiu and others were loyal retainers and had always devoted themselves to the country, so they were afraid that Chen Xiu and other loyal retainers would expose their treacherous crimes, so they cleverly slandered and framed Chen Xiu and others.

古文：陛下不察，遽加极刑，痛彻天地，贤愚伤惧。
现代文：而陛下不仅没有察觉，还仓促地对忠臣处以极刑，天地也要为之痛心，社会上下都为之悲痛心惊。
English: And His Majesty not only did not notice, but also hastily imposed capital punishment on his loyal vassal. Heaven and earth will be pained by it, and the whole society will be saddened and shocked by it.

古文：今遗晋未殄，巴、蜀不宾，石勒谋据赵、魏，曹嶷欲王全齐，陛下心腹四支，何处无患！
现代文：现在残留的晋朝还没有消灭，巴、蜀也不来朝见，石勒图谋占据赵、魏地区，曹嶷想在齐地称王，陛下的心腹四肢，哪一处没有危险呢？
English: Now the remnants of the Jin Dynasty have not yet been eliminated, Ba and Shu will not come to the court, Shi Le plans to occupy the Zhao and Wei regions, Cao Pi wants to be crowned king in Qi, His Majesty's heart and limbs, where is there no danger?

古文：乃复以沈等助乱，诛巫咸，戮扁鹊，臣恐遂成膏盲之疾，后虽救之，不可及已。
现代文：却还宠信王沈等人再来增加麻烦，诛杀神巫巫咸、杀戮神医扁鹊，我们耽心这样会病入膏肓，成为不治之症，以后即使想抢救，也来不及了。
English: However, they still believe that Wang Shen and others will come again to increase the trouble, kill witches and wizards, and kill the witch doctor Bian Qi. We are worried that this will lead to a terminal illness and become an incurable disease, and even if we want to save it, it will be too late.

古文：请免沈等官，付有司治罪。 
现代文：请求免除王沈等人的官职，交付有关部门治罪。 
English: Request that Wang Shen and others be relieved of their official duties and handed over to the relevant departments for criminal prosecution.

古文：聪以表示沈等，笑曰： 群儿为元达所引，遂成痴也。 
现代文：刘聪把这份奏表给王沈等人看，并笑道： 这群小子被陈元达带着，也都成了痴呆的人了。 
English: Liu Cong showed this report card to Wang Shen and others, and laughed: This group of boys was led by Chen Yuanda, and they have all become demented people.

古文：沈等顿首泣曰： 臣等小人，过蒙陛下识拔，得洒扫闺阁；而王公、朝士疾臣等如仇，又深恨陛下。
现代文：王沈等人磕头哭着说： 我们都是小人，承蒙陛下错爱提拔，能够为陛下扫洒闺阁，而王公、朝臣嫉恨我们如同仇敌，又对陛下深感遗憾。
English: Wang Shen and others bowed their heads in tears and said, "We are all villains. Thanks to His Majesty's undeserved promotion, we are able to sweep the boudoir for His Majesty. However, the prince and courtiers hate us as enemies and deeply regret His Majesty.

古文：愿以臣等膏鼎镬，则朝廷自然雍穆矣。 
现代文：愿陛下把我们放到鼎沸的油锅中，那么朝廷自然平和静穆了。 
English: May His Majesty put us in the boiling pot of oil, then the court will naturally be peaceful and quiet.

古文：聪曰： 此等狂言常然，卿何足恨乎！ 
现代文：刘聪说： 这样的狂言乱语是很平常的，你们哪里值得痛恨呢？ 
English: Liu Cong said, "Such ranting and raving is very common. What is there about you that is worth hating?

古文：聪问沈等于相国粲，粲盛称沈等忠清；聪悦，封沈等为列候。
现代文：刘聪向相国刘粲问王沈等人怎么样，刘粲非常称赞王沈等人忠心清廉。刘聪高兴了，把王沈等人封为列侯。
English: Liu Cong asked his brother-in-law Liu Ye about Wang Shen and the others. Liu Ye highly praised Wang Shen and the others for their loyalty and integrity. Liu Cong was pleased and made Wang Shen and the others into vassals.

古文：太宰易又诣阙上疏极谏，聪大怒，手坏其疏。
现代文：太宰刘易又到皇宫上奏疏极力劝谏，刘聪大为愤怒，撕碎了这份奏疏。
English: Dazai Liu Yi also went to the imperial palace to play the score and strongly advise him. Liu Cong was very angry and tore up the score.

古文：三月，易忿恚而卒。
现代文：三月，刘易愤怒而死。
English: In March, Liu Yi died of anger.

古文：易素忠直，陈元达倚之为援，得尽谏诤。
现代文：刘易一向忠心率直，陈元达依靠他为后援，才得以尽心劝谏。
English: Liu Yi has always been loyal and straightforward, and Chen Yuanda relied on him for support to be able to do his best to persuade him.

古文：及卒，元达哭之恸，曰：  人之云亡，邦国殄悴。 
现代文：刘易去世后，陈元达哭得非常悲痛，说： 《经》云： 贤人死亡，国家必将窘困。 
English: After Liu Yi's death, Chen Yuanda wept with great sorrow and said: "The sutras say that when a wise man dies, the country is bound to be in trouble.

古文：吾既不复能言，安用默默苟生乎！ 
现代文：我既然不能再尽言了，还用得着沉默不语苟且偷生吗？ 
English: Since I can no longer express myself, do I still need to be silent and silent?

古文：归而自杀。
现代文：回去后便自杀了。
English: After returning, he committed suicide.

古文：初，代王猗卢爱其少子比延，欲以为嗣，使长子六修出居新平城，而黜其母。
现代文：当初，代王拓跋猗卢偏爱小儿子拓跋比延，想让他作为继承人，便让长子拓跋六出去居住在新平城，并废黜了他的母亲。
English: At first, King Tuoba preferred his youngest son Tuoba Biyan, and wanted him to be the heir, so he sent his eldest son Tuoba VI to live in Xinping City and deposed his mother.

古文：六修有骏马，日行五百里，猗卢夺之，以与比延。
现代文：拓跋六有骏马，能日行五百里，拓跋猗卢便把马要过来送给拓跋比延。
English: Tuoba Lu has a fine horse, which can travel 500 miles a day. Tuoba Lu wants to bring the horse to Tuoba Biyan.

古文：六修来朝，猗卢使拜比延，六修不从。
现代文：拓跋六来朝见，拓跋猗卢让他给拓跋比延行礼，拓跋六不答应。
English: Tuoba 6 came to see the emperor, Tuoba 6 asked Lu to give Tuoba 6 a bow, but Tuoba 6 did not agree.

古文：猗卢乃坐比延于其步辇，使人导从出游。
现代文：拓跋猗卢于是让拓跋比延乘坐自己辇乘，派人当先导和随从，出去巡游。
English: Tuoba Lu then let Tuoba Biyan ride on his donkey, sent people to be the leader and follower, and went out for a cruise.

古文：六修望见，以为猗卢，伏谒路左；至，乃比延，六修惭怒而去。
现代文：拓跋六远远看见，还以为是拓跋猗卢，便在路左边伏首拜谒，来了一看，原来是拓跋比延，拓跋六羞惭愤怒地扬长而去。
English: Seeing it from afar, Tuoba Lu thought it was Tuoba Qilu, so he bowed down on the left side of the road to pay homage. When he took a look, it turned out to be Tuoba Biyan. Shy and angry, Tuoba Lu walked away.

古文：猗卢召之不至，大怒，帅众讨之，为六修所败。
现代文：拓跋猗卢宣召他而不来，勃然大怒，率领军队讨伐拓跋六，结果被拓跋六打败。
English: Tuobao Lu called for him not to come, and he flew into a rage, and led the army to fight against Tuobao Six. As a result, Tuobao Six was defeated.

古文：猗卢微服逃民间，有贱妇人识之，遂为六修所弑。
现代文：拓跋猗卢穿上百姓的衣服逃到百姓中，有一个贫贱的妇人认出了他，于是被拓跋六杀了。
English: Tuoba Lu put on civilian clothes and fled into the crowd. A poor woman recognized him and was killed by Tuoba Lu.

古文：拓跋普根先守外境，闻难来赴，攻六修，灭之。
现代文：拓跋普根原先在外面镇守，听说后便来赴难，攻打拓跋六，把他消灭了。
English: Originally, Tuoba Pugen was guarding the town outside, but when he heard about it, he came to the rescue, attacked Tuoba Six, and eliminated him.

古文：普根代立，国中大乱，新旧猜嫌，迭相诛灭。
现代文：拓跋普根代立为首领，国中大乱，部落中新人与旧人互相猜忌，不断互相残杀。
English: The Tuoba-Pugen Dynasty became the leader, the country was in turmoil, and the new people and the old people in the tribe were suspicious of each other and constantly killed each other.

古文：左将军卫雄、信义将军箕澹，久佐猗卢，为众所附，谋归刘琨，乃言于众曰： 闻旧人忌新人悍战，欲尽杀之，将奈何？ 
现代文：左将军卫雄、信义将军箕澹，很久以来一直辅佐拓跋猗卢，因此被大家依附，就谋划投奔刘琨，于是对大家说： 听说旧人忌恨新人强悍善战，想把新人全部杀掉，怎么办好呢？ 
English: General Zuo Wei Xiong and General Xinyi Yao, who had been supporting Tuobao Lu for a long time, were attached by everyone, so they planned to go to Liu Yao, so they said to everyone: I heard that the old people hated the new people because they were strong and good at fighting and wanted to kill all the new people, what should we do?

古文：晋人及乌桓皆惊惧，曰： 死生随二将军！ 
现代文：晋人与乌桓人都震惊惧怕，说： 生死都跟随着二位将军！ 
English: The Jin people and the Wuhuan people were shocked and afraid, saying: Life and death follow the two generals!

古文：乃与琨质子遵帅晋人及乌桓三万家、马牛羊十万头归于琨。
现代文：于是与刘琨派在这儿当作人质的儿子刘遵率领晋人以及乌桓人三万家、十万头马牛羊去归附刘琨。
English: Therefore, Liu Zun, the son of Liu Bei who was sent here as a hostage, led the Jin people and the Wuhuan people with thirty thousand households and one hundred thousand horses, cattle and sheep to join Liu Bei.

古文：琨大喜，亲诣平城抚纳之，琨兵由是复振。
现代文：刘琨非常高兴，亲自到平城抚慰接纳他们，刘琨的军队从此又振作起来。
English: Liu Bei was very pleased and personally went to Pingcheng to comfort and welcome them. Liu Bei's army has since perked up.

古文：夏，四月，普根卒。
现代文：夏季，四月，拓跋普根去世，他的儿子刚刚出世。
English: In the summer, in April, Tubapugen passed away, his son had just been born.

古文：其子始生，普根母惟氏立之。
现代文：拓跋普根的母亲惟氏把拓跋普根的儿子立为首领。
English: Tuoba Pugen's mother, Wo U, made Tuoba Pugen's son the leader of the tribe.

古文：张实下令：所部吏民有能举其过者，赏以布帛羊米。
现代文：张下达命令：所属的官吏、百姓有能指出自己过错的，奖赏给布帛羊米。
English: Zhang issued an order: If any of the officials and people who belong to the party can point out their own mistakes, they will be rewarded with Bujang mutton rice.

古文：贼曹佐高昌隗瑾曰： 今明公为政，事无巨细，皆自决之，或兴师发令，府朝不知；万一违失，谤无所分。
现代文：贼曹佐高昌人隗瑾说： 现在您处理政事，事无巨细，都是自己来决断，有时兴师发布命令，州府的其他官员都不知道，万一有什么失误，无人代其受责。
English: Thief Cao Zuo Gao Changren said: Now you are dealing with political affairs, no matter how big or small, you have to make your own decisions. Sometimes the social development division issues orders, and other officials in the state government do not know. In case of any mistakes, no one will be held responsible on their behalf.

古文：群下畏威，受成而已。
现代文：下级官吏们畏惧您的权威，都服从您的成命罢了。
English: The lower-ranking officials are afraid of your authority and only obey your orders.

古文：如此，虽赏之千金，终不敢言也。
现代文：像这样，即使赏赐千金，终究也还是不敢说。
English: Like this, even if you are rewarded with a lot of money, you still dare not say it.

古文：谓宜少损聪明，凡百政事，皆延访群下，使各尽所怀，然后采而行之，则嘉言自至，何必赏也！ 
现代文：我认为应当稍微减少一点儿您的聪明，凡是各种政事，都拿到下级官员们中去访求意见，使他们把心里所想的都说出来，然后选择采用，有益的建议自然会来，何必赏赐呢？ 
English: I think you should reduce your cleverness a little. In all kinds of government affairs, you should get the lower-level officials to visit and ask for opinions, so that they can say what they think, and then choose to adopt. Useful suggestions will naturally come, why reward it?

古文：实悦，从之，增瑾位三等。
现代文：张高兴，采纳了这个建议。给隗瑾提升了三级。
English: Zhang was pleased and accepted the suggestion. He promoted Zou to the third grade.

古文：实遣将军王该帅步骑五千入援长安，且送诸郡贡计。
现代文：张派遣将军王该率领五千步兵、骑兵支援长安，并且送去郡县贡品清单。
English: Zhang dispatched General Wang Ge to lead five thousand infantry and cavalry to support Chang'an, and sent a list of tributes to the county.

古文：诏拜实都督陕西诸军事，以实弟茂为秦州刺史。
现代文：朝廷诏令任命张为都督陕西诸军事，命张的弟弟张茂任秦州刺史。
English: The imperial decree appointed Zhang as the military governor of Shaanxi Province, and Zhang's younger brother Zhang Mao as the military governor of Qin Province.

古文：石勒使石虎攻刘演于廪丘，幽州刺史段匹磾使其弟文鸯救之；虎拔廪丘，演奔文鸯军，虎获演弟启以归。
现代文：石勒派石虎到廪丘攻打刘演，幽州刺史段匹派他弟弟段文鸯救援刘演。石虎攻克了廪丘，刘演逃奔到段文鸯的军中，石虎抓获了刘演的弟弟刘启后就回去了。
English: Shi Le sent Shi Hu to attack Liu Xuan in Shaoqiu, and Yuzhou sent his brother, Duan Wenyi, to rescue Liu Xuan. Shi Hu conquered Shaoqiu, Liu Xuan fled to Duan Wenyi's army, and Shi Hu captured Liu Xuan's brother, Liu Qi, and then went back.

古文：宁州刺史王逊，严猛喜诛杀。
现代文：宁州刺史王逊，严厉凶猛喜好杀人。
English: Ningzhou assassin Wang Xun, stern and fierce, likes to kill people.

古文：五月，平夷太守雷炤、平乐太守董霸帅三千馀家叛，降于成。
现代文：五月，平夷太守雷、平乐太守董霸，带领三千多人家叛离，向成汉投降。
English: In May, Pingyi Taizhou Lei and Pingle Taizhou Dongba led more than 3,000 people to defect and surrender to Chenghan.

古文：六月，丁巳朔，日有食之。
现代文：六月，丁巳朔，出现日食。
English: In June, shortly after sunrise, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：秋，七月，汉大司马曜围北地太守麹昌，大都督麹允将步骑三万救之。
现代文：秋季，七月，汉大司马刘曜围攻北地太守昌，大都督允率领三万步兵骑兵去救援。
English: In the autumn, in July, the Han Daishi, Ma Liuyang, besieged the Hokkien Tai Shuchang, and Dadu Du Yun led thirty thousand infantry and cavalry to the rescue.

古文：曜绕城纵火，烟起蔽天，使反间绐允曰： 郡城已陷，往无及也！ 
现代文：刘曜环绕着城墙纵火，浓烟滚滚遮蔽天日，派奸细造谣欺骗允说： 郡城已陷落，赶去也来不及了。 
English: Liu You set fire to the city wall, and the thick smoke obscured the sky. He sent spies to spread rumors and deceive the people, saying, "The county seat has fallen, and it's too late to go."

古文：众惧而溃。
现代文：部众们听了后惊惧不已，四处溃散。
English: After hearing this, the club members were shocked and scattered everywhere.

古文：曜追败允于磻石谷，允奔还灵武，曜遂取北地。
现代文：刘曜追击，在石谷打败允，允逃回灵武，刘曜于是占取了北地。
English: Liu You chased and defeated Yun in Shidani, Yun fled back to Lingwu, and Liu You then occupied the north.

古文：允性仁厚，无威断，喜以爵位悦人。
现代文：允性情仁慈宽厚，没有威严也不果断，喜欢拿爵位去取悦于人。
English: He has an agreeable disposition, is kind and generous, lacks majesty and decisiveness, and likes to use his title to please others.

古文：新平太守竺恢、始平太守杨像、扶风太守竺爽、安定太守焦嵩，皆领征、镇，杖节，加侍中、常侍；村坞主帅，小者犹假银青将军之号；然恩不及下，故诸将骄恣而士卒离怨。
现代文：新平太守竺恢，始平太守杨像、扶风太守竺爽、安定太守焦嵩，都兼任征、镇将军，具有掌握符节的资格，并担任侍中、常侍。村堡的首领，小的也都让他们借用银印、青绶，加将军的名号。但是恩惠却不施及下层兵士，所以造成将领们骄横放纵而士卒离心怨恨。
English: Xinping Taishu Yangzhuang, Shiheping Taishu Yangzhuang, Fufeng Taishu Yangshuang, and Jingdong Taishu Jiao Song were all concurrently appointed as enlisted and town generals, with the qualifications of mastering the symbols, and served as attendants and regular attendants. The leaders of the village fort, even the small ones, also let them borrow the silver seal, the green seal, and the name of the general. However, the favors were not extended to the lower-level soldiers, which caused the generals to be arrogant and indulgent, and the soldiers to be resentful.

古文：关中危乱，允告急于焦嵩；嵩素侮允，曰： 须允困，当救之。 
现代文：关中危险变乱，允向焦嵩告急，焦嵩平常对允很轻慢，说： 必须允困窘，才去救他。 
English: In the middle of the pass, when there was danger and chaos, Yun was in a hurry to get to Jiaosong. Jiaosong was usually very slow to respond to Yun, saying, "I have to be embarrassed before I can save him."

古文：曜进至泾阳，渭北诸城悉溃。
现代文：刘曜进发泾水以北地区，渭水以北各城全部溃败。
English: Liu Ye marched into the area north of Surabaya and defeated all the cities north of Surabaya.

古文：曜获建威将军鲁充、散骑常侍梁纬、少府皇甫阳。
现代文：刘曜抓获建威将军鲁充、散骑常侍梁纬、少府皇甫阳。
English: Liu You captured General Jian Wei Rucheng, straggler attendant Liang Wei, and Shofu Emperor Foyang.

古文：曜素闻充贤，募生致之，既见，赐之酒曰： 吾得子，天下不足定也！ 
现代文：刘曜平常听说鲁充贤能，就让把他活着带来，见面时，赐给他酒说： 我得到了您，安定天下就不成问题了！
English: Liu You always heard that Lu Chengxian was capable, so he had him brought to him alive. When they met, he gave him wine and said, "Now that I have you, stability in the world will not be a problem!"

古文：充曰： 身为晋将，国家丧败，不敢求生。
现代文：鲁充说： 我身为晋朝将军，国家沦丧失败不敢求生。
English: Luchun said: As a general of the Jin Dynasty, I dared not survive the country's downfall and defeat.

古文：若蒙公恩，速死为幸。 
现代文：如果能蒙受您的恩德，就请让我快点死为幸。 
English: If I can receive your kindness, please let me die soon.

古文：曜曰： 义士也。 
现代文：刘曜说： 真是义士。 
English: Liu You said: What a righteous man.

古文：赐之剑，令自杀。
现代文：赐给他剑，让他自杀。
English: Give him a sword and let him kill himself.

古文：梁纬妻辛氏，美色，曜召见，将妻之，辛氏大哭曰： 妾夫已死，义不独生，且一妇人而事二夫，明公又安用之！ 
现代文：梁纬的妻子辛氏，容貌美丽，刘曜召见她，打算娶她为妻，辛氏大哭说： 我的丈夫已死，从道义讲我不能自己活下去，再说一个妇人而侍奉两个丈夫，您难道需要这样做吗？ 
English: Liang Wei's beautiful wife, Xin, was summoned by Liu You, who planned to marry her. Xin burst into tears and said, "My husband is dead. Morally speaking, I can't live on my own. Besides, one woman serves two husbands. Do you really need to do this?"

古文：曜曰： 贞女也。 
现代文：刘曜说： 真是贞女。 
English: Liu You said: She is really a chaste woman.

古文：亦听自杀，皆以礼葬之。
现代文：也听任她自杀，把鲁充与辛氏都按照礼制安葬了。
English: He also allowed her to commit suicide and buried both Luchun and Xin in accordance with the rules of etiquette.

古文：汉主聪立故张后侍婢樊氏为上皇后，三后之外，佩皇后玺绶者复有七人。
现代文：汉主刘聪把已故张皇后的侍从婢女樊氏立为上皇后，三个皇后之外，佩戴皇后玺印绶带的还有七个人。
English: The lord of the Han Dynasty, Liu Cong, appointed the late Empress Zhang's handmaid, Zou Shi, as the upper empress. In addition to the three empresses, there are also seven people who wear the empress's seal ribbon.

古文：嬖宠用事，刑赏紊乱。
现代文：朝廷中宠信的小人掌权，刑罚奖赏混乱不堪。
English: The court's favorite villain is in power, and punishment and reward are in disarray.

古文：大将军敷数涕泣切谏，聪怒曰： 汝欲乃公速死邪，何以朝夕生来哭人！ 
现代文：大将军刘敷多次哭着恳切的劝谏，刘聪说： 你想让父亲我尽快死呀？为什么早晚活生生地哭人！ 
English: Major General Liu Shiki repeatedly wept and earnestly exhorted, Liu Cong said: Do you want my father to die as soon as possible? Why do you cry so much?

古文：敷忧愤，发病卒。
现代文：刘敷忧虑激愤，得病去世。
English: Liu Shiki, worried and enraged, fell ill and died.

古文：河东平阳大蝗，民流殍者什五六。
现代文：河东平阳遭受严重蝗灾，百姓流亡或饿死的有十之五六。
English: Pingyang, east of the river, suffered a serious locust plague, and 56 out of every 10 people were forced into exile or starved to death.

古文：石勒遣其将石越帅骑二万屯并州，招纳流民，民归之者二十万户。
现代文：石勒派他的部将石越率领二万骑兵到并州驻扎，招纳流民，投奔他的百姓有二十万户。
English: Shiller sent his general, Ishi Yue, with twenty thousand cavalry to annex the state and recruit displaced persons. Two hundred thousand households fled to him.

古文：聪遣使让勒，勒不受命，潜与曹嶷相结。
现代文：刘聪派遣使者责备石勒，而石勒不服从，暗自与曹嶷相勾结。
English: Liu Cong sent an envoy to rebuke Shi Le, but Shi Le disobeyed and secretly colluded with Cao Pi.

古文：八月，汉大司马曜逼长安。
现代文：八月，汉大司马刘曜进逼长安。
English: In August, the Vice-Chancellor of Han University, Ma Liu, entered Chang'an.

古文：九月，汉主宴群臣于光极殿，引见太弟乂。
现代文：九月，汉主在光极殿宴请群臣，召太弟刘义来相见。
English: In September, the emperor held a banquet for his courtiers at the Hall of Light, and summoned Liu Yi, the emperor's younger brother, to meet him.

古文：乂容貌憔悴，鬓发苍然，涕泣陈谢，聪亦为之恸哭；乃纵酒极欢，待之如初。
现代文：刘义容貌憔悴，鬓须头发都白了，哭着道谢，刘聪也因此痛哭。于是开怀饮酒极尽欢畅，对待刘义就像最初时一样。
English: Liu Yi's face was haggard, his whiskers and hair were all white. He cried and thanked him, and Liu Cong also cried bitterly. So he drank happily and treated Liu Yi as he did at the beginning.

古文：焦嵩、竺恢、宋哲皆引兵救长安，散骑常侍华辑监京兆、冯翊、弘农、上洛四郡兵，屯霸上，皆畏汉兵强，不敢进。
现代文：焦嵩、竺恢、宋哲都带兵救援长安，散骑常侍华辑监督京兆、冯翊、弘农、上洛四个郡的军队，驻扎在霸上，但都畏惧汉兵的强大不敢前进。
English: Jiao Song, Xuan Hui, and Song Zhe all led troops to rescue Chang'an, and the cavalryman Hua Ji oversaw the armies of the four counties of Jing Zhao, Feng Luo, Hong Nong, and Shangluo, stationed in Baxian, but they were afraid of the powerful Chinese soldiers and dared not advance.

古文：相国保遣胡崧将兵入援，击汉大司马曜于灵台，破之。
现代文：相国司马保派遣胡崧带兵去援救，在灵台攻打汉大司马刘曜，打败了他。
English: His counterpart, Sima Bao, sent Hu Yao and his soldiers to rescue him, and they attacked Han Daishi, Ma Liu You, in Lingtai and defeated him.

古文：崧恐国威复振则麹、索势盛，乃帅城西诸郡兵屯渭北不进，遂还槐里。
现代文：胡崧担心国威重新振作，使得麴允、索的势力变强，就带领城西各郡军队驻扎在渭水以北地区不前进，随后回师槐里。
English: Hu Wei was worried that the national prestige would be reinvigorated, making the power of Shuyun and Suo stronger, so he led the troops of the counties west of the city to stay in the area north of Surabaya and not advance, and then returned to Shili.

古文：曜攻陷长安外城，麹允、索纟林退守小城以自固。
现代文：刘曜攻陷长安的外城，允、索退到小城自守。
English: Liu Yow attacked and captured the outer city of Chang'an, while Yun and Suo retreated to a small city to defend themselves.

古文：内外断绝，城中饥甚，米斗直金二两，人相食，死者太半，亡逃不可制，唯凉州义众千人，守死不移。
现代文：内外断绝了联系，城中非常饥饿，一斗米值二两金子，人吃人，城里人死了一大半，兵士逃亡不能控制禁止，只有凉州义兵几千人，誓死不动。
English: Internal and external communications were cut off, the city was very hungry, a bucket of rice was worth two or two gold coins, people were eating people, more than half of the people in the city died, soldiers were not allowed to escape, and only a few thousand volunteers from Liangzhou vowed to die.

古文：太仓有麹数十饼，麹允屑之为粥以供帝，既而亦尽。
现代文：京城粮食仓库有几十个麦饼，允把饼弄碎做成粥来供愍帝食用，不久也吃光了。
English: There were dozens of wheat cakes in the grain warehouse in the capital city, but they were soon eaten up, and the cake was crushed and made into porridge for Emperor Xuan to eat.

古文：冬，十一月，帝泣谓允曰： 今穷厄如此，外无救援，当忍耻出降，以活士民。 
现代文：冬季，十一月，愍帝哭着对麴允说： 现在这样穷困，外无救援，应该忍受耻辱出去投降，使士人、百姓能够生存下来。 
English: In the winter, in November, Emperor Zou cried to Zou Yun and said, "Now that we are so impoverished and there is no outside help, we should bear the shame and go out and surrender so that our scholars and people can survive.

古文：因叹曰： 误我事者，麹、索二公也！ 
现代文：说完又感叹说： 耽误我的事业的，是允、索二公！ 
English: When he had finished, he sighed and said, "It is Yun and Suo who are delaying my career!

古文：使侍中宗敞送降笺于曜。
现代文：派侍中宗敞给刘曜送交投降书。
English: He sent his attendant, Zhong Zongchan, to deliver the surrender letter to Liu You.

古文：索纟林潜留敝，使其子说曜曰： 今城中食犹足支一年，未易克也，若许纟林以车骑、仪同、万户郡公者，请以城降。 
现代文：索暗自留住宗敞，又派他的儿子去对刘曜说： 现在城中的粮食还足够维持一年，是不容易攻克的，如果应允封索为仪同、万户郡公，那就请求献城投降。 
English: So Min kept his room and sent his son Wu to Liu You, saying, "There is enough grain in the city to last for a year. It is not easy to conquer. If you agree to make So Min the ruler of Wanhu County, then ask him to surrender the city."

古文：曜斩而送之，曰： 帝王之师，以义行也。
现代文：刘曜把他杀了送回尸首，说： 帝王之师，按照道义行事。
English: Liu You killed him and sent back his corpse, saying, "Teacher of the emperor, act according to morality.

古文：孤将兵十五年，未尝以诡计败人，必穷兵极势，然后取之。
现代文：我带兵十五年，从来没有靠诡计去打败敌人，一定是竭尽全部兵力打到底，然后占取该地。
English: I have been leading soldiers for fifteen years, and I have never relied on trickery to defeat the enemy. I must fight to the end with all my strength and then occupy the land.

古文：今索纟林所言如此，天下之恶一也，辄相为戮之。
现代文：现在按索所说的这样，天下的恶人都一样，总是互相攻杀。
English: Now, as Medusa said, all the wicked people in the world are the same, always attacking and killing each other.

古文：若兵食审未尽者，便可勉强固守；如其粮竭兵微，亦宜早寤天命。 
现代文：如果军队、粮食确实没有用完，就可以尽力坚守；但如果军粮用尽兵势微弱，你们也就应该早点明白上天的旨意。 
English: If the army and grain are indeed not exhausted, you can do your best to stick to it; but if the army and grain are exhausted and the army is weak, you should also understand the will of heaven earlier.

古文：甲午，宗敞至曜营；乙未，帝乘羊车，肉袒、衔璧、舆榇出东门降。群臣号泣，攀车执帝手，帝亦悲不自胜。
现代文：甲午，宗敞到刘曜的兵营。乙未，愍帝谦恭地乘着羊车、袒露着臂膀、口含玉璧，用车拉着棺材从东门出去投降，群臣放声大哭，登车去拉愍帝的手，愍帝也悲痛万分不能自已。
English: In the afternoon of the first day, Zong Zhang went to Liu You's barracks. In the evening of the second day, Emperor Zou, with humility, rode a sheep cart, bare-armed and with his mouth full of gems. He pulled the coffin out of the east gate and surrendered. The courtiers cried loudly and boarded the cart to pull Emperor Zou's hand. Emperor Zou was also overwhelmed with grief.

古文：御史中丞冯翊吉朗叹曰： 吾智不能谋，勇不能死，何忍君臣相随，北面事贼虏乎！ 
现代文：御史中丞冯翊人吉朗感叹说： 我的才智不能为国家出谋划策，勇力也不能为国战死，怎么能忍心君臣相随，向贼寇低头称臣呢？ 
English: Grand Historian Feng Xuan, a native of Jilang, lamented, "My talent cannot make plans and suggestions for the country, and my courage cannot die in battle for the country. How can I bear to be a ruler and a subject, and bow down to a thief and a robber?

古文：乃自杀。
现代文：说完就自杀了。
English: He killed himself.

古文：曜焚榇受璧，使宗敞奉帝还宫。
现代文：刘曜焚烧了愍帝所带的棺材，接受了他口含的玉璧，派宗敞侍奉着愍帝回宫。
English: Liu You burned the coffin that Emperor Gong brought with him, accepted the jade gem that he held in his mouth, and sent Zong Zang to serve Emperor Gong back to the palace.

古文：丁酉，迁帝及公卿以下于其营；辛丑，送至平阳。
现代文：丁酉，刘曜把愍帝以及公卿大臣们迁到自己的兵营中。
English: Ding Xuan and Liu You moved Emperor Gao and the noblemen and ministers to their own barracks.

古文：壬寅，汉主聪临光极殿，帝稽首于前。
现代文：辛丑，把他们送到平阳，壬寅，汉君主刘聪来到光极殿，愍帝向前行稽首礼。
English: Xin ugly, send them to Pingyang, Ren Yin, Han monarch Liu Cong came to the Hall of Light, and Emperor Zou bowed his head forward.

古文：麹允伏地恸哭，扶不能起。聪怒，囚之，允自杀。
现代文：允趴伏在地下痛哭，扶不起来，刘聪发怒，把他囚禁起来，允自杀。
English: Yoon prostrated himself on the ground and cried bitterly, unable to get up. Liu Cong became angry, imprisoned him and Yoon committed suicide.

古文：聪以帝为光禄大夫，封怀安候。
现代文：刘聪让愍帝任光禄大夫，封为怀安侯。
English: Liu Cong appointed Emperor Zou as the doctor of Guanglu, and he was given the title of Prince of Huai'an.

古文：以大司马曜为假黄钺、大都督、督陕西诸军事、太宰，封秦王。
现代文：以大司马刘曜担任假黄钺、大都督、都督陕西诸军事、太宰，封为秦王。
English: Grand Secretary Ma Liuyang served as the pseudo Huang Di, the grand governor, the military governor of Shaanxi Province, the Dazai, and the Qin King.

古文：大赦，改元麟嘉。
现代文：宣布大赦，改年号为麟嘉。
English: An amnesty was declared, and the year name was changed to Lin Jia.

古文：以麹允忠烈，赠车骑将军，谥节愍候。
现代文：根据允的忠心刚烈，追赠为车骑将军，谥号为节愍侯。
English: According to the loyalty and fortitude of Yun, he was posthumously awarded the title of chariot and cavalry general, and his posthumous name was Jiejunhou.

古文：以索纟林不忠，斩于都市。
现代文：又根据索的不忠，在都市把他杀了。
English: And he killed him in the city, because of his trespass.

古文：尚书梁允、侍中梁浚等及诸郡守皆为曜所杀，华辑奔南山。
现代文：尚书梁允、侍中梁浚等人以及各郡太守都被刘曜所杀，华辑逃奔南山。
English: Shang Shul Liang Yun, Liang Jun and others, as well as the county governors, were all killed by Liu You, and Hua Ji fled to Nanshan.

古文：干宝论曰： 昔高祖宣皇帝，以雄才硕量，应时而起，性深阻有若城府，而能宽绰以容纳；行数术以御物，而知人善采拔。
现代文：干宝论曰：过去高祖宣皇帝司马懿，靠着他的雄才大略，顺应时势而崛起，性格深沉内向如同城府一样，但能用博大的胸怀宽容他人，使用算计权术驾驭人才，知人善任。
English: The dry treasure theory says: Emperor Sima Qian, the great ancestor of Emperor Xuan in the past, relied on his great talent to rise in accordance with the trend of the times. His character was deeply introverted like the city government, but he was able to tolerate others with a broad mind, use the power of calculation to drive talent, and know people well.

古文：于是百姓与能，大象始构。
现代文：于是百姓一致相信他的才能，晋朝的法度规模开始构建。
English: In this situation, the people are close to the talented people, and the general trend is beginning to take shape.

古文：世宗承基，太祖继业，咸黜异图，用融前烈。
现代文：世宗司马师承续了司马懿开创的基础，太祖司马昭继承了先辈事业，他们都粉碎了来自内部的阴谋，使前人的建立的事业更加辉煌灿烂。
English: Sima Shi, the founder of the dynasty, continued the foundation created by Sima Yao, and Sima Zhao, the great-great-grandfather, inherited the cause of his predecessors. They all smashed the internal conspiracy and made the cause established by their predecessors more brilliant.

古文：至于世祖，遂享皇极，仁以厚下，俭以足用，和而不弛，宽而能断，掩唐、虞之旧域，班正朔于八荒，于时有 天下无穷人 之谚，虽太平未洽，亦足以明民乐其生矣。
现代文：到世祖司马炎，便登上了皇帝的宝座，他仁爱宽厚地对待百姓，节俭而保证用度，雍和而不放任，宽容而能够决断，统治遍及唐尧虞舜当年的疆域，所颁布的新历法延及遥远的边陲地区。当时出现了 天下无穷人 的民谣，即使还没有完全太平，也完全能够表明百姓安居乐业了。
English: When Zhu Sima Yan came into the world, he ascended to the throne of the emperor. He treated the people with benevolence and generosity. He was frugal and ensured the use of resources. He was peaceful and did not let them go. He was tolerant and decisive. He ruled over the territory of the Tang Dynasty. The new calendar he promulgated extended to the distant border areas. At that time, the folk song "There are no poor people in the world" appeared. Even if it was not completely peaceful, it could fully show that the people lived in peace and contentment.

古文：武皇既崩，山陵未干而变难继起。
现代文：武皇司马炎去世后，陵墓的泥土还没有干而变乱灾难连续发生。
English: After the death of Emperor Sima Yan, the mud of the mausoleum had not yet dried, and the chaotic disaster continued to occur.

古文：宗子无维城之助，师尹无具瞻之贵，朝为伊、周，夕成桀、跖；国政迭移于乱人，禁兵外散于四方，方岳无钧石之镇，关门无结草之固。
现代文：宗室的子弟没有帮助辅佐皇城，职位最高的大臣没有让百姓瞻仰的高贵形象，早晨是商朝的伊尹、周朝的周公，晚上就成了凶暴的桀和盗跖。国家政务屡次落入为乱之人的手中，禁卫军队分散在四面八方，地方上没有坚如磐石的镇守一方的人才，关隘城门还没有茅屋坚固。
English: The children of the imperial family did not help to support the imperial city, the highest-ranking minister did not have a noble image for the people to admire, in the morning it was Yi Yin of the Shang Dynasty and Zhou Gong of the Zhou Dynasty, and in the evening it became a ferocious thief and robber. State affairs repeatedly fell into the hands of people who were in chaos, the guarding army was scattered in all directions, there was no rock-solid talent of the town guard side in the local area, and the narrow gate was not yet strong.

古文：戎、羯称制，二帝失尊，何哉？
现代文：戎人、羯人称帝，怀帝、愍帝失去尊严，为什么呢？
English: Emperors, emperors, emperors, emperors, emperors lose their dignity, why?

古文：树立失权，托付非才，四维不张，而苟且之政多也。
现代文：大权旁落，国政交给了没有才能的庸人，礼义廉耻四维没有确立而苟且维持的政务太多。
English: Great power has fallen by the wayside, national politics has been handed over to mediocrities without talent, and there are too many government affairs that have not been established and maintained in the four dimensions of propriety, honesty, and integrity.

古文：夫基广则难倾，根深则难拔，理节则不乱，胶结则不迁。
现代文：基础广大就难以倾倒，根基很深就难以拔出，政务有条不紊就不会混乱，人心牢固地结连在一起就不可动摇。
English: If the foundation is broad, it is difficult to topple; if the foundation is deep, it is difficult to pull out; if the government affairs are orderly, there will be no chaos; if the hearts of the people are firmly connected, they cannot be shaken.

古文：昔之有天下者所以能长久，用此道也。
现代文：过去拥有天下的人所以能够长治久安，就是这个道理。
English: This is the reason why those who owned the world in the past were able to maintain long-term stability.

古文：周自后稷爱民，十六王而武始君之，其积基树本，如此其固。
现代文：周朝从后稷开始爱护百姓，经过十六代后的周武王才成为君主，他们积累的基础，树立的根本，是这样的坚固。
English: The Zhou dynasty began to love and care for the people from Houyi, and it took 16 generations for King Zhouwu to become the monarch. The foundation they have built up, the foundation they have established, is so solid.

古文：今晋之兴也，其创基立本，固异于先代矣。
现代文：今天晋朝兴起，开创基业树立根本，已经与古代不同。
English: Today, the rise of the Jin Dynasty, the creation of the foundation and the establishment of the foundation, has been different from the ancient times.

古文：加以朝寡纯德之人，乡乏不二之老，风俗淫僻，耻尚失所。
现代文：加上朝廷中缺少纯正有德的人，乡野也缺乏不重犯同样错误的乡老，风俗靡淫怪僻，什么是羞耻，什么应当崇尚，都失去了标准。
English: In addition to the lack of pure and virtuous people in the imperial court, there is also a lack of countrymen who do not repeat the same mistakes in the countryside. Customs are pervasive and eccentric. What is shame and what should be revered have lost their standards.

古文：学者以庄、老为宗而黜《六经》，谈者以虚荡为辩而贱名检，行身者以放浊为通而狭节信，进仕者以苟得为贵而鄙居正，当官者以望空为高而笑勤恪。
现代文：学习的人以庄子、老子的学说为宗旨而废黜《诗》、《书》、《礼》、《乐》、《易》、《春秋》六经，谈论的人以虚无放纵为明理而轻蔑礼教和谦逊，修身的人以放纵随意为通达而瞧不起节操信用，求官的人以能够用不正当的手段得到官职为高贵而鄙视遵循正道，当官的以不分是非不问政务为崇高而耻笑于政事恪守职责。
English: Those who study the teachings of Zhuangzi and Lao Zi depose the Six Classics of Poetry, Calligraphy, Rites, Music, Yi and Spring and Autumn. Those who talk about them despise etiquette and modesty, taking the nihilism of indulgence as the reason. Those who practice self-cultivation despise prudence and trustworthiness, taking the indulgence of free will as the reason. Those who aspire to be officials despise following the right path, taking the ability to obtain an official position by improper means as the nobility. Those in power hold the principle of not caring about the rights and wrongs of government affairs as noble, but are ashamed to abide by

古文：是以刘颂屡言治道，傅咸每纠邪正，皆谓之俗吏；其倚杖虚旷，依阿无心者，皆名重海内。
现代文：所以刘颂屡次论说治世的道理，傅咸常常上书矫正错误，都被称为庸俗的官吏。但那些倚仗虚无旷废职守，依靠迎合放达恣意妄为的人，却都声名显赫于海内。
English: Therefore, Liu Song repeatedly discussed the principles of ruling the world, Fu Xian often wrote to correct mistakes, and they were all called vulgar officials. However, those who relied on nothingness, abandoned their duties, and relied on pandering to the arbitrary behavior of Fangda, were all famous in the sea.

古文：若夫文王日昃不暇食，仲山甫夙夜匪懈者，盖共嗤黜以为灰尘矣！
现代文：像那周文王理政从早晨忙到下午都顾不上吃饭，周朝仲山甫做事昼夜不懈怠，都被嗤笑贬低认为是灰尘一样！
English: Like that Zhou Wen Wang Li Zheng, who was so busy from morning to afternoon that he did not have time to eat, and the Zhou dynasty Zhong Shan Fu, who worked day and night without slacking, they were ridiculed and belittled as dust!

古文：由是毁誉乱于善恶之实，情慝奔于货欲之涂，选者为人择官，官者为身择利，世族贵戚之子弟，陵迈超越，不拘资次。
现代文：从此在毁誉方面混淆了善恶的事实，感情和邪恶都投入到追逐财物私欲的路上。选官的人因人而不是因才来选择官员，当官的人为自己谋取利益，世家豪族皇亲贵戚的子弟破格超越，不管资历和次序。
English: Since then, the facts of good and evil have been confused in the aspect of defamation, and both emotions and evil have been invested in the pursuit of wealth and selfish desires. The people who elect officials choose officials because of people rather than because of talent, the people in power seek their own interests, and the children of the imperial relatives of the powerful families surpass the standards, regardless of seniority and order.

古文：悠悠风尘，皆奔竞之士；列官千百，无让贤之举。
现代文：悠悠人世，全都是追逐名利的士人，朝廷百官，没有举贤让能的行为。
English: Throughout their lives, all of them were scholars who chased fame and fortune. There were hundreds of officials in the imperial court, and they did not act to promote talent.

古文：子真著《崇让》而莫之省，子雅制九班而不得用。
现代文：刘著《崇让论》提倡举贤让能却无人省悟，刘颂制定考核官员的九班之制却不能得到采用。
English: Liu Song, author of "The Theory of Concession," advocated the promotion of talents and abilities, but no one thought about it. However, Liu Song's nine-class system for assessing officials could not be adopted.

古文：其妇女不知女工，任情而动，有逆于舅姑，有杀戮妾媵，父兄弗之罪也，天下莫之非也。
现代文：妇女不懂得纺织、刺绣等女工，随心所欲，有的忤逆公婆，有的杀戮姬妾婢女，而其父兄却不以为罪，天下也无人非议。
English: Women do not understand female workers such as weaving and embroidery, and do as they please. Some are rebellious against their in-laws, and some kill their concubines and maids, but their fathers and brothers do not consider it a crime, and no one in the world criticizes them.

古文：礼法刑政，于此大坏。 国之将亡，本必先颠， 其此之谓乎！
现代文：礼制法度刑罚政令，因此受到严重破坏， 国家将要灭亡，根本一定会先颠倒 ，说的大概就是这种情况吧？
English: The ceremonial system, the legal system, the penal system, and the government decrees have been seriously damaged as a result. The country is going to perish, and it must be reversed first. Is this probably the case?

古文：故观阮籍之行而觉礼教崩弛之所由，察庾纯、贾充之争而见师尹之多僻，考平吴之功而知将帅之不让，思郭钦之谋而寤戎狄之有衅，览傅玄、刘毅之言而得百官之邪，核傅咸之奏、《钱神》之论而睹宠赂之彰。
现代文：所以观察阮籍的行为而能发现礼制名教崩溃松弛的原因，察视庚纯和贾充之间的纷争而可以发现担任百官之长的大臣大多行为不端。考察平定东吴时互相争功而知道将帅的不谦让，思考郭钦的计谋而能感到戎人狄人要挑起事端，观览傅玄、刘毅的言论而能了解百官中的奸邪之事，核察傅咸的奏议以及《钱神论》而能看到宠幸贿赂公然进行的情形。
English: Therefore, by observing the behavior of Nguyn Quc, we can find the reasons for the collapse and slackening of the etiquette system. By observing the dispute between Geng Chun and Jia Chong, we can find that most of the ministers who served as the chiefs of hundreds of officials misbehaved. By examining the time of the pacification of the Eastern Wu, we can know the intransigence of the generals, by thinking about the strategy of Guo Qin, we can feel that the soldiers of Di were trying to stir up trouble. By observing the remarks of Fu Xuan and Liu Yi, we can understand the treachery among the hundreds of officials. By

古文：民风国势，既已如此，虽以中庸之才、守文之主治之，犹惧致乱，况我惠帝以放荡之德临之哉！
现代文：百姓的风气、国家的趋势，既然已是这样，即使是中等平常的才能、只知守成的君主来治理，也还怕导致祸乱，更何况我朝惠帝用放任纵情的行为方式来君临天下呢？
English: Since the people's customs and the country's trend are already like this, even if it is governed by a moderately ordinary talent and a monarch who only knows how to protect himself, he is still afraid of leading to disaster. What's more, how can I reign over the world with a permissive and indulgent behavior?

古文：怀帝承乱得位，羁以强臣；愍帝奔播之后，徒守虚名。
现代文：怀帝在变乱的时局下登上帝位，受到势力强大的权臣的控制。愍帝即位于朝廷奔波流亡之后，徒具虚名。
English: Emperor Huai ascended to the throne in turbulent times, under the control of powerful vassals. Emperor Zou, after fleeing the imperial court, had only a false name.

古文：天下之势既去，非命世之雄才，不能复取之矣！
现代文：晋朝的天下大势已去，如果没有一代称雄的治世雄才，就不能再取得天下了！
English: The imperial power of the Jin Dynasty is gone. If there is no generation of outstanding young talents to rule the world, it will no longer be possible to rule the world!

古文：石勒围乐平太守韩据于坫城，据请救于刘琨。
现代文：石勒在坫城围攻乐平太守韩据，韩据向刘琨请求救援。
English: Shiller besieged Leping's garrison Han Zuo in Lucheng, and Han Zuo begged Liu Bei for help.

古文：琨新得拓跋猗卢之众，欲因其锐气以讨勒。
现代文：刘琨刚刚得到拓跋猗卢的军队，想靠着这支军队的锐气来讨伐石勒。
English: Liu Bei had just received the army of Tuoba and Lu, and he wanted to rely on the sharpness of this army to fight against Shilu.

古文：箕澹、卫雄谏曰： 此虽晋民，久沦异域，未习明公之恩信，恐其难用。
现代文：箕澹、卫雄劝谏说： 这些人虽然是晋朝的百姓，但长时间沦落在异族地区，不了解您的恩德信义，恐怕他们难以使用。
English: Gong and Wei Xiong advised Gong, "Although these people are from the Jin Dynasty, they have been stranded in a foreign land for a long time, and they don't know about your benevolence and loyalty. I'm afraid it will be difficult to use them.

古文：不若且内收鲜卑之馀谷，外抄胡贼之牛羊，闭关守险，务农息兵，待其服化感义，然后用之，则功无不济矣！ 
现代文：不如暂且在内收取鲜卑人的剩余谷物，在外抢夺胡人贼寇的牛羊，关闭关卡守住险要之地，开展农业生产，停止军事行动，等待拓跋猗卢的军队受到信义的教化感召，然后使用他们，那么功业没有不完成的。 
English: It is better to temporarily collect the surplus grain of the peasants inside, rob the cattle and sheep of the barbarians and thieves outside, close the checkpoints to protect the critical places, carry out agricultural production, stop military operations, wait for the army of Tuobao Lu to be inspired by the enlightenment of faith, and then use them, then the work is not unfinished.

古文：琨不从，悉发其众，命澹帅步骑二万为前驱，琨屯广牧，为之声援。
现代文：刘琨不接受，把这些人全部调遣出去，命令箕澹率领二万步兵、骑兵作为前锋，刘琨驻扎在广牧，为他们声援。
English: Liu Bei did not accept this, and sent all these people out, ordering Zhu to lead 20,000 infantry and cavalry as the vanguard. Liu Bei was stationed in Guangmu to support them.

古文：石勒闻澹至，将逆击之。
现代文：石勒听说箕澹到了，将要阻击箕澹。
English: When Shi Le heard that the dragonfly had arrived, he was going to intercept the dragonfly.

古文：或曰： 澹士马精强，其锋不可当，不若且引兵避之，深沟高垒，以挫其锐，必获万全。 
现代文：有人说： 箕澹兵士战马精悍强壮，势不可当，不如暂且带兵避其锋芒，修筑深沟高墙来使他们的锐气受挫，这样一定能够获得全面胜利。 
English: Some people said: "The soldiers and horses are so strong and powerful that they cannot be defeated. It is better to temporarily lead the soldiers to avoid their sharp edges and build a high wall to frustrate their sharpness. In this way, they will surely be able to win a comprehensive victory."

古文：勒曰： 澹兵虽众，远来疲弊，号令不从，何精强之有！
现代文：石勒说： 箕澹的军队人数虽然很多，但从远方开来，兵士疲惫，号令还不能统一，有什么精悍强壮？
English: Shi Ler said: Although there are a lot of soldiers, they come from far away, the soldiers are tired, and the orders cannot be unified. What is there that is brave and strong?

古文：今寇敌垂至，何可舍去！
现代文：现在敌人来临，怎么能舍弃离开？
English: Now that the enemy is coming, how can we give up and leave?

古文：大军一动，岂易中还！
现代文：大军一动，难道容易中途回师？
English: When a large army moves, is it easy to turn back halfway?

古文：若澹乘我之退而逼之，顾逃溃不暇，焉得深沟高垒乎！
现代文：如果箕澹乘我撤退之机而攻逼，溃逃都顾不上，哪儿能挖深沟垒高墙呢？
English: If the centipede seizes the opportunity of my retreat and attacks, where can it dig a deep ditch and build a high wall?

古文：此自亡之道也。 
现代文：这是消灭自己的方法。 
English: It's a way of destroying yourself.

古文：立斩言者。
现代文：当即斩杀了说话的人。
English: They immediately killed the speaker.

古文：以孔苌为前锋都督，令三军： 后出者斩！ 
现代文：以孔苌任前锋都督，命令三军： 滞后出击者，斩！ 
English: Appointing Kong Yu as the forward governor, he ordered the three armies: If you are late in attacking, behead you!

古文：勒据险要，设疑兵于山上，前设二伏，出轻骑与澹战，阳为不胜而走。
现代文：石勒占据险要之地，在山上设置诱敌的兵马，前面安排两支军队埋伏，派出轻骑兵与箕谵交战，假装不能取胜而退逃。
English: Shearer occupied a critical position, set up tempting soldiers and horses on the mountain, arranged two armies to ambush in front, sent light cavalry to fight with the hail, pretended that he could not win and fled.

古文：澹纵兵追之，入伏中。
现代文：箕澹放开军队追击，进入埋伏中。
English: Let go of the army's pursuit and enter the ambush.

古文：勒前后夹击澹军，大破之，获铠马万计。
现代文：石勒前后夹击箕澹的军队，大败箕澹，缴获铠甲、战马数以万计。
English: Shi Le clamped down on Shao's army, defeated Shao, and captured tens of thousands of armor and horses.

古文：澹、雄帅骑千馀奔代郡，韩据弃城走，并土震骇。
现代文：箕澹、卫雄率领一千多骑兵逃奔代郡，韩据弃城逃跑，并州土地为之震惊恐惧。
English: Zhai and Weixiong led more than a thousand cavalrymen to flee to Dayi County, while Han abandoned the city and fled, causing shock and fear in the state.

古文：十二月，乙卯朔，日有食之。
现代文：十二月，乙卯朔，发生日食。
English: In December, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：司空长史李弘以并州降石勒。
现代文：司空长史李弘率并州向石勒投降。
English: Air Vice-Marshal Shi Lihong led the combined state to surrender to Shile.

古文：刘琨进退失据，不知所为，段匹磾遣信邀之，己未，琨帅众从飞狐奔蓟。
现代文：这样刘琨失去据点进退两难，不知所措，段匹派使者邀请他，己未，刘琨率领部众从飞狐奔往蓟城。
English: In this way, Liu Bei lost his stronghold and was in a dilemma, at a loss. Duanpi sent an envoy to invite him, and before long, Liu Bei led the people from Feihu to Shicheng.

古文：匹磾见琨，甚相亲重，与之结婚，约为兄弟。
现代文：段匹见了刘琨，非常亲近敬重，与他联姻，并结拜为兄弟。
English: When Duan Ping met Liu Ye, he was very close to him and respected him. He married him and they became brothers.

古文：勒徙阳曲、乐平民于襄国，置守宰而还。
现代文：石勒分别迁徙阳曲、乐平的百姓到襄国，安排了郡守县令等地方长官而回师。
English: Shi Le separately migrated the people of Yangqu and Leping to Xiangguo, and arranged for local governors such as the county magistrate to return.

古文：孔苌攻箕澹于代郡，杀之。
现代文：孔苌到代郡攻打箕澹，杀了他。
English: Kong Li went to Dayi County to attack and kill him.

古文：苌等攻贼帅马严、冯䐗者，久而不克，司、冀、并、兗流民数万户在辽西，迭相招引，民不安业。
现代文：孔苌等人又攻打强盗首领马严、冯，很久攻不下来。司、冀、并、兖四州的数万户流民在辽西，多次互相招引，百姓不能安居乐业。
English: Kong Yu and others also attacked the bandit leaders Ma Yan and Feng Luo, but they could not be defeated for a long time. Tens of thousands of displaced households in the four prefectures of Si, Hebei, Nanning and Liaoning were attracted to each other many times in western Liaoning, and the people could not live and work in peace.

古文：勒问计于濮阳侯张宾，宾曰： 严、者本非公之深仇，流民皆有恋本之志，今班师振旅，选良牧守使招怀之，则幽、冀之寇可不日而清，辽西流民将相帅而至矣。 
现代文：石勒向濮阳侯张宾询问计策，张宾说： 马严、冯本来与您没有深仇，流民们都有思恋故乡的想法。现在调动军队回师，选择安排优秀的地方长官让他们招抚安慰他们，那么幽州、冀州的强盗用不了几天就能够肃清，辽西流民将会互相携带着而来了。 
English: Shi Le asked Zhang Bin, the lord of Poyang, about the strategy. Zhang Bin said: Ma Yan and Feng did not have a deep-seated grudge against you, and the displaced people all have the idea of missing their hometown. Now, mobilize the army to return to the division, select and arrange excellent local governors to let them caress and comfort them, then the robbers in Yuzhou and Jizhou will be able to clean up in a few days, and the displaced people in West Liaoning will come with each other.

古文：勒乃召苌等归，以武遂令李回为易北督护，兼高阳太守。
现代文：石勒于是宣召孔苌等人回来，以武遂县令李回担任易北督护，兼高阳太守。
English: Shi Le then called on Kong Ye and others to come back, and appointed Li Hui, the governor of Wusui County, as the governor of Yibei and the governor of Gaoyang.

古文：马严士卒素服回威德，多叛严归之，严惧而出走，赴水死。
现代文：马严的兵率一直佩服李回的威严恩德，大多叛离马严而投奔李回，马严恐惧而出逃，投水而死。
English: Ma Yan's soldiers have always admired Li Hui's majesty and virtue. Most of them defected from Ma Yan and joined Li Hui. Ma Yan fled in fear and drowned.

古文：冯者帅其众降。
现代文：冯率领他的部众投降。
English: Feng led his men to surrender.

古文：回徙居易京，流民归之者相继于道。
现代文：李回迁徙到易京居住，跟随他的流民不绝于道。
English: Li Hui migrated to live in Yijing, and the exiles who followed him were constantly on the road.

古文：勒喜，封回为弋阳子，增张宾邑千户，进位前将军；宾固辞不受。
现代文：石勒高兴，封李回为弋阳子，给张宾增加一千户的封邑，并升为前将军。张宾坚持推辞而不接受。
English: Shi Le was pleased. Li Hui was reinstated as the Yang Zi, and Zhang Bin was given an additional thousand fiefs and promoted to the rank of general. Zhang Bin refused to accept the resignation.

古文：丞相睿闻长安不守，出师露次，躬擐甲胄，移檄四方，刻日北征。
现代文：丞相司马睿听说长安失守，带军队出去露宿野外，亲自穿上铠甲，向各地发布檄文，限定日期北伐。
English: When the prime minister, Sima Rui, heard that Chang'an was out of defense, he took the army out to camp in the open, put on armor himself, and issued an edict to all parts of the country, limiting the date of the Northern Expedition.

古文：以漕运稽期，丙寅，斩督运令史淳于伯。
现代文：因为水道运粮耽误了日期，杀督运史淳于伯。
English: Because of the delay in the date of grain transportation by waterway, the history of the transportation of grain by waterway dates back to ancient times.

古文：刑者以刀拭柱，血逆流上，至柱末二丈馀而下，观者咸以为冤。
现代文：行刑的人用刀擦柱子，血逆流而上，一直到二丈多的柱子末端才流下。
English: The executioner wiped the post with a knife, and the blood flowed upstream until it reached the end of the two-story-high post.

古文：丞相司直刘隗上言： 伯罪不至死，请免从事中郎周莚等官。 
现代文：观看的人都认为淳于伯冤枉。丞相司直刘隗上言道： 淳于伯罪不至死，请免除从事中郎周等人的官职。 
English: The people watching thought that Chun Yubo had been wronged. The prime minister, Liu Ye, said: If Chun Yubo is not to die for his crime, please relieve him of his official duties as Zhong Lang Zhou and others.

古文：于是右将军王导等上疏引咎，请解职。
现代文：于是右将军王导等人上奏疏承认错误，请求免除职务。
English: As a result, Wang Du, the right general, and others made a public appeal to admit their mistake and request to be relieved of their duties.

古文：睿曰： 政刑失中，皆吾暗塞所致。 
现代文：司马睿说： 政令刑罚失当，都是我糊涂昏昧造成的。 
English: Sima Rui said, "The inappropriate government decrees and punishments were all caused by my confusion.

古文：一无所问。
现代文：他没有把一个人问罪。
English: There was no scolding at all.

古文：隗性刚讦，当时名士多被弹劾，睿率皆容贷，由是众怨皆归之。
现代文：刘隗性格刚烈不徇私情，当时的名士多被他弹劾，但司马睿总是加以宽容，因此大家都把怨恨集中到刘隗身上。
English: Liu Wei's character was tough and unselfish. At that time, many celebrities were impeached by him, but Sima Rui was always tolerant, so everyone concentrated their resentment on Liu Wei.

古文：南中郎将王含，敦之兄也，以族强位显，骄傲自恣，一请参佐及守长至二十许人，多非其才；隗劾奏含，文致甚苦，事虽被寝，而王氏深忌疾之。
现代文：南中郎将王含是王敦的哥哥，因为家族势强而地位显赫，骄傲放纵，一次请求安排参佐以及郡守县令等官职就达二十人左右，而且大多不称职。刘隗弹劾王含，罗织罪名，事情虽然被压了下来，而王氏家族对他深怀忌恨。
English: Wang Han was the elder brother of Wang Tun, and because of the family's powerful position, he was proud and self-indulgent. At one time, he requested the appointment of about twenty people to positions such as counselor and county magistrate, and most of them were incompetent. Although Liu Bei impeached Wang Han and fabricated charges, the matter was suppressed, and the Wang family harbored deep hatred for him.

古文：丞相睿以邵续为冀州刺史。
现代文：丞相司马睿以邵续担任冀州刺史。
English: The Minister of War, Ma Rui, and Shao Lian served as the governor of Jizhou.

古文：续女婿广平刘遐聚众河、济之间，睿以遐为平原内史。
现代文：邵续的女婿广平人刘遐在河、济地区聚集了一些人马，司马睿就让刘遐担任平原内史。
English: Shao Jian's son-in-law, the Guangping man Liu Wei, gathered some people and horses in the He and Ji regions, and Sima Rui let Liu Wei serve as the leader of the plain's internal history.

古文：托跋普根之子又卒，国人立其从父郁律。
现代文：拓跋普根的儿子又去世了，国人又把他的叔父拓跋郁律立为首领。
English: Tuoba Pugen's son died again, and the local people appointed his uncle Tuoba Yu Lu as their leader.

