古文：闻始见君子者，辞曰： 某固愿闻名于将命者。 
现代文：听说古人相见之礼，如果是第一次拜访君子，就要说： 某某很希望把贱名报告给您的传达。 
English: If it is the first time you visit a gentleman, you should say: "So-and-so would very much like to convey his nickname to you."

古文：不得阶主。
现代文：不能径直说要见主人。
English: You can't just say you want to see the owner.

古文：敌者曰： 某固愿见。 
现代文：如果是拜访与自己地位相等的人，就说： 某某特地前来拜会。 
English: If you are visiting someone of equal status, say: Come to the meeting at such and such a place.

古文：罕见曰： 闻名 。
现代文：平时很少见面的，就说： 某某很希望将名字通报给您的传达。 
English: If you rarely see each other, say: So-and-so would very much like to communicate his or her name to you.

古文：亟见曰： 朝夕 。
现代文：如果是经常见面的，就说： 某某常常麻烦您通报。 
English: If you see each other often, say: So-and-so often bothers you to inform you.

古文：瞽曰： 闻名 。适有丧者曰： 比 。
现代文：如果是盲人求见，其所致辞与平时难得见面者相同。到有丧事的人家去求见，应说： 特来与您的传达一同效劳。 
English: If it is a blind person asking for an audience, the address should be the same as that of a person who is rarely seen. If you are asking for an audience with someone who has died, you should say: I am here to help with your message.

古文：童子曰： 听事 。
现代文：未成年的孩子则说： 特来听候使唤。 
English: The underage children said: "We come to be called."

古文：适公卿之丧，则曰： 听役于司徒 。
现代文：到有丧事的公卿之家去求见，应说： 特来听候府上总管的吩咐。 
English: If you go to the house of a nobleman who is in mourning, you should say, "I have come at the command of the chief steward of the palace."

古文：君将适他，臣如致金玉货贝于君，则曰： 致马资于有司 ；敌者曰： 赠从者 。
现代文：国君将到他国出访，臣下如果要向国君赠送金玉货币等物，应该谦让地说： 这是送给陛下随从的一点养马费用。 
English: The sovereign will be visiting another country, and if a vassal wishes to present the sovereign with something, such as gold or jade coins, he should humbly say: "This is a little horse-breeding fee for His Majesty's retinue."

古文：臣致禭于君，则曰： 致废衣于贾人 ；敌者曰： 襚 。
现代文：如果是赠给与自己身份地位相当的人，就说： 送点微薄之礼供您的随从使用。 臣下送敛衣给国君，应该说： 臣某来给贾人送点废置不用的衣服。 
English: If it is a gift to a person who is equivalent to his status, say: Send a small gift for your entourage to use. If a vassal sends a coat to the sovereign, it should be said: A vassal came to send some unused clothes to Jia Ren.

古文：亲者兄弟不，以襚进。
现代文：如果是送敛衣于地位相当的人，就应该说： 特来为死者送敛衣。 
English: If it is a gift of chastity to a person of equivalent status, it should be said: I have come especially to give a gift of chastity to the deceased.

古文：臣为君丧，纳货贝于君，则曰： 纳甸于有司 。
现代文：如果是大功以上的亲属赠送敛衣，那就不必客套，直接把敛衣送去就是，无须通过传话的人。臣下为国君的丧事向国君进献财货，应该说： 这是向有关部门进献一点田野之物。 
English: If it is a relative who has made a great contribution or more who is giving away the chador, then there is no need to be polite. The person who sends the chador directly is the one who does not need to pass the message. If a vassal donates money and goods to the sovereign for the sovereign's funeral, it should be said: This is a gift of a field to the relevant department.

古文：赗马入庙门；赙马与其币，大白兵车，不入庙门。
现代文：送给死者的马可以进入祖庙大门。送给丧主料理丧事的马和礼品，以及插有太白旗帜的兵车，就不宜进入祖庙大门。
English: The horses given to the deceased can enter the ancestral temple gate. The horses and gifts given to the mourners for the funeral, as well as the chariots with white flags, should not enter the ancestral temple gate.

古文：赙者既致命，坐委之，摈者举之。主人无亲受也。
现代文：赠送丧主礼品的人在吊唁以后，要跪着将礼品放在地上，然后由接待宾客的人从地上拿起来，加以收藏，丧主是不亲自接受的。
English: After offering condolences, the person giving the gift to the deceased should kneel and place the gift on the ground, and then the person receiving the guests should pick it up from the ground and collect it. The deceased should not accept it in person.

古文：受立，授立不坐。性之直者则有之矣。
现代文：一般情况下，受授礼物的双方都是站立着，不采取跪姿，这样比较方便。
English: Under normal circumstances, both parties receiving gifts are standing, not kneeling, which is more convenient.

古文：始入而辞，曰： 辞矣 。
现代文：如果是生来身材高大的人，那就得采取跪姿受授礼物，以避免造成居高临下之势。
English: If you are tall by nature, you should receive the gift in a kneeling position to avoid creating a patronising impression.

古文：即席，曰： 可矣 。排阖说屦于户内者，一人而已矣。
现代文：宾客入门的时候，摈者要提醒主人向客人说： 请您向客人致谦让之辞。 等到宾主双方都来到席前时，摈者就说： 请各位落座，不须辞让 。
English: When the guests enter, the host should remind the host to say to the guests: Please make a humble concession to the guests.When both guests come to the front of the table, the host should say: Please sit down, there is no need to make concessions.

古文：有尊长在则否。问品味曰： 子亟食于某乎？ 
现代文：如果座席是铺设在室内，宾主在推门进去以后，只有地位最尊贵或者年龄最长的人可以把鞋脱在室内席侧，其他都脱在户外。
English: If the seat is laid indoors, after the guest pushes the door to enter, only the person with the highest status or the oldest person can take off his shoes on the indoor seat side, and the others are taken off outdoors.

古文：问道艺曰： 子习于某乎？ 、 子善于某乎？ 
现代文：如果室内原来已经坐有尊长，则后来的人都要将鞋子脱在户外。宾主之间如果询间对方的口味嗜好，要说： 您经常吃某种食品吗？ 
English: If a dignitary is already seated in the room, the next person should take off their shoes outdoors. If guests inquire about each other's taste preferences, say: Do you often eat certain foods?

古文：不疑在躬，不度民械，不愿于大家，不訾重器。
现代文：如果询问对方的学问、技能，要说： 您熟悉某一方面的学问吗？ 或者说： 足下是某一方面的专家吧？ 
English: If you ask about the other person's knowledge and skills, say: Are you familiar with a certain area of knowledge? Or: Are you an expert in a certain area?

古文：泛扫曰扫，扫席前曰拚；拚席不以鬣。
现代文：对自己的一言一行都有充足的自信，不猜测人家家里兵械多少，不要羡慕富贵人家的财产，不说人家的珍宝之器不好。
English: Have sufficient self-confidence in your every word and deed, do not guess how many weapons are in other people's homes, do not envy the property of rich people, and do not say that other people's treasures are not good.

古文：执箕膺鬛。不贰问。
现代文：室内室外都进行打扫叫扫，只打扫席前一片地方叫拚。
English: Both indoors and outdoors are cleaned, and only the area in front of the seats is cleaned.

古文：问卜筮曰： 义与？
现代文：打扫席前不可使用扫帚，拿备箕时要把箕舌对住自己的胸口。
English: Do not use a broom before cleaning the table, and hold your tongue against your chest when preparing the broom.

古文：志与？ 
现代文：问卜的时候必须专心致志。
English: When asking questions, you have to concentrate.

古文：义则可问，志则否。
现代文：在卜笠以前先要打心自问： 我来求卜签是为了公家正事呢？
English: Before making a bet, you should first ask yourself: Am I asking for a bet for the sake of public affairs?

古文：尊长于己逾等，不敢问其年。燕见不将命。
现代文：还是为了个人目的？ 如果是为了公家正事，才可以问；为了个人目的，就不可以问。
English: Is it for personal purposes? If it is for official business, you can ask; for personal purposes, you cannot ask.

古文：遇于道，见则面，不请所之。
现代文：对于爵位或辈分高于自己的尊长，不能询问他们的年龄。
English: You cannot ask the age of someone with a higher title or rank than you.

古文：丧俟事不特吊。
现代文：在尊长闲暇时前去拜见，可以不用传达通报。
English: You don't have to send a notification if you go to visit your father-in-law at his leisure.

古文：侍坐弗使，不执琴瑟，不画地，手无容，不翣也。
现代文：在路上遇到尊长，如果被尊长看见了，就上前问好，但是不要询问他到哪里去。
English: If you meet an elder on the road and he sees you, say hello, but don't ask him where he's going.

古文：寝则坐而将命。侍射则约矢，侍投则拥矢。
现代文：去尊长家里吊丧，要等到朝夕哭时，不要独自随便闯进去吊丧。
English: If you go to your elders' home to mourn, you should wait until the morning and evening when you cry, do not break into the mourning alone.

古文：胜则洗而以请，客亦如之。不角，不擢马。
现代文：在陪侍尊长坐谈时，如果尊长没有发话，就不要拿起琴瑟弹奏，不要在地上画来画去，不要玩弄手指，不要摇动扇子。
English: When you are sitting and chatting with him, if he is not speaking, do not pick up the piano and play, do not draw on the floor, do not play with your fingers, and do not shake the fan.

古文：执君之乘车则坐。
现代文：尊长如果是躺着，卑幼者就应跪着为他传话。
English: If the superior is lying down, the inferior should kneel down and speak for him.

古文：仆者右带剑，负良绥，申之面，拖诸幦，以散绥升，执辔然后步。
现代文：在陪侍尊长射箭时，要让尊长先取箭，然后自己再一次取过四箭。
English: When accompanying a respected elder in archery, let the elder take the arrows first, and then take four arrows again.

古文：请见不请退。朝廷曰退，燕游曰归，师役曰罢。
现代文：在陪侍尊长投壶时，要把自己要投的四支箭都拿在手里，不可放到地上。
English: When throwing the jug with the attendant, you should hold the four arrows you want to throw in your hands and not put them on the ground.

古文：侍坐于君子，君子欠伸，运笏，泽剑首，还屦，问日之蚤莫，虽请退可也。
现代文：在射箭和投壶时，如果是卑幼者获胜，不可像通常那样让尊长吃罚酒，而要洗好杯子，斟好酒，端到他席前请他喝。
English: In archery and juggling, if the inferior wins, he should not make the superior drink wine as usual, but wash the glass, pour the wine, and bring it to his seat to drink.

古文：事君者量而后入，不入而后量；凡乞假于人，为人从事者亦然。
现代文：如果是主人和客人比赛而客人输了，主人也要以这样的礼数对待客人。请尊长吃罚酒，不可使用吃罚酒的专用杯子。
English: If there is a competition between the host and the guest and the guest loses, the host should also treat the guest with the same amount of courtesy. Please ask the host to eat the penalty wine, and do not use the special cup for eating the penalty wine.

古文：然，故上无怨，而下远罪也。
现代文：投壶时尽管卑幼者占据优势，但也不能按照摧马规则办事。
English: Despite the fact that the underdogs have the advantage when it comes to throwing the pot, it is not possible to act according to the rules of horse-killing.

古文：不窥密，不旁狎，不道旧故，不戏色。
现代文：在国君尚未登车时，驾车人手执马缪，跪在车中央。
English: When the sovereign had not yet boarded the car, the driver held Mamyu by the hand and knelt in the middle of the car.

古文：为人臣下者，有谏而无讪，有亡而无疾；颂而无谄，谏而无骄；怠则张而相之，废则扫而更之；谓之社稷之役。
现代文：驾车人要把剑佩在身体右侧，把良绥搭在左肩，绕过背后，从右腋下穿出而至于面前，使其末稍搭在车轼的覆盖物上，准备让国君拉着登车。
English: The driver should wear the sword on the right side of the body, put the good yoke on the left shoulder, go around the back, pass under the right yoke and go to the front, and then put it on the cover of the yoke, ready for the king to pull on board.

古文：毋拔来，毋报往，毋渎神，毋循枉，毋测未至。
现代文：驾车的人拉着散绥登车，一手执马鞭，一手握马堰，然后试车。
English: The driver pulls a sledge and climbs aboard, holding a whip in one hand and a horse weir in the other, and then tests the vehicle.

古文：士依于德，游于艺；工依于法，游于说。
现代文：卑幼者可以请求进见尊长，但在既见之后不可主动请求退下，须待尊长示意方可告辞。
English: A lowly person may request to see His Eminence, but after seeing him, he may not voluntarily request to step down. He must wait for His Eminence's signal before he can say goodbye.

古文：毋訾衣服成器，毋身质言语。
现代文：从朝廷上下来叫作 退 ，从宴席上或游玩后回家叫 归 ，从军队上、从工地上下来叫 罢 。
English: If you come down from the imperial court, you should call it quits; if you come home from a banquet or after playing, you should call it quits; if you come down from the army, you should call it quits from the construction site.

古文：言语之美，穆穆皇皇；朝廷之美，济济翔翔；祭祀之美，齐齐皇皇；车马之美，匪匪翼翼；鸾和之美，肃肃雍雍。
现代文：言语之美，在于语气平和，言简意深。朝廷之美，在于端庄整齐，举动合礼。祭祀之美，在于谨慎诚恳，心系鬼神。车马之美，在于行进整齐。莺和之美，在于铃声的清脆和谐。
English: The beauty of speech lies in its peaceful tone and profound conciseness. The beauty of the imperial court lies in its dignified and orderly behavior. The beauty of sacrifice lies in its prudence and sincerity. The beauty of chariots and horses lies in their orderly movement. The beauty of peace lies in the crispness and harmony of the bells.

古文：问国君之子长幼，长，则曰： 能从社稷之事矣 ；幼，则曰： 能御 ， 未能御 。
现代文：别人问及国君儿子的年龄，如果已经长大，就回答说 已经能够从事国家的政事了 ；如果还没有长大，就回答说 已经能够办理小事了 ；如果尚未成童，就回答说叮还不能够办理小事 。
English: When asked about the age of the sovereign's son, if he has grown up, he will answer that he has been able to engage in national politics; if he has not grown up, he will answer that he has been able to handle small things; if he has not yet become a child, he will answer that he is not yet able to handle small things.

古文：问大夫之子长幼，长，则曰： 能从乐人之事矣 ；幼，则曰： 能正于乐人 ，未能正于乐人 。
现代文：别人间及大夫儿子的年龄，如果已经长大，就回答说： 已经大学毕业了 ；如果尚未长大，就回答说 正在大学求学呢 ；如果尚未成童，就回答说 还没有进大学受教育呢 。
English: When asked the age of the doctor's son, if he had grown up, they answered that he had graduated from university; if he had not grown up, they answered that he was studying at university; if he had not yet become a child, they answered that he had not yet entered university.

古文：问士之子长幼，长，则曰： 能耕矣 ；幼，则曰： 能负薪 、 未能负薪 。
现代文：别人问及士的儿子的年龄，如果已经长大，就回答说 已经会耕地了 ；如果尚未长大，就回答说 已经会背柴禾了 ；如果尚未成童，就回答说 还不会背柴禾呢 。
English: When people ask the age of a scholar's son, if he is already grown up, he will answer that he can already cultivate the land; if he is not yet grown up, he will answer that he can already carry firewood; if he is not yet a child, he will answer that he still cannot carry firewood.

古文：执玉执龟策不趋，堂上不趋，城上不趋。
现代文：手中拿着玉器，手中拿着龟甲菩草，不要快步走。在堂上不要快步走，在城上不要快步走。
English: Do not walk briskly while holding a jade object in your hand or a tortoise shell in your hand. Do not walk briskly in the hall, and do not walk briskly in the castle.

古文：武车不式；介者不拜。
现代文：在兵车上，不需要凭轼行礼。
English: On a military vehicle, there is no need to salute with a bow.

古文：妇人吉事，虽有君赐，肃拜。
现代文：身穿恺甲的将士不行拜礼。妇女在行吉礼时，即令是拜谢国君之赐，也是用肃拜。
English: Armor-clad soldiers are not allowed to offer prayers. When women perform the blessing, even if it is to thank the sovereign, it is also done with reverence.

古文：为尸坐，则不手拜，肃拜；为丧主则不手拜。
现代文：在充当祖姑之尸时，虽取坐姿，但不用手拜，而用肃拜。如果为丈夫或长子的丧主，则不行手拜礼，而行稽颗礼。
English: When serving as the corpse of a great-aunt, although she assumes a seated position, she does not bow with her hands, but with respect. If she is the bereaved of her husband or eldest son, she does not bow with her hands, but performs a prostration.

古文：葛绖而麻带。取俎进俎不坐。执虚如执盈，入虚如有人。
现代文：为尊长驾车，尊长上下车时，要把登车索递给他，使他有所把持。
English: If you are driving a car for your father-in-law, you should hand him the boarding rope when he gets on and off the car, so that he has some control.

古文：凡祭于室中堂上无跣，燕则有之。
现代文：始乘之时，尊长尚未出来，驾车人要俯首凭轼，敬候尊长上车。
English: At the time of the first ride, the patriarch has not yet come out, the driver should bow his head and wait for the patriarch to get on the bus.

古文：未尝不食新。仆于君子，君子升下则授绥；始乘则式；君子下行，然后还立。乘贰车则式，佐车则否。
现代文：尊长下车步行离开之后，驾车人然后将车转往一旁，下车站着守候。乘贰车要凭轼行礼，乘佐车就不必了。
English: After His Holiness got off the train and left on foot, the driver then turned the train to the side and waited at the station. If you take a local train, you have to bow. If you take a local train, you don't have to bow.

古文：贰车者，诸侯七乘，上大夫五乘，下大夫三乘。
现代文：贰车的数量，诸侯是七辆，上大夫是五辆，下大夫是三辆。
English: In terms of the number of chariots, there were seven for the lords, five for the chief magistrate, and three for the inferior magistrate.

古文：有贰车者之乘马服车不齿。
现代文：对于大夫以上的阶层，对于他们所乘之车及驾车之马，不要随便评论其新旧老幼。
English: As for the class of doctors and above, as for the cars they ride and the horses they drive, do not casually comment on their new, old, and young horses.

古文：观君子之衣服，服剑，乘马，弗贾。
现代文：观看尊长的衣服、佩剑、驾车之马，不要议论其价值。
English: Do not discuss the value of the clothes, the sword, or the driving horse.

古文：其以乘壶酒，束修，一犬赐人，若献人，则陈酒执修以将命，亦曰乘壶酒，束修，一犬。
现代文：如果以四壶酒、十条干肉、一只食用狗赐给下属，或者下属以同样的物品献给尊长，都是把酒和狗留到门外，只拿着干肉进去察报，但察报辞却要把所献物品全部表述出来： 送来四壶酒、十条干肉、一只食用狗。 
English: If a subordinate is given four jars of wine, ten strips of dried meat, and a dog to eat, or if a subordinate offers the same items to his or her superior, the wine and dog are left outside the door, and only the dried meat is brought in for inspection. However, the inspection report must state all the items offered: Four jars of wine, ten strips of dried meat, and a dog to eat.

古文：其以鼎肉，则执以将命。
现代文：如果赠送的是已经切割好的肉，那就拿着肉进去通报。
English: If the gift is meat that has already been cut, then take the meat inside and report it.

古文：其禽加于一双，则执一双以将命，委其余。
现代文：如果赠送的是家禽而且数量超过一双，那就只拿着一双进去通报，其余的都留在门外。
English: If the gift is poultry and the number is more than one pair, then only one pair should be brought in for notification, and the rest should be left outside the door.

古文：犬则执绁；守犬，田犬，则授摈者，既受，乃问犬名。
现代文：当然，通报时要有多少双就说多少双。赠犬时，要牵着系狗的绳子。如果是赠送看家犬、田猎犬，就要交给主人家负责接待宾客的摈者；摈者接受之后，要询问这些狗的名字。
English: When giving a dog as a gift, it is necessary to hold the dog's leash. If it is a gift of a watchdog or a field hound, it should be given to the host family's host who is responsible for receiving guests; after the host accepts it, ask for the names of these dogs.

古文：牛则执纼，马则执靮，皆右之。
现代文：如果是赠牛，就要牵着牛鼻绳；如果是赠马，就要牵着马僵绳。
English: If it is a gift of a cow, it is necessary to lead the cow by the nose rope; if it is a gift of a horse, it is necessary to lead the horse by the rope.

古文：臣则左之。车则说绥，执以将命。
现代文：牛和马之类，都用右手牵绳；如果所送的是俘虏，就要用左手牵，空着右手以备其反抗。
English: Cattle, horses and the like should be led by the right hand; if they are prisoners, they should be led by the left hand, leaving the right hand free for resistance.

古文：甲若有以前之，则执以将命；无以前之，则袒櫜奉胄。
现代文：如果是赠车，只要将车上的绥解下来拿着进去通报就可以了。
English: If it's a free ride, all you have to do is unbuckle the car and take it inside to report it.

古文：哭则执盖。
现代文：赠送盔甲时，如果有其他较轻的礼物需要先献，那就拿着此较轻礼物进去通报；如果没有较轻的礼物需要先献，那就打开放盔甲的袋子，取出头盔，拿着它进去通报。赠送笨重的盒子，可以只拿着它的盖子进去通报。
English: When giving armor, if there are other lighter gifts that need to be presented first, then take this lighter gift and announce it; if there is no lighter gift that needs to be presented first, then open the armor bag, take out the helmet and announce it. When giving a bulky box, you can only announce it with its lid.

古文：弓则以左手屈韣执拊。
现代文：赠弓时要把弓套褪下，左手抓着中央把手。
English: When giving a bow, the bow cover should be removed, and the left hand should grasp the center handle.

古文：剑则启椟盖袭之，加夫桡与剑焉。
现代文：赠剑时要打开剑匣的盖，把匣盖合在剑匣底部，然后把剑套垫在匣内，压在剑下。
English: When giving a sword, the lid of the sword box should be opened, the box lid should be closed at the bottom of the sword box, and then the sword cover should be placed in the box and pressed under the sword.

古文：笏、书、修、苞苴、弓、茵、席、枕、几、颖、杖、琴、瑟、戈有刃者椟、策、龠，其执之皆尚左手。
现代文：凡是赠送翁、书、干肉、芦苇包着鱼肉、弓、褥子、席、枕、小几、警枕、手杖、琴、瑟、用木盒装着的有刃的戈、着草、篱等物，在拿的时候都以用左手为敬。
English: The left hand is to be used when receiving gifts such as a pen, book, dried meat, reed wrapped around fish, bow, dice, seat, pillow, small table, police pillow, cane, harp, sickle, boxed sword, grass, fence, etc.

古文：刀却刃授颖。
现代文：送刀给人时，要让刀刃向后，递给对方刀环。
English: When giving a knife to someone, the blade should be turned backwards, and the other person should be handed the knife ring.

古文：削授拊。
现代文：递送曲刀时，要把刀把递给对方。
English: When handing a curved knife, the handle should be handed to the other person.

古文：凡有刺刃者，以授人则辟刃。
现代文：凡是把有锋刃的东西递给别人时，都不要把锋刃正对着别人。
English: When handing something with a sharp edge to someone else, do not hold the sharp edge directly against the other person.

古文：乘兵车，出先刃，入后刃，军尚左，卒尚右。
现代文：在兵车上的人，出城时刀刃向前，入城时刀刃向后。军队中的行列，将军以左为上，士卒以右为上。
English: The people on the chariot go forward when leaving the city, and backward when entering the city. In the army, the general is on the left, and the soldiers are on the right.

古文：宾客主恭，祭祀主敬，丧事主哀，会同主诩。
现代文：接待宾客，主要要谦恭有礼；举行祭祀，主要要内心诚敬；丧事以内心悲哀为主；诸候会同时要表现敏勇的精神。
English: When receiving guests, it is important to be courteous and polite; when holding religious services, it is important to be sincere and respectful; when attending funerals, it is important to be sad at heart; and when attending religious gatherings, it is important to show a courageous spirit.

古文：军旅思险，隐情以虞。燕侍食于君子，则先饭而后已；毋放饭，毋流歠；小饭而亟之；数毋为口容。
现代文：行军作战，要时时想到各种危险，要对自己这方面的军情严加保密而经常测度对方的情况。陪着尊长吃便饭时，要先动手吃，但要在尊长吃饱后才住手。
English: When marching in battle, you should always think about all kinds of dangers. You should keep your military situation in this area strictly confidential and constantly measure the other side's situation. When you accompany your father-in-law to a casual meal, you should start eating first, but you should stop when your father-in-law is full.

古文：客自彻，辞焉则止。
现代文：不要把多取的饭再放回食器，不要大口大口地喝汤以致于汤汁顺着嘴角外流。
English: Don't put the extra rice back on the plate, and don't gulp down soup so much that the soup runs out of your mouth.

古文：客爵居左，其饮居右；介爵、酢爵、僎爵皆居右。
现代文：要小口吃饭，但要迅速咽下。咀嚼要快，不要满嘴都是饭 弄得腮帮子都鼓起来。饭后，客人想自己收拾餐具，这时主人要加以劝阻，客人也就住手。
English: Eat in small mouthfuls, but swallow quickly. Chew quickly, don't fill your mouth with food and make your gums swell up. After the meal, if the guest wants to clean up the tableware, the host should discourage it, and the guest will stop.

古文：羞濡鱼者进尾；冬右腴，夏右鳍；祭膴。凡齐，执之以右，居之于左。
现代文：举行乡饮酒礼时，主人酬宾的爵，宾接过以后不饮，放在自己席前的左边。
English: When a township drinking ceremony is held, the host rewards the guest's gong, and the guest does not drink after receiving it, and places it on the left side in front of his seat.

古文：赞币自左，诏辞自右。酌尸之仆，如君之仆。
现代文：主人献给介的爵，宾回敬主人的爵，主人献给撰的爵，这都是必饮之爵，都放在各自席前的右边。平常吃鱼，如果上的是烧好后又浇上汁的鱼，就要叫鱼尾朝前。
English: The master's gift to the assistant, the guest's gift to the host, and the host's gift to the scribe are all must-drink gifts, and they are all placed on the right side in front of their respective seats. Usually eat fish, if the fish is cooked and then poured with juice, it is necessary to call the fish tail forward.

古文：其在车则左执辔右受爵，祭左右轨范乃饮。
现代文：如果驾车人在车上，则以左手抓住僵绳，右手接过酒杯犷先用酒祭车轴两头和车轼前面，然后自饮。
English: If the driver is in the car, he will grasp the rope with his left hand, take the wine cup with his right hand, and first use the wine to sacrifice the two ends of the axle and the front of the car frame, and then drink himself.

古文：凡羞有俎者，则于俎内祭。
现代文：凡上菜，如有用姐盛的，就在姐内祭之。
English: Whenever a dish is served, if it is well-done, it will be included in the sister's offering.

古文：君子不食圂腴。
现代文：君子不吃猪大的肠胃。
English: A gentleman does not eat intestines the size of a pig.

古文：小子走而不趋，举爵则坐祭立饮。凡洗必盥。
现代文：弟子辈参预宴会，只能匆忙奔走而供役使，不能要求他们的步伐合礼中节；若举杯喝酒，可以和尊长一样跪着祭酒，但饮时却要起立。
English: When disciples attend the pre-feast banquet, they can only run in a hurry to serve, and cannot require their pace to match the mid-ceremony; if they raise a glass to drink, they can kneel to drink the sacrificial wine like their elders, but they must stand up when drinking.

古文：牛羊之肺，离而不提心。
现代文：凡是洗杯子以前，一定先要洗手。
English: Always wash your hands before washing the cup.

古文：凡羞有湇者，不以齐。
现代文：牛羊的肺，切割时要留着中央的一点相连，到吃的时候再用手拉断，以便祭而后食。
English: When cutting the lungs of cattle and sheep, it is necessary to keep the central point connected. At the time of eating, it should be broken by hand, so that it can be sacrificed and then eaten.

古文：为君子择葱薤，则绝其本末。
现代文：凡有汁的菜肴，就不用再加什么调料。为君子择葱、蓬时，要把不能吃的根须和枯叶掐掉。
English: There is no need to add any seasoning to dishes that have juice. When choosing green onions and scallions for a gentleman, it is necessary to remove the roots and dead leaves that cannot be eaten.

古文：羞首者，进喙祭耳。
现代文：凡上牲头，要把牲嘴对着尊者；尊者以牲耳来祭。
English: If anyone offers the head of an animal, the mouth of the animal must be facing the venerable one; if the venerable one offers the ear of the animal.

古文：尊者以酌者之左为上尊。
现代文：陈设酒尊的人，要以斟酒人的左方为上尊之位。
English: The person serving the sake should stand to the left of the person pouring the sake.

古文：尊壶者面其鼻。
现代文：陈设酒壶的人，要使壶嘴朝外向着人。
English: If you're setting up a wine jug, make sure the spout faces away from you.

古文：饮酒者、禨者、醮者，有折俎不坐。
现代文：平常饮酒、洗头之后饮酒、向始冠者敬酒，在折姐未被撤下之前不敢落座。
English: Normal drinking, drinking after shampooing, toasting to the first champion, not daring to sit down before being removed.

古文：未步爵，不尝羞。
现代文：在宴会尚未进行到无算爵时，不吃菜肴。
English: Don't eat the dishes before the banquet is over.

古文：牛与羊鱼之腥，聂而切之为脍；麋鹿为菹，野豕为轩，皆聂而不切；麇为辟鸡，兔为宛脾，皆聂而切之。
现代文：生的牛肉、羊肉、鱼肉，切成薄片以后再加细切就成为脍。糜肉、鹿肉切得较粗， 月做值；野猪肉也切得较粗，叫做轩；都是切成薄片后不再细切。糜肉切得较细，叫作辟鸡；兔肉切得较细，那叫宛脾；都是切成薄片以后再加细切。
English: Raw beef, mutton, and fish are thinly sliced and then finely sliced to become stew. Stew meat and venison are thickly sliced and are worth a month; wild boar meat is also thickly sliced and is called xuan; all are thinly sliced and no longer finely sliced. Stew meat is finely sliced and is called chicken; rabbit meat is finely sliced and is called wan spleen; all are thinly sliced and then finely sliced.

古文：切葱若薤，实之酰以柔之。
现代文：葱和燕都要切碎，和肉拌在一起浸到醋里，使肉变软和除去腥气。
English: Both the onion and the swallow should be chopped, mixed with the meat and soaked in vinegar to soften the meat and remove the smell.

古文：其有折俎者，取祭肺，反之，不坐；燔亦如之。尸则坐。
现代文：如果有折姐，宾客就从折姐中取肺而祭，祭毕再放回姐内，取祭与放回时都不坐。
English: If there is a folded sister, the guests take the lungs from the folded sister and sacrifice them, and then put them back into the sister. They do not sit when they take the sacrifice and put it back.

古文：衣服在躬，而不知其名为罔。
现代文：取炙肉祭与放回时也不坐。做这些事情时，尸可以坐。
English: Nor does he sit when the roasting meat is taken and when it is put back. When these things are done, the corpse can sit.

古文：其未有烛而有后至者，则以在者告。道瞽亦然。
现代文：衣服穿在身上而对有关衣服的知识讲不出个道道，就是无知。
English: Ignorance is wearing clothes and not being able to explain what you know about them.

古文：凡饮酒为献主者，执烛抱燋，客作而辞，然后以授人。执烛不让，不辞，不歌。
现代文：夜晚的宴会，宾主之礼就不十分讲究了：不必过多谦让，不必更相辞谢，不必交替歌诗。
English: At the evening banquet, the guest's gift is not very particular: you don't have to be too humble, you don't have to thank each other, you don't have to alternate songs.

古文：洗盥执食饮者勿气，有问焉，则辟咡而对。
现代文：为长者倒水洗脚、洗手和拿取吃的喝的，不要让口中之气直冲长者和食品。长者如果有所垂问，幼者要侧着头回答，以免口气冲及长者。
English: When pouring water for the elderly to wash their feet, washing their hands and fetching food and drink, do not let the breath of the mouth directly hit the elderly and food. If the elderly ask questions, the young people should answer with their heads to the side to avoid the breath hitting the elderly.

古文：为人祭曰致福；为己祭而致膳于君子曰膳；祔练曰告。
现代文：代人主持祭祀，祭毕将炸肉送人时，要说： 把祭祀之福送给您。 
English: When the representative officiates the sacrifice and gives the fried meat to the person after the sacrifice, say: "I give you the blessing of the sacrifice."

古文：凡膳告于君子，主人展之，以授使者于阼阶之南，南面再拜稽首送；反命，主人又再拜稽首。
现代文：主持自家祭祀，祭毕将昨肉送人时，要说： 送点好吃的请品尝。 如果是举行衬、练之祭，祭毕送肺肉时，要说： 我刚刚举行了衬、练之祭，特来某告。 凡是送昨肉给国君，主人要亲自加以检视，在昨阶南面交给使者一，面向南再拜稽首以送使者出发；使者完成使命归来，主人又面向南再拜稽首，以接受使者带回的君命。
English: When presiding over one's own sacrificial rites and giving away the yakitori after offering it, one should say, "Please taste the delicious yakitori." When holding the lining and training rites and giving away the lung meat after offering it, one should say, "I have just held the lining and training rites, and I am here to report to you." When giving yakitori to the sovereign, the owner should personally inspect it, hand it to the messenger on the south side of the yakitori, face south and bow his head to send the messenger out; when the messenger completes his mission and returns, the owner should face south and bow his head again to accept the

古文：其礼：大牢则以牛左肩、臂臑、折九个，少牢则以羊左肩七个，特豕则以豕左肩五个。
现代文：致送炸肉的礼数是：如果是太牢而祭，那就送牛的左肩、臂、蠕兰个部位，每个部位折为三段，共九段乡如果是少牢而祭，那就送羊的左肩，折为七段；如果是用一只猪而祭，那就送猪的左肩尹折为五段。
English: The number of rites for sending fried meat is: if it is a dumpling sacrifice, then the left shoulder, arm, and cormorant parts of the cow are sent, each part is divided into three sections, a total of nine sections; if it is a dumpling sacrifice, then the left shoulder of the sheep is folded into seven sections; if it is a pig sacrifice, then the left shoulder of the pig is folded into five sections.

古文：国家靡敝，则车不雕几，甲不组縢，食器不刻镂，君子不履丝屦，马不常秣。
现代文：国家财政紧张时，车子就不要雕刻花纹，恺甲也不用组带缘饰，食器也不用刻镂，有身份的人也不要穿丝鞋，马也不经常喂以谷物。
English: When the country's finances are tight, cars should not have carved patterns, armor should not be decorated with ribbons, tableware should not be engraved, people with status should not wear silk shoes, and horses should not be regularly fed with grain.

