古文：牛仙客，泾州鹑觚人也。
现代文：牛仙客，泾州鹑觚人。
English: Niu Xianke, the star of Zhangzhou Xingren.

古文：初为县小吏，县令傅文静甚重之。
现代文：最初任县小吏，县令傅文静非常器重他。
English: He was initially appointed as a county minor official, and the county magistrate Fu Wenzhing held him in high regard.

古文：文静后为陇右营田使，引仙客参预其事，遂以军功累转洮州司马。
现代文：傅文静后来担任陇右营田使，召引牛仙客参加计划制定工作，因立军功多次转为洮州司马。
English: Fu Wenzhing later served as Zou Yueting's field envoy, summoning Niu Xianke to participate in the work of formulating the plan. Due to his military service, he was repeatedly transferred to Zhangzhou Sima.

古文：开元初，王君为河西节度使，以仙客为判官，甚委信之。
现代文：开元初年，王君任河西节度使，让仙客任判官，非常信任他。
English: In the first year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Wang Jun served as the envoy of the Hexi Festival, and allowed Xian Ke to serve as the judge. He trusted him very much.

古文：时又有判官宋贞，与仙客俱为腹心之任。
现代文：当时又有判官宋贞，与牛仙客都是王的心腹。
English: At that time, there was also the judge Song Zhen, who, together with Niu Xianke, was the king's favorite.

古文：及君死，宋贞亦为回纥所杀，仙客以不从获免。
现代文：等王君死了，宋贞也被回纥杀害，仙客由于没有参与而获免。
English: After Wang Jun died, Song Zhen was also killed by Hui Xuan. Xian Ke was released because he did not participate.

古文：俄而萧嵩代君为河西节度，又以军政委于仙客。
现代文：不久肖嵩代替君，担任河西节度使，又将军政大事托给牛仙客。
English: Soon, Xiao Song replaced him as the envoy of the Hexi Festival, and entrusted the general political affairs to Niu Xianke.

古文：仙客清勤不倦，接待上下，必以诚信。
现代文：牛清正勤奋从不倦怠，接待上下，定守信用。
English: Niu Qing Zheng is diligent and never gets tired. He receives people from all walks of life and always keeps his word.

古文：及嵩入知政事，数称荐之。
现代文：等肖嵩主持政事时，多次称赞推荐他。
English: When Xiao Song presided over government affairs, he praised and recommended him many times.

古文：稍迁太仆少卿，判凉州别驾事，仍知节度留后事。
现代文：逐渐升为太仆少卿，兼任凉州别驾事，继续主持节度留后事。
English: He gradually rose to the position of Taigu Shaoqing, concurrently serving as the deputy governor of Liangzhou, and continued to preside over the festival.

古文：竟代嵩为河西节度使，判凉州事。
现代文：最后代替肖嵩任河西节度使，兼任凉州刺史。
English: Finally, he replaced Xiao Song as the Hexi Festival Commissioner and concurrently served as the Yangzhou Historian.

古文：历太仆卿、殿中监，军使如故。
现代文：历任太仆卿、殿中监，军使如故。
English: Successive eunuchs, palace overseers, and military envoys are still there.

古文：开元二十四年秋，代信安王祎为朔方行军大总管，右散骑常侍崔希逸代仙客知河西节度事。
现代文：开元二十四年秋，代替信安王为朔方行军大总管，右散骑常侍崔希逸代替牛仙客主持河西节度事。
English: In the autumn of the 24th year of the first century, King Xin'an was replaced by the general manager of the march of the Shuo side, and the right rider, Cui Xiyi, took the place of Niu Xianke to preside over the Hexi Festival.

古文：初，仙客在河西节度时，省用所积钜万，希逸以其事奏闻，上令刑部员外郎张利贞驰传往覆视之。
现代文：先前，牛仙客任河西节度时，节省开支积蓄极多，崔将这件事上奏，皇上令刑部员外郎张利贞快马前往查讯。
English: Previously, when Niu Xianku was in charge of the Hexi Festival, he saved a lot of money. Cui reported the matter to the emperor, and the emperor ordered his son-in-law Zhang Lizhenkangma, a member of the criminal investigation department, to investigate.

古文：仙客所积仓库盈满，器械精劲，皆如希逸之状。
现代文：牛所积蓄仓库盈满，器械精锐强劲，都如崔所说。
English: The storage warehouse of the Cattle Depot is full, and the equipment is excellent and powerful, all as Cui said.

古文：上大悦，以仙客为尚书。
现代文：皇上很高兴，任仙客为尚书。
English: The emperor was very pleased. Ren Xianke was appointed as Shangshu.

古文：中书令张九龄执奏以为不可，乃加实封二百户。
现代文：中书令张九龄上奏认为不合宜，于是加实封二百户。
English: The Chinese government considered it inappropriate to order Zhang Jiuling to report to the emperor, so 200 households were sealed.

古文：其年十一月，九龄等罢知政事，遂以仙客为工部尚书、同中书门下三品，仍知门下事。
现代文：这年十一月，张九龄等人停止主持政事，于是牛任工部尚书，同中书门下三品，继续主持门下事。
English: In November of that year, Zhang Juling and others ceased to preside over political affairs. Therefore, Niu Ren Shangshu of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce continued to preside over the affairs of his subordinates.

古文：时有监察御史周子谅窃言于御史大夫李适之曰： 牛仙客不才，滥登相位，大夫国之懿亲，岂得坐观其事？ 
现代文：当时有监察御史周子谅私下对御史大夫李适之说 ：牛仙客没有才气，滥登相位，大夫国之懿系，怎么能望观其事呢？ 
English: At that time, an inspector of the Imperial Historian, Zhou Zi Peng, privately said to the Imperial Historian, Li Shizhu: "Cowherd has no talent, indiscriminate appearance, doctor of the country, how can you watch it?

古文：适之遽奏子谅之言，上大怒，廷诘之，子谅辞穷，于朝堂决配流瀼州，行至蓝田而死。
现代文：李适之立即将子谅的话上奏，皇上大怒，朝廷审讯这件事，周子谅没话可说，在朝廷大堂决定发配流放氵襄州，走到蓝田就死了。
English: Li Shizhi immediately played the words of the son's pardon, the emperor was furious, the court tried the matter, Zhou Zi Peng had nothing to say, and it was decided in the court lobby to send and exile Zou Xiangzhou, and he died when he reached Lantian.

古文：仙客既居相位，独善其身，唯诺而已。
现代文：牛仙客不久身居相位，独善其身，惟惟诺诺而已。
English: Niu Xianke soon found himself in a position where he had no choice but to agree.

古文：所有锡赍，皆缄封不启。
现代文：所有赏赐，都缄封不启。
English: All rewards are sealed and cannot be opened.

古文：俄又进拜侍中，兼兵部尚书。
现代文：百司商议如何处理政务，牛仙客说： 只依照标准就可以了。 
English: When discussing how to handle government affairs with the Hundred Elders, Niu Xianke said: Just follow the standards.

古文：天宝年，改易官名，拜左相，尚书如故。
现代文：不敢施行裁决。第二年，牛被特地封为豳国公，追封他的父亲意为礼部尚书，祖父会为泾州刺史。
English: He did not dare to enforce the ruling. In the following year, Niu was specially designated as the Duke of Zhang Province, and his father was designated as the Minister of Ceremonies, and his grandfather was designated as the Governor of Zhang Province.

古文：其年七月卒，年六十八。
现代文：不久又升任侍中，兼兵部尚书。这年七月去世，终年六十八岁。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the position of Samurai Junior Officer, and he also served as the Military Secretary. He passed away in July of this year, at the age of 68.

古文：内出绢一千匹、布五百端，遣中使送至宅以赙之，赠尚书左丞，谥曰贞简。
现代文：皇宫拿出一千匹绢、五百端布派中使送到住宅用来帮助料理丧事，追封牛仙客为尚书左丞，谥号贞简。
English: The imperial palace took out a thousand yakitori noodles and five hundred pieces of cloth and sent them to the residence to help with the funeral preparations. Niu Xianke was given the posthumous name of Shang Shuzang Rong and the nickname of Zhen Zhen.

古文：初，仙客为朔方军使，以姚崇孙闳为判官。
现代文：先前，牛仙客任朔方军使，使姚崇的孙子闳任判官。
English: Previously, Niu Xianke was appointed as the military envoy of Shuo Fang, and Yao Chong's grandson Zou was appointed as the judge.

古文：及知政事，闳累迁侍御史，自云能通鬼道，预知休咎。
现代文：等到牛主持政事，闳多次迁为侍御史，自称能通鬼道，预知美善与灾祸。
English: By the time Niu presided over the political affairs, Yao had moved several times to become an attendant of history, claiming to be able to pass through the ghost road, predicting good and evil.

古文：仙客颇信惑之。
现代文：牛仙客非常相信迷惑这件事。
English: Niu Xianke is a great believer in entanglement.

古文：及疾甚，闳请为仙客祈祷，在其门下，遂逼仙客令作遗表荐闳叔尚书右丞弈及兵部侍郎卢奂堪代己，闳为起草。
现代文：等到病重时，闳请求为牛祈祷，在牛门下，逼迫牛写下遗书，推荐闳的叔叔尚书右丞弈和兵部侍郎卢奂代替牛的位置，闳帮忙起草。
English: When he became seriously ill, Yao requested prayers for the cow. Under the cow's gate, he forced the cow to write a suicide note, recommending that Yao's uncle, Shang Shu Rong, and the attendant of the military department, Lu Yao, replace the position of the cow, and Yao helped draft it.

古文：仙客时既危殆，署字不成，其妻因中使来吊，以其表上。
现代文：牛当时危在旦夕，不能动笔，他的妻子乘中使来慰问时，将此事表上。
English: At that time, Niu was in a critical situation and could not write. When his wife was sent by the Chinese government to offer condolences, she wrote the matter down.

古文：玄宗览而怒之，左迁弈为永阳太守，卢奂为临淄太守，赐闳死。
现代文：玄宗知道后非常恼怒，降弈为永阳太守，卢奂为临淄太守，赐闳死罪。
English: After learning of this, Xuanzong was very angry. He demoted Yi to the position of Yongyang Daju, and Lu Xi to the position of Linyi Daju, and sentenced him to death.

古文：王忠嗣，太原祁人也，家于华州之郑县。
现代文：王忠嗣，太原祁人，家住华州郑县。
English: Wang Zhongzi, a native of Taiyuan, lives in Zheng County, Huazhou.

古文：父海宾，太子右卫率、丰安军使、太谷男，以骁勇闻陇上。
现代文：父亲海宾，为太子右卫率、丰安军使、太谷男，在陇上以骁勇闻名。
English: His father, Haibin, was a member of the Prince's Right Guard, a Feng'an military envoy, and a man from Taiyuan. He was famous for his bravery on the battlefield.

古文：开元二年七月，吐蕃入寇，朝廷起薛讷摄左羽林将军，为陇右防御使，率杜宾客、郭知运、王晙、安思顺以御之，以海宾为先锋。
现代文：开元二年七月，吐蕃入侵，朝廷任薛讷辅助羽林将军，为陇右防御史，率领杜宾客、郭知运、王睃、安思顺抵御，以海宾为先锋。
English: In July of the second year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, when Tubo invaded, the imperial court appointed Xue Ne as an assistant to General Ulin, and led Du Binke, Guo Zhiyun, Wang Hui and An Sishun to resist, with Haibin as the vanguard.

古文：及贼于渭州西界武阶驿，苦战胜之，杀获甚众。
现代文：等贼军到了渭州西界的武阶驿，经过苦战取得胜利，杀死俘获敌兵极多。
English: After a hard-fought victory, they killed and captured a large number of enemy soldiers.

古文：诸将嫉其功，按兵不救，海宾以众寡不敌，殁于阵。
现代文：各将领妒嫉其功绩，按兵不动，海宾由于寡不敌众，战死在疆场。
English: The generals were jealous of his exploits and did not move their troops. However, as Haibin was outnumbered, he died on the battlefield.

古文：大军乘其势击之，斩首一万七千级，获马七万五千匹，羊牛十四万头。
现代文：大军乘势出击，斩敌首一万七千级，获战马七万五千匹、羊牛十四万头。
English: The great army took advantage of the situation and attacked, decapitating 17,000 enemy troops, capturing 75,000 horses and 140,000 sheep and cattle.

古文：玄宗闻而怜之，诏赠左金吾大将军。
现代文：唐玄宗听说后很痛惜，下令授予左金吾大将军。
English: Tang Xuan Zong was very sorry to hear about this and ordered that Zuo Kingu be awarded the title of General.

古文：忠嗣初名训，年九岁，以父死王事，起复拜朝散大夫、尚辇奉御，赐名忠嗣，养于禁中累年。
现代文：忠嗣原名训，九岁时，由于父亲为朝廷身死缘故，授为朝散大夫、尚辇奉御，赐名忠嗣，在禁宫中供养多年。
English: At the age of nine, due to his father's death at the hands of the imperial court, Tadatsugu's original name, Tadatsugu, was bestowed upon him as Chosan-dokufu, Shonin-hobo-yo, he was given the name Tadatsugu, and he was raised in the Forbidden Palace for many years.

古文：肃宗在忠邸，与之游处。
现代文：肃宗在忠嗣的家舍里，与他游玩。
English: Sozong stayed at Tadatsugu's house and played with him.

古文：及长，雄毅寡言，严重有武略。玄宗以其兵家子，与之论兵，应对纵横，皆出意表。
现代文：等到长大，雄毅而少言，受人尊重有武略，玄宗由于他是兵家子弟，和他讨论兵法，应对纵横，皆出意料。
English: When he grew up, he was courageous and spoke little, he was respected for his military strategy, and because he was a soldier's son, Xuanzong discussed military tactics with him and dealt with vertical and horizontal, which was unexpected.

古文：玄宗谓之曰： 尔后必为良将。 
现代文：玄宗对他说 ：你今后必然为良将。 
English: Xuanzong said to him, "You will surely be a good general in the future."

古文：十八年，又赠其父安西大都护。
现代文：十八年，又授予其父安西大都护之职。
English: Eighteen years later, his father, Anxi, was also awarded the post of Metropolitan Protector.

古文：其后，遂从河西节度、兵部尚书萧嵩，河东副元帅、信安王祎，并引为兵马使。
现代文：之后，忠嗣跟随河西节度、兵部尚书萧嵩，河东副元帅、信安王，并推荐为兵马使。
English: After that, Tadatsugu followed the Hexi Festival, the military department of Shangshu Xiao Song, the deputy marshal of Hedong, and the king of Xin'an, and was recommended as a military envoy.

古文：二十一年再转左领军卫郎将、河西讨击副使、左威卫将军、赐紫金鱼袋、清源男，兼检校代州都督。
现代文：二十一年，再升为左领军卫郎将、河西讨击副使、左威卫将军、赐紫金鱼袋、清源男，兼检校代州都督。
English: In the 21st year, he was promoted again to the left leader of the army, the deputy commander of the west of the river, the general of the left Wei Wei, the purple gold fish bag, the Qing Yuan's son, and the acting governor of the state.

古文：尝短皇甫惟明义弟王昱，憾焉，遂为所陷，贬东阳府左果毅。
现代文：曾经议论皇甫惟明的义弟王昱，感到很遗憾，于是被人所诬陷，贬为东阳府左果毅。
English: He felt very sorry that he had once talked about Wang Xi, the younger brother-in-law of Wang Fu Wei Ming, so he was framed and relegated to Zuo Guoyi of Dongyang Prefecture.

古文：属河西节度使杜希望谋拔新城，或言忠嗣之材足以辑事，必欲取胜，非其人不可。
现代文：河西节度使杜希望谋划占领新城，有人说以忠嗣的才能足以完成，若要取胜，非他不可。
English: The Hexi Festival made Du hope to plan the occupation of the new city. Some people said that the talent of the loyal heir was enough to complete it. If he wanted to win, he had to do something else.

古文：希望即奏闻，诏追忠嗣赴河西。
现代文：希望随即上奏请求，皇上诏令忠嗣赴河西。
English: Hoping that his request would be granted, the emperor issued an imperial edict ordering Tadatsugu to go to Hexi.

古文：既下新城，忠嗣之功居多，因授左威卫郎将，专知行军兵马。
现代文：攻下新城，忠嗣功绩显著，授予左威卫郎将，专管行军兵马。
English: After the capture of Xincheng, Tadatsugu was awarded the title of General of the Left Division, in charge of marching soldiers and horses.

古文：是秋，吐蕃大下，报新城之役，晨压官军，众寡不敌，师人皆惧焉。
现代文：这年秋天，吐蕃大兵南下，以报复新城被占，敌军逼近官军，官军寡不敌众，兵士们都感到害怕。
English: In the autumn of that year, the Tubo soldiers went south to take revenge for the occupation of Xincheng. The enemy army approached the official army. The official army was outnumbered, and the soldiers were afraid.

古文：忠嗣乃以所部策马而前，左右驰突，当者无不辟易，出而复合，杀数百人，贼众遂乱。
现代文：忠嗣于是率领所部策马前进，左右冲杀，阻挡者无不躲开，冲出又折返，杀死数百人，贼兵开始混乱。
English: Therefore, Tadatsugu led his troops and horses to advance, rushing left and right, evading all blockers, rushing out and turning back, killing hundreds of people, and the robber soldiers began to be confused.

古文：三军翼而击之，吐蕃大败。
现代文：三军从两翼攻击，吐蕃大败。
English: The three armies attacked from two flanks and inflicted a crushing defeat on Tubo.

古文：以功最，诏拜左金吾卫将军同正员，寻又兼左羽林军上将军、河东节度副使，兼大同军使。
现代文：由于战功显赫，皇上下诏授予左金吾卫将军同正员，不多久又兼左羽林军上将军、河东节度副使、兼大同军使。
English: Due to his distinguished war service, the Emperor issued the imperial edict awarding General Zuo Kingu Wei with the rank of full-fledged member, and soon also General Zuo Yulin, Deputy Envoy of the Hedong Festival, and Senior Envoy of the Chinese People's Liberation Army.

古文：二十八年，以本官兼代州都督，摄御史大夫，兼充河东节度，又加云麾将军。
现代文：二十八年，以本官又兼代州都督、摄御史大夫、兼充河东节度，又加云麾将军。
English: In the 28th year, he was also appointed as the acting governor of the state, the director of photography, the director of the East Hedong Festival, and the general of the Yunnan Military Region.

古文：二十九年，代韦光乘为朔方节度使，仍加权知河东节度事。
现代文：二十九年，替代韦光乘为朔方的节度使，多次加权知河东节度使。
English: In the 29th year, Wei Guang was replaced by Shuo Fang as the festival envoy, and Zhidong Festival envoy was weighted many times.

古文：其月，以田仁琬充河东节度使，忠嗣依旧朔方节度。
现代文：这月，田仁琬作为河东节度使，忠嗣依然为朔方节度使。
English: This month, Tian Rincun was the envoy to the Hedong Festival, while Zhongzhi was still the envoy to the Shuo Festival.

古文：天宝元年，兼灵州都督。
现代文：天宝元年，兼灵州都督。
English: In the first year of Tianbao, he was also the governor of Lingzhou.

古文：是岁北伐，与奚怒皆战于桑乾河，三败之，大虏其众，耀武漠北，高会而旋。
现代文：这年北伐，与奚怒皆在桑干河作战，三次将他打败，俘获其大量人马，耀武漠北，凯旋而归。
English: In this year's Northern Expedition, they all fought against Xuan Rong in the Sangan River, defeated him three times, captured a large number of his men and horses, and returned home triumphantly.

古文：时突厥叶护新有内难，忠嗣盛兵碛口以威振之。乌苏米施可汗惧而请降，竟迁延不至。
现代文：此时突厥叶护新有内难，忠嗣率强盛军队以威震慑，乌苏米施可汗害怕请求投降，却变化拖延不到。
English: At this time, the Turkic Yegu Xin had internal difficulties, the loyal heirs led a strong army to deter, the Usumish Khan was afraid to ask for surrender, but the change could not be delayed.

古文：忠嗣乃纵反间于拔悉密与葛逻禄、回纥三部落，攻米施可汗走之。
现代文：忠嗣于是在拔悉密与逻禄、回纥三个部落之间使用反间计策，攻打米施可汗使之败逃。
English: Tadatsugu then used a counter-strategy between the three tribes of Baximi, Luolu, and Hui, attacking Mishikhan and defeating him.

古文：忠嗣因出兵伐之，取其右厢而归，其西叶护及毗伽可敦、男杀葛腊哆率其部落千馀帐入朝，因加左武卫大将军。
现代文：王忠嗣于是出兵讨伐，夺取其右厢而归，其西叶护及毗伽可敦、男西杀死葛腊哆，率领其部落一千余帐进京朝拜，于是授予左武卫大将军。
English: Wang Zhongzhi then sent out troops to fight, captured his right wing and returned, killed his west leaf protector and Vijagakdoon, and his male west, and led his tribe of more than a thousand accounts to Beijing to worship, and then awarded the General of the Left Division.

古文：明年，又再破怒皆及突厥之众。
现代文：第二年，又击败怒皆及突厥的军队。
English: The next year, they defeated the armies of Nugai and the Turks.

古文：自是塞外晏然，虏不敢入。
现代文：从此塞外安定，虏人不敢来犯。
English: Since then, stability has been maintained outside the country, and intruders have not dared to break in.

古文：天宝三载，突厥九姓拔悉密叶等竟攻杀乌苏米施可汗，传首京师。
现代文：天宝三年，突厥拔悉密等九家姓叶护联合攻打乌苏米施可汗，将其首级传到京师。
English: In the third year of Tianbao, nine families with the surname Ye Guo, including the Turkic Batshimi, jointly attacked Uzumishi Khan, and sent his head to the Beijing division.

古文：四载，加摄御史大夫，充河东节度采访使。
现代文：四年，忠嗣被授予御史大夫，充任河东节度采访使。
English: Four years later, Tadatsugu was awarded the title of goshi taifu (master of history) and appointed as the special envoy to the Hedong Festival.

古文：五月，进封清源县公。
现代文：五月，被封为清源县公。
English: In May, he was made the governor of Qingyuan County.

古文：忠嗣少以勇敢自负，及居节将，以持重安边为务。
现代文：忠嗣年少时以勇敢自负，到了身居将职，又以稳重守边为本职。
English: When he was young, Tadatsugu was brave and self-assured. When he became a general, he took on the responsibility of guarding the border.

古文：尝谓人云： 国家昇平之时，为将者在抚其众而已。
现代文：曾对人说： 当国家安定的时候，作为将领的职责是抚恤军队而已。
English: He once told people: When the country is stable, the duty of a general is to support the army.

古文：吾不欲疲中国之力，以徼功名耳。 
现代文：我不想凭借国家的力量，来捞取个人功名。 
English: I don't want to rely on the power of the state to gain personal glory.

古文：但训练士马，缺则补之。
现代文：训练兵马，缺少份量的一定要补上。
English: Training soldiers and horses, the lack of weight must be made up for.

古文：有漆弓百五十斤，尝贮之袋中，示无所用。
现代文：有一把重达一百五十斤重的漆弓，曾贮在袋中，表示没有多大用处。
English: There was a lacquer bow weighing a hundred and fifty pounds, which had been stored in a bag, indicating that it was not very useful.

古文：军中皆日夜思战，因多纵间谍以伺虏之隙，时以奇兵袭之，故士乐为用，师出必胜。
现代文：军中士卒都日夜思战，由于常常派遣侦探观察敌方的薄弱地方，然后出奇兵攻击，因而士卒喜欢这样做，师出必胜。
English: The non-commissioned officers and soldiers think about the battle day and night. Since they often send detectives to observe the enemy's weak spots and then attack with surprise soldiers, the soldiers like to do this, and the division is bound to win.

古文：每军出，即各召本将付其兵器，令给士卒，虽一弓一箭，必书其名姓于上以记之，军罢却纳。
现代文：每次军队出战，便召集各将领交付兵器分发给士兵，虽然是一弓一箭，但都在上面记上用者的姓名，战斗完后收回。
English: Every time the army goes to war, the generals are summoned to deliver weapons to the soldiers. Although it is a bow and arrow, the names of the users are recorded on it, and it is taken back after the battle.

古文：若遗失，即验其名罪之。
现代文：如果遗失，就验明其身份治罪。
English: If they are lost, they will be identified and prosecuted.

古文：故人人自劝，甲仗充牣矣。
现代文：所以人人自勉，兵器充足。
English: Therefore, everyone is self-disciplined and has sufficient weapons.

古文：四载，又兼河东节度采访使。
现代文：四年，又兼任河东节度采访使。
English: In four years, he also served as the reporter of the Eastern Hedong Festival.

古文：自朔方至云中，缘边数千里，当要害地开拓旧城，或自创制，斥地各数百里。
现代文：从朔方到云中，边境线长达数千里，在要害地段开拓旧城，有的地方则自己制定规则，开拓边域各数百里。
English: From Shuo Fang to Yun Zhong, the border line is thousands of miles long, and the old city is developed in the key areas. In some places, they make their own rules and develop the border area for hundreds of miles.

古文：自张仁亶之后四十馀年，忠嗣继之，北塞之人，复罢战矣。
现代文：自从张仁守边四十多年之后，忠嗣继承此事，北塞的胡人又停止了战事。
English: After Zhang Ren had been in charge of the border for more than forty years, his successor took over the matter, and the Hu people in North Tibet stopped fighting.

古文：五年正月，河陇以皇甫惟明败衄之后，因忠嗣以持节充西平郡太守，判武威郡事，充河西、陇右节度使。
现代文：五年正月，皇甫惟明由于在河、陇战败，忠嗣由此担任西平郡太守、判武威郡事，担任河西、陇右节度使。
English: In the first month of the fifth year, due to the defeat of Emperor Fu Weiming in He and Sui, Tadatsugu served as the governor of Xiping County, the magistrate of Wuwei County, and the delegate to the Hexi and Sui right festivals.

古文：其月，又权知朔方、河东节度使事。
现代文：这月，又暂替朔方、河东节度使事。
English: This month, he also temporarily replaced Shuo Fang and Hedong Jiedu.

古文：忠嗣佩四将印，控制万里，劲兵重镇，皆归掌握，自国初已来，未之有也。
现代文：忠嗣佩带四种将印，控制万里，劲兵重镇，都归其掌握，自建国以来，还未曾有过这种事。
English: Since the founding of the country, there has never been such a thing.

古文：寻迁鸿胪卿，馀如故，又加金紫光禄大夫，仍授一子五品官。
现代文：不久授予鸿胪卿，其余官职如故，又加授金紫光禄大夫，授其一个儿子五品官职。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the title of Hongyuqing, and the rest of his official positions remained the same. In addition, he was awarded the title of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor, and one of his sons was awarded the official position of Wuxin.

古文：后频战青海、积石，皆大克捷。
现代文：后来频频在青海、积石作战，都大获全胜。
English: Later, he frequently fought in Qinghai and Jishi, and won a complete victory.

古文：寻又伐吐谷浑于墨离，虏其全国而归。
现代文：不久又在墨离讨伐吐谷浑，占领其全国后凯旋。
English: Not long after, they fought against Tugu Hun in Mo Liang and occupied the whole country before returning in triumph.

古文：初，忠嗣在河东、朔方日久，备谙边事，得士卒心。
现代文：当初，忠嗣在河东、朔方很长时间，对边疆的情况非常熟悉，很得士卒人心。
English: At the beginning, Tadatsugu spent a long time in the east of the river and in the south of the country. He was very familiar with the situation in the border areas and was very popular.

古文：及至河、陇，颇不习其物情，又以功名富贵自处，望减于往日矣。
现代文：到了河、陇，对当地风俗人情非常不习惯，又以功名富贵自傲，威望比往日降低。
English: When they arrive in Hebei and Fujian, they are not used to the local customs and people, and they are proud of their achievements. Their prestige is lower than before.

古文：其载四月，固让朔方、河东节度，许之。
现代文：这年四月，坚持让位朔方、河东节度使职务，皇上同意了。
English: In April of that year, he insisted on relinquishing his position as the imperial envoy to the Shao Fang and the Hedong Festival, and the emperor agreed.

古文：玄宗方事石堡城，诏问以攻取之略，忠嗣奏云： 石堡险固，吐蕃举国而守之。
现代文：玄宗正在考虑攻占石堡城，下诏令征询攻战的方法，忠嗣上奏说： 石堡城地势险要，吐蕃全力守卫它。
English: Xuanzong was considering the capture of Shibao Castle, and issued an imperial edict to solicit methods of attack. Tadatsugu reported: Shibao Castle is in a precarious situation, and Tubo will do his best to defend it.

古文：若顿兵坚城之下，必死者数万，然后事可图也。
现代文：如果以疲惫之师攻其坚固的城池，必将被敌杀死数万人，之后战事才能完成。
English: If you attack a fortified city with a tired division, you will surely kill tens of thousands of people by the enemy, and then the battle can be completed.

古文：臣恐所得不如所失，请休兵秣马，观衅而取之，计之上者。 
现代文：我想所得的不如所失的，请休兵秣马，观察势态发展再夺取它，这是上策。 
English: I think that what I have gained is not as good as what I have lost. Please rest, observe the development of the situation and then seize it. This is the best strategy.

古文：玄宗因不快。
现代文：玄宗由此不高兴。
English: Xuanzong was not happy about this.

古文：李林甫尤忌忠嗣，日求其过。
现代文：李林甫特别忌妒忠嗣，每天都在寻察他的过失。
English: Li Linfu was particularly jealous of his loyal son, and every day he searched for faults in him.

古文：六载，会董延光献策请下石堡城，诏忠嗣分兵应接之。
现代文：六年，董延光献计请求攻占石堡城，皇上下诏命令忠嗣分兵接应他。
English: Six years later, when Dong Yanguang made a request to capture Shibao Castle, the emperor issued an imperial edict ordering loyal soldiers to meet him.

古文：忠嗣僶俯而从，延光不悦。
现代文：忠嗣勉强服从，延光不高兴。
English: Tadatsugu reluctantly obeyed, but Enko was not happy.

古文：河西兵马使李光弼危之，遽而入告。将及于庭，忠嗣曰： 李将军有何事乎？ 
现代文：河西兵马使李光弼告危，跑进来相告，等他来时，忠嗣问： 李将军有什么事吗？ 
English: The soldiers and horses from the west of the river put Li Guangya in danger, ran in and reported to each other. When he came, Zhongzhi asked: Is there anything wrong with General Li?

古文：光弼进而言曰： 请议军。 
现代文：光弼上前说 ：请商议军情。 
English: Mitsukuni stepped forward and said, "Please discuss the military situation."

古文：忠嗣曰： 何也？ 
现代文：忠嗣说 ：为什么？ 
English: Tadatsugu said: Why?

古文：对曰： 向者大夫以士卒为心，有拒董延光之色，虽曰受诏，实夺其谋。
现代文：光弼回答： 大夫以士卒为己心，有拒绝董延光的怒色，虽然接受了诏令，实际上是耽误他的谋略。
English: Guangyao replied, "The doctor is self-centered and has the anger to reject Dong Yan Guang. Although he accepted the edict, it was actually a ploy to delay him.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么？
English: Why is that?

古文：大夫以数万众付之，而不悬重赏，则何以贾三军之勇乎？
现代文：大夫以数万兵出战，却不悬以重赏，这怎么能鼓起三军的勇气？
English: The doctor went to war with tens of thousands of soldiers, but did not receive a heavy reward. How could this rouse the courage of the three armies?

古文：大夫财帛盈库，何惜数万段之赏以杜其谗口乎！
现代文：大夫财帛装满库房，何必可惜以万段的奖赏来堵住谗言之口呢？
English: The doctor's coffers are full of money, so why should it be a pity to use a 10,000-dan reward to shut the mouth of a gossip?

古文：彼如不捷，归罪于大夫矣。 
现代文：这次战斗若不能取胜，将归罪于大夫啊。 
English: If this battle is not won, it will be the doctor's fault.

古文：忠嗣曰： 李将军，忠嗣计已决矣。
现代文：忠嗣说： 李将军，我忠嗣的决计已定。
English: Tadatsugu said, "General Lee, my loyal successor's decision has been made.

古文：平生始望，岂及贵乎？
现代文：平生的初愿，难道是追求显贵吗？
English: Is one's first wish in life the pursuit of grandeur?

古文：今争一城，得之未制于敌，不得之未害于国，忠嗣岂以数万人之命易一官哉？
现代文：如今力争一城，得到了它也未能遏制敌人，没有得到它也对国家无害，忠嗣怎么能以数万人的生命去换取一个官职呢？
English: Now they are striving for a city, and if they get it, they will not be able to contain the enemy, and if they do not get it, it will not harm the country. How can the loyal heirs exchange tens of thousands of lives for an official post?

古文：假如明主见责，岂失一金吾羽林将军，归朝宿卫乎！
现代文：如果皇上责备我，不就是失去一个金吾羽林将军，回朝做侍卫吗！
English: If the Emperor reproaches me, won't he be losing a general, King Wu Hulin, who will return to the imperial court to serve as a bodyguard?

古文：其次，岂失一黔中上佐乎？
现代文：其次，难道失去一个在黔中的辅佐人吗？
English: Secondly, are we going to lose an assistant in the middle of the pack?

古文：此所甘心也。
现代文：这些我也心甘情愿了。
English: I did all of this willingly.

古文：虽然，公实爱我。 
现代文：即使这样，你还是爱护我的。 
English: Even so, you still love me.

古文：光弼谢曰： 向者恐累大夫，敢以衷告。
现代文：光弼谢道： 我担心连累大夫，因而向你提出忠告。
English: Guang Rong Xie said, "I am worried that I may have annoyed the doctor, so I would like to give you some advice."

古文：大夫能行古人之事，非光弼所及也。 
现代文：大夫能遵循古人之事，不是我光弼能达到的。 
English: A doctor can follow what the ancients did, but it's not something I can achieve on my own.

古文：遂趋而出。
现代文：于是恭敬退出。
English: Say goodbye and go out.

古文：及延光过期不克，诉忠嗣缓师，故师出无功。
现代文：等到延光逾期未攻下城堡，却上奏说是忠嗣延缓出兵，因此导致战事无功。
English: Yan Guang waited until it was too late to capture the castle, but it was reported that Taishi delayed the dispatch of troops, which led to the war being fruitless.

古文：李林甫又令济阳别驾魏林告忠嗣，称往任朔州刺史，忠嗣为河东节度，云 早与忠王同养宫中，我欲尊奉太子。 
现代文：李林甫又命令济阳别驾魏林诬告忠嗣，声称自己过去在担任朔州刺史，忠嗣任河东节度使时，忠嗣曾经说： 早年与忠王在宫中一起生活，我愿意尊奉太子。 
English: Li Linfu also ordered Jiyang not to drive Wei Lin to falsely accuse Tadatsugu, claiming that when he used to serve as the governor of Shuozhou and Tadatsugu served as the Hedong Festival envoy, Tadatsugu once said: In the early years, I lived with King Tadatsugu in the palace, I am willing to honor the prince.

古文：玄宗大怒，因征入朝，令三司推讯之，几陷极刑。
现代文：玄宗大怒，召见忠嗣入朝，命令三司详细审讯，几乎被陷害致死。
English: Xuanzong was furious, summoned his loyal successor to the imperial court, and ordered the three divisions to interrogate him in detail. Xuanzong was almost framed to death.

古文：会哥舒翰代忠嗣为陇右节度，特承恩顾，因奏忠嗣之枉，词甚恳切，请以己官爵赎罪。
现代文：适逢哥舒翰代替忠嗣为陇右节度，承蒙皇上宠爱，因而上奏说忠嗣为冤枉，辞语非常恳切，请求以自己的官职来替忠嗣赎罪。
English: At the right time, Goshukhan, who was favored by the emperor, replaced Tadatsugu as the rightful heir to the throne. Therefore, he said that Tadatsugu was wronged, and he was very sincere in his words. He asked to use his official position to atone for Tadatsugu.

古文：玄宗怒稍解。
现代文：玄宗怒气才稍稍消释。
English: Xuanzong's anger only subsided slightly.

古文：十一月，贬汉阳太守。
现代文：十一月，被贬为汉阳太守。
English: In November, he was demoted to Hanyang governor.

古文：七载，量移汉东郡太守。
现代文：七年，经权衡后又转任为汉东郡太守。
English: Seven years later, after being weighed up, he was transferred to the position of Hantong County Governor.

古文：明年，暴卒，年四十五。
现代文：第二年暴死，年龄为四十五岁。
English: He died suddenly the following year, aged 45.

古文：子震，天宝中秘书丞。
现代文：儿子震，天宝年间任秘书丞。
English: His son, Zhen, served as secretary-general during the Tenpo era.

古文：其后哥舒翰大举兵伐石堡城，拔之，死者大半，竟如忠嗣之言，当代称为名将。
现代文：之后，哥舒翰指挥大军攻打石堡城并占领了此城，却死伤大半，正如忠嗣所言，忠嗣被称为当代名将。
English: After that, Goshukhan commanded a large army to attack Shibakucho and occupied the city, but most of them were killed and wounded. As Tadatsugu said, Tadatsugu was known as a contemporary great general.

古文：先是，忠嗣之在朔方也，每至互市时，即高估马价以诱之，诸蕃闻之，竞来求市，来辄买之。
现代文：在此之前，忠嗣在朔方的时候，每当到集贸市场时，就以高价买马来引诱，各蕃听说后，都竞相来交换，来了便买。
English: Prior to this, when Tadatsugu was in the Shuo side, whenever he went to the bazaar market, he would buy horses at a high price to lure them. After hearing about it, each clan would compete to exchange horses and buy horses when they came.

古文：故蕃马益少，而汉军益壮。
现代文：所以蕃人的马匹越来越少，而汉军越来越壮大。
English: Therefore, there are fewer and fewer horses to beat people, while the Chinese army is growing stronger and stronger.

古文：及至河、陇，又奏请徙朔方、河东戎马九千匹以实之，其军又壮。
现代文：等到了河、陇两地，又上奏请求迁徙朔方、河东的战马九千匹用来补充军队，其队伍又有了壮大。
English: When they arrived in He and Handan, they requested that 9,000 horses from Shuo and the east of He be moved to supplement the army, and their ranks swelled again.

古文：迄于天宝末，战马蕃息。
现代文：到了天宝末年，战马繁殖增长。
English: By the end of the Tenpo era, the breeding of war horses had increased.

古文：宝应元年，追赠兵部尚书。
现代文：宝应元年追赠予兵部尚书。
English: It was posthumously presented to the Ministry of Military Affairs in the first year of the Heian period.

