古文：宗室○衡阳元王道度始安贞王道生子遥光遥欣遥昌安陆昭王缅
现代文：衡阳元王道度始安贞王道生子遥光遥欣遥昌安陆昭王缅
English: Hengyang Yuan Wang Daodu Shi Anzhen Wang Daodu's son, Yuan Guang, Yuan Xin, Yuan Chang, Yuan Lu Zhao Wang Meng

古文：衡阳元王道度，太祖长兄也。
现代文：衡阳元王萧道度，是齐太祖萧道成的长兄。
English: Xiao Daodu, the former king of Hengyang, was the eldest brother of Xiao Daucheng, the founder of Qi Dynasty.

古文：与太祖俱受学雷次宗。
现代文：与太祖都受学于雷次宗。
English: He and his great-grandfather both studied under Lei Zizong.

古文：宣帝问二儿学业，次宗答曰： 其兄外朗，其弟内润，皆良璞也。 
现代文：宣帝询问二位儿子的学业情况，雷次宗回答说： 哥哥清亮，表现在外，弟弟温润，包含在内，二人都是优良的玉石。 
English: Emperor Xuan inquired about the academic performance of the two sons, and Lei Jizong replied: "The elder brother is bright and outwardly expressive, and the younger brother is warm and gentle. Both of them are excellent jade.

古文：随宣帝征伐，仕至安定太守，卒于宋世。
现代文：后来萧道度跟随父亲宣帝南征北战，官至安定太守，卒于宋代。
English: Later, Xiao Daodu followed his father, Emperor Xuan, to invade the south and fight in the northern war. He was an official of the Prince of Stability and died in the Song Dynasty.

古文：建元二年，追加封谥。
现代文：齐建元二年，追加封号谧号。
English: In the second year of Qi Jianyuan, the additional seal number 号 was created.

古文：无子，太祖以第十一子钧继道度后。
现代文：没有儿子，太祖将自己的第十一子萧钩过继给萧道度为后。
English: Without a son, the great-grandfather passed his eleventh son, Xiao Hu, to Xiao Daodu.

古文：钧字宣礼。
现代文：萧钧字宣礼。
English: Xiao Yao's call to prayer resounded.

古文：永明四年为江州刺史，加散骑常侍。
现代文：永明四年，任江州刺史，加散骑常侍。
English: In the fourth year of Yongming, he was appointed as the governor of Jiangsu Province, and was also appointed as a non-commissioned officer.

古文：母区贵人卒，居丧尽礼。六年，迁为征虏将军。
现代文：其母区贵人去世，他守丧完全符合礼仪永明六年，升为征虏将军。
English: His mother district dignitary passed away, his funeral was in full accordance with the etiquette of Yongming six years, and he was promoted to conscript general.

古文：八年，迁骁骑将军，常侍如故，仍转左卫将军。
现代文：永明八年，又升为骁骑将军，散骑常侍照旧。又调任左卫将军。
English: In the eighth year of the Yongming era, he was promoted to General of the Horse Guards, and continued to ride horseback. He was also transferred to General of the Left Guards.

古文：钧有好尚，为世祖所知。
现代文：萧钧喜爱什么、崇尚什么，都被其长兄齐世祖所知。
English: What Xiao Yao loved and what he advocated were all known to his eldest brother Qi Shizuo.

古文：兄弟中意遇次鄱阳王锵。
现代文：兄弟之间，齐世祖对待他仅次于对待鄱阳王萧锵。
English: Among brothers, Qi Shizu treated him second only to the treatment of the King of Shenyang, Xiao Yu.

古文：十年，转中书令，领石头戍事。
现代文：永明十年，萧钩调任中书令，领石头戍事。
English: In the 10th year of the Yongming era, Xiao Hook was transferred to the post of the middle secretary, leading the stone anecdote.

古文：迁散骑常侍，秘书监，领骁骑如故。
现代文：又调为散骑常侍，秘书监，照旧领骁骑将军。
English: He was also transferred to the position of horseback riding attendant, secretary supervisor, and as before, the leader of horseback riding generals.

古文：不拜。
现代文：未正式拜授。
English: He refused to be appointed.

古文：隆昌元年，改加侍中，给扶。
现代文：郁林王隆昌元年，改加侍中，配给扶侍一人。
English: In the first year of Yu Lin Wang Longchang, he was promoted to attendant and assigned one attendant.

古文：海陵立，转抚军将军，侍中如故。
现代文：海陵王被拥立为皇帝时，萧钧调任抚军将军，侍中照旧。
English: When King Hailing was enthroned as emperor, Xiao Gan was transferred to the position of general of the army, and the chamberlains remained as before.

古文：寻遇害，年二十二。
现代文：不久便遇害，时年二十二岁。
English: He was killed soon after, at the age of 22.

古文：明帝即位，以永阳王子珉仍本国，继元王为孙。
现代文：齐明帝即位，以永阳王萧王退仍旧据有原来的藩国，而过继给衡阳元王萧道度为孙。
English: When Emperor Qiming ascended to the throne, Yongyang King Xiao Wangtu still ruled the original domain, and he was succeeded by Hengyang King Xiao Daodu as his grandson.

古文：子珉，字云玙，世祖第二十子也。
现代文：萧子珉字云玙，是世祖第二十子。
English: Xiao Zixi, also known as Yun Zixi, was the 20th son of the founder.

古文：永明七年，封义安王，后改永阳，永泰元年见害，年十四。
现代文：永明七年，封为义安王，后改封丞疆王。他在永泰元年被杀害，年仅十四岁。
English: In the seventh year of Yongming, he was given the title of King of Yian, later changed to King of Yongjiang. He was killed in the first year of Yongtai and was only fourteen years old.

古文：复以武陵昭王晔第三子子坦奉元王后。
现代文：又以武陵昭王萧晔第三子萧子坦作为五王的后人以奉祀宗庙。
English: In addition, Wuling Zhao Wang's third son, Xiao Zitan, as the descendant of the five kings, is enshrined in the ancestral temple.

古文：始安贞王道生，字孝伯，太祖次兄也。
现代文：始安贞王萧道生字孝伯，是齐太祖的二哥。
English: Xiao Dao, the first An Zhen Wang, was the second brother of Qi Taizu.

古文：宋世为奉朝请，卒。
现代文：宋朝任奉朝请，去世。
English: He was appointed to serve the Song Dynasty and died.

古文：建元元年，追封谥。
现代文：建元逝元年，追赠封号谧号。
English: In the first year of Jianyuan's death, he was posthumously awarded the seal number 号.

古文：建武元年，追尊为景皇，妃江氏为后。
现代文：明帝建武元年，又被迫尊为景皇，追尊其妃江氏为皇后。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jianwu of the Ming Dynasty, he was also forced to be revered as King Jing, and his wife Jiang was revered as the empress.

古文：立寝庙于御道西，陵曰修安。
现代文：又在御道西边设置寝庙，陵墓叫作脩安。
English: In addition, a sleeping temple was set up on the west side of the main road, and the mausoleum was called "Juan."

古文：生子凤、高宗、安陆昭王缅。
现代文：他有三个儿子：萧凤、高宗萧鸾、安陆昭王萧缅。
English: He had three sons: Xiao Feng, Gao Zong Xiao Wei, and Anlu Zhao Wang Xiao Ming.

古文：凤字景慈，官至正员郎。
现代文：萧凤字景慈，官至正员郎。
English: Xiao Feng, also known as Jing Ci, is a high-ranking official.

古文：卒于宋世，谥靖世子。
现代文：死于塞优，谧茎世子。
English: He died in Seiyu and was succeeded by his son.

古文：明帝建武元年，赠侍中、骠骑将军，开府仪同三司、始安靖王。
现代文：明帝建武元年，追赠为侍中、骠骑将军，开府仪同三司、始安靖王。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jianwu of the Ming Dynasty, he was posthumously awarded the titles of Chamberlain, General of Cavalry, Keifu Yi Tong Sanji, and Prince Shi'an Jing.

古文：改华林凤庄门为望贤门，太极东堂书画凤鸟，题为神鸟，而改鸾鸟为神雀。
现代文：改华林凤庄门为望贤门，并在太极东堂画上凤鸟，题名为神鸟，而改鸾鸟名为神雀。
English: The gate of Hualin Fengzhuang was changed to Wangxian Gate, and the phoenix was painted on the east hall of Taiji Temple, with the title "Divine Bird," while the ostrich was changed to "Divine Sparrow."

古文：子遥光嗣。
现代文：子萧遥继继承其王位。
English: His son, Xiao Yao, succeeded to the throne.

古文：遥光字元晖。
现代文：萧遥光字元晖。
English: Xiao Yaoguang's character.

古文：生有躄疾，太祖谓不堪奉拜祭祀，欲封其弟，世祖谏，乃以遥光袭爵。
现代文：生有瘸腿的毛病，齐太祖说他不能承受奉拜祭祀的重任，想封其弟继承王位，变世祖极力劝谏，才以萧遥光承袭王爵。
English: Born with a crippling leg disease, Qi Taizu said that he could not bear the heavy duty of worship and sacrifice. He wanted to appoint his younger brother to succeed to the throne. He tried his best to persuade him, and only then did Xiao Yaoguang succeed to the throne.

古文：初为员外郎，转给事郎，太孙洗马，转中书郎，豫章内史，不拜。
现代文：最初任员外郎，调任给事郎，太孙洗马，转宫中书郎，豫章内史，没有正式拜授。
English: He was initially appointed as a member of the outer circle, transferred to the inner circle, the great-great-grandson of Shima, the prince of the middle circle, and the internal history of Yushang, but was not officially conferred.

古文：高宗辅政，遥光好天文候道，密怀规赞。
现代文：高宗萧鸾辅理朝政，萧遥光喜爱天文占验之术，暗暗抱有谋划佐理朝政的心思。
English: Gaozong Xiaohui was an assistant to the imperial court, and Xiao Yaoguang was fond of the art of astronomical divination, and secretly harbored the idea of plotting to take over the imperial court.

古文：隆昌元年，除骁骑将军、冠军将军、南东海太守，行南徐州事；仍除南彭城太守，将军如故；又除辅国将军、吴兴太守。
现代文：郁林王隆昌元年，他任骁骑将军、冠军将军、南束海太守，代行南徐州事务。又任南彭城太守，将军照旧。又任辅国将军？吴兴太守。
English: In the first year of Yu Lin Wang Longchang, he served as the general of the imperial cavalry, the champion general, the governor of Nan Sokhai, acting for the affairs of South Xuzhou. He also served as the governor of Nan Pengcheng, the general as before. He also served as the general of the auxiliary state? Wu Xing governor.

古文：高宗废郁林，又除冠军将军、南蛮校尉、西平中郎长史、南郡太守。
现代文：高宗废郁林王后，又任冠军将军、南蛮校尉、西中郎长史、南郡太守。
English: Gao Zong became the Queen of Yulin, and also served as Champion General, Nanban Lieutenant, West Middle Brother Chang Shi, and Nan County Governor.

古文：一岁之内频五除，并不拜。
现代文：一年之内，他频繁调动，连任五职，都没有正式拜授。
English: Within a year, he was frequently transferred, re-appointed to five posts, but never formally appointed.

古文：是时高宗欲即位，诛赏诸事唯遥光共谋议。
现代文：当时高宗萧蚕想登上皇位，凡是诛杀封赏各种事情都衹和萧遥光一人共同商议。
English: At that time, Gaozong Xiao Silkworm wanted to ascend to the throne, and Xiao Yaoguang and Gaozong Xiao Silkworm discussed all kinds of matters together.

古文：建武元年，以为持节、都督扬南徐二州诸军事、前将军、扬州刺史。
现代文：建武元年，以萧遥光为持节、都督扬南徐二州诸军事、前将军、扬州刺史。
English: In the first year of Jianwu, with Xiao Yaoguang as the keeper of the festival, Yangnan Xu, the military governor of the two states, the former general, and the history of Yangzhou.

古文：晋安王宝义为南徐州，遥光求解督，见许。
现代文：晋安王萧宝义当时任亩徐州刺史，所以萧遥光请求解除都督南徐州军事的职务，得到允许。
English: At that time, King Xiao Baoyi of Jin'an was appointed as the military governor of Xuzhou, so Xiao Yaoguang requested to be relieved of his duties as the military governor of South Xuzhou, which was allowed.

古文：二年，进号抚军将军，加散骑常侍，给通宪车鼓吹。
现代文：建武二年，萧逐光进号抚军将军，加封散骑常侍，并赐给带布幔的车和鼓吹乐一部。
English: In the second year of the Jianwu era, Xiao Zhiguang was promoted to the general of the Fuzhou army, and he was given a car with cloth saddle and a part of the trumpet music.

古文：遥光好吏事，称为分明。颇多惨害。
现代文：萧遥光喜欢判理诉讼之事，自认为公正严明，但被他残酷杀害的人很多。
English: Xiao Yaoguang likes to judge lawsuits and considers himself to be fair and strict, but there are many people who were brutally killed by him.

古文：足疾不得同朝列，常乘舆自望贤门入。
现代文：由于患有脚病，不能与百官同在朝廷站列，所以常常乘车从望贤门入宫。
English: As he suffers from a foot disease, he cannot stand in line with the hundreds of officials at the imperial court, so he often enters the palace by car from the Wangxian Gate.

古文：每与上久清闲，言毕，上索香火，明日必有所诛杀。
现代文：每次和明帝闲谈很久，谈完，明帝要香火敬神，第二天必定要杀人。
English: Every time he chats with Mingdi for a long time, after the conversation, Mingdi wants to burn incense and worship God, and the next day he must kill someone.

古文：上以亲近单少，憎忌高、武子孙，欲并诛之，遥光计画参议，当以次施行。
现代文：明帝认为自己这一支脉近亲人少，势单力薄，对高帝、武帝的子孙既恨又怕，想把他们全都杀掉。萧遥光便帮他参谋策划，要依次施行，逐步除掉他们。
English: Emperor Ming thought that this line had few close relatives and was weak, and he both hated and feared the children and grandchildren of Emperor Gao and Emperor Wu, and wanted to kill them all. Xiao Yaoguang helped him to plan and execute the plan in sequence, gradually eliminating them.

古文：永泰元年，即本位为大将军，给油络车。
现代文：永泰元年，萧遥光就任本位赠为大将军，赐给油络车。
English: In the first year of Yongtai, Xiao Yaoguang was promoted to the rank of general and given an oil tanker.

古文：帝不豫，遥光数入侍疾，帝渐甚，河东王铉等七王一夕见杀，遥光意也。
现代文：明帝患病，萧遥光多次入宫侍候，明帝病势逐渐沉重，河东王萧铉等七王在同一夜全被杀害，这是萧遥光的主意。
English: Emperor Ming fell ill, Xiao Yaoguang entered the palace several times to wait for him, Emperor Ming's condition gradually worsened, and the seven kings, including King Xiao Yao of Hedong, were all killed on the same night. This was Xiao Yaoguang's idea.

古文：帝崩，遗诏加遥光侍中、中书令，给扶。
现代文：明帝驾崩，遣诏加封萧遥光为侍中、中书令，赐给扶侍一人。
English: After the Ming Emperor passed away, he sent an imperial edict to appoint Xiao Yaoguang as an attendant and chancellor, and gave him one attendant.

古文：永元元年，给班剑二十人，即本号开府仪同三司。
现代文：东昏侯永元元年，又赐给他带剑仪仗队二十人，即以大将军号开府仪同三司。
English: In the first year of Dongming Hou Yongyuan, he was also given a ceremonial guard of twenty people with swords, that is, he was given the title of general to open the ceremony with the three divisions.

古文：遥光既辅政，见少主即位，潜与江祏兄弟谋自树立。
现代文：萧遥光既已辅佐朝政，见东昏侯即皇帝位，暗中与江柘兄弟谋划要自立为帝。
English: Since Xiao Yaoguang had already assisted the imperial government, he secretly plotted with the Jiang brothers to become emperor himself.

古文：弟遥欣在荆楚，拥兵居上流，密相影响。
现代文：其弟萧遥欣在荆楚，拥有重兵居于长江上游，秘密地准备起兵响应。
English: His brother, Xiao Yaoxin, in Jingchu, had a heavy army in the upper reaches of the Yangtze River, secretly preparing to raise an army in response.

古文：遥光当据东府号令，使遥欣便星速急下。潜谋将发，而遥欣病死。
现代文：萧遥光当即据东府发出号令，要萧遥欣马上领兵火速束下阴谋将要发动，但萧遥欣病死。
English: Xiao Yaoguang immediately issued an order to Xiao Yaoxin to immediately lead the troops under the rapid-fire conspiracy, but Xiao Yaoxin died of illness.

古文：江祏被诛，东昏侯召遥光入殿，告以祏罪。遥光惧，还省便阳狂号哭，自此称疾不复入台。
现代文：江柘也被诛杀，东昏侯召萧遥光进殿，把江柘的罪行告诉了他，萧遥光很害怕，回到台省便假装发狂号哭，从此以后藉口有病不再进入朝廷。
English: Jiang Chen was also beaten to death. Dongdimou summoned Xiao Yaoguang to the imperial court and told him of Jiang Chen's crime. Xiao Yaoguang was very scared, and when he returned to Taizhou, he pretended to be mad and cried. From then on, he would no longer enter the imperial court on the pretext of illness.

古文：先是遥光行还入城，风飘仪伞出城外。
现代文：先前，萧遥光出行回来进入城中，风把仪伞吹起飘出了京城。
English: Previously, when Xiao Yaoguang returned from a trip and entered the city, the wind blew up his umbrella and floated out of the capital.

古文：遥光弟遥昌先卒寿春，豫州部曲皆归遥光；及遥欣丧还葬武进，停东府前渚，荆州众力送者甚盛。
现代文：萧遥光弟萧遥昌先死于寿春，其豫州的部下都归属萧遥光统领；及萧遥欣归葬于武进，暂时停柩在束府前的小洲上，荆州来送葬的人很多。
English: Xiao Yaoguang's younger brother, Xiao Yaochang, died first in Shuchun, and his subordinates in Yuzhou all belonged to Xiao Yaoguang's leader; and Xiao Yaoxin was buried in Wujin, temporarily staying on the small island in front of Sokfu, and many people from Jingzhou came to attend the funeral.

古文：帝诛江祏后，虑遥光不自安，欲转为司徒还第，召入喻旨。
现代文：束昏侯诛杀江柘后，忧虑萧遥光自己不安心，想转调他为司徒回到府第，召他进宫告诉他这个意思。
English: After the drowsy Hou Yi killed Jiang Chen, the worried Xiao Yao Guang was uneasy. He wanted to transfer him back to the capital as an apprentice and call him to the palace to tell him this.

古文：遥光虑见杀，八月十二日晡时，收集二州部曲，于东府门聚人众，街陌颇怪其异，莫知指趣也。
现代文：萧遥光担心被杀，于八月十二日黄昏，收集荆、豫二州的部属，在东府门前聚集了很多人，街上路人都觉得很奇怪，不知他们想干什么。
English: Fearing that he would be killed, Xiao Yaoguang went out at dusk on August 12 to gather his subordinates from Jing and Yuzhou, and many people gathered in front of the Dongfu Gate. People on the street thought it was very strange and did not know what they wanted to do.

古文：遥光召亲人丹阳丞刘沨及诸伧楚，欲以讨刘暄为名。
现代文：萧遥光召见亲信丹阳丞刘涸以及很多卑贱之人，想以讨刘喧为名发难。
English: Xiao Yaoguang summoned Danyang Choi's close confidant Liu Qi, as well as many low-born people, who wanted to make trouble in the name of punishing Liu Dian.

古文：夜遣数百人破东冶出囚，尚方取仗。
现代文：并连夜派遣好几百人攻破束冶放出囚徒，到尚方署取来兵器。
English: And overnight, several hundred people were dispatched to break the shackles and release the prisoners, and to collect weapons from the Shangfang Detention Center.

古文：又召骁骑将军垣历生，历生随信便至，劝遥光令率城内兵夜攻台，辇籥烧城门，曰： 公但乘舆随后，反掌可得。 
现代文：又召骁骑将军垣历生，垣历生跟随着使者立刻就到了，他劝萧遥光派他率领城内的兵马连夜攻击朝廷，用车载蒿草去焚烧城门。他说： 你衹需乘车跟在后面，反掌便可夺取台城。 
English: He also summoned the cavalry general, Gao Lisheng, and Gao Lisheng immediately arrived with the envoy. He advised Xiao Yaoguang to send him to lead the soldiers and horses in the city to attack the imperial court overnight, and to burn the city gate with car-borne weeds. He said: "You don't need to ride behind, but you can capture Taicheng."

古文：遥光意疑不敢出。
现代文：萧遥光狐疑，不敢出动。
English: Xiao Yaoguang was suspicious and did not dare to move.

古文：天稍晓，遥光戎服出听事，停舆处分上仗登城行赏赐。
现代文：天稍微有些亮，萧遥光便身穿军服出外听消息，停车安排仪仗，登上城楼施行赏赐。
English: The sky was a little bit bright, so Xiao Yaoguang put on his military uniform and went out to listen to the news. He parked his car, arranged a ceremonial battle, and went up to the city tower to give out awards.

古文：历生复劝出军，遥光不肯，望台内自有变。
现代文：垣历生又劝他出兵，萧遥光不答应，却希望朝廷内部自己发生事变。
English: Gao Lisheng also advised him to send troops, but Xiao Yaoguang did not agree, but hoped that there would be an incident within the imperial court.

古文：至日中，台军稍至，尚书符遥光曰： 逆顺之数，皎然有征，干纪乱常，刑兹罔赦。
现代文：到中午，朝廷的军队渐渐到来，尚书给萧遥光的檄文中说： 逆顺的运数，是有明显征兆的，干犯纲纪扰乱常规，刑法是不会赦免这种人的。
English: By noon, the imperial army was gradually arriving. Shangshu wrote to Xiao Yaoguang in his obituary: "There are obvious signs of reversing the operation number, and the criminal code will not pardon such a person.

古文：萧遥光宗室蚩庸，才行鄙薄，缇裙可望，天路何阶。
现代文：萧遥光是宗室的败类，品行卑劣才能浅薄，他像缇裙山的瘸子想上天，天路哪有他登的阶级。
English: Xiao Yaoguang is the scum of the family. He is a despicable person with a shallow talent. He is like the lame man of the skirt mountain who wants to go to heaven. There is no class for him to go to heaven.

古文：受遇自昔，恩加犹子，礼绝帝体，宠越皇季。
现代文：他从前就受到明帝的知遇，恩待他好像儿子一样，而且礼敬宠信超过了一般的皇子。
English: He had once been favored by Emperor Ming, who treated him like a son and treated him with more respect and favor than an ordinary prince.

古文：旗章车服，穷千乘之尊；闉隍爽闿，逾百雉之制。
现代文：赐给他的旗章车服等仪仗，超过了藩王的尊严；他所据府第宽阔，超过了城墙的规模。
English: The honours bestowed on him, such as flags, car livery, and so on, exceeded the dignity of the king of the domain; the breadth of his domain exceeded the scale of the city walls.

古文：及圣后在天，亲受顾托，话言在耳，德音犹存，侮蔑天明，罔畏不义，无君之心，履霜有日，遂乃称兵内犯，窃发京畿，自古巨衅，莫斯为甚。
现代文：等到圣皇升天，他亲受顾命托孤的重任，先帝的话犹在耳，德音尚存，他就欺侮蔑视皇上，并不害怕背负不义的名声，他心中没有君父，像寒霜一样由来已久。甚至私下在京畿发兵，进犯朝廷，自古以来巨大的挑衅事件，没有哪次能比这次更过分。
English: By the time the holy emperor ascended to heaven, he was personally entrusted with the important task of caring for the fate of the lonely. The words of the former emperor were still in his ears, and the German pronunciation still existed. He bullied and despised the emperor, and was not afraid to bear the reputation of injustice. He did not have a prince in his heart, and it had been like frost for a long time. He even privately sent troops to Gyeonggi and attacked the imperial court. Since ancient times, there have been huge provocative incidents, and none of them could be more excessive than this one.

古文：今便分命六师，弘宣九伐。
现代文：现在我命令六军，宣布对你讨伐。
English: Now I order the Six Armies to declare war on you.

古文：皇上当亲御戎轩，弘此庙略。
现代文：皇上当会亲驾兵车，实施这朝廷的重大的战略。
English: The emperor would personally drive the chariot to implement this major strategy of the imperial court.

古文：信赏必罚，有如大江。 
现代文：指长江为誓，一定要奖赏勇士，惩罚你这逆贼。 
English: I swear by the Yangtze River that we must reward the warriors and punish you, the traitor.

古文：于是戒严，曲赦京邑。
现代文：于是全城戒严，在京城部分地区实行大赦。
English: As a result, the entire city was placed under martial law, and an amnesty was implemented in some areas of the capital.

古文：领军萧坦之屯湘宫寺，镇军司马曹虎屯清溪大桥，太子右卫率左兴盛屯东府东篱门。
现代文：领军萧坦之屯兵湘宫寺，镇军司马曹虎驻扎在清溪大桥，太子右卫率左兴盛驻守束府束篱门。
English: The leader of Xiao Tan's army, the garrison soldier Xiang Gong Temple, the town's military commander, Ma Cao Hu, was stationed at Qingxi Bridge, and the prince's right guard, Zuo Xingsheng, was stationed at Sokufu Sokue Gate.

古文：众军围东城三面，烧司徒二府。
现代文：各路兵马三面包围了东城，焚烧了司徒的二座府库。
English: Troops and horses surrounded Dongcheng on three sides and burned the two government treasuries.

古文：遥光遣垣历生从西门出战，台军屡北，杀军主桑天爱。
现代文：萧遥光派垣历生从西门出战，朝廷军马多次战败，主将桑天爱被杀。
English: Xiao Yaoguang sent Gaki Lisheng to fight from the west gate, the imperial army horses were defeated many times, and the main commander, Sang Tian'ai, was killed.

古文：初，遥光起兵，问谘议参军萧畅，畅正色拒折不从，十五日，畅与抚军长史沈昭略潜自南出，济淮还台，人情大沮。
现代文：当初。萧遥光起兵之时，曾经询问过谘议参军萧畅，萧畅正色拒绝，不服从他的命令。八月十五日，萧畅与抚军长史沈昭略偷偷从南门逃出来，渡过秦淮河回到朝廷，萧遥光的部众很是灰心丧气。
English: At the beginning, when Xiao Yaoguang raised an army, he asked Xiao Chang for advice on joining the army, but Xiao Chang flatly refused and disobeyed his order. On August 15, Xiao Chang secretly escaped from the South Gate with the commander of the army, Shen Zhaoyu, and crossed the Qinhuai River to return to the imperial court. Xiao Yaoguang's subordinates were very discouraged.

古文：十六日，垣历生从南门出战，因弃槊降曹虎军，虎命斩之。
现代文：十六日，垣历生从南门出战，乘便丢下长矛投降了曹虎部，曹虎命令将他斩首。
English: On the 16th, Gao Lisheng went to fight from the south gate, threw down his spear and surrendered to Cao Hubei. Cao Hubei ordered him to be beheaded.

古文：遥光大怒，于床上自竦踊，使杀历生儿。
现代文：萧遥光闻讯大怒，自己从床上蹦跳起来，让人去杀垣历生的儿子。
English: Hearing the news, Xiao Yaoguang flew into a rage. He jumped out of bed and ordered someone to kill his son.

古文：其晚，台军射火箭烧东北角楼，至夜城溃。
现代文：当晚，官军发射火箭焚烧城东北的角楼，至深夜城中溃散了。
English: That night, the government army fired rockets to burn the corner building in the northeast of the city, and by late evening the city had collapsed.

古文：遥光还小斋，帐中著衣帢坐，秉烛自照，令人反拒，斋阁皆重关。
现代文：萧遥光回到小房屋，在帐中穿好衣服戴着哈帽端坐着，自己拿着烛火照明，命人拒守，房屋阁门都紧紧关闭。
English: Xiao Yaoguang went back to the small house. He dressed himself and sat in the middle of the table, wearing a hard hat. He held a candle and lit it. He refused to be guarded by anyone. The door of the house was tightly closed.

古文：左右并逾屋散出。
现代文：他左右的侍从都越过房屋四散逃出。
English: His attendants on either side fled across the house in all directions.

古文：台军主刘国宝、时当伯等先入。遥光闻外兵至，吹灭火，扶匐下床。军人排阁入，于暗中牵出斩首，时年三十二。
现代文：官军主将刘国宝、时当伯等人最先冲进去，萧遥光听见外面士兵到来，便吹灭烛火，爬下床来，官军冲开房门进来，在黑暗中将萧遥光拉出去斩首，时年三十二岁。
English: Liu Guobao, Shi Dangbo and others were the first to be rushed in by the commander of the government army. When Xiao Yaoguang heard the soldiers coming from outside, he blew out the candlelight and climbed out of bed. The government army broke open the door of the house and pulled Xiao Yaoguang out in the dark and beheaded him. He was thirty-two years old.

古文：遥光未败一夕，城内皆梦群蛇缘城四出，各各共说之，咸以为异。
现代文：萧遥光还未失败的一天晚上，城内人都梦见很多蛇沿着城向四外爬出去，大家议论纷纷，都觉得很奇怪。
English: One evening, when Xiao Yaoguang had not yet failed, everyone in the city dreamed that many snakes were crawling out along the city, and everyone was talking about it. They all thought it was very strange.

古文：台军入城，焚烧屋宇且尽。
现代文：官军入城，将城中房屋焚烧殆尽。
English: The government troops entered the city and burned all the houses in the city to the ground.

古文：遥光府佐司马端为掌书记，曹虎谓之曰： 君是贼非？ 
现代文：萧遥光府中的佐官司马端任掌书记，曹虎对他说： 你是反贼不是? 
English: Xiao Yaoguang's aide-de-camp, Sima Duan, held the post of secretary. Cao Hu said to him, "You are an anti-thief, aren't you?

古文：端曰： 仆荷始安厚恩，今死甘心。 
现代文：司马端说： 我受了始安王的厚恩，今天死了也甘心。 
English: Sima Duan said, "I have been favored by King Shi'an, and I am willing to die today."

古文：虎不杀，执送还台，徐世扌剽杀之。
现代文：曹虎不杀他，把他抓起来送回朝廷，徐世揦把他杀了。
English: Cao Hu did not kill him, but arrested him and sent him back to the imperial court, where Xu Shihong killed him.

古文：刘沨遁走还家园，为人所杀。端，河内人。
现代文：刘况逃跑回家，被人杀死。司马端是河内人。
English: Liu Cang fled home and was killed. Sima Duan was from Hanoi.

古文：沨，南阳人，事继母有孝行，弟溓事沨亦谨。
现代文：刘飒是南阳人，事奉继母很孝顺，其弟刘漾事奉刘飒也很谨慎小心。
English: Liu Ye is from Nanyang. He is very dutiful in serving his stepmother, and his brother Liu Ye is also very cautious in serving Liu Ye.

古文：诏敛葬遥光尸，原其诸子。
现代文：诏命将萧遥光的尸体收殓安葬，赦免了他的几个儿子。
English: He ordered Xiao Yaoguang's body to be collected and buried, and pardoned several of his sons.

古文：追赠桑天爱辅国将军、梁州刺史。
现代文：追赠桑天爱为辅国将军、梁州刺史。
English: Sang Tianai was posthumously awarded the title of Vice-Provincial General, and Liang Zhou was awarded the title of Grand Historian.

古文：以江陵公宝览为始安王，奉靖王后。
现代文：以江陵公萧宝览继任始安王，作为始安靖王萧凰的后代。
English: Jiangling Gong Xiao Baochan succeeded as the King of Shi'an, as a descendant of Shi'an Jing Wang Xiao Ying.

古文：永元二年，为持节、督湘州、辅国将军、湘州刺史。
现代文：永元二年，萧宝览任持节、督湘州、辅国将军、湘州刺史。
English: In the second year of the Yongyuan era, Xiao Baozhang was appointed to hold the festival, the governor of Hunan Province, the general of the auxiliary province, and the history of Hunan Province.

古文：遥欣字重晖。
现代文：萧遥欣字重晖。
English: Xiao Yaoxin was speechless.

古文：宣帝兄西平太守奉之无后，以遥欣继为曾孙。
现代文：宣帝萧承之的兄长西平太守之奉没有后代，以萧遥欣过继给他作曾孙。
English: Emperor Xuanzong's elder brother, Xiao Chengzhi, had no descendants, and Xiao Yaoxin became his great-grandson.

古文：除秘书郎，太子舍人，巴陵王文学，中书郎。
现代文：官拜秘书郎，太子舍人，巴陵王文学，中书郎。
English: The official secretary, the prince, the king of literature, the middle school teacher.

古文：延兴元年，高宗树置，以遥欣为持节、督兖州缘淮军事、宁朔将军、兖州刺史。
现代文：延兴元年，高宗扶植势力，以萧遥欣为持节、督兖州沿进回军事、宁朔将军、兖州刺史。
English: In the first year of Yanxing, Gaozong supported the forces, with Xiao Yaoxin as the leader, the governor of Bozhou along the military, the general of Ningshuo, and the history of Bozhou.

古文：仍为督豫州郢州之西阳司州之汝南二郡、辅国将军、豫州刺史，持节如故。
现代文：又为督豫州及郢州的西阳、司州的汝南二郡军事、辅国将军、豫州刺史，持节照旧。
English: In addition, Xiyang, the governor of Yuzhou and Zhangzhou, and the military commander of the two counties in the south of Yunnan, the general of the auxiliary country, and the historian of Yuzhou, will hold the festival as usual.

古文：未之任。
现代文：尚未到任。
English: He has not yet taken up his post.

古文：建武元年，进号西中郎将，封闻喜县公。
现代文：建武元年，他进号西中郎将，封闻喜瑟公。
English: In the first year of the Jianwu era, he was promoted to the rank of West Middle Captain and given the title of Xixi Gong.

古文：迁使持节、都督荆雍益宁梁南北秦七州军事、右将军、荆州刺史。
现代文：又调任使持节，都督荆、雍、益、宁、梁、南北秦七州军事，右将军，荆州刺史。
English: He was also transferred to the position of envoy to Jixi, the governor of Jing, Yong, Yi, Ning, Liang, the military of the seven states of North and South Qin, the right general, and the history of Jing.

古文：改封曲江公。
现代文：又改封为曲江公。
English: He also changed his title to Qujiang.

古文：高宗子弟弱小，晋安王宝义有废疾，故以遥光为扬州居中，遥欣居陕西在外，权势并在其门。
现代文：齐高宗由于自己的子弟势弱力小，晋安王萧实义又有残疾，所以以萧遥光为扰业刺史居于朝中，以萧遥欣外居陕西，这样都由同宗同门子弟掌握权势。
English: Because Qigong Zong's own sons were weak and Jinan's King Xiao Siyi was disabled, Xiao Yaoguang was appointed as a distraction and sat in the middle of the dynasty, while Xiao Yaoxin lived outside in Shaanxi. In this way, the power was controlled by the sons of the same clan.

古文：遥欣好勇，聚畜武士，以为形援。
现代文：萧遥欣喜爱勇武，积聚蓄养了很多武士，作为自己的支援。
English: Xiao Yuxin loved bravery and amassed a large number of warriors to support himself.

古文：四年，进号平西将军。
现代文：建武四年，进号为平西将军。
English: In the fourth year of Jianwu, he was promoted to General Pingxi.

古文：永泰元年，以雍州虏寇，诏遥欣以本官领刺史，宁蛮校尉，移镇襄阳，虏退不行。
现代文：永泰元年，由于雍州受到侵犯，诏命萧迁毖以原官职兼领雍州刺史，宁蛮校尉，迁移到襄阳镇守，后因北魏兵退而没有成行。
English: In the first year of Yongtai, due to the invasion of Yongzhou, Xiao Qianqian was ordered by the imperial edict to move to the town of Xiangyang as the former official and territorial governor of Yongzhou, and he did not go because of the retreat of the Northern Wei soldiers.

古文：永元元年卒，年三十一。
现代文：永元元年去世，时年三十一岁。
English: Yongyuan died at the age of 31 in the first year of the year.

古文：赠侍中、司空，谥康公。
现代文：追赠侍中、司空，溢康公。
English: posthumously awarded the title of samurai, tsukasa, and yakko.

古文：葬用王礼。
现代文：安葬时采用了藩王的礼仪。
English: The etiquette of the king of the domain was adopted for the burial.

古文：遥昌字季晖。
现代文：萧遥昌字季晖。
English: Xiao Yaochang's character, Ji Yao.

古文：解褐秘书郎，太孙舍人，给事中，秘书丞。
现代文：初任秘书郎，历任太孙舍人，给事中，秘书丞。
English: The first secretary, 郎, and the successive great-grandsons, 舍人, are in the middle, secretary, 丞.

古文：延兴元年，除黄门侍郎，未拜，仍为持节、督郢司二州军事、宁朔将军、郢州刺史。
现代文：延兴元年，任黄门侍郎，未正式拜授，转任持节、督郢司二州军事、宁朔将军、郢州刺史。
English: In the first year of Yanxing, he was appointed as a Yellow Gate attendant, but was not officially conferred, and was transferred to the position of Jisai, the military governor of two states, the general of Ningshuo, and the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：建武元年，进号冠军将军。
现代文：建武元年，进号冠军将军。
English: In the first year of the Jianwu era, he was promoted to champion general.

古文：封丰城县公，千五百户。
现代文：封丰城县公，食邑一千五百户。
English: Fengcheng County Public Security Bureau, 1,500 households in food villages.

古文：未之镇，徙督豫州郢州之西阳司州之汝南二郡军事、征虏将军、豫州刺史，持节如故。
现代文：尚未到任，转调督豫州及郢州的西阳、司州的汝南二郡军事、征虏将军、豫州刺史，持节照售。
English: Those who have not yet arrived have been transferred to the governor of Xiyang in Yuzhou and Zhangzhou, the military of the two counties in the south of Yunnan in Shizhou, the conscript general, and the historian of Yuzhou, and are still on sale.

古文：二年，虏主元宏寇寿春，遣使呼城内人。遥昌遣参军崔庆远、朱选之诣宏。
现代文：建武二年，北魏主元宏侵犯寿春，派使者呼叫城裹人答话，萧遥昌派参军崔庆速、朱选之去拜见元宏。
English: In the second year of the Jianwu era, the Northern Wei ruler, Yuanhong, invaded Shuchun and sent an envoy to call the people of the city to answer. Xiao Yaochang sent the soldiers Cui Qinghe and Zhu Xuan to visit Yuanhong.

古文：庆远曰： 旌盖飘摇，远涉淮、泗、风尘惨烈，无乃上劳？ 
现代文：崔庆远说： 旌旗车盖迎风飘扬，大队人马远渡淮河、泅水，受到风霜尘土的侵蚀，岂不是太辛苦了? 
English: Cui Qingyuan said, "Isn't it too hard to fly the flag of the flag of the flag of the flag of the flag of the flag of the flag of the flag of the flag of the flag of the flag of the flag of the flag of the flag of the flag of the flag of the flag?

古文：宏曰： 六龙腾跃，倏忽千里，经途未远，不足为劳。 
现代文：元宏说： 大军像六龙腾跃，一会儿便飞越千里，经过的路程不算太远，谈不上辛苦。 
English: Motohiro said, "The army leaps like six dragons, flying thousands of miles in a moment. The distance is not too far, and it is not hard work.

古文：庆远曰： 川境既殊，远劳轩驾。
现代文：崔庆远说： 山川环境既然不同，有劳皇驾远来。
English: Cui Qingyuan said: Since the mountain and river environments are different, it is a good idea to come from far away.

古文：屈完有言： 不虞君之涉吾地也，何故？  
现代文：屈完曾经说过： 不曾料到您会来到我们的国土上，这是什么缘故呢?  
English: Kukan once said: I did not expect you to come to our country, why is that?

古文：宏曰： 故当有故。
现代文：元宏说： 原因自然会有的。
English: Motohiro said, "There will naturally be a reason.

古文：卿欲使我含瑕依违，为欲指斥其事？ 
现代文：您想要我含糊其辞、模棱两可地回答呢，还是想要我直接地指明你们的过失呢? 
English: Do you want me to answer vaguely and ambiguously, or do you want me to point out your faults directly?

古文：庆远曰： 君包荒之德，本施北政，未承来议，无所含瑕。 
现代文：崔庆远说： 您包容远荒的仁德，本来衹施行于北地的政治，我们并没有要你们来发议论，所以也就不必含糊其辞。 
English: Cui Qingyuan said, "You are a benevolent person who is tolerant of the wilderness. We didn't ask you to discuss politics in the North, so there's no need to be vague.

古文：宏曰： 朕本欲有言，会卿来问。
现代文：元宏说： 朕本来就有话想说，正巧你来询问，我就直说罢。
English: Motohiro said, "I had something I wanted to say, but you happened to ask, so I'll just say it.

古文：齐主废立，有其例不？ 
现代文：齐主废君自立，有过这种先例没有? 
English: Has there ever been such a precedent?

古文：庆远曰： 废昏立明，古今同揆。
现代文：崔庆远说： 废昏君而立明主，这是古今相同的准则。
English: Cui Qingyuan said: It is the same principle from ancient times to the present.

古文：中兴克昌，岂唯一代？
现代文：要使国家能够中兴昌盛，岂能衹依靠某一代君主?
English: If the country is to prosper, can it really rely on a particular generation of monarchs?

古文：主上与先武帝，非唯昆季，有同鱼水。
现代文：当今我主明帝与先武帝，不仅是堂兄弟，而且关系融洽有如鱼水。
English: Today, my Lord Emperor Ming and Emperor Xianwu are not only cousins, but also have a harmonious relationship.

古文：武皇临崩，托以后事。
现代文：武帝临崩之际，将后事托付给明帝。
English: When Emperor Wu was on the verge of death, he entrusted the succession to Emperor Ming.

古文：嗣孙荒迷，废为郁林，功臣固请，爰立明圣。
现代文：继立的皇太孙昭业荒淫昏乱，我主才将他废为郁林王，功臣们坚决请求，要拥立圣明的君主。
English: Zhao Ye, the great-grandson of the empress dowager, who succeeded to the throne, was debauched and chaotic. It was only my lord who deposed him as the king of Yulin. The meritorious vassals firmly requested that the monarch of Shengming should be established.

古文：上逼太后之严令，下迫群臣之稽颡，俯从亿兆，践登皇极。
现代文：我主砠壹上迫于皇太后的严令，下迫于群臣的恳拜，这才顺应万民的心愿，登上了皇帝宝座。
English: My lord ascended the imperial throne in accordance with the wishes of all the people, first under the strict orders of the empress dowager, and then under the entreaties of his ministers.

古文：未审圣旨独何疑怪？ 
现代文：不知何故衹有魏主意下觉得怀疑惊奇? 
English: Why do you think Wei was surprised and suspicious?

古文：宏曰： 闻卿此言，殊解我心。
现代文：元宏说： 听你这一席话，消释了我心中的怀疑。
English: Motohiro said, "Listening to your speech has cleared my doubts.

古文：但哲妇倾城，何足可用。
现代文：但聪明的妇人倾国倾城，怎么可以再次使用?
English: But how can a clever woman, who has devoted herself to her country, be used again?

古文：果如所言，武帝子弟今皆何在？ 
现代文：果然像你所说的，子孙现今在什么地方? 
English: As you said, where are the descendants now?

古文：庆远曰： 七王同恶，皆伏管、蔡之诛，其余列蕃二十余国，内升清阶，外典方牧。
现代文：崔庆远说： 七王共同作恶，都像管叔、蔡叔一样被诛杀。其余各藩国二十余位王子，在朝内的晋升了官阶，在外地的都作了方镇的首领。
English: Cui Qingyuan said: "The seven kings committed evil together and were all killed like Uncle Guan and Uncle Cai. The remaining twenty-odd princes of each domain were promoted to higher ranks within the imperial court and became the leaders of Fangzhen in the outside world.

古文：哲妇之戒，古人所惑；然十乱盈朝，实唯文母。 
现代文：对那位聪明妇人的惩戒，古人都会感到迷惑不解；但各种乱行充满朝廷，实在是这位文帝幸姬霍氏的罪过。 
English: The ancients would have been puzzled by the wise woman's chastisement, but the misdeeds that filled the imperial court were really the fault of the literary emperor, Prince Kihō.

古文：宏曰： 如我所闻，靡有孑遗。
现代文：元宏说： 据我所知，武帝子孙没有剩下一个。
English: Motohiro said: As far as I know, there is not a single descendant of Emperor Wu left.

古文：卿言美而乖实。未之全信。 
现代文：你的言辞华美但违背了事实，不可全信。 
English: Your rhetoric is flamboyant but contradicts the facts and cannot be fully trusted.

古文：宏又曰： 云罗所掩，六合宜一。
现代文：元宏又说： 云雾遮盖之处，天地四方应当归于一统。
English: Motohiro also said: Where clouds and fog cover, the four directions of heaven and earth should be unified.

古文：故往年与齐武有书，言今日之事，书似未达齐主。命也。
现代文：所以往年曾有书信给齐武帝，谈论今天的事情，看来书信似乎没有送达齐武帝，遣也是天命啊。
English: Therefore, in previous years, there were letters to Emperor Qiwu, talking about today's events. It seems that the letters did not reach Emperor Qiwu, and it was also God's will to send them.

古文：南使既反，情有怆然，朕亦休兵。
现代文：你可以回返，朕也觉得悲伤，当会停止进兵。
English: You can come back, I also feel sad, when will the marching stop.

古文：此段犹是本意，不必专为问罪。
现代文：我这次来，原意主要是问清情况，并不是专门为兴师问罪。
English: When I came this time, my intention was mainly to inquire about the situation, not specifically to question the crime for Xing Shi.

古文：若如卿言，便可释然。 
现代文：如果真的像你所说的那样，便可消释我的疑心。 
English: If it's as you say, then I can put my doubts to rest.

古文：庆远曰： 见可而进，知难而退，圣人奇兵。
现代文：崔庆远回答说： 见可进则进，知难而退，这是圣人用兵的奇妙之处。
English: Cui Qingyuan replied, "If you can advance, then advance; if you can't advance, then retreat. This is the wonder of the sage's use of soldiers.

古文：今旨欲宪章圣人，不失旧好，岂不善哉！ 
现代文：今魏主的旨意是想效法圣人，不使两国丧失原来的和好之情，这不是非常好吗! 
English: Now the will of the Wei Lord is to emulate the sage, not to make the two countries lose the original and good feelings, isn't this very good!

古文：宏曰： 卿为欲朕和亲？
现代文：元宏说： 你是想要我与贵国和亲?
English: Motohiro said, "Do you want me to be related to your country?

古文：为欲不和？ 
现代文：还是不想要二国和亲? 
English: Or do you not want two countries and families?

古文：庆远曰： 和亲则二国交欢，苍生再赖；不和则二国交怨，苍生涂炭。
现代文：崔庆远说： 和亲则两国都很欢悦，天下苍生将赖以生存；不和则两国互相仇恨，将使生灵涂炭。
English: Cui Qingyuan said: If the two countries are on good terms with each other, the two countries will be very happy, and all living beings in the world will be able to survive; if they are not on good terms, the two countries will hate each other, and the living beings will be destroyed.

古文：和与不和，裁由圣衷。 
现代文：和还是不和，一切听凭魏主陛下的裁决。 
English: Whether to make peace or not, everything depends on the ruling of His Majesty the Emperor of Wei.

古文：宏曰： 朕来为复游行盐境，北去洛都，率尔便至。
现代文：元宏说： 朕这次来是为了再次巡行江、淮一带产盐的边境，北去洛阳，轻易就可到达。
English: Yuanhong said: I came this time to patrol the salt-producing border in the Jiangsu and Huaihai regions again. It is easy to get to Luoyang from the north.

古文：亦不攻城，亦不伐坞，卿勿以为虑。 
现代文：我既不攻打你的城池，也不侵伐你的村庄，你不要担心。 
English: Don't worry, I won't attack your city or invade your village.

古文：宏设酒及羊炙杂果，又谓庆远曰： 听卿主克黜凶嗣，不违忠孝。
现代文：元宏设置酒席及烤羊果品招待崔庆远等人，他又对崔庆远说： 听说你朝君主废黜凶恶的继位者而又没有违背忠孝之义。
English: Yuanhong set up a banquet and roasted lamb and fruit to invite Cui Qingyuan and others. He also said to Cui Qingyuan: I heard that you dethroned the evil successor to the monarch without violating the principles of loyalty and filial piety.

古文：何以不立近亲，如周公辅成王，而苟欲自取？ 
现代文：为何不拥立武帝的近亲藩王，就像周公辅佐成王一样，而要苟且地自取皇位呢? 
English: Why did he not support the king of the clan, a close relative of Emperor Wu, like Zhou Gongfu Suo Cheng Wang, but rather take the throne for himself?

古文：庆远答曰： 成王有亚圣之贤，故周公得辅而相之。
现代文：崔庆远回答说： 成王有次于圣主的贤德，所以周公才能够做他的宰辅扶助他。
English: Cui Qingyuan replied, "Cheng Wang's virtue is second only to that of the Lord, so Zhou Gongcai can only be his deputy and help him.

古文：今近蕃虽无悖德，未有成王之贤。
现代文：今武帝的近亲藩王虽然没有谁违背仁德，但都没有周成王那样贤能。
English: Although none of Emperor Wu's close relatives, the lords of the domain, violated benevolence, none of them were as virtuous as King Zhoucheng.

古文：霍光亦舍汉蕃亲而远立宣帝。 
现代文：霍光电舍汉昭帝的近亲藩王而迎立丁远亲的宣帝。 
English: Huo Guangdian rejected Han Zhao Di's close relative, the king of the domain, and welcomed Ding's distant relative, Emperor Xuan Di.

古文：宏曰： 若尔，霍光向自立为君，当复得为忠臣不？ 
现代文：元宏说： 如果是逭样，那么从前霍光自立为帝，他能不能算得上忠臣? 
English: Motohiro said, "If it's not true, then Ho Guang once ruled himself as an emperor. Can he be counted as a loyal subject?"

古文：庆远曰： 此非其类，乃可言宣帝立与不立义当云何。
现代文：崔庆远回答说： 这本不是同一类性质的事，怎么可以去谈论该不该拥立宣帝的问题呢?
English: Cui Qingyuan replied: This is not the same kind of thing, how can we talk about the issue of whether or not to support Xuan Di?

古文：皇上岂得与霍光为匹？
现代文：明帝怎能去和霍光相比较?
English: How can Emperor Ming compare with Emperor Huo Guang?

古文：若尔，何以不言 武王伐纣，何意不立微子而辅之，苟贪天下？ 宏大笑。
现代文：如果这样去比，为什么不说 武王伐纣，为何不拥立塑王而辅佐他，而要自己去贪得天下? ，元宏大笑。
English: If this is the way to compare, why not say that King Wu fell down the mountain, why not support and assist King Shou, but want to be greedy for the world?, Yuan Hong laughed loudly.

古文：明日引军向城东，遣道登道人进城内施众僧绢五百匹，庆远、选之各袴褶络带。
现代文：第二天魏主元宏领兵向城东开拔，并派道登道人进城向众和尚布施五百匹绢，给崔庆远、朱选之每人一套裤褶和络带。
English: The next day, the Wei lord Yuanhong led the troops to the east of the city, and sent Daodeng Taoists into the city to give five hundred horses and mules to the monks, and a pair of trousers and a braided belt to each of Cui Qingyuan and Zhu Xuan.

古文：遥昌，永泰元年卒。
现代文：萧遥昌死于永泰元年。
English: Xiao Yaochang died in the first year of the Yongtai Dynasty.

古文：上爱遥昌兄弟如子，甚痛惜之。
现代文：明帝喜爱萧遥昌兄弟好像喜欢儿子一样，所以对他的死很感痛惜。
English: Emperor Ming loved Xiao Yaochang's brother as if he were his own son, so he felt very sorry for his death.

古文：赠车骑将军、仪同三司。
现代文：追赠他马车骑将军、仪同三司。
English: He was posthumously awarded the General of the Horse-drawn Carriage and the Third Division of the Order of the Garter.

古文：帝以问徐孝嗣，孝嗣曰： 丰城本资尚轻，赠以班台，如为小过。 
现代文：明帝以此询问徐孝嗣，徐孝嗣说： 丰城县公原来资历尚浅，赠给他这样高的职位，好像有些小失误。 
English: Emperor Ming asked Xu Xiaozhi about this, and Xu Xiaozhi said: Fengcheng County's governor was still relatively inexperienced, and giving him such a high position seems to be a small mistake.

古文：帝曰： 卿乃欲存万代准则，此我孤兄子，不得与计。 
现代文：明帝说： 你是想保存万代的准则，他是我死去兄长的儿子，就不必计较这些了。 
English: Emperor Ming said: If you want to preserve the principle of all generations, he is the son of my dead brother, so you don't have to worry about this.

古文：谥宪公。
现代文：谧为宪公。
English: He became the constitutional prince.

古文：安陆昭王缅，字景业。善容止。
现代文：安陆昭王萧缅字景业他的仪表举止很得体。
English: An Lu Zhao Wang Xiao Meng Zi Jingye His manners are very proper.

古文：初为秘书郎，宋邵陵王文学，中书郎。
现代文：初任秘书郎，宋朝邵陵王的文学侍从，中书郎。
English: The first secretary of the Song Dynasty, Shao Ling Wang's literary attendant, Zhong Shuro.

古文：建元元年，封安陆侯，邑千户。
现代文：齐太祖建元元年，受封为安陆侯，食邑一千户。
English: In the first year of the founding of the Republic of China, Qi Taizu was given the title of Anlu Hou, with a thousand households in the food village.

古文：转太子中庶子，迁侍中。
现代文：转调为太子中庶子，又改迁为侍中。
English: He was transferred to the position of Prince's middle son, and then to the position of chamberlain.

古文：世祖即位，迁五兵尚书，领前军将军，仍出为辅国将军、吴郡太守，少时大著风绩。
现代文：齐世祖即位，萧缅调任五兵尚书，领前军将军，又出任辅国将军、吴郡太守。不久，在教化方面便政绩卓著。
English: When Qi Shizu ascended to the throne, Xiao Meng was transferred to the position of the five soldiers of Shangshu, leading the front army general, and also served as the general of the auxiliary country and the governor of Wu County. Soon, he made outstanding achievements in the field of enlightenment.

古文：竟陵王子良与缅书曰： 窃承下风，数十年来未有此政。 
现代文：竟陵王萧子良给萧缅的信中说： 我甘拜下风，您的政绩数十年来都未曾有过。 
English: In fact, Xiao Ziliang, the King of the Mausoleum, said in a letter to Xiao Ming: I bow to the wind, your political achievements have been unprecedented for decades.

古文：世祖嘉其能，转持节、都督郢州司州之义阳军事、冠军将军、郢州刺史。
现代文：齐世祖很赏识他的才能，调他任持节、都督郢州及司州的义阳郡军事、冠军将军、郢州刺史。
English: Qi Shizu was very appreciative of his talent, and promoted him to the post of Jixi, the military governor of Bozhou and Yiyang County, the champion general, and the history of Bozhou.

古文：永明五年，还为侍中，领骁骑将军，仍迁中领军。
现代文：永明五年，萧缅回京任侍中，领骁骑将军，又迁为中领军。
English: In the fifth year of Yongming, Xiao Meng returned to Beijing to serve as an attendant, leading the cavalry general, and moved to the middle leader.

古文：明年，转散骑常侍，太子詹事。
现代文：第二年，又转官属散骑常侍，太子詹事。
English: In the second year, Prince Zhan Zhi, the prince's equerry, was transferred to the imperial court.

古文：出为会稽太守，常侍如故。
现代文：出任会稽太守，照旧是散骑常侍。
English: He will take up the post of Grand Treasurer of the Association, and will continue to serve as a samurai.

古文：迁使持节、都督雍梁南北秦四州荆州之竟陵司州之随郡军事、左将军、宁蛮校尉、雍州刺史。
现代文：又升为使持节、都督雍梁南北秦四州以及荆州的竟陵郡司州的随郡军事、左将军、宁蛮校尉、雍州刺史。
English: He was also promoted to Jizhi Festival, the governor of Yongliang, the four provinces of North, South and Central Qin, and the governor of Jingshuling County, the governor of Jing Province, the military of Suixian County, the left general, the captain of Ningman, and the historian of Yongzhou.

古文：缅留心辞讼，亲自隐恤，劫抄度口，皆赦遣许以自新，再犯乃加诛，为百姓所畏爱。
现代文：萧缅很留心于诉讼狱事，亲自体恤百姓的疾苦，对于那些以劫夺财物度的人，都赦免遣散他们，允许他们改过自新，如果再犯才加以惩罚，所以深受百姓的敬畏与爱戴。
English: Xiao Ming was very attentive to the litigation and prison affairs, and personally sympathized with the sufferings of the people. For those who robbed the people of their property, he pardoned and dismissed them, allowed them to reform, and only punished them if they re-offended, so he was deeply revered and loved by the people.

古文：九年，卒。
现代文：永明九年，萧缅去世。
English: Yan Xi died nine years later.

古文：诏赙钱十万，布二百匹。
现代文：诏命发放十万钱和二百匹布以资助他家办丧事。
English: The imperial edict ordered the distribution of 100,000 yuan and 200 horses to fund his family's funeral.

古文：丧还，百姓缘沔水悲泣设祭，于岘山为立祠。
现代文：灵柩回京时，百姓们沿着沔水痛哭着为他祭奠，并在岘山为他建立祠堂。
English: When the coffin returned to Beijing, the people along Surabaya wept and paid tribute to him, and built a shrine for him in Shaoshan.

古文：赠侍中、卫将军，持节、都督、刺史如故。
现代文：追赠为侍中、卫将军，持节、都督、刺史这些官位照旧。
English: The posthumous awards are for the official ranks of Samurai Middle Officer, General of the Imperial Guards, Grand Marshal, Governor of the Capital, and Grand Historian.

古文：给鼓吹一部。
现代文：又赐给鼓吹乐一部。
English: Part of the trumpet band.

古文：谥昭侯。
现代文：谧号昭侯。
English: His posthumous name is Akihiro.

古文：年三十七。
现代文：时年三十七岁。
English: He was thirty-seven years old.

古文：高宗少相友爱，时为仆射，领卫尉，表求解卫尉，私第展哀，诏不许。
现代文：明帝年轻时便和萧缅非常友爱，萧面死时明帝任仆射，领卫尉，他上表请求解除卫尉的职务，在自己家中陈设灵堂对他哀悼，韶命不许可这样做。
English: When Emperor Ming was young, he was very friendly with Xiao Meng. When Xiao Meng died, Emperor Ming was the second-in-command, the captain of the guards. He requested that the captain of the guards be relieved of his duties, and a chapel was set up in his home to mourn him. He tried his best not to allow this.

古文：每临缅灵，辄恸哭不成声。
现代文：明帝每当来到萧缅的灵前，总要悲哭，泣不成声。
English: Whenever Emperor Ming came to the front of Xiao Ming's spirit, he would always weep bitterly, unable to stop crying.

古文：建武元年，赠侍中、司徒、安陆王，邑二千户。
现代文：建武元年，又追赠萧缅为侍中，司徒，安陆王，食邑二千户。
English: In the first year of the Jianwu era, Xiao Ming was posthumously awarded as a waiter, Sito, King of Anlu, and two thousand households were provided with food.

古文：子宝晊嗣，为持节、督湘州军事、辅国将军、湘州刺史。
现代文：萧缅子萧宝睡继承安陆王位，任持节、督湘州军事、辅国将军、湘州刺史。
English: Xiao Mencius and Xiao Baoshu succeeded to the throne of Anlu, and were appointed to hold festivals, to be the military governor of Hunan Province, to be the general of the auxiliary province, and to write the history of Hunan Province.

古文：弟宝览为江陵公，宝宏汝南公，邑各千五百户。
现代文：萧宝晅弟萧宾览为江陵公，萧宝宏为汝南公，食邑各一千五百户。
English: Xiao Bao's younger brother, Xiao Binchan, was named the Prince of Jiangling, and Xiao Baohong was named the Prince of Runan, with 1,500 households in each county.

古文：二年，宝晊进号冠军将军。
现代文：建武二年，萧宝眨进号为冠军将军。
English: In the second year of Jianwu, Xiao Bao became the champion general.

古文：三年，宝宏改封宵城。
现代文：建武三年，萧宾宏改封为霄城公。
English: In the third year of Jianwu, Xiao Binhong changed his title to Xiaocheng.

古文：永元元年，以安陆郡边虏，宝晊改封湘东王，进号征虏将军。
现代文：永元元年，由于安陆郡靠近北魏，所以改封萧宝晅为湘东王，进号征虏将军。
English: In the first year of the Yongyuan era, because Anlu County was close to the Northern Wei Dynasty, Xiao Baojun changed his title to the King of Eastern Hunan and was promoted to General of Conscription.

古文：二年，为左卫将军。
现代文：永元二年任左卫将军。
English: He was appointed General of the Left Division in the second year of the Eisho era.

古文：高宗兄弟一门皆尚吏事，宝晊粗好文章。
现代文：齐明帝兄弟一门都喜爱审案之事，萧宝晅还略微爱好文学。
English: The Qiming brothers are all fond of litigation, and Xiao Baojun is also slightly fond of literature.

古文：义师下，宝晊在城内，东昏废，宝晊望物情归己，坐待法驾，既而城内送首诣梁王。
现代文：梁王义师束下，萧宝晅正在京城内。东昏侯被废黜后，萧宝晅希望人心归向自己，坐等成为皇帝。不久城内人将束昏侯首级送去给梁王。
English: Under the tutelage of Liang Wang Yishi, Xiao Baojun was in the capital city. After Dongwu Hou was deposed, Xiao Baojun hoped that the hearts of the people would turn to him and wait for him to become emperor. Soon, the people in the city would send the head of Zouwu Hou to Liang Wang.

古文：宣德太后临朝，以宝晊为太常。
现代文：宣德太后临朝视事，以萧宝晅为太常。
English: Empress Dowager Xuan De visited the imperial court to oversee the situation, with Xiao Baojun as the first consort.

古文：宝晊不自安，谋反，兄弟皆伏诛。
现代文：萧宝陉自己感到很不安，所以谋反，兄弟都被诛杀。
English: Xiao Baojun himself felt very uneasy, so he plotted a rebellion, and his brothers were all killed.

古文：史臣曰：太祖膺期御世，二昆夙殒，庆命傍流，追序蕃胙。
现代文：史臣曰：齐太祖承受天下的期望统治国家，他的二位兄长却早已殒落，奖赏的命令惠及同族旁支，所以都被追封为藩王。
English: Shichen said, "Qi Taizu bore the expectations of the world to rule the country, but his two elder brothers had already fallen, and the order of reward benefited the other branches of the same family, so they were all crowned as the king of the clan.

古文：安陆王缅以宗子戚属，弱年进仕，典郡临州，去有余迹，遣爱在民。
现代文：安陆王萧缅由于是太祖的同宗子侄世祖的亲属，年轻时便进入仕宦之列，执掌过治理州郡的大权，人虽去而存有余迹，在百姓中留下了仁爱。
English: Because Anlu Wang Xiao Ming was a relative of his great-great-grandfather's son-in-law, his great-great-grandfather's nephew, he entered the ranks of ministers when he was young, and he held the power to govern the state and county. Although he left, he left a trace, leaving benevolence among the people.

古文：盖因情而可感，学以从政，夫岂必然。
现代文：这是由于他顺应民情施行感化的结果。这样的政绩，岂是那些初学从政的人所必定能够达到的。
English: This is the result of the influence he has exerted in accordance with the people's will. Is this the kind of political achievement that those new to politics must be able to achieve?

古文：赞曰：太祖二昆，追树双蕃。
现代文：赞曰：太祖二位兄长，双双被迫封藩王。
English: Zang Zai said, "My grandfather's two elder brothers were both forced to become the king of the domain.

古文：元托继胤，贞兴子孙。
现代文：元王的后代依托过继，贞王的子孙兴旺发达。
English: The descendants of Yuan Wang relied on the adoption, and the descendants of Zhen Wang thrived.

古文：并用威福，自取亡存。
现代文：各人都依靠自己的威福，或存或亡，都是自取。
English: For every man shall bear his own burden, and shall die for his own iniquity.

古文：安陆称美，事表西魂。
现代文：安陆王确实值得赞美，他的事迹显扬在西部边境人民的心。
English: King Anlu is indeed praiseworthy, and his deeds reveal the hearts of the people on the western border.

