古文：卢象升刘之纶邱民仰
现代文：卢象升，字建斗，宜兴人。
English: Lu Xiangsheng, also known as Jiantou, was from Yixing.

古文：卢象升，字建斗，宜兴人。
现代文：祖父卢立志，曾做过仪封知县。
English: His grandfather, Lu Lizhi, once served as the magistrate of Fengchi County.

古文：祖立志，仪封知县。象升白皙而臞，膊独骨，负殊力。
现代文：象升肤色白皙，人很瘦，胳膊上长着一根粗大的骨头，力气特别大。
English: Xiang Sheng has a fair complexion and is very thin. He has a big bone on his arm and is very strong.

古文：举天启二年进士，授户部主事。
现代文：他考中天启二年榜进士，初任户部主事。
English: He was a top student in his second year of junior high school, and became the head of the household department for the first time.

古文：历员外郎，稍迁大名知府。
现代文：经员外郎，之后升为大名知府。
English: He was promoted to daimyo (feudal lord) chifu.

古文：崇祯二年，京师戒严，募万人入卫。
现代文：崇祯二年，京师戒严，象升招募了一万兵马入卫。
English: In the second year of Chongzhen, the Beijing division was under martial law, and Xiang Sheng recruited ten thousand soldiers and horses into the guard.

古文：明年，进右参政兼副使，整饬大名、广平、顺德三府兵备，号 天雄军 。
现代文：第二年，升任右参政兼副使，外出整顿大名、广平、顺德三府的兵备，号称 天雄军 。
English: In the second year, he was promoted to the post of right-wing politician and deputy envoy, and went out to rectify the military preparedness of the three prefectures of Daimyo, Guangping and Shunde, known as the Tianxiong Army.

古文：又明年举治行卓异，进按察使，治兵如故。
现代文：第三年被推荐为政绩、品行突出，升任按察使，照旧治军。
English: In the third year, he was recommended for outstanding political performance and conduct, promoted to inspector, and continued to lead the army.

古文：象升虽文士，善射，娴将略，能治军。
现代文：象升虽然是一个文人，但善于射箭，武略娴熟，有领兵的才干。
English: Although Xiang Sheng was a man of letters, he was good at archery, skilled in military strategy, and had the ability to lead an army.

古文：六年，山西贼流入畿辅，据临城之西山。
现代文：六年，山西的贼兵涌入京师郊区，占领了临城的西山。
English: In the sixth year, the bandits from Shanxi poured into the suburbs of Beijing and occupied the West Mountain of Lincheng.

古文：象升击却之，与总兵梁甫、参议寇从化连败贼。
现代文：象升打退了他们的进攻，与总兵梁甫、参议寇从化接连打败贼兵。
English: Xiang Sheng repulsed their attack, and together with General Liang Fu and Councillor Guo Conghua, defeated the bandits one after another.

古文：贼走还西山，围游击董维坤冷水村。
现代文：贼兵逃回西山，把游击董维坤围困在冷水村。
English: The bandits fled back to Xishan and besieged the guerrilla Dong Wei Kun in Lengshui Village.

古文：象升设伏石城南，大破之，又破之青龙冈，又破之武安。连斩贼魁十一人，歼其党，收还男女二万。
现代文：象升在石城南部设下埋伏，大败贼兵，又在青龙冈、武安先后获胜，接连斩杀贼首十一名，歼灭了他们的党羽，收降、遣返男女群众两万人。
English: Xiang Sheng set up an ambush in the south of Shicheng and defeated the bandits. He also won in Qinglonggang and Wu'an successively, killed eleven bandits in succession, annihilated their party members, and collected and repatriated 20,000 men and women.

古文：三郡之民，安堵者数岁。
现代文：京郊三府的百姓因此几年中间得以安居乐业。
English: As a result, the people of the three prefectures on the outskirts of Kyoto have been able to live and work in peace for several years.

古文：象升每临阵，身先士卒，与贼格斗，刃及鞍勿顾，失马即步战，逐贼危崖，一贼自巅射中象升额，又一矢仆夫毙马下，象升提刀战益疾。
现代文：象升每次上战场，都身先士卒，跟贼兵格斗时，贼兵的兵刃砍到他的马鞍他都不顾，战马死掉就步行作战。有一次他在险峻的山崖边追赶贼寇，一名贼兵从山顶上放箭射中了象升的额头，又一支箭飞来，象升的仆夫死于马下，象升提刀更加勇武地作战。
English: Every time Xiang Sheng went to the battlefield, he led the soldiers. When he fought against the bandits, he did not care if the bandits' blades cut his saddle. If the horse died, he would fight on foot. Once he chased the bandits on the edge of a steep cliff. A bandit from the top of the mountain shot an arrow into Xiang Sheng's forehead. Another arrow came. Xiang Sheng's servant died under the horse. Xiang Sheng fought more bravely with his sword.

古文：贼骇走，相戒曰： 卢廉使遇即死，不可犯。 
现代文：贼兵吓得逃走了，相互告诫说 ：卢廉使这个人，谁撞上谁死，不可碰他。 
English: The robbers ran away in fright and warned each other, "Lu Liang made this man die, whoever bumps into him must not touch him."

古文：象升以是有能兵名。
现代文：象升因此获得了军事本领大的声名。
English: As a result, Xiang Sheng gained a great reputation for military prowess.

古文：贼惧，南渡河。
现代文：贼兵怕了，向南渡黄河而逃。
English: The bandits were afraid and fled south across the Yellow River.

古文：明年，贼入楚，陷郧阳六县。
现代文：第二年，贼兵进入湖北，打下了郧阳府的六个县。
English: In the following year, the bandits entered Hubei and conquered six counties in Fenyang Prefecture.

古文：命象升以右佥都御史，代蒋允仪抚治郧阳。
现代文：朝廷命令象升以右佥都御史的身份去接替蒋允仪抚治郧阳。
English: The imperial court ordered Xiang Sheng to succeed Jiang Yunyi to govern Fuxiang as the right-hand man of the imperial capital.

古文：时蜀寇返楚者驻郧之黄龙滩，象升与总督陈奇瑜分道夹击，自乌林关、乜家沟、石泉坝、康宁坪、狮子山、太平河、竹木砭、箐口诸处，连战皆捷，斩馘五千六百有奇，汉南寇几尽。
现代文：当时四川的贼兵返回湖北，驻扎在郧阳的黄龙滩。象升和总督陈奇瑜分路夹击，在乌林关、乜家沟、石泉坝、康宁坪、狮子山、太平河、竹木砭、箐口等地连战连胜，斩敌五千六百多人，汉南的贼寇几乎给消灭完了。
English: At that time, the bandit soldiers from Sichuan returned to Hubei and were stationed at Huanglongtan in Fenyang. Xiang Sheng and Governor Chen Qiyu made a split-second attack, and won consecutive victories in Wulingguan, Xingjiagou, Shiquanba, Kangningping, Lion Mountain, Taipinghe, Zhumuxuan, and Hukou, defeating more than 5,600 enemies. The bandits in Hannan were almost wiped out.

古文：因请益郧主兵，减税赋，缮城郭，贷邻郡仓谷，募商采铜铸钱，郧得完辑。
现代文：接着象升向朝廷申请增加郧阳城的驻军人数，减免税赋，修补城郭，向邻近的府借贷稻谷，招募商人来采铜铸钱，郧阳由此安定下来。
English: Next, Xiang Sheng applied to the imperial court to increase the number of garrisons in Fenyang City, reduce and exempt taxes, repair the castle, borrow rice from neighboring governments, recruit merchants to mine copper and mint money, and Fenyang settled down.

古文：八年五月，擢象升右副都御史，代唐晖巡抚湖广。八月，命总理江北、河南、山东、湖广、四川军务，兼湖广巡抚。
现代文：八年五月，朝廷提升象升为右副都御史，接替唐晖前往巡抚湖广，八月让他总理江北、河南、山东、湖广、四川军务，兼湖广巡抚。
English: In May of the eighth year, the imperial court promoted Xiang Sheng to the right vice-governor of the capital, succeeding Tang Xiu to the governor of Hukang, and in August made him the prime minister of Jiangbei, Henan, Shandong, Hukang and Sichuan military affairs, and the governor of Hukang.

古文：总督洪承畴办西北，象升办东南。
现代文：总督洪承畴负责惩办西北部的贼寇，象升负责东南部。
English: Governor Hong Chengzheng is responsible for punishing bandits in the northwest, and Xiang Sheng is responsible for the southeast.

古文：寻解巡抚任，进兵部侍郎，加督山西、陕西军务，赐尚方剑，便宜行事。
现代文：不久，象升解除了巡抚一职，升为兵部侍郎，增加管理山西、陕西军务，庄烈帝赐给他尚方宝剑，让他便宜行事。
English: Soon after, Xiang Sheng was relieved of the post of governor and was promoted to the position of military commissar, increasing the management of Shanxi and Shaanxi military affairs. Emperor Zhuang gave him the Shangfang Sword, allowing him to act cheaply.

古文：汝、洛告警，象升倍道驰入汝。
现代文：汝州、洛阳传来警报，象升昼夜兼程飞马进入汝州。
English: The alarm came from Ruzhou and Luoyang. It was like a rising day and night and a flying horse entered Ruzhou.

古文：贼部众三十余万，连营百里，势甚盛。
现代文：贼兵的人数有三十多万，连营百里，气势很豪大。
English: The number of robber soldiers is more than three hundred thousand, with a company of one hundred li, and the momentum is very great.

古文：象升督副将李重镇、雷时声等击高迎祥于城西，用强弩射杀贼千余人。
现代文：象升率领副将李重镇、雷时声等在汝州城西面进攻高迎祥，用强弩射死贼兵一千多人。
English: Xiang Sheng led the vice-commanders Li Chongzhen and Lei Shisheng to attack Gao Yingxiang on the west side of Ruzhou City, and shot more than a thousand thieves with a powerful crossbow.

古文：迎祥、李自成走，陷光州，象升复大破之确山。
现代文：迎祥、李自成撤离而去，攻占了光州，象升又在确山将他们打得大败。
English: Yingxiang and Li Zicheng withdrew and occupied Gwangju, while Xiang Sheng defeated them in Jishan.

古文：先是，大帅曹文诏、艾万年阵亡，尤世威败衄，诸将率畏贼不敢前，象升每慷慨洒泣，激以忠义。
现代文：在此之前，大将曹文诏、艾万年阵亡，尤世威战败，所以官兵将领很多人害怕贼兵，畏缩不前。象升常常慷慨激昂，热泪横流地激励大家忠义报国。
English: Prior to this, the generals Cao Wenzhao and Ai Wanian were killed in battle, and You Shiwei was defeated, so many officers and soldiers were afraid of the bandits and did not dare to move forward. Xiang Sheng was often impassioned and tearfully encouraged everyone to serve the country loyally.

古文：军中尝绝三日饷，象升亦水浆不入口，以是得将士心，战辄有功。
现代文：他的部队曾经有一回绝了三天粮饷，象升自己也不喝一口水，因此他得到了将士们的拥戴，每次打仗都能立下战功。
English: His troops were once deprived of food and water for three days, and he himself did not drink a single sip of water. As a result, he was loved by his soldiers, and was able to make war achievements every time he fought.

古文：九年正月，大会诸将于凤阳。象升乃上言曰： 贼横而后调兵，贼多而后增兵，是为后局；兵至而后议饷，兵集而后请饷，是为危形。
现代文：九年正月，象升在凤阳大会诸将，然后上书说： 贼寇横行以后朝廷再调兵，贼寇人多时再增派兵力，这只能说是跟不上趟儿。部队开上战场然后再讨论供应军饷，部队会合以后再来申请粮饷，这只能说是玩命。
English: In the first month of the ninth year, Xiang Sheng addressed the generals at the Fengyang General Assembly, and then wrote a letter saying: After the bandits rampaged, the imperial court redeployed troops, and the bandits often sent more troops, which can only be said to be unable to keep up. The troops went to the battlefield and then discussed the supply of military pay, and after the meeting of the troops, they came to apply for grain subsidies, which can only be said to be a matter of life and death.

古文：况请饷未敷，兵将从贼而为寇，是八年来所请之兵皆贼党，所用之饷皆盗粮也。 
现代文：况且请到的粮饷不够用，士兵们就会跟随贼寇去抢劫，这样近八年来所召来的部队都和贼寇成了同伙，所食用的军饷都无异于盗贼的饷粮了。 
English: Moreover, the invited grain is not enough, the soldiers will follow the bandits to rob, so that the troops called up in the past eight years have become allies with the bandits, and the food used by the soldiers is tantamount to the thieves' stolen grain.

古文：又言： 总督、总理宜有专兵专饷。
现代文：又说： 总督、总理应该掌握有专门的部队和专门的粮饷。
English: He also said that the governor and the prime minister should have special troops and special food rations.

古文：请调咸宁、甘、固之兵属总督，蓟、辽、关、宁之兵属总理。 
现代文：把咸宁、甘肃、固原的部队调派给总督，蓟州、辽阳、山海关、宁远的部队归属总理指挥。 
English: The troops of Xianning, Gansu, and Guyuan will be assigned to the governor, and the troops of Zhangzhou, Liaoyang, Shanhaiguan, and Ningyuan will be under the command of the prime minister.

古文：又言： 各直省抚臣，俱有封疆重任，毋得一有贼警即求援求调。不应则吴、越也，分应则何以支。 
现代文：还说道： 各直省的巡抚大臣都有边疆重任，不要一有贼警就请求别人增援、调兵，不响应他呢，大家本来就应当同舟共济，四处去接应他吧，兵力怎么能跟得上？ 
English: He also said, "The supervising ministers of all the provinces have important border responsibilities. Don't ask others for reinforcements and troop deployments as soon as there is a bandit police, and don't respond to him. Everyone should have been in the same boat, and go everywhere to meet him. How can the troop strength keep up?

古文：又言： 台谏诸臣，不问难易，不顾死生，专以求全责备。
现代文：又说： 台谏大臣们不管事情的难易，不顾将士的死活，专门在那里说长道短，求全责备。
English: He also said: Regardless of the difficulty of the matter, regardless of the life and death of the soldiers, the ministers of the Taiwan Straits Administration are specifically there to talk about the long and short of things and seek full blame.

古文：虽有长材，从何展布。
现代文：别人即使有再大的本事又怎么能施展出来？
English: Even if others have great ability, how can they show it?

古文：臣与督臣，有剿法无堵法，有战法无守法。 
现代文：我和总督大臣两个人只讲剿法不讲堵法，只讲怎么打不讲怎么守。 
English: The Governor-General and I are two people who only talk about how to pass the ball, not how to block it. We only talk about how to play, not how to defend.

古文：言皆切中机宜。
现代文：这些话都说中了要害。
English: These words hit the nail on the head.

古文：于是迎祥围庐州，不克，分道陷含山、和州，进围滁州。
现代文：这个时候迎祥来围攻庐州，没打下，分路打下了含山、和州，然后进围滁州。
English: At this time, Yingxiang came to besiege Bozhou, but failed to defeat it. The branch line defeated Hanzhong, Hezhou, and then encircled Bozhou.

古文：象升率总兵祖宽、游击罗岱救滁州，大战城东五里桥，斩贼首摇天动，夺其骏马。
现代文：象升率领总兵祖宽、游击罗岱解救滁州，在州城东面的五里桥展开大战，杀掉了贼首摇天动，夺取了他骑的骏马。
English: Xiang Sheng led the general soldier Zu Guang and the guerrilla fighter Luo Gan to liberate Ganzhou, and launched a great battle in the Wuli Bridge east of the state capital, killing the thief Shao Tian Diao and seizing the horse he was riding.

古文：贼连营俱溃，逐北五十里，朱龙桥至关山，积尸填沟委堑，滁水为不流。
现代文：贼兵的连营一齐败下阵来，象升把战败的贼兵赶了五十里以外。从朱龙桥到关山，贼兵的死尸填满了沟壑，滁水都因此无法流动了。
English: The bandits' company battalions were all defeated, and Xiang Sheng drove the defeated bandits fifty miles away. From Zhulong Bridge to Guanshan, the dead bodies of the bandits filled the gully, so that the water could not flow.

古文：贼乃北趋凤阳，围寿州，突颍、霍、萧、砀、灵璧、虹，窥曹、单。
现代文：贼兵这才北趋凤阳，围困寿州，闯过颍上、霍山、萧县、砀山、灵壁、虹县，窥视曹县、单县。
English: The robber soldiers then moved north to Fengyang, besieged Shoushou, broke through Jinshang, Huoshan, Xiao County, Lushan, Lingbi, Hongxian, and peeped into Cao County and Shan County.

古文：总兵刘泽清拒河，乃掠考城、仪封而西。
现代文：总兵刘泽清在黄河岸上驻防，贼兵就掳掠了考城、仪封然后西去。
English: The general Liu Zeqing stationed on the bank of the Yellow River, and the bandits plundered Khao Cheng, Ji Feng, and then went west.

古文：其犯亳者，折入归德。
现代文：有一支进犯亳州的贼兵转而打进归德。
English: There was a bandit army that invaded Zhangzhou, but turned around and returned to Germany.

古文：永宁总兵官祖大乐邀击之，贼乃北向开封。
现代文：永宁总兵官祖大乐加以拦截打击，贼兵于是北向开封。
English: Yongning general officer Zu Dalet intercepted the attack, and the bandits then moved north to Kaifeng.

古文：陈永福败之朱仙镇，贼遂走登封，与他贼合，分趋裕州、南阳。
现代文：陈永福在朱仙镇打败他们，贼兵就逃往登封跟别的贼军会合。然后分路开往裕州、南阳。
English: Chen Yongfu defeated them in Zhuxian Town, and the bandits fled to Dengfeng to join up with other bandits. They then went their separate ways to Yuzhou and Nanyang.

古文：象升合宽、大乐、岱兵大破之七顶山，歼自成精骑殆尽。
现代文：象升会合祖宽、大乐、罗岱的兵力在七顶山把贼兵打得大败，几乎把自成精锐骑兵给歼灭殆尽了。
English: Xiang Sheng rallied the forces of Zu Kuan, Dali Le and Luo Yao and defeated the bandits in the Seven Peak Mountains, almost annihilating the self-made elite cavalry.

古文：已，次南阳，令大乐备汝宁，宽备邓州，而躬率诸军蹙贼。遣使告湖广巡抚王梦尹、郧阳抚治宋祖舜曰： 贼疲矣，东西邀击，前阻汉江，可一战歼也。 
现代文：过后，象升驻兵南阳，让大乐防守汝宁，祖宽防守邓州，自己亲率各路官军进逼贼寇，同时派使者去通知巡抚王梦尹、郧阳抚治宋祖舜说： 贼兵现在已经精疲力竭，我们现在从东西两面夹击它，前面有汉江挡它的路，只要你们顶住，官军可以把它一举全歼。 
English: After that, Xiang Sheng stationed soldiers in Nanyang, let Dalek defend Yuning, Zu Kuan defend Dengzhou, and personally led the government troops to force the bandits. At the same time, he sent an envoy to inform the governor Wang Meng Yin and the governor of Shenyang, Song Zu Xi, saying: The bandits are now exhausted. We are now attacking it from both east and west. There is the Han River in front of it to block its way. As long as you resist, the government army can wipe it out.

古文：两人竟不能御，贼遂自光化潜渡汉入郧。
现代文：他们两个竟没能防好，贼兵从光化偷渡汉江进入了郧阳。
English: The two of them were unable to defend themselves, and the bandits sneaked across the Han River from Gwanghwa and entered Shenyang.

古文：象升遣总兵秦翼明、副将雷时声由南漳、谷城入山击贼。
现代文：象升派总兵秦翼明、副将雷时声从南漳、谷城出发入山击贼。
English: Xiang Sheng sent General Qin Yiming and Vice Admiral Lei Shisheng from Nanlu and Gucheng to attack the bandits.

古文：宽等骑军，不利阻隘，副将王进忠军哗，罗岱、刘肇基兵多逃，追之则弯弓内向。
现代文：祖宽等人的骑兵不利于险阻地区作战，副将王进忠的部下发生哗变，罗岱、刘肇基的很多士兵逃跑，派人去追，他们就弯弓回头射。
English: The cavalry of Zu Guang and others was not conducive to fighting in dangerous areas, the subordinates of Vice-General Wang Jinzhong mutinied, many soldiers of Luo Wei and Liu Zhaoji fled, sent someone to chase, and they shot back with a bow.

古文：象升乃调四川及筸子土兵，搜捕均州贼。
现代文：象升只好调四川及子地方的士兵来搜捕均州的贼寇。
English: Xiang Sheng had no choice but to dispatch soldiers from Sichuan and its surrounding areas to hunt down the Junzhou bandits.

古文：是时，楚、豫贼及迎祥等俱在秦、楚、蜀之交万山中，象升自南阳趋襄阳进兵。
现代文：当时，湖北、河南的贼兵及迎祥等人的贼兵都躲在陕西、湖北、四川交界地带的群山之中，象升从南阳开赴襄阳进兵作战。
English: At that time, the bandits of Hubei and Henan and the bandits of Yingxiang and others were hiding in the mountains at the junction of Shaanxi, Hubei and Sichuan. Xiang Sheng went from Nanyang to Xiangyang to fight.

古文：贼多兵少，而河南大饥，饷乏，边兵益汹汹。
现代文：当时贼兵多官兵少，河南又大闹饥荒，官兵缺饷，边防部队更加人心惶惶。
English: At that time, there were more robber soldiers than officers and soldiers, Henan was suffering from famine, officers and soldiers were short of food, and the border troops were even more panicked.

古文：承畴、象升议，关中平旷，利骑兵，以宽、重镇军入陕，而襄阳、均、宜、谷、上津、南漳，环山皆贼。
现代文：承畴、象升合计后认为关中地势平坦广阔，利于骑兵，就让祖宽、重镇的部队开入陕西。而襄阳、均州、宜城、谷城、上津、南漳一带满山都是贼兵。
English: After taking into account the terrain of Guanzhong, which was considered to be flat and expansive and favorable to cavalry, Zou Kuan and the troops from Chongzhen were allowed to enter Shaanxi. However, the mountains around Yangyang, Junzhou, Yicheng, Guicheng, Shangjin and Nanlu were full of robber soldiers.

古文：七月，象升渡淅河而南。九月，追贼至郧西。
现代文：七月，象升渡过淅河南下，九月追击贼兵到达郧阳西部地区。
English: In July, Xiang Sheng crossed the Min River to the south, and in September, he pursued the bandits to the western region of Poyang.

古文：京师戒严，有诏入卫，再赐尚方剑。
现代文：京师戒严后，朝廷传诏书要他去入卫京师，庄烈帝又一次赐给他尚方宝剑。
English: After the martial law of the Beijing Division, the imperial edict of the imperial court asked him to enter the Beijing Division, and Emperor Zhuang gave him the Shangfang Sword again.

古文：既行，贼遂大逞，骎骁乎不可复制矣。
现代文：自象升离开后，贼兵就大肆逞凶，迅猛发展，无法再加以制服了。
English: After the departure of Xiang Sheng, the bandits became more aggressive and developed rapidly, and could no longer be subdued.

古文：既解严，诏迁兵部左侍郎，总督宣、大、山西军务。
现代文：京师解严以后，朝廷传诏书提拔象升为兵部左侍郎，让他去总督宣府、大同、山西的军事。
English: After the Beijing division was relieved of strictness, the imperial edict promoted Zong Sheng to the left attendant of the military department, and let him go to the military governor of Xuanfu, Datong and Shanxi.

古文：大兴屯政，谷熟，亩一钟，积粟二十余万。
现代文：象升在那里大兴屯田，谷熟以后，每亩收成一钟，储存了二十多万石谷米。
English: After the valley ripened, each mu was harvested for one hour, and more than 200,000 koku of valley rice was stored.

古文：天子谕九边皆式宣、大。
现代文：庄烈帝为此发布指示要九边各地都学习宣府、大同。
English: To this end, Emperor Zhuo issued an instruction that all regions of the nine sides should learn from Xuanfu and Datong.

古文：明年春，闻宣警，即夜驰至天城。矢檄旁午，言二百里外乞炭马蹄阔踏四十里。
现代文：第二年春天，象升听说宣府的战警，当夜骑马赶到天城，各地的檄文不断用箭射来，说二百里以外乞炭的骑兵横排四十里大举而来。
English: In the spring of the following year, Xiang Sheng heard that the military police of Xuanfu had arrived at Tiancheng on horseback that night. People from all over the country kept coming with arrows, saying that the cavalrymen who were begging for charcoal two hundred miles away had come forty miles in a row.

古文：象升曰： 此大举也。 
现代文：象升说 ：这是大举来犯呀。 
English: Xiang Sheng said, "This is a large-scale crime."

古文：问： 入口乎？ 
现代文：又问道 ：进入隘口了吗？ 
English: He also asked: Have you entered the pass?

古文：曰： 未。 
现代文：探马回答说 ：还没有。 
English: The explorer replied: Not yet.

古文：象升曰： 殆欲右窥云、晋，令我兵集宣，则彼乘虚入耳。 
现代文：象升说 ：大概是想东犯云阳、晋阳，让我们的军队聚集到宣府来后，他好乘虚直入。 
English: Xiang Sheng said, "He probably wanted to invade Yunyang and Jinyang. After our troops were gathered in Xuanfu, he took advantage of the situation to enter directly.

古文：因檄云、晋兵勿动，自率师次右卫，戒边吏毋轻言战。
现代文：于是传令云阳、晋阳的部队按兵不动，自己率领部队驻扎在右卫，告诫边防官员不要轻易叫战。
English: As a result, the troops of Yunyang and Jinyang were ordered to remain motionless, and he himself led the troops stationed in the right guard, warning the border officials not to easily call for war.

古文：持一月，象升曰： 懈矣，可击。 
现代文：在与敌人相持了一个月后，象升说： 敌人已经懈怠，可以出击了。 
English: After a month of holding out against the enemy, Xiang Sheng said, "The enemy has slacked off and is ready to attack."

古文：哨知三十六营离墙六十里，潜召云师西来，宣师东来，自督兵直子午，出羊房堡，计日鏖战。
现代文：通过侦察象升了解到三十六营敌兵离防护墙只六十里远，就暗中召云阳部队西来，宣府军队东来，自己领兵坐镇子午，从羊房堡出兵，约定时间大战。
English: Through reconnaissance, Xiang Sheng learned that the enemy soldiers of the 36th battalion were only 60 miles away from the protective wall, so he secretly called the Yunyang troops to the west and the Xuanfu army to the east, led the soldiers to the town at noon, and dispatched the soldiers from the Yangfang Fort, and agreed on the time of the war.

古文：乞炭闻之遂遁。
现代文：乞炭得知后就逃跑了。
English: When the beggar found out, he ran away.

古文：象升在阳和，乞炭不敢近边。
现代文：象升在阳和驻兵，乞炭不敢来边界骚扰。
English: Ascended in the sun and stationed soldiers, begging for charcoal dare not come to the border to harass.

古文：五月，丁外艰，疏十上，乞奔丧。
现代文：五月，象升的父亲去世，他十次上书请求回家奔丧。
English: In May, Xiang Sheng's father passed away, and he wrote to him ten times to ask him to come home for the funeral.

古文：时杨嗣昌夺情任中枢，亦起陈新甲制中，而令象升席丧候代。进兵部尚书。
现代文：当时杨嗣昌免行守丧在兵部任职，也起用陈新甲在守丧期间出仕，并命令象升在职守丧，等候别人接替，升用他为兵部尚书。
English: At that time, Yang Shichang was relieved of the duty of guarding the funeral in the military department, and Chen Xinjia was also appointed to serve during the funeral, and ordered the elephant to be promoted in the duty of guarding the funeral, waiting for others to take over, and promoted him to the military department.

古文：新甲在远，未即至。九月，大清兵入墙子岭、青口山，杀总督吴阿衡，毁正关，至营城石匣，驻于牛兰。
现代文：九月，大清部队进入墙子岭、青口山，杀掉了总督吴阿衡，捣毁了山海关正门，直至在石匣修筑了城墙，把部队驻扎到牛兰来。
English: In September, the Great Qing troops entered Wanziling and Qingkou Mountain, killed the governor Wu Aheng, destroyed the main gate of the Shanhaiguan Customs, until they built the city wall in Shijiazhuang and stationed the troops in Niu Lan.

古文：召宣、大、山西三总兵杨国柱、王朴、虎大威入卫，三赐象升尚方剑，督天下援兵。
现代文：庄烈帝召宣府、大同、山西的三个总兵杨国柱、王朴、虎大威入卫京师，第三次赐予象升尚方宝剑，让他指挥全国各地来增援的部队。
English: Emperor Zhuge Liang summoned three generals from Xuanfu, Datong, and Shanxi, Yang Guozhu, Wang Pak, and Hu Dawei, to enter the Beijing Division. For the third time, he gave Xiang Sheng Shangfang the sword and let him command the reinforcement troops from all over the country.

古文：象升麻衣草履，誓师及郊，驰疏报曰： 臣非军旅才。愚心任事，谊不避难。
现代文：象升披麻戴孝，脚穿草鞋，誓师后来到京城郊区，飞章向朝廷报告说： 我并不是用兵之才，过去凭着一颗愚鲁的心，担任了些职事，按理不应该回避艰难，但是自从我父亲病逝以后，我在长长的征途上伤心过度，五脏坏乱，不像从前那样了。
English: Xiang Sheng was dressed in filial piety, his feet in straw sandals, and he later went to the suburbs of Beijing to take the oath. Feizhang reported to the imperial court: I am not a soldier. In the past, with a foolish heart, I held some positions. By rights, I should not avoid hardships. But since my father died of illness, I have been too sad on the long journey, and my internal organs have deteriorated. It is not like before.

古文：但自臣父奄逝，长途惨伤，溃乱五官，非复昔时；兼以草土之身踞三军上，岂惟观瞻不耸，尤虞金鼓不灵。 已闻总监中官高起潜亦衰绖临戎，象升谓所亲曰： 吾三人皆不祥之身也。
现代文：加上以不体面的打扮位居三军之上，不仅看起来没有威信，我尤其还担心号令不灵，难于取胜。 后来听说总监宦官高起潜也即将身穿孝服来指挥军事，象升对自己的亲随说： 我们三个人现在都是不祥之身。
English: In addition to being above the three armies with an unseemly dress, not only does it look like there is no prestige, I am especially worried that the command is not effective, and it is difficult to win. Later, I heard that the director general, the eunuch Gao Qiqian, was also about to wear the filial piety to command the military, and Xiang Sheng said to his relatives: We three are now ominous.

古文：人臣无亲，安有君。
现代文：人臣不管自己的父母，心中哪还有什么天子？
English: Regardless of one's parents, what kind of heavenly son is there in the heart of a vassal?

古文：枢辅夺情，亦欲予变礼以分愆耶？
现代文：阁部大臣杨嗣昌自己不守丧，也想让我放弃礼制跟着他受话吗？
English: Cabinet Minister Yang Shichang himself did not attend the funeral, and he wants me to give up the etiquette and follow his lead?

古文：处心若此，安可与事君。
现代文：一个人居心如此，怎么能跟他一块服侍皇上呢？
English: If someone has such a heart, how can he serve the emperor together with him?

古文：他日必面责之。 
现代文：以后我一定要当面数落数落他。 
English: From now on, I'll be sure to count him out in person.

古文：当是时，嗣昌、起潜主和议。
现代文：这个时候，嗣昌、起潜主张和议。
English: At this time, Tsuchimasa and Tsukimi advocated and discussed.

古文：象升闻之，顿足叹曰： 予受国恩，恨不得死所，有如万分一不幸，宁捐躯断脰耳。 
现代文：象升得知后，跺着脚感慨说： 我蒙受国家的大恩，只是恨这下要死而不得其所了，假如这一回有万分之一的不幸，我宁愿捐躯断头，以身殉国。 
English: After learning of this, Xiang Sheng stomped his feet and said with emotion: "I have received a great favor from the country, but I hate that I have to die and have no place to go. If there is one misfortune out of ten thousand this time, I would rather be beheaded and die for the country."

古文：及都，帝召对，问方略。
现代文：他到都城后，庄烈帝召见他，向他询问方略。
English: After he arrived in the capital, Emperor Zhuangde summoned him and asked him about his strategy.

古文：对曰： 臣主战。 
现代文：象升回答说： 我主张开战。 
English: Xiang Sheng replied: I am in favour of going to war.

古文：帝色变，良久曰： 抚乃外廷议耳，其出与嗣昌、起潜议。 
现代文：庄烈帝脸色变了，好久才说 ：安抚他们只是朝臣们的意见，希望你出去和嗣昌、起潜再商量商量！ 
English: Zhuge Liang's face changed, and it was a long time before he said: appeasing them is just the opinion of the courtiers, I hope you go out and discuss it with Tsuchang and the submarine!

古文：出与议，不合。
现代文：象升出去跟他们俩讨论，意见不一致。
English: Xiang Sheng went out to discuss with the two of them, and they disagreed.

古文：明日，帝发万金犒军，嗣昌送之，屏左右，戒毋浪战，遂别去。
现代文：第二天，庄烈帝发出一万两银子犒劳部队，嗣昌为象升送行时喝退左右，告诫他不要冒失地出战，象升于是分别而去。
English: The next day, Emperor Zhuang issued a reward of ten thousand taels of silver to the troops. When Zichang sent Xiang Sheng on his way, he warned him not to go to war recklessly. Xiang Sheng then left separately.

古文：师次昌平，帝复遣中官赍帑金三万犒军。
现代文：当部队驻扎在昌平时，庄烈帝又派宦官送来三万两国库银，犒劳部队。
English: When the troops were stationed in Changping, Emperor Zhuang Li sent eunuchs to bring 30,000 taels of treasury silver to reward the troops for their hard work.

古文：明日，又赐御马百，太仆马千，银铁鞭五百。
现代文：第二天又赐给一百匹御用马匹和一千匹太仆寺养的马，五百条银铁鞭。
English: The next day, he also gave one hundred horses for the imperial use and one thousand horses raised by the servants of the temple, as well as five hundred silver and iron whips.

古文：象升曰： 果然外廷议也，帝意锐甚矣。 
现代文：象升说： 和议果然是朝臣们的意见，看来皇上抗战的决心坚定得很呀。 
English: Xiang Sheng said: The conciliation was indeed the opinion of the courtiers. It seems that the emperor's determination to resist the war was very firm.

古文：决策议战，然事多为嗣昌、起潜挠。
现代文：于是下定决心考虑作战。但是很多事都受到嗣昌、起潜的阻挠。
English: Therefore, he made up his mind to consider fighting, but many things were obstructed by Shichang and Zhixing.

古文：疏请分兵，则议宣、大、山西三帅属象升，关、宁诸路属起潜。
现代文：象升上书请分编部队，朝廷就决定宣府、大同、山西三位总名的部队归象升指挥，山海关、宁远等各路部队归属于起潜。
English: When Xiang Sheng submitted a letter requesting the division of the troops, the imperial court decided that the three general-named troops of Xuanfu, Datong and Shanxi should be under the command of Xiang Sheng, and the troops of Shanhaiguan, Ningyuan and other provinces should be under the command of Xiamen.

古文：象升名督天下兵，实不及二万。次顺义。
现代文：象升名义上统率全国各地的部队，实际上领的兵不到两万人，驻扎在顺义。
English: Xiang Sheng nominally commanded the troops across the country, but in fact he led less than twenty thousand soldiers, stationed in Shunyi.

古文：先是，有瞽而卖卜者周元忠，善辽人，时遣之为媾。
现代文：在此之前有一个卖卦的瞎子名叫周元忠，跟辽东人关系好，朝廷当时派他去议和。
English: Prior to this, there was a blind man named Zhou Yuanzhong, who sold Chinese riddles. He had a good relationship with the Liaodong people, and the imperial court sent him to negotiate peace.

古文：会嗣昌至军，象升责数之曰： 文弱，子不闻城下盟《春秋》耻之，而日为媾。
现代文：当嗣昌到军队中视察时，象升数落他说 ：文弱，你难道不知道城下与敌结盟《春秋》引以为耻辱吗？
English: When Tsuchimasa inspected the troops, he said, "Wenfei, don't you know that it's a disgrace to ally with the enemy in Spring and Autumn?"

古文：长安口舌如锋，袁崇焕之祸其能免乎？ 
现代文：干什么天天在那里议和？京城里人们的嘴巴利同刀刃，袁崇焕那样的灾祸你能躲得过去吗？ 
English: What is the point of discussing peace there every day? People's mouths in Beijing are as sharp as swords. Can you avoid a disaster like Yuan Chonghuan?

古文：嗣昌颊赤，曰： 公直以尚方剑加我矣。 
现代文：嗣昌脸红了，说： 你简直要拿尚方宝剑向我开刀了。 
English: Tsuchimasa blushed and said, "You're just about to take Shangfang's sword and cut me open."

古文：象升曰： 既不奔丧，又不能战，齿剑者我也，安能加人？ 
现代文：象升说 ：既不回家奔丧，在此又不交战，人们还在抨击我呢，我还能拿别人怎样呢？ 
English: Xiang Sheng said, "I don't go home to mourn, and I don't fight here. People are still criticizing me. What else can I do with others?"

古文：嗣昌辞遁。象升即言： 元忠讲款，往来非一日，事始于蓟门督监，受成于本兵，通国闻之，谁可讳也？ 
现代文：嗣昌借口想溜，象升便说道 ：元忠过去讲和已不是一两天的时间了，这事由蓟门总督太监发起，由你这兵部尚书促成，举国上下都知道，能瞒住哪一个呢？ 
English: Tsuchimasa wanted to escape on some pretext, but Xiang Sheng said, "It's been more than a day or two since Yuan Zhong declared peace. This matter was initiated by the eunuch, the governor of Qimen, and facilitated by you, the secretary of the military department. The whole country knows about it. Which one can you hide?

古文：嗣昌语塞而去。
现代文：嗣昌无法辩解，离开了。
English: Unable to defend himself, Tsuchimasa left.

古文：又数日，会起潜安定门，两人各持一议。
现代文：又过几天象升在安定门碰到起潜，两人各持一议。
English: A few days later, they met at the stable gate, and the two of them had a discussion.

古文：新甲亦至昌平，象升分兵与之。
现代文：后来新甲也到了昌平，象升分出部分兵力给了他。
English: Later, Xin Jia also came to Changping, and he was given part of the troops from Xiang Shibuan.

古文：当是时，象升自将马步军列营都城之外，冲锋陷阵，军律甚整。
现代文：这个时候，象升亲自率领骑、步兵在京城外边扎营，冲锋陷阵，军纪很严整。
English: At this time, Xiang Sheng personally led the cavalry and infantry to camp on the outskirts of the capital, stormed the front, and military discipline was very strict.

古文：大清兵南下，三路出师：一由涞水攻易，一由新城攻雄，一由定兴攻安肃。
现代文：大清部队南下，分兵三路：一路经涞水攻易州，一路经新城攻雄县，一路经定兴攻打安肃。
English: The Great Qing troops went south, and the detachment of troops went three ways: one way through Surabaya to attack Yizhou, one way through Xincheng to attack Xiongxian, and one way through Dingxing to attack Ansu.

古文：象升遂由涿进据保定，命诸将分道出击，大战于庆都。
现代文：象升便经过涿州进据保定，命令诸将分路出击，在庆都展开大战。
English: Xiang Sheng then went through Zhangzhou to Baoding, and ordered the generals to attack in separate routes to launch a large-scale battle in Qingdu.

古文：编修杨廷麟上疏言： 南仲在内，李纲无功；潜善秉成，宗泽殒恨。
现代文：编修杨廷麟上书说 ：过去南仲在朝廷，李纲不能取得战功；潜善掌大权，宗泽含恨而死。
English: Editor Yang Tinglin wrote: In the past, Nanzhong was in the imperial court, Li Gang could not gain military merit; Kuken Son took power, and Soze died of hatred.

古文：国有若人，非封疆福。 
现代文：国家有那样的人决不是封疆大吏的福气。 
English: It is by no means a blessing for a country to have such a person as a high-ranking official in a fiefdom.

古文：嗣昌大怒，改廷麟兵部主事，赞画行营，夺象升尚书，侍郎视事。
现代文：嗣昌大怒，把廷麟改官兵部主事，派他到象升的军队中当参谋，免去了象升尚书的官衔，让他以侍郎的身份管理军事。
English: Tsuguchang was furious and changed Tinglin to the head of the military department, sent him to serve as a staff officer in Xiang Sheng's army, removed Xiang Sheng's title of Shangshu, and let him manage the military as a waiter.

古文：命大学士刘宇亮辅臣督师，巡抚张其平闭闉绝饷。
现代文：又命令大学士刘宇亮以辅臣的身份来指挥军队，让巡抚张其平紧闭城门，断绝了运饷的道路。
English: He also ordered Liu Yuliang, a university scholar, to command the army as an assistant minister, and ordered the governor Zhang Qiping to close the city gate tightly, thus cutting off the road of the imperial exodus.

古文：俄又以云、晋警，趣出关，王朴径引兵去。
现代文：不久又借口云阳、晋阳有战警，催象升统兵出关作战，王朴恼了，只管领兵回去了。
English: Soon, under the pretext that there were military police in Yunyang and Jinyang, they ordered the soldiers to go out to fight. Wang Pu was annoyed and just led the soldiers back.

古文：象升提残卒，次宿三宫野外。
现代文：象升统领剩下的弱卒，驻扎在京师野外。
English: Xiang Sheng led the remaining weak soldiers and stationed them outside the capital.

古文：畿南三郡父老闻之，咸叩军门请曰： 天下汹汹且十年，明公出万死不顾一生之计为天下先。乃奸臣在内，孤忠见嫉。
现代文：畿南三府的父老听说后都来军门前拜访，说： 天下汹汹快十年了，先生抱着出万死不顾一生的思想为天下人充当榜样，可是奸臣在内，先生因为孤忠受到嫉恨。
English: After hearing of this, the elders of the three provinces in the south of Gyeongsangnam-do came to pay a visit in front of the gate of the army and said, "The world has been in turmoil for the past ten years, and you have been a role model for the people of the world by holding the thought of never giving up, no matter what. However, even among the traitors, you have been envied for your loyalty.

古文：三军捧出关之檄，将士怀西归之心，栖迟绝野，一饱无时。脱巾狂噪，云帅其见告矣。
现代文：三军接到了出关作战的命令，将士们却有西归的想法，军队就这样驻扎在荒郊野外，吃顿饱饭都不能够，所以甩手不干，哗变而去，云阳总兵已经做出了样子。
English: The three armies received the order to go out to fight, but the soldiers had the idea of returning to the west. The army was stationed in the wilderness, unable to eat a full meal, so they gave up and mutinied away. The Yunyang soldiers had already made their appearance.

古文：明公诚从愚计，移军广顺，召集义师。
现代文：先生如果肯听从我们的主意，就移兵驻到广顺去，召集义师。
English: If he is willing to listen to our idea, he will move his troops to Guangshun and call for volunteers.

古文：三郡子弟喜公之来，皆以昔非公死贼，今非公死兵，同心戮力，一呼而裹粮从者可十万，孰与只臂无援，立而就死哉！ 
现代文：三府子弟欢迎先生来领导，大家认为过去要不是先生您我们就死在贼兵手里了，现在你不来又要死于兵乱，所以能同心合力，您只要一号召，愿意裹粮相随的人可以有十万，总比您孤立无援，站着等死好吧！ 
English: The children of Sanfu welcome you, sir, as their leader. Everyone thinks that in the past, if it wasn't for you, sir, we would have died at the hands of the bandits. Now, if you don't come, we will die in the turmoil. Therefore, we can work together. You only need to make one call, and there can be 100,000 people who are willing to follow you, which is better than you being alone and helpless. Stand and wait to die!

古文：象升泫然流涕而谓父老曰： 感父老义。
现代文：象升双眼垂泪对父老们说 ：感谢诸位父老的好心！
English: With tears in his eyes, Xiang Sheng said to his parents: "Thank you, parents, for your kindness!

古文：虽然，自予与贼角，经数十百战未尝衄。
现代文：虽然这样，但自从我跟贼兵争战以来，历经数十百次战斗都没有败过。
English: In spite of this, I have not been defeated in tens of hundreds of battles since I fought against the bandits.

古文：今者，分疲卒五千，大敌西冲，援师东隔，事由中制，食尽力穷，旦夕死矣，无徒累尔父老为也。 
现代文：如今朝廷只给我五千名疲惫不堪的士兵，大敌西冲，援师东隔，凡事都由中央牵制着，粮食吃完了，力气使干了，旦夕之间就要死了，不要再白白连累你们父老乡亲了吧！ 
English: Now the imperial court has only given me five thousand exhausted soldiers. The great enemy is rushing to the west, and the supporting division is moving to the east. Everything is controlled by the central government. The grain has been eaten, the strength has dried up, and you will die between dusk and dawn. Don't bother your fellow countrymen and women in vain anymore!

古文：众号泣雷动，各携床头斗粟饷军，或贻枣一升，曰： 公煮为粮。 
现代文：大家的哭泣声响成了一片，各自拿来自家床头仅有的斗把米给军队食用，有的只有那么一升枣也拿来送给象升说 ：先生煮了当军粮吃吧！ 
English: The sound of everyone's weeping became one. Each of them took the only bucket of rice at their bedside from home to feed the army, and some also brought only one liter of jujube to give to Xiang Sheng and said: "Sir, cook it and eat it as military food!"

古文：十二月十一日，进师至钜鹿贾庄。
现代文：十二月十一日，象升进兵到了巨鹿的贾庄。
English: On December 11th, Xiang Sheng marched into Jiazhuang of the Giant Deer.

古文：起潜拥关、宁兵在鸡泽，距贾庄五十里而近，象升遣廷麟往乞援，不应。
现代文：当时起潜率领山海关、宁远的部队在鸡泽安扎，离贾庄只五十里这么近，象升派廷麟前往求援，起潜不接应。
English: At that time, the submarine led the Shanhaiguan Customs and Ningyuan troops in Jizhe Anza, only 50 miles away from Jiazhuang. Xiang Sheng sent Tinglin to ask for help, but the submarine did not respond.

古文：师至蒿水桥，遇大清兵。象升将中军，大威帅左，国柱帅右遂战。
现代文：象升的军队开到蒿水桥时遇上了大清部队，象升带领中路部队，大威率左路，国柱率右路，双方展开了激战。
English: When Xiang Sheng's army drove to Surabaya Bridge, they encountered the Qing Dynasty troops. Xiang Sheng led the middle army, Dawei led the left army, Guozhu led the right army, and the two sides fought a fierce battle.

古文：夜半，觱篥声四起。旦日，骑数万环之三匝。
现代文：当时是夜半时分，篥声四面吹响，天明时，大清部队几万骑兵里里外外把他们围了三重。
English: At that time, it was the middle of the night, and the sound of gongs was heard on all sides. At dawn, the Qing forces surrounded them three times with tens of thousands of cavalry.

古文：象升麾兵疾战，呼声动天，自辰迄未，炮尽矢穷。
现代文：象升指挥部队穷攻猛打，呼声动天，从清晨一直打到午后，炮药完了，箭也没了。
English: Xiang Sheng's commanding troops fought fiercely and desperately, their shouts moved heaven and earth. They fought from the early morning until the afternoon. The ammunition was exhausted and the arrows were gone.

古文：奋身斗，后骑皆进，手击杀数十人，身中四矢三刃，遂仆。
现代文：象升挺身而出进行短搏，后边的骑兵也都跟了上来，他亲手杀死了几十个人，身上中了四箭，挨了三刀，于是倒下去了。
English: He killed dozens of people with his own hands. He was hit by four arrows and three swords and fell to the ground.

古文：掌牧杨陆凯惧众之残其尸而伏其上，背负二十四矢以死。仆顾显者殉，一军尽覆。
现代文：掌牧杨陆凯怕敌人乱砍他的尸体，就自己盖在上边，背上挨了二十四支箭死掉了，象升的仆人顾显自杀，整个部队都覆灭了。
English: Yang Lukai, the herdsman, was afraid that the enemy would cut up his body indiscriminately, so he covered himself up, received twenty-four arrows on his back and died. Gu Xian, the servant of Xiangsheng, committed suicide, and the entire army was destroyed.

古文：大威、国柱溃围乃得脱。
现代文：大威、国柱冲破包围圈才得以活命。
English: Dawei and Guozhu broke through the encirclement to survive.

古文：起潜闻败，仓皇遁，不言象升死状。嗣昌疑之，有诏验视。
现代文：起潜听到象升战败的消息后仓惶逃跑，不向朝廷讲象升阵亡情况，嗣昌认为象升的死可疑，庄烈帝就颁布诏令要人验明。
English: After hearing the news of Xiang Sheng's defeat, he ran away in a panic and did not tell the court about Xiang Sheng's death. Tsuchang thought that Xiang Sheng's death was suspicious, and Emperor Zhuo issued a decree to investigate.

古文：廷麟得其尸战场，麻衣白网巾。
现代文：廷麟在战场上找到象升的尸体，还穿麻布孝服，戴着白网巾。
English: Tinglin found Xiang Sheng's corpse on the battlefield, still wearing the linen filial piety clothes and a white net scarf.

古文：一卒遥见，即号泣曰： 此吾卢公也。 
现代文：一个士兵远远望见就号啕大哭地说 ：这是我们卢先生呀！ 
English: A soldier in the distance wailed, "This is our Mr. Lu!"

古文：三郡之民闻之，哭失声。
现代文：畿南三府的百姓听说后莫不失声痛哭。
English: The people of the three prefectures in the southern part of Gyeongnam heard about this and wept bitterly.

古文：顺德知府于颍上状，嗣昌故靳之，八十日而后殓。
现代文：顺德知府于颖向上汇报了这个情况，嗣昌故意吝啬，八十天后象升才被入殓。
English: Shunde prefectural governor Yu Ying reported the situation to his superiors. Tsuchimasa was deliberately stingy, and it was eighty days before Xiang Sheng was taken into custody.

古文：明年，象升妻王请恤。又明年，其弟象晋、象观又请，不许。
现代文：第二年，象升的妻子王氏请求给予抚恤，第三年象升的弟弟象晋、象观又一次申请，朝廷都不答应。
English: In the second year, Xiang Sheng's wife Wang Moru requested a pension, and in the third year, Xiang Sheng's younger brothers Xiang Jin and Xiang Gu once again applied, but the court did not agree.

古文：久之，嗣昌败，廷臣多为言者，乃赠太子少师、兵部尚书，赐祭葬，世荫锦衣千户。
现代文：很久以后嗣昌败亡，廷臣中有很多人对此讲了话，朝廷才追赠象升为太子少师、兵部尚书，赐予公祭、公葬，荫封子孙为世袭锦衣千户。
English: After a long time, Shichang was defeated and killed, and many courtiers in the court spoke about it. The imperial court only posthumously promoted Zhao to the rank of young prince, granted him the title of military commander, gave him a public festival and a public funeral, and made his children and grandchildren the hereditary brocade of a thousand households.

古文：福王时，追谥忠烈，建祠奉祀。
现代文：福王在位时又给他追加谥号为 忠烈 ，修建祠堂予以祭祀。
English: When King Fu was on the throne, he was given the additional title of "Faithful," and an ancestral hall was built to be dedicated to him.

古文：象升少有大志，为学不事章句。
现代文：象升从小有大志，做学问不讲求章句。
English: Xiang Sheng has had a great ambition since childhood, and does not ask for a chapter or a sentence when doing his studies.

古文：居官勤劳倍下吏，夜刻烛，鸡鸣盥栉，得一机要，披衣起，立行之。
现代文：他做官比手下人勤一倍，夜间点烛工作，鸡一叫就起床洗梳，准备办事。每想到一件紧要事，就披衣而起，马上去干。
English: He was twice as diligent as his subordinates. He worked by candlelight at night. As soon as the rooster crowed, he would get up, wash and comb his hair, and get ready for work. Whenever he thought of something important, he would get dressed and immediately go to work.

古文：象升上疏救，不得，弘文卒遣戍。
现代文：有闲暇就跟人比试射箭，用箭对着花射。五十步之外，每发必中。
English: If you have leisure, you can try archery with others and shoot arrows at flowers. If you are fifty paces away, you must hit every shot.

古文：天下由是惜弘文而多象升。
现代文：他爱才惜下惟恐不周到，三次得到赐他的尚方宝剑，他都未曾斩过一个偏裨将官。
English: He loves to spare but fears to be inconsiderate. He has been given the Shangfang Sword three times, but he has never killed a general.

古文：象升好畜骏马，皆有名字。
现代文：象升喜欢养骏马，每匹马都取有名字。
English: Xiang Sheng likes to keep horses. Each horse has its own name.

古文：尝逐贼南漳，败，追兵至沙河，水阔数丈，一跃而过，即所号五明骥也。
现代文：有一次他在南漳追逐贼兵时战败，追兵赶他到了沙河边上，河水有几丈宽，他的马一跃而过，这匹马就是名叫五明骥的那一匹。
English: Once, when he was chasing the bandits in Nanlu, he was defeated. The pursuing soldiers drove him to the edge of the Sand River. The river was several feet wide, and his horse jumped over it. This horse was the one named Wu Mingyao.

古文：方象升之战殁也，嗣昌遣三逻卒察其死状。
现代文：当象升战死后，嗣昌派了三名探马去察看他的死状。
English: When Xiang Sheng died after the battle, Zichang sent three scouts to investigate his death.

古文：其一人俞振龙者，归言象升实死。
现代文：其中有一个叫俞振龙的回来说象升真的死了。
English: One of them, Zou Zhenlong, came back to say that Xiang Sheng was really dead.

古文：嗣昌怒，鞭之三日夜，且死，张目曰： 天道神明，无枉忠臣。 
现代文：嗣昌很恼火，把振龙抽了三天三夜的鞭子，振龙临死睁开眼睛喊道： 天道神明，可不要冤枉忠臣呢！ 
English: Tsuchimasa was very angry and whipped Zhenlong for three days and three nights. When Zhenlong was about to die, he opened his eyes and shouted, "God of heaven, don't do injustice to your loyal subject!"

古文：于是天下闻之，莫不欷歔，益恚嗣昌矣。
现代文：由此，天下人听说以后无不叹气连声，更加恼恨嗣昌了。
English: As a result, people all over the world heard that there would be sighs and groans, and they were even more angry with Tsuchimasa.

古文：其后南都亡，象观赴水死，象晋为僧，一门先后赴难者百余人。
现代文：后来南京灭亡时，象观投水而死，象晋当了和尚，他们一家先后赴难的有一百多人。
English: Later, when Nanjing was destroyed, Xiang Guan was drowned and died, Xiang Jin became a monk, and more than a hundred members of their family went to the disaster.

古文：从弟象同及其部将陈安死尤烈。
现代文：堂弟象同及其部将陈安死得尤为壮烈。
English: The death of his cousin Xiang Tong and his subordinate, Chen An, was particularly violent.

古文：象升死时，年三十九。
现代文：象升死的时候，年仅三十九岁。
English: Xiang Sheng was only 39 years old when he died.

