古文：王骥徐有贞杨善王越
现代文：王骥，字尚德，束鹿人。
English: Wang Yao, the character of Sun De, the character of Shu Degu.

古文：王骥，字尚德，束鹿人。长身伟干，便骑射，刚毅有胆，晓畅戎略。
现代文：他身材修长，躯干伟岸，擅长骑马射箭，为人刚毅有胆量，通晓军事谋略。
English: He was tall and slender, with a great torso. He was good at riding and archery. He was courageous and knew military strategy.

古文：中永乐四年进士。
现代文：考中永乐四年进士。
English: Yongle was promoted to a scholar in his fourth year of middle school.

古文：为兵科给事中，使山西，奏免盐池逋课二十余万，寻迁山西按察司副使。
现代文：任兵科给事中。王骥出使山西，上奏免除盐池拖欠的赋税二十余万，不久晋升为山西按察司副使。
English: While he was in charge of military affairs, Wang Hui sent an envoy to Shanxi, and presented a petition to waive the tax arrears of more than 200,000 yuan in Yanchi. He was soon promoted to deputy envoy of the Shanxi Investigation Department.

古文：洪熙元年入为顺天府尹。
现代文：洪熙元年，八京任顺天府尹。
English: In the first year of Hongxi, he was appointed to Shun Tianfu Yin in Beijing.

古文：宣德初，擢兵部右侍郎，代顾佐署都察院。
现代文：宣德初年，升任兵部右侍郎，代替顾佐代理都察院。
English: In the first year of Xuande, he was promoted to the position of the right attendant of the military department, replacing Gu Sa as the deputy of the Duza Academy.

古文：久之，署兵部尚书。
现代文：很久以后，代理兵部尚书。
English: A long time later, the acting military commander was still writing.

古文：九年命为真。
现代文：九年被任命焉正式官。
English: He was appointed to the post nine years ago.

古文：正统元年奉诏议边事，越五日未奏。
现代文：正统元年奉诏讨论边防事务，过了五天还没有上奏。
English: In the first year of orthodoxy, the border affairs were discussed by imperial edict. Five days later, there has been no report.

古文：帝怒，执骥与侍郎邝埜下之狱。
现代文：皇帝大怒，拘捕王骥和侍郎墉茎，把他们关进狱中。
English: The emperor was so angry that he arrested Wang Yao and his attendant Yan Zhuo and put them in prison.

古文：寻得释。
现代文：不久得到释放。
English: He was soon released.

古文：阿台、朵儿只伯数寇甘、凉，边将屡失利。
现代文：阿台、朵儿只伯数次侵犯甘、凉，边将屡次失利。
English: Atai and Dole Kubo repeatedly encroached on Gan and Liang, and the generals repeatedly lost.

古文：侍郎柴车、徐晞，都御史曹翼相继经理边务，未能制。
现代文：侍郎柴车、徐晞，都御史曹翼相继经营边防事务，不能控制局势。
English: Chamberlains Chai Che and Xu Rong, and the governor of the capital, Cao Ying, successively managed the border affairs, but were unable to control the situation.

古文：二年五月命骥往，许便宜行事。
现代文：正统二年五月命王骥前去，允许他相机行事。
English: In May of the second year of orthodoxy, Wang Yao went forward and allowed his camera to act.

古文：骥疾驱至军，大会诸将，问 往时追敌鱼儿海子，先退败军者谁 。
现代文：王骥快速驱驰到军中，大会众将，询问先前追击敌人鱼儿海子，首先退却使军队失败的人是谁。
English: Wang Yao quickly drove to the army and asked the generals who had previously chased the enemy and who was the first to retreat and defeat the army.

古文：佥曰 都指挥安敬 。
现代文：众将都说是 都指挥安敬 。
English: The generals all said that they were under the command of AnQi.

古文：骥先承密旨戮敬，遂缚敬斩辕门，并宣敕责都督蒋贵。
现代文：王骥事先接到处决安敬的密旨，于是把他捆绑起来在辕门斩首，并宣布敕令斥责都督蒋贵。
English: Wang Yao had received the secret order to execute Anqing in advance, so he tied him up and beheaded him at the imperial gate, and announced the imperial order to reprimand the governor Jiang Gui.

古文：诸将皆股慄。
现代文：众将都吓得大腿发抖。
English: The generals trembled in fear.

古文：骥乃大阅将士，分兵画地，使各自防御，边境肃然。
现代文：王骥于是大规模检阅将士，分派兵力，划分地域，命令他们各自防御，边境得到安定。
English: As a result, Wang Yao conducted a large-scale review of soldiers, assigned troops, divided regions, ordered them to defend themselves, and the border was stabilized.

古文：阅军甘、凉，汰三之一。
现代文：王骥在甘、凉检阅军队，淘汰了三分之一。
English: Wang Hui reviewed the troops in Gan and Liangshan, eliminating one-third.

古文：定更番法，兵得休息而转输亦省。
现代文：制定轮番更替的制度，军队得到了休息，而运输也碱省了。
English: With the establishment of a system of rotation, the army got a rest, and transportation was also saved.

古文：俄阿台复入寇。
现代文：不久阿台再次入侵。
English: Not long after, the Atai invaded again.

古文：帝以任礼为平羌将军，蒋贵、赵安为副，骥督军。
现代文：皇上任命任礼为平羌将军，蒋贵、赵安焉副将军，王骥督军。
English: The emperor appointed Renli as the general of Pingyao, Jiang Gui and Zhao Anyan as the deputy generals, and Wang Bing as the commander of the army.

古文：三年春，偕诸将出塞，以贵为前锋，而自与任礼帅大军后继，与贵约曰： 不捷，无相见也。 
现代文：正统三年春，至壁卒秉将出军边塞，任命蒋贵为先锋，自己和任礼统率大军后继，和蒋贵约定说： 不取胜，就不再相见了。 
English: In the spring of the third year of the Zhengtong era, Zhi Qibing sent troops to the frontier fortress and appointed Jiang Gui as the vanguard. He and Ren Li led the army successively, and agreed with Jiang Gui: If we do not win, we will no longer see each other.

古文：贵击敌石城，敌走兀鲁乃。
现代文：蒋贵在石城攻击敌人，敌人逃向兀鲁乃。
English: Chiang Kai-shek attacked the enemy in Shicheng, and the enemy fled to Yalunai.

古文：贵帅轻骑二千五百人出镇夷，间道兼行，三日夜及之。
现代文：蒋贵率轻骑二千五百人从镇夷出发，取小道昼夜兼行，三天三夜追上了敌人。
English: Jiang Gui led 2,500 people on horseback from Zhenyi, taking the trail day and night, and caught up with the enemy for three days and three nights.

古文：擒左丞脱罗，斩首三百余，获金银印各一，驼马兵甲千计。
现代文：擒获左丞脱罗，杀敌三百多，缴获金印银印各一枚，骆驼马匹武器镗甲敷以千计。
English: He captured Zuo Rong, killed more than 300 enemies, captured one gold seal and one silver seal each, and thousands of camels and horses and armor.

古文：骥与礼自梧桐林至亦集乃，擒枢密、同知、佥院十五人，万户二人。降其部落，穷进至黑泉。
现代文：王骥和任礼从梧桐林到亦集乃，擒获枢密、同知、余院共十五人，万户二人，降服其部落，穷追到黑泉。
English: Wang Qian and Renli went from the sycamore grove to Yizhimen, and captured a total of fifteen people, including two million households, including privy councilors, confidants, and courtiers. They subjugated their tribe and chased them to Heiquan.

古文：而赵安等出昌宁，至刁力沟，亦擒右丞、达鲁花赤三十人。
现代文：趟安等人从昌宁出发，到刁力沟，也擒获右丞、达鲁花赤三十人。
English: Watan'an and others set out from Changning and went to Huligou. They also captured Ujo and Darukaakko, thirty people.

古文：分道夹击，转战千余里，朵儿只伯远遁。
现代文：王骥等分兵几路夹击敌人，转战一千多里，朵儿只伯速逃。
English: Wang Yao and other soldiers clamped down on the enemy several ways, turning the battle more than a thousand miles, and Dole only fled quickly.

古文：论功，贵、礼皆封伯，而骥兼大理卿，支二俸。
现代文：论功，蒋贵、任礼都封为伯爵，而王骥兼任大理卿，领取两项俸禄。
English: On the basis of merit, Jiang Gui and Ren Li were both named as Counts, while Wang Xi was also appointed as Daliqing and received two salaries.

古文：寻召还，理部事。
现代文：不久被召回京，管理本部事务。
English: He was soon recalled to Kyoto to manage the affairs of the headquarters.

古文：久之，麓川之役起。
现代文：很久以后，麓川事件发生。
English: A long time later, the Luchuan Incident occurred.

古文：麓川宣慰使思任发叛，数败王师。
现代文：麓川宣慰使思任发叛乱，数次打败朝廷的军队。
English: Luchuan Xuan's consolation caused Shiren to rebel and defeat the imperial army several times.

古文：黔国公沐晟讨之，不利，道卒。以沐昂代。
现代文：黔国公沐晟征讨他，没有成功，在半路上死去，以沐昂代替。
English: King Muang of the State of Lu did not succeed in recruiting him. He died on the way and was replaced by Muang.

古文：昂条上攻取策，征兵十二万人。
现代文：沐昂向皇上分条陈述攻取的对策，征兵十二万人。
English: Muang presented to the emperor the countermeasures for the attack, conscripting 120,000 soldiers.

古文：中官王振方用事，喜功名，以骥可属，思大举。骥亦欲自效。
现代文：宦官王振正当权，喜欢功名，认为王骥可担重任，想大举出兵王骥也想效力。
English: The eunuch Wang Zhen is entitled to legitimacy, likes fame, thinks that Wang Zhen can shoulder heavy responsibilities, and wants to play a big role in the military.

古文：六年正月遂拜蒋贵平蛮将军，李安、刘聚为副，而骥总督军务，大发东南诸道兵十五万讨之。
现代文：六年正月，就授予蒋贵平蛮将军，李安、刘聚为副将，王骥总督军务，大规模调发东南各路兵十五万人征讨。
English: In the first month of the sixth year, Jiang Guiping was promoted to general, Li An and Liu Ju were promoted to vice generals, and Wang Qi was appointed as the military governor, and a large-scale transfer of 150,000 soldiers from the southeast was carried out.

古文：刑部侍郎何文渊、侍讲刘球先后疏谏，不纳。
现代文：刑部侍郎何文渊、侍讲刘球先后上疏谏止，不被采纳。
English: He Wenyuan, the attendant of the Department of Criminal Law, and Liu Qiu, the attendant of the Department of Criminal Law, were not accepted.

古文：濒行，赐骥、贵金兜鍪、细铠、蟒绣绯衣、朱弓矢。
现代文：临出发，皇上赐给王骥、蒋贵金头盔、精细的锉甲、蟒绣的红色官服、大红的弓箭。
English: Before setting off, the emperor gave Wang Qian and Jiang Guijin helmets, fine armor, embroidered red official uniforms, and crimson bows and arrows.

古文：骥请得以便宜从事。
现代文：王骥请求能够见机行事。
English: Wang Hui asked to be able to act at the right time.

古文：驰传至云南，部署诸将，遣参将冉保由东路趋孟定，大军由中路至腾冲，分道夹击。
现代文：王骥驱驰驿传到达云南，部署诸将，派参将冉保由东路进军孟定，大军由中路到腾冲，分道夹击。
English: Wang Qian drove the gallop to reach Yunnan, deployed the generals, sent the general Ran Bao to march from the east to Mengding, the army from the middle to Tengchong, and split the road.

古文：是年十一月，与贵以二万人趋上江，围其寨，五日不下。
现代文：这年十一月与蒋贵率领二万人到上江，包围了敌人的营寨，攻打五日没有攻下。
English: In November of that year, he and Chiang Kai-shek led 20,000 men to the upper reaches of the Yangtze River, encircled the enemy's camp, and fought for five days without capturing it.

古文：会大风，纵火焚栅，拔之，斩首五万余级。
现代文：恰巧刮大风，放火烧其栅栏，攻占敌营，斩首五万余级。
English: A strong wind happened to blow, and they set fire to the fence, captured the enemy camp, and beheaded more than 50,000 soldiers.

古文：进自夹象石，渡下江，通高黎贡山道。
现代文：从夹象石进军，渡下江，通过高黎贡山道。
English: Marching from Jianxiangshi, crossing the lower reaches of the river, through the Gaoligong Mountain Road.

古文：闰月至腾冲，长驱抵杉木笼山。
现代文：闰十一月到腾冲，长驱抵达杉木笼山。
English: Leap November to Tengchong, long drive to arrive at Sugimiketsuzan.

古文：贼乘高据险，筑七垒相救。
现代文：敌人乘高据险，营筑七座堡垒相互救应。
English: The enemy took advantage of the high security risk to build seven fortresses to save each other.

古文：骥遣参将宫聚、副将刘聚分左右翼缘岭上，而自将中军奋击之，贼大溃，乘胜至马鞍山。
现代文：王骥派遣参将宫聚、副将刘聚分左右两翼绿岭而上，自率中军奋起攻击，敌人大败，王骥乘腾到达马鞍山。
English: Wang Hui dispatched the general officer Gong Ju and the vice-general Liu Ju to go up the green ridge on the left and right sides. The Chinese army led by Wang Hui rose up to attack, the enemy was defeated, and Wang Hui reached Ma'an Mountain.

古文：逾月，抵贼巢。
现代文：一个月以后，抵达叛贼的巢穴。
English: A month later, they arrived at the traitor's lair.

古文：山陡绝，深堑环之。东南面江，壁立不可上。
现代文：山极陡，很深的大沟环绕着它，山的东南面临着大江，山壁直立不可以沿山岭而上。
English: The mountain is extremely steep, with a deep ravine surrounding it. The southeast of the mountain faces a large river, and it is not allowed to climb up the mountain while standing upright.

古文：骥遣前军觇贼，败其伏兵。
现代文：王骥派前军去侦察叛贼，击败他们的伏兵。
English: Wang Yao sent his vanguard to reconnoiter the traitors and defeat their ambush.

古文：贼更自间道立栅马鞍山，出大军后。
现代文：叛贼又以小道在马鞍山上建立栅栏，出现在王骥大军的后面。
English: The traitors also used a path to build a fence on Ma'anshan Mountain and appeared behind Wang Yao's army.

古文：骥戒军中无动，而令都指挥方瑛以六千人突贼寨，斩首数百，复诱败其象阵。
现代文：王骥告诫大军不要动，而命令都指挥方瑛用六干兵力突袭敌寨，杀敌几百人，又引诱击败他们的象阵。
English: Wang Qian warned the army not to move, and ordered the commander Fang Ying to use six troops to raid the enemy camp, kill hundreds of enemies, and lure and defeat their elephant array.

古文：会东路军冉保等已合木邦、车里、大侯诸土军，破乌木弄、戛邦诸寨。遣别将守西峨渡，防贼轶，刻期与大军会。
现代文：恰好东路军冉保等人已经会合木邦、车里、大侯等土着军队，击破迭立孟、戛邦等山寨，派另外的将军驻守西峩渡，防备叛贼逃跑，规定日期和大军会合。
English: It just so happened that Ran Bao and others of the Eastern Route Army had already rallied the indigenous armies of Mupang, Cheli, and Dahu, defeated the copycats of Dili, Meng, and Canbang, stationed another general in Xishuandu to prevent the escape of the traitors, and set a date for the meeting of the great army.

古文：骥乃督诸将环攻其七门，积薪纵火。
现代文：王骥于是督率众将围攻敌寨的七个大门，积聚木柴放火烧。
English: Therefore, Wang Yao led his troops to besiege the seven gates of the enemy's encampment, collect firewood and set them on fire.

古文：风大作，贼焚死无算，溺江死者数万人。
现代文：风刮得很大，叛贼烧死的无法计算，掉入江中淹死的有几万人。
English: The wind was blowing hard, the number of traitors burned to death was incalculable, and tens of thousands of people fell into the river and drowned.

古文：思任发携二子走孟养。
现代文：思任发带领他的两个儿子逃到盂养。
English: Sireenfa fled with his two sons to the mountains.

古文：获其虎符、金牌、宣慰司印及所掠腾冲诸卫所印章三十有奇。
现代文：缴获叛贼的虎符、金牌、宣慰司印及所掠夺的腾冲诸卫所印章三十多枚。
English: They captured the traitor's tiger emblem, gold medal, seal of consolation and more than thirty seals of Tengchong Public Security Bureau.

古文：犁其巢穴，留兵守之而还。
现代文：摧毁他的巢穴，留下一部分兵力守护而返回京城。
English: Destroy his lair, leave a part of the troops to guard and return to the capital.

古文：明年四月遣偏师讨维摩土司韦郎罗。
现代文：第二年四月，派遣非主力军队征讨维摩土司韦郎罗。
English: In April of the following year, he dispatched a non-major force of troops to subjugate the Wima Toshivelangro.

古文：郎罗走安南，俘其妻子。
现代文：郎罗逃跑到安南，俘虏了他的妻子儿女。
English: Lang Luo fled to Annan and captured his wife and children.

古文：传檄安南，缚之以献。
现代文：传送檄文给安南，于是捆绑了郎罗来进献。
English: He sent the letter to Annan, and then tied up Lang Luo to make a donation.

古文：五月，师还。
现代文：五月，军队返回。
English: In May, the troops returned.

古文：帝遣户部侍郎王质赍羊酒迎劳，赐宴奉天门。封推诚宣力武臣、特进荣禄大夫、上柱国、靖远伯，岁禄千二百石，世袭指挥同知，赐貂蝉冠玉带。
现代文：皇帝派遣户部侍郎王质准备了羊和酒来欢迎犒劳他们，在奉天门赏赐宴席，皇上封王骥为推诚宣力武臣、特进荣禄大夫、上柱国、靖远伯，每年的俸禄为一千二百石，世袭指挥同知，赐给貂蝉冠和玉腰带。
English: The emperor dispatched the royal household attendant to prepare the sheep and wine to welcome and reward them, and awarded the banquet at the Gate of Heaven. The emperor appointed Wang Qian as the vassal of Pushcheng Xuanli, the doctor of honor, Shangzhu Guo, and Jingyuan Bo, with an annual salary of 1200 koku, and the hereditary commander Tongzhi, and gave him the cicada crown and the jade belt.

古文：贵进侯，刘聚等迁赏有差。
现代文：蒋贵晋升为侯爵，刘聚等人升迁赏赐不一。
English: Jiang Gui was promoted to marquis, and Liu Ju and others received different promotion rewards.

古文：从征少卿李蕡，郎中侯琎、杨宁皆擢侍郎，士卒赐予加等。
现代文：跟从大军往讨的少卿李黄，郎中侯璀、杨宁等都擢升为侍郎，士卒都赏赐加等。
English: Shaoqing Li Huang, Langzhong Houyi, Yang Ning, who followed the great army, were all promoted to waiters, and the soldiers were rewarded with higher ranks.

古文：府库为竭。
现代文：国家府库为此而用尽。
English: The state treasury was drained for this purpose.

古文：思任发之窜缅甸也，其子思机发复帅余众居者蓝，乞入朝谢罪。
现代文：思任发逃窜到缅甸时，他的儿子思机发再次率领残余的士兵盘踞在者蓝，请求到朝廷谢罪。
English: When Si Rongfa fled to Burma, his son Si Jiao Fa once again led the remaining soldiers to entrench themselves in Zhichang, and asked the imperial court to apologize.

古文：廷议因而抚之，王振不可。
现代文：大臣在朝廷上议论可以趁机招抚他，王振不同意。
English: Wang Zhen did not agree that the minister could use the opportunity to cajole him by arguing in the court.

古文：是年八月复命骥总督云南军务，帅参将冉保、毛福寿以往。
现代文：这年八月，再次任命王骥总督云南军务，王骥率领参将冉保、毛福寿前往。
English: In August of that year, Wang Hui was reappointed as the military governor of Yunnan. Wang Hui led General Ran Bao and General Mao Fushou to the capital.

古文：未至而思机发遣弟招赛入贡，缅甸亦奏获思任发，要麓川地。
现代文：没有到达思机发就派遣他的弟弟招赛入朝献贡，缅甸也上奏擒获思任发，要求拥有麓川这个地方。
English: Without waiting for an opportunity, he sent his younger brother Zhaosai to the imperial court to offer tribute, and Myanmar also received a summons from Zhaosai to claim this place in the Luchuan River.

古文：朝廷不纳其贡，且敕骥图缅甸，骥因请济师。
现代文：朝廷不接受思机发的贡品，并且敕令王骥谋取缅甸，王骥因此请求增派军队。
English: The imperial court did not accept the opportunistic tribute, and ordered Wang Yao to seek Myanmar. Therefore, Wang Yao requested to send more troops.

古文：八年五月复命蒋贵为平蛮将军，调土兵五万往，发卒转饷五十万人。
现代文：正统八年五月，再命蒋贵为平蛮将军，调遣五万名当地兵前往，调发士兵运输军饷的有五十万人。
English: In May of the 8th year of the Juche revolution, Jiang Gui was reappointed as the general of the People's Liberation Army, and 50,000 local soldiers were dispatched to the capital, and 500,000 soldiers were dispatched to transport military supplies.

古文：骥初檄缅甸送思任发。
现代文：王骥起初用檄文晓谕缅甸交出思任发。
English: At first, Wang Yi used a message to tell Burma to surrender.

古文：缅人阳听命，持两端。
现代文：缅甸人口头上答应，却犹豫不决。
English: The Burmese verbally agreed, but hesitated.

古文：是年冬，大军逼缅甸，缅人以楼船载思任发觇官军，而潜以他舟载之归。
现代文：这年冬天，大军逼近缅甸，缅人用楼船载着思任发侦察朝廷的军队，暗中用另外的船载着思任发回去。
English: In the winter of that year, a large army was approaching Burma. The Burmese used a barge to carry Sireen away to spy on the imperial army, and secretly used another boat to carry Sireen back.

古文：骥知缅人资木邦水利为唇齿，且虑思机发将以献其父故仇之，故终不肯献思任发。
现代文：王骥知道缅甸人依赖木邦水利，唇齿相依，并且担心思机发将因为缅人要向朝廷进献上他的父亲的原因从而仇恨缅人，所以最终缅人不肯献上思任发。
English: Wang Yao knew that the Burmese people depended on the water conservancy of Mupang, and their lips and teeth depended on each other, and he was worried that the Burmese people would hate the Burmese people because the Burmese people wanted to present his father to the court, so in the end, the Burmese people refused to present him.

古文：骥乃趋者蓝，破思机发巢，得其妻子部落，而思机发独脱去。
现代文：王骥于是赶到者蓝，击破思机发的巢穴，获得他的妻儿和部落，思机发独自脱身逃走。
English: Wang Yao then rushed to Zhelang, broke the lair of Si Cai Fa, obtained his wife and children and tribe, and Si Cai Fa escaped alone and fled.

古文：明年召还，加禄三百石，命与都御史陈镒巡延绥、宁夏、甘肃诸边。
现代文：第二年，王骥奉召回京，增加俸禄三百石，皇上命令他和都御史陈镒出巡延绥、宁夏、甘肃等边境。
English: The following year, Wang Xi was recalled to Beijing and his salary was increased to 300 koku. The emperor ordered him and the governor of the capital, Chen Xi, to patrol the borders of Yancheng, Ningxia, and Gansu.

古文：初，宁夏备边军，半岁一更。后边事亟，三年乃更。
现代文：起初，宁夏设置了边防军队，半年更换一次，后来边境军事频繁，三年纔更换一次。
English: At first, Ningxia set up a border defense force, which was replaced once every six months. Later, the border military was frequently replaced once every three years.

古文：军士日久疲罢，又益选军余防冬，家有五六人在边者，军用重困。
现代文：时间长了士兵都疲惫不堪，又增选没有正式军籍的军人来防冬，一家有五六口人在边境的，军队费用更加陷入困境。
English: The soldiers are exhausted after a long time, and more soldiers without official military status have been elected to prevent winter. If there are five or six people in a family at the border, the military expenses are even more in trouble.

古文：骥请岁一更，当代者以十月至，而代者留至来年正月乃遣归，边备足而军不劳。
现代文：王骥向皇上请求一年更换一次，替换的人在十月份来到，而被替换的人留到第二年正月纔遣送回家，边防军备充足并且军队不疲劳。
English: Wang Xi asked the emperor to replace him once a year. The replacement came in October, and the person who was replaced was kept until the first month of the following year and sent home. The border defense armament was sufficient and the army was not tired.

古文：帝善其议，行之诸边。
现代文：皇帝认为他的建议很好，推行到各处边境。
English: The emperor thought his suggestion was a good one and pushed it to all parts of the frontier.

古文：当是时，缅人已以思任发来献，而思机发窃驻孟养地，屡遣使入贡谢罪。
现代文：正在这时，缅甸人已经送思任发来进献，而思机发偷偷驻扎在孟养，数次派遣使者来进贡谢罪。
English: Just at this time, the Burmese had already sent Zijian to make a donation, and Zijian secretly stationed in Mengyang and sent envoys several times to pay tribute.

古文：中外咸愿罢兵。
现代文：朝廷内外都愿意罢兵停战。
English: Both inside and outside the imperial court were willing to call a truce.

古文：振意终未慊，要思机发躬入朝谢。
现代文：王振意愿还未满足，要思机发亲自入朝谢罪。
English: Wang Zhen's intention has not yet been satisfied, and he must think of a way to personally enter the court to express his gratitude.

古文：沐斌帅师至金沙江招之，不至。
现代文：沐斌带领军队来到金沙江招降他，不来。
English: Mu Bin led the army to the Jinsha River to invite him to surrender, but he did not come.

古文：谕孟养执之以献，亦不听命。
现代文：谕告孟养绑着他来进献，也不听徒命令。
English: He told Meng Yao to tie him up and force him to make the offering, but Meng Yao didn't listen to his orders.

古文：于是振怒，欲尽灭其种类。
现代文：于是王振发怒，打算全部消灭他的种族。
English: So Wang Zhen got angry and decided to wipe out his entire race.

古文：十三年春复命骥总督军务，宫聚为平蛮将军，帅师十五万人往。
现代文：垂统十三年春，再次命令王骥总督军务，宫聚为平蛮将军，率领军队十五万人前往。
English: In the spring of the thirteenth year of his reign, he once again ordered the military affairs of Wang Xi, the governor-general, to gather the palace as a barbarian general and led the army of 150,000 people.

古文：明年造舟浮金沙江，蛮人栅西岸拒守。
现代文：第二年，造船渡金沙江，蛮人在江西岸建立栅栏抗拒官军。
English: In the second year, when the ship was crossing the Jinsha River, the barbarians built a fence on the west bank of the river to resist the government army.

古文：官军联舟为浮桥以济，拔其栅，进破鬼哭山，连下十余寨，坠溺死者无算。而思机发终脱去，不可得。
现代文：官军把船连接起来作为浮桥渡江，攻拔蛮人的栅栏，向前进破敌于鬼哭山，接连攻下十多个寨子，坠入江中淹死的无法计算，然而思机发最终逃脱，没能够俘获。
English: The government army connected the boats as a floating bridge to cross the river, attacked the barbarians' fence, broke through the enemy's ghost crying mountain, captured more than ten castles in succession, fell into the river and drowned in an incalculable manner. However, the thinker finally escaped and could not be captured.

古文：是时，官军逾孟养。至孟冉阝海。
现代文：这时候，官军经过孟养，到达孟郎海。
English: At this time, the government army passed through Mengyang and reached Menglanghai.

古文：地在金沙江西，去麓川千里，自古兵力所不至，诸蛮见大军皆震怖。
现代文：这个地方在金沙江西岸，距离麓川一千里，自古以来军队未曾到过，众蛮人看见大军都非常害怕。
English: This place is on the west bank of the Jinsha River, a thousand miles away from the Luchuan River. Since ancient times, no army has ever come to this place, and all the savages are very afraid when they see a large army.

古文：而大军远涉，骥虑馈饷不继，亟谋引还。
现代文：而大军速途跋涉，王骥担心粮食军饷供应不上，几次打算率军返回。
English: But the large army trekked at a fast pace. Wang Yao was worried that the supply of grain and military supplies would not be available, and he planned to lead the army back several times.

古文：时思机发虽遁匿，而思任发少子思陆复拥众据孟养。
现代文：当时思机发虽然逃跑躲藏起来，然而思任发的小儿子思陆再次聚众盘据在孟养。
English: At that time, although Si Jifa ran away and went into hiding, Si Renfa's youngest son, Si Lu, once again gathered a crowd and settled in Mengyang.

古文：骥度贼终不可灭，乃与思陆约，立石表，誓金沙江上，曰： 石烂江枯，尔乃得渡。 
现代文：王骥考虑叛贼最终不能完全消灭，于是和思陆订立和约，建立石碑作为标记，在金沙江上发誓，说： 石碑腐烂了，江水枯竭了，你们纔能渡过金沙江。 
English: Wang Yao considered that the traitors could not be completely eliminated in the end, so he concluded a peace treaty with Silu, set up a stone monument as a mark, and swore on the Jinsha River, saying: The stone monument is rotten, the river is exhausted, and none of you can cross the Jinsha River.

古文：遂班师。
现代文：于是就率领军队回朝。
English: Then the class teacher came out.

古文：骥凡三征麓川，卒不得思机发。
现代文：至骥总共三次征伐麓川，最终也没有擒获思机发。
English: Up to now, there have been a total of three attempts to conquer the Luhu River, but in the end, nothing came of it.

古文：议者咎骥等老师费财，以一隅骚动天下。
现代文：评论者责备王骥等人劳苦军队，浪费财物，因为一个角落而使天下骚动不安。
English: Commentators reproached Wang Qian and others for making the army work hard, wasting property, and making the world restless because of a corner.

古文：而会川卫训导詹英抗疏劾之，大略谓： 骥等多役民夫，舁彩绘，散诸土司以邀厚利。
现代文：而会川卫训导詹英直接奏议弹劾他，大体是： 王骥等人大量地募役民夫，装载彩色绢帛，散发给众土司来求取丰厚的利益。
English: On the other hand, Zhan Ying, the leader of the Sichuan Guards Training Corps, made a direct appeal to impeach him, which was roughly as follows: Wang Qian and others recruited a large number of people, loaded them with colored plows, and distributed them to the local officials in order to obtain rich profits.

古文：擅用腐刑，诡言进御，实充私役。
现代文：擅自使用腐刑，谎称进献给皇上，实际上是充作个人役使。
English: Unauthorized use of corruption, falsely claiming to be dedicated to the emperor, but actually serving as a personal servant.

古文：师行无纪，十五万人一日起行，互相蹂践。
现代文：军队行动没有纪律，十五万人一天出发，互相践踏。
English: There was no discipline in the army's actions. One hundred and fifty thousand men set out in one day, trampling on each other.

古文：每军负米六斗，跋陟山谷，自缢者多。
现代文：每个士兵背着六斗大米，爬山越谷，自杀的人很多。
English: Each soldier carried six buckets of rice on his back, climbed mountains and crossed valleys, and many committed suicide.

古文：抵金沙江，徬徨不敢渡；既渡不敢攻；攻而失都指挥路宣、翟亨等。
现代文：大军抵达金沙江，犹豫困惑不敢渡，已经渡过又不敢进攻，进攻则牺牲都指挥路宣、翟亨等将。
English: When the large army arrived at the Jinsha River, they hesitated and were confused and did not dare to cross the river. Once they had crossed the river, they did not dare to attack. Lu Xuan, Yao Heng and other generals commanded the attack.

古文：俟贼解，多捕鱼户为俘。以地分木邦、缅甸，掩败为功。
现代文：等到叛贼瓦解，就大量地捕捉打鱼的老百姓作为俘虏，把土地分发给木邦、缅甸，掩盖了失败，把它作为自己的功劳。
English: When the rebels disintegrated, they captured a large number of fishermen as captives and distributed the land to China and Myanmar, covering up the failure and taking it as their own merit.

古文：此何异李宓之败，而杨国忠以捷闻也。 
现代文：这和李宓的失利，然而杨国忠却用胜利来向皇上汇报有什么两样呢？ 
English: What's the difference between this and Li Xi's defeat, yet Yang Guozhong used his victory to report his success to the emperor?

古文：奏下法司。
现代文：奏章发送到法司。
English: The transcript was sent to the Department of Justice.

古文：王振左右之，得不问。而命英从骥军自效。
现代文：王振保护他，得以不被问罪而命令詹英跟从王骥军队效力。
English: Wang Zhen protected him and ordered Zhan Ying to serve in Wang Yao's army so that he would not be prosecuted.

古文：英知往且获罪，匿不去。
现代文：詹英知道前去将要获罪，就藏了起来不去。
English: Zhan Ying knew that he would be punished if he went forward, so he hid.

古文：当是时，湖广、贵州诸苗，所在蜂起，围平越及诸城堡，贵州东路闭。
现代文：在这时候，湖广、贵州等苗族人，在他们居住的地方纷纷起事，包围平越及众城堡，贵州束面的道路被堵塞。
English: At this time, the Miao people in Huguang, Guizhou and other places where they lived rose up one after another, surrounded Pingyue and the castles, and the roads in Guizhou were blocked.

古文：骥至武昌，诏还军讨苗。
现代文：王骥到达武昌，皇上下韶让他回军讨伐苗人。
English: Wang Yao arrived in Wuchang, and the emperor ordered him to return to the army to fight against the Miao people.

古文：会英宗北狩，群臣劾王振并及骥。
现代文：正好英宗被俘北去，众大臣弹劾王振并涉及王骥。
English: Just as Yingzong was captured and headed north, ministers impeached Wang Zhen and implicated Wang Hui.

古文：以骥方在军，且倚之平苗，置弗问。
现代文：因为王骥当时正在军中，并且要依霏他荡平苗人，所以把他放在一边没有问罪。
English: Because Wang Yao was in the army at the time, and he wanted to snuggle up to him and flatter Miao Ren, so he put him aside without asking for a crime.

古文：命佩平蛮将军印，充总兵官，侍郎侯琎总督军务。
现代文：命令他佩带平蛮将军的大印，充任总兵官，侍郎侯璀总督军务。
English: He was ordered to wear the great seal of General Pingman, to serve as the chief military officer, and to serve as the steward of the governor-general of the military affairs.

古文：已而苗益炽，众至十余万。
现代文：不久苗人势力更加旺盛，聚众达到十多万人。
English: Soon, the Miao people became more powerful and gathered more than one hundred thousand people.

古文：平越被围半岁，巡按御史黄镐死守，粮尽掘草根食之，而骥顿军辰、沅不进。
现代文：平越被包围半年，巡按御史黄镐拼命守住，粮食吃完了就挖草根吃。而王骥驻军于辰、沅，不向前进。
English: Pingyue had been besieged for half a year, and the patrolling magistrate Huang Qi desperately held out. When he had finished eating the grain, he dug up the grass and ate it. Meanwhile, Wang Qi stationed his troops in Chen and Handan, and did not advance.

古文：景泰元年，镐草疏置竹筒中，募人自间道出，闻于朝。
现代文：景泰元年，黄镐起草了一份奏疏把它放在竹筒中，找人从小路出发，报告给朝廷。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Taejo, Huang Qi drafted a report and put it in a bamboo tube, looking for someone to start from the path and report to the imperial court.

古文：更命保定伯梁珤为平蛮将军，益兵二万人。
现代文：朝廷改令保定伯梁瑶焉平蛮将军，增加二万兵力。
English: The imperial court changed the order to Baoding Bo Liangxuan Pingban General, increasing the number of troops by 20,000.

古文：侯琎自云南督之前，疾战，大破贼，尽解诸城围。而骥亦俘刬平王虫富等以献。
现代文：侯璀从云南督率军队前进，速战，大破贼人，全部解除了众城的包围，王骥也俘获刬平王虫富等人来进献。
English: Hou Yi led the army from Yunnan to advance, quick battle, smash thieves, all lifted the siege of many cities, Wang Yi also captured Zouping Wang Zhifu and others to present.

古文：骥还，命总督南京机务。
现代文：玉骥回到京城，皇上命令他总管南京的机务。
English: Tamakazura returned to the capital, and the emperor ordered him to be in charge of the machinery of Nanjing.

古文：其冬，乞世券，与之。
现代文：这年冬天，王骥向皇上请求世代相袭的铁券，皇上给了他。
English: This winter, Wang Yao asked the emperor for a generation of iron coupons, and the emperor gave him one.

古文：南畿军素偷惰。
现代文：南畿军队一向苟且怠惰。
English: The Nanki army has always been lazy.

古文：骥至，以所驭军法教之。
现代文：王骥来后，用他所掌握的治理军队的办法来训导他们。
English: After Wang Hui arrived, he used the methods of governing the army at his disposal to train them.

古文：于谦弗重也，朝廷以其旧臣宠礼之。
现代文：于谦不重视这件事，朝廷因为他是老臣所以宠爱礼待他。
English: Yu Qian did not attach importance to this matter. The imperial court treated him with favor because he was an old retainer.

古文：三年四月，赐敕解任，奉朝请。
现代文：景泰三年四月，皇上赐令他免职让他定期参加朝会。
English: In April of the third year of King Tae's reign, the emperor relieved him of his duties and allowed him to regularly attend the imperial court.

古文：骥年七十余，跃马食肉，盛声伎如故。
现代文：王骥年龄七十多岁了，但是他骑马飞驰吃肉，喜爱声伎跟以前一样。
English: Wang Yao is more than 70 years old, but he still rides a horse, eats meat, and likes acrobatics as before.

古文：久之，石亨、徐有贞等奉英宗复辟，骥与谋。
现代文：很久以后，石亨、徐有贞等人拥护英宗重登皇位，王骥参与了谋划。
English: After a long time, Shi Heng, Xu Youzhen and others supported Ying Zong's re-ascension to the throne, and Wang Xi participated in the planning.

古文：赏稍后，上章自讼，言： 臣子祥入南城，为诸将所挤，堕地几死。
现代文：赏赐稍微迟后，王骥上奏章为自己申诉，说： 臣的儿子王祥进入南城，被众将推挤，落到地上几乎死去。
English: After the award was given a little late, Wang Yao wrote a petition for himself, saying: Minister's son Wang Xiang entered Nancheng, was jostled by the crowd, fell to the ground and almost died.

古文：今论功不及，疑有蔽之者。 
现代文：如今论功行赏没有他，怀疑有人掩盖了这件事。 
English: Now that he's gone, there are suspicions of a cover-up.

古文：帝乃官祥指挥佥事。
现代文：皇帝于是授予王祥指挥食事的官职，命令王骥仍然做兵部尚书，管理兵部事务。
English: The emperor then granted Wang Xiang the official post of commanding the meal, and ordered Wang Qian to continue to be the military secretary and manage the affairs of the military department.

古文：而命骥仍兵部尚书，理部事，加号奉天翊卫推诚宣力守正文臣、光禄大夫，余如故。数月请老，又三年乃卒，年八十三。
现代文：增加封号为奉天翊卫推诚宣力守正文臣、光禄大夫，其余的和以前一样。几个月以后请求回家养老，又遇了三年纔去世，年龄八十三岁。
English: He added the seal names of "Bong Tianyu Wei Xuan Cheng Xuan Liguo Zheng Wen Cun" and "Guang Luo Daifu," and the rest were the same as before. A few months later, he asked to go home to retire, and he died three years later, at the age of 83.

古文：赠靖远侯，谥忠毅。
现代文：赐为靖速侯，谧号忠毅。
English: He was given the title of Yasuhiro and the posthumous name of Tadayoshi.

古文：传子瑺及孙添。
现代文：传给儿子王瑺和孙子王添。
English: It was passed down to his son Wang Xuan and grandson Wang Tian.

古文：添尚嘉善长公主。
现代文：王添娶嘉善长公主为妻。
English: Wang Tien married the eldest princess Jiashan.

古文：再传至孙瑾。
现代文：官爵再传到孙王瑾。
English: The title of Kanshaku was then passed down to Sun Wangtao.

古文：嘉靖初，提督三千营，协守南京，还掌左府。
现代文：嘉靖初年，为三千营提督，协助防守南京，回京掌管左府。
English: In the first year of Jiajing, he was the admiral of three thousand battalions, assisted in the defense of Nanjing, and returned to Beijing to take charge of Zuofu.

古文：久之，佩征蛮将军印，镇两广。
现代文：很久以后，佩带征蛮将军印，镇守两广。
English: A long time later, he wore the seal of the conquering barbarian general and guarded the two provinces.

古文：广东新宁、新兴、思平间多高山丛箐，亡命者辄入诸瑶中，吏不得问，众至万余人，流劫高要、阳江诸县。
现代文：广东新宁、新兴、思平之间，多高山竹林，亡命之徒窜入瑶人中间，官吏不能追究，聚众一万多人，流动抢劫高要、阳江诸县。
English: Between Guangdong's Shining, Xinxing, and Siping, there are many high mountain bamboo forests, outlaws have broken into the middle of the people, officials cannot be investigated, more than ten thousand people have gathered, mobile robbery is high, and Yangjiang counties.

古文：官军讨之，辄失利。
现代文：官军征讨他们，常常失利。
English: The government forces tried to recruit them, but often failed.

古文：三十五年春，瑾与巡抚都御史谈恺檄诸路土兵诛其魁陈以明，悉平诸巢。
现代文：三十五年春，王瑾和巡抚都御史谈恺传檄各踣士兵诛杀魁首陈以明，全部扫平了他们的巢穴。
English: In the spring of the 35th year, Wang Yao and the governor of the capital talked about the history of the city, and each of the soldiers killed the leader Chen Yiming, and all swept their nests.

古文：捷闻，加太子太保。
现代文：捷报传到朝廷，加封王瑾为太子太保。
English: The news of the victory reached the imperial court, and Wang Xi was appointed as the prince's guardian.

古文：而扶藜、葵梅诸山峒冯天恩等，据险为寇者亦数十年。
现代文：然而扶藜、葵梅诸山峒冯天恩等人，据险为寇也有几十年。
English: However, Fuxuan, Kwaimei, Zhoushan, Feng Tian'en and others have been at risk for decades.

古文：瑾复督军分道进剿，破巢二百余，复以功荫一子锦衣百户。
现代文：王瑾又率军分路进剿，击破巢穴二百多个，再因功封荫一子为锦衣卫百户。
English: Wang Hui also led the army to advance into the valley, breaking more than two hundred nests, and then, because of his efforts, he sealed one son as a hundred households of Jin Yi Wei.

古文：言官劾其暴横，召还。
现代文：谏官弹劾他残暴横行，被召回京。
English: The eunuchs impeached him for brutality and he was recalled to Kyoto.

古文：爵传至明亡乃绝。
现代文：爵位传到明亡纔绝。
English: The title of nobility has been passed down from generation to generation.

古文：徐有贞，字元玉，初名珵，吴人。
现代文：徐有贞，字符玉，起初名理，是昊人。
English: Xu Yuzhen, character Jade, originally named Li, is a Hao person.

古文：宣德八年进士。
现代文：宣德八年进士。
English: In the eighth year of Xuan De, he became a junior high school graduate.

古文：选庶吉士，授编修。
现代文：选为庶吉士，授予编修官。
English: He was selected to be appointed to the post of deputy editor, and the post of editor was conferred on him.

古文：为人短小精悍，多智数，喜功名。
现代文：为人矮小精悍，多智慧，喜好功名。
English: He is a short and agile man, with a lot of wisdom and a penchant for achievement.

古文：凡天官、地理、兵法、水利、阴阳方术之书，无不谙究。
现代文：凡天文、地理、兵法、水利、阴阳方术之类的书，没有不熟习深究的。
English: There is no book on astronomy, geography, military tactics, water conservancy, and yin and yang that cannot be studied in depth.

古文：时承平既久，边备媮惰，而西南用兵不息，珵以为忧。
现代文：当时天下太平已经很久，边备怠惰，而西南用兵不止，徐理很担心。
English: At that time, the country had been at peace for a long time, the border guards were lazy, and the southwest used more and more soldiers. Xu Li was very worried.

古文：正统七年疏陈兵政五事，帝善之而不能用。
现代文：正统七年上疏陈述用兵之道五件事情，皇帝认为很好但是没有采用。
English: The emperor thought it was a good idea to state five things about the use of military force seven years ago, but did not adopt them.

古文：十二年进侍讲。
现代文：宣德十二年进升为侍讲。
English: In 12th year of Xuan De, he was promoted to attendant lecturer.

古文：十四年秋，荧惑入南斗。
现代文：十四年秋，火星入南斗。
English: In the autumn of the 14th year, Mars entered the Southern Cross.

古文：珵私语友人刘溥曰 祸不远矣 ，亟命妻子南还。
现代文：徐理私下裹对友人刘溥说： 灾祸不远了。 急命妻子儿女回到南方。
English: Xu Li said to his friend Liu Wei in private, "The disaster is not far away. My wife and children have to return to the south.

古文：及土木难作，郕王召廷臣问计。
现代文：等到土木之难发生，郦王召集廷臣询问计策。
English: When the civil engineering difficulties occurred, the king summoned courtiers to inquire about strategies.

古文：珵大言曰： 验之星象，稽之历数，天命已去，惟南迁可以纾难。 
现代文：徐理大声说： 检验星象，考查历敷，天命已去，只有南迁纔能解除灾难。 
English: Xu Li said in a loud voice: Checking the stars, examining the history, the destiny has gone, only the southward migration can solve the disaster.

古文：太监金英叱之，胡濙、陈循咸执不可。兵部侍郎于谦曰： 言南迁者，可斩也。 
现代文：太监金英责骂他，胡淡、陈循都坚持认为不可以，兵部侍郎于谦说： 说南迁的人，可以斩首。 
English: The eunuch Jin Ying scolded him, and both Hu Tan and Chen Xun insisted that it was unacceptable. The attendant of the military department, Yu Qian, said: "Those who say they have moved south can be beheaded.

古文：珵大沮，不敢复言。
现代文：徐埕十分恐惧，不敢再说话。
English: Xu Yao was so scared that he did not dare to speak.

古文：景帝即位，遣科道官十五人募兵于外，珵行监察御史事，往彰德。
现代文：景帝即位，派遣科道官十五人在外招兵，徐理兼代理监察御史之职，到彰德。
English: When Emperor Jing ascended to the throne, he dispatched fifteen officers of the Science and Technology Bureau to recruit soldiers abroad, and Xu Li, who was also acting as an inspector of imperial history, went to Zhangde.

古文：寇退，召还，仍故官。
现代文：敌人退却，召令徐埕回京，仍然做原来的官。
English: The enemy retreated and ordered Xu Xi to return to Beijing, where he still worked as an official.

古文：珵急于进取，自创南迁议为内廷讪笑，久不得迁。
现代文：徐理急于进取，自己提出的南迁建议被朝中大臣嘲笑，很久没有升迁。
English: Xu Li was eager to forge ahead, and his own proposal to move south was ridiculed by the Minister of the Middle Kingdom, and he was not promoted for a long time.

古文：因遗陈循玉带，且用星术，言 公带将玉矣。 
现代文：因此赠给陈循一根玉带，并且使用星术，说 大人将要使用玉制的腰带 。
English: Therefore, he gave a jade belt to Chen Xun and used astrology to say that the adults would use the jade belt.

古文：无何，循果加少保，大喜，因屡荐之。
现代文：不久，陈循果然加官为太保，十分高兴，所以屡次推荐他。
English: Soon after, Chen Xuan was promoted to the position of Tai Po. He was very happy, so he repeatedly recommended him.

古文：而是时用人多决于少保于谦。
现代文：而当时用人大多取决于少保于谦。
English: At that time, however, hiring people mostly depended on whether they were humble or not.

古文：珵属谦门下士游说，求国子祭酒。
现代文：徐埕委托于谦门客为他游说，谋求国子祭酒。
English: Xu Xi entrusted Yu Qianmen to lobby for him and seek the best wine for the National Children's Festival.

古文：谦为言于帝，帝曰： 此议南迁徐珵邪？
现代文：于谦在皇帝面前为他说话，皇帝说： 这是建议南迁的徐理吗？
English: Yu Qian spoke for him in front of the emperor, who said: Is this the same Xu Li who suggested moving to the south?

古文：为人倾危，将坏诸生心术。 
现代文：他为人狡诈，恐怕会使诸生员心术变坏。 
English: He is a cunning person, and I'm afraid he'll corrupt everyone's mind.

古文：珵不知谦之荐之也，以为沮己，深怨谦。
现代文：徐埕不知道于谦椎荐了他，以为他诽谤自己，很怨恨于谦。
English: Xu Yao did not know that Yu Qianxi had recommended him, and thought that he had slandered himself. He was very resentful of Yu Qianxi.

古文：循劝珵改名，因名有贞。
现代文：陈循劝徐理改名，因此改名为有贞。
English: Chen Cun advised Xu Li to change his name, so he changed his name to Yuzhen.

古文：景泰三年迁右谕德。
现代文：景泰三年，升迁为右谕德。
English: In the third year of Jing Tai, he was promoted to the right.

古文：河决沙湾七载，前后治者皆无功。
现代文：黄河决口于沙湾七年，前后去治理的官员都没有成功。
English: The mouth of the Yellow River has been in Shawan for seven years, and officials who have tried to manage it before and after have not succeeded.

古文：廷臣共举有贞，乃擢左佥都御史，治之。
现代文：朝廷大臣共同推举徐有贞，于是擢升为左愈都御史，治理黄河。
English: The ministers of the imperial court jointly nominated Xu Youzhen, who was then promoted to the position of Zuoyutou Imperial Historian to govern the Yellow River.

古文：至张秋，相度水势，条上三策：一置水门，一开支河，一浚运河。
现代文：到达张秋，徐有贞观察估量水势，条奏给皇上三个方案：一是设置水门，一是开通支流，一是疏通运河。
English: Arriving at Zhangqiu, Xu Youzhen observed and estimated the water potential, and presented three plans to the emperor: one was to set up a sluice gate, one was to open a tributary, and one was to dredge a canal.

古文：议既定，督漕都御史王竑以漕渠淤浅滞运艘，请急塞决口。
现代文：决议已定，督漕都御史王弦因为漕渠淤积阻碍运输船只，请求紧急堵塞决口。
English: The decision has been made, and the governor of the canal, Wang Zhen, has requested an emergency blockage of the breach because the silting of the canal is hindering the transport of ships.

古文：帝敕有贞如軏议。
现代文：皇帝命令徐有贞采用王弦的建议。
English: The emperor ordered Xu Youzhen to adopt Wang Zhen's suggestion.

古文：有贞守便宜。言： 临清河浅，旧矣，非因决口未塞也。
现代文：有贞坚持见机行事，说： 临清河变浅，以前就这样，不是因为决口没有堵住。
English: Yuzhen persisted in seizing the opportunity and said, "The Linqing River has become shallow, just as it was before, not because the outlet was not blocked.

古文：漕臣但知塞决口为急，不知秋冬虽塞，来春必复决，徒劳无益。
现代文：漕臣王弦只知道堵住决口最焉紧急，却不知秋冬之季即使堵住决口，第二年春天一定会再次决口，白白地劳顿而没有好处。
English: Cao Zhen Wang Zhen only knew that it was most urgent to block the outlet, but he did not know that even if he blocked the outlet in the autumn and winter season, he would definitely break the outlet again in the spring of the next year, and he would work hard in vain without any benefit.

古文：臣不敢邀近功。 
现代文：我不敢谋求眼前的利益。 
English: I dare not seek immediate profit.

古文：诏从其言。
现代文：皇上下诏听从了他的话。
English: The Emperor accepted his suggestion.

古文：有贞于是大集民夫，躬亲督率，治渠建闸，起张秋以接河、沁。
现代文：有贞于是大集民夫，亲自督率，治理河渠建立水闸，从张秋连接黄河、沁水。
English: Therefore, Yuzhen gathered a large number of people and personally supervised and managed the canal to build a sluice, connecting the Yellow River and Surabaya from Zhangqiu.

古文：河流之旁出不顺者，为九堰障之。
现代文：河水旁流，不顺河道的，修建九条大坝阻挡它。
English: The river is diverted, it doesn't follow the course of the river, and nine dams have been built to block it.

古文：更筑大堰，楗以水门，阅五百五十五日而工成。
现代文：又修筑大坝，用闸门挡住它，经过五百五十五天纔竣工。
English: He also built a dam, blocked it with a sluice gate, and completed it in five hundred and fifty-five days.

古文：名其渠曰 广济 ，闸曰 通源 。
现代文：把河渠命名为 广济 ，闸门为 通源 。
English: The canal was named Guangji, and the sluice gate was the source.

古文：方工之未成也，帝以转漕为急，工部尚书江渊等请遣中书偕文武大臣督京军五万人往助役，期三月毕工。
现代文：当工程还未完成的时候，皇帝以转运粮饷为急务，工部尚书江渊等请求派遣中书同文武大臣率领京城里的军队五万人前去帮助，限期三个月完工。
English: When the project was not yet completed, the emperor took the transshipment of grain as an urgent matter, and the Ministry of Industry and Commerce requested that the Minister of Literature and Military Affairs lead 50,000 troops from the capital to help, with a deadline of three months to complete.

古文：有贞言： 京军一出，日费不赀，遇涨则束手坐视，无所施力。
现代文：查贞说： 京城的军队一出动，每天的费用不可计算，遇到水涨就束手无策无从下手。
English: Zha Zhen said: Once the army of the capital is dispatched, the daily cost cannot be calculated, and when the water rises, there is nothing to do.

古文：今泄口已合，决堤已坚，但用沿河民夫，自足集事。 
现代文：现在泄口已经合拢，溃决的大堤也已坚固，祇使用沿岸的民夫，足以成事。 
English: Now that the spillway has been closed and the levee has been breached, only the use of local people along the coast will suffice.

古文：议遂寝。
现代文：他们的建议于是被废弃。
English: The discussion then came to an end.

古文：事竣，召还，佐院事。
现代文：事情完成以后，皇上召有贞回京，辅佐院事。
English: After the matter was completed, the emperor summoned Arisada back to Kyoto to assist in the affairs of the cloister.

古文：帝厚劳之。
现代文：皇帝很丰厚地慰劳他。
English: The emperor consoled him very generously.

古文：复出巡视漕河。
现代文：又出去巡枧漕河。
English: He went out again to patrol the Caohe River.

古文：济守十三州县河夫多负官马及他杂办，所司趣之亟，有贞为言免之。
现代文：济宁十三个州县的民夫大多要承担朝廷献马和其它杂税，官署逼促他们很紧急，有贞上告皇上予以免除。
English: Most of the commoners in the thirteen prefectures and counties of Jining had to bear the burden of donating horses to the imperial court and other miscellaneous taxes. The government office urged them very urgently to appeal to the emperor for exemption.

古文：七年秋，山东大水，河堤多坏，惟有贞所筑如故。
现代文：景泰七年秋，山束发大水，河堤大多被毁坏，只有有贞修筑的还和以前一样。
English: In the autumn of the seventh year of King Taejo, the mountains were flooded, and most of the river banks were destroyed. Only those built with chastity remained the same as before.

古文：有贞乃修旧堤决口，自临清抵济宁，各置减水闸，水患悉平。
现代文：有贞就修固旧堤决口，从临清抵达济宁，分别设置碱水闸，水患全都平息。
English: Youzhen repaired the old dike breach, arrived in Jining from Linqing, and separately set up the alkali sluice, and the floods all subsided.

古文：还朝，帝召见，奖劳有加，进左副都御史。
现代文：回到朝廷，皇帝召见他，奖赏慰劳有加，官升为左副都御史。
English: Returning to the imperial court, the emperor summoned him, rewarded him for his hard work, and promoted him to the post of Left Vice-Governor of the Capital.

古文：八年正月，景帝不豫。石亨、张辄等谋迎上皇，以告太常卿许彬。
现代文：景泰八年正月，景帝身体不适，石亨、张軏等谋划迎接回上皇，把这件事告诉了太常卿许彬。
English: In the first month of the eighth year of King Taejo's reign, King Taejo was not feeling well. Shi Heng, Zhang Ye and others planned to welcome the retired emperor back, and they told this to Grand Admiral Xu Bin.

古文：彬曰： 此不世功也。
现代文：许彬说： 这是罕有的大功。
English: Xu Bin said, "This is a rare achievement.

古文：彬老矣，无能为。
现代文：我年纪大了，不能尽力。
English: I'm too old to do my best.

古文：徐元玉善奇策，盍与图之。 
现代文：徐元玉善于奇策，何不和他一起图谋这件事呢？ 
English: Xu Yuanyu is good at conjuring up schemes, why not join him in plotting this?

古文：亨即夜至有贞家。
现代文：石亨就在晚上来到徐有贞家。
English: Shi Heng came to Xu Youzhen's home in the evening.

古文：闻之，大喜，曰： 须令南城知此意。 
现代文：有贞听说这件事，非常高兴，说： 应该让南城知道这件事。 
English: When Arizane heard about this, she was very happy and said, "We should let Nancheng know about this."

古文：軏曰： 阴达之矣。 
现代文：张軏说： 暗地襄告诉他了。 
English: Zhang Ye said: I told him secretly.

古文：令太监曹吉祥入白太后。
现代文：有贞命太监曹吉祥入宫桌报太后。
English: There is a scene in which the chastity overseer auspiciously reports to the empress dowager that she has entered the palace.

古文：辛巳夜，诸人复会有贞所。
现代文：辛巳晚上，众人又一次聚集在有贞家。
English: In the evening, the crowd gathered again at Arisada's house.

古文：有贞升屋览乾象，亟下曰： 时至矣，勿失。 
现代文：徐有贞爬上房屋观看天象，急忙下来说： 时机到了，不要错过。 
English: Xu Youzhen climbed up the building to watch the celestial elephant, and hurried down to say: The time has come, don't miss it.

古文：时方有边警，有贞令軏诡言备非常，勒兵入大内。
现代文：当时正有边境的警报，徐有贞令张軏谎称应付非常事件，率兵进入宫内。
English: At that time, there was an alert at the border. Xu Youzhen ordered Zhang Ye to falsely claim that he was dealing with an emergency and led soldiers into the palace.

古文：亨掌门钥，夜四鼓，开长安门纳之。
现代文：石亨掌管钥匙，深夜四更，打开长安门迎接张軏。
English: Shi Heng was in charge of the key, and opened the Chang'an Gate four times in the middle of the night to welcome Zhang Ye.

古文：既入，复闭以遏外兵。
现代文：进入后，又关闭大门来阻止外面的官兵。
English: After entering, they closed the gate to stop soldiers and officers from marching outside.

古文：时天色晦冥，亨、軏皆惶惑，谓有贞曰： 事当济否？ 
现代文：当时天色昏暗，石亨、张軏都非常惊恐，对有贞说： 事情能够成功吗？ 
English: At that time, the sky was dark, Shi Heng and Zhang Ye were very frightened, and said to Youzheng: Can things be successful?

古文：有贞大言 必济 ，趣之行。
现代文：徐有贞大声说一定会成功，督促他们出发。
English: Xu Youzhen said loudly that they would definitely succeed and urged them to set off.

古文：既薄南城，门锢，毁墙以入。
现代文：已经靠近南城，大门紧闭，毁坏墙壁得以进入。
English: Already close to the southern city, the gates are closed, and the destroyed walls can be entered.

古文：上皇灯下独出问故，有贞等俯伏请登位，乃呼进舆。
现代文：上皇点上灯独自出来询问发生了什么事。徐有贞等人俯首跪下请求太上皇即位，于是呼喊随从送来舆车。
English: The Emperor lit a lamp and came out alone to inquire what had happened. Xu Youzhen and others bowed their heads and knelt to ask the Emperor to ascend the throne, and then shouted for a carriage to be sent.

古文：兵士惶惧不能举，有贞率诸人助挽以行。
现代文：士兵心中恐惧不能抬起来，有贞率众人帮助挽舆而行。
English: Fear cannot be raised in the hearts of soldiers, and people with integrity can help them walk the path of rectification.

古文：星月忽开朗，上皇各问诸人姓名。
现代文：夜空忽然明朗起来，上皇分别询问众人的姓名。
English: The night sky suddenly became clear, and the Emperor asked each of them their names.

古文：至东华门，门者拒弗纳，上皇曰 朕太上皇帝也 ，遂反走。
现代文：到束华门，守门的士兵拒绝他们进入，上皇说 朕是太上皇帝 ，于是门卫都退却了。
English: When they arrived at the Shuhua Gate, the soldiers guarding the gate refused to let them in. The emperor said, "I am the supreme emperor," and the guards retreated.

古文：乃升奉天门，有贞等常服谒贺，呼 万岁 。
现代文：太上皇就在奉天门升朝，徐有贞等人穿着普通衣服谒见拜贺，口呼万岁。
English: Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne at the Gate of Heaven, and Xu Youzhen and others, wearing ordinary clothes, came to pay their respects and say "long live."

古文：景帝明当视朝，群臣咸待漏阙下。忽闻殿中呼噪声，方惊愕。
现代文：量帝天明应当临朝听政，群臣都在宫阙下等候，忽然听到殿中传出呼喊喧闸声，正在惊恐。
English: Emperor Tenmei was supposed to be at court to listen to the government, and the courtiers were all waiting under the palace gate. Suddenly, they heard shouting and noise coming from the palace, and they were panicking.

古文：俄诸门毕启，有贞出号于众曰： 太上皇帝复位矣！ 
现代文：不一会儿诸门都打开，徐有贞出来对众人大声说： 太上皇帝又即位了。 
English: In a short while, all the doors were opened, and Xu Youzhen came out and said loudly to everyone: "The great emperor has ascended the throne again."

古文：趣入贺。
现代文：催促进去祝贺。
English: I urge you to congratulate us.

古文：即日命有贞兼学士，入内阁，参预机务。
现代文：当日命令徐有贞兼任学士，进入内阁，参预国家机务。
English: On the same day, Xu Youzhen was also ordered to serve as a bachelor, enter the cabinet, and participate in national affairs.

古文：明日加兵部尚书。
现代文：第二天加授兵部尚书。
English: The next day, he was awarded the Medal of Honor.

古文：有贞谓亨曰： 愿得冠侧注从兄后。 
现代文：有贞对石亨说： 希望能够戴着冠侧注跟在你的后面。 
English: Yuzhen said to Shi Heng, "I hope I can wear the crown and follow behind you."

古文：亨为言于帝，封武功伯兼华盖殿大学士，掌文渊阁事，赐号 奉天翊卫推诚宣力守正文臣 ，禄千一百石，世锦衣指挥使，给诰券。
现代文：石亨把他的话告诉了皇帝，封有贞焉武功伯兼华盖殿大学士，掌管文渊阁事务，赐号为奉天翊卫推诚宣力守正文臣，俸橾为一千一百石，世袭锦衣指挥使，给他世袭为官的诰券。
English: Shi Heng told his words to the emperor, and he was given the title of Zhengyan Wu Gong Bo and Huagai Dian University Scholar, in charge of the affairs of Wen Yuan Ge, given the title of Bong Tianyu Wei Xucheng Xuanli Shou Zheng Wen Sheng, with a salary of eleven hundred stone, and a hereditary brocade commanding officer, giving him a hereditary official's certificate.

古文：有贞遂诬少保于谦、大学士王文，杀之。
现代文：徐有贞于是诬陷少保于谦、大学士王文，杀了他们。
English: Xu Youzhen then framed Shao Bao, Yu Qian, and Wang Wen, a university judge, and killed them.

古文：内阁诸臣斥遂略尽。
现代文：内阁诸臣被排斥驱逐将尽。
English: Cabinet ministers will be excluded and expelled.

古文：陈循素有德于有贞，亦弗救也。
现代文：陈循一向对有贞有恩，也没有救助他。
English: Chen Xun had always been kind to Youzhen and did not help him.

古文：事权尽归有贞，中外咸侧目。
现代文：大小权力尽归有贞，朝廷内外都不敢正视他。
English: All power, great or small, belongs to Zhen, and no one inside or outside the court dares to look him in the face.

古文：而有贞愈益发舒，进见无时，帝亦倾心委任。
现代文：然而徐有贞愈加放纵，朝见没有一定的时间，皇帝也诚心诚意地委任他。
English: However, Xu Youzhen became more and more indulgent. He did not have a certain amount of time to see the emperor, and the emperor sincerely appointed him.

古文：有贞既得志，则思自异于曹、石。
现代文：有贞既已得志，就考虑自别于曹吉祥、石亨。
English: Now that you have achieved your goal, you should consider differentiating yourself from Cao Jixiang and Shi Heng.

古文：窥帝于二人不能无厌色，乃稍稍裁之，且微言其贪横状，帝亦为之动。
现代文：观察皇帝对两人有厌恶的神色，便稍微节制他们，并且暗示说他们贪婪横暴的情形，皇帝也为此动心。
English: Observing the emperor's aversion to the two men, he restrained them slightly, and hinted at their greed and violence, which the emperor was also moved by.

古文：御史杨瑄奏劾亨、吉祥侵占民田。
现代文：御史杨埴上奏弹劾石亨、曹吉祥侵占民田。
English: Emperor Shi Yangxuan issued a proclamation to impeach Shi Heng and Cao Jixiang for encroaching on people's fields.

古文：帝问有贞及李贤，皆对如瑄奏。
现代文：皇帝问有贞和李贤，回答都和杨坛说的一样。
English: When the emperor asked about Youzheng and Lixian, their answers were all the same as what Yang Dang said.

古文：有诏奖瑄。
现代文：皇帝下诏奖赏杨琼。
English: The emperor rewarded Yang Qiong generously.

古文：亨、吉祥大怨恨，日夜谋构有贞。
现代文：石亨、曹吉祥心中非常怨恨，日夜谋划诬陪有贞。
English: Shi Heng and Cao Jixiang were very resentful in their hearts and plotted day and night.

古文：帝方眷有贞，时屏人密语。
现代文：皇帝正垂爱有贞，时常屏退别人和有贞密语。
English: The emperor was in love with chastity, and often had secret conversations with other people.

古文：吉祥令小竖窃听得之，故泄之帝。
现代文：吉祥令小宦官偷听得到他们谈话的内容，故意把它泄露给皇帝。
English: He ordered a eunuch to eavesdrop on their conversation and deliberately leak it to the emperor.

古文：帝惊问曰： 安所受此语？ 
现代文：皇帝惊问： 在哪里听到这些话的？ 
English: The emperor asked in alarm: Where did you hear these words?

古文：对曰： 受之有贞，某日语某事，外间无弗闻。 
现代文：回答说： 在徐有贞那里听到的，某天说某事，外面没有不知道的。 
English: He replied, "There is nothing that I heard from Xu Youzhen that I didn't know about.

古文：帝自是疏有贞。
现代文：皇帝从此疏远徐有贞。
English: The emperor alienated Xu Youzhen from then on.

古文：会御史张鹏等欲纠亨他罪，未上，而给事中王铉泄之亨、吉祥。
现代文：恰好御史张鹏等人想纠劾石亨的其它罪状，没有上奏，而给事中王铉泄露给石亨、曹吉祥。
English: It just so happened that the imperial historian Zhang Peng and others wanted to impeach Shi Heng for other crimes, but they did not report it, and in the middle of the matter, Wang Yao leaked it to Shi Heng and Cao Jixiang.

古文：二人乃泣诉于帝，谓内阁实主之。
现代文：两人就向皇帝哭诉，说内阁实际上主使他们。
English: The two cried to the emperor, saying that the cabinet was actually controlling them.

古文：遂下诸御史狱，并逮系有贞及李贤。
现代文：于是就把众御史下到监狱，并且逮捕了徐有贞和李贤。
English: So he sent all the princes to prison and arrested Xu Youzhen and Li Xian.

古文：忽雷雹交作，大风折木。
现代文：忽然雷电冰雹交相发生，大风吹折了树木。
English: Suddenly, lightning, hail and hailstorms occurred, and high winds broke trees.

古文：帝憾悟，重违亨意，乃释有贞出为广东参政。
现代文：皇帝有所感悟，重新违背了石亨的意愿，就释放徐有贞出任广东参政。
English: The emperor was impressed and, again against Shi Heng's wishes, released Xu Youzhen to take part in politics in Guangdong.

古文：亨等憾未已，必欲杀之。
现代文：互亨等人怨恨不已，一定要杀了他。
English: Mutahoen and the others were so angry that they had to kill him.

古文：令人投匿名书，指斥乘舆，云有贞怨望，使其客马士权者为之。
现代文：令人投匿名信指斥责问皇上，说有贞心生怨恨，让他的门客马士权写的。
English: The anonymous letter accusing and rebuking the emperor, saying that having chastity breeds resentment, was written by his protégé Ma Shiquan.

古文：遂追执有贞于德州，并士权下诏狱，榜治无验。
现代文：于是在德州追捕囚禁了徐有贞，和马士权一起投入关押钦犯的监狱，严刑拷打，没有验证。
English: So they hunted down and imprisoned Xu Youzhen in Texas, and together with Ma Shiquan, they threw her into a prison for "honorary prisoners," where she was severely tortured without trial.

古文：会承天门灾，肆赦。
现代文：正赶上承天门发生灾祸，都被赦免了。
English: Just in time for the disaster at the Gate of Heaven, they were all pardoned.

古文：亨、吉祥虑有贞见释，言于帝曰： 有贞自撰武功伯券辞云 缵禹成功 ，又自择封邑武功。
现代文：石亨、曹吉祥忧虑有贞被释放，对皇帝说： 有贞自己在武功伯诰券上写上 缵禹成功 ，又自己选择武功作为分封的邑地。
English: Shi Heng and Cao Jixiang were worried that Youzhen would be released, and said to the emperor: Youzhen wrote "Successful" on his martial arts certificate, and chose martial arts as his fief.

古文：禹受禅为帝，武功者曹操始封也。有贞志图非望。 
现代文：禹受禅让成为皇帝，武功是曹操开始受封的地方，徐有贞志向抱负有非分的希望。 
English: Yu was made emperor by Zen, Wu Gong was the place where Cao Cao began to be crowned, and Xu had the aspiration of chastity and the hope of non-participation.

古文：帝出以示法司，刑部侍郎刘广衡等奏当弃市。
现代文：皇帝拿出来给法官看，刑部侍郎型庭冲等人上奏称应当斩首。
English: The emperor held it out for the judge to see, and the attendant of the criminal department, Niuchong, and others made a report saying that it should be beheaded.

古文：诏徙金齿为民。
现代文：皇帝下诏命令把徐有贞迁徙到金齿为民。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict ordering Xu Youzhen to migrate to Jinzu as a citizen.

古文：亨败，帝从容谓李贤、王翱曰： 徐有贞何大罪？为石亨辈所陷耳。其释归田里。 
现代文：互亨失败，皇帝不慌不忙地对李贤、王翱说： 徐有贞有什么大罪，被石亨等人陷害罢了，还是释放他让他回乡吧。 
English: When the mutual hunting failed, the emperor said unhurriedly to Li Xian and Wang Yao: Xu Youzhen has committed no serious crime, he has just been framed by Shi Heng and others, so release him and let him return to his hometown.

古文：成化初，复冠带闲住。
现代文：成化初年，又恢复官职闲住。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, he resumed his official position and lived idly by.

古文：有贞既释归，犹冀帝复召，时时仰观天象，谓将星在吴，益自负。
现代文：有贞已经被释放回家，还希望皇帝再次召见他，常常抬头观看天象，说将星在昊，更加自信。
English: Yuzhen had already been released to go home, and he still hoped that the emperor would summon him again. He often looked up at the celestial body and said that the stars were in the sky, and he felt more confident.

古文：常以铁鞭自随，数起舞。
现代文：经常把铁鞭带在身边，屡次随鞭起舞。
English: He often carries the iron whip around with him and dances with the whip many times.

古文：及闻韩雍征两广有功，乃掷鞭太息曰： 孺子亦应天象邪？ 
现代文：等到听说韩雍征讨两广有功，纔扔掉铁鞭叹息说： 那小子也应验天象吗？ 
English: When he heard that Han Yong had won two great feats, he threw away the iron whip and sighed, "Will that boy also pass the heavenly elephant test?"

古文：遂放浪山水间，十余年乃卒。
现代文：于是放纵于山水之间，十多年后纔死。
English: As a result, he indulged in the mountains and rivers, and died more than ten years later.

古文：有贞初出狱时，拊士权背曰： 子，义士也，他日一女相托。 
现代文：有贞刚出狱时，抚着马士权的背说： 你是义士，将来以一女相许。 
English: When she was just released from prison, she stroked Ma Shiquan's back and said, "You are a righteous man. In the future, you will be betrothed to a woman."

古文：金齿归，士权时往候之，绝不及婚事。
现代文：回到金齿，马士权经常去问候他，有贞开口不提婚事。
English: Back in Jintao, Ma Shiquan often went to greet him, but Yuzhen did not mention marriage.

古文：士权辞去，终身不言其事，人以是薄有贞而重士权。
现代文：士权辞去，终身不再说这件事。人们因此轻视徐有贞而尊重马士权。
English: People despised Xu Youzhen and respected Ma Shiquan because of this.

古文：杨善，字思敬，大兴人。
现代文：扬善，字思敬，大兴人。
English: Yang Shan, Zi Si Jing, Daxing Ren.

古文：年十七为诸生。
现代文：十七岁成为生员。
English: He became a freshman at the age of seventeen.

古文：成祖起兵，预城守有劳，授典仪所引礼舍人。
现代文：成祖起兵的时候，杨善参预守城有功，被授予典仪所引礼舍人。
English: When Cheng Zu raised an army, Yang Shanshan was awarded the title of "Courtesan of the Ceremony" for his outstanding contribution to the defense of the city.

古文：永乐元年，改鸿胪寺序班。
现代文：永乐元年，改任鸿胪寺序班。
English: In the first year of Yongle, he was transferred to the first grade of Hongye Temple.

古文：善伟风仪，音吐洪亮，工进止。
现代文：杨善伟岸有风度，吐音洪亮，擅长进止。
English: Yang Shanwei has good manners, a booming voice, and is good at pauses.

古文：每朝谒引进奏时，上目属之。累进右寺丞。
现代文：每当朝见引进奏时，皇上用眼睛注视着他，多次进升为右寺丞。
English: Whenever the Emperor was introduced to a musician, the Emperor watched him with his eyes and promoted him to Uji no jo many times.

古文：仁宗即位，擢本寺卿。
现代文：仁宗即位，晋升为本寺卿。
English: Ninso ascended the throne and was promoted to chief priest of this temple.

古文：宣德六年被劾下狱，褫冠带，逾月。
现代文：宣德六年被弹劾入狱，革除冠带，超过一月。
English: Xuan De was impeached and imprisoned for six years. He was stripped of his crown and belt for more than a month.

古文：正统六年，子容诈作中官书，假金于尚书吴中。
现代文：巫统六年，杨善的儿子杨容伪造宦官的书信，向尚书昊中借金。
English: In the sixth year of UMNO, Yang Son's son Yang Rong forged a letter from a eunuch and borrowed money from Shang Shuhao.

古文：事觉，谪戍威远卫，置善不问。
现代文：事情败露，被贬谪戍守威远卫，赦免杨善没有问罪。
English: The affair was exposed, Wei Yuanwei was demoted, and Yang Shan was pardoned without being charged.

古文：久之，擢礼部左侍郎，仍视鸿胪事。
现代文：很久以后，晋升为礼部左侍郎，仍然处理鸿胪事务。
English: After a long time, he was promoted to the left attendant of the etiquette department, and still dealt with the affairs of Hongye.

古文：十四年八月扈驾北征。及土木，师溃，善间行得脱。
现代文：十四年八月，杨善护驾北征，到达土木，军队溃败，杨善走小路得以逃脱。
English: In August 14th, Yang Shan took part in the Northern Expedition and arrived at the civil engineering site. The army was defeated, and Yang Shan was able to escape by taking a side road.

古文：也先将入寇，改左副都御史，与都督王通提督京城守备。
现代文：也先将要入侵，杨善改任左副都御史，和都督王通提督京城守备。
English: They were also going to invade first, and Yang Shan was changed to the left vice-governor of the capital, and the governor Wang Tong, the admiral of the capital, guarded the capital.

古文：寇退，进右都御史，视鸿胪如故。
现代文：敌人退去，杨善晋升为右都御史，和以前一样处理鸿胪事务。
English: As the enemy retreated, Yang Shan was promoted to the post of the Right Capital Imperial Historian, and he handled the affairs of Hongyu as before.

古文：景泰元年，廷臣朝正毕，循故事，相贺于朝房。
现代文：景泰元年，廷臣正月初一朝拜已毕，遵循旧有制度，相贺于朝房。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the first year of King Taejo, the courtiers had finished their morning prostrations and, following the old system, were congratulating each other in the throne room.

古文：善独流涕曰： 上皇在何所，而我曹自相贺乎！ 
现代文：杨善独自流着眼泪说： 上皇在什么地方，而我们这些人却自己互相祝贺！ 
English: With tears streaming down his face, Yang Shan said, "Where is the emperor, while we are congratulating each other!"

古文：众愧，为之止。
现代文：大家愧疚，因为他的话而停止了祝贺。
English: To our shame, we stopped congratulating him because of his words.

古文：是年夏，李实、罗绮使瓦剌，议罢兵，未还，而也先使至，言朝廷遣使报阿剌知院，而不遣大臣报可汗及太师，事必不济。
现代文：这年夏天，李实、罗绮出使瓦刺，商议罢兵，没有回来，而也先使者来到京城，说朝廷派使者报答阿刺知院，却不派大臣去报答可汗及太师，事情肯定不成功。
English: In the summer of that year, Li Si and Luo Gan sent an envoy to Wajin to discuss the disengagement of troops, but he did not return. An envoy also came to Beijing first, saying that the imperial court sent an envoy to repay Asanshiin, but did not send a minister to repay the khan and the grandmaster, and the matter would certainly not succeed.

古文：尚书王直等奏其言，廷议简四人为正副使，与偕行，帝命俟李实还议之。
现代文：尚书王直等人奏上他的话，在朝廷上商议选择四个人作为正副使，和他一起出使，皇帝命令等李实回来再讨论。
English: Shang Shu, Wang Zhi and others echoed his words. At the imperial court, they discussed the selection of four people as the chief and deputy envoys, and sent them out together with him. The emperor ordered that they wait for Li Si to return before discussing.

古文：已而实将至，乃命善及侍郎赵荣为使，赍金银书币往。
现代文：随后李实将要到达，纔命杨善及侍郎趟荣为使者，带着金银书币前往。
English: Subsequently, Li Si was about to arrive, and Yang Shan and his attendant, Wai Rong, were sent as emissaries, bringing gold and silver coins.

古文：先是袁敏者，请赍服御物问上皇安，不纳。
现代文：在此前，有个叫袁敏的人，请求带着皇帝服饰用品问候上皇，没有采纳。
English: Prior to this, a man named Yuan Min requested to greet the emperor with the emperor's clothing supplies, but it was not accepted.

古文：及是，尚书胡濙等言，上皇蒙尘久，御用服食宜付善等随行，亦不报。
现代文：等到这一次，尚书胡淡等人说，上皇遭难很久了，御用的衣服食物应该交给杨善等人随行，也没有答复。
English: This time, Shangshu HuTan and others said that the emperor had been in trouble for a long time, and that the imperial clothes and food should be given to Yang Shan and others to accompany him, but there was no reply.

古文：时也先欲还上皇，而敕书无奉迎语，自赍赐也先外，善等无他赐。
现代文：当时也先打算归还上皇，然而敕书上没有表示奉迎的话，除了带着赐给也先的财物外，杨善等人没有其它的赐物。
English: At that time, they first planned to return it to the emperor, but there was no word of welcome in the imperial edict. Yang Shan and the others had no other gifts except for the property given to the former emperor.

古文：善乃出家财，悉市彼中所需者，携以往。
现代文：杨善于是拿出家里的钱，全买了他们那里需要的东西，携带着前去。
English: Yang Shan then took out his family's money, bought everything they needed there, and carried it with him.

古文：既至，其馆伴与饮帐中，诧善曰： 土木之役，六师何怯也？ 
现代文：到了以后，杨善的馆伴和他在帐中饮酒，诧异地问杨善： 土木之役，你们的军队为何胆怯呢？ 
English: When they arrived, Yang Shan's companion from the guesthouse, who had been drinking with him, asked Yang Shan in surprise, "Why is your army so timid during the Civil Engineering Campaign?"

古文：善曰： 彼时官军壮者悉南征，王司礼邀大驾幸其里，不为战备，故令汝得志耳。
现代文：杨善说： 那时官军年轻力壮的都南征去了，王司礼邀请上皇驾幸其里，不作战争准备，所以让你们得志了。
English: Yang Shan said: At that time, the young and strong troops of the government army went to the south of the capital, and Wang Sili invited the emperor to drive there, without preparing for war, so let you be inspired.

古文：今南征将士归，可二十万。
现代文：如今南征的将士回来可以有二十万。
English: Today, there may be as many as two hundred thousand returned soldiers from the Southern Expedition.

古文：又募中外材官技击，可三十万。
现代文：又招募中外材官技击，可达三十万。
English: It will also recruit up to 300,000 foreign and domestic talent.

古文：悉教以神枪火器药弩，百步外洞人马腹立死。
现代文：全都用神枪火器药弩训练他们，百步以外洞穿人马腹部立即死去。
English: All of them were trained with guns, firearms, and poison pills, and all of them died instantly through a hole in the abdomen of a man and a horse a hundred paces away.

古文：又用策士言，缘边要害，隐铁椎三尺，马蹄践辄穿。
现代文：又采用谋士的话，沿着边防要塞的边缘，隐藏埋铁椎深三尺，马蹄一踏上就会穿透。
English: He also used the words of a strategist, along the edge of the border fortress, to hide the buried iron vertebrae three feet deep, and the horseshoe would penetrate as soon as he stepped on it.

古文：又刺客林立，夜度营幕若猿猱。 
现代文：又有刺客林立，夜度营帐像猿猴一样。 
English: There are also assassins, who camp at night like apes.

古文：伴色动。
现代文：馆伴色变。
English: The color of the pavilion changes.

古文：善曰： 惜哉，今皆置无用矣。 
现代文：杨善说： 可惜啊，如今这些都弃置没有用处了。 
English: Yang Shan said, "It's a pity that all these things have been abandoned and are no longer useful."

古文：问： 何故？ 
现代文：馆伴问： 为什么？ 
English: The museum attendant asked: Why?

古文：曰： 和议成，欢好且若兄弟，安用此？ 
现代文：杨善说： 和议成功了，我们欢乐友好就像兄弟一样，用它干什么呢？ 
English: Yang Shan said, "The peace talks have been successful. We are happy and friendly like brothers. What should we do with it?"

古文：因以所赍遗之。其人喜，悉以语也先。
现代文：杨善乘机用所拿的东西馒赠他，那个人很高兴，把杨善的话全都告诉了也先。
English: Yang Shan took the opportunity to present him with what he had taken. The man was very happy and told Yang Shan everything before leaving.

古文：明日谒也先，亦大有所遗，也先亦喜。
现代文：第二天谒见也先，也大有馊赠，也先也很高兴。
English: The next day, I was the first to see him, the first to give him a gift, and the first to be happy.

古文：善因诘之曰： 太上皇帝朝，太师遣贡使必三千人，岁必再赉，金币载途，乃背盟见攻何也？ 
现代文：杨善乘机责问他说： 太上皇帝朝，太师派遣上贡的使臣一定三干人，一年内一定两次进贡，黄金钱币不断，却背盟进攻为什么呢？ 
English: Yang Shan took the opportunity to scold him and asked: When the emperor ascended to the throne, the emperor's master sent a certain number of envoys to pay tribute. Within a year, there must have been two payments of tribute. The gold and coins kept coming in, but why did they attack against the alliance?

古文：也先曰： 奈何削我马价，予帛多剪裂，前后使人往多不归，又减岁赐？ 
现代文：也先说： 为何削减我的马价，给我的布帛多被剪断，前后派人去大多不归，又减少了岁赐？ 
English: He also said first: Why was the price of my horse reduced, my cloth cape was mostly cut off, I sent people back and forth, most of whom did not return, and my pension was reduced?

古文：善曰： 非削也，太师马岁增，价难继而不忍拒，故微损之。
现代文：杨善说： 不是削减，太师的马年年增多，价格难以维持又不忍心拒绝，所以稍微减少一些。
English: Yang Shan said, "It's not a cut. Taishi's horses have increased year by year. The price is difficult to maintain and I can't bear to refuse, so I'll reduce it a little."

古文：太师自度，价比前孰多也？
现代文：太师自己考虑一下，价钱和以前相比哪一个多？
English: Think about it for yourself, which one is more expensive than before?

古文：帛剪裂者，通事为之，事露，诛矣。
现代文：布帛被剪裂，是通事干的，事情败露，被杀掉了。
English: The cloth was cut and torn, it was the courier who did it, the affair was exposed, and he was killed.

古文：即太师贡马有劣弱，貂或敝，亦岂太师意耶？
现代文：就是太师上贡的马有劣有弱，貂裘有的破敝，难道是太师的意思吗？
English: Is it the meaning of the Grand Master that there are inferior and weak horses in the tribute, and that there are broken horses?

古文：且使者多至三四千人，有为盗或犯他法，归恐得罪，故自亡耳，留若奚为？
现代文：并且使者多达三四千人，有做强盗的或犯其它法律，回去恐怕获罪，所以自己逃跑了，留他们干什么？
English: Moreover, there were as many as three or four thousand envoys. Some of them were robbers or other lawbreakers, and they were afraid they would be punished if they went back, so they ran away. Why did they stay?

古文：贡使受宴赐，上名或浮其人数，朝廷核实而予之。
现代文：来进贡的使者接受赐宴，报上的名字又虚浮其人数，朝廷核实后给予他们。
English: The envoys who came to pay tribute received a banquet, the names in the newspaper were false and the number was false, the court verified and gave them.

古文：所减乃虚数，有其人者，固不减也。 
现代文：减少的祇是虚数，本有其人便一定不会减少。 
English: The reduction is only an imaginary number, the number of people will not decrease.

古文：也先屡称善。
现代文：也先多次称说得对。
English: He also said that he was right many times.

古文：善复曰： 太师再攻我，屠戮数十万，太师部曲死伤亦不少矣。
现代文：杨善又说： 太师两次进攻我们，屠杀几十万人，太师部下死伤也不少。
English: Yang Shan also said, "The grandmaster attacked us twice, slaughtering hundreds of thousands of people, and many of the grandmaster's subordinates were killed and injured.

古文：上天好生，太师好杀，故数有雷警。
现代文：上天好生，而太师好杀，所以常常有雷击。
English: God is good at giving birth, but the devil is good at killing, so there are often lightning strikes.

古文：今还上皇，和好如故，中国金币日至，两国俱乐，不亦美乎？ 
现代文：现在归还上皇，和好如初，中原金币一天天送至两国都欢乐，不也是美事吗？ 
English: Isn't it a beautiful thing to return the emperor's crown now, to make peace as in the beginning, and to send Central Plains gold coins to both countries every day to make them happy?

古文：也先曰： 敕书何以无奉迎语？ 
现代文：也先说： 敕书为何没有奉迎语？ 
English: He also said first: Why didn't the imperial edict have a welcoming speech?

古文：善曰： 此欲成太师令名，使自为之。
现代文：杨善说： 这是想成就太师美好的名声，让你自己去做。
English: Yang Shan said, "This is to achieve the good reputation of the great master, and let you do it yourself."

古文：若载之敕书，是太师迫于朝命，非太师诚心也。 
现代文：如果记载在敕书上，这是太师迫于朝命而不是太师的真心。 
English: If it is recorded in the imperial edict, it is because the Grand Master was forced to do so by the order of the Emperor, and not because of the true heart of the Grand Master.

古文：也先大喜，问： 上皇归将复得为天子乎？ 
现代文：也先大喜，问： 上皇回去后将再为天子吗？ 
English: He was also overjoyed at first, and asked, "When the Emperor returns, will he become the Son of Heaven again?"

古文：善曰： 天位已定，难再移。 
现代文：杨善说： 皇位已定，很难再改变。 
English: Yang Shan said, "The throne has already been decided, and it is difficult to change it.

古文：也先曰： 尧、舜如何？ 
现代文：也先说： 尧、舜的事情怎么样？ 
English: He also said first, "How are things with you and your family?"

古文：善曰： 尧让舜，今兄让弟，正相同也。 
现代文：杨善说： 尧禅让舜，如今兄让位给弟，道理是相同的。 
English: Yang Shan said: Zen gives way to, now the elder brother gives way to the younger brother, the reason is the same.

古文：其平章昂克问善： 何不以重宝来购？ 
现代文：也先的平章昂克问杨善： 为何不用重金来换？ 
English: Also earlier, Pingzhang Unke asked Yang Zhen: Why don't you have to pay a lot of money?

古文：善曰： 若赍货来，人谓太师图利。
现代文：杨善说： 如果拿着财物来，人们会说太师图利。
English: Yang Shan said, "If you come with wealth, people will say that you are too greedy.

古文：今不尔，乃见太师仁义，为好男子，垂史策，颂杨万世。 
现代文：如今不这样做，纔见出太师仁义，是个英雄好汉，名垂史策，颂扬万世。 
English: If he does not do so now, he will be seen as a benevolent and righteous grandmaster, a hero and a great man, and his name will go down in history and be glorified forever.

古文：也先笑称善。
现代文：也先笑着说好。
English: He also said yes with a smile.

古文：知院伯毅帖木耳劝也先留使臣，而遣使要上皇复位。
现代文：知院伯颜帖木耳劝也先扣留使臣，派遣使者去要挟上皇复位。
English: At the urging of the chief adviser to the emperor, Boryan Tsmul, he first detained the envoys and sent an emissary to threaten the emperor's reinstatement.

古文：也先惧失信，不可，竟许善奉上皇还。
现代文：也先害怕失信，认为不可，终于允许杨善陪着上皇回去。
English: At first, he was also afraid of losing credibility and thought it was impossible, and finally allowed Yang Shan to accompany the last emperor back.

古文：时举朝竞奇善功，而景帝以非初遣旨，薄其赏。
现代文：当时举朝上下争相夸赞杨善的功劳，而景帝认为不是当初派遣他去时的旨意，对他赏赐很少。
English: At that time, the imperial court was full of praise for Yang Shan's merits, but Emperor Jing believed that it was not his original intention to send him, and he received little reward.

古文：迁左都御史，仍莅鸿胪事。
现代文：晋升为左都御史，仍然治理鸿胪事务。
English: He was promoted to Sadogoto Imperial Historian, and continued to manage Hongye affairs.

古文：二年，廷臣朝正旦毕，修贺朝房。
现代文：二年，廷臣在正旦日朝见结束祝贺于朝房。
English: Two years later, the courtiers congratulated the Imperial Household Agency at the end of the meeting on the first day of the new year.

古文：善又曰： 上皇不受贺，我曹何相贺也？ 
现代文：杨善又说： 上皇不受贺，我们何必相贺呢？ 
English: Yang Shan also said: If the emperor is not congratulated, why should we congratulate each other?

古文：三年正月加太子太保。
现代文：三年正月，加官为太子太保。
English: In the first month of the third year, he was promoted to Crown Prince Taibo.

古文：六年以衰老乞致仕，优诏不许。
现代文：六年，以衰老请求退休，朝廷下褒美嘉奖的诏书役答应。
English: Six years later, he asked to retire because he was getting old, and the Imperial Court rewarded him with the title of Imperial Clerk.

古文：善状貌魁梧，应对捷给。
现代文：杨善状貌魁梧。应对敏捷。
English: Yang Shan is a burly man with a quick wit.

古文：然无学术，滑稽，对客鲜庄语。
现代文：然而没有学问，言语滑稽，对客人很少有正经话。
English: However, he is uneducated, his speech is comical, and he rarely has anything serious to say to his guests.

古文：家京师，治第郭外。
现代文：家在京城，在城外修建官邸。
English: His home is in the capital, but he is building an official residence outside the city.

古文：园多善果，岁时馈公卿戚里中贵，无不得其欢心。
现代文：花园有很多好的果树，每年成熟的时候赠送给公卿戚里中贵，没有对他不喜欢的。
English: The garden had many good fruit trees, and every year when they were ripe, they were given as gifts to the nobles' middle-class relatives. There was nothing he did not like.

古文：王振用事，善媚事之。
现代文：王振当权，杨善谄媚侍奉他。
English: Wang Zhen was in power, and Yang Zhen served him.

古文：至是又与石亨、曹吉祥结。
现代文：到这时又和石亨、曹吉祥结交。
English: At this time, he also made friends with Shi Heng and Cao Jixiang.

古文：天顺元年正月，亨、吉祥奉上皇复辟。善以预谋，封奉天翊卫推诚宣力武臣、特进光禄大夫、柱国、兴济伯，岁禄千二百石，赐世券，掌左军都督府事。
现代文：天顺元年正月，石亨、曹吉祥拥护上皇复位，杨善因参预谋划，被封为奉天翊卫推诚宣力武臣、特进光禄大夫、柱国、兴济伯，一年的俸禄焉一千二百石，赐予世代享受特权的铁券，掌管左军都督府事。
English: In the first month of the first year of Tianshun, Shi Heng and Cao Jixiang supported the restoration of the emperor, and Yang Shan, because of his participation in the pre-planning, was appointed as a warrior minister, a special doctor of Guanglu, a pillar state, and a Xing Zhibo, with a one-year salary of 1200 koku, an iron coupon granted to generations to enjoy privileges, and in charge of the left-army governor's affairs.

古文：尚书胡濙颂善迎驾功，命兼礼部尚书，寻改守正文臣。
现代文：尚书胡淡颂扬杨善迎驾之功，让他兼任礼部尚书，不久改任守正文臣。
English: Shangshu Hu Tan eulogized Yang Shan for his achievement in welcoming the driver, and made him concurrently serve as Shangshu of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and soon he was appointed as Shuzheng Wencheng.

古文：善使瓦剌，携子四人行，至是并得官。
现代文：杨善出使瓦刺，带领四个儿子去，到这时一并得官。
English: Yang Shan sent his emissary, Wazhang, to lead his four sons, and by this time they had all been promoted to high-ranking officials.

古文：又为从子、养子乞恩，得官者复十数人。
现代文：又为侄子养子请求恩惠，得官者又有十几人。
English: He also asked for favors for his nephew's adopted son, and there were more than a dozen people who received official positions.

古文：气势烜赫，招权纳贿。亨辈嫉而间之，以是渐疏外。
现代文：杨善气势垣赫，招权纳贿，石亨等人因嫉妒而离间他，因为这个原因逐渐被疏远。
English: Yang Zhengyi was very powerful, attracted power and accepted bribes, and Shi Heng and others separated him because of jealousy. For this reason, he was gradually alienated.

古文：二年五月卒。
现代文：二年五月杨善去世。
English: In May of the following year, Yang Shan passed away.

古文：赠兴济侯，谥忠敏。
现代文：赠为兴济侯，谧号忠敏。
English: He was given the posthumous title of Prince of Xingji, and his posthumous name was Zhongmin.

古文：善负才辨，以巧取功名，而憸忮为士论所弃。
现代文：杨善凭借才智机辩，以巧取功名，而他奸邪猜忌被士人们所唾弃。
English: Yang Shan relied on his talent and wit to gain fame, but he was rejected by the scholars because of his treachery and suspicion.

古文：其为序班，坐事与庶吉士章朴同系狱，久之，相狎。
现代文：他为序班时，因事和庶吉士章朴一起被囚禁在监狱，很久以后，相互亲近而不庄重。
English: When he was an orderly, he was imprisoned in a prison together with Zhang Pu, a commoner, because of an affair. After a long time, they were intimate and undignified.

古文：时方穷治方孝孺党，朴言家有孝孺集，未及毁。
现代文：当时正彻底查办方孝孺党羽，章朴说家里有孝孺的书集，役有来得及烧毁。
English: At that time, Fang Xiaohui's party was being thoroughly investigated. Zhang Pu said that there was a book collection of Fang Xiaohui at home, which had to be burned.

古文：善从借观，密奏之。
现代文：杨善从他家襄借来看，密奏了这件事。
English: From the perspective of borrowing from his family, Yang Shan secretly played this matter.

古文：朴以是诛死，而善得复官。
现代文：章朴因此被诛死，杨善却得以复官。
English: As a result, Zhang Pak was strangled to death, but Yang Shan was reinstated.

古文：于谦、王文之戮，陈循之窜，善亦有力焉。
现代文：于谦、王文被杀，陈循被放逐，杨善也起了作用。
English: Yu Qian and Wang Wen were killed, Chen Xun was exiled, and Yang Shan also played a role.

古文：子宗袭爵，后革 夺门 功，降金吾指挥使。
现代文：其子杨宗世袭爵位，后来革除 夺门 之功，降为金吾指挥使。
English: His son, Yang Zong, inherited the title of nobility, but was later stripped of his achievement in capturing the gate and reduced to the rank of Kingu commander.

古文：孙增尚公主。
现代文：其孙杨增娶公主为妻。
English: His grandson Yang Zeng married a princess.

古文：李实，字孟诚，合州人。
现代文：李实，字孟诚，合州人。
English: Li Si, alias Meng Cheng, from Hezhou.

古文：正统七年进士。
现代文：正统七年中进士。
English: He has been a member of the Orthodox Church for seven years.

古文：为人恣肆无拘检，有口辨。
现代文：为人放肆没有拘束，有口才。
English: He is bold, has no restraint, and is eloquent.

古文：景泰初，为礼科给事中。
现代文：景泰初年，任礼科给事中。
English: In the first year of Jing Tai, he was in charge of the etiquette department.

古文：也先令完者脱欢议和，实请行。
现代文：也先命令完者脱麸议和，李实请求随行。
English: He also ordered those who had finished to disengage from the discussion, and Li Si requested to accompany him.

古文：擢礼部右侍郎以往，少卿罗绮为副。
现代文：晋升为礼部右侍郎前往，少卿罗绮为副使。
English: He was promoted to the position of the Right Attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and Shoko (Junior Secretary) Rowan became the deputy envoy.

古文：至则见上皇，颇得也先要领，还言也先请和无他意。
现代文：到了就谒见上皇，颇得也先心意，回来说也先请求议和没有其它的意思。
English: When I arrived for the audience with the Emperor, I was quite anxious to get there first, and when I came back, I asked for a discussion first, and had no other intention.

古文：及杨善往，上皇果还。
现代文：等到杨善前往，上皇果然返回。
English: After waiting for Yang Shan to leave, the retired emperor returned.

古文：是年十月进右都御史，巡抚湖广。
现代文：这一年十月晋升为右都御史，巡抚湖广。
English: In October of the same year, he was promoted to the post of Utsu no goshi, the governor of Hakuo.

古文：五年召还，掌院事。
现代文：五年被召回京，掌管院事。
English: He was called back to Kyoto five years later to take charge of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：初，实使谒上皇，请还京引咎自责，失上皇意。
现代文：开始，李实出使谒见上皇，请求上皇回京引咎自责，违背了上皇的意思。
English: At the beginning, Li Si sent an envoy to see the Emperor and asked the Emperor to return to Beijing to reprimand himself, which was against the Emperor's wishes.

古文：后以居乡暴横，斥为民。
现代文：后来因为在乡暴横被贬斥为民。
English: Later, he was denounced as a villain because of his violent behavior in the village.

古文：赵荣，字孟仁，其先西域人。
现代文：赵荣，字孟仁，他的祖先是西域人。
English: Zhao Rong, alias Meng Ren, his ancestors were from the Western Regions.

古文：元时入中国，家闽县。
现代文：元朝时来到中原住在闽县。
English: During the Yuan Dynasty, he came to the Central Plains and lived in Jixian.

古文：舅萨琦，官翰林，从入都，以能书授中书舍人。
现代文：舅萨琦，做翰林官，跟从他来到京城，因为能书写授予中书舍人。
English: His father-in-law, Saju, a forestry official, followed him to the capital, because he could write and was awarded the title of Chinese Calligrapher.

古文：正统十四年十月，也先拥上皇至大同，知府霍瑄谒见，恸哭而返。
现代文：正统十四年十月，也先挟持上皇到大同，知府霍埴谒见，働哭而返。
English: In October of the 14th year of orthodoxy, he first took the emperor to Datong, met the prefectural governor, and returned crying.

古文：也先遂犯京师，奉上皇登土城，邀大臣出迓。
现代文：也先于是侵犯京城，拥着上皇登上土城，邀约大臣出来拜见。
English: He first invaded the capital, holding the emperor aloft in his arms, and invited the minister to come and see him.

古文：荣慨然请行。
现代文：赵荣慷慨请求出城。
English: Zhao Rong generously asked to leave the city.

古文：大学士高谷拊其背曰： 子，忠义人也。 
现代文：大学士高谷抚摸着他的后背说： 你是一个忠义之人。 
English: College student Takaya stroked his back and said, "You are a loyal person.

古文：解所佩犀带赠之，即擢大理右少卿，充鸿胪卿。
现代文：解下他所佩的犀牛皮腰带赠送给趟荣，立即提升为大理右少卿，充当鸿胪卿。
English: He took off the rhinoceros leather belt he was wearing and presented it to Wu Rong. He was immediately promoted to Dali Yu Shaoqing, acting as Hong Xuanqing.

古文：偕右通政王复出城朝见，进羊酒诸物。
现代文：和右通政王复一起出城朝见，进献羊酒等物。
English: He and Utsunomasa no Okimi went out of the city together to see the morning, bringing sheep wine and other things.

古文：也先以非大臣，遣之还，而邀于谦、石亨、王直、胡濙出。
现代文：也先因为他们不是重臣，让他们回去，而邀约于谦、石亨、王直、胡淡出来。
English: Also, because they are not senior ministers, let them go back first, and invite Yu Qian, Shi Heng, Wang Zhi and Hu Tan to come out.

古文：景帝不遣。
现代文：景帝不派遣他们。
English: Emperor Jing did not send them.

古文：改荣太常少卿，仍供事内阁。
现代文：改任趟荣为太常少卿，仍在内阁供职。
English: He was reappointed to the post of Vice-Minister of the State Council, and continues to serve in the cabinet.

古文：景泰元年七月擢工部右侍郎，偕杨善等往。
现代文：景泰元年七月提升焉工部右侍郎，和杨善等人出使。
English: Jing Tai was promoted to the position of the right-hand man of the engineering department in July of the first year, and Yang Shan and others were dispatched.

古文：敕书无奉迎语，善口辩，荣左右之，竟奉上皇归。进左侍郎。
现代文：敕书中无奉迎语，杨善舌战辩解，赵荣帮助他，终于侍奉着上皇回来晋升为左侍郎。
English: In the imperial edict, there was no welcoming speech, Yang Shan justified the war of words, Zhao Rong helped him, and finally he returned to serve the last emperor and was promoted to the left attendant.

古文：行人王晏请开沁河通漕运，再下廷议，言不便，遣荣往勘。
现代文：行人王晏奏请开沁河通漕运，两次下交朝廷商议，说不利，派遣赵荣前去勘察。
English: Pedestrian Wang Shuxiao asked to open the Lugu River to paddle transport, twice submitted to the imperial court for discussion, said it was unfavorable, and sent Zhao Rong to investigate.

古文：还，亦言不便。
现代文：回来也说不利。
English: Coming back is also said to be disadvantageous.

古文：寻奉敕会山东、河南三司相度河道。
现代文：不久奉敕令会同山东、河南三司测量河道。
English: Soon, Feng Yu ordered the three departments of Shandong and Henan to survey the river.

古文：众以荣不由科目，慢之。
现代文：众人因趟荣不是经由科考出身，怠慢他。
English: Many people scorned him because he did not come from a scientific background.

古文：荣怒，多所挞辱，又自摄衣探水深浅。
现代文：趟荣发怒，多有所责打辱骂又提起衣服自己试探河水深浅。
English: Weng Rong flew into a rage. He often beat and abused her, and even took off her clothes to test the depth of the river.

古文：三司各上章言荣单马驰走，惊骇军民，杖伤县官，鬻廪米多取其直。
现代文：三司各上奏章称赵荣单马奔走，惊骇军民，用木板打伤县官，卖公家的粮食获取大量钱财。
English: The report of the three departments said that Zhao Rong ran on a single horse, shocked the military and the people, injured the county officials with a wooden board, and sold the grain of the public to obtain a lot of money.

古文：抚、按薛希琏、张琛亦以闻。
现代文：巡抚、按察使薛希理、张琛也把这件事上报朝廷。
English: The governor and deputy inspectors Xue Xili and Zhang Xi also reported the matter to the imperial court.

古文：章下治河佥都御史徐有贞核奏。
现代文：奏章下到治河愈都御史徐有贞核实上奏。
English: At the end of the movement, the music is played with the verification of Xu Youzhen, the governor of Zhihe Yudu.

古文：法司言，荣虽失大体，终为急于国事，鬻米从人所为。诸臣侮大臣，抗敕旨，宜逮治，希琏、琛亦宜罪。
现代文：司法官说赵荣虽失大体，终究是因为急于国事，卖官粮是从人所为；诸臣轻慢大臣，违抗敕旨，应该逮捕惩治，薛希理、张琛也应惩罪。
English: The judicial officer said that although Zhao Rong lost the general election, it was ultimately because he was in a hurry to deal with state affairs, and the selling of official grain was done by others; the ministers who disobeyed the imperial edict should be arrested and punished, and Xue Xili and Zhang Xi should also be punished.

古文：帝令按臣责取诸臣供状，宥之。
现代文：皇帝命令按察大臣责取诸臣供状，赦免了他。
English: The emperor ordered the minister of justice to obtain confessions from all his subjects, and pardoned him.

古文：天顺元年进尚书。
现代文：天顺元年，晋升为尚书。
English: In the first year of Tianshun, he was promoted to Shangshu.

古文：曹钦反，荣策马大呼于市曰： 曹贼作逆，壮士同我讨罪。 
现代文：曹钦谋反，赵荣驰马大呼于市说： 曹贼叛逆，壮士同我讨其罪。 
English: Cao Qin plotted to rebel, Zhao Rongqi rode his horse to the city and shouted: Cao the thief is a traitor, the strong man should plead with me for his crime.

古文：果有至者，即率之往。
现代文：果然有跟来的，就率领他们前往。
English: When some did come, he led them on their way.

古文：贼平，英宗与李贤言，叹荣忠，命兼大理寺卿，食其俸。
现代文：叛贼被平定，英宗对李贤交谈，叹赏趟荣的忠心，命令他兼任大理寺卿，食其俸禄。
English: The traitors were subdued, and Emperor Yingzong talked to Li Xian, praised Tuan Rong's loyalty, and ordered him to concurrently serve as the Lord of Dali Temple and eat his salary.

古文：七年以疾罢。
现代文：七年，因病免职。
English: Seven years later, he was relieved of his duties due to illness.

古文：成化十一年卒。
现代文：成化十一年去世。
English: Chenghua passed away at the age of 11.

古文：赐恤如制。霍瑄，字廷璧，凤翔人。
现代文：按制度赐予抚恤。霍管，字廷璧，凤翔人。
English: According to the system, a pension is given. Huo Guan, Zi Ting Bi, Feng Xiangren.

古文：由乡举入国学，授大同通判。
现代文：由乡试中举入国学，授予大同通判。
English: He was promoted from the township test to enter the national school and was awarded the Datong pass.

古文：正统十二年，以武进伯朱冕荐，就擢知府。
现代文：正统十二年，因武进伯朱冕推荐，就地提升为知府。
English: In the 12th year of orthodoxy, because of the recommendation of Wu Jin Bo Zhu Guan, it was promoted to the prefecture.

古文：也先拥英宗至城下，瑄与理饷侍郎沈固等出谒，叩马号泣。
现代文：也先拥英宗到城下，霍管与理饷侍郎沈固等出去谒见，勒住马号哭。
English: He also took Yingzong to the castle first, and went out to meet with Huo Guan and Lijun's servant Shen Guo. He held back his sobs.

古文：众露刃叱之，不为动。
现代文：众兵士露出刀刃喝叱他，不为之所动。
English: The soldiers scolded him and were unmoved.

古文：上皇命括城内金帛，瑄悉所有献之，上皇嘉叹。
现代文：上皇命他搜括城内金帛，霍管都拿来献给他，上皇嘉赏赞叹。
English: The emperor ordered him to collect all the gold ingots in the city, and he presented them to him. The emperor was very impressed.

古文：寇数出没大同、浑源，伺军民樵采，辄驱掠。
现代文：敌寇屡次出汝于大同、浑源。等待军民出来打柴，就驱逐掠夺。
English: Enemy raiders repeatedly appeared in Datong and Hunyuan. They waited for soldiers and civilians to come out to collect firewood, and then drove them away and plundered.

古文：或幸脱归，率残伤肢体。
现代文：有的侥幸逃脱回来，大都伤残了肢体。
English: Some were lucky to escape and came back, but most of them were injured.

古文：遗民相率入城，无所栖，又乏食。
现代文：遗民相继入城，没有可以栖息的地方，又缺乏粮食。
English: Survivors have entered the city one after another, with no place to live and a lack of food.

古文：瑄俱为奏之。
现代文：霍埴都为他们奏请。
English: The whole world is rooting for them.

古文：老弱听暂徙，发粟振，而所留城守丁壮除赋役。
现代文：老弱听凭暂留或迁徙，散发粮食赈济，而所留下来守城的壮丁免除赋税徭役。
English: The old and the weak were allowed to stay or migrate temporarily to distribute grain for subsistence, while the young men who remained to defend the city were exempted from paying taxes.

古文：秩满当迁，镇巡诸臣乞留。
现代文：任职期满应当升迁，镇巡诸臣请求他留下。
English: He was due to be promoted at the end of his term of office, and the town councilors asked him to stay on.

古文：诏加山西右参政，仍治府事。
现代文：皇上下诏加升为山西右参政，仍治理府事。
English: The emperor was elevated to the right to participate in politics in Shanxi, and still governed the affairs of the government.

古文：英宗复位，征拜瑄工部右侍郎，而固亦以石亨荐，起为户部尚书。
现代文：英宗复位，征召授霍管为工部右侍郎，而沈固也因石亨推荐，起任户部尚书。
English: Yingzong was reinstated, and he was conscripted to serve as the right hand man of the engineering department, and Shen Gu was also recommended by Shi Heng to serve as the head of the household.

古文：既而巡抚上瑄治行，赐诰旌异。
现代文：不久巡抚上报霍管的政绩，皇上赐令褒奖他。
English: Soon after, the governor reported the political achievements of Huo Guan, and the emperor gave him a commendation.

古文：初，瑄在大同，巡抚年富被逮，瑄资其家还里，为镇守太监韦力转所恶，挞之十余。
现代文：起初，霍坛在大同，巡抚年富被逮捕，霍坛资助他的家人返回乡里，为镇守太监韦力转所厌恶，鞭挞他十几下。
English: At first, Hottan was arrested in Datong, the governor Nianfu, Hottan helped his family return to the countryside, and was disgusted by the town guard eunuch Wei Li, and whipped him more than a dozen times.

古文：至是瑄以闻，且言力转每宴辄用妓乐，服御僣侈如王者，强取部民女为妾。
现代文：到这时霍坛把这件事上报给朝廷，并且说韦力转每次宴会总是使用妓乐，服御越制奢侈好像王者，强娶部民女为妾。
English: At this time, Hottan reported the matter to the imperial court, and said that Wei Liguo always used prostitutes at every banquet, served extravagant luxury like a king, and forcibly married female servants as concubines.

古文：力转亦讦瑄违法事。
现代文：韦力转也攻击他违法的事情。
English: Weilitu also attacked him for breaking the law.

古文：帝两释焉。
现代文：皇帝把两人都赦免了。
English: The emperor pardoned them both.

古文：其年转左，赐二品服。
现代文：这年转为左侍郎，赐二品官服。
English: In that year, he was transferred to the position of Sasajiro and given a second-class official uniform.

古文：成化初，屡为言官所劾。命致仕。
现代文：成化初年，屡次被谏官所弹劾皇帝命他退休。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, he was repeatedly impeached by eunuchs, and the emperor ordered him to retire.

古文：卒于京师。
现代文：在京城去世。
English: He died in Kyoto.

古文：瑄初治郡有声，晚节不检。
现代文：霍坛开始治理郡县很有声望，晚节不检点。
English: Hottan began to govern the county and county is very prestigious, late in the day indiscreet.

古文：特以艰危时见知天子，遂久列显位。
现代文：特别以艰危时刻为天子所了解，于是久列显位。
English: In particular, it is understood by the Son of Heaven to be a difficult time, so Jiulei appears.

古文：沈固，丹阳人。
现代文：沈固，丹阳人。
English: Shen Gu, from Danyang.

古文：永乐中，起家乡举，积官至尚书。
现代文：永乐年问，由乡试起家，积官至尚书。
English: Yongle asked, starting from the township, accumulating officials to Shangshu.

古文：石亨败，乞休去。
现代文：石亨事败，请求退休离去。
English: Shi Heng was defeated and asked to retire.

古文：王越，字世昌，濬人。
现代文：玉越，字世昌，浚人。
English: Yu Yue, Zi Shichang, Dongren.

古文：长身，多力善射。涉书史，有大略。
现代文：身材修长，力气大善射，涉猎书史，有大谋略。
English: Slender figure, great strength, good shot, involved in book history, has a great strategy.

古文：登景泰二年进士。
现代文：考中景泰二年进士。
English: Jing Tai became a member two years after passing the middle school entrance examination.

古文：廷试日，旋风起，扬其卷去，更给卷，乃毕事。
现代文：廷试那天，有旋风刮起吹走了他的卷子，重新给他试卷，纔完事。
English: On the day of the court examination, a whirlwind blew up and blew away his paper. He was given a new exam paper and the matter was closed.

古文：授御史，出按陕西。
现代文：授予御史，出京巡按陕西。
English: He was awarded the title of Imperial Historian and went on a tour of Beijing and Shaanxi.

古文：闻父讣，不俟代辄归，为都御史所劾。
现代文：听说父亲去世，不等接替者到就回去，被都御史弹劾。
English: When he heard that his father had died, he did not wait for his successor to arrive before returning, and was impeached by the Metropolitan Historian.

古文：帝特原之。
现代文：皇帝特意原谅他。
English: The emperor pardoned him on purpose.

古文：天顺初，起掌诸道章奏，超拜山东按察使。
现代文：天顺初年，起用掌诸道奏章，破格授予山东按察使。
English: In the first year of Tianshun, he was appointed to the post of inspector general of Shandong Province.

古文：七年，大同巡抚都御史韩雍召还，帝难其代，喟然曰： 安得如雍者而任之。 
现代文：七年，大同巡抚都御史韩雍被召回京，皇帝为他的继任犯难，喟然叹道： 哪里得到和韩雍一样的人而任用他？ 
English: In the seventh year, the Datong governor Han Yong was recalled to Beijing. The emperor was puzzled about his successor and sighed: Where can I get someone like Han Yong to appoint him?

古文：李贤荐越，召见。
现代文：李贤推荐王越，皇上召见他。
English: Li Xian recommended Wang Yue, and the emperor summoned him.

古文：越伟服短袂，进止便利。
现代文：王越穿着宽松的衣服短的衣袖，举止敏捷。
English: Wang Yue wears loose clothes with short sleeves and has a quick manner.

古文：帝喜，擢右副都御史以行。
现代文：皇帝喜欢，擢升他为右副都御史而行。
English: The emperor liked him and promoted him to the post of right vice-governor of the capital.

古文：甫至，遭母忧，夺情视事。
现代文：刚到，遭遇母亲去世，不等丧期满便办公。
English: He had just arrived when his mother passed away. He did not wait for the period of mourning to expire before returning to work.

古文：越乃缮器甲，简卒伍，修堡寨，减课劝商，为经久计。
现代文：王越于是修缮器甲，精选士卒，修建地堡木栅，减免赋税鼓励商业，为长久打算。
English: Wang Yue then repaired machine A, selected soldiers, built a bunker grate, reduced taxes to encourage business, and planned for the long term.

古文：成化三年，抚宁侯朱永征毛里孩，以越赞理军务。
现代文：成化三年，抚宁侯朱永征讨毛里孩，用王越助理军务。
English: In the third year of Chenghua, Zhu Yong, the lord of Fuxing, sent troops to subjugate the Mao children and appointed Wang Yue as his assistant in military affairs.

古文：其秋，兼巡抚宣府。
现代文：这年秋，兼任宣府巡抚。
English: In the autumn of that year, he also assumed the post of the Proclamation Office governor.

古文：五年冬，寇入河套，延绥巡抚王锐请济师，诏越帅师赴之。
现代文：五年冬，敌寇侵入河套，延绥巡抚王锐请求增派军队。皇上诏令王越率军前往。
English: In the winter of the fifth year, the enemy corsairs invaded Hetao, and the governor of Yancheng, Wang Rui, requested the dispatch of additional troops. The emperor ordered Wang Yue to lead the army.

古文：河套者，周朔方、秦河南地，土沃，丰水草。
现代文：河套是周朝的朔方、秦朝的河南，土地肥沃，水草丰足。
English: Hetao is the Shuofang of the Zhou Dynasty and the Henan of the Qin Dynasty, with fertile land and abundant aquatic plants.

古文：东距山西偏头关，西距宁夏，可二千里。
现代文：东距山西偏头关，西距宁夏，约有二千里。
English: It is about two thousand miles from Shanxi Yangtou Pass in the east and Ningxia in the west.

古文：三面阻河，北拊榆林之背。
现代文：三面以黄河为险阻，北靠榆林之背。
English: The Yellow River is a dangerous obstacle on three sides, and the back of Yulin is in the north.

古文：唐三受降城在河外，故内地。
现代文：唐朝三座受降城在黄河以外，所以是内地。
English: The three capitulated cities of the Tang Dynasty were outside the Yellow River, so they were inland.

古文：明初，阻河为守，延绥亦无事。
现代文：明初，凭仗黄河险阻防守，延绥也没有战事。
English: At the beginning of the Ming Dynasty, with the help of the Yellow River, there was no war in Yancheng.

古文：自天顺间，毛里孩等三部始入为寇，然时出没，不敢久驻。
现代文：白天顺年问，毛里孩等三部开始侵入为寇。然而时常出没，不敢久驻。
English: During the day, the Year-Round Festival, the Three Departments such as the Maori Children began to invade. However, they often appeared and did not dare to stay for long.

古文：至是始屯牧其中，屡为边患。
现代文：到这时开始在这里居住放牧，屡焉边患。
English: At this time, people began to live and graze here, and there were frequent border disputes.

古文：越至榆林，遣游击将军许宁出西路龙州、镇靖诸堡，范瑾出东路神木、镇羌诸堡，而自与中官秦刚按榆林城为声援。
现代文：王越到达榆林，派遣游击将军许宁出西路龙州、镇靖诸堡，范瑾出东路神木、镇羌诸堡，而自己和宦官秦刚巡视榆林城作为声援。
English: Wang Yue arrived in Yulin and sent the guerrilla general Xu Ning out of the west road of Longzhou and the towns of Jing and Zhu, Fan Yu out of the east road of Shenmu and the towns of Zhu, and himself and the eunuch Qin Gang toured Yulin City as a show of solidarity.

古文：宁战黎家涧，瑾战崖窑川，皆捷；右参将神英又破敌于镇羌，寇乃退。
现代文：许宁战黎家涧，范瑾战崖窑川，都取胜，右参将神英又破敌于镇羌，敌寇纔撤退。
English: Xu Ning fought against Lijiaqi and Fan Yu fought against Yaochuan, both of which were victorious. The right wing general Shen Ying defeated the enemy at Zhenyao, and the enemy corsairs retreated.

古文：明年正月以捷闻，越引还。
现代文：第二年正月，捷报上达朝廷，王越引军回京。
English: In the first month of the second year, the report reached the imperial court, and Wang Yue led the army back to Beijing.

古文：抵偏头关，延绥告警。
现代文：抵达偏头关，延绥发出警报。
English: Arriving at the turning point, Yan Xun issued an alarm.

古文：兵部劾越擅还。
现代文：兵部弹劾王越擅自返回。
English: The military department impeached Wang Yue for returning without permission.

古文：诏弗罪，而令越屯延绥近地为援。
现代文：皇上下诏没有怪罪，而仑令王越居延绥近地为援。
English: The imperial edict did not blame anyone, but ordered Wang Yueju to come to Yancheng's aid.

古文：寇万余骑五路入掠，越令宁等击退之。
现代文：敌寇万余骑兵分五路入侵抢掠，王越令许宁等人击退了他们。
English: More than 10,000 enemy cavalrymen invaded and plundered in five directions, and Wang Yue ordered Xu Ning and others to repel them.

古文：进右副都御史。
现代文：晋升为右副都御史。
English: He was promoted again to the post of Right Vice-Governor.

古文：是年三月，朝廷以阿罗出等扰边不止，拜抚宁侯朱永为将军，与越共图之。
现代文：这年三月，朝廷因阿罗出等敌不断侵扰边境，任命抚宁侯朱永为将军，与王越共同谋划这件事。
English: In March of that year, the imperial court, due to the continuous invasion of the border by enemies such as Aro, appointed Zhu Yong, a Fuxing lord, as a general to jointly plan the matter with Wang Yue.

古文：破敌开荒川，诸将追奔至牛家寨，阿罗出中流矢走。
现代文：破敌于开荒川，诸将追击逃敌到牛家寨，阿罗出被乱箭射中逃走。
English: After defeating the enemy at Kaibara-gawa River, the generals chased the fleeing enemy to Niu Jiazhai, and Aro was shot by random arrows and fled.

古文：论功，进右都御史。
现代文：论功，王越晋升为右都御史。
English: On the basis of merit, Wang Yue was promoted to the post of the Right Metropolitan Historian.

古文：又明年，越以方西征，辞大同巡抚。
现代文：又第二年，王越因将要西征，辞去大同巡抚。
English: The following year, Wang Yue resigned as Datong's governor because he was planning to go on the Western Expedition.

古文：诏听之，加总督军务，专办西事。
现代文：诏令听从，加官总督军务，专办西部边防事务。
English: He obeyed the imperial edict and was appointed as the military governor, specializing in the western border defense affairs.

古文：然是时寇数万，而官军堪战者仅万人，又分散防守，势不敌。
现代文：然而这时敌寇敷万，而官军能够作战的只有一万人，又分散防守，势力不敌。
English: However, at this time, there were thousands of enemy invaders, and only ten thousand government troops were able to fight, and they were scattered in defense, and their forces were defeated.

古文：永、越乃条上战、守二策。
现代文：朱永、王越于是上奏皇上攻守二策。
English: Zhu Yong and Wang Yue then presented the emperor with two strategies for attack and defense.

古文：尚书白圭亦难之，请敕诸将守。
现代文：尚书白圭也认为困难，请求皇上敕令诸将防守。
English: Shangshu Bai Gui also thought it was difficult and asked the emperor to order the generals to defend themselves.

古文：其年，寇复连入怀远诸堡，永、越御却之。
现代文：这一年，敌寇又连入怀速诸堡，朱永、王越抵御击退了他们。
English: In the same year, the enemy raiders once again entered the fortresses of Huaihai, and Zhu Yong and Wang Yue resisted and repelled them.

古文：圭复请大举搜套。
现代文：白圭又请求大举搜查河套。
English: Bai Gui also requested a large-scale search of the river.

古文：明年遣侍郎叶盛至军议。
现代文：第二年皇上派侍郎叶盛到军中商议。
English: In the following year, the emperor sent Ye Sheng, a chamberlain, to the army to discuss the matter.

古文：时永已召还，越以士卒衣装尽坏，马死过半，请且休兵，与盛偕还。
现代文：当时朱永已被召回，王越以士卒衣服全都破旧，战马死去过半，请求暂且休兵，和叶盛一起回京。
English: At that time, Zhu Yong had been recalled, Wang Yue and his soldiers were all in worn-out clothes, and more than half of the horses had died. They requested a temporary leave of absence and returned to Beijing together with Ye Sheng.

古文：而廷议以套不灭，三边终无宁岁；先所调诸军已逾八万，将权不一，迄无成功。宜专遣大将调度。
现代文：然而廷议以河套敌人不灭，三边终究无安宁之日。起先所调去的各路军马已超过八万，将军权力不统一，终于没有成功，应专遣大将调度指挥。
English: However, the court deliberated that the enemy would not be destroyed by the river loop, and the three sides would eventually have no peace. At the beginning, more than 80,000 troops and horses from all directions were transferred, and the power of the generals was not unified, and it was not successful in the end. A general should be dispatched to dispatch and command.

古文：乃拜武靖侯赵辅为平虏将军，敕陕西、宁夏、延绥三镇兵皆受节制，越总督军务。
现代文：于是授予武靖侯趟辅为平虏将军，敕令陕西、宁夏、延绥三镇军队部受其指挥，王越总督军务。
English: Therefore, Wu Jing was given the additional title of General Pingru, and the three military commands of Shaanxi, Ningxia and Yancheng were placed under his command, and Wang Yue was appointed as the military governor.

古文：比至，寇方深入环庆、固原饱掠，军竟无功。
现代文：等到到达，敌寇刚深入环庆、固原大肆掠夺，军队最终没有建功。
English: When they arrived, the enemy raiders had just penetrated into Huanqing and plundered Guyuan, and the army ultimately did not make any contribution.

古文：越、辅以满都鲁、孛罗忽、癿加思兰方强盛，势未可破，乃奏言： 欲穷搜河套，非调精兵十五万不可。
现代文：玉越、赵辅因满都鲁、孛罗忽、乩加思兰正强盛，形势还不能够消灭，于是上奏说： 想穷搜河套，非调精兵十五万不可。
English: Yu Yue and Zhao Fu, due to the fact that the Manchurian, Minoan, and Qajar empires were flourishing, the situation could not yet be eliminated, so the report said: If you want to search the river, you must transfer 150,000 soldiers.

古文：今馈饷烦劳，公私困竭，重加科敛，内衅可虞。
现代文：如今粮饷烦重劳顿。公私都困苦枯竭，重加赋税，内部的矛盾可忧。
English: Today, the granary is overburdened and overworked. Both the public and private sectors are exhausted, taxes have been increased, and internal contradictions are worrying.

古文：宜姑事退守，散遣士马，量留精锐，就粮鄜、延，沿边军民悉令内徙。
现代文：应暂且退守，遣散士马，估量留下精锐军队，移兵到粮多的墉、延，沿边军民都命令迁往内地。
English: It was necessary to retreat temporarily, demobilize soldiers and horses, and leave behind an elite army according to estimates. The soldiers were moved to the grain-rich provinces of Yan and Yan, and the soldiers and civilians along the border were ordered to move inland.

古文：其寇所出没之所，多置烽燧，凿堑筑墙，以为保障。 
现代文：敌寇所出役的地方，多多设置烽燧，挖沟筑墙，以此作为保障。 
English: In the places where the enemy raiders were sent, they mostly set up ploughs, dug ditches and built walls as a safeguard.

古文：奏上，廷议不决。
现代文：奏折呈上，朝廷议论不能决断。
English: Once the report was submitted, the discussion in the Imperial Court could not be resolved.

古文：越等又奏： 寇知我军大集，移营近河，潜谋北渡，殆不战自屈。
现代文：王越等又奏： 敌寇知道我军大集，把军营移近黄河，暗中谋划北渡，大概不战自届。
English: Wang Yue and others also played: The enemy bandits knew that our army was gathering, moved the military camp close to the Yellow River, secretly planned to cross to the north, and probably resigned without fighting.

古文：但山、陕荒旱，刍粮缺供，边地早寒，冻馁相继。
现代文：但山西、陕西荒芜干旱，粮草缺乏供应，边地早寒，冻饿相继。
English: However, Shanxi and Shaanxi are desolate and arid, lack of supply of grain and grass, early cold in the border areas, and freezing and starving successively.

古文：以时度之，攻取实难，请从防守之策，臣等亦暂还朝。 
现代文：以时机考虑，攻取实在困难，请听从防守之策，臣等也暂时还朝。 
English: Considering the timing, it is really difficult to capture Zhengzhou. Please follow the defensive strategy. The vassals also temporarily returned to the imperial court.

古文：于是部科诸臣劾越、辅欺谩。
现代文：于是部科诸臣弹劾王越、趟辅欺骗朝廷。
English: As a result, ministers and ministers impeached Wang Yue, and Watanabe deceived the imperial court.

古文：会辅有疾，召还，以宁晋伯刘聚代。
现代文：恰好趟辅有病，被召回京，用宁晋伯刘聚代替他。
English: It just so happened that Trip Fu was ill and was called back to Beijing. He was replaced by Ning Jinbo Liu Ju.

古文：明年，越与聚败寇温天岭，进左都御史。
现代文：第二年，王越和刘聚败敌于漫天岭，晋升为左都御史。
English: In the second year, Wang Yue and Liu Ju defeated the enemy in Mantianling and were promoted to the left capital imperial history.

古文：是时三遣大将，皆以越总督军务。
现代文：此时三次派遣大将，都以王越总督军务。
English: At this time, three times dispatched generals, all with Wang Yue as the military governor.

古文：寇每入，小击辄去，军罢即复来，率一岁数入。
现代文：敌寇每次来，受很小的打击就离去，军队疲惫就又回来，大概一年来好几次。
English: Each time the enemy raiders came, they suffered a very small blow and left, and the army returned exhausted, probably several times a year.

古文：将士益玩寇，而寇势转炽。
现代文：将士更加轻视敌人，而敌人势力转盛。
English: The soldiers despised the enemy even more, and the enemy forces became more powerful.

古文：其年九月，满都鲁及孛罗忽、癿加思兰留妻子老弱于红盐池，大举深入，直抵秦州、安定诸州县。
现代文：这年九月，满都鲁及孛罗忽、乩加思兰留妻儿老弱于红盐池，大举深入，直抵秦州、安定诸州县。
English: In September of that year, Manduro and his wife and children, who were too weak to stay in Hongyanchi, made their way to Qinzhou and Zhouzhou counties.

古文：越策寇尽锐西，不备东偏，乃率延绥总兵官许宁、游击将军周玉各将五千骑为左右哨，出榆林，逾红儿山，涉白盐滩，两昼夜行八百里。
现代文：王越谋划敌精锐都在西面，不防备东边，于是率领延绥总兵官许宁、游击将军周玉各率五千骑兵作为左右哨，出榆林，过红儿山，涉白盐滩，两昼夜行军八百里。
English: Wang Yue planned that the enemy's elite would be in the west, not guarding the east, so he led Yancheng's commander-in-chief Xu Ning and guerrilla general Zhou Yu, each with five thousand cavalry as left and right posts, out of Yulin, over Honger Mountain, and across the White Salt Beach, marching eight hundred miles for two days and nights.

古文：将至，暴风起，尘翳目。
现代文：将要到达，暴风刮起，尘土蔽目。
English: We're about to arrive, the wind is howling, the dust is blinding.

古文：一老卒前曰： 天赞我也。
现代文：一个老兵上前说： 天助我也。
English: An old soldier stepped forward and said, "Heaven help me, too."

古文：去而风，使敌不觉。
现代文：去而刮大风，使敌不知。
English: The wind was blowing hard, and the enemy did not know it.

古文：还军，遇归寇，处下风。
现代文：回军，遇归敌，处于风所吹向的那一方。
English: If you return to the enemy, you will be on the other side of the wind.

古文：乘风击之，蔑不胜矣。 
现代文：乘风攻击，没有不胜的。 
English: Attack by the wind, there is no invincible.

古文：越遽下马拜之，擢为千户。
现代文：王越赶快下马拜谢，提升他为千户。
English: Wang Yue quickly dismounted from Bai Xie and promoted him to the top of the thousand households.

古文：分兵千为十覆，而身率宁、玉张两翼，薄其营，大破之。
现代文：分兵一千作为十处伏兵，而自己率领许宁、周玉张开两翼，靠近敌营，大破敌军。
English: He led Xu Ning and Zhou Yu to open the two wings, close to the enemy camp, and broke the enemy army.

古文：擒斩三百五十，获驼马器械无算，焚其庐帐而还。
现代文：擒杀敌三百五十人，缴获驼马器械无数，焚烧了他们的帐篷而回。
English: They killed three hundred and fifty of the enemy, captured countless camel and horse equipment, and burned their tents.

古文：及满都鲁等饱掠归，则妻子畜产已荡尽，相顾痛哭。
现代文：等到满都鲁等大肆掠夺回来，妻儿牲畜已荡然无存，相视痛哭。
English: By the time the Manchurians and others returned from their plunder, the wives, children, and livestock were all gone, and they looked at each other in tears.

古文：自是远徙北去，不敢复居河套，西陲息肩者数年。
现代文：从此远远地向北迁徙而去，不敢再居住在河套，西部边境安定了数年。
English: Since then, they have migrated far to the north, no longer daring to live in Hetao, and the western border has been stable for several years.

古文：初，文臣视师者，率从大军后，出号令行赏罚而已。
现代文：开始，文臣督率军队，大体跟从在大军之后，出号令行赏罚罢了。
English: At the beginning, Governor Wencheng led the army and generally followed the army, issuing orders for rewards and punishments.

古文：越始多选跳荡士为腹心将，亲与寇搏。又以间觇敌累重邀劫之，或剪其零骑，用是数有功。
现代文：王越开始多选锐卒作为心腹将，亲自和敌寇搏杀，又以刺探敌人疲惫时截击他，或者消灭其零散的骑兵，因此屡次建功。
English: Wang Yue began to select more and more vassals as confidants, personally fighting and killing the enemy, and intercepting the enemy when he was tired, or destroying his scattered cavalry, so he repeatedly made contributions.

古文：十年春，廷议设总制府于固原，举定西侯蒋琬为总兵官，越提督军务，控制延绥、宁夏、甘肃三边。
现代文：十年春，朝廷决议设总制府于固原，选拔定西侯蒋琬为总兵官，王越提督军务，控制延绥、宁夏、甘肃三边。
English: In the spring of the tenth year, the imperial court decided to set up a general establishment in Guyuan, and selected the western lord Jiang Wei as the chief military officer, and Wang Yue as the admiral of military affairs, controlling Yancheng, Ningxia and Gansu.

古文：总兵、巡抚而下，并听节制。
现代文：总兵、巡抚以下，一并听从指挥。
English: All soldiers below the rank of captain and inspector obeyed the command.

古文：诏罢琬，即以越任之，三边设总制自此始。
现代文：皇上下诏罢免蒋琬，就用王越接任，三边设总制从此开始。
English: When the emperor decreed the dismissal of Chiang Kai-shek, Wang Yue took over, and the tripartite system began.

古文：论功，加太子少保，增俸一级。
现代文：论功，加官太子少保，增加俸禄一级。
English: On the basis of meritorious service, he was promoted to the rank of crown prince minor protector, and his salary was increased by one level.

古文：纪功郎中张谨、兵科给事中郭镗等论刘聚等滥杀冒功，并劾越妄奏。
现代文：纪功郎中张谨、兵科给事中郭镗等弹劾刘聚等滥杀冒取功名，并且弹劾王越假奏。
English: Zhang Zhen, the winner of the Nobel Prize in Literature, and Guo Jun, the winner of the Nobel Prize in Military Science, impeached Liu Ju and others for taking credit for indiscriminate killing, and impeached Wang Yue for faking.

古文：越方自以功大赏薄，遂怏怏，称疾还朝。
现代文：王越正因功大赏薄，于是快怏不乐，称病回朝。
English: Wang Yuezheng was greatly rewarded for his service, so he was unhappy and said he was ill and returned to the imperial court.

古文：明年与左都御史李宾同掌院事，兼督十二团营。
现代文：笫二年王越与左都御史李宾同掌院事，兼督十二团营。
English: In 1832, Wang Yue and Li Bin, the governor of the Left Capital, jointly took charge of the affairs of the academy, and also became the governor of the 12th regiment.

古文：越素以才自喜，不修小节，为朝议所齮。
现代文：王越向来以才自喜，不拘小节，被朝议所排斥。
English: Wang Yue has always been self-satisfied with his achievements, no matter how small, and has been rejected by the imperial court.

古文：至是乃破名检，与群小关通。
现代文：到这时更是不顾名誉礼法，和小人结交。
English: At this time, it is even more disrespectful to honor the etiquette, and make friends with villains.

古文：奸人韦英者，以官奴从征延绥，冒功得百户。
现代文：奸人韦英，以官奴从征延绥，冒取功名为百户。
English: Wei Ying, an impostor, took the official slaves from the conquest of Yancheng and took the credit for the hundred households.

古文：汪直掌西厂用事，英为爪牙，赵因英自结于直。
现代文：汪直掌管西厂特权，韦英为爪牙，王越通过韦英巴结汪直。
English: Wang Zhi is in charge of the western factory privilege, Wei Ying is the minion, Wang Yue is through Wei Yingba and Wang Zhi.

古文：内阁论罢西厂，越遇大学士刘吉、刘珝于朝，显谓之曰： 汪直行事亦甚公。
现代文：内阁议论撤销西厂，王越在朝廷上遇见大学士刘吉、刘翊，公开对他们说： 汪直办事也很公平。
English: When the cabinet was discussing the cancellation of the West Factory, Wang Yue met the university scholars Liu Ji and Liu Wei at the imperial court and said to them openly: "It is also fair for Wang Zhi to act.

古文：如黄赐专权纳赂，非直不能去。
现代文：比如黄赐专权受赂，非汪直不能除去。
English: For example, Huang Zizhi's exclusive right to accept bribes cannot be removed without Wang Zizhi.

古文：商、万在事久，是非多有所忌惮。
现代文：商、万居官任事很久，是非多有所忌惮。
English: Merchants and magistrates have been in office for a long time, so they have a lot of scruples.

古文：二公入阁几日，何亦为此？ 
现代文：二位大人入阁几天，何必为此？ 
English: The two adults have only been in the cabinet for a few days. Why do they have to resign?

古文：珝曰： 吾辈所言，非为身谋。
现代文：刘翊说： 我们所言，不是为自身谋利。
English: Liu Wei said: What we have said is not for our own benefit.

古文：使值行事皆公，朝廷置公卿大夫何为？ 
现代文：假使汪直办事都公平，朝廷设公卿大夫干什么？ 
English: If Wang Zhi can do things fairly, why did the imperial court appoint him as a noble doctor?

古文：越不能对。
现代文：王越不能回答。
English: Wang Yue could not answer.

古文：兵部尚书项忠罢，越当迁，而朝命予陕西巡抚余子俊。
现代文：兵部尚书项忠被罢免，王越应当升迁，而朝廷任命陕西巡抚余子俊。
English: Shang Shujiangzhong of the Military Department was dismissed, Wang Yue should be promoted, and the imperial court appointed Yu Zijun as the governor of Shaanxi.

古文：越弥不平，请解营务，优诏不许。
现代文：王越更加不平，请求解除军务，褒美下诏不允许。
English: Wang Yue was even more disgruntled. He requested to be relieved of his military duties and was not allowed to receive any rewards.

古文：因自陈捣巢功，为故尚书白圭所抑，从征将士多未录，乞移所加官酬之。
现代文：因此，自述捣毁敌巢的功劳，被前尚书白圭所压抑，从征将士大多没有录功，王越请求转移自己所加的官职赏赐他们。
English: Therefore, Wang Yue's self-reported achievement of destroying the enemy's nest was suppressed by the former Shang Shu Bai Gui, and most of the enlisted soldiers did not record their achievements. Wang Yue requested to transfer the official position he had added to reward them.

古文：子俊亦言越赏不酬功，乃进兵部尚书，仍掌院事。
现代文：子俊也说王越赏不当功，于是晋升王越为兵部尚书，仍掌管院事。
English: Zijun also said that Wang Yue's award was undeserved, so Wang Yue was promoted to the military department and still in charge of the affairs of the academy.

古文：寻加太子太保。
现代文：不久加升太子太保。
English: Soon, Chunfang was promoted to Crown Prince Taibo.

古文：越急功名。
现代文：王越争于求取功名。
English: Wang Yue vied for glory.

古文：汪直初东征，越望督师，为陈钺所沮。
现代文：汪直起初东征，王越希望督军，被陈钹所阻。
English: At the beginning of Wang Zhi's eastward expedition, Wang Yue hoped to lead the army, but was blocked by Chen Xi.

古文：钺骤宠，心益艳之。
现代文：陈铁迅速受宠，心中更加羡慕他。
English: Chen Tie was quickly favored, and his heart was even more envious of him.

古文：十六年春，延绥守臣奏寇潜渡河入靖虏，越乃说直出师。
现代文：十六年春，延绥守臣上奏敌寇暗渡黄河进入靖虏，王越便劝说汪直出师。
English: In the spring of the 16th year of the Yancheng Emperor, Wang Yue persuaded Wang Zhizhong to become his disciple after Wang Zhizhong secretly crossed the Yellow River.

古文：诏拜保国公朱永为平虏将军，直监军，而越提督军务。
现代文：皇上诏授保国公朱永为平虏将军，汪童监军，玉越提督军务。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict awarding Zhu Yong, the Guo Guo, as the general of Pingru, Wang Tong as the supervisor of the army, and Yu Yue as the admiral of military affairs.

古文：越说直令永率大军由南路，己与直将轻骑循塞垣而西，俱会榆林。
现代文：王越劝说汪直命令朱永率大军由南路进发，自己和汪直率领轻锐的骑兵沿着边塞的城墙向西，都会军榆林。
English: Wang Yue persuaded Wang Zhi to order Zhu Yong to lead the army to advance from the south road, and he and Wang Zhi led the light cavalry along the wall of the frontier fortress to the west, the metropolitan army Yulin.

古文：越至大同，闻敌帐在威宁海子，则尽选宣、大两镇兵二万，出孤店，潜行至猫儿庄，分数道。
现代文：王越到大同，听说敌人的营帐在盛窒海子，就全部派遣宣、大两镇士兵二万出军孤店，秘密行至猫儿庄，分兵数路。
English: When Wang Yue arrived in Datong, he heard that the enemy's camp was in Sheng Nian Haizi, so he dispatched all 20,000 soldiers from Xuan and Daya Towns to the isolated camp, secretly went to the Cat Village, and divided the soldiers into several routes.

古文：值大风雨雪晦冥，进至威宁，寇犹不觉，掩击大破之。
现代文：正赶上大风雨雪昏暗，进军到威宁，敌人还没发觉，掩杀攻击大破敌军。
English: Just in time for the storm, rain, snow and darkness, they marched into Vinh, the enemy had not yet discovered, covered up and attacked the enemy army.

古文：斩首四百三十余级，获马驼牛羊六千，师不至榆林而还。
现代文：杀敌四百三十余人，缴获马驼牛羊六千头，军队不到榆林而回。
English: They killed more than four hundred and thirty of the enemy, captured six thousand horses, camels, cattle and sheep, and the army did not reach Yulin and returned.

古文：永所出道迂，不见敌，无功。
现代文：朱永所出道路迂回，没有发觉敌人，无功。
English: Zhu Yong made a detour and did not detect the enemy, to no avail.

古文：由是封越威宁伯，世袭，岁禄千二百石。
现代文：由此封王越为威宁伯，世袭，一年俸禄一千二百石。
English: As a result, Wang Yue was given the hereditary title of Weningbo, with an annual salary of 1200 koku.

古文：越受封，不当复领都察院，而越不欲就西班。
现代文：王越受封，不应再管都察院，而王越不想就任内阁官。
English: Wang Yue should no longer be in charge of the Duka, and Wang Yue does not want to be appointed as a cabinet official.

古文：御史许进等颂其功，引王骥、杨善例，请仍领院事，提督团营。
现代文：御史许进等颂扬他的功劳，援引王骥、杨善的例子，请求仍让他统领院事，提督团营。
English: Mishi Xu Jin and others extolled his merits, citing the examples of Wang Xi and Yang Shan, and requested that he still be allowed to lead the academy and become the admiral.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上听从了他的话。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：明年复与直、永帅师出大同。
现代文：第二年又和汪直、朱永率军出大同。
English: The next year, he and Wang Zhi and Zhu Yong led the troops out of Datong.

古文：适寇入掠，追击至黑石崖，擒斩百二十余人，获马七百匹。
现代文：正好敲寇来抢掠，王越等追击到黑石崖，擒杀敌一百二十余人，缴获战马七百匹。
English: Wang Yue and others chased the robbers to the Black Rock Cliff, killed more than 120 of the enemy, and captured 700 horses.

古文：进太子太傅，增岁禄四百石。
现代文：晋升为太子太傅，增加俸禄四百石。
English: He was promoted to Prince Taifu and his salary was increased by 400 koku.

古文：明制，文臣不得封公侯。
现代文：明朝规定，文臣不得封公侯。
English: According to the regulations of the Ming Dynasty, Wenshin could not be given the title of prince.

古文：越从勋臣例，改掌前军都督府，总五军营兵，督团营如故。
现代文：王越依照勋臣例，改任掌管前军都督府，总领五军营兵，和以前一样提督团营。
English: Wang Yue, in accordance with the example of honorable vassals, was reappointed to be in charge of the former military governor's office, the commander of the five military battalions, and the admiral's battalion as before.

古文：自是真为武人，且望侯矣。
现代文：从此真正成为武将，并且希望封侯。
English: From then on, he truly became a warrior, and hoped to be given a title of nobility.

古文：其年五月，宣府告警，命佩平胡将军印，充总兵官。
现代文：这年五月，宣府告警，皇上命王越佩带平胡将军印，充任总兵官。
English: In May of that year, the government issued a warning, and the emperor ordered Wang Yue to wear the seal of General Pinghu and serve as the chief military officer.

古文：复以直监督军务，率京军万人赴之。
现代文：又用汪直监督军务，率京城军队一万人前往。
English: He also used Wang Zhi to supervise military affairs and led 10,000 troops from Beijing to the capital.

古文：比至，寇已去，因留屯其地。
现代文：等到达，敌寇已逃去，就留下来驻扎在这个地方。
English: When they arrived, the enemy bandits had already fled, so they stayed and stationed themselves in this place.

古文：至冬，而直为其侪所间，宠衰。
现代文：到了冬天，汪直被他的同辈离间，失宠。
English: In the winter, Wang Zhi was separated from his peers and fell out of favor.

古文：越等再请班师，不许。
现代文：王越等人再请求班师回朝，皇上不许。
English: Wang Yue and others again requested that the team return to the imperial court, but the emperor would not allow it.

古文：陈钺居兵部，亦代直请。
现代文：陈铁官居兵部，也替汪直请求。
English: Chen Tie, an official of the Ministry of Military Affairs, also made a request on behalf of Wang Zhi.

古文：帝切责之，两人始惧。
现代文：皇帝严厉斥责他们，两人纔开始恐惧。
English: The emperor reprimanded them severely, and the two began to tremble with fear.

古文：已，大同总兵官孙钺卒，即命越代之，而以直总镇大同、宣府，悉召京营将士还。
现代文：随后，大同总兵官孙铁去世，就命王越代替他，而以汪直总领镇守大同、宣府，把京营将士全都召回。
English: Subsequently, the Datong general officer Sun Tie died, and he ordered Wang Yue to replace him, and Wang Zhi, the commander-in-chief, to guard Datong and Xuanfu, and to recall all the soldiers from the Beijing camp.

古文：明年，寇犯延绥。
现代文：第二年，敌寇侵犯延绥。
English: In the second year, the enemy invaded Yancheng.

古文：越等调兵援之，颇有斩获，益禄五十石。
现代文：王越等调兵增援，颇有斩获，增加俸禄五十石。
English: Wang Yue and others recruited reinforcements and made considerable gains, increasing the salary by 50 koku.

古文：帝是时益知越、直交结状。
现代文：皇帝这时更加知道王越、汪直相互交结的情况。
English: At this time, the emperor was more aware of the situation of Wang Yue and Wang Zhi's mutual contact.

古文：大学士万安等以越有智计，恐诱直复进，乃请调越延绥以离之。两人势益衰。
现代文：大学士万安等人因王越有智谋，恐怕他诱导汪直再晋升，于是请求皇上把王越调离延绥来拆散他们，两人的势力更加衰弱。
English: Because Wang Yue was so resourceful, Wan'an and the others were afraid that he would induce Wang Zhi to be promoted again, so they asked the emperor to transfer Wang Yue away from Yan'an to break them up, and the power of the two was further weakened.

古文：明年，直得罪，言官并劾越。
现代文：第二年，汪直获罪，谏官一并弹劾王越。
English: The following year, Wang Zhi was found guilty, and the eunuchs impeached Wang Yue together.

古文：诏夺爵除名，谪居安陆，三子以功荫得官者，皆削籍，且使使赍敕谕之。
现代文：皇上下诏剥夺爵位革除官名，贬谪居住在安陆，三个儿子因功封荫得官的，都削夺官籍，并且派使者拿着敕令告谕他。
English: The emperor issued an edict to deprive him of his title, remove his official title, and banish him to live in Anlu. His three sons, who had been awarded official titles, were all deprived of their official status, and an envoy was sent to inform him with the edict.

古文：越闻使至，欲自裁，见敕有从轻语，乃稍自安。越既为礼法士所疾，自负豪杰，骜然自如。
现代文：王越听说使者到，想自杀，发现敕令中有从轻处分的话，纔稍感自安，王越既已为礼法之士所忌恨，自负豪杰，高傲自如。
English: When Wang Yue heard that the messenger had arrived, he wanted to commit suicide. When he found out that there was a light punishment in the imperial edict, he felt a little relieved. Wang Yue was already hated by the people of etiquette. He was arrogant and proud.

古文：饮食供奉拟王者，射猎声乐自恣，虽谪徙不少衰。
现代文：饮食供奉模拟王者，射猎声乐恣意享受，即使谪迁也汝减弱。
English: Eating and drinking are offered to the simulated king, shooting and hunting are enjoyed at will, and even migration is weakened.

古文：故其得罪，时议颇谓太过，而竟无白之者。
现代文：所以他获罪，当时的舆论多认为太过分，然而终于没有为他表白的。
English: As a result, he was found guilty, which was considered excessive by the public opinion at the time, but he did not confess.

古文：孝宗立，赦还。
现代文：孝宗即位，赦免他回来。
English: Emperor Xiaozong ascended to the throne and pardoned him to return.

古文：弘治七年，越屡疏讼冤。
现代文：弘治七年，王越屡次上疏诉讼冤屈。
English: After seven years of persecution, Wang Yue was repeatedly sued for grievances.

古文：诏复左都御史，致仕。
现代文：诏令复任左都御史，退休。
English: He was reinstated as Sadogoto Imperial Historian by Imperial Edict and retired.

古文：越年七十，耄矣，复结中官李广，以中旨召掌都察院事。
现代文：王越年纪七十岁，老了，又巴结宦官李广，以皇帝旨命掌管都察院事。
English: Wang Yue was seventy years old. He was old, and he was also a puppet of the eunuch Li Guang. By order of the emperor, he was in charge of the affairs of the Duza Academy.

古文：给事中季源、御史王一言等交章论，乃寝。
现代文：给事中李源、御史王一言等先后上奏章议论，纔停止。
English: In the middle of the performance, Li Yuan, Goshi Wang, and others successively discussed the movement, and the music stopped.

古文：十年冬寇犯甘肃。
现代文：十年冬，敌寇侵犯甘肃。
English: In the winter of the tenth year, the enemy invaded Gansu.

古文：廷议复设总制官，先后会举七人，不称旨。
现代文：朝廷决议复设总制官，先后推举七人，不称职。
English: The Imperial Court passed a resolution to reinstate the chief bureaucrat, and seven people were elected successively, all of whom were incompetent.

古文：吏部尚书屠滽以越名上，乃诏起原官，加太子太保，总制甘、凉边务兼巡抚。
现代文：吏部尚书屠浦推荐王越，于是下诏起用王越，恢复原来的官职，加授太子太保，总制甘、凉边务兼任巡抚。
English: Wang Yue was recommended by Shangshu Tuopu, the head of the cadre department, and Wang Yue was appointed to the post by imperial edict. He resumed his original official position, and was also awarded the title of crown prince and grand tutor. He also served as the governor-general of Gannan and Liangbian.

古文：越言甘镇兵弱，非籍延、宁两镇兵难以克敌，请兼制两镇，解巡抚事。
现代文：王越说甘镇兵弱，不凭借延、宁两镇兵难以克敌，请求兼制两镇，解除巡抚职务。
English: Wang Yue said that the soldiers of Gan Town were weak, and it would be difficult to defeat the enemy without relying on the soldiers of Yan and Ning Towns. He requested that the two towns be made concurrently and the governor's post be removed.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝听从了他。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：明年，越以寇巢贺兰山后，数扰边，乃分兵三路进剿。
现代文：第二年王越因敌寇筑巢于贺兰山后，数次骚扰边境，就分兵三路进军剿除。
English: The following year, after Wang Yue was disturbed several times by enemy bandits who had built a nest in the Helan Mountains, he divided his troops into three groups to drive them out.

古文：斩四十三级，获马驼百余。
现代文：斩敌四十三人，缴获马驼百余匹。
English: He killed forty-three enemies and captured more than a hundred camels.

古文：加少保，兼太子太傅。
现代文：加授少保，兼太子太傅。
English: In addition, he was awarded the title of Junior Security Guard, and also became the Prince's Great Grandfather.

古文：遂条上制置哈密事宜。
现代文：于是向皇上条述设置哈密事宜。
English: As a result, he reported to the emperor on the matter of setting up Hami.

古文：会李广得罪死，言官连章劾广党，皆及越。
现代文：恰巧李广获罪被处死，谏官连续上章弹劾李广同党，都涉及王越。
English: Coincidentally, Li Guang was convicted and executed, and eunuchs continuously impeached Li Guang and his party, all involving Wang Yue.

古文：越闻忧恨，其冬卒于甘州。
现代文：王越听说后内心忧恨，这年冬死于甘州。
English: Wang Yue was heartbroken when he heard the news. He died in Gansu this winter.

古文：赠太傅，谥襄敏。
现代文：赠太傅，谧号襄敏。
English: He was given the title of Taifu, and his posthumous name was Xiangmin.

古文：越姿表奇伟，议论飙举。
现代文：玉越姿态外表奇伟，议论风发。
English: Yu Yue's posture is outwardly magnificent, and he talks a lot.

古文：久历边陲，身经十余战，知敌情伪及将士勇怯，出奇制胜，动有成算。
现代文：长久经历边陲，身经十余战，了解敌人的真伪及将士勇怯，出奇制胜，出兵便有成功。
English: After a long period of experience on the frontier, after more than ten battles, understanding the truth and falsehood of the enemy and the courage of the soldiers, surprisingly winning, the soldiers were successful.

古文：奖拔士类，笼罩豪俊，用财若流水，以故人乐为用。
现代文：奖励提拔士卒，聚集豪俊，用财如流水，因此人们乐于为他所用。
English: He rewards and promotes his subordinates, gathers talented people, and spends money like water, so people are happy to use it for him.

古文：又尝荐杨守随、〈舌钟〉、屠滽辈，皆有名于世。
现代文：又曾推荐杨守随、倡锺、屠溏等人，都有名于世。
English: He also recommended Yang Shouzhu, Xuan Zheng, Tu Zheng and others, all of whom are famous in the world.

古文：睦族敦旧，振穷恤贫，如恐不及。
现代文：和睦家族、敦睦故旧，赈济穷困、抚恤贫苦，惟恐做不到。
English: Reconciling families, keeping up with the times, relieving poverty, and supporting the poor, but they are afraid they can't do it.

古文：其胆智过绝于人。
现代文：他的胆量智慧过人。
English: He's got guts and he's got brains.

古文：尝与朱永帅千人巡边，寇猝至，永欲走，越止之，列阵自固，寇疑未敢前。
现代文：曾经和朱永率千人巡边，敌寇突然来到，朱永想逃跑，王越阻止他，列阵自我固守，敌疑惑不敢前进。
English: Once he and Zhu Yong led a thousand people to patrol the border, the enemy suddenly came, Zhu Yong wanted to escape, Wang Yue stopped him, the lineup was self-sufficient, and the enemy did not dare to advance.

古文：薄暮，令骑皆下马，衔枚鱼贯行，自率骁勇为殿，从山后行五十里抵城，谓永曰： 我一动，寇追击，无噍类矣，示暇以惑之也。
现代文：傍晚，王越令骑兵都下马，衔枚鱼贯而行，自率骁勇之士殿后，从山后行走五十里抵达城堡，对朱永说： 我们一动，敌人就会追击，就没有我们这些人了，我不动，是表示闲暇来迷惑他们。
English: In the evening, Wang Yue ordered the cavalry to dismount and march with the fish. He led the cavalry to the palace of the brave, and walked fifty miles from the back of the mountain to the castle. He said to Zhu Yong: As soon as we move, the enemy will chase us, and there will be no more of us. I do not move, it is to show leisure to confuse them.

古文：下马行，无军声，令寇不觉耳。 
现代文：下马行走，没有军队行进的声音，让敌人不觉而已。 
English: Getting off the horse and walking, there is no sound of the army marching, so that the enemy does not notice.

古文：性故豪纵。
现代文：至越性格本来豪放。
English: The supreme character of the Yue people is that they are naturally bold.

古文：尝西行谒秦王，王开筵奏妓。越语王： 下官为王吠犬久矣，宁无以相酬者？ 
现代文：曾经西行谒见秦王，王设筵进献歌妓，王越对王说： 下官为王吠犬很久了，难道没有可赏赐的吗？ 
English: Once upon a time, Wang Yue met with King Qin when he was on his way to the West. The king had invited Wang Yue to come to the West to present a courtesan. Wang Yue said to the king, "Your subordinate has been the king's barking dog for a long time. Isn't there a reward for that?"

古文：因尽乞其妓女以归。
现代文：因此全部请求他的妓女而归。
English: So they all asked for his whore back.

古文：一夕大雪，方围炉饮，诸妓拥琵琶侍。
现代文：一天傍晚下大雪，正围炉饮酒，众歌妓拥抱琵琶而侍。
English: One evening, it was snowing heavily, drinking was going on around the hearth, and all the singers and prostitutes were hugging their lutes and dancing.

古文：一小校诇敌还，陈敌情。未竟，越大喜，酌金卮饮之，命弹琵琶侑酒，即以金卮赐之。
现代文：一个小校侦察敌情回来，陈述敌情，没有说完，王越大喜，向金卮中添酒让他喝，命令歌妓弹琵琶劝酒助兴，就用金卮赐他。
English: A schoolboy came back from reconnaissance of the enemy's position and stated the enemy's position. Before he finished, Wang Yue was overjoyed. He added wine to the golden gong to make him drink, ordered the singer to play the lute to persuade him to drink, and gave him the golden gong.

古文：语毕益喜，指妓绝丽者目之曰： 若得此何如？ 
现代文：话说完更加高兴，指着歌妓中最美丽的，用眼看化说： 如果得到她怎么样？ 
English: After he finished speaking, he was even happier, pointing to the most beautiful of the geishas and saying with his eyes: What if I get her?

古文：校惶恐谢。
现代文：小校惶恐谢罪。
English: The school panicked and apologized.

古文：越大笑，立予之。
现代文：王越大笑，立即给了他。
English: Wang Yue laughed loudly and immediately gave it to him.

古文：校所至为尽死力。
现代文：小校所到之处为他尽死力。
English: The school did everything they could for him.

古文：越在时，人多咎其贪功。
现代文：至越在时，人多责备他贪功。
English: At the time, many people accused him of being greedy.

古文：及死，而将馁卒惰，冒功糜饷滋甚，边臣竟未有如越者。
现代文：等到死后，将士骄惰，冒功浪费军饷更加厉害，边臣终没有如王越的。
English: After his death, he became even more arrogant and wasteful of military pay. In the end, there was no border retainer like Wang Yue.

古文：赞曰：人非有才之难，而善用其才之难。
现代文：赞曰：人不是难在有才，而是难在善用其才。
English: Zang said: It is not difficult for people to have talents, but it is difficult to make good use of their talents.

古文：王骥、王越之将兵，杨善之奉使，徐有贞之治河，其才皆有过人者。
现代文：王骥、王越带兵，杨善奉命出使，徐有贞治河，他们的才能都有遇人之处。
English: Wang Qian, Wang Yue led the troops, Yang Shan was sent by order, Xu Yizheng and Zheng Zhehe, their talents are all worthy of praise.

古文：假使随流平进，以干略自奋，不失为名卿大夫。
现代文：假如随波而进，以才干谋略自奋，不失为名卿大夫。
English: If you go with the flow and push yourself a little with talent and strategy, you can become a famous doctor.

古文：而顾以躁于进取，依附攀援，虽剖符受封，在文臣为希世之遇，而誉望因之隳损，甚亦不免削夺。
现代文：祇是急于进取，依附攀援，即使剖符受封，在文臣看来为希世之遇，而声誉名望因此隳损，甚至难免被削夺。
English: He was only anxious to forge ahead, clinging to the support of others. Even if Kaifu was sealed, it would be a rare opportunity in the opinion of Wenshin, and his reputation would be tarnished as a result, and he would inevitably be deprived of it.

古文：名节所系，可不重哉！
现代文：名节所关，难道不重要吗？
English: Isn't the name of the festival important?

