古文：二十九日，由上岩转入东北峡，过牛陇，共三里出峡，有岐焉。
现代文：二十九日由上岩转入东北的峡中，经过牛陇，共走三里出峡，有个岔路口。
English: On the 29th, from Shangyan to the northeast of the gorge, passing through Niulong, a total of three miles out of the gorge, there is a fork in the road.

古文：一直北循北支东麓者，为北流大道；一转东向逾岭者，为北流间道。
现代文：一直往北沿北支东麓走的，是去北流的大道；一条转向东越岭的，是去北流抄近路的小道。
English: If you walk north along the eastern foot of the North Branch, it is the main road to the North Stream; if you turn to the East Ridge, it is a shortcut to the North Stream.

古文：乃东过田塍，更逾土岭而东。
现代文：于是向东走过田埂，再越过土岭往东行。
English: So I walked east past the rice paddies, and then east across the mounds.

古文：又二里，过一村，又东抵小石峰下，是为塘岸墟。
现代文：又走二里，路过一村，又往东抵达小石峰下，这里是塘岸墟。
English: Walk another two miles, pass a village, and head east to reach the foot of a small stone peak. This is Tongan Market.

古文：时山雨自东北来，弥漫山谷，墟无集者。
现代文：此时山雨自东北方下过来，弥漫在山谷中，集市上没有赶集的人。
English: At this time, the mountain rain came down from the northeast, pervading the valley, and there were no people gathering at the market.

古文：从此转而北，冒雨循山，荒冈漫衍，已为北流境矣。
现代文：塘岸墟是陆川县北境，从此转向北，冒雨顺山走，荒凉的山冈漫延开来，已是北流县境内了。
English: Tongan Hui is the northern border of Luchuan County. From here, we turned north, braved the rain, walked along the mountain, and the desolate mountains and hills spread out. It was already in Beilu County.

古文：十里为果子山，有数家倚冈而居。
现代文：十里路是果子山，有几家人背靠山冈居住。
English: Shili Road is the fruit mountain, there are several families living in the mountains and hills.

古文：过坳，雨渐止。
现代文：走过山坳，雨渐渐停了。
English: Walking through the mountains, the rain gradually stopped.

古文：又十里为横林，有聚落在路右坞，数日前盗劫平乐墟，还宿于此，去北流只十里也。
现代文：又行十里是横林，有村落在路右山坞中，几天前强盗抢劫平乐墟，返回来住在此地，距北流只有十里了。
English: Another ten miles away is Henglin. There is a village in the middle of the dock on the right side of the road. A few days ago, robbers robbed Pinglehu, and returned to live here. It is only ten miles away from Beilun.

古文：其北有石山一支，自北而南，丛尖簇翠。
现代文：村北有一石山支脉，自北延向南，成丛的尖峰簇拥着翠色。
English: To the north of the village, there is a branch of the Ishiyama Mountains, stretching from north to south, with clusters of spikes surrounded by emerald green.

古文：余初望之，以为勾漏在是，渐近而路出其东南，西望而行，秀色飞映。
现代文：我最初望见它，以为勾漏山在这里了，渐渐走近而路通到山的东南麓，向西望着它而行，秀色飞舞映衬。
English: At first, I saw it and thought that the mountain was here. Gradually, I approached and the road led to the southeastern foot of the mountain. I looked at it to the west, and the beautiful colors danced in the background.

古文：盖此山在北流西十里，而勾漏尚在北流东十里也。
现代文：原来此山在北流县城西面十里，而勾漏山还在北流县城东边十里。
English: Originally, this mountain was ten miles to the west of the city of Beilu County, while Gokuloshan was still ten miles to the east of the city of Beilu County.

古文：由横林东北五里，逾一土岭，下行田塍中，有石桥跨小溪，溪流西北去。
现代文：由横林往东北行五里，越过一道土岭，下岭行走在田野中。有座石桥跨过小溪，溪流往西北流去。
English: I walked five miles from the cross-forest to the northeast, crossing a mound of earth and walking in the fields below the mound. There was a stone bridge across the stream, and the stream flowed to the northwest.

古文：又东行平冈上，五里，抵北流西门。
现代文：又向东行走在平缓的山冈上，五里，到达北流的西门。
English: I walked eastward on a gentle hill, five miles, to the west gate of the north stream.

古文：西门闭不启，以西当贼冲，故戒严也。
现代文：西门关闭着不开，因为西面正当盗贼来往的要道，所以戒严了。
English: The west gate is closed and cannot be opened, because the west side is an important route for thieves to come and go, so martial law has been imposed.

古文：循城由南门人，经县前，出东门，则街市颇盛。
现代文：沿着城外绕到南门进城，经过县衙前，出了东门，就见街市十分繁荣。
English: Walking along the outskirts of the city to the south gate into the city, passing in front of the county seat, and out of the east gate, you will see that the street market is very prosperous.

古文：一街循城而北者，为街墟；一街随江而东者，为沙街。
现代文：一条街沿着城墙往北而去的，是街墟；一条街沿江往东去的，是沙街。
English: A street going north along the city wall is the market; a street going east along the river is the sand street.

古文：街墟由城北隅东转，有溪自城北来，石桥跨之，曰登龙桥。
现代文：街墟由城北隅向东转，有溪水从城北流来，石桥跨在溪上，叫登龙桥。
English: The streets turn from the north corner of the city to the east, there is a stream flowing from the north of the city, and a stone bridge spans the stream, called the Dragon Bridge.

古文：其溪为大容东流之水，由桥下而南注绣江者也。
现代文：此溪是大容山向东流的水流，由桥下往南注入绣江。
English: This stream is the eastward flow of water from the Dalong Mountain, which flows southward from under the bridge into the Xujiang River.

古文：沙街由城南转东，绣江南自粤东高州来，至此已胜巨舟，故阛闠依之，宋人名驿为朝宗者，指此江而言也。
现代文：沙街由城南转向东，绣江从南面广东的高州府流来，到此已能承载巨船，所以街市紧依江畔，宋代人把骚站起名叫朝宗的，是指这条江而言的。
English: Sha Jie turned from the south of the city to the east, and the Yuxi River flowed from Gaozhou in Guangdong in the south. It has been able to carry huge ships to this point, so the street market is close to the riverside. The Song Dynasty people named the Suo Station as Chaozong, which refers to this river.

古文：今驿名宝圭。沙街东北过广济桥，则北溪之水至此入绣。
现代文：由沙街往东北过了广济桥，就见城北的溪水到这里流入绣江。
English: From Sha Jie to the northeast, after passing Guangji Bridge, you can see the streams in the north of the city flowing into the Yuxi River.

古文：渡桥而与登龙之路合，路乃北出隘门，江乃东流而去。
现代文：过桥后便与登龙桥来的路会合，路于是往北通出关隘门，江流就向东流。
English: After crossing the bridge, it will meet the road coming from the Long Bridge. The road will then go north to the gate of the pass, and the river will flow eastward.

古文：余于是饭于沙街。
现代文：我于是在沙街吃了饭。
English: So I had lunch in Sha Jie.

古文：出隘门，抵北山下，循其南麓东行，五里，渡一小溪桥，遂入石山夹中。
现代文：出了关隘门，抵达北山下，沿北山南麓往东行，五里，越过一条小溪上的桥，便走入石山夹谷之中。
English: Out of the gate, arrived at the foot of the North Mountain, along the southern foot of the North Mountain to the east, five miles, crossed a bridge over a stream, then walked into the stone mountain valley.

古文：又东五里，石山回合处，中复突一峰，则宝圭洞在其西隅，而勾漏庵在其南麓。
现代文：此处南北两面的石峰，都向东拱卫着宝圭洞。又向东走五里，在石山回合之处，中央又突起一峰，宝圭洞就在它的西隅，而勾漏庵在它的南麓。
English: At this point, the stone peaks on both the north and south sides are arched to the east, guarding Bao Gui Cave. Walking five miles to the east, at the place of the stone mountain round, another peak protrudes in the center, Bao Gui Cave is in its western corner, and Goguryeo Hermitage is at its southern foot.

古文：时殷雷轰轰，先投庵中。
现代文：此时雷声隆隆响，先奔入庵中。
English: At this time, thunder rumbles, rushing into the hermitage first.

古文：庵颇整洁，乃万历间有司重构者。
现代文：寺庵十分整洁，是万历年间官府重建的。
English: The temple hermitage is very tidy, having been rebuilt by the government over the years.

古文：内堂三楹，中列金仙，东则关圣，西则葛令。
现代文：内堂有三间房屋，正中坐着如来佛，东边是关帝，西边是葛洪。
English: There are three houses in the inner hall. In the middle sits the Buddha, to the east is Guan Di, and to the west is Ge Hong.

古文：而葛令葛洪之像，纶巾朱履，飘然如生。
现代文：而葛洪的坐像，头戴纶巾脚穿朱红靴，神采飘逸栩栩如生。
English: But Ge Hong's seated statue, wearing a skullcap on his head and red shoes on his feet, is ethereal and lifelike.

古文：后轩则准堤大士在其中，西置炊而东设坐焉。
现代文：后面的轩廊内是准提菩萨在其中，西边放了炊具而东边设了座位。
English: In the back of the hall is a Buddha statue, with cooking utensils on the west side and seats on the east side.

古文：前庭佛桑扶桑盛开，红粉簇映；后庭粉墙中护，篁桂森绕其中，寂然无人。
现代文：前面庭院里扶桑盛开，粉红的花簇互相掩映；后面庭院粉墙环护着院中，竹丛桂花树森然回绕在庭院中，寂静无人。
English: In the front courtyard, the fusang is in full bloom, and the pink flower clusters cover each other; in the back courtyard, the pink wall surrounds the courtyard, and the bamboo bushes and osmanthus trees surround the courtyard, and there is no one.

古文：有老道之妻掩关于后，询 游洞何自？ 对以 俟道者晚归。 
现代文：有老道的妻子掩上门在后院，问她 游洞从哪里走？ 答以 等道士晚上来。 
English: A Taoist wife shut the door behind her in the backyard and asked her where to go from the cave. She replied that she would wait for the Taoist to come in the evening.

古文：乃停囊轩中，令从去，就炊于中。
现代文：只好把行李停放在轩廊中，叫她跟随而去，在庵中做饭吃。
English: He had no choice but to leave his luggage in the hall and tell her to follow him and cook and eat in the hermitage.

古文：既而雨止，时已暮，道入始归。
现代文：不久雨停了，时光已是傍晚，道士这才归来。
English: Soon the rain stopped, and it was late afternoon before the Taoist priest returned.

古文：乃县令摄以当道，欲索洞中遗丹及仙人米，故勾摄追捕而去。
现代文：是县令摄服于当权之人，想要索取洞中葛洪遗下的丹砂和仙人米，所以把他拘捕去。
English: He was arrested by the county magistrate, who wanted to claim the sands and rice left by Ge Hong in the cave.

古文：然葛令欲就丹砂，乃其一时乘兴之言，其后蝉脱解脱罗浮，实未至此，此中久已无丹砂，安得有遗丹仙粒耶？
现代文：然而葛洪想要炼成丹砂，是他一时间乘兴说出的话，那以后在罗浮山尸解登仙，实际未到过此地，这一带早就没有丹砂，哪能有遗下的丹砂和仙米呢？
English: However, Ge Hong wanted to refine it into Tanzanite, which was something he said on a whim. Since then, it has been immortalized in the corpse of Luofu Mountain, but he has not actually been to this place. There has been no Tanzanite in this area for a long time, where can there be leftover Tanzanite and senmai?

古文：道者忧形于色，余姑畀钱，令多觅竹束炬，为明晨游具。
现代文：道士的忧虑显露在脸上，我姑且给他钱，命令他多找些竹子捆成火把，为明早游洞做准备。
English: The preacher's concern showed on his face. I gave him some money and ordered him to find more bamboo to bundle into torches to prepare for tomorrow morning's cave tour.

古文：道者领命，愿前驰焉。
现代文：道士接受了命令，愿在前边领路。
English: The Taoist accepted the order and was willing to lead the way.

古文：北流县当大容南面之中，其脉由大容南下，曰绿蓝山。
现代文：北流县正当大容山南面的中段，这里的山脉由大容山向南下延，叫做绿蓝山。
English: Beiliu County is located in the middle of the southern part of the Dalong Mountain. The mountains here extend southward from the Dalong Mountain and are called the Green and Blue Mountains.

古文：水分东西流：东流者即北溪，循城东下，登龙桥而入绣江者也；西流者为南流江之源，西南合水月洞之水，经郁林南门而西合罗望、定川诸水，南下廉州入海。
现代文：水分向东西两面流：往东流的就是城北的溪流，沿着城墙东面下流，经登龙桥而流入绣江；向西流的是南流江的源头，往西南会合水月洞的溪水，流经郁林城南门而后往西会合罗望江、定川江诸水流，向南下流到廉州府入海。
English: Water flows in both directions: to the east is the stream to the north of the city, which flows down along the east side of the city wall and flows into the Yuxi River via the Long Bridge; to the west is the source of the Nanliu River, which flows to the southwest to join the streams of Shuiyue Cave, flows through the south gate of Yulin City, and then to the west to join the rivers of Luowang River and Dingchuan River, and flows south to the sea in Lianzhou.

古文：是北流实南流之源，其曰 北流 者，以绣江南来，至此始大，非北流源此也。
现代文：这样北流县实际是南流江的发源地，它称做 北流 的原因，是由于绣江从南面流来，到这里水流才变大，往东流过容县境内，会合洛桑渡的河水，流经容县南门，下流到藤县，向北流入郁江而去，不是北流的江流发源于此地。
English: In this way, Beiliu County is actually the birthplace of the Nanliu River. The reason why it is called Beiliu is because the Xujiang River flows from the south, and the water flow only becomes large here. It flows eastward through the territory of Rong County, meeting the water of the Lausanne River, flowing through the South Gate of Rong County, flowing down to Fujian County, and flowing north into the Yujiang River. The river flow that is not north-flowing originates here.

古文：旧有北流、南流二县，南流即今之郁林州，皆当南北二水胜舟之会，东西相距四十里焉。
现代文：旧时有北流、南流两县，南流县就是今天的郁林州，都正当南北两条江能承载船只的会聚之处，东西相距有四十里。
English: In the old days, there were two counties, North Stream and South Stream. South Stream County is today's Yulin Prefecture. It is the meeting place of the two rivers, north and south, which can carry ships. The east and west are forty miles apart.

古文：北流山脉中脊，由县而西南趋水月，南抵高州，散为诸山。
现代文：北流县山脉的中脊，由县城向西南趋向水月洞，往南延到高州府，散开成为群山。
English: The middle ridge of the mountains in Beilu County, stretching from the county seat to the southwest toward Shuiyue Cave, and extending southward to Gaozhou Prefecture, spread out into mountains.

古文：而北流之东十里，为勾漏洞；北流之西十里，为鬼门关。
现代文：而北流的东面十里处，是勾漏洞；北流以西十里处，是鬼门关。
English: But ten miles east of the North Stream is a loophole; ten miles west of the North Stream is a dead end.

古文：二石山分支耸秀，东西对列，虽一为洞天，一为鬼窟，然而若排衙拥戟以卫县城者，二山实相伯仲也。
现代文：两座石山分出支峰，秀色耸立，东西对峙，虽然一处是神仙居住的洞天，一处是鬼魂幽处的窟宅，然而分列两旁好像持戟拱卫县城的样子，两座山实际不相上下。
English: Two stone mountains branch out from the peak, towering in beauty, facing east and west. Although one is a cave heaven inhabited by immortals, and the other is a cave dwelling of ghosts, the two sides seem to have the appearance of the county seat, and the two mountains are actually comparable.

古文：鬼门关在北流西十里，颠崖邃谷，两峰相对，路经其中，谚所谓： 鬼门关，十人去，九不还。 
现代文：鬼门关在北流西面十里，石崖倒斜，山谷深邃，两座山峰相对，道路经过其中，谚语说： 鬼门关，十人去，九不还。 
English: The Devil's Gate is ten miles west of the North Stream. The stone cliff slopes down, the valley is deep, the two peaks are opposite, and the road passes through them. A proverb says: The Devil's Gate, ten people go, nine do not return.

古文：言多瘴也。
现代文：是说瘴气很多。
English: That is to say, there is a lot of miasma.

古文：《舆地纪胜》以为桂门关之讹，宣德中改为天门关，粤西关隘所首称者。
现代文：《舆地纪胜》认为是桂门关的错读，宣德年间改为天门关，是粤西关隘中称颂为第一的地方。
English: "Utsuchi Ji Sheng" considered it to be a misreading of Guimen Pass, and it was changed to Tianmen Pass during the Xuande era. It is the first place to be praised in the West Guangxi Pass.

古文：八月初一日晨餐毕，余先作宝圭行，约道者肩矩篝火后至。
现代文：八月初一日吃完早餐，我先去宝圭洞，约道士扛着火把点燃火跟在后面来。
English: After breakfast on the first day of August, I first went to Bao Gui Cave and asked a Taoist priest to carry a torch and light a fire to follow me.

古文：洞在庵北半里，庵后先有一岩南向，一岩西向，望之俱浅，而宝圭更在其北。
现代文：洞在庵北半里处，庵后先有一个岩洞向南，一个岩洞向西，望去它们都很浅，而宝圭洞还在它们北面。
English: The cave is located half a mile north of the hermitage. Behind the hermitage, there is a cave to the south and a cave to the west. They are all shallow, but Bao Gui cave is still north of them.

古文：先有漫流自西北来，东向直漱山麓，涉其北登山，则洞门在矣。
现代文：先有四处流淌的水流自西北流来，向东径直冲洗着山麓，涉到水北登山，就看见洞口了。
English: First, there was a stream of water flowing in all directions from the northwest, washing the foot of the mountain straight to the east, wading into the water north of the mountain, and then I saw the mouth of the cave.

古文：其门西向，左开岩而右深入。
现代文：洞口向西，左边是敞开的岩洞而右边深入进去。
English: The mouth of the cave is to the west, the left side is an open cave and the right side is deeper.

古文：开岩处甃以列碑轩敞，平临西峰；右洼嵌而下，有石柱当门，其端有石斜飞磴。
现代文：岩洞敞开之处砌着许多石碑高大宽敞，水平面临西峰；右边凹嵌下去，有石柱挡在洞口，顶端有岩石倾斜飞空。
English: The open space of the cave is paved with many tall and spacious stone monuments, facing the west peak horizontally; the right side is inlaid, with a stone pillar blocking the mouth of the cave, and the top of the rock is tilted and flying.

古文：道由其侧下至洞底，交辟为四岐：一由东入，一由南进，二岐俱深黑；一向西豁，一向北透，二岐俱虚明。
现代文：石瞪路由石柱侧边下到洞底，交叉为四条岔道：一条由东面深入，一条往南进去，这两条岔道都又深又黑；一条向西裂开，一条通向北面，这两条岔道都空阔明亮。
English: The stone pillars run down the sides of the pillar to the bottom of the cave, intersected by four passages: one deepens from the east, one enters to the south, both passages are deep and dark; one cracks to the west, one leads to the north, both passages are wide and bright.

古文：东岐之南，顶侧忽倒垂一叶，平庋半空，外与当门之柱相对，叶间复有圆窍曲窦，透漏异常。
现代文：东面岔路的南边，洞顶侧面忽然倒垂一叶状岩石，平架在半空中，与外边挡在洞口的石柱相对，上下凭临虚空，各有数十丈，卷曲舒展地悬挂着，薄处与蝉翅相等，叶面上又有圆形屈曲的孔洞，异常透亮漏风。
English: On the south side of the east fork of the road, the side of the top of the cave suddenly overhangs a leaf-shaped rock. It is flat in mid-air, opposite the stone pillar that blocks the entrance to the cave. The top and bottom are against the void, each with dozens of heights, curling and hanging. The thin part is equal to the wings of a cicada, and there are round and curved holes on the leaf surface. It is unusually transparent.

古文：由左崖攀级而上，抵平庋处，盘旋其间，踞叶而坐，真云軿í贵族妇女乘坐的车霞驭，不复人间也。
现代文：由左侧石崖攀石阶上登，到达石片平架之处，徘徊在叶面上，盘腿坐在叶上，真是乘坐云车驾着云霞，不再像是人间了。
English: Climbing up the stone steps from the left cliff, reaching the place where the stone plate is flat, wandering on the leaf surface, sitting cross-legged on the leaf, really riding the cloud car driving the clouds, no longer like the human world.

古文：坐久之，复盘叶而下，向北透之岐。
现代文：坐了很久，又绕着叶片下来，走向通往北面的岔道。
English: After sitting for a long time, I circled the blades again and walked down to the path leading to the north.

古文：岐中倒垂一乳，长数丈，其端空悬，水由端涓涓下。
现代文：岔道中倒垂着一根钟乳石，长数丈，顶端空悬，水从顶端涓涓下滴。
English: A stalactite hangs upside down in the middle of the pathway. It is several meters long, with the top hanging empty and water dripping down from the top.

古文：更北入峡中，其右则洼而北出，为下门，其左则高而北渡，为上叠，此明洞之西北二岐也。
现代文：再向北走入峡中，峡右便往北下洼出去，是下洞口，峡左却向北高耸飞渡，是上层，重叠成上方的楼阁，楼阁前水平地面临西北方，也有钟乳石柱隔在其中。
English: Walking further north into the gorge, the right side of the gorge dips to the north. This is the lower mouth of the cave, while the left side of the gorge soars to the north. It is the upper level, overlapping into the upper pavilion. In front of the pavilion, it faces the northwest horizontally, and there is also a stalactite pillar separating it.

古文：探历久之，道者负炬至，又携伴持筐。
现代文：这是明洞的西、北两条岔道的情况。走来走去探察了许久，道士扛着火把来了，又带来同伴拿着竹筐。
English: This is the situation of the west and north side roads of Myeongdong. After walking around and exploring for a long time, the Taoist priest came carrying torches, and brought a companion carrying a bamboo basket.

古文：余询其故，道者曰： 县以司道命，取砂米二丹，适有痒士已为我觅仙米，而砂从洞穴中可探而得，将携筐就炬以览之。 
现代文：我询问他缘故，道士说： 县里遵照司道的命令，要取丹砂和仙人米两种仙丹，恰好有县学学生已为我找到仙人米，而丹砂从洞穴中可找到，将带上筐子就着火把去找丹砂。 
English: I asked him why, and the Taoist priest said, "The county, following the order of the chief priest, wants to take two kinds of immortelle, tansha and immortelle rice. It just so happens that a county student has found immortelle rice for me, and tansha can be found in caves. I will take a basket and light a torch to find tansha."

古文：始知所为砂者，非丹砂，乃砂粒如丹，其色以白为上，而黄次之，故其北洞以白砂命名；所谓米者，乃山洼中菰ū茭瓜的果米，土人加以 仙人 之名耳。
现代文：这才明白所谓丹砂的东西，不是丹砂，是如丹砂一样的砂粒，颜色以白色为上，而黄色的次一等，所以这里的北洞用白砂来命名；所谓仙人米的东西，是山洼中的抗米，不过是当地人加上 仙人 之名罢了。
English: This made it clear that the so-called Tanzan sand is not Tanzan sand, but sand grains like Tanzan sand. The color is white on top, and yellow is next, so the north cave here is named after white sand. The so-called fairy rice is the resistant rice in the mountain depression, but it is just the name of the local people plus "fairy."

古文：乃爇炬先入南穴，两旁壁起如峡，高而不广。
现代文：于是点燃火把先进入南洞，两旁石壁耸起如峡，高而不宽。
English: So they lit torches to enter the south cave first, and the stone walls on both sides rose up like canyons, high but not wide.

古文：入半里，左壁有痕横亘，曰仙床，悬地丈许。
现代文：深入半里，左壁上有石痕横亘着，叫做仙床，高悬地面一丈左右。
English: Half a mile deep, there are stone marks on the left wall, called the Fairy Bed, which hangs about a meter above the ground.

古文：其侧垂柱裂窍，皆短而隘。
现代文：它侧面石柱下垂石窍裂开，都又短又窄。
English: On the side of the pillar, the hanging stones are short and narrow.

古文：窍腹宕如臼，以手探之，中有磊磊之粒，方圆不计，姑扫置筐中。
现代文：石窍腹中平滑如臼，用手去探，里面有堆积的砂粒，不管方的圆的，姑且扫了放在筐中。
English: The inside of the cairn is smooth as a millstone, and you can feel it with your hand. There are sand grains piled up inside, whether they are round or square, so just sweep them up and put them in the basket.

古文：连探三四穴，不及升许，计出而淘濯其污，简取其圆洁成粒者，又不及十之一也。
现代文：一连掏了三四个洞，不到一升左右，估计出洞后淘洗去其中的污物，挑选出其中圆滑光洁成颗粒的，又不足十分之一了。
English: I dug three or four holes in a row, less than a liter. After estimating the holes, I washed the dirt to remove the dirt, and selected the smooth and smooth particles, which was less than one tenth.

古文：然此亦砂粒之常，岂真九转之余哉？
现代文：然而这也是平常的砂粒，怎能真的是九转金丹的遗物呢？
English: However, this is also an ordinary grain of sand, how can it really be a relic of the Golden Goose?

古文：又少进，峡忽下坠成渊，由洞抵水，其深二丈，而水之深，更不知其几也。
现代文：又略进去，峡谷忽然下坠成深渊，由洞上到达水面，那深处有二丈，而水的深度，更不知是多少了。
English: Slipping in again, the canyon suddenly plunged into the abyss, reaching the surface of the water from the cave. The depth was two meters, and the depth of the water, I don't know how much more.

古文：两崖俱危峭无可着足，南眺其内，窅黑无尽。
现代文：两侧的崖壁全都高险陡峭无处可落脚，向南眺望洞内，深远漆黑没有尽头。
English: The cliffs on both sides are very high and steep, with nowhere to land. Looking south into the cave, there is no end to the darkness.

古文：始促道者涉渊，言： 水深，从无能徒涉者。 
现代文：起初催促道士涉过深渊，说： 水深，从来无人能徒步涉过去。 
English: At first, he urged the Taoist to wade through the abyss, saying, "The water is so deep that no one has ever been able to wade through it on foot."

古文：再促道者觅筏，言： 隘逼，曾无以筏进者。 
现代文：又催促道士去找木筏，说： 太狭窄，从来无人乘木筏进去过。 
English: He also urged the Taoist to find a raft, saying, "It's too narrow, no one has ever entered by raft.

古文： 然则何如可入？ 
现代文： 那么如何才能进去？ 
English: So how do you get in?

古文：曰： 冬月水涸，始可坠崖而涉。 
现代文：答： 冬月间水干涸时，才可坠下悬崖涉水进去。 
English: A: Only when the water dries up during the winter months can you fall off the cliff and wade in.

古文： 入当何如？ 
现代文： 进去将是什么样？ 
English: What will it be like inside?

古文：曰： 其内甚深，能见明而不能升也。 
现代文：说： 那里面非常深，能见到亮光但不能爬上去。 
English: He said: It's very deep in there, you can see the lights but you can't climb up.

古文：余闻之，为之怅怅。
现代文：我听了这些话，感到怅怅不乐。
English: I listened to these words and felt unhappy.

古文：扪石投水中，渊渊不遽ù急速及底。
现代文：摸石块投入水中，深深的不是很快到底。
English: Touching the stone and plunging into the water, the swimmer does not get to the bottom quickly.

古文：旁瞩久之，仰见左壁之上，有隙旁通，亟入焉。
现代文：在旁边注视了很久，抬头见左壁之上，有裂隙旁通，急忙进去。
English: Stared at the side for a long time, looked up and saw a crack in the left wall, and hurried in.

古文：隙柱透漏，渐入渐束，亦无余窍。
现代文：裂隙中有石柱透空，渐渐进去渐渐束拢，也无别的石窍。
English: In the crack, there is a column of stone that is open to the air, gradually entering and gradually closing, and there is no other stone point.

古文：乃下，返而仍出四达之中，更爇炬而入东穴。
现代文：于是下来，仍返回来出到四条路相通的中心，再点燃火把走入东洞。
English: So I went down, came back again, and went out to the center of the four roads, and then lit a torch and walked into the East Cave.

古文：初，两旁亦成峡壁，而其下渐高，既而中辟如堂皇，旁折如圭窦，皆暗窟也。
现代文：最初，两旁也形成峡壁，可它下边渐渐变高，不久中间开阔起来如大厅，旁边折来折去如像玉圭样的洞穴，都是昏暗的洞窟。
English: At first, both sides also formed a canyon wall, but it gradually became higher on the lower side, and soon it opened up in the middle like a hall, and the side was like a jade-like cave. They were all dark caves.

古文：稍北而东，其径遂穷，比之南窍，虽有穴宛转，而深不及其半。
现代文：稍往北走转向东，这条路便到了头，它与南洞相比，虽有洞穴弯弯转转，但深处不到它的一半。
English: If you walk a little further north and turn to the east, you will reach the end of this road. Compared to the South Cave, it is less than half as deep, although there are cave twists and turns.

古文：彼有穴而水阻，此无水而穴阻，转觉东穴之无涯涘ì水边矣。
现代文：那里有洞却被水阻断，此处无水可洞穴断了，反而觉得东洞没有水岸了。
English: There is a cave there but it is blocked by water, here there is no water but the cave is broken, but it feels like there is no water bank in the east cave.

古文：复出至四达处，谋为白砂洞游。
现代文：再次出到四条道相通之处，打算去白砂洞游。
English: I went out again to the place where the four roads intersect, intending to visit Baisha Cave.

古文：按《志》，白砂在勾漏北，勾漏甲天下，而此洞复甲勾漏。
现代文：据志书，白砂洞在勾漏洞北面，勾漏洞甲天下，而此洞又胜过勾漏洞。
English: According to the history book, the white sand cave is in the north of the hook loophole, the hook loophole and the world, and this hole is better than the hook loophole.

古文：如玉虚、玉田诸洞，普照、独秀诸岩，道者俱不言，而独津津言此洞。
现代文：如玉虚、玉田诸洞，普照、独秀诸岩，道士全不言及，可唯独津津乐道地谈论此洞。
English: For example, the Gyokaku, the Tamada caves, the Fusho, and the Dokushu rocks are not mentioned at all by Taoists, but this cave is talked about enthusiastically by Taoists.

古文：余急趣其前，道者复肩炬束火携筐帚以导。
现代文：我急忙赶到白砂洞前，道士又肩扛火把束了火种带上筐子扫帚来领路。
English: I hurried to the white sand cave, and the Taoist priest shouldered the torch, bundled the kindling, and brought a basket of brooms to lead the way.

古文：遍询土人，无知玉田洞者。岂即以后洞为白砂，以此门为玉田洞耶？后门南向，而高隘仅通一孔，前对宝圭之背，其左即中连之脊也。
现代文：从北边钻过偏洞口的下层出来，于是沿山的西北麓而行，这才见到此山前后有两座山峰，双双并立而中间连着，山峰向西南突起的，是宝圭洞依托之处，山峰在东北屹立的，是白砂洞隐伏之地。白砂洞前后也有两个洞口：前洞口向北而且高敞，分为三个洞口，两旁的悬绝陡峻，但中间的可俯身沿石阶进去；后洞口向南，可又高又窄仅通有一个孔，前方对着宝圭洞的后背，它左面就是中间相连的山脊了。
English: From the north, the crane drilled through the lower layer of the partial cave opening, and then walked along the northwest foot of the mountain. Only then did I see two peaks in front and behind this mountain, both standing side by side and connected in the middle. The peak protruding to the southwest is the place where Bao Gui Cave is supported. The peak standing in the northeast is the hidden place of the white sand cave. There are also two openings in front and behind the white sand cave: the front opening to the north and spacious, divided into three openings, the sides are steep, but the middle can be bent down to enter along the stone steps; the back opening to the south,

古文：先过后门山坳，草没无路，道者不入而北去。
现代文：先走过后洞口的山坳，草丛深没无路可走，道士不进洞却往北走。
English: First, they walked through the mountains at the entrance of the cave. The grass was so deep that there was no way out. The Taoist did not enter the cave, but walked north.

古文：共一里，转而东，绕山北麓而南跻前门。
现代文：共走一里，转向东，绕到山的北麓后向南登上前洞口。
English: Walk a total of one mile, turn to the east, go around to the northern foot of the mountain and then go south to the front cave entrance.

古文：入门即洼下，数十级及底。
现代文：走入洞口洞立即洼下去，走下数十级台阶下到洞底。
English: Walk into the cave mouth and immediately sink down, walk down dozens of steps to the bottom of the cave.

古文：仰视门左右，各有隙高悬旁启，即所谓左、右门也。
现代文：仰望洞口左右两侧，各有缝隙在旁边裂开高悬着，就是所谓的左、右洞口了。
English: Looking up at the left and right sides of the mouth of the cave, each has a gap next to the crack and hangs high, which is the so-called left and right hole.

古文：倒光流影，余照四达，然虚嵌莫攀焉。
现代文：倒光流影，太阳的余辉四处射入，然而嵌在虚空无法攀上去。
English: Reflected light streams, the sun's afterglow shoots in everywhere, but it is embedded in the void and cannot be climbed.

古文：从洞中右转，颇崇宏，而渐暗渐穷。
现代文：从洞中向右转，十分高大，但渐渐变暗渐渐到了头。
English: Turn right out of the cave, the rhino is very tall, but it's getting darker and darker.

古文：余先遍探而四觅之，无深入路。
现代文：我先到处探察四处找路，无深入之路。
English: I first explored everywhere to find a way around, there is no in-depth way.

古文：出，促炬命导，仍由之入抵其中，以火四烛，旁无路也。道者忽从右壁下，投炬蛇伏而入，窦高不逾尺，而广亦如之。
现代文：出来，催促点亮火把命令道士领路，仍由原路进到洞中。用火光四处照射，四旁无路，道士忽然从右壁之下，扔进火把像蛇一样趴伏着进去，石洞高不超过一尺，宽处也如此。
English: He came out, urged them to light torches and ordered the Taoist priest to lead the way, and still entered the cave from the original path. He shined the firelight everywhere, there was no way around, and the Taoist priest suddenly threw the torch from under the right wall and went in like a snake, lying on his stomach. The stone cave was no more than one foot high, and the width was the same.

古文：既入，忽廓然盘空，众象罗列，如阊阖āé天门下启，天地复通。
现代文：进去之后，忽然旋空而起，十分空阔，罗列着种种景象，如天门向下打开，天地重又相通。
English: After entering, it suddenly swirled up into the sky, very spacious, listing various scenes, such as the gates of heaven opening downwards, and heaven and earth coming together again.

古文：方瞻顾不遑，而崇宏四际，复旁无余隙。
现代文：正当四处环顾不及之时，在高大宽阔的四周，又一次四旁没有别的缝隙。
English: Just when it was too late to look around, there was no other gap in the tall and wide surroundings.

古文：忽得窦如前，透而东，转而南，倏开倏合，凡经四窦，皆隘若束管，既而见左崖之上，大书 丹砂 二字。
现代文：忽然找到一个如前边那样的洞穴，向东钻进去，转向南，忽开忽合，共经过四个洞穴，都窄得如紧束的竹管，薄得仅如钻过屏风，所以虽极其狭窄却忘了窘迫的处境，屡次经过却不厌其烦。随即见左面崖壁之上，大写着 丹砂 两个字。
English: Suddenly, he found a cave like the one in front of him. He drilled into it to the east, turned to the south, and suddenly opened and closed it. He passed through a total of four caves, all of which were as narrow as a bunch of bamboo tubes, and as thin as if he had just drilled through a screen. So, although they were extremely narrow, he forgot his predicament, and repeatedly passed through them without getting tired of them. Then, he saw two words, "Dansha," written in capital letters on the cliff wall to his left.

古文：其下有一龛，道者曰： 此丹穴也。 
现代文：字下有一个石完，道士说： 这是丹穴。 
English: There was a stone at the end of the word, and the Taoist said, "This is the Dan Cave."

古文：复伏而扫砂盈掬双手一捧焉。其南稍有一岐，入之不深。
现代文：又趴下去扫满一捧砂粒。它稍南处有一个岔洞，进去里面不深。
English: I got down again and swept up a heap of sand. There was a sinkhole just south of it, but it wasn't deep inside.

古文：出向西转，再折南行，则天光炯然，若明星内射，后洞门在望矣。
现代文：出来向西转，再折向南行，就见天光灿烂，好像明星射入洞内，后洞口在望了。
English: When you come out, turn west, and then turn south, you will see the sky shining brightly, as if a star has shot into the cave, and you can see the back of the cave.

古文：是洞内洼而中甚平，惟壁窦閤é辟，无沟陀升降，前后两门，俱高悬于上。
现代文：洞里面下洼但洞中十分平坦，唯有洞壁上开启着洞口，没有深沟高冈的升降，前后两个洞口，都高悬在上。
English: There are depressions in the cave, but the cave is very flat. Only the opening of the cave is on the cave wall, there is no rise and fall of the deep ravine, and the two openings are high above.

古文：道者欲仍从前门返，余欲逾后窦出。
现代文：道士想仍从前洞口返回去，我想越过后洞出去。
English: Taoist still want to go back from the front hole, I want to go out through the back hole.

古文：道者曰： 后门隘不可跻，而外复草深莫从。 
现代文：道士说： 后洞口狭窄不可登，而且洞外又草深无法走。 
English: The moralist said, "The back entrance of the cave is too narrow to climb, and the grass outside the cave is too deep to walk.

古文：余曰： 前暗中之隘，尚不惮其烦，况此空明，正可宛转，草之深浅，余所不顾也。 
现代文：我说： 前边黑暗中的隘口，尚且不惮其烦，何况此处空阔明亮，正可宛转而出，草的深浅，我就不顾了。 
English: I said, "I don't mind the gap in the darkness ahead, and it's wide and bright enough to turn around in, and I don't care about the grass.

古文：遂穿窦出，则午日方中，始见宝圭后峰，君树塞门焉。
现代文：于是穿过洞出来，就见太阳刚好在中天，这才见到宝圭洞的后峰，君子树堵塞了洞口。
English: So I went out through the hole and saw that the sun was exactly in the middle of the sky, and that's when I saw the back peak of Bao Gui Cave. The juniper tree had blocked the cave entrance.

古文：乃披茅践棘，西南出山拗，仍过宝圭透北偏门，共二里，将及庵后，命夫同道者还炊于庵，余挟寄宿庵中者东探清泉焉，洞不深而明洁可栖。
现代文：于是分开茅草踏着荆棘，向西南走出山坳，仍经过宝圭洞通到北面的偏洞口，共行二里，将到庵后，命令脚夫同道士返回庵中做饭，我带着寄宿在庵中的人往东去探清泉岩，就是先前经过时向南的岩洞。洞不深但明亮清洁可以居住。
English: So I parted the thatch by stepping on the thorns, walked out of the ridge to the southwest, and still passed through Bao Gui Cave to the north side of the cave mouth, a total of two miles. After arriving at the hermitage, I ordered the porter and the priest to return to the hermitage to cook. I took the people who were staying in the hermitage to the east to explore the clear spring rock, which was the cave to the south when I passed it before. The cave is not deep, but it is bright and clean and can be lived in.

古文：洞前有宋碑，大书 清泉岩 三字。
现代文：洞前有块宋碑，写着 清泉岩 三个大字。
English: In front of the cave, there is a Song Dynasty monument inscribed with "Three big characters of Qingquan Rock."

古文：下午，挟夫与寄宿庵中人此人不知何处人，先停庵中，身无半文，随余游诸洞，余与之饭，两日后不知所往。
现代文：洞左右无泉，可唯独得了这个名字，无从证实它的出处。
English: There are no springs on either side of the cave, but this name was given by chance, and there is no way to confirm its origin.

古文：探近山诸岩，乃西南入黄婆岩焉。
现代文：回到庵中吃饭。下午，带着脚夫与寄宿庵中的人去探寻近处山中的各个岩洞，于是向西南走入黄婆岩。
English: Back to the hermitage for dinner. In the afternoon, I took the porter and the people in the boarding hermitage to explore the various caves in the nearby mountains, so I walked southwest into Huangba Rock.

古文：黄婆岩者，宝圭西南诸峰所裂之岩也。
现代文：黄婆岩，是宝圭洞西南方群峰之中裂开的岩洞。
English: Huangbai Rock is a rock cave in the southwest of Baoguidong, in the middle of a group of peaks.

古文：其山西自望夫石攒沓而东，岩当其东北隅，与宝圭东西相对，而兹稍南逊。
现代文：这里的山从西边望夫石杂沓攒聚往东延，岩洞正当山的东北隅，与宝圭洞东西相对，而这里稍偏向南些。
English: The mountain here stretches from the west to the east, and the cave is in the northeast corner of the mountain, opposite the east and west of Baoguidong, and here it is slightly southward.

古文：岩门甚高，中有黄崖叠缀。
现代文：岩洞口十分高，洞中有黄色石崖重叠连缀在一起。
English: The mouth of the cave is very high, and there are overlapping yellow rock cliffs in the cave.

古文：岩外石峰之顶，分岐耸异，有欹若妇人之首，鬃髻盘空，作回睇顾影之态。
现代文：洞外石峰之顶，分出岔峰耸立异状，有的倾斜着好像女人的头，发髻盘绕在空中，作出回头顾视身影的姿态。
English: At the top of the stone peak outside the cave, the peaks stand out in a strange shape. Some are tilted like a woman's head, the hairpin is coiled in the air, making a gesture of looking back at the figure.

古文：其北面亦有石峰丛突，南与此山并夹，东与宝圭对峙。
现代文：它北面也有石峰成丛突起，南面与此山并排相夹，东面与宝圭洞对峙。
English: It also has a cluster of stone peaks protruding in the north, and is sandwiched side by side with this mountain in the south, and faces Bao Gui Cave in the east.

古文：当时必多碑碣，而沧桑之后，断础无存矣。
现代文：东南的石壁上，写着 勾漏山 三个大字，大处与山一样高，当地人认为是神仙的遗迹。此大字的下边旧时必定是寺观依托之处，但今天不可考证了。
English: On the stone wall to the south-east, there are three large characters that read "勾漏山," which are as tall as the mountain, and are believed by the locals to be the remains of a god. In the old days, the underside of this large character must have been where the view of the temple was supported, but this cannot be verified today.

古文：徘徊其下。
现代文：徘徊在这下边。
English: hanging around down here.

古文：又西抵望夫山西麓，眺望山崖，别无岩洞。
现代文：又往西抵达望夫山西麓，眺望山崖，别无岩洞。
English: Further west, we arrived at the western foot of Mount Mofu, overlooking the cliffs, and there were no other caves.

古文：惟见东南一面，峦岫攒簇，疑即所云巫山寨者，巫山寨一名石寨。
现代文：仅见东南一面，峰峦簇拥攒聚，怀疑就是所说的巫山寨的地方，然而渺茫广漠之中无法考证，唯有与灵秀的群山互相左顾右盼而已。
English: Seen only from the southeast, with peaks and ridges clustered together, it is suspected to be the so-called Wushanzhai place. However, it cannot be verified in the vastness of the vastness, only with the beautiful mountains looking at each other.

古文：草房数十间，营共居之，为居停卖浆之所。
现代文：不久就沿黄婆岩的东麓，边看边走，向南抵达东南隅，石崖悬绝陡峭，片片飞入云天点缀在空中。
English: Soon, I walked along the eastern foot of Huangba Rock, looking and walking, and reached the southeast corner to the south. The cliff was extremely steep, with pieces flying into the clouds and dotting the sky.

古文：横过勾漏庵，抵后峰东南角，盖宝圭所托之峰，南面骈立而中连，西立一峰，即庵后清泉岩所倚，东立者与之比肩南向，循峰东麓北行，路左得一东向岩，内颇深，渐缩如牛角。
现代文：从外层山崖攀着陡峭的崖石上登，经过竖直的裂隙，屡次钻出层层悬空岩，到达峰顶，终于让它高险深嵌的姿态全部显露出来。下山来，转而沿南麓走，见悬崖弯然隆起，石色呈深红色。下边虽有洞口，洞内进去不深，无法穿过门扉通入内室。于是向东由营房横向走过勾漏庵，抵达后峰的东南角。大致宝圭洞依托的山峰，在南面双双并立而中间相连，西边立着一峰，就是庵后清泉岩依托之处，东面竖立的山峰与它并肩向南。沿山峰东麓往北行，路左见到一个向东的岩洞，洞内很深，渐渐缩拢如牛角。
English: Climbing up the steep cliff from the outer cliff, through vertical cracks, repeatedly drilling out layers of overhanging rock, reaching the peak, finally revealing all of its high-risk, deeply embedded posture. Coming down the mountain, turn around and walk along the southern foot, see the cliff rising steeply, the stone color is dark red. Although there is a cave at the bottom, it is not deep enough to enter the cave, and it is impossible to enter the inner room through the door. So I walked eastwards from the barracks across the hook-hole hermitage to reach the southeast corner of the back peak. The peaks that are roughly supported by the Bao Gui cave, standing side by

古文：出洞又北，有清流一方，淙淙自乱石中流出，其上则草石蒙茸，其下则西南成小溪去，行道者俱从此渡崖，庵与营俱从此取汲，而无问其所从来者。
现代文：出洞后又向北走，有一片清流，从乱石中涂涂流出，泉上满是青草岩石蒙蒙茸茸，泉下就向西南形成小溪流去，走路的人都从此处涉过山崖，庵中与营房都从这里汲水，但无人问它是从哪里来的。
English: After coming out of the cave, they walked north. There was a clear stream that flowed out of the rubble. The spring was full of green grass and rocks covered with mushrooms. A small stream formed to the southwest below the spring. People who were walking waded through the cliff from here. Both the hermitage and the camp drew water from here, but no one asked where it came from.

古文：余正欲求其源委，忽一少年至，见之，语从夫曰： 汝辈欲寻洞乎？
现代文：我正想去追寻它的源头，忽然间一个少年来到，见了我们，对随行的脚夫说： 你们这些人想要找洞吗？
English: I was about to go in search of its source, when suddenly a young man came and saw us and said to the porter accompanying us: "Do you people want to look for a hole?

古文：此其上有二洞，相距数十丈，路为草翳，可探而入也。 
现代文：这上边有两个洞，相距数十丈，路被草隐没了，可试探着进去。 
English: There are two holes on the upper side, dozens of meters apart. The path is hidden by the grass, so you can try to get in.

古文：又一人曰： 昨未晚，有二人携犬自东来者，虎自崖上跃下攫犬去。
现代文：又有一人说： 昨天还不到晚上，有两个人带着狗从东边走来，老虎从山崖上跃下来叼着狗跑了。
English: Another said: "Yesterday evening, two people came from the east with a dog. The tiger jumped down from the cliff and ran away with the dog.

古文：虎穴宾客不可往。 
现代文：老虎穴在山上，不能去。 
English: The tiger's den is in the mountains, so we can't go there.

古文：余不顾，亟挟夫与寄宿者攀棘践刺上跻，觅之深蔓中，则洞门果穹然东向，但外为蔓拥石蔽，无从即见耳。
现代文：我不理会，急忙带着脚夫与寄宿的人攀着荆、棘踏着刺丛上登，在深草中找洞，就见洞口果然弯然向东，只不过外面被蔓草环拥被岩石遮蔽了，无法马上见到罢了。
English: Ignoring me, I hurriedly climbed up the thorn bushes with the porter and the boarder, climbing thorns and thorns, and looking for a hole in the deep grass. I saw that the hole was indeed bent to the east, but it was surrounded by vines and covered by rocks, so I couldn't see it right away.

古文：人洞门，即隤í然下坠。
现代文：走入洞口，洞立即猛地下坠。
English: Entering the cave, the cave immediately plummeted down.

古文：俯瞰之，则有溪贯其底，水声潺渓á，崖势峻削，非攀缘可下，四瞩其上，南崖有坠而未尽者，片石悬空，若栈道架壁，阔不盈咫，而长竟坠处直达西崖，但栈中有二柱骈立，若树栅断路者。
现代文：俯瞰洞底，见有溪水自北往南流贯洞底，水声潺潺缓缓流动，崖势陡削，不是靠攀援可以下去的。四面注视上方，南面石崖有处未全部坠陷下去之处，石片悬空，如栈道架在壁上，宽不到一尺，长处与一坠处一样长，直到西边的石崖，但栈道中有两根石柱并立，如用大树作栅栏阻断道路的样子。
English: Looking down at the bottom of the cave, you can see a stream flowing from north to south through the bottom of the cave, the water flowed slowly, the cliff was steep, and it was not possible to go down by climbing. Looking up on all sides, there were places where the southern cliff did not all fall down, the stone pieces were suspended, such as the footbridge on the wall, less than one foot wide, and the length was as long as a fall, until the west cliff, but there were two stone pillars standing side by side in the footbridge, as if blocking the road with large trees.

古文：而外一柱已为人截去，止下存尺余，可跨而过。
现代文：外边的一根石柱已被人截去，下边只留下一尺多，可跨过去。
English: A stone pillar on the outside has been cut off by people, leaving only a foot or more below, which can be stepped over.

古文：但其处益狭，以双手握内柱，而盘越外柱，临深越险，莫此为甚。
现代文：那地方十分狭窄，用双手握住里面的柱子，而绕着越过外边的石柱，下临深渊越过险途，没有比这里更危险的了。
English: The place is very narrow, and there is nothing more dangerous than holding the inner pillar with both hands, and passing around the outer stone pillar, descending into the abyss and crossing the dangerous path.

古文：过栈达西崖，已与洞门隔溪相向。
现代文：过了栈道走到西边的石崖，已与洞口隔溪相望。
English: After walking along the boardwalk to the west of the cliff, I was already looking across the creek from the mouth of the cave.

古文：乃明炬四烛：崖之下，深坠与外崖同，崖之上，内入则垂乳列柱，回错开閤合，忽环而为璇室，忽透而为曲榭，中藏之秘，难以言罄。
现代文：于是点亮火把四处照射：石崖之下，深深下坠与外面的石崖相同，石崖之上，向内进去就见垂着石乳排着石柱，交错开合，如疏朗的窗棍窈窕秀丽，忽而环绕成美玉装饰的石室，忽而穿透进去成弯弯曲曲的长廊，内中所藏的秘密，难以言尽。
English: So they lit torches and shone them all around: under the cliff, deep down, the same as the cliff outside, above the cliff, inwardly, you can see the hanging stone breasts lined with stone pillars, staggered open and closed, like sparse window bars, beautiful, suddenly surrounded by a stone room decorated with gems, suddenly penetrating into a curving corridor, the secret hidden inside is inexpressible.

古文：乃出崖临溪，从深坠处溜险投空而下，遂抵溪中。
现代文：于是出到石崖上面临溪流，从深坠之处滑下险途投身虚空而下，终于抵达溪中。
English: So he went out on the cliff to face the stream, slid down from a deep place, plunged into the void, and finally reached the middle of the stream.

古文：水深不及膝，南从崖下涌来，北从崖下坠去。
现代文：仰望洞顶，高高隆起，散射的日光映照在洞内，侧面的栈道凌空，尤其增加了飘渺的感觉。
English: Looking up at the top of the cave, the high rise, the scattered sunlight reflected in the cave, and the side of the boardwalk, in particular, increased the feeling of ethereality.

古文：余于是从南崖下溯流入。其穴甚低，垂覆水面，相距止尺。
现代文：水深不到膝，从南面的石崖下涌来，从北面的石崖上下坠而去，随即由此向东流出洞，成为乱石间泉水的源头。我于是从南面的石崖上下去溯流深入。那洞穴很低，垂覆在水面上，相距仅一尺。
English: The water was less than knee-deep, coming up from under the cliff on the south side, falling down from the cliff on the north side, and then flowing out of the cave to the east, becoming the source of the turbulent stone spring water. So I went down from the cliff on the south side to follow the flow deeper. The cave was very low, hanging over the water, only one foot apart.

古文：从夫暨寄宿者恐炬为水湿，内深莫辨，共阻莫入。
现代文：随行的脚夫及寄宿的人担心火把被水浸湿，洞内深处无法辨清路径，共同劝阻我不要进去。
English: The porters and boarders who accompanied me were worried that the torches were wet with water, and deep inside the cave it was impossible to discern the path, and together they discouraged me from going in.

古文：余贾勇溯流，冲沫过颡额头。
现代文：我鼓足勇气逆流而入，冲激的水沫漫过额头。
English: I plucked up the courage to swim against the current, the rush of water across my forehead.

古文：南入数丈，望前有流光熠熠，余喜，更透一洞，益高声呼二从人，虽伏水碍石，匍匐垂首，而瞻前顾后，火光与天光交通旁映，益前入不停。
现代文：向南进去几丈，望见前方有闪闪流动的亮光，我很高兴，再钻入一洞，益加高声呼唤两个随行的人，虽然伏在水中有石头阻碍着，甸甸低头，可瞻前顾后，火光与夭光交辉四射，越发向前深入不肯停了。
English: I went a few meters to the south and saw a flashing, flowing light ahead. I was very happy. I went into another hole and shouted louder and louder for the two people accompanying me. Although there were stones in the water, I bowed my head and looked ahead and behind. The firelight and the fading light shone everywhere, and I got further and further ahead and didn't want to stop.

古文：又南数丈，有洞穹然东西横贯，其上东辟而为外门，其内西入而成巨壑，时二人已至，乃令其以炬更前。
现代文：又向南数丈，有洞弯然隆起横贯东西，洞往上向东张开而成为外洞口，洞内往西进去而形成巨大的壑谷，洞口高耸与前边进来的洞口气势相当。
English: A few meters to the south, there is a cave that rises diagonally across the east and west, the cave opens up to the east and becomes the outer cave mouth, and the cave enters the west and forms a huge valley. The height of the cave mouth is equal to the momentum of the hole coming in from the front.

古文：于是西向溯流，洞愈崇宏，流愈深阔。
现代文：此时那两人已来到，便命令他们拿着火把再往前走。从这里向西溯流，洞越来越高大，流水越来越深广。
English: By this time the two men had arrived, and he ordered them to go on with their torches, and from here they followed the stream westwards, the hole getting bigger and bigger, and the water getting deeper and wider.

古文：又数丈，有石砥中流。
现代文：又走数丈，有块岩石如砒柱在中流。
English: A few metres further on, there is a rock like a pillar in the middle of the stream.

古文：登石内望，洞辟如广厦，渊水四际其下，以杖测水，不竟其底，以炬烛洞，洞甚深黑，乃自砥石返步随流；仍抵东辟外门之下。
现代文：登上岩石望里面，洞开阔得如高楼大厦，深水在洞下漫到四边，用手杖测水深，探不到水底，用火把照射洞中，山洞十分深黑，不知再转几个弯，才能到达宝圭洞南洞先前望见的深坠之处了。
English: Climbing onto the rock to look inside, the cave is as wide open as a tall building, deep water under the cave spreads to the four sides, measuring the depth of the water with a cane, can not detect the bottom of the water, illuminating the cave with a torch, the cave is very dark, I do not know how many more turns it will take to reach the previously seen deep place in the south cave of Bao Gui cave.

古文：二从者将垂首横炬，匍匐向低穴北入。
现代文：于是从砒柱样的岩石反身顺流而行，仍走到向东张开的外洞口之下。两个随行的人将低下头横拿火把，葡旬着向那低矮的洞穴往北进去。
English: Then, from the pillar-shaped rock, they will turn around and go downstream, still reaching the mouth of the outer cave, which opens to the east. The two accompanying people will bow their heads, hold torches sideways, and enter the low cave to the north.

古文：余止之曰： 此门虽峻，与所入者无异。
现代文：我拦住他们说： 这个洞口虽然高峻，与先前进来的地方没什么不同。
English: I stopped them and said, "This cave entrance, although steep, is no different from the first place you came from.

古文：若伛偻下涉而就所入之门，不若攀空跻危，竟登此门为便。 
现代文：如果弯腰下涉到进来时的洞口，还不如攀登上高空上登险途，走到头登上这个洞口方便些。 
English: If you stoop down and wade into the entrance of the cave, it is better to climb up to the top of the cave. It is more convenient to climb to the top of the cave.

古文：二从者曰： 门外不通，奈何？ 
现代文：两个随行的人说： 洞口外路不通，怎么办？ 
English: The two people accompanying him said, "There is no way out of the cave, what should we do?"

古文：余曰： 门以外总不出此山，即所入之门，其外岂坦途哉？ 遂攀崖先登，二人亦弃炬从之，乃出洞口。
现代文：于是向北转了一个弯，走到山前汲水的泉眼旁，从容洗脚，等候随行的人来到，便一口气用在北洞上登的方法下来。
English: So he turned a corner to the north, walked to the spring in front of the mountain to draw water, washed his feet slowly, waited for the accompanying people to come, and then used the method of climbing down the north cave in one breath.

古文：循左崖平行，还眺门上，又上辟一层，若悬阁当空，然无级以登。于是北转一曲，至前汲泉之穴，从容濯足，候从者至，亟自东南山角转过营房，共一里，入勾漏庵，大雨如注。
现代文：山崖半腰上石缝草影之中，仿佛连同北洞也能见到，等到在最下边抬头眺望时，仍然茫然消失看不见了。急忙从东南的山角转过营房，共走一里，进入勾漏庵，大雨如注。
English: Halfway up the cliff, amidst the shadows of the grass in the stone crevices, it seemed as if I could see the dragonflies along with the North Cave. But when I looked up at the very bottom, they still had vanished. I hurriedly walked one mile from the southeast corner of the mountain, past the barracks, and entered the Hook Leak Hermitage. It was raining heavily.

古文：是日，先西觅玉虚、玉田诸洞而不得，既而东得此二洞，尤为奇绝。
现代文：这一天，起初向西寻找玉虚、玉田诸洞却找不到，随后在东边找到这两个洞，尤其算得上奇妙绝伦。
English: On this day, at first, I looked for the Jade Deception and the Tamada Caves in the west, but I couldn't find them. Then, I found these two caves in the east, which was especially amazing.

古文：然此洞非异人忽指，则跬步之间，亦交臂而过，安知西峰大字岩之侧无棘霾蔓锁者？
现代文：不过这两个洞如不是奇人忽然现身指点，那在一两步路之间，也将交臂错过，哪能知道西峰大字岩的侧边有没有荆棘埋没蔓草闭锁的洞穴？
English: However, if these two holes are not suddenly pointed out by a strange person, then between one or two steps, they will also miss each other. Who can know whether there are thorns buried in the side of the Xifeng Oji Rock?

古文：安得峰峰手摩足抉，如黄婆岩东南诸峭石也耶！
现代文：怎么能座座山峰用手抚摩用脚挑选如黄婆岩东南诸处陡峭的石崖那样呢！
English: How can the peaks of Mount Zao be stroked with the hand and picked with the foot like the steep cliffs in the southeast of Huangba Rock!

古文：初二日晨餐后，令从夫随道者西向北流市蔬米于城，余独憩庵中。
现代文：初二日早餐后，命令随行的脚夫跟随道士向西去北流城中买米买菜，我独自在庵中休息。
English: After breakfast on the first two days, I ordered the footman to follow the Taoist monk to the west to buy rice and vegetables in Beilu Castle, and I rested alone in the hermitage.

古文：先是，寄宿者夜避蚊不知何往，至是至，曰： 已询得独胜岩在县北。 
现代文：这之前，寄宿的那人夜里躲避蚊子不知去到哪里，到这时来了，说： 已打听到独胜岩在县城北面。 
English: Prior to this, the person who was staying at the hostel had been hiding from mosquitoes at night and did not know where to go. At this time, he came and said, "I have heard that Dokseng Rock is north of the county seat.

古文：余知在县北者或新开他岩，必非独胜，而庵中无人，不能与即去，姑辞明日，而此人遂去不复来。
现代文：我知道在县城北面的或许是别的新开辟的岩洞，必定不是独胜岩，但庵中无人，不能与他马上去，暂且推辞明日去，可此人竟然一去不复还。
English: I know that in the north of the county town there may be other newly opened caves, certainly not the rock of victory, but there is no one in the hermitage, I can't go with him right away, I temporarily refuse to go tomorrow, but this person has gone and never returned.

古文：既午，从夫以蔬米返，余急令其具餐，将携砚载笔往录宝圭洞中遗诗。
现代文：已到中午，随行的脚夫拿着米菜返回来，我急忙命令他准备午饭，将携带笔砚前去抄录宝圭洞的遗诗。
English: At noon, the porter who had accompanied me returned with rice dishes. I hurriedly ordered him to prepare lunch, and he would carry a pen to copy the poems left behind in Bao Gui Cave.

古文：忽道者驰至，曰： 兵道将至，恐治餐庵中。 
现代文：忽然道士疾跑而来，说； 兵备道要来，恐怕会在庵中办酒宴。 
English: Suddenly, a Taoist priest came running, saying, "The soldiers are preparing to come, and I'm afraid they'll have a drinking party in the hermitage."

古文：录未半而彼已至洞，余趋避于北岐叠阁之上。
现代文：要把我的行李暂时带入他住的地方。我不理会，竟自赶去宝圭洞。刚出庵门，而使者和族旗已到了，不是管辖这里的郁林道，而是廉州府的悔北道。
English: He wanted to take my luggage to his place for a while. I ignored him and hurried to Bao Gui Cave. I had just left the door of the hermitage, but the messenger and the family flag had already arrived. It was not the Yulin Road that governed here, but the Jiebei Road of Lianzhou Prefecture.

古文：回忆《梧志》所纪西小室，洞朗外瞩，自然石榻，平辅叠架，可眠可踞，与东洞对，正如两掖，其景宛然。
现代文：我隐藏在围墙西面，等他进入庵中，立即赶去抄录洞中的诗。还未抄完一半而他已来到洞中，我赶快回避到北劝分洞重香的雄囱夕上。回忆起亥梧志》所记的西侧的小室，洞内明朗可向外远望，自然形成的石床，平整地铺着，叠成床架，可睡可坐，与东洞相对，正如两个胳肢窝，那景色宛如这里。
English: I hid on the west side of the enclosure wall, waiting for him to enter the hermitage, and immediately rushed to copy the poem in the cave. I had not yet finished half of the copy and he had already come to the cave, and I quickly avoided the male chimney on the west side of the cave. Recalling the small room on the west side of the cave, which was recorded in the "Hui Wu Zhi," the cave is clear and can look far and wide, and the naturally formed stone bed is neatly laid, stacked into a bed frame, can sleep and sit, opposite the east cave, like two armholes, the scenery is like here.

古文：彼入南穴，亦抵水而返；余石卧片时，听洞中人倏寂倏喧，亦一异趣。
现代文：他进入南洞，也是到水边便返回了；我在石上躺了片刻，倾听洞中的人声时而寂静时而喧闹，也是一种奇异的情趣。
English: He went into the south cave, also to the water's edge, and came back; I lay on the stone for a while, listening to the voices of the people in the cave, sometimes silent, sometimes noisy, is also a strange pleasure.

古文：张出南穴，亦北趋偏门下，终不能攀上层而登，与县官啧啧称奇指盼，而不知有人卧其中也。
现代文：张国径出了南洞，也是向北赶到偏洞口下，最终不能攀到上层，与县官一同啧啧称奇指点顾盼，却不知有人躺在其中。
English: Zhang Guobing went out of the south cave, but also rushed north to the mouth of the side cave, and finally could not climb to the upper floor. Together with the county officials, they pretended to be curious and looked around, but they did not know that someone was lying in it.

古文：俟其去，仍出录诸诗。
现代文：等他们离开，仍出来抄录各诗。
English: When they leave, they still come out to transcribe the poems.

古文：诗俱代，只有一宋碑而不佳，盖为兵燹战火荡净也。
现代文：诗都是近代的，只有一块宋碑却不佳，大概是被兵灾扫荡干净了。
English: The poems are all modern, but only one Song monument is not good. It was probably swept clean by the war.

古文：录甫毕，日衔西山，乃返于庵。
现代文：刚抄录完毕，已日衔西山，于是返回到庵中。
English: He had just finished transcribing and had already left for the West, so he returned to the hermitage.

