古文：宋子曰：水火既济而土合。
现代文：宋先生说：水与火都成功而协调地起到了作用，泥土就能牢固地结合成为陶器和瓷器了。
English: Mr. Song said: Water and fire have successfully and harmoniously played a role, and the soil can be firmly combined into pottery and porcelain.

古文：万室之国，日勤千有而不足，民用亦繁矣哉。
现代文：在上万户的城镇里，每天都有成千人在辛勤地制作陶器却还是供不应求，可见民间日用陶瓷的需求量是真够多的了。
English: In towns with tens of thousands of households, thousands of people are hard at work making pottery every day, but supply still falls short of demand. It can be seen that the demand for folk daily-use ceramics is really quite large.

古文：上栋下室以避风雨，而瓴建焉。
现代文：修建大的小的房屋来避风雨，这就要用到砖瓦。
English: Building large and small houses to shelter from the wind and rain requires the use of bricks and tiles.

古文：王公设险以守其国，而城垣雉堞，寇来不可上矣。
现代文：王公为了设置险阻以防守邦国，就要用砖来建造城墙和护身矮墙，使敌人攻不上来。
English: In order to set up a perilous obstacle to defend the country, the prince had to use bricks to build a city wall and a protective low wall, so that the enemy could not attack.

古文：泥瓮坚而醴酒欲清，瓦登洁而醯醢以荐。
现代文：泥瓮坚固，能使甜酒保持清彻；瓦器清洁，好用来盛装用于献祭的醋和肉酱。
English: The mud is firm and can keep the sweet wine clean; the earthenware is clean and can be used to hold the vinegar and meat sauce for the sacrifice.

古文：商周之际俎豆以木为之，毋亦质重之思耶。
现代文：商周时代，礼器是用木制造的，无非是重视质朴庄重的意思罢了。
English: During the Shang and Zhou dynasties, ceremonial objects were made of wood, which was nothing more than a way of emphasizing simplicity and solemnity.

古文：后世方土效灵，人工表异，陶成雅器，有素肌玉骨之象焉。
现代文：后来，各个地方都发现了不同特点的陶土和瓷土，人工又创造出各种技巧奇艺，制成了优美洁雅的陶瓷器皿，有的像绢似的白如肌肤，有的质地光滑如玉石。
English: Later, potter's clay and porcelain clay with different characteristics were discovered in various places, and various techniques and wonders were created by hand to produce beautiful and elegant ceramic vessels, some as white as skin and some as smooth as jade.

古文：掩映几筵，文明可掬，岂终固哉？
现代文：摆设在桌子、茶几或宴席上交相辉映，所显现的色泽文雅十分美观，让人爱不释手，难道这仅仅是因为它们坚固耐用吗？
English: When they are placed on a table, a coffee table or a banquet table, they reflect each other, and the color and elegance they show are so beautiful that people can't help but love them. Is it just because they are durable?

古文：○瓦
现代文：瓦
English: Tiles

古文：凡埏泥造瓦，掘地二尺余，择取无沙粘土而为之。
现代文：凡是和泥制造瓦片，就要挖地两尺多深，并从中选择不含沙子的黏土来造。
English: Whenever tiles are made from mud, it is necessary to dig more than two feet deep and choose clay that does not contain sand.

古文：百里之内必产合用土色，供人居室之用。
现代文：方圆百里之中，一定会有适合制造瓦片所用的黏土。
English: Within a hundred-mile radius, there is bound to be clay suitable for making tiles.

古文：凡民居瓦形皆四合分片，先以圆桶为模骨，外画四条界。调践熟泥，叠成高长方条。
现代文：民房所用的瓦是四片合在一起而成型的。先用圆桶做一个模型，圆桶外壁划出四条界，把黏土踩和成熟泥，并将它堆成一定厚度的长方形泥墩。
English: The tiles used for the residential house are formed by joining four pieces together. First, a model is made with a barrel, the outer wall of the barrel is marked with four lines, the clay is trodden with mature mud, and it is piled into a rectangular mud of a certain thickness.

古文：然后用铁线弦弓，线上空三分，以尺限定，向泥不平戛一片，似揭纸而起，周包圆桶之上。
现代文：然后用一个铁线制成的弦弓向泥墩平拉，割出一片三分厚的陶泥，像揭纸张那样把它揭起来，将这块泥片包紧在圆桶的外壁上。
English: Then, using a bow made of iron wire, he drew it flat against the crucible, cut out a three-quarter-thick piece of clay, unfolded it like a piece of paper, and wrapped the piece of clay tightly around the outer wall of the barrel.

古文：待其稍干，脱模而出，自然裂为四片。
现代文：等它稍干一些以后，将模子脱离出来，就会自然裂成四片瓦坯了。
English: After it dries a little, the mold will be detached, and it will naturally crack into four pieces of slab.

古文：凡瓦大小古无定式，大者纵横八九寸，小者缩十之三。
现代文：瓦的大小并没有一定的规格，大的长宽达八九寸，小的则缩小十分之三。
English: The size of the tiles does not have a certain specification, with the largest measuring up to 89 inches in length and width, and the smallest shrinking by three-tenths.

古文：室宇合沟中，则必需其最大者，名曰沟瓦，能承受淫雨不溢漏也。
现代文：屋顶上的水槽，必须要用被称为 沟瓦 的那种最大的瓦片，才能承受连续持久的大雨而不会溢漏。
English: Sinks on rooftops must use the largest tiles, known as gutter tiles, to withstand continuous heavy rain without leaking.

古文：凡坯既成，干燥之后，则堆积窑中燃薪举火，或一昼夜或二昼夜，视窑中多少为熄火久暂。
现代文：瓦坯在做好且经过干燥之后，就可以堆在瓦窑内，点火烧柴，开始烧制。有时要烧一天一夜，有时则需要两天两夜之久。至于什么时候熄火，则要视窑里有多少瓦坯而决定。
English: After the tiles have been made and dried, they can be stacked in the tile kiln, lit with firewood and started to burn. Sometimes it takes one day and one night to burn, sometimes it takes two days and two nights. As for when to turn off the fire, it depends on how many tiles are in the kiln.

古文：浇水转泑与造砖同法。
现代文：熄火后，要马上从窑顶向里面浇水，这样就可使瓦片闪现出蓝色的光泽，其方法与造砖类似。
English: After the fire is out, water should be poured from the top of the kiln to the inside immediately, so that the tiles can flash a blue luster. The method is similar to brick-making.

古文：其垂于檐端者有滴水，不于脊沿者有云瓦，瓦掩覆脊者有抱同，镇脊两头者有鸟兽诸形象，皆人工逐一做成，载于窑内受水火而成器则一也。
现代文：垂在屋檐处的瓦叫 滴水 ；用在屋脊两边的称 云瓦 ；而覆盖屋脊的叫做 抱同 。作为装饰而置于屋脊两端的各种陶制鸟兽，都要逐一经手工雕刻成坯，再放进窑里，经水与火的共同作用而变为成品。
English: The tiles hanging from the eaves are called drips; the ones used on both sides of the roof ridge are called clouds; and the ones covering the roof ridge are called cradles. All kinds of pottery birds and beasts placed at both ends of the roof ridge as decoration must be hand-carved into billets one by one, then put into the kiln, and transformed into finished products through the joint action of water and fire.

古文：若皇家宫殿所用，大异于是。
现代文：制作起来与之前的程序基本一样。至于皇家宫殿所用的瓦与民间所用瓦的方法就大不相同。
English: The production process is basically the same as before. As for the tiles used in the royal palace, the method is quite different from that used by the people.

古文：其制为琉璃瓦者，或为板片，或为宛筒。以圆竹与斫木为模逐片成造，其土必取于太平府造成。
现代文：例如琉璃瓦，有的形状是板片形的，有的是半圆筒形的，都是用圆竹筒或木块做模型一片一片烧成的。所用的黏土一定要从安徽当涂运来。
English: For example, the glazed tiles, some of which are plate-shaped, and some of which are semi-cylindrical, are all made of round bamboo tubes or wooden blocks. The clay used must be transported from Anhui Province.

古文：先装入琉璃窑内，每柴五千斤浇瓦百片。
现代文：瓦坯造成后，装入琉璃窑内，每烧一百片瓦要用五千斤柴。
English: After the slab is made, it is loaded into the glazing kiln, and for every hundred tiles fired, five kilos of firewood is used.

古文：取出，成色以无名异、棕榈毛等煎汁涂染成绿，黛赭石、松香、蒲草等涂染成黄。
现代文：烧成功后取出来涂上釉色，用无名异和棕榈毛汁涂成绿色或青黑色，或者用赭石、松香及蒲草等涂成黄色。
English: After successful firing, it is taken out and coated with glaze, painted green or blue-black with mugwort and palm sap, or painted yellow with vermiculite, rosin and rushes.

古文：再入别窑，减杀薪火，逼成琉璃宝色。
现代文：然后再装入另一窑中，用较低窑温烧成带有琉璃光泽的漂亮色彩。
English: Then it is loaded into another kiln and fired at a lower kiln temperature to produce a beautiful color with a glaze luster.

古文：外省亲王殿与仙佛宫观间亦为之，但色料各有配合，采取不必尽同，民居则有禁也。
现代文：京都以外的亲王宫殿和寺观庙宇，也有用琉璃瓦的，各地都有它自己的色釉配方，制作方法不一定都相同，一般的民房则禁止用这种琉璃瓦。
English: Prince's palaces and temples outside of Kyoto also use glazed tiles. Each region has its own glaze recipe, and the production methods are not necessarily the same. The use of such glazed tiles is prohibited in ordinary houses.

古文：○砖
现代文：砖
English: bricks

古文：凡埏泥造砖，亦掘地验辨土色，或蓝或白，或红或黄，皆以粘而不散、粉而不沙者为上。
现代文：炼泥造砖，也需要先挖取地下黏土，对泥土的成色加以鉴别。黏土一般有蓝、白、红、黄几种颜色，以黏而不散，土质细而没有沙的最为适宜。
English: To make bricks from clay, it is also necessary to first excavate underground clay and identify the color of the soil. Clay generally has blue, white, red, and yellow colors, and it is most suitable to be sticky and not loose, and the soil is fine and does not have sand.

古文：汲水滋土，人逐数牛错趾，踏成稠泥，然后填满木匡之中，铁线弓戛平其面，而成坯形。
现代文：先要浇水用于浸润泥土，再赶几头牛去践踏，踩成稠泥。然后把稠泥填满木模子，用铁线弓削平表面，脱下模子就成砖坯了。
English: First, water is used to impregnate the soil, and then a few cows are herded to trample and tread it into a thick mud. Then the thick mud is filled with a wooden mold, the surface is smoothed with a wire bow, and the mold is removed to form a brick billet.

古文：凡郡邑城雉民居垣墙所用者，有眠砖、侧砖两色。
现代文：建筑各郡县的城墙和民房的院墙所用的砖中，有 眠砖 和 侧砖 两种。
English: Among the bricks used to build the city walls of counties and counties and the courtyard walls of private houses, there are two types of sleeping bricks and side bricks.

古文：眠砖方长条，砌城郭与民人饶富家，不惜工费直垒而上。
现代文：眠砖是呈长方形的，郡县的城墙和有钱人家的墙壁，往往因其不惜工本，便全部用眠砖一个一个地叠砌上去。
English: The sleeping bricks are rectangular in shape. The county walls and the walls of rich people's homes are often built with sleeping bricks one by one because they do not mind the cost.

古文：民居算计者则一眠之上施侧砖一路，填土砾其中以实之，盖省啬之义也。
现代文：会精打细算的居民为了节省，在一层眠砖上面砌两条侧砖，中间再用泥土和沙石瓦砾之类填满。
English: In order to save money, the residents, who are meticulous in their calculations, lay two side bricks on top of a layer of sleeping bricks, and then fill the middle with soil and sandstone rubble.

古文：凡墙砖而外地者名曰方墁砖。榱桷上用以承瓦者曰皇板砖。圆鞠小桥梁与圭门与窀穸墓穴者曰刀砖，又曰鞠砖。
现代文：除了墙砖以外，还有其他的砖：铺砌地面用的叫做方墁砖，屋椽和屋桷斜枋上用来承瓦的叫做楻板砖，砌小拱桥、拱门和墓穴用的砖叫做刀砖，或者又叫做鞠砖。
English: In addition to wall bricks, there are other types of bricks: the ones used to pave the ground are called square bricks, the ones used to support tiles on the eaves and roof rafters are called mortise-and-tenon bricks, and the ones used to build small arched bridges, arches, and tombs are called knife bricks, or also called ball bricks.

古文：凡刀砖削狭一偏面，相靠挤紧，上砌成圆，车马践压不能损陷。
现代文：刀砖用的时候要削窄一边，紧密排列，砌成圆拱形，即便有车马践压也不会损坏坍塌。
English: When using cutter bricks, it is necessary to cut a narrow side, closely arrange them, and build a round arch. Even if there is pressure from a car or horse, it will not be damaged and collapse.

古文：造方墁砖，泥入方匡中，平板盖面，两人足立其上，研转而坚固之，浇成效用。
现代文：制造方墁砖的方法是，是首先把泥土放进方形的木框中，上面铺上平板，让两个人站在上面不断用力踩踏，把泥踩压瓷实。
English: The method of making square mortar bricks is to first put the soil into a square wooden frame, cover it with a flat plate, and let two people stand on it and continuously step on it.

古文：石工磨斫四沿，然后地。
现代文：砖烧成后，由石匠把砖块的四周磨削一下，就可用来砌地。
English: After the bricks are fired, the stonemason grinds the bricks on all sides, and then they can be used for building.

古文：刀砖之直视墙砖稍溢一分，皇板砖则积十以当墙砖之一，方墁砖则一以敌墙砖之十也。
现代文：在价格方面，刀砖的价格比墙砖要略贵一点，而板砖则只有墙砖的十分之一，方墁砖则要比墙砖还贵十倍。
English: In terms of price, the price of cutter bricks is slightly more expensive than wall bricks, while slab bricks are only one-tenth of wall bricks, and square mortar bricks are ten times more expensive than wall bricks.

古文：凡砖成坯之后，装入窑中，所装百钧则火力一昼夜，二百钧则倍时而足。
现代文：砖坯做好后就可以装窑烧制了。每装三千斤砖要烧一天一夜，装六千斤则要烧两天两夜才行。
English: After the brick blank is ready, it can be fired in the kiln. Each three-kilogram brick needs to be fired for one day and one night, and six-kilogram bricks need to be fired for two days and two nights.

古文：凡烧砖有柴薪窑，有煤炭窑。
现代文：烧砖有的用柴薪窑，有的用煤炭窑。
English: Some use firewood kilns to burn bricks, while others use coal kilns.

古文：用薪者出火成青黑色，用煤者出火成白色。
现代文：用柴烧成的砖呈青灰色，而用煤烧成的砖呈浅白色。
English: Wood-fired bricks are bluish-grey, while coal-fired bricks are pale white.

古文：凡柴薪窑巅上偏侧凿三孔以出烟，火足止薪之候，泥固塞其孔，然后使水转氵幼。
现代文：柴薪窑顶上偏侧凿有三个孔用来出烟，当火候已足而不需要再烧柴时，就用泥封住出烟孔，然后在窑顶浇水使砖变成青灰色。
English: On the top of the wood-fired kiln, there are three holes drilled on the side to produce smoke. When the fire is hot enough and there is no need to burn more wood, the smoke holes are sealed with mud, and then water is poured on the top of the kiln to turn the bricks blue-gray.

古文：凡火候少一两则氵幼色不光，少三两则名嫩火砖。本色杂现，他日经霜冒雪，则立成解散，仍还土质。
现代文：烧砖时，如果火力缺少一成的话，砖就会没有光泽；火力缺少三成的话，就会烧成嫩火砖，现出坯土的原色，日后经过霜雪风雨侵蚀，就会立即松散而重新变回泥土。
English: When burning bricks, if the firepower is less than one percent, the bricks will have no luster; if the firepower is less than three percent, it will be burned into tender bricks, the primary color of the loam will appear, and after a day of frost, snow, wind and rain erosion, it will immediately loosen and turn back into soil.

古文：火候多一两则砖面有裂纹，多三两则砖形缩小拆裂，屈曲不伸，击之如碎铁然，不适于用。
现代文：如果过火一成，砖面就会出现裂纹；过火三成，砖块就会缩小拆裂、弯曲不直而一敲就碎，如同一堆烂铁，就不再适于砌墙了。
English: If the temperature is too high, the brick surface will be cracked; if the temperature is too high, the brick will be shrunk, torn, bent, and broken. Like a pile of rotten iron, it is no longer suitable for building walls.

古文：巧用者以之埋藏土内为墙脚，则亦有砖之用也。
现代文：有些会使用材料的人把它埋在地里做墙脚，这也还算是起到了砖的作用。
English: Some people who know how to use materials buried it in the ground to make the foot of the wall, which also played the role of bricks.

古文：凡观火候，从窑门透视内壁，土受火精，形神摇荡，若金银熔化之极然，陶长辨之。
现代文：烧窑时要注意从窑门往里面观察火候，砖坯受到高温的作用，看起来好像有点晃荡，就像金银完全熔化时的样子，这要靠老师傅的经验来辨认掌握。
English: When firing the kiln, pay attention to observe the fire from the kiln door to the inside. The brick billet is affected by the high temperature and looks a bit wobbly, just like the appearance of gold and silver when completely melted. It depends on the experience of the teacher to identify and master.

古文：凡转氵幼之法，窑巅作一平田样，四围稍弦起，灌水其上。
现代文：使砖变成青灰色的方法，是在窑顶堆砌一个平台，平台四周应该稍高一点，在上面灌水。
English: The way to make the bricks turn blue-gray is to build a platform on top of the kiln. The platform should be slightly higher on all sides, and water should be poured over it.

古文：砖瓦百钧用水四十石。
现代文：每烧三千斤砖瓦要灌水四十担。
English: For every three-thousand-pound brick and tile that is burned, forty cords of water must be poured.

古文：水神透入土膜之下，与火意相感而成。
现代文：窑顶的水从窑壁的土层渗透下来，与窑内的火相互作用。
English: The water at the top of the kiln penetrates down from the soil layer of the kiln wall and interacts with the fire inside the kiln.

古文：水火既济，其质千秋矣。
现代文：借助水火的配合作用，就可以形成坚实耐用的砖块了。
English: With the help of the combination of water and fire, it is possible to form solid and durable bricks.

古文：若煤炭窑视柴窑深欲倍之，其上圆鞠渐小，并不封顶。
现代文：煤炭窑要比柴薪窑深一倍，顶上圆拱逐渐缩小，而不用封顶。
English: The coal kiln is twice as deep as the wood-fired kiln, and the top arch gradually shrinks, without having to be capped.

古文：其内以煤造成尺五径阔饼，每煤一层隔砖一层，苇薪垫地发火。
现代文：窑里面堆放直径约一尺五寸的煤饼，每放一层煤饼，就添放一层砖坯，最下层垫上芦苇或者柴草以便引火烧窑。
English: Inside the kiln, coal cakes with a diameter of about one foot and five inches are stacked. For each layer of coal cakes, an additional layer of bricks is placed. The bottom layer is covered with reeds or firewood to ignite the kiln.

古文：若皇居所用砖，其大者厂在临清，工部分司主之。
现代文：皇宫里所用的砖，大厂设在山东临清县，由工部设立主管砖块烧制的专门机构。
English: The large factory of bricks used in the imperial palace is located in Linqing County, Shandong Province. The Ministry of Industry has set up a special organization in charge of brick firing.

古文：初名色有副砖、券砖、平身砖、望板砖、斧刃砖、方砖之类，后革去半。
现代文：最初定的砖名有副砖、券砖、平身砖、望板砖、斧刃砖及方砖等名目，后来有一半左右被废除了。
English: Originally, the names of bricks included sub-bricks, voucher bricks, flat bricks, gazebo bricks, axe-blade bricks and square bricks. Later, about half of them were abolished.

古文：运至京师，每漕舫搭四十块，民舟半之。
现代文：要将这些砖运到京都，按规定每只运粮船要搭运四十块，民船可以减半。
English: To transport these bricks to Kyoto, according to regulations, each grain ship must carry forty bricks, and civilian ships can be reduced by half.

古文：又细料方砖以正殿者，则由苏州造解。
现代文：用来砌皇宫正殿的细料方砖，是在苏州烧成后再运到京都的。
English: The fine square bricks used to build the main hall of the Imperial Palace were fired in Suzhou and then transported to Kyoto.

古文：其琉璃砖色料已载《瓦》款。取薪台基厂，烧由黑窑云。
现代文：至于琉璃砖和釉料已在《瓦》那一节中详细记述了，据说它用的是 台基厂 的柴草并在黑窑中烧制而成的。
English: As for the glazed tiles and glazes, which have been described in detail in the section on "Tiles," it is said that they were made using firewood from the base factory and fired in a black kiln.

古文：○罂瓮
现代文：罂瓮
English: 

古文：凡陶家为缶属，其类百千。
现代文：陶坊制造的缶，种类很多。
English: There are many types of cans made by potteries.

古文：大者缸瓮，中者钵孟，小者瓶罐，款制各从方土，悉数之不能。
现代文：较大的有缸瓮，中等的有钵盂，小的有瓶罐。各地的式样都不太一样，难以一一列举。
English: Larger ones have cymbals, medium-sized ones have pestles, and small ones have jars. The patterns are not the same everywhere, and it is difficult to list them all.

古文：造此者必为圆而不方之器。
现代文：这类陶器，都是造成圆形的而不是方形的。
English: This type of pottery is round rather than square.

古文：试土寻泥之后，仍制陶车旋盘。
现代文：通过实验找到适宜的陶土之后，还要制造陶车和旋盘。
English: After finding a suitable clay soil through experiments, a potter's wheel and a lathe are also made.

古文：工夫精熟者视器大小掐泥，不甚增多少，两人扶泥旋转，一捏而就。
现代文：技术熟练的人按照将要制造的陶器的大小而取泥，放上旋盘，数量正好而不用增添多少。扶泥和旋转陶车要两人配合，用手一捏而成。
English: Skilled craftsmen take the mud according to the size of the pottery to be made, and put it on the turntable, the quantity is just right without adding much. Two people should cooperate in the mud pumping and the rotating pottery wheel, and it is made by hand.

古文：其朝迁所用龙凤缸与南直花缸，则厚积其泥，以俟雕镂，作法全不相同，故其直或百倍或五十倍也。
现代文：朝廷所用的龙凤缸和南直隶的花缸，要造得厚一些，以便于在上面雕镂刻花，这种缸的做法跟一般缸的制法完全不同，价钱也要贵五十倍到一百倍。
English: The dragon and phoenix vase used by the imperial court and the flower vase of Nan Zhiqiu had to be made thicker so that it was easier to carve and engrave flowers on it. The method of making this kind of vase was completely different from that of ordinary vases, and the price was also fifty to one hundred times more expensive.

古文：凡罂缶有耳嘴者皆另为合，上以泑水涂粘。
现代文：罂缶上的嘴和耳，都是有陶匠另外沾釉水粘上去的。
English: The spout and ears on the gourd were glued on by a potter who also dipped them in glaze.

古文：陶器皆有底，无底者则陕以西炊甑用瓦不用木也。
现代文：陶器都有底，没有底的只有陕西以西地区蒸饭用的甑子。
English: All pottery has a bottom. The only pottery without a bottom is the ladle used for steaming rice in the west of Shaanxi Province.

古文：凡诸陶器精者中外皆过釉，粗者或釉其半体。
现代文：它是用陶土烧成的而非木制。精制的陶器，里外都会上釉，比较粗糙的陶器有的就下半体上釉。
English: It is fired with clay rather than wood. Refined pottery will be glazed inside and out, while rougher pottery may be glazed on the lower half.

古文：惟沙盆齿钵之类其中不釉，存其粗涩，以受研擂之功。
现代文：至于沙盆和齿钵之类的，里面也不上釉，使内壁保持粗涩，以便于研磨。
English: As for sand trays and toothed rollers, they are not glazed on the inside, so that the inner wall remains rough and crisp for easy grinding.

古文：沙锅沙罐不釉，利于透火性以熟烹也。
现代文：沙煲和瓦罐不上釉，以利于传热煮食。
English: Crock pots and crock pots are not glazed in order to facilitate heat transfer while cooking.

古文：凡釉质料随地而生，江、浙、闽、广用者蕨蓝草一味。其草乃居民供灶之薪，长不过三尺，枝叶似杉木，勒而不棘人。
现代文：制造陶釉的原料分布很广，在江苏、福建、广东等地区用一种蕨蓝草，这种草本是当地的居民平常当柴火用的，长不及三尺，枝叶类似杉树，有筋但不刺手，这种草有几十个名称，在各地的叫法各不相同。
English: The raw materials for making pottery glaze are widely distributed. In Jiangsu, Fujian, Guangdong and other regions, a kind of indigo grass is used. This herb is commonly used by local residents as firewood. It is less than three feet long, with branches and leaves similar to cedar trees. It has sinews but no thorns. There are dozens of names for this grass, and the names vary from place to place.

古文：陶家取来燃灰，布袋灌水澄滤，去其粗者，取其绝细。
现代文：陶坊在把这种草烧成灰后便装进布袋里，灌水将其过滤之后，再筛去其中比较粗大的颗粒，只留下细碎的灰末。
English: After burning the grass to ashes, the pottery workshop put it in a cloth bag, filtered it with water, and then sifted out the coarser particles, leaving only the finely chopped ash.

古文：每灰二碗参以红土泥水一碗，搅令极匀，蘸涂坯上，烧出自成光色。
现代文：每两碗灰末加以一碗红泥水后搅拌均匀，就形成釉料了。将它涂在坯上，烧出来的器皿就会呈现出漂亮的光泽。
English: For every two bowls of ash, add a bowl of red muddy water and stir well to form a glaze. Apply it to the pan and the pan will take on a beautiful sheen.

古文：北方未详用何物。苏州黄罐釉亦别有料。
现代文：北方的釉料不知用什么方法制成，苏州的黄罐釉也是用其他的原料制造的。
English: The northern glaze is made by some unknown method, and the Suzhou yellow pot glaze is also made from other raw materials.

古文：惟上用龙凤器则仍用松香与无名异也。
现代文：至于朝廷专用的龙凤缸，则一律用松香和无名异作釉料。
English: As for the dragon and phoenix jars used exclusively by the imperial court, they were all glazed with rosin and nameless herbs.

古文：凡瓶窑烧小器，缸窑烧大器。
现代文：瓶窑用来烧制小件的陶器，缸窑则是用来烧制大件的陶器。
English: A bottle kiln is used to fire small pieces of pottery, while a cylinder kiln is used to fire large pieces of pottery.

古文：山西、浙江省分缸窑、瓶窑，余省则合一处为之。
现代文：山西、浙江两省的缸窑和瓶窑是分开的，其他各省则是将这两种窑合并在一起。
English: Cylinder kilns and bottle kilns in Shanxi and Zhejiang provinces are separate, while other provinces combine the two types of kilns.

古文：凡造敞口缸，旋成两截，接合处以木椎内外打紧，匝口、坛瓮亦两截，接合不便用椎，预于别窑烧成瓦圈如金刚圈形，托印其内，外以木椎打紧，土性自合。
现代文：制造大口的缸，要先转动陶车分别制成上下两截然后再接合起来，接合的地方要用木槌内外打紧。制造小口的坛瓮也是由上下两截接合成的，只是里面不便槌打，便预先烧制一个像金刚圈那样的瓦圈承托内壁，然后在外面用木槌打紧，两截泥坯就会自然地黏合在一起了。
English: To make a large-mouthed jar, the potter's wheel must first be turned to make the upper and lower halves separately and then joined, and the joint must be tightened with a mallet inside and out. The jar for making a small-mouthed jar is also made up of the upper and lower halves, but it is inconvenient to hammer inside, so a tile ring like a diamond ring is pre-fired to support the inner wall, and then it is tightened with a mallet on the outside, and the two pieces of mud will naturally stick together.

古文：凡缸、瓶窑不于平地，必于斜阜山冈之上，延长者或二三十丈，短者亦十余丈，连接为数十窑，皆一窑高一级。
现代文：无论是缸窑还瓶窑都不是建在平地上，必须建在一座小山斜坡上，比较高的窑有二三十丈，矮的窑也有十多丈，几十个窑连接在一起，一个窑比一个窑高。
English: Both the cylinder kiln and the bottle kiln are not built on flat ground, but must be built on a hill slope. The relatively high kiln is twenty to thirty meters high, and the low kiln is also more than ten meters high. Dozens of kilns are connected together, and one kiln is higher than another.

古文：盖依傍山势，所以驱流水湿滋之患，而火气又循级透上。
现代文：这样依傍山势，既可以避免积水，又可以促进窑中热气的逐渐上升。
English: In this way, it is possible to avoid stagnant water and promote the gradual rise of hot gas in the kiln by following the slope of the mountain.

古文：其数十方成窑者，其中苦无重值物，合并众力众资而为之也。
现代文：几十个窑连接起来所烧成的陶器，其中虽然没有什么昂贵的东西，但也是需要好多人合资合力才能做到的。
English: Although there is nothing expensive in the pottery fired by connecting dozens of kilns, it requires the joint efforts of many people.

古文：其窑鞠成之后，上铺覆以绝细土，厚三寸许。
现代文：窑顶的圆拱砌成之后，上面要铺一层约三寸厚的细土。
English: After the round arch at the top of the kiln is built, a layer of fine soil about three inches thick should be laid on top.

古文：窑隔五尺许则透烟窗，窑门两边相向而开。
现代文：窑顶每隔五尺多开一个透烟窗，窑门是在两侧相向而开的。
English: At intervals of five feet on the top of the kiln, an additional smoke window was opened, and the kiln door was opened on both sides.

古文：装物以至小器，装载头一低窑，绝大缸瓮装在最末尾高窑。
现代文：最小的陶件装入最低的窑，最大的缸瓮则装在最高的窑。
English: The smallest pottery pieces are loaded into the lowest kiln, while the largest crucibles are loaded into the highest kiln.

古文：发火先从头一低窑起，两人对面交看火色。
现代文：烧窑是从最低的窑烧起，两个人面对面观察火色。
English: The kiln is fired from the lowest kiln, and two people face to face observe the fire.

古文：大抵陶器一百三十费薪百斤。
现代文：大概陶器一百三十斤，需要用柴一百斤。
English: About one hundred and thirty kilos of pottery and one hundred kilos of firewood are needed.

古文：火候足时，掩闭其门，然后次发第二火。
现代文：当第一窑火候足够之时，关闭窑门，再烧第二窑，就这样逐窑烧直到最高的窑为止。
English: When the first kiln is hot enough, close the kiln door, then fire the second kiln, and so on, kiln by kiln, until the highest kiln is built.

古文：以次结竟至尾云。○白瓷凡白土曰垩土，为陶家精美器用。
现代文：白瓷附：青瓷垩土是一种白色的黏土，一般用来制造最精美的瓷器。
English: White porcelain attached: Celadon rammed earth is a white clay, generally used to make the most exquisite porcelain.

古文：中国出惟五六处，北则真定定州、平凉华亭、太原平定、开封禹州，南则泉郡德化、徽郡婺源、祁门。
现代文：我国只有五六个地方出产这种垩土：在北方有河北省的定县、甘肃省的华亭县、山西省的平定县和河南省的禹县，在南方产地则只有福建省的德化县、江西省的婺源县以及安徽省的祁门县。
English: There are only five or six places in China that produce this rammed earth: in the north there are Ding County in Hebei Province, Huating County in Gansu Province, Pingding County in Shanxi Province and Yu County in Henan Province, and in the south there are only Dehua County in Fujian Province, Yuyuan County in Jiangxi Province and Qimen County in Anhui Province.

古文：德化窑惟以烧造瓷仙、精巧人物、玩器，不适实用；真、开等郡瓷窑所出，色或黄滞无宝光，合并数郡不敌江西饶郡产。
现代文：其他地方所出产的白土，因其质地不够黏而不宜用来制作陶瓷的坯胎，只可以用来刷墙或铺地。德化窑是专门烧制以仙人佛像、精巧人物或玩赏用器皿的瓷器的，并没有生活中的实用价值，而河北定县和河南禹县窑中所出品的瓷器，颜色发黄且没有光泽。上述这些瓷窑的产品，都远远比不上江西省景德镇所产的陶瓷的质量。
English: The white clay produced in other places, because its texture is not sticky enough to be used for making ceramic blanks, can only be used for brushing walls or paving. The Dehua kiln is specially made of porcelain with immortal Buddha statues, exquisite figures or playful utensils, and has no practical value in life, while the porcelain produced in the kilns of Ding County, Hebei Province, and Yu County, Henan Province, is yellow in color and has no luster. The products of these porcelain kilns are far less than the quality of the ceramics produced in Jingde Town, Jiangxi Province.

古文：浙省处州丽水、龙泉两邑，烧造过釉杯碗，青黑如漆，名曰处窑，宋、元时龙泉琉山下，有章氏造窑出款贵重，古董行所谓哥窑器者即此。
现代文：浙江省丽水、龙泉两县烧制的杯碗涂有釉层，其成品呈现为墨蓝色，如漆器一般光亮，被称为 处窑 。宋元年代时，在龙泉县的琉华山下，章姓人士所建造的瓷窑，出品甚为名贵，即古董店中所说的 哥窑瓷器 。
English: The cups and bowls fired in the counties of Lishui and Longquan in Zhejiang Province are coated with a glaze layer, and their finished products appear inky blue, as bright as lacquer ware, and are called 处窑. In the Song and Yuan Dynasties, the porcelain kilns built by people with the surname Zhang at the foot of Mount Ryuhua in Longquan County produced very valuable products, that is, the so-called 哥窑 porcelains in antique shops.

古文：若夫中华四裔驰名猎取者，皆饶郡浮梁景德镇之产也。
现代文：至于我国远近闻名、人人争购的瓷器，则都是江西饶郡浮梁县景德镇的产品。
English: As for the porcelain that is famous far and wide in our country and that everyone competes to buy, they are all products of Jingdezhen, Fuyang County, Rao County, Jiangxi Province.

古文：此镇从古及今为烧器地，然不产白土。
现代文：自古以来，景德镇都是烧制瓷器的名都，但当地却不产白土。
English: Since ancient times, Jingdezhen has been the famous capital of fired porcelain, but the local area does not produce white clay.

古文：土出婺源、祁门两山：一名高梁山，出粳米土，其性坚硬；一名开化山，出糯米土，其性粢软。
现代文：白土出自婺源和祁门两地的山上：其中的一座名叫高梁山，出粳米土，土质坚硬；另一座名开化山，出糯米土，土质黏软。
English: The white soil comes from the mountains in the two places of Luyuan and Shimen. One of them is called Gaoliang Mountain, which is made of glutinous rice soil, and the soil is hard; the other is called Kaihua Mountain, which is made of glutinous rice soil, and the soil is soft.

古文：两土和合，瓷器方成。
现代文：只有两种白土混合，才能做成瓷器。
English: Only two types of clay can be mixed to make porcelain.

古文：其土作成方块，小舟运至镇。
现代文：将这两种白土分别塑成方块，用小船运到景德镇。
English: The two kinds of white soil were separately shaped into cubes and transported to Jingdezhen by boat.

古文：造器者将两土等分入臼舂一日，然后入缸水澄，其上浮者为细料，倾跌过一缸，其下沉底者为粗料。
现代文：造瓷器的人取等量的两种瓷土放入臼内，舂一天，然后放入缸内用水澄清。缸里面浮上来的是细料，把它倒入另一口缸中，下沉的则是粗料。
English: Porcelain makers take equal amounts of the two types of porcelain clay, put them in a mortar, simmer for a day, and then put them in a jar to clarify with water. The fine material that floats up inside the jar is poured into another jar, while the coarse material sinks.

古文：细料缸中再取上浮者，倾过为最细料，沉底者为中料。
现代文：细料缸中再倒出上浮的部分便是最细料，沉底的是中料。
English: In the fine material cylinder, the part that rises after being poured out is the finest material, and the bottom is the middle material.

古文：既澄之后，以砖砌方长塘，逼靠火窑以借火力。倾所澄之泥于中，吸干然后重用清水调和造坯。
现代文：澄过后，分别倒入窑边用砖砌成的长方塘内，借窑的热力吸干水分，然后重新加清水调和造瓷坯。
English: After clarification, it is separately poured into a rectangular pond made of bricks at the kiln edge, and the heat of the kiln is used to dry the water, and then the clear water is added again to reconcile the porcelain slab.

古文：凡造瓷坯有两种，一曰印器，如方圆不等瓶瓮炉合之类，御器则有瓷屏风、烛台之类。
现代文：瓷坯分为两种。一种叫印器，有方形或圆形的，比如瓶、瓮、炉、盒之类，此外朝廷所用的瓷屏风、烛台也属于这一类。
English: Porcelain blanks are divided into two types. One is a printer, with square or round nozzles, such as bottles, jars, stoves, boxes, etc. In addition, porcelain screens and candlesticks used by the imperial court also belong to this category.

古文：先以黄泥塑成模印，或两破或两截，亦或囫囵。
现代文：这种瓷坯先要用黄泥制成模型，模具可分左右两半，或为上下两截，但也可以是整体的模型。
English: This kind of porcelain slab is first made into a model with yellow clay. The mold can be divided into two halves, or into two sections, but it can also be a complete model.

古文：然后埏白泥印成，以釉水涂合其缝，浇出时自圆成无隙。
现代文：之后将瓷土放入泥模型中印成瓷坯，把它从模型上拿下后，再用釉水在接缝的地方涂抹均匀，经过这样的处理之后，烧成的瓷器就会完整而看不到痕迹。
English: After that, the porcelain clay is put into the mud model to print the porcelain blank, and after taking it off the model, the glaze is applied evenly at the seams. After this treatment, the fired porcelain will be complete and no traces will be seen.

古文：一曰圆器，凡大小亿万杯盘之类乃生人日用必需，造者居十九，而印器则十一。
现代文：另一种瓷坯叫做圆器，包括数不胜数的大小杯盘之类，都是人们的日常生活用品。圆器产量约占了十分之九，而印器只占其中的十分之一。
English: Another type of porcelain slab is called roundware, including countless large and small cups and plates, which are people's daily necessities. The production of roundware accounts for about nine-tenths, while the printer only accounts for one-tenth of it.

古文：造此器坯先制陶车。
现代文：制造这种圆器坯，要先做一辆陶车。
English: In order to make this round billet, it is necessary to make a pottery wheel first.

古文：车竖直木一根，埋三尺入土内使之安稳，上高二尺许，上下列圆盘，盘沿以短竹棍拨运旋转，盘顶正中用檀木刻成盔头冒其上。
现代文：用直木一根，埋入地下三尺并使它稳固。露出地面二尺，在上面安装一上一下两个圆盘，用小竹棍拨动盘沿，陶车便会旋转，用檀木刻成一个盔头戴在上盘的正中。
English: With a straight log, bury it three feet underground and make it stable. Expose the ground two feet, install two discs on top, move the rim of the disc with a small bamboo stick, the potter's wheel will rotate, carve a helmet with sandalwood and wear it in the middle of the upper disc.

古文：凡造杯盘无有定形模式，以两手棒泥盔冒之上，旋盘使转，拇指剪去甲，按定泥底，就大指薄旋而上，即成一杯碗之形。
现代文：塑造杯盘，没有固定的模式，用双手捧泥放在盔头上，拨盘使转。用剪净指甲的拇指按住泥底，使瓷泥沿着拇指旋转向上展薄，便可捏塑成杯碗的形状。
English: There is no fixed pattern for shaping the cup and saucer. Hold the clay with both hands and place it on the head of the helmet. Use the dial to turn it. Hold the bottom of the clay with the thumb of a clean fingernail and rotate the clay along the thumb to thin it out. The clay can then be molded into the shape of a cup and bowl.

古文：功多业熟，即千万如出一范。
现代文：功夫深技术熟练的人，就可以做到千万个杯碗好像都是用同一个模子印出来的。
English: A highly skilled person can make millions of cups and bowls look like they were printed from the same mold.

古文：凡盔冒上造小杯者不必加泥，造中盘、大碗则增泥大其冒，使干燥而后受功。
现代文：在盔帽上塑造小坯时，不必加泥，塑中盘和大碗时，就要加泥扩大盔帽，等陶泥晾干以后再加工。
English: It is not necessary to add mud when molding a small billet on the helmet. When molding a middle plate and a large bowl, it is necessary to add mud to expand the helmet. Wait for the clay to dry before processing.

古文：凡手指旋成坯后，覆转用盔冒一印，微晒留滋润，又一印，晒成极白干，入水一汶，漉上盔冒，过利刀二次，然后补整碎缺，就车上旋转打圈。
现代文：用手指在陶车上旋成泥坯之后，把它翻过来罩在盔帽上印一下，稍晒一会儿而坯还保持湿润时，再印一次，使陶器的形状圆而周正，然后再把它晒得又干又白。
English: After spinning the clay into a loaf with your fingers on the potter's wheel, turn it upside down, cover it with a cloth, print it on the helmet, let it dry for a while while the loaf is still moist, print it again to make the shape of the pottery round and round, and then let it dry and white.

古文：圈后或画或书字，画后喷水数口，然后过釉。
现代文：接着，在瓷坯上绘画或写字，喷上几口水，然后再上釉。
English: Next, paint or write on the porcelain, spray a few sprays of water, and then glaze.

古文：凡为碎器与千钟粟与褐色杯等，不用青料。
现代文：在制造大多数碎器、千钟粟和褐色杯等瓷器时，都不用上青釉料。
English: Blue glaze is not used in the manufacture of most porcelain items such as choppers, millet jars, and brown cups.

古文：欲为碎器，利刀过后，日晒极热。入清水一蘸而起，烧出自成裂纹。
现代文：制造碎器，用利刀修整生坯后，要把它放在阳光下晒得极热，在清水中蘸一下随即提起，烧成后自然会呈现裂纹。
English: After making a shredder and trimming the raw billet with a sharp knife, it should be placed in the sun to get extremely hot. It should be dipped in clear water and then lifted. After firing, it will naturally show cracks.

古文：千钟粟则釉浆捷点，褐色则老茶叶煎水一抹也。
现代文：千钟粟的花纹是用釉浆快速点染出来的。褐色杯是用老茶叶煎的水一抹而成的。
English: The patterns of the millet poppies were dyed quickly with a glaze, and the brown cups were made with a dab of water from old tea leaves.

古文：凡饶镇白瓷釉用小港嘴泥浆和桃竹叶灰调成，似清泔汁，盛于缸内。
现代文：景德镇的白瓷釉是用 小港嘴 的泥浆和桃竹叶的灰调匀而成的，很像澄清的淘米水，盛在瓦缸里。
English: Jingdezhen's white porcelain glaze is made from the mud of Xiaogangzui and the ash of peach and bamboo leaves, much like clarified rice water, and is placed in a crock pot.

古文：凡诸器过釉，先荡其内，外边用指一蘸涂弦，自然流遍。
现代文：瓷器上釉，先要把釉水倒进泥坯里荡一遍，再张开手指撑住泥坯往釉水里点蘸外壁，点蘸时使釉水刚好浸到外壁弦边，这样釉料自然就会布满全坯身了。
English: To glaze porcelain, first pour the glaze into the clay and swirl it around, then hold the clay with your fingers outstretched and rub the outer wall into the glaze. When rubbing, soak the glaze just to the edge of the outer wall string, so that the glaze will naturally cover the entire body of the clay.

古文：凡画碗青料总一味无名异。
现代文：画碗的青花釉料只用无名异一种。
English: There is only one kind of blue flower glaze used for the painting bowl.

古文：此物不生深土，浮生地面，深者掘下三尺即止，各省直皆有之。亦辨认上料、中料、下料，用时先将炭火丛红煅过。
现代文：无名异不藏在深土之下而是浮生在地面，最多向下挖土三尺深即可得到，各省都有，也分为上料、中料和下料三种，使用时要先经过炭火煅烧。
English: Muji does not hide under the deep soil, but floats on the ground. It can be obtained by digging up to three feet deep. It is available in all provinces. It is also divided into three types of topping, middle and bottom. When used, it must first be charcoal-fired.

古文：上者出火成翠毛色，中者微青，下者近土褐。
现代文：上料出火时呈翠绿色，中料呈微绿色，下料则接近土褐色。
English: The upper material was emerald green when it caught fire, the middle material was slightly green, and the lower material was close to earthy brown.

古文：上者每斤煅出只得七两，中下者以次缩减。
现代文：每煅烧无名异一斤，只能得到上料七两，中、下料依次减少。
English: For every kiln-fired kilo, only seven kilos can be obtained from the upper material, and the middle and lower materials are reduced in turn.

古文：如上品细料器及御器龙凤等，皆以上料画成，故其价每石值银二十四两，中者半之，下者则十之三而已。
现代文：制造上等精致的瓷器和皇帝所用的龙凤器等，都是用上料绘画后烧制成的。因此上料无名异每担值白银二十四两，中料只值上料的一半，下料只值其三分之一。
English: The finest porcelain and the dragon and phoenix vessels used by emperors were all made by painting and firing the upper material. Therefore, the upper material was worth 24 taels of silver, the middle material was only worth half of the upper material, and the lower material was only worth a third of it.

古文：凡饶镇所用，以衢、信两郡山中者为上料，名曰浙料，上高诸邑者为中，丰城诸处者为下也。
现代文：景德镇所用的，以浙江衢州府和江西广信府出产的为上料，也叫做浙料。江西上高出产的为中料，江西丰城等地出产的为下料。
English: Jingdezhen uses the top material, also known as the Zhejiang material, which is produced in the Zhejiang province of Ganzhou and the Guangxin province of Jiangxi. The middle material is produced in the Jiangxi province, and the bottom material is produced in Fengcheng and other places in Jiangxi.

古文：凡使料煅过之后，以乳钵极研，然后调画水。调研时色如皂，入火则成青碧色。
现代文：凡是煅烧过的青花料，要用研钵磨得极细，然后再用水调和研磨到呈现黑色，入窑经过高温煅烧就变成了亮蓝色了。
English: All the blue flower materials that have been calcined must be finely ground with a grinder, and then mixed with water and ground until they are black. After high-temperature calcination in the kiln, they become bright blue.

古文：凡将碎器为紫霞色杯者，用胭脂打湿，将铁线纽一兜络，盛碎器其中，炭火炙热，然后以湿胭脂一抹即成。凡宣红器乃烧成之后出火，另施工巧微炙而成者，非世上殊砂能留红质于火内也。
现代文：制造紫霞色的碎器的方法是，先把胭脂石粉打湿，用铁线网兜盛着碎器放到炭火上炙热，再用湿胭脂石粉一抹就成了。 宣红 瓷器则是烧制而成之后再用巧妙的技术借微火炙成的，这种红色并不是那种朱砂在火中所留下来的。
English: The way to make a violet-blue chipper is to first wet the cochineal powder, use a wire mesh bag to hold the chipper and put it on the charcoal fire to heat up, and then use a wet cochineal powder to make it.Xuanhong porcelain is made after firing and then using clever technology to use low heat.This red is not the kind of cinnabar left in the fire.

古文：凡瓷器经画过釉之后，装入匣钵。钵以粗泥造，其中一泥饼托一器，底空处以沙实之。
现代文：瓷器坯子经过画彩和上釉之后，装入匣钵，匣钵是用粗泥造成的，其中每一个泥饼托住另一个瓷坯，底下空的部分用沙子填实。
English: After being painted and glazed, the porcelain blank is placed in a coffer, which is made of coarse mud, in which each mud cake supports another porcelain blank, and the bottom empty part is filled with sand.

古文：大器一匣装一个，小器十余共一匣钵。
现代文：大件的瓷坯一个匣钵只能装一个，小件的瓷坯一个匣钵可以装十几个。
English: A tray for a large porcelain slab can only hold one, while a tray for a small porcelain slab can hold more than a dozen.

古文：钵佳者装烧十余度，劣者一二次即坏。
现代文：好的匣钵可以装烧十几次，差的匣钵用一两次就坏了。
English: A good magazine can be loaded and fired more than a dozen times, while a bad magazine will break after one or two uses.

古文：凡匣钵装器入窑，然后举火。
现代文：把装满瓷坯的匣钵放入窑后，就开始点火烧窑。
English: After placing the box full of porcelain into the kiln, the kiln is ignited.

古文：其窑上空十二圆眼，名曰天窗。
现代文：窑顶有十二个圆孔，这叫做天窗。
English: At the top of the kiln there are twelve round holes, which are called skylights.

古文：火以十二时辰为足。
现代文：烧二十四个小时火候就足了。
English: Twenty-four hours of cooking is enough.

古文：先发门火十个时，火力从下攻上，然后天窗掷柴烧两时，火力从上透下。
现代文：先从窑门发火烧二十个小时，火力从下向上攻，然后从天窗丢进柴火入窑烧四个小时，火力从上往下透。
English: First, the fire is ignited from the kiln door for twenty hours, and the firepower attacks from the bottom up. Then, the firewood is thrown into the kiln from the skylight for four hours, and the firepower penetrates from the top down.

古文：器在火中其软如棉絮，以铁叉取一以验火候之足。
现代文：瓷器在高温烈火中软得会像棉絮一样，用铁叉取出一个样品用以检验火候是否已经足够。
English: Porcelain can become as soft as lint in a high-temperature fire, and a sample is taken with a fork to check whether it has been sufficiently heated.

古文：辨认真足，然后绝薪止火。共计一坯工力，过手七十二方克成器，其中微细节目尚不能尽也。
现代文：火候已足了就应该停止烧窑了，合计造一个瓷杯所费的工夫，要经过七十二道工序才能完成，其中许多细节还没有计算在内呢！
English: The kiln should be stopped when it is hot enough, and the total time required to make a porcelain cup requires 72 processes to complete, many of which have not yet been calculated!

古文：○附：窑变回青
现代文：附：窑变回青
English: Attached: kiln turns back to blue

古文：正德中，内使监造御器。
现代文：正德年间，皇宫中派出专使来监督制造皇族使用的瓷器。
English: During the Zhengde era, a special envoy was sent to the imperial palace to supervise the production of porcelain used by the imperial family.

古文：时宣红失传不成，身家俱丧。一人跃入自焚。
现代文：当时 宣红 瓷器的具体制作方法已经失传而无法造出来了，因此承造瓷器的人都担心自己的生命财产难以保全。
English: At that time, the specific production method of Xuanhong porcelain had been lost and could not be made, so the people who undertook the production of porcelain were worried that their lives and property would be difficult to preserve.

古文：托梦他人造出，竞传窑变，好异者遂妄传烧出鹿、象诸异物也。
现代文：其中有一个人害怕皇帝治罪，于是就跳入瓷窑里自焚而死了。这人死后托梦给别人把 宣红 瓷器终于造成了，于是人们竞相传说发生了 窑变 。好奇的人更胡乱传言烧出了鹿、大象等奇异的动物。
English: One of them was afraid of the emperor's punishment, so he jumped into the porcelain kiln and burned himself to death. After this person died, he dreamed of others to finally create "Xuanhong" porcelain, so people competed to say that the kiln changed. Curious people even more wild rumors burned out deer, elephants and other strange animals.

古文：又回青乃西域大青，美者亦名佛头青。
现代文：又记：回青乃是产自西域地区的大青，优质的又叫做佛头青。
English: Also note: Huiqing is a large green tea produced in the western region, and the high-quality one is also called Buddha's head green tea.

古文：上料无名异出火似之，非大青能入洪炉存本色也。
现代文：用上料无名异为釉料烧出来的颜色与回青的颜色相似，并不是说大青这种颜料入瓷窑经过高温之后还能保持它本来的蓝色。
English: The color of the glaze fired with the glaze is similar to the color of the glaze, which is not to say that the glaze can maintain its original blue color after entering the kiln at a high temperature.

