古文：◎世祖十三二十七年春正月戊申，改大都路总管府为都总管府。
现代文：至元二十七年春，正月初四，把大都路总管府改为都总管府。
English: In the spring of the 27th year of the Yuan, on the fourth day of the first month of the year, the Dadu Road General Administration Office was changed to the General Administration Office.

古文：庚戌，太白犯牛。
现代文：初六，太白金星干犯牛宿天区。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the new year, the too-white Venus committed a crime.

古文：改储偫提举司为军储所，秩从三品。
现代文：把储提举司改为军储所，秩禄为从三品。
English: He changed the name of the Reservist Training Division to the Armory, and the rank was changed to Junior Third Rank.

古文：以河东山西道宣慰使阿里火者为尚书右丞，宣慰使如故。
现代文：任命河东山西道宣慰使阿里火者为尚书右丞，仍旧担任宣慰使。
English: The person who appointed Ali to be the messenger of condolence in the Western Shanxi Province of the People's Republic of China is Shang Shuju Rong, who still serves as the messenger of condolence.

古文：癸丑，太阴犯井。
现代文：初九，太阴星干犯井宿天区。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month of the lunar calendar, the yin and yang stars are in the yin and yang constellations.

古文：敕从臣子弟入国子学。
现代文：敕命侍从大臣的子弟入国子学学习。
English: He was ordered to serve the minister's son who was studying abroad.

古文：安南国王陈日烜遣其中大夫陈克用来贡方物。
现代文：安南国王陈日火亘派遣其中大夫陈克用前来进贡地方特产。
English: The king of Annan, Chen Riguo, sent one of his doctors, Chen Kegui, to pay tribute with local special products.

古文：乙卯，造祀天幄殿。
现代文：十一日，制造祭天的帐殿。
English: On the eleventh day, the tabernacle for the festival was made.

古文：高丽国王王睶遣使来贡方物。
现代文：高丽国王王贝春派遣使臣前来进贡地方特产。
English: King Baechun of Goryeo dispatched envoys to pay tribute with local specialties.

古文：丁巳，遣使代祀岳渎、海神、后土。
现代文：十三日，派遣使臣代表皇帝祭祀五岳、四渎、海神、土地大神。
English: On the 13th, envoys were dispatched on behalf of the emperor to offer sacrifices to the Five Mountains, the Four Deities, the Sea God, and the Land God.

古文：戊午，辽阳自乃颜之叛，民甚疲敝，发钞五千八十锭赈之。
现代文：十四日，辽阳自从经过乃颜的叛乱以后，百姓非常疲惫，发放五千零八十锭钱钞赈济他们。
English: On the 14th, the people of Liaoyang, who had been very tired since Naian's rebellion, issued 5,080 baht banknotes to help them.

古文：己未，赐镇远王牙忽都、靖远王合带涂金银印各一。
现代文：十五日，赐给镇远王牙忽都、靖远王合带镀金的银印各一方。
English: On the fifteenth day, Zhenyuan Wang Yaguodu and Jingyuan Wang were each given a gold-plated silver seal.

古文：章吉寇甘木里，诸王术伯、拜答寒、亦怜真击走之。
现代文：章吉进犯甘木里，诸侯王术伯、拜答寒、亦怜真将其击退。
English: Zhangji attacked Amagi-ri, and the princes Wang Shubo, Baida Kan, and Yirizane repulsed him.

古文：庚申，赈马站户饥。
现代文：十六日，赈济马驿饥饿缺食的民户。
English: On the 16th, we gave food to hungry and food-deprived households.

古文：给滕竭儿回回屯田三千户牛、种。
现代文：赐给滕竭儿的三千户回回族屯田户耕牛、种子。
English: The three thousand households of the Hui-Hui ethnic group in Tonden were given oxen and seeds.

古文：辛酉，营懿州仓。
现代文：十七日，营建懿州粮仓。
English: On the 17th, the construction of the Ganzhou grain silo began.

古文：壬戌，造长甲给北征军。
现代文：十八日，制造长甲供给北征军。
English: On the 18th, the long armor was made to supply the Northern Expeditionary Force.

古文：乙丑，伸思、八儿术答儿、移剌四十、石抹蛮忒四人，以谋不轨伏诛。
现代文：二十一日，伸思、八儿术答儿、移剌四十、石抹蛮忒四人，因图谋不轨被处死。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, four people, namely, Shansi, Hachiro, Shudo, Mokko, and Shima, were put to death for plotting to commit a crime.

古文：丙寅，合丹余寇未平，命高丽国发耽罗戍兵千人讨之。
现代文：二十二日，合丹的余寇尚未平定，命令高丽国派遣耽罗的守军一千人讨伐之。
English: On the 22nd, with the remaining raiders of Khatan yet to be subdued, the Koryo Kingdom was ordered to dispatch a thousand of Tanra's defenders to fight them.

古文：赐河西质子军五百人马。
现代文：赐给河西的五百名质子军马匹。
English: Five hundred horses of the proton army were given to Hexi.

古文：丁卯，荧惑犯房。
现代文：二十三日，荧惑星干犯房宿天区。
English: On the 23rd, a fluorescent planet intruded into the sky.

古文：高丽国王王睶言： 臣昔宿卫京师，遭林衍之叛，国内大乱，高丽民居大同者皆籍之，臣愿复以还高丽为民。 
现代文：高丽国王王贝春上奏说 ：臣原来宿卫京师的时候，遭逢林衍叛变，国内大乱，居住在大同的高丽百姓都被籍没为奴，臣希望把他们全部带回高丽为民。 
English: The King of Goryeo, King Baechun, said in his speech, "When my father was the governor of Goryeo, he suffered a rebellion and a civil war. The Goryeo people living in Datong were all registered as slaves. My father wanted to bring them all back to Goryeo as citizens.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：己巳，改西南番总管府为永宁路。
现代文：二十五日，把西南番总管府改为永宁路。
English: On the 25th, the Southwestern Patrol Headquarters was changed to Yongning Road.

古文：辛未，赐也速带儿所部万人钞万锭。
现代文：二十七日，赐给也速带儿的一万名部属钱钞一万锭。
English: On the 27th, 10,000 subordinates were given 10,000 baht banknotes.

古文：丰闰署田户饥，给六十日粮。
现代文：丰闰署的田户饥饿缺食，供给六十天口粮。
English: The Toyotomi Famine Relief Agency has supplied 60 days of rations to households suffering from hunger and food shortages.

古文：无为路大水，免今年田租。
现代文：无为路发生水灾，免除今年的田租。
English: This year's rice field rent was exempted due to the accidental flooding.

古文：癸酉，忻都所部别笳儿田户饥，给九十日粮。
现代文：二十九日，忻都部属的别笳儿田户饥饿缺食，供给他们九十天口粮。
English: On the 29th, the Beilun children's rice field families under the Yidu Department were starving and short of food, and they were provided with 90 days of rations.

古文：降临淮府为盱眙县，隶泗州。
现代文：把临淮府降格为盱眙县，隶属于泗州。
English: Linhuai Prefecture was downgraded to Handan County, which is part of Handan Province.

古文：复立兴文署，掌经籍板及江南学田钱谷。
现代文：重新设立兴文署，掌管经籍的印版和江南学田的钱粮。
English: The Education and Cultural Affairs Bureau was re-established, in charge of the printing plates of textbooks and the money grain of Jiangnan Gakuda.

古文：合丹寇辽东海阳。
现代文：合丹进犯辽东海阳。
English: He Dan invaded Liaodong Haiyang.

古文：二月乙亥朔，立全罗州道万户府。
现代文：二月初一，设立全罗州道万户府。
English: On the first day of February, the Jeolla Provincial Government was established.

古文：江西诸郡盗未平，诏江淮行省分兵一千益之。
现代文：江西各郡的盗贼尚未平定，诏令江淮行省分遣一千名士卒增援江西。
English: The thieves in the counties of Jiangxi have not yet been subdued, and the imperial edict ordered Jianghuai Province to send one thousand soldiers to reinforce Jiangxi.

古文：命太仆寺毋隶宣徽院。
现代文：命太仆寺不得隶属于宣徽院。
English: Meitaipu-ji Temple must not be affiliated with Xuanhui Temple.

古文：丙子，新附屯田户饥，给六十日粮。
现代文：初二，新归附的屯田户饥饿乏食，供给六十日口粮。
English: On the second day of the new year, the newly annexed Tonden households were starving and short of food, and were provided with sixty-day rations.

古文：顺州僧、道士四百九十一人饥，给九十日粮。
现代文：顺州的僧侣、道士四百九十一人饥饿缺粮，供给九十日口粮。
English: Four hundred and ninety-one monks and Taoists in Shunzhou were starving and short of food, and were provided with 90 days of rations.

古文：戊寅，太阴犯毕。
现代文：初四，太阴星干犯毕宿天区。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the school year, the criminal was punished by the Great Yin Star.

古文：开元路宁远等县饥，民、站户逃徙，发钞二千锭赈之。
现代文：开元路宁远等县发生饥馑，百姓、站户逃亡、迁徙，发放钱钞二千锭赈济他们。
English: When famine occurred in Ningyuan County, Kaiyuan Road, and other counties, the people and station residents fled and migrated, and 2,000 banknotes were issued to help them.

古文：播州安抚使杨汉英进雨毡千，驸马铁别赤进罗罗斯雨毡六十、刀五十、弓二十。
现代文：播州安抚使杨汉英进献雨毡一千件，驸马铁别赤进献罗罗斯雨毡六十件、刀五十把、弓二十张。
English: Banzhou's pacification made Yang Han Ying donate a thousand raincoats, and Tsushima Tiebei Aka donated sixty Roros raincoats, fifty swords, and twenty bows.

古文：己卯，兴州兴安饥，给九十日粮。
现代文：初五，兴州兴安县发生饥馑，供给九十日口粮。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, famine occurred in Xing'an County, Xingzhou, and 90 days of rations were provided.

古文：庚辰，伯答罕民户饥，给六十日粮。
现代文：初六，伯答罕的民户饥饿缺粮，供给六十日口粮。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the households of Berthaham were starving and short of grain, and the supply of sixty-day rations began.

古文：辛巳，括河间昔宝赤户口。
现代文：初七，登记河间昔宝赤户口。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the year, the registration of Kawama's former treasure, Akahiguchi, began.

古文：癸未，泉州地震。
现代文：初九，泉州发生地震。
English: In early September, an earthquake occurred in Quanzhou.

古文：乙酉，赈新附民居昌平者。
现代文：十一日，赈济居住在昌平新归附的百姓。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the newly-annexed people living in Changping were relieved.

古文：丙戌，改奉先县为房山县。
现代文：十二日，把奉先县改为房山县。
English: On the 12th, Fengxian County was changed to Fangshan County.

古文：泉州地震。
现代文：泉州发生地震。
English: An earthquake occurred in Quanzhou.

古文：己丑，江西群盗钟明亮等复降，诏徙为首者至京师，而给其余党粮。
现代文：十五日，江西群盗钟明亮等再次投降，下诏把为首的移送到京师，而供给其余党粮食。
English: On the 15th, the Jiangxi bandits, including Zhong Mingliang, surrendered again, and it was ordered that the leader be transferred to Beijing Division, while the rest were provided with party grain.

古文：浙东诸郡饥，给粮九十日。
现代文：浙东各郡发生饥馑，供给九十日口粮。
English: Famine occurred in counties in eastern Zhejiang, and ninety-day rations were provided.

古文：庚寅，太阴犯亢。
现代文：十六日，太阴星干犯亢宿天区。
English: On the 16th, Taiyin Star committed a crime in the Pengshu Heavenly Area.

古文：辛卯，复立南康、兴国榷茶提举司，秩从五品。
现代文：十七日，重新设立南康、兴国榷茶提举司，秩禄为从五品。
English: On the 17th, the Nankang and Xingguo Tea Raising Division was re-established, and the rank was reduced to five products.

古文：发虎贲更休士二千人赴上都修城。
现代文：派遣轮休的虎贲卫士二千人前往上都修筑城垣。
English: He sent 2,000 retired Tiger Clan guards to Shangdu to build the city wall.

古文：河间路任丘饥，给九十日粮。
现代文：河间路的任丘发生饥馑，供给九十天口粮。
English: Famine occurred in Renqiu, Hezi Road, and food rations were provided for 90 days.

古文：癸巳，晋陵、无锡二县霖雨害稼，并免其田租。
现代文：十九日，晋陵、无锡二县连降大雨伤害庄稼，均免征其田租。
English: On the 19th, two counties of Jinling and Wuxi were exempted from land rent after consecutive heavy rains damaged crops.

古文：江西贼华大老、黄大老等掠乐昌诸郡，行枢密院讨平之。
现代文：江西贼寇华大老、黄大老等劫掠乐昌各郡，行枢密院讨平了他们。
English: The Jiangxi bandits, including the Kuo Hua Grand Elder and the Huang Grand Elder, plundered the counties of Lechang, and the Privy Council was formed to defeat them.

古文：阇兀所部阑遗户饥，给六十日粮。
现代文：兀属下的驱口户饥饿乏食，供给六十日口粮。
English: The Hekkou households under the Zou clan were starving and short of food, and were provided with sixty-day rations.

古文：常宁州民遭群盗之乱，免其田租。
现代文：常宁州的百姓遭受群盗的祸害，免征其田租。
English: The people of Changningzhou suffered from the scourge of banditry and were exempt from paying their farm rents.

古文：己亥，保定路定兴饥，发粟五千二百六十四石赈之。
现代文：二十五日，保定路定兴县发生饥馑，发放五千二百六十四石粮食赈济他们。
English: On the 25th, a famine occurred in Dingxing County, Baoding Road, and 5,264 kilos of grain were distributed to help them.

古文：辛丑，唆欢禾稼不登，给九十日粮。
现代文：二十七日，唆欢的庄稼不收，供给九十天口粮。
English: On the 27th, the crops for the celebration were not harvested, and rations were provided for 90 days.

古文：三月乙巳，中山畋户饥，给六十日粮。
现代文：三月初二，中山的猎户饥饿缺食，供给六十天口粮。
English: On the second day of March, the hunters in Zhongshan were starving and short of food. Sixty days of rations were provided.

古文：戊申，广济署饥，给粟二千二百五十石以为种。
现代文：初五，广济署发生饥馑，供给其二千二百五十石粮食作为种子。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the Guangxi Development and Reform Commission was hit by a famine and had to provide 2,250 kilos of grain as seeds.

古文：壬子，荧惑犯钩钤。
现代文：初九，荧惑星干犯钩钤星。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th lunar month, a fluorescent planet collided with the planet Uranus.

古文：蓟州渔阳等处稻户饥，给三十日粮。
现代文：蓟州、渔阳等地的稻户发生饥馑，供给三十日口粮。
English: Rice farmers in Luzhou, Yuyang and other places experienced famine and were supplied with thirty-day rations.

古文：戊午，出忙安仓米，赈燕八撒儿所属四百二十人。
现代文：十五日，发放忙安粮仓的米，赈济燕八撒儿属下的四百二十人。
English: On the 15th, rice from the Busan granary was distributed, benefiting 420 people under the supervision of Yanbasaer.

古文：己未，改云南蒙怜甸为蒙怜路军民总管府，蒙莱甸为蒙莱路。
现代文：十六日，把云南蒙怜甸改为蒙怜路军民总管府，蒙莱甸改为蒙莱路。
English: On the 16th, Yunnan Mengledian was changed to Mengled Road Military and Civil Administration Headquarters, and Mengledian was changed to Mengled Road.

古文：放罢福建猎户、沙鱼皮户为民，以其事付有司总之。
现代文：遣放福建的猎户、沙鱼皮户为民，把有关他们的事务交给地方官府统管。
English: to repatriate hunters and trappers from Fujian to the people, and to hand over the affairs related to them to the local government for overall management.

古文：发云州民夫凿银洞。
现代文：调发云州的民夫开凿银矿的洞穴。
English: Minfu from Yunnan Province was dispatched to excavate a silver mine cave.

古文：永昌站户饥，卖子及奴产者甚众，命甘肃省赎还，给米赈之。
现代文：永昌的站户饥馑，卖售儿子和奴仆、财产的很多，命甘肃行省减免他们赎回，并供给粮米赈济他们。
English: The station owners of Yongchang were starving, and they sold their sons, servants, and much of their property. They gave their lives to Gansu Province to redeem them, and provided grain and rice to feed them.

古文：并福、泉二州人匠提举司为一，仍放无役者为民。
现代文：合并福州、泉州二州的人匠提举司为一处，并放回那些没有工役的匠户为民。
English: Merge Fuzhou and Quanzhou two states into one place, and return those artisans who do not have laborers to the people.

古文：庚申，升御史台侍御史正四品，治书侍御史正五品，增蒙古经历一员，从五品。
现代文：十七日，把御史台侍御史的秩禄升格为正四品，治书侍御史为正五品，增设蒙古经历一名，为从五品。
English: On the 17th, the rank and title of the Mishidai Attendant to the Grand Historian was upgraded to Senior Fourth Rank, that of the Jisho Attendant to the Grand Historian to Senior Fifth Rank, and that of the Mongolian Experienced Officer to Junior Fifth Rank.

古文：罢行司农司及各道劝农营田司；增提刑按察司佥事二员，总劝农事。
现代文：撤销行司农司及各道劝农营田司；增设提刑按察司佥事二名，总管劝勉农耕的事务。
English: Revoke the Agricultural Department of the General Administration of Agricultural Affairs and the Agricultural Field Department of each province; increase the penalty according to the case of two inspectors, and the general manager of agricultural affairs.

古文：四川行省旧移重庆，成都之民苦于供给，诏复徙治成都。
现代文：四川行省原来迁移到重庆，成都的百姓苦于供应行署的钱粮物资，皇帝下诏把行署重新迁到成都。
English: Originally, the Sichuan Trade Office was relocated to Chongqing. The people of Chengdu were struggling to supply the Trade Office with money and grain supplies. The emperor issued an edict to relocate the Trade Office to Chengdu.

古文：立江南营田提举司，秩从五品，掌僧寺赀产。
现代文：设立江南营田提举司，秩禄为从五品，掌管寺庙的资产。
English: Jiangnan Yingtian Tihouji was set up, with the rank of Congregation of the Five Ranks, to manage the assets of the temple.

古文：放寿、颍屯田军千九百五十九户为民，撤江南戍兵代之。
现代文：遣放寿州、颍州屯田军的一千九百五十九户军户为民，撤除江南的戍兵来代替他们屯田。
English: One thousand nine hundred and fifty-nine military households of the Shoushou and Zhangzhou garrison troops were repatriated to the people, and the soldiers stationed in the south of the Yangtze River were removed to replace them.

古文：凡工匠隶吕合剌、阿尼哥、段贞无役者，皆区别为民。
现代文：凡是隶属于吕合剌、阿尼哥、段贞而没有工役的工匠，均区别于其他工匠遣放为民。
English: All craftsmen who were subordinate to Lü Hejun, Anigo, and Duan Zhen and did not have labor service were deported to the people, unlike other craftsmen.

古文：诏风宪之选仍归御史台，如旧制。
现代文：诏令风纪法度的选择评定仍旧归御史台主持，和旧制一样。
English: The selection and evaluation of the laws and regulations of the imperial edict and discipline still falls under the auspices of the Imperial History Channel, the same as the old system.

古文：置金竹府大隘等四十二寨蛮夷长官。
现代文：设置金竹、府大隘等四十二寨蛮夷的长官。
English: Forty-two Zhai and barbarian chiefs such as Jinzhu and Fudaigang were set up.

古文：癸亥，建昌贼丘元等称大老，集众千余人，掠南丰诸郡，建昌副万户擒斩之。
现代文：二十日，建昌贼寇丘元等自称 大老 ，聚集部众一千多人劫掠南丰各郡，建昌副万户将其擒获斩首。
English: On the 20th, Jianchang thief Kuo Qiuyuan and other self-proclaimed elders led a gathering of more than a thousand people to loot Nanfeng counties, and Jianchang deputy Wanyu was beheaded.

古文：甲子，杨震龙余众剽浙东，总兵官讨贼者，多俘掠良民，敕行御史台分拣之，凡为民者千六百九十五人。
现代文：二十一日，杨镇龙的余党剽掠浙东。讨伐贼寇的统兵官，大多抓捕抢劫良善的百姓，皇帝敕命行御史台，把百姓从俘虏中区分、挑选出来，共选拣出良民一千六百九十五人。
English: On the twenty-first day, the remnants of Yang Zhenlong's party plundered eastern Zhejiang. The commander-in-chief of the crusade against the thieves and robbers mostly arrested and robbed the good people. The emperor tried his best to distinguish and select the people from the prisoners, and selected a total of 1,695 good people.

古文：庚午，以建昌路广昌县经钟明亮之乱，免其田租九千四百四十七石。
现代文：二十七日，因为建昌路广昌县遭受了钟明亮的祸害，减免其田税九千四百四十七石。
English: On the 27th, because Guangchang County, Jianchang Road, suffered from the scourge of the bell, the reduction and exemption of its field tax increased to 9,447 koku.

古文：辛未，太平县贼叶大五集众百余人寇宁国，皆擒斩之。
现代文：二十八日，太平县贼人叶大五聚集部众一百多人进犯宁国，均将他们擒获、斩首。
English: On the 28th, more than a hundred thieves from the Taihei County Ye Dawei gathering attacked Ningguo, all of whom were captured and beheaded.

古文：夏四月癸酉朔，大驾幸上都。
现代文：夏季，四月初一，圣驾临幸上都。
English: In the summer, on the first day of April, the Pilgrim's Progress arrives at the Capital.

古文：婺州螟害稼，雷雨大作，螟尽死。
现代文：婺州稻螟虫危害庄稼，雷雨大作，稻螟虫尽都死亡。
English: The rice aphids in Zhangzhou harmed crops, thunderstorms were heavy, and the rice aphids all died.

古文：丙子，太阴犯井。
现代文：初四，太阴星干犯井宿天区。
English: On the 4th day of the first month, the star of the sun is too gloomy to commit a crime.

古文：辛巳，命大都路以粟六万二千五百六十四石赈通州、河西务等处流民。
现代文：初九，命令大都路用六万二千五百六十四石粮食赈济通州、河西务等地流亡的百姓。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Dadu Road was ordered to use 62,564 koku of grain to support the exiled people in Tongzhou, Hexi and other places.

古文：芍陂屯田以霖雨河溢，害稼二万二千四百八十亩有奇，免其租。
现代文：芍陂的屯田因连降大雨，河水泛滥，伤害庄稼二万二千四百八十多亩，免征其田租。
English: As a result of continuous heavy rain and river flooding, more than 22,480 mu of crops were damaged in the affected farmlands, which are exempt from farmland rent.

古文：癸未，罢海道运粮万户府。
现代文：十一日，撤销海道运粮万户府。
English: On the 11th, the Ministry of Food and Rural Affairs revoked the approval for the transportation of grain by sea.

古文：江淮行省言： 近朝廷遣白絜矩来，与沙不丁议，令发兼并户偕宋宗族赴京，人心必致动摇，江南之民方患增课、料民、括马之苦，宜俟它日行之。 
现代文：江淮行省上奏说 ：近日朝廷派白薭矩前来与沙不丁商议，命令遣发兼并土地的富户和亡宋的宗族一起前往京师，必然会引起人心动摇，江南的百姓正忧虑增加税赋、统计人口、收聚马匹的苦楚，应该等以后再实行。 
English: An envoy from Jianghuai Province said, "Recently, the imperial court sent Bai Xuanqin to come and discuss with Shabudin, and ordered that the rich families who had their lands annexed should be sent to Beijing together with the families of the dead Song Dynasty. This will inevitably cause people's hearts to be shaken. The people in the south of the Yangtze River are worried about the pain of increasing taxes, population statistics, and collecting horses. It should be implemented later.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：阿速敦等二百九十五人乏食，命验其实给粮赈之。
现代文：阿速敦等二百九十五人缺粮，命验证其实际情况，供给粮食以赈济他们。
English: Azotun and other 295 people were short of food, so he was ordered to verify their actual situation and provide food to help them.

古文：改利津海道运粮万户府为临清御河运粮上万户府。
现代文：把利津海道运粮万户府改为临清御河运粮上万户府。
English: The name of the prefecture where grain was transported on the Ritsu-kaido Road was changed to the prefecture where grain was transported on the Linqing-Mihe River.

古文：诸王小薛部曲万二千六十一户饥，给六十日粮。
现代文：诸侯王小薛部属一万二千零六十一户百姓饥馑，供给六十日口粮。
English: Prince Wang Xiao Xuebu's 12,061 households suffered from hunger and were provided with 60 days of rations.

古文：发六卫汉军万人伐木为修城具。
现代文：派遣六卫的汉军士兵一万人砍伐木料做修建城垣之用。
English: Ten thousand Chinese soldiers from Liuhe were sent to cut wood for the construction of the city wall.

古文：甲申，以荐饥免今岁银俸钞，其在上都、大都、保定、河间、平滦者万一百八十锭，在辽阳省者千三百四十八锭有奇。
现代文：十二日，因连年饥馑免征今年的银俸钞，在上都、大都、保定、河间、平滦减免一万零一百八十锭，在辽阳行省减免一千三百四十八锭有余。
English: On the 12th, due to consecutive years of famine, this year's silver salary banknotes were exempted from taxation, with 10,180 baht reduced and exempted in Shangdu, Datu, Baoding, Hema and Pingyao, and more than 1,348 baht reduced and exempted in Liaoyang Province.

古文：丙戌，遣桑吉剌失等诣马八儿国访求方伎士。
现代文：十四日，派遣桑吉剌失等前往马八儿国访求医药养生的人才。
English: On the 14th, talent such as Sanjit Prabowo and others were dispatched to visit Malaysia to seek medical and health care.

古文：壬辰，荧惑守氐十余日。
现代文：二十日，荧惑星守候氐宿十余日。
English: On the 20th, the fluorescent planet waited for more than ten days.

古文：癸巳，河北十七郡蝗。
现代文：二十一日，河北十七郡发生蝗灾。
English: On the 21st, a locust plague occurred in 17 counties in Hebei.

古文：千户也先、小阔阔所部民及喜鲁、不别等民户并饥，敕河东诸郡量赈之。
现代文：千户也先、小阔阔部属的百姓，以及喜鲁、不别等民户均发生饥馑，敕命河东各郡酌量赈济他们。
English: Thousands of households, including those belonging to small, large and large households, as well as those belonging to small, large and large households such as Qilu and Bu Bu households, all suffered from famine, and the counties in the eastern part of the river were desperately trying to help them.

古文：千户也不干所部乏食，敕发粟赈之。
现代文：千户也不干的部属缺粮，敕令发放粮食赈济他们。
English: Thousands of idle subordinates were short of grain, and the emperor ordered the distribution of grain to help them.

古文：太傅玉吕鲁言： 招集斡者所属亦乞烈，今已得六百二十一人，令与高丽民屯田，宜给其食。 
现代文：太傅玉吕鲁上奏说： 收聚斡者所属亦乞烈，现在已经得到六百二十一人，令他们和高丽百姓一起屯田，应当供给他们饮食。 
English: Grandmaster Yululu said, "The person who gathered the mediators also asked for martyrs, and now he has 621 of them. Let them occupy the fields together with the Korean people, and provide them with food and drink."

古文：敕辽阳行省验实给之。
现代文：敕令辽阳行省验证实情供给他们粮食。
English: He ordered Liaoyang Province to verify the situation and provide them with grain.

古文：平山、真定、枣强二县旱，灵寿、元氏二县大雨雹，并免其租。
现代文：平山、真定、枣强三县发生旱灾，灵寿、元氏二县降下大雨雹，均免除其田租。
English: Drought occurred in three counties of Hirayama, Mading and Zaoqiang, and heavy rain fell in two counties of Lingshou and Wonshi, all of which were exempt from field rent.

古文：丁酉，以钞二千五百锭赈昌平至上都站户贫乏者。
现代文：二十五日，以钱钞二千五百锭赈济昌平至上都贫穷困乏的站户。
English: On the 25th, Changping used 2,500 baht in banknotes to help poor and needy station residents.

古文：定兴站户饥，给三十日粮。
现代文：定兴站户饥困，供给三十日口粮。
English: To alleviate the hunger of station residents, thirty-day rations were provided.

古文：己亥，命考大都路贫病之民在籍者二千八百三十七人，发粟二百石赈之。
现代文：二十七日，命令查实大都路在籍贫病交迫的百姓共二千八百三十七人，发放二百石粮食赈济他们。
English: On the 27th, an order was issued to verify a total of 2837 impoverished and sick people in Datou Road and distribute 200 kilos of grain to help them.

古文：庚子，合丹复寇海阳。
现代文：二十八日，合丹再次进犯海阳。
English: On the 28th, Hatan attacked Haiyang again.

古文：复立安和署，从六品。
现代文：重新设立安和署，秩禄为从六品。
English: The Peace and Security Department was re-established, and Chichiroku was raised to the rank of Rokuhon.

古文：五月乙巳，罢秦王典藏司，收其印。
现代文：五月初三，撤销秦王典藏司，收回其印信。
English: On the third day of the fifth lunar month, the King of Qin's Collections Department was revoked and its seal was withdrawn.

古文：括江南阑遗人杂畜、钱帛。
现代文：收聚江南流落无主驱口的杂畜、钱帛。
English: The collection of stray animals from the southern reaches of the Yangtze River.

古文：合丹寇开元。
现代文：合丹进犯开元。
English: It was the beginning of the Goten Offensive.

古文：戊申，江西行省管如德、江西行院月的迷失合兵讨反寇钟明亮，明亮降，诏缚致阙下，如德等留不遣，明亮复率众寇赣州。
现代文：初六，江西行中书省管如德、江西行枢密院月的迷失合兵讨伐反贼钟明亮，钟明亮投降，诏令捆缚送至京师，管如德等留下钟明亮不发遣，钟明亮重新率领部众进犯赣州。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Jiangxi went to the People's Republic of China, and the People's Republic of China went to the People's Republic of China, and the People's Republic of China went to the People's Republic of China, and the People's Republic of China went to the People's Republic of China, and the People's Republic of China went to the People's Republic of China, and the People's Republic of China went to the People's Republic of China, and the People's Republic of China went to the People's Republic of China, and the People's Republic of China went to the People's Republic

古文：枢密院以如德等违诏纵贼，请诘之，从之。
现代文：枢密院认为管如德等违反诏令，放纵贼人，请求查究，皇上允从。
English: The Privy Council considered that Guan Rude and others had violated the Imperial Edict and indulged thieves. They requested an investigation, and the emperor complied.

古文：诏罢江西行枢密院。
现代文：诏令撤销江西行枢密院。
English: The Imperial Edict revoked the Privy Council's travel to Jiangxi.

古文：庚戌，陕西南市屯田陨霜杀稼，免其租。
现代文：初八，陕西南市的屯田降下严霜冻死庄稼，免征其田租。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, the crops in the occupied fields in the southwestern part of Shaanxi Province were frozen to death due to severe frost, and their field rent was exempted.

古文：壬子，赐诸王铁木儿等军一万七百人粮，一人一从者五石，二人一从者七石五斗。
现代文：初十，赐给诸侯王铁木儿等人的士卒一万零七百人粮食，一人一个随从的五石，二人一个随从的七石五斗。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, he gave ten thousand seven hundred rupees of grain to the vassals of the vassal king Tie Mu'er and others. Each vassal received five stone, and each vassal of two vassals received seven stone and five buckets.

古文：丙辰，发粟赈御河船户。
现代文：十四日，发放粮食赈济御河的船户。
English: On the 14th, grain was distributed to help the boatmen of the Okawa River.

古文：叙州等处诸部蛮夷进雨毡八百。
现代文：叙州等地各部的蛮夷进献雨毡八百件。
English: In Suzhou and other places, there are 800 pieces of barbaric raincoats from various departments.

古文：戊午，移江西行省于吉州，以便捕盗。
现代文：十六日，把江西行署迁移到吉州，以便于捕捉盗贼。
English: On the 16th, the Jiangxi Traffic Department was relocated to Jizhou to facilitate the capture of thieves.

古文：尚书省遣人行视云南银洞，获银四千四十八两。
现代文：尚书省派人巡视云南炼银的冶洞，获得四千零四十八两白银。
English: Shangshu Province sent people to inspect the Yangtze Silver Mine in Yunnan, and they obtained 4,0482 pieces of silver.

古文：奏立银场官，秩从七品。
现代文：上奏设立银场官，秩禄为从七品。
English: A silver field officer was established at the first performance of the play, with a rank of second to seventh.

古文：出鲁等千一百一十五户饥，给六十日粮。
现代文：出鲁等一千一百一十五户饥饿缺粮，供给六十日口粮。
English: One thousand one hundred and fifteen starving households, such as those in Deru, were short of food and were provided with 60 days of rations.

古文：癸亥，敕： 诸王分地之民有讼，王傅与所置监郡同治，无监郡者，王傅听之。 
现代文：二十一日，敕令： 诸侯王封地的百姓有诉讼的事，由王傅和封地设置的监郡共同究治，没有设置监郡的听任王傅究治。 
English: On the twenty-first day of the year, a royal decree was issued: If the people in the fiefdoms of the princes and kings have a lawsuit, the wangfu and the supervising county set up by the fiefs will jointly investigate and deal with it. There is no supervising county set up to listen to the investigation of the wangfu.

古文：平滦民万五千四百六十五户饥，赈粟五千石。
现代文：平滦百姓一万五千四百六十五户饥饿缺食，赈济五千石粮食。
English: 15,465 households in Pingyao suffered from hunger and food shortages, and 5,000 kilos of grain were donated.

古文：徽州绩溪贼胡发、饶必成伏诛。
现代文：徽州绩溪贼寇胡发、饶必成被处死。
English: Huizhou Jixi thief Kou Hufa and Rao Bicheng were executed.

古文：乙丑，太阴犯填星。
现代文：二十三日，太阴星干犯土星。
English: On the twenty-third day, the planet of the great shadow interfered with Saturn.

古文：丙寅，罢奉宸库。
现代文：二十四日，撤销奉宸库。
English: On the 24th, the Fenghuang Library was revoked.

古文：迁江西行尚书省参政杨文璨为左丞，文璨逾岁不之官，诏以外剌带代之。
现代文：提升江西行尚书省参政杨文璨为左丞，杨文璨一年多不到职上任，诏令以外剌带代替他。
English: Yang Wenzhong, who was promoted from Jiangxi Province to Shangshu Province and participated in politics, was promoted to the left-hand side. Yang Wenzhong did not take office for more than a year, and he was replaced by the umbilical cord.

古文：外剌带至，文璨复署事，桑哥乃奏文璨升右丞。
现代文：外剌带到任之后，杨文璨却又处理公务，桑哥便上奏把杨文璨提升为右丞。
English: After Yang Wenyi was brought to the post, Yang Wenyi had to deal with official duties, and Sango then promoted Yang Wenyi to the position of the second-in-command.

古文：江西行省言： 吉、赣、湖南、广东、福建以禁弓矢，贼益发，乞依内郡例，许尉兵持弓矢。 
现代文：江西行省上奏说： 吉州、赣州、湖南、广东、福建等地，因为禁止携带弓箭，贼寇滋生更多，请按照内地州郡的先例，允许尉兵持弓箭。 
English: Jiangxi Province: Jizhou, Ganzhou, Hunan, Guangdong, Fujian and other places, because it is forbidden to carry bows and arrows, the bandits breed more, please follow the precedent of the inland counties and allow the soldiers to carry bows and arrows.

古文：江阴大水，免田租万七百九十石。
现代文：皇上允从。二十七日，设立云南行御史台。
English: On the 27th, the Yunnan History Channel was established.

古文：庚午，复置诸王也只里王傅，秩正四品。尚珍署广备等屯大水，免其租。
现代文：命令彻里铁木儿所部的女真人、高丽人、契丹人、汉人的军户，除交纳地税之外，免除其他所有的徭役。尚珍署的广备等处屯田发生大水，免征其田税。
English: It ordered the military households of the Jurchen, Korean, Khitan, and Han people in the Temur section of Cherri to be exempted from all other taxes except for the land tax. If there is heavy water in the military field in the Guangbei and other areas of the Shangzhen Department, they will be exempted from the land tax.

古文：伯要民乏食，命撒的迷失以车五百辆运米千石赈之。
现代文：伯要的百姓缺粮，命令撒的迷失用五百辆车运米一千石赈济他们。
English: The people of Bethel were short of food, so he ordered the Lost of Sheba to transport a thousand stones of rice in five hundred carts to feed them.

古文：婺州永康、东阳，处州缙云贼吕重二、杨元六等反，浙东宣慰使史弼擒斩之。
现代文：婺州永康、东阳，处州缙云的贼寇吕重二、杨元六等谋反，浙东宣慰使史弼将其擒获、斩首。
English: Yongkang of Bozhou and Dongyang, and the bandits Lv Chung II and Yang Yuan VI of Bozhou and Shiyun plotted to rebel, and Shizhen of Zhedong Xuanlian captured and beheaded them.

古文：泉州南安贼陈七师反，讨平之。
现代文：泉州南安贼寇陈七师谋反，将其讨平。
English: The Quanzhou Nan'an bandits and invaders led by Chen Shichishi plotted a rebellion and fought it to a draw.

古文：括天下阴阳户口，仍立各路教官，有精于艺者，岁贡各一人。
现代文：登记天下阴阳生的户口，并设立各路阴阳学教官，有精通阴阳术数的，每年各贡奉一人。
English: to register the household accounts of Yin and Yang students around the world, and set up Yin and Yang instructors of all kinds, who are proficient in Yin and Yang operations, and pay tribute to one person each year.

古文：六月壬申朔，升闰盐州为柏兴府，降普乐州为闰盐县，金州为金县。
现代文：六月初一，把闰盐州升格为柏兴府，把普乐州降格为闰盐县，金州降格为金县。
English: On the first day of June, Leishan County was upgraded to Baoxing Prefecture, Ple County was downgraded to Leishan County, and Jin County was downgraded to Jin County.

古文：河溢太康，没民田三十一万九千八百余亩，免其租八千九百二十八石。
现代文：黄河在太康泛滥，淹没民田三十一万九千八百余亩，免除其田租八千九百二十八石。
English: The Yellow River overflowed in Taikang, flooding more than 319,800 mu of private farmland and exempting 8,928 koku of farmland rent.

古文：纳邻等站户饥，给九十日粮。
现代文：纳邻等地的站户饥馑，供给九十日口粮。
English: Famine-stricken station-dwellers in Nako and other places were provided with 90 days' rations.

古文：甲戌，桑州总管黄布蓬、那州长罗光寨、安郡州长闭光过率蛮民万余户内附。
现代文：初三，桑州总管黄布蓬、那州长官罗光寨、安郡州长官闭光过率领一万多户蛮民归附朝廷。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Huang Bupeng, the governor of Kuanzhou, Luo Guangzhai, the governor of that province, and the governor of An County led more than 10,000 barbarian households to join the imperial court.

古文：丙子，放保定工匠楚通等三百四十一户为民。
现代文：初五，遣放保定的楚通等三百四十一户工匠为民。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, 341 families of craftsmen, including Baoding's Chutong, were sent to the countryside.

古文：庚辰，从江淮行省请，升广济库为提举司，秩从五品。
现代文：初九，依从江淮行省的请求，把广济库升格为提举司，秩禄为从五品。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, in accordance with the request of Jianghuai Province, the Guangji Library was upgraded to the promotion department, and the rank was raised to the fifth grade.

古文：用江淮省平章沙不丁言，以参政王巨济钩考钱谷有能，赏钞五百锭。
现代文：采纳江淮行省平章沙不丁的意见，因为参政王巨济考核钱财有功，赏赐钱钞五百锭。
English: Adopted the opinion of Ping Zhang Shabudin of Jianghuaihang Province, because Wang Juzhi, a participant in politics, had made great contributions to the examination of money and wealth, he was awarded 500 money banknotes.

古文：缮写金字《藏经》，凡糜金三千二百四十四两。
现代文：缮写金字《藏经》，共耗费黄金三千二百四十四两。
English: The gold-lettered "Collection of Classics" cost a total of 3,244 taels of gold.

古文：广州增城、韶州乐昌以遭畲贼之乱，并免其田租。
现代文：广州增城、韶州乐昌因遭受畲族叛贼的祸害，均免除其田租。
English: Guangzhou Zengcheng and Zhangzhou Lechang were exempted from land rent due to the scourge of the Yi rebels.

古文：杭州贼唐珍等伏诛。
现代文：杭州贼寇唐珍等被处死。
English: Hangzhou bandit Tang Zhen and others were executed.

古文：己丑，荧惑犯房。
现代文：十八日，荧惑星干犯房宿天区。
English: On the 26th, a fluorescent planet intruded into the sky.

古文：辛卯，敕应昌府以米千二百石给诸王亦只里部曲。
现代文：二十日，敕令应昌府以一千二百石米供给诸侯王亦只里的部属。
English: On the 20th, the government ordered the Changfu government to provide 1,200 koku of rice to the vassals of Prince Yidari.

古文：壬辰，别给江西行省印，以便分省讨贼。
现代文：二十一日，另给江西行省印信，以便于分省讨伐贼寇。
English: On the 21st, another letter was sent to Jiangxi Province to facilitate the division of the province to fight against the bandits.

古文：泉州大水。
现代文：泉州发生大水。
English: Flooding in Quanzhou.

古文：丙申，发侍卫兵万人完都城。
现代文：二十五日，派遣侍卫兵一万人完成都城的修建。
English: On the 25th, 10,000 soldiers were dispatched to complete the construction of the capital city.

古文：丁酉，大司徒撒里蛮、翰林学士承旨兀鲁带进《定宗实录》。
现代文：二十六日，大司徒撒里蛮、翰林学士承旨兀鲁带献《定宗实录》。
English: On the 26th, the senior disciple, Sariman, and the scholar, Hanlin, presented the True Record of the Dingzong.

古文：己亥，棣州厌次、济阳大风雹，害稼，免其租。
现代文：二十八日，棣州的厌次、济阳大风、冰雹伤害庄稼，免征其田租。
English: On the 28th, crops were damaged by the typhoons and hailstorms in Bozhou and Jiyang, and farmers were exempted from paying field rent.

古文：庚子，从江西省请，发各省戍兵讨贼。
现代文：二十九日，依照江西行省的请求，调发各省的守军讨伐贼兵。
English: On the 29th, in accordance with the request of Jiangxi Province, the defenders of each province were dispatched to fight against the bandits.

古文：辛丑，免河间、保定、平滦岁赋丝之半。
现代文：三十日，减免河间、保定、平滦全年丝税的一半。
English: On the 30th, half of the annual silk tax in Hema, Baoding and Pingyao will be reduced and exempted.

古文：怀孟路武陟县、汴梁路祥符县皆大水，蠲田租八千八百二十八石。
现代文：怀孟路的武涉县、汴梁路的祥符县均发生大水，免征其田租八千八百二十八石。
English: Both Wushu County on Huai Meng Road and Xiangfu County on Min Liang Road were hit by floods, and their farm rents were exempted by 8,828 koku.

古文：秋七月，终南等屯霖雨害稼万九千六百余亩，免其租。
现代文：秋季，七月，终南等地的屯田连降大雨伤害庄稼一万九千六百余亩，免征其田租。
English: In autumn, July, and December, more than 19,600 mu of crops were damaged by heavy rain in the south and other places, and their field rent was exempted.

古文：丙午，禁平地、忙安仓酿酒，犯者死。
现代文：初五，禁止平地、忙安仓酿酒，违犯禁令者处死。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, brewing on flat ground and in busy warehouses was prohibited, and violators of the ban were put to death.

古文：戊申，江西霖雨，赣、吉、袁、瑞、建昌、抚水皆溢，龙兴城几没。
现代文：初七，江西连降大雨，赣州、吉州、袁州、瑞州、建昌、抚州的河水都泛滥，龙兴城几乎被淹没。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, heavy rain fell continuously in Jiangxi Province, and the rivers in Zhangzhou, Jizhou, Yuanzhou, Ruizhou, Jianchang and Fuzhou all flooded, and Longxing City was almost submerged.

古文：癸丑，罢缅中行尚书省。
现代文：十二日，撤销缅中行尚书省。
English: On the 12th, the Ministry of Education and Culture of Myanmar was revoked.

古文：江淮省平章沙不丁，以仓库官盗欺钱粮，请依宋法黥而断其腕，帝曰： 此回回法也。 
现代文：江淮行省平章沙不丁，因为仓库官盗窃诈骗钱粮，请求依照宋朝的法律黥其面并砍下其手腕，皇帝说 ：这是回回人的法律。 
English: The emperor said, "This is the law of the Hui people," when Pingzhang Sabuding of Huaihang Province requested that his face and hand be chopped off in accordance with the Song Dynasty law because the warehouse official had stolen and defrauded money and grain.

古文：不允。
现代文：不允许。
English: He did not agree to the request of the Guru.

古文：免大都路岁赋丝。
现代文：免除大都路一年的丝税银。
English: Dadu Road will be exempted from silk tax for one year.

古文：戊午，贵州猫蛮三十余人作乱，劫顺元路，入其城，遂攻阿牙寨，杀伤官吏，其众遂盛。
现代文：十七日，贵州的猫蛮三十余人作乱，劫掠顺元路，进入该城。于是又进攻阿牙寨，杀伤官吏，其部众便强盛起来。
English: On the 17th, more than 30 cats from Guizhou rioted, looted Shunyuan Road, and entered the city. They then attacked Aza Village, killing and wounding officials, and their followers became more powerful.

古文：湖广省檄八番蔡州、均州二万户府及八番罗甸宣慰司合兵讨之。
现代文：湖广行省传令给八番的蔡州、均州两个万户府，以及八番的罗甸宣慰司，合兵讨伐贼军。
English: Hougang Province sent orders to the eight capital cities of Caizhou and Junzhou, as well as the eighth capital city of Luodian, to join forces to fight against the bandit army.

古文：凤翔屯田霖雨害稼，免其租。
现代文：凤翔的屯田因连降大雨伤害庄稼，免征其田租。
English: Due to the continuous heavy rain that has damaged crops, Fengxiang's farmland is exempt from land rent.

古文：建平贼王静照伏诛。
现代文：建平贼寇王静照被处死。
English: Jianping thief and robber Wang Jingzhao was executed.

古文：辛酉，荧惑犯天江。
现代文：二十日，荧惑星干犯天江星。
English: On the 20th, the fluorescent planet interfered with Tianjiang star.

古文：壬申，驻跸老鼠山西。
现代文：二十一日，皇帝驻跸于老鼠山之西。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the emperor took up his residence in the west of the Mouse Mountain.

古文：乙丑，芜湖贼徐汝安、孙惟俊等伏诛。
现代文：二十四日，芜湖贼寇徐汝安、孙惟俊等被处死。
English: On the 24th, Wuhu bandits Xu Ruan and Sun Weijun were executed.

古文：丙寅，云南阇力白衣甸酋长凡十一甸内附。
现代文：二十五日，云南力的白衣甸共十一甸的酋长归附朝廷。
English: On the 25th, eleven dynasties of the Bai Riding Dynasty of Yunnan Province were annexed to the imperial court.

古文：丁卯，用桑哥言，诏遣庆元路总管毛文豹搜括宋时民间金银诸物，已而罢之。
现代文：二十六日，采纳桑哥的意见，下诏派庆元路总管毛文豹搜括宋朝时期民间的金银等物，不久又停止此事。
English: On the 26th, adopting Sango's opinion, the general manager of Qingyuan Road, Mao Wenpiao, was sent to search for folk gold and silver and other items during the Song Dynasty, and soon stopped the matter.

古文：沧州乐陵旱，免田租三万三百五十六石。
现代文：沧州乐陵旱灾，减免田租三万零三百六十五石。
English: Leling in Cangzhou suffered from drought, and the farm rent was reduced to 30,365 koku.

古文：江夏水溢，害稼六千四百七十余亩，免其租。
现代文：江夏河水泛滥，伤害庄稼六千四百七十余亩，免征其田租。
English: The flooding of the Jiangxia River has damaged more than 6,470 mu of crops, and their field rent is exempted.

古文：魏县御河溢，害稼五千八百余亩，免其租百七十五石。
现代文：魏县御河泛滥，伤害庄稼五千八百余亩，免除其田租一百七十五石。
English: Wei County's Ohe River flooded, damaging more than 5,800 mu of crops and exempting 175 koku of farmland from rent.

古文：八月辛未朔，日有食之。
现代文：八月初一，发生日食。
English: On the first day of August, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：并广东道真阳、洽光二县为英德州。
现代文：合并广东道的真阳、氵含光两个县为英德州。
English: The two counties of Zhengyang and Quanhanguang of Guangdong Road are merged into Yingde County.

古文：沁水溢，害冀氏民田，免其租。
现代文：沁水泛滥、祸害冀氏县的民田，免除其田租。
English: People's fields in Jishi County that have been flooded by floodwaters are exempt from field rent.

古文：禁诸人毋沮平阳、太原、大同宣课。
现代文：禁令：诸人不得阻挠平阳、太原、大同征收赋税。
English: Ban: People are not allowed to obstruct the collection of taxes in Pingyang, Taiyuan and Datong.

古文：丁丑，广州清远大水，免其租。
现代文：初七，广州清远县发生大水，免征其田租。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, heavy water occurred in Qingyuan County, Guangzhou, and farmers were exempted from paying land rent.

古文：庚辰，免大都、平滦、河间、保定四路流民租赋及酒醋课。
现代文：初十，免征大都、平滦、河间、保定四个路流民的租赋和酒醋税。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the rent and wine vinegar tax of the four displaced persons in Datu, Pingyao, Hema and Baoding were exempted.

古文：丁亥，复徙四川南道宣慰司于重庆府。
现代文：十七日，重新把四川南道宣慰司迁到重庆府。
English: On the 17th, the Southern Sichuan Provincial Department of Propaganda and Consolation was relocated to Chongqing.

古文：以南安、赣、建昌、丰州尝罹钟明亮之乱，悉免其田租。
现代文：因为南安、赣州、建昌、南丰州曾经遭受钟明亮谋反的祸害，均免征他们的田租。
English: Because Nan'an, Zhangzhou, Jianchang and Nanfengzhou once suffered the scourge of bell-ringing rebellion, all of them were exempted from paying their farm rents.

古文：癸巳，地大震，武平尤甚，压死按察司官及总管府官王连等及民七千二百二十人，坏仓库局四百八十间，民居不可胜计。
现代文：二十三日，发生大地震，武平特别严重，压死按察司的官员以及总管府官员王连等，并百姓七千二百二十人，毁坏仓库库房四百八十间，百姓的居屋不计其数。
English: On the 23rd, a major earthquake occurred. Wuping was particularly severe, crushing officials such as the inspector-general and Wang Lian, an official of the General Administration Office, as well as 7,220 people to death, destroying 480 warehouses and warehouses, and countless people's homes.

古文：己亥，帝闻武平地震，虑乃颜党入寇，遣平章政事铁木儿、枢密院官塔鲁忽带引兵五百人往视。
现代文：二十九日，皇帝听说武平发生大地震，忧虑乃颜的党羽入侵，派遣平章政事铁木儿、枢密院官员塔鲁忽带率领五百名士兵前往视察。
English: On the 29th, the emperor heard that a major earthquake had occurred in Wuping, and, worried about the invasion of the party's vassals, he sent Pingzhang Politician Tiemu Er, Privy Council official Taru Kuo and 500 soldiers to inspect the situation.

古文：九月壬寅，河东山西道饥，敕宣慰使阿里火者炒米赈之。
现代文：九月初二，河东山西道发生饥馑，敕令宣慰使阿里火者炒米赈济饥民。
English: On the second day of September, there was a famine in the West Shanxi Province of Hedong Province. The Emperor's order to preach and comfort the people caused Ali the Fireman to fry rice to feed the hungry people.

古文：癸卯，岁星犯鬼。
现代文：初三，木星干犯鬼宿天区。
English: In the third year of junior high school, Jupiter was the culprit.

古文：申严汉人田猎之禁。
现代文：申令严禁汉人进行狩猎。
English: The proclamation strictly prohibited the Chinese from hunting.

古文：乙巳，禁诸王遣僧建寺扰民。
现代文：初五，禁止诸侯王派遣僧侣建造寺庙扰害百姓。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the princes were forbidden to send monks to build temples and disturb the people.

古文：敕河东山西道宣慰使阿里火者发大同钞本二十万锭，籴米赈饥民。
现代文：敕命河东山西道宣慰使阿里火者发放二十万锭钱钞给大同，购买米粮赈济饥民。
English: The exhortation of the East-Hebei-Shanxi Road made Ali the fireman issue 200,000 baht of banknotes to Datong to buy rice to feed the hungry.

古文：平章政事阇里铁木儿帅师与合丹战于瓦法，大破之。
现代文：平章政事里铁木儿率军与合丹在瓦法交战，将合丹军打得大败。
English: In the political affairs of Pingzhang, Tiemu Er led the army to fight with Hetan in Wafa, and defeated Hetan's army.

古文：丁未，御河决高唐，没民田，命有司塞之。
现代文：初七，御河在高唐决口，淹没民田，命官府堵塞决口。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the Okawa River flooded people's fields at the Gaotang culvert, and the government ordered to block the culvert.

古文：戊申，武平地震，盗贼乘隙剽劫，民愈忧恐。
现代文：初八，武平发生地震，盗贼乘机偷盗抢劫，百姓们更加忧愁恐惧。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, an earthquake occurred in Wuping, thieves took the opportunity to steal and rob, and the people were even more worried and afraid.

古文：平章政事铁木儿以便宜蠲租赋，罢商税，弛酒禁，斩为盗者；发钞八百四十锭，转海运米万石以赈之。
现代文：平章政事铁木儿酌情自行免征田租，停收商税，放宽酒禁，处死盗贼；又发放钱钞八百四十锭，转输海运米一万石以赈济饥民。
English: At his own discretion, Pingzhang's political advisor Tiemu'er exempted farmers from land rent, suspended the collection of commercial tax, relaxed the ban on alcohol, and executed thieves; he also issued 840 yuan in banknotes and transferred 10,000 koku of rice by sea to help the starving people.

古文：金竹府知府扫闾贡马及雨毡，且言： 金竹府虽内附，蛮民多未服。
现代文：金竹府知府扫闾进贡马匹及雨毡，并上奏说： 金竹府虽然已经归附朝廷，蛮民却大多没有臣服。
English: Jinzhu prefectural governor brooms into the tribute horses and raincoats, and reported: Although Jinzhu prefecture has been annexed to the imperial court, most of the barbarians have not been subjugated.

古文：近与赵坚招降竹古弄、古鲁花等三十余寨，乞立县，设长官、总把，参用土人。 
现代文：最近和赵坚一起招降竹古弄、古鲁花等三十余寨，请设立县治，设置长官、总把，参用当地人。 
English: Recently, together with Zhao Jian, more than 30 villages, such as Zhu Guzang and Gulhua, have been recruited. Please set up a county government, set up a chief and a general, and use local people.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：己酉，福建省以管内盗贼蜂起，请益戍兵，命江淮省调下万户一军赴之。
现代文：初九，福建行省因辖区内盗贼蜂起，请求增加守军，命令江淮行省调遣下万户一军前往福建。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Fujian Province, due to the uprising of thieves in the area under its jurisdiction, requested an increase in the number of defenders, and ordered Jianghuai Province to dispatch 10,000 troops to Fujian.

古文：发蒙古都万户府探马赤军五百人戍鄂州。
现代文：派遣蒙古都万户府的探马赤军五百人戍守鄂州。
English: Five hundred members of the Red Army were sent from the Mongolian capital of Wanyufu to defend Ezhou.

古文：辛亥，修东海广德王庙。
现代文：十一日，修建东海广德王庙。
English: On the 11th, the construction of the East China Sea Guangde King Temple was completed.

古文：丙辰，赦天下。
现代文：十六日，大赦天下。
English: On the 16th, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：丁卯，命江淮行省钩考行教坊司所总江南乐工租赋，置四巡检司于宿迁之北。
现代文：二十七日，命令江淮行省考核行教坊司所掌管江南乐工的租赋情况。在宿迁之北设置四个巡检司。
English: On the 27th, he ordered the Jianghuai Provincial Inspection and Education Bureau to investigate the situation of the renting and leasing of music workers in the south of the Yangtze River. Four inspection bureaus were set up in the north of Suqian.

古文：以所罢陆运夫为兵，护送会通河上供之物，禁发民挽舟。
现代文：以已经罢除的陆运人夫为兵，护送会通河上所运送的上供物品，禁止调用百姓挽引船只。
English: With the land transport workers who have been removed as soldiers, the escort will pass through the supplies transported on the river, and it is forbidden to call the people to tow the ships.

古文：冬十月壬申，封皇孙甘麻剌为梁王，赐金印，出镇云南。
现代文：冬季，十月初二，封皇孙甘麻剌为梁王，赐予金印，出京镇守云南。
English: In the winter, on the second day of October, Emperor Gaomaxuan made Emperor Sun the King of Liang, bestowed the Golden Seal, and left Beijing to defend Yunnan.

古文：癸酉，享于太庙。
现代文：初三，向太庙奉献祭品。
English: On the third day of the new year, offerings were made to the Imperial Temple.

古文：甲戌，立会通汶泗河道提举司，从四品。
现代文：初四，设立会通、汶、泗河道提举司，秩禄为从四品。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Hoi Tong, Wen and Luanhe District Promotion Office was established, and the rank was raised to the fourth grade.

古文：丁丑，尚书省臣言： 江阴、宁国等路大水，民流移者四十五万八千四百七十八户。 
现代文：初七，尚书省大臣上奏说： 江阴、宁国等路发生大水，流落迁徙的百姓共有四十五万八千四百七十八户。 
English: On the 7th day of the first month, the minister of Shangshu Province reported: There was heavy water in Jiangyin, Ningguo and other roads, and a total of 458,478 households were displaced.

古文：帝曰： 此亦何待上闻，当速赈之！ 
现代文：皇帝说 ：这又等什么奏闻朝廷，应当赶快赈济他们！ 
English: The emperor said, "What kind of report is this to the imperial court? They should help them quickly!"

古文：凡出粟五十八万二千八百八十九石。
现代文：一共发放粮食五十八万二千八百八十九石。
English: A total of 582,889 koku of grain was distributed.

古文：己卯，增上都留守司副留守、判官各一员。
现代文：初九，增设上都留守司副留守、判官各一员。
English: On the first nine days of the new year, one member each of the deputy stay-at-home officer and the judge will be added.

古文：从甘肃行省请，签管内民千三百人为兵，以戍其境。
现代文：依从甘肃行省的请求，签征其辖区内的百姓一千三百人为兵，以戍守其边境。
English: In compliance with the request of Gansu Province, it conscripted 1,300 people within its jurisdiction to guard its borders.

古文：辛巳，太白犯斗。
现代文：十一日，太白金星干犯斗宿天区。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the too-white Venus entered the heaven zone.

古文：只深所部八鲁剌思等饥，命宁夏路给米三千石赈之。
现代文：只深所部的八鲁剌思等地饥馑，命令宁夏路供米三千石赈济他们。
English: However, due to the famine in places such as Balochistan, he ordered Ningxia Road to provide 3,000 kilos of rice to help them.

古文：禁大同路酿酒。
现代文：禁止大同路酿酒。
English: It is forbidden to brew alcohol in the same way.

古文：乙酉，门答占自行御史台入觐。
现代文：十五日，门答占从行御史台入朝觐见。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, Munetakazan entered the Imperial Palace from the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：梁洞梁宫朝、吴曲洞吴汤暖等凡二十洞，以二千余户内附。
现代文：梁洞的梁宫朝、吴曲洞的吴汤暖等一共二十洞，率领二千多民户归附朝廷。
English: Liang Gongcha of Liangdong, Wu Tangnang of Wu Qudong, and so on, a total of twenty caves, led more than two thousand households to join the imperial court.

古文：丁亥，赐北边币帛十万匹。
现代文：十七日，赐予北部边境绢帛十万匹。
English: On the 17th, 100,000 northern border pythons were given.

古文：己丑，新作太庙登歌、宫悬乐。
现代文：十九日，新制作太庙的登歌、宫悬乐。
English: On the 19th, a new production of the temple's ascending song and the palace suspense music began.

古文：以昔宝赤岁取鸬鹚成都扰民，罢之。
现代文：因昔宝赤每年从成都求取鸬鹚，扰害百姓，革除这件事。
English: Because in the past, the Bao Red Army asked for money from Chengdu every year, disturbing the people and eliminating this matter.

古文：十一月辛丑，广济署洪济屯大水，免租万三千一百四十一石。
现代文：十一月初二，广济署的洪济屯田发生大水，减免田租一万三千一百四十一石。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, there was heavy water in the Hongji Tun Tian of the Guangji Department, and the land rent was reduced and exempted by 13,141 koku.

古文：兴、松二州陨霜杀禾，免其租。
现代文：兴州、松州二州降寒霜冻死禾苗，免征其田租。
English: In the two prefectures of Xingzhou and Songzhou, the field rent is exempted from the cold and frost.

古文：隆兴苦盐泺等驿饥，发钞七千锭赈之。
现代文：隆兴的苦盐泊等驿站饥馑，发放钱钞七千锭赈济之。
English: Longxing's bitterns and salt mines and other stations are starving, and the issuance of money and banknotes is the best way to save money.

古文：丁未，大同路蒙古多冒名支粮，置千户、百户十员，以达鲁花赤总之，食粮户以富为贫者，籍家赀之半。
现代文：初八，大同路的蒙古人有许多冒名顶替支取粮食的，设置千户、百户十名，由镇守官统管，凡属以富装穷的食粮户，没收家产的一半。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, the Mongolians of Datong Road had many impostors to withdraw grain, setting up a thousand households and a hundred households of ten people, under the supervision of the town guardian, and confiscating half of the family property of grain households that were rich and poor.

古文：戊申，太阴掩镇星。
现代文：初九，太阴星掩蔽土星。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, a very cloudy star occults Saturn.

古文：桑哥言： 向奉诏，内外官受命不赴及受代官居五年不赴铨者，罢不复叙。
现代文：桑哥上奏说： 从前奉诏令，朝内外的官员接到任命不去任职，以及被他人代理五年而不前往吏部听候铨选的，革职永远不再叙用。
English: Sangho said: In the past, by imperial decree, officials inside and outside the DPRK who were appointed but did not take office, and those who were represented by others for five years and did not go to the cadre department to wait for election, would never be demoted.

古文：臣谓苟无大故，不可终弃。 
现代文：臣认为只要没有什么重大的理由，不可最终弃置不顾。 
English: The minister believes that as long as there is no major reason, it cannot be finally abandoned.

古文：帝复允其请。
现代文：皇帝重新允准了他的请求。
English: The emperor again granted his request.

古文：江淮行省平章不怜吉带言： 福建盗贼已平，惟浙东一道，地极边恶，贼所巢穴。
现代文：江淮行省平章不怜吉带上奏说 ：福建的盗贼已经平定，唯有浙东一道，地方极其边远险恶，是贼寇的巢穴所在。
English: Ping Zhang Rongji, governor of Jianghuai Province, said in his speech, "The thieves in Fujian have been subdued. Only in eastern Zhejiang, a very remote and dangerous place, is the den of thieves.

古文：复还三万户，以合剌带一军戍沿海明、台，亦怯烈一军戍温、处，札忽带一军戍绍兴、婺。
现代文：应当重新调回三名万户，派合剌带的一军戍守沿海的明州、台州，以亦怯烈的一军戍守温州、处州，札忽带的一军戍守绍兴、婺州。
English: The three million households should be redeployed, and an army should be sent to defend the coastal areas of Mingzhou and Taizhou, and an army should be sent to defend Wenzhou and Wenzhou, and an army should be sent to defend Shaoxing and Zhangzhou.

古文：共宁国、徽，初用土兵，后皆与贼通，今以高邮、泰两万户汉军易地而戍。
现代文：至于宁国、徽州，当初用的都是当地的士兵，后来都与贼寇相勾结，现在用高邮、泰州的两名万户统领汉军，与他们交换地方戍守。
English: As for Ningguo and Huizhou, they initially used local soldiers, but later they all colluded with the bandits. Now they use Gaoyou and Taizhou's two million households to command the Chinese army and exchange local garrisons with them.

古文：杨州、建康、镇江三城，跨据大江，人民繁会，置七万户府。
现代文：扬州、建康、镇江三城，跨据于长江，人口繁华集中，应设置七个万户府。
English: The three cities of Yangzhou, Jiankang and Zhenjiang, straddling the Yangtze River, are densely populated, and seven million households should be set up.

古文：杭州行省诸司府库所在，置四万户府。
现代文：杭州是行省各司府库的所在地，应设置四个万户府。
English: Hangzhou is the location of the provincial treasuries, and four treasuries should be set up.

古文：水战之法，旧止十所，今择濒海沿江要害二十二所，分兵阅习，伺察诸盗。
现代文：学习水战之法的地方，原来只有十处，现在选择临海沿江的要害之地二十二处，分置水军进行训练，监视各处盗贼。
English: Originally, there were only ten places to learn the law of water warfare, but now 22 key locations along the coast and rivers have been selected, and sailors have been separated for training and monitoring thieves everywhere.

古文：钱塘控扼海口，旧置战船二十艘，故海贼时出，夺船杀人，今增置战船百艘、海船二十艘，故盗贼不敢发。 
现代文：钱塘江控制扼守着海口，原来只置有战船二十艘，故海盗不时出现，夺船杀人，如今增设战船一百艘、海船二十艘，故而盗贼不敢行动。 
English: The Qiantang River controls and guards the estuary. Originally, there were only twenty warships, so pirates appeared from time to time, seizing ships and killing people. Now there are an additional hundred warships and twenty seagoing ships, so thieves dare not act.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：庚戌，罢云南会川路采碧甸子。
现代文：十一日，罢除云南会川路采集碧玉的甸子。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Yunnan Huichuan Road was removed from the collection of jasper.

古文：甲寅，禁上都酿酒。
现代文：十五日，禁止上都酿酒。
English: On the 15th, the brewing of wine in Shangdu was banned.

古文：乙卯，贵赤三百三十户乏食，发粟赈之。
现代文：十六日，贵赤三百三十户缺粮，发放粮食赈济之。
English: On the 16th, 330 households in Guizhong were short of grain, and grain was distributed to relieve the shortage.

古文：己未，禁山后酿酒。
现代文：二十日，禁止山后酿酒。
English: On the 20th, it was forbidden to brew sake in the mountains.

古文：庚申，赐伯颜所将兵，币帛各万三千四百匹、绵三千四百斤。
现代文：二十一日，赐给伯颜所率领的军队绢和帛各一万三千四百匹，绵三千四百斤。
English: On the twenty-first day, the army led by Bo Yan was given thirteen thousand four hundred yakitori and thirteen thousand four hundred yakitori, with a weight of three thousand four hundred jin.

古文：辛酉，太阴掩左执法。
现代文：二十二日，太阴星掩蔽左执法星。
English: On the 22nd, the eclipsed star occulted the left law enforcement star.

古文：隆兴路陨霜杀稼，免其田租五千七百二十三石。
现代文：隆兴路降下寒霜冻死庄稼，减免其田租五千七百二十三石。
English: Longxing Road had frost-killed crops, and its field rent was reduced by 5,723 kilos.

古文：壬戌，大司徒撒里蛮、翰林学士承旨兀鲁带进《太宗实录》。
现代文：二十三日，大司徒撒里蛮、翰林学士承旨兀鲁带进呈《太宗实录》。
English: On the 23rd, the senior disciple, Sariman, and the Hanlin scholar, Zongzhi Jialu, presented the "Taizong Record."

古文：癸亥，河决祥符义唐湾，太康、通许，陈、颍二州大被其患。
现代文：二十四日，黄河在祥符的义唐湾决口，太康、通许，以及陈州、颍州二州大受其害。
English: On the 24th, the Yellow River broke through the Yitang Bay in Xiangfu. Taikang, Tongxu, and the two prefectures of Chenzhou and Zhangzhou were greatly affected.

古文：甲子，御史台言： 江南盗起，讨贼官利其剽掠，复以生口充赠遗，请给还其家。 
现代文：二十五日，御史台上奏说： 江南的盗贼兴起，讨贼官以其抢劫的物品占为私利，又以人口作为馈赠的礼物，请交还他们的家属。 
English: On the 25th, a report was made on the historical platform: Thieves in the south of the Yangtze River have arisen, and the thief-catching officers have used the goods they robbed for their own benefit, and have used the population as a gift. Please return them to their families.

古文：帝嘉纳之。
现代文：皇帝嘉许、采纳了。
English: The emperor appreciated and adopted his opinion.

古文：徙河北河南道提刑按察司治许州。
现代文：把河北河南道提刑按察司的治所迁到许州。
English: The office of the Hebei Henan Provincial Criminal Investigation Bureau was moved to Xuzhou.

古文：罢大都东西二驿脱脱禾孙，以通政院总之。
现代文：裁减大都东西两处驿站的驿卒，由通政院统管驿站。
English: Most of the two stations in the eastern and western parts of the city will be reduced, and the station will be under the overall control of the State Administration of Foreign Exchange.

古文：乙丑，易水溢，雄、莫、任丘、新安田庐漂没无遗，命有司筑堤障之。
现代文：二十六日，易水泛滥，雄州、莫州、任丘、新安的田地庐舍被冲毁淹没无遗，命官府筑堤阻拦洪水。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, the flood water overflowed, and the farmhouses in Xiongzhou, Mozhou, Renqiu and Xin'an were washed away and flooded, and the government ordered the government to build a dike to block the flood.

古文：丙寅，括辽阳马六千匹，择肥者给阇里铁木儿所部军。
现代文：二十七日，收聚辽阳的马六千匹，选择肥壮的给里铁木儿所部军队。
English: On the 27th, they gathered 6,000 horses from Liaoyang and selected the fattest ones for the army of Tiemu Children's Hospital.

古文：丁卯，立新城榷场、平地脱脱禾孙，遣使钩考延安屯田。
现代文：二十八日，设立新城榷场、平地的巡官。派遣使臣核查延安屯田的钱粮。
English: On the 28th, inspectors were set up in Xincheng and Pingye, and envoys were dispatched to inspect the money grain in Yan'an Tunden.

古文：降南雄州为保昌县，韶州为曲江县。
现代文：把南雄州降格为保昌县，韶州降格为曲江县。
English: Nanxiong County was downgraded to Baochang County, and Ganzhou County was downgraded to Qujiang County.

古文：十二月辛未，以卫尉院为太仆寺。
现代文：十二月初二，把卫尉院改为太仆寺。
English: On the second day of the first month of December, the Wei尉院 was changed to Taibo-ji Temple.

古文：戊寅，免大都、平滦、保定、河间自至元二十四年至二十六年逋租十三万五百六十二石。
现代文：初九，免除大都、平滦、保定、河间从至元二十四年到二十六年拖欠未交的田租十三万零五百六十二石。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the unpaid farm rents amounting to 130,562 koku from 2004 to 2006 were exempted from most of the cities, Pingyao, Baoding, and Hama.

古文：己卯，命枢密院括江南民间兵器及将士习武，如戊子岁诏。
现代文：初十，命令枢密院收聚江南民间的兵器，并令将士习武，如戊子年的诏书所要求的一样。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, he ordered the Privy Council to collect the weapons of the people south of the Yangtze River, and ordered the soldiers to practice martial arts, as required by the edict of the Year of the Goat.

古文：甲申，遣兵部侍郎靳荣等阅实安西、凤翔、延安三道军户，元籍四千外，复得三万三千二百八十丁，枢密院欲以为兵，桑哥不可，帝从之。
现代文：十五日，派遣兵部侍郎靳荣等检查、核实安西、凤翔、延安三个道的军户，除初入军籍的四千名士兵之外，又查出三万三千二百八十名男丁，枢密院想让他们从军，桑哥不同意，皇帝依从了他。
English: On the 15th, Zang Rong, the secretary of the military department, was dispatched to inspect and verify the military households in the three provinces of Anxi, Fengxiang and Yan'an. In addition to the 4,000 soldiers who entered the military for the first time, another 33,280 men were found. The Privy Council wanted them to join the military, but Sango did not agree, and the emperor obeyed him.

古文：丙戌，兴化路仙游贼朱三十五集众寇青山，万户李纲讨平之。
现代文：十七日，兴化路仙游的贼寇朱三十五聚集部众进犯青山，万户李纲讨平贼军。
English: On the 17th day of the month, the Zhu 35th gathering of thieves and bandits of Xinghua Road Xianyu invaded Qingshan, and all households of Li Gang joined in to defeat the thief army.

古文：京兆省上屯田所出羊价钞六百九锭，敕以赐札散、暗伯民贫乏者。
现代文：京兆行省献上屯田所收获的羊价钞六百零九锭，皇帝敕命将其赠与札散、暗伯贫穷的百姓。
English: Jingzhaogang Province presented 6009 baht worth of mutton price banknotes harvested in the field, and the emperor gave it to the poor people of Fazan and Dimbo.

古文：辛卯，太阴犯亢。
现代文：二十二日，太阴星干犯亢宿天区。
English: On the 22nd, the great yin and yang star committed the crime of entering the heaven zone.

古文：乙未，初分万亿为四库，以金银输内府，至是立提举富宁库，秩从五品，以掌之。
现代文：二十六日，最初，把万亿库分为四库，把金银交纳给内府，至此，设立提举富宁库，秩禄为从五品，以其掌管金银。
English: On the 26th, initially, the trillion-yuan treasury was divided into four treasuries, and the gold and silver were handed over to the Nefu. At this point, the Funing treasury was established, and the chitsuroku was reduced to five goods, with which it controlled the gold and silver.

古文：大同路民多流移，免其田租二万一千五百八石。
现代文：大同路的百姓大多流离迁徙，减免其田租二万一千五百零八石。
English: Most of the people in Datong Road have been displaced and migrated, and their field rent has been reduced to 21,508 koku.

古文：洪赞、滦阳驿饥，给六十日粮。
现代文：洪赞、滦阳驿站饥馑，供给六十日口粮。
English: Hungry people in Hongzan and Shenyang Railway Station were provided with 60-day rations.

古文：不耳答失所部灭乞里饥，给九十日粮。
现代文：不耳答失所部的灭乞里地方饥馑，供给九十日口粮。
English: The Ministry of Unanswered Prayers, for the eradication of hunger in rural areas, will provide 90 days of food rations.

古文：诏诸王乃蛮带、辽阳行省平章政事薛阇干、右丞洪察忽，摘蒙古军万人分戍双城及婆娑府诸城，以防合丹兵。
现代文：诏令诸侯王乃蛮带、辽阳行省平章政事薛干、右丞洪察忽，选取蒙古军一万人分别戍守双城以及婆娑府各城，以防守合丹的贼军。
English: The imperial edict ordered the princes Wang Naiman, Liaoyang Province Governor Pingzhang, and political leaders Xue Gan and U.S. General Hong Chak, to select 10,000 Mongolian troops to guard the two cities and the cities of Bawang Prefecture, respectively, in order to defend the Khitan invaders.

古文：己亥，省溧阳路为县，入建康。
现代文：三十日，裁撤溧阳路，降格为县，划入建康。
English: On the 30th, Fenyang Road was abolished, downgraded to a county, and transferred to Jiankang.

古文：湖广省上二年宣课珠九万五百一十五两。
现代文：湖广行省进奉两年珍珠税课九万零五百一十五两。
English: Hubei Guangxing Province will pay pearl tax of 90,515 taels for two years.

古文：处州青田贼刘甲乙等集众万余人寇温州平阳。
现代文：处州青田贼寇刘甲、刘乙等聚集部众一万多人进犯温州平阳。
English: More than ten thousand people from the gathering areas of Liu Jia, Liu B and other bandits in Wenzhou, Qingdao invaded Pingyang, Wenzhou.

古文：是岁，赐诸王、公主、驸马金、银、钞、币如岁例。
现代文：这一年，按照每年的惯例赐给诸侯王、公主、驸马黄金、白银、钱钞、绢帛等。
English: This year, according to the annual practice, princes, princes, princesses, horses, horses, horses, horses, horses, horses, horses, horses, horses, horses, horses, horses, horses, horses, horses, horses, horses, horses, horses, horses, horses, horses, horses, horses, horses, horses, horses, horses, horses, horses, horses.

古文：命帝师西僧递作佛事坐静于万寿山厚载门、茶罕脑儿、圣寿万安寺、桓州南屏庵、双泉等所，凡七十二会。
现代文：命令帝师和西僧在万寿山厚载门、茶罕脑儿、圣寿万安寺、桓州南屏庵、双泉等处顺次入定做佛事，一共七十二次法会。
English: He ordered the Emperor and the Western Monks to perform Buddhist rites in succession at the Manshou Mountain, Chakannengro, Shenshou Wanyan Temple, Nanping Monastery, Shuangquan and other places, for a total of seventy-two puja.

古文：断死罪七十二人。
现代文：全年判处死刑的罪囚共七十二人。
English: A total of 72 prisoners were sentenced to death throughout the year.

古文：二十八年春正月壬寅，太白、荧惑、镇星聚奎。
现代文：至元二十八年春，正月初三，金星、火星、土星聚集在奎宿天区。
English: In the spring of 28 BC, on the third day of the first month of the year, Venus, Mars and Saturn gathered in the Quixote sky.

古文：癸卯，给诸王爱牙赤印。
现代文：初四，赐给诸侯王爱牙赤印信。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, a red stamped letter was given to Prince Aiya.

古文：命玄教宗师张留孙置醮祠星三日。
现代文：命令道教宗师张留孙设置醮坛祭星三日。
English: He ordered the Taoist master Zhang Rusun to set up the altar and star for three days.

古文：上都民仰食于官者众，诏佣民运米十万石致上都，官价石四十两，命留守木八剌沙总其事。
现代文：上都的百姓饮食仰赖于官府的很多，下诏令雇佣百姓运米十万石到上都，官价每石四十两银子，命留守木八剌沙主管此事。
English: The diet of the people of Shangdu depended a lot on the government. The next imperial edict hired people to transport rice of 100,000 koku to Shangdu, the official price was forty-two silver coins per koku, leaving Muyaba Basha in charge of the matter.

古文：辛亥，罢汴梁至正阳、杞县、睢州、中牟、郑、唐、邓十二站站户为民。
现代文：十二日，罢除汴梁至正阳、杞县、睢州、中牟、郑州、唐州、邓州十二处驿站的站户为民。
English: On the 12th, the station owners of the 12 stations from Qiliang to Zhengyang, Qixian, Bozhou, Zhongmou, Zhengzhou, Tangzhou and Dangzhou were removed.

古文：癸丑，高丽国遣使来贡方物。
现代文：十四日，高丽国派遣使臣前来贡奉地方特产。
English: On the 14th, the State of Korea sent an envoy to pay tribute to the local specialties.

古文：丁巳，遣贵由赤四百人北征。
现代文：十八日，派遣贵由赤四百人北征。
English: On the 18th, Guiyu dispatched 400 Red Guards to the Northern Expedition.

古文：辛酉，罢江淮漕运司，并于海船万户府，由海道漕运。
现代文：二十二日，撤销江淮漕运司，合并到海船万户府，由海路进行漕运。
English: On the 22nd, the Jianghuai Rowing Transport Division was abolished and merged into the Ocean Vessel Wanhu Prefecture to carry out rowing transport by sea.

古文：并浙西金玉人匠提举司入浙西道金玉人匠总管府。
现代文：把浙西金玉人匠提举司合并到浙西道金玉人匠总管府。
English: The Zhejiang West JinYuRenCraftsmen Promotion Division was merged into the Zhejiang West JinYuRenCraftsmen General Administration Office.

古文：降无为、和州二路、六安军为州，巢州为县，入无为，并隶庐州路。
现代文：把无为、和州两个路以及六安军降格为州，把巢州降格为县，并入无为州，均隶属于庐州路。
English: Wuzhou Road, Wuzhou Road and Liuzhou Road were downgraded to counties, while Chaozhou Road was downgraded to counties and merged into Wuzhou Road, both of which are subordinate to Zhangzhou Road.

古文：升安丰府为路，降寿春府、怀远军为县，怀远入濠州，并隶安丰路。
现代文：把安丰府升格为路，把寿春府、怀远军降格为县，把怀远划入濠州，均隶属于安丰路。
English: Anfeng Prefecture was upgraded to a road, Shuchun Prefecture and Huaiyuan Junction were downgraded to counties, and Huaiyuan was included in Zhangzhou, all of which are subordinate to Anfeng Road.

古文：升各处行省理问所为四品。
现代文：把各地行省理问所的秩禄升格为四品。
English: To upgrade the ranking of the provincial and municipal examination centers to four products.

古文：免江淮贫民至元十二年至二十五年所逋田租二百九十七万六千余石，及二十六年未输田租十三万石、钞千一百五十锭、丝五千四百斤、绵千四百三十余斤。
现代文：免除江淮贫民至元十二年至二十五年拖欠未交的田租二百九十七万六千余石，以及至元二十六年尚未交纳的田租十三万石、钱钞一千一百五十锭、丝五千四百斤、绵一千四百三十余斤。
English: The Jianghuai poor were exempted from the arrears of land rent of more than 2.976 million koku from the 12th to the 25th year of the Yuan Dynasty, and from the arrears of land rent of 130,000 koku, banknotes of 1,150 baht, silk of 5,400 jin, and cotton of more than 1,430 jin in the 26th year of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：罢淘金提举司，立江东两浙都转运使司。
现代文：撤销淘金提举司。设立江东两浙都转运使司。
English: Revocation of the Taojin Transfer Office. Establishment of the Jiangdong and Zhejiang Transfer Office.

古文：壬戌，以札散、秃秃合总兵于瓮古之地，命有司供其军需，敕大同路发米赈瓮古饥民。
现代文：二十三日，命令札散、秃秃合统兵驻扎于瓮古地方，令当地官府供应其军需物资。敕令在大同路发放粮米赈济瓮古的饥民。
English: On the 23rd, he ordered the general troops of Fazan and Bald Bald to be stationed in the Yingu region, and ordered the local government to supply them with military supplies. He ordered the distribution of grain and rice on Datong Road to help the starving people of Yugu.

古文：尚书省臣桑哥等以罪罢。
现代文：尚书省大臣桑哥因犯罪被革职。
English: Sangho, minister of the Ministry of Education and Culture, was dismissed from his post for committing a crime.

古文：二月辛未，赐也速带儿所部兵騬马万匹。
现代文：二月初三，赐给也速带儿所部的士兵马乘马一万匹。
English: On the third day of the second month, 10,000 horses were given to the soldiers of the Rapid Deployment Nursery Department.

古文：徙万亿库金银入禁中富宁库。
现代文：把万亿库的金银转移到禁中的富宁库。
English: The transfer of trillions of gold and silver to the banned Funing vault.

古文：尚书省言： 大同仰食于官者七万人，岁用米八十万石，遣使覆验，不当给者万三千五百人，乞征还官。 
现代文：尚书省上奏说 ：大同饮食仰赖于官府的有七万人，一年消耗八十万石米，派遣使臣去复查，不应当供给的有一万三千五百人，请追回还给官府。 
English: Shang Shuxu said in his report: 70,000 people depend on the government for their food and drink, and 800,000 kilos of rice are consumed each year. Envoys were sent to investigate, and 13,500 people who should not have been provided with food were sent back to the government.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：癸酉，以陇西四川总摄辇真术纳思为诸路释教都总统。
现代文：初五，任命陇西人四川总管辇真术纳思为诸路释教都总统。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, he appointed the Shaanxi Sichuan general manager Zou Zhenshu Na Si as the president of ZhuLu Xie Jiao Du.

古文：改福建行省为宣慰司，隶江西行省。
现代文：把福建行省改为宣慰司，隶属于江西行省。
English: Fujian Province was changed to the Department of Consolation, which is subordinate to Jiangxi Province.

古文：诏： 行御史台勿听行省节度。 
现代文：诏令： 行御史台不得听任行中书省节制。 
English: Imperial edict: The conduct of the historical platform must not be subject to the control of the Ministry of Education.

古文：云南行省言： 叙州、乌蒙水路险恶，舟多破溺，宜自叶稍水站出陆，经中庆，又经盐井、土老、必撒诸蛮，至叙州庆符，可治为驿路，凡立五站。 
现代文：云南行省上奏说： 叙州、乌蒙的水路险恶，船大多因破损而沉没。应当从叶稍的水驿站登上陆路，经过中庆，又经盐井、土老、必撒的各个蛮部，抵达叙州的庆符，可以修建成一条驿路，一共设立五处驿站。 
English: Yunnan Province Shangso said: The waterways of Suzhou and Umong are dangerous, and most of the ships have sunk due to damage. It is necessary to board the land route from the water station of Yehan, pass through Zhongqing, and pass through the various barbaric parts of Yanjing, Tu Lao, and Bisa, and arrive at the celebration of Suzhou. It can be built into a branch line, and a total of five branch stations can be set up.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：也速带儿、汪总帅言： 近制，和顾和买不及军家，今一切与民同。 
现代文：也速带儿、汪总帅上奏说 ：按照近制，用钱钞雇佣工匠、征收物税不涉及军队，现在一切都是与民间相同。 
English: Wang Shoushuai also made a quick speech, saying: According to the Chinese system, craftsmen are hired with money and bills, and the army is not involved in the collection of taxes. Now everything is the same as for the people.

古文：诏自今军勿输。
现代文：诏令从现在起军队不交纳赋税。
English: The emperor decreed that from now on, the army would not pay taxes.

古文：丙子，罢征理司。
现代文：初八，撤销征理司。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, the registration department was abolished.

古文：上都、太原饥，免至元十二年至二十六年民间所逋田租三万八千五百余石，遣使同按察司赈大同、太原饥民，口给粮两月或三月。
现代文：上都、太原发生饥馑，免除至元二十二年至二十六年民间所拖欠未交的田租三万八千五百余石。派遣使臣同按察司一起赈济大同、太原的饥民，每人供给两月或三月的口粮。
English: When famine occurred in Shangdu and Taiyuan, he exempted the land rent arrears of more than 38,500 koku that had not been paid by the people from 1922 to 2006. He sent envoys together with inspectors to help the starving people in Datong and Taiyuan, providing two months or three months of rations for each person.

古文：以桑哥党与，罢杨州路达鲁花赤唆罗兀思。
现代文：因为是桑哥的党羽，扬州路镇守官唆罗兀思被革职。
English: Yangzhou Road Town's governor, Yu Luo Jisi, was dismissed because he was a member of Sanguo's party.

古文：遣官覆验水达达、咸平贫民，赈之。
现代文：派遣官员核查水达达、咸平的贫民，给他们赈济。
English: Officials will be sent to inspect the water supply of poor people in Dada and Hamping and provide them with relief.

古文：丁丑，以太子右詹事完泽为尚书右丞相，翰林学士承旨不忽木平章政事，诏告天下。
现代文：初九，任命太子右詹事完泽为尚书右丞相，翰林学士承旨不忽木为平章政事，下诏告谕天下。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Prince U Zhanji Kanze was appointed as the Minister of the Right of Shangshu, and Hanlin Scholar Zongzhi Nukmoku was appointed as the Minister of the Right of Pingzhang, and the following edict was announced to the world.

古文：以列兀难粳米赈给贫民。
现代文：把列兀难的粳米赈济贫民。
English: to distribute the hard-to-grow glutinous rice to the poor.

古文：己卯，遣官持香诣中岳、南海、淮渎致祷。
现代文：十一日，派遣官员持香烛前往中岳嵩山、南海、淮水致祭祈祷。
English: On the 11th day, officials were sent to Zhongyue Songshan, Nanhai and Huai Shui with incense and candles to offer prayers.

古文：立金齿等处宣慰司都元帅府。
现代文：设立金齿等处宣慰司都元帅府。
English: The Jinzu and other offices were established to comfort the capital marshal's office.

古文：以上都虎贲士二千人屯田，官给牛具农器，用钞二万锭。
现代文：派上都的虎贲勇士二千人屯田，由官府供给耕牛、农具，用去钱钞二万锭。
English: He sent two thousand warriors to the capital to occupy the land, and the government provided them with oxen and farm tools, as well as twenty thousand taels of money.

古文：以云南曲靖路宣抚司所辖地广，民心未安，改立曲靖等处宣慰司、管军万户府以镇之，辛巳，以湖广行省八番罗甸司复隶四川省。
现代文：因为云南曲靖路宣抚司所统辖的地域广阔，人心尚未安定，改立曲靖等处宣慰司、管军万户府以镇守之。十三日，把湖广行省的八番罗甸司重新隶属于四川行省。
English: Because the area under the jurisdiction of the Yunnan Qujing Road Relief Division is vast and the people's hearts are not yet stable, the Qujing and other places have been replaced by the Relief Division and the Wanyu Prefecture as the town guard. On the 13th, the Eighth Rhodium Division of Hougang Province was re-subordinated to Sichuan Province.

古文：壬午，以桑哥沮抑台纲，又箠监察御史，命御史大夫月儿鲁辨之。
现代文：十四日，因为桑哥败坏贬抑纲常，又鞭打监察御史，命御史大夫月儿鲁辨明此事。
English: On the 14th, because Sango had demeaned and humiliated Gangcheng and whipped the inspector, he ordered the inspector, Dr. Yueru, to investigate the matter.

古文：癸未，太阴犯左执法。
现代文：十五日，太阴星干犯左执法星。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, Taiyin star criminal left law enforcement star.

古文：大驾幸上都，是日次大口，复召御史台及中书、尚书两省官辨论桑哥之罪。
现代文：圣驾临幸上都，这天驻跸于大口，再次征召御史台及中书、尚书两省的官员辨别、议论桑哥的罪状。
English: On this day, when the saint arrived in the capital of happiness, he stayed in Oguchi, and once again summoned officials from the Imperial History Station and the two provinces of Zhongshu and Shangshu to identify and discuss Sango's crime.

古文：复以阑遗监隶宣徽院。
现代文：重新把阑遗监隶属于宣徽院。
English: Re-assigning Gong's surviving relatives to the Xuanhuiyuan.

古文：诏毋沮扰山东转运使司课程。
现代文：下诏不得阻挠、干扰山东转运使司收取赋税。
English: The following edict shall not obstruct or interfere with the Shandong Transportation and Logistics Division collecting taxes.

古文：甲申，太白犯昴。
现代文：十六日，太白金星干犯昴宿天区。
English: On the 16th, the too-white Venus committed a crime in the mansion of heaven.

古文：命江淮行省钩考沙不丁所总詹事院江南钱谷。
现代文：命令江淮行省考察、核实沙不丁所管辖詹事院的江南钱粮数额。
English: Jianghuai Province was ordered to inspect and verify the amount of Jiangnan Qianrong in Zhanji Hospital under the jurisdiction of Sabuding.

古文：乙酉，立江淮、湖广、江西、四川等处行枢密院，诏谕中外，江淮治广德军，湖广治岳州，江西治汀州，四川治嘉定。
现代文：十七日，设立江淮、湖广、江西、四川等地行枢密院，并下诏晓谕朝内外；江淮院署设在广德军，湖广院署设在岳州，江西院署设在汀州，四川院署设在嘉定。
English: On the 17th, the Privy Council of Jianghuai, Huguang, Jiangxi and Sichuan was established, and the following edict was issued to the North and the outside world; the Jianghuai Academy Office was located in Guangde, the Huguang Academy Office was located in Yuezhou, the Jiangxi Academy Office was located in Tingzhou, and the Sichuan Academy Office was located in Jiading.

古文：丙戌，诏： 改提刑按察司为肃政廉访司，每道仍设官八员，除二使留司以总制一道，余六人分临所部，如民事、钱谷、官吏奸弊，一切委之，俟岁终，省、台遣官考其功效。 
现代文：十八日，诏令： 把提刑按察司改为肃政廉访司，每道仍设八名官员，除两名廉访使留守司署总管全部事务之外，其余六人分临各自的地方，所有的事务，如民事、钱粮、官吏奸佞舞弊等，均委任其处置。等到年终，再由中书省、御史台派遣官员考核其功效治绩。 
English: On the 18th, the imperial edict: The Department of Investigation was changed from the Department of Investigation to the Department of Investigation of Political Corruption, and eight officials were still set up in each province. In addition to the two inspectors who remained in charge of all the affairs of the Department, the remaining six people were assigned to their respective places. All matters, such as civil affairs, money and grain, and official malfeasance, were delegated to them. By the end of the year, officials from the Ministry of Chinese Literature and the State Administration of History would be dispatched to evaluate their effectiveness and performance.

古文：以集贤大学士何荣祖为尚书右丞，集贤学士贺胜为尚书省参知政事。
现代文：任命集贤大学士何荣祖为尚书右丞，集贤学士贺胜为尚书省参知政事。
English: He Rongzu, a scholar of Jixian University, was appointed as the Vice-President of Shangshu, and He Sheng, a scholar of Jixian University, was appointed as the Vice-Governor of Shangshu.

古文：诏江淮行省遣蒙古军五百、汉兵千人，从皇子镇南王镇杨州。
现代文：诏令江淮行省派遣蒙古军五百人、汉军一千人随从皇子镇南王镇守扬州。
English: The imperial edict ordered Jianghuai Province to dispatch 500 Mongolian troops and 1,000 Chinese troops to the Prince's town of Nanwang to defend Yangzhou.

古文：执河间都转运使张庸，仍遣官钩考其事。
现代文：逮捕河间都转运使张庸，并派官员核实其事实。
English: the arrest of the transit agent Zhang Yong in Hebei Province, and sent officials to verify the facts.

古文：丁亥，营建宫城南面周庐，以居宿卫之士。
现代文：十九日，营建宫城南面角落的房舍，以供宿卫的士兵居住。
English: On the 19th, a building was built in the southern corner of the palace to house the guards.

古文：执湖广要束木诣京师，戊子，籍要束木家赀，金凡四千两。
现代文：逮捕湖广的要束木前来京师。二十日，抄没要束木的家产，黄金共有四千两。
English: On the 20th, they confiscated the property of the family of the person they wanted to arrest, a total of 4,000 taels of gold.

古文：辛卯，封诸王铁木儿不花为肃远王，赐之印。
现代文：二十三日，封诸侯王铁木儿不花为肃远王，赐给他印信。
English: On the twenty-third day, the king of the princes, Tiemu Er, crowned him as the king of Suyuan and gave him a seal letter.

古文：壬辰，雨坏太庙第一室，奉迁神主别殿。
现代文：二十四日，大雨毁坏太庙第一祭室。奉移神主牌位到别的殿堂。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, heavy rain destroyed the first hall of the ancient temple. The position of the main god was moved to another hall.

古文：癸巳，籍桑哥家赀。
现代文：二十五日，抄没桑哥的家产。
English: On the 25th, Sango's family property was confiscated.

古文：遣行省、行台官发粟，赈徽之绩溪，杭之临安、余杭、于潜、昌化、新城等县饥民。
现代文：派遣行中书省、行御史台的官员发放粮食，以赈济徽州的绩溪，杭州的临安、余杭、于潜、昌化、新城等县的饥民。
English: Officials from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology and the State Administration of History were dispatched to distribute food to help the hungry people in Jiexi of Huizhou, Lin'an, Yuhang, Yuchuan, Changhua, Xincheng and other counties in Hangzhou.

古文：命江淮行省参政燕公楠整治盐法之弊。
现代文：命令江淮行省参政燕公楠整顿、治理盐法的弊病。
English: Jianghuai Province was ordered to participate in the political reform of Yan Gongnan and rectify and cure the ills of the salt law.

古文：丁酉，诏加岳、渎、四海封号，各遣官诣祠致告。
现代文：二十九日，诏令加授五岳、四渎、四海封号，各地派遣官员前往祠庙进行祭告。
English: On the 29th, the imperial edict added the names of the Five Mountains, the Four Forests, and the Four Seas, and officials from all over the country were dispatched to the ancestral temples to make the announcement.

古文：三月己亥朔，真定、河间、保定、平滦饥，平阳、太原尤甚，民流移就食者六万七千户，饥而死者三百七十一人。
现代文：三月初一，真定、河间、保定、平滦发生饥馑，平阳、太原特别严重，百姓流离迁徙到别地就食的达六万七千户，因饥饿而死的三百七十一人。
English: On the first day of March, famine occurred in Jinding, Hema, Baoding, and Pingyao, with Pingyang and Taiyuan being particularly severe. As many as 67,000 households were displaced and migrated to other places for food, and 371 people died of starvation.

古文：桑哥妻弟八吉由为燕南宣慰使，以受赂积赃伏诛。
现代文：桑哥的妻弟八吉由任燕南宣慰使，因接受贿赂、聚敛赃银被处死。
English: Sango's brother-in-law and wife, Hakki, was executed by Yan Nan Xuanfei for accepting bribes and collecting stolen money.

古文：仆桑哥辅政碑。
现代文：推倒为桑哥树立的辅政碑。
English: Tear down the auxiliary monument erected for Sango.

古文：太原饥，严酒禁。
现代文：太原发生饥馑，严申禁酒令。
English: A famine occurred in Taiyuan, and the prohibition of alcohol was strictly enforced.

古文：丁未，太阴犯御女。
现代文：初九，太阴星干犯御女星。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, the female star of the lunar month.

古文：己酉，大阴犯右执法。
现代文：十一日，太阴星干犯右执法星。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Taiyin Star committed a crime and became a star of law enforcement.

古文：庚戌，太阴犯太微东垣上相。
现代文：十二日，太阴星干犯太微东垣的上相星。
English: On the twelfth day, the too-dim star caused the too-dim east wall's upper phase star.

古文：甲寅，常德路水，免田租二万三千九百石。
现代文：十六日，常德路发生水灾，减免田租二万三千九百石。
English: On the 16th, floods occurred in Changde Road, resulting in a reduction of 23,900 koku in farmland rent.

古文：乙卯，太白犯五车。
现代文：十七日，太白金星干犯五车星。
English: On the seventeenth day, the too-white Venus committed the five-car star.

古文：乃颜所属牙儿马兀等同女直兵五百人追杀内附民余千人，遣塔海将千人平之。
现代文：乃颜部属的牙儿马兀等同女真的五百名士兵追杀归附朝廷的百姓一千余人，派遣塔海率领一千人平定了他们。
English: Naoyan's subordinate, 500 soldiers including Genuine's son, Ma Jun, chased and killed more than a thousand people who had joined the imperial court, and dispatched Taha to lead a thousand people to pacify them.

古文：辛酉，吕连站木赤五十户饥，赈三月粮。
现代文：二十三日，吕连驿站的站户五十户饥饿缺食，赈济其三个月粮食。
English: On the 23rd, 50 households of Lulian Railway Station were short of food due to hunger, and were provided with food for three months.

古文：发侍卫兵营紫檀殿。
现代文：遣发侍卫兵驻在紫檀殿。
English: The dispatched bodyguards are stationed at Shidandan-den.

古文：壬戌，以甘肃行省右丞崔彧为中书右丞。
现代文：二十四，任命甘肃行省右丞崔为中书右丞。
English: On the 24th, he appointed Cui, the right-hand man of the Gansu Provincial Government, as the right-hand man of the Central Government.

古文：南丹州莫国麟入觐，授国麟安抚使、三珠虎符。
现代文：南丹州的莫国麟入朝觐见，授予莫国麟安抚使、三珠虎符。
English: Mo Guolin from Nantan Province entered the imperial court and was awarded the title of "Peacemaker" and the "Three Pearl Tiger Emblem."

古文：杭州、平江等五路饥，发粟赈之，仍弛湖泊蒲、鱼之禁。
现代文：杭州、平江等五路发生饥馑，发放粮食赈济饥民，并放宽湖泊不得打捞蒲草、捕鱼的禁令。
English: Hunger occurred in Hangzhou, Pingjiang and other five provinces. Grain was distributed to feed the hungry, and the ban on salvaging rushes and fishing in lakes was relaxed.

古文：溧阳、太平、徽州、广德、镇江五路亦饥，赈之如杭州。
现代文：溧阳、太平、徽州、广德、镇江五路也发生饥馑，如杭州一样赈济饥民。
English: Famine also occurred in the five provinces of Fenyang, Taiping, Huizhou, Guangde and Zhenjiang, which, like Hangzhou, made great efforts to feed the hungry.

古文：武平路饥，百姓困于盗贼军旅，免其去年田租。
现代文：武平路发生饥馑，百姓被盗贼和军旅困扰，免除他们去年的田租。
English: Famine occurred in Wuping Road, and the people were plagued by thieves and military brigades, exempting them from last year's field rent.

古文：凡州郡田尝被灾者，悉免其租，不被灾者免十之五。
现代文：凡是州郡官田曾经受灾的均免除其田租，没有受灾的免除其十分之五。
English: All state and county government-owned fields that have been affected by the disaster are exempt from their field rent, and those that have not been affected are exempt from five-tenths of it.

古文：罢甘州转运司。
现代文：撤销甘州转运司。
English: Revoke the Ganzhou Transportation Division.

古文：江淮豪家多行贿权贵，为府县卒史，容庇门户，遇有差赋，惟及贫民，诏江淮行省严禁之。
现代文：江淮的豪门大多向权贵行贿，担任府县衙门的兵卒佐吏，宽容包庇自己的门庭，遇有差役赋税，只推到贫苦百姓身上，皇上下诏，令江淮行省严禁。
English: Most of the wealthy families in Jianghuai paid bribes to the rich and powerful, served as soldiers and officers of the prefectural and county governments, and were tolerant in protecting their own interests. In the case of taxation by officials, it was only pushed onto the poor people. The emperor issued an edict that it was strictly forbidden to travel in Jianghuai Province.

古文：赈辽阳、武平饥民，仍弛捕猎之禁。
现代文：赈济辽阳、武平的饥民，并放宽捕猎的禁令。
English: to help the starving people in Liaoyang and Wuping, and relax the ban on hunting.

古文：夏四月己巳，禁屠宰牝羊。
现代文：夏季，四月初二，禁止屠宰母羊。
English: In the summer, on the second day of April, the slaughter of ewes is forbidden.

古文：甲戌，诏各路府、州、司、县长次官兼管诸军奥鲁。
现代文：初七，诏令各路、州、司、县的府衙长官及次官兼管各军的辎重老营。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the prefectural governors and vice-governors of all provinces, prefectures, divisions, and counties, as well as the military commanders of all armies, were ordered.

古文：以地震故，免侍卫兵籍武平者今岁徭役。
现代文：因为地震的缘故，免除籍贯为武平的侍卫兵今年的徭役。
English: Because of the earthquake, the bodyguards from Wuping were exempted from this year's cortege.

古文：增置钦察卫经历一员，用汉人为之，余不得为例。
现代文：增设钦察卫的经历一人，以汉人担任，但其他地方不得以此为先例。
English: Add one person from the experience of Qin Chawei, with a Han Chinese person in charge, but this must not be used as a precedent elsewhere.

古文：庚辰，弛杭州西湖禽鱼禁，听民网罟。
现代文：十三日，放宽杭州西湖不得捕捉禽鱼的禁令，听任百姓张网捕捉。
English: On the 13th, the ban on catching poultry and fish in Hangzhou West Lake was relaxed, allowing people to catch them with nets.

古文：丙戌，诏凡负斡脱银者，入还皆以钞为则。
现代文：十九日，诏令凡是亏欠商税银的，归还时均以钱钞为准。
English: On the 19th, it was decreed that all debts owed to merchants in the form of taxes and silver should be repaid in the form of money.

古文：乙未，岁星犯舆鬼。
现代文：二十八日，木星干犯鬼宿天区。
English: On the 28th, Jupiter was the culprit.

古文：以沙不丁等米赈江南饥民。
现代文：用沙不丁等人的米赈济江南的饥民。
English: The starving people in the southern part of the Yangtze River were fed with rice harvested by Sa Boudin and others.

古文：召朱清、张瑄诣阙。
现代文：征召朱清、张王宣前来京师。
English: Zhu Qing and Zhang Wang Xuan were conscripted to come to Beijing as teachers.

古文：庚寅，并总制院入宣政院。
现代文：二十三日，把总制院合并到宣政院。
English: On the 23rd, the General Institution was merged into the Xuancheng Institute.

古文：以钞法故，召叶李还京师。
现代文：因为钞法的缘故，征召叶李返回京师。
English: Because of the banknote law, Ye Li was called up to return to the Beijing Division.

古文：乙未，徙湖广行枢密院治鄂州。
现代文：二十八日，把湖广行枢密院治所迁移到鄂州。
English: On the 28th, the Privy Council Office of the Guangxing Emperor was moved to Ezhou.

古文：丙申，以米三千石赈阔里吉思饥民。
现代文：二十九日，以三千石米赈济阔里吉思的饥民。
English: On the 29th, he used 3,000 koku of rice to feed the starving people of Korigis.

古文：五月戊戌，召江西行枢密院副使阿里诣阙，升章佩监秩三品。
现代文：五月初二，征召江西行枢密院副使阿里前来京师。把章佩监的秩禄升格为三品。
English: On the second day of the fifth month, the deputy envoy of the Privy Council to Jiangxi, Ali, was summoned to Beijing. The rank of Zhang Pei Jun was upgraded to Sanpin.

古文：遣脱脱、塔剌海、忽辛三人追究僧官江淮总摄杨琏真伽等盗用官物。
现代文：派遣脱脱、塔剌海、忽辛三人追究僧官江淮总管杨琏真伽等盗用官物之罪。
English: Dispatching three people, Shedu, Ta Bihai, and Qu Xin, to investigate the crime of embezzlement of official goods by the chief abbot of Jianghuai, Yang Xizhenga.

古文：以参知政事廉希恕为湖广等处行省右丞，行海北海南道宣慰使都元帅，琼州安抚使陈仲达海北海南道宣慰使都元帅，湖广行省左右司郎中不颜于思、别十八里副元帅王信并同知海北海南道宣慰司事副元帅，并佩虎符，将二千二百人以征黎蛮，僚属皆从仲达辟置。
现代文：任命参知政事廉希恕为湖广等处行省右丞，署理海北海南道宣慰使都元帅，琼州安抚使陈仲达任海北海南道宣慰使都元帅，湖广行省左右司郎中不颜于思、别十八里副元帅王信均任海北海南道宣慰使同知、副元帅，均佩戴虎符，率领二千二百人征伐黎蛮，僚属都由陈仲达聘用设置。
English: He appointed Chen Zhongda, the pacifying envoy of Qiongzhou, as the grand marshal of Hubei, Hubei, Hubei, Hubei, Hubei, Hubei, Hubei, Hubei, Hubei, Hubei, Hubei, Hubei, Hubei, Hubei, Hubei, Hubei, Hubei, Hubei, Hubei, Hubei, Hubei, Hubei, Hubei, Hubei, Hubei, Hubei, Hubei, Hubei, Hubei, Hubei, Hubei, H

古文：立左右两江宣慰司都元帅府。
现代文：设立左右两江宣慰司都元帅府。
English: The Marshal's Office was set up in the Xuanliao District of Liangjiang.

古文：壬寅，太阴犯少民。
现代文：初六，太阴星干犯少民星。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the first year of junior high school, Ta Yin Xing committed a minor crime.

古文：徙江淮行枢密院治建康。
现代文：把江淮行枢密院的治所迁移到建康。
English: The administrative office of the Jianghuaihang Privy Council was moved to Jiankang.

古文：甲辰，中书省臣麦术丁、崔彧言： 桑哥当国四年，诸臣多以贿进，亲旧皆授要官，唯以欺蔽九重、朘削百姓为事，宜令两省严加考核，并除名为民。 
现代文：初八，中书省大臣麦术丁、崔上奏说： 桑哥主持国柄四年，大臣们多数凭着贿赂进身，亲戚故旧都授以要职，专门以欺骗蒙蔽皇帝、剥削百姓为能事。应当令中书省、尚书省严加查核追究，并削除官籍为民。 
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the Minister of the People's Republic of China's Book Ministry, Mai Shuting and Cui Shangso, said: Sango presided over the country for four years, most of the ministers were bribed, and relatives were given important positions. They were able to deceive the emperor and exploit the people. The People's Republic of China's Book Ministry and the People's Republic of China's Book Ministry should be strictly investigated and investigated, and their official records should be deleted.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：要束木以桑哥妻党为湖广行省平章，至是坐不法者数十事，诏械致湖广省诛之。
现代文：要束木凭着是桑哥的妻党担任湖广行省平章政事，至此因几十件非法的事而犯罪，皇上诏令以刑具解送到湖广行省处死。
English: Zou Sok Moku, who served as the governor of Pingzhang Province in Hukanghang Province on the pretext of being Sango's wife, was sentenced to death by imperial edict after being convicted of dozens of illegal offenses.

古文：辛亥，以太原及杭州饥，免今岁田租。
现代文：十五日，因为太原及杭州发生饥馑，免除今年的田租。
English: On the 15th, because of the famine in Taiyuan and Hangzhou, this year's field rent was exempted.

古文：增河东道宣慰使一员。
现代文：增设河东道宣慰使一人。
English: An additional person has been appointed to the position of the river god's consolation envoy.

古文：征太子赞善刘因；因前为太子赞善，以继母病去，至是母亡，以集贤学士征之，不起。
现代文：征召太子赞善刘因。刘因原先担任太子赞善，因为继母患病而离去，到这时继母去世，便以集贤学士的名义征召他，但刘因不动身起程。
English: Summoning Prince Zanzan Liu Ying. Liu Ying, who had previously served as Prince Zanzan, left because his stepmother was ill. When his stepmother died, he was summoned in the name of Shixian Bao, but Liu did not move.

古文：罢脱脱、塔剌海、忽辛等理算僧官钱谷。
现代文：取消脱脱、塔剌海、忽辛等清理、核算僧官钱粮。
English: The cancellation of detachment, the clean-up of pagodas and temples, and the accounting of monastic money and grain.

古文：罢江南六提举司岁输木绵。
现代文：停止江南六处提举司每年交纳木棉。
English: Stop the six districts in the south of the Yangtze River from donating wood and cotton every year.

古文：巩昌旧惟总帅府，桑哥特升为宣慰司，以其弟答麻剌答思为使，桑哥败，惧诛自杀，至是复总帅府。
现代文：巩昌原来只有总帅府，桑哥特地将其升格为宣慰司，任命他的弟弟答麻剌答思为宣慰司使，桑哥事败之后，他害怕被处死而自杀，至此恢复为总帅府。
English: Originally, Gongchang only had the General Headquarters, but Sango specially promoted him to the Consolation Division, and appointed his brother, Dammajin, as the Consolation Division's envoy. After Sango's defeat, he was afraid of being executed and committed suicide, so he was restored to the General Headquarters.

古文：增置异珍、御带二库，秩从五品，并设提点、使、副各一员。
现代文：增设异珍、御带二库，秩禄为从五品，并设置提点、使、副使各一名。
English: In addition, there will be two collections of rare and imperial belts, and the rank will be from the fifth grade, and there will be a point, an envoy, and a deputy envoy.

古文：减中外冗官三十七员。
现代文：裁减朝内外的冗官三十七人。
English: Thirty-seven redundant officials inside and outside the DPRK will be reduced.

古文：宫城中建蒲萄酒室及女工室。
现代文：宫城中建立葡萄酒室及女红室。
English: A wine room and a redhead room were built in Miyagi.

古文：诏以桑哥罪恶系狱按问，诛其党要束木、八吉等。
现代文：诏令：因为桑哥的罪恶将其拘禁入狱审问，将他的党羽要束木、八吉等处死。
English: Imperial edict: Because of Sango's crime, he will be detained in prison for interrogation, and his followers, including Sokoku and Hakichi, will be executed.

古文：发兵塞晃火儿月连地河渠，修城堡，令蒙古戍兵屯田川中以御寇。
现代文：派兵堵塞晃火儿月连地方的河渠，修筑城堡，令蒙古守军在河道中屯田以防御贼寇。
English: He sent troops to block the canals in the fire-swept areas of Yue Lian and built a castle, forcing the Mongolian defenders to build fortifications in the middle of the river to fend off the bandits.

古文：癸丑，罢尚书省事皆入中书，改尚书右丞相、右詹事完泽为中书右丞相，平章政事麦术丁、不忽木并中书平章政事，尚书右丞何荣祖中书右丞，尚书左丞马绍中书左丞，参知政事贺胜、高翥并参知中书政事；征东行尚书省左丞相、驸马高丽国王王睶为征东行中书省左丞相。
现代文：十七日，罢除的尚书省事务均划入中书省。改尚书右丞相、右詹事完泽为中书右丞相。平章政事麦术丁、不忽木均任中书平章政事，尚书右丞何荣祖任中书右丞，尚书左丞马绍任中书左丞，尚书省参知政事贺胜、高翥均任中书省参知政事；征东行尚书省左丞相、驸马高丽国王王贝春任征东行中书省左丞相。
English: On the 17th, the affairs of Shangshu Province, which had been dismissed, were all transferred to Zhongshu Province. Shangshu Right Vice-Minister and U Zhanji Kanze were changed to Zhongshu Right Vice-Minister. Pingzhang Political Secretary Mai Juting and Fu Kuo Mu were appointed as Zhongshu Pingzhang Political Secretary, Shangshu Right Vice-Minister He Rongzu was appointed as Zhongshu Right Vice-Minister, Shangshu Left Vice-Minister Marshal was appointed as Zhongshu Left Vice-Minister, Shangshu Vice-Minister He Sheng was appointed as Zhongshu Vice-Minister, Gao

古文：罢大都烧钞库，仍旧制，各路昏钞令行省官监烧。
现代文：撤销大都的烧钞库，仍行旧制，各路印制模糊的昏钞令行省的官员监督烧毁。
English: Withdrawal of most of the capital's banknote burning vaults, the old system is still in place, and officials in the provinces are ordered to supervise the burning of fuzzy banknotes printed in various ways.

古文：增置户部司计、工部司程，正七品。
现代文：增设户部的司计、工部的司程，秩禄为正七品。
English: The position of the comptroller of the household department and the position of the secretary of the engineering department were added, and their ranks were raised to the rank of Shichihon.

古文：甲寅，太阴犯牛。
现代文：十八日，太阴星干犯牛宿天区。
English: On the 18th day of the lunar month, the yin and yang planets collided in the celestial sphere.

古文：赈上都、桓州、榆林、昌平、武平、宽河、宣德、西站、女直等站饥民。
现代文：赈济上都、桓州、榆林、昌平、武平、宽河、宣德、西站、女真等驿站的饥民。
English: Provide relief to the hungry people in Shangdu, Hanzhou, Yulin, Changping, Wuping, Kuanhe, Xuande, West Station, Nianzhen and other stations.

古文：乙卯，以政事悉委中书，仍遣使布告中外。
现代文：十九日，把政务全部委托给中书省，并派遣使臣向朝内外宣告。
English: On the 19th, he entrusted all government affairs to the Ministry of Chinese Literature, and dispatched envoys to announce it to the imperial court and beyond.

古文：诏禁失陷钱粮者托故诣京师。
现代文：诏令禁止失陷钱粮的人托故前来京师。
English: The imperial edict forbade those who lost money and grain to come to Beijing to beg.

古文：丁巳，建白塔二，各高一丈一尺，以居咒师朵四的性吉等七人。
现代文：二十一日，建造白塔二座，各高一丈一尺，以便咒禁师朵四的性吉等七人居住。
English: On the twenty-first day, two white pagodas were built, each one foot high, so that seven people, including the exorcist, lived there.

古文：何荣祖以公规、治民、御盗、理财等十事缉为一书，名曰《至元新格》，命刻版颁行，使百司遵守。
现代文：何荣祖把公规、治民、御盗、理财等十方面的事编成一书，名为《至元新格》，皇帝命刻印出版颁行，令百官遵守。
English: He Rongzu compiled ten aspects of public regulations, governing the people, stealing, and financial management into a book called "Zhi Yuan Xin Ge," which was engraved and published by order of the emperor, and was obeyed by hundreds of officials.

古文：桑哥尝以刘秉忠无子，收其田土，其妻窦氏言秉忠尝鞠犹子兰章为嗣，敕以地百顷还之。
现代文：桑哥曾经因为刘秉忠没有儿子，收回他的田地。刘秉忠的妻子说，刘秉忠曾经抚养侄子刘兰章作为嗣子，皇帝敕命还给他一百顷土地。
English: Sango once took back his fields because Liu Bingzhong did not have a son. Liu Bingzhong's wife said that Liu Bingzhong once raised his nephew Liu Lanzhang as his heir, and the emperor gave him a hundred hectares of land.

古文：己未，以门答占复为御史大夫，行御史台事。
现代文：二十三日，重新任命门答占担任御史大夫，执掌御史台事务。
English: On the 23rd, Mentaochan was reappointed to the post of Imperial Historian, in charge of the Imperial Historian's Office.

古文：高丽国王王睶乞以其子謜为世子，诏立謜为高丽王世子，授特进上柱国，赐银印。
现代文：高丽国王王贝春请求以他的儿子王讠原为世子，诏命立王讠原为高丽王世子，授予特进上柱国，赐予银印。
English: King Baechun of Goryeo requested that his son, King Sejong, be made the heir to the throne, and issued an imperial edict that King Sejong be made the heir to the throne of Goryeo, be granted special access to Shangzhuang, and be given a silver seal.

古文：六月丁卯朔，禁蒙古人往回回地为商贾者。
现代文：六月初一，禁止把蒙古人运往回回人地方进行买卖。
English: On the first day of June, it was forbidden to transport Mongolians to other places to buy and sell.

古文：湖广饥，敕以剌里海牙米七万石赈之。
现代文：湖广发生饥馑，敕令用剌里海牙的米七万石赈济饥民。
English: Famine occurred in Hukang, and the emperor ordered that 70,000 koku of rice from Bali and The Hague be used to feed the starving people.

古文：辛巳，洞蛮镇远立黄平府。
现代文：十五日，在洞蛮的镇远地方建立黄平府。
English: On the 15th, Huangping Prefecture was established in a remote area of Dongmanzhen.

古文：乙酉，以云南诸路行省参知政事兀难为梁王傅。
现代文：十九日，任命云南诸路行省参知政事兀难为梁王太傅。
English: On the 19th, Liang Wang Taifu was appointed as the political advisor to the governor of ZhuLu Xing Province of Yunnan.

古文：洗国王洞主、市备什王弟同来朝。
现代文：洗国王的洞主、市备什王的弟弟共同前来朝见皇帝。
English: The owner of the cave where the king was baptized and the younger brother of the king of Shibeshi came together to see the emperor.

古文：益江淮行院兵二万击郴州、桂阳、宝庆、武冈四路盗贼。
现代文：增派江淮行枢密院的士兵二万人攻击郴州、桂阳、宝庆、武冈四路的盗贼。
English: He sent an additional 20,000 soldiers from the Jianghuai line to the Privy Council to attack the thieves on the four roads of Zhangzhou, Guiyang, Baoqing and Wugang.

古文：以汴梁逃人男女配偶成家，给农具耕种。
现代文：把汴梁逃亡的男女人口相配成家，供给其农具进行耕种。
English: to match the male and female population who fled Qilian into families and provide them with agricultural tools for farming.

古文：丙戌，敕： 屯田官以三岁为满，互于各屯内调用。 
现代文：二十日，敕令： 屯田官以三年作为任期届满，在各屯内互相调用。 
English: On the 20th day of the month, the imperial edict was issued: the term of the officials of the townships would expire after three years, and they would be called to each other in the townships.

古文：宣谕江淮民恃总统琏真加力不输租者，依例征输。
现代文：下令江淮地区仗恃总统杨琏真加的势力不交纳田租的百姓，依惯例征收，交纳田租。
English: President Yang Jiechi of the Jianghuai region ordered the people not to pay the land rent, but to pay the land rent according to the usual practice.

古文：辛卯，太阴犯毕。
现代文：二十五日，太阴星干犯毕宿天区。
English: On the 22nd, the great Yin star committed a crime and was banished to the heavenly region.

古文：癸巳，以涟、海二州隶山东宣慰司。
现代文：二十七日，把涟州、海州二州隶属于山东宣慰司。
English: On the 27th, the two states of Ganzhou and Haizhou were subordinated to the Shandong Xuanliao Division.

古文：秋七月丙申朔，云南省参政怯剌言： 建都地多产金，可置冶，令旁近民炼之以输官。 
现代文：秋季，七月初一，云南行省参政怯剌上奏说 ：建都地方大多出产金子，可以设置冶炼场，命附近的百姓冶炼黄金交纳给官府。 
English: In the autumn, on the first day of July, Yunnan's provincial government sent a letter to the government, saying: Most of the places where the capital is built produce gold, and smelters can be set up. The people living nearby can smelt gold and pay it to the government.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：己亥，太白犯井。
现代文：初四，太白金星干犯井宿天区。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, it's too white for Venus to commit a crime.

古文：诏谕尚州等处诸洞蛮夷。
现代文：下诏招降尚州等地各溪洞的蛮夷。
English: The following edict calls for the expulsion of the barbarians from all the caves in Shangzhou and other places.

古文：庚子，徙江西行枢密院治赣州。
现代文：初五，把江西行枢密院治所迁移到赣州。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the Jiangxi-bound Privy Council was relocated to Zhangzhou.

古文：乙巳，大都饥，出米二十五万四千八百石赈之。
现代文：十一日，大都发生饥馑，发放二十五万四千八百石米赈济饥民。
English: On the 11th, famine occurred in most areas, and 254,800 koku of rice was distributed to feed the hungry.

古文：戊申，扬州路学正李淦上言： 人皆知桑哥用群小之罪，而不知尚书右丞叶李妄举桑哥之罪，宜斩叶李以谢天下。 
现代文：十四日，扬州路学正李淦上奏说： 人人都知道桑哥重用群小的罪过，却不知道尚书省右丞叶李胡乱举荐桑哥的罪过，应当把叶李处斩以谢天下。 
English: On the 14th, Yangzhou Lu Xuezheng Li Rong said: Everyone knows that Sango reuses a group of small sins, but they do not know that Shangshuo Yu Rong Rong recommended Sango's sin, and they should be grateful to the world.

古文：有旨驿召淦诣京师，淦至而李卒，除淦江阴路教授，以旌直言。
现代文：颁发圣旨用驿传征召李淦前来京师，李淦抵达时而叶李却去世了，升迁李淦为江阴路教授，以表彰他能直言。
English: He issued a sacred edict to summon Li Jie to Beijing to teach, but Li Jie died when Li Jie arrived. Li Jie was promoted to professor of Jiangyin Road in recognition of his outspokenness.

古文：给还行台监察御史周祚妻子。
现代文：发还行御史台监察御史周祚的妻儿。
English: The wife and child of the chief inspector of the Imperial Historical Records Office, the inspector of the Imperial Historical Records Office, Zhou Ye.

古文：祚尝劾行尚书省官，桑哥诬以他罪，流祚于憨答孙，妻子家赀入官，及是还之。
现代文：周祚曾经弹劾行尚书省的官员，桑哥用别的罪状诬陷他，把周祚流放到憨答孙，妻儿和家产都被没收，到这时还给了他。
English: Zhou Rong had once impeached an official of the Ministry of Education and Culture, but Sango framed him with other charges and exiled Zhou Rong to Shandong Province. His wife, children and family property were all confiscated and then returned to him.

古文：禁屠宰马牛。
现代文：禁止屠宰马牛。
English: The slaughter of horse cattle is prohibited.

古文：敕： 江南重囚，依旧制闻奏处决。 
现代文：敕令 ：江南重罪的囚犯，应当按照旧制奏闻朝廷再行处决。 
English: Imperial edict: Prisoners of serious crimes in the south of the Yangtze River should be re-executed according to the old system of reporting to the imperial court.

古文：罢江南诸省买银提举司。
现代文：撤销江南诸行省买银提举司。
English: to revoke the authority of Jiangnan Province to buy silver and raise money.

古文：遣官招集宋时涅手军可充兵者八万三千六百人，以蒙古、汉人、宋人参为万户、千户、百户领之。
现代文：派遣官员招聚宋朝的可以充任士兵的涅手军，共得八万三千六百人，参用蒙古人、汉人、宋人担任万户、千户、百户，以统领他们。
English: Officials were dispatched to recruit the Neandertals of the Song Dynasty who could serve as soldiers, a total of 83,600 people were obtained, and Mongolians, Han Chinese, and Song people were used as 10,000 households, 1,000 households, and 100 households to lead them.

古文：辽阳诸路连岁荒，加以军旅，民苦饥，发米二万石赈之。
现代文：辽阳各路连年荒歉，再加上军旅之劳，百姓苦于饥饿，发放二万石米赈济饥民。
English: The roads of Liaoyang have been deserted for years, coupled with the hardships of military travel, the people suffer from hunger, and 20,000 koku of rice are distributed to feed the hungry.

古文：己酉，召交趾王弟陈益稷、右丞陈岩、郑鼎子那怀并诣京师。
现代文：十五日，征召安南国王的弟弟陈益稷、右丞陈岩、郑鼎的儿子那怀一起前来京师。
English: On the 15th, King Annan's younger brother Chen Yixuan, his right-hand man Chen Yan, and Zheng Ding's son Nahai were summoned to come to Beijing together.

古文：癸丑，赐师壁洞安抚司、师壁镇抚所、师罗千户所印，安抚司从三品，余皆五品。
现代文：十九日，赐给师壁洞安抚司、师壁镇抚所、师罗千户所印信，安抚司的秩禄为从三品，其余均为五品。
English: On the 19th, letters were issued to Shibakidong Pacification Division, Shibakizhen Pacification Division, and Shiloh Thousand Household Division. The rank of the pacification division was three products, and the rest were five products.

古文：丁巳，桑哥伏诛。
现代文：二十三日，桑哥被处死。
English: On the 23rd, Sango was executed.

古文：募民耕江南旷土，户不过五顷，官授之券，俾为永业，三年后征租。
现代文：招募百姓耕种江南的荒地，每户不超过五顷，由官府授给券契，使之成为永业田，三年以后征收田租。
English: People were recruited to cultivate the wasteland in the south of the Yangtze River, with no more than five hectares per household. The government issued a voucher to make it a permanent field, and the field rent was levied after three years.

古文：遣憨散总兵讨平江南盗贼。
现代文：派遣憨散统率军队讨平江南的盗贼。
English: He dispatched the army led by Xuan San to crush the thieves in the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：己未，降江阴路为州，宜兴府为县，并隶常州路。
现代文：二十五日，把江阴路降格为州，宜兴府降格为县，均属于常州路管辖。
English: On the 25th, Jiangyin Road was downgraded to a prefecture, and Yixing Prefecture was downgraded to a county, both of which are under the jurisdiction of Changzhou Road.

古文：移扬子县治新城，分华亭之上海为县，松江府隶行省。
现代文：把扬子县的治所迁到新城，把华亭从上海分出为县，松江府隶属于行省管辖。
English: The administrative center of Yangzi County will be moved to Xincheng, Huating will be separated from Shanghai as a county, and Songjiang Prefecture will be under the jurisdiction of Xincheng Province.

古文：罢淘金提举司、江淮人匠提举司凡五，以其事并隶有司。
现代文：撤销淘金提举司、江淮人匠提举司共五处，把它们的事务均划归地方官府管辖。
English: A total of five departments, including the Department of Taojin Promotion and the Department of Jianghuai Craftsmanship Promotion, were abolished, and their affairs were all placed under the jurisdiction of local governments.

古文：雨坏都城，发兵二万人筑之。
现代文：大雨冲坏京师城垣，派兵二万人修筑。
English: Heavy rain breaks down the walls of the city of Kyoto, and 20,000 soldiers are sent to rebuild them.

古文：增置各卫经历一员，俾汉人为之。
现代文：增设各卫的经历一人，命汉人担任。
English: Add one person with experience in each branch of the armed forces, and appoint a Han Chinese person to the post.

古文：壬戌，弛畿内秋耕禁。
现代文：二十八日，放宽在京畿以内不得秋耕的禁令。
English: On the 28th, the ban on autumn farming in Gyeonggi Province was relaxed.

古文：八月乙丑朔，平阳地震，坏民庐舍万有八百二十六区，压死者百五十人。
现代文：八月初一，平阳发生地震，毁坏百姓的房屋一万零八百二十六座，压死一百五十人。
English: On the first day of August, an earthquake hit Pingyang, destroying 10,826 houses and killing 150 people.

古文：丙寅，太白犯舆鬼。
现代文：初二，太白金星干犯鬼宿天区。
English: In the second year of junior high school, it is too white for Venus to commit a crime.

古文：己巳，置中书省检校二员，秩正七品，俾考核户、工部文案疏缓者。
现代文：初五，设置中书省检校二人，秩禄为正七品，令其考核户部、工部疏忽拖延的公文案卷。
English: In the fifth year of junior high school, two students were set up for inspection by the Ministry of Education and Culture, and their rank was raised to the seventh grade, which made the assessment of the household department and the work department a negligent delay of official documents.

古文：罢江西等处行泉府司、大都甲匠总管府、广州人匠提举司、广德路录事司，罢泉州至杭州海中水站十五所。
现代文：撤销江西等地行泉府司、大都的甲匠总管府、广州的人匠提举司、广德路录事司。撤销泉州到杭州的海中水驿站十五所。
English: In Jiangxi and other places, the Quan prefectural office, the Jiaotong general administration office in most cities, the Guangzhou people and craftsmen promotion office, and the Guangde road record office were revoked. Quanzhou and Hangzhou's fifteen mid-sea sluice stations were revoked.

古文：抚州路饥，免去岁未输田租四千五百石。
现代文：抚州路发生饥馑，免除去年尚未交纳的田租四千五百石。
English: Famine occurred in Fuzhou Road, exempted from last year's unpaid farm rent of four thousand five hundred koku.

古文：马八儿国遣使进花牛二、水牛土彪各一。
现代文：马八儿国派遣使臣进贡花牛二头、水牛老虎各一头。
English: Mabara dispatched envoys to bring two cows and one buffalo tiger as tribute.

古文：丙子，太阴犯牵牛。
现代文：十二日，太阴星干犯牵牛星。
English: On the twelfth day, the Yin star was the culprit of the Cowherd star.

古文：大名之清河、南乐诸县霖雨害稼，免田租万六千六百六十九石。
现代文：大名路的清河、南乐各县连降大雨伤害庄稼，免除田租一万六千六百六十九石。
English: Qinghe and Nanle counties along Daming Road, where heavy rain fell in succession and damaged crops, were exempted from land rent of 16,669 koku.

古文：己卯，诏谕思州提省溪洞官杨都要招安叛蛮，悔过来归者，与免本罪。
现代文：十五日，诏令思州提省溪的洞官杨都要招降叛变的蛮部，凡悔过前来归顺的，免于追究其罪行。
English: On the fifteenth day, the imperial edict ordered Yang, the cave official of Sizhou's Tisheng Creek, to invite the mutineers to surrender. Anyone who repented and came to surrender would be exempt from investigation of their crimes.

古文：罢云南四州，立东川府。
现代文：撤销云南四个州，设立东川路。
English: The four prefectures of Yunnan were abolished, and Dongchuan Road was established.

古文：癸未，岁星犯轩辕大星。
现代文：十九日，木星干犯轩辕座大星。
English: On the 19th, Jupiter became the great star of Capricorn.

古文：乙酉，遣麻速忽、阿散乘传诣云南，捕黑虎。
现代文：二十一日，派遣麻速忽、阿散乘驿传前往云南，捕捉黑虎。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, they sent Masaho and Asan to Yunnan to capture the black tiger.

古文：戊子，太白犯轩辕大星，并犯岁星。
现代文：二十二日，太白金星干犯轩辕座大星，并干犯木星。
English: On the 22nd, too-white Venus offends the great star of Virgo, and also offends Jupiter.

古文：咀喃藩邦遣马不剌罕丁进金书、宝塔及黑狮子、番布、药物。
现代文：咀喃番国派遣马不剌罕丁进献金书、宝塔，以及黑狮子、番布、药物。
English: Tsui-Nuan-Banggu dispatched Ma-Fu-Han-Ding to bring donation books, pagodas, as well as black lions, bandages, and medicines.

古文：婺州水，免田租四万一千六百五十石。
现代文：婺州发生水灾，免除田租四万一千六百五十石。
English: A flood occurred in Zhangzhou, exempting 41,650 koku of farmland rent.

古文：辛卯，命工部造飞车五辆。
现代文：二十五日，命令工部制造五辆飞车。
English: On the 25th, the Ministry of Industry and Trade was ordered to manufacture five flying cars.

古文：癸巳，太阴掩荧惑。
现代文：二十七日，太阴星掩蔽荧惑星。
English: On the 27th, the eclipsing star occulted the fluorescent planet.

古文：九月辛丑，以平章政事麦术丁商议中书省事，复以咱喜鲁丁平章政事代之。
现代文：九月初七，命令平章政事麦术丁参议中书省事务，又命平章政事咱喜鲁丁代替他。
English: On the 7th day of the 9th month of the year, he ordered Pingzhang's political secretary Mei Zhuting to take part in the consultation on the affairs of Shuzhou Province, and ordered Pingzhang's political secretary Zhe Xi Luding to replace him.

古文：乙巳，景州、河间等县霖雨害稼，免田租五万六千五百九十五石。
现代文：十一日，景州、河间等县连降大雨伤害庄稼，减免田租五万六千五百九十五石。
English: On the 11th, heavy rain fell in succession in Jingzhou, Hema and other counties, damaging crops, and land rent was reduced and exempted by 56,595 koku.

古文：丙午，立行宣政院，治杭州。
现代文：十二日，设立行宣政院、治所在杭州。
English: On the 12th, the Xuan Xuan Political Bureau was established, with its headquarters in Hangzhou.

古文：己酉，设安西、延安、凤翔三路屯田总管府。
现代文：十五日，设置安西、延安、凤翔三路屯田总管府。
English: On the 15th, the Tonden General Administration Office of Anxi, Yan'an and Fengxiang was set up.

古文：庚戌，太白犯右执法。
现代文：十六日，太白金星干犯右执法星。
English: On the 16th, the too-white Venus criminal right law enforcement star.

古文：襄阳南漳县民李氏妻黄一产三男。
现代文：襄阳南漳县李姓百姓之妻黄氏一胎产下三个儿子。
English: Ms. Huang, the wife of a commoner surnamed Li in Nanlu County, Yangyang, gave birth to three sons.

古文：辛亥，安南王陈日烜遣使上表贡方物，且谢不朝之罪。
现代文：十七日，安南国王陈日火亘派遣使臣奉上表章进贡当地土产，而且为他未能前来朝见之事请罪。
English: On the 17th, the king of Annan, Chen Riguo, sent an envoy to pay tribute to the local local products with the above seal, and pleaded guilty for his failure to come to the court.

古文：徽州绩溪县贼未平，免二十七年田租。
现代文：徽州绩溪县的贼寇尚未平定，免征至元二十七年的田租。
English: The banditry in Jixi County, Huizhou, has not yet been quelled, and the farmland rent exempted to the 27th year of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：禁宣德府田猎。
现代文：禁止宣德府狩猎。
English: Hunting in Xuandefu is prohibited.

古文：壬子，酒醋课不兼隶茶盐运司，仍隶各府县。
现代文：十八日，酒醋的税务不由榷茶盐运司兼管，仍旧隶属于各府县。
English: On the 18th, the taxation of wine and vinegar is not managed by the Department of Tea and Salt Transportation, but still belongs to each prefecture.

古文：立乞里吉思至外剌等六驿。
现代文：设立从乞里吉思到外剌等地的六处驿站。
English: Six post stations will be set up from Kyirigis to Wailea and other places.

古文：命海船副万户杨祥、合迷、张文虎并为都元帅，将兵征琉求。
现代文：命海船副万户杨祥、合迷、张文虎均任都元帅，率军征伐琉求。
English: Yang Xiang, He Fan, and Zhang Wenhu, vice-commanders of the naval vessels, were appointed as marshals and led the army to conquer Ryukyu.

古文：置左右两万户府，官属皆从祥选辟。
现代文：设置左、右两个万户府，府中的官属均由杨祥挑选、征聘。
English: Set up the left and right two million households prefectures, the officials in the prefecture are all selected and recruited by Yang Xiang.

古文：既又用福建吴志斗言 祥不可信，宜先招谕之 ，乃以祥为宣抚使，佩虎符，阮监兵部员外郎，志斗礼部员外郎，并银符，赍诏往琉求。
现代文：后来又采用福建吴志斗的话： 杨祥不可信赖，应当先招降琉求。 便任命杨祥为宣抚使，佩戴虎符，阮监任兵部员外郎，吴志斗任礼部员外郎，均佩戴银符，携带诏书前往琉求。
English: Later, the words of Wu Zhidou of Fujian were used: Yang Xiang cannot be trusted, he should first invite the surrender of the Ryukyus. Yang Xiang was appointed as the envoy, wearing a tiger badge, Ruan Guan as the foreign minister of the military department, and Wu Zhidou as the foreign minister of the ceremonial department, both wearing silver badges and carrying the imperial rescript to the Ryukyus.

古文：明年，杨祥、阮监果不能达琉求而还，志斗死于行，时人疑为祥所杀，诏福建行省按问，会赦不治。
现代文：第二年，杨祥、阮监果然不能抵达琉求而返回，吴志斗死于途中，当时人怀疑他是被杨祥所杀害，皇上下诏由福建行省审察勘问，适逢大赦没有进行处置。
English: The following year, Yang Xiang and Ruan Jian were indeed unable to reach Liuqiu and returned, and Wu Zhidou died on the way. At that time, people suspected that he was killed by Yang Xiang. The imperial edict was examined and investigated by Fujian Province, and there was no amnesty.

古文：乙卯，以岁荒，免平滦屯田二十七年田租三万六千石有奇。
现代文：二十一日，因为年岁荒歉，减免平滦屯田至元二十七年的田租三万六千多石。
English: On the twenty-first day of the year, as an apology for years of barrenness, the farm rent of 36,000 koku was reduced and waived from Pingyao Tonden to 27 years ago.

古文：丙辰，荧惑犯左执法。
现代文：二十二日，荧惑星干犯左执法星。
English: On the 22nd, the fluorescent planet interfered with the left enforcement star.

古文：戊午，太白犯荧惑。
现代文：二十四日，太白金星干犯荧惑星。
English: On the 24th, the too-white Venus will collide with the fluorescent planet.

古文：徙四川行枢密院治成都。
现代文：把四川行枢密院的治所迁到成都。
English: The administrative office of the Sichuan-bound Privy Council was moved to Chengdu.

古文：以八忽答儿、秃鲁欢、唆不阑、脱儿赤四翼蒙古兵复隶蒙古都万户府。
现代文：把八忽答儿、秃鲁欢、唆不阑、脱儿赤四支蒙古军队重新隶属于蒙古都万户府。
English: The four Mongolian armies of Hakuhoda, Baldurukhana, Sofukyo, and Tsoerakha were re-attached to the Mongolian capital, Bandung.

古文：庚申，以铁里为礼部尚书，佩虎符，阿老瓦丁、不剌并为侍郎，遣使俱蓝。
现代文：二十六日，任命铁里为礼部尚书，佩戴虎符，阿老瓦丁、不剌均任礼部侍郎，派遣他们出使俱蓝国。
English: On the 26th, he appointed Tie Li as the minister of etiquette, wearing the tiger emblem, and appointed Lao Wading and Bu Xun as the attendants of the ministry of etiquette, and sent them to the Blue Country.

古文：辛酉，岁星犯少民。
现代文：二十七日，木星干犯少民星。
English: On the 27th, Jupiter interfered with a minor star.

古文：免大都今岁田租。
现代文：免征大都今年的田租。
English: Most of this year's rice field rent is exempted.

古文：保定、河间、平滦三路大水，被灾者全免，收成者半之。
现代文：保定、河间、平滦三个路发生大水，受灾者全部免交田租，有所收成的免交一半。
English: Three major floods occurred in Baoding, Hema and Pingyao. All the victims were exempted from paying field rent, and half of the harvest was exempted.

古文：以别铁木儿、亦列失金为礼部侍郎，使马八儿国；陕西脱西为礼部侍郎，佩金符，使于马都。
现代文：任命别铁木儿、亦列失金担任礼部侍郎出使马八儿国；任命陕西的脱西为礼部侍郎，佩戴金符，出使于马都。
English: Appointed Beidimuer, also listed as lost money, as a ceremonial attendant to send to Mabara country; appointed Dussi of Shaanxi as a ceremonial attendant, wearing a gold badge, and sent to Madu.

古文：尚衣局职无缝衣。
现代文：尚衣局织造无缝的衣服。
English: Shang clothing bureau weaves seamless clothes.

古文：冬十月乙丑朔，赐薛彻温都儿等九驿贫民三月粮。
现代文：冬季，十月初一，赐给薛彻温都儿等九处驿站的贫民三个月口粮。
English: In the winter, on the first day of October, three months of rations were given to poor people in nine stations such as Xue Che Windu'er.

古文：己巳，修太庙在真定倾坏者。
现代文：初五，修建在真定倒塌、毁坏的太庙。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the original temple that was built in Jinding collapsed and was destroyed.

古文：壬申，以前缅中行尚书省平章政事雪雪的斤为中书省平章政事。
现代文：初八，任命前缅中行尚书省平章政事雪雪的斤为中书省平章政事。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Pingzhang Zhengji of the former Burma Central Government was appointed as the Pingzhang Zhengji of the Central Government.

古文：癸酉，享太庙。
现代文：初九，向太庙敬献祭品。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, offerings were made to the Imperial Temple.

古文：遣使发仓，赈大同屯田兵及教化的所部军士之饥者。
现代文：派遣使者开仓放粮，赈济大同屯田的士兵，以及教化的部属中饥困的士兵。
English: He sent emissaries to open storehouses and distribute grain, to help the soldiers of Datong and Tongtian, as well as the starving soldiers among his educated subordinates.

古文：江淮行省言： 盐课不足，由私鬻者多，乞付兵五千巡捕。 
现代文：江淮行省上奏说： 盐税不足，因为贩卖私盐的多，请求交付五千名士兵进行巡捕。 
English: An envoy from Jianghuaihang Province said, "The salt tax is insufficient, because there is a lot of illegal salt being sold. Therefore, we request that 5,000 soldiers be sent to patrol."

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：塔剌海、张忽辛、崔同知并坐理算钱谷受赃论诛。
现代文：塔剌海、张忽辛、崔同知都因为清算钱粮时接受贿赂而犯罪，被判处死刑。
English: Tabuhai, Zhang Huxin and Cui Tongzhi were all sentenced to death for the crime of accepting bribes in the process of liquidating cash grain.

古文：辛巳，召高丽国王王睶、公主忽都鲁揭里迷失诣阙。
现代文：十七日，征召高丽国王王贝春、公主忽都鲁揭里迷失前来朝廷。
English: On the 17th, the king of Goryeo, King Baechun, and the princess, Khutuluk, were summoned to the imperial court.

古文：癸未，罗斛国王遣使上表，以金书字，仍贡黄金、象齿、丹顶鹤、五色鹦鹉、翠毛、犀角、笃缛、龙脑等物。
现代文：十九日，罗斛国王派遣使臣奉上表章，表章用金粉书写文字，并进贡黄金、象牙、丹顶鹤、五色鹦鹉、翠毛、犀角、笃缛、龙脑等物。
English: On the 19th, King Luo Rong sent envoys to present the medals. The medals were written with gold powder, and the tribute included gold, ivory, red-crowned cranes, five-colored parrots, emeralds, rhinoceros horns, egrets, dragon brains and other items.

古文：高丽国饥，给以米一十万斛。
现代文：高丽国发生饥馑，给予二十万斛米。
English: A famine occurred in Goryeo, and 200,000 bushels of rice were given.

古文：罢各处行枢密院，事入行省。
现代文：撤销各地的行枢密院，有关事务并入行中书省管辖。
English: The Privy Council was abolished in all regions, and related affairs were brought under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Education.

古文：割八番洞蛮自四川隶湖广行省。
现代文：把八番洞蛮从四川划属于湖广行省。
English: The 8th cave was transferred from Sichuan to the province of Hubei.

古文：丙戌，太阴犯轩辕大星并御女。
现代文：二十二日，太阴星干犯轩辕座大星及御女星。
English: On the 22nd, the Great Star of Virgo and the Great Star of Capricorn became the victims of the Great Yin Star.

古文：丁亥，洞蛮烂土立定云府，改陈蒙洞为陈蒙州，合江为合江州。
现代文：二十三日，在洞蛮的烂土地方设立定云府，把陈蒙洞改为陈蒙州，合江改为合江州。
English: On the 23rd, Dingyunfu was set up in a place with a lot of dirt, Chen Mengdong was changed to Chen Mengzhou, and Hejiang was changed to Hejiangzhou.

古文：严山后酒禁。
现代文：严格山后的酒禁。
English: There is a strict ban on drinking alcohol in the mountains.

古文：中书省臣言： 洞蛮请岁进马五十匹、雨毡五十被、刀五十握，丹砂、雌雄黄等物，率二岁一上。 
现代文：中书省大臣上奏说 ：洞蛮请求每年进贡五十匹马、雨毡五十床、刀五十把；丹砂、雌黄、雄黄等物，大体上两年进贡一次。 
English: The Minister of the Ministry of the People's Republic of China said in his report: "Dong Man requested that the annual tribute of fifty horses, fifty yakitori, and fifty swords be paid; and that the annual tribute of red sand, female yellow, male yellow, etc. be paid once every two years.

古文：有诏从其所为。
现代文：皇帝下诏按照他们所说的办。
English: The emperor gave the order to do as they said.

古文：己丑，太阴犯太微东垣上相。
现代文：二十五日，太阴星干犯太微东垣的上相星。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the too-dim star caused the too-dim east wall's upper phase star.

古文：敕没入琏真加、沙不丁、乌马儿妻，并遣诣京师。
现代文：敕令把杨琏真加、沙不丁、乌马儿等人之妻充公入官，并遣送他们前来京师。
English: The imperial edict confiscated the wives of Yang Shuzhenka, Shabudin, Umar and others and sent them to Beijing.

古文：召行省转运司官赴京师，集议治赋法。
现代文：征召各行省转运司的官员前来京师，集中议论整顿赋税的办法。
English: Officials from the Provincial Transportation Departments were summoned to Beijing to discuss ways to rectify taxation.

古文：辛卯，诸王出伯部曲饥，给米赈之。
现代文：二十七日，诸侯王出伯的部属饥饿乏食，给予米粮赈济饥民。
English: On the 27th, the vassals of the Prince of Princes and Nobles were starving and short of food, so they gave rice to the starving people.

古文：癸巳，武平路饥，免今岁田租。
现代文：二十九日，武平路发生饥馑，免征今年的田租。
English: On the 29th, a famine occurred in Wuping Road, and this year's field rent was exempted.

古文：以武平路总管张立道为礼部尚书，使交趾。
现代文：任命武平路总管张立道为礼部尚书，出使交趾。
English: Zhang Lido, the general manager of Wuping Road, was appointed as the ceremonial secretary.

古文：免卫辉种仙茅户徭役。
现代文：免去卫辉种植仙茅民户的徭役。
English: To relieve Weihui from the role of supporting the private households that grow immortelle.

古文：从辽阳行省言，以乃颜、合丹相继叛，诏给蒙古人内附者及开元、南京、水达达等三万人牛畜、田器。
现代文：按照辽宁行省的建议，因为乃颜、合丹先后相继叛乱，下诏赐给归附朝廷的蒙古人以及开元、南京、水达达等三万人牛畜、农具等。
English: In accordance with the recommendation of Liaoning Province, because Naiyan and Hetan had successively rebelled, the following edict was issued to the Mongolians who had joined the imperial court, as well as 30,000 cattle, agricultural tools, etc. in Kaiyuan, Nanjing, and Shuidada.

古文：诏严益都、般阳、泰安、宁海、东平、济宁畋猎之禁，犯者没其家赀之半。
现代文：诏令严禁益都、般阳、泰安、宁海、东平、济宁进行狩猎，违犯禁令者没收其家产的一半。
English: The edict strictly prohibited hunting in Banyang, Tai'an, Ninghai, Dongping and Jining, and those who violated the ban would have half of their family property confiscated.

古文：十一月丙申，以甘肃旷土赐昔宝赤合散等，俾耕之。
现代文：十一月初三，把甘肃的荒地赐给昔宝赤合散等人，令他们耕种。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, the wasteland of Gansu was given to the former Bao Chiaxuan and others to cultivate.

古文：壬寅，遣左吉奉使新合剌的音。
现代文：初九，派遣左吉奉命出使新合剌的音。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, Sakichi was dispatched with the order to send out the sound of a new gong.

古文：甲辰，太白犯房。
现代文：十一日，太白金星干犯房宿天区。
English: On the 11th day, the too-white Venus committed the crime of lodging in the sky.

古文：减太府监冗员三十一人，罢器备、行内藏二库。
现代文：裁减太府监的冗员三十一人。撤销器备、行内藏二库。
English: The redundancy of 31 superintendents was reduced. The revocation device was prepared, and two libraries were stored in the line.

古文：诏： 回回以答纳珠充献及求售者还之，留其估以济贫者。 
现代文：诏令 ：用答纳珠献上并寻求出售给朝廷的回回族人，令他们回去，留下东西发卖以救济贫穷的人。 
English: Imperial edict: The Hui Hui tribe, who had offered and sought to sell their amulets to the imperial court, were ordered to go back and leave something to be sold to help the poor.

古文：塔义儿、塔带民饥，发米赈之。
现代文：塔叉儿、塔带的百姓饥饿乏食，发放米粮以赈济饥民。
English: The people in and around the pagodas were hungry and short of food, and rice was distributed to feed the hungry.

古文：给按答儿民户四月粮，罢海道运粮镇抚司。
现代文：供给按答儿的民户四个月口粮。撤销海道运粮镇抚司。
English: Four months of food rations will be provided to households with children who answered the questionnaire correctly. The directorate for transporting food by sea will be abolished.

古文：丙午，荧惑犯亢。
现代文：十三日，荧惑星干犯亢宿天区。
English: On the 13th, the fluorescent planet entered the Pleiades.

古文：丁未，太阴犯毕。
现代文：十四日，太阴星干犯毕宿天区。
English: On the 14th, the Great Yin Star committed a crime and was banished to the Heaven Realm.

古文：耽罗遣使贡东纻百匹。
现代文：耽罗派遣使臣进贡东麻一百匹。
English: Thang Lo dispatched an envoy to pay tribute to Dong Ma with a hundred cows.

古文：太史院灵台上修祀事三昼夜。
现代文：在太史院灵台上做祭祀的事三昼夜。
English: For three days and nights, religious services were held on the platform of Taishi-in.

古文：甲寅，太阴犯岁星。
现代文：二十一日，太阴星干犯木星。
English: On the twenty-first day, the planet of the great yin offended Jupiter.

古文：郴州路达鲁花赤曲列有罪论诛。
现代文：郴州路镇守官曲列犯罪，被判处死刑。
English: Zhangzhou Road Town Officer Committed Multiple Crimes, Sentenced to Death.

古文：复置会同馆，禁沮扰益都淘金。
现代文：重新设置会同馆。禁止阻碍、干扰益都淘金。
English: Re-establish the association with the museum. Prohibit obstruction, interference and profit-seeking.

古文：乙卯，新添葛蛮宋安抚率洞官阿汾、青贵来贡方物。
现代文：二十二日，新添葛蛮的宋安抚率领洞官阿汾、青贵来进贡地方特产。
English: On the 22nd, Song Anfu, the new Ge Man, led Dongguan Ayao and Qinggui to pay tribute to local special products.

古文：监察御史言： 沙不丁、纳速剌丁灭里、乌里儿、王巨济、琏真加、沙的、教化的皆桑哥党与，受赃肆虐，使江淮之民愁怨载路，今或系狱，或释之，此臣下所未能喻。 
现代文：监察御史上奏说： 沙不丁、纳速剌丁灭里、乌马儿、王巨济、琏真加、沙的、教化的都是桑哥的党羽，接受贿赂，横行不法，使得江淮的百姓忧愁怨恨载道，现在有的关进监狱，有的却释放了，这是臣下们所不能理解的。 
English: The inspector of the imperial history report said: Shabudin, Nasoqin, Dingzhuangli, Umar, Wang Juzi, Shizhenga, Shat, and Xueqing are all the party members of Sanguo, accepting bribes, rampant lawlessness, making the people of Jianghuai sad and resentful. Some are now in prison, while others have been released, which is incomprehensible to the subjects.

古文：帝曰： 桑哥已诛，纳速剌丁灭里在狱，唯沙不丁朕姑释之耳。 
现代文：皇帝说： 桑哥已经被处死，纳速剌丁灭里关进了监狱，只有沙不丁我暂时放了他。 
English: The emperor said, "Sango has already been put to death, Naso Dingzhi has been put in prison, and I have only temporarily released Sabudin.

古文：武平、平滦诸州饥，弛猎禁，其孕字之时勿捕。
现代文：武平、平滦各州发生饥馑，放宽狩猎的禁令，但野兽怀孕产崽时不得捕捉。
English: Famine occurred in Wuping and Pingyao provinces, and the ban on hunting was relaxed. However, wild animals may not be hunted when they are pregnant or giving birth.

古文：谕中书议增中外官吏俸。
现代文：谕令中书省商讨增加朝内外官员薪俸的事。
English: The decree ordered the Ministry of Education and Culture to discuss the matter of increasing the salaries of officials inside and outside the DPRK.

古文：戊午，金齿国遣阿腮入觐。
现代文：二十五日，金齿国派遣阿腮入朝觐见。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the Golden Tooth Kingdom sent a grand maiden to the Imperial Court.

古文：庚申，荧惑犯氐。
现代文：二十七日，荧惑星干犯氐宿天区。
English: On the 27th, the fluorescent planet entered the Pleiades.

古文：辛酉，升宣德龙门镇为望云县，割隶云州，置望云银冶。
现代文：二十八日，把宣德的龙门镇升格为望云县，划属于云州管辖，设置望云冶银场。
English: On the 28th, Longmen Town of Xuande was upgraded to Wangyun County, under the jurisdiction of Yunnan Province, and the Wangyun Metallurgical Silver Mine was established.

古文：十二月乙丑，复都水监，秩从三品。
现代文：十二月初二，恢复都水监，秩禄为从三品。
English: On the second day of December, the Metropolitan Waterworks Supervisor was reinstated, and his rank was raised to the third grade.

古文：遣官迓云南鸭池所遣使。
现代文：派遣官员迎接云南鸭池所派来的使臣。
English: Officials were dispatched to welcome the envoys sent by Yunnan Duck Pond.

古文：辽阳洪宽女直部民饥，借高丽粟赈给之。
现代文：辽阳洪宽的女真部百姓发生饥馑，向高丽借粮食赈济他们。
English: When famine struck the people of Jizhenbu in Liaoyang Hongguan, they borrowed grain from Goryeo to feed them.

古文：籍探马赤八忽带儿等六万户成丁者为兵。
现代文：登记探马赤军八忽带儿等部属六万户的成年男丁为兵。
English: Sixty thousand households of adult males belonging to the Red Army's eight guerrilla groups were registered as soldiers.

古文：丁卯，高丽国鸭绿江西十九驿，经乃颜反，掠其马畜，给以牛各四十。
现代文：初四，高丽国的鸭绿江以西十九处驿站，经历乃颜的叛乱，抢走了他们的马匹，赐给他们各四十头牛。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, nineteen post stations west of the Yalu River in Korea experienced Nae Yan's rebellion, robbed their horses and gave them forty cows each.

古文：大都饥，下其价粜米二十万石赈之。
现代文：大都发生饥馑，降低价格出售二十万石米赈济饥民。
English: Famine occurred in most areas, and 200,000 koku of rice was sold at a reduced price to feed the hungry.

古文：己巳，诏罢遣官招集畏兀氏。
现代文：初六，下诏停止派遣官员招聚畏兀儿人。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the new year, the following edict was issued to stop sending officials to recruit children.

古文：改辰、沅、靖州转运司为湖北湖南道转运司，立葛蛮军民安抚司。
现代文：把辰州、沅州、靖州转运司改为湖北湖南道转运司。设立葛蛮军民安抚司。
English: Rename the Chenzhou, Zhangzhou, and Jingzhou Transportation Departments to the Hubei Hunan Province Transportation Departments, and establish the Qibao Military and Civilian Pacification Department.

古文：宣政院臣言： 宋全太后、瀛国公母子以为僧、尼，有地三百六十顷，乞如例免征其租。 
现代文：宣政院大臣上奏说： 宋朝的全太后，瀛国公母子，作为僧尼，拥有三百六十顷土地，请依照惯例免于征收其田租。 
English: The Minister of the Xuan Zheng Academy said in his report: As a nun and the mother and son of the Empress Dowager of the Song Dynasty, who owned 360 hectares of land, please be exempted from the collection of land rent in accordance with the usual practice.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：辛未，以铁灭为兵部尚书，佩虎符，明思昔答失为兵部侍郎，佩金符，使于罗孛卜儿。御史台臣言： 钩考钱谷，自中统初至今余三十年，更阿合马、桑哥当国，设法已极，而其余党公取贿赂，民不堪命，不如罢之。 
现代文：初八，任命铁灭为兵部尚书，佩戴虎符，明思昔答失为兵部侍郎，佩戴金符，出使到罗孛卜儿，御史台大臣上奏说： 考察核实钱粮，从中统初年到现在已经三十多年，更兼阿合马、桑哥当权，设意乱法已到极点，而他们的余党公开收受贿赂，百姓无法忍受这样的折腾，不如撤销这件事。 
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Tetsukatsu was appointed as the secretary of the military department, wearing the tiger badge, and Minshi was appointed as the waiter of the military department, wearing the gold badge, and sent to Lop Nur. The Minister of the History Department reported: It has been more than 30 years since the first year of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, and it has been more than 30 years since the first year of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China. Moreover, Ahamma and Sango are in power. The law of confusion has reached the extreme, and their remaining party openly accepted bribes. The people cannot bear such

古文：有旨： 议拟以闻。 
现代文：皇帝有旨说： 拟出具体建议上奏。 
English: The emperor said, "Let's work out a concrete proposal and present it to the emperor."

古文：壬申，立河南江北行中书省，治汴梁。
现代文：初九，设立河南江北行中书省，治所在汴梁。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the Henan Jiangbei Zhongshuo Province was established, with the capital at Qilian.

古文：撒里蛮、老寿并为大司徒，领太常寺。
现代文：撒里蛮、老寿均任大司徒，掌管太常寺。
English: Sariman and Laoju were both appointed as Daisetsu, in charge of Taijo-ji Temple.

古文：中书省臣言： 江南在宋时，差徭为名七十有余，归附后一切未征，今分隶诸王城邑，岁赐之物，仰给京师，又中外官吏俸少，似宜量添，可令江南依宋时诸名征赋尽输之。 
现代文：中书省大臣上奏说 ：江南在宋朝的时候，差役的名目有七十多种，归附于本朝之后全都没有征派，如今分属于诸侯王的城邑，每年赐给他们的物品都仰赖于京师供给；又，朝内外的官吏职俸很少，似应酌量增加，可令江南地区依照宋朝时的各项名义征收赋税，全部交纳上来。 
English: The Minister of the People's Republic of China's Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy said in his report, "During the Song Dynasty, there were more than 70 titles of officials in the south of the Yangtze River. None of them were conscripted after they were annexed to this dynasty. Nowadays, they belong to the cities and towns of the princes. The goods given to them every year depend on the supply of the Beijing division. In addition, the salaries of officials inside and outside the dynasty are very small. It may be necessary to increase the discretionary amount, so that the south of the Yangtze River region can collect taxes in accordance with the names of the Song Dynasty and pay them in full

古文：何荣祖言： 宜召各省官任钱谷者诣京师，集议科取之法以闻。 
现代文：何荣祖上奏说： 应当征召各行省掌管钱粮的官员前来京师，集中议论分项收取赋税的办法上奏皇上。 
English: He Rongzu said: It is necessary to recruit officials in charge of money and grain from all provinces to come to Beijing to discuss and report to the emperor on the method of collecting taxes.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：甲戌，诏： 罢钩考钱谷，应昔年逋负钱谷文卷，聚置一室，非朕命而视之者有罪。 
现代文：十一日，诏令： 罢除考察核实钱粮之事，所有往年拖欠钱粮的文书案卷，全部集中放在一间房屋中，没有我的命令而去看的治罪。 
English: On the 11th day of the month, he issued the following edict: cancel the inspection and verification of the money grain, and all the documents and files of the previous years' arrears of the money grain should be concentrated in one house. It is a crime to visit without my order.

古文：仍遣使布告中外。
现代文：并派遣使臣向朝内外宣告。
English: He also dispatched envoys to announce the victory to the imperial court and beyond.

古文：庚辰，太阴犯御女。
现代文：十七日，太阴星干犯御女星。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, the great yin star committed a crime against the great female star.

古文：江北州郡割隶河南江北行中书省，改江淮行省为江浙等处行中书省，治杭州。
现代文：把江北的州郡划属于河南江北行中书省管辖。把江淮行省改为江浙等处行中书省，治所在杭州。
English: The counties and prefectures in the northern part of the Yangtze River should be placed under the jurisdiction of the Hebei Province of the People's Republic of China, and the Hebei Province of the People's Republic of China should be changed to the Hebei Province of the People's Republic of China, with its capital in Hangzhou.

古文：赈阔阔出饥民米。
现代文：以粮米赈济阔阔出的饥民。
English: The starving people who have been able to feed themselves with grain and rice.

古文：阇里带言： 乃颜余党窜女直之地，臣与月儿鲁议，乞益兵千五百人，可平之。 
现代文：里带上奏说 ：乃颜的余党流窜到女真地区，臣与月儿鲁商议，请增派一千五百名士兵，可以平定他们。 
English: In the letter, he wrote: Naoyan's remaining party members have fled to the Yeojin area, and the minister and Yue'erlu are discussing, please send an additional fifteen hundred soldiers so that they can be pacified.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：癸未，太阴犯东垣上相。广济署大昌等屯水，免田租万九千五百石。
现代文：二十日，太阴星干犯太微东垣的上相星，广济署的大昌等地屯田发生水灾，减免田租一万九千五百石。
English: On the 20th day of the month, floods occurred in the tundra areas of Shangxo Star in Donggaki, which is too far away from the city, and Dachang in Guangxi, resulting in the reduction and exemption of farm rents by 19,500 koku.

古文：平滦路及丰赡、济民二署饥，出米万五千石赈之。
现代文：平滦路以及丰赡、济民二署发生饥馑，发放一万五千石米赈济饥民。
English: Famine occurred in Pingyao Road and Fengyi and Jimin 2nd Departments, and 15,000 koku of rice was distributed to feed the hungry.

古文：别都儿丁前以桑哥专恣，不肯仕，命仍为中书左丞。
现代文：别都儿丁先前因为桑哥专横恣肆不肯入仕做官，命令他仍旧担任中书左丞。
English: Beidou Reding had previously ordered Sango to remain in his post as the Second Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC) because Sango had arbitrarily refused to become an official.

古文：丙戌，八番洞官吴金叔等以所部二百五十寨民二万有奇内附，诣阙贡方物。
现代文：二十三日，八番的洞官吴金叔等率领所部二百五十个村寨的二万余名百姓归附朝廷，前来朝廷贡奉地方特产。
English: On the 23rd, the eighth-ranking Dongguan official Wu Jinxu and others led more than 20,000 people from 250 villages and hamlets in Shobu to join the imperial court, and came to pay tribute to the imperial court with local special products.

古文：戊子，诏释天下囚非杀人抵罪者。
现代文：二十五日，下诏释放全国不属于杀人抵罪的囚犯。
English: On the 25th, a decree was issued to release prisoners across the country who were not guilty of homicide.

古文：己丑，荧惑犯房。
现代文：二十六日，荧惑星干犯房宿天区。
English: On the 26th, a fluorescent planet intruded into the sky.

古文：庚寅，荧惑犯钩钤。
现代文：二十七日，荧惑星干犯钩钤星。
English: On the 27th, the fluorescent planet interfered with the hook star.

古文：升营田提举司为规运提点所，正四品。
现代文：把营田提举司升格为规运提点所，秩禄为正四品。
English: The Yingtan Lifting Station was upgraded to a regular lifting station, and the rank was raised to the fourth grade.

古文：辛卯，浚运粮坝河，筑堤防。
现代文：二十八日，疏浚运粮的癱河，修筑堤防。
English: On the 28th, dredging of the Wei River, used for transporting grain, and construction of a dike began.

古文：授吃剌思八斡节儿为帝师，统领诸国僧尼释教事。
现代文：授任吃剌思八斡节儿为帝师，统领各地僧尼佛教的事务。
English: conferred the title of "Imperial Teacher" to Emperor Taizong, and presided over the affairs of Buddhist monks and nuns in various regions.

古文：赐亲王、公主、驸马金、银、钞、币如岁例。
现代文：按照每年的惯例赐给亲王、公主、驸马黄金、白银、钱钞、绢帛。
English: According to the annual practice, gold, silver, banknotes and ingots are given to princes, princesses and horses.

古文：令僧罗藏等递作佛事坐静于圣寿万安、涿州寺等所，凡五十度。
现代文：命令僧人罗藏等顺次在圣寿万安寺、涿州等地的寺庙入定做佛事，一共五十次。
English: He ordered the monk Rozang and others to enter the temples of Shenshou Wanyan Temple, Zhangzhou and other places to do Buddhist activities, a total of fifty times.

古文：遣真人张志仙持香诣东北海岳、济渎致祷。
现代文：派遣道教真人张志仙手持香烛到东北方的海岳、济水进行祝祷。
English: Zhang Zhisen, a true believer of Taoism, was dispatched to Mount Haidake and Jishui in the northeast with an incense candle to offer prayers.

古文：户部上天下户数，内郡百九十九万九千四百四十四，江淮、四川一千一百四十三万八百七十八，口五千九百八十四万八千九百六十四，游食者四十二万九千一百一十八。
现代文：户部呈上天下户口的数目，内地的州郡为一百九十九万九千四百四十四户，江淮、四川为一千一百四十三万零八百七十八户，人口五千九百八十四万八千九百六十四人，游食者四十二万九千一百一十八人。
English: The number of household registrations submitted to the Ministry of Households was 19,999,444 households in mainland provinces and counties, and 11,430,878 households in Jianghuai and Sichuan provinces, with a population of 59,849,964 and 4,291,118 nomads.

古文：司农司上诸路所设学校二万一千三百余，垦地千九百八十三顷有奇，植桑枣诸树二千二百五十二万七千七百余株，义粮九万九千九百六十石。
现代文：司农司报上各路所设的学校为二万一千三百余所，开垦田地一千九百八十三顷多，种植桑枣等各种树木二千二百五十二万七千七百余株，储备义粮九万九千九百六十石。
English: The Secretary for Agriculture and Rural Affairs reported that there were more than 21,300 schools set up on various roads, more than 1,983 hectares of fields were cultivated, more than 22,527,770 trees of various kinds such as mulberry jujube were planted, and 99,960 koku of donated grain was stored.

古文：宣政院上天下寺宇四万二千三百一十八区，僧、尼二十一万三千一百四十八人。
现代文：宣政院报上天下寺庙总共为四万二千三百一十八座，僧、尼总数为二十一万三千一百四十八人。
English: According to the report of the Xuan Zheng Academy, the total number of temples in the world is 42,318, and the total number of monks and nuns is 213,148.

古文：断死刑五十五人。
现代文：全年判处死刑的囚犯五十五人。
English: Fifty-five prisoners were sentenced to death during the year.

