古文：黄帝问曰：余闻刺法言有余泻之，不足补之。
现代文：黄帝问道：我听刺法说，病属有余的用泻法，不足的用补法。
English: Huang Di asked: I have heard that the thorn method is the best, the laxative method is the best, and the supplement method is the best.

古文：何谓有余，何谓不足？
现代文：但怎样是有余，怎样是不足呢？
English: But what is a surplus and what is a deficit?

古文：岐伯对曰：有余有五，不足亦有五。帝欲何问？
现代文：岐伯回答说：病属有余的有五种，不足的也有五种，你要问的是哪一种呢？
English: Gibo replied, "There are five kinds of diseases that are in excess and five kinds that are deficient. Which one are you asking about?"

古文：帝曰：愿尽闻之。
现代文：黄帝说：我希望你能全部讲给我听。
English: Huang Di said, "I want to listen to your comprehensive and detailed explanation."

古文：岐伯曰：神有余有不足，气有余有不足，血有余有不足，形有余有不足，志有余有不足。
现代文：岐伯说：神有有余、有不足；气有有余、有不足；血有有余、有不足；形有有余、有不足；志有有余、有不足。
English: Qibo said: God has surplus and deficiency; breath has surplus and deficiency; blood has surplus and deficiency; form has surplus and deficiency; aspiration has surplus and deficiency.

古文：凡此十者，其气不等也。
现代文：这些共计十种，它们的气各不相同。
English: All these are ten in number, and their auras are different.

古文：帝曰：人有精气、津液，四肢、九窍、五脏十六部，三百六十五节，乃生百病。
现代文：黄帝说：人有精气、津液，四肢、九窍、五脏十六部，三百六十五节，而发生百病。
English: The Yellow Emperor said: A person has essence, fluid, limbs, nine acupoints, sixteen internal organs, three hundred and sixty-five joints, and a hundred diseases occur.

古文：百病之生，皆有虚实。
现代文：但百病的发生，都有虚实的不同。
English: However, the occurrence of all diseases is different from each other.

古文：今夫子乃言有余有五，不足亦有五，何以生之乎？
现代文：现在先生说病属有余的有五种，病属不足的也有五种，是怎样发生的呢？
English: Now, the teacher said that there are five kinds of plants that have too many pathogens and five kinds that have too few pathogens. How did this happen?

古文：岐伯曰：皆生于五脏也。
现代文：岐伯说：都是生于五脏。
English: Qi Bo said, "Everyone is born with five internal organs.

古文：夫心藏神，肺藏气，肝藏血，脾藏肉，肾藏志，而此成形。
现代文：心藏神，肺藏气，肝藏血，脾藏肉，肾藏志，由此组成了人的形体。
English: The heart contains God, the lungs contain qi, the liver contains blood, the spleen contains flesh, and the kidneys contain chi, thus constituting the human form.

古文：志意通，内连骨髓，而成身形五脏。
现代文：必须保持志意通达，内与骨髓联系，始能使身形与五脏成为一个整体。
English: It is necessary to keep one's mind open, connect the inside with the bone marrow, and be able to make the body shape and the five organs become a whole.

古文：五脏之道，皆出于经隧，以行血气，血气不和，百病乃变化而生，是故守经隧焉。
现代文：五脏相互联系的通道是经脉，通过经脉以运行血气，血气不和，就会变化而发生百病，所以诊断和治疗均以经脉为依据。
English: The channel through which the five internal organs are interconnected is the meridians. Blood and gas circulate through the meridians. If the blood and gas do not match, changes will occur and various diseases will occur. Therefore, diagnosis and treatment are based on the meridians.

古文：帝曰：神有余不足何如？
现代文：黄帝说：神有余、不足会是什么症状呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "What are the symptoms of having too much and not enough energy?"

古文：岐伯曰：神有余则笑不休，神不足则悲。
现代文：岐伯说：神有余的则嬉笑不止，神不足的则悲哀。
English: Qibo said: If you have more than one god, you will laugh endlessly, but if you don't have enough gods, you will be sad.

古文：血气未并，五脏安定，邪客于形，洒淅起于毫毛，未入于经络也，故命曰神之微。
现代文：若病邪尚未与气血相并，五脏安定之时，此时邪气仅客于形体之肤表，病人觉得寒栗起于汗毛孔，尚未侵入经络，所以叫做 神之微 。
English: If the disease is not yet in line with qi and blood, when the five internal organs are stable, then the evil spirit is only on the skin surface of the body, the patient feels chills from the sweat pores, has not yet invaded the meridians, so it is called God's microcosm.

古文：帝曰：补泻奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：怎样进行补泻呢？
English: Huangdi said: How to make up for diarrhea?

古文：岐伯曰：神有余则泻其小络之血，出血勿之深斥，无中其大经，神气乃平。
现代文：岐伯说：神有余的应刺其体表的小络使之出血，但不要向里深推其针，不要刺中大经，神气自会平复。
English: Qibo said: The gods should prick the small network on the surface of the body to make it bleed, but do not push the needle deep into the body, do not prick the middle and large meridian, and the godliness will be restored.

古文：神不足者，视其虚络，按而致之，刺而利之，无出其血，无泄其气，以通其经，神气乃平。
现代文：神不足的其络必虚，应在其虚络处，先用手按摩，使气血实于虚络，再以针刺之，以疏利其气血，但不要使之出血，也不要使气外泄，只疏通其经，神气就可以平复。
English: If the qi is deficient, the qi will be deficient. The qi should first be massaged by hand to make the qi and blood solid in the deficient area. Then, it should be pricked with a needle to dilute the qi and blood, but do not make it bleed, and do not cause the qi to leak out. Just dilute the qi and blood, and the godliness can be restored.

古文：帝曰：刺微奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：怎样刺微风呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "How can you stab the breeze?"

古文：岐伯曰：按摩勿释，着针勿斥，移气于不足，神气乃得复。
现代文：岐伯说：按摩的时间要久一些，针刺时不要向里深推，使气移于不足之处，神气就可以平复。
English: Qi Bo said: the massage time should be longer, do not push deep into the needles when needling, so that the air is moved to the deficiencies, and the spirit can be restored.

古文：帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝说：好。
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Very good."

古文：气有余不足，奈何？
现代文：气有余、不足会出现什么症状呢？
English: What are the symptoms of excess and deficiency of qi?

古文：岐伯曰：气有余则喘欬上气，不足则息利少气。
现代文：岐伯说：气有余的则喘咳气上逆，气不足则呼吸虽然通利，但气息短少。
English: Qi Bo said: If you are out of breath, wheezing and coughing will be the opposite, and if you are short of breath, although breathing is beneficial, your breath will be short.

古文：血气未并，五脏安定，皮肤微病，命曰白气微泄。
现代文：若邪气尚未与气血相并，五脏安定之时，有邪气侵袭，则邪气仅客于皮肤，而发生皮肤微病，使肺气微泄，病情尚轻，所以叫做 白气微泄 。
English: If the evil gas has not yet been combined with the qi and blood, and the five internal organs are stable, and the evil gas invades, the evil gas will only be attracted to the skin, and the skin micro-disease will occur, causing the lung gas to leak slightly. The condition is still mild, so it is called white gas leakage.

古文：岐伯曰：气有余则泻其经隧，无伤其经，无出其血，无泄其气；不足则补其经隧，无出其气。
现代文：岐伯说：气有余的应当泻其经脉，但不要伤其经脉，不要使之出血，不要使其气泄。气不足的则应补其经脉，不要使其出气。
English: Qi Bo said, "If you have too much qi, you should relax your meridians, but don't injure your meridians, don't make them bleed, and don't deflate them. If you don't have enough qi, you should replenish your meridians, but don't deflate them."

古文：岐伯曰：按摩勿释，出针视之，曰我将深之，适人必革，精气自伏，邪气散乱，无所休息，气泄腠理，真气乃相得。
现代文：岐伯说：先用按摩，时间要久一些，然后拿出针来给病人看，并说： 我要深刺 ，但在刺时还要恰中病处即止，这样可使其精气深注于内，邪气散乱于外而无所滞留，邪气从腠理外泄，则真气通达，恢复正常。
English: Qi Bo said, "First, use massage, it will take some time, then take out the needle to show the patient, and say: I want to pierce deeply, but when I pierce, I want to stop at the exact location of the disease, so that its essence can be deeply infused inside, the evil spirit can be scattered outside and can not stay anywhere, the evil spirit can leak out from the body, then the true spirit can reach and return to normal.

古文：帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝说：好。
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Very good."

古文：血有余不足，奈何？
现代文：血有余、不足会出现什么症状呢？
English: What are the symptoms of having too much or not enough blood?

古文：岐伯曰：血有余则怒，不足则恐。
现代文：岐伯说：血有余的则发怒，血不足的则恐惧。
English: Qi Bo said, "If there is too much blood, there will be anger, and if there is not enough blood, there will be fear."

古文：血气未并，五脏安定，孙络水溢，则经有留血。
现代文：若邪气尚未与气血相并，五脏安定之时，有邪气侵袭，则邪气仅客于孙络，孙络盛满外溢，则流于经脉，经脉就会有血液留滞。
English: If the evil qi is not yet equal to the qi and blood, when the five internal organs are stable, if there is an evil qi invasion, then the evil qi is only in the sunroof, the sunroof is full and overflowing, then it flows in the meridians, and the meridians will have blood retention.

古文：岐伯曰：血有余则泻其盛经，出其血；不足则视其虚经，内针其脉中，久留而视，脉大疾出其针，无令血泄。
现代文：岐伯说：血有余的应泄其充盛的经脉，以出其血。血不足的应察其经脉之虚者补之，刺中其经脉后，久留其针而观察之，待气至而脉转大时，即迅速出针，但不要使其出血。
English: Qi Bo said: "If there is too much blood, you should release its abundant meridians to release its blood. If there is insufficient blood, you should check the deficiency of its meridians to make up for it. After stabbing its meridians, keep its needle and observe it for a long time. When the breath comes and the pulse turns large, quickly release the needle, but do not make it bleed.

古文：帝曰：刺留血奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：刺经脉血液留滞应当怎样呢？
English: Huang Di said: What should be done about the blood stagnation of the stabbing vein?

古文：岐伯曰：视其血络，刺出其血，无令恶血得入于经，以成其疾。
现代文：岐伯说：诊察血络有血液留滞的，刺出其血，使恶血不得入于经脉而形成其他疾病。
English: Qi Bo said: If there is blood stagnation in the bloodstream, prick out the blood, so that the bad blood can not enter the veins and form other diseases.

古文：帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝说：好。
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Very good."

古文：形有余不足奈何？
现代文：形有余、不足会出现什么症状呢？
English: What are the symptoms of being overweight or underweight?

古文：岐伯曰：形有余则腹胀，泾溲不利，不足则四肢不用。
现代文：岐伯说：形有余的则腹胀满，大小便不利。形不足的则四肢不能运动。
English: Qi Bo said: If you are overweight, your abdomen will be bloated and full, and your bowel movements will be unfavorable. If you are underweight, your limbs will not be able to move.

古文：血气未并，五脏安定，肌肉蠕动，命曰微风。
现代文：若邪气尚未与气血相并，五脏安定之时，有邪气侵袭，则邪气仅客于肌肉，使肌肉有蠕动的感觉，这叫做 微风 。
English: If the evil spirit has not yet merged with the qi and blood, and the five internal organs are stable when the evil spirit invades, the evil spirit will only attack the muscles, causing the muscles to have a creeping feeling, which is called breeze.

古文：岐伯曰：形有余则泻其阳经，不足则补其阳络。
现代文：岐伯说：形有余应当泻其阳经，使邪气从内外泻；形不足的应当补其阳络。
English: Qibo said, "If the shape is too short, the yang should be drained, and the evil should be drained from inside and outside; if the shape is too short, the yang should be replenished."

古文：岐伯曰：取分肉间，无中其经，无伤其络，卫气得复，邪气乃索。
现代文：岐伯说：应当刺其分肉之间，不要刺中经脉，也不要伤其络脉，使卫气得以恢复，则邪气就可以消散。
English: Qibo said: It should be pricked between its meat, do not prick the middle meridians, and do not injure its vas deferens, so that the virtue can be restored, and the evil can be dissipated.

古文：帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝说：好。
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Very good."

古文：志有余不足，奈何？
现代文：志有余、不足会出现什么症状呢？
English: What are the symptoms of having too much ambition and not enough?

古文：岐伯曰：志有余则腹胀飧泄，不足则厥。
现代文：岐伯说：志有余的则腹胀飧泄，志不足的则手足厥冷。
English: Qi Bo said: If you have too much ambition, you will have bloated belly, and if you lack ambition, your hands and feet will be cold.

古文：血气未并，五脏安定，骨节有动。
现代文：若邪气尚未与气血相并，五脏安定之时，有邪气侵袭，则邪气仅客于骨，使骨节间如有物震动的感觉。
English: If the evil spirit has not yet merged with the qi and blood, and when the five internal organs are stable, the evil spirit invades, then the evil spirit is only in the bones, making the bones feel like something is vibrating between the bones.

古文：岐伯曰：志有余则泻然筋血者，不足则补其复溜。
现代文：岐伯说：志有余的应泻然谷穴以出其血，志不足的则应补复溜穴。
English: Qi Bo said: Those who have more ambition should drain the valley hole to bring out their blood, and those who lack ambition should make up the loophole.

古文：帝曰：刺未并奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：当邪气尚未与气血相并，邪气仅客于骨时，应当怎样刺呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "When the evil spirit has not yet merged with the qi and blood, and the evil spirit is only in the bones, how should it be stabbed?

古文：岐伯曰：即取之，无中其经，邪所乃能立虚。
现代文：岐伯说：应当在骨节有鼓动处立即刺治，但不要中其经脉，邪气便会自然去了。
English: Qi Bo said: It is necessary to immediately stab the place where there is agitation in the bone joint, but do not hit its meridians, and the evil spirit will naturally go away.

古文：帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝说：好。
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Very good."

古文：余已闻虚实之形，不知其何以生？
现代文：关于虚实的症状我已经知道了，但还不了解它是怎样发生的。
English: I already knew about the false symptoms, but I didn't understand how it happened.

古文：岐伯曰：气血以并，阴阳相倾，气乱于卫，血逆于经，血气离居，一实一虚。
现代文：岐伯说：虚实的发生，是由于邪气与气血相并，阴阳间失去协调而有所偏倾，致气乱于卫，血逆于经，血气各离其所，便形成一虚一实的现象。
English: Qi Bo said: The occurrence of false reality is due to the fact that evil qi and qi and blood are in the same phase, and the yin and yang are out of coordination and are biased, causing qi to be confused with Wei, blood to be contrary to Jing, and blood and gas to be separated from each other, thus forming a false and real phenomenon.

古文：血并于阴，气并于阳，故为惊狂。
现代文：如血并于阴，气并于阳，则发生 惊狂 。
English: If the blood is in the yin and the qi is in the yang, there will be a frenzy.

古文：血并于阳，气并于阴，乃为炅中。
现代文：血并于阳，气并于阴，则发生 炅中 。
English: If the blood is in the yang and the qi is in the yin, it will occur in the middle of the palate.

古文：血并于上，气并于下，心烦惋善怒。
现代文：血并于上，气并于下，则发生心中烦闷而易怒。
English: If the blood is on the top and the qi on the bottom, the mind will be irritable and angry.

古文：血并于下，气并于上，乱而喜忘。
现代文：血并于下，气并于上，则发生精神散乱而善忘。
English: Blood and down, qi and up, the spirit is scattered and forgetful.

古文：帝曰：血并于阴，气并于阳，如是血气离居，何者为实？何者为虚？
现代文：黄帝说：血并于阴，气并于阳，像这样血气各离其所的病证，怎样是实，怎样是虚呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "Blood and yin, qi and yang, blood and qi are separated from each other like this. What is the true and what is the false?

古文：岐伯曰：血气者，喜温而恶寒，寒则泣不能流，温则消而去之。
现代文：岐伯说：血和气都是喜温暖而恶寒冷的，因为寒冷则气血滞涩而流行不畅，温暖则可使滞涩的气血消散流行。
English: Qi Bo said: Blood and qi are both warm and cold, because cold is qi and blood stagnation and poor circulation, while warmth can make stagnant qi and blood dissipate and circulate.

古文：是故气之所并为血虚，血之所并为气虚。
现代文：所以气所并之处则血少而为血虚，血所并之处则气少而气虚。
English: Therefore, the place where the qi is combined will have less blood and be deficient in blood, and the place where the blood is combined will have less qi and be deficient in qi.

古文：帝曰：人之所有者血与气耳，今夫子乃言血并为虚，气并为虚，是无实乎？
现代文：黄帝说：人身的重要物质是血和气。现在先生说血并的是虚，气并的也是虚，难道没有实吗？
English: The Yellow Emperor said: The important substances of the human body are blood and qi. Now you say that blood and qi are false, and qi and qi are also false. Isn't that true?

古文：岐伯曰：有者为实，无者为虚。
现代文：岐伯说：多余的就是实，缺乏的就是虚。
English: Qibo said: "What is superfluous is real, what is lacking is imaginary."

古文：故气并则无血，血并则无气。
现代文：所以气并之处则血少；血并之处则气少。
English: Therefore, there is less blood where the qi is unified; there is less qi where the blood is unified.

古文：今血气相失，故为虚焉。
现代文：血和气各离其所不能相济，故而为虚。
English: Blood and breath cannot coexist without each other, so they are false.

古文：络之与孙脉俱输于经，血与气并则为实焉。
现代文：络脉和孙络的气血均输注于经脉，如果血与气相并，就成为实了。
English: The qi and blood of the vas deferens and Sun Luo are both infused into the meridians. If the blood and the qi are united, it will become the real thing.

古文：血之与气并走于上，则为大厥，厥则暴死。气复反则生，不反则死。
现代文：血与气并循经上逆，就会发生 大厥 病，使人突然昏厥如同暴死，这种病如果气血能得以及时下行，则可以生，如果气血壅塞于上而不能下行，就要死亡。
English: If the blood and qi flow in the opposite direction of the meridian, it will cause a major illness, causing a person to suddenly faint as if it were a violent death. If the blood and qi are able to flow downwards in a timely manner, the illness can be born. If the blood and qi are blocked from flowing upwards, the illness will cause the person to die.

古文：帝曰：实者何道从来？
现代文：黄帝说：实是通过什么渠道来的？
English: Huang Di said, "What channel did it actually come from?"

古文：虚者何道从去？
现代文：虚又是通过什么渠道去的？
English: And through what channels did the virtual go?

古文：虚实之要，愿闻其故。
现代文：形成虚和实的道理，希望能听你讲一讲。
English: I would like to hear from you about the reason for the formation of the false and the true.

古文：岐伯曰：夫阴与阳皆有俞会，阳注于阴，阴满之外，阴阳匀平，以充其形，九候若一，命曰平人。
现代文：岐伯说：阴经和阳经都有俞有会，以互相沟通。如阳经的气血灌注于阴经，阴经的气血盛满则充溢于外，能这样运行不已，保持阴阳平调，形体得到充足的气血滋养，九候的脉象也表现一致，这就是正常的人。
English: Qibo said: Yin and yang have a special relationship to communicate with each other. If the qi and blood of the yang are poured into the yin, and the qi and blood of the yang are full and overflowing, it can run continuously, keep the yin and yang in balance, the body is nourished by sufficient qi and blood, and the pulse of the nine seasons is also consistent. This is a normal person.

古文：夫邪之生也，或生于阴，或生于阳。
现代文：凡邪气伤人而发生病变，或发生于阴的内脏，或发生于阳的体表。
English: When the evil spirit injures someone, the lesion occurs either in the internal organs of yin or on the body surface of yang.

古文：其生于阳者，得之风雨寒暑；其生于阴者，得之饮食居处，阴阳喜怒。
现代文：病生于阳经在表的，都是感受了风雨寒暑邪气的侵袭；病生于阴经在里的，都是由于饮食不节、起居失常、房事过度、喜怒无常所致。
English: Illnesses born in the yang period on the surface are all caused by the wind, rain, cold and heat; illnesses born in the yin period on the inside are all caused by irregular diet, abnormal living, excessive housework, and mood swings.

古文：帝曰：风雨之伤人奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：风雨之邪伤人是怎样的呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said: How does the evil of wind and rain hurt people?

古文：岐伯曰：风雨之伤人也，先客于皮肤，传入于孙脉，孙脉满则传入于络脉，络脉满则输于大经脉。
现代文：岐伯说：风雨之邪伤人，是先侵入皮肤，由皮肤而传入于孙脉，孙脉满则传入于络脉，络脉满则输注于大经脉。
English: Qi Bo said: The evil of wind and rain is the first to invade the skin, and it is transmitted from the skin to the umbilical cord, and from the umbilical cord to the vas deferens, and from the vas deferens to the great meridians.

古文：血气与邪并客于分腠之间，其脉坚大，故曰实。
现代文：血气与邪气并聚于分肉腠理之间，其脉必坚实而大，所以叫做实证。
English: The blood and evil spirits are gathered together in the meridians between the meridians, and their veins must be firm and large, so they are called positive.

古文：实者，外坚充满，不可按之，按之则痛。
现代文：实证，受邪部位的表面多坚实充满，不可触按，按之则痛。
English: Empirically, the surface of the affected area is mostly solid and full, untouchable, and painful.

古文：帝曰：寒湿之伤人奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：寒湿之邪伤人是怎样的呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "How does the cold and wet weather hurt people?"

古文：岐伯曰：寒湿之中人也，皮肤不收，肌肉坚紧，营血泣，卫气去，故曰虚。
现代文：岐伯说：寒湿之邪气伤人，使人皮肤失却收缩功能，肌肉坚紧，营血滞涩，卫气离去，所以叫做虚证。
English: Qi Bo said: The evil spirits of cold and dampness hurt people, causing the skin to lose its contraction function, the muscles to tighten, the blood to stagnate, and the vitality to leave, so it is called deficiency.

古文：虚者，聂辟气不足，按之则气足以温之，故快然而不痛。帝曰：善。
现代文：虚证多见皮肤松弛而有皱折，卫气不足，营血滞涩等，按摩可以致气，使气足能温煦营血，故按摩则卫气充实，营血畅行，便觉得爽快而不疼痛了。黄帝说：好。
English: Symptoms of deficiency include loose skin with wrinkles, lack of qi, stagnant blood, etc. Massage can induce qi, so that the qi can warm the blood, so the massage is full of qi, the blood flows smoothly, and it feels refreshing and not painful. Huang Di said: Good.

古文：阴之生实奈何？
现代文：阴分所发生的实证是怎样的呢？
English: What is the empirical evidence for this?

古文：岐伯曰：喜怒不节，则阴气上逆，上逆则下虚，下虚则阳气走之，故曰实矣。
现代文：岐伯说：人若喜怒不加节制，则使阴气上逆，阴气上逆则必虚于下，阴虚者阳必走之，所以叫做实证。
English: Qibo said: If a person's joy and anger are unrestrained, then the yin will be reversed, the yin will be reversed, and the yang will go away, so it is called positive proof.

古文：帝曰：阴之生虚奈何？
现代文：黄帝说；阴分所发生的虚证是怎样的呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "What is the nature of the false testimony that occurred during the Yin phase?"

古文：岐伯曰：喜则气下，悲则气消，消则脉虚空。因寒饮食，寒气熏满，则血泣气去，故曰虚矣。
现代文：岐伯说：人若过度喜乐则气易下陷，过度悲哀则气易消散，气消散则血行迟缓，脉道空虚；若再寒凉饮食，寒气充满于内，血气滞涩而气耗，所以叫做虚证。
English: Qi Bo said: If a person is overjoyed, the qi will easily sink, if the person is overly sad, the qi will easily dissipate, and if the qi dissipates, the blood circulation will be slow and the blood vessels will be empty; if the person eats cold food, the cold air will be filled inside, the blood will be stagnant and the air will be consumed, so it is called deficiency.

古文：帝曰：经言阳虚则外寒，阴虚则内热；阳盛则外热，阴盛则内寒，余已闻之矣，不知其所由然也。
现代文：黄帝说：医经上所说的阳虚则生外寒，阴虚则生内热，阳盛则生外热，阴盛则生内寒。我已听说过了，但不知是什么原因产生的。
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "The medical sutra says that the yang deficiency causes external cold, the yin deficiency causes internal heat, the yang abundance causes external heat, and the yin abundance causes internal cold. I have heard of this, but I don't know what causes it.

古文：岐伯曰：阳受气于上焦，以温皮肤分肉之间。今寒气在外，则上焦不通，上焦不通则寒气独留于外，故寒栗。
现代文：岐伯说：诸阳之气，均承受于上焦，以温煦皮肤分肉之间，现寒气侵袭于外，使上焦不能宣通，上焦不通则寒气独留于肌表，因而发生恶寒战栗。
English: Qi Bo said: "All of the sun's gas is absorbed by the scorching, with the warm skin separating the flesh. Now the cold air invades from the outside, so that the scorching cannot be transmitted, and if the scorching is not transmitted, the cold air remains only on the skin surface, resulting in chills and shivers.

古文：帝曰：阴虚生内热奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：阴虚则生内热是怎样的呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "What is the difference between yin and yang?

古文：岐伯曰：有所劳倦，形气衰少，谷气不盛，上焦不行，下脘不通，胃气热，热气熏胷中，故内热。
现代文：岐伯说：过度劳倦，必形气衰少，这样上焦即不能宣发五谷气味，下脘也不能化水谷之精，胃气郁而生热，热气上熏于胸中，因而发生内热。
English: Qi Bo said, "Excessive fatigue will cause the qi to decline. If you burn yourself like this, you will not be able to emit the smell of grain, and your lower jaw will not be able to absorb the essence of the valley. Your stomach will be full of gas and become hot, and the hot gas will be absorbed into your chest, causing internal heat.

古文：帝曰：阳盛生外热奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：阳盛则生外热是怎样的呢？
English: Huang Di said: What is Yang Sheng's external heat?

古文：岐伯曰：上焦不通利，则皮肤致密，腠理闭塞，玄府不通，卫气不得泄越，故外热。
现代文：岐伯说；若上焦不通利，可使皮肤致密，腠理闭塞，汗毛孔不通，如此则卫气不得发泄散越，所以发生外热。
English: Qi Bo said that if the upper heat is not effective, it can make the skin dense, the pores of the skin will be blocked, and the sweat pores will not open. In this case, the qi cannot be released and dissipated, so external heat will occur.

古文：帝曰：阴盛生内寒奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：阴盛则生内寒是怎样的呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "What is it like to be born in the winter and grow up in the winter?"

古文：岐伯曰：厥气上逆，寒气积于胷中而不泻，不泻则温气去，寒独留，则血凝泣，凝则脉不通，其脉盛大以濇，故中寒。
现代文：岐伯说：若寒厥之气上逆，寒气积于胸中而不下泄，寒气不泻，则阳气必受耗伤，则寒气独留，则营血凝涩，营血凝涩则脉行不畅，其脉搏必见盛大而涩，所以成为内寒。
English: Qi Bo said: If the cold air is on the opposite side, the cold air accumulates in the chest without venting, the cold air does not slacken, then the yang air must be exhausted, then the cold air is left alone, then the blood is coagulated, the blood is coagulated, the pulse is not smooth, and the pulse must be large and astringent, so it becomes internal cold.

古文：帝曰：阴与阳并，血气以并，病形以成，刺之奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：阴与阳相并，气与血相并，疾病已经形成时，怎样进行刺治呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "Yin and yang are the same, and qi and blood are the same. When a disease has already formed, how should it be treated?

古文：岐伯曰：刺此者，取之经隧，取血于营，取气于卫，用形哉，因四时多少高下。
现代文：岐伯说：刺治这种疾病应取其经脉，病在营分的刺治其血，病在卫分的刺治其气，同时还要根据病人形体的肥瘦高矮，四时气候的寒热温凉，决定针刺次数的多少，取穴部位的高下。
English: Qi Bo said: the needles for the treatment of this disease should be taken from the meridians. The needles for the treatment of the disease should be taken from the meridians. The needles for the treatment of the disease should be taken from the meridians. The needles for the treatment of the disease should be taken from the meridians. The needles for the treatment of the disease should be taken from the meridians. The needles for the treatment of the disease should be taken from the meridians. The needles for the treatment of the disease should be taken from the meridians.

古文：帝曰：血气以并，病形以成，阴阳相倾，补泻奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：血气和邪气已并，病已形成，阴阳失去平衡的，刺治应怎样用补法和泻法呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "When the blood and evil spirits have merged, the disease has formed, and the yin and yang are out of balance, how should we use the methods of tonic and purgative to cure the sting?

古文：岐伯曰：泻实者，气盛乃内针，针与气俱内，以开其门，如利其户；针与气俱出，精气不伤，邪气乃下，外门不闭，以出其疾，摇大其道，如利其路，是谓大泻，必切而出，大气乃屈。
现代文：岐伯说：泻实证时，应在气盛的时候进针，使针与气同时入内，以打开邪气外出之门，以利于邪气外出于户，使针与气同时外出，这样可使精气不伤，邪气得以外泄；在针刺时还要使针孔不要闭塞，以排泄邪气，应摇大其针孔，而通利邪气外出的道路，这叫做 大泻 ，出针时先以左手轻轻切张针孔周围，然后迅速出针，这样亢盛的邪气就可穷尽。
English: Qi Bo said: In the case of positive laxity, the needle should be inserted when the qi is strong, so that the needle and the qi enter at the same time, so as to open the door for the evil qi to go out, so as to facilitate the evil qi to go out of the house, so that the needle and the qi go out at the same time, so that the qi is not damaged and the evil qi can be released; in the case of acupuncture, the needle hole should not be blocked, in order to excrete the evil qi, the needle hole should be shaken, and the way to benefit the evil qi is out, this is

古文：帝曰：补虚奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：怎样补虚呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "How can I make up for it?"

古文：岐伯曰：持针勿置，以定其意，候呼内针，气出针入，针空四塞，精无从去，方实而疾出针，气入针出，热不得还，闭塞其门，邪气布散，精气乃得存，动气候时，近气不失，远气乃来，是谓追之。
现代文：岐伯说；以手持针，不要立即刺入，先安定其神气，待病人呼气时进针，即气出针入，使针孔周围紧密与针体连接，使精气无隙外泄，当气至针下时，迅速出针，气入针出，使针下所至的热气不能内还，出针后立即按闭针孔，使邪气布散于外，而精气得以保存于内。针刺侯气时，要耐心等待，必俟其气至而充实，始可出针，这样可使已至之气不致散失，远处未至之气可以导来，这叫做补法。
English: Qi Bo said: with a hand-held needle, do not immediately pierce, first stabilize its aura, wait for the patient to exhale when the needle enters, that is, the air out of the needle enters, so that the surrounding of the needle hole is closely connected with the needle body, so that the essence can leak out without a gap, when the breath reaches the needle, quickly release the needle, the breath enters the needle, so that the hot air coming from the needle can not be returned inside, and immediately press the closed needle hole after the needle is released, so that the evil air is scattered outside, and the essence can be preserved inside. When the needle is pierced, wait patiently, must

古文：帝曰：夫子言虚实者有十，生于五脏，五脏五脉耳。夫十二经脉皆生其病，今夫子独言五脏。
现代文：黄帝说：先生说虚证和实证共有十种，都是发生于五脏，但五脏只有五条经脉，而十二经脉，每经都能发生疾病，先生为什么只单独谈了五脏？
English: Huang Di said: Mr. said that there are ten kinds of false evidence and positive evidence, all of which occur in the five viscera, but the five viscera only have five meridians, while the twelve meridians, each meridian can cause disease. Why did Mr. only talk about the five viscera?

古文：夫十二经脉者，皆络三百六十五节，节有病必被经脉，经脉之病皆有虚实，何以合之？
现代文：况且十二经脉又都联络三百六十五节，节有病也必然波及到经脉，经脉所发生的疾病，又都有虚有实，这些虚证和实证，又怎样和五脏的虚证和实证相结合呢？
English: Moreover, the twelve meridians are all connected to 365 meridians. If there is a disease in the meridians, it will inevitably spread to the meridians. The diseases caused by the meridians are both false and real. How can these false and real evidence be combined with the false and real evidence of the five internal organs?

古文：岐伯曰：五脏者，故得六腑与为表里，经络支节，各生虚实，其病所居，随而调之。
现代文：岐伯说：五脏和六腑本有其表里关系，经络和肢节各有其所发生的虚证和实证，应根据其病变所在，随其病情的虚实变化，给予适当的调治。
English: Qi Bo said: the five viscera and the six pharyngeal organs have their superficial and internal relationships, and the meridians and the limb joints each have their own signs and symptoms. Appropriate treatment should be given according to the location of the lesion and the actual changes of the condition.

古文：病在脉，调之血；病在血，调之络；病在气，调之卫；病在肉，调之分肉；病在筋，调之筋；病在骨，调之骨。
现代文：如病在脉，可以调治其血；病在血分，可以调治其络脉；病在气分，可以调治其卫气；病在肌肉，可以调治其分肉间；病在筋，可以调治其筋；病在骨，可以调治其骨。
English: If the disease is in the veins, its blood can be adjusted; if the disease is in the blood, its veins can be adjusted; if the disease is in the qi, its qi can be adjusted; if the disease is in the muscles, its joints can be adjusted; if the disease is in the sinews, its sinews can be adjusted; if the disease is in the bones, its bones can be adjusted.

古文：燔针劫刺其下及与急者。病在骨，焠针药熨；病不知所痛，两蹻为上；身形有痛，九候莫病，则缪刺之；痛在于左而右脉病者，巨刺之。
现代文：病在筋，亦可用焠针 劫刺 其病处，与其筋脉挛急之处；病在骨，亦可用焠针和药烫病处；病不知疼痛，可以刺阳蹻阴蹻二脉；身形有疼痛，而九侯之脉没有病象，则用 缪刺法 治之。如果疼痛在左侧，而右脉有病象，则用 巨刺法 刺之。
English: If the disease is in the sinews, it can also be treated with acupuncture needles; if the disease is in the bones, it can also be treated with acupuncture needles and drugs; if the disease is painless, it can be treated with two veins; if there is pain in the body, but there is no disease in the jugular vein, it can be treated with the method of acupuncture needles; if the pain is on the left side, but there is disease in the right vein, it can be treated with the method of acupuncture needles.

古文：必谨察其九候，针道备矣。
现代文：总之，必须详细地诊察九侯的脉象，针刺的技术才算完备。
English: In short, it is necessary to examine the pulse of Jiuhou in detail before the acupuncture technique can be considered complete.

