古文：禽滑厘子事子墨子三年，手足胼胝，面目黧黑，役身给使，不敢问欲。
现代文：译文禽滑厘事奉墨子三年，手脚都起了老茧，脸晒得黑黑的，干仆役的活听墨子使唤，却不敢问自己想要问的事。
English: After three years of service to Mozi, his hands and feet were calloused, his face was sunburned black, and he did the work of a servant to listen to Mozi, but he did not dare to ask what he wanted to ask.

古文：子墨子其哀之，乃管酒块脯，寄于大山，昧葇坐之，以樵禽子。
现代文：墨子先生对此感到十分怜悯，于是备了酒和干肉，来到泰山，垫些茅草坐在上面，用酒菜酬劳禽滑厘。禽子行了
English: Mr. Mozi felt very sorry about this, so he prepared wine and dried meat, came to Mount Taishan, sat on some thatch, and rewarded the poultry with wine and vegetables.

古文：禽子再拜而叹。
现代文：再拜礼之后，叹了口气。
English: After another prayer, he sighed.

古文：子墨子曰： 亦何欲乎？ 
现代文：墨子问他： 你有什么要问的吗？ 
English: Mozi asked him, "Do you have anything to ask?"

古文：禽子再拜再拜曰： 敢问守道？ 
现代文：禽滑厘又行了两次再拜礼，说道： 请问守城的方法。 
English: After performing two more prostrations, the bird said, "Please tell me how to defend the city."

古文：子墨子曰： 姑亡，姑亡。
现代文：墨子回答说： 先不要问，先不要问。
English: Mozi replied, "Don't ask first, don't ask first."

古文：古有其术者，内不亲民，外不约治，以少间众，以弱轻强，身死国亡，为天下笑。
现代文：古代也曾有懂得守城方法的人，但对内不亲抚百姓，对外不缔结和平，自己兵力少却疏远兵力多的国家，自己力量弱却轻视强大的国家，结果送命亡国，被天下人耻笑。
English: In ancient times, there were also people who knew how to defend the city, but they did not care about the people at home and did not make peace with the outside world. They had fewer troops but alienated the countries with more troops. They were weak but despised the powerful countries. As a result, they lost their lives and were ridiculed by the world.

古文：子其慎之，恐为身姜。 
现代文：你对此可要慎重对待，弄不好，懂得了守城的办法反为身累。 
English: You have to be careful about this. If you get it wrong, knowing how to defend the city will be exhausting.

古文：禽子再拜顿首，愿遂问守道。曰： 敢问客众而勇，烟资吾池，军卒并进，云梯既施，攻备已具，武士又多，争上吾城，为之奈何？ 
现代文：禽滑厘行再拜礼后又伏地叩头行稽首礼，希望能弄清防守的办法，说： 我还是冒昧地问问，如果攻城一方兵士众多又勇敢，堵塞了我方护城河，军士一齐进攻，攻城的云梯架起来了，进攻的武器已安排好，勇敢的士兵蜂涌而至，争先恐后爬上我方城墙，该如何对付呢？ 
English: "I still venture to ask," he said, "if there are many brave soldiers on the attacking side of the city and they block our moat, if the sergeants attack together, if the siege ladders are set up, if the offensive weapons have been arranged, and if brave soldiers swarm and scramble up our walls, how should we deal with it?

古文：子墨子曰：问云梯之守邪？
现代文：墨子回答说：你问的是对付云梯的防卫办法吗？
English: Mozi replied, "Are you asking about the defensive measures against cloud ladders?"

古文：云梯者重器也，其动移甚难。
现代文：云梯是笨重的攻城器械，移动十分困难。
English: The ladder is a bulky siege tool, and it is very difficult to move.

古文：守为行城，杂楼相见，以环其中。
现代文：守城一方可以在城墙上筑起 行城 和 杂楼 ，将自己环绕起来。
English: The defending side can surround itself by building towers and towers on the walls.

古文：以适广陕为度，环中藉幕，毋广其处。
现代文：行城和杂楼之间要保持适当的距离，两者之间的部分要拉上防护用的遮幕，因此距度不宜过宽。
English: An appropriate distance should be maintained between the procession and the miscellaneous buildings, and the part between the two should be covered with a protective screen, so the distance should not be too wide.

古文：行城之法，高城二十尺，上加堞，广十尺，左右出巨各二十尺，高、广如行城之法。
现代文：筑行城的方法是：行城高出原城墙二十尺，上面加上锯齿状的矫墙，这种矫墙称作 堞 ，宽十尺，左右两边所编大木横出各二十尺，高度和宽度与行城相应。
English: The method of building the town was as follows: the town was built twenty feet higher than the original city wall, with a jagged retaining wall on top. This retaining wall was called the, and was ten feet wide. The large trees on the left and right sides were twenty feet across, and the height and width corresponded to the town.

古文：为爵穴、煇鼠，施荅其外，机、冲、钱、城，广与队等，杂其间以镌剑，持冲十人，执剑五人，皆以有力者。
现代文：矫墙下部开名叫 爵穴 、 ■鼠 的小孔，孔外用东西遮挡起来。供投掷的技机，抵挡冲撞的冲撞车，供出外救援用的行栈，临时用的行城等器械，其排列的宽度应与敌人进攻的广度相等。各器械之间挟进持镌和持剑的士兵，其中掌冲车的十人，拿剑的五人，都应挑选力大的军士担任。
English: The lower part of the rectification wall should have small holes called "champion hole" and "mouse hole," and the outside of the hole should be covered with something. The equipment such as the throwing machine, the collision vehicle to resist the collision, the traveling stack for the rescue outside, and the temporary traveling city should be arranged in a width equal to the breadth of the enemy's attack. Soldiers holding plowshares and swords should be sandwiched between each instrument, and ten of them holding a hand car and five holding a sword should be selected as powerful sergeants.

古文：令案目者视适，以鼓发之，夹而射之，重而射，披机藉之，城上繁下矢、石、沙、炭以雨之，薪火、水汤以济之，审赏行罚，以静为故，从之以急，毋使生虑。
现代文：用视力最好的兵士观察敌人，用鼓声发出抗击号令，或两边向敌人夹射，或重点集射一处，或借助技机向敌人掷械，从城上雨点般地将箭、砂石、灰土倾泄给城下之敌，加上往下投掷火把、倾倒滚烫的开水，同时赏罚严明，处事镇静，但又要当机立断，不致发生其他变故。
English: With the soldiers with the best eyesight to observe the enemy, with the sound of the drum to issue a counterattack signal, or both sides to the enemy, or focus on one place, or with the help of technology to throw weapons at the enemy, from the city like a rain of arrows, sand and gravel to the enemy under the city, plus throwing down torches, dumping hot boiling water, while the reward and punishment are strict, dealing with things calmly, but it is necessary to make a decision on the spot, so as not to cause other changes.

古文：若此，则云梯之攻败矣。
现代文：象这样防守，云梯攻法就得被打败了。
English: With a defense like that, the ladder offense has to be beaten.

古文：守为行堞，堞高六尺而一等，施剑其面，以机发之，冲至则去之。
现代文：守城一方在 行城 上筑起临时用的矫墙 堞 ，一律高六尺，在墙外安装剑，用机械发射，敌方的冲撞器来了就撤发射机，没来就使用它。
English: The defending side of the city built a temporary retaining wall, all six feet high, on the line of march, installed swords outside the wall, and fired them mechanically. When the enemy's ram arrived, they would remove the transmitter, and if it did not arrive, they would use it.

古文：不至则施之。爵穴，三尺而一。蒺藜投必遂而立，以车推引之。
现代文：矫墙下部开的名叫 爵穴 的小洞，每三尺一个。 蒺藜投 一定要针对敌方进攻的范围摆放，用车推下城墙然后又用车再拉上来，以便反复使用。
English: At the bottom of the retaining wall, there are small holes, called jiexing (爵穴), one every three feet. 投 (投) must be placed according to the range of the enemy's attack, pushed down the city wall with a car and then pulled up again with a car, so that it can be used repeatedly.

古文：裾城外，去城十尺，裾厚十尺。
现代文：在城外十尺远的地方安置断树，这称之为 置裾 。裾的厚度为十尺。
English: The placement of the broken tree ten feet outside the city is called placing the hem. The thickness of the hem is ten feet.

古文：伐裾，小大尽本断之，以十尺为传，离而深埋之，坚筑，毋使可拔。
现代文：采伐断树 裾 的方法是，无论大小，一律连根拔起，锯成十尺一段，间隔一段距离深埋于地中，一定要埋牢实，不能让它被拔出来。
English: The method of felling a tree stump is to uproot all trees, regardless of size, and saw them into ten-foot sections, buried deep in the ground at intervals. They must be buried firmly so that they cannot be pulled out.

古文：二十步一杀，杀有一鬲，鬲厚十尺。杀有两门，门广五尺。
现代文：城墙上每隔二十步设置一个 杀 ，备有一个储放投掷物的 鬲 ，鬲厚十尺。 杀 安有两个门，门宽五尺。
English: On the wall of the city, at intervals of twenty paces, there shall be a killing chamber, with a ten-feet-thick bank for the storage of projectiles; it shall have two doors, each five feet wide.

古文：裾门一，施浅埋，弗筑，令易拔。
现代文：裾也可设有门，不过要浅埋才成，不要埋牢实，要让它能容易被拔出来。
English: The hem can also have a door, but it should be shallowly buried, not firmly buried, so that it can be easily pulled out.

古文：城希裾门而直桀。
现代文：城上对着裾门的地方放置 桀石 ，以供投掷。
English: On the top of the castle, in front of the side gate, there is a place where flints are placed for throwing.

古文：县火，四尺一钩樴。
现代文：城上悬挂有火具，叫悬火，每隔四尺设置一个挂火具的钩樴。
English: On the castle there are hanging fireplaces, called hanging fires, and every four feet there is a hook for hanging the fire.

古文：五步一灶，灶门有炉炭。
现代文：五步设一口灶，灶门备有炉炭。
English: There is a stove in five steps, and charcoal is provided at the door.

古文：令适人尽入，■火烧门，县火次之。
现代文：让敌人全部进入就放火烧门，接着投掷悬火。
English: Let all the enemies enter, set fire to the door, and then throw a hanging fire.

古文：出载而立，其广终队。两载之间一火，皆立而待鼓而然火，即具发之。适人除火而复攻，县火复下，适人甚病，故引兵而去，则令我死士左右出穴门击遗师，令贲士、主将皆听城鼓之音而出，又听城鼓之音而入。
现代文：在此篇中，墨子指出守城的战术方法固然重要，但更重要的还是外交战略。 其 应作 甚 。 块 应作 槐 。 ■ 应作 茅 。 烟资 应作 堙茨 。 钱 应作 栈 。 射 字后疑漏一 之 字。 披 应作 技 。 炭 应作 灰 。 裾城外 三字前疑漏一 置 字。 伐裾 后疑漏 之法 。 传 应作 断 。 城 后漏一 上 字。
English: In this article, Mozi pointed out that although the tactical method of defending the city was important, the diplomatic strategy was more important. It should be done. The block should be made of straw. ■ Should be made of thatch. The tobacco should be made of straw. The money should be made of stacks. The word that was missed after the word was shot. The cloak should be made of skills. The charcoal should be made of ashes. Outside the city The word that was missed before the word was placed. The way that was missed after the word was cut. The legend should be made. The word that was missed after the city was placed.

