古文：新罗东女国廪君大食国私阿修国俱振提国牂牁龟兹乾陀国
现代文：新罗东女国廪君大食国私阿修国俱振提国牂牁龟兹乾陀国
English: SINLODONG Women's National Day Grandmother's National Day Grandmother's National Day Grandmother's National Day Grandmother's National Day

古文：新罗
现代文：新罗
English: Silla

古文：新罗国，东南与日本邻，东与长人国接。
现代文：新罗国东南面跟日本国相邻，东面跟长人国相接。
English: The southeastern side of Silla is adjacent to Japan, and the eastern side is adjacent to Chosen.

古文：长人身三丈，锯牙钩爪，不火食，逐禽兽而食之，时亦食人。
现代文：长人身高三丈，牙齿像锯。指甲像钩子，不用火烧东西吃，抓到禽兽就生吃了，有时候也吃人。
English: The elders are three meters tall, their teeth are like saws, and their nails are like hooks. They don't need to burn anything to eat, and when they catch an animal, they eat it raw. Sometimes, they also eat people.

古文：裸其躯，黑毛覆之。
现代文：他们的身体裸露着，上面长有一层黑毛。
English: Their bodies were naked, with a layer of black hair on top.

古文：其境限以连山数千里，中有山峡，固以铁门，谓之铁关。常使弓弩数千守之，由是不过。
现代文：他们的国土周围有相连数千里的山脉围绕着。边境上有山口。用铁门挡住，称为铁关，常派数千弓弩手守着，因此是过不去的。
English: Their land is surrounded by thousands of miles of mountains. There is a mountain pass on the border. It is blocked by an iron gate, known as the iron gate, and thousands of archers are often sent to guard it, so it is impossible to pass.

古文：又新罗国有第一贵族金哥，其远祖名旁竾，有弟一人，甚有家财。其兄旁竾，因分居，乞衣食。
现代文：又说新罗国有个第一贵族金哥。他的远祖名叫旁竾。旁竾有位弟弟，家财很多，他的哥哥因为分居，生活困难，只好乞衣乞食。
English: It is also said that there was a first aristocrat in Silla, Kingo. His distant ancestor was named Bongyeong. Bongyeong had a younger brother, and the family had a lot of wealth. His older brother had to beg and panhandle because he was separated and his life was difficult.

古文：国人有与其隙地一亩，乃求蚕谷种于弟，弟蒸而与之，旁竾不知也。
现代文：有位乡里人送给旁竾一块空地，旁竾向弟弟要蚕种和谷种，弟弟就把蚕种、谷种煮熟了送给他，旁竾并不知道。
English: A villager gave him a piece of open space. He asked his younger brother for silkworm and grain seeds. The younger brother cooked the silkworm and grain seeds and gave them to him, unbeknownst to him.

古文：至蚕时，止一生焉，日长寸余，居旬大如牛，食数树叶不足。
现代文：到孵蚕种时，只孵出了一只。这只蚕每天长一寸多，过了十天长得像牛一样大了，好几棵桑树的叶都不够它吃。
English: By the time the silkworms were hatched, only one had hatched. This silkworm grew more than an inch a day, and after ten days it grew as big as a cow. Several mulberry leaves were not enough for it to eat.

古文：其弟知之，伺间，杀其蚕。
现代文：他的弟弟知道这事后，就找了一个机会，杀死了这条大蚕。
English: When his brother found out, he took a chance and killed the silkworm.

古文：经日，四方百里内蚕，悉飞集其家。
现代文：一天后，四面八方百里以内的蚕，都飞来落到了旁竾的家。
English: A day later, the silkworms within a hundred miles in all directions flew to and landed at the home of the next door neighbor.

古文：国人谓之巨蚕，意其蚕之王也。
现代文：国内的人都说被杀死的蚕是巨蚕。
English: People in the country say that the killed silkworms are giant silkworms.

古文：四邻共缲之，不供。
现代文：推测它可能是那些蚕的王。旁竾周围的邻居共同帮着缫丝也忙不过来。
English: It is speculated that it may be the king of those silkworms. Neighbors around the pupa are also busy helping the pupa.

古文：谷唯一茎植焉，其穗长尺余。旁竾常守之。
现代文：旁竾的谷子只长出了一棵。但结的穗有一尺多长，旁竾经常在旁边看着它。
English: Only one seedling has grown, but the spike of the knot is more than a foot long, and she often watches it from the side.

古文：忽为鸟所折，衔去。
现代文：忽然这棵谷子被一只鸟折断，并把穗子衔走了。
English: Suddenly, a bird snapped the seedling and carried off the spike.

古文：旁竾逐之，上山五六里，鸟入一石罅，日没径黑，旁竾因止石侧。
现代文：旁竾于是跟着追赶，追到山上。在山上又追了五六里，这时鸟飞入了一个石缝中。日头落了，路上很黑，旁竾只好在一块石头旁边停下了。
English: He chased it up the mountain for another five or six miles, when the bird flew into a crevice in the rock. The sun had set and it was dark on the road, so he had to stop next to a rock.

古文：至夜半月明，见群小儿，赤衣共戏。
现代文：到了半夜，月亮很明亮，旁竾见一群小孩，穿着红色衣服在一起做游戏。
English: At midnight, the moon was bright and a group of children dressed in red were playing together.

古文：一小儿曰： 汝要何物？ 
现代文：一个小孩说： 你要什么东西？ 
English: One child said: What do you want?

古文：一曰： 要酒。 
现代文：一个小孩回答说： 要酒。 
English: One child replied, "Wine."

古文：小儿出一金锥子，击石，酒及樽悉具。
现代文：那个小孩就拿出一把金锥子，敲打石头，于是酒和酒具都摆了出来。
English: The child took out a gold cone and struck the stone, and the wine and the vessels were set out.

古文：一曰： 要食 ，又击之，饼饵羹炙，罗于石上。
现代文：还有一个说要食物，又敲打石头，饼、糕、汤、烤肉又摆在了石头上。
English: Another one asked for food and knocked on the stone. Bread, cakes, soup and grilled meat were placed on the stone.

古文：良久，饮食而去，以金锥插于石罅。
现代文：过了好一会儿那些小孩才吃喝完走了，把金锥插在石头缝里。
English: It was some time before the children had finished eating and drinking, and they went away, leaving the golden cone in a crack in the stone.

古文：旁竾大喜，取其锥而还，所欲随击而办，因是富侔国力，常以珠玑赡其弟，弟云： 我或如兄得金锥也。 旁竾知其愚，谕之不及，乃如其言。
现代文：凭着这把金锥，旁竾的富裕可跟国家相比，所以经常把珍珠送给他弟弟。弟弟说： 我也许能像哥哥一样得到一把金锥。 旁竾了解他的无知，但告诉他也不听，只好让他按他的话办了。
English: With this golden cone, the wealth of the country could be compared to the wealth of the country, so he often gave the pearl to his younger brother. The younger brother said, "Maybe I can get a golden cone like my brother." The younger brother understood his ignorance, but told him that he would not listen to him, so he had to let him do as he said.

古文：弟蚕之，止得一金如常者。谷种之，复一茎植焉，将熟，亦为鸟所衔。
现代文：于是，旁竾的弟弟孵蚕，也只得到一只很平常的蚕；也种了谷子，又只长出一棵，将要成熟时，也被鸟把穗衔走。
English: As a result, the younger brother hatched a silkworm, but only got a very ordinary silkworm; he also planted corn, and only one grew up, and when it was about to mature, it was also taken away by the bird.

古文：其弟大悦，随之入山，至鸟入处，遇群鬼。
现代文：旁竾的弟弟非常高兴，随着鸟进了山。到了鸟入石缝的地方，遇到了群鬼。
English: The younger brother was very happy. He followed the bird into the mountain. When he reached the place where the bird had fallen into the crevice, he encountered a group of ghosts.

古文：怒曰， 是窃余锥者。 
现代文：群鬼生气地说： 这是偷金锥的人。 
English: The ghosts said angrily: This is the man who stole the golden cone.

古文：乃执之。谓曰： 尔欲为我筑糖三版乎？尔欲鼻长一丈乎？ 
现代文：便抓住了他，对他说： 你想为我们筑墙二十四尺呢，还是想让鼻子长成一丈长呢？ 
English: They caught him and said to him, "Do you want us to build a wall twenty-four feet high, or do you want your nose to grow a foot long?"

古文：其弟请筑糖三版，三日，饥困不成，求哀于鬼。
现代文：旁竾弟请求筑墙二十四尺。经过三天，饥饿困苦没筑成，向鬼请求怜悯，鬼便拉长他的鼻子。
English: His younger brother begged to build a wall twenty-four feet high. After three days of hunger and hardship, the wall was not built. He begged the devil for mercy, and the devil stretched his nose.

古文：鬼乃拔其鼻，鼻如象而归。
现代文：旁竾的弟弟拖着一只和象鼻子一样长的鼻子回了家。
English: The younger brother of the sidekick dragged a nose as long as an elephant's back home.

古文：国人怪而聚观之，惭恚而卒。
现代文：国内人觉得奇怪，都聚拢来看他。他又惭愧，又生气。
English: People in the country thought it was strange and gathered to see him. He was ashamed and angry.

古文：其后子孙戏锥求狼粪，因雷震，锥失所在。
现代文：死掉了。从那以后旁竾的子孙们开玩笑，用金锥要狼粪，于是雷声震响，金锥失去，不知道哪里去了。
English: He died. Since then, his children and grandchildren have joked about using the golden cone to get wolf dung. Then, there was a thunderclap, the golden cone was lost, and they don't know where it went.

古文：又登州贾者马行余转海，拟取昆山路适桐庐，时遇西风，而吹到新罗国。
现代文：还有个传说。说登州商人马行余在海上航行，打算取道昆山到桐庐去，但当时却遇到了西风，被吹到了新罗国。
English: There is also a legend. It is said that the merchant Ma Xingyu of Dengzhou was sailing on the sea, intending to take the road from Kunshan to Tonglu, but at that time he encountered the west wind and was blown to Silla.

古文：新罗国君闻行余中国而至，接以宾礼。乃曰： 吾虽夷狄之邦，岁有习儒者，举于天阙。
现代文：新罗国的国君听说马行余是从中国来的，便以宾客之礼接待他，并说： 我们虽属夷狄国家，但每年都有到中国学习儒学的人，其中还有些人被推荐到中国朝廷，考中功名光荣回国。
English: When the sovereign of Silla heard that Ma Xingyu came from China, he received him as a guest and said: Although we belong to the Yidi nation, every year there are people who come to China to study Confucianism. Some of them were recommended to the Chinese imperial court, and they returned home with honors after the middle school examinations.

古文：登第荣归，吾必禄之甚厚。乃知孔子之道，被于华夏乎。 
现代文：回国后，我一律给他们很多的俸禄。你知道孔子的学说，覆盖了整个中国了吧？ 
English: After returning to China, I always gave them a lot of salary. Did you know that Confucius's teachings cover the whole of China?

古文：因与行余论及经籍，行余避位曰： 庸陋贾竖，长养虽在中华，但闻土地所宜，不读诗书之义。
现代文：于是跟行余谈论到经书。马行余离开坐席回答说： 我是个平庸浅薄的商人，虽然生长在中国，但是只听说土地适合种什么，不懂诗书中的道理。
English: Ma Xingyu left the table and replied: "I am a mediocre and shallow businessman. Although I grew up in China, I only heard that the land is suitable for planting, and I don't understand the principles in poetry books.

古文：熟诗书，明礼义者，其唯士大夫乎！非小人之事也。 
现代文：熟悉诗书，明白礼义的，大概只有那些士大夫，我们这些粗人是一窍不通的。 
English: The only people who are familiar with poetry books and understand etiquette are probably those scholars and doctors. We, the common people, are clueless.

古文：乃辞之。
现代文：于是向国君告辞。
English: He then bade farewell to the sovereign.

古文：新罗君讶曰： 吾以中国之人，尽闻典教。不谓尚有无知之俗欤！ 
现代文：新罗国君惊讶地说： 我以为中国的人都受到过经书的教育，没料到还有无知的俗人。 
English: Surprised, Xinluo Guojun said, "I thought that people in China were all educated by scriptures, but I didn't expect to find ignorant commoners.

古文：行余还至乡井，自惭以贪吝衣食，愚昧不知学道，为夷狄所嗤，况哲英乎。
现代文：行余回到家乡，对自己以前因为贪图衣服食物，愚昧不懂得学儒家之道而被夷狄嗤笑感到惭愧。
English: After returning to his hometown, he felt ashamed that he had been ridiculed for coveting clothes and food, and for not knowing how to learn Confucianism.

古文：又天宝初，使赞善大夫魏曜使新罗，策立幼主。
现代文：商人尚且如此，何况聪敏而有才能的人呢？还有一个传说。天宝初年，唐朝派赞善大夫魏曜出使新罗国，策立他们年幼的太子当国王。
English: There is also a legend. In the first year of the Tenpo era, the Tang Dynasty sent the doctor Wei You to Silla to set up their young prince as king.

古文：曜年老，深惮之。
现代文：魏曜年纪大了，很打怵这件事。
English: Wei Youyou is very old, and he is very worried about this.

古文：有客曾到新罗，因访其行路。
现代文：有位客人曾到过新罗，于是魏曜就去访问他了解情况。
English: One of the guests had been to Silla, so Wei Chong went to visit him to understand the situation.

古文：客曰：永徽中，新罗日本皆通好，遣使兼报之。
现代文：客人说： 永徽年间，唐朝和新罗国、日本国都有友好往来。派使者时两国都去。
English: The guest said, "During the Yonghui era, the Tang Dynasty had friendly exchanges with Silla and Japan, and sent envoys to both countries.

古文：使人既达新罗，将赴日本国，海中遇风，波涛大起，数十日不止。
现代文：使者到达新罗以后，又将去日本国，不想在海中遇到了大风，波浪滔天，数十日不止，船只好在海上漂。
English: After the envoys arrive in Silla, they will also go to Japan. They do not want to encounter strong winds and heavy waves in the sea for more than dozens of days, so that the ships can float on the sea.

古文：随波漂流，不知所届，忽风止波静，至海岸边。
现代文：也不知到了什么地方，忽然风停波静，船到了海岸边。
English: I don't know where I was, but suddenly the wind stopped and the waves calmed, and the boat reached the shore.

古文：日方欲暮，时同志数船，乃维舟登岸，约百有余人。
现代文：太阳刚要落山，当时一同航行的几只船上的人，都拴好了船，往海岸上攀登，总共大约有一百多人。
English: The sun was just about to set, when several of the people on board who were sailing together, all tied up their boats and climbed onto the shore, a total of about a hundred people.

古文：岸高二三十丈，望见屋宇，争往趋之。
现代文：海岸高二三十丈，登上去后，远远地看到了屋子，便争先恐后地跑过去。
English: The shore is twenty to thirty meters high. After climbing up, I saw a house in the distance, and I ran to it in a hurry.

古文：有长人出，长二丈，身具衣服，言语不通。见唐人至，大喜，于是遮拥令入宅中，以石填门，而皆出去。
现代文：有些很高的人走来了，高有二丈，身上穿着衣服，说话听不懂，看见唐朝人到来，他们非常高兴，便前呼后拥地让入屋子，然后用石头堵上了门，就都出去了。
English: Some very tall people came, taller and taller, wearing clothes on their bodies, unable to understand what they were saying. They were very happy to see the Tang Dynasty people arrive, so they crowded forward to let them enter the house, then blocked the door with stones, and they all went out.

古文：俄有种类百余，相随而到，乃简阅唐人肤体肥充者，得五十余人，尽烹之，相与食啖。
现代文：不一会儿就有他们同类的一百多人，前后相随走来了，原来是挑选唐朝人中皮肤好身体肥胖的，共选出了五十多人，都被他们煮熟了，然后聚在一起吃。
English: Soon there were more than a hundred of their kind, coming one after the other. Originally, more than fifty people were selected from the Tang Dynasty people with good skin and fat bodies. They all cooked and then gathered together to eat.

古文：兼出醇酒，同为宴乐，夜深皆醉。
现代文：又拿出好酒，一同宴饮取乐。到了深夜，这些巨人都吃醉了。
English: He also brought out the best wine, and they ate and drank and were merry; and when it was late, the giants were drunk.

古文：诸人因得至诸院，后院有妇人三十人，皆前后风漂，为所虏者。
现代文：于是人们才能够到各个院子里看看。后院里有三十位妇女，都是先后被风刮到此地而被掳掠来的。
English: This made it possible for people to look into the various courtyards. There are thirty women in the backyard, all of whom were taken by the wind.

古文：自言男子尽被食之，唯留妇人，使造衣服。汝等今乘其醉，何为不去。
现代文：她们自己说： 男的全被吃了，只留下妇女，让我们做衣服，你们现在趁着他们喝醉了，为什么还不离开？
English: They themselves said, "The men have all been eaten, and only the women are left. Let us make clothes." Now that you have gotten them drunk, why don't you leave?

古文：吾请道焉，众悦。
现代文：请让我们给你们带路。 
English: Please let us show you the way.

古文：妇人出其练缕数百匹负之，然后取刀，尽断醉者首。
现代文：大家一听都很高兴。妇女们扛着她们的几百匹熟绢丝，然后拿来刀，把喝醉的那些巨人的脑袋都砍了下来。
English: To everyone's delight, the women shouldered their hundreds of yakitori, then brought out their knives and chopped off the heads of the drunken giants.

古文：乃行至海岸，岸高，昏黑不可下。
现代文：人们于是走到海岸上，海岸很高，天黑没法下，便用帛拴着身体自己吊下去。
English: People then went to the coast, the coast is very high, it was dark and they couldn't get down, so they used ropes to hang themselves.

古文：皆以帛系身，自缒而下，诸人更相缒下，至水滨，皆得入船。
现代文：用这个办法，大家陆续吊下去到了水边，都上了船。等到天亮时船就出发了。
English: Using this method, everyone was successively hung down to the water's edge and got on the boat. When it was dawn, the boat set off.

古文：及天曙船发，闻山头叫声，顾来处，已有千余矣。络绎下山，须臾至岸，既不及船，虓吼振腾。
现代文：忽听山头上有叫喊声，回头看逃出的地方，已有一千多巨人追来了，都络绎不绝地下山来，不一会儿就到了海岸。看到没有赶上船，都气得像虎那样吼叫，又咆哮又蹦跳。
English: Suddenly, they heard shouting on the top of the mountain. Looking back at the place where they had escaped, they saw that more than a thousand giants had already chased them. They all continued to descend the mountain and soon reached the coast. When they saw that they had not caught up with the boat, they were so angry that they roared like tigers, roaring and jumping.

古文：使者及妇人并得还。
现代文：使者和那些妇女最后终于都回到了家。
English: The messenger and the women eventually returned home.

古文：又近有海客往新罗，次至一岛上，满地悉是黑漆匙箸。
现代文：又有一件事，最近有个航海的人到新罗去，途中到一海岛上临时停脚，只见满地全是涂有黑漆的汤匙和筷子。
English: In another incident, a sailor who was on his way to Silla recently stopped at an island and saw black-painted spoons and chopsticks everywhere.

古文：其处多大木，客仰窥匙箸，乃木之花与须也，因拾百余双还。
现代文：那地方有很多大树，航海的人仰起头看那大树，原来那些汤匙筷子都是树上的花和花蕊。于是捡了一百多双带回去。
English: There were a lot of big trees in that area. The sailor looked up and saw the big tree. It turned out that those spoons and chopsticks were flowers and flower stems on the tree. So he picked up more than a hundred pairs and brought them back.

古文：用之，肥不能使，偶取搅茶，随搅随消焉。
现代文：回家一用，不好使，因为太粗。偶然用它搅茶水，一边搅一边这种筷子就消溶了。
English: Once you get home, it's hard to use because it's too thick. If you accidentally stir tea with it, the foam will dissolve as you stir.

古文：又六军使西门思恭，常衔命使于新罗。风水不便，累月漂泛于沧溟，罔知边际。
现代文：还有一件事，六军使西门思恭，曾经奉命出使新罗，由于风向水流常有不正常情况，所以往往连续几个月漂浮在大海上，不知海岸在哪里。
English: Another thing is that the envoy of the Sixth Army, Simon Sikyong, who was sent to Silla, often floated on the sea for several months in a row, not knowing where the coast was, because the wind direction and water flow were often abnormal.

古文：忽南抵一岸，亦有田畴物景，遂登陆四望。
现代文：忽有一天到了南边的一处海岸，看上去也有田地、景物，便登上陆地四下眺望。
English: Suddenly, one day, I arrived at a place on the southern coast, which also seemed to have fields and scenery. I stepped onto the land and looked around.

古文：俄有一大人，身长五六丈，衣裾差异，声如震雷，下顾西门，有如惊叹。
现代文：不一会儿，一个很高大的人，身高有五六丈，衣襟很奇特，声音像打雷，俯视西门思恭，有点像惊讶赞叹似的。
English: Soon, a very tall man, five or six meters tall, with a very strange collar and a voice like thunder, looked down on Simon Sikyong, a bit like surprise and admiration.

古文：于时以五指撮而提行百余里，入一岩洞间，见其长幼群聚，递相呼集，竞来看玩。
现代文：当时就用五个手指撮着西门思恭走了一百多里，进入一个岩洞里面。只见他们年老的年幼的都聚在一处，一个传一个地把他们的人都招呼过来，争先恐后地来观看欣赏西门思恭。
English: At that time, he walked more than a hundred miles with five fingers holding Simon Sikyong and entered a rock cave. I saw their old and young people gathered in one place, one by one calling their people over, scrambling to watch and appreciate Simon Sikyong.

古文：言语莫能辨，皆有欢喜之容，如获异物。
现代文：他们的话一点也听不懂，但都显出很高兴的样子，好像得到一种奇异的东西。
English: I couldn't understand a word they were saying, but they all looked happy, as if they'd won something special.

古文：遂掘一坑而置之，亦来看守之。
现代文：于是挖了一个坑，把西门思恭放在里面，还有人看守着。
English: So they dug a pit and put Simon Sikyong in it, with someone else watching over him.

古文：信宿之后，遂攀缘跃出其坑，径寻旧路而窜。
现代文：过了一个晚上，西门思恭就攀缘而上，跳出了坑，找到原路逃了回去。
English: After one night, Simon Sikyong climbed up the ledge, jumped out of the pit, found the original path and fled back.

古文：才跳入船，大人已逐而及之矣，便以巨手攀其船舷，于是挥剑，断下三指，指粗于今槌帛棒。大人失指而退，遂解缆。
现代文：西门思恭才跳上船，那巨人已追到船边，于是用大手抓住了船舷。在这危急情况下，西门思恭挥剑砍断了巨人的三个手指头手指头比现在捶帛的棒子还粗巨人掉了三个手指头，只好退回去。于是西门思恭解开缆绳开船。
English: The giant had already chased him to the edge of the boat, so he grabbed the side of the boat with his big hand. In this critical situation, Simon Scrooge swung his sword and cut off three of the giant's fingers. The fingers were thicker than the rods used today. The giant lost three of his fingers and had to retreat. So Simon Scrooge untied the cable and set sail.

古文：舟中水尽粮竭，经月无食，以身上衣服，啮而啖之。
现代文：船上水和粮食一点也没有了，一个月没粮吃，就吃身上穿的衣服，最后到达了北岸。
English: There was no water or food left on the boat. After a month without food, they ate the clothes they were wearing and finally reached the north shore.

古文：后得达北岸，遂进其三指，漆而藏于内库。
现代文：于是西门思恭献上了那三颗手指头，用漆漆了收藏在皇宫的仓库里。
English: So Simen Sikyong donated the three fingers, which were painted and stored in a warehouse at the Imperial Palace.

古文：洎拜主军，宁以金玉遗人，平生不以饮馔食客，为省其绝粮之难也。东女国
现代文：后来西门思恭被提升做了主军。从那时起，他宁可把金玉送给人，平生也一直不用饮食招待客人，因为他深深明白那没有粮食吃的艰难。东女国
English: Later, Simon Sikyong was promoted to the main army. From then on, he preferred to give gold and jewels to people, and he never invited guests to dinner, because he deeply understood the hardship of not having food to eat.

古文：东女国，西羌别种，俗以女为王。
现代文：东女国是西羌族的一支，她们的风俗是女人当国王。
English: Dongyang is a tribe of the Xidi people, and their custom is for a woman to be king.

古文：与茂州邻，有八十余城。以所居名康延州。
现代文：东女国与我国的茂州相邻，国内有八十多座城，她们把女王所住的地方命名为康延州。
English: Dongnyeong Province is adjacent to our country's Maozhou, and there are more than eighty cities in the country. They named the place where the queen lives as Kangyang Province.

古文：中有弱水，南流，用牛皮为船以渡。
现代文：国内有条弱水河，是向南流的，那里的人用牛皮做船来渡河。
English: There is a weak-water river in China that flows southward. People there use cowhides to make boats to cross the river.

古文：户口兵万人，散山谷，号曰宾就。
现代文：百姓和士兵共一万人，散居在山谷间，把这叫作 宾就 。
English: Ten thousand people, both civilians and soldiers, live scattered among the valleys, and they call it Bintso.

古文：有女官，号曰高霸，平议国事。
现代文：她们设有女官，号称 高霸 ，是商量讨论国家大事的。
English: They have a lady-in-waiting, known as the Gaoba, to discuss matters of state.

古文：在外官僚，并男夫为之，五日一听政。
现代文：外地官员。
English: field officers.

古文：王侍左右女数百人。
现代文：则是由男子担任。国王五天上朝一次，听取臣下的意见，处理国家大事。
English: The king comes to the palace once every five days to listen to the opinions of his subjects and deal with national affairs.

古文：王死，国中多敛物，至数万。
现代文：国王有女侍从数百人。国王死了，国内百姓大多要贡献财物，合起来可达数万。
English: The king had hundreds of ladies-in-waiting. When the king died, most of the people in the country had to contribute property, amounting to tens of thousands.

古文：更于王族中，求令女二人而立之，大者为大王，小者为小王。
现代文：还要在王族中找出两位美好的女子立为国王，年岁大的当大国王，年岁小的做小国王。
English: He must also find two beautiful women from the royal family to be king, the eldest to be the great king, and the youngest to be the little king.

古文：大王死，则小王位之，或姑死妇继。
现代文：大国王死了，小国王就登上大国王的位置，或者婆婆死了儿媳妇继承。
English: When the great king dies, the younger king takes the place of the great king, or when the mother-in-law dies, the daughter-in-law takes over.

古文：无墓。
现代文：死后没有坟墓。
English: There is no grave after death.

古文：所居皆重屋，王至九重，国人至六层。
现代文：人们住的都是楼，国王的楼达九层，百姓达到六层。
English: People live in buildings. The king's building is nine stories high, while the people's is six stories high.

古文：其王服青毛裙，平领衫，其袖委地。以文锦为小髻，饰以金耳垂珰。足履素靴。
现代文：他们的国王穿青色毛裙，平领的衣衫，衣袖都长长地拖在地上，她们以有花纹的锦扎成小发髻，耳朵垂上装饰着耳坠儿，脚上穿着白靴。
English: Their king is dressed in a blue fur coat, a shirt with a flat collar, the sleeves of which are long and dragging on the ground, and they wear their hair in small braids of patterned brocade, earrings dangling from their ears, and white shoes on their feet.

古文：重妇人而轻丈夫，文字同于天竺。
现代文：国中重视妇人，而轻视男人。
English: Women are valued in the country, while men are despised.

古文：以十一月为正，每十月，令巫者赍酒肴，诣山中，散糟麦于空，大咒呼鸟。
现代文：文字跟印度一样，她们以十一月为正月，每到十月令巫师送酒肴到山里去，还把碾碎的麦子散向空中，大声祷告呼唤鸟。
English: The script is the same as in India. They celebrate November as the first month of the year, and every October they have a sorcerer deliver wine and food to the mountains. They also scatter crushed wheat into the air and pray aloud for the birds.

古文：俄有鸟如雉，飞入巫者之怀，因剖腹视之，有谷，来岁必登。
现代文：不一会儿，就有一只像野鸡的山鸟飞到巫师的怀里，于是剖这只鸟的肚子，如果看到肚子里有谷粒。
English: Soon, a pheasant-like bird flew into the wizard's arms, and he cut open the bird's belly to see if there were any grains in it.

古文：若有霜雪，必有大灾。其俗名为鸟卜。
现代文：那么来年一定是好年头；如果里面是霜雪，就一定有大的灾难，她们称这种做法为 鸟卜 。
English: Then the next year must be a good year; if there is frost and snow inside, there must be a great disaster. They call this practice "birding."

古文：人死则纳骨肉金瓶中，和金屑而埋之。
现代文：这个国的人死后，就把骨头和肉装入金瓶中，和上金屑然后埋入土中。
English: In this country, when a person dies, his bones and flesh are put into a golden jar, together with gold dust, and then buried in the ground.

古文：廪君
现代文：廪君
English: 君

古文：李时，字玄休，廪君之后，昔武落钟离山崩，有石穴，一赤如丹，一黑如漆。
现代文：李时，字玄休，是古代巴郡南郡氏族首领廪君的后代。从前武落的钟离山崩塌，出了一个石坑，一坑红如朱砂，一坑黑如生漆。
English: Li Shi, also known as Xuanzhu, is a descendant of the ancient Ba County, Nan County clan leader Rui Jun. The bell of the former Wuling collapsed and a stone pit emerged, one pit red like cinnabar, one pit black like raw paint.

古文：有人出于丹穴者，名务相。
现代文：有一个人从红色坑中出来，名叫务相，姓巴。
English: A man emerged from the red pit. His name was Buso, and his surname was Ba.

古文：姓巴氏；有出于黑穴者，凡四姓：婂氏，樊氏，柏氏，郑氏。
现代文：有人从黑色坑中出来，共四个姓：婂氏，樊氏，柏氏，郑氏。
English: Someone came out of the black pit with a total of four surnames: Min, Min, Bao, and Zheng.

古文：五姓出而争焉，于是务相以矛刺穴。
现代文：五姓出现后开始争斗，于是务相用矛扎坑壁，说能把矛扎在坑壁上的，就做廪君。
English: After the appearance of the five surnames, they began to fight, so the magistrate used a spear to pierce the pit wall, saying that if he could pierce the spear on the pit wall, he would be the prince.

古文：能著者为廪君，四姓莫著，而务相之剑悬。
现代文：结果姓婂、樊、柏、郑的人谁也没扎住，而务相扎在坑壁上的矛上还能挂住剑。
English: As a result, no one with the surnames of Zou, Zou, Bai, or Zheng was stuck, but Wu Xiang could still hang his sword on the spear stuck on the pit wall.

古文：又以土为船，雕画之，而浮水中。曰： 若其船浮者为廪君。 
现代文：又用土做船，在船身上雕刻绘画，然后让船浮在水上，约定说： 如果谁的船能浮在水上，就可做廪君。 
English: They also made a boat out of clay, carved and painted on the hull, and then let the boat float on the water. The agreement said, "If anyone's boat can float on the water, he can be the king."

古文：务相船又独浮，于是遂称廪君。
现代文：又独有务相的船能浮在水上，于是就称务相为廪君。
English: In addition, the ship of the unique Mu Xiang can float on the water, so it is called the Mu Xiang.

古文：乘其土船，将其徒卒，当夷水而下，至于盐阳。
现代文：务相乘着他的土船，带着他的部众，顺夷水而下，到达了盐阳。
English: Taking his earthen boat and his followers, he sailed down the Yiwu River and arrived in Yan'an.

古文：水神女子止廪君曰： 此鱼盐所有，地又广大，与君俱生，可无行。 
现代文：水神的女儿阻止廪君说： 此地鱼盐都有，土地广大，我愿跟您一块生活，不要再走了。 
English: The daughter of the water god stopped him, saying, "There is fish and salt here, and the land is vast. I would like to live with you. Don't go away."

古文：廪君曰： 我当为君，求廪地，不能止也。 
现代文：廪君说： 我将成为国君，所以我要寻找能生产粮食的土地，不能停止。 
English: "I'm going to be the king of the country, so I'm going to look for land that can produce food, and I can't stop," he said.

古文：盐神夜从廪君宿，旦辄去为飞虫，诸神皆从，其飞蔽日。
现代文：盐神夜晚跟廪君一起睡觉，早晨离去变成了飞虫。各种神都跟着盐神，它们飞舞起来遮蔽了太阳。
English: At night, the salt god sleeps with the dragonfly, and when he leaves in the morning, he turns into a flying insect. All kinds of gods follow the salt god, and they fly up to cover the sun.

古文：廪君欲杀之，不可别，又不知天地东西。
现代文：廪君想杀死盐神，但没法分辨，又不知天地和方向，像这种情形持续了十天。
English: Zou Jun wanted to kill the salt god, but he couldn't tell the difference, and he didn't know the sky, the earth, or the direction. This kind of situation lasted for ten days.

古文：如此者十日，廪君即以青缕遗盐神曰： 婴此即宜之，与汝俱生；不宜，将去汝。 
现代文：廪君就把青线送给盐神，说： 缠上这个，如果适合你，就与你一块生活；不适合的话，我就要离开你。 
English: The king gave the blue thread to the salt god and said, "Wrap this around you. If it suits you, you can live with me. If it doesn't, I'll leave you."

古文：盐神受而婴之。
现代文：盐神接过去缠在了身上。
English: The salt god then became entangled in the body of the cow.

古文：廪君至砀石上，望膺有青缕者，跪而射之。中盐神，盐神死，群神与俱飞者皆去，天乃开朗。廪君复乘土船，下及夷城。
现代文：廪君到了一块带花纹的石头上，望着飞虫胸上有青线的，跪在石上射它，一下子就射中了盐神，盐神死了，天也开朗了。廪君又乘上船，下行到夷城。
English: Yu Jun arrived at a stone with a pattern, looked at the flying insect with a blue line on its chest, knelt on the stone and shot it, and immediately shot the salt god. The salt god died, and the sky was bright. Yu Jun got on the boat again and went down to Yicheng.

古文：石岸曲，泉水亦曲，望之如穴状。
现代文：那地方石岸曲折，泉水也弯弯曲曲，远远看去像大坑似的。
English: In that place, the rocky shore is tortuous, and the spring water is also tortuous, looking like a big pit from far away.

古文：廪君叹曰： 我新从穴中出，今又入此，奈何？ 
现代文：廪君感叹说： 我刚从坑中出来，现在又进了坑，怎么办？ 
English: Zou Jun sighed and said: I just came out of the pit, and now I'm back in the pit, what should I do?

古文：岸即为崩，广三丈余，而阶阶相承。
现代文：河岸马上就崩溃了，宽有三丈多，而且一个台阶接着一个台阶。
English: The bank immediately collapses, more than three feet wide, and one step after another.

古文：廪君登之，岸上有平石，长五尺，方一丈。
现代文：廪君登上去，岸上有平坦的石头，长五尺，面积有一丈。
English: On the shore, there is a flat stone, five feet long, with a height.

古文：廪君休其上，投策计算，皆著石焉。
现代文：廪君在上面休息，拈阄测算，结果都说建城。
English: Zou Jun rested on it, Zou measured, and the results all said that the city was built.

古文：因立城其旁，有而居之。
现代文：于是就在石头旁边建立城镇，靠近石头，在这里住了下来。
English: So he built a town next to the stone, close to the stone, and lived here.

古文：其后种类遂繁。
现代文：从那以后廪君的种族便繁衍起来。
English: Since then, the Shogun's race has multiplied.

古文：秦并天下，以为黔中郡，薄赋敛之，岁出钱四十万。
现代文：秦统一天下后，就把此地定为黔中郡。对此地收税不多，每年贡钱四十万。
English: One day after the Qin Dynasty was unified, this area was designated as Yuzhong County. Not much tax was collected from this area, with an annual tribute of 400,000 yuan.

古文：巴人以赋为賨，因谓之賨人焉。
现代文：巴人把赋税称为賨，于是便把巴人称为賨人了。
English: The Ba people called the tax levying a tax, so they called the Ba people a tax-levying people.

古文：大食国
现代文：大食国
English: A nation of gluttons

古文：大食西南二千里有国，山谷间，树枝上生花如人首，但不语，人借问，笑而已，频笑辄落。
现代文：大食国西南方二千里外有个国家，山野里的树上长出的花像人头，只是不说话。人问它时，它光能笑笑罢了，若频繁的笑，这花就落了。
English: There is a country two thousand miles to the southwest of the country of gluttony. The flowers growing on the trees in the mountains and fields look like human heads, but they do not speak. When people ask it, it can only smile. If it smiles frequently, the flower will fall.

古文：私阿修国
现代文：私阿修国
English: I am Ashoka

古文：私阿修国金辽山寺中，有石鼍，众僧饮食将尽，向石鼍作礼，于是饮食悉具。
现代文：私阿修国金辽山寺庙里，有个石鼍，和尚们饮食将要吃完时，只要向石鼍行礼，饮食饭菜就又会有了。
English: There is a stalagmite in the temple of Jinliao Mountain in the country of Ashu. When the monks are about to finish eating and drinking, as long as they bow to the stalagmite, they will have food and drink again.

古文：俱振提国
现代文：俱振提国
English: countries around the world

古文：俱振提国尚鬼神，城北隔真珠江二十里，有神。
现代文：俱振提国崇信鬼神，城北隔真珠江二十里处有神。
English: The country reveres ghosts and gods, and there is a shrine 20 miles north of the city across the Pearl River.

古文：春秋之时，国王所须什物金银器，神厨中自然而出，祠毕亦灭。
现代文：春秋祭祀季节国王所需要的什物和金银器具，神厨中会自动出现。
English: The objects and gold and silver utensils needed by the king during the spring and autumn sacrificial season will automatically appear in the sacred kitchen.

古文：天后使人验之，不妄。
现代文：祭祀完了，这些东西又会自动消失。武则天让人验证这事，果然不虚假。
English: After the ritual is over, these things will automatically disappear. Wu Zetian has someone verify this, and it is indeed true.

古文：牂牁
现代文：牂牁
English: 

古文：獠在牂牁，其妇人七月生子，死则竖棺埋之。
现代文：仡佬族生活在牂牁。他们的妇女怀孕七个月就生孩子。人死后，棺材是竖着埋在土中的。
English: The Yingluo people live in Handan. Their women give birth when they are seven months pregnant. When a person dies, the coffin is buried upright in the ground.

古文：木耳夷，旧牢西，以鹿角为器。
现代文：木耳族，居住在旧牢西面，他们用鹿角制作器具。
English: The Mule people, who live to the west of the old prison, make tools from antlers.

古文：其死则屈而烧，而埋其骨。
现代文：他们死了人，就把尸体弯曲起来焚烧，烧后只把骨头埋葬。
English: When they died, they bent the bodies over and burned them, burying only the bones.

古文：木耳夷人，黑如漆。
现代文：木耳这个少数民族的人。肤色黑得像漆。
English: Mule, a member of the ethnic minority, has a skin color as dark as lacquer.

古文：小寒则焙沙自处，但出其面。
现代文：天气稍冷些，就用微火把沙烧热，然后把身子埋在沙里面，只把脸露出来。
English: When the weather is a little cooler, they use a small fire to heat up the sand, and then bury their bodies in the sand, exposing only their faces.

古文：龟兹
现代文：龟兹
English: Kamez

古文：古龟兹国主阿主儿者，有神异力，能降伏毒蛇龙。
现代文：古代龟兹国王阿主儿有神奇的力量。能降伏毒蛇和龙。
English: The ancient turtle king, Amenhotep, had magical powers. He could subdue snakes and dragons.

古文：时有人买市人金银宝货，至夜中，钱并化为炭。
现代文：当时有人买了金银宝器等货物，到了半夜，钱都变成了炭。
English: At that time, some people bought gold, silver and other goods. By midnight, the money had turned into charcoal.

古文：境内数百家，皆失金宝。
现代文：国内的数百家都丢失了金银财宝。
English: Hundreds of companies in China have lost gold and silver treasures.

古文：王有男先出家，成阿罗汉果。
现代文：国王有个儿子先前就出家了，已修成了阿罗汉。
English: The king had a son who had previously become a monk and had become an arahant.

古文：王问之，罗汉曰： 此龙所为，居北山，其头若虎，今在某处眠耳。 
现代文：国王问他这件事，罗汉说： 这是龙干的事，此龙住在北山，它的头像老虎，现正在某处睡觉呢。 
English: When the king asked him about it, Rohan said, "This is the work of a dragon. This dragon lives in the North Mountain, its head resembles a tiger, and it is sleeping somewhere."

古文：王乃易衣持剑，默至龙所，见龙卧，将斩之。
现代文：国王于是换了衣服拿着宝剑，悄悄地到了龙所在的地方。
English: The king then changed his clothes, took his sword and quietly went to the place where the dragon was.

古文：思曰： 吾斩寐龙，谁知吾有神力。 
现代文：国王看见龙趴在那里，就要杀了它，但一想，我杀了睡着的龙，谁知道我有神奇的力量？
English: When the king saw the dragon lying there, he wanted to kill it, but he thought, I killed a sleeping dragon, who knows if I have magical powers?

古文：遂叱龙，龙惊起，化为狮子，王即乘其上。龙怒，作雷声，腾空，至城北二十里。王谓龙曰： 尔不降，当断尔头。 
现代文：便呵斥龙。龙吃惊地醒过来，变成了一头狮子，国王就骑到它的背上，龙非常愤怒，发出了雷鸣一般的声音，并飞上天空。飞到城北二十里，国王对龙说： 你不降伏，我会砍断你的头。 
English: The dragon woke up startled and turned into a lion, and the king rode on its back. The dragon was so angry that it let out a thunderous roar and flew into the sky. Twenty miles north of the city, the king said to the dragon: "If you do not surrender, I will cut off your head."

古文：龙惧王神力，人语曰： 勿杀我，我当与王为乘。欲有所向，随心即至。 
现代文：龙害怕国王神奇的力量，像人那样说： 不要杀我，我会给你当坐骑，你想到什么地方，心里一想就能到。 
English: The dragon was afraid of the king's miraculous power, and said, "Don't kill me, I'll be your mount. You can go anywhere you set your mind to.

古文：王许之，后遂乘龙而行。
现代文：国王答应了他，以后便乘龙而行。
English: The king agreed to this, and they set off on a journey by dragon.

古文：葱岭以东，人好淫僻，故龟兹于阗置女市，以收钱。
现代文：葱岭以东的地方，人们喜欢乱搞两性关系，所以龟兹于阗国都设有妓馆，以此赚钱。
English: East of the Onion Ridge, people like to mess around with sexual relationships, so there are brothels all over the country to make money.

古文：龟兹，元日斗羊马驼，为戏七日，观胜负，以占一年羊马减耗繁息也。
现代文：龟兹国每年都在正月初一那天举行斗羊、斗马、斗驼的活动。共进行七天，看谁胜谁负，以此推测一年中羊马损耗或繁衍增殖的情况。
English: Every year, on the first day of the first month of the year, Kuez Province holds sheep, horse and camel fighting activities. For a total of seven days, see who wins and who loses, in order to predict the loss or reproduction of sheep and horses during the year.

古文：婆逻遮，并服狗头猴面，男女无昼夜歌舞。
现代文：过婆逻遮节时，人们都戴上狗头猴脸面具，男女不分昼夜地唱歌跳舞。
English: During the festival, people wear masks with the face of a dog-headed monkey, and men and women sing and dance day and night.

古文：八月十五日，行像及透索为戏。
现代文：八月十五日把捧着佛像游行和跳绳作为娱乐活动。
English: On August 15th, they held a Buddha statue parade and rope skipping as entertainment.

古文：焉耆，元日二月八日婆摩遮。三日野祀，四月十五日游林。
现代文：焉耆国在正月初一、二月八日过婆摩遮节，三日到野外祭祀，四月十五日到树林中游玩。
English: On the first day of the first month of the year and on the 8th day of the 2nd month of the year, Yancheng Province celebrated the Mahabharata Festival. On the 3rd day, they went to the open-air sacrifice, and on the 15th day of the 4th month, they went to play in the woods.

古文：五月五日弥勒下生。七月七日祀生祖。
现代文：五月五日是弥勒生日节，七月七祭祀祖先。
English: The 5th of May is Maitreya's birthday, and the 7th of July is the day for ancestor worship.

古文：九月九日麻撒。
现代文：九月九日是麻撒节。
English: September 9th is Masa Day.

古文：十月十日，王为厌法，王领家出宫，首领代王焉，一日一夜，处分王事。
现代文：十月十日国王做厌世法事，国王带领家人走出王宫，由部落首领代替国王，一天一夜，处理国王的事务。
English: On October 10th, the king did a world-weary ritual. The king led his family out of the royal palace, and the tribal leader replaced the king. For one day and one night, he handled the king's affairs.

古文：十月十四日，每日作乐，至岁穷。
现代文：十月十四日起，每天奏乐，直到年终。
English: From October 14th, there will be music every day until the end of the year.

古文：拔汗那。十二月及元日，王及首领，分为两朋，各出一人，著甲。
现代文：十二月及正月初一，拔汗那国国王和部落首领分成两帮，各方出一人，穿上铠甲。
English: In December and on the first day of the first month of the year, the king and the tribal chiefs of the country of Pahang were divided into two groups. One person from each side put on armor.

古文：众人执瓦石棒棍，东西互击，甲人先死即止，以占当年丰俭。
现代文：众人拿着瓦、石、棒、棍，打他们，哪方穿铠甲的人先被打死，活动就停止，以此来推测当年丰收还是歉收。
English: People take shingles, stones, sticks and rods and beat them. Whichever person wearing armor is killed first, the activity stops, in order to guess whether the harvest was good or bad that year.

古文：乾陀国
现代文：乾陀国
English: Kenda Province

古文：乾陀国，昔有王神男多谋，号伽当。
现代文：乾陀国以前有个国王神勇多谋，号伽当。
English: Once upon a time, there was a king in the land of Kenda. He was a man of great courage and resourcefulness.

古文：讨袭诸国，所向悉降。
现代文：他讨伐袭击各国，所到之处全都投降。
English: He crusaded and attacked countries, and everywhere he went, they surrendered.

古文：至五天竺国，得上细緤二条，自留一，一与妃。
现代文：到五天竺国时，得到上等的细緤衣两条，自己留下一条，另一条给了妃子。
English: By the time of the five-day banishment, he had obtained two fine silk robes of the highest quality. He kept one for himself and gave the other to his concubine.

古文：妃因衣其緤谒王。
现代文：妃子于是穿上那条緤衣拜见伽当王。
English: The concubine then put on the long robe and bowed to King Gadon.

古文：緤当妃乳上，有郁金香手印迹，王见惊恐，谓妃曰： 尔忽衣此手迹衣服何也？ 
现代文：王见妃子穿的緤衣正当乳房的地方有郁金香色的手印，非常惊恐。问妃子说： 你忽然穿这带手印的衣服是怎么回事呢？ 
English: The king was horrified to see the tulip-coloured handprints on the right breast of the pleated dress the princess was wearing. He asked the princess: "What made you suddenly wear this hand-printed dress?"

古文：妃言向王所赐之緤。
现代文：妃子说是前些日子国王赐的緤衣。
English: The concubine said that it was a long robe given by the king a few days ago.

古文：王怒，问藏臣，藏臣曰： 緤本有是，非臣之咎。 
现代文：国王大怒，问藏臣。藏臣说： 緤上原有这手印，不是我的过错。 
English: The king was furious and asked the Tibetan official. The Tibetan official said, "It is not my fault that there was this handprint on the shackle.

古文：王追商者问之。
现代文：国王又抓来商人询问。
English: The king had the merchant brought in for questioning.

古文：商言天竺国娑陀婆恨王，有宿愿。每年所赋细緤，并重叠积之，手染郁金，柘于緤上，千万重手印即透。
现代文：商人说天竺国的国王叫娑陀婆恨王，他一向有个愿望：要把每年百姓上交的细緤，都重叠着放成一堆，然后把手染上郁金香染料，印到緤上。即使有千万层緤，手印也能立刻印透。
English: The merchant said that the king of the kingdom of heaven and earth called Gundabha to hate the king, and he always had a wish: to put all the thin cocoons handed in by the people every year into a pile, and then dye his hands with tulip dye and print them on the cocoons. Even if there are millions of layers of cocoons, the handprints can be printed immediately.

古文：丈夫衣之，手印当背；妇人衣之，手印当乳。
现代文：男的穿上它，手印在背上，女的穿上它，手印就在乳房部位。 
English: If a man wears it, his handprint is on his back, if a woman wears it, her handprint is on her breasts.

古文：王令左右披之，皆如商者。
现代文：国王就命令近侍穿上它，果然像商人说的那样。
English: The king ordered his attendants to put it on, and they did, just as the merchant had said.

古文：王因叩剑曰： 吾若不以此剑裁娑陀恨王手足，无以寝食。 
现代文：国王于是敲着宝剑说： 我如果不用这把剑砍下娑陀婆恨王的手脚，就无法睡觉吃饭！ 
English: The king then tapped his sword and said, "If I don't use this sword to cut off the hands and feet of Gautama, who hates the king, I won't be able to sleep or eat!"

古文：乃遣使就南天竺，索娑陀婆恨王手足。
现代文：于是派遣使者到南天竺，索要娑陀婆恨王的手脚。
English: So he sent an emissary to Nan Tianyao to ask for the hands and feet of Gong Daba Huan Wang.

古文：使至其国，娑陀婆恨王与群臣绐报曰： 我国虽有王名娑陀婆恨，元无王也，但以金为王，设于殿上。
现代文：使者到了那个国家，娑陀婆恨王与群臣用谎话回复说： 我国虽然有个国王叫娑陀婆恨。但那只是个虚名，其实我们根本就没有王，只不过用金子做成王的像，摆在殿上。
English: When the envoy arrived in that country, Kinga and her courtiers replied with a lie: Although there is a king in our country called Kinga, it is only a false name. In fact, we do not have a king at all, but a king's image made of gold and placed in the palace.

古文：凡统领教习，皆臣下耳。 
现代文：所有的事情都是大臣说了算。
English: The minister has the final say on everything.

古文：王遂起象马兵，南讨其国。
现代文：伽当王于是带领象、马、兵，讨伐天竺国。
English: King Gadang then led elephants, horses, and soldiers to fight against the Heavenly Kingdom.

古文：国隐其王于地窟中，铸金人，来迎伽王。
现代文：天竺国把国王隐藏在地窖中，而铸了一个金人，来迎接伽当王。
English: Amaterasu hid the king in a cellar and made a golden man to welcome King Gadon.

古文：伽王知其伪，且自恃神力，因断金人手足。
现代文：伽当王知道他们弄虚作假，并且仗着自己的神力，于是砍断了那金人的手脚。
English: King Gadon cut off the hands and feet of the man of gold, because he knew that they had lied and cheated, and because he relied on his own divine power.

古文：娑陀婆恨王于窟中，手足悉皆自落。
现代文：娑陀婆恨王当时正在地窖中，手脚居然全都自己掉了下来。
English: Gong Daba Huan Wang was in the cellar at the time, and her hands and feet all fell off by themselves.

古文：乾陀国者，尸毗王仓库，为火所烧。其中粳米焦者，于今尚存。
现代文：乾陀国尸毗王的仓库被火所烧，那里面烧焦的粳米，到现在还有。
English: The storehouse of the Bodhisattva of Kenda was burned by fire, and there is still charred glutinous rice in it.

古文：服一粒，永不患疟。
现代文：如果吃上一粒，永远不患疟疾。
English: If you eat one grain, you will never get malaria.

