古文：金纯，字德修，泗州人。
现代文：金纯，字德修，泗州人。
English: Jin Chun, the character De Xiu, is from Zhangzhou.

古文：洪武中国子监生。以吏部尚书杜泽荐，授吏部文选司郎中。
现代文：洪武年间国子监生，因吏部尚书杜泽的推荐，被授予吏部文选司郎中。
English: During the Hongwu era, he was awarded the title of Junior Secretary of the Ministry of Education and Culture on the recommendation of the Secretary of the Ministry of Education and Culture, Shang Shu Duze.

古文：三十一年出为江西布政司右参政。
现代文：三十一年，他出任江西布政司右参政。
English: In the 31st year, he served as the political secretary of Jiangxi Province and participated in politics.

古文：成祖即位，以蹇义荐，召为刑部右侍郎。
现代文：成祖即位后，因蹇义的推荐，把他召回任刑部右侍郎。
English: After the enthronement of Cheng Zu, he was recalled to serve as the right hand man of the Department of Justice on the recommendation of Zhai Yi.

古文：时将营北京，命采木湖广。
现代文：当时将营建北京，命他到湖广采木。
English: At that time, Beijing was to be built, and he was ordered to go to Hukang to collect wood.

古文：永乐七年从巡北京。
现代文：永乐七年，他随从皇上巡视北京。
English: In the seventh year of Yongle, he accompanied the emperor on a tour of Beijing.

古文：八年从北征，迁左侍郎。
现代文：八年，随从皇上北征，升为左侍郎。
English: Eight years later, he followed the Emperor to the Northern Expedition and was promoted to Sasajiro.

古文：九年命与宋礼同治会通河，又同徐亨、蒋廷瓒浚鱼王口黄河故道。
现代文：九年，命他和宋礼一同治理会通河，又同徐亨、蒋廷瓒疏浚鱼王口黄河故道。
English: In the ninth year, he and Song Li were ordered to jointly manage the Tonghe River, and together with Xu Heng and Jiang Tingtao to dredge the Yuewangkou Yellow River.

古文：初，太祖用兵梁、晋间，使大将军徐达开塌场口，通河于泗。又开济宁西耐牢坡引曹、郓河水，以通中原之运。
现代文：当初，太祖在梁、晋之间用兵，派大将军徐达挖开塌场口，把黄河通到泗水；又掘开济宁以西的耐牢坡，引曹州、郓城地区的黄河水，以开通中原的运输通道。
English: At first, Emperor Taizu used soldiers between Liang and Jin, and sent the great general Xu Da to excavate the collapse site to open the Yellow River to Surabaya. He also excavated the resistant slope west of Jining to divert the Yellow River water in Caozhou and Lucheng to open the transport channel in the Central Plains.

古文：其后故道浸塞，至是纯疏治之。
现代文：后来故道渐渐淤塞，至此金纯来疏浚治理它。
English: Later, the old road gradually silted up, so Jin Chun came to dredge and treat it.

古文：自开封北引水达郓城，入塌场，出谷亭北十里为永通、广运二闸。
现代文：他从开封之北引水到郓城，进入塌场，出谷亭以北十里，在这里设永通、广运两座闸门。
English: He diverted water from the north of Kaifeng to Lucheng, entered the landslide site, ten miles north of Dejuting, and set up two gates here, Yongtong and Guangyun.

古文：十四年改礼部左侍郎。
现代文：十四年，他改任礼部左侍郎。
English: Fourteen years later, he was reassigned to the position of Reibu Sasajiro.

古文：越二月，进尚书。
现代文：过了两个月，他升为尚书。
English: Two months later, he was promoted to Shangshu.

古文：十五年从巡北京。
现代文：十五年他随从皇上巡视北京。
English: For fifteen years he accompanied the emperor on his inspection tour of Beijing.

古文：十九年同给事中葛绍祖巡抚四川。
现代文：十九年，他同给事中葛绍祖巡抚四川。
English: In the 19th year, he also appointed Ge Shaozu as the governor of Sichuan.

古文：仁宗即位，改工部。
现代文：仁宗即位后，他改为工部尚书。
English: After Emperor Nanzong ascended to the throne, he was transferred to the Ministry of Industry.

古文：居数月，又改刑部。
现代文：几个月后，又改为刑部尚书。
English: A few months later, it was changed to the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：明年兼太子宾客。
现代文：第二年他兼任太子宾客。
English: The following year he was also a guest of the Crown Prince.

古文：宣德三年，纯有疾，帝命医视疗。
现代文：宣德三年，金纯有病，皇上派医生给他看病。
English: In the third year of Xuande's reign, Jin Chun fell ill, and the emperor sent a doctor to treat him.

古文：稍间，免其朝参，俾护疾视事。
现代文：病情有好转后，皇上免予他朝参，让他能养病治事。
English: After his condition improved, the emperor exempted him from the morning rites so that he could recover from his illness.

古文：会暑，敕法司理滞囚。
现代文：当时正暑热，皇上敕令法司审理积压的案件。
English: At that time, it was hot, and the emperor ordered the law department to review the backlog of cases.

古文：纯数从朝贵饮，为言官所劾。
现代文：金纯多次与朝中显贵饮酒，被言官弹劾。
English: Jin Chun repeatedly drank alcohol with high-ranking officials of the dynasty and was impeached by the speaker.

古文：帝怒曰： 纯以疾不朝而燕于私，可乎？ 
现代文：皇上怒道： 金纯因病不朝见，却私下燕饮，这能行吗？ 
English: The emperor angrily said, "Can it be right for Jin Chun to not see the emperor in the morning because of his illness, but to swallow alcohol in private?

古文：命系锦衣狱。
现代文：命令将他关进锦衣卫监狱。
English: He was ordered to be detained in Jinlingwei Prison.

古文：既念纯老臣，释之，落太子宾客。
现代文：后来又念金纯是老臣，放了他，降为太子宾客。
English: Later, he thought that Jin Chun was an old minister, released him, and reduced him to a prince's guest.

古文：八月予致仕去。
现代文：八月，准予他退休而去。
English: In August, he was allowed to retire.

古文：纯在刑部，仁宗尝谕纯： 法司近尚罗织，言者辄以诽谤得罪，甚无谓。
现代文：金纯在刑部时，仁宗曾谕告他说： 法司近来专好罗织罪名，提意见的人常被指责为诽谤而得罪，这很没意思。
English: When Jin Chun was in the Criminal Investigation Department, Rinzong had once admonished him: "The Department of Justice has recently specialized in fabricating crimes, and people who offer opinions are often accused of slander, which is very uninteresting.

古文：自今告诽谤者勿论。 
现代文：自今以后，告诽谤的不要论罪。 
English: From now on, those who slander should not be punished.

古文：纯亦务宽大，每诫属吏不得妄椎击人。
现代文：金纯也力求宽大，常告诫属官不得乱拷打犯人。
English: Jin Chun also strived for leniency, often admonishing subordinate officers not to torture prisoners indiscriminately.

古文：故当纯时，狱无瘐死者。
现代文：所以金纯当权时期，没有死于狱中的人。
English: That is why no one died in prison during Kim Chun's time in power.

古文：正统五年卒。
现代文：他于正统五年去世。
English: He died five years later.

古文：赠山阳伯。
现代文：赠山阳伯。
English: Presented to Sanyo Bo.

古文：张本，字致中，东阿人。
现代文：张本，字致中，东阿人。
English: Zhang Ben, Zhi Zhong, Dong A Ren.

古文：洪武中，自国子生授江都知县。
现代文：洪武年间，他以国子监生被授予江都知县。
English: During the Hongwu era, he was awarded the title of Kuniko-chokusho of Jiangdu County.

古文：燕兵至扬州，御史王彬据城抗，为守将所缚。
现代文：燕王的部队到达扬州时，御史王彬据城抵抗，被守将所缚。
English: When Yan Wang's troops arrived in Yangzhou, Goshi Wangbin resisted and was tied up by the garrison.

古文：本率父老迎降。
现代文：张本率父老迎接并归降。
English: Zhang Ben led his father and grandfather to meet and surrender.

古文：成祖以滁、泰二知州房吉、田庆成率先归附，命与本并为扬州知府，偕见任知府谭友德同涖府事。
现代文：成祖因滁、泰二州的知州房吉、田庆成率先归附，便命他们与张本同为扬州知府，偕同现任知府谭友德治理府事。
English: Cheng Zu, Chizhou Fangji and Tian Qingcheng of Tai Erzhou were the first to be annexed, and they were ordered to be the governors of Yangzhou together with Zhang Ben, and to govern the affairs of the prefecture together with the current governor, Tan Youde.

古文：寻擢本江西布政司右参政。
现代文：不久他升为江西布政司右参政。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to Jiangxi Provincial Secretary of the Communist Party of China.

古文：永乐四年召为工部左侍郎。
现代文：永乐四年，他被召回任工部左侍郎。
English: In the fourth year of Yongle, he was called back to serve as the left attendant of the work department.

古文：坐事免官，冠带办事。
现代文：后来因犯有过失被免官，但仍让他冠带办事。
English: He was later removed from office for negligence, but he was still allowed to do his job.

古文：明年五月复官。
现代文：第二年五月给他复官。
English: He was reinstated in May of the following year.

古文：寻以奏牍书衔误左为右，为给事中所劾。
现代文：不久他因在奏章中署官衔时误左为右，被给事中弹劾。
English: He was soon impeached for misspelling his official title in a report.

古文：帝命改授本部右侍郎而宥其罪。
现代文：皇上命改任他为本部右侍郎。而宽宥了他的罪过。
English: The emperor appointed him as Motobu's right-hand man and forgave his sins.

古文：七年，皇太子监国，奏为刑部右侍郎。
现代文：七年，皇太子监国，上奏任他为刑部右侍郎。
English: In the seventh year, the crown prince supervised the country, and he was appointed as the right hand man of the criminal department.

古文：善摘奸。
现代文：他善于发现奸情。
English: He's good at spotting infidelity.

古文：命督北河运。躬自相视，立程度，舟行得无滞。
现代文：他奉命总督北河运输时，亲自巡视，订立制度，使舟行无阻。
English: He was ordered by the Governor of the Beichuan River to personally inspect and establish a system to make the boat unimpeded.

古文：会疾作，太子赐之狐裘冠钞，遣医驰视。
现代文：正值他疾病发作，太子赐给他狐裘冠帽和钞币，派医生驰往为他看病。
English: At the time of his illness, the prince gave him a fox fur cap and money, and sent a doctor to see him.

古文：十九年将北征，命本及王彰分往两直隶、山东、山西、河南，督有司造车挽运。
现代文：十九年，皇上将北征，命张本和王彰分别前往南北两直隶、山东、山西、河南，监督有关官员造车挽运。
English: In the 19th year, the emperor ordered Zhang Ben and Wang Zhang to go to the north and south, Shandong, Shanxi and Henan respectively, to supervise the relevant officials to build cars for the transport.

古文：明年即命本督北征饷。
现代文：第二年即命张本总督北征粮饷。
English: The following year, Governor Zhang Ben was ordered to go to the north to collect grain.

古文：仁宗即位，拜南京兵部尚书兼掌都察院事。
现代文：仁宗即位后，他被任为南京兵部尚书兼掌都察院事务。
English: After Emperor Nanzong ascended to the throne, he was appointed as the chief of the Nanjing Military Department and also in charge of the affairs of the Capital Inspection Office.

古文：召见，言时政得失，且请严饬武备。
现代文：他被召见时，谈论时政得失，并请严整武备。
English: When he was summoned, he talked about the merits and demerits of the current political situation, and asked for strict preparation.

古文：帝嘉纳之，遂留行在兵部。
现代文：皇上嘉纳了他的建议，遂把他留在行在兵部。
English: His suggestion was accepted by the emperor, who left him in the army.

古文：宣德初，工部侍郎蔡信乞征军匠家口隶锦衣卫。
现代文：宣德初年，工部侍郎蔡信请征取军匠家属隶属于锦衣卫。
English: In the first year of Xuande, Cai Xin, the attendant of the Ministry of Industry, requested the recruitment of the families of the military artisans affiliated with Jin Rongwei.

古文：本言： 军匠二万六千人，属二百四十五卫所，为匠者暂役其一丁。
现代文：张本说 ：军匠二万六千户，分属于二百四十五个卫所，为匠的人暂且每家役使一丁。
English: Zhang Ben said, "There are twenty-six thousand households of artisans, divided into two hundred and forty-five sanctuaries, and the artisans are temporarily assigned to one household each.

古文：若尽取以来，家以三四丁计之，数近十万。
现代文：如果全部把他们征来，每家按三四丁计算，为数将近十万。
English: If all of them were to be conscripted, the number would be close to one hundred thousand, based on three or four children per family.

古文：军伍既缺，人情惊骇，不可。 
现代文：这样则不但军伍缺少，而且人情惊骇。不可。 
English: As a result, not only is there a shortage of troops, but the human condition is appalling.

古文：帝善本言。
现代文：皇上称赞张本的意见。
English: The emperor praised Zhang Ben's opinion.

古文：征汉庶人，从调兵食。
现代文：征讨汉庶人时，张本随从，处理军饷。
English: When recruiting Han commoners, Zhang Ben followed and handled the military payroll.

古文：庶人就擒，命抚辑其众，而录其余党。
现代文：汉庶人就擒后，张本受命安抚他的部众，并登记其余党。
English: After the fall of Han, Zhang was ordered to appease his subordinates and register the rest of the party.

古文：还以军政久敝，奸人用贷脱籍，而援平民实伍，言于帝。
现代文：回来后，他将军政久弊，奸邪之人通过纳贿得以脱籍，而把平民拉来充实军伍的情况报告了皇上。
English: After his return, he reported to the emperor that the military government had been flawed for a long time, that traitors had been able to get out of the country by paying bribes, and that civilians had been brought in to replenish the army.

古文：择廷臣四出厘正之。
现代文：皇上挑选廷臣四出，进行改正。
English: The emperor selected four courtiers to make the correction.

古文：时马大孳息，畿内军民为畜牧所困。本请分牧于山东、河南及大名诸府。
现代文：当时马匹大量繁衍，畿内军民被畜牧所困，张本请到山东、河南、大名等府分别牧养。
English: At that time, horses were proliferating in large numbers, and soldiers and civilians in the Kinai region were trapped in animal husbandry. Zhang Ben was invited to Shandong, Henan, and daimyo (feudal lords) to herd them separately.

古文：山东、河南养马自此始。
现代文：山东、河南养马自此而始。
English: Horse breeding in Shandong and Henan began from here.

古文：晋王济熿坐不轨夺爵，本奉命散其护卫军于边镇。
现代文：晋王朱济火黄犯行为不法被削夺封爵，张本奉命将他的护卫军分派到各个边镇。
English: The Jin king Zhu Zi was deprived of his knighthood for the illegal actions of a criminal, and Zhang Ben was ordered to dispatch his escort army to various border towns.

古文：四年命兼太子宾客。
现代文：四年，张本兼任太子宾客。
English: For four years, Zhang was also a guest of the crown prince.

古文：户部以官田租减，度支不给，请减外官俸及生员军士月给。
现代文：户部因官田租税减少，请削减外官的俸禄和生员军士的月给。
English: The Ministry of Households, due to the reduction of the official field tax, please reduce the salary of the foreign minister and the monthly allowance of the junior non-commissioned officer.

古文：帝以军士艰，不听减。
现代文：皇上认为军士生活艰难，不让减，其他的交大臣廷议。
English: The emperor thought that the life of a sergeant was difficult and would not allow him to be demoted. The rest was left to the discretion of the court.

古文：余下廷议，本等持不可，乃止。阳武侯薛禄城独石诸戍成，本往计守御之宜。
现代文：张本等人反对，此事作罢。阳武侯薛禄修筑独石等戍城池成功，张本前往谋划守御事宜。
English: Zhang Ben and others objected, and the matter was dropped. Yangwu lord Xue Lu was successful in building the monolithic castle pond, and Zhang Ben went to plan the defense of the palace.

古文：还奏称旨，命兼掌户部。
现代文：回来后他作了汇报，很合皇上旨意，命他兼掌户部事务。
English: After his return, he gave a report, which was very much in line with the Emperor's wishes, and he was also ordered to take charge of the household affairs.

古文：本虑边食不足，而诸边比岁稔，请出丝麻布帛输边易谷，多者三四十万石，少者亦十万石，储偫顿充。
现代文：张本担心边防储粮不足，而各边地连年丰收，便请拿出丝麻布帛输运到边疆以换取粮食，多的三、四十万石，少的也有十万石，边粮储备顿时充实起来。
English: Zhang Ben was worried about the shortage of grain stored at the border, but the border areas had a bumper harvest year after year, so he asked to take out the flax cloth and transport it to the border areas in exchange for grain, the most was 300,000-400,000 koku, and the least was 100,000 koku, and the border grain reserves were immediately replenished.

古文：六年病卒，赐赙三万缗，葬祭甚厚。
现代文：六年，张本病逝。赐给丧资三万缗，葬祭很丰厚。
English: Six years later, Zhang Ben died of illness. He was given a funeral fund of thirty thousand baht, and the funeral was very rich.

古文：本廉介有执持，尚刻少恕。
现代文：张本廉洁刚介，有原则，比较严厉而少有宽恕。
English: Zhang Ben is an honest and straightforward person, principled, relatively strict and rarely forgiving.

古文：同官有为不义者，辄厉色待之，其人悔谢乃已。性好学，公退，手不释卷。
现代文：登记朱高煦党羽时，胁从者多不得免。成祖宴请近臣，每人都各摆银器一案，并把这些都赐给各人，唯独给张本的案上摆陶案，对他说： 爱卿号称 穷张 ，银器没什么用。 
English: When registering Zhu Gaozhang's party, most of the followers were forced to obey. Cheng Zu invited his close vassals to the banquet, and each person put up a case of silverware, and gave these to each person, but only put a pottery case on Zhang Ben's case, and said to him: Aijing is known as poor Zhang, and silverware is useless.

古文：六年，卒官，年六十二。郭琎，字时用，初名进，新安人。
现代文：张本叩头致谢。他就是这样为皇上所知。郭琎，字时用，初名进，新安人。
English: Zhang Ben bowed his head in thanks. This is how he became known to the emperor. Guo Wei, his first name is Jin, and he was from Xin'an.

古文：永乐初，以太学生擢户部主事。历官吏部左、右侍郎。
现代文：永乐初年，他以太学生被升为户部主事，历任吏部左、右侍郎。
English: In the first year of Yongle, he was promoted from a student to the head of the household department, and successively served as the left and right attendant of the cadre department.

古文：仁宗即位，命兼詹事府少詹事，更名琎。
现代文：仁宗即位后，命他兼詹事府少詹事，改名为璡。
English: After Emperor Nanzong ascended to the throne, he ordered him to serve as Zhan Shifu Sho Zhan Shifu and changed his name to Zou.

古文：宣宗初，掌行在詹事府。
现代文：宣宗初年，他掌管行在詹事府。
English: In the first year of Xuan Zong's reign, he was in charge of the administration in Zhanzhi Prefecture.

古文：吏部尚书蹇义老，辍部务，帝欲以琎代。
现代文：吏部尚书蹇义年老，解除了部里职务，皇上想用郭璡取代他。
English: The Emperor wanted to replace him with Guo Jie, as he was too old and had been relieved of his duties in the ministry.

古文：琎厚重勤敏，然寡学术。
现代文：郭琎为人厚重勤敏，但没有学问。
English: Guo Wei is a diligent and diligent person, but he has no knowledge.

古文：杨士奇言恐琎不足当之，宜妙择大臣通经术知今古者，帝乃止。
现代文：杨士奇说恐怕郭琎不能胜任，应当妙选通经术知古今的大臣来担任。
English: Yang Shichi said that he was afraid that Guo Gan was not competent, and that a minister who was well versed in the ancient and modern scriptures should be chosen.

古文：逾年，卒为尚书。
现代文：皇上于是作罢。过了一年，他终于成为尚书。
English: A year later, he finally became Shosho.

古文：谕以吕蒙正夹袋，虞允文材馆录故事。
现代文：皇上对他谈吕蒙正夹袋、虞允文材馆录的故事。
English: The emperor talked to him about the story of Lv Mengzheng's bag and Yu Yun's literary collection.

古文：琎由是留意人才。
现代文：郭璡由此留意人才。
English: As a result, Guo Wei pays attention to talent.

古文：识进士李贤辅相器，授吏部主事，后果为名相。
现代文：他知道进士李贤有辅相之器，便任他为吏部主事，李贤后来果然成为名相。
English: He knew that the conscript Li Xian had complementary skills, so he appointed him as the head of the personnel department. Li Xian later became the famous minister.

古文：时外官九年考满，部民走阙下乞留，辄增秩复任。
现代文：当时外官九年任满后，所辖百姓来到京城请求让其留任的，总是增加俸禄让他复任。
English: At that time, after the nine-year term of a foreign official, if the people under his jurisdiction came to the capital to request that he remain in office, he would always be reinstated with an increase in salary.

古文：琎虑有妄者，请覆实。
现代文：郭璡担心其中有的有诈，请求核实。
English: Guo Gan was worried that some of them were fraudulent and asked for verification.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上听从了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：琎虽长六卿，然望轻。
现代文：郭琎虽然为六卿长官，但名望较轻。
English: Although Guo Wei was the sixth chief, he was less famous.

古文：又政归内阁，自布政使至知府阙，听京官三品以上荐举；既又命御史、知县，皆听京官五品以上荐举。
现代文：汉时又政归内阁，从布政使到知府，有了出缺，听任京官三品以上推荐。后来又命御史和知县，也都听任京官五品以上推荐。
English: In the Han Dynasty, when a political leader returned to the cabinet, from the cloth minister to the prefectural governor, if there was a vacancy, he would listen to the recommendation of more than three products from the Beijing official. Later, he would also listen to the recommendation of more than five products from the Beijing official.

古文：要职选擢，皆不关吏部。
现代文：要职选任和提升，都不关吏部。
English: The selection and promotion of important posts are not related to the cadre department.

古文：正统初，左通政陈恭言： 古者择任庶官，悉由选部，职任专而事体一。
现代文：正统初年，左通政陈恭说： 古代择任百官，都经过选部，职责专任而事体一致。
English: In the first year of orthodoxy, Zotong Zheng Chen Jiong said: In ancient times, the selection of hundreds of officials was through the selection department, and the responsibilities were full-time and consistent.

古文：今令朝臣各举所知，恐开私谒之门，长奔竞之风，乞杜绝，令归一。 
现代文：现在令朝臣各举荐其所了解的人，恐怕令开私谒之门，助长奔走之风，乞请杜绝，使职权归一。 
English: To ask courtiers to recommend people they know is to open the door to selfishness, to encourage a culture of rushing around, to beg for things to stop, and to consolidate authority.

古文：下吏部议。
现代文：皇上交吏部讨论。
English: The Emperor's Diplomatic Corps discussed it.

古文：琎逊谢不敢当，事遂寝。
现代文：郭璡谦逊辞谢，说不敢当，此事遂罢。
English: Guo Wei humbly declined to thank him, saying that he did not dare to do so. Let the matter be over.

古文：正统六年，御史曹恭以灾异请罢大臣不职者。
现代文：正统六年，御史曹恭因有灾异请求罢免不称职的大臣。
English: In the sixth year of his reign, Mishi Cao Qiong requested the dismissal of an incompetent minister due to a calamity.

古文：帝命科道官参议。
现代文：皇上命科道官员会同讨论。
English: Officials from the Emperor's Life Science Academy will also join the discussion.

古文：琎及尚书吴中、侍郎李庸等被劾者二十人。
现代文：郭璡和尚书吴中、侍郎李庸等二十人被弹劾。
English: Guo Jun, monk Wu Zhong, chamberlain Li Yong and twenty others were impeached.

古文：琎等自陈，帝切责而宥之。
现代文：郭琎等人自述自己所为。皇上严厉责备他，而后宽宥了他。
English: Guo Gan and the others confessed to what they had done. The emperor severely reprimanded him and then pardoned him.

古文：琎子亮受赂为人求官。
现代文：郭琎的儿子郭亮受贿为他人求官。
English: Guo Yao's son, Guo Liang, took bribes to seek positions for others.

古文：事觉，御史孙毓等劾琎。
现代文：事情被发觉后，御史孙毓等人弹劾郭璡。
English: After the affair was discovered, Guo Guo was impeached by Sun Yat-sen and others.

古文：乃令琎致仕，而以王直代。
现代文：于是皇上令郭琎退休，而以王直取代他。
English: So the emperor retired Guo Gan and replaced him with Wang Zhi.

古文：郑辰，字文枢，浙江西安人。
现代文：郑辰，字文枢，浙江西安人。
English: Zheng Chen, Zhi Wenzhu, from Xi'an, Zhejiang Province.

古文：永乐四年进士，授监察御史。
现代文：永乐四年，中进士。后被授予监察御史。
English: Yongle four years, junior high school graduate. Later, he was awarded the supervision of history.

古文：江西安福民告谋逆事，命辰往廉之，具得诬状。
现代文：江西安福的百姓告有谋逆事，朝廷命郑辰前往查访，查得诬告的情况。
English: The people of Anfu, Jiangxi, accused him of plotting against them. The imperial court ordered Zheng Chen to pay a visit to investigate the false accusation.

古文：福建番客杀人，复命辰往。
现代文：福建外番杀人，又命郑辰前往。
English: Zheng Chen was ordered to go to Fujian to carry out extrajudicial killings.

古文：止坐首恶，释其余。
现代文：郑辰只将首恶治罪，其他的都释放了。
English: Zheng Chen only punished the first crime, and released the others.

古文：南京敕建报恩寺，役囚万人。
现代文：南京敕令建报恩寺，役使囚犯一万人。
English: The Nanjing Imperial Edict ordered the construction of Bao'en Temple, which was built by 10,000 prisoners.

古文：蜚语言役夫谤讪，恐有变，命辰往验。
现代文：有流言说役夫诽谤，恐怕有变，朝廷命郑辰前往调查。
English: There is a rumor that the servant slandered, I'm afraid there is a change, the court ordered Zheng Chen to investigate.

古文：无实，无一得罪者。
现代文：郑辰查无实据，结果没有一人得罪。
English: Zheng Chen's investigation found no evidence, and as a result, no one was offended.

古文：谷庶人谋不轨，复命辰察之，尽得其踪迹。
现代文：谷庶人图谋不轨，又命郑辰察访，郑辰全部查清了他的踪迹。
English: Gu, a commoner, plotted to commit a crime, and ordered Zheng Chen to pay a visit. Zheng Chen found out everything about him.

古文：帝语方宾曰： 是真国家耳目臣矣。 
现代文：皇上对方宾说 ：他真是国家耳目之臣啊！ 
English: The Emperor said to his guest: "He really is a loyal subject of the state!"

古文：十六年超迁山西按察使，纠治贪浊不少贷。
现代文：十六年，他被超升为山西按察使，惩治贪污者，不稍有宽贷。
English: Sixteen years later, he was promoted to inspector of Shanxi Province, punishing those who were corrupt, with no leniency.

古文：潞州盗起，有司以叛闻，诏发兵讨捕。
现代文：潞州有盗贼起事，有关官员上报说有反叛，诏令发兵去讨伐。
English: Thieves rose up in Zhangzhou, and the relevant officials reported that there was a rebellion, and issued an order to send troops to fight.

古文：辰方以事朝京师，奏曰： 民苦徭役而已，请无发兵。 
现代文：郑辰正有事回京师朝见，上奏说 ：这是百姓苦于徭役而已，请不要发兵。 
English: Zheng Chen was on his way back to Beijing to see his master in the morning, and said in his report: This is just the people suffering from the siege, please don't send troops.

古文：帝然之。
现代文：皇上同意了。
English: The emperor agreed to Wang Hun's score.

古文：还则屏驺从，亲入山谷抚谕。
现代文：他回去时则屏退驺从人员，亲自入山谷中进行安抚。
English: When he returned, he withdrew from the officers and personally went into the valley to appease them.

古文：盗皆感泣，复为良民。
现代文：盗贼都感动而泣，重做良民。
English: The thieves were moved to tears and became good citizens again.

古文：礼部侍郎蔚绶转粟给山海军，辰统山西民辇任。
现代文：礼部侍郎蔚绶转运粮食给山海关驻军，郑辰统领山西百姓用车运。
English: The attendant of the ceremonial department, Wei Wei, transported the grain to the Shanhaiguan customs station, and Zheng Chen led the Shanxi people to transport it by car.

古文：民劳，多逋耗，绶令即山海贷偿之。
现代文：百姓很辛苦，多有拖欠和损耗，蔚绶命令就在山海关借贷偿还。
English: The people worked very hard, there were many arrears and losses, and Wei Xuan ordered to borrow and repay at the Shanhaiguan Customs.

古文：辰曰： 山西民贫而悍，急之恐生变。
现代文：郑辰说 ：山西百姓贫穷而且凶悍，逼急了恐怕会生变。
English: Zheng Chen said: The people of Shanxi are poor and fierce, and I am afraid that they will change when they are in a hurry.

古文：不如缓之，使自通有无。 
现代文：不如先缓一下，让他们自通有无。 
English: It would be better to wait a bit and let them go their own way.

古文：用其言，卒无逋者。
现代文：他的意见被采纳，终于没有拖欠。
English: His suggestion was accepted, and finally there was no delay.

古文：丁内艰归，军民诣御史乞留。
现代文：遭母丧归家时，军民都前往御史处乞请把他留下。
English: When he returned home after his mother's death, soldiers and civilians alike went to the Imperial History Office to beg him to stay.

古文：御史以闻，服阕还旧任。
现代文：御史上报朝廷，郑辰守孝期满后，回到旧任。
English: After Zheng Chen's term of filial piety expired, he returned to his old post.

古文：宣德三年召为南京工部右侍郎。
现代文：宣德三年，他被召回任南京工部右侍郎。
English: In the third year of Xuan De, he was recalled to serve as the right hand man of the Nanjing Engineering Department.

古文：初，两京六部堂官缺，帝命廷臣推方面官堪内任者。
现代文：当初，两京六部堂官出缺，皇上命令廷臣推荐可胜任的在外的方面之臣。
English: At first, there were vacancies for six courtiers in the two capitals, and the emperor ordered courtiers to recommend competent foreign courtiers.

古文：蹇义等荐九人。
现代文：蹇义等推荐了九个人。
English: Zou Yi and others recommended nine people.

古文：独辰及邵玘、傅启让，帝素知其名，即真授，余试职而已。
现代文：只有郑辰和邵王己、傅启让三人，皇上素知他们的名字，马上真授他们官职，其他的只是试用而已。
English: Only Zheng Chen, Shao Wangji and Fu Qijang were three. The emperor knew their names and immediately gave them official positions. The others were just probationers.

古文：英宗即位，分遣大臣考察天下方面官。
现代文：英宗即位后，分派大臣考察天下方面官。
English: After Emperor Yingzong ascended the throne, he dispatched a minister to inspect the imperial officials.

古文：辰往四川、贵州、云南，悉奏罢其不职者。
现代文：郑辰前往四川、贵州、云南，都上奏罢免不称职的人。
English: Zheng Chen went to Sichuan, Guizhou, and Yunnan to report on the removal of incompetent people.

古文：云南布政使周璟居妻丧，继娶。辰劾其有伤风教，璟坐免。
现代文：云南布政使周王景在妻丧期间纳妾，郑辰弹劾他有伤风教，周王景被免职。
English: Zhou Wangjing, the political envoy of Yunnan Province, took a concubine during his wife's funeral. Zheng Chen impeached him for violating the moral code, and Zhou Wangjing was removed from office.

古文：正统二年，奉命振南畿、河南饥。
现代文：正统二年，他奉命赈济南畿、河南饥荒。
English: In the second year of his reign, he was ordered to relieve the famine in Nanki and Henan.

古文：时河堤决，即命辰伺便修塞。
现代文：当时黄河决堤，即命郑辰趁便修复堤防。
English: At that time, the Yellow River broke through the dike, and Zheng Chen was immediately ordered to repair the dike.

古文：或议自大名开渠，引诸水通卫河，利灌输。
现代文：有人建议从大名开渠，引各水灌通卫河，以利于灌溉运输。
English: Some people suggested that a canal should be opened from the daimyo to bring water from various places to the Wei River to facilitate irrigation transport.

古文：辰言劳民不便，事遂寝。
现代文：郑辰说这样会劳民，不便，此事遂罢了。
English: Zheng Chen said that this would be inconvenient for the workers, and the matter was finally over.

古文：迁兵部左侍郎，与丰城侯李彬转饷宣府、大同。
现代文：后来他升任兵部左侍郎，与丰城侯李彬转运粮食到宣府、大同。
English: Later, he was promoted to the position of the left attendant of the military department, and transported grain to Xuanfu and Datong with Fengcheng Hou Li Bin.

古文：镇守都督谭广挠令，劾之，事以办。
现代文：镇守都督谭广阻挠命令，郑辰弹劾他，事情得以办妥。
English: The town's governor, Tan Guang, obstructed the order, Zheng Chen impeached him, and the matter was settled.

古文：八年得风疾，告归。明年卒。
现代文：八年，他患风疾，告病归家，第二年去世。
English: In the eighth year, he fell ill with the wind and returned home. He died the following year.

古文：辰为人重义轻财。
现代文：郑辰为人重义轻财。
English: Zheng Chen is a man who values righteousness over money.

古文：初登进士，产悉让兄弟。
现代文：初登进士时，他把财产都让给兄弟。
English: When he was first enlisted, he gave all his property to his brother.

古文：在山西与同僚杜佥事有违言。
现代文：在山西时，与同僚杜佥事有言语冲突。
English: When he was in Shanxi Province, he had a verbal conflict with his colleague Du Xuan.

古文：杜卒，为治丧，资遣其妻子。
现代文：杜去世后，郑辰为他治丧，出资遣送他的妻儿回乡。
English: After Du's death, Zheng Chen paid for his funeral and sent his wife and children back to their hometown.

古文：柴车，字叔舆，钱塘人。
现代文：柴车，字叔舆，钱塘人。
English: Chai Chariot, Zha Shu Ying, Qiantang People.

古文：永乐二年，以举人授兵部武选司主事，历员外郎。
现代文：永乐二年，他以举人被任为兵部武选司主事，历任员外郎。
English: In the second year of Yongle, he was appointed as the chief of the Military Department's Military Selection Office, and successively served as a member of the Foreign Affairs Office.

古文：八年，帝北征，从尚书方宾扈行。
现代文：八年，皇上北征，柴车随从尚书方宾扈行。
English: In the eighth year, the emperor went on the Northern Expedition, and Chai Chari followed Shang Shufangbin.

古文：还迁江西右参议。
现代文：回来后升为江西右参议。
English: After returning, he was promoted to Jiangxi Right Counselor.

古文：坐事，左迁兵部郎中，出知岳州府，复入为郎中。
现代文：后因犯有过失，降为兵部郎中，出京任岳州知府，后来又入京任郎中。
English: Later, due to his negligence, he was demoted to Hyobusho no roju (Junior Secretary of the Ministry of Military Affairs) and was sent to Kyoto to serve as the governor of Gakushu, and later he became a junior secretary of the Ministry of Military Affairs.

古文：宣德五年擢兵部侍郎。
现代文：宣德五年，他升为兵部侍郎。
English: In the fifth year of Xuande's reign, he was promoted to the rank of Hyobushirou.

古文：明年，山西巡按御史张勖言，大同屯田多为豪右占据，命车往按。
现代文：第二年，山西巡按御史张勖说大同的屯田多被豪门大族所占据，朝廷命柴车前往处理。
English: The following year, the Shanxi inspector-general Zhang Zhe said that most of Datong's military camps were occupied by wealthy families, and the imperial court ordered Chai Che to deal with the situation.

古文：得田几二千顷，还之军。
现代文：他查得田地近二千顷，还给了部队。
English: He surveyed nearly two thousand hectares of fields and returned them to the troops.

古文：英宗初，西鄙不靖。
现代文：英宗初年，西陲不宁。
English: In the first year of Yingzong, Xidi was restless.

古文：以车廉干，命协赞甘肃军务。
现代文：皇上因柴车廉洁而有才干，命他协助赞理甘肃军务。
English: The emperor praised Chai Che for his honesty and ability, and ordered him to assist in the military affairs of Gansu.

古文：调军给饷，悉得事宜。
现代文：柴车调动军队，供应粮饷，都很合宜。
English: It is appropriate for the chariot to mobilize the army and supply grain.

古文：初，朵儿只伯寇凉州，副总兵刘广丧师。不以实闻，顾饰功要赏。
现代文：当初，朵儿只伯入侵凉州，副总兵刘广兵败丧师，不据实上报，还粉饰功劳以邀赏赐。
English: At first, Doer just invaded Liangzhou, and the vice-commander Liu Guangbing lost his division, but did not report it, and also whitewashed his merits with an invitation and reward.

古文：车劾其罪，械广至京。赐车金币，旌其直。
现代文：柴车弹劾他的罪状。刘广被押送到京师，皇上赐给柴车金币，以表彰他的正直。
English: Liu Guang was escorted to Beijing, and the emperor gave him a gold coin in recognition of his honesty.

古文：岷州土官后能冒功得升赏，车奏请加罪。
现代文：岷州土官后能冒功获得升赏，柴车奏请给他加罪。
English: If a local official in Zhangzhou can get a promotion for his meritorious service, he should be given a harsher punishment.

古文：能复请，命宥之。
现代文：后能又上书请赏，皇上命令宽宥他。
English: Later, he was able to write again to ask for a reward, and the emperor ordered him to be pardoned.

古文：车反覆论其不可，曰： 诈冒如能者，实繁有徒，臣方次第按核。
现代文：柴车反复论奏说这样不行，他说： 像后能这样欺诈的人，实应罚做苦役，臣正在逐步调查。
English: Chai Che repeatedly argued that this was not acceptable. He said, "People who can commit fraud like Hou should be punished with hard labor. The minister is gradually investigating."

古文：今宥能，何以戢众？
现代文：现在宽宥后能，何以管治大众？
English: Now that forgiveness is possible, how can we govern the masses?

古文：若无功得官，则捐躯死敌者，何以待之？ 
现代文：如果无功可以得官，那么捐躯死敌的人，又怎么对待他们呢？ 
English: If it is possible to attain high office without merit, then what should be done with those who sacrifice their lives for their sworn enemies?

古文：朝廷虽从能请，然嘉车贤，遣使劳赐之。
现代文：朝廷虽然批准了后能的请求，但都赞柴车贤明，派使者去慰劳他。
English: Although the imperial court approved Houneng's request, they all praised Chai Che for his wisdom and sent emissaries to console him.

古文：正统三年，以破朵儿只伯功，增俸一级。
现代文：正统三年，柴车以击破朵儿只伯之功，得增加一级俸禄。
English: In the third year of the orthodoxy, Chai Che won the first-class salary increase for the achievement of defeating Doer Chubo.

古文：在边，章数十上，悉中时病。
现代文：他在边防，上了数十篇奏章，都切中时弊。
English: He was at the border, and he wrote dozens of essays, all of which were timely.

古文：同事多不悦，车持益坚。
现代文：同事多不高兴，柴车却更坚持自己的意见。
English: Most of his colleagues were unhappy, but Chai Che stuck to his opinion.

古文：尝建言： 漠北降人，朝廷留之京师，虽厚爵赏，其心终异。
现代文：他曾建议说： 漠北来投降的人，朝廷把他们留在京师，虽然给了他们优厚的封赏，但其心终究与我们不同。
English: He once suggested, "Those who came from the north to surrender, the imperial court kept them in Beijing. Although they were given generous rewards, their hearts were ultimately different from ours.

古文：如长脱脱木儿者，昔随其长来归，未几叛去。
现代文：如长脱脱木儿，当初随他的首领来归附，不久却又叛去。
English: For example, Nagatototmukher initially followed his leader to join the rebellion, but soon defected again.

古文：今乃复来，安知他日不再叛，宜徙江南，离其党类。 
现代文：如今又来，怎知将来他不再叛呢？宜将他迁到江南，让他与他的族类分开。 
English: Now he has come again, how can we know that he will not rebel again in the future? It is appropriate to move him to the south of the Yangtze River and separate him from his tribe.

古文：事下兵部，请处之河间、德州。
现代文：此事下到兵部，兵部请把他安置到河间、德州一带。
English: This matter has been referred to the Ministry of Military Affairs. The Ministry of Military Affairs is requested to relocate him to the Hama and Texas areas.

古文：帝报可。
现代文：皇上的回报批准了。
English: The great-grandfather consented to the instruction.

古文：后降者悉以此令从事。
现代文：后来来归降的人都按此令执行。
English: Those who later came to surrender were executed according to this order.

古文：稽核屯田豪占者，悉清出之，得六百余顷。
现代文：柴车检查被豪门占去的屯田，全部清了出来，共得六百余顷。
English: Chai Che checked the military cantonments that had been occupied by wealthy families, and they were all cleared out, totaling more than six hundred hectares.

古文：四年进兵部尚书，参赞如故。
现代文：四年，柴车升为兵部尚书，仍参赞边务。
English: Four years later, Chai Che was promoted to Hyobusho (Minister of Military Affairs) and remained as a councillor for border affairs.

古文：寻命兼理陕西屯田。
现代文：不久命他兼理陕西屯田。
English: Shortly before his death, he was also in charge of Tunden in Shaanxi Province.

古文：明年召还，命与佥都御史曹翼岁更代出镇。
现代文：第二年把他召回，命他与佥都御史曹翼每年轮流出去镇守。
English: He was recalled the following year and ordered to go out to guard the town in rotation with the governor of the capital, Cao Ying, every year.

古文：及期病甚。诏遣大理寺少卿程富代翼，而命车归治疾。
现代文：到期时，柴车病重，诏派大理寺少卿程富代替曹翼，而命柴车回来治病。
English: At the end of the term, Chai Che was seriously ill, so the emperor sent Cheng Fu, the junior secretary of Dali Temple, to replace Cao Ying, and ordered Chai Che to come back for treatment.

古文：未及行，六年六月卒。
现代文：柴车还来不及动身，六年六月去世。
English: Chai Che was too late to leave, and died in June of the same year.

古文：车在江西时，以采木入闽，经广信。
现代文：柴车在江西时，因采办木材入四川，经过广信。
English: When Chai Che was in Jiangxi, he went to Sichuan to procure timber and passed through Guangxin.

古文：广信守，故人也，馈蜜一罂。
现代文：广信长官是故人，赠给他一坛蜜。
English: Guangxin's superior was deceased, and he was presented with a jar of honey.

古文：发视之，乃白金。
现代文：柴车揭开一看，却是白金。
English: When the chariot is unveiled, it is white gold.

古文：笑曰： 公不知故人矣 ，却不受。
现代文：柴车笑道： 公还不了解故人呢。 推辞不收。
English: Chai Che laughed and said, "The public doesn't know the deceased yet.

古文：同事边塞者多以宴乐为豪举。车恶之，遂断酒肉。
现代文：在边塞的同事多以宴乐为豪华，柴车很厌恶，便戒掉了酒肉。
English: Colleagues in the border town mostly regard the banquet as luxurious, but Chai Che is disgusted and has given up meat and alcohol.

古文：其介特多此类。
现代文：他的节操多类这样。
English: His frugality takes many forms.

古文：刘中敷，大兴人，初名中孚。
现代文：刘中敷，大兴人，初名中孚。
English: Liu Zhongshiki, Daxingren, first name Zhongfu.

古文：燕王举兵，以诸生守城功，授陈留丞。
现代文：燕王举兵时，他作为生员，以守城之功，被任为陈留县丞。
English: When Yan Wang raised an army, he was appointed as Chen Liu County's chancellor for his contribution to the defense of the city.

古文：擢工部员外郎。
现代文：后来升为工部员外郎。
English: Later, he was promoted to the position of Wairo, a member of the engineering department.

古文：仁宗监国，命署部事，赐今名。迁江西右参议。
现代文：仁宗监国时，命他代理工部事，赐给今名，升为江西右参议。
English: When Rinzong was the supervisor of the country, he ordered him to act as the deputy of the Ministry of Works, gave him his present name, and was promoted to the Right Counselor of Jiangxi.

古文：宣德三年迁山东右参政，进左布政使。
现代文：宣德三年，升为山东右参政，再升为左布政使。
English: In the three years of Xuande, he was promoted to Shandong Right Party Politician, and then promoted to Shandong Left Party Politician.

古文：质直廉静，吏民畏怀。
现代文：他朴实正直，廉洁清静，吏民都敬畏他，诚心归附。
English: He is unpretentious, honest, clean and quiet. The officials and the people all fear him and sincerely follow him.

古文：岁大侵，言于巡抚，减赋三之二。
现代文：农作物严重欠收，中敷向巡抚请求，得减去三分之二的税收。
English: If there is a serious shortfall in the harvest of agricultural crops and the middle layer requests it from the governor, two-thirds of the tax must be deducted.

古文：正统改元，父忧夺情，俄召拜户部尚书。
现代文：正统改元后，他遭父丧，被夺情留任，不久召他回京任户部尚书。
English: After the official change of the era name, his father passed away, and he was forced to remain in office, and he was soon called back to Beijing to serve as the head of the household.

古文：帝冲年践阼，虑群下欺己，治尚严。
现代文：皇上幼龄登基，担心臣下欺骗自己，所以统治从严。
English: The emperor ascended the throne at a young age, and feared that his vassals would deceive him, so his rule became stricter.

古文：而中官王振假以立威，屡摭大臣小过，导帝用重典，大臣下吏无虚岁。
现代文：而宦官王振借此来立威，屡次抓住大臣小过，引导皇上用重刑，每年都有大臣被交给司法官员处罪。
English: The eunuch Wang Zhen took advantage of this to assert his authority, repeatedly catching ministers in minor offenses and leading the emperor to impose heavy sentences. Every year, ministers were handed over to judicial officials to be punished.

古文：三年讽给事御史劾中敷与左侍郎吴玺等，下狱，释还职。
现代文：三年，王振暗示给事中和御史弹劾中敷和左侍郎吴玺等人，将他们投进监狱，不久释放复职。
English: Three years ago, Wang Zhen hinted that he would impeach Zhongshiku and Zuo Zirong Wu Yao, who were involved in the affair, and Goshi, and put them in prison. They were soon released and reinstated.

古文：六年，言官劾中敷专擅。
现代文：六年，言官弹劾中敷专权。
English: Six years later, impeachment of the speaker resulted in the imposition of an authoritarian regime.

古文：诏法司于内廷杂治。
现代文：诏令法司在内廷全面审理。
English: The Imperial Edict ordered the Legal Department to conduct a full trial in the Inner Court.

古文：当流，许输赎。
现代文：论罪应当流放，允许出资赎罪。
English: The crime should be exiled, and the payment of money to atone for the crime is allowed.

古文：帝特宥之。
现代文：皇上特别宽宥了他。
English: The Emperor pardoned him specially.

古文：其冬，中敷、玺及右侍郎陈瑺请以供御牛马分牧民间。
现代文：这年冬，中敷、吴玺和右侍郎陈纋请将供御用的牛马分给民间牧养。
English: In the winter of that year, Nakashiki, Wu Ye, and Chen Ye, the right-hand man, requested that the cattle and horses used for royal purposes be given to the people for herding.

古文：言官劾其变乱成法，并下狱论斩。
现代文：言官弹劾他们变乱成法，他们并被下狱论斩。
English: The magistrate impeached them for changing the law, and they were sentenced to death.

古文：诏荷校长安门外，凡十六日而释。
现代文：诏令将他们枷在长安门外，十六天后才释放。
English: The imperial edict shackled them outside the Chang'an Gate, and they were not released until sixteen days later.

古文：瓦剌入贡，诏问马驼刍菽数，不能对，复与玺、瑺论斩系狱。
现代文：瓦剌来朝贡，皇上下诏问他马驼和草料豆类的数量，中敷答不上来，又把他和吴玺、陈纋论斩，关进监狱。
English: Varangian came to pay tribute, the emperor asked him the number of llamas and legumes, but he could not answer, and he and Wu Xi and Chen Xi were put in prison.

古文：中敷以母病，特许归省。
现代文：中敷因母亲有病，特许回家省亲。
English: Due to her mother's illness, Nakashiki was allowed to go home to visit relatives.

古文：明年冬，当决囚，法司以请。
现代文：第二年冬，应当处理刑狱案件，法司请示皇上。
English: In the winter of the second year, the case of imprisonment should be dealt with, and the legal department requested the emperor.

古文：命玺、瑺戍边，中敷俟母终其奏。
现代文：皇上命吴玺、陈纋戍边，中敷等他母亲去世后再具奏。
English: The emperor ordered Wu Xuan, Chen Xuan Bian, Zhongzhi and others to play after his mother's death.

古文：已，释为民。
现代文：后来，把他释放为民。
English: Later, he was released to the public.

古文：景帝立，起户部左侍郎兼太子宾客。
现代文：景帝即位后，起用他为户部左侍郎兼太子宾客。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Jing, he was appointed as the left attendant of the household and the guest of the prince.

古文：时方用兵，论功行赏无虚日。
现代文：当时正在用兵，每天都在论功行赏。
English: At that time, soldiers were being used, and every day they were being rewarded for their service.

古文：中敷言府库财有限，宜撙节以备缓急。
现代文：中敷说府库财物有限，应节制以备缓急之用。
English: Nakashiki said that the prefectural treasury has limited assets, which should be used sparingly to prepare for emergencies.

古文：帝嘉纳。
现代文：皇上嘉许采纳了他的建议。
English: Xuanzong praised it and adopted it.

古文：致仕归，卒。
现代文：景泰四年，中敷去世。
English: In the fourth year of King Tae's reign, Nakashiki died.

古文：张凤，字子仪，安平人。
现代文：赠尚书。中敷个性淡泊，食不重味，为官五十年，家无余资。张凤，字子仪，安平人。
English: He was presented with a book. His personality was light, his food was not heavy, he had been an official for fifty years, and his family had no spare money. Zhang Feng, a scholar, was a peaceful person.

古文：父益，官给事中。
现代文：父亲张益，官任给事中。
English: His father, Zhang Yi, was in the middle of his term of office.

古文：永乐八年从征漠北，殁于阵。
现代文：永乐八年，他从征漠北，阵亡。
English: In the eighth year of Yongle, he went to fight in the north of the desert and was killed.

古文：凤登宣德二年进士。授刑部主事。
现代文：张凤考中宣德二年进士，后被授予刑部主事。
English: Zhang Fengkao middle school student Xuan De entered the second year, and was later awarded the head of the criminal department.

古文：谳江西叛狱，平反数百人。
现代文：他审理江西反叛一案，平反了数百人。
English: He tried the Jiangxi rebellion case and rehabilitated hundreds of people.

古文：正统三年十二月，法司坐事尽系狱，遂擢凤本部右侍郎。
现代文：正统三年十二月，司法官员因犯了过失全被关进监狱，遂升张凤为本部右侍郎。
English: In December of the third year of orthodoxy, the judicial officials were all put in prison for committing negligence, so Zhang Feng was promoted to the right hand man of the headquarters.

古文：以主事擢侍郎，前时未有也。
现代文：从主事升为侍郎，从前还没有过。
English: There has never been a case of a waiter being promoted from the position of head waiter.

古文：明年命提督京仓。
现代文：第二年命他提督京师粮仓。
English: The following year he was appointed Admiral of the Imperial Grain Depot.

古文：六年改户部，寻调南京。
现代文：六年，把他改到户部，不久调往南京。
English: Six years later, he was transferred to the Household Department, and soon after to Nanjing.

古文：适尚书久阙，凤遂掌部事。
现代文：正好尚书一职长期出缺，张凤于是掌管南京户部事务。
English: Just as the position of Shangshu was vacant for a long time, Zhang Feng was put in charge of the household affairs department in Nanjing.

古文：贵州奏军卫乏粮，乞运龙江仓及两淮盐于镇远府易米。
现代文：贵州上奏说军卫缺粮，请求运龙江仓和两淮的盐到镇远府换米。
English: Guizhou reported that the military guards were short of grain, and requested that the Longjiang warehouse and the salt of the two Huai be transported to Zhenyuanfu to exchange for rice.

古文：凤以龙江盐杂泥沙，不堪易米给军，尽以淮盐予之，然后以闻。
现代文：张凤因龙江的盐杂有泥沙，不能换米来供给军队，便全部以淮盐来给他们，然后再上报。
English: Zhang Feng couldn't exchange rice to supply the army because the salt in the Longjiang River was mixed with mud and sand, so he gave them all Hoai salt and then reported it.

古文：帝嘉赏。
现代文：皇上嘉奖了他。
English: The Emperor was very appreciative.

古文：又言留都重地，宜岁储二百万石，为根本计。
现代文：他又说南京留都重地，应每年储存二百万石粮食，作根本打算。
English: He also said that Nanjing should store two million koku of grain every year and make a fundamental plan.

古文：从之，遂为令。
现代文：皇上批准了，并定为法令。
English: The Emperor approved it and it became a law.

古文：南京粮储，旧督以都御史，十二年冬命凤兼理。
现代文：南京的粮储，旧由都御史提督，十二年冬，命张凤兼理。
English: The granary of Nanjing, formerly headed by the admiral of the imperial capital, was founded in the winter of the twelfth year, with Zhang Feng in charge.

古文：廉谨善执法，号 板张 。
现代文：张凤谦谨，善于执法，号称 板张 。
English: Zhang Feng is modest, good at enforcing the law, and is known as "Plank Zhang."

古文：景泰二年进尚书。
现代文：景泰二年，他升为尚书。
English: In the second year of Jing Tai, he was promoted to Shang Shu.

古文：四年改兵部，参赞军务。
现代文：四年改任兵部尚书，参赞军务。
English: Four years later, he was reassigned to the Ministry of Military Affairs, and became the military affairs counselor.

古文：户部尚书金濂卒，召凤代之。
现代文：户部尚书金濂去世，皇上召张凤回京取代他。
English: When the head of the household, Shangshu Jintao, died, the emperor summoned Zhang Feng to return to Beijing to replace him.

古文：时四方兵息，而灾伤特甚。帝屡诏宽恤。
现代文：当时四方战事平息，而灾荒却特别严重，皇上屡次下诏宽恤。
English: At that time, the four-sided war had calmed down, but the disaster was particularly serious, and the emperor repeatedly issued a pardon.

古文：凤偕廷臣议上十事，明年复先后议上八事，咸报可。
现代文：张凤与廷臣一同议上十项建议。第二年他又先后议上八项。回报都说可行。
English: Zhang Feng and the courtiers discussed ten suggestions together. The next year, he discussed eight items successively. They all said that the return was feasible.

古文：凤以灾伤蠲赋多，国用益诎，乃奏言： 国初天下田八百四十九万余顷，今数既减半，加以水旱停征，国用何以取给。
现代文：张凤因灾荒严重，国家减免的租税多，导致国家用度更加不足，便上奏说 ：建国初期天下田地八百四十九万余顷，现在耕地数量已经减半，加上因水旱之灾而停征租税，国家开支到哪儿去支给？
English: Zhang Feng, because of the serious disaster and famine, and the large amount of tax reduction and exemption by the state, which led to a further shortage of state expenditure, reported: In the early days of the founding of the country, there were more than 8.49 million hectares of fields under the country. Now the amount of cultivated land has been halved, and the tax has been suspended due to the flood and drought disaster. Where will the state expenditure be spent?

古文：京畿及河南、山东无额田，甲方垦辟，乙即讦其漏赋。
现代文：京畿以及河南、山东没有税额的田地，甲方一开垦，乙方即揭发他漏税。
English: In Gyeonggi, as well as in Henan and Shandong, as soon as Party A reclaimed the fields that did not have the tax amount, Party B exposed his tax evasion.

古文：请准轻则征租，不惟永绝争端，亦且少助军国。 
现代文：请批准轻额征税，这样不仅可以永绝争端，而且还可以稍稍助军国之用。 
English: Please approve a light tax, which will not only put an end to the dispute, but will also help the military state a little.

古文：报可。
现代文：回报说可行。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：给事中成章等劾凤擅更祖制，杨穟等复争之。
现代文：给事中成章等弹劾张凤擅自更改祖制，杨禾遂等人又极力论争。
English: In the middle of the matter, Zhang Feng was impeached for changing the ancestral system without authorization, and Yang He and others vigorously argued.

古文：帝曰： 国初都江南，转输易。
现代文：皇上说 ：建国初期定都江南，输运粮食容易。
English: The emperor said: In the early days of the founding of the People's Republic, the capital was located in the south of the Yangtze River, and it was easy to transport grain.

古文：今居极北，可守常制耶？ 
现代文：现在定都极北之地，难道还能守常制吗？ 
English: Now that the capital is in the far north, can it still maintain a regular schedule?

古文：四方报凶荒者，凤请令御史勘实。
现代文：四方报告灾荒的，张凤请令御史调查核实。
English: If the four parties report a famine, Zhang Feng will ask the Imperial Historian to investigate and verify.

古文：议者非之。
现代文：议论的人因此而非难他。
English: That's why the critics don't attack him.

古文：英宗复辟，调南京户部，仍兼督粮储。
现代文：英宗复辟后，张凤调到南京户部，仍兼督粮储。
English: After the restoration of Emperor Yingzong, Zhang Feng was transferred to the household department in Nanjing, where he was also in charge of grain storage.

古文：五年二月卒。
现代文：五年二月，张凤去世。
English: In February 2005, Zhang Feng passed away.

古文：凤有孝行。性淳朴。
现代文：张凤有孝行，个性淳朴。
English: Zhang Feng has filial piety and a simple personality.

古文：故人死，聘其女为子妇，教其子而养其母终身。
现代文：有个故人死了，他聘其女儿为儿媳，教其儿子而奉养其母亲终身。
English: A deceased man died, he hired his daughter as a daughter-in-law, taught his son and supported his mother for life.

古文：同学友苏洪好面斥凤过，及为凤属官犹然。
现代文：同窗好友苏洪喜欢当面指责张凤的过失，到张凤当官后还是这样，但张凤都一如既往地对待他。
English: His classmate and friend, Su Hong, liked to accuse Zhang Feng of his faults in person. This was still the case after Zhang Feng became an official, but Zhang Feng still treated him as before.

古文：凤待之如初，闻其贫，即赒给之。周瑄，字廷玉，阳曲人。
现代文：听说他贫寒，张凤立即接济他。周瑄，字廷玉，阳曲人。
English: Hearing that he was poor, Zhang Feng immediately helped him out. Zhou Qi, also known as Tingyu, was a Yang Qu person.

古文：由乡举入国学。
现代文：由乡荐进入国子学。
English: He was recommended by his hometown to enter Kuniko Gakuin.

古文：正统中，除刑部主事，善治狱。
现代文：正统年间，他被授予刑部主事，善于处理法律案件。
English: During the orthodox years, he was awarded the position of the head of the criminal department, and was good at handling legal cases.

古文：十三年迁员外郎。
现代文：十三年，升为员外郎。
English: Thirteen years later, he was promoted to member of the outer circle.

古文：明年，帝北征。郎中当扈从者多托疾，瑄请行。
现代文：第二年，皇上北征，应当扈从圣驾的郎中多托病不去，周瑄请求随行。
English: In the second year, when the emperor went on the Northern Expedition, he should have asked his son-in-law, Zhou Jun, not to go because of illness. Zhou Jun asked him to accompany him.

古文：六师覆没，瑄被创归，擢署郎中。
现代文：六师覆没，周瑄受伤而回，升为代理郎中。
English: The Sixth Division was wiped out, Zhou Qi was injured and returned, and was promoted to acting junior lieutenant.

古文：校尉受赇纵盗，以仇人代。
现代文：有校尉受贿放了盗贼，而以仇人来代替。
English: A lieutenant was bribed to release a thief and replace him with an enemy.

古文：瑄辨雪之，抵校尉罪。
现代文：周瑄进行辩解，为他雪了冤，而将校尉抵罪。
English: Zhou Yuxuan defended himself, saying that he had been wronged, and the lieutenant pleaded guilty.

古文：外郡送囚，一日至八百人。瑄虑其触热，三日决遣之殆尽。
现代文：外郡送来囚犯，一天达八百人，周瑄担心他们中暑，三天便审理遣送殆尽。
English: Outside the county, prisoners were sent in, up to 800 a day. Zhou Ye was worried that they would suffer from heatstroke, and after three days, all the trials and deportations were exhausted.

古文：景泰元年，以尚书王直荐，超拜刑部右侍郎。
现代文：景泰元年，因尚书王直的推荐，超升周瑄为刑部右侍郎。
English: In the first year of the Qing Dynasty, due to the recommendation of Shang Shu Wang Zhi, Chaosheng Zhou Qi became the right hand man of the criminal department.

古文：久之，出振顺天、河间饥。
现代文：后来，他出去赈济顺天、河间饥荒。
English: Later, he went out to help the poor during the famine.

古文：未竣，而英宗复位。
现代文：还没办完，英宗已复位。
English: It's not over yet, Yingzong has been reinstated.

古文：有司请召还。不听。
现代文：有关官员请把他召回，皇上不听。
English: The officials concerned requested that he be recalled, but the Emperor did not listen.

古文：复赐敕，令便宜处置。
现代文：又赐给他敕令，命他可以相机处置。
English: He was also given a royal warrant ordering him to dispose of the camera.

古文：瑄遍历所部，大举荒政，先后振饥民二十六万五千，给牛种各万余，奏行利民八事。
现代文：周瑄遍历所辖地区，大举救荒之政，先后赈济饥民二十六万五千人，发给耕牛种子各一万多，上奏实行利民八件事。
English: Zhou Enlai toured the areas under his jurisdiction, vigorously carried out the policy of famine relief, successively provided food to 265,000 hungry people, distributed more than 10,000 seeds to each of the cattle, and reported the implementation of eight things beneficial to the people.

古文：事竣还，明年转左。
现代文：事情办完后回京，第二年转为左侍郎。
English: After the matter was settled, he returned to Kyoto, and in the following year he was transferred to the position of Sasajiro.

古文：帝方任门达、逯杲，数兴大狱。
现代文：皇上正信任门达、录杲，多次制造大案。
English: Emperor Zheng trusted Menda and Luo Zheng, and repeatedly made big plans.

古文：瑄委曲开谕，多所救正，复饬诸郎毋避祸。
现代文：周瑄千方百计疏导，多有匡正，他还转告各郎官不要避祸。
English: Zhou Bei tried his best to divert the situation, but most of them were righteous. He also told the officials not to avoid the calamity.

古文：以故移部定罪者，不至冤滥。
现代文：因此移交刑部定罪的人，不至于滥被冤枉。
English: Therefore, those who are convicted and transferred to the criminal department will not be wronged.

古文：官刑部久，属吏不敢欺。
现代文：他供职刑部岁久，属下官吏多不敢欺骗。
English: He has served the Criminal Investigation Department for a long time, and most of his subordinate officials dare not deceive him.

古文：意主宽恕，不为深文。
现代文：他主张宽恕，不苛刻地引用法律条文来定罪。
English: He argued for clemency, liberally applying the letter of the law to convict.

古文：同佐部者安化孔文英，为御史时按黄岩妖言狱，当坐者三千人，皆白其诬，独械首从一人论罪。
现代文：一同佐理部务的安化人孔文英，他任御史时曾审理黄岩妖言案，应当判罪的有三千人，孔文英说他们都是冤枉，结果只抓了首从一人定罪。
English: Together with Kong Wenying, a person from Anhua, who was in charge of the Sari Department, he tried the Huangyan demonic speech case when he was the minister of history. There were three thousand people who should have been convicted. Kong Wenying said that they were all wronged, and as a result, only one person was convicted.

古文：及是居部，与瑄并称长者。
现代文：至此他与周瑄同在刑部，并称为长者。
English: At this point, he was with Zhou Qi in the criminal department and was called the elder.

古文：七年命瑄署掌工部事。
现代文：七年，命周瑄代理工部事务。
English: Seven years later, he became the acting director of the engineering department.

古文：瑄恬静淡荣利。
现代文：周瑄恬静，淡于名利。
English: Zhou Yujing, less than fame and fortune.

古文：成化改元，为侍郎十六年矣，始迁右都御史。
现代文：成化改元时，他任侍郎已十六年了，才升为右都御史。
English: When Chenghua changed the era, he had been a chamberlain for sixteen years before he was promoted to Utsunomiya Imperial Historian.

古文：督理南京粮储，捕惩作奸者数辈，宿弊为清。
现代文：他督理南京粮储时，捕捉惩治作奸者多人，清除了宿弊。
English: When he was the superintendent of the Nanjing Grain Reserve, he caught and punished many people who committed treason, and eliminated the inherent defects.

古文：凤阳、淮、徐饥，以瑄言发廪四十万以振。
现代文：凤阳、淮安、徐州闹饥荒，皇上据周瑄的建议发仓米四十万赈济。
English: There were famines in Fengyang, Huai'an, and Xuzhou, and the emperor, according to the suggestion of Zhou Qi, sent 400,000 tons of rice to help.

古文：久之，迁南京刑部尚书。
现代文：后来，他升为南京刑部尚书。
English: Later, he was promoted to the head of the Nanjing Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：令诸司事不须勘者，毋出五日。狱无滞囚。
现代文：他命令各部门，凡是不需要调查的案情，不出五日必须处理完毕，因此监狱中没有滞留的囚犯。
English: He ordered all departments to complete all cases that do not need to be investigated within five days, so there are no detainees in the prison.

古文：暑疫，悉遣轻系者，曰： 召汝则至。 
现代文：夏天发生瘟疫，他将犯轻罪的放出监狱，对他们说： 叫你们时再来。 
English: If there is a plague in the summer, he will let out the prisoners who have committed minor offenses, and will say to them, "Come back when you are fit."

古文：囚欢呼去，无失期者。
现代文：囚犯们欢呼而去，没有人误期回来。
English: The prisoners left to cheers, and no one came back late.

古文：为尚书九载，屡疏乞休。久之乃得请。
现代文：他任尚书九年，多次上疏请求退休，过了好久才得到批准。
English: He held the post for nine years and repeatedly requested retirement from Shangshu. It took a long time for his request to be approved.

古文：家无田园，卜居南京。
现代文：他家中没有田园，择地居于南京。
English: His family did not have a farm, so he chose to live in Nanjing.

古文：卒，赠太子少保，谥庄懿。
现代文：他去世后，赠太子少保，谥庄懿。
English: After his death, he bestowed the title of Prince's Junior Bodyguard, 庄.

