古文：起旃蒙单阏，尽柔兆执徐，凡二年。
现代文：起旃蒙单阏，尽柔兆执徐，一共两年。
English: a total of two years. It was the eleventh year of Emperor Jian's reign.

古文：昭宗圣穆景文孝皇帝上之下乾宁二年
现代文：唐昭宗乾宁二年
English: In the second year of Qianning of Tang Zhaozong

古文：春，正月，辛酉，幽州军民数万以麾盖歌鼓迎李克用入府舍；克用命李存审、刘仁恭将兵略定巡属。
现代文：春季正月，辛酉，幽州的军队百姓几万人张起伞盖、敲锣打鼓、载歌载舞欢迎李克用进入卢龙节度使官署；李克用命令李存审、刘仁恭带领军队巡视安定卢龙节度使所属的各个州县。
English: In the first month of spring, tens of thousands of military people in Xinlu and Yuzhou opened their umbrellas, beat gongs and drums, and sang and danced to welcome Li Ke for entering the Lulong Festival envoy office; Li Ke ordered Li Cunxin and Liu Rengong to lead the army to inspect the various states and counties belonging to the Stable Lulong Festival envoy.

古文：癸未，硃全忠遣其将硃友恭围兗州，硃瑄自郓以兵粮救之，友恭设伏，败之于高梧，尽夺其饷，擒河东将安福顺、安福庆。
现代文：癸亥，朱全忠派遣属下将领朱友恭围攻朱瑾据守的兖州，朱从郓州带着军器粮食前往救援朱瑾，朱友恭设下埋伏，在高梧打败朱的人马，把朱携带的军响全部夺去，并擒获河东将领安福顺、安福庆。
English: Yan Hai and Zhu Quanzhong sent their subordinate general Zhu Youqiong to besiege Zhangzhou, where Zhu Quanzhong was garrisoned. Zhu went to rescue Zhu Quanzhong from Zhangzhou with military supplies. Zhu Youqiong set up an ambush, defeated Zhu's men in Gaowu, took away all of Zhu Quanzhong's army, and captured the generals of Hedong, An Fushun and An Fuqing.

古文：己已，以给事中陆希声为户部侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：已巳，朝廷任命给事中陆希声为户部侍郎、同平章事。
English: Already, the Imperial Court has appointed the middle-ranking official, Lu Xisheng, as the Household Attendant and Tongping Shouji.

古文：希声，元方五世孙也。
现代文：陆希声是陆元方的第五代孙子。
English: Lu Xisheng is the fifth-generation grandson of Lu Yuanfang.

古文：壬申，护国节度使王重盈薨，军中请以重荣子行军司马珂知留后事。
现代文：壬申，护国节度使王重盈死去，军中将士向朝廷请求任命他的儿子行军司马王珂主持留后事宜。
English: According to Jinshin, Wang Chung Ying died during the National Defense Day, and the lieutenant general asked the imperial court to appoint his son, Marshal Ma Wang Ke, to preside over the succession.

古文：珂，重盈兄重简之子也，重荣养以为子。
现代文：王珂是王重盈的哥哥王重简的儿子，被王重荣收养为义子。
English: Wang Ke is the son of Wang Chongyan, the elder brother of Wang Chongying, and was adopted by Wang Chong Rong as his son-in-law.

古文：杨行密表硃全忠罪恶，请会易定、兗、郓、河东兵讨之。
现代文：杨行密向朝廷进呈表章历数朱全忠的罪恶，请求会同易定、兖州、郓州、河东的军队一同讨伐朱全忠。
English: Yang Xingmi presented the imperial court with a list of Zhu Quanzhong's crimes and requested to join the armies of Yiding, Zhangzhou, Zhangzhou and Hedong to fight Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：董昌将称帝，集将佐议之。
现代文：董昌将要称帝，他召集手下将领僚佐进行商议。
English: Dong Chang is about to be crowned emperor. He gathers his generals and adjutants for discussion.

古文：节度副使黄碣曰： 今唐室虽微，天人未厌。
现代文：节度副使黄碣说： 现在大唐皇室虽然衰败，但是天道民心还没有厌弃它。
English: Huang Qi, the vice-minister of the Great Tang Dynasty, said: Although the royal family of the Great Tang Dynasty is now in decline, the people's hearts have not yet abandoned it.

古文：齐桓、晋文皆翼戴周室以成霸业。
现代文：春秋时代的齐桓公、晋文公都辅佐尊奉周室才成就了称霸一方的大业。
English: It was not until the Spring and Autumn Period that Prince Qi Huan and Prince Jinwen, assisted by Emperor Bozhong, achieved the great cause of hegemony.

古文：大王兴于畎亩，受朝廷厚恩，位至将相，富贵极矣，奈何一旦忽为族灭之计乎！
现代文：您爵至陇西郡王，是从田间民夫逐渐兴起的，承蒙朝廷的宽厚恩泽，官位做到镇将和宰相，荣华富贵已到了极点，为什么突然做出灭九族的打算呀！
English: Your peerage to the county king of Shaanxi has gradually emerged from the farmers in the fields, thanks to the generous grace of the imperial court, the official rank has reached the town general and the prime minister, the glory and wealth have reached the extreme, why suddenly make the plan to exterminate the nine ethnic groups!

古文：碣宁死为忠臣，不生为叛逆！ 
现代文：我黄碣宁可死也要做大唐的忠臣，而不为了活命去做朝廷叛逆！ 
English: I, Huang Qi, would rather die than be a loyal vassal of the Great Tang Dynasty, rather than rebel against the imperial court for the sake of my life!

古文：昌怒，以为惑众，斩之，投其首于厕中，骂之曰： 奴贼负我！
现代文：董昌大为震怒，认为黄碣是在蛊惑手下，当即将他斩杀，把他的脑袋扔到厕所里面，并痛骂说： 这个奴才贼子背叛了我！
English: Dong Chang was furious, thinking that Huang Qi was under the control of the demagogue. He was about to kill him, throw his head into the toilet, and scolded: This slave thief betrayed me!

古文：好圣明时三公不能待，而先求死也！ 
现代文：我如此的圣明时代他不等着坐三公高位，而先要找死！ 
English: In my enlightened age, he didn't wait to sit in the Three Great Kings' high seat, but sought death first!

古文：并杀其家八十口，同坎瘗之。
现代文：董昌并县把黄碣全家的八十口人全部斩杀，将他们埋葬在一个墓穴里。
English: Dong Changyi County beheaded all 80 members of Huang Qi's entire family and buried them in a grave.

古文：又问会稽令吴镣，对曰： 大王不为真诸侯以传子孙，乃欲假天子以取灭亡邪！ 
现代文：董昌又问会稽令吴镣，吴镣回答说： 大王您不做诸候让子孙世袭相传，而要做假天子去自取灭亡吗？ 
English: Dong Chang also asked the inspector to order Wu Xi, and Wu Xi replied: "Your Majesty, you do not want to let your descendants pass down the family line, but do you want to be a fake heavenly son to self-destruct?

古文：昌亦族诛之。
现代文：董昌听后，把吴镣的全家也杀光。
English: After hearing this, Dong Chang also killed Wu Gan's entire family.

古文：又谓山阴令张逊曰： 汝有能政，吾深知之，俟吾为帝，命汝知御史台。 
现代文：董昌又对阴山令张逊说： 你有行政才能，我清楚地知道，等我称皇帝后，任命你主管御史台。 
English: Dong Chang also said to Zhang Xun, the commander of Yin Mountain, "You have administrative ability. I clearly know that after I proclaim you emperor, I will appoint you to be in charge of the imperial history department.

古文：逊曰： 大王起石镜镇，建节浙东，荣贵近二十年，何苦效李锜、刘辟之所为乎！
现代文：张逊回答他说： 大王您当初从石镜镇兴起，在浙东建下节度使的基业，荣华富贵快二十年了，何苦像李、刘辟那样背离朝廷最后遭受杀身大祸呢！
English: Zhang Xun replied to him: Great King, you originally emerged from Shijiazhuang Town and built the foundation of the festival in East Zhejiang. You have been prosperous and rich for nearly 20 years. Why do you have to depart from the imperial court like Li and Liu Bi and finally suffer a fatal accident?

古文：浙东僻处海隅，巡属虽有六州，大王若称帝，彼必不从，徒守孤城，为天下笑耳！ 
现代文：浙东地方偏僻处在海边，管辖的虽然有台州、明州、温州、处州、婺州、衢州这六个州，但大王您若是自己称帝，他们一定不会附合，你徒然据守越州一座空城，只让天下人耻笑！ 
English: The remote eastern Zhejiang region is located on the coast. Although it is governed by the six prefectures of Taizhou, Mingzhou, Wenzhou, Wenzhou, Quanzhou, Zhangzhou and Zhangzhou, if you were to proclaim yourself emperor, they would certainly not accede to you. Your futile defense of an empty city in Yuezhou has only made the world laugh!

古文：昌又杀之，谓人曰： 无此三人者，则人莫我违矣！ 
现代文：董昌又将张逊杀掉，对人们说： 没有了黄碣、吴镣、张逊这三个人，就没有再敢违背我的人了！ 
English: Dong Chang also killed Zhang Xun and said to the people: Without Huang Qi, Wu Qi and Zhang Xun, there will be no one who dares to disobey me!

古文：二月，辛卯，昌被兗冕登子城门楼，即皇帝位。
现代文：二月，辛卯，董昌身穿帝王的冠服登上越州内城，即位称帝。
English: In February, Xinwu, Dong Chang, wearing the imperial crown, ascended the Yuezhou Inner City and was enthroned as emperor.

古文：悉陈瑞物于庭以示众。
现代文：他把官吏百姓进献的祥瑞物品全都摆放在庭堂上向众人展示。
English: He placed all the auspicious items donated by officials and the public on the courtyard to show them to everyone.

古文：先是，咸通末，吴、越间讹言山中有大鸟，四目三足，声云 罗平天册 ，见者有殃，民间多画像以祀之。及昌僭号，曰： 此吾鸑鷟也。 乃自称大越罗平国，改元顺天，署城楼曰天册之楼，令群下谓己曰： 圣人 。
现代文：在这之前，咸通末年，浙东一带民间谣传山中有一个大鸟，四只眼睛三条腿，叫喊 罗平天册 ，见到这个在鸟的人就会有灾祸，于是民间百姓纷纷画像祭祀它，等到董昌自行称大越罗平国，改年号为顺天，给越州城楼题字为 天册之楼 ，命令所有属下称他为 圣人 。
English: Prior to this, at the end of the Han Dynasty, folk tales from the eastern Zhejiang region told of a large bird in the mountains, with four eyes and three legs, called the Luoping Book of Heaven. Seeing this person in the bird would bring disaster, so the common people made a series of images to worship it. Until Dong Chang called himself the Greater Luoping Country, changed the year to Shun Tian, and inscribed the name of the castle tower in Yuezhou to the Tower of the Book of Heaven, ordering all his subordinates to call him a saint.

古文：以前杭州刺史李邈、前婺州刺史蒋瑰、两浙盐铁副使杜郢、前屯田郎中李瑜为相。
现代文：董昌任命以前的杭州刺史李邈、婺州刺史蒋、两浙盐铁副使杜郢、屯田郎中李瑜为宰相。
English: Dong Chang appointed the former prime ministers of Hangzhou Zhangshi Li Jun, Zhangzhou Zhangshi Jiang, two Zhejiang Salt and Iron Deputy Envoys Du Jun, and Tunden Langzhong Li Yu.

古文：又以吴瑶等皆为翰林学士、李畅之等皆为大将军。
现代文：又任命吴瑶等人都做翰林学士、李畅之等人都做大将军。
English: He also appointed Wu Gan and others as Hanlin Bachelors, and Li Changzhi and others as Grand Generals.

古文：昌移书钱镠，告以权即罗平国位，以镠为两浙都指挥使。
现代文：董昌给钱送去书信，告诉他已暂且即罗平国皇帝位，任命钱为两浙都指挥使。
English: Dong Chang sent a letter to Qian, telling him that he had temporarily become the emperor of Loping and appointed Qian as the commander of the two Zhejiang provinces.

古文：镠遗昌书曰： 与其闭门作天子，与九族、百姓俱陷涂炭，岂若开门作节度使，终身富贵邪！
现代文：钱写信给董昌说： 您与其关起门来称帝作天子，与家族和百姓一同遭殃，不如打开城门作节度使，终身享受荣华富贵呢！
English: Qian wrote to Dong Chang, saying: "Instead of closing the door and calling the emperor the son of heaven, and suffering together with your family and the people, it is better to open the city gate as the messenger of the festival, and enjoy the glory and wealth for life!

古文：及今悛悔，尚可及也！ 
现代文：即使到现在改正错误，还来得及！ 
English: Even if you correct your mistakes now, there is still time!

古文：昌不听，镠乃将兵三万诣越州城下，至迎恩门见昌，再拜言曰： 大王位兼将相，奈何舍安就危！
现代文：董昌不听钱的劝告，钱于是带领军队三万奔赴越州城下，钱到越州城西迎恩门与董昌相见，再次奉劝董昌说： 大王你的地位既是镇将又是宰相，为什么要舍弃安宁而自找祸患呢！
English: Dong Chang did not listen to Qian Qian's advice, so Qian Qian led an army of thirty thousand to rush to the city of Yuezhou. Qian Qian went to the west of Yuezhou to meet Dong Chang at Ying'en Gate. Again, he advised Dong Chang and said: Great King, your position is both mayor and prime minister, why should you give up peace and seek disaster?

古文：镠将兵此来，以俟大王改过耳。
现代文：钱我带领军队到这里来，就是等着大王你改过。
English: I have brought my army here to wait for you, the great king, to make amends.

古文：若天子命将出师，纵大王不自惜，乡里士民何罪，随大王族灭乎！ 
现代文：即使大王你不顾惜自己，可里乡里的士人百姓有什么罪，要随着你被毁灭家族呢！ 
English: Even if you, great king, do not spare yourself, what is the sin of the people of Shili Township, that their families should be destroyed along with you?

古文：昌惧，致犒军钱二百万，执首谋者吴瑶及巫觋数人送于镠，且请待罪天子。
现代文：董昌这才惧怕起来，送给钱犒劳军队的钱财二百万，抓获首先为他谋划称帝的吴瑶以及几名男女巫士送交钱，并且请求等待皇帝治他的罪。
English: It was only then that Dong Chang became afraid. He sent two million yuan to the Qianlong army, captured Wu Gan, who had first planned to make him emperor, and several male and female sorcerers, and asked them to wait for the emperor to punish him.

古文：镠引兵还，以状闻。
现代文：钱带领军队返回，把这件事报知朝廷。
English: Qian led the troops back and reported the matter to the imperial court.

古文：王重盈之子保义节度使珙、晋州刺史瑶举兵击王珂，表言珂非王氏子。
现代文：王重盈的儿子保义节度使王珂、绛州刺史王瑶发动军队攻打王珂，向朝廷上表说王珂并不是王家的儿子。
English: Wang Chunying's son, Baoying Jiedu, made Wang Ke and Zhangzhou Jishi Wang Jun launch an army to attack Wang Ke, and told the imperial court that Wang Ke was not a son of the royal family.

古文：与硃全忠书，言 珂本吾家苍头，不应为嗣。 
现代文：又给朱全忠送去书信，说： 王珂本来是我家的奴仆，不应该做继承人。 
English: He also sent a letter to Zhu Quanzhong, saying, "Wang Ke was originally a servant of my family, and should not be an heir.

古文：珂上表自陈，且求援于李克用。
现代文：王珂本人则上呈表章向朝廷自行陈述，并且向李克用请求救援。
English: Wang Ke himself submitted a self-declaration to the imperial court, and asked Li Ke for help.

古文：上遣中使谕解之。
现代文：昭宗派遣宦官传谕，劝王珙、王瑶与王珂和解。
English: Zhaozong sent eunuchs to preach and persuade Wang Yao, Wang Xi and Wang Ke to reconcile.

古文：上重李溪文学，乙未，复以溪为户部侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：唐昭宗很器重李的文才学识，乙未，再次任命李为户部侍郎、同平章事。
English: Tang Zhaozong attached great importance to Li's literary talent and learning, and once again appointed Li as the head of the household, Tongping Zhang.

古文：己酉，硃全忠军于单父，为硃友恭声援。
现代文：己酉，朱全忠率军在单父县驻扎，声援正在围攻兖州的朱友恭。
English: Zhu Quanzhong and his army were stationed in Shanfa County to support Zhu Youqiong, who was besieging Ganzhou.

古文：李克用表刘仁恭为卢龙留后，留兵戍之；壬子，还晋阳。
现代文：李克用进呈表章请朝廷任命刘仁恭为卢龙留后，留下军队驻守幽州；壬子，李克用从幽州返回晋阳。
English: Li Ke used the presentation form to ask the court to appoint Liu Renkong to stay in Lulong, leaving the army stationed in Yuzhou; after that, Li Ke used to return to Jinyang from Yuzhou.

古文：妫州人高思继兄弟，在武干，为燕人所服，克用皆以为都将，分掌幽州兵；部下士卒，皆山北之豪也，仁恭惮之。
现代文：妫州人高思继兄弟几人，勇猛强干，为燕地一带人所折服，李克用任命他们为都将，分别常管幽州的军队；他们部下士兵，都是幽州山北等地的豪杰之士，刘仁恭惧怕他们。
English: Gao Si and several of his stepbrothers from Zhangzhou were brave and strong, and won the respect of the people around Yan'an. Li Ke used to appoint them as generals, and they were in charge of the Yuzhou army. Their subordinate soldiers were heroes in Yuzhou, Shandong and other places, and Liu Rengong was afraid of them.

古文：久之，河东兵戍幽州者暴横，思继兄弟以法裁之，所诛杀甚多。
现代文：时间长了，河东军队驻守幽州的士卒残暴横行，高思继兄弟用法度制裁他们，诛杀的人很多。
English: It took a long time. The soldiers of the Hedong Army stationed in Yuzhou were cruel and rampant. Gao Si's stepbrother used the law to sanction them, and there were many people who fought and killed.

古文：克用怒，以让仁恭，仁恭诉称高氏兄弟所为，克用俱杀之。
现代文：李克用很愤怒，以此责备刘仁恭，刘仁恭便向李克用诉说高思继兄弟的所做所为，李克用于是把高思继兄弟全部杀掉。
English: Li Ke used his anger to blame Liu Rengong. Liu Rengong then told Li Ke what Gao Si's stepbrother had done. Li Ke used his anger to kill all of Gao Si's stepbrothers.

古文：仁恭欲收燕人心，复引其诸子置帐下，厚抚之。
现代文：刘仁恭想收买燕地人民的心，便又把高思继兄弟的几个儿子安置在身边，优厚地安抚他们。
English: Liu Rengong wanted to buy the hearts of the Yan people, so he placed several sons of Gao Si's stepbrother around him to pacify them.

古文：崔昭纬与李茂贞、王行瑜深相结，得天子过失，朝廷机事，悉以告之。
现代文：崔昭纬与李茂贞、王行瑜交结很深，得知唐昭宗的过错失误和朝廷的机密事务，他全都告诉李茂贞、王行瑜。
English: Cui Zhaowei was very close to Li Maozhen and Wang Xingyu. When he learned of Tang Zhaozong's mistakes and the confidential affairs of the imperial court, he told Li Maozhen and Wang Xingyu everything.

古文：邠宁节度副使崔鋋，昭纬之族也，李溪再入相，昭纬使鋋告行瑜曰： 向者尚书令之命已行矣，而韦昭度沮之，今又引李溪为同列，相与荧惑圣听，恐复有杜太慰之事。 
现代文：宁节度副使崔，是崔昭纬同族人，当李再次进入朝廷做宰相时，崔昭纬让崔告诉王行瑜说： 以前皇帝任命你做尚书令的诏令已颁发了，可是韦昭度极力阻挠，现在韦昭度又引荐李同为宰相，相互勾结迷惑皇帝视听，恐怕又要有太尉杜让能那样的事了。 
English: When Li once again entered the imperial court to serve as prime minister, Cui Zhaowei asked Cui to tell Wang Xingyu, "The imperial edict appointing you to be prime minister has been issued before, but Wei Zhaowei tried his best to obstruct it. Now Wei Zhaowei is recommending Li Tong as prime minister, and they are colluding with each other to deceive the emperor. I'm afraid there will be another Du Jiangneng.

古文：行瑜乃与茂贞表称溪奸邪，昭度无相业，宜罢居散秩。
现代文：王行瑜于是与李茂贞上表朝廷声称李奸诈邪恶，韦昭度没有做宰相的才具，应当罢免他们的宰相做闲官。
English: Wang Xingyu and Li Maozhen then went to the imperial court to claim that Li was treacherous and evil, that Wei Zhaodu was not qualified to be prime minister, and that their prime minister should be dismissed as a slacker.

古文：上报曰： 军旅之事，联则与籓镇图之；至于命相，当出朕怀。 
现代文：昭宗回答他们说： 军营中的战事，朕即与各藩镇图谋商议；至于任命宰相，则应当出自联的意向。 
English: Shozong replied to them, "As for the war in the military camp, I will try to consult with the various townships; as for the appointment of the prime minister, it should come from the intention of the federation.

古文：行瑜等论列不已，三月，溪复罢为太子少师。
现代文：王行瑜等论争不休，三月，李又被贬为太子少师。
English: Wang Xingyu and others argued incessantly, and in March, Li was relegated to the position of prince's apprentice.

古文：王珙、王瑶请朝廷命河中帅，诏以中书侍郎、同平章事崔胤同平章事，充护国节度使；以户部侍郎、判户部王抟为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：王珙、王瑶请求朝廷任命河中节度使，唐昭宗诏令任命中书侍郎、同平章事崔胤为同平章事，充任护国节度使；任命户部侍郎、判户部王抟为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: Wang Hui and Wang Hui requested the imperial court to appoint a festival envoy in the middle of the river, and the Tang Zhaozong issued an edict to appoint Cui Yan, a chushushushijiro and Tongping Shoji, as a Tongping Shoji to serve as a national guard festival envoy; and appointed Wang Hui, a Hubei Shojiro and Han, a Hubei Shojiro, as a Chushijiro and Tongping Shoji.

古文：王珂，李克用之婿也。
现代文：王珂是李克用的女婿。
English: Wang Ke is Li Kegui's son-in-law.

古文：克用表重荣有功于国，请赐其子珂节钺。
现代文：李克用向朝廷上表说王重荣对国家有功，请求赐给他的儿子王珂节度使旌旗节钺。
English: Li Ke told the imperial court that Wang Chung Rong was of great service to the country, and asked that his son, Wang Ke Jiedu, be given the honor of flying the national flag.

古文：王珙厚结王行瑜、李茂贞、韩建三帅，更上表称珂非王氏子，请以珂为陕州、珙为河中。
现代文：王珙进一步与王行瑜、李茂贞、韩建三位节度使交结，交替着向朝廷进呈表章声称王珂并不是王重荣的儿子，请求任命王珂为陕州刺史，王珙为河中节度使。
English: Wang Hui further intersected with the three festival envoys, Wang Xingyu, Li Maozhen and Han Jian, and alternately presented to the imperial court a badge claiming that Wang Ke was not the son of Wang Chung Rong, and requested the appointment of Wang Ke as the historian of Shaanxi Province and Wang Hui as the festival envoy of Central China.

古文：上谕以先已允克用之秦，不许。加王镕兼侍中。
现代文：唐昭宗颁谕说先前已经许可了李克用的奏请，而没有准行王行瑜等人的请求。朝廷加封王兼任待中。
English: Tang Zhaozong issued an edict saying that he had previously approved Li Ke's request, but did not approve the request of Wang Xingyu and others.

古文：杨行密浮淮至泗州，防御使台濛盛饰供帐，行密不悦。
现代文：杨行密沿淮河到达泗州，泗州防御使台为杨行密大肆装饰营帐，杨行密对此并不高兴。
English: Yang Xingmi arrived in Ganzhou along the Huai River. The Ganzhou defense station lavishly decorated the camp for Yang Xingmi. Yang Xingmi was not happy about this.

古文：既行，濛于卧内得补绽衣，驰使归之。
现代文：杨行密启程离开泗州后，台在杨行密的卧室内发现一件补钉衣服，台骑马追赶把那件衣服送还杨行密。
English: After Yang Xingmi left Zhangzhou, Taiwan found a piece of clothing with tacks in Yang Xingmi's bedroom. Taiwan chased him on horseback to return the piece of clothing to Yang Xingmi.

古文：行密笑曰： 吾少贫贱，不敢忘本。 
现代文：杨行密笑着说： 我小时候家中贫寒，出身低贱，现在我也不敢忘本。 
English: Yang Xingmi said with a smile: When I was a child, my family was poor and I came from a lowly background. Now I dare not forget this.

古文：濛甚惭。
现代文：台听后十分惭愧。
English: I was very ashamed after listening to it.

古文：行密攻濠州，拨之，执刺史张璲。
现代文：杨行密攻打濠州，予以攻克，抓获濠州刺史张。
English: Yang Xing attacked Bozhou in secret, defeated it, and captured Zhang Shizhong of Bozhou.

古文：行密军士掠得徐州人李氏之子，生八年矣，行密养以为子，行密长子渥憎之；行密谓其将徐温曰： 此儿质状性识，颇异于人，吾度渥必不能容，今赐汝为子。 
现代文：杨行密的军中士兵抢掠到一个徐州姓李人家的孩子，已经八岁了，杨行密把他收为养子，杨行密的长子杨渥憎恨这个孩子；杨行密对他的属将徐温说： 这个孩子质朴聪颖，和别人很不一样，我揣测杨渥一定容不下他，现在赐给你为养子。 
English: Yang Xingmi's soldiers looted the eight-year-old child of a family with the surname Li in Xuzhou. Yang Xingmi adopted him. Yang Wou, Yang Xingmi's eldest son, hated the child. Yang Xingmi said to his subordinate Xu Wen: "This child is simple and clever, and very different from others. I guess Yang Wou can't tolerate him, so I'm giving him to you as an adopted son."

古文：温名之曰知诰。
现代文：徐温给这个孩子起名叫徐知诰。
English: Xu Wen named the child Xu Zhisheng.

古文：知诰事温，勤孝过于诸子。
现代文：徐知诰侍奉徐温，勤谨孝敬超过徐温的其他几个儿子。
English: Xu Zhisheng served Xu Wen, and his diligence and filial piety surpassed those of several other sons of Xu Wen.

古文：尝得罪于温，温笞而逐之；及归，知诰迎拜于门。温问： 何故犹在此？ 
现代文：有一次，徐知诰得罪了徐温，徐温鞭打他并赶他走；等到徐温回到家里，徐知诰跪在门口迎接。徐温问他： 为什么还在这里？ 
English: Once, Xu Zhisheng offended Xu Wen, Xu Wen whipped him and drove him away; when Xu Wen returned home, Xu Zhisheng knelt at the door to greet him. Xu Wen asked him: Why are you still here?

古文：知诰泣对曰： 人子舍父母将何之！
现代文：徐知诰流着眼泪回答说： 做儿子的离开了父母还能到哪里去呢！
English: With tears streaming down his face, Xu Zhisheng replied: "As a son, where can you go if you leave your parents?

古文：父怒而归母，人情之常也。 
现代文：父亲盛怒时候就先回到母亲的身边，这是人之常情。 
English: It is human nature for a father to return to his mother's side first when he is angry.

古文：温以是益爱之，使掌家事，家人无违言。
现代文：徐温因此更加疼爱徐知诰，让他掌管家中事务，家里的人没有不听他话的。
English: As a result, Xu Wen loved Xu Zhisheng even more, and put him in charge of the family affairs. There was no one in the family who did not listen to him.

古文：及长，喜书善射，识度英伟。
现代文：等到徐知诰长大了，喜好读书善于射箭，见识不凡，器度英伟。
English: When Xu Zhisheng grew up, he liked to read and was good at archery. His insight was extraordinary and his talent was great.

古文：行密常谓温曰： 知诰俊杰，诸将子皆不及也。 
现代文：杨行密经常对徐温说： 徐知诰英俊杰出，各位将领的儿子都比不上他。 
English: Yang Xingmi often said to Xu Wen: Xu Zhisheng is handsome and outstanding, the sons of generals are no match for him.

古文：丁亥，行密围寿州。
现代文：丁亥，杨行密围攻寿州。
English: Dinghai and Yang Xingmi besieged Shoushou.

古文：上以郊畿多盗，至有逾垣入宫或侵犯陵寝者，欲令宗室诸王将兵巡警，又欲使之四方抚慰籓镇。
现代文：昭宗因为京师长安的郊区盗贼很多，甚至有越过城墙进入皇宫或挖掘皇陵的，便想命令宗室各王带领军队巡查警防，又想派他们到各地安抚慰问藩镇。
English: Because there were many thieves in the suburbs of Beijing Division Chang'an, and some even crossed the city wall to enter the imperial palace or excavate the imperial mausoleum, Akimune wanted to order the kings of the imperial family to lead the army to patrol the police, and also wanted to send them to various places to pacify and console the towns of the domain.

古文：南北司用事之臣恐其不利于己，交章论谏。上不得已，夏，四月，下诏悉罢之。
现代文：朝中大臣及宦官中掌权的人担心这样对自己不利，交相进呈奏章进行劝阻，昭宗不得已，于夏季四月份，颁下诏令全部停止。
English: Those in power among the ministers and eunuchs in the middle of the dynasty feared that this would be disadvantageous to themselves, so they made a concerted effort to dissuade it. As a last resort, in the summer of April, Emperor Akimune issued an edict to stop it all.

古文：朝廷以董昌有贡输之勤，今日所为，类得心疾，诏释其罪，纵归田里。
现代文：朝廷因为董昌有进贡纳赋殷勤的功劳，这次称帝的叛逆举动，好象他得了疯病，唐昭宗便颁诏赦免董昌的罪过，放他回到故里。
English: Because the imperial court had given Dong Chang a tribute for his diligent service, this rebellious act of proclaiming himself emperor was as if he had gone mad. Tang Zhaozong then issued an edict to pardon Dong Chang's sins and let him return to his hometown.

古文：户部侍郎、同平章事陆希声罢为太子少师。
现代文：昭宗把户部侍郎、同平章事陆希声贬为太子少师。
English: Akimune demoted Tomobe's chamberlain, Dondaira no Shosho, to the position of prince's apprentice.

古文：杨行密围寿州，不克，将还；庚寅，其将硃延寿请试往更攻，一鼓拨之，执剌史江从勖。
现代文：杨行密围攻寿州，未能攻克，想要返回；庚寅，杨行密的手下将领朱延寿请求再次前往攻打试试，结果一鼓作气攻克，抓获寿州刺史江从勖。
English: Yang Xingmi besieged Shoushou, failed to conquer it, and wanted to return; Geng Yin, Yang Xingmi's subordinate general Zhu Yanshou, requested to go and attack it again. As a result, he made a great effort to conquer it, and captured Shoushou's Jishi River from Gong.

古文：行密以延寿权知寿州团练使。
现代文：杨行密任命朱延寿暂任寿州团练使。
English: Yang Xingmi appointed Zhu Yanshou as the interim Shoushou group training envoy.

古文：未几，汴兵数万攻寿州，州中兵少，吏民忷惧。
现代文：不久，朱全忠的汴州军队几万人攻打寿州，州内兵力较少，官吏百姓人心惶惶。
English: Soon, Zhu Quanzhong's Zhangzhou army of tens of thousands of people attacked Shoushou. There were fewer troops in the state, and the officials and people were panicked.

古文：延寿制，军中每旗二十五骑。
现代文：朱延寿便规定，军队每面旗帜下二十五名骑兵。
English: Zhu Yanshou then stipulated that the army should have twenty-five cavalry under each banner.

古文：命黑云队长李厚将十旗击汴兵，不胜；延寿将斩之，厚称众寡不敌，愿益兵更往，不胜则死。
现代文：命令黑云队长李厚带领十旗袭击汴州军队，没有取胜。朱延寿要将李厚斩杀，李厚说敌众我寡难以抵敌，希望给他增添军队再次前往迎战，如果还不能获胜甘愿一死。
English: He ordered the captain of the Black Cloud, Li Hou, to lead ten banners to attack the Zhangzhou army, but he did not win. Zhu Yanshou wanted to kill Li Hou. Li Hou said that the number of enemies was too small to resist, and he hoped to add more troops to him to go to war again. If he could not win, he was willing to die.

古文：都押牙汝阳柴再用亦为之请，乃益以五旗。
现代文：都押牙将汝阳人柴再用也为李厚请求，于是朱延寿又给李厚增拨了五旗兵力。
English: Li Hou also requested the Duosha to reuse the firewood from the Ryu Yang people, so Zhu Yanshou also allocated an additional five-banner force to Li Hou.

古文：厚殊死战，再用助之，延寿悉众乘之，汴兵败走。
现代文：李厚拼死奋战，柴再用从中协助，朱延寿也率全部人马后援，汴州军队终于败撤走。
English: Li Hou fought to the death, Chai Re-use assisted, Zhu Yanshou also led all the manpower and horse support, and the Zhangzhou army was finally defeated and withdrawn.

古文：厚，蔡州人也。
现代文：李厚是蔡州人。
English: Li Hou is from Caizhou.

古文：行密又遣兵袭涟水，拨之。
现代文：杨行密又派遣军队袭击泗州涟水县，予以攻克。
English: Yang Xingmi also sent troops to attack Lishui County, Luzhou, and conquered it.

古文：钱镠表董昌僭逆，不可赦，请以本道兵讨之。
现代文：钱镠向昭宗上表说董昌犯有自行称帝叛逆大罪，不应赦免，请求率领本道军队讨伐董昌。
English: Qian Hong told Zhaozong that Dong Chang was guilty of high treason and should not be pardoned, and asked him to lead the local army to fight against Dong Chang.

古文：太傅、门下侍郎、同平章事韦昭度以太保致仕。
现代文：昭宗诏令太傅、门下侍郎、同平章事韦昭度以太保官衔退休。
English: Shoson Daisho ordered Taifu, his disciple Jiro, and Tongpei Shoshoji Wei Shodo to retire from their official positions.

古文：戊戌，以刘建锋为武安节度使。
现代文：戊戌，朝廷任命刘建锋为武安节度使。
English: At that time, the imperial court appointed Liu Jianfeng as the envoy of the Wu'an Festival.

古文：建锋以马殷为内外马步军都指挥使。
现代文：刘建锋委任马殷为内外马步军都指挥使。
English: Liu Jianfeng appointed Ma Yin as the commander of the domestic and foreign horse cavalry.

古文：杨行密遣使诣钱镠，言董昌已改过，宜释之；亦遣诣昌，使趣朝贡。
现代文：杨行密派遣使者前往钱那里，说董昌已经知罪悔过，应当赦免他，也派使者到董昌那里，让他立即向朝廷进贡纳赋。
English: Yang Xingmi sent an envoy to Qian, saying that Dong Chang had confessed and repented and should be pardoned. He also sent an envoy to Dong Chang, asking him to immediately pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：河东遣其将史俨、李承嗣以万骑驰入于郓，硃友恭退归于汴。
现代文：河东节度使李克用派遣属下将领史俨、李承嗣带领一万骑兵疾驰进入郓州，朱友恭退走返回汴州。
English: At the festival in Hedong, Li Ke used the dispatch of his subordinate generals Shi Jun and Li Chengzhi to lead ten thousand cavalry into Ganzhou at high speed, while Zhu Yougong retreated back to Ganzhou.

古文：五月，诏削董昌官爵，委钱镠讨之。
现代文：五月，唐昭宗诏令革除董昌的官职爵位，委派钱征讨董昌。
English: In May, Emperor Zhaozong of Tang issued an edict to revoke the official title and knighthood of Dong Chang, and assigned Qian to solicit money from Dong Chang.

古文：初，王行瑜求尚书令不获，由是怨朝廷。
现代文：当初，王行瑜谋求尚书令官职未能获得，因此怨恨朝廷。
English: At first, Wang Xingyu was unable to obtain an official position by seeking Shang Shuling, so he resented the imperial court.

古文：畿内有八镇兵，隶左右军。
现代文：京师长安所辖地区有八镇军队，隶属左、右神策军。
English: In the area under the jurisdiction of the Beijing division of Chang'an, there are eight town armies, belonging to the left and right Shensha armies.

古文：郃阳镇近华州，韩建求之；良原镇近邠州，王行瑜求之。
现代文：阳镇靠近华州，韩建请求兼管；良远镇接近州，王行瑜希望由他统领。
English: Yang Town is close to Huazhou, and Han Jian requested to be in charge; Liangyuan Town is close to the state, and Wang Xingyu hopes to be led by him.

古文：宦官曰： 此天子禁军，何可得也！ 
现代文：宫内宦宫说： 这都是皇帝的禁卫军，怎么能让他们得到！ 
English: The palace eunuch said, "These are the emperor's bodyguards, how can they get away with this!"

古文：王珂、王珙争河中，行瑜、建及李茂贞皆为珙请，不能得，耻之。
现代文：王珂、王珙争夺河中节度使这一官职，王行瑜、韩建以及李茂贞都为王珙请求，结果王珙却未能得到，这几个人都感到很耻辱。
English: Wang Ke and Wang Yao were competing for the position of Hezhong Jiedu, and Wang Xingyu, Han Jian, and Li Maozhen all requested the post for Wang Yao, but Wang Yao did not get it. All of these people felt very humiliated.

古文：珙使人语三帅曰： 珂不受代而与河东昏姻，必为诸公不利，请讨之。 
现代文：王珙派人对王行瑜、韩建、李项贞三位节度使说： 王珂在河中不接受我的代替而与河东节度使李克用结成姻亲，对你们各位一定不利，请求你们讨伐王珂。 
English: Wang Hui sent a message to Wang Xingyu, Han Jian and Li Xiangzhen, the three festival envoys: Wang Ke did not accept my substitution in the middle of the river, and instead asked Li Ke to form a marriage with the festival in the east of the river. This was definitely unfavorable to all of you, and he asked you to fight Wang Ke.

古文：行瑜使其弟匡国节度使行约攻河中，珂求救于李克用。
现代文：王行瑜便派他的弟弟匡国节度使王行约攻打河中，王珂向李克用请求救援。
English: Wang Xingyu then sent his younger brother Kuangguo Jiedu to have Wang Xingyu attack the middle of the river, and Wang Ke to ask Li Ke for help.

古文：行瑜乃与茂贞、建各将精兵数千入朝，甲子，至京师，坊市民皆窜匿。
现代文：王行瑜于是与李茂贞、朝建各带领精兵几千人奔赴朝廷。甲子，王行瑜等人率军到达京师，长安街市居民都到处逃窜躲藏。
English: Wang Xingyu then rushed to the imperial court with several thousand elite soldiers led by Li Maozhen and Wang Jian. Qozi, Wang Xingyu and others led the army to Beijing, and the residents of Chang'an Street fled and hid everywhere.

古文：上御安福门以待之，三帅盛陈甲兵，拜伏舞蹈于门下。
现代文：唐昭宗来到安福门等待他们，三位节度使把披甲军队大规模排列开来，在安福门下行大跪大拜礼仪。
English: Tang Zhaozong came to Anfu Gate to wait for them, and the three emperors ordered the armored troops to line up in large numbers and kneel down under the Anfu Gate.

古文：上临轩，亲诘之曰： 卿辈不奏请俟报，辄称兵入京城，其志欲何为乎？
现代文：昭宗走到门楼前，亲自责问他们说： 你们不上表奏请等待朝廷回话，就发动军队进入京城，你们的意图究竟要干什么？
English: Shozong walked up to the gatehouse and personally scolded them: "If you don't show up, please wait for a reply from the imperial court, and then launch an army to enter the capital, what exactly are your intentions?

古文：若不能事朕，今日请避贤路！ 
现代文：如果你们不能侍奉朕，今天就请你们退离官位让给贤明的人！ 
English: If you can't serve me, resign today and give your position to someone who can!

古文：行瑜、茂贞流汗不能言，独韩建粗述入朝之由。
现代文：王行瑜、李茂贞听后浑身冒冷汗而不能说一句话，唯有韩建粗略地陈述了前来京师的原因。
English: After listening to Wang Xingyu and Li Maozhen, Wang Xingyu and Li Maozhen broke out in a cold sweat and could not say a word. Only Han Jian roughly stated the reason for coming to Beijing.

古文：上与三帅宴，三帅奏称： 南、北司互有朋党，堕紊朝政。
现代文：昭宗与三位节度使宴会，三位节度使向皇帝奏道： 朝中大臣和宫内宦官互相结党为奸，败坏扰乱朝廷大政。
English: Zhaozong held a banquet with the three ceremonial officials, and the three ceremonial officials made a speech to the emperor: the ministers of the Central Court and the eunuchs in the court formed a party to conspire with each other, corrupting and disrupting the imperial government.

古文：韦昭度讨西川失策，李溪作相，不合众心，请诛之。 
现代文：韦昭度讨伐西川决策失误，李充任宰相，不合群臣的心愿，请将李诛杀。 
English: Wei Zhaodu's crackdown on the West River was a mistake in decision-making, and Li Chong was appointed prime minister, which was not in line with the wishes of the ministers. Please kill Li Xuan.

古文：上未之许。
现代文：昭宗没有准许他们的奏请。
English: Shozong did not allow them to perform.

古文：是日，行瑜等杀昭度、溪于都亭驿，又杀枢密使康尚弼及宦官数人。
现代文：这一天，王行瑜等在朱雀门外都亭驿将韦昭度、李杀死，又杀掉枢密使康尚弼及宦官好几人。
English: On this day, Wang Xingyu and others killed Wei Zhaodu and Li Du in the pavilion outside the Suzak Gate, and also killed the confidential envoy Kang Shangtao and several eunuchs.

古文：又言： 王珂、王珙嫡庶不分，请除王珙河中，徙王行约于陕，王珂于同州。 
现代文：王行瑜等又向唐昭宗进言说： 王珂、王珙的作用是不分子嫡子和庶子的尊卑，现在请求任命王珙为河中节度使，把王行约调往陕州，王珂调到同州。 
English: Wang Xingyu and others also gave advice to Tang Zhaozong, saying, "The roles of Wang Ke and Wang Yao do not include the superiority and inferiority of the legitimate son and the illegitimate son. Now, we request that Wang Yao be appointed as the envoy of the Mid-River Festival, and that Wang Xingyao be transferred to Shaanxi and Wang Ke to the same province.

古文：上皆许之。
现代文：昭宗都予以同意。
English: The emperor agreed to all of Duan Yu's demands.

古文：始，三帅谋废上，立吉王保；至是，闻李克用已起兵于河东，行瑜、茂贞各留兵二千人宿卫京师，与建皆辞还镇。
现代文：开始，王行瑜等三位节度使谋划废黜唐昭宗，拥立吉王李保称帝。这时，听说李克用已在河东起兵，王行瑜、李茂贞便分别留下军队二千人守护京师，与韩建一同辞别返回镇所。
English: At the beginning, Wang Xingyu and three other officials plotted to depose Tang Zhaozong and install Ji Wang Li Bao as emperor. At this time, it was heard that Li Keyi had raised an army in Hedong. Wang Xingyu and Li Maozhen separately left an army of two thousand people to guard the Beijing division, and resigned together with Han Jian to return to the town.

古文：贬户部尚书杨堪为雅州刺史。
现代文：昭宗又诏令把户部尚书杨堪贬职为雅州刺史。
English: Zhaozong also decreed that Yang Kan, the head of the household, be demoted to the position of the governor of Yashu.

古文：堪，虞卿之子，昭度之舅也。
现代文：杨堪是杨虞卿的儿子，韦昭度的舅舅。
English: Yang Kan is the son of Yang Yuqing and the uncle of Wei Zhaodu.

古文：初，崔胤除河中节度使，河东进奏官薛志勤扬言曰： 崔公虽重德，以之代王珂，不若光德刘公于我公厚也。 
现代文：当初，崔胤授职河中节度使，河东节度使司的进奏官薛志勤便扬言说： 崔胤虽然是注重德行的人，但是让他取代王珂，不如长安城内光德坊的刘公对我主公李克用感情好。 
English: At first, Xue Zhiqin, the forwarding officer who appointed Cui Yan as the envoy to the Mid-Hebei Festival and the East-Hebei Festival, threatened: Although Cui Yan is a person who pays attention to virtue, but to let him replace Wang Ke is not as good as if Liu Gong from Guangdefang in Chang'an City had feelings for my lord Li Ke.

古文：光德刘公者，太常卿刘崇望也。
现代文：光德坊刘公，就是太常卿刘崇望。
English: Liu Gong of Guangdefang is Liu Chongwang, the First Secretary of the Central Military Commission.

古文：及三帅入朝，闻志勤之言，贬崇望昭州司马。
现代文：等到王行瑜等三位节度使进入京师，知道了薛志勤说的话，便把刘崇望贬职为昭州司马。
English: When Wang Xingyu and the other three emissaries arrived in Beijing and learned what Xue Zhiqin had said, they demoted Liu Chongwang to the position of Zhaozhou Sima.

古文：李克用闻三镇兵犯阙，即日遣使十三辈发北部兵，期以来月渡河入关。
现代文：李克用听说三位节度使率领军队侵犯京师，当天就派遣使者十三起去征发北部蕃族部落军队，约定下个月渡过黄河进入潼关。
English: Li Ke took advantage of the rumor that the three emissaries of the Qing Dynasty had led the troops to invade the Beijing Division. On the same day, he dispatched 13 emissaries to recruit and dispatch the northern Yi tribal army, and agreed to cross the Yellow River into Shaoguan next month.

古文：六月，庚寅，以钱镠为浙东招讨使；镠复发兵击董昌。
现代文：六月，庚寅初四，朝廷任命钱为浙东招讨使，钱于是再次征发军队攻打董昌。
English: In June, on the fourth day of the first month of the reign of Emperor Go-In, the imperial court appointed Qian as the envoy to Zhejiang to solicit suggestions. Qian then once again sent troops to attack Dongchang.

古文：辛卯，以前均州刺史孔纬、绣州司户张浚并为太子宾客。
现代文：辛卯，朝廷任命以前的均州刺史孔纬、绣州司户张浚一同为太子宾客。
English: In addition, the Imperial Court appointed the former Junzhou embroiderer Kong Wei and the embroiderer Zhang Jun to be guests of the prince.

古文：壬辰，以纬为吏部尚书，复其阶爵；癸已，拜司空，兼门下侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：壬辰，朝廷任命孔纬为吏部尚书，恢复他的官级爵位；癸巳，又授职孔纬司空，兼任门下侍郎、同平章事。
English: At the same time, the imperial court appointed Kong Yat-sen as the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs and restored his official rank and title; at the same time, Kong Yat-sen was appointed as the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and concurrently served as a subordinate attendant and a peer of the Emperor.

古文：以张浚为兵部尚书、诸道租庸使。
现代文：朝廷还任命张浚为兵部尚书、诸道租庸使。
English: The imperial court also appointed Zhang Jun as the secretary of the military department and the chief envoy to the various provinces.

古文：时纬居华州，浚居长水，上以崔昭纬等外交籓镇，朋党相倾，思得骨鲠之士，故骤用纬、浚。
现代文：当时孔纬居住在华州，张浚居住在长水，昭宗因为崔昭纬等在外交结藩镇，结党营私，相互倾轧，而想起用刚直人士，因此突然任用孔纬、张浚。
English: At that time, Kong Wei was living in Huazhou and Zhang Jun was living in Changshui. Because Cui Zhaowei and others were in the process of establishing diplomatic ties, forming parties, and competing with each other, Zhaozong thought of using upright people, so he suddenly appointed Kong Wei and Zhang Jun.

古文：纬以有疾，扶舆至京师，见上，涕泣固辞；上不许。
现代文：孔纬因为身体有病，抱病乘车来到京师，他见到昭宗，流着泪坚决推辞；昭宗不准。
English: Because Kong Wei was ill, he came to Beijing Division by car with illness. When he saw Zhaozong, he firmly declined with tears; Zhaozong was not allowed to go.

古文：李克用大举蕃、汉兵南下，上表称王行瑜、李茂贞、韩建称兵犯阙，贼害大臣，请讨之，又移檄三镇，行瑜等大惧。
现代文：李克用大规模地发动蕃族和汉人的军队向南开进，他向唐昭宗上表声称王行瑜、李茂贞、韩建派兵进犯京师，残害朝中大臣，请求讨伐他们。李克用又向王行瑜、李茂贞、韩建三位节度使发去征讨檄文，王行瑜等大为恐惧。
English: Li Ke used large-scale to launch the Yi and Han armies to advance southward. He claimed to Tang Zhaozong that Wang Xingyu, Li Maozhen, and Han Jian had sent troops to invade the Beijing Division and destroy the ministers of North Korea and China, and requested to fight them. Li Ke also sent Wang Xingyu, Li Maozhen, and Han Jian to the three festivals to collect and discuss the imperial edicts. Wang Xingyu and others were very afraid.

古文：克用军至绛州，刺史王瑶闭城拒之；克用进攻，旬日，拔之。斩瑶于军门，杀城中违拒者千馀人。
现代文：李克用的军队到达绛州，绛州刺史王瑶关闭城门抵抗；李克用发动进攻，十天，就将绛州攻克，在军营的大门将王瑶斩杀，并杀掉城内进行抵抗的一千余人。
English: Li Ke used the army to arrive in Zhangzhou, Zhangzhou stabbed Wang Shizhen to close the city gate to resist; Li Ke used to launch an attack, ten days later, he conquered Zhangzhou, cut off Wang Shizhen at the gate of the military camp, and killed more than a thousand people who resisted in the city.

古文：秋，七月，丙辰朔，克用至河中，王珂迎谒于路。
现代文：秋季，七月，丙辰朔，李克用到达河中，王珂在路上迎接拜见他。
English: In autumn, in July, when Li Kezhen arrived in the middle of the river, Wang Ke met him on the road.

古文：匡国节度使王行约败于朝邑，戊午，行约弃同州走，己未，至京师。
现代文：匡国节度使王行约在朝邑打了败仗，戊午，王行约放弃同州逃路，己未，到达京师长安。
English: The Kuangguo Festival made Wang Xing about to lose the battle in the morning, and in the afternoon, Wang Xing about to give up the escape route in Tongzhou, and had not yet reached the Beijing Division of Chang'an.

古文：行约弟行实时为左军指挥使，帅众与行约大掠西市。
现代文：王行约的弟弟王行实当时充任京师左军指挥使，他率领手下人马与王行约一起在长安西市大肆抢掠。
English: Wang Xingyao's younger brother Wang Xingshi was at that time acting as the commanding officer of the Left Army of the Beijing Division. He led his men and horses together with Wang Xingyao to plunder extensively in West Chang'an.

古文：行实奏称同华已没，沙陀将至，请车驾幸邠州。
现代文：王行实向唐昭宗上表奏称，同州、华州已经沦陷，李克用的沙陀人马就要到了，请皇帝的车驾到州去避难。
English: Wang Xingshi made a report to Tang Zhaozong on the table, saying that Tongzhou and Huazhou had fallen, Li Ke's satyrs were about to arrive, and asked the emperor's car to drive to the state for refuge.

古文：庚申，枢密使骆全瓘奏请车驾幸凤翔。
现代文：庚申，枢密使骆全上表奏请皇帝出巡凤翔。
English: Goshun, the privy council sent Luo Quan to ask the emperor to go on a phoenix flight.

古文：上曰： 朕得克用表，尚驻军河中。
现代文：唐昭宗说： 朕收到了李克用的表章，他尚且率军在河中驻扎。
English: Tang Zhaozong said: I have received the insignia used by Li Ke. He is still stationed in the middle of the river with his army.

古文：就使沙陀至此，朕自有以枝梧，卿等但各抚本军，勿令摇动。 
现代文：即使是李克用的沙陀人马到达这里，朕自然有办法应付他，你们只要各自安抚好自己的军队。不要让他们动摇骚动。 
English: Even if Li Ke's satrapy arrives here, I naturally have a way to deal with him, as long as you each pacify your own army. Don't let them shake the turmoil.

古文：右军指挥使李继鹏，茂贞假子也，本姓名阎珪，与骆全瓘谋劫上幸凤翔。
现代文：右军指挥使李继鹏，是李茂贞的养子，原本叫阎，他与骆全策划劫持唐昭宗前往凤翔。
English: The commander of the right-wing army sent Li Jipeng, the adopted son of Li Maozhen, originally named Yan. He and Luo Quan planned to kidnap Tang Zhaozong and go to Fengxiang.

古文：中尉刘景宣与王行实知之，欲劫上幸邠州。
现代文：中尉刘景宣与王行实知道了，则想劫持昭宗前赴州。
English: When Lieutenant Liu Jingxuan and Wang Xingshi found out, they wanted to kidnap Zhaozong and take him to the state.

古文：孔纬面折景宣，以为不可轻离宫阙。
现代文：孔纬当面驳斥刘景宣，认为皇帝不能轻易离开长安宫殿。
English: Kong Wei refuted Liu Jingxuan in person, saying that the emperor could not easily leave the Chang'an Palace.

古文：向晚，继鹏连奏请车驾出幸，于是王行约引左军攻右军，于楼前侍卫。
现代文：近傍晚时，李继鹏接连上奏请昭宗出走凤翔，王行约见李继鹏要抢先劫走昭宗，便带领他的左军攻打李继鹏的右军，锣鼓喧闹声惊天动地。
English: In the late afternoon, Li Jipeng successively played for Feng Xiang to ask Zhaozong to leave. Wang Xing made an appointment with Li Jipeng to kidnap Zhaozong first, and led his left army to attack Li Jipeng's right army. The noise of the drums was earth-shattering.

古文：继鹏复纵火焚宫门，烟炎蔽天。
现代文：昭宗听到外面混乱，便登上承天楼，想谕令制止他们，捧日都头李筠带领自己的军队，在承天楼前护卫昭宗。
English: Hearing the chaos outside, Zhaozong went up to Cheng Tian Lou and wanted to give an order to stop them. Li Xi, the head of the capital, led his army to escort Zhaozong in front of Cheng Tian Lou.

古文：时有盐州六都兵屯京师，素为两军所惮，上急召令入卫；既至，两军退走，各归邠州及凤翔。
现代文：李继鹏指挥凤翔军队攻打李筠，飞箭掠过昭宗的衣服，落在承天楼椽木上，身边的侍卫搀扶着昭宗下楼；李继鹏又放火焚烧宫门，浓烟烈炎遮盖了天空。当时有盐州六都军队驻扎京师，平时左、右两军都很惧怕他们，昭宗便紧急召令这支军队入宫护卫；盐州六都军队到达后，左、右两军队都撤退离去，分别返回州和凤翔。
English: Li Jipeng commanded the Fengxiang army to attack Li Qian, and the flying arrows passed through the clothes of Zhaozong and landed on the beech tree of the Heian Tower. The guards around him helped Zhaozong down the stairs. Li Jipeng also set fire to the palace gate, and the thick smoke and flames covered the sky. At that time, the Beijing Division was stationed by the Yanzhou Six Capital Army. In normal times, the left and right armies were very afraid of them, so Zhaozong urgently summoned this army to escort the palace. After the arrival of the Yanzhou Six Capital Army, both the left and right armies retreated and left

古文：城中大乱，互相剽掠，上与诸王及亲近幸李筠营，护跸都头李居实帅众继至。
现代文：长安城内大为混乱，到处抢劫掠夺，昭宗与各王以及亲近人员到李筠的军营躲避，神策军护跸都头李居实率领人马随后也赶到。
English: The city of Chang'an was in chaos, with robberies and looting everywhere. Emperor Zhaozong, the kings, and their close associates fled to the military camp of Li Xi. Li Jushi, the leader of the Divine Providence Army guarding the capital, also arrived later.

古文：或传王行瑜、李茂贞欲自来迎车驾，上惧为所迫，辛酉，以筠、居实两都兵自卫，出启夏门，趣南山，宿莎城镇。
现代文：有人传说王行瑜、李茂贞要亲自来长安迎接皇帝，昭宗担心被他们逼迫，辛酉，命令李筠、李居实的两都军队进行护卫，出长安城南面的启夏门，急速奔往南山，在莎城镇过夜。
English: Some people said that Wang Xingyu and Li Maozhen wanted to come to Chang'an to meet the emperor in person. Zhaozong was worried that they would persecute him, so he ordered Li Xi and Li Jushi to escort the two capital armies. They left the Qixia Gate in the south of Chang'an City and rushed to Nanshan to spend the night in Sha Town.

古文：士民追从车驾者数十万人，比至谷口，暍死者三之一，夜，复为盗所掠，哭声震山谷。
现代文：追随昭宗车驾的人民有几十万，等到抵达南山的谷口时，中暑而死的人竟有三分之一，夜里，流亡的百姓又遭受盗贼的抢掠，哭喊的声音震动山谷。
English: Hundreds of thousands of people followed Zhaozong's car. By the time they reached the valley mouth of the Nanshan Mountains, one-third of the people had died of heatstroke. At night, the exiled people were robbed by thieves, and the sound of crying shook the valley.

古文：时百官多扈从不及，户部尚书、判度支及盐铁转运使薛王知柔独先至，上命权知中书事及置顿使。
现代文：当时朝廷百官大多没有来得及跟随上昭宗，唯有户部尚书、判度支及盐铁转运使薛王李知柔首先赶到，昭宗便任命他暂时掌管中书省事务及兼任置顿使。
English: At that time, most of the hundred officials of the imperial court did not have time to follow Shozong, only the household department Shangshu, the judgment support and the salt and iron transport made Xue Wang Li Zhirou arrive first, and Shozong appointed him to temporarily take charge of the affairs of the Central Book Ministry and concurrently serve as an envoy.

古文：壬戌，李克用入同州。
现代文：壬戌，李克用进入同州。
English: From Ningbo, Li Ke used to enter the same state.

古文：崔昭纬、徐彦若、王抟至莎城。
现代文：崔昭纬、徐彦若、王抟到达莎城。
English: Cui Zhaowei, Xu Yanruo and Wang Xi arrived in Shajing.

古文：甲子，上徙幸石门镇，命薛王知柔与知枢密院刘光裕还京城，制置守卫宫禁。
现代文：甲子，昭宗迁移到石门镇，诏令薛王李知柔与主管枢密院的刘光裕返回京城，安置守卫皇宫。
English: Emperor Akihito and Emperor Akizong moved to Shimen Town, and issued an imperial edict ordering King Xue and Liu Guangyu, who was in charge of the Privy Council, to return to the capital and guard the imperial palace.

古文：丙寅，李克用遣节度判官王瑰奉表问起居。
现代文：丙寅，李克用派遣节度判官王敬奉表文问候昭宗的起居情况。
English: Hsin-yin and Li Ke used the dispatch of the festival judge Wang Jing to send greetings to the living conditions of Zhaozong.

古文：丁卯，上遣内侍郗廷昱赍诏诣李克用军，令与王珂各发万骑同赴新平。又诏彰义节度使张鐇以泾原兵控扼凤翔。
现代文：丁卯，昭宗派遣内侍郗廷昱带着诏令前赴李克用的军营，命令李克用与王珂分别派发一万骑兵，一同赶往州新平郡讨伐王行瑜，又诏令彰义节度使张带领泾原军队控制凤翔的李茂贞。
English: Dingwu, Zhaozong dispatched his inner attendant Zhai Tingyu to Li Keyi's military camp with a royal edict. He ordered Li Keyi and Wang Kejun to send ten thousand cavalrymen separately to fight Wang Xingyu in Shuxinping County. He also issued a royal edict to Changyi Jiedu to let Zhang lead the Yuyuan army to control Fengxiang's Li Maozhen.

古文：李克用遣兵攻华州；韩建登城呼曰： 仆于李公未尝失礼，何为见攻？ 
现代文：李克用派遣军队进攻华州；韩建登上华州城楼呼喊着说： 我对李公不曾失礼，为什么要攻打我？ 
English: Li Ke used to send troops to attack Huazhou; Han Jian climbed onto the Huazhou tower and shouted: I have never disrespected Li Gong, why attack me?

古文：克用使谓之曰： 公为人臣，逼逐天子，公为有礼，孰为无礼者乎！ 
现代文：李克用派人对他说： 你是大唐的臣子，却逼迫驱赶皇帝，你这样如果还算有礼，那么天下还有谁是无礼呢？ 
English: Li Ke sent someone to say to him, "You are a vassal of the Great Tang Dynasty, but you persecute and drive out the emperor. If you are still polite in this way, then who else in the world is rude?

古文：会郗廷昱至，言李茂贞将兵三万至盩厔，王行瑜将兵至兴平，皆欲迎车驾，克用乃释华州之围，移兵营渭桥。
现代文：恰巧这时郗廷昱赶到，他对李克用说，李茂贞带领军队三万已到，王行瑜率领军队到达兴平，都想迎接唐昭宗的车驾，李克用于是解除对华州的围攻，把军队开赴渭桥安营扎寨。
English: Just at that time, Gong Dingyao arrived, and he said to Li Kejun that Li Maozhen had arrived with an army of thirty thousand, and Wang Xingyu had arrived in Xingping with an army, and they all wanted to meet Tang Zhaozong's chauffeur. Li Kejun used it to lift the siege of Huazhou and drive the army to Lianqiao to camp.

古文：以薛王知柔为清海节度使、同平章事，仍权知京兆尹、判度支，充盐铁转运使，俟反正日赴镇。
现代文：昭宗任命薛王李知柔为清海节度使、同平章事，仍然暂任京兆尹、判度支，并充任盐铁转运使，让他等待平乱反正后再前赴岭南镇所。
English: Zhaozong appointed Xue Wang Li Zhirou as the Qinghai Festival envoy and Tongping chapter, still temporarily serving as the Beijing Zhaoyun and Judgement Branch, and acting as the Salt and Iron Transportation Envoy, and let him wait for the disturbance to be settled before going to the Lingnan Town Hall.

古文：上在南山旬馀，士民从车驾避乱者日相惊曰： 邠、岐兵至矣！ 
现代文：昭宗在南山已有十几天了，跟随唐昭宗车驾的士人百姓每天都惊慌失措地相互惊叫： 州、岐州的军队到了！ 
English: Zhaozong has been in Nanshan for more than a dozen days, and the common people who follow Tang Zhaozong's car are panicking and shouting to each other every day: The state and Qizhou armies have arrived!

古文：上遣延王戒丕诣河中，趣李克用令进兵。
现代文：昭宗派遣延王李戒丕前赴河中，催促李克用下令开进军队。
English: Zhaozong dispatched Yan Wang Li Jiechi to go to Hezhong and urge Li Kejun to march into the army.

古文：壬午，克用发河中。
现代文：壬午，李克用的军队从河中出发。
English: At noon, Li Ke's army set out from the middle of the river.

古文：八月，上遣供奉官张承业诣克用军。
现代文：唐昭宗派遣供奉官张承业前往李克用的军营。
English: Tang Zhaozong dispatched Zhang Chengye, a tributary official, to the military camp used by Li Ke.

古文：承业，同州人，屡奉使于克用，因留监其军。
现代文：张承业是同州人，多次奉唐昭宗的谕令出使李克用，昭宗趁便把他留在李克用的军营监视。
English: Zhang Chengye was a native of Tongzhou. He was dispatched to Li Ke for several times by the order of Tang Zhaozong. Zhaozong took the opportunity to leave him at Li Ke's military camp for surveillance.

古文：己丑，克用进军渭桥，遣其将李存贞为前锋；辛卯，拨永寿，又遣史俨将三千骑诣石门侍卫。
现代文：己丑，李克用命令军队向渭桥开进，派遣属下将领李存贞为前锋；辛卯，李克用攻克永寿，又派遣史俨带领三千骑兵前赴石门护卫唐昭宗。
English: Ugly, Li Ke ordered the army to advance towards the bridge, and sent his subordinate general Li Cunzhen as the forward; beautiful, Li Ke used to conquer Yongshou, and sent Shi Yan to lead three thousand cavalry to escort Tang Zhaozong to Shimen.

古文：癸已，遣李存信、李存审会保大节度使李思孝攻王行瑜黎园寨，擒其将王令陶等，献于行在。
现代文：癸巳，李克用派遣李存信、李存审会同保大节度使李思孝攻打在梨园寨的王行瑜，擒获王行瑜的将领王令陶等人，送往南山昭宗那里。
English: At that time, Li Ke used the dispatch of Li Cunxin and Li Cunxin Examination Committee to ensure that Li Sihiao attacked Wang Xiangyu in Liyuan Village, captured Wang Xiangyu's general Wang Lingtao and others, and sent them to Nanshan Zhaozong.

古文：思孝本姓拓跋，思恭之弟也。
现代文：李思孝本姓拓跋，是拓跋思恭的弟弟。
English: Li Sijiao, whose real name was Tuoba, was the younger brother of Tuoba Sikyong.

古文：李茂贞惧，斩李继鹏，传首行在，上表请罪，且遣使求和于克用。
现代文：李茂贞兵败很是恐惧，他斩杀李继鹏，把头颅传送到石门镇昭宗的住地，向朝廷进呈表章请求治他的罪，并且派出使者向李克用求和。
English: Li Maozhen's defeat was due to fear. He killed Li Jipeng and sent his head to the residence of Shimen Town's Zhaozong. He presented a seal to the imperial court to request that he be punished for his crime, and sent an envoy to Li Ke to sue for peace.

古文：上复遣延王戒丕、丹王允谕克用，令且赦茂贞，并力讨行瑜，俟其殄平，当更与卿议之。
现代文：昭宗再次派遣延王李戒丕、丹王李允传谕李克用，命令暂且赦免李茂贞，联合军队全力讨伐王行瑜，等到把王行瑜消灭了，朝廷会再与李克用商议处置李茂贞。
English: Zhaozong once again dispatched Yan Wang, Li Jingyao, and Dan Wang, Li Yun, to preach to Li Ke, and ordered that Li Maozhen be pardoned for the time being, and that the joint army should make every effort to fight Wang Xingyu. Once Wang Xingyu was eliminated, the imperial court would discuss the disposition of Li Maozhen with Li Ke.

古文：且命二王拜克用为兄。
现代文：昭宗并且命令延王李戒丕、丹王李允拜李克用为兄长。
English: Zhaozong also ordered Yan Wang, Li Jiechi, and Dan Wang, Li Yunbei, to use Li Ke as their elder brothers.

古文：以前河中节度使崔胤为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：朝廷任命前河中节度使崔胤为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: The imperial court appointed the former Kawazu no Nakatsuko no Setsudo to make Choiin the chushujishiro (chancellor's secretary) and dohei shoji (chancellor).

古文：戊戌，削夺王行瑜官爵。
现代文：戊戌，朝廷革除王行瑜的官职爵位。
English: The imperial court stripped Wang Xingyu of his official title and knighthood.

古文：癸卯，以李克用为邠宁四面行营都招讨使，保大节度使李思孝为北面招讨使，定难节度使李思谏为东面招讨使，彰义节度使张鐇为西面招讨使。
现代文：癸卯，朝廷任命李克用为宁四面行营都招讨使，保大节度使李思孝为北面招讨使，定难节度使李思谏为东面招讨使，彰义节度使张为四面招讨使。
English: At the same time, the imperial court appointed Li Ke to be the envoy for the four-sided campaign in Ning, Baoda Jie to be the envoy for the north, Dingan Jie to be the envoy for the east, and Changyi Jie to be the envoy for the four-sided campaign.

古文：克用遣其子存勖诣行在，年十一，上奇其状貌，抚之曰： 儿方为国之栋梁，它日宜尽忠于吾家。 
现代文：李克用派遣他的儿子李存勖到昭宗住地，李存勖当时才十一岁，昭宗对他的外貌就称奇不已，抚摸着他说： 你是国家的栋梁之才，将来要对天子我家尽忠效力。 
English: Li Ke used to send his son Li Cunxu to the residence of Zhaozong. Li Cunxu was only eleven years old at the time. Zhaozong was amazed at his appearance and caressed him and said: You are the backbone of the country. In the future, you must be loyal and effective to the heavenly son of my family.

古文：克用表请上还京；上许之。
现代文：李克用上表请求昭宗返回京师长安，昭宗同意。
English: Li Ke used the above chart to request that Zhaozong return to the capital Chang'an, and Zhaozong agreed.

古文：令克用遣骑三千驻三桥为备御。
现代文：命令李克用派遣骑兵三千驻扎三桥作为防备。
English: He ordered Li Ke to send 3,000 cavalrymen to be stationed at Sanqiao as a precaution.

古文：辛亥，车驾还京师。
现代文：辛亥，昭宗的车驾返回京师。
English: At the end of the year, Akimune's car drove back to Kyoto.

古文：壬子，司空兼门下侍郎、同平章事崔昭纬罢为右仆射。
现代文：壬子，朝廷将司空兼门下侍郎、同平章事崔昭纬罢职降为右仆射。
English: As a result, the imperial court demoted Choi Shoei, who was also a subordinate attendant and a subordinate of Choi, to the position of a right-hand man.

古文：以护国留后王珂、卢龙留后刘仁恭各为本镇节度使。
现代文：朝廷任命护国留后王珂、卢龙留后刘仁恭分别充任本镇节度使。
English: The imperial court appointed Wang Ke, who stayed behind to protect the country, and Liu Rengong, who stayed behind in Lulong, to serve as the town's festival envoys.

古文：时宫室焚毁，未暇完葺，上寓居尚书省，百官往往无袍笏仆马。
现代文：当时宫殿被焚烧毁坏，没有来得及修建整理，昭宗暂时住在尚书省，朝中百官常常没有长袍期笏和仆役马匹。
English: At that time, the palace was burned and destroyed, and there was no time to build and tidy up. Zhaozong temporarily lived in Shangshu Province, and the hundreds of officials in the court often did not have robes and servants.

古文：以李克用为行营都统。
现代文：朝廷任命李克用为行营都统。
English: The imperial court appointed Li Kegui as the acting general secretary.

古文：九月，癸亥，司空兼门下侍郎、同平章事孔纬薨。
现代文：九月，癸亥，司空兼门下侍郎、同平章事孔纬去世。
English: In September, Zeng Hai, the second-in-command of the imperial palace, and Tongping Zhang, the second-in-command, died.

古文：辛未，硃全忠自将击硃瑄，战于梁山；瑄败走还郓。
现代文：辛未，朱全忠亲自率领军队攻打朱，在寿张县的梁山展开激放，朱战败逃走返回郓州。
English: In Xinwei, Zhu Quanzhong personally led the army to attack Zhu, and launched a fierce attack on Liangshan in Shouzhang County. Zhu was defeated and fled back to Zhangzhou.

古文：李克用急攻梨园，王行瑜求救于李茂贞，茂贞遣兵万人屯龙泉镇，自将兵三万屯咸阳之旁。
现代文：李克用率军猛攻梨园寨，王行瑜向李茂贞求救，李茂贞派遣军队一万人驻扎在州的龙泉镇，自己率领军队三万在咸阳附近驻扎。
English: Li Ke led the army to storm the Pear Orchard Village, Wang Xingyu appealed to Li Maozhen for help, Li Maozhen dispatched an army of ten thousand people stationed in Longquan Town, and he led an army of thirty thousand stationed near Xianyang.

古文：克用请诏茂贞归镇，仍削夺其官爵，欲分兵讨之。
现代文：李克用奏请朝廷诏令李茂贞返回凤翔镇所，再革除他的官职爵位，想分兵对李茂贞进行讨伐。
English: Li Ke requested the imperial court to order Li Maozhen to return to Fengxiang Township, and then revoke his official title and rank, and wanted to send troops to fight against Li Maozhen.

古文：上以茂贞自诛继鹏，前已赦宥，不可复削夺诛讨，但诏归镇，仍令克用与之和解。
现代文：昭宗认为李茂贞自己诛杀了李继鹏，前些时候已经赦免了他的罪过，不便重新颁诏将他革除官职进行征伐，只是诏令李茂贞返回凤翔镇所，依然命令李克用与李茂贞和解。
English: Zhaozong thought that Li Maozhen had killed Li Jipeng herself, and had pardoned his crime some time ago. It was inconvenient to re-issue the edict to remove him from his official post and carry out the conquest. However, the edict ordered Li Maozhen to return to Fengxiang Town Hall, and still ordered Li Ke to reconcile with Li Maozhen.

古文：以昭义节度使李罕之检校侍中，充邠宁四面行营副都统。
现代文：朝廷任命昭义节度使李罕之任检校侍中，充任宁四面行营副都统。
English: The imperial court appointed Shouyi Jiedu to make Li Han serve as a school inspector, and appointed Ning Si Mian Xingye as deputy governor.

古文：史俨败邠宁兵于云阳，擒云阳镇使王令诲等，献之。
现代文：史俨在云阳打败王行瑜的宁军队，擒获云阳镇使王令诲等人，进献给朝廷。
English: Shi Yan defeated Wang Xingyu's Ning army in Yunyang and captured the Yunyang town envoy Wang Lingya and others, and presented them to the imperial court.

古文：王建遣简州刺史王宗瑶等将兵赴难；甲戌，军于绵州。
现代文：王建派遣简州刺史王宗瑶等人带领军队前来为朝廷解难；甲戌，王宗瑶等在绵州驻扎下来。
English: Wang Jian dispatched the Jianzhou general Wang Zongyao and others to lead the army to solve the problem for the imperial court; Armor, Wang Zongyao and others were stationed in Mianzhou.

古文：董昌求救于杨行密，行密遣泗州防御使台濛攻苏州以救之，且表昌引咎，愿修职贡，请复官爵。
现代文：董昌向杨行密请求救援，杨行密便派遣泗州防御使台攻打钱所属的苏州，以此援救董昌，杨行密并且向朝廷上表说，董昌已经自行认错悔过，愿意修好进贡，请恢复他的官职爵位。
English: Dong Chang asked Yang Xingmi for help, and Yang Xingmi dispatched the Zhangzhou Defense Force to attack Suzhou, which belonged to Qian, in order to rescue Dong Chang. Yang Xingmi also told the imperial court that Dong Chang had admitted his mistake and repented, and was willing to pay tribute. Please restore his official title.

古文：又遗钱镠书，称： 昌狂疾自立，已畏兵谏，执送同恶。不当复伐之。 
现代文：杨行密又给钱送去书信，信中说： 董昌发疯自行称帝，在你率军劝阻时已经惧怕，并将蛊惑他称帝的奸恶之人捉拿交送给你，这样就不应当再讨伐他了。 
English: Yang Xingmi also sent Qian a letter, which said: "Dong Chang went mad and proclaimed himself emperor. When you led the army to dissuade him, he was already afraid, and sent you to capture the treacherous person who tempted him to proclaim himself emperor. In this way, he should no longer be fought.

古文：冬，十月，丙戌，河东将李存贞败邠宁军于梨园北，杀千馀人。
现代文：冬季十月，丙戌，河东军队的将领李存贞在梨园寨北部打败王行瑜的宁军队，斩杀一千余人。
English: In the winter of October, Li Cunzhen, the general of the Hedong army, defeated Wang Xingyu's Ning army in the northern part of Liyuanzhai and killed more than a thousand people.

古文：自是梨园闭壁不敢出。
现代文：从此，梨园寨关团营垒不敢再出战。
English: From then on, the camp of Liyuan Zhai Guan did not dare to fight again.

古文：贬右仆射崔昭纬为梧州司马。
现代文：朝廷把右仆射崔昭纬贬为梧州司马。
English: The imperial court relegated his right-hand man, Choi Zhaowei, to the role of Wuzhou Sima.

古文：魏国夫人陈氏，才色冠后宫；戊子，上以赐李克用。
现代文：魏国夫人陈氏，才能姿色在后宫堪数第一，戊子，昭宗把陈氏赐给李克用。
English: Wei's wife, Chen, was the most beautiful woman in the imperial court. Wu Zi and Zhao Zong gave Chen to Li Ke for his use.

古文：克用令李罕之、李存信等急攻梨园；城中食尽，弃城走。
现代文：李克用命令李罕之、李存信等紧急攻打梨园寨；梨园城内粮食吃尽，王行瑜的军队弃城逃跑。
English: Li Ke ordered Li Hanzhi, Li Cunxin and others to urgently attack Liyuan Village; the grain in Liyuan City was exhausted, and Wang Xingyu's army abandoned the city and fled.

古文：罕之等邀击之，所杀万馀人，克梨园等三寨，获王行瑜子知进及大将李元福等；克用进屯梨园。
现代文：李罕之等拦截攻打，斩杀一万余人，攻克了梨园等三个营寨，擒获王行瑜的儿子王知进以及大将李元福等。李克用开进梨园寨驻扎。
English: Li Hanzhi and others intercepted and attacked, slaughtered more than ten thousand people, conquered three camps such as Liyuan, captured Wang Zhijin, the son of Wang Xingyu, and General Li Yuanfu. Li Ke used to enter Liyuan and stay there.

古文：庚寅，王行约、王行实烧宁州遁去。
现代文：庚寅，王行约、王行实放火焚烧宁州然后逃跑。
English: Geng Yin, Wang Xingyao and Wang Xingsi set fire to Ningzhou and then fled.

古文：克用奏请以匡国节度使苏文建为静难节度使，趣令赴镇，且理宁州，招抚降人。
现代文：李克用上奏朝廷请任用匡国节度使苏文建为静难节度使，催促他赶赴镇所，暂且把镇所设在宁州，招收安抚前来投降的人。
English: Li Ke appealed to the imperial court to appoint Kuangguo Jiedu to make Su Wenjian the Jiedu Jiedu envoy, urging him to rush to the town hall, temporarily set up the town hall in Ningzhou, and recruit people who came to appease and surrender.

古文：上迁居大内。
现代文：昭宗迁回修缮稍完的皇宫。
English: Akimune moved back to the slightly renovated Imperial Palace.

古文：硃全忠遣都将葛从周击兗州，自以大军继之。
现代文：朱全忠派遣都将葛从周攻打兖州的朱瑾，他本人亲自督率大军在后面跟随。
English: Zhu Quanzhong dispatched Ge from Zhou to attack Zhu Xi in Luzhou, and he personally led a large army to follow.

古文：癸卯，围兗州。
现代文：癸卯，朱全忠的军队包围兖州。
English: At the same time, Zhu Quanzhong's army surrounded Zhangzhou.

古文：杨行密遣宁国节度使田頵、润州团练使安仁义攻杭州镇戍以救董昌，昌使湖州将徐淑会淮南将魏约共围嘉兴。
现代文：杨行密派遣宁国节度使田、润州团练使安仁义攻打在杭州镇守驻防的钱军队以应援董昌，董昌派湖州将领徐淑会同淮南将领魏约共同围攻嘉兴。
English: Yang Xingmi dispatched Ningguo Jiedu Zhitian and Runzhou Reunification Training Corps to Anrenyi to attack the Qian army stationed in Hangzhou to support Dongchang. Dongchang sent Huzhou General Xu Shuhui and Huainan General Wei You to jointly besiege Jiaxing.

古文：钱镠遣武勇都指挥使顾全武救嘉兴，破乌墩、光福二寨。
现代文：钱派遣武勇都指挥使顾全武救援嘉兴，攻破乌墩、光福二个营寨。
English: Qian dispatched Wuyongdu commander Gu Quanwu to rescue Jiaxing, and broke through the two camps of Wuyi and Guangfu.

古文：淮南将柯厚破苏州水栅。
现代文：淮南将领柯厚攻破苏州水中栅栏。
English: Huainan general Ke Hou breaks through the Suzhou underwater fence.

古文：全武，馀姚人也。
现代文：顾全武是余姚人。
English: Gu Quanwu is from Yuyao.

古文：义武节度使王处存薨，军中推其子节度副使郜为留后。
现代文：义武节度使王处存死去，军中将士推举他的儿子节度副使王郜为留后。
English: After the death of the king, the vice-commander of the army recommended his son, the vice-commander of the festival, Wang Xuan, to succeed him.

古文：以京兆尹武邑孙亻屋为兵部侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：朝廷任命京兆尹、武邑人孙为兵部侍郎、同平章事。
English: The imperial court appointed Jing Zhaoyun and Wuyi Rensun as the attendants of the military department and the subordinates of the same level.

古文：王行瑜以精甲五千守龙泉寨，李克用攻之。
现代文：王行瑜带领精壮甲兵五千驻守龙泉寨，李克用率军攻打。
English: Wang Xingyu led five thousand strong armored soldiers stationed in Longquanzhai, Li Ke led the army to attack.

古文：李茂贞以兵五千救之，营于镇西。
现代文：李茂贞带领军队五千救援王行瑜，在龙泉镇的西面安营扎寨。
English: Li Maozhen led an army of five thousand to rescue Wang Xingyu and set up camp on the west side of Longquan Town.

古文：李罕之击凤翔兵，走之，十一月，丁巳，拨龙泉寨。
现代文：李罕之袭击李茂贞的凤翔军队，将李茂贞赶跑，十一月，丁巳，李罕之攻克龙泉寨。
English: Li Hangzhi attacked Li Maozhen's Fengxiang army, drove Li Maozhen away, and in November, Ding Si, Li Hangzhi attacked Longquan Village.

古文：行瑜走入邠州，遣使请降于克用。
现代文：王行瑜于是逃进州，派遣使者向李克用请求投降。
English: Wang Xingyu then fled to Suzhou and sent an envoy to Li Keqiang with a request to surrender.

古文：齐州刺史硃琼举州降于硃全忠。
现代文：齐州刺史朱琼献出齐州向朱全忠投降。
English: Zhu Qiong, the governor of Qizhou, offered to surrender Qizhou to Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：琼，瑾之从父兄也。
现代文：朱琼是朱瑾的堂兄。
English: Zhu Qiong is Zhu Xi's cousin.

古文：衢州刺史陈儒卒，弟岌代之。
现代文：衢州刺史陈儒死去，他的弟弟陈岌代任衢州刺史。
English: Chen Ru, the prefect of Zhangzhou, died, and his younger brother Chen Ru took the post of prefect of Zhangzhou.

古文：李克用引兵逼邠州，王行瑜登城，号哭谓克用曰： 行瑜无罪，迫胁乘舆，皆李茂贞及李继鹏所为。请移兵问凤翔，行瑜愿束身归朝。 
现代文：李克用带领军队进逼州，王行瑜登上城楼，号哭着对李克用说： 我王行瑜没有罪过，逼迫威胁皇帝的车驾，都是李茂贞和李继鹏干的事，请你调开军队去讨伐凤翔节度使李茂贞，我王行瑜愿意捆绑自己回到朝廷。 
English: Li Kezhen led the army into the state of Jiangzhou, and Wang Xingyu ascended the city tower. He cried and said to Li Kezhen: I, Wang Xingyu, am not guilty. Persecuting and threatening the emperor's chauffeur is the work of Li Maozhen and Li Jipeng. Please dispatch the army to fight Fengxiang. I, Wang Xingyu, am willing to bind myself to return to the imperial court.

古文：克用曰： 王尚父何恭之甚！
现代文：李克用说： 王尚父真是太恭谦了！
English: Li Kegui said, "Wang Shangfu is so humble!

古文：仆受诏讨三贼臣，公预其一，束身归朝，非仆所得专也。 
现代文：我受朝廷的诏令讨伐你和李茂贞、韩建三个乱臣贼子，你是其中的一个，你想自己捆绑入朝，这不是我能擅自做主的。 
English: I was ordered by the imperial court to fight you and Li Maozhen and Han Jian, three ruffian thieves. You are one of them. You want to bind yourself to the imperial court. This is not something I can decide on my own.

古文：丁卯，行瑜挈族弃城走。
现代文：丁卯，王行瑜带着全家族的人弃城逃跑。
English: Dingwu and Wang Xingyu fled the city with their entire family.

古文：克用入邠州，封府库，抚居人，命指挥使高爽权巡抚军城，奏趣苏文建赴镇。
现代文：李克用进入州城，封闭官府库房，安抚居民，任命指挥使高爽暂且掌管巡抚军城事宜，又奏请朝廷催促苏文建赶赴镇所。
English: Li Ke used the opportunity to enter the state capital, close the government treasury, pacify the residents, appoint the commander Gao Shuang to temporarily take charge of the patrol of the military city, and asked the court to urge Su Wenjian to rush to the town.

古文：行瑜走至庆州境，部下斩行瑜，传首。
现代文：王行瑜逃到庆州境内，部下将他斩杀，把头颅传送朝廷。
English: Wang Xingyu fled to Gyeongju, where his subordinates beheaded him and sent his head to the imperial court.

古文：硃瑄遣其将贺瑰、柳存及河东将何怀宝将兵万馀人袭曹州，以解兗州之围。
现代文：朱派遣属下将领贺、柳存以及河东将领薛怀宝，带领军队一万余人袭击曹州，以图解除汴州军队对兖州的围攻。
English: Zhu dispatched his subordinate generals He and Liu Cun, as well as the general of Hedong, Xue Huai Bao, to lead an army of more than ten thousand people to attack Caozhou, in order to lift the siege of the Zhangzhou army on Zhangzhou.

古文：瑰，濮阳人也。
现代文：贺是濮阳人。
English: He is from Shenyang.

古文：丁卯，全忠自中都引兵夜追之，比明，至巨野南，及之，屠杀殆尽，生擒瑰存、怀宝，俘士卒三千馀人，是日晡后，大风沙尘晦冥，全忠曰： 此杀人未足耳！ 
现代文：丁卯，朱全忠从中都带领军队在夜间追赶贺等的人马，天亮时，到达钜野的南部，追赶上，几乎将他们全部杀光，贺、柳存、薛怀宝被活捉，另俘虏三千多名士兵。这天傍晚，狂风大作沙尘弥漫，朱全忠说： 这是杀人还不够数的原因！ 
English: Ding Wu and Zhu Quanzhong led the army from Zhongdu to chase after He and his followers at night. At dawn, they reached the southern part of the wilderness, caught up with them, and almost killed them all. He, Liu Cun and Xue Huai Bao were captured alive, and more than 3,000 soldiers were captured. In the evening of this day, when the wind was blowing and the sand was thick, Zhu Quanzhong said: This is the reason why there are not enough murders!

古文：下令所得之俘尽杀之。
现代文：于是下令将擒获的俘虏全部杀掉。
English: He then gave the order to kill all the captured prisoners.

古文：庚午，缚瑰等徇于兗州城下，谓硃瑾曰： 卿兄已败，何不早降！ 
现代文：庚午，朱全忠把贺等捆绑起来在兖州城下巡示，对朱瑾说： 你哥哥朱已经被我打败，你为什么还不早点投降！ 
English: In the afternoon, Zhu Quanzhong tied up He and the others and made a patrol under the city of Zhangzhou. He said to Zhu Xi: Your brother Zhu has already been defeated by me, why didn't you surrender earlier!

古文：丁丑，雅州刺史王宗侃攻拨利州，执刺史李继颙，斩之。
现代文：丁丑，雅州刺史王宗侃攻克凤翔节度使李茂贞管辖的利州，抓获利州刺史李继，将他斩杀。
English: Ding Yuxiu, Yazhou assassin Wang Zongkan, defeated Feng Xiang and made Li Maozhen's jurisdiction Li Zhou, captured Li Zhou assassin Li Jie, and killed him.

古文：硃瑾伪遣使请降于硃全忠，全忠自就延寿门下与瑾语。
现代文：朱瑾派出使者假装向朱全忠请求投降，朱全忠亲自到兖州城的延寿门下与朱瑾商谈。
English: Zhu Xi sent an envoy pretending to request Zhu Quanzhong to surrender, and Zhu Quanzhong personally went to negotiate with Zhu Xi under the Yenshou Gate in Zhangzhou City.

古文：瑾曰： 欲送符印，愿使兄琼来领之。 
现代文：朱瑾对朱全忠说： 我想向你交送符节官印，希望让我的堂兄齐州刺史朱琼来领取。 
English: Zhu Xi said to Zhu Quanzhong, "I want to give you the official seal of the Rune Festival, and I hope that my cousin, Qizhou Jishi Zhu Qiong, will come to collect it."

古文：辛巳，全忠使琼往，瑾立马桥上，伏骁果董怀进于桥下，琼至，怀进突出，擒之以入，须臾，掷首城外。
现代文：辛巳，朱全忠派朱琼前往兖州，朱瑾骑马站立在兖州城的桥上，叫勇猛果敢的董怀进躲藏在桥下，朱琼来到桥上，董怀进突然从桥下奔出，抓获朱琼带入兖州城内，不一会儿，朱琼的脑袋被扔到兖州城墙外边。
English: Suddenly, Zhu Quanzhong sent Zhu Qiong to Zhangzhou. Zhu Xi rode on horseback and stood on the bridge of Zhangzhou City, telling the brave and courageous Dong Huaijin to hide under the bridge. Zhu Qiong came to the bridge. Dong Huaijin suddenly ran out from under the bridge, captured Zhu Qiong and brought him into Zhangzhou City. After a while, Zhu Qiong's head was thrown outside the walls of Zhangzhou City.

古文：全忠乃引兵还，以琼弟玭为齐州防御使，杀柳存、何怀宝；闻贺瑰名，释而用之。
现代文：朱全忠于是带领军队返回汴州，委任朱琼的胞弟朱为齐州防御使，斩杀了柳存、薛怀宝。朱全忠听说贺有名气，便把他释放留用。
English: Zhu Quanzhong then led the army back to Zhangzhou, appointed Zhu Qiong's brother Zhu Rong as the defense envoy of Qizhou, and killed Liu Cun and Xue Huai Bao. Zhu Quanzhong heard that He was famous, so he released and retained him.

古文：李克用旋军渭北。
现代文：李克用回到渭州北部驻扎。
English: Li Kexin returned to the northern part of Ganzhou and stationed there.

古文：加静难节度使苏文建同平章事。
现代文：朝廷加封静难节度使苏文建为同平章事。
English: The fact that the imperial court added a seal of approval made it difficult for the Soviet Union to build the wall.

古文：蒋勋求为邵州刺史，刘建锋不许，勋乃与邓继崇起兵，连飞山、梅山蛮寇湘潭，据邵州，使其将申德昌屯定胜镇以扼潭人。
现代文：将勋谋求邵州刺史这一官职，刘建锋不准许，蒋勋于是与邓继宗发动军队，联合邵州西北飞山和潭州界内梅山的蛮人侵扰湘潭，占据邵州，蒋勋还派手下将领申德昌在定胜镇驻扎，以扼制潭州人。
English: Liu Jianfeng did not allow General Xiong Xun to seek the official position of Shaozhou's chief historian, so Jiang Xiong and Deng Jizong launched an army to invade Xiangtan and occupy Shaozhou together with the barbarians from Feishan in the northwest of Shaozhou and Meishan within the borders of Tanzhou. Jiang Xiong also sent his general Shen Dechang to be stationed in Ding Sheng Town to suppress the Tanzhou people.

古文：十二月，甲申，阆州防御使李继雍、蓬州刺史费存、渠州刺史陈璠各帅所部兵奔王建。
现代文：十二月，甲申，阆州防御使李继雍、蓬州刺史费存、渠州刺史陈等分别率领所部人马投奔王建。
English: In December, the defense of Jiaxing and Zhangzhou made Li Jiyong, Pengzhou's Zhang Shi Feicun, and Quzhou's Zhang Shi Chen, respectively, lead the staff to rush to Wang Jian.

古文：乙酉，李克用军于云阳。
现代文：乙酉，李克用的军队到达云阳驻扎。
English: Acetylene, Li Ke used the army arrived in Yunyang stationed.

古文：王建奏： 东川节度使顾彦晖不发兵赴难，而掠夺辎重，遣泸州刺史马敬儒断峡路，请兴兵讨之。 
现代文：王建向朝廷上奏说： 东川节度使顾彦晖不派兵前来为朝廷解难，却抢掠夺去我的器械、粮草，又派遣泸州刺史马敬儒截断峡路，请朝廷发兵讨伐顾彦晖。 
English: Wang Jian reported to the imperial court: The Dongchuan Festival made Gu Yanqi not send troops to solve the problem for the imperial court, but robbed and plundered my equipment, grain and grass, and sent Zhangzhou Sima Jingru to cut off the gorge road, and asked the imperial court to send troops to fight against Gu Yanqi.

古文：戊子，华洪大破东川兵于楸林，俘斩数万，拔揪林寒。
现代文：戊子，王建的将领华洪在楸林把东川军队打得大败，俘获斩杀几万人，攻克楸林寨。
English: Wu Zi, Wang Jian's general Hua Hong defeated the Dongchuan army in Yulin, captured and killed tens of thousands of people, and conquered Yulin Village.

古文：乙未，进李克用爵晋王，加李罕之兼侍中，以河东大将盖寓领容管观察使；自馀克用将佐、子孙并进官爵。
现代文：乙未，朝廷将李克用的爵位升为晋王，加封李罕之兼侍中，任命河东大将盖寓兼任容管观察使；其余的李克用将领佐僚以及儿子孙子都得以加官升爵。
English: Two years later, the imperial court promoted Li Kegui to the rank of Jin Wang, and also appointed Li Hanzhi as an aide-de-camp, and appointed Hedong General Gaie as a health management observation envoy; the rest of Li Kegui's generals and advisers, as well as his son and grandson, were promoted to higher ranks.

古文：克用性严急，左右小有过辄死，无敢违忤；惟盖寓敏慧，能揣其意，婉辞裨益，无不从者。
现代文：李克用性情严厉急躁，手下的人稍微有点过错就被处死，没人敢与他相违抗；只有盖寓敏锐聪慧，能够揣测出李克用的心意，他婉言相劝予以完善，李克用没有不听从的。
English: Li Ke used to have a stern and impatient disposition, and his subordinates were executed if they made the slightest mistake. No one dared to disobey him. Only Gao Yue, who was keen and intelligent, was able to guess Li Ke's intentions. He gently persuaded Li Ke to improve, and Li Ke did not disobey.

古文：克用或以非罪怒将吏，寓必阳助之怒，克用常释之；有所谏诤，必征近事为喻；由是克用爱信之，境内无不依附，权与克用侔。
现代文：李克用有时错怪迁怒于手下将吏，盖寓必定表面上为李克用助威加油，结果往往使李克用消去怒气。盖寓劝说李克用改正过错时，必定拿近前的一些事作比喻。因此李克用对盖寓宠爱信任，所辖境内的将领官吏也无不依附盖寓，他的权力几乎与李克用等同。
English: Li Ke used to sometimes misdirect his anger at his subordinate generals. Gai Fong must have cheered Li Ke with encouragement on the surface, and as a result, Li Ke used to dissipate his anger. When Gai Fong persuaded Li Ke to correct his mistakes, he must have used some recent events as a metaphor. Therefore, Li Ke used to cherish and trust Gai Fong. The generals and officials under his jurisdiction were all dependent on Gai Fong, and his power was almost equivalent to Li Ke's.

古文：朝廷及邻道遣使至河东，其赏赐赂遗，先入克用，次及寓家。
现代文：朝廷和邻近各道派遣使者到河东来，凡是赏赐和赠送财物时，先送到李克用那里，接着就去盖寓的家。
English: The imperial court and neighboring provinces sent emissaries to the east of the river, and whenever they gave rewards and gifts of wealth, they first sent them to Li Ke for use there, and then went to build a dwelling house.

古文：硃全忠数遣数人间之，及扬言云盖寓已代克用，而克用待之益厚。
现代文：朱全忠几次派人挑拨离间李克用和盖寓的关系，扬言说盖寓已经取代了李克用，可是李克用对待盖寓却更加友好。
English: Zhu Quanzhong sent people several times to sow discord between Li Kegui and Gai Fuxiong, threatening that Gai Fuxiong had replaced Li Kegui, but Li Kegui treated Gai Fuxiong more friendly.

古文：丙申，王建攻东川，别将王宗弼为东川兵所擒，顾彦晖畜以为子，戊戌，通州刺史李彦昭将所部兵二千降于建。
现代文：丙申，王建攻打东川节度使顾彦晖，手下将领王宗弼被东川军队抓获，顾彦晖把王宗弼收为养子。戊戌，通州刺史李彦昭带领所部人马二千向王建投降。
English: According to the legend, Wang Jian attacked the Dongchuan Festival and forced Gu Yanqi to surrender. Gu Yanqi's general Wang Zongqi was captured by the Dongchuan army, and Gu Yanqi adopted Wang Zongqi as his son. According to the legend, Li Yan Zhao, the governor of Tongzhou, surrendered to Wang Jian with 2,000 men under his command.

古文：李克用遣掌书记李袭吉入谢恩，密言于上曰： 比年以来，关辅不宁，乘此胜势，遂取凤翔，一劳永逸，时不可失。
现代文：李克用派遣军府的掌书记李袭吉进入京师向朝廷谢恩，秘密对唐昭宗说： 近些年来，浦、潼、陇、蜀、蓝田诸关和京师长安一带不得安宁，现在乘着朝廷取胜的优势，应一举攻克凤翔，一劳永逸，时机不可丧失。
English: Li Ke used the dispatch of Li Weiji, the chief secretary of the military government, to enter the Beijing division to thank the imperial court, and secretly said to Tang Zhaozong: In recent years, there has been no peace in the areas of Puxi, Handan, Handan, Shu, Lantian, and the Beijing division Chang'an. Now, taking advantage of the advantage of the imperial court's victory, we should defeat Fengxiang in one fell swoop, once and for all. The opportunity must not be lost.

古文：臣屯军渭北，专俟进止。 
现代文：我时下在渭水北部驻扎，专门等候朝廷的命令以便行动。 
English: I am currently stationed in the northern part of Surabaya, specifically waiting for an order from the imperial court to take action.

古文：上谋于贵近，或曰： 茂贞复灭，则沙陀大盛，朝廷危矣！ 
现代文：唐昭宗和朝中权贵及近臣商谋，有人说： 李茂贞如果被消灭，那么李克用的势力就会大大膨胀，朝廷则在危险之中了！ 
English: Tang Zhaozong entered into negotiations with the powerful people and courtiers of the dynasty. Some people said: If Li Maozhen is eliminated, then the power of Li Kejun will greatly expand, and the imperial court will be in danger!

古文：上乃赐克用诏，褒其忠款，而言： 不臣之状，行瑜为甚。
现代文：唐昭宗于是向李克用颁赐诏书，赞扬他对朝廷的忠诚，但又说： 叛逆朝廷的罪行，王行瑜十分严重。
English: Tang Zhaozong then issued an imperial edict to Li Ke, praising his loyalty to the imperial court, but also said: Wang Xingyu's crime of rebelling against the imperial court is very serious.

古文：自朕出幸以来，茂贞、韩建自知其罪，不忘国恩，职贡相继，且当休兵息民。 
现代文：这次自从朕离开京师出巡以来，李茂贞、韩建已经知道他们自己的罪过，没有忘记朝廷的恩德，进献的赋税贡品接连不断，姑且停止对他们的征伐让军队休整百姓安宁。 
English: This time, since I left Beijing for the inspection tour, Li Maozhen and Han Jianming have already known their own sins, have not forgotten the benevolence of the imperial court, and have continuously donated tax tributes. Let's stop the conquest of them and let the army rest and rectify the people's tranquility.

古文：克用奉诏而止。
现代文：李克用接奉这一诏令后便不行动。
English: Li Keqiang did not act after receiving this edict.

古文：既而私于诏使曰： 观朝廷之意，似疑克用有异心也。
现代文：不久，李克用私下里对朝廷传达诏令的使臣说： 我看朝廷的意思，似乎怀疑我李克用有别的意图。
English: Soon, Li Ke said to the envoy who privately conveyed the imperial edict to the imperial court: I see the meaning of the imperial court, it seems to suspect that I, Li Ke, have other intentions.

古文：然不去茂贞，关中无安宁之日。 
现代文：可是不铲除李茂贞，关中一带就没有安宁的日子。 
English: But if Li Maozhen is not eradicated, there will be no peace in the Guanzhong area.

古文：又诏免克用入朝，将佐或言： 今密迩阙庭，岂可不入见天子， 克用犹豫未决，盖寓言于克用曰： 向者王行瑜辈纵兵狂悖，致銮舆播越，百姓奔散。
现代文：唐昭宗又诏令免去李克用入京上朝，李克用的将领佐僚中有人说： 现在与朝廷近在咫尺，怎么能不进入京师拜见皇帝呢？ 李克用自己犹豫不决，盖寓这时对李克用说： 从前王行瑜一伙放纵士兵背叛朝廷，致使皇帝车驾流离迁徙，百姓逃散。
English: Tang Zhaozong also issued a decree exempting Li Kegui from entering Beijing to visit the imperial court. Some of Li Kegui's generals and advisers said: "Now that we are so close to the imperial court, how can we not enter Beijing to meet the emperor?" Li Kegui hesitated, and then said to Li Kegui: "Once Wang Xingyu and his group of indulgent soldiers betrayed the imperial court, causing the emperor to drive away and migrate, and the people to flee.

古文：今天子还未安席，人心尚危，大王若引兵渡渭，窃恐复惊骇都邑。
现代文：现在天子返回京师还没有安宁下来，人心尚在忧惧之中，大王你如果带领军队渡过渭水，我担心会再次让京城惊恐。
English: Now that Tianzi has returned to Beijing, the division has not yet calmed down, and people are still worried. Your Majesty, if you lead the army across Surabaya, I am worried that you will once again frighten Beijing.

古文：人臣尽忠，在于勤王，不在入觐，愿熟图之！ 
现代文：做臣子的效忠朝廷，在于为皇室起兵救难，而不在于入朝拜见皇帝，然望大王你仔细考虑！ 
English: As a courtier, your allegiance to the imperial court lies in raising an army to save the imperial family, not in entering the imperial court to pay homage to the emperor. I hope you will carefully consider this!

古文：克用笑曰： 盖寓尚不欲吾入朝，况天下之人乎！ 
现代文：李克用笑着说： 盖寓尚且不希望我入京上朝，更何况天下的人们呢！ 
English: With a smile, Li Ke said, "Even though I live in a condominium, they don't want me to move to Beijing for the imperial court, let alone the people around the world!

古文：乃表称： 臣总帅大军，不敢径入朝觐，且惧部落士卒侵扰渭北居人。 
现代文：于是，李克用上表朝廷奏称： 我统领着大军，不敢随意进入京城拜见皇上，并且担心所部士兵会侵扰渭水以北的居民。 
English: As a result, Li Ke used the above table to report to the imperial court: I am in command of a large army, I dare not enter the capital at will to visit the emperor, and I am worried that the soldiers of Shobu will invade the residents north of Surabaya.

古文：辛亥，引兵东归。
现代文：辛亥，李克用率领手下人马东返晋阳。
English: In Xinhai, Li Ke used his subordinate Ma Dong to return to Jinyang.

古文：表至京师，上下始安。
现代文：他的表文送达京师，上至朝廷下到百姓才安宁下来。
English: His petition was sent to the imperial court, and it was only after it had reached the imperial court that the people calmed down.

古文：诏赐河东士卒钱三十万缗。
现代文：唐昭宗诏令赐给河东士兵三十万缗钱。
English: Emperor Zhaozong of Tang Dynasty gave 300,000 baht to the soldiers of Hedong.

古文：克用既去，李茂贞骄横如故，河西州县多为茂贞所据，以其将胡敬璋为河西节度使。
现代文：李克用离开后，李茂贞骄横如同以往，河西的州县大多被李茂贞占据，他又任命手下将领胡敬璋为河西节度使。
English: After Li Kezhen's departure, Li Maozhen was as arrogant as ever. Most of the counties and prefectures in Hexi were occupied by Li Maozhen. He also appointed his subordinate general Hu Jingyao as the Hexi Festival envoy.

古文：硃全忠之去兗州也，留葛从周将兵守之，硃瑾闭城不复出，从周将还，乃扬言 天平、河东救兵至，引兵西北邀之， 夜半，潜归故寨。
现代文：朱全忠离开兖州时，留下葛从周带领军队继续看守围困兖州，朱瑾关闭城门不再出来交战。葛从周想要返回，于是四处扬言说： 天平和河东的救援军队到了，我军到西北方向去拦截他们。 
English: When Zhu Quanzhong left Zhangzhou, he left Ge Zhou to lead the army to continue to guard and besiege Zhangzhou. Zhu Xi closed the city gate and no longer came out to fight. Ge Zhou wanted to return, so he threatened everywhere: Tianping and Hedong's rescue army have arrived, our army will go to the northwest to intercept them.

古文：瑾以从周精兵悉出，果出兵攻寨。
现代文：半夜，葛从周把人马又偷偷带回原来的营寨。
English: In the middle of the night, Ge Zhou secretly brought the men and horses back to the original encampment.

古文：从周突出奋击，杀千馀人，擒其都将孙汉筠而还。
现代文：朱瑾以为葛从周的精兵都离开了，果然派军队来攻打城外的营寨。葛从周率领人马突然杀出奋勇攻打，斩杀一千余人，擒获朱瑾的都将孙汉筠之后返回。
English: Zhu Xi thought that Gezong Zhou's elite soldiers had all left, so he sent troops to attack the camp outside the city. Gezong Zhou suddenly led the troops to fight bravely, killing more than a thousand people, and those captured by Zhu Xi all returned after Sun Han.

古文：加镇海节度使钱镠兼侍中。
现代文：朝廷加封镇海节度使钱兼侍中。
English: The imperial court sealed the Zhenhai Festival to make money and attendants.

古文：彰义节度使张鐇薨，以其子琏权知留后。
现代文：彰义节度使张死去，朝廷任命张的儿子张琏暂任彰义留后。
English: After the death of Zhang at the Jiaoyi Festival, the imperial court appointed Zhang's son, Zhang Xuan, as the temporary governor of Jiaoyi.

古文：硃瑄、硃瑾屡为硃全忠所攻，民失耕稼，财力俱弊。
现代文：朱、朱瑾一再受到朱全忠的进攻，地方百姓无法耕种收获，军中资财人力都已困乏。
English: Zhu and Zhu Xi were repeatedly attacked by Zhu Quanzhong, the local people were unable to cultivate and harvest, and the resources, money and manpower of the army were exhausted.

古文：告急于河东，李克用遣大将史俨、李承嗣将数千骑假道于魏以救之。
现代文：便向河东节度使李克用告急，李克用派遣大将史俨、李承嗣带领几千骑兵借道经过魏州前去救援。
English: Li Ke used the occasion of the Hedong Festival to call for help. Li Ke used the occasion to dispatch Generals Shi Yan and Li Chengzhi, leading several thousand cavalrymen, to pass through Weizhou on their way to the rescue.

古文：安州防御使家晟与硃全忠亲吏蒋玄晖有隙，恐及祸，与指挥使刘士政、兵马监押陈可璠将兵三千袭桂州，杀经略使周元静而代之。
现代文：安州防御使家晟与朱全忠的亲近官吏蒋玄晖有怨仇，恐怕大祸临头，便与指挥使刘士政、兵马监押陈可带领军队三千袭击桂州，杀死桂州经略使周元静，家晟代管桂州。
English: The defense of Anzhou made Jiayu have a grudge against Jiang Xuanzang, a close official of Zhu Quanzhong, and fearing that a great disaster was imminent, he attacked Guizhou with Liu Shizheng, the commander of the commander, and Chen Ke, the commander of the soldiers and horses, leading an army of three thousand, killed Zhou Yuanjing, the governor of Guizhou, and Jiayu took charge of Guizhou.

古文：晟醉侮可璠，可璠手刃之，推士政知军府事，可璠自为副使。
现代文：家晟喝醉酒后侮辱陈可，陈可亲手将家晟杀死，推举刘士政主管军府事宜，陈可自己做副使。
English: Jiaqi got drunk and insulted Chen Ke, Chen Ke killed Jiaqi with his own hands, promoted Liu Shizheng to be in charge of the military affairs, and Chen Ke himself became the deputy envoy.

古文：诏即以士政为桂管经略使。
现代文：朝廷当即颁下诏令任命刘士政为经略使。
English: The imperial court immediately issued a decree appointing Liu Shizheng as the economic envoy.

古文：玄晖，吴人也。
现代文：蒋玄晖是吴州人。
English: Jiang Xuanqiu is from Wuzhou.

古文：昭宗圣穆景文孝皇帝上之下乾宁三年春，正月，西川将王宗夔攻拔龙州，杀刺史田昉。
现代文：乾宁三年春季正月，西川将领王宗夔攻克龙州，杀死龙州刺史田。
English: In the first month of the spring of the third year of Qianning, the West River general Wang Zongyi invaded Kailongzhou and killed Longzhou Shishida.

古文：丁已，刘建锋遣都指挥使马殷将兵讨蒋勋，攻定胜寨，破之。
现代文：丁巳，刘建锋派遣都指挥使马殷带领军队讨伐蒋勋，进攻定胜寨，打败蒋勋。
English: Ding Si, Liu Jianfeng dispatched Du Du to command Ma Yin to lead the army to fight against Jiang Xun, attack Ding Shengzhai, and defeat Jiang Xun.

古文：辛未，安仁义以舟师至湖州，欲渡江应董昌，钱镠遣武勇都指挥使顾全武、都知兵马使许再思守西陵，仁义不能度。
现代文：辛未，安仁义从润州率军乘船到达湖州，想要渡过长江接应董昌，钱派遣武勇都指挥使顾全武、都知兵马使许再思驻守西陵，使得安仁义不能渡江。
English: Shortly before Xinwei, An Renyi led an army from Runzhou to Huzhou by ship, and wanted to cross the Yangtze River to meet with Dong Chang. Qian sent the commander of the Zhuangyong capital, Gu Quanwu, and the commander of the Zhuangyong capital, Xu Zaisi, to guard Xiling, so that An Renyi could not cross the river.

古文：昌遣其将汤臼守石城，袁邠守馀姚。
现代文：董昌派遣属下将领汤臼据守石城山，袁据守余姚。
English: Dong Chang dispatched his subordinate generals Tang Us to guard Shicheng Mountain and Yuan to guard Yuyao.

古文：闰月，克用遣蕃、汉都指挥使李存信将万骑假道于魏以救兗、郓，军于莘县。
现代文：闰正月，李克用派遣蕃、汉都指挥使李存信带领一万骑兵借道经过魏州前往救援兖州、郓州，在莘县驻扎下来。
English: In the leap month, Li Ke dispatched Li Cunxin, the commander of the Han Dynasty, to lead ten thousand cavalrymen to rescue Ganzhou and Ganzhou through Weizhou, and stationed them in Ganzhou County.

古文：硃全忠使人谓罗弘信曰： 克用志吞河朔，师还之日，贵道可忧。 
现代文：朱全忠派人对罗弘信说： 李克用的意图是在侵吞黄河以北的地盘，他的军队返回的时候，你那里令人担忧。 
English: Zhu Quanzhong told Luo Hongxin: Li Keqin's intention is to encroach on the territory north of the Yellow River, and when his army returns, you will be worried.

古文：存信戢众不严，侵暴魏人。弘信怒，发兵三万夜袭之。
现代文：李存信管束士兵不严，侵扰残害魏州人民，罗弘信大为愤怒，发兵三万在夜间袭击李存信。
English: Li Cunxin's soldiers were loosely controlled and harassed and tortured the people of Weizhou. Luo Hongxin was very angry and sent 30,000 soldiers to attack Li Cunxin at night.

古文：存信军溃退。保洺州，丧士卒什二三，委弃资粮兵械万楼；史俨、李承嗣之军隔绝不得还。
现代文：李存信的军队溃败，退到州据守，损失士兵十分之二三，丢弃资财粮食兵器数以万计；史俨、李承嗣的军队被隔绝不能返回。
English: Li Cunxin's army was routed and retreated to the state to defend itself, losing two-thirds of its soldiers and discarding tens of thousands of resources, grain and weapons; Shi Yan and Li Heung Hei's army was cut off and could never return.

古文：弘信自是与河东绝，专志于汴。
现代文：罗弘信从此与河东节度使李克用决裂，专心依附汴州的朱全忠。
English: Luo Hongxin then made Li Kegui break with Hedong Jiedu, and concentrated on adhering to Zhu Quanzhong of Ganzhou.

古文：金忠方图兗、郓，畏弘信议其后，弘信每有赠遗，全忠必对使者北向拜授之，曰： 六兄于予，倍年以长，固非诸邻之比。 
现代文：朱全忠正在筹划攻打兖州、郓州，担心罗弘信在背后算计他，所以每当罗弘信向他赠送财物，朱全忠必定当着罗弘信使者的面向北跪拜接受这些东西，嘴里说着： 六哥对我来说，是上一辈的人，不是邻近各道节度使所能比的。 
English: Zhu Quanzhong was planning to attack Bozhou and Zhangzhou, and was worried that Luo Hongxin was plotting against him behind his back. Therefore, whenever Luo Hongxin gave him gifts of wealth, Zhu Quanzhong would certainly kneel to the north in front of Luo Hongxin's messenger to accept these things, saying in his mouth: "For me, the sixth brother is a man of the previous generation, not comparable to the festivals of neighboring provinces."

古文：弘信信之，全忠以是得专意东方。
现代文：罗弘信相信了这话，朱全忠因此得以专心攻打东面。
English: Luo Hongxin believed this, so Zhu Quanzhong was able to concentrate on attacking the east.

古文：丁亥，果州刺史张雄降于王建。
现代文：丁亥，果州刺史周雄向王建投降。
English: Dinghai, Guozhou assassin Zhou Xiong surrenders to Wang Jian.

古文：二月，戊辰，顾全武、许再思败汤臼于石城。
现代文：二月，戊辰，顾全武、许再思在石城山打败汤臼。
English: In February, Boshen, Gu Quanwu, and Xu Zaisi defeated Tangwu in Shicheng Mountain.

古文：上用杨行密之请，赦董昌，复其官爵；钱镠不从。
现代文：唐昭宗根据杨行密的请求，赦免了董昌的罪过，恢复他的官职爵位；钱对此不服。
English: According to Yang Xingmi's request, Tang Zhaozong pardoned Dong Chang's sins and restored his official title; Qian was not satisfied with this.

古文：以通王滋判侍卫诸将事。
现代文：朝廷任命通王李滋兼管侍卫诸将事宜。
English: The imperial court appointed Tong Wang Li Zhi to be in charge of the guards.

古文：硃全忠荐兵部尚书张浚，上欲复相之；李克用表请发兵击全忠，且言 浚朝为相，臣则夕至阙庭！ 
现代文：朱全忠向朝廷荐举兵部尚书张浚，唐昭宗想要重新任命张浚为宰相。李克用上表请求派军队攻打朱全忠，并且说： 张浚如果早晨做了宰相，我傍晚就要赶到朝廷！ 
English: Zhu Quanzhong recommended Zhang Jun to the imperial court to raise an army, and Tang Zhaozong wanted to reappoint Zhang Jun as prime minister. Li Ke used the above table to request that an army be sent to attack Zhu Quanzhong, and said: If Zhang Jun becomes prime minister in the morning, I will arrive at the imperial court in the evening!

古文：京师震惧，上下诏和解之。
现代文：京师上下震惊恐慌，唐昭宗颁下诏书劝李克用与朱全忠和解。
English: The officials in Beijing were shocked and panicked, and Tang Zhaozong issued an edict to persuade Li Kegui to reconcile with Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：三月，以天雄留后李继徽为节度使。
现代文：三月，朝廷任命天雄留后李继徽为节度使。
English: In March, the imperial court appointed Li Jihui as the envoy to the festival after Tian Xiong's stay.

古文：保大节度使李思孝表请致仁，荐弟思敬自代，诏以思孝为太师，致仕，思敬为保大留后。
现代文：保大节度使李思孝向朝廷上表请求退休，推荐他的胞弟李思敬接替自己，唐昭宗下诏命李思孝以太师官衔辞退，李思敬为保大留后。
English: Baoda Festival made Li Sijiao request retirement to the imperial court, recommending his brother Li Sijian to succeed him. Tang Zhaozong ordered Li Sijian to decline the official rank of ether division, and Li Sijian to remain as Baoda.

古文：硃全忠遣庞师古将兵伐郓州，败郓兵于马颊，遂抵其城下。
现代文：朱全忠派遣庞师古带领军队讨伐郓州，在马颊水一带打败朱的郓州军队，于是抵达郓州城下。
English: Zhu Quanzhong sent Pang Shigu to lead the army to fight against Zhangzhou, and defeated Zhu's Zhangzhou army in the area of Maqianshui, and then arrived at the foot of Zhangzhou City.

古文：己酉，顾全武等攻馀姚，明州刺史黄晟遣兵助之；董昌遣其将徐章救馀姚，全武击擒之。
现代文：己酉，顾全武等攻打余姚，明州刺史黄晟派遣军队协助。董昌派遣属下将领徐章救援余姚，结果徐章被顾全武拦击擒获。
English: Ji Yao, Gu Quan Wu and others attacked Yu Yao, and the Ming State Governor Huang Qi dispatched troops to assist. Dong Chang dispatched his subordinate general Xu Zhang to rescue Yu Yao, and as a result, Xu Zhang was intercepted and captured by Gu Quan Wu.

古文：夏，四月，辛酉，河涨，将毁滑州城，硃全忠命决为二河，夹滑城而东，为害滋甚。
现代文：夏季四月，辛酉，黄河大水上涨，眼看就要淹毁滑州城，朱全忠命令再行决口把黄河一分为二，两条河夹着滑州城向东滚滚流去，危害相当严重。
English: In the hot summer of April, when the Yellow River was in full flood, and it was about to drown the city of Nanzhou, Zhu Quanzhong ordered to split the Yellow River into two, and the two rivers rolled eastward between the city of Nanzhou. The damage was quite serious.

古文：李克用击罗弘信，攻洹水，杀魏兵万馀，进攻魏州。
现代文：李克用攻打罗弘信，进攻洹水，斩杀罗弘信的军队一万余人，接着进军攻打魏州。
English: Li Ke used to attack Luo Hongxin, attack Surabaya, slaughtered more than ten thousand of Luo Hongxin's army, and then marched to attack Weizhou.

古文：武安节度使刘建锋既得志，嗜酒，不亲政事。
现代文：武安节度使刘建锋占据长沙后便觉得已经得志，饮酒成性，不料理政务事宜。
English: After the Wu'an Festival, Liu Jianfeng occupied Changsha and felt that he had achieved his goal, drinking alcohol and not dealing with government affairs.

古文：长直兵陈赡妻美，建锋私之。
现代文：长年值日卫兵陈赡的妻子貌美，刘建锋与她通奸，陈赡在衣袖内藏带铁打死刘建锋。
English: Liu Jianfeng committed adultery with the beautiful wife of guard Chen Yan, who had been on duty for many years. Chen Yan hid an iron belt in his sleeve and beat Liu Jianfeng to death.

古文：赡袖铁挝击杀建锋；诸将杀赡，迎行军司马张佶为留后。佶将入府，马忽踶啮，伤左髀。
现代文：各将领将陈赡杀掉，迎接行军司马张佶为武安留后。张佶将要进入节度使司时，他骑的马忽然狂踢乱咬，伤了张佶的左大腿。
English: The generals killed Chen Jie and left Zhang Jie as the marshal to greet the marchers. When Zhang Jie was about to enter the festival, the horse he was riding suddenly kicked and bit him, injuring Zhang Jie's left thigh.

古文：时马殷攻邵州未下，佶谢诸将曰： 马公勇而有谋，宽厚乐善，吾所不及，真乃主也。 
现代文：当时马殷攻打邵州还没有攻克，张佶便谢绝各位拥立他的将领说： 马殷有勇有谋，待人宽厚与人为善，我比不上他，他才是真正的主帅。 
English: At that time, Ma Yin's attack on Shaozhou had not yet been conquered, Zhang Ye refused to support his generals and said: Ma Yin is brave and resourceful, he is generous and kind to others, I am not as good as him, he is the real coach.

古文：乃以牒召之。
现代文：于是给马殷送去公文召请他到长沙来。
English: So he sent a letter to Ma Yin to invite him to come to Changsha.

古文：殷犹豫未行，听直军将汝南姚彦章说殷曰： 公与刘龙骧、张司马，一体人也，今龙骧遇祸，司马伤髀，天命人望，舍公尚谁属哉！ 
现代文：马殷犹豫不决没有启程，听直军将姚彦章劝马殷说： 你与刘建锋、张佶同属一样的人才，现在刘建锋遇难死去，张佶大腿受伤，上天的安排人们的期望，舍去你还能有谁呢！ 
English: Ma Yin hesitantly did not set off, listening to Zhi Jun's exhortation to Yao Yan Zhang, Ma Yin said: You are the same talent as Liu Jianfeng and Zhang Ye, now Liu Jianfeng died in a disaster, Zhang Ye's thigh was injured, God arranged people's expectations, who else can you have?

古文：殷乃使亲从都指挥使李琼留攻邵州，径诣长沙。
现代文：马殷于是派令亲从都副指挥使李琼留下继续攻打邵州，他本人直接前往长沙。
English: Ma Yin then sent his deputy commander from the capital to ask Li Qiong to stay and continue to attack Shaozhou, and he himself went directly to Changsha.

古文：淮南兵与镇海兵战于皇天荡，镇海兵不利，杨行密遂围苏州。
现代文：淮南军队与镇海军队在皇天荡展开激战，结果镇海军队战败失利，杨行密于是率军围攻苏州。
English: Huainan's army and Zhenhai's army fought a fierce battle in Emperor Tianwang. As a result, Zhenhai's army was defeated and lost. Yang Xingmi then led his army to besiege Suzhou.

古文：钱镠、钟传、杜洪畏杨行密之强，皆求援于硃全忠；全忠遣许州刺史硃友恭将兵万人渡淮，听以便宜从事。
现代文：钱、钟传、杜洪畏惧杨行密的强大，都向朱全忠求援；朱全忠派遣许州刺史朱友恭带领军队一万人渡过淮水，让他根据情况随机料理，便宜行事。
English: Qian, Zhong Chuan, and Du Hong were afraid of Yang Xingmi's power and asked Zhu Quanzhong for help; Zhu Quanzhong sent Xu Zhou's aide-de-camp, Zhu Youqong, to lead an army of ten thousand across the Huai River, and let him cook at random according to the situation and act cheaply.

古文：董昌使人觇钱镠兵，有言其强盛者辄怒，斩之；言兵疲食尽，则赏之。
现代文：董昌派人侦察钱军队的情况，有说钱军队强盛的人，董昌就勃然大怒，将他斩杀。
English: Dong Chang sent someone to investigate the situation of Qian's army. When someone said that Qian's army was strong, Dong Chang flew into a rage and killed him.

古文：戊寅，袁邠以馀姚降于镠；顾全武、许再思进兵至越州城下。
现代文：那些说钱军队疲惫不堪粮食已光的人，就受到董昌的奖赏。戊寅，袁献出余姚向钱投降；顾全武、许再思进兵到达越州城下。
English: Those who said that Qian's army was exhausted and had run out of food were rewarded by Dong Chang. Wu Yin, Yuan offered Yu Yao to surrender to Qian; Gu Quanwu and Xu Zaisi entered the army and arrived at the foot of Yuezhou Castle.

古文：五月，昌出战而败，婴城自守，全武等围之。
现代文：五月，董昌率军出越州城交战失败，只好环绕着越州城固守，顾全武等便将董昌围困起来。
English: In May, Dong Chang led his army out of Yuezhou City and failed to engage in battle. He had no choice but to surround Yuezhou City and defend it. Gu Quanwu and others then besieged Dong Chang.

古文：昌始惧，去帝号，复称节度使。
现代文：董昌这才恐惧，去掉帝号，重新称做节度使。
English: This made Dong Chang afraid, so he removed the imperial title and renamed himself as the regent.

古文：马殷至长沙，张佶肩舆入府，坐受殷拜谒，已，乃命殷升听事，以留后让之，即趋下，帅将吏拜贺，复为行军司马，代殷将兵攻邵州。
现代文：马殷到达长沙，张佶乘坐轿子进入节度使司，坐在那里接受马殷的拜见。事毕，张佶让马殷升堂治理政事，把留后的官职让给马殷，当即下来，率领将领官吏恭贺马殷任留后，张佶重新充任行军司马，代替马殷带领军队攻打邵州。
English: When Ma Yin arrived in Changsha, Zhang Ye took a sedan chair to enter Ma Yin's ceremonial envoy's office and sat there to receive Ma Yin's greetings. After all, Zhang Ye let Ma Yin ascend to the hall to govern the government affairs, and gave Ma Yin the official post after he left. He immediately came down and led the generals and officials to congratulate Ma Yin on his appointment. After he left, Zhang Ye re-assumed the post of marching steward and led the army to attack Shaoshou in place of Ma Yin.

古文：癸未，苏州常熟镇使陆郢以州城应杨行密，虏刺史成及。
现代文：癸未，苏州常熟镇使陆郢献出苏州城接应杨行密，并虏获苏州刺史成及。
English: Before long, Suzhou Changshu Town made Lu Wei offer Suzhou City to Yang Xingmi, and captured Suzhou Jishi Chengyi.

古文：行密阅及家所蓄，惟图书、药物，贤之，归，署行军司马。
现代文：杨行密察看成及家里收藏的东西，只有图书、药物，很敬重他，把他放回，并任命为行军司马。
English: Yang Xing inspected the things in the family's collection, only books and medicines. He respected him very much, put him back, and appointed him as the marshal.

古文：及拜且泣曰： 及百口在钱公所。失苏州不能死，敢求富贵！
现代文：成及跪谢杨行密并且流着泪说： 我全家族有一百口人在钱那里，我身为刺史失掉苏州而不能以身殉职，怎敢再谋求荣华富贵！
English: Cheng knelt down and thanked Yang Xingmi and said with tears: My whole family has a hundred people in the money, I lost Suzhou as a cardinal and cannot die in the line of duty, how dare I seek glory and wealth again!

古文：愿以一身易百口之死！ 
现代文：希望用我一个人除全家百口人的死！ 
English: I hope to use me alone to eliminate the death of a hundred people in my entire family!

古文：引佩刀欲自刺。
现代文：说着举起身上佩刀就要自杀。
English: He said he was going to kill himself and held up a knife.

古文：行密遽执其手，止之，馆于府舍。
现代文：杨行密立即抓住成及的手，阻止的行动，在节度使司的宅院里为成及安设馆舍。
English: Yang Xingmi immediately grabbed Cheng Yao's hand, stopped the action, and set up a building for Cheng Yao in the courtyard of the festival ambassador.

古文：其室中亦有兵仗，行密每单衣诣之，与之共饮膳，无所疑。
现代文：成及的屋里也有兵器，杨行密常常身穿单衣到成及那里，与他一同喝酒吃饭，毫无疑虑。
English: There were also weapons in Cheng Yao's house. Yang Xingmi often went to Cheng Yao's house wearing a singlet, and drank and ate with him without hesitation.

古文：钱镠闻苏州陷，急召顾全武，使趋西陵备行密，全武曰： 越州贼之根本，奈何垂克而弃之！
现代文：钱听说苏州失陷，立即召顾全武，命他赶赴西陵防备杨行密，顾全武说： 越州是董昌这伙贼寇的大本营，为什么马上就要攻克却又舍弃它！
English: When Qian heard of the fall of Suzhou, he immediately summoned Gu Quanwu and ordered him to rush to Xiling to guard against Yang Xingmi. Gu Quanwu said: Yuezhou is the base camp of Dong Chang's band of thieves and robbers. Why should we conquer it immediately, but then abandon it!

古文：请先取越州，后复苏州。 
现代文：请让我先攻取越州，然后再去收复苏州。 
English: Please let me capture Yuezhou first, and then go on to recover Zhouzhuang.

古文：镠从之。
现代文：钱听从了顾全武的意见。
English: Qian heeded Gu Quanwu's advice.

古文：淮南将硃延寿奄至蕲州，围其城。
现代文：淮南将领朱延寿忽然来到蕲州城下，围攻蕲州城。
English: Zhu Yanshou, the general of Huainan, suddenly came to the city of Ganzhou and besieged it.

古文：大将贾公鐸方猎，不得还，伏兵林中，命勇士二人衣羊皮夜入延寿所掠羊群，潜入城，约夜半开门举火为应，复衣皮返命。
现代文：蕲州大将贾公铎正在城外打猎，不能返回，贾公铎把军队埋伏在树林里，命令勇猛士兵二人身披羊皮乘夜进入朱延寿的驻地，掠赶羊群，偷偷进入城内，与城里的人相约半夜时候打开城门举起火把相接应，这两个人又身披羊皮回到贾公铎的营地，报告情况。
English: Zhangzhou General Jia Gongyao was hunting outside the city and could not return. Jia Gongyao ambushed the army in the woods and ordered two brave soldiers dressed in sheepskins to enter Zhu Yanshou's camp at night, steal sheep, sneak into the city, meet the people in the city at about midnight, open the city gate and hold up torches. The two men returned to Jia Gongyao's camp dressed in sheepskins to report the situation.

古文：公鐸如期引兵至城南，门中火举，力战，突围而入。
现代文：贾公铎按着约定的时间来到蕲州城南面，城门中间火把高举，贾公铎极力奋战，突破朱延寿的包围圈进入城内。
English: According to the agreed time, Jia Gongye came to the south side of Zhangzhou City. He held a torch high in the middle of the city gate. Jia Gongye fought hard to break through Zhu Yanshou's encirclement and enter the city.

古文：延寿惊曰： 吾常恐其溃围而出，反溃围而入，如此，城安可猝拔！ 
现代文：朱延寿吃惊地说： 我常常担心贾公铎会冲破包围逃出，现在反倒是打破包围进来，这样看来，蕲州城怎么可能立即攻克！ 
English: Zhu Yanshou said in surprise: I often worried that Jia Gongjun would break through the encirclement and escape, but now it is breaking the encirclement and entering, so it seems that how can Zhangzhou City be immediately conquered!

古文：乃白行密，求军中与公鐸有旧者持誓书金帛往说之，许以婚。
现代文：朱延寿于是告诉杨行密，请求派军中与贾公铎有旧交情的人手持盟誓书信和金银布帛前往劝说，并许诺和贾公铎结成姻亲。
English: Zhu Yanshou then told Yang Xingmi to request that someone in the army who had an old friendship with Jia Gonglu be sent to persuade him with an oath letter and gold and silver cloth, and promised to marry Jia Gonglu.

古文：寿州团练副使柴再用请行，临城与语，为陈利害。
现代文：寿州团练副使柴再用请求前去劝说，在临近蕲州城的地方，柴再用与贾公铎会晤，为贾公铎陈述利弊得失。
English: At the request of the vice-commander of the Shoushu Rehearsal Team, Chai Zhengyi went to persuade him. In a place near Zhangzhou City, Chai Zhengyi met with Jia Gongyao and stated the pros and cons for Jia Gongyao.

古文：数日，公鐸及刺史冯敬章请降。
现代文：几天之后，贾公铎与蕲州刺史冯敬章向朱延寿请求投降。
English: A few days later, Jia Gongyao and Zhangzhou chief Feng Jingzhang requested Zhu Yanshou to surrender.

古文：以敬章为左都押牙，公鐸为右监门卫将军。
现代文：杨行密任命冯敬章为左都押牙，贾公铎为右监门卫将军。
English: Yang Xingmi appointed Feng Jingzhang as the left doorkeeper and Jia Gongyao as the right doorkeeper.

古文：延寿进拔光州，杀刺吏刘存。
现代文：朱延寿乘势进军攻克光州，杀死光州刺史刘存。
English: Zhu Yanshou took advantage of the situation to invade Gwangju and killed Liu Cun, the governor of Gwangju.

古文：丙戌，上遣中使诣梓州和解两川，王建虽奉诏还成都，然犹连兵未解。
现代文：丙戌，唐昭宗派遣宦官到达梓州，劝说西川节度使王建和东川节度使顾彦晖和解，王建虽然奉诏令返回成都，可是仍然布署军队没有停止进攻势态。
English: The Tang Emperor Zhaozong sent eunuchs to Zizhou to persuade the West River Sect to make Wang Jian and the East River Sect to make Gu Yanjun reconcile. Although Wang Jian returned to Chengdu by imperial order, he still deployed troops and did not stop the offensive.

古文：崔昭纬复求救于硃全忠。
现代文：崔昭纬再次向朱全忠请求救援。
English: Cui Zhaowei once again asked Zhu Quanzhong for help.

古文：戊子，遣中使赐昭纬死，行至荆南，追及，斩之，中外咸以为快。
现代文：戊子，朝廷派遣宦官将崔昭纬赐死，崔昭纬行到荆南，宦官追上，斩杀了崔昭纬，京城内外都感到大快人心。
English: Bo Zi, the imperial court dispatched eunuchs to put Cui Zhaowei to death, Cui Zhaowei went to Jingnan, the eunuchs caught up and killed Cui Zhaowei, and people in and out of Beijing felt very happy.

古文：荆南节度使成汭与其将许存溯江略地，尽取滨江州县。
现代文：荆南节度使成与属下将领许存沿着长江逆而上侵占地盘，把长江沿岸的州县全都夺取。
English: Jingnan Jiedu forced Cheng and his subordinate general Xu Cun to invade the territory along the Yangtze River and seize all the states and counties along the Yangtze River.

古文：武泰节度使王建肇弃黔州，收馀众保丰都。
现代文：武泰节度使王建肇放弃黔州，收集剩余人马固守忠州的丰都县。
English: The Wu Tai Festival made Wang Jian Zhao give up Zhangzhou and gather the remaining people and horses to stick to Fengdu County in Chungju.

古文：存又引兵西取谕、涪二州，汭以其将赵武为黔中留后，存为万州刺史。
现代文：许存又带领军队向西攻取渝州、涪州，成委任手下将领赵武为黔中留后，许存为万州刺史。
English: Xu Cun also led the army to the west to conquer Yuzhou and Zhangzhou, and after appointing his subordinate general Zhao Wu to stay in Zhangzhong, Xu Cun became the history of Wanzhou.

古文：汭知存不得志，使人诇之，曰： 存不治州事，日出蹴鞠。 
现代文：成知道许存不得志，派人去刺探许存的举动，回来的人说； 许存不料理州内的事宜，每天出去踢球取乐。 
English: Cheng knew that Xu Cun was not ambitious, and sent someone to spy on Xu Cun's actions. The person who came back said; Xu Cun does not take care of affairs in the state, and goes out to play football every day for fun.

古文：汭曰： 存将逃，先匀足力也。 
现代文：成说： 许存是想要逃跑，现在先调整脚的力量。 
English: Cheng said: "Xu Cun is trying to run away, now first adjust the strength of the foot.

古文：遣兵袭之，存弃城走；其众稍稍归之，屯于茅坝。
现代文：便派军队袭击许存，许存放弃万州城逃跑；许存的人马渐渐投归，在茅坝驻扎下来。
English: He then sent troops to attack Xu Cun, and Xu Cun abandoned Wanzhou City and fled; Xu Cun's men gradually returned and settled down in Mao Ba.

古文：赵武数攻丰都，王建肇不能守，与存皆降于王建，建忌存勇略，欲杀之，掌书记高烛曰： 公方总揽英雄以图霸业，彼穷来归我，奈向杀之！ 
现代文：赵武几次攻打丰都，王建肇不能据守，与许存一同向王建投降。王建顾忌许存有勇有谋，想把许存杀掉，掌书记高烛说： 你正在招揽天下的英雄豪杰以谋求称霸大业，许存在处境艰难时来投靠我们，怎么能杀害他呢！ 
English: Zhao Wu attacked Fengdu several times. Wang Jian Zhao could not hold out and surrendered to Wang Jian together with Xu Cunxun. Wang Jian was afraid that Xu Cunxun was brave and resourceful and wanted to kill him. Gao Xiang, the secretary-in-charge, said: You are recruiting the world's heroes and heroines to seek the great cause of hegemony. Xu Cunxun came to rely on us in a difficult situation. How can you kill him?

古文：建使戍蜀州，阴使知蜀州王宗绾察之。
现代文：王建便令许存驻守蜀州，暗中让主持蜀州事务的王宗绾监视许存。
English: Wang Jian then ordered Xu Cun to stay in Shuzhou and secretly let Wang Zongqi, who presided over the affairs of Shuzhou, monitor Xu Cun.

古文：宗绾密言存忠勇廉厚，有良将才，建乃舍之，更其姓名臼王宗播，而宗绾竟不使宗播知其免己也。
现代文：王宗绾秘密向王建说，许存忠诚勇敢谦恭谨慎，具有贤良将领的才能，王建于是放弃了先前的成见，把许存的姓名改为王宗播认做养子，可是王宗绾却不让王宗播知道，当初是他向王建美言而免除了对王宗播的不信任。
English: Wang Zongxuan secretly told Wang Jian that Xu Cunxuan was loyal, brave, courteous and prudent, and had the ability of a good general. Wang Jian then abandoned his previous prejudices and changed Xu Cunxuan's name to Wang Zongxuan as an adopted son. However, Wang Zongxuan did not let Wang Zongxuan know that he initially spoke well to Wang Jian and relieved his distrust of Wang Zongxuan.

古文：宗播元从也目官柳修业，每劝宗播慎静以免祸。
现代文：原来追随王宗播的孔目官柳修业，常常劝说王宗播要谨慎镇静以免不测大祸。
English: Originally, the Confucian official Liu Xiuye, who followed Wang Zongbo, often persuaded Wang Zongbo to be cautious and calm in order to avoid unexpected disasters.

古文：其后宗播为建将，遇强敌诸将所惮者，以身先之。及有功，辄称病，不自伐，由是得以功名终。
现代文：在这以后，王宗播作为王建的手下将领，凡遇到强敌而各位将领有所畏惧时，他就身先士卒冲锋陷阵，等到有了功劳，就声称有病，不高傲自夸，因此王宗播得以终身保全功名。
English: After this, Wang Zonghan, as a general under Wang Jian, whenever he encountered a strong enemy and the generals were afraid, he was the first to charge into battle. When he got credit, he claimed to be ill and was not proud to boast, so Wang Zonghan was able to preserve his reputation for life.

古文：甲午，夜，顾全武急攻越州，乙未旦，克其外郭，董昌犹据牙城拒之。
现代文：甲午夜间，顾全武猛烈攻打越州，乙未，早晨，攻克越州外城，董昌仍然占据内城顽强抗拒。
English: In the evening of the first day of the second month, Gu Quanwu fiercely attacked Yuezhou, and in the morning of the second day of the third month, he conquered the outer city of Yuezhou, but Dong Chang still occupied the inner city and stubbornly resisted.

古文：戊戌，镠遣昌故将骆团绐昌云： 奉诏，令大王致仕归临安。 
现代文：戊戌，钱派遣董昌的原来将领骆团欺骗董昌说： 奉到朝廷的诏令，命令大王你退休返回临安。 
English: Wuzhen, Qian sent Dongchang's former general Luo Duan to trick Dongchang, saying, "I have received a royal decree ordering you to retire and return to Lin'an.

古文：昌乃送牌印，出居清道坊。
现代文：董昌于是送上牌照官印，迁出内城到清道坊居住。
English: Dong Chang then sent the official seal of the license and moved out of the inner city to live in Qingdao.

古文：己亥，全武遣武勇都监使吴璋以舟载昌如杭州，至小江南，斩之，并其家三百馀人，宰相李邈、蒋瑰以下百馀人。
现代文：已亥，顾全武派遣武勇都监使吴璋用船只把董昌从越州送往杭州，到了小江的南部，将董昌斩杀，连同董昌家族三百余人，董昌任用的宰相李邈、蒋以下的官员一百余人，全部杀掉。
English: At this time, Gu Quanwu dispatched Wu Gan, the military commander of the capital, to send Dong Chang from Yuezhou to Hangzhou by ship. He arrived in the south of the Xiao Jiang River and killed Dong Chang, along with more than three hundred members of the Dong Chang family, and more than one hundred officials appointed by Dong Chang, including the prime minister Li Xi and Chiang Kai-shek.

古文：昌在围城中，贪吝益甚，口率民间钱帛，减战士粮。
现代文：董昌在越州城内被围困时，一天更比一天贪婪吝啬，按人口计算征收民间的钱财布帛，减少作战士兵的粮食。
English: When Dongchang was besieged in the city of Yuezhou, he became more and more greedy and miserly day by day, collecting the money and cloth of the people according to the population and reducing the grain of the combat soldiers.

古文：及城破，库有金帛杂货五百间，仓有粮三百万斛。
现代文：等到越州城被攻克，府库内藏有各种货物五百间，粮仓里还有粮食三百万斛。
English: By the time the city of Yuezhou was conquered, there were 500 containers of various goods in the government warehouse, and 3 million cormorants of grain in the granary.

古文：钱镠传昌首于京师，散金帛以赏将士，开仓以振贫乏。
现代文：钱把董昌的头颅传送到京师长安，散发金银布帛以奖赏军中将士，打开粮仓振济贫困的百姓。
English: Qian sent the head of Dong Chang to the capital Chang'an, distributed gold and silver cloth to reward the generals, and opened the granary to help the poor people.

古文：李克用攻魏博，侵掠遍六州。
现代文：李克用攻打魏博节度使罗弘信，在魏州、博州、贝州、卫州、澶州、相州这六个州的范围内大肆侵扰抢掠。
English: Li Ke used the attack on the Wei Bo Festival to make Luo Hongxin attack and plunder the six states of Weizhou, Bozhou, Bozhou, Weizhou, Ganzhou and Xiangzhou.

古文：硃全忠召葛从周于郓州，使将兵营洹水以救魏博，留庞师古攻郓州，六月，克用引兵击从周，汴人多凿坎于陈前，战方酣，克用之子铁林指挥使落落马遇坎而踬，汴人生擒之；克用自往救之。
现代文：朱全忠召令正在攻打郓州的葛从周，让他带领军队在洹水驻扎以便救援魏博节度使罗弘信，留下庞师古继续攻打郓州的朱。六月，李克用率领军队攻打葛从周，汴州军队在洹水的阵地前挖凿了许多沟坎，双方交战正激烈的时候，李克用的儿子铁林指挥李落落骑的马遇到沟坎被绊倒，汴州军队将他活捉。
English: Zhu Quanzhong summoned Zhu Quanzhong, who was attacking Gezong Zhou in Luzhou, and asked him to lead the army to stay in Surabaya in order to rescue Wei Bo. Wei Bo sent Luo Hongxin, leaving Pang Shigu to continue attacking Zhu in Luzhou. In June, Li Ke used to lead the army to attack Gezong Zhou, and the Luzhou army dug many ditches in front of the position in Surabaya. When the fighting between the two sides was intense, Li Ke's son, Tie Lin commander Li Luo Luo, was riding a horse that tripped over a ditch, and the Luzhou army caught him alive.

古文：马亦踬，几为汴人所获；克用顾射汴将一人，毙之，乃得免。
现代文：李克用亲自去救李落落，战马也被绊倒，几乎就要被汴州军队擒获，李克用这时回身发箭射中一名汴州军队的将领，将他击毙，这才免于被俘。
English: Li Ke personally went to rescue Li Liao, the horse also tripped, and was almost captured by the Zhangzhou army. Li Ke used this time to return and shoot an arrow at a general of the Zhangzhou army, killing him, so that he would not be captured.

古文：克用请修好以赎落落，全忠不许，以与罗弘信，使杀之。
现代文：李克用向朱全忠请求和好以赎回儿子李落落，朱全忠不答应，把李落落交给魏博节度使罗弘信，让他把李落落杀掉。
English: Li Ke used Zhu Quanzhong's request for reconciliation to redeem his son Li Liao, but Zhu Quanzhong did not agree, and gave Li Liao to Wei Bo and Luo Hongxin, and let him kill Li Liao.

古文：克用引军还。
现代文：李克用带领军队从洹水返回晋阳。
English: Li Ke used to lead the army from Surabaya back to Jinyang.

古文：葛从周自洹水引兵济河，屯于杨刘，复击郓，及兗、郓、河东之兵战于故乐亭，破之，兗、郓属城皆为汴人所据，屡求救于李克用，克用发兵赴之，为罗弘信所拒，不得前，兗、郓由是不振。
现代文：朱全忠的将领葛从周从洹水带领军队渡过黄河，在杨刘驻扎，接着又攻打郓州的朱，兖州、郓州、河东的军队在故乐亭与汴州军队交战，打败葛从周。但兖州、郓州所属的城镇都被朱全忠的汴州军队占据，兖州的朱瑾、郓州的朱多次向李克用求救，李克用派军队前往，又受到魏博节度使罗弘信的阻截，无法向前开进，兖州的朱瑾、郓州的朱从此一蹶不振。
English: Zhu Quanzhong's general Ge from Zhou Quanzhong led the army across the Yellow River from Surabaya, stationed in Yang Liu, and then attacked Zhu of Luzhou. The armies of Luzhou, Luzhou and Hedong fought with the Luzhou army in Gaoleting and defeated Ge from Zhou. However, the towns of Luzhou and Luzhou were all occupied by Zhu Quanzhong's Luzhou army. Zhu Xi from Luzhou and Zhu from Luzhou repeatedly asked Li Ke for help, Li Ke used to send troops to go, and was blocked by Wei Bo and Luo Hongxin, unable to move forward. Zhu Xi from Luzhou and Zhu from Luzhou have

古文：初，李克用屯渭北，李茂贞、韩建惮之，事朝廷礼甚恭。
现代文：当初，李克用在渭水以北一带驻扎时，李茂贞、韩建惧怕他，侍奉朝廷的礼节十分恭谦。
English: At first, when Li Ke used to be stationed in the area north of Surabaya, Li Maozhen and Han Jian were afraid of him, and the etiquette of serving the imperial court was very respectful.

古文：克用去，二镇贡献渐疏，表章骄慢，上自石门还，于神策两军之外，更置军圣、捧宸、保宁、宣化等军，选补数万人，使诸王将之；嗣延王戒丕、嗣贾王嗣周又自募麾下数千人。
现代文：李克用离开后，李茂贞、韩建二人向朝廷进献贡品逐渐减少，进呈的表章也骄横傲慢起来。昭宗从石门返回京师后，在左、右神策军之外，又设置安圣军、捧宸军、保宁军、宣化军等军队，挑选增补几万人，命令各王统领。继任延王李戒丕和继任覃王李嗣周又自己招募属下人马几千人。
English: After Li Kegui's departure, Li Maozhen and Han Jian gradually reduced the amount of tribute they offered to the imperial court, and the insignia they presented became arrogant. After Akimune returned to Beijing from Shimen, in addition to the Left and Right Divisions, he also set up the An Sheng Army, Hotei Army, Boryeong Army, Xuanhua Army and other armies, selected tens of thousands of additional people, and ordered each king to lead. The successor of Yan Wang, Li Kaizhen, and the successor of Zou Wang, Li Zizhou, also recruited thousands of subordinates.

古文：茂贞以为欲讨己；语多怨望，嫌隙日构。
现代文：李茂贞认为朝廷这样扩充军队是要讨伐他，言语中有很多抱怨，朝廷和李茂贞之间的怨恨越来越深。
English: Li Maozhen thought that the imperial court's expansion of the army was to fight him. There were many complaints in the words, and the resentment between the imperial court and Li Maozhen was getting deeper and deeper.

古文：茂贞亦勒兵扬言欲诣阙讼冤；京师士民争亡匿山谷。
现代文：李茂贞也布署军队扬言说要前赴京师向朝廷诉讼冤屈；京城长安的士民争先恐后地逃到山谷里躲藏起来。
English: Li Maozhen also deployed troops and threatened to go to Beijing to sue the imperial court for grievances; the people of Chang'an in Beijing scrambled to escape and hide in the valley.

古文：上命通王滋及嗣周、戒丕分将诸军以卫近畿，戒丕屯三桥。
现代文：昭宗命令通王李滋和覃王李嗣周、延王李戒丕分别带领各军，护卫京师一带，并命李戒丕到三桥驻扎。
English: Zhaozong ordered Tong Wang Li Zhi, Fan Wang Li Zhi Zhou, and Yan Wang Li Jiechi to lead their respective armies to guard the Beijing Division area, and ordered Li Jiechi to be stationed at Sanqiao.

古文：茂贞遂表言 延王无故称兵讨臣，臣今勒兵入朝请罪。 
现代文：李茂贞于是向朝廷进呈表章说： 延王李戒丕无缘无故地发动军队讨伐我，我现在率领军队前赴京师请朝廷治我的罪。 
English: Li Maozhen then submitted a petition to the imperial court, saying: "Yan Wang Li Jiechi launched an army to fight me for no reason. I am now leading the army to Beijing to ask the imperial court to punish me for my crime.

古文：上遽遣使告急于河东。
现代文：唐昭宗立即派使臣向河东节度使李克用告急。
English: Tang Zhaozong immediately sent envoys to the Hedong Festival to make Li Ke with urgent.

古文：丙寅，茂贞引兵逼京畿，覃王与战于娄馆，官军败绩。
现代文：丙寅，李茂贞带领军队逼近京畿一带，覃王李嗣周在西部的娄馆迎战，结果朝廷的官军战败失利。
English: Hsin Yin, Li Maozhen led the army to approach the Gyeonggi area, and the warlord, Li Shizhou, led the army to meet the war in the west at Shuguang. As a result, the imperial army was defeated and lost.

古文：秋，七月，茂贞进逼京师。
现代文：秋季，七月，李茂贞进军逼近京师长安。
English: In the autumn, in July, Li Maozhen marched into the capital Chang'an.

古文：延王戒丕曰： 今关中籓镇无可依者，不若自鄜州济河，幸太原，臣请先往告之。 
现代文：延王李戒丕说： 现在关中一带的藩镇没有可以依靠的，不如从州渡过黄河，到太原去避难，我请求先行一步去告诉河东节度使李克用。 
English: Yan Wang Li Jiechi said: Now there is nothing to rely on in the towns around Guanzhong. It is better to cross the Yellow River from the state and take refuge in Taiyuan. I request you to go one step ahead and tell the Hedong Festival to use Li Ke.

古文：辛卯，诏幸鄜州；壬辰，上出至渭北；韩建遣其子从允奉表请幸华州，上不许，以建为亦畿都指挥、安抚制置及开通四面道路、催促诸道纲运等使。而建奉表相继，上及从官亦惮远去，癸己，至富平，遣宣徽使元公讯召建，面议去留。
现代文：韩建派遣他的儿子韩从允手捧表章请唐昭宗到华州，唐昭宗不同意。朝廷任命韩建为京畿都指挥、安抚制置使及开通四面道路使、催促诸道纲运使等职，可是韩建进呈的表章接二连三地送到请皇帝去华州，昭宗和跟随的朝中各官也有些怕到远处去，癸巳，昭宗到达富平，派遣宣徽使元公讯召韩建前来，要与他当面商议是东去太原还是留在华州。
English: Han Jian sent his son, Han Zong Yun, to invite Tang Zhaozong to Huazhou, holding a watch badge in his hand. Tang Zhaozong did not agree. The imperial court appointed Han Jian as the commander of the Gyeonggi capital, the pacification envoy, the four-sided road envoy, and the urgent road transport envoy. However, the watch badges presented by Han Jian Jin were sent one after another to invite the emperor to Huazhou. Zhaozong and the following North Korean and Chinese officials were also somewhat afraid to go far away. Soon after, Zhaozong arrived in Fuping and sent the heraldic envoy

古文：甲午，建诣富平见上，顿首涕泣言： 方今籓臣跋扈者，非止茂贞。陛下若去宗庙园陵，远巡边鄙，臣恐车驾济河，无复还期。
现代文：甲午，韩建到达富平拜见昭宗，他下跪磕头痛哭说： 当今各藩大臣骄横跋扈的，并不止李茂贞一人，陛下如果离开宗庙园陵，到边远的地方巡游，我担心皇帝的车驾渡过黄河，就再也没有返回的时候了。
English: At one o'clock in the afternoon, Han Jian arrived in Fuping to pay homage to Zhaozong. He knelt down, bowed his head and wept bitterly, saying: Today's ministers of various domains are arrogant, and Li Maozhen is not the only one. If Your Majesty leaves the gardens of the ancestral temple and goes on a tour to remote places, I am worried that the emperor's car will drive across the Yellow River, and there will be no time to return.

古文：今华州兵力虽微，控带关辅，亦足自固。
现代文：现在华州军队虽然不是很强大，但控制关中京畿一带，也还足以自卫。
English: Now, although the Huazhou army is not very strong, it is still enough to control the Guanzhong-Gyeonggi area and defend itself.

古文：臣积聚训厉，十五年矣，西距长安不远，愿陛下临之，以图兴复。 
现代文：我积聚资财训练军队已经十五年了，而且华州往西距离长安也不远，希望陛下驾临华州，以图振兴光复。 
English: I have been accumulating resources and training troops for fifteen years, and Huazhou is not far from Chang'an to the west. I hope that His Majesty will visit Huazhou in order to revitalize and recover.

古文：上乃从之。
现代文：昭宗于是依从了韩建的意见。
English: The emperor listened to Jia Dongzhi's opinion.

古文：乙未，宿下邽；丙申，至华州，以府署为行宫；建视事于龙兴寺。
现代文：乙未，昭宗在下住宿；丙申，到达华州，把韩建的节度使司作为皇帝的行宫。韩建则改在龙兴寺办理政务。
English: Biyi, Zhaozong stayed in the next room; Bishen, arriving in Huazhou, used Han Jian's ceremonial envoy office as the emperor's palace. Han Jian was transferred to Longxing Temple to handle government affairs.

古文：茂贞遂入长安，自中和以来所葺宫室、市肆，燔烧俱尽。
现代文：唐昭宗离开京师后，李茂贞便进入长安，自从中和年间以来所修缮的宫殿、市街店铺，全都被李茂贞放火烧毁。
English: After Tang Zhaozong left Beijing, Li Maozhen entered Chang'an. The palace and shops in the city that had been renovated since the middle of the 19th century were all set on fire by Li Maozhen.

古文：乙己，以中书侍郎、同平章事崔胤同平章事，充武安节弃使。
现代文：乙巳，朝廷任命中书侍郎、同平章事崔胤以同平章事衔，充任武安节度使。
English: At this time, the imperial court appointed Choi In, Chushushijiro and Tonghei Shoji, with the title of Tonghei Shoji, to serve as Buan Setsudoshi.

古文：上以胤，崔昭纬之党也，故出之。
现代文：唐昭宗因为崔胤是崔昭纬的党羽，所以把他调出朝廷。
English: Tang Zhaozong transferred Cui Yin out of the imperial court because he was a member of Cui Zhaowei's party.

古文：丙午，以翰林学士承旨、尚书左丞陆扆为户部侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：丙午，朝廷任命翰林学士承旨、尚书左丞陆为户部侍郎、同平章事。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, the imperial court appointed Hanlin Baccalaureate Zong Zi and Shang Shuzo Zuo Lu as household attendants and Tong Ping Zhang Ji.

古文：扆，陕人也。
现代文：陆是陕州人。
English: Lu is from Shaanxi Province.

古文：水部郎中何迎表荐国子《毛诗》博士襄阳硃朴，才如谢安，道士许岩士亦荐朴有经济才。
现代文：水部郎中何迎向朝廷进呈表章，荐举国子监 毛诗 博士、襄阳人朱朴，说他的才能可比东晋谢安，道士许岩士也向朝廷推荐朱朴有经邦济世的才学。
English: He Ying, a retainer of the Ministry of Water Resources, presented a badge to the imperial court, recommending the appointment of Dr. Mao Shi, a national tutor, and Zhu Pu, a native of Yangyang, saying that his talent was comparable to that of Dong Jin Xie'an. Taoist Xu Yanshi also recommended to the imperial court that Zhu Pu had the ability to learn from Bon Jie.

古文：上连日召对，朴有口辩，上悦之，曰： 朕虽非太宗，得卿如魏征矣。 
现代文：昭宗于是连续几天召见朱朴进行答对，朱朴有论辩口才，昭宗很欣赏他，说： 朕虽然比不上太宗，但得到你就象得到魏徵一样呀！ 
English: Zhaozong then summoned Zhu Pu for several days in a row to answer the questions. Zhu Pu had the eloquence to argue, and Zhaozong admired him very much, saying: Although I am not as good as Taizong, getting you is just like getting Wei Zheng!

古文：赐以金帛，并赐何迎。
现代文：赏赐给朱朴金银布帛，并且赏赐何迎。
English: Zhu Pu was rewarded with gold and silver cloth, and He Ying was also rewarded.

古文：以徐彦若为大明宫留守，兼京畿安抚制置等使。
现代文：朝廷任命徐彦若为大明宫留守，兼任京畿安抚制置等使。
English: The imperial court appointed Xu Yan to stay at the Daming Palace and concurrently serve as the chief envoy of the Gyeonggi Pacification and Restoration.

古文：杨行密表请上迁都江淮，王建请上幸成都。
现代文：杨行密上表请求唐昭宗迁都到江淮，王建则请唐昭宗到成都去。
English: Yang Xingmi requested Tang Zhaozong to move the capital to Jianghuai, and Wang Jian asked Tang Zhaozong to go to Chengdu.

古文：宰相畏韩建，不敢专决政事。
现代文：朝中宰相惧怕韩建，不敢决断政事。
English: The prime ministers of North Korea and China are afraid of Han Jian and dare not make political decisions.

古文：八月，丙辰，诏建关议朝政；建上表固辞，乃止。
现代文：八月，丙辰，昭宗诏令韩建入朝商议朝廷政事；韩建上呈表章坚决推辞，昭宗于是停止召见。
English: In August, Han Jian went to the DPRK to discuss the political affairs of the imperial court according to the edict of Emperor Zhaozong. Han Jian refused the invitation, and Emperor Zhaozong stopped summoning him.

古文：韩建移檄诸道，令共输资粮诣行在。
现代文：韩建向各道发出檄文，命令他们共同运输资财粮食送到华州唐昭宗这里。
English: Han Jian issued an edict to all provinces, ordering them to jointly transport funds and grain to Tang Zhaozong here in Huazhou.

古文：李克用闻之，叹曰： 去岁从余言，岂有今日之患！ 
现代文：李克用听到后，叹息道： 上年皇上若是听从了我的话，怎么会有今天的祸患！ 
English: After listening to Li Ke, he sighed, "If the emperor had listened to me last year, how could today's disaster have happened!"

古文：又曰： 韩建天下痴物，为贼臣弱帝室，是不为李茂贞所擒，则为硃全忠所虏耳！ 
现代文：又说： 韩建是当今世上的愚人，替乱臣贼子削弱大唐皇室，这样他不被李茂贞擒拿，就被朱全忠虏获！ 
English: He also said: Han Jian is a fool in today's world, weakening the imperial family of Datang on behalf of the ruffian thief, so that he would not be captured by Li Maozhen, but by Zhu Quanzhong!

古文：因奏将与邻道发兵入援。
现代文：于是，李克用上奏韩廷要与邻近各道发兵前往救援。
English: As a result, Li Ke sent troops to rescue Han Ting with the help of neighboring provinces.

古文：加钱镠兼中书令。
现代文：朝廷加封钱兼中书令。
English: The imperial court sealed the money and issued a written order.

古文：癸丑，以王建为凤翔西面行营招讨使。
现代文：癸丑，朝廷任命王建为凤翔西面行营招讨使。
English: As a result, the imperial court appointed Wang Jian as Fengxiang's envoy to the west.

古文：甲寅，以门下侍郎、同平章事王抟同平章事，充威胜节度使。
现代文：甲寅，朝廷任命门下侍郎、同平章事王抟以同平章事衔，充任威胜节度使。
English: At the same time, the imperial court appointed a subordinate attendant, Tongping Zhangji Wangyi, with the title of Tongping Zhangji, to serve as the Victory Festival envoy.

古文：上愤天下之乱，思得奇杰之士不次用之。
现代文：昭宗愤恨天下战乱不得安宁，想得到特别杰出的人才破格作用。
English: Zhaozong resented the fact that there was no peace in the war-torn country, and wanted to get a special outstanding talent to play an extraordinary role.

古文：国子博士硃朴自言： 得为宰相，月馀可致太平。 
现代文：国子博士朱朴说： 让我任宰相，一个多月的时间就可以使天下太平。 
English: Dr. Zhu Pu said, "Let me be appointed as the prime minister, and in just over a month's time, I will be able to bring peace to the world."

古文：上以为然。
现代文：唐昭宗认可。
English: Tenshi thinks it makes sense.

古文：乙丑，以朴为左谏议大夫、同平章事。
现代文：乙丑，朝廷任命朱朴为左谏议大夫、同平章事。
English: Second, the imperial court appointed Zhu Pu as Zuo Jianli Doctor and Tongping Zhangji.

古文：朴为人庸鄙迂僻，无它长。
现代文：朱朴为人处事庸俗卑鄙、迂腐冷僻，并没有什么其他的长处。
English: Zhu Pu is vulgar and despicable, pedantic and eccentric, and has no other strengths.

古文：制出，中外大惊。
现代文：诏令颁布后，朝廷内外都大为吃惊。
English: After the edict was issued, both inside and outside the imperial court were taken aback.

古文：丙寅，加韩建兼中书令。
现代文：丙寅，朝廷加封韩建兼中书令。
English: Cui Yin, the imperial court added Han Jian and Zhong Shuling.

古文：九月，庚辰，升福建为威武军，以观察使王潮节度使。
现代文：九月，庚辰，朝廷把福建观察使司升为威武节度使司，任命福建观察使王潮为威武节度使。
English: In September, Gengchen, the imperial court promoted the Fujian observation envoy to the Weiwu Festival envoy, and appointed the Fujian observation envoy Wang Chao as the Weiwu Festival envoy.

古文：以湖南留后马殷判湖南军府事。
现代文：朝廷任命湖南留后马殷兼管湖南节度使司事宜。
English: After the imperial court appointed Ma Yin to stay in Hunan, he was also in charge of the affairs of the envoy to the Hunan Festival.

古文：殷以高郁为谋主。
现代文：马殷任用高郁做自己的主要谋士。
English: Ma Yin appointed Gao Yu as his chief strategist.

古文：郁，扬州人也。
现代文：高郁是扬州人。
English: Gao Yu is from Yangzhou.

古文：殷畏杨行密、成汭之强，议以金帛结之，高郁曰： 成汭不足畏也，行密公之仇。
现代文：马殷惧怕杨行密、成势力的强大，商议想通过帛和杨行密、成结好，高郁对马殷说： 成，没有什么可怕的。
English: Ma Yin was afraid of Yang Xingmi, who was a powerful force. He wanted to negotiate with Yang Xingmi through Zou and Yang Xingmi, and form a good alliance. Gaoyu said to Ma Yin: Cheng, there is nothing terrible.

古文：虽以万金赂之，安肯为吾援乎！
现代文：杨行密和你仇恨很深，即使是向他赠送一万两黄金，他也不会援助我们的！
English: The hatred between Yang Xingmi and you is very deep. Even if you gave him ten thousand taels of gold, he would not help us!

古文：不若上奉天子，下抚士民，训卒厉兵，以修霸业，则谁与为敌矣。 
现代文：不如对上尊奉天子，对下安抚士民，训练士兵整治装备，以谋求霸业，这样谁还敢与我们为敌呢！ 
English: It would be better to honor the Son of God above, pacify the people below, train soldiers to improve their equipment, and seek hegemony, so who would dare to be our enemy!

古文：殷从之。
现代文：马殷听从了高郁的意见。
English: Yin Zhong could do as he said.

古文：崔胤出镇湖南，韩建之志也。
现代文：将崔胤调出朝廷派到湖南任武安节度使，是韩建的意图。
English: It was Han Jian's intention to transfer Cui Yan out of the imperial court and send him to Hunan to serve as an envoy for the Wu'an Festival.

古文：胤密求援于硃全忠，且教之营东都宫阙，表迎车驾，且全忠与河南尹张全义表请上廷都洛阳，全忠仍请以兵二万迎车驾，且言崔胤忠臣，不宜出外。
现代文：崔胤暗中向朱全忠求援，并且指使朱全忠修缮东都洛阳的宫殿，向朝廷上表迎接唐昭宗车驾到洛阳。朱全忠于是与河南尹张全义向朝廷进呈表章，请唐昭宗迁都洛阳，朱全忠再三请求派出二万军队去迎接唐昭宗的车驾，并且说崔胤是位忠臣，不应当把他调到外地任职。
English: Cui Yin secretly asked Zhu Quanzhong for help, and instructed Zhu Quanzhong to repair the palace in Luoyang, the eastern capital, and drive the carriage to Luoyang to welcome Tang Zhaozong to the imperial court. Zhu Quanzhong and Yin Zhang Quanzhi from Henan Province then presented the imperial seal to the imperial court, asking Tang Zhaozong to move the capital to Luoyang. Zhu Quanzhong repeatedly requested that twenty thousand troops be sent to meet Tang Zhaozong's carriage, and said that Cui Yin was a loyal subject and should not be transferred to a post outside the country.

古文：韩建惧，复奏召胤为相，遣使谕全忠以且宜安静，全忠乃止。
现代文：韩建恐惧，重新上奏召请崔胤为宰相，派遣使臣传谕朱全忠暂且应当保持安静，朱全忠这才停止了行动。
English: Han Jian was afraid, he renewed his call for Cui Yan to become prime minister, and sent an envoy to tell Zhu Quanzhong to keep quiet for the time being. Zhu Quanzhong then stopped his actions.

古文：乙未，复以胤为中书侍郎、同平章事。以翰林学士承旨、兵部侍郎崔远同平章事。
现代文：乙未，朝廷再次任命崔胤为中书侍郎、同平章事，任命翰林学士承旨、兵部侍郎崔远为同平章事。
English: Two years later, the imperial court once again appointed Cui Yan as the chancellor of the Chinese Academy of Letters and the vice-chancellor of the Chinese Academy of Arts, and appointed Hanlin Scholar Zongyi and the vice-chancellor of the Chinese Academy of Arts, Cui Yuan as the vice-chancellor of the Chinese Academy of Arts and the vice-chancellor of the Chinese Academy of Arts.

古文：远，珙弟玙之孙也。
现代文：崔远是崔胞弟崔的孙子。
English: Cui Yuan is the grandson of Cui's brother Cui.

古文：丁酉，贬中书侍郎、同平章事陆扆为硖州刺史。
现代文：丁酉，朝廷将中书侍郎、同平章事陆贬为硖州刺史。
English: According to Ding Xi, the imperial court relegated Zhongshu Zhi Rong and Tongping Zhang to the status of Zhangzhou Zhi Shi.

古文：崔胤恨扆代己，诬扆，云党于李茂贞而贬之。
现代文：崔胤嫉恨陆取代了自己，便诬陷陆，说他与李茂贞结党营私，将他贬职。
English: Envious that Lu had replaced him, Cui Yin slandered Lu, saying that he and Li Maozhen had formed a conspiracy and demoted him.

古文：己亥，以硃朴兼判户部，凡军旅财赋之事，上一以委之。
现代文：已亥，朝廷任命朱朴兼管户部，所有军事费用、财政赋税等事，唐昭宗全都委交朱朴掌管。
English: In the year of the boar, the imperial court appointed Zhu Pu to be in charge of the household department, and all military expenses, financial taxation and other matters were entrusted to Zhu Pu by Tang Zhaozong.

古文：以孙偓为凤翔四面行营都统，又以前定难节度使李思谏为静难节度使，兼副都统。
现代文：朝廷还任命孙为凤翔四面行营都统，又任命以前的定难节度使李思谏为静难节度使，兼任凤翔四面行营副都统。
English: The imperial court also appointed Sun to be Fengxiang's four-faceted encampment leader, and appointed Li Siyu, who had previously served as the commander of the Festival of Fortitude, to be the commander of the Festival of Tranquility, concurrently serving as Fengxiang's four-faceted encampment deputy leader.

古文：以保大留后李思敬为节度使。
现代文：朝廷保大留后李思敬为节度使。
English: After the imperial court remained in Baodai, Li Sijing became the regent.

古文：河东将李存信攻临清，败汴将葛从周于宗城北，乘胜至魏州北门。
现代文：河东将领李存信攻打临清，在宗城县北部打败汴州军队将领葛从周，乘胜进军直达魏州城的北门。
English: Li Cunxin, the general of Hedong, attacked Linqing, defeated Ge Zhou, the general of the Zhangzhou army, in the northern part of Zongcheng County, and marched straight to the north gate of Weizhou City.

古文：冬，十月，壬子，加孙偓行营节度、招讨、处置等使。
现代文：冬季十月，壬子，朝廷加封孙为行营节度使、招讨使、处置使等职。
English: In the winter of October, Jinsi, the imperial court added Fongsun as the envoy of the festival, the envoy of the invitation, and the envoy of the disposition.

古文：丁已，以韩健权知京兆尹，兼把截使。
现代文：丁巳，朝廷任命韩建暂任京兆尹，兼任把截使。
English: Soon after, the imperial court appointed Han Jian as the temporary regent of Beijing Zhaoyun and concurrently as the chief envoy.

古文：戊午，李茂贞上表请罪，愿得自新，仍献助修宫室钱；韩建复佐佑之，竟不出师。
现代文：戊午，李茂贞向朝廷上表自请治罪，原意改过自新，并进献帮助朝廷修缮长安宫殿的钱财。韩建又从中为李茂贞情，朝廷竟然不再出动军队讨伐李茂贞。
English: In the afternoon, Li Maozhen presented herself to the imperial court to plead guilty, intending to reform herself, and donated money and resources to help the imperial court repair the Chang'an Palace. Han Jian also took this as a sign of affection for Li Maozhen, and the imperial court actually stopped dispatching troops to fight Li Maozhen.

古文：钱镠令两浙吏民上表，请以镠兼领浙东；朝廷不得已，复以王抟为吏部尚书、同平章事，以镠为镇海、威胜两军度使。
现代文：钱命令两浙官民向朝廷上呈表章，请求朝廷委任钱兼管浙东。朝廷不得已，又任命王抟为吏部尚书、同平章事，任命钱为镇海、威胜两军节度使。
English: Qian ordered the officials and citizens of the two Zhejiang Provinces to present their signatures to the imperial court, requesting the imperial court to appoint Qian to also be in charge of eastern Zhejiang. As a last resort, the imperial court also appointed Wang Qian as the official representative of the Ministry of Public Security and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and appointed Qian as the festival envoy of the Zhenhai and Wei Sheng armies.

古文：丙子，更名威胜曰镇东军。
现代文：丙子，朝廷将威胜军改名为镇东军。
English: The imperial court changed the name of the Weixing Army to the Zhendong Army.

古文：李克用自将攻魏州，败魏兵于白龙潭，追至观音门。
现代文：李克用亲自带领军队攻打魏州的罗弘信，在白龙潭打败魏州军队，一直追赶到魏州外城的观音门。
English: Li Ke used to personally lead the army to attack Luo Hongxin in Weizhou, defeated the Weizhou army in Bailongtan, and chased it all the way to the Guanyin Gate in the outer city of Weizhou.

古文：硃全忠复遣葛从周救之，屯于洹水，全忠以大军继之。克用乃还。
现代文：朱全忠又派遣葛从周救援魏州，率军到洹水驻扎，朱全忠带领大队人马也相继赶到，李克用便返回晋阳。
English: Zhu Quanzhong also sent Ge from Zhou to rescue Weizhou and led the army to be stationed in Surabaya. Zhu Quanzhong led a large group of men and horses to arrive one after another, and Li Kegui returned to Jinyang.

古文：加河中节度使王珂同平章事。
现代文：朝廷加封河中节度使王珂为同平章事。
English: The Imperial Court sealed the middle section of the river to make Wang Ke a peer.

古文：十一月，硃全忠还大梁，复遣葛从周东会庞师古，攻郓州。
现代文：十一月，朱全忠返回大梁，又派遣葛从周向东会合庞师古，去攻打郓州的朱。
English: In November, Zhu Quanzhong returned to Daliang, and sent Ge from Zhou to the east to meet Pang Shigu and attack Zhu in Zhangzhou.

古文：湖州刺史李师悦求旌节，诏置忠国军于湖州，以师悦为节度使。
现代文：湖州刺史李师悦向朝廷谋求节度使旌旗节钺，唐昭宗诏令在湖州设置忠国军，任命李师悦为节度使。
English: Li Shiyue, the historian of Huzhou, asked the imperial court for permission to set up a flag festival. The Tang Zhaozong issued a decree to set up a loyal army in Huzhou and appointed Li Shiyue as a festival envoy.

古文：赐告身旌节者未入境，戊子，师悦卒。
现代文：朝廷派出向李师悦颁赐授职文书和旌旗节钺的使臣还没有到达湖州，戊子，李师悦便死去了。
English: The envoys sent by the imperial court to present Li Shiyue with the certificate of appointment and the flag festival had not yet arrived in Huzhou, and Li Shiyue died.

古文：杨行密表师悦子前绵州刺史彦徽知州事。
现代文：杨行密于是向朝廷上表请任命李师悦的儿子、前绵州刺史李彦徽主持湖州事宜。
English: Yang Xingmi then petitioned the imperial court to appoint Li Shiyue's son, the former Mianzhou governor Li Yanhui, to preside over the affairs of Huzhou.

古文：淮南将安仁义攻婺州。
现代文：淮南将领安仁义攻打婺州。
English: The Huainan general An Renyi attacked Zhangzhou.

古文：十二月，东川兵焚掠汉、眉、资简之境。
现代文：十二月，东川节度使顾彦晖的军队在西川节度使王建管辖的汉州、眉州、简州境内焚烧抢掠。
English: In December, the Dongchuan Festival sent Gu Yanqi's army to burn and loot in the territory of Hanzhou, Meizhou and Jianzhou under the jurisdiction of Wang Jian in the West Sichuan Festival.

古文：清海节度使薛王知柔行至湖南，广州牙将卢琚、谭弘据境拒之，使弘守端州。
现代文：清海节度使薛王李知柔前往赴任行至湖南，广州牙将卢琚、谭弘据守广州抗拒他入境，由谭弘固守端州。
English: The Qinghai Festival made Xue Wang Li Zhirou go to Hunan to take up his post, and the Guangzhou generals Lu Wei and Tan Hong defended Guangzhou against his entry, and Tan Hong firmly defended Danzhou.

古文：弘结封州刺史刘隐，许妻以女。
现代文：谭弘交结封州刺史刘隐，许诺把自已的女儿嫁给刘隐为妻。
English: Tan Hong made a promise to marry his daughter to Liu Ying.

古文：隐伪许之，托言亲迎，伏甲舟中，夜入端州，斩弘；遂袭广州，斩琚；具军容迎知柔入视事，知柔表隐为行军司马。
现代文：刘隐假装答应了这桩婚事，以娶亲为借口，把士兵武器埋藏在船上，夜里进入端州，斩杀了谭弘，又乘胜袭击广州，斩杀卢琚，接着刘隐整顿军容迎接薛王李知柔进入广州主持节度使事务。李知柔上表朝廷任命刘隐为行军司马。
English: Liu Yin pretended to agree to the marriage, buried the soldiers' weapons on the ship under the pretext of marrying a relative, entered Danzhou at night, killed Tan Hong, and attacked Guangzhou in victory, killing Lu Wei. Liu Yin then trimmed his military appearance to welcome Xue Wang Li Zhirou into Guangzhou to preside over the festival affairs. Li Zhirou was appointed by the imperial court as the marching steed.

