古文：起玄黓摄提格五月，尽阏逢执徐五月，凡二年有奇。
现代文：玄黓摄提格五月，尽阏逢执徐五月，凡二年有奇。
English: Xuanzang shot Tighe in May, and it was a great success. Every two years, there is a miracle.

古文：僖宗惠圣恭定孝皇帝中之下中和二年五月，以湖南观察使闵勖权充镇南节度使。勖屡求于湖南建节，朝廷恐诸道观察使效之，不许。
现代文：唐僖宗中和二年五月，唐僖宗任命湖南观察使闵勖权且充当镇南节度使。闵勖多次请求在湖南设立节度使，朝廷恐怕各道观察使竟相效仿，而未予批准。
English: In the middle of the Tang Dynasty and in May of the second year of the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Xizong appointed the Hunan Observer to serve as the festival envoy. Emperor Xizong repeatedly requested the establishment of a festival envoy in Hunan, and the imperial court feared that all observers would follow suit, but did not approve.

古文：先是，王仙芝寇掠江西，高安人钟传聚蛮獠，依山为堡，众至万人。
现代文：在这之前，王仙芝到江西一带抢掠，高安人钟传收集蛮獠土著居民，借依山势修筑堡垒，人数多达一万。
English: Prior to this, Wang Xianzhi went to the Jiangxi region to plunder, and the Gaoan people were rumored to collect the barbarian indigenous people and build a fortress by taking advantage of the mountain situation, with a number of up to ten thousand.

古文：仙芝陷抚州而不能守，传入据之，诏即以为刺史。
现代文：王仙芝攻隐抚州后不能固守，钟传率众占据了抚州，唐僖宗立颁诏，任命钟传为抚州刺史。
English: After Wang Xianzhi attacked Fuzhou and was unable to hold it, Zhong Chuan led the crowd to occupy Fuzhou. Tang Xizong issued an edict, appointing Zhong Chuan as Fuzhou's chief historian.

古文：至是，又逐江西观察使高茂卿，据洪州。
现代文：到这时，钟传又驱逐江西观察使高茂卿，占据了洪州。
English: At this time, Zhong Chuan also expelled Jiangxi observation envoy Gao Maoxing and occupied Hongzhou.

古文：朝廷以勖本江西牙将，故复置镇南军，使勖领之。若传不受代，令勖因而讨之。
现代文：因为闵勖来就是江西地方的牙将，所以朝廷又设置了镇南军，命令闵勖统领；如果钟传拒不受管，就命令闵勖对他进行讨伐。
English: Because Gong Lai was the warlord of the Jiangxi region, the imperial court set up the Zhennan Army and ordered Gong Lai to lead it. If Zhong Chuan refused to be controlled, Gong Lai was ordered to fight against him.

古文：勖知朝廷意欲斗二盗使相毙，辞不行。
现代文：闵勖知道朝廷的意图是使他和钟传相互争，两败俱伤，因而推辞拒不赴任。
English: Yan knew that the intention of the imperial court was to make him and Zhong Chuan fight against each other, and both lost, so he refused to take office.

古文：加淮南节度使高骈兼侍中，罢其盐铁转运使。
现代文：唐僖宗命淮南节度使高骈兼任侍中，而罢免了他的盐铁转运使官职。
English: The Huainan Festival decreed by the Tang Dynasty that Gao Qi should also serve as an attendant, but he was dismissed from the post of salt and iron transport envoy.

古文：骈既失兵柄，又解利权，攘袂大诟，遣其幕僚顾云草表自诉，言辞不逊，其略曰： 是陛下不用微臣，固非微臣有负陛下。 
现代文：高骈既已丧失兵权，又被解除了财权，捋起袖子破口怒骂，并指使他的幕僚顾云起草表文进行自我陈诉，所用言辞多有极不谦恭之处，其中说： 是皇帝陛下不重用我，而决不是我辜负了皇帝陛下。 
English: Gao Jiong, who had already lost his military power and was relieved of his financial power, rolled up his sleeves and shouted angrily, and ordered his staff member Gu Yun to draft a self-report. The words he used were mostly extremely immodest, saying: "It was His Majesty the Emperor who did not value me, but it was by no means I who failed His Majesty the Emperor."

古文：又曰： 奸臣未悟，陛下犹迷，不思宗庙之焚烧，不痛园陵之开毁。 
现代文：又说： 奸臣没有醒悟，皇上还在迷惘，宗庙被火焚烧不忧虑，园陵被打开捣毁也不痛惜。 
English: He also said: The treacherous ministers have not woken up, the emperor is still confused, the ancestral temple is not worried about being burned, and the garden is not sorry about being opened and destroyed.

古文：又曰： 王鐸偾军之将，崔安潜在蜀贪黩，岂二儒士能戢强兵！ 
现代文：表文说道： 王铎在江陵战役中是个败将，崔安潜在四川贪婪轻狂，这两个儒士么能统管大军呢！ 
English: The frontispiece said: Wang Yao was a loser in the Battle of Gangneung, and Cui An was a potential greedy and frivolous man in Sichuan. How could these two Confucians control a large army?

古文：又曰： 今之所用，上至帅臣，下及裨将，以臣所料，悉可坐擒。 
现代文：又说： 今天廷所重用的人，上自统帅大员，下到一般将领，若让我筹划料理，可以坐着就把他们全部擒获。 
English: He also said, "If I were asked to plan a meal, I could sit down and capture all the people who are important to the imperial court today, from commanders-in-chief to generals.

古文：又曰： 无使百代有抱恨之臣，千古留刮席之耻。
现代文：表文还说： 不要使子孙后代有抱怨痛恨的臣僚，不要让千古岁月留下汉朝淮阳王那样的刮席辱。
English: The notice also said: Don't let future generations have ministers who complain and hate, and don't let thousands of years of time leave behind the humiliation of the Han Dynasty's King Huaiyang.

古文：臣但虑寇生东土，刘氏复兴，即轵道之灾，岂独往日！ 
现代文：我唯恐东土出现盗寇，刘季一类的人再次兴起。象轵道那样的灾害，难道只能是以前才有吗？ 
English: I'm afraid that thieves and robbers will appear in the East, and people like Liu Ji will rise again. Can disasters like the Shandong Road only happen in the past?

古文：又曰： 今贤才在野，憸人满朝，致陛下为亡国之君，此子等计将安出！ 
现代文：又说： 现今贤能有才的人闲置不用，鲜廉寡耻的人把持朝政，这是要让皇帝陛下做亡国的君主，他们这些人究竟能出什么计策！ 
English: He also said, "Nowadays, those who are capable and talented are idle and useless, and those who are shameless and shameless are in charge of the government. This is to make His Majesty the Emperor the ruler of a ruined country. What kind of strategy can these people come up with?

古文：上命郑畋草诏切责之，其略曰： 绾利则牢盆在手，主兵则都统当权，直至京北、京西神策诸镇，悉在指挥之下，可知董制之权。而又贵作司徒，荣为太尉。以为不用，如何为用乎？ 
现代文：唐僖宗郑畋起草诏书斥责高骈，诏书说： 你专营江、淮盐利，身为都统管领大兵，直到京北、京西、神策军及各防守，这些都是由你指挥的，由此可知你操掌的大权；后来又封你为司徒，荣升为太尉，如果这样还不算重用你，那么怎样才算重用呢？ 
English: Tang Yanzong Zheng Yi drafted an edict to reprimand Gao Yao. The edict said: You specialize in the River and Huaiyansili, and as a general in charge of leading soldiers, you have commanded the North Beijing, West Beijing, and Shensha armies, as well as the various defenses. This shows the great power you wield. Later, you were awarded the title of "Stu" and promoted to the rank of "Taifeng." If this does not count as reusing you, then what does?

古文：又曰： 朕缘久付卿兵柄，不能翦荡元凶，自天长漏网过淮，不出一兵袭逐，奄残京国，首尾三年。
现代文：又说： 朕长期把兵权交付给你，却不能扫荡剪除乱除贼魁首，黄巢从天长县漏网逃跑经过淮河，你竟一个兵卒也不派出去追击，致使他们占据残害京国，前后达三年之久。
English: He also said, "I have long entrusted the military power to you, but I am unable to sweep up, cut off, and remove the leader of the disorderly thieves. The Yellow Nest escaped from the leaky net of Tianchang County and passed through the Huai River. You did not send a single soldier to chase them, causing them to occupy and destroy Beijing for three years.

古文：广陵之师，未离封部，忠臣积望，勇士兴讥，所以擢用元臣，诛夷臣寇。 
现代文：在广陵的军队，没有离开过驻地，忠良大臣怀有期望，勇猛士兵出现讥讽，因此启用元老诸臣，以剿杀当今大寇。 
English: The troops in Guangling have never left the garrison, the loyal minister has expectations, and the brave soldiers are mocked, so they use the elders and ministers to fight and kill today's big thieves.

古文：又曰： 从来倚仗之意，一旦控告无门，凝睇东南，惟增凄恻！ 
现代文：诏书又说： 你向来是杀图有所倚仗，而一旦控告呈诉找不到门路，就会斜眼凝视着东南方，只能增加哀伤。 
English: The edict also said: "You have always had murderous intentions, and once you cannot find a way to file a complaint, you will gaze at the southeast with slanted eyes, which will only increase your sorrow.

古文：又曰： 谢玄破苻坚于淝水，裴度平元济于淮西，未必儒臣不如武将。 
现代文：又说： 谢玄在淝水能战胜苻坚，裴度在淮西能平灭吴元济，可见并不一定文臣不如武将。 
English: He also said: Xie Xuan was able to defeat Gong Jian in Surabaya, and Pei Du was able to defeat Wu Yuanji in Huaxi. It can be seen that a scholar is not necessarily inferior to a military commander.

古文：又曰： 宗庙焚烧，园陵开毁，龟玉毁椟，谁之过欤！ 
现代文：诏书还说道： 宗庙被火焚烧，园陵被打开捣毁，宝龟美玉藏在匣内被毁，这是谁的过错？ 
English: The edict also said: The ancestral temple was set on fire, the garden was opened and destroyed, and the treasure turtle hidden in the box was destroyed. Whose fault was this?

古文：又曰：  奸臣未悟 之言，何人肯认！ 陛下犹迷 之语，朕不敢当！ 
现代文：并说：  奸臣没有醒悟 这话，哪个人肯承认！ 皇上还在迷惘 这话，朕不敢应承认！ 
English: And he said: "Who would admit that the treacherous ministers have not woken up! I dare not admit that the Emperor is still confused!

古文：又曰： 卿尚不能缚黄巢于天长，安能坐擒诸将！ 
现代文：诏书责问高骈： 你尚且不能在长天县剿获黄巢，又怎么能坐着就把各位将领擒拿？ 
English: The edict reprimanded Gao Qi: Even though you can't capture the Yellow Nest in Changtian County, how can you capture the generals sitting down?

古文：又曰： 卿云刘氏复兴，不知谁为魁首？
现代文：又说： 你说刘季一类的人会再次兴起，不知头目是谁？
English: He also said: You said that people like Liu Ji will rise again, I don't know who the ringleader is.

古文：比朕于刘玄、子婴，何太诬罔！ 
现代文：你把朕比作刘玄、子婴，实在是太诬蔑欺罔了！ 
English: Your comparison of me to Liu Xuan, a baby, is really too slanderous and bullying!

古文：又曰： 况天步未倾，皇纲尚整，三灵不昧，百度俱存，君臣之礼仪，上下之名分，所宜遵守，未可堕陵。
现代文：又说： 况且，大唐天下还未倾倒，朝廷纲纪尚且整肃，天道人心没有沦丧，各种法度全都存在，君主和臣子之间的礼仪，上上下下的名份，理所当然应该严格遵守，而不可有违定制。
English: He also said, "Moreover, the world of the Great Tang Dynasty has not yet been overthrown, the discipline of the imperial court has yet to be rectified, the people of heaven and earth have not been lost, all kinds of laws exist, the etiquette between the monarch and the courtiers, the names of the upper and lower ranks, should of course be strictly observed, and must not violate the custom.

古文：朕虽冲人，安得轻侮！ 
现代文：朕加然年龄幼小，但怎能容忍你如此轻狂的侮辱！ 
English: I may be young, but how can I tolerate your frivolous insults!

古文：骈臣节既亏，自是贡赋遂绝。
现代文：高骈既已丧失了做臣子的礼节，自此以后便断绝了进贡纳。
English: Since Gao Yao had already lost the etiquette of being a courtier, he cut off the tribute.

古文：以天平留后曹存实为节度使。
现代文：朝廷天平留后曹存实为节度使。
English: After the imperial court left the balance, Cao Cunshi became the chief envoy.

古文：黄巢攻兴平，兴平诸军退屯奉天。
现代文：黄巢攻打兴平，兴平地方的各路官军退到奉天屯驻。
English: Huang Chao attacked Xingping, and all the government troops in Xingping retreated to Fengtian.

古文：加河阳节度使诸葛爽同平章事。
现代文：朝廷为河阳节度使诸葛爽加封同中书门下平章事。
English: The imperial court made Zhuge Shuangqiao and Zhuge Shuangqiao and Zhuge Shuangqiao and Zhuge Shuangqiao and Zhuge Shuangqiao equal.

古文：六月，以泾原留后张钧为节度使。
现代文：六月，朝廷任命泾原留后张钧为节度使。
English: In June, the imperial court appointed Zhang Ye as the envoy to the festival after he had stayed in Yuyuan.

古文：荆南节度使段彦谟与监军硃敬玫相恶，敬玫别选壮士三千人，号忠勇军，自将之。
现代文：刑南节度使段彦谟与监军朱敬玫相互仇视，朱敬玫特地精选强壮士兵三千人，号称忠勇军，亲自统领。
English: The Southern Song Festival made Duan Yanmu and the supervisor of the army, Zhu Jingmei, hate each other. Zhu Jingmei specially selected three thousand strong soldiers, known as the loyal army, and personally led them.

古文：彦谟谋杀敬玫；己亥，敬玫先帅众攻彦谟，杀之，以少尹李燧为留后。
现代文：段彦谟伙图杀害朱敬玫。已亥，朱敬玫先发制人，带领士兵攻打段彦谟，将估彦谟杀死，让少尹李燧做荆南的留后。
English: Duan Yanmo's group planned to kill Zhu Jingmei. However, Zhu Jingmei pre-empted Duan Yanmo and led the soldiers to attack Duan Yanmo, killing Gui Yanmo and leaving Shao Yin Lijun as Jingnan's heir.

古文：蜀人罗浑擎、句胡僧、罗夫子各聚众数千人以应阡能，杨行迁等与之战，数不利，求益兵。
现代文：四川人罗浑擎、句胡僧、罗夫子各招聚了几千人马，响应能。朝廷派令杨行迁等人与他们作战，几次都失利。
English: The Sichuanese, Luo Hunqin, Quan Hu, and Luo Fuzi, each gathered several thousand horses, and were able to respond. The imperial court sent Yang Xingyan and others to fight them, and they lost several times.

古文：府中兵尽，陈敬瑄悉搜仓库门庭之卒以给之。
现代文：杨行迁等请求增兵，官府已无兵可派，陈敬便把看守仓库门庭的兵卒都搜集起来，派给杨行迁。
English: Yang Xingqian and others requested more soldiers, but the government had no soldiers to send, so Chen Jing gathered the soldiers guarding the warehouse courtyard and sent them to Yang Xingqian.

古文：是月，大战于乾溪，官军大败。
现代文：这个月，双方在乾展开激战，结果官军惨败。
English: This month, the two sides fought a fierce battle in Qianzhou, resulting in a crushing defeat for the government army.

古文：行迁等恐无功获罪，多执村民为俘送府，日数十百人。
现代文：杨行迁等人深恐没有立功而被治罪，便抓了许多村民充作俘虏送到官府，每天都有几十甚至上百人。
English: Yang Xingqian and others were deeply afraid of being punished for not making meritorious contributions, so they captured many villagers and sent them to the government as prisoners. Dozens or even hundreds of people were taken away every day.

古文：敬瑄不问，悉斩之。
现代文：陈敬不问青红皂白，把抓来的村民都杀了。
English: Chen Jing killed all the villagers he caught, no questions asked.

古文：其中亦有老弱及妇女，观者或问之，皆曰： 我方治田绩麻，官军忽入村，系虏以来，竟不知何罪！ 
现代文：其中，也有年老体弱的人及妇女，围观的人问他们为什么被抓，都回答说： 我们正在耕田绩麻，官军忽然进了村子，使强行抓来，我们也不知道犯不什么罪。 
English: Among them, there were also old and frail people and women. When asked by onlookers why they were arrested, they all replied: "We were ploughing the fields, and the government army suddenly entered the village and forcibly arrested us. We didn't know what crime we had committed.

古文：秋，七月，己巳，以钟传为江西观察使，从高骈之请也。
现代文：秋季七月，已巳，朝廷任命钟传为江西观察使，这是根据高骈的请求任命的。
English: In the autumn of July, the imperial court appointed Zhong Chuan as the Jiangxi observation envoy, which was appointed at the request of Gao Wei.

古文：传既去抚州，南城人危全讽复据之，又遣其弟仔倡据信州。
现代文：钟传离开抚州，南城人危全讽又占据了抚州，并遣他的弟弟危仔倡占据信州。
English: Zhong Chuan left Fuzhou, and the Nancheng people occupied Fuzhou again, and sent his brother, Gui Zi Fan, to occupy Shinshu.

古文：尚让攻宜君寨，会大雪盈尺，贼冻死者什二三。
现代文：尚让攻让宜君寨，恰好天下大雪，有一尺多厚，贼寇被冻死的占十分之二三。
English: Yijun Village was still to be conquered, and there happened to be heavy snow all over the country, more than a foot thick. Thieves and robbers were frozen to death two-thirds of the time.

古文：蜀人韩求聚众数千人应阡能。
现代文：四川人韩求聚集了几千人，响应阡能。
English: Han Kui, a Sichuanese, has gathered several thousand people in response to Huaneng.

古文：镇海节度使周宝奏高骈承制以贼帅孙端为宣歙观察使。
现代文：镇海节度使周宝上奏，说高骈自称秉承旨意，让贼寇头目孙端做宣歙地方的观察使。
English: Zhenhai Festival made Zhou Bao play up, saying that Gao Wei claimed to uphold the will, and let the bandit leader Sun Duan be the observation envoy of Xuanwu.

古文：诏宝与宣歙观察使裴虔馀发兵拒之。
现代文：唐僖宗颁发诏书给周宝和宣歙观察使裴虔余，命他们派发大兵阻击孙端。
English: Tang Xizong issued an edict to Zhou Bao and Xuan Zang's observation agent Pei Qianyu, ordering them to dispatch soldiers to block Sun Duan.

古文：南诏上书请早降公主，诏报以方议礼议。
现代文：南诏王上书请求尽早迎娶公主，唐僖宗颁诏告诉南诏王正在商议车服礼仪。
English: King Nanzhao sent a letter requesting to marry the princess as soon as possible, and Emperor Tang issued a decree telling King Nanzhao that he was discussing the etiquette of chariot dress.

古文：以保大留后东方逵为节度使，充京城东面行营招讨使。
现代文：朝廷任命保大留后东方逵为节度使，充当京城东面行营的招讨使。
English: After Bao Da was retained, the imperial court appointed Dongfang Yao as the festival envoy to act as an envoy to invite people to camp on the east side of Beijing.

古文：闰月，加魏博节度使韩简兼侍中。
现代文：闰七月，朝廷加封魏博节度使简兼任侍中
English: In leap July, the imperial court appointed Wei Bo as the second-in-command of the imperial court

古文：八月，以兵部侍郎、判度支郑绍业同平章使，兼荆南节度使。
现代文：八月，朝廷任命兵部侍郎、判度支郑绍业为同中书门下平章事，并兼充荆南节度使。
English: In August, the imperial court appointed the attendant of the military department and the judge Zheng Shaoye to be the deputy secretary of the book gate of the same school, and also the deputy secretary of the Jingnan Festival.

古文：渐东观察使刘汉宏遣弟汉宥及马步军都虞候辛约，将兵二万营于西陵，谋兼并浙西，杭州刺史董昌遣都知兵马使钱镠拒之。
现代文：浙东观察使刘汉宏派遣其弟刘汉宥及马步都虞候辛约，带领二万兵马在西陵安营扎寨，谋划兼并浙西地方，杭州刺史董昌派遣都知兵马使钱带兵抵抗。
English: The East Zhejiang Observer sent Liu Hanhong to dispatch his brother Liu Hanyu and Ma Bu to the capital of Xiling, leading 20,000 soldiers and horses to set up camp in Xiling to plan the annexation of West Zhejiang, and the Hangzhou Historian Dongchang sent soldiers and horses to the capital of Sichuan to lead the resistance.

古文：壬子，镠乘雾夜济江，袭其营，大破之，所杀殆尽，汉宥、辛约皆走。
现代文：壬子，钱在夜间乘有大雾督兵过江，袭击刘汉宥和辛约的军营，势如破竹，敌营兵马多被斩杀，刘汉宥、辛约二人逃跑。
English: According to the legend, Qian crossed the river at night with the help of the fog to attack the camp of Liu Han Yu and Xin Yu. The situation was desperate. Most of the enemy soldiers were killed, and Liu Han Yu and Xin Yu fled.

古文：魏博节度使韩简亦有兼并之志，自将兵三万攻河阳，败诸葛爽于脩武；爽弃城走，简留兵戍之，因掠邢、洺而还。
现代文：魏博节度使韩简也有兼并的意图，新自带兵三万攻打河阳，在修武打败诸爽；诸葛爽放弃河阳城逃跑，韩简派留军队在此驻守，并到邢州、水一带抢掠一番回起。
English: The Wei Bo Festival made Han Jian also have the intention of annexation. Han Jian brought 30,000 soldiers to attack Hebei and defeated Zhu Shuang in military training. Zhu Ge Shuang abandoned Hebei City and fled. Han Jian sent troops to stay here and returned to Luzhou and the water area to loot.

古文：李国昌自达靼帅其族迁于代州。
现代文：李国昌从达靼率领其部落族人迁到一居。
English: Li Guochang led his tribal people from Datar to move into a house.

古文：黄巢所署同州防御使硃温屡请益兵以扞河中，知右军事孟楷抑之，不报。
现代文：黄巢的部属同州防御使朱温多次请求增兵，以固守河中一带，知右军事孟楷把这事压下而不上报。
English: Huang Chao's subordinate Tongzhou Defense made Zhu Wen repeatedly request an increase in troops in order to hold fast to the middle of the river, and the right-wing military Meng Kai suppressed the matter and did not report it.

古文：温见巢兵势日蹙，知其将亡，亲将胡真、谢瞳劝温归国。
现代文：朱温看到黄巢队伍的形势越来越紧迫，知道将以失败告终，亲信将领胡直、谢瞳二人规劝朱温归顺大唐。
English: Zhu Wen saw that the situation of the Yellow Nest team was getting more and more urgent and knew that it would end in failure. His close confidants, generals Hu Zhi and Xie Hitomi, persuaded Zhu Wen to surrender to Datang.

古文：九月，丙戌，温杀其监军严实，举州降王重荣。
现代文：九月，丙戌，朱温杀掉军严实，率同州全部人马投降王重荣。
English: In September, Puyi and Zhu Wen killed Yan Sisi and led all the people of Tongzhou to surrender to Wang Chong Rong.

古文：温以舅事重荣，王鐸承制以温为同华节度使，使瞳奉表诣行在。
现代文：朱温把王重荣当作舅舅来侍奉。王铎承旨意，让朱温做同华节度使，派谢瞳奉恭表文到皇帝年所报告。
English: Zhu Wen treated Wang Chung Rong as his uncle to serve him. According to Wang Ye's will, Zhu Wen was assigned to be the envoy of the Tonghua Festival, and sent Xie Hitomi to report to the emperor's residence.

古文：瞳，福州人也。
现代文：谢瞳是福州人氏。
English: Xie Hitomi is from Fuzhou.

古文：李详以重荣待温厚，亦欲归之，为监军所告。黄巢杀之，以其弟思鄴为华州刺史。
现代文：李详看到王重荣对待朱很宽厚，便也想归顺他，被监军察觉告发，黄巢于是将李详杀掉，让他的弟弟黄思邺当华州刺史。
English: When Li Zhao saw that Wang Chongrong treated Zhu very generously, he also wanted to submit to him. He was discovered and denounced by the supervising army. Huang Xie then killed Li Zhao and let his brother Huang Siyu become the ruler of Huazhou.

古文：桂州军乱，逐节度使张从训，以前容管经略使崔焯为岭南西道节度使。
现代文：邕州军队发生叛乱，赶走节度使张从训，让以前的容管经略使崔焯做岭南西道节度使。
English: When the Zhangzhou army rebelled, Zhang Zongxun was forced to drive away the commander of the festival and let the former vice-governor, Cui Qian, become the commander of the festival in the west of Lingnan Province.

古文：平卢大将王敬武逐节度使安师儒，自为留后。
现代文：平卢地方的大将王敬武赶趟走节度使安师儒，自已做这里的留后。
English: The general of the Pinglu region, Wang Jingwu, hurriedly went to the festival to make An Shiru, and made himself stay here.

古文：初，朝廷以庞勋降将汤群为岚州刺史，群潜通沙陀，朝廷疑之，徙群怀州刺史，郑从谠遣使赍告身授之。
现代文：起初，朝廷让庞勋的投降将领汤群做岚州刺史，汤群私下暗通沙陀，朝廷对他产生了怀疑，便调汤群到怀州当刺史，郑从谠派遣使臣拿着告文前往传授命令。
English: At first, the court asked Tang Qun, the general who led the surrender of Pang Xun, to be the governor of Bozhou. Tang Qun secretly communicated with Shado. The court had doubts about him, so he transferred Tang Qun to be the governor of Huai Zhou. Zheng Conglu sent an envoy to convey the order with a petition.

古文：冬，十月，庚子朔，群杀使者，据城叛，附于沙陀。
现代文：冬季，十月，庚子朔，汤群杀掉郑从谠派来的使臣，占据城邑反叛，归附沙陀。
English: In winter, October, Geng Zishuo and Tang Qun killed the envoys sent by Zheng Conglu, occupied the rebellious towns and attached them to Shatou.

古文：壬寅，从谠遣马步都虞候张彦球将兵讨之。
现代文：壬寅，郑从谠派遣马步都虞候张彦球带兵讨伐汤群。
English: Ren Yin, Zheng Conglu dispatched Ma Bu Du Yu and Zhang Yanqiu to lead troops to fight Tang Qun.

古文：贼帅韩秀升、屈行从起兵，断峡江路。癸丑，陈敬瑄遣押牙庄梦蝶将二千人讨之，又遣押牙胡弘略将千人继之。
现代文：贼寇将领韩秀升、屈行从起兵，截断峡江路，癸丑，陈敬派遣押牙将庄梦蝶带领二千人马进行讨伐，又续派押牙将胡弘略率领一千余人前往。
English: Han Xiu Sheng and Qu Xing, the bandit generals, led the troops from the start, cut off the canyon road, and made a mess. Chen Jing sent the commander Zhuang Mengde to lead two thousand horses in the crusade, and continued to send the commander Hu Hongliu to lead more than one thousand people.

古文：韩简复引兵击郓州，节度使曹存实逆战，败死。
现代文：韩简再次带兵进攻郓州，天平节度使曹存实应战还击，结果战败身亡。
English: Han Jian once again led an army to attack Zhangzhou, and the balance of power forced Cao Cunshi to fight back. As a result, he was defeated and died.

古文：天平都将下邑牛瑄收馀众，婴城拒守，简攻之不下。
现代文：天平都将下邑的朱招收残存余部，环绕郓州城拒敌死守，韩简终于没有攻下郓州。
English: The balance of the balance of the balance of the balance of the balance of the balance of the balance of the balance of the balance of the balance of the balance of the balance of the balance of the balance of the balance of the balance of the balance of the balance of the balance

古文：诏以瑄权知天平留后。
现代文：唐僖宗颁诏，命朱暂代天平留后。
English: Tang Xizong issued an edict, ordering Zhu to temporarily replace Tianping.

古文：以硃温为右金吾大将军、河中行营招讨副使，赐名全忠。
现代文：唐僖宗以朱温为右金吾大将军、河中行营招讨副使，并赐名为全忠。
English: Tang Xizong made Zhu Wen the grand general of the Right Kingu, invited him to the encampment in the middle of the river as a vice-envoy, and gave him the name Quanzhong.

古文：李克用虽累表请降，而据忻、代州，数侵掠并、汾，争楼烦监。
现代文：李克用虽然多次进呈表文请求投降，可是他占据忻州、代州，经常入侵抢掠并州、汾州，并争夺楼烦监。
English: Although Li Ke repeatedly submitted a written request to surrender, he occupied Zhangzhou and Daizhou, frequently invaded and plundered and annexed Zhangzhou and Zhangzhou, and competed for buildings and prisons.

古文：义武节度使王处存与克用世为婚姻，诏处存谕克用： 若诚心款附，宜且归朔州俟朝命。若暴横如故，当与河东、大同军共讨之。 
现代文：义武节度使王处存与李克用是世代姻亲，唐僖宗于是诏令王处存告诫李克用： 如果是真心诚意地归附，就应当暂且回到朔州等待朝廷的命令；如果仍象从前一样暴虐横行，朝廷就会汇集河东和大同的官军一同进行讨伐。 
English: According to the festival of righteousness, Wang Shizhen and Li Kegui were generational relatives by marriage. Therefore, Tang Xizong ordered Wang Shizhen to admonish Li Kegui: If you are a true and sincere adherent, you should temporarily return to Shuozhou to wait for the order of the imperial court; if you continue to be as violent as before, the imperial court will gather the government troops from Hedong and Datong to carry out a crusade.

古文：以平卢大将王敬武为留后。
现代文：朝廷平卢大将王敬武为留。
English: General Wang Jingwu of the Imperial Court Pinglu stayed behind.

古文：时诸道兵皆会关中讨黄巢，独平卢不至，王鐸遣都统判官、谏议大夫张濬往说之。
现代文：当时各道官兵都汇聚关中讨伐黄巢，唯独平卢的官军没有到来，王铎派都统判官、谏议大夫张浚前往规劝王敬武。
English: At that time, officers and soldiers from all provinces gathered in Guanzhong to fight against the Yellow Nest. However, the government army from Pinglu did not arrive, and Wang Xi sent Zhang Jun, the magistrate of the capital and the doctor of deliberation, to persuade Wang Jingwu.

古文：敬武已受黄巢官爵，不出迎，濬见敬武，责之曰： 公为天子籓臣，侮慢诏使，不能事上，何以使下！ 
现代文：王敬武已经接受了黄巢封给的官爵，拒不出城接迎，张浚见到王敬武，责问他说： 你是大唐天子的臣僚，却侮辱怠慢传诏的使臣，你不能侍奉朝廷怎么能指挥下属！ 
English: Wang Jingwu had already accepted the rank and title given to him by Huang Chao, but refused to come to the city to receive him. Zhang Jun saw Wang Jingwu and scolded him, saying, "You are a minister of the Great Tang Emperor, but you insult the envoy who neglected to deliver the edict. If you cannot serve the imperial court, how can you command your subordinates!"

古文：敬武愕然，谢之。
现代文：王敬武很吃惊，感激张浚的开导。
English: Wang Jingwu was very surprised and grateful for Zhang Jun's enlightenment.

古文：既宣诏，将士皆不应，濬徐谕之曰： 人生当先晓逆顺，次知利害。
现代文：接着宣读唐僖宗的诏书，将领和士兵都不呼应，张浚慢慢地谕劝他们说： 人生在世应当首先知道什么是反动判逆，什么是顺应时势，其次应当知道干什么有利，干什么有害。
English: Afterward, the edict of Tang Xizong was read out, and the generals and soldiers did not respond at all. Zhang Jun slowly advised them: People in the world should first know what is reactionary and what is conforming to the trend of the times, and second, they should know what is beneficial and what is harmful.

古文：黄巢，前日贩盐虏耳，公等舍累叶天子而臣之，果何利哉！
现代文：黄巢这个人，从前不过是个贩卖食盐的下贱人，你们舍弃几代的大唐天子而对黄巢称臣，究竟能有什么好处？
English: This person, Huang Chao, used to be nothing more than a common whore who sold salt. What good can it do for you to abandon several generations of the Great Tang Emperor and praise Huang Chao?

古文：今天下勤王之师皆集京畿，而淄青独不至。一旦贼平，天子返正，公等何面目见天下之人乎！
现代文：现在天下救援大唐皇帝的军队都聚集在京畿一带，可是唯有淄青的官军不到；将来一旦贼寇平灭，大唐皇这回京师重新一统天下，你们还有什么脸面是去见天下的人？
English: At present, the world's armies are gathered in the Gyeonggi area to rescue the Emperor of the Great Tang Dynasty, but only the official army of the Qing Dynasty can't get there; in the future, once the bandits are wiped out, the Emperor of the Great Tang Dynasty's Beijing division will once again rule the world. What kind of face do you have to face the world?

古文：不亟往分功名、取富贵，后悔无及矣！ 
现代文：现在若是不立即前往相建功立业、争取荣华富贵，将来后悔可就来不及了！ 
English: If you do not immediately go to build a career and strive for glory and wealth, you will regret it in the future!

古文：将士皆改容引咎，顾谓敬武曰： 谏议之言是也。 
现代文：平卢将领和士兵听了张浚的一番讲话的都收起刚才的面容，感到自己错了，纷纷回过头对王敬武说： 谏议大夫张浚的话对呀！ 
English: After listening to Zhang Jun's speech, the Pinglu generals and soldiers all looked away, felt that they had made a mistake, and turned their heads back to Wang Jingwu and said, "The words of Dr. Zhang Jun are right!

古文：敬武即发兵从濬而西。
现代文：王敬武立即派发军队跟随张浚往西开进。
English: Wang Jingwu immediately dispatched troops to follow Zhang Jun to the west.

古文：刘汉宏又遣登高镇将王镇将兵七万屯西陵，钱镠复夜济江袭击，大破之，斩获万计，得汉宏补诸将官伪敕二百馀通。镇奔诸暨。
现代文：刘汉宏又派遣镇守登高的大将王镇带兵七万屯驻西陵，钱于夜间再次过江对王镇发动突然袭击，大破王军，斩杀擒获一万余人，缴获刘汉宏委命补授各位将官的伪敕书二百余件，王镇逃往诸暨。
English: Liu Hanhong also dispatched Wang Zhen, the general in charge of the town guard, to Xiling with 70,000 soldiers. Qian crossed the river again at night to launch a surprise attack on Wang Zhen. He defeated Wang Zhen's army, killed and captured more than 10,000 people, and seized more than 200 forged documents ordered by Liu Hanhong's committee to supplement the generals. Wang Zhen fled to Zhuji.

古文：黄巢兵势尚强，王重荣患之，谓行营都监杨复光曰： 臣贼则负国，讨贼则力不足，奈何？ 
现代文：黄巢的兵势还比较强大，王重荣对此深表忧虑，他对行营都监杨复光说： 对贼寇称臣就辜负了大唐，讨伐贼寇又兵力不足，怎样才好？ 
English: Huang Chao's army was still relatively strong. Wang Chong Rong was deeply worried about this. He said to Yang Fuguang, the camp commander: If you call yourself a vassal of the bandits, you have failed the Great Tang Dynasty. If you fight the bandits, but you are short of troops, what should you do?

古文：复光曰： 雁门李仆射，骁勇，有强兵，其家尊与吾先人尝共事相善，彼亦有徇国之志。所以不至者，以与河东结隙耳。
现代文：杨复光说： 雁门节度使李克用，作勇猛，并拥有强大的军，他的父亲与我已故的养父曾经一同共事，相处很好，他也有以身殉国的宏大志愿，之所以他不来，是因为他与河东的郑从谠有矛盾。
English: Yang Fuguang said, "The Wild Goose Festival has made Li Ke use, be brave, and have a strong army. His father and my late foster father once worked together and got along very well. He also has a great willingness to die for the country. The reason why he does not come is because he has a contradiction with Zheng Conglu of Hedong.

古文：诚以朝旨谕郑公而召之，必来，来则贼不足平矣！ 
现代文：若是诚恳地用朝廷的旨意谕劝郑从谠，从而召唤李克用，李克用一定会来。李克用若来，则平贼寇不在话下了！ 
English: If Zheng Zongyao was sincerely persuaded by the imperial court's will and thus summoned Li Kegui, Li Kegui would certainly come. If Li Kegui did come, then Ping Jiao Kou was out of the question!

古文：东面宣慰使王徽亦以为然。
现代文：东面宣慰使王徽也这样认为。
English: Wang Hui also thought so.

古文：时王鐸在河中，乃以墨敕召李克用，谕郑从谠。
现代文：当时王铎在河中，就用墨敕召集李克用，谕劝郑从谠。
English: At that time, Wang Yao was in the river, and he used ink to summon Li Ke to use it to persuade Zheng Zongyao.

古文：十一月，克用将沙陀万七千自岚、石路趣河中，不敢入太原境，独与数百骑过晋阳城下与从谠别，从谠以名马、器币赠之。
现代文：十一月，李克用带领一万七千沙陀人马，从岚州、石州赶往河中，但不敢进入太原境内，只带几百骑兵经过晋阳城与郑从谠告别，郑从谠赠送给他名马、器具和钱币。
English: In November, Li Ke used to lead 17,000 soldiers and horses from Shanzhou and Shizhou to the middle of the river, but he did not dare to enter Taiyuan. He only took a few hundred cavalrymen to bid farewell to Zheng Conglu via Jinyang City. Zheng Conglu presented him with famous horses, equipment and coins.

古文：李详旧卒共逐黄思鄴，推华阴镇使王遇为主，以华州降于王重荣，王鐸承制以遇为刺史。
现代文：李详的旧部兵卒共同驱逐黄思邺，推华阴镇使王遇做首领，将华州降归王重荣，王铎受命委任王遇为刺史。
English: Li Jie's former subordinates jointly expelled Huang Sijian, promoted Huayin Zhen to make Wang Rong the leader, reduced Huazhou to Wang Chong Rong, and Wang Jie was ordered to appoint Wang Rong as the assassin.

古文：阡能党愈炽，侵淫入蜀州境。
现代文：阡能一伙势和越来越大，一路侵掠乱进入蜀州境内。
English: Yan Neng's group was getting bigger and bigger, invading and plundering all the way into the territory of Shuzhou.

古文：陈敬瑄以杨行迁等久无功，以押牙高仁厚为都招讨指挥使，将兵五百人往代之。
现代文：因为杨行迁等人长期以来没有立功，陈敬便任命押牙将高仁厚为都招讨指挥使，带领军队五百人前往取代杨行迁。
English: Because Yang Xingqian and others had not done any meritorious deeds for a long time, Chen Jing appointed Oshi Yaga to recruit Gao Renhou as commander and lead 500 troops to replace Yang Xingqian.

古文：未发前一日，有鬻面者，自旦至午，出入营中数四，逻者疑之，执而讯之，果阡能之谍也。
现代文：在出发的前一天，有个卖面的人，从早晨到中午，在军营中出出入入好多次，巡逻的士兵对这人产生了怀疑，把他抓起来讯问，果然是阡能的间谍。
English: The day before the departure, there was a noodle seller who, from morning to noon, went in and out of the military camp many times. The soldiers on patrol became suspicious of this person, arrested him and interrogated him. He was indeed a powerful spy.

古文：仁厚命释缚，温言问之，对曰： 某村民，阡能囚其父母妻子于狱，云 汝诇事归，得实则免汝家；不然，尽死！ 
现代文：高仁厚命令为他解开捆绑的绳索，和言悦色地对他进行询问，那个人说： 我是某个村子的人，阡能把我的父母妻子都囚禁在狱中，并说 你刺探官军情况回来，得到证实就宽免了你们全家；不然的话，你们全家都要处死。 
English: Gao Renhou ordered him to untie the ropes and questioned him pleasantly. The man said, "I am from a certain village. If you can imprison my parents and wife in prison, and say that you have investigated the situation of the officers and soldiers, and if it is confirmed, you will pardon your whole family; otherwise, your whole family will be executed."

古文：某非愿尔也。 
现代文：我并不是甘心情愿地为能效力。 
English: I did not serve willingly.

古文：仁厚曰： 诚知汝如是，我何忍杀汝！
现代文：高仁厚说： 我相信你是这样的，怎能忍心杀害你！
English: Gao Renhou said, "I believe you are like this, how can I bear to kill you!"

古文：今纵汝归，救汝父母妻子，但语阡能云： 高尚书来日发，所将止五百人，无多兵也。 
现代文：现在我放你回去，去救你的父母和妻子，只是对阡能说： 高仁厚明日就发兵，所带的军队不过五百人，没有多少人马。 
English: Now I'm letting you go back to save your parents and wife, but I just want to say to Yan Neng: Gao Ren Hou will send troops tomorrow. The army he's bringing with him is only five hundred people, not many people.

古文：然我活汝一家，汝当为我潜语寨中人云： 仆射愍汝曹皆良人，为贼所制，情非得已。
现代文：可是，我救了你们一家人，你要为我对营寨的人偷偷传话说： 陈敬仆射可怜你们都是善良的人，被贼寇控制，其情形实在是不得已。
English: However, I saved your family. You should secretly send a message to the people in the encampment for me, saying, "Chen Jing, pity you, you are all good people, you are being controlled by thieves and robbers. This situation is really unavoidable."

古文：尚书欲拯救湔洗汝曹，尚书来，汝曹各投兵迎降。尚书当使人书汝背为 归顺 字，遣汝复旧业。
现代文：高仁厚要来拯救你们，为你们洗刷冤枉。高仁厚来的时候，你们要分别扔掉兵器前往投降，高厚会叫人在你们的北上书写 归顺 二字，让你们回去仍操旧业。
English: Gao Ren Hou will come to save you and cleanse you of your wrongdoings. When Gao Ren Hou comes, you will each throw away your weapons and go to surrender. Gao Ren Hou will have people in your north write the word "surrender" and let you go back to your old business.

古文：所欲诛者，阡能、罗浑擎、句胡僧、罗夫子、韩求五人耳，必不使横及百姓也。  
现代文：想要杀掉的，不过是阡能、罗浑擎、句胡僧、罗夫子和韩求这五个人，一定不会牵连到老百姓的。  
English: The only people who wanted to kill him were Huaneng, Luo Hunching, Quan Hu Zeng, Luo Zi and Han Kui, but they would not have involved the common people.

古文：谍曰： 此皆百姓心上事，尚书尽知而赦之，其谁不舞跃听命！
现代文：阡能派来的那个间谍说： 这些全是老姓心里想的事，尚书您都一清二楚而宽百姓，还有谁不高高兴兴地去听命！
English: The spy sent by Xuan Neng said, "These are all things that the old man has in mind. You have made it clear to the people in your books. Who wouldn't cheerfully follow your orders?"

古文：一口传百，百传千，川腾海沸，不可遏也。
现代文：这些话一个人传给一百人，一百人传给一千人，就会象河川欢跃大海沸腾，势不可挡。
English: If one person were to pass these words on to a hundred people, or a hundred people to a thousand people, they would be like rivers of joy and the sea would boil over, irresistible.

古文：比尚书之至，百姓必尽奔赴如婴儿之见慈母，阡能孤居，立成擒矣！ 
现代文：等到尚书您到来，老百姓一定都投奔而来，就象婴儿见到慈爱的母亲。那时，能立无援，马上就可以擒获！ 
English: When Shang Shuxu and you arrive, the common people will certainly come running, just like a baby seeing a loving mother. At that time, if you can stand without help, you can be captured immediately!

古文：遂遣之。
现代文：于是，高仁厚派他回去。
English: So he repatriated his captives.

古文：明日，仁厚引兵发，至双流，把截使白文现出迎。
现代文：第二天，高仁厚率领军队出发，到达双流，把截使白文现出来迎接。
English: The next day, Gao Renhou led the army to set out, arrived at Shuangliu, and brought Bai Wen to meet him.

古文：仁厚周视堑栅，怒曰： 阡能役夫，其众皆耕民耳，竭一府之兵，岁馀不能擒，今观堑栅重复牢密如此，宜其可认安眠饱食，养寇邀功也！ 
现代文：高仁厚环视堑壕栅栏，怒气冲冲地说： 阡能一伙人，都是耕种土地的百姓，你们用尽一府的军队，长达一年多而不能擒获，现在看到你这里堑壕栅栏重重叠叠如此牢固，大概也可以安稳睡觉饱食终日而留养贼寇以邀功请赏了！ 
English: Gao Renhuo looked around the trench fences and said angrily, "Yong Neng's group of people are all farmers. You have exhausted the army of a province and have not been able to capture them for more than a year. Now that you see the trench fences here overlapping so firmly, you can probably sleep peacefully and have enough to eat all day long, and you can reward yourself for keeping the thieves and robbers with a reward!

古文：命引出斩之。监军力救，久之，乃得免。
现代文：便命令把白文现拉出斩首；监军极力营救，劝了好久，白文现才免于一死。
English: He then ordered that Bai Wenxin be dragged out and beheaded. The supervising troops tried their best to rescue him and advised him for a long time, but Bai Wenxin was only saved from death.

古文：命悉平堑栅，才留五百兵守之，馀兵悉以自随，又召诸寨兵，相继皆集。
现代文：高厚下令把堑壕栅栏全部平掉，仅留下五百士兵守卫，其余士兵全都跟随他走，又召命各个寨子的士兵，都相继集合起来。
English: Gao Hou ordered all the trench fences to be leveled off, leaving only five hundred soldiers to guard them. The rest of the soldiers all followed him, and he also ordered the soldiers from each stockade to assemble one after another.

古文：阡能闻仁厚将至，遣罗浑擎立五寨于双流之西，伏兵千人于野桥箐以邀官军。
现代文：阡能听说高仁厚将到，派遣罗浑擎在双流的西面设立五个营寨，在野桥箐一带高伏兵一千余人，以拦击官军。
English: Hearing that Gao Renhou was about to arrive, Yan Neng sent Luo Hunxin to set up five camps on the west side of Shuangliu, and more than a thousand high-ranking soldiers in the area of Wild Bridge to intercept the government army.

古文：仁厚诇知，引兵围之，下令勿杀，遣人释戎服贼中告谕，如昨日所以语谍者。
现代文：高厚刺探到这一军情，带兵把罗浑擎的军营包围起来，下令不要剿杀，而是派人脱掉军人装束潜入贼寇营中传话，象昨天对那个间谍说的一样。
English: Gao thick thorn probed this military situation, led soldiers to surround Luo Hunqin's military camp, ordered not to fight, but sent people to take off their military uniforms and sneak into the bandit camp to pass on the message, as he said to the spy yesterday.

古文：贼大喜，呼噪，争弃甲投兵请降，拜如摧山。
现代文：贼寇听后很是欢喜，呼喊叫嚷着，争先后地抛弃盔甲扔掉兵器请求投降，下拜的人多得高山倾倒一样。
English: After listening, the bandits were very happy, shouting and shouting, successively abandoning their armor, throwing away their weapons and requesting surrender. The number of people bowing down was as high as a mountain.

古文：仁厚悉抚谕，书其背，使归语寨中未降者，寨中馀众争出降。
现代文：高仁厚对这些来降的人均加抚恤劝导，在他们的背上书写 归顺 二字，然后让他们加到贼寇营寨之中，告诉那些还未投降的人，于是营寨内剩余的人都争着跑出去投降。
English: Gao Renhong gave each of these people who came to surrender a stipend and advice, wrote the word "surrender" on their backs, and then had them added to the bandit camp to tell those who had not yet surrendered, so the remaining people in the camp all ran out to surrender.

古文：浑擎狼狈逾堑走，其众执以诣仁厚，仁厚曰： 此愚夫，不足与语。 
现代文：罗浑擎只好越过堑壕狼狈逃跑，结果被他的部属抓住送到高仁厚那里，高仁厚说： 这个蠢货，不值得和他说什么。 
English: Luo Hunching had no choice but to flee across the trench in disarray. As a result, he was caught by his subordinates and sent to Gao Renhou. Gao Renhou said, "This idiot is not worth talking to."

古文：械以送府。
现代文：便给罗浑擎带上刑具送往官府。
English: He then sent Luo Hunqin to the government office with the torture equipment.

古文：悉命焚五寨及其甲兵，惟留旗帜，所降凡四千人。
现代文：高仁厚下令把贼寇的五个营寨和盔甲武全部烧掉，只留下收缴的旗帜，先后投降的人总共有四千名。
English: Gao Renhou ordered the five encampments and armor of the bandits to be burned, leaving only the confiscated flags. A total of four thousand people surrendered successively.

古文：明旦，仁厚谓降者曰： 始欲即遣汝归，而前涂诸寨百姓未知吾心，或有忧疑，藉汝曹为我前行，过穿口、新津寨下，示以背字告谕之，比至延贡，可归矣。 
现代文：第三天早晨，高厚对投降的人说： 开始时本想立即放你们回家，可是前面道上各个寨子的百姓还不知道我的心思，有的人会有忧虑和疑问，现在借助你们在前面行走，经过穿口、新津寨一带时，向那里的百姓展示你们北上的 归顺 二字，把投降情告诉他们，等到了延贡，就放你们回去。 
English: On the morning of the third day, Gao Hou said to the people who surrendered: At the beginning, I wanted to let you go home immediately, but the people in the various stockades on the road ahead did not know my thoughts, and some people would have worries and doubts. Now, with the help of you walking in front, when passing through the area of Tongkou and Xinjinzhai, show the people there the word "surrender" to the north, tell them about the surrender, and let you go back when the tribute is paid.

古文：乃取浑擎旗倒系之，每五十人为队，授以一旗，使前走，扬旗疾呼曰： 罗浑擎已生擒，送使府，大军行至。
现代文：于是取来了罗浑擎的旗帜倒着挂起来，第五十个人结为一队，扛着旗子大声呼喊： 罗浑擎已经被活捉，送到官府去了，大唐王朝的军队来到这里。
English: So they took Luo Hunqin's flag and hung it upside down. The fiftieth person formed a team, carrying the flag and shouting loudly: Luo Hunqin has been captured alive and sent to the government, the army of the Great Tang Dynasty has come here.

古文：汝曹居寨中者，速如我出降，立得为良人，无事矣！ 
现代文：你们住在寨子中的人，快快象我们一样出来投降，马上就可以成为朝廷的良民，没有事了！ 
English: You people who live in the stockade, come out and surrender as quickly as we did, and you can immediately become good citizens of the imperial court. That's it!

古文：至穿口，句胡僧置十一寨，寨中人争出降。胡僧大惊，拔剑遏之，众投瓦石击之，共擒以献仁厚，其众五千馀皆降。
现代文：官军到达穿口，句胡僧设有十一个营寨，寨子中的人都争着跑出来投降，句胡僧大为惊慌，拔出剑来阻止，大家用瓦片石头打他，一起把他抓住献给高仁厚，句胡僧的部属五千余人都投降了。
English: When the government army arrived in Jiankou, Guo Huo had set up eleven encampments. People in the encampments ran out to surrender. Guo Huo was greatly alarmed and drew his sword to stop them. Everyone hit him with tiles and stones, grabbed him together and dedicated him to Gao Renhu. More than 5,000 of Guo Huo's subordinates surrendered.

古文：又明旦，焚寨，使降者执旗先驱，一如双流。
现代文：第四天早晨，高仁厚焚烧贼寇营寨，让投降的人打着旗子在前面走，象在双流出发时一样。
English: On the morning of the fourth day, Gao Renhou set fire to the encampment of the bandits, and let the surrendering soldiers march ahead with flags, just as they had done when Shuangliu set out.

古文：至新津，韩求置十三寨皆迎降。
现代文：到达新津，韩求设置的十三个营寨中的人都出来投降。
English: Arriving in Xinjin, all the people in the thirteen camps set up by Han Qi came out to surrender.

古文：求自投深堑，其众钩出之，已死，斩首以献。
现代文：韩求自己跳入深深堑壕，他的部属把他钩了上来，已经死了，便砍下他的脑袋送给高仁厚。
English: Han Kui himself jumped into a deep trench, his subordinates hooked him up, and when he was already dead, they cut off his head and gave it to Gao Renhou.

古文：将士欲焚寨，仁厚止之曰： 降人皆未食。 
现代文：官军将士要烧毁寨，高仁厚阻止他们说： 投降的人还没有吃饭。 
English: The officers and men of the government army wanted to burn down the village, but Gao Renhou stopped them and said, "Those who surrender haven't eaten yet."

古文：使先运出资粮，然后焚之。
现代文：让人先把资财粮食运出来，然后再烧营寨。
English: Let people first transport the wealth and grain out, and then burn the camp.

古文：新降者竞炊爨，与先降来告者共食之，语笑歌吹，终夜不绝。
现代文：刚刚投降的人相烧火做饭，与先前投降来向他们传话的人一同进餐，欢歌笑语，整夜都没有停。
English: The newly-surrendered cooked over open fires, ate with the previously-surrendered who had come to deliver a message to them, and sang and laughed all night long.

古文：明日，仁厚纵双流，穿口降者先归，使新津降者执旗前驱，且曰： 入邛州境，亦可散归矣。 
现代文：第五天，高仁厚把双流、穿口投降的人先行放回去，而让新津投降的人打着旗帜在前面走，并且对他们说： 进入邛州境内，也可以放你们回去。 
English: On the fifth day, Gao Renhou let the people from Shuangliu and Tongkou surrender first, and let the people from Xinjin surrender first with flags, and said to them, "If you enter the territory of Zhangzhou, you can also be sent back."

古文：罗夫子置九寨于延贡，其众前夕望新津火光，已不眠矣。
现代文：罗夫子在延贡设置九个营寨，他的部属前一天晚上看到新津火光冲天，已是夜不能眠。
English: Luo Fuzi set up nine encampments in Yan Gong. The night before, his subordinates could not sleep at night after seeing the Xinjin fire light up the sky.

古文：及新津人至，罗夫子脱身弃寨奔阡能，其众皆降。
现代文：等到新津投降的人赶到这里，罗夫子便仍下寨子逃奔阡能，他的部一部投降。
English: When the people from Xinjin surrendered and arrived here, Luo Fuzi still fled down the stockade to Yunnan, and a part of his unit surrendered.

古文：明日，罗夫子至阡能寨，与之谋悉众决战。
现代文：第六天，罗夫子逃到阡能的营寨，与阡能谋划如何动用全部人马进行决战。
English: On the sixth day, Luo Fuzi fled to Yaneng's encampment, and planned with Yaneng how to use all the men and horses for the decisive battle.

古文：计未定，日向暮，延贡降者至，阡能、罗夫子走马巡寨，欲出兵，众皆不应。
现代文：计策还没商定，天快黑了，高仁厚带着延贡投降的人赶到，阡能、罗夫子骑上战马巡视营寨，想派兵出战，部属都不听号令。
English: The strategy had not yet been agreed upon, it was getting dark, Gao Renhou arrived with the people who had surrendered Yan Gong, Yaneng and Luo Fuzi rode their horses to inspect the camp, and wanted to send soldiers to fight, but their subordinates did not listen to their orders.

古文：仁厚引兵连夜逼之，明旦，诸寨知大军已近，呼噪争出，执阡能，阡能窘急赴井，为众所擒，不死；又执罗夫子，罗夫子自刭。
现代文：高仁厚带领官军连夜逼近，次日早晨，各个营寨知道大唐官军已经接近，争先恐后地呼喊着往外跑，有人去抓阡能，阡能走投无路只好跳井，被众人拿获，没有死；同时去抓罗夫子，罗夫子自杀了。
English: Gao Renhou led the government army to approach overnight. The next morning, each camp knew that the Datang government army had approached, and they ran out shouting in a hurry. Someone went to catch Yan Neng, and Yan Neng had no choice but to jump into a well. He was caught by everyone and did not die. At the same time, they went to catch Luo Fuzi, and Luo Fuzi committed suicide.

古文：众挈罗夫子首，缚阡能，驱之前迎官，见仁厚，拥马首大呼泣拜曰： 百姓负冤日久，无所控诉。
现代文：大家提着罗夫子的脑袋，绑着阡能，驱赶着他前往迎接官军，见到高仁厚，众人拥簇着高厚的马大哭泣着说： 老百姓忍辱含冤时间太长了，找不到地方控告申诉。
English: They all carried Rofzi's head, tied him up, and drove him to meet the government army. When they saw Gao Renhu, they all gathered around Gao Renhu and cried, saying, "The time for the common people to bear the humiliation and injustice is too long, and there is no place to file a complaint."

古文：自谍者还，百姓引领，度顷刻如期年。
现代文：自从你放回间谍，老百姓就伸长脖子盼望官军到来，度日如年。
English: Ever since you released the spies, the people have been craning their necks in anticipation of the arrival of the government army.

古文：今遇尚书，如出九泉睹白日，已死而复生矣！ 
现代文：现在见到尚书您，就象走出阴间重见天日，死而复生一样。 
English: Seeing you now is like coming out of the underworld and seeing the light of day, like being reborn from the dead.

古文：欢呼不可止。
现代文：欢呼的声音此起彼伏。
English: The sound of cheering rose and fell.

古文：贼寨在他所者，分遣诸将往降之。
现代文：其他地方的贼寇营寨，也分别派遣将领前往招降。
English: In other places, the encampment of thieves and robbers also sent generals to invite and surrender.

古文：仁厚出军凡六日，五贼皆平。
现代文：高仁厚出兵总共六天，五大贼寇都被平灭。
English: Gao Renhou dispatched troops for a total of six days, and the five bandits were all eliminated.

古文：每下县镇，辄补镇遏使，使安集户口。
现代文：他每攻打下一个县镇，就补授镇遏使，令其安抚召集民人户口。
English: Every time he attacked a county town, he would give the town's commander a supplementary award, and order him to pacify and gather the people's hukou.

古文：于是陈敬瑄枭韩求、罗夫子首于市，钉阡能、罗浑擎、句胡僧于城西，七日而之。
现代文：于是，陈敬把韩求、罗夫子二人的首级挂在市井，又将阡能、罗浑擎、句胡僧钉在城西，七天后把他们三人处以凌迟极刑。
English: As a result, Chen Jing hung the heads of Han Qiu and Luo Fuzi in the city well, and nailed Xun Neng, Luo Hun Qin, and Gu Hu Zeng to the west of the city. Seven days later, the three of them were sentenced to capital punishment.

古文：阡能孔目官张荣，本安仁进士，屡举不中第，归于阡能，为之谋主，为草书檄；阡能败，以诗启求哀于仁厚，仁厚送府，钉于马市。自馀不戮一人。
现代文：为阡能掌管文书的吏员张荣，来是安仁的进士，多次参加科而未被录取入仕，最后投奔阡能，为阡能出谋划策，起草书信檄文。阡能失败后，张荣做诗向高仁厚苦苦哀求，高仁厚把他送到官府，钉在马市处死，其余的没有再杀戮一人。
English: Zhang Rong, the clerk in charge of the clerical work, came to Anren as a trainee. He repeatedly attended the department but was not admitted to the service. Finally, he went to Annen, made suggestions for Annen, and drafted letters and documents. After the failure of Annen, Zhang Rong made a poem to Gao Ren Hou and begged him. Gao Ren Hou sent him to the government office, nailed him to the horse and executed him. The rest did not kill another person.

古文：十二月，以仁厚为眉州防御使。
现代文：十二月，朝廷任命高仁厚为眉州防御使。
English: In December, the imperial court appointed Gao Renhou as the defense envoy of Meizhou.

古文：陈敬瑄榜邛州，凡阡能等亲党皆不问。
现代文：陈敬在邛州张贴告示，所有阡能等人的亲朋党羽都不问罪。
English: Chen Jing posted a notice in Zhangzhou that all relatives, friends and party members of Huaneng and others would not be prosecuted.

古文：未几，邛州刺史申捕获阡能叔父行全家三十五人系狱，请准法。
现代文：不久，邛州刺史申报抓获阡能的叔父阡行全家三十五人，囚在狱中，请求正法。
English: Soon after, Zhangzhou Sashih declared that he had arrested the whole family of thirty-five people, including Xuneng's uncle Min Xing, and they were imprisoned. He asked for the rectification of the law.

古文：敬瑄以问孔目官唐溪，对曰： 公已有榜，令勿问，而刺史复捕之，此必有故。
现代文：陈敬就此征求掌管文书的吏员唐溪的意见，唐溪说： 您已经张贴告示，下令对阡能的亲友不再问罪，可是邛州刺史还是把阡行全一家逮捕，这里面一定有原因。
English: In this regard, Chen Jing sought the opinion of Tang Xi, the clerk in charge of paperwork. Tang Xi said: You have posted a notice and ordered that no more charges be brought against the relatives and friends of Xuaneng, but Zhangzhou Sashih still arrested the whole family of Xuan Xing. There must be a reason for this.

古文：今若杀之，岂惟使明公失大信，窃恐阡能之党纷纷复起矣！ 
现代文：现在若是把阡行全一家杀掉，不但会使您失信于民，我还担心会导致阡能的党羽再次纷纷起兵谋反！ 
English: If you kill the entire Minhang family now, you will not only lose your credibility with the people, but I am also worried that it will cause the powerful party members to rise up again and plot a rebellion!

古文：敬瑄从之，遣押牙牛晕往，集众于州门，破械而释之，因询其所以然。果行全有良田，刺史欲买之，不与，故恨之。
现代文：陈敬听从了唐溪的话，派遣押牙将牛晕前往，在邛州的州门口召集众人，打开阡行全一家人的刑具而释放他们，并顺便询问他们为什么被刺史抓起来，果然是阡行全家里有肥沃的田地，刺史想要收买，阡行全不同意，刺史便因此怀恨在心。
English: Chen Jing listened to Tangxi's words and sent a messenger to take the cow halo to Zhangzhou. He gathered everyone at the state gate of Zhangzhou, opened the torture instruments of the whole family of Minhang and released them. He also asked why they were arrested by Zhishi. It turned out that the whole family of Minhang had a fertile field. Zhishi wanted to buy it, but Minhang did not agree. Therefore, Zhishi held a grudge.

古文：敬瑄召刺史，将按其罪，刺史以忧死。
现代文：陈敬叫来邛州刺史，要对他治罪，邛州刺史忧惧而死。
English: Chen Jing called Zhang Zhou to punish him, and Zhang Zhou died of fear.

古文：他日，行全闻其家由唐溪以免，密饷溪蚀箔金百两。
现代文：后来，阡行全听说他们全家是由于唐溪的一番话而免于治罪，暗地里给唐溪送去蚀箔金一百两。
English: Later, Min Xingquan heard that their whole family was exempted from punishment because of a word from Tangxi, and secretly sent Tangxi a hundred taels of etched foil gold.

古文：溪怒曰： 此乃太师仁明，何预吾事，汝乃怀祸相饷乎！ 
现代文：唐溪怒气冲冲地说： 这都是太师陈敬仁慈开明，哪里有我什么事，你是在向我送祸呀！ 
English: Tang Xi said angrily, "This is all due to Grand Master Chen Jing's benevolence and open-mindedness. No matter what happens to me, you are sending me harm!"

古文：还其金，斥逐使去。
现代文：他把阡行全送来的金子全都退回，斥责并赶走了派来的人。
English: He returned all the gold sent by Minhang Quan, rebuked and chased away those who had been sent.

古文：河东节度使郑从谠奏克岚州，执汤群，斩之。
现代文：河东节度使郑从谠奏报攻克岚州，抓获汤群，并将其斩杀。
English: The Hedong Festival ordered Zheng Zongxiao to attack Zhangzhou, capture Tangqun, and kill him.

古文：以忻、代等州留后李克用为雁门节度使。
现代文：朝廷任命忻州、代州等处的留后李克用为雁门节度使。
English: The imperial court appointed Li Kegui, a returnee from Bozhou, Daizhou and other places, as the envoy of the Wild Goose Gate Festival.

古文：初，朝廷以郑绍业为荆南节度使，时段彦谟方据荆南，绍业惮之，逾半岁，乃至镇。
现代文：起初，朝廷任命郑绍业为荆南节度使，当时段彦谟刚刚占据荆南，郑绍业对段彦谟有些畏惧，过了半年，才到荆南。
English: At first, the imperial court appointed Zheng Shaoye as the Jingnan Festival envoy. At that time, Duan Yanmu had just occupied Jingnan. Zheng Shaoye was a little afraid of Duan Yanmu. It took half a year before he arrived in Jingnan.

古文：上幸蜀，召绍业还，以彦谟为节度使。
现代文：唐僖宗到达蜀地，召令郑绍业回去，任命段彦谟为荆南节度使。
English: When Tang Xizong arrived in Shu, he summoned Zheng Shaoye to return and appointed Duan Yanmu as the chief envoy of Jingnan Festival.

古文：彦谟为硃敬玫所杀，复以绍业为节度使。
现代文：段彦谟被朱敬玫杀害，朝迁再次任命郑绍业为荆南节度使。
English: Duan Yanmu was killed by Zhu Jingmei, and the imperial reshuffle reappointed Zheng Shaoye as Jingnan's festival envoy.

古文：绍业畏敬玫，逗遛不进，军中久无帅，至是，敬玫署押牙陈儒知府事。
现代文：郑绍业畏惧朱敬玫，逗留不前，荆南官军很长时间没有主帅；这时，朱敬玫便暂任押牙陈儒掌管荆南府事宜。
English: Zheng Shaoye was afraid of Zhu Jingmei and did not move forward. The Jingnan government army did not have a commander for a long time. At this time, Zhu Jingmei temporarily took over the affairs of Jingnan Prefecture from Oshi Chen Ru.

古文：儒，江陵人也。
现代文：陈儒是江陵人。
English: Chen Ru is from Jiangling.

古文：加奉天节度使齐克俭、河中节度使王重荣并同平章事。
现代文：朝廷加封奉天节度使齐克俭、河中节度使王重荣均为同平章事。
English: The imperial court's addition of the fief and the dedication to Heaven Festival made Zeke frugal, and the mid-river Festival made Wang Chung Rong equal.

古文：李克用将兵四万至河中，遣从父弟克修先将兵五百济河尝贼。
现代文：李克用带领军队四万人到达河中，派遣他的堂弟李克修先带五百人马过河试探贼寇。
English: Li Ke used to lead an army of forty thousand people to the river and sent his cousin Li Kexiu with five hundred people to cross the river to test the bandits.

古文：初，克用弟克让为南山寺僧所杀，其仆浑进通归于黄巢。
现代文：当初，李克用的弟弟李克让躲避贼寇隐藏在南山佛寺，被寺里的僧人杀害，李克让的仆人浑进通投归黄巢。
English: At first, Li Kezhen's younger brother, Li Kezhen, hid in a Buddhist temple in Nanshan to avoid thieves and robbers. He was killed by the monks in the temple. Li Kezhen's servants all returned to the Yellow Nest.

古文：自高浔之败，诸军皆畏贼，莫敢进。
现代文：自从高浔一役吃了败仗，各路官军都畏惧贼寇，不敢向前。
English: Since the defeat in the Battle of Gaocheng, all the government troops were afraid of the bandits and did not dare to advance.

古文：及克用军至，贼惮之，曰： 鸦军至矣，当避其锋。 
现代文：等到李克用的军队到来，贼寇害怕了，说： 乌鸦军队来到了，应当避开他们的锋芒。 
English: When Li Ke's army arrived, the thief and robber was afraid and said, "The crow army has arrived, you should avoid their edge."

古文：克用军皆衣黑，故谓之鸦军。
现代文：李克用的军队穿衣服都是黑色，所以贼寇称他们是乌鸦军队。
English: Li Ke's troops were all dressed in black, so the bandits called them the Crow Army.

古文：是岁，王鐸墨制以方立知邢州事，方立不受，囚全勖；与鐸书，愿得儒臣镇潞州，鐸以郑冒图知昭义军事。
现代文：黄巢于是抓获南山佛寺的僧人十余名，派出使者带着诏书及丰厚的贿赂财物，通过浑进通的关系到李克用那里求和。李克用杀掉僧人，为弟弟李克让悲伤痛哭，又接受黄巢的贿赂财物，分给各位将领，而将黄巢的诏书烧掉，把使者打发回去。然后带领大军从夏阳过河，在同州安设军营。孟方立即已杀掉成麟，带兵回到邢州，潞州民人便请求监军吴全勖主持留后事宜。
English: Huang Chao then captured more than a dozen monks from the Nanshan Buddhist Temple, sent an envoy with an edict and rich bribes to seek peace with Li Keqiang. Li Keqiang killed the monks, made Li Keqiang cry for his brother, accepted the bribes and bribes from Huang Chao, distributed them to the generals, burned the edict of Huang Chao, and sent the envoy back. Then he led the army across the river from Xiayang and set up a military camp in Tongzhou. The Meng side immediately killed Cheng Lin and brought the soldiers back to Ganzhou, and the people of Ganzhou asked the supervisor Wu Quanzhang to preside over the

古文：既而朝廷以右仆射、租庸使王徽同平章事，充昭义节度使，徽以车驾播迁，中原方扰，方立专据山东邢、洺、磁三州，度朝廷力未能制，辞不行，请且委昌图。
现代文：这一年，王铎受命以孟方立主持邢州事宜，孟方立拒不受命，囚禁吴全勖，写信给王铎，愿意招用儒臣镇守潞州，王铎任命郑昌图主持昭义的军事。不久，朝廷任命右仆射、租庸使王徽为同平章事，充任昭义节度使。王徽认为唐僖宗远迁蜀地，中原一带正扰乱不安，孟方立单独占据山东的邢？磁三个州，估计朝廷无力控制这种局面，推辞而不赴任，请求暂且委派郑昌图为昭义节度使。
English: That year, Wang Hui was ordered to appoint Meng Fangli to preside over the affairs of Zhangzhou. Meng Fangli refused to accept the order and imprisoned Wu Quanzhang. He wrote to Wang Hui that he was willing to recruit Confucian scholars to guard Zhangzhou. Wang Hui appointed Zheng Changtu to preside over the military in Shouyi. Soon after, the court appointed Wang Hui's right-hand man, Zeng Yong, as the Tongping official and appointed him as the festival envoy to Shouyi. Wang Hui believed that the Tang Dynasty had moved to Shu, and the Central Plains region was in turmoil. Meng Fangli alone occupied

古文：诏以徽为大明宫留守、京畿安抚制置修奉园陵使。
现代文：朝廷又颁诏任命王徽为大明宫留守、京畿安抚制置修奉图陵使。
English: The imperial court also issued an imperial edict appointing Wang Hui as an envoy to Daming Palace and the Gyeonggi Peace-keeping System.

古文：昌图至潞州，不三月而去，方立遂迁昭义军于邢州，自称留后，表其将李殷锐为潞州刺史。
现代文：郑昌图到达潞州任上，不到三个月就走了，孟方立于是把昭义军调到邢州，自称留后，进呈表章请任命他的将领李殷锐为潞州刺史。
English: Zheng Changtu arrived in Ganzhou to take office, and left after less than three months. Meng Fangli then transferred the Shouyi Army to Ganzhou, claiming to stay behind, and asked his general Li Yinrui to be appointed as the governor of Ganzhou.

古文：和州刺史秦彦使其子将兵数千袭宣州，逐观察使窦潏而代之。
现代文：和州刺史秦彦派遣他的儿子带领军队几千人袭击宣州，赶走观察使窦，取而代之。
English: and the provincial governor, Qin Yan, dispatched his son to lead an army of several thousand to attack Xuanzhou, drive away the inspector Dou, and replace him.

古文：僖宗惠圣恭定孝皇帝中之下中和三年春，正月，李克用将李存贞败黄揆于沙苑；己巳，克用进屯沙苑。
现代文：中和三年春季，正月，李克用的将领李存贞在沙苑打败黄揆。己巳，李克用进驻沙苑。黄揆是黄巢的弟弟。
English: In the spring of the middle and third years, in the first month, Li Cunzhen, the general of Li Ke, defeated Huang Qi in Shayuan. At that time, Li Ke was stationed in Shayuan. Huang Qi was the younger brother of Huang Chao.

古文：揆，巢之弟也。王鐸承制以克用为东北面行营都统，以杨复光为东面都统监军使，陈景思为北面都统监军使。
现代文：政锋秉承旨意，任命李克用为东北面行营都统，杨复光为东面都统监军使，陈景思为北面都统监军使。
English: Adhering to the will of Zhengfeng, Li Kegui was appointed as the Northeastern District Commander, Yang Fuguang as the Eastern District Supervisor, and Chen Jingsi as the Northern District Supervisor.

古文：乙亥，制以中书令、充诸道行营都统王鐸为义成节度使，令赴镇。
现代文：乙亥，唐僖宗以中书令、充诸道行营都统王铎为义成节度使，命他前赴镇所。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, the Tang Dynasty Emperor Jianzong sent Wang Xi to the town for the Yicheng Festival, ordering him to go to the town hall.

古文：田令孜欲归重北司，称鐸讨黄巢久无功，卒用杨复光策，召沙陀而破之，故罢鐸兵柄以悦复光。
现代文：田令孜想要加重北司权，奏称王铎讨剿黄巢时间长久而没立功，最后采用杨复光策略，召来沙陀才击败贼寇，因而罢免了王铎的兵权以取悦杨复光。
English: Tian Lingzi wanted to increase the power of the Northern General, and said that Wang Hui had been fighting against the Yellow Nest for a long time without any success. Finally, he adopted Yang Fuguang's strategy and summoned Satocai to defeat the bandits, thus removing Wang Hui's military power to please Yang Fuguang.

古文：又以副都统崔安潜为东都留守，以都都监西门思恭为右神策中尉，充诸道租庸兼催促诸道进军等使。
现代文：朝廷又任命副都统崔安潜为东都留守，命都都监西门思恭为右神策中尉，充任诸道租庸兼催促诸道进军等使。
English: The imperial court also appointed the deputy governor of the capital, Cui Anqian, to stay behind in the eastern capital, and the governor of the capital, Ximen Siyong, to be the lieutenant of the right divine policy, and to serve as the envoy to rent the capital and urge the capital to march.

古文：令孜自以建议幸蜀、收传国宝、列圣真容、散家财犒军为己功，令宰相籓镇共请加赏，上以令孜为十军兼十二卫观军容使。
现代文：田令孜自以为建议唐僖宗出走蜀地、收藏传国宝和各先帝的画像、散放家中资财犒赏官军有功，便指令宰相藩镇一同请求为他恩加赏赐，唐僖宗于是任命田令孜为神策十军兼南牙十二卫观军容使。
English: Thinking that he had done a good deed in suggesting that Tang Xizong leave Shudi, collect national treasures and images of previous emperors, distribute domestic wealth, and reward officials and soldiers, Tian Lingze ordered the prime minister of the province and town to jointly request a reward for him. Tang Xizong then appointed Tian Lingze as the envoy of the Ten Divine Defense Forces and the Twelve Southern Guards.

古文：成德节度使常山忠穆王王景崇死，军中立其子节度副使镕知留后事，时镕生十年矣。
现代文：成德节度使常山忠穆王王景崇去世，军营中拥立王景崇的儿子节度副使王主持留后事宜，当时王才十岁。
English: Chengde Jiedu caused the death of Wang Jingsong, the king of the Changshan loyalists, and Wang Jingsong's son Jiedu, the deputy envoy of Wang Jingsong, who was stationed in the military camp, presided over the matter of staying behind. At that time, Wang was only ten years old.

古文：以天平留后硃瑄为节度使。
现代文：朝廷任命天平留后朱为节度使。
English: The imperial court appointed Tianping Ruohu Zhu as the festival envoy.

古文：二月，壬子，李克用进军乾干坑，与河中、易定、忠武军合。
现代文：二月，壬子，李克用率军前往乾，与河中、易定、忠武军等各路官军会合。
English: In February, Li Ke led his troops to Qian in Renzi, and met with various government troops such as Hechu, Yiding, and Zhongwu.

古文：尚让等将十五万众屯于梁田陂，明日，大战，自午至晡，贼众大败，俘斩数万，伏尸三十里。巢将王璠、黄揆袭华州，据之，王遇亡去。
现代文：尚让等人带十五万人马屯驻梁田陂。第二天，展开激战，从中午一直打到傍晚，贼寇大败，俘虏斩杀几万人，横卧在地上的尸体长达三十里，黄巢带领王、黄揆袭击华州，并占据了华州，王遇逃跑离去。
English: The next day, a fierce battle was fought from noon to evening, the bandits were defeated, the captives killed tens of thousands of people, and the bodies lying on the ground were up to thirty miles long. Huang Chao led Wang and Huang Qi to attack and occupy Huazhou, and Wang ran away.

古文：初，光州刺史李罕之为秦宗权所攻，弃州奔项城，帅馀众归诸葛爽，爽以为怀州刺史。
现代文：起初，光州刺史李罕之受到秦宗权的进攻，离弃光州奔往项城，率领剩余的人马归附诸葛爽，诸葛爽以李罕之为怀州刺史。
English: At first, Li Han of Gwangju was attacked by the Qin Dynasty. He abandoned Gwangju and rushed to Xiangcheng, leading the rest of the people to join Zhuge Shuang. Zhuge Shuang took Li Han as the ruler of Waizhou.

古文：韩简攻郓州，半年，不能下。爽复袭取河阳，硃瑄请和，简乃舍之，引兵袭河阳。
现代文：韩简攻打郓州，半年也没能攻下，诸葛爽又袭击攻取河阳；朱请求讲和，韩简便放弃进攻郓州，带兵回攻河阳。
English: Han Jian attacked Bozhou, but failed to capture it for half a year, Zhuge Shuang attacked and captured Heyang; Zhu requested peace, Han Jian then gave up attacking Bozhou and led his troops back to attack Heyang.

古文：爽遣罕之逆战于武陟，魏军大败而还。大将澶州刺史乐行达先归，据魏州，军中共立行达为留后，简为部下所杀。
现代文：诸葛爽派遣李罕之在武陟迎战，结果魏州军大败退回，大将澶州刺史乐行达先期回去，占据了魏州，军营上下便共同拥立乐行达为魏州留后，韩简被部下杀害。
English: Zhuge Shuang sent Li Hanzhi to fight in Wuxi. As a result, the Weizhou army was defeated and retreated. The general of Weizhou, Zhishi Le Xingda, went back ahead of time and occupied Weizhou. After the military camp jointly supported Le Xingda to stay in Weizhou, Han Jian was killed by his subordinates.

古文：己未，以行达为魏博留后。
现代文：己未，朝廷任命乐行达为魏博留后。
English: Before long, the imperial court appointed Le Xingda as Wei Bo's successor.

古文：甲子，李克用进围华州，黄思鄴、黄揆婴城固守。克用分骑屯渭北。
现代文：甲子，李克用进军围攻华州，黄思邺、黄揆环绕华州顽固坚守；李克用分派一部分骑兵屯驻渭北。
English: In the first half of the year, Li Ke used to march into and besiege Huazhou, while Huang Siyu and Huang Qi stubbornly held out around Huazhou; Li Ke used to assign a part of the cavalry to be stationed in the north of Fujian.

古文：以王镕为成德留后。
现代文：朝廷任命王熔为成德留后。
English: The imperial court appointed Wang Rong as Chengde's successor.

古文：以郑绍业为太子宾客、分司，以陈儒为荆南留后。
现代文：朝廷任命郑绍业为太子宾客、分司，任命陈儒为荆南留后。
English: The imperial court appointed Zheng Shaoye as the prince's guest and branch, and appointed Chen Ru as Jing Nan's successor.

古文：峡路招讨指挥使庄梦蝶韩秀升、屈行从所败，退保忠州，应援使胡弘略战亦不利。
现代文：峡路招讨指挥使庄梦蝶被韩秀升、屈行从打败，退到忠州固守，应援使胡弘略与贼寇作战也同样失利。
English: The commanding officer of the canyon road was defeated by Han Xiu Sheng and Jian Xing, and retreated to Chungju to hold fast. The commanding officer of the canyon road, Hu Hongliu, was also defeated in the battle with the bandits.

古文：江、淮贡赋皆为贼所阻，百官无俸。
现代文：这样，江、淮一带的贡赋都被贼寇阻截，朝廷百官无俸可供。
English: As a result, tributes from the Jiang and Huai regions were intercepted by bandits, leaving hundreds of officials in the imperial court without pay.

古文：云安、淯井路不通，民间乏盐。
现代文：云安、井一带的道路不通，民间缺乏食盐。
English: Roads in the Yunnan and Jing regions are impassable, and people are suffering from a shortage of salt.

古文：陈敬瑄奏以眉州防御使高仁厚为西川行军司马，将三千兵讨之。
现代文：于是陈敬奏请，任命眉州防御使高仁厚为西川行军司马，率领军队三千人前往讨伐韩秀升、屈行从。
English: As a result, Chen Jingso asked Gao Renhou to be appointed as the commander of the Meizhou defense to lead 3,000 troops to fight against Han Xiu Sheng and submit to him.

古文：加凤翔节度使李昌言同平章事。
现代文：朝廷加封凤翔节度使李昌言同平章事。
English: The fact that the imperial court sealed Feng Xiang's sentence made Li Changyan's sentence the same.

古文：黄巢兵数败，食复尽，阴为遁计，发兵三万扼蓝田道。
现代文：黄巢所带的人马多次战败，粮食也吃尽，暗中筹谋逃离长安，他派出三万兵马扼守住蓝田这一向南出走的要道。
English: The men and horses led by Huang Chao were defeated many times and ran out of food. He secretly plotted to escape from Chang'an. He sent 30,000 soldiers and horses to hold down Lantian, a key route to the south.

古文：三月，壬申，遣尚让将兵救华州。李克用、王重荣引兵逆战于零口，破之。
现代文：三月，壬申，派遣尚让带兵救援华州；李克用、王重荣带领官军在零口迎击，获得胜利。
English: In March, Jinshin dispatched Shang Zhan to lead troops to rescue Huazhou; Li Keyong and Wang Chung Rong led the official army to counterattack at the mouth of the river and won the victory.

古文：克用进军渭桥，骑军在渭北，克用每夜令其将薛志勤、康君立潜入长安，燔积聚，斩虏而还，贼中大惊。
现代文：李克用率令大军前赴渭桥，骑兵则布置在渭北，李克用每天夜间都命令将领薛志勤、康君立偷偷进入长安城，焚烧黄巢积聚的财物，斩杀虏获黄巢的人马，然后再退出，使贼寇大为惊慌恐惧。
English: Li Ke used to order the army to march to Fengtai Bridge, and the cavalry was deployed in the north of Fengtai. Li Ke used to order generals Xue Zhiqin and Kang Junli to secretly enter Chang'an City every night, burn the wealth accumulated by the Yellow Nest, kill the people and horses captured by the Yellow Nest, and then withdraw, causing great panic and fear among the bandits.

古文：以淮南押牙合肥杨行愍为庐州刺史。
现代文：朝廷任命淮南押牙将合肥人杨行愍为庐州刺史。
English: The imperial court appointed Huainan Osa to appoint Yang Xingyao, a native of Hefei, as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：行愍本庐州牙将，勇敢，屡有战功，都将忌之，白刺史郎幼复遣使出戍于外。
现代文：杨行愍本来是庐州的牙将，勇猛果敢，多次作战立功，行营都将很嫉妒他，白刺史郎幼复派遣他到外边驻防。
English: Yang Xingyao was originally a Fang general in Ganzhou. He was brave and courageous, and made meritorious contributions in many battles. The camp would be very jealous of him. Bai Xizhi Shiro Yufu sent him to garrison outside.

古文：行愍过辞，都将以甘言悦之，问其所须，行愍曰： 正须汝头耳！ 
现代文：杨行愍向都将辞行，都将对他好言相待，问他还有什么需要的东西，杨行愍说： 就是需要你的脑袋！ 
English: Yang Xingyao will both resign, will treat him well, ask him what else he needs, Yang Xingyao said: I just need your head!

古文：遂起斩之，并将诸营，自称八营都知兵马使。
现代文：于是起身把都将斩杀，并统领各路军营，自称八营都知兵马使。
English: As a result, he rose up and killed everyone, and led all the military camps, claiming to be the commander of eight battalions.

古文：幼复不能制，荐于高骈，请以自代。
现代文：郎幼复见已无法控制杨行愍，便向高骈推荐，请求以杨行愍接替自己。
English: Seeing that he was no longer able to control Yang Xingyao, he recommended him to Gao Jun and asked Yang Xingyao to succeed him.

古文：骈以行愍为淮南押牙，知庐州事，朝廷因而命之。
现代文：高骈于是任命杨行愍为淮南押牙将，掌管庐州事宜，朝廷因而委任杨行愍。
English: Gao Wei then appointed Yang Xingtao as the Huainan commander, in charge of Zhangzhou affairs, and the imperial court thus appointed Yang Xingtao.

古文：行愍闻州人王勖贤，召，欲用之，固徉。
现代文：杨行愍听说庐州人王勖很是贤能，把他召来，想起用他，王勖坚持推辞。
English: Yang Xingyao heard that Wang Yao, a man from Zhangzhou, was very capable. He summoned him and wanted to use him, but Wang Yao insisted on refusing.

古文：问其子弟，曰： 子潜，好学慎密，可任以事；弟子稔，有气节，可为将。 
现代文：杨行愍询问王勖的弟弟和儿子的情况，回答说： 儿子王潜，勤奋学习，办事谨慎周密，可以委用；弟弟的儿子王稔，很有气节，可以用为将领。 
English: Yang Xingyao inquired about Wang Qian's younger brother and his son, and replied: "Wang Qian, Wang Qian's son, is diligent in his studies and meticulous in his work, and can be appointed; Wang Qian, Wang Qian's younger brother's son, is very temperamental, and can be used as a general.

古文：行愍召潜置门下，以稔及定远人季章为骑将。
现代文：杨行愍便把王潜召来安置在身边，任命王稔和定远人季章为骑兵将领。
English: Yang Xingyao then summoned Wang Qian and placed him at his side, appointing Wang Qian and Dingyuan Qizhang as cavalry generals.

古文：初，吕用之因左骁雄军使俞公楚得见高骈。用之横甚，或以咎公楚，公楚数戒用之少自敛，毋相累，用之衔之。
现代文：起初，吕用之因为左骁雄军使俞公楚的关系而得以拜见高骈；吕用之过于蛮横霸道，有人因此责怪俞公楚，俞公楚几次劝戒吕用之稍微收敛一些，不要相互受到牵连，吕用之对俞公楚怀恨在心。
English: At first, Lyu Yingzhi was able to visit Gao Yao because of the relationship between Zuo Yao Xiong's army and Lyu Gongchu; Lyu Yingzhi was too domineering, and some people blamed Lyu Yingzhi for this. Lyu Yingzhi several times advised Lyu Yingzhi to be a little more restrained and not to be involved with each other. Lyu Yingzhi held a grudge against Lyu Yingzhu.

古文：右骁雄军使姚归礼气直敢言，尤疾用之所为，时面数其罪，常欲手刃之。
现代文：右骁雄军使姚归礼，性格直爽敢于说话，尤其憎恶吕用之的所做所为，有时当面指责他的横暴行为，常常想亲手杀了他。
English: The right-hand eunuch forces Yao to bow, his character is forthright and dares to speak, especially he hates what Lyu Yingzhi has done, sometimes blames him for his violent behavior, and often wants to kill him with his own hands.

古文：癸未夜，用之与其党会倡家，归礼潜遣人爇其室，杀貌类者数人，用之易服得免。
现代文：癸未夜，吕用之与他的党羽在娼妓家会聚，姚归礼暗中派人焚烧吕用之的卧室，杀掉好几个与他面貌相似的人，吕用之因更换衣服而免于一死。
English: Before dawn, Lyu Yingzhi and his followers gathered at a brothel. Yao Guili secretly sent someone to burn Lyu Yingzhi's bedroom, killing several people who resembled him. Lyu Yingzhi was spared death because he changed his clothes.

古文：明旦，穷治其事，获纵火者，皆骁雄之卒。用之于是日夜谮二将于骈。
现代文：第二天早晨，吕用之严厉追究这件事，抓获放火的人，都是骁雄军的兵卒，吕用之于这天夜间向高骈诬陷俞公楚和姚归礼两位将领。
English: The next morning, Lü Yingzhi severely investigated the matter. The arsonists who were caught were all soldiers of the Shao Xiong army. Lü Yingzhi framed the two generals, Shao Gongchu and Yao Guilei, to Gao Wei that night.

古文：未几，骈使二将将骁雄卒三千袭贼于慎县，用之密以语杨行愍云： 公楚、归礼欲袭庐州。 
现代文：不久，高骈命令俞公楚和姚归礼二人督率骁雄军三千人，在庐州境内慎县袭击贼寇，吕用之偷偷向杨行愍说： 俞公楚、姚归礼要攻打庐州。 
English: Not long after, Gao Zheng ordered Zangongchu and Yao Guilei to lead 3,000 men of Zangong's army to attack the bandits in Shen County in Zangzhou. Lu used this to secretly tell Yang Xingtao: Zangongchu and Yao Guilei should attack Zangzhou.

古文：行愍发兵掩之，二将不为备，举军尽殪，以二将谋乱告骈。骈不知用之谋，厚赏行愍。
现代文：杨行愍出其不意发动突然进攻，俞公楚、姚归礼二人没有任何准备，结果全军覆没。杨行愍又向高骈告发俞公楚、姚归礼谋反叛乱，高骈不知道这是吕用之的阴谋，竟重赏杨行愍。
English: Yang Xingtao unexpectedly launched a surprise attack, and the two men, Zongongchu and Yao Guilei, did not have any preparation. As a result, the whole army was wiped out. Yang Xingtao also told Gao Zongchu that Zongchu and Yao Guilei were plotting a counter-insurgency. Gao Zongchu did not know that this was Lu Yingzhi's plot, but he rewarded Yang Xingtao.

古文：己丑，以河中行营招讨副使朱全忠为宣武节度使，俟克复长安，令赴镇。
现代文：己丑，朝廷任命河中行营招讨副使朱全忠为宣武节度使，等夺回长安，再令他前往镇所。
English: As a result, the imperial court appointed the deputy envoy Zhu Quanzhong, who went to the camp in Hechu to recruit soldiers, as the envoy of the military proclamation, and ordered him to go to the town hall after recapturing Chang'an.

古文：癸巳，李克用等拔华州，黄揆弃城走。
现代文：癸巳，李克用等人攻克华州，黄揆离城逃走。
English: Soon after, Li Ke used others to conquer Huazhou, and Huang Qi fled the city.

古文：刘汉宏分兵屯黄岭、岩下、贞女三镇，钱镠将八都兵自富春击之，破黄岭，擒岩下镇将史弁、贞女镇将杨元宗。
现代文：刘汉宏在黄岭、岩下、贞女三个镇分别驻扎军队，钱带八都兵从富春渡江发动进攻，攻战黄岭，抓获岩下镇将史弁和贞女镇将杨元宗。
English: Liu Hanhong stationed troops separately in the three towns of Huangling, Iwashita, and Zhenme. Qian took eight soldiers to launch an attack from Fuchun Dujiang, attacked Huangling, and captured Iwashita Town General Shi Ben and Zhenme Town General Yang Yuanzong.

古文：汉安以精兵屯诸暨，镠又击破之，汉宏走。
现代文：刘汉宠调集精锐人马驻守诸暨，钱又发动进攻占领诸暨，刘汉宏只好逃跑。
English: Liu Hancheng mobilized elite troops to garrison Zhuji, Qian launched an attack to occupy Zhuji, and Liu Hanhong had to flee.

古文：庄梦蝶与韩秀升、屈行从战，又败。
现代文：庄梦蝶与韩秀升、屈行从激战，再次失败。
English: Zhuang Mengdiao and Han Xiu Sheng and Qu Rong Rong engaged in a fierce battle and failed again.

古文：其败兵纷纭还走，所在慰谕，不可遏。遇高仁厚于路，叱之，即止。仁厚斩都虞候一人，更令修娖部伍。
现代文：庄梦蝶的败兵纷纷逃走，进行抚慰劝导，也不能阻止；这些逃兵在路上遇见高仁厚，被他高声怒喝，逃兵当即停下；高仁厚斩杀了一名都虞候，重新下令整顿队伍。
English: Zhuang Mengchao's defeated soldiers fled one after another, offering consolation and advice, but could not be stopped; these deserters met Gao Renhou on the road, and were shouted at by him, and the deserters immediately stopped; Gao Renhou killed a member of the Du Yu, and again ordered the team to be reorganized.

古文：乃召耆老，询以山川蹊径及贼寨所据，喜曰： 贼精兵尽在舟中，使老弱守寨，资粮皆在寨中，此所谓重战轻防，其败必矣！ 
现代文：高仁厚找来当地高龄老人，向他们询问这一带山川小路以及贼寇营寨的情况之后，高兴地说： 贼寇的精锐人马都在船上，而让那些年老体弱的人守卫营寨，资财粮食都在寨子里，这就是人们所说的重视攻战轻视防守，他们一定会失败的！ 
English: Gao Renhou found the local elderly people and asked them about the situation of the mountain road and the bandit encampment, and said happily: The elite bandits are on the boat, and let those old and weak people guard the encampment, and the wealth and grain are in the stockade. This is what people call emphasizing the offensive and despising the defense. They will surely fail!

古文：乃扬兵江上，为欲涉之状。
现代文：高仁厚于是在江面上布置下军队，摆出要过江攻打的阵势。
English: Therefore, Gao Renkhou arranged his army on the surface of the river and set up a position to attack across the river.

古文：贼昼夜御备，遣兵挑战，仁厚不与交兵，潜发勇士千人执兵负稿，夜，由间道攻其寨，且焚之。
现代文：船上的贼寇日夜防御准备，并派兵前来挑战，高仁厚不与这些贼寇交战，而暗中派出一千名勇猛士兵手拿兵器肩扛藁秆，在夜晚从偏僻的小路前往攻打贼寇的营寨，并且放火焚烧。
English: Thieves and robbers on the ship prepared for defense day and night, and sent soldiers to challenge them. Gao Renhou did not fight with these thieves and robbers, but secretly sent a thousand brave soldiers armed with weapons and shouldering shackles to attack the camp of thieves and robbers from a remote path at night, and set it on fire.

古文：贼望见，分兵往救之不及，资粮荡尽，众心已摇。
现代文：船上的贼寇看到这种情况，马上分派人马回营寨救援，已来不及了，贼寇的资财粮食全被毁掉，人心动摇。
English: The bandits on the ship saw this situation and immediately sent people back to the camp for rescue. It was too late, the bandits' wealth and grain were all destroyed, and their hearts were shaken.

古文：仁厚复募善游者凿其舟底，相继皆沉，贼往来惶惑，不能相救，仁厚遣兵于要路邀击，且招之，贼众皆降。
现代文：高仁厚又招募善于游泳的人凿破贼寇的船只，使其都相继沉没，贼寇来来往往惶恐迷惑，相互不能救援，高仁厚派遣军队在交通要道拦截贼寇，并且招降，最后贼寇都投降了。
English: Gao Renyu also recruited good swimmers to scuttle the ships of the bandits, so that they all sank one after another. The bandits often came and went in fear and confusion, unable to rescue each other. Gao Renyu sent troops to intercept the bandits on the main road, and invited them to surrender. Finally, the bandits surrendered.

古文：秀升、行从见众溃，挥剑乱斫，欲止之。众愈怒，共执二人诣仁厚，仁厚诘之曰： 何故反？ 
现代文：韩秀升、屈行从看到人马溃败不堪，挥剑乱砍，想进行阻止，大家更加愤怒，一同抓往韩秀升、屈行从二人送到高仁厚那里。高仁厚质问说： 你们为什么起兵谋反？ 
English: When Han Xiu Sheng and Qu Xing saw that people and horses were defeated, they waved their swords and slashed wildly, and wanted to stop it, everyone was more angry, and together they caught Han Xiu Sheng and Qu Xing and sent them to Gao Ren Hou. Gao Ren Hou asked: Why did you raise an army to rebel?

古文：秀长曰： 自大中皇帝晏驾，天下无复公道，纽解纲绝。
现代文：韩秀升回答说： 自从宣宗皇帝死后，天下再也没有公道，维系大唐王朝的纽带松懈，朝廷法度被废弃。
English: Han Xiu Sheng replied: Since the death of Emperor Xuan Zong, there has been no justice in the world, the ties that maintained the Great Tang Dynasty have been loosened, and the Imperial Court Law has been abandoned.

古文：今日反者，岂惟秀升！
现代文：当今谋反的人，难道只是我韩秀升？
English: Is it just me, Han Soo-sung, who is plotting rebellion today?

古文：成是败非，机上之肉，惟所烹醢耳！ 
现代文：成者王侯败者贼，我已是桌子上的肉，任凭你们煮杀剁成肉酱了！ 
English: Winner, prince, loser, or thief, I am already meat on the table, ready to be boiled and stewed into meat sauce!

古文：仁厚愀然，命善食而械之。
现代文：高仁厚听后不禁感到凄怆，命令让他美餐之后戴上刑具。
English: Hearing this, Gao Renkou couldn't help but feel despondent. He was ordered to wear a torture device after the meal.

古文：夏，四月，庚子，献于行在，斩之。
现代文：夏季，四月，庚子，高仁厚把韩秀升献到成都唐僖宗那里，韩秀升被斩杀。
English: In the summer, in April, Geng Zi and Gao Renhou offered Han Xiu Sheng to Tang Xizong in Chengdu, and Han Xiu Sheng was beheaded.

古文：李克用与忠武将庞从、河中将白志迁等引兵先进，与黄巢军战于渭南，一日三战，皆捷。义成、义武等诸军继之，贼众大奔。
现代文：李克用与忠武将军庞从、河中将军白志迁等带领人马先行进军，在渭南与黄巢军队展开激战，一天交战三次，都获得胜利；义成、义武等军相继赶到，黄巢人马只好争相败逃。
English: Li Kegui marched ahead of the troops with the loyal generals Pang Cong and Bai Zhijian, and waged a fierce battle with the Yellow Nest Army in the south of Hunan Province. They fought three times a day and were victorious. Yicheng, Yiwu and other armies arrived one after another, and the Yellow Nest soldiers and horses had to fight and flee.

古文：甲辰，克用等自光泰门入京师，黄巢力战不胜，焚宫室遁去。
现代文：甲辰，李克用等从光泰门进入京师长安，黄巢顽强争战而不能取胜，最后放火焚烧宫殿后逃跑。
English: Ji Chen, Li Kegui, etc. entered Chang'an of Beijing Division from Guangtai Gate, Huang Chao fought tenaciously but could not win, and finally set fire to the palace and fled.

古文：贼死及降者甚众，官军暴掠，无异于贼，长安室屋及民所存无几。
现代文：贼寇战死和投降的人很从，但官军横暴抢掠，与贼寇没有什么两样，长安城内的房屋和百姓所剩无几。
English: Thieves and robbers died in battle and those who surrendered were very few, but the government army looted violently, no different from the thieves and robbers. There are few houses and people left in Chang'an City.

古文：巢自蓝田入商山，多遗珍宝于路。官军争取之，不急追，贼遂逸去。
现代文：黄巢从蓝田进入商山，在路上扔上许多珍宝，官军争抢这些东西，而不急于追击，贼寇于是逃脱了。
English: Huang Chao entered Shangshan from Lantian, and threw many treasures on the road. The government army fought for these things, but did not rush to pursue. The thief then escaped.

古文：杨复光遣使告捷，百官入贺。
现代文：杨复光派遣使臣向唐僖宗报捷，朝中百官向皇上恭贺。
English: Yang Fuguang sent envoys to Tang Xizong to report the success, and hundreds of officials in the court congratulated the emperor.

古文：诏留忠武等军二万人，委大明宫留守王徽及京畿制置使田从异部分，守卫长安。
现代文：僖宗颁诏，留下忠武等军二万人，委派大明宫留守王徽和京畿制置使田从异行进处置，驻守护卫长安。
English: Emperor Taizong issued an edict, leaving 20,000 loyal soldiers and other troops behind, and assigned Daming Palace to stay in Wanghui and Gyeonggi Province to set up envoy fields to deal with the movement of foreigners, and stationed guards in Chang'an.

古文：五月，加硃玫、李克用、东方逵同平章事。
现代文：五月，朝廷为朱玫、李克用、东方逵加封同平章事。
English: In May, the imperial court granted Zhu Mei, Li Kegui and Dongfang Yao the same rank.

古文：升陕州为节度使，以王重盈为节度。
现代文：将陕州升格为节度，任命王重盈为节度使。
English: He upgraded Shaanxi Province to a festival and appointed Wang Chungying as the festival's envoy.

古文：又建延州为保塞军，以保大行军司马、延州刺史李孝恭为节度使。
现代文：又在延州建立保塞军，任命保大行军司马、延州刺史李孝恭为节度使。
English: He also established the Korean People's Liberation Army in Yanzhou and appointed the secretary of the Korean People's Liberation Army and the governor of Yanzhou, Li Xiaogong, as the delegate of the Korean People's Liberation Army.

古文：克用时年二十八，于诸将最少，而破黄巢，复长安，功第一，兵势最强，诸将皆畏之。
现代文：李克用当时年仅二十八岁，在各位将领中最年轻的，可是打败黄巢，收复长安，李克用的功劳实属第一，军队实力也最强大，各位将领对他都很畏惧。
English: Li Kegui was only twenty-eight years old at the time, the youngest among the generals, but he defeated Huang Chao and recovered Chang'an. Li Kegui's merit is actually the first, and the strength of the army is also the strongest. All the generals are afraid of him.

古文：克用一目微眇，时人谓之 独眼龙 。
现代文：李克用的一只眼睛略微小些，当时人们都叫他 独眼龙 。
English: Li Ke used a slightly smaller eye, and people called him a one-eyed dragon at that time.

古文：诏以崔璆家贵身显，为黄巢相首尾三载，不逃不隐，于所在斩之。
现代文：唐僖宗颁发诏令，指责崔家世富贵出身显赫，却在黄巢手下做同平章事先后三年，既不逃走也不隐藏，于是将他在住所斩杀。
English: Tang Yanzong issued a royal edict, accusing Cui of being born into a wealthy and illustrious family, but he did not escape or hide for three years after he was made a peer of Huang Chao, so he was beheaded at his residence.

古文：黄巢使其骁将孟楷将万人为前锋，击蔡州，节度使秦宗权逆战而败。贼进攻其城，宗权遂称臣于巢，与之连兵。
现代文：黄巢派令他的骁将孟督率一万人马为前锋，进攻蔡州，节度使秦宗权带官兵迎战失败；贼寇攻打蔡州城，秦宗权于是向黄巢称臣，把他的队伍与黄巢的人马合并到一起。
English: Huang Chao sent his eunuchs to attack Caizhou with Meng Guo leading ten thousand soldiers as the vanguard, but Qin Zongquan and his soldiers were defeated. The bandits attacked Caizhou City, and Qin Zongquan praised Huang Chao and merged his troops with those of Huang Chao.

古文：初，巢在长安，陈州刺史宛丘赵犨谓将佐曰： 巢不死长安，必东走，陈其冲也。
现代文：起初，黄巢在长安时，陈州刺史宛丘人赵对手下将领僚佐说： 黄巢如果不是在长安战死，一定是向东逃跑，陈州则首当其冲。
English: At first, when Huang Chao was in Chang'an, Chen Zhou stabbed Shi Wanqiu, who was Zhao's rival general and advisor, said: If Huang Chao did not die in Chang'an, he must have fled to the east, and Chen Zhou was the first to bear the brunt.

古文：且巢素与忠武为仇，不可不为之备。 
现代文：并且黄巢一向仇视忠武军，我们不能不做准备。 
English: Moreover, Huang Chao has always been hostile to the loyal armed forces. We cannot but make preparations.

古文：乃完城堑，缮甲兵，积刍粟；六十里之内，民有资粮者，悉徙之入城。
现代文：于是赵把护卫陈州城的堑壕挖整完毕，修缮盔甲武器，大量积储草料粮食；在六十里之内，老百姓家有资财粮食的，都迁入陈州城内。
English: Therefore, Zhao dug and completed the trenches guarding Chenzhou City, repaired armor and weapons, and accumulated a large amount of grass and grain. Within sixty miles, all the people who had wealth and grain moved into Chenzhou City.

古文：多募勇士，使其弟昶珝、子麓林分将之。
现代文：赵还招募许多勇猛的士兵，让他的弟弟赵昶赵、儿子赵麓林赵分别统领。
English: Zhao also recruited many brave soldiers, and had his younger brother Zhao Shizhao and his son Zhao Lulin Zhao take the lead respectively.

古文：孟楷既下蔡州，移兵击陈，军于项城。犨先示之弱，伺其无备，袭击之，杀获殆尽，生擒楷，斩之。
现代文：黄巢的骁将孟楷既已攻下蔡州，便调动军队去打陈州，率军驻扎在项城；赵先是向孟楷做出势单力薄的样子，乘他没有准备，发动突然袭击，孟楷的人马几乎全被斩杀擒获，本人也被活捉处斩。
English: As soon as Meng Kai, the warlord of Huang Chao, had conquered Caizhou, he mobilized his army to fight Chenzhou, and stationed his army in Xiangcheng. Zhao first made Meng Kai look weak, and took advantage of his lack of preparation to launch a surprise attack. Almost all of Meng Kai's men were killed and captured, and he was also captured alive.

古文：巢闻楷死，惊怒，悉众屯溵水。
现代文：黄巢听说孟楷被处死，很惊慌恐惧，把所有的人马都调集到水一带驻守。
English: When Huang Chao heard that Meng Kai had been put to death, he panicked and gathered all his men and horses to stand guard around the water.

古文：六月，与秦宗权合兵围陈州，掘堑五重，百道攻之。
现代文：六月，黄巢与秦宗权汇合人马围攻陈州，挖开层层密布的五重堑壕，从上百个道路向陈州发起进攻。
English: In June, Huang Chao and Qin Zongquan joined forces to besiege Chenzhou, digging five layers of trenches and launching an attack on Chenzhou from hundreds of roads.

古文：陈人大恐，犨谕之曰： 忠武素著义勇，陈州号为劲兵，况吾家久食陈禄，誓与此州存亡。
现代文：陈州城内的人们极其恐慌，赵对他们说： 忠武军向来以正义勇敢著称，陈州的兵马号称为最强有力的队伍，况且我赵一家长期食用陈州的俸禄，誓与陈州共存亡。
English: The people in the city of Chenzhou were extremely panicked. Zhao said to them: "The Zhongwu Army has always been known for its justice and bravery. The Terracotta Army of Chenzhou is known as the most powerful team. Moreover, my Zhao family has been eating Chenzhou's salary for a long time, vowing to coexist with Chenzhou.

古文：男子当求生于死中，且徇国而死，不愈于臣贼而生乎！
现代文：男子汉要以死相拼来求得生路，况且以身殉国而死，不比向贼寇称臣苟且偷生要好吗？
English: A man has to fight to the death in order to survive. Moreover, dying as a martyr for the country is not better than pretending to be a vassal to a bandit and sneaking away with his life?

古文：有异议者斩！ 数引锐兵开门出击贼。
现代文：有异议者一律斩首！ 赵几次带领精锐人马打开城门出去攻打贼寇，挫败了贼寇的进攻。
English: Anyone who disagreed would be beheaded! Zhao opened the city gate several times and led the elite soldiers and horses to attack the bandits, defeating the bandits' attack.

古文：破之。巢益怒，营于州北，立宫室百司，为持久之计。
现代文：黄巢更加震怒，在陈州的北面建立行营，设立宫室百官，做长远的打算。
English: Huang Chao was even more furious. He set up a camp on the north side of Chenzhou, set up a palace for hundreds of officials, and made long-term plans.

古文：时民间无积聚，贼掠人为粮，生投于碓硙，并骨食之，号给粮之处曰 舂磨寨 。
现代文：当时民间钱粮都没有积储，贼寇抓掠百姓充作粮食，把活人扔到石磨里面去磨，连同骨头一起吃掉，号称供给粮食的地方是 舂磨寨 。
English: At that time, there was no accumulation of private money and grain. Thieves and robbers plundered the people to make grain, threw the living people into the stone mill to grind, and ate them together with the bones. It was said that the place to supply grain was Zhaomaozhai.

古文：纵兵四掠，自河南、许、汝、唐、邓、孟、郑、汴、曹、濮、徐、兗等数十州，咸被其毒。
现代文：黄巢放纵士兵到处抢掠，所有河南府许州、汝州、唐州、邓州、孟州、郑州、汴州、曹州、濮州、徐州、兖州等几十个州的地方，都受到黄巢的蹂躏。
English: The Yellow Nest allowed soldiers to plunder everywhere, and all the places in dozens of states such as Xuzhou, Ruzhou, Tangzhou, Dengzhou, Mengzhou, Zhengzhou, Ganzhou, Caozhou, Ganzhou, Xuzhou and Ganzhou in Henan Province were ravaged by the Yellow Nest.

古文：初，上蔡人刘谦为岭南小校，节度使韦宙奇其器，以兄女妻之。
现代文：当初，上蔡人刘谦做岭南小校，节度使韦宙特别器重他，把哥哥的女儿嫁给他做妻子。
English: At first, Liu Qian, who was from Shangcai, worked at a small school in Lingnan. The festival made Wei Chao pay special attention to him and married his brother's daughter to him.

古文：谦击群盗，屡有功，辛丑，以谦为封州刺史。
现代文：刘谦攻打各股贼寇，连连立功，辛丑，朝廷任命刘谦为封州刺史。
English: Liu Qian fought against bandits and robbers from all walks of life. He made great achievements and great sacrifices. The imperial court appointed Liu Qian as the leader of the history of Fenzhou.

古文：加东川节度使杨师立同平章事。
现代文：朝廷为东川节度使杨师立加封同平章事。
English: For the Dongchuan Festival, the imperial court made Yang Shiru set up a post with the same rank.

古文：宣武节度使硃全忠帅所部数百人赴镇，秋，七月，丁卯，至汴州。
现代文：宣武节度使朱全忠率领部下几百人前往镇所，秋季，七月，丁卯，朱全忠到达汴州。
English: The Xuanwu Festival made Zhu Quanzhong lead hundreds of his subordinates to the town hall. In the autumn, in July, Zhu Quanzhong arrived in Zhangzhou.

古文：时汴、宋荐饥，公私穷竭，内外骄军难制，外为大敌所攻，无日不战，众心危惧，而全忠勇气益振。
现代文：当时汴州、宋州一带接连闹饥荒，国库资财匮乏，百姓穷困潦倒，内部有骄横的军队难以控制，外面又受到强大的贼寇进攻，没有一天停止交战，很多人担忧害怕，可是朱全忠的勇气却更加振奋。
English: At that time, there were successive famines in Luzhou and Songzhou, the state treasury was short of funds, the people were impoverished and destitute, there were arrogant troops inside that were difficult to control, and they were attacked by powerful thieves and robbers outside. The war did not stop for a day, and many people were worried and afraid, but Zhu Quanzhong's courage was even more inspiring.

古文：诏以黄巢未平，加全忠东北面都招讨使。
现代文：唐僖宗颁发诏令，指出黄巢一伙还没平灭，加封朱全忠为东北面都招讨使。
English: Tang Xizong issued a decree, pointing out that Huang Chao's group had not yet been wiped out, and Zhu Quanzhong was added to the northeast to recruit envoys.

古文：南诏遣布燮杨奇肱来迎公主。
现代文：南诏王派遣清平官杨奇肱来内地迎娶公主。
English: King Nanzhao sent Yang Qichen, a Qing official, to the mainland to marry the princess.

古文：诏陈敬瑄与书，辞以 銮舆巡幸，仪物未备，俟还京邑，然后出降。 
现代文：唐僖宗诏令陈敬回信答复，说； 皇帝外出，公主婚嫁的礼仪物品尚未准备齐全，待皇帝回到京师长安之后再办公主婚事。 
English: Tang Xizong ordered Chen Jing to reply to the letter, saying: The emperor is out, the ceremonial items for the princess's wedding have not yet been fully prepared, and the main wedding will be held after the emperor returns to Beijing Shichang'an.

古文：奇肱不从，直前至成都。
现代文：以此来推辞，杨厅肱不肯，直接前往成都去见唐僖宗。
English: Using this as an excuse, Yang Zhanjun refused and went directly to Chengdu to meet Tang Yanzong.

古文：李克用自长安引兵还雁门，寻有诏，以克用为河东节度使，召郑从谠诣行在。
现代文：李克用从长安带领军队回到雁门，不久唐僖宗颁诏，任命李克用为河东节度使，召令郑从谠前往成都。
English: Li Kegui led the army from Chang'an back to the Wild Goose Gate, and soon Tang Yanzong issued an edict, appointing Li Kegui as the Hedong Festival envoy and summoning Zheng Conglu to Chengdu.

古文：克用乃自东道过榆次，诣雁门省其父。
现代文：李克用于是从东道经过榆次，到达雁门探望他的父亲。
English: Li Ke used to visit his father in the Wild Goose Gate after passing through the host three times.

古文：克用寻榜河东，安慰军民曰： 勿为旧念，各安家业。 
现代文：不久。李克用在河东张贴告示，安慰官军和百姓说： 不要再思虑过去的事，应各自安置家口操持旧业。 
English: Soon after, Li Ke used to put up notices in the east of the river to comfort the government army and the people, saying: "Don't think about the past any more, each family should settle down and carry on the old business."

古文：左骁卫上将军杨复光卒于河中。复光慷慨喜忠义，善抚士卒，军中恸哭累日，八都将鹿晏弘等各以其众散去。
现代文：左骁卫上将军杨复光在河中府死去；杨复光为人慷慨，忠诚义气，善于安抚军内士卒，他死后士兵连哭数日，八都将鹿晏弘等率领自己人马分别散去。
English: General Yang Fuguang of the Zuo Wei died in Hechu Prefecture; Yang Fuguang was a generous man, loyal and virtuous, and good at appeasing the soldiers. After his death, the soldiers cried for several days, and the eight generals led their men and horses separately.

古文：田令孜素畏忌之，闻其卒，甚喜，因摈斥其兄枢密使复恭为飞龙使。
现代文：田令孜一向畏惧忌恨杨复光，听说杨复光死了，十分高兴，趁机排斥杨复光的哥哥枢密使杨复恭，任他为飞龙使。
English: Tian Lingzi had always feared and hated Yang Fuguang. When he heard that Yang Fuguang had died, he was very happy. He took the opportunity to expel Yang Fuguang's brother, the Privy Councilor Yang Fuguang, and appointed him as the Flying Dragon Envoy.

古文：令孜专权，人莫与之抗，惟复恭数与之争得失，故令孜恶之，复恭因称疾归蓝田。
现代文：田令孜独揽大权，没有人敢和他抗争，只有杨复恭多次与他争论得失事宜，因此田令孜憎恨他，杨复恭于是托词有病回到蓝田。
English: Tian Lingzi monopolized power, and no one dared to fight against him. Only Yang Fuqiong argued with him many times about gains and losses. Therefore, Tian Lingzi hated him, and Yang Fuqiong returned to Lantian on the pretext that he was ill.

古文：以成德留后王镕、魏博留后乐行达、天平留后硃瑄为本道节度使。
现代文：朝廷任命成德留后王熔、魏博留后乐行达、天平留后朱分别为本道节度使。
English: The imperial court appointed Chengde to stay after Wang Rong, Wei Bo to stay after Le Xingda, and Tianping to stay after Zhu, respectively.

古文：司徒、门下侍郎、同平章事郑畋，虽当播越，犹谨法度。
现代文：司徒、门下侍郎、同平章事郑畋，虽然是颠沛流离，仍然谨慎地维护朝廷的法度。
English: Although he was a vagabond, Zheng Yao, a tutor, a subordinate attendant, and a peer of the emperor, still carefully upheld the laws of the imperial court.

古文：田令孜为判官吴圆求郎官，畋不许；陈敬瑄欲立于宰相之上，畋以故事，使相品秩虽高，皆居真相之下，固争之；二人乃令凤翔节度使李昌言上言： 军情猜忌，不可令畋扈从过此。 
现代文：田令孜请求为判官吴圆加封郎官，郑畋不同意；陈敬要把自己的职位提到宰相之上，郑畋认为在以往的旧例中，虽然节度使带平章事及检校三省长官、三公、三师的这些人称为使相，其品秩都在真正的宰相之下，因而坚决与陈敬争辩。田令孜、陈敬二人于是指令凤翔节度使李昌言向唐僖宗进言说： 军中人情猜疑，不能让郑畋随从皇上经过这里。 
English: Tian Lingze requested the judge Wu Yuan plus the vassal, but Zheng Yi disagreed; Chen Jing wanted to elevate his position above the prime minister. Zheng Yi thought that in the previous old cases, although the governor had made these people with the title of Ping Zhangji and the inspection of the three provincial governors, the three princes and the three divisions be called envoys, their rank was below the real prime minister, so he firmly argued with Chen Jing. Tian Lingzi and Chen Jing then ordered Feng Xiang to make Li Changyan speak to Tang Yanzong and said: The military is suspicious of human feelings, and Zheng Yi cannot be allowed to pass through here with the emperor.

古文：畋亦累表辞位，乃罢为太子太保，又以其子兵部侍郎凝绩为彭州刺史，使之就养。
现代文：郑畋也多次进呈表文请求辞官，唐僖宗于是罢免郑畋的官职，封为太子太保，又以郑畋的儿子兵部侍郎郑凝绩为彭州刺史，让郑畋到那里去养老。
English: Zheng Rong also repeatedly submitted a written request to be demoted, and Tang Xizong then dismissed Zheng Rong from his official position and appointed him as the Crown Prince's bodyguard. He also designated Zheng Rong's son, the military aide Zheng Rong, as the official historian of Pengzhou, and asked Zheng Rong to retire there.

古文：以兵部尚书判度支裴澈为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：朝廷任命兵部尚书判度支裴澈为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: The Imperial Court appointed Hyobu Shosho Shundo Shippetsu as Chusho Jiro and Tonghei Shoji.

古文：八月，甲辰，李克用至晋阳，诏以前振武节度使李国昌为代北节度使，镇代州。
现代文：八月，甲辰，李克用到达晋阳，唐僖宗诏令任命以前的振武节度使李国昌为代北节度使，镇所设在代州。
English: In August, Jia Chen, Li Kezhen arrived in Jinyang, and Tang Xizong issued an imperial edict to appoint the former Zhenwu Festival to make Li Guochang the representative of the North Festival, and the town was located in Daizhou.

古文：升湖南为钦化军，以观察使闵勖为节度使。
现代文：朝廷将湖南的军队晋升为钦化军，任命观察使闵勖为节度使。
English: The imperial court promoted the army of Hunan to the Jinhua Army and appointed the observation envoy Zeng as the festival envoy.

古文：九月，如陈敬瑄兼中书令，进爵颍川郡王。
现代文：九月，朝迁加封陈敬兼任中书令，晋升爵位为颖川郡王。
English: In September, Chen Jing was promoted to the position of the King of Yingchuan County.

古文：感化节度使时溥营于溵水；加溥东面兵马都统。
现代文：感化节度使时溥在不安设军，朝廷加封他为东面兵马都统。
English: Influenced by the festival, Shisheng was uneasy about setting up an army, and the imperial court sealed him as the East Terracotta Warriors and Horses.

古文：以荆南留后陈儒为节度使。
现代文：朝廷任命荆南留后陈儒为节度使。
English: The imperial court appointed Chen Ru as the festival envoy after Jing Nan left.

古文：昭义节度使孟方立，以潞州地险人劲，屡篡主帅，欲渐弱之，及迁治所于邢州，大将家及富室皆徙山东，潞人不悦。
现代文：昭义节度使孟方立，因为潞州地势险要民人刚烈，几次强夺主帅，所以想逐渐削弱这里，于是把镇所迁移到邢州，各大将领的家属和富贵人家都搬到山东，潞州人很不高兴。
English: The Shouyi Festival made Meng Fangli, because the terrain of Zhangzhou was dangerous for the people to be strong, several times forcibly captured the commander, so he wanted to gradually weaken here, so he moved the town hall to Zhangzhou. The families of major generals and rich people moved to Shandong. Zhangzhou people were very unhappy.

古文：监军祁审诲因人心不安，使武乡镇使安居受潜以蜡丸乞师于李克用，请复军府于潞州。
现代文：监军祁审诲因为人心不稳定，派遣武乡镇使安居受偷偷地通过蜡丸传递消息请求李克用出兵，希望把军府重新设在潞州。
English: Because of the instability of the people's hearts, Li Ke used the wax ball to secretly send a message to Anju, asking him to send troops, hoping to re-establish the military headquarters in Zhangzhou.

古文：冬，十月，克用遣其将贺公雅等赴之，为方立所败；又遣李克用击之，辛亥，取潞州，杀其刺史李殷锐。
现代文：冬季，十月，李克用派遣他的将领贺公雅等人前往，被孟方立打败；李克用又派遣李克修去进攻。辛亥，攻下潞州，杀掉潞州刺史李殷锐。
English: In the winter, in October, Li Ke used to send his generals He Gongya and others, and they were defeated by Meng Fangli; Li Ke used to send Li Kexiu to attack. Xinhai, captured Zhangzhou, and killed Li Yin Rui, the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：是后克用每岁出兵争山东，三州之人半为俘馘，野无稼穑矣。
现代文：从这以后，李克用每年都派出军队争夺山东的地盘，邢州、州、磁州这三个州的百姓有一半被俘获，田野里见不到庄稼。
English: From then on, Li Ke used to send troops every year to fight for the territory of Shandong Province. Half of the people in the three provinces of Zhangzhou, Zhoushou and Maganzhou were captured, and no crops could be seen in the fields.

古文：以宗女为安化长公主，妻南诏。
现代文：唐僖宗诏令以宗室的女儿为安化长公主，嫁给南诏王。
English: Emperor Zongzhao of Tang Dynasty decreed that the daughter of the imperial family should be Anhua, the eldest princess, and married to King Nanzhao.

古文：刘汉宏将十馀万众出西陵，将击董昌；戊午，钱镠济江逆战，大破之，汉宏易服持会刀而遁。
现代文：刘汉宏带领十几万人马从西陵出发，要攻打董昌。戊午，钱过江迎战，击败了刘汉宏的队伍，刘汉宏更换衣服手拿鱼刀扮成厨师逃走。
English: Liu Hanhong led more than a hundred thousand horses from Xiling to attack Dongchang. At noon, Qian crossed the river to fight and defeated Liu Hanhong's team. Liu Hanhong changed his clothes and ran away with a fish knife dressed as a chef.

古文：己未，汉宏收馀众四万又战，镠又破之，斩其弟汉容及将辛约。
现代文：己未，刘汉宏把残兵败将收集起来再次对战，钱又将刘汉宏打败，斩杀了他的弟弟刘汉容及其将领辛约。
English: Before long, Liu Hanhong gathered the defeated soldiers to fight again, and Qian defeated Liu Hanhong and killed his brother Liu Han Rong and his general Xin Rong.

古文：十一月，甲子朔，秦宗权围许州。
现代文：十一月，甲子朔日，秦宗权围攻许州。
English: In November, on the day of the new moon, Qin Zongquan besieged Huzhou.

古文：忠武大将鹿晏弘帅所部自河中南掠襄、邓、金、洋，所过屠灭，声云西赴行在。
现代文：忠武大将鹿晏弘率领部属从河中向南抢掠，路经襄州、邓州、金州、洋州，所经过的地方都遭到屠杀残害，鹿晏弘扬言说要往西开进，直奔成都唐僖宗的处所。
English: The loyal general Lu Qianhong led his subordinates to rob and plunder from the middle of the river to the south, passing through Xiangzhou, Dengzhou, Jinzhou and Yangzhou. All the places they passed through were slaughtered and mutilated. Lu Qianhong threatened to go west and go straight to the location of the Tang Yizong in Chengdu.

古文：十二月，至兴元，逐节度使牛勖，勖奔龙州西山。
现代文：十二月，鹿晏弘到达兴元，赶走节度使牛勖，牛勖逃奔龙州的西山。
English: In December, Lu Yuhong arrived in Xingyuan, drove away the festival to make the calf, and the calf fled to the West Mountain of Longzhou.

古文：晏弘据兴元，自称留后。
现代文：鹿晏弘于是占据兴元，自称留后。
English: Shikanehiro then occupied Xingyuan, claiming to stay behind.

古文：感化节度使时溥因食中毒，疑判官李凝古而杀之。
现代文：武宁节度使时溥因食物中毒，怀疑是判官李凝古所为而将李斩杀。
English: It is suspected that the judge, Li Jinggu, was responsible for the decapitation of Li Zhiyao, who was poisoned by food at the festival in Wu Ning.

古文：凝古父损，为右散骑常侍，在成都，溥奏凝古与父同谋。田令孜受溥赂，令御史台鞫之。
现代文：李凝古的父亲李损，是朝廷的右散骑常侍，当时在成都，时溥奏参李凝古和他的父亲合谋杀害他；田令孜收受时溥的贿赂，命令御史台审讯李损。
English: Li Jinggu's father, Li Jia, was the imperial court's right cavalryman. At that time, in Chengdu, Li Jinggu and his father conspired to murder him; Tian Lingzi received a bribe from Shi Jia and ordered the History Channel to interrogate Li Jia.

古文：侍卸史王华为损论冤，令孜矫诏移损下神策狱，华拒而不遣。
现代文：侍御史王华为李损鸣冤叫屈，田令孜假借唐僖宗的诏令要将李损转移投入神策狱，王华拒绝命令而不发遣李损。
English: Wang Hua, the attendant of Shi Wang, complained about Li Kaiming's injustice, and Tian Lingzi falsely borrowed Tang Xizong's edict to transfer Li Kaiming to Shenshe Prison. Wang Hua refused the order and did not send Li Kaiming.

古文：萧遘奏： 李凝古行毒，事出暖昧，已为溥所杀，父损相别数年，声问不通，安得诬以同谋！
现代文：萧遘上奏说： 李凝古投毒谋害时溥案本来事实不清，而李凝古已被时溥杀死，李凝古与他的父亲李损已分别多年，彼此信息不通，怎么能诬陷他们父子是同谋！
English: Xiao Yan said in his report: The facts of Li Geng Gu's poisoning and murder of Shigong were unclear, but Li Geng Gu had been killed by Shigong. Li Geng Gu and his father Li Zai had been separated for many years, and they did not have mutual information. How could they frame their father and son as co-conspirators!

古文：溥恃功乱法，陵蔑朝廷，欲杀天子侍臣；若徇其欲，行及臣辈，朝廷何以自立！ 
现代文：时溥倚仗有功践踏法度，凌辱蔑视朝廷，想要杀害天子身边的大臣；如果依从了他的狂妄要求，牵连在朝中臣僚，朝廷还怎么能够立足天下！ 
English: At times, he has the merit of trampling on the law, insulting and defying the imperial court, and trying to kill the ministers around the emperor; if he follows his arrogant demands and implicates the ministers in the imperial court, how can the imperial court maintain its foothold in the world!

古文：由是损得免死，归田里。
现代文：这样，李损才免于一死，解职回到故里。
English: In this way, Li Jia was spared from death and returned to his hometown after being relieved of his duties.

古文：时令孜专权，群臣莫敢迕视，惟遘屡与争辩，朝廷倚之。
现代文：当时田令孜独揽大权，臣僚们没有敢不顺从的，只有萧遘多次与他争辩，成为朝廷的依靠。
English: At that time, Tian Lingzi was the sole holder of great power, and his ministers did not dare to disobey him. Only Xiao Tong repeatedly argued with him and became the reliance of the imperial court.

古文：升浙东为义胜军，以刘汉宏为节度使。
现代文：朝廷将浙东的军队升格为义胜军，任命刘汉宏为节度使。
English: The imperial court upgraded the army of eastern Zhejiang to the victorious army and appointed Liu Hanhong as the envoy of the emperor.

古文：赵犨遣人间道求救于邻道，于是周岌、时溥、硃全忠皆引兵救之。
现代文：赵派人抄近路向邻近各道求救，于是周岌、时溥、朱全忠都率领队伍前往救援。
English: Zhao sent someone to take a shortcut to the neighboring roads to ask for help, so Zhou Rui, Shijun, and Zhu Quanzhong led the team to the rescue.

古文：全忠与黄巢之党战于鹿邑，败之，斩首二千馀级，遂引兵入亳州而据之。
现代文：朱全忠与黄巢的人马在鹿邑展开激战，打败黄巢，斩杀二千余人，带领官军进入亳州而占据该城。
English: Zhu Quanzhong and Huang Chao's men fought a fierce battle in Ruyi, defeated Huang Chao, killed more than two thousand people, and led the government army into Zhangzhou to occupy the city.

古文：僖宗惠圣恭定孝皇帝中之下中和四年春，正月，以鹿晏弘为兴元留后。
现代文：中和四年春季正月，朝廷任命鹿晏弘为兴元留后。
English: In the first month of the spring of the 4th year of the Middle Ages, the imperial court appointed Shika Shihong as the successor of Xingyuan.

古文：赐魏博节度使乐行达名彦祯。
现代文：唐僖宗赐魏博节度使乐行达名为彦祯。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang Dynasty gave Wei Bo Festival the name of Hikone.

古文：东川节度使杨师立以陈敬瑄兄弟权宠之盛，心不能平。
现代文：东川节度使杨师立对陈敬、田令孜兄弟极度专权，心中愤愤不平。
English: The Dongchuan Festival made Yang Shili extremely autocratic towards Chen Jing and Tian Lingzi brothers, and he was resentful.

古文：敬瑄之遣高仁厚讨韩秀升也，语之曰： 成功而还，当奏天子，以东川相赏。 
现代文：陈敬派遣高仁厚讨代韩秀升时，对高仁厚说： 大功告成后，我要奏请皇上，赏你做东川节度使。 
English: When Chen Jing dispatched Gao Renhou to negotiate on behalf of Han Xiu Sheng, he said to Gao Renhou: After the great achievement is completed, I will ask the emperor to reward you for being the Dongchuan Festival envoy.

古文：师立闻之，怒曰： 彼此列籓，而遽以我疆土许人，是无天地也！ 
现代文：杨师立知道这事，悖然大怒，气愤地说： 彼此都是大唐的属地，而竟然把我管辖的疆土许诺给别人，这实在是没有天公地道了！ 
English: Yang Shili knew this, but defied it with great anger, saying angrily, "Both are territories belonging to the Great Tang Dynasty, but to go so far as to promise the territory under my jurisdiction to others, this is truly unheard of!"

古文：田令孜恐其为乱，因其不发兵遏，征师立为右仆射。
现代文：田令孜担心杨师立发动叛乱，趁着他还没有发兵进行防范，就征调杨师立为右仆射。
English: Tian Lingze was worried that Yang Shili would launch a rebellion, and took advantage of the fact that he had not yet sent troops to take precautions, to conscript Yang Shili as his right-hand man.

古文：黄巢兵尚强，周岌、时溥、硃全忠不能支，共求救于河东节度使李克用。
现代文：黄巢人马的势力还比较强大，周岌、时溥、朱全忠支持不住，一同和河东节度使李克用请求救援。
English: Huang Chao's forces were still relatively strong, and Zhou Rui, Shi Yan, and Zhu Quanzhong could not be supported. Together with Hedong Jiedu, Li Ke used to request rescue.

古文：二月，克用将蕃、汉兵五万出天井关，河阳节度使诸葛爽辞以河桥不完，屯兵万善以拒之。
现代文：二月，李克用带领蕃夷和汉族兵马五万杀出天井关；河阳节度使诸葛爽以河阳桥还没完工为理由进行推辞，在万善屯驻军队拒绝李克用经由这里。
English: In February, Li Ke used to lead the Qianyi and Han soldiers and horses to kill fifty thousand out of the ceiling pass; the Kheyang Festival made Zhuge Shuang refuse to allow Li Ke to use the Kheyang Bridge because it was not yet completed, and the troops stationed in Wanshan Tun refused to pass through here.

古文：克用乃还兵自陕、河中渡河而东。
现代文：李克用于是带兵回去从陕州和河中渡过黄河向东挺进。
English: Li Ke used to lead the soldiers back from Shaanxi and Hechu to cross the Yellow River and advance eastward.

古文：杨师立得诏书，怒，不受代，杀官告使及监军使，举兵，以讨陈敬瑄为名，大将有谏者辄杀之，进屯涪城，遣其将郝蠲袭绵州，不克。
现代文：杨师立接到调任他为右仆射的诏令，极其愤怒，拒不受命，杀掉朝廷的官告使和东川监军使，以讨伐陈敬为名兴兵反叛，大将中有谏阻的，杨师立当即斩杀，进军驻扎涪城，派遣他的将领郝蠲攻打绵州，没有攻克。
English: Yang Shili immediately received the imperial decree to assign him as the right-hand man, was extremely angry, refused to accept orders, killed the imperial court's official complaint envoy and the Dongchuan supervision envoy, and rebelled in the name of fighting Chen Jing. Yang Shili immediately killed the resistance among the generals, marched into Shicheng, sent his generals to attack Mengzhou, and did not conquer.

古文：丙午，以陈敬瑄为西川、东川、山南西道都指挥、招讨、安抚、处置等使。
现代文：丙午，朝廷任命陈敬为西川、东川、山南西道都指挥、招讨、安抚、处置等使。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd, the imperial court appointed Chen Jing as the envoy to command, solicit, pacify, and deal with the West River, East River, and West Shannan Province.

古文：三月，甲子，杨师立移檄行在百官及诸道将吏士庶，数陈敬瑄十罪，自言集本道将士、八州坛丁共十五万人，长驱问罪。
现代文：三月，甲子，杨师立向成都唐僖宗那里的文武百官和各道将士官民，历数陈敬的十大罪状，自己陈言招集本道将士、八州坛丁共十五万人，长驱直进前往问罪。
English: In March, Ya Zi and Yang Shili went to Tang Xizong in Chengdu, where there were hundreds of civil and military officials and officials and people from various provinces. They counted the ten major offenses of Chen Jing, and summoned 150,000 soldiers from their own province and eight provinces, and drove straight ahead to ask for punishment.

古文：诏削师立官爵，以眉州防御使高仁厚为东川留后，将兵五千讨之，以西川押牙杨茂言为行军副使。
现代文：僖宗颁发诏令，削去杨师立的官爵，任命眉州防御使高仁厚为东川留后，率领军队五千进行讨伐，命西川押牙将杨茂言为行军副使。
English: Emperor Taizong issued an imperial edict, stripping Yang Shiren of his official title, appointing Gao Renhou of Meizhou Defense to stay in Dongchuan, leading an army of five thousand to carry out the crusade, and ordering Xichuan Oshiaga to make Yang Maoyan the deputy envoy.

古文：硃全忠击黄巢瓦子寨，拔之；巢将陕人李唐宾、楚丘王虔裕降于全忠。
现代文：朱全忠攻打黄巢的瓦子寨，予以攻克。黄巢的将领陕州人李唐宾、楚丘人王虔裕向朱全忠投降。
English: Zhu Quanzhong attacked the tile village of Huang Chao and defeated it. The generals of Huang Chao, Li Tangbin from Shaanxi and Wang Qianyu from Chuqiu, surrendered to Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：婺州人王镇执刺史黄碣，降于钱镠。
现代文：婺州人王镇捉拿剌史黄碣，向钱投降。
English: Wang Zhen, a native of Zhangzhou, captured Huang Qi and surrendered to Qian.

古文：刘汉宏遣其将娄赉杀镇而代之，浦阳镇将蒋环召镠兵共攻婺州，擒赉而还。
现代文：刘汉宏派遣他的将领娄赉杀掉王镇而取代，镇守浦阳的将领蒋召来钱的兵马一同进攻婺州，擒获娄赉而回。
English: Liu Hanhong dispatched his generals to kill Wang Zhen and replace him. The general of the town guarding Poyang, Jiang Yu, summoned Qian's soldiers and horses to attack Zhangzhou together. They were captured and returned.

古文：碣，闽人也。
现代文：黄碣是福建人。
English: Huang Qi is from Fujian Province.

古文：高骈从子左骁卫大将军澞，疏吕用之罪状二十馀幅，密以呈骈，且泣曰： 用之内则假神仙之说，蛊惑尊听；外则盗节制之权，残贼百姓；将佐惧死，莫之敢言。
现代文：高骈的侄子左骁卫大将军高，阵述吕用之的罪状，状纸达二十多篇，秘密呈交高骈，并且哭着说： 吕用之在内假借神仙鬼怪，迷惑您的耳目，在外则盗用节制权柄，残害地方百姓；将领佐官都惧怕大祸，而不敢说话。
English: Gao Ye's nephew, General Gao Zuowei, wrote more than 20 articles about Lu Ye's crimes, which he secretly submitted to Gao Ye, crying: "Inside, Lu Ye's disguised himself as a fairy and ghost to confuse your eyes and ears, but outside, he stole the power of restraint and brutalized the local people; generals and adjutants were afraid of a big disaster and did not dare to speak.

古文：岁月浸深，羽翼将成，苟不除之，恐高氏弈代勋庸，一朝扫地矣！ 
现代文：随着时光的流逝，吕用之的羽毛将要丰满，翅膀要硬起来，如果不把他铲除掉，恐怕高家世代的功劳，在一个早晨就会败落下去！ 
English: With the passage of time, Lü Yingzhi's feathers will become plump and his wings will harden. If he is not eliminated, I am afraid that the merits of Gao Jia's generation will be ruined in one morning!

古文：因呜咽不自胜。
现代文：于是情不自禁地痛哭起来。
English: So I couldn't help but burst into tears.

古文：骈曰： 汝醉邪！ 
现代文：高骈说： 你是喝酒过多了吧！ 
English: Gao Yao said, "You've been drinking too much!

古文：命扶出。
现代文：叫人把高搀扶出去。
English: The order was to get her out.

古文：明日，以澞状示用之，用之曰： 四十郎尝以空乏见告，未获遵命，故有此憾。 
现代文：第二天，高骈把高的诉状展示给吕用之看，吕用之说： 高曾因手头拮据请求救助，没有获得准许，所以对我怀恨在心。 
English: The next day, Gao Jun showed Gao's complaint to Lv Yanzhong. Lv Yanzhong said: Gao had asked for help due to financial difficulties and was not allowed, so he held a grudge against me.

古文：因出澞手书数幅呈之。
现代文：吕用之顺便拿出高原来亲手写的几封信呈送高骈。
English: By the way, Lv Yizhi took out several letters written by Gao himself to present to Gao Yao.

古文：骈甚惭，遂禁澞出入；后月馀，以澞知舒州事。
现代文：高骈十分惭愧，于是禁止高随便出入；一个月后，让高去掌管舒州事宜。
English: Gao Yao was so ashamed that he forbade Gao to come and go as he pleased. A month later, Gao was put in charge of Shuzhou affairs.

古文：群盗陈儒攻舒州，澞求救于庐州。
现代文：盗贼陈儒攻打舒州，高向庐州的杨行愍请求救援。
English: Thief Chen Ru attacked Shuzhou, Gao requested rescue from Yang Xingyao of Ganzhou.

古文：杨行愍力不能救，谋于其将李神福，神福请不用寸刃而逐之。
现代文：杨行愍估计靠他的兵力难以应救，便和他的将领李神福谋划对策，李神福自请不动刀枪就可赶走盗贼。
English: Yang Xingyao estimated that it would be difficult to respond to the rescue with his troops, so he and his general Li Shenfu planned a countermeasure. Li Shenfu could drive away the thieves without using a knife or gun.

古文：乃多赍旗帜，间道入舒州，顷之，引舒州兵建庐州旗帜而出，指画地形，若布大陈状；贼惧，宵遁。
现代文：于是带上许多旗帜，从偏僻的小路进入舒州，不久，李神福带领舒州的军队挂着庐州带来的旗帜纷纷出城，看着地形比比划划，就象布置大的作战阵容的样子；陈儒一伙盗贼害怕起来，乘夜间逃走了。
English: So he took a lot of flags with him and entered Shuzhou from a remote path. Soon, Li Shenfu led the Shuzhou army out of the city with the flags brought by Zhangzhou. Looking at the topography, it was like arranging a large battle lineup. Chen Ru and a group of thieves got scared and fled by night.

古文：神福，洺州人也。
现代文：李神福是州人。
English: Li Shenfu is from Suzhou.

古文：久之，群盗吴迥、李本复攻舒州，澞不能守，弃城走，骈使人就杀之。
现代文：过了很久，盗贼吴迥、李本再次攻打舒州，高不能固守，扔下舒州城逃跑，高骈派人追上把高杀掉。
English: After a long time, the thieves Wu Gan and Li Ben attacked Shuzhou again, Gao could not hold on, threw down Shuzhou City and fled, Gao Gan sent someone to catch up and kill Gao.

古文：杨行愍遣其将合肥陶雅、清流张训等将兵击吴迥、李本，擒斩之，以雅摄州刺史。
现代文：杨行愍派遣手下将领合肥人陶雅、清流人张训等人率领官军攻打吴迥、李本，将他们擒获斩杀，便任命陶雅代理舒州剌史。
English: Yang Xingya dispatched his subordinate generals, including He Fei's Tao Ya and Qingliu's Zhang Xun, to lead the official army to attack Wu Gan and Li Ben, capturing and killing them, and then appointed Tao Ya's deputy, Shuzhou Xinshi.

古文：秦宗权遣其弟将兵寇庐州，据舒城，杨行愍遣其将合肥田頵击走之。
现代文：秦宗权派遣他的弟弟带领人马侵扰庐州，占据舒城，杨行愍又派遣他的将领合肥人田将盗贼打跑。
English: Qin Zongquan sent his younger brother to invade Zhangzhou and occupy Shucheng, and Yang Xingyao sent his general Hefei Ren Tian to drive the thieves away.

古文：前杭州刺史路审中客居黄州，闻鄂州刺史崔绍卒，募兵三千人入据之。
现代文：以前的杭州剌史路审中旅居黄州，他听说鄂州剌史崔绍死去，便招募三千人马占据了鄂州。
English: He had lived in Huangzhou during the previous Hangzhou 史 Road Trial. When he heard that Ezhou 史崔绍 had died, he recruited three thousand horses to occupy Ezhou.

古文：武昌牙将杜洪亦逐岳州刺史而代之。
现代文：武昌牙将杜洪也驱逐岳州剌史取而代之。
English: Du Hongyi was ousted by Wuchang Fang and replaced by Yuezhou Zou Shi.

古文：黄巢围陈州几三百日，赵犨兄弟与之大小数百战，虽兵食将尽，而众心益固。
现代文：黄巢围攻陈州将近三百天，赵兄弟与黄巢大小战斗几百次，虽然官兵的粮食快有没了，可是大家抗击贼寇的决心更加坚定。
English: Huang Chao besieged Chenzhou for nearly 300 days, and the Zhao brothers fought with Huang Chao several hundred times. Although the officers and soldiers were running out of food, everyone's determination to resist the bandits was even stronger.

古文：李克用会许、汴、徐、兗之军于陈州。时尚让屯太康，夏，四月，癸巳，诸军进拔太康。
现代文：李克用在陈州与许州、汴州、徐州、兖州的各路官军相会；当时，尚让驻守太康，夏季，四月，癸巳，各路官军推进攻克太康。
English: Li Ke used Chenzhou to meet with officials and troops from Huzhou, Ganzhou, Xuzhou and Ganzhou; at that time, Shang Jian was stationed in Taikang, and in the summer, in April, all the officials and troops advanced to conquer Taikang.

古文：黄思鄴屯西华，诸军复攻之。思鄴走。
现代文：黄思邺驻扎西华，各路官军又攻打西华，黄思邺逃跑。
English: Huang Siyu was stationed in West China, and the various government troops attacked West China, and Huang Siyu fled.

古文：黄巢闻之惧，退军故阳里，陈州围始解。
现代文：黄巢听到这些战况很是恐惧，把人马撤退到故阳里，陈州开始解围。
English: When Huang Chao heard about these war conditions, he was very afraid. He withdrew his troops to Goyang, and Chenzhou began to lift the siege.

古文：硃全忠闻黄巢将至，引军还大梁。
现代文：朱全忠听说黄巢快要到来，带领军队回到大梁。
English: Zhu Quanzhong heard that Huang Chao was about to arrive and led the army back to Daliang.

古文：五月，癸亥，大雨，平地三尺，黄巢营为水所漂，且闻李克用至，遂引兵东北趣汴州，屠尉氏。
现代文：五月，癸亥，天下大雨，雨水淹没地面三尺深，黄巢的军营被水淹漫，又听说李克用将要来到，于是带领人马往东北方向的汴州奔去，进屠尉氏。
English: In May, during the Boer War, there was heavy rain. The rainwater flooded the ground to a depth of three feet. The military camp in Huang Chao was flooded. It was also rumored that Li Kegui was about to arrive, so he led his men and horses to the northeastern direction of Zhangzhou, and entered the house of Tu Youyi.

古文：尚让以骁骑五千进逼大梁，至于繁台，宣武将丰人硃珍、南华庞师古击却之。
现代文：尚让带领精壮骑兵五千逼近大梁，到达繁台，宣武将军丰州人朱珍、南华人庞师古将尚让击退。
English: Shangzhen, leading five thousand strong cavalry, approached the girders and reached the plateau, but was repulsed by Zhu Zhen, a native of Fengzhou, and Pang Shigu, a native of South China.

古文：全忠复告急于李克用。丙寅，克用与忠武都监使田从异发许州，戊辰，追及黄巢于中牟北王满渡，乘其半济，奋击，大破之，杀万馀人，贼遂溃。
现代文：朱全忠又向李克用告急请求援救，丙寅，李克用与忠武都监使田从异从许州出发，戊辰，在中牟北面的王满渡追赶上黄巢，李克用乘黄巢人马渡到汴河一半的时候，奋勇攻打，击败黄巢的队全，斩杀一万余人，贼寇于溃退。
English: Zhu Quanzhong also sent an urgent request for rescue to Li Keqiang, Hsin, Li Keqiang and the loyal military governor sent Tian from Xiang from Huzhou, Wuchen, in the north of Zhongmou, Wang Mandu chased the Yellow Nest, Li Keqiang took the Yellow Nest to the middle of the Minhe River, fought bravely, defeated the entire team of the Yellow Nest, killed more than 10,000 people, and the bandits retreated.

古文：尚让帅其众降时溥，别将临晋李谠、曲周霍存、甄城葛从周、冤句张归霸及从弟归厚帅其众降硃全忠。
现代文：尚让率领人马向时溥投降，其他将领临晋人李谠、曲周人霍存、甄城人葛从周、冤句人张归霸以及他的堂弟张归厚带领所部向朱全忠投降。
English: Shang Zhan led the troops to surrender to Xicheng, and other generals including Linjin's Li Zhen, Qu Zhou's Huo Cun, Zhencheng's Ge Zhou, Wugu's Zhang Gui Bao, and his cousin Zhang Gui Hou led the headquarters to surrender to Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：巢逾汴而北，己巳，克用追击之于封丘，又破之。
现代文：黄巢经过汴河向北奔去，己巳，李克用在封丘追上黄巢，又将黄巢打败。
English: The Yellow Nest ran north through the Li River, and Li Ke used the seal hill to catch up with the Yellow Nest, and then defeated the Yellow Nest.

古文：庚午夜，复大雨，贼惊惧东走，克用追之，过胙城、匡城。
现代文：庚行午夜间，又下大雨，贼寇惊慌畏惧向东逃跑，李克用穷追不舍，先后经过胙城、匡城。
English: During the night of the middle of the day, it rained heavily again. The bandits panicked and fled to the east. Li Ke pursued them relentlessly, passing through Shicheng and Kuangcheng successively.

古文：巢收馀众近千人，东奔充州。辛未，克用追至冤句，骑能属者才数百人，昼夜行二百馀里，人马疲乏，粮尽，乃还汴州，欲裹粮复追之，获巢幼子及乘舆器服符印，得所掠男女万人，悉纵遣之。
现代文：黄巢把剩余的人马收集起将近一千人，向东奔往兖州；辛未，李克用追到冤句，统领的骑兵仅几百人，一天一夜行程二百余里，士兵和马匹都疲惫不堪，粮食也断绝了，于是回到汴州，想携带这里的粮食再次追击黄巢。李克用捉住黄巢的幼子，缴获了黄巢乘坐的车马和他的器具、服装、符节和印章，并收得黄巢以前掠抢的男女百姓有一万多，把他们全部放回去。
English: Huang Chao gathered up the remaining nearly one thousand people and horses and rushed eastward to Zhangzhou; before long, Li Ke chased the wrong sentence, commanding only a few hundred cavalry, traveling more than two hundred miles a day and night, soldiers and horses were exhausted, and food was cut off, so he returned to Zhangzhou and wanted to carry the grain here to chase Huang Chao again. Li Ke used to catch the young son of Huang Chao and captured the chariot and horse of Huang Chao and his utensils, clothing, symbols and seals, and collected more than ten thousand men and women who had been robbed by Huang Chao before, and put them all back.

古文：癸酉，高仁厚屯德阳，杨师立遣其将郑君雄、张士安据鹿头关以拒之。
现代文：癸酉，高仁厚驻扎德阳，杨师立派遣他的将领郑君雄、张士安占据鹿头关以抗拒高仁厚。
English: At that time, Gao Renhou was stationed in Deyang, and Yang Shili sent his generals Zheng Junxiong and Zhang Shian to occupy Shitou Pass to resist Gao Renhou.

古文：甲戌，李克用至汴州，营于城外，硃全忠固请入城，馆于上源驿。
现代文：甲戌，李克用到达汴州，在城外安营扎寨；朱全忠坚持请李克用进入城内，在上源驿为李克用设立馆舍。
English: Zhu Quanzhong insisted that Li Quanzhong enter the city and set up a pavilion for Li Quanzhong in Shangyuan.

古文：全忠就置酒、声乐，馔具皆精丰，礼貌甚恭。
现代文：朱全忠为李克用置办酒席招待，有精彩的歌舞音乐，丰盛的美食佳肴，礼貌十分恭谦。
English: Zhu Quanzhong invited Li Ke to a banquet, with wonderful song and dance music, sumptuous food and delicacies, and very polite.

古文：克用乘酒使气，语颇侵之，全忠不平，薄暮，罢酒，从者皆沾醉，宣武将杨彦洪密与全忠谋，连车树栅以塞衢路，发兵围驿而攻之，呼声动地。
现代文：李克用乘着酒兴大发脾气，多有恶语伤人之处，朱全忠心里愤愤不平。到了傍晚，酒宴结束，李克用的随从都饮酒大醉胸襟沾湿而不能自恃，宣武将军杨彦洪与朱全忠谋划，把马车连起来用树木做栅栏以堵塞主要道路，然后派出军队包围上源驿攻打李克用，呼喊的声音惊天动地。
English: In the evening, after the banquet was over, Li Kegui's attendants were all drunk and wet and could not control themselves. The propaganda general Yang Yanhong and Zhu Quanzhong plotted to block the main road by connecting the carriages with trees to make a fence, and then sent troops to surround Shangyuan and attack Li Kegui. The sound of the shouting was earth-shattering.

古文：克用醉，不之闻；亲兵薛志勤、史敬思等十馀人格斗，侍者郭景铢灭烛，扶克用匿床下，以水沃其面，徐告以难，克用始张目援弓而起。
现代文：李克用已醉，不知道这一切，他的亲兵薛志勤、史敬思等十几人展开激烈的搏杀，侍卫郭景铢扑灭蜡烛，搀扶李克用藏到床下，用凉水浇李克用的脸，慢慢地告诉他所发生的灾难，李克用开始睁开眼睛拉着弓箭起来。
English: Li Kegui was drunk and did not know all of this. A dozen of his soldiers, including Xue Zhiqin and Shi Jingsi, fought fiercely. Guard Guo Jingyao extinguished the candle, helped Li Kegui hide under the bed, poured cold water on Li Kegui's face, and slowly told him about the disaster. Li Kegui began to open his eyes and draw his bow and arrow.

古文：志勤射汴人，死者数十。
现代文：薛志勤用箭射汴州的人，射死几十名。
English: Xue Zhi frequently shot people in Luzhou with arrows, killing dozens of them.

古文：须臾，烟火四合，会大雨震电，天地晦冥，志勤扶克用帅左右数人，逾坦突围，乘电光而行，汴人扼桥，力战得度，史敬思为后拒，战死。
现代文：不一会浓烟烈火从四面扑来，恰好天下大雨，电闪雷呜，天地昏暗，薛志勤扶着李克用率领身边的几名卫兵，越过墙垣突破包围，乘着闪电的光亮向前走，汴州军队把守渡桥，经过激烈的交战李克用才过去，史敬思在后面阻击掩护，战死。
English: Not long after, thick smoke and fire came from all sides. It happened to be a heavy rain, lightning and thunder, and the sky was dark. Xue Zhiqin supported Li Kexin and led several guards around him to break through the wall and go forward with the light of lightning. The Zhangzhou army guarded the bridge. After a fierce battle, Li Kexin passed, and Shi Jingsi blocked the cover behind and died in battle.

古文：克用登尉氏门，缒城得出，监军陈景思等三百馀人，皆为汴人所杀。
现代文：李克用登上汴州城的南门尉氏门，用绳子拴住身体溜下去，得以逃出，监军陈景思等三百余人，都被汴州军队杀害。
English: Li Ke used the South Gate of Zhangzhou City to escape. He tied a rope around his body and slipped down. More than 300 people, including the military supervisor Chen Jingsi, were killed by the Zhangzhou army.

古文：杨彦洪谓全忠曰： 胡人急则乘马，见乘马者则射之。 
现代文：杨彦洪对朱全忠说： 北方的胡人遇有急事就乘骑马匹，我们见到有骑马人便射他。 
English: Yang Yanhong said to Zhu Quanzhong, "In case of emergency, the northern Hu people ride horses. When we see a rider, we shoot him.

古文：是夕，彦洪乘马适在全忠前，全忠射之，殪。
现代文：当天晚上，杨彦洪恰好骑着马出现在朱全忠的面前，朱全忠当即射箭，杀死了杨彦洪。
English: On the evening of the same day, Yang Yanhong just happened to appear on horseback in front of Zhu Quanzhong. Zhu Quanzhong immediately shot arrows and killed Yang Yanhong.

古文：克用妻刘氏，多智略，左右先脱归者以汴人为变告，刘氏神色不动，立斩之，阴召大将约束，谋保军以还。
现代文：李克用的妻子刘氏，智多善谋，李克用身边的人有的先从汴州城内逃脱回去，把汴州城内朱全忠发动变乱一事告诉给她，刘氏不动声色，立却将逃回来的人斩杀，暗中召集各大将军，谋划以求全军回还。
English: Mr. Liu, the wife of Li Ke, was clever and good at plotting. Li Ke used some of the people around him to escape back from the city of Zhangzhou first, and told her about Zhu Quanzhong's rebellion in the city of Zhangzhou. Mr. Liu did not make a fuss, but he killed the people who escaped and secretly convened the major generals to plan for the return of the whole army.

古文：比明，克用至，欲勒兵攻全忠，刘氏曰： 公比为国讨贼，救东诸侯之急，今汴人不道，乃谋害公，自当诉之朝廷。
现代文：等到天亮，李克用回来，要率领所部官兵去攻打朱全忠，刘氏说： 你正在为国家讨伐贼寇，解救东面各路官军的燃眉之急，今天汴州朱全忠一伙人不仁道，竟阴谋杀害你，正应当去呈诉朝廷。
English: When Li Kexin returned at dawn, he wanted to lead the officers and soldiers of the headquarters to attack Zhu Quanzhong. Mr. Liu said: You are fighting against the bandits for the country, and it is urgent to save the government troops in the east. Today, a group of Zhu Quanzhong in Zhangzhou are not benevolent, and they actually conspired to murder you. You should go to sue the imperial court.

古文：若擅举兵相攻，则天下孰能辨其曲直！
现代文：如果你擅自带领人马去攻打他，那么天下的人谁还能辨别这件事的是非曲直！
English: If you arbitrarily lead men and horses to attack him, then who in the world can distinguish the rights and wrongs of this matter!

古文：且彼得以有辞矣。 
现代文：而且那样会让朱全忠有话可说了。 
English: And that would give Zhu Quanzhong something to talk about.

古文：克用从之，引兵去，但移书责全忠。
现代文：李克用听从了妻子刘氏的话，带领军队离去，只是写信责备朱全忠。
English: Li Kejun obeyed his wife Liu's words and led the army to leave, but only wrote a letter to blame Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：全忠复书曰： 前夕之变，仆不之知，朝廷自遣使者与杨彦洪为谋，彦洪既伏其辜，惟公谅察。 
现代文：朱全忠回信说： 前天晚上的变乱，我实在不知道，是朝廷派遣的使臣与杨彦洪相谋划的，杨彦洪既然已经伏罪处死，只有请你体察原谅了。 
English: Zhu Quanzhong replied in a letter, "I really don't know what caused the disturbance the night before yesterday. It was planned by the envoys sent by the imperial court and Yang Yanhong. Since Yang Yanhong has already been sentenced to death, I can only ask for your understanding and forgiveness.

古文：克用养子嗣源，年十七，从克用自上源山，矢石之间，独无所伤。
现代文：李克用的养子李嗣源，年龄十七岁，跟随李克用从上源驿出来，枪林弹雨之中，唯独没有受伤。
English: Li Kegui's adopted son, Li Siyuan, age seventeen, followed Li Kegui out of Shangyuan. Amidst the hail of bullets, he was the only one not injured.

古文：嗣源本胡人，名邈佶烈，无姓。
现代文：李嗣源本来是北方的胡人，名字是邈佶烈，没有姓。
English: Li Siyuan was originally a Hu man from the north. His first name was Yan Rong and he had no surname.

古文：克用择军中骁勇者，多养为子，名回鹘张政之子曰存信，振武孙重进曰存进，许州王贤曰存贤，安敬思曰存孝，皆冒姓李氏。
现代文：李克用选择军营中勇健强悍的人，收养许多作为义子，有回纥人张政的儿子起名存信，振武人孙重进起名存进，许州人王贤起名存贤，安敬思起名存孝，都冒充李姓。
English: Li Ke used to choose the brave, vigorous and strong people in the military camp, and adopted many of them as his adopted sons. The son of Zhang Zheng of Huiyang named and kept the letter, the son of Sun Chongjin of Zhenwu named and kept the letter, the son of Wang Xian of Xuzhou named and kept the letter, and the son of An Jing Si named and kept the letter, all of which were assumed to be the surname of Li.

古文：丙子，克用至许州故寨，求粮于周岌，岌辞以粮乏，乃自陕济河还晋阳。
现代文：丙子，李克用到达许州原来的营寨，向周岌请求援助粮食，周岌以粮食缺乏为理由而拒绝了，李克用于是从陕州渡过黄河回到晋阳。
English: For example, Li Ke used to go to the original encampment in Huzhou to request food aid from Zhou De, but Zhou De refused on the grounds of lack of food. Li Ke used to cross the Yellow River from Shaanxi to return to Jinyang.

古文：郑君雄、张士安坚壁不出，高仁厚曰： 攻之则彼利我伤，围之则彼困我逸。 
现代文：郑君雄、张士安坚守东川城堡而不出战，高仁厚说； 发动进攻对郑君雄、张士安有利而我军将要付出大的伤亡，进行围困会使郑君雄、张士安疲惫困乏而我军安闲无损。 
English: Zheng Junxiong and Zhang Shian firmly defended Dongchuan Castle without going to war, Gao Renhou said; launching an attack is beneficial to Zheng Junxiong and Zhang Shian, and our army will pay a lot of casualties; carrying out a siege will make Zheng Junxiong and Zhang Shian tired and weary, but our army will be safe and sound.

古文：遂列十二寨围之。
现代文：于是布置十二个营寨将东川城堡包围起来。
English: As a result, twelve encampments were set up to surround Dongchuan Castle.

古文：丁丑，夜二鼓，君雄等出劲兵掩击城北副使寨，杨茂言不能御，帅众弃寨走，其旁数寨见副使走，亦走。
现代文：丁丑，夜间二更时分，郑君雄等人出动强劲军队乘官兵不备突然袭击城北副使的营寨，杨茂言抵御不住，率领人马扔下营寨逃跑，旁边几个营寨的官兵看到副使逃跑，也纷纷离去。
English: Ding Qiu, at two o'clock in the morning, Zheng Junxiong and others sent out a strong army of officers and soldiers to suddenly attack the camp of the deputy envoy to the north of the city. Yang Maoyan could not resist, and led the men and horses to throw down the camp and flee. Several officers and soldiers in the next camp saw the deputy envoy flee and also left.

古文：东川人并兵南攻中军，仁厚闻之，大开寨门，设炬火照之，自帅士卒为两翼伏道左右。
现代文：东川人集中兵力向南攻打官军主帅所在中军，高仁厚听到这一消息，下令把营寨的大门打开，设置火炬照着这里，亲自率领士兵在大道左右埋伏下来。
English: When Gao Renhou heard this news, he ordered the gate of the camp to be opened, set up a torch to shine here, and personally led the soldiers to ambush down around the avenue.

古文：贼至，见门开，不敢入，还去。仁厚发伏击之，东川兵大奔，追至城下，蹙之壕中，斩获甚众而还。
现代文：贼寇赶到，看见营寨的大门敞开着，不敢进去，调头往回走，高仁厚令伏兵发起进攻，东川的人马拼命奔逃，高仁厚追赶到东川城下，贼寇拥挤在堑壕里面，官军斩杀擒获大量人马后回去。
English: The bandits arrived, saw that the gate of the camp was open, did not dare to enter, turned around and went back. Gao Renhou ordered the ambush troops to attack, the men and horses of Dongchuan desperately fled, Gao Renhou chased them to the foot of Dongchuan Castle, the bandits crowded inside the trench, and the government troops killed and captured a large number of men and horses and went back.

古文：仁厚念诸弃寨走者，明旦所当诛杀甚多，乃密召孔目官张韶，谕之曰： 尔速遣步探子将数十人分道追走者，自以尔意谕之曰： 仆射幸不出寨，皆不知，汝曹速归，来旦牙参如常，勿忧也。  
现代文：高仁厚考虑到那些扔下营寨逃跑的官军，第二天早晨应当诛杀处斩的人很多，于是秘密找来掌管文书的吏员张韶，命令他说： 你快快派遣军营侦探带领几十人分头追赶逃跑的官兵，只是用你自己的意思告诉他们说： 检校仆射高仁厚幸好没有走出营寨，一切都不知道，你们快点回去，明天早晨牙将们象往常一样去参见高仁厚，不要有什么忧虑 。 
English: Gao Ren Hou considered that there were many people who should be killed and beheaded the next morning, taking into account the government soldiers who had abandoned their camps and fled. Therefore, he secretly found the clerk in charge of paperwork, Zhang Qi, and ordered him to say: You should quickly send the camp detective to lead dozens of people to chase the fleeing officers and soldiers, but just tell them in your own way: Fortunately, Gao Ren Hou's guards did not leave the camp, they do not know anything, you should hurry back, tomorrow morning the guards will go to see Gao Ren Hou as usual, do not have any worries.

古文：韶素名长者，众信之，至四鼓，皆还寨；惟杨茂言走至张把，乃追及之。
现代文：张韶向有忠厚长者之名，大家对他的话都很信，到四更时分，逃走的官军都分别回到营寨；只有副使杨茂言跑到了张把，于是极力追赶将他劝回。
English: Zhang Xiangxiang was known as a loyal elder, and everyone believed in his words. By four o'clock, the fleeing government troops had all returned to the camp separately; only the deputy envoy Yang Maoyan ran to Zhang, so he tried his best to chase him and persuade him to return.

古文：仁厚闻诸寨漏鼓如故，喜曰： 悉归矣！ 
现代文：高仁厚听到各个寨打更的漏鼓声已和往日一样，高兴地说： 都回来了！ 
English: Gao Renhou heard that the sound of the leaking drums in each village has been the same as in the past, and said happily: They have all come back!

古文：诘旦，诸将牙集，以为仁厚诚不知也，坐良久，仁厚谓茂言曰： 昨夜闻副使身先士卒，走至张把，有诸？ 
现代文：次日早晨，各营寨的将领集合参见高仁厚，都以为他对出逃的事确实不知道。坐了好久，高仁厚对杨茂言说： 昨天夜间听说你带头逃跑，竟跑到了张把，有这事吗？
English: In the morning of the next day, the generals of each camp gathered to see Gao Renhou, all of them thought that he really did not know about the escape. After sitting for a long time, Gao Renhou said to Yang Maogan, "I heard that you took the lead in escaping last night and actually ran to Zhang Tu, is this true?

古文：对曰： 昨夜闻贼攻中军，左右言仆射已去，遂策马参随，既而审其虚，复还寨中。 
现代文：杨茂言回答说： 昨天夜里听到贼寇攻打主力队伍，身边的人说你已撤离了，于是快马加鞭跟随上去，后来了解到你根本没有离去，所以又回到营寨之中。 
English: Yang Maoyan replied, "Yesterday night, I heard the bandits attack the main force. The people around me said that you had evacuated, so I quickly followed you. Later, I realized that you had not left at all, so I returned to the camp.

古文：仁厚曰： 仁厚与副使俱受命天子，将兵讨贼，若仁厚先走，副使当叱下马，行军法，代总军事，然后奏闻。
现代文：高仁厚说： 我高仁厚和你都是接受皇上的谕令，督率官军讨伐贼寇，如果是我高仁厚先行逃跑，你作为副使理当怒声叱喝我下马，进行军法处置，而代行总理军中事宜，然后奏报皇上。
English: Gao Renhou said: I, Gao Renhou, and you both accept the emperor's order and supervise the official army to fight the bandits. If I, Gao Renhou, escape first, you, as the deputy envoy, should angrily scold me to dismount, carry out the military law disposal, and act as the prime minister in the military affairs, and then report to the emperor.

古文：今副使既先走，又为欺罔，理当如何？ 
现代文：今天你既已先行逃跑，又欺骗蒙蔽，按理说应当怎样处置？ 
English: Today, since you have fled ahead of us and deceived us, how should we deal with you?

古文：茂言拱手曰： 当死。 
现代文：杨茂言拱手说： 该当死罪。 
English: Yang Maojin immediately said: It should be a capital crime.

古文：仁厚曰： 然！ 
现代文：高仁厚说： 是这样！ 
English: Gao Renhou said: That's right!

古文：命左右扶下，斩之，诸将股栗。
现代文：于是命令身边的人把杨茂言拉下，将他处斩，各位将领吓得腿都发抖。
English: So he ordered the people around him to pull Yang Maojin down and behead him. The generals were so scared that their legs were shaking.

古文：仁厚乃召昨夜所俘虏数十人，释缚纵归。
现代文：高仁厚又召来几十名昨天夜里俘虏的贼寇，给们解开绳索放他们回去。
English: Gao Renhou also called in dozens of bandits who had been captured the previous night, untied their ropes and let them go.

古文：君雄等闻之惧，曰： 彼军法严整如是，自今兵不可复出矣！ 
现代文：郑君雄等人听说这些后很害怕，说： 高仁厚这样严格执行军法整饬营伍，从现在起咱们人马可不能再出去！ 
English: Zheng Junxiong and others were very scared after hearing this, saying: Gao Renhou is so strict in enforcing the military law to rectify the battalion, from now on, our people can no longer go out!

古文：庚辰，时溥遣其将李师悦将兵万人追黄巢。
现代文：庚辰，时溥派遣手下将领李师悦带领军队一万人追击黄巢。
English: Geng Chen and Shih Kui dispatched their subordinate general Li Shiyue to lead an army of ten thousand to pursue Huang Chao.

古文：癸未，高仁厚陈于鹿头关城下，郑君雄等悉众出战。
现代文：癸未，高仁厚带领所部官军在鹿头关城下摆开阵势，郑君雄等人率全部人马出城作战。
English: Soon after, Gao Renhou led the government army of the headquarters to set up a position under the city of Shuguanguan, and Zheng Junxiong and others led all the men and horses out of the city to fight.

古文：仁厚设伏于陈后，阳败走。君雄等追之，伏发，君雄等大败。
现代文：高仁厚在阵列后面设下埋伏，假装败退，郑君雄等人追击，中了埋伏，吃了一场败仗。
English: Gao Renhou set up an ambush behind the array and pretended to retreat. Zheng Junxiong and others pursued the ambush and suffered a defeat.

古文：是夕，遁归梓州。
现代文：这天傍晚，郑君雄逃回梓州。
English: That evening, Zheng Junxiong fled back to Zizhou.

古文：陈敬瑄发兵三千以益仁厚军，进围梓州。
现代文：阵敬派发军队三千，以壮大高仁厚的阵容，进军围攻梓州。
English: Yan Jing dispatched an army of three thousand, and marched into the siege of Zizhou with a large and highly talented lineup.

