古文：起柔兆敦牂，尽旃蒙单阏，凡十年。
现代文：起，止，一共十年。汉殇帝延平元年
English: a total of ten years. Emperor Han Xuan died in the first year of Yanping

古文：孝殇皇帝延平元年春，正月，辛卯，以太尉张禹为太傅，司徒徐防为太尉，参录尚书事。
现代文：春季，正月辛卯，将太尉张禹任命为太傅，将司徒徐防任命为太尉，参与主管尚书事务。
English: In the spring, in the first month of Xinwu, Zhang Yu was appointed as Taifu, and Sitou Xu Bao was appointed as Taifu, and participated in the management of Shangshu affairs.

古文：太后以帝在襁褓，欲令重臣居禁内。乃诏禹舍宫中，五日一归府；每朝见，特赞，与三公绝席。
现代文：邓太后因皇帝是个婴孩，尚在襁褓怀抱之中，打算让重要的大臣住在宫内，于是下诏，命张禹留居宫中，每五天回家一次；每逢朝见，都专门为他唱名，让他单独就座，不与三公同席。
English: Empress Dowager Deng, because the emperor was a baby and still in her arms, planned to let important ministers live in the palace, so she issued an edict ordering Zhang Yu to stay in the palace and return home every five days; every time he was seen in the morning, his name was specially sung for him, and he was allowed to sit alone, not with the three princes.

古文：封皇兄胜为平原王。
现代文：将皇兄刘胜封为平原王。
English: Liu Sheng, the emperor's brother, was crowned the king of the plain.

古文：癸卯，以光禄勋梁鲔为司徒。
现代文：正月癸卯，将光禄勋梁鲔任命为司徒。
English: At the turn of the new year, the Guanglu Honorable Liang Jun was appointed as a disciple.

古文：三月，甲申，葬孝和皇帝于慎陵，庙曰穆宗。
现代文：三月甲申，将和帝安葬在慎陵，庙号称为穆宗。
English: In March of the Jiaxun Dynasty, he and Emperor An were buried in the Shen Mausoleum, and the temple's name was changed to Muzong.

古文：丙戌，清河王庆、济北王寿、河间王开、常山王章始就国；太后特加庆以殊礼。
现代文：丙戌，清河王刘庆、济北王刘寿、河间王刘开、常山王刘章从此前往封国就位。
English: Hun Ye, Qinghe King Liu Qing, Jibei King Liu Shou, Hema King Liu Kai, and Changshan King Liu Zhang then went to the fief to take their places.

古文：庆子祜，年十三，太后以帝幼弱，远虑不虞，留祜与嫡母耿姬居清河邸。
现代文：邓太后对刘庆特别优待，礼遇超过其他亲王。刘庆的儿子刘祜，当时十三岁，邓太后因皇帝幼小单弱，担心将来发生不测，就让刘祜和他的嫡母耿姬留下，住在清河国设在京城的官邸。
English: Empress Dowager Deng gave special preferential treatment to Liu Qing, and treated him more courteously than other princes. Liu Qing's son, Liu Wei, was 13 years old at the time. Empress Dowager Deng was worried about the emperor's young age and frail health, so she let Liu Wei and his legitimate mother, Geng Ji, stay and live in the official residence of Qinghe State in Beijing.

古文：耿姬，况之曾孙也；祜母，犍为左姬也。
现代文：耿姬是耿的曾孙女。刘祜的生母是犍为人左姬。
English: Geng Ji is Geng's great-granddaughter. Liu Ye's biological mother is Zou Renmin Zuo Ji.

古文：夏，四月，鲜卑寇渔阳，渔阳太守张显率数百人出塞追之。
现代文：夏季，四月，鲜卑侵犯渔阳。渔阳太守张显率领数百人出塞追击。
English: In the summer, in April, the Xianbei invaded Yuyang. Zhang Xian, the governor of Yuyang, led hundreds of people out of the fortress to pursue them.

古文：兵马掾严授谏曰： 前道险阻，贼势难量，宜且结营，先令轻骑侦视之。 
现代文：兵马掾严授劝谏道： 前方道路险恶而阻碍重重，敌人的实力难以估量，我军应暂且安营扎寨，先命轻装骑兵进行侦察。 
English: The terracotta warriors and horses were strictly instructed and advised: The road ahead is treacherous and full of obstacles, and the strength of the enemy is difficult to estimate. Our army should temporarily camp, and light cavalry should be ordered to carry out reconnaissance.

古文：显意甚锐，怒，欲斩之，遂进兵。
现代文：张显锐气正盛，听后大怒，要将严授处斩。
English: Zhang Xianrui was in high spirits. After hearing this, he was furious and wanted to be severely punished.

古文：愚虏伏发，士卒悉走，唯授力战，身被十创，手杀数人而死。
现代文：于是汉军向前挺进。途中遇到鲜卑军伏兵袭击，汉军全部逃散，唯独严授奋力迎战，身受十处创伤，亲手格杀数人后战死。
English: As a result, the Han army advanced. On the way, they encountered an ambush attack by the Xianbei army, and all the Han army fled. However, they were forced to fight hard, suffered ten wounds, and died after killing several people with their own hands.

古文：主簿卫福、功曹徐咸皆自投赴显，俱殁于陈。
现代文：渔阳郡主簿卫福、郡功曹徐咸二人自动赶来营救张显，一同阵亡。
English: Yuyang County's leader Wei Fu and county gong Cao Xuxian both came to rescue Zhang Xian on their own and died together.

古文：丙寅，以虎贲中郎将邓骘为车骑将军、仪同三司。
现代文：丙寅，将虎贲中郎将邓骘任命为车骑将军、仪同三司，待遇与三公相同。
English: Cui Yin, the middle brother of Tigress, appointed Deng Wei as the general of chariot and cavalry, and the third secretary of ceremony, and the treatment was the same as that of the three princes.

古文：骘弟黄门侍郎悝为虎贲中郎将，弘、阊皆侍中。
现代文：将邓骘的弟弟、黄门侍郎邓悝任命为虎贲中郎将，邓弘、邓阊二人皆为侍中。
English: He appointed Deng Hui's younger brother, the Yellow Gate chamberlain Deng Hui, as the vice-chamberlain of the Tiger Clan. Both Deng Hong and Deng Hui were chamberlains.

古文：司空陈宠薨。
现代文：司空陈宠去世。
English: Siku Chenchong passed away.

古文：五月，辛卯，赦天下。
现代文：五月辛卯，大赦天下。
English: In May, there will be a general amnesty.

古文：壬辰，河东垣山崩。
现代文：壬辰，河东郡垣山发生山崩。
English: In Imjin, a landslide occurred in Kakiyama, Hedong County.

古文：六月，丁未，以太常尹勤为司空。
现代文：六月丁未，将太常尹勤任命为司空。
English: In June, Ding Wei appointed Taizhang Yinqin as Secretary of the Air Force.

古文：郡国三十七雨水。
现代文：有三十七个郡和封国大雨成灾。
English: Thirty-seven places in the county have received a lot of rain.

古文：己未，太后诏减太官、导官、尚方、内署诸服御、珍膳、靡丽难成之物，自非供陵庙，稻梁米不得导择，朝夕一肉饭而已。
现代文：六月已未，邓太后下诏，削减太官、导官、尚方、内署的各种御用衣服车马、珍羞美味，和各色奢靡富丽精巧难成的物品。除非供奉皇陵祠庙，否则稻谷粱米不得加工精选，每日早晚只吃一次肉食。
English: It was not yet June when Empress Dowager Deng issued an edict to cut down on all kinds of royal clothing, chariots and horses, rare and delicious, and all kinds of luxurious and exquisite items used by imperial officials, leading officials, court officials, and courtiers. Unless they were dedicated to the imperial tombs and temples, rice and glutinous rice were not allowed to be processed and selected, and meat was only eaten once a day in the morning and evening.

古文：旧太官、汤官经用岁且二万万，自是裁数千万。
现代文：以往太官、汤官的费用每年将近二万万钱，至此才数千万钱。
English: In the past, the expenses of the eunuchs and tea officials were nearly 20 million yuan per year, but now they are only tens of millions of yuan.

古文：及郡国所贡，皆减其过半；悉斥卖上林鹰犬；离宫、别馆储峙米Я、薪炭，悉令省之。
现代文：连同各郡、各封国的贡物，都削减一半以上。
English: Together with the tribute of counties and fiefdoms, it was reduced by more than half.

古文：丁卯，诏免遣掖庭宫人及宗室没入者皆为庶民。
现代文：将上林苑的猎鹰、猎犬全部卖掉。各地离宫、别馆所储备的存米、干粮、薪柴、木炭，也一律下令减少。
English: All the falcons and hounds in Shanglin Court will be sold. All the stored rice, dried grain, firewood and charcoal in the reserves of the Imperial Palace and other museums will also be reduced.

古文：秋，七月，庚寅，敕司隶校尉、部刺史曰： 间者郡国或有水灾，防害秋稼，朝廷惟咎，忧惶悼惧。
现代文：六月丁卯，下诏遣散掖庭部分宫人，并将罚入掖庭当奴婢的皇族成员一律免罪，使他们成为平民。秋季，七月庚寅，敕令司隶校尉和部刺史： 近来有些郡和封国发生水灾，伤害了秋天的庄稼，朝廷思考自己的过失，深为忧虑惶恐。
English: In June, Emperor Dingwu issued an edict dismissing some members of the imperial court and pardoned all members of the royal family who had been sentenced to serve as slaves in the imperial court, making them commoners. In the autumn, Emperor Goying issued an edict in July, ordering Lieutenant-Colonel Sisli and Vice-Admiral Shi: Recently, floods have occurred in some counties and fiefdoms, damaging the autumn crops. The imperial court is deeply worried and frightened as it contemplates its own mistakes.

古文：而郡国欲获丰穰虚饰之誉，遂覆蔽灾害，多张垦田，不揣流亡，竞增户口，掩匿盗贼，令奸恶无惩，署用非次，选举乖宜，贪苛惨毒，延及平民。
现代文：然而各地方官府为了要得到丰产的虚名假誉，便隐瞒灾情，夸大垦田面积；不去统计逃亡人数，却竞相增加户口；掩盖盗匪活动情况，使罪犯得不到惩处；不依照规定次序任用官吏，举荐人才不当，将贪婪苛刻的祸害，加在人民的身上。
English: However, the county and state only tried to gain the false reputation of a bumper harvest, so they covered up disasters, over-reported the number of acres sown, did not estimate the number of exiles, over-reported the number of households, and covered up thieves, so that there was no punishment for treachery, officials were not appointed and promoted in order, election recommendation talents were improper, greed was harsh, miserable, poisonous, evil, and good people.

古文：刺史垂头塞耳，阿私下比，不畏于天，不愧于人。
现代文：而刺史却低头塞耳，循私包庇，在下面互相勾结，不知畏惧上天，也不知愧对于人。
English: However, the conspirators bowed their heads and closed their ears, shielded themselves, and colluded with each other below. They were not afraid of heaven, nor were they ashamed of people.

古文：假贷之恩，不可数恃，自今以后，将纠其罚。
现代文：不能让他们一再地仗恃朝廷的宽容恩典，从今以后，将加重对不法官员的处罚。
English: It is impossible to win people's hearts with small favors for a long time. From now on, it will be corrected and punished.

古文：二千石长吏其各实核所伤害，为除田租刍稿。 
现代文：现命令二千石官员各自核查百姓受灾情况，免除他们应向国家交付的田赋禾秆。 
English: Now, 2,000-koku officials have been ordered to independently verify the situation of the people affected by the disaster and exempt them from the duty to deliver rice to the state.

古文：八月，辛卯，帝崩。
现代文：八月辛卯，皇帝驾崩。
English: In August, the emperor passed away.

古文：癸丑，殡于崇德前殿。
现代文：癸丑，将皇帝入殓后，灵柩停放在崇德前殿。
English: According to legend, after the emperor was buried, the coffin was parked in the front hall of Chongde.

古文：太后与兄车骑将军骘、虎贲中郎将悝等定策禁中，其夜，使骘持节以王青盖车迎清河王子祜，斋于殿中。
现代文：邓太后与她的哥哥车骑将军邓骘、虎贲中郎将邓悝等在宫中商议大计，决定了继位人选。当夜，派邓骘持符节，用已封王的皇子才能乘坐的青盖车将清河王的儿子刘祜接来，在殿中斋戒。
English: Empress Dowager Deng, together with her brother, the chariot-riding general Deng Yu, and the tiger-clawed middle brother Deng Yu, discussed the succession plan with Deng Yu in the palace and decided on the candidate. That night, Deng Yu was sent to hold the festival of symbols and use the Qinghai chariot, which could only be used by the prince who had been crowned king, to pick up Liu Yu, the son of the Qinghe king, and fast in the palace.

古文：皇太后御崇德殿，百官皆吉服陪位，引拜祜为长安侯。
现代文：皇太后登上崇德殿，文武百官都穿上吉服陪同出席。刘祜被引导上殿，皇太后将他封为长安侯。
English: The empress dowager ascended the throne of the House of Chongde, accompanied by hundreds of civil and military officials dressed in auspicious clothing. Liu Ye was led to the palace, and the empress dowager made him the prince of Chang'an.

古文：乃下诏，以祜为孝和皇帝嗣，又作策命。
现代文：随即下诏，将刘祜立为和帝的后嗣。接着又撰写了册立皇帝的诏命。
English: He immediately issued an imperial edict to make Liu Xuan the heir of Emperor He. He then wrote an imperial edict to proclaim him emperor.

古文：有司读策毕，太尉奉上玺绶，即皇帝位，太后犹临朝。
现代文：有关官员宣读完诏令，太尉献上皇帝的御玺，刘祜便正式即位。邓太后仍旧临朝摄政。
English: After the relevant officials read out the imperial decree, the captain presented the emperor's imperial scepter, and Liu Bei officially ascended to the throne. Empress Dowager Deng remained the regent of the imperial court.

古文：诏告司隶校尉、河南尹、南阳太守曰： 每览前代，外戚宾客浊乱奉公，为民患苦，咎在执法怠懈，不辄行其罚故也。
现代文：邓太后对司隶校尉、河南尹、南阳太守下诏说： 每每查阅前代史事，看到皇后家族及其宾客仗势横行，使奉公而不徇私情的官员陷于混乱，给人民带来痛苦，这是由于执法不严，没有立即施行惩罚的缘故。
English: Empress Dowager Deng said to Captain Sili, Yin of Henan Province, and Nanyang Daju: Every time I look up the historical events of the previous generation, I see that the empress's family and their guests were rampant, causing the officials who served the public and did not indulge in personal feelings to fall into chaos and bring suffering to the people. This was due to lax law enforcement and the lack of immediate punishment.

古文：今车骑将军骘等虽怀敬顺之志，而宗门广大，姻戚不少，宾客奸猾，多干禁宪，其明加检敕，勿相容护。 
现代文：如今车骑将军邓骘等虽然怀有恭敬顺从的心意，但家族庞大，亲戚不少，宾客奸诈狡猾，对国家的法律禁令多有冒犯。
English: Today, although General Deng Wei, the general of the cavalry and cavalry, has a respectful and obedient mind, his family is huge, he has many relatives, his guests are treacherous and cunning, and most of them are offensive to the country's legal prohibition.

古文：自是亲属犯罪，无所假贷。
现代文：现命令对邓氏家族的不法行为要公开地加以检束，不许包容袒护。 
English: The current order is to publicly punish the wrongdoing of the Deng family, and not to tolerate and protect them.

古文：九月，六州大水。
现代文：从此以后，邓氏家族亲属犯罪，官员都不予以宽免。
English: Since then, officials have not pardoned any crime committed by relatives of the Deng family.

古文：丙寅，葬孝殇皇帝于康陵。
现代文：九月，有六个州发生水灾。丙寅，将殇帝安葬于康陵。
English: In September, floods occurred in six states. Hun Sen buried his father in Kangneung.

古文：以连遭大忧，百姓苦役，方中秘藏及诸工作事，事减约十分居一。
现代文：因国家接连遭受水灾，人民苦于徭役，所以陵墓中的随葬之物及各项工程都予以裁减，只留十分之一。
English: As the country was hit by successive floods and the people were struggling to make ends meet, the burial objects and various projects in the mausoleum were reduced, leaving only one-tenth.

古文：乙亥，殒石于陈留。
现代文：乙亥，陈留郡天降陨石。
English: Eihei, a meteorite that fell from the sky in Chenlu County.

古文：诏以北地梁慬为西域副校尉。
现代文：朝廷任命北地人梁为西域副校尉。
English: The imperial court appointed Liang, a northerner, as the deputy lieutenant of the western region.

古文：慬行至河西，会西域诸国反，攻都护任尚于疏勒；尚上书求救，诏慬将河西四郡羌，胡五千骑驰赴之。
现代文：梁到达河西时，恰逢西域各国背叛了汉朝，在疏勒向西域都护任尚发动进攻。任尚上书朝廷求救，朝廷便命令梁率领河西四郡敦煌、武威、酒泉、张掖的羌、胡骑兵五千人急速前去救援。
English: When Liang arrived in Hexi, it coincided with the countries in the western region betraying the Han Dynasty. In Shule, he launched an attack on the western region. Ren Shang wrote to the imperial court for help, and the imperial court ordered Liang to lead five thousand people from four counties in Hexi, Dunhuang, Wuwei, Jiuquan, Zhangye, and Hu cavalry, to go to the rescue.

古文：慬未至而尚己得解，诏征尚还，以骑都尉段禧为都护，西域长史赵博为骑都尉。
现代文：梁还没有到达，任尚已经解围。朝廷将任尚召回，任命骑都尉段禧为西域都护，任命西域长史赵博为骑都尉。
English: Before Liang arrived, Ren Shang had already lifted the siege. The imperial court recalled Ren Shang, appointed Cavalry Captain Duan Xie as the Western Capital Protector, and appointed Western Governor Shi Zhao Bo as Cavalry Captain.

古文：禧、博守它乾城，城小，梁慬以为不可固，乃谲说龟兹王白霸，欲入共保其城；白霸许之，吏民固谏，白霸不听。
现代文：段禧和赵博据守在它乾城。它乾城是个小城，梁认为不能固守，于是用诈术游说龟兹王白霸，声称愿意进入龟兹，和他共同守城。白霸同意了梁的建议。龟兹的官员和百姓极力进行劝阻，但白霸不听。
English: Duan Xiyi and Zhao Bo were based in Qiancheng. Qiancheng was a small city, and Liang thought it was impossible to hold on to it, so he used trickery to persuade the turtle king Baiba, claiming that he was willing to enter the turtle city and jointly defend the city with him. Baiba agreed to Liang's suggestion. The officials and people of the turtle city tried their best to dissuade, but Baiba did not listen.

古文：慬既入，遣将急迎段禧、赵博，合军八九千人。
现代文：梁进入龟兹城以后，派将领急速前去迎接段禧和赵博，汉军汇合为八九千人。
English: After Liang entered Kuez City, he sent generals to rush forward to meet Duan Xiyi and Zhao Bo, and the Han army amassed to 89,000.

古文：龟兹吏民并叛其王，而与温宿、姑墨数万兵反，共围城，慬等出战，大破之。
现代文：龟兹的官员和百姓一同背叛了龟兹王，与温宿、姑墨两国联合造反，军队达数万人，一同围攻龟兹城。梁等出城迎战，大破联军。
English: The officials and people of Kuez together betrayed the king of Kuez and rebelled jointly with Onjuku and Gumo. Tens of thousands of troops besieged the city of Kuez together. Liang and others went out to fight and defeated the allied forces.

古文：连兵数月，胡众败走，乘胜追击，凡斩首万馀级，获生口数千人，龟兹乃定。
现代文：战争持续了数月，联军兵败退走。梁乘胜追击，共斩杀一万余人，生擒数千人，龟兹局势才告平定。
English: The war lasted for several months, the allied soldiers were defeated and retreated. Liang Yingcheng successfully pursued, killing a total of more than ten thousand people, thousands of survivors, and the situation in Kuez was only pacified.

古文：冬，十月，四州大水，雨雹。
现代文：冬季，十月，有四个州发生水灾和雹灾。
English: In the winter, in October, there were floods and hail in four states.

古文：清河孝王庆病笃，上书求葬樊濯宋贵人冢旁。
现代文：清河王刘庆病重，上书请求死后葬在樊濯宋贵人墓旁。
English: Liu Qing, the king of the Qing Dynasty, was seriously ill. After his death, he requested in a letter to be buried next to the tomb of the noblemen of the Song Dynasty.

古文：十二月，甲子，王薨。
现代文：十二月甲子，刘庆去世。
English: In December, Liu Qing passed away.

古文：乙酉，罢鱼龙曼延戏。
现代文：十二月乙酉，废止杂戏 鱼龙曼延 。
English: In December, acetylene was banned, and the Yu Longman Yan puppet show was abolished.

古文：尚书郎南阳樊准以儒风浸衰，上疏曰： 臣闻人君不可以不学。
现代文：尚书郎、南阳人樊准因儒家学风日渐衰颓，上书说： 我听说，君主不可以不学习。
English: Shang Shulang, a Nanyang scholar, said in his petition, "I have heard that a monarch must study.

古文：光武皇帝受命中兴，东西诛战，不遑启处，然犹投戈讲艺，息马论道。
现代文：光武皇帝承受天命，使汉朝中兴，东征西伐，顾不上安居休息。但他仍然放下武器，讲说儒家学问；停鞍歇马，讨论圣人之道。
English: Emperor Guangwu was destined by Heaven to make the Han Dynasty prosperous, to conquer the East and the West, and to live a peaceful life. However, he still laid down his weapons and spoke about Confucianism; he paused to discuss the way of the sage.

古文：孝明皇帝庶政万机，无不简心，而垂情古典，游意经艺，每飨射礼毕，正坐自讲，诸儒并听，四方欣欣。
现代文：孝明皇帝日理万机，事事经心，但却爱好古籍，留意儒家经典，每当行过飨射礼在学校举办宴会和射箭比赛之后，都坐在正位上，亲自讲解经书，儒生们则一同聆听，四方都欢欣喜悦。
English: Emperor Xiaoming was a man of many talents, but he loved ancient books and paid attention to Confucian classics. Whenever he held a banquet and an archery competition at the school, he would sit in the right seat and personally explain the scriptures. The Confucian students listened together, and everyone was delighted.

古文：又多征名儒，布在廓庙，每宴会则论难衎衎，共求政化，期门、羽林介胄之士，悉通《孝经》，化自圣躬，流及蛮荒，是以议者每称盛时，咸言永平。
现代文：他还广召著名的儒家学者，将他们安置在朝廷，每逢宴会，便亲切地和他们讨论疑难，共同研究治国和教化之道。即便是期门、羽林的武士军官，也都人人通晓《孝经》。儒学的影响从圣明的君王身上开始，扩展到野蛮荒凉之地。因此，每当人们称颂盛世的时候，都谈到明帝永平年代。
English: He also called on famous Confucian scholars and placed them in the imperial court. Whenever there was a banquet, he would cordially discuss problems and difficulties with them and jointly study the ways of governing the country and enlightening people. Even the samurai officers of the Sui Dynasty and the Hualin Dynasty were all familiar with the "Book of Filial Piety." The influence of Confucianism began with the holy kings and extended to the barbaric and desolate lands. Therefore, whenever people praised the prosperous times, they talked about the Ming Dynasty and the Yongping era.

古文：今学者益少，远方尤甚，博士倚席不讲，儒者竞论浮丽，忘謇謇之忠，习諓諓之辞，臣愚以为宜下明诏，博求幽隐，宠进儒雅，以俟圣上讲习之期。 
现代文：如今学者日益减少，京城以外的远方尤其严重。博士把坐席放在一旁，不再讲学，儒生则竞相追求华而不实的理论，忘掉了正直忠诚的原则，只熟悉谄媚阿谀的言词。我认为应当颁布诏书，明告天下，广泛寻访隐居的学者，提拔渊博的儒士，等到将来圣上上学的时候，为他讲解经书。 
English: Nowadays, scholars are decreasing day by day, and the distance from the capital is particularly serious. Doctors put aside their seats and no longer lecture, while Confucian scholars compete to pursue flashy theories, forget the principle of honesty and loyalty, and are only familiar with the words of flattering imams. I think it is necessary to issue an edict and announce it to the world, extensively search for secluded scholars, promote profound Confucian scholars, and explain scriptures to him when he goes to school in the future.

古文：太后深纳其言，诏： 公、卿、中二千石各举隐士、大儒，务取高行，以劝后进，妙简博士，必得其人。 
现代文：邓太后认为樊准的意见很对，予以采纳，下诏说： 三公、九卿和中二千石官员，要各自举荐隐士、大儒；被举荐者务必具有高尚的德行，以劝导晚生后进。从中精选博士，一定可以得到适当的人选。 
English: Empress Dowager Deng thought that the opinion of Zou Jun was very right and adopted it, and said in the next edict: The three princes, nine lords and middle officials of 2,000 koku each should recommend a hermit and a great scholar; the person recommended must have a noble moral conduct to persuade the late students to advance. From among them, the selected doctor must be able to get the appropriate candidate.

古文：汉孝安皇帝上
现代文：汉孝安皇帝上
English: Emperor Han Xiao'an

古文：孝殇皇帝永初元年
现代文：汉安帝永初元年
English: In the first year of the Han Dynasty

古文：春，正月，癸酉朔，赦天下。
现代文：春季，正月癸酉朔，大赦天下。
English: Spring, the first month of the year, is the beginning of spring.

古文：蜀郡徼外羌内属。
现代文：蜀郡边境外的羌人归附汉朝。
English: The outlying areas of Shu County and the people of Yunnan Province were attached to it.

古文：二月，丁卯，分清河国封帝弟常保为广川王。
现代文：二月丁卯，分割清河国部分封土，将安帝的弟弟刘常保封为广川王。
English: In February of Dingwu, Qinghe Province was divided into several fiefs, and Emperor An's younger brother Liu Changbo was crowned King of Guangchuan.

古文：庚午，司徒梁鲔薨。
现代文：庚午，司徒梁鲔去世。
English: On the 28th, Stuliang Yao passed away.

古文：三月，癸酉，日有食之。
现代文：三月癸酉，出现日食。
English: At the March equinox, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：自和帝之丧，邓骘兄弟常居禁中，骘不欲久在内，连求还第，太后许之。
现代文：已卯，永昌郡边境外夷人僬侥部落的首领陆类等人，率领全体部众归附汉朝。三月甲申，将清河孝王刘庆安葬在广丘，由司空、宗正负责治丧，礼仪比照东海恭王刘强。
English: In March, Jiaxun buried Liu Qing'an, the King of the Qing Dynasty, in Guangqiu, with Siku and Zongzheng in charge of the funeral, and the etiquette was compared to that of Liu Qiang, the King of the East Sea.

古文：夏，四月，封太傅张禹、太尉徐防、司空尹勤、车骑将军邓骘，城门校尉邓悝、虎贲中郎将邓弘、黄门郎邓阊皆为列侯，食邑各万户，骘以定策功增三千户；骘及诸弟辞让不获，遂逃避使者，间关诣阙，上疏自陈，至于五六，乃许之。
现代文：自从和帝驾崩，邓骘兄弟一直住在皇宫。邓骘不愿久在宫中，一再请求回家，太后应允。夏季，四月，将太傅张禹、太尉徐防、司空尹勤、车骑将军邓骘、城门校尉邓悝、虎贲中郎将邓弘、黄门郎邓阊全都封为侯爵，各自享有一万户的食邑。邓骘因协助册立皇帝有功，增加三千户。邓骘和他的弟弟们推辞谦让，但未获批准。于是他们躲开朝廷的使者，绕路前往皇宫大门，上书陈述自己的请求，前后达五六次，邓太后这才应允。
English: Since Emperor He died, the Deng brothers have been living in the imperial palace. Deng Yu did not want to stay in the palace for a long time, and repeatedly asked to go home. The empress dowager agreed. In the summer, in April, the Taifu Zhang Yu, the First Lieutenant Xu Fang, the Secretary of the Air Force Yin Qin, the Cavalry General Deng Yu, the City Gate Lieutenant Deng Yu, the Tiger King Lieutenant General Deng Hong, and the Yellow Gate Lord Deng Yu were all made marquesses, and each of them enjoyed ten thousand households. Deng Yu had the merit of helping to establish the emperor, adding three thousand households. Deng Yu and his brothers refused to make concessions

古文：五月，甲戌，以长乐卫尉鲁恭为司徒。
现代文：五月甲戌，将长乐卫尉鲁恭任命为司徒。
English: In May of the year of Jiajing, he appointed the Changle Guardsman Lu Qiong as an apprentice.

古文：恭上言： 旧制，立秋乃行薄刑，自永元十五年以来，改用孟夏。
现代文：鲁恭上书说： 以往制度规定，立秋之日才开始审理轻刑案件。但自从永元十五年以来，将时间改到了孟夏四月。
English: Lu Qiong said in the letter: According to the previous system, the trial of light punishment cases did not begin until the beginning of autumn. However, since the 15th year of Yongyuan, the time has been changed to the fourth month of Mengxia.

古文：而刺史、太守因以盛夏征召农民，拘对考验，连滞无已。
现代文：而州刺史、郡太守便在盛夏时节传讯农民，拘捕、审讯、拷问、核实，连续拖延不断。
English: However, the prefectural governor and the county magistrate summoned the farmers in the midsummer season, arrested, interrogated, tortured, verified, and continuously delayed.

古文：上逆时气，下伤农业。
现代文：对上违背了天时，对下伤害了农业。
English: On the one hand, it violates the laws of nature and time, and on the other hand, it harms agriculture.

古文：按月令 孟夏断薄刑 者，谓其轻罪已正，不欲令久系，故时断之也。
现代文：考查《月令》所说 孟夏四月判决轻刑 的含义，是说对于罪行轻微并已定案的犯人，不愿使他们长期地遭受囚禁，因此要及时判决。
English: Examining the meaning of "Monthly Order" that "Mengxia was sentenced to a light sentence in April" is to say that for prisoners whose crimes are minor and have been finalized, they do not want to be imprisoned for a long time, so they should be sentenced in a timely manner.

古文：臣愚以为今孟夏之制，可从此令。其决狱案考，皆以立秋为断。 
现代文：我认为，如今的孟夏四月判决制度，可以照此施行；而其它案件的审讯、拷问、核实，则都从立秋开始。 
English: I believe that the current system of sentencing Meng Xia in April can be implemented accordingly, while the trial, interrogation, and verification of other cases will begin in early autumn.

古文：又奏： 孝章皇帝欲助三正之微，定律著令，断狱皆以冬至之前。
现代文：他还上书说： 孝章皇帝想有助于天、地、人 三正 的开端，制订律令，规定审理判决罪案一律在冬至之前结束。
English: He also wrote: "Emperor Xiaozhang, wishing to contribute to the beginning of the rectification of heaven, earth, and man, has formulated a decree stipulating that all criminal cases to be tried and adjudicated must be completed before the winter solstice.

古文：小吏不与国同心者，率入十一月得死罪贼，不问曲直，便即格杀，虽有疑罪，不复谳正。
现代文：而那些不与国家同心的执法小官，却大都在十一月捕到被控犯有死罪的犯人后，不问是非曲直便立即处死，尽管罪状可疑，也不再重新审理。
English: If the county magistrate is not in sympathy with the state, the prisoners who have committed capital crimes will be executed in November at the same rate. They will not ask about the rights and wrongs, but will ask about beheading. Although some cases are suspicious, they will not review and correct them.

古文：可令大辟之科，尽冬月乃断。 
现代文：我建议，对死刑重罪的判决，可延长到十二月底再截止。 
English: I suggest that the deadline for death penalty felony sentencing be extended to the end of December.

古文：朝廷皆从之。
现代文：朝廷将他的建议全部采纳。
English: The court accepted all of his suggestions.

古文：丁丑，诏封北海王睦孙寿光侯普为北海王。
现代文：丁丑，邓太后下诏，将前北海王刘睦的孙子、寿光侯刘普封为北海王。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the lunar calendar, Liu Mucsun Shuguang Hou Liu Pu, the king of the North Sea, was proclaimed the king of the North Sea.

古文：九真徼外、夜郎蛮夷，举土内属。
现代文：九真郡边境外的蛮夷及夜郎国蛮夷，以全部领土归属汉朝。
English: The barbarians outside the border of Kuching County and the barbarians in Yelang Province all belonged to the Han Dynasty.

古文：西域都护段禧等虽保龟兹，而道路隔塞，檄书不通。
现代文：西域都护段禧等虽然保住了龟兹，但通往中原的道路已被堵塞，命令、文件无法传递。
English: Although the western region's capital, Guodanxi, and other cities have been spared, the roads leading to the Central Plains have been blocked, and orders and documents cannot be passed on.

古文：公卿议者以为 西域阻远，数有背叛，吏士屯田。其费无已。 
现代文：公卿中议论此事的人认为： 西域阻碍重重而距离遥远，又屡次反叛；官兵在那里屯戍垦田，经费消耗没有止境。 
English: Those among the court nobles who discussed the matter believed that: the western region was full of obstacles, far away, and repeatedly rebelled; officers and soldiers were stationed there, and there was no end to the expenditure of funds.

古文：六月，壬戌，罢西域都护，遣骑都尉王弘发关中兵，迎禧及梁慬、赵博、伊吾卢、柳中屯田吏士而还。
现代文：六月壬戌东汉朝廷撤销西域都护，派遣骑都尉王弘征调关中兵，将段禧和梁、赵博以及伊吾庐和柳中的屯田官兵接回汉朝本土。
English: In June, the Eastern Han Dynasty revoked the protection of the Western Capital, dispatched the cavalry captain Wang Hongzheng to transfer the middle-ranking soldiers, and brought back the officers and soldiers of Duan Xiyi and Liang, Zhao Bo, as well as the officers and soldiers of Iguru and Liu Zhong to the mainland of the Han Dynasty.

古文：初，烧当羌豪东号之子麻奴随父来降，居于安定。
现代文：起初，烧当羌人部落首领东号的儿子麻奴跟随父亲前来归降，居住在安定郡。
English: At first, Asano, the son of Donggo, the chief of the Burntang people, followed his father to surrender and lived in Anding County.

古文：时诸降羌布在郡县，皆为吏民豪右所徭役，积以愁怨。
现代文：当时，归降的羌人诸部落分散于各个郡县，全都遭受汉人官吏和民间豪强的役使，悲愁怨恨日益深重。
English: At that time, the tribes of the Hui people who had surrendered were scattered in various counties and counties, all of which were forced by the Han officials and the powerful people. Sadness and resentment were becoming more and more serious.

古文：及王弘西迎段禧，发金城、陇西、汉阳羌数百千骑与俱，郡县迫促发遣。
现代文：后来，王弘西行迎接段禧，要征调金城、陇西、汉阳千百羌人充当骑兵，一同前往。于是郡县官府紧急征发遣调。
English: Later, Wang Hong went to the west to welcome Duan Xi, and wanted to conscript hundreds of people from Jincheng, Shaanxi and Hanyang to serve as cavalry and go together. Therefore, the county government urgently conscripted and dispatched.

古文：群羌惧远屯不还，行到酒泉，颇有散叛，诸郡各发兵邀遮，或覆其庐落；于是勒姐、当煎大豪东岸等愈惊，遂同时奔溃。
现代文：羌人们担心会被派到远方屯戍，不能再返回家乡，行进到酒泉的时候，已有不少人逃散叛离。诸郡各自派兵进行拦截，有些郡兵捣毁了羌人住宿的庐落。于是勒姐、当煎部落的首领东岸等人愈发惊恐，便一同急速地大举逃亡。
English: The Xiongnu people feared that they would be sent to distant settlements and would not be able to return to their hometowns. By the time they marched to Jiuquan, many people had already fled and defected. Each county sent soldiers to intercept them, and some county soldiers destroyed the homes of the Xiongnu people. Therefore, Le Sister, the leader of the Dongan tribe, and others became more and more frightened and fled together in a hurry.

古文：麻奴兄弟因此与种人俱西出塞，先零别种，滇零与锺羌诸种大为寇掠，断陇道。
现代文：麻奴兄弟因此与本部落的人一同西行出塞。而滇零与钟羌各部落则大肆抢掠，切断了陇道。
English: As a result, the Manu brothers and their tribe headed west out of the fortress, while the Minzu and Zhonglu tribes plundered and cut off the supply route.

古文：时羌归附既久，无复器甲，或持竹竿木枝以代戈矛，或负板案以为楯，或执铜镜以象兵，郡县畏懦不能制，丁卯，赦除诸羌相连结谋叛逆者罪。
现代文：这时，羌人因归附汉朝已久，不再拥有武器，他们便有人手持竹竿、树枝代替戈、矛，有人用木板桌案当作盾牌，还有人拿着铜镜，伪装兵器。郡县官府畏惧怯懦，不能制止。六月丁卯，朝廷赦免羌人各部落中互相勾结进行谋反叛逆者的罪行。
English: At this time, because the Xiongnu people had been affiliated with the Han Dynasty for a long time and no longer possessed weapons, some of them held bamboo poles and branches instead of spears and spears, some used wooden table cases as shields, and others held bronze mirrors to disguise weapons. The county government was afraid of cowardice and could not stop them. In June, the imperial court pardoned the crimes of the Xiongnu people who had colluded with each other to plot rebellion.

古文：秋，九月，午，太尉徐防以灾异，寇贼策免。
现代文：秋季，九月庚午，太尉徐防因天灾、天象异常和叛匪作乱而被颁策罢免。
English: In the autumn, on the afternoon of the 9th month, Lieutenant Xu Fang was removed from his post due to natural disasters, abnormal celestial phenomena, and rebel gangs.

古文：三公以灾异免，自防始。
现代文：太尉、司徒、司空三公由于天灾或天象异常而遭罢免，徐防乃是首例。
English: Captain, Sito, and Siku were dismissed due to natural disasters or abnormal celestial phenomena, and the departure of Xu Bei was the first case.

古文：辛未，司空尹勤以水雨漂流策免。
现代文：辛未，司空尹勤因大雨水灾被颁策罢免。
English: Soon after, the chief of the Civil Aeronautics Administration, Yin Qin, was removed from his post due to heavy rain and flooding.

古文：仲长统昌言曰：光武皇帝愠数世之失权，忿强臣之窃命，矫枉过直，政不任下，虽置三公，事归台阁。
现代文：仲长统《昌言》曰：光武皇帝因西汉数世失去权柄而愤慨，对强悍之臣窃取帝位深为痛恨。因此他矫枉过正，权力不交给臣下，虽然设立了三公，政事却归尚书台总理。
English: Zhong Changtong's "Changyan" says: Emperor Guangwu was indignant because the Western Han Dynasty had lost power for several generations, and he deeply resented the theft of the imperial throne by a powerful vassal. Therefore, he overreacted and did not hand over power to his vassal. Although he established the Three Princes, political affairs were left to Prime Minister Shang Shudai.

古文：自此以来，三公之职，备员而已；然政有不治，犹加谴责。
现代文：他们颠倒贤能与愚劣，利用举荐人才的机会，进行私人交易。
English: They invert merit and demerit, take advantage of the opportunity to recommend talent, and engage in private transactions.

古文：而权移外戚之家，宠被近习之竖，亲其党类，用其私人，内充京师，外布列郡，颠倒贤愚，贸易选举，疲驽守境，贪残牧民，挠扰百姓，忿怒四夷，招致乖叛，乱离斯瘼，怨气并作，阴阳失和，三光亏缺，怪异数至，虫螟食稼，水旱为灾。
现代文：使无能不才者守卫疆土，贪婪凶残者统治人民。黎民百姓受到搅扰，四方外族又被激怒，终于导致反叛，带来战乱流亡和忧患疾苦。怨愤之气一时并发，阴阳失和，日、月、星三光出现亏缺，怪异不断降临，害虫吃掉庄稼，水旱带来灾难。
English: The incompetent and unskilled were made to guard the territory, and the greedy and brutal ruled the people. The people of Li were disturbed, and the foreigners in the four directions were enraged, which finally led to rebellion, leading to war and exile and sorrow and suffering. The resentment was momentarily concurrent, yin and yang lost harmony, the sun, moon and stars were deficient, and strange things kept coming, pests ate crops, and drought brought disaster.

古文：此皆戚宦之臣所致然也，反以策让三公，至于死、免，乃足为叫呼苍天，号咷泣血者矣！
现代文：这样的局面都是外戚宦官所造成的，而朝廷反而颁策责备三公，甚至将三公处死、免官，足以使人为此呼叫苍天，号啕泣血！
English: Such a situation was caused by the maternal eunuchs, but the imperial court, on the contrary, issued a policy to blame the three princes, and even executed the three princes and removed them from office, which was enough to make people cry out to the heavens and wail for blood!

古文：又，中世之选三公也，务于清悫谨慎，循常习故者，是乃妇女之检柙，乡曲之常人耳，恶足以居斯位邪！
现代文：再者，从中期开始，选任三公，都务必从清廉忠厚而又谨慎小心、循规蹈矩而又熟悉旧典的人中擢拔。这乃是妇女的楷模，乡间的平常之人罢了，怎么足以身居三公高位呢！
English: Moreover, starting from the mid-term, when the Three Wise Men are appointed, they must be promoted from those who are honest and loyal, but prudent and careful, follow the rules and regulations, and are familiar with the old classics. This is a model for women, just an ordinary person in the countryside, how can it be enough to hold the high position of the Three Wise Men!

古文：势既如彼，选又如此，而欲望三公勋立于国家，绩加于生民，不亦远乎！
现代文：三公的势力既然已是那样低落，人选又是如此平庸，却希望三公为国家建立功勋，为人民取得政绩，这岂不是遥远的事情吗！
English: Since the power of the three dukes is already so low, and the candidates are so mediocre, but the three dukes hope to establish merit for the country and achieve political achievements for the people, is this not a distant thing?

古文：昔文帝之于邓通，可谓至爱，而犹展申徒嘉之志。
现代文：从前，汉文帝对待邓通，可以说是宠爱之至，但仍使申徒嘉得以实现自己的意图，惩罚了邓通。
English: Once upon a time, Emperor Hanwen treated Dantong as his favorite, but he still allowed Shentujia to realize his intention and punished Dantong.

古文：夫见任如此，则何患于左右小臣哉！
现代文：受到这般信任，那么对皇帝左右的小臣又有什么顾忌呢！
English: Having received such trust, what scruples did the ministers around the emperor have?

古文：至如近世，外戚、宦竖，请托不行，意气不满，立能陷人于不测之祸，恶可得弹正者哉！
现代文：可是到了近代，对待外戚、宦官，官员如果不执行他们的请托，馈献不够丰足，立刻便会陷入意外的灾祸，哪里还能够弹劾纠正他们呢！
English: However, in modern times, if the relatives, eunuchs, and officials do not carry out their requests, and the gifts are not plentiful, they will immediately fall into an unexpected disaster. Where can they be impeached and corrected?

古文：曩者任之重而责之轻，今者任之轻而责之重。
现代文：从前，对三公信任多而责罚轻，如今，对三公信任少而责罚重。
English: In the past, if you had more trust in the Three Kingdoms, the punishment would be lighter. Nowadays, if you have less trust in the Three Kingdoms, the punishment would be heavier.

古文：光武夺三公之重，至今而加甚；不假后党以权，数世而不行；盖亲疏之势异也！
现代文：光武帝夺去三公的大权，如今则剥夺得更为彻底；光武帝制定不让皇后家族掌权的政策，几代之后却已不再遵行，其原因就在于皇帝与三公和外戚的亲疏关系不同。
English: Emperor Guangwu took away the power of the three princes, and now it has been stripped even more completely; Emperor Guangwu formulated a policy of not allowing the empress family to take power, but after several generations it was no longer followed, the reason being that the emperor and the three princes and their foreign relatives had a different relationship.

古文：今人主诚专委三公，分任责成，而在位病民，举用失贤，百姓不安，争讼不息，天地多变，人物多妖，然后可以分此罪矣！
现代文：如今，若是君主真能信赖三公，将权力交给他们，责令完成重任，而三公身居高位却为害人民，不能举荐任用贤才，致使百姓不安，纠纷不断，天地变化无常，人间妖物大量出现，到了那个时候，才可以让三公分担此罪！
English: Today, if the monarch can truly trust the three princes, hand over power to them, and order them to complete the important task, while the three princes are in high positions but harm the people, cannot recommend the appointment of talents, causing the people to be uneasy, disputes continue, the world is fickle, and a large number of human monsters appear, then the three princes can share this crime!

古文：壬午，诏：太仆、少府减黄门鼓吹以补羽林士；厩马非乘舆常所御者，皆减半食；诸所造作，非供宗庙园陵之用，皆且止。
现代文：九月壬午，诏书命令：太仆、少府裁减黄门乐队，用来增补羽林武士的名额；厩苑中的官马，凡不是皇上经常使用的，一律将食料减半；各项工程，凡不是用来供应皇家宗庙和陵园的，一律暂停。
English: At noon of September, the imperial edict ordered: the servants of the emperor and the young officials should reduce the number of the Yellow Gate Band, which would be used to increase the number of Ulin warriors; the official horses in the stable yard, which were not often used by the emperor, would reduce the food by half; all projects, which were not used to supply the royal family temple and cemetery, would be suspended.

古文：庚寅，以太傅张禹为太尉，太常周章为司空。
现代文：庚寅，将太傅张禹任命为太尉，将太常周章任命为司空。
English: Geng Yin appointed Zhang Yu as Tai Fu and Zhou Zhang as Siku.

古文：大长秋郑众、中常侍蔡伦等皆秉势豫政，周章数进直言，太后不能用。
现代文：大长秋郑众和中常侍蔡伦等依靠权势干预朝政，周章曾多次直率地进言劝谏，但邓太后未能采纳。
English: The Great Elder, Qiu Zhengzong, and the Second Chamberlain, Cai Lun, and others relied on their power to interfere in court politics. Zhou Zhang repeatedly made forthright suggestions, but they were not accepted by Empress Dowager Deng.

古文：初，太后以平原王胜有痼疾，而贪殇帝孩抱，养为己子，故立焉。
现代文：当初，邓太后认为平原王刘胜有久治不愈的顽疾，而贪图殇帝是个怀抱中的婴孩，便将他收养为自已的儿子，立为皇帝。
English: At first, Empress Dowager Deng thought that Liu Sheng, the king of the plains, had an incurable disease, while Emperor Gaozu was a baby in her arms, so she adopted him as her own son and made him emperor.

古文：及殇帝崩，群臣以胜疾非痼，意咸归之；太后以前不立胜，恐后为怨，乃迎帝而立之。
现代文：及至殇帝驾崩，群臣认为刘胜的病并非不可痊愈，便一致属意于刘胜。但邓太后因先前没有立刘胜，怕他将来怀恨，就将刘祜接来，立为皇帝。
English: When Emperor Xian died, the courtiers believed that Liu Sheng's illness was not incurable, and they all agreed that Liu Sheng should be the next emperor. However, Empress Dowager Deng, who had not previously appointed Liu Sheng, feared that he would hold a grudge in the future, so she appointed Liu Bei as emperor.

古文：周章以众心不附，密谋闭宫门，诛邓骘兄弟及郑众、蔡伦，劫尚书，废太后于南宫，封帝为远国王而立平原王。
现代文：周章认为群臣并不归心于太后，于是密谋关闭宫门，诛杀邓骘兄弟及郑众、蔡伦，胁迫尚书写诏，于南宫罢黜邓太后，把安帝贬到遥远的封国为王，将平原王立为皇帝。
English: Zhou Zhang believed that the courtiers were not loyal to the empress dowager, so he plotted to close the palace gate, kill the Deng brothers and Zheng Zong and Cai Lun, coerce Shang to write an edict, depose the empress dowager in the South Palace, degrade An Di to a distant feudal state as king, and establish Pingyuan Wang as emperor.

古文：事觉，冬，十一月，丁亥，章自杀。
现代文：但事机泄露。冬季，十一月丁亥，周章自杀。
English: However, the opportunity was leaked. In the winter, in November of Dinghai, Zhou Zhang committed suicide.

古文：戊子，敕司隶校尉、冀、并二州刺史， 民讹言相惊，弃捐旧居，老弱相携，穷困道路。
现代文：十一月戊子，太后训令司隶校尉及冀州、并州两州刺史： 人民受到谣言的惊扰，抛弃了旧居，扶老携幼，在路上贫困交加。
English: In November, the Empress Dowager Wu Zi, the Empress Dowager Xun Rong, the Empress Dowager Shi Rong, and the Empress Dowager Jizhou and the Empress Dowager Nian Zhou made history: the people were alarmed by rumors, abandoned their old homes, helped the elderly with their children, and were impoverished on the road.

古文：其各敕所部长吏躬亲晓喻：若欲归本郡，在所为封长檄；不欲，勿强。 
现代文：司隶校尉及冀州、并州两位刺史，要命令下属官员亲自对百姓进行劝导，说明情况：如果他们愿意返回原郡，由当地官府为他们出县公文；如果不愿返回，也不勉强。 
English: Lieutenant Sili and Jizhou, and the two provincial historians, should order subordinate officials to personally persuade the people and explain the situation: if they are willing to return to the original county, the local government will issue a county official document for them; if they do not want to return, they will not be forced.

古文：十二月，乙卯，以颍川太守张敏为司空。
现代文：十二月乙卯，将颍川太守张敏任命为司空。
English: In December, Zhang Min, the governor of Beichuan, was appointed to the position.

古文：诏车骑将军邓骘、征西校尉任尚将五营及诸郡兵五万人，屯汉阳以备羌。
现代文：诏书命令车骑将军邓骘和征西校尉任尚，率领屯骑、步兵、越骑、长水、射声等五营兵及各郡郡兵，共五万人，进驻汉阳，以防备羌军进攻。
English: The edict ordered the cavalry general Deng Qian and the Western Expeditionary Lieutenant Ren Shang to lead the cavalry, infantry, Yue cavalry, Changshui, Yixing and other five battalions and county soldiers, a total of 50,000 people, stationed in Hanyang to prevent the attack of the Wei army.

古文：是岁，郡国十八地震，四十一大水，二十八大风，雨雹。
现代文：本年，有十八个郡和封国发生地震，四十一个郡和封国大水成灾，二十八个郡和封国发生风灾和雹灾。
English: This year, there were earthquakes in 18 counties and fiefdoms, floods in 41 counties and fiefdoms, and windstorms and hailstorms in 28 counties and fiefdoms.

古文：鲜卑大人燕荔阳诣阙朝贺。
现代文：鲜卑首领燕荔阳到汉朝宫廷朝贺。
English: The leader of the Xianbei, Yan Liyang, went to the Han court to offer congratulations.

古文：太后赐燕荔阳王印绶、赤车、参驾，令止乌桓校尉所居宁城下，通胡市，因筑南、北两部质馆。
现代文：邓太后将王爵印信绶带和三匹马驾驶的赤车赐给燕荔阳，命他定居在乌桓校尉的驻地宁城附近，开通边塞贸易，还特地修建了南北两个宾馆，用来接待人质。
English: Empress Dowager Deng gave Yan Liyang the royal seal letter ribbon and a red carriage driven by three horses, ordered him to settle near Ningcheng, the residence of Captain Wu Huan, opened the border trade, and specially built two hotels in the north and south to receive the hostages.

古文：鲜卑邑落百二十部各遗入质。
现代文：鲜卑一百二十个部落分别将人质送到汉朝。
English: More than one hundred and twenty tribes sent their hostages to the Han Dynasty.

古文：孝殇皇帝永初二年
现代文：永初二年
English: In the second year of the Edo period

古文：春，正月，邓骘至汉阳；诸郡兵未至，钟羌数千人击败骘军于冀西，杀千馀人。
现代文：春季，正月，邓骘抵汉阳。各郡郡兵还没有到达，钟羌部落数千人便在冀县以西打败邓骘军，杀死一千余人。
English: In the spring, in the first month, Deng Wei arrived in Hanyang. The county soldiers had not yet arrived, and thousands of Zhong Wei tribesmen defeated Deng Wei's army in the west of Ji County, killing more than a thousand people.

古文：梁慬还，至敦煌，逆诏慬留为诸军援。
现代文：当时梁刚从西域回国，到达敦煌郡时，接到诏书，让他留下来担任各部队的后援。
English: At that time, Liang had just returned from the western region, and when he arrived in Dunhuang County, he received an imperial edict to let him stay and serve as a backup for the troops.

古文：慬至张掖，破诸羌万馀人，其能脱者十二三；进至姑臧，羌大豪三百余人诣慬降，并慰譬，遣还故地。
现代文：梁军到达张掖，打败羌军各部队一万余人，逃脱者仅占十分之二三。梁军开到姑臧，羌人首领三百余人向他投降。梁对他们全都进行安抚开导，遣送他们返回故地。
English: Liang's army arrived at Zhangye, defeated more than ten thousand troops of the Shan army, and the escapees accounted for only two-thirds of ten. Liang's army drove to Guzheng, and more than three hundred leaders of the Shan people surrendered to him. Liang pacified and enlightened all of them and sent them back to their hometown.

古文：御史中丞樊准以郡国连年水旱，民多饥困，上疏： 请令太官、尚方、考功、上林池御诸官，实减无事之物；五府调省中都官吏、京师作者。
现代文：御史中丞樊准因各地连年水旱成灾，许多百姓饥饿贫困，上书说： 请命令太官、尚方、考工、上林等各官署，核实裁撤无用之物；太傅、太尉、司徒、司空、车骑将军等五府，调整削减中央官吏及在京城营造建筑的工匠。
English: Due to successive years of floods and droughts in various regions, many people are starving and poverty-stricken, the letter said: Please order all government offices such as Taikan, Shangfong, Kaogong, Shanglin, etc. to verify the abolition of useless things; Taifu, Taifu, Szeto, Sikuo, General of Chariots and Cavalry and other five prefectures to adjust and reduce central government officials and craftsmen who build buildings in Beijing.

古文：又，被灾之郡，百姓凋残，恐非赈给所能胜赡，虽有其名，终无其实。
现代文：再者，受灾各郡的百姓凋零残破，恐怕官府的赈济不能拯救他们，虽然有赈济之名，却最终收不到赈济之实。
English: Furthermore, the people of the counties affected by the disaster are withered and broken, and I am afraid that the government's aid cannot save them. Although it has the name of aid, it will ultimately not receive the actual aid.

古文：可依征和元年故事，遣使持节慰安，尤困乏者徙置荆、扬孰郡。
现代文：建议依照汉武帝征和元年的先例，派遣使者持符节前往灾区进行慰问，将特别贫困的灾民迁徙安置到荆州、扬州所属的丰产郡。
English: It is suggested that, in accordance with the precedents of the Conquest of Emperor Hanwu and the first year of the year, envoys should be sent to the disaster area to offer condolences, and the extremely poor victims should be resettled to the productive counties of Jingzhou and Yangzhou.

古文：今虽有西屯之役，宜先东州之急。 
现代文：目前虽然西方有战事，也应先解救东方的急难。 
English: Although there is a war in the West at present, the urgent need to save the East should be addressed first.

古文：太后从之。悉以公田赋与贫民，即擢准与议郎吕仓并守光禄大夫。
现代文：邓太后听从了樊准的建议，将国家所有的公田全部交给贫民使用，并随即擢升樊准，将他和议郎吕仓一同任命为代理光禄大夫。
English: Empress Dowager Deng listened to the suggestion of Gongjun and gave all the public land owned by the state to the poor for use. She immediately promoted Gongjun and appointed him as acting Guanglu doctor together with He Lang and Lü Cang.

古文：二月，乙丑，遗准使冀州、仓使兗州禀贷，流民咸得苏息。
现代文：二月乙丑，派遣樊准为使者前往冀州，派遣吕仓为使者前往兖州，对灾民进行赈济，流亡的百姓全都得以复苏。
English: In February, in the second month of the year of the Ugly Goat, Zong Zheng was sent as an envoy to Jizhou, and Lu Cang was sent as an envoy to Zhangzhou to provide relief to the victims of the disaster, and all the exiled people were able to recover.

古文：夏，旱。
现代文：夏季，发生旱灾。
English: Summer, drought.

古文：五月，丙寅，皇太后幸洛阳寺及若卢狱录囚徒。
现代文：五月丙寅，邓太后亲临洛阳地方官府及若卢监狱，审查囚犯的罪状。
English: In May, Empress Dowager Deng personally visited the Luoyang local government and the Ruolu Prison to review the prisoners' criminal records.

古文：洛阳有囚，实不杀人而被考自诬，羸困舆见，畏吏不敢言，将去，举头若欲自诉。
现代文：有个洛阳的囚犯，实际上并没有杀过人，但被屈打成招，自认有罪。他十分瘦弱，身有伤残，被人抬上来进见，却因惧怕官吏而不敢开口。将要离去的时候，他抬起头来，像要为自己申诉。
English: There was a prisoner in Luoyang who did not actually kill anyone, but was beaten into confessing his guilt. He was very thin and disabled. He was carried up to court, but he was afraid of the officials and did not dare to speak. When he was about to leave, he raised his head as if to appeal for himself.

古文：太后察视觉之，即呼还问状，具得枉实。
现代文：邓太后看到后，有所察觉，便马上把他叫回来询问情况，查清了全部冤屈事实。
English: After seeing and noticing something, Empress Dowager Deng immediately called him back to inquire about the situation and found out all the facts of the grievance.

古文：即时收洛阳令下狱抵罪。
现代文：于是立即将洛阳令逮捕入狱，抵偿罪过。
English: As a result, Luo Yangling was immediately arrested and jailed to atone for his crime.

古文：行未还宫，澍雨大降。
现代文：太后起驾，还没有回到皇宫，一场丰沛的及时雨便从天而降。
English: When Empress Dowager Deng had not yet returned to the palace after this trip, it rained just in time.

古文：六月，京师及郡国四十大水，大风，雨雹。
现代文：六月，京城及四十个郡和封国出现水灾、风灾和雹灾。
English: In June, forty places in Beijing and the county were affected by heavy rain, strong winds, and hail.

古文：秋，七月，太白入北斗。
现代文：秋季，七月，金星进入北斗星座。
English: In autumn, in July, Venus enters the constellation of the Big Dipper.

古文：闰月，辛丑，广川王常保薨。
现代文：闰七月，广川王刘常保去世。
English: In leap July, Liu Changbo, the King of Guangchuan, passed away.

古文：无子，国除。
现代文：因无子嗣，封国撤除。
English: Without a son, the state was abolished.

古文：癸未，蜀郡徼外羌举士内属。
现代文：癸未，蜀郡边境外的羌人以全部土地归属汉朝。
English: By the end of the year, the people of Shun outside the border of Shu County had all the land belonging to the Han Dynasty.

古文：冬，邓骘使任尚及从事中郎河内司马钧率诸郡兵，与滇零等数万人战于平襄，尚军大败，死者八千馀人，羌众遂大盛，朝廷不能制。
现代文：冬季，邓骘命令任尚及从事中郎、河内人司马钧率领各郡郡兵，在平襄同滇零率领的数万羌军交战。任尚军大败，八千余人战死。羌军于是声势大振，实力强盛，朝廷不能控制。
English: In the winter, Deng Xiao ordered Ren Shang and engaged in the middle, Hanoi man Sima Qian led the soldiers of each county, and tens of thousands of Xiongnu troops led by Ping Xiang and Xizhe fought in Ping Xiang. Ren Shang's army was defeated, and more than eight thousand people died in battle. The Xiongnu army was then very strong and powerful, and the court could not control it.

古文：湟中诸县，粟石万钱，百姓死亡不可胜数，而转运难剧。
现代文：湟中地区各县的谷价，每石达一万钱，死亡的百姓多得无法统计，但粮食运输十分艰难。
English: Grain prices in various counties in the Central Yunnan region are as high as 10,000 yuan per stone, and the number of people who have died cannot be counted, but grain transportation is very difficult.

古文：书奏，会樊准上疏荐参，太后即擢参于徒中，召拜谒者，使西督三辅诸军屯。
现代文：奏书呈上，恰好樊准正上书保荐庞参，邓太后便召见庞参，将他由刑徒擢拜为谒者，命令他西上三辅，监督驻扎在该地区的各部队。
English: When the report was submitted, it just so happened that Zhai Junjun was the sponsor of the report. Empress Dowager Deng summoned Pang San, promoted him from a convict to a prisoner, and ordered him to go west to Sanfu to supervise the troops stationed in the region.

古文：十一月，辛酉，诏邓骘还师，留任尚屯汉阳为诸军节度。
现代文：十一月辛酉，邓太后下诏，命邓骘回师，留下任尚驻扎汉阳，负责各军的调度。
English: In November of Xinwu, Empress Dowager Deng issued an edict, ordering Deng Wei to return to the division, leaving Shang stationed in Hanyang, responsible for the dispatch of each army.

古文：遣使迎拜骘为大将军。
现代文：邓太后派使者迎接邓骘，将他任命为大将军。
English: Empress Dowager Deng sent an envoy to meet Deng Yao and appointed him as grand general.

古文：既至，使大鸿胪亲迎，中常侍郊劳，王、主以下候望于道，宠灵显赫，光震都鄙。
现代文：邓骘到达洛阳以后，邓太后又派大鸿胪亲自出迎，中常侍前往效外慰劳。亲王、公主以下的群臣则在路旁等候。邓骘所得的恩宠和荣耀极为显赫，声势震动京城内外。
English: After Deng Xuan arrived in Luoyang, Empress Dowager Deng sent Dahongjun to meet him in person, and the middle-ranking attendants went to work as extras to console him. A group of courtiers below the prince and princess waited by the roadside. The grace and glory that Deng Xuan received was extremely prominent, and the momentum shook both inside and outside the capital.

古文：滇零自称天子，于北地招集武都参狼、上郡、西河诸杂种羌断陇道，寇钞三辅，南入益州，杀汉中太守董炳。
现代文：羌人首领滇零在北地自称天子，招集武都的参狼部落，以及散布在上郡、西河的杂种羌人，切断陇道，进攻抢掠三辅地区，并南下进入益州，杀死汉中太守董炳。
English: The leader of the Xiongnu, Zou Zi, called himself the "Son of Heaven" in the north, and gathered the tribes of the ginseng wolves in Wudu, as well as the mixed-breed Xiongnu scattered in Shang County and the West River, to cut off the Xiongdu Road, attack and plunder the Sanfu area, and go south into Yizhou to kill the Han Dynasty Governor Dong Zou.

古文：梁慬受诏当屯金城，闻羌寇三辅，即引兵赴击，转战武功、美阳间，连破走之，羌稍退散。
现代文：梁接受诏命，本当驻守金城，但听说羌军进攻三辅，便立即率兵赶来迎敌。他转战于武功、美阳一带，接连将敌军击败赶跑。
English: Liang accepted the imperial command and was actually stationed in Jincheng, but when he heard that the Wei army was attacking Sanshu, he immediately led his troops to meet the enemy. He fought in the areas of Wugong and Miyang, and successively defeated the enemy army and drove them away.

古文：十二月，广汉塞外参狼羌降。
现代文：羌人略向后撤，有所离散。十二月，广汉郡边塞外的羌人参狼部落归降。
English: The Xiongnu retreated slightly and dispersed. In December, the Xiongnu-Ginseng-Wolf tribe outside the border fortress of Guanghan County surrendered.

古文：是岁，郡国十二地震。
现代文：这一年，有十二个郡和封国发生地震。
English: This year, there were twelve earthquakes in the county.

古文：孝殇皇帝永初三年
现代文：永初三年己酉，公元年
English: In the third year of Yongchu, in the year of the Goat

古文：春，正月，庚子，皇帝加元服，赦天下。
现代文：春季，正月庚子，安帝举行成年加冠礼。大赦天下。
English: In the spring, in the first month of Geng Zi, Emperor An held a coming-of-age ceremony.

古文：遣骑都尉任仁督诸郡屯兵救三辅。
现代文：派遣骑都尉任仁率领各郡驻军救援三辅。
English: Sending Cavalry Captain Ren Ren to lead the county garrisons to rescue Sanfu.

古文：仁战数不利，当煎、勒姐羌攻没破羌县，锺羌攻没临洮县，执陇西南部都尉。
现代文：任仁屡战屡败。羌人当煎、勒姐部落攻陷破羌县，钟羌部落则攻陷临洮县，俘虏了陇西南部都尉。
English: Renren repeatedly failed in battle. The Yan people, Dangren and Le sister tribes invaded and occupied the broken county, and the Zhongyi tribe invaded and occupied the Linyi county, and captured the captain in the southwestern part of Linyi.

古文：三月，京师大饥，民相食。
现代文：三月，京城洛阳发生饥荒，出现人吃人的现象。
English: In March, there was a great famine in Beijing, and the starving people were cannibalistic.

古文：壬辰，公卿诣阙谢；诏 务思变复，以助不逮。 
现代文：壬辰，三公九卿前往宫门请罪。诏书回答： 大家要一心改过向善，以助我完成力所不及的重任。 
English: At that time, the three princes and nine nobles went to the palace gate to plead guilty. The imperial edict replied: Everyone should change their hearts for the better in order to help me complete the important task that is beyond their ability.

古文：壬寅，司徒鲁恭罢。
现代文：三月壬寅，将司徒鲁恭罢免。
English: In March, Jinyin removed Stulukong from his post.

古文：恭再在公位，选辟高第至列卿、郡守者数十人，而门下耆旧或不蒙荐举，至有怨望者。
现代文：鲁恭曾两次出任三公，由他遴选征召的成绩优秀的官吏，升任九卿和郡太守的有几十人。而那些长期跟随他的学生门徒，却往往得不到举荐，有人甚至产生了怨恨。
English: Lu Gong had twice served as the Three Princes. He selected and conscripted officials with outstanding achievements, and there were dozens of people who were promoted to Nine Lords and County Dames. However, those student disciples who had followed him for a long time were often not recommended, and some even became resentful.

古文：恭闻之，曰： 学之不讲，是吾忧也，诸生不有乡举者乎！ 
现代文：鲁恭听到这个情况后，说： 学问讲解得不明白，才是我所操心的事。诸位儒生不是可以由故乡郡县来举荐吗！ 
English: After hearing this, Lu Qiong said, "It is what I am worried about that I don't understand the explanation of the teachings. Can't you Confucian scholars be recommended by your hometowns and counties?"

古文：终无所言，亦不借之议论。
现代文：他到底不肯开口举荐，也不借此发表议论。
English: After all, he did not want to make a recommendation, nor did he use it to make a speech.

古文：学者受业，必穷核问难，道成，然后谢遣之。
现代文：学生向他学习，他总是对难点穷根究底地下断提问。学业完成以后，才同学生辞别，让他们离去。
English: Students learn from him, and he is always asking probing questions about difficult issues. Only after they have completed their studies does he say goodbye to the students and let them go.

古文：学者曰： 鲁公谢与议论，不可虚得。 
现代文：学者们说： 鲁公的辞别和议论，都不可凭空得到。 
English: Scholars said: Lu Gong's farewell and speech cannot be obtained out of thin air.

古文：夏，四月，丙寅，以大鸿胪九江夏勤为司徒。
现代文：夏季，四月丙寅，将大鸿胪九江人夏勤任命为司徒。
English: In the summer, in April, Xiong Yin appointed Xia Qin, a great giant and a native of Jiujiang, as his disciple.

古文：三公以国用未足，奏令吏民入钱谷得为关内侯、虎贲、羽林郎、五官、大夫、官府吏、缇骑、营士各有差。
现代文：三公因国家经费不足，上书请求准许官吏和百姓在缴纳钱财和谷物之后，成为关内侯、虎贲、羽林郎、五官、大夫、政府官吏、缇骑武士、五校营士。
English: Due to insufficient state funds, the three dukes requested in a petition that officials and commoners be allowed, after paying money and grain, to become guan nai hō, tōgō, 羽林郎, gokan, daibu, government officials, 騎武士,五校营士.

古文：甲申，清河愍王虎威薨，无子。
现代文：依缴纳数量的多少，各分等级。四月甲申，清河愍王刘虎威去世，没有子嗣。
English: According to the number of contributions, each grade is graded. In April of Jiaxing, Liu Huwei, the king of Qinghe, died without an heir.

古文：五月，丙申，封乐安王宠子延平为清河王，奉孝王后。
现代文：五月丙申将乐安王刘宠的儿子刘延平封为清河王，作为清河孝王刘庆的后嗣。
English: In May, Xinshen made Liu Yanping, the son of Liu Jie, the king of Le'an, the king of Qinghe, as the heir of Liu Qing, the king of Qinghe.

古文：六月，渔阳乌恒与右北平胡千馀寇代郡、上谷。
现代文：六月，渔阳郡的乌桓部落与右北平的胡人部落，共一千余人，进攻代郡、上谷。
English: In June, the Wuhuan tribe of Yuyang County and the Hu people of Right Beiping, a total of more than a thousand people, attacked Daigun and Shanggu.

古文：汉人韩琮随匈奴南单于入朝，既还，说南单于云： 关东水潦，人民饥饿死尽，可击也。 
现代文：汉人韩琮随同南匈奴单于进京朝见。回去以后，他向南匈奴单于建议： 函谷关以东发生水灾，人民因饥饿几乎死尽，我们可以向汉朝发动攻击。 
English: Han Xuan, a Han Chinese, accompanied the Southern Xiongnu to Beijing to meet with the Han Dynasty. After returning, he proposed to the Southern Xiongnu: There is a flood east of the Huan Valley Pass, and the people are almost dead from starvation. We can launch an attack on the Han Dynasty.

古文：单于信其言，遂反。
现代文：单于听信了他的主张，于是反叛。
English: He only listened to his suggestion, and then rebelled.

古文：秋，七月，海贼张伯路等寇滨海九郡，杀二千石、令、长；遣侍御史巴郡庞雄督州郡兵击之，伯路等乞降，寻复屯聚。
现代文：秋季，七月，海匪张伯路等攻打沿海九郡，杀死郡县长官。东汉朝廷派遣侍御史、巴郡人庞雄指挥州郡地方军进行讨伐。张伯路等人求降，但不久又再度集结。
English: In the autumn, in July, the sea bandits such as Chamber Road attacked nine counties along the coast, killing the county magistrates. The East Han Dynasty dispatched the attendant of history, Pang Xiong, who was from Ba County, to command the local army of the county. Chamber Road and others sought to surrender, but soon gathered again.

古文：九月，雁门乌桓率众王无何允与鲜卑大人丘伦等，及南匈奴骨都侯合七千骑寇五原，与太守战于高渠谷，汉兵大败。
现代文：九月，雁门郡的乌桓率众王无何允与鲜卑大人丘伦等，联合南匈奴的骨都，共七千骑兵，进攻五原郡，与五原郡太守在高渠谷交战，汉军大败。
English: In September, Wu Huan of Ganmen County, led by Wang Mu He Yun and Qulun, joined forces with the capital of the Southern Xiongnu, a total of seven thousand cavalry, to attack Wuhuan County, and fought with the governor of Wuhuan County in Gaojiu Valley, and the Chinese army was defeated.

古文：南单于围中郎将耿种于美稷。
现代文：南匈奴单于在美稷包围了中郎将耿仲。
English: The Southern Xiongnu encircled the middle-ranked general Geng Zhong in Meili.

古文：冬，十一月，以大司农陈国何熙行车骑将军事，中郎将庞雄为副，将五营及边郡兵二万馀人，又诏辽东太守耿夔率鲜卑及诸郡兵共击之。
现代文：冬季，十一月，东汉政府任命大司农陈国人何熙代理车骑将军职务，以中郎将庞雄为副手，统领五营兵及边境各郡郡兵，共二万余人。又命令辽东郡太守耿夔率领鲜卑兵及诸郡兵，一同参战。
English: In the winter, in November, the East Han government appointed the chief farmer Chen Guojin He Xi as the acting cavalry general, with Zhong Lang as the deputy and Pang Xiong as the deputy, commanding the five battalions and the border counties, a total of more than 20,000 people. He also ordered the Liaodong County Governor Geng Wei to lead the fresh soldiers and the county soldiers to join the war.

古文：以梁慬行度辽将军事。
现代文：任命梁代理度辽将军职务。
English: Liang was appointed acting General Du Liao.

古文：雄、夔击南匈奴薁鞬日逐王，破之。
现代文：庞雄、耿夔进攻南匈奴日逐王，打败南匈奴军。
English: Pang Xiong and Geng Yao attacked the Southern Huns day after day, defeating the Southern Huns.

古文：十二月，辛酉，郡国九地震。
现代文：十二月辛酉，有九个郡和封国发生地震。
English: In December, an earthquake occurred in nine counties and fiefdoms.

古文：乙亥，有星孛于天苑。
现代文：十二月乙亥，天苑星座出现异星。
English: On the 19th, a comet appeared in the sky.

古文：是岁，京师及郡国四十一雨水，并、凉二州大饥，人相食。
现代文：这一年，京城洛阳和四十一个郡和封国大雨成灾，并州、凉州发生严重饥荒，出现人吃人的现象。
English: In the same year, the capital Luoyang and 41 counties were affected by heavy rains, and there was a severe famine in the counties of Nanzhou and Liangzhou, with people eating each other.

古文：太后以阴阳不和，军旅数兴，诏岁终飨遣卫士勿设戏作乐，减逐疫侲子之半。
现代文：邓太后因天地阴阳失调，又接连发生战事，征调军队，于是下诏：在年终为退役的皇家卫士举行宴会时，不再安排游戏和奏乐。将参加大傩仪式的逐疫童子的数量减少一半。
English: Due to the imbalance of heaven, earth, yin and yang, there were successive wars and the army was conscripted, so the Empress Dowager Deng issued an edict: when holding a banquet for retired royal guards at the end of the year, games and music would no longer be arranged. The number of epidemic-chasing boys participating in the grand banquet ceremony would be reduced by half.

古文：孝殇皇帝永初四年
现代文：永初四年
English: For the first time in four years

古文：春，正月，元会，彻乐，不陈充庭车。
现代文：春季，正月，在举行元旦朝会时，取消奏乐和在庭中陈列御用车驾的仪式。
English: In spring and the first month of the year, when the New Year's Day imperial court meeting is held, the music performance and the display of the royal chariot in the court are cancelled.

古文：邓骘在位，颇能推进贤士，荐何熙、李郃等列于朝廷，又辟弘农杨震、巴郡陈禅等置之幕府，天下称之。
现代文：邓骘身居大将军之位，颇能推举贤能人才。他保荐何熙、李等进入朝廷任职，还延聘弘农人杨震、巴郡人陈禅等做自己的幕僚，受到天下人的称赞。
English: As a great general, Deng Xiaoping was quite capable of promoting talented people. He recommended He Xi and Li to serve in the imperial court, and also hired Yang Zhen, a farmer from Hong, and Chen Zhen, a man from Ba County, to be his staff, which was praised by the people of the world.

古文：震孤贫好学，明欧阳《尚书》，通达博览，诸儒为之语曰： 关西孔子杨伯起。 
现代文：杨震自幼孤弱贫困而好学，通晓欧阳氏解释的《尚书》，而且知识丰富，博览群书，儒家学者们称他为 关西孔子杨伯起 。
English: Yang Zhen was lonely, poor and eager to learn from a young age. He was familiar with the "Shang Shu" explained by Ou Yang, and was rich in knowledge and well-versed in books. Confucian scholars called him the Kansai Confucius Yang Boqi.

古文：教授二十馀年，不答州郡礼命，众人谓之晚暮，而震志愈笃。
现代文：他教生授徒二十多年，不接受州郡官府的延聘征召。人们认为杨震年岁已大，步入仕途已晚，但他的志向却愈发坚定。
English: He has been teaching students for more than 20 years and does not accept the extended recruitment call from the state and county government. People think that Yang Zhen is too old and too late to enter the career path, but his ambition is becoming more and more firm.

古文：骘闻而辟之，时震年已五十馀，累迁荆州刺史、东莱太守。
现代文：邓骘听到杨震的名声以后，将他聘为幕僚。当时，杨震已经五十多岁，接连出任荆州刺史和东莱太守。
English: After hearing Yang Zhen's reputation, Deng Yu hired him as a staff member. At that time, Yang Zhen was more than fifty years old and successively served as the governor of Jingzhou and the governor of Donglai.

古文：当之郡，道经昌邑，故所举荆州茂才王密为昌邑令，夜怀金十斤以遗震。
现代文：在前往东莱郡的路上，途经昌邑，他先前所举荐的荆州茂才王密正担任昌邑县令。夜里，王密揣着十斤金来送给杨震。
English: On his way to Donglai County, he passed through Changyi. Wang Mi, the Jingzhou Maocai he had previously recommended, was serving as the county magistrate of Changyi. At night, Wang Mi came to Yang Zhen with ten kilos of gold.

古文：震曰： 故人知君，君不知故人，何也？ 
现代文：杨震说： 故人了解你，你却不了解故人，这是为什么？ 
English: Yang Zhen said: An old friend knows you, why don't you know an old friend?

古文：密曰： 暮夜无知者。 
现代文：王密说： 黑夜之中，没有人知道。 
English: Wang Mi said, "In the evening, no one knows.

古文：震曰： 天知，地知，我知，子知，何谓无知者！ 
现代文：杨震说： 天知，地知，我知，你知，怎能说没有人知道！ 
English: Yang Zhen said: Heaven knows, earth knows, I know, you know, how can you say that no one knows!

古文：密愧而出。
现代文：于是王密惭愧地出门走了。
English: Wang Mi walked away in shame.

古文：后转涿郡太守。
现代文：杨震后转任涿郡太守。
English: Later, he became the governor of Gyeongju County.

古文：性公廉，子孙常蔬食、步行；故旧或欲令为开产业，震不肯，曰： 使后世称为清白吏子孙，以此遗之，不亦厚乎！ 
现代文：他公正清廉，子孙经常以蔬菜为食，徒步出行。有的故人旧友劝杨震为子孙置办产业，但杨震不肯，他说： 使后代人说他们是清官的子孙，把这当作遗产留下，不也很丰厚吗？ 
English: He was fair and honest, and his children and grandchildren often ate vegetables and traveled on foot. Some old friends of the deceased advised Yang Zhen to buy property for his children and grandchildren, but Yang Zhen refused. He said, "Wouldn't it be very rich to make future generations say that they are the children and grandchildren of Qing officials and leave this as a legacy?"

古文：张伯路复攻郡县，杀吏，党众浸盛。
现代文：张伯路再次进攻郡县，杀死郡太守和县令，跟随他的人逐渐增多。
English: Chamber Road attacked the county again, killing the county governor and the county magistrate. The number of people following him gradually increased.

古文：诏遣御史中丞王宗持节发幽、冀诸郡兵合数万人，征宛陵令扶风法雄为青州刺史，与宗并力讨之。
现代文：朝廷下诏，派遣御史中丞王宗持符节，征调幽州、冀州的各郡郡兵，合计数万人。征召宛陵县令扶风人法雄，将他任命为青州刺史，与王宗合作，一道进行讨伐。
English: The imperial court issued an imperial edict, dispatched the imperial historian Wang Zong to hold the festival, conscripted the county soldiers of Yuzhou and Jizhou, totaling tens of thousands of people, conscripted Wanling County Commander Fengren Hossong, appointed him as the Qingzhou historian, and cooperated with Wang Zong to carry out the crusade.

古文：南单于围耿种数月，梁慬、耿夔击斩其别将于属国故城，单于自将迎战，慬等复破之，单于遂引还虎泽。
现代文：南匈奴包围耿种已达数月，梁、耿夔在原先是属国都尉治所的旧城与南匈奴军交锋，斩杀敌将。单于亲自率兵迎战，梁等再次败敌军。于是单于引军退回虎泽。
English: The Southern Xiongnu had been besieging Gengze for several months. Liang and Geng Yao confronted the Southern Xiongnu army in the old city, which was originally a provincial capital, and killed the enemy general. Liang personally led the troops into battle, and Liang and others defeated the enemy army again. Therefore, Liang led the troops back to Khuze.

古文：丙午，诏减百官及州郡县奉各有差。
现代文：正月丙午，下诏削减文武百官及州郡县各级官吏的俸禄，依照等级，各有差别。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of the first month, the next edict cut the salaries of civil and military officials and state, county and county officials at all levels, according to the level, each with a difference.

古文：二月，南匈奴寇常山。
现代文：二月，南匈奴军进攻常山。
English: In February, the Southern Xiongnu Army attacked Changshan.

古文：滇零遣兵寇褒中，汉中太守郑勤移屯褒中。
现代文：滇零派兵进攻褒中。汉中郡太守郑勤进驻褒中，以抵抗羌军。
English: Zheng Zi sent troops to attack Baozhong. Zheng Qin, the governor of Hanzhong County, stationed himself in Baozhong to resist the Baozhong army.

古文：任尚军久出无功，民废农桑，乃诏尚将吏兵还屯长安，罢遣南阳、颍川、汝南吏士。
现代文：任尚的大军出征已久而没有战功，人民无法从事农业和桑蚕之业。于是朝廷下诏命令任尚率领官吏和百姓回到长安，让南阳、颍川、汝南的官兵复员，返归本郡。
English: Since Ren Shang's large army had been away for a long time and had no military merit, the people were unable to engage in agriculture and the silkworm industry. Therefore, the imperial court ordered Ren Shang to lead the officials and the people back to Chang'an, to demobilize the officers and soldiers from Nanyang, Luochuan and Runan, and to return to the county.

古文：乙丑，初置京兆虎牙都尉于长安，扶风都尉于雍，如西京三辅都尉故事。
现代文：乙丑，首次在长安设置京兆虎牙都尉，在雍设置扶风都尉，如同西汉在三辅地区设置都尉的旧制。
English: In the second ugliness, for the first time in Chang'an, the Beijing-Zhao-Tiger-Tooth-Captain was set up, and the Fufeng-Captain was set up in Yong, just as the old system of setting up captains in the Sanfu area in Western Han Dynasty.

古文：谒者庞参说邓骘徙边郡不能自存者入居三辅，骘然之，欲弃凉州，并力北边。
现代文：谒者庞参向邓骘建议： 将边疆各郡因贫困而无法生存的人民迁徙到三辅居住。 邓骘同意庞参的建议，打算放弃凉州，集中力量对付北方的边患。
English: The warden, Pang San, suggested to Deng Wei that the people in the border counties who could not survive due to poverty should be moved to Sanfu. Deng Wei agreed to Pang San's suggestion and planned to abandon Liangzhou and concentrate on dealing with the border problems in the north.

古文：乃会公卿集议，骘曰： 譬若衣败坏，一以相补，犹有所完，若不如此，将两无所保。 
现代文：于是他召集公卿进行商议，说道： 这就好比是破衣服，牺牲其中的一件去补另一件，还能得到一件整衣，不然的话，就两件全都不保了。 
English: So he called the nobles together and said, "This is like a piece of clothing that is torn. If you sacrifice one piece to mend the other, you will get a new garment, but if you don't, you will lose both."

古文：公卿皆以为然。郎中陈国虞诩言于太尉张禹曰： 若大将军之策，不可者三：先帝开拓土宇，劬劳后定，而今惮小费，举而弃之，此不可一也。
现代文：郎中陈国人虞诩对太尉张禹说： 大将军邓骘的计策不可行，理由有三点：先帝开疆拓土，历尽辛劳，才取得了这块土地，而现在却因害怕消耗一点经费，便将它全部丢弃，这是不可行的第一点。
English: Gu Yao, a retainer of Chen Guoren, said to Zhang Yu, a lieutenant: General Deng Yao's strategy is not feasible, for three reasons: the former emperor opened up the empire and dug up the land, and after all the hard work, he obtained this land, but now, for fear of spending a little money, he will throw it all away. This is the first point that is not feasible.

古文：凉州既弃，即以三辅为塞，则园陵单外，此不可二也。
现代文：丢弃凉州以后，便以三辅为边塞，皇家祖陵墓园便失去屏障而暴露在外，这是不可行的第二点。
English: After the abandonment of Liangzhou, Sanfu was used as a border fortress, and the Royal Ancestral Mausoleum Cemetery lost its barrier and was exposed. This is the second point that is not feasible.

古文：喭曰： 关西出将，关东出相。 
现代文：俗话说： 函谷关以西出将，函谷关以东出相。 
English: As the saying goes: "Hakodate Pass to the west is the starting point, while to the east is the starting point."

古文：烈士武臣，多出凉州，士风壮猛，便习兵事。
现代文：猛士和武将，多数出在凉州，当地民风雄壮勇武，惯于从军作战。
English: Most of the warriors and generals were from Liangzhou. The local people are strong and brave, and are used to fighting in the army.

古文：今羌、胡所以不敢入据三辅为心腹之害者，以凉州在后故也。
现代文：如今羌人、胡人所以不敢占据三辅而在我汉朝心腹之地作乱的缘故，是因为凉州在他们的背后。
English: Today, the reason why the Xiongren and Hu people do not dare to occupy Sanfu and make trouble in the heartland of our Han Dynasty is because Liangzhou is behind them.

古文：凉州士民所以推锋执锐，蒙矢石于行陈，父死于前，子战于后，无反顾之心者，为臣属于汉故也。
现代文：而凉州的人民所以手执兵器，冒着流矢飞石冲锋陷阵，父亲死在前面，儿子继续作战，并无反顾之心的缘故，是由于他们归属于汉朝。
English: However, the reason why the people of Liangzhou took up arms, braved all odds to charge into battle, the father died at the front, the son continued to fight, and did not have the heart to turn back, was because they belonged to the Han Dynasty.

古文：今推而捐之，割而弃之，民庶安土重还，必引领而怨曰： 中国弃我于夷狄！ 
现代文：如今将凉州推开不管，割断抛弃，而人民安于乡土而不愿迁徙，必然引颈哀叹： 朝廷把我们丢给了夷狄！ 
English: Now they are pushing Liangzhou aside, cutting it off and abandoning it, while the people are satisfied with the countryside and do not want to migrate. They will inevitably lament: The court has abandoned us to the Yidi!

古文：虽赴义从善之人，不能无恨。
现代文：虽然是忠义善良之人，也不能没有怨恨。
English: Although he is a loyal and kind person, he cannot live without resentment.

古文：如卒然起谋，因天下之饥敝，乘海内之虚弱，豪雄相聚，量材立帅，驱氏、羌以为前锋，席卷而东，虽贲、育为卒，太公为将，犹恐不足当御；如此，则函谷以西，园陵旧京非复汉有，此不可三也。
现代文：假如突然有人起事，乘着天下饥馑和国力虚弱的时机，郡雄聚会，依据才能推选领袖，驱使氐人、羌人做前锋，席卷东来，即使是用古代勇士孟贲和夏育当士兵，用姜太公做大将，仍然恐怕难以抵挡。果真如此，那么函谷关以西，历代帝陵和旧京长安将不再归汉朝所有，这是不可行的第三点。
English: If there is a sudden uprising, taking advantage of the world's famine and the weakness of the national strength, the county strongmen will gather, based on the ability to elect leaders, drive the Xiong people and the Xiong people to be the forwards, and sweep to the east. Even if the ancient warriors Meng Xuan and Xia Yu are used as soldiers, and Jiang Taigong is used as the general, it will still be difficult to resist. If this is true, then west of the Hanzhong Pass, the imperial tombs and the old Beijing Chang'an will no longer belong to the Han Dynasty. This is an unfeasible third point.

古文：议者喻以补衣犹有所完，诩恐其疽食侵淫而无限极也！ 
现代文：倡议者用补破衣做比喻，认为还可以保留一件，而我担心局势正如恶疮，不断侵蚀溃烂而没有止境！ 
English: The proponents use the analogy of mending a torn garment, believing that one thing can still be preserved, but I am afraid that the situation is like a malignant sore, constantly eroding and festering without an end!

古文：禹曰： 吾意不及此，微子之言，几败国事！ 
现代文：张禹说： 我没有考虑到这些，如果没有你这番话，几乎要坏了国家大事！ 
English: Zhang Yu said, "I didn't take these things into consideration. If it weren't for your words, I would have almost ruined a national event!"

古文：诩因说禹： 收罗凉土豪杰，引其牧守子弟于朝，令诸府各辟数人，外以劝厉答其功勤，内以拘致防其邪计。 
现代文：于是虞诩向张禹建议： 收揽网罗凉州当地的英雄豪杰，将州郡长官的子弟带到朝廷来，命中央各官府分别任用数人，表面上是一种奖励，用来回报他们父兄的功勋劳绩，而实质上是将他们控制起来，做为人质，以防叛变。 
English: Therefore, Gu Yao suggested to Zhang Yu: to capture the local heroes of Liangzhou, bring the sons of the prefect of the prefecture to the imperial court, and order the central government to appoint several people separately. On the surface, it was a reward to reward the merits of their father and brother, but in essence, it was to control them and hold them hostage to prevent them from mutiny.

古文：禹善其言，更集四府，皆从诩议。
现代文：张禹赞赏他的意见，再次召集大将军、太尉、司徒、司空等四府进行商议。
English: Zhang Yu appreciated his opinion and once again convened the four prefectures, including the general, the captain, the secretary, and the secretary for consultation.

古文：于是辟西州豪桀为掾属，拜牧守、长吏子弟为郎，以安慰之。
现代文：众人一致同意虞诩的意见。于是征辟凉州地区有势力和有影响的人士到四府担任属官，并将当地刺史、太守和其他州郡高级官员的子弟任命为郎，进行安抚。
English: The people unanimously agreed with the opinion of the magistrate. Therefore, powerful and influential people from the Liangzhou region were recruited to serve as subordinate officials in the four prefectures, and the children of local magistrates, governors and other senior state and county officials were appointed as rowers to appease them.

古文：邓骘由是恶诩，欲以吏法中伤之。
现代文：邓骘因放弃凉州的计划未被采纳，从此对虞诩怀恨，打算用吏法进行陷害。
English: Since Deng Yao's plan to give up Liangzhou was not adopted, he held a grudge against Guo Yao and planned to use the Li Law to frame him.

古文：会朝歌贼宁季等数千人攻杀长吏，屯聚连年，州郡不能禁，乃以诩为朝歌长。
现代文：恰好朝歌县叛匪宁季等数千人造反，杀死官吏，聚众作乱连年，州郡官府无法镇压。于是邓骘便任命虞诩为朝歌县长。
English: It just so happened that Ning Ji, a rebel bandit from Chaoga County, and thousands of others revolted, killed government officials, and rallied the people to create turmoil for years, and the state and county government could not suppress it. Therefore, Deng Wei appointed Yu Wei as the governor of Chaoga County.

古文：故旧皆吊之，诩笑曰： 事不避难，臣之职也。
现代文：虞诩的故人旧友都为他深感忧虑，虞诩却笑着说： 做事不避艰难，乃是臣子的职责。
English: His deceased old friends were deeply worried about him, but he smiled and said, "It is the duty of a courtier not to avoid difficult tasks.

古文：不遇槃根错节，无以别利器，此乃吾立功之秋也。 
现代文：不遇到盘根错节，就无法识别锋利的刀斧，这正是我建功立业的时机！ 
English: You can't recognize a sharp knife and axe without encountering tangled roots and knots. This is exactly the time for me to make my mark!

古文：始到，谒河内太守马稜。
现代文：他一到任，便去拜见河内太守马棱。
English: As soon as he took office, he went to meet with Hanoi's grand marshal Ma Ren.

古文：稜曰： 君儒者，当谋谟庙堂，乃在朝歌，甚为君忧之。 
现代文：马棱说： 您是一位儒家学者，应当在朝廷做谋士，如今却到了朝歌，我很是为您担忧！ 
English: Maren said: You are a Confucian scholar, you should be a counselor in the imperial court, but now you have reached the morning song, I am very worried about you!

古文：诩曰： 此贼犬羊相聚，以求温饱耳，愿明府不以为忧。 
现代文：虞诩说： 朝歌的这群叛匪，只是象狗群羊群那样聚在一起，以寻求温饱罢了，请阁下不要担忧！ 
English: Yu Yao said, "This group of rebels in the morning song are just gathering together like dogs and sheep to seek food and clothing. Please don't worry!

古文：稜曰： 何以言之？ 
现代文：马棱问： 为什么这样讲？ 
English: Maren asked: Why do you say that?

古文：诩曰： 朝歌者，韩、魏之郊，背太行，临黄河，去敖仓不过百里，而青、冀之民流亡万数，贼不知开仓招众，劫库兵，守成皋，断天下右臂，此不足忧也。
现代文：虞诩说： 朝歌位于古代韩国与魏国的交界处，背靠太行山，面临黄河，离敖仓不过百里，而青州、冀州逃亡的难民数以万计，但叛匪却不懂得打开敖仓，用粮食招揽民众，抢劫武库中的兵器，据守成皋，斩断天下的右臂，这说明对他们不值得忧虑。
English: Yu Yao said: Chaoga is located at the junction of ancient Korea and Wei, backed by the Taihang Mountains, facing the Yellow River, and only a hundred miles away from Hanzang. There are tens of thousands of refugees fleeing from Qingzhou and Jizhou, but the rebels do not know how to open Hanzang, use grain to attract people, rob weapons in the arsenal, and cut off the right arm of the world. This shows that they are not worth worrying about.

古文：今其众新盛，难与争锋；兵不厌权，愿宽假辔策，勿令有所拘阂而已。 
现代文：如今他们的势力正在高涨，我们难于以强力取胜，兵不厌诈，请允许我放开手脚去对付他们，只不要有所约束阻碍即可。 
English: Now that their power is on the rise, it is difficult for us to win by force, and the soldiers are not tired of deception. Please allow me to deal with them freely, as long as there are no restrictions or obstacles.

古文：及到官，设三科以募求壮士，自掾史以下各举所知，其攻劫者为上，伤人偷盗者次之，不事家业者为下，收得百馀人，诩为飨会，悉贳其罪，使入贼中诱令劫掠，乃伏兵以待之，遂杀贼数百人。
现代文：及至上任以后，虞诩制定了三个等级，用来召募勇士，命掾史及以下官员各自就所了解的情况进行保举：行凶抢劫的，属上等；打架伤人，偷盗财物的，属中等；不经营家业、不从事生产的，属下等。共收罗了一百多人。虞诩设宴招待他们，将他们的罪行一律赦免，命混入匪帮，诱使叛匪进行抢劫，而官府则设下伏兵等候，于是杀死叛匪数百人。
English: After he took office, he set up three levels to recruit warriors, and the following officials were each promoted according to their knowledge: those who committed violent robberies were assigned to the highest level; those who fought and injured people and stole property were assigned to the middle level; and those who did not run a family business or engage in production were assigned to the lower level. A total of more than one hundred people were recruited. He invited them to a banquet, pardoned all their crimes, ordered them to join the gang, and induced the rebels to rob, while the government set up an ambush and killed hundreds of rebels.

古文：又潜遣贫人能缝者佣作贼衣，以采线缝其裾，有出市里者，吏辄禽之。
现代文：虞诩还秘密派遣会缝纫的贫民为叛匪制作服装。这些人用彩线缝制裙衣，叛匪穿上以后，在集市街巷一露面，就被官吏抓获。
English: He also secretly dispatched poor people from a sewing club to make clothes for the rebels. They sewed skirts with colored thread. After the rebels put them on, they were caught by officials as soon as they appeared in the streets of the city.

古文：贼由是骇散，咸称神明，县境皆平。
现代文：叛匪因此惊骇四散，都说有神灵在帮助官府。于是朝歌县境内全部平定。
English: As a result, the rebels were shocked and scattered, saying that there were gods helping the government. As a result, all the territory of Asaga County was pacified.

古文：三月，何熙军到五原曼柏，暴疾，不能进；遣庞雄与梁慬、耿种将步骑万六千人攻虎泽，连营稍前。
现代文：三月，何熙率军到达五原曼柏，突然身患急病，不能继续前进。于是派庞雄与梁、耿种率领步骑兵一万六千人，进攻虎泽。汉军连营行动，逐渐向前推进。
English: In March, He Xi led the army to Wuhuan Manbei, but suddenly fell ill and was unable to continue the advance. Therefore, he sent Pang Xiong, Liang and Geng Zeng, leading 16,000 infantry and cavalry, to attack Khuze. The Chinese army conducted a joint operation and gradually advanced.

古文：单于见诸军并进，大恐怖，顾让韩琮曰： 汝言汉人死尽，今是何等人也！ 
现代文：南匈奴单于见汉朝各路兵马一同进军，大为惊恐，责备韩琮道： 你说汉人已经死光，现在来的是什么人！ 
English: The Southern Xiongnu was greatly alarmed at the sight of all the soldiers and horses of the Han Dynasty marching together, and scolded Han Xuan: "You said that the Han people were already dead, what kind of people are coming now!

古文：乃遣使乞降，许之。
现代文：于是派使者求降，汉军表示准许。
English: So they sent an envoy to beg for surrender, and the Han army agreed.

古文：单于脱帽徒跣，对庞雄等拜陈，道死罪。
现代文：南匈奴单于脱掉帽子，赤着双足，向庞雄等人下拜，责备自已犯了死罪。
English: The Southern Xiongnu only took off his hat, wore bare feet, bowed down to Pang Xiong and others, and reproached himself for committing a capital crime.

古文：于是赦之，遇待如初，乃还所钞汉民男女及羌所略转卖入匈奴中者合万馀人。
现代文：于是东汉朝廷将他赦免，待遇照旧。单于则送还所掳掠的男女汉民，以及被羌人劫走后转卖到匈奴的汉民，共计一万余人。
English: As a result, the East Han Dynasty pardoned him and treated him as before. In addition, he returned the male and female Han people who had been abducted, as well as the Han people who had been abducted and sold to the Xiongnu, a total of more than ten thousand people.

古文：会熙卒，即拜梁慬度辽将军。
现代文：适逢何熙病故，朝廷便将梁任命为度辽将军。
English: When He Xi died of illness, the imperial court appointed Liang as General Du Liao.

古文：庞雄还，为大鸿胪。
现代文：庞雄回到京城，被任命为大鸿胪。
English: Pang Xiong returned to Beijing and was appointed as the leader of the Great Hungarians.

古文：先零羌复寇褒中，郑勤欲击之，主簿段崇谏，以为 虏乘胜，锋不可当，宜坚守待之。 
现代文：羌人先零部落再次进攻褒中。汉中郡太守郑勤准备回击，主簿段崇进行劝阻，认为： 敌人乘胜而来，锐不可当，我们应当坚守城池，等待时机。 
English: Zheng Qin, the governor of Hanzhong County, prepared to strike back, but his chief adviser, Duan Chong, tried to dissuade him, saying, "The enemy is taking advantage of the victory, and we should hold fast to the castle and wait for the right time."

古文：勤不从，出战，大败，死者三千馀人，段崇及门下吏王宗、原展以身扞刃，与勤俱死。
现代文：郑勤不听，出城迎战。汉军大败，死亡三千余人。段崇及门下史王宗、原展用身躯抵挡兵刃，保护郑勤，与郑勤一同战死。
English: Zheng Qin did not listen and went out of the city to fight. The Chinese army was heavily defeated and more than 3,000 people died. Duan Chong and his disciples Shi Wangzong and Yuan Zhan used their bodies to fend off the sword and protect Zheng Qin, and died together with Zheng Qin.

古文：徙金城郡居襄武。
现代文：金城郡府迁移到襄武。
English: Jincheng County Government moved to Xiangwu.

古文：戊子，杜陵园火。
现代文：戊子，汉宣帝陵园杜陵园失火。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, a fire broke out in the cemetery.

古文：癸巳，郡国九地震。
现代文：癸巳，有九个郡和封国发生地震。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, the 9th earthquake occurred.

古文：夏，四月，六州蝗。
现代文：夏季，四月，有六个州发生蝗灾。
English: In the summer, in April, there were locust plagues in six states.

古文：丁丑，赦天下。
现代文：四月丁丑，大赦天下。
English: April Ding Ugly, amnesty around the world.

古文：王宗、法雄与张伯路连战，破走之，会赦到，贼以军未解甲，不敢归降。
现代文：王宗、法雄与张伯路连续交战，张伯路兵败而逃。当赦令到达时，张伯路等因官兵没有解去盔甲，不敢投降。
English: Wang Zong, Fa Xiong and Zhang Bolu fought continuously, and Zhang Bolu was defeated and fled. When the pardon order arrived, Zhang Bolu and other soldiers did not dare to surrender because they had not removed their armor.

古文：王宗召刺史太守共议，皆以为当遂击之，法雄曰： 不然。
现代文：王宗召集州刺史和郡太守共同商议对策。众人都认为，敌人既然不投降，就应当进行攻击。而法雄却说： 这种见解不对。
English: Wang Zong called together the prefectural governor and the county magistrate to discuss countermeasures. Everyone agreed that since the enemy would not surrender, they should attack. But Hossong said, "This opinion is wrong."

古文：兵凶器，战危事，勇不可恃，胜不可必。
现代文：刀枪是凶恶的器物，战争是危险的行为，不可仗恃勇猛，没有必胜之人。
English: The sword and the gun are evil tools, war is a dangerous act, it is not necessary to be brave, there is no one who will win.

古文：贼若乘船浮海，深入远岛，攻之未易也。
现代文：叛匪如果乘船渡海，深入到遥远的岛屿，攻击他们就不容易了。
English: If thieves go out to sea by boat and go deep into distant islands, it is not so easy to attack them.

古文：及有赦令，可且罢兵以慰诱其心，势必解散，然后图之，可不战而定也。 
现代文：我们乘着朝廷发布赦令的机会，可暂且放下武器，进行安抚劝诱，叛匪势必溃散瓦解。然后再打他们的主意，就可以不经过战斗而取胜。 
English: We can take the opportunity of the pardon issued by the imperial court to temporarily lay down our weapons, appease and persuade, and the rebels are bound to collapse and disintegrate. Then we can fight them, and we can win without fighting.

古文：宗善其言，即罢兵。
现代文：王宗赞同他的意见，立即解除了官军的武装。
English: Wang Zong agreed with his opinion and immediately disarmed the government army.

古文：贼闻，大喜，乃还所略人；而东莱郡兵独未争甲，贼复惊恐，遁走辽东，止海岛上。
现代文：叛匪听到消息后，十分高兴，便将所劫掠的俘虏释放。而唯独东莱郡官军没有解去盔甲，叛匪见了，再次惊疑恐慌，逃往辽东郡，停留在海岛上。
English: After hearing the news, the rebels were very happy and released the prisoners they had robbed. However, the Donglai County government troops did not remove their armor. Seeing this, the rebels panicked again and fled to Liaodong County, where they stayed on the island.

古文：秋，七月，乙酉，三郡大水。
现代文：秋季，七月乙酉，有三个郡发生水灾。
English: In the autumn, from July to September, there were floods in three counties.

古文：骑都尉任仁与羌战累败，而兵士放纵，槛车征诣延尉，死。
现代文：骑都尉任仁与羌军交战，接连失利，而士兵放纵。朝廷下令将任仁用囚车押送到洛阳，交付廷尉后处死。
English: Cavalry captain Ren Ren fought against the Han army and suffered successive defeats, while the soldiers indulged. The imperial court ordered that Ren Ren be transported to Luoyang in a prison wagon, and after he was handed over to a court lieutenant, he was executed.

古文：护羌校尉段禧卒，复以前校尉侯霸代之，移居张掖。
现代文：护羌校尉段禧去世。朝廷再度委任前护羌校尉侯霸接替此职，并将校尉府迁到张掖。
English: The Imperial Court re-appointed the former Captain Hou Ba to take over the position after the death of Captain Duan Xie, and moved the Captain's residence to Zhangye.

古文：九月，甲申，益州郡地震。
现代文：九月甲申，益州郡发生地震。
English: In September, an earthquake occurred in Jiaxing, Yizhou County.

古文：皇太后母新野君病，太后幸其第，连日宿止；三公上表固争，乃还宫。
现代文：邓太后的母亲新野君患病。邓太后前往新野君府省亲，连续留居数日。三公上表坚决反对这种举动，邓太后这才回宫。
English: Empress Dowager Deng's mother, Nino-kun, fell ill. Empress Dowager Deng went to Nino-kun's provincial home and stayed there for several days in a row. The three princes at the table resolutely opposed this action, and only then did Empress Dowager Deng return to the palace.

古文：冬，十月，甲戌，新野君薨，使司空护丧事，仪比东海恭王。
现代文：冬季，十月甲戌，新野君去世。邓太后命令司空负责治丧，礼仪比照东海恭王刘强。
English: In the winter, in October, Emperor Jiajing, Emperor Nino passed away. Empress Dowager Deng ordered Siku to be in charge of the funeral, and the etiquette was compared to that of the East Sea King Liu Qiang.

古文：邓骘等乞身行服，太后欲不许，以问曹大家，大家上疏曰： 妾闻谦让之风，德莫大焉。
现代文：邓骘兄弟请求辞官服丧，邓太后打算拒绝，询问曹大家的意见。曹大家上书说： 我听说，谦让的风格，是最大的美德。
English: Deng Yao's brothers requested the funeral of the deceased, but Empress Dowager Deng was going to refuse, and asked Cao everyone's opinion. Cao everyone wrote: I heard that the style of modesty is the greatest virtue.

古文：今四舅深执忠孝，引身自退，而以方垂未静，拒而不许，如后有豪毛加于今日，诚恐推让之名不可再得。 
现代文：如今四位舅父坚持忠孝原则，自动引身退下高位，而陛下却因边境战乱不宁，不肯应允。然而，如果将来有人对今日的作法提出毫毛般的指摘，我担心那谦让的美名便不可再得。 
English: Today, the four uncles adhere to the principle of loyalty and filial piety and voluntarily step down from their high positions, but His Majesty does not want to agree because of the unrest caused by the border war. However, if someone in the future points out the slightest criticism of today's practice, I am afraid that the humble reputation will never be regained.

古文：太后乃许之。
现代文：邓太后这才答应了邓骘等人的请求。
English: It was only then that Empress Dowager Deng agreed to the request of Deng Yao and others.

古文：乃服除，诏骘复还辅朝政，更授前封，骘等叩头固让，乃止。
现代文：及至服丧期满，邓太后下诏命令邓骘重新回来辅佐朝政，并再次授予以前曾欲加封的爵位。邓骘等一再叩头，坚决地辞让，邓太后这才罢休。
English: At the end of the mourning period, Empress Dowager Deng issued an edict ordering Deng Yao to come back and assist the government, and once again granted the title of nobility that she had previously wanted to add. Deng Yao and others repeatedly kowtowed and resolutely refused to concede, but Empress Dowager Deng did not give up.

古文：于是并奉朝请，位次三公下，特进、侯上，其有大议，乃诣朝堂，与公卿参谋。
现代文：于是邓氏兄弟全都被赐予 奉朝请 的名义，他们的地位在三公之下，在特进及侯之上，遇到国家大事，便前往朝堂，与三公九卿一同参议。
English: As a result, all the Deng brothers were given the title of "at the invitation of the imperial court." Their status was below the three princes and above the special envoys and princes. When national events occurred, they would go to the imperial court to consult with the three princes and nine nobles.

古文：太后诏阴后家属皆归故郡，还其资财五百馀万。
现代文：邓太后下诏，准许被贬逐的阴皇后的家属全部返回原郡，发还被官府没收的资产五百余万。
English: Empress Dowager Deng issued an edict, allowing all the family members of the dethroned Empress Dowager Yin to return to their original county, and returning more than five million yuan in assets confiscated by the government.

古文：孝殇皇帝永初五年
现代文：永初五年
English: In the fifth year of the Yongchu era

古文：春，正月，庚辰朔，日有食之。
现代文：春季，正月庚辰朔，出现日食。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：丙戌，郡国十地震。
现代文：丙戌，有十个郡和封国发生地震。
English: In total, ten counties and fiefdoms were affected by the earthquake.

古文：己丑，太尉张禹免。
现代文：已丑，将太尉张禹免职。
English: He was so ugly that he dismissed First Lieutenant Zhang Yu from his post.

古文：甲申，以光禄勋颍川李修为太尉。
现代文：甲申，将光禄勋颍川人李任命为太尉。
English: Gao Shen, appointed the Guanglu Medal of the People's Liberation Army of the People's Republic of China to Li Gang, a native of the Minchuan River.

古文：先零羌寇河东，至河内，百姓相惊，多南奔渡河，使北军中候硃宠将五营士屯孟津，诏魏郡、赵国、常山、中山缮作坞候六百一十六所。
现代文：羌人先零部落攻打河东郡，到达河内郡。
English: The Xiongnu attacked Hedong County first and reached Hanoi County.

古文：羌既转盛，而缘边二千石、令、长多内郡人，并无守战意，皆争上徙郡县以避寇难。
现代文：百姓惊慌不安，很多人南逃，渡过黄河。东汉朝廷派遣北军中候朱宠率领五营兵在孟津驻防，下诏命令魏郡、赵国、常山、中山等地修建堡垒，共六百一十六座。
English: People panicked and worried, many fled south and crossed the Yellow River. The Eastern Han Dynasty sent the Northern Army Lieutenant General Zhu Cai and five battalions to garrison in Mengjin, and ordered the construction of fortresses in Wei County, Zhao Province, Changshan, Zhongshan and other places, a total of 616 fortresses.

古文：三月，诏陇西徒襄武，安定徙美阳，北地徙池阳，上郡徙衙。
现代文：羌人势力已经转盛，但沿边郡县的二千石官员、县令、县长多数是内地人，并没有守土抗战的决心，全都争着上书请求将郡县官府内迁，以躲避兵灾祸难。
English: However, most of the 2,000-koku officials, county magistrates, and county governors along the border counties were mainlanders, and they did not have the determination to defend the land and resist the war. They all scrambled to submit a request to relocate the county and county government offices to avoid the disaster of the war.

古文：百姓恋土，不乐去旧，遂乃刈其禾稼，发彻室屋，夷营壁，破积聚。
现代文：三月，朝廷下令，将陇西郡府迁到襄武，安定郡府迁到美阳，北地郡府迁到池阳，上郡官府迁到衙县。百姓眷恋乡土，不愿离开故地，于是官府下令割去庄稼，拆除房屋，铲平营垒，毁掉粮仓。
English: In March, the imperial court ordered that the county seat of Shaanxi be moved to Xiangwu, the county seat of Ding'an be moved to Miyang, the county seat of Beidi be moved to Chiyang, and the county seat of Shang County be moved to Jixian. People were attached to the countryside and did not want to leave their hometowns, so the government ordered the cutting of crops, the demolition of houses, the bulldozing of fortifications, and the destruction of granaries.

古文：时连旱蝗饥荒，而驱蹙劫掠，流离分散，随道死亡，或弃捐老弱，或为人仆妾，丧其太半。
现代文：当时接连发生旱灾、蝗灾和饥荒，加上驱赶劫掠，百姓流离四散，沿路死亡，或者抛弃老弱，或者沦为他人的奴仆婢妾，人口损失超过半数。
English: At that time, droughts, locust plagues and famines occurred one after another, coupled with expulsions and robberies, the people were scattered and died along the way, or abandoned the old and weak, or became the slaves of others, and the population loss exceeded half.

古文：复以任尚为侍御史，击羌于上党羊头山，破之，乃罢孟津屯。
现代文：朝廷再次任命任尚为侍御史，在上党郡羊头山与羌军交战，打败了羌军。
English: The imperial court once again appointed Ren Shang as an attendant of imperial history, and he fought against the Shan army in Yangtoushan, Shangdang County, and defeated the Shan army.

古文：夫馀王寇乐浪。
现代文：于是朝廷撤销在孟津的驻兵。夫馀国国王进攻乐浪郡。
English: As a result, the imperial court withdrew the troops stationed in Mengjin. The King of Yu attacked Lelang County.

古文：高句骊王宫与濊貊寇玄菟。
现代文：高句骊国国王宫和貊部落进攻玄菟郡。
English: The palace of the king of Goguryeo and the Goguryeo tribe attacked Xuanzang County.

古文：夏，闰四月，丁酉，赦凉州、河西四郡。
现代文：夏季，闰四月丁酉，在凉州与河西四郡实行大赦。
English: In the summer, in the leap month of April, Dingwu, an amnesty was implemented in Liangzhou and four counties in Hexi.

古文：海郡张伯路复寇东莱，青州刺史法雄击破之；贼逃还辽东，辽东人李久等共斩之，于是州界清静。
现代文：海匪张伯路再次进攻东莱郡，被青州刺史法雄击败。叛匪逃回辽东郡，辽东人李久等一同将张伯路斩杀。于是青州全境平静。
English: The sea bandits, Zhang Bo Lu, once again attacked Donglai County and were defeated by the Qingzhou assassin, Fa Xiong. The rebels fled back to Liaodong County, and the Liaodong people, Li Jiu and others, killed Zhang Bo Lu together. As a result, the whole territory of Qingzhou was calm.

古文：秋，九月，汉阳人杜琦及弟季贡、同郡王信等与羌通谋，聚众据上邽城。
现代文：秋季，九月，汉阳人杜琦和他的弟弟杜季贡、同郡人王信等与羌军勾结，聚众占领了上城。
English: In the autumn, in September, the Hanyang people Du Qun, his brother Du Jigong, and Wang Xin, who was from the same county, colluded with the Qin army and gathered a crowd to occupy the upper city.

古文：冬，十二月，汉阳太守赵博遣客杜习刺杀琦；封习讨奸侯。
现代文：冬季，十二月，汉阳郡太守赵博派遣刺客杜习杀死了杜琦。朝廷将杜习封为讨奸侯。
English: In winter, in December, the governor of Hanyang County, Zhao Bo, dispatched the assassin Du Xi to kill Du Juan. The court named Du Xi as a traitor.

古文：杜季贡、王信等将其众据樗泉营。
现代文：杜季贡、王信等率领部众据守在樗泉营。
English: Dudigong, Wang Xin and other leaders stayed in the camp.

古文：是岁，九州蝗，郡国八雨水。
现代文：这一年，有九个州发生蝗灾，有八个郡和封国大雨成灾。
English: This year, Kyushu was plagued by locusts, and the county received eight inches of rain.

古文：孝殇皇帝永初六年
现代文：永初六年
English: For the first time in six years

古文：春，正月，甲寅，诏曰： 凡供荐新味，多非其节，或郁养强孰，或穿掘萌牙，味无所至而夭折生长，岂所以顺时育物乎！
现代文：春季，正月甲寅，诏书说： 各地进贡的新鲜食物，多数违反时令。或者用火熏暖，强使成熟；或者萌芽时便从土中掘出，还未生出滋味，便已夭折。这难道是顺应天时化育万物吗！
English: In the spring, in the first month of the year, the edict said: "Most of the fresh foods that are paid tribute from various regions are against the season. Either they are warmed by fire and forced to mature; or they are dug out of the soil when they sprout, and they have not yet produced a taste, and they have died young. Is this in accordance with the time of day to breed all things?

古文：《传》曰： 非其时不食。 
现代文：《论语》说： 不合乎时令的东西不吃。 
English: "Analects" says: Do not eat things that are out of season.

古文：自今当奉祠陵庙及给御者，皆须时乃上。 
现代文：从今以后，供奉皇家陵园宗庙及御用的食物，一律等到成熟时再进献。 
English: From now on, the food offered to the Imperial Mausoleum and Imperial Temple, as well as the food for royal use, must wait until it is ripe before being offered.

古文：凡所省二十三种。
现代文：省减的食物共有二十三种。
English: A total of 23 kinds of food were reduced.

古文：三月，十州蝗。
现代文：三月，有十个州发生蝗灾。
English: In March, locust plagues began in ten prefectures.

古文：夏，四月，乙丑，司空张敏罢。
现代文：夏季，四月乙丑，将司空张敏罢免。
English: In the summer, in the second month of April, Zhang Min was removed from his post.

古文：己卯，以太常刘恺为司空。
现代文：四月己卯，将太常刘恺任命为司空。
English: In April of the same year, he appointed Mr. Liu Jianrong as Secretary of the Air Force.

古文：诏建武元功二十八将皆绍封。
现代文：诏书宣布，光武帝建武时期的元勋二十八将的封爵，无论曾否撤销，一律由其后裔继承。
English: The edict announced that the knighthoods of the 28 generals who were awarded during the reign of Emperor Guangwu Jianwu would be inherited by their descendants regardless of whether or not they had been revoked.

古文：五月，旱。
现代文：五月，发生旱灾。
English: In May, there was a drought.

古文：丙寅，诏令中二千石下至黄绶，一切复秩。
现代文：丙寅，诏书命令全国官员，上自中二千石，下至黄绶四百石到二百石的小吏，一律恢复原来的俸禄。
English: Hsin-yin, the edict ordered the national officials, from the middle to the upper 2,000 koku, down to the petty officials of 400 koku to 200 koku, to restore the original salary.

古文：六月，壬辰，豫章员谿原山崩。
现代文：六月壬辰，豫章郡员溪原山发生山崩。
English: In June, a landslide occurred in Yancheng, Yuzhang County.

古文：辛巳，赦天下。
现代文：辛巳，大赦天下。
English: It's time for a general amnesty.

古文：侍御史唐喜讨汉阳贼王信，破斩之。
现代文：侍御史唐喜讨伐汉阳叛匪王信。打败叛军，将王信斩杀。
English: The chamberlain Shi Tangxi fought against the Hanyang rebel Wang Xin. He defeated the rebels and beheaded Wang Xin.

古文：杜季贡亡，从滇零。
现代文：杜季贡逃亡，投奔羌人首领滇零。
English: Dudigong fled and defected to the leader of the Xiongnu, Zeng Zi.

古文：是岁，滇零死，子零昌立，年尚少，同种狼莫为其计策，以季贡为将军，别居丁奚城。
现代文：本年，滇零去世，他的儿子零昌继位。零昌年龄还小，同一部族的狼莫为他出谋划策，将杜季贡任命为将军，分兵驻扎到丁奚城。
English: This year, Zi Zi died, and his son, Zi Chang, succeeded him. Zi Chang was still young, and the wolves of the same clan advised him to appoint Du Jigong as a general, and the detachment was stationed in Dingyao City.

古文：孝殇皇帝永初七年
现代文：永初七年
English: For the first time in seven years

古文：春，二月，丙午，郡国十八地震。
现代文：春季，二月丙午，有十八个郡和封国发生地震。
English: In the spring, on the afternoon of the third day of February, earthquakes occurred in eighteen counties and counties.

古文：夏，四月，乙未，平原怀王胜薨，无子；太后立乐安夷王宠子得为平原王。
现代文：夏季，四月乙未，平原怀王刘胜去世，没有子嗣。邓太后将乐安夷王刘宠的儿子刘得封为平原王。
English: In the summer, in April, Liu Sheng, the king of the Plains, died without an heir. Empress Dowager Deng made Liu Derfeng, the son of Liu Ji, the king of the Le An Yi, the king of the Plains.

古文：丙申晦，日有食之。
现代文：丙申晦，出现日食。
English: On the 30th, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：秋，护羌校尉侯霸、骑都尉马贤击先零别部牢羌于安定，获首虏千人。
现代文：秋季，护羌校尉侯霸、骑都尉马贤在安定郡进攻羌人先零部落的分支牢羌，斩首俘获一千人。
English: In the autumn, Guard Lieutenant Hou Ba and Cavalry Lieutenant Ma Xian attacked the branch dungeons of the Xiongren First Zero Tribe in Anding County, beheading and capturing a thousand people.

古文：蝗。
现代文：发生蝗灾。
English: A plague of locusts.

古文：孝殇皇帝元初元年
现代文：元初元年
English: in the first year of the Yuan Dynasty

古文：春，正月，甲子，改元。
现代文：春季，正月甲子，改年号。
English: Spring, New Year's Eve, New Year's Day.

古文：二月，乙卯，日南地坼，长百馀里。
现代文：二月乙卯，日南郡发生地裂，长一百余里。
English: In February, a rift occurred in Nichinan County, stretching more than 100 miles.

古文：三月，癸亥，日有食之。
现代文：三月癸亥，出现日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurs in March, in the middle of the year of the boar.

古文：诏遣兵屯河内通谷冲要三十三所，皆为坞壁，设鸣鼓，以备羌寇。
现代文：朝廷下诏，派兵驻守河内郡关隘要冲三十六处，各处全都修筑堡寨，设置传警之鼓，以防备羌人进攻。
English: The imperial court decreed that the troops stationed in Guanxi, Hanoi County, should rush to 36 places, build fortresses everywhere, and set up warning drums to prevent the attack of the barbarians.

古文：夏，四月，丁酉，赦天下。
现代文：夏季，四月丁酉，大赦天下。
English: In the summer, in April, Ding Zhen, the great amnesty.

古文：京师及郡国五旱，蝗。
现代文：京城洛阳及五个郡和封国发生旱灾、蝗灾。
English: The capital Luoyang and five counties and fiefdoms suffered from drought and locust infestation.

古文：五月，先零羌寇雍城。
现代文：五月，羌人先零部落进攻雍城。
English: In May, a group of raiders raided Yongcheng.

古文：秋，七月，蜀郡夷寇蚕陵，杀县令。
现代文：秋季七月，罗郡夷人进攻蚕陵县，杀死县令。
English: In the autumn of July, the Luo County barbarians attacked Jialing County and killed the county magistrate.

古文：九月，乙丑，太尉李修罢。
现代文：九月乙丑，将太尉李罢免。
English: In September of the second month, he removed Lieutenant Li from his post.

古文：羌豪号多与诸种钞掠武都、汉中、巴郡，板楯蛮救之，汉中五官掾程信率郡兵与蛮共击破之。
现代文：羌人首领号多与诸部落在武都、汉中二郡掳掠抢劫。巴郡的析蛮人前往救援。汉中郡五官掾程信率领郡兵与蛮人一同作战，打败羌军。
English: The leaders of the Xiongnu mostly plundered and robbed with the tribes in Wudu and the two counties of Hanzhong. The barbarians of Ba County went to the rescue. The five officials of Hanzhong County, led by the county soldiers, fought with the barbarians and defeated the Xiongnu army.

古文：号多走还，断陇道，与零昌合，侯霸、马贤与战于枹罕，破之。
现代文：号多逃归，切断陇道，与零昌会合。侯霸、马贤同羌军在罕交战，打败羌军。
English: Houba and Ma Xian fought with the Xiongnu army in Hunan and defeated the Xiongnu army.

古文：辛未，以大司农山阳司马苞为太尉。
现代文：九月辛未，将大司农山阳人司马苞任命为太尉。
English: In September, Xinwei appointed the head of the Department of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, Yangren Sima, as a lieutenant.

古文：冬，十月，戊子朔，日有食之。
现代文：冬季，十月戊子朔，出现日食。
English: In winter, in October, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：凉州刺史皮杨击羌于狄道，大败，死者八百馀人。
现代文：凉州刺史皮杨在狄道与羌军交战，皮杨大败，八百余人战死。
English: In Didao, Liangzhou's Zhang Spiyang fought with the Han army. Piyang was soundly defeated, and more than 800 people died in the battle.

古文：是岁，郡国十五地震。
现代文：这一年，有十五个郡和封国发生地震。
English: It was the county's 15th earthquake.

古文：孝殇皇帝元初二年
现代文：元初二年
English: in the second year of the Yuan Dynasty

古文：春，护羌校尉庞参以恩信招诱诸羌，号多等帅众降；参遣诣阙，赐号多侯印，遣之。
现代文：春季，护羌校尉庞参用恩德信义招抚引诱各羌人部落，号多等率领部众归降。庞参派他们前往京城朝见。
English: In the spring, the garrison captain, Pang Sang, used the enticement of Nde Xinyi to lure all the Xiongnu tribes, and led many of them to surrender. Pang Sang sent them to the capital to meet the emperor.

古文：参始还治令居，通河西道。
现代文：东汉朝廷赐予号多侯爵印信，让他返回。
English: The Eastern Han Dynasty court issued a stamped letter to the Grand Marquis to allow him to return.

古文：零昌分兵寇益州，遣中郎将尹就讨之。
现代文：庞参从此将护羌校尉府迁回令居，打通了河西走廊与内地之间的道路。零昌分兵攻打益州，朝廷派遣中郎将尹就进行讨伐。
English: From then on, Pang San moved the garrison commander's house back to his residence, opening up the road between the Hexi Corridor and the inland. The soldiers of the Zichang Division attacked Yizhou, and the court sent the middle man, General Yin, to fight.

古文：夏，四月，丙午，立贵人荥阳阎氏为皇后。
现代文：夏季，四月丙午，将贵人荥阳人阎氏立为皇后。
English: In the summer, on the afternoon of the third day of the fourth month, the nobleman, Shenyang Yan, was crowned as empress.

古文：后性妒忌，后宫李氏生皇子保，后鸩杀李氏。
现代文：阎皇后生性忌妒，宫女李氏生下皇子刘保，阎皇后便将她毒死。
English: The Queen of Hell was jealous of her, and when the princess Li gave birth to the prince Liu Bao, the Queen of Hell poisoned her to death.

古文：五月，京师旱，河南及郡国十九蝗。
现代文：五月，京城洛阳发生旱灾。河南及十九个郡和封国发生蝗灾。
English: In May, there was a drought in Beijing and 19 locust plagues in Henan and the county.

古文：六月，丙戌，太尉司马苞薨。
现代文：六月丙戌，太尉司马苞去世。
English: In June, Second Lieutenant Sima Yao passed away.

古文：秋，七月，辛巳，以太仆泰山马英为太尉。
现代文：秋季，七月辛巳，将太仆泰山人马英任命为太尉。
English: In the autumn, in July of Xin Si, Ma Ying, the servant of Emperor Taishan, was appointed as the first lieutenant.

古文：八月，辽东鲜卑围无虑；九月，又攻夫犁营，杀县令。
现代文：八月，辽东郡鲜卑人包围了无虑县。九月，又进攻夫犁营，杀死县令。
English: In August, the Xianbei people of Liaodong County besieged Muxian County. In September, they attacked Fuyao Camp again, killing the county magistrate.

古文：壬午晦，日有食之。
现代文：九月壬午晦，出现日食。
English: On the 30th, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：尹就击羌党吕叔都等，蜀人陈省、罗横应募刺杀叔都，皆封侯，赐钱。
现代文：尹就讨伐与羌军勾结的吕叔都等，招募蜀郡人陈省、罗横刺杀了吕叔都。朝廷将陈、罗二人封为侯爵，并赏赐钱财。
English: Yin attacked Lü Shudu, who was colluding with the Wei army, and recruited Chen Zhou and Luo Yang, both from Shu County, to assassinate Lü Shudu. The imperial court made Chen and Luo marquesses and rewarded them with money.

古文：诏屯骑校尉班雄屯三辅。
现代文：诏书命令屯骑校尉班雄在三辅驻防。
English: The imperial edict ordered the cavalry lieutenant Ban Xiong to be stationed in Sanfu.

古文：雄，超之子也。
现代文：班雄是班超之子。
English: Banxiong is the son of Banchao.

古文：以左冯翊司马钧行征西将军，督关中诸郡兵八千馀人。
现代文：命左冯翊司马钧代理征西将军职务，指挥关中各郡郡兵八千余人。
English: The order left Feng Jiesma as acting general of the Western Expedition, commanding more than eight thousand soldiers from all counties in Guanzhong.

古文：庞参将羌、胡兵七千馀人，与钧分道并击零昌。
现代文：庞参率领羌、胡兵七千余人，与司马钧分路进军，一同攻打零昌。
English: Pang Zhan led more than seven thousand soldiers from Xing and Hu, and marched separately with Sima Yao to attack Luchang together.

古文：参兵至勇士东，为杜季贡所败，引退。
现代文：庞参军到达勇士县以东，被杜季贡击败，庞参撤退。
English: Pang Sang's army reached the east of Warriors' County, was defeated by Dudigong, and Pang Sang retreated.

古文：钧等独进，攻拔丁奚城，杜季贡率众伪逃。
现代文：司马钧孤军挺进，攻克丁奚城，杜季贡带领兵众假装逃跑。
English: Sima Yi's lone army advanced and conquered Dingyao City. Du Jigong led the troops to pretend to flee.

古文：钧令右扶风仲光等收羌禾稼，光等违钧节度，散兵深入，羌乃设伏要击之，钧在城中，怒而不救。
现代文：司马钧命右扶风仲光率兵收割羌人的庄稼，仲光等却违背司马钧的调度，分散兵力，深入敌区。于是羌人设下埋伏，对仲光进行拦腰袭击。司马钧在城中得到消息，大为愤怒，不肯救援。
English: Sima Yan ordered his right-hand man Zhong Guang to lead his soldiers to harvest the crops of the Yan people. However, Zhong Guang and others disobeyed Sima Yan's dispatch, dispersed their forces and penetrated deep into the enemy area. Therefore, the Yan people set up an ambush and carried out a surprise attack on Zhong Guang. Sima Yan got the news in the city, was very angry and refused to rescue.

古文：冬，十月，乙未，光等兵败，并没，死者三千馀人，钧乃遁还。
现代文：冬季，十月乙未，仲光等战败，全军覆没，死亡三千余人。于是司马钧逃归内地。
English: In the winter, in October, Zhongguang was defeated, the whole army was wiped out, and more than three thousand people died. So Sima Yi fled back to the mainland.

古文：庞参既失期，称病引还。
现代文：庞参既然未能按期到达预定地点，便声称患病，撤退返回。
English: Since Pang San failed to arrive at the scheduled place on time, he claimed to be ill and withdrew to return.

古文：皆坐征，下狱，钧自杀。
现代文：司马钧和庞参都被指控有罪，召回京城，逮捕下狱。司马钧自杀。
English: Both Sima Yi and Pang San were accused of being guilty, recalled to Beijing, arrested and imprisoned. Sima Yi committed suicide.

古文：时度辽将军梁慬亦坐事抵罪。
现代文：当时，度辽将军梁也因遭到指控而被判罪。
English: At the time, General Du Liao Liang was also convicted of the same charge.

古文：校书郎中扶风马融上书称参、慬智能，宜宥过责效。
现代文：校书郎中、扶风人马融上书说，庞参、梁机智而有才干，应当宽宥过失，让他们戴罪立功。
English: The school scribe and leader of the students said in the letter that Pang San and Liang were witty and talented. They should forgive their mistakes and let them take the blame.

古文：诏赦参等，以马贤代参领护羌校尉，复以任尚为中郎将，代班雄屯三辅。
现代文：于是朝廷下令将庞参、梁赦免，任命马贤接替庞参，兼任护羌校尉，再次任命任尚为中郎将，接替班雄驻防三辅。
English: As a result, the imperial court ordered that Pang San and Liang be pardoned, appointed Ma Xian to succeed Pang San and serve concurrently as a guard lieutenant, and reappointed Ren Shang as a lieutenant general to succeed Ban Xiong stationed at Sanfu.

古文：怀令虞诩说尚曰： 兵法：弱不攻强，走不逐飞，自然之势也。
现代文：怀县县令虞诩向任尚建议道： 依据兵法，弱的不去进攻强的，走的不去追赶飞的，这是自然之势。
English: Yu Yao, the county magistrate of Wai County, suggested to Ren Shang: According to the law of war, the weak should not attack the strong, and the weak should not chase the strong. This is the natural trend.

古文：今虏皆马骑，日行数百里，来如风雨，去如绝弦，以步追之，势不相及，所以虽屯兵二十馀万，旷日而无功也。
现代文：如今羌兵全都骑马，每天可行数百里，来时像急风骤雨，去时像离弦飞箭，而我军用步兵追赶，是势必追不上的。所以，尽管集结兵力二十余万，旷日持久，却没有战功。
English: Nowadays, the soldiers of the imperial army all ride horses, and can travel hundreds of miles every day. They come like a sudden wind and rain, and go like a flying arrow, and our military infantry cannot catch up with them. Therefore, although the military force of more than 200,000 has been assembled for a long time, there is no war achievement.

古文：为使君计，莫如罢诸郡兵，各令出钱数千，二十人共市一马，以万骑之众，逐数千之虏，追尾掩截，其道自究。
现代文：我为阁下打算，不如让各郡郡兵复员，命他们每人出数千钱，二十人合买一匹马，这样便可用一万骑兵去驱逐数千敌寇，尾追截击，羌人自然走投无路。
English: I have a plan for your excellency. It would be better to demobilize the soldiers of each county and order them to pay thousands of money each, and twenty of them to buy a horse. In this way, we can use ten thousand cavalry to expel thousands of enemy corsairs, chase and intercept, and the cormorants will naturally have no choice.

古文：便民利事，大功立矣。 
现代文：既方便了人民，也有利于战事，大功便可以建立了！ 
English: If it is convenient for the people and beneficial to the war effort, great achievements can be made!

古文：尚即上言，用其计，遣轻骑击杜季贡于丁奚城，破之。
现代文：于是任尚根据虞诩的建议上书，被朝廷采纳。任尚派轻骑兵在丁奚城打败了杜季贡。
English: As a result, Ren Shang submitted a letter based on the suggestion of Gu Yao, which was accepted by the imperial court. Ren Shang sent light cavalry to defeat Dudigong in Dingyao City.

古文：太后闻虞诩有将帅之略，以为武都太守，羌众数千遮诩于陈仓崤谷，诩即停军不进，而宣言： 上书请兵，须到当发。 
现代文：邓太后听说虞诩有将帅的韬略，将他任命为武都郡太守。数千羌军在陈仓崤谷集拦截虞诩。虞诩得知后，立即下令部队停止前进，宣称： 我已上书请求援兵，等援兵到后，再动身出发。 
English: When Empress Dowager Deng heard that Yu Gan had a plan to become a general, she appointed him as the governor of Wudu County. Thousands of troops intercepted Yu Gan at Chencangyu Valley. Upon learning of this, Yu Gan immediately ordered the troops to halt their advance, declaring: "I have sent a letter requesting reinforcements. Once the reinforcements arrive, we will set off again."

古文：羌闻之，乃分钞傍县。
现代文：羌军听说以后，便分头前往邻县劫掠。
English: After hearing of this, the Wei army split up and went on a looting spree in neighboring counties.

古文：诩因其兵散，日夜进道，兼行百馀里，令吏士各作两灶，日增倍之，羌不敢逼。
现代文：虞诩乘羌军兵力分散的机会，日夜前进，兼程行进了一百余里。他让官兵每人各作两个灶，以后每日增加一倍。于是羌军不敢逼近。
English: Taking the opportunity of the dispersion of the Wei army, Gu Yao advanced day and night, and traveled more than a hundred miles. He asked each officer and soldier to make two stoves, and then doubled every day. Therefore, the Wei army did not dare to approach.

古文：或问曰： 孙膑减灶而君增之，兵法日行不过三十里，以戒不虞，而今日且二百里，何也？ 
现代文：有人问虞诩： 以前孙膑使用过减灶的计策，而您却增加灶的数量；兵法说每日行军不超过三十里，以保持体力，防备不测，而您如今却每天行军将近二百里，这是什么道理？ 
English: Someone asked Yu Yao: In the past, Sun Yao used the strategy of reducing the number of stoves, but you have increased the number of stoves; the law of war says that you should march no more than thirty miles a day to maintain physical strength and prevent accidents, but now you are marching nearly two hundred miles a day. What is the reason for this?

古文：诩曰： 虏众多，吾兵少，徐行则易为所及，速进则彼所不测。
现代文：虞诩说： 敌军兵多，我军兵少，走慢了容易被追上，走快了对方便不能测知我军的底细。
English: Yu Yao said: The enemy has more soldiers than we have. If we walk slowly, we can easily be overtaken. If we walk fast, it is not convenient to know the details of our army.

古文：虏见吾灶日增，必谓郡兵来迎，众多行速，必惮追我。
现代文：敌军见我军的灶数日益增多，必定以为郡兵已来接应。我军人数既多，行动又快，敌军必然不敢追赶。
English: When the enemy saw that the number of our troops was increasing day by day, they must have thought that the county soldiers had come to meet them. Since our troops were numerous and moved quickly, the enemy troops must not have dared to chase them.

古文：孙膑见弱，吾今示强，势有不同故也。 
现代文：孙膑有意向敌人示弱，我现在有意向敌人示强，这是由于形势不同的缘故。 
English: Sun Yat-sen pretended to be weak, I am now pretending to be strong, it is because of the different situation.

古文：既到郡，兵不满三千，而羌众万馀，攻围赤亭数十日。
现代文：虞诩到达郡府以后，兵员不足三千，而羌军有一万余人，围攻赤亭达数十日。
English: After the Yuezhi arrived at the county seat, there were less than three thousand soldiers, while the Wei army had more than ten thousand people, and the siege of Chiting lasted for dozens of days.

古文：诩乃令军中，强弩勿发，而潜发小弩；羌以为矢力弱，不能至，并兵急攻。
现代文：虞诩便向部队下令，不许使用强弩，只许暗中使用小弩。羌人误认为汉军弓弩力量微弱，射不到自己，便集中兵力猛烈进攻。
English: The magistrate ordered the troops not to use the strong crossbow, but to secretly use the small crossbow. The soldiers mistakenly thought that the Chinese army's bow and arrow strength was weak and could not shoot themselves, so they concentrated their forces to attack fiercely.

古文：诩于是使二十强弩共射一人，发无不中，羌大震，退。
现代文：于是虞诩命令每二十只强弩集中射一个敌人，射无不中。羌军大为震恐，纷纷退下。
English: Gu Yao made the twenty-strong Yao shoot a total of one person, and the shot hit everything. The Yao soldiers were shocked and withdrew.

古文：诩因出城奋击，多所伤杀。
现代文：虞诩乘胜出城奋战，杀伤众多敌人。
English: As a result, Gu Yao went out of the city to pursue them, and many were killed and injured.

古文：明日，悉陈其兵众，令从东郭门出，北郭门入，贸易衣服，回转数周；羌不知其数，更相恐动。
现代文：次日，他集合全部兵众，命令他们先从东门出城，再从北门入城，然后改换服装，往复循环多次。羌人不知城中有多少汉军，于是更加惊恐不安。
English: The next day, he gathered all the soldiers and ordered them to leave the city through the east gate first, then enter the city through the north gate, and then change their clothes and go back and forth several times. People did not know how many Chinese troops were in the city, so they were even more frightened and uneasy.

古文：诩计贼当退，乃潜遣五百馀人于浅水设伏，候其走路；虏果大奔，因掩击，大破之，斩获甚众。
现代文：虞诩估计羌军将要撤走，便秘密派遣五百余人在河道浅水处设下埋伏，守住羌军的逃路。羌军果然大举奔逃，汉军乘机突袭，大败羌军，杀敌擒虏数量极多。
English: Estimating that the Wei army was about to withdraw, Yu Yu secretly dispatched more than five hundred people to set up an ambush at the shallow water of the river to guard the Wei army's escape route. The Wei army did indeed flee in a big way, the Chinese army took the opportunity to raid, defeated the Wei army, and killed a large number of enemy captives.

古文：贼由是败散。
现代文：羌军从此溃败离散。
English: The Han army was defeated and dispersed.

古文：诩乃占相地势，筑营壁百八十所，招还流亡，假赈贫民，开通水运。
现代文：于是虞诩查看研究地形，修建营堡一百八十处，并招回流亡的百姓，赈济贫民，开通水路运输。
English: As a result, he inspected and studied the terrain, built 180 camps, called back the exiled people, helped the poor, and opened water transportation.

古文：诩始到郡，谷石千，盐石八千，见户万三千；视事三年，米石八十，盐石四百，民增至四万馀户，人足家给，一郡遂安。
现代文：虞诩刚到任时，谷价每石一千钱，盐价每石八千钱，仅存户口一万三千户。而在任三年之后，米价每石八十钱，盐价每石四百钱，居民增加到四万多户。人人富足，家家丰裕，从此一郡平安。
English: When Gu Yao first took office, the price of grain was 1,000 yuan per kilo, the price of salt was 8,000 yuan per kilo, and only 13,000 households had bank accounts. However, after three years in office, the price of rice was 80 yuan per kilo, the price of salt was 400 yuan per kilo, and the number of residents increased to more than 40,000 households. Everyone was rich, every family was rich, and the county was safe from then on.

古文：十一月，庚申，郡国十地震。
现代文：十一月庚申，有十个郡和封国发生地震。
English: In November, an earthquake occurred in 10 counties and fiefdoms.

古文：十二月，武陵澧中蛮反，州郡讨平之。
现代文：十二月，武陵郡澧中蛮人反叛，被州郡官府剿平。
English: In December, the barbarians in Wuling County rebelled and were put down by the county government.

古文：己酉，司徒夏勤罢，庚戌，以司空刘恺为司徒，光禄勋袁敞为司空。
现代文：己酉，将司徒夏勤罢免。庚戌，将司空刘恺任命为司徒，将光禄勋袁敞任命为司空。
English: Ji Yan, removed Szu Xiaqin from his post. Geng Yan, appointed Sku Liu Wei as Szu, and appointed Guanglu Xun Yuan Jiao as Sku.

古文：敞，安之子也。
现代文：袁敞是袁安之子。
English: Yuan Chang is the son of Yuan An.

古文：前虎贲中郎将邓弘卒。
现代文：前虎贲中郎将邓弘去世。
English: The former Vice-Chancellor of the State Council, Deng Hong, passed away.

古文：弘性俭素，治欧阳《尚书》，授帝禁中。
现代文：邓弘生性节俭朴素，研究欧阳氏解释的《尚书》，曾在宫中教授安帝。
English: Deng Hongshu was frugal and simple by nature. He studied "Shang Shu" interpreted by Ouyang, and once taught An Di in the palace.

古文：有司奏赠弘骠骑将军，位特进，封西平侯。
现代文：有关部门建议追赠邓弘为骠骑将军，位居特进，并封为西平侯。
English: Relevant departments suggested that Deng Hong be posthumously awarded the title of General of Cavalry, promoted to the rank of special promotion, and given the title of Xiping Hou.

古文：太后追弘雅意，不加赠位、衣服，但赐钱千万，布万匹；兄骘等复辞不受。
现代文：邓太后追念邓弘平素的志向，不加赠官爵及衣服，只赐钱一千万，布一万匹。邓弘的哥哥邓骘等人仍然辞让，不肯接受。
English: The Empress Dowager Deng, in memory of Deng Hongping's unadulterated aspirations, did not give him a title and clothes, but only gave him ten million yuan and ten thousand pieces of cloth. Deng Hong's brother Deng Yao and others still refused to accept the offer.

古文：诏封弘子广德为西平侯。
现代文：太后下诏，将邓弘的儿子邓广德封为西平侯。
English: The empress dowager decreed that Deng Guangde, the son of Deng Hong, would be made the Prince of Xiping.

古文：将葬，有司复奏发五营轻车骑士，礼仪如霍光故事。
现代文：下葬之前，有关部门再次上奏，请求征调北军五营的轻车骑士护灵，礼仪如同西汉霍光的旧例。
English: Before the burial, the relevant departments played again, requesting the enlistment of the five battalions of the Northern Army Light Cavalry to protect the spirit. The etiquette was the same as the old example of the Western Han Dynasty Ho Guang.

古文：太后皆不听，但白盖双骑，门生輓送。
现代文：邓太后一概不准，只许使用白盖丧车，派两名骑士护卫，由邓弘的学生门徒送葬。
English: Empress Dowager Deng did not allow anyone to take part in the funeral. She only allowed the use of a white-covered funeral carriage and sent two knights to escort the funeral procession, which was led by a disciple of Deng Hong's students.

古文：后以帝师之重，分西平之都乡，封广德弟甫德为都乡侯。
现代文：后来，因邓弘曾做过安帝的师傅，地位重要，便分割西平国的封土，将邓广德的弟弟邓甫德封为都乡侯。
English: Later, because Deng Hong had been a teacher of Emperor An and his position was important, he divided the fiefs of Xiping Province and made Deng Guangde's brother Deng Fude the capital town.

