古文：起旃蒙大荒落，尽著雍涒滩，凡四年。
现代文：起，止，一共四年。
English: A total of four years.

古文：安皇帝己义熙元年
现代文：晋安帝义熙元年
English: In the first year of Emperor Jian of the Andean Dynasty

古文：春，正月，南阳太守扶风鲁宗之起兵袭襄阳，桓蔚走江陵。
现代文：春季，正月，东晋南阳太守扶风人鲁宗之，发动军队袭击襄阳，桓蔚失败后逃往江陵。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, Lu Zongzhi, the governor of Nanyang in East Jin, launched an army to attack Yangyang. After the defeat, Huan Wei fled to Gangneung.

古文：己丑，刘毅等诸军至马头。
现代文：己丑，刘毅等人的几支军队抵达马头。
English: Several armies led by Ji Jiu, Liu Yi and others arrived in Ma Tau.

古文：桓振挟帝出屯江津，遣使求割江、荆二州，奉送天子；毅等不许。
现代文：桓振挟持着安帝出兵屯据在江津，派遣使节请求割据江、荆两个州，以送回安帝作为交换条件。
English: Holding An Di's outpost in Jiangjin hostage, Kuan Zhen dispatched an envoy to request that the two states of Jiang and Jing be divided and sent back to An Di as a quid pro quo.

古文：辛卯，宗之击破振将温楷于柞溪，进屯纪南。
现代文：刘毅等人没有答应。辛卯，鲁宗之在柞溪将桓振的部将温楷击败，进军屯扎在纪南。
English: Liu Yi and others did not agree. Xin Wu and Lu Zongzhi defeated Kan Zhen's subordinate Wen Kai in Qixi and marched into Jinan.

古文：振留桓谦、冯该守江陵，引兵与宗之战，大破之。
现代文：桓振留下桓谦、冯该镇守江陵，率领部队与鲁宗之展开决战，并打败了他。
English: Kuan Zhen left Kuan Qian and Feng Gai to guard Gangneung, and led the troops to launch a decisive battle with Luzong, and defeated him.

古文：刘毅等击破冯该于豫章口，桓谦弃城走。
现代文：刘毅等人又在豫章口把冯该打败，桓谦放弃守城，逃跑。
English: Liu Yi and others defeated Feng Jia at Yuzhangkou, and Huan Qian gave up defending the city and fled.

古文：毅等入江陵，执卞范之等，斩之。
现代文：刘毅等人的部队进入江陵，抓住卞范之等人，全部杀掉。
English: The troops of Liu Yi and others entered Jiangling, seized Yu Fanzhi and others, and killed them all.

古文：桓振还，望见火起，知城已陷，其众皆溃，振逃于涢川。
现代文：桓振回师，望见城中大火四起，知道江陵已经被攻陷，他所带的军队全部溃散，桓振逃到川。
English: When Kuan Zhen returned to his division, he saw four large fires in the city and knew that Gangneung had been captured. All the troops he had brought with him were dispersed, and Kuan Zhen fled to the river.

古文：乙未，诏大处分悉委冠军将军刘毅。
现代文：乙未，安帝下诏说，把国家的重大事件的处理权，全部交给冠军将军刘毅。
English: Two years later, Emperor An said in his edict that the power to deal with the country's major events would be entirely handed over to the champion general Liu Yi.

古文：戊戌，大赦，改元，惟桓氏不原；以桓冲忠于王室，特宥其孙胤。
现代文：戊戌，下令实行大赦，改年号为义熙，只有桓氏家族的成员不加原宥。因为桓冲一心忠于王室司马家族，特别赦免了他的孙子桓胤。
English: Wuzhong ordered a general amnesty and changed the name of the year to Yixi. Only members of the Huan family were exempted. Because Huanchong was loyal to the royal Sima family, his grandson Huan Ting was specially pardoned.

古文：以鲁宗之为雍州刺史，毛璩为征西将军、都督益、梁、秦、凉五州诸军事、璩弟瑾为梁、秦二州刺史，瑗为宁州刺史。
现代文：任命鲁宗之为雍州刺史，任命毛璩为征西将军及都督益、梁、秦、凉、宁五州诸军事，任命毛璩的弟弟毛瑾为梁、秦二州的刺史，毛瑷为宁州刺史。
English: Lu Zong was appointed as the prefect of Yongzhou, Mao Jun was appointed as the general of the Western Expedition and the military governor of the five prefectures of Yixing, Liang, Qin, Liang and Ning, Mao Jun's brother Mao Jun was appointed as the prefect of Liang, the prefect of the two prefectures of Qin, and Mao Jun was appointed as the prefect of Ningzhou.

古文：刘怀肃追斩冯该于石城，桓谦、桓怡、桓蔚、桓谧、何澹之、温楷皆奔秦。
现代文：刘怀肃在石城追上冯该并把他杀了。桓谦、桓怡、桓蔚、桓谧、何澹之、温楷等人都逃奔后秦。
English: Liu Huai Su caught up with Feng Jia in Shicheng and killed him. Huan Qian, Huan Yi, Huan Wei, Huan Yao, He Yanzhi, Wen Kai and others all fled to Houqin.

古文：怡，弘之弟也。
现代文：桓怡是桓弘的弟弟。
English: Kanyi is Kanehiro's younger brother.

古文：燕王熙伐高句丽。
现代文：后燕王慕容熙征伐高句丽。
English: Emperor Yan's successor, Emperor Murongxi, conquered Goguryeo.

古文：戊申，攻辽东。
现代文：戊申，进攻辽东。
English: Boshin, attack Liaodong.

古文：城且陷，熙命将士： 毋得先登，俟铲平其城，朕与皇后乘辇而入。 ，由是城中得严备，卒不克而还。
现代文：在将要攻下城墙的时候，慕容熙命令手下的将士说： 不得抢先登城，等到把城墙铲成平地的时候，我跟皇后坐在车上一同进城。 因此，城中得到喘息的机会，加强了防备，于是他们没法攻破，只好回去了。
English: When it was time to attack the city wall, Murongxi ordered his soldiers to say, "Don't rush into the city first, wait until the city wall is leveled, and then I will sit in the car with the queen to enter the city." As a result, the city got a breather and strengthened its defenses, so they couldn't break through and had to go back.

古文：秦王兴以鸠摩罗什为国师，奉之如神，亲帅群臣及沙门听罗什讲佛经，又命罗什翻译西域《经》、《论》三百馀卷，大营塔寺，沙门坐禅者常以千数。
现代文：后秦王姚兴任命鸠摩罗什为国师，像侍奉神灵那样尊重他，亲自率领大臣们以及一些僧人听鸠摩罗什讲授佛经，又命令鸠摩罗什翻译从西域传来的佛家 经 、 论 共三百多卷，并大量营造佛塔、寺院等建筑，在那里坐禅修行的僧人常常有千人之多。
English: Later, King Yao Xing of Qin appointed Kumarajiva as the national teacher and respected him as if he were serving a deity. He personally led the ministers and some monks to listen to Kumarajiva's lectures on Buddhist scriptures. He also ordered Kumarajiva to translate Buddhist scriptures and treatises from the Western Regions, a total of more than three hundred volumes, and to build a large number of pagodas, temples and other buildings, where there are often more than a thousand monks meditating.

古文：公卿以下皆奉佛，由是州郡化之，事佛者十室而九。
现代文：朝廷公、卿以下的官员也都信奉佛教，于是，地方上也都受这种风气的熏，信佛的人在十家当中往往有九家。
English: Officials below the rank of court officials and nobles also believed in Buddhism, and as a result, the local people were also influenced by this culture. There were often nine out of ten families that believed in Buddhism.

古文：乞伏乾归击吐谷浑大孩，大破之，俘万馀口而还，大孩走死胡园。
现代文：后秦归义侯乞伏乾归进攻吐谷浑可汗大孩，并把他打得大败，俘获了一万多人后回师。大孩逃往胡园，死在那里。
English: After the return of the Qin Dynasty to the state of Qi, Qian Hui attacked Tugu Hun Khan Daigo, and defeated him, captured more than 10,000 people, and returned to the division. Daigo fled to Huyuan, where he died.

古文：视罴世子树洛干帅其馀众数千家奔莫何川，自称车骑大将军、大单于、吐谷浑王。
现代文：前任可汗视罴的嫡长子树洛干率领剩下的部众几千家逃奔莫何川，自己号称车骑大将军、大单于、吐谷浑王。
English: The eldest legitimate son of the previous khan, Shu Luo Gan, led the remaining members of several thousand families to flee to the Mohe River, calling himself the General of Chariot and Cavalry, the Great Monk, and the King of Tuyun.

古文：树洛干轻徭薄赋，信赏必罚，吐谷浑复兴，沙、漒诸戎皆附之。
现代文：树洛干减轻徭役和赋税，有功必赏，有罪必罚，所以吐谷浑很快便复兴起来。沙州、川一带的那些戎族部落都归附了他们。
English: Shulokan reduced taxes and taxes, rewarding merit and punishing crime, so Tuyagun was quickly revived. All the Edo tribes around Shazhou and Sichuan joined them.

古文：西凉公暠自称大将军、大都督、领秦、凉二州牧，大赦，改元建初，遣舍人黄始梁兴间行奉表诣建康。
现代文：西凉公李自己号称大将军、大都督并兼秦、凉二州牧，下令实行大赦，改年号为建初，派遣舍人黄始、梁兴携带奏章，抄小路去建康诣见东晋朝廷。
English: Xiliang Gong Li himself claimed to be the great general, the great governor and also the Qin and Liang two-state herdsman, ordered an amnesty, changed the year name to Jianzhu, and sent his subordinates Huang Zhi and Liang Xing to carry the calligraphy and cut a path to Jiankangyu to see the East Jin court.

古文：二月，丁巳，留台备法驾迎帝于江陵，刘毅、刘道规留屯夏口，何无忌奉帝东还。
现代文：二月，丁巳，东晋留台准备皇帝专用的车驾仪仗，去江陵迎接安帝，刘毅、刘道规留在夏口驻扎，何无忌陪同护卫安帝东下还都。
English: In February, Ding Si stayed in the Eastern Jin Dynasty to prepare for the emperor's special car-driving ceremonial battle, and went to Gangneung to meet Emperor An, while Liu Yi and Liu Daojie stayed in Xiakou to be stationed, so why not accompany the escort of Emperor An to the eastern capital.

古文：初，毛璩闻桓振陷江陵，帅众三万顺流东下，将讨之，使其弟西夷校尉瑾、蜀郡太守瑗出外水，参军巴西谯纵、侯晖出涪水。
现代文：当初，毛璩听说桓振攻陷了江陵，便率领三万人的部队顺长江向东进发，准备讨伐他，派遣他的弟弟西夷校尉毛瑾、蜀郡太守毛瑷从外水出发，参军巴西人谯纵、侯晖从涪水出发。
English: At first, when Mao Jun heard that Huan Zhen had captured Jiangling, he led a force of 30,000 men eastward along the Yangtze River, preparing to fight against him. He sent his brother, Xi'i Colonel Mao Jun, and Shu County Governor Mao Jun from Zuishui, and the Brazilian soldiers Xizhong and Hou Jun from Surabaya.

古文：蜀人不乐远征，晖至五城水口，与巴西阳昧谋作乱。
现代文：蜀地的人不喜欢到远方征战，侯晖到了五城水口，与巴西人阳昧谋划发动叛乱。
English: The people of Shu did not like to go far away to fight. Hou Yi went to the Five Cities Water Port and plotted with the Brazilian Yang Mian to launch a rebellion.

古文：纵为人和谨，蜀人爱之，晖、昧共逼纵为主，纵不可，走投于水；引出，以兵逼纵登舆，纵又投地，叩头固辞，晖缚纵于舆。还，袭毛瑾于涪城，杀之，推纵为梁、秦二州刺史。
现代文：谯纵为人谦和谨慎，蜀地的人都很拥戴他，侯晖、阳昧一起逼迫谯纵为盟主。谯纵严辞拒绝，纵身投江，被叛军救了上来。他们又用兵刃逼迫谯纵登上车轿，谯纵又扑倒在地，向大家磕头，坚决拒绝，侯晖把谯纵绑在车上，回军，在涪城袭击毛瑾，并把他杀了，拥推谯纵为凉、秦二州刺史。
English: He was a modest and prudent man, and the people of Shu were very fond of him. The lord of the manor and the lord of the man together forced him to be the leader. He refused, threw himself into the river, and was rescued by the rebels. They also used the sword to force him to board the car, he threw himself to the ground, and shook his head at everyone, and resolutely refused. The lord of the manor tied him to the car, returned to the army, attacked Mao Yao in Lucheng, and killed him, pushed him to be cool, and stabbed the history of Qin Erzhou.

古文：璩至略城，闻变，奔还成都，遣参军王琼将兵讨之，为纵弟明子所败，死者什八九。
现代文：毛璩来到略城，听说军中发生叛乱，飞马回成都，派遣参军王琼带兵前去讨伐，被谯纵的弟弟谯明子打败，被杀死者十有八九。
English: Mao Yao came to Liaocheng, heard that there was a rebellion in the army, Pegasus returned to Chengdu, sent Wang Qiong to join the army to lead the troops to fight, was defeated by his arrogant brother Yao Mingzi, and nine out of ten were killed.

古文：益州营户李腾开城纳纵兵，杀璩及弟瑗，灭其家。
现代文：益州营户李腾打开城门迎入谯纵的军队，杀了毛璩和他的弟弟毛瑷，屠灭了他们全家。
English: Li Teng, the warden of Yizhou, opened the city gate to welcome the invading army, killed Mao Kun and his brother Mao Kun, and slaughtered their entire family.

古文：纵称成都王，以从弟洪为益州刺史，以明子为巴州刺史屯白帝。
现代文：谯纵号称成都王，任命堂弟谯洪为益州刺史，任命谯明子为巴州刺史，驻守白帝。
English: He called himself the king of Chengdu, appointed his cousin Zou Hong as the governor of Yizhou, and appointed Zou Mingzi as the governor of Bazhou, stationed in Baidu.

古文：于是蜀大乱，汉中空虚，氐王杨盛遣其兄子平南将军抚据之。
现代文：从此，蜀地局势大乱，汉中的实力也十分空虚。氐王杨盛派遣他的侄儿平南将军杨抚占据了那里。
English: Since then, the situation in Shu has been chaotic, and the power in Hanzhong is also very empty. The warlord Yang Sheng sent his nephew, the Pingnan general Yang Fu, to occupy there.

古文：癸亥，魏主珪还自豺山，罢尚书三十六曹。
现代文：癸亥，北魏国主拓跋从豺山回京，撤销了尚书三十六曹等官署。
English: Tuoba, the ruler of Northern Wei, returned to Beijing from Shaoshan and revoked the Thirty-six Cao and other government offices.

古文：三月，桓振自郧城袭江陵，荆州刺史司马休之战败，奔襄阳，振自称荆州刺史。
现代文：三月，桓振自郧城发兵袭击江陵，荆州刺史司马休之迎战，大败，逃奔襄阳，桓振自称为荆州刺史。
English: In March, Huan Zhen sent troops from Lucheng to attack Jiangling, Jingzhou assassin Sima Xiu's counterattack, defeated, fled to Xiangyang, Huan Zhen called himself the assassin of Jingzhou.

古文：建威将军刘怀肃自云杜引兵驰赴，与振战于沙桥；刘毅遣广武将军唐兴助之，临隈斩振，复取江陵。
现代文：建威将军刘怀肃从云杜带兵迅速赶到，在沙桥与桓振展开决战。刘毅派遣广武将军唐兴前来助战，就在战场上将桓振杀死，重新夺回江陵。
English: Liu Huai-Su, the general of Jianwei, quickly arrived from Yundu with his soldiers and fought a decisive battle with Kuan Zhen at Shaqiao. Liu Yi dispatched the general of Guangwu, Tang Xing, to come to the aid of the war, and killed Kuan Zhen on the battlefield and recaptured Gangneung.

古文：甲午，帝至建康。
现代文：甲午，安帝抵达建康。
English: In the afternoon of the first day, Andi arrived in Jiankang.

古文：乙未，百官诣阙请罪，诏令复职。
现代文：乙未，文武百官前往宫门拜见请罪。安帝下诏命令他们恢复职务。
English: Soon after, hundreds of civil and military officials went to the palace gate to plead guilty. Emperor An ordered them to resume their duties.

古文：尚书殷仲文以朝廷音乐未备，言于刘裕，请治之。
现代文：尚书殷仲文因为朝廷音乐设施不完备，告之刘裕，请求重建。
English: Shangshu Yin Zhongwen told Liu Yu that the imperial music facilities were not complete, and requested that they be rebuilt.

古文：裕曰： 今日不暇给，且性所不解。 
现代文：刘裕说： 现在没有时间做这件事，而且我也不懂它的道理。 
English: Liu Yu said, "I don't have time to do this now, and I don't understand the reason for it.

古文：仲文曰： 好之自解。 
现代文：殷仲文说： 如果你喜欢它，那就自然懂了。 
English: Yin Zhongwen said: If you like it, then you will naturally understand.

古文：裕曰： 正以解则好之，故不习耳。 
现代文：刘裕说： 正因为懂了就会喜爱，所以我才不去学习它。 
English: Liu Yu said, "I don't want to learn it because once I understand it, I will love it."

古文：庚子，以琅邪王德文为大司马，武陵王遵为太保，刘裕为侍中、车骑将军、都督中外诸军事，徐、青二州刺史如故，刘毅为左将军，何无忌为右将军、督豫州、扬州五郡军事、豫州刺史，刘道规为辅国将军、督淮北诸军事、并州刺史，魏咏之为征虏将军、吴国内史。
现代文：庚子，任命琅邪王司马德文为大司马，武陵王司马遵为太保，刘裕为侍中、车骑将军、都督中外诸军事，原任的徐、青二州刺史仍然兼任，刘毅为左将军，何无忌为右将军、督豫州和扬州五郡诸军事、豫州刺史。刘道规为辅国将军、督淮北诸军事、并州刺史，魏咏之为征虏将军、吴国内史。
English: Geng Zi appointed Sima Dewen, the king of Yunnan, as the grand steward, Sima Zun, the king of Wuling, as the eunuch, Liu Yu as the chamberlain, general of cavalry and cavalry, and military governor of the Middle and Outer Provinces; Xu and Qing Erzhou, who were originally appointed, still served concurrently; Liu Yi as the left general, He Muxui as the right general, the military governor of Yuzhou and the five counties of Yangzhou, and the military governor of Yuzhou; Liu Daojin as the auxiliary general, the military governor of Huaibei, and the military governor of Yuzhou;

古文：裕固让不受，加录尚书事，又不受，屡请归籓；诏百官敦劝，帝亲幸其第。
现代文：刘裕坚决辞让，不接受这些官职。安帝加封他为录尚书事，他还是不接受，几次请求仍回到他的属地去。安帝命令文武百官一起敦促、规劝，安帝也亲自驾临到他的宅第。
English: Liu Yu resolutely resigned and did not accept these official positions. An Di added him as a record keeper, but he still did not accept, and several times asked him to return to his territory. An Di ordered hundreds of civil and military officials to urge and persuade, and An Di also personally came to his house.

古文：裕惶惧，复诣阙陈请，乃听归籓。
现代文：刘裕惶恐害怕，再次前往宫门去拜见，陈述理由，最后，安帝终于准许他回属地去了。
English: Liu Yu Rong was afraid and went to the palace gate to visit him again and explain his reasons. Finally, Emperor An finally allowed him to return to his territory.

古文：以魏咏之为荆州刺史，代司马休之。
现代文：安帝又任命魏咏之为荆州刺史，代替司马休之。
English: Emperor An also appointed Wei Xuan as Jingzhou's chief historian, replacing Sima Xiu.

古文：初，刘毅尝为刘敬宣宁朔参军，时人或以雄杰许之。
现代文：当初，刘毅曾经做过刘敬宣的宁朔参军，当时有的人认为他是一个英雄豪杰。
English: At the beginning, Liu Yi once did Liu Jingxuan's Ningshuo to join the army. At that time, some people thought he was a hero.

古文：敬宣曰： 夫非常之才自有调度，岂得便谓引君为人豪邪！
现代文：刘敬宣说： 非常的人才自有胸怀和水平，何以见得他就是人中豪杰呢？
English: Liu Jingxuan said: A very talented person has his own mind and level, how can he be a hero among people?

古文：此君之性，外宽而内忌，自伐而尚人，若一旦遭遇，亦当以陵上取祸耳。 
现代文：此人的性格，外表宽厚，但心胸狭窄，自视很高，总想在别人之上，如果一旦掌握大权，也一定会因为犯上而招到祸患。 
English: This person's character, outwardly generous, but narrow-minded, self-esteem is very high, always want to be on top of others, if once mastered the power, it will certainly invite disaster because of committing.

古文：毅闻而恨之。
现代文：刘毅听说之后，心中对刘敬宣十分怀恨。
English: After hearing this, Liu Yi harbored a lot of hatred towards Liu Jingxuan in his heart.

古文：及敬宣为江州，辞以无功，不宜援任先于毅等，裕不许。
现代文：到了朝廷任命刘敬宣为江州刺史的时候，他认为自己无功，诚恳辞让，不应该在刘毅等人之前接受任命。
English: When the imperial court appointed Liu Jingxuan as the governor of Jiangsu Province, he thought that he was useless and sincerely resigned, and should not accept the appointment before Liu Yi and others.

古文：毅使人言于裕曰： 刘敬宣不豫建议。
现代文：刘裕没有答应他的请求。刘毅这时派人去对刘裕说： 刘敬宣并没有参与勤王讨逆的义举。
English: Liu Yu did not agree to his request. At this time, Liu Yi sent someone to tell Liu Yu: Liu Jingxuan did not participate in the righteous deed of defeating the enemy.

古文：猛将劳臣，方须叙报；如敬宣之比，宜令在后。
现代文：现在，平乱中的勇猛之将、劳顿之臣才要论功行赏，像刘敬宣那样的官员，应该让他们靠后一些。
English: Now, it is the brave generals and hard-working officials who should be rewarded for their achievements. Officials like Liu Jingxuan should let them take a back seat.

古文：若使君不忘平生，正可为员外常侍耳。
现代文：如果你不忘记过去的情谊，不妨给他一个员外常侍之类的官做，就可以了。
English: If you don't forget your past friendship, you might as well give him a position as an outside attendant, that's fine.

古文：闻已授郡，实为过优；寻复为江州，尢为骇惋。 
现代文：现在听说已经授给他郡守的官职，实在已经是太过于优厚了。不久又再次把江州交给他管辖，尤其让人惊骇惋惜。 
English: Now I hear that he has been given the official post of county governor, which is really too generous. It is particularly shocking and regrettable that he will soon be given the jurisdiction of Jiangzhou again.

古文：敬宣愈不自安，自表解职；乃召还为宣城内史。
现代文：刘敬宣越加感到心中不安，自己上表请求解去职务，于是，朝廷把他召回做宣城内史。
English: Liu Jing Xuan felt more and more uneasy in his heart. He petitioned to be relieved of his duties, so the court recalled him to do Xuan's inner city history.

古文：夏，四月，刘裕旋镇京口，改授都督荆、司等十六州诸军事，加领兗州刺史。
现代文：夏季，四月，刘裕回到京口镇守。朝廷改任他为都督荆、司等十六州诸军事，兼任兖州刺史。
English: In the summer, in April, Liu Yu returned to the town of Jingkou. The imperial court appointed him as the military governor of 16 prefectures, including Jing and Shi, and also as the prefect of Zhangzhou.

古文：卢循遣使贡献。
现代文：卢循派遣使节前来建康进贡。
English: Lu Xun sent envoys to Jiankang to pay tribute.

古文：时朝廷新定，未暇征讨；壬申，以循为广州刺史，徐道覆为始兴相。
现代文：这时，东晋朝廷刚刚稳定下来，没有时间前去征讨。壬申，朝廷任命卢循为广州刺史，徐道覆为始兴相。
English: At this time, the Eastern Jin Dynasty court had just stabilized, and there was no time to go to collect. In Jinshin, the court appointed Lu Xun as the governor of Guangzhou, and Xu Daohui as the prime minister.

古文：循遗刘裕智粽，裕报以续命汤。
现代文：卢循赠送给刘裕益智粽，刘裕回赠给他续命汤。
English: Lu Xun gave Liu Yu Yizhishan, and Liu Yu gave him the soup to prolong his life.

古文：循以前琅邪内史王诞为平南长史。
现代文：卢循任命前琅邪内史王诞为平南长史。
English: Lu Xun appointed the former King of Inner History to be the King of Long History of Pingnan.

古文：诞说循曰： 诞本非戎旅，在此无用；素为刘镇军所厚，若得北归，必蒙寄任，公私际会，仰答厚恩。 
现代文：王诞游说卢循道： 王诞我本来不是军旅出身，留在这里也没什么用处。我一向被刘镇军厚爱，如果能够回到北方去的话，一定会得到他的委派重用，这样，不管是为公为私，遇到机会，我一定要报答您的厚恩。 
English: Wang Xizhun lobbied Lu Zhi Dao: Wang Xizhun, I am not originally from the military, and it is of little use to stay here. I have always been loved by Liu Zhenjun. If I can go back to the north, I will definitely get his appointment and re-use. In this way, whether it is for public or private, if I have the opportunity, I must repay your kindness.

古文：循甚然之。
现代文：卢循认为他说得很对。
English: Lu Xun thought his words made a lot of sense.

古文：刘裕与循书，令遣吴隐之还，循不从。
现代文：这时刘裕写给卢循一封信，让他派吴隐之回去，卢循没有听从。
English: At this time, Liu Yu wrote a letter to Lu Xun, asking him to send Wu Yingzhi back, but Lu Xun did not listen.

古文：诞复说循曰： 将军今留吴公，公私非计。
现代文：王诞又对卢循说： 将军这次扣留吴公，对公对私都不是好计策。
English: Wang Xizhe also said to Lu Xun: The general's detention of Wu Gong this time is not a good strategy for the public or for me.

古文：孙伯符岂不欲留华子鱼邪？但以一境不容二君耳。 
现代文：孙策岂能不想扣留华歆？只是因为一个地方容不下两个君长罢了。 
English: Could it be that Sun Ce did not want to detain Hua Tuo? Just because one place cannot accommodate two rulers.

古文：于是循遣隐之与诞俱还。
现代文：于是，卢循派吴隐之与王诞一起回去了。
English: As a result, Lu Xun's disciple Wu Yingzhi went back with Wang Xizhe.

古文：初，南燕主备德仕秦为张掖太守，其兄纳与母公孙氏居于张掖，备德之从秦王坚寇淮南也，留金刀与其母别。
现代文：当初，南燕国主慕容备德在前秦担任张掖太守。他的哥哥慕容纳与母亲公孙氏居住在张掖。后来，慕容备德跟随秦王苻坚进犯淮南，留下一把金刀向母亲告别。
English: At the beginning, Murong Bei De, the ruler of Nanyan, served as the first governor of Zhangye in the former Qin Dynasty. His brother, Murong Bei De, lived in Zhangye with his mother, Gongsun. Later, Murong Bei De followed Qin King He Jian to invade Huainan, leaving a golden sword to say goodbye to his mother.

古文：备德与燕王垂举兵于山东，张掖太守苻昌收纳及备德诸子，皆诛之，公孙氏以老获免，纳妻段氏方娠，未决。
现代文：慕容备德与燕王慕容垂在崤山之东起兵反叛，张掖太守苻昌便抓获慕容纳以及慕容备德的几个儿子，都杀掉了。他的母亲公孙氏因为年老而得到赦免，慕容纳的妻子段氏正在怀孕，也没有被马上处死。
English: Murong Bide and Yan Wang Murongdang rebelled in the east of Lushan Mountain. Zhang Yutai, the governor of Yuchang, captured Murong Bide and several of Murong Bide's sons and killed them. His mother, Gongsun, was pardoned because of her old age. Murong Bide's wife, Duan, was pregnant and was not immediately executed.

古文：狱掾呼延平，备德之故吏也，窃以公孙氏及段氏逃于羌中。
现代文：监狱看守呼延平，是原来慕容备德的老部下，暗地里把在押的公孙氏和段氏放跑，带她们逃到羌中去了。
English: The prison guard, Hu Yanping, who was originally an old subordinate of Mu Rong Bi Rong, secretly released Gong Sun and Duan, who were in custody, and took them to the detention center.

古文：段氏生子超，十岁而公孙氏病，临卒，以金刀授超曰： 汝得东归，当经此刀还汝叔也。 
现代文：段氏生下儿子慕容超。孩子十岁的时候，公孙氏得了重病，临死的时候，把金刀交给慕容超说： 你将来如果有机会回到东方去的话，你应当把这把刀还给你的叔叔。 
English: Duan gave birth to a son, Murong Chao. When the child was ten years old, Gongsun fell seriously ill. As he was about to die, he handed the golden sword to Murong Chao and said, "In the future, if you have the opportunity to return to the East, you should return this sword to your uncle."

古文：呼延平又以超母子奔凉。
现代文：呼延平又带着慕容超母子二人投奔后凉国。
English: Huyanping also took Murong Chao's mother and two sons and fled to Houliang Province.

古文：及吕隆降秦，超随凉州民徙长安。
现代文：到了吕隆投降后秦之后，慕容超又随着凉州的百姓一起被迁到长安。
English: After the Qin Dynasty after the surrender of Lulong, Murong Chao was moved to Chang'an together with the people of Liangzhou.

古文：平卒，段氏为超娶女为妇。
现代文：呼延平死后，段氏为慕容超娶了呼延平的女儿做媳妇。
English: After Huyanping's death, Duan married Mu Rongchao to Huyanping's daughter as his daughter-in-law.

古文：超恐为秦人所录，乃阳狂行乞；秦人贱之，惟东平公绍见而异之，言于秦王兴曰： 慕容超姿干瑰伟，殆非真狂，愿微加官爵以縻之。 
现代文：慕容超担心自己被后秦扣押，于是表面上假装疯癫，到处乞食为生。后秦国的人都觉得他很贱，歧视他，只有东平公姚绍看见他后，认为他很奇异特殊，对后秦王姚兴说道： 慕容超身材魁梧，举措轩昂，恐怕不是真疯，希望您能稍稍给他一个小官当，把他拴住。 
English: Murong Chao was worried that he would be detained by Hou Qin, so he pretended to be crazy on the surface and begged everywhere for a living. The people of Hou Qin felt that he was very cheap and discriminated against him. Only Dongping Gong Yao Shao saw him and thought he was very strange and special. He said to Hou Qin King Yao Xing: Murong Chao has a big body and is very energetic. I'm afraid he is not really crazy. I hope you can give him a little official post and hold him down.

古文：兴召见，与语，超故为谬对，或问而不答。
现代文：姚兴召见慕容超，与他说话，慕容超故意往错处回答。
English: Yao Xing summoned Murong Chao and spoke with him. Murong Chao deliberately answered in the wrong place.

古文：兴谓绍曰： 谚云 妍皮不裹痴骨， 徒妄语耳。 
现代文：姚兴对姚绍说： 谚语说得好， 好皮不包蠢骨头 ，他只不过是胡说八道罢了。 
English: Yao Xing said to Yao Shao: As the saying goes, a good skin does not cover a bad bone, he is just talking nonsense.

古文：乃罢遣之。
现代文：于是把他放了出去。
English: So they let him out.

古文：备德闻纳有遣腹子在秦，遣济阴人吴辩往视之，辩因乡人宗正谦卖卜在长安，以告超。
现代文：慕容备德听说慕容纳有一个遗腹子还在后秦，便派遣济阴人吴辩去那里查访。吴辩因为同乡人宗正谦在长安依靠占卜算卦为生，便通过他与慕容超取得了联系。
English: When Murong Bide heard that Murong had a stillborn son in Houqin, he sent Wu Dian, a Jilin man, to visit there. Wu Dian got in touch with Murong Chao through fellow villager Zong Zhengqian, who relied on divination in Chang'an for a living.

古文：超不敢告其母妻，潜与谦变换姓名逃归南燕。
现代文：慕容超不敢把这个消息告诉母亲和妻子，只有暗地里与宗正谦改名换姓逃回到南燕。
English: Murong Chao did not dare to tell this news to his mother and wife, and only secretly changed his name with Zong Zhengqian to escape back to Nanyan.

古文：行至梁父，镇南长史悦寿以告兗州刺史慕容法。
现代文：他们走到梁父的时候，镇南长史悦寿把消息告诉给兖州刺史慕容法。
English: When they got to Liang's father, Zhenan Mayor Shi Yueshou told the news to Zhangzhou Mayor Murong Fa.

古文：法曰： 昔汉有卜者诈称卫太子，今安知非此类也！ 
现代文：慕容法说： 过去在汉代的时候有个卜卦的人谎称自己是卫太子，现在怎么知道此人不是这类的骗子呢？ 
English: Murong Fa said: In the past, during the Han Dynasty, there was a fortune-teller who falsely claimed to be Wei Taizi. How do we know that this person is not a kind of liar?

古文：不礼之。超由是与法有隙。
现代文：因此对慕容超不甚恭敬，慕容超从此与慕容法产生隔阂。
English: As a result, there was little respect for Murong Chao, and Murong Chao became estranged from the Murong Method.

古文：备德闻超至，大喜，遣骑三百迎之。
现代文：慕容备德听说慕容超已经到来，非常高兴，派遣三百名骑兵前来迎接。
English: When Murong Bei De heard that Murong Chao had arrived, he was very happy and sent three hundred cavalry to welcome him.

古文：超至广固，以金刀献于备德。备德恸哭，悲不自胜。
现代文：慕容超抵达广固，把那把金刀献给慕容备德，慕容备德失声恸哭，悲痛不能自己。
English: When Murong Chao arrived in Guanggu, he offered the golden sword to Murong Bei De. Murong Bei De broke down and wept, unable to contain his grief.

古文：封超北海王，拜侍中、骠骑大将军、司隶校尉、开府，妙选时贤，为之僚佐。
现代文：册封慕容超为北海王，任命他为侍中、骠骑大将军、司隶校尉、开府，并精心遴选一时的贤俊、英杰，作为他的僚属辅佐他。
English: He crowned Murong Chao as the king of the North Sea, appointed him as the chamberlain, the cavalry general, the lieutenant of the regiment, and the head of the government, and carefully selected the temporary sages and heroes to assist him as his subordinates.

古文：备德无子，欲以超为嗣。
现代文：慕容备德没有儿子，打算让慕容超做自己的后嗣，将来继承王位。
English: Murong Bide did not have a son, and he planned to make Murong Chao his heir to inherit the throne in the future.

古文：超入则侍奉尽欢，出则倾身下士，由是内外誉望翕然归之。
现代文：慕容超入宫陪同侍奉叔父，就可以使叔父尽情欢快，出宫办事也能礼贤下士、谦诚待人。从此，朝廷内外美誉声望全部归于慕容超。
English: When Murong Chao entered the palace to accompany his uncle, he was able to make his uncle as happy as possible, and when he left the palace, he was able to work as a courteous corporal and treat people with humility. From then on, all the fame and reputation inside and outside the imperial court belonged to Murong Chao.

古文：五月，桂阳太守章武王秀及益州刺史司马轨之谋反，伏诛。
现代文：五月，东晋桂阳太守、章武王司马秀和益州刺史司马轨之阴谋反叛，被杀。
English: In May, the East Jin Guiyang governor-general, Zhangwu Wang Sima Xiu, and the governor of Yizhou Province, Sima Lu, were killed in a conspiracy and rebellion.

古文：秀妻，桓振之妹也，故自疑而反。
现代文：司马秀的妻子是桓振的妹妹，所以他自己疑心受到牵连，索性反叛。
English: Sima Xiu's wife was Kan Zhen's younger sister, so he suspected that he was implicated and rebelled.

古文：桓玄馀党桓亮、苻宏等拥众寇乱郡县者以十数，刘毅、刘道规、檀祗等分兵讨灭之，荆、汀、江、豫皆平。
现代文：桓玄的余党桓亮、苻宏等人，裹胁着百姓，几十次侵扰为祸地方郡县，刘毅、刘道规、檀祗等人分别带兵将他们剿灭，荆、湘、江、豫等几个地方的局势全部得到平安。
English: Huan Xuan's remaining party, Huan Liang, Zou Hong and others, threatened the people and disturbed the local counties and counties for dozens of times. Liu Yi, Liu Daobei, and Danzhang separately led soldiers to annihilate them, and the situation in several places such as Jing, Hunan, Jiangsu, and Henan was completely peaceful.

古文：诏以毅为都督淮南等五郡军事、豫州刺史，何无忌为都督江东五郡军事、会稽内史。
现代文：朝廷下诏，任命刘毅为都督淮南等五郡军事、豫州刺史，任命何无忌为都督江东五郡军事、会稽内史。
English: The imperial court issued an edict, appointing Liu Yi as the governor of Huainan and other five counties of military affairs and the history of Yuzhou, and appointing him as the governor of Jiangdong five counties of military affairs and the history of the internal audit.

古文：北青州刺史刘该反，引魏为援，清河、阳平二郡太守孙全聚众应之。
现代文：东晋北青州刺史刘该叛变，勾结北魏为外援，清河、阳平两个郡的太守孙全拉起队伍响应他。
English: East Jin, North Qingzhou, assassinated Liu Kegui, colluded with the Northern Wei Dynasty for foreign aid, and Sun Quan, the grand marshal of Qinghe and Yangping counties, raised a team to respond to him.

古文：六月，魏豫州刺史索度真、大将斛斯兰寇徐州，围彭城。
现代文：六月，北魏豫州刺史索度真、大将斛斯兰进犯徐州，围攻彭城。
English: In June, the Northern Wei general Xulan invaded Xuzhou and besieged Pengcheng.

古文：刘裕遣其弟南彭城内史道怜、东海太守孟龙符将兵救之，斩该及全，魏兵败走。
现代文：刘裕派遣他的弟弟南彭城内史刘道怜、东海太守孟龙符带兵前去救援，斩杀了刘该和孙全，北魏军失败而退走。
English: Liu Yu sent his younger brother Liu Daorai, the governor of Nanpeng, and the governor of the East Sea, Meng Longfu, to the rescue, killing Liu Kaya and Sun Quan. The Northern Wei army failed and retreated.

古文：龙符，怀玉之弟也。
现代文：孟龙符是孟怀玉的弟弟。
English: Meng Longfu is the younger brother of Meng Huaiyu.

古文：秦陇西公硕德伐仇池，屡破杨盛兵；将军敛俱攻汉中，拔成固，徙流民三千馀家于关中。
现代文：后秦陇西公姚硕德，征伐仇池，多次打败杨盛的部队。将军敛俱进攻汉中，攻克成固，把三千多家流民迁徙到关中。
English: After the Western Qin Dynasty, Yao Shuo De, the general of the Western Qin Dynasty, conquered Quchi and defeated Yang Sheng's troops many times. The general attacked Hanzhong, conquered it, and moved more than three thousand refugees to Guanzhong.

古文：秋，七月，杨盛请降于秦。
现代文：秋季，七月，杨盛向后秦请求投降。
English: In the autumn, in July, Yang Sheng asked Houqin to surrender.

古文：秦以盛为都督益、宁二州诸军事、征南大将军、益州牧。
现代文：后秦任命杨盛为都督益、宁二州诸军事，征南大将军，益州牧。
English: After the Qin Dynasty, Yang Sheng was appointed as the governor of Yixian, the military commander of Ning Erzhou, the general of the Southern Expedition, and the herdsman of Yixian.

古文：刘裕遣使求和于秦，且求南乡等诸郡，秦王兴许之。
现代文：刘裕派遣使节向后秦求和，并要求归还南乡等几个郡，后秦王姚兴答应了他。
English: Liu Yu sent envoys to the Later Qin to sue for peace, and demanded the return of Nanxiang and several other counties. Later Qin King Yaoxing agreed.

古文：群臣咸以为不可，兴曰： 天下之善一也。
现代文：姚兴的大臣们都觉得这样不行，姚兴说： 天底下的善行都是一样的。
English: Yao Xing's ministers all felt that this was unacceptable. Yao Xing said, "Good deeds under heaven are all the same.

古文：刘裕拔起细微，能讨诛桓玄，兴复晋室，内釐庶政，外修封疆，吾何惜数郡，不以成其美乎！ 
现代文：刘裕从社会底层最卑贱的地位上发展起来，能够诛杀桓玄，重新振兴晋室，对内整顿日常政务，对外核查勘定封地疆土，我怎么能为了珍惜几个郡，便因此不成全他的好事呢？ 
English: Liu Yu rose from the lowest social status and was able to kill Huan Xuan, revitalize the Jin dynasty, rectify the daily affairs of government internally, and verify the account of the fief territory externally. How could I not fulfill his good deed in order to cherish a few counties?

古文：遂割南乡、顺阳、新野、舞阴等十二郡归于晋。
现代文：于是割让南乡、顺阳、新野、舞阴等十二个郡，归还给东晋。
English: As a result, twelve counties including Nanxiang, Shunyang, Nianye and Wuyin were ceded and returned to the Eastern Jin Dynasty.

古文：八月，燕辽西太守邵颜有罪，亡命为盗；九月，中常侍郭仲讨斩之。
现代文：八月，后燕辽西太守邵颜犯罪，出外逃命当了盗贼。九月，中常侍郭仲出兵征讨并把他杀了。
English: In August, after Yan Liao, the West Taizhou governor Shao Yan committed a crime, he fled abroad and became a thief. In September, Guo Zhong, the vice-minister of the CPC Central Committee, sent soldiers to investigate and killed him.

古文：汝水竭，南燕主备德恶之，俄而寝疾。
现代文：汝水枯竭，南燕国主慕容备德为此十分焦虑，不久便得病，卧床不起。
English: When the water ran out, the lord of Nanyan, Mu Rong Bi De, was very anxious about this, and soon fell ill and was bedridden.

古文：北海王超请祷之，备德曰： 人主之命，短长在天，非汝水所能制也。 
现代文：北海王慕容超请求为此祷告，慕容备德说： 作为人主，他的寿命长短，全由上天决定，不是汝水所能制约得了的。 
English: The king of the North Sea, Murong Chao, asked for prayers for this, and Murong Bei De said: As a human lord, the length of his life is entirely determined by heaven, and cannot be controlled by you.

古文：固请，不许。
现代文：慕容超一再请求，慕容备德只是不允许。
English: Murongchao repeatedly requested, but Murongbei did not allow it.

古文：戊午，备德引见群臣于东阳殿，议立超为太子。
现代文：戊午，慕容备德在东阳殿召见群臣，商议册立慕容超为太子。
English: In the afternoon, Murong Bei De summoned a group of courtiers to Dongyang Palace, where they discussed and decided to make Murong Chao the crown prince.

古文：俄而地震，百僚惊恐，备德亦不自安，还宫。
现代文：不巧突然间发生地震，文武百官非常惊恐，慕容备德心里也非常不安，于是回宫。
English: Unfortunately, an earthquake suddenly occurred. The civil and military officials were very frightened, and Murong Bei De was also very uneasy, so he returned to the palace.

古文：是夜，疾笃，瞑不能言。
现代文：这天夜里，他的病情加重，眼睛紧闭，不能说话。
English: That night, his condition worsened. His eyes were tightly shut and he could not speak.

古文：段后大呼： 今召中书作诏立超，可乎？ 
现代文：段后大声对他说： 现在召中书官进宫写诏书，立慕容超为太子，可以吗？ 
English: After a while, he said to him in a loud voice, "Now, is it okay to call the chief scribe into the palace to write an imperial edict and install Murong Chao as the crown prince?"

古文：备德开目颔之。
现代文：慕容备德睁开眼睛点了点头。
English: Murong Bide opened his eyes and nodded.

古文：乃立超为皇太子，大赦，备德寻卒。
现代文：于是，册立慕容超为皇太子，下令大赦。慕容备德很快便去世了。
English: As a result, Murong Bichao was appointed crown prince and a general amnesty was ordered. Murong Bichao soon died.

古文：为十馀棺，夜，分出四门，潜瘗山谷。
现代文：他们制作了十几个相同的棺材，在夜间，分别抬着从四个城门出去，埋在不同的地方，暗地里却把真的棺木秘密葬在山谷之中。
English: They made a dozen identical coffins and, at night, carried them separately out of the four city gates and buried them in different places, while secretly burying the real coffins in the valley.

古文：己未，超即皇帝位，大赦，改元太上。
现代文：己未，慕容超登上皇帝位，下令大郝，改年号为太上。
English: Before he died, Murong Chao ascended to the imperial throne, issued an edict to be given the title of Grand Empress, and changed his era name to Grand Empress Dowager.

古文：尊段后为皇太后。
现代文：尊奉段后为皇太后。
English: After the homage section, it is the Empress Dowager.

古文：以北地王钟都督中外诸军、录尚书事，慕容法为征南大将军、都督徐、兗、扬、南兗四州诸军事，加慕容镇开府仪同三司，以尚书令封孚为太尉，麹仲为司空，封嵩为尚书左仆射。
现代文：任命北地王慕容钟都督中外诸军事、录尚书事，慕容法为征南大将军并都督徐、兖、扬、南兖四州诸军事，加封慕容镇开府仪同三司，任命尚书令封孚为太尉，鞠仲为司空，封嵩为尚书左仆射。
English: The king of the Northland, Murong Zhong, was appointed as the military governor of the Middle and Outer Provinces, and the records of the Shang Dynasty were recorded. Murong Fa was appointed as the Grand General of the Southern Expedition and the military governor of the four states of Xu, Min, Yang and Nanzhang. Murong Town's Kaifu ceremony and three departments were added. He was also appointed as the lieutenant of Shang Shuling Fong Fu, the secretary of Jizhong, and the left assistant of Shang Shuling.

古文：癸亥。虚葬备德于东阳陵，谥曰献武皇帝，庙号世宗。
现代文：癸亥，表面上把没有慕容备德尸体的空棺葬在东阳陵，并把他追谥为献武皇帝，庙号世宗。
English: Zou Hai, on the surface, buried the empty coffin without the body of Murong Bide in the Dongyang Mausoleum, and pursued him as the emperor of dedication, the temple name Shizong.

古文：超引所亲公孙五楼为腹心。
现代文：慕容超把他过去的亲信公孙五楼当做心腹。
English: Murong Chao treated his former close confidant Gongsun Wulong as a confidant.

古文：备德故大臣北地王钟、段宏等皆不自安，求被外职。
现代文：慕容备德原来的大臣北地王慕容钟、段宏等都在心里感到不安，请求去外地任职。
English: Murong Bei De's former ministers, Wang Murong Zhong and Duan Hong, both felt uneasy in their hearts and requested to go abroad to work.

古文：超以钟为青州牧，宏为徐州刺史。
现代文：慕容超任命慕容钟为青州牧，任命段宏为徐州刺史。
English: Murong Chao appointed Murong Zhong as the mayor of Qingzhou, and appointed Duan Hong as the governor of Xuzhou.

古文：公孙五楼为武卫将军，领屯骑校尉，内参政事。
现代文：又任命公孙五楼为武卫将军，领屯骑校尉，参与处理国家政事。
English: He also appointed Gongsun Wulong as the general of the armed forces and the captain of the cavalry to participate in the handling of national affairs.

古文：封孚谏曰： 臣闻亲不处外，羁不处内。
现代文：封孚劝阻说： 臣下我听说，亲人不能排斥到外地，客人却不能让进内室。
English: Fong Fu dissuaded him, saying: Subordinate, I have heard that relatives cannot be expelled to other places, but guests cannot be allowed to enter the inner room.

古文：钟，国之宗臣，社稷所赖；宏，外戚懿望，百姓具瞻；正应参翼百揆，不宜远镇外方。
现代文：慕容钟是国家的皇族重臣，政权的倚靠；段宏，在外戚中极负盛名，百姓也都十分景仰。正应该让他们协助并带动文武百官，辅佐陛下，而不应该让他们到很远的外地去镇守。
English: Murong Zhong is a senior vassal of the imperial family of the country, and the power of the regime relies on him; Duan Hong is very famous among foreign relatives, and the people are also very admired. They should be allowed to assist and lead hundreds of civil and military officials to assist His Majesty, but they should not be allowed to go to a faraway place to defend the town.

古文：今钟等出籓，五楼内辅，臣窃未安。 超不从。
现代文：现在，慕容钟等出外守边，公孙五楼却在朝中辅佐，臣下我内心里觉得是不妥的。 慕容超拒不听从。
English: Now, Murong Zhong is waiting outside to guard the edge, but Gongsun Fifth Floor is in the middle of the morning assistant, I feel that it is not right in my heart. Murong Chao refused to obey.

古文：钟、宏心皆不平，相谓曰： 黄犬之皮，恐终补狐裘也。 
现代文：慕容钟、段宏心中都感到愤愤不平，相对着说： 黄狗的皮毛，恐怕终将要补狐皮衣服了。 
English: Murong Zhong and Duan Hong both felt indignant and dissatisfied in their hearts, and said: I'm afraid that the yellow dog's fur will eventually make up for the fox fur clothes.

古文：五楼闻而恨之。
现代文：公孙五楼听说这话之后，怀恨在心。
English: After hearing this, Gongsun Fifth Floor harbored a grudge.

古文：魏咏之卒，江陵令罗修谋举兵袭江陵，奉王慧龙为主。
现代文：东晋魏咏之去世，江陵令罗阴谋发动兵变袭击江陵，拥奉王慧龙为盟主。
English: After the death of Emperor Wei of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, Jiangling Lingluo conspired to launch a mutiny to attack Jiangling, with Wang Huilong as the ringleader.

古文：刘裕以并州刺史刘道规为都督荆、宁等六州诸军事、荆州刺史。
现代文：刘裕任命并州刺史刘道规为都督荆、宁等六州诸军事及荆州刺史。
English: Liu Yu appointed Liu Daojun, the military governor of the six states including Jing and Ning, as the governor of the city.

古文：修不果发，奉慧龙奔秦。
现代文：罗来不及发动叛乱，只好随同王慧龙逃往后秦。
English: Luo was too late to launch a rebellion, so he had to flee to Houqin with Wang Huilong.

古文：乞伏乾归伐仇池，为杨盛所败。
现代文：后秦归义侯乞伏乾归征伐仇池，被杨盛打败。
English: After the return of the Qin Dynasty to Yiwu, Qian fell into a trap and was defeated by Yang Sheng.

古文：西凉公暠与长史张邈谋徙都酒泉，以逼沮渠蒙逊；以张体顶为建康太守，镇乐涫，以宋繇为敦煌护军，与其子敦煌太守让镇敦煌，遂迁于酒泉。
现代文：西凉公李与长史张商议，把都城迁往酒泉，用来对北凉国沮渠蒙逊施加威胁与压力，于是任命张体顺为建康太守，镇守乐涫，任命宋繇为敦煌护军，和他的儿子敦煌太守宋让一起镇守敦煌，于是把都城迁到酒泉。
English: Xilang Gong Li and Changshi Zhang discussed and moved the capital city to Jiuquan to use it to threaten and exert pressure on the northern Liang country, and then appointed Zhang Tieshun as the governor of Jiankang, the governor of Lejuan, appointed Song Xi as the Dunhuang protector, and his son, the governor of Dunhuang, Song Zhan, together with the governor of Dunhuang, and then moved the capital city to Jiuquan.

古文：傉檀手令戒诸子，以为： 从政者当审慎赏罚，勿任爱憎，近忠正，远佞谀，勿使左右窃弄威福。
现代文：李写下一首手谕，告诫他的几个儿子，认为： 从事政务的人应当对奖赏或惩罚非常谨慎，万万不能任凭自己的爱憎，随意而为，接近忠直正派的人，疏远奸佞阿谀的小人，不让自己左右亲近的人暗地里操纵权力，作威作福。
English: Li wrote a handbook to admonish his sons, saying: Those who are engaged in government affairs should be very cautious about rewards or punishments. They must not indulge in their own likes and dislikes, act arbitrarily, get close to loyal and honest people, alienate petty people, and do not allow those close to them to secretly manipulate power and seek glory.

古文：毁誉之不，当研核真伪；听讼折狱，必和颜任理，谨勿逆诈亿必，轻加声色。
现代文：别人毁谤或者赞誉你的时候，应当仔细斟酌辩别是真是假。听取讼诉，判定案情，一定要和颜悦色地按规章情理仔细处置，千万不要事先推测对方心怀奸诈，主观臆断，轻易地发脾气。
English: When others slander or praise you, you should carefully consider and debate whether it is true or false. When hearing a lawsuit and judging the case, you must carefully handle it in a friendly manner according to the rules and regulations. Do not speculate in advance that the other party is treacherous, subjectively judge, and easily lose your temper.

古文：务广咨询，勿自专用。
现代文：要尽量争取多听别人的意见，不要自己独断专行。
English: We should strive to listen to the opinions of others as much as possible, and not act arbitrarily.

古文：吾莅事五年，虽未能息民，然含垢匿瑕，朝为寇仇，夕委心膂，粗无负于新旧，事任公平，坦然无类，初不容怀，有所损益。
现代文：我主持政事五年来，虽然不能说使百姓得到了很好的休息安抚，但是，我尽量地宽容别人的错误，掩饰别人的缺点，所以才使早上还是对手、仇人的人，到晚上便可能成为知心朋友。大体上，没有什么对不起那些新知旧友的地方，因为我处事公平，胸怀坦荡，没有偏差，一点儿也不许因私意有所变更。
English: In the five years that I have presided over the affairs of state, although I cannot say that the people have been well rested and appeased, I have tried my best to tolerate the mistakes of others and cover up the shortcomings of others, so that those who are opponents and enemies in the morning can become close friends in the evening. In general, there is nothing to be sorry about for those who are new acquaintances and old friends, because I deal with things fairly, with an open mind, without deviation, and do not allow any change due to selfishness.

古文：计近则如不足，经远乃为有馀，庶亦无愧前人也。 十二月，燕王熙袭契丹。
现代文：这样做，从眼前的利益来考虑，好像是要受到些损失，但是时间一久，才能看出好处来，也只有这样，在前人的面前，我才可说是无愧的。 十二月，后燕王慕容熙进攻契丹。
English: In doing so, from the perspective of immediate benefits, it seems that I will suffer some losses, but it will take a long time to see the benefits, and only in this way, in front of the predecessors, can I say that I am unworthy.In December, Houyan King Murongxi attacked Khitan.

古文：安皇帝己义熙二年
现代文：义熙二年
English: in the second year of Yixi

古文：春，正月，甲申，魏主珪如豺山宫。
现代文：春季，正月，甲申，北魏国主拓跋来到豺山宫。
English: In the spring, in the first month of the year, Jia Sheng, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, came to Lushan Palace.

古文：诸州置三刺史，郡置三太守，县置三令长；刺史、令长各之州县，太守虽置而未临民，功臣为州者皆征还京师，以爵归第。
现代文：并下令，每个州设置三个刺史，每个郡设置三个太守，每个县设置三个令长。其中，刺史、令长等各去到所在州县上任，太守虽然设置了却并不上任，有功之臣管辖州所的，都被征召回京师，保持原有的爵位，回家。
English: He also ordered that each prefecture should set up three chief advisers, each county should set up three governors, and each county should set up three commanders. Among them, the chief adviser and the commander should each go to the prefecture to take office, but the commander, although set up, would not take office, and the meritorious officers in charge of the prefectural government should be conscripted back to the capital division, keep their original titles, and return home.

古文：益州刺史司马荣期击谯明子于白帝，破之。
现代文：东晋益州刺史司马荣期，在白帝进攻西蜀政权的谯明子，将他打败。
English: During the reign of Sima Rong, the ruler of East Jin Province's Yizhou Province, Emperor Baidu attacked and defeated the puppet of the Western Shu regime.

古文：燕王熙至陉北，畏契丹之众，欲还，苻后不听，戊申，遂弃辎重，轻兵袭高句丽。
现代文：后燕王慕容熙抵达陉北，因为害怕契丹部落人多，打算回去，但苻皇后却不听从。戊申，慕容熙只好放弃笨重的军用物资，用轻装部队袭击高句丽。
English: After Yan Wang Murongxi arrived in the north of Goguryeo, he was afraid of the large number of Khitan tribesmen and planned to go back, but the Empress of Goguryeo did not listen. In Wushan, Murongxi had to abandon the bulky military supplies and attack Goguryeo with light troops.

古文：南燕主超猜虐日甚，政出权幸，盘于游畋，封畋、韩讠卓屡谏不听。
现代文：南燕国主慕容超的猜忌、暴虐一天比一天厉害，政令完全由受他宠幸的掌权者颁发，自己则沉迷于游牧打猎，封孚、韩多次规劝，他也不听。
English: The suspicions and tyranny of Murong Chao, the lord of Nanyan, became more and more severe day by day. The government decrees were issued entirely by those in power who were favored by him, while he was addicted to nomadic hunting. He did not listen to the repeated persuasions of Fong Fu and Han.

古文：超尝临轩问孚曰： 朕可方前世何主？ 对曰： 桀、纣。 
现代文：慕容超曾有一次在金殿之上问封孚道： 联可以和前代的哪位君主相比？ 封孚回答说： 桀、纣。 
English: Once upon a time, Murong Chao asked Fufu Dao on top of the Golden Pavilion: Which monarch of the previous generation can Lian compare to? Fufu replied: "Hao, hao."

古文：超惭怒，孚徐步而出，不为改容。
现代文：慕容超既惭愧又气愤，封孚则缓缓地从容走出，神色不改。
English: Murong Chao was both ashamed and angry, while Fong Fu slowly and calmly walked out, his expression unchanged.

古文：鞠仲谓孚曰： 与天子言，何得如是！
现代文：鞠仲对封孚说： 与天子说话，怎么能够这样呢？
English: Jizhong said to Fu Fu: How can you talk to the Son of Heaven like this?

古文：宜还谢。 
现代文：你应该回去谢罪。 
English: You should go back and repent.

古文：孚曰： 行年七十，惟求死所耳！ 
现代文：封孚说： 我现在已经年过七十，只求死得其所罢了！ 
English: Fufu said, "I'm over seventy years old now, I just want to die a happy man!"

古文：竟不谢。
现代文：竟然不去请罪。
English: He didn't even go to plead guilty.

古文：超以其时望，优容之。
现代文：慕容超因为他在当时声望很高，所以特别地宽容了他。
English: Murong Chao was particularly tolerant of him because of his high reputation at the time.

古文：桓玄之乱，河间王昙之子国璠、叔璠奔南燕。
现代文：东晋桓玄叛乱时，河间王司马昙之的儿子司马国、司马叔逃奔南燕。
English: When Eastern Jin Emperor Kuan Xuan rebelled, Sima Guo and Sima Shu, the sons of Kawama King Sima Xuan, fled to Nanyan.

古文：二月，甲戌，国璠等攻隐弋阳。
现代文：二月，甲戌，司马国等人攻陷弋阳。
English: In February, Jia Rong, Sima Guo and others invaded Shenyang.

古文：燕军行三千馀里，士马疲冻，死者属路，攻高句丽木底城，不克而还。
现代文：后燕军走了三千多里，兵士和马匹因疲惫寒冷，一路不断有死掉的。他们进攻高句丽木底城，没有攻克，只好回去。
English: After Yan's army had traveled more than three thousand miles, soldiers and horses were constantly dying from exhaustion and cold. They attacked the city of Moudi in Goguryeo, but did not conquer it, and had to go back.

古文：夕阳公云伤于矢，且畏燕王熙之虐，遂以疾去官。
现代文：夕阳公慕容云被箭射伤，加上又害怕后燕王慕容熙的凶残暴虐，于是以有病为借口，辞官回家。
English: Murongyun, the Prince of the Setting Sun, was wounded by an arrow, and he was afraid of the savage brutality of Murongxi, the King of the Later Yan, so he used his illness as an excuse to return home.

古文：三月，庚子，魏主珪还平城。
现代文：三月，庚子，北魏国主拓跋回到平城。
English: In March, Geng Zi, the ruler of Northern Wei, returned to Pingcheng.

古文：夏，四月，庚申，复如豺山宫。
现代文：夏委，四月，庚申，再一次来到豺山宫。
English: Summer Party, April, Goshun, once again came to Lushan Palace.

古文：甲午，还平城。
现代文：甲子，又回到平城。
English: Kosi, back to Heijo.

古文：柔然社仑侵魏边。
现代文：柔然可汗郁久闾社仑，侵犯北魏边境。
English: Khan Ikujutsu invaded the Northern Wei border.

古文：五月，燕主宝之子博陵公虔、上党公昭，皆以嫌疑赐死。
现代文：五月，后燕国主慕容宝的儿子博陵公慕容虔、上党公慕容昭，都因为嫌疑而被逼自杀。
English: In May, Boling Gong Murong Qian and Shangdang Gong Murong Zhao, sons of Houyan Guozhong Murong Bao, were both forced to commit suicide because of suspicion.

古文：六月，秦陇西公硕德自上邽入朝，秦王兴为之大赦；及归，送之至雍乃还。
现代文：六月，后秦陇西公姚硕德从上来到都城朝见。后秦国主姚兴为此下令实行大赦。等他回去的时候，姚兴又把他送到雍城，才回来。
English: In June, Yao Shude, the lord of the Western Qin Dynasty, came to the capital to see the emperor. Yao Xing, the lord of the Western Qin Dynasty, ordered an amnesty for this. When he returned, Yao Xing sent him to Yongcheng before returning.

古文：兴事晋公绪及硕德皆如家人礼，车马、服玩，先奉二叔，而自服其次，国家大政，皆咨而后行。
现代文：姚兴对待晋公姚绪和姚硕德，都用家里亲人的礼节，车马、衣服、珍玩等也都先送给两位叔父，然后自己才留用差一点的。国家的大政方针，都事先请示他们之后再决定。
English: Yao Xing treated Jin Gong Yao Xu and Yao Shuo De with the etiquette of relatives at home. Cars, horses, clothes, rare toys, etc. were first given to the two uncles, and then he kept what was almost used. The country's major policies were all decided after asking them in advance.

古文：秃发傉檀伐沮渠蒙逊，蒙逊婴城固守。
现代文：南凉景王秃发檀讨伐北凉沮渠蒙逊，沮渠蒙逊环城坚守。
English: In the south, the king of Liangjing, Bald-haired Dang, fought against the invasion of the north Liang, the ditch of Monsoon, the ditch of Monsoon, and the ring of the city stood firm.

古文：傉檀至赤泉而还，献马三千匹、羊三万口于秦。
现代文：秃发檀抵达赤泉之后便回去了，把三千匹马、三万只羊献给后秦。
English: After arriving in Akizumi, Bald-Faced Sandalwood went back and offered three thousand horses and thirty thousand sheep to Emperor Qin.

古文：秦王兴以为忠，以傉檀为都督河右诸军事、车骑大将军、凉州刺史，镇姑臧，征王尚还长安。
现代文：后秦王姚兴认为他很忠诚，任命秃发檀为都督河右诸军事、车骑大将军、凉州刺史，镇守姑臧。征调王尚回长安。
English: Later, Qin King Yao Xing thought that he was very loyal and appointed Bald-Faced Tan as the military governor of Heyou, the general of cavalry and cavalry, the governor of Liangzhou, and the governor of Guye.

古文：凉州人申屠英等遣王簿胡威诣长安请留尚，兴弗许。
现代文：凉州人申屠英等派遗主簿胡威前往长安拜见后秦王，请求让王尚留任，姚兴没有答应。
English: Shen Tuying and other people from Liangzhou sent Hu Wei, the chief executor of the will, to Chang'an to meet with King Hou Qin and request that Wang Shang remain in office. Yao Xing did not agree.

古文：威见兴，流涕言曰： 臣州奉戴王化，于兹五年，王宇僻远，威灵不接，士民尝胆抆血，共守孤城；仰恃陛下圣德，俯杖良牧仁政，克自保全，以至今日。
现代文：胡威见到姚兴，流着眼泪说： 我们凉州，遵照陛下的教化，至今已有五年，土地偏僻遥远，朝廷的威力命令，很难到达我们那里。官吏百姓卧薪尝胆，自抚伤口血渍，一起同心协力守卫孤城。仰仗陛下的恩德贤明，又幸亏有一个好的州牧施行仁政，才得以自我保全，维持到今天。
English: Hu Wei saw Yao Xing and said with tears: We, Liangzhou, have been following Your Majesty's teachings for five years so far. The land is remote and far away, and it is difficult to reach us due to the powerful order of the imperial court. Officials and commoners lie on the bed, taste the bile, rub the blood stains on their wounds, and work together to guard the lonely city. Relying on Your Majesty's grace and wisdom, and thanks to a good state shepherd to carry out benevolent government, we have been able to preserve ourselves and maintain it to this day.

古文：陛下奈何乃以臣等贸马三千匹、羊三万口；贱人贵畜，无乃不可！
现代文：陛下怎么能够用我们这些人换来三千匹马、三万只羊呢？轻贱人而珍视牧畜，这是无论如何也说不通的！
English: How can your majesty exchange us for three thousand horses and thirty thousand sheep? It makes no sense at all that you value cattle and despise the common people!

古文：若军国须马，直烦尚书一符，臣州三千馀户，各输一马，朝下夕办，何难之有！
现代文：如果说国家军队需要马匹，只要尚书下一道公文就是了，我们凉州三千多户百姓，每户捐献一匹马，早晨下令，傍晚便办完了，又有什么困难的呢！
English: If it is said that the national army needs horses, as long as the next official document is written, it is done. We, more than three thousand households in Liangzhou, each household donated a horse, ordered in the morning, and completed in the evening. What are the difficulties?

古文：昔汉武倾天下之资力，开拓河西，以断匈奴右臂。
现代文：过去汉武帝用尽天下所有的财力，开辟河西的疆土，从此斩断了匈奴的右臂。
English: In the past, Emperor Hanwu exhausted all the financial resources of the world, opened up the territory of Hexi, and cut off the right arm of the Xiongnu.

古文：今陛下无故弃五郡之地忠良华族，以资暴虏，岂惟臣州士民坠于涂炭，恐方为圣朝旰食之忧。 
现代文：现在陛下无缘无故地放弃了五郡土地上忠良的高华之族，用来资助残暴的敌虏，这哪里只是我们一州的官民坠陷于生灵涂炭的深渊，恐怕这也正是我们国家将来的忧患。 
English: Now, without any reason, His Majesty has abandoned the loyal Gaohua people on the land of the five counties to finance the brutal enemy. This is just a state where our officials and people have fallen into the abyss of life and death. I am afraid that this is also the future sorrow of our country.

古文：兴悔之，使西平人车普驰止王尚，又遣使谕傉檀。
现代文：姚兴对此非常后悔，派遗西平人车普飞马前去阻止王尚，又派使节通知秃发檀。
English: Yao Xing regretted this very much. He sent the Xiping people's car, Pu Feima, to stop Wang Shang, and also sent an envoy to inform Bald Sandalwood.

古文：会傉檀已帅步骑三万军于五涧，普先以状告之，傉檀遽逼遣王尚；尚出自清阳门，傉檀入自凉风门。
现代文：正赶上秃发檀已经率步、骑兵三万人驻扎在五涧，车普先把诏令的内容告诉给了他。秃发檀于是马上催促王尚回去。王尚从清阳门出城，秃发檀便入凉风门进了城。
English: He was just catching up with Bald-Faced Sandal, who was already leading the march, with thirty thousand cavalry stationed in Wuzhen. Chepu first told him the contents of the edict. Bald-Faced Sandal then immediately urged Wang Shang to go back. Wang Shang left the city through the Qingyang Gate, while Bald-Faced Sandal entered the city through the Cool Breeze Gate.

古文：别驾宗敞送尚还长安，傉檀谓敞曰： 吾得凉州三千馀家，情之所寄，唯卿一人，奈何舍我去乎！ 
现代文：别驾宗敞护送王尚回长安，秃发檀告诉宗敞说： 我得到凉州三千多家居民，但是感情所瞩望寄托的，却只有你一个，你为什么舍去我而走呢？ 
English: Don't drive Zongchan to escort Wang Shang back to Chang'an. The bald-headed pigeon told Zongchan, "I have gained more than three thousand residents of Liangzhou, but you are the only one I look up to with affection. Why did you leave me?

古文：敞曰： 今送旧君，所以忠于殿下也。 
现代文：宗敞说： 现在我护送我旧日的上司，也就是对您的忠诚呵。 
English: Zongchan said: Now I am escorting my old boss, that is, loyalty to you.

古文：傉檀曰： 吾新牧贵州，怀远安迩之略如何？ 
现代文：秃发檀说： 我刚刚执掌你们凉州的权力，你以为应该采取哪种怀柔远方、安抚近土的策略？ 
English: Bald-headed Sandal said: I have just taken over the power of your Liangzhou, what kind of strategy do you think should be adopted to appease the far away and pacify the near land?

古文：敞曰： 凉土虽弊，形胜之地。
现代文：宗敞说： 凉州的土地虽然贫瘠，但是却是地形非常重要的地方。
English: Zongchan said: Although the land in Liangzhou is barren, it is a very important place.

古文：殿下惠抚其民，收其贤俊以建功名，其何求不获！ 
现代文：殿下您好好地安抚黎民百姓，收纳这里的贤明俊杰之士，用他们建立功名，有什么目标不能达到呢？ 
English: Your Royal Highness, you have done a good job of appeasing the people of Lebanon, accommodating the wise and talented people here, and using them to build a reputation. What goal can you not achieve?

古文：因荐本州文武名士十馀人，傉檀嘉纳之。
现代文：随后，他又推荐本州的文武有名之士十多个人给秃发檀，秃发檀非常高兴地一一任用了他们。
English: Subsequently, he recommended more than ten famous men of letters and martial arts in Honshu to Balda, who was very happy to use them one by one.

古文：王尚至长安，兴以为尚书。
现代文：王尚回到长安，姚兴任命他为尚书。
English: Wang Shang returned to Chang'an, and Yao Xing appointed him as Shang Shu.

古文：傉檀燕群僚于宣德堂，仰视叹曰： 古人有言： 作者不居，居者不作 。
现代文：秃发檀在宣德堂设宴，宴请大臣们，仰头看着这座建筑，叹息说： 古人说得说， 盖房的人，自己不住；住房的人，自己不盖 ，太对了。 
English: Bald-headed Tan set up a banquet in Xuande Hall and invited the ministers. He looked up at the building and said with a sigh, "The ancients were right when they said, 'Those who build houses do not live in them; those who live in houses do not build them.'

古文：信矣。 武威孟祎曰： 昔张文王始为此堂，于今百年，十有二主矣，惟履信思顺者可以久处。 
现代文：武威人孟说： 从前，张文王开始建筑这座大堂，到今天已将近一百年了，经历的主人也有十二个了，只有讲信义顺民心的人才可以在这里久住。 
English: Meng, a man of martial valor, said: Once upon a time, Zhang Wenwang began to build this hall, and today it has been nearly a hundred years, and there have been twelve experienced owners. Only those who are faithful and follow the people's hearts can live here for a long time.

古文：傉檀善之。
现代文：秃发檀觉得他说得很对。
English: Bald-haired Sandal thought he was right.

古文：魏主珪规度平城，欲拟鄴、洛、长安，修广宫室。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋规划设计平城，打算按照邺城、洛阳、长安的样子，扩建宫殿。
English: The Northern Wei ruler Tuoba planned and designed Pingcheng, intending to expand the palace according to the appearance of Lucheng, Luoyang and Chang'an.

古文：以济阳太守莫题有巧思，召见，与之商功。
现代文：因为济阳太守莫题有很多精巧微妙的想法，便把他征召来，与他商议宫殿式样以及施工进度等。
English: Because the Jiyang abbot Mo Zhui had many ingenious and subtle ideas, he summoned him to discuss the palace style and construction schedule with him.

古文：题久侍稍怠，珪怒，赐死。
现代文：莫题侍奉魏主的时间一长，态度稍稍有些怠慢，拓跋大怒，命他自杀。
English: After serving the Wei Lord for a long time, his attitude was slightly negligent. Tuoba was furious and ordered him to commit suicide.

古文：题，含之孙也。
现代文：莫题是莫含的孙子。
English: Mochitai is Mochan's grandson.

古文：于是发八部五百里内男丁筑南宫，阙门高十馀丈，穿沟池，广苑囿，规立外城，方二十里，分置市里，三十日罢。
现代文：从此，他征发四面八方五百里以内的男丁，修筑南宫，宫的门高十多丈。另外又挖掘水沟池塘，扩大花园的面积，再按计划建立外城，方圆二十里，分别设置市区街道，三十天之后完成。
English: From then on, he conscripted and dispatched men within five hundred miles in all directions to build the South Palace, the door of which was more than ten meters high. In addition, he excavated the ditch pond, expanded the garden area, and then built the outer city according to the plan, with a radius of twenty miles, and separately set up the urban streets. It was completed after thirty days.

古文：秋，七月，魏太尉宜都丁公穆崇薨。
现代文：秋季，七月，北魏太尉、宜都丁公穆崇去世。
English: In the autumn, in July, the Northern Wei Taifu, Yidu Ding Gong Mu Chong passed away.

古文：八月，秃发傉檀以兴城侯文支镇姑臧，自还乐都；虽受秦爵命，然其车服礼仪，皆如王者。
现代文：八月，秃发檀命令兴城侯秃发文支镇守姑臧，自己回到乐都。他虽然接受后秦国的爵位任命，但他所使用的车辇、服装、礼仪等，都与帝王的一样。
English: In August, Baldfadan ordered the lord of Xingcheng, Baldfadan Wanzhizhen, to guard Guzhen and return to Letu on his own. Although he accepted the appointment of a peerage in the post-Qin state, the chariot, clothing, etiquette, etc. he used were the same as those of the emperor.

古文：甲辰，魏主珪如豺山宫，遂之石漠。
现代文：甲辰，北魏国主拓跋来到豺山宫，然后又前往石漠。
English: Jia Chen, the Northern Wei sovereign Tuoba came to the Lushan Palace, and then went to the Stone Desert.

古文：九月，度漠北；癸巳，南还长川。
现代文：九月，穿过大漠向北。癸巳，向南回长川。
English: In September, we crossed the desert to the north, and then headed south back to Nagakawa.

古文：刘裕闻谯纵反，遣龙骧将军毛修之将兵与司马荣期、文处茂、时延祖共讨之。
现代文：东晋刘裕听说谯纵叛变，派遣龙骧将军毛之带兵，与司马荣期、文处茂、时延祖等人一起去讨伐他。
English: When Liu Yu of the Eastern Jin Dynasty heard of the rebellion, he sent Longyu's general Mao Zong with soldiers to fight against him, together with Sima Rongji, Manchukuo's Shigeru, Shi Yanzu and others.

古文：修之至宕渠，荣期为其参军杨承祖所杀。
现代文：毛之抵达宕渠，司马荣期被他的参军杨承祖杀害。
English: When Mao arrived at the canal, Sima Rong was killed by Yang Chengzu, who had joined the army with him.

古文：承祖自称巴州刺史，修之退还白帝。
现代文：杨承祖自称为巴州刺史。毛之只好退回到白帝。
English: Yang Chengzu claimed to be the founder of Pazhou. Mao Zhi had no choice but to return to Baidu.

古文：秃发傉檀求好于西凉，西凉公暠许之。
现代文：秃发檀向西凉请求和好。西凉公李答应了。
English: Bald-headed Sandan asked Xilang for a reconciliation. Xilang Gong Li agreed.

古文：沮渠蒙逊袭酒泉，至安珍。
现代文：北凉国沮渠蒙逊袭击酒泉，到达安珍。
English: Mengxiong attacked the wine spring and arrived at Anzhen.

古文：暠战败，城守，蒙逊引还。
现代文：李在战斗失败后，进城固守，沮渠蒙逊带兵回师。
English: After his defeat in the battle, Li entered the city and held fast, forcing Mengxun to lead his troops back to the division.

古文：南燕公孙五楼欲擅朝权，谮北地王钟于南燕主超，请诛之。
现代文：南燕王公孙五楼打算独揽朝政大权，在南燕国主慕容超面前进谗言陷害北地王慕容钟，请求杀了他。
English: On the fifth floor of Nanyan King Gongsun's palace, he planned to monopolize the political power of the dynasty. In front of Murong Chao, the ruler of Nanyan, he tried to frame the King of the North, Murong Zhong, and asked him to kill him.

古文：南燕主备德之卒也，慕容法不奔丧，超遣使让之；法惧，遂与钟及段宏谋反。
现代文：南燕国主慕容备德去世时，慕容法没有前来奔丧，慕容超派信使前去责备他，慕容法因而非常害怕，于是便与慕容钟、段宏等人商议，准备反叛。
English: When Murong Bide, the ruler of Nanyan, died, Murong Fa did not come to his funeral. Murong Chao sent a messenger to reproach him. Murong Fa was very afraid, so he discussed with Murong Zhong, Duan Hong and others and prepared to rebel.

古文：超闻之，征钟，钟称疾不至。
现代文：慕容超听说这个消息之后，征召慕容钟进京，慕容钟却以身体有病为理由，拒绝前来。
English: After Murong Chao heard the news, he summoned Murong Zhong to come to Beijing. However, Murong Zhong refused to come on the grounds that he was ill.

古文：超收其党侍中慕容统等，杀之。
现代文：慕容超便把他的亲信党羽侍中慕容统等人抓起来，杀掉。
English: Murong Chao then arrested and killed his close confidant, Party General Secretary Murong Ru and others.

古文：征南司马卜珍告左仆射封嵩数与法往来，疑有奸，超收嵩下廷尉。
现代文：征南司马卜珍告发左仆射封嵩经常与慕容法来往，怀疑他们有什么奸谋。
English: The secretary of the Southern Expedition, Ma Buzhen, reported that his left-hand man, Shefong Song, often had dealings with Murong Fa, and suspected that they were plotting something.

古文：太后惧，泣告超曰： 嵩数遣黄门令牟常说吾云： 帝非太后所生，恐依永康故事。
现代文：慕容超便把封嵩抓起来，交付廷尉议罪。皇太后段氏大为害怕，哭着告诉慕容超说： 封嵩几次派黄门令牟常前来动员我说： 皇上不是太后您自己亲生儿子，恐怕像永康年间那样的旧事又要重演了。 
English: Murong Chao then arrested Fong Song and handed him over to a courtier to plead guilty. The Empress Dowager Houdan was very scared and told Murong Chao in tears, "Fong Song sent Huang Menling Mou Chang to come several times to mobilize me and say, 'The Emperor is not the Empress Dowager's own biological son. I'm afraid that the same old thing as in the Yongkang years will happen again.'"

古文：我妇人识浅，恐帝见杀，即以语法。法为谋见误，知复何言。 
现代文：我一个妇道人家，见识浅，害怕您杀了我，就把这话告诉了慕容法，慕容法为我出主意，所以被他引入歧途，现在您知道了，我还有什么话可说？ 
English: I am a woman who is not well-informed and was afraid that you would kill me, so I told this to Murong Fa. Murong Fa made a suggestion for me, so I was led astray by him. Now that you know, what else can I say?

古文：超乃车裂嵩。
现代文：慕容超于是用车裂的酷刑处死封嵩。
English: Murong Chao then used the torture of splitting the car to kill Fong Song.

古文：西中郎将封融奔魏。
现代文：西中朗将封融投奔北魏。
English: West Zhonglang sent Feng Rong to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：超遣慕容镇攻青州，慕容昱攻徐州，右仆射济阳五及韩范攻兗州。
现代文：慕容超派遣慕容镇带兵攻打青州，派慕容昱攻打徐州，派右仆射济阳王慕容凝和韩范一起攻打兖州。
English: Murong Chao sent Murong Zhen to attack Qingzhou with soldiers, sent Murong Yao to attack Xuzhou, and sent his right-hand man Jiyang King Murong Jie and Han Fan to attack Ganzhou.

古文：昱拔莒城，段宏奔魏。
现代文：慕容昱攻克莒城，段宏投奔北魏。
English: Murong Yao conquered Licheng, and Duan Hong went to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：封融与群盗袭石塞城，杀镇西大将军馀郁，国中振恐。
现代文：封融率领盗贼袭击石塞城，杀死了镇西大将军余郁，全国上下大为震惊恐慌。
English: Feng Rong led the thieves to attack Shisai City and killed the town's Western General Yu Yu. The whole country was shocked and panicked.

古文：济阳王凝谋杀韩范，袭广固，范知之，勒兵攻凝，凝奔梁父；范并将其众，攻梁父，克之。
现代文：济阳王慕容凝阴谋刺杀韩范，袭击广固，韩范知道了这件事，集中部队攻打慕容凝，慕容凝逃奔梁父。
English: King Murongning of Jiyang plotted to assassinate Han Fan and attacked Guanggu. Han Fan found out about this and concentrated his troops to attack Murongning. Murongning fled to Liang's father.

古文：法出奔魏，凝出奔秦。慕容镇克青州，钟杀其妻子。地道以出，与高都公始皆奔秦。
现代文：韩范收编了他的部队，自己领导着攻打梁父，攻陷了这座城，慕容法逃出投奔北魏，慕容凝逃出投奔后秦。慕容镇也攻克了青州，慕容钟杀了他的妻子儿女，挖了一条地道逃了出去，与高都公慕容始一起全都投奔了后秦。
English: Han Fan gathered his troops and led his own attack on Liang father, capturing the city. Murong Fa fled to the Northern Wei Dynasty, Murong Jing fled to the Later Qin Dynasty. Murong Town also conquered Qingzhou. Murong Zhong killed his wife and children, dug a tunnel and fled, and together with Godu Gong Murong Shi, they all fled to the Later Qin Dynasty.

古文：秦以钟为始平太守，凝为侍中。
现代文：后秦任命慕容钟为始平太守，慕容凝为侍中。
English: Later, the Qin Dynasty appointed Murong Zhong as the First Prince and Murong Jian as a chamberlain.

古文：南燕主超好变更旧制，朝野多不悦；又欲复肉刑，增置烹轘之法，众议不合而止。
现代文：南燕国主慕容超喜欢改变旧有的一些制度，朝廷内外对此都很反感。他又打算恢复肉刑，并增加设置烹刑和刑，因为官员们都说不应该，才作罢。
English: Murong Chao, the ruler of Nanyan, liked to change some of the old systems, which was very distasteful both inside and outside the court. He also planned to resume corporal punishment, and increase the setting of cooking and punishment, because the officials all said that it should not be done.

古文：冬，十月，封孚卒。
现代文：冬季，十月，封孚去世。
English: In the winter, in October, Feng Fu passed away.

古文：尚书论建义功，奏封刘裕豫章郡公，刘毅南平郡公，何无忌安城郡公，自馀封赏有差。
现代文：东晋尚书评定勤王举义的功劳，秦请封刘裕为豫章郡公，刘毅为南平郡公，何无忌为安成郡公，其余的人加封赏赐高低、多少不等。
English: According to the Eastern Jin Dynasty's Shangshu, the Qin Dynasty awarded Liu Yu the title of Yuzhang County Governor, Liu Yi the title of Nanping County Governor, and He Muxui the title of Ancheng County Governor, while the rest of the people received different rewards.

古文：梁州刺史刘稚反，刘毅遣将讨禽之。
现代文：东晋梁州刺史刘稚叛变，刘毅派遣将领前去讨伐，并把他抓获。
English: East Jin Liangzhou instigated Liu Zhi's mutiny, Liu Yi sent generals to fight against him and captured him.

古文：庚申，魏主珪还平城。
现代文：庚申，北魏国主拓跋回到平城。
English: Gao Shen, the ruler of Northern Wei, returned to Pingcheng.

古文：乙亥，以左将军孔安国为尚书左仆射。
现代文：乙亥，东晋任命左将军孔安国为尚书左仆射。
English: Emperor Yihai appointed the Left General Kong An Guo as Shangshu's right-hand man.

古文：十一月，秃发傉檀迁于姑臧。
现代文：十一月，南凉国秃发檀把都城迁到姑臧。
English: In November, the capital of South Liang Province was moved to Guzheng.

古文：乞伏乾归入朝于秦。
现代文：后秦归义侯乞伏乾归到长安去朝见后秦王姚兴。
English: After the Qin Dynasty was overthrown, Qian returned to Chang'an to meet the Emperor Yao Xing.

古文：十二月，以何无忌为都督荆、江、豫三州八郡军事、江州刺史。
现代文：十二月，东晋任命何无忌为都督荆、江、豫三州八郡军事，江州刺史。
English: In December, the Eastern Jin Dynasty appointed He Muxi as the military governor of eight counties in the three states of Jing, Jiang and Henan, and the history of Jiangzhou was written.

古文：是岁，桓石绥与司马国璠、陈袭聚众胡桃山为寇，刘毅遣司马刘怀肃讨破之。
现代文：这一年，东晋桓石绥与司马国、孙袭等人在胡桃山招兵，当了强盗。刘毅派遣司马刘怀肃带兵把他们剿灭。
English: In the same year, Eastern Jin Huan Shijun, Sima Guo, Sun Yat-sen and others recruited soldiers in Hu Taoshan and became robbers. Liu Yi dispatched Sima Liu Huai-Su and his soldiers to exterminate them.

古文：石绥，石生之弟也。
现代文：桓石绥是桓石生的弟弟。
English: Kanshimaro is Kanshimaro's younger brother.

古文：安皇帝己义熙三年
现代文：义熙三年
English: The Third Year of Yixi

古文：春，正月，辛丑朔，燕大赦，改元建始。
现代文：春季，正月，辛丑朔，后燕实行大赦，改年号为建始。
English: Spring, the first month of the year, the first day of the new year, and the last day of the old year will be amnestied, and the year will be changed.

古文：秦王兴以乞伏乾归浸强难制，留为主客尚书，以其世子炽磐行西夷校尉，监其部众。
现代文：后秦王姚兴认为乞伏乾归的势力逐渐强大，难以控制，便把他留在都城长安，任命他做主客尚书，任命他的嫡长子乞伏炽磐代理西夷校尉的职务，监管他的部众。
English: Later, Qin King Yao Xing thought that the influence of the beggar-dried returnees was gradually strong and difficult to control, so he left him in the capital Chang'an, appointed him as the host and guest of Shangshu, and appointed his eldest son, the beggar-dried returnee, as the acting captain of Xiyi, supervising his subordinates.

古文：二月，己酉，刘裕诣建康，固辞新所除官，欲诣廷尉；诏从其所守，裕乃还丹徒。
现代文：二月，己酉。刘裕前往都城建康，坚决辞让刚刚加封他的那些官职，否则打算自己投监问罪。安帝下诏同意他所坚持的意见，刘裕才回到丹徒。
English: In February, Liu Yu went to Jiankang, the capital, and resolutely refused to give up the official posts that had just been added to his title, otherwise he planned to go to prison for questioning. Emperor An agreed with his insistent opinion, and Liu Yu returned to Dantu.

古文：魏主珪立其子修为河间王，处文为长乐王，连为广平王，黎为京兆王。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋册立他的儿子拓跋为河间王，拓跋处文为长乐王，拓跋连为广平王，拓跋黎为京兆王。
English: The ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuoba, appointed his son Tuoba to be the king of Hebei, Tuoba Chengwen to be the king of Changle, Tuoba Lian to be the king of Guangping, and Tuoba Li to be the king of Jingzhao.

古文：殷仲文素有才望，自谓宜当朝政，悒悒不得志；出为东阳太守，尤不乐。
现代文：东晋殷仲文一向很有才智声望，自己以为应当管理朝政，所以一直闷闷不乐，觉得没有实现自己的志向。后来出京做了东阳太守，更加不高兴。
English: East Jin Yin Zhongwen had always been very talented and prestigious. He thought that he should manage the court politics, so he had always been sullen and unhappy, feeling that he had not achieved his ambition. Later, when he went to Beijing and became the governor of Dongyang, he was even more unhappy.

古文：何无忌素慕其名，东阳，无忌所统，仲文许便道修谒，无忌喜，钦迟之。
现代文：何无忌平常就仰慕他的名气。东阳又在何无忌的管辖之内，殷仲文答应他得便顺路去拜访，何无忌非常高兴，谨慎恭敬地对待这件事。
English: As Dongyang is under the jurisdiction of He Muxi, Yin Zhongwen promised to pay him a visit on his way. He Muxi was very pleased and treated the matter with caution and respect.

古文：而仲文失志恍惚，遂不过府；无忌以为薄己，大怒。
现代文：但是，殷仲文因为官场失意，常常神情恍惚，所以才没能过来相见。何无忌以为他这是瞧不起自己，大为恼怒。
English: However, because Yin Zhongwen was frustrated in the official world, he was often in a daze, so he couldn't come to see him. Why not think that he was looking down on himself and was very angry.

古文：会南燕入寇，无忌言于刘裕曰： 桓胤、殷仲文乃腹心之疾，北虏不足忧也。 
现代文：正好南燕此时进兵侵犯，何无忌便对刘裕说： 桓胤、殷仲文是我们的心腹大患，而北方的强盗却不必担心。 
English: It was just at this time that Nanyan invaded, and he said to Liu Yu: Huan Yin and Yin Zhongwen are our greatest enemies, but the robbers in the north need not worry.

古文：闰月，刘裕府将骆冰谋作乱，事觉，裕斩之。
现代文：闰二月，刘裕官府的将军骆冰阴谋制造叛乱，事情被发觉，刘裕把他杀了。
English: In leap February, Luo Bing, a general in Liu Yu's government, plotted to create a rebellion. The plot was discovered, and Liu Yu killed him.

古文：因言冰与仲文、桓石松、曹靖之、卞承之、刘延祖潜相连结，谋立桓胤为主，皆族诛之。
现代文：于是，他们又声称骆冰和殷仲文、桓石松、曹靖之、卞承之、刘延祖等人在暗中互相勾结，打算拥立桓胤为盟主，所以把这些人连同他们的家族，全部杀掉。
English: As a result, they also claimed that Luo Bing and Yin Zhongwen, Huan Shisong, Cao Jingzhi, Zou Chengzhi, Liu Yanzu and others had secretly colluded with each other and planned to support Huan Yin as the leader, so they killed all these people along with their families.

古文：燕王熙为其后苻氏起承华殿，负土于北门，土与谷同价。
现代文：后燕王慕容熙为他的皇后苻氏兴建承华殿，从北门外把土运来，使土的价格上涨到与粮食的价格一样。
English: Later, Yan King Murongxi built the Chenghua Palace for his queen, Zou, and brought soil from outside the north gate, causing the price of soil to rise to the same level as the price of grain.

古文：宿军典军杜静载棺诣阙极谏，熙斩之。
现代文：宿军典军杜静带着棺木来到皇宫门外拜见后燕王，极力劝阻，慕容熙把他杀了。
English: Du Jing, a member of the host army, came with a coffin to meet Houyan Wang outside the palace gate, and tried his best to dissuade him, but Murongxi killed him.

古文：苻氏尝季夏思冻鱼，仲冬须生地黄，熙下有司切责不得而斩之。
现代文：夏季，四月，癸丑，苻皇后去世，慕容熙悲哀痛哭甚至气闷昏晕，很长时间才苏醒过来。
English: In the summer, in April, after the death of the ugly queen, Murongxi cried bitterly and even fainted, and it took a long time to wake up.

古文：夏，四月，癸丑，苻氏卒，熙哭之懑绝，久而复苏；丧之如父母，服斩衰，食粥，命百官于宫内设位而哭，使人按检哭者，无泪则罪之，群臣皆含辛以为泪。
现代文：他好像死了父母那样，披麻戴孝，只喝稀粥。命令文武百官在宫内设置皇后牌位，一起痛哭，并派人一个个地检查哭的人，没有眼泪的就要治罪，群臣没有办法，全都含着辛辣的东西，刺激自己落泪。
English: As if he were his dead parents, he put on a mask of filial piety and drank only gruel. He ordered the civil and military officials to set up a queen's seat in the palace and weep together, and sent people one by one to check those who were crying. Those who had no tears were to be punished, and the courtiers had no choice. They all had spicy things to stimulate themselves to shed tears.

古文：高阳王妃张氏，熙之嫂也，美而有巧思，熙欲以为殉，乃毁其禭靴中得弊氈，遂赐死。
现代文：高阳王慕容隆的王纪张氏，是慕容熙的嫂子，美貌而聪明机敏，慕容熙打算用她来为为苻皇后殉葬，于是，拆开她特地缝制的丧鞋，发现里面有不好的毛毡，命令她自杀。
English: Wang Jizhang of Goyang King Muronglong was the sister-in-law of Murongxi. She was beautiful, clever and resourceful. Murongxi planned to use her for the funeral of Empress Zhai. Therefore, he tore apart her specially sewn mourning shoes, found bad felt inside, and ordered her to commit suicide.

古文：右仆射韦璆等皆恐为殉，沐浴俟命。
现代文：右仆射韦等人都害怕指定自己去殉葬，每天都洗澡换衣，恭恭敬敬地等候皇命。
English: His right-hand man, Sha Wei, and others were afraid to designate themselves for martyrdom and burial. They took a bath and changed their clothes every day, and waited for the emperor's command respectfully.

古文：公卿以下至兵民，户率营陵，费殚府藏。
现代文：公卿以下的官员直到士卒百姓，每一户都去参加营建皇后陵墓的劳动，使国库的积蓄花销殆尽。
English: Every household, from officials to commoners, participated in the construction of the queen's tomb, draining the treasury of its savings.

古文：陵周围数里，熙谓监作者曰： 善为之，朕将继往。 
现代文：陵墓的四周长达几里，慕容熙告诉监工的头目说： 好好干吧，我随后就到。 
English: The perimeter of the mausoleum is several miles long. Murongxi told the head of the supervisors, "Do your best, I'll be there later."

古文：丁酉，燕太后段氏去尊号，同居外宫。
现代文：丁酉，后燕太后段氏被除去尊号，逐出外宫居住。
English: Ding Xi, the Dowager Empress Dowager Duan was stripped of her honorary title and banished from the Outer Court.

古文：氐王杨盛以平北将军苻宣为梁州督护，将兵入汉中，秦梁州别驾吕莹等起兵应之。
现代文：氐王杨盛任命平北将军苻宣为梁州督护，带兵向汉中进犯。后秦梁州别驾吕莹等发动军队响应他们。
English: Yang Sheng, the king of Qin, appointed the general of North Pyongan Province, Xuan Xuan, as the overseer of Liangzhou, and led the troops to attack Hanzhong. After Qin, Liangzhou and Lyu Ying launched an army to respond to them.

古文：刺史王敏攻之，莹等求援于盛，盛遣军临浕口，敏退屯武兴。
现代文：梁州刺史王敏出兵讨伐。吕莹等人向杨盛求援，杨盛派出军队来到口，王敏只好退到武兴驻扎。
English: Lu Ying and others appealed to Yang Sheng for help, Yang Sheng sent troops to the mouth, and Wang Min had to retreat to Wuxing.

古文：盛复通于晋，晋以盛为都督陇右诸军事、征西大将军、开府仪同三司，盛因以宣行梁州刺史。
现代文：杨盛又与东晋联络，东晋任命杨盛为都督陇右诸军事、征西大将军、开府仪同三司，杨盛于是任命苻宣代理梁州刺史职务。
English: Yang Sheng also liaised with the Eastern Jin Dynasty, and the Eastern Jin Dynasty appointed Yang Sheng as the governor of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, the military commander of the Western Jin Dynasty, the grand marshal of the Western Jin Dynasty, and the third secretary of the Eastern Jin Dynasty. Yang Sheng then appointed Xuan Xuan as the acting governor of Liangzhou.

古文：五月，壬戌，燕尚书郎苻进谋反，诛。
现代文：五月，丙戌，后燕国尚书郎苻进阴谋反叛，被杀。
English: In May, he and Shang Shulang of the Later Yan Kingdom plotted a rebellion and were killed.

古文：进，定之子也。
现代文：苻进是苻定的儿子。
English: Hao Jin is the son of Hao Ding.

古文：魏主珪北巡，至濡源。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋向北巡视，抵达濡源。
English: Tuoba, the head of the Northern Wei Dynasty, went on a tour to the north and arrived at the wetland.

古文：魏常山王遵以罪赐死。
现代文：北魏常山王拓跋遵因为犯罪，被勒令自杀。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, the Changshan King Tuoba Zun was ordered to commit suicide for committing a crime.

古文：初，魏主珪灭刘卫辰，其子勃勃奔秦，秦高平公没弈干以女妻之。
现代文：当初，北魏国主拓跋消灭匈奴部落首领刘卫辰，他的儿子刘勃勃投奔后秦，后秦高平公没奕干把女儿嫁给他做妻子。
English: At the beginning, the Northern Wei sovereign Tuoba annihilated the Hun tribal leader Liu Weichen, his son Liu Gong went to the Later Qin, and the Later Qin Gaoping Gong did not succeed in marrying his daughter to his wife.

古文：勃勃魁岸，美风仪，性辩慧，秦王兴见而奇之，与论军国大事，宠遇逾于勋旧。
现代文：刘勃勃身材魁梧伟岸，容貌漂亮，仪表堂堂，生性善辩，聪慧机智。后秦王姚兴见到他之后觉得他是一个奇才，便与他谈论军队、国家的大事，对他的宠爱超过了功臣旧属。
English: Liu Rong is a big man with a great physique, good looks, a dignified appearance, a good debater by nature, and a clever wit. When the late Qin King Yao Xing met him, he thought he was a genius, and talked with him about the military and national affairs. His favor exceeded that of his former vassals.

古文：兴弟邕谏曰： 勃勃不可近也。 
现代文：姚兴的弟弟姚邕劝说他道： 刘勃勃这个人不可过于亲近。 
English: Yao Xing's younger brother, Yao Yao, persuaded him: "You shouldn't be too close to Liu Gong.

古文：兴曰： 勃勃有济世之才，吾方与之平天下，奈何逆忌之！ 
现代文：姚兴说： 刘勃勃有拯救乱世的才干，我正要和他一起平定天下，你们怎么这样疑心猜忌他呢？ 
English: Yao Xing said: Liu Gong has the ability to save the chaotic world, I am about to level the world with him, why are you so suspicious of him?

古文：乃以为安远将军、使助没弈干镇遍平，以三城、朔方杂夷及卫辰部众三万配之，使伺魏间隙。
现代文：于是，任命刘勃勃为安远将军，让他协助没弈干镇守高平，并把三城、朔方等地的各夷族部落和刘卫辰的老部下三万人交付给他统辖，让他严密监视北魏的行动，等待机会。
English: As a result, Liu Gong was appointed General Anyuan, and he was asked to assist Mogi Gan in the defense of Gaoping, and 30,000 people from various Yi tribes and Liu Weichen's old subordinates in Sancheng, Shuofang and other places were placed under his control, and he was asked to closely monitor the actions of the Northern Wei Dynasty and wait for an opportunity.

古文：邕固争以为不可，兴曰： 卿何以知其为人？
现代文：姚邕坚持争辩，认为万万不可这样。姚兴说： 你怎么知道他的为人？ 
English: Yao Xing said: How do you know who he is?

古文：邕曰： 勃勃奉上慢，御众残，贪猾不仁，轻为去就。
现代文：姚邕说： 刘勃勃对待上级，态度傲慢无礼；对待下属部众，手段残忍、贪婪狡猾，不讲仁义，对待去留问题，都轻率决定。
English: Yao Wei said: Liu Gong treated his superiors with arrogance and rudeness; he treated his subordinates with cruelty, greed and cunning, and did not pay attention to benevolence, and he made rash decisions on the issue of leaving and staying.

古文：宠之逾分，恐终为边患。 
现代文：这样的人，过分地宠爱他，将来一定会成为边疆的祸患。 
English: Such a man, if you pamper him too much, will surely become the scourge of the frontier in the future.

古文：兴乃止。
现代文：姚兴这才放弃了原来的想法。
English: Only then did Yao Xing give up his original idea.

古文：久之，竟以勃勃为安北将军、五原公，配以三交五部鲜卑及杂虏二万馀落，镇朔方。
现代文：但时间一长，又任命刘勃勃为安北将军、五原公，把三交地区的五个鲜卑部落以及其他杂族二万多部落交给他，让他镇守朔方。
English: However, as time passed, he appointed Liu Gong as the general of Anbei and the prince of Wuhara, and gave him the five Xianbei tribes and more than 20,000 other tribes in the Sanjiao area, and let him guard the Shuo side.

古文：魏主珪归所虏秦将唐小方于秦。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋把所俘虏的后秦将领唐小方，归还给后秦。
English: Tuoba, the ruler of Northern Wei, returned the captured post-Qin general Tang Xiaifang to the post-Qin.

古文：秦王兴请归贺狄干，仍送良马千匹以赎狄伯支；珪许之。
现代文：后秦王姚兴要求归还贺狄干，并决定送给北魏一千匹好马，用来赎回狄伯支，拓跋同意了。
English: Later, Qin King Yao Xing demanded the return of He Dikang, and decided to give the Northern Wei Dynasty a thousand good horses to redeem Di Bozhi, and Tuoba agreed.

古文：勃勃闻秦复与魏通而怒，乃谋叛秦。
现代文：刘勃勃听说后秦又与北魏和好，非常愤怒，于是，计划叛变后秦。
English: Hearing that the Later Qin Dynasty had made peace with the Northern Wei Dynasty, Liu Gong was very angry. Therefore, he planned to rebel against the Later Qin Dynasty.

古文：柔然可汗社仑献马八千匹于秦，至大城，勃勃掠取之，悉集其众三万馀人，伪畋于高平川，因袭杀没弈干而并其众。
现代文：柔然可汗郁久闾社仑向后秦献上八千匹马，走到大城的时候，刘勃勃把马匹全部抢走，并把自己的三万多部众全部集结在一起，假装去高平川打猎，却借机突然袭击杀死了没弈干，并且收编了他的军队。
English: The gentle khan, Yu Jiu, presented eight thousand horses to the Qin emperor. When he reached the big city, Liu Gong stole all the horses and gathered his more than thirty thousand followers together, pretending to go hunting in the Gaoping River. However, he took the opportunity to suddenly attack and kill the rebels, and reorganized his army.

古文：勃勃自谓夏后氏之苗裔，六月，自称大夏天王、大单于，大赦，改元龙升，置百官。
现代文：刘勃勃自称是夏后氏的后代，六月，自封为大夏天王、大单于，下令大赦，改年号为龙升，设置文武百官。
English: Liu Gong claimed to be a descendant of the Xiaowu clan. In June, he proclaimed himself the Great Summer King and Great Single, ordered an amnesty, changed the year name to Longsheng, and set up 100 civil and military officials.

古文：以其兄右地代为丞相，封代公；力俟提为大将军、封魏公；叱干阿利为御史大夫，封梁公；弟阿利罗引为司隶校尉，若门为尚书令，叱以鞬为左仆谢，乙斗为右仆射。
现代文：任命他的哥哥刘右地代为丞相，加封代公；刘力俟提为大将军，加封魏公；刘叱于阿利为御史大夫，加封梁公；任命他的弟弟刘阿利罗引为司隶校尉，刘若门为尚书令，刘叱以为左仆射，刘乙斗为右仆射。
English: He appointed his elder brother Liu Udi as the deputy prime minister and the deputy governor of Jiefang; Liu Lihongti as the grand general and the deputy governor of Wei; Liu Zheyu Ali as the imperial historian and the deputy governor of Liang; appointed his younger brother Liu Aliro as the lieutenant of Sili, Liu Ruomen as the deputy governor of Shang, Liu Zheyu as the left lieutenant and Liu Yidu as the right lieutenant.

古文：贺狄干久在长安，常幽闭，因习读经史，举止如儒者。
现代文：贺狄干长期被扣押在长安，因为经常被幽禁，所以有时间熟读了儒家经典与历史书藉，到后来，一举一动都变成与读书人一样了。
English: He Dikang was detained in Chang'an for a long time. Because he was often confined, he had time to familiarize himself with Confucian classics and historical books. Later, his every move became the same as that of a reader.

古文：及还，魏主珪见其言语衣服皆类秦人，以为慕而效之，怒，并其弟归杀之。
现代文：到他回到北魏之后，国主拓跋见他言谈语调衣着服饰全与后秦人一样，以为他是倾慕后秦而有意摹仿，非常生气，把他和他的弟弟贺狄归一起杀掉了。
English: After he returned to the Northern Wei Dynasty, the sovereign Tuoba saw him speaking, dressing and dressing all the same as the post-Qin people, thought that he was admiring the post-Qin and intended to imitate, was very angry, and killed him and his brother Hedi together.

古文：秦王兴以太子泓录尚书事。
现代文：后秦王姚兴命太子姚泓录尚书事。
English: After the death of Qin King Yao Xing, the crown prince Yao Jiu recorded the event in his diary.

古文：秋，七月，戊戌朔，日有食之。
现代文：秋季，七月，戊戌朔，出现日食。
English: In autumn, in July, the waxing gibbous moon, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：汝南王遵守之坐事死。
现代文：东晋汝南王司马遵之，被指控犯法，处死。
English: Sima Zunzhi, King of the Southern Eastern Jin Dynasty, was accused of breaking the law and executed.

古文：遵之，亮之五世孙也。
现代文：司马遵之是司马亮的五世孙。
English: Sima Zunzhi is the fifth generation grandchild of Sima Liang.

古文：癸亥，燕王熙葬其后苻氏于徽平陵，丧车高大，毁北门而出，熙被发徒跣，步从二十馀里。
现代文：癸亥，后燕王慕容熙把他的皇后苻氏埋葬在徽平陵，因为送丧的车驾太高大，所以拆毁了北城门才出去。慕容熙披散头发，光着双脚，跟着灵柩步行了二十多里。
English: In the Year of the Rooster, the late Yan King Murong Xi buried his Empress Min in Huiping Mausoleum. Because the funeral car was too tall, he demolished the north gate before going out. Murong Xi wore his hair loose, barefoot, and walked more than twenty miles with the coffin.

古文：甲子，大赦。
现代文：甲子，实行大赦。
English: On the 24th, a general amnesty was implemented.

古文：初，中卫将军冯跋及弟侍御郎素弗皆得罪於熙，熙欲杀之，跋兄弟亡命山泽。
现代文：当初，中卫将军冯跋和他的弟弟侍御郎冯素弗都在慕容熙那里获罪，慕容熙打算杀了他们，冯跋等人便逃到深山僻水之间。
English: At first, the middle guard general Feng Bao and his younger brother, the chamberlain Feng Su Fu, were both found guilty by Murongxi. Murongxi planned to kill them, and Feng Bao and others fled to the mountains and secluded waters.

古文：熙赋役繁数，民不堪命；跋、素弗与其从弟万泥谋曰： 吾辈还首无路，不若因民之怨，共举大事，可以建公侯之业。
现代文：后来，慕容熙征收繁重的赋税，徭役也经常摊派，百姓无法忍受。冯跋、冯素弗便与堂弟冯万泥商议说： 我们已经没有办法再回去认罪了，还不如趁着百姓怨声载道的时刻，一起发动变乱，或许也可以建立一番公侯那样的大功业。
English: Later, Murongxi levied heavy taxes, and the bailiffs were also often assigned, which the people could not bear. Feng Bao and Feng Su Fu then discussed with their cousin Feng Wandi, saying, "We have no way to go back and confess again. We might as well take advantage of the time when the people are complaining and launch a revolution together. Perhaps we can also build a great achievement like a prince."

古文：事之不捷，死未晚也。 
现代文：事情即使不成，那时死也不晚。 
English: If things don't work out, then it's not too late to die.

古文：遂相与乘车，使妇人御，潜入龙城，匿于北部司马孙护之家。
现代文：于是，他们相继乘上一辆马车，让一个妇女驾驭着，暗中混进了龙城，藏在北部司马孙护之家中。
English: As a result, they successively boarded a carriage, let a woman drive it, secretly mixed into Longcheng, and hid in the home of Sima Sun Rong in the north.

古文：及熙出送葬，跋等与左卫将军张兴及苻进馀党作乱。
现代文：等到慕容熙出城送葬，冯跋等人便和左卫将军张兴，以及苻进的余党发动了叛乱。
English: When Murongxi left the city to attend the funeral, Feng Bao and others launched a rebellion with Zhang Xing, the left guard general, and the rest of the party.

古文：跋素与慕容云善，乃推云为主。
现代文：冯跋平常一直与慕容云关系友善，于是，推举慕容云为盟主。
English: Feng Ba has always had a friendly relationship with Murongyun, so he chose Murongyun as the leader.

古文：云以疾辞，跋曰： 河间淫虐，人神共怒，此天亡之时也。
现代文：慕容云以自己有病为借口，辞谢不去，冯跋说： 慕容熙乱暴虐，百姓和上天都已怒不可遏，这正是老天让他灭亡的时候。
English: Murong Yun used his illness as an excuse to decline to go. Feng Ba said, "Murong Hee was a violent tyrant. Both the people and heaven were furious. This was the time for God to let him perish.

古文：公，高氏名家，何能为人养子，而弃难得之运乎？ 
现代文：您出生在名门高氏家族，怎么能做别人的养子而放弃这一难得的机运呢？ 
English: You were born into the prestigious Gao family. How can you be someone else's adopted son and give up this rare opportunity?

古文：扶之而出。
现代文：强把他扶出家门。
English: Force him out of the house.

古文：跋弟乳陈等帅众攻弘光门，鼓噪而进，禁卫皆散走；遂入宫授甲，闭门拒守。
现代文：冯跋的弟弟冯乳陈等人率领兵众攻打弘光门，呐喊着冲了进去，禁卫军的士兵全部溃散逃走。于是，他们进得宫来，分发宫中的武器盔甲，关闭城门坚守。
English: Feng Bao's younger brother, Feng Lian Chen, and others led the troops to attack the Hongguang Gate, shouting and rushing in. All the soldiers of the Imperial Guard dispersed and fled. Therefore, they entered the palace, distributed the weapons and armor in the palace, and closed the gate.

古文：中黄门赵洛生走告于熙，熙曰： 鼠盗何能为！
现代文：中黄门赵洛生逃出城去向慕容熙报告，慕容熙说： 这几个老鼠一样的强盗，能干什么大事！
English: In the middle of the Yellow Gate, Zhao Losheng fled the city to report to Murongxi. Murongxi said: These mouse-like robbers, what can they do!

古文：朕当还诛之。 
现代文：我现在就回去诛杀他们。 
English: I'm going to go back and fight them now.

古文：乃置后枢于南苑，收发贯甲。驰还赴难。
现代文：于是把苻皇后的灵柩放在南花园，系好头发，穿上甲胄，飞马回来解救都城危难。
English: So he placed the coffin of the Empress Dowager in the South Garden, tied up her hair, put on armor, and returned on his flying horse to save the capital from danger.

古文：夜，至龙城，攻北门，不克，宿于门外。
现代文：当夜，赶回龙城，向北门发动进攻，没有攻克，露宿在城门之外。
English: That night, they rushed back to Longcheng and launched an attack on the north gate. They did not conquer it, but camped outside the city gate.

古文：乙丑，云即天王位，大赦，改元正始。
现代文：乙丑，慕容云即天王位，实行大赦，改年号为正始。
English: Second ugly, Murongyun is the throne of heaven, the implementation of amnesty, change the year as the beginning.

古文：熙退入龙腾苑，尚方兵褚头逾城从熙，称营兵同心效顺，唯俟军至。
现代文：慕容熙退到龙滕苑驻守。尚方兵褚头翻跃城墙投奔慕容熙，说护卫营的士兵仍然一心效忠，只等大军到来。
English: Murongxi retreated to Longtenguan to garrison. Shangfang soldiers jumped over the city wall to rush to Murongxi, saying that the soldiers of the escort battalion were still loyal, just waiting for the large army to arrive.

古文：熙闻之，惊走而出，左右莫敢迫。
现代文：慕容熙听说这番话后，却惊恐不安，跑了出去，左右的人也都不敢追随。
English: After Murongxi heard these words, he was terrified and ran out, and people around him did not dare to follow.

古文：熙从沟下潜遁，良久，左右怪其不还，相与寻之，唯得衣冠，不知所适。
现代文：慕容熙从河道边上偷偷跑走，很久之后，左右将领们觉得他还不回来很奇怪，互相跟着出去寻找，只找到了慕容熙的衣服帽子，人却不知跑到哪里去了。
English: Murongxi secretly ran away from the edge of the river. After a long time, the generals on both sides thought it was strange that he had not returned. They followed each other out to look for him. They only found Murongxi's clothes and hat, but they did not know where he had gone.

古文：中领军慕容拔谓中常侍郭仲曰： 大事垂捷，而帝无故自惊，深可怪也。
现代文：中领军慕容拔对中常侍郭仲说： 大事马上就要成功了，但是皇上却无缘无故地自己惊恐，实在是太奇怪了。 
English: The leader of the middle army, Murong Ba, said to the middle attendant, Guo Zhong: The big thing is about to succeed, but the emperor is scared for no reason. It's really strange.

古文：然城内企迟，至必成功，不可稽留。
现代文：但是城中将士正在盼望我们回去，如果回去，就一定会成功，因此，我们不能在这里多耽搁。
English: But the generals are expecting us to come back, and if we do, we will succeed, so we can't stay here any longer.

古文：吾当先往趣城，卿留待帝，得帝，速来；若帝未还，吾得如意安抚城中，徐迎未晚。 
现代文：我应当先去攻城，你留在这里等着皇上，如果皇上找到了，那就快来；如果皇上还是没回来，那么等我按计划把都城平定安抚了之后，再慢慢寻找迎接皇上回来也不晚。 
English: I should attack the capital first. You should stay here and wait for the emperor. If the emperor is found, then come quickly. If the emperor still hasn't returned, then wait until I have pacified the capital as planned, and then slowly look for the emperor to come back.

古文：乃分将壮士二千馀人登北城。
现代文：于是，与其他将领分别率领两千多名壮士向北城发动强攻。
English: As a result, he and other generals separately led more than two thousand strong men to launch a strong attack on the northern city.

古文：将士谓熙至，皆投仗请降。
现代文：城里的官兵以为是慕容熙回来了，都纷纷放下武器请求投降。
English: The officers and soldiers in the city thought that Murongxi had returned, and they all put down their weapons and asked for surrender.

古文：既而熙久不至，拔兵无后继，众心疑惧，复下城赴苑，遂皆溃去。
现代文：然而，慕容熙很长时间也没露面，慕容拔的军队又没有后续的影子，所以攻城的士兵们心中既怀疑又恐惧，最后，重新放弃攻城，回到龙腾苑，然后又全部溃散逃走。
English: However, Murongxi did not appear for a long time, and there was no follow-up shadow of Murongba's army, so the soldiers who attacked the city had both suspicion and fear in their hearts. Finally, they gave up attacking the city again, returned to Longteng Court, and then all scattered and fled.

古文：拔为城中人所杀。
现代文：慕容拔被城中的乱军杀死。
English: Murongba was killed by the rebels in the city.

古文：丙寅，熙微服匿于林中，为人所执，送于云，云数而杀之，并其诸子。
现代文：丙寅，慕容熙穿着平民百姓的衣服，藏在树林中，被人抓住，押送给了慕容云，慕容云数了他的罪状后，把他杀了。
English: Bình Yìn, Mu Rong Hi, disguised in civilian clothes, hid in the woods. He was caught and taken to Mu Rong Yun, who counted the charges against him and killed him.

古文：云复姓高氏。
现代文：又杀死了他的几个儿子。慕容云又恢复姓高。
English: He also killed several of his sons. Murong Yun resumed the surname Gao.

古文：幽州刺史上庸公懿以支降魏，魏以懿为平州牧、昌黎王。
现代文：后燕幽州刺史上庸公慕容懿，献出自己的辖地令支，投降北魏。北魏任命慕容懿为平州牧、昌黎王。
English: Later, in the history of Yanyu Prefecture, Yungong Muronglu gave up his territory to the Northern Wei Dynasty. The Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Muronglu as the governor of Pingzhou and the king of Changli.

古文：懿，评之孙也。
现代文：慕容懿是慕容评的孙子。
English: Murong Hui is the grandson of Murong Hui.

古文：魏主珪自濡源西如参合陂，乃还平城。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋从濡源向西抵达参合陂之后，才回到平城。
English: Tuoba, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, only returned to Pingcheng after traveling westward from Niuyuan to Sangheiyang.

古文：秃发珪檀复贰于秦，遣使邀乞伏炽磐，炽磐斩其使，送长安。
现代文：南凉国王秃发檀再次背叛后秦，派遣使节邀约代理西夷校尉乞伏炽磐，一同起事。乞伏炽磐杀死了他的使者送到长安。
English: The king of Nanliang, Bald-headed Dang, once again betrayed the Later Qin Dynasty, and sent an envoy to invite the deputy of the Later Qin Dynasty, Colonel Xiyi, to go to war with him. The latter killed his envoy and sent him to Chang'an.

古文：南燕王超母妻犹在秦，超遣御史中丞封恺使于秦以请之。
现代文：南燕国主慕容超的母亲和妻子还在后秦居住。慕容超派遣御史中丞封恺出使后秦，请求接回来。
English: The mother and wife of the Nanyan sovereign, Murong Chao, were still living in Houqin. Murong Chao sent an envoy to Houqin to ask him to return.

古文：秦王兴曰： 昔苻氏之败，太乐诸伎悉入于燕。
现代文：后秦王姚兴说： 过去苻氏败亡的时候，皇家御用音乐和那些歌舞伎人，便都遗留在燕国。
English: Later Qin King Yao Xing said: In the past, when the Yao clan was defeated, the royal music and those Kabuki actors were all left behind in Yan Province.

古文：燕今称籓，送伎或送吴口千人，所请乃可得也。 
现代文：后燕现在如果愿意做我的一个藩属国，并把那些歌舞伎人送给我、或者送给我一千口吴地的居民，那么你们所要求的才可以得到。 
English: If Houyan is now willing to be one of my vassals, and give me those Kabuki actors, or give me a thousand residents of Wudi, then you will get what you asked for.

古文：超与群臣议之，左仆射段晖曰： 陛下嗣守社稷，不宜以私亲之故遂降尊号；且太乐先代遗音，不可与也，不如掠吴口与之。 
现代文：慕容超与大臣们商议这件事，左仆射段晖说： 陛下承继守护江山社稷，不应该因为个人亲情的缘故，就随便降低国家的尊贵名号，况且，皇家御用的音乐是前代君王遗留下来的作品，万万不可拱手送给别人。
English: Murong Chao and his ministers discussed the matter, and his left-hand man, Yatuan Zang, said: "Your Majesty inherits the guardianship of the country and society, and should not casually lower the country's noble name for the sake of personal affection. Moreover, the music used by the royal family is a work left by the previous monarch, and must not be given away to others.

古文：尚书张华曰： 侵掠邻国，兵连祸结，引既能往，彼亦能来，非国家之福也。
现代文：我看不如派军队到东晋抢掠吴地的居民送给他们。 尚书张华说： 侵略掠夺相邻的国家，兵祸就会连绵不断，我们既然可以去抢他们，他们也就可以来抢我们，这不是国家的福分呀！
English: I don't see how sending troops to the East Jin to plunder the residents of the Wu region is a good idea. Shangshu Zhanghua said: "If you invade and plunder a neighboring country, the military disaster will be continuous. Since we can go to rob them, they can also come to rob us. This is not a blessing for the country!"

古文：陛下慈亲在人掌握，岂可靳惜虚名，不为之降屈乎！
现代文：陛下的慈母姻亲正在受人掌握，怎么可以看重虚无的名号，不肯降低声名、委屈求全呢？
English: His Majesty's loving mother-in-law is being controlled by others. How can he value a worthless name, refuse to lower his reputation, and seek redress for his grievances?

古文：中书令韩范尝与秦王俱为苻氏太子舍人，若使之往，必得如志。 
现代文：中书令韩范曾经与秦王一起做过苻氏的太子舍人，如果让他去出使，一定会满足我们的愿望。 
English: Han Fan, the second-in-command of the Chinese imperial court, once served as the prince's concubine together with King Qin. If he were to be sent on a mission, it would certainly satisfy our wishes.

古文：超从之，乃使韩范聘于秦，称籓奉表。
现代文：慕容超听从了他的意见，于是，派韩范出使后秦国，呈递奏章，愿做藩属。
English: Murong Chao listened to his opinion, so he sent Han Fan as an envoy to the Later Qin state to present the music chapter, and he was willing to become a member of the clan.

古文：慕容凝言于兴曰： 燕王得其母妻，不复可臣，宜先使送伎。 
现代文：慕容凝对姚兴说道： 慕容超一旦得到母亲和妻子，便不可能再向您称臣，所以应该先让他送歌舞伎人来。 
English: Murongning said to Yao Xing, "Once Murong Chao gets a mother and a wife, he will no longer be able to praise you, so you should let him send a Kabuki actor first."

古文：兴乃谓范曰： 朕归燕王家属必矣，然今天时尚热，当俟秋凉。 
现代文：姚兴于是对韩范说： 我把燕王的家属送回去那是一定的，但是，现在天气还很热，应当等到秋凉之后再送。 
English: Yao Xing then said to Han Fan: It is certain that I will send Yan Wang's family back, but now the weather is still very hot, it should wait until after the cool autumn.

古文：八月，秦使员外散骑常侍韦宗聘于燕。
现代文：八月，后秦派员外散骑常侍韦宗出使南燕。
English: In August, Emperor Go-Qin dispatched roving envoy Wei Zong to Nanyan.

古文：超与群臣议见宗之礼，张华曰： 陛下前既奉表，今宜北面受诏。 
现代文：慕容超与大臣们商议召见韦宗的礼仪，张华说： 陛下在这之前既然已经送去了奏表，承认藩属，那么，现在就应该面向北方接受诏书。 
English: Murong Chao and the ministers discussed the etiquette of summoning Wei Zong, and Zhang Hua said: Since His Majesty has already sent a report form before this, recognizing the clan, then it is time to face the north to receive the imperial decree.

古文：封逞曰： 大燕七圣重光，奈何一旦为竖子屈节！ 
现代文：封逞说： 我大燕几代圣主光芒辉耀，怎么能一下子为一个小崽子丧失气节！ 
English: Feng Gang said, "I've been shining brightly for several generations, how can I suddenly lose my stamina for a little boy!"

古文：超曰： 吾为太后屈，愿诸君勿复言！ 
现代文：慕容超说： 我这是为太后屈服，希望你们不要再多说了！ 
English: Murong Chao said, "I am giving in for the Empress Dowager. I hope you won't say anything more!"

古文：遂北面受诏。
现代文：于是，面向北方接受后秦的诏书。
English: As a result, the imperial rescript of the Later Qin Dynasty was accepted facing north.

古文：毛修之与汉嘉太守冯迁合兵击杨承祖，斩之。
现代文：东晋龙骧将军毛之与汉嘉太守冯迁联合兵力进攻杨承祖，杀了他。
English: East Jin Longjing General Mao Zhi and Han Jia Taishou Feng Qian jointly attacked Yang Chengzu and killed him.

古文：修之欲进讨谯纵，益州刺史鲍陋不可。
现代文：毛之打算继续进军讨伐谯纵，益州刺史鲍陋不同意。
English: Mao's intention to continue to march to fight against indulgence, Yizhou Zhishi Baoguang did not agree.

古文：修之上表言： 人之所以重生，实有生理可保。
现代文：毛之向朝廷呈上奏表，说： 人之所以看重自己的生命，实在因为有得以生存之理可保。
English: Mao Zhi submitted a report to the imperial court, saying: The reason why people value their own lives is because they have a reason to survive.

古文：臣之情也，生涂已竭，所以借命朝露者，庶凭天威诛夷仇逆。
现代文：臣下现在所处的情势地位，生存的道理已经断绝。我还像早晨的露水那样苟活在世的原因，也不过就是希望凭借着上天的威力屠灭仇敌和叛匪罢了。
English: The reason why I am still alive, like the morning dew, is nothing more than the hope that I can use the power of heaven to slaughter my enemies and rebels.

古文：今屡有可乘之机，而陋每违期不赴，臣虽效死寇庭，而救援理绝，将何以济！ 
现代文：现在几次出现可以乘便进攻的机会，但每次都是鲍陋违背约定不来配合。我虽然愿意直捣匪巢，以死报国，但是救援的部队没能跟上来，这怎么可以成功呢！ 
English: Now there have been several opportunities to take advantage of the attack, but each time, it is Bao Hui who breaks the agreement and does not cooperate. Although I am willing to directly attack the bandits' nest and serve the country with death, but the rescue forces have not been able to keep up, how can this be successful!

古文：刘裕乃表襄城太守刘敬宣帅众五千伐蜀，以刘道规为征蜀都督。
现代文：刘裕于是上疏推荐襄城太守刘敬宣率领五千兵丁讨伐蜀地，任命刘道规为征蜀都督。
English: Liu Yu was then recommended by Shang Shao to Liu Jingxuan, the governor of Yangcheng, to lead five thousand soldiers to fight against Shu, and appointed Liu Daojie as the governor of Shu.

古文：魏主珪如豺山宫。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋来到豺山宫。
English: Tuoba, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, came to Lushan Palace.

古文：候官告： 司空庾岳服饰鲜丽，行止风采，拟则人君。 
现代文：候官报告说： 司空瘐岳，衣服装饰新鲜华美，行为举止、风度神采，都模仿君王。 
English: The officer-in-waiting reported: Sikuo Yingyue's clothes are decorated with fresh and gorgeous designs, and his behavior and demeanor are all imitations of the king.

古文：珪收岳，杀之。
现代文：拓跋把瘐岳抓起来，杀掉了。
English: Tuoba caught and killed Zou Yue.

古文：北燕王云以冯跋为都督中外诸军事、开府仪同三司、录尚书事，冯万泥为尚书令，冯素弗为昌黎尹，冯弘为征东大将军，孙护为尚书左仆射，张兴为辅国大将军。
现代文：北燕王高云任命冯跋为都督中外诸军事、开府仪同三司、录尚书事，任命冯万泥为尚书令，冯素弗为昌黎尹，冯弘为征东大将军，孙护为尚书左仆射，张兴为辅国大将军。
English: Gao Yun, the king of Northern Yan, appointed Feng Badu as the governor of the Middle and Outer Military Provinces, the head of the Three Departments of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office.

古文：弘，跋之弟也。
现代文：冯弘是冯跋的弟弟。
English: Feng Hong is Feng Bao's younger brother.

古文：九月，谯纵称籓于秦。
现代文：九月，谯纵向后秦请求归降，成为藩属国。
English: In September, Zeng Zongxiang requested the Qin Dynasty to surrender and became a vassal state of the Han Dynasty.

古文：秃发檀将五万馀人伐沮渠蒙逊，蒙逊与战于均石，大破之。
现代文：南凉王秃发檀带领五万多人讨伐北凉王沮渠蒙逊，沮渠蒙逊与他在均石展开激战，将他打得大败。
English: The Southern Liang Wang, Bald Dang, led more than fifty thousand people to fight against the Northern Liang Wang, Deqiu Mengxun. Deqiu Mengxun fought a fierce battle with him in Junshi and defeated him.

古文：蒙逊进攻西郡太守杨统于日勒，降之。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊又在日勒进攻西郡太守杨统，迫使杨统投降。
English: Despondent, Mengxun attacked Yang Tong, the governor of Xishu County, in Zhile, forcing Yang Tong to surrender.

古文：冬，十月，秦河州刺史彭奚念叛，降于秃发傉檀，秦以乞伏炽磐行河州刺史。
现代文：冬季，十月，后秦河州刺史彭奚念叛变，向秃发檀投降。后秦任命乞伏炽磐代理河州刺史。
English: In the winter, in October, after the Qin Dynasty, the ruler of Hezhou, Zhang Spengyu, thought of mutiny and surrendered to Bald-Faced Sandalwood. Later, the Qin Dynasty appointed Begging Glowing Rock as the deputy ruler of Hezhou.

古文：南燕主超使左仆射张华、给事中守正元献太乐伎一百二十人于秦，秦王乃还超母妻，厚其资礼而遣之，超亲帅六宫迎于马耳关。
现代文：南燕国主慕容超派遣左仆射张华、给事中宗正元作为使节，向后秦进献皇家歌舞伎一百二十人。后秦王姚兴于是归还慕容超的母亲、妻子，给她们很优厚的礼品钱财，并为她们送行。
English: Murong Chao, the ruler of Nanyan, sent his left-hand man, Zhang Hua, and his envoy, Zhong Zong Zhengyuan, to present one hundred and twenty royal kabuki actors to the Later Qin Dynasty. The Later Qin King Yao Xing then returned Murong Chao's mother and wife, gave them very generous gifts of money, and saw them off.

古文：高平山川险固，土田肥沃，可以定都。 勃勃曰： 陛下欲经营关中，宜先因根本，使人心有所凭系。
现代文：慕容超亲自率领文武百官和后宫嫔妃前往马耳关迎候。夏王刘勃勃攻破了鲜卑族首领薛千等三个部落，收降那里的部众一万多人。他又进攻后秦三城以北的几个边境要塞，斩杀了后秦将领杨丕、姚石生等。他的部将们都说： 陛下如果打算夺取关中，那么应该首先巩固自己的根基，使我们的人心有一个寄托凭借的地方。
English: Murong Chao personally led hundreds of military and civilian officials and the concubines of the imperial court to Malekan to welcome him. Xia Wang Liu Gong defeated three tribes, including Xue Qian, the leader of the Xianbei tribe, and conquered more than ten thousand people there. He also attacked several border fortresses north of the Three Cities of the Later Qin Dynasty, and killed Yang Xuan, Yao Shisheng, and other generals of the Later Qin Dynasty. His generals all said: "If Your Majesty intends to seize Guanzhong, then you should first consolidate your foundation, so that our human hearts have a place to rely on."

古文：高平山川险固，土田饶沃，可以定都。 
现代文：高平山高河深，地势险要，容易驻守，土地又很富饶肥沃，可以在这里定都。 
English: High mountains and high rivers, the terrain is precarious, it is easy to garrison, and the land is very rich and fertile. It is possible to establish the capital here.

古文：勃勃曰： 卿知其一，未知其二。
现代文：刘勃勃说： 你们只知其一，不知其二。
English: Liu Gong said: You only know one thing, you don't know the other.

古文：吾大业草创，士众未多。
现代文：我的宏伟大业才不过刚刚开始，士卒部众还不够多。
English: My great career has only just begun, and there are not enough graduates.

古文：姚兴亦一时之雄，诸将用命，关中未可图也。
现代文：姚兴也是一个时代的英雄，他的那些将领又都肯于为他卖命，关中是极不容易到手的。
English: Yao Xing is also a hero of the times, and his generals are all willing to work for him. It is extremely difficult to get close to him.

古文：我今专固一城彼必并力于我，众非其敌，亡可立待。
现代文：我现在如果只是固守一个城池，他一定会全力向我发动进攻，我们人少，绝不是他的敌手，灭亡那是立刻就会到来的。
English: If I now only hold fast to one city, he will certainly attack me with all his might. We are few in number and by no means his enemies. Destruction will come immediately.

古文：不如以骁骑风驰，出其不意，救前则击后，救后则击前。使彼疲于奔命，我则游食自若。
现代文：不如像现在这样战马驰骋，来去如风，趁他们不注意的时候，他们营救前面，我们便袭击后面，他们营救后面，我们便袭击前面，使他们疲于奔命，自顾不暇，我们却游击四处，猎取现成的食物，从容自若。
English: It would be better if the war horses galloped like they do now, coming and going like the wind, taking advantage of them when they are not paying attention, they rescue the front, we attack the back, they rescue the back, we attack the front, making them tired of running for their lives and preoccupied with themselves, while we fight guerrillas everywhere, hunt for ready-made food, and take it easy.

古文：不及十年，岭北、河东尽为我有。
现代文：这样不到十年，岭北、河东地区便都是我们的了。
English: In less than ten years, the Lingbei and Hedong regions will all be ours.

古文：待兴既死，嗣子暗弱，徐取长安，在吾计中矣。 
现代文：等到姚兴死后，他继位的儿子昏庸懦弱，我们便可以慢慢地攻陷长安。这些都是在我的计划中的。 
English: After Yao Xing's death, when his son who succeeded him is weak and feeble, we can slowly invade Chang'an. All of this is in my plan.

古文：于是侵掠岭北，岭北诸城门不昼启。
现代文：从此，他们侵扰抢掠岭北地区的居民。岭北各个城池，白天也不敢打开城门。
English: Since then, they have been harassing and robbing the residents of the Lingbei region. In all the cities of Lingbei, they do not dare to open the city gates during the day.

古文：兴乃叹曰： 吾不用黄儿之言，以至于此！ 
现代文：姚兴于是叹息说： 吾不听信黄儿姚邕的话，才到了这个地步！ 
English: Yao Xing then sighed and said, "I didn't believe Huang Er Yao Yao's words until I got to this point!

古文：勃勃求婚于秃发傉檀，傉檀不许。
现代文：刘勃勃向秃发檀请求联姻，秃发檀没有答应。
English: Liu Rongren asked for a marriage to Bald-Faced Sandalwood, but Bald-Faced Sandalwood did not agree.

古文：十一月，勃勃帅骑二万击傉檀，至于支阳，杀伤万馀人，驱掠二万七千馀口、牛羊数十万而还。
现代文：十一月，刘勃勃率二万骑兵袭击秃发檀，走到支阳，屠杀一万多人，驱赶掠夺平民百姓二万七千多口人以及几十万头牛马羊等方才回师。
English: In November, Liu Kuning led 20,000 cavalry to attack the Bald Eagle, marched to Zhiyang, slaughtered more than 10,000 people, drove away and plundered more than 27,000 civilians and hundreds of thousands of cattle, horses and sheep before returning to the division.

古文：傉檀帅众追之，焦朗曰： 勃勃天资雄健，御军严整，未可轻也。不如从温围北渡，趣万斛堆，阻水结营，扼其咽喉，百战百胜之术也。 
现代文：秃发檀率领大军追击他们，焦朗说： 刘勃勃身材雄伟劲健，治理军队严肃整齐，不可轻视，我看不如从温围向北渡过黄河，直逼万斛堆，堵住河水，扎下大营，扼住刘勃勃的咽喉，这才是百战百胜的好方法。 
English: Bald-headed Dang led an army to pursue them, Jiao Lang said: Liu Gong is a majestic and vigorous figure, and the management of the army is serious and orderly, and should not be despised. I can't see how to cross the Yellow River from Wenwei to the north, straight to Wanlu Heap, block the river, set up a large camp, and strangle Liu Gong's throat. This is a good way to win every battle.

古文：傉檀将贺连怒曰： 勃勃败亡之馀，乌合之众，奈何避之，示之以弱！宜急追之！ 
现代文：秃发檀的将领贺连大怒说： 刘勃勃不过是一个战败逃亡的残渣余孽，率领的也都是乌合之众，为什么要躲避他，向他表示我们的软弱，应该快些去追击他！ 
English: The bald-headed general, He Lian, said angrily, "Liu Gong is nothing more than the remnants of a defeated fugitive, and those who lead him are also the rabble. Why should we hide from him and show him our weakness? We should go after him quickly!"

古文：傉檀从之。
现代文：秃发檀听信了他的话。
English: Bald-haired Sandan took him at his word.

古文：勃勃于阳武下峡凿凌埋车以塞路，勒兵逆击傉檀，大破之，追奔八十馀里，杀伤万计，名臣勇将死者什六七。
现代文：刘勃勃在阳武下峡谷中凿开黄河中的冰块，用冰与车辆堵死峡谷的出口，带兵回击秃发檀，将他们打得大败，又追击了八十多里才收兵。这一战杀死的将士有一万多人，有名的大臣和勇猛的武将战死的也十有六七。
English: Liu Rong chiseled away the ice in the Yellow River in the canyon below Yangwu, using ice and vehicles to block the exit of the canyon. He led the troops to fight back against the Bald Sandal, defeated them, and chased them for more than eighty miles before withdrawing the troops. More than ten thousand soldiers were killed in this battle, and famous ministers and brave generals also died in battle.

古文：傉檀与数骑奔南山，几为追骑所得。勃勃积尸而封之，号曰髑髅台。
现代文：秃发檀仅与几个骑兵逃奔南山，差一点又被追击的骑兵抓获，刘勃勃把战场的尸体堆积起来，一起掩埋，并称之为髑髅台。
English: Bald-headed Dang fled to Nanshan with only a few cavalrymen, and was almost caught by the pursuing cavalrymen. Liu Gong piled up the corpses of the battlefield, buried them together, and called it Xingtai.

古文：勃勃又败秦将张佛生于青石原，俘斩五千馀人。
现代文：刘勃勃又在青石原击败后秦将领张佛生，俘虏斩杀的加在一起有五千多人。
English: Liu Gong also defeated the Qin general Zhang Fusheng in Qingshi Plain, killing more than five thousand captives altogether.

古文：傉檀惧外寇之逼，徙三百里内民皆入姑臧；国人骇怨，屠各成七儿因之作乱，一夕聚众至数千人。
现代文：秃发檀对外来贼寇的威逼进犯非常恐惧，把三百里以内的居民全部迁进姑臧。国内的百性非常惊骇，怨声载道，屠各部落的首领成七儿因此趁机叛乱，一个晚上便聚众达几千人。
English: Bald Dang was very afraid of the threat of foreign thieves and robbers, and moved all the residents within three hundred miles to Guzheng. The people of the country were very shocked and complained, and the leaders of the seven tribes took advantage of the opportunity to rebel, and gathered thousands of people in one night.

古文：殿中都尉张猛大言于众曰： 主上阳武之败，盖恃众故也。责躬悔过，何损于明，而诸君遽从此小人为不义之事！
现代文：殿中都尉张猛大声对他们说： 主上在阳武那次的惨败，就是依仗人多的缘故，他深深地自责，后悔所做的错事，这对他的英明又有什么损害呢。但是你们却突然跟从这个小人做这样不义的事！
English: The captain of the palace, Zhang Meng, said to them in a loud voice: The Lord's disastrous defeat in Yangwu that time was due to the large number of people. He deeply reproached himself and regretted the wrong things he had done. What harm did this do to his wisdom? But you have suddenly followed this villain to do such an unjust thing!

古文：殿中兵今至，祸在目前矣！ 
现代文：宫殿禁卫军的兵马现在就要到了，你们的灾祸就在眼前了。 
English: The soldiers of the palace guard are on their way, and your doom is at hand.

古文：众闻之，皆散；七儿奔晏然，追斩之。
现代文：大家听说后，全部溃散。成七儿逃奔晏然，南凉派兵把他追上斩首。
English: After everyone heard about it, everyone scattered. Seven children fled in panic, and Nan Liang sent soldiers to catch up with him and behead him.

古文：军咨祭酒染裒、辅国司马边宪等谋反，傉檀皆杀之。
现代文：军谘祭酒梁、辅国司马边宪等人阴谋反叛、秃发檀把他们全部杀掉。
English: The military advisor, Jialiang, the assistant to the state secretary, Ma Bianxian, and others plotted to rebel and killed them all.

古文：魏主珪还平城。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋返回平城。
English: Tuoba, the ruler of Northern Wei, returned to Pingcheng.

古文：十二月，戊子，武冈文恭侯王谧薨。
现代文：十二月，戊子，东晋扬州刺史、武冈文恭侯王谧去世。
English: In December, Wu Zi, Dong Jin, Yang Zhou, Shishi, and Wu Gang, Wenyong, and Wang Yao passed away.

古文：是岁，西凉公暠以前表未报，复遣沙门法泉间行奉表诣建康。
现代文：这一年，西凉公李因为上次呈送给东晋的奏表没有得到答复，又再次派遣和尚法泉带奏章，抄小路前往建康，拜谒东晋朝廷。
English: This year, Xilang Gong Li, because the report form he had submitted to the Eastern Jin Dynasty had not received a reply, again sent the monk Fa Quan with a report, and took a side road to Jiankang to pay homage to the Eastern Jin Dynasty.

古文：安皇帝己义熙四年
现代文：义熙四年
English: The Fourth Year of Yixi

古文：春，正月，甲辰，以琅邪王德文领司徒。
现代文：春季，正月，甲辰，东晋任命琅邪王司马德文兼司徒职务。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, Jia Chen, the Eastern Jin Dynasty appointed the king of evil, Sima Dewen, as well as the post of Sitoru.

古文：刘毅等不欲刘裕入辅政，议以中领军谢混为扬州刺史，或欲令裕于丹徒领扬州，以内事付孟昶。
现代文：刘毅等人不希望刘裕进入朝中辅佐政事，因而商议任命中领军谢混为扬州刺史，也有人打算让刘裕在丹徒兼管扬州，而把朝中的政务交给孟昶管理。
English: Liu Yi and others did not want Liu Yu to enter the political affairs of the central government of the DPRK, so they discussed the appointment of the central leader Xie Ming as the governor of Yangzhou. Some people also planned to let Liu Yu be in charge of Yangzhou in Dantu, and leave the political affairs of the central government of the DPRK to Meng Wei.

古文：遣尚书右丞皮沈以二议咨裕，沈先见裕记室录事参军刘穆之，具道朝议。
现代文：朝廷特意派尚书右丞皮沈带着这两个方案，前去征求刘裕意见。皮沈首先拜见刘裕的记室录事参军刘穆之，把朝廷讨论的情形全部告诉了他。
English: The imperial court specially sent Shang Shuyuan and Pi Shen with these two plans to solicit Liu Yu's opinion. Pi Shen first visited Liu Yu's office to record Liu Mu Zhi's participation in the army, and told him all about the situation discussed by the imperial court.

古文：穆之伪起如厕，密疏白裕曰： 皮沈之言不可从。 
现代文：刘穆之假装起身上厕所，秘密地写了一篇书疏告诉刘裕说： 皮沈说的话，千万不要同意。 
English: Liu Muzhi pretended to go to the toilet and secretly wrote a book to tell Liu Yu: "Don't agree with what Pishen said.

古文：裕既见沈，且令出外，呼穆之问之。
现代文：刘裕召见皮沈后，暂时先让他出去，又把刘穆之叫进去询问。
English: After Liu Yu was summoned to see Pi Shen, he temporarily let him go out first, and then called Liu Muzhong in for questioning.

古文：穆之曰： 晋朝失政日久，天命已移。
现代文：刘穆之说： 晋朝对朝政失去控制，时间已经很久了，现在上天的福命已经转移。
English: Liu Muzhi said: It has been a long time since the Jin Dynasty lost control over the government, and now the blessings of heaven have shifted.

古文：公兴复皇祚，勋高位重，今日形势，岂得居谦，遂为守籓之将耶！
现代文：您兴复皇家的事业，功高德勋，地位重要，在今天的形势之下，怎么还能一味谦让，而去永远做一个老守藩地的普通地方将领呢？
English: Your cause of reviving the royal family, your merits, your status are important. Under today's situation, how can you still be so humble and always be an ordinary local general who defends the domain?

古文：刘、孟诸公，与公俱起布衣，共立大义以取富贵，事有前后，故一时相推，非为委体心服，宿定臣主之分也。
现代文：刘毅、孟昶几个人，与您都是从百姓开始起家的，当年一起倡导大义，争取富贵。但举事的时候，有先有后，所以当时便都推举您做了盟主，他们并不是诚心诚意地对您心服口服、不惜献身，也不是决定和您有君臣的名分。
English: Liu Yi, Meng Xuan and a few other people all started from the common people with you, and together they advocated righteousness and strived for wealth. However, when things were held, there was a first and a second, so at that time they all nominated you to be the leader. They did not sincerely and wholeheartedly give you their heart and soul, and did not sacrifice themselves, nor did they decide to have the title of monarch and minister with you.

古文：势均力敌，终相吞噬。扬州根本所系，不可假人。
现代文：所以，当他们的力量和您相当，地位也差不太多的时候，终究是要互相吞并、排挤的。正因如此，扬州是可以起到决定性作用的根本所在，决不可以把它拱手让给别人。
English: Therefore, when their strength is equal to yours and their status is not too different, they will eventually absorb and crowd out each other. For this reason, Yangzhou is the fundamental place that can play a decisive role, and it must never be given to others.

古文：前者以授王谧，事出权道；今若复以佗授，便应受制于人。
现代文：上一次把它交给王谧，不过是处理事情的权宜之计，这次如果再把它交给别人，可就要受到别人的制约。
English: The last time it was given to Wang Qian, it was just a stopgap measure to deal with the matter. This time, if it is given to others, it will be subject to the constraints of others.

古文：一失权柄，无由可得，将来之危，难可熟念。
现代文：权柄一旦丧失，再想得到，但没有理由和机会了，那样一来，将来的危险，实在无法想象。
English: Once power is lost, there is no reason or opportunity to regain it, so the future danger is really unimaginable.

古文：今朝议如此，宜相酬答，必云在我，措辞又难，唯应云： 神州治本，宰辅崇要，此事既大，非可悬论，便暂入朝，共尽同异。 
现代文：现在朝廷这样商议，您理应表明一下态度，作出回答。但是如果说只有我自己合适，又未免难于启齿用辞，所以，只应该这样说： 中央地区是治理国家的根本所在，辅佐君王的宰相一级官员，地位也非常重要。
English: Now that the Imperial Court is deliberating in this way, you should show your attitude and make a reply. However, if I were to say that only I am suitable, and it is inevitable that I would have to say something, then I should only say this: The central region is the fundamental place for governing the country, and the position of the prime minister-level official who assists the monarch is also very important.

古文：公至京邑，彼必不敢越公更授馀人明矣。 
现代文：选定这样的官员一事既然如此重大，便决不可以在外地随便发几声空议论敷衍，最近我抽时间前往京都，再与你们一起充分地交换意见。 
English: Since the selection of such an official is so important, it is by no means appropriate to make a few empty and perfunctory comments in the field. Recently, I took the time to travel to Kyoto to fully exchange views with you.

古文：裕从之。朝廷乃征裕为侍中、车骑将军、开府仪同三司、扬州刺史、录尚书事，徐、兗二州刺史如故。
现代文：您到了都城，他们一定不敢越过您再把这官职交给别的人，这是不言自明的。 刘裕听从了他的话。朝廷于是征召刘裕任侍中、车骑将军、开府仪同三司、扬州刺史、录尚书事，他原来的徐、兖二州刺史的职务仍然兼任。
English: When you arrived in the capital, they certainly would not dare to pass you over and give this official position to someone else, which is self-evident. Liu Yu obeyed his words. The imperial court then conscripted Liu Yu to serve as an attendant, cavalry general, Kaifu Yi Tong San Division, Yangzhou historian, and recorder of records, and his original position of Xu and Zou two-state historian was still concurrent.

古文：裕表解兗州，以诸葛长民为青州刺史，镇丹徒，刘道怜为并州刺史，戍石头。
现代文：刘裕上表请求解除自己兖州的职务，任命诸葛长民为青州刺史，镇守丹徒，任命刘道怜为并州刺史，戍卫石头。
English: Liu Yu requested to be relieved of his post in Zhangzhou on the table, appointed Zhuge Changmin as the governor of Qingzhou and the town guard of Dantu, and appointed Liu Daorei as the governor of the merged state and the defender of the stone.

古文：庚申，武陵忠敬王遵薨。
现代文：庚申，东晋武陵忠敬王司马遵去世。
English: Goshun, East Jin Dynasty Wuling Prince Sima Zun passed away.

古文：魏主珪如豺山宫，遂至宁川。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋来到豺山宫，又到宁川。
English: Tuoba, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, came to Lushan Palace, and then to Ningchuan.

古文：南燕主超尊其母段氏为皇太后，妻呼延氏为皇后。
现代文：南燕国主慕容超尊奉他的母亲段氏为皇太后，封他的妻子呼延氏为皇后。
English: Nanyan ruler Murong Chao honored his mother Duan as empress dowager and his wife Huyan as empress dowager.

古文：超祀南郊，有兽如鼠而赤，大如马，来至坛侧。
现代文：慕容超到南郊祭祀上天，有一种野兽，样子像老鼠一样，红毛，像马一般大，来到祭坛的旁边。
English: When Murong Chao went to the southern suburbs to offer sacrifices to heaven, a beast with the appearance of a mouse, red hair, and the size of a horse came to the side of the altar.

古文：须臾，大风，昼晦，羽仪帷幄皆毁裂。
现代文：一会儿，狂风骤起，天色昏暗，王室仪仗的羽饰帘帐全部被吹毁。
English: A moment later, the wind suddenly picked up, the sky darkened, and the royal ceremonial feather curtains were all blown down.

古文：超惧，以问太史令成公绥，对曰： 陛下信用奸佞、诛戮贤良、赋敛繁多、事役殷重之所致也。 
现代文：慕容超非常恐惧，问太史令成公绥这是怎么回事，成公绥回答说： 这是陛下宠信重用奸佞的小人，诛杀屠戮俊贤良才，赋税繁重，过分劳役百姓所导致。 
English: Murong Chao was very frightened and asked the Grand Historian why he had ordered Cheng Gongjun to do this. Cheng Gongjun replied, "This was caused by your majesty's favoured villains who often used traitors, killed and slaughtered talented people, levied heavy taxes, and overworked the people.

古文：超乃大赦，黜公孙五楼等。俄而复用之。
现代文：慕容超于是下令大赦，罢免了公孙五楼等人，但不久又再次任用了他。
English: Murong Chao then ordered an amnesty, dismissed Gongsun Wufu and others, but soon reappointed him.

古文：北燕王云立妻李氏为皇后，子彭城为太子。
现代文：北燕王高云册立他的妻子李氏为皇后，立他的儿子高彭城为太子。
English: The king of the Northern Yan, Gao Yun, appointed his wife, the Li clan, as empress and his son, Gao Pengcheng, as crown prince.

古文：三月，庚申，葬燕王熙及苻后于徽平陵，谥熙曰昭文皇帝。
现代文：三月，庚申，把后燕王慕容熙和苻皇后安葬在徽平陵。追谥慕容熙为昭文皇帝。
English: In March, Goshun buried Emperor Gaoyan and Empress Dowager Murongxi in Huiping Mausoleum. He was succeeded by Emperor Shouwen.

古文：高句丽遣使聘北燕，且叙宗族，北燕王云遣侍御史李拔报之。
现代文：高句丽派遣使者前往北燕访问，并讲述两国宗族血统的关系。北燕王高云也派遣侍御史李拔进行了回访。
English: Goguryeo sent an envoy to Beiyan to visit and tell about the relationship between the ancestral bloodlines of the two countries. Beiyan King Gao Yun also sent his attendant Shi Li Ba to pay a return visit.

古文：夏，四月，尚书左仆射孔安国卒；甲午，以吏部尚书孟昶代之。
现代文：夏季，四月，东晋国尚书左仆射孔安国去世。甲午，任命吏部尚书孟昶代替他的职务。
English: In the summer, in April, Eastern Jin's left-hand man, Shangshu Mengyuan, died, and Shangshu Mengyuan was appointed to replace him.

古文：北燕大赦。
现代文：北燕实行大赦。
English: North Yan implemented an amnesty.

古文：五月，北燕以尚书令冯万泥为幽、冀二州牧，镇肥如；中军将军冯乳陈为并州牧，镇白狼；抚军大将军冯素弗为司隶校尉；司隶校尉务银提为尚书令。
现代文：五月，北燕任命尚书令冯万泥为幽、冀二州牧，镇守肥如。任命中军将军冯乳陈为并州牧，镇守白狼。任命抚军大将军冯素弗为司隶校尉。任命司隶校尉务银提为尚书令。
English: In May, Beiyan appointed Shang Shuling Feng Wanzhong as Yu, Ji, two provincial governors, and town guard Huiru; appointed the Chinese army general Feng Lian Chen as concurrent provincial governors, and town guard Bai Lu; appointed the Fuzhou army general Feng Su Fu as Sili lieutenant; and appointed Sili lieutenant Mu Yinti as Shang Shuling.

古文：谯纵遣使称籓于秦，又与卢循潜通。
现代文：谯纵派使节前往后秦，请求作为后秦的藩属国，同时又与卢循暗中勾结。
English: The envoys of the Qianlong faction went to the Later Qin and requested to become a vassal state of the Later Qin, while at the same time secretly colluding with Lu Xun.

古文：纵上表请桓谦于秦，欲与之共击刘裕。
现代文：谯纵向后秦呈上奏章，请求允许桓谦前来，打算和他一起进攻刘裕。
English: After the battle, Qin Zongxiang presented a petition, requesting permission for Huan Qian to come and planned to attack Liu Yu together with him.

古文：秦王兴以问谦，谦曰： 臣之累世，著恩荆、楚，若得因巴、蜀之资，顺流东下，士民必翕然响应。 
现代文：后秦王姚兴就这件事问桓谦，桓谦说： 臣下几代人，都对荆、楚一带的百姓有恩，如果有机会凭借巴、蜀之地的力量，顺长江水流向东挺进，当地的官员百姓一定会纷纷起来响应。 
English: Later, Qin King Yao Xing asked Huan Qian about this matter. Huan Qian said: Generations of vassals have been kind to the people around Jing and Chu. If there is an opportunity to advance eastward along the Yangtze River with the power of Ba and Shu, local officials and people will surely respond.

古文：兴曰： 小水不容巨鱼，若纵之才力自足办事，亦不假君以为鳞翼。
现代文：姚兴说： 小的河沟里容不下大鱼，如果谯纵的才能力量足以一个人就能办得好事，也就不会借助你做他的鳞甲和羽翼了。
English: Yao Xing said: There is no room for big fish in a small river ditch. If you have enough talent and ability to do good things, you will not be able to use you to make his scales and wings.

古文：宜自求多福。 
现代文：你应该多考虑自己的福佑。 
English: You should think more about your own blessings.

古文：遂遣之。
现代文：于是就派他去了。
English: So he repatriated his captives.

古文：谦至成都，虚怀引士；纵疑之，置于龙格，使人守之。
现代文：桓谦到了成都，虚心谦恭，招纳各地投靠的人士。谯纵对他渐渐生起猜忌之心，把他软禁在龙格，并派人看守他。
English: When Huan Qian arrived in Chengdu, he was humble and courteous, and recruited people from all over the country to help him. However, suspicion gradually grew against him, and he was placed under house arrest in Longge, and someone was sent to guard him.

古文：谦泣谓诸弟曰： 姚主之言神矣！ 
现代文：桓谦流着泪对几个弟弟说： 姚主的话真是神算呵！ 
English: With tears streaming down his face, Huan Qian said to a few younger brothers: Yao's words are truly miraculous!

古文：秦王兴以秃发傉檀外内多难，欲因而取之，使尚书郎韦宗往觇之。
现代文：后秦王姚兴认为南凉国秃发檀现处在朝廷内外多难之秋，所以打算趁机消灭他，派尚书郎韦宗前去观察局势。
English: Later, Qin King Yao Xing thought that the Southern Lianggu Bald-headed Dandelion was in a difficult situation inside and outside the imperial court, so he planned to take advantage of the opportunity to eliminate him and sent Shang Shulang Wei Zong to observe the situation.

古文：傉檀与宗论当世大略，纵横无穷。
现代文：秃发檀与韦宗谈论当世的大事，纵横驰骋，酣畅淋漓。
English: Bald-headed sandalwood and Wei Zong talk about the important things of the present world, gallop across the country and the country, and have a good time.

古文：宗退，叹曰： 奇才英器，不必华夏，明智敏识，不必读书，吾乃今知九州之外，《五经》之表，复自有人也。 
现代文：韦宗告辞之后，叹道： 奇异之才，英雄之器，不一定只华夏中原有；明晰的智慧，敏锐的见识，也不一定只有读书才能获得。我今天才知道九州地域之外，除了儒学《五经》，也还大有人在。 
English: After Wei Zong's farewell, he sighed: Extraordinary talent, the tools of heroes, are not necessarily only original in China; clear wisdom, keen insight, are not necessarily only obtainable by reading. I only know today that in addition to the Kyushu region, in addition to the Confucianism "Five Classics," there are also many people.

古文：归，言于兴曰： 凉州虽弊，傉檀权谲过人，未可图也。 
现代文：韦宗回去，对姚兴说： 凉州虽然凋敝破败，但秃发檀的权谋诡诈却超过常人，不可对他打什么主意。 
English: Wei Zong went back and said to Yao Xing: Although Liangzhou is ruined, the power and cunning of the bald-headed man surpasses that of ordinary people. You should not make any suggestions to him.

古文：兴曰： 刘勃勃以乌合之众犹能破之，况我举天下之兵以加之乎！ 
现代文：姚兴说： 刘勃勃依靠一群乌合之众，还能把他打败，何况我要发动天下所有的兵马来对付他呢？ 
English: Yao Xing said: Liu Gong can still defeat him if he relies on a group of rabble. What's more, should I unleash all the soldiers and horses in the world to deal with him?

古文：宗曰： 不然。
现代文：韦宗说： 不对。
English: Weizong said, "That's not right."

古文：形移势变，返覆万端，陵人者易败，戒惧者难攻。
现代文：情况转变，形势不同，变化虽多种多样，但仗势欺人的人，容易失败，戒备谨慎的人，却很难攻取。
English: Circumstances change, the situation is different, and the changes are diverse, but those who are deceitful are easy to fail, and those who are cautious are difficult to attack.

古文：傉檀之所以败于勃勃者，轻之也。
现代文：秃发檀之所以败给刘勃勃的原因，就是轻敌。
English: The reason why Bald-Haired Sandalwood lost to Liu Gong is that he is a light opponent.

古文：今我以大军临之，彼必惧而求全。
现代文：现在我们用大部队去进攻他，他一定会非常恐惧，想办法保全自己。
English: Now we are going to attack him with a large army, and he will be very afraid and will try to save himself.

古文：臣窃观群臣才略，无傉檀之比者，虽以天威临之，亦未敢保其必胜也。 
现代文：臣下我私下里观察我们这些官员的才能谋略，没有一个能和秃发檀相比的，虽然您自己可以亲自带兵前去征伐，但也不敢保证到那时一定会胜利。 
English: My lord, I have observed in private the talents and stratagems of our officials, and none of them can be compared to that of the bald-headed pigeon. Although you yourself can personally lead an army to go to war, you cannot guarantee victory at that time.

古文：兴不听，使其子中军将军广平公弼、后军将军敛成、镇远将军乞伏乾归帅步骑三万袭傉檀，左仆射齐难帅骑二万讨勃勃。
现代文：姚兴不听，派遣他的儿子中军将军广平公姚弼、后军将军敛成、镇远将军乞伏乾归率步、骑兵三万人进攻秃发檀，又派左仆射齐难率骑兵二万讨伐刘勃勃。
English: Yao Xing did not listen and sent his son, the general of the Chinese army, Guang Ping Gong, Yao Tong, the general of the rear army, Hui Cheng, the general of Zhenyuan, to beg for his return, the cavalry of 30,000 attacked the bald sandal, and sent the left-hand man, Qi Nian, to lead the cavalry of 20,000 to fight Liu Gong.

古文：吏部尚书尹昭谏曰： 傉檀恃其险远，故敢违慢；不若诏沮渠蒙逊及李暠讨之，使自相困毙，不必烦中国之兵也。 
现代文：吏部尚书尹昭劝阻说： 秃发檀依仗他所处地域的险峻遥远，所以才胆敢违抗怠慢朝廷。我看不如下诏给沮渠蒙逊和李，让他们去讨伐秃发檀，使他们自己互相之间消耗力量，自行毁灭，不必劳烦中原这里的兵力。 
English: Shangshu Yin Zhao, an official of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, dissuaded him, saying, "Bald-faced Sandpiper relies on the perilous remoteness of his region, which is why he dares to defy and neglect the imperial court. I don't see the need to issue the following edict to Deshu Mengxun and Li, asking them to fight Bald-faced Sandpiper, so that they can consume each other's strength and self-destruct, and not have to bother the troops here in the Central Plains.

古文：亦不听。
现代文：姚兴仍然不听。
English: I can't listen to it either.

古文：兴遗傉檀书曰： 今遣齐难讨勃勃，恐其西逸，故令弼等于河西邀之。 
现代文：姚兴写信给秃发檀说： 现在，我派遣齐难讨伐刘勃勃，我担心他向西逃跑，所以命令姚弼等人带兵在河西一带截击他们。 
English: Yao Xing wrote a letter to Bald Eagle saying: Now, I am sending Qidan to fight Liu Gong. I am worried that he will flee to the west, so I ordered Yao Yao and others to lead troops to intercept them in the west of the river.

古文：傉檀以为然，遂不设备。
现代文：秃发檀以为真是这样，所以便不再增设防备。
English: Bald-head thought that was true, so he didn't add any more defenses.

古文：弼济自金城，姜纪言于弼曰： 今王师声言讨勃勃，傉檀犹豫，守备未严，愿给轻骑五千，掩其城门，则山泽之民皆为吾有，孤城无援，可坐克也。 
现代文：姚弼从金城一带渡过黄河。姜纪对姚弼说道： 这次我们大军表面上说要讨伐刘勃勃，所以秃发檀才犹豫不决，守卫戒备也不是很严，请您拨给我轻装骑兵五千人，径直突袭他们都城的城门，那么，住在城外草野山川里的居民便都归我们所有，剩下他那一座孤城，没有救援到来，我们就可以坐在那里等着他们了。 
English: Yao Yao crossed the Yellow River from the area around Jincheng. Jiang Ji said to Yao Yao: This time, our army ostensibly said that they wanted to fight Liu Gong, so the bald eagle hesitated, and the guards were not very alert. Please assign me five thousand light cavalry and directly raid the gates of their city. Then, the residents living in the grasslands outside the city will all belong to us. What is left is his lonely city. If no rescue comes, we can sit there and wait for them.

古文：弼不从。
现代文：姚弼却不接受他的意见。
English: However, Yao Jun did not accept his opinion.

古文：进至漠口，昌松太守苏霸闭城拒之，弼遣人谕之使降，霸曰： 汝弃信誓而代与国，吾有死而已，何降之有！ 
现代文：大军开到漠口，昌松太守苏霸紧闭城门抗拒他们。姚弼派人前去劝说，让他们投降。苏霸说： 你们背信弃义讨伐友好的国家，我只有一死罢了，哪里有投降的道理。 
English: The large army reached the mouth of the desert, and Su Ba, the governor of Changsong, closed the city gate tightly to resist them. Yao Yao sent people to persuade them to surrender. Su Ba said: You treacherously attack a friendly country, I only have one death, where is the reason to surrender?

古文：弼进攻，斩之，长驱至姑臧。
现代文：姚弼果然攻克这座城，把苏霸杀死了。然后又挥动大军长驱直入，进逼姑臧。
English: Yao Yao successfully conquered the city and killed Su Ba. Then he waved the army commander to drive straight in and force Gu Yao.

古文：傉檀婴城固守，出奇兵击弼，破之，弼退据西苑。
现代文：秃发檀环城坚固拒守，并出动奇兵回击姚弼，将他打败，姚弼退到西苑据守。
English: Bald-haired Tanhuan City firmly refused to defend, and sent out a strange soldier to fight back Yao Yao, defeated him, and Yao Yao retreated to Xiyuan to defend.

古文：城中人王钟等谋为内应，事泄，傉檀欲诛首谋者而赦其馀，前军将军伊力延侯曰： 今强寇在外，而奸人窃发于内，危孰甚焉！
现代文：城中王钟等人阴谋做后秦军的内应，事情泄漏后，秃发檀准备杀死主谋而赦免其他的人。前军将军伊力延侯说： 现在强大的敌人就在城外，而奸人又私下里准备在城内发动叛乱，危险是多么的严重呵！
English: Wang Zhong and others in the city plotted to do the internal correspondence of the post-Qin army. After the affair leaked out, Bald Dang prepared to kill the mastermind and pardon the others. Former army general Yili Yanhou said: Now the powerful enemy is outside the city, and the traitors are secretly preparing to launch a rebellion inside the city. How serious is the danger!

古文：不悉坑之，何以惩后！ 
现代文：如果不全部把他们活埋的话，用什么来惩戒后来的人！ 
English: If we don't bury them all alive, what will we use to punish those who come after us?

古文：傉檀从之，杀五千馀人。
现代文：秃发檀听从了他的话，坑杀了五千多人。
English: Bald-headed Dan listened to his words and killed more than five thousand people.

古文：命郡县悉散牛羊于野，敛成纵兵钞掠；傉檀遣镇北大将军俱延、镇军将军敬归等击之，秦兵大败，斩首七千馀级。
现代文：他又命令群县把牛羊等全部驱散到野外去，后秦军将领敛成纵容他的部下大肆抢掠。这时秃发檀派遣镇北大将军秃发俱延、镇军将军秃发敬归等联合进攻，后秦军队大败，被斩首的有七千多人。
English: He also ordered the counties to disperse all the cattle, sheep, etc. into the open, and the commander of the Later Qin Army became complacent and allowed his subordinates to loot and pillage. At this time, Bald Dang sent the general of Zhenbei University, Bald Gu Yan, and the general of the Zhen Army, Bald Jing Gui, to jointly attack. The Later Qin Army was defeated, and more than seven thousand people were beheaded.

古文：姚弼固垒不出，傉檀攻之，未克。
现代文：姚弼坚守堡垒，不出来交战，秃发檀进攻他们，没有攻克。
English: Yao Xuan held fast to the fortress, and did not come out to fight. Bald-headed Sandalwood attacked them, but did not conquer.

古文：秋，七月，兴遣卫大将军常山公显帅骑二万，为诸军后继，至高平，闻弼败，倍道赴之。
现代文：秋季七月，姚兴派遣卫大将军常山公姚显统帅骑兵二万作为各路军队的后继队伍，来到高平，听说姚弼战败，便加快行军速度，兼程赶到那里。
English: In the autumn of July, Yao Xing sent General of the Guard Changshan Gong Yao Xian, commander of the cavalry of twenty thousand, as the follow-up team of the various armies, came to Gaoping. When he heard that Yao Xi was defeated, he accelerated the speed of the march and rushed there.

古文：显遣善射者孟钦等五人挑战于凉风门，弦未及发，傉檀材官将军宋益等迎击，斩之。
现代文：姚显派遣善于射箭的孟钦等五人，在凉风门向敌兵挑战，弓弦上的箭还还没来得及发射出去，秃发檀的材官将军宋益等便赶到迎战，把他们杀了。
English: Yao Xian sent Meng Qin and five others, who were good at archery, to challenge the enemy soldiers at Liangfeng Gate. Before the arrows on the bow strings could be launched, the bald-headed officer general Song Yi and others rushed to meet the battle and killed them.

古文：显乃委罪敛成，遣使谢傉檀，慰抚河外，引兵还。
现代文：姚显于是把罪过推托给敛成，派人向秃发檀认错，安抚慰问黄河以外地区的百姓，带领大军回去了。
English: Yao Xian then put the blame on Huacheng, sent people to admit their mistakes to Balfa, comforted and consoled the people outside the Yellow River, and led the army back.

古文：傉檀遣使者徐宿诣秦谢罪。
现代文：秃发檀也派遣使节徐宿到后秦首都拜谒谢罪。
English: Bald-headed Dang also sent envoy Xu Shuku to the post-Qin capital to pay homage to Xie Sin.

古文：夏王勃勃闻秦兵且至，退保河曲。
现代文：夏王刘勃勃听说后秦兵马很快就要来到，退到河曲据守。
English: Xia Wang Liu Ling heard that the post-Qin soldiers and horses would soon arrive, and retreated to Hequ.

古文：齐难以勃勃既远，纵兵野掠。
现代文：齐难以为刘勃勃已经跑远，放纵自己的士兵到处抢掠。
English: It was hard to believe that Liu Gong had already run away, allowing his soldiers to loot and plunder everywhere.

古文：勃勃潜师袭之，俘斩七千馀人。
现代文：刘勃勃暗中回师袭击他们，俘虏、斩杀的一共有七千多人。
English: Liu Gongren secretly sent his division to attack them, capturing and killing a total of more than seven thousand people.

古文：难引兵退走，勃勃追至木城，禽之，虏其将士万三千人。
现代文：齐难带兵退走，刘勃勃追到木城，把他活捉，又俘虏了他手下的将士有一万三千人之多。
English: It was difficult for Qi to retreat with his soldiers, but Liu Gong followed him to Mucheng, captured him alive, and took as many as 13,000 of his soldiers prisoner.

古文：于是岭北夷、夏附于勃勃者以万数，勃勃皆置守宰以抚之。
现代文：从此，岭北夷族和汉人归附刘勃勃的有一万多人，刘勃勃都分别安排了守、宰一类的地方官，用来安抚他们。
English: Since then, more than 10,000 Lingbei Yi people and Han people have been affiliated with Liu Gong. Liu Gong has arranged local officials such as guards and butchers to appease them.

古文：司马叔璠自蕃城寇邹山，鲁郡太守徐邵弃城走，车骑长史刘钟击却之。
现代文：东晋叛将军司马叔从蕃城进犯邹山，鲁郡太守徐邕放弃城池逃走，车骑长史刘钟迎击，并把他打退。
English: East Jin Dynasty rebel general Sima Shizhu attacked Lushan from Lucheng. Lu County Governor Xu Yao abandoned the city and fled. Liu Zhong, the commander of the cavalry, met the attack and repulsed him.

古文：北燕王云封慕容归为辽东公，使主燕祀。
现代文：北燕王高云封慕容归为辽东公，让他主管燕帝室宗庙的祭祀工作。
English: Northern Yan King Gao Yunfeng Murong was assigned to Liaodong Gong, and he was put in charge of the sacrificial work of Emperor Yan's ancestral temple.

古文：刘敬宣既入峡，遣巴东太守温祚以二千人出外水，自帅益州刺史鲍陋、辅国将军文处茂、龙骧将军时延祖由垫江转战而前。
现代文：东晋刘敬宣进入三峡后，派遗巴东太守温祚率领二千人从外水进军，自己则统帅益州刺史鲍陋、辅国将军文处茂、龙骧将军时延祖从垫江一边作战一边前进。
English: After Liu Jingxuan of the Eastern Jin Dynasty entered the Three Gorges, he sent the last Emperor of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, Ba Dongtao, to invade from the outer waters, leading 2,000 men. He himself, the commander of Yizhou, Shishi Baohui, the general of Fu Guo, Wenshu Shigeru, and the general of Longjing, Shi Yanzu, fought and advanced from the side of the Jianjiang River.

古文：谯纵求救于秦，秦王兴遣平西将军姚赏、南梁州刺史王敏将兵二万赴之。
现代文：谯纵向后秦求救，后秦王姚兴派遣平西将军姚赏、南凉州刺史王敏带兵二万人前去解救。
English: Longitudinally, he appealed to the Later Qin for help, and the Later Qin king Yao Xing sent the Pingxi general Yao Bao and the Southern Liangzhou general Wang Min with 20,000 soldiers to rescue him.

古文：敬宣军至黄虎，去成都五百里。
现代文：刘敬宣的大军开到黄虎，距成都还有五百里。
English: Liu Jingxuan's army drove to Huanghu, still five hundred miles away from Chengdu.

古文：纵辅国将军谯道福悉众拒嶮，相持六十馀日，敬宣不得进；食尽，军中疾疫，死者太半，乃引军还，敬宣坐免官，削封三分之一，荆州刺史刘道规以督统降号建威将军。
现代文：谯纵的辅国将军谯道福把兵力全部调动起来据险要地势抵抗。双方在这里对抗僵持了六十多天，刘敬宣无法向前推进，粮食吃完，军中又流行疾病瘟疫，病死的人超过一半，于是只好带兵退了回去。刘敬宣因指挥不利被免去官职，削去他的封地的三分之一，荆州刺史刘道规也因此从督统的名号贬降为建威将军。
English: The two sides fought a stalemate here for more than sixty days. Liu Jingxuan was unable to advance, the grain supply was exhausted, the army was plagued by disease, and more than half of the people died of disease, so he had no choice but to retreat with his troops. Liu Jingxuan was removed from his post due to unfavorable command, and one-third of his fief was cut off. Liu Daobei, the governor of Jingzhou, was also demoted from the title of governor to that of general.

古文：九月，刘裕以敬宣失利，请逊位，诏降为中军将军，开府如故。
现代文：九月，刘裕因为刘敬宣的战场失利，请求退位。朝廷下诏把他降为中军将军，开府的待遇不变。
English: In September, Liu Yu requested to abdicate because of Liu Jingxuan's defeat in the battlefield. The imperial court decreed that he would be reduced to a general in the Chinese army, and the treatment of the imperial capital remained unchanged.

古文：刘毅欲以重法绳宣，裕保护之，何无忌谓毅曰： 奈何以私憾伤至公！ 
现代文：刘毅打算重刑惩处刘敬宣，刘裕多方保护，方才得免。何无忌对刘毅说： 怎么能用私人间的恩怨伤害天下的大公道呢！ 
English: Liu Yi planned to punish Liu Jingxuan with a heavy sentence, but Liu Yu was spared only after receiving protection from many sides. Why not say to Liu Yi: How can you use personal grudges to hurt the world's great justice!

古文：毅乃止。
现代文：刘遂这才停止。
English: Only then did Liu Sui stop.

古文：乞伏炽磐以秦政浸衰，且畏秦之攻袭，冬，十月，招结诸部二万馀人筑城于嵻良山而据之。
现代文：后秦河州刺史乞伏炽磐，认为后秦的政权越来越衰退，而且又害怕后秦前来进攻，冬季十月，征召集结各部落的二万多人在山修城池进行据守。
English: After the Qin Dynasty, Hezhou was in a desperate situation, believing that the regime of the Qin Dynasty was declining more and more, and was afraid of the Qin Dynasty coming to attack. In the winter of October, more than 20,000 people from various tribes were conscripted and assembled to build a castle in the mountains.

古文：十一月，秃发傉檀复称凉王，大赦，改元嘉平，置百官。
现代文：十一月，南凉秃发檀重新自称凉王，实行大赦，改年号为嘉平，设置文武百官。
English: In November, Nan Liang Bald Dang re-proclaimed himself as Liang Wang, implemented an amnesty, changed the year name to Jiaping, and set up a hundred civil and military officials.

古文：立夫人折掘氏为王后，世子武台为太子，录尚书事。
现代文：册立夫人折掘氏为王后，封嫡长子秃发武台为太子、录尚书事。
English: Lady Origori was crowned queen, and the eldest son, Baldfaced Budai, was crowned prince, according to the records.

古文：左长史赵晁、右长史郭幸为尚书左、右仆射，昌松侯俱延为太尉。
现代文：任命左长史赵晁、右长史郭为尚书左、右仆射。任命昌松侯秃发俱延为太尉。
English: Appointed the left-long Shi Zhao Jun, the right-long Shi Guo as Shang Shuxu left, and the right-long minion Shao. Appointed Chang Song Hou as the second lieutenant.

古文：南燕汝水竭。
现代文：南燕汝水枯竭。
English: Nan Yan Ru water depletion.

古文：河冻皆合，而渑水不冰。南燕王超恶之，问于李宣，对曰： 渑水无冰，良由逼带京城，近日月也。 
现代文：所有的河水全部结冻、冰封，而只有渑水没有结冰，南燕国主慕容超心里对此非常忌讳，向李宣询问这是怎么回事，李宣回答说： 渑水没有冻冰，主要是因为它流经都城，跟日月靠得很近的缘故。 
English: All the water in the river was frozen and frozen, but only Surabaya's water was not frozen. Murong Chao, the ruler of Nanyan, was very suspicious of this and asked Li Xuan what was going on. Li Xuan replied: Surabaya's water was not frozen, mainly because it flowed through the capital and was very close to the sun and the moon.

古文：超大悦，赐朝服一具。
现代文：慕容超听后非常高兴，赐给李宣一套官服。
English: Murong Chao was very happy to hear this and gave Li Xuan a set of official uniforms.

古文：十二月，乞伏炽磐攻彭奚念于枹罕，为奚念所败而还。
现代文：十二月，后秦河州刺史乞伏炽磐在罕进攻叛将彭奚念，被彭奚念打败，撤回。
English: In December, after Qin Hezhou's attack on the traitor Peng Xuanneng, Peng Xuanneng was defeated and retreated.

古文：是岁，魏主珪杀高邑公莫题。
现代文：这一年，北魏国主拓跋诛杀高邑公莫题。
English: In this year, it was impossible for the Northern Wei ruler Tuobao to kill Gaoyu Gong.

古文：初，拓跋窟咄之伐珪也，题以珪年少，潜以箭遗窟咄曰： 三岁犊岂能胜重载邪！ 
现代文：当初，拓跋窟咄征伐拓跋的时候，莫题以为拓跋年纪小，不可依靠，便在暗地里与拓跋窟咄联络，赠箭盟誓说： 三岁大的小牛犊，怎么能拉得动重载的车呢！ 
English: At first, when the Tuoba Grottoes were conquered by the Tuoba, they thought that the Tuoba was too young and could not be relied on, so they secretly contacted the Tuoba Grottoes and swore with arrows: How can a three-year-old calf pull a heavy-loaded car?

古文：珪心衔之。
现代文：拓跋一直怀恨在心。
English: Tuoba has always held a grudge.

古文：至是，或告题居处倨傲、拟则人主者，珪使人以箭示题而谓之曰： 三岁犊果何如？ 
现代文：到了这时，有人告发莫题平时接人待物高傲无理，好像有意摹仿君主的样子。拓跋便派人拿着那支箭给莫题看，并告诉他说： 三岁的牛犊结果怎么样？ 
English: At this time, someone told him that Mo Ting was arrogant and unreasonable, as if he intended to imitate the monarch's appearance. Tuoba sent someone to show Mo Ting the arrow and told him: How did the three-year-old calf turn out?

古文：题父子对泣。
现代文：莫题父子二人相对而哭。
English: The father and son can't stand each other and cry.

古文：诘朝，收斩之。
现代文：第二天早晨，便被抓起来杀了。
English: The next morning, he was arrested and killed.

