古文：郑兴字少赣，河南开封人也。
现代文：◆郑兴传，郑兴，字少赣，河南开封人。
English: ◆ Zheng Xing Chuan, Zheng Xing, Zhaoxiao, Henan Kaifeng.

古文：少学《公羊春秋》。晚善《左氏传》，遂积精深思，通达其旨，同学者皆师之。
现代文：少时学《公羊春秋》，晚年学《左氏传》，积累知识，深入思考，通达书中要旨，同学辈都以郑为师。
English: At a young age, he studied "Ram Spring and Autumn," and in his later years he studied "The Biography of Zuo," accumulating knowledge, thinking deeply, and getting to the essence of the book. His classmates all took Zheng as their teacher.

古文：天凤中，将门人从刘歆讲正大义，歆美兴才，使撰条例、章句、传诂，及校《三统历》。
现代文：天凤年间，率领学生从刘歆讲《左氏传》大义，刘歆赞美郑兴的才华，使郑撰写条例、章句、传诂，并校正《三统历》。
English: During the Tianfeng era, he led the students to learn from Liu Bei about the greatness of "The Biography of Zuo Shi Huang," Liu Bei praised Zheng Xing's talent, and made Zheng write regulations, chapters, and proclamations, and correct the "Three Calendars."

古文：更始立，以司直李松行丞相事，先入长安，松以兴为长史，令还奉迎迁都。
现代文：更始即位，用司直李松代理丞相，先入长安，李松用郑兴做长史，派他回去接皇帝迁都。
English: At the beginning of the enthronement, Li Song, the acting minister of the emperor, went to Chang'an first. Li Song used Zheng Xing to make a long history and sent him back to pick up the emperor to move the capital.

古文：更始诸将皆山东人，咸劝留洛阳。
现代文：更始的一些将领都是山东人，都劝驾留住洛阳。
English: Some of the generals at the beginning of the revolution were from Shandong, and they all urged him to stay in Luoyang.

古文：兴说更始曰： 陛下起自荆楚，权政未施，一朝建号，而山西雄桀争诛王莽，开关郊迎者，何也？
现代文：郑兴劝皇帝道： 陛下从荆楚起兵，权政尚未施行，一朝建立国号，而山西雄桀争着杀王莽，打开关门在郊外迎接陛下，为的是什么呢？
English: Zheng Xing advised the emperor as follows: Your Majesty has raised an army from Jingchu, power and politics have not yet been implemented, and the country's name has just been established. Meanwhile, the heroes of Shanxi are competing to kill Wang Mang, opening and closing doors to welcome Your Majesty in the suburbs. What is this for?

古文：此天下同苦王氏虐政，而思高祖之旧德也。
现代文：这是天下百姓被王莽的虐政害苦了，而思念汉高祖的旧德哩。
English: This is the people of the world who are suffering from the tyranny of Wang Mang and miss the old Delhi of Han Gao Zu.

古文：今久不抚之，臣恐百姓离心，盗贼复起矣。
现代文：现在久不安抚百姓，臣下恐怕百姓离心，盗贼又会兴起。
English: For a long time now, I have not been able to appease the people. I am afraid that my subjects will alienate the people, and thieves will rise again.

古文：《春秋》书 齐小白入齐 ，不称侯，未朝庙故也。
现代文：《春秋》上写齐桓公即位为 齐小白入齐 ，而不称齐侯，因为尚未朝庙祭祖的原故。
English: In "Spring and Autumn," the enthronement of Prince Qi Kuan was written as "Qi Xiao Bai Rong Qi," rather than "Qi Hou," because there was not yet a temple to celebrate the ancestor.

古文：今议者欲先定赤眉而后入关，是不识其本而争其末，恐国家之守转在函谷，虽卧洛阳，庸得安枕乎？ 
现代文：现在议论的人想先平定赤眉而后入关，是不知根本而争其末梢，恐怕国家的守卫转移在函谷关，即使睡在洛阳，难道安于枕席吗？ 
English: The people who are talking now want to first pacify the red eyebrows and then enter the pass, but they do not know the root and fight its ends. I am afraid that the guard of the country will be transferred to Hakodate Pass, even if they sleep in Luoyang, will they be satisfied with the pillow seat?

古文：更始曰： 朕西决矣。 
现代文：更始帝说 ：我向西已下决心了。 
English: The emperor said, "I have made up my mind to go west."

古文：拜兴为谏议大夫，使安集关西及朔方、凉、益三州，还拜凉州刺史。
现代文：拜郑兴为谏议大夫，派他安集关西和朔方、凉州、益州，回来后拜为凉州刺史。
English: He sent Bai Zhengxing to collect Kansai and Shuo Fang, Liangzhou and Yizhou, and after returning, Bai wrote a history of Liangzhou.

古文：会天水有反者，攻杀郡守，兴坐免。
现代文：恰逢天水有反叛的，攻杀郡守。郑兴因而免职。
English: At the same time, Tianshui rebelled and attacked and killed the county governor. Zheng Xing was dismissed.

古文：时赤眉入关，东道不通，兴乃西归隗嚣，嚣虚心礼请，而兴耻为之屈，称疾不起。
现代文：当时赤眉入关，东边道路不通，郑兴就向西归附隗嚣，隗嚣虚心用礼节请郑，而郑兴感到委屈，称病不起。
English: At that time, the Red Eyebrows entered the pass, the eastern road was impassable, and Zheng Xing returned to the west to join the hustle and bustle. The hustle and bustle humbly invited Zheng with etiquette, but Zheng Xing felt wronged and said that he could not afford to be ill.

古文：嚣矜己自饰，常以为西伯复作，乃与诸将议自立为王。
现代文：隗嚣夸耀自己，常用周文王自比，便与诸将商议自立为王。
English: He boasted loudly about himself, often comparing himself to King Zhou Wen, and then negotiated with the generals to make himself king.

古文：兴闻而说嚣曰： 《春秋传》云： 口不道忠信之言为嚣，耳不听五声之和为聋。 
现代文：郑兴听说就劝阻隗嚣道： 《春秋》传说： 口里不说忠信的话叫，耳朵不听五声之和叫聋。 
English: When Zheng Xing heard about it, he tried to dissuade the ruffian: "Spring and Autumn" legend: The mouth does not speak the words of loyalty, the ears do not listen to the five voices and are deaf.

古文：间者诸将集会，无乃不道忠信之言；大将军之听，无乃阿而不察乎？
现代文：近来诸将集会，莫不是不说忠信的话么，大将军听从了，莫不是缺乏详细的考察么？
English: When generals gathered recently, did they not speak words of loyalty, did the great generals listen, and was there a lack of detailed investigation?

古文：昔文王承积德之绪，加之以睿圣，三分天下，尚服事殷。及武王即位，八百诸侯不谋同会，皆曰 纣可伐矣 ，武王以未知天命，还兵待时。
现代文：从前周文王继承祖宗道德的余绪，加之本人的聪明才智，三分天下有其二，尚且能服侍殷商，等到武王即位，八百诸侯不谋而会于孟津，都说 商纣可以讨伐了 。周武王认为天命尚不可知，于是还师等待天时。
English: From the time when King Chouwen inherited the moral heritage of his ancestors, combined with his own ingenuity, two-thirds of the world were able to serve the merchants. When King Wu ascended the throne, eight hundred princes met in Mengjin and said that the merchants could fight. King Chouwen thought that the fate of heaven was still unknown, so he also learned to wait for the right time.

古文：高祖征伐累年，犹以沛公行师。
现代文：汉高祖征伐多年，还用沛公的名义行军。
English: For many years, Henkel's ancestors went on campaigns and marched in the name of Pei Gong.

古文：今令德虽明，世无宗周之祚，威略虽振，未有高祖之功，而欲举未可之事，昭速祸患，无乃不可乎？
现代文：现在你的令德虽然鲜明，但没有周朝那样的福泽，威略虽很振兴，但没有汉高祖的功勋，而想举办不可办的事业，将加速引祸，恐怕不可以吧！
English: Now, although your virtue is bright, it does not have the same blessing as that of the Zhou Dynasty. Although it is very revitalized, it does not have the merits of the Han Gaozu. But if you want to organize an impossible undertaking, it will accelerate the disaster. I am afraid it is impossible!

古文：惟将军察之。 
现代文：希望将军仔细考虑一下。 
English: I hope the general will think about it carefully.

古文：嚣竟不称王。
现代文：隗嚣终于没有称王。
English: In the end, hubris was not king.

古文：后遂广置职位，以自尊高。
现代文：后来就广泛设置官吏职位，用来提高自己的威望。
English: Later, it created a wide range of official positions to enhance its prestige.

古文：兴复止嚣曰： 夫中郎将、太中大夫、使持节官皆王者之器，非人臣所当制也。
现代文：郑兴又阻止隗嚣道： 那些中郎将、太中大夫、使持节官都是王者的车服，不是人臣所应有的。
English: Zheng Xing also stopped the ranting and said: Those middle lords, great middle lords, and officials are the king's chariot, not what a vassal should have.

古文：孔子曰： 惟器与名，不可以假人。 
现代文：孔子说 ：只有器和名，不可借给别人。 
English: Confucius said: There is only the name and the image, which should not be lent to others.

古文：不可以假人者，亦不可以假于人也。
现代文：不可借给别人的东西，也不可向别人借来。
English: You may not lend or borrow things from others.

古文：无益于实，有损于名，非尊上之意也。 
现代文：对实际无好处，对名声有损害，不是尊重皇上的意思。 
English: It is of no practical benefit, and is harmful to reputation, and is not respectful of the emperor's will.

古文：嚣病之而止。
现代文：隗嚣感到为难也就停止了。
English: The hullabaloo of embarrassment ceased.

古文：及嚣遣子恂入侍，将行，兴因恂求归葬父母，嚣不听而徙兴舍，益其秩礼。
现代文：等到隗嚣叫儿子隗恂入侍，将出发时，郑兴托隗恂请求回家安葬父母，隗嚣不听从而迁徙郑兴的房舍，增加其官秩与礼仪。
English: When he was about to leave, Zheng Xing begged him to go home and bury his parents, but Zheng Xing did not listen, so he moved to Zheng Xing's house and increased his official rank and etiquette.

古文：兴入见嚣曰： 前遭赤眉之乱，以将军僚旧，故敢归身明德。
现代文：郑兴进见隗嚣道 ：从前遭逢赤眉之乱，凭将军僚旧的关系，所以冒昧请求回家明德。
English: Zheng Xingjin saw the way of arrogance: he had suffered from the Red Eyebrow Rebellion in the past, and because of the old relationship between generals and colleagues, he had the temerity to ask Mingde to return home.

古文：幸蒙覆载之恩，复得全其性命。
现代文：幸蒙天地的大恩，又得保全其性命。
English: Fortunately, thanks to the great grace of heaven and earth, his life was saved.

古文：兴闻事亲之道，生事之以礼，死葬之以礼，祭之以礼，奉以周旋，弗敢失坠。
现代文：我听说侍亲的道理，父母活着时用礼节奉养他，父母死后用礼节安葬他，用礼节祭奠他，遵奉这些礼节，不敢半点违反。
English: I have heard of the principle of serving one's relatives. When one's parents are alive, they use etiquette to take care of them. When one's parents die, they use etiquette to bury them. They use etiquette to pay tribute to them. They follow these etiquettes and dare not violate them in the slightest.

古文：今为父母未葬，请乞骸骨，若以增秩徙舍，中更停留，是以亲为饵，无礼甚矣，将军焉用之！ 
现代文：现在因为父母尚未埋葬，请求告老还乡，如果增加官秩搬迁房舍，中间又拖延不少时间，这是用父母作钓饵，太无礼了。将军怎么能这样？ 
English: Now, because his parents have not yet been buried, he is requesting to return to his hometown. If he were to increase his official rank and relocate his house, and delay a lot of time in the middle, this would be using his parents as bait, which is too rude. How can a general do this?

古文：嚣曰： 嚣将不足留故邪？ 
现代文：隗嚣说 ：我就不配挽留老朋友吗？ 
English: Do I not deserve to keep an old friend?

古文：兴曰： 将军据七郡之地，拥羌胡之众，以戴本朝，德莫厚焉，威莫重焉。
现代文：郑兴说： 将军占有七郡的土地，拥有羌胡的百姓，来拥戴本朝，德没有再厚的，威没有再重的。
English: Zheng Xing said: The general occupies the land of seven counties, owns the people of the moustache, to embrace this dynasty, the virtue is no thicker, and the dignity is no heavier.

古文：居则为专命之使，入必为鼎足之臣。
现代文：在驻地就是专命的大使，进朝延就是鼎立的大臣。
English: The resident is a special envoy, and Jin Chaoyan is a high-ranking minister.

古文：兴，从俗者也，不敢深居屏处，因将军求进，不患不达，因将军求入，何患不亲，此兴之计不逆将军者也。
现代文：我，从俗之人，不敢深处不出，通过将军求进身之阶，不担心达不到目的；委托将军求进入朝廷，不担心不亲受恩典，这就是我不违背将军的心计哩！
English: I, a man of the world, dare not go out of my depth. I seek advancement through the generals, without fear of not achieving my goal; I entrust the generals to seek entry into the imperial court, without fear of not receiving grace personally. This is why I do not go against the generals' intentions!

古文：兴业为父母请，不可以已，愿留妻子独归葬，将军又何猜焉？ 
现代文：我已替父母请求，不可这样中止，愿把妻子留下来，我独自归葬，将军又何必猜疑呢？ 
English: I have already asked for my parents, it is not possible to stop like this, I would like to keep my wife, I will be buried alone, why should the general be suspicious?

古文：嚣曰： 幸甚。 
现代文：隗嚣说 ：这太好了。 
English: The hubbub says: This is great.

古文：促为辨装，遂令与妻子俱东。
现代文：于是催他赶办行装，叫他和妻子一道向东而去。
English: So he hurried him to pack his things and told him to leave for the east with his wife.

古文：时建武六年也。
现代文：这是建武六年的事。
English: This has been going on for six years.

古文：侍御史杜林先与兴同寓陇右，乃荐之曰： 窃见河南郑兴，执义坚固，敦悦《诗》、《书》，好古博物，见疑不惑，有公孙侨、观射父之德，宜侍帷幄，典职机密。
现代文：侍御史杜林先与郑兴同住在陇右，杜林就推荐郑兴道： 我看到河南郑兴，坚守正义，喜好诗书，知识渊博，思想坚定，有公孙侨、观射父的德行，应该留在皇上的身边，掌握国家的机密。
English: Steulin, the chamberlain, first lived with Zheng Xing in Shiyu, and Du Lin recommended Zheng Xing: I saw that Henan Zheng Xing, who adheres to justice, likes poetry and books, is knowledgeable, has a firm mind, and has the virtues of his father, grandson, and father, should stay by the emperor's side and master the state's secrets.

古文：昔张仲在周，燕冀宣王，而诗人悦喜。
现代文：从前张仲在周朝，辅佐周宣王，而诗人十分高兴。
English: Zhang Zhong once assisted King Zhou Xuan in the Zhou Dynasty, and the poet was very happy.

古文：惟陛下留听少察，以助万分。 
现代文：希望陛下留心观察，来为陛下分劳。 
English: I hope His Majesty will pay attention and come to work for His Majesty.

古文：乃征为太中大夫。
现代文：于是郑兴被征为太中大夫。
English: As a result, Zheng Xing was conscripted as a doctor.

古文：明年三月晦，日食。
现代文：第二年三月三十日，日食。
English: On March 30 of the following year, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：兴因上疏曰：《春秋》以天反时为灾，地反物为妖，人反德为乱，乱则妖灾生。
现代文：郑兴便上疏道 ：《春秋》认为天反时便成灾，地反物便成妖，人反德便是乱，乱就妖灾发生。
English: Zheng Xing then went on to explain: "Spring and Autumn" believes that when nature is against something, it becomes a disaster, when the earth is against something, it becomes a demon, when people are against something, it is a chaos, and when there is a chaos, a demonic disaster occurs.

古文：往年以来，谪咎连见，意者执事颇有阙焉。
现代文：往年以来，怪现象连续出现，料想是办事有缺陷。
English: Since the past few years, strange phenomena have continued to appear, presumably due to deficiencies in the handling of cases.

古文：案《春秋》 昭公十七年夏六月甲戌朔，日有食之 。
现代文：按《春秋》 鲁昭公十七年夏六月甲戍初一，有日食。 
English: According to "Spring and Autumn," Lu Zhaogong's seventeenth year, in the summer of June, the first day of spring, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：传曰： 日过分而未至，三辰有灾，于是百官降物，君不举，避移时，乐奏鼓，祝用币，史用辞。 
现代文：古书上说： 日过分而未至，日、月、星三辰有灾，于是百官穿着素服，国君不举盛馔，避正寝过日食时，乐师奏鼓，庙祝用币于社，史官用语言自责。 
English: An ancient book said: The sun passes by and does not arrive, the sun, the moon, and the three stars are plagued, so the officials wear plain clothes, the sovereign does not hold the imperial scepter, when avoiding the eclipse, the musician plays the drum, the temple congratulates the society with coins, and the historian reproaches himself with language.

古文：今孟夏，纯乾用事，阴气未作，其灾尤重。
现代文：现在正值孟夏，纯乾用事，阴气未发作，灾害更重。
English: Now is the time of Mengxia, the dry season, the gloomy weather has not occurred, and the disasters are more serious.

古文：夫国无善政，则谪见日月，变咎之来，不可不慎，其要在因人之心，择人处位也。
现代文：国家没有善政，天意就在日月上表现出来。变咎一来，不可不谨慎，其要害在于针对人心，选择恰当的官吏。
English: If a country does not have good governance, providence will manifest itself in the form of the sun and the moon. When it comes to changing the blame, it is necessary to be cautious. The key lies in selecting the right officials for the people.

古文：尧知鲧不可用而用之者，是屈己之明，因人之心也。
现代文：古时尧帝知道鲧不可用而用了他，这是屈己之明，因人之心。
English: In ancient times, Emperor Qian knew that Zhai could not be used, so he used him. This was a clear act of self-sacrifice, because of the human heart.

古文：齐桓反政而相管仲，晋文归国而任郤者，是不私其私，择人处位也。
现代文：齐桓公不计旧仇而用管仲，晋文公回晋国而用谷阝索殳，都是不计私仇，择人处位的意思。
English: Qi Kuan Gong used Guanzhong without regard to old enmity, and Jinwen Gong returned to Jin Province and used Guizhong, both of which mean to choose a person's position without regard to personal enmity.

古文：今公卿大夫多举渔阳太守郭亻及可大司空者，而不以时定，道路流言，咸曰 朝廷欲用功臣 ，功臣用则人位谬矣。
现代文：现在公卿大夫多推举渔阳太守郭亻及可做大司空，而陛下没有及时定下来，道路上流言很多，都说 朝廷想用功臣 ，功臣用而位置错了。
English: At present, many court nobles and doctors are recommending Guo Jian, the Yang di-Pertuan Agong, as a candidate for the position of grand marshal, but His Majesty has not decided in time. There are many rumors on the road, saying that the court wants to use heroes and heroines, but the position is wrong.

古文：愿陛下上师唐、虞，下览齐、晋，以成屈己从众之德，以济群臣让善之功。
现代文：希望陛下上以唐虞为师，下看齐、晋的做法，来成就屈己从众的美德，促成群臣让善的功劳。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will take Tang Yu as a teacher and follow the practices of Qi and Jin to achieve the virtue of bowing down and obeying the masses, and promote the merit of the group of courtiers yielding to the good.

古文：夫日月交会，数应在朔，而顷年日食，每多在晦。
现代文：日月交会，本应在每月初一，而近年日食，每多在三十日。
English: The meeting of the sun and the moon should have taken place on the first day of each month, but in recent years the solar eclipse has taken place on the 30th.

古文：先时而合，皆月行疾也。
现代文：先时而合，都是月亮走快了点。
English: Coincidentally, the moon is moving a little faster.

古文：日君象而月臣象，君亢急则臣下促迫，故行疾也。
现代文：太阳是君王的象征而月亮是臣子的象征，君主亢急那么臣下促迫，所以走得快了。
English: The sun is the symbol of the monarch and the moon is the symbol of the vassal. The monarch is in a hurry, so the vassal urges him, so he walks fast.

古文：今年正月繁霜，自尔以来，率多寒日，此亦急咎之罚。
现代文：今年正月出现繁霜，自那时以来，大多寒日。这也是急咎的惩罚。
English: There was a heavy frost in the first month of this year, and since then, there have been mostly cold days. This is also the punishment of blame.

古文：天子贤圣之君，犹慈父之于孝子也。丁宁申戒，欲其反政，故灾变仍见，此乃国之福也。
现代文：老天爷对贤圣之君，等于慈父对于孝子，丁宁申戒，想让他反思政事，所以灾变出现，这是国家的福。
English: God is to a wise and saintly prince as a loving father is to a filial son, Ding Ning said. He wanted him to reflect on political affairs, so a catastrophe occurred, which is a blessing for the country.

古文：今陛下高明而群臣惶促，宜留思柔克之政，垂意《洪范》之法，博采广谋，纳群下之策。书奏，多有所纳。
现代文：现在陛下高明而群臣惶促，应多想柔克之政，留心《洪范》之法，广泛听取意见。 书奏上，多被采纳。
English: Now that His Majesty is so wise and his courtiers are panicking, he should think more about a soft policy, pay attention to the law of "Hong Fan" and widely listen to opinions.

古文：帝尝问兴郊祀事，曰： 吾欲以谶断之，何如？ 
现代文：帝曾经问郑兴郊祀的事，并说： 我想用谶言断定，怎么样？ 
English: The emperor once asked Zheng Xing about the suburb of worship, and said: I want to use slander to determine, how about it?

古文：兴对曰： 臣不为谶。 
现代文：郑兴答道： 臣下不懂德谶。 
English: Zheng Xing replied: Subordinates do not understand virtue.

古文：帝怒曰： 卿之不为谶，非之邪？ 
现代文：皇上怒道： 卿不为谶，你能说谶不对吗？ 
English: The emperor angrily said, "Sir, you are not a eunuch. Can you say that eunuch is not right?

古文：兴惶恐曰： 臣于书有所未学，而无所非也。 
现代文：郑兴惶恐地说 ：臣对于谶书没有学过，而不是认为不对哩。 
English: Zheng Xing said with trepidation: "The minister has not studied the book, but does not think it is wrong."

古文：帝意乃解。
现代文：皇上的意思才缓解下来。
English: It was only then that Mingzong put his heart into it.

古文：兴数言政事，依经守义，文章温雅，然以不善谶故不能任。
现代文：郑兴多次言政事，依经守义，文章温和儒雅，但因为他不会用谶所以不得重用。
English: Zheng Xing repeatedly made speeches on politics, adhered to the scriptures, and his articles were gentle and elegant, but because he did not know how to use chopsticks, he was not allowed to reuse them.

古文：九年，使监征南、积弩营于津乡，会征南将军岑彭为刺客所杀，兴领其营，遂与大司马吴汉俱击公孙述。
现代文：九年，皇帝派郑兴监征南、积弩营于津乡。恰逢征南将军岑彭被刺客所杀，郑兴率领他的营部，便与大司马吴汉一道去打公孙述。
English: In the ninth year, the emperor sent Zheng Xing to supervise the Southern Expedition and encamp in Tsu Township. Coincidentally, the Southern Expeditionary General Zi Peng was killed by the assassins. Zheng Xing led his battalion and went to fight Gongsun Su together with the Chief Secretary Ma Wuhan.

古文：述死，诏兴留屯成都。
现代文：公孙述死后，皇上下诏让郑兴留屯成都。
English: After the death of his grandson, the emperor issued an edict to let Zheng Xing stay in Chengdu.

古文：顷之，侍御史举奏兴奉使私买奴婢，坐左转莲勺令。
现代文：不久，侍御史奏郑兴奉使私买奴婢，于是降职做莲勺令。
English: Soon after, the chamberlain, Zheng Xing, ordered me to buy slaves and maidservants, so I was demoted to the position of lotus spoon.

古文：是时丧乱之余，郡县残荒，兴方欲筑城郭，修礼教以化之，会以事免。
现代文：这时正是丧乱以后，郡县残破荒芜，郑兴正想修筑城郭，修礼教来教化百姓，后来因事免职。
English: It was at this time, after the riots, that the counties were left in ruins. Zheng Xing was trying to build fortresses and conduct rituals to enlighten the people. Later, he was removed from his post for some reason.

古文：兴好古学，尤明《左氏》、《周官》，长于历数，自杜林、桓谭、卫宏之属，莫不斟酌焉。
现代文：郑兴好古学，尤其对《左氏》、周官》有研究，长于历算，从杜林、桓谭、卫宏等人，都斟酌取其旨意。
English: Zheng Xing was fond of ancient studies, especially of "Zao Shi Huang" and "Zhou Guan," and was better than the calendar. He carefully selected his will from Du Lin, Kuan Tan, Wei Hong and others.

古文：世言《左氏》者多祖于兴，而贾逵自传其父业，故有郑、贾之学。
现代文：世上谈《左氏》的多半以郑兴为祖。而贾逵自传其父业，所以有郑、贾之学的说法。
English: Most of the world's talk about "Mr. Left" is about Zheng Xing as the progenitor. And Jia Wei's autobiography is about his father's business, so there is a saying about Zheng and Jia's learning.

古文：及顺帝立，安世已卒，追赐钱、帛，除子亮为郎。众曾孙公业，自有传。范升字辩卿，代郡人也。
现代文：郑兴离开莲勺以后，不再做官。曾经客授阌乡，三公几次请他都不肯出来，死在家中。◆范升传，范升，宇辩卿，代郡人。
English: After Zheng Xing left the Lotus Spoon, he no longer worked as an official. Once he was invited to visit the county, he refused to come out several times, and died at home. ◆ Fan Sheng Chuan, Fan Sheng, Yu Yuanqing, deputy county people.

古文：少孤，依外家居。
现代文：少年时死了父亲，靠外家生活。
English: His father died when he was a boy, and he lived off the family.

古文：九岁通《论语》、《孝经》，及长，习《梁丘易》、《老子》，教授后生。
现代文：九岁时读了《论语》、《孝经》，年长时，学习《梁丘易》、《老子》，并教授后生学习。
English: At the age of nine, he read "Analects of Confucius" and "The Book of Filial Piety." When he was older, he studied "Liang Qiu Yi" and "Lao Zi" and taught future students how to study.

古文：王莽大司空王邑辟升为议曹史。
现代文：王莽的大司空王邑提拔范升做议曹史。
English: Wang Mang's grand secretary, Kong Wangyi, promoted Fan Sheng to the post of chief adviser.

古文：时莽频发兵役，征赋繁兴，升乃奏记邑曰： 升闻子以人不间于其父母为孝，臣以下不非其君上为忠。
现代文：当时王莽连续征兵，赋税繁多，范升于是向王邑提意见道 ：我听说做儿子的别人不非议其父母算作孝，做臣子的下面不非议其君上算作忠。
English: At that time, Wang Mang continuously conscripted soldiers and paid a lot of taxes. Fan Sheng then made a suggestion to Wang Yue: I heard that a son who does not criticize his parents is regarded as a filial son, and a subordinate who does not criticize his superior is regarded as loyal.

古文：今众人咸称朝圣，皆曰公明。
现代文：现在众人都称朝圣，都说皇上公明。
English: Now everyone is calling it a pilgrimage and saying that the emperor has made it clear.

古文：盖明者无不见，圣者无不闻。
现代文：所谓明者没有看不见的东西，圣者没有听不见的东西。
English: The so-called enlightened have nothing that cannot be seen, and the holy have nothing that cannot be heard.

古文：今天下之事，昭昭于日月，震震于雷霆，而朝云不见，公云不闻，则元元焉所呼天？
现代文：现在天下的事情，明明胜过日月，震震胜于雷庭，而朝廷上看不见，公也说听不见，那么老百姓怎能呼天？
English: At present, the affairs of the world are clearly better than the sun and the moon, and the earthquake is better than the thunder and lightning, but the imperial court can't see it, and the public can't hear it, so how can the common people call out to heaven?

古文：公以为是而不言，则过小矣；知而从令，则过大矣。
现代文：您以为对的而不讲，那么过失还小；明知道错了而跟着干，那么过就大了。
English: If you do not say what you think is right, the fault is small; if you do it when you know it is wrong, the fault is great.

古文：二者于公无可以免，宜乎天下归怨于公矣。
现代文：两者对于公无可避免，天下埋怨您是应该的。
English: Both are unavoidable for the public, and the world should complain about you.

古文：朝以远者不服为至念，升以近者不悦为重忧。
现代文：朝廷把远处人民不服从为忧虑，我认为近处人民不喜悦算是重忧。
English: The imperial court worries about the disobedience of the people far away. I think that the displeasure of the people nearby is a serious worry.

古文：今动与时戾，事与道反，驰鹜覆车之辙，探汤败事之后，后出益可怪，晚发愈可惧耳。
现代文：现在行动与时令乖戾，事情与道理相违，好比车子在覆车的道上狂奔，在事败之后去探汤，后出更加可怪，晚发更可怕哩。
English: To act now is contrary to the season, and things are contrary to reason, just as a car runs wild on the road behind the car, and goes to explore the soup after the defeat, and it is more strange to come out later, and it is more terrible to start late.

古文：方春岁首，而动发远役，藜藿不充，田荒不耕，谷价腾跃，斛至数千，吏人陷于汤火之中，非国家之人也。
现代文：现在正是岁首，而动员百姓远征，野草不能充饥，田荒无人耕种，谷价飞涨，每斛涨至数千，官吏百姓陷于水火之中，不是国家的人。
English: Now is the first day of the year, and the people are being mobilized for an expedition. Weeds cannot satisfy hunger, fields are barren and no one is cultivating them, grain prices are soaring, rising to thousands per bushel, and government officials and the people are caught in the crossfire. They are not people of the state.

古文：如此，则胡、貊守关，青、徐之寇在于帷帐矣。
现代文：这样下去，就像让胡、貊之人守关，青州、徐州的强盗就近在帷帐之内了。
English: If this continues, it will be like letting Hu and Zou guard the gate, and the robbers from Qingzhou and Xuzhou will be close to entering the curtain.

古文：升有一言，可以解天下倒县，免元元之急，不可书传，愿蒙引见，极陈所怀。 
现代文：我有一句话，可以解除天下人倒悬之忧，免去百姓的焦虑，不可用书信传递，希望皇上引见，陈述我的想法。 
English: I have a sentence that can relieve the worries of the world and the anxieties of the people. It cannot be passed on by letter. I hope the emperor will see it and state my thoughts.

古文：邑虽然其言，而竟不用。
现代文：王邑虽然认为范升的话有理，但始终不用它。
English: Although Wang Yu thought that Fan Sheng's words were reasonable, he never used it.

古文：升称病乞身，邑不听，令乘传使上党。
现代文：范升称病请求退休，王邑不听，派他乘传出使上党。
English: Fan Sheng claimed to be ill and asked to retire, but Wangyi did not listen and sent him to the party as an emissary.

古文：升遂与汉兵会，因留不还。
现代文：范升就与汉兵相会，于是留下来没回去。
English: Fan Sheng met with the Chinese soldiers, so he stayed and did not go back.

古文：建武二年，光武征诣怀宫，拜议郎，迁博士，上疏让曰： 臣与博士梁恭、山阳太守吕羌俱修《梁丘易》。
现代文：建武二年，光武帝征召范升到怀宫，封为议郎，升为博士。范升上疏推辞道 ：臣和博士梁恭、山阳太守吕羌都学过《梁丘易》。
English: In the second year of the Jianwu era, Emperor Guangwu conscripted Fan Sheng to go to the Imperial Palace, and he was given the title of Heir Apparent and promoted to the rank of Doctor. Fan Sheng gave the following speech: "Minister and Doctor Liang Hong and Shanyang Daju Lv Ying have all studied Liang Qiu Yi."

古文：二臣年并耆艾，经学深明，而臣不以时退，与恭并立，深知羌学，又不能达，惭负二老，无颜于世。
现代文：他们二人年纪老了，对经学很有研究，而臣没有及时退休，现在与梁恭并立，深知吕羌有学问，又不能进，对二老深感惭愧，没脸面见世人。
English: The two of them are old and have a lot of research on the classics, but the minister did not retire in time and now stands side by side with Liang Qiong. He knows that Lv Ying has knowledge, but cannot enter. He is deeply ashamed of the two old men and has no face to show to the world.

古文：诵而不行，知而不言，不可开口以为人师，愿推博士以避恭、羌。 
现代文：读了书不能实行，知道而不能说，不能开口以为人师，愿推掉博士让给梁恭吕羌。 
English: You can't practice what you read, you can't speak what you know, and you can't open your mouth to be a teacher. I am willing to give up my doctorate and give it to Liang Gong Lv.

古文：帝不许，然由是重之，数诏引见，每有大议，辄见访问。
现代文：皇上不同意，但从此更重视他，数次下诏引见，每有大事，常召见访问。
English: The emperor did not agree, but from then on, he paid more attention to him, and several times introduced him to the emperor. Whenever there was a big event, he often called him for a visit.

古文：时，尚书令韩歆上疏，欲为《费氏易》、《左氏春秋》立博士，诏下其议。
现代文：当时尚书令韩歆上疏，想为《费氏易》、《左氏春秋》立博士，皇上下诏让大家讨论。
English: At that time, Shang Shuling wanted to promote Han Xuan to a doctorate, and wanted to establish a doctorate for "Fei's Yi" and "Zao's Spring and Autumn." The emperor issued an edict to let everyone discuss it.

古文：四年正月，朝公卿、大夫、博士，见于云台。
现代文：四年正月，朝见公卿、大夫、博士在云台。
English: In the first month of the fourth year, nobles, doctors, and doctors were in Yuntai.

古文：帝曰： 范博士可前平说。 
现代文：皇帝说： 范博士可上前发表意见。 
English: The emperor said, "Dr. Fan can come forward to express his opinion.

古文：升起对曰： 《左氏》不祖孔子，而出于丘明，师徒相传，又无其人，且非先帝所存，无因得立。 
现代文：范升起立答道 ：《左氏》不以孔子为祖，而出于左丘明，师徒相传，又无其人，又不是先帝所存，没有因由可立博士。 
English: Fan Sheng stood up and replied: "The Zuo Clan" does not take Confucius as the ancestor, but from Zuo Quming, the teacher and disciple are passed down from generation to generation, and there is no one else, and it is not from the previous emperor, and there is no reason to establish a doctor.

古文：遂与韩歆及太中大夫许淑等互相辩难，日中乃罢。
现代文：于是和韩歆及太中大夫许淑等互相辩难，到了中午才罢。
English: As a result, she argued with Han Zheng and Tai Zhong Doctor Xu Shu, and it was not until noon that they broke up.

古文：升退而奏曰：臣闻主不稽古，无以承天；臣不述旧，无以奉君。
现代文：范升退朝后又奏道 ：臣下听说人主不稽考古史，不能承受天命；臣子不述旧闻，不能侍奉国君。
English: After Fan Sheng's abdication, he also said, "My subjects have heard that if a ruler does not study archaeological history, he will not be able to bear the Mandate of Heaven; if a subject does not recount old stories, he will not be able to serve the sovereign."

古文：陛下愍学微缺，劳心经艺，情存博闻，故异端竞进。
现代文：陛下同情经学有缺，劳心经艺，总想广征意见，所以异端都起来了。
English: His Majesty sympathized with the lack of study and hard work in the arts, and always wanted to solicit opinions, so heresies arose.

古文：近有司请置《京氏易》博士，群下执事，莫能据正。
现代文：近来有司请设《京氏易》博士，下面执事们没有谁能有根据地纠正。
English: Recently, there was a request from a deacon to set up a "Beijing Yi" doctorate, but none of the deacons below could make a well-founded correction.

古文：《京氏》既立，《费氏》怨望，《左氏春秋》复以比类，亦希置立。
现代文：《京氏易》既立了，《费氏易》又在怨望，《左氏春秋》也希望设立。
English: "Beijing Yi Yi" has already been established, "Fai Yi Yi" is also in resentment, and "Zao Yi Spring and Autumn" also hopes to be established.

古文：《京》、《费》已行，次复《高氏》，《春秋》之家，又有《驺》、《夹》。
现代文：《京》、《费》已立，再就是《高氏》了，《春秋》之家，又有《驺》、《夹》。
English: "Beijing" and "Fee" have already been established, and then there is "Gao's," the home of "Spring and Autumn," as well as "Dragonfly" and "Crane."

古文：如今《左氏》、《费氏》得置博士，《高氏》、《驺》、《夹》，《五经》奇异，并复求立，各有所执，乖戾分争。
现代文：如果《左氏》、《费氏》能设博士，《高氏》、《驺》、《夹》，《五经》奇异，都要求设立，各有所执，乖戾分争。
English: If "Mr. Zu" and "Mr. Fei" can set up a doctorate, "Mr. Gao" and "Fu" and "Zi" and "Five Classics" and "Singularity" all require the establishment of a doctorate.

古文：从之则失道，不从则失人，将恐陛下必有倦之听。
现代文：听从了就失去正道，不听从就失去人，将恐陛下必然听得厌烦。
English: If you obey, you will lose the right path, and if you disobey, you will lose people. I'm afraid Your Majesty will get tired of listening to me.

古文：孔子曰： 博学约之，弗叛矣夫。 
现代文：孔子说 ：博学约之，弗叛矣夫。 
English: Confucius said, "He who is well-educated should not be a traitor."

古文：夫学而不约，必叛道也。
现代文：学了不约，一定会叛道。
English: If you don't learn, you're sure to turn traitor.

古文：颜渊曰： 博我以文，约我以礼。 
现代文：颜渊说： 博我以文，约我以礼。 
English: Yan Yuan said: Bo me with a letter, ask me with a bow.

古文：孔子可谓知教，颜渊可谓善学矣。
现代文：孔子可说是知教，颜渊可说是善学了。
English: Confucius can be said to be knowledgeable, Yan Yuan can be said to be good at learning.

古文：《老子》曰： 学道日损。 
现代文：《老子》说： 学道日损。 
English: "Lao Zi" said: "Learning the Tao is a waste of time."

古文：损犹约也。
现代文：损，就是约的意思。
English: "Kaso" means "agreement."

古文：又曰： 绝学无忧。 
现代文：又说： 绝学无忧。 
English: He also said: "There is no need to worry about studying.

古文：绝末学也。
现代文：绝，指末学。
English: "Absolute" refers to the last year of high school.

古文：今《费》、《左》二学，无有本师，而多反异，先帝前世，有疑于此，故《京氏》虽立，辄复见废。
现代文：现在《费》、《左》二学，没有本师，而多反异，先帝前世，对这便有坏疑，所以《京氏》虽立，马上又被废掉。
English: Now, "Fei" and "Zhao" are two schools of thought, and there is no real division, but many contradictions, the previous emperor's previous life, there is a bad doubt about this, so although "Keiji" was established, it was immediately abolished.

古文：疑道不可由，疑事不可行。
现代文：疑道不可遵循，疑事不可实行。
English: Doubtful paths cannot be followed, and doubtful things cannot be put into practice.

古文：《诗》、《书》之作，其来已久。
现代文：《诗书》的兴起，由来已经很久。
English: The rise of the "poem book" has been around for a long time.

古文：孔子尚周流游观，至于如命，自卫反鲁，乃正《雅》、《颂》。
现代文：孔子尚且周游列国，到了五十岁，才从卫国回到鲁国，校正《雅》、《颂》。
English: Confucius also traveled around the countries, and at the age of fifty, he returned from the Great Patriotic War to the State of Lu to revise "Ya" and "Ode."

古文：今陛下草创天下，纪纲未定，虽设学官，无有弟子，《诗》、《书》不讲，礼乐不修，奏立《左》、《费》，非政急务，孔子曰： 攻乎异端，斯害也已。 
现代文：现在陛下草创天下，纪纲尚未定立，虽设学官，没有弟子，《诗书》不讲，礼乐不修，奏立《左氏》、《费氏》，不是当务之急。孔子说： 攻乎异端，斯害也已。 
English: Now that His Majesty has created the world, the syllabus has not yet been established, although there is a scholar, there is no disciple, the "Book of Poetry" is not spoken, the liturgy is not performed, and the establishment of "Zao" and "Fei" is not an urgent matter. Confucius said: Attacking heresy has already been done.

古文：传曰： 闻疑传疑，闻信传信，而尧、舜之道存。 
现代文：古书说 ：闻疑传疑，闻信传信，而尧舜之道存。 
English: An ancient book says: Suspicion breeds suspicion, belief breeds belief, and there is no way around it.

古文：愿陛下疑先帝之所疑，信先帝之所信，以示反本，明不专已。
现代文：愿陛下疑先帝之所疑，信先帝之所信，用来表示回到根本，也表明不专己。
English: May His Majesty doubt what the previous emperor doubted and believe what the previous emperor believed, which is used to express returning to the basics, and also to show that he is not self-serving.

古文：天下之事所以异者，以不一本也。《易》曰： 天下之动，贞夫一也。 
现代文：天下之事不同的原因，就在于根本不一致哩。《易》说： 天下之动，贞夫一也。 
English: The reason why things in the world are different is that they are fundamentally inconsistent. "Yi" said: The world is moving, and so is Sadafu.

古文：又曰： 正其本，万事理。 
现代文：又说 ：正其本，万事理。 
English: He also said, "Be true to yourself, everything is rational."

古文：《五经》之本自孔子始，谨奏《左氏》之失凡十四事。
现代文：《五经》的根本从孔子开始，谨奏《左氏》的错失共十四件事。 
English: The foundation of the Five Classics begins with Confucius, and there are a total of fourteen things that are missing from Zuo Shi.

古文：时难者以太史公多引《左氏》，升又上太史公违戾《五经》，谬孔子言，及《左氏春秋》不可录三十一事。
现代文：当时提出疑难的认为太史公多引《左氏》，范氏又上书说太史公违背《五经》，歪曲孔子的话，以及《左氏春秋》不可录三十一事。
English: At that time, doubts were raised that Taishigong quoted too much from Zuo, and Fan also wrote that Taishigong violated the Five Classics, distorted the words of Confucius, and that Zuo's Spring and Autumn could not record thirty-one things.

古文：诏以下博士。
现代文：诏书把他的意见下交给博士讨论。
English: The emperor sent his opinion to the doctor for discussion.

古文：后升为出妻所告，坐系，得出，还乡里。
现代文：后来范升被出妻所告，坐了牢，出狱后，回到乡里。
English: Later, Fan Sheng was sued by his ex-wife and went to prison. After he was released, he returned to the countryside.

古文：永平中，为聊城令，坐事免，卒于家。
现代文：永平年间，做聊城令，因事免职，死在家中。
English: During the Yongping era, he was the Liaocheng mayor, but was removed from office for some reason, and died at home.

古文：陈元字长孙，苍梧广信人也。
现代文：◆陈元传，陈元字长孙，苍梧广信人。
English: ◆Chen Yuan Chuan, Chen Yuan Zi's eldest grandson, is a great-great-grandson of Guangxin.

古文：父钦，习《左氏春秋》，事黎阳贾护，与刘歆同时而别自名家。
现代文：父亲陈钦，学习《左氏春秋》，师侍黎阳贾护，与刘歆同时而自成一家。
English: His father, Chen Qin, studied "The Spring and Autumn of Zuo," and his teacher was Li Yang Jia You, and they became a family at the same time.

古文：王莽从钦受《左氏》学，以钦为难将军。
现代文：王莽曾经从陈钦受《左氏》学，封陈钦为蕌难将军。
English: Wang Mang once learned from Chen Qin from "The Master of the Left" and appointed Chen Qin as the general of Xingnan.

古文：元少传父业，为之训诂，锐精覃思，至不与乡里通。
现代文：陈元少时传父亲的学业，为《左氏》作注解，集中精力思考，甚至不与乡里往来。
English: When Chen Yuan was young, he followed his father's study, annotated "Mr. Zuo," concentrated on thinking, and did not even go to the countryside.

古文：以父任为郎。
现代文：因父亲的职务而为郎。
English: Because of his father's position, he became a retainer.

古文：建武初，元与桓谭、杜林、郑兴俱为学者所宗。
现代文：建武初年，陈元与桓谭、杜林、郑兴都被当时学者认为正宗。
English: In the first year of Jianwu, Chen Yuan, along with Kuan Tan, Du Lin, and Zheng Xing, were all considered authentic by scholars at the time.

古文：时议欲立《左氏传》博士，范升奏以为《左氏》浅末，不宜立。
现代文：当时有人倡议想立《左氏传》博士，范升上奏认为《左氏》浅末，不该立。
English: At that time, some people proposed to set up a "Zao's Biography" doctorate, but Fan Sheng Shangxuo thought that "Zao's" was shallow and should not be set up.

古文：元闻之，乃诣阙上疏曰：陛下拨乱反正，文武并用，深愍经艺谬杂，真伪错乱，每临朝日，辄延群臣讲论圣道。
现代文：陈元听了，就上朝奏疏道： 陛下拨乱反正，文武并用，深感经艺谬误错杂，真伪难分，每临朝日，常请群臣议论圣道。
English: When Chen Yuan heard this, he went up to the emperor and said, "Your majesty is a man of justice, who uses both literature and martial arts. He is deeply aware that the scriptures and arts are full of fallacies and errors, and that truth and falsehood are inseparable. Every morning, he often invites his ministers to discuss the sacred path.

古文：知丘明至贤，亲受孔子，而《公羊》、《穀梁》传闻于后世，故诏立《左氏》，博询可否，示不专已，尽之群下也。
现代文：知道左丘明是极贤的人，亲受孔子教育，而《公羊》、《谷梁》传闻于后世，所以下诏立《左氏》，广泛征询意见，表示不专用己意，尽之群下。
English: Knowing that Zuo Qiuming was a very wise man, personally educated by Confucius, and that "Ram" and "Guliang" were rumored in later generations, he decided to publish "Zuo Shi" after extensive consultation, expressing that he did not want to be exclusive, but wanted to reach out to the masses.

古文：今论者沉溺所习，玩守旧闻，固执虚言传受之辞，以非亲见实事之道。
现代文：现在论者沉溺于自己所习的学问，玩守旧闻，固执虚言传受之辞，认为不是亲见实事之道。
English: The present-day theorists indulge in their own learning, play with the old news, stubbornly cling to the lies and hearsay, and believe that it is not the way to see the facts for themselves.

古文：《左氏》孤学少与，遂为异家之所复冒。
现代文：《左氏》个人钻研，少与别人通气，于是被异家掩盖。
English: "Mr. Zuo" studied hard on his own and rarely communicated with others, so he was covered up by a different family.

古文：夫至音不合众听，故伯牙绝弦；至宝不同众好，故卞和泣血。
现代文：最好的音乐不合众人听觉，所以伯牙绝弦；最好的宝石不被众人认知，所以卞和泣血。
English: The best music is not heard by the common people, so it is not played; the best gems are not recognized by the common people, so it is not played.

古文：仲尼圣德，而不容于世，况于竹帛余文，其为雷同者所排，固其宜也。
现代文：孔子圣人之德，而不容于当世。何况是竹帛余文，被雷同者所排斥，本是当然的啊！
English: The virtue of the sage Confucius is not tolerated in the modern world. Moreover, it is only natural that Bamboo Shoe Yuwen was ostracized by his peers.

古文：非陛下至明，孰能察之！臣元窃见博士范升等所议奏《左氏春秋》不可立，及太史公违戾凡四十五事。
现代文：不是陛下至明，谁能觉察出来。 臣见过范升博士所议奏《左氏春秋》不可立博士，和他列举太史公违戾共四十五件事。
English: If His Majesty is not very perceptive, who can detect it? The minister has seen Dr. Fan Sheng's recital of "The Spring and Autumn of the Zuo Clan" and listed a total of forty-five incidents of Taishigong's transgression.

古文：案升等所言，前后相违，皆断小文，黩微辞，以年数小差，掇为巨谬，遗脱纤微，指为大尤。抉瑕衅，掩其弘美，所谓 小辩破言，小言破道 者也。
现代文：按升等所言，前后相违，都是断截小文，吹毛求疵，因年数稍有出入，就指为大错误；遗漏一些小节，认为便是大缺失，挑剔毛病，掩盖弘美，正所谓 小辩破言，小言破道 的意思。
English: According to the words of the promotion, the contradiction between the front and the back are all truncated small articles, nitpicking, because there is a slight difference in the number of years, it is referred to as a big mistake; the omission of some subsections is considered to be a big defect, picking faults, covering up beauty, just as the so-called small debate, small words.

古文：升等又曰： 先帝不以《左氏》为经，故不置博士，后主所宜因袭。 
现代文：范升他们又说： 先帝不以左氏为经，故不置博士，后主所宜因袭。 
English: Fan Sheng, they also said: The former emperor did not take Zuo as his disciple, so he did not set up a doctorate, so it was appropriate for his successor to follow suit.

古文：臣愚以为若先帝所行而后主必行者，则盘庚不当迁于殷，周公不当营洛邑，陛下不当都山东也。
现代文：臣愚认为如果先帝所行而后主必须照办的话，那么盘庚不应迁到殷都去，周公也不应营洛阳，陛下也不应都山东了。
English: The vassal thought that if the former emperor did it and the latter had to do it, then Pan Geng should not move to Yindu, Zhou Gong should not go to Luoyang, and His Majesty should not go to Shandong.

古文：往者，孝武皇帝好《公羊》，卫太子好《穀梁》，有诏诏太子受《公羊》，不得受《梁》，孝宣皇帝在人间时，闻卫太子好《穀梁》，于是独学之。
现代文：过去，孝武皇帝好《公羊》，卫太子好《谷梁》，有诏书叫太子受《公羊》，不得受《公梁》。孝宣皇帝在世时，听说卫太子好《谷梁》，于是独自学习。
English: In the past, Emperor Xiaowu liked "Ram" and Crown Prince Wei liked "Guliang." There was an edict that the crown prince should receive "Ram" and not "Guliang." When Emperor Xiaoxuan was alive, he heard that Crown Prince Wei liked "Guliang," so he studied alone.

古文：及即位，为石渠论而《穀梁氏》兴，至今与《公羊》并存。
现代文：等到即位，在石渠讨论《五经》而《谷梁》之学兴起，至今与《公羊》学并存。
English: After the enthronement, the "Five Classics" were discussed in the stone canal, and the study of "Guliang" arose, which has coexisted with the study of "Ram" to this day.

古文：此先帝后帝各有所立，不必其相因也。
现代文：这就是先帝后帝各有所立，不必互相因袭哩。
English: This means that the former emperor and the later emperor each have their own position, and there is no need to attack each other.

古文：孔子曰，纯，俭，吾从众；至于拜下，则违之。
现代文：孔子说 ：纯，俭，吾从众；至于拜下，则违之。 
English: Confucius said: Pure, frugal, I follow the crowd; as for worship, it is contrary.

古文：夫明者独见，不惑于朱紫，听者独闻，不谬于清浊，故离朱不为巧眩移目，师旷不为新声易耳。
现代文：眼睛明的人有独见，不被朱紫所迷惑，会听者有独闻，不被清浊所混乱，所以离朱不被巧眩移目，师旷不被新声易耳。
English: Bright-eyed people have their own opinions and are not confused by the red and purple, and those who can listen have their own opinions and are not confused by the clear and crisp, so they are not dazzled by the red and black, and they are not confused by the new sound.

古文：方今干戈少弭，戎事略，留思圣艺，眷顾儒雅，采孔子拜下之义，卒渊圣独见之旨，分明白黑，建立《左氏》，解释先圣之积结，洮汰学者之累惑，使基业垂于万世，后进无复狐疑，则天下幸甚。臣元愚鄙，尝传师言。
现代文：现在干戈初停，战事略止，留心圣经贤传，考虑儒雅之学，采取孔子拜下的意思，卒渊圣人独见的宗旨，分明白黑，建立《左氏》学派，解释先圣的积结，淘汰学者的困惑，使基业垂于万代，后进不再狐疑，那么天下就幸甚了。 臣元愚昧，曾经向老师学过。
English: Now is the time to stop fighting, to stop warring, to pay attention to the wisdom of the Bible, to consider the study of Confucianism, to adopt the meaning of Confucius's worship, the purpose of the sage's unique vision, to distinguish between light and darkness, to establish the "Zao" school, to explain the accumulation of the first saint, to eliminate the confusion of scholars, to make the foundation fall to generations, and to move forward without suspicion, then the world will be more fortunate.

古文：如得以褐衣召见，俯伏庭下，诵孔氏之正道，理丘明之宿冤；若辞不合经，事不稽古，退就重诛，虽死之日，生之年也。
现代文：如果能以粗布衣召见，俯伏庭下，诵孔氏的正道，理丘明的宿冤；如果言辞不合经传，事情不合古人，退下来甘受重刑，即使死了，也等于活着。 
English: If you can be summoned in a coarse cloth, prostrate yourself before the court, and recite the righteous path of Kong and the fate of Li Qiuming; if the words are not in line with the scriptures, and the things are not in line with the ancients, and if you retreat and accept a heavy punishment, even if you die, you are still alive.

古文：书奏，下其议，范升复与元相辩难，凡十余上。
现代文：书奏上去，皇上批示交下边议论，范升又与陈元辩论起来，共十多次。
English: When the calligraphy was played, the emperor's order was passed down for discussion, and Fan Sheng debated with Chen Yuan more than a dozen times.

古文：帝卒立《左氏》学，太常选博士四人，元为第一。
现代文：皇上最后立了《左氏》学，太常选博士四人，陈元第一。
English: The emperor finally set up the "Zao" school, with four doctoral candidates, and Chen Yuan was the first.

古文：帝以元新忿争，乃用其次司隶从事李封，于是诸儒以《左氏》之立，论议哗，自公卿以下，数廷争之。
现代文：帝认为陈元刚参加争论，就用他作司录李封的从事，于是诸儒因《左氏》之立，议论纷纷，自公卿以下，几次在廷争论。
English: The emperor thought that as soon as Chen Yuan took part in the debate, he would use him to keep a record of Li Feng's activities. As a result, all the Confucian scholars, from the court nobles down, argued several times in court because of the establishment of "Zao Clan."

古文：会封病卒，《左氏》复废。
现代文：正逢李封病死，《左氏》之学又废止了。
English: Just as Li Feng died of illness, the study of "Mr. Zuo" was abolished.

古文：元以才高著名，辟司空李通府。
现代文：陈元因才高著名，提升到司空李通府。
English: Chen Yuan, renowned for his talent, was promoted to the position of the Secretary of the Air Force, Lintong Prefecture.

古文：时，大司农江冯上言，宜令司隶校尉督察三公。
现代文：当时大司农江冯上言，应叫司隶校尉督察三公。
English: At that time, the chief superintendent, Nongjiang Feng, said that the superintendent should be called Sili Lieutenant Inspector Sangong.

古文：事下三府。
现代文：事情下达三府。
English: The matter was referred to the three prefectures.

古文：元上疏曰：臣闻师臣者帝，宾臣者霸。
现代文：陈元上疏道 ：臣听说以臣为师的能为帝，以臣为宾者能称霸。
English: Chen Yuan Shang Soda: I have heard that those who have you as a teacher can become emperors, and those who have you as a guest can become rulers.

古文：故武王以太公为师，齐桓以夷吾为仲父。
现代文：所以武王用太公为师，齐桓公用管夷吾为仲父。
English: Therefore, King Wu used Taigong as his teacher, and King Qi used Guan Er as his mentor.

古文：孔子曰： 百官总己听于冢宰。 
现代文：孔子说 ：百官总己听于冢宰。 
English: Confucius said, "All the officials obey the magistrate."

古文：近则高帝优相国之礼，太宗假宰辅之权。及亡新王莽，遭汉中衰，专操国柄，以偷天下，况已自喻，不信群臣。
现代文：近代汉高帝有优待相国之礼，太宗从丞相手中救出邓通叫做 假权 ，到了王莽篡位，汉室中衰，专操国柄，窃得天下，专凭己意，不信群臣。
English: In modern times, the Emperor of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Gao, had the privilege of treating his fellow countrymen well. Emperor Taizong rescued Duntong from his rival, called "False Power." Wang Mang usurped the throne, the Han dynasty fell into decline, monopolized the national character, stole the world, relied solely on his own will, and did not trust the courtiers.

古文：夺公辅之任，损宰相之威，以刺举为明，徼讦为直。
现代文：夺公辅之任，损害宰相之威，以揭发别人为明，攻人之短为直。
English: To seize the post of vice-premier, to undermine the authority of the prime minister, to expose others, and to attack others.

古文：至乃陪仆告其君长，子弟变其父兄，罔密法峻，大臣无所措手足。
现代文：以至陪仆控告其君长，子弟违背其父兄，网密法峻，大臣无所措手足。
English: So much so that the attendant accused his sovereign, the son disobeyed his father and brother, the net was tight and the law was strict, and the minister was at a loss.

古文：然不能禁董忠之谋，身为世戮。
现代文：然而不能阻止董忠的反叛，本身被杀害。
English: However, Dong Zhong's rebellion could not be stopped and he himself was killed.

古文：故人君患在自骄，不患骄臣；失在自任，不在任人。
现代文：所以人君患在自己骄傲，不患有骄臣；失在自任，不在任人。
English: Therefore, people suffer from pride in themselves, not from arrogance; they suffer from self-responsibility, not from others.

古文：是以文王有日昊之劳，周公执吐握之恭，不闻其崇刺举，务督察也。
现代文：因此文王有日昊吃饭之劳，周公有吐饣甫握发之恭，没听说有什么提倡揭发，加强督察的作法。
English: As a result, King Wen has to work hard every day, and Zhou Gong has to work hard every day. I have not heard of any advocacy to expose and strengthen the practice of inspectors.

古文：方今四方尚扰，天下未一，百姓观听，咸张耳目。
现代文：当前四方还不平靖，天下不够统一，百姓都在观望，耳目张得大大的。
English: At present, the four parties are still not pacified, the world is not unified enough, the people are watching, and their ears are wide open.

古文：陛下宜修文武之圣典，袭祖宗之遗德，劳心下士，屈节待贤，诚不宜使有司察公辅之名。
现代文：陛下应修文武的圣典，继承祖宗的遗德，劳心下士，屈节待贤，但不应使有司监察公辅之名。 
English: His Majesty should revere the sacred scriptures of literature and martial arts, inherit the legacy of his ancestors, be a hard-working corporal, and be a virtuous man, but he should not have a secretary supervise the name of the public assistant.

古文：帝从之，宣下其议。
现代文：皇帝听从了，把他的建议发下去。
English: The emperor obeyed and sent his suggestion on.

古文：李通罢，元后复辟司徒欧阳歙府，数陈当世便事、郊庙之礼，帝不能用。
现代文：李通罢官后，陈元又提拔到司徒欧阳歙府，几次陈述当世事务，郊庙之礼，皇帝不能采用。
English: After Li Tong was dismissed from his post, Chen Yuan was promoted to the Ouyang Prefecture of the State Council. He made several statements on current affairs, and the emperor could not accept the gift of a suburban temple.

古文：以病去，年老，卒于家。
现代文：因病离职，年老，死在家中。
English: Left office due to illness, aged, died at home.

古文：子坚卿，有文章。贾逵字景伯，扶风平陵人也。
现代文：◆贾逵传，贾逵，字景伯，扶风平陵人。
English: ◆Jia Yu Chuan, Jia Yu, Zi Jing Bo, Fu Feng Pingling Ren.

古文：九世祖谊，文帝时为梁王太傅。
现代文：九世祖贾谊，汉文帝时做过梁王的老师。
English: The ninth generation ancestor, Han Wendi was a teacher of King Liang.

古文：曾祖父光，为常山太守，宣帝时以吏二千石自洛阳徙焉。
现代文：曾祖父贾光，做过常山太守，汉宣帝时以吏二千石，从洛阳迁去。
English: His great-grandfather Jia Guang, who had been the governor of Changshan, moved from Luoyang when Emperor Han Xuan ruled the country with a stipend of 2,000 koku.

古文：父徽，从刘歆受《左氏春秋》，兼习《国语》、《周官》，又受《古文尚书》于涂恽，学《毛诗》于谢曼卿，作《左氏条例》二十一篇。
现代文：父亲贾徽，从刘歆学习《左氏春秋》，还学习《国语》、《周官》，又向涂恽学习古文《尚书》，向谢曼卿学习《毛诗》，著有《左氏条例》二十一篇。
English: His father, Jia Hui, learned "The Spring and Autumn of the Zuo Clan" from Liu Bei, as well as "National Language" and "Zhou Guan." He also learned the ancient text "Shang Shu" from Tu You, and "Mao Shi" from Lord Sheman. He was the author of twenty-one "Regulations of the Zuo Clan."

古文：逵悉传父业，弱冠能诵《左氏传》及《五经》本文，以《大夏侯尚书》教授，虽为古学，兼通五家《穀梁》之说。
现代文：贾逵完全继承父亲的学业，二十岁时能读《左氏传》和《五经》本文，用《大夏侯尚书》教授门徒，虽然是古学，兼通五家《谷梁》之学说。
English: Jia Wei completely inherited his father's studies. At the age of twenty, he was able to read the text of "The Biography of Zuo" and "The Five Classics," and taught his disciples with "The Great Xia Hou Shang Shu." Although it was ancient studies, it also included the teachings of the five schools of "Gu Liang."

古文：自为兒童，常在太学，不通人间事。
现代文：从儿童时起，就常在太学，不了解外面的事务。
English: As a child, he was always in school and did not know about the outside world.

古文：身长八尺二寸，诸儒为之语曰： 问事不休贾长头。 
现代文：贾逵身长八尺二寸，一些儒生取笑他说： 问事不休贾长头。 
English: Some Confucian scholars made fun of him, saying, "Jia Yao is eight feet two inches tall.

古文：性恺悌，多智思，俶傥有大节。
现代文：意思是说贾逵个头很高，但对外面情况不了解，喜欢问这问那。
English: It means that Jia Juan is very tall, but he doesn't understand the outside situation and likes to ask questions.

古文：尤明《左氏传》、《国语》，为之《解诂》五十一篇，永平中，上疏献之。
现代文：他性格快活，平易，很聪明，喜思考，与众不同，很大方。他特别对《左氏传》、《国语》有研究，写有这两部书的《解诂》五十一篇，永平年间，上疏献给皇帝。
English: He was cheerful, easy-going, very clever, liked to think, was different from others, and was very generous. He especially studied "The Biography of Zuo" and "The Chinese Language," and wrote fifty-one articles of "Deciphering the Deciphering," which included these two books. During the Yongping era, Shang Su dedicated it to the emperor.

古文：显宗重其书，写藏秘馆。
现代文：显宗很重视，令人将它抄写一份藏在秘馆里面。
English: Emperor Xuanzong attached great importance to it, and had a copy of it copied and kept in a secret library.

古文：时，有神雀集宫殿宫府，冠羽有五采色，帝异之，以问临邑侯刘复，复不能对，荐逵博物多识，帝乃召见逵，问之。对曰： 昔武王终父之业，鸑鷟在岐，宣帝威怀戎狄，神雀仍集，此胡降之征也。 
现代文：当时有神雀飞到宫殿官府，头上羽毛有五彩之色，皇帝很觉奇怪，问临邑侯刘复是什么原故，刘复答不上来，推荐贾逵说他知识很渊博，皇帝于是召见贾逵，问他是什么原故，贾逵答道： 从前周武王完成父亲的基业，凤凰出现在岐山，汉宣帝威信很高，戎狄归顺，神雀也连续出现过，这是胡人将降顺的预兆哩。 
English: At that time, there was a divine sparrow flying to the palace and government office. The feathers on its head were multicolored. The emperor felt very strange. He asked Liu Fu, the lord of Linyi, what the reason was. Liu Fu could not answer. He recommended Jia Wei, saying that he was very knowledgeable. The emperor then summoned Jia Wei and asked him what the reason was. Jia Wei replied: From the previous day, King Zhou Wu completed his father's foundation, the phoenix appeared in Qishan, the Han Emperor's prestige was very high, the emperor surrendered, and the divine sparrow also appeared continuously. This was an omen that the Hu people

古文：帝敕兰台给笔札，使用《神雀颂》，拜为郎，与班固并校秘书，应对左右。
现代文：皇帝命令兰台史官拿出笔札，叫贾逵写一篇《神雀赋》，并拜贾逵为郎，与班固一道任校秘书，留在皇帝身边备咨询。
English: The emperor ordered the Lantai historian to take out a pen and tell Jia Yu to write a "Divine Sparrow Fu," and to worship Jia Yu as a son, to serve as a school secretary together with Ban Gu, and to stay with the emperor to prepare for consultation.

古文：肃宗立，降意儒术，特好《古文尚书》、《左氏传》。
现代文：肃宗即位，推崇儒家学术，特别喜欢《古文尚书》、《左氏传》。
English: Su Zong ascended the throne, respected Confucianism, and was particularly fond of "Kowen Shangshu" and "Zao Shi Chuan."

古文：建初元年，诏逵入讲北宫白虎观、南宫云台。
现代文：建初元年，诏进北宫白虎观、南宫云台讲学。
English: In the first year of Jian, he entered the White Tiger View of the North Palace and the Yuntai Lecture of the South Palace.

古文：帝善逵说，使发出《左氏传》大义长于二传者。
现代文：皇帝赞赏贾逵的讲法，要他发挥《左氏传》的大义比公羊、谷梁二传见长的地方。
English: The emperor appreciated Jia Jia's lecture, and asked him to give full play to the strengths of "The Tale of Zuo," "The Greater Than a Ram" and "The Tale of Gu Liang II."

古文：逵于是具条奏之曰：臣谨出《左氏》三十七事尤著明者，斯皆君臣之正义，父子之纪纲。
现代文：贾逵于是逐条奏明道： 臣谨挑选出《左氏传》三十事特别著名的地方，都是宣扬君为臣纲的正义，父为子纲的道理。
English: Jia Wei then sent a clear message one by one: The minister has carefully selected thirty particularly famous places in "The Biography of Zuo," all of which promote the justice of the prince as a vassal and the principle of the father as a son.

古文：其余同《公羊》者什有七八，或文简小异，无害大体。
现代文：其余十分之七八与《公羊传》相同，有的文字简略，小有差异，无伤大体。
English: The remaining seventy-eight tenths are the same as "The Ram's Tale," some of the characters are abbreviated, there are small differences, and there is no damage.

古文：至于祭仲、纪季、伍子胥、叔术之属，《左氏》义深于君父，《公羊》多任于权变，其相殊绝，固以甚远，而冤抑积久，莫肯分明。臣以永平中上言《左氏》与图谶合者，先帝不遗刍荛，省纳臣言，写其传诂，藏之秘书。
现代文：至如写到祭仲、纪季、伍子胥、叔术等人，《左氏》深刻发挥君臣的大义，《公羊》多认为是通权达变，这就相差很确定，但是冤抑太久，不能分清是非。 臣在永平年间曾经上书谈到《左氏传》中某些与图谶相合的地方，先帝没有遗弃刍荛之言，采纳了臣的话，由臣写出详细的讲解，藏在秘书处。
English: For example, he wrote about Saizhong, Ji Ji, Wu Zixuan, Shu Shu, and others. "Zao Shi" profoundly exerts the great righteousness of the monarch and the minister. "Ram" is mostly considered to be a transfer of power, which is a very definite difference, but the grievance has been suppressed for too long to distinguish right and wrong. During the Yongping years, the minister had written about some places in "Zao Shi Biography" that were compatible with Tu Shi. The former emperor did not abandon the words of the minister, adopted the words of the minister, and the minister wrote a detailed explanation and hid it in the secretariat.

古文：建平中，侍中刘歆欲立《左氏》，不先暴论大义，而轻移太常，恃其义长，诋挫诸儒，诸儒内怀不服，相与排之。
现代文：建平年间，侍中刘歆想立《左氏传》，但他不先摆出大义，而轻易地交给太常，自以为理由充足，能够挫败那些儒生，可儒生们内心不服，联合起来抵制。
English: During the Jianping era, the attendant Liu Xuan wanted to establish "The Biography of Zuo Shi Huang," but he did not first set up a great cause, but easily handed it over to Tai Chang, thinking that the reason was sufficient to defeat those Confucians, but the Confucians were not satisfied with their hearts and united to resist.

古文：孝哀皇帝重逆众心，故出歆为河内太守。
现代文：孝哀皇帝又迎合众人心理，所以刘歆做河内太守。
English: Emperor Xiao Ai also welcomed commoners, so Liu Bei became the governor of Hanoi.

古文：从是攻击《左氏》，遂为重仇。
现代文：从此大家攻击《左氏》，成为众矢之的。
English: Since then, everyone has attacked "Mr. Left" and it has become the target of many arrows.

古文：至光武皇帝，奋独见之明，兴立《左氏》、《穀梁》，会二家先师不晓图谶，故令中道而废。
现代文：到了光武皇帝，有独特的见地，兴立《左氏》、《谷梁》两家，恰巧两家先师不通晓图谶之学，所以半途而废了。
English: When Emperor Guangwu came, he had the unique insight to establish two schools, Zuo and Gu Liang. It just so happened that the two masters were not familiar with the study of calligraphy, so they gave up halfway.

古文：凡所以存先王之道者，要在安上理民也。
现代文：臣下认为凡是保存先王之道的书籍，要害在于安上理民。
English: In the opinion of his subjects, books that preserve the ways of the former king are the key to the stability of the people.

古文：今《左氏》崇君父，卑臣子，强干弱枝，劝善戒善，至明至切，至直至顺。
现代文：现在《左氏》推崇君父之道，卑视臣子，这是强干弱枝，劝痒戒恶，道理极为明白切当，直接顺理成章。
English: Now, "Mr. Zuo" promotes the way of the king and father, and despises the vassal. This is a strong and weak branch, exhorting itchiness and refraining from evil. The principle is extremely clear and appropriate, and it is directly logical.

古文：且三代异物，损益随时，故先帝博观异家，各有所采。
现代文：况且三代时不同事物，随时有所增减，所在先帝广泛观察各种学说，采取各家之长。
English: Moreover, things are different in the third generation, and there are increases and decreases at any time. The previous emperor observed a wide range of doctrines and adopted the strengths of each family.

古文：《易》有施、孟，复立梁丘，《尚书》欧阳，复有大小夏侯，今三传之异亦犹是也。
现代文：例如《易经》有了施、孟两家，又立梁丘氏；《尚书》有了欧阳一家，又有大小夏侯，现在三传各不相同，也是这个道理。
English: For example, "I Ching" has the Shih and Meng families, and the Liang Qiu clan; "Shang Shu" has the Ouyang family, and the Xia Hou family, and now the three versions are different, which is also the reason.

古文：又《五经》家皆无以证图谶明刘氏为尧后者，而《左氏》独有明文。
现代文：又《五经》各家都不能用图谶来证明刘氏是尧帝的后代，而《左氏》独有明文能够说明。
English: In addition, all the "Five Classics" cannot use pictures to prove that the Liu clan is a descendant of Emperor Xuan, but the "Zao clan" has a unique clear text to explain.

古文：《五经》家皆言颛顼代黄帝，而尧不得为火德。
现代文：《五经》家都说颛顼代替黄帝，而尧不得为火德。
English: The "Five Classics" all say that the dragonfly replaces the Yellow Emperor, but the dragonfly must not be the fire virtue.

古文：《左氏》以为少昊代黄帝，即图谶所谓帝宣也。
现代文：但《左氏》却以为少昊代替黄帝，就是图谶所讲的帝宣。
English: However, "Mr. Zuo" thought that Xiao Hao replacing the Yellow Emperor was the imperial proclamation preached by Tu Youyou.

古文：如令尧不得为火，则汉不得为赤。其所发明，补益实多。陛下通天然之明，建大圣之本，改元正历，垂万世则，是以麟凤百数，嘉瑞杂。犹朝夕恪勤，游情《六艺》，研机综微，靡不审核。
现代文：如果尧不得为火，那么汉就不得为赤，它所发明的见解，很能补充一些道理。 陛下通晓天然的聪明，建大圣的根本，更改年号，修正历法，为万代做出典范，因此，麟凤百数呈说，好兆头多次出现，陛下仍然早晚勤勉，钻研《六艺》，对细微之处，也无不审理核实。
English: If the dragon cannot become fire, then the Han cannot become red, and the opinion it invents can very well supplement some truths. His Majesty is familiar with the wisdom of nature, the foundation of building a great saint, changing the year number, revising the calendar, and making a model for all generations. Therefore, Lin Fenghong said that good omens have appeared many times, and His Majesty is still diligent in the morning and evening, studying the "Six Arts," and verifying and verifying the details.

古文：若复留意废学，以广圣见，庶几无所遗失矣。
现代文：如果再留心一些废弃的学问，增广一些见闻，那就没有什么遗失的了 。 
English: If you pay attention to some abandoned knowledge and expand some knowledge, then there is nothing lost.

古文：书奏，帝嘉之，赐布五百匹，衣一袭，令逵自选《公羊》严、颜诸生高才者二十人，教以《左氏》，与简纸经传各一通。
现代文：书奏上去，皇帝十分嘉奖，赏赐布五百匹，衣一套，命令贾逵自己挑选《公羊》学派的严、颜诸生有高才的二十人，以《左氏传》作教材，给予竹简和纸写的经传各一通。
English: When the calligraphy performance was over, the emperor was very appreciative and rewarded Jia Jia with 500 pieces of cloth and a set of clothes. He ordered Jia Jia to choose 20 highly talented scholars from the "Ram" school of Yan and Yan, to use "The Biography of Zuo" as a teaching material, and to give each of them a copy of the Bamboo Cuttings and the Paper Biography.

古文：逵母常有疾，帝欲加赐，以校书例多，特以钱二十万，使颍阳侯马防与之。
现代文：贾逵的母亲经常有病，皇帝想加赐一些财物，因为校书例多，特地拿了钱二十万，派颍阳侯马防送去。
English: Jia Yao's mother was often ill, and the emperor wanted to give her some more property, because there were many school books. He specially took 200,000 yuan and sent it to Hou Ma Fang in Shenyang.

古文：谓防曰： 贾逵母病，此子无人事于外，屡空则从孤竹之子于首阳山矣。 
现代文：对马防说： 贾逵的母亲病了，他与外界没有什么交往，再穷困就会像伯夷、叔齐在首阳山那样做饿鬼了。 
English: He said to Ma Fang: Jia Yao's mother is ill, he has little contact with the outside world, and if he is poor, he will become a hungry ghost like Bo Yi and Shu Qi in Shouyang Mountain.

古文：逵数为帝言《古文尚书》与经传《尔雅》诂训相应，诏令撰《欧阳》、《大小夏侯尚书古文》同异。
现代文：贾逵多次给皇帝讲《古文尚书》与经传《尔雅》的诂训相呼应，皇帝下诏书命他著《欧阳、大小夏侯尚书古文同异》。
English: Jia Wei repeatedly told the emperor that the "Ancient Texts of the Shang Dynasty" echoed the teachings of the "Er Ya," and the emperor ordered him to write "The Ouyang, the Great and Small Xia Hou, and the Ancient Texts of the Shang Dynasty are the same."

古文：逵集为三卷，帝善之。
现代文：贾逵集中写了三卷，帝认为很好。
English: Jia Zhang wrote three volumes of the collection, and the emperor thought it was very good.

古文：复令撰《齐》、《鲁》、《韩诗》与《毛氏》异同。
现代文：又叫他写《齐、鲁、韩诗与〈毛氏〉异同》，并作《周官解故》。
English: He also asked him to write "Qi, Lu, Han poetry and [Mao's] similarities and differences" and "Zhou Guan's explanation of the past."

古文：并作《周官解故》。迁逵为卫士令。
现代文：提升贾逵作卫士令。
English: Jia Rong was promoted to the rank of bodyguard.

古文：八年，乃诏诸儒各选高才生，受《左氏》、《穀梁春秋》、《古文尚书》、《毛诗》，由是四经遂行于世。
现代文：八年，下诏诸儒各选高才生学习《左氏》、《谷梁春秋》、《古文尚书》、《毛诗》，从此四经便流行于世。
English: In the following eight years, all Confucian scholars selected high school students to study "The Zuo Clan," "The Spring and Autumn of Gu Liang," "Ancient Texts," and "Mao Poetry." Since then, the Four Classics have been popular in the world.

古文：皆拜逵所选弟子及门生为千乘王国郎，朝夕受业黄门署，学者皆欣欣羡慕焉。
现代文：都封贾逵所选弟子和门生作千乘王国郎，早晚在黄门署学习，学者都很羡慕。
English: The disciples and disciples selected by Dufeng Jiaqi to be the King of the Thousand Kingdoms study at the Yellow Gate sooner or later, and scholars are very envious.

古文：和帝即位，永元三年，以逵为左中郎将。
现代文：和帝即位，永元三年，任命贾逵作左中郎将。
English: Emperor He ascended to the throne, and in the third year of the Yong Yuan Dynasty, he appointed Jia Ye as the left middle commander.

古文：八年，复为侍中，领骑都尉。内备帷幄，兼领秘书近署，甚见信用。
现代文：八年，又作侍中，领骑都尉内备帷幄，兼管秘书近署，很被信用。
English: For eight years, he also served as an attendant, leading the cavalry captain to prepare the curtain, and also in charge of the secretary's office, and was very trusted.

古文：逵所著经传义诂及论难百余万言，又作诗、颂、诔、书、连珠、酒令凡九篇，学者宗之，后世称为通儒。
现代文：贾逵所著经传义诂及论难百多万字，又作诗、谏、书、连珠、酒令共九篇。学者很崇拜他，后代称他为通儒。
English: Jia Yao wrote more than a million words on the sutras and the discussion of difficulties, as well as a total of nine poems, poems, books, rhymes and rhymes. Scholars adored him, and future generations called him a connoisseur.

古文：桓谭以不善谶流亡，郑兴以逊辞仅免，贾逵能附会文致，最差贵显。
现代文：但是他为人不大注意小节，当代对此有些讥讽，所以没有做成大官。永元十三年死去，时年七十二岁。
English: However, he did not pay much attention to detail, which was mocked by his contemporaries, so he did not become a high-ranking official. Yongyuan died 13 years later, at the age of 72.

古文：世主以此论学，悲矣哉！张霸字伯饶，蜀郡成都人也。
现代文：朝廷怜悯他，封他两个儿子作太子舍人。◆张霸传，张霸字伯饶，蜀郡成都人。
English: The imperial court took pity on him and made his two sons princes. ◆ Zhang Ba Chuan, Zhang Ba Zi Bo Rao, from Chengdu, Shu County.

古文：年数岁而知孝让，虽出入饮食，自然合礼，乡人号为 张曾子 。
现代文：年龄很小就知道孝顺和谦让，即使出入饮食，自然合乎礼节，乡里人称他叫 张曾子 。
English: At a very young age, he knew filial piety and humility. Even when he went out to eat, he naturally followed etiquette. The villagers called him Zhang Zengzi.

古文：七岁通《春秋》，复欲进余经，父母曰： 汝小未能也 ，霸曰 我饶为之 ，故字曰 饶 焉。
现代文：七岁时就通晓《春秋》，又想进修其他经书，父母说 你年纪小不能学那么多 ，张霸说 我饶为之 ，所以又取名叫 饶 。
English: At the age of seven, he was familiar with "Spring and Autumn" and wanted to study other scriptures. His parents said, "You can't study so much when you are young." Zhang Ba said, "I am Rao," so he was also named Rao.

古文：后就长水校尉樊受《严氏公羊春秋》，遂博览《五经》。
现代文：后来跟长水校尉樊鲦学习《严氏公羊春秋》，于是博览《五经》。
English: Later, he studied "The Spring and Autumn of Yan Shi's Ram" with Changshui Lieutenant Zou, and then expounded "The Five Classics."

古文：诸生孙林、刘固、段著等慕之，各市宅其傍，以就学焉。
现代文：当时青年人孙林、刘固、段著等羡慕他，各人在张霸住室旁边买房子住下，以便向张学习。
English: At that time, young people such as Sun Lin, Liu Gu and Duan Zhuang admired him, and each of them bought a house next to Zhang Ba's living room to live in order to learn from Zhang.

古文：举孝廉光禄主事，稍迁，永元中为会稽太守，表用郡人处士顾奉、公孙松等。
现代文：张霸被推举为孝廉光禄勋之主事，不久又有升迁，永元年间做了会稽太守，上表录用郡人处士顾奉、公孙松等。
English: Zhang Ba was selected as the chief of the honor of the honor of the filial piety, and soon he was promoted again. During the Yongyuan period, he served as the auditor-general, and the above table was used by the county people's officers Gu Bong and Gong Sun Song.

古文：奉后为颍川太守，松为司隶校尉，并有名称。
现代文：顾奉后来做了颍川太守，公孙松做了司隶校尉，都很著名。
English: Gu Bong later became the governor of Hechuan, and Gong Sun Song became the captain of Sili, both of which are famous.

古文：其余有业行者，皆见擢用。
现代文：其余有专业特长的，都被提拔录用。
English: The rest, who had professional strengths, were all promoted and hired.

古文：郡中争厉志节，习经者以千数，道路但闻诵声
现代文：郡中人从此都争相磨砺志节，学习经书的上千数人，道路上都听见诵读声。
English: Since then, people in the county have been competing to celebrate the festival, thousands of people have studied scriptures, and chanting voices can be heard on the road.

古文：初，霸以樊删《严氏春秋》犹多繁辞，乃减定为二十万言，更名《张氏学》。
现代文：起初，张霸认为樊鲦删改《严氏春秋》还有许多繁辞，于是他又减定为二十万字，改名《张氏学》。
English: At first, Zhang Ba thought that there were still a lot of complicated words in Yan's Spring and Autumn, so he reduced it to 200,000 words and renamed it "Zhang's Learning."

古文：霸始到越，贼未解，郡界不宁，乃移书开购，明用信赏，贼遂束手归附，不烦士卒之力。
现代文：张霸开始到越，贼人尚未解除，郡界不安宁，于是张霸便发布公文悬赏，明用信实，贼人就束手归附，不烦士卒之力。
English: Zhang Ba began to arrive in Yue, the bandits had not yet been disbanded, and the county border was uneasy, so Zhang Ba issued a public document offering a reward, and the bandits returned with their hands tied, not bothering the soldiers.

古文：童谣曰： 弃我戟，捐我矛，盗贼尽，吏皆休。 
现代文：童谣说： 弃我卓戈，捐我矛，盗贼尽，吏皆休。 
English: The nursery rhyme says: Abandon me, dragons, donate me, spears, thieves are done, all officials are dismissed.

古文：视事三年，谓掾史曰： 太守起自孤生，致位郡守。
现代文：张视事三年，对椽史说： 太守从孤儿出身，做到了郡守。
English: After three years of observing the situation, Zhang said to Zou Shi: The deputy governor was born as an orphan and became the county governor.

古文：盖日中则移，月满则亏。
现代文：大凡太阳正中就倾斜，月亮满后就亏损。
English: When the sun is at its zenith, it is tilted, and when the moon is full, it loses.

古文：老氏有言： 知足不辱。  
现代文：老子有句话： 知足不辱 。 
English: Lao Tzu has a saying: contentment is no disgrace.

古文：遂上病。
现代文：于是上书请病假。
English: So I applied for sick leave.

古文：后征，四迁为侍中。
现代文：后来又被征用，四次升迁做到侍中。
English: Later, he was requisitioned again and promoted four times to become a chamberlain.

古文：时皇后兄虎贲中郎将邓骘，当朝贵盛，闻霸名行，欲与为交，霸逡巡不答，众人笑其不识时务。
现代文：这时皇后之兄虎贲中郎将邓骘，是当朝贵盛，听到张霸的名气，想与他交朋友，张霸犹豫不作回答，众人笑他不识时务。
English: At this time, the queen's brother, Tigress's middle brother, sent Deng Ya, who was a noble in his day, to hear Zhang Ba's fame and wanted to make friends with him. Zhang Ba hesitated to answer, and everyone laughed at his ignorance of current affairs.

古文：后当为五更，会疾卒，年七十。
现代文：后来到了应当休养时，恰巧生病而死，年七十。
English: Later, when it was time to rest and recuperate, he happened to fall ill and died at the age of seventy.

古文：遗赖诸子曰： 昔延州使齐，子死嬴、博，因坎路侧，遂以葬焉。
现代文：临终前写遗书给儿子们道 ：从前延州季子出使齐国，儿子死在赢、博之间，就在坎坷的路侧，埋葬在那里。
English: Before his death, he wrote a suicide note to his sons, saying: Once upon a time, Yanzhou Qizi sent an envoy to Qi. His son died between Win and Bo, on the side of a rough road, and was buried there.

古文：今蜀道阻远，不宜归茔，可止此葬，足藏发齿而已。
现代文：现在蜀道阻远，不宜运归乡里，可埋在此处，够掩埋头发牙齿就够了。
English: Now Shu Road is far away, it is not suitable to be transported back to the countryside, it can be buried here, it is enough to bury the hair and teeth.

古文：务遵速朽，副我本心。
现代文：务必遵照速朽的原则，体现我的心愿。
English: It is imperative to follow the principle of fast decay and embody my wishes.

古文：人生一世，但当畏敬于人，若不善加己，直为受之。 
现代文：人生一世，应当受别人畏敬，如果不好好安排自己，简直自作自受。 
English: In one's lifetime, one should be revered by others. If one does not arrange oneself well, one is simply left to one's own devices.

古文：诸子承命，葬于河南梁县，因遂家焉。
现代文：儿子们遵照父命，将他葬于河南梁县，就在那里安了家。
English: The sons followed their father's orders and buried him in Liang County, Henan Province, where they made their home.

古文：将作大匠翟等与诸儒门人追录本行，谥曰宪文。
现代文：将作大匠翟酉甫等与诸儒门人追录他的生平行事，谥曰 宪文 。
English: He will act as a great master, Shifu, and other people of Confucianism to trace his life, starting with the Constitution.

