古文：武王伐殷。往伐归兽，识其政事，作《武成》。
现代文：武王征伐殷国，征伐归来把兽类放归山林，记下他的政事，作《武成》。
English: King Wu conquered Yin, returned from the conquest, released the animals into the mountains and forests, recorded his political affairs, and wrote "Wucheng."

古文：惟一月壬辰，旁死魄。
现代文：一月壬辰日，月亮大部分无光。
English: On January's Imjin Day, the moon is mostly without light.

古文：越翼日，癸巳，王朝步自周，于征伐商。
现代文：到明天癸巳日，武王早晨从周京出发，前往征伐殷国。
English: On the following day, King Wu left Zhoujing in the morning to conquer Yin.

古文：厥四月，哉生明，王来自商，至于丰。
现代文：四月间，月亮开始放出光辉，武王从商国归来，到了丰邑。
English: In April, the moon began to shine brightly, and King Wu returned from the country of merchants to Fengyi.

古文：乃偃武修文，归马于华山之阳，放牛于桃林之野，示天下弗服。
现代文：于是停止武备，施行文教，把战马放归华山的南面，把牛放回桃林的旷野，向天下表示不用它们。
English: Therefore, they stopped their military preparations, carried out literature and education, released their war horses to the south side of Huashan Mountain, and released their cattle to the wilderness of Taolin, showing the world that they did not need them.

古文：丁未，祀于周庙，邦甸、侯、卫，骏奔走，执豆、笾。
现代文：四月丁未日，武王在周庙举行祭祀，建国于甸服、侯服、卫服的诸侯都忙于奔走，陈设木豆、竹笾等祭器。
English: On the third day of the fourth month, King Wu held a religious service in the Zhou Temple. The princes who founded the country in Tianfu, Houfu and Weifu were busy running around, setting up wooden beans, bamboo shoots and other sacrificial vessels.

古文：越三日，庚戌，柴、望，大告武成。
现代文：到第三天庚戌日，举行柴祭来祭天，举行望祭来祭山川，大力宣告伐商武功的成就。
English: On the third day, Geng Zi Day, a firewood festival was held to worship the heavens, and a longing festival was held to worship the mountains and rivers, vigorously proclaiming the achievements of the war merchants.

古文：既生魄，庶邦冢君暨百工，受命于周。
现代文：月亮已经生出光辉的时候，众国诸侯和百官都到周京来接受王命。武王这样说： 啊！
English: When the moon had already given birth to its brilliance, all the princes and officials of various countries came to Zhoujing to accept the king's order. King Wu said: Ah!

古文：惟先王建邦启土，公刘克笃前烈，至于大王肇基王迹，王季其勤王家。
现代文：众位君侯。我的先王建立国家开辟疆土，公刘能修前人的功业。到了太王，开始经营王事。王季勤劳王家。
English: My predecessors established the country and opened up the territory, and Prince Liu was able to repair the work of his predecessors. When he became the great king, he began to run the royal affairs. Wang Ji diligently worked for the royal family.

古文：我文考文王克成厥勋，诞膺天命，以抚方夏。
现代文：我文考文王能够成就其功勋，大受天命，安抚四方和中夏。
English: I believe that King Wenkuo can achieve his meritorious deeds, be greatly blessed by heaven, and pacify the four directions and Central Asia.

古文：大邦畏其力，小邦怀其德。
现代文：大国畏惧他的威力，小国怀念他的恩德，诸侯归附九年而卒，大业没有完成。
English: Great nations fear his might, small nations remember his kindness. Princes died nine years after his accession, and his great work remains unfinished.

古文：惟九年，大统未集，予小子其承厥志。厎商之罪，告于皇天、后土、所过名山、大川，曰： 惟有道曾孙周王发，将有大正于商。
现代文：我小子将继承他的意愿。我把商纣的罪恶，曾经向皇天后土以及所经过的名山大川禀告说： 有道的曾孙周王姬发，对商国将有大事。
English: My son will carry on his wishes. I used to denounce the evils of the merchants to the empress dowager and the famous mountains and rivers that I passed by, saying, "My virtuous great-grandson, Zhou Wang Jifa, will do great things for the merchant country."

古文：今商王受无道，暴殄天物，害虐烝民，为天下逋逃主，萃渊薮。
现代文：现在商王纣残暴无道，弃绝天下百物，虐待众民。他是天下逃亡罪人的主人和他们聚集的渊薮。
English: Now, the mercantile king is cruel and ruthless, abandons all things under heaven, and mistreats all people. He is the master of the world's fugitive sinners and the source of their gathering.

古文：予小子既获仁人，敢祗承上帝，以遏乱略。
现代文：我小子得到了仁人志士以后，冒昧地敬承上天的意旨，以制止乱谋。
English: After my son received the title of "benevolent person," he had the temerity to follow the will of heaven to stop the chaos.

古文：华夏蛮貊，罔不率俾。恭天成命，肆予东征，绥厥士女。
现代文：华夏各族和蛮貊的人民，无不遵从，我奉了上天的美命，所以我向东征讨，安定那里的士女。
English: All the ethnic groups in China and the barbaric people all obeyed. I accepted the heavenly mandate, so I went to the East to fight and stabilize the women and men there.

古文：惟其士女，篚厥玄黄，昭我周王。
现代文：那里的士女，用竹筐装着他们的黑色黄色的丝绸，求见我周王。
English: The women and men there, carrying their black and yellow silk in bamboo baskets, asked to see me, King Zhou.

古文：天休震动，用附我大邑周。
现代文：他们被上天的休美震动了，因而归附了我大国周啊！
English: They were shaken by Heaven's Hu Mei, and thus became attached to our great country Zhou!

古文：惟尔有神，尚克相予以济兆民，无作神羞！
现代文：你等神明庶几能够帮助我，来救助亿万老百姓，不要发生神明羞恶的事！ 
English: How many of you gods can help me, come to the rescue of hundreds of millions of ordinary people, so that the abominations of the gods do not occur!

古文：既戊午，师逾孟津。
现代文：到了戊午日，军队渡过孟津。
English: By the afternoon of the third day, the army had crossed the Mengjin Pass.

古文：癸亥，陈于商郊，俟天休命。
现代文：癸亥日，在商郊布好军阵，等待上天的美命。
English: On the Day of the Boar, they set up an army in the outskirts of Shang and waited for the good fortune of heaven.

古文：甲子昧爽，受率其旅若林，会于牧野。
现代文：甲子日清早，商纣率领他如林的军队，来到牧野会战。
English: In the early morning of the 6th day of the 6th month, Shangguan led his forest-like army to the Battle of Makino.

古文：罔有敌于我师，前途倒戈，攻于后以北，血流漂杵。
现代文：他的军队对我军没有抵抗，前面的士卒反戈向后面攻击，因而大败，血流之多简直可以漂起木杵。
English: His army offered no resistance to ours. The soldiers in front turned and attacked the rear, resulting in a crushing defeat. There was so much bloodshed that it could have floated a raft.

古文：一戎衣，天下大定。
现代文：一举讨伐殷商，而天下大安了。
English: In one fell swoop, the merchants were defeated, and the world was at peace.

古文：乃反商政，政由旧。
现代文：我于是反掉商王的恶政，政策由旧。
English: I therefore overthrew the evil government of the merchant kings, and the old policy prevailed.

古文：释箕子囚，封比干墓，式商容闾。
现代文：解除箕子的囚禁，修治比干的坟墓，致敬于商容的里门。
English: Release the prisoners, repair the tombs, and pay homage to the inner gate of Shangrong.

古文：散鹿台之财，发钜桥之粟，大赉于四海，而万姓悦服。 
现代文：散发鹿台的财货，发放鉅桥的粟，向四海施行大赏，天下万民都心悦诚服。 
English: Distribute the wealth and goods of Lutetia, distribute the poppies of Qianqiao, and implement the grand reward to the four seas. All the people in the world are sincerely pleased.

古文：列爵惟五，分土惟三。
现代文：武王设立爵位为五等，区分封地为三等。
English: King Wu established the peerage to be of the fifth class and the division of fiefs to be of the third class.

古文：建官惟贤，位事惟能。
现代文：建立官长依据贤良，安置众吏依据才能。
English: The establishment of officials is based on virtue, and the placement of officials is based on ability.

古文：重民五教，惟食、丧、祭。惇信明义，崇德报功。
现代文：注重人民的五常之教和民食、丧葬、祭祀，重视诚信，讲明道义；崇重有德的，报答有功的。
English: Pay attention to the people's five constant teachings and folk food, funerals, and sacrifices, pay attention to integrity, and teach morality; respect the virtuous, and reward the meritorious.

古文：垂拱而天下治。
现代文：于是武王垂衣拱手而天下安治了。
English: As a result, King Wu abdicated and the country was pacified.

