古文：东阳夜怪录
现代文：东阳夜怪录
English: Dongyang Nightmare

古文：前进士王洙字学源，其先琅琊人，元和十三年春擢第。
现代文：前进士王洙字学源，他的先人是琅琊人，唐宪宗元和十三年春应举考中。
English: Wang Xizhi Xueyuan, a progressive scholar, and his predecessors were Xiongren, Tang Xian Zongyuan and the 13th year of the Spring Festival.

古文：尝居邹鲁间名山习业。
现代文：王洙曾经住在邹鲁之间的名山中修习学业。
English: Wang Yao used to live in the famous mountains between Yilu to study.

古文：洙自云，前四年时，因随籍入贡，暮次荥阳逆旅。
现代文：王洙自己说，四年前，乡试考中了贡士，随着名单进京参加会试。
English: Wang Yao himself said that four years ago, he passed the township examination and entered Beijing to participate in the examination with the list.

古文：值彭城客秀才成自虚者，以家事不得就举，言旋故里，遇洙，因话辛勤往复之意。
现代文：黄昏时投宿于荥阳的旅馆中。正赶上家住彭城的客人秀才成自虚，因为家庭的事情不能参加考试，准备回故乡。成自虚碰到我王洙后，便谈起了辛辛苦苦往返于路途上的事。
English: At dusk, he stayed at a hotel in Poyang. He was catching up with a guest from his home in Pengcheng. Since he couldn't take the exam because of family matters, he was preparing to return to his hometown. When he met my wife, he talked about the hard work on the road.

古文：自虚字致本，语及人间目睹之异。
现代文：自虚字叫致本，谈到了在人世间亲眼看到的奇怪的事情。
English: Zi Huanzi called Zi Ben and talked about the strange things he saw with his own eyes on earth.

古文：是岁，自虚十有一月八日东还，翼翌日，到渭南县，方属阴曀，不知时之早晚。
现代文：那一年，成自虚十一月八日回东边去。第二天，到达了渭南县，正是阴沉多风的天气，也看不出时间的早晚。
English: That year, Cheng Zihu went back to the east on November 8. The next day, he arrived in Yinan County. It was a gloomy and windy weather, and he couldn't tell the time.

古文：县宰黎谓留饮数巡，自虚恃所乘壮，乃命僮仆辎重，悉令先于赤水店俟宿，聊踟蹰焉。
现代文：县宰黎谓留住自虚喝了几巡酒。自虚仗着坐骑健壮，就让大小仆人们携带着东西全都先到赤水店等候住宿。
English: County Zaili said that he had drunk a few rounds of wine to keep himself happy. Since he was proud of being able to ride a horse, he let the servants of all sizes bring their things to the Chakusui store first to wait for accommodation.

古文：东出县郭门，则阴风刮地，飞雪雾天。
现代文：自己姑且在此处逗留一会儿。成自虚向东出了县的外城门，阴冷的风就在地上刮起来，雪花飘舞，天气昏濛濛的。
English: Allowing myself to linger here for a moment, I made my way out of the outer gate of the county to the east. A cold wind was blowing on the ground, snowflakes were flying, and the weather was gloomy.

古文：行未数里，迨将昏黑。
现代文：走了还不到几里路，天就要黑了。
English: It's only a few miles away, and it's getting dark.

古文：自虚僮仆，既悉令前去，道上又行人已绝，无可问程，至是不知所届矣。
现代文：自虚的大小仆人已经都让他们先走了，路上又没有一个行人，想打听路也找不到人，到了这个地步成自虚也不知是到了什么地方。
English: Self-deprecating servants of all sizes have let them go first, there is not a single pedestrian on the road, and if you want to ask for directions, you can't find anyone. At this point, you don't know where you are.

古文：路出东阳驿南，寻赤水谷口道，去驿不三四里，有下坞，林月依微，略辨佛庙。
现代文：继续前行，经过东阳驿的南面，寻找赤水谷口的道。距离东阳驿不到三四里的地方，有个下坞，树林和月亮依稀隐约，大体上可以看出是一座佛寺。
English: Continue on, passing the southern side of Dongyang Pass, looking for the road to the mouth of the Red Water Valley. Less than three or four miles from Dongyang Pass, there is a dock, the woods and the moon are faintly faint, and it can be seen that it is a Buddhist temple.

古文：自虚启扉，投身突入，雪努愈甚。
现代文：自虚推开了门，一闪而进，这时雪下得更大了。
English: I pushed the door open and walked in. The snow was getting heavier.

古文：自虚窃意佛宇之居，有住僧，将求委焉，则策马入。
现代文：自虚心想，供奉佛的庙宇，一定住有和尚，于是打算求他们给个托身之处，就打马进入。
English: He humbly thought that there must be monks living in the temple dedicated to Buddha, so he planned to ask them to give him a place to stay, so he rode in.

古文：其后才认北横数间空屋，寂无灯烛。
现代文：进去之后才看到北面横着好几间空屋，但静悄悄的，也没有灯火。
English: Only after entering did I see several empty houses to the north, but they were quiet and there were no lights.

古文：久之倾听，微似有人喘息声，遂系马于西面柱，连问 院主和尚，今夜慈悲相救。 
现代文：仔细听了半天，似乎有微微喘气声。于是把马拴在西面柱子上，连续喊了几遍： 请主持和尚今晚发发慈悲救救我。 
English: After listening carefully for half a day, there seemed to be a slight panting sound. So he tied his horse to the west pillar and shouted several times in a row: Please, presiding monk, show mercy tonight and save me.

古文：徐闻人应： 老病僧智高在此。适僮仆已出使村中教化，无从以致火烛。
现代文：慢慢地听到有答话的声音： 老病和尚智高在这里，刚好让仆人们都出去到村中化缘去了，没法弄来灯火。
English: Slowly he heard a voice reply: "Here is the old sick monk Zhigao. He just had his servants go out to the village to end their lives. They couldn't get any lights.

古文：雪若是，复当深夜，客何为者？
现代文：雪下得这样大，又赶上深夜，客人你是干什么的？
English: It's snowing so hard, and it's late at night. What are you doing as a guest?

古文：自何而来？
现代文：从什么地方来？
English: Where are you from?

古文：四绝亲邻，何以取济？
现代文：周围又没有亲戚邻居，怎能得到他们的帮助？
English: There are no relatives or neighbours around, how can I get help from them?

古文：今夕脱不恶其病秽，且此相就，则免暴露。
现代文：今天晚上如果不厌恶我有病肮脏，暂且就在此住一宿，以免露宿野外。
English: Tonight, if you don't hate me for being sick and dirty, stay here for a night to avoid sleeping out in the open.

古文：兼撤所藉刍槁分用，委质可矣。 
现代文：我再把我铺的秸草分给你一些，在上面躺一躺还是可以的。 
English: I'll give you some of the reeds from my bed, and you can lie down on them.

古文：自虚他计既穷，闻此内亦颇喜。乃问 高公生缘何乡？
现代文：自虚已经没有别的办法，听到这话心里挺高兴，便询问： 高公出生于什么地方？
English: There was no other way to be self-deprecating, and I was very happy to hear this, so I asked: Where was Gao Gong born?

古文：何故栖此？
现代文：为什么住在这里？
English: Why live here?

古文：又俗姓云何？
现代文：俗姓什么？
English: What is your common name?

古文：既接恩容，当还审其出外。 
现代文：既接受了收留的恩惠，理当回问一下您的来历。 
English: Now that you've accepted the hospitality, it's time to ask about your background.

古文：曰： 贫道俗姓安，生在碛西。本因舍力，随缘来诣中国。
现代文：和尚回答说： 贫道俗姓安，出生在沙漠以西，本靠出力吃饭，随着机遇来到中国。
English: The monk replied, "I am a poor man with the common name of An. I was born in the west of the desert. I used to rely on my own efforts to eat. I came to China when I had the opportunity.

古文：到此未几，房院芜，秀才卒降，无以供待，不垂见怪为幸。 
现代文：到此时间还不长，房屋零落荒芜。秀才突然光临，没有什么用来供奉招待，望不要见怪才好。 
English: The time has not been long, the houses are scattered and deserted. The talented person suddenly comes, there is nothing to offer for the invitation, it is better not to look strange.

古文：自虚如此问答，颇忘前倦。
现代文：自虚跟老和尚这样问答，有些忘记了刚才的疲倦。
English: Some of them forget the tiredness of just now as they ask and answer questions with the old monk.

古文：乃谓高公曰： 方知探宝化城，如来非妄立喻，今高公是我导师矣。
现代文：于是对高公说： 我现在才知道到化城探宝的如来，不是胡乱比喻的。现在高公是我的导师了。
English: So he said to Gao Gong: I only now know that the treasure-hunting in Hwaseong is not a wild metaphor. Now Gao Gong is my mentor.

古文：高公本宗，固有如是降伏其心之教。 
现代文：高公的宗旨本来就是这样说服人的。 
English: This is how Gao Gong's purpose is to persuade people.

古文：俄则沓沓然若数人联步而至者，遂闻云： 极好雪，师丈在否？ 
现代文：不一会儿就听到匆匆忙忙的好像几个人同时走来的声音。于是听见说： 极好的雪，师丈在不在？ 
English: Soon he heard the sound of several people coming in a hurry, as if they were all coming at once. Then he heard someone say: "This is great snow. Is your master not here?"

古文：高公未应间，闻一人云： 曹长先行。 
现代文：高公还没来得及答应，又听到一个人说： 曹长先走。 
English: Before Gao Gong could say yes, he heard another person say: Cao Chang go first.

古文：或曰： 朱八丈合先行。 
现代文：有的说： 朱八老应该先走。 
English: Some said: Zhu Balao should go first.

古文：及闻人曰： 路其宽，曹长不合苦让，偕行可也。 
现代文：又听人说： 路很宽，曹长不该老让，大家一块走好了。 
English: Another listener said: The road is very wide, Cao Chang should not give up, let's walk together.

古文：自虚窃谓人多，私心益壮。
现代文：自虚私下说人这么多，更可以给自己壮胆了。
English: It's even more encouraging to be able to say that to so many people in private.

古文：有顷，即似悉造座隅矣。
现代文：过了一阵子，就觉得都坐到周围的座上了。
English: After a while, it felt like we were all sitting on the seats around us.

古文：内谓一人曰： 师丈此有宿客乎？ 
现代文：其中有人对另一个人说： 师丈这里有住宿的客人吗？ 
English: One of them said to the other, "Master, are there any guests staying here?"

古文：高公对曰： 适有客来诣宿耳。 
现代文：高公回答说： 刚才有个客人来这里投宿。 
English: Gao Gong replied, "Just now, a guest came to stay here.

古文：自虚昏昏然，莫审其形质，唯最前一人，俯檐映雪，仿佛若见着皂裘者，背及肋有搭白补处。
现代文：自虚糊里糊涂的，也看不清说话的人是什么样子。只有最前面的那个人，弯腰在屋檐下坐着，被雪映着，模模糊糊地看见好像穿着黑色的皮衣，后背和两肋处有白色的补丁。
English: Only the man at the front, sitting hunched under the eaves, reflected in the snow, looked vaguely like he was wearing a black fur coat, with white patches on his back and ribs.

古文：其人先发问自虚云： 客何故瑀瑀然犯雪，昏夜至此？ 
现代文：那个人首先向自虚发问说： 客人为什么孤零零地一个人夜晚冒着雪来到这里？ 
English: The man first asked spontaneously: Why did the guest come here alone at night, braving the snow?

古文：自虚则具以实告。
现代文：自虚把实情都告诉了他。
English: I told him the whole truth.

古文：其人因请自虚姓名，对曰： 进士成自虚。 
现代文：那个人于是询问自虚的姓名，自虚回答说： 进士成自虚。 
English: The man then asked for his name, to which he replied: "I'm a self-made man.

古文：自虚亦从而语曰： 暗中不可悉揖清扬，他日无以为子孙之旧，请各称其官及名氏。 
现代文：自虚也接着提议： 黑暗当中不能一一拜见各位清秀的面容，将来无法使子孙接续旧交情，所以请各报一下自己的官衔和姓名。 
English: Zi Hu also went on to suggest: It is not possible to see everyone's handsome faces one by one in the dark, and it will not be possible for descendants to continue old friendships in the future, so please report your official title and name.

古文：便闻一人云： 前河阴转运巡官，试左骁卫胄曹参军卢倚马。 
现代文：于是就听到一个人说： 原先的河阴转运巡官、任左骁卫胄曹参军卢倚马。 
English: Then I heard someone say: "The former Hekin transshipment inspector, Ren Zuoying Cao, has joined the army.

古文：次一人云： 桃林客，副轻车将军朱中正。 
现代文：然后又一个人说： 桃林客，副轻车将军朱中正。 
English: Then another person said: Taolin guest, deputy light vehicle general Zhu Zhongzheng.

古文：次一人曰： 去文姓敬。 
现代文：然后又一人说： 我名叫去文，姓敬。 
English: Then another said, "My name is Go Wen, my surname is Kei.

古文：次一人曰： 锐金姓奚。 
现代文：然后又一人说： 我叫锐金，姓奚。 
English: Then another person said: My name is Ruijin, my surname is Zhuo.

古文：此时则似周坐矣。初因成公应举，倚马旁及论文。
现代文：这时候好像各坐位上的人都报了官职和姓名了。因为开始时成公说过应举，卢倚马便谈论起文章来。
English: At this time, it seemed as if everyone in the audience had announced their official positions and names. Because Cheng Gong had said at the beginning that he should be promoted, Lu Yima began to talk about the article.

古文：倚马曰： 某儿童时，即闻人咏师丈聚雪为山诗，今犹记得。
现代文：倚马说： 我在儿童时代，就听人家吟诵过师丈堆雪为山的诗，现在还记得。
English: "When I was a child, I used to listen to people reciting the poem about my father-in-law making a mountain out of snow, and I still remember it now," said Isima.

古文：今夜景象，宛在目中，师丈有之乎？ 
现代文：今晚的景象，仿佛还在面前。师丈有这回事没有？ 
English: Tonight's scene seems to be still in front of me. Is this happening to my master?

古文：高公曰： 其词谓何？
现代文：高公说： 那词句写些什么，你说说看。 
English: Gao Gong said, "Tell me what that word means."

古文：试言之。 倚马曰： 所记云，谁家扫雪满庭前，万壑千峰在一拳。吾心不觉侵衣冷，曾向此中居几年。 
现代文：倚马说： 记得写的是： 谁家扫雪满庭前，万壑千峰在一拳。吾心不觉侵衣冷，曾向此中居几年。 
English: Lying on his horse, he said, "I remember writing, 'Before anyone sweeps the whole yard with snow, there are a thousand peaks in a single blow.' My heart unknowingly felt cold, and I lived in this state for several years.

古文：自虚茫然如失，口呿眸贻，尤所不测。
现代文：自虚一点也不懂得这诗的含义，心中如有所失，张着口，瞪着眼，非常出乎意料。
English: He did not understand the meaning of the poem at all, and if he lost something in his heart, he would open his mouth and stare, which was very unexpected.

古文：高公乃曰： 雪山是吾家山，往年偶见小儿聚雪，屹有峰峦山状，西望故国怅然，因作是诗。
现代文：高公于是说： 雪山是我家乡的山，往年偶尔看见小孩堆雪，高高耸立着，呈现出山和山峰的样子，西望故国心情惆怅，于是作了这首诗。
English: Gao Gong then said: "Snowy Mountain is the mountain of my hometown. In previous years, I occasionally saw children making snow, standing tall, showing the appearance of mountains and peaks. Looking west, I felt sad for my home country, so I wrote this poem.

古文：曹长大聪明，如何记得，贫道旧时恶句。
现代文：曹长很聪明，怎么还记得我过去的那不好的诗句？
English: Cao Chang is very clever. How can he remember that bad poem I wrote in the past?

古文：不因曹长诚念在口，实亦遗忘。 
现代文：要不是曹长实实在在的从口中念出，我实际上已经忘掉了。 
English: If Cao Chang hadn't actually read it out loud, I would have actually forgotten it.

古文：倚马曰： 师丈骋逸步于遐荒，脱尘机于维系，巍巍道德，可谓首出侪流。
现代文：倚马说： 师丈在荒远的地方，驰聘安闲的步伐，从束缚当中摆脱了尘世的罗网。高尚的道德，可以说在同辈中是最突出的。
English: Lying on his horse, he said: "My master and I walked at a leisurely pace in a desolate place, freed from the bondage of earthly traps. High morals, it can be said, are the most prominent among our peers.

古文：如小子之徒，望尘奔走，曷敢窥其高远哉？
现代文：像我这样的人，远远地在后面追赶，哪里敢希望赶上你呢？
English: How can someone like me, who is far behind, hope to catch up with you?

古文：倚马今春以公事到城，受性顽钝。阙下桂玉，煎迫不堪。
现代文：倚马我今年春天因公事到城里去，禀性愚顽迟钝，皇城下面，生活费用昂贵，煎熬得受不了，早晚困在旅馆里。
English: This spring, I went to the city on business. I was stubborn, stupid, and slow. Under the imperial city, the cost of living was expensive, and the suffering was unbearable. I was stuck in a hotel in the morning and evening.

古文：旦夕羁旅，虽勤劳夙夜，料入况微，负荷非轻，常惧刑责。
现代文：虽然从早到晚辛勤劳动，但俸禄外的物品收入情况很差，承担的活却不轻，经常害怕用刑责罚。
English: Although they work hard from morning to night, their income from goods other than salary is very poor. The work they undertake is not easy, and they are often afraid of being punished.

古文：近蒙本院转一虚衔，意在苦求脱免。
现代文：近来承蒙本院给我换了一个虚衔，用意在于努力求得免去沉重的负担。
English: Recently, thanks to our hospital, I was given a false title, with the intention of trying to get rid of a heavy burden.

古文：昨晚出长乐城下宿，自悲尘中劳役，慨然有山鹿野麋之志。
现代文：昨晚出去到长乐城下住宿，自己哀叹在人世间的劳役，很感慨地产生了离开人世，与野兽为伍的思想。
English: Last night, I went to stay at the foot of the Great Wall of China. I lamented the hard labor in the human world. With great emotion, I had the thought of leaving the human world and being with the beasts.

古文：因寄同侣，成两篇恶诗，对诸作者，辄欲口占，去放未敢。 
现代文：因此作了两首歪诗，寄给了同伴。对各位作者，就想口头上念一遍，但念不念没敢定。 
English: Therefore, I composed two distorted poems and sent them to my companions. I would like to read them out loud to each of the authors, but I am not sure whether I should read them or not.

古文：自虚曰： 今夕何夕，得闻佳句。 
现代文：自虚说： 今晚上是什么样的晚上，得以听到美妙的词句？ 
English: Self-deprecating: What kind of evening is this, to be able to hear wonderful words?

古文：倚马又谦曰： 不揆荒浅，况师丈文宗在此，敢呈丑拙邪？ 
现代文：倚马又谦让说： 没有估量空虚浅薄，况且师丈这文章宗师在这里，怎么敢献上又丑又拙劣的东西呢？ 
English: Leaning on his horse, he humbly said, "I didn't measure up to the emptiness and shallowness, and besides, my master, this article guru, is here, how dare I present something ugly and clumsy?

古文：自虚苦请曰： 愿闻，愿闻。 
现代文：自虚竭力请求说： 愿意听到，愿意听到！ 
English: He pleaded with all his might: I am willing to hear, I am willing to hear!

古文：倚马因朗吟其诗曰： 长安城东洛阳道，车轮不息尘浩浩。
现代文：倚马于是高声朗读他的诗道： 长安城东洛阳道，车轮不息尘浩浩。
English: So, he read aloud his poem: "On Dongluoyang Road in Chang'an City, the wheels never stop rolling.

古文：争利贪前竞着鞭，相逢尽是尘中老。
现代文：争利贪前竞着鞭，相逢尽是尘中老。
English: Competing for profit and greed, competing for the whip, the encounter is all in the dust.

古文：日晚长川不计程，离群独步不能鸣。
现代文：日晚长川不计程，离群独步不能鸣。
English: Day and night, the Nagakawa River does not calculate the journey, and the outliers can not sing.

古文：赖有青青河畔草，春来犹得慰羁情。 
现代文：赖有青青河畔草，春来犹得慰羁情。 
English: The grass along the banks of the Qingqing River is a great source of comfort in spring.

古文：合座咸曰： 太高作。 
现代文：座上的人全都说： 大作，高作。 
English: Everyone at the table said, "Great work, great work."

古文：倚马谦曰： 拙恶，拙恶。 
现代文：倚马谦虚地说： 拙劣不好！
English: Leaning on his horse, he said modestly: "Badly done is not good!"

古文：中正谓高公曰： 比闻朔漠之士，吟讽师丈佳句绝多，今此是颖川，况侧聆卢曹长所念，开洗昏鄙，意爽神清。
现代文：拙劣不好！ 中正对高公说： 近闻北方沙漠中的读书人，吟诵师丈佳句的极多。现在这里是颖川，况且在旁边听到卢曹长所念的，启发糊涂，洗刷浅薄，使人精神清爽。
English: It's not bad! Zhong Zheng said to Gao Gong: Recently, I heard that there are a lot of readers in the northern deserts, chanting the teacher's good words. Now here is Yingchuan, and moreover, I heard Lu Cao Chang's recitation next to me, enlightening the muddled, washing the shallow, refreshing the spirit.

古文：新制的多，满座渴咏，岂不能见示三两首，以沃群瞩？ 
现代文：新作确实多，在座的都渴望吟诵吟诵，高公难道不能向我们展示三两首，来满足大家的愿望吗？ 
English: There are indeed many new works, and everyone here is eager to chant and chant. Couldn't Gao Gong show us three or two pieces to satisfy everyone's wishes?

古文：高公请俟他日。
现代文：高公请求等以后再吟。
English: The chanting will be repeated later at the request of Gao Gong.

古文：中正又曰： 眷彼名公悉至，何惜兔园。雅论高谈，抑一时之盛事。
现代文：中正又说： 考虑到这些名人全来了，有什么舍不得这美好的地方，来一番高雅的议论，或许也是一时的佳话。
English: Zhong Zheng also said, "Considering that all these celebrities have come, what is there not to like about this beautiful place, to have an elegant discussion, perhaps it is also a momentary fairy tale.

古文：今去市肆若远，夜艾兴余，杯觞固不可求，炮炙无由而致，宾主礼阙，惭恧空多。
现代文：现在距离市场店铺这么远，夜晚美好，兴致很高，酒是办不到了，烤肉也没办法弄来，宾主之礼有缺憾，感到很惭愧。
English: Now it is so far away from the market shops, the night is beautiful, the interest is high, the wine is not available, the barbecue can not be obtained, the host's gift has shortcomings, I feel very ashamed.

古文：吾辈方以观心朵颐，而诸公通宵无以充腹，赧然何补？ 
现代文：我们正在观察心性，准备大嚼，各位也通宵没有吃什么东西，真感到羞愧，但又无补于事。 
English: We're watching our tempers, getting ready to chow down, and you've been up all night with nothing to eat, which is a shame, but it doesn't help.

古文：高公曰： 吾闻嘉话可以忘乎饥渴，秪如八郎，力济生人，动循轨辙，攻城犒士，为己所长。但以十二因缘，皆从觞起；茫茫苦海，烦恼随生。
现代文：高公说： 我听说美好的谈话可使人忘记饥渴。只说八郎吧，努力帮助世人，活动都遵循规定，攻下城池犒劳士兵，是他最擅长的事，只因为十二因缘都从喝酒开始，茫茫无尽的尘世，烦恼随着它不断产生。
English: Gao Gong said: I have heard that a good conversation can make people forget hunger and thirst. Let's just talk about Hachiro, he strives to help the world, his activities are all in accordance with regulations, capturing cities and laboring soldiers is what he is best at, just because the twelve causes and conditions all begin with drinking, the boundless world, and troubles continue to arise with it.

古文：何地而可见菩提？
现代文：什么地方可以见到菩提？
English: Where can I see Bodhisattvas?

古文：何门而得离火宅？ 
现代文：从哪个门可以离开火宅？ 
English: Which door can you use to leave a burning house?

古文：中正对曰： 以愚所谓，覆辙相寻，轮回恶道；先后报应，事甚分明。
现代文：中正回答说： 翻车的事一件接着一件，人们在罪恶的路上周而复始，报应或先或后，但一定出现。
English: Zhong Zheng replied, "One car accident follows another, and people go around and around on the road of sin. Retribution may come sooner or later, but it will surely come.

古文：引领修行，义归于此。 
现代文：这样的事都是很清楚的，引导修行，意义就在于这。 
English: Such things are very clear, and the meaning of guiding practice lies in this.

古文：高公大笑，乃曰： 释氏尚其清净，道成则为正觉，觉则佛也。
现代文：高公大笑，然后说： 佛教崇尚清净，修行成功就成为 正觉 ， 觉 就是 佛 的意思。
English: Gao Gong laughed loudly, and then said: Buddhism advocates purity, and successful practice becomes right awareness, and awareness is the meaning of Buddha.

古文：如八郎向来之谈，深得之矣。 
现代文：像八郎刚才的议论，就深得其中奥妙。 
English: Like Hachiro's discussion just now, it is deeply mysterious.

古文：倚马大笑。
现代文：倚马大笑。
English: He rode his horse and laughed.

古文：自虚又曰： 适来朱将军再三有请和尚新制，在小生下情，实愿观宝。
现代文：自虚又说： 刚才朱将军再三请和尚展示新作，按小生的心愿，实在是愿意观赏宝物。
English: Self-deprecatingly, he also said: Just now, General Zhu Zhu repeatedly asked the monk to show a new work. According to Xiao Sheng's wish, he is really willing to watch the treasure.

古文：和尚岂以自虚远客，非我法中而见鄙之乎？
现代文：和尚难道因为我是远处来客，不是佛门中人而鄙视我吗？
English: Does the monk despise me because I am a visitor from afar and not a member of the Buddhist priesthood?

古文：高公曰： 深荷秀才苦请，事则难于固违，况老僧残疾衰羸，习读久废，章句之道，本非所长，却是朱八无端挑抉吾短。然于病中偶有两篇自述，匠石能听之乎？ 曰： 愿闻。 
现代文：不过老衲残年有病，衰老、瘦弱、早就不读书了。诗文方面的学问，本来不擅长，却是朱八毫无道理的揭我的短处，然而在病中偶有两首叙述自身情况的诗，文章高手愿意听吗？ 众人回答说： 愿意听。 
English: However, Lao Zang was ill for the rest of his life, he was old and frail, and had long since stopped reading. He was not good at poetry, but Zhu Bata had no reason to expose his shortcomings. However, when he was ill, he occasionally wrote two poems describing his own situation. Would a good writer like to listen to them? People replied: I would like to listen to them.

古文：其诗曰： 拥褐藏名无定踪，流沙千里度衰容。
现代文：那诗说： 拥褐藏名无定踪，流沙千里度衰容。
English: The poem says: There is no trace of a brown-skinned Tibetan name, and the quicksand is thousands of miles away.

古文：传得南宗心地后，此身应便老双峰。
现代文：传得南宗心地后，此身应便老双峰 。 为有阎浮珍重因。
English: According to Nan Zongxin, this body should be the old Twin Peaks. It is a rare and important reason.

古文：为有阎浮珍重因，远离西国赴咸秦。
现代文：远离西国赴咸秦。
English: Far away from the West, to Hamchin.

古文：自从无力休行道，且作头陀不系身。 
现代文：自从无力休行道，且作头陀不系身。 
English: He has been unable to walk since the accident, and his head is not attached to his body.

古文：又闻满座称好声。
现代文：念完后，听到座上的人全都叫好，过了好久还没平静下来。
English: After the reading, I heard everyone in the audience cheering, and it was a long time before they calmed down.

古文：移时不定，去文忽于座内云： 昔王子猷访戴安道于山阴，雪夜皎然，及门而返，遂传何必见戴之论。当时皆重逸兴，今成君可谓以文会友，下视袁安、蒋诩。
现代文：去文忽然在座上说： 从前王子猷到山阴去拜访戴安道，雪天，晚上很明亮，王子猷到了门口没进去就返回来了，于是留下了 何必见戴 的议论，当时都看重脱俗的雅兴，今天成君可说是以文会友，品格比袁安、蒋诩还高。
English: To Wen suddenly said on the seat: Once upon a time, Prince Zou went to the mountain shade to visit Dian Dao. It was snowy and the evening was very bright. When Prince Zou arrived at the door, he did not go in and returned, so he left behind the discussion of why he had to see Dai. At that time, they all valued the refined elegance. Today, Cheng Jun can be said to be a member of Zouwen, and his character is higher than Yuan An and Jiang Chen.

古文：吾少年时，颇负隽气，性好鹰鹯，曾于此时，畋游驰骋。
现代文：我少年时代，对自己的才气颇为自负，性情喜欢玩鹰鹯，曾在那个时候，骑马奔驰打猎游乐。
English: When I was a boy, I was quite proud of my talent, and I liked to play falconry. At that time, I used to ride a Mercedes to go hunting.

古文：吾故林在长安之巽维，御宿川之东畤。
现代文：我的故乡在长安的东南方，御宿川的东田寺。
English: My hometown is in the southeastern part of Chang'an, near the Higashida-ji Temple on the Onjuku River.

古文：咏雪有献曹州房一篇，不觉诗狂所攻，辄污泥高鉴耳。
现代文：咏雪诗有《献曹州房》一篇，不知不觉被诗兴所激，恐怕会玷污你们高明的鉴赏力。
English: There is a "Dedication to Caozhou Room" in Xuexue's poem, which is unknowingly inspired by poetry, and I am afraid it will tarnish your sophisticated appreciation.

古文：因吟诗曰： 爱此飘飖六出公，轻琼洽絮舞长空。
现代文：我的诗是： 爱此飘摇六出公，轻琼洽絮舞长空。
English: My poem is: Love this wafting six out of the public, light Qiong Chaozhou dance the long sky.

古文：当时正逐秦丞相，腾踯川原喜北风。
现代文：当时正逐秦丞相，腾踯川原喜北风。
English: At that time, the prime minister of the Qin Dynasty, Tengchong Chuan Yuan, was succeeding the North Wind.

古文：献诗讫，曹州房颇甚赏仆此诗，因难云： 呼雪为公，得无检束乎？ 
现代文：献此诗后，曹州房很欣赏我这首诗，但出难题，说： 把雪称为 公 ，该不会有失检点约束吧？ 
English: After presenting this poem, Cao Zhufang appreciated my poem very much, but there was a problem, saying: Calling snow a public, should there be a misconduct point constraint?

古文：余遂征古人尚有呼竹为君，后贤以为名论，用以证之。
现代文：我于是征引古人中还有称竹为 君 的，后代的贤人还认为是有名的说法，用这个例子来证明我的诗是言之有据的。
English: I then invoked the ancient saying that bamboo is also called jun, which later generations of sages also considered to be a famous saying, and used this example to prove that my poem was well-founded.

古文：曹州房结舌，莫知所对。
现代文：曹州房张口结舌，无法驳斥。
English: Caozhou Fang was speechless, unable to refute.

古文：然曹州房素非知诗者，乌大尝谓吾曰： 难得臭味同。
现代文：然而曹州房平素并不是一个懂得诗的人，乌大曾经对我说： 难得臭味相同。
English: However, Caozhou Fang Ping Su is not a person who understands poetry. Wu Da once said to me: It is rare that the smell is the same.

古文：斯言不妄。
现代文：这话并不是没有根据的。
English: This is not without foundation.

古文：今涉彼远官，参东州军事，相去数千。
现代文：现在到那远处做官，参与东州军事，距此地数千里。
English: Now, I am thousands of miles away from this place, working as an official and participating in the military of Dongzhou.

古文：苗十气候哑吒。凭恃群亲，索人承事。
现代文：苗十态度暧昧，依赖亲戚们，选人奉行职务。
English: Miao ten is ambiguous, relies on relatives, and selects people to carry out duties.

古文：鲁无君子者，斯焉取诸？ 
现代文：鲁地没有君子，那么到哪里去找君子呢？ 
English: There are no gentlemen in Ludi, so where can you find a gentleman?

古文：锐金曰： 安敢当。
现代文：锐金说： 怎么敢承受。
English: Ruijin said, "How dare you bear it."

古文：不见苗生几日？ 
现代文：不见苗生几天了？ 
English: How long has it been since I've seen my seedlings?

古文：曰： 涉旬矣，然则苗子何在？ 
现代文：说： 已经十天了。那么，苗子在哪里呢？ 
English: And he said, It is the tenth day; and where are the seedlings?

古文：去文曰： 亦应非远。
现代文：去文说： 也不会太远。
English: Go Wen said, "It won't be too far."

古文：知吾辈会于此，计合解来。 
现代文：知道我们在这里聚会，估计他会知道来的。 
English: Knowing we were meeting here, I figured he'd know.

古文：居无几，苗生遽至。
现代文：过了不长时间，苗生突然来了。
English: After a short time, the seedlings suddenly appeared.

古文：去文伪为喜意，拊背曰： 适我愿兮。 
现代文：去文装作高兴的样子，拍着他的背说： 正合乎我的心愿哪！ 
English: She pretended to be happy, patted him on the back and said, "It's just what I wanted!"

古文：去文遂引苗生与自虚相揖，自虚先称名氏，苗生曰： 介立姓苗。 
现代文：去文于是引导着苗生跟自虚互相作揖见面。自虚先说了自己的姓名，苗生说： 我名叫介立姓苗。 
English: To Wen then led Miao Sheng and Zi Hu to meet each other. Zi Hu said his name first, and Miao Sheng said: My name is Jie Li, surname Miao.

古文：宾主相谕之词，颇甚稠沓。
现代文：宾主互相自我介绍的话，说得都不少。
English: When guests introduce themselves to each other, they say a lot.

古文：锐金居其侧曰： 此时则苦吟之矣，诸公皆由，老奚诗病又发，如何如何？ 
现代文：锐金坐在他们旁边说： 此时就努力吟诵它吧，各位都得轮到。老奚的诗病又犯了，怎么办？
English: Ruijin sat next to them and said, "At this time, try to recite it, you all have to take your turn. Lao Zi's poetry disease has struck again, what should we do?"

古文：自虚曰： 向者承奚生眷与之分非浅，何为尚吝瑰宝，大失所望？ 
现代文：怎么办？ 自虚说： 刚才承受奚生的器重赞美的情分不浅，为什么还舍不得珍奇的宝贝，令人非常失望？ 
English: What should I do? I said self-deprecatingly, "It's not a shallow emotion to receive the weight of the twins' praise just now. Why do I still have to put up with this rare treasure? It's very disappointing."

古文：锐金退而逡巡曰： 敢不贻广席一噱乎？ 
现代文：锐金退了几步犹犹豫豫地说： 这不是要留下大大的笑谈吗？ 
English: Ruijin took a few steps back and hesitantly said, "Isn't this about leaving behind a big joke?"

古文：辄念三篇近诗云： 舞镜争鸾彩，临场定鹘拳。
现代文：就念了三首近作： 舞镜争鸾彩，临场定鹘拳。
English: He read three of his recent works: Dance Mirror, and On-the-Spot Kickboxing.

古文：正思仙仗日，翘首仰楼前。养斗形如木，迎春质似泥。
现代文：正思仙仗日，翘首仰楼前 。 养斗形如木，迎春质似泥。
English: I am thinking about the day of the fairy battle, and I am looking up at the front of the building. The raising bucket is shaped like a tree, and the spring quality is like mud.

古文：信如风雨在，何惮迹卑栖。为脱田文难，常怀纪涓恩。
现代文：信如风雨在，何惮迹卑栖 。 为脱田文难，常怀纪涓恩。
English: Belief is like the wind and rain, what a cowardly way to live. For the difficulties in getting rid of Tianwen, always cherish the blessings.

古文：欲知野态，霜晓叫荒村。 
现代文：欲知疏野态，霜晓叫荒村。 
English: If you want to know the wild state, frost is called a barren village.

古文：锐金吟讫，暗中亦大闻称赏声。
现代文：锐金吟诵完了之后，黑暗中也很听到一些称赞欣赏的声音。
English: After the Ruijin chanting was over, some voices of praise and appreciation were also heard in the darkness.

古文：高公曰： 诸贤勿以武士见待朱将军，此公甚精名理，又善属文，而乃犹无所言，皮里臧否吾辈，抑将不可。
现代文：高公说： 各位贤士不要以武士的身份看待朱将军，此公很精通事理，又擅长写文章，却还没说什么话，肚子里恐在评论我们，这将是不可以的。
English: Gao Gong said, "Fellow sages, don't regard General Zhu as a samurai. This gentleman is very knowledgeable and good at writing articles, but he hasn't said anything yet. I'm afraid he's commenting on us from the pit of his stomach. This is unacceptable.

古文：况成君远客，一夕之聚，空门所谓多生有缘，宿鸟同树者也。
现代文：况且成君是远方的客人，一个晚上的聚会，佛门所谓的多世有缘，像同栖宿于一棵树上的鸟啊！
English: Moreover, Chengjun is a guest from far away, an evening party, the so-called multi-generation fate of the Buddhist gate, like a bird roosting in a tree!

古文：得不因此留异时之谈端哉？ 
现代文：能不借此机会留下将来的话头吗？ 
English: Can I take this opportunity to leave you with a message for the future?

古文：中正起曰： 师丈此言，乃与中正树荆棘耳。苟众情疑阻，敢不唯命是听。
现代文：中正站起来说： 师丈的这个话，是给我中正树立荆棘罢了，如果众人心里怀疑阻挠，怎敢不听从命令？
English: Zhong Zheng stood up and said, "Master's words are just a thorn in my side. If everyone suspects obstruction in their hearts, how dare they disobey orders?

古文：然卢探手作事，自贻伊戚，如何？ 
现代文：然而卢探手做事，是自寻烦恼，怎么办？ 
English: However, what should Detective Lu do when he finds himself in trouble?

古文：高公曰： 请诸贤静听。 
现代文：高公说： 请各位贤士静听。 
English: Gao Gong said, "Please listen carefully, all of you sages.

古文：中正诗曰： 乱鲁负虚名，游秦感宁生。
现代文：中正的诗说： 乱鲁负虚名，游秦感宁生。
English: Zhongzheng's poem said: "Randomness bears a false name, wandering Qin can feel tranquil."

古文：候惊丞相喘，用识葛卢鸣。黍稷滋农兴，轩车乏道情。
现代文：候惊丞相喘，用识葛庐鸣，黍稷滋农兴，轩车乏道情。
English: Xuan Zhenzhen is asthmatic, with the knowledge of Ge Yiming, Yan Zi Nong Xing, Xuan Che Biao Taoism.

古文：近来筋力退，一志在归耕。 
现代文：近来筋力衰，一志在归耕。 
English: Recently, my strength has been failing, and I am determined to return to farming.

古文：高公叹曰： 朱八文华若此，未离散秩，引驾者又何人哉？
现代文：高公叹息说： 朱八文章的文采已到这种程度，却还没有御去官职，配做引驾大师的还能有谁呢？
English: Gao Gong sighed and said, "The writing of Zhu Xi's article has reached such a level, but he has not yet left his official position. Who else is qualified to be a driving master?

古文：屈甚，屈甚。 
现代文：太委屈了！太委屈了！ 
English: I am so wronged! I am so wronged!

古文：倚马曰： 扶风二兄，偶有所系，吾家龟兹苍文毙甚，乐喧厌静，好事挥霍，兴在结束，勇于前驱。
现代文：倚马说： 扶风的二哥，被偶然的情况牵制。我们家在龟兹，灰白色花纹损坏很厉害，喜欢热闹，厌恶清静，喜做挥霍的事。兴趣在于装束打扮起来，勇敢地走在最前面。
English: Lying on the horse, he said, "The second brother of Fufeng is held back by accidental circumstances. Our family is in Guze, the gray-white pattern is badly damaged, he likes lively, hates quiet, and likes to do extravagant things. He is interested in dressing up and bravely walking in the forefront.

古文：此会不至，恨可知也。 
现代文：这次聚会二兄不能来，那遗憾是可想而知的。 
English: The second brother can't come to this party, and his regret is understandable.

古文：去文谓介立曰： 胃家兄弟，居处匪遥，莫往莫来，安用尚志。
现代文：去文对介立说： 胃家兄弟，住处离此不远，不去不来，使自己志向高尚还有什么用呢？
English: To Wen said to Jie Li, "Brother gastroenterologist, your residence is not far from here. If you don't go, you can't come. What's the use of trying to be noble?

古文：《诗》云： 朋友攸摄， 而使尚有遐心，必须折简见招，鄙意颇成其美。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 要辅佐朋友 ，你假如还有疏远他的意思，必须用简易的礼节而随便把它们招呼来。我的意思是很想成全这件好事。 
English: The Book of Songs says: "To help a friend, if you mean to alienate him, you must use simple courtesy and call them casually. I mean, I really want to accomplish this good deed."

古文：介立曰： 某本欲访胃大去，方以论文兴酣，不觉迟迟耳。
现代文：介立说： 我本想拜访胃老大去，刚才因为谈论文章谈得正高兴，不知不觉地就去得晚了。
English: Mediate said: I originally wanted to visit the chief of gastroenterology, but just now, because I was happy to talk about the article, I unknowingly went too late.

古文：敬君命予，今且请诸公不起，介立略到胃家即回。
现代文：你让我去，现在请各位暂且不要动，我介立稍去胃家，一会儿，马上就回来。
English: You asked me to go. Now, please don't move. I'll go to the gastroenterologist for a moment. I'll be right back.

古文：不然，便拉胃氏昆季同至，可乎？ 
现代文：要不，就拉着胃家兄弟一块来，可以吗？ 都说： 好。 
English: If not, can I bring my gastro brothers with me? They all said, "Okay."

古文：皆曰： 诺 。介立乃去。
现代文：介立于是去了。
English: The mediator then left.

古文：无何，去文于众前，窃是非介立曰： 蠢兹为人，有甚爪距。
现代文：过了不一会儿，去文在大家面前，评论介立的对错，说： 这人的为人很不谦虚，他有什么爪子？
English: After a short while, I went to Wen in front of everyone and commented on the rights and wrongs of mediation, saying: This person is very immodest, what claws does he have?

古文：颇闻洁廉，善主仓库。
现代文：很听到一些关于他谦洁，善于管理仓库的事迹。
English: I've heard a lot about how humble he is and how good he is at managing warehouses.

古文：其如蜡姑之丑，难以掩于物论何？ 
现代文：但是又能对像蜡蛄那样丑，难以被众人的议论所掩盖的事实怎么办呢？ 
English: But what can be done about a fact that is as ugly as a wax moth and difficult to conceal by public discussion?

古文：殊不知介立与胃氏相携而来，及门，瞥闻其说。
现代文：殊不知介立与胃氏兄弟已携手而来。
English: Unbeknownst to all, Mediate and the Magen brothers have come together.

古文：介立攘袂大怒曰： 天生苗介立，斗伯比之直下，得姓于楚远祖棼皇茹。
现代文：到了门口时，忽然听到了这话，介立挽起袖子，非常恼火地说： 老大生我苗介立，是楚国斗伯比的直系后裔，得姓于楚国的远祖棼皇茹。
English: When he arrived at the door, he suddenly heard these words, and he rolled up his sleeves and said with great annoyance: "I, Miao Jie Li, the eldest son, am a direct descendant of Tuo Bebi of the State of Chu, and was given the surname of the distant ancestor of the State of Chu, Xuan Wang Ru.

古文：分二十族，祀典配享，至于《礼经》。
现代文：共分二十族，我的祖先祭礼典礼时也配享，都写到《礼经》中了。
English: There are a total of twenty ethnic groups, which were also shared at the time of my ancestor's ceremony, and they are all written down in the "Book of Rites."

古文：奈何一敬去文，盘瓠之余，长细无别，非人伦所齿。
现代文：什么样的一个敬去文！是盘瓠的余种，尊贵与低贱没有区别，不合于人伦。
English: What kind of a respect for literature! It is the remnants of the entrenchment, there is no difference between the noble and the lowly, and it does not conform to human ethics.

古文：只合驯狎稚子，狞守酒旗，谄同妖狐，窃脂媚灶，安敢言人之长短。
现代文：只配乖乖地被小孩子戏耍，凶恶地守着酒幌子，像妖精狐狸那样谄媚，像窃脂鸟那样效劳巴结，怎么敢谈论别人的长处短处！
English: They only deserve to be obediently played with by children, to viciously guard the liquor hood, to be as charming as a fairy fox, to serve and flatter like a skimmer bird, how dare they talk about the strengths and weaknesses of others!

古文：我若不呈薄艺，敬子谓我咸秩无文，使诸人异日藐我。
现代文：我如果不显示一下我小小的本事，敬子会认为我俸禄全要了却没有文采，使各位将来看不起我。
English: If I don't show a little of my talent, everyone will look down on me in the future, thinking that I've spent all my salary and have no talent.

古文：今对师丈念一篇恶诗，且看如何？ 
现代文：现在我在师丈面前念一着劣诗，且看怎么样。
English: Now I recite a bad poem in front of my master and see how it goes.

古文：诗曰： 为惭食肉主恩深，日晏蟠蜿卧锦衾。
现代文：我的诗是： 为惭食肉主恩深，日晏蟠蜿卧锦衾。
English: My poem is: I am deeply grateful to my meat-eating master, the sun shines on me and I sleep soundly.

古文：且学志人知白黑，那将好爵动吾心。 
现代文：且学志人知白黑，那将好爵动吾心 。 
English: And scholars know white and black, that will be a good sign to move my heart.

古文：自虚颇甚佳叹。
现代文：自虚觉得不错，很赞叹。
English: I think it's good to be self-deprecating, it's admirable.

古文：去文曰： 卿不详本末，厚加矫诬。
现代文：去文说： 你不清楚事情的来龙去脉。
English: To Wen: You don't know the ins and outs of the situation.

古文：我实春秋向戌之后，卿以我为盘瓠樀，如辰阳比房，于吾殊所华阔。 
现代文：苗介立对我假借名义，狠狠地进行诬陷。我实际上是春秋时代向戍的后代。您把我当成盘瓠的后裔，像辰阳的那些百姓，对我来说太偏离事实了。 
English: I am actually a descendant of Xiang Yao in the Spring and Autumn Period. For you to think of me as a descendant of Huan Yao, like those people in Chenyang, is too far from the truth for me.

古文：中正深以两家献酬未绝为病，乃曰： 吾愿作宜僚以释二忿，可乎？
现代文：中正对两家不断互相攻击感到很头疼，就说： 我愿作个和事佬来消除你们二人的气愤，这样好吧？
English: Zhong Zheng was puzzled by the constant attacks between the two families, so he said: I would like to be a peacemaker to eliminate the anger of the two of you, is that okay?

古文：昔我逢丑父，实与向家棼皇，春秋时屡同盟会。
现代文：从前我祖逢丑父，实际上跟向家和棼皇都有交情，春秋时多次会见订立共同盟约。
English: Once upon a time, my ancestor had an ugly father. In fact, he had a friendship with Xiang Jia and Emperor Qian. They met many times in spring and autumn to conclude a common covenant.

古文：今座上有名客，二子何乃互毁祖宗？
现代文：现在座中有著名客人，你们二人为何竟然互相毁谤祖宗？
English: Now that we have a distinguished guest in the audience, why are the two of you slandering each other's ancestors?

古文：语中忽有绽露，是取笑于成公齿冷也。
现代文：如果话中忽然露出了破绽，是会被成公取笑瞧不起的。
English: If a flaw suddenly appeared in the speech, it would be ridiculed and looked down upon by Chenggong.

古文：且尽吟咏，固请息喧。 
现代文：暂且尽情作诗吟诵，请一定不要再吵吵嚷嚷。 
English: For the time being, please do your best to recite poetry, but please do not make any more noise.

古文：于是介立即引胃氏昆仲与自虚相见，初襜襜然若自色，二人来前，长曰胃藏瓠，次曰藏立。
现代文：于是介立就引导胃氏兄弟跟自虚相见。开头自虚颤抖着好像觉得自己变了脸色。二人来到面前，大的说叫胃藏瓠，二的说叫胃藏立。
English: Therefore, the mediator led the gastro brothers to meet the self-deception. At the beginning, the self-deception trembled as if he felt that his face had changed. The two came to the front, the big one said the stomach was hidden, and the second said the stomach was hidden.

古文：自虚亦称姓名。
现代文：自虚也报了姓名。
English: Zi Hu also gave his name.

古文：藏瓠又巡座云： 令兄令弟。 
现代文：藏瓠又绕座一圈说： 各位是我的好哥哥，好弟弟！ 
English: The Tibetan mastiff circled the table again and said, "You are my good brother, my good brother!

古文：介立乃于广众延誉胃氏昆弟： 潜迹草野，行著及于名族；上参列宿，亲密内达肝胆。
现代文：介立于是在大家面前宣传胃氏兄弟的荣誉： 隐居在荒草野外。品行卓著赶得上望族，上耸于星宿之间；兄弟亲密，肝胆相照。
English: The point is to advertise the honor of the gastro brothers in front of everyone: they live in seclusion outside the wild grass. Their behavior is outstanding enough to catch up with respectable people, and they rise among the stars; the brothers are close, and their hearts and stomachs are the same.

古文：况秦之八水，实贯天府，故林二十族，多是咸京。闻弟新有题旧业诗，时称甚美，如何得闻乎？ 
现代文：况且秦地八条河，实通天府，故乡二十族，多在咸阳城，听说弟弟有题旧业的诗，当时都说作得很好。
English: Moreover, Qin's Hachijohe, Shitong Tianfu, hometown of 20 ethnic groups, mostly in Xianyang City, heard that his brother had a poem on the old business, and it was well said at the time.

古文：藏瓠对曰： 小子谬厕宾筵，作者云集，欲出口吻，先增惭怍。
现代文：怎么样才能听到呢？ 藏瓠回答说： 我很不量力地参加了这次聚会，作者这么多，想念自己的作品，可是先觉得很惭愧。
English: The Tibetan mastiff replied, "I participated in this gathering with great difficulty, there are so many authors, I miss my own works, but at first I felt very ashamed.

古文：今不得已，尘汙诸贤耳目。
现代文：现在不得已，只好玷污各位贤士的耳目了。
English: Now we have no choice but to tarnish the eyes and ears of the sages.

古文：诗曰： 鸟鼠是家川，周王昔猎贤。
现代文：我的诗是： 鸟鼠是家川，周王昔猎贤。
English: My poem is: The bird and the mouse are the Ikawa, and King Zhou used to hunt the wise men.

古文：一从离子卯，应见海桑田 。 
现代文：一从离子卯，应见海桑田。 介立说： 好！
English: From Io to U, you should see the Sea of Kuwata. Kaede said: Good!

古文：介立称好： 弟他日必负重名，公道若存，斯文不朽。 
现代文：老弟将来一定会获得盛名。公道如果存在的话，这首诗也会流传不朽。 
English: If there is justice, this poem will also be immortalized.

古文：藏瓠敛躬谢曰： 藏瓠幽蛰所宜，幸陪群彦，兄揄扬太过，小子谬当重言，若负芒刺。 
现代文：藏瓠弯腰感谢说： 我藏瓠只适合隐居在幽暗的地方，今天陪侍各位俊才很感荣幸。老兄赞扬太过分了，我错误地接受这些很有分量的评价，真像芒刺在背。 
English: The Tibetan mastiff bent down to thank him and said, "I am only fit to live in seclusion in a dark place. It is an honor to accompany you fine people today. Dude, the praise is too much. I mistakenly accept these very weighty evaluations. It really is like a thorn in my back."

古文：座客皆笑。
现代文：听了这话，座中的客人都笑了起来。
English: Hearing this, the guests in the audience all burst into laughter.

古文：时自虚方聆诸客嘉什，不暇自念己文，但曰： 诸公清才绮靡，皆是目牛游刃。 
现代文：当时自虚正在聆听各位客人的佳作，没有工夫自己念自己的文章。只是说： 各位才能优秀，词句华艳，都是目无全牛，游刃有余。 
English: At that time, I was listening to the excellent works of the guests, and I did not have time to read my own article. I just said: You are excellent, the words are gorgeous, they are all flawless, and you are more than capable.

古文：中正将谓有讥，潜然遁去。
现代文：中正认为这话含有讥讽的意思，便暗中溜走了。
English: Zhong Zheng thought that the remark was meant to be ironic, so he secretly slipped away.

古文：高公求之不得，曰： 朱八不告而退，何也？ 
现代文：高公找中正找不到，说： 朱八不告诉一声就走了，怎么回事？ 
English: Gao Gong couldn't find him in the middle of looking for him, and said: Zhu Yao left without telling him, what's going on?

古文：倚马对曰： 朱八世与炮氏为仇，恶闻发硎之说而去耳。 
现代文：倚马回答说： 朱八世代与炮氏有仇，不愿听到 关于磨刀石 的话，因而离开了。 
English: Isima replied, "The eighth generation of Zhu had a grudge against the Gun clan, and did not want to hear about the sharpening stone, so he left."

古文：自虚谢不敏。
现代文：自虚道歉说自己不聪明。
English: Self-righteously apologizing for being unintelligent.

古文：此时去文独与自虚论诘，语自虚曰： 凡人行藏卷舒，君子尚其达节。
现代文：这时去文单独与自虚评论发问，去文对自虚说： 凡是人的行、止、收束、施展，君子崇尚的是有气节。
English: At this time, Zhuo Wen alone and Zi Hui commented and asked questions, and Zhuo Wen said to Zi Hui: For all human actions, cessation, contraction, and exertion, what a gentleman advocates is to have a temperament.

古文：摇尾求食，猛虎所以见几，或为知己吠鸣，不可以主人无德，而废斯义也。
现代文：摇尾求食，是猛虎看清形势的原因。有时为知己吠鸣，不可因为主人无德，而不讲义气。
English: The reason why a ferocious tiger sees the situation clearly is that it wags its tail in search of food. Sometimes it barks for its friends, but not because the owner is not virtuous.

古文：去文不才，亦有两篇言志奉呈。 
现代文：我去文没有才能，也有两篇表明志向的诗奉献于您面前。
English: I have no talent for writing, but I have two poems dedicated to you that show my ambition.

古文：诗曰： 事君同乐义同忧，那校糟糠满志休。
现代文：我的诗是： 事君同乐义同忧，那校糟糠满志休。
English: My poem is: "Things bring you joy, happiness, and sorrow. That school is full of waste."

古文：不是守株空待兔，终当逐鹿出林丘。 
现代文：不是守株空待免，终当逐鹿出林丘 。
English: It's not a case of standing by and waiting for the deer to come out of the hills.

古文： 少年尝负饥鹰用，内愿曾无宠鹤心。
现代文：少年尝负饥鹰用，内愿曾无宠鹤心。
English: The boy tried to use the hungry eagle, but he did not have a pet crane.

古文：秋草殴除思去宇，平原毛血兴从禽。 
现代文：秋草殴除思去宇，平原毛血兴从禽。 
English: The autumn grass is beating away the thoughts of the birds, and the plains are bleeding from the birds.

古文：自虚赏激无限，全忘一夕之苦，方欲自夸旧制，忽闻远寺撞钟。
现代文：自虚非常欣赏这二首诗，一晚上的辛苦全都忘了，正想夸耀自己原先的作品，忽然听到远处寺院里撞钟的声音。
English: He was very pleased with these two poems. He had forgotten all the hard work of the night, and was just about to show off his original work, when he suddenly heard the sound of a bell in a distant temple.

古文：则比膊鍧然声尽矣。
现代文：就觉得原先并列靠近的胳膊 哄 的一声，声音全没了。
English: I felt that the sound of my arms, which had been close together, snapping, was completely gone.

古文：注目略无所睹，但觉风雪透窗，臊秽扑鼻。
现代文：往各处一看毫无所见，只觉得风雪吹进窗内，腥臊扑鼻。
English: Everywhere I looked, I saw nothing. I only felt the wind and snow blowing into the window, and my nose was stuffed.

古文：唯窣飒如有动者，而厉声呼问，绝无由答。
现代文：只有轻微细碎的声音像有什么东西在活动，可是大声喊问，绝无回答。
English: There was only the faintest sound of something moving, but there was no answer to the loud shouting.

古文：自虚心神恍惚，未敢遽前扪撄。
现代文：自虚心神恍恍惚惚，不敢立刻向前摸碰。
English: In a daze of self-deprecation, he did not dare to move forward immediately.

古文：退寻所系之马，宛在屋之西隅，鞍鞯被雪，马则龁柱而立。
现代文：退出去寻找所拴的马，仿佛在屋子的西角落处，鞍子上盖上了一层雪，马站在那里啃着柱子。
English: He retreated to look for his horse, which seemed to be standing in the west corner of the room, its saddle covered with snow, swinging from a post.

古文：迟疑间，晓色已将辨物矣。
现代文：正在迟疑不定的期间，天已出现了曙色，几乎可以看清东西了。
English: While I was hesitating, the sky began to lighten and I could almost see things clearly.

古文：乃于屋壁之北，有橐驼一，贴腹跪足，儑耳龆口。
现代文：就在墙壁的北面看到一头骆驼，肚子贴着地面，小腿跪在那里微动着耳朵在倒嚼。
English: Just north of the wall, a camel can be seen, belly flat on the ground, calf kneeling there, ears twitching, chewing.

古文：自虚觉夜来之异，得以遍求之。
现代文：自虚似乎觉察到了夜晚的奇异。正好有时间可以各处普遍找一遍。
English: Self-deprecation seems to be aware of the strangeness of the night. There is just enough time to find the rhyme everywhere.

古文：室外北轩下，俄又见一瘁瘠乌驴，连脊有磨破三处，白毛茁然将满。
现代文：在室外的北窗下，不久就发现一头劳累疲惫的瘦黑驴，背上有连着三处磨破的地方，白毛几乎长满了全身。
English: Outside, under the north window, they soon found a thin black donkey, tired and exhausted, with three scuff marks on its back, and white hair almost all over its body.

古文：举视屋之北拱，微若振迅有物，乃见一老鸡蹲焉。
现代文：抬头看屋子北拱门外，微微像迅急摇动的什么东西。定睛一看，原来是一只老鸡蹲在那里。
English: Looking up at the north arch of the house, I saw something that looked like it was rapidly shaking. At first glance, it turned out to be an old chicken squatting there.

古文：前及设像佛宇塌座之北，东西有隙地数十步。牖下皆有彩画处，土人曾以麦稳之长者，积于其间，见一大驳猫儿眠于上。
现代文：往前到了摆设佛像的屋子坍塌的佛座的北面，东西有空地数十步，窗下都有彩色绘画的地方，当地人曾把麦秸中的较长的堆集在那地方，见一只大花猫正睡在那上面。
English: Moving forward to the north side of the collapsed Buddha's seat, there are dozens of steps from east to west, and there are places with colorful paintings under the windows. Locals had piled the longer ones in the straw in that place, and saw a big flower cat sleeping on top of it.

古文：咫尺又有盛饷田浆破瓠一，次有牧童所弃破笠一，自虚因蹴之，果获二刺猬，蠕然而动。
现代文：不远的地方又有一只住田里送饮料给人喝的破瓢，其次还有一顶牧童扔掉的破草帽。自虚于是踢了一脚，里面果然有两只刺猬，蠕蠕而动。
English: Not far away, there was also a broken donkey that lived in a field and brought people drinks, and then there was a broken straw hat that a shepherd boy had thrown away. He felt ashamed and kicked it, and sure enough, there were two hedgehogs inside, wriggling around.

古文：自虚周求四顾，悄未有人，又不胜一夕之冻乏，乃揽辔振雪，上马而去。
现代文：自虚又住四下里寻看，静悄悄的没有人。觉得由于一宿的冻和乏，现在有点支持不住了，便拉紧马缰绳，抖掉积雪，上马走了。
English: Feeling a little overwhelmed by the cold and fatigue of the night, I tightened the reins of the horse, shook off the snow, and got on the horse to go.

古文：绕出村之北，道左经柴栏旧圃，睹一牛踣雪龁草。
现代文：绕过村子的北面，经过道左的劈柴围成的牲口圈和老菜园，看见一条牛趴在雪里吃草。
English: Passing around the north side of the village, past the circle of livestock surrounded by firewood and the old vegetable garden on the left side of the road, I saw a cow lying in the snow and eating grass.

古文：次此不百余步，合村悉辇粪幸此蕴崇。
现代文：离这不到百余步，是全村用车把粪送到此处堆积的粪堆。
English: Less than a hundred paces away is the dung heap, where the whole village has brought their excrement by cart.

古文：自虚过其下，群犬喧吠，中有一犬，毛悉齐裸，其状甚异，睥睨自虚。
现代文：自虚经过粪堆下面时，一群狗狂犬不止，其中有一只狗，毛全掉光了，那样子很怪，斜着眼睛看自虚。
English: Passing beneath the pile of excrement, a pack of rabid dogs, including a dog that had lost all its hair, looked at me with squinted eyes in a strange way.

古文：自虚驱马久之，值一叟，辟荆扉，晨兴开径雪，自虚驻马讯焉。对曰： 此故友右军彭特进庄也。
现代文：自虚骑马走了好久，才碰到一位老人，开了柴门，早晨起来打扫路上的雪，自虚停住向他问讯，老人回答说： 这里是我的老朋友右军彭特进的庄园。
English: He rode for a long time before he met an old man. He opened the gate and got up in the morning to sweep the snow off the road. He stopped to ask him for information. The old man replied, "This is the manor house of my old friend, the right-wing soldier, Pentzen."

古文：郎君昨宵何止？
现代文：郎君昨晚在哪里住的？
English: Where did your brother-in-law stay last night?

古文：行李间有似迷途者。 
现代文：看行李有些像迷了路的样子。 
English: Some of the luggage looked as if it had lost its way.

古文：自虚语及夜来之见，叟倚篲惊讶曰： 极差，极差。
现代文：自虚跟他说了夜晚见到的情况。老人拄着扫帚惊讶地说： 太奇怪了！
English: Self-deprecatingly, he told him what he had seen during the night. The old man, holding his broom, said in surprise: "How strange!

古文：昨晚天气风雪，庄家先有一病橐驼，虑其为所毙，遂覆之佛宇之北，念佛社屋下。
现代文：太奇怪了！昨晚天气刮风下雪，农户先前有一头病骆驼，担心被风雪冻死，便把它牵到佛寺的北面念佛社屋中。
English: It's so strange! Last night the weather was windy and snowy. The farmer had previously had a sick camel, and fearing that it would freeze to death in the wind and snow, he took it north of the Buddhist temple to the Buddhist shrine.

古文：某哀其残命未舍，以粟斛易留之，亦不羁绊。
现代文：还有，几天前，河阴的公家脚夫经过，有一头疲惫不堪的驴，再也走不动了，我可怜它有口气就用十斗小米换下了它。也没有拴它。
English: Also, a few days ago, a public footman from Heyin passed by. There was an exhausted donkey that could no longer walk. I felt sorry for it and replaced it with ten buckets of millet. I didn't beat it.

古文：彼栏中瘠牛，皆庄家所畜。
现代文：那圈里的瘦牛，都是农户养的。
English: The lean cows in that circle are all raised by farmers.

古文：适闻此说，不知何缘如此作怪。 
现代文：刚才听了你的话，不知什么原因如此作怪。 
English: After listening to your words just now, I don't know why you are acting so strangely.

古文：自虚曰： 昨夜已失鞍驮，今馁冻且甚，事有不可率话者，大略如斯，难于悉述。 
现代文：自虚说： 昨夜已失掉了鞍驮，现在又冷又饿，还有些事也不能细说。大致情况就这样，难以详细叙述。 
English: Self-deprecatingly: I lost my saddlebags last night, I'm cold and hungry, and there are some things I can't say in detail. That's the general situation, it's hard to describe in detail.

古文：遂策马奔去，至赤水店，见僮仆，方讶其主之相失，始忙于求访。
现代文：于是打马奔向前方。到了赤水店，看见了大小仆人，正在惊讶他们的主人跟他们失散了，才开始忙着寻访。
English: So they galloped ahead. When they arrived at the red water store, they saw the servants, big and small, who were surprised to see that their master was no longer with them, and they began to search for him.

古文：自虚慨然，如丧魂者数日。
现代文：自虚非常感慨，一直好多天像丢了魂一样。
English: I feel very sorry for myself, I've been feeling like I've lost my soul for many days.

