古文：裴叔业，河东闻喜人，晋冀州刺史徽后也。
现代文：裴叔业，河东郡闻喜县人，是晋朝冀州刺史裴徽的后代。
English: Pei Shuye, a native of Wensi County, Hedong County, is a descendant of the Jin Dynasty Jizhou scholar Pei Hui.

古文：徽子游击将军黎，遇中朝乱，子孙没凉州，仕于张氏。
现代文：裴徽之子游击将军裴黎，遭遇中原八王之乱，子孙陷没在凉州，在凉州牧张氏部下任职。
English: Pei Hui's son, the guerrilla general Pei Li, was caught up in the Central Plains Revolt of the Eight Kings. His children and grandchildren were trapped in Liangzhou and served under the Zhang clan in Liangzhou.

古文：黎玄孙先福，义熙末还南，至荥阳太守。
现代文：裴黎玄孙裴先福，束晋安帝义熙末年回到南方，官至荣阳太守。
English: Pei Li Xuan's grandson, Pei Xianfu, returned to the south at the end of the Andean Dynasty, and became the governor of Rongyang.

古文：叔业父祖晚渡。
现代文：裴叔业的祖父和父亲很晚才南渡。
English: Bae's grandfather and father came to the South very late.

古文：少便弓马，有武干。
现代文：裴叔业年轻时就弓马娴熟，有武才。
English: When he was young, Pei Shuhei was good at archery and martial arts.

古文：宋元徽末，累官为羽林监，太祖骠骑行参军。
现代文：宋元徽末年，积宫至羽林监，齐太祖萧道成的骠骑行参军。
English: At the end of the Song and Yuan dynasties, Jigu to Ulin Guan, Qi Taizhu Xiao Dousheng's riding to join the army.

古文：建元元年，除屯骑校尉。
现代文：齐建元元年，拜屯骑校尉。
English: In the first year of Qi Jianyuan, Bai Tun was a cavalry lieutenant.

古文：虏侵司豫二州，以叔业为军主征讨，本官如故。
现代文：北魏侵犯司、豫二州，以裴叔业为主将负责征讨，官职照旧。
English: The Northern Wei Invasions Division and the Henan Erzhou, with Pei Shiye as the main person, will be responsible for the collection, and the official position will remain unchanged.

古文：上初即位，群下各献谠言。
现代文：齐太祖即位之初，群臣纷纷进献正直有益的意见。
English: At the beginning of Emperor Qizong's reign, many courtiers offered their honest and helpful opinions.

古文：二年，叔业上疏曰： 成都沃壤，四塞为固，古称一人守隘，万夫趑趄。
现代文：建元二年，裴叔业上疏说： 成都土地肥沃，四面都有天险很是牢固，自古以来就有一人守关，令万夫疑惧莫进的说法。
English: In the second year of the first century, Pei Shuyuan said: Chengdu is a fertile land, and there are natural hazards on all sides. It is very solid. Since ancient times, there has been a person guarding the pass, which makes everyone suspicious.

古文：雍、齐乱于汉世，谯、李寇于晋代，成败之迹，事载前史。
现代文：在漠代这里便发生过雍闽、齐氏的叛乱，在晋朝又有谯纵、成汉李氏割据骚扰，关于其成败的事迹，前史已有记载。
English: The rebellions of the Yongle and Qi dynasties occurred here in the desert era, and the Jin dynasty instigated and harassed the Chenghan and Li dynasties, and their successes and failures have been recorded in prehistory.

古文：顷世以来，绥驭乖术，地惟形势，居之者异姓，国实武用，镇之者无兵，致寇掠充斥，赕税不断。
现代文：近一段时间以来，朝廷违反了安抚驾驭百姓的常法，让一些异姓依据地理形势之便在造裹统治，国家凭藉武力以示威慑，但派去镇守的官员却缺少足够的兵力，致使寇乱充斥，私自征收财税不断。
English: For some time now, the imperial court has violated the common law of appeasing and controlling the people, allowing some different surnames to take advantage of the geographical situation to rule. The state uses force to demonstrate and deter, but the officials sent to guard the town lack sufficient troops, resulting in a flood of robberies and the continuous private collection of taxes.

古文：宜遣帝子之尊，临抚巴蜀，总益、梁、南秦为三州刺史。
现代文：现在应当派尊贵的帝王之子，亲临巴蜀镇抚，总领益、梁、南秦为三州刺史。
English: Now it is time to send the distinguished son of the emperor to personally visit Bashu, Zhenfu, and the general leaders, Yi, Liang, and Nanqin, to record the history of the three states.

古文：率文武万人，先启岷汉，分遣郡戍，皆配精力，搜荡山源，纠虔奸蠹。
现代文：率领文臣武将万余人，先开辟婚县、漠中，然后分别派遣各郡的守军，都配备精良的武器装备，去搜索扫荡山头水流，纠察斩杀奸人蟊贼。
English: He led more than ten thousand civil and military officers to first open up the marriage county and the middle of the desert, and then separately dispatched the defenders of each county, all equipped with sophisticated weapons and equipment, to search and sweep the mountain water flow, picket and kill the traitors and thieves.

古文：威令既行，民夷必服。 
现代文：威令一旦施行，百姓夷人必定服从。 
English: Once the edict is carried out, the common people will surely obey.

古文：除宁朔将军，军主如故。
现代文：拜裴叔业为宁朔将军，照旧作征军统帅。
English: Bai Pei Shuhei is the general of Ningshuo, and is still the commander of the army.

古文：永明四年，累至右军将军，东中郎谘议参军。
现代文：永明四年，积官至右军将军，东中郎谘议参军。
English: In the fourth year of Yongming, he was promoted to the general of the right army, and Dong Zhongro advised him to join the army.

古文：高宗为豫州，叔业为右军司马，加建威将军、军主，领陈留太守。
现代文：齐高宗萧鸾当时任豫州刺史，裴叔业为右军司马，加号建威将军、军主，领陈留太守。
English: At that time, Qigong Zong Xiaoqi was appointed as the chief historian of Yuzhou, Pei Shuye was the right-hand military secretary, plus the name of General Jianwei, the military leader, and the leader of Chen Liu Taishu.

古文：七年，为王敬则征西司马，将军、军主如故。
现代文：永明七年，又任王敬则的征西司马将军、军主照旧。
English: In the seventh year of the Yongming era, Wang Jingze was appointed as the general of the Western Sima Expedition and the commander of the army as before.

古文：随府转骠骑。
现代文：随着司府一道转为骠骑。
English: Along with the prefectural governors, they all switched to riding horses.

古文：在寿春为佐数年。
现代文：在寿春任副职好几年。
English: In Shuchun, he served as a deputy for several years.

古文：九年，为宁蛮长史、广平太守。
现代文：永明九年，又任为宁蛮长史、广平太守。
English: In the ninth year of Yongming, he was also appointed as the governor of Ningyuan, Changshi and Guangping.

古文：雍州刺史王奂事难，叔业率部曲于城内起义。
现代文：雍州刺史王奂被杀时，裴叔业率领部下在城内起义。
English: When the Yongzhou assassin Wang Xi was killed, Pei Shuhei led his subordinates in an uprising in the city.

古文：上以其有干用，仍留为晋安王征北谘议，领中兵，扶风太守，迁晋熙王冠军司马。
现代文：武帝因为他很有才干能力，仍留任他为晋安王征北谘议，领中兵，扶风太守，升迁为晋熙王冠军司马。
English: Emperor Wu, because he was very talented, remained in his position to advise the King of Jinan on the Northern Expedition, led the middle-ranking soldiers, and promoted to the champion of the King of Jinxi.

古文：延兴元年，加宁朔将军，司马如故。
现代文：海陵王延兴元年，加封宁朔将军，冠军司马之职照旧。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Hailing Yanxing, the general of Ningshuo in Gafu, the champion of Sima, was still in charge.

古文：叔业早与高宗接事，高宗辅政，厚任叔业以为心腹，使领军掩袭诸蕃镇，叔业尽心用命。
现代文：裴叔业很早便与高宗萧鸾有往来，高宗辅政时，厚待裴叔业，把他当做心腹使用，派他率军袭击各路藩镇王侯，裴叔业都竭尽心力完成使命。
English: Baizhuye had a long-standing relationship with Gaozong Xiaohui. When Gaozong was a vice-regent, he treated Baizhuye well, used him as a confidant, and sent him to lead an army to attack the princes of all the towns of the domain. Baizhuye did his best to complete his mission.

古文：建武二年，虏围徐州，叔业以军主隶右卫将军萧坦之救援。
现代文：高宗建武二年，北魏军围困徐州，裴叔业以军主身份隶属于右卫将军萧坦之，率军救援。
English: In the second year of Gaozong Jianwu, the Northern Wei Army besieged Xuzhou. Pei Shuhei, as the commander of the army, was subordinate to the right guard general Xiao Tan, and led the army to rescue.

古文：叔业攻虏淮栅外二城，克之，贼众赴水死甚众。
现代文：裴叔业攻击北魏淮水大营外的两座小城，都攻克了，敌人掉进淮水被淹死的很多。
English: Pei Shuhei attacked two small towns outside the Northern Wei Huai Shui camp and conquered them both. Many enemies fell into the Huai Shui and were drowned.

古文：除黄门侍郎。
现代文：所以被拜授为黄门侍郎。
English: That's why he was given the title of Huangmen waiter.

古文：上以叔业有勋诚，封武昌县伯，五百户。
现代文：高宗认为裴叔业有功绩而且很忠诚，封他为武昌县伯，食邑五百户。
English: Gao Zong believed that Pei Shuhei had merits and was very loyal. He was awarded the title of Count of Wuchang County, and there were more than 500 households in the food village.

古文：仍为持节、督徐州军事、冠军将军、徐州刺史。
现代文：依旧为持节、督徐州军事、冠军将军、徐州刺史。
English: It is still the festival, the military governor of Xuzhou, the champion general, and the history of Xuzhou.

古文：四年，虏主寇沔北，上令叔业援雍州。
现代文：北方人不喜欢跑太远的路，衹喜欢就近骚扰劫掠。
English: The northerners do not like to run too far, and the baboons like to harass and rob nearby.

古文：叔业启： 北人不乐远行，唯乐侵伐虏堺，则雍司之贼，自然分张，无劳动民向远也。 
现代文：如果派兵攻入敌虏的地盘，那么雍、司两地的敌势自然分散，不需要烦劳军队去远征了。 
English: If troops are sent to invade the enemy's territory, then the enemy forces in Yong and Si will naturally disperse, and there will be no need for the army to go on an expedition.

古文：上从之。
现代文：高宗听从了他的建议。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：叔业率军攻虹城，获男女四千余人。徙督豫州、辅国将军、豫州刺史，持节如故。
现代文：裴叔业率军进攻虹城，俘获敌方男女共四千余人转调为督豫州、辅团将军、豫州刺史，持节照旧。
English: Pei Shuhei led the army to attack Hongcheng, captured a total of more than four thousand men and women from the enemy and transferred them to be the governor of Yuzhou, the general of the auxiliary group, and the historian of Yuzhou, and kept the festival as before.

古文：永泰元年，叔业领东海太守孙令终、新昌太守刘思效、马头太守李僧护等五万人围涡阳，虏南兖州所镇，去彭城百二十里。
现代文：永泰元年，裴叔业率领束海太守孙令终、新昌太守刘思劫、马头太守李僧护等五万人马围攻涡阳，涡阳是北魏南兖州治所，离彭城有一百二十里远。
English: In the first year of the Yongtai era, Pei Xueye led fifty thousand people and horses, including the dynasties of the dynasties of the dynasties of the dynasties of the dynasties of the dynasties of the dynasties of the dynasties of the dynasties of the dynasties of the dynasties of the dynasties of the dynasties of the dynasties of the dynasties of the dynasties of the dynasties of the dynasties of the dynasties of the dynasties of the dynasties.

古文：伪兖州刺史孟表固守拒战，叔业攻围之，积所斩级高五丈，以示城内。
现代文：魏兖州刺史孟表坚守城池抵御抗击，裴叔业便包围起来猛攻，并把斩杀的魏兵首级堆积起来，高达五丈，以向城内魏军示威。
English: Wei Shizhou's general Meng Yao defended the city against the counterattack, and Pei Shueye surrounded and attacked, and piled up the severed heads of Wei soldiers as high as five meters to demonstrate to the Wei army in the city.

古文：又遣军主萧璝、成宝真分攻龙亢戍，即虏马头郡也。
现代文：又派军主萧坟、成宝真分兵去攻打龙亢戍，也就是北魏的马头郡。
English: He also sent the army commanders Xiao Gu and Cheng Baozhen to attack Longyu, that is, Ma Tou County in Northern Wei.

古文：虏闭城自守。
现代文：魏军闭关自守。
English: The Wei army closed the gate to defend itself.

古文：伪徐州刺史广陵王率二万人、骑五千匹至龙亢，璝等拒战不敌。
现代文：伪徐州刺史广陵王率领二万人，骑兵五千，来到龙亢，萧坟等人抵挡不住。
English: The pseudo Xuzhou assassin Guangling Wang led twenty thousand people and five thousand cavalry, came to Longjing, and Xiaogu and others could not resist.

古文：叔业三万余人助之，数道攻虏。
现代文：裴叔业便亲率三万余人前去援助他们，分兵几路攻击魏军。
English: Pei Shuhei personally led more than thirty thousand people to go to their aid, and several detachments attacked the Wei army.

古文：虏新至，营未立，于是大败。
现代文：魏军刚到，还没有扎好营盘，于是大败。
English: The Wei army had just arrived and had not yet set up camp, so they were soundly defeated.

古文：广陵王与数十骑走，官军追获其节。
现代文：广陵王仅带几十名骑兵逃跑，齐官兵追赶，缴获了他的符节。
English: Guangling Wang fled with only a few dozen cavalrymen. Qi officers and soldiers chased him and captured his symbols.

古文：虏又遣伪将刘藻、高聪继至，叔业率军迎击破之，再战，斩首万级，获生口三千人，器仗驴马绢布千万计。
现代文：北魏又派遣将军刘藻、高聪领兵来援，裴叔业率军迎击，打败了他们，两次战斗，斩首一万，俘虏三千人，夺得的兵器械杖驴马绢布数以千万计。
English: The Northern Wei also sent generals Liu Zhao and Gao Cong to lead the troops to come to the rescue. Pei Shuhei led the army to meet and defeat them, fought twice, beheaded ten thousand, captured three thousand, and seized tens of millions of weapons, weapons, donkeys, horses, and cloth.

古文：虏主闻广陵王败，遣伪都督王肃、大将军杨大眼步骑十八万救涡阳，叔业见兵盛，夜委军遁走。
现代文：魏孝文帝听说广陵王战败，便派伪都督王肃、大将军杨大眼率领步兵、骑兵十几万人来救涡阳，裴叔业见敌兵众多，连夜丢下军队逃跑。
English: When Emperor Wei Xiaowen heard that the Guangling Emperor had been defeated, he sent the pseudo-governor Wang Su and the general Yang Dajian, leading more than a hundred thousand infantry and cavalry, to rescue Wuruyang. Pei Shuhei saw the large number of enemy soldiers and left the army overnight to escape.

古文：明日，官军奔溃，虏追之，伤杀不可胜数，日暮乃止。
现代文：第二天，齐军四散溃逃，魏军追击他们，杀死杀伤齐兵卒无数，天黑了才停止追赶。
English: The next day, the Qi army scattered and fled, the Wei army chased them, killing and injuring countless Qi soldiers, and only stopped chasing after dark.

古文：叔业还保涡口，上遣使慰劳。
现代文：裴叔业回守涡口，明帝派使臣慰劳他。
English: Pei Shuhei returned to defend Turukou, and the Ming emperor sent envoys to console him.

古文：高宗崩，叔业还镇。
现代文：齐明帝驾崩，裴叔业回到徐州的治所。
English: Emperor Qiming passed away, and Pei Shuhei returned to the capital of Xuzhou.

古文：少主即位，诛大臣，京师屡有变发。
现代文：东昏侯即位，诛杀大臣，京城不断发生变乱。
English: The Eastern dowager emperor ascended the throne, ministers were assassinated, and there were constant upheavals in Kyoto.

古文：叔业登寿春城北望肥水，谓部下曰： 卿等欲富贵乎？
现代文：裴叔业登上寿春城楼北望肥水对部下说。你们想富贵吗?
English: Pei Shuhei said to his subordinates as he climbed to the north of Shuchuncheng Tower. Do you want to be rich and noble?

古文：我言富贵亦可办耳。 
现代文：我认为富贵能够得到。 
English: I guess rich people can get it too.

古文：永元元年，徙督南兖兖徐青冀五州军事、南兖州刺史，将军、持节如故。
现代文：永元元年，裴叔业转任督南兖、兖、徐、青、冀五州军事，南兖州刺史，将军、持节照旧。
English: In the first year of the Yongyuan era, Pei Shuhei was transferred to the military governor of the five states of Nanxun, Min, Xu, Qing and Hebei, and he continued to serve as the governor of the five states of Nanxun, Min, Xu, Qing and Hebei.

古文：叔业见时方乱，不乐居近蕃，朝廷疑其欲反，叔业亦遣使参察京师消息，于是异论转盛。
现代文：裴叔业见时局正纷乱，不乐意镇守在京城附近。朝廷怀疑他想反叛，裴叔业也派人侦察京师的消息，于是谣言四起，越来越多。
English: Pei Shuhei saw that the situation was chaotic and was not happy to keep the town near the capital. The court suspected that he wanted to rebel, and Pei Shuhei also sent someone to investigate the news of the capital, so rumors were everywhere, more and more.

古文：叔业兄子植、扬并为直阁，殿内驱使。
现代文：当时裴叔业哥哥的儿子裴植、裴飏同为直合，殿内驱使。
English: At that time, Pei Shuye's brother's sons, Pei Zhi and Pei Yao, were also in the palace.

古文：虑祸至，弃母奔寿阳，说叔业以朝廷必见掩袭。
现代文：担心大祸降临，于是抛下母亲跑到寿阳，告诉裴叔业说朝廷必定会派兵来偷袭。
English: Fearing a catastrophe, he left his mother and ran to Shouyang, telling Pei Shuhei that the imperial court would certainly send soldiers to attack secretly.

古文：徐世檦等虑叔业外叛，遣其宗人中书舍人裴长穆宣旨，许停本任。
现代文：而徐世榇等人也担心裴叔业叛变，所以派裴叔业同族人中书舍人裴长穆去宣布圣旨，允许裴叔业暂时停止本身的职务。
English: However, Xu Shijun and others were also worried about Pei Shuhe's rebellion, so they sent Pei Changmu, a scholar among Pei Shuhe's compatriots, to announce the holy will and allow Pei Shuhe to temporarily suspend his duties.

古文：叔业犹不自安，而植等说之不已，叔业忧惧，问计于梁王，梁王令遣家还都，自然无患。
现代文：裴叔业还觉得不安全，而裴植等劝说不停，于是裴叔业忧虑害怕，便向梁王问计，梁王让他派遣家属回京师去，自然就没有灾难。
English: Pei Xiuye still felt insecure, but Pei Zhi and others kept persuading him, so Pei Xiuye was worried and afraid, so he asked Liang Wang for a plan. Liang Wang asked him to send his family members back to Beijing. Naturally, there was no disaster.

古文：叔业乃遣子芬之等还质京师。
现代文：裴叔业于是便派儿子裴芬之等人回到京都作为人质。
English: Pei Shuhei then sent his son Pei Fenzhi and others back to Kyoto as hostages.

古文：明年，进号冠军将军。
现代文：第二年，进封冠军将军的称号。
English: The following year, he won the title of Jinfeng Champion General.

古文：传叔业反者不已，芬之愈惧，复奔寿春。
现代文：但是传说裴叔业反叛的流言不断，裴芬之更加恐惧，又跑回寿春。
English: However, the legend of Pei Shuye's rebellion continued, and Pei Fenzhi was even more afraid and ran back to Shouchun.

古文：于是发诏讨叔业，遣护军将军崔慧景、征虏将军豫州刺史萧懿督水陆众军西讨，顿军小岘。
现代文：于是朝廷颁发韶书讨伐裴叔业，派护军将军崔慧景、征虏将军豫州刺史萧懿督率水陆各军向西征讨，驻军在小岘。
English: As a result, the imperial court issued an imperial edict to subjugate Baishuye, and sent the escort army general Cui Huijing and the conscript army general Yu Zhou Shishi Xiaoqi to lead the land and sea armies to the west to subjugate, and the troops were stationed in Xiaoqi.

古文：叔业病困，植请救魏虏，送芬之为质。
现代文：裴叔业病重，裴植便向北魏请求救助，并送裴芬之去作人质。
English: Pei Shuye was seriously ill, so Pei Zhi asked the Northern Wei Dynasty for help, and sent Pei Fen to serve as a hostage.

古文：叔业寻卒，虏遣大将军李丑、杨大眼二千余骑入寿春。
现代文：裴叔业不久去世，北魏派大将军李丑、杨大眼带二千多骑兵进入寿春。
English: Pei Shuhei died soon after, and the Northern Wei Dynasty sent generals Li Gou and Yang Dajian to lead more than two thousand cavalry into Shuchun.

古文：初，虏主元宏建武二年至寿春，其下劝攻城。宏曰： 不须攻，后当降也。 
现代文：当初，北魏孝文帝元塞在齐明帝洼武二年时曾到过画画城下，他的臣下们都劝他攻城元宏说： 用不着攻打，以后会投降的。 
English: At first, Emperor Yuan of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Emperor Xiaowen, went to the city of painting in the second year of the reign of Emperor Wu of the Ming Dynasty. His vassals all advised him to attack the city of Yuanhong, saying, "There is no need to attack, we will surrender later."

古文：植等皆还洛阳。
现代文：裴植等人都回到洛阳。
English: Pei Zhi and others all returned to Luoyang.

古文：崔慧景，字君山，清河东武城人也。
现代文：崔慧景字君山，清河郡东武城人。
English: Cui Huijing, also known as Junshan, is from Dongwu City, Qinghe County.

古文：祖构，奉朝请。父系之，州别驾。
现代文：祖父崔构任奉朝请，父亲崔系之为州别驾。
English: His grandfather, Cui Jianren, was invited by the imperial court, and his father, Cui Jianwei, came from a different province.

古文：慧景初为国子学生。
现代文：崔慧景初为国子学生。
English: Cui Huiqing was once a student of Kuniko.

古文：宋泰始中，历位至员外郎，稍迁长水校尉，宁朔将军。
现代文：宋明帝泰始年间，历任职位至员外郎，不久便升为长水校尉，宁朔将军。
English: During the early years of Emperor Taizong of the Song Dynasty, he rose through the ranks to the position of deputy foreign minister, and was soon promoted to the rank of Changshui lieutenant and Ningshuo general.

古文：太祖在淮阴，慧景与宗人祖思同时自结。
现代文：齐太祖萧道成在淮阴时，崔慧景便与同族人崔祖思自动前去交结。
English: When Qi Taizhu Xiao Daocheng was in Huaiyin, Cui Huijing and his compatriot Cui Zusi went to the junction.

古文：太祖欲北渡广陵，使慧景具船于陶家后渚，事虽不遂，以此见亲。除前军。
现代文：萧道成想北渡广陵，让崔慧景在陶家后渚准备好舟船，北渡之事虽然没有施行，但崔慧景因此而受到亲近，拜授前军之职。
English: Xiao Daocheng wanted to sail north to Guangling, so he asked Cui Huiqing to prepare a boat after the potters. Although the northward voyage was not carried out, Cui Huiqing was approached and given the position of the former military.

古文：沈攸之事平，仍出为武陵王安西司马、河东太守，使防捍陕西。
现代文：沈攸之的事件乎息以后，崔慧景出任武陵王安西司马、河东太守，被派去防卫陕西。
English: After Shen Yu's incident was over, Cui Huijing was appointed as the Wuling King Anxi Sima and the governor of Hedong, and was sent to defend Shaanxi.

古文：升明三年，豫章王为荆州，慧景留为镇西司马，兼谘议，太守如故。
现代文：宋顺帝升明三年，豫章工任荆州刺史，崔慧景留任为镇西司马，兼谘议，河东太守之职照旧。
English: Three years after Emperor Song Shun ascended to the throne, Yu Zhangguo was appointed as the chief historian of Jingzhou, while Cui Huijing remained as the town's western magistrate and adviser. The position of the governor of Hedong remained unchanged.

古文：太祖受禅，封乐安县子，三百户。
现代文：齐太祖受宋帝禅让登基，封崔慧景为乐安县子，食邑三百户。
English: Qi Taizu was enthroned by Emperor Zenzang of the Song Dynasty, and Cui Huijing was given the title of the son of Le'an County, with more than 300 households in the county.

古文：豫章王遣慧景奉表称庆还京师，太祖召见，加意劳接。
现代文：豫章王派崔慧景奉表祝贺回到京都，齐太祖召见他，特意慰劳接待他。
English: Yu Zhangwang sent Cui Huiqing a congratulatory letter to return to Kyoto. Qi Taizu summoned him and made a special effort to receive him.

古文：转平西府司马、南郡内史。
现代文：转官为平西府司马、南郡内史。
English: He was transferred to the post of Sima of Pingxi Prefecture and the post of Naishi of Minami County.

古文：仍迁为南蛮长史，加辅国将军，内史如故。
现代文：不久即改任南蛮横史，加辅国将军，内史照旧。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the governor of Nanban Province, and then as the general of Guizhou Province.

古文：先是蛮府置佐，资用甚轻，至是始重其选。
现代文：从前南蛮府设置辅佐官员，其资历很浅，自此以后才开始注重被选派者的资历。
English: Since the former Nanmang Prefecture set up assistant officials, their qualifications are very shallow, and only since then have they begun to pay attention to the qualifications of those selected to be sent.

古文：建元元年，虏动，豫章王遣慧景三千人顿方城，为司州声援。
现代文：齐太祖建元元年，北魏兵出动，豫章王派崔慧景率三千人屯驻方城，以声援司州。
English: In the first year of the founding of the Republic of China, the Northern Wei soldiers were dispatched, and the Prince of Henan dispatched three thousand people to stay in Fangcheng with the rate of Cui Huiqing to support Sizhou.

古文：虏退，梁州贼李乌奴未平，以慧景为持节、都督梁南北秦沙四州军事、西戎校尉、梁南秦二州刺史，将军如故。
现代文：魏兵退去，但梁州贼人李乌奴还没有平定，任命崔慧景为持节、都督梁南北秦沙四州军事、西戎校尉、梁与南秦二州剌史，将军照旧。
English: Wei soldiers retreated, but Liangzhou thief Li Wunu was not yet subdued, and Cui Huijing was appointed as the military commander, the military governor of Liangnan, North and South Qin, Shashi and Shizhou, the captain of Xirong, Liang and South Qin, Ershih, and the general as before.

古文：敕荆州资给发遣，配以实甲千人，步道从襄阳之镇。
现代文：敕命荆州供应物资派人送去，并配备甲士千人，徒步经过襄阳去梁州镇所。
English: Jingzhou desperately sent supplies, and equipped with a thousand soldiers, walked through Xiangyang to the town of Liangzhou.

古文：初，乌奴屡为官军所破，走氐中，乘间出，扰动梁、汉，据关城。
现代文：当初，李乌奴多次被官军打败，逃奔到氐地，常常乘隙而出，扰动梁州、漠中，并据守在关城。
English: At the beginning, Li Wunu was repeatedly defeated by the government army, fled to Shantian, and often took advantage of loopholes to disturb Liangzhou and the desert, and remained in Guancheng.

古文：遣使诣荆州请降，豫章王不许。
现代文：他曾派遣使者到荆州请求投降。
English: He had sent an envoy to Jingzhou to request their surrender.

古文：遣中兵参军王图南率益州军从剑阁掩讨，大摧破之，乌奴还保武兴。
现代文：豫章王不答允，派中兵参军王图南率领益州的军队从砌合进击李乌奴，大大地挫败了他，李乌奴回保武兴。
English: Yu Zhang Wang did not agree, and sent soldiers to join the army. Wang Tunan led the army of Yizhou to attack Li Wunu from the masonry, greatly defeated him, and Li Wunu returned to Baowu Xing.

古文：慧景发汉中兵众，进顿白马。
现代文：崔慧景发汉中军，进驻白马。
English: Cui Huiqing led the Han Chinese army into Baima.

古文：遣支军与图南腹背攻击，乌奴大败，遂奔于武兴。
现代文：又派另一支部队与王圆南腹背夹击李乌奴，岛奴大败，于是便从武兴逃走。
English: He also sent another force to attack Li Wunu with Wang Yunan, and the islander was defeated, so he fled from Wuxing.

古文：世祖即位，进号冠军将军。
现代文：齐世祖即位，崔慧景进号为冠军将军。
English: Qi Shizu ascended to the throne, and Cui Huijing became the champion general.

古文：在州蓄聚，多获珍货。
现代文：他在州任职时积聚了很多财产，获得了很多珍贵的物品。
English: He amassed a fortune and acquired many prized possessions during his time in state office.

古文：永明三年，以本号还。
现代文：丞明三年，以原来授予的称号回到京都。
English: Three years later, he returned to Kyoto with the title he was originally awarded.

古文：迁黄门郎，领羽林监。
现代文：转官为黄门郎领羽林监。
English: He was transferred to the post of Huangmen Langluo Yu Forest Supervisor.

古文：明年，迁随王东中郎司马，加辅国将军。
现代文：过一年，又调任随手东中郎司马，加辅国将军。
English: A year later, he was reassigned to be the general of Kazuo Kazuo, the general of Kazuo Kazuo.

古文：出为持节、督司州军事、冠军将军、司州刺史。
现代文：出任持节、督司州军事、冠军将军、司州刺史。
English: He served as Jisai, Superintendent of the State Military, Champion General, and Secretary of the State Military History.

古文：母丧，诏起复本任。
现代文：母亲丧亡，有诏起用恢复原任职务。
English: After his mother's death, he was appointed to his former position.

古文：慧景每罢州，辄倾资献奉，动数百万，世祖以此嘉之。九年，以本号征还，转太子左率，加通直常侍。
现代文：崔慧景每次终止在州郡的任职。都要倾其资财奉献给朝廷，动辄几百万，齐世祖因此很赞赏他永明九年，以本号征召回京，转官太子左率，加通直常侍。
English: Every time Cui Huiqing terminated his position in the state and county, he had to devote his wealth to the imperial court, often spending millions. Qi Shizu therefore highly appreciated him. In Yongming 9, he was called back to Beijing with this title, transferred to the left of the crown prince, and became a regular attendant.

古文：明年，迁右卫将军，加给事中。
现代文：过一年。升为右卫将军，加给事中。
English: A year later, he was promoted to the rank of Ue no shogun (general of the Right Division of the Middle Palace Guards).

古文：是时虏将南侵，上出慧景为持节、督豫州郢州之西阳司州之汝南二郡诸军事、冠军将军、豫州刺史。
现代文：当时北魏将要南侵，齐世祖派崔慧景出任持节、督豫州、郢州的西阳郡、司州的汝南郡一：郡的各种军事，冠军将军，豫州刺史。
English: At that time, the Northern Wei Dynasty was about to invade the south, and Qi Shizuo sent Cui Huijing to serve as the military commander of Xiyang County, the governor of Henan Province, the governor of Henan Province, the governor of Henan Province, the governor of Henan Province and the champion general of Henan Province.

古文：郁林即位，进号征虏将军。慧景以少主新立，密与虏交通，朝廷疑惧。
现代文：郁林王即位，进号为征虏将军、崔慧景因为郁林王新登帝位，所以秘密地与北魏互相往来，朝廷因此而怀疑担忧。
English: When King Yulin ascended the throne, he was given the title of Conqueror General. As King Yulin was newly enthroned, Cui Huijing secretly interacted with the Northern Wei Dynasty, which made the imperial court suspicious and worried.

古文：高宗辅政，遣梁王至寿春安慰之，慧景遣密启送诚劝进，征还，为散骑常侍，左卫将军。
现代文：齐高宗萧鸾辅政，派梁王到寿春去安抚慰问他，崔慧景派人送秘密奏疏给萧鸾，表示忠诚，劝他登上帝王之位。朝廷征召崔慧景回京，任散骑常侍，左卫将军。
English: Qigong Emperor Gaozong sent Liang Wang to Shuchun to appease and comfort Xiao Yao, while Cui Hui Jing sent someone to deliver a secret message to Xiao Yao, expressing his loyalty and urging him to ascend to the throne of God. The imperial court called Cui Hui Jing back to Beijing to serve as a cavalryman and left guard general.

古文：建武二年，虏寇徐、豫，慧景以本官假节向钟离，受王玄邈节度。
现代文：齐高宗建武二年，北魏侵犯徐州、豫州，崔慧景以本官假以符节，临时出巡去钟离，受王玄邈节制调度。
English: In the second year of Qigaozong Jianwu, when the Northern Wei Dynasty invaded Xuzhou and Yuzhou, Cui Huijing used his official leave as a token, temporarily went on patrol to Zhongli, and was dispatched by Wang Xuanqin.

古文：寻加冠军将军。
现代文：不久加冠军将军。
English: Soon to be crowned champion general.

古文：四年，迁度支尚书，领太子左率。
现代文：建武四年，转为度支尚书，领太子左率。
English: In the fourth year of Jianwu, he changed to Duozhi Shangshu, leading the prince to the left.

古文：冬，虏主攻沔北五郡，假慧景节，率众二万，骑千匹，向襄阳。
现代文：这年冬天，北魏孝文帝发兵攻打沔北五郡。朝廷令崔慧景以假节的身份率领二万人，战马一千匹，向襄阳进发。
English: In the winter of that year, Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty sent troops to attack the five counties in the north of Shandong. The court ordered Cui Huijing to lead 20,000 people and 1,000 horses to Xiangyang as a false festival.

古文：雍州众军并受节度。
现代文：雍州各军都受他的节制调度。
English: All the armies in Yongzhou are under his control.

古文：永泰元年，慧景至襄阳，五郡已没。
现代文：永泰元年，崔慧景来到襄阳，但五郡已经陷落。
English: In the first year of Yongtai, Cui Huijing came to Xiangyang, but the five counties had already fallen.

古文：加慧景平北将军，置佐史，分军助戍樊城。
现代文：朝廷加封崔慧景为平北将军，设立辅佐官员，分兵帮助守卫樊城。
English: The imperial court appointed Cui Huiqing as the general of Pingbei, set up assistant officials, and sent troops to help guard Lucheng.

古文：慧景顿涡口村，与太子中庶子梁王及军主前宁州刺史董仲民、刘山阳、裴帟、傅法宪等五千余人进行邓城。
现代文：崔慧景屯驻在涡口村，与太子中庶子梁王以及军主前宁州刺史董仲民、刘山阳、裴帟、傅法宪等人率五千余人前进到邓越。
English: Cui Hui Jing was stationed in Turukou village, and together with Prince Liang Wang, the prince's middle son and son-in-law, as well as the former military commander of Ningzhou Zhishi, Dong Zhongmin, Liu Shanyang, Pei Xuan, Fu Faxian and others, led more than 5,000 people to advance to Deng Yue.

古文：前参骑还，称虏军且至。
现代文：前军参将返回，说北魏军马上就要到来。
English: The former army general returned, saying that the Northern Wei Army was about to arrive.

古文：须臾，望数万骑俱来，慧景据南门，梁王据北门，令诸军上城上。
现代文：不久，便见几万骑兵一同冲来，崔慧景据守南门，翌王据守北门，命各路人马都到城上。
English: Soon, he saw tens of thousands of cavalrymen rushing together. Cui Huiqing guarded the south gate, the next king guarded the north gate, and ordered everyone to go to the city.

古文：时慧景等蓐食轻行，皆有饥惧之色。
现代文：当时崔慧量等人的部队因为早餐时间很早又轻装急行军，所以都面有饥色心中害怕。
English: At that time, the troops of Cui Huiyuan and others were hungry and scared because the breakfast time was very early and they were lightly equipped for the express march.

古文：军中北馆客三人走投虏，具告之。
现代文：当时军中有三位幕友是北方人，逃跑去投奔北魏，将齐军的情况全都告诉给他们。
English: At that time, there were three comrades-in-arms in the army who were northerners. They ran away to join the Northern Wei Dynasty and told them all about the situation of the Qi army.

古文：虏伪都督中军大将军彭城王元勰分遣伪武卫将军元蚪趣城东南，断慧景归路，伪司马孟斌向城东，伪右卫将军播正屯城北，交射城内。
现代文：北魏都督中军大将军彭城王元勰分派其武卫将军元蚪急忙挥兵邓城东南，截断崔盖量的归路。伪司马孟斌挥兵指向城东，北魏右卫将军播正屯驻城北，都向城内射箭。
English: The governor of the Northern Wei Dynasty, the general of the Central Army, Pengcheng Wangyuanqian, dispatched his martial guard general, Yuan Qi, to rush to the southeast of Dengcheng and cut off the return route of Cui Gaosheng. The pseudo Sima Mengbin waved his soldiers to the east of the city, and the Northern Wei right guard general, Fan Zhengtun, stationed in the north of the city, all fired arrows into the city.

古文：梁王欲出战，慧景曰： 虏不夜围人城，待日暮自当去也。 
现代文：梁王芦面想出战，崔慧景说： 北虏不会连夜包围城池，到太阳落山时便会自动散去。 
English: When Liang Wang Lumen wanted to go to war, Cui Huijing said: The North Korean troops will not encircle the city overnight, and will disperse automatically when the sun sets.

古文：既而虏众转盛，慧景于南门拔军，众军不相知，随后奔退。
现代文：不久北魏兵越来越多，于是崔慧景便先率军从南门撤退，开始各军并不知道，随后便跟着败退。
English: Soon, the number of Northern Wei soldiers increased, so Cui Huijing led the first army to retreat from the South Gate. At first, the armies did not know, and then they followed the retreat.

古文：虏军从北门入，刘山阳与部曲数百人断后死战，虏遣铠马百余匹突取山阳，山阳使射手射之，三人倒马，手杀十余人，不能禁，且战且退。
现代文：北魏军从北门攻入城中，刘山阳与部下几百人断后，拼死而战。北魏军派铁甲马队百余人冲击刘山阳，刘山阳让射手用箭射他们，射倒了三人，并亲自斩杀十几人，不能阻止住，边战边退。
English: The Northern Wei Army entered the city from the North Gate, and Liu Shanyang and several hundred of his subordinates broke off and fought to the death. The Northern Wei Army sent more than a hundred iron horse cavalry to attack Liu Shanyang. Liu Shanyang let the archer shoot them with arrows, shot down three people, and personally killed more than a dozen people. Unable to stop, he retreated while fighting.

古文：慧景南出过闹沟，军人蹈藉，桥皆断坏，虏军夹路射之，军主傅法宪见杀，赴沟死者相枕。
现代文：崔慧景出南门过闹沟，上兵们互相践踏，桥都断裂倒塌。北魏军从两边向他们放箭，军丰傅法宪被射死，掉进沟中而死的人尸体都互相枕压着。
English: Cui Huijing went out of the south gate through the ditch, the soldiers trampled each other, the bridges broke and collapsed. The Northern Wei Army fired arrows at them from both sides, the army Fengfu Faxian was shot dead, and the bodies of those who fell into the ditch and died were pressed against each other.

古文：山阳取袄杖填沟，乘之得免。
现代文：刘山阳取用衣袄器杖填进沟中，踩在上面过了沟，得以幸免。
English: Liu Shanyang took a cane to fill in the ditch, stepped on it to cross the ditch, and was able to escape.

古文：虏主率大众追之，晡时，虏主至沔北，围军主刘山阳，山阳据城苦战，至暮，虏乃退。
现代文：北魏孝文帝率领大军追击他们。黄昏时，北魏孝文帝到达沔北，包围了军主刘山阳。刘山阳依据城池苦战，到傍晚，敌人才退去。
English: Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty led a large army to pursue them. At dusk, Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty arrived in northern Shandong and surrounded the army commander Liu Shanyang. Liu Shanyang fought hard according to the city, and in the evening, the enemy retreated.

古文：众军恐惧，其夕皆下船还襄阳。
现代文：齐众军都恐慌害怕，当夜便都乘船回到襄阳。
English: The entire Qi army was panicked and afraid, and they all took the boat back to Yangyang that night.

古文：东昏即位，改领右卫将军，平北、假节如故。
现代文：东昏侯即位，崔慧景改领右卫将军，平北将军、假节则照旧。
English: Dong Xiumuo ascended the throne, and Cui Huiqing became the leader of the Right Division of the General Staff, while the General Staff of the North Division of the General Staff and the General Staff of the North Division of the General Staff remained unchanged.

古文：未拜。
现代文：尚没有正式拜授。
English: It has not yet been officially conferred.

古文：永元元年，迁护军将军，寻加侍中。
现代文：永元元年，调为护军将军，不久加侍中。
English: In the first year of the Yongyuan era, he was transferred to the position of escort general, and was soon promoted to the position of chamberlain.

古文：陈显达反，加慧景平南将军，都督众军事，屯中堂。
现代文：陈显达反叛，朝廷又加封崔慧景为平南将军，都督各项军事，屯驻于中堂。
English: Chen Xianda rebelled, and the imperial court appointed Cui Huijing as the general of Pingnan and the military governor of various provinces, stationed in Zhongtang.

古文：时辅国将军徐世檦专势号令，慧景备员而已。
现代文：当时辅国将军徐世铡专权，发号施令，崔慧景衹不过是凑数而已。
English: At that time, General of the Auxiliary State Xu Shixuan had the exclusive right to issue orders, and Cui Hui Jingyao was just a number.

古文：帝既诛戮将相，旧臣皆尽，慧景自以年宿位重，转不自安。
现代文：东昏侯大肆杀戮将相，原来的大臣几乎被杀尽，崔慧景由于资历老职位重，渐渐地自感不安。
English: Dongwu marquis killed generals on a large scale, the original minister was almost killed, and Cui Huijing gradually felt uneasy due to the seniority of the old position.

古文：明年，裴叔业以寿春降虏，改授慧景平西将军，假节、侍中、护军如故，率军水路征寿阳。
现代文：第二年，裴叔业以寿春投降北魏，于是朝廷改授崔慧景为平西将军，假节、侍中、护军将军诸职号照旧，命其率军从水路去征讨寿阳。
English: In the second year, Pei Shuhei surrendered to the Northern Wei Dynasty with Shuchun, so the imperial court changed the title of Cui Huijing to Pingxi General, and ordered him to lead the army to conquer Shouyang from the waterway.

古文：军顿白下，将发，帝长围屏除出琅邪城送之。
现代文：军队驻扎在白下，将要出发，东昏侯用很长的围布形成屏障，挡住杂人，亲自出琅邪城送他。
English: The army was stationed in Baixia and was about to leave. Dongdimou used a long cloth to form a barrier to block the intruder and personally escorted him out of the evil city.

古文：帝戎服坐城楼上，召慧景单骑进围内，无一人自随者。
现代文：东昏侯身着军服坐在城楼上，单召崔慧景一骑进入围屏内，没有一人跟随着。
English: Dong Dou Hou, dressed in military uniform, sat on the castle tower. He invited Cui Huijing to ride into the enclosure, but no one followed.

古文：裁交数言，拜辞而去。
现代文：才交谈几句话，崔慧景便拜别告辞而去。
English: After entering, Cui Huiqing only spoke a few words with Dong Douhou, and then bowed out.

古文：慧景既得出，甚喜。
现代文：他出了围屏之后，很是高兴。
English: After Cui Huijing came out, she felt extremely proud.

古文：子觉为直阁将军，慧景密与期。四月慧景至广陵，觉便出奔。
现代文：崔慧量之子崔觉任直合将军，崔慧景秘密与他约定：三月崔慧景到达广陵，崔觉便从京师逃出来奔向广陵。
English: Choi Hye Kyeong, son of Choi Hye Kwan's son Choi Kyok-in, was a general of the Chunghe Army. Choi Hye Kyeong made a secret agreement with him: Choi Hye Kwan would arrive at Quang Ling in March, and Choi Hye Kwan would escape from the Beijing Division and run to Quang Ling.

古文：慧景过广陵数十里，召会诸军主曰： 吾荷三帝厚恩，当顾托之重。
现代文：部队遇了广陵几十里，崔慧景召集各位军主说： 我蒙受齐三位皇帝的厚恩，本应顾及托付的重任。
English: After passing through Guangling for dozens of miles, Cui Huijing called together the military leaders and said to them: I bear the benevolence of the previous three generations of emperors and shoulder the important task entrusted by the Ming Emperor before his death.

古文：幼主昏狂，朝廷坏乱，危而不扶，责在今日。
现代文：但幼主昏庸狂暴，朝廷纲纪败坏混乱，如果见危险而不去扶持，那么责任便在今天。
English: However, the young master is delusional and violent, the imperial discipline is corrupt and chaotic, if you see danger and do not support, then the responsibility is today.

古文：欲与诸君共建大功，以安宗社，何如？ 
现代文：我想与奋位共建大功，以使社稷安定，怎么样? 
English: I want to work with you to make a great contribution to the stability of society, how about it?

古文：众皆响应。
现代文：大家都一齐响应。
English: Everyone responded in unison.

古文：于是回军还广陵，司马崔恭祖守广陵城，开门纳之。
现代文：于是回师广陵，司马崔恭祖镇守广陵城，打开城门迎接他们。
English: So he returned to Guangling, Sima Cui Gongzu guarded Guangling, and opened the gate to welcome them.

古文：帝闻变，以征虏将军右卫将军左兴盛假节，督京邑水陆众军。
现代文：东昏侯听说兵变，便派征虏将军右卫将军左兴盛假以符节，都督京城水陆各军。
English: Hearing of the mutiny, Dongdimou sent the conscript general, Uwei, and the general, Zuo Xing Sheng, to take over the capital city and its land and water forces.

古文：慧景停二日，便收众济江集京口。
现代文：崔慧景停驻了两天，便收集部众渡过长江会合在京口。
English: Cui Huiqing stopped for two days, and then the collection department crossed the Yangtze River to meet in Beijing.

古文：江夏王宝玄又为内应，合二镇兵力，奉宝玄向京师。
现代文：江夏王萧宝玄又作为内应，崔慧景便聚合两藩镇的兵力，奉萧宝玄为主挥师京都。
English: Jiangxia King Xiao Baoxuan also acted as an internal response, and Cui Huijing then gathered the forces of the two towns, and appointed Xiao Baoxuan as the main archer of Kyoto.

古文：台遣骁骑将军张佛护、直阁将军徐元称、屯骑校尉姚景珍、西中郎参军徐景智、游荡军主董伯珍、骑官桓灵福等据竹里为数城。
现代文：朝廷派骁骑将军张佛护、直阁将军徐元称、屯骑校尉姚景珍、西中郎参军徐景智、游荡军主董伯珍、骑官桓灵福等以竹里为据点造了几道城墙。
English: The imperial court sent the cavalry generals Zhang Fogao and Zhigang General Xu Yuan, the cavalry lieutenant Yao Jingzhen, the west middle-aged soldier Xu Jingzhi, the wandering army leader Dong Bozhen, and the cavalry officer Huan Lingfu to build several city walls with Bamboo Lane as a stronghold.

古文：宝玄遣信谓佛护曰： 身自还朝，君何意苦相断遏？ 
现代文：萧宝玄派信使对张佛护说： 我要返回朝廷，你为何要竭力阻止我的去路? 
English: Xiao Baoguan sent a message to Zhang Fogao, saying, "I'm going back to the imperial court myself, why are you trying so hard to stop me?

古文：佛护答曰： 小人荷国重恩，使于此创立小戍。
现代文：张佛护回答说： 小人我深受国家大恩，奉命在这裹创建小小的营垒。
English: Zhang Fuguo replied: "I am a villain who has been greatly blessed by the state, and I have been ordered to build a small camp here.

古文：殿下还朝，但自直过，岂敢干断。 
现代文：殿下要返回朝廷，但请径直通过，我怎敢阻断。 
English: Your Highness wants to return to the Imperial Court, but please go straight through, how dare I stop you.

古文：遂射慧景军，因合战。
现代文：便用箭去射崔慧景军，于是两军会战。
English: Saying this, Zhang Fuguo shot Cui Huijing's army with an arrow, and the two sides began to scuffle.

古文：慧景子觉及崔恭祖领前锋，皆伧楚善战；又轻行不爨食。以数舫缘江载酒肉为军粮。
现代文：崔慧景子崔觉及崔恭祖率领的前锋，都是粗猛善战的人；况且他们装备轻便，行动迅速，不生火煮饭，衹用几艘大船沿江排开，船上满载酒肉作为军粮。
English: The forwards led by Cui Hui Jingzi, Cui Jue and Cui Gongzu were rough and tough men who were good at fighting; moreover, they were lightly equipped, moved quickly, did not make fire to cook rice, and used several large ships to row along the river. The ships were full of wine and meat as military food.

古文：每见台军城中烟火起，辄尽力攻击，台军不复得食，以此饥困。
现代文：每当看见朝廷军城中的炊烟升起，他们就尽力攻击，朝廷军没法吃饭，因此都很饥饿困乏。
English: Whenever they saw the smoke rising from the imperial army, they tried to attack. The imperial army could not eat, so they were very hungry.

古文：元称等议欲降，佛护不许。
现代文：涂互称等人商议，想投降，退佛护却不答允。
English: Tu Yuanzhong and others deliberated and wanted to surrender, but the Returning Buddha Protector did not agree.

古文：十二日，恭祖等复攻之，城陷，佛护单马走，追得斩首，徐元称降，余军主皆死。
现代文：十二日，崔恭祖等又一次发动攻击，城池被攻陷，张佛护单人匹马逃跑，被崔军追杀斩首，徐元称投降，其余的军主也都被杀死。
English: On the 12th, Cui Gongzu and others launched another attack, the city was captured, Zhang Fogao ran away single-handedly, was chased and beheaded by Cui's army, Xu Yuan surrendered, and the rest of the military leaders were also killed.

古文：慧景至临沂，令李玉之发桥断路，慧景收杀之。
现代文：崔慧景来到堕近，命李玉之拆桥断路，崔慧景将他捕杀了。
English: When Cui Huiqing came close to the fallen, he ordered Li Yuzhi to demolish the bridge and cut off the road. Cui Huiqing killed him.

古文：台遣中领军王莹都督众军，据湖头筑垒，上带蒋山西岩，实甲数万。
现代文：朝廷义派中领军王莹都督众军，占据湖头构筑营垒，上面连着蒋山的西岩，有甲士几万人。
English: Wang Ying, the leader of the army of the imperial court's righteous faction, occupied the head of the lake to build a camp, which was connected to the West Rock of Jiangshan, with tens of thousands of soldiers.

古文：慧景至查硎，竹塘人万副儿善射猎，能捕虎，投慧景曰： 今平路皆为台军所断，不可议进。
现代文：崔慧景来到查硎。竹塘人万副儿善于射猎，能捕捉老虎，他投奔崔慧景，说： 现在平路上都被官军阻断，不要想从这条道前进。
English: Cui Huijing came to Zhaojun. The people of Zhutang are very good at shooting and can catch tigers. He ran to Cui Huijing and said, "Now all the flat roads are blocked by the government army. Don't try to advance along this road."

古文：唯宜从蒋山龙尾上，出其不意耳。 
现代文：衹应当从蒋山那像龙尾一样的后山爬上去以出其不意。 
English: The dragonfly should climb up from the dragon's tail-like back mountain of Jiangshan Mountain to catch it unawares.

古文：慧景从之，分遣千余人鱼贯缘山，自西岩夜下，鼓叫临城中。
现代文：崔慧景听从了他的建议，分派一千多人沿着山尾鱼贯而上，晚上从西岩而下，鼓噪而进，兵临城中。
English: Cui Huiqing listened to his suggestion and dispatched more than a thousand people to march up along Shanwei Fish Pass and down from the West Rock in the evening. They marched noisily and the soldiers reached the city center.

古文：台军惊恐，即时奔散。
现代文：官军惊惶恐惧，当即四散奔逃。
English: The imperial army was taken by surprise and fled in panic, scattering like birds and beasts.

古文：帝又遣右卫将军左兴盛率台内三万人拒慧景于北篱门，望风退走。
现代文：东昏侯又派右卫将军左兴盛率台省的三万人，在北篱门抗击崔慧基，但抵敌不住，望风而逃。
English: Dongdimou also sent Right Guard General Zuo Xingsheng to lead 30,000 people from Taiwan Province to fight against Cui Huiji at the North Gate, but he could not resist and fled.

古文：慧景引军入乐游苑，恭祖率轻骑十余匹突进北掖门，乃复出，宫门皆闭。
现代文：崔慧景领兵进入乐游苑，崔恭祖率十几位轻骑兵冲进北掖门，又退出来，宫门都紧紧关上。
English: Cui Huiqing led the soldiers into Le Youyuan, Cui Gongzu led more than a dozen light cavalry into the North Gate, and then withdrew. The palace gates were tightly closed.

古文：慧景引众围之。
现代文：崔慧景率军包围了皇宫。
English: Cui Huiqing's army surrounded the imperial palace.

古文：于是东府、石头、白下、新亭诸城皆溃。
现代文：于是东府、石头、白下、新亭各城营都溃败。
English: At this time, people from several cities, including Dongfu, Stone, Baisha and Xinting, scattered.

古文：左兴盛走，不得入宫，逃淮渚荻舫中，慧景擒杀之。
现代文：逃跑，不能进入宫中，只好逃到停泊在秦淮河小洲边芦荻中的船上，崔慧景把他抓住杀掉。
English: Zuo Xingsheng fled and could not enter Miyagi, so he had to hide in a boat among the reeds along the Qinhuai River and was killed by Cui Huijing.

古文：宫中遣兵出荡，不克。
现代文：宫中派兵出去冲杀，不能腾敌。
English: The palace dispatched troops to rush out of the city, but they did not win.

古文：慧景烧兰台府署为战场，守卫尉萧畅屯南掖门处分城内，随方应击，众心以此稍安。
现代文：崔慧景把兰台府署都放火烧掉以作为战场。守卫尉萧畅屯驻在南掖门，处理城内军事，随机应付来自不同方向的攻击，因此众心才稍微安定一些。
English: Cui Huiqing set fire to the Lantai prefectural government office and used it as a battleground. Guard lieutenant Xiao Chang was stationed at the South Gate to deal with the military in the city and randomly deal with attacks from different directions, so everyone's hearts were a little more stable.

古文：慧景称宣德太后令，废帝为吴王。
现代文：崔慧景以宣德太后的名义发布命令，废少帝为吴王。
English: Cui Huiqing issued an order in the name of Empress Dowager Xuan De, and the deposed emperor became King Wu.

古文：时巴陵王昭胄先逃民间，出投慧景，慧景意更向之，故犹豫未知所立。
现代文：当时。先前逃往民间的且逛萧昭胄，这时也出来投奔崔慧景。崔慧景有意改向着他，所以犹豫不决，不知到底拥立江夏王还是巴陵王。
English: At that time, Xiao Zhaohui, who had previously fled to the people, also came out to support Cui Huijing. Cui Huijing deliberately turned to him, so he hesitated, not knowing whether to support the king of Jiangxia or the king of Baling.

古文：竹里之捷，子觉与恭祖争勋，慧景不能决。
现代文：竹里之捷，崔觉和崔恭祖争功，而崔慧景不能判定。
English: Zhu Li Zhi Jie, Cui Jie and Cui Gong Zu competed for the merit, but Cui Hui Jing could not decide.

古文：恭祖劝慧景射火箭烧北掖楼，慧景以大事垂定，后若更造，费用功力，不从其计。
现代文：崔恭祖劝崔慧景射火箭糊匕掖楼，崔慧景藉大事即将告成，如以后再行建造，又要花费大量的财力人力，所以没有听从他的计谋。
English: Cui Hongzu advised Cui Hui Jing to shoot a rocket to create a mirage. Cui Hui Jing did not listen to his advice because a great event was about to be accomplished, and if it were to be built later, it would cost a lot of money and manpower.

古文：性好谈义，兼解佛理，顿法轮寺，对客高谈。
现代文：崔慧景生性喜欢谈论义理，又通晓佛理，屯驻在法轮寺，与客人高谈阔论。
English: Cui Hui Jing likes to talk about the principles of righteousness, and she is also familiar with Buddhist principles. She stays at the Falun Temple and talks with guests.

古文：恭祖深怀怨望。
现代文：因此崔恭祖抱有深深的怨恨情绪。
English: As a result, Choe Kyong Joo harbored deep resentment.

古文：先是卫尉萧懿为征虏将军、豫州刺史，自历阳步道征寿阳。
现代文：先前，卫尉萧懿任征虏将军、豫州刺史，从历阳出发从陆路征讨寿阳。
English: Previously, Guard Lieutenant Xiao Jun, who was appointed as the conscript general and Yuzhou assassin, set out from Liyang to conquer Shouyang by land.

古文：帝遣密使告之，懿率军主胡松、李居士等数千人自采石济岸，顿越城，举火，台城中鼓叫称庆。
现代文：东昏侯派秘密使臣将京城情况告诉给他。萧懿率军主胡松、李居士等几千人马从采石矶登岸，屯驻在越城，举火为号，台城中见了擂鼓欢呼庆贺。
English: The secret envoys sent by Dongdimou told him about the situation in Beijing. Xiao Gan led the commander Hu Song, Li Jushi and several thousand horses ashore from the quarry, stationed in Yuecheng, and held a fire as a signal. Drums and cheers were heard in Taicheng.

古文：恭祖先劝慧景遣二千人断西岸军，令不得渡，慧景以城旦夕降，外救自然应散。
现代文：崔恭祖原先曾劝崔慧景派二千人阻挡住西岸敌军，使他们不能渡江。崔慧景认为台城早晚便要投降，那时外援自然会消散，不听。
English: Cui Hongzu had previously advised Cui Hui Jing to send two thousand men to block the enemy troops on the west coast, so that they could not cross the river. Cui Hui Jing believed that Taicheng would surrender sooner or later, at which time foreign aid would naturally dissipate, and did not listen.

古文：至是恭祖请击义师，又不许。
现代文：至此，崔恭祖请求攻击勤王义师，崔慧景又没有答应。
English: At this point, Cui Gongzu requested to attack Qin Wang Yishi, but Cui Huijing did not agree.

古文：乃遣子觉将精手数千人渡南岸。
现代文：衹派崔觉带领数千精兵渡到南岸。
English: Qi sent Cui Jue to lead thousands of elite soldiers to the south coast.

古文：义师昧旦进战，数合，士皆致死，觉大败，赴淮死者二千余人，觉单马退，开桁阻淮。
现代文：义师从黎明起发动进攻，几个回合，官兵们都拼命冲锋，因此崔觉大败，掉下秦淮河而死的有二千多人。崔觉单人匹马逃回，拆掉朱雀航以阻断秦淮。
English: Yishi launched an attack from dawn, several rounds, officers and soldiers were desperately charging, so Cui Jue was defeated, more than two thousand people died after falling down the Qin Huai River. Cui Jue single-handedly fled back, dismantled Zhu Zhaohang to block Qin Huai.

古文：其夜，崔恭祖与骁将刘灵运诣城降，慧景众情离坏，乃将腹心数人潜去，欲北渡江，城北诸军不知，犹为拒战。
现代文：当夜，崔恭祖舆勇将刘灵运都跑到台城投降，崔慧景军心离散，他衹带几名心腹偷偷地逃离，想北渡长江。而删匕的各军还不知晓，仍然在作战。
English: That night, Cui Gongzu Yunyong ran Liu Lingyun to Taicheng to surrender, Cui Huijing's army was dispersed, he secretly fled with several confidants, and wanted to cross the Yangtze River to the north. However, the armies of Qianlong still did not know, and they were still fighting.

古文：城内出荡，杀数百人。
现代文：这时，台城内又派兵出击，杀了好几百人。
English: At this time, soldiers in Taicheng attacked again, killing several hundred people.

古文：及走，众于道稍散，单马至蟹浦，为渔父所斩，以头内鳅鱼篮，担送至京师，时年六十三。
现代文：义师又从北岸渡过来，崔慧景的余部才纷纷奔逃。崔慧景围困台城总共十二天，部队都分散在京城各处，并且没有建造营垒。及至退兵，沿途又逃散了一些人。崔慧景单人匹马来到懈浦，被渔民所杀。渔民把他的头颅装在泥鳅篮中，挑送到京城。崔慧景当时六十三岁。
English: Yishi also came over from the north shore, and only then did the rest of Cui Huiqing flee. Cui Huiqing besieged Taicheng for a total of twelve days. The troops were scattered all over the capital, and no camp was built. When they withdrew, some people fled along the way. Cui Huiqing came to Sepu alone and was killed by fishermen. The fishermen put his head in a muddy basket and carried it to the capital. Cui Huiqing was sixty-three years old.

古文：追赠张佛护为司州刺史，左兴盛豫州刺史，并征虏将军，徐景智、桓灵福屯骑校尉，董伯珍员外郎，李玉之给事中，其余有差。
现代文：朝廷追赠张佛护为司州刺史，左兴盛为豫州刺史，二人都被封为征虏将军。追封徐景智、桓灵福为屯骑校尉，董伯珍为员外郎，李玉之为给事中，其余死难者的追赠依等级不同而各有差别。
English: The imperial court posthumously awarded Zhang Fuguo as the history of Shizhou, Zuo Xingsheng as the history of Henan, and both of them were named as conscript generals. Xu Jingzhi and Huan Lingfu were posthumously awarded the rank of cavalry lieutenant, Dong Bozhen was awarded the rank of envoy, and Li Yuxin was awarded the rank of general. The posthumous awards of the remaining victims were different according to their rank.

古文：恭祖者，慧景宗人，骁果便马槊，气力绝人，频经军阵，讨王敬则，与左兴盛军容袁文旷争敬则首，诉明帝曰： 恭祖秃马绛衫，手刺倒贼，故文旷得斩其首。
现代文：崔恭祖是崔慧景同族之人，骁勇果敢，善于骑马惯用长矛，气力超众，多次经历过战阵。讨伐王敬则时，他与左兴盛部的军容袁文旷争夺斩王敬则首级的功劳，向明帝诉说：严恭祖我骑一匹无鞍之马，身着红袍，亲手将贼人刺倒，所以文旷方能够斩下他的首级。
English: Cui Hongzu was a member of the same ethnic group as Cui Huijing. He was brave and daring, good at riding a horse, used to use a spear, and had superior strength. He had experienced many battles. When he was fighting against Wang Jingze, he competed with Yuan Wenyuan, a military figure from Zuo Xing Sheng, for the honor of cutting off Wang Jingze's head. He told Emperor Ming: Yan Gongzu, I rode a bareback horse, wore a red robe, and stabbed the thief with my own hand, so Wenyuan was able to cut off his head.

古文：以死易勋，而见枉夺。
现代文：我拼死换得的功绩，却冤枉被别人抢夺走。
English: My hard-won achievements were unjustly snatched away by others.

古文：若失此勋，要当刺杀左兴盛。 
现代文：如果我失掉逭件功劳，定要刺杀左兴盛。 
English: If I lose this achievement, I will definitely assassinate Zuo Xingsheng.

古文：帝以其勇健，使谓兴盛曰： 何容令恭祖与文旷争功。 
现代文：明帝认为他很勇猛，派人对左兴盛说： 怎能忍心让恭祖与文旷争功。 
English: Emperor Ming thought he was very brave, and sent someone to Zuo Xing Sheng to say: "How can I bear to let Gong Zu compete with Wen Kuang?"

古文：遂封二百户。
现代文：于是便封他食邑二百户。
English: As a result, two hundred households in the food village were sealed off to him.

古文：慧景平后，恭祖系尚方，少时杀之。
现代文：崔慧景事件被平定后，崔恭祖遭囚禁，不久被杀。
English: After the Cui Huijing incident was quelled, Cui Gongzu was imprisoned and soon killed.

古文：觉亡命为道人，见执伏法。
现代文：崔觉亡命作了道士，最后被捕伏法。
English: Cui Jue became a Taoist after his defection, and was finally arrested.

古文：临刑与妹书曰： 舍逆旅，归其家，以为大乐；况得从先君游太清乎！
现代文：他临刑前给妹妹的信中说： 舍弃客舍，回归家中，我以为是极大的快乐，何况还能够追随先君去游历太空呢!
English: In a letter to his sister before his execution, he said: "I thought it was a great joy to abandon the guest house and return home, not to mention being able to follow my forefather to travel in space!

古文：古人有力扛周鼎，而有立锥之叹，以此言死，亦复何伤！
现代文：古人有力能扛起周鼎，但却无立锥之地以处身的叹息；由此而言，死又有什么值得哀伤的呢!
English: The ancients were strong enough to carry Zhou Ding, but they had no place to stand with a sigh; therefore, what is there to mourn about death!

古文：平生素心，士大夫皆知之矣。
现代文：我平生夙愿，士大夫们都已知道。
English: I've always wanted to be a doctor, and the doctors already know it.

古文：既不得附骥尾，安得施名于后世？
现代文：既然不能够依附他人以成名，怎能扬名于后世?
English: If you can't rely on others to make you famous, how can you make a name for yourself in the future?

古文：慕古竹帛之事，今皆亡矣。 
现代文：心中向往的古人留芳于竹帛的美事，现在全都消亡了。 
English: All the beautiful things that the ancients yearned for in the bamboo grove have now disappeared.

古文：慧景妻女亦颇知佛义。
现代文：崔慧景的妻子女儿也懂得一些佛理。
English: Cui Huijing's wife and daughter also know some Buddhist principles.

古文：觉弟偃，为始安内史，藏窜得免。
现代文：崔觅的弟弟崔堡，任垃室内史，到处躲避流窜，才得幸免。
English: Cui Fang's younger brother, Cui Bao, was left to face the history of the room. He had to avoid the vagrants everywhere to be spared.

古文：和帝西台立，以为宁朔将军。
现代文：和帝萧实融在江睦即位，以崔僵为宁朔将军。
English: Emperor He and Emperor Xiao were enthroned in Jiangmu, with Cui Jian as the general of Ningshuo.

古文：中兴元年，诣公车门上书曰： 臣窃惟太祖、高宗之孝子忠臣，而昏主之贼臣乱子者，江夏王与陛下，先臣与镇军是也。
现代文：史兴元年，他到公重盟上书说：我想，算得上是太祖、高宗的孝子忠臣，东昏侯的乱臣贼子的人，恐怕祇有江夏王萧实玄和陛下，先父与镇军蔻颖胄。
English: In the first year of Shi Xing, he wrote to the Guozhong League, saying: I think that only Jiangxia King Xiao Shixuan and His Majesty, the forefather and the townspeople, can be regarded as the great-grandfather, the filial son and loyal subject of Gaozong, and the unruly vassal and thief of Dongdimou.

古文：臣闻尧舜之心，常以天下为忧，而不以位为乐。
现代文：我听说尧、垒的心中，常以天下安危为忧虑，而不以天子的地位为快乐。
English: I have heard that in the hearts of priests and nuns, they are often worried about the safety of the world, rather than being happy with the status of the Son of Heaven.

古文：彼孑然之舜，垄亩之人，犹尚若此；况祖业之重，家国之切？
现代文：舜是孑然一身独自躬耕田野的人，尚且能够如此；何况陛下还有祖宗家国厚重基业的切身利益呢?
English: You are a man who tills the fields single-handedly, and you can do so; what about the vital interests of Your Majesty and the rich heritage of your ancestral home?

古文：江夏既行之于前，陛下又蹈之于后，虽成败异术，而所由同方也。
现代文：江夏玉既然施行义举于前，陛下其后又照着这样走下去，虽然成败的结果不同，但所采取的方法是一样的。
English: Since Jiang Xiayu was the first to carry out the lifting of righteousness, and His Majesty followed suit, although the results of success and failure were different, the methods adopted were the same.

古文：陛下初登至尊，与天合符。
现代文：陛下初登至尊高位，与天命相符合。
English: His Majesty's ascension to the supreme high rank for the first time is in line with his destiny.

古文：天下纤介之屈，尚望陛下申之，丝发之冤，尚望陛下理之，况先帝之子，陛下之兄，所行之道，即陛下所由哉？
现代文：天下人有小如草芥的委屈，尚希望陛下为之伸张；有微如丝发的冤枉，犹期盼陛下审理它。何况先帝贵子，陛下尊兄，他所走的道路，不就是陛下所经历的吗?
English: People all over the world have grievances that are as small as a mustard seed, but they still hope that His Majesty will assert them; they have wrongs that are as thin as silk, and they still expect His Majesty to adjudicate them. What's more, isn't the path taken by the former emperor's son, His Majesty's elder brother, the same one that His Majesty experienced?

古文：如此尚弗恤，其余何几哉？
现代文：像这样大的冤屈还不去体恤，那其余的还有什么希望?
English: With a grievance as big as this still unsatisfied, what hope is there for the rest?

古文：陛下德侔造化，仁育群生，虽在昆虫草木，有不得其所者，览而伤焉，而况乎友爱天至，孔怀之深！
现代文：陛下的仁德可以和天地相媲美，爱护抚育万物众生，即使是昆虫草木，如果有不能按其自然形态生长的，您见了也觉得悲伤。何况对于出白天性的兄弟友爱的深情，怎会不怀恋?
English: His Majesty's benevolence can be compared to that of heaven and earth. He cares for and nurtures all living things. Even insects and plants, if they cannot grow according to their natural form, you feel sad when you see them. What's more, how can you not be nostalgic for the deep feelings of brotherly love that come out during the day?

古文：夫岂不怀，将以事割。
现代文：并不是不怀恋，而是由于事态被分离了。
English: It's not that they don't miss each other, it's just that they're separated due to the state of affairs.

古文：此实左右不明，未之或详。
现代文：这实在是因为陛下左右群臣不明事实真象，不了解详细情况所造成的。
English: This was really caused by the fact that His Majesty's right and left ministers did not know the truth and did not know the details.

古文：惟陛下公听并观，以询之刍荛。
现代文：希望陛下能兼听并观，去询问平民百姓。
English: I hope His Majesty will listen and see, and ask questions of the common people.

古文：群臣有以臣言为不可，乞使臣廷辩之，则天人之意塞，四海之疑释。
现代文：如果群臣中有人认为我的意见不对，不可施行，乞望能让我与他当廷辩论这个问题。则天意民意的不满便会止息，四海的怀疑也会消释。
English: If there is anyone among the courtiers who thinks that my opinion is wrong and cannot be carried out, and begs me to debate the issue with him in court, then the discontent of the people's will will cease, and the suspicion of the four seas will also disappear.

古文：必若不然，幸小民之无识耳。使其晓然知此，相聚而逃陛下，以责江夏之冤，朝廷将何以应之哉？
现代文：假若不这样做的话，那衹有侥幸希望小民们没有识见假使百姓们都十分清楚地懂得这个道理，那就会相聚而从陛下这裹逃亡，以此来表示对江夏王冤情的责问，朝廷将如何回答他们?
English: If they do not do so, it is to be hoped that the common people do not realize that if the people understand this principle very clearly, they will gather together and flee from His Majesty in order to express their grievances against the King of Jiangxia. How will the court answer them?

古文：若天听沛然回光，发恻怆之诏，而使东牟朱虚东褒仪父之节，则荷戈之士，谁不尽死？
现代文：陛下若能开天听，颁发悲悯的韶书，使束牟、朱虚、东褒、仪父的高节重新充实光大，那么荷戟的战士，哪个会不拼死效力?
English: If your majesty could open the heavens and listen, issue a condolence letter, and make Sokumu, Zhu Hu, Dongbao, and the high festival of the father of the ceremony replenish the glory, then which of the warriors of the lotus will not fight to the death?

古文：愚戆之言，万一上合，事乞留中。 
现代文：我这愚蠢的意见，万一能够符合陛下之意，便乞请将奏章留于宫禁之中。
English: In the unlikely event that this foolish opinion of mine should meet with Your Majesty's approval, I beg you to keep the score under house arrest.

古文：事寝不报。
现代文：书奏上而消息全无，不见答覆。
English: The motion was put on hold with no response.

古文：偃又上疏曰：
现代文：崔偃又上奏和帝说：
English: Cui Zhen again played the role of the emperor and said:

古文：近冒陈江夏之冤，定承圣诏，已有褒赠，此臣狂疏之罪也。
现代文：最近我冒昧地陈述了江夏王的冤情，后接到诏书，对他已有所封赠，这是我狂妄粗率所造成的罪过。
English: Recently, I had the temerity to state the grievances of Jiangxia Wang, and after receiving the edict, I have already given him a gift, which is a crime caused by my arrogance and rudeness.

古文：然臣所以谘问者，不得其实，罪在万没，无所复云。
现代文：但臣下我之所以再度询问的原因，在于没有得到切合实际的答覆，虽罪该万死，我也没有什么话说。
English: But the reason I'm asking again is because I haven't gotten a real answer, and I don't have anything to say, even though I'm guilty as hell.

古文：但愚心所恨，非敢以父子之亲，骨肉之间，而侥幸曲陛下之法，伤至公之义。
现代文：但我心中深感遗憾的，并非胆敢以父子骨肉之间的亲情，去侥幸地让陛下的法律受到枉屈，伤害了极公止的道义。
English: But what I deeply regret in my heart is not that I dared to take advantage of the kinship between father and son, to let His Majesty's law be unjustly infringed, and hurt the morality of extreme fairness.

古文：诚不晓圣朝所以然之意。
现代文：而是确实不懂得圣朝之所以这样做的含意何在。
English: But I really don't understand the meaning of why the Holy See did this.

古文：若以狂主虽狂，而实是天子，江夏虽贤，实是人臣，先臣奉人臣逆人君，以为不可申明诏，得矣；然未审陛下亦是人臣不？
现代文：如果因为狂暴的君主即使狂暴，他也是天子；江夏王虽然贤德，也不过是人臣；先父事奉人臣而背叛人君，所以认为不可以颁发韶书为之申雪，从道理上讲似乎是这样。但我不明白陛下也是不是人臣?
English: If, because of a violent ruler, even if he is violent, he is the son of heaven; the king of Jiangxia, although he is virtuous, is only a vassal; his father served as a vassal and betrayed a vassal, so it is considered that it is not possible to issue an imperial edict for him to abdicate, it seems to be so from a logical point of view. But I don't understand, is your majesty also not a vassal?

古文：而镇军亦复奉人臣逆人君，今之严兵劲卒，方指于象魏者，其故何哉？
现代文：而镇军将军也是事奉人臣去背叛人君，现在严整而强劲的军队，正在向朝廷进发，这又是什么缘故呢?
English: But the general of the town army also served as a vassal to betray a vassal, and now the strict and strong army is advancing towards the imperial court, what is the reason for this?

古文：臣所不死，苟存视息，非有他故，所以待皇运之开泰，申冤魂之枉屈。
现代文：我之所以不死，苟且偷生，没有别的原因，衹是在等待着皇朝国运的重新开通。以便申诉冤魂的枉屈之情。
English: There is no other reason why I do not die, but secretly live, but I am waiting for the re-opening of the imperial and national games. In order to appeal to the unjust feelings of the souls.

古文：今皇运既已开泰矣，而死于社稷尽忠，反以为贼，臣何用此生陛下世矣。
现代文：今皇运已经亨通安泰，而那些竭尽忠心为社稷而死的人，反而被认为是贼子，我这辈子何必要生在陛下之世呢!
English: Now that the emperor's fortune has been successful and secure, and those who are loyal and die for the society are considered to be thieves, why do I need to be born in His Majesty's world in this life!

古文：臣闻王臣之节，竭智尽公以奉其上；居股肱之任者，申理冤滞，荐达群贤。
现代文：我听说志匡王室之臣的节义，是竭尽才智公心来事奉君上。担负辅佐重任的股肱之臣，更要申雪处理冤屈阻滞之情，举荐各种贤德之人。
English: I have heard that the duty of a vassal of the imperial family is to serve the emperor with all his abilities, wisdom and sincerity. A vassal of a vassal who is responsible for supporting the imperial family should not only handle grievances, but also recommend people with various virtues.

古文：凡此众臣，夙兴夜寐，心未尝须臾之间而不在公。
现代文：所有的这些臣子们，都是早起晚睡，心思没有一刻不是放在公务上。
English: All these courtiers get up early and go to bed late, and their minds are not on official business for a single moment.

古文：故万物无不得其理，而颂声作焉。
现代文：所以万事万物都处理得井井有条，而百姓们便发出了颂扬之声。
English: Therefore, everything was handled in an orderly manner, and the people gave a voice of praise.

古文：臣谨案镇军将军臣颖胄，宗室之亲，股肱之重，身有伊、霍之功，荷陛下稷、旦之任。中领军臣详，受帷幄之寄，副宰相之尊。
现代文：据我看来，镇军将军大臣萧颖胄，是皇室的宗亲，股肱重臣，具有伊尹、霍光那样的功勋，为陛下担负着像后稷、周公旦那样的重任中领军大臣夏侯详，受到军事重任的委托，和宰相的尊贵相称。
English: In my opinion, Minister Xia Yingtao, the general of the town army, is a relative of the imperial family, a senior vassal, and has the same merits as Yi Yin and Huo Guang. For His Majesty, he bears the heavy responsibilities like Houyi and Zhou Gong's husband, and is entrusted with heavy military responsibilities, which is commensurate with the dignity of the prime minister.

古文：皆所以栋梁朝廷，社稷之臣，天下所当，遑遑匪懈，尽忠竭诚，欲使万物得理，而颂声大兴者，岂复宜逾此哉？
现代文：他们都是朝廷的栋梁，社稷的重臣，众望所归，民心所向。他们毫不松懈地竭尽忠诚，想让万事万物都顺其条理，而赞颂之声大起，还有什么事比这更重要的?
English: They are the pillars of the imperial court, the chief ministers of the society, the hopes of the people, and the hearts of the people. They are unremittingly loyal, want everything to be orderly, and praise is loud, what else is more important than this?

古文：而同知先臣股肱江夏，匡济王室，天命未遂，王亡与亡，而不为陛下瞥然一言。
现代文：而先父同样作为江夏王的股肱之臣，匡扶挽救王室，但天命不使其成功，与江夏王一道就死，却得不到陛下匆忙的一顾和片言的评价。
English: His father, as a vassal of King Jiangxia, also helped save the royal family, but fate did not allow him to succeed, and he died together with King Jiangxia, but he did not receive His Majesty's hasty attention and partial evaluation.

古文：知而不言，是不忠之臣，不知而言，乃不智之臣，此而不知，将何所知？
现代文：知道而不说，是不忠正的臣子；不知道而随便说，是不明智的臣子。这样重大的事都不想知道，那还有什么值得知道的。
English: He who knows but does not speak is an unfaithful and dishonest vassal; he who does not know but speaks carelessly is an unwise vassal. He does not want to know such important things, so what is there worth knowing?

古文：如以江夏心异先臣，受制臣力，则江夏同致死毙，听可昏政淫刑，见残无道。
现代文：如果以为江夏王心志并不同于先父，他是受到先父力量的挟制，那么江夏王与先父共同招致杀身之祸，就只好聘任昏暗的政治和暴虐的刑罚横行，被无道的君主残害了。
English: If it is believed that Jiangxia Wang's heart is different from that of his forefather and that he is being held hostage by his forefather's power, then Jiangxia Wang and his forefather have jointly brought about the calamity of killing himself, so he had no choice but to employ dark politics and tyrannical punishment to run rampant, and was killed by the ruthless monarch.

古文：然江夏之异，以何为明，孔、吕二人，谁以为戮？
现代文：但江夏王与先父不同心，用什么来证明?孔明、吕尚二人，将会拿谁来开刀?
English: But what is the proof that King Jiangxia is not of the same mind as his forefather? Which of the two, Kongming or Lushang, will be executed?

古文：手御麾幡，言辄任公，同心共志，心若胶漆，而以为异，臣窃惑焉。
现代文：他们都手执指挥大旗，言谈出以公心，同心共志，如胶似漆般的亲密，而认为他们各怀异心，我对此深感疑惑。
English: I am deeply puzzled by the fact that they all hold the flag of command in their hands and talk about being of the same mind, having the same aspirations, and being as close as glue.

古文：如以先臣遣使，江夏斩之，则征东之驿，何为见戮？
现代文：如果以先父派遣去的使臣被江夏王斩杀作为他们异心的理由的话，那么征东将军派来的使者又为什么会被杀戮?
English: If the envoys sent by his father were killed by the King of Jiangxia as the reason for their estrangement, then why were the envoys sent by the General of the Expedition to the East killed?

古文：陛下斩征东之使，实诈山阳；江夏违先臣之请，实谋孔矜。
现代文：陛下斩征束将军的使臣，是像山阳公那样使用欺诈之术；江夏王违背先父的请求，也是出于像孔矜一样的策略需要。
English: His Majesty's beheading of King Tianhu was indeed for the purpose of deceiving Liu Shanyang; while King Jiangxia, in defiance of his father's request, beheaded the envoy sent by his father, was actually for the purpose of obtaining Kong Yao.

古文：天命有归，故事业不遂耳。
现代文：天命已确定了归向，所以他们的事业才没有成功。
English: As fate would have it, the careers of Jiang Xiao Wang and his father did not succeed.

古文：夫唯圣人，乃知天命，守忠之臣，唯知尽死，安顾成败。
现代文：大凡衹有圣人才知道天命，而一般坚持忠诚的臣子，惟知尽心竭力，哪裹会去考虑事业的成败。
English: Only a great sage knows the fate of the world, but a loyal vassal will not think about the success or failure of the cause unless he knows how to do his best.

古文：诏称江夏遭时屯故，迹屈行令，内恕探情，无玷纯节。
现代文：诏书说江夏王因为遇到艰难时世的缘故，所以才不得不委屈自己的心迹而行事，探测他心中的隐情，是可以原谅的，这并没有玷污他纯洁的节操。
English: The edict said that King Jiangxia was forced to act against his own inclinations because of the hard times he had encountered, and that it was forgivable to probe the hidden feelings in his heart. This did not tarnish his pure morality.

古文：今兹之旨，又何以处镇军哉？
现代文：依照这道圣旨，又将把镇军将军萧颖胄放在什么位置上呢。
English: According to this edict, what position will the town's general Xiao Yingyao be placed in?

古文：臣所言毕矣，乞就汤镬。
现代文：我要说的都说完了，请求让我赴汤镂而死吧。
English: I've said all I have to say. Please let me go to Tanggu and die.

古文：然臣虽万没，犹愿陛下必申先臣。
现代文：但即使我罪该万死，还希望陛下一定为先父申辩冤情。
English: However, even if I die, I still hope that His Majesty will definitely seek justice for my father.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：恻怆而申之，则天下伏；不恻怆而申之，天下之人北面而事陛下者，徒以力屈耳。
现代文：悲悯而申辩冤情，则天下人便心悦诚服；不去悲悯和申辩冤情，则天下人之所以还能向北事奉陛下，那衹不过是屈服于陛下的威力罢了。
English: To sympathize and plead for one's grievances is to win the hearts and minds of the people of the world; not to sympathize and plead for one's grievances is to succumb to the power of His Majesty, which is why the people of the world can still serve His Majesty in the north.

古文：先臣之忠，有识所知，南史之笔，千载可期，亦何待陛下屈申而为褒贬。
现代文：先父的忠贞，这是有识之士所共知的，并可期望良史之笔将他载入史册，千古流传，何苦定要等待陛下为之伸张褒赞呢。
English: The loyalty of my forefather is well known to those with insight, and it can be expected that the pen of history will record him in the annals of history. Why should we wait for His Majesty to praise him?

古文：然小臣惓惓之愚，为陛下计耳。
现代文：但小臣我之所以要如此恳切地表达愚情，是替陛下考虑啊。
English: However, the foolishness of my impatience is entirely out of consideration for His Majesty.

古文：臣之所言，非孝于父，实忠于君。
现代文：我所说的一切，并非是孝顺父亲，实在是忠诚于君王。
English: All that I have said is not out of obedience to my father, but out of loyalty to the king.

古文：唯陛下熟察，少留心焉。
现代文：希望陛下能仔细考虑，对此稍加留心。
English: I hope His Majesty will think about it carefully and pay some attention to it.

古文：臣频触宸严，而不彰露，所以每上封事者，非自为戆地，犹以《春秋》之义有隐讳之意也。
现代文：我多次触犯了陛下的帝威，但都不是明显地表露出来。之所以每次都是上奏封事，以防泄漏，并非故作戆直，而是包含有《春秋》大义为尊者隐讳的意思在内。
English: I have violated His Majesty's imperial majesty's will many times, but it has not been obvious. The reason why I have sealed the letter every time to prevent leaks is not a deliberate act, but includes the meaning of concealing the "Spring and Autumn" virtue for His Holiness.

古文：臣虽浅薄，然今日之事，斩足断头，残身灭形，何所不能？为陛下耳。
现代文：我虽然浅薄，但今日之事，即使是砍断我的脚，杀我的头，摧残我的身体，消灭我，怎样做都可以，我是为了陛下啊。
English: Although I am shallow, but today's matter, even if I cut off my feet, kill my head, destroy my body, destroy me, I can do anything, I am for His Majesty.

古文：臣闻生人之死，肉人之骨，有识之士，未为多感。
现代文：我听说让将死的人复生，使贫弱的人富有，对于这种做法，有识之士并不会过多的感激。
English: I've heard it said that raising the dead and enriching the poor and the weak is not a practice for which a man of sense can be too grateful.

古文：公听并观，申人之冤，秉德任公，理人之屈，则普天之人，争为之死。
现代文：如果能够保持仁德，处事公正，普遍听取意见，多方加以考察，为人申理冤屈，则普天下的人都会争着为他去死。
English: If you can maintain benevolence, deal with things fairly, generally listen to opinions, examine them from many sides, and settle grievances for people, then people all over the world will compete to die for him.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢?
English: Why is that?

古文：理之所不可以已也。
现代文：因为公理是不可以止息的。
English: Because justice cannot be silenced.

古文：陛下若引臣冤，免臣兄之罪，收往失，发恻怆之诏，怀可报之意，则桀之犬实可吠尧，跖之客实可刺由，又何况由之犬，尧之客？
现代文：陛下如果能够替我申冤。赦免我兄长的罪过，收回以往的失误，颁布悲伤的诏书，心怀报德之意，则夏桀之犬可以对尧狂吠，盗跖的刺客可以去刺杀许由，何况尧之犬，许由之客，更会为主人效死力。
English: Your Majesty, if you can do justice for me, forgive my brother's sins, take back the past mistakes, issue a sad edict, and have the intention of rewarding virtue, then the dog of Xia Ye can bark madly at the dragonfly, the assassin of the dragonfly can assassinate Xu Ye, and the dog of the dragonfly, the guest of Xu Ye, will serve the master with deadly force.

古文：臣非吝生，实为陛下重此名于天下。已成之基，可惜之宝，莫复是加。
现代文：我并不期望着能够活着，实在是为了使陛下的名声受天下人所敬重已开创的基业，是最可珍惜的宝物，再没有什么东西比它更珍贵。
English: I do not expect to live, but to make His Majesty's reputation revered by the world. The foundation that has been created is the most precious treasure, and there is nothing more precious than it.

古文：浸明浸昌，不可不循，浸微浸灭，不可不慎。惟陛下熟察，详择其衷。
现代文：对于君土来说，一定要让它顺着逐渐开明昌盛的道路继续发展，而小心谨慎地不使它逐渐衰微和败亡。希望陛下仔细考虑，审慎地择取我的善言。
English: As for the royal land, it must continue to develop along the path of gradual enlightenment and prosperity, and be careful not to let it gradually decline and fall. I hope that His Majesty will carefully consider and carefully choose my kind words.

古文：若陛下犹以为疑，镇军未之允决，乞下征东共详可否。
现代文：如果陛下还有疑惑，镇军将军萧颖胄也不能决断的话，那就乞请陛下舆征束将军萧衍共同研究能否这么办。
English: If Your Majesty still has doubts and the town's general Xiao Yingtao cannot make a decision, then please ask Your Majesty to enlist General Xiao Yan to jointly study whether this can be done.

古文：无以向隅之悲，而伤陛下满堂之乐。
现代文：不要因为我个人的悲伤而损害了陛下满朝的和乐。
English: Don't let my personal grief damage the harmony of His Majesty's reign.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢?
English: Why is that?

古文：陛下昏主之弟，江夏亦昏主之弟；镇军受遗托之恩，先臣亦荷顾命之重。
现代文：陛下足昏庸君主的弟弟，江夏王也是昏庸君主的弟弟；萧颖胄受到托孤的恩宠，先父也肩负着顾命的重任。
English: His Majesty was the younger brother of Emperor Douyu, and King Jiangxia was also the younger brother of Emperor Douyu; Xiao Yingyao was favored by the emperor, and his father also shouldered the heavy responsibility of taking care of his life.

古文：情节无异，所为皆同，殊者唯以成败仰资圣朝耳。
现代文：情节毫无差异，所作所为也都相同，区别之处仅是仰仗依赖皇朝的方式不同及最终成败的结果不同而已。
English: There is no difference in the plot, the actions are all the same, the only difference is the different ways of relying on the imperial dynasty and the different results of ultimate success or failure.

古文：臣不胜愚忠，请使群臣廷辩者，臣乞专令一人，精赐本语，侥幸万一，天听昭然，则轲沈七族，离燔妻子，人以为难，臣岂不易！
现代文：我之所以不胜愚忠地请求与群臣当廷辩论，实际是请求陛下专门命令一人，将陛下的原话精确地恩赐给我。我侥幸地寄希望于万一，天听能够明白无疑，则荆轲刺秦王而使七族遭难，要离刺庆忌而火烧妻子儿女，别人都认为很难做到，对我来说就不难了。
English: The reason why I so foolishly asked to debate with the courtiers at court was actually to ask His Majesty to specifically order one person to give me His Majesty's exact words. I was lucky enough to hope that in the unlikely event that the heavenly audience could understand without a doubt, it would not be difficult for me to stab the King of Qin and cause the Seven Tribes to suffer, and to burn my wife and children to death. Others think it is difficult to do, but it is not difficult for me.

古文：诏报曰： 具卿冤切之怀。
现代文：韶书答覆说： 我完全了解你冤切的情怀。
English: Zenshu replied, "I completely understand your feelings of grievance.

古文：卿门首义，而旌德未彰，亦追以慨然。今当显加赠谥。 
现代文：你一家首举义旗，但有德之人未获表彰，回想起来也叫人感慨叹息，现在应当明显她加以追封称号。 
English: Your family was the first to raise the banner of righteousness, but the virtuous person was not commended, and in retrospect it was also a sigh of regret. Now it should be obvious that she was awarded the title.

古文：偃寻下狱死。
现代文：不久，崔偃便被送进监狱而死。
English: But Cui Yao was soon released from prison and died.

古文：张欣泰，字义亨，竟陵人也。
现代文：张欣泰字义亨，竟陵人。
English: Zhang Xintai's character, Yiheng, is actually a mausoleum.

古文：父兴世，宋左卫将军。
现代文：其父张兴世是宋左卫将军。
English: His father, Zhang Xingshi, was a general of the Song Dynasty.

古文：欣泰少有志节，不以武业自居，好隶书，读子史。
现代文：张欣泰少年时便很有志气，不仅仅把习武当成学业，还爱好隶书，喜欢读些诸子著作和历史书籍。
English: When Zhang Xintai was a young boy, he was very ambitious. He not only regarded martial arts as his schoolwork, but also loved reading books, and liked to read various children's books and history books.

古文：年十余，诣吏部尚书褚渊，渊问之曰： 张郎弓马多少？ 
现代文：十几岁时，去见吏部尚书厘瑚，鲨遄问他： 张郎武艺如何? 
English: When he was a teenager, he went to see Shang Shulihu, the head of the personnel department, and asked him: How is Zhang Lang's martial arts?

古文：欣泰答曰： 性怯畏马，无力牵弓。 
现代文：张欣泰回答说： 生性胆怯害怕骑马，无力开弓。 
English: Zhang Xintai replied, "I'm afraid of riding a horse, and I can't open a bow.

古文：渊甚异之。
现代文：褚渊觉得他与众不同。
English: Shanyuan thinks he's different.

古文：辟州主簿，历诸王府佐。
现代文：张欣泰被征召为州主簿，历任诸王府佐。
English: Zhang Xintai was conscripted to be the chief accountant of the state, and successively served as the assistant of the royal court.

古文：元徽中，兴世在家，拥雍州还资，见钱三千万。
现代文：元徽年间，张兴世闲居在家，有从雍州带回来的资财现钱三千万。
English: During the Yuanhui era, Zhang Xingshe idled at home and brought back 30 million yuan from Yongzhou.

古文：苍梧王自领人劫之，一夜垂尽，兴世忧惧感病卒。
现代文：苍梧王亲自领着人把钱都抢走，一夜之间几乎抢劫得干干净净。张兴世忧惧交加，得病而死。
English: Cangwu Wang personally led the people to rob the money, and the robbery was almost clean overnight. Zhang Xingshi was worried and died of illness.

古文：欣泰兄欣华时任安成郡，欣泰悉封余财以待之。
现代文：当时，张欣泰的兄长张欣华正在安成郡任职，张欣泰便把剩下的财产封存好等待他来。
English: At that time, Zhang Xintai's brother Zhang Xinhua was working in Ancheng County. Zhang Xintai sealed the rest of his property and waited for him to come.

古文：建元初，历官宁朔将军，累除尚书都官郎。
现代文：齐建元初年，他官至宁朔将军，拜授为尚书都官郎。
English: In the first year of Qi Jianyuan, he was promoted to the position of Ningshuo general, and was awarded the title of Shangshuo official.

古文：世祖与欣泰早经款遇，及即位，以为直阁将军，领禁旅。
现代文：齐世祖萧迹与张欣泰很早便有交情，即位后，便任命他为直合将军，统领禁军。
English: Qi Shizuo and Zhang Xintai had been friends for a long time. After he ascended the throne, he appointed him as the general of the imperial army.

古文：除豫章王太尉参军，出为安远护军、武陵内史。
现代文：拜授为豫章王太尉参军，出任安远护军、武陵内史。
English: He was awarded the title of Yu Zhang Wang Taifu, joined the army, and served as a protector of Anyuan and a historian of Wuling.

古文：还复为直阁，步兵校尉，领羽林监。
现代文：回京后复任为直合将军，步兵校尉，领羽林监。
English: After returning to Beijing, he was reappointed as Zhihe general, infantry lieutenant, and forester.

古文：欣泰通涉雅俗，交结多是名素。
现代文：张欣泰雅俗兼通，相交往的多是些名士清流。
English: Zhang Xintai is both elegant and vulgar. Most of his acquaintances are celebrities.

古文：下直辄游园池，著鹿皮冠，衲衣锡杖，挟素琴。
现代文：下班后就去园林中游玩，而且是头戴鹿皮帽，身穿僧衣，拿着锡杖，带着素琴。
English: After work, he would go for a walk in the garden, wearing a deerskin hat, monk's robes, a pewter cane and a suqin.

古文：有以启世祖者，世祖曰： 将家儿何敢作此举止！ 
现代文：有人向齐世祖报告，世祖说： 武将家的儿子怎敢有如此的举动! 
English: Someone reported to Qi Shizu, and Shizu said: "How dare the son of a military family behave like that!

古文：后从车驾出新林，敕欣泰甲仗廉察，欣泰停仗，于松树下饮酒赋诗。
现代文：后来，随从世祖出巡新林，敕命张欣泰身披盔甲拿着仪仗去访察，张欣泰放下仪仗，在松树下饮酒赋诗。
English: Later, when Zhang Xintai went on a tour of the New Forest with his ancestor, he put on his armor and went to inspect the ceremonial battle. Zhang Xintai put down the ceremonial battle and drank alcohol under the pine trees to compose poems.

古文：制局监吕文度过见，启世祖。
现代文：制局监吕文度经过时看见了，便报告了齐世祖。
English: When the superintendent of the Bureau of Engraving and Printing, Lü Wenda, saw it, he reported it to Qi Shizu.

古文：世祖大怒，遣出外，数日，意稍释，召还，谓之曰： 卿不乐为武职驱使，当处卿以清贯。 
现代文：齐世祖大怒，把他赶了出去。过了几天，世祖的怒气稍稍有些消释，又把张欣泰召回来，对他说： 你不乐意担任武职供我驱使，就把你放置在清贵的文职上去吧。 
English: Qi Shizu was furious and threw him out. A few days later, when Shizu's anger had somewhat subsided, he called Zhang Xintai back and said to him, "If you are not willing to serve as a military official for me to drive you, then place yourself in a noble civilian position."

古文：除正员郎。
现代文：拜为正员郎。
English: He was appointed to Shokanshiro.

古文：永明八年，出为镇军中兵参军、南平内史。
现代文：永明八年，张欣泰出任镇军中兵参军、南平内史。
English: In the eighth year of Yongming, Zhang Xintai served as a soldier in the town army and joined the army, Nanping history.

古文：巴东王子响杀僚佐，上遣中庶子胡谐之西讨，使欣泰为副。
现代文：巴东王萧子响杀了政府派去的官吏属员，世祖派中庶于胡谐之向西征讨，命张欣泰作他的副手。
English: Xiao Zi, the king of Badong, ordered Zhang Xintai to be his second-in-command after he killed the official sent by the government.

古文：欣泰谓谐之曰： 今太岁在西南，逆岁行军，兵家深忌，不可见战，战必见危。
现代文：张欣泰对胡谐之说： 现太岁星正处在西南，违反岁星的方位而采取军事行动，是兵家的大忌，所以不可以和他们交战，直接交战会有危险。
English: Zhang Xintai said to Hu Huningzhi: At present, the Chinese New Year Star is in the southwest. It is a taboo for soldiers to take military action against the position of the Chinese New Year Star. Therefore, it is not allowed to fight with them. There will be danger in direct combat.

古文：今段此行，胜既无名，负诚可耻。
现代文：现在这场战争，胜了也不能扬名，败了就实在可耻。
English: Now this war, if you win, you can't make a name for yourself. If you lose, it's really a shame.

古文：彼凶狡相聚，所以为其用者，或利赏逼威，无由自溃。
现代文：这些凶狠狡诈之徒聚合在一起，被巴束王利用，其原因或是贪图财物的赏赐，或是被威势所逼迫，因此不会无缘无故就溃散。
English: Xiao Zixing gathered a group of fierce and cunning people. They obeyed his command because some were greedy for rewards, and some were afraid of his voice. Therefore, they would not collapse on their own.

古文：若且顿军夏口，宣示祸福，可不战而擒也。 
现代文：如果我们暂时驻军于夏口，向他们晓谕利害翻系，便可以不战而胜，擒获他们。 
English: If we temporarily station our troops in Xiakou and explain to them what is at stake, we can win without a fight and capture them.

古文：谐之不从，进屯江津，尹略等见杀。
现代文：胡谐之没有听从劝告，进驻江津，结果，尹略等人被杀。
English: Hu Junzhi did not listen to the advice and stationed in Jiangjin. As a result, Yin Luo and others were killed.

古文：事平，欣泰徙为随王子隆镇西中兵，改领河东内史。
现代文：事件平息之后，张欣泰改任随王萧子隆的镇西中兵，改领河东内史。
English: After the incident subsided, Zhang Xintai was reassigned to the Zhenxi Middle School of Wang Xiaozilong, and he was assigned to the Department of Inner History of Hedong Province.

古文：子隆深相爱纳，数与谈宴，州府职局，多使关领，意遇与谢朓相次。
现代文：萧子隆对他很是厚爱，多次与他交谈宴饮。州府中的职位事务，也大多让他去照看统领，对他的赏识待遇与对待谢跳差不多。
English: Xiao Zilong was very fond of him, and had many conversations and banquets with him. He also mostly let him look after the commander-in-chief in the post affairs of the state government, and his appreciation and treatment were almost the same as that of Xie Biao.

古文：典签密以启闻，世祖怒，召还都。
现代文：典签把这些情况秘密地上奏，世祖听了，大怒，把张欣泰召回到京城。
English: The annotator secretly recorded these circumstances. Hearing this, the patriarch flew into a rage and summoned Zhang Xintai back to the capital.

古文：屏居家巷，置宅南冈下，面接松山。
现代文：他隐居在普通的小巷中，在南冈下造了一座住宅，面朝着松山。
English: He secluded himself in an ordinary alley and built a house under the South Hill, facing Matsuyama.

古文：欣泰负弩射雉，恣情闲放。
现代文：张欣泰经常带着弓弩去射雉鸡，放纵闲情逸致。
English: Zhang Xintai often takes a bow and arrow to shoot pheasants, indulging in idleness.

古文：众伎杂艺，颇多闲解。
现代文：对于一些闲杂的技艺，也颇为通晓。
English: He is also quite familiar with some idle skills.

古文：明帝即位，为领军长史，迁谘议参军。
现代文：齐明帝即位，张欣泰为领军长史，迁谘议参军。
English: When Emperor Qiming ascended to the throne, Zhang Xintai, who had been leading the army for a long time, decided to join the army.

古文：上书陈便宜二十条，其一条言宜毁废塔寺。
现代文：他上书陈述二十条简便可行的事情，其中有一条说应当拆除佛塔寺庙。
English: He submitted a letter stating twenty simple and feasible things, one of which said that the pagoda temple should be demolished.

古文：帝并优诏报答。
现代文：明帝都用平和的口气下诏回答他。
English: Emperor Ming replied to him in a peaceful tone.

古文：建武二年，虏围钟离城。
现代文：建武二年，北魏军围困钟离城。
English: In the second year of Jianwu, the Northern Wei Army besieged Zhongli.

古文：欣泰为军主，随崔慧景救援。
现代文：张欣泰当时任军主，随崔慧景前去救援。
English: Zhang Xintai, then commander of the army, went to the rescue with Cui Huijing.

古文：欣泰移虏广陵侯曰： 闻攻钟离是子之深策，可无谬哉！
现代文：张欣泰移传檄文给北魏广陵侯说： 听说攻打钟离，是先生的高深的计策，可这不是一个错误的决策吗？
English: Zhang Xintai transferred the imperial edict to Guangling Hou of the Northern Wei Dynasty and said: I heard that attacking Zhongli was the master's profound strategy, but is this not a wrong decision?

古文：《兵法》云： 城有所不攻，地有所不争。 
现代文：《兵法》说 城有所不攻，地有所不争 。
English: The "Law of War" says that the city is not attacked, and the land is not disputed.

古文：岂不闻之乎？
现代文：你难道没有听说过吗?
English: Haven't you heard?

古文：我国家舟舸百万，覆江横海，所以案甲于今不至，欲以边城疲魏士卒。
现代文：我国有舟船百万，遮盖了大江布满了大海，之所以按兵不动，到现在也不去救援，是想用边城把魏军拖垮。
English: China has millions of boats and ships, covering the great river with the sea. The reason why the soldiers did not move and still do not go to the rescue is that they want to use the border city to drag down the Wei army.

古文：我且千里运粮，行留俱弊，一时霖雨，川谷涌溢，然后乘帆渡海，百万齐进，子复奚以御之？
现代文：我军即将千里运来粮草，等到你们行军驻扎都很疲惫之时，乘大雨连绵，江河溪谷涨满之机，然后乘风帆渡海，百万舟船齐头并进，那时你将如何抵御?
English: Our army is about to transport thousands of miles of grain and grass, and when you are tired of marching and stationing, take advantage of the continuous heavy rain, the rivers and valleys are full of opportunities, and then sail across the sea, millions of boats go hand in hand, then how will you resist?

古文：乃令魏主以万乘之重，攻此小城，是何谓欤？
现代文：你让魏主以万乘之君的贵重身份，来攻打这小小的城池，这叫什么谋略?
English: What kind of strategy is it when you ask the Lord of Wei to attack this small city with the precious identity of the Prince of Manchuria?

古文：攻而不拔，谁之耻邪？
现代文：攻城却不能夺取，那将是谁的耻辱?
English: Whose shame would it be to attack a city and fail to take it?

古文：假令能拔，子守之，我将连舟千里，舳舻相属，西过寿阳，东接沧海，仗不再请，粮不更取，士卒偃卧，起而接战，乃鱼鳖不通，飞鸟断绝，偏师淮左，其不能守，晈可知矣。
现代文：即使让你攻克了，你来守卫它，我军战船首尾相连，延绵千里，西过寿阳，束接沧海，军备充足，不必再增添兵械粮草，士卒们晚上安睡，养精蓄锐，起而接战，能使鱼鳖不通，飞鸟断绝，你一支偏师驻守在淮河之北，根本就守不住，这是明显可知的。
English: Even if you were to conquer it, you would come to guard it. Our warships are connected end-to-end, stretching thousands of miles, passing Shouyang in the west, and connecting the sea of vicissitudes. The armament is sufficient, and there is no need to add more military equipment and grain. The officers sleep well at night, keep their spirits up, and get up to fight. This can make the fish bait impassable and cut off the birds. Your one division stationed in the north of the Huai River cannot be defended at all. This is obvious.

古文：如其不拔，吾将假法于魏之有司，以请子之过。
现代文：假如你不能攻占城池，我将藉魏的司法部门，去惩罚你的过错。
English: If you fail to take the city, I will use Wei's justice department to punish you for your mistake.

古文：若挫兵夷众，攻不卒下，驱士填隍，拔而不能守，则魏朝名士，其当别有深致乎？吾所未能量。
现代文：如果你攻城不能很快地攻下，使兵锋受挫，被杀的人很多，或者虽然攻克却不能守卫，衹是白白地驱赶士卒身填壕沟，则你这位魏朝名士，大概会别有一番滋味在心头吧，这是我所不能够量度的。
English: If you attack a city and can't take it quickly, frustrate the front line, and many people are killed, or if you can't defend it even though you've taken it, but you just drive the soldiers away to fill the trenches, then you, a famous person from the Wei Dynasty, will probably have a different taste in your heart, which I can't measure.

古文：昔魏之太武佛狸，倾一国之众，攻十雉之城，死亡太半，仅以身返。
现代文：从前，北魏太武帝佛狸，竭尽全国之兵，去攻打十堞的小城，死亡大半，仅只身而返。
English: Once upon a time, the Northern Wei Emperor Taibu, the Buddha, exhausted the soldiers of the whole country, went to attack ten small cities, most of them died, only to return.

古文：既智屈于金墉，亦虽拔而不守，皆算失所为，至今为笑。
现代文：智力被坚城所屈服，虽攻占却不能守卫，逭都是筹划失策所造成的。至今成为笑柄。
English: Intellect was bowed down by the fortified city, and although it was captured, it could not be guarded. The confusion was caused by planning mistakes. It has become a laughing stock.

古文：前鉴未远，已忘之乎？
现代文：前车之鉴不速，难道已经忘记了吗?
English: Isn't it time to learn from the past, or have we already forgotten?

古文：和门邑邑，戏载往意。 
现代文：对于我这偏将说的意见，你这位军门大概不很乐意吧。 
English: You, as a member of the military, are probably not very happy about my opinion.

古文：虏既为徐州军所挫，更欲于邵阳洲筑城。
现代文：北魏军被徐州军挫败后，又想在邵阳洲建筑城池。
English: After the Northern Wei Army was defeated by the Xuzhou Army, it wanted to build a city in Shaoyangzhou.

古文：慧景虑为大患。
现代文：崔慧景担心这是心腹大患。
English: Cui Huiqing is worried that this is the result of a personal grudge.

古文：欣泰曰： 虏所以筑城者，外示姱大，实惧我蹑其后耳。
现代文：张欣泰说： 敌虏筑城的原因，是对外显示强大，实际上是害怕我军偷偷地行进到他们的后面去。
English: Zhang Xintai said: The reason why the enemy built the city was to show their strength to the outside world, but in fact it was because they were afraid of our army secretly marching behind them.

古文：今若说之以彼此各愿罢兵，则其患自息。 
现代文：如果以彼此都自愿罢兵去说服他们，则祸患自然消解。 
English: If you convince them that both sides are willing to disengage, the disaster will naturally dissipate.

古文：慧景从之。
现代文：崔慧景听从了他的建议。
English: Cui Huijing followed Zhang Xintai's suggestion.

古文：遣欣泰至虏城下具述此意。
现代文：并派张欣泰到北魏城下陈述了这个建议。
English: He also sent Zhang Xintai to the Northern Wei capital to present this proposal.

古文：及虏引退，而洲上余兵万人，求输五百匹马假道，慧景欲断路攻之。
现代文：及至北魏退兵时，而洲上还有余部上万人，他们请求运去五百匹马，借条道路回去，崔慧景想截断其归路而攻击他们。
English: By the time the Northern Wei retreated, there were still tens of thousands of people left on the continent. They asked to transport five hundred horses and borrow a road to go back. Cui Huijing wanted to cut off their way back and attacked them.

古文：欣泰说慧景曰： 归师勿遏，古人畏之。
现代文：张欣泰劝阻崔慧景说： 想回去的军队不要去阻止它，古人对此都有点害怕。
English: Zhang Xintai dissuaded Cui Huijing, saying: If the army wants to go back, don't try to stop it. The ancients were a little afraid of this.

古文：死地之兵，不可轻也。
现代文：放置于死地的部队是不能轻视的。
English: Troops left for dead cannot be taken lightly.

古文：胜之既不足为武，败则徒丧前功。
现代文：如果战胜它也不足以显示武力的强大，万一失败则白白地丧失了前功。
English: If it is defeated, it will not be enough to show the strength of the force. If it fails, the previous work will be lost in vain.

古文：不如许之。 
现代文：不如答应他们的要求。 
English: You might as well give in to their demands.

古文：慧景乃听虏过。
现代文：于是崔慧景听任北魏军通过。
English: Therefore, Cui Huijing allowed the Northern Wei Army to pass.

古文：时领军萧坦之亦援钟离，还启明帝曰： 邵阳洲有死贼万人，慧景、欣泰放而不取。 
现代文：当时领军萧坦之也在增援钟离，回来后便报告给明帝，说： 邵阳洲有将死的贼众万余人，崔慧景、张欣泰放跑了他们而不擒获。 
English: At that time, Xiao Tanzhi, the leader of the army, was also reinforcing Zhong Liang, and after returning, he reported to the Ming Emperor, saying: There are more than ten thousand dead thieves in Shaoyangzhou. Cui Huijing and Zhang Xintai let them go and did not capture them.

古文：帝以此皆不加赏。
现代文：因此，明帝对他们都不赏赐。
English: Emperor Ming therefore did not reward them.

古文：四年，出为永阳太守。
现代文：建武四年，张欣泰出任永阳太守。
English: In the fourth year of Jianwu, Zhang Xintai became the Yongyang governor.

古文：永元初，还都。
现代文：东昏侯永元初年，他回到京都。
English: In the first year of the Yongyuan era, he returned to Beijing.

古文：崔慧景围城，欣泰入城内，领军守备。
现代文：崔慧景圃城时，张欣泰进入城内，率领军队守备防卫。
English: When Cui Hui was in Jingpu City, Zhang Xintai entered the city and led the army to prepare for defense.

古文：事宁，除辅国将军、庐陵王安东司马。
现代文：事件平定后，被拜授为辅国将军、庐陵王安束司马。
English: After the incident was quelled, he was awarded the title of Auxiliary General, and was given the title of Fuling Wangan Sok Sima.

古文：义师起，以欣泰为持节、督雍梁南北秦四州郢州之竟陵司州之随郡军事、雍州刺史，将军如故。
现代文：义兵兴起时，朝廷以张欣泰为持节、督雍粱南北秦四州以及郢州的竟陵、司州的随郡军事、雍州刺史，辅国将军照旧。
English: At the time of the rise of the volunteer soldiers, the imperial court held Zhang Xintai as the festival, the governor of Yongzheng, the four states of North and South Qin, and the Jingling of Zhangzhou, the military of the county of Sizhou, the history of Yongzhou, and the general of the auxiliary country as before.

古文：时少帝昏乱，人情咸伺事隙。
现代文：当时东昏侯昏乱，人人心裹都想伺机起事。
English: At that time, the East was in a daze, and everyone wanted to take advantage of the situation.

古文：欣泰与弟前始安内史欣时密谋结太子右率胡松、前南谯太守王灵秀、直阁将军鸿选、含德主帅苟励、直后刘灵运等十余人，并同契会。
现代文：张欣泰与弟弟、前始安内史张欣时密谋，结交太子右率胡松、前南谯太守王灵秀、直合将军鸿选、含德主帅苟励、直后刘灵运等十多人，一齐聚会。
English: Zhang Xintai conspired with his younger brother, the former First Prince Zhang Xinti, and made friends with more than ten people, including the Prince's right-hand man Hu Song, the former Southern Wei Empress Wang Lingxiu, the General Zhonghe Hongxuan, the German coach Guo Li, and the immediate successor Liu Lingyun, and gathered together.

古文：帝遣中书舍人冯元嗣监军救郢，茹法珍、梅虫儿及太子右率李居士、制局监杨明泰等十余人相送中兴堂。
现代文：东昏侯派中书舍人冯元嗣监督部队援救郢州，茹法珍、梅虫儿及太子右率李居士、制局监杨明泰等十多人都到中兴堂相送。
English: Feng Yuan Ci, a scholar from Dongming County, was sent to supervise the troops to rescue Zhangzhou. More than ten people, including Ru Fazhen, Mei Zueri, Li Jushi, the right-hand man of the prince, and Yang Mingtai, the inspector of the Bureau of Statistics, went to Zhongxing Hall to see them off.

古文：欣泰等使人怀刀于座斫元嗣，头坠果柈中，又斫明泰，破其腹，虫儿伤刺数疮，手指皆堕。
现代文：张欣泰等派人身藏刀剑，在座位上斩杀冯元嗣，他的头颅掉落在水果盘中，又砍破了杨明泰的腹部，梅虫儿被刺伤好几处，手指都断落了。
English: Zhang Xintai and others sent a person to hide the sword and cut off Feng Yuanci on the seat. His head fell into the fruit plate and cut Yang Mingtai's abdomen. Mei Zuer was stabbed several times and his fingers were broken.

古文：居士逾墙得出，茹法珍亦散走还台。
现代文：李居士翻墙而出，得以逃脱，茹法珍也逃回到宫中。
English: Li Kuishi climbed over the wall and was able to escape, and Ru Fazhen also fled back to the palace.

古文：灵秀仍往石头迎建安王宝夤，率文武数百，唱警跸，至杜姥宅。
现代文：王灵秀仍然到石头城去迎接建安王萧宾夤，率领着几百文武官员，一路鸣锣开道，到达杜姥宅。
English: Wang Lingxiu still went to Stone Town to meet Jian'an Wang Xiaobingya, leading hundreds of literary and military officials, all the way to the grandma's house.

古文：欣泰初闻事发，驰马入宫，冀法珍等在外，城内处分，必尽见委，表里相应，因行废立。
现代文：张欣泰刚听到事变已经发动，急忙骑马奔进宫中，希望茹法珍等人还在宫外，台城之内各项事务的处置，必定会委派他来办理，裹应外合，便能行废立大事。
English: As soon as Zhang Xintai heard that the incident had been launched, he hurriedly rode into the palace on horseback, hoping that Ru Fazhen and others were still outside the palace, and that he would be appointed to handle the handling of various affairs within Taicheng.

古文：既而法珍得反，处分闭门上仗，不配欣泰兵，鸿选在殿内亦不敢发。
现代文：不一会儿，茹法珍回宫来了，命令众人关紧宫门，都拿好兵器，但不给张欣泰分配士卒。鸿选在殿内也不敢行动。
English: After a short while, Zhu Fazhen returned to the palace and ordered everyone to close the palace gate and take their weapons, but he did not assign any soldiers to Zhang Xintai. Hung Xuan did not dare to act in the palace.

古文：城外众寻散。
现代文：城外的人群不久便散去。
English: The crowd outside the city soon dispersed.

古文：少日事觉，诏收欣泰、胡松等，皆伏诛。
现代文：遇了几天，真相败露诏命收捕张欣泰、胡松等人，都被诛杀。
English: A few days later, the truth was revealed, and the order to arrest Zhang Xintai, Hu Song and others was carried out, and they were all killed.

古文：欣泰少时有人相其当得三公，而年裁三十。
现代文：张欣泰年轻时曾有人给他相面，说他的地位可达到三公，但祇能活三十岁。
English: When Zhang Xintai was young, someone once gave him an omen, saying that his status could reach the Three Kingdoms, but he could only live for thirty years.

古文：后屋瓦堕伤额，又问相者，云 无复公相，年寿更增，亦可得方伯耳 。
现代文：后来他被屋上掉下的瓦砸伤额头，又问看相人，看相人说： 再也达不到公卿之位了，不过年寿有所增加，但还可以做藩镇的首领。 
English: Later, he was hit in the forehead by a falling roof tile and asked his friend, who said, "He can no longer be a noble, but his life expectancy has increased, but he can still be the leader of the town."

古文：死时年四十六。
现代文：死时三十六岁。
English: He was thirty-six when he died.

古文：史臣曰：崔慧景宿将老臣，忧危昏运，回董御之威，举晋阳之甲，乘机用权，内袭少主，因乐乱之民，藉淮楚之剽，骁将授首，群帅委律，鼓鼙讙于宫寝，戈戟跱于城隍，陵埤负户，士衰气竭，屡发铜虎之兵，未有释位之援，势等易京，鱼烂待尽。
现代文：史臣曰：崔慧景是宿将老臣，遭逢昏乱的世运而担心处境危险，于是督察御敌之军回师，举晋阳之甲兵，乘时机而行权宜之计，袭击年少的君主，凭藉着喜欢动乱的众人及淮、楚之地剽悍的士卒，使得勇将投降，群帅听命，战鼓声震撼着皇宫，刀枪耸立满京城；欺凌平民百姓而致士气衰竭，虽然屡次发兵，但没有能替他消解困境的外援，所以其态势虽像易京那么坚实，但最终却像烂鱼那样完结。
English: Shi Zhen said: Cui Hui Jing was a veteran veteran, who was worried about the danger of the situation because of the chaotic world movement, so he inspected the enemy's army to return to the division, raised Jinyang's armored soldiers, took the opportunity to carry out a makeshift plan, attacked the young monarch, with the help of people who like turmoil and Huai and Chu's fierce soldiers, made the brave general surrender, the generals obeyed orders, the war drums shook the palace, and swords and guns towered over the capital; bullying the common people led to morale failure. Although he repeatedly sent troops, there was no foreign aid that could solve his

古文：征虏将军投袂以先国急，束马旅师，横江竞济，风驱电扫，制胜转丸。
现代文：征虏将军萧懿投袂奋起，以国家急难为首要的任务，厉兵秣马，挥师进发，横江竞渡，风驰电扫，克敌制胜，其势如旋转泥丸。
English: The conscript general Xiao Jian was aroused and took the national emergency as the primary task. He led the troops to march forward, waved the division to advance, sailed across the river, swept by the wind, and defeated the enemy. His momentum was like a spinning ball of mud.

古文：越城之战，旗获蔽野，津行之捷，献俘象魏。
现代文：越城之战，斩获之敌漫山遍野，秦淮河渡口大捷，终于献俘朝门。
English: The battle of Yuecheng, the enemy conquering mountains and plains, the great victory of the Qin Huaihe River crossing, and finally the capture of the Imperial Palace.

古文：瞻尘望烽，穷垒重辟，戮带定襄，曾未及此。
现代文：瞻望烽烟，扫除了无数的营垒，进击带方，平定襄阳，都比不上此战胜利重大。
English: Looking into the smoke, sweeping away countless camps, advancing to the belt side, and pacifying Xiangyang are all less important than this victory.

古文：盛矣哉，桓文异世也。
现代文：多么隆盛啊，真是齐桓、晋文再世。
English: What prosperity, it really is the reincarnation of Qi Kan and Jinwen.

古文：赞曰：叔业外叛，淮肥失险。
现代文：赞曰：裴叔业叛投外敌，使淮河、肥水失去险阻。
English: Zang said: Pei Shuhei's defection to the foreign enemy has made the Huaihe River and the Fertile Water lose their dangerous obstacles.

古文：慧景倒戈，宫门昼掩。
现代文：崔慧景倒戈叛乱，使皇宫门白天紧闭。
English: Cui Hui Jing rebelled and closed the palace doors during the day.

古文：欣泰仓卒，霜刃不染。
现代文：张欣泰仓猝起事，兵不血刃便被平息。
English: Zhang Xin Taicang suddenly rose up, and the soldiers were bloodlessly quelled.

古文：实起时昏，坚冰互渐。
现代文：实在是由于政局的昏乱，王朝像坚冰一样慢慢地融化。
English: In fact, due to the political turmoil, the dynasty is slowly melting like ice.

