古文：盖今儒者，本因古之六学，斯则王教之典籍，先圣所以明天道，正人伦，致治之成法也。
现代文：今日的儒者，本因承着古代的六学，造就是王教的典籍，它们是先圣之所以明天道，正人伦，使国家政治清平的成法。
English: Today's Confucians, by virtue of inheriting the six schools of thought of ancient times, have created the classics of the royal religion. They are the first holy cause of tomorrow's way, the righteous human relations, and the laws that make the country's politics clear.

古文：秦始皇焚书坑儒，六学自此缺矣。
现代文：秦始皇焚书坑儒，六学从此阙失。
English: Emperor Qin Shihuang burned the books of Confucius, and the six schools of thought were lost forever.

古文：汉武帝立《五经》博士，置弟子员，设科射策，劝以官禄，其传业者甚众焉。
现代文：汉武帝立《五经》博士，置弟子员，设科射策，劝之以官禄，它的传业者就很多了。
English: Emperor Hanwu set up a "Five Classics" doctorate, set up disciples, set up a scientific strategy, and persuaded officials, and there are many passers-on.

古文：自两汉登贤，咸资经术。
现代文：自两汉登贤，都靠运用经术。
English: Since the two Han dynasty emperors, all rely on the use of scripture.

古文：魏、晋浮荡，儒教沦歇，公卿士庶，罕通经业矣。
现代文：魏、晋浮荡，儒教衰落，公卿士庶人士，很少通经业了。
English: The Wei and Jin Dynasties were turbulent, Confucianism was in decline, and court nobles and commoners rarely went into business.

古文：宋、齐之间，国学时复开置。
现代文：宋、齐之间，国学又重新开设。
English: Between the Song and Qi dynasties, the study of Chinese classics was reopened.

古文：梁武帝开五馆，建国学，总以《五经》教授，经各置助教云。
现代文：梁武帝开五馆，建国学，总体以《五经》教授，每经各置助教。
English: Emperor Liangwu opened five libraries for the study of the founding of the People's Republic of China, teaching the "Five Classics" as a whole, with an assistant teacher for each.

古文：武帝或纡銮驾，临幸庠序，释奠先师，躬亲试胄，申之宴语，劳之束帛，济济焉斯盖一代之盛矣。
现代文：梁武壹有时亲驾来到国学学校，置爵于神前祭先师，亲自考试国子学生，申之以宴语，慰劳以束帛，济济一堂于国学馆，这是一代的兴盛。
English: Liang Wuyi sometimes came to the Chinese school in person, knighted a teacher in the pre-sacrifice ceremony, personally examined Chinese students, delivered a banquet speech, consoled with a bunch of strawberries, and held a class in the Chinese school hall. This was the prosperity of a generation.

古文：高祖创业开基，承前代离乱，衣冠殄尽，寇贼未宁，既日不暇给，弗遑劝课。
现代文：高祖创业开基之时，正承前代的离乱，衣冠已绝尽，寇贼未安宁，已经忙得日不暇给，无法顾到劝课读书。
English: When Gao Zu started his business, he was inheriting the chaos of the previous generation, the clothes were exhausted, the bandits were restless, and he was too busy to attend lectures.

古文：世祖以降，稍置学官，虽博延生徒，成业盖寡。
现代文：世祖以后，稍微置了些学宫，虽然广泛延请了一些书生弟子，然而成业的很少。
English: After the founder, a few schools were set up, and although some scholars were widely invited, very few were able to complete their studies.

古文：今之采缀，盖亦梁之遗儒云。
现代文：今采缀的，衹是梁代的遗儒。
English: Now decorated, it is the remnants of the Liang Dynasty.

古文：沈文阿，字国卫，吴兴武康人也。
现代文：沈文阿，字国卫，吴兴武康人。
English: Shen Wen Ah, Zi Guo Wei, Wu Xing Wu Kang Ren.

古文：父峻，以儒学闻于梁世，授桂州刺史，不行。
现代文：父亲沈峻，以儒学闻名于梁世，被授桂州刺史，不去上任。
English: His father, Shenjun, was famous in the Liang Dynasty for his Confucianism. He was awarded the title of Guizhou Provincial Historian, but did not take up the post.

古文：文阿性刚强，有膂力，少习父业，研精章句。
现代文：沈文阿性格刚强，有力气，小时候从父习业，精研古书章节句读。
English: As a child, he learned from his father, studying the chapters and sentences of ancient books.

古文：祖舅太史叔明、舅王慧兴并通经术，而文阿颇传之。
现代文：祖舅太史叔明、舅王姜兴都通经术，而这塞厘大都能传习。
English: His great-uncle Taishi Shuming and uncle Wang Jiangxing were both versed in Confucianism, and they were able to pass it on to their children.

古文：又博采先儒异同，自为义疏。
现代文：又博采先儒异同，自为词义疏解。
English: In addition, it makes use of the similarities and differences between Confucianism and Confucianism, and tries to simplify the meaning of words.

古文：治《三礼》、《三传》。
现代文：治《三礼》、《三传》。
English: "Three Rites" and "Three Stories" will be performed.

古文：察孝廉，为梁临川王国侍郎，累迁兼国子助教、《五经》博士。
现代文：举孝廉，为梁临川王国侍郎，又改兼国子助教、《五经》博士。
English: He was a courtier of the Liang Linchuan Kingdom, an assistant professor of Kuniko, and a doctor of the Five Classics.

古文：梁简文在东宫，引为学士，深相礼遇，及撰《长春义记》，多使文阿撮异闻以广之。
现代文：梁简文在东宫，引他为学士，对他深为礼遇，到撰写《长春义记》，多派沈文阿撮取异闻而广之。
English: Liang Jianwen was in the East Palace, he was referred to as a bachelor, he was treated with deep courtesy, and when he wrote "Changchun Yi Ji," many schools of Shenwen A-shooting took exception and spread it.

古文：及侯景寇逆，简文别遣文阿招募士卒，入援京师。
现代文：到侯景叛乱，梁简文另派沈文阿招募士兵，入援京城。
English: When the Houjing Rebellion broke out, Liang Jianwen sent Shen Wenya to recruit soldiers to come to the aid of Beijing.

古文：城陷，与张乘共保吴兴，乘败，文阿窜于山野。
现代文：城池陷落，沈文阿与张嵊共同保卫吴兴，张嵊失败，沈文阿逃窜到山野中。
English: When the city fell, Shen Wenya and Zhang Ye jointly defended Wuxing. Zhang Ye failed, and Shen Wenya fled to the mountains.

古文：景素闻其名。求之甚急，文阿穷迫不知所出，登树自缢，遇有所亲救之，便自投而下，折其左臂。
现代文：侯景早听说沈文阿之名，求他很急，沈文阿穷迫得不知道从哪儿逃出，爬树上吊自尽，正遇与他有亲的人救了他，便自己投身而下，折断了左臂。
English: Hou Jing had long heard of the name of Shen Wen Ah, and he was in a hurry to ask for him. Shen Wen Ah was so poor that he did not know where to escape from. He climbed a tree and hanged himself. Just as someone who was related to him saved him, he threw himself down and broke his left arm.

古文：及景平，高祖以文阿州里，表为原乡令，监江阴郡。
现代文：到侯景被平定，高祖因沈文阿是同乡，封为原乡令，监江阴郡。
English: After Houjing was subdued, Gao Zu, who was a fellow villager of Shen Wen'a, was appointed as the original township magistrate of Jiangyin County.

古文：绍泰元年，入为国子博士，寻领步兵校尉，兼掌仪礼。
现代文：绍泰元年，沈文阿入为国子博士，不久领步兵校尉，兼掌仪礼。
English: In the first year of the Shao Tai Dynasty, Shen Wen'ai became a doctor of the country, and soon became an infantry captain, and also held the ceremonial.

古文：自太清之乱，台阁故事，无有存者，文阿父峻，梁武世尝掌朝仪，颇有遗稿，于是斟酌裁撰，礼度皆自之出。
现代文：自太清之乱后，台阁故事没有保存的，沈文阿父亲沈峻，梁武帝时曾掌朝仪，颇有些遣稿，于是沈文阿斟酌裁删撰写，礼度都由此出。
English: Since the Taiching Rebellion, the story of the table has not been preserved. Shen Wenya's father, Shen Jun, held the imperial regalia when Emperor Liang Wu was in power, and there was quite a bit of manuscript, so Shen Wenya carefully cut and edited the writing, and the courtesy came from this.

古文：及高祖受禅，文阿辄弃官还武康，高祖大怒，发使往诛之。
现代文：到高祖受禅，沈文阿便弃官还武康，高祖大怒，派使者去杀他。
English: When Gao Zu was meditating, Shen Wen Ah resigned his post and returned to Wu Kang. Gao Zu was furious and sent an envoy to kill him.

古文：时文阿宗人沈恪为郡，请使者宽其死，即面缚锁颈致于高祖，高祖视而笑曰： 腐儒复何为者？ 
现代文：其时文阿宗的同宗族人沈恪治郡，请求使者宽容，免其一死，便当面缚住他，锁住颈送到高祖处，高祖见了笑着说： 腐儒又能做什么? 
English: At that time, a member of the same clan as Wen Azong, Shen Guozhi, came to the county and asked the messenger for tolerance and to spare his life. He then tied him face to face, chained his neck and sent him to Gao Zu. Gao Zu saw this and smiled and said: What can a rotten person do?

古文：遂赦之。
现代文：于是便赦免了他。
English: So he pardoned him.

古文：高祖崩，文阿与尚书左丞徐陵、中书舍人刘师知等议大行皇帝灵座侠御衣服之制，语在师知传。
现代文：高祖崩，沈文阿与尚书左丞徐陵、中书舍人刘师知等人商议大行皇帝灵座侠御衣服的制度，详细话语在刘师知传内。
English: After Gao Zu's death, Shen Wen'a discussed the system of Emperor Da Xing's imperial robes with Shang Shul Zu Rong, Xu Ling, and Liu Shizhi, a scholar of Chinese literature. The detailed discourse is recorded in Liu Shizhi's biography.

古文：及世祖即皇帝位，克日谒庙，尚书右丞庾持奉诏遣博士议其礼。
现代文：到世祖就皇位，限日拜谒庙宇，尚书右丞庾持奉诏派博士议礼。
English: On the day of the enthronement of the world's founding father, he paid homage at the temple, and held a ceremony to confer the title of Imperial Prince.

古文：文阿议曰：
现代文：沈文阿议道：
English: Shen Wen'a said:

古文：民物推移，质文殊轨，圣贤因机而立教，王公随时以适宜。
现代文：民与物推移，质与文不同轨，圣贤视机会立教，王公随时机适应。
English: People and things change, quality and culture are on different tracks, sages see opportunities to establish teachings, and princes adapt to opportunities.

古文：夫千人无君，不散则乱，万乘无主，不危则亡。
现代文：千人无君，不是散就是乱；万乘无主，不是危就是亡。
English: A thousand people without a ruler is either chaos or disorder; a million people without a master is either danger or death.

古文：当隆周之日，公旦叔父，吕、召爪牙，成王在丧，祸几覆国。
现代文：当时周隆盛之日，公旦叔父，旦、丑爪牙，旦适在丧之际，大祸几乎倾覆国家。
English: At that time, on the day of Zhou Longsheng, the uncle of the prince, the prince, the ugly minions, and the prince were in mourning, and the disaster almost toppled the country.

古文：是以既葬便有公冠之仪，始殡受麻冕之策。
现代文：所以葬礼之后便有公冠的仪式，开始入殡要受麻冕之策。
English: Therefore, after the funeral, there will be a crowning ceremony, and it is necessary to be crowned at the beginning of the funeral.

古文：斯盖示天下以有主，虑社稷之艰难。
现代文：这是为了昭示天下国家有主，正考虑社稷的艰难。
English: This is to show that the owner of the country is considering the difficulties of the society.

古文：逮乎末叶纵横，汉承其弊，虽文、景刑厝，而七国连兵。
现代文：到酉周末年出现纵横之争，汉代承其弊，虽然塞、基时期刑法搁置不用，但星、楚七国起兵反叛。
English: By the end of the 7th year of the 7th month, there was a vertical and horizontal dispute, and the Han Dynasty inherited its drawbacks. Although the criminal law was put on hold during the Zi and Ji periods, the seven states of Xing and Chu rebelled.

古文：或逾月即尊，或崩日称诏，此皆有为而为之，非无心于礼制也。
现代文：或者超过一个月即立尊，或者帝崩日便下诏，这都是有为而为之，不是无心于礼制。
English: Whether it takes more than a month to erect the statue, or the emperor dies and then issues an edict, all of this is done for a purpose, and not without the intention of maintaining the etiquette.

古文：今国讳之日，虽抑哀于玺绂之重，犹未序于君臣之仪。
现代文：如今国讳的日子，虽然抑制悲哀于以皇室社稷为重，还是没有使君臣之仪有序。
English: Nowadays, the days of state taboos, although the suppression of sadness is based on the imperial family and society, still do not make the ceremony of the monarch and the subject orderly.

古文：古礼，朝庙退坐正寝，听群臣之政，今皇帝拜庙还，宜御太极殿，以正南面之尊，此即周康在朝一二臣卫者也。
现代文：按古代礼制，在朝拜庙后应退坐正寝宫，听群臣之政见，而今皇帝拜庙还，应御政太极殿，以正南面之尊，造就是周康王在朝时一二个臣卫来朝的情况。
English: According to the ancient etiquette, after paying homage to the temple, the emperor should retire to the palace and listen to the political opinions of his ministers. Nowadays, the emperor should also pay homage to the temple, and the emperor should pay homage to the Imperial Palace, with the respect of the south side, which is the situation that King Zhou Kang had one or two vassals come to the country during his reign.

古文：其壤奠之节，周礼以玉作贽，公侯以圭，子男执璧，此瑞玉也。
现代文：他们所奠的土产贡物，周礼以玉作贽，公侯以珪作蛰，子男执璧，遣都是祥瑞之玉。
English: The local tributes they laid, Zhou Li made of jade, princes made of jade, sons and grandsons made of jade, were all the jade of Xiang Rui.

古文：奠贽既竟，又复致享，天子以璧，王后用琮。
现代文：奠蛰结束，又要致享礼，天子用璧，王后用琮。
English: At the end of the laying of wreaths, there will also be a ceremony of enjoyment. The emperor will use wreaths, and the queen will use gongs.

古文：秦烧经典，威仪散灭，叔孙通定礼，尤失前宪，奠贽不圭，致享无帛，公王同璧，鸿胪奏贺。
现代文：秦朝焚烧经典，威仪散尽消灭，汉代叔孙通定礼，尤其失却前定宪章，奠贽不用珪，致享没有帛，公侯诸王同璧，鸿胪官奏贺。
English: The Qin Dynasty incinerated the classics, the dignity and etiquette were destroyed, the Han Dynasty passed down the rites, especially the loss of the pre-determined charter, the memorial service did not use the flag, the celebration did not have the flag, the princes and kings were the same, and the officials played the congratulatory song.

古文：若此数事，未闻于古，后相沿袭，至梁行之。
现代文：像这数件事，古代未曾听闻遇，后代相沿袭，到梁代行之。
English: Such things were unheard of in ancient times, and the descendants followed suit, acting on Liang's behalf.

古文：夫称觞奉寿，家国大庆，四厢雅乐，歌奏欢欣。
现代文：凡举杯祝酒奉寿，家国大庆，四面雅乐，歌奏欢欣。
English: Everyone raised a toast to celebrate the birthday, the great celebration of the motherland, the four-sided classical music, and the songs were joyful.

古文：今君臣吞哀，万民抑割，岂同于惟新之礼乎？
现代文：今日君臣悲哀，万民感情悲抑如割，哪裹同于那新礼呢?
English: Today, monarchs and ministers are sad, and the feelings of all the people are sad and depressed. How can they be wrapped in that new gift?

古文：且周康宾称奉圭，无万寿之献，此则前准明矣。
现代文：且周康王以宾客称而奉以珪，没有万寿之献，造就是前代准则已很显明了。
English: Moreover, King Zhou Kuan honored him as a guest, and there was no life-long dedication. It is clear that the previous generation's standard has been broken.

古文：三宿三咤，上宗曰飨，斯盖祭傧受福，宁谓贺酒邪！
现代文：宿三夜而三叱咤，大宗伯说大饮宾，这是祭宾受福还是说贺酒!
English: If you stay for three nights and three days, the great patriarch will say that you are a big drinker. Is this a blessing for the guests or a congratulatory drink?

古文：愚以今坐正殿，止行荐璧之仪，无贺酒之礼。
现代文：我以为今坐正殿，应衹行荐璧之礼，不应有贺酒之礼。
English: I thought that now I am sitting in the main hall, I should make a toast of recommendation, not a toast of congratulation.

古文：谨撰谒庙还升正寝、群臣陪荐仪注如别。
现代文：谨撰写拜谒庙还升止寝宫、群臣陪荐仪注如别纸。
English: I am honored to write that the worship of the Qianlong Temple, the rise and fall of the sleeping palace, and the recommendation of the courtiers are all like other papers.

古文：诏可施行。
现代文：帝下诏说可以施行。
English: The Emperor's edict can now be implemented.

古文：寻迁通直散骑常侍，兼国子博士，领羽林监，仍令于东宫讲《孝经》、《论语》。
现代文：不久改任通直散骑常侍，兼国子博士，领羽林监，仍命令他在束宫讲《孝经》、《论语》。
English: Soon he was reassigned to the post of Tsuchizane Sanzhiki no Tsuneishi, concurrently the post of Kuniko hakase, the leader of the forest inspectors, and he was still ordered to recite the "Filial Piety Sutra" and the "Analects" in Sokonomiya.

古文：天嘉四年卒，时年六十一。
现代文：天嘉四年死，其时六十一岁。
English: Tian Jia died four years later, at the age of 61.

古文：诏赠廷尉卿。
现代文：诏赠廷尉卿。
English: The Imperial Rescript was presented to the Lord Lieutenant.

古文：文阿所撰《仪礼》八十馀卷，《经典大义》十八卷，并行于世，诸儒多传其学。
现代文：沈文阿所撰《仪礼》八十多卷，《经典大义》十八卷，都行于世，很多儒生都传习他的学问。
English: More than eighty volumes of "Rites" and eighteen volumes of "Classic Daoyi" written by Shen Wen'ao have been passed down to the world, and many Confucian scholars have passed on his knowledge.

古文：沈洙，字弘道，吴兴武康人也。
现代文：沈洙，字弘道，吴兴郡武康人。
English: Shen Yao, surnamed Hong Dao, Wu Xing County Wu Kang people.

古文：祖休稚，梁馀杭令。
现代文：祖父沈休稚，梁朝余杭令。
English: Grandfather Shen Jiuyong, Liang Chao Yu Hang Ling.

古文：父山卿，梁国子博士、中散大夫。
现代文：父亲沈山卿，梁朝国子博士、中散大夫。
English: Father Shen Shanqing, Dr. Liang Chaoguo, Dr. Zhong San.

古文：洙少方雅好学，不妄交游。
现代文：沈洙少年时大方文雅而又好学，不随便交游。
English: When he was a young boy, Shen Yao was generous, elegant and eager to learn. He did not socialize freely.

古文：治《三礼》、《春秋左氏传》。
现代文：治《三礼》、《春秋左氏传》。
English: Zhi "Three Rites" and "The Spring and Autumn Legend of Zuo Shiwen."

古文：精识强记，《五经》章句，诸子史书，问无不答。
现代文：精识强记，凡《五经》章句及诸子史书，问无不答。
English: With a strong sense of knowledge, all the chapters and verses of the "Five Classics" and all the children's history books are full of questions.

古文：解巾梁湘东王国左常侍，转中军宣城王限内参军，板仁威临贺王记室参军，迁尚书祠部郎中，时年盖二十馀。
现代文：初任梁朝湘束王国左常侍，转任中军宣城王限内参军，板仁威临贺王记室参军，改任尚书祠部郎中，其时年纪在二十多岁。
English: At the beginning, he served as the Left Attendant of the Kingdom of Xiangzhu in the Liang Dynasty. He was transferred to join the army of the Chinese army as the commander of Xuancheng Wang Guennai, and joined the army of Ban Ren Wei Lin He Wang Ji's office, and was reassigned as the assistant of Shang Shuxi's ancestral hall. At that time, he was in his twenties.

古文：大同中，学者多涉猎文史，不为章句，而洙独积思经术，吴郡硃异、会稽贺琛甚嘉之。
现代文：大同年中，学者多涉猎文史，不搞古书的章节句读，而沈洙独独积思于经术，吴郡朱异、会稽贺琛十分称道他。
English: In the middle of the same year, scholars mostly dabbled in literary history, and did not engage in the reading of chapters and sentences of ancient books, while Shen Qi was exclusively absorbed in the study of the scriptures. Wu County Zhu Yi and He Qi, the secretary of the association, highly praised him.

古文：及异、琛于士林馆讲制旨义，常使洙为都讲。
现代文：到朱异、贺琛在士林馆讲制旨义，常派沈洙为主讲者。
English: Zhu Yixing and He Qian lectured on the meaning of the system in the Shilin Pavilion, and often sent Shen Qian as the main speaker.

古文：侯景之乱，洙窜于临安，时世祖在焉，亲就习业。
现代文：侯景叛乱时，沈洙窜逃于临安，此时世祖在那裹，亲自跟从他习业。
English: At the time of the rebellion of Houjing, Shen Yi fled to Lin'an. At this time, the patriarch was there, and he personally followed him to study.

古文：及高祖入辅，除国子博士，与沈文阿同掌仪礼。
现代文：到高祖入宫辅政，封沈洙为国子博士，与沈文阿同掌仪礼。
English: At the time of Gao Zu's accession to the imperial court as a vice-regent, Shen Ye was awarded the title of Doctor of the State, and he and Shen Wenya shook hands at the ceremony.

古文：高祖受禅，加员外散骑常侍，历扬州别驾从事史、大匠卿。
现代文：高祖受禅，沈洙被加员外散骑常侍，历任扬州别驾从事史、大匠卿。
English: Gao Zu was trained in Zen, and Shen Zheng was promoted to the rank of non-commissioned officer. Successive Yangzhou governors were engaged in history and were great craftsmen.

古文：有司奏前宁远将军、建康令沈孝轨门生陈三儿牒称主人翁灵柩在周，主人奉使关内，因欲迎丧，久而未返。
现代文：有司上奏，前宁远将军、建康令沈孝轨的门生陈三儿书札称主人的灵柩在周，主人奉使关内，由于想要迎丧，很久未返。
English: Chen San'er, a former Ningyuan general and disciple of Jiankangling Shen Xiaorou, said that his master's casket was in Zhou, and his master had not returned for a long time because he wanted to mourn.

古文：此月晦即是再周，主人弟息见在此者，为至月末除灵，内外即吉？
现代文：这个月末就是第二周，主人弟子在此的，是到月末除灵，内外就吉?
English: The end of this month is the second week. If the master and disciple are here, will they be exorcised by the end of the month, and will they be happy inside and outside?

古文：为待主人还情礼申竟？
现代文：还是等待主人还情礼就申毕?
English: Or is it better to wait for the master to return the favor?

古文：以事谘左丞江德藻，德藻议： 王卫军云： 久丧不葬，唯主人不变，其馀亲各终月数而除。 
现代文：帝以此事咨询左丞江德藻，江德藻议道： 王卫军说： 久丧不葬，惟主人不变，其余亲人各终月数而除灵。 
English: The emperor consulted the left-hand man Jiang Demao about this matter, and Jiang Demao said: Wang Weijun said: "The deceased will not be buried for a long time, but the owner will not change, and the rest of the relatives will be removed from the soul at the end of the month."

古文：此盖引《礼》文论在家内有事故未得葬者耳。
现代文：这是引《礼》之文论在家内有事故而未得葬的人罢了。
English: This is a person who has an accident at home and has not been buried, according to the text of the "Rite."

古文：孝轨既在异域，虽已迎丧，还期无指，诸弟若遂不除，永绝婚嫁，此于人情，或为未允。
现代文：沈孝轨既然在异域，虽已迎丧，回还日期无指望。诸位弟子如便不除灵，永绝婚嫁，此于人情，或许不太公允。
English: Since Shen Xiaoguo is in a foreign land, although he has passed away, there is no hope for the return date. If you disciples do not remove the spirit and never marry, this may not be fair in human terms.

古文：中原沦陷已后，理有事例，宜谘沈常侍详议。 
现代文：中原沦陷之后，应当有类似事例，可咨询沈常侍详细议之。 
English: After the fall of the Central Plains, there should be similar cases, which can be discussed in detail with Shen Changzhu.

古文：洙议曰： 礼有变正，又有从宜。
现代文：沈洙议道： 礼有变正，又有从宜。
English: Shen Yao said, "There is etiquette and etiquette, and there is etiquette.

古文：《礼小记》云： 久而不葬者，唯主丧者不除，其馀以麻终月数者除丧则已。 
现代文：《礼小记》说： 久而不葬的，惟主丧的不除灵，其余以麻终月数的解除丧服就可以了。 
English: "Li Xiao Ji" said: "For those who have not been buried for a long time, only the main mourner will not remove the spirit, and the rest can be relieved of the mourning clothes with the last months of the month."

古文：《注》云： 其馀谓傍亲。 
现代文：《注》说： 其余指旁亲。 
English: "Note" says: The rest refers to collateral relatives.

古文：如郑所解，众子皆应不除，王卫军所引，此盖礼之正也。
现代文：如郑玄所解，众人都应不除，王卫军所引，是礼之正。
English: As Zheng Xuan explained, everyone should not be excluded, and Wang Weijun's lead is the correct one.

古文：但魏氏东关之役，既失亡尸柩，葬礼无期，议以为礼无终身之丧，故制使除服。
现代文：但是魏氏东关一役，既失亡尸棺材，葬礼无期，议以为礼无终身之丧，因而制使除丧服。
English: However, the Wei clan's Dongguan campaign, not only lost the coffin of the dead body, the funeral was indefinite, and it was considered that there was no life-long mourning, so it was forced to remove the funeral clothes.

古文：晋氏丧乱，或死于虏庭，无由迎殡，江左故复申明其制。
现代文：晋氏丧乱，或有死于寇虏之庭的，无法迎殡，江左因而又申明其制。
English: If the Jin clan was in turmoil, or if someone died in the courtyard of the imperial guards, it was impossible to attend the funeral, so Jiang Zuo declared his rule.

古文：李胤之祖，王华之父，并存亡不测，其子制服依时释縗，此并变礼之宜也。
现代文：李胤的祖父，王华的父亲，都存亡不测，他们的子孙制服按时脱去丧服，这都是变礼之宜。
English: Li Yan's grandfather, Wang Hua's father, both survived and died, and their grandchildren took off their uniforms and mourning clothes on time. This is all a matter of etiquette.

古文：孝轨虽因奉使便欲迎丧，而戎狄难亲，还期未克。
现代文：沈孝轨虽然因奉使便要迎丧，但戎狄难亲，还期不测。
English: Although Shen Xiaorong will be mourned because of his envoy, he is a difficult relative and will not meet the deadline.

古文：愚谓宜依东关故事，在此国内者，并应释除縗麻，毁灵附祭，若丧柩得还，别行改葬之礼。
现代文：我以为应该按塞盐过去的规矩，在此国内的，都应脱去丧服，毁灵附祭，如果丧棺得以回还，另行改葬之礼。
English: I thought that we should follow the rules of the past. In this country, everyone should take off their mourning clothes, destroy the offerings, and if the coffin can be returned, perform another funeral ceremony.

古文：自天下寇乱，西朝倾覆，流播绝域，情礼莫申，若此之徒，谅非一二，宁可丧期无数，而弗除衰服，朝庭自应为之限制，以义断恩，通访博识，折之礼衷。 
现代文：白天下寇乱，西朝倾覆，流落于绝远之地，情礼无法得申，像这类人，恐怕不止一二。宁可丧期无数，而不脱丧服，朝廷自应为此作出限制，以礼义决断恩情，通访博识之士，以礼折衷。 
English: There are probably more than one or two people like this. They would rather have an endless period of mourning than take off their mourning clothes. The imperial court should set limits for this, decide on kindness with courtesy, communicate with knowledgeable people, and compromise with courtesy.

古文：德藻依洙议，奏可。
现代文：江德藻同意沈洙之议，上奏被允准。
English: Jiang Demosuo agreed to Shen Yao's suggestion, and the performance was allowed.

古文：世祖即位，迁通直散骑常侍，侍东宫读。
现代文：世祖登位，沈洙改任通直散骑常侍，侍东宫读。
English: The founder of the dynasty ascended the throne, and Shen Zhen was appointed as the general equerry of the Eastern Court.

古文：寻兼尚书左丞，领扬州大中正，迁光禄卿，侍读如故。
现代文：不久兼尚书左丞，领扬州大中正，改任光禄卿，侍读照旧。
English: Soon after, he was also promoted to Senior Secretary of the Left Division of the Ministry of Education, and was appointed Vice-President of Yangzhou University. He was also appointed as Guangluqing, and continued to attend classes.

古文：废帝嗣位，重为通直散骑常侍，兼尚书左丞。
现代文：废帝继位，重又任通直散骑常侍，兼尚书左丞。
English: When the former emperor succeeded to the throne, he was reappointed to the position of Tsunechi Sanzhijiki no Tsuneishi, and concurrently to the position of Shoshozojo.

古文：迁戎昭将军、轻车衡阳王长史，行府国事，带琅邪、彭城二郡丞。
现代文：改任戎昭将军、轻车衡阳王长史，行府国事，兼带琅邪、彭城二郡丞。
English: He was reappointed as General Rong Zhao, Light Car Hengyang Wang Changshi, Conducted prefectural and state affairs, Concurrently took part in the suppression of evil, and became Pengcheng Second County Commissar.

古文：梁代旧律，测囚之法，日一上，起自晡鼓，尽于二更。
现代文：梁代旧的法律，测囚徒的办法是，每曰一上，开始于下午三时到五时，结束于夜裹九时到十一时。
English: According to Liang's old law, the method of measuring prisoners is to start every day on the 1st, starting from 3:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m. and ending at around 9:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m.

古文：及比部郎范泉删定律令，以旧法测立时久，非人所堪，分其刻数，日再上。
现代文：到比部郎范泉删定律令，以旧法测立时间太久，不是人所能忍受，划分其中的刻敷，每日二上。
English: By the order of Biburo Fanquan, the old method of measuring time was too long and unbearable, and the inscriptions were divided into two every day.

古文：廷尉以为新制过轻，请集八座丞郎并祭酒孔奂、行事沈洙五舍人会尚书省详议。
现代文：廷尉认为新律制太轻，请求集八座丞郎并祭酒孔奂、行事沈洙五舍人会同尚书省详议。
English: The courtier thought that the new legal system was too light, and requested that the eight choirs of priests be assembled, and that the offering of wine be made to Confucius, and the actions of the five lay people be discussed in detail with the Ministry of Education.

古文：时高宗录尚书，集众议之，都官尚书周弘正曰： 未知狱所测人，有几人款？
现代文：此时高宗录尚书，集众人议之，都官尚书周弘正说： 不知狱中所测的人，有几人服罪?
English: At this time, Gao Zonglu Shangshu and Zhou Hongzheng, the city official of Shangshu, said: I don't know how many people who were tested in prison have pleaded guilty.

古文：几人不款？
现代文：几人不服罪?
English: How many have pleaded not guilty?

古文：须前责取人名及数并其罪目，然后更集。 
现代文：必须先责取人名及数目并加罪目，然后再集。 
English: The names and numbers of the accused must first be collected and the charges must be added, and then collected again.

古文：得廷尉监沈仲由列称，别制已后，有寿羽儿一人坐杀寿慧，刘磊渴等八人坐偷马仗家口渡北，依法测之，限讫不款。
现代文：得廷尉监沈仲由陈述，实行别制以后，有寿羽儿一人杀了寿慧，刘磊渴等八人偷了马仗家口渡北，依法测之，限期完毕仍不服罪。
English: After the implementation of the separate system, there were eight people, including Zhu Yuer, who killed Shou Hui, and Liu Lei, who stole horses from his family and went to the north, according to the statement of Detaining Officer Shen Zhongyu. After the deadline was over, they still did not admit guilt.

古文：刘道朔坐犯七改偷，依法测立，首尾二日而款。
现代文：刘道朔犯了七次偷窃，依法测立，前后二日便服罪。
English: Liu Daoshuo committed seven thefts, which was determined according to law, and he served his sentence two days later.

古文：陈法满坐被使封藏、阿法受钱，未及上而款。
现代文：陈法满被使封藏、背法受钱坐罪，没来得及上就服罪。
English: Chen Fa Man was forced to hide and betray the law, and received money to do so. He did not have time to go to the court to plead guilty.

古文：弘正议曰： 凡小大之狱，必应以情，正言依准五听，验其虚实，岂可全恣考掠，以判刑罪。
现代文：弘正议道： 凡小大之狱，必应之以情，正言依准审案的五种方法，验它们的虚实，哪可全凭拷问鞭打，来判定罪刑。
English: Hong Zheng said: Whenever a small or large prison is created, it must be based on compassion. Zheng Zheng said that the five methods of adjudication should be used to test their falsity, which can only be determined by torture and whipping.

古文：且测人时节，本非古制，近代已来，方有此法。
现代文：况且测人的时节，本不是古制，近代以来，才有此种方法。
English: What's more, the measurement of a person's time zone is not an ancient system, but a method that has only existed since modern times.

古文：起自晡鼓，迄于二更，岂是常人所能堪忍？
现代文：起始于下午三时到五时，结束于夜裹九时到十一时，难道是常人所能够忍受的?
English: Starting from 3:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m. and ending at around 9:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m., is this something that ordinary people can tolerate?

古文：所以重械之下，危堕之上，无人不服，诬枉者多。
现代文：所以重械之下，危堕之上，没有人不服罪，冤枉的人便多了。
English: Therefore, under the heavy weapons, on the brink of collapse, no one pleaded guilty, and there were more people who were wronged.

古文：朝晚二时，同等刻数，进退而求，于事为衷。
现代文：早晚二个时间，同等刻敷，进退而求。于事才为折衷。
English: In the morning and in the evening, two times, the same notching, advancing and retreating. It is a compromise.

古文：若谓小促前期，致实罪不伏，如复时节延长，则无愆妄款。
现代文：假如说小促前期，致使实罪不伏，如再将时节延长，那么没有不错服罪的。
English: If we say that we should shorten the preliminary period so that the actual crime does not succumb, and then extend the time period, then there is no good way to serve the crime.

古文：且人之所堪，既有强弱，人之立意，固亦多途。
现代文：况且人所能忍受的，原本即有强弱，人的立意，更有多途。
English: Moreover, what a person can endure is originally strong and weak, and a person's determination is even more promising.

古文：至如贯高榜笞刺爇，身无完者，戴就熏针并极，困笃不移，岂关时刻长短，掠测优劣？
现代文：至于如贯高鞭笞刺身，身上体无完肤，戴就熏烤针刺并加致极，病重垂危仍不变移，哪关时间长短，鞭打而测的优劣?
English: As for the sashimi that is whipped at a high speed, the body has no complete skin, the sashimi is smoked and roasted, and the needles are added to the extreme, and the severity of the disease remains unchanged, what is the length of time, and the pros and cons of whipping?

古文：夫与杀不辜，宁失不经，罪疑惟轻，功疑惟重，斯则古之圣王，垂此明法。
现代文：与其杀无辜者，宁可失之不经，罪疑惟轻，功疑惟重，造就是古代圣王，重视此明法。
English: Rather than kill the innocent, it is better to be careless, the crime is doubtful, the work is doubtful, and the creation is the ancient holy king, attach importance to this clear law.

古文：愚谓依范泉著制，于事为允。 
现代文：我认为依范泉所著的律制，于事为妥。 
English: I think it is appropriate to follow the legal system written by Fan Quan.

古文：舍人盛权议曰： 比部范泉新制，尚书周弘正明议，咸允《虞书》惟轻之旨，《殷颂》敷正之言。
现代文：舍人盛权议道： 比部范泉的新制，尚书周弘正的明议，都适合《虞书》惟轻的旨意，《殷颂》布正的言论。
English: Shengren Shengquan reasoned: The new system initiated by Hibe Fanquan and the explicit discussion of Shangshu Zhou Hongzheng are both suitable for the light intention of "Gyoshu" and the statement of Buzheng of "Yinsong."

古文：窃寻廷尉监沈仲由等列新制以后，凡有狱十一人，其所测者十人，款者唯一。
现代文：我私下寻思廷尉监沈仲由等列新制以后，共有狱囚十一人，其中所测的人十个，衹有一人服罪。
English: After the new system was introduced, there were a total of eleven prisoners, ten of whom were tested, and only one of whom pleaded guilty.

古文：愚谓染罪之囚，狱官宜明加辩析，穷考事理。
现代文：我以为服罪的囚犯，狱官应明加辨析，尽考事理。
English: I think that the prison officers should make a clear distinction between the prisoners who have confessed their crimes and thoroughly examine the matter.

古文：若罪有可疑，自宜启审分判，幸无滥测；若罪有实验，乃可启审测立；此则枉直有分，刑宥斯理。
现代文：如罪有可疑，自应重审另判，做到没有滥测；如罪有实际验证，才可重审测立；这样就枉与直有分别，刑罚与宽大合理了。
English: If the crime is suspicious, it should be retried and re-sentenced, so that there is no abuse; if the crime has actual verification, it can only be retried and determined; in this way, it is unreasonable and straightforward, and the punishment and leniency are reasonable.

古文：范泉今牒述《汉律》，云 死罪及除名，罪证明白，考掠已至，而抵隐不服者，处当列上 。
现代文：范泉今讼述《汉律》，说 死罪与除名，罪证明白，拷问鞭打已到，而抵赖隐瞒不服罪的，处罚应当列上 。
English: Fan Quan is now expounding on "Hanrui," saying that the death penalty and removal from the list are the first, the crime is proved to be white, the torture and whipping have arrived, and the punishment should be listed for those who deny, conceal or refuse to admit guilt.

古文：杜预注云 处当，证验明白之状，列其抵隐之意 。窃寻旧制深峻，百中不款者一，新制宽优，十中不款者九，参会两文，宽猛实异，处当列上，未见厘革。
现代文：杜预注说： 处罚应当，指证验明白的罪状，列他抵赖隐瞒的意思，我寻思旧制深刻严峻，一百人中不服罪者一个，新制宽大优厚，十人中不服罪者九人，参会两文，宽严是如此不同，处罚应当列上，未见改正。
English: Du Yu annotated: "Punishment should be based on the evidence and clear evidence of the crime, and include his denial and concealment. I think that the old system is profound and severe, one out of a hundred people who do not admit guilt, the new system is lenient and generous, nine out of ten people who do not admit guilt, and two members of the meeting. The leniency and severity are so different, the punishment should be listed, and there is no correction.

古文：愚谓宜付典法，更详 处当列上 之文。 
现代文：愚以为应付典法，更要详明 处罚应当列上 之文。 
English: It is foolish to think that we should follow the canon law, and it is more important to specify the text that the punishment should be listed.

古文：洙议曰： 夜中测立，缓急易欺，兼用昼漏，于事为允。
现代文：沈洙议道： 夜间测立，缓急容易欺骗，应兼用滴水计时的漏壶，于事妥当。
English: Shen Yao said: It is better to measure at night, since it is easy to deceive the priority. It is appropriate to use a leaking kettle for drip timing.

古文：但漏刻赊促，今古不同，《汉书·律历》，何承天、祖冲之、釭之父子《漏经》，并自关鼓至下鼓，自晡鼓至关鼓，皆十三刻，冬夏四时不异。
现代文：但漏壶刻制有久近之分，今古不同，汉书。律历》，何承天、祖冲之、佢之父子的《漏经》，都从关鼓到下鼓，从晡鼓到关鼓，都是十三刻，冬夏四时没有不同。
English: However, the leaking pot engraving system has a long-term and short-term difference, which is different from ancient times, the Chinese book, the legal calendar, and the "Leaking Sutra" of He Chengtian, Zu Chongzhi, and the father and son of Zou, are all from the gong drum to the lower drum, from the gong drum to the gong drum, are all 13 o'clock, and there is no difference in winter and summer 4 o'clock.

古文：若其日有长短，分在中时前后。
现代文：如果曰有长短，分在中午时分前后。
English: If there is a difference, it should be around noon.

古文：今用梁末改漏，下鼓之后，分其短长，夏至之日，各十七刻，冬至之日，各十二刻。
现代文：今用梁末改的漏壶，下鼓之后，分别短长，夏至那天，各十七刻，冬至那天，各十二刻。
English: The leaking jug is now replaced with the last piece of timber, and after the drums are lowered, the short and long ones are played separately, on the day of the summer solstice, 17 minutes each, and on the day of the winter solstice, 12 minutes each.

古文：伏承命旨，刻同勒令，检一日之刻乃同，而四时之用不等，廷尉今牒，以时刻短促，致罪人不款。
现代文：伏承命令旨意，刻同勒令，检一日之刻乃同，而四时之用不等，廷尉今诉讼，因时刻短促，致使罪人不服罪。
English: The moment of the order to surrender is the same as the moment of the order to surrender, and the moment of the day of the examination is the same, but the four hours are different, and the court officer is now litigating, because of the short time, causing the sinner to plead not guilty.

古文：愚意愿去夜测之昧，从昼漏之明，斟酌今古之间，参会二漏之义，舍秋冬之少刻，从夏日之长晷，不问寒暑，并依今之夏至，朝夕上测，各十七刻。
现代文：我的意思是应去除夜测的暗昧，遵从昼漏的明白，斟酌于今古之间，参会二漏之义，舍去秋冬的少刻，依从夏日的长晷，不问寒暑，并依今时的夏至，早晚上测，各十七刻。
English: What I mean is that we should remove the obscurity of the night measurement, follow the clarity of the day leak, consider the meaning of the two leaks between the present and the past, give up the small hours of autumn and winter, follow the summer solstice, regardless of cold and heat, and follow the summer solstice at this time, early evening measurement, seventeen hours each.

古文：比之古漏，则一上多昔四刻，即用今漏，则冬至多五刻。
现代文：比之于古代的漏刻，那么一上多于过去四刻，就用今日的漏刻，那么冬至多了五刻。
English: Compared to the ancient leap second, the leap second is four more than in the past, so we use today's leap second, and the winter solstice is five more.

古文：虽冬至之时，数刻侵夜，正是少日，于事非疑。
现代文：虽然冬至之时，敷刻侵夜，正是少，于事不疑。
English: Although at the time of the winter solstice, when the sun sets and the night falls, it is rare, there is no doubt about it.

古文：庶罪人不以漏短而为捍，狱囚无以在夜而致诬，求之鄙意，窃谓允合。 
现代文：使得罪人不以漏刻短而为依捍，狱囚不因在夜间而遭受诬陷，求之于我的意思，我自己以为是允合的。 
English: so that the sinner does not take advantage of the shortness of the hour, and the prisoner is not put to the worse for being out at night.

古文：众议以为宜依范泉前制，高宗曰： 沈长史议得中，宜更博议。 
现代文：众人议论以为应依范泉的前制，龌说： 沈长史之议说得合理，可再加广议。 
English: Many people argued that Fan Quan's previous system should be followed. Zou said: Shen Changshi's argument is reasonable and can be discussed more broadly.

古文：左丞宗元饶议曰： 窃寻沈议非顿异范，正是欲使四时均其刻数，兼斟酌其佳，以会优剧。
现代文：左丞宗元饶议道： 我寻思这选之议并非完全不同于艺星，正是想使四时都平均刻敷，兼斟酌它们的佳处，以使劳逸平均。
English: Zuo Zongyuan Rao said, "I think that this choice is not completely different from that of the art stars. It is just that I want to make the four hours equal, and at the same time consider their advantages, so that the work and rest are equal.

古文：即同牒请写还删定曹详改前制。 
现代文：便同牒请写还删定曹详细更改前制。 
English: Please also write "deleted Cao" to change the previous system.

古文：高宗依事施行。
现代文：高宗依事施行。
English: Gaozong implemented it according to the circumstances.

古文：洙以太建元年卒，时年五十二。
现代文：洙于太建元年死，其时五十二岁。
English: He died at the age of fifty-two in the first year of Taijian.

古文：戚衮，字公文，吴郡盐官人也。
现代文：戚衮，字公文，吴郡盐官人。
English: He was a relative of the emperor, a member of the imperial court, and an official of the Wuzhong County Salt Bureau.

古文：祖显，齐给事中。
现代文：祖父戚显，齐朝给事中。
English: The grandfather is a relative of Xian, and the Qi Dynasty is in the middle of the matter.

古文：父霸，梁临贺王府中兵参军。
现代文：父亲戚霸，梁朝临贺王府中兵参军。
English: His father's relative, Liang Chao, came to congratulate the soldiers in the king's palace on joining the army.

古文：衮少聪慧，游学京都，受《三礼》于国子助教刘文绍，一二年中，大义略备。
现代文：戚衮少年聪敏有智慧，游学京城，向国子助教刘文绍受教三礼》，一二年中，就大义略通。
English: Relatives of the boy are smart and intelligent, they have traveled to Beijing to study, and have been taught the Three Rites by the assistant teacher Liu Wenshao. In the past year or two, they have a slight understanding of the Great Righteousness.

古文：年十九，梁武帝敕策《孔子正言》并《周礼》、《礼记》义，衮对高第。
现代文：十九岁，选亘瞳韶令为《孔子正言》及《周礼》、《礼记》疏义，盛塞应对入高品第。
English: At the age of nineteen, Wataru Hitomi was selected as the winner of the "Confucius Speech" and "Weekly Ritual" and "Rituals" contest.

古文：仍除扬州祭酒从事史。
现代文：于是封扬州祭酒从事史。
English: As a result, the history of the Fengyang State Festival Liquor began.

古文：就国子博士宋怀方质《仪礼》义，怀方北人，自魏携《仪礼》、《礼记》疏，秘惜不传，及将亡，谓家人曰： 吾死后，戚生若赴，便以《仪礼》、《礼记》义本付之，若其不来，即宜随尸而殡。 
现代文：戚衮去向国子博士宋怀方求教《仪礼》之义，宋怀方是北人，从魏朝携带《仪礼》、《礼记》疏，秘藏爱惜而不愿流传，到他临终时，对家人说 我死后，雯速如来，便将《仪礼》、《礼记》义本交付他，如他不来，就把它们随尸体入葬 。
English: Relatives went to ask Dr. Song Huaifang, the son of the state, for the meaning of "Rite." Song Huaifang was a northerner who carried "Rite" and "Ritual" from the Wei Dynasty. He cherished the secret and did not want to pass it on. At the end of his life, he said to his family, "When I die, I will hand over the "Rite" and "Ritual" to him. If he does not come, they will be buried with the body."

古文：其为儒者推许如此。
现代文：戚衮被儒者推重到如此地步。
English: This is how far the Confucianists have pushed the importance of relatives.

古文：寻兼太学博士。
现代文：不久兼太学博士。
English: He was also awarded a doctorate shortly afterwards.

古文：梁简文在东宫，召衮讲论。
现代文：梁简文在东宫，召盛塞讲论。
English: Liang Jianwen called Sheng Sai to give a speech at the East Palace.

古文：又尝置宴集玄儒之士，先命道学互相质难，次令中庶子徐摛驰骋大义，间以剧谈。
现代文：又曾置宴召集玄儒人士，先命道学互相质难，再令中庶子徐搞发挥大义，中间插以激烈辩谈。
English: In addition, he once held a banquet to convene Neo-Confucianists, and first ordered the scholars of Taoism to challenge each other, and then ordered the middle son, Xu, to play the role of the great righteous, and in the middle of the banquet, they had a heated debate.

古文：摛辞辩纵横，难以答抗，诸人慑气，皆失次序。
现代文：徐摘辞辩纵横，他人难以抗对，旁人都被震慑却气，失了次序。
English: Xu Zizhi's argument is long and wide, others are difficult to resist, others are shocked and discouraged, and the order is lost.

古文：衮时骋义，摛与往复，衮精采自若，对答如流，简文深加叹赏。
现代文：此时戚衮阐义，与他往复，戚衮神采自若，对答如流，梁简文深加赞赏。
English: At this time, Liang Jianwen was deeply impressed by Liang Jianwen's elucidation, and he reciprocated with Liang Jianwen. Liang Jianwen was self-assured, and his answers were fluent.

古文：寻除员外散骑侍郎，又迁员外散骑常侍。
现代文：不久封员外散骑侍郎，又改任员外散骑常侍。
English: Soon after, he was given the title of "sanshōji samurai" and later "sanshōji regular samurai."

古文：敬帝承制，出为江州长史，仍随沈泰镇南豫州。
现代文：敬帝承制，戚衮出任江州长史，并随沈泰镇南豫州。
English: Emperor Jing was enthroned, and his relative Zhu served as the governor of Jiangsu Province, and accompanied Shen Tai Zhen to South Yuzhou.

古文：泰之奔齐也，逼衮俱行，后自鄴下遁还。
现代文：沈泰投奔齐朝时，逼戚衮与他同行，戚衮后从邺工逃回。
English: When Shen Tai fled to the Qi Dynasty, he forced his relatives to go with him, and they later fled back from Shandong.

古文：又随程文季北伐，吕梁军败，衮没于周，久之得归。
现代文：他又随程文季北伐，吕梁军败，戚衮沦落于周，久而得归。
English: He also followed the Northern Expedition of Wen Ji, the defeat of the Luliang army, the fall of his relatives to Zhou, and finally returned.

古文：仍兼国子助教，除中卫始兴王府录事参军。
现代文：仍兼国子助教，封中卫始兴王府录事参军。
English: He was still an assistant professor of Kuniko, and he was sent to join the army as a middle guard of Shishing Wangfu.

古文：太建十三年卒，时年六十三。
现代文：左建十三年死，死时六十三岁。
English: Zuo Jian died thirteen years ago, at the age of sixty-three.

古文：衮于梁代撰《三礼义记》，值乱亡失，《礼记义》四十卷行于世。
现代文：戚衮于梁代撰写了《三礼义记》，值乱世而遗失，有《礼记义》四十卷行于世。
English: Qi Xuan wrote the "Three Rites and Virtues" in the Liang Dynasty, but it was lost in the turbulent times. Forty volumes of the "Three Rites and Virtues" were published.

古文：郑灼，字茂昭，东阳信安人也。
现代文：郑灼，字茂昭，束阳郡信安人。
English: Zheng Lu, also known as Maozhao, was from Shinyang County, Sokyang County.

古文：祖惠，梁衡阳太守。
现代文：祖父郑惠，梁朝衡阳太守。
English: His grandfather, Zheng Hui, was the crown prince of Hengyang in the Liang Dynasty.

古文：父季徽，通直散骑侍郎、建安令。
现代文：父亲郑季徽，通直散骑侍郎、建安令。
English: His father, Zheng Qihui, was a Tsunzhi Zanzhong riding attendant and Jiananling.

古文：灼幼而聪敏，励志儒学，少受业于皇侃。
现代文：郑灼幼时聪敏，励志于儒学，少年时受业于皇侃。
English: As a child, Zheng Yuelu was bright and inspired to study Confucianism. As a teenager, he was trained in imperial etiquette.

古文：梁中大通五年，释褐奉朝请。
现代文：梁代中大通五年，初任奉朝请。
English: It has been five years since Liang served as Zhongdazhong, and he was first appointed to serve the imperial court.

古文：累迁员外散骑侍郎、给事中、安东临川王府记室参军，转平西邵陵王府记室。
现代文：又改任员外散骑侍郎、给事中、安东临川王府记室参军，转平西邵陵王府记室。
English: He was also reassigned to the position of non-commissioned officer, horseback riding attendant, and in the middle of the matter, he joined the army of the Andong Linchuan King's Office and transferred to the Pingxi Shaoling King's Office.

古文：简文在东宫，雅爱经术，引灼为西省义学士。
现代文：简文在束宫，雅爱经术，引郑灼为西省义学士。
English: Jianwen in Sokgong, Ya'ai in the sutras, led Zheng Jiao to be awarded the title of West China's Baccalaureate.

古文：承圣中，除通直散骑侍郎，兼国子博士。
现代文：承圣年中，封通直散骑侍郎，兼国子博士。
English: In the year of his consecration, he was given the title of Fongtong Zhizan Jikei Jiro, and was also given the title of Dr. Kuniko.

古文：寻为威戎将军，兼中书通事舍人。
现代文：不久为威戎将军，兼中书通事舍人。
English: He was soon replaced by General Weirong, who was also an expert in Chinese calligraphy.

古文：高祖、世祖之世，历安东临川、镇北鄱阳二王府谘议参军，累迁中散大夫，以本职兼国子博士。
现代文：高祖、世祖时期，郑灼历任安东临川、镇北鄱阳二王府谘议参军，又改任中散大夫，并以本职兼国子博士。
English: During the time of Gaozu and Shizuo, Zheng Rong served as a member of the advisory council of the armies of the two kings of Lintong and Zhenbei and Shiyang. He was also appointed as the doctor of Zhongshan and concurrently served as the doctor of Kuniko.

古文：未拜，太建十三年卒，时年六十八。
现代文：未拜官，于太建十三年死，其时六十八岁。
English: He died at the age of sixty-eight, after thirteen years of service.

古文：灼性精勤，尤明《三礼》。
现代文：郑灼生性精明勤快，尤其懂得《三礼》。
English: Zheng Jia is a shrewd and diligent person, especially he knows the "Three Rites."

古文：少时尝梦与皇侃遇于途，侃谓灼曰 郑郎开口 ，侃因唾灼口中，自后义理逾进。
现代文：少年时曾梦见与皇侃在路上相遇，皇侃对郑灼说 郑郎开日 ，皇侃便将唾液吐于郑灼口中，此后郑灼义理愈加进步。
English: When he was a boy, he had a dream that he and Wang Kan met on the road. Wang Kan said to Zheng Yao, "Zheng Lang, open the sun," and Wang Kan spit saliva into Zheng Yao's mouth. Since then, Zheng Yao's virtue has continued to improve.

古文：灼家贫，抄义疏以日继夜，笔毫尽，每削用之。
现代文：郑灼家贫，他抄写义疏日以继夜，笔毫用尽，每次都削而用之。
English: Zheng Jiao's family was poor, and he spent day and night transcribing the rhyme scheme. Every time he ran out of ink, he scraped it off and used it.

古文：灼常蔬食，讲授多苦心热，若瓜时，辄偃卧以瓜镇心，起便诵读，其笃志如此。
现代文：郑灼常吃蔬食，讲授时多苦于心内发热，若有瓜时，他就伏卧用瓜镇住心，起来后便诵读，笃志于学达到了如此地步。
English: Zheng Yu often eats vegetables. When he is lecturing, he often suffers from fever. If there is melon, he will lie down and use melon powder to calm his mind. When he gets up, he will recite, and his dedication to learning has reached such a level.

古文：时有晋陵张崖、吴郡陆诩、吴兴沈德威、会稽贺德基，俱以礼学自命。
现代文：其时有晋陵张崖、吴郡陆诩、吴兴沈德威、会稽贺德基，都以礼学自命。
English: At that time, there were Jinling Zhangya, Wu County Lu Wei, Wu Xing Shen Dewei, and He Deji, all of whom were self-committed to etiquette.

古文：张崖传《三礼》于同郡刘文绍，仕梁历王府中记室。
现代文：张崖传《三礼》于同郡刘文绍，在梁朝任王府中记室。
English: Zhang Yanyuan's "Three Rites" was written in the same county as Liu Wenshao, in the Liang Dynasty's royal office.

古文：天嘉元年，为尚书仪曹郎，广沈文阿《仪注》，撰五礼。
现代文：天嘉元年，为尚书仪曹郎，对沈文阿《仪注》作扩广，撰成《五礼》。
English: In the first year of Tianjia, he was a disciple of Shang Shuxi and expanded Shen Wenya's "Commentary on Ceremonies" into "Five Rites."

古文：出为丹阳令、王府谘议参军。
现代文：出任丹阳令、王府谘议参军。
English: He was appointed as Danyang commander, and the royal court advised him to join the army.

古文：御史中丞宗元饶表荐为国子博士。
现代文：御史中丞宗元饶上表举荐为国子博士。
English: Imperial Historian Chujo Sogenrao was recommended for the position of Kuniko doctor.

古文：陆诩少习崔灵恩《三礼义宗》，梁世百济国表求讲礼博士，诏令诩行。
现代文：陆诩少年时学习崔灵恩《三礼义宗》，梁朝百济国上表请求讲礼博士，帝下诏令陆翔前往。
English: When Lu Xun was a boy, he studied Choe Ling Un's "Three Rites of the Righteous Sect." The Liang Dynasty requested Baekje to grant him a doctorate in etiquette, and the emperor ordered Lu Xiang to go.

古文：还除给事中、定阳令。
现代文：回来后封他给事中、宣盐令。
English: After his return, he was ordered to resign from his post.

古文：天嘉初，侍始兴王伯茂读，迁尚书祠部郎中。
现代文：玉台初年，陆诩侍奉始兴王伯茂读书，改任尚书祠部郎中。
English: In the first year of Yutai, Lu Wei served as the attendant of Shixing Wang Bomao to study, and was reappointed as the junior priest of the Shoshu Shrine.

古文：沈德威字怀远，少有操行。
现代文：沈德威，字怀远，少年时有操行。
English: Shen Dewei, the words are far away, when he was a boy, he had a practice.

古文：梁太清末，遁于天目山，筑室以居，虽处乱离，而笃学无倦，遂治经业。
现代文：梁朝太渍末年，逃于天目山，筑室而居，虽处乱离之世，却笃于学而无倦，于是专治经书之业。
English: In the last years of the reign of Emperor Taizu, Liang fled to Mount Tenmoku, built a room and lived there. Although he lived in a chaotic world, he was devoted to learning and tireless, so he devoted himself to the study of scripture.

古文：天嘉元年，征出都，侍太子讲《礼传》。
现代文：天嘉元年，被征出都，侍奉太子讲授《礼》、《传》。
English: In the first year of Tianjia, he was conscripted out of the capital and served the crown prince to teach "Rite" and "Biography."

古文：寻授太学博士，转国子助教。
现代文：不久被授太学博士，转任国子助教。
English: He was soon awarded the title of Doctor of Science, and was transferred to the position of assistant professor at Kuniko University.

古文：每自学还私室以讲授，道俗受业者数十百人，率常如此。
现代文：经常自国子学回到私室讲授，道士俗人受业的有数十上百人，经常如此。
English: He often returned to his private room to teach from Kuniko-gaku, and there were dozens or hundreds of Taoist laymen who were engaged, often in this way.

古文：迁太常丞，兼五礼学士，寻为尚书仪曹郎，后为祠部郎。
现代文：改任太常丞，兼五礼学士，不久为尚书仪曹郎，后为祠部郎。
English: He was appointed to the position of Taizanjo (Grand Councilor of State) and was also appointed to the position of Goryo Gakushi (Master of the Five Rites). Soon he was appointed to the position of Shoshu-i-soro (Master of Ceremonies) and later to the position of Shokibu-ro (Minister of the Imperial Shrine).

古文：俄丁母忧去职。
现代文：继而母丧离职。
English: She then left the company after the death of her mother.

古文：祯明三年入隋，官至秦王府主簿。
现代文：祯塱三年入造，官至台王府主簿。
English: It was built three years later and became the official residence of the king of Taiwan.

古文：年五十五卒。
现代文：五十五岁死。
English: He died at the age of 55.

古文：贺德基字承业，世传《礼》学。
现代文：贺德基，字承业，世代传《礼》学。
English: Hedeki, word inheritance, "Ri" learning passed down from generation to generation.

古文：祖文发，父淹，仕梁俱为祠部郎，并有名当世。
现代文：祖父贺文发，父亲贺淹，在梁朝做官都为祠部郎，都有名于当世。
English: His grandfather, He Wenfa, and his father, He Duan, were both officials in the Liang Dynasty, both of whom were minister of the shrine, and both of whom were famous in the contemporary world.

古文：德基少游学于京邑，积年不归，衣资罄乏，又耻服故弊，盛冬止衣裌襦袴。
现代文：贺德基少年时游学于京城，积数年不回，衣服缺乏，又耻于穿旧的坏的衣服，隆冬时衹穿夹衣衫裤。
English: As a boy, He Deji traveled to Beijing to study. He did not return for several years. He lacked clothes and was ashamed to wear old, bad clothes. In the middle of winter, he wore a jacket and trousers.

古文：尝于白马寺前逢一妇人，容服甚盛，呼德基入寺门，脱白纶巾以赠之。仍谓德基曰： 君方为重器，不久贫寒，故以此相遗耳。 
现代文：他曾在白马寺前遇到一位妇人，她容貌服装都很华贵，叫贺德基到寺门内，脱下白纶巾赠送给他，并对贺德基说： 你正为重器，不会久于贫寒，所以将此相赠。 
English: He once met a woman in front of the White Horse Temple. She was very elegant in appearance and clothing. She asked Hodeki to come to the temple gate, take off his white silk scarf and give it to him. She said to Hodeki: "You are a heavyweight, you will not last long in poverty, so give this to each other."

古文：德基问妪姓名，不答而去。
现代文：贺德基问遣妇人姓名，她不答而离去。
English: He Deji asked the woman's name, but she did not answer and left.

古文：德基于《礼记》称为精明，居以传授，累迁尚书祠部郎。
现代文：贺德基对于《礼记》堪称精明，居而传授，又改任为尚书祠部郎。
English: He Deji was a shrewd teacher of "Li Ji," and he was appointed as the minister of the temple of Shangshu.

古文：德基虽不至大官，而三世儒学，俱为祠部，时论美其不坠焉。
现代文：贺德基虽没做到大官，但他家三代儒学，都为祠部郎，当时舆论赞美他家学不坠落。
English: Although He Deji did not become a high-ranking official, his family's three generations of Confucianism were all priests. At that time, public opinion praised his family's learning.

古文：全缓，字弘立，吴郡钱塘人也。
现代文：全缓字弘立，吴郡钱塘人。
English: He is a native of Qiantang, Wuxi.

古文：幼受《易》于博士褚仲都，笃志研玩，得其精微。
现代文：幼年向博士遥控都求教《易》，笃志研习，得其精微。
English: When he was young, he asked Dr. Yu to teach him "Easy," and he was determined to study hard.

古文：梁太清初，历王国侍郎、奉朝请，俄转国子助教，兼司义郎，专讲《诗》、《易》。
现代文：梁代主遣初年，历任王国侍郎、奉朝请，不久转任国子助教，兼司义郎，专讲《诗》、《易》。
English: In the first year of Liang Dai's teaching, he was invited by successive attendants of the kingdom and the imperial court, and soon he was transferred to the position of assistant professor of Kuniko, also known as Siyiro, specializing in "Poetry" and "Easy."

古文：绍泰元年，除尚书水部郎。
现代文：绍泰元年，封尚书水部郎。
English: In the first year of Shao Tai, Feng Shang, the Minister of Water Resources, was born.

古文：太建中，累迁镇南始兴王府谘议参军，随府诣湘州，以疾卒，时年七十四。
现代文：塞建年中，又改任镇南始兴王府谘议参军，随府到湘州，因病亡，其时七十四岁。
English: In the middle of the Sijian period, he was transferred to Zhenan Shixing Wangfu Advisory Council to join the army, and went with the government to Hunan Province, where he died of illness at the age of 74.

古文：缓治《周易》、《老庄》，时人言玄者咸推之。
现代文：全垄治《周易》、《老》、庄》，当时凡言玄学的都推重他。
English: Zeng Rongzhi wrote "Zhou Yi," "Lao" and "Zhuang." At that time, he was highly regarded for his profound knowledge of the classics.

古文：张讥，字直言，清河武城人也。
现代文：张讥，字直言，清河武城人。
English: Zhang Qian, the word straight talk, Qinghe Wucheng people.

古文：祖僧宝，梁散骑侍郎、太子洗马。
现代文：祖父张僧宝，梁朝散骑侍郎、太子洗马。
English: Grandfather Zhang Xiangbao, Liang Dynasty horseback riding attendant, prince Zhaima.

古文：父仲悦，梁庐陵王府录事参军、尚书祠部郎中。
现代文：父亲张仲悦，梁朝庐陵王府录事参军、尚书祠部郎中。
English: His father, Zhang Zhongyue, joined the army after being recorded in the records of the Liang Dynasty's Mausoleum, and was a disciple of Shang Shuxi.

古文：讥幼聪俊，有思理，年十四，通《孝经》、《论语》。
现代文：张讥幼年聪敏才智出众，有思理，十四岁通《孝经》、《论语》。
English: Zhang Qian was very bright and intelligent at a young age. He was thoughtful and learned "The Filial Piety Sutra" and "Analects" at the age of fourteen.

古文：笃好玄言，受学于汝南周弘正，每有新意，为先辈推伏。
现代文：笃志喜好玄言，受学于汝南周弘正，每有新意，都为先辈推重。
English: Duzhi is fond of proverbs, he studied under Runan Zhou Hongzheng, and every new idea is highly valued by his predecessors.

古文：梁大同中，召补国子《正言》生。
现代文：梁代大同年中，被召补为国子《正言》生。
English: In the same year of Liang Dai's graduation, he was summoned to be a student of Guo Zi's "Motto."

古文：梁武帝尝于文德殿释《乾》、《坤》文言，讥与陈郡袁宪等预焉，敕令论议，诸儒莫敢先出，讥乃整容而进，谘审循环，辞令温雅。
现代文：梁武帝曾于文德殿解释《干、《坤》、《文言》，张讥舆陈郡袁宪等参预其中，帝韶令论议，诸位儒生没有敢先出言的，张讥便整容而进，咨询审问循环，辞令温文尔雅。
English: Emperor Liangwu once explained "Gan," "Kun" and "Wenwen" in the Palace of Literature. Zhang Zizhi, Chen County, Yuan Xian and others participated in the discussion, and the imperial edict was discussed. If the Confucian scholars did not dare to speak first, Zhang Zizhi proceeded to make a face-lift, consulted the interrogation cycle, and spoke in a gentle and elegant manner.

古文：梁武帝甚异之，赐裙襦绢等，仍云 表卿稽古之力 。
现代文：梁武帝十分惊异，赐他裙襦绢等，并说 表彰你的研习古事之功力 。
English: Emperor Liangwu was very surprised and gave him a robe and said, "I commend you for your ability to study ancient things."

古文：讥幼丧母，有错彩经帕，即母之遗制，及有所识，家人具以告之，每岁时辄对帕哽噎，不能自胜。
现代文：张讥幼年丧母，有错彩的经帕，是母亲遗留的亲制之物，到他有所懂事时，家裹人具体告诉了他，他每年此时就要对着此帕哭泣，感情不能自己。
English: Zhang Qian lost his mother when he was very young. His mother had left him with a handkerchief with the wrong color. When he came to his senses, his family specifically told him that he had to weep over this handkerchief every year at this time. He couldn't keep his feelings to himself.

古文：及丁父忧，居丧过礼。
现代文：到父丧，他居丧超过礼节。
English: At the time of his father's death, he went beyond the bounds of propriety.

古文：服阕，召补湘东王国左常侍，转田曹参军，迁士林馆学士。
现代文：服丧毕，被召补湘东王国左常侍，转任田曹参军，改任士林馆学士。
English: After the funeral, he was summoned to fill in for the left attendant of the Kingdom of Shandong, transferred to the Tian Cao to join the army, and became a scholar of the Shilin Museum.

古文：简文在东宫，出士林馆发《孝经》题，讥论议往复，甚见嗟赏，自是每有讲集，必遣使召讥。
现代文：简文在东宫，出士林馆发布《孝经》题，张讥论议往复，很被简文叹赏，自此每有讲论集会，简文必定派人召张讥。
English: In the East Palace and the Shilin Pavilion, Jianwen published the "Filial Piety" topic, and Zhang Zi discussed and discussed, which was highly appreciated by Jianwen. Since then, whenever there is a lecture meeting, Jianwen must send someone to call Zhang Zi.

古文：及侯景寇逆，于围城之中，犹侍哀太子于武德后殿讲《老》、《庄》。
现代文：到侯景叛乱，在围城之中，张讥还侍奉哀太子在武德后殿讲《老》、《庄》。
English: Until the rebellion of Houjing, during the siege of the city, Zhang Qian still served the crown prince to speak "Lao" and "Zhuang" in the Wu De Hou Temple.

古文：梁台陷，讥崎岖避难，卒不事景，景平，历临安令。
现代文：梁台城陷落，张讥崎岖避难，终不事侯景。侯景被平定，任临安令。
English: Liangtai Castle fell, Zhang Zizhong took refuge in the rugged terrain, but ultimately nothing happened to Houjing. Houjing was subdued, and Lin Anling was appointed.

古文：高祖受禅，除太常丞，转始兴王府刑狱参军。
现代文：高祖受禅，封太常丞，转任始兴王府刑狱参军。
English: Gao Zu accepted Zen, was given the title of Grand Prince, and was transferred to the Shixing Royal Prison to join the army.

古文：天嘉中，迁国子助教。
现代文：天嘉年中，改任国子助教。
English: In the middle of the Tian Jia year, he was reassigned as an assistant professor of Kuniko.

古文：是时周弘正在国学，发《周易》题，弘正第四弟弘直亦在讲席。
现代文：此时周弘正在国学，阐发《周易》题，周弘正第四弟周弘直也在讲席。
English: At this time, Zhou Hongzhi was studying Chinese classics, explaining the topic of "Zhou Yi." Zhou Hongzhi's fourth brother, Zhou Hongzhi, was also in the lecture hall.

古文：讥与弘正论议，弘正乃屈，弘直危坐厉声，助其申理。
现代文：张讥舆周弘正论议，周弘正理屈，周弘直正襟危坐厉声而说，助周弘正申理。
English: Zhang Qianming and Zhou Hongzheng argued, Zhou Hongzheng argued, Zhou Hongzheng argued, Zhou Hongzheng argued, Zhou Hongzheng argued, Zhou Hongzheng argued.

古文：讥乃正色谓弘直曰： 今日义集，辩正名理，虽知兄弟急难，四公不得有助。 
现代文：张讥便脸色严肃地对周弘直说： 今日义集，辩正名理，即使知道兄弟有急难，四公你也不得帮助。 
English: Zhang Qianbin said to Zhou Hongzhi with a serious face: Today, you are a righteous person, and you are arguing for the truth. Even if you know that your brother is in trouble, you are not allowed to help him.

古文：弘直曰： 仆助君师，何为不可？ 
现代文：周弘直说： 我助君师，有何不可? 
English: Zhou Hongzhi said: I am an assistant teacher, why not?

古文：举座以为笑乐。
现代文：举座以此为笑乐之谀。
English: The audience laughs at this.

古文：弘正尝谓人曰： 吾每登座，见张讥在席，使入懔然。 
现代文：周弘正曾对人说： 我每次登座，见张讥在席，便感到有点懔然。 
English: Zhou Hongzheng once said to someone: Every time I take the stage and see Zhang Qian at the table, I feel a little stunned.

古文：高宗世，历建安王府记室参军，兼东宫学士，转武陵王限内记室，学士如故。
现代文：高宗时，张讥历任建安王府记室参军，兼束宫学士，转任武陵王限内记室，学士照旧。
English: During the reign of Emperor Gao, Zhang Qian joined the army as a member of the Jianan King's Office of Records, and was also a scholar of the Sokong Palace. He was transferred to the Wuling King's Office of Records, and continued to be a scholar.

古文：后主在东宫，集宫僚置宴，时造玉柄麈尾新成，后主亲执之，曰： 当今虽复多士如林，至于堪捉此者，独张讥耳。 
现代文：后主在东宫，召集宫中官员宴会，其时造玉柄麈尾刚成，后主亲手执之，说： 当今虽然士多如林，至于可以捉此物的，衹有张讥。 
English: In the East Palace, the Empress Dowager convened a banquet for officials of the palace. At that time, the jade handle and the fin were just made. The Empress Dowager held it in her own hands and said, "Today, although there are as many princes as there are forests, there is no one who can catch this thing."

古文：即手授讥。
现代文：当即亲手授给张讥。
English: He immediately personally gave it to Zhang Qian.

古文：仍令于温文殿讲《庄》、《老》，高宗幸宫临听，赐御所服衣一袭。
现代文：乃命他在温文殿讲授《庄》、《老》，高宗驾临宫中听讲，赐他自己所穿衣服一袭。
English: However, he was ordered to teach "Zhuang" and "Lao" in the Wenwen Hall. Gao Zong came to the palace to listen to the lecture and gave him the clothes he was wearing.

古文：后主嗣位，领南平王府谘议参军、东宫学士。
现代文：后主继位，张讥领南平王府谘议参军、东宫学士。
English: Later, he was enthroned as the head of the dynasty, and Zhang Jizhong took the advice of the Nanping royal court to join the army, and became a scholar of the Eastern Palace.

古文：寻迁国子博士，学士如故。
现代文：接着改任国子博士，学士照旧。
English: Then he was appointed as Dr. Kuniko, and the bachelor's degree remained the same.

古文：后主尝幸钟山开善寺，召从臣坐于寺西南松林下，敕召讥竖义。
现代文：后主曾驾临钟山开善寺，召集从臣坐于寺的西南松林下，诏召张讥讲义。
English: The late lord once came to open a Zen temple on Mount Zhongshan, summoned his vassals to sit under the southwestern pine forest of the temple, and gave a sermon.

古文：时索麈尾未至，后主敕取松枝，手以属讥，曰 可代麈尾 。
现代文：遣时索拿麈尾未到，后主韶取松枝，亲手给张讥，说 可代尘尾 。
English: At the time of sending, Sona did not arrive at the end of the rope, so the master took a pine branch and gave it to Zhang Qian with his own hand, saying that he could replace the end of the rope.

古文：顾谓群臣曰 此即是张讥后事 。
现代文：后主面对群臣说 这就是张讥后事 。
English: Afterward, the master said to his retainers, "This is what happened to Zhang Qianlian."

古文：祯明三年入隋，终于长安，时年七十六。
现代文：祯明三年入隋，张讥死于长安，其年七十六岁。
English: Three years into the Sui Dynasty, Zhang Qian died in Chang'an at the age of seventy-six.

古文：讥性恬静，不求荣利，常慕闲逸，所居宅营山池，植花果，讲《周易》、《老》、《庄》而教授焉。
现代文：张讥生性恬静，不求荣利，常慕闲逸，所居宅营山池，植种花果，在此讲《周易》、《老》、《庄》并教授。
English: Zhang Qian was born with a quiet nature. He did not seek glory or profit, but often yearned for leisure. He lived in a house surrounded by mountains and ponds, planted flowers and fruits, and lectured on and taught "Zhou Yi," "Lao," and "Zhuang."

古文：吴郡陆元朗、硃孟博、一乘寺沙门法才、法云寺沙门慧休、至真观道士姚绥，皆传其业。
现代文：吴郡陆元朗、朱孟博、一乘寺沙门法才、法云寺沙门慧休、至真观道士姚绥，都传他的学业。
English: Lu Yuanlang of Wu County, Zhu Mengbo, Shamen Hocai of Yijian Temple, Shamen Huixiu of Foyun Temple, and Yao Zhenguan, a Taoist priest, all passed on his studies.

古文：讥所撰《周易义》三十卷，《尚书义》十五卷，《毛诗义》二十卷，《孝经义》八卷，《论语义》二十卷，《老子义》十一卷，《庄子内篇义》十二卷，《外篇义》二十卷，《杂篇义》十卷，《玄部通义》十二卷，又撰《游玄桂林》二十四卷，后主尝敕人就其家写入秘阁。
现代文：张讥所撰《周易义》三十卷，《尚书义》十五卷，《毛诗义》二十卷，《孝经义》八卷，《论语义》二十卷，《老子义》十一卷，《庄子内篇义》十二卷，《外篇义》二十卷，《杂篇义》十卷，《玄部通义》十二卷，又撰《游玄桂林》二十四卷，后主曾令人到他的家写入秘阁。
English: Zhang Qian wrote 30 volumes of "Zhou Yi Yi," 15 volumes of "Shang Shu Yi," 20 volumes of "Mao Shi Yi," 8 volumes of "Xiao Jing Yi," 20 volumes of "On Semantics," 11 volumes of "Lao Zi Yi," 12 volumes of "Zhuang Zi Nei Zhen Yi," 20 volumes of "Zhang Zhen Yi," 10 volumes of "Zhang Bu Zhen Yi," 12 volumes of "Xuan Bu Zhen Yi," and 24 volumes of "Yu Xuan Guilin." Later, his master had him write into a secret bookcase at his home.

古文：子孝则，官至始安王记室参军。
现代文：张讥儿子张孝则，官至始安王记室参军。
English: Zhang Qian's son, Zhang Xiaozhe, joined the army at the beginning of the Heian period.

古文：顾越，字思南，吴郡盐官人也。
现代文：顾越，字思南，吴郡盐官人。
English: Gu Yue, the character Sinan, and the salt officials of Wuxi County.

古文：所居新坡黄冈，世有乡校，由是顾氏多儒学焉。
现代文：所居新坡黄冈，世代有乡校，由此顾氏家族在此地便多儒学人士了。
English: The Gu family, who live in Huanggang, Xinpo, has had a township school for generations, which has made the Gu family more of a Confucianist in this area.

古文：越少孤，以勤苦自立，聪慧有口辩，说《毛氏诗》，傍通异义，梁太子詹事周舍甚赏之。
现代文：顾越小时候是孤儿，以勤苦自立，聪敏有口辩之才，解说《毛氏诗》，能旁通异义，梁朝太子詹事周舍十分赞赏他。
English: Gu Yue was an orphan when he was a child. He was self-reliant through hard work, intelligent and talented in oral argument. He explained "Mao's Poem" and was able to pass on heresies. The crown prince of the Liang Dynasty, Zhan Zhi Zhou, highly appreciated him.

古文：解褐扬州议曹史，兼太子左率丞。
现代文：初任扬州议曹史，兼太子左率丞。
English: He was the first Yangzhou Councillor Cao Shi, and also the prince's left-hand man.

古文：越于义理精明，尤善持论，与会稽贺文发俱为梁南平王伟所重，引为宾客。
现代文：顾越对于义理很精通明了，尤其擅长持论，与会稽贺文发都为梁朝南平王萧伟所器重，被引为宾客。
English: Gu Yue was well versed in the doctrine, especially good at holding the theory. The participants of the congratulatory letter were all valued by Xiao Wei, the king of Nanping in the Liang Dynasty, and were invited as guests.

古文：寻补《五经》博士。
现代文：不久补为《五经》博士。
English: He was soon promoted to Doctor of the Five Classics.

古文：绍泰元年，迁国子博士。
现代文：绍泰元年，改为国子博士。
English: In the first year of Shaotai, it was changed to Dr. Kuniko.

古文：世祖即位，除始兴王谘议参军，侍东宫读。
现代文：世祖登位，封始兴王谘议参军，侍奉束宫读书。
English: Emperor Taizu ascended the throne, King Fongshi Xing advised him to join the army, and he served and studied at the Imperial Palace.

古文：世祖以越笃老，厚遇之，除给事黄门侍郎，又领国子博士，侍读如故。
现代文：世祖因顾越年纪很老了，很厚待他，封给事黄门侍郎，又领国子博士，侍读照旧。
English: Because Gu Yuejun was very old, the patriarch treated him very generously, giving him the title of Huangmen waiter, and leading Dr. Kuniko to wait on him as before.

古文：废帝嗣立，除通直散骑常侍、中书舍人。
现代文：庐壹继位，封通直散骑常侍、中书舍人。
English: Succession to the throne, the first to be enthroned, the first to be knighted, and the first to renounce Chinese calligraphy.

古文：华皎之构逆也，越在东阳，或谮之于高宗，言其有异志，诏下狱，因坐免。
现代文：华皎叛逆作乱，顾越在束阳，有人向高宗进谗言，说他有异志，直塞下韶判他入狱，因此牵连而免职。
English: Gu Yue was in Sakuyang when Huaying rebelled and started a riot. Someone suggested to Gao Zong that he had a different ideology, and he was sentenced to prison. As a result, he was implicated and removed from his post.

古文：太建元年卒于家，时年七十八。
现代文：友建元年死于家中，年纪七十八岁。
English: Tomo Jian died at home in 1981, at the age of seventy-eight.

古文：时有东阳龚孟舒者，亦治《毛氏诗》，善谈名理。
现代文：其时有东阳龚孟舒，也治《毛氏诗》，善谈名理。
English: At that time, there was Dongyang Gong Mengshu, who also wrote "Mao's Poetry" and was good at talking about philosophy.

古文：梁武世，仕至寻阳郡丞，元帝在江州，遇之甚重，躬师事焉。
现代文：梁武帝时代，官至寻阳郡，元帝在江州，对他很为器重，亲自以他为师。
English: In the era of Emperor Liangwu, officials went to Xiangyang County, while Emperor Yuan was in Jiangzhou. He was very important to him and personally took him as his teacher.

古文：承圣中，兼中书舍人。
现代文：承圣年中，兼中书舍人。
English: In the year of his ordination, he also gave up the study of Chinese.

古文：天嘉初，除员外散骑常侍，兼国子助教、太中大夫。
现代文：天嘉初年，封员外散骑常侍，兼国子助教、太中大夫。
English: In the first year of Tian Jia, he served as a non-commissioned officer, riding horseback as a regular attendant, as well as an assistant teacher of Kuniko, and a junior high school teacher.

古文：太建中卒。
现代文：左建年中死。
English: Zuo Jian died in the middle of the year.

古文：沈不害，字孝和，吴兴武康人也。
现代文：沈不害，字孝和，吴兴郡武康人。
English: Shen Nuxin, Zi Xiaohe, Wu Xing County Wu Kang people.

古文：祖总，齐尚书祠部郎。
现代文：祖父沈总，齐朝尚书祠部郎。
English: His grandfather, Shen Zong, was the minister of the imperial library in the Qi Dynasty.

古文：父懿，梁邵陵王参军。
现代文：父亲沈懿，梁朝邵陵王参军。
English: His father, Shen Yi, joined the army in the reign of King Shao Ling of Liang Dynasty.

古文：不害幼孤，而修立好学。
现代文：沈不害幼年是孤儿，但修立好学。
English: Shen Fuxiong was orphaned at a young age, but he was eager to learn.

古文：十四召补国子生，举明经。
现代文：十四岁被召补为国子生，举明经。
English: At the age of fourteen, he was summoned to serve as the son of the country and recite the Ming Dynasty.

古文：累迁梁太学博士。转庐陵王府刑狱参军，长沙王府谘议，带汝南令。
现代文：又改任梁代太学博士，转任庐医王府刑狱参军，昼室生王府谘议，带这宜令。
English: He was also reappointed as Liang Dai Taigaku Doctor, transferred to the post of Shao Yi Wangfu Prison to join the army, and advised Wangfu, a day room student, to take this appropriate order.

古文：天嘉初，除衡阳王府中记室参军，兼嘉德殿学士。
现代文：丢台初年，封面压旺府中记室参军，兼台垄毖学士。
English: In the first year after losing Taiwan, he joined the army and became a Taiwanese bachelor.

古文：自梁季丧乱，至是国学未立，不害上书曰：
现代文：自梁朝末年丧乱，至此国学未立，这丕害上书道：
English: Since the riots at the end of the Liang Dynasty, the study of Chinese classics has not been established, which has harmed calligraphy:

古文：臣闻立人建国，莫尚于尊儒，成俗化民，必崇于教学。
现代文：臣听说立人建国，无不以尊儒为高，成风俗化民众，必崇尚于教学。
English: The minister heard that since the founding of the People's Republic of China, people have always held Confucianism in high esteem, and it has become a custom among the people to hold teaching in high esteem.

古文：故东胶西序，事隆乎三代，环林璧水，业盛于两京。
现代文：因而夏代的大学小学，使教育之事隆盛于夏、商、届三代，环林璧水，学业兴盛于漠代两京。
English: As a result, the university and elementary schools in Xia Dynasty flourished in Xia, Shang and Ji for three generations, and flourished in the forests and rivers, and flourished in the desert and Beijing.

古文：自淳源既远，浇波已扇，物之感人无穷，人之逐欲无节，是以设训垂范，启导心灵，譬彼染蓝，类诸琢玉，然后人伦以睦，卑高有序，忠孝之理既明，君臣之道攸固。
现代文：自从淳朴源头已经遥远，浇薄之风已扇，物的感人无穷，人的追逐欲望无节度，所以要设训诫垂风范，启导人的心灵，譬如那染蓝色，类似那雕琢玉，然后人伦可以和睦，尊卑会有序，忠孝之理明确，君臣之道久远不变。
English: Since the source of simplicity has been far away, the wind of casting thin has been fanned, the touching of things is endless, and the pursuit of people's desires is unrestrained, so it is necessary to set up exhortations to follow the style and enlighten people's hearts, such as that dyed blue, similar to that carved jade, and then the relationship between people can be harmonious, there will be an order of superiority and inferiority, the principle of loyalty and filial piety is clear, and the way of the monarch will remain unchanged for a long time.

古文：执礼自基，鲁公所以难侮，歌乐已细，郑伯于是前亡，干戚舞而有苗至，泮宫成而淮夷服，长想洙、泗之风，载怀淹、稷之盛，有国有家，莫不尚已。
现代文：执礼从基础开始，鲁公所以难以欺侮，歌乐达到捆部，郑伯于是早亡，干戚武舞而有苗至，泮水的学宫成而淮夷被征服，长想洙、泗之风，又怀淹、担之盛，有国有家者，无不是崇尚儒教。
English: The performance of rites began from the foundation, so it was difficult to bully Lu Gong, the singing reached the binding part, and Zheng Bo died early, and there were seedlings in the martial arts, and the palace of learning in Surabaya was conquered by Huaiyi, the wind of longing and yearning, and the wind of drowning and carrying, and there were state-owned families, all of which were advocating Confucianism.

古文：梁太清季年，数钟否剥，戎狄外侵，奸回内，朝闻鼓鼙，夕炤烽火。
现代文：梁代太清末年，遭逢乖舛之时运，戎狄外族入侵，邪恶内生，早闻战鼓，晚起烽火。
English: At the end of the Liang Dynasty of the Taiqing Dynasty, the country was hit by an unlucky time and misfortune. Foreign invaders invaded the country, evil was born, war drums were heard early, and bonfires were lit late.

古文：洪儒硕学，解散甚于坑夷，《五典》、《九丘》，湮灭逾乎帷盖。
现代文：众多儒学之士，解散多过坑埋，《五期、《九丘》典籍，湮减超过帷盖。
English: Many Confucian scholars have been dissolved rather than buried, and the "Five Periods" and "Nine Hills" classics have been reduced more than they have been covered.

古文：成均自斯坠业，瞽宗于是不修，裒成之祠弗陈稞享，释菜之礼无称俎豆，颂声寂寞，遂逾一纪。
现代文：大学自此坠业，学宫于是不修，褒成之祠堂不陈列祭享物品，入学的释菜礼没有相称的俎豆之器，颂声不问，已超过十二年。
English: Since then, the university has fallen into disrepair, the school palace has not been repaired, the ancestral hall of the praiseworthy does not display sacrificial items, the entrance ceremony does not have a commensurate pea vessel, and the eulogy has not been asked for more than twelve years.

古文：后生敦悦，不见函杖之仪，晚学钻仰，徒深倚席之叹。
现代文：后生笃信深好，不见尊称之礼仪，晚学深入研究，徒生倚席之长叹。
English: Later generations have a deep faith, do not see the etiquette of honorifics, study in depth at night, and have a long sigh of sitting down.

古文：陛下继历升统，握镜临宇，道洽寰中，威加无外，浊流已清，重氛载廓，含生熙阜，品庶咸亨。
现代文：陛下您继皇室升统位，握明镜临宇内，道遍寰中，威加海内，浊流已清，重氛廓清，含生兴盛，上品下庶都已亨通。
English: Your Majesty, you have ascended to the throne following the royal family, holding a bright mirror in front of the world, traveling all over the world, in the Vega Sea, the turbulence has been cleared, the heavy atmosphere has been cleared, the growth has been prosperous, and the high-end and low-end have been successful.

古文：宜其弘振礼乐，建立庠序，式稽古典，纡迹儒宫，选公卿门子，皆入于学，助教博士，朝夕讲肄，使担簦负笈，锵锵接衽，方领矩步，济济成林。
现代文：现在应该弘扬振兴礼乐，建立学校，参照古典，按旧迹建儒宫，选公卿门生，都入于学堂，助教博士，早晚讲学，使学子们提雨具背书袋，行而接席，方可领会规矩步伐，从而济济成林。
English: Now is the time to promote the revitalization of ritual music, establish schools, refer to the classics, build a Confucian palace according to the old relics, select disciples of nobles, all enter the school, assistant professors, lecture in the morning and evening, make the students carry rain gear, carry a book bag, and walk to the table, so that they can understand the rules and pace, so that they can make money.

古文：如切如磋，闻《诗》闻《礼》，一年可以功倍，三冬于是足用。
现代文：切磋琢磨，闻《诗》闻《礼》，一年可以功倍，三年于是足用。
English: Work hard together, listen to "poetry," listen to "ceremony," one year can double your efforts, three years is enough.

古文：故能擢秀雄州，扬庭观国，入仕登朝，资优学以自辅，莅官从政，有经业以治身，轖驾列庭，青紫拾地。
现代文：故而能擢拔秀才扬雄九州，名扬家庭与国家，入仕登朝，依靠优学以自辅，做官从政。有经业治身，皮革车驾列庭，取青紫贵服如拾地芥。
English: As a result, he was able to promote talented young men from Kyushu, bring fame to his family and the country, enter the imperial court, rely on his superior education to support himself, become an official in politics, have a good business sense, drive a leather car, and pick up expensive blue-and-purple clothing.

古文：古者王世子之贵，犹与国子齿，降及汉储，兹礼不坠，暨乎两晋，斯事弥隆，所以见师严而道尊者也。
现代文：古代王太子显贵，还与贵族大夫弟子相列，到了汉代的太子，此礼不坠，延之于两晋，此事更隆，所以显示师严而称道尊者。
English: In ancient times, the crown prince was a prominent person, and he was also ranked with the noble doctor's disciples. When the prince of the Han Dynasty came, this honor did not fall, it was extended to the two Jin dynasties, and the matter was more prominent, so it showed that the teacher was strict and praised the venerable person.

古文：皇太子天纵生知，无待审喻，犹宜晦迹俯同，专经请业，奠爵前师，肃若旧典。
现代文：皇太子纵然天生知道，无须审喻，还是应该隐居匿迹俯身相同，专经请业，祭奠前师，敬肃如旧典。
English: Even though the crown prince knows by nature that there is no need to judge others, he should still live in seclusion, bow down to others, learn from others, pay tribute to former teachers, and respect the classics.

古文：昔阙里之堂，草莱自辟，旧宅之内，丝竹流音，前圣遗烈，深以炯戒。
现代文：过去孑子阙里之堂，野草自己辟除，旧宅之内，丝竹流音，前圣遣烈，深以为明白的鉴戒。
English: In the past, weeds were removed from the hall of the Hanzi Baili, and inside the old house, the sound of the bamboo stream, the former martyrs, and the deeply thought-out admonition.

古文：况复江表无虞，海外有截，岂得不开阐大猷，恢弘至道？
现代文：何况又江表无意外之事，海外有阻拦，怎么能不畅开阐发大道，恢复弘扬至道?
English: What's more, there is nothing unexpected about the river table, and there are obstacles overseas. How can we not smoothly open the road of exposition and resume the promotion of the truth?

古文：宁可使玄教儒风，弗兴圣世，盛德大业，遂蕴尧年？
现代文：宁可使玄教儒风，不兴于圣世，盛德大业，便蕴于尧年?
English: Is it better to follow the mysticism of Confucianism rather than the holy world and the great cause of virtue in the Year of the Rooster?

古文：臣末学小生，词无足算，轻献瞽言，伏增悚惕。
现代文：臣是末学小生，词无足算，轻献无见识之言，伏而更增惶恐战栗。
English: The minister is a junior high school student, the words are not enough, the words are light and have no knowledge, and he is even more frightened and trembling.

古文：诏答曰： 省表闻之。
现代文：帝诏答道： 上表已览，所说已知。
English: The emperor replied: The above table has been reviewed, and what has been said is known.

古文：自旧章弛废，微言将绝，朕嗣膺宝业，念在缉熙，而兵革未息，军国草创，常恐前王令典，一朝泯灭。
现代文：自从旧典章废弛，微言几乎已绝，我继位承大业，念在光大，但战争未停息，军队国家都在草创阶段，常常恐怕前王大典，一朝泯灭。
English: Since the old laws and regulations have been abolished, and weasel words have almost died out, I have succeeded to the throne to carry on the great cause, but the war has not stopped, the army and the country are in the initial stage, and I am afraid that the former king's edict will soon be destroyed.

古文：卿才思优洽，文理可求，弘惜大体，殷勤名教，付外详议，依事施行。 
现代文：你才思敏捷，文理可求，弘扬珍惜大体，殷勤于名教，此可付外详议，依事施行。 
English: You are quick-witted, good at literature and science, can be promoted and cherished in general, and are diligent in famous teachings. This can be discussed in detail and implemented according to the circumstances.

古文：又表改定乐章，诏使制三朝乐歌八首，合二十八曲，行之乐府。
现代文：又上表改定乐章，帝韶使制三朝乐歌八首，合二十八曲，行之于乐府。
English: In addition, the above table was amended to set the music, and the emperor ordered eight pieces of music from the three dynasties, totaling 28 pieces, to be performed at the music palace.

古文：五年，除赣令。
现代文：天嘉五年，封瀚令。
English: Tianjia five years, the order of the Han Dynasty.

古文：入为尚书仪曹郎，迁国子博士，领羽林监，敕治五礼，掌策文谥议。
现代文：入为尚书仪曹郎，改任国子博士，领羽林监，诏治五礼，掌管策文谧议。
English: He was promoted to the position of the assistant of Shang Shouyi, and changed to the position of Dr. Kuniko, the leader of the foresters, the keeper of the Five Precepts, and the person in charge of the policy and discussion.

古文：太建中，除仁武南康嗣王府长史，行丹阳郡事。
现代文：太建年中，封仁武南康嗣王府长史，行丹阳郡事。
English: In the middle of the Tai Jian period, the governor of Danyang County, Wang Fuzhi, was sent to Danyang.

古文：转员外散骑常侍、光禄卿。
现代文：转任员外散骑常侍、光禄卿。
English: He was replaced by a non-commissioned officer, a knight errant, and a regular attendant, Kōroku-kyō.

古文：寻为戎昭将军、明威武陵王长史，行吴兴郡事。
现代文：不久为戎昭将军、明威武陵王长史，行吴兴郡事。
English: It was not long before General Rong Zhao and Mingwei Wuling Wang Changshi arrived in Wuxing County.

古文：俄入为通直散骑常侍，兼尚书左丞。
现代文：接着入为通直散骑常侍，兼尚书左丞。
English: Next, he became a Tsuchidaizanki no Tsuneishi, and also a Shoshozojo.

古文：十二年卒，时年六十三。
现代文：太建十二年死，其年六十三岁。
English: Tai Jian died twelve years later at the age of sixty-three.

古文：不害治经术，善属文，虽博综坟典，而家无卷轴。
现代文：选丕昼专攻经术，擅长撰文，虽博览各种典籍，家中却无书卷。
English: He specialized in divination and was good at writing. Although he was well-versed in various classics, there were no books in his home.

古文：每制文，操笔立成，曾无寻检。
现代文：每撰文，提笔即成，不曾寻检资料。
English: Every time I write an article, it's done as soon as I raise my pen, and I don't have to search for information.

古文：仆射汝南周弘正常称之曰： 沈生可谓意圣人乎！ 
现代文：仆射迪南周弘正常称赞他说： 沈生可说是心怀圣人了! 
English: His servant Dinan Zhouhong praised him as normal, saying: Shen Sheng can be said to have the heart of a saint!

古文：著治《五礼仪》一百卷，《文集》十四卷。
现代文：沈不害着有治《五礼仪》一百卷，《文集》十四卷。
English: Shen did not harm Yuzhi's "Five Rites" of one hundred volumes and "Collection" of fourteen volumes.

古文：子志道，字崇基，少知名。
现代文：儿子沈志道，字祟基，少年即知名。
English: His son, Shen Zhi Dao, nicknamed "Tibetan," became famous as a young man.

古文：解褐扬州主簿，寻兼文林著士，历安东新蔡王记室参军。
现代文：初任扬塑主簿，继而兼塞挞着士，历任安东堑基王记室参军。
English: At first, he was the chief bookkeeper of Yangshuo, and then he was also a clerk of Jiefang, and successively, he joined the army from the office of Wang Ji of Andong Shiji.

古文：祯明三年入隋。
现代文：桢明三年入隋。
English: He entered the Sui Dynasty three years after the Ming Dynasty.

古文：王元规，字正范，太原晋阳人也。
现代文：王元规，字正范，太原郡晋阳人。
English: Wang Yuanfei, alias Zhengfan, from Jinyang, Taiyuan County.

古文：祖道宝，齐员外散骑常侍、晋安郡守。
现代文：祖父王道宣，变塑员外散骑常侍、晋安郡守。
English: His grandfather, Wang Daoxuan, was a chameleon, horseback rider, and governor of Jin'an County.

古文：父玮，梁武陵王府中记室参军。
现代文：父亲王璋，梁朝武陵王府中记室参军。
English: His father, Wang Qian, joined the army in the middle of the Liang Dynasty in Wuling.

古文：元规八岁而孤，兄弟三人，随母依舅氏往临海郡，时年十二。
现代文：王元规八岁成为孤儿，兄弟三人，随母亲依舅氏到临海郡，其时十二岁。
English: Wang Yuanjie was orphaned at the age of eight, and his three brothers followed their mother and uncle to Linhai County when they were twelve.

古文：郡土豪刘瑱者，资财巨万，以女妻之。
现代文：郡中土豪塑坠，资产巨万，想把女儿许配于他。
English: A middle-of-the-country tycoon with a huge fortune wants to marry off his daughter to him.

古文：元规母以其兄弟幼弱，欲结强援，元规泣请曰： 姻不失亲，古人所重。
现代文：王元规母亲因她的儿子兄弟三人年幼弱小，想要结强援，王元规哭着请求说： 婚姻不失亲，古人所重。
English: Wang Yuanfei's mother, because her son's three brothers were too young and weak, wanted to rally strong support. Wang Yuanfei cried and pleaded: "Marriage does not lose relatives, ancient people are important."

古文：岂得苟安异壤，辄婚非类！ 
现代文：哪能苟且偷安于异土，就舆非亲类通婚! 
English: Who can be so scrupulous as to settle down in a foreign land, marrying a non-relative!

古文：母感其言而止。
现代文：母亲被他的所言感动，罢了此念。
English: His mother was so moved by what he said that she just let it go.

古文：元规性孝，事母甚谨，晨昏未尝离左右。
现代文：王元规生性孝顺，侍奉母亲十分恭谨。早晨到黄昏都不曾离开母亲身边。
English: Wang Yuanjie was born with filial piety and served his mother very respectfully. He never left his mother's side from morning until dusk.

古文：梁时山阴县有暴水，流漂居宅，元规唯有一小船，仓卒引其母妹并孤侄入船，元规自执楫棹而去，留其男女三人，阁于树杪，及水退获全，时人皆称其至行。
现代文：梁朝时山阴县有暴水，流水漂溢居宅，王元规祇有一艘小船，仓猝间他引母亲舆妹妹及孤侄入船，他自己手执船桨而去，留下他的子女三人，搁于树梢，到水退时三人都获救，当时人都称赞王元规的纯厚孝行。
English: During the Liang Dynasty, there was a flood in Shanyin County, and the flowing water overflowed the house. Wang Yuanjie only had a small boat. In a hurry, he led his mother, sister and nephew into the boat. He himself took the oars and left, leaving his three children stranded in the treetops. When the water receded, all three were rescued. At that time, people praised Wang Yuanjie's pure filial piety.

古文：元规少好学，从吴兴沈文阿受业，十八，通《春秋左氏》、《孝经》、《论语》、《丧服》。
现代文：王元规少年好学，跟从吴兴沈文阿受业，十八岁通《春秋左氏》、《孝经》、《论语》、丧服》。
English: Wang Yuanjie was a studious boy. He studied under Wu Xing and Shen Wenya. At the age of 18, he was familiar with "The Spring and Autumn Left-Handers," "The Book of Filial Piety," "The Analects" and "The Funeral Robe."

古文：梁中大通元年，诏策《春秋》，举高第，时名儒咸称赏之。
现代文：梁代中大通元年，帝韶策《春秋》，王元规举高品第，其时名儒都称赏他。
English: In the first year of Liang's middle school, Wang Yuan was praised by famous Confucian scholars for his "Spring and Autumn."

古文：起家湘东王国左常侍，转员外散骑侍郎。
现代文：出仕任湘束王国左常侍，转任员外散骑侍郎。
English: He served as the Left-Handed Attendant of the Kingdom of Hōzoku, and was transferred to the position of Outside-Horse Riding Attendant.

古文：简文之在东宫，引为宾客，每令讲论，甚见优礼。
现代文：简文在束宫时，被引为宾客，每令讲论，均受到优厚礼遇。
English: When he was at Sokgong, Jianwen was invited as a guest, and was treated with great courtesy every time he gave a lecture.

古文：除中军宣城王府记室参军。
现代文：封中军宣城王府记室参军。
English: He joined the army after enlisting in the King's Palace Recorder's Office of Xuancheng.

古文：及侯景寇乱，携家属还会稽。
现代文：到侯景作乱，携家属回会稽。
English: He went to Houjing to create a disturbance and returned to the auditorium with his family.

古文：天嘉中，除始兴王府功曹参军，领国子助教，转镇东鄱阳王府记室参军，领助教如故。
现代文：天嘉年中，封始兴王府功曹参军，领国子助教，转任镇东鄱阳王府记室参军，领助教照旧。
English: In the middle of the Tianjia year, Feng Shi Xing Wang Fu Gong Cao joined the army, leading the assistant professor Guo Zi, and was transferred to the record office of Zhendong Shiyang Wang Fu to join the army, leading the assistant professor as before.

古文：后主在东宫，引为学士，亲受《礼记》、《左传》、《丧服》等义，赏赐优厚。
现代文：后主在东宫，王元规被引为学士，后主亲受《礼记》、《左传》、《丧服》等义，对他赏赐优厚。
English: In the East Palace, Wang Yuanjie was awarded a bachelor's degree, and his posthumous titles included "Rituals," "Left Biography" and "Funeral Clothes," and he was rewarded generously.

古文：迁国子祭酒。
现代文：改任国子祭酒。
English: It was renamed Kuniko Matsuri Sake.

古文：新安王伯固尝因入宫，适会元规将讲，乃启请执经，时论以为荣。
现代文：新安王伯固曾因入宫适遇王元规将开讲，便启奏请求执经，当时舆论认为这是一种荣誉。
English: Xin'an King Baogu once asked Wang Yuanjie to recite the sutra when he entered the palace, which was considered an honor at the time.

古文：俄除尚书祠部郎。
现代文：不久封尚书祠部郎。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to the post of Shang Shuxi minister.

古文：自梁代诸儒相传为《左氏》学者，皆以贾逵、服虔之义难驳杜预，凡一百八十条，元规引证通析，无复疑滞。
现代文：自梁代开始，诸儒相传为《左氏》学者的，都以贾逵、服虔之义驳难杜预，共一百八十条，王元规引证通析，不再有疑滞之处。
English: Since the Liang Dynasty, all the scholars of Confucianism who have been passed down as "Zao's" scholars have been refuted with Jiaqi and Obedience, a total of one hundred and eighty articles, Wang Yuan Gui's citation analysis, and there is no longer any doubt.

古文：每国家议吉凶大礼，常参预焉。
现代文：每当国家议论吉凶大礼，他常参预其间。
English: Whenever the country talks about auspicious and inauspicious events, he often takes part in them.

古文：丁母忧去职，服阕，除鄱阳王府中录事参军，俄转散骑侍郎，迁南平王府限内参军。
现代文：母丧去职，服丧毕，封鄱阳王府中录事参军，不久转任散骑侍郎，改任南平王府限内参军。
English: After his mother's death, he left his post and joined the army after the funeral. He was given the title of Yang Wangfu Zhong Luo Ji, and soon he was transferred to the position of Sanzhiyi Jirong, and then he was transferred to the position of Nanping Wangfu Jirong.

古文：王为江州，元规随府之镇，四方学徒，不远千里来请道者，常数十百人。
现代文：南平王在江州，王元规随王府去镇守，四方学徒，不远千里来请学道的，常有数十上百人之多。
English: Nanping Wang was in Jiangzhou, Wang Yuanjie went to the town guard with the king's palace, and apprentices from all over the country came thousands of miles to learn Taoism, often with dozens or hundreds of people.

古文：祯明三年入隋，为秦王府东阁祭酒。
现代文：祯明三年入隋，为秦王府柬合祭酒。
English: It entered the Sui Dynasty in the 3rd year of the Ming Dynasty, and was the Qin Dynasty's most important ceremonial wine.

古文：年七十四，卒于广陵。元规著《春秋发题辞》及《义记》十一卷，《续经典大义》十四卷，《孝经义记》两卷，《左传音》三卷，《礼记音》两卷。子大业，聪敏知名。
现代文：子大业，聪敏知名。
English: He has a university degree and is known for his intelligence.

古文：时有吴郡陆庆，少好学，遍知《五经》，尤明《春秋左氏传》，节操甚高。
现代文：时有吴郡陆庆，少好学，遍知《五经》，尤明《春秋左氏传》，节操甚高。
English: At that time, there was Lu Qing of Wuxi County, who was not very eager to learn, knew the "Five Classics" very well, especially "The Spring and Autumn Legend of Zuo Shi," and had very high self-discipline.

古文：释褐梁武陵王国右常侍，历征西府墨曹行参军，除娄令。
现代文：释褐梁武陵王国右常侍，历征西府墨曹行参军，除娄令。
English: Xie Hongliang, the Right Attendant of the Kingdom of Wuling, joined the army after conquering the Western Prefecture of Mozao, and was relieved of his command.

古文：值梁季丧乱，乃覃心释典，经论靡不该究。
现代文：值梁季丧乱，乃覃心释典，经论靡不该究。
English: The value of Liang Ji's death and turmoil is the interpretation of his heart, and it should not be discussed.

古文：天嘉初，征为通直散骑侍郎，不就。
现代文：天嘉初，征为通直散骑侍郎，不就。
English: At the beginning of the Heian period, he was enlisted as a horseman.

古文：永阳王为吴郡太守，闻其名，欲与相见，庆固辞以疾。
现代文：永阳王为吴郡太守，闻其名，欲与相见，庆固辞以疾。
English: Yongyang Wang is the governor of Wuzhong County. He is well-known for his eagerness to meet people and his inability to do so.

古文：时宗人陆荣为郡五官掾，庆尝诣焉，王乃微服往荣第，穿壁以观之。
现代文：时宗人陆荣为郡五官掾，庆尝诣焉，王乃微服往荣第，穿壁以观之。
English: At that time, Lu Rong, the head of the family, was the county's fifth-ranking official, and the celebration was over. Wang Nao went to Rong first, and walked through the wall to watch it.

古文：王谓荣曰： 观陆庆风神凝峻，殆不可测，严君平、郑子真何以尚兹。 
现代文：王谓荣曰： 观陆庆风神凝峻，殆不可测，严君平、郑子真何以尚兹。 
English: Wang Zhirong said: Guanluqing wind god is steep, almost immeasurable, Yan Junping and Zheng Zi are really impressive.

古文：鄱阳、晋安王俱以记室征，并不就。
现代文：鄱阳、晋安王俱以记室征，并不就。
English: The kings of Shanyang and Jin'an both used to record their conquests, but it was not enough.

古文：乃筑室屏居，以禅诵为事，由是传经受业者盖鲜焉。
现代文：乃筑室屏居，以禅诵为事，由是传经受业者盖鲜焉。
English: It was built as a screened-in room, with meditation and chanting as the theme, so the practitioners of the transmission of the sutras were few and far between.

古文：史臣曰：夫砥身励行，必先经术，树国崇家，率由兹道，故王政因之而至治，人伦得之而攸序。
现代文：史臣曰：夫砥身励行，必先经术，树国崇家，率由兹道，故王政因之而至治，人伦得之而攸序。
English: Shichen said: "If one is to practice diligently, he must first go through the art, and if one is to build a nation and a family, he must first go through this way. Therefore, kingship comes from this way, and people's morality comes from this way."

古文：若沈文阿之徒，各专经授业，亦一代之鸿儒焉。
现代文：若沈文阿之徒，各专经授业，亦一代之鸿儒焉。
English: If one is a disciple of Shen Wen Ah, one will receive special education and become a great scholar in one generation.

古文：文阿加复草创礼仪，盖叔孙通之流亚矣。
现代文：文阿加复草创礼仪，盖叔孙通之流亚矣。
English: Wen Aga and Fu Cao created the etiquette, and Gao's uncle Sun Tong followed suit.

