古文：传语曰：圣人忧世，深思事勤，愁扰精神，感动形体，故称 尧若腊，舜若腒，桀、纣之君，垂腴尺余。 
现代文：世间流传的话说： 圣人忧虑世间的事，总是深入思考努力工作，劳精伤神，损害了身体，所以说尧长得像块干肉，舜长得像只干腌的鸟，而桀、纣这样的君主却腹部胖得垂下一尺多。 
English: There is a saying that has been passed down through the ages: "Sages are worried about worldly affairs, always thinking deeply about hard work. Hard work hurts the spirit and damages the body. Therefore, it is said that the dragonfly looks like a piece of dry meat, and the cormorant looks like a dry bird, but the monarchs like the cormorant and the cormorant have a belly that is more than a foot thick."

古文：夫言圣人忧世念人，身体赢恶，不能身体肥泽，可也；言尧、舜若腊与腒，桀、纣垂腴尺余，增之也。
现代文：说圣人忧虑社会关心百姓，身体瘦弱不健康，身上肌肉不丰满光润，是可能的。但要说尧、舜瘦得像干肉、干鸟，而桀、纣肚皮上的肥肉却垂下一尺多，这就过份夸大了。
English: It is possible to say that sages worried about society and cared about the people, that their bodies were thin and unhealthy, and that the muscles on their bodies were not plump and shiny. However, it would be an exaggeration to say that crickets and grasshoppers are thin like dried meat and birds, while the fat on the belly of crickets and grasshoppers hangs down more than a foot.

古文：齐桓公云： 寡人未得仲父极难，既得仲父甚易。 
现代文：齐桓公说： 我没有得到仲父辅佐以前，治理国家感到很困难，得到仲父之后，就感到很容易了。 
English: Qi Kuan Gong said: I felt it was very difficult to govern the country before I got Zhongfu's assistant, but after I got Zhongfu, I felt it was easy.

古文：桓公不及尧、舜，仲父不及禹、契，桓公犹易，尧、舜反难乎？
现代文：桓公赶不上尧、舜，仲父也赶不上禹、契，桓公尚且感到容易，尧、舜反而会感到困难吗？
English: Kuan Gong can't keep up with Yao and Shun, and the matchmaker can't keep up with Yu and Qi. Kuan Gong still feels easy, but will Yao and Shun feel difficult?

古文：以桓公得管仲易，知尧、舜得禹、契不难。
现代文：从桓公得到管仲感到治理国家容易，就知道尧、舜得到禹、契治理国家不困难。
English: If you feel that it is easy to govern a country when you are governed by Kankong and Guanzhong, then you will know that it is not difficult to govern a country when you are governed by Yu and Qi.

古文：夫易则少忧，少忧则不愁，不愁则身体不癯。
现代文：治理国家容易就少忧虑，少忧虑就没有忧愁，没有忧愁那么身体就不会瘦。
English: It is easy to govern the country with less anxiety. With less anxiety, there is no sadness. Without sadness, the body will not be thin.

古文：舜承尧太平，尧、舜袭德。功假荒服，尧尚有忧，舜安无事。
现代文：舜继承了尧的太平盛世，尧、舜承袭了圣人的美德，其功德达到了极边远的地区，尧的时候还有忧虑的事，舜的时候却安定而无事。
English: Dragonflies have inherited the peaceful and prosperous world of dragonflies. Dragonflies and damselflies have inherited the virtues of saints, and their merits have reached the most remote areas. When there is a dragonfly, there are worries, but when there is a dragonfly, it is stable and uneventful.

古文：故《经》曰： 上帝引逸 ，谓虞舜也。
现代文：所以《尚书·多士》上说： 天帝是长久安逸的 ，指的就是舜。
English: Therefore, "Shangshu · Tozhong" said: The Heavenly Emperor is long-lasting and comfortable, referring to the dragonfly.

古文：舜承安继治，任贤使能，恭己无为而天下治。
现代文：舜继承了安定太平的局面，任用贤人能人，使自己尊严、庄重，不亲自管理国家具体事务却天下太平。
English: Yu Xi inherited the method of ruling the world peacefully, appointing capable people, respecting and adhering to nature, and ruling the world successfully.

古文：故孔子曰： 巍巍乎！
现代文：所以孔子说 崇高啊！
English: That is why Confucius said, "Awesome!

古文：舜、禹之有天下而不与焉。 
现代文：舜和禹统治天下而不参与国家具体事务。 
English: He and Yu ruled the world without getting involved in the country's specific affairs.

古文：夫不与尚谓之癯若腒，如德劣承衰，若孔子栖栖，周流应聘，身不得容，道不得行，可骨立附，僵仆道路乎？
现代文：舜和禹不参与国家具体事务，还说他们瘦得像只干腌的鸟，如果道德比他差的人继承了衰乱的局面，像孔子东奔西跑，周游列国，到处求官，没有容身之地，没有可走的路，能说他瘦得皮包骨头，直挺挺地倒在路上吗？
English: Yu and Yu do not participate in the country's specific affairs, and they say that they are as thin as a withered bird. If a person with a lower morality than him inherits a decadent situation, like Confucius running from place to place, traveling around the countries, looking for officials everywhere, with no place to stay and no way to go, can he be said to be thin as a bone and fall straight down on the road?

古文：纣为长夜之饮，糟丘酒池，沉湎於酒，不舍昼夜，是必以病。
现代文：商纣是通宵达旦地饮酒，酒糟堆成山丘酒液流满池，沉醉在酒里面，昼夜不休息，这肯定要得病。
English: Merchants are all-night drinking, the dregs piled up into hills, the liquor flowing over the pond, intoxicated in the wine, day and night without rest, this is sure to get sick.

古文：病则不甘饮食，不甘饮食，则肥腴不得至尺。
现代文：病了就会不想吃东西，不想吃东西那么腹部的肥肉就不会垂得一尺长。
English: If you're sick, you won't want to eat. If you don't want to eat, then the fat in your abdomen won't hang down a foot long.

古文：《经》曰： 惟湛乐是从，时亦罔有克寿。 
现代文：《尚书·无逸》上说： 只知道纵情过分享乐，从此以后就没有能长寿的君主了。 
English: "Shangshu · Muxiyuan" said: I only know indulgence and sharing, and since then there has been no monarch who can live long.

古文：魏公子无忌为长夜之饮，困毒而死。
现代文：魏公子无忌也是通宵达旦地饮酒，结果中毒而死。
English: Wei Gongzi also drank all night long, and died of poisoning.

古文：纣虽未死，宜赢癯矣。
现代文：商纣虽然没有死，应该瘦弱。
English: Although not dead, Shang Xuan should be thin.

古文：然桀、纣同行则宜同病，言其腴垂过尺余，非徒增之，又失其实矣。
现代文：这样桀、纣同样的操行，就应该得同样的病，说他们腹部的肥肉下垂超过一尺，这不仅是夸大之词，而且又失去了它的真实性。
English: It is not only an exaggeration to say that people with the same habits should have the same diseases, but it is also untrue to say that the fat in their abdomen sags more than a foot.

古文：传语又称： 纣力能索铁伸钩，抚梁易柱。 
现代文：世间流传的话又说，纣王力能把铁条拧成绳，把铁钩拉直，托梁换柱，这是说他力大。
English: It is also said that, according to the world's popular saying, the power of the Dragon King can twist iron bars into ropes, straighten iron hooks, and replace beams with pillars, which means that he is very powerful.

古文：言其多力也。 蜚廉、恶来之徒，并幸受宠。言好伎力之主致伎力之士也。
现代文：蜚廉、恶来一类人，都受到宠幸，是说有好本领好力气的君主才能招来有本领有力气的人。
English: People who are corrupt and evil are favored, which means that a monarch with good skills and strength can only attract people with skills and strength.

古文：或言武王伐纣，兵不血刃。 
现代文：有的人说周武王伐纣，兵器的锋刃上没有沾血就取得了胜利。
English: Some people say that Zhou Wu Wangfujing achieved victory without blood on the edge of the weapon.

古文：夫以索铁伸钩之力，辅以蜚廉、恶来之徒，与周军相当，武王德虽盛，不能夺纣素所厚之心；纣虽恶，亦不失所与同行之意。虽为武王所擒，时亦宜杀伤十百人。
现代文：以纣能把铁条拧成绳把铁钩拉直的力气，再有蜚廉、恶来之类人来辅佑，跟周军对敌，周武王道德虽受称赞，也不能征服一向受纣王厚爱的人的心，纣王即使被咒骂，也不会失去跟他操行相同的人的心，因而虽然他被周武王捉住，当时也应当杀伤几十百把个人。
English: Although King Zhou's morality was praised, it could not conquer the hearts of the people who had always been loved by King Zhou. Even if King Zhou was cursed, he would not lose the hearts of the people who behaved like him. Therefore, although he was caught by King Zhou, he should have killed tens of hundreds of people.

古文：今言 不血刃， 非纣多力之效，蜚廉、恶来助纣之验也。
现代文：如今说武王 兵不血刃 ，这不是纣王力大的结果，而是蜚廉、恶来帮助纣王的证明。
English: Nowadays, it is said that King Wu's soldiers are bloodless, which is not a result of the king's great strength, but a proof of the king's corruption and evil to help the king.

古文：案武王之符瑞，不过高祖。
现代文：考察周武王吉祥的征兆超不过汉高祖。
English: An examination of the auspicious signs of King Zhouwu is more than just the ancestor of Han Gaozu.

古文：武王有白鱼、赤乌之佑，高祖有断大蛇、老妪哭於道之瑞。
现代文：武王有白鱼、赤乌鸦的吉兆，高祖有斩断大蛇，老妇人在路上哭诉的吉兆。
English: King Wu has the auspicious signs of white fish and red crow, Gao Zu has the auspicious signs of cutting off a big snake, and an old woman crying on the road.

古文：武王有八百诸侯之助，高祖有天下义兵之佐。
现代文：武王有八百诸侯的帮助，高祖有天下义兵的支持。
English: King Wu had the help of eight hundred princes, and Gaozu had the support of the world's volunteers.

古文：武王之相，望羊而已；高祖之相，龙颜、隆准、项紫、美须髯，身有七十二黑子。
现代文：武王的骨相，仅仅是眼睛的位置高而已；高祖的骨相，眉骨突出，高高的鼻梁，紫色的颈子，漂亮的胡子和髯须，身上还有七十二颗黑痣。
English: The skeleton of King Wu is just the high position of the eyes; the skeleton of Gaozhu has prominent eyebrows, a high nose, a purple neck, a beautiful mustache and whiskers, and 72 black moles on his body.

古文：高祖又逃吕后於泽中，吕后辄见上有云气之验，武王不闻有此。
现代文：高祖几次躲着吕后到沼泽里去，吕后总是看见天上有彩云，瑞气的出现，就没有听说武王有这样的情况。
English: Gaozu went to the swamp several times to avoid Lugu. Lugu always saw colorful clouds in the sky and the appearance of fresh air, but never heard of such a situation with King Wu.

古文：夫相多於望羊，瑞明於鱼乌，天下义兵并来会汉，助强於诸侯。
现代文：高祖骨相比 望阳 多，吉兆比白鱼、赤乌明显，天下义兵一起来会集辅助汉军，这种辅助比八百诸侯强得多。
English: Compared with the high ancestral bones, there are more hope, and the auspicious signs are more obvious than the white fish and red wormwood. The world's volunteers come together to gather the auxiliary Chinese army, which is much stronger than the eight hundred princes.

古文：武王承纣，高祖袭秦，二世之恶，隆盛於纣，天下畔秦，宜多於殷。
现代文：武王惩罚商纣，高祖袭击秦朝。秦二世的罪恶，比纣王厉害，天下背叛秦的，应该比背叛殷的多。
English: King Wu punished the merchants, and Emperor Gaozhu attacked the Qin Dynasty. The evil of Qin II was more severe than that of Emperor Zhao, and there were more traitors to Qin than to Yin.

古文：案高祖伐秦，还破项羽，战场流血，暴尸万数，失军亡众，几死一再，然後得天下，用兵苦，诛乱剧。
现代文：考察高祖讨伐秦朝，又回头来打败项羽，战场上流满鲜血，横尸以万计，军队散失士兵伤亡惨重，自己多次几乎死掉，然后才得到天下，可见作战艰苦，讨伐叛乱激烈。
English: An examination of Gao Zu's crusade against the Qin Dynasty and his return to defeat Xiang Yu, the blood shed on the battlefield, the tens of thousands of corpses, the army's loss of soldiers and heavy casualties, and his own near-death many times before he gained the world, shows that the battle was arduous and the crusade and rebellion were fierce.

古文：独云周兵不血刃，非其实也。
现代文：可是却偏偏要说周武王连兵器上都没有沾血就取得胜利，这不是事实。
English: However, it is not true to say that Zhou Wu Wang achieved victory without blood on his weapons.

古文：言其易，可也；言不血刃，增之也。
现代文：说他很轻易地打败纣，是可能的；要说是 兵不血刃 ，就过份夸大了。
English: To say that he defeated the dragonfly easily is possible; to say that the battle was bloodless is an exaggeration.

古文：案周取殷之时，太公《阴谋》之书，食小兒丹，教云亡殷，兵到牧野，晨举脂烛。
现代文：考察周攻取殷的时候，姜太公《阴谋》上记载，给小孩朱砂吃，教他们去说 殷朝要灭亡了 。
English: When inspecting Zhou's conquest of Yin, Jiang Taigong, as recorded in the Conspiracy, gave children cinnabar to eat and taught them to say that the Yin Dynasty was about to perish.

古文：察《武成》之篇，牧野之战，血流浮杵，赤志千里。
现代文：武王的军队开到牧野，天还没有亮就举着有油脂的火把开始进攻。察看《尚书·武成》，牧野之战，血流成河能把杵漂起来，染红了千里大地。
English: King Wu's army drove to the pastures, and before dawn, the crows began to attack, holding torches with grease. Look at the "Shangshu · Wucheng," the battle of the pastures, the blood flowed into the river can float the dragonfly, and dyed the earth thousands of miles red.

古文：由此言之，周之取殷，与汉、秦一实也。
现代文：由此说来，周攻取殷，跟汉灭秦是同样的情况。
English: Therefore, Zhou's conquest of Yin is the same as Han's destruction of Qin.

古文：而云取殷易，兵不血刃，美武王之德，增益其实也。
现代文：却说周攻取殷很容易，连兵器的锋刃上都没沾血，这是在美化周武王的道德，故意过分夸大事实。
English: But to say that it was easy for Zhou to capture Yin, and that there was no blood on the blade of the weapon, is to glorify the morality of King Zhou and deliberately exaggerate the facts.

古文：凡天下之事，不可增损，考察前後，效验自列。
现代文：大凡天下的事情，不能夸大与缩小，要考察它的前前后后，其真相就会自然表现出来。
English: The great things in the world cannot be exaggerated and narrowed down. It is necessary to examine its before and after, and the truth will naturally emerge.

古文：自列，则是非之实有所定矣。
现代文：自然表现出来，那么是非的真实情况就能判定。
English: If it manifests itself naturally, then the true situation of right and wrong can be determined.

古文：世称纣力能索铁伸钩；又称武王伐之兵不血刃。
现代文：世间称说纣的力气能绞铁条成绳把铁钩拉直，又讲武王伐纣，兵不血刃。
English: It is said in the world that the strength of the dragonfly can twist the iron into a rope and straighten the iron hook. It is also said that the warrior king can cut the dragonfly, and the soldier does not bleed.

古文：夫以索铁伸钩之力当人，则是孟贲、夏育之匹也；以不血刃之德取人，是则三皇、五帝之属也。
现代文：以绞铁条成绳把铁钩拉直的力量去抵挡敌人，那是孟贲、夏育同等的人；以兵不血刃的道德战胜敌人，那是三皇、五帝一类的人。
English: To resist the enemy with the strength of twisting iron strips into ropes and straightening iron hooks is the same as Meng Xuan and Xia Yu; to defeat the enemy with the morality of soldiers without bloodshed is the same as the three emperors and five emperors.

古文：以索铁之力，不宜受服；以不血刃之德，不宜顿兵。
现代文：以绞铁条成绳的力量，是不应该被制服的；以兵不血刃的道德，是不应该使用武力的。
English: The strength to tie a rope with a noose should not be subdued; the morality of a bloodless sword should not be used to use force.

古文：今称纣力，则武王德贬；誉武王，则纣力少。
现代文：如今称赞纣的力气大，那么武王的道德就被贬低了；称誉武王的道德，那么纣王的力气就不大。
English: Nowadays, if the power of the dragonfly is praised, then the morality of King Wu is belittled; if the morality of King Wu is praised, then the power of the dragonfly is not great.

古文：索铁、不血刃，不得两立；殷、周之称，不得二全。
现代文：纣王力大能把铁条拧成绳与武王兵不血刃，这两种说法不能同时成立；赞美纣王力大与赞美武王德高，这两种说法不可能都对。
English: It is not possible to say that the great strength of King Gong can twist iron bars into ropes and that the soldiers of King Wu are bloodless at the same time. It is not possible to praise the great strength of King Gong and the great virtue of King Wu at the same time.

古文：不得二全，则必一非。
现代文：两种说法不能都对，那么肯定有一个不对。
English: Both statements can't be right, so one must be wrong.

古文：孔子曰： 纣之不善，不若是之甚也。是以君子恶居下流，天下之恶皆归焉。 
现代文：孔子说： 纣的坏，不像传说的那样严重，这是因为君子厌恶处干下流地位的人，天下的坏事都会归在他头上。 
English: Confucius said, "The evil of the yakitori is not as serious as it is said to be. This is because a gentleman detests a person in a lowly position. All the bad things in the world will be attributed to him.

古文：孟子曰： 吾於《武成》，取二三策耳。
现代文：孟子说： 我对于《武成》，只取二、三简罢了。
English: Mencius said, "With regard to Wu Cheng, I only took two or three lines.

古文：以至仁伐不仁，如何其血之浮杵也？ 
现代文：以最仁义的武王去讨伐不仁义的纣王，怎么会血流得把杵都漂起来呢？ 
English: With the most benevolent warrior king to fight the unmerciful dragon king, how can the blood flow so much that the dragonflies are floating?

古文：若孔子言，殆浮杵；若孟子之言，近不血刃。
现代文：照孔子的话，流血差不多会把杵漂起来；按孟子的话， 不血刃 就近似事实。
English: According to Confucius, bloodshed will almost float the cocoon; according to Mencius, a bloodless blade is an approximate fact.

古文：浮杵过其实，不血刃亦失其正。
现代文：说流血能把杵漂起来超过了事实，说 不血刃 也欠公证。
English: Saying that bloodshed can make a dragonfly float is more than the truth, saying that a bloodless blade also needs to be notarized.

古文：一圣一贤，共论一纣，轻重殊称，多少异实。
现代文：一个圣人一个贤人，都在共同评论同一个纣王，而对纣王罪恶的轻重有不同的说法，对被杀人数多少的情况有不同的估计。
English: A saint and a wise man are all commenting on the same king, but there are different opinions about the severity of the king's sins, and different estimates of the number of people killed.

古文：纣之恶不若王莽。
现代文：纣王的罪恶不如王莽。
English: The wickedness of the wicked is not as great as the wickedness of the wicked.

古文：纣杀比干，莽鸩平帝；纣以嗣立，莽盗汉位。
现代文：纣王杀死比干，王莽用毒酒毒死汉平帝；纣王是继承父位，而王莽则是窃取汉朝帝位。
English: King Yao killed Bi Gan, and Wang Mang poisoned Emperor Hanping with poisoned wine; King Yao was to inherit his father's throne, while Wang Mang was to steal the imperial throne of the Han Dynasty.

古文：杀主隆於诛臣，嗣立顺於盗位，士众所畔，宜甚於纣。
现代文：杀君主比杀臣子的罪严重，继承父位比窃取帝位名正言顺，在士大夫与士兵中背叛的人，王莽的应该比纣王的更多。
English: The crime of killing a monarch is more serious than the crime of killing a vassal, the crime of inheriting a father's throne is more justifiable than stealing an imperial throne, and there should be more traitors among officials and soldiers than there are kings.

古文：汉诛王莽，兵顿昆阳，死者万数，军至渐台，血流没趾。
现代文：汉军讨代王莽，进军昆阳，死者以万数，军队到渐台，地上淌的血已经淹没了脚趾。
English: The Han army fought on behalf of Wang Mang and marched into Kunyang. The death toll was in the tens of thousands. The army reached Qiantai, and the blood dripping on the ground had already drowned the toes.

古文：而独谓周取天下，兵不血刃，非其实也。
现代文：可是世间却偏偏要说周武王夺取天下，连兵器的锋刃上血都没有沾，这并不是事实。
English: However, it is not true that the world wants to say that King Zhou Wu conquered the world, and even the blade of the weapon was not stained with blood.

古文：传语曰： 文王饮酒千钟，孔子百觚。 
现代文：世间流传的话说： 周文王能喝千钟酒，孔子能喝百觚酒。 
English: There is a saying in the world: Zhou Wen Wang can drink a thousand cups of wine, Confucius can drink a hundred cups of wine.

古文：欲言圣人德盛，能以德将酒也。
现代文：这是想说圣人道德崇高，能够以道德来控制酒。
English: This is to say that a saint is highly moral and can control alcohol with morality.

古文：如一坐千钟百觚，此酒徒，非圣人也。
现代文：如果一坐下就要喝一千钟一百觚，这是酒徒，不是圣人。
English: If you have to drink one thousand one hundred gourds as soon as you sit down, you're an alcoholic, not a saint.

古文：饮酒有法，胸腹小大，与人均等。饮酒用千钟，用肴宜尽百牛，百觚则宜用十羊。
现代文：喝酒有一定的规矩，圣人胸腹的大小，跟常人一样，如果喝酒要吃千钟，吃的下酒菜就应该吃完一百头牛，如果是吃一百觚酒那么就应该吃完十只羊。
English: There are certain rules for drinking. The size of a saint's chest and abdomen is the same as that of an ordinary person. If you want to drink a thousand cups of wine, you should eat a hundred cows after eating wine and vegetables. If you want to eat a hundred jars of wine, then you should eat ten sheep.

古文：夫以千钟百牛、百觚十羊言之，文王之身如防风之君，孔子之体如长狄之人，乃能堪之。
现代文：拿吃千钟酒百头牛、吃百觚酒十只羊来说，周文王的身体要像防风氏的君主，孔子的身体要像长狄人一样，才能受得住。
English: For example, if one hundred cattle and ten sheep were to drink a thousand ounces of wine, King Zhouwen's body would have to be like the ruler of the Feng clan, and the body of Confucius would have to be like the Changdi people, in order to be able to bear it.

古文：案文王、孔子之体，不能及防风、长狄，以短小之身，饮食众多，是缺文王之广，贬孔子之崇也。
现代文：考察周文王和孔子的身体，不可能达到防风君和长狄人那样高大。以矮小的身体，吃许许多多的东西，这就损害了周文王道德的广大，贬低了孔子道德的崇高。
English: Looking at the bodies of King Zhouwen and Confucius, it is impossible for them to be as tall as Fengjun and Changdi. With short bodies, they eat a lot of things, which damages the vastness of King Zhouwen's morality and belittles the loftiness of Confucius's morality.

古文：案《酒诰》之篇， 朝夕曰祀兹酒 ，此言文王戒慎酒也。
现代文：考察《尚书·酒诰》上说： 早晚都说： 只有祭祀时才能用酒。  这是周文王告诫谨慎吃酒的话。
English: According to an examination of the "Shangshu·Juicun," it is said that: In the morning and in the evening, it is said that: "Wine can only be used for sacrifices." This is the word of King Zhou Wen cautioning to be careful when eating wine.

古文：朝夕戒慎，则民化之。
现代文：早晚都告戒慎用，那么人民就会受感化。
English: Sooner or later, everyone should be cautious, and then the people will be influenced.

古文：外出戒慎之教，内饮酒尽千钟，导民率下，何以致化？
现代文：如果只是表面上发出告戒谨慎用酒的教令，实际上却喝酒尽千钟，这样来教育人民，做下属的表率，以什么来使得他们受感化呢！
English: If, on the surface, you only issue a warning to be careful with alcohol, but in reality you drink to the full, how can you educate the people and set an example for your subordinates? How can you influence them?

古文：承纣疾恶，何以自别？
现代文：这是承袭纣王患的恶习，拿什么来使自己跟纣王区别呢！
English: This is a bad habit inherited from the king of warts. What can you do to distinguish yourself from the king of warts?

古文：且千钟之效，百觚之验，何所用哉？
现代文：况且喝酒千钟的验证，喝酒百觚的证明，是根据什么得出来的呢？
English: Moreover, the verification of drinking thousands of hours, the proof of drinking hundreds of hours, is based on what?

古文：使文王、孔子因祭用酒乎？则受福胙不能厌饱。因飨射之用酒乎，飨射饮酒，自有礼法。如私燕赏赐饮酒乎？则赏赐饮酒，宜与下齐。
现代文：假使周文王和孔子由于祭祀用酒，那么受用的祭祀酒肉是不能满足需要的；要是因为飨射而用酒，那么飨射喝酒是自有礼仪规矩的；如果是私人宴饮与赏赐喝酒，那么赏赐喝酒应该跟下属一样多。
English: If King Zhouwen and Confucius used wine as a result of sacrificial offerings, then the sacrificial meat and wine used could not meet the needs; if wine was used because of drinking, then drinking from a spit had its own etiquette; if it was a private banquet and drinking was rewarded, then the reward of drinking should be as much as that of subordinates.

古文：赐尊者之前，三觞而退，过於三觞，醉酗生乱。
现代文：在尊者面前接受赏赐，酒过三觞就该退席，超过三觞，就要发酒疯造成祸乱。
English: If you receive a reward in front of His Holiness, you should leave the table if you have drunk more than three cups of wine. If you drink more than three cups of wine, you will go mad and cause havoc.

古文：文王、孔子，率礼之人也，赏赉左右，至於醉酗乱身：自用酒千钟百觚，大之则为桀、纣，小之则为酒徒，用何以立德成化，表名垂誉乎？
现代文：周文王和孔子是遵循礼义的人，如果赏赐周围的人，到了酒疯祸害身体的地步，自己又饮酒千钟喝酒百觚，说重些就是桀、纣，说轻些就是酒鬼，那又凭什么来树立功德，成就教化，显扬名声，得到后人的称赞呢？
English: King Chouwen and Confucius were people who followed etiquette and righteousness. If you reward the people around you to the point of alcoholism and harm to the body, and you yourself drink thousands of hours of alcohol and drink hundreds of beers, and if you say heavier, you are drunk, and if you say lighter, you are a drunkard, then what is the basis for establishing merit, achieving enlightenment, showing fame, and being praised by future generations?

古文：世闻 德将毋醉 之言，见圣人有多德之效，则虚增文王以为千钟，空益孔子以百觚矣。
现代文：世人都听说过 用道德加以控制，不要喝醉 的话，如此才显出圣人有德高的效验，那么可见是无根据地夸大周文王喝酒千钟，凭空地夸大孔子吃酒百觚了。
English: People all over the world have heard that if you use morality to control yourself and don't get drunk, this will show that the sage has a high degree of virtue, so it can be seen that it is groundless to exaggerate that King Zhou Wen drank thousands of hours, and it is groundless to exaggerate that Confucius drank hundreds of hours.

古文：传语曰： 纣沉湎於酒，以糟为丘，以酒为池，牛饮者三千人，为长夜之饮，亡其甲子。 
现代文：世间流传的话说： 纣王沉湎在酒里，酒糟堆成山丘，酒液流满池子，狂饮者三千人；通宵达旦地喝，简直忘记了天日。
English: There is a saying in the world: "The king of the drunkards lies dead in his wine; the dregs of the wine have piled up into hills; the wine has filled the pools; the drunkards are three thousand; they have drunk all night long and have forgotten the light of day."

古文：夫纣虽嗜酒，亦欲以为乐。
现代文：纣王虽然喜欢喝酒也想以酒作乐。
English: Although the king liked to drink, he also wanted to have fun with alcohol.

古文：则不当言为长夜之饮。
现代文：假令酒池在庭院当中，就不该说 通宵达旦地喝酒 。
English: If the pool is in the middle of the courtyard, it should not be called all-night drinking.

古文：坐在深室之中，闭窗举烛，故曰长夜。
现代文：要坐在深宫中，关上门窗点上蜡烛，才能叫通宵达旦。
English: You have to sit in the depths of the palace, close the doors and windows and light a candle in order to stay up all night.

古文：令坐於室乎？每当饮者，起之中庭，乃复还坐，则是烦苦相藉，不能甚乐。
现代文：假令他们是坐在宫室里，每次要喝酒的人得站起来到庭院中去，然后又得回来坐下，这样一来，既劳苦，又会互相踩着碰着，不能很快乐。
English: Supposing they were sitting in the palace, every time a man wanted to drink he had to get up and go out into the courtyard, and then he had to come back and sit down again, so that he had to work hard and step on each other, and could not be very happy.

古文：令池在深室之中，则三千人宜临池坐，前俯饮池酒，仰食肴膳，倡乐在前，乃为乐耳。
现代文：假令酒池在深宫中，那么三千人该靠池边坐着，朝前低头喝池中的酒，抬头便吃饭菜，面前有歌舞音乐，这样才有乐趣。
English: If the wine pool is in the depths of the palace, then the three thousand people should sit by the side of the pool, bow their heads forward to drink the wine in the pool, look up and eat the food, with song and dance music in front of them, so that they can have fun.

古文：如审临池而坐，则前饮害於肴膳，倡乐之作不得在前。
现代文：但是如果真要靠池而坐，那么面前就会没有酒菜吃，歌舞音乐的表演也不会在面前。
English: But if you really want to sit by the pool, then there will be no food and drink in front of you, and there will be no singing and dancing performances in front of you.

古文：夫饮食既不以礼，临池牛饮，则其啖肴不复用杯，亦宜就鱼肉而虎食。
现代文：那吃喝完全不按礼法，在池边像牛饮水似的狂饮，而吃酒菜不再用餐具，适宜围着鱼肉像老虎一样地吞食。
English: That eating and drinking is completely not according to etiquette, binge drinking like a cow drinking water at the edge of the pool, and eating wine and vegetables without using cutlery, it is suitable to eat like a tiger surrounded by fish.

古文：则知夫酒池牛饮，非其实也。
现代文：这样一来，就会明白那 酒池牛饮 的传言，并不是事实。
English: In this way, it will be clear that the rumor of drinking from the drinking pool is not true.

古文：传又言：纣悬肉以为林，令男女倮而相逐其间，是为醉乐淫戏无节度也。
现代文：世间流传的话又说： 纣王把肉悬挂起来形成肉林，叫男女裸着身体在那里面互相追逐。 这是说他整天醉酒、享乐、淫荡、嬉戏没有节制。
English: It is also said that the king of the flies hung up the meat to form a meat forest, and made men and women chase each other naked in it, which means that he was drunk all day long, and had no control over his pleasure, lasciviousness, and play.

古文：夫肉当内於口，口之所食，宜洁不辱。
现代文：肉该送进口里，是口里吃的东西，应该干净不能弄脏。
English: The meat should be brought inside, it is something to be eaten with the mouth, it should be clean and not dirty.

古文：今言男女倮相逐其间，何等洁者？
现代文：现在说男女裸着身体在那里边互相追逐，肉怎么会干净呢？
English: Now that a man and a woman are naked and chasing each other, how can the flesh be clean?

古文：如以醉而不计洁辱，则当其浴於酒中，而倮相逐於肉间。何为不肯浴於酒中？
现代文：如果是由于酒醉而不计较干净与污浊，那么他们应当一起在酒中洗澡。能裸着身体在肉之间互相追逐，为什么又不肯在酒里洗浴呢？
English: If by reason of drunkenness they are heedless of cleanliness and uncleanness, then they should bathe together in wine. If they can chase each other naked through the flesh, why should they not bathe in wine?

古文：以不言浴於酒，知不倮相逐於肉间。
现代文：由于不说在酒里洗澡，所以知道不可能裸着身体在肉之间互相追逐。
English: Apart from bathing in wine, they knew it was impossible to chase each other naked through the flesh.

古文：传者之说，或言： 车行洒，骑行炙，百二十日为一夜。 
现代文：传话的人说，有人说： 驾着车给喝酒的人送酒，骑着马给喝酒的人送烤肉，一连狂饮一百二十天才算一夜。 
English: Someone said: "Driving a car to deliver wine to drinkers, riding a horse to deliver roast meat to drinkers, one hundred and twenty days of binge drinking in a row is one night."

古文：夫言： 用酒为池， 则言其车行酒非也；言其 悬肉为林， 即言骑行炙非也。
现代文：要说 用酒为池 ，那么说 驾着车给他们送酒 就不对；要说 悬肉为林 ，那么说 骑着马给他们送肉 就不对。
English: If you want to say that using wine as a pool, then it is wrong to drive a car to give them wine; if you want to say that hanging meat is a forest, then it is wrong to ride a horse to give them meat.

古文：或时纣沉湎覆酒，滂沲於地，即言以酒为池。
现代文：或者纣王酒醉打翻了酒缸，酒倾泻遍地，就说酒流成池。
English: Or the king of drunkenness knocked over the wine tank, and the wine poured all over the ground, saying that the wine flowed into a pool.

古文：酿酒糟积聚，则言糟为丘。
现代文：酒糟堆积在一起，就说酒糟堆成了山丘。
English: When the dregs of wine are heaped together, it is said that they form a heap.

古文：悬肉以林，则言肉为林。
现代文：悬挂的肉有点像树林，就说肉成了树林。
English: The hanging meat is a bit like a forest, so let's say the meat becomes a forest.

古文：林中幽冥，人时走戏其中，则言倮相逐。
现代文：树林昏暗，人们有时跑到里面嬉戏，就说裸着身体互相追逐。
English: The woods are dark, and people sometimes run into them to play, they say, chasing each other naked.

古文：或时载酒用鹿车，则言车行酒、骑行炙。
现代文：或者装酒用鹿车，就说驾着车送酒、骑着马送肉。
English: Or using a deer-drawn cart to carry wine, for example, or driving a car to deliver wine, or riding a horse to deliver meat.

古文：或时十数夜，则言其百二十。
现代文：或者一连喝了十多夜，就说他一连喝了一百二十夜。
English: Or if he has drunk for more than ten nights in a row, he says that he has drunk for one hundred and twenty nights in a row.

古文：或时醉不知问日数，则言其亡甲子。
现代文：或者酒醉不晓得问时间，就说他忘记了天日。
English: Or if he is too drunk to tell the time, he says he has forgotten the date.

古文：周公封康叔，告以纣用酒期於悉极，欲以戒之也。而不言糟丘酒池，悬肉为林，长夜之饮，亡其甲子。
现代文：周公封康叔的时候，就把纣王酗酒的事告诉他，目的在于把纣王酗酒的害处全部摆出来，想以此告诫他，但是却没有说酒糟堆成山丘，酒流成池，悬挂的肉成了树林，通宵达旦地喝酒，忘记了天日的事。
English: When Zhou Gong enfeoffed Uncle Kang, he told him about the drunkenness of the King of Sheba. The purpose was to expose all the harms of the King of Sheba's drunkenness, in order to warn him, but he did not say that the wine dregs piled up into hills, the wine flowed into ponds, the hanging meat became a forest, and he drank all night long, forgetting the things of the day.

古文：圣人不言，殆非实也。
现代文：圣人不说，可见大概不是事实。
English: If a sage doesn't say it, it's probably not true.

古文：传言曰： 纣非时与三千人牛饮於酒池。 
现代文：世间流传的话说： 纣王不分时间跟三千人在酒池边狂饮。 
English: There is a saying in the world: the king of drunkenness is always drinking with three thousand people at the edge of the pool.

古文：夫夏官百，殷二百，周三百。
现代文：其实，夏朝官职有一百，殷朝有二百，周朝有三百。
English: In fact, there were one hundred officials in the Xia Dynasty, two hundred in the Yin Dynasty, and three hundred in the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：纣之所与相乐，非民，必臣也；非小臣，必大官，其数不能满三千人。
现代文：纣王去与他们作乐的，不是老百姓，肯定是臣子；而且不是小臣，必定是大官，那么数量不可能满三千人。
English: It was not the common people who went to play with them, but certainly the courtiers; and if it was not the courtiers, it must have been the dignitaries, so the number could not have reached three thousand.

古文：传书家欲恶纣，故言三千人，增其实也。
现代文：作传书的人想把纣王说得很坏，故意说有三千人，是夸大事实。
English: The writer of the epistle wanted to speak ill of the king, and deliberately said that there were three thousand people, exaggerating the truth.

古文：传语曰： 周公执贽下白屋之士。 
现代文：世间流传的话说： 周公拿着礼物降低身份到地位低下的人那儿去。 
English: According to a popular saying, Zhou Gong would take a gift and lower his status to a person of lower status.

古文：谓候之也。
现代文：说是去问候他们。
English: He said he was going to greet them.

古文：夫三公，鼎足之臣，王者之贞干也；白屋之士，闾巷之微贱者也。
现代文：那三公是国家的重臣，君王的骨干；而住在白屋的人，不过是民间地位低贱的人。
English: Those three princes are the chiefs of the state, the backbone of the monarch; and the people who live in the White House are just people of low status.

古文：三公倾鼎足之尊，执贽候白屋之士，非其实也。
现代文：要说周公以三公的身分，倾身降低重臣的尊严，拿着礼物去问候地位低下的人，这不是事实。
English: To say that Zhou Gong, as the Third Prince, stooped to lower the dignity of the chief minister and took gifts to greet people with low status is not true.

古文：时或待士卑恭，不骄白屋，人则言其往候白屋；或时起白屋之士，以璧迎礼之，人则言其执贽以候其家也。
现代文：或许周公待人谦卑恭敬，不以骄傲的态度对待地位低下的人，于是人们就说他去问候他们或许是周公起用了地位低下的人，又拿着玉璧作迎聘的礼物，人们就说他拿着礼物去问候那些人。
English: Perhaps Zhou Gong treated people humbly and respectfully, and did not treat people of low status with pride, so people said that he went to greet them. Perhaps Zhou Gong used people of low status and took jade as a gift to welcome them. People said that he took a gift to greet those people.

古文：传语曰： 尧、舜之俭，茅茨不剪，采椽不斫。
现代文：世间流传的话说： 尧和舜很节俭，用茅草盖屋顶从不修剪，用栎木作椽子也不加砍削。 
English: There is a popular saying: "The cormorant and the cormorant are very frugal. They never trim the thatch roofs, nor do they chop down the birch rafters.

古文：夫言茅茨采椽，可也；言不剪不斫，增之也。
现代文：说用茅草盖房顶，用栎木作椽子，是可以的；但要说从不修剪不砍削，是过分夸大。
English: It is all right to say that the roof should be made of thatch and the rafters of birch, but it is an exaggeration to say that there should be no pruning or cutting.

古文：《经》曰 弼成五服 。
现代文：《尚书·益稷》上说： 我重新划定了五个服役的地带。 
English: "I have redrawn the five service zones," he said in "Shangshu Yixuanhuang."

古文：五服，五采服也。
现代文：五服，就是有五个颜色的衣服。
English: "Gofuku" means clothes with five colors.

古文：服五采之服，又茅茨、采椽，何宫室衣服之不相称也？
现代文：穿上五彩的衣服，再住进修整好的茅屋，什么宫室的衣服不相称呢？
English: After putting on colorful clothes and living in a well-maintained thatched cottage, what palace clothes are not appropriate?

古文：服五采，画日月星辰，茅茨、采椽，非其实也。
现代文：要是穿上五彩的衣服，衣服上又画着日月星辰，却住在没有修整的茅屋里，就不符合事实了。
English: If you wear colorful clothes with the sun, moon and stars painted on them, but live in an unkempt hut, it does not correspond to reality.

古文：传语曰： 秦始皇帝燔烧诗书，坑杀儒士。 
现代文：世间流传的话说： 秦始皇帝焚烧诗书，活埋儒生。 
English: There is a saying circulating in the world: Emperor Qin Shi Huang burned poetry books and buried Confucians alive.

古文：言燔烧诗书，灭去《五经》文书也；坑杀儒士者，言其皆挟经传文书之人也。
现代文：说焚烧诗书，是要消灭掉五经等书籍。活埋儒生，是说他要杀尽收藏经传书籍的人。
English: He said that the burning of poetry books was to wipe out books such as the Five Classics, and that burying Confucian scholars alive meant that he wanted to kill all those who collected books of the classics.

古文：烧其书，坑其人，诗书绝矣。
现代文：烧掉书，埋掉人，诗书就灭绝了。
English: Burn the books, bury the people, and the poetry book is extinct.

古文：言烧燔诗书、坑杀儒士，实也；言其欲灭诗书，故坑杀其人，非其诚，又增之也。
现代文：说焚烧诗书，活埋儒生，是事实；但要说他想灭绝诗书，就故意活埋人，不确实，又夸大了。
English: It is true to say that he burned poetry books and buried Confucian scholars alive, but to say that he wanted to exterminate poetry books and deliberately buried people alive is not true and exaggerated.

古文：秦始皇帝三十四年，置酒咸阳台，儒士七十人前为寿。
现代文：秦始皇三十四年，在咸阳宫设酒宴，博士七十人前去为秦始皇祝寿。
English: In the thirty-fourth year of Qin Shi Huang, a wine banquet was held at Xianyang Palace, and seventy doctors went to celebrate the birthday of Qin Shi Huang.

古文：仆射周青臣进颂始皇之德。
现代文：仆射周青臣进表称颂秦始皇的功德。
English: The servant shoots Zhou Qingchen into the table and praises the merits of Qin Shihuang.

古文：齐淳於越进谏始皇不封子弟功臣自为辅，刺周青臣以为面谀。
现代文：可是原齐国的淳于越却进表劝说秦始皇不该不封赏子、弟、功臣而自己去挟制大臣们，并且指责周青臣认为他当面奉承秦始皇。
English: However, Junyu Yue, originally from Qi Province, went to the front to persuade Qin Shi Huang that he should not appoint a reward child, a younger brother, or a meritorious vassal, but should take control of the ministers himself, and accused Zhou Qingchen that he was flattering Qin Shi Huang to his face.

古文：始皇下其议於丞相李斯。
现代文：秦始皇把他的意见交给丞相李斯。
English: Emperor Qin gave his opinion to the Minister of War, Li Si.

古文：李斯非淳于越曰： 诸生不师今而学古，以非当世，惑乱黔首。
现代文：李斯责备淳于越说： 这些儒生不效法今人而去仿照古人，用它们来非难当今皇上，迷惑混乱老百姓。
English: Li Si reproached Junyue, saying, "These Confucian scholars do not follow the practice of modern people, but imitate the ancients. They use them to criticize the emperor of today and confuse the confused people.

古文：臣请敕史官，非秦记皆烧之；非博士官所职，天下有敢藏诗书、百家语、诸刑书者；悉诣守尉集烧之；有敢偶语诗书，弃市；以古非今者，族灭；吏见知弗举，与同罪。 
现代文：我请求皇上下命令给史官，凡不是秦国史官记录的历史材料都烧掉。不是博士官职掌的书藉典册，其他天下有敢收藏《诗经》、《尚书》、诸子百家语录，旧六国刑书的，要他们全送到郡守郡尉那儿去统统烧掉。有敢两人私下说及《诗经》和《尚书》的，就拖到闹市处死示众；有用古制非难现今制度的，全族处死。官吏知情不举报的，跟他们同罪。 
English: I request the emperor to issue an order to the historians to burn all the historical materials that are not the records of the historians of Qin. Not the reference books of the doctoral officials, but those who dare to collect the "Song of Songs," the "Book of Songs," the "Hundred Sayings of the Sons of Heaven" and the "Old Six Kingdoms" should be sent to the county magistrate to burn them all. If two people dare to talk about the "Song of Songs" and the "Book of Songs" in private, they will be dragged to the city to be publicly executed; if they use the ancient system to criticize the current system, the whole family will be executed. If the officials

古文：始皇许之。
现代文：秦始皇同意了李斯的主张。
English: Qin Shihuang agreed to Li Si's proposal.

古文：明年，三十五年，诸生在咸阳者，多为妖言。
现代文：第二年，秦始皇三十五年，这些儒生在咸阳尽说不中听的话。
English: In the second year, the thirty-fifth year of the reign of Qin Shi Huang, these Confucian scholars in Xianyang said all the right things.

古文：始皇使御史案问诸生，诸生传相告引者，自除犯禁者四百六十七人，皆坑之。
现代文：秦始皇派御史大夫追查审讯他们，这些儒生据说互相告发，于是秦始皇决定亲自处决违犯禁令的四百六十七人，把他们统统活埋。
English: Qin Shihuang sent the imperial historian to investigate and interrogate them. These Confucians are said to have denounced each other, so Qin Shihuang decided to personally execute 467 people who violated the ban and buried them all alive.

古文：燔诗书，起淳于越之谏；坑儒士，起自诸生为妖言，见坑者四百六十七人。
现代文：焚烧《诗经》和《尚书》等书，起源于淳于越对秦始皇的劝说；活埋儒生，起因于这些儒生说不中听的话，被活埋的有四百六十七人。
English: The burning of the "Song of Songs" and "Song of Songs" and other books originated from the persuasion of Jun Yu Yue to the First Emperor of Qin; burying Confucians alive was caused by these Confucians saying things that were not good to hear, and 467 people were buried alive.

古文：传增言坑杀儒士，欲绝诗书，又言尽坑之。
现代文：流言夸大说活埋了儒生，想灭绝《诗经》、《尚书》等书，而且还说儒生完全被活埋了。
English: The rumor that the Confucian scholars were buried alive was exaggerated, and they wanted to exterminate the "Song of Songs," "Song of Songs" and other books, and it was also said that the Confucian scholars were completely buried alive.

古文：此非其实，而又增之。
现代文：这不是事实而且又过分夸大了。
English: It's not true and it's wildly exaggerated.

古文：传语曰： 町町若荆轲之闾。 
现代文：世间流传的话说： 荆轲住的街巷被荡平，人被杀得一干二净。 
English: There is a saying that goes around the world: "The streets and lanes where the Jing family lived were flattened, and people were killed without exception."

古文：言荆轲为燕太子丹刺秦王，後诛轲九族，其後恚恨不已，复夷轲之一里，一里皆灭，故曰町町。此言增之也。
现代文：这是说荆轲为燕太子丹刺杀秦王嬴政，后来秦王杀了荆轲的九族，那之后秦王还愤恨不止，又杀光了荆轲的整个乡里。整个乡里全被杀光，所以叫做空空如也。
English: This is to say that Jing Jie assassinated Qin King Hezhen for Prince Yan Dan, and later Qin King killed Jing Jie's nine tribes, after which Qin King was still angry and killed Jing Jie's entire township. The entire township was killed, so it was called empty.

古文：夫秦虽无道，无为尽诛荆轲之里。
现代文：这话太夸大了。因为秦始皇虽然无道，也不会干出杀光荆轲乡里的事。
English: This is an exaggeration, because although Qin Shihuang was a madman, he would not do anything to kill people in the countryside.

古文：始皇幸梁山之宫，从山上望见丞相李斯车骑甚盛，恚，出言非之。其後左右以告李斯，李斯立损车骑。
现代文：始皇驾临梁山的皇宫，从山上望见丞相李斯的随从车马太多，很不高兴，随口说了指责李斯的话。
English: When the First Emperor arrived at the imperial palace on Mount Liang, he saw from the mountain that the entourage of Premier Li Si had too many horses and chariots. He was very unhappy, and casually said something to criticize Li Si.

古文：始皇知左右泄其言，莫知为谁，尽捕诸在旁者皆杀之。
现代文：过后，他的左右侍从把话告诉了李斯，李斯马上减少了随从车马。始皇知道左右侍从泄漏了他的话，又不知道是谁，于是就把那时在他身旁的人都全捉来杀了。
English: Afterward, his right and left attendants told Li Si about his words, and Li Si immediately reduced the number of attendants. The First Emperor knew that his right and left attendants had leaked his words, but did not know who they were, so he caught and killed everyone who was around him at the time.

古文：其後坠星下东郡，至地为石，民或刻其石曰 始皇帝死，地分 。
现代文：那之后有流星坠落在东郡，落到地上是块石头，当地百姓有人在那块陨石上刻道 始皇帝死后，天下要分裂 。
English: After that, a meteorite fell in Dongshun, and it fell to the ground as a stone. Some local people carved "The world will be divided after the death of the First Emperor" on the meteorite.

古文：皇帝闻之，令御史逐问，莫服，尽取石旁人诛之。
现代文：始皇听说这事，就派御史大夫追查审讯，但没有认罪的，于是就把当时在石头旁边的人全部捉来杀了。
English: When the first emperor heard about this, he sent an imperial historian to investigate and investigate, but he did not confess, so he caught and killed all the people who were near the stone at that time.

古文：夫诛从行於梁山宫及诛石旁人，欲得泄言、刻石者，不能审知，故尽诛之。
现代文：处死跟随到梁山皇宫的侍从和处死在陨石旁边的人，是想晓得泄漏话和在石头上刻字的人，由于不能确切知道他们，所以把他们全杀了。
English: The attendants who followed him to the Liangshan Palace and the people who died next to the meteorite were those who wanted to know the leaks and the inscriptions on the stone. Since they could not know them for sure, they killed them all.

古文：荆轲之闾，何罪於秦而尽诛之？
现代文：荆轲的街坊邻里对秦始皇有什么罪要把他们全部杀光呢？
English: What crime did the neighbors of Jingyao commit against Qin Shi Huangdi to make him kill them all?

古文：如刺秦王在闾中，不知为谁，尽诛之，可也；荆轲已死，刺者有人，一里之民，何为坐之？
现代文：如果刺杀秦王嬴政的人躲藏在街坊邻里家，又不知道他是谁，把邻里全部杀光，还说得过去。现在荆轲已经被处死，刺客找到了人，整个里的百姓，为什么要受牵连呢？
English: If the assassin of Qin King Yongzheng hid in a neighbor's house, but did not know who he was, and killed the entire neighborhood, it can be said. Now that Jing Yong has been executed, the assassin has found someone, the entire people, why should they be implicated?

古文：始皇二十年，燕使荆轲刺秦王，秦王觉之，体解轲以徇，不言尽诛其闾。
现代文：始皇二十年，燕太子丹派荆轲刺杀秦王，秦王察觉了，就肢解荆轲来示众，并没有说全部杀掉他的街坊邻里。
English: Twenty years after the founding of the First Emperor, Yan Taizi Dan sent Jing Jiao to assassinate Qin Wang. When Qin Wang became aware of this, he dismembered Jing Jiao to show it to the public. He did not say that he had killed his entire neighborhood.

古文：彼或时诛轲九族，九族众多，同里而处，诛其九族，一里且尽，好增事者，则言町町也。
现代文：那时或许诛杀了荆柯的九族，九族人太多，都同在一个地方住，杀了他的九族，整个里的人差不多被杀光了，于是喜欢把事情夸大的人就说把整个里的人全杀光了。
English: At that time, he may have killed Jing Ke's nine tribes. There were too many people from nine tribes living together in one place. He killed his nine tribes, and almost all the people in the village were killed. Therefore, people who like to exaggerate things say that they killed all the people in the village.

