古文：堂下之左，尹公、夏公立焉，皆南面，絻有繁露，朝服，五十物，皆缙笏。
现代文：成周朝会诸侯，坛上挂着红帐子，用黑羽毛作装饰。天子成王面朝南方，冠冕上没有垂珠，朝服八彩色，腰间插着大圭。唐叔、郇叔在左，周公、太公望在右，都有冠冕，也没有垂珠，朝服七彩色，都腰插笏板，依傍天子站在坛上。
English: The princes of the Cheng Zhou imperial court, red curtains hanging on the altar, decorated with black feathers. The emperor Cheng Wang faces south, no beads on the crown, eight-colored imperial robes, and a large cedar inserted in the waist. Uncle Tang and Uncle Zhou on the left, Zhou Gong and Taigongwang on the right, all have crowns, and no beads, seven-colored imperial robes, all waist-inserted beadboard, standing next to the emperor on the altar.

古文：为诸侯之有疾病者，阼阶之南，祝淮氏、荣氏，次之慓瓚，次之皆西面，弥宗旁之。
现代文：坛下右边，唐公、虞公面朝南站在那里；坛下左边，殷公、夏公站在那里。都是面朝南，冠冕上有垂珠，朝服五彩色，都腰插笏板。坛的中阶南面，太祝淮氏、荣氏依次站着，旁边放着以圭柄的盛酒器，都面朝西。
English: On the right under the altar, Tang Gong and Yu Gong are standing there facing south; on the left under the altar, Yin Gong and Xia Gong are standing there. They are all facing south, with beads on their crowns, five-colored robes, and their waists are inserted with chopsticks. On the south side of the middle tier of the altar, Tai Zhu Huai Shi and Rong Shi are standing in turn, next to them is a wine container with a ginger handle, all facing west.

古文：为诸侯有疾病者之医药所居。
现代文：弥宗傍着太祝，弥宗是掌管生病诸侯医药事务的。
English: Beside the emperor, Yazong is in charge of the medical affairs of the sick vassals.

古文：相者，太史鱼、大行人，皆朝服，有繁露。堂下之东面，郭叔掌为天子菉币焉，絻有繁露。
现代文：司仪太史鱼和大行人都穿朝服，冠冕上有垂珠，坛下的东面，郭叔掌管替天子登录礼品，冠冕上无垂珠。
English: The master of ceremonies, Taishi Yu, and the dignitaries all wore imperial robes. There were hanging beads on the crown. On the east side under the altar, Guo Shu was in charge of registering gifts for the heavenly son. There were no hanging beads on the crown.

古文：内台西面正北方，应侯、曹叔伯舅、中舅。比服次之，要服次之，荒服次之。
现代文：内台面朝西以北为上，站着应侯、曹叔及伯舅、中舅等，以下依次是比服、要服、荒服的方国。
English: The inner table faces west to north, and stands for the lord of the manor, the lord of the manor, the lord of the manor, the lord of the manor, the lord of the manor, the lord of the manor, and the lord of the manor.

古文：西方东面正北方，伯父中子次之。
现代文：内台面朝东以北为上，依次是伯父、中子等人。
English: On the inner table, the east-to-north direction is up, followed by the uncle, the middle child, and so on.

古文：方千里之内为比服，方二千里之内为要服，方三千里之内为荒服，是皆朝于内者。
现代文：一千里见方以内为比服，二千里见方以内为要服，三千里见方以内为荒服。这些诸侯都是朝于坛内的。
English: Within 1,000 li of the square, it is a match dress, within 2,000 li of the square, it is a formal dress, and within 3,000 li of the square, it is a casual dress.

古文：堂后东北为赤帟焉，浴盆在其中。其西天子车立马乘，六青阴羽凫旌。
现代文：坛后东北角，挂着红帐子，里面是浴盆；它的西面，天子的车马在那里，六匹青马，黑羽饰车盖，凫旌建车上。
English: Behind the altar, in the northeast corner, hangs a red curtain, inside of which is a bath tub; to the west of it, there is the chariot and horse of the son of heaven, six blue horses, black feathers adorning the chariot cover, on the chariot.

古文：中台之外，其右泰士，台右弥士。
现代文：中台外面，左边是泰土，右边是弥士。
English: Outside the middle platform, on the left is Thai soil, on the right is the mass.

古文：受贽者八人，东面者四人，西面四人也。
现代文：接收礼品共八人，面朝东四人，面朝西四人。
English: A total of eight people received gifts, four facing east and four facing west.

古文：陈币当外台，天玄曷毛宗马十二，王元缭璧綦十二，参方玄缭璧、豹虎皮十二，四方玄缭璧琰十二。
现代文：放的礼品摆在外台上。上方是黑鬃马十二匹，下方是黑丝的玉琪十二块，第三方是黑丝带缠绕的豹虎皮十二张及璧玉十二块，第四方是黑丝带缠绕的玉琰十二块。
English: The gifts are placed on the outer table. Above are twelve black horses, below are twelve pieces of black silk jade, the third is twelve pieces of black ribbon-wrapped leopard skin and twelve pieces of jade, and the fourth is twelve pieces of black ribbon-wrapped jade.

古文：外台之四隅，张赤帟，为诸侯，欲息者皆息焉，命之曰爻闾。
现代文：外台的四角，挂着红色帐子，是想休息的诸侯休息的地方，称之为爻闾。
English: The four corners of the outer stage, hung with a red curtain, is the resting place of the lords who want to rest, called the cocoon.

古文：周公旦主东方，所之青马、黑葛毛，谓之母兒，其守营墙者，衣青操弓执矛。
现代文：周公旦主管东方所贡礼品，有黑鬃毛青马，叫做母儿。那些守护围墙的，穿青色衣服，操弓执矛。
English: Zhou Gongdan, in charge of the tribute gifts from the East, has a black-maned blue horse, called mother and child. Those who guard the fence wear blue clothes and use bows and spears.

古文：西面者，正北方，稷慎大麈。
现代文：外台东边朝西以北为上，依次是：肃慎，贡物是大麈。
English: On the east side of the outer stage, from the west to the north is up, followed by: prudence, and the tribute is a large urn.

古文：秽人前兒，前兒若弥猴，立行似小兒。
现代文：秽人，贡物是浅黑鲵。浅黑猊像猕猴，可站着走，叫声像小儿。
English: A filthy person, the tribute is a light-black baboon. A light-black baboon is like a macaque, can walk on its feet, and calls like a child.

古文：俞人虽马，青丘狐九尾，周头煇互，煇互者，羊也。
现代文：青丘，贡的九尾狐狸。周头，贡的烊羝，烽羝是一种羊。
English: Qingqiu, tribute of the nine-tailed fox. Zhou Tou, tribute of the yakitori, yakitori is a kind of sheep.

古文：黑齿白鹿白马，白民乘黄，乘黄者似骐，背有两角。
现代文：黑齿国，贡的白鹿、白马。白民，贡的乘黄。乘黄像狐狸，背上有两只角。
English: Black-toothed country, tribute white deer, white horse. White people, tribute multiplied by yellow. Multiplied by yellow like a fox, with two horns on its back.

古文：东越海蛤，欧人蝉蛇，蝉蛇顺食之美。
现代文：东越，贡的海蛤。瓯人，贡的鳝鱼。鳝鱼温顺，肉味鲜美。
English: Dongyue, Gong's sea bream. Gong people, Gong's eel. Tame eel, delicious meat.

古文：遇越纳□。
现代文：于越，贡的纳鱼。
English: In Viet Nam, fish is a tribute.

古文：姑妹珍，
现代文：女占蔑，贡小蜃蛤。
English: The woman is a charlatan, the tribute is petty.

古文：且瓯文蜃，其人玄贝，海阳大蟹。
现代文：具瓯，贡有纹的大蜃蛤。供人，贡的黑色海贝。海阳，贡的大蟹。
English: With the dragonfly, tribute to the big dragonfly with stripes. For the people, tribute to the black sea shell. Haiyang, tribute to the crab.

古文：自深桂。
现代文：自深，贡的桂树。
English: Katsura tree of self-deepening and tribute.

古文：会稽以单黾，皆面向。
现代文：会稽，贡的扬子鳄。都面向西方。
English: The guildmaster, the yangzi crocodile of tribute, all face west.

古文：正北方义渠，以兹白，兹白者，若白马，锯牙食虎豹。
现代文：外台西边，朝东，北为上，依次是：义渠，贡以兹白。兹白像白马，长着锯牙，吃虎豹。
English: On the west side of the outer platform, facing east, north is up, followed by: Yichuan, Gongyi Zibei. Zibei is like a white horse, with saw teeth, eating a tiger leopard.

古文：央林以酋耳，酋耳者，身若虎豹，尾长，参其身，食虎豹。
现代文：央林，贡以酋耳。酋耳身子像虎豹，尾巴有身子三倍长，吃虎豹。
English: The body of the eagle-owl is like that of the tiger-leopard, and its tail is three times as long as its body. It eats the tiger-leopard.

古文：北唐以闾，闾似隃冠。
现代文：北唐，贡以驴。驴像母羊。
English: North Tang Dynasty, the tribute was a donkey. The donkey looked like a ewe.

古文：渠叟以鼠勺犬，鼠勺犬者，露犬也，能飞食虎豹。
现代文：渠叟，贡以跑犬。跑犬又叫露犬，能飞奔，吃虎豹。
English: Running dogs, also known as dew dogs, can run fast and eat leopards.

古文：楼烦以星施，星施者，珥旌。
现代文：楼烦，贡星施。星施是旗子上的垂珥。
English: Building troubles, tribute to the stars. The stars are the drool on the flag.

古文：卜庐以纨牛，纨牛者，牛之小者也。
现代文：卜卢，贡纨牛。纨牛是一种小牛。区阳，贡鳖封。
English: Bulu, tribute yakitori. Yakitori is a kind of veal. Guiyang, tribute yakitori.

古文：区阳以鳖封，鳖封者，若彘，前后有首。
现代文：鳖封像貉，前后都有头。
English: The cormorant seal looks like a cormorant, with a head on both sides.

古文：规规以麟，麟者仁兽也。
现代文：规规，贡麟。麟是一种灵性的兽。
English: Gu Gu, Gong Lin. Lin is a spiritual beast.

古文：西申以凤鸟，凤鸟者，戴仁抱义掖信。
现代文：西申，贡凤鸟。凤鸟头顶青色，怀抱白色，腋下黄色。
English: Xishen, tribute phoenix bird. The phoenix bird is blue on the top of the head, white in the arms, and yellow under the arms.

古文：氐羌以鸾鸟。
现代文：氐羌，贡鸾鸟。
English: Ho, ho, ho, ho.

古文：巴人以比翼鸟。
现代文：巴人，贡比翼鸟。
English: Bajin, a winged bird.

古文：反炀以皇鸟，蜀人以文翰，文翰者，若皋鸡。
现代文：方炀，贡皇鸟。蜀人，贡天鸡。天鸡像五彩鸡。
English: Fang Yao, a tribute to the emperor bird. Shu Ren, a tribute to the celestial chicken. The celestial chicken looks like a colorful chicken.

古文：方人以孔鸟，卜人以丹沙，夷用门焦木。
现代文：方人，贡孔雀。卜人，贡丹砂。寡人，贡阑木。
English: Fangren, tribute peacock. Boren, tribute sand. Oren, tribute maple.

古文：康民以桴苡，苡者，其实如李，食之宜子。
现代文：庸人，贡桴苡。桴苡的果实像李子，妇女吃了容易怀孩子。
English: The fruit of the loquat is like a plum, and if a woman eats it, she can easily conceive a child.

古文：周靡费费，其形人身反踵，自笑，笑则上脣翕其目，食人，北方谓之吐喽。
现代文：州靡，贡狒狒。形状像人身，脚踵是反的，爱笑，一笑嘴唇就掩住眼睛，吃人，北方人叫土蝼。
English: It is shaped like a human being, has an inverted heel, loves to smile, covers its eyes with its lips when it laughs, and eats people. Northerners call it a mound.

古文：都郭生生，欺羽生生，若黄狗人面能言。
现代文：都郭，贡猩猩和欺羽鸟。猩猩像黄狗，人脸，能说话。
English: Du Guo, Gong the orangutan, and the feathered bird. The orangutan looks like a yellow dog, has a human face, and can talk.

古文：奇干善芳，善芳者，头若雄鸡，佩之令人不昧。
现代文：奇干，贡善芳。善芳头像雄鸡，佩戴在身上使人不昏昧。
English: Qigang, Gong Zhenfang. Zhenfang's head looks like a rooster, wearing it on the body makes people not dizzy.

古文：皆东向。
现代文：以上方国的人都面向东方。
English: The people of these countries all face east.

古文：北方台正东，高夷嗛羊，嗛羊者，羊而四角。
现代文：外台北边，靠东一边，依次是：高夷，贡的赚羊。赚羊，是四角羊。
English: On the outside of Taipei, on the east side, in order: Gao Yi, tribute-earning sheep. Earning sheep are four-horned sheep.

古文：独鹿邛邛，距虚善走也。
现代文：独鹿，贡的蛩蛩。蛩蛩，善于奔跑。
English: A solitary deer, a tribute deer. A roe deer, good at running.

古文：孤竹距虚，不令支玄獏，不屠何青熊。
现代文：孤竹，贡的距虚。令支，贡的黑旗。屠何，贡的黑熊。
English: Lone bamboo, the distance of tribute is nothing. Lingzhi, the black flag of tribute. Tuhe, the black bear of tribute.

古文：东胡黄罴，山戎戎菽。
现代文：东胡，贡的黄罴。山戎，贡的胡豆。
English: Donghu, tributary of Huanglong. Shan Rong, tributary of Huzhou.

古文：其西般吾，白虎。
现代文：靠西一边，依次是：番吾，贡的白虎。
English: On the west side, in order: Fango, Tribute's White Tiger.

古文：屠州黑豹，禺氏騊駼。
现代文：屠州，贡的黑豹。禺氏，贡的驹赊。
English: The black panther of Tuozhou, tribute. The dragonfly clan, tribute.

古文：大夏兹白牛，兹白牛野兽也，牛形而象齿。
现代文：大夏，贡的兹白牛。兹白牛是一种野兽，有牛的的形体和大象的牙齿。
English: Daxia is a tribute to the white ox. The white ox is a beast with the body of an ox and the teeth of an elephant.

古文：犬戎文马，文马赤鬣缟身，目若黄金，名古黄之乘。
现代文：犬戎，贡的文马。文马是红鬃自身，眼睛亮如黄金，名叫吉黄之乘。
English: Inu Rong, a tribute to Wen Ma. Wen Ma is Red Kite himself, his eyes are bright as gold, and his name is Ji Huang Rong.

古文：数楚每牛，每牛者，牛之小者也。
现代文：数楚，贡的每牛。每牛，是一种小牛。
English: Every cow, every cow, is a calf.

古文：匈奴狡犬，狡犬者，巨身四足果。
现代文：匈奴，贡的狡犬。狡犬者，体大，四条腿无毛。
English: Xiongnu, Gong's cunning dog. The cunning dog is large and has four hairless legs.

古文：汤曰： 善。 
现代文：商汤道： 好! 
English: Shang Tang Dao: Good!

