古文：季友尚宪宗永昌公主，拜驸马都尉。
现代文：于季友与宪宗的永昌公主结婚，封官驸马都尉。
English: Yu Jiyu married Princess Yongchang of the Jianzong Dynasty, and was given the title of lieutenant of horses.

古文：从穆宗猎苑中，求改頔谥，会徐泗节度使李愬亦为请，更赐谥曰思。
现代文：跟随穆宗在禁苑中打猎时，请求改于由页的谥号，遇上徐泗节度使李訫也请求，于是改谥号为思。
English: When he was hunting with Mu Zong in the Forbidden Garden, he asked to change it to the number of the page, and when he met Xu Zheng, he also asked Li Zheng to change the number of the page.

古文：方，长庆时以勋家子通豪侠，欲事河朔，以策干宰相元稹。而李逢吉党谋倾执政，乃告稹结客刺裴度，事下有司，验无状，方坐诛。
现代文：尚书右丞张正甫退回诏书，右补阙高钅弋、太常博士王彦威不赞成，他们说： 于由页是文官，却倔强违反命令，擅自在襄州、邓州集结军队，想胁迫朝廷；杀无辜的人，扣留皇帝判罪的犯人；阻拦皇帝使臣，妄改礼乐。被迫朝拜，不是他的本意，能寿终正寝，已是幸运，不应改谥号。 皇帝没采纳。
English: Shangshu's right-hand man Zhang Zhengfu returned the imperial edict, while the right-hand man Gao Jun and the right-hand man Wang Yanwei did not approve. They said, "Yu Yufei was a civil servant, but he stubbornly disobeyed orders, assembled troops in Xiangzhou and Dengzhou without authorization, and wanted to coerce the imperial court; kill innocent people, detain prisoners convicted by the emperor; obstruct the emperor's envoys, and arbitrarily change the ritual music. It was not his intention to be forced to worship. He was lucky to live to a ripe old age, and should not change his nickname. The emperor did

古文：王智兴，字匡谏，怀州温人。
现代文：王智兴的字叫匡谏，怀州温县人。
English: Wang Zhixing's Chinese name is Kuangyao. He is from Wenzhou's Wenzhou County.

古文：少骁锐，为徐州牙兵，事刺史李洧。
现代文：年轻时健壮勇敢，在徐州当亲兵，侍奉刺史李洧。
English: When he was young, he was strong and brave. He was a soldier in Xuzhou and served as the aide-de-camp of Li Jun.

古文：洧弃李纳，挈州自归。
现代文：李洧背离李纳，自愿率徐州归顺朝廷。
English: Li Gan defected from Li Na, and Xuzhou voluntarily surrendered to the imperial court.

古文：纳怒，急攻洧。
现代文：李纳发怒了，拼命进攻李洧。
English: Li Na got angry and attacked Li Zhen desperately.

古文：智兴能驶步，奉表，不数日至京师告急，德宗出朔方军五千击纳，解去，自是为徐特将。
现代文：王智兴善于骑马快跑，拿着奏章几天就跑到京城告急，德宗派朔方军五千名攻打李纳，李纳退走了，王智兴从此当了徐州独挡一面的将领。
English: Wang Zhixing was good at riding a horse and running fast. He ran to Beijing for a few days with a musical score to express his urgency. The German sect sent five thousand troops to attack Li Na, Li Na retreated, and Wang Zhixing became the general of Xuzhou alone.

古文：讨吴元济也。李师道谋挠王师，数侵徐救蔡。
现代文：讨伐吴元济时，李师道想干扰朝廷军队，多次入侵徐州救援蔡州。
English: When fighting against Wu Yuanji, Li Shidao wanted to interfere with the imperial army and repeatedly invaded Xuzhou to rescue Caizhou.

古文：节度使李愿遣智兴率步骑拒贼。
现代文：节度使李愿派王智兴率步、骑兵抵抗叛军。
English: Li willingly sent Wang Zhixing to lead the cavalry against the rebels.

古文：其将王朝晏方攻沛，智兴逆击，败之，朝晏脱身保沂州。
现代文：李师道的将领王朝晏正进攻沛县，王智兴迎战，打败了他，他逃去守卫沂州。
English: The general of Li Shidao's dynasty, Yao, was attacking Peixian. Wang Zhixing met him and defeated him. He fled to guard Zhangzhou.

古文：进破姚海兵五万于丰北，获美妾三人，智兴曰： 军中有女子，安得不败？ 
现代文：王智兴进兵在丰县北边打败了姚海的五万军队，俘获了三名漂亮的小妾，他说 ：军队里有女人，怎能不打败仗！ 
English: Wang Zhixing marched into the north of Feng County, defeated Yao Hai's fifty thousand troops and captured three beautiful concubines. He said, "There are women in the army, how can we not defeat the war!"

古文：即斩以徇。
现代文：就把她们杀了示众。
English: and killed them in public.

古文：朝晏自沂以轻兵袭沛，夜战狄丘，复破之。
现代文：王朝晏从沂州率轻装士兵袭击沛县，夜里在狄丘会战，王智兴又打败了他。
English: Wang Zhaohui led light-armed soldiers from Zhangzhou to attack Pei County. They fought in the night in Dicu, and Wang Zhixing defeated him again.

古文：累迁侍御史。
现代文：多次升官后任侍御史。
English: He was promoted several times and later served as an attendant to the Emperor.

古文：元和十三年，伐师道，智兴以步骑八千次胡陵，与忠武军会，以骑畀其子晏平、晏宰为先锋，自率军继之。
现代文：元和十三年，讨伐李师道。王智兴率步、骑步八千人驻扎在胡陵，和忠武军会合，将骑兵交给他儿子王晏平、王晏宰率领任先锋，自己率军队接应他们。
English: In the 13th year of the Yuan Dynasty, there was a campaign against the Li Shidao. Wang Zhixing led eight thousand men on foot and horseback stationed in Huling, met with the loyal troops, handed over the cavalry to his son Wang Bingping, led by Wang Bingzai as the vanguard, and led the army to meet them.

古文：坏河桥，收黄队，攻金乡，拔鱼台，俘斩万计。
现代文：破坏了黄河桥梁，收复了黄队，进攻金乡，攻占鱼台，俘虏、杀死敌人数以万计。
English: They destroyed the Yellow River bridges, recovered the Yellow Team, attacked Jinxiang, captured Yutai, and captured and killed tens of thousands of enemies.

古文：贼平，进御史中丞。
现代文：叛贼被讨平后，升任御史中丞。
English: After the rebels were subdued, he was promoted to goshi chujo.

古文：明年，召还，为沂州刺史。
现代文：第二年，被召回任命为沂州刺史。
English: In the second year, he was recalled and appointed as the chief historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：长庆初，河朔用兵，加检校左散骑常侍，充武宁军副使、河北行营诸军都知兵马使，帅兵三千度河。
现代文：长庆初年，征伐河北，他升任检校左散骑常侍、武宁军副使、河北行营各军都知兵马使，率领三千军队渡过了黄河。
English: In the first year of the Long Qing Dynasty, he led 3,000 troops across the Yellow River in the conquest of Hebei Province. He was promoted to the position of the left rider of the inspection team, the deputy envoy of the Wu Ning Army, and the military envoy of all the armies in Hebei Province.

古文：属朝廷用崔群为武宁节度使，群畏智兴难制，密请追还京师，未报。
现代文：当时朝廷任命崔群为武宁军节度使。他怕王智兴难以控制，秘密请求把王智兴调到京城，朝廷没有答复。
English: At that time, the imperial court appointed Cui Qun as the military governor of the Wu Ning Army. He was afraid that Wang Zhixing would be difficult to control, and secretly requested that Wang Zhixing be transferred to Beijing. The imperial court did not reply.

古文：会赦王廷凑，诸节度班师。
现代文：遇上赦免了王廷凑，各节度使撤军。
English: Wang Tingpai was pardoned on the occasion, and all provinces ordered the withdrawal of troops.

古文：智兴还，群遣寮属迎之，令士季甲而入。
现代文：王智兴回去，他派下属迎接他，命兵将解除武装后进城。
English: When Wang Zhixing returned, he sent his subordinates to meet him. The soldiers would disarm and enter the city.

古文：智兴心不悦，因勒兵斩关入，杀异己者十余辈，然后谒群谢曰： 此军情也！ 
现代文：王智兴心里不高兴，就率军攻破城门进城，杀死了十几个不附和自己的人，此后才去拜见他说 ：这是兵将们的愿望！ 
English: Unhappy in his heart, Wang Zhixing led his army to break through the city gate and enter the city, killing more than a dozen people who did not agree with him. Only then did he go to see him and say: This is the wish of the generals!

古文：群乃治装去，智兴以兵卫送还朝；至埇桥，掠盐铁院及贡物，劫商旅，逐濠州刺史侯弘度。
现代文：他就整理行装离去。王智兴率军护送他回朝廷，走到土甬桥，抢劫了盐铁院和进贡的物资，又拦劫商人，赶走了濠州刺史侯弘度。
English: Wang Zhixing led the army to escort him back to the imperial court, walked to the Tuyun Bridge, robbed the Salt and Iron Institute and the tribute materials, robbed the merchants, and drove away the Zhangzhou assassin Hou Hongdu.

古文：朝廷甫罢兵，不能讨，即诏检校工部尚书，充本军节度使。
现代文：朝廷刚解散了军队，不能讨伐他，就下诏任命他为检校工部尚书、武宁军节度使。
English: As soon as the imperial court disbanded the army and was unable to fight against him, it issued an edict appointing him as the inspector of the school inspection department and the festival envoy of the Wu Ning army.

古文：智兴由是揫索财赂，交权幸以贾虚名，用度不足，始税泗口以佐军须。
现代文：王智兴从此搜刮钱财，交结权贵幸臣来沽名钓誉，开支不够，开始在泗口收税来帮助军费开支。
English: Wang Zhixing scrounged for money from this point on, and began to collect taxes in Hekou to help pay for military expenses.

古文：李騕攻宋州，智兴悉锐师出宋西鄙，破之漳口。
现代文：李宀介进攻宋州，王智兴率全部精兵进军宋州西边，在漳口打败了他。
English: Li Bingkai attacked Songzhou, Wang Zhixing led all the elite soldiers to march into the west of Songzhou and defeated him in Hekou.

古文：騕平，加检校尚书左仆射。
现代文：他被讨平后，王智兴升任检校尚书左仆射。
English: After he was leveled, Wang Zhixing was promoted to the post of school inspector.

古文：李同捷以沧德叛，智兴请悉师三万赍五月粮讨贼，诏拜检校司徒、同中书门下平章事、沧德行营招抚使。
现代文：李同捷占据沧德反叛，王智兴请求率全部三万军队带五个月粮食去讨伐，有诏任命他为检校司徒、同中书门下平章事、沧德行营招抚使。
English: Li Tongjie occupied Cangde rebellion, Wang Zhixing requested the rate of all thirty thousand troops to bring five months of grain to the crusade, there was an edict appointed him as a school inspector, a student of the same school, and an envoy of the Cangde campaign.

古文：既战，降其将十辈、锐士三千，遂拔棣州。
现代文：接战后，招降了敌将十人、精兵三千，于是攻占了棣州。
English: After the engagement, ten enemy generals and three thousand elite soldiers were recruited and surrendered, thus capturing Zhangzhou.

古文：诸将闻，战愈力，遂有功。
现代文：众将听说了，作战更加卖力，就讨平了叛贼。
English: When the generals heard of this, they fought harder and defeated the rebels.

古文：入朝，燕麟德殿，赐予备厚。
现代文：后入京朝拜，皇帝赐宴麟德殿，赏赐丰厚。
English: After entering Beijing to pay homage, the emperor gave Lin De Dian a banquet and rewarded him handsomely.

古文：册拜太傅，封雁门郡王，进兼侍中。
现代文：封他担任太傅、雁门郡王，兼任侍中。
English: He was appointed Taifu, the king of Ganmen County, and also served as a chamberlain.

古文：改忠武、河中、宣武三节度。
现代文：曾调任忠武、河中、宣武三处节度使。
English: He was transferred to serve as the chief envoy to the three festivals in Zhongwu, Hechu, and Xuanwu.

古文：卒，年七十九，赠太尉。
现代文：后去世了，享年七十九岁，赠官太尉。
English: He later passed away at the age of seventy-nine, having been awarded the rank of Second Lieutenant.

古文：子九人，晏平、宰知名。
现代文：他有九个儿子，王晏平、王宰有名气。
English: He had nine sons, including the famous Wang Bingping and Wang Zai.

古文：晏平幼从父军，以讨同捷功，检校右散骑常侍、朔方灵盐节度使。
现代文：王晏平年轻时跟父亲从军，因讨伐李同捷的功劳，任检校右散骑常侍，朔方、灵盐节度使。
English: Wang Yuping joined the army with his father when he was young. Due to his efforts in fighting against Li Tongjie, he was appointed as a regular attendant of the right horseback of the inspection school, and an envoy of the Shuo Fang and Lingyan Festival.

古文：父丧，擅取马四百、兵械七千自卫归洛阳。
现代文：父亲去世，他擅自调骑兵四百人、步兵七千人保护自己回到洛阳。
English: When his father died, he sent four hundred cavalry and seven thousand infantry to Luoyang to protect himself.

古文：御史劾之，有诏流康州，不即行，阴求援于河北三镇。
现代文：御史弹劾他，皇帝下诏流放康州。他不立即上路，暗中向河北三处藩镇求援。
English: History impeached him, and the emperor issued an edict to exile him to Kangzhou. He did not immediately go on the road, but secretly asked for help from three towns in Hebei.

古文：三镇表其困，改抚州司马。
现代文：三位节度使上表求情，改任抚州司马。
English: The three governors pleaded for mercy and were transferred to the post of Fuzhou Sima.

古文：给事中韦温、薛廷老、卢弘宣等还诏不敢下，改永州司户参军。
现代文：给事中韦温、薛廷老、卢弘宣等人退还诏书不愿交办，又改任永州司户参军。
English: During the incident, Wei Wen, Xue Ting Lao, Lu Hongxuan and others returned the imperial rescript and did not want to be assigned, and they were reappointed as Yongzhou stewards to join the army.

古文：温固执，文宗谕而止。
现代文：韦温坚持不让，文宗开导后他才答应了。
English: Wei Wen insisted, but he only agreed after the enlightenment of Emperor Wenzong.

古文：晏宰，后去 晏 ，独名宰。
现代文：王晏宰后来去掉 晏 字，单名叫宰。
English: Wang Xizai later removed the  character and was simply called Zai.

古文：少拳果，长隶神策军。
现代文：他年轻时有勇力、果断，年长后隶属神策军。
English: When he was young, he had courage and decisiveness. When he was older, he was a member of the Shinsaku army.

古文：甘露之变，以功兼御史大夫，为光州刺史。有美政，观察使段文昌荐之朝，除盐州刺史。
现代文：甘露事变，他因功任光州刺史兼御史大夫。有好政绩，观察使段文昌在朝廷推荐他，就任命他为盐州刺史。
English: In the Kamloops Incident, he was appointed as the Gwangju chief historian and chief historian due to his achievements. He had a good political record, and Duan Wenchang recommended him to the imperial court, and he was appointed as the Gwangju chief historian.

古文：持法严，人不甚便。
现代文：他执行法纪严格，人们认为不方便。
English: He enforces strict discipline, which people find inconvenient.

古文：累擢邠宁庆节度使。回鹘平，徙忠武军。
现代文：他多次升官后任、宁、庆州节度使，回纥被讨平后，调任忠武军节度使。
English: He was promoted many times to the post of deputy, Ning and Gyeongju festival envoy, and was transferred to the post of loyal military festival envoy after Hui Ye was defeated.

古文：讨刘稹也，诏宰以兵出魏博，趋磁州。
现代文：讨伐刘稹时，有诏命王宰率军从魏博进兵，进攻磁州。
English: When Liu Bei was being subdued, Wang Zai led an army from Weibo to attack Magnetized Prefecture.

古文：当是时，何弘敬阴首鼠，闻宰至，大惧，即引军济漳水。
现代文：那时候，何弘敬暗中犹豫，听说王宰来了，很害怕，马上率兵渡过了漳水。
English: At that time, He Hongjing hesitated in secret, heard that Wang Zai was coming, was very afraid, and immediately led the army across the Surabaya.

古文：宰相李德裕建言： 河阳兵寡，以忠武为援，既以捍洛，则并制魏博。 
现代文：宰相李德裕建议说 ：河阳兵少，应用忠武军做援军，既保卫了洛阳，又牵制了魏博。 
English: Prime Minister Li Deyu suggested, "Hayang has fewer soldiers, so we should use loyal troops as reinforcements. This will not only protect Luoyang, but also contain Weibo."

古文：遂诏宰以兵五千椎锋，兼统河阳行营。
现代文：于是下诏王宰率五千军队任先锋，兼管河阳行营。
English: As a result, Wang Zai led five thousand troops as the vanguard, and was also in charge of the Kheyang campaign.

古文：进取天井关，贼党离沮。
现代文：他进军占领了天井关，叛贼分裂、害怕了。
English: He marched in and seized Ceiling Pass, and the rebels were divided and afraid.

古文：德裕以宰乘破竹势不遂取泽州，以其子晏实守磁，为顾望计，帝有诏切责。
现代文：李德裕认为王宰不乘破竹之势立即攻占泽州，却派他儿子王晏实据守磁州，是打算观望，皇帝下诏责备他。
English: Li Deyu thought that Wang Zai would not take advantage of the situation to immediately capture Zezhou, but he sent his son Wang Jinshi to defend Magizhou, intending to wait and see. The emperor issued a decree to reproach him.

古文：宰惧，急攻陵川，破贼石会关，进攻泽州。
现代文：他害怕了，拼命进攻陵川，在石会关打败了叛军，又进军攻打泽州。
English: Afraid, he desperately attacked Lingchuan, defeated the rebels at Shikheiguan, and then marched to attack Zezhou.

古文：其将郭谊杀稹降。
现代文：刘稹的部将郭谊杀了刘稹投降了。
English: Liu Ye's subordinate, Guo Yi, killed Liu Ye and surrendered.

古文：宰传稹首京师，遂节度太原。
现代文：王宰将刘稹的头用传车送到京城，于是任命他为太原节度使。
English: Wang Zai sent Liu Yao's head to Beijing by truck, and then appointed him as Taiyuan's ceremonial envoy.

古文：宣宗初，入朝，厚结权幸求宰相，周墀劾之，乃还军。
现代文：宣宗初年，他进京朝拜，用厚礼结交权贵幸臣谋求任宰相，周墀弹劾他，他就回到了军中。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xuanzong's reign, he went to Beijing to pay homage to the emperor. He used the occasion to make friends with powerful and honorable vassals to seek the post of prime minister. Zhou Enlai impeached him, and he returned to the army.

古文：吐蕃引党项、回鹘寇河西，诏统代北诸军进击。
现代文：吐蕃率领党项、回纥进犯河西，有诏命他率代北各军进攻。
English: Tubo led the party and Hui into the west of the river, and was ordered by the emperor to attack on behalf of the northern armies.

古文：以疾不任事，徙河阳。
现代文：他因病不能任职，被调到河阳。
English: He was unable to take up his post due to illness, and was transferred to Heyang.

古文：罢为太子少保，分司东都。
现代文：又贬任太子少保，分管洛阳分署。
English: He was also relegated to the position of the Prince's Junior Security Officer, in charge of the Luoyang branch.

古文：进少傅，卒。
现代文：后升任少傅，去世了。
English: He was later promoted to sous-chef and passed away.

古文：晏实幼机警，智兴自养之，故名与诸父齿。
现代文：王晏实年轻时机智敏锐，王智兴自己抚养他，因此他的名字和父辈同辈分。
English: Wang Jinshi was young and smart. Wang Zhixing raised him by himself, so his name is different from that of his parents and peers.

古文：稹平，擢淄州刺史，终天雄节度使。
现代文：刘稹被讨平后，他升任淄州刺史，后来官当到天雄节度使。
English: After Liu Bei was subdued, he was promoted to be the governor of Zhangzhou, and later he became the official envoy to the Tianxiong Festival.

