古文：田先生穆将符房建萧洞玄
现代文：田先生穆将符房建萧洞玄
English: Mr. Tian Mu will build a house for Xiao Dong Xuan

古文：田先生
现代文：田先生
English: Mr. Tian

古文：田先生者，九华洞中大仙也。元和中，隐于饶州鄱亭村，作小学以教村童十数人，人不知其神仙矣。
现代文：田先生，是九华洞中的大仙，唐宪宗元和年间，隐居在饶州鄱亭村，办小学，教十几个村中的小孩，人们都不知道他是神仙。
English: Mr. Tian is the Great Immortal in Jihua Cave. During the Tang Dynasty, he lived in seclusion in the village of Jingting in Raozhou, running an elementary school and teaching more than a dozen children in the village. People did not know that he was an immortal.

古文：饶州牧齐推，嫁女与进士李生，数月而孕。
现代文：饶州的州牧齐推，把女儿嫁给了进士李生，几个月后就怀孕了。
English: Raozhou's Zhumu Qi pushed her daughter to marry the conscript Li Sheng, and she became pregnant a few months later.

古文：李生赴举长安，其孕妇将产于州之后堂，梦鬼神责其腥秽，斥逐之。
现代文：李生奔赴长安应试。那个孕妇将要在州衙的后堂生产，夜里梦见鬼神责备她腥秽，并且斥责她，赶她搬走。
English: Li Sheng rushed to Chang'an to take the exam. The pregnant woman was going to give birth in the backyard of the county seat. In the night, she dreamed that the ghosts and gods reproached her for being dirty, and scolded her and drove her away.

古文：推常不信鬼神，不敢言，未暇移居，既产为鬼所恶害，耳鼻流血而卒，殡于官道侧，以俟罢郡迁之北归。
现代文：因为齐推平常不信鬼神，孕妇不敢说，没有搬走，生产完了被恶鬼所害，耳鼻流血死去，埋葬在官道旁边，以等待郡职满期，把它迁回北方去。
English: Because Qidul generally did not believe in ghosts and gods, pregnant women did not dare to say that they had not moved away, and after giving birth, they were harmed by evil spirits, died with bleeding ears and noses, and were buried next to the official road to wait for the county post to expire and move it back to the north.

古文：明年，李生下第归饶，日晚，于野中见其妻，诉以鬼神所害之事，乃曰： 可诣鄱亭村学中，告田先生，求其神力，或可再生耳。 
现代文：第二年，李生落第返回饶州，天晚了，在荒野中看见他的妻子，妻子向他诉说了被鬼神害死的事情经过，于是说： 可以到鄱亭村的村学中去，告诉田先生，请求他的神力，或许可以再生。 
English: The following year, Li Shengludi returned to Raozhou. It was late in the day, and he saw his wife in the wilderness. His wife told him the story of how she was killed by ghosts and gods, and then said, "You can go to the village school in Fengting Village, tell Mr. Tian, ask for his divine power, and perhaps you can be reborn."

古文：李如其言，诣村学见先生，膝行而前，首体投地，哀告其事，愿大仙哀而救之。
现代文：李生按照她的话做了，到村学中去见田先生，跪在地上爬到田先生跟前，五体投地，哀告他的妻子被害的事。希望大仙哀怜，并救一救他的妻子。
English: Li Sheng did what she said, went to the village middle school to see Mr. Tian, knelt on the ground and crawled to Mr. Tian, fell to the ground, and lamented the death of his wife. He hoped that the Great Sage would have pity on him and save his wife.

古文：先生初亦坚拒。李叩告不已，涕泗滂沱，自早及夜，终不就坐。
现代文：田先生最初坚决拒绝，但是李生叩拜请求不止，眼泪鼻涕如同雨下，从早到晚始终不就坐。
English: Mr. Tian initially resolutely refused, but Li Sheng begged and pleaded, tears and snot fell like rain, and he never sat down from morning to night.

古文：学徒既散，先生曰： 诚恳如此，吾亦何所隐耶。
现代文：学生已经散了，田先生说： 你这么诚恳，我又有什么隐瞒的呢？
English: When the students had dispersed, Mr. Tian said: You are so sincere, what do I have to hide?

古文：但不早相告，屋舍已坏矣，诚为作一处置。 
现代文：只是没有早点告诉我，你妻子的躯体已经坏了，确实得给它作一下处置。 
English: It's just that you didn't tell me sooner that your wife's body was broken and really needed to be fixed.

古文：即从舍出百余步桑林中，夜已昏瞑，忽光明如昼，化为大府崇门，仪卫森列。先生宝冠紫帔，据案而坐，拟于王者，乃传声呼地界。
现代文：说完，马上从屋里出来到一百多步以外的桑林中，天色已经昏暗，忽然光明得像白天一样，变化成为大府高门，仪仗侍卫森严排列，田先生宝冠紫帔，按照桌案而坐，类似于王者。
English: Having said that, he immediately came out of the house to the mulberry grove more than a hundred paces away. The sky was already dark, and suddenly it was as bright as day. It changed into a large high gate, with guards of honor standing in a strict line. Mr. Tian Bao Guan Zijuan sat according to the table plan, resembling a king.

古文：俄有十余队，各拥百余骑，奔走而至，皆长丈余。
现代文：于是传声招唤地界，一会儿，有十多队人马，各拥有一百多骑，奔跑而来，他们的身高都有一丈多。
English: Then a voice called out to the land, and in a moment, more than ten teams of men and horses, each with more than a hundred riders, came running, all of them more than a metre tall.

古文：谒者呼名通入曰： 庐山江滨彭蠡等神到。 
现代文：报告的人叫着自己名字通报进去说： 庐山江滨彭蠡等神到！ 
English: The person giving the report called out his own name, announced himself and said: 山江滨彭等神到!

古文：先生曰： 刺史女因产为暴鬼所杀事，闻之何不申理？ 
现代文：田先生问诸位神说： 刺史的女儿因为生产被暴鬼所杀的事，听说了为什么不替受屈的人申辩，以求昭雪。 
English: Mr. Tian asked the gods, "I heard that Tashi's daughter was killed by a demon for giving birth. Why didn't you plead on behalf of those who suffered, in order to atone?

古文：对曰： 狱讼无主，未果发谪。
现代文：回答说： 诉讼案件没有主人，还没有发落。
English: He replied: "The lawsuit has no owner and has not yet been filed.

古文：今贼是鄱阳王吴芮，刺史宅是其所居，怒其生产腥秽，遂肆凶暴；寻又擒吴芮，牒天曹而诛戮之。勘云： 李氏妻算命尚有三十二年，合生二男三女。  
现代文：现在已知贼是鄱阳王吴芮，刺史的住宅是他的居所，气不过那个妇人生产腥秽，就施行凶暴。不久又擒住吴芮，上报天曹后就杀了他，判词说，李生妻子寿命还有三十二年，应当生二男三女。 
English: It is now known that the thief was Wu Yao, the King of Shenyang, and that the house where the stabbing took place was his residence. The woman was so angry that she had produced filth that she became violent. She soon captured Wu Yao and killed him after reporting it to Tian Cao. The verdict said that Li Sheng's wife still had thirty-two years to live and should have two sons and three daughters.

古文：先生曰： 屋舍已坏如何？ 
现代文：田先生说： 她的躯体已坏怎么办？ 
English: Mr. Tian said, "What if her body is already bad?

古文：有一老吏曰： 昔东晋邺下，有一人误死，屋宅已坏，又合还生，与此事同。
现代文：有一个老吏说： 过去东晋邺下，有一个误死，躯体已经坏了，又应当还生，与这件事相同。
English: An old official said: In the past, under the reign of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, there was a case of accidental death. The body had been destroyed, but it should be revived, which is the same as this case.

古文：其时葛仙君断令具魂为身，与本无异，但寿尽之日无形尔。
现代文：那时葛仙君判断：使魂魄凝聚为躯体，和原来没有区别，只是寿尽再死去时尸体也同时消失。
English: At that time, Ge Xianjun judged that there was no difference between condensing the soul into a body and the original, but when the soul died, the body also disappeared.

古文：先生许之，即只追李妻魂魄，合为一体，以神胶涂之，大王发遣却生，即便生矣。 
现代文：若田先生允许这样做，马上追索李妻魂魄，合成一体，用神胶涂抹，大王发放派遣她还生，立即就活了。 
English: Mr. Wakata allowed him to do so, and he immediately retrieved his wife's soul, synthesized it into one, smeared it with divine glue, and sent her back to life. She immediately came back to life.

古文：见有七八女人，与李妻相似，吏引而至，推而合之，有药如稀餲，以涂其身。
现代文：又看见有七八个女人，和李生妻子相似，由官吏领来，把他们推在一起，合为一人。有药象稀餲一样，用它涂抹那个合成的躯体。
English: He also saw seven or eight women who resembled Li Shengmao's wife, who were brought by officials and pushed together to form one person. There was a medicine like a thistle, which was used to smear the synthetic body.

古文：顷刻官吏皆散，李生及妻田先生在桑林间。
现代文：不一会儿，官吏都散了。李生和他的妻子以及田先生都在桑林间。
English: Soon after, the officials dispersed. Li Sheng, his wife, and Mr. Tian were all in the mulberry grove.

古文：李生夫妻恳谢之。
现代文：李生夫妻诚恳地拜谢田先生。
English: Mr. and Mrs. Li Sheng sincerely worship Mr. Xie Tian.

古文：先生曰： 但云自得再生，勿多言也。 
现代文：田先生说： 你们只说自己获得再生，不要多说别的。 
English: Mr. Tian said, "You only say that you have been reborn, don't say anything else.

古文：遂失先生所在。
现代文：随后，田先生就消失了。
English: Mr. Tian then disappeared.

古文：李与妻还家。
现代文：李生和妻子还家。
English: Li Sheng and his wife returned home.

古文：其后年寿所生男女，皆如所言。
现代文：从那以后，李生妻子的年寿和所生男女，都像所说的那样。
English: Since then, the longevity of Li's wife and the men and women he has fathered have all been as described.

古文：穆将符
现代文：穆将符
English: Mu Zhengfu

古文：穆将符者。唐给事中仁裕之侄也。
现代文：穆将符，是唐给事中仁裕的侄儿。
English: Mu Zhengfu is the nephew of Renyu who was given to Tang Dynasty.

古文：幼而好学，不慕声利，不矰世禄，而深入玄关，纵逸自放，不知师匠何人，已得吐纳内修之道。
现代文：幼年的时候，非常好学，不羡慕名声和金钱，不谋求贵族世代享受奉禄，却深入入道之门，自己恣纵放荡，不知道他的师傅是什么人。他已经获得了吐纳内修的道术。
English: When he was young, he was a very good student, he did not envy fame and money, he did not seek to enjoy the benefits of the aristocratic generation, but he went deep into the door of initiation, he indulged in debauchery, he did not know who his master was.

古文：好饮酒，高闲傲睨，人莫能测之。
现代文：他喜好饮酒，高傲清闲，看不起一切，人们不能猜度他。
English: He likes to drink, is arrogant and idle, despises everything, and people can't figure him out.

古文：长安东市酒肆姚生，与其友善，时往来其家，则饮酒话道，弥日累夕。
现代文：长安东市酒铺的姚生，和他友好亲善，时常到他家里来，就是饮酒谈论道术，日积月累，经过了很长时间。
English: Yao Sheng, a liquor store owner in East Chang'an, was friendly with him and often came to his home to drink and talk about Taoism. It took a long time.

古文：姚忽暴卒，举家惶骇，使人奔访将符。
现代文：有一天，姚生突然死了，全家惶恐惊骇，派人飞奔到穆家去找将符。
English: One day, Yao Sheng suddenly died, the whole family panicked and sent people running to Mu's house to find the match.

古文：际夜方至，姚已奄然，无复喘息。
现代文：接近夜晚的时候穆将符才来到，姚生已经僵卧，不再喘气。
English: It was close to night when Mu Zhengfu arrived. Yao Sheng was already lying motionless, no longer gasping for breath.

古文：将符方醉，其家人哀号告之。
现代文：穆将符正在大醉，姚生家里的人哀号告诉他姚生的死讯。
English: Mu Zhengfu was getting drunk. People in Yao Sheng's family cried and told him the news of Yao Sheng's death.

古文：笑曰： 可救也，无遽忧怖。 遂解衣与姚同衾而卧。
现代文：穆将符笑着说： 可以救活，你们不要恐惧忧虑，于是解开衣服和姚生合盖同一条被子躺在床上。
English: Mu Zhengfu said with a smile: You can save his life, don't be afraid, so he undid his clothes and lay down on the bed with Yao Sheng under the same quilt.

古文：戒其家，令作人参汤稀粥以候之。勿得悲泣惊呼，待唤即应，灭烛而寝。
现代文：并告戒他的家人，让他们作人参汤和稀粥等候，不得悲泣惊呼，等待呼唤立即答应。说完吹灭蜡烛就睡觉了。
English: He also warned his family to make ginseng soup and gruel and wait, not to cry out in anguish, and to answer the call immediately. After saying this, he blew out the candle and went to sleep.

古文：悄然中夜，方命烛视之，姚已起坐矣。
现代文：悄悄地一直到半夜，方才让他们点着蜡烛看姚生，见姚生已经起来坐着了。
English: Quietly until midnight, only then did they light a candle to see Yao Sheng. They saw that Yao Sheng was already up and sitting.

古文：少以人参汤注之，良久，乃以粥助之。
现代文：先给他灌了少量的人参汤，过了好久，这才给他喝稀粥。
English: First, he was given a small amount of ginseng soup. After a long time, he was given gruel.

古文：乃能言曰： 适为黄衣使者三四人，以马载去，西行甚速，道途蒙昧，如微月之中。
现代文：这样，姚生才能说话，他说： 刚才被三四个黄衣使者用马载去，往西走得很快，道路生疏昏暗，好象是在微弱的月光之中。
English: This is how Yao Sheng was able to speak. He said: "Just now, I was carried by three or four yellow-clad messengers on horseback. I was going west very fast. The road was unfamiliar and dim, as if in the faint moonlight.

古文：逡巡，有赤色光，如日出之状，照其行路。 
现代文：不一会儿，有红色的光出现，象日出的样子，照他们走路。 
English: Soon, a red light appeared, like a sunrise, as they walked.

古文：黄衣者促辔尤急，即闻传呼云： 太乙有敕，使天兵遣回。 
现代文：黄衣使者急促地赶着马，这时就听传呼说： 太乙有命令，让天兵遣送回去。 
English: The yellow-clothed messenger hurriedly set out on his horse, at which time he heard the herald say: "There is an order for the heavenly army to be sent back.

古文：乃顾见骑乘旌旗，森然成列。
现代文：就看见骑乘旌旗，威武森严，排列成行。
English: They saw the riders with their banners and swords lined up in rows.

古文：所乘马及黄衣者，奔迸不知所之。
现代文：我所乘坐的马和黄衣使者，也不知道奔逃走散到什么地方去了。
English: I don't know where the horse and the yellow-clothed messenger I rode in went.

古文：别有朱衣一人，引而归之。
现代文：另有一个穿着红色衣服的人，引导我回来。 
English: Another man, dressed in red, guided me back.

古文：自是姚生平复如初。将符遁去，不知所适。
现代文：从这以后，姚生恢复如初，穆将符隐去，不知到什么地方去了。
English: Since then, Yao Sheng recovered as before, Mu Zhengfu disappeared, and I don't know where he went.

古文：罗浮轩辕先生，有道之士也。大中年，徵入关，至京，即使人访之，将符以遁去。
现代文：罗浮轩辕先生，是个有道之士，大中年间，征召入关，到了京城，就派人寻访穆将符。
English: Mr. Luo Fu Xuan Qi was a man of virtue. During his college and junior high school years, he was conscripted into the Guan, and when he arrived in Beijing, he sent someone to search for the Mu Zhengfu.

古文：先生曰： 穆处士隐仙者也，名位列于九清之上矣。勿以其嗜酒昏醉为短，真和光混俗尔。 
现代文：穆将符因为隐去了，没有找到。轩辕先生说： 穆处士是一位隐仙，名位列在九清之上，不要认为他好酒昏醉是短处，真是和光混俗而已。 
English: Mr. Xuan Zhuang said: Mr. Mu is a Hidden Immortal, and his rank ranks higher than that of the Nine Immortals. Don't think that his drunkenness is a shortcoming, it's just a mixture of light and vulgarity.

古文：淮浙间颇显其异迹，接于闻见，若左元放、葛孝先之流也。房建
现代文：淮、浙一带流传他奇异事迹。接触到的所见所闻说明，他像左元放、葛孝先之流。房建
English: Around Huaihai and Zhejiang, his strange deeds have been passed down. What we have seen and heard indicates that he is like Zuo Yuanfang and Ge Xiaosheng.

古文：清河公房建，居于含山郡，性尚奇，好玄元之教。
现代文：清河公房建，居住在含山郡，性情崇尚奇异，信奉道教。
English: He was born in a public house in Qinghe and lives in Hanshan County. He has a strange temperament and believes in Taoism.

古文：常从道士授六甲符及九章真箓，积二十年。
现代文：经常有道士授给他六甲符和九章真箓，累计有二十年。
English: Taoists often gave him the six-pointed star and the nine-pointed star, for a total of twenty years.

古文：后南游衡山，遇一道士，风骨明秀，与建语，述上清仙都及蓬莱方丈灵异之事，一一皆若涉历。
现代文：后来他往南去游衡山，在那里遇见一个道士，品格明朗出众。他和房建谈话，述说上清仙都和蓬莱方丈的灵验奇异的事情，一一都象他亲身经历过一样。
English: Later, he went to the south to visit Hengshan Mountain, where he met a Taoist monk with an outstanding character. He talked with Fang Jian and described the wonderful and strange things of Shang Qing Xiantu and Penglai abbot, all of which were just as he had experienced.

古文：建奇之。
现代文：房建感到这个道士很奇异。
English: Fang Jian felt that this Taoist was very strange.

古文：后旬余，建自衡山适南海。
现代文：过了十多天，房建要从衡山到南海去。
English: After more than ten days, the house builder had to go from Hengshan to Nanhai.

古文：道士谓建曰： 吾尝客于南海，迨今十年矣，将有寺官李侯者护其军。
现代文：那个道士对房建说： 我曾经客居在南海，到现在已经十年了。当时有个寺官叫李侯的做南海护军。
English: The Taoist said to Fang Jian: I used to live in Nanhai for ten years. At that time, there was a temple official named Li Hou who was a South Sea escort.

古文：李侯以玉簪遗我。我以簪赐君，君宜宝之。 
现代文：李侯把玉簪赠送给我，我把这玉簪赏赐给你，你应当把它当作宝物。 
English: Li Hou gave me the Jade Scepter as a gift. I give you this Jade Scepter as a reward. You should treat it as a treasure.

古文：建得其簪，喜且甚。因而别去。
现代文：房建得到那个玉簪，非常高兴，于是就和道士告别去南海。
English: Fang Jian was very happy to get the jade bowl, so he said goodbye to the Taoist and went to the South China Sea.

古文：是岁秋，建至南海。
现代文：这年的秋天，房建到了南海。
English: In the autumn of this year, the house was built in the South China Sea.

古文：尝一日独游开元观。
现代文：曾有一天，房建独自游览开元观。
English: Once upon a time, a house builder went on a solo tour of the Kaigenkan.

古文：观之北轩，有砖涂为真人状者二焉，其位于东者左玄真人，及视左玄之状，果衡山所遇道士也，奇而叹者且久；及睹左玄之冠，已亡簪矣。
现代文：观的北边长廊，有涂饰成真人形状的两个砖雕。那位于东侧的是左玄真人。等到看左玄的形状，果真就是在衡山所遇到的那个道士。房建惊奇赞叹了许久。等到看左玄的帽子，簪已经没有了。
English: On the north side of the promenade, there are two brick sculptures painted in the shape of a real person. The one on the east side is Zuo Xuan's real person. When you look at Zuo Xuan's shape, it's really the Taoist that Hengshan met. I marveled at the building for a long time. When you look at Zuo Xuan's hat, the brim is gone.

古文：时有观居道士数辈在焉，建具以事言次，出玉簪示之。
现代文：当时有在观里居住的道士几人在那里，房建一五一十地把衡山的事对他们说了，并把玉簪拿出来给他们看。
English: At that time, there were several Taoists who lived in Guanzhong Village. He told them about Hengshan in detail, and showed them the Jade Scepter.

古文：道士惊曰： 往岁有寺官李侯。护兵于南海。尝以二玉簪饰左右真人，迨今且十年。
现代文：道士们惊奇地说： 往年有寺官李侯，在南海做护军，曾拿两支玉簪装饰左右真人，到现在快要十年了。
English: The moralists said in surprise: In previous years, there was a temple official, Li Hou, who served as a military escort in the South China Sea, and who used to take two jade bracelets to decorate his right and left sides. Now, it has been almost ten years.

古文：其左玄之簪，亡之十年，今君所获果是焉。 
现代文：那左玄的玉簪，丢失了也快十年了。现在你所获得的玉簪果然是那个。 
English: It's been almost ten years since Zuo Xuan's jade scepter was lost. Now the jade scepter you have gained is indeed the one.

古文：建奇之，因以玉簪归道士。
现代文：房建对此很奇怪，于是把玉簪归还给道士了。
English: Fang Jian was puzzled by this, so he returned the jade bowl to the Taoist.

古文：萧洞玄
现代文：萧洞玄
English: Xiao Dongxuan

古文：王屋灵都观道士萧洞玄，志心学炼神丹，积数年，卒无所就。
现代文：王屋山灵都观道士萧洞玄，立志学习烧炼神丹。累积几年，最终没有什么成就。
English: Wangyashan Lingdu contemplated the Taoist monk Xiao Dongxuan, determined to learn how to distill Shintan. After several years of accumulation, there were no achievements in the end.

古文：无何，遇神人授以大还秘诀曰： 法尽此耳；然更须得一同心者，相为表里，然后可成。
现代文：不久，遇到一个神人授给他大还秘诀说： 法术全部在这了。然而，再需得到一个志同道合的人，互为表里，然后才可以成功，何不寻求呢？ 
English: Not long after, he met a godman who gave him a great secret and said: "The magic is all here. However, if you need to get a like-minded person, who is like-minded, and then you can succeed, why not seek it?

古文：盍求诸乎？ 洞玄遂周游天下，历五岳四渎，名山异境，都城聚落，人迹所辏，罔不毕至，经十余年，不得其人。
现代文：萧洞玄于是周游天下，经过五岳四渎，名山异境，都城村落，凡是人迹所聚集的地方，没有不到的。经过十多年，仍然没有得到那个志同道合的人。
English: Xiao Dongxuan then traveled around the world, passing through five mountains and four deserts, famous mountains and foreign lands, capital cities and villages, and all the places where people gathered. After more than ten years, he still did not get the like-minded person.

古文：至贞元中，洞玄自浙东抵扬州，至庱亭埭，维舟于逆旅主人。
现代文：到贞元年间，萧洞玄从浙东到扬州去。走到庱亭埭，把船拴在旅馆主人那里。
English: In the first year of Zhengyuan, Xiao Dongxuan went from East Zhejiang to Yangzhou. He walked to the pavilion and anchored the boat to the hotel owner.

古文：于时舳舻万艘，隘于河次。堰开争路，上下众船，相轧者移时，舟人尽力挤之。
现代文：在当时是大船万艘，停泊在狭窄的河道中，等待前行，拦河坝开放，船都争路前行，上行和下行的众船相互倾轧的，历时不休，船家尽力拥挤前行。
English: At that time, there were tens of thousands of large ships, anchored in the narrow river channel, waiting to go forward, the barrage was open, the ships were competing for the way forward, the upstream and downstream ships were rolling against each other, and the boatmen tried their best to crowd forward.

古文：见一人船顿，蹙其右臂且折，观者为之寒栗，其人颜色不变，亦无呻吟之声，徐归船中，饮食自若。
现代文：萧洞玄看见一个人的船停顿下来，因为船挤了他的右臂，已经骨折。观看的人为他不寒而栗，但那个人脸不变色，也没有呻吟的声音，慢慢回到船中，饮食自若。
English: Xiao Dongxuan saw a man's boat stop, because the boat squeezed his right arm, which was already fractured. People watching shuddered for him, but the man's face did not change color, nor did he moan. He slowly returned to the boat and ate with confidence.

古文：洞玄深嗟异之，私喜曰： 此岂非天佑我乎。 
现代文：萧洞玄觉得这个人很奇异，赞叹不已。私自高兴地说： 这难道不是上天在扶助我吗？ 
English: Xiao Dongxuan thought that this person was very strange and was full of admiration. I said with pleasure: Isn't this heaven helping me?

古文：问其姓名，则曰终无为，因与交结，话道欣然，遂不相舍，即俱之王屋。
现代文：萧洞玄问他姓名。他就说： 终无为。 由此结识交往，谈论道术投机，都很高兴，谁也离不开谁了，就都到王屋山去。
English: Xiao Dongxuan asked him his name, and he said, "It's all in vain." They were very happy to get to know each other and talk about the speculation of Taoism. They couldn't leave each other, so they all went to Wangya Mountain.

古文：洞玄出还丹秘诀示之。无为相与揣摩。更终二三年，修行备至。
现代文：萧洞玄取出还丹秘诀给终无为看，终无为与他相互揣摩，经过二三年，修行得很全面，可以说是无微不至。
English: Xiao Dongxuan took out the secret of repaying the Dan to finally see, and finally guessed with him. After two or three years, the practice was very comprehensive, and it can be said to be perfect.

古文：洞玄谒无为曰： 将行道之夕，我当作法护持，君当谨守丹灶，但至五更无言，则携手上升矣。 
现代文：萧洞玄告诉终无为说： 将要行道的晚上，我掌管作法护持，你应当谨慎地守丹灶，只要到五更一直不说话，我们就携手上升了。 
English: Xiao Dongxuan told him that there was nothing he could do, saying, "In the evening before the procession, I am in charge of protecting the practice. You should be careful to guard the stove. As long as you don't speak until five o'clock, we will go up together."

古文：无为曰： 我虽无他术，至于忍断不言，君所知也。 
现代文：终无为说： 我虽然没有别的道术，至于抑制，做到绝对不说话，这是你知道的，我能够做到。 
English: Finally, he said, "Although I don't have any other techniques, as far as restraint is concerned, I can restrain myself from speaking at all, which you know I can do.

古文：遂十日设坛场，焚金炉，饰丹灶。
现代文：于是设十天坛场，点燃金炉，修整丹灶。
English: As a result, an altar was set up for ten days, a gold furnace was lit, and the stove was repaired.

古文：洞玄绕坛行道步虚。无为于药灶前，端拱而坐，心誓死不言。
现代文：行道那天晚上，萧洞玄绕坛行道步虚；终无为在药灶前面，端正拱手坐着，心里发誓，死也不说话。
English: That evening, Xiao Dongxuan walked around the altar and the aisle, but in the end, he could do nothing. In front of the medicinal stove, he sat with his arms folded, swearing in his heart that he would not speak until he died.

古文：一更后，忽见两道士自天而降，谓无为曰： 上帝使问尔，要成道否。 
现代文：一更以后，忽然看见两个道士从天而降，对终无为说： 天帝派我们来问你，要不要成道？ 
English: A moment later, he suddenly saw two Taoists descend from the sky and say to him: "The Heavenly Emperor has sent us to ask you, do you want to attain enlightenment?"

古文：无为不应。
现代文：终无为不答应。
English: In the end, he did not refuse.

古文：须臾，又见群仙，自称王乔、安期等。谓曰： 适来上帝使左右问尔所谓，何得不对？ 
现代文：过了一会儿，又看见一群神仙来了，自称是王乔、安期等，对终无为说： 刚才天帝派他的亲近的人来，问你所要说的，你为什么不回答？ 
English: After a while, he saw a group of immortals arrive, claiming to be Wang Qiao, An Ji, etc. He said to all of them, "Just now, the Heavenly Emperor sent someone close to him to ask you what you wanted to say. Why didn't you answer?

古文：无为亦不言。
现代文：终无为也不说。
English: In the end, nothing is done and nothing is said.

古文：有顷，见一女人，年可二八，容华端丽，音韵幽闲，绮罗缤纷，薰灼动地，盘旋良久，调戏无为。
现代文：过了一会儿，看见一个女人，年龄约十六岁左右，容貌端正美丽，说话声音幽雅娴静，衣服五彩缤纷，薰灼的香料味，感染周围处所。
English: After a while, I saw a woman, aged about sixteen, with a beautiful face, an elegant and quiet voice, colorful clothes, and a burning spice smell, infecting the surrounding area.

古文：无名亦不顾。俄然有虎狼猛兽十余种类，哮叫腾掷，张口向无为，无为亦不动。
现代文：她围绕终无为转了很久，然后去调戏终无为，终无为也不看她。忽然有虎狼猛兽十余种，奔腾咆哮，张着大口扑向终无为，终无为也不动。
English: For a long time, she revolved around the helpless, and then she went to tease the helpless, and the helpless would not look at her. Suddenly, there were more than ten kinds of tigers, wolves, and beasts of prey, rushing and roaring, opening their big mouths to pounce on the helpless, and the helpless would not move.

古文：有顷，见其祖考父母先亡眷属等，并在其前，谓曰： 汝见我，何得无言？ 
现代文：过了一会儿，看见他的祖父母等早已死去的亲人，并排站在他的前面，对他说： 你看见我们，为什么不说话？ 
English: After a while, he saw his grandparents and other long-dead relatives standing side by side in front of him and said to him: You see us, why don't you speak?

古文：无为涕泪交下，而终不言。
现代文：终无为涕泪交流，但始终不说话。
English: The exchange ended in tears, but they never spoke.

古文：俄见一夜叉，身长三丈，目如电赩，口赤如血，朱发植竿，锯牙钩爪，直冲无为。无为不动。
现代文：不久，见一个夜叉，身长三丈，目如闪电，口似血盆，红发直立，牙如锯齿，手爪如钩，一直冲向终无为，终无为不动。
English: Soon, I saw a nightingale, three-feet-tall, eyes like lightning, mouth like a blood basin, red hair standing upright, teeth like serrated teeth, hands like hooks, rushing all the way to the end of inaction, the end of inaction.

古文：既而有黄衫人，领二手力至，谓无为曰： 大王追，不愿行，但言其故即免。 
现代文：不久，有一个身穿黄衫的人，领两个手力来到，对终无为说： 大王追你，你如不愿意走，只要说明其中的原因，就可以免。 
English: Before long, a man in a yellow shirt arrived with two helpers and said to the lame one: "The Great King is chasing you. If you don't want to go, just explain the reason and you will be excused."

古文：无为不言。
现代文：终无为不说话。
English: In the end, all talk and no action.

古文：黄衫人即叱二手力可拽去。
现代文：穿黄衫的人就呼喝两个手力将他拽去。
English: The man in the yellow shirt shouts and uses two hands to drag him away.

古文：无名不得已而随之。
现代文：终无为不得已，只得跟随他们走，不一会儿，到了一所官府衙门，说是平等王的府衙。
English: In the end, I had no choice but to follow them. Soon, I arrived at the gate of a government office, which was said to be the residence of the king of equality.

古文：须臾至一府署，云是平等王，南面凭几，威仪甚严，厉声谓无为曰： 尔未合至此，若能一言自辨，即放尔回。 
现代文：平等王面南扶着桌案端坐，威仪甚严，厉声对终无为说： 你不应该到这里，如果能够说句话自己辨解，就放你回去。 
English: The king of equality sat with his face to the south, holding a desk, very dignified, and said sharply to the do-nothing: You shouldn't have come here. If you can say a word and explain it to yourself, you can go back.

古文：无为不对。
现代文：终无为不回答。
English: In the end, they did nothing and did not answer.

古文：平等王又令引向狱中，看诸受罪者，惨毒痛楚，万状千名。
现代文：平等王又命令人把终无为领进狱中，看众多的受罪的人，荼毒凄惨，苦不堪言，辗转反侧地折腾。
English: The king of equality also ordered people to take the helpless into prison, to see the many victims of crime, to see the misery, the suffering, and to toss and turn.

古文：既回，仍谓之曰： 尔若不言，便入此中矣。 
现代文：看完了回来，仍旧对终无为说： 你如果不说，便进入这些人当中去了。 
English: When he came back after watching it, he still said to the lame man, "If you don't speak, you will go among these people."

古文：无为心虽恐惧，终亦不言。
现代文：终无为心里虽然很恐惧，但始终不说话。
English: In the end, although he was very frightened, he did not speak.

古文：平等王曰： 即令别受生，不得放归本处。 
现代文：平等王说： 就让他到别处托生，不能放归本处。 
English: The Equality King said: Let him go somewhere else to give birth, he can't be returned to his place.

古文：无为自此心迷，寂无所知，俄然复觉，其身托生于长安贵人王氏家。
现代文：终无为从此心中迷惑，头脑空廓一无所知。突然又醒悟了，他的身子已经托生在长安贵人姓王的家中。
English: From then on, he was confused in his heart, and his mind knew nothing. Suddenly, he realized that his body had been born in the home of a dignitary named Wang in Chang'an.

古文：初在母胎，犹记宿誓不言；既生，相貌具足，唯不解啼。
现代文：初在母腹的时候，还记得以前发誓不说话，既而出生了，五官相貌都很好，只是不会啼哭。
English: When I was in my mother's womb, I remember swearing not to speak. I was born with all five of my facial features, but I couldn't cry.

古文：三日满月，其家大会亲宾，广张声乐，乳母抱儿出。
现代文：三朝后满月时，他家大会亲友宾朋，大张旗鼓，制造声势。
English: When the moon was full after the three dynasties, the relatives, friends and guests of his family made a big fuss and made a lot of noise.

古文：众中递相怜抚。
现代文：乳母抱着小儿出来，在众人中相互传递，爱怜抚摸。
English: The nanny comes out with the child in her arms, passes it among the crowd, and caresses it tenderly.

古文：父母相谓曰： 我儿他日必是贵人。 
现代文：父母相对说： 我儿他日一定是贵人。 
English: His parents said to each other: My son will be a great man one day.

古文：因名曰贵郎。
现代文：于是名叫贵郎。
English: That's how he got the name Kiro.

古文：聪慧日甚，祗不解啼。
现代文：贵郎一天比一天聪明有智慧，只是不会啼哭。
English: Kiro is getting smarter and wiser every day, but he can't cry.

古文：才及三岁便行，弱不好弄，至五六岁，虽不能言，所为雅有高致。
现代文：到三岁才会走，身体柔弱不愿意玩耍。到五六岁，虽然不能说话，但行为文雅高尚。
English: They don't walk until they are three years old, their bodies are weak and they don't want to play. By the age of five or six, although they can't speak, their behavior is gentle and noble.

古文：十岁操笔，即成文章。动静嬉游，必盈纸墨。
现代文：十岁拿笔就能写成文章，动静嬉戏，都用笔墨来表达。
English: A ten-year-old can write an article with a pen, and express movement and play with pen and ink.

古文：既及弱冠，仪形甚都，举止雍雍，可为人表；然自以喑痖，不肯入仕。
现代文：等到了二十岁左右，仪表形体非常漂亮优美举止雍容尔雅，可以作人的表帅。然而，自己认为喑痖，不肯进入仕途。
English: When he was about twenty years old, his appearance was very beautiful and his manners were graceful and elegant, and he could have been a watchmaker. However, he considered himself lazy and did not want to pursue a career.

古文：其家富比王室，金玉满堂。婢妾歌钟，极于奢侈。
现代文：他家的富有可以和王室相比，金玉满堂，婢妾成群，编钟歌舞，极其奢华。
English: His family's wealth can be compared to that of the royal family, a house full of gold and jewels, hordes of maidservants and concubines, chimes, songs and dances, and extreme luxury.

古文：年二十六，父母为之娶妻。妻亦豪家，又绝代姿容，工巧伎乐，无不妙绝。
现代文：贵郎二十六岁时，父母给他娶妻，妻子也是豪富之家的女儿，又有绝代姿容，女工技巧，音乐技艺，没有一样不奇妙高超。
English: At the age of twenty-six, Guiro's parents married him off to a wife who was also the daughter of a wealthy family. She had a once-in-a-generation figure, woman's skills as a worker, and superb musical skills.

古文：贵郎官名慎微，一生自矜快乐，娶妻一年，生一男，端敏惠黠，略无伦比。
现代文：贵郎的大名叫慎微，一生庄重快乐，娶妻一年，生一男孩，端正聪明温顺机灵，大概没有能和他匹敌的。
English: His great name was Shen Wei, and he lived a dignified and happy life. He had been married for one year and had a son. He was upright, intelligent, gentle, and resourceful. There was probably no one who could match him.

古文：慎微爱念，复过常情。
现代文：慎微对孩子的爱惜惦念，超过常情。
English: Careful to the child's love and miss, more than usual.

古文：一旦妻及慎微，俱在春庭游戏，庭中有盘石，可为十人之坐，妻抱其子在上，忽谓慎微曰： 观君于我，恩爱甚深，今日若不为我发言，便当扑杀君儿。 
现代文：一天，妻子及慎微，都在春天的庭院中游戏，庭院中有一盘石，可以作为十个人的座位，妻子抱着他的儿子在上面，忽然对慎微说： 看你对我，恩爱非常深，今天你如果不给我发话，就面对着摔死你的儿子。 
English: One day, his wife and Shen Wei were playing in the spring courtyard. There was a stone plate in the courtyard, which could be used as a seat for ten people. His wife was holding his son on top of it, and suddenly said to Shen Wei: Look at me, my love is very deep. If you don't speak to me today, you will face the death of your son.

古文：慎微争其子不胜，妻举手向石扑之，脑髓迸出，慎微痛惜抚膺，不觉失声惊骇，恍然而寤，则在丹灶之前。而向之盘石，乃丹灶也。
现代文：慎微争夺他的儿子没有争夺过来，妻子举起他儿子向盘石摔去，脑浆迸裂。慎微悲痛婉惜，顿足拍胸，不觉失声惊骇，恍然醒悟，是在丹灶的前面，他面向的盘石，就是丹灶。
English: His son did not come over, his wife lifted up his son and threw him against the rock, splitting his brain. She was a little sad, patted her chest, and suddenly lost her voice in shock, suddenly realizing that she was in front of the stove, and the rock he was facing was the stove.

古文：时洞玄坛上法事方毕，天欲晓矣。
现代文：当时萧洞玄坛上的法事将要完毕。
English: At that time, the legal proceedings on the Xiaodong Mausoleum were about to be completed.

古文：俄闻无为叹息之声，忽失丹灶所在，二人相与恸哭，即更炼心修行。后亦不知所终。
现代文：天要亮了，俄而听到终无为的叹息之声，忽然失去了丹灶，二人一起大哭。马上再炼心修行，后来，也不知所终。
English: The sun was about to rise, and suddenly they heard the sound of a sigh of utter helplessness. Suddenly, they lost their stove, and both of them burst into tears. They immediately resumed their cultivation practice, and later, they didn't know where they were going.

