古文：◎兵一
现代文：兵一
English: Soldier 1

古文：明以武功定天下，革元旧制，自京师达于郡县，皆立卫所。
现代文：明朝以武力平定全国，革除元朝的旧制度，从京城到郡县，都建立卫所。
English: The Ming Dynasty subdued the whole country by force, abolished the old system of the Yuan Dynasty, and established sanatoriums from Beijing to counties.

古文：外统之都司，内统于五军都督府，而上十二卫为天子亲军者不与焉。
现代文：地方的卫所由都司管辖，京城的卫所由五军都督府管辖，至于上十二卫是皇帝的随身卫兵，与它们没关系。
English: Local watchtowers are under the jurisdiction of the prefectural governor, and those in the capital are under the jurisdiction of the five military governors. As for the upper twelve watchtowers, they are the bodyguards of the emperor, and have nothing to do with them.

古文：征伐则命将充总兵官，调卫所军领之，既旋则将上所佩印，官军各回卫所。
现代文：打仗就任命将领担任总兵官，征调卫所的军队让他们带领；仗打完后就将领上交所佩带的官印，官军回到各自的卫所。
English: During the war, generals were appointed as chief military officers, and the troops of the recruiting and guarding stations were led by them; after the war was over, the generals received the official seal worn by the exchange, and the official troops returned to their respective guard stations.

古文：盖得唐府兵遗意。
现代文：大概得到了唐朝府兵制留下的意旨。
English: He probably got the intention left behind by the military system of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：文皇北迁，一遵太祖之制，然内臣观兵，履霜伊始。
现代文：明成祖向北迁都后，完全遵照明太祖时的制度，然而宦官监军，危险的征兆开始出现。
English: After Ming Chengzu moved the capital to the north, he fully complied with the system of the great-grandfather, however, the eunuch supervised the army, and the signs of danger began to appear.

古文：洪、宣以后，狃于治平，故未久而遂有土木之难。
现代文：洪熙、宣德以后，对太平安定习以为常而有所忽略，所以不久就发生了土木之难。
English: After Hongxi and Xuande, they took the peace and stability for granted and neglected it, so the civil engineering difficulties occurred soon.

古文：于谦创立团营，简精锐，一号令，兵将相习，其法颇善。
现代文：于谦创立团营，选拔精锐，统一号令，士兵与将领互相熟悉，他的方法比较好。
English: Yu Qian founded a regimental camp, selected the elite, unified orders, soldiers and generals were familiar with each other, and his method was better.

古文：宪、孝、武、世四朝，营制屡更，而威益不振。
现代文：宪宗、孝宗、武宗？世宗四朝，兵制屡屡更改，然而兵威渐渐不振。
English: During the four dynasties of Kenzong, Xiaozong, Wuzong and Shesong, the military system was repeatedly changed, but the military power gradually declined.

古文：卫所之兵疲于番上，京师之旅困于占役。
现代文：卫所的士兵因定期轮流到京城宿卫而疲惫，京城的军队因被调遣干分外杂务而困苦。
English: The soldiers of the garrison were tired because of the regular rotation to the capital city of Kyoto, and the troops in Kyoto were in trouble because they were assigned to do extra chores.

古文：驯至末造，尺籍久虚，行伍衰耗，流盗蜂起，海内土崩。
现代文：渐渐到了末世，军籍久已空虚，军队衰弱耗损，流窜的强盗纷纷起来作乱，全国土崩瓦解。
English: Gradually, in the last days, the military ranks have long been empty, the army is weak and worn out, the corrupt robbers have risen up to make trouble, and the whole country has collapsed.

古文：宦竖降于关门，禁军溃于城下，而国遂以亡矣。
现代文：宦官在关口城门投降，保卫京城的军队在城外被击溃，而国家于是就灭亡了。
English: The eunuchs surrendered at the gate of the city, the army defending the capital was defeated outside the city, and the country was destroyed.

古文：今取其一代规制之详，及有关于军政者，著于篇。
现代文：现在收集这一个朝代规章制度的详细材料，以及舆军政有关的情况，著录在本篇中。
English: Now, let's collect the detailed materials of the rules and regulations of this dynasty, as well as the situation related to the military and politics, and record them in this article.

古文：京营侍卫上直军四卫营
现代文：京营侍卫上直军四卫营
English: The guards of the Imperial Camp in Kyoto march up to the camp of the Imperial Guards in Shizuoka

古文：京军三大营，一曰五军，一曰三千，一曰神机。
现代文：京军有三大营，一个叫五军营，一个叫三千营，一个叫神机营。
English: The Beijing army has three major battalions, one called the Fifth Battalion, one called the Three Thousand Battalion, and one called the Divine Machine Battalion.

古文：其制皆备于永乐时。
现代文：它们的制度都在永乐年间完备。
English: Their systems were all completed in the Yongle era.

古文：初，太祖建统军元帅府，统诸路武勇，寻改大都督府。
现代文：最初，明太祖建立统军元帅府，统率各路士兵，不久改名大都督府。
English: At first, Ming Taizu established the United Army Marshal's Office, leading soldiers from all directions, and soon changed its name to the Grand Governor's Office.

古文：以兄子文正为大都督，节制中外诸军。
现代文：用哥哥的儿子朱文正任大都督，调度指挥朝廷、地方各路军队。
English: Zhu Wenzheng, the son of his elder brother, was appointed as the grand governor of the capital, and commanded the army of the imperial court and various local armies.

古文：京城内外置大小二场，分教四十八卫卒。
现代文：京城内外设置一大一小两个场，分别训练四十八卫的士兵。
English: Two fields, one large and one small, were set up inside and outside the capital to train the soldiers of the 48th Guards separately.

古文：已，又分前、后、中、左、右五军都督府。
现代文：后来，大都督府又分成前、后、中、左、右五军都督府。
English: Later, the great governor's office was divided into five military governor's offices: front, back, middle, left, and right.

古文：洪武四年，士卒之数，二十万七千八百有奇。
现代文：洪武四年，士兵的数目为二十万七千八百多人。
English: In the fourth year of Hongwu, the number of soldiers increased to more than 27800.

古文：成祖增京卫为七十二。
现代文：成祖将京军卫增加到七十二个。
English: Chengzu increased the number of Beijing military guards to seventy-two.

古文：又分步骑军为中军，左、右掖，左、右哨，亦谓之五军。
现代文：又将步骑军分成中军，左、右掖，左、右哨，也称他们为五军。
English: He also divided the infantry and cavalry into the Central Army, the Left and Right Divisions, and the Left and Right Posts, also calling them the Five Armies.

古文：岁调中都、山东、河南、大宁兵番上京师隶之。
现代文：每年征调中都、山东、河南、大宁的军队轮番到京城守卫，隶属京军。
English: Every year, the troops from Zhongdu, Shandong, Henan and Daning are conscripted and transferred to guard the capital in turn, and they are subordinate to the Beijing Army.

古文：设提督内臣一，武臣二，掌号头官二，大营坐营官一，把总二，中营坐营官一，马步队把总各一。
现代文：设置提督内臣一名，武臣二名，掌号头官二名；大营设坐营官一名，把总二名；中营设坐营官一名，马队把总、步队把总各一名。
English: There was to be one admiral, two vassals, and two commanders-in-chief; in the main camp, there was to be one camp officer and two commanders-in-chief; in the middle camp, there was to be one camp officer, one commander-in-chief of the cavalry, and one commander-in-chief of the infantry.

古文：左右掖、哨官如之。
现代文：左右掖、哨官也如此。
English: The same applies to the left and right posts and the sentries.

古文：又有十二营，掌随驾马队官军，设把总二。
现代文：又有十二营，负责伴随皇帝的马队官兵，设置把总二名。
English: There were also twelve battalions, responsible for escorting the emperor's cavalry officers and soldiers, setting up a total of two.

古文：又有围子手营，掌操练上直叉刀手及京卫步队官军，设坐营官一，统四司，以一、二、三、四为号，把总各二。
现代文：还有围子手营，负责操练当值的叉刀手和京卫中的步兵官军，设置坐营官一名，统率四个司，用一、二、三、四作为名号，各设把总二名。
English: There was also a battalion of wranglers, responsible for training the forklift operators on duty and the infantry officers of the Beijing Garrison, setting up a battalion officer to command four divisions, using one, two, three, and four as names, with a total of two people in each division.

古文：又有幼官舍人营，掌操练京卫幼官及应袭舍人，坐营官一，四司把总各一。
现代文：还有幼官舍人营，负责操练京卫中的幼官和世袭武官的子弟应袭舍人，设坐营官一名，四个司各设把总一名。
English: There is also a cadet cadet camp, which is responsible for the training of cadet officers and the children of hereditary military officers in the Beijing Defense Academy, with one cadet officer and one general officer for each of the four divisions.

古文：此五军营之部分也。
现代文：这就是五军营的部署。
English: This is the deployment of the five military camps.

古文：已，得边外降丁三千，立营分五司。
现代文：后来，获得边境外三千降服的人，建立营分成五司。
English: Later, after gaining the surrender of three thousand people outside the border, the battalion was divided into five divisions.

古文：一，掌执大驾龙旗、宝纛、勇字旗、负御宝及兵仗局什物上直官军。
现代文：一司掌管大驾龙旗、宝纛、勇字旗、负御宝以及兵仗局器物当值官军。
English: The 1st Division is in charge of driving the dragon flag, the treasure banner, the courage flag, the negative treasure and the equipment of the War Office to the official army on duty.

古文：一，掌执左右二十队勇字旗、大驾旗纛金鼓上直官军。
现代文：一司掌管左右二十队勇字旗、大驾旗纛金鼓当值官军。
English: The 1st Division is in charge of the left and right 20 teams of "Courage Flag" and "Big Driver Flag" and "Golden Drum" as the official army on duty.

古文：一，掌传令营旗牌，御用监盔甲、尚冠、尚衣、尚履什物上直官军。
现代文：一司掌管传令营旗牌，御用监盔甲、尚冠、尚衣、尚履器物当值官军。
English: The first department is in charge of the flag of the command post, and the official army is on duty to supervise the armor, crown, coat, and footwear.

古文：一，掌执大驾勇字旗、五军红盔贴直军上直官军。
现代文：一司掌管大驾勇字旗、五军红盔贴直军当值官军。
English: The 1st Division is in charge of driving the flag of valor, and the 5th Army's red helmets are attached to the army on duty.

古文：一，掌杀虎手、马轿及前哨马营上直明甲官军、随侍营随侍东宫官舍、辽东备御回还官军。
现代文：一司掌管杀虎手马轿以及前哨马营当值明甲官军、随侍营随侍东宫官舍、辽东备御回还官军。
English: The first department is in charge of the tiger-killing horse-drawn carriage and the outpost horse battalion of the Ming Jia government army, the attendant battalion of the East Palace government house, and the Liaodong preparation for the return of the government army.

古文：提督内臣二，武臣二，掌号头官二，坐司官五，见操把总三十四，上直把总十六，明甲把总四。
现代文：提督内臣二名，武臣二名，执掌号头官二名，坐司官五名，见操把总三十四名，当值把总十六名，明甲把总四名。
English: There were two vice-admirals, two vassals, two commanders in chief, five magistrates, a total of thirty-four officers, sixteen duty officers, and four warrant officers.

古文：此三千营之部分也。
现代文：这就是三千营的部署。
English: This is the deployment of three thousand battalions.

古文：已，征交阯，得火器法，立营肄习。
现代文：后来，征讨交趾，获得使用火器的方法，设立军营演习。
English: Later, they were able to recruit soldiers, acquire the means to use firearms, and set up military camp exercises.

古文：提督内臣、武臣，掌号头官，皆视三千营，亦分为五军。
现代文：提督内臣、武臣，执掌号头官，都比照三千营的制度设置，也分为五军。
English: Admirals, vassals, and commanders-in-chief are all set up according to the system of three thousand battalions, and are also divided into five armies.

古文：中军，坐营内臣一，武臣一。
现代文：中军，设坐营内臣一名，武臣一名。
English: Chinese army, set up a camp, one vassal, one vassal.

古文：其下四司，各监枪内臣一，把司官一，把总官二。
现代文：它下属的四个司，各设监枪内臣一名，把司官一名，把总官二名。
English: Each of the four divisions under it has a prison warden, a magistrate, and two general officers.

古文：左右掖、哨皆如之。
现代文：左、右掖，左、右哨都如此。
English: Left, right cross, left, right whistle are all the same.

古文：又因得都督谭广马五千匹，置营名五千下，掌操演火器及随驾护卫马队官军。
现代文：又因获得都督谭广的五千匹马，设置五千下营，负责演练火器以及跟随皇帝的护卫马队官军。
English: In addition, because he obtained 5,000 horses from the governor Tan Guang, he set up a 5,000-strong battalion, which was responsible for practicing firearms and escorting the emperor's cavalry.

古文：坐营内臣、武臣各一，其下四司，各把司官二。
现代文：设坐营内臣、武臣各一名，它属下的四个司，各设把司官二名。
English: It was established with a camp vassal and a military vassal each, and the four divisions under it were each set up with two officers.

古文：此神机营之部分也。
现代文：这就是神机营的部署。
English: This is the deployment of the miracle battalion.

古文：居常，五军肄营阵，三千肄巡哨，神机肄火器。
现代文：平时，五军营操练结营布阵，三千营操练巡视警备，神机营操练火器。
English: In normal times, the five battalions practice camp formation, the three thousand battalions practice patrolling and guarding, and the military machine battalion practices firearms.

古文：大驾征行，则大营居中，五军分驻，步内骑外，骑外为神机，神机外为长围，周二十里，樵采其中。
现代文：皇帝出征，皇帝的大营便位于正中，五军分别驻扎在四周，步兵在肉骑兵在外，骑兵之外是神机营，神机营之外是长围，方圆二十里，在这中间割草打柴。
English: When the emperor sets out on a campaign, the emperor's large battalion is located in the center, the five armies are stationed around it, the infantry is outside the cavalry, the cavalry is outside the divine machine battalion, and the divine machine battalion is outside the long perimeter, a radius of twenty miles, in the middle of which grass is cut and firewood is cut.

古文：三大营之制如此。
现代文：三大营的制度就是这样。
English: This is how the three-battalion system works.

古文：洪熙时，始命武臣一人总理营政。
现代文：洪熙年间，开始任命一名武臣全面管理营中政务。
English: During Hong Hee's reign, he began to appoint a vassal to comprehensively manage the political affairs of the camp.

古文：宣德五年，以成国公朱勇言，选京卫卒隶五军训练。
现代文：宣德五年，按照成国公朱勇的意见，挑选京卫中的士兵隶属五军进行训练。
English: In the fifth year of Xuan De, in accordance with the opinion of Cheng Guogong Zhu Yong, the soldiers of the Beijing National Guard were selected to be affiliated with the Five Armies for training.

古文：明年，命科道及锦衣官核诸卫军数。
现代文：第二年，命令科道以及锦衣官核实各卫的士兵数目。
English: In the second year, he ordered Kodo and the brocade officer to verify the number of soldiers in each division.

古文：帝之征高煦及破兀良哈，皆以京营取胜焉。
现代文：皇帝征讨朱高煦以及打败兀良哈，都是依靠京营取得胜利。
English: The emperor's conquest of Zhu Gaozhen and defeat of Qiliangha both relied on the Beijing camp to achieve victory.

古文：正统二年，复因勇言，令锦衣等卫、守陵卫卒存其半，其上直旗校隶锦衣督操，馀悉归三大营。
现代文：正统二年，又因为朱勇的意见，下令锦衣等卫、守陵卫士兵保留各自人数的一半，其中当值的旗校官隶属锦衣卫监督操练，其余的全部归属三大营。
English: In the second year of the orthodoxy, because of Zhu Yong's opinion, he ordered the Jinling guards and the soldiers guarding the tomb guards to retain half of their respective numbers, of which the flag officers on duty were subordinated to the Jinling guards to supervise the drill, and the rest all belonged to the three battalions.

古文：土木之难，京军没几尽。
现代文：土木之难，京军几乎全部覆灭。
English: Due to the difficulties of civil engineering, the Beijing army was almost completely destroyed.

古文：景帝用于谦为兵部尚书，谦以三大营各为教令，临期调拨，兵将不相习，乃请于诸营选胜兵十万，分十营团练。
现代文：景帝任用于谦为兵部尚书。于谦认为三大营各有各的命令，临时调遣，士兵与将领互相不熟悉，于是请求从各营挑选十万精兵，分成十个营进行操练。
English: Yu Qian thought that each of the three battalions had its own orders, temporary deployment, and soldiers and generals were not familiar with each other, so he requested that 100,000 elite soldiers be selected from each battalion and divided into ten battalions for training.

古文：每营都督一，号头官一，都指挥二，把总十，领队一百，管队二百。
现代文：每个营设都督一名，号头官一名，都指挥二名，把总十名，领队一百名，管队二百名。
English: Each battalion has a governor and a bugle officer, and there are two commanders, for a total of ten, one hundred team leaders, and two hundred supervisors.

古文：于三营都督中推一人充总兵官，监以内臣，兵部尚书或都御史一人为提督。
现代文：从三个营的都督中推选一人充当总兵官，用宦官监督，任命兵部尚书或都御史一人做提督。
English: From the governors of the three battalions, one person was selected to serve as the commander-in-chief, supervised by eunuchs, and one person was appointed as the admiral of the military department or the governor of the capital.

古文：其余军归本营，曰老家。
现代文：其余军士返归原来的营，称为老家。
English: The remaining sergeants returned to their original battalion, calling it home.

古文：京军之制一变。
现代文：京军的制度变革了一次。
English: The system of the Beijing army has changed once again.

古文：英宗复辟，谦死，团营罢。
现代文：英宗恢复帝位，于谦被杀，团营被废除。
English: Yingzong restored the imperial throne, Yu Qian was killed, and the regimental camp was abolished.

古文：宪宗立，复之，增为十二。
现代文：宪宗登上皇位，恢复团营，增到十二个。
English: Kenzong ascended the throne and restored the regiments, increasing them to twelve.

古文：成化二年复罢。
现代文：成化二年，再次废除。
English: Two years later, it was abolished again.

古文：命分一等、次等训练。
现代文：命令分作一等、次等进行训练。
English: Commands are divided into first-class and second-class for training.

古文：寻选得一等军十四万有奇。
现代文：不久挑选获得一等军十四万有余。
English: He was soon selected to join the first-class army of more than 140,000 soldiers.

古文：帝以数多，令仍分十二营团练，而区其名，有奋、耀、练、显四武营，取、果、效、鼓四勇营，立、伸、扬、振四威营。
现代文：皇帝认为数量太多，命令仍旧分成十二个营进行操练，而且区分它们的名称，有奋、耀、练、颢四个武营，敢、果、效、鼓四个勇营，立、伸、扬、振四个威营。
English: The emperor thought that the number was too large, so he ordered that they should still be divided into twelve battalions for training, and distinguished by their names. There were four military battalions: Fen, Yao, Chun, and Yao; four brave battalions: Dang, Guo, Xing, and Drum; and four weak battalions: Zhi, Sheng, Yang, and Zhen.

古文：命侯十二人掌之，各佐以都指挥，监以内臣，提督以勋臣，名其军曰选锋。
现代文：任命十二个侯掌管它们，各自用都指挥辅佐，用宦官监督，用功臣任提督，将这些军队命名为选锋。
English: He appointed twelve marquesses to be in charge of them, each with a commander and an assistant, with eunuchs to supervise, with meritorious men to be appointed as admirals, and named these armies as the front line.

古文：不任者仍为老家以供役，而团营之法又稍变。
现代文：不胜任的仍旧返本营作老家以供役使，于是团营的制度又稍稍变革。
English: The incompetent ones still returned to the base camp to serve as servants, so the camp system was slightly reformed.

古文：二十年，立殚忠、效义二营；练京卫舍人、余丁。
现代文：成化二十年，建立弹忠、效义两个营；操练京卫中的舍人、余丁。
English: In the past twenty years, two battalions have been established, namely, the battalions for loyalty and loyalty, and the battalions for obedience and obedience have been trained.

古文：二营，永乐间设，后废，至是复设。
现代文：这两个营，丞乐年间设置，后来废除，到这时重新设立。
English: The two battalions, set up during the Joseon Dynasty and later abolished, were re-established at this time.

古文：未几，以无益罢。
现代文：不久，认为没有用处而废除。
English: It was soon abolished as being of no use.

古文：帝在位久，京营特注意，然缺伍至七万五千有奇，大率为权贵所隐占。
现代文：皇帝在位时间长久，特别留意京营，然而欠缺的士兵敷达到七万五千多，大多被居于高位有权势的人私占。
English: The emperor had been on the throne for a long time, and paid special attention to the Beijing camp. However, the shortage of soldiers reached more than seventy-five thousand, and most of them were occupied by powerful people in high positions.

古文：又用汪直总督团营，禁旅专掌于内臣，自帝始也。
现代文：又任用汪直全面监督团营，禁军让宦官独自掌管，从成化年间开始。
English: He also appointed Wang Zhi to supervise the regimental camp in an all-round way, and let the eunuchs take sole charge of the Forbidden Army, starting from the Chenghua years.

古文：孝宗即位，乃命都御史马文升为提督。
现代文：孝宗登上皇位，就任命都御史马文升为提督。
English: When Emperor Xiaozong ascended the throne, he appointed the governor of the capital, Shima Wen, to the rank of admiral.

古文：是时营军久苦工役。
现代文：这个时候营中的军士已久为土木建筑事务所困苦。
English: By this time, the soldiers in the battalion had long been suffering from the hardships of the civil engineering and architecture office.

古文：成化末，余子俊尝言之，文升复力陈不可。
现代文：成化末年，余子俊曾讲到这个情况，马文升再次竭力陈述这样不行。
English: In the last years of Chenghua, Yu Zijun once talked about this situation, and Ma Wensheng once again tried to state that this is not possible.

古文：又请于每营选马步锐卒二千，遇警征调。
现代文：又请求从每个营中选拔精锐的骑兵、步兵二千名，遇到紧急情况征用调遣。
English: He also requested that 2,000 elite cavalrymen and infantrymen be selected from each battalion, and that they be mobilized in the event of an emergency.

古文：且遵洪、永故事，五日一操，以二日走阵下营，以三日演武。
现代文：而且依照洪武、永乐时的旧例，每五天操练一次，其中用两天练习排阵扎营，用三天演习武艺。
English: Moreover, in accordance with the old practice of Hongwu and Yongle, they practiced once every five days, including two days to practice camp formation and three days to practice martial arts.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝依从了他的意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：时尚书刘大夏陈弊端十事，复奏减修乾清宫卒。
现代文：这时尚书刘大夏陈述十件弊端，又上书请求减少整修干清宫的士兵。
English: This fashion book Liu Daxia stated ten drawbacks, and also petitioned to reduce the number of soldiers renovating the Qianqing Palace.

古文：内臣谓其不恤大工，大学士刘健曰： 爱惜军士，司马职也。 
现代文：宦官说他不顾念皇帝的大工程，大学士刘健说： 爱护士兵，是司马的职责。 
English: The eunuch said that he did not care about the emperor's great project. Liu Jian, a university scholar, said: It is Sima's duty to care for soldiers.

古文：帝纳之。
现代文：皇帝采纳了刘大夏的意见。
English: The emperor took him at his word.

古文：会户部主事李梦阳极论役军之害，并及内臣主兵者。
现代文：恰逢户部主事李梦阳竭力论述让士兵服劳役的害处，并且牵连到宦官中掌管军队的人。
English: This coincided with the head of the Household Department, Li Mengyang, trying his best to discuss the harm of making soldiers perform labor service, and implicating the eunuchs in charge of the army.

古文：以语侵寿宁侯，下诏狱，遂格不行。
现代文：因为言辞中冒犯了寿宁侯张鹤龄，被关押进囚禁鈇犯的大牢里，于是刘大夏的建议被搁置汝有实行。
English: Liu Daxia's suggestion was put on hold because Zhang Heling, a Shuning official, offended Liu Daxia in his speech and was detained in a large prison for convicts.

古文：武宗即位，十二营锐卒仅六万五百余人，稍弱者二万五千而已。
现代文：武宗登上皇位，十二营的精兵仅有六万零五百多人，稍微体弱的士兵不过二万五千人而已。
English: When Emperor Wuzong ascended the throne, the elite soldiers of the 12th battalion numbered only more than 60.5 thousand, while the slightly weaker soldiers numbered only 25 thousand.

古文：给事中葛嵩请选五军、三千营精锐归团练，而存八万余人于营以供役。
现代文：给事中葛嵩请求选拔五军、三千营中的精锐归属团练，而保存八万多人在营中供役使。
English: In the matter, Ge Song requested that the five armies and the elite of the three thousand battalions be selected for group training, and that more than eighty thousand people be kept in the battalions to serve.

古文：惠安伯张伟谬引旧制以争，事遂已，隐占如故。
现代文：惠安伯张伟胡乱称引旧制度来反对，此事就停止了，私占军役像从前一样。
English: Hui An Bo Zhang Wei made a wild claim to oppose the old system, and the matter was stopped. Private military service continued as before.

古文：寘鐇反，太监张永将京军往讨，中官权益重。
现代文：朱寞镭反叛，太监张永率领京城军队前往讨伐，宦官的权力更加重。
English: Zhu Xianqi rebelled, the eunuch Zhang Yong led the Beijing army to go to the crusade, and the power of the eunuch was even heavier.

古文：及流寇起，边将江彬等得幸，请调边军入卫。
现代文：等到流窜的强盗起来造反，边镇将领江彬等人得到宠幸，请求调遣边境的军队入京守卫。
English: When the fugitive bandits rebelled, the commander of the border town, Jiang Bin, and others were given the privilege of requesting the deployment of troops from the border to guard Beijing.

古文：于是集九边突骑家丁数万人于京师。名曰外四家。
现代文：于是征集九边的突骑家丁几万人到京城，称为外四家。
English: As a result, tens of thousands of Tujia Ding from the nine sides were recruited to the capital, known as the outer four.

古文：立两官厅，选团营及勇士、四卫军于西官厅操练，正德元年所选官军操于东官厅。
现代文：建立两个官厅，选拔团营以及勇士、四卫军在西官厅操练，正德元年，所选拔的官军在柬官厅操练。
English: Two government offices were established, and the selection battalion, as well as the warriors and four guards, practiced in the western government office. In the first year of Zhengde, the selected government army practiced in the Cambodian government office.

古文：自是两官厅军为选锋。而十二团营且为老家矣。
现代文：从此两个官厅的军士成了选锋，而十二团营将成为老家。
English: Since then, the sergeants of the two government offices have become the election front, and the 12th regiment battalion will become the hometown.

古文：武宗崩，大臣用遗命罢之。
现代文：武宗去世，大臣根据皇帝临终留下的命令废除了两个官厅。
English: After the death of Emperor Wuzong, the minister abolished two government offices according to the order left by the emperor on his deathbed.

古文：当是时，工作浩繁，边将用事，京营戎政益大坏。
现代文：当这个时候，土木建筑工程浩大繁多，边镇将领当权，京营的军政更加大大败坏。
English: At this time, the civil construction projects were vast and numerous, the border town generals were in power, and the military government in Beijing was even more corrupt.

古文：给事中王良佐奉敕选军，按籍三十八万有奇，而存者不及十四万，中选者仅二万余。
现代文：给事中王良佐奉皇帝的命令选拔军队，查考军籍有三十八万多人，然而实有人数不到十四万，被选中的仅有两万多。
English: In this matter, Wang Liangsa was ordered by the emperor to select the army, and more than three hundred and eighty thousand military personnel were examined. However, the actual number was less than one hundred and forty thousand, and only more than twenty thousand were selected.

古文：世宗立，久之，从廷臣言，设文臣知兵者一人领京营。
现代文：世宗登上皇位，遇了很久，依从朝廷大臣的意见，任命一名通晓军事的文臣统领京营。
English: When Sejong ascended to the throne, he waited for a long time and, in accordance with the opinion of the Minister of the Imperial Court, appointed a civil servant who was familiar with military affairs to command the Beijing camp.

古文：是时额兵十万七千余人，而存者仅半。
现代文：这个时候额定兵士数应是十万七千多人，然而实有人数仅仅一半。
English: At this time, the number of soldiers should be more than 107,000, but the actual number is only half.

古文：专理京营兵部尚书李承勋请足十二万之数。
现代文：专门管理京营的兵部尚书李承勋请求补足十二万的数量。
English: Li Chengxun, who was in charge of the Beijing encampment, requested that the number of soldiers be increased by 120,000.

古文：部议遵弘治中例，老者补以壮丁，逃、故者清军官依期解补。
现代文：兵部议定遵照弘治年间的例子，年老的用青壮年替补，逃跑了的、死去了的清军官按期解送补充。
English: The military agreed to follow the example of the Hongzhi era, replacing the old with the young, and dispatching and replacing the Qing officers who had fled or died on schedule.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从了这个意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：十五年，都御史王廷相提督团营，条上三弊：一，军士多杂派，工作终岁，不得入操。
现代文：嘉靖十五年，都御史王廷相任团营提督，备文向上陈述三个弊病。一，士兵车役之外的徭役多，一年到头从事土木工程，不能进行操练。
English: In the 15th year of the Jiajing era, the governor of the capital, Shi Wangting, was appointed admiral of the regimental battalion. He wrote a letter to the emperor to explain three drawbacks. First, there were many soldiers who served as guards in addition to the car service, and they were engaged in civil engineering all year round, so they could not conduct drills.

古文：虽名团营听征，实与田夫无异。
现代文：虽名为听候出征的团营，实际与农夫没有差别。
English: Although it is called a camp awaiting departure, there is no difference between it and a farmer's camp.

古文：二，军士替代，吏胥需索重贿，贫军不能办，老羸苟且应役，而精壮子弟不得收练。
现代文：二，士兵替代，下级官吏索要大笔赂贿。贫穷的士兵不能行贿，年老体弱仍得遇且过地服役，而精壮的年轻人不能收编训练。
English: Second, instead of soldiers, lower-level officials demanded large bribes. Poor soldiers could not pay bribes, the old and infirm still had to serve, and strong young people could not be recruited and trained.

古文：三，富军惮营操征调，率贿将弁置老家数中，贫者虽老疲，亦常操练。
现代文：三，有钱的士兵害怕营中操练和征调，都贿赂军官把自己安插在老家营的数目中。贫穷的虽然老迈疲弱，仍照常操练。
English: Thirdly, the rich soldiers were afraid of the drill and transfer in the battalion, so they bribed the officers to place themselves in the number of the old battalion. The poor ones, although old and weak, still practiced as usual.

古文：语颇切中。
现代文：意见很中肯。
English: Very pertinent point.

古文：既而两郊九庙诸宫殿之工起，役军益多。
现代文：不久两郊九庙各宫殿的工程兴起，役使士兵更多。
English: Soon, the construction of nine temples and palaces in the two suburbs began, and the number of soldiers increased.

古文：兵部请分番为二，半团操，半放归，而收其月廪雇役。
现代文：兵部请求将轮班服役的士兵分为两部分，一半留在团营操练，一半解散遣返，而收取这部分人出月俸以雇人服劳役。
English: The military department requested that the soldiers serving in shifts be divided into two parts, half remaining in the regimental camp for training, half being disbanded and repatriated, and that this part of the people be paid a monthly salary and hired for labor service.

古文：诏行一年。
现代文：诏令实行了一年。
English: The edict went into effect a year later.

古文：自后边警急，团营见兵少，仅选骑卒三万，仍号东西官厅。
现代文：此后边防发生紧急情况，团营现有的士兵少，仅挑选了三万骑兵，仍旧号称东西官厅。
English: After that, an emergency occurred in the border defense, the existing soldiers in the regiment were few, only thirty thousand cavalry were selected, and it was still known as the East-West Government Office.

古文：馀者悉老弱，仍为营帅、中官私役。
现代文：其余的都年老体弱，仍旧作营帅、宦官私人的杂役。
English: The rest are old and infirm, still working as camp marshals, eunuchs and private servants.

古文：二十九年，俺答入寇，兵部尚书丁汝夔核营伍不及五六万人。
现代文：嘉靖二十九年，俺答进犯，兵部尚书丁汝夔核实营中军队不到五六万人。
English: In the 29th year of Jiajing, I responded to the invasion, and the military department Shangshu Dingru verified that there were less than 560,000 troops in the camp.

古文：驱出城门，皆流涕不敢前，诸将领亦相顾变色。
现代文：驱遣出城门，都流着眼泪不敢向前，众将领也你看我，我看你，变了脸色。
English: Driven out of the city gate, they all shed tears and dared not go forward. The generals also look at me, I look at you, and their faces change.

古文：汝夔坐诛。
现代文：丁汝夔得罪被杀。
English: Ding Ruxuan was killed for his crime.

古文：大学士严嵩乃请振刷以图善后。
现代文：大学士严嵩于是请求振奋更新以求妥善解决遗留的事情。
English: Yan Song, a university scholar, then asked for encouragement and renewal in order to properly resolve the remaining issues.

古文：吏部侍郎王邦瑞摄兵部，因言： 国初，京营劲旅不减七八十万，元戎宿将常不乏人。
现代文：吏部侍郎王邦瑞代理兵部尚书，因而说： 开国之初，京营精锐部队不少于七八十万，主帅老将经常不缺乏人员。
English: Wang Bangrui, Secretary of the General Staff, acting for the General Staff, said: At the beginning of the founding of the People's Republic of China, the elite troops of the Beijing Camp were no less than seven or eight hundred thousand, and the head coach was often not short of personnel.

古文：自三大营变为十二团营，又变为两官厅，虽浸不如初，然额军尚三十八万有奇。
现代文：自从三大营改变为十二团营，再变成两官厅，虽然渐渐不如当初，然而额定士兵数目还有三十八万多。
English: Since the three major battalions were changed to twelve regimental battalions and then to two regiments, although it is gradually not as good as it was at the beginning, the number of rated soldiers is still more than 380,000.

古文：今武备积驰，见籍止十四万余，而操练者不过五六万，支粮则有，调遣则无。
现代文：而今军备积久废弛，军籍中现有人数仅十四万多，而操练的不过五六万。支取口粮倒有人，调遣时就没有人。
English: Today, however, the armaments have been worn out for a long time. The current number of military personnel is only more than one hundred and forty thousand, while only five or six thousand are trained. There are people to collect rations, but there is no one at the time of deployment.

古文：比敌骑深入，战守俱称无军。
现代文：等到敌人的骑兵侵入，作战、防守都说没有军队。
English: When the enemy's cavalry invaded, the battle and defense both said that there was no army.

古文：即见在兵，率老弱疲惫、市井游贩之徒，衣甲器械取给临时。
现代文：就现有的士兵，大都是年老体弱疲惫无力、集市无赖和游动贩卖的人，盔甲武器临时纔拿取供给。
English: As far as the existing soldiers are concerned, most of them are old, frail, tired and feeble, market ruffians and itinerant traders, temporarily stealing armor and weapons for supply.

古文：此其弊不在逃亡，而在占役；不在军士，而在将领。
现代文：造成这种弊端不是因为士兵逃跑，而是因为占用士兵服工役；不是因为士兵，而是因为将领。
English: The cause of this evil is not that the soldiers run away, but that the soldiers are employed as laborers; not the soldiers, but the generals.

古文：盖提督、坐营、号头、把总诸官，多世胄纨袴，平时占役营军，以空名支饷，临操则肆集市人，呼舞博笑而已。
现代文：因为提督、坐营、号头、把总各将官大多是世家贵族有钱子弟，平时让营中的士兵服工役，用虚假名字支取粮饷，临到操练的时候就大肆招集街市中的人，乱叫乱舞讨人笑话而已。
English: Because most of the admirals, commanders-in-chief, commanders-in-chief, and commanders-in-chief are rich sons of aristocrats, they usually make the soldiers in the camp serve as laborers, use false names to withdraw grain, and when it comes to training, they call up the people in the street market, shouting and dancing to make people laugh.

古文：先年，尚书王琼、毛伯温、刘天和常有意振饬。
现代文：往年，尚书王琼、毛伯温、刘天和曾经有意整顿。
English: In previous years, Shangshu Wang Qiong, Mao Bowen, Liu Tianhe and others have been interested in rectification.

古文：然将领恶其害己，阴谋阻挠，军士又习于骄惰，竞倡流言，事复中止，酿害至今。
现代文：然而将领厌恶这样会损害自己，阴谋阻挠，士兵又习惯于骄横懒惰，竞相传布流言，事情再次中止，酿成祸害直至今天。
English: But the generals, loath to be outdone, conspired to obstruct, and the soldiers, habituated to arrogance and idleness, vied with each other in spreading rumours, and the affair was again aborted, creating havoc to this day.

古文：乞大振乾纲，遣官精核。 
现代文：请求大力整顿朝政，派遣官员精确调查。 
English: He asked for vigorous rectification of the imperial government and dispatched officials to investigate thoroughly.

古文：帝是其言，命兵部议兴革。
现代文：皇帝认为他的意见对，下令兵部讨论兴利除弊。
English: The emperor thought his opinion was right and ordered the military to discuss the pros and cons.

古文：于是悉罢团营、两官厅，复三大营旧制。
现代文：于是全部废除团营、两官厅，恢复三大营旧有制度。
English: As a result, the regimental battalions and the two government offices were all abolished, and the old system of three battalions was restored.

古文：更三千曰神枢。
现代文：将三千营改名为神枢营。
English: Renamed Sanzen battalion to Shinshu battalion.

古文：罢提督、监枪等内臣。
现代文：罢免任提督、监枪等职的宦官。
English: The eunuchs who have been appointed as admiral, superintendent and so on will be dismissed.

古文：设武臣一，曰总督京营戎政，以咸宁侯仇鸾为之；文臣一，曰协理京营戎政，即以邦瑞充之。
现代文：设立一名武臣，称做总督京营戎政，以咸宁侯仇鸾任此职；设立一名文臣，称做协理京营戎政，就以王邦瑞住此职。
English: The establishment of a military vassal, known as the Governor of the Beijing Military Government, with Xianning Hou Cixuan as the post; the establishment of a civilian vassal, known as the Co-ordinator of the Beijing Military Government, with Wang Bangrui as the post.

古文：其下设副参等官二十六员。
现代文：以下设置副参等官吏二十六名。
English: The following is the list of 26 vice-councilors.

古文：已，又从部议，以四武营归五军营中军，四勇营归左右哨，四威营归左右掖。
现代文：后来，又依从兵部的意见，将四个武营归并入五军营的中军，四个勇营归并入左右哨，四个威营归并入左右掖。
English: Later, in accordance with the opinion of the Ministry of Military Affairs, the four military camps were merged into the five military camps of the Chinese army, the four brave battalions were merged into the left and right posts, and the four weak battalions were merged into the left and right posts.

古文：各设坐营官一员，为正兵，备城守；参将二员，备征讨。
现代文：各设立坐营官一名，是主力部队，用作守城；设立参将二名，用作出征讨伐。
English: Each set up a camp officer, is the main force, used to defend the city; set up two generals, used to make the conquest.

古文：帝以营制新定，告于太庙行之。
现代文：皇帝因为军营的制度重新制定，向太庙祭告而后实施。
English: Because of the military camp system, the emperor reformulated it, announced it to the imperial temple, and then implemented it.

古文：又遣四御史募兵畿辅、山东、山西、河南，得四万人，分隶神枢、神机。
现代文：又派遣四个御史往京城附近、山东、山西、河南招募士兵，获得四万人，分别隶属神枢营、神机营。
English: He also sent four envoys to recruit soldiers in the vicinity of Beijing, Shandong, Shanxi and Henan, gaining 40,000 men, who were assigned to the Sacred Heart Camp and the Sacred Machine Camp, respectively.

古文：各设副将一，而增能战将六员，分领操练。
现代文：各设置副将一名，而且增加有征战才能的将领六名，分别带领操练。
English: Each set up a deputy general, and added six generals with the ability to go to war to lead the drill.

古文：大将所统三营之兵，居常名曰练勇，有事更定职名。
现代文：大将所统率的三个营的士兵，平常称做练勇，有任务时再换名称。
English: The soldiers of the three battalions under the command of the general are usually referred to as the drill, and they change their names when there is a task.

古文：五军营：大将一员，统军一万，总主三营副、参、游击、佐击及坐营等官；副将二员，各统军七千；左右前后参将四员，各六千；游击四员，各三千。
现代文：五军营：大将一名，率领军队一万，全面管辖三个营的副将、参将、游击、佐击以及坐营等官员；副将二名，各统兵七千；左右前后参将四名，各统兵六千；游击四名，各统兵三千。
English: Five military camps: one general, leading an army of ten thousand, with overall jurisdiction over three battalions of vice-generals, general officers, guerrillas, auxiliaries and camp officers; two vice-generals, each with seven thousand soldiers; four general officers, each with six thousand soldiers; four guerrillas, each with three thousand soldiers.

古文：外备兵六万六千六百六十人。
现代文：另外备兵六万六千六百六十人。
English: In addition, the number of reservists was increased to 66,660.

古文：神枢营：副将二员，各统军六千；佐击六员，各三千。
现代文：神枢营：副将二名，各统兵六千；佐击六名，各统兵三千。
English: Shenshu camp: two vice-commanders, six thousand soldiers each; six assistants, three thousand soldiers each.

古文：外备兵四万人。
现代文：另外备兵四万人。
English: In addition, there are 40,000 soldiers on standby.

古文：神机营亦如之。
现代文：神机营也如此。
English: The same is true for Shinki Camp.

古文：已，又定三大营官数：五军营一百九十六员，神枢营二百八员，神机营一百八十二员，共五百八十六员。
现代文：后来，又限定三大营的官吏数量：五军营一百九十六名，神枢营二百零八名，神机营一百八十二名，总共五百八十六名。
English: Later, the number of officials in the three major battalions was also limited: 196 in the five military battalions, 208 in the Sacred Heart Battalion, and 182 in the Sacred Machine Battalion, for a total of 586 officials.

古文：在京各卫军，俱分隶三营。
现代文：在京城的各卫士兵，都分别隶属三大营。
English: The soldiers of each of the guards in the capital are subordinated to three major battalions.

古文：分之为三十营，合之为三大营。
现代文：细分成三十个营，合起来是三个大营。
English: It was subdivided into thirty battalions, and altogether there were three large battalions.

古文：终帝世，其制屡更，最后中军哨掖之名亦罢，但称战守兵兼立车营。
现代文：整个嘉靖帝在位期间，京营的制度屡次更改，最后中军、哨、掖的名目也废弃，只称做战守兵兼立车营。
English: During the entire reign of Emperor Jiajing, the system of the Beijing Camp was repeatedly changed, and finally the names of the Chinese army, sentry post, and guard post were also abandoned, and it was only called the battle guard and car camp.

古文：故事，五军府皆开府给印，主兵籍而不与营操，营操官不给印，戎政之有府与印，自仇鸾始。
现代文：旧例，五军府都开府授军印，掌管兵籍而不参与营中操练，营操官不授给军印。军政有军府与印信，从仇鸾开始。
English: Under the old system, the five military administrations were responsible for awarding military seals, and they were in charge of military ranks, but they did not participate in the training of the battalion, and they did not award military seals to battalion commanders.

古文：鸾方贵幸，言于帝，选各边兵六万八千人，分番入卫，与京军杂练，复令京营将领分练边兵，于是边军尽隶京师。
现代文：仇鸾正被宠幸的时候，向皇帝进言，挑选各边镇的士兵六万八千人，轮番进京护卫，和京城的军队混杂操练，又命令京营的将领分别演练边镇士兵，于是边镇军队全部隶属京城军队。
English: When he was at the height of his popularity, he proposed to the emperor to select 68,000 soldiers from each border town, escort them to Beijing in rotation, and conduct mixed drills with the troops from the capital. He also ordered the generals of the Beijing camp to separately drill the soldiers from the border towns. As a result, the troops from the border towns were all subordinated to the capital troops.

古文：塞上有警，边将不得征集，边事益坏。
现代文：边塞上有危险，边镇将领无士兵可以征集，边防事务更加败坏。
English: There is danger on the border fortress, the border town generals have no soldiers to recruit, and the border defense affairs are even more corrupt.

古文：鸾死，乃罢其所置戎政厅首领官之属，而入卫军则惟罢甘肃者。
现代文：仇鸾死后，纔废除他所设置的戎政厅首领官之类，然而入京护卫的军队只是停调了甘肃的边军。
English: After Qiu Jun's death, Zou abolished the military and political leaders he had set up, but the army that escorted him to Beijing only suspended the border troops from Gansu.

古文：隆庆四年，大学士赵贞吉请收将权，更营制。
现代文：隆庆四年，大学士赵贞吉请求收回将领的军权，变更京营制度。
English: In the fourth year of Longqing, Zhao Zhengyi, a university scholar, requested that the generals' military power be taken back and the Beijing camp system be changed.

古文：极言戎政之设府铸印，以数十万众统于一人，非太祖、成祖分府分营本意。
现代文：竭力进言军政设置军府铸造军印，将敷十万军队交给一个人统率，不是太祖、成祖分府分营的本来意图。
English: It is not the original intention of Taizu and Chengzu to try to persuade the military government to set up a military government to mint military seals and hand over 100,000 troops to a single person to lead.

古文：请以官军九万分五营，营择一将，分统训练。
现代文：请求将九万官军分成五个营，每营选择一名将领，分别统率训练。
English: The request is to divide the 90,000-strong government army into five battalions, with each battalion selecting a general to lead the training.

古文：诏下廷臣议。
现代文：皇帝颁诏书命令将趟贞吉的意见交给朝廷大臣讨论。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict ordering that the opinion of Sui Zhengyi be submitted to the minister of the imperial court for discussion.

古文：尚书霍冀言： 营制，世宗熟虑而后定，不宜更。
现代文：尚书霍冀说： 京营制度，世宗深思热虑后纔制定，不应该更改。
English: Shangshu Hojie said: The Beijing camp system, which was formulated by Shizong after careful consideration, should not be changed.

古文：惟大将不当专设，戎政不宜有印，请如贞吉言。 
现代文：只是大将不应当专门设置，军政不应当有军印，请求依从赵贞吉的意见。 
English: However, the general should not be specially set up, the military and politics should not have military seals, and it is requested to follow the opinion of Zhao Zhengyi.

古文：制曰 可 。
现代文：皇帝下命令说 可以 。
English: Emperor Jing agreed.

古文：于是三大营各设总兵一，副将二。
现代文：于是三大营各设置总兵一名，副将二名。
English: As a result, each of the three battalions was set up with one general and two vice-generals.

古文：其参佐等官，互有增损，各均为十人。
现代文：那些参将、佐击等官员，有的增加有的减少，各大营都是十名。
English: Those officials such as general officers and commanders, some increase and some decrease, each battalion has ten people.

古文：而五军营兵，均配二营，营十枝，属二副将分统。
现代文：而五军营的士兵，都配备两个营，每营细分成十枝，隶属两名副将分别统率。
English: The soldiers of the five battalions are equipped with two battalions, each battalion subdivided into ten branches, under the command of two vice-generals.

古文：以侯伯充总兵，寻改曰提督。
现代文：用侯、伯充当总兵，不久改称提督。
English: He used Hou and Bo to act as general soldiers, and soon changed his title to Admiral.

古文：又用三文臣，亦称提督。
现代文：又任用三个文臣，也称作提督。
English: He also appointed three civilian ministers, also known as admirals.

古文：自设六提督后，各持意见，遇事旬月不决。
现代文：自从设置六位提督后，各持己见，遇到事情很久不能决定。
English: Since the establishment of six admirals, each has his own opinion, and when things come up, they can't decide for a long time.

古文：给事中温纯言其弊，乃罢，仍设总督、协理二臣。
现代文：给事中温纯进言它的弊病，纔废除，仍旧设总督京营戎政、协理京营戎政二名大臣。
English: In the middle of the matter, it was suggested that its drawbacks should be abolished, and the Governor of the Beijing Military Government and the two ministers of the Beijing Military Government should still be set up.

古文：万历二年，从给事中欧阳柏请，复给戎政印，汰坐营官二员。
现代文：万历二年，依从给事中欧阳柏的请求，重新给予军政军印，裁减两名坐营官。
English: In the second year of Wanli, in accordance with the request of Ouyang Bai, who was in charge of the matter, the military and political seal was given again, and two camp officers were reduced.

古文：五年，巡视京营科臣林景旸请广召募，立选锋。
现代文：万历五年，巡视京营科臣林景旸请求扩大士兵招募，设立选锋。
English: After five years of hard work, Lin Jingyao, a scholar who inspected the Beijing camp, requested to expand the recruitment of soldiers and set up a selection front.

古文：是时，张居正当国，综核名实，群臣多条上兵事，大旨在足兵、选将，营务颇饬。
现代文：这时，张居正掌权，综合考核名称和实际是否一致，众大臣大多备文上书陈说军队事务，主要意见在补足士兵、挑选将领，京营事务多有整顿。
English: At this time, Zhang Ju was in power, a comprehensive assessment of whether the name and reality were consistent, most of the ministers prepared a written report on military affairs, the main opinions were to supplement soldiers and select generals, and Beijing camp affairs were mostly rectified.

古文：久之，帝厌政，廷臣渐争门户，习于偷惰，遂日废弛。
现代文：后来，皇帝厌倦政务，朝廷大臣渐渐有了党派争执，习惯于苟且怠惰，于是军务一天天地败坏。
English: Later, the emperor was tired of government affairs, and the ministers of the imperial court gradually had party disputes and were accustomed to laziness. As a result, military affairs deteriorated day by day.

古文：三十六年，尚书李化龙理戎政，条上京营积弊。
现代文：万历三十六年，兵部尚书李化龙管理军政，备文上书陈述京营由来已久的弊病。
English: In the 36th year of the Wanli calendar, Li Hualong, the secretary of the Ministry of Military Affairs, took over the management of military affairs and prepared a written statement on the long-standing ills of the Beijing camp.

古文：敕下部议，卒无所振作。
现代文：皇帝命令将李化龙的意见交兵部讨论，最终没有整顿的具体措施。
English: The emperor ordered that Li Hualong's opinion be submitted to the military department for discussion, and ultimately there were no specific measures for rectification.

古文：及兵事起，总督京营赵世新请改设教场城内，便演习。
现代文：等到战争发生，总督京营的赵世新请求将演武场改设在城内，方便演练。
English: When the war broke out, the governor of Beijing, Zhao Shixin, requested that the martial arts arena be relocated to the city to facilitate training.

古文：太常少卿胡来朝请调京军戍边，可变弱为强。
现代文：太常少卿胡来朝请求调遣京城军队戍守边防，可以使京军由弱变强。
English: Too often, Shaoqing Hulai requested the dispatch of the Beijing army to defend the border, which could make the Beijing army from weak to strong.

古文：皆无济于用。
现代文：都对用兵没有起到帮助作用。
English: None of this has helped with the use of troops.

古文：天启三年，协理侍郎朱光祚奏革老家军，补以少壮。
现代文：天启三年，协理侍郎朱光祚上害请求革除老家军，用青壮年补充。
English: In the third year of the Apocalypse, the assistant steward Zhu Guangyao made a request to remove the old soldiers and supplement them with young adults.

古文：老家怨，以瓦砾投光祚，遂不果革。
现代文：老家军士兵怨恨，用瓦片石子投掷朱光祚，于是最终役能革除。
English: The soldiers of the Laojia Army were resentful and threw the cinnamon sticks with tiles and stones, so they were finally able to get rid of the cinnamon.

古文：是时，魏忠贤用事，立内操，又增内臣为监视及把牌诸小内监，益募健丁，诸营军多附之。
现代文：这时，魏忠贤当权，设立内操，挑选太监在宫中授甲操练，又增加宦官担任监视以及把牌等小内监，更多地招募壮丁，各营军队大多依附他。
English: At this time, Wei Zhongxian was in power, set up internal drills, selected eunuchs to give armor drills in the palace, and increased the number of eunuchs to serve as small internal supervisors such as monitoring and dealing cards, recruited more young men, and most of the battalion troops adhered to him.

古文：庄烈帝即位，撤内臣，已而复用。
现代文：庄烈帝登上皇位，撤去宦官，不久又重新任用。
English: Emperor Zhuge Liang ascended the throne, removed the eunuchs, and soon reappointed them.

古文：戎政侍郎李邦华愤京营弊坏，请汰老弱虚冒，而择材力者为天子亲军。
现代文：戎政侍郎李邦华忧愤京营败坏，请求淘汰年老体弱和假冒的人，从而选择有勇力的作为皇帝的亲军。
English: Li Banghua, the attendant of the military government, was worried and angry about the corruption of the Beijing camp, and requested that the old, weak and fake people be eliminated, so as to choose the brave as the emperor's pro-army.

古文：营卒素骄，有疑其为变者。
现代文：京营士兵向来骄横，有的怀疑李邦华要发动变乱。
English: The soldiers of the Beijing Battalion have always been arrogant, and some suspect that Li Banghua wants to start a riot.

古文：勋戚中官亦恶邦华害己，蜚语日闻。
现代文：功臣、皇戚、宦官也厌恶李邦华损害自己，流言渐渐传到皇帝耳朵里。
English: The meritorious vassals, imperial relatives, and eunuchs also detested Li Banghua for harming himself, and the rumor gradually spread to the emperor's ears.

古文：帝为罢邦华，代以陆完学，尽更其法。
现代文：皇帝因此罢免了李邦华，让陆完学接替他，全部改变了他的举措。
English: As a result, the emperor dismissed Li Banghua and let Lu Ganxue succeed him, completely changing his measures.

古文：京营自监督外，总理捕务者二员，提督禁门、巡视点军者三员，帝皆以御马监、司礼、文书房内臣为之，于是营务尽领于中官矣。
现代文：京营除了监督似外，总理捕务的两名，提督禁门、巡视点军的三名，皇帝都让御马监、司礼监、文书房的太监担任，于是军营事务完全被宦官控制了。
English: In addition to the supervision of the Beijing camp, the two members of the prime minister's arrest, the three members of the admiral's forbidden gate and the inspection point army, and the emperor all had the overseer of the horse, the supervisor of the department of etiquette, and the eunuch of the clerk's office, so the camp affairs were completely controlled by the eunuch.

古文：十年八月，车驾阅城，铠甲旌旗甚盛，群臣悉鸾带策马从。
现代文：崇祯十年八月，皇帝检查城防事务，镗甲旗帜很壮盛，众人臣全都穿着官服骑马跟随。
English: In August of the 10th year of Chongzhen, the emperor inspected the city defense affairs. The armored flag was very magnificent, and all the courtiers were wearing official uniforms and riding horses.

古文：六军望见乘舆，皆呼万岁。
现代文：六军望见皇帝，都高呼万岁。
English: When the six armies saw the emperor, they all shouted "Long live the emperor!"

古文：帝大悦，召完学入御幄奖劳，酌以金卮，然徒为容观而已。
现代文：皇帝大喜，将陆完学召入自己的帐篷奖赏慰问，用金杯赏他酒喝，然而不过是仪式好看而已。
English: The emperor was overjoyed and invited Lu Ganxu into his tent to reward his condolences, and gave him a golden cup to drink from. However, it was just a showy ceremony.

古文：时兵事益亟。
现代文：这时军事形势更加紧急。
English: At this time, the military situation became more urgent.

古文：帝命京军出防剿，皆监以中官。
现代文：皇帝命令京城军队出京防卫讨伐，都用宦官作监军。
English: The emperor ordered the capital troops to go out to defend Beijing, and they all used eunuchs to supervise the troops.

古文：廪给优渥，挟势而骄，多夺人俘获以为功，轻折辱诸将士，将士益解体。
现代文：俸禄优厚，依仗权势而骄横，多夺取别人的战利品作为自己的功劳，动辄侮辱众将领军士，将领士兵更加人心涣散。
English: They are well-paid, arrogant because of their power, take the spoils of others as their own merit, and often insult generals and non-commissioned officers. Generals and soldiers are even more unpopular.

古文：周延儒再入阁，劝罢内操，撤诸监军。
现代文：周延儒再次进入内阁，规劝废除内操，撤除各监军。
English: Zhou Yanru re-entered the cabinet, exhorted the abolition of internal operations, and the removal of all supervisory troops.

古文：京兵班师还。
现代文：京城士兵撤军回京。
English: The Kyoto soldiers withdrew and returned to Kyoto.

古文：时营将率内臣私人，不知兵。
现代文：这时京营将领都是宦官的亲信，不懂军务。
English: At this time, the generals of the Beijing camp were all cronies of eunuchs and did not understand military affairs.

古文：兵惟注名支粮，买替纷纭，朝甲暮乙，虽有尺籍，莫得而识也。
现代文：士兵只注册姓名支取粮俸，出钱雇人顶替的情况很多，早晨还是甲，晚上就变成了乙，虽然有军人名籍，但没有办法识别。
English: Soldiers only register their names to receive their salaries, and there are many cases where they pay money to hire a replacement. In the morning they are still A, and in the evening they become B. Although they have military names, there is no way to identify them.

古文：帝屡旨训练，然日不过二三百人，未昏遂散。
现代文：皇帝屡次下旨命令训练，然而每日不过两三百人操练，不到黄昏就解散了。
English: The emperor repeatedly issued orders for training, but only two or three hundred people practiced every day, and they disbanded before dusk.

古文：营兵十万幸抽验不及，玩愒佚罚者无算。
现代文：十万营兵都侥幸抽查不到自己，贪图安逸违反法纪而逃脱处罚的不可胜数。
English: One hundred thousand battalions of soldiers are not able to randomly check themselves, and there are countless people who want to violate the law and discipline and escape punishment.

古文：帝尝问戎政侍郎王家彦，家彦曰： 今日惟严买替之禁，改操练之法，庶可救万一，然势已晚。 
现代文：皇帝曾经询问戎政侍郎王家彦，王家彦说： 现在只有严格出钱雇人顶替的禁令，改革操练的方法，大概可以挽救万分之一，然而形势已经来不及了。 
English: The emperor once asked Wang Jiahong, a military government official, about this. Wang Jiahong said, "Nowadays, only a strict ban on paying money to hire replacements and reforming the methods of drill can probably save one in ten thousand, but the situation is too late.

古文：帝不怿而罢。
现代文：皇帝不高兴而中止。
English: The great-grandfather was not happy and left.

古文：十六年，襄城伯李国祯总戎政，内臣王承恩监督京营。
现代文：崇祯十六年，襄城伯李国祯主持军政，宦官王承恩监察督促京营。
English: In the 16th year of Chongzhen, Xiangcheng Count Li Guozhen presided over the military government, and eunuch Wang Cheng'en supervised and urged the Beijing camp.

古文：明年，流贼入居庸关，至沙河。
现代文：第二年，流窜的贼寇侵入居庸关，抵达沙河。
English: In the second year, the roving bandits invaded Juyongguan and arrived at Shahe.

古文：京军出御，闻炮声溃而归。贼长驱犯阙，守陴者仅内操之三千人，京师遂陷。
现代文：京军出京迎击，听见炮声就溃散逃回京城贼寇不停地快速推进进犯京城，守城军士仅有内操的三千人，京城于是沦陷。
English: The Beijing army went out to meet the attack, heard the sound of the cannon, broke up and fled back to Beijing. The bandits kept advancing rapidly to attack Beijing. There were only three thousand soldiers guarding the city, and Beijing fell.

古文：大率京军积弱，由于占役买闲。
现代文：大体上京军渐渐疲弱，是因为占用军役和出钱就能免去兵役。
English: In general, the Beijing-riding troops gradually weakened, because they were exempted from military service by occupying military posts and paying money.

古文：其弊实起于纨袴之营帅，监视之中官，竟以亡国云。
现代文：它的弊端事实上是由贵族有钱子弟出身的营中将帅，监视营军的宦官引起的，最后导致国家的灭亡。
English: Its drawbacks were actually caused by the eunuchs who oversaw the battalion, battalion generals who were rich sons of aristocrats, and eventually led to the country's demise.

古文：京营之在南者，永乐北迁，始命中府掌府事官守备南京，节制在南诸卫所。
现代文：在南方的京营，永乐年迁都北方时，开始任命中府掌府事官为南京守备，调度约东在南方的各个卫、所。
English: When the Yongle Emperor moved the capital to the north from the southern capital of Beijing, he began to appoint the officials in charge of the central government to guard Nanjing, and dispatched them to various hospitals and clinics in the south.

古文：洪熙初，以内臣司守备。
现代文：洪熙初年，任用宦官为同守备。
English: In the first year of Hongxi, eunuchs were appointed as guards.

古文：宣德末，设参赞机务官。
现代文：宣德末年，设置参赞机务官。
English: In the last years of the Xuande era, the post of Counsellor of Mechanisms was established.

古文：景泰间，增协同守备官。
现代文：景泰年间，增设协同守备官。
English: During the reign of King Gyeongtae, a collaborative garrison was added.

古文：成化末，命南京兵部尚书参赞机务，视五部特重。
现代文：成化末年，命令南京兵部尚书参赞机务，与其它五部相比兵部特别受重视。
English: At the end of Chenghua's life, he ordered the Nanjing Military Department to become an advisory mechanism, and compared with the other five departments, the military department was particularly valued.

古文：先是，京师立神机营，南京亦增设，与大小二教场同练。
现代文：在这以前，京城军队设立神机营，南京也增设，与大小两个教场同样操练。
English: Prior to this, the Beijing army set up a military training camp, and Nanjing also added one, with the same drill as the two large and small training grounds.

古文：军士常操不息，风雨方免。
现代文：士兵经常操练不问断，刮风下两的时候纔免去。
English: Soldiers often drill without interruption. When it's windy, they skip the drill.

古文：有逃籍者，宪宗命南给事御史时至二场点阅。
现代文：有逃避军籍的人，宪宗命令南给事御史定期到两个教场点名查阅。
English: For those who had evaded military service, Emperor Gensong ordered Nan to send them to two schools on a regular basis to check their names.

古文：成国公朱仪及太监安宁不便，诡言军机密务，御史诘问名数非宜。
现代文：成国公朱仪以及太监安宁认为对自己不利，谎称军事是机密事务，御史追问军人姓名人数不合适。
English: Chengguogong Zhu Yi and eunuch Anning Rong thought that it was not good for themselves, falsely claiming that military affairs were confidential, and that it was not appropriate for him to ask the names and numbers of soldiers.

古文：帝为罪御史，仍令守备参赞官阅视，著为令。
现代文：皇帝因此责怪御史，仍旧命令守备参赞官检阅视察，并写定著录为法令。
English: The emperor blamed the imperial historian for this, but still ordered the guarding counselor to inspect the inspection and write the record as a decree.

古文：嘉靖中，言者数奏南营耗亡之弊。
现代文：嘉靖年间，谏官屡次上书说南营消耗逃亡的弊端。
English: During the Jiajing period, the eunuchs repeatedly wrote to the emperor about the drawbacks of fleeing to Nanying.

古文：二十四年冬，诏立振武营，简诸营锐卒充之，益以淮扬趫〗捷者。
现代文：嘉靖二十四年冬天，皇帝下诏建立振武营，挑选各营精锐士兵充任，以淮、扬的矫健兵士补充。
English: In the winter of the twenty-fourth year of Jiajing, the emperor issued an edict to establish the Zhenwu Battalion, and selected the elite soldiers of each battalion to fill the post, supplemented by the vigorous soldiers of Huai and Yang.

古文：江北旧有池河营，专城守，护陵寝。
现代文：长江北面从前有池河营，专门负责城池的守备，保护帝王的墓园。
English: On the north side of the Yangtze River, there used to be a pond camp, which was specifically responsible for guarding the city pond and protecting the emperor's cemetery.

古文：二营兵各三千，领以勋臣，别设场训练。
现代文：两个营的士兵各有三千，任用有功劳的大臣率领，分别设演武场训练。
English: The two battalions, each with 3,000 soldiers, will be led by a distinguished minister and will be separately set up for martial arts training.

古文：然振武营卒多无赖子。
现代文：然而振武营的士兵许多是无赖汉。
English: However, many of Zhenwu's soldiers were scoundrels.

古文：督储侍郎黄懋官抑削之，遂哗，殴懋官至死。
现代文：督储侍郎黄懋官抑制裁削士兵，于是军队突然哗变，把黄懋官殴打致死。
English: The governor's retainer, Huang Yukan, suppressed the soldiers, so the army suddenly mutinied and beat Huang Yukan to death.

古文：诏诛首恶，以户部尚书江东为参赞。
现代文：皇帝诏令诛杀罪魁祸首，任命户部尚书江柬任参赞。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict to kill the culprit, and appointed the household minister, Shangshu Jiangkang, as counselor.

古文：东多所宽假，众益骄，无复法纪。
现代文：江东多方宽容，众士兵越加骄横，不再遵守法纪。
English: The Kanto region was tolerant in many ways, but the soldiers became more and more arrogant and no longer obeyed the laws and regulations.

古文：给事中魏元吉以为言，因举浙直副总兵刘显往提督。
现代文：给事中魏元吉就这种情况向皇帝进言，因而推举浙、直副总兵刘显前往担任提督。
English: During the incident, Wei Yuanji advised the emperor on this situation, and therefore nominated Zhe, Vice-Admiral Liu Xian to serve as admiral.

古文：未至，池河兵再变，殴千户吴钦。
现代文：还未到达，池河营士吴再次叛乱，殴打千户昊钦。
English: Before they arrived, the Chihe battalion commander Wu rebelled again and beat Qianhu Haoqin.

古文：诏显亟往，许以川兵五百自随，事始定。
现代文：诏令刘显迅速前往，允许他随身带领五百名川兵，事情纔平定。
English: The emperor ordered Liu Xian to go there quickly and allowed him to take 500 soldiers from the Sichuan army with him, and the matter was settled.

古文：隆庆改元，罢振武营，以其卒千余仍隶二场及神机营。
现代文：隆庆元年，废除振武营，将它的一千多名士兵仍旧归属大小两个教场和神机营。
English: In the first year of Longqing, Zhenwu Camp was abolished, and its more than one thousand soldiers still belonged to two large and small schools and Shenji Camp.

古文：万历十一年，参赞尚书潘季驯言： 操军原额十有二万，今仅二万余。
现代文：万历十一年，参赞尚书潘季驯建议： 操练军原来数额是十二万，现在仅有二万多。
English: In the eleventh year of Wanli, Counsellor Shang Shu Pan Ji Tame suggested: The original amount of the training army was 120,000, but now it is only more than 20,000.

古文：祖军与选充参半，选充例不补，营伍由是虚。
现代文：祖籍军人和选充军人各占一半，选充按例不补充，营中军队因此空虚。
English: Soldiers of ancestral origin and conscripts each account for half, and conscripts are not replenished as usual, so the army in the camp is empty.

古文：请如祖军收补。 
现代文：请求按照祖籍军人一样招集补充。 
English: The request is to recruit and supplement according to ancestral soldiers.

古文：已而王遴代季驯，言： 大小二场，新旧官军二万三千有余。
现代文：不久王遴接替潘季驯，说： 大小两个教场，新旧官军有二万三千多。
English: Wang Zhan soon took over from Pan Jitai and said: "There are more than 23,000 old and new government troops in the two schools.

古文：请如北京各边，三千一百二十人为一枝，每枝分中、左、右哨，得兵七枝。
现代文：请求与北京各边镇一样，三千一百二十人分为一支，每支分为中、左、右哨，分得七支军队。
English: The request is the same as that of all the border towns of Beijing, the 3,120 people are divided into one, each is divided into the middle, left and right posts, and divided into seven armies.

古文：馀置旗鼓下，备各营缺。 
现代文：其余的安置在旗手、鼓手中，预备各营的空缺。 
English: The rest were placed with the standard-bearers and drummers to prepare for vacancies in the battalions.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从了他的意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：巡视科臣阮子孝极论南营耗弊，言颇切中，然卒无振饬之者。
现代文：巡枧科臣阮子孝竭力论说南营的消耗弊端，意见很切中弊端，然而终究没有整顿南营的人。
English: The cruiser scientist Ruan Zi Xiao tried his best to discuss the consumption drawbacks of the South Camp, and the opinions were very relevant to the drawbacks, but in the end there was no one to rectify the South Camp.

古文：已，从尚书吴文华请，增参赞旗牌，得以军法从事，兼听便宜调遣。
现代文：后来，依从尚书昊文华的请求，增设参赞旗牌，能够依军法办事，而且任凭随机调度派遣。
English: Later, in accordance with the request of Shang Shuhao and Wenhua, the flag of counselor was added, so that they could act in accordance with the military law, and dispatched by random scheduling.

古文：三十一年，添设南中军标营，选大教场卒千余，设中军参将统练。
现代文：万历三十一年，增设南中军标营，挑选一千多名大教场的士兵，设置中军参将指挥操练。
English: In the 31st year of Wanli, the South China military standard camp was added, more than one thousand soldiers of the large training ground were selected, and the Chinese military general staff was set up to command the drill.

古文：规制虽具，而时狃苟安，阘茸一如北京。
现代文：规模制度虽然具备，然而当时习惯于苟且偷安，庸碌低劣完全与北京的军队一样。
English: Although the scale system was in place, at that time, it was customary to steal the peace, and the mediocrity and inferiority were exactly the same as Beijing's army.

古文：及崇祯中，流寇陷庐、凤，踞上流，有窥留都意。
现代文：到了崇祯年间，流窜的贼寇攻占庐、凤，盘踞长江上游，有进攻留都南京的意图。
English: During the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, roving bandits captured the cities of Handan and Feng and occupied the upper reaches of the Yangtze River, with the intention of attacking and occupying Nanjing.

古文：南中将士日夜惴惴，以护陵寝、守京城为名，幸贼不东下而已。
现代文：南营中的将领士兵每日每夜惴惴不安，以保护帝王的墓地、守卫南京城为借口，侥幸期望贼军不往东边进攻丽已。
English: The generals and soldiers in the South Camp were uneasy every day and every night. On the pretext of protecting the emperor's graveyard and guarding Nanjing City, they hoped that the bandits would not attack Lijiang to the east.

古文：最后，史可法为参赞尚书，思振积弊，未久而失，盖无可言焉。
现代文：最后，史可法任参赞尚书，考虑整顿由来已久的弊端，不久就失败了，大概没有可以说的了。
English: In the end, Shi Kehua appointed counselor Shang Shu, considering rectifying the long-standing drawbacks, soon failed, and there is probably nothing left to say.

古文：侍卫上直军之制。
现代文：侍卫当值军队的制度。
English: The system of bodyguards on duty in the military.

古文：太祖即吴王位，其年十二月设拱卫司，领校尉，隶都督府。
现代文：太祖登上昊王王位，在造年的十二月设置拱卫司，统领校尉，隶属都督府。
English: The great-great-grandfather ascended the throne of King Hao, and in December of the year of the founding, he set up the Arch Guards Division, under the command of the captain, which was subordinate to the Governor's Office.

古文：洪武二年，改亲军都尉府，统中、左、右、前、后五卫军，而仪銮司隶焉。
现代文：洪武二年，改名为亲军都尉府，统率中、左、右、前、后五卫军，而仪銮司隶属于它。
English: In the second year of Hongwu, it was renamed as the pro-army governor's office, and commanded the middle, left, right, front and rear five guards, and the ceremonial secretary was subordinate to it.

古文：六年，造守卫金牌，铜涂金为之。
现代文：洪武六年，铸造守卫金牌，用铜涂上金粉做成金牌。
English: In the sixth year of Hongwu, the guarding gold medal was cast, and the gold medal was made of copper coated with gold powder.

古文：长一尺，阔三寸。
现代文：一尺长，三寸宽。
English: One foot long, three inches wide.

古文：以仁、义、礼、智、信为号。
现代文：用仁、义、礼、智、信为名号。
English: Using benevolence, righteousness, courtesy, wisdom, and faith as their names.

古文：二面俱篆文：一曰 守卫 ，一曰 随驾 。
现代文：两面都是篆文：一面是 守卫 ，一面是 随驾 。
English: Both sides are inscriptions: one side is the guard, the other side is the escort.

古文：掌于尚宝司，卫士佩以上直，下直纳之。
现代文：由尚宝司掌管，卫兵佩带着值班，下班时交回金牌。
English: The guards wear the medals on duty and hand them back when they are off duty.

古文：十五年，罢府及司，置锦衣卫。
现代文：洪武十五年，废除府以及司，设置锦衣卫。
English: In the 15th year of Hongwu's reign, the prefecture and the division were abolished, and the Jin Yi Wei was established.

古文：所属有南北镇抚司十四所，所隶有将军、力士、校尉，掌直驾侍卫、巡察缉捕。
现代文：包括南北镇抚司十四个所，管辖的有将军、力士、校尉，负责护卫皇上、侦察逮捕。
English: It included fourteen North and South Town Fusiliers, under the jurisdiction of generals, wrestlers, and school lieutenants, responsible for escorting the emperor, reconnaissance and arrest.

古文：已又择公、侯、伯、都督、指挥之嫡次子，置勋卫散骑舍人，而府军前卫及旗手等十二卫，各有带刀官。
现代文：不久又选择公、侯、伯、都督、指挥的嫡次子，设置勋卫散骑舍人，而府军前卫以及旗手等十二个卫，各有各的带》官。
English: Soon after, he selected the prince, lord, great-uncle, governor, and the second son of the commander, and set up the guards of honor and horsemen, while the vanguard of the prefectural army and the flag bearer were twelve guards, each with their own belt.

古文：锦衣所隶将军，初名天武，后改称大汉将军，凡千五百人。
现代文：锦衣所管辖的将军，起初名号叫天武，后来改叫大汉将军，一共一千五百人。
English: The generals under the jurisdiction of the brocade, at first called Tianwu, later changed to Dahan, a total of fifteen hundred people.

古文：设千、百户，总旗七员。
现代文：设置于户、百户、总旗七名。
English: It is set up in a household, a hundred households, and a total of seven people.

古文：其众自为一军，下直操练如制，缺至五十人方补。
现代文：锦衣卫的兵众自为一军，值班后按照制度操练，缺员到五十人纔补充。
English: The soldiers of the brocade guards are an army in their own right. After duty, they practice in accordance with the system. There is a shortage of up to fifty people.

古文：月糈二石，积劳试补千、百户，亡者许以亲子弟魁梧材勇者代，无则选民户充之。
现代文：每月粮饷二石，积累功劳可试补担任千户、百户，死去的允许让亲兄弟或儿子中身材魁梧有勇力的替代，若没有就从百姓家挑选补充。
English: Two stones of grain are given every month, and the accumulated merits can be replenished to serve one thousand or one hundred households. If someone dies, it is allowed to let his brother or son be a strong and courageous replacement, and if there is no replacement, it will be selected from the people's homes.

古文：永乐中，置五军、三千营。
现代文：永乐年间，设置五军、三千营。
English: During the Yongle Era, five armies and three thousand battalions were set up.

古文：增红盔、明甲二将军及叉刀围子手之属，备宿卫。
现代文：增设红盔、明甲两个将军以及叉围子手之类，用来在皇官中值勤任警卫。
English: Red helmets, two generals in Ming armor, and a forklift driver were added to serve as guards among the imperial officials.

古文：校尉、力士佥民间丁壮无恶疾、过犯者。
现代文：校尉、力士全都是民间没有大的疾病、没犯过法的壮年男丁。
English: The school captain and wrestler are all middle-aged men who have no major illnesses and have never broken the law.

古文：力士先隶旗手卫，后改隶锦衣及腾骧四卫，专领随驾金鼓、旗帜及守卫四门。
现代文：力士起初隶属旗手卫，后来改成隶属锦衣以及腾壤四个卫，专门负责跟随皇帝的金鼓、旗帜以及守卫四个宫门。
English: At first, wrestlers belonged to the standard-bearer guards, but later they were changed to the four guards belonging to Jin Yi and Tengyeong. They were specifically responsible for following the emperor's golden drum, flag and guarding the four palace gates.

古文：校尉原隶仪銮司，司改锦衣卫，仍隶焉。
现代文：枝尉最初隶属仪銮司，仪銮司改成锦衣卫，仍然隶属锦衣卫。
English: The branch officer originally belonged to the Ceremonial Division, the Ceremonial Division was changed to the Brocade Guards, and still belongs to the Brocade Guards.

古文：掌擎执卤簿仪仗，曰鉴舆，曰擎盖，曰扇手，曰旌节，曰旗幢，曰班剑，曰斧钺，曰戈戟，曰弓矢，曰驯马，凡十司，及驾前宣召差遣，三日一更直。
现代文：负责举持帝王出行时随驾的仪仗，叫銮舆，叫擎盖，叫扇手，叫旌节，叫施幢，叫班窍，叫斧钹，叫戈戟，叫弓矢，叫驯马，共十个司，以及皇帝跟前宣召使唤的人，每隔三天换一次班。
English: It is responsible for holding the ceremonial battle that accompanies the emperor when he travels. It is responsible for calling the dragon, calling the crane, calling the fan, calling the fan, calling the fan, calling the fan, calling the fan, calling the fan, calling the fan, calling the fan, calling the fan, calling the fan, calling the fan, calling the fan, calling the fan, calling the fan, calling the fan, calling the fan, calling the fan, calling the fan, calling the fan, calling the fan, calling the fan, calling the fan, calling the fan, calling the fan, calling the fan, calling the fan, calling the fan, calling the fan, calling the fan,

古文：设总旗、小旗，而领以勋戚官。
现代文：设置总旗、小旗，用功臣皇戚率领。
English: The general banner and small banners were set up, with meritorious imperial relatives leading the procession.

古文：官凡六：管大汉将军及散骑舍人、府军前卫带刀官者一，管五军营叉刀围子手者一，管神枢营红盔将军者四。
现代文：官员共六名：管辖大汉将军以及散骑舍人、府军前卫带，官的一名，管辖五军营叉圈子手的一名，管辖神枢营红盔将军的四名。
English: There were a total of six officials: one officer to supervise the general of the Great Han Army, the stragglers, and the vanguard of the prefectural army, one officer to supervise the forklift operator of the Fifth Military Camp, and four officers to supervise the general of the Red Helmet of the Shenshu Camp.

古文：圣节、正旦、冬至及大祀、誓戒、册封、遣祭、传制用全直，直三千人，余则更番，器仗衣服位列亦稍殊焉。
现代文：皇帝的生日、正月初一、冬至以及大祀、誓戒、册封、遣祭、传制采用全期值班制度，值班的有三千人，剩余的就轮番换班，器物仪仗衣服队列排位也稍有不同。
English: The emperor's birthday, the first day of the first month of the year, the winter solstice, as well as the great worship, vows and pledges, the enthronement, the sending of offerings, and the passing of the system adopt a full-time duty system. There are three thousand people on duty, and the rest change shifts in rotation. The equipment, ceremonial wares, and clothing queue rankings are also slightly different.

古文：凡郊祀、经筵、巡幸侍从各有定制，详《礼志》中。
现代文：凡是在郊外祭祀天地、御前讲席、皇帝巡游时的随身卫士各有一定的制度，详见《礼志》中。
English: All the bodyguards who were in the suburbs to offer sacrifices to heaven and earth, to give lectures in front of the emperor, and to accompany the emperor when he was on parade, each had a certain system, which is described in detail in the "Li Zhi."

古文：居常，当直将军朝夕分候午门外，夜则司更，共百人。
现代文：在平常，值班的军官从早到晚各自在午门外守候，夜里就负责打更，总共一百人。
English: Normally, the officers on duty wait outside the noon gate from morning to night, and at night they are responsible for calling more, a total of one hundred people.

古文：而五军叉刀官军，悉于皇城直宿。
现代文：而五车叉刀官军，都在皇城值勤护卫。
English: And the five-car forklift official army are all on duty escorting in the imperial city.

古文：掌侍卫官输直，日一员。
现代文：掌管卫兵的官员轮流值班，每天一名。
English: The officers in charge of the guards rotate on duty, one each day.

古文：惟掌锦衣卫将军及叉刀手者，每日侍。
现代文：只有掌管锦衣卫的军官以及叉刀手的官员，每天值班。
English: Only the officers in charge of the brocade guards and the officers in charge of the forks and knives are on duty every day.

古文：尤严收捕之令，及诸脱更离直者。
现代文：尤其严格执行拘捕的命令，以及严惩迟到早退擅离职守的人。
English: In particular, they strictly enforce the order of arrest, and severely punish those who are late, leave early, and leave the office without permission.

古文：共计锦衣卫大汉将军一千五百七人，府军前卫带刀官四十，神枢营红盔将军二千五百，把总指挥十六，明甲将军五百二，把总指挥二，大汉将军八，五军营叉刀围子手三千，把总指挥八，勋卫散骑舍人无定员，旗手等卫带刀官一百八十，此侍卫亲军大较也。
现代文：总共计算锦衣卫大汉将军一千五百零七人，府军前卫带刀官四十人，神枢营红盔将军二千五百人，把总指挥十六人，明甲将军五百零二人，把总指挥二人，大汉将军八人，五军营叉刀围子手三千人，把总指挥八人，勋卫散骑舍人没有定数，旗手等卫带刀官一百八十人，这就是皇帝随身护卫军队的大致情况。
English: In total, there were 1,507 Jin clothing guards and generals, 40 vanguard guards with sword officers, 2,500 red helmet guards and generals, 16 commander-in-chiefs, 5002 Ming and Jia generals, 2 commander-in-chiefs, 8 great generals, 3,000 forks and swordsmen of the 5 battalions, 8 commander-in-chiefs, no fixed number of guards and horsemen, and 180 guards and swordsmen of the standard bearers. This is the general situation of the army escorting the emperor.

古文：正统后，妃、主、公、侯、中贵子弟授官者，多寄禄锦衣中。
现代文：正统以后，妃、主、公、侯、得宠宦官的子侄中被授予官位的，大多在锦衣卫中挂名领俸禄。
English: After the establishment of orthodoxy, the sons and nephews of empresses, lords, dukes, marquesses, and favored eunuchs were awarded official ranks, and most of them were appointed to receive salaries from the Jin, Yi, and Wei.

古文：正德时，奏带传升冒衔者，又不下数百人。
现代文：正德年间，因上奏而升官和冒充军衔的，又不少于几百人。
English: During the Zhengde era, there were no less than several hundred people who were promoted and assumed military ranks as a result of shangsao.

古文：武宗好养勇士，尝以千、把总四十七人，注锦衣卫带俸舍、余千一百人充御马监家将勇士，食粮骑操。
现代文：武宗喜欢供养有勇力之士，曾经把干、把总四十七人，注入锦衣卫带俸的名籍中，舍人、余丁一千一百人充当御马监家将勇士，领食粮饷骑马操练。
English: Emperor Wuzong liked to provide for those with courage. He once put a total of forty-seven people, both men and women, on the list of those entitled to wear the brocade and armor, and made one thousand one hundred people, both men and women, serve as overseers of the horses, leading the warriors, receiving food, and riding horses.

古文：又令大汉将军试百户，五年实授，著为令。
现代文：又下令大汉将军试用任百户，五年后正式任命，写定著录成法令。
English: He also ordered the Han general to appoint 100 households on a trial basis, and formally appoint them five years later, and write down the recorded decree.

古文：幸窦开而恩泽滥，宿卫稍轻矣。
现代文：侥幸进身的门户一打开而皇帝的恩惠施行遇滥，宫廷中的卫士渐渐变得地位轻了。
English: As soon as the portals of opportunity were opened and the emperor's favors were abused, the guards in the court gradually became less important.

古文：至万历间，卫士多占役、买闲，其弊亦与三大营等。
现代文：到万历年间，卫士中被调派为私人服杂役、出钱免去兵役的现象很多，这种现象的弊端也和三大营差不多。
English: During the Wanli era, there were many cases of guards being assigned to private service and paying money to be exempted from military service, and the drawbacks of this phenomenon were similar to those of the three major battalions.

古文：虽定离直者夺月糈之例，然不能革。
现代文：虽然制定有离开值班的罚扣一个月粮饷的制度。然而不能革除这些弊端。
English: Although there is a system of a fine of one month's salary for leaving duty, these drawbacks cannot be eliminated.

古文：太祖之设锦衣也，专司卤簿。
现代文：太祖设置锦衣，是专门负责帝王的仪仗。
English: Grandfather set up brocade, is specifically responsible for the emperor's ceremonial role.

古文：是时方用重刑，有罪者往往下锦衣卫鞫实，本卫参刑狱自此始。
现代文：这时，正采用严刑，有罪的人常常交给锦衣卫审讯，锦衣卫参预刑罚事务从此开始。
English: At this time, severe punishments were being used, and the guilty were often handed over to the brocade guards for interrogation, and the brocade guards began to participate in pre-sentence affairs.

古文：文皇入立，倚锦衣为心腹。
现代文：文皇登上帝位，依靠锦衣做亲信。
English: Emperor Wen ascended to the throne, relying on Jin Yi as a close confidant.

古文：所属南北两镇抚司，南理本卫刑名及军匠，而北专治诏狱。
现代文：所管辖的南北两个镇抚司，南镇抚司治理本卫的刑事案件以及军中的工匠，而北镇抚司专门治理奉旨办理的案件。
English: The two township magistrates of the north and south, the south town magistrate administers the criminal cases of the guards and the craftsmen in the army, while the north town magistrate specifically administers the cases handled by the order.

古文：凡问刑、奏请皆自达，不关白卫帅。
现代文：凡是审判、上奏请示都自行向皇帝上书，不通报卫帅。
English: Whenever there was a trial or a petition, they would submit a letter to the emperor on their own, without notifying Wei Shuai.

古文：用法深刻，为祸甚烈，详《刑法志》。
现代文：依法判罪严峻苛刻，造成的祸害很惨烈，详细情况见《刑法志》。
English: According to the law, the sentence is severe and harsh, and the harm caused is very tragic. For details, see the "Criminal Law."

古文：又锦衣缉民间情伪，以印官奉敕领官校。
现代文：又锦衣访察民间的真伪，以印官奉着皇帝的命令带领官校。
English: In addition, Jin Yi visited the people to investigate the authenticity of the people, with the Emperor's order to lead the official school.

古文：东厂太监缉事，别领官校，亦从本卫拨给，因是恒与中官相表里。
现代文：东厂太监办理侦察缉捕的事情，另外带领官校，也从锦衣卫调拨，因此总与宦官互相勾结。
English: The eunuch of the East Factory was in charge of reconnaissance and arrest. In addition, the leader of the government school was also transferred from Jinlingwei, so he always colluded with the eunuch.

古文：皇城守卫，用二十二卫卒，不独锦衣军，而门禁亦上直中事。
现代文：皇城的守卫，任用二十二个卫的士兵，不只是锦衣军，而守门的卫兵也值班宫中事务。
English: The guards of the imperial city, appointed with twenty-two guards soldiers, are not only the brocade army, but the gate guards are also on duty in the palace affairs.

古文：京城巡捕有专官，然每令锦衣官协同。
现代文：京城的巡逻搜捕事务有专门的官员负责，然而常命令锦衣官协助办理。
English: Special officers are responsible for patrolling and searching in the capital, but officers in brocade are often ordered to assist in the process.

古文：地亲权要，遂终明之世云。
现代文：地位亲贵，权势重大，就这样持续到明朝灭亡。
English: Their position was intimate and their power was great, and this continued until the fall of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：初，太祖取婺州，选富民子弟充宿卫，曰御中军。
现代文：当初，太祖攻取婺州，挑选有钱人家子弟充当值勤的卫士，称作御中军。
English: At first, Emperor Taizu conquered Luzhou and selected the sons of wealthy families to serve as guards on duty, known as the Imperial Chinese Army.

古文：已，置帐前总制亲兵都指挥使。
现代文：后来，设置帐前总制亲兵都指挥使。
English: Later, the general accounting system was set up, and all soldiers were commanded by their commanders.

古文：后复省，置都镇抚司，隶都督府，总牙兵巡徼。
现代文：后来又裁除，设置都镇抚司，隶属都督府，总领卫兵巡行视察。
English: Later, it was abolished, and the post of the governor of the capital town, subordinate to the governor's office, was established, with the commander-in-chief of the guards inspecting the procession.

古文：而金吾前后、羽林左右、虎贲左右、府军左右前后十卫，以时番上，号亲军。
现代文：至于前后金吾、左右羽林、左右虎贲、左右前后府军十个卫，按时轮番值勤，称做亲军。
English: As for the front and back Kingo, left and right Uebayashi, right and left Tigress, left and right front and back ten guards of the prefectural army, they are on duty according to the time rotation, and are called the pro-army.

古文：有请，得自行部，不关都督府。
现代文：有请求，可以自己往部里报告，不通报都督府。
English: If requested, they can report to the ministry themselves, without informing the governor's office.

古文：及定天下，改都镇抚司为留守，设左右前后中五卫，关领内府铜符，日遣二人点阅，夜亦如之，所谓皇城守卫官军也。
现代文：等到平定天下，将都镇抚司改为留守司，设置左右前后中五个卫，领取内府的铜符，白天派遣两个人点名查阅，晚上也如此，就是所说的皇城守卫官军。
English: Wait until the world is pacified, change the post of the imperial guard to the post of the imperial guard, set up five guards on the left, right, front and back, receive the bronze certificates of the inner palace, send two people to check the names during the day, and do the same in the evening, that is, the so-called imperial guard army.

古文：二十七年，申定皇城门禁约。
现代文：洪武二十七年，申明规定皇官城门的戒备防范规定。
English: In the 27th year of Hongwu, the alert and precautionary regulations of the imperial city gate were explicitly stipulated.

古文：凡朝参，门始启，直日都督、将军及带刀、指挥、千百户、镇抚、舍人入后，百官始以次入。
现代文：凡是百官上朝参拜君主，门刚打开，当天值勤的都督、将军以及带刀指挥、干百户、镇抚、舍人入宫以后，众官员纔依次进入。
English: Whenever hundreds of officials visit the palace to pay homage to the monarch, the doors are just opened, and after the governor, general, commander with a sword, governors, governors, and courtiers who are on duty that day enter the palace, the officials enter one after another.

古文：上直军三日一更番，内臣出入必合符严索，以金币出者验视勘合，以兵器杂药入门者擒治，失察者重罪之。民有事陈奏，不许固遏。
现代文：值勤的军士每隔三天轮换一次，宦官进出必定合验符信严格检查，带金钱彩帛出门的检碱查看验对符契，带武器和不纯正的药进门的要擒捉处治，失于督察的从重判他的罪百姓有事情上报，不允许阻挡遏止。
English: The on-duty sergeant rotates every three days, the eunuchs enter and leave must be checked and checked, the money and money are checked and checked, the weapons and impure drugs are caught and dealt with, and the people who are lost to the inspector are sentenced to his crime. The people have things to report, and it is not allowed to obstruct and stop.

古文：帝念卫士劳苦，令家有婚丧、疾病、产子诸不得已事，得自言情，家无余丁，父母俱病者，许假侍养，愈乃复。
现代文：皇帝可怜卫士辛苦，下令若家裹有结婚丧葬、患疾病、生小孩等不可避免的事情，可以自己讲明情况；家中没有其它壮年男子，父母都患病的，允许请假侍奉保养父母，父母病愈俊再回来。
English: The emperor pitied the guards for their hard work, and ordered that if a family had unavoidable things such as marriage, funeral, illness, and having a child, they could explain the situation themselves; if there was no other adult male in the family, and both parents were ill, they were allowed to take time off to serve and care for their parents, and their parents would come back when they were sick.

古文：先是，新宫成，诏中书省曰： 军士战斗伤残，难备行伍，可于宫墙外造舍以居之，昼则治生，夜则巡警。 
现代文：此前，新的宫殿建成，诏令中书省说： 在战斗中受伤致残的士兵，难以在军队中任职，可以在皇宫墙外建造房舍让他们居住，白天就经营家业，夜里就巡逻警戒。 
English: Previously, after the new palace was built, the Ministry of Education and Culture said in the edict: "For soldiers who are injured and disabled in battle and find it difficult to serve in the army, houses can be built outside the palace wall for them to live in, and they can run their family business during the day and patrol and guard at night.

古文：其后，定十二卫随驾军上直者，人给钱三百。
现代文：这以后，规定十二卫跟随皇帝的军队值班的，每人供给钱三百。
English: After that, it was stipulated that the twelve guardsmen who were on duty with the emperor's army would be provided with 300 yuan each.

古文：二十八年，复于四门置舍，使恩军为卫士执爨。
现代文：洪武二十八年，又在四个城门设置房舍，让恩军为卫士做饭。
English: In the 28th year of Hongwu, they also set up houses at the four city gates and asked the En Army to cook for the guards.

古文：恩军者，得罪免死及诸降卒也。
现代文：恩军，是被判罪免于死刑以及各投降的士兵。
English: The soldiers who were convicted were spared the death penalty and each surrendered.

古文：永乐中，定制，诸卫各有分地。
现代文：永乐年间，制定制度，各卫各有分防的区域。
English: During the Yongle Dynasty, a system was established in which each Wei had a separate defense zone.

古文：自午门达承天门左右，逮长安左右门，至皇城东西，属旗手、济阳、济川、府军及虎贲右、金吾前、燕山前、羽林前八卫。
现代文：从午门到承天门左右两边，及左长安门、右长安门，至皇城的东面、西面，属于旗手、济阳、济川、府军以及虎贲右、金吾前、燕山前、羽林前八个卫。
English: From the noon gate to the left and right sides of the Chengdian Gate, and the left Chang'an Gate, the right Chang'an Gate, to the east and west of the imperial city, it belongs to the standard-bearer, Jiyang, Jichuan, the prefectural army, and the eight guards of the right side of the tiger, Kingu front, Yanshan front, and Ulin front.

古文：东华门左右至东安门左右，属金吾、羽林、府军、燕山四左卫。
现代文：东华门左右两边到柬安门左右两边，属于金吾、羽林、府军、燕山四个左卫。
English: Both sides of Donghua Gate to the left and right, to the left and right of Camden Gate, belong to the four left guards of Kingu, Ulin, prefectural army and Yanshan.

古文：西华门左右至西安门左右，属四右卫。
现代文：西华门左右两边到西安门左右两边，属于四个右卫。
English: From the left and right sides of Xihua Gate to the left and right sides of Xi'an Gate, there are four right guards.

古文：玄武门左右至北安门左右，属金吾、府军后及通州、大兴四卫。
现代文：玄武门左右两边到北安门左右两边，属于金吾、府军后以及通州、大兴四个卫。
English: From the left and right sides of the Xuanwu Gate to the left and right sides of the Bei'an Gate, it belongs to the four wei of Kingu, Fuchunhou, Tongzhou and Daxing.

古文：卫有铜符，颁自太祖。
现代文：卫有铜制的符信，从太祖开始颁发。
English: Wei has a bronze seal, which has been issued since the time of his great-grandfather.

古文：曰承，曰东，曰西，曰北，各以其门名也。
现代文：名叫承、东、西、北，各自根据它们的门命名。
English: They are named Cheng, Dong, Xi and Bei, each named after their gate.

古文：巡者左半，守者右半。
现代文：巡逻的拿符的左半，守卫的拿右半。
English: Patrol officers hold the left half of the flag, while guards hold the right half.

古文：守官遇巡官至，合契而从事。
现代文：守卫的官员遇见巡逻的官员到来，核验符契然后办事。
English: The guarding officers meet the patrolling officers when they arrive, verify the deed and then do their business.

古文：各门守卫官，夜各领铜令申字牌巡警，自一至十六。
现代文：各门的守卫官，夜里各自领取铜令申字牌巡逻警戒，从一个到十六个。
English: The guards at each gate will each receive a bronze "patrol alert" sign at night, from one to sixteen.

古文：内皇城卫舍四十，外皇城卫舍七十二，俱设铜铎，次第循环。
现代文：内皇城卫舍四十个，外皇城卫舍七十二个，都设置有铜铃，依次循环。
English: Forty inner imperial city watchtowers and seventy-two outer imperial city watchtowers are equipped with bronze bells, which are rung sequentially.

古文：内皇城左右坐更将军百，每更二十人，四门走更官八，交互往来，钤印于籍以为验。
现代文：内皇城左右坐更将军一百名，每更二十人值勤，四门走更官八名，互相往来，在书册上盖印章作为凭证。
English: In the Inner Imperial City, there are one hundred ganger generals sitting on the left and right, with twenty on duty for each ganger, and eight ganger officials walking four doors, interacting with each other, and stamping seals on the books as proof.

古文：都督及带刀、千百户日各一人，领申字牌直宿，及点各门军士。
现代文：都督以及带刀、千户、百户每日各一名，领取申字牌值班，以及清点各门的士兵。
English: The governor of the city, as well as soldiers with swords, thousands of households, and hundreds of households, one each per day, are on duty to receive registration cards, as well as soldiers who count each door.

古文：后更定都督府，改命侯、伯佥书焉。
现代文：后来改成都督府，改令侯、伯在书册上签字。
English: Later, it was changed to the governor's office, and the mayor and mayor were changed to sign the book.

古文：洪熙初，更造卫士悬牌。
现代文：洪熙初年，再制造卫士悬挂的号牌。
English: In the first year of Hongxi, the number plate hung by the guards was re-made.

古文：时亲军缺伍，卫士不获代。
现代文：当时跟随皇帝左右的亲军人数不足，卫士不能替代。
English: At that time, the number of pro-army soldiers around the emperor was insufficient, and the guards could not be replaced.

古文：帝命选他卫军守端、直诸门，尚书李庆谓不可。
现代文：皇帝命令挑选其它卫的军士守卫端门、直门等门，尚书李庆认为不行。
English: The emperor ordered to select other guards sergeants to guard the front door, straight door and other doors, but Shangshu Li Qing did not think it was possible.

古文：帝曰： 人主在布德以属人心，苟心相属，虽非亲幸，何患焉。 
现代文：皇帝说： 君主在于布施恩德来收拢人心，如果心相连属，即使不是亲近宠信的入，又担心什么呢。 
English: The emperor said: The sovereign is to offer kindness to win the hearts of the people. If the hearts are connected, even if they are not close to the favorite, what are they worried about?

古文：宣德三年，命御史点阅卫卒。
现代文：宣德三年，命令御史检阅卫兵。
English: Three years after the promulgation of the Constitution, Emperor Xuanzong ordered the imperial historian to inspect the guards.

古文：天顺中，复增给事中一人。
现代文：天顺年间，又增设给事中一名。
English: During the Tenshun era, an additional post was created for a chorus member.

古文：成化十年，尚书马文升言： 太祖置亲军指挥使司，不隶五府。
现代文：成化十年，尚书马文升建议说： 太祖设置亲军指挥使司，不隶属五府。
English: Ten years later, Shangshu Ma Wensheng suggested that: the great-grandfather set up a pro-army command mission, not affiliated with the five prefectures.

古文：文皇帝复设亲军十二卫，又增勇士数千员，属御马监，上直，而以腹心臣领之。
现代文：文皇帝又设置亲军十二卫，又增加几千名勇士，隶属御马监，入宫值勤，而任命心腹大臣带领他们。
English: Emperor Wen also set up twelve guards of the pro-army, and added several thousand warriors, subordinate to the steward, to enter the palace on duty, and appointed the minister to lead them.

古文：比者日废弛，勇士与诸营无异，皇城之内，兵卫无几，诸监门卒尤疲羸，至不任受甲。
现代文：近来渐渐败坏，勇士与各营士兵没有差异，皇城里面，士兵卫士没有几个，众监门的士兵尤其疲惫羸弱，以至于不能承受盔甲的重量。
English: Lately, it has been deteriorating. There is no difference between the warriors and the soldiers of each battalion. In the imperial city, there are few soldiers and guards. The soldiers of the prison gate are especially tired and weak, so that they can not bear the weight of armor.

古文：宜敕御马监官，即见军选练。
现代文：应该命令御马监官，就在现有军队中选拔操练。
English: Supervisor Mima should be ordered to conduct a selection drill among the existing troops.

古文：仍敕守卫官常严步伍，讥察出入，以防微销萌。 
现代文：仍旧命令守卫官常常严格整顿军队，稽察盘查进出的人，以防微杜渐消除酝酿中的祸患。 
English: He still ordered the guards to regularly and strictly rectify the army and inspect the people entering and leaving, in order to prevent and gradually eliminate the brewing disaster.

古文：帝然其言，亦未能有所整饬。
现代文：皇帝认为他的意见正确，但也不能有所整顿。
English: The emperor thought that his opinion was correct, but he could not rectify it.

古文：正德初，严皇城红铺巡徼，日令留守卫指挥五员，督内外夜巡军。
现代文：正德初年，严格皇城红铺的巡行视察，每天命令留下五名守卫指挥，监督皇城内外夜里巡逻的士兵。
English: In the first year of Zhengde, the patrol inspection of the red shops in the imperial city was strict. Every day, five guards were ordered to stay behind to supervise the soldiers patrolling inside and outside the imperial city at night.

古文：而兵部郎中、主事各一人，同御史、锦衣卫稽阅，毋摄他务。
现代文：而兵部郎中、主事各一人，协同御史、锦衣卫稽察检阅，不得兼代其它事务。
English: However, one person from each of the Hyobusho (Minister of Military Affairs) and the person in charge, in cooperation with the inspector of the Imperial History Museum and the Keeper of the Imperial Regalia, must not also be in charge of other affairs.

古文：嘉靖七年，增直宿官军衣粮，五年一给。
现代文：嘉靖七年，增加值夜官军的衣物粮饷，每隔五年供给一次。
English: In the seventh year of Jiajing, the value-added clothing and grain rations of the night official army increased, and they were supplied once every five years.

古文：万历十一年，于皇城内外设把总二员，分东西管理。
现代文：万历十一年，在皇城内外设置两名把总，分管东面西面。
English: In the eleventh year of Wanli, two chief inspectors were set up inside and outside the imperial city, in charge of the east and west.

古文：时门禁益弛，卫军役于中官，每至空伍，赁市儿行丐应点阅。
现代文：当时城门的戒备防守更加松弛，卫军被宦官役使，常常至于队伍空缺，出钱雇集市中的青年流浪的乞丐应付点名检枧。
English: At that time, the alert defense of the city gate was more relaxed, the guards were eunuchs, and often, as for the team vacancies, they paid to hire young wandering beggars in the market to cope with the roll call.

古文：叉刀、红盔日出始一入直，直庐虚无人。
现代文：叉刀、红盔太阳出来时纔值一下班，卫士值夜的地方空虚无人。
English: Forked swords, red helmets When the sun comes out, the guards are off duty, and the place where the guards are on duty at night is empty.

古文：坐更将军皆纳月镪于所辖。
现代文：坐更将军都向上司交纳月钱以逃避值夜。
English: Even senior generals pay their superiors a monthly fee to avoid being on duty at night.

古文：凡提号、巡城、印簿、走更诸事悉废。
现代文：凡是播铃喊号、城中巡逻、点名、打更等事情全都荒废。
English: All the things like ringing bells and shouting, patrolling the city, calling out names, and beating people up were all in vain.

古文：十五年，再申门禁。
现代文：正德十五年，再次申明城门的戒备。
English: In the fifteenth year of Zhengde, the alertness of the city gate was once again affirmed.

古文：久之，给事中吴文炜乞尽复旧制。
现代文：很久后，给事中昊文焯请求完全恢复以前的制度。
English: After a long time, Hao Wenzhong, who was involved in the case, requested that the previous system be fully restored.

古文：不报。
现代文：皇帝没有答复。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：末年，有失金牌久之始觉者。
现代文：正德后期，有丢失金牌很久后纔被发觉的人。
English: In the late Zhengde period, there were people who lost their gold medals long after they were found.

古文：梃击之事，张差一妄男子，得阑入殿廷，其积弛可知。
现代文：梃击事件，张差一个无知妄为的男子，能够无凭证擅自进入皇宫，宫廷戒备很久以来的荒废由此可以知道。
English: Zhang Zha, an ignorant and reckless man, was able to enter the imperial palace without any documents. This shows that the palace has been abandoned for a long time.

古文：是后中外多事，启、祯两朝虽屡申饬，竟莫能挽，侵寻以至于亡。
现代文：这以后朝廷内外很多变故，天启、崇祯两个朝代虽然屡次整顿，终究不能够挽回，渐渐地直到灭亡。
English: After this, there were many changes both inside and outside the imperial court. Although the two dynasties of Tianqi and Chongzhen were repeatedly rectified, they could not be saved, and gradually died out.

古文：京城巡捕之职，洪武初，置兵马司，讥察奸伪。
现代文：京城巡捕的职务，洪武初年，设置兵马司，稽察诡诈虚假的人或者事。
English: The duties of patrolling the capital, the first year of Hongwu, the establishment of the Terracotta Warriors and Horses Division, the inspection of fraudulent and false people or things.

古文：夜发巡牌，旗士领之，核城门扃鐍及夜行者。
现代文：夜里发放巡逻的牌子，旗士领取巡牌，检查城门的锁钥门闩以及夜里行走的人。
English: At night, patrol signs will be distributed, flag officers will receive patrol cards, and the locks and latches of city gates and people walking at night will be checked.

古文：已改命卫所镇抚官，而掌于中军都督府。
现代文：不久改名卫所镇抚官，而且由中军都督府掌管。
English: The name was soon changed to the Town Governor's Office, and the Chinese army took over the administration of the town.

古文：永乐中，增置五城兵马司。
现代文：永乐年间，增加设置五城兵马司。
English: During the Yongle period, the five-city Terracotta Warriors and Horses Division was added.

古文：宣德初，京师多盗，增官军百人，协五城逐捕。
现代文：宣德初期，京城强盗多，增加一百名官军，协助五城兵马司追捕。
English: In the early days of Xuande, there were many robbers in Beijing, and one hundred government troops were added to assist the pursuit of the five-city Terracotta Army.

古文：已，复增夜巡候卒五百。
现代文：后来，又增加五百名夜里巡逻的士兵。
English: Later, another five hundred soldiers were added for night patrols.

古文：成化中，始命锦衣官同御史督之。
现代文：成化年间，开始任命锦衣卫官协同御史监督他们。
English: During the Chenghua period, the Jin clothing guards began to be appointed to supervise them in cooperation with the imperial historian.

古文：末年，拨给团营军二百。
现代文：成化后期，调拨给二百各团营士兵。
English: In the later stages of its formation, it was assigned to 200 soldiers of each regimental battalion.

古文：弘治元年，令三千营选指挥以下四员，领精骑巡京城外，又令锦衣官五、旗手等卫官各一，分地巡警，巡军给牌。
现代文：弘治元年，命令三千营选拔官职在指挥以下的四名官员，率领精锐骑兵巡视京城外面，又命令锦衣官五名，旗手等卫官员各一名，划分区域巡逻警戒，巡逻军队发给牌子。
English: In the first year of the Hongzhi era, he ordered the three thousand battalion to select four officials below the commander to lead the elite cavalry to inspect the outside of the capital, and ordered five brocade officers, one flagman and one guard officer to divide the patrol area and issue the patrol army with signs.

古文：五年，设把总都指挥，专职巡捕。
现代文：弘治五年，设置把总都指挥，专门负责巡捕。
English: In the fifth year of the Hongzhi era, the commander of the headquarters was set up, specifically responsible for patrolling.

古文：正德中，添设把总，分画京城外地，南抵海子，北抵居庸关，西抵卢沟桥，东抵通州。
现代文：正德年间，添加设置把总，划分京城外的地方，南到海子，北到居庸关，西到卢沟桥，东到通州。
English: During the Zhengde era, the location of the general was added, dividing the places outside the capital, south to Haizi, north to Juyongguan, west to Lugou Bridge, and east to Tongzhou.

古文：复增城内二员，而益以团营军，定官卒赏罚例。
现代文：又在京城内增设二名把总，而用团营的军士来扩充，制定官军奖惩条例。
English: In addition, two commander-in-chiefs were added in the capital, and the corps of soldiers was expanded, and regulations on rewards and punishments for officers and soldiers were formulated.

古文：末年，逻卒增至四千人，特置参将。
现代文：正德后期，巡逻兵增加到四千人，专门设置参将。
English: In the late Zhengde period, the number of patrol soldiers was increased to four thousand, and the general staff was specially set up.

古文：嘉靖元年，复增城外把总一员，并旧为五，分辖城内东西二路，城外西南、东南、东北三路，增营兵马五千。
现代文：嘉靖元年，又增加城外把总一名，与旧有的一共是五名，分别管辖城内的东西两路，城外的西南、东南、东北三路，增加五千名营兵。
English: In the first year of Jiajing, the total number of out-of-town supervisors was increased by one to a total of five, which was the same as the old one. They were responsible for the two east-west routes in the city, and the three south-west, south-east and north-east routes outside the city, respectively, with an increase of five thousand battalions.

古文：又十选一，立尖哨五百骑，厚其月糈。
现代文：又每十人选一人，设立五百名尖哨骑兵，增加他们每月的粮饷。
English: And for every ten persons he appointed another, to make an hundred and fifty horsemen, and to increase their provisions every month.

古文：命参将督操，而监以兵部郎。
现代文：命令参将率领操练，而且用兵部郎监督。
English: He ordered the general staff to lead the drill and supervise it with the military chaplains.

古文：是时京军弊坏积久，捕营亦然。
现代文：这时，京军败坏已经很久，捕营也是这样。
English: At this time, the Beijing army had been corrupted for a long time, and so was the capture of the camp.

古文：三十四年，军士仅三百余。
现代文：嘉靖三十四年，士兵只有三百多。
English: In the 34th year of Jiajing, there were only more than 300 soldiers.

古文：以给事中丘岳等言，削指挥樊经职，而禁以军马私役骑乘。
现代文：依照给事中丘岳等的意见，撤掉指挥樊经的官职，而禁止办私事时骑军队的马。
English: In accordance with the opinions of Yue Yue and others, the official post of commanding the imperial rescript was removed, and it was forbidden to ride the army's horse when doing private business.

古文：万历十二年，从兵部议，京城内外盗发，自卯至申责兵马司，自酉至寅责巡捕官，贼众则协力捕剿。
现代文：万历十二年，依从兵部的决议，京城内外强盗发生，从卯时到申时由兵马司负责，从酉时到寅时由巡捕官负责，强盗多就一齐出力追捕剿杀。
English: In the 12th year of Wanli, in accordance with the resolution of the Ministry of Military Affairs, robberies occurred in and outside the capital. From dusk to dawn, the Terracotta Warriors and Horses Division was responsible, and from dusk to dusk, the patrol officers were responsible. The robbers mostly worked together to hunt and kill.

古文：是后，军额倍增，驾出及朝审、录囚皆结队驻巷口。
现代文：这以后，团营军士数额成倍增加，皇帝出行以及朝廷官员复审死刑案件、审察甄别囚徒都集结成队驻守在巷口。
English: After that, the number of regimental sergeants-at-arms doubled, and when the emperor traveled, as well as when court officials reviewed death penalty cases and inspected and screened prisoners, they all gathered in groups to stand guard at street corners.

古文：籍伍虽具，而士马实凋弊不足用。
现代文：编入军籍的人数虽然齐全，然而军队实际上困苦疲惫不堪任用。
English: Although the number of people enlisted in the military is complete, the army is actually exhausted and exhausted.

古文：捕营提督一，参将二，把总十八，巡军万一千，马五千匹。
现代文：捕营提督一名，参将二名，把总十八名，巡军一万一千名，马五千匹。
English: There was one camp admiral, two general officers, a total of eighteen captains, eleven thousand patrols, and five thousand horses.

古文：盗贼纵横，至窃内中器物。
现代文：盗贼横行，甚至盗窃宫廷内的器物。
English: Thieves are on the rampage, even stealing items from the palace.

古文：获其橦索，竟不能得也。
现代文：获取他们的木竿绳索，竞然不能避住他们。
English: The race is on to get their poles and ropes, but there's no avoiding them.

古文：庄烈帝时，又以兵部左侍郎专督。
现代文：庄烈帝时期，又让兵部左侍郎专门督率。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhuang of Zhuang, he also allowed the left attendant of the military department to be the special superintendent.

古文：然营军半虚廪，马多雇人骑，失盗严限止五日，玩法卒如故。
现代文：然而营军有一半空领俸米，马大多出钱雇人骑，失窃破案的严格期限只有五天，玩忽法令终究像往常一样。
English: However, half of the battalion was short of rice, most of the horses were paid to be ridden, the strict deadline for solving the theft case was only five days, and the negligence law was eventually the same as usual.

古文：四卫营者，永乐时，以迤北逃回军卒供养马役，给粮授室，号曰勇士。
现代文：四卫营，永乐年间，让从北方逃回来的军士供养马役，供给粮饷授予房屋，号称勇士。
English: During the Yongle Era, the soldiers of the Fourth Guards Battalion, who had escaped from the North, were allowed to provide horse-drawn carriages, grain baskets and houses. They were known as warriors.

古文：后多以进马者充，而听御马监官提调，名隶羽林，身不隶也。
现代文：后来多数让进献马匹的人充任，而听从御马监官调遣，名义上隶属羽林，实际上自身不隶属。
English: Later, most of them were put in charge by the people who donated the horses, but they obeyed the dispatch of the horse inspector and nominally belonged to Uebayashi, but in fact they did not belong.

古文：军卒相冒，支粮不可稽。
现代文：军士互相冒充，支驭的粮饷不能稽察。
English: The sergeants pretended to be each other, and the food rations they carried could not be inspected.

古文：宣德六年，乃专设羽林三千户所统之，凡三千一百余人。
现代文：宣德六年，于是专门设置羽林三干户所统率，总共三千一百多人。
English: Six years after the proclamation of the People's Republic of China, it was specially set up to manage the three major households in Yulin, with a total of more than 3,100 people.

古文：寻改武骧、腾骧左右卫，称四卫军。
现代文：不久改成武壤、腾骏左右卫，称做四卫军。
English: It was soon changed to Wuzhen and Tengxun left and right guards, and was called the Fourth Guards Army.

古文：选本卫官四员为坐营指挥，督以太监，别营开操，称禁兵。
现代文：选拔本卫的官员四名，任坐营指挥，用太监监督，分营进行操练，称做禁兵。
English: The four officials who selected the guards were appointed as camp commanders, supervised by eunuchs, and drilled in separate camps. They were called forbidden soldiers.

古文：器械、衣甲异他军，横于辇下，往往为中官占匿。
现代文：兵器、军服镗甲与其它军队不一样，横行于京城，往往被宦官占用藏匿。
English: Weapons, uniforms and armor, unlike those of other armies, are rampant in the capital and are often hidden by eunuchs.

古文：弘治末，勇士万一千七百八十人，旗军三万一百七十人，岁支廪粟五十万。
现代文：弘治末期，勇士一万一千七百八十人，旗军三万零一百七十人，每年支取国家的粮食五十万石。
English: At the end of the Heian period, there were 11,780 warriors and 30,170 standard-bearers, and the country received 500,000 koku of grain each year.

古文：孝宗纳廷臣言，核之。
现代文：孝宗采纳朝廷大臣的意见，核查他们。
English: Takamune adopted the opinions of the ministers of the Imperial Court and checked them.

古文：又令内臣所进勇士，必由兵部验送乃给廪，五年籍其人数，著为令。
现代文：又命令宦官所引荐的勇士，必须由兵部检验派遣纔发给军饷，每隔五年登记四卫军的人数，写定著录为法令。
English: He also ordered that the warriors recommended by the eunuch must be sent by the inspection of the military department to the military eunuch, and the number of the four guards must be registered every five years, and the record must be written as a decree.

古文：省度支金钱岁数十万。
现代文：每年节省经费开支几十万两。
English: Annual cost savings of several hundred thousand taels.

古文：武宗即位，中官宁瑾乞留所汰人数。
现代文：武宗登上帝位，宦官宁瑾请求保留所淘汰的人员。
English: Emperor Wuzong ascended to the throne, and the eunuch Ning Xi requested that the eliminated personnel be retained.

古文：言官及尚书刘大夏持不可，不听。
现代文：谏官以及兵部尚书刘大夏坚持不同意，不被听从。
English: Liu Daxia, the eunuch and the commander of the military department, persisted in disagreeing and was not obeyed.

古文：后两官厅设，遂选四卫勇士隶西官厅，掌以边将江彬、太监张永等。
现代文：后来东西两官厅设立，于是挑选四卫勇士隶属西官厅，由边将江彬、太监张永等掌管。
English: Later, the East and West Government Offices were established, and the Four Guards Warriors were selected to be subordinate to the West Government Office, under the control of the border general Jiang Bin and the eunuch Zhang Yong.

古文：世宗入立，诏自弘治十八年存额外，悉裁之，替补必兵部查驳。
现代文：世宗入宫登上帝位，诏令四卫营军除弘治十八年保留的数额以外，全部裁除，顶替补充必须经过兵部查实。
English: When Sejong entered the palace and ascended to the throne, he decreed that the four guards battalions should be completely eliminated except for the amount retained in the 18th year of Hongzhi, and the replacement supplement must be verified by the Ministry of Military Affairs.

古文：而御马监马牛羊，令巡视科道核数。
现代文：至于御马监的马牛羊，下令巡枧科道核实数目。
English: As for the number of horses, cattle and sheep, the superintendent ordered a scientific inspection to verify the number.

古文：既而中旨免核，马多虚增。
现代文：随后未经过中书省、门下省直接由内廷发出的圣旨命令免除查核，马匹数很多虚假增报。
English: Subsequently, without going through the Ministry of Education and Culture and the subordinate provinces, the Holy Order issued directly by the Inner Court exempted from inspection, and the number of horses was falsely increased.

古文：后数年，御马太监闵洪复矫旨选四卫官。
现代文：过了几年，御马监太监闵洪又假托圣旨选拔四卫官。
English: A few years later, Mima supervisor and eunuch Hao Hong also selected four guards under the guise of a sacred edict.

古文：给事中郑自璧劾其欺蔽，不报。
现代文：给事中郑自壁弹劾他的欺诈蒙蔽，不予答复。
English: He did not reply to Zheng Zibai's accusation that he had been deceived.

古文：久之，兵部尚书李承勋请以选核仍隶本部，中官谓非便。
现代文：很久后，兵部尚书李承勋请求将选拔考核事务仍旧隶属兵部，宦官认为不方便。
English: After a long time, the eunuch of the Ministry of Military Affairs, Li Chengxun, requested that the selection and assessment affairs remain under the Ministry of Military Affairs, which the eunuch considered inconvenient.

古文：帝从承勋言。
现代文：皇帝依从了李承勋的意见。
English: The emperor followed the advice of Li Chengxun.

古文：十六年，又命收复登极诏书所裁者，凡四千人。
现代文：嘉靖十六年，又命令召回继承皇位时的诏书中所裁除的人，一共四千人。
English: In the 16th year of the reign of Emperor Jiajing, he also ordered the recall of a total of 4,000 people who had been dismissed in the edict issued when he succeeded to the throne.

古文：后五年，内臣言，勇士仅存五千余，请令子侄充选，以备边警。
现代文：过了五年，宦官建议说，勇士只剩五千多人，请求下令子侄辈选拔充任，以预备边防紧急情况。
English: After five years, the eunuch suggested that there were only more than five thousand warriors left, and asked to order the sons and nephews to be selected and appointed to prepare for the border emergency.

古文：部臣言： 故额定五千三百三十人。
现代文：兵部的大臣说： 以前的名额规定是五千三百三十人。
English: The Minister of the Ministry of Military Affairs said: The previous quota was 5,330 people.

古文：八年清稽，已浮其数，且此营本非为备边设者。 
现代文：八年时清查，已经超过这个数额，而且此营本来不是为守卫边防而设置的。 
English: An eight-year audit found that this amount had already been exceeded, and the battalion was not originally set up to guard the border.

古文：帝从部议。
现代文：皇帝依从了兵部的意见。
English: The emperor obeyed the opinion of the military department.

古文：然隐射、占役、冒粮诸弊率如故。
现代文：然而假冒蒙混、占用士兵服杂役、冒领粮饷等弊端一概如同以前。
English: However, malpractices such as impersonation and deception, using soldiers to perform menial tasks, and pretending to receive food rations are all the same as before.

古文：万历二年，减坐营官二员。
现代文：万历二年，削减坐营官两名。
English: In the second year of Wanli, two camp officers were reduced.

古文：已，复定营官缺由兵部择用。
现代文：后来，又规定营官的空额由兵部选择任用。
English: Later, it was also stipulated that the vacancy of battalion officers should be selected and appointed by the military department.

古文：其后复为中官所挠，仍属御马监。
现代文：这以后，又被宦官所阻挠，仍旧隶属御马监。
English: After that, he was blocked by the eunuchs and still belonged to the imperial equestrian inspector.

古文：廷臣多以为言，不能从。
现代文：朝廷大臣很多因此上疏进言，不能听从。
English: As a result, many ministers of the Imperial Court were unable to listen to his advice.

古文：四十二年，给事中姚宗文点阅本营，言： 官勇三千六百四十七，仅及其半。
现代文：万历四十二年，给事中姚宗文查点检阅四卫营，说： 书册上，官军勇士三千六百四十七人，实际祇够这个数目的一半。
English: In the 42nd year of the Wanli era, Yao Zongwen, who was in charge of the inspection of the Sifu camp, said: "On the books, there are 3,647 warriors in the official army, but in reality, only half of this number is enough.

古文：马一千四十三，则无至者。
现代文：马一千零四十三匹，却没有来一匹。
English: There were a thousand and forty-three horses, yet not one came.

古文：官旗七千二百四十，止四千六百余。
现代文：官旗士兵七千二百四十人，祇有四干六百多人。
English: The number of soldiers under the imperial banner was 7,240, of whom only 4,600 or so survived.

古文：马亦如之。
现代文：马也如此。
English: So is the horse.

古文：乞下法司究治。 
现代文：请求交给司法刑狱官追究处治。 
English: The request was referred to the judicial penitentiary officer for investigation and punishment.

古文：帝不能问。
现代文：皇帝不能够追究。
English: The emperor could not be held to account.

古文：天启末，巡视御史高弘图请视三大营例，分弓弩、短兵、火器，加以训练。至庄烈帝时，提督内臣曹化淳奏改为勇卫营，以周遇吉、黄得功为帅，遂成劲旅，出击贼，辄有功。
现代文：天启末年，巡视御史高弘图请求按照三大营的制度，分戍弓弩、短兵器、火器，加以训练到庄烈帝的时候，提督内臣曹化淳上书请改为勇卫营，任命周遇吉、黄得功为军帅，于是成了精锐部队，出征打击贼军，总有功劳。
English: At the end of the year of the Apocalypse, Gao Hongtu, the inspector of military history, requested that in accordance with the system of the three major battalions, the division of bows and arrows, short weapons, and firearms be carried out and trained until the time of Emperor Zhuang, and Cao Huachun, the admiral and vassal of Cao Huachun, sent a letter requesting that it be changed to the Yongwei Battalion, and appointed Zhou Yujie and Huang Dergong as commanders. Thus, it became an elite force, and there was always merit in going out to fight against the invaders.

古文：得功军士画虎头于皂布以衣甲，贼望见黑虎头军，多走避，其得力出京营上云。
现代文：黄得功的军士在黑布上画上老虎头以穿在镗甲外面。贼军望见黑虎头军，大多逃避，他们起的作用超出了京营。
English: The yellow meritorious sergeant drew a tiger's head on a black cloth to wear it on the outside of the armor. The thief army saw the black tiger's head army, most of them fled, they played a role beyond the Beijing camp.

