古文：昔颛顼氏有三子，死而为疫鬼：一居江水，为疟鬼；一居若水，为魍魉鬼；一居人宫室，善惊人小儿，为小鬼。
现代文：从前，颛顼氏有三个儿子，死后都成了使人生病的恶鬼：一个居住在长江里，是传播疟疾的疟鬼，一个居住在若水中，是魍魉鬼；一个居住在人们的屋子里，善于惊吓小孩，是小鬼。
English: Once upon a time, the Yu family had three sons, who all became evil ghosts that made people sick after they died: one lived in the Yangtze River and was a malarial ghost that spread malaria, one lived in the Wakamizu River and was a lazy ghost, and one lived in people's houses and was good at scaring children and was a small ghost.

古文：于是正岁，命方相氏帅肆傩以驱疫鬼。
现代文：于是帝王在正月里命令方相氏举行庙会，来驱赶传播疾病的恶鬼。
English: As a result, the emperor ordered the Fangxiang clan to hold a temple fair in the first month to drive away the evil spirits that spread the disease.

古文：挽歌者，丧家之乐，执绋者相和之声也。
现代文：挽歌，是丧家的音乐，是手握牵引灵车绳索的人一起合唱的歌。
English: Elegy is the music of the bereaved, a song that is sung in chorus by those who hold the rope that pulls the hearse.

古文：挽歌辞有薤露，蒿里二章。汉田横门人作。
现代文：挽歌的歌辞有《薤露》、《蒿里》二章，是汉代田横的门客写的。
English: The lyrics of the elegy include two chapters of "Gonglu" and "Gongli" and were written by a disciple of Tianye in the Han Dynasty.

古文：横自杀，门人伤之，悲歌，言：人如薤上露，易稀灭；亦谓人死，精魂归于蒿里。
现代文：当时田横自杀，门客哀悼他，就悲哀地唱起来了。歌辞的意思是说人就象薤上的露水，容易晒干灭亡，又以为人死了灵魂回归到泰山南边的蒿里。
English: At that time, Tian Yang committed suicide, and his disciples mourned for him and began to sing mournfully. The lyrics mean that people are like the dew on the reed, which is easily dried up by the sun and perishes, and the soul returns to the reed on the south side of Mount Tai, thinking that the person is dead.

古文：故有二章。
现代文：所以有这两章。
English: That's why there are these two chapters.

古文：阮瞻，字千里，素执无鬼论。物莫能难。
现代文：阮瞻，字千里，一向持无鬼论，没有人能难倒他。
English: Ruan Zhan, a man of many words, has always held the view that there are no ghosts, and no one can stump him.

古文：每自谓，此理足以辨正幽明。
现代文：他经常自吹这种理论足够用来辨别纠正有关阴间和阳间的错误说法。
English: He often boasted that this theory was sufficient to distinguish and correct the erroneous statements about the underworld and the sun.

古文：忽有客通名诣瞻，寒温毕，聊谈名理。
现代文：忽然有一个客人通报了姓名来拜见阮瞻，寒暄完毕，聊且辩论起事物的是非、道理。
English: Suddenly, a guest announced his name and came to visit Ruan Zhan. After exchanging greetings, they chatted and debated the rights and wrongs of things.

古文：客甚有才辨，瞻与之言，良久，及鬼神之事，反复甚苦。
现代文：那客人很有口才，阮瞻和他谈了好久，讲到有关鬼神的事情，折腾得很苦。
English: The guest was very eloquent, and Ruan Zhan talked with him for a long time, and when he talked about ghosts and gods, he struggled very hard.

古文：客遂屈，乃作色曰： 鬼神，古今圣贤所共传，君何得独言无？
现代文：结果那客人理屈词穷了，却板起面孔说： 鬼神是古今圣人贤士都传扬的，您怎么能标新立异偏要说没有呢？
English: As a result, the guest was at a loss for words, but he said with a straight face: Ghosts and gods have been propagated by saints and sages from ancient times to the present. How can you be so unconventional as to say there are none?

古文：即仆便是鬼。 
现代文：就拿我来说，便是个鬼。 
English: As far as I'm concerned, he's a ghost.

古文：于是变为异形，须臾消灭。
现代文：于是客人就变成鬼样，一会儿便消失了。
English: As a result, the guest turned into a ghost and disappeared in an instant.

古文：瞻默然，意色太恶。
现代文：阮瞻沉默了，心情面色很不好。
English: Ruan Zhan fell silent and looked very sad.

古文：岁余，病卒。
现代文：过了一年多，他就病死了。
English: After more than a year, he fell ill and died.

古文：吴兴施续为寻阳督，能言论，有门生亦有理意，常秉无鬼论。
现代文：吴兴郡的施续，是寻阳郡的大将，善于言谈议论。他有个学生，也很有论列是非的学识，曾经持无鬼论。
English: Wuxing County's magistrate is the general of Xuanyang County, good at talking and discussing. He has a student who is also very knowledgeable about the rights and wrongs, and once held a ghost theory.

古文：忽有一黑衣白袷客来，与共语，遂及鬼神。
现代文：忽然有一个身穿黑衣白领的客人来和他一起谈论，于是就谈到鬼神的事。
English: Suddenly, a black-clad, white-collared guest came to talk with him, and the subject of ghosts and gods came up.

古文：移日，客辞屈。乃曰： 君辞巧，理不足。
现代文：太阳歪西了，那客人理屈辞穷了，就说： 您很会说，但理由却不充分。
English: The sun was setting, and the guest was at a loss for words. He said, "You are very eloquent, but your reasons are inadequate.

古文：仆即是鬼。
现代文：我就是鬼，您凭什么说没有呢？ 
English: I am a ghost. How can you say that I am not?

古文：何以云无；问： 鬼何以来？ 
现代文：学生问： 你这鬼为什么而来？ 
English: The student asked: Why did you come here, you devil?

古文：答曰： 受使来取君。期尽明日食时。 
现代文：鬼回答说： 我受到委派来抓您，时间最后只能拖到明天吃饭的时候。 
English: The ghost replied, "I have been assigned to catch you, and the time can only be delayed until tomorrow's meal time."

古文：门生请乞，酸苦，鬼问： 有人似君者否？ 
现代文：这学生苦苦哀求。鬼便问道： 是否有人长得象您？ 
English: The student begged, and the demon asked, "Is there anyone who looks like you?"

古文：门生云： 施续帐下都督，与仆相似。 
现代文：学生说： 施续手下有个都督，和我长得很相象。 
English: The student said: There is a governor under my supervision who looks very similar to me.

古文：便与俱往，与都督对坐；鬼手中出一铁凿，可尺余，安着都督头，便举椎打之。
现代文：学生便带着鬼一起去了，和都督面对面坐着。鬼的手里拿出一把铁凿子，大约有一尺多长，把它安放在都督的头上后，便举起捶子打这铁凿。
English: The student then went with the ghost and sat face to face with the governor. The ghost took out an iron chisel from its hand, which was more than a foot long, placed it on the governor's head, and then picked up a pair of pliers to hit the iron chisel.

古文：都督云： 头觉微痛。 
现代文：都督说： 我头上感到稍微有点疼痛。 
English: The governor said: "I feel a little bit of pain in my head.

古文：向来转剧，食顷，便亡。
现代文：接着疼痛加剧，一顿饭的工夫就死了。
English: Then the pain got worse and I died within one meal.

古文：蒋济，字子通，楚国平阿人也，仕魏，为领军将军。
现代文：蒋济，字子通，楚国平阿县人。他在魏国做官，任领军将军。
English: Jiang Ji, also known as Zizi Tong, was from Ping'a County, Chu Province. He was an official in Wei and served as a leading general.

古文：其妇梦见亡儿，涕泣曰： 死生异路，我生时为卿相子孙，今在地下，为泰山伍伯，憔悴困苦，不可复言。
现代文：他妻子梦见死去的儿子哭着对她说： 死和生真是两个世界。我活着的时候是将相的子孙，现在在阴间却只是个泰山县的差役，劳累困苦，不能再说了。
English: His wife dreamed of her dead son and wept and said to her: "Death and life are really two different worlds. When I was alive, I was the descendant of a general, but now in the underworld I am just a messenger from Taishan County. I am overworked and overburdened. I can't say any more."

古文：今太庙西讴士孙阿见召为泰山令，愿母为白侯，属阿，令转我得乐处。 
现代文：现在太庙西边的歌手孙阿，被任命为泰山县令，希望母亲替我去告许当昌陵亭侯的父亲，让他去嘱托孙阿，叫孙阿把我调到快乐的地方。 
English: Now, the singer Sun Ah on the west side of the Grand Temple has been appointed as the Taishan County Governor. I hope that my mother will tell my father, the lord of Changling Pavilion, for me, so that he can ask Sun Ah to transfer me to a happier place.

古文：言讫，母忽然惊寤。
现代文：说完，母亲忽然惊醒了。
English: After saying this, my mother suddenly woke up.

古文：明日以白济。济曰： 梦为虚耳，不足怪也。 
现代文：第二天他母亲把这梦告诉了蒋济，蒋济说： 梦都是空的，不值得大惊小怪。 
English: The next day, his mother told Jiang Ji about the dream. Jiang Ji said, "Dreams are all empty and not worth making a fuss about.

古文：日暮，复梦曰： 我来迎新君，止在庙下未发之顷，暂得来归。
现代文：到了晚上，母亲又梦见儿子说： 我来迎接新任的县令孙阿，在太庙里歇息。现在趁还没出发之际，暂时可以回来一下。
English: In the evening, the mother dreamed of her son again and said, "I have come to welcome the new county magistrate, Sun Ah, and rest in the temple. Now I can come back for a while before I leave."

古文：新君，明日日中当发。临发多事，不复得归。
现代文：新任的县令明天中午要出发了，到出发的时候事情烦多，我不能再回来了。
English: The new county magistrate is leaving tomorrow at noon. By the time I leave, things will be so hectic that I won't be able to come back.

古文：永辞于此。
现代文：所以和您就此永别了。
English: So I'm bidding you a fond farewell.

古文：侯气强难感悟，故自诉于母，愿重启侯：何惜不一试验之？ 
现代文：父亲脾气倔强，很难使他醒悟，所以我独自向您母亲诉说。希望您再去开导开导父亲，为什么要这样吝啬时间不去孙阿那里验证一下呢？ 
English: My father has a strong temper, and it is difficult to wake him up, so I told your mother alone. I hope you will enlighten and enlighten your father again. Why are you so stingy with time and not go to Sun Ah to verify it?

古文：遂道阿之形状言甚备悉。
现代文：于是就描述了孙阿的形状，他对孙阿的描述非常详尽。
English: So he described the shape of Sun Ah, and his description of Sun Ah was very detailed.

古文：天明，母重启济： 虽云梦不足怪，此何太适适，亦何惜不一验之？ 
现代文：天亮后，母亲又劝导蒋济： 虽然说梦里的事情不值得大惊小怪，但这个梦为什么会这样巧合？
English: After dawn, his mother advised Jiang Jie again: Although the things in the dream are not worth making a fuss about, why is this dream such a coincidence?

古文：济乃遗人诣太庙下，推问孙阿，果得之，形状证验，悉如儿言。
现代文：你又为什么要这样吝啬时间不去孙阿那里验证一下呢？ 蒋济就派人到太庙边上去打听查询孙阿，果然找到了他，验看他的长相，都和儿子说的一样。
English: Why would you be so stingy with your time not to go to Sun Ah to verify it? Jiang Ji sent someone to the edge of the Great Temple to inquire about Sun Ah, and they found him, and his appearance was the same as that of his son.

古文：济涕泣曰： 几负吾儿。 
现代文：蒋济痛哭流涕他说： 我差一点辜负了我的儿子啊！ 
English: Jiang Jie cried bitterly and said, "I almost failed my son!"

古文：于是乃见孙阿，具语其事。
现代文：于是蒋济就召见了孙阿，详细地叙述了这件事情。
English: So he found Sun Ah and talked to him in detail.

古文：阿不惧当死，而喜得为泰山令，惟恐济言不信也，曰： 若如节下言，阿之愿也。
现代文：孙阿并不怕自己将要死去，反而为自己能做泰山县令而感到高兴，他只怕蒋济的话不确实，所以说： 如果正象将军所说的那样，实在是我的愿望啊。
English: Sun Ah was not afraid that he was about to die, but was happy that he could be the governor of Taishan County. He was only afraid that Jiang Ji's words were not true, so he said: If it is as the general said, it is really my wish.

古文：不知贤子欲得何职？ 
现代文：不知道贤子想得到什么官职？ 
English: I don't know, what kind of official position does the wise man want?

古文：济曰： 随地下乐者与之。 阿曰： 辄当奉教。 
现代文：蒋济说： 随便把什么阴间的美差给他就行了。 
English: Jiang Jie said, "Just give him any beautiful messenger from the underworld.

古文：乃厚赏之。
现代文：孙阿说： 我立即就按您的吩咐去办。 
English: Sun Ah said, "I will immediately do as you ordered."

古文：言讫，遣还。
现代文：蒋济就优厚地奖赏了他。说完，就打发孙阿回去。
English: Jiang Ji rewarded him generously. After saying this, he sent Sun Ah back.

古文：济欲速知其验，从领军门至庙下，十步安一人，以传消息。
现代文：蒋济想快一点知道这事的结果，便从他的领军将军府门直到太庙边，每十步安置一个人，用来传递消息。
English: Jiang Jie wanted to know the result of this matter as soon as possible, so he placed a person every ten steps from the gate of the general's residence, where he was leading his army, to the edge of the Great Temple, to pass on the news.

古文：辰时，传阿心痛；已时，传阿剧；日中，传阿亡。
现代文：上午八点钟左右，传言说孙阿心口疼痛，十点钟左右传言说孙阿的心痛加剧，到中午传言说孙阿死了。
English: Around eight o'clock in the morning, there was a rumor that Sun Ah's heart was in pain. Around ten o'clock, there was a rumor that Sun Ah's heart was in pain. At noon, there was a rumor that Sun Ah had died.

古文：济曰： 虽哀吾儿之不幸，且喜亡者有知。 
现代文：蒋济说： 我虽然伤心我儿子的不幸，但也为他死后还有知觉而感到高兴。 
English: Jiang Jie said: Although I am saddened by my son's misfortune, I am also happy that he is still conscious after his death.

古文：后月余，儿复来，语母曰： 已得转为录事矣， 
现代文：过了一个多月，儿子又来托梦了，他告诉母亲说： 我已经调任录事参军了。 
English: More than a month later, her son came to her again in a dream. He told his mother, "I've been transferred to join the army."

古文：汉，不其县，有孤竹城，古孤竹君之国也，灵帝光和元年，辽西人见辽水中有浮棺，欲斫破之；棺中人语曰： 我是伯夷之弟，孤竹君也。
现代文：汉代不其县内有座孤竹城，它是古代孤竹君的封国。汉灵帝光和元年，辽西郡的人看见辽河中漂浮着一口棺材，想要砍破它。棺村里的人对他们说： 我是伯夷的弟弟孤竹君。
English: In the Han Dynasty, there was a Lone Bamboo City in the county, which was a fiefdom of the ancient Lone Bamboo Monk. In the first year of the Han Dynasty, the people of Liaoxi County saw a coffin floating in the Liao River and wanted to cut it. The people in the coffin village said to them: I am the brother of Boyi, Lone Bamboo Monk.

古文：海水坏我棺椁，是以漂流。
现代文：海水冲坏了我的棺材外套，因此我漂流在辽河中。
English: The sea water broke my coffin coat, so I drifted in the Liao River.

古文：汝斫我何为？ 
现代文：你们砍我的棺材又是为了什么呢？ 
English: What did you chop up my coffin for?

古文：人惧，不敢斫。因为立庙祠祀。
现代文：人们害怕了，不敢再砍它了，因而给孤竹君建造了庙宇并祭祀他。
English: People were afraid and did not dare to cut it again, so they built a temple for Lone Bamboo and worshipped him.

古文：吏民有欲发视者，皆无病而死。
现代文：官吏百姓之中有想打开棺材看一下孤竹君的，都没有生病便死了。
English: Among the officials and common people, those who wanted to open the coffin and take a look at Lone Bamboo Man did not get sick and died.

古文：温序，字公次，太原祈人也，任护军校尉，行部至陇西，为隗嚣将所劫，欲生降之。
现代文：温序，字公次，太原郡祁县人氏，任护军校尉。有一次，他巡视部属来到陇西郡，被隗嚣的部将劫持，这些强盗想要他投降。
English: On one occasion, when he was inspecting his subordinates in Shaanxi County, he was kidnapped by a brawling brigadier, and the robbers wanted him to surrender.

古文：序大怒，以节挝杀人，贼趋，欲杀序。荀宇止之曰： 义士欲死节。 
现代文：温序十分愤怒，使用符节击杀他们。强盗们奔上去想杀死温序，荀宇阻止他们说： 有节操的人要为气节而死。 
English: Wenzhong was very angry and killed them with a rune. The robbers rushed to kill Wenzhong, but the universe stopped them and said, "Those who have discipline will die for discipline."

古文：赐剑，令自裁。
现代文：说完就赐给温序一把宝剑，叫他自杀。
English: After saying this, he gave Wenxiu a sword and told him to commit suicide.

古文：序受剑，衔须着口中，叹曰： 则令须污土。 
现代文：温序接过剑，把胡须衔在嘴里，叹息说： 别让泥土把我的胡须搞脏了。 
English: Wenzhong took the sword, tucked his beard in his mouth and sighed, "Don't let the dirt dirty my beard."

古文：遂伏剑死。
现代文：于是就拿起剑自刎而死。
English: So he picked up his sword and stabbed himself to death.

古文：更始怜之，送葬到洛阳城旁，为筑冢。
现代文：皇帝爱怜他，把他的尸体送到洛阳城边埋葬了，并给他修筑了坟墓。
English: The emperor took pity on him and sent his body to Luoyang to be buried, and built a tomb for him.

古文：长子寿，为印平侯，梦序告之曰 久客思乡。 
现代文：他的大儿子温寿，是印平侯，曾梦见温序告诉他说： 我长时间呆在外地，十分想念家乡。 
English: His eldest son, Wen Shou, is an Inping marquis. He once dreamed that Wen Shou told him, "I have been away from home for a long time, and I miss my hometown very much.

古文：寿即弃官，上书乞骸骨，归葬。帝许之。
现代文：温寿就辞去了官职，上书乞求将父亲的尸骨迁葬到老家去，皇帝批准了他的请求。
English: Wen Shou resigned from his post and wrote a letter begging for his father's remains to be moved to his hometown for burial. The emperor approved his request.

古文：汉，南阳文颖，字叔长，建安中为甘陵府丞，过界止宿，夜三鼓时，梦见一人跪前曰： 昔我先人，葬我于此，水来湍墓，棺木溺，渍水处半，然无以自温。
现代文：汉代南阳郡人文颖，字叔长，建安年间任甘陵府丞。有一次他路过边界停下来过夜，半夜三更时分，梦见一个人跪在面前说： 过去我的父亲把我埋葬在这里，但是河水流过来涌进了我的坟墓，我的棺材被淹了，有一半老泡在水里，而我也没有什么办法能自己取暖。
English: Once he passed the border and stopped to spend the night. At midnight, he dreamed of a man kneeling in front of him and saying: In the past, my father buried me here, but the river flowed over and poured into my grave. My coffin was flooded, and half of it was soaked in water, and I had no way to warm myself.

古文：闻君在此，故来相依，欲屈明日暂住须臾，幸为相迁高燥处。 
现代文：听见您来到这儿，所以来依靠您。想委屈您明天暂时停留片刻，希望您把棺材搬迁到高爽干燥的地方去。 
English: I heard that you came here, so I came to rely on you. I would like to begrudge you a short stay tomorrow, and I hope you will move the coffin to a high and dry place.

古文：鬼披衣示颖，而皆沾湿。
现代文：这个说话的鬼还揭开衣裳给文颖看，的确都浸湿了。
English: The talking ghost also opened his clothes to show them to Wen Ying, and they were indeed wet.

古文：颖心怆然，即寤。
现代文：文颖心里感到很凄凉，当即醒了过来，就把这梦告诉了身边的人。
English: Wen Ying felt very desolate in her heart. When she woke up, she told the people around her about this dream.

古文：语诸左右。曰： 梦为虚耳亦何足怪。 
现代文：身边人说： 梦都是空的，哪里值得您大惊小怪的？ 
English: People close to me say: dreams are empty, what's worth making a fuss about?

古文：颖乃还眠向寐处，梦见谓颖曰： 我以穷苦告君，奈何不相愍悼乎？ 
现代文：文颖就又睡了。他一睡着便又梦见了这个鬼，对文颖说： 我把我的困苦告诉了您，怎么不哀怜我呢？ 
English: As soon as he fell asleep, he dreamed of the ghost again and said to Wen Ying, "I told you about my hardships, why don't you have pity on me?"

古文：颖梦中问曰： 子为谁？ 
现代文：文颖在梦中问道： 您是谁？ 
English: Wen Ying asked in her dream: Who are you?

古文：对曰： 吾本赵人，今属汪芒氏之神。 
现代文：鬼回答说： 我本来是赵国人，今天属于汪芒国的神管辖。 
English: The ghost replied, "I am originally from the country of Zhao, but today I am under the jurisdiction of the gods of the country of Wang Mang.

古文：颖曰： 子棺今何所在？ 
现代文：文颖说： 您的棺材现在在什么地方？ 
English: Wen Ying said: Where is your coffin now?

古文：对曰： 近在君帐北十数步水侧枯杨树下，即是吾也。
现代文：鬼回答说： 很近，就在您帐篷北边十几步，河边枯杨树下面，就是我的棺材。
English: The ghost replied, "Very close, just a dozen steps north of your tent, under a dead poplar tree by the river, is my coffin.

古文：天将明，不复得见，君必念之。 颖答曰： 喏！ 
现代文：天就要亮了，我不能再见到您了，您一定要把这事放在心上。 文颖回答说： 好的。 
English: The sun is about to rise and I won't be able to see you again, so you must bear this in mind.Wen Ying replied, "Okay.

古文：忽然便寤。
现代文：一下子就又醒了。
English: I woke up all of a sudden.

古文：天明，可发，颖曰： 虽曰梦不足怪，此何太适。 
现代文：天亮以后该出发了，文颖说： 虽然说梦里的事不值得大惊小怪，但这个梦为什么会这样明明白白？ 
English: It's time to set out after dawn, Wen Ying said: Although the things in the dream are not worth making a fuss about, why is this dream so clear?

古文：左右曰： 亦何惜须臾，不验之耶？ 
现代文：他身边的人说： 你为什么要吝啬这一点点时间，不去验证一下呢？ 
English: People close to him say: Why would you waste this little bit of time and not check it out?

古文：颖即起，率十数人将导顺水上，果得一枯杨，曰： 是矣。 
现代文：文颖便立即起身，率领了十几个人，带着他们顺着河流向上走，果然发现一棵干枯的杨树，便说： 就是这个地方了。 
English: Wen Ying immediately got up, led a dozen people, and led them upstream along the river. Sure enough, she found a dried poplar tree and said, "This is the place."

古文：掘其下，未几，果得棺。
现代文：于是挖掘杨树底下，没有多少工夫，果然发现了棺材。
English: So they dug under a poplar tree and, without much effort, found the coffin.

古文：棺甚朽坏，没半水中。
现代文：棺材已腐烂得很厉害，有一半浸在水中。
English: The coffin was badly decomposed and half submerged in water.

古文：颖谓左右曰： 向闻于人，谓之虚矣；世俗所传，不可无验。 
现代文：文颖对身边的人说： 昨晚我把这件事告诉了你们，你们都说梦是空的。其实，社会上流传的东西，是不可能没有验证的。
English: Wen Ying said to the people around her: Last night I told you about this, and you all said that dreams are empty. In fact, what is circulated in society is impossible without verification.

古文：为移其棺，葬之而去。
现代文：这鬼的托梦便是个很好的说明啊。 
English: So he moved the coffin and buried it before leaving.

古文：汉，九江何敞，为交州刺史，行部到苍梧郡高安县，暮宿鹄奔亭，夜犹未半，有一女从楼下出，呼曰： 妾姓苏，名娥，字始珠，本居广信县修里人。
现代文：于是就为这个鬼搬迁了棺材，埋葬好了才动身赶路。汉朝九江郡人氏何敞任交州刺史时，有一次视察部属来到苍梧郡高要县，夜里留宿在鹄奔亭。还没有到半夜，便有一个女子从楼下走出来，呼冤叫屈地对他说： 我姓苏，名娥，字始珠，本来居住在广信县，是修里人氏。
English: So they moved the coffin for this ghost and buried it before setting off. During the Han Dynasty, when Jiujiang County's Mr. Ren He was in charge of writing the history of Jiaozhou, once the inspection department came to Gaoyao County, Gansu County, and stayed at night in Gaobenting. Before midnight, a woman came out from downstairs, complaining and saying to him: My surname is Su, my name is E, my first name is Zhu, I originally lived in Guangxin County, and I am Mr. Shuli.

古文：早失父母，又无兄弟，嫁与同县施氏，薄命夫死，有杂缯帛百二十疋，及婢一人，名致富，妾孤穷羸弱，不能自振；欲之傍县卖缯，从同县男子王伯赁牛车一乘，直钱万二千，载妾幷缯，令致富执辔，乃以前年四月十日到此亭外。
现代文：我很早就失去了父母，又没有哥哥弟弟，嫁给了本县的施家，也是我的命薄，丈夫又死了，但还有各种各样的丝织品一百二十匹，以及一名叫致富的婢女。我孤苦零丁，无依无靠，身体又瘦弱，不能自谋生计，所以想到邻县去卖掉这些丝织品。于是从本县的一个男人王伯那里租了一辆牛车，那牛车值一万二千文钱，载了我和丝织品，叫致富牵了缰绳驾车，就在前年四月十日，来到这鹄奔亭外面。
English: I lost my parents early on, and I had no brothers or sisters. I married into the Shi family in our county, which was also my fate. My husband died again, but there were still a hundred and twenty different kinds of silk products, and a servant girl named Zhifu. I was alone, helpless, physically weak, and unable to make a living, so I thought of going to a neighboring county to sell these silk products. So I rented an ox cart from a man in our county, Wang Bo. The ox cart was worth 12,000 yuan, and it carried me and the silk products. Zhifu took the reins and drove, and on April 10th of the previous year, he came to the outside of

古文：于时日已向暮，行人断绝，不敢复进，因即留止，致富暴得腹痛。
现代文：当时太阳已快下山，路上都没人了，我不敢再前进，便到这里留宿。致富突然腹痛，我便到亭长的住处去讨一点茶水和火种。
English: At that time, the sun was about to set, and there was no one on the road. I didn't dare to go any further, so I came here to stay. I suddenly had a stomachache, so I went to the innkeeper's residence to get some tea and water and kindling.

古文：妾之亭长舍乞浆，取火，亭长龚寿，操戈持戟，来至车旁，问妾曰： 夫人从何所来车上所载何物？
现代文：那亭长龚寿，却手拿戈戟，来到车边，问我说： 夫人从什么地方来？
English: He was a long-lived man, but he came to the side of the car with a guitar in his hand and asked me: "Where did your wife come from?"

古文：丈夫安在？
现代文：车上装的是什么东西？丈夫在哪里？
English: Where's your husband?

古文：何故独行？ 
现代文：为什么单独一个人赶路？ 
English: Why walk alone?

古文：妾应曰： 何劳问之？ 
现代文：我回答说： 何必劳驾你问这些事情？ 
English: I replied, "Why should I trouble you to ask about these things?

古文：寿因持妾臂曰： 少年爱有色，冀可乐也。 
现代文：龚寿竟抓住我的胳膊说： 小伙子喜欢漂亮的姑娘，希望你能让我乐一下。 
English: He actually grabbed my arm and said, "The young man likes beautiful girls. I hope you can make me happy."

古文：妾惧怖不从，寿即持刀刺胁下一创，立死。
现代文：我十分害怕，不肯依从他。龚寿便拿起刀刺我的肋下，一刀刺进来我就马上死了。
English: I was very scared and did not want to obey him. Gong Shou picked up a knife and stabbed me under the ribs. Once the knife went in, I died immediately.

古文：又刺致富，亦死。
现代文：他又刺致富，致富也死了。
English: He struck it rich, and died rich.

古文：寿掘楼下，合埋妾在下，婢在上，取财物去。
现代文：龚寿在楼下挖了坑，把我们合埋在里边，我在底下，我的婢女致富在上面。
English: Shou dug a pit downstairs and buried us in it. I was at the bottom and my maid Zhifu was at the top.

古文：杀牛，烧车，车缸及牛骨，贮亭东空井中。
现代文：他取走了财物，杀了牛，烧了车，车轴上的铁和牛骨，都藏在这亭楼东边的空井里。
English: He took the property, killed the cow, burned the car, and hid the iron on the axle and the cow bones in the empty well on the east side of the pavilion.

古文：妾既冤死，痛感皇天，无所告诉，故来自归于明使君。
现代文：我虽然冤屈而死，但痛切地感到天高皇帝远，实在没有地方去控告申诉，所以便亲自来投诉给您这贤明的刺史。 
English: Although I died with a grievance, I felt painfully that the emperor was far away and there was no place to complain, so I personally came to complain to you about this wise stab at history.

古文：敞曰： 今欲发出汝尸，以何为验？ 
现代文：何敞说： 我现在想挖出你的尸体，用什么来证明那是你的尸体呢？ 
English: He said, "I want to dig up your body now. How can I prove that it is your body?"

古文：女曰： 妾上下着白衣，青丝履，犹未朽也，愿访乡里，以骸骨归死夫。 
现代文：那女子说： 我上下身都穿着白色的衣服，脚上穿着青丝鞋，还没有腐烂。希望您以后能询问一下我的乡邻，把我的尸骨归葬到我死去的丈夫那里。 
English: The woman said, "I am wearing white clothes on my upper and lower body, and I am wearing blue silk shoes on my feet, and I have not yet decomposed. I hope that you can inquire about my neighbors in the future and bury my bones with my dead husband."

古文：掘之，果然。
现代文：何敞叫人把尸体挖了出来，果然是这样。
English: He called for the bodies to be dug up, and they were.

古文：敞乃驰还，遣吏捕捉，拷问，具服。
现代文：何敞于是赶着马回到自己的官府，派遣差役逮捕犯人，拷问审讯以后，犯人们都服了罪。
English: He then rushed back to his government office on his horse, dispatched officers to arrest the prisoners, and after torture and interrogation, the prisoners all confessed to their crimes.

古文：下广信县验问，与娥语合。
现代文：他又到广信县查问，也和苏娥说的话相合。
English: He also went to Guangxin County to ask questions, which is also consistent with what Su Ao said.

古文：寿父母兄弟，悉捕系狱。
现代文：龚寿的父母兄弟，全部被逮捕入狱。
English: Zou Shou's parents and brothers were all arrested and jailed.

古文：敞表寿，常律，杀人不至族诛，然寿为恶首，隐密数年，王法自所不免。
现代文：何敞给朝廷所写有关龚寿案的表文说： 按照通常的法律，杀人不致于全家被处死。但龚寿做了罪大恶极的事，家里人却隐瞒了好几年，王法自然不能让他们免受惩罚。
English: He openly wrote to the imperial court about the Gong Shou case, saying: According to the usual law, murder does not result in the whole family being executed. However, Gong Shou did a very evil thing, but the family members concealed it for several years. Of course, Wang Fa cannot let them go unpunished.

古文：令鬼神诉者，千载无一，请皆斩之，以明鬼神，以助阴诛。
现代文：而且，让鬼神来申诉的事，千年也碰不上一次。所以我请求把他们都杀了，用来显扬鬼魂的神灵，用来赞助鬼魂对恶人的惩罚。 
English: Moreover, it does not happen once in a thousand years that a ghost or a god comes to make a complaint, so I asked that they all be killed, the gods used to show the ghosts, and the spirits used to support the punishment of the wicked.

古文：上报听之。
现代文：皇帝批复同意何敞的意见。
English: The emperor's reply agreed with Ho's opinion.

古文：濡须口有大船，船覆在水中，水小时便出见，长老云： 是曹公船。 
现代文：濡须口有一条大船，船身沉没在水中，水小的时候，它就露出来了。老人们说： 这是曹操的船。 
English: There is a big boat at the mouth of the wet whiskers, the hull is sunk in the water, when the water is small, it will come out.The old people said: This is Cao Cao's boat.

古文：尝有渔人，夜宿其旁，以船系之；但闻竽笛弦歌之音，又香气，非常。
现代文：曾经有一个渔夫，夜里停宿在它的旁边，把自己的船缚在这条大船上，只听见那船上传来吹奏竽笛、弹拨丝弦以及歌唱的声音，又有非同寻常的香气飘来。
English: Once upon a time, a fisherman moored next to it at night, tied his boat to this big ship, and only heard the sound of flute playing, string playing, and singing coming from the ship, as well as unusual aromas.

古文：渔人始得眠，梦人驱遣，云： 勿近官妓。 
现代文：渔夫刚入睡，便梦见有人驱赶他说： 别靠近官家的歌妓。 
English: As soon as the fisherman fell asleep, he dreamed of someone chasing him and saying, "Don't go near the official courtesan."

古文：相传云： 曹公载妓，船覆于此，至今在焉。 
现代文：夏侯恺，字万仁，因生病而死了。他同族人的儿子苟奴，平素能看见鬼。
English: Xia Houjun, also known as Wanren, died of illness. His compatriot's son, Guo Nong, could normally see ghosts.

古文：夏侯恺，字万仁，因病死、宗人儿苟奴，素见鬼，见恺数归，欲取马，幷病其妻，着平上帻，单衣，入坐生时西壁大床，就人觅茶饮。
现代文：他看见夏侯恺多次回家，想取走马，并为他的病妻担忧，他回家时戴着上部平如屋顶的帽子，穿着单衣，进屋坐在他在世时经常坐的西墙边的大床上，向人要茶喝。
English: He saw Xia Houya come home many times, wanting to take away his horse, and worried about his sick wife. When he came home, he wore a hat with a flat top like a roof, wore a singlet, entered the house and sat on a large bed next to the west wall, where he often sat when he was alive, and asked people for tea.

古文：诸仲务，一女，显姨，嫁为米元宗妻，产亡于家。
现代文：诸仲务有一个女儿叫显姨，嫁给米元宗做妻子，生小孩时死在家中。
English: Zhuzhongwu had a daughter named Xianyi, who was married to Ye Yuanzong and died at home while giving birth to a child.

古文：俗闻，产亡者，以墨点面。
现代文：当时民间的风俗：生小孩而死的，要用墨点在脸上。
English: At that time, the folk custom was to use ink dots on the face to mark the death of a child.

古文：其母不忍，仲务密自点之，无人见者。
现代文：她母亲不忍心这样做，诸仲务就偷偷地自己去给女儿点墨，没有人看见他这样做。
English: Her mother didn't have the heart to do it, so the officials quietly gave her a mark without letting anyone see it.

古文：元宗为始新县丞，梦其妻来，上床，分明见新白，面上有黑点。
现代文：米元宗任始新县丞，梦见他妻子来上床，分明看见她那刚用白粉化过妆的脸上有黑点。
English: Yim Yuan Zongren, the first new county magistrate, dreamed that his wife came to bed, and clearly saw that her face, which had just been made up with white powder, had black spots.

古文：晋世，新蔡王昭平，犊车在厅事上，夜，无故自入斋室中，触壁而出。
现代文：晋代新蔡县人王昭的小牛车停在官府的厅堂上，晚上，这车子却无缘无故地自己转动起来，闯进了官厅旁边的厢房中，撞破墙壁冲了出去。
English: The bullock cart of Wang Zhao, a resident of Xin Cai County in the Jin Dynasty, was parked on the hall of the government office. In the evening, this car turned on its own for no reason, broke into the compartment next to the government office, broke through the wall and rushed out.

古文：后又数闻呼噪攻击之声，四面而来。
现代文：后来又多次听到呼喊喧闹以及攻打的声音从四面传来。
English: Later, the sounds of shouting, noise and fighting were heard several times from all sides.

古文：昭乃聚众设弓弩战斗之备，指声弓弩俱发，而鬼应声接矢数枚，皆倒入土中。
现代文：王昭就召集很多人，准备好弓箭等战斗武器，随着手指拉弦的声音，箭都射出去了，而鬼也随声挨了好几箭，都跌倒在泥土中。
English: Wang Zhao gathered a lot of people and prepared battle weapons such as bows and arrows. With the sound of the fingers pulling the strings, the arrows were shot out, and the ghost also received several arrows with the sound, and they all fell down in the dirt.

古文：吴，赤乌三年，句章民杨度，至余姚，夜行，有一少年，持琵琶，求寄载。度受之。
现代文：吴国赤乌三年，句章县百姓杨度到余姚去。他在夜里赶路，有一个拿着琵琶的少年要求搭车，杨度就让他上了车。
English: Three years ago, Yang Du, a citizen of Juzhang County in Wuzhong, Wuzhong, went to Yuyao. He was on his way in the night, and a young boy with a lute asked for a ride. Yang Du let him get on the car.

古文：鼓琵琶数十曲，曲毕，乃吐舌，擘目，以怖度而去。
现代文：那少年弹琵琶弹了几十只曲子，弹完后，就吐出舌头瞪着眼睛来吓唬杨度，然后就走了。
English: The boy played dozens of pieces of music on the pipa. After he finished playing, he spat out his tongue and stared at Yang Du to scare him, and then he left.

古文：复行二十里许，又见一老父，自云： 姓王，名戒。 
现代文：又走了二十里左右，杨度又看见一个老人，自称姓王名戒。
English: After walking another twenty miles or so, Yang Du saw another old man, who called himself Wang Mingjiao.

古文：因复载之。谓曰： 鬼工鼓琵琶，甚哀。 
现代文：杨度又让他搭了车，还对他说： 鬼善于弹琵琶，弹得很悲哀。 
English: Yang Du also gave him a ride and said to him: "The ghost is good at playing the lute, and plays it very sadly.

古文：戒曰： 我亦能鼓。 
现代文：王戒说： 我也会弹。 
English: Wang Jie said, "I can play too."

古文：即是向鬼。复擘眼，吐舌，度怖几死。
现代文：原来他就是刚才那个鬼，又瞪眼吐舌的，杨度吓得差一点死去。
English: It turned out that he was the ghost who had just appeared, and Yang Du nearly died of fright when he opened his eyes wide.

古文：琅琊秦巨伯，年六十，尝夜行，饮酒，道经蓬山庙，忽见其两孙迎之；扶持百余步，便捉伯颈着地，骂： 老奴！
现代文：琅邪郡人秦巨伯，六十岁了，曾经在夜里出去喝酒，路过蓬山庙的时候，忽然看见他的两个孙子来迎接他。但一个孙子搀扶着他才走了一百多步，便掐住他的脖子把他按到在地，嘴里骂道： 老奴才！
English: Qin Jubei, a sixty-year-old resident of Yuya County, once went out to drink at night. When he passed the Pengshan Temple, he suddenly saw his two grandsons come to greet him. But one grandson only walked more than a hundred steps with him, then he grabbed his neck and pushed him to the ground, cursing: "Old slave!"

古文：汝某日捶我，我今当杀汝。 
现代文：你某某天毒打了我，我今天要杀死你！ 
English: You hit me so-and-so day, I'm going to kill you today!

古文：伯思，惟某时信捶此孙。
现代文：秦巨伯仔细想了想，那天的确打过这个孙子。
English: Qin Jubei thought about it carefully. He did indeed hit his grandson that day.

古文：伯乃佯死，乃置伯去。
现代文：秦巨伯就装死，两个孙子便扔下秦巨伯走了。
English: His two grandsons left him behind.

古文：伯归家，欲治两孙，两孙惊惋，叩头言： 为子孙宁可有此？
现代文：秦巨伯回到家中，想要处罚两个孙子。两个孙子又惊讶又惋惜，向他磕头说： 当子孙的，哪会有这种事呢？
English: When Qin Jubei returned home, he wanted to punish his two grandsons. The two grandsons were both surprised and sorry, and they shook their heads at him, saying, "As a grandchild, how could such a thing happen?"

古文：恐是鬼魅，乞更试之。 
现代文：恐怕是鬼魅作祟，求您再去试它一下。 
English: I'm afraid it's a trick of the devil. Please try it again.

古文：伯意悟，数日，乃诈醉，行此庙间，复见两孙来扶持伯。
现代文：秦巨伯心中有点醒悟了。过了几天，他又假装喝醉了酒，来到这座庙前。又看见两个孙子来搀扶他。
English: After a few days, he pretended to be drunk again and came to this temple. He also saw his two grandsons come to help him.

古文：伯乃急持，鬼动作不得；达家，乃是两人也。
现代文：秦巨伯连忙把他们紧紧挟住，鬼动弹不得。到家中一看，却是两个庙中的偶像。
English: Qin Jubei quickly clamped them tightly, unable to move. When he got home, he saw that they were idols from two temples.

古文：伯着火炙之，腹背俱焦坼，出着庭中，夜皆亡去。
现代文：秦巨伯便点了火烤它们，它们的腹部、背部都被烤得枯焦裂开了，然后把它们提出去扔在院子中，到夜里它们便都逃跑了。
English: Qin Jubao then lit a fire to roast them, and their stomachs and backs were roasted until they were charred and cracked. He then picked them up and threw them into the courtyard. By nightfall, they had all fled.

古文：伯恨不得杀之，后月余，又佯酒醉，夜行，怀刃以去，家不知也，极夜不还，其孙恐又为此鬼所困，乃俱往迎伯，伯竟刺杀之。
现代文：秦巨伯后悔自己没能把它们杀了。一个多月后，秦巨伯又假装喝醉了酒在夜里外出，他怀里藏着刀离家，家里的人却不知道。夜深了他还没有回来，他的孙子怕他又被那鬼魅搞得走投无路，就一起去迎候秦巨伯，秦巨伯竟然把自己的两个孙子刺死了。
English: Qin Jubei regretted that he had not been able to kill them. More than a month later, Qin Jubei again pretended to be drunk and went out at night. He left home with a knife hidden in his arms, but the people at home did not know. He had not returned in the dead of night. His grandson was afraid that he would be cornered by the ghost, so they went to meet Qin Jubei. Qin Jubei actually stabbed his two grandsons to death.

古文：汉，武建元年，东莱人，姓池，家常作酒，一日，见三奇客，共持面饭至，索其酒饮。
现代文：汉代建武元年，东莱郡有个姓池的人，家里常常造酒。有一天，他看见三个奇怪的客人，一起拿着面和饭来到他家，向他要酒喝，喝完就走了。
English: In the first year of Jianwu in the Han Dynasty, there was a man surnamed Chi in Donglai County, who often made wine at home. One day, he saw three strange guests, who came to his house with noodles and rice, asked him for wine, and left after drinking it.

古文：饮竟而去。顷之，有人来，云： 见三鬼酣醉于林中。 
现代文：一会儿，有一个人来，说他看见三个鬼醉倒在树林里。
English: After a while, a man came and said he had seen three ghosts lying drunk in the woods.

古文：吴先主杀武卫兵钱小小，形见大街，顾借赁人吴永，使永送书与街南庙，借木马二匹，以酒噀之，皆成好马，鞍勒俱全。
现代文：吴先主孙权杀死了武卫营中的小兵钱小小，钱死后却在大街上显出原形，并雇用佣工吴永派他送信给大街南端的庙宇，去借两匹木马。木马借来后，他用酒喷了一下，便都变成了好马，连鞍座和马笼头也都完备。
English: Wu's ancestor Sun Quan killed Qian Xiao Xiao, a small soldier in the camp of Wu Wei. After Qian's death, he appeared in his original form on the street. He hired the domestic worker Wu Yong to send him to the temple at the southern end of the street to borrow two wooden horses. After borrowing the wooden horses, he sprayed them with wine, and they all became good horses, even the saddle and the horse cage head were complete.

古文：南阳宋定伯，年少时，夜行，逢鬼，问之。鬼言： 我是鬼。 
现代文：南阳郡人氏宋定伯，还在他年轻的时候，一次在夜里走路时碰上了鬼。宋定伯问他，鬼说： 我是鬼。 
English: Song Dingbo, a young man from Nanyang County, once encountered a ghost while walking at night. When Song Dingbo asked him about it, the ghost said, "I am a ghost."

古文：鬼问： 汝复谁？ 
现代文：鬼问宋定伯： 你又是谁？ 
English: The ghost asked Song Dingbo: Who are you?

古文：定伯诳之，言： 我亦鬼。 
现代文：宋定伯欺骗他说： 我也是鬼。 
English: Song Dingbo deceived him and said, "I am also a ghost."

古文：鬼问： 欲至何所？ 
现代文：鬼问： 你要到什么地方去？ 
English: The ghost asked, "Where are you going?"

古文：答曰： 欲至宛市。 
现代文：宋定伯回答说： 想到宛县县城的市场上去。 
English: Song Dingbo replied: I want to go to the market in Wanxian County.

古文：鬼言： 我亦欲至宛市。 
现代文：鬼说： 我也想到宛城的市场上去。 
English: The ghost said, "I also want to go to the market in Wancheng."

古文：遂行。数里，鬼言： 步行太迟，可共递相担，何如？ 
现代文：于是宋定伯就和鬼一起走了几里路。鬼说： 步行太慢，我们可以互相合作，轮流掮着走，怎么样？ 
English: So Song Dingbo walked a few miles with the ghost. The ghost said, "Walking is too slow. How about we work together and take turns walking?"

古文：定伯曰： 大善。 
现代文：宋定伯说： 那太好了。 
English: Song Dingbo said: That's great.

古文：鬼便先担定伯数里。
现代文：鬼就先掮着宋定伯走了几里。
English: The ghost first walked several miles behind Ding Bo.

古文：鬼言： 卿太重，将非鬼也。 
现代文：鬼说： 您太重，恐怕不是鬼吧？ 
English: The ghost said, "You're too heavy. I'm afraid you're not a ghost."

古文：定伯言： 我新鬼，故身重耳。 
现代文：宋定伯说： 我是新鬼，所以身体才沉重。 
English: Song Dingbo said: I am a new ghost, so my body is heavy.

古文：定伯因复担鬼，鬼略无重。
现代文：接下来宋定伯也掮起了鬼，鬼一点儿也没有什么重量。
English: When Ding Bo is carrying a ghost, there is no weight on his back.

古文：如是再三，定伯复言： 我新鬼，不知有何所畏忌？ 
现代文：他们就如此反复轮换掮着走。宋定伯又说： 我是新鬼，不知道鬼害怕什么？忌讳什么？ 
English: Song Dingbo said, "I'm a new ghost, I don't know what ghosts are afraid of? What are their taboos?"

古文：鬼答言： 惟不喜人唾。 
现代文：鬼回答说： 只是不喜欢人的唾沫。 
English: The demon replied, "I just don't like human spit."

古文：于是共行。
现代文：于是他们还是一起走着。
English: So they walked on together.

古文：道遇水，定伯令鬼先渡，听之，了然无声音。
现代文：路上碰到了河，宋定伯叫鬼先渡，仔细听着那鬼渡河，一点声音也没有。
English: On the way, they came across a river. Song Dingbo asked the ghost to cross the river first. He listened carefully to the ghost crossing the river, and there was no sound at all.

古文：定伯自渡，漕漼作声。
现代文：宋定伯自己渡河时，水声嘈杂。
English: When Dingbo became obsolete, the river was noisy.

古文：鬼复言： 何以有声？ 
现代文：鬼又说： 你渡河为什么有声音？ 
English: The ghost also said, "Why is there a sound when you cross the river?"

古文：定伯曰： 新死，不习渡水故耳。
现代文：宋定伯说： 是我刚死，不熟练淌水过河的缘故吧。
English: Song Dingbo said, "It's because I just died and I'm not good at crossing the river."

古文：勿怪吾也。 
现代文：请你不要奇怪。 
English: Please don't be surprised.

古文：行欲至宛市，定伯便担鬼，着肩上，急执之。
现代文：快要到宛城的市场了，宋定伯便把鬼掮在肩上，紧紧地捏住他。
English: As he was about to reach the market in Wancheng, Song Dingbo put the ghost on his shoulder and held him tightly.

古文：鬼大呼，声咋咋然，索下，不复听之。
现代文：鬼被捏得大声叫嚷，声音哇哇哇的，请求宋定伯把他放下来。
English: The ghost screamed and squeaked incessantly for Ding Bo to put him down.

古文：径至宛市中下着地，化为一羊，便卖之，恐其变化，唾之，得钱千五百，乃去。
现代文：宋定伯不再听他的，一直把他掮到宛城的市场上，才把他放下扔在地上，鬼却变成了一只羊，宋定伯就把这只羊卖了，怕它再有变化，便对它唾了些口水，得到了一千五百文钱就走了。
English: Song Dingbo didn't listen to him anymore. He chased him all the way to the market in Wancheng before he put him down and threw him on the ground. However, the ghost turned into a sheep, and Song Dingbo sold the sheep. Fearing that it might change again, he spat on it, got fifteen hundred coins, and left.

古文：当时石崇有言： 定伯卖鬼，得钱千五。 
现代文：当时石崇说过这样的话： 定伯卖鬼，得钱千五。 
English: At that time, Shi Chong said something like this: Dingbo sold ghosts and got five thousand dollars.

古文：吴王夫差，小女，名曰紫玉，年十八，才貌俱美。
现代文：吴王夫差的小女儿名叫紫玉，年纪十八岁，才能和容貌都很出色。
English: Wu Wangfu's poor little daughter, named Ziyu, is eighteen years old, and her talent and appearance are outstanding.

古文：童子韩重，年十九，有道术，女悦之，私交信问，许为之妻。
现代文：当时有个少年叫韩重，十九岁，有道术。紫玉爱上了他，私下派人给他送信，心许做他的妻子。
English: At that time, there was a boy named Han Chung, nineteen years old, who was good at martial arts. Ziyu fell in love with him and secretly sent him a letter, promising to be his wife.

古文：重学于齐，鲁之间，临去，属其父母使求婚。
现代文：韩重要到齐、鲁一带去求学。临走时，把这婚事托付给了自己的父母，让他们去求婚。
English: Han Zhengde went to study in Qi and Lu. Before leaving, he entrusted the marriage to his parents and asked them to propose.

古文：王怒、不与。
现代文：吴王很恼火，不肯把女儿嫁给韩重。
English: Wu Wang was very angry and refused to marry his daughter to Han Chong.

古文：女玉结气死，葬阊门之外。
现代文：紫玉因此郁闷而死，埋葬在阊门的外边。
English: Purple Jade was so depressed that she died and was buried outside the gate.

古文：三年，重归，诘其父母；父母曰： 王大怒，玉结气死，已葬矣。 
现代文：三年后韩重回到家中，问他的父母，父母说： 吴王非常恼火，紫玉也郁结而死，早已埋葬了。 
English: Three years later, Han Chung returned home and asked his parents. His parents said, "Wu Wang was very angry, and Ziyu died of grief and was buried long ago."

古文：重哭泣哀恸，具牲币往吊于墓前。
现代文：韩重痛哭流涕，十分悲哀，他准备了祭品礼物，去紫玉墓前悼念她。
English: Han Chong cried bitterly and was very sad. He prepared a sacrificial gift and went to the Purple Jade Tomb to mourn her.

古文：玉魂从墓出，见重流涕，谓曰： 昔尔行之后，令二亲从王相求，度必克从大愿；不图别后遭命，奈何！ 
现代文：紫玉的灵魂从坟墓中走了出来，和韩重见面后，流着眼泪对韩重说： 过去你走了以后，你双亲向父王求婚，想必能成全我这终生大愿。没料到分别以后，遭到这样的命运，又有什么办法呢？ 
English: Purple Jade's soul came out of the grave, and after meeting Han Chung, she said to Han Chung with tears streaming down her face, "In the past, after you left, your parents proposed to my father, and I thought that I would be able to fulfill this lifelong dream. I didn't expect to be separated, and to suffer such a fate, so what can I do?

古文：玉乃左顾，宛颈而歌曰： 南山有乌，北山张罗；乌既高飞，罗将奈何！
现代文：紫玉于是向左边掉过头去，弯着脖子唱道： 南山有只乌，北山张网罗。乌鸦已高飞，罗网没奈何！
English: Ziyu Yu then turned his head to the left, bent his neck and sang: There is a crow on the south mountain, and a net on the north mountain. The crow has flown high, and the net can't help it!

古文：意欲从君，谗言孔多。
现代文：本想嫁给您，坏话又太多。
English: I wanted to marry you, but there were too many bad things said about you.

古文：悲结生疾，没命黄垆。
现代文：郁结生重病，没命葬黄土。
English: Tragedy leads to disease. Death leads to jaundice.

古文：命之不造，冤如之何！
现代文：命运真不好，冤死又如何！
English: Fate is really bad, what about wrongful death!

古文：羽族之长，名为凤凰；一日失雄，三年感伤；虽有众鸟，不为匹双。
现代文：鸟类的大王，名字叫凤凰。一日失雄凤，三年多悲伤。虽有众鸟在，不愿配成双。
English: The king of birds, his name is Phoenix. One day he lost his male phoenix, and for more than three years he was sad. Although there were many birds, he did not want to make a pair.

古文：故见鄙姿，逢君辉光。
现代文：故显鄙陋身，迎您满面光。
English: When you are despised, you shine.

古文：身远心近，何当暂忘。 
现代文：身远心相近，哪有一刻忘？ 
English: Far away and close at heart, how can you ever forget?

古文：歌毕，歔欷流涕，要重还冢。
现代文：唱完后，紫玉抽泣流泪，邀请韩重一起回到坟墓里。
English: After the singing was over, Ziyu sobbed and shed tears, and invited Han Chong to return to the tomb together.

古文：重曰： 死生异路，惧有尤愆，不敢承命。 
现代文：韩重说： 死和生是两个世界。我怕有罪过，不敢接受你的邀请。 
English: Han Chung said, "Death and life are two worlds. I'm afraid of sinning, and I don't dare to accept your invitation."

古文：玉曰： 死生异路，吾亦知之；然今一别，永无后期。
现代文：紫玉说。 死和生是两个世界，我也知道这个道理。但是今天一分别，以后就永远没有见面的机会了。
English: Purple Jade said, "Death and life are two worlds, I also know this truth, but once we part today, there will never be a chance to meet again."

古文：子将畏我为鬼而祸子乎？
现代文：您是怕我成了鬼而来祸害您吗？
English: Are you afraid that I will become a ghost and come to haunt you?

古文：欲诚所奉，宁不相信。 
现代文：我是要真诚地把自己奉献给您，难道您不相信？ 
English: Don't you believe that I sincerely want to give myself to you?

古文：重感其言，送之还冢。
现代文：韩重被她的话感动了，就送她回到坟墓里去。
English: Han Chong was moved by her words and sent her back to the grave.

古文：玉与之饮燕，留三日三夜，尽夫妇之礼。
现代文：紫玉置办了酒宴款待他，留他住了三天三夜，尽到了夫妻之间的札仪。
English: Ziyu Juyi held a wine banquet to entertain him, and kept him for three days and three nights, until the match between husband and wife was over.

古文：临出，取径寸明珠以送重曰： 既毁其名，又绝其愿，复何言哉！
现代文：韩重将要出坟墓时，紫玉拿了一颗直径一寸的明珠送给韩重，对他说： 父王既毁坏了我的名声，又断绝了我的心愿，还有什么话可说呢？
English: When Han Chung was about to leave the tomb, Ziyu took a one-inch-diameter pearl and gave it to Han Chung. She said to him, "Father Wang has destroyed my reputation and cut off my heart's desire. What else can I say?"

古文：时节自爱。
现代文：季节交替气候变化时您要多加保重。
English: You need to take extra care when the seasons change and the climate changes.

古文：若至吾家，致敬大王。 
现代文：如果去我家，请你代我向父王表示敬意。 
English: If you come to my house, please pay your respects to my father.

古文：重既出，遂诣王自说其事。
现代文：韩重出了坟墓，就去拜见吴王，主动叙述了这些事情。
English: When Han Xuan came out of the tomb, he went to see King Wu and took the initiative to recount these things.

古文：王大怒曰： 吾女既死，而重造讹言，以玷秽亡灵，此不过发冢取物，托以鬼神。 
现代文：吴王大发雷霆，说： 我女儿已经死了，你却制造谣言，来污辱死者的灵魂。这不过是你偷挖坟墓盗窃宝物而假托鬼神罢了。 
English: Wu Wang flew into a rage and said, "My daughter is dead, but you are creating rumors to defame the soul of the dead. This is just you digging up graves, stealing treasures, and pretending to be a ghost.

古文：趣收重。
现代文：于是就马上逮捕了韩重。
English: As a result, Han Chung was immediately arrested.

古文：重走脱，至玉墓所，诉之。
现代文：韩重逃跑了，来到紫玉的坟地诉说了这件事。
English: Han Chung ran away and came to Ziyu's graveyard to report the incident.

古文：玉曰： 无忧。今归白王。 
现代文：紫玉说； 别担心，我现在就回去向父王说明。 
English: Don't worry, I'll go back and explain to my father.

古文：王妆梳，忽见玉，惊愕悲喜，问曰： 尔缘何生？ 
现代文：吴王正在梳洗，忽然看见紫玉，大吃一惊，又悲又喜，问道： 你靠了什么又活了？ 
English: King Wu was combing his hair when he suddenly saw Ziyu Yu. He was surprised, sad and happy, and asked, "What did you rely on to survive?

古文：玉跪而言曰： 昔诸生韩重来求玉，大王不许，玉名毁，义绝，自致身亡。
现代文：紫玉跪着说道： 过去书生韩重来求婚，大王不同意。我的名誉被毁坏了，我对他的情义被截断了，所以我自己把自己折磨死了。
English: Purple Jade knelt down and said: In the past, the scholar Han Chong came to propose marriage, but the king did not agree. My reputation was ruined, my feelings for him were cut off, so I tortured myself to death.

古文：重从远还，闻玉已死，故赍牲币，诣冢吊唁。
现代文：韩重从远方回来，听说我已经死了，所以特地送来了祭品礼物，到坟上悼念我。
English: Han Chung returned from far away, heard that his daughter had died, and brought offerings to my grave.

古文：感其笃，终辄与相见，因以珠遗之，不为发冢。
现代文：我感激他情意深厚，始终如一，就立即和他见了面，接着又把明珠送给了他。
English: I appreciated that he was so affectionate and consistent, so I immediately met with him and then gave him the pearl.

古文：愿勿推治。 
现代文：他没有去挖我的坟，请大王别再追究他了。 
English: He didn't dig my grave, so please stop investigating him.

古文：夫人闻之，出而抱之。玉如烟然。
现代文：吴王夫人听见紫玉的声音，便出来抱住她，紫玉却象烟一样消失了。
English: When Lady Wu Wang heard Ziyu's voice, she came out to embrace her, but Ziyu vanished like smoke.

古文：陇西辛道度者，游学至雍州城四五里，比见一大宅，有青衣女子在门。
现代文：陇西郡有个叫辛道度的，外出东学到雍州城，离城还有四五里路，看见近处有一座很大的住宅，一个身穿青衣的婢女站在门口。
English: In Shaanxi County, there was a man named Xin Daodu, who went out to the east to study Yongzhou City. He was still four or five miles away from the city. He saw a large house nearby, and a maid in a blue dress standing at the door.

古文：度诣门下求飧。
现代文：辛道度便到门前请求吃顿晚饭。
English: After a hard day's work, he went to the front door to ask for dinner.

古文：女子入告秦女，女命召入。
现代文：婢女进去报告了秦王的女儿，秦姑娘便叫婢女去让辛道度进屋。
English: The maid went in and reported the Qin King's daughter, and the Qin girl asked the maid to let Xin Daodu enter the house.

古文：度趋入阁中，秦女于西榻而坐。
现代文：辛道度有礼地小步走进阁子中，秦姑娘在西边的床榻上坐着。
English: With great difficulty and politeness, he walked into the attic, and Qin Nien sat on the bed on the west side.

古文：度称姓名，叙起居，既毕，命东榻而坐。
现代文：辛道度报上了自己的姓名，请了安，寒暄问候完毕，秦姑娘便叫他坐在东边的床榻上。
English: Xin Daodu wrote down his name, said hello, and when the greetings were over, the Qin girl told him to sit on the east side of the bed.

古文：即治饮馔。
现代文：接着就准备好了酒菜饮食一起进餐。
English: Next, we prepared the food and drink and ate together.

古文：食讫，女谓度曰： 我秦闵王女，出聘曹国，不幸无夫而亡。
现代文：吃完后，秦姑娘对辛道度说： 我是秦闵王的女儿，出聘给曹国，不幸我还没有成婚就死了。
English: After eating, Qin girl said to Xin Daodu, "I am the daughter of Qin Yu Wang, and I was hired out to Cao Guo. Unfortunately, I died before I was married.

古文：亡来已二十三年，独居此宅，今日君来，愿为夫妇，经三宿。 
现代文：到如今已经二十三年，独自一个人居住在这住宅里。今天您来了，我希望和你做夫妻。 
English: It is now twenty-three years that I have lived alone in this house. Today you have come, and I wish to be your husband and wife.

古文：三日后，女即自言曰： 君是生人，我鬼也，共君宿契，此会可三宵，不可久居，当有祸矣。
现代文：经过了三夜三天以后，秦姑娘便主动对辛道度说： 您是活人，我是鬼。虽然和您早就有了缘份，但这种幽会只可以有三夜，您不可以再住下去了，否则，就会有祸害了。
English: After three nights and three days, the Qin girl took the initiative to say to Xin Daodu: "You are a living person, I am a ghost. Although I have had a predestined relationship with you for a long time, this kind of tryst can only last for three nights. You can't stay longer, otherwise, there will be a disaster."

古文：然兹信宿，未悉绸缪，既已分飞，将何表信于郎？ 
现代文：但是这么短暂的一两夜，还没有能够尽情地了却我们之间那如胶如漆的缠绵情意，既然我们现在要分别了，我拿什么来向郎君表明我终身相许的真情呢？ 
English: But such a short one or two nights, have not been able to fully enjoy, but between us is like glue, the lingering affection. Since we are now going to separate, what can I use to show my husband the true feelings of my lifelong commitment?

古文：即命取床后盒子开之，取金枕一枚，与度为信。
现代文：说完当即就叫婢女把床后的盆子拿来打开，取出一个金枕，给辛道度作为信物。
English: Having said this, she immediately asked her maid to open the basin behind the bed, take out a golden pillow, and give it to Cinderella as a token.

古文：乃分袂泣别，即遣青衣送出门外。
现代文：秦姑娘于是哭泣着和辛道度分手告别，又派婢女把他送出门外。
English: The Qin girl then wept and bid farewell to the hard-working man, and sent her maidservant to escort him out of the door.

古文：未逾数步，不见舍宇，惟有一冢。
现代文：辛道度还没走几步，这房屋就不见了，只有一座坟墓。
English: After a few steps, the house was gone, and there was only a grave.

古文：度当时荒忙出走，视其金枕在怀，乃无异变。
现代文：辛道度当时慌忙逃跑，看看那金枕倒还在怀里，并没有发生什么变化。
English: At that time, Xin Daodu ran away in a hurry, but the golden pillow was still in his arms, and nothing had changed.

古文：寻至秦国，以枕于市货之，恰遇秦妃东游，亲见度卖金枕，疑而索看。诘度何处得来？度具以告。
现代文：不久他便来到秦国，于是就把这金枕放在市场上出售。恰巧碰到秦妃到东方游玩，亲眼看见辛道度在卖金枕，因为有点怀疑，就向辛道度要来仔细察看，并追问辛道度是从什么地方搞到的，辛道度详细地把那事情的前后经过告诉了秦妃。
English: Soon he came to Qin, so he put the golden pillow on the market to sell. He happened to meet Qin Fei when she was visiting the East, and he saw with his own eyes that Xin Daodu was selling the golden pillow. Because he was a little suspicious, he asked Xin Daodu to come and take a closer look, and asked where Xin Daodu got it from. Xin Daodu told Qin Fei the details of what happened before and after.

古文：妃闻，悲泣不能自胜，然向疑耳，乃遣人发冢启柩视之，原葬悉在，唯不见枕。
现代文：秦妃听了后，禁不住悲哀地哭泣起来。但是她还有点怀疑，就派人去挖那坟墓，打开棺材仔细查看，只见原先葬下去的东西都在，只是不见了金枕。
English: After hearing this, Qin Fei couldn't help but weep with sadness. However, she still had some doubts, so she sent someone to dig up the grave, open the coffin and take a closer look. She saw that everything that was originally buried was still there, but the golden pillow was missing.

古文：解体看之，交情宛若。秦妃始信之。
现代文：解开衣服验看秦姑娘的身体，男女交欢的痕迹宛然在目，秦妃这才相信了。
English: After unzipping the dress and inspecting Qin's body, the traces of sexual intercourse between a man and a woman were clearly visible, which made Qin Fei believe.

古文：叹曰： 我女大圣，死经二十三年，犹能与生人交往。此是我真女婿也。 
现代文：她深有感慨地说： 我的女儿真是十分神通，死了二十三年，还能和活人交往，这辛道度是我真正的女婿啊。 
English: She said with deep emotion, "My daughter is really quite magical. She has been dead for twenty-three years, and she can still communicate with the living. This difficulty is my true son-in-law."

古文：遂封度为驸马都尉，赐金帛车马，令还本国。
现代文：于是就封辛道度为驸马都尉，赐给他金帛车马，叫他回到自己国内。
English: So he made Xin Daodu the captain of the horse-drawn carriage, gave him a golden horse-drawn carriage, and told him to go back to his own country.

古文：因此以来，后人名女婿为 驸马； 今之国婿！亦为 驸马 矣。
现代文：从这件事发生以来，后代人侵把女婿称为 驸马 。现在国王的女婿，也被称作驸马了。
English: Since then, descendants have referred to the king's son-in-law as "horse." Now the king's son-in-law is also called "horse."

古文：汉，谈生者，年四十，无妇，常感激读诗经，夜半，有女子，年可十五六，姿颜服饰，天下无双，来就生为夫妇之言，曰： 我与人不同，勿以火照我也，三年之后，方可照耳。 
现代文：汉朝有个叫谈生的，年纪四十岁了，还没有妻子，常常因为心中有所感慨激动而诵读《诗经》。有一天半夜，有个姑娘年纪大约在十五六岁，体态容貌和衣着打扮，天下没有谁能比得上她的，她主动来接近谈生，和他做夫妻。说道： 我和人不同，你不要用火来照我。三年以后，才可以照照罢了。 
English: In the Han Dynasty, there was a forty-year-old bachelor who did not yet have a wife. He often recited the "Book of Songs" because of the emotional excitement in his heart. At midnight one day, there was a girl of about fifteen or sixteen years old, with a physique, appearance and dress that no one in the world could match. She took the initiative to approach the bachelor and become his wife. She said: "I am different from other people. Don't use fire to shine on me. You can only shine on me after three years."

古文：与为夫妇，生一儿，已二岁，不能忍，夜，伺其寝后，盗照视之。
现代文：谈生就和她结成了夫妻。后来生了一个儿子，已经两岁了，谈生实在忍不住了，便在夜里等妻子入睡后，偷偷地用火烛照着看她。
English: He later gave birth to a son, who is now two years old. He couldn't bear to part with his wife, so he waited for her to fall asleep at night and secretly watched her with a lighted candle.

古文：其腰已上生肉，如人，腰已下，但有枯骨。
现代文：只见她的腰部以上，象人一样长着肉，腰部以下，只有枯骨。
English: From the waist up, she had flesh like a human, but from the waist down, she was nothing but bones.

古文：妇觉，遂言曰： 君负我。
现代文：妻子醒了，就说道： 您辜负了我。
English: When my wife woke up, she said: You have failed me.

古文：我垂生矣，何不能忍一岁，而竟相照也？ 
现代文：我快要活了，您为什么不能再忍耐一年而竟然在现在来照我呢？ 
English: I am about to die. Why can't you wait one more year and come to see me now?

古文：生辞谢涕泣，不可复止。
现代文：谈生连忙向她道歉。
English: He quickly apologized to her.

古文：云： 与君虽大义永离；然顾念我儿若贫不能自偕活者，暂随我去，方遗君物。 
现代文：他妻子痛哭流涕再也忍不住了，对谈生说： 虽然和您永远断绝了夫妻关系，但我顾念我的儿子，如果您穷得不能连他一起养活，就暂且跟我走一趟，我要送给您一点东西。 
English: His wife couldn't hold back the tears any longer and said to the interviewee: Although we have severed our conjugal relationship with you forever, I am thinking of my son. If you are too poor to support him, come with me for a while. I want to give you something.

古文：生随之去，入华堂，室宇器物不凡。以一珠袍与之，曰： 可以自给。 
现代文：谈生跟着妻子去了，进入一间华丽的堂屋，里面的器物都非同寻常，他妻子拿了一件缀着珠宝的长袍给了他，说： 可以靠它来养活你自己了。 
English: He went with his wife into a magnificent hall, the furnishings of which were extraordinary, and his wife gave him a bejeweled robe, saying, "You can support yourself with this."

古文：裂取生衣裾留之而去。
现代文：她撕了一片谈生的衣襟，谈生就把衣襟留下走了。
English: She tore a piece of his shirt collar, and he left the collar behind.

古文：后生持袍诣市，睢阳王家买之，得钱千万。
现代文：后来谈生拿着这珠袍到市场上出售，睢阳王家的人买了它，谈生得到了成千上万的钱。
English: Later, Tong Sheng went to the market to sell a beaded robe, which was bought by a member of the Shanyang royal family, and made tens of thousands of dollars.

古文：王识之曰： 是我女袍，那得在市？
现代文：睢阳王认识那长袍，说： 这是我女儿的长袍，哪会在市场上呢？
English: King Shenyang recognized the robe and said, "This is my daughter's robe, which one will be on the market?"

古文：充曰： 此何府也？ 
现代文：卢充问： 这是什么府第呀？ 
English: Lu Chong asked: What kind of prefecture is this?

古文：答曰： 少府府也， 充曰： 我衣恶，那得见少府？ 
现代文：回答说： 是崔少府的府第。 卢充说： 我衣服破烂，哪能去见少府呢？ 
English: Lu Chun said, "My clothes are torn, where can I go to see Cui Shao Fu?"

古文：即有一人提一幞新衣，曰： 府君以此遗郎。 
现代文：这时立即有个人拿来一包新衣服，对卢充说： 府君把这个送给您。 
English: At this time, a person immediately brought a package of new clothes and said to Lu Chong: "Fu Jun is giving this to you.

古文：充便着讫，进见少府。展姓名。
现代文：卢充便换好衣服，进去拜见少府，通报了自己的姓名。
English: Lu Chong then changed his clothes, went in to see Shofu, and told him his name.

古文：酒炙数行。谓充曰： 尊府君不以仆门鄙陋，近得书，为君索小女婚，故相迎耳。 
现代文：酒斟了数巡、菜上了几道后，少府便对卢充说： 令尊大人不嫌我门第卑贱，最近收到他的信，为您向我小女求婚，所以我才把你接了来。 
English: After the wine had been poured several times and the dishes had been served, Shofu said to Lu Chun, "Your Excellency, I am not ashamed to say that you are a lowly member of my family. I recently received a letter from him, proposing marriage to my little girl, so I brought you here.

古文：便以书示充。
现代文：说完便把信拿给卢充看。
English: After saying this, he showed the letter to Lu Chong.

古文：充，父亡时虽小，然已识父手迹，即欷歔无复辞免。便敕内： 卢郎已来，可令女郎妆严。 
现代文：父亲死的时候，卢充虽然很小，但已经能认识父亲的笔迹了，所以看到信后便马上哽咽起来，也不再推辞了。少府便吩咐家里的人说： 卢郎已经来了，可以叫女儿梳妆打扮好。 
English: At the time of his father's death, although Lu Chong was very young, he was already able to recognize his father's handwriting, so when he saw the letter, he immediately choked up and no longer refused. Shoufu then ordered the family to say: Lu Lang has arrived, you can have your daughter dress up.

古文：且语充云： 君可就东廊，及至黄昏。 内白： 女郎妆严已毕。 
现代文：又对卢充说： 您可以到东厢房去。 等到黄昏，里面的人说： 小姐梳妆打扮已经完毕。 
English: He also said to Lu Chun, "You can go to the east wing room. " When it was dusk, the person inside said, "Miss, your dressing has been completed.

古文：充既至东廊，女已下车，立席头，却共拜。
现代文：卢充到了东厢房，小姐已经下了车，站在席边，和卢充一起拜堂。
English: Lu Chun arrived at the east wing room, the young lady had already got off the car, stood at the edge of the seat, and worshiped together with Lu Chun.

古文：时为三日，给食三日毕，崔谓充曰： 君可归矣。
现代文：喜庆的时间是三天，每天都大办酒席。三天过去了，崔少府对卢充说： 您可以回家了。
English: The celebration lasted for three days, with a grand banquet held every day. After the three days were over, Cui Shaofu said to Lu Chong, "You can go home now."

古文：女有娠相，若生男，当以相还，无相疑。生女，当留自养。 
现代文：我女儿有怀孕的迹象，如果生男孩，会抱来还给你，请你放心，如果生女孩，就留下来让她自己抚养。 
English: My daughter has signs of pregnancy. If she gives birth to a boy, she will bring him back to you. Please rest assured. If she gives birth to a girl, she will stay and raise him by herself.

古文：敕外严车送客。充便辞出。
现代文：又命令外面的侍从准备好车辆送客人，卢充便告辞出门。
English: He also ordered the attendants outside to prepare a vehicle to send the guests, and Lu Chong then left.

古文：崔送至中门，执手涕零。
现代文：崔少府送到大门口，握着他的手眼泪直淌。
English: Cui Shaofu was brought to the front door, and tears streamed down his face as she held his hand.

古文：出门，见一犊车，驾青衣，又见本所着衣及弓箭，故在门外。
现代文：卢充出了大门，看见一辆小牛车，套着一头青牛，又看见自己原来所穿的衣服和弓箭仍在门外。
English: Lu opened the gate and saw a calf cart with a young cow on it. He also saw the clothes he was wearing and his bow and arrow still outside the gate.

古文：寻传教将一人提幞衣与充，相问曰： 姻援始尔，别甚怅恨。
现代文：不久，崔少府又传令让一个人提着包衣服交给卢充，并慰问他说： 姻缘就这样开始了，分别却使我家小姐十分惆怅怨恨。
English: Soon after, Cui Shaofu sent another messenger to have a man carry a bag of clothes to give to Lu Chong, and consoled him by saying, "This is how the marriage began, but the separation made my wife very resentful.

古文：今复致衣一袭，被褥自副。 
现代文：现在再送给您一套衣服，被褥也配备好了。 
English: Now I'll give you another set of clothes, and the bedding is ready.

古文：充上车，去如电逝，须臾至家。
现代文：卢充上了车，象闪电般地离去了。
English: Lu filled up the car, the car was as fast as lightning, and soon arrived at home.

古文：家人相见，悲喜推问，知崔是亡人，而入其墓。
现代文：一会儿到了家，家人看见他悲喜交集。打听查询后，才知道崔少府是死人而卢充进了他的坟墓。
English: After a while, he arrived home, and his family saw him in a state of mixed grief and joy. After making inquiries, they learned that Cui Shaofu was dead and that Lu had entered his grave.

古文：追以懊惋。
现代文：卢充回忆着那一切，十分懊恼惋惜。
English: Lu Chong recalled all of that with great regret.

古文：别后四年，三月三日，充临水戏，忽见水旁有二犊车，乍沈乍浮，既而近岸，同坐皆见，而充往开车后户，见崔氏女与三岁男共载。
现代文：分别后四年的三月三日，卢充到河边修楔游玩，忽然看见河边有二辆小牛车，忽沉忽浮，一会儿靠近了岸边。和卢充坐在一起的人都看见了，卢充开了车子的后门，看见崔氏女和一个三岁的男孩一起坐在车中。
English: On March 3rd, four years after their separation, Lu Chun went to the river to repair a wedge and play. Suddenly, he saw two oxcarts by the river. They floated up and down, and came close to the shore. The people who were sitting with Lu Chun saw it. Lu Chun opened the back door of the car and saw Cui's daughter and a three-year-old boy sitting in the car together.

古文：充见之，忻然欲捉其手，女举手指后车曰： 府君见人。 
现代文：卢充看见了她们很高兴，想去握住她的手。崔氏姑娘举起手来指着后面的车子说： 郎君快去拜见大人。 
English: Lu Chun was very happy to see them and wanted to hold her hand. Cui's daughter raised her hand, pointed to the car behind and said, "Brother-in-law, hurry up and meet the adults."

古文：即见少府。
现代文：卢充拜见崔少府，上前问候。
English: Luchun bowed to see Cui Shaofu and came forward to greet him.

古文：充往问讯，女抱儿还。充又与金鋺，幷赠诗曰： 煌煌灵芝质，光丽何猗猗！
现代文：崔氏姑娘抱着儿子还给了卢充，又给了他一只金碗，还赠给他一首诗，写道： 姿色辉煌象灵芝，光泽丰满多美丽。
English: Ms. Cui hugged her son and gave him back the loincloth. She also gave him a golden bowl, and presented him with a poem, writing: "His appearance is brilliant like Ganoderma lucidum, the luster is full and beautiful."

古文：华艳当时显，嘉异表神奇。
现代文：漂亮艳丽谁不知，夸我出众又神奇。
English: The gorgeousness was obvious at the time, and the Jiaying watch was magical.

古文：含英未及秀，中夏罹霜萎。
现代文：含花欲放未及开，盛夏遭霜全枯萎。
English: In the middle of summer, the frost withers the young shoots.

古文：荣耀长幽灭，世路永无施。
现代文：华丽荣耀永消逝，人间道路全隔离。
English: Glory is fleeting, and the world will never be the same.

古文：不悟阴阳运，哲人忽来仪。
现代文：阴阳命运看不透，贤郎忽然来偎倚。
English: Without enlightenment, yin and yang are unattainable. The philosopher suddenly becomes an instrument.

古文：会浅离别速，皆由灵与只。
现代文：交欢短暂离别速，都由神灵来管理。
English: Intercourse, brief parting, are all managed by the gods.

古文：何以赠余亲，金鋺可颐儿。
现代文：赠送亲人用什么？送只金碗可养子。
English: What to give to relatives as a gift? You can raise a child by giving a gold bowl.

古文：恩爱从此别，断肠伤肝脾。 
现代文：恩爱夫妻从此别，心碎肠断肝脾裂。 
English: The loving couple never saw each other again. Their hearts were broken and their spleens ruptured.

古文：充取儿，鋺及诗，忽然不见二车处。
现代文：卢充接过儿子、金碗和诗，忽然之间两辆车子就不见了。
English: Lu Chun took over his son, the golden bowl and the poem, and suddenly the two cars disappeared.

古文：充将儿还，四坐谓是鬼魅，佥遥唾之。形如故。问儿： 谁是汝父？ 
现代文：卢充带着儿子回到岸上，在座的人说这儿子是鬼，就都远远地朝他吐唾沫，但他儿子的形状却还是老样子。大家就问这孩子： 谁是你的父亲？ 
English: Lu Chong returned to the shore with his son. The people present said that this son was a ghost, and they all spit on him from a distance, but his son's shape remained the same. Everyone asked the child: Who is your father?

古文：儿径就充怀。
现代文：孩子径直扑进卢充怀里。
English: The child ran straight into Lu Chong's arms.

古文：众初怪恶，传省其诗，慨然叹死生之玄通也。
现代文：大家开始还有点奇怪厌恶，等到传阅了那首诗以后，便都感慨地叹息死人和活人之间这种玄妙的交往。
English: At first there was a strange repugnance, but when they had read the poem, they all sighed with emotion at this mysterious intercourse between the dead and the living.

古文：充后乘车入市，卖鋺，高举其价，不欲速售，冀有识。
现代文：卢充后来驾车到集市上去出售金碗，故意抬高它的价格，不想让它很快就卖掉，期待着认识金碗的人到来。
English: Lu Chong then drove to the bazaar to sell the golden bowl, deliberately raising its price, not wanting it to be sold quickly, and looking forward to the arrival of people who knew the golden bowl.

古文：欻有一老婢识此，还白大家曰： 市中见一人，乘车，卖崔氏女郎棺中鋺。 
现代文：忽然有一个年老的婢女认识这只碗，便回去告诉女主人说： 我在集市上看见一个人坐在车上，出售崔氏姑娘棺材中的金碗。 
English: Suddenly, an old servant girl recognized the bowl and went back to tell her mistress: "I saw a man sitting on a cart at the fair, selling the golden bowl from the coffin of the Cui girl.

古文：大家，即崔氏亲姨母也，遣儿视之，果如其婢言。
现代文：这女主人就是崔氏姑娘的亲姨母。她派儿子去查看，果然象那个老婢女讲的。
English: The hostess was the aunt of the Cui girl. She sent her son to investigate, and sure enough, it was just as the old maid had said.

古文：上车，叙姓名，语充曰： 昔我姨嫁少府，生女，未出而亡。
现代文：他便上了卢充的车，通报了自己的姓名，对卢充说： 过去我的姨母嫁给了崔少府，生了个女儿，还没有出嫁就死了。
English: He then got into Lu Chong's car, announced his name, and said to Lu Chong: In the past, my aunt married Cui Shaofu, gave birth to a daughter, and died before getting married.

古文：家亲痛之，赠一金鋺，着棺中。
现代文：我母亲很悲痛，赠送给她一只金碗，把它放在棺材中。
English: My mother was very sad and gave her a gold bowl to put in the coffin.

古文：可说得鋺本末。 
现代文：你能否说说你得到这只金碗的前后经过？ 
English: Can you talk about your journey to get this golden bowl?

古文：充以事对。
现代文：卢充便把那事情的经过告诉了他。
English: Lu Chong then told him the story.

古文：此儿亦为之悲咽。赉还白母，母即令诣充家，迎儿视之。
现代文：那孩子也为此悲伤地抽泣起来，于是便带着金碗回去把这事情告诉了母亲。母亲便叫他到卢充家里，把卢充的儿子接来看看。
English: The child also sobbed with grief at this, so he took the golden bowl and went back to tell his mother about this. His mother then called him to come to Lu Chong's house to pick up Lu Chong's son and take a look.

古文：诸亲悉集。
现代文：所有的亲友都来了。
English: All my relatives and friends came.

古文：儿有崔氏之状，又复似充貌。
现代文：那儿子有崔氏姑娘的形状，又有点象卢充的相貌。
English: The son has the shape of a Cui girl, and a bit of a Luchun look.

古文：儿、鋺俱验。姨母曰： 我外甥三月末间产。
现代文：儿子和金碗都得到了验证，姨母说： 我的外甥女是三月底降生的。
English: Both her son and the golden bowl have been verified, and her aunt said: My niece was born at the end of March.

古文：父曰春，暖温也。愿休强也。 
现代文：她父亲说： 春天温暖，祝愿她休美健强。 
English: Her father said, "May the spring be warm, and may she be healthy and strong."

古文：即字温休。温休者，盖幽婚也，其兆先彰矣。
现代文：于是就给她取了个名字叫温休。 温休 ，大概就是 幽婚 ，是在阴间结婚的意思吧。
English: So he gave her a name, Wenxiu, which probably means "marriage in the underworld."

古文：儿遂成令器。
现代文：她在死后成婚的预兆早在取名时就很明显了。 
English: The omens of her posthumous marriage were clear from the moment she was named.

古文：历郡守二千石，子孙冠盖相承。
现代文：卢充的儿子长大后根有才器，做过秩禄为二千石的郡守。子孙都做官，一直承袭到现在。
English: Ruchin's son grew up to be a talented person, and served as the county governor of 2,000 koku in Chichiroku. His children and grandchildren all worked as officials, which has been passed down to the present day.

古文：至今其后植，字子干，有名天下。
现代文：他的后代卢植，字子干，更是天下闻名。
English: His descendant Lu Zhi, also known as Zhizi Gang, is even more famous.

古文：后汉时，汝南汝阳西门亭，有鬼魅，宾客止宿，辄有死亡。
现代文：东汉时，汝南郡汝阳县西门亭有鬼魅。旅客在亭楼中留宿，总是有人死亡。
English: During the Eastern Han Dynasty, the Ximen Pavilion in Ruyang County, Runan County was haunted. Tourists stayed in the pavilion, and there was always someone who died.

古文：其厉，厌者皆亡发，失精。
现代文：被恶鬼残害的人，都掉了头发，遗精而死。
English: People who were mutilated by evil spirits lost their hair and died.

古文：寻问其故，云： 先时颇已有怪物。
现代文：探问其中缘故，那里的人说： 从前这里也已常有怪物。
English: When asked why, the locals say: "There used to be monsters here.

古文：其后，郡侍奉掾宜禄郑奇来，去亭六七里，有一端正妇人乞寄载，奇初难之，然后上车，入亭，趋至楼下。
现代文：后来汝南郡的侍奉掾宜禄县人郑奇来这儿，离亭还有六七里，忽然有个打扮得很整齐的妇女请求搭车。郑奇开始为难她，然后就让她上了车。他们到了亭中，便匆匆赶到楼下。
English: Later, Zheng Qi, a servant of Runan County and a native of Gongyilu County, came here. There were still six or seven miles to the pavilion, and suddenly a neatly dressed woman asked for a ride. Zheng Qi began to embarrass her, and then let her get on the car. When they arrived at the pavilion, they hurried downstairs.

古文：亭卒白： 楼不可上。 奇云： 吾不恐也。 
现代文：守亭的士兵说： 这楼上不得。 郑奇说： 我不怕。 
English: The soldiers guarding the pavilion said, "You are not allowed on this floor." Zheng Qi said, "I am not afraid."

古文：时亦昏冥，遂上楼，与妇人栖宿。
现代文：当时天色也已经昏暗了，于是郑奇就上了楼，和这妇女睡了。
English: At that time, it was already dark, so Zheng Qi went upstairs and slept with the woman.

古文：未明，发去。亭卒上楼扫除，见一死妇，大惊，走白亭长。
现代文：天还没亮，郑奇就动身走了，守亭的士兵上楼去打扫。竟看见一具女尸，他十分惊惧，就跑去报告了亭长。
English: It was not yet dawn when Zheng Qi left. The soldiers guarding the pavilion went upstairs to clean. They actually saw a female corpse. He was very alarmed and ran to report it to the pavilion manager.

古文：亭长击鼓，会诸庐吏，共集诊之。
现代文：亭长马上敲鼓，召集了所有的侍从差役，一起去查看。
English: The master of the palace immediately beat the drum and called together all the attendants and servants to go and have a look.

古文：乃亭西北八里吴氏妇，新亡，夜临殡，火灭，及火至，失之。
现代文：原来这妇女是西门亭西北八里处的吴家媳妇，最近刚死，昨天晚上快要下葬了，火烛却熄灭了，等到点了火烛再拿来，尸体就不见了。
English: It turned out that this woman was the daughter-in-law of the Wu family, eight miles northwest of Ximenting. She had recently died, and yesterday evening she was about to be buried, but the candle went out. When she lit the candle and brought it back, the body was gone.

古文：其家即持去。
现代文：现在一经发现，吴家的人就来把这尸体抬走了。
English: So the woman's family took her body back.

古文：奇发，行数里，腹痛，到南顿利阳亭，加剧，物故。
现代文：郑奇动身走了几里路，小腹开始疼痛，走到南顿县利阳亭，腹痛加剧，人便死了。
English: Zheng Qi started to walk a few miles, and his lower abdomen began to ache. When he walked to Liyang Pavilion in Nantong County, his abdominal pain intensified, and he died.

古文：楼遂无敢复上。
现代文：从此，这楼上就没有人再敢上去了。
English: Later, no one dared to go up to that floor.

古文：颍川钟繇，字符常，尝数月不朝会，意性异常。
现代文：颍川郡的钟繇，字元常，曾经几个月不上朝，他的神色气质与平时不同。
English: Jonghyun Jonghyun of Yeoncheon-gun, whose family name is Jeong, had not been to the North for several months, and his appearance and temperament were different from usual.

古文：或问其故。云： 常有好妇来，美丽非凡。 
现代文：有人问他这是什么缘故，他说： 这几个月常常有一个美女到我这儿来，她漂亮得非同一般。 
English: When he was asked why, he said, "During the last few months, a beautiful woman has often come to me.

古文：问者曰： 必是鬼物，可杀之。 
现代文：问他的人说： 这美女一定是个鬼，你可以把她杀了。 
English: His questioner said: This beauty must be a ghost, you can kill her.

古文：妇人后往，不即前，止户外。
现代文：那美女后来又来了，却不马上走到钟繇跟前，而停在门外。
English: The beautiful woman later came again, but she did not immediately walk up to the bell, but stopped outside the door.

古文：繇问； 何以？ 
现代文：钟繇问她： 你为什么不进门？ 
English: Zhong Que asked her: Why don't you come in?

古文：曰： 公有相杀意。 
现代文：那女人说： 因为您有杀我的念头。 
English: The woman said, "Because you want to kill me."

古文：繇曰： 无此。 
现代文：钟繇说： 我根本没有这种想法。 
English: Zhong Qi said, "I don't have such an idea at all."

古文：勤勤呼之，乃入。
现代文：便殷勤地连声呼唤她，她才进了屋。
English: Then he called her in a loud voice, and she came in.

古文：繇意恨，有不忍之，然犹之。伤髀。
现代文：钟繇心里很恨她，却又有点不忍心，但还是砍了她一刀，伤了她的大腿。
English: Zhong Xuan hated her very much in his heart, but he was a little impatient, but he still cut her with a knife and hurt her thigh.

古文：妇人即出，以新绵拭血，竟路。
现代文：这女人马上出了门，用新棉花揩擦，鲜血滴满了她走过的路。
English: The woman immediately went out, rubbed herself with fresh cotton wool, and blood dripped down her path.

古文：明日，使人寻迹之，至一大冢，木中有好妇人，形体如生人，着白练衫，丹绣裲裆，伤左髀，以裲裆中绵拭血。
现代文：第二天，钟繇派人按照这血迹去找她，便来到一座大坟，棺材中有一个漂亮的女人，身体就象活人一样，穿着白色的丝绸衫、红色的绣花背心，被砍伤了的左大腿，还用背心中的棉絮揩擦了鲜血。
English: The next day, Zhong Que sent someone to look for her according to this bloodstain, and they came to a large grave. In the coffin was a beautiful woman, her body like a living person, wearing a white silk shirt, a red embroidered vest, a cut left thigh, and a cotton swab in the vest to wipe the blood.

