古文：去北台七十里，山始豁然，曰东底山。
现代文：离开北台七十里，山谷渐渐开阔起来，这里有一座山叫东底山。
English: Seventy miles away from Beitai, the valley gradually opens up, and there is a mountain called Dongdishan.

古文：台山北尽，即属繁峙界矣。
现代文：五台山的北边尽头处，就隶属于繁峙县境了。
English: At the northern end of Mount Wutai, it is part of the county border.

古文：初九日出南山。
现代文：初九日走出南山。
English: I walked out of Nanshan on the 9th day of the first month.

古文：大溪从山中俱来者，别而西去。
现代文：一直伴随我走出南山的大溪此时与我分道扬镳，向西流去。
English: The stream that had accompanied me all the way out of Nanshan parted ways with me at this point and flowed west.

古文：余北驰平陆中，望外界之山，高不及台山十之四，其长缭绕如垣矮墙，东带平邢，西接雁门，横而径者十五里。北抵山麓，渡沙河，即为沙河堡。
现代文：我往北在平地上疾行，遥望平地外部的山峦，高度不到五台山的十分之四，绵长的山脉像矮墙一样地缭绕平地，东边和平邢连接，西边和雁门连接。横穿平地十五里，往北走到山麓，渡过沙河就是沙河堡。
English: I sped northward on the plain, looking far and wide at the mountains outside the plain. The height is less than four-tenths of Mount Wutai. The long mountains surround the plain like a low wall. The east side is connected to Pingyao, and the west side is connected to the Wild Goose Gate. Cross the plain for fifteen miles, go north to the foot of the mountain, and cross the Sand River to the Sand River Castle.

古文：依山瞰流，砖甃高整。
现代文：沙河堡傍靠山麓，俯瞰河流，砖砌的围墙又高又整齐。
English: The Sand River Fort is located at the foot of the mountain overlooking the river. The brick walls are high and neat.

古文：由堡西北七十里，出小石口，为大同西道；直北六十里，出北路口，为大同东道。
现代文：从沙河堡往西北走七十里，出到小石口，是大同府西边的大路；直直往北走六十里，出到北路口，是大同府东边的大路。
English: From Shahe Fort, walk seventy miles to the northwest, and exit at Xiaoishikou, which is the main road on the west side of Datong Prefecture; walk sixty miles straight north, and exit at the north intersection, which is the main road on the east side of Datong Prefecture.

古文：余从堡后登山，东北数里，至峡口，有水自北而南，即下注沙河者也。
现代文：我从堡后登山，往东北走了几里，来到峡口，有股水从北往南流，流下去就注入沙河。
English: I climbed from behind the castle, walked a few miles to the northeast, and came to the mouth of the gorge. There was a stream of water flowing from north to south, and it flowed into the Sand River.

古文：循水入峡，与流屈曲，荒谷绝人。
现代文：沿水流走进峡谷，路随着流水弯转曲折，峡谷荒凉，空无人烟。
English: Walking along the stream into the canyon, the road bends and twists with the flow of water, the canyon is desolate, the sky is deserted.

古文：数里，义兴寨。
现代文：走了数里，到兴义寨。
English: Walked a few miles to Xingyi Village.

古文：数里，朱家坊。
现代文：又走数里，到朱家坊。
English: Walk a few more miles to Zhujiafang.

古文：又数里，至葫芦嘴。
现代文：再走数里，到葫芦嘴。
English: Walk a few more miles to Gourd Mouth.

古文：舍涧登山，循嘴而上，地复成坞四周高中央凹的地方，溪流北行，为浑源界。
现代文：离开沟涧登山，沿山嘴而上，地势又变成山坞，随溪流往北行，进入浑源州境。
English: After leaving the gully and climbing up along the ridge, the terrain turns into a dock, and follows the stream to the north, entering the Hunyuan state border.

古文：又数里，为土岭，去州尚六十里，西南去沙河，共五十里矣，遂止居住居民同姓家。
现代文：又走数里，到土岭，土岭距离州城还有六十里，西南距离沙河，一共有五十里了。于是在土岭一户和我同姓的居民家住下。
English: I walked a few more miles to Tuling. Tuling is still sixty miles away from the state capital, and the southwest is fifty miles away from Shahe. So I lived in a family with the same surname as mine in Tuling.

古文：初十日循南来之涧北去三里，有涧自西来合，共东北折而去。
现代文：初十日顺着从南伸来的沟涧往北走了三里，有道沟涧从西伸来会合，然后一齐朝东北转去。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, they walked three miles north along the gully extending from the south. There was a gully extending from the west to meet, and then they all turned to the northeast.

古文：余溯西涧入，又一涧自北来，遂从其西登岭，道甚峻。
现代文：我溯西边的沟涧往里走，又有一道沟涧从北伸来，于是从沟涧西边登岭，路很陡。
English: I followed a gully to the west and went in. Another gully came from the north, so I climbed the mountain from the west side of the gully. The road was very steep.

古文：北向直上者六七里，西转，又北跻而上者五六里，登峰两重，造其巅，是名箭筸岭。
现代文：往北直直上了六七里，往西转，又往北攀登，然后上五六里，登越两重山峰，直达峰顶，峰名箭草岭。
English: He went straight north for six or seven miles, turned west, climbed north again, and then went up five or six miles, climbing over two peaks, reaching the peak, the peak name Arrow Grass Ridge.

古文：自沙河登山涉润，盘旋山谷，所值皆土魁土堆荒阜；不意至此而忽跻穹窿，然岭南犹复阿蒙也。
现代文：从沙河开始登山涉涧，在山谷中盘旋前进，所经过的都是土堆荒山；想不到到这里地势突然升高、山岭突然高大，只是岭南仍然是故态依旧。
English: From the Sand River, the climbers began to wade, circling in the valley, and all they passed were mounds of barren mountains. Unexpectedly, the terrain suddenly rose here, the mountains suddenly became tall, but the south of Lingnan is still the same as before.

古文：一逾岭北，瞰东西峰连壁隤同颓，翠蜚飞丹流。
现代文：一翻到岭北，俯瞰东西两边，峰峦连绵，崖壁崩塌，红色、绿色交相辉映。
English: Once you reach the northern part of the ridge, you can overlook the east and west sides. The peaks are continuous, the cliffs have collapsed, and the red and green colors are reflected in each other.

古文：其盘空环映者，皆石也，而石又皆树；石之色一也、而神理又各分妍；树之色不一也，而错综又成合锦。
现代文：那盘绕映照空中的，都是岩石；而岩石上又都有树，岩石的色彩是一致的，但自然形态与纹理又各得其妙；树木的颜色不一致，但各种颜色互相交错，又如同织成的彩色锦缎。
English: The coils that reflect the sky are all rocks; and on the rocks there are trees. The colors of the rocks are consistent, but the natural forms and textures are different; the colors of the trees are inconsistent, but the colors are intertwined, and they are like woven colored brocades.

古文：石得树而嵯峨倾嵌者，幕覆盖以藻绘文采而愈奇；树得石而平铺倒蟠弯曲者，缘以突兀而尤古。
现代文：岩石上有树而且高峻斜插，就像覆盖着一层美丽的幕布，因而愈发奇妙；有的树干匍匐在岩石上，曲折环绕，由于山势高峻而更加显得古雅。
English: There are trees on the rock and they are high and slanting, like a beautiful curtain covering it, which makes it all the more wonderful; some tree trunks are attached to the rock and twisted around, which is even more quaint because of the height of the mountain.

古文：如此五十里，直下至阮大土山底，则奔泉一壑，自南注北，遂与之俱出坞口，是名龙峪口，堡临之。
现代文：在这样的景致中走了五十里，一直下到大土山底，沟壑中有一股奔流的泉水，从南往北流，于是随着泉水一齐走到龙峪口，龙峪口对面有一村庄。
English: In such a landscape, I walked fifty miles, all the way down to the bottom of the Dadu Mountain. In the gully, there was a rushing spring water, flowing from south to north, so I followed the spring water all the way to Longyukou, and there was a village on the other side of Longyukou.

古文：村居颇盛，皆植梅杏，成林蔽麓。
现代文：村庄比较大，每家都种植梅树、杏树，形成果林掩映的山麓。
English: The village is relatively large, and each house is planted with plum trees and almond trees, forming a fruit forest at the foot of the mountain.

古文：既出谷，复得平陆。
现代文：走出山谷又来到平地。
English: Out of the valley and onto flat land.

古文：其北又有外界山环之，长亦自东而西，东去浑源州三十里，西去应州七十里。
现代文：平地北部外围还有群山环绕，长长的也从东向西延伸，平地东边距离浑源州三十里，西边距离应州七十里。
English: The northern periphery of the flatland is also surrounded by mountains, with long ridges extending from east to west. The eastern edge of the flatland is 30 miles from Hunyuan Prefecture, and the western edge is 70 miles from Yingzhou.

古文：龙峪之临外界，高卑远近，一如东底山之视沙河峡口诸山也。
现代文：龙峪口所对着的外界，高地远近，完全和在东底山看沙河、峡口的群山相同。
English: The outside world that Longyukou faces, the highlands far and near, are completely the same as the mountains of Dongdi Mountain looking at the Shahe River and the gorge.

古文：于是沿山东向，望峪之东，山愈嶙嶒斗峭，问知为龙山。
现代文：于是沿山往东走，远看龙峪口东边，山势更加高峻陡峭，询问后得知是龙山。
English: So I walked along the mountain to the east, looking at the eastern side of Longyukou from a distance, the mountain was higher and steeper, and after inquiring, I learned that it was Longshan.

古文：龙山之名，旧著于山西，而不知与恒岳比肩；至是既西涉其阃ｋùｎ内境域，又北览其面目，从不意中得之，可当五台桑榆之收矣。
现代文：龙山的名称，旧书写着山西省，却不知原来是和恒山并肩相靠；走到这里时已经从西边越过了龙山内境，又从北面观览了龙山的风貌，在无意之中得以游龙山，可算做游五台山的意外收获。
English: The old name of Longshan was Shanxi Province, but I did not know that it was originally side by side with Hengshan Mountain. When I came here, I had already crossed the interior of Longshan Mountain from the west, and viewed the scenery of Longshan Mountain from the north. I was able to swim in Longshan Mountain unintentionally, which can be regarded as a windfall of the tour of Mount Wutai.

古文：东行十里，为龙山大云寺，寺南面向山。
现代文：往东行十里，到龙山大云寺，寺的南面有山。
English: Go east for ten miles to Longshan Mountain Cloud Temple. There is a mountain to the south of the temple.

古文：又东十里，有大道往西北，直抵恒山之麓，遂折而从之，去山麓尚十里。
现代文：又往东走了十里，有条大路通向西北，直达恒山山麓，于是转头从大路走，距离恒山麓还有十里。
English: Another ten miles to the east, there is a highway leading to the northwest, straight to the foot of Hengshan Mountain, so turn around and walk from the highway, there are still ten miles from the foot of Hengshan Mountain.

古文：望其山两峰亘峙，车骑接轸，破壁而出，乃大同入倒马、紫荆大道也。
现代文：遥望恒山两边山峰横贯对峙，路上车马络绎不绝，穿山而过，原来这条路是从大同府到倒马关、紫荆关的大路。
English: Looking from a distance, the peaks on both sides of Mount Heng are facing each other. On the road, there is an endless stream of cars and horses, passing through the mountains. Originally, this road was the main road from Datong Prefecture to Houma Pass and Bauhinia Pass.

古文：循之抵山下，两崖壁立，一涧中流，透罅而入，逼仄如无所向，曲折上下，俱成窈窕，伊阙双峰，武彝九曲，俱不足以拟之也。
现代文：沿大路来到恒山下，两旁崖壁耸立，一条涧水从中流过，穿行在缝隙一样的峡谷中而往里走，狭窄得好象没有地方可通，山涧弯弯曲曲、崖壁高高低低，完全是深远幽雅的景色，伊胭两山相对的风光，武夷山回环旋转九曲的溪水，都不能和这里的景色相比。
English: Along the road to the foot of Mount Heng, the cliff walls tower on both sides, a stream of brackish water flows through it, passing through the gap-like canyon, narrow as if there is no place to pass, the mountains are crooked, the cliff walls are high and low, completely profound and elegant scenery, the contrasting scenery of the two mountains of Yili, and the nine-curved stream of the Wuyishan Loop, cannot be compared with the scenery here.

古文：时清流未泛，行即溯涧。
现代文：此时清澈的溪流还没涨水，可以溯溪流从涧中行走。
English: At this time, the clear stream has not yet risen, and you can walk along the stream from the raft.

古文：不知何年两崖俱凿石坎、大四、五尺，深及丈，上下排列，想水溢时插木为阁道者，今废已久，仅存二木悬架高处，犹栋梁之巨擘巨擘即领先或首要之意也。三转，峡愈隘，崖愈高。
现代文：不知哪一年在两边崖壁都凿了石坎，有四五尺宽，近一丈深，上上下下地排列着，想来是涨水时插木头修栈道用的，至今已经废弃了很久，只剩下两根木头悬空架在高处，是像柱子一样的大木料。转了三次后，峡谷越来越窄，崖壁越来越高。
English: I don't know what year the stone dikes were hewn on both sides of the cliff wall. They are four or five feet wide and almost a foot deep, and they are arranged up and down. They were probably used to insert logs when the water rose to repair the boardwalk. They have been abandoned for a long time now, and only two logs remain suspended at high altitudes. They are large pieces of timber like pillars. After three turns, the canyon becomes narrower and narrower, and the cliff wall becomes higher and higher.

古文：西崖之半，层楼高悬，曲榭斜倚，望之如蜃吐重台者，悬空寺也。
现代文：西边崖壁的半腰，层层叠叠的楼阁悬在高空，弯转曲折，建在高土谷上的敞屋斜靠山崖，看上去像海市崖楼中重叠的亭台，这是悬空寺。
English: Halfway up the cliff wall on the west side, the layers of superimposed mansions hang high in the sky, twisting and turning. The open house built on the high soil valley leans against the cliff, looking like the overlapping pavilions in the cliff tower. This is a suspended temple.

古文：五台北壑亦有悬空寺，拟此未能具体。
现代文：五台山北面的壑谷中也有悬空寺，但和这里的相比就不能算完备了。
English: There is also a suspended temple in the valley north of Mount Wutai, but it is incomplete compared to this one.

古文：仰之神飞，鼓勇独登。
现代文：抬头观看令人神往，鼓足勇气独自攀登。
English: It is fascinating to look up and watch, and it takes courage to climb alone.

古文：入则楼阁高下，槛路屈曲。
现代文：进寺后则是楼阁高低错落，围着栏杆的路弯转曲折。
English: After entering the temple, the lofts are staggered, and the road around the railing twists and turns.

古文：崖既矗削，为天下巨观，而寺之点缀，兼能尽胜。
现代文：崖壁已经十分高峻陡峭，称得上天下大观了，再加上有悬空寺点缀，使原来的胜景更完美无缺。
English: The cliff wall is already very high and steep, and is said to be the most magnificent in the world. Coupled with the hanging temple decoration, it makes the original scenic spot more perfect.

古文：依岩结构，而不为岩石累者，仅此。
现代文：傍靠岩壁建盖楼阁，却能不受岩石的限制，只有悬空寺啊。
English: You can build a castle next to a rock wall, but you can't be limited by the rock. There is only a suspended temple.

古文：而僧寮位置适序，凡客坐禅龛ｋāｎ，明窗暖榻，寻丈之间，肃然中雅。
现代文：而且僧人住的房屋位置次第适当，凡是接待来客的地方和供奉佛像的小屋，窗户明净、卧榻温暖，在小小的范围内，显得庄严肃穆，舒适幽雅。
English: Moreover, the houses in which the monks live are in the most appropriate locations. All the places for receiving guests and the huts for worshiping Buddha statues have clear windows and warm beds. Within a small range, they appear solemn, comfortable and elegant.

古文：既下，又行峡中者三四转，则洞门豁然，峦壑掩映，若别有一天者。
现代文：从悬空寺下来后，又在峡谷中转了三四道弯，于是峡谷口豁然开阔，峰峦壑谷相互掩映，仿佛是另外一个世界。
English: After coming down from the Hanging Temple, I turned three or four corners in the canyon, so the mouth of the canyon was suddenly wide open, the peaks and valleys covered each other, as if it were another world.

古文：又一里，涧东有门榜匾额三重，高列阜上，其下石级数百层承之，则北岳恒山庙之山门也。
现代文：又走了一里，涧东面有三道悬挂着匾额的大门，高高地排列在大山上，门下有几百级石阶和门相连，这是北岳恒山庙的山门。
English: After another mile, on the east side of the ridge, there are three gates with coats of arms hanging. They are arranged high on the mountain. Under the gates, there are hundreds of stone steps connected to the gates. This is the mountain gate of Beidake Hengshan Temple.

古文：去庙尚十里，左右皆土山层昼，岳顶杳不可见。
现代文：距离庙还有十里，左右两边都是层叠的土山，北岳顶还遥远得看不见。
English: The distance to the temple is still ten miles. On both sides are cascading hills, and the peak of Mount Hoku is still too far away to be seen.

古文：止门侧土人家，为明日登顶计。
现代文：在山门旁边当地人的家中住宿，为明天攀登北岳顶作准备。
English: Stayed at a local's home next to the mountain gate to prepare for tomorrow's climb to the top of Beidake.

古文：十一日风翳净尽，澄碧如洗。
现代文：十一日风吹过后，云雾散尽。
English: On the 11th day, after the wind had passed, the clouds dispersed.

古文：策杖登岳，面东而上，土冈浅阜，无攀跻劳。
现代文：拄着手杖攀登北岳，朝东往上走，土冈是低缓的山丘，没有攀登的劳累。
English: Climbing Beidake with a cane, going up to the east, Tsuchigaoka is a gentle hill, without the fatigue of climbing.

古文：盖山自龙泉来，凡三重。惟龙泉一重峭削在内，而关以外反土脊平旷；五台一重虽崇峻，而骨石耸拔，俱在东底山一带出峪之处；其第三重自峡口入山而北，西极龙山之顶，东至恒岳之阳，亦皆藏锋敛锷，一临北面，则峰峰陡削，悉现岩岩本色。
现代文：大体上山脉从龙泉关延伸过来，一共有三重，只有龙泉关这一重关山势陡峭尖削，而关外反而是平坦宽阔的泥土山脊；五台山这一重虽然高峻，但聂立挺拔的岩石，都在东底山一带山谷出口处；第三重顺峡谷口延伸到山中然后往北去，西边到龙山顶为尽头，东边到恒山南面，也都像不露锋刃的刀剑一样收敛，一到北面，则每一峰都陡峭，全部显露出高峻的本来面目。
English: Generally speaking, the mountains extend from Longquan Pass. There are a total of three layers. Only Longquan Pass is steep and sharp, while the outside of the pass is a flat and wide dirt ridge. Wutai Mountain is a high, but upright rock, all at the exit of the valley around Dongdishan Mountain. The third layer extends along the mouth of the canyon to the mountain and then to the north. The west side ends at the top of Longshan Mountain, and the east side ends at the south side of Hengshan Mountain. They also converge like a sword without a sharp edge. When it comes to the north side, each peak is steep, and all of them show their original

古文：一里转北，山皆煤炭，不深凿即可得。
现代文：走一里后往北转，山中都是煤炭，不用深挖就可以采得。
English: After walking one mile, turn north. The mountains are full of coal, which can be mined without digging deep.

古文：又一里，则土石皆赤，有虬松离立道旁，亭曰望仙。
现代文：又走一里，于是土石都变为赤色，盘曲得像虫龙一般的松树一棵一棵地立在路旁，有望仙亭。
English: After walking another mile, the dirt and stones turned red, and pine trees that were twisted like worms and dragons stood one by one by the side of the road, promising Xianting.

古文：又三里，则崖石渐起，松影筛阴，是名虎风口。
现代文：又走三里，则崖石渐渐突起，松影如同从筛孔中透下来一样，这里名虎风口。
English: After walking another three miles, the cliff gradually rises, and the pine shadows seem to come through the sieve. This is the famous Tiger's Mouth.

古文：于是石路萦回，始循崖乘峭而上。
现代文：从这里开始，石头路曲折盘旋，于是沿着山崖迎着峭壁而上。
English: From here, the stone path twists and turns as it climbs along the cliff face.

古文：三里，有杰坊曰 朔方第一山 ，内则官廨厨井俱备。
现代文：三里，有一块特大的牌坊，坊上题名 朔方第一山 ，坊内的官署里厨房水井都齐备。
English: Three miles away, there is a huge archway. The inscription on the archway is "Shuo Fang Daiichi Shan," and the government offices, kitchens and wells inside the archway are all complete.

古文：坊右东向拾级上，崖半为寝宫，宫北为飞石窟，相传真定府恒山从此飞去。
现代文：坊右往东顺台阶上去，山崖半腰有寝宫，寝宫北是飞石窟，相传真定府的恒山是从这里飞去的。
English: Go up the steps from the right to the east. There is a sleeping palace halfway up the cliff. To the north of the sleeping palace is the flying rock cave. According to legend, the Hengshan Mountain in Dingfu flew away from here.

古文：再上，则北岳殿也。
现代文：再上去，则是北岳殿了。
English: Further up, it's Hokudake-dono.

古文：上负绝壁，下临宫廨，殿下云级插天，庑门上下，穹碑很高的碑森立。
现代文：殿上靠绝壁，下临官署，殿前的石阶直通云天，正殿两侧的房门上下，高大的石碑林立。
English: On the top of the hall, there is a cliff, the lower government office, the stone steps in front of the hall lead straight to the sky, the doors on both sides of the main hall are up and down, and tall stone tablets stand.

古文：从殿右上，有石窟倚而室之，曰会仙台。
现代文：从殿右上去，有石窟傍靠着大殿而被建成房屋，名会仙台。
English: To the right of the main hall, there is a grotto next to the main hall, which has been converted into a house. Sendai is famous for this.

古文：台中像群仙，环列无隙。
现代文：台中群仙的塑像，把石屋环列得没有一点空隙。
English: The statues of the Immortals in Taichung are arranged in a ring of stone houses without any gaps.

古文：余时欲跻危崖，登绝顶。
现代文：我这时打算上陡崖，登绝顶。
English: I was about to climb a steep cliff and reach the top.

古文：还过岳殿东，望两崖断处，中垂草莽者千尺，为登顶间道，遂解衣攀蹑而登。
现代文：返下来时经过北岳殿东，远看两座山崖的断裂处，中间下垂千尺，杂草丛生，这是登绝顶的小路，于是脱掉外衣，攀扯践踏着杂草往上登。
English: When I came back, I passed the east side of Beidake-dono, and I could see the break of the two mountain cliffs in the distance, with the middle hanging down a thousand feet and overgrown with weeds. This was the path to the top, so I took off my coat and climbed up, trampling over the weeds.

古文：二里，出危崖上，仰眺绝顶，犹杰然天半，而满山短树蒙密，槎桠枝柯歧出枯竹，但能钩衣刺领，攀践辄断折，用力虽勤，若堕洪涛，汩汩不能出。
现代文：二里，出到陡崖上面，抬头眺望绝顶，仍然还高高地耸立在半空中，而满山矮树稠密，歧出的枝条枯竹，只会钩住衣服、刺破脖颈，一攀扯践踏就折断了，我虽然辛勤地用力攀登，却像落进汹涌的浪涛之中一样，只听到泊泊水声而不能越出去。
English: After two miles, I reached the top of the steep cliff and looked up at the peak. It was still high in the air. The mountain was full of dense low trees, and the branches of dead bamboo that had sprouted out could only catch my clothes, pierce my neck, and break when I stepped on them. Although I climbed hard and diligently, it was like falling into a raging wave. I could only hear the sound of the rushing water and could not get out.

古文：余益鼓勇上，久之棘尽，始登其顶。
现代文：我益发鼓足勇气而上，很久才走完荆棘矮树地带，于是登上了北岳绝顶。
English: It took me a long time to walk through the thorny scrubland, so I climbed to the very top of Beidake.

古文：时日色澄丽，俯瞰山北，崩崖乱坠，杂树密翳。
现代文：这时天色清朗而明丽，俯瞰恒山北边，崩塌的崖壁任意往下坠陷，杂草树丛稠密地覆盖着。
English: At this time, the sky is clear and bright, overlooking the northern side of the Hengshan Mountain, the collapsed cliff wall falls down arbitrarily, and the weeds are densely covered.

古文：是山土山无树，石山则有；北向俱石，故树皆在北。
现代文：这里的山是土山没有树，石山上却有树；北边都是石山，所以树木都长在北边。
English: The mountains here are muddy and have no trees, but there are trees on the rocky mountains; the north side is all rocky mountains, so the trees grow on the north side.

古文：浑源州城一方，即在山麓，北瞰隔山一重，苍茫无际；南惟龙泉，西惟五台，青青与此作伍；近则龙山西亘，支峰东连，若比肩连袂，下扼沙漠者。
现代文：浑源州城一带，就在山麓，往北看下去隔着一重山，苍茫一片，看不到边际；南边是龙泉关，西边是五台山，一片青翠的山峰与恒山相伴；近处是往西横贯的龙山，龙山的支脉往东伸去，和东边的山峰肩并肩、袖挨袖地紧密相连，阻扼住下面的沙漠。
English: Around Hunyuan County Town, at the foot of the mountain, looking north, there is a heavy mountain, a vast expanse, and you can't see the edge; the south is Longquan Pass, the west is Mount Wutai, a verdant peak with Hengshan; nearby is the west-crossing Longshan, the branch of Longshan stretches to the east, and is closely connected to the eastern peaks shoulder to shoulder, sleeve to sleeve, blocking the desert below.

古文：既而下西峰，寻前入峡危崖，俯瞰茫茫，不敢下。
现代文：不久下到西边的山峰，寻找先前进入峡谷时的陡崖，往下看只见茫茫一片，不敢下。
English: Soon I went down to the western peak, looking for the steep cliff where I had previously entered the canyon. Looking down, all I could see was a vast expanse, and I didn't dare go down.

古文：忽回首东顾，有一人飘摇于上，因复上其处问之，指东南松柏间。
现代文：忽然间回头向东看，有一个人轻快的走在上面，于是我又上去向他询问，他指向东南的松柏间。
English: All of a sudden, I looked back to the east, and there was a man walking briskly above, so I went up to ask him again, and he pointed to the pine grove in the southeast.

古文：望而趋，乃上时寝宫后危崖顶。
现代文：我朝着松柏奔过去，是上来时寝宫背后的陡崖顶。
English: I ran towards the pines and climbed to the top of the steep cliff behind the sleeping palace.

古文：未几，果得径，南经松柏林。
现代文：没多久，果然找到小路，往南穿过松柏林。
English: It didn't take long to find a path, heading south through the pine forest.

古文：先从顶上望，松柏葱青，如蒜叶草茎，至此则合抱参天，虎风口之松柏，不啻百倍之也。
现代文：先前我在绝顶上眺望，青翠的松柏好像蒜叶草茎一样细小，到这里才知是两人合抱粗的参天大树，和虎风口的松柏相比，不止大百倍呢。
English: Earlier, I looked out over the peak. The verdant conifers were as small as the stems of garlic leaves. It was only when I got here that I realized that the two of us were hugging the thick towering trees, which were more than a hundred times larger than the conifers at the mouth of the Tigris.

古文：从崖隙直下，恰在寝官之右，即飞石窟也，视余前上隘，中止隔崖一片耳。
现代文：顺崖缝直下，恰好在寝宫右侧，就是飞石窟，仔细看我先前所登的狭窄险要之处，中间只相隔着一块崖石啊。
English: Straight down the cliff seam, just on the right side of the sleeping palace, is the flying rock cave, look carefully at the narrow and dangerous place I climbed earlier, only a cliff stone is separated in the middle.

古文：下山五里，由悬空寺危崖出。
现代文：下山五里，从悬空寺的陡崖出山。
English: Five miles down the mountain, from the steep cliff of the Hanging Temple out of the mountain.

古文：又十五里，至浑源州西关外。
现代文：又走十五里，到达浑源州西关外。
English: He walked another fifteen miles to reach the outskirts of Xiguan, Hunyuan Prefecture.

