古文：陶渊明高简闲靖，为晋、宋第一辈人。
现代文：陶渊明高超、闲静、淡远，是晋宋间第一流人物。
English: Tao Yuan was brilliant, quiet and distant. He was a first-class figure in the Jin and Song dynasties.

古文：语其饥则箪瓢屡空，缾无储粟；其寒则裋褐穿结，絺绤冬陈；其居则环堵萧然，风日不蔽。
现代文：说到饥饿，他是饭瓢常空，家无存粮。说到寒冷，他是粗布短衣，冬天还穿着夏天的葛衣，没有替换的衣服。
English: When it comes to hunger, he has an empty plate and no food in the house. When it comes to cold, he wears coarse cloth shorts. In winter, he still wears summer clothes. He has no replacement clothes.

古文：穷困之状，可谓至矣。
现代文：他的住房是四壁空空，难以遮蔽寒风和太阳。穷困之状可以说是到了极点。
English: His house is four walls empty, it is difficult to cover the cold wind and the sun. The state of poverty can be said to have reached the extreme.

古文：读其《与子俨等疏》云： 恨室无莱妇，抱兹苦心。
现代文：读他的《与子俨等疏》说： 我常恨家中没有楚国老莱子之妻那样的贤内助来开导我，只有自己怀抱这样的一片苦心了。
English: Reading his "And Sons and Daughters," he said, "I often hate that I don't have a wise helper at home like the wife of Lao Lai Zi of Chu to enlighten me. I only have myself to bear such a hard time."

古文：汝等虽不同生，当思四海皆兄弟之义，管仲、鲍叔，分财无猜，他人尚尔，况同父之人哉！ 
现代文：你们虽然不是一母所生，也应该思索四海之内皆兄弟的意义，齐国的管仲、鲍叔二人是朋友，在经商赢利分财时，多少并无猜疑之意，外人尚可以如此，何况你们是同父的兄弟呢！ 
English: Although you are not born of the same mother, you should also think about the meaning of being brothers in all four seas. Guanzhong and Baozhu of Qi are friends. When doing business and dividing profits, there is little suspicion. Foreigners can still do so. What's more, you are brothers of the same father!

古文：然则犹有庶子也。
现代文：这样看来，陶渊明还是妾生的儿子。
English: From this perspective, Tao Yuanming is still the son of a concubine.

古文：《责子》诗云： 雍、端年十三。 此两人必异母尔。
现代文：他的《责子》诗说 雍、端两人年龄都是十三 ，看来这两个人一定不是同母的弟兄了。
English: His poem "Jianzi" says that both Yong and Fang are thirteen years old, so it seems that these two people must not be brothers from the same mother.

古文：渊明在彭泽，悉令公田种秫，曰： 吾常得醉于酒足矣。 
现代文：陶渊明在彭泽县作县令时，下令公田全都种成高粱，说： 这样我就能常醉酒了，便心满意足了。 
English: When Tao Yuanming was the county magistrate of Pengze County, he ordered all public fields to be planted with sorghum, saying, "This way, I can get drunk often and be satisfied.

古文：妻子固请种粳，乃使二顷五十亩种秫，五十亩种粳。
现代文：但妻子和儿子坚决请求种粳稻，他就下令让二顷五十亩种高粱来酿酒，五十亩种粳稻供食用。
English: However, his wife and son firmly requested that he grow sorghum rice, and he ordered that two hectares and fifty mu of sorghum be used to make wine, and fifty mu of sorghum rice be used for food.

古文：其自叙亦云： 公田之利，足以为酒，故便求之。 
现代文：他在《归去来兮辞》中自叙也说： 公田的收成，足够做酒，所以顺便求了彭泽令这个小官。 
English: In his "Return Speech," he also said in his autobiography: "The harvest of my father's field is enough to make wine, so I asked for this minor official, Peng Ze Ling, by the way.

古文：犹望一稔而逝，然仲秋至冬，在官八十余日，即自免去职。
现代文：他本希望种的庄稼熟了，一年后离任。然而从仲秋到冬天，他在官仅八十几天，就自动免官离职。
English: The crops he had hoped to plant ripened, and he left office a year later. However, from mid-autumn to winter, after only eighty days in office, he was automatically relieved of his duties.

古文：所谓秫粳，盖未尝得颗粒到口也，悲夫！
现代文：所谓的高粱粳稻，都没有能吃到一颗一粒，可悲啊！
English: The so-called sorghum rice, no one can eat a single grain, it's pathetic!

