古文：蔡诞须曼卿马太守邺城人纥干狐尾李恒惠范史崇玄岭南淫祀贺玄景
现代文：蔡诞须曼卿马太守邺城人纥干狐尾李恒惠范史崇玄岭南淫祀贺玄景
English: Cai Xing, Su Manqing, Ma Tai, Shou, Shicheng, Jiao Gan, Foxtail, Li Henghui, Fan Shi, Chong Xuanling, Nan Yuxi, He Xuanjing

古文：蔡诞总想得道成仙，连家业都废弃了，夜以继日地研读《黄庭》、《太清》、《中经》、《观天》、《节解》等著作，说：道，全都在这里呢！他的家人跟着受罪，他自己也觉得惭愧和懊悔。
现代文：蔡诞总想得道成仙，连家业都废弃了，夜以继日地研读《黄庭》《太清》《中经》《观天》《节解》等著作，说：道，全都在这里呢！他的家人跟着受罪，他自己也觉得惭愧和懊悔。
English: Cai Xat always wanted to become a Taoist. Even his family business was abandoned. He studied "Huangting," "Taiqing," "Zhongjing," "Guanzhong," "Sijie" and other works day and night, saying: "Dao, it's all here! His family suffered along with him, and he felt ashamed and remorseful.

古文：一天，他忽然离开了家，并说道：我的成仙之道有望了！
现代文：一天，他忽然离开了家，并说道：我的成仙之道有望了！
English: One day, he suddenly left home, and said: My path to immortality is promising!

古文：于是，他走进深山，平时用卖柴的钱买衣服穿。
现代文：于是，她走进深山，平时用卖柴的钱买衣服穿。
English: As a result, she went deep into the mountains and usually used the money from selling firewood to buy clothes to wear.

古文：三年里苦不堪言，终于又回到家中。
现代文：三年里苦不堪言，终于又回家家中。
English: After three years of suffering, he finally returned home.

古文：他又黑又瘦，瘦骨嶙峋，还欺骗家人说：我现在只是个地仙，地位卑微，为太上老君管理几十条龙。
现代文：他又黑又瘦，瘦骨嶙峋，还欺骗家人说：我现在只是个地仙，地位卑微，为太上老君管理几十条龙。
English: He was dark, thin and scrawny, and he deceived his family, saying, "I'm just an earth fairy now, with a lowly position, managing dozens of dragons for my great-grandfather."

古文：其中有一条五色的斑龙，老君曾送给了我，后来我与仙人们赌博玩，又把它输掉了。
现代文：其中有一条五色的斑龙，老君曾送给了我，后来我与仙人们赌博玩，又把它输掉了。
English: One of them was a five-coloured chevrotain, which the old man had given me. Later, I gambled with the fairies and lost it again.

古文：结果，我便受到了贬谪，被流放到昆仑山下管理三四顷地的灵芝草。
现代文：结果，我便受到了贬谪，被流放到昆仑山下管理三四顷地的灵芝草。
English: As a result, I was belittled and exiled to manage three or four hectares of Ganoderma lucidum at the foot of Mount Kunlun.

古文：这些灵芝草都生长在细碎的石头里，且多林木荒草，很苦，按规定得十年之后才能回来。
现代文：这些灵芝草都生长在细碎的石头里，且多林木荒草，很苦，按规定得十年之后才能回来。
English: These Ganoderma lucidum plants grow in finely crushed stones, and there are many trees and wild grasses. They are very bitter, and according to regulations, they can only come back after ten years.

古文：一天，正赶上偓佺、子乔等大仙来此巡察，我先向他们诉说了自己的情况，他们共同为我出力，我才免遭那么大的苦难。
现代文：一天，正赶上偓佺、子乔等大仙来此巡察，我先向他们诉说了自己的情况，他们共同为我出力，我才免遭那么大的苦难。
English: One day, I was just in time to catch up with Zou, Zi Qiao and other great sages who came to inspect this place. I first told them about my situation, and they worked together to help me, so I was spared such great suffering.

古文：须曼卿
现代文：须曼卿
English: Lord Suman

古文：蒲坂有须曼卿者曰：在山中三年精思，有仙人来迎我，乘龙升天。
现代文：蒲坂县有个叫须曼卿的人说：我在深山里精心修道三年，后来有个神仙来接我，乘着龙升上了天。
English: There was a man in Busaka County named Lord Suman who said, "I carefully practiced in the mountains for three years, and then a god came to pick me up and ascended to heaven on a dragon."

古文：龙行甚疾，头昂尾低，令人在上危怖。
现代文：那龙飞得极快，昂着头摆着尾，使人感到十分危险而又可怕。
English: The dragon flew very fast, with its head held high and tail wagging, which made people feel very dangerous and scary.

古文：及到天上，先过紫府，金床玉几，晃晃昱昱，真贵处也。
现代文：到了天上之后，先进了紫微宫，那里金床玉几，闪闪发光，真是个富贵所在呵。
English: After reaching heaven, he advanced to the Purple Micro Palace, where the gold bed, the jade table, and the glittering, truly a place of wealth.

古文：仙人以流霞一杯饮我，辄不饥渴。
现代文：神仙取一杯流霞给我喝，便再也不觉得饥渴。
English: The gods gave me a cup of clear water to drink, and I no longer felt hungry or thirsty.

古文：忽然思家，天帝前谒拜失仪，见斥来还。
现代文：后来不知为什么就忽然想起家来，随即拜谒玉皇大帝，想告个假，不料违反了礼仪，被玉帝斥责一顿遣送回来。
English: Later, I don't know why, I suddenly thought of home, and immediately bowed to the Jade Emperor and wanted to take a leave of absence. However, I violated the etiquette and was rebuked by the Jade Emperor and sent back.

古文：令更自修责，乃可更往。
现代文：这样一来，我还得加强修养，苦苦修炼，总有一天还会回去的。
English: In this way, I still have to strengthen cultivation and hard training, and I will go back one day.

古文：昔淮南王刘安，升天见上帝，而箕坐大言，自称寡人，遂见谪，守天厕三年。
现代文：当年，淮南王刘安升天之后去见玉帝，盘腿大坐，而且还大言不惭地自称寡人，随即遭到贬谪，在天宫的厕所里守了三年。
English: In that year, Liu An, the king of Huainan, went to see the Jade Emperor after his ascension to heaven, sat cross-legged, and boldly claimed that he was no one. He was immediately humiliated and kept in the toilet of the Heavenly Palace for three years.

古文：吾何人哉？
现代文：与他相比，我算什么呀？
English: Compared to him, what am I?

古文：河东因号曼卿为斥仙人。
现代文：没关系的。因此，河东一带喊须曼卿为斥仙人。
English: It doesn't matter. That's why people in the eastern part of the river are calling Lord Shuman a "rejected hermit."

古文：马太守
现代文：马太守
English: St Matthew's Cathedral

古文：兴古太守马氏在官，有亲故人投之，求恤焉。
现代文：兴州的老太守马某在任时，有个亲戚来投奔他，乞求体恤帮助，马某将他赶出家门。
English: When the old lady of Xingzhou, Shouma, was in office, a relative came to him, begging for compassionate help, and Ma drove him out of the house.

古文：马乃令此人出住外，诈云：是神人道士，治病无不手下立愈。
现代文：这个人无计可施，便欺骗说自己是个成仙的道士，治病无不手到病除。
English: This person could do nothing, so he lied and said that he was a Taoist who had become immortal, and that he could cure any illness.

古文：又令辩士游行，为之虚声，云：能令盲者明，躄者即行。
现代文：他又找了几个帮忙的四处游说，虚张声势，说：他能使瞎子睁开眼睛，瘸子立即能走。
English: He also took a few helpers and lobbied everywhere, bluffing, saying: He can make the blind open their eyes, and the lame walk immediately.

古文：于是四方云集，赴之如市，而钱帛固已山积矣。
现代文：于是，四面八方的人们都云集而来，像赶集似的，因此钱物渐渐就堆积如山了。
English: As a result, people from all over the place came flocking in, like a stampede, so the money gradually piled up.

古文：又敕诸来治病者：虽不便愈，其当告人已愈也，如此则必愈也；若告人言未愈者，则后终不愈也。
现代文：他还告诉各位前来的病人说：你的病虽然没有好，但当着别人面要说好了，这样，你的病才会真的好起来；如果你告诉别人说没有好，则最终也不会好的。
English: He also told all the patients who came: Although your illness is not good, you have to say it in front of others, so that your illness will really get better; if you tell others that it is not good, it will not be good in the end.

古文：道法正尔，不可不承信。
现代文：道法是公正的，你不可不信服。
English: The Fa is fair, you should not be unconvinced.

古文：于是后人问前来者，辄告之云已愈，无敢言未愈者也。
现代文：于是后来的病人问先来的病人怎么样，得到的回答总说是病已经好了，没有敢说不见效没治好的。
English: So the later patient asked the first patient how he was, and the answer he got was always that the disease had been cured, and he did not dare to say that it did not work and was not cured.

古文：旬月之间，乃致巨富焉。
现代文：旬月之间，他就变成了一个大富翁。
English: In a matter of months, he became a millionaire.

古文：邺城人
现代文：邺城人
English: People from Shicheng

古文：北齐后主武平中，和士开讽百官。奏胡太后临朝，所在皆言有狐魅，截人头发。
现代文：北齐后主高纬当朝的武平年间，开始广开言路，这时，奏报请胡太后临朝，所有的人都说有狐狸精，拦截行人头发。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu of the Northern Qi Dynasty, Emperor Gaowu began to speak widely. At that time, the report invited Empress Dowager Hu to the imperial court. Everyone said that there was a fox spirit, intercepting the hair of pedestrians.

古文：邺城北两三坊无人居住，空墙。
现代文：在邺城北面有两三条街道无人居住，只剩下一座座空房子。
English: In the north of Lucheng, there are two or three streets that are uninhabited, with only a few empty houses remaining.

古文：时有某家婢子，年十六七，独行。
现代文：这时，某家有个婢女，十六七岁，独自在这里行走。
English: At this time, a certain family has a maid, sixteen or seventeen years old, walking alone here.

古文：荷一大黄袱。袱内有锦被。
现代文：她背着一个大黄包袱，包袱里有锦锻做的被子。
English: She was carrying a large yellow bag containing a quilt made of brocade.

古文：忽逢一妪。
现代文：忽然，她与一个老太太相遇。
English: Suddenly, she met an old lady.

古文：年可五十余，面作白妆，漫糊可畏，以皂巾抹头。
现代文：这老太太五十多岁，脸上抹得白糊糊的，挺吓人，而且还用黑布巾蒙住脑袋。
English: The woman, in her fifties, was white-faced and scary, and had a black scarf over her head.

古文：四顾无人，便走逐婢子，脱却皂巾，头发尽作屈髻十余道，綖束之，手持一剃刀。
现代文：她瞅瞅四下无人，便向婢女追来。摘掉黑布巾，可以看见她的头发盘了十余道髻，都平顶束着，手中提着一把剃头刀。
English: There was no one around, so she ran after her maid. When she took off her black headscarf, she could see that her hair was twisted in more than a dozen directions, all tied in a bun, and she was holding a razor in her hand.

古文：云：我是狐魅，汝急舍袱反走。
现代文：她对婢女说：我是狐狸精，你赶快放下包袱回去！
English: She said to her maid: I am a fox spirit, you should quickly put down your burden and go back!

古文：此妪得袱，趋走入东坊。
现代文：这老太太得到包袱后，转身钻进了东边的胡同。
English: After receiving the package, the old lady turned around and walked into the alley on the east side.

古文：婢子行啼，逢同州人乘马来，借问何为。云：狐夺我被袱，始入东坊。
现代文：婢女便哭，正赶上有人骑马过来，就问她这是怎么回事，她说：狐狸精把我的包袱夺走，钻进了东边的胡同！
English: The maid began to cry. Just as she was about to catch up with someone on horseback, he asked her what was going on. She said, "The fox spirit has taken away my pack and gone into the alley on the east side!"

古文：人驰马往，执得之，盖是人也。
现代文：那人打马追赶，果然将她抓住，原来是个人。
English: The man chased after her on horseback and caught her. It turned out to be an individual.

古文：数百人看之，莫不竞笑，天下有如此造妖事。
现代文：数百人前来围观，没有不争先而笑的，想不到天下有这样装妖弄鬼的事情。
English: Hundreds of people came to watch, and no one could help but laugh. I had no idea that there was such a thing as pretending to be a demon.

古文：经略财货，殴击垂死，行路劝放之。
现代文：处理了她的财物，并把她打得半死，后来经过路人劝说才得以解脱。
English: He disposed of her belongings and beat her half to death before being persuaded by a passer-by to let her go.

古文：纥干狐尾
现代文：纥干狐尾
English: Dried foxtail stew

古文：并州有人姓纥干，好剧。
现代文：并州有个人姓纥干，喜欢开玩笑。
English: In addition, there is a person in the state with the surname of Yu Gan, who likes to joke.

古文：承间在外有狐魅。
现代文：当时外面正闹狐狸精。
English: At the time there was a ruckus outside.

古文：遂得一狐尾，缀着衣后。
现代文：一天，他得到一条狐狸尾巴，随即就拴在了衣服后面。
English: One day, he got a fox's tail, which he immediately tied to the back of his clothes.

古文：至妻旁，侧坐露之。
现代文：来到妻子身旁，他侧身而坐，故意将狐狸尾巴露在外边。
English: When he came to his wife's side, he sat sideways, deliberately exposing his fox tail.

古文：其妻私心疑是狐魅，遂密持斧，欲斫之。
现代文：妻子见了，暗自怀疑他是狐狸精，于是便悄悄操起斧头向他砍来。
English: When his wife saw him, she secretly suspected that he was a fox spirit, so she quietly took an axe and chopped him down.

古文：其人叩头云：我不是魅。
现代文：他吓得连忙磕头说：我不是狐狸精！
English: Terrified, he quickly shook his head and said: "I'm not a vixen!

古文：妻不信。走遂至邻家，邻家又以刀杖逐之。
现代文：妻子不相信，急忙又跟邻居们说了，邻居们又拿起刀棍追逐不已。
English: His wife didn't believe him and hurriedly told the neighbours, who picked up their knives and sticks and chased after him.

古文：其人惶惧告言：我戏剧，不意专欲杀我。
现代文：他吓得急忙说出实情：我这是恶作剧，不料想你们竟然一心要杀死我。
English: Terrified, he hurried to tell the truth: "I did it as a prank, and I can't believe you're trying to kill me."

古文：此亦妖由人兴矣。
现代文：看来，这狐妖一说也是由人的作用才兴盛起来的呵！
English: It seems that this vixen is also thriving thanks to the role of humans!

古文：李恒
现代文：李恒
English: Li Heng

古文：陈留男子李恒家事巫祝，邑中之人，往往吉凶为验。
现代文：陈留县有个男子叫李恒，在家中以行巫为职业。县城里的人，常常找他验个吉凶祸福。
English: There is a man in Chenliu County named Li Heng, who is a professional witch in his family. People in the county town often look for him to test their luck.

古文：陈留县尉陈增妻张氏，召李恒。
现代文：陈留县尉陈增的妻子张氏，派人将李恒唤入府中。
English: Zhang, the wife of Chen Liu County Lieutenant Chen Zeng, sent someone to summon Li Heng to the capital.

古文：恒索于大盆中置水，以白纸一张，沉于水中，使增妻视之。
现代文：李恒向她要一个大盆，装满水，然后把一张白纸沉入水中，喊她过来看。
English: Li Heng asked her for a large basin, filled with water, and then sank a piece of white paper into the water and called her to come and see.

古文：增妻正见纸上有一妇人，被鬼把头髻拽，又一鬼，后把棒驱之。
现代文：张氏俯身望去，只见纸上有一个女人，被鬼拽着头发往前拖，后面还有个鬼拎着棒子驱赶她。
English: Mr. Zhang bent down to look and saw a woman on the paper, being dragged forward by a ghost with her hair, and a ghost chasing her with a stick.

古文：增妻惶惧涕泗，取钱十千，并沿身衣服与恒，令作法禳之。
现代文：张氏吓得面如土色并哭了起来，急忙掏出十千钱，又顺手抓了套衣服送给他，求他赶紧作法祈祷。
English: Mr. Zhang was so scared that his face turned white and he began to cry. He hurriedly took out ten thousand yuan and grabbed a set of clothes to give to him, begging him to quickly practice the prayer.

古文：增至，其妻具其事告增。
现代文：陈增回来了，妻子将这件事告诉他。
English: When Chen Zeng returned, his wife told him about the incident.

古文：增明召恒，还以大盆盛水，沉一张纸，使恒观之。
现代文：第二天，陈增又把李恒唤到府中，还用那大盆装满水，然后从怀中掏出一张纸沉进去，让李恒过来看。
English: The next day, Chen Zeng again called Li Heng to the residence. He also filled the large basin with water, and then took out a piece of paper from his pocket and sank it into it, so that Li Heng could look at it.

古文：正见纸上有十鬼拽头，把棒驱之，题名云，此李恒也。
现代文：这时，只见有十个鬼拽住一个人的脑袋，一边用棒子赶，一边往前拖，上面还写着一行小字：这个人是李恒。
English: At this time, I saw ten ghosts tugging at the head of a person, while using a stick to drive, while dragging forward, with a line of small characters written on it: This person is Li Heng.

古文：惭惶走，遂却还昨得钱十千及衣服物。便潜窜出境。
现代文：李恒又是羞愧又是害怕，当即把昨天得到的十千钱物还了回去，狼狈地潜逃出县境。
English: Embarrassed and afraid, Li Heng immediately returned the ten thousand yuan he received yesterday and fled the county.

古文：众异而问，增曰：但以白矾画纸上，沉水中，与水同色而白矾干。
现代文：人们惊异不解，前来询问，陈增说：只要用白矾在纸上画好，沉入水中，渐渐纸同水色而白矾就显出来了。
English: Surprised and puzzled, people came to inquire, Chen Zeng said: as long as you draw on the paper with chalk and sink into the water, gradually the paper will be the same color as the water and the chalk will appear.

古文：验之亦然。
现代文：大家一验证，果然如此。
English: As soon as everyone verified it, it was true.

古文：惠范
现代文：惠范
English: Hui Fan

古文：周有婆罗门僧惠范，奸矫狐魅，挟邪作盅，趑趄鼠黠，左道弄权。
现代文：唐代，武后称帝之后，有个来自婆罗门的僧人叫惠范，奸诈而善于谄媚，靠邪术盅惑人心，像老鼠一样狡猾，且喜弄权术搞旁门左道。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, after Empress Wu was proclaimed emperor, there was a brahmin monk named Hui Fan. He was deceitful and good at flattery, used magic to seduce people, was as cunning as a mouse, and played around with power.

古文：则天以为圣僧，赏赉甚重。
现代文：武则天把他当成圣僧，赏赐厚重。
English: Wu Zetian regarded him as a holy monk and rewarded him generously.

古文：太平以为梵王，接纳弥优，生其羽翼，长其光价。
现代文：太平公主以为他是婆罗门教教主，对他更加热情接待，视作上宾，使他培植起自己的党羽，身价倍增。
English: Princess Taiping thought that he was the head of the Brahman religion, and she received him more warmly and regarded him as the chief guest, so that he cultivated his own party and doubled his worth.

古文：孝和临朝，常乘官马，往还宫掖。
现代文：孝和皇帝临朝时，惠范常常骑着官马，往返于宫中嫔妃所居之处。
English: When Emperor Xiaowa was on the throne, Hui Fan often rode an official horse to and from the place where the Empress Dowager lived in the palace.

古文：太上登极，从以给使，出入禁门。
现代文：太上皇登基，他又像个内侍随其左右，大摇大摆地出入禁门。
English: When the Emperor ascended the throne, he followed him around like a chamberlain, swaggering in and out of the forbidden door.

古文：每入，即赐绫罗金银器物。
现代文：每次入宫，都能得到金银器物和绫罗绸缎等赏赐。
English: Every time you enter the palace, you will be rewarded with gold and silverware and silk brocades.

古文：气岸甚高，风神傲诞，内府珍宝，积在僧家。
现代文：于是，他更加旁若无人，傲慢无礼，内宫的珍宝，不少都集中到了他手中。
English: As a result, he became even more aloof, arrogant and rude, and many of the treasures of the inner palace were concentrated in his hands.

古文：矫说妖祥，妄陈祸福。
现代文：他随意为他人占卜吉凶，乱陈祸福，信口开河，胡言一派。
English: He freely divined the fortunes and misfortunes of others, misrepresented calamities and blessings, and talked a lot of nonsense.

古文：神武斩之，京师称快也。
现代文：后来，神武皇帝把他杀了，京城上下无不拍手称快。
English: Later, Emperor Jimmu killed him, and everyone in the capital applauded.

古文：史崇玄
现代文：史崇玄
English: Shi Chongxuan

古文：唐道士史崇玄，怀河内县缝靴人也，后度为道士。
现代文：唐代有个道士叫史崇玄，他本是怀州河内县一个缝制靴子的人，后来出家当了道士。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a Taoist monk named Shi Chongxuan. He was originally a shoemaker in Hanoi County, Waizhou, and later became a Taoist monk.

古文：矫假人也，附太平，为太清观主。
现代文：他为人伪诈而不老实，依附于太平公主，成为太清观主。
English: He was deceitful and dishonest, clinging to the Taiping Princess and becoming a too-cleareyed observer.

古文：金仙、玉真出俗，立为尊师。
现代文：金仙、玉真为了巴结权贵，立他为尊师。
English: In order to ingratiate themselves with the powerful, Jinxian and Yuzhen set him up as a respected teacher.

古文：每入内奏请，赏赐甚厚，无物不赐。
现代文：每当他进入皇宫禀奏请安时，都能够得到十分丰厚的赏赐，没有什么东西不能够得到。
English: Every time he enters the palace to play for good health, he can get a very rich reward, there is nothing he can't get.

古文：搜鸿胪卿，衣紫罗裙帔，握象笏，佩鱼符。
现代文：他竟被授予鸿胪寺卿一职，身穿罗裙紫衣，握着象牙笏板上朝，佩戴着鱼符。
English: He was actually awarded the position of Hongluo Temple Lord, dressed in a purple robe, holding an ivory scepter, and wearing a fish charm.

古文：出入禁闱。公私避路。
现代文：每当他出入禁宫，上下都为他让路。
English: Whenever he went in and out of the Forbidden City, everyone made way for him.

古文：神武斩之，京师中士女相贺。
现代文：后来，神武皇帝将他斩杀，京城里的男男女女都奔走欢呼。
English: Later, Emperor Jimmu had him beheaded, and the men and women of the capital city ran to celebrate.

古文：岭南淫祀
现代文：岭南淫祀
English: Lingnan Sex Cult

古文：岭南风俗：家有人病，先杀鸡鹅等以祀之，将为修福；若不差，即刺杀猪狗以礼之；不差，即次杀太牢以祷之；更不差，即是命也。
现代文：在岭南，有这样的风俗：家里有人生病了，先杀鸡鹅等进行祭祀，祈福；如果不见病情好转，随即杀狗猪进行祭祀；还不见病情好转，随即再杀大牛进行祭祀；如果仍然不见好转，那就是命了。
English: In Lingnan, there is such a custom: if someone in the family is ill, first kill chickens and geese for sacrifice and pray for good luck; if the illness does not get better, then kill dogs and pigs for sacrifice; if the illness does not get better, then kill cattle for sacrifice; if it still does not get better, then it is death.

古文：不复更祈。
现代文：于是，便不再祭祀。
English: As a result, there were no more sacrifices.

古文：死则打鼓鸣钟于堂，比至葬讫。
现代文：人死之后，就在堂前打鼓鸣钟做道场，一直等到埋葬完毕。
English: After a person's death, a drum is beaten in front of the hall and a bell is rung to make a dojo, until the burial is complete.

古文：初死，但走大叫而哭。
现代文：刚死的时候，只是一边走一边哭喊而已。
English: When he died, he was just walking and crying.

古文：贺玄景
现代文：贺玄景
English: He Xuanjing

古文：唐景云中，有长发贺玄景，自称五戒贤者。
现代文：唐代，景云年间，有个留着长头发的人叫贺玄景，自称是五戒贤人，跟他一起作妖弄怪的还有十多个人。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, during the Jingyun period, there was a long-haired man named He Xuanjing, who claimed to be a sage of the Five Precepts. There were more than ten people who played tricks with him.

古文：同为妖者十余人，陆浑山中结草舍，幻惑愚人子女，倾家产事之。绐云：至心求者，必得成佛。
现代文：在陆浑山林搭起草棚，迷惑那些愚昧的人和少男少女，不少人被害得倾家荡产。他哄骗人们说：诚心来求的人，必定成佛。
English: He set up stalls in the forests of the Lukhun Mountains to deceive the ignorant people and young boys and girls, and many people were ruined. He deceived people by saying, "Those who sincerely pray will surely become Buddhas."

古文：玄景为金薄袈裟，独坐暗室。令愚者窃视，云佛放光，众皆慑伏。
现代文：贺玄景穿上金箔袈裟，独自坐在昏暗的屋子里，让愚昧的人们窥视，说这是佛在放光，使众人都被慑服了。
English: He Xuanjing put on a gold-leafed robe and sat alone in a dark room, letting the ignorant people peep in, saying that it was the Buddha shining, and everyone was stunned.

古文：缘於悬崖下烧火，遣数人于半崖间，披红碧纱为仙衣，随风习飏。
现代文：他们沿着悬崖根点上大火，再派一些人披着红绿纱站在半崖间，那红绿纱随风飘举，如同仙衣。
English: They built a fire along the base of the cliff, and then sent some people to stand in the middle of the cliff wearing red and green yarns. The red and green yarns floated with the wind, like fairy clothes.

古文：令众观之，诳曰：此仙也。
现代文：贺玄景让众人来看，并诳他们说，这就是神仙呵。
English: He Xuanjing let everyone look at it and told them, "This is a fairy godmother."

古文：各令着仙衣，以飞就之，即得成道。
现代文：他让那些人都穿上红绿纱衣，说飞过去就可以成道了。
English: He told those people to put on red and green gauze, saying that if they flew there, they would become enlightened.

古文：克日设斋，饮中置莨菪子，与众餐之。
现代文：他们选择日子设斋，酒中放进莨菪子，和那些愚昧的人们共食。
English: They choose the day to set up a fast, put hazelnuts in the wine, and eat with those foolish people.

古文：女子好发者截取，为剃头。
现代文：女人和头发长得好的人都把发剪了，说这是为了剃度。
English: Women and people with long hair cut their hair, saying it was for the sake of modesty.

古文：串仙衣，临崖下视，眼花恍惚，推崖底，一时烧杀。没取资财。
现代文：他们披着仙衣，临悬崖往下看，一个个眼花缭乱，神志恍惚。这时，贺玄景一伙将他们推到崖底，当时都烧死了，所有的财物被这伙人窃取。
English: Dressed in fairy clothes, they looked down from the cliff, dazzled and dazed. At this time, He Xuanjing and his group pushed them to the bottom of the cliff. They were all burned to death, and all their belongings were stolen by this group of people.

古文：事败，官司来检，灰中得焦拳尸骸数百余人。
现代文：后来，事情败露，官府派人来侦查，从灰中发现残腿剩臂等数百具尸骸。
English: Later, when the affair was revealed, the government sent someone to investigate and found hundreds of corpses, including the remains of legs and arms, in the ashes.

古文：敕决杀玄景，县官左降。
现代文：皇帝下令将贺玄景斩首，县官也被降职使用。
English: The emperor ordered the beheading of He Xuanjing, and the county officials were demoted and forced to work overtime.

古文：瀛州妇人
现代文：瀛州妇人
English: Zhangzhou Woman Wails

古文：唐景龙中，瀛州进一妇人，身上隐起浮图塔庙诸佛形像。
现代文：唐代景龙年间，瀛州奉献一个女人，身上隐隐可以看到佛塔及诸佛的形象。
English: During the Jinglong period of the Tang Dynasty, Bozhou dedicated a woman, on whose body the image of the pagoda and the Buddhas could be faintly seen.

古文：按察使进之，授五品，其女妇留内道场。
现代文：按察使把她献给皇上。皇上大悦，授他五品官，并将那女人留在宫内做道场。
English: According to the inspector, he presented her to the emperor. The emperor was very pleased, awarded him the five-star rank, and kept the woman in the palace as a dojo.

古文：逆韦死后，不知去处。
现代文：韦后被杀死不久，这女人便不知去向了。
English: Shortly after Wei Hou was killed, the woman disappeared.

古文：薛怀义
现代文：薛怀义
English: Xue Huaiyi

古文：周证圣元年，薛师名怀义，造功德堂一千尺，于明堂北。
现代文：唐代，武后称帝的证圣元年，法师薛怀义建造一座千尺之高的功德堂，在明堂的北面。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, in the first year of Emperor Wu's reign, the sorcerer Xue Huaiyi built a 1,000-foot-tall Hall of Merit on the north side of the Hall of Light.

古文：其中大像，高九百尺，鼻如千斛船，小指中容数十人并坐。
现代文：里面的大佛像，就有九百尺高，鼻子像大船，小指中能够并肩坐下几十个人。
English: The large Buddha statue inside is nine hundred feet tall, with a nose like a large ship, and dozens of people can sit side by side in the middle of the little finger.

古文：夹紵以漆之。
现代文：夹着萱麻把它漆了一遍。
English: Painted it over with a nettle.

古文：正月十五，起无遮大会于朝堂。
现代文：这月十五这天，要在堂前举行露天大斋会。
English: On the fifteenth day of this month, there will be an open-air Lenten feast in front of the church.

古文：掘地五丈深，以乱彩为宫殿台阁，屈竹为胎，张施为桢盖。
现代文：会前，薛怀义派人掘地五丈深，用彩色丝绸画上宫殿台阁，把竹子扎成护圈，作为支柱和顶盖。
English: Before the meeting, Xue Huaiyi sent people to dig the ground five feet deep, painted the palace table with colored silk, and tied bamboo into a retaining ring as a pillar and roof.

古文：又为大像金刚，并坑中引上，诈称从地涌出。
现代文：又造了一个金刚的大佛像把它从坑中拽上来，骗人说它是从地里冒出来的。
English: He also made a large Buddha statue of King Kong, pulled it out of the pit, and lied that it had emerged from the ground.

古文：又刺牛血，画作大像头，头高二百尺，诳言薛师膝上血作之。
现代文：接着又用刺出来的牛血，画成大佛的头，二百尺长，骗人说这是他用自己膝上的血画的。
English: Then he painted the head of a giant Buddha, two hundred feet long, with the blood of a bull that had been stabbed out. He lied and said that he had painted it with the blood from his own knee.

古文：观者填城溢郭，士女云会。
现代文：观看的人们从四面八方涌来，使城内人满为患。
English: Spectators came from far and wide, filling the city to capacity.

古文：内载钱抛之，更相蹈藉，老少死者非一。
现代文：男女云集，纷纷进前抛钱，你推我挤，老人和孩子被踩死好几个。
English: Men and women gathered, one after another advancing to throw money, pushing and shoving, and several old people and children were trampled to death.

古文：至十六日，张像于天津桥南，设斋。
现代文：到十六日，把那大佛像挂在天津桥南，设斋祝祷。
English: On the 16th, they hung the large Buddha statue on the south side of the Tianjin Bridge and held a prayer service.

古文：二更，功德堂火起，延及明堂，飞焰冲天，洛城光如昼日。
现代文：二更天，功德堂起火了，蔓延到明堂，火焰冲天，照得整个洛阳城如同白昼。
English: Two days later, the Gongde Hall caught fire, spreading to the Ming Hall, and the flames soared into the sky, illuminating the entire city of Luoyang like broad daylight.

古文：其堂作仍未半，已高七十余尺。
现代文：功德堂刚建了没有一半，已经七十多尺高。
English: The Hall of Merit has just been built less than halfway and is already more than seventy feet high.

古文：又延烧金银库，铁汁流液，平地尺余。
现代文：火势又蔓延到金银库，那些金银都化成水在流淌，平地都一尺来深。
English: The fire also spread to the gold and silver vault. All the gold and silver turned into water and was flowing. The flat ground was a foot deep.

古文：人不知错入者，便即焦烂。
现代文：有的人误入其中，立刻就烧焦了。
English: Some people fell into it by mistake and were immediately scorched.

古文：其堂煨烬，尺木无遗。
现代文：功德堂化作灰烬，一块木头也没剩下。
English: The Hall of Merit was reduced to ashes, and not a single piece of wood was left.

古文：至晓，乃更设会，暴风欻起，裂血像为数百段。
现代文：天亮之后，又设斋会，忽然来了一阵狂风，把那用牛血绘制的大佛像撕成了好几百块。
English: After daybreak, a feast was held, and suddenly a strong wind came, tearing the large Buddha statue, which was painted with cow's blood, into hundreds of pieces.

古文：浮休子曰：梁武帝舍身同泰寺，百官倾库物以赎之。
现代文：浮休子张鷟说：梁武帝出家同泰寺，文武百官倾其所有把他赎了回来。
English: Ukikyushi's son Zhang Xuan said: Emperor Liangwu became a monk at Dongtai Temple, and all the civil and military officials gave their all to redeem him.

古文：其夜欻电霹雳，风雨暝晦。寺浮图佛殿，一时荡尽。
现代文：那天夜里电闪雷鸣，天昏地暗，同泰寺虽为佛堂圣殿，顷刻之间便被大水淹没。
English: That night, there were lightning and thunder, the sky was dark, and although Dongtai Temple was a Buddhist temple, it was flooded with water in an instant.

古文：非理之事，岂如来本意哉？
现代文：这种非理之事，难道说都是如来佛的本意吗？
English: Is this kind of irrationality all part of Buddha's original intention?

古文：胡僧宝严
现代文：胡僧宝严
English: Hu Monk Bao Yan

古文：唐景云中，西京霖雨六十余日。
现代文：唐代景云年间，长安一连下了六十多天雨。
English: During the Jingyun period of the Tang Dynasty, it rained more than sixty days in a row in Chang'an.

古文：有一胡僧，名宝严，自云有术法，能止雨，设坛场，读经咒。
现代文：有一个叫宝严的胡僧自称有法术，能够使雨止住，于是便设祭坛，读经文念咒语。
English: There was a goth monk named Bao Yan who claimed to have magic that could stop the rain, so he set up an altar, read scriptures and chanted spells.

古文：其时禁屠宰，宝严用羊二十口，马两匹以祭。
现代文：当时禁止屠宰，宝严却用二十只羊、两匹马来祭天。
English: Slaughter was prohibited at the time, but Bao Yan used twenty sheep and two horses to sacrifice to heaven.

古文：祈请经五十余日，其雨更盛。
现代文：他读经念咒五十多天，雨反而下得更大了。
English: He had been chanting the sutras for more than 50 days, but the rain had become heavier.

古文：于是斩逐胡僧，其雨遂止。
现代文：于是，便将他斩了。他死之后，雨随之而停。
English: So they beheaded him, and when he died, the rain stopped.

古文：胡超僧
现代文：胡超僧
English: Hu Chaozang

古文：周圣历年中，洪州有胡超僧，出家学道，隐白鹤山，微有法术，自云数百岁。
现代文：唐武后称帝时的圣历年间，洪州有个叫胡超的僧人，他隐居在白鹤山中，出家学道，刚会些法术，便自称已经活了好几百岁了。
English: During the sacred calendar year of Emperor Wu of the Tang Dynasty, there was a monk named Hu Chao in Hongzhou. He lived in seclusion in the White Crane Mountain, became a monk and studied Taoism. As soon as he learned some spells, he claimed to have lived for several hundred years.

古文：则天使合长生药，所费巨万，三年乃成。
现代文：武则天知道后，让他做长生不老之药，耗资上万，历时三年，药终于做成了。
English: After Wu Zetian knew, he asked him to make the elixir of life, which cost tens of thousands of yuan and took three years. The medicine was finally completed.

古文：自进药于三阳宫。
现代文：胡超来到三阳宫，将药奉上。
English: Hu Chao came to Sanyang Palace and sent the medicine to the crane.

古文：则天服之，以为神妙，望与彭祖同寿，改元为久视元年。
现代文：武则天将药服下，自以为药力非凡，希望能活到传说中的彭祖那么大年龄，便改年号为久视元年。
English: Wu Zetian took the medicine, thought that the medicine was extraordinary, and hoped to live to the age of the legendary Peng Zu, so he changed the year to the first year of Jiuxi.

古文：放超还山，赏赐甚厚。
现代文：她把胡超放回山中，并给予优厚的赏赐。
English: She put Hu Chao back into the mountains and gave him a generous reward.

古文：服药之后二年而则天崩。
现代文：然而，在服了他的药之后两年，武则天便驾崩了。
English: However, two years after taking his medicine, Wu Zetian passed away.

古文：调猫儿鹦鹉
现代文：调猫儿鹦鹉
English: Tune Cat Parrot

古文：骆宾王唐裴炎为中书令，时徐敬业欲反，令骆宾王画计，取裴炎同起事。
现代文：唐代，裴炎做中书令的时候，徐敬业想谋反。他让骆宾王策划一计，争取裴炎共同起事。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, when Pei Yan was in charge of China, Xu Jingye wanted to rebel. He asked Luo Bin Wang to devise a plan to get Pei Yan to rise up together.

古文：宾王足踏壁，静思食顷，乃为谣曰：一片火，两片火，绯衣小儿当殿坐。
现代文：骆宾王把脚踩在墙上，静静地考虑了一顿饭的工夫，便编了几句童谣：一片火，两片火，绯衣小儿当殿坐。
English: Luo Bin Wang stamped his foot on the wall, quietly considered the time of a meal, and then made up a few nursery rhymes: one fire, two fires, children in coats sit in the hall.

古文：教炎庄上小儿诵之，并都下童子皆唱。
现代文：然后，他便去教裴炎老家的孩子学唱。并且，都城里的孩子们也跟着唱。
English: Then he went to teach the children in Pei Yan's hometown to sing, and the children in the capital also sang along.

古文：炎乃访学者令解之。
现代文：裴炎拜访有学问的人，请他们把这首童谣解开。
English: Pei Yan visited learned people and asked them to decipher this nursery rhyme.

古文：召宾王至，数啖以宝物锦绮，皆不言。
现代文：骆宾王到了，裴炎用珠宝锦缎引诱他，可他却一言不发。
English: Luo Bin Wang arrived, Pei Yan lured him with jewelry brocade, but he did not say a word.

古文：又赂以音乐妓女骏马，亦不语。
现代文：裴炎又送来音乐、歌妓、骏马，可骆宾王仍然不说话。
English: Pei Yan also sent music, a singer, and a horse, but King Luo Bin still did not speak.

古文：乃将古忠臣烈士图共观之，见司马宣王，宾王歘然起曰：此英雄丈夫也。
现代文：裴炎见没有办法，就将古代的忠臣烈士图像拿出来，请骆宾王共同欣赏。当看到司马宣王时，骆宾王站起身来说：这才是真正的英雄，真正的大丈夫呵！
English: Seeing that there was nothing he could do, Pei Yan took out the ancient images of loyal subjects and martyrs, and invited Luo Bin Wang to enjoy them together. When he saw Sima Xuan Wang, Luo Bin Wang stood up and said, "This is the real hero, the real hero!"

古文：即说自古大臣执政，多移社稷。
现代文：随即便说自古以来大臣执政，有不少都改朝换代了，等等。
English: It is easy to say that since ancient times, ministers have been in power, many of them have changed the dynasty, and so on.

古文：炎大喜，宾王曰：但不知谣谶何如耳？
现代文：裴炎非常兴奋。骆宾王问道：听没听到什么童谣，对此有何预兆？
English: Pei Yan was very excited. Luo Bin Wang asked: Did you hear any nursery rhymes? What are the signs?

古文：炎以谣言片片火绯衣之事白。
现代文：裴炎就把那首一片火，两片火，绯衣小儿当堂坐告诉了骆宾王。
English: Pei Yan then told King Lopin about the song "One Fire, Two Fires, Children in Tuxedo" in front of everyone.

古文：宾王即下，北面而拜曰：此真人矣。
现代文：骆宾王随即退下，面北拜道：这真是我们的人呵！
English: Luo Bin Wang then stepped back and bowed to the North, saying, "This is really our man!"

古文：遂与敬业等合谋，扬州兵起，炎从内应。
现代文：不久，他与徐敬业合谋造反，在扬州起兵，裴炎做内应。
English: Soon after, he conspired with Xu Jingye to rebel and raise an army in Yangzhou, with Pei Yan acting as a go-between.

古文：书与敬业等，书唯有青鹅字。
现代文：裴炎给徐敬业等人写了一封密信，信上只有青鹅二字。
English: Pei Yan wrote a secret letter to Xu Jingye and others, with only the word "green goose" on the letter.

古文：人有告者，朝臣莫之能解。
现代文：因为有人告密，事情败露。对那封密信，朝臣没有一个能解开的。
English: Because someone tipped them off, the affair was exposed. None of the courtiers could decipher the secret letter.

古文：则天曰： 此青字者，十二月。鹅字者，我自与也。 
现代文：武则天说： 青 字，就是十二月； 鹅 字，我自与呵！
English: Wu Zetian said: The word "blue" means December; the word "goose" means spring.

古文：遂诛炎，敬业等寻败。
现代文：当下就把裴炎杀了，徐敬业等人随即也就失败了。
English: He immediately killed Pei Yan, and Xu Jingye and others immediately failed.

