古文：欧阳守道，字公权，一字迂父，吉州人。
现代文：欧阳守道，字公权，另一字迂父，吉州人。
English: Ouyang Shoudao, the word of public power, another word of roundabout father, the people of Jizhou.

古文：初名巽，自以更名应举非是，当祭必称巽。
现代文：起初名叫欧阳巽，他自己认为改名去考科举不妥当，每逢祭祀时一定称欧阳巽。
English: At first, his name was Ouyang Zang. He thought it was inappropriate to change his name for the entrance examination, so he always called himself Ouyang Zang when performing religious rites.

古文：少孤贫，无师，自力于学。
现代文：欧阳守道从小就失去父亲，家中贫困，他没有老师，在学问上他自己很努力学习。
English: Ouyang Shoudao lost his father when he was young, his family was poor, he didn't have a teacher, and he studied very hard.

古文：里人聘为子弟师，主人瞷其每食舍肉，密归遗母，为设二器驰送，乃肯肉食，邻媪儿无不叹息感动。
现代文：同乡的人请他担任自己孩子的老师，主人偷着看到他每次在学堂吃肉时，他都偷着回家把肉送给母亲，主人就替他用两个容器装好肉赶紧送给他母亲，他才肯吃肉食，邻居妇女、儿童没有不为他叹息和感动的。
English: A fellow villager asked him to be his child's teacher. The owner secretly saw that every time he ate meat at school, he would sneak home to give the meat to his mother. The owner quickly packed the meat in two containers for him and gave it to his mother. Only then did he agree to eat meat. The women and children in the neighborhood couldn't help but sigh and be moved by him.

古文：年未三十，翕然以德行为乡郡儒宗。
现代文：欧阳守道不到三十岁，就以自己的德行成为乡里间儒者的宗师。
English: Ouyang Shudao was less than thirty years old when he became the guru of rural Confucians with his own virtues.

古文：江万里守吉州，守道适贡于乡，万里独异视之。
现代文：江万里为吉州知州，欧阳守道参加乡试，江万里只对他另眼相看。
English: Jiang Wanli is Jizhou Chizhou, Ouyang Shoudao participated in the village test, Jiang Wanli only looks at him with different eyes.

古文：淳祐元年举进士，廷对，言： 国事成败在宰相，人才消长在台谏。
现代文：淳祐元年欧阳守道被推举参加进士考试，在朝廷上奏对时，他说 ：国事的成功和失败在于宰相，人才的减少和增加在于台谏。
English: In the first year of the Chunyu era, Ouyang Shudao was selected to participate in the entrance examination, and when he testified at the imperial court, he said: The success and failure of state affairs lies in the prime minister, and the decrease and increase of talent lies in the Taichung.

古文：昔者当国恶箴规，言者疑触迕，及其去位，共谓非才。
现代文：从前掌管国家的人厌恶规谏，负责劝谏的人怀疑自己触犯了当权的人，等他们罢官后，人们共同认为他们不是人才。
English: Those who used to be in charge of the country detest rules and regulations, and those who are responsible for persuading others suspect that they have violated those in power. After they leave office, people generally think that they are not talented.

古文：或有迎合时宰，自效殷勤，亦有疾恶乖方，苟求玼颣，以致忠邪不辨，黜陟无章。 唱名，徐俨夫为第一，俨夫握守道起曰： 吾愧出君上矣，君文未尝不在我上也。 授雩都主簿。
现代文：有的人迎合当时的宰相，对宰相阿谀逢迎，十分殷勤，也有的人痛恨乖巧奸诈，对错误和过失也是得过且过，以至于忠直和奸邪不能辨别，提升和罢免官员没有章法。 决定进士名次时，徐俨夫排在第一位，徐俨夫握着欧阳守道的手站起来说： 我的名次在您之上，使我感到羞愧，您的文章未尝不在我之上啊。 欧阳守道被授予雩都主簿。
English: Some people catered to the prime minister at the time, and were very courteous to the prime minister, and some people hated the cunning and treacherous, and they were so casual about mistakes and faults that they could not distinguish between loyalty and treachery, and there was no regulation for the promotion and dismissal of officials.When the promotion and dismissal of officials was decided, Xu Shufu ranked first, and Xu Shufu stood up holding Ouyang Shudao's hand and said: My rank is above you, which makes me feel ashamed, your article is not above me. Ouyang Shudao was awarded the book of the capital.

古文：丁母忧，服除，调赣州司户，其次在十年，后万里作白鹭洲书院，首致守道为诸生讲说。
现代文：欧阳守道遭母丧，他为母亲守孝期满后，调任为赣州司户，他在赣州呆了十年，后来江万里建成白鹭洲书院，首先请欧阳守道为学生讲说。
English: Ouyang Shudu was bereaved by his mother. After his mother's term of filial piety expired, he was transferred to the Shanzhou Sido. He stayed in Shanzhou for ten years. Later, Baiyanzhou College was built in Jiangwanli. First, he asked Ouyang Shudo to speak for the students.

古文：湖南转运副使吴子良聘守道为岳麓书院副山长。守道初升讲，发明孟氏正人心、承三圣之说，学者悦服。
现代文：湖南转运副使吴子良聘请欧阳守道为岳麓书院副山长，欧阳守道第一次给学生讲课，就阐明了孟氏端正人心，继承三圣的学说，学习的人都心悦诚服。
English: Wu Ziliang, deputy envoy of Hunan Transportation, hired Ouyang Shudao as vice-mountain chief of Yuelu Academy. Ouyang Shudao gave a lecture to students for the first time, clarifying that the Meng family is a righteous person, inherits the doctrine of the Three Saints, and people who study are sincerely convinced.

古文：宗人新及子必泰先寓居长沙，闻守道至，往访之。初犹未识也，晤语相契，守道即请于子良，礼新为岳麓书院讲书。
现代文：族人欧阳新和自己的儿子欧阳必泰先在长沙客居，听说欧阳守道来了，就前去拜访他，开始他们还不认识，见面后他们谈话都能互相契合，欧阳守道就向吴子良请求，对欧阳新给予优礼，请他为岳麓书院讲书。
English: Ouyang Xin and his son Ouyang Bittai first stayed in Changsha. When they heard that Ouyang Shouda was coming, they went to visit him. At first, they did not know each other. After they met, their conversation could fit together. Ouyang Shouda asked Wu Ziliang to give a courtesy to Ouyang Xin and ask him to give a lecture at Yuelu Academy.

古文：新讲《礼记》 天降时雨、山川出云 一章，守道起曰： 长沙自有仲齐，吾何为至此。 仲齐，新之字也。
现代文：欧阳新讲《礼记》中 上天降下符合时气的雨、山川出现云 一章，欧阳守道站起来说 ：长沙自己有仲齐这样的人，我为什么到这来。 仲齐，是欧阳新的字。
English: Ouyang Xin said, "In the Book of Rites, the heavens fall the rain that fits the season, and clouds appear in the mountains and rivers" In the first chapter, Ouyang Shudao stood up and said, "Changsha itself has people like Zhongqi, why did I come here.

古文：逾年，新卒，守道哭之恸，自铭其墓，又荐其子必泰于当道。
现代文：第二年，欧阳新去世，欧阳守道十分悲痛，亲自为他写墓志铭，又在掌权的人面前推荐欧阳新的儿子欧阳必泰。
English: The next year, Ouyang Xin died. Ouyang Shoudao was very sad. He personally wrote an epitaph for him, and recommended Ouyang's new son Ouyang Bittai in front of the people in power.

古文：子良代，守道复还吉州。
现代文：吴子良代欧阳守道为岳麓书院副山长的职位，欧阳守道又回到吉州。
English: Ouyang Shoudao was the vice-mountain chief of Yuelu Academy in Wu Ziliang's generation, and Ouyang Shoudao returned to Jizhou.

古文：里有张某丧其父，小祥，而舅氏讼以事，系之狱，使不得祭，邀其售己地以葬。
现代文：乡里有位丧父的张某，在父亲死后一周年准备举行祭祀礼时，他的舅舅因事诉讼他，他被投到监狱里，使张某不能祭祀父亲，张某的舅舅要求他买自己的土地埋葬父母。
English: In the village, there was a man named Zhang who lost his father. When he was preparing to hold a memorial service on the first anniversary of his father's death, his uncle sued him for something. He was thrown into prison, so that Zhang could not honor his father. Zhang's uncle asked him to buy his own land to bury his parents.

古文：守道闻之，叹曰： 吾惟痛斯子之不得一哭其父也，且其痛奈何？ 明日告之邑令曰： 此非人心，滨祭而薄之，挠葬而夺之，舅如此，是自食其肉也。
现代文：欧阳守道听说这件事后，叹着气说： 我只痛惜这个儿子不能去哭祭父亲啊，但只痛惜又能怎么样？ 第二天欧阳守道把这事报告给县令说： 这不是人心所能想到的，在将要举行祭礼时而去逼迫他，阻挠安葬死去的人而耽误他，舅舅这样，是在自己吃自己的肉。
English: The next day, Ouyang Shoudao reported the matter to the county magistrate, saying, "This is not something that people can think of. To persecute him at the time of the upcoming festival, to obstruct the burial of the dead and delay him, my uncle is eating his own flesh.

古文：请任斯子出，祭而复狱。 令亟出之。
现代文：请让这个儿子出来，等他祭祀完父亲再回到狱中。 县令马上放出了张某。
English: Please let this son come out, and wait for his father to return to prison after his sacrifice. The county immediately released Zhang.

古文：其舅丑诬守道，守道亦不自辨。
现代文：张某的舅舅诬陷欧阳守道，欧阳守道也不替自己申辩。
English: Zhang's uncle framed Ouyang Shoudao, and Ouyang Shoudao did not defend himself.

古文：转运使包恢为请祠于朝。
现代文：转运使包恢替他向朝廷请求回家祭祀。
English: The transfer caused Bao Wei to petition the imperial court to allow him to return home to offer a sacrifice.

古文：万里入为国子祭酒，荐为史馆检阅，召试馆职，授秘书省正字。
现代文：江万里入朝担任国子祭酒，推荐欧阳守道为史馆检阅，欧阳守道应召试馆职，被授予秘书省正字。
English: Jiang Wanli entered the imperial court to serve as the national son's sacrificial wine, recommended Ouyang Shoudao for the history museum review, Ouyang Shoudao was summoned to the examination hall, and was awarded the secretary of the provincial orthography.

古文：安南国王陈日照传位其子，求封太上国王，下省官议。
现代文：安南国王陈日照传王位给他的儿子，请求朝廷封他为太上国王，皇上把这个请求交给大臣们讨论。
English: The king of Annam, Chen Rizhao, passed the throne to his son and asked the court to make him the crown prince. The emperor submitted this request to the ministers for discussion.

古文：守道谓： 太上者，汉高帝以尊其父，累朝未之有改，若赐诏书称太上国王，非便。
现代文：欧阳守道说： 太上的称号，是汉高帝用来尊奉他父亲的，历朝都没有改变，如果赐封陈日照为太上国王，不合适。
English: Ouyang Shoudao said, "The title of Grand Empress Dowager was used by Emperor Gaozu to honor his father, and it has not changed through the ages. If Chen Rizhao were to be given the title of Grand Empress Dowager, it would not be appropriate.

古文：南越尉佗尝自称 蛮夷大长老 ，正南夷事也。
现代文：南越的尉佗曾经自称 蛮夷大长老 ，这符合南夷的事。
English: South Vietnam's 尉 once called himself the "Great Elder of the Barbarians," which is consistent with what happened in Nam Đi.

古文：《礼》，方伯自称曰 天子之老 ，大夫致仕曰 老 ，自称亦曰 老 。
现代文：《礼》中说，一方诸侯之长自称 天子之老 ，士大夫辞官退休称 老 ，自称也叫 老 。
English: "Li" said that on the one hand, the head of the princes claimed to be the old man of the son of heaven, and the retired magistrate called himself old, and also claimed to be old.

古文：自蛮夷言之则有尉佗之故事；自中国言之，亦方伯致仕者之常称。
现代文：从蛮夷方面讲，有尉佗称 老 的先例；从中国来讲，也有一方诸侯之长和辞官退休称 老 的源头。
English: Speaking from the barbarian side, there is a precedent of a vassal becoming old; speaking from the Chinese side, there is also a source of a vassal retiring to old age.

古文：汉亦有老上单于之号，易 太 以 老 无损。
现代文：汉代也有老上单于的称号，把 太 改成 老 没有损害。
English: In the Han Dynasty, there was also the title of Lao Shang Shan Yu, which was changed from "too old" to "old without damage."

古文：或去 上 字存其 太 字，太王则有古公，三太、三少，太宰、少宰， 太 所以别于 少 也。
现代文：或者去掉 上 字留下 太 字，称太王的则有古公，三太、三少，太宰、少宰，所以 太 与 少 是有区别的。
English: Or remove the word "上" and leave the word "太." To be called "太王" there are "古公," "三太," "三少," "太宰" and "少宰," so there is a difference between "太" and "少."

古文：谓父为太，则子为少矣。
现代文：称父亲为太，那么儿子就是少。
English: If you call the father too much, then the son is too little.

古文：太以尊言，则太后、太妃、太子、太孙；以卑言，则太史、太卜、太祝、乐太、师太，固上下所通用也。 时病足，不及与议。
现代文：从尊的方面称太，则有太后、太妃、太子、太孙；从卑的方面称太，则有太史、太卜、太祝、乐太、师太， 太 字，本来是上下通用的。 当时欧阳守道脚患病，没能议论到底。
English: From the respect side, there are the empress dowager, the tofu, the prince, and the great-grandson; from the inferior side, there are the great-grandmother, the great-grandmother, the great-grandmother, the great-grandmother, the great-grandmother, the great-grandmother, the great-grandmother, the great-grandmother, the great-grandmother, the great-grandmother, the great-grandmother, the great-grandmother, the great-grandmother, the great-grandmother, the great-grandmother, the great-grandmother, the great-grandmother, the great-grandmother, the great-grand

古文：迁校书郎兼景宪府教授，迁秘书郎，转对，言： 欲家给人足，必使中外臣庶无复前日言利之风而后可。
现代文：欧阳守道被升为校书郎兼景宪府教授，升为秘书郎，在百官轮次奏对时，他说 ：陛下要想做到家家富裕，人人丰足，一定要让朝内外的群臣百姓不再像以前那样只讲求利，然后才能达到目的。
English: Ouyang Shudao was promoted to school librarian and professor of Jingshanfu, and was promoted to secretary. During the match of the hundred officials, he said: "If His Majesty wants to make his family rich and everyone rich, he must let the masses of people inside and outside the country not only talk about profit as before, and then he can achieve his goal.

古文：风化惟反诸身。
现代文：要改变只讲求利的风气，只能从自身做起。
English: If we want to change the profit-driven culture, we can only start with ourselves.

古文：化之以俭，而彼不为俭，吾惟有卑宫室、菲饮食；化之以廉，而彼不兴廉，吾惟有不贵难得之货、不厚无益之藏。 以言罢。
现代文：用勤俭教化群臣百姓，但他们不做勤俭的事，陛下就只能不建高大的宫殿、在饮食上简单和平常；用廉洁教化群臣百姓，但他们不做廉洁的事，陛下就只有对那些难得到的东西不看重，不储藏那些没有好处的东西。 
English: With diligence and frugality to educate the masses, but they do not do the things of diligence and frugality, His Majesty can only refrain from building tall palaces and eating simple and ordinary food; with integrity to educate the masses, but they do not do the things of integrity, His Majesty can only disregard the things that are difficult to obtain and not store the things that are not beneficial.

古文：守道徒步出钱塘门，唯书两箧而已。
现代文：欧阳守道因讲政事得失被罢官。欧阳守道徒步走出钱塘门，只带了两箱书而已。
English: Ouyang Shoudao was removed from office for lecturing on the merits and demerits of politics. Ouyang Shoudao walked out of Qiantang Gate on foot, carrying only two boxes of books.

古文：理宗遗诏闻，守道与其徒相向哭踊，僮奴孺子各为悲哀。
现代文：理宗的遗诏传来，欧阳守道和他的弟子们相视痛哭，书僮、仆人也都很悲哀。
English: When the last will and testament of Emperor Rizong was delivered, Ouyang Shudao and his disciples wept bitterly as they looked at each other, and the scribes and servants were also very sad.

古文：咸淳三年，特旨与祠。
现代文：咸淳三年，皇上特下诏旨给他管理宫观的闲职。
English: In the third year of Emperor Xianjun's reign, the emperor issued a special decree to give him the sinecure of managing the palace.

古文：诏大臣举贤才，少傅吕文德举九十六人，守道预焉。
现代文：皇上下诏让大臣们推举贤能的人才，少傅吕文德推举了九十六人，其中有欧阳守道。
English: The Emperor issued an edict to the ministers to nominate virtuous people, and Shao Fu Lvende nominated ninety-six people, including Ouyang Shudu.

古文：添差通判建昌军，以书谢庙堂曰： 史赞大将军不荐士，今大将军荐士矣，而某何以得此于大将军哉。
现代文：欧阳守道为添差通判建昌军，他用书感谢宗庙明堂说 ：史书称赞大将军不推荐读书人，现在大将军推荐读书人了。而我凭什么能得到大将军的推荐呢？
English: Ouyang Shoudao judged Jianchang Army for Tianzhatong, he used the book to thank the ancestral temple Myeongdong and said: The history book praised the general for not recommending a reader, now the general recommends a reader. And how can I get the general's recommendation?

古文：幸尝蒙召，擢备数三馆，异时或者谓其放废无聊，托身诸贵人，亏伤国体，则宁得而解，愿仍赋祠禄足矣。 迁著作佐郎兼崇政殿说书兼权都官郎官。
现代文：我曾经有幸蒙受皇恩被召用，提升为馆职，以后或许有人认为我是一个没有什么才能的废人，只因巴结权贵才被推荐的，这对国家不利，所以我宁可解除职务，愿意仍旧领朝廷给的管宫观的俸禄，这就足够了。 欧阳守道升为著作佐郎兼崇政殿说书兼权都官郎官。
English: I once had the privilege of being called by the grace of the emperor and promoted to the post of librarian. In the future, some people may think that I am a useless person with little talent, who was only recommended because of the power and nobility, which is not good for the country. Therefore, I would rather be relieved of my duties and would like to continue to receive the salary of Guan Gongguan given by the imperial court. That is enough. Ouyang Shouda was promoted to the post of Shosha Saro, the post of Su Zheng Dian Shosha, and the post of the governor of the capital.

古文：经筵所进，皆切于当世务，上为动色。
现代文：他在为皇帝讲读时，都结合当时的政务，皇上为此也很激动。
English: When he read for the emperor, he always combined it with the political affairs of the time, and the emperor was very excited about it.

古文：迁著作郎，卒，家无一钱。
现代文：欧阳守道升为著作郎，他去世，他的家一贫如洗。
English: Ouyang Shoudao rose to become a famous writer. He died, and his family was destitute.

古文：守道之兄之妻蚤丧，其子演五岁余，且多病，浚生甫数月，守道三十未有室，顾无能乳哺者，日夜抱二子泣，里巷怜之。
现代文：欧阳守道的哥哥和嫂子都死得早，他们的儿子欧阳演五岁多，而且常有病，欧阳浚生下才几个月，欧阳守道三十岁还没成家，没有哺乳孩子的能力，他就日夜抱着两个孩子哭，邻里们都可怜他们。
English: Ouyang Shudao's brother and sister-in-law both died early. Their son, Ouyang Xuan, was more than five years old and often ill. Ouyang Jian was only a few months old. Ouyang Shudao, who was thirty years old, had not yet started a family and did not have the ability to breastfeed his children. He cried day and night while holding his two children. The neighbors pitied them.

古文：演既长，出莫知所之，守道哭而求诸野，终不能得，三年不食肉，憔悴不释者终身。
现代文：欧阳演长大后，出去不知到了什么地方，欧阳守道哭着在田野里寻找，始终没找到，因此他三年不吃肉，失去欧阳演的痛苦折磨他一生。
English: After Ouyang En grew up, he went out to I don't know where. Ouyang Shuduo cried and looked for him in the fields, but he never found him. So he didn't eat meat for three years. The pain of losing Ouyang En tormented him for the rest of his life.

古文：吉有贤守而大家怨之厚诬以赃者，下其事常平使者。
现代文：吉州有位贤德的郡守但大家怨恨他，说了很多诬陷他贪污的话，郡守被交给常平使者处治。
English: There was a virtuous county magistrate in Jizhou, but everyone resented him and said a lot of things to frame him for corruption. The county magistrate was handed over to the emissary of Changping to deal with.

古文：会旱甚，祷云腾，守道曰： 无以祷也，云腾之神，唐郡守吴侯也。
现代文：恰好天大旱，人们祈雨，欧阳守道说： 不用祈祷了，雨神，是唐代的郡守吴侯。
English: It happened to be a very dry day, and people were praying for rain. Ouyang Shoudao said, "There's no need to pray, the rain god is Wu Hou, the county governor of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：冤莫甚于前守，冤不直而吴侯于祷，侯有辞矣。
现代文：冤屈没有比前任郡守大的，冤屈不伸，那么吴侯对祈雨的人也有话回答了。
English: The grievance is not greater than the previous county governor, the grievance does not extend, then Wu Hou has something to say to those who pray for rain.

古文：匹妇藏冤，旱或三年，冤在民牧，害岂其小。 反覆千余言，或迂笑之，守道不改，告来者不倦，守卒以得直。
现代文：一个妇人的冤屈，或许还要大旱三年，郡守的冤屈，灾害也不能小啊。 欧阳守道反复讲了一千多句这种话，有的人就嘲笑他，欧阳守道仍然不动摇，不知疲倦地对来祈雨的人说，郡守的冤案终于得到平反。
English: A woman's grievance may require three years of drought, and a county magistrate's grievance is no small calamity. Ouyang Shudao repeatedly said more than a thousand such words, and some people laughed at him. Ouyang Shudao remained unshaken, tirelessly telling those who came to pray for rain that the county magistrate's grievance had finally been rectified.

古文：所著有《易故》、文集。
现代文：欧阳守道著有《易故》、文集。
English: Ouyang Shoudao is the author of "Yi Guo" and a collection of essays.

