古文：崔绍辛察僧彦先陈龟范
现代文：崔绍辛察僧彦先陈龟范
English: Cui Shaoxincha Monk Yanxian Chen Guanfan

古文：崔绍
现代文：崔绍
English: Cui Shao

古文：崔绍者，博陵王玄暐曾孙。
现代文：崔绍是博陵王崔玄暐的曾孙子。
English: Cui Shao was the great-grandson of King Cui Xuan of Boling.

古文：其大父武，尝从事于桂林。
现代文：崔绍的祖父叫崔武，曾在桂林作官。
English: Cui Shao's grandfather, Cui Wu, was an official in Guilin.

古文：其父直，元和初，亦从事于南海，常假郡符于端州。
现代文：父亲崔直，元和初年也在南海作官，曾被郡里任命到端州做官。
English: His father, Cui Zhi, also served as an official in Nanhai in the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, and was once appointed by the county to serve as an official in Danzhou.

古文：直处官清苦，不蓄羡财，给家之外，悉拯亲故。
现代文：崔直为政清廉，生活过得很清苦，从不聚敛贪财。所得薪俸除了养家糊口，就都周济了困难的亲朋。
English: Cui Zhizhong is politically clean and honest. He lives a very clean life, never accumulating wealth. In addition to supporting his family, the salaries he earns are used to help relatives and friends who are in need.

古文：在郡岁余，因得风疾，退卧客舍，伏枕累年。
现代文：他在郡里呆了一年多，因为得了中风病，卧床不起好几年。
English: He had been in the county for more than a year after suffering a stroke that left him bedridden for several years.

古文：居素贫，无何。寝疾复久，身谢之日，家徒索然。繇是眷属辈不克北归。
现代文：本来就很穷，又得了重病，更是惨淡，死了以后，家里几乎只剩四壁，家里的人们也没有能力拉他的灵柩回北方故土安葬。
English: Originally very poor, he became seriously ill, and was even more miserable. After his death, there were almost only four walls left in the house, and the people in the family did not have the ability to take his coffin back to the northern homeland for burial.

古文：绍遂孜孜履善，不堕素业。
现代文：崔绍在这种情况下，更是兢兢业业的作人为官，处处效法亡父的节操而积德行善。
English: In this situation, Cui Shao is an even more dedicated official. He follows his late father's example of self-restraint and virtuous conduct.

古文：南越会府，有摄官承乏之利，济沦落羁滞衣冠。
现代文：当时郡里有 南越会府 ，常常资助一些清贫的官员和沦落的士人学子。
English: At that time, the county was home to the South Vietnam Association, which often supported impoverished officials and downtrodden scholars and students.

古文：绍迫于冻馁，常屈至于此。
现代文：崔绍常常为了救燃眉之急迫于冻饿之苦，不得不到 南越会府 中求点帮助。
English: In order to relieve the burning urgency of hunger and cold, Cui Shao often had to go to the South Vietnam Association to ask for help.

古文：贾继宗，外表兄夏侯氏之子，则绍之子婿，因缘还往，颇熟其家。
现代文：在会府里结识了贾继宗，他的外表兄夏侯氏的儿子就是崔绍的女婿，所以崔绍和贾继宗交往很密，对他家很熟。
English: He met Jia Jizong in the meeting hall. His cousin Xia Hou's son is Trishao's son-in-law, so Trishao has a close relationship with Jia Jizong and is very familiar with his family.

古文：大和六年，贾继宗自琼州招讨使改换康州牧，因举请绍为掾属。
现代文：大和六年，贾继宗由琼州招讨使改任康州牧，就荐举崔绍到州衙里任掾属。
English: In the sixth year of the Yamato era, Jia Jizong was invited by Qiongzhou to be appointed as the herdsman of Kangzhou, and he recommended that Cui Shao be appointed as the vassal of Kangzhou.

古文：康之附郭县曰端溪，端溪假尉陇西李彧，则前天理评事景休之犹子。
现代文：康州所属有个县名端溪，代理县尉陇西人李彧是前任大理寺评事景休的侄子。
English: There is a county named Duanxi that belongs to Kangzhou, and the acting county officer, Li Yan, who is from the west of Guizhou, is the nephew of the former Dali Temple critic Jingyu.

古文：绍与彧，锡类之情，素颇友洽。
现代文：崔绍与李彧是的交情，处得很融洽。
English: Trishao and Li Xuan have a good relationship and get along very well.

古文：崔李之居，复隅落相近。
现代文：崔、李两家住得也很近。
English: The Cui and Li families also live very close to each other.

古文：彧之家，畜一女猫，常往来绍家捕鼠。
现代文：李彧家里养了一只母猫，常常跑到崔绍家抓耗子。
English: Li Yao's family kept a female cat, which often ran to the Cui Shao's house to catch mice.

古文：南土风俗，恶他舍之猫产子其家，以为大不祥。
现代文：南方当地有种民俗十分讨厌，别人家的猫在自己家里生崽，认为是很不吉利的事。
English: There is a local folk custom in the south that is very unpleasant. It is considered to be very unlucky for someone else's cat to have lice in their own home.

古文：彧之猫产二子于绍家，绍甚恶之。因命家童，絷三猫于筐箧，加之以石，复以绳固筐口，投之于江。
现代文：李彧家的母猫在崔绍家生了两只猫崽，崔绍十分厌恶，就让家里的僮仆把三只猫拴在一个筐箩里，弄了些石头装在里面，又用绳子把筐口拴死，扔到了江里。
English: The female cat of the Li Yan family gave birth to two kittens at the home of the Trichao family. The Trichao family was very disgusted by this, so they asked the family's servant to put the three cats in a basket, made some stones and put them inside, and then strangled the basket with a rope and threw it into the river.

古文：是后不累月。绍丁所出荥阳郑氏之丧，解职，居且苦贫。
现代文：不到一个月，崔绍的生身母亲荥阳人郑氏去世，按官方的规定父母去世凡有官职的必须解除职务守孝。
English: Less than a month later, Cui Shao's biological mother, Zheng, a native of Shenyang, passed away. According to official regulations, anyone with a government post who loses his or her parents must be relieved of his or her duties to maintain filial piety.

古文：孤孀数辈，饘粥之费，晨暮不充。
现代文：崔绍解了官更加贫苦了，家里有好几辈的孤寡，连喝粥的钱都供不上，常常是吃了早上没有晚上的。
English: When Cui Shao was relieved of his post, he became even more impoverished. There were several generations of orphans in his family, and he couldn't even afford to drink porridge. He often ate in the morning and not at night.

古文：遂薄游羊城之郡，丐于亲故。
现代文：崔绍实在没办法，就在广州一带到处游荡，向亲戚朋友们告帮。
English: There was really nothing Cui Shao could do, so he roamed all over Guangzhou, calling on relatives and friends for help.

古文：大和八年五月八日发康州官舍，历抵海隅诸郡，至其年九月十六日达雷州。
现代文：他于太和八年五月八日从康州出发，走遍了海南的几个郡，到这年的九月十日到了雷州。
English: He set out from Kangzhou on May 8th of the same year, traveled through several counties in Hainan, and arrived in Leizhou on September 10th of this year.

古文：绍家常事一字天王，已两世矣。
现代文：崔绍家里经常供奉的神像，是一字天王，已经供了两代。
English: The statue of the god that is often worshipped in the home of Trishao is called the Heavenly King, and has been worshipped for two generations.

古文：雷州舍于客馆中，其月二十四日，忽得热疾，一夕遂重，二日遂殛。
现代文：崔绍到雷州后，住在旅店里，当月二十四日突然得了热病，过了一夜更重了，第二天就死了。
English: After Trishao arrived in Leizhou, he stayed in a hotel. On the 24th of that month, he suddenly fell ill with a fever. It worsened overnight, and he died the next day.

古文：将殛之际，忽见二人焉，一人衣黄，一人衣皂，手执文帖，云： 奉王命追公。 
现代文：临死的时候，崔绍忽然看见两个人，一个穿黄衣一个穿黑衣，手里拿着公文对崔绍说： 我们奉阎王的命令捕你。 
English: When he was about to die, Trishaw suddenly saw two men, one dressed in yellow and one in black, holding a document in their hands and saying to Trishaw, "We have been ordered by the King of Hell to capture you."

古文：绍初拒之，云： 平生履善，不省为恶，今有何事，被此追呼。 
现代文：崔绍一开始不服，说： 我一辈子净作好事，从未做过恶，我犯了什么罪要被你们捉到阴间呢？ 
English: At first, Trishao was not convinced and said, "I have been doing good deeds all my life and have never done anything evil. What sin have I committed that you want to take me to the underworld?"

古文：二使人大怒曰： 公杀无辜三人，冤家上诉，奉天符下降，令按劾公。方当与冤家对命，奈何犹敢称屈，违拒王命！ 
现代文：两个鬼卒大怒，说： 你杀害了三个无辜的人，被害人在阴间告了你，天帝都下了公文让阎罗王审问你，准备让你为受害人抵命呢，你怎敢自己叫屈，抗拒王命？ 
English: The two evil spirits were very angry and said, "You have killed three innocent people. The victims have accused you in the underworld. The Heavenly Emperor has issued an official document to let the King of Hell interrogate you and prepare you to defend the lives of the victims. How dare you give in and resist the king's order?"

古文：遂展帖示。
现代文：说罢展开手中的公文。
English: Saying this, he unfolded the document in his hand.

古文：绍见文字分明，但不许细读耳。
现代文：崔绍见上面的字写得很清楚，但鬼卒不许他细看。
English: Cui Shao saw that the above words were written very clearly, but the devil's pawn did not allow him to look closely.

古文：绍颇畏詟，不知所裁。
现代文：崔绍这时心里十分害怕，但仍不知道判自己什么罪。
English: At that time, Cui Shao was very scared, but he still didn't know what crime he had been convicted of.

古文：顷刻间，见一神人来，二使者俯伏礼敬。
现代文：这时，见来了一个神人，两个鬼卒赶快伏在地上叩拜。
English: At this time, they saw a godman, and the two ghost soldiers quickly prostrated themselves on the ground and prostrated themselves.

古文：神谓绍曰： 尔识我否？ 
现代文：神对崔绍说： 你认识我吗？ 
English: God said to Trishaw: Do you know me?

古文：绍曰： 不识。 
现代文：崔绍说不认识。
English: Cui Shao said he didn't know him.

古文：神曰： 我一字天王也，常为尔家供养久矣，每思以报之。
现代文：神说： 我就是一字天王，你家供奉我多年了，我常常想报答你。
English: God said, "I am the King of Heaven. Your family has served me for many years, and I have often wanted to repay you.

古文：今知尔有难，故来相救。 
现代文：现在我知道你遭了难，所以特地来救你。 
English: Now I know you're in trouble, so I've come to rescue you.

古文：绍拜伏求救。
现代文：崔绍一听立刻跪伏在地下求一字天王相救。
English: As soon as Cui Shao heard this, he immediately knelt down on the ground and asked for help.

古文：天王曰： 尔但共我行，必无忧患。 
现代文：天王说： 你尽管跟我走吧，我保你不会有灾难。 
English: The King of Heaven said, "Just follow me, and I will make sure that nothing bad will happen to you."

古文：王遂行，绍次之，二使者押绍之后。
现代文：说罢天王就走了。崔绍紧跟着天王，那两个鬼卒在崔绍身后押着。
English: After saying this, the King of Heaven left. Trishao followed the King of Heaven closely, and the two devil pawns were holding Trishao behind.

古文：通衙广陌，杳不可知际。
现代文：他们走过去的是一望无头的大道，也不知这道是通向哪里的。
English: They walked along a headless road, not knowing where it led.

古文：行五十许里，天王问绍： 尔莫困否？ 绍对曰： 亦不甚困。
现代文：走了五十多里。天王问崔绍累不累，崔绍说不太累，还能勉强走二三十里。
English: He had walked more than fifty miles. Tianwang asked if Cui Shao was tired. Cui Shao said that he was not too tired and could still walk twenty to thirty miles.

古文：犹可支持三二十里。 天王曰： 欲到矣。 
现代文：天王说，快到了。
English: The king of heaven said, "It's getting late.

古文：逡巡，遥见一城门，墙高数十仞，门楼甚大，有二神守之。其神见天王，侧立敬惧。
现代文：正纳闷寻思快到什么地方时，远远看见一个城门，城墙有几十丈高，门楼很高大，有两个神人把守着，他们见天王来了，都侧身站着行礼，显出很敬畏的样子。
English: While he was wondering where he was going, he saw a city gate in the distance. The city wall was dozens of meters high, and the gate tower was very tall. It was guarded by two godmen. When they saw the king of heaven coming, they all stood sideways and bowed, showing great awe.

古文：更行五里，又见一城门，四神守之。
现代文：又走了五里，又看见一个城门，有四个神守着。
English: He walked another five miles and saw a gate guarded by four gods.

古文：其神见天王之礼，亦如第一门。
现代文：这四个神见了天王后，也像第一个城门前的神那样行礼。
English: When these four gods saw the Queen of Heaven, they also bowed like the first god in front of the city gate.

古文：又行三里许，复有一城门，其门关闭。
现代文：再走三里多地，又有一个城门，但城门关着。
English: After walking more than three miles, there was another gate, but it was closed.

古文：天王谓绍曰： 尔且立于此，待我先入。 
现代文：天王对崔绍说： 你先站在这儿等着，我先进城去。 
English: Tianwang said to Trishao, "You stand here and wait, I'll go to the city first."

古文：天王遂乘空而过。
现代文：说罢天王就腾空从城上飞过去进了城。
English: And the king of heaven said, Let there be a firmament in the midst of the city, and it was.

古文：食顷，闻摇锁之声，城门洞开。见十神人，天王亦在其间，神人色甚忧惧。
现代文：过了一顿饭工夫，听见城门上的大锁有了响动，城门大开，见有十个神人，天王也在中间，看他们的神色，都很忧虑恐惧。
English: After a meal, he heard the large lock on the city gate rattle. The gate swung wide open, and he saw ten holy men, with the heavenly king in the middle. Looking at their faces, he was very worried and afraid.

古文：更行一里，又见一城门，有八街，街极广阔，街两边有杂树，不识其名目。
现代文：又走了一里地，又见一个城门。城里有八条街，街道十分宽阔，两边种着各种树木。崔绍认不出来是什么树。
English: He walked another mile and saw another gate. There are eight streets in the city, and the streets are very wide, with all kinds of trees planted on both sides. Cui Shao couldn't tell what kind of tree it was.

古文：有神人甚多，不知数，皆罗立于树下。
现代文：街上有很多的神人，简直数不清有多少，都站在树下。
English: On the street, there are countless shinjin, all standing under trees.

古文：八街之中，有一街最大。街西而行，又有一城门，门两边各有数十间楼，并垂帘。
现代文：八条街中有一条街最大，顺这条街往西走，又有一个城门，门两旁各有好几十间楼房，房门都挂着帘子。
English: One of the eight streets is the largest, and if you walk west along this street, you will find another gate. There are dozens of buildings on both sides of the gate, and the doors are all covered with curtains.

古文：街衢人物颇众，车舆合杂，朱紫缤纷。
现代文：街道上各种人物都很多，车、轿混杂在一起，车盖轿篷五彩缤纷。
English: There are many characters on the streets, cars and cars are mixed together, and the car covers are colorful.

古文：亦有乘马者，亦有乘驴者，一似人间模样。
现代文：有骑马的，也有骑驴的，和人世间的街市一模一样。
English: And there were horsemen, and there were asses, and the street of the city was made like unto the street of the world.

古文：此门无神看守。
现代文：这个城门，没有人看守。
English: This gate is unguarded.

古文：更一门，尽是高楼，不记间数。珠帘翠幕，眩惑人目。
现代文：又过了一道城门，尽是高楼，不记得有多少间，楼上的房门都挂着珠帘翠幕，看得人眼花缭乱。
English: Another city gate passed by, it was all high-rises, I don't remember how many there were. The doors on the upper floors were all hung with beaded curtains, and it was dazzling to look at.

古文：楼上悉是妇人，更无丈夫，衣服鲜明，装饰新异，穷极奢丽，非人寰所睹。
现代文：楼上全都是女人，没有一个男人。她们的衣服十分华丽，佩戴的首饰非常新奇，高贵绚丽是人世上从来没见过的。
English: Upstairs, all women, no men, dressed in the most sumptuous clothes, wearing the most extravagant jewels, the likes of which the world had never seen before.

古文：其门有朱旗，银泥画旗，旗数甚多，亦有著紫人数百。
现代文：每家门上都挂着朱红的旗或银粉绘制的彩旗，旗多得数不过来。也有好几百穿紫衣服的人在城门上来来往往。
English: On every gate hung a scarlet banner or a bunting painted with powdered silver, more than could be counted, and hundreds of people dressed in purple came and went at the gates.

古文：天王立绍于门外，便自入去。
现代文：天王让崔绍在城门外先站一会儿，自己先走进去了。
English: Tianwang asked Trishao to stand outside the city gate for a while, and then went in himself.

古文：使者遂领绍到一厅，使者先领见王判官。
现代文：这时那两个鬼卒领崔绍来到一座大厅堂上，让他先见一见王判官。
English: At this time, the two ghostly guards led Cui Shao to a large hall and let him see Wang Gangjun for the first time.

古文：既至厅前，见王判官著绿，降阶相见，情礼甚厚。而答绍拜，兼通寒暄，问第行，延升阶与坐，命煎茶。
现代文：到了大堂前，穿着绿袍的王判官走下台阶和崔绍相见，很热情的接待了他，并向崔绍施礼回拜，问寒问暖，还问一路的辛苦，并请崔绍走上大堂和他一齐坐下说话，还让人泡茶。
English: When he arrived at the lobby, Judge Wang, who was wearing a green robe, came down the steps to meet with Cui Shao. He received him warmly and bowed to Cui Shao, asked him about the cold and the warm, and asked him about the hardships along the way. He also invited Cui Shao to walk into the lobby and sit down with him to talk, and asked him to make tea.

古文：良久，顾绍曰： 公尚未生。 
现代文：过了半天，王判官才看着崔道： 你还没有生吧？ 
English: After half a day, Judge Wang looked at Cui and said, "You haven't been born yet, have you?

古文：绍初不晓其言，心甚疑惧。
现代文：崔绍不懂他这句话是什么意思，心里很惊慌。
English: Trishaw didn't understand what he meant by this, and panicked.

古文：判官云： 阴司讳死，所以唤死为生。 
现代文：王判官解释说： 阴间忌讳说 死 字，所以把死叫作生。 
English: Judge Wang explained, "It is a taboo in the underworld to say the word death, so we call death life.

古文：催茶，茶到，判官云： 勿吃，此非人间茶。 
现代文：说罢就催人快上茶，茶端上来以后，王判官说： 这茶你不要吃，因为它不是人世间的茶。 
English: After the tea was served, the judge said, "Don't eat this tea, for it is not the tea of the world.

古文：逡巡，有著黄人，提一瓶茶来，云： 此是阳官茶，绍可吃矣。 
现代文：崔绍正犹豫问，有个穿黄衣的人提了一壶茶来，判官说： 这才是阳间官家用的茶，你可以放心喝了。 
English: Cui Shao was hesitating to ask. A man in yellow brought a pot of tea. The judge said, "This is the kind of tea that is used by officials in the Yang diaspora. You can drink it with confidence."

古文：绍吃三碗讫。判官则领绍见大王，手中把一纸文书，亦不通入。
现代文：崔绍喝了三杯茶以后，判官就带他去见阎王，手里拿着一张公文，也不经通报，就进了阎王大殿。
English: After Trishaw drank three cups of tea, the judge took him to see the king of hell, holding a document in his hand. Without any notification, he entered the great hall of hell.

古文：大王正对一字天王坐，天王向大王云： 只为此人来。 
现代文：崔绍看见阎王正和一字天王对面而坐，天王问阎王说： 我就是为这个人来向你求情的。 
English: Trishaw saw that the king of hell was sitting opposite the king of heaven. The king of heaven asked the king of hell, "I have come to ask your mercy for this man."

古文：大王曰： 有冤家上诉，手虽不杀，口中处分，令杀于江中。 
现代文：阎王说： 有苦主上诉，尽管崔绍没有亲手杀人，但是他亲口下了命令，让别人把受害人杀死在江里的。 
English: Yan Wang said: "There is an appeal by the aggrieved party. Although Cui Shao did not kill the victim with his own hands, he personally gave the order for someone else to kill the victim in the river.

古文：天王令唤崔绍冤家，有紫衣十余人，齐唱喏走出。
现代文：天王命人传被崔绍杀害的人上堂。
English: According to legend, the king ordered that the person killed by Cui Shao be brought to court.

古文：顷刻间，有一人，著紫襕衫，执牙笏，下有一纸状，领一妇人来，兼领二子，皆人身而猫首。
现代文：这时有十几个穿紫衣的鬼卒应声出了大堂，不一会儿有一个人，穿着色彩斑烂的紫袍，手里拿着笏板，笏板下有一张状纸，领着一个女人上了堂，女人后面还跟着两个孩子，这三个人都是猫头人身。
English: At this time, more than a dozen ghostly figures in purple robes came out of the lobby. Soon, a person wearing a colorful purple robe, holding a cutting board in his hand, with a piece of paper under the cutting board, led a woman into the hall. The woman was followed by two children, all three of whom were cat-headed.

古文：妇人著惨裙黄衫子，一女子亦然，一男子亦然，著皂衫。
现代文：那女人穿淡色裙子黄衫子。两个孩子中一个女孩穿着同样的衣服，一个男孩穿着黑衫。
English: The woman was wearing a light-coloured skirt and a yellow shirt. One of the two children, a girl, was wearing the same clothes and the boy was wearing a black shirt.

古文：三冤家号泣不已，称崔绍非理相害。
现代文：三个告状的在大堂上哭号不止，说崔绍无缘无故地杀害了他们母子。
English: The three plaintiffs cried incessantly in the lobby, saying that Cui Shao had killed their mother and son for no reason.

古文：天王向绍言： 速开口与功德。 
现代文：这时天王对崔绍说： 你赶快答应为他们抄经书作功德，使他们超度！ 
English: At this time, the Heavenly King said to Cui Shao: Promptly promise to copy the scriptures for them as a merit, so that they can transcend!

古文：绍忙惧之中，都忘人间经佛名目，唯记得《佛顶尊胜经》，遂发愿，各与写经一卷。
现代文：崔绍由于又慌又怕，竟一时想不起人间常念的佛经都有什么名目，只记得有一部《佛顶尊胜经》，就忙向那三个猫鬼许愿说为他们各自抄写一卷经文。
English: Due to his panic and fear, Cui Shao couldn't even remember the names of the Buddhist scriptures that people often recite. He only remembered one "Buddha's Sutra," so he quickly made a wish to the three cats and said that he would copy a volume of scriptures for each of them.

古文：言讫，便不见妇人等。
现代文：刚许完愿，那三个告状的猫鬼就消失了。
English: As soon as the wish was fulfilled, the three suing cats disappeared.

古文：大王及一字天王遂令绍升阶与坐，绍拜谢大王，王答拜。
现代文：阎王和一字天王就让崔绍从台阶下走上堂来坐下，崔绍忙向阎王拜谢，阎王也施礼回拜。
English: The king of hell and the king of heaven let Trishaw come up from the bottom of the steps to sit down. Trishaw hurried to thank the king of hell, and the king of hell also bowed.

古文：绍谦让曰： 凡夫小生，冤家陈诉，罪当不赦，敢望生回。大王尊重，如是答拜，绍实所不安。 
现代文：崔绍非常谦恭地说： 我是一个凡夫俗子，犯了罪又有苦主控告，是不该得到宽恕的，没想到还能生还，这都是大王的恩德，大王还这样降尊向我还礼，使我实感不安有愧啊！ 
English: Trishaw said very humbly, "I am an ordinary person who has committed a crime and has a grievance to complain about. I don't deserve to be forgiven. I didn't expect to still be alive. This is all the grace of the great king. The great king still condescends to me in this way, which makes me feel uneasy and ashamed!

古文：大王曰： 公事已毕，即还生路。
现代文：阎王说： 您的事已经处理完了，就快回人间吧。
English: Yan Wang said: Your matter has been dealt with, so hurry back to the human world.

古文：存殁殊途，固不合受拜。 
现代文：死生是完全不同的两界，你是活人，所以我不敢接受你的拜礼。
English: Death and life are two completely different worlds. You are a living person, so I dare not accept your worship.

古文：大王问绍： 公是谁家子弟？ 
现代文：那么，你是谁家的子弟呢？ 
English: So, whose child are you?

古文：绍具以房族答之。大王曰： 此若然者，与公是亲家，总是人间马仆射。 
现代文：崔绍说出自己的姓氏、族系给阎王，阎王说： 你说的如果是真的，那么我和你还是亲家呢。我就是马总，人世间的马仆射。 
English: Trishaw told the king of hell his family name and lineage, and the king of hell said, "If what you say is true, then you and I are still blood relatives. I am the head of the horse, the horse of the world."

古文：绍即起申叙，马仆射犹子磻夫，则绍之妹夫。
现代文：崔绍一听立刻站起来说： 马仆射的养子磻夫，就是我的妹夫啊。 
English: Upon hearing this, Trishao immediately stood up and said, "Ma Douyao's adopted son, the widower, is my brother-in-law."

古文：大王问磻夫安在，绍曰： 阔别已久，知家寄杭州。 
现代文：阎王问磻夫现在何处，崔绍说他和磻夫分别很久了，只知道他家住杭州。
English: When Yan Wang asked the widower where he was now, Cui Shao said that he and the widower had been separated for a long time, and only knew that he lived in Hangzhou.

古文：大王又曰： 莫怪此来，奉天符令勘，今则却还人道。 
现代文：阎王又说： 这次捕你到阴间你不要责怪我，我是奉了上天的命令审你的案子，现在放你还阳吧。 
English: The king of hell also said, "Don't blame me for taking you to the underworld this time. I was ordered by heaven to judge your case. Let me release you now."

古文：便回顾王判官云： 崔子停止何处？ 
现代文：说着回头问王判官道， 崔公现在什么地方歇息？ 
English: Looking back, Wang Ganguan asked, where does Cui Gong rest now?

古文：判官曰： 便在某厅中安置。 
现代文：王判官说： 就在我的府里安置。 
English: And the king's officer said, Put him in my house.

古文：天王云： 甚好。 
现代文：天王说： 很好。 
English: The King of Heaven said, "Very good.

古文：绍复咨启大王： 大王在生，名德至重，官位极崇，则合却归人天，为贵人身。
现代文：崔绍又问阎王， 大王在人间时，德高望重，官位颇尊，现在应该归入天界，成为仙家。
English: Cui Shao also asked the king of hell. When the great king was on earth, he was held in high esteem and his official position was highly respected. Now, he should be relegated to the heavenly world and become a hermit.

古文：何得在阴司职？ 
现代文：以你这样高贵的身份，怎么竟在阴司作官呢？ 
English: With such a noble status as yours, how can you be an official in the nether regions?

古文：大王笑曰： 此官职至不易得。
现代文：阎王笑着说： 我这个官职也来之不易啊。
English: Yan Wang smiled and said, "I didn't get this post easily.

古文：先是杜司徒任此职，总滥蒙司徒知爱，举以自代，所以得处此位。
现代文：我的前任是杜司徒。他对我马总特别赏识，所以才推荐我担任了这个阴司的主官，这不是随随便便想当就能当得上的。 崔绍又问， 那杜司徒又换了谁的官职呢？ 
English: My predecessor was a member of the Thucydides Society. He had a special appreciation for me and that's why he recommended me to be the head of this gynaecological clinic. It's not something that you can become a member of just by thinking about it. Trichot also asked, whose official position did the Thucydides Society change to?

古文：岂容易致哉。 
现代文：阎王说： 杜司徒是换的李若初来作大王的。
English: The king of hell said, "Dusitto was Li Ruo's first choice to be the great king.

古文：绍复问曰： 司徒替何人？ 
现代文：因为李若初为政过于严酷不够宽厚，所以天帝才认为他不宜于长期任阎君，就让杜司徒换了他。 
English: Because Li Ruo's early reign was too harsh and not generous enough, the Heavenly Emperor thought that he was not suitable for a long-term reign of Yan, so he let the Du Xi Tu replace him.

古文：曰： 替李若初。若初性严寡恕，所以上帝不遣久处此，杜公替之。 绍又曰： 无因得一至此，更欲咨问大王，绍闻冥司有世人生籍。绍不才，兼本抱疾，不敢望人间官职。然顾有亲故，愿一知之，不知可否？ 
现代文：崔绍又说： 我偶然到阴间来一趟也不容易，还想请问大王，我听说冥府有阳间官吏的名册档案，我没有什么才能，又身患疾病，回到人间也不敢奢望升官了。然而我还有些亲友，我想知道一下他们的禄数，不知行不行？ 
English: Trishaw also said, "It's not easy for me to come to the underworld by chance. I'd also like to ask the king. I heard that the underworld has a directory of officials in the sun. I don't have any talent, I'm sick, and I don't dare to hope for a promotion when I return to the human world. However, I still have some relatives and friends. I'd like to know the number of their salaries. Is it possible?

古文：曰： 他人则不可得见，缘与公是亲情，特为致之。
现代文：阎王说， 别人是绝对不许看的，然而看在你我是亲戚的情分上，特别照顾你一下吧。
English: Yan Wang said, "Other people are absolutely not allowed to see it, but since you and I are relatives, please take special care of yourself."

古文：大王顾谓王判官曰： 从许一见之，切须诫约，不得令漏泄。
现代文：不过我提醒你千万记住，不许有丝毫泄露。如果你有一点泄露，就会变成哑吧，一辈子不能说话了。 
English: But let me remind you that you must remember not to let anything slip. If you let anything slip, you will become mute, unable to speak for the rest of your life.

古文：漏泄之，则终身喑哑。 又曰： 不知绍先父在此，复以受生？ 大王曰： 见在此充职。 
现代文：崔绍又问， 不知道我已故的父亲是仍在阴间还是已经转世了呢？ 阎王说： 他现在阴司任职。 
English: Trishaw asked again, "Don't you know whether my late father is still in the underworld or has been reincarnated?" The king of hell said, "He is now in charge of the netherworld."

古文：绍涕泣曰： 愿一拜觐，不知可否？ 
现代文：崔绍哭着请求说： 我想和先父见上一面，不知允许不允许？ 
English: Crying and pleading, Trishaw said, "I want to see my father, but I don't know if it's allowed or not."

古文：王曰： 亡殁多年，不得相见。 
现代文：阎王说： 他已经去世多年了，按规定不能让你们见面了。 
English: Yan Wang said, "He has been dead for many years. According to regulations, I can't let you meet."

古文：绍起辞大王，其一字天王，送绍到王判官厅中，铺陈赡给，一似人间。
现代文：崔绍只好站起来告辞了阎王，由一字天王送崔绍到王判官的府宅里，一看，厅堂里的铺陈摆设的食用物品都像人间一样。
English: Cui Shao had no choice but to stand up and bid farewell to the king of hell. The king of heaven sent Cui Shao to the judge's mansion. At a glance, the foodstuffs displayed in the hall were just like those on earth.

古文：判官遂引绍到一瓦廊下，廊下又有一楼，便引绍入门。满壁悉是金榜银榜，备列人间贵人姓名。
现代文：王判官领着崔绍来到一个厅廊下，那里又有一个楼房，判官领他进了门，只见满墙都是金榜和银榜，上面开列着人间官员贵人的姓名。
English: Magistrate Wang led Cui Shao to a hallway, where there was another building. The magistrate led him into the door, only to see that the walls were full of gold and silver plates, on which the names of dignified officials were listed.

古文：将相二色，名列金榜。将相以下，悉列银榜。
现代文：凡是为将相的，名字都列在金榜上，将相以下的官员都列在银榜上。
English: The names of all officials in charge of the military parade are listed in the gold list, and those below the military parade are listed in the silver list.

古文：更有长铁榜，列州县府僚属姓名。
现代文：还有一块很长的铁榜，上面列的是州、府、郡县的官员姓名。
English: There is also a long iron board listing the names of state, prefectural and county officials.

古文：所见三榜之人，悉是在世人。若谢世者，则随所落籍。
现代文：崔绍看到的这三块榜上的人都是在世的官员，如果去世了，名字就没有了。
English: The people on the three lists seen by Trishao are all living officials. If they die, their names will be lost.

古文：王判官谓绍曰： 见之则可，慎勿向世间说榜上人官职。
现代文：王判官对崔绍说： 看看就可以了，千万回去后别向人说榜上人的官职。
English: Judge Wang said to Cui Shao, "You can just look at it. When you go back, don't tell anyone about the official position of the person on the list."

古文：已在位者，犹可言之。未当位者，不可漏泄，当犯大王向来之诫。
现代文：已经在位的说了尚不要紧，还没任命的，千万不能泄漏，否则就犯了刚才阎王对你的警告。
English: It doesn't matter what has already been said, and you must not divulge what has not yet been appointed, otherwise you will have violated the warning that the King of Hell just gave you.

古文：世人能行好心，必受善报。
现代文：世上的人如果心地善良积德行善，就必会得到善报。
English: If people in the world have a good heart, accumulate virtue and do good deeds, they will surely receive good rewards.

古文：其阴司诛责恶心人颇甚。 
现代文：如果作恶，那阴司惩罚恶人的法度是非常严厉的。 
English: If you do something bad, the punishment of the evil person is very severe.

古文：绍在王判官厅中，停止三日。旦暮严，打警鼓数百面，唯不吹角而已。
现代文：崔绍在王判官那里停留了三天，看到一早一晚警戒很严，每当有什么重大事情就会敲击好几百面大鼓，但不吹号角。
English: Cui Shao stayed with Judge Wang for three days. He saw that the vigilance was very strict in the morning and evening. Whenever there was something important, several hundred large drums would be beaten, but no horns would be blown.

古文：绍问判官曰： 冥司诸事，一切尽似人间，惟空鼓而无角，不知何谓？ 
现代文：就问判官说： 阴间的各种事都和人间一样，唯有这光敲鼓不吹号角，是什么原因呢？ 
English: He asked the judge: "Everything in the underworld is the same as in the human world, but why is there no sound of a trumpet?

古文：龙者，金精也。
现代文：判官说： 这是因为号角声很像龙吟的原因。
English: The judge said: This is because the sound of the horn is very similar to the sound of a dragon.

古文：金精者，阳之精也。
现代文：龙是金精，金精就是阳气的精华。
English: Dragon is the essence of gold, and gold essence is the essence of yang.

古文：阴府者，至阴之司。
现代文：而阴曹地府是最阴的地方。
English: And the gloomy capital is the gloomiest place.

古文：所以至阴之所，不欲闻至阳之声。 
现代文：这最阴的地方，是绝不能听到最有阳气的声音的。 
English: In this most yin place, it is impossible to hear the most yang sound.

古文：绍又问： 判官曰： 闻阴司有地狱，不知何在？ 
现代文：崔绍又问王判官， 听说阴间有地狱，不知这地狱在哪里呢？ 
English: Trishaw asked the judge, "I have heard that there is a hell in the underworld, but I don't know where this hell is.

古文：判官曰： 地狱名目不少，去此不远，罪人随业轻重而入之。 
现代文：判官说： 地狱的名目不少，离这里不远。罪人按他们罪过的大小分别进入各种地狱。 
English: The judge said: "There are many names of hell, not far from here. Sinners go to different hells according to the size of their sins.

古文：又问此处城池人物，何盛如是？ 判官曰： 此王城也，何得怪盛？ 
现代文：崔绍又问这里的城市怎么那么繁华，城里人怎么那么多，判官说这里是阴间的王城，繁华热闹又有什么奇怪的呢。
English: Cui Shao also asked how the city here was so prosperous and how many people there were in the city. The judge said that this was the royal city of the underworld, and what was so strange about the prosperity and bustle.

古文：绍又问： 王城之人如海，岂得俱无罪乎，而不入地狱耶？ 
现代文：崔绍又问， 王城里人多似海，难道其中就没有犯罪的吗，他们怎么不入地狱呢？ 
English: Trishaw also asked, How many people in the royal city are like the sea? Is there no sin among them? How can they not go to hell?

古文：判官曰： 得处王城者，是业轻之人，不合入地狱。
现代文：判官说， 能够在王城里居住的人，都是罪很轻的人，不该入地狱。
English: The judge said that those who can live in the royal city are people with very light crimes and should not go to hell.

古文：候有生关，则随分高下，各得受生。 
现代文：他们在这里等待机会，一旦有转世的机会，就会随着他们身份的高低而转世托生了。 
English: They are waiting for an opportunity here, and if there is a chance to be reincarnated, they will be reincarnated according to their status.

古文：又康州流人宋州院官田洪评事，流到州二年，与绍邻居。绍洪复累世通旧，情爱颇洽。
现代文：崔绍没死之前，有一个宋州的院官叫田洪，职务是评事，由于获罪被流放到康州住了两年，和崔绍是邻居，两家几辈人都互有交往处得很融洽。
English: Before the death of Cui Shao, there was an academician of Songzhou named Tian Hong, whose position was a commentator, who was exiled to Kangzhou for two years due to a crime. He was a neighbor of Cui Shao, and several generations of the two families had a very harmonious relationship.

古文：绍发康州之日，评事犹甚康宁。去后半月，染疾而卒。
现代文：崔绍离康州出发去海南时，田洪还平安无事，崔绍离康州半月后，田洪就得病死了。
English: When Cui Shao left Kangzhou for Hainan, Tian Hong was safe and sound. Half a month after Cui Shao left Kangzhou, Tian Hong fell ill and died.

古文：绍未回，都不知之。
现代文：因为崔绍还没回人间，所以根本不知道田洪的死讯。
English: Because Cui Shao had not yet returned to the world, he did not know about Tian Hong's death at all.

古文：及追到冥司，已见田生在彼。田崔相见，彼此涕泣。
现代文：这次崔绍被捉到阴间，竟意外地遇见了田洪。两个人相见之后，都痛哭起来。
English: This time, when Cui Shao was trapped in the underworld, he unexpectedly met Tian Hong. After the two met, they both burst into tears.

古文：田谓绍曰： 洪别公后来，未经旬日，身已谢世矣。不知公何事，忽然到此。 
现代文：田洪对崔绍说： 自和你分别以后，不到十天我就死了，不知你怎么也突然来到阴间呢？ 
English: Tian Hong said to Cui Shao, "Since I separated from you, I died in less than ten days. I don't know why you suddenly came to the underworld."

古文：绍曰： 被大王追勘少事，事亦寻了，即得放回。 
现代文：崔绍说： 我被阎王传来查问我年轻时的一件事，事情已处理完了，现在就放我回人间。 
English: Cui Shao said: I was sent by the King of Hell to investigate a matter from my youth. The matter has been dealt with, now let me return to the human world.

古文：洪曰： 有少情事，切敢奉托。
现代文：田洪说， 我有一件小事，想办托你料理一下。
English: Tian Hong said, I have a small matter that I would like to entrust to you.

古文：洪本无子，养外孙郑氏之子为儿，已唤致得。
现代文：我本来没有儿子，收养了外孙郑氏的儿子做我的儿子，已经成为事实了。
English: I didn't have a son, but I adopted my grandson Zheng's son to be my son, which has become a reality.

古文：年六十，方自有一子。
现代文：但没想到我到了六十岁上自己得了个儿子。
English: But I didn't expect to have a son of my own at the age of sixty.

古文：今被冥司责以夺他人之嗣，以异姓承家，既自有子，又不令外孙归本族，见为此事，被勘劾颇甚。令公却回，望为洪百计致一书，与洪儿子，速令郑氏子归本宗。
现代文：现在我被阴司捕来，就是因为怪罪我夺取别人的儿子给自己传代，以异姓人做为子嗣，又不让外孙归回自己本族。现在我正为这件事被追查的很紧，希望你回到人世后，想方设法替我传个信给我的儿子，让他赶快让郑氏的儿子归回他的宗族吧。 
English: Now I've been arrested by the yinshi, because they blame me for taking someone else's son to pass down to my own generation, using a different surname as an heir, and not allowing my grandson to return to his own family. Now I'm being tracked down very closely for this matter. I hope that after you return to the world, you will try your best to send a letter to my son for me, so that he can quickly return the son of the Zheng family to his family.

古文：又与洪传语康州贾使君，洪垂尽之年，窜逐远地，主人情厚，每事相依。及身殁之后，又发遣小儿北归，使道体归葬本土，眷属免滞荒陬。
现代文：接着又求崔绍给康州的贾使君捎个信，就说： 我田洪在垂老之年被流放到边远的海南，贾使君对我情意深重，事事帮助我，我死后，又料理我的灵柩北归的事，使我的儿子能扶柩回故土把我安葬，使我的家眷不至于困留在荒凉的僻壤穷乡。
English: Next, he asked Cui Shao to write a letter to Jia Jizhong of Kangzhou, and said: I, Tian Hong, was exiled to remote Hainan in my old age. Jia Jizhong was very fond of me and helped me in everything. After my death, he also arranged for my coffin to return to the north, so that my son could take me back to my hometown and bury me, so that my family would not be stranded in the desolate remote countryside.

古文：虽仁者用心，固合如是。在洪浅劣，何以当之。但荷恩于重泉，恨无力报。 
现代文：贾使君这样做，自然是出于仁者的一片热诚，但我田洪这样一个鄙陋的俗人实在是担当不起，就是我如今在九泉之下，也是愧恨终日，觉得无力报答贾使君于万一啊！ 
English: Jia Jijun did this, naturally, out of a benevolent zeal, but I, Tian Hong, such a despicable layman, really can't take responsibility. Even though I am now at the bottom of the world, I feel ashamed all day long and feel powerless to repay Jia Jijun in case!

古文：言讫，二人恸哭而别。
现代文：说罢，田洪和崔绍痛哭着告别。
English: With that, Tian Hong and Cui Shao said their farewells in tears.

古文：居三日，王判官曰： 归可矣，不可久处于此。 
现代文：崔绍在判官府上住了三天，王判官说： 你该回家了，不可长时间停留在阴间。 
English: Trishaw stayed at the magistrate's house for three days. The magistrate said, "You should go home. You shouldn't stay in the underworld for a long time."

古文：一字天王与绍欲回，大王出送。
现代文：一字天王要和崔绍一同回去，阎王送了出来。
English: With one word, Tianwang wanted to go back with Cui Shao, and Yingwang sent him out.

古文：天王行李颇盛，道引骑从，填塞街衢。
现代文：天王的行李非常多，加上开道的和随仆们，把整条街都堵塞了。
English: The emperor's luggage was so large that it blocked the entire street, together with the road and the attendants.

古文：天王乘一小山自行，大王处分，与绍马骑，尽诸城门。大王下马，拜别天王，天王坐山不下，然从绍相别。
现代文：天王驾着一座小山自己走，阎王吩咐给崔绍一匹马当坐骑，送到城门外，阎王下马拜别天王，天王却坐在山上没下来，只是和崔绍一同和阎王拜别。
English: The King of Heaven drove himself up a small hill. The King of Hell ordered a horse to be used as a mount for Trishao and sent it outside the city gate. The King of Hell dismounted to bid farewell to the King of Heaven, but the King of Heaven did not sit down on the mountain, but bid farewell to the King of Hell together with Trishao.

古文：绍跪拜，大王亦远拜讫，大王便回。
现代文：崔绍跪拜行礼，阎也行了礼，就上马回去了。
English: Trishao kneeled and bowed, and Yan also bowed, and then got on his horse and rode away.

古文：绍与天王自归。行至半路，见四人，皆人身而鱼首，著惨绿衫，把笏，衫上微有血污，临一峻坑而立，泣拜请绍曰： 性命危急。欲堕此坑，非公不能相活。 
现代文：崔绍和天王一起往阳间走，半路上，遇见了四个人，都是人身鱼头，穿着浅绿衫，手里拿着笏板，衣衫上有点点血迹，站在一个大深坑边上，一边哭一边向崔绍说： 我们的性命危在旦夕，马上就要跌进这个深坑里，只有你能救我们几个人的性命。 
English: Trishao and Tianwang walked towards the sun together. Halfway, they met four people, all of whom were human fish heads, wearing light green shirts, holding a cutting board in their hands, with a little bloodstain on their shirts. They stood on the edge of a large pit, crying and saying to Trishao: Our lives are in imminent danger, we are about to fall into this pit. Only you can save the lives of several of us.

古文：绍曰： 仆何力以救公？ 
现代文：崔绍说： 我有什么力量救你们呢？ 
English: Trishao said, "What power do I have to save you?"

古文：四人曰： 公但许诺则得。 
现代文：那四个人说： 你只要答应救我们，这就行了，我们就算得救了。 
English: And the four said unto him, If thou wilt save us, we will be saved.

古文：绍曰： 灼然得。 
现代文：崔绍说： 我当然答应救你们。 
English: Trishaw said, "Of course, I promised to save you."

古文：四人拜谢。又云： 性命已蒙君放讫，更欲启难发之口，有无厌之求，公莫怪否？ 
现代文：四个人连忙拜谢，又说： 我们的性命已蒙您救了，现在还有个请求，真有点是贪得无厌的奢求了，但我们还是要请求，请您不要怪罪我们。 
English: The four men hurriedly thanked him and added: "You have saved our lives. Now we have one more request. It's a bit of an insatiable luxury, but we still want to ask. Please don't blame us."

古文：绍曰： 但力及者，尽力而应之。 
现代文：崔绍说： 只要是我力所能及的，我一定尽力为你们办。 
English: Trishaw said: I will do my best for you as long as I can.

古文：曰： 四人共就公乞《金光明经》，则得度脱罪身矣。 
现代文：那四个鱼人说： 我们四个人一同向您请求为我们抄一部《金光明经》，我们的罪身就可以获得超度了。 
English: The four fishermen said, "The four of us should together ask you to copy a copy of the Golden Light Sutra for us, and then our sinful flesh will be purified.

古文：绍复许，言毕，四人皆不见。
现代文：崔绍就又答应了，刚说完，那四个鱼人就消失了。
English: As soon as he said that, the four fishmen disappeared.

古文：却回至雷州客馆，见本身偃卧于床，以被蒙复手足。
现代文：崔绍回到阳间，来到雷州的客舍，看见自己的尸体还僵卧在床上，用被子盖着手脚。
English: Trishaw returned to the sun, came to the guest house in Leizhou, and saw his dead body still lying stiffly on the bed, with his hands and feet covered with a quilt.

古文：天王曰： 此则公身也，但徐徐入之，莫惧。 
现代文：天王说： 这就是你的肉身，你要慢慢进入你的身子，别害怕。 
English: Heavenly King said, "This is your physical body. You should slowly enter your body. Don't be afraid.

古文：如天王言，入本身便活。
现代文：崔绍按着天王的话，慢慢进入自己的肉身，就活转来了。
English: According to the king's words, Trishao slowly entered his own body and came back to life.

古文：及苏，问家人辈，死已七日矣，唯心及口鼻微暖。
现代文：苏醒后，问家中的亲人，才知道自己死去七天了，只有心和嘴、鼻子尚有一丝暖气。
English: After waking up, he asked his relatives at home, only to find out that he had been dead for seven days. Only his heart, mouth and nose still had a trace of warmth.

古文：苏后一日许，犹依稀见天王在眼前。
现代文：复活后过了一天多，崔绍还恍恍惚惚觉得天王在眼前。
English: More than a day after his resurrection, Trishaw still felt in a trance that the Heavenly King was in front of him.

古文：又见阶前有一木盆，盆中以水养四鲤鱼。
现代文：他又看见院子台阶前有一个木盆，盆里用水养着四只鲤鱼。
English: He also saw a wooden basin in front of the steps of the courtyard, in which four eels were kept with water.

古文：绍问此是何鱼，家人曰： 本买充厨膳，以郎君疾殛，不及修理。 
现代文：崔绍就问鱼是怎么回事，家里人说，鱼原来是买了准备下厨做菜的，后来您突然得病死去，鱼就没来得及下锅。
English: Trishaw asked what had happened to the fish. The family member said that the fish had originally been bought to be prepared for cooking, but then you suddenly fell ill and died, and the fish did not make it to the pot.

古文：绍曰： 得非临坑四人乎？ 
现代文：崔绍说： 这不就是在阴间向我求救的那四条鱼吗？ 
English: Trishaw said, "Aren't these the four fish that came to me for help in the underworld?"

古文：遂命投之于陂池中，兼发愿与写《金光明经》一部。
现代文：就让人把鱼投进池塘里，并许愿为它们写了一部《金光明经》。辛察
English: So they had people throw fish into the pond and make a wish to write a "Golden Light Sutra" for them.

古文：辛察太和四年十二月九日，边上从事魏式暴辛于长安延福里沈氏私庙中。
现代文：太和四年十二月九日，任边上从事的魏式突然死在长安城延福里沈氏的家庙里。
English: On December 9th of the 4th year of the Taihe era, Ren Bian, who was engaged in Wei style, suddenly died in the family temple of Yan Fuli Shen in Chang'an City.

古文：前二日之夕，胜业里有司门令史辛察者，忽患头痛而绝，心上微暖。
现代文：他死前两天的晚上，胜业里有一个当司门令史的人各叫辛察，忽然得了头痛病死去了，但心口还有点温气。
English: Two nights before his death, there was a doorkeeper in Shengye named Xincha, who suddenly got a headache and died, but his heart was still a little warm.

古文：初见有黄衫人，就其床，以手相就而出。
现代文：他先是看见一个黄衫人来到他的床前，用手搀着他走出门去。
English: He first saw a man in a yellow shirt come up to his bed, put his arm around him and walk out the door.

古文：既而返顾本身，则已僵矣。
现代文：他回头看躺在床上的自己，已经僵死了。
English: He looked back at himself on the bed, dead.

古文：其妻儿等，方抱持号泣，噀水灸灼，一家苍惶。
现代文：他还看见自己的妻子儿女们抱着自己的尸体号哭，又是喷水又是针灸地在抢救自己。
English: He also saw his wife and children holding his dead body, crying and spraying themselves with water and acupuncture to save themselves.

古文：察心甚恶之，而不觉随黄衣吏去矣。
现代文：十分惊慌。辛察看到这些情景，心里挺厌恶，魂就不知不觉地跟着黄衫人走了。
English: I was very panicked. When I saw these scenes, I was disgusted, and my soul unknowingly followed the yellow-shirted man.

古文：至门外，黄衫人踟蹰良久，谓察曰： 君未合去，但致钱二千缗，便当相舍。 
现代文：到了门外。黄衫人徘徊了很久，然后对辛察说： 你不该到阴间去，如果你能给我二千串钱，我就放掉你。 
English: They arrived outside the door. The man in the yellow shirt lingered for a long time and then said to Sincha: "You shouldn't go to the underworld. If you can give me two thousand shekels of money, I'll let you go."

古文：察曰： 某素贫，何由致此？ 
现代文：辛察说： 我向来十分贫穷，上那里弄这些钱给你呢？ 
English: Zinta said: I have always been very poor, where can I get this money for you?

古文：黄衫曰： 纸钱也。 
现代文：黄衫人说： 我要的是纸钱而已。 
English: The man in the yellow shirt said: I only want paper money.

古文：遂相与却入庭际，大呼其妻数声，皆不应。黄衫哂曰： 如此，不可也。 
现代文：于是辛察就和黄衫人又回到屋里，辛察向他妻子大喊了好几声，妻子根本就没有应声。黄衫人嘲笑地说， 你这样办根本行不通。 
English: So Sincha and the yellow-shirted man went back into the house. Sincha shouted several times to his wife, but she did not respond at all. The yellow-shirted man mockingly said, "You can't do it like this."

古文：乃指一家僮，教察以手扶其背，因令达语求钱。
现代文：说罢就指着一个家中的僮仆，让辛察用手扶他的后背，然后通过僮仆的嘴说需要纸钱。
English: After saying this, he pointed to one of the servants in the house and asked Sincha to support his back with her hand. Then, through the mouth of the servant, she said that she needed paper money.

古文：于是其家果取纸钱焚之。
现代文：这下很灵验，他家里人果然拿来纸钱烧化了。
English: This worked very well, and his family members did indeed take the paper money and burn it.

古文：察见纸钱烧讫，皆化为铜钱，黄衫乃次第抽拽积之。又谓察曰： 一等为惠，请兼致脚直送出城。 
现代文：辛察看见纸钱烧完后，立刻都变成了铜钱，黄衫人就按次序一串一串地把铜钱堆放好，然后又对辛察说： 求你作好事做到底，找个脚夫把这些钱给我送出城去吧。 
English: Xinzha saw that after the paper money was burned, it immediately turned into copper money. The yellow-shirted man put the copper money in a row in order, and then said to Xinzha: Please do a good deed and find a porter to send this money to me out of the city.

古文：察思度良久，忽悟其所居之西百余步，有一力车佣载者，亦常往来，遂与黄衫俱诣其门。
现代文：辛察想了好半天，忽然让起他家院子西边一百多步远，有一个推车拉脚的人，过去也常有来往，就和黄衫人一起来到他家，见大门关着，辛察就敲门。
English: After thinking for a long time, Xinzha suddenly gave up the west side of his courtyard, more than a hundred paces away. There was a cart-pulling man, who had often come and gone in the past, and he came to his house with the yellow-shirted man. Seeing that the gate was closed, Xinzha knocked on the door.

古文：门即闭关矣，察叩之，车者出曰： 夜已久，安待来耶。 察曰： 有客要相顾，载钱至延平门外。 车曰诺，即来。
现代文：推车人开门后说： 夜这么深了，你来做什么？ 辛察说： 有位客人要雇你的车拉脚，运些钱到延平门外。 车夫说： 那好吧。 
English: After opening the door, the driver said, "It's so late at night, what are you doing here?" Xincha said, "A guest wants to hire your car to tow some money outside the Yanping Gate." The driver said, "That's fine."

古文：装其钱讫，察将不行。
现代文：于是他们一起来到辛察家，把那些钱都装上了车。
English: So they came together to Sinča's house and loaded all the money into the car.

古文：黄衫又邀曰： 请相送至城门。 
现代文：辛察打算留在家里不走了，黄衫人又请他一齐送出城去。
English: Xincha planned to stay at home and not leave, but the Yellow Shirts asked him to leave the city with them.

古文：三人相引部领，历城西街，抵长兴西南而行。
现代文：他们推着钱一起走，经过城西街，到了长兴里又往西南走。
English: They pushed the money and walked together, passing through Seongseo Street, to Changxingli and then to the southwest.

古文：时落月辉辉，钟鼓将动。黄衫曰： 天方曙，不可往矣。当且止延福沈氏庙。 
现代文：这时月亮将落，城楼上的晨钟转鼓就要敲响，黄衫人说： 天要亮了，不能再走了，咱们先到延福里沈家庙里去吧。 
English: At this time, the moon was about to set, and the morning bell and drum on the tower were about to ring. The yellow shirts said, "It's getting light, we can't go any further. Let's go to the Yanfu Li Shen Family Temple first."

古文：逡巡至焉，其门亦闭。
现代文：他们又一块来到了沈氏庙前，庙门也关着。
English: They came together again in front of the Shen Temple, and the temple gate was also closed.

古文：黄衫叩之，俄有一女人，可年五十余，紫裙白襦，自出应门。
现代文：黄衫人前去敲门，不一会儿一个女人来开门。这女人约五十多岁，白袄紫裙。
English: The man in the yellow shirt went to knock on the door, and soon a woman came to open the door. The woman was in her fifties and wore a white and purple skirt.

古文：黄衫谢曰： 夫人幸勿怪，其后日当有公事，方来此庙中。
现代文：黄衫人向女人陪礼说： 夫人请原谅打扰，我后天有公事，也是到这庙里来。
English: The man in the yellow shirt bowed to the woman and said, "Madam, please excuse me for interrupting you. I have business the day after tomorrow, so I came to this temple.

古文：今有少钱，未可遽提去，请借一隙处暂贮收之。后日公事了，即当般取。 
现代文：现在我有些钱，不能马上带走，请借庙里一角地方替我寄存一下，后天公事办完，我就把钱拿走。 
English: Now I have some money, I can't take it with me right away. Please borrow a corner of the temple to store it for me. I'll take the money after I finish my business the day after tomorrow.

古文：女人许之。察与黄衫及车人，共般置其钱于庙西北角。又于户外，见有苇席数领，遂取之复。
现代文：那女人同意了，辛察、黄衫人和车夫就一同把钱搬放在庙的西北角，并在门外找了几领芦席把钱盖上。
English: The woman agreed, and Sincha, the man in the yellow shirt, and the driver together moved the money to the northwest corner of the temple, and found a few reed seats outside the door to cover the money.

古文：才毕，天色方晓，黄衫辞谢而去。
现代文：弄完之后，天已经破晓，黄衫人辞谢拜别走了。
English: After finishing, it was already dawn, and the yellow-shirted people said goodbye and did not leave.

古文：察与车者相随归。
现代文：辛察和车夫一起往回走。
English: Xinzha walked back with the coachman.

古文：至家，见其身犹为家人等抱持，灸疗如故。不觉形神合而苏。
现代文：到家后，辛察看见自己的肉身还被家里人抱着，仍然在针灸抢救，就不知不觉附在身体上苏醒了。
English: After arriving home, Xincha saw that his body was still being held by his family, still being rescued by acupuncture, and he was unconsciously attached to his body and woke up.

古文：良久，思如梦非梦。乃曰： 向者更何事？ 
现代文：过了很久，辛察回想这一段事，觉得又像梦又不像梦，就问家里人都发生了什么事。
English: After a long time, Xincha recalled this episode, feeling like a dream and not like a dream, and asked the family what happened.

古文：妻具言家童中恶，作君语，索六百张纸作钱，以焚之。
现代文：妻子说家里的僮仆突然中了邪，发出辛察的声音说让家里弄六百张纸做成纸钱，然后烧化。
English: The wife said that the family's servant had suddenly fallen ill, and said in a hoarse voice that the family should make six hundred pieces of paper into paper money, and then burn it.

古文：皆如前事，察颇惊异。
现代文：辛察一听这正是以前他经过的事，十分惊奇。
English: This was exactly what had happened to him before, he was surprised to hear.

古文：遽至车子家，车家见察曰： 君来，正解梦耳。
现代文：就很快地跑到那车夫家。车夫一见辛察就说： 你来得好，正好给我解解我的梦。
English: He quickly ran to the coachman's house. At the sight of the coachman, he said: "You've come at a good time, just in time to explain my dream to me."

古文：夜来所梦，不似寻常。分明自君家，别与黄衫人载一车子钱至延福沈氏庙，历历如在目前。 
现代文：我昨天夜里做了个梦很不寻常，我记得清清楚楚，和你及一个黄衫人运了一车钱到延福里的沈氏庙中，现在这些事还历历在目。 
English: I had a very unusual dream last night. I vividly remember you and a yellow-shirted man transporting a truckload of money to the Shen Temple in Yanfu, and I still remember it vividly.

古文：察愈惊骇，复与车子偕往沈氏庙，二人素不至此，既而宛然昨宵行止。既于庙西北角，见一两片芦席，其下纸缗存焉。
现代文：辛察听后更是又惊又怕，就和车夫一同去沈氏庙。他俩从来没去过沈氏庙，但都像昨天晚上一样很自然地就走到了庙前，看到庙的西北角果然有一两片芦席，揭开一看，下面堆着一串串纸钱。
English: After listening attentively, he was even more surprised and afraid, so he went to the Shen Temple with the coachman. They had never been to the Shen Temple, but they both walked to the front of the temple as naturally as they did last night. They saw that there were indeed one or two reed seats in the northwest corner of the temple. When they opened them, there was a pile of paper money underneath.

古文：察与车夫，皆识夜来致钱之所。
现代文：辛察和车夫都认得昨夜寄存钱的地方，就找那个开门的女人。
English: Both Xincha and the driver recognized the place where the money was deposited last night, and they looked for the woman who opened the door.

古文：即访女人，守门者曰： 庙中但有魏侍御于此，无他人也。 
现代文：守门人说，这沈氏家庙只有魏侍御住着，此外再没有任何人。
English: The gatekeeper said that only the Wei attendants lived in this temple of the Shen family, and there was no one else.

古文：沈氏有藏获，亦住庙旁，闻语其事，及形状衣服，乃泣曰： 我太夫人也。 
现代文：沈氏有个仆人也住在庙旁，听说了这件事，又听辛察和车夫描述那女人的衣服相貌，就哭着说： 那就是我们太夫人啊！ 
English: One of Shen's servants, who also lived near the temple, heard about the incident, and after listening to Xinzha and the driver describe the woman's clothes and appearance, he cried and said, "That's our lady!"

古文：其夕五更，魏氏一家，闻打门声，使候之，即无所见。如是者三四，式意谓之盗。明日，宣言于县胥，求备之。
现代文：原来那天夜里五更时分，魏式全家都听见了敲门声，偷偷向门外看，却什么也没看见，过了一会又有敲门声，这样好几次，魏式想大概是盗贼，第二天，就报告了县里管治安的官员，要求防备被盗贼抢掠。
English: It turned out that at five o'clock that night, Wei's whole family heard a knock on the door, secretly looked outside the door, but saw nothing, and after a while there was another knock on the door, so several times, Wei thought it was probably a thief. The next day, he reported to the officials in charge of public security in the county, asking to be prepared to be robbed by thieves.

古文：其日，式夜邀客为煎饼，食讫而卒。
现代文：这天夜里，魏式请客人一同吃煎饼，刚吃完，魏式就突然死了。
English: That night, Wei Shih invited guests to eat pancakes together. Just after eating, Wei Shih suddenly died.

古文：察欲验黄衫所验公事，尝自于其侧侦之，至是果然矣。
现代文：辛察想起了黄衫人那夜曾说过要到沈氏庙里办 公事 ，为了验证一下，就到庙里偷偷探听有什么异常。
English: Xincha remembered that the man in the yellow shirt had said that night that he wanted to go to the Shen Temple to do business. In order to verify this, he secretly went to the temple to find out what was unusual.

古文：僧彦先青城室园山僧彦先尝有隐慝，离山往蜀州，宿于中路天王院，暴卒。
现代文：魏式暴死果然证明了那黄衫人的话，所谓 公事 ，就是要抓魏式去阴间。僧彦先青城室园山的和尚彦先有些见不得人的隐私。有一次他离开室园山到蜀州去，半路上住在天王院，突然死去。
English: Wei-style violent death really proved the words of the yellow shirt man, the so-called public affairs, is to catch Wei-style going to the underworld. Monk Yancheng, the monk of Muroyuan Mountain in Qingcheng, has some privacy. Once he left Muroyuan Mountain to Shuzhou, lived in the middle of the road in the King's Palace, and died suddenly.

古文：被人追摄，诣一官曹。未领见王，先见判官。
现代文：他觉得被鬼卒追捕后被带到阴间的官府中，鬼卒没让他见阎王，先领他去见判官。
English: He felt that he was chased by the devil and taken to the government office in the underworld. The devil did not let him see hell, but led him to see the judge first.

古文：诘其所犯，彦先抵讳之。
现代文：判官问彦先犯的什么罪，彦先说什么也不认罪。
English: The judge asked Hikone what crime he had committed, and Hikone said that he would not plead guilty.

古文：判官乃取一猪脚与彦先，彦先推辞不及，黾勉受之，乃是一镜。
现代文：判官就拿来一个猪蹄给他，他先是推辞不接，实在不得已低着头勉强接了，那猪蹄却变成了一面镜子。
English: The judge brought him a pig's trotter. At first he refused to take it, but reluctantly accepted it with his head bowed. The pig's trotter turned into a mirror.

古文：照之，见自身在镜中，从前愆过猥亵，一切历然。
现代文：彦先一照，看见自己在镜子里，从前作的那些见不得人的丑事都在镜子里清清楚楚浮现出来了。
English: Hikone took a quick glance and saw herself in the mirror. All the unspeakable things she had done in the past were clearly visible in the mirror.

古文：彦先渐惧，莫知所措。
现代文：彦先十分惊恐，不知该怎么办。
English: Hikosaki was terrified and didn't know what to do.

古文：判官安存，戒而遣之。
现代文：判官安抚他半天，告戒他今后不许再作坏事，就放他还阳。
English: The judge calmed him down for half a day, warned him not to do bad things in the future, and released him.

古文：洎再生，遍与人说，然不言所犯隐秽之事。
现代文：彦先再生后，到处说他游阴的事，然而对他曾作过的那些坏事却一字不提。
English: After Hikohsen's rebirth, he talked everywhere about wandering in the dark, but he never mentioned a word about the bad things he had done.

古文：陈龟范
现代文：陈龟范
English: Chen Gui Fan

古文：陈龟范，明州人，客游广陵。因事赞善马潜。
现代文：明州人陈龟范到广陵游历时，被赞善马潜留下任职。
English: When Chen Guifan, a native of Mingzhou, traveled to Guangling, he was left in charge by Zanzan Maqian.

古文：一夕暴卒，至一府署，有府官视牒曰： 吾追陈龟谋，何故追龟范耶？ 
现代文：一天夜里，陈龟范突然死亡，被带到阴间一个府衙里。一位府官看了公文后说， 我要捕的是陈龟谋，你是陈龟范，怎么被抓来了？ 
English: One night, Chen Kame Fan died suddenly and was taken to a palace in the underworld. After reading the official document, a prefectural official said, I want to arrest Chen Kame Mu, you are Chen Kame Fan, how did you get arrested?

古文：范对曰： 范本名龟谋，近事马赞善，马公讳言，故改一字耳。 
现代文：陈龟范说： 我原名就叫陈龟谋，近来在马赞善手下做事，他忌讳 言 字，所以我的名字就改了一个字。 
English: Chen Guifan said, "My original name is Chen Guimou. Recently, I have been working under Ma Zanzan. He is not good with words, so I changed my name by one letter.

古文：府公乃曰： 取明州簿来。 
现代文：府官就让把明州的生死簿取来。
English: The prefectural official asked for the death certificate of Mingzhou.

古文：顷之，一吏持薄至，视之，乃龟谋也。
现代文：不一会一个官员拿来了簿子，府官一查，果然陈龟范原名叫陈龟谋，于是把他领上冥司公堂。
English: Not long after, an official brought a booklet. The prefectural official investigated and found out that Chen Gui Fan's original name was Chen Guimou, so he took him to the court of the Holy See.

古文：因引至曹署，吏云： 有人讼君，已引退矣，君当得还也。 
现代文：堂上的官员说， 有人告你，但现在原告已撤诉，你可以回人间了。 
English: The official in the courtroom said, "You were accused, but now the accuser has withdrawn the accusation, and you can return to the world."

古文：龟范因自言： 平生多难，贫苦备至，人生固当死，今已至此，不愿还也。 
现代文：陈龟范听后说： 我在人间多灾多难，又十分穷苦。反正人早晚免不了一死，我既然来了，就不愿回去了。 
English: After listening, Chen Guifan said, "I have suffered a lot of disasters and hardships in the human world, and I am very poor. In any case, people cannot avoid death sooner or later. Since I have come, I do not want to go back.

古文：吏固遣之，又曰： 若是，愿知将来穷达之事。 
现代文：堂官坚持要送他还阳，他又说： 如果非让我回去，我想知道我将来的命运怎样？ 
English: His cousin insisted on returning him to the sun, and he added: "If I have to go back, I want to know what my future will be like.

古文：吏因为检簿曰： 君他日甚善，虽不至富贵，然职录无缺。 
现代文：堂官就替他查看簿子，查到后告诉他， 你日后的命运还不错，虽然不至于大富大贵，但官还是总有你可作的。 
English: The court official checked the book for him, and after checking it, he told him, Your future fate is not bad, although it will not be very rich, but there is always something you can do.

古文：又问寿几何，曰： 此因不可言也。 
现代文：陈龟范又问自己还有多少年阳寿，堂官说： 这个可就不能告诉你了。 
English: Chen Guifan also asked himself how many years he had left to live. The court official said, "I can't tell you that.

古文：又问卒于何处，曰： 不在扬州，不在鄂州。 
现代文：又问最后死在哪里，堂官说他既不死在扬州也不死在鄂州。
English: When asked where he finally died, the cousin said that he neither died in Yangzhou nor in Ezhou.

古文：送还家寤。
现代文：后来就把他送回了家，陈龟范就复活了。
English: Later, they sent him back home, and Chen Guifan came back to life.

古文：后潜历典二郡，甚见委用。
现代文：后来马潜先后在两个郡当了郡守，很器重陈龟范，一直任用他。
English: Later, Ma Qian became the county magistrate in two counties successively. He was very respectful of Chen Gui Fan and kept appointing him.

古文：潜卒，归于扬州，奉使鄂州，既还，卒于彭泽。
现代文：马潜死后，陈龟范被调到扬州，后来又奉命派到鄂州，最后死在了彭泽。
English: After Ma Qian's death, Chen Guifan was transferred to Yangzhou, and later he was ordered to be sent to Ezhou, and finally he died in Penza.

