古文：○孝宗二三年春正月甲辰，诏廷尉大理官毋以狱情白宰执，探刺旨意为轻重。
现代文：乾道三年春正月初五，诏令廷尉大理官不要把狱情告诉宰执，刺探旨意以为轻重。
English: On the 5th day of the 3rd month of the 3rd year of the 3rd month of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5

古文：庚戌，置三省户房国用司。
现代文：十一日，设置三省户房国用司。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the three provincial departments for housing and land use were set up.

古文：初，以国用匮乏，罢江州屯驻军马，至是复留之。
现代文：起初，因国家财政困难，废罢江州屯驻军马，至此又留驻军马。
English: At first, due to the country's financial difficulties, it was decided to abolish the military garrison in Jiangzhou, and the military garrison was left there.

古文：癸亥，罢铜钱过江之禁。
现代文：二十四日，废除铜钱过江的禁令。
English: On the 24th, the ban on copper money crossing the river was abolished.

古文：裁定利州西路诸军额。
现代文：裁定利州西路各军数额。
English: Decided that the amount of each army in Lizhou West Road is the highest.

古文：二月壬申，诏国用司月上宫禁及百司官吏、三衙将士请给之数。
现代文：二月初三，下诏国用司每月上报宫禁和百司官吏、三衙将士开支数目。
English: On the 3rd day of the 2nd month of the following year, the Imperial Household Agency reported the number of expenses for the palace ban and the 100 officials and three generals.

古文：癸酉，出龙大渊为江东总管，曾觌为淮西总管。
现代文：初四，任龙大渊为江东总管，曾规为淮西总管。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Long Dayuan was appointed as the general manager of Jiangdong, and Zeng Jie as the general manager of Huaixi.

古文：甲戌，大渊改浙东，觌改福建。
现代文：初五，龙大渊改为浙东、曾规改为福建总管。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Long Dayuan was changed to East Zhejiang, and Zengqi was changed to Fujian.

古文：乙亥。罢成都、潼川路转运司轮年铨试，以其事付制置司。
现代文：初六，废除成都、撞川路转运司轮年锉试，以其事付制置司。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the trial of the Chengdu and Qianchuan Road Transportation Division was abolished, and the division was established according to the matter-based system.

古文：辛巳，以端明殿学士虞允文知枢密院事。
现代文：十二日，任命端明殿学士虞允文为知枢密院事。
English: On the 12th, Duanming Palace scholar Yu Yunwen was appointed as a member of the Privy Council.

古文：癸未，雨雹。
现代文：十四日，降冰雹。
English: On the 20th, hail fell.

古文：甲申，为知陈州陈亨祖立庙于光州，赐名愍忠。
现代文：十五日，在光州为陈州知州陈亨祖立庙，赐名憨忠。
English: On the 15th, in Gwangju, a temple was built for Chen Zhou Zhi Zhou Chen Heng Zu, and he was given the name Zhaozhong.

古文：丙戌，以《武经龟鉴》、《孙子》赐镇江都统戚方、建康都统刘源。癸巳，措置淮东山水砦。
现代文：十七日，赐给镇江都统戚方、建康都统刘源武经龟鉴、咧、开。二十四日，措置淮东山水寨。
English: On the 17th, Liu Yuanwu, who was a relative of Zhenjiang Dudu and the founder of Jiankang Dudu, was given the title of Jiajing, Jiajing and Jiajing. On the 24th, Huai Dong Mountain Water Village was established.

古文：丙申，从太上皇、太上皇后幸玉津园。
现代文：二十七日，跟随太上皇、太上皇后到玉津园。
English: On the 27th, he followed the Retired Emperor and Empress Dowager to Tamatsuen Garden.

古文：戊戌，直秘阁、前广东提刑石敦义犯脏，刺面配柳州，籍其家。
现代文：二十九日，直秘阁前广东提刑石敦义犯贪赃罪，刺面发配到柳州，籍没其家。
English: On the 29th, the former Guangdong Minister of State for the People's Republic of China was sentenced to death for the crime of embezzlement. He was sent to Liuzhou and lost his home.

古文：三月甲辰，从太上皇、太上皇后幸聚景园。
现代文：三月初六，随从太上皇、太上皇后到聚景园。
English: On the 6th day of the 3rd month, the retinue of the Emperor and Empress went to the park.

古文：辛亥，诣德寿宫，恭请裁定医官员额。
现代文：十三日，到德寿宫恭请裁定医官名额。
English: On the 13th, I went to Deoksugung Palace to respectfully request a decision on the number of medical officers.

古文：丁巳，诏四川宣抚司创招千人，置司所在屯驻。
现代文：十九日，诏令四川宣抚司创招千人，置司所在屯驻。
English: On the 19th, the Sichuan Proclamation and Relief Department was ordered to recruit a thousand people, and the department was stationed.

古文：壬戌，伯母秀王夫人张氏薨。
现代文：二十四日，伯母秀王夫人张氏逝世。
English: On the 24th, Mr. Zhang's aunt, Mrs. Xiu Wang, passed away.

古文：夏四月辛未，蠲诸路州军逋负。
现代文：夏四月初四，免除各路州军拖欠钱物。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4

古文：癸酉，为秀王王夫人成服于后苑，百官进名奉慰。
现代文：初六，为秀王夫人成服于后苑，百官进名奉慰。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the new year, Mrs. Show Wang was honored in the backyard, and she received the consolation of being promoted to a hundred officials.

古文：丁丑，合利州东、西路为一。
现代文：初十，利州东西路合为一路。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the east-west road of Lizhou was merged into the first road.

古文：戊寅，以吴璘知兴元府、充利州路安抚使、四川宣抚使。
现代文：十一日，任命吴瞒为知兴元府，担任利州路安抚使、四川宣抚使。
English: On the 11th, Wu Zhen was appointed as the Chixing Yuanfu, served as the Lizhou Road Peace Envoy and the Sichuan Peace Envoy.

古文：五月癸卯，叶颙等上《三祖下仙源积庆图》及《太宗真宗玉牒》、《哲宗宝训》。甲寅，吴璘薨。
现代文：五月初六，叶等呈上三祖下仙源积庆图》和太宗真宗玉碟、哲宗宝切卜。十七日，吴瞒逝世。
English: On the 6th day of the 5th month, Ye et al. presented the "Three Ancestors and Lower Immortals Celebration Map" and the Taizong Zhenzong Jade Plate and Zhezong Bao Chebu. On the 17th, Wu Zhe passed away.

古文：庚申。命四川制置使汪应辰主管宣抚司事，移司利州。
现代文：二十三日，命令四川制置使汪应辰主管宣抚司事，移司利州。
English: On the 23rd, it ordered the Sichuan government to transfer Wang Yingchen, the head of the public relations department, to Lishu.

古文：修扬州城。
现代文：修扬州城。
English: Yangzhou City is to be rebuilt.

古文：壬戌，大减三衙官属。
现代文：二十五日，大减三衙官属。
English: On the 25th, the three eunuch officials were greatly reduced.

古文：六月己巳，命汪应辰权节制利州路屯驻御前军马。
现代文：六月初三，命令汪应辰主管调遣利州路屯驻御前军马。
English: On the third day of the first month of June, he ordered Wang Yingchen to dispatch military horses stationed in front of the imperial palace to Lizhou Road.

古文：辛未，复分利州东、西路为二。
现代文：初五，又分利州路为东西二路。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Lishu Road was divided into East and West.

古文：甲戌，以虞允文为资政殿大学士、四川宣抚使。
现代文：初八，任命虞允文为资政殿大学士、四川宣抚使。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Yu Yunwen was appointed as a scholar of the Academy of the Palace of Councillors and an envoy to Sichuan.

古文：乙亥，金遣使来取被俘人。
现代文：初九，金国派人来取被俘人。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Jin Guo sent people to retrieve the captives.

古文：诏实俘在民间者还之，军中人及叛亡者不预。
现代文：下诏俘虏的民间百姓给还金朝，军中人和叛亡者不给还。
English: Under the edict, the civilian captives were to be returned to the Kim dynasty, but the military personnel and traitors were not to be returned.

古文：戊寅，复以虞允文为知枢密院事，充宣抚使，帝亲书九事戒之。
现代文：十二日，又任命虞允文为知枢密院事，担任宣抚使，孝宗亲自书写九事告诫他。
English: On the twelfth day, he also appointed Yu Yunwen as a member of the Privy Council to serve as a messenger, and Xiaozong personally wrote nine things to warn him.

古文：罢淮西、江东总领所营田，募人耕佃，壮丁各还本屯，癃老存留，减半请给。
现代文：废除淮西、江东总领所屯田，募人耕佃，壮丁各还本屯，衰弱多病者存留，供给减半。
English: Abolish the military garrisons in the western provinces of Huai and the eastern provinces of Jiangsu, recruit people to work, encourage the young to return to the military garrisons, retain the weak and sick, and reduce the supply by half.

古文：甲申，诏镇江都统制戚方、武锋军都统制陈敏各上清河口战守之策。
现代文：十八日，下诏镇江都统制戚方、武锋军都统制陈敏各自奏上清河口战守策略。
English: On the 18th, Zhenjiang was placed under the control of Qi Fang, and Chen Min was placed under the control of Wu Feng. Both of them played a role in the defense strategy of the upper Qing estuary.

古文：追封吴璘为信王。
现代文：追封吴瞒为信王。
English: Wu Zhe was crowned as the king of letters.

古文：丁亥，诏后省参考理检院典故。
现代文：二十一日，下诏后省参考理检院典故。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the province issued the following edict with reference to the Sanitary and Epidemiological Inspection.

古文：辛卯，皇后夏氏崩。
现代文：二十五日，皇后夏氏逝世。
English: On the 25th, Empress Xia passed away.

古文：振泉州水灾。
现代文：贩济泉州水灾饥民。
English: Vendors give food to flood-stricken and hungry people in Quanzhou.

古文：秋七月己亥，立荐举改官额。
现代文：秋七月初四，立荐举改官额。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of the autumn, a recommendation to change the official post was made.

古文：壬寅，以皇太子疾，减杂犯死罪囚，释流以下。
现代文：初七，因皇太子生病，杂犯死罪囚犯减罪，流刑以下释放。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, due to the illness of the crown prince, the death penalty for minor offenders was commuted, and those sentenced to exile or less were released.

古文：乙巳，皇太子薨，谥曰庄文。
现代文：初十，皇太子逝世，溢号为庄文。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the crown prince died, and his posthumous name was changed to Zhuangwen.

古文：己酉，东宫医官杜揖除名、昭州编管，寻改琼州。
现代文：十四日，东宫医官杜揖被除名，昭州编管，不久改为琼州编管。
English: On the 14th, Donggong Medical Officer Du Wei was removed from his post, and he became Zhaozhou Editor-in-Chief, which was soon changed to Qiongzhou Editor-in-Chief.

古文：闰月辛未，诏诸军复置副都统制，文字与都统制连书，军马调发从都统制，违者奏劾。
现代文：闰七月初六，下诏： 各军重新设置副都统制，文字与都统制连书，军马调发听从都统制的意见，违者，上奏弹勃。 
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of the leap year, the following edict was issued: All armies were to re-establish the vice-metropolitan system, the written language and the metropolitan system were to be combined, and the army and horses were to be dispatched in obedience to the opinions of the metropolitan system.

古文：戚方罢。
现代文：戚方被罢免。
English: Kikata was removed from office.

古文：癸酉，权欑安恭皇后于临安修吉寺。
现代文：初八，安恭皇后的殡宫暂且安放在临安修吉寺。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the funeral palace of Empress Angyong was temporarily placed in Lin'an Shuji Temple.

古文：丁亥，戚方落节钺、信州居住。
现代文：二十二日，戚方被罢除军职，信州居住。
English: On the 22nd, my relative was dismissed from the military and now lives in Shinshu.

古文：八月丁酉，内侍陈瑜、李宗回坐交结戚方受赂，瑜除名、决杖、黥面配循州，宗回除名、筠州编管，方责授果州团练副使、潭州安置，籍所盗库金以犒军。
现代文：八月初三，内侍陈瑜、李宗回因交结戚方接受贿赂获罪，陈瑜被除名，决杖，刺面发配到循州；李宗回被除名，箔州编管；戚方降为果州团练副使，潭州安置，籍没所盗库金用来搞军。
English: At the beginning of August 3rd, the chambermaids Chen Yu and Li Zong Hui were found guilty of accepting bribes due to their relationship with relatives. Chen Yu was removed from the list and sent to Chuzhou; Li Zong Hui was removed from the list and sent to Foozhou; the relatives were reduced to the deputy envoy of the Gozhou Rehearsal Team and resettled in Tanzhou. They were stripped of their citizenship and the stolen treasury funds were used to engage in military activities.

古文：甲寅，以久雨，命临安府决系囚。
现代文：二十日，因久雨不晴，命令临安府处理关押囚犯。
English: On the 20th, due to persistent rain and bad weather, Lin'an Prefecture was ordered to deal with the prisoners.

古文：丁巳，叶颙等请罢，不许。
现代文：二十三日，叶等人请求罢免，没有得到批准。
English: On the 23rd, Ye and others requested to be dismissed, but this was not approved.

古文：蠲光、濠、庐三州、寿春府赋一年。
现代文：免除光壕庐三州、寿春府赋税一年。
English: Kwangchong, Gansu and Shouchun prefectures will be exempt from the tax for one year.

古文：戊午，遣官分决滞狱。
现代文：二十四日，派遣官吏分别处决拖延的狱案。
English: On the 24th, officials were dispatched to carry out the delayed prison cases separately.

古文：壬戌，以知建康府史正志兼沿江水军制置使，自盐官至鄂州沿江南北及沿海十五州水军悉隶之。
现代文：二十八日，任命建康知府史正志兼沿江水军制置使，从盐官到鄂州沿江南北和沿海十五州水军全部隶属于他。
English: On the 28th, Jiankang was appointed the governor of the prefecture of Shizhengzhi and the commander of the naval forces along the Yangtze River. The naval forces of all 15 states along the Yangtze River, from the Salt Bureau to Ezhou, were subordinated to him.

古文：癸亥，诏给、舍讨论考课旧法。
现代文：二十九日，下诏给、舍官讨论考课旧法。
English: On the 29th, it was announced that examiners would discuss the old law.

古文：四川旱，赐制置司度牒四百，备振济。
现代文：四川早灾，赐制置司度碟四百，备作贩济。
English: Sichuan was hit by an early disaster, and the system was set up to set aside 400 trays of rice, ready to be sold.

古文：九月戊子，太白昼见。
现代文：九月二十四日，太白星白天出现。
English: On September 24th, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：冬十月乙未朔，占城入贡。
现代文：冬十月初一，占城国来进贡。
English: In winter, on the first day of October, Zhancheng came to pay tribute.

古文：丁酉，遣唐彖等使金贺正旦。
现代文：初三，派遣唐家等人出使金国祝贺正旦。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the Tang family and others were sent to China to congratulate Zhengdan.

古文：戊戌。修真州城。
现代文：初四，修真州城。
English: 4th year of junior high school, Shuzhen city.

古文：以嗣濮王士曷为开府仪同三司。
现代文：任命嗣攫王赵多易为开府仪同三司。
English: Zhao Do Yi, the heir to the throne, was appointed as the head of the Three Departments of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：庚子，定内外荐举改官人岁额。
现代文：初六，确定内外荐举改官人数额。
English: Sixth, determine the number of officials to be promoted through internal and external recommendation.

古文：癸卯，诏归正借补官资人充枢密院效士，于指定州军以官库酒息赡之者，毋罢其给。
现代文：初九，下诏归正借补官资人充当枢密院效士，在指定州军用官库酒息供养他们，不要断绝供给。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the following year, the emperor ordered the Quisong to borrow and supplement officials to serve as Privy Councillors, and to provide them with liquor at designated state military treasuries, and not to cut off the supply.

古文：乙卯，金遣蒲察莎鲁窝等来贺会庆节。
现代文：二十一日，金国派遣蒲察莎鲁窝等来祝贺会庆节。
English: On the 21st, the State of Kim dispatched Putsasaluwo and others to congratulate the festival.

古文：十一月丙寅，合祀天地于圜丘，大赦。
现代文：十一月初二，在圆丘合祭天地，大赦。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, there will be an amnesty at the Round Mound Festival.

古文：戊辰，雷。
现代文：初四，打雷。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, thunder.

古文：己巳，诏戒饬武臣及百官。
现代文：初五，下诏整治武臣和百官。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the imperial edict was issued to rectify samurai and officials.

古文：癸酉，以郊祀雷，叶颙、魏杞并罢，命陈俊卿为参知政事，翰林学士刘珙同知枢密院事。
现代文：初九，因郊祀打雷，叶颐、魏祀都罢免，命令陈俊卿为参知政事，翰林学士刘琪为同知枢密院事。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, because of thunderstorms in the suburbs, Ye Xi and Wei Xi were both dismissed, and Chen Junqing was ordered to be a member of the Council of State, and Liu Qi, a scholar of Hanlin, to be a member of the Tongzhi Privy Council.

古文：甲戌，蒋芾、陈俊卿请罢，不许。
现代文：初十，蒋莆、陈俊卿请求罢职，没批准。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, Jiang Yu and Chen Junqing requested to resign, but were not approved.

古文：丁丑，以雷发非时，诏台谏、侍从、两省官指陈阙失。
现代文：十三日，因打雷不是时候，诏令台谏、侍从、两省官陈述缺失。
English: On the 13th, due to the thunderstorm, it was not the right time, and there was no statement from the Emperor, the attendants, and the two provincial officials.

古文：辛巳，诏侍从、两省、台谏、卿监、郎官举堪郎官、寺监丞、监司、郡守者。
现代文：十七日，下诏侍从、两省、台谏、卿监、郎官，推举可以担任郎官、寺监承、监司、郡守的人。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, the following officials were selected from the Imperial Household Agency, the two provinces, the Taiwan Straits, the court superintendent, and the steward, and those who could serve as steward, temple superintendent, supervisor, and county governor were selected.

古文：癸巳，罢川路马船。
现代文：二十九日，废除川路马船。
English: On the 29th, horse-drawn carriages on the Sichuan Railway were abolished.

古文：十二月丙申，增修六合城。
现代文：十二月初三，增修六合城。
English: On the third day of the first month of December, the additional construction of Liuhe City began.

古文：己亥，遣王瀹贺金主生辰。
现代文：初六，派王擒祝贺金主生日。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the new year, Wang Yao sent his birthday greetings to Jin Shou.

古文：乙巳，置丰储仓。
现代文：十二日，设置丰储仓。
English: On the 12th, a large storage warehouse was set up.

古文：增印会子。
现代文：增印会子。
English: A member of the Additive Printing Society.

古文：辛亥，以吴益为太傅。
现代文：十八日，任命吴益为太傅。
English: On the 18th, Wu Yi was appointed as Taifu.

古文：庚申，金遣徒单忠卫等来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十七日，金国派徒单忠卫来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 27th, Kim Jong-un sent Duzan Zhongwei to congratulate next year's Spring Festival.

古文：是岁，两浙水，四川旱，江东西、湖南北路蝗，振之。
现代文：这一年，两浙水灾。四川早灾，江东西和湖南北路蝗灾，分别进行贩济。
English: This year, the two floods in Zhejiang, the early disaster in Sichuan, and the locust plagues in the east and west of the river and the north and south of the lake, were carried out separately.

古文：四年春正月戊辰，籍荆南义勇民兵，增给衣甲，遇农隙日番教。
现代文：乾道四年春正月初五，登记荆南义勇民兵，增给衣甲，遇农闲时轮番教阅训练。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the first month of the fourth year of the dry season, the Jingnan Volunteer Militia was registered, the clothing was added, and the farmers took turns to teach and train when they were idle.

古文：壬午，夺秦埙、秦堪郊恩荫补。
现代文：十九日，削夺秦埙、秦堪郊恩荫补。
English: On the 19th, Qin Xuan and Qin Kanjiao were eliminated.

古文：癸未，雨雹。
现代文：二十日，降冰雹。
English: On the 20th, hail fell.

古文：甲申，幸天竺寺，遂幸玉津园。
现代文：二十一日，到天竺寺，于是到玉津园。
English: On the 21st, I went to Tensho-ji Temple, and then to Tamatsuen Garden.

古文：辛卯，罢吴益郊恩荫补。
现代文：二十八日，罢除吴益郊恩荫补。
English: On the 28th, Wu Yixuan was removed from office.

古文：壬辰，叶颙薨。
现代文：二十九日，叶逝世。
English: On the 29th, Ye passed away.

古文：二月甲午朔，罢福建路卖钞盐，蠲转运司岁发钞盐钱十五万缗。
现代文：二月初一，废除福建路卖钞盐，免除转运司岁发钞盐钱十五万络。
English: On the first day of February, the sale of banknote salt on Fujian Road was abolished, and the transfer department was exempted from issuing banknote salt money of 150,000 rupees.

古文：诏四川宣抚使虞允文集四路漕臣会计财赋所入，对立兵额。
现代文：下诏四川宣抚使虞允文招集四路槽臣、会计财赋所人，依此确立兵额。
English: In the following edict, the Sichuan Procuratorate ordered Yu Yunwen to call up four subordinates, including an accountant and a financial officer, and establish the number of soldiers accordingly.

古文：丁酉，命湖北安抚司给田募辰、沅、靖三州刀弩手。
现代文：初四，命令湖北安抚司给田召募辰、沉、靖三州弓弩手。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, he ordered the Hubei Pacification Division to recruit bowmen from the three prefectures of Tian, Chong, and Jing.

古文：戊戌，置和州铸钱盐。
现代文：初五，设置和州铸钱监。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the state mint inspector was set up.

古文：己亥，以蒋芾为尚书右仆射、同中书门下平章事兼枢密使兼制国用使，观文殿大学士史浩为四川制置使，浩辞不行。
现代文：初六，任命蒋莆为尚书右仆射、同中书门下平章事兼枢密使兼制国用使，观文殿大学士史浩为四川制置使，史浩推辞，不就任。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Jiang Yu was appointed as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, Shang Shumun's subordinate Ping Zhangji, concurrently the Privy Envoy and the Envoy of the State, and Shi Hao, a scholar at the University of the Palace of Literature, was appointed as the Envoy of the State of Sichuan. Shi Hao resigned and did not take office.

古文：庚子，诏蒋芾常朝，赞拜不名。
现代文：初七，下诏蒋莆常朝，赞拜时不称姓名。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the following edict was issued by Chiang Kai-shek.

古文：芾辞，许之。
现代文：蒋莆推辞被批准。
English: Chiang Kai-shek's resignation was approved.

古文：乙巳，赐王炎出身，签书枢密院事。
现代文：十二日，赐王炎出身，为签书枢密院事。
English: On the twelfth day of the month, he was granted the title of Privy Councillor.

古文：癸丑，五星皆见。
现代文：二十日，五星都显现。
English: On the 20th, all five stars appeared.

古文：乙卯，雪，雨雹。
现代文：二十二日，降雪和冰雹。
English: Snow and hail fell on the 22nd.

古文：三月庚午，以敷文阁待制晁公武为四川安抚制置使。
现代文：三月初八，任命敷文阁待制晃公武为四川安抚制置使。
English: On the 8th day of the 3rd month of the year, Shikibun Kaku Shosei Akira Kobu was appointed as the envoy to pacify Sichuan.

古文：戊寅，诏赠果州团练使韩崇岳立庙，赐名忠勇，宣州观察使朱勇立庙，赐名忠节。
现代文：十六日，下诏赠果州团练使韩崇岳立庙，赐名忠勇；宣州观察使朱勇立庙，赐名忠节。
English: On the 16th, the following edict was issued, awarding the name of Zhongyong to Han Chongyue, the founder of the temple, and the name of Zhongyong to Zhu Yong, the founder of the temple, from the observation of Xuanzhou.

古文：己丑，四方雾下若尘。
现代文：二十七日，四面八方下雾若尘。
English: On the 27th, the fog was thick in all directions.

古文：庚寅，蠲楚州壮丁、社民税役。
现代文：二十八日，免除楚州壮丁、社民税役。
English: On the 28th, Chuzhou's able-bodied men and social democrats were exempted from paying taxes.

古文：谥陈亨伯曰愍节。
现代文：陈亨伯溢号为憨节。
English: Chen Hunbo's exclamation mark is 節.

古文：夏四月乙未，置汉阳军收发马监。
现代文：夏四月初四，设置汉阳军收发马监。
English: On the fourth day of the fourth month of the summer, the Hanyang Army set up a horse inspector.

古文：诏公吏非犯公罪，毋得引用并计案问法。
现代文：下诏公吏没有犯公罪，不得引用并计案问法。
English: According to the following edict, if a public official has not committed a public crime, he or she may not cite and inquire into the case.

古文：巳亥，置郢州转般仓。
现代文：初八，设置郑州转般仓。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the Zhengzhou turnaround warehouse was set up.

古文：癸卯，遣使抚邛、蜀二州饥民为乱者。
现代文：十二日，派遣使臣抚恤邓、蜀二州饥民作乱的人。
English: On the 12th, the envoys were sent to Deng and Shu, the two states where the famine-stricken people had caused unrest.

古文：己酉，追封韩世忠为蕲王。
现代文：十八日，追封韩世忠为薪王。
English: On the 18th, Han Shizhong was crowned as the salary king.

古文：甲寅，蒋芾等上钦宗《帝纪》、《实录》。
现代文：二十三日，蒋莆等呈上钦宗帝重己和钦宗实录。
English: On the 23rd, Chiang Kai-shek and others presented the Emperor Chongyi of the Qin Dynasty with the authentic records of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：丙辰，礼部员外郎李焘上所著《续通鉴长编》自建隆至治平一百八卷。
现代文：二十五日，礼部员外郎李煮呈上所著续通鉴长编，从建隆至治平共一百零八卷。
English: On the 25th day of the month, the member of the Ceremonial Department, Wai Lang Li Ni, presented the continuation of the book, the long edition, from Jianlong to Zhiping, a total of 108 volumes.

古文：丁巳，诏太史局参用新旧历。
现代文：二十六日，下诏太史局参用新旧历。
English: On the 26th, the Taishi Bureau issued the following edict on the use of the old and new calendars.

古文：戊午，诏贩牛过淮者，论如兴贩军须之罪。
现代文：二十七日，下诏贩牛过淮者，按兴贩军须之罪论处。
English: On the 27th, it was decreed that anyone caught in the act of selling beef would be punished according to the crime of hawking military supplies.

古文：是月，振绵、汉等州饥。
现代文：这个月，贩济绵、汉等州饥民。
English: This month, vendors give money to starving people in Xinjiang, Hunan and other provinces.

古文：五月癸亥，出度牒千道，续减四川科调。
现代文：五月初二，出度碟千道，继续减免四川科调。
English: On the second day of the first month of May, a thousand discs were issued, and the reduction and exemption of Sichuan Science Adjustment continued.

古文：乙丑，太白昼见。
现代文：初四，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：以邛州安仁县荒旱，失于蠲放，致饥民扰乱，守、贰、县令降罢追停有差。
现代文：因邓州安仁县荒早，官府失于免除赋役，致使饥民作乱，郡正副长官、县令降罢追停不等。
English: Due to the early onset of the famine in Anren County, Dengzhou, the government failed to grant exemption from forced labor, causing the hungry people to riot. The county's chief and deputy chiefs and county magistrates did not follow suit.

古文：甲申，谥赵鼎曰忠简。
现代文：二十三日，赐赵鼎溢号为忠简。
English: On the 23rd, Zhao Ding was given the posthumous name Zhong Jian.

古文：丙戌，行乾道新历。
现代文：二十五日，颁行乾道新厉。
English: On the 25th, a new set of rules for dry roads was issued.

古文：丁亥，以饶、信二州、建宁府饥民啸聚，遣官措置振济。
现代文：二十六日，因饶信二州、建宁府饥民啸聚，派遣官员措置贩济。
English: On the 26th, because of Rao Xin, the starving people of two states and Jianning Prefecture gathered in droves, and officials were dispatched to take measures to sell food.

古文：是月，西夏任敬德遣使至四川宣抚司，约发兵攻西番。
现代文：这个月，西夏任敬德派人到四川宣抚司，相约发兵进攻西蕃。
English: This month, Xi Xia sent Jingde to Sichuan to send troops to attack Xidi.

古文：六月辛卯朔，太白昼见，经天。
现代文：六月初一，太白星白天出现，历经一天也没消失。
English: On the first day of June, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime and did not disappear for a day.

古文：甲午，诏罢广西钞盐，复官般官卖法，岁减转运司钞钱十九万缗，其秋苗毋得科折。
现代文：初四，下诏废除广西钞盐，队复官般官卖法，每年减除转运司钞钱十九万络，秋苗不得科折。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, it was decreed to abolish the Guangxi banknote salt, and the team was reinstated as the official selling method, and the transfer department's banknote money was reduced by 190,000 rupees each year, and the autumn seedlings were not allowed to be broken.

古文：戊戌，蠲诸路逋负乾道元年二月和市、折帛、杂色钱。
现代文：初八，免除各路拖欠的乾道元年二月和市、折帛、杂色钱。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, all arrears of the first year of the first year of the second month of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the first year of the first year

古文：辛丑，龙大渊卒，诏以为宁武军节度使致仕。
现代文：十一日，龙大渊去世，下诏他以宁武军节度使职衔退休。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Long Dayuan passed away, and it was announced that he would retire with the title of Ningwu Junction.

古文：五星皆见。
现代文：五星都显现。
English: All the stars are aligned.

古文：癸卯，诏四川宣抚司增印钱引一百万，对偿民间预借钱。
现代文：十三日，下诏四川宣抚司增印钱引一百万，用来对偿民间预借钱。
English: On the 13th, the Sichuan Publicity Department announced that it would print an additional one million yuan to repay the private loan.

古文：蠲邛、蜀二州夏税。
现代文：免除邓、蜀二州夏税。
English: The summer tax of the two states of Deng and Shu will be exempted.

古文：丁巳，召兴化军布衣林彖赴行在。
现代文：二十七日，召兴化军布衣林象前往行在。
English: On the 27th, the Xinghua Army was summoned to travel to Builing.

古文：戊午，蒋芾以母丧去位。
现代文：二十八日，蒋莆因母丧离位。
English: On the 28th, Chiang Kai-shek abdicated due to the death of his mother.

古文：秋七月壬戌，以刘珙兼参知政事。
现代文：秋七月初三，任命刘琪为参知政事。
English: On the 3rd day of the 7th month of autumn, Liu Qi was appointed to the post of Vice-governor.

古文：召建宁府布衣魏掞之赴行在。
现代文：召建宁府布衣魏淡之前往行在。
English: He went there before he was summoned to Buyei, Jianning.

古文：申禁异服异乐。
现代文：申禁异服异乐。
English: Prohibit dissimilar clothes and dissimilar music.

古文：癸亥，徽州大水。
现代文：初四，徽州大水。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Huizhou Dashui.

古文：己巳，罢沿江水军制置司。
现代文：初十，废除沿江水军制置司。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, the riverine naval system was abolished.

古文：辛未，衢州大水。
现代文：十二日，瞥州大水。
English: On the 12th, there was a big flood in Bozhou.

古文：戊寅，知衢州王悦以盛暑祷雨、蔬食减膳、尤勤致疾而死，赠直龙图阁。
现代文：十九日，瞥州知州王悦因盛暑祈祷降雨、素食减膳、忧勤致病而死，赠官直龙图阁。
English: On the 19th day of the month, Wang Yue from Bozhou, Chizhou, died of illness caused by praying for rain in the heat, eating a vegetarian diet, and being overworked. He was presented with the Jialong Pavilion.

古文：丁亥，以经、总制余剩钱二十一万缗桩留邛、蜀州，以备振济。
现代文：二十八日，把经、总制余剩钱二十一万络桩留邓、蜀州，用来预备贩济。
English: On the 28th, he left the remaining 210,000 rupees from the surplus of the General System of Accounts to Deng and Shuzhou to be used to prepare for trading.

古文：己丑，以久雨，御延和殿虑囚，减临安府、三衙死罪以下囚，释杖以下。
现代文：三十日，因久雨不晴，到延和殿讯察记录囚犯罪状，临安府、三衙死罪囚犯减刑，杖刑以下释放。
English: On the 30th, due to the persistent rain and cloudy weather, he went to Yanhe Hall to inquire and record the criminal status of prisoners. Lin'an and San'an death penalty prisoners had their sentences reduced and were released with a cane or less.

古文：是月，西夏遣间使来。
现代文：这个月，西夏派遣秘密使臣来。
English: This month, Xixia sent a secret envoy.

古文：八月乙未，班祈雨雪之法于诸路。
现代文：八月初六，向各路颁布祈祷雨雪之法。初十，五星都显现。
English: On the 6th day of the 8th month, the law of praying for rain and snow was issued to all roads. On the 10th day of the 8th month, the five stars all appeared.

古文：己亥，五星皆见。丁未，主管殿前司公事王琪传旨不实，擅兴工役，降三官放罢。
现代文：十八日，主管殿前司公事王琪传旨不实，擅兴工役，降三官放罢。二十一日，刘琪被罢免。
English: On the 18th, Wang Qi, the former director of the Public Affairs Department of the General Office of the Communist Party of China, was dismissed for insubordination. On the 21st, Liu Qi was dismissed.

古文：庚戌，刘珙罢。辛亥，陈俊卿请罢政，不许。
现代文：二十二日，陈俊卿请求罢职没有得到批准。
English: On the 22nd, Chen Junqing's request for dismissal was not approved.

古文：九月庚申，立内外将佐升差审察法。
现代文：九月初二，确定内外将佐升差审察法。
English: On the second day of September, the internal and external promotion will be determined according to the examination method.

古文：庚午，从太上皇幸天竺寺。
现代文：十二日，随从太上皇到天竺寺。
English: On the twelfth day, he followed the emperor to Tianzhu Temple.

古文：限品官子孙名田。
现代文：限制品官子孙名田。
English: The descendants of restricted goods officer Nada.

古文：是秋，罢关外四州营田官兵，募民耕佃。
现代文：这年秋天，罢除关外四少营田官兵，募民耕佃。
English: In the autumn of that year, the four minor officers and soldiers of Guanzhai District were dismissed, and the people were recruited to work hard.

古文：冬十月壬辰，遣郑闻等使金贺正旦。
现代文：冬十月初五，派遣郑闻等出使金朝祝贺正旦。
English: On the fifth day of the tenth month of winter, Zheng Wen and others sent envoys to the Kim dynasty to congratulate Zheng Dan.

古文：甲午，禁归正人藏匿金人者。
现代文：初七，禁止归正人藏匿金人。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, it is forbidden for the reformed to hide money.

古文：乙未，臣僚言： 天下之事，必历而后知，试而后见。
现代文：初八，臣僚建议说： 天下的事情，只有经历后才能知晓，尝试后才能有所表现。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the ministers suggested: The things of the world can only be known after experience, and can only be shown after trying.

古文：为县令者必为丞簿，为郡守者必为通判，为监司者必为郡守，皆有等差。
现代文：为县令者必须先做承簿，为郡守者必须先做通判，为监司者必须先为郡守，都有等级。
English: For county magistrates, they must first make a record book, for county guards, they must first pass judgment, and for supervisors, they must first be county guards, all of which have grades.

古文：自今职事官及局务官，必任满方许求外，未历亲民任使，即未得拟州郡，且授通判。 
现代文：从今以后职事官和局务官，必须任期年满才允许另外任职，没有做亲民官，就不得任职州郡长官和通判。 
English: From now on, staff officers and bureau officers must have completed their term of office before being allowed to serve in another position. If they are not pro-civil servants, they are not allowed to serve as state and county governors and judges.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：孝宗下诏采纳。
English: He complied.

古文：庚子，蒋芾起复尚书左仆射，陈俊卿右仆射，并同中书门下平章事兼枢密使兼制国用使。
现代文：十三日，蒋莆被重新起用为尚书左仆射，陈俊卿为右仆射，都为同中书门下平章事兼枢密使兼制国用使。
English: On the 13th, Chiang Kai-shek was re-appointed as Shang Shu's left-hand retainer, and Chen Junqing as his right-hand retainer, both of whom were concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently concurrently.

古文：甲辰，大阅。
现代文：十七日，举行大阅。
English: On the 17th, a grand reading was held.

古文：己酉，金遣移刺神独斡等来贺会庆节。
现代文：二十二日，金国派遣移刺神独斡等人来祝贺会庆节。
English: On the 22nd, the State of Kim dispatched the emissary of the Immortal Emperor and others to congratulate the festival.

古文：庚戌，大风。
现代文：二十三日，大风。
English: On the 27th, there was a strong wind.

古文：十一月壬戌，遣知无为军徐子寅措置楚州官田，招集归正忠义人以耕。
现代文：十一月初五，派遣知无为军徐子寅措置楚州官田，招集归正忠义人耕种。
English: On the 5th day of the 11th month of the year, Xu Ziying dispatched the army of know-nothings to reclaim the government-owned land in Chuzhou, and called for loyal and righteous people to cultivate the land.

古文：甲戌，严盗贼法。
现代文：十七日，严密盗贼法。
English: On the 17th, the strict thief law came into effect.

古文：乙亥，诏峡州布衣郭雍赴行在。
现代文：十八日，下诏峡州布衣郭雍前往行在。
English: On the 18th, they traveled to Buge Guoyong, Xizhao Gorge.

古文：壬申，两淮归正忠义有田产者，蠲役五年。
现代文：壬申日，两淮归正忠义人有田产者，免役五年。
English: On the day of Jinshin, the two Huai returned to the righteous and loyal people who were landowners, and were exempted from service for five years.

古文：癸未，岳阳军节度使居广封永阳郡王。
现代文：二十六日，岳阳军节度使居广封为永阳郡王。
English: On the 26th, the commander of the Yueyang Army's military festival was enthroned as the king of Yongyang County.

古文：十二月丙申，遣胡元质等贺金主生辰。
现代文：十二月初九，派遣胡元质等祝贺金主生日。
English: On the 9th day of the 12th month, Hu Yuanqing and others were dispatched to congratulate the birthday of the gold master.

古文：甲辰，赐魏掞之同进士出身，为太学录。
现代文：十七日，赐魏淡之同进士出身，为太学录。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, Wei Tan Zi, who was born in the same year as Wei Tan Zi, was enrolled as a student.

古文：蒋芾辞起复，许之。
现代文：蒋莆推辞重新任职，被批准。
English: Chiang Kai-shek's resignation to resume his post was approved.

古文：减两浙、江东西路明年夏税、和市之半。
现代文：减除两浙、江东西路明年夏税、和市的一半。
English: Next year's summer tax of Zhejiang and Jiangxi will be reduced by half.

古文：甲寅，金遣完颜仲仁等来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十七日，金国派遣完颜仲仁等来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 27th, Kim Jong-un sent Yan Chung-in and others to congratulate the next year's Spring Festival.

古文：五年春正月甲戌，措置两淮屯田。
现代文：乾道五年春正月十七日，措置两淮屯田。
English: On the 17th day of the first month of the spring of the fifth year of the dry road, the measures of two Huaiyutun fields were completed.

古文：二月己丑，申严太庙季点法。
现代文：二月初二，申严太庙季点法。
English: On the 2nd day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2

古文：乙未，命楚州兵马钤辖羊滋专一措置沿淮、海盗贼。
现代文：初八，命令楚州兵马铃辖羊滋专门措置沿淮、沿海盗贼。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, he ordered the Chuzhou Terracotta Army to take special measures against thieves along the Huaihai and coastal areas.

古文：先是，海州人时旺聚众数千来请命，旺寻为金人所获，其徒渡淮而南者甚众，故命滋弹压之。
现代文：当初，海州人时旺聚众数千人来请命，时旺不久被金人俘获，他的部众渡淮河南归者很多，所以命令羊滋镇压他们。
English: At first, Shiwang, a native of Haizhou, gathered thousands of people to plead for his life. Soon, Shiwang was captured by the Jin. Many of his followers had returned to the south of the Huai River, so he ordered Yangzi to suppress them.

古文：戊戌，赠张浚太师，谥忠献。
现代文：十一日，赠张浚为太师，溢号忠献。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Zhang Jun was awarded the title of Grand Master.

古文：壬寅，以给事中梁克家签书枢密院事。
现代文：十五日，任命给事中梁克家为签书枢密院事。
English: On the 15th, the Liang Ke family was appointed as the signatory of the Privy Council.

古文：癸卯，大风。
现代文：十六日，大风。
English: On the 16th, the wind picked up.

古文：甲辰，以王炎参知政事兼同知枢密院事。
现代文：十七日，任命王炎为参知政事兼同知枢密院事。
English: On the 17th, Wang Yan was appointed to the post of Sangchi Politician and Tongchi Privy Councillor.

古文：丙午，雨雹。
现代文：十九日，降冰雹。
English: On the 19th, hail fell.

古文：辛亥，诏自今诏令未经两省书读者毋辄行，给、舍驳正毋连衔同奏。
现代文：二十四日，下诏： 从今以后诏令没经两省书读者不得颁布实行。给、舍官员驳正不要连衔同奏。 
English: On the 24th, the following edict was issued: From now on, the edict shall not be promulgated and implemented without the approval of the readers of the books of the two provinces.

古文：三月丁巳朔，诏趣修庐、和二州城。
现代文：三月初一，下诏督修庐、和州城。
English: On the first day of March, the next imperial edict was issued for the cities of Shuxuan and Hezhou.

古文：己巳，蠲成都府路民户岁输对籴米脚钱三十五万缗。
现代文：十三日，免除成都府路民户岁输对来米脚钱三十五万络。
English: On the 13th, the year-on-year remittance of Chengdu households was exempted from 350,000 rupees.

古文：乙亥，以王炎为四川宣抚使，仍参知政事。
现代文：十九日，任命王炎为四川宣抚使，仍旧为参知政事。
English: On the 19th, Wang Yan was appointed as the chief envoy of Sichuan, and he was still a member of the Council of State.

古文：召虞允文赴行在。
现代文：召虞允文前往行在。
English: Summoning Yu Yunwen to go to the scene.

古文：丙子，赐礼部进土郑侨以下三百九十有二人及第、出身。
现代文：二十日，赐礼部进士郑侨以下三百九十二人及第、出身。
English: On the 20th, it conferred honorary titles on 392 people of various ranks and backgrounds, including Zheng Qiao, a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：壬午，赐郭雍号冲晦处士。
现代文：二十六日，赐给郭雍号冲晦处士。
English: On the 26th, Guo Yong was given the title of Chongyu steward.

古文：癸未。罢利州路诸州营田官兵，募民耕佃。
现代文：二十七日，废除利州路各州营田官兵，募民耕佃。
English: On the 27th, Li Zhou Road abolished the state camp officers and soldiers, and recruited people to work hard.

古文：诏侍从、监司、帅臣、管军荐武举出身人可将佐者。
现代文：诏令侍从、监司、帅臣、管军推举武举出身人可以担任将领的人。
English: The edict decreed that attendants, overseers, court nobles, and officers in charge of the army could nominate people from the military to serve as generals.

古文：夏四月己丑，复置将作、军器少监。
现代文：夏四月初三，重新设置将作军器少监。
English: On the third day of the fourth month of the summer, he will be re-installed as a junior inspector of military equipment.

古文：壬辰，以梁克家兼参知政事。
现代文：初六，任命梁克家兼参知政事。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the Liang Ke family was appointed to be the prime minister.

古文：辛丑，诏福建路贫民生子，官给钱米。
现代文：十五日，下诏：福建路贫民生子官府供给钱米。
English: On the 15th, the following edict was issued: The government will no longer supply rice to the children of the poor on Fujian Road.

古文：庚戌，修襄阳府城。
现代文：二十四日，修襄阳府城。
English: On the 24th, Xiu Xiangyang Fucheng.

古文：辛亥，振恤衢、婺、饶、信四州流民。
现代文：二十五日，贩济抚恤瞥、姿、饶、信四州流民。
English: On the 25th, the traffickers gave the displaced people from four prefectures of Shizuoka, Shizuoka, Rao, and Shin.

古文：五月己巳，帝以射弩弦断伤目，不视朝。
现代文：五月十四日，孝宗因射弩弦断伤了眼睛，不上朝处理政事。
English: On the 14th of May, Takamune was wounded in the eye by a crossbow bolt, and did not go to the court to deal with political affairs.

古文：金牒取俘获人，王抃议尽遣时旺余党，陈俊卿持不可，帝然之。
现代文：金国要取被南宋俘获的人，王林建议尽遣时旺余党，陈俊卿认为不可，孝宗支持陈俊卿的意见。
English: Jin Guo wanted to take the people captured by the Southern Song Dynasty, Wang Lin suggested that the remaining party should be dispatched as much as possible, Chen Junqing thought it was impossible, and Xiaozong supported Chen Junqing's opinion.

古文：六月庚寅，太白昼见。
现代文：六月初五，太白星白天出现。
English: On the fifth day of the sixth lunar month, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：戊戌，始视朝。
现代文：十三日，开始视朝。
English: On the 13th, he began to see the North.

古文：己酉，以虞允文为枢密使。
现代文：二十四日，任命虞允文为枢密使。
English: On the 24th, Yu Yunwen was appointed as a Privy Councilor.

古文：秋七月乙丑，召曾觌入见，陈俊卿及虞允文请罢之，不许。
现代文：秋七月十一日，召曾规朝见皇上，陈俊卿和虞允文请求罢免他，没得到批准。
English: On the 11th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Zeng Jichang was summoned to see the emperor. Chen Junqing and Yu Yunwen requested that Zeng Jichang be dismissed, but the request was not approved.

古文：至行在，俊卿、允文复言其不可留，诏以觌为浙东总管。
现代文：曾规到达行在，陈俊卿、虞允文又说不可留用他，下诏委任曾规为浙东总管。
English: Zeng Gu arrived at the line, Chen Junqing and Yu Yunwen also said that he could not be retained, and the next edict appointed Zeng Gu as the general manager of East Zhejiang.

古文：八月甲申朔，日有食之。
现代文：八月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of August, a solar eclipse.

古文：己丑，以陈俊卿为尚书左仆射，虞允文为尚书右仆射，并同中书门下平章事兼枢密使兼制国用使，辛亥，命淮西路铸小铁钱。
现代文：初六，任命陈俊卿为尚书左仆射，虞允文为尚书右仆射，并为中书门下平章事兼枢密使兼制国用使。初八，命令淮西铸造小铁钱。
English: In the sixth year of the Junior High School, Chen Junqing was appointed as the left-hand servant of Shangshu, and Yu Yunwen was appointed as the right-hand servant of Shangshu, and he was appointed as the Second Secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters, the Privy Secretary and the State Envoy. In the eighth year of the Junior High School, Huaxi was ordered to mint small iron coins.

古文：九月己未，罢淮东屯田官兵，募民耕佃。
现代文：九月初六，废罢淮东屯田官兵，募民佃耕。
English: On the 6th day of the 9th month of the year, the officials and soldiers of Huaidong Township were dismissed and the people were recruited to plough the fields.

古文：辛酉，诏淮东诸州农隙教阅民丁。
现代文：初八，下诏淮东诸州，农闲时教阅训练民丁。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Zhuzhou, East Huaihai Province, issued an edict to teach and train people during the off-season.

古文：甲子，诏侍从、台谏集议钦宗配飨功臣。
现代文：十一日，下诏侍从、台谏一起商议钦宗配享功臣。
English: On the 11th day of the following month, the attendants of the imperial edict and the Taiwanese envoy together discussed the distribution of the meritorious minister of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：壬申，大风。
现代文：十九日，大风。
English: On the 27th, the wind picked up.

古文：命淮西安抚司参议官许子中措置淮西山水砦，招集归正忠义人耕垦官田。
现代文：命令淮西安抚司参议官许子中措置淮西山水寨，招集归正忠义人耕垦官田。
English: He ordered Xu Zichong, the senator of the Huaixi Pacification Division, to arrange the Huaixi Mountain Water Villages, and to summon the righteous and loyal people to cultivate the official fields.

古文：冬十月乙酉，遣汪大猷等使金贺正旦。
现代文：冬十月初三，派汪大酞等出使金朝祝贺新春。
English: On the third day of October in winter, Wang Dajuan and others sent an envoy to the Kim dynasty to congratulate the new spring.

古文：戊子，振温、台二州被水贫民，以守臣、监司失职，降责有差。
现代文：初六，贩济温、台二州遭受水灾贫民，因守臣、监司失职，降贬不等。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the poor people who suffered from floods in Jianwen and Taizhou were reduced in rank due to the dereliction of duty by the guards and supervisors.

古文：戊戌，大风。
现代文：十六日，大风。
English: On the 16th, the wind picked up.

古文：己亥，命饶、信二州岁各留上供米三万石，以备振粜。
现代文：十七日，命令饶、信二州每年分别留上供米三万石，以备贩桌。
English: On the 17th, Rao and Xin were ordered to set aside 30,000 koku of rice each year to supply the table.

古文：癸卯，金遣高德基等来贺会庆节。
现代文：二十一日，金国派高德基等来祝贺会庆节。
English: On the 21st, Kim Guo sent Gao Deji and others to congratulate the festival.

古文：十一月癸丑朔，复置淮东万弩手，名神劲军。
现代文：十一月初一，重新设置淮东弓弩手，称为神劲军。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, the Huaidong Archery Team was re-established, known as the Divine Strength Team.

古文：庚申，增置广东水军。
现代文：初八，增置广东水军。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the Guangdong Navy was added.

古文：乙丑，以孙扩为右千牛卫大将军。
现代文：十三日，委任孙子赵扩为右千牛卫大将军。
English: On the 13th, he appointed his grandson, Zhao Zhan, to the post of General of the Right Division of the Middle Palace Guards.

古文：以明州定海县水军为御前水军。
现代文：以明州定海县水军为御前水军。
English: The navy of Dinghai County, Mingshu, is called the Imperial Navy.

古文：丙寅，为岳飞立庙于鄂州。己巳，太白昼见。
现代文：十四日，在鄂州为岳飞立庙。十七日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 14th, a temple was built for Yue Fei in Ezhou. On the 17th, Taibai Star appeared during the day.

古文：辛未，诏侍从、台谏、两省官，各举京朝官以上、才堪监司、郡守者三人。
现代文：十九日，下诏侍从、台谏、两省官，各自推举京朝官以上可以担任监司、郡守者三人。
English: On the 19th, three officials from the Imperial Household Agency, the Taiwan Provincial Government, and the two provinces were elected to serve as supervisors and county governors.

古文：壬申，复成闵庆远军节度使、镇江诸军都统制。
现代文：二十日，恢复成阂为庆远军节度使、镇江诸军都统制。
English: On the 20th, Chengyu was restored as the Qingyuan army's festival envoy, and the Zhenjiang armies were controlled.

古文：十二月己丑，遣司马伋等贺金主生辰。
现代文：十二月初八，派遣司马极等祝贺金主生日。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of December, Sima Ji and others were dispatched to congratulate Jin on his birthday.

古文：辛卯，大风。
现代文：初十，大风。
English: Early in the morning, a strong wind.

古文：丁酉，置应城县马监。
现代文：十六日，设置应城县牧马监。
English: On the 16th, the Yingcheng County Horse-breeding Supervisor was set up.

古文：复李显忠威武军节度使。
现代文：恢复李显忠为威武军节度使。
English: To reinstate Lee Hsien Chung as the Commander-in-Chief of the People's Liberation Army.

古文：乙巳，复置成都府广惠仓。
现代文：二十四日，重新设置成都府广惠仓。
English: On the 24th, the Chengdu Prefectural Guanghui Warehouse was re-established.

古文：戊申，金遣完颜毅等来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十七日，金国派遣完颜毅等来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 27th, China sent Yan Yi and others to congratulate the next year's Spring Festival.

古文：六年春正月癸丑，雅州沙平蛮寇边，焚碉缅砦。
现代文：乾道六年春正月初二，雅州沙平蛮攻打边境，焚烧碉门寨。
English: On the second day of the first month of the sixth year of the Qiandao Spring, Yazhou Shaping brutally attacked the border and burned Yamenzhai.

古文：四川制置使晁公武调兵讨之，失利。
现代文：四川制置使晃公武调兵讨伐，失利。
English: The establishment of the Sichuan Protectorate led to the deployment of troops by Emperor Akira, but it was a failure.

古文：乙卯，修楚州城。
现代文：初四，修建楚州城。
English: In his fourth year, he built Chuzhou City.

古文：丁巳，复强盗旧法，其四年十一月指挥勿行。
现代文：初六，恢复强盗旧法，乾道四年十一月命令不再执行。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the old law on bandits was restored, and the November order on dry roads was no longer enforced.

古文：癸亥，初降金字牌下四川宣抚司，备边奏。
现代文：十二日，初降金字牌下四川宣抚司，备作边奏。
English: On the twelfth day, the first gold medal was awarded to the Sichuan Sheng Fuzi Division, which prepared for the performance.

古文：乙丑，增筑丰储仓。
现代文：十四日，增筑丰储仓。
English: On the 14th, more warehouses were built.

古文：庚午，以奉国军承宣使、知庐州郭振为武泰军节度使。
现代文：十九日，任命奉国军承宣使、庐州知州郭振为武泰军节度使。
English: On the 19th, Feng Guojun was appointed as the successor of the envoy, and Guo Zhen of Bozhou and Chizhou was appointed as the envoy of the Wu Tai Army.

古文：二月乙酉，诏户部侍郎二人分领诸路财赋。
现代文：二月初四，下诏户部侍郎二人分领各路财赋。
English: On the 4th day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 4th month of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 8th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 14th year of the 13th year of the 14th year of the 14th year of the 15th year of the 15th year of the 15

古文：丁亥，复置舒州同安监，铸铁钱。
现代文：初六，重新设置舒州同安监，铸造铁钱。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Shuzhou Tongan Safety Supervisor was re-established, and iron money was minted.

古文：辛卯，王炎遣人约沙平蛮归部，稍损边税与之。
现代文：初十，王炎派人约沙平蛮归部，稍捐边税分给他们。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Wang Yan sent people to Yosaping to return to the club, and gave them a little tax.

古文：丙申，广西路复行钞盐法，仍增收通货钱四十万缗，以备漕计。
现代文：十五日，广西路重新实行钞盐法，并且增收通货钱四十万络，以备槽计。
English: On the 15th, Guangxi Road re-implemented the banknote salt method, and increased the collection of currency by 400,000 yuan to prepare the tank.

古文：壬寅，诏谕大臣：均役法，严限田，抑游手，务农桑。
现代文：二十一日，诏谕大臣：均役法，严限田，抑游手，务农桑。
English: On the twenty-first day, the minister issued an edict: the law of equal service, strictly limited fields, restrained wanderers, and agricultural mulberry.

古文：己酉，置应城县孳生监。
现代文：二十八日，设置应城县孽生监。
English: On the 28th, the Yingcheng County Birth Control Center was set up.

古文：庚戌，以曾觌为福州观察使。
现代文：二十九日，任命曾规为福州观察使。
English: On the 29th, Zeng Jie was appointed as the Fuzhou observation envoy.

古文：遣司农寺丞许子中诣淮西，措置铁钱。
现代文：派遣司农寺承许子中到淮西，措置铁钱。
English: He dispatched the middle-aged chief priest of the Farmer's Temple, Cheng Xiu Zi, to Huaxi to collect the money.

古文：三月癸丑，用三省言，两淮守帅宜久其任，二年后察其能否，以行赏罚。
现代文：三月初二，采用三省建议，两淮守帅应该延长任期，二年后考察能否，施行赏罚。
English: On the second day of March, the three-provincial proposal was adopted that the two Huaihuai field marshals should extend their term of office, examine whether it is possible after two years, and implement rewards and punishments.

古文：乙卯，裁减枢密院吏额一百十有四人。
现代文：初四，裁减枢密院吏额一百一十四人。
English: On the fourth day of the month, the number of Privy Councillors was reduced by one hundred and fourteen.

古文：丁巳，诏步军司权以三万五千人为额。
现代文：初六，诏令步军司暂以三万五千人为额。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the Empress Dowager issued an order that the number of military officers should be increased to 35,000 for the time being.

古文：乙丑，以晁公武、王炎不协，罢四川制置司归宣抚司。
现代文：重新起用王打为知阎门事，专门措置三衙拣选官兵。
English: Re-instate the use of Wang Du as the gate of knowledge, and take special measures to select officers and soldiers.

古文：辛未，从太上皇、太上皇后幸聚景园。
现代文：赠彰国军节度使大周仁为太尉。初九，随从太上皇、太上皇后到聚景园。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, he accompanied the Emperor and Empress Dowager to Juxingyuan.

古文：甲戌，裁减三省吏额七十人。
现代文：二十三日，裁减三省吏额七十人。
English: On the 23rd, the number of officials in three provinces was reduced by 70 people.

古文：戊寅，以知绍兴府史浩为检校少傅、保宁军节度使。
现代文：二十七日，任命知绍兴府史浩为检校少傅、保宁军节度使。
English: On the 27th, Zhishao Xingfu's Shi Hao was appointed as the junior inspector of the school and the festival envoy of the Baoding Army.

古文：己卯，诏两淮州县官以繁简易其任。
现代文：二十八日，下诏两淮州县官以繁简易其任。
English: On the 28th, the two county officials of Huai Zhou issued the following edict to simplify and simplify their duties.

古文：复置江、浙、京湖、两广、福建等路都大发运使，以新知成都府史正志为之。
现代文：重新设置江、浙、京湖、淮、广、福建等路都大发运使，委任新知成都府史正志担任该职务。
English: The commissioners of transportation of Jiangsu, Zhejiang, Jinghu, Huai, Guangxi and Fujian were re-established, and Shizheng Zhi of Xinzhi Chengdu was appointed to the post.

古文：夏四月辛巳朔，罢铸钱司归发运司。
现代文：夏四月初一，铸钱司罢归发运司。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, the mint returned to the shipping department.

古文：并淮东总领所归淮西总领所。
现代文：淮东总领所并归淮西总领所。
English: The General Consulate of East Huai belongs to the West Huai General Consulate.

古文：以敷文阁直学士张震知成都府，充本路安抚使，乙未，赐发运使史正志缗钱二百万，为均输、和籴之用。
现代文：委任敷文阁直学士张震为知成都府，担任本路安抚使。十五日，赐给发运使史正志络钱二百万为均输、和来之用。
English: He appointed Zhang Zhen, a scholar from Shibun Academy, to be the peace envoy to Chengdu. On the 15th, he gave the peace envoy, Shi Zhengzhi, two million rupees for the purpose of equalization and reconciliation.

古文：吏部尚书汪应辰三上疏论发运司。
现代文：吏部尚书汪应辰三次上疏议论发运司。
English: Shangshu Wang Yingchen of the Personnel Department discussed the Dispatching and Shipping Department for the third time.

古文：戊戌，以应辰知平江府。
现代文：十八日，任命汪应辰知平江府。
English: On the 18th, Wang Yingchen was appointed as the head of Pingjiang Prefecture.

古文：五月甲寅，裁减六部吏额百五十人，其余百司、三衙以是为差。
现代文：五月初四，裁减六部吏额一百五十人，其余百司、三衙以此为标准进行裁减。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth month of the year, the number of officials in six departments was reduced by 150, and the remaining 100 departments and three divisions were reduced according to this standard.

古文：己未，陈俊卿、虞允文等上神宗、哲宗、徽宗、钦宗四朝《会要》、太上皇玉牒。
现代文：初九，陈俊卿、虞允文等呈上神宗哲宗徽宗钦宗咽朝会要、太上皇玉牌。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Chen Junqing, Yu Yunwen, etc. presented the Shensong Zhe, Zonghui, Zongqin, Guanzhong, and the Emperor's Gold Medal.

古文：已已，陈俊卿以议遣使不合，罢为观文殿大学士、知福州。
现代文：十九日，陈俊卿因议论遣使不合，罢为观文殿大学士、知福州。
English: On the 19th, Chen Junqing was dismissed as a member of the faculty of the Academy of Fine Arts and Crafts, Zhifu Prefecture, due to disagreements over the dispatch of an envoy.

古文：罢行在至镇江征税所比近者十有三。
现代文：罢除行在到镇江征税所相邻太近者十分之三。
English: Three-tenths of those who were too close to the Zhenjiang Tax Office were removed.

古文：甲戌，诏戒饬百官。
现代文：二十四日，下诏整治百官。
English: On the 24th, he issued an edict to purge 100 officials.

古文：丁丑，知潮州曾造犯赃，贷命、南雄州编管，籍其家。
现代文：二十七日，知潮州曾造犯贪赃罪，免死，南雄州编管，籍没其家。
English: On the 27th, Zhi Chaozhou, who had committed the crime of embezzlement, was spared death, and Nanxiongzhou was placed under administrative control. He lost his home.

古文：戊寅，诏给舍、台谏言事。
现代文：二十八日，下诏给舍、台谏官议论国事。
English: On the 28th, the emperor issued an edict to the emperor and the Taiwanese eunuchs to discuss state affairs.

古文：闰月壬午，诏监司、帅臣举守令臧否失实，依举清要官法定罪。
现代文：闰五月初三，下诏监司、帅臣推举守令好坏失实，依照举清要官法定罪。
English: On the third day of the fifth month of the leap year, the next day, the overseer and the courtier recommended whether the order was good or bad and untrue, in accordance with the legal crime of clearing the dignitaries.

古文：甲申，印给诸州上供纲目，季申而岁校之，以为殿最。
现代文：初五，印给各州上供纲目，每季上报，岁终比较，作为考核好坏的依据。
English: On the 5th day of the first month of the year, the outline will be printed for each state, reported quarterly, and compared at the end of the year, as a basis for assessing the best and worst.

古文：戊子，遣范成大等使金求陵寝地，且请更定受书礼。
现代文：初九，派遣范成大等出使金朝索求陵寝地，并且请求改定受书礼仪。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, he dispatched Fan Chengda and other emissaries to the Kim dynasty to ask for the burial place, and requested that the etiquette for receiving letters be revised.

古文：辛卯，吏部侍郎陈良祐论祈请使不当遣，恐生边衅。
现代文：十二日，吏部侍郎陈良议论祈请使不应当派遣，恐怕发生边患。
English: On the 12th, Chen Liang, the secretary of the personnel department, discussed and prayed that the troops should not be dispatched, fearing that there would be a border incident.

古文：诏以良祐妄兴异论，不忠不孝，放罢、送筠州居住。
现代文：下诏说陈良妄兴异论，不忠不孝，放罢，送往箔州居住。
English: The next edict said that Chen Liang's dissent, disloyalty and filial piety should be abandoned and he should be sent to live in Huzhou.

古文：癸巳，增环卫官奉。
现代文：十四日，增加环卫官棒禄。
English: On the 14th, the bonus of the environmental protection officer was increased.

古文：以梁克家为参知政事兼同知枢密院事。
现代文：任命梁克家为参知政事兼同知枢密院事。
English: Liang Kejia was appointed as a member of the Council of State as well as a member of the Privy Council.

古文：壬寅，以江东漕臣黄石不亲按行水灾州郡，降二官。
现代文：二十三日，因江东槽臣黄石不亲自视察遭受水灾州郡，降二官。
English: On the 23rd, because Huang Shi, the vassal of the Jiangdong trough, did not personally inspect the flood-stricken county of Zhou, he was demoted to the second rank.

古文：甲辰，辛次膺薨。
现代文：二十五日，辛次膺逝世。
English: On the 25th, Xin Jizhe passed away.

古文：戊申，复置武臣提刑。
现代文：二十九日，重新设置武臣提刑。
English: On the 29th, the punishment of being a retainer was reinstated.

古文：六月壬子，申严卿监、郎官更迭补外之制。
现代文：六月初三，申严卿监、郎官更选补外之制。
English: On the 3rd day of the 6th month of the year, the superintendent of Shen Yanqing and the vassals were selected without the system of supplement.

古文：壬申，增武学生为百人。
现代文：二十三日，武学生员增为百人。
English: On the 23rd, the number of martial arts students increased to one hundred.

古文：癸酉，置蕲州蕲春监、黄州齐安监，铸铁钱。
现代文：二十四日，设置薪州薪春监、黄州齐安监，铸造铁钱。
English: On the 24th, the Tongzhou Tongchun Supervisor and the Huangzhou Qi'an Supervisor were set up to mint iron money.

古文：是月，荣国公挺自东宫出居外第。
现代文：这个月，荣国公赵挺从东宫出居自己府第。
English: This month, Prince Emeritus Zhao Ting moved from the East Palace to his own residence.

古文：秋七月癸未，诏以沙田、芦场岁收租税六十余万缗入左藏南库。
现代文：秋七月初五，下诏把沙田、芦场每年征收的租税六十余万络人左藏南库。
English: On the 5th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the following edict transferred the annual tax levied by Sha Tin and Lujang to the Southern Treasury.

古文：丙戌，诏川广监司、郡守任满奏事讫方调。
现代文：初八，诏令川广监司、郡守任满奏事完毕才允许调任他职。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, it was decreed that the supervisor of Kawaguchiko and the governor of the county would not be allowed to be transferred to another post until the report was completed.

古文：己丑，置兴国军兴国监。
现代文：十一日，设置兴国军兴国监。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the National Revival Army and the National Revival Supervision Bureau were established.

古文：甲午，诏除郎官并引对毕供职。
现代文：十六日，下诏任命郎官都要引对完毕后才能供职。
English: On the 16th day of the following month, all the appointed officials had to complete the introduction before they could serve.

古文：辛丑，复置御前弓马子弟所，命吴挺兼提举。
现代文：二十三日，重新设置御前弓马子弟所，命令吴挺兼任提举。
English: On the 23rd, the Imperial Archery and Equestrian School was re-established, and Wu Ting was ordered to be promoted concurrently.

古文：赐岳飞庙曰忠烈。
现代文：赐岳飞庙为忠烈。
English: Yuefei Temple was awarded the title of "Faithful."

古文：八月庚戌，虞允文请蚤建太子。
现代文：八月初三，虞允文请求早立太子。
English: On the 3rd day of the 8th month, Yu Yunwen requested that the crown prince be crowned early.

古文：癸丑，复置详定一司敕令所。
现代文：初六，重新设置详定一司救令所。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the first year of junior high school, a detailed rescue station was re-established.

古文：丙寅，置阁门舍人十员。
现代文：十九日，设置阁门舍人十员。
English: On the 19th, a pavilion was set up to accommodate ten people.

古文：是月，虞允文上《乾道敕令格式》。
现代文：这个月，虞允文呈上咙道救令格式。
English: This month, Yu Yunwen appeared in the form of a throat relief.

古文：九月壬辰，赐苏轼谥曰文忠。
现代文：九月十五日，赐苏轼溢号为文忠。
English: On September 15, he was given the posthumous name of Wenzhong.

古文：辛丑，沅州人相仇杀，守臣孙叔杰出兵击之，失利。
现代文：二十四日，沉州摇人互相仇杀，守臣孙叔杰出兵袭击，失利。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the Shenzhou Shakers killed each other, and the vassal Sun Shouliang attacked and lost.

古文：徭人进迫州城，安抚司谕解之，叔杰寻抵罪。
现代文：瑶人进逼州城，安抚司谕解瑶人，孙叔杰不久抵罪。
English: The eunuchs marched into the city of Keizhou, the pacifying overseer relieved the eunuchs, and Sun Shujie soon confessed.

古文：是月，范成大至自金，金许以迁奉及归钦庙梓宫，而不易受书礼。
现代文：这个月，范成大从金国回国，金国答应迁奉和归还钦宗梓宫，但不更改受书礼仪。
English: This month, Fan Chengda returned from China, which promised to relocate and return the Qin Zongzi Palace, but not to change the etiquette of receiving letters.

古文：冬十月己酉，以孙摅为左千牛卫大将军。
现代文：冬十月初三，委任孙子赵滤为左千牛卫大将军。
English: On the 3rd day of the 10th month of winter, he appointed his grandson Zhao Yil as the general of Zuo Qian Niu Wei.

古文：丙辰，诏发运使置司行在。
现代文：初十，诏令发运使在行在置司。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, the imperial edict was issued to dispatch an envoy to the line to set up a division.

古文：谥司马朴曰忠洁。
现代文：司马朴溢号为忠洁。
English: Sima Pu is the epitome of loyalty.

古文：辛酉，遣吕正己等使金贺正旦。
现代文：十五日，派吕正己等人出使金国祝贺新春。
English: On the 15th, Lu Zhengyi and others sent an envoy to congratulate Jin Guo on the Spring Festival.

古文：丁卯，金遣耶律子敬等来贺会庆节。
现代文：二十一日，金国派遣耶律子敬等人来祝贺会庆节。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the State of Jin dispatched Ye Lu Zi Ke and others to congratulate the festival.

古文：甲戌，起居舍人赵雄请置局议恢复，诏以雄为中书舍人。
现代文：二十八日，起居舍人赵雄请求置局讨论恢复国土，下诏委任赵雄为中书舍人。
English: On the 28th, Zhao Xiong, the chief resident, requested the location bureau to discuss the restoration of the land, and the next edict appointed Zhao Xiong as the chief resident.

古文：十一月丁丑朔，复置军器监一员。
现代文：十一月初一，重新设置军器监一人。
English: On the first day of November, the position of the Supervisor of Ordnance was reinstated.

古文：壬午，合祀天地于圜丘，大赦。
现代文：初六，在圆丘合祭天地，大赦。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the new year, there will be an amnesty at the round mound festival.

古文：乙未，复置神武中军，以吴挺为都统制。
现代文：十九日，重新设置神武中军，委任吴挺为都统制。
English: On the 19th, the Shenwu Middle Army was re-established, and Wu Ting was appointed as the governor of the capital.

古文：召曾觌提举佑神观。
现代文：召曾规提举佑神观。
English: Zengjie's invocation of Zengjie's invocation of Zengjie's invocation of Zengjie.

古文：丁酉，加上光尧寿圣太上皇帝尊号曰光尧寿圣宪天体道太上皇帝、寿圣太上皇后尊号曰寿圣明慈太上皇后。
现代文：二十一日，加上光尧寿圣太上皇帝尊号为光尧寿圣宪天体道太上皇帝、寿圣太上皇后尊号为寿圣明慈太上皇后。
English: On the twenty-first day, the honorific titles of Emperor Guangxu Shousheng and Empress Shousheng were added as Emperor Guangxu Shousheng and Empress Shousheng and Empress Shousheng respectively.

古文：是月，遣赵雄等贺金主生辰，别函书请更受书之礼。
现代文：这个月，派遣赵雄等祝贺金主生日，另外致书请求更改受书礼仪。
English: This month, Zhao Xiong and others were sent to congratulate the donor on his birthday, and another letter was sent to request a change in the etiquette for receiving letters.

古文：置左藏南上库。
现代文：设置左藏南上库。
English: The Zuozang South-Upper Library was established.

古文：十二月戊申，大阅。
现代文：十二月初三，大阅军队。
English: On the third day of the first month of December, a grand military parade was held.

古文：甲子，置江州广宁监、临江军丰余监、抚州裕国监铸铁钱。
现代文：十九日，设置江州广宁监、临江军丰余监、抚州裕国监，铸造铁钱。
English: On the 19th, Jiangzhou Guangning Supervisor, Linjiang Junfeng Yu Supervisor and Fuzhou Yiguo Supervisor were set up to mint iron money.

古文：壬申，金遣蒲察愿等来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十七日，金国派遣蒲察愿等来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 27th, the DPRK sent Pu Cha Rong and other officials to congratulate the upcoming Spring Festival.

古文：癸酉，罢发运司。
现代文：二十八日，废除发运司。
English: On the 28th, the Shipping Department was abolished.

古文：以史正志奏课不实，责为楚州团练副使、永州安置。
现代文：因史正志奏课不实，贬降为楚州团练副使，永州安置。
English: He was demoted to vice-envoy of Chuzhou regimental drill, and was resettled in Yongzhou.

古文：是岁，两浙、江东西、福建水、旱。
现代文：这一年，两浙、江东西、福建发生水早灾害。
English: This year, water-related disasters occurred in Zhejiang, Jiangxi and Fujian.

古文：七年春正月丙子，率群臣奉上太上皇、太上皇后册宝于德寿宫。
现代文：乾道七年春正月初一，孝宗率领大臣到德寿宫奉上太上皇、太上皇后册宝。
English: On the first day of the first month of the seventh year of the Heian period, Takamune led the ministers to Deoksugung Palace to present the treasures to the retired emperor and empress.

古文：庚辰，虞允文复请建太子，帝命允文拟诏以进。
现代文：初五，虞允文再次请求立太子，孝宗命令虞允文拟诏进呈。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Yu Yunwen once again requested the crown prince, and Xiaozong ordered Yu Yunwen to prepare and submit the imperial edict.

古文：壬寅，命三省旬录宣谕圣语及时政记同进。
现代文：二十七日，命令三省每旬记录宣谕圣语和时政记一起进呈。
English: On the 27th, the three provinces were ordered to record and submit the proclamation of the holy words together with the chronicles of the time.

古文：是月，复铸钱司。
现代文：这个月，恢复铸钱司。
English: This month, the mint reopens.

古文：二月癸丑，诏立子惇为皇太子，大赦。
现代文：二月初八，下诏立儿子赵为皇太子，大赦。
English: On the eighth day of the second month of the year, Zhao, the youngest son of Emperor Zhao, was crowned crown prince and granted amnesty.

古文：以庆王恺为雄武、保宁军节度使、判宁国府，进封魏王。
现代文：委任庆王赵恺为雄武、保宁军节度使，判宁国府，进封魏王。
English: He appointed Qing Wang Zhao Jie as the military commander and the military commander of the Baoding and Ningde armies, appointed him as the governor of Ningde, and sent him to the Wei Dynasty.

古文：丁巳，增置皇太子宫讲读官。
现代文：十二日，增置皇太子宫讲读官。
English: On the 12th, the post of the Crown Prince's uterus reader was added.

古文：庚申，罢会子库，仍赐户部内藏南库缗钱二百万、银九十万两，以增给官兵之奉。
现代文：十五日，废除会子库，并且赐户部内藏南库络钱二百万、银九十万两用来增加官兵薪棒。
English: On the fifteenth day, the children's fund was abolished, and two million yuan and 900,000 taels of silver were given to the South Tibet Bank of the Ministry of the Interior to increase the salaries of officers and soldiers.

古文：甲子，诏寺观毋免税役。
现代文：十九日，下诏寺观不免税役。
English: On the 19th, Emperor Zhao decreed that the temple would no longer be exempt from taxation.

古文：丁卯，太傅、大宁郡王吴益薨。
现代文：二十二日，太傅、大宁郡王吴益逝世。
English: On the 22nd, King Wu Yi of Daming County passed away.

古文：壬申，大风。
现代文：二十七日，大风。
English: On the 27th, the wind picked up.

古文：三月乙亥朔，赵雄至金，金拒其请。
现代文：三月初一，赵雄到达金国，金朝拒绝所提请求。
English: On the first day of March, Zhao Xiong arrived in the People's Republic of China. The request was rejected by the Kim dynasty.

古文：诏训习水军。
现代文：下诏训练水军。
English: He issued an edict to train the navy.

古文：丙子，立恭王夫人李氏为皇太子妃。
现代文：初二，立恭王夫人李氏为皇太子妃。
English: On the second day of the new year, the wife of King Rikun, Princess Lee, became the crown princess.

古文：戊寅，徙侍卫马军司戍建康。
现代文：初四，侍卫马军司迁戍建康。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, the bodyguard Ma Junji moved to Jiankang.

古文：己卯，起复刘珙同知枢密院事。
现代文：初五，重新起用刘琪为同知枢密院事。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Liu Qi was reappointed as Tongzhi Privy Councilor.

古文：以明州观察使、知阁门事兼枢密都承旨张说签书枢密院事。
现代文：任命明州观察使、知阎门事兼枢密都承旨张说为签书枢密院事。
English: The appointment of the Mingzhou Observation Envoy, the Zhiyan Gate matter and the Privy Council order Zhang said were the signing of the Privy Council matter.

古文：左司员外郎兼侍讲张栻言说不宜执政。
现代文：左司员外郎兼侍讲张试议论张说不应该担任执政。
English: Zhang, the left-hand secretary, and Zhang, the right-hand lecturer, tried to argue that Zhang should not be in power.

古文：乙酉，立沿海州军私赍铜钱下海船法。
现代文：十一日，颁立沿海州军私自带铜钱下海船法。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the Coastal State Military Privately Brought Copper Money to the Sea Ship Law was issued.

古文：丙戌，复置将作监。
现代文：十二日，重新设置将作监。
English: On the 12th, he will be reinstated as a supervisor.

古文：殿中侍御史李处全乞遣张说按行边戍，以息众论，中书舍人范成大乞不草词。
现代文：殿中侍御史李处全请派张说视察边戍，以平息众论，中书舍人范成大请求不草拟制词。
English: In order to calm the public, the palace's attendants, the Li Office, all asked Zhang Ruo to say that he would inspect the edging, and the Chinese calligrapher, Fan Chengda, asked him not to draft the lyrics.

古文：戊子，说罢为安庆军节度使、提举万寿观。
现代文：十四日，张说罢为安庆军节度使、提举万寿观。
English: On the 14th, Zhang said that it was time for the Anqing Army to celebrate the festival and raise the concept of longevity.

古文：庚寅，遣使核两淮种麦。
现代文：十六日，派遣使臣验证两淮种麦。
English: On the 16th, an envoy was dispatched to verify the success of the double wheat planting.

古文：丙申，御大庆殿册皇太子。
现代文：二十二日，到大庆殿册立皇太子。
English: On the 22nd, the crown prince was enthroned at Daqing Hall.

古文：礼部侍郎郑闻、工部侍郎胡铨、枢密院检详文字李衡、秘书丞潘慈明并罢。
现代文：礼部侍郎郑闻、工部侍郎胡锉、枢密院检详文字李衡、秘书承潘慈明都被罢免。
English: Zheng Wen, the attendant of the Ceremonial Department, Hu Wei, the attendant of the Engineering Department, Li Heng, the scrutineer of the Privy Council, and Cheng Pan Ciming, the secretary, were all dismissed.

古文：虞允文乞留铨，乃以为宝文阁待制兼侍讲。
现代文：虞允文请求留任胡锉，于是胡锉被任命为宝文阁待制兼侍讲。
English: Yu Yunwen asked Hu Yao to stay on, so Hu Yao was appointed as a Baowenge trainee and assistant lecturer.

古文：己亥，皇太子谢于紫宸殿，宰相率百官赴东宫贺。
现代文：二十五日，皇太子到紫哀殿致谢，宰相率领百官到东宫祝贺。
English: On the 25th, the Crown Prince went to the Purple Shrine to express his gratitude, and the Prime Minister led hundreds of officials to the East Palace to offer congratulations.

古文：夏四月戊申，以曾觌为安德军承宣使。
现代文：夏四月初四，任命曾规为安德军承宣使。
English: On the fourth day of the fourth month of the summer, Zeng Jie was appointed as the envoy of the Andorran army.

古文：庚申，诏诸路增收无额钱物，并输南上库。
现代文：十六日，诏令诸路增收无额钱物，都输纳南上库。
English: On the 16th, all roads were ordered to increase revenue by an unlimited amount of money and goods, and all of them were sent to the southern warehouse.

古文：壬戌，从太上皇、太上皇后幸聚景园。
现代文：十八日，随从太上皇、太上皇后到聚景园。
English: On the 18th, they followed the Retired Emperor and Empress Dowager to the park.

古文：甲子，诏皇太子判临安府。
现代文：二十日，下诏皇太子判临安府。
English: On the 20th, the crown prince decreed that Lin'an would become the capital.

古文：己巳，诏侍从、台谏、两省官举任刑狱、钱谷及有智略吏能者各二人。
现代文：二十五日，诏令侍从、台谏、两省官举荐可以担任刑狱、钱谷官吏有才能的人各二名。
English: On the 25th, it was decreed that the attendant, the governor of Taiwan, and the two provincial officials could each recommend two talented people to serve as penitentiary and Qiantan officials.

古文：辛未，诏皇太子领临安尹。
现代文：二十七日，诏令皇太子领临安尹。
English: On the 27th, the imperial edict ordered the crown prince to lead Lin Anyin.

古文：五月戊寅，复置淮东总领所。
现代文：五月初四，重新设置淮东总领所。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth lunar month, the Huadong Consulate-General was re-established.

古文：丁亥，刘珙起复同知枢密院事，为荆、襄宣抚使，珙辞不拜。
现代文：十三日，刘琪重新起用为同知枢密院事，为荆襄宣抚使，刘琪推辞不赴任。
English: On the 13th, Liu Qi was reappointed as Tongzhi Privy Councillor and as Jingxiang's envoy, but Liu Qi refused to take up the post.

古文：庚寅，金人葬钦宗于巩原。
现代文：十六日，金人将钦宗葬在巩原。
English: On the 16th, Jinren buried Qinzong in Gongyuan.

古文：丁酉，诏广西帅臣措置南丹州市马。
现代文：二十三日，诏令广西帅臣措置南丹州买马。
English: On the 23rd, the emperor ordered the Guangxi suzerain to buy horses from Nantan.

古文：是月，遣知阁门事王抃点阅荆、襄军马。
现代文：这个月，派知阁门事王林点阅荆襄军马。
English: This month, Wang Lin, the gatekeeper of Paizhiguan, read the military horse of Jingxiang.

古文：六月丙午，复主管马军司公事李显忠为太尉。
现代文：六月初三，恢复主管马军司公事李显忠为太尉。
English: On the third day of the sixth month, Li Xianzhong, the head of the Civil Affairs Department of the General Staff of the Korean People's Army, was reinstated as a lieutenant.

古文：己巳，赐吴璘谥曰武顺。
现代文：二十六日，赐吴瞒溢号为武顺。
English: On the 26th, Wu Zetian was given the title of Wushun.

古文：壬申，诏两淮垦田毋创增税赋。
现代文：二十九日，诏令两淮垦田不要增征税赋。
English: On the 29th, the emperor ordered the two Huaiyu fields not to increase taxation.

古文：秋七月庚子，以王炎为枢密使、四川宣抚使。
现代文：秋七月二十七日，任命王炎为枢密使、四川宣抚使。
English: On the 27th day of the 7th month of autumn, Wang Yan was appointed as the Privy Envoy and the Envoy to Sichuan.

古文：八月丙辰，诏两淮民丁充民兵者，本名丁钱勿输。
现代文：八月十四日，诏令两淮民丁充民兵者，本名丁钱不输纳。
English: On August 14th, it was decreed that Ding Qian, the real name of Ding Qian, who served as a militia member, would not lose his salary.

古文：辛酉，复修襄阳城。
现代文：十九日，重新修襄阳城。
English: On the 19th, Xiangyang City was rebuilt.

古文：九月壬申朔，以江西、湖南旱，命募民为兵。
现代文：九月初一，因江西、湖南早灾，命令募民为兵。
English: On the first day of September, due to the early disaster in Jiangxi and Hunan, he ordered to recruit people as soldiers.

古文：甲申，从太上皇、太上皇后幸东园。
现代文：十三日，随从太上皇、太上皇后到东园。
English: On the 13th, they followed the Retired Emperor and Empress to the East Garden.

古文：戊子，安定郡王令德薨。
现代文：十七日，安定郡王赵令德去世。
English: On the 17th, Zhao Linde, the Prince of Anning County, passed away.

古文：冬十月丁未，罢绍兴宗正行司，改恩平郡王璩判西外宗正。
现代文：冬十月初六，废除绍兴宗正行司，恩平郡王赵朦改判西外宗正。
English: On the 6th day of the 10th month of winter, the Shaoxing Zongzheng Division was abolished, and the King of Enping County, Zhao Mei, changed the sentence to Xiwai Zongzheng.

古文：己酉，遣莫濛等使金贺正旦。
现代文：初八，派遣莫檬等出使金朝祝贺新春。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Mo Limon and others were dispatched to the Kim dynasty to congratulate the new spring.

古文：壬戌，金遣乌林答天锡等来贺会庆节，天锡要帝降榻问金主起居，虞允文请帝还内，命知阁门事王抃谕天锡以明日见，天锡沮退。
现代文：二十一日，金国派遣乌林答天锡等来祝贺会庆节，天锡要孝宗降榻问金主起居，虞允文请孝宗回到宫内，命令知门事王打告诉天锡安排在明天与孝宗见面，天锡沮丧而退。
English: On the twenty-first day, Jin sent Ulin to reply to Tianxi and others to congratulate the festival. Tianxi wanted Xiaozong to lie down and ask Jin to stay up. Yu Yunwen asked Xiaozong to return to the palace and ordered the gatekeeper to tell Tianxi to arrange to meet with Xiaozong tomorrow. Tianxi was frustrated and withdrew.

古文：癸亥，会庆节，金使随班入见。
现代文：二十二日，会庆节，金国使臣随班人见。
English: On the 22nd, the anniversary of the meeting, the envoys of the People's Republic of China arrived.

古文：十一月甲戌，御集英殿策试应贤良方正能直言极谏科李垕。
现代文：十一月初四，到集英殿策试应考贤良方正能直言极谏科李镖。
English: On the 4th day of the 11th month of the first month, the virtuous Fang Zhengneng went to the Jieying Hall to prepare for the examination.

古文：戊寅，锡垕制科出身。
现代文：初八，赐李镖制科出身。
English: He is in his eighth year of junior high school.

古文：十二月丁未，遣翟绂等贺金主生辰。
现代文：十二月初七，派遣翟级等祝贺金主生日。
English: On the seventh day of the twelfth month of the lunar calendar, the eunuchs and others were dispatched to congratulate the emperor on his birthday.

古文：庚申，诏阁门舍人依文臣馆阁以次轮对。
现代文：二十日，诏阎门舍人依文臣馆阁顺序轮对。
English: On the 20th, the Zhao and Yan gates were aligned according to the order of the Wenshen Pavilion.

古文：癸亥，罢太医局。
现代文：二十三日，废罢太医局。
English: On the 23rd, the Medical Bureau was abolished.

古文：丙寅，金遣完颜宗宁等来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十六日，金国派遣完颜宗宁等来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 26th, Kim Guo dispatched Yan Zongning and others to congratulate the next year's Spring Festival.

古文：是岁，湖南、江东西路旱，振之。
现代文：这一年，湖南、江东西路早灾，进行贩济。
English: This year, Hunan and the east and west of the Yangtze River were hit by a series of natural disasters.

古文：八年春正月庚午朔，班《乾道敕令格式》。
现代文：乾道八年春正月初一，颁布乾道救令格鸯。
English: On the first day of the first month of the eighth year of the dry road, the dry road relief order was promulgated.

古文：丁酉，朝献景灵宫，遂幸天竺寺、玉津园。
现代文：二十八日，祭祀景灵宫，于是到天竺寺、玉津园。
English: On the 28th, they held a religious service at Jingling Temple, and then went to Tianzhu Temple and Tamatsuen Garden.

古文：二月乙巳，诏改尚书左右仆射、同中书门下平章事为左、右丞相。
现代文：二月初六，诏令改尚书左右仆射、同中书门下平章事为左右承相。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the year, the imperial edict changed the style of calligraphy to the left and right, and the style of calligraphy to the left and right, and the style of calligraphy to the left and right.

古文：丙午，诏六察分隶，事有违戾，许监察御史随事具实状纠劾以闻。
现代文：初七，诏令六察分别监察尚书六部事务，事有违法和过失，允许监察御史随事核实，纠勃失误，上报朝廷。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the imperial edict ordered six inspectors to separately supervise the affairs of the six departments of Shangshu, and there were illegalities and mistakes, allowing the inspectors to verify the history, correct mistakes, and report to the imperial court.

古文：戊申，遣姚宪等使金贺上尊号，附请受书之事。
现代文：初九，派遣姚宪等出使金国祝贺上尊号，附带请改受书礼仪。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Yao Xian and others were dispatched to the State of Jin to congratulate His Eminence, with the request to change the etiquette of receiving letters.

古文：辛亥，以虞允文为左丞相，梁克家为右丞相，并兼枢密使。
现代文：十二日，任命虞允文为左承相，梁克家为右承相，并兼枢密使。
English: On the 12th, Yu Yunwen was appointed as the left successor minister, Liang Kejia as the right successor minister, and concurrently as the privy councilor.

古文：癸丑，以安庆军节度使张说、吏部侍郎王之奇并签书枢密院事。
现代文：十四日，任命安庆军节度使张说、吏部侍郎王之奇都为签书枢密院事。
English: On the 14th, Zhang said that the appointment of the Anqing Army Festival Envoy Zhang said that the officials of the Ministry of the People's Liberation Army are the signatories of the Privy Council.

古文：侍御史李衡、右正言王希吕交章论说不可为执政，不报。
现代文：侍御史李衡、右正言王希吕交章议论张说不可担任执政，没有得到回音。
English: Li Heng, the courtier and historian, and Wang Xiliu, the right-hand man, argued that Zhang should not be allowed to govern, but received no response.

古文：礼部侍郎兼直学士院周必大不草答诏，权给事中莫济封还录黄，诏并与在外宫观。
现代文：礼部侍郎兼直学士院周必大不草拟答诏，权给事中莫济封还录黄，诏令调出任在外宫观。
English: Zhou Bida, an attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies and a member of the Academy, did not draft the reply to the imperial edict, and the imperial edict was changed to the view of the outer palace.

古文：丙辰，诏罢王希吕与远小监当，寻诏与宫观。
现代文：十七日，诏令罢免王希吕为远小监当，不久诏令任职宫观。
English: On the 17th, Wang Xiliu was removed from his post as Yuanxiao supervisor by imperial edict, and Gongguan was appointed by imperial edict soon after.

古文：丁巳，李衡罢为起居郎。
现代文：十八日，李衡罢为起居郎。
English: On the 18th, Li Heng was promoted to kijiro.

古文：丙寅，户部尚书曾怀赐出身，参知政事。
现代文：二十七日，户部尚书曾怀赐给出身，参知政事。
English: On the 27th, the head of the household, Shosho, who was born in the family, was appointed to the post of chancellor.

古文：三月戊子，诏省侍中、中书、尚书令员，以左、右丞充其位。
现代文：三月二十日，诏令减省侍中、中书尚书令员，以左右承相充其位。
English: On March 20th, the imperial edict reduced the number of provincial vice-ministers and vice-ministers of the Chinese Academy of Letters, with the left and right vice-ministers taking their places.

古文：夏四月庚子，赐礼部进士黄定以下三百八十有九人及第、出身。
现代文：夏四月初二，赐礼部进士黄定以下三百八十九人及第、出身。
English: On the second day of the fourth month of the summer, three hundred and eighty-nine people, including Huang Ding, a member of the Ceremonial Department, were born.

古文：己酉，殿中侍御史萧之敏劾虞允文擅权不公，允文请罢政，许之。翼日复留，出之敏提点江东刑狱。
现代文：十一日，殿中侍御史萧之敏弹勃虞允文擅权不公，虞允文请求罢职，被批准；第二天又留任他，调出萧之敏提点江东刑狱。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the palace attendant Shi Xiao Zhimin accused Yu Yunwen of abuse of power and unfairness. Yu Yunwen's request to resign was approved; the next day, he was retained, and Xiao Zhimin was transferred to the Jiangdong Prison.

古文：甲子，措置两淮官田徐子寅等坐授田归正人逃亡，夺官有差。
现代文：二十六日，措置两淮官田徐子寅等因授田归正人逃亡，夺官不等。
English: On the 26th, two Huai officials, Tian Xu Zi Yin and others, fled because of the transfer of land to the righteous, and were deprived of their posts.

古文：乙丑，诏再蠲两淮二税一年。
现代文：二十七日，诏令再次免除两淮二税一年。
English: On the 27th, the imperial edict once again exempted the two Huai and two taxes for one year.

古文：五月戊子，福建盐行钞法。
现代文：五月二十日，福建盐行钞法。
English: On May 20th, the Fujian Salt Banknote Law came into effect.

古文：丙申，立宗室铨试法。
现代文：二十八日，立宗室锉试法。
English: On the 28th, Zong Murogong's trial method was established.

古文：六月庚子，以武德郎令撎为金州观察使，封安定郡王。
现代文：六月初三，任命武德郎赵令债为金州观察使，封为安定郡王。
English: At the beginning of June 3, Wu De Lang Zhao Lingbong was appointed as the observation envoy of Jinzhou, and was named the king of the stable county.

古文：壬寅，蠲两淮归正人撮收课子。
现代文：初五，免除两淮归正人撮收课子。
English: On the fifth day of the new school year, exempt two Huai Guizheng people from taking and collecting schoolchildren.

古文：淮东巡尉有纵逸归正户口过淮者，夺官有差。
现代文：淮东巡尉有纵逸归正户口过淮者，夺官不等。
English: Lieutenant Huaidong has a long-distance return to the main residence, and those who have passed Huaidong have won positions.

古文：壬子，省监司荐举员。
现代文：十五日，裁减监司荐举名额。
English: On the 15th, the number of places recommended by the Supervision Department was reduced.

古文：秋七月辛巳，罢淮西屯田官兵，募归正人耕佃。
现代文：秋七月十四日，废罢淮西屯田官兵，招募归正人耕佃。
English: On the 14th day of the 7th month of autumn, officials and soldiers stationed in the western part of Huaixi Province were abolished, and returnees were recruited to work.

古文：姚宪、曾觌至自金，金人拒其请。
现代文：姚宪、曾规从金朝回国，金人拒绝了他们的请求。
English: Yao Xian and Zeng Jie returned from the Kim dynasty, and the Kim people refused their request.

古文：癸未，以觌为武泰军节度使。
现代文：十六日，任命曾规为武泰军节度使。
English: On the 16th, Zeng Jie was appointed as the special envoy of the Thai army.

古文：壬辰，雨雹。
现代文：二十五日，降冰雹。
English: On the 20th, hail fell.

古文：九月戊辰，定江西四监铁钱额。
现代文：九月初二，确定江西四监铁钱额。
English: On the second day of September, the amount of money for the Jiangxi four supervisors was determined.

古文：乙亥，诏王炎赴都堂治事。
现代文：初九，诏令王炎赴政事堂治事。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, Wang Yan was ordered to go to the government office.

古文：戊寅，以虞允文为少保、武安军节度使、四川宣抚使，封雍国公。
现代文：十二日，任命虞允文为少保、武安军节度使、四川宣抚使，封为雍国公。
English: On the 12th, Yu Yunwen was appointed as the Minor Protector, the Military Governor of the Wu'an Army, and the Sichuan Proclamation Envoy, and was named the Prince of Yongguo.

古文：己丑，赐允文家庙祭器。
现代文：二十三日，赐给虞允文家庙祭器。
English: On the 23rd, a sacrificial vessel from the Wenjia Temple was given to Yu Yun.

古文：壬辰，允文入辞，帝谕以决策亲征，令允文治兵俟报。
现代文：二十六日，虞允文向孝宗告辞，孝宗告诉他决定亲征，命令虞允文治兵来作为报答。
English: On the 26th, Yu Yunwen said goodbye to Xiaozong. Xiaozong told him that he had decided to enlist himself, and ordered Yu Yunwen to come and lead the troops as a reward.

古文：冬十月丁未，遣冯撙等使金贺正旦。
现代文：冬十月十二日，派遣冯搏等出使金国祝贺新春。
English: In winter, on October 12th, Feng Bo and others were dispatched to congratulate the Chinese New Year.

古文：丙辰，金遣夹谷清臣等来贺会庆节。
现代文：二十一日，金国派遣夹谷清臣等来祝贺会庆节。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the State of Kim dispatched Jiayu Qingcheng and others to congratulate the festival.

古文：罢借诸路职田。
现代文：废罢借各路职田。
English: Abolition of strikes and borrowing of all fields of work.

古文：十一月辛未，遣官鬻江、浙、福建、二广、湖南八路官田。
现代文：十一月初六，派遣官员警卖江、浙、福建、二广、湖南八路官田。
English: At the beginning of November 6, officials were dispatched to sell the river, Zhejiang, Fujian, Erguang, and Hunan 8th Road.

古文：辛巳，复四川诸州教授员。
现代文：十六日，恢复四川各州教授名额。
English: On the 16th, the number of professors in each state of Sichuan was restored.

古文：庚寅，进检校少傅、知福州史浩开府仪同三司。
现代文：二十五日，检校少傅、知福州史浩进为开府仪同三司。
English: On the 25th, the school inspector, Zhi Fuzhou Shi Haojin, was appointed as the third secretary of the Kaifu ceremony.

古文：十二月戊戌，蠲两淮明年租赋。
现代文：十二月初四，免除两淮明年租赋。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of December, the two Huai were exempted from next year's rent.

古文：甲辰，诏京西招集归正人授田如两淮。
现代文：初十，诏令京西招集归正人，授田如同两淮一样。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, the imperial edict called for people in western Beijing to return to the righteous, and the land was given to them just like the two Huai.

古文：甲寅，命四川试武举。
现代文：二十日，命令四川试武举。
English: On the 20th, Sichuan was ordered to try martial arts.

古文：丙辰，追封刘光世为安成郡王。
现代文：二十二日，追封刘光世为安成郡王。
English: On the 22nd, Liu Guangshi was posthumously crowned the king of Ancheng County.

古文：丁巳，遣韩元吉等贺金主生辰。
现代文：二十三日，派遣韩元吉祝贺金主生日。
English: On the 23rd, Han Yuanji was sent to congratulate Kim Jong Nam on his birthday.

古文：庚申，复置铸钱司提点官二员。
现代文：二十六日，重新设置铸钱司提点官二名。
English: On the 26th, two officials from the mint were reinstated.

古文：辛酉，金遣曹望之等来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十七日，金国派遣曹望之等来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 27th, China sent Cao Wangzhi and other officials to congratulate the upcoming Chinese New Year.

古文：是岁，隆兴府、江、筠州、临江、兴国军大旱，四川水。
现代文：这一年，隆兴府、江箔州、临江兴国军大早，四川水灾。
English: In this year, Longxingfu, Jiangfuzhou and Linjiang were affected by floods in Sichuan.

古文：九年春正月辛未，王之奇罢为淮南安抚使，王炎罢为观文殿大学士、提举洞霄宫。
现代文：乾道九年春正月初七，王之奇罢为淮南安抚使，王炎罢为观文殿大学士、提举洞霄宫。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the spring of the ninth year of the Qian Dao, Wang Zhiqi became the Huainan pacification envoy, Wang Yan became a scholar of the Guanwen Temple, and the Dongxiao Palace was raised.

古文：乙亥，以张说同知枢密院事，户部侍郎沈夏签书枢密院事。
现代文：十一日，任命张说为同知枢密院事，户部侍郎沈夏为签书枢密院事。
English: On the 11th day, Zhang Said was appointed as the Tongzhi Privy Councilor, and the Household Attendant Shen Xia was appointed as the Signing Privy Councilor.

古文：戊寅，遣官鬻两浙营田及没官田，次及江东、西、四川如之。
现代文：十四日，派官员警卖两浙营田和没官田，然后江东西和四川也如此。
English: On the 14th, officials and police were sent to sell the two Zhejing fields and the non-official fields, and then the East and West Rivers and Sichuan.

古文：以刑部尚书郑闻签书枢密院事。
现代文：任命刑部尚书郑闻为签书枢密院事。
English: Appointed the Penal Department's Shang Shu Zhengwen as the signatory of the Privy Council.

古文：乙酉，福建盐复官卖法。
现代文：二十一日，福建盐恢复官卖法。
English: On the twenty-first day, Fujian Salt restored the official selling method.

古文：是月，以措置两淮、荆襄十六事敕安抚、转运司督诸州守臣，月具所行事奏，仍审择臧否，以议黜陟。
现代文：这个月，命令安抚、转运使用措置两淮和荆襄十六事督促各州守臣，每月奏上所行事件，并且审选好坏，作为讨论升降的依据。
English: This month, the order to pacify, transfer and use the measures of the Two Huai and Sixteen Jing Xiang urged the states to keep the vassals, report the incidents every month, and review the good and bad, as the basis for discussing the promotion and demotion.

古文：闰月戊申，以久雨，命大理、三衙、临安府及两浙州县决系囚，减杂犯死罪以下一等，释杖以下。
现代文：闰正月十五日，因久雨不晴，命令三衙、大理和临安府以及两浙州县处理审押囚犯，杂犯死罪以下减罪一等，杖刑以下释放。
English: On the 15th day of the first month of the leap year, due to the long rain and cloudy weather, Sanqi, Dali and Lin'an prefectures and the two counties of Zhejiang were ordered to deal with the prisoners in custody, and the minor offenders were given a first-class reduction of the crime below the death penalty, and were released below the cane punishment.

古文：乙卯，修庐州城。
现代文：二十二日，修庐州城。
English: On the 22nd, the construction of Zhangzhou City began.

古文：辛酉，大风。
现代文：二十八日，大风。
English: On the 28th, the wind picked up.

古文：幸天竺寺、玉津园。
现代文：到天竺寺、玉津园。
English: To Tenchu-ji Temple and Tamatsu-en Garden.

古文：二月壬申，蠲江西旱伤五州逋负米。
现代文：二月初九，免除江西早灾五州拖欠的米。
English: On the 9th day of the 2nd month, the rice arrears of five prefectures in Jiangxi Province were exempted from the early disaster.

古文：乙亥，青羌奴儿结寇安静砦，黎州推官黎商老战死。
现代文：十二日，青羌奴儿结攻打安静寨，黎州推官黎商老战死。
English: On the 12th day of the month, the young soldiers of the Qing Dynasty attacked and defeated the quiet village, and Li Shanglao, the governor of Lizhou, died in the battle.

古文：乙酉，孙荣国公挺薨，追封豫国公。
现代文：二十二日，孙子荣国公赵司延逝世，追封为豫国公。
English: On the 22nd, Zhao Siyan, the grandson of the Prince of Rongguo, passed away and was posthumously named the Prince of Yunnan.

古文：丁亥，特赠苏轼为太师。
现代文：二十四日，特赠苏轼为太师。
English: On the 24th, Su Shi was awarded the title of Grand Master.

古文：三月甲午，禁北界博易银绢。
现代文：三月初二，禁止北界博易银绢。
English: On the second day of March, the northern Bo Yi silver mine was banned.

古文：戊申，从太上皇、太上皇后幸聚景园。
现代文：十六日，随从太上皇、太上皇后到聚景园。
English: On the 16th, they followed the Retired Emperor and Empress Dowager to the park.

古文：癸丑，复以进奏院隶门下后省。
现代文：二十一日，又把进奏院隶属门下后省。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, he also subordinated Shinso-in to his subordinate province, Hou.

古文：丙辰，复分淮南安抚司为东、西路。
现代文：二十四日，重新分淮南安抚司为东西路。
English: On the 24th, Huainan Pacifying Division was re-divided into East-West Road.

古文：夏四月丁丑，裁定武锋军军额。
现代文：夏四月十五日，裁定武锋军军额。
English: On the 15th day of the 4th month of the summer, it was decided that the number of troops in the army would be increased.

古文：己丑，皇太子解临安尹事。
现代文：二十七日，皇太子解除临安尹事务。
English: On the 27th, the crown prince relieved Lin Anyin of his duties.

古文：五月壬辰朔，日有食之。
现代文：五月初一，日食。
English: On May 1, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：己未，以迪功郎朱熹屡诏不起，特改宣教郎、主管台州崇道观。
现代文：二十八日，因迪功郎朱熹屡诏不起，特改为宣教郎，主管台州崇道观。
English: On the 28th, because Zhu Xi, the meritorious person of Di, repeatedly failed to deliver the edict, he was specially changed into a missionary, in charge of Taizhou's Taoism.

古文：六月甲戌，禁两淮、荆襄、四川诸州籍民户马。
现代文：六月十三日，禁止两淮、荆襄、四川各州籍没民户马。
English: On June 13th, the horses of stateless households in Zhuhai, Zhejiang and Sichuan were banned.

古文：己丑，戒饬监司、守令劝农。
现代文：二十八日，告诫监司、守令劝农。
English: On the 28th, the supervisors were admonished and the farmers were advised.

古文：秋七月壬寅，青羌奴儿结降。
现代文：秋七月十一日，青羌奴儿结投降。
English: On the 11th day of the 7th month of autumn, the young soldiers surrendered.

古文：辛亥，吐蕃弥羌畜列陷安静砦，引兵深入，黎州守臣诱邛部川蛮击却之。
现代文：二十日，吐蕃弥羌畜列攻陷安静寨，引兵深人，黎州守臣劝诱邓部川蛮打退他。
English: On the 20th day of the month, the animal column led by Tubo Yiming invaded Qizhai, and Li Zhou Shouwen persuaded Deng Bechuan to beat him back.

古文：八月丙子，诏兴修水利。
现代文：八月十六日，诏令兴修水利。
English: On August 16th, the government issued a decree to begin the construction of water conservancy.

古文：癸未，合荆、鄂二军为一，以吴挺充都统制。
现代文：二十三日，荆、鄂二军合为一军，任命吴挺担任都统制。
English: On the 23rd, the Jing and Hubei armies were merged into one army, and Wu Ting was appointed as the governor of the capital.

古文：九月丙申，梁克家等上《中兴会要》、太上皇及皇帝玉牒。
现代文：九月初六，梁克家等呈上《中兴会要和太上皇和皇上压牌。
English: On the 6th day of the 9th month, the Liang Ke family and others submitted the "ZTE wants to compete with the Emperor and Empress."

古文：庚子，命盱眙军以受书礼移牒泗州，示金生辰使，金使不从。
现代文：初十，命令盯胎军以受书礼移碟泅州，拿给金生辰使看，金使不从。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, he ordered the troops to move the dish to Bozhou with the honor of receiving the book, and show it to Jin Shengchen, but Jin Sheng did not comply.

古文：冬十月甲子，遣留正等使金贺正旦。
现代文：冬十月初五，派遣留正等出使金国祝贺新春。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of October in winter, the dispatch of the Chinese envoys to congratulate the Chinese New Year began.

古文：右丞相梁克家与同知枢密院张说议使事不合，乃求去。
现代文：右承相梁克家与同知枢密院张说议论出使事不合，于是请求离去。
English: The right-hand heir to the throne, Liang Kejia, and his confidant, the Privy Councillor Zhang, argued and disagreed on the matter, so he asked to leave.

古文：辛未，克家罢为观文殿大学士、知建宁府。
现代文：十二日，梁克家罢为观文殿大学士、建宁知府。
English: On the 12th, Liang Ke's family became a scholar of Guanwendeng University and the governor of Jianning Prefecture.

古文：壬申，矞云见。
现代文：十三日，出现彩色瑞云。
English: On the 13th, the colorful clouds appeared.

古文：甲戌，以曾怀为右丞相，张说知枢密院事，郑闻参知政事，沈夏同知枢密院事。
现代文：十五日，任命曾怀为右承相，张说为知枢密院事，郑闻为参知政事，沈夏为同知枢密院事。
English: On the 15th, Zeng Huai was appointed as the Minister of the Right, Zhang He as the Secretary of the Privy Council, Zheng Wen as the Assistant Secretary of the Privy Council, and Shen Xia as the Secretary of the Privy Council.

古文：庚辰，金遣完颜襄等来贺会庆节。
现代文：二十一日，金朝派完颜襄等来祝贺会庆节。
English: On the 21st, Kim Jong-il sent his emissaries to congratulate the festival.

古文：丁亥，襄等入辞，别函申议受书之礼，仍示虞允文速为边备。
现代文：二十八日，完颜襄等告辞，另外致函金国重新讨论受书礼仪，并且指示虞允文迅速准备边防。
English: On the 28th, after Yan Xiang's farewell, he sent another letter to Kim Guo to re-discuss the etiquette of receiving letters, and instructed Yu Yunwen to quickly prepare for border defense.

古文：十一月辛卯，诏枢密院除授及财赋，事关中书、门下省，其边机军政更不录送。
现代文：十一月初二，诏令枢密院，除授及财赋，事关中书、门下省外，其边机军政更不录送。
English: On the 2nd day of the 11th month, the Privy Council issued an edict that, in addition to the grant and financial endowment, except for matters related to Zhongshu and subordinate provinces, the military and political affairs would not be recorded.

古文：戊戌，合祀天地于圜丘，大赦，改明年为淳熙元年。
现代文：初九，在圆丘合祭天地，大赦，改明年为淳熙元年。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, at the round mound, the heaven and the earth will hold a festival, and there will be a general amnesty, and the next year will be the first year of Junxi.

古文：十二月未朔，戒敕沿边诸军，毋辄遣间探、招纳叛亡。
现代文：十二月初一，告诫沿边诸军，不要动不动就派遣间探、招纳叛亡。
English: On the first day of December, he warned the armies along the border not to send spies and recruit traitors.

古文：甲子，沈夏罢。
现代文：初六，沈夏被罢免。
English: On the sixth day of the new year, Shen Xia was dismissed.

古文：乙丑，以御史中丞姚宪签书枢密院事。
现代文：初七，任命御史中承姚宪为签书枢密院事。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, he appointed Yao Xian, a member of the Imperial History Society, as a member of the Privy Council.

古文：遣韩彦直等贺金主生辰。
现代文：派遣韩彦直等祝贺金主生日。
English: Han Yan Zhi and others were dispatched to congratulate Kim on his birthday.

古文：辛未，交阯入贡。
现代文：十三日，交趾来进贡。
English: On the thirteenth day, Koji came to pay tribute.

古文：癸酉，罢广西客钞盐，复官般官卖法。
现代文：十五日，罢废广西客钞盐，恢复官般官卖法。
English: On the 15th, Guangxi guest bill salt was abolished, and the official selling method was restored.

古文：甲戌，遣使措置宜州市马。
现代文：十六日，派遣使臣措置宜州买马。
English: On the 16th, envoys were dispatched to Yizhou to buy horses.

古文：乙亥，以嗣濮王士輵、永阳郡王居广并为少保。
现代文：十七日，任命嗣攫王赵匕揭、永阳郡王赵居广并为少保。
English: On the 17th, Zhao Jijie, the heir to the throne, and Zhao Jiguang, the king of Yongyang County, were appointed as junior guards.

古文：乙酉，金遣完颜璋等来贺明年正旦，以议受书礼不合，诏俟改日。
现代文：二十七日，金国派遣完颜璋等来祝贺明年新春，因商议受书礼意见不一，诏侯改日。
English: On the 27th, after China sent Yan Xuan and others to congratulate the next year's Spring Festival, due to the differences in opinions on the acceptance of the letter, the date was changed.

古文：以太上皇有旨，姑听仍旧。
现代文：因太上皇有旨，姑且允许仍旧。
English: Since it is the Emperor's will, it is still allowed.

古文：丁亥，璋等入见。
现代文：二十九日，完颜璋朝见孝宗。
English: On the 29th, after the funeral, I met with Takamune.

古文：是岁，浙东、江东西、湖北旱。
现代文：这一年，浙东、江东西、湖北早灾。
English: This year, the East of Zhejiang, the East and West of the Yangtze River, and Hubei suffered from early disasters.

古文：淳熙元年春正月乙未，禁淮西诸关采伐林木。
现代文：淳熙元年春正月初七，禁止淮西诸关采伐林木。
English: On the 7th day of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st year of Chunxi, the logging of trees in Zhugang, west of Huaixi, was banned.

古文：戊戌，罢坐仓籴米赏。
现代文：初十，废罢坐仓来米奖赏。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, the winner of the sit-in is rewarded with rice.

古文：庚子，罢两淮将帅权摄官。
现代文：十二日，废除两淮将帅权摄官。
English: On the 12th, the two Huai generals were abolished.

古文：丙午，禁两淮耕牛出境。
现代文：十八日，禁止两淮耕牛出境。
English: On the 18th, two Huai Cattle were banned from leaving the country.

古文：以交阯入贡，诏赐国名安南，封南平王李天祚为安南国王。
现代文：因交趾来进贡，诏令赐国名安南，封南平王李天柞为安南国王。
English: Due to the payment of tribute, the imperial edict gave the country the name Annan, and named the king of Nanping, Li Tianyao, as the king of Annan.

古文：二月癸酉，虞允文薨。
现代文：二月十六日，虞允文去世。
English: On February 16, Yu Yunwen passed away.

古文：辛巳，为郭浩立庙于金州。
现代文：二十四日，在金州为郭浩立庙。
English: On the 24th, Guo Hao Temple was built in Jinzhou.

古文：三月戊子朔，诏寄禄官及选人并去左右字。
现代文：三月初一，诏令寄禄官和选人并去左右字。
English: On the first day of March, an imperial edict was sent to the stipendiary magistrate and the person to be selected.

古文：丙申，以郑闻为资政殿大学士、四川宣抚使。
现代文：初九，任命郑闻为资政殿大学士、四川宣抚使。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month of the year, Zheng Wen was appointed as a scholar of the Academy of the Palace of Succession and a messenger of Sichuan.

古文：戊申，幸玉津园。
现代文：二十一日，到玉津园。
English: On the 21st, we went to Tamatsuen.

古文：癸丑，金遣梁肃等来计事。
现代文：二十六日，金国派遣梁肃等来商议有关事宜。
English: On the 26th, the DPRK dispatched Liang Su and others to discuss relevant matters.

古文：夏四月戊辰，从太上皇幸聚景园。
现代文：夏四月十二日，随从太上皇到聚景园。
English: On the 12th day of the 4th month of the summer, he accompanied the emperor to the scenic garden.

古文：壬申，许桂阳军溪洞子弟入州学听读。
现代文：十六日，允许桂阳军溪洞子弟进人州学听读。
English: On the 16th, the children of Guiyang Junxi Cave were allowed to enter Renzhou to learn to read.

古文：乙亥，诏四川宣抚司教阅诸州将兵。
现代文：十九日，诏令四川宣抚司教阅各州将兵。
English: On the 19th, the emperor ordered the bishop of Xuanfu in Sichuan to read the generals and soldiers of each state.

古文：戊寅，遣张子颜等使金报聘。
现代文：二十二日，派遣张子颜等出使金国答谢。
English: On the 22nd, Zhang Ziyan and others were sent to China to express their thanks.

古文：己卯，以姚宪参知政事，户部尚书叶衡签书枢密院事。
现代文：二十三日，任命姚宪为参知政事，户部尚书叶衡为签书枢密院事。
English: On the 23rd, Yao Xian was appointed as a member of the Council of State, and the Head of the Household, Shang Shuxu Yeheng, was appointed as a member of the Privy Council.

古文：五月壬寅，班郑兴裔所创《检验格目》。
现代文：五月十七日，颁布郑兴裔所创检验格卧。
English: On May 17th, the inspection standard created by Zheng Xingxiong was promulgated.

古文：六月丙辰朔，诏礼官讨论别建四祖庙，正太祖东向位。
现代文：六月初一，下诏礼官讨论另外建筑四祖庙，正太祖东向位。
English: On the first day of June, the lower etiquette officials discussed the construction of another four ancestral temples, and Zhengda Zu Dongxiang was enthroned.

古文：戊午，以兴州都统制吴挺为定江军节度使。
现代文：初三，任命兴州都统制吴挺为定江军节度使。
English: On the third day of the first month, Wu Ting, the governor of Xingzhou, was appointed as the chief envoy of the Dingjiang Army.

古文：癸酉，改江陵府为荆南府。
现代文：十八日，改江陵府为荆南府。
English: On the 18th, Jiangling Prefecture was renamed Jingnan Prefecture.

古文：戊寅，曾怀罢。
现代文：二十三日，曾怀被罢免。
English: On the 23rd, Zeng Huai was dismissed.

古文：癸未，姚宪罢。
现代文：二十八日，姚宪被罢免。
English: On the 28th, Yao Xian was removed from office.

古文：甲申，落宪端明殿学士，罢宫观。
现代文：二十九日，姚宪被解除端明殿学士职衔，罢宫观衔。
English: On the 29th, Yao Xian was relieved of the title of Duanmingdian and the title of Zangongyuan.

古文：以叶衡参知政事。
现代文：任命叶衡为参知政事。
English: Ye Heng was appointed to the post of vice-governor.

古文：秋七月丁亥，以郑闻参知政事。
现代文：秋七月初二，任命郑闻为参知政事。
English: On the 2nd day of the 7th month of autumn, Zheng Wen was appointed to the post of Vice-governor.

古文：罢四川宣抚司。
现代文：罢废四川宣抚司。
English: The Sichuan Publicity Department was abolished.

古文：以成都府路安抚使薛良朋为四川安抚制置使。
现代文：任命成都府路安抚使薛良朋为四川安抚制置使。
English: The Chengdu Provincial Road Pacification Envoy Xue Liangpeng was appointed as the Sichuan Pacification Envoy.

古文：戊子，诏举廉吏。
现代文：初三，诏令推举廉吏。
English: On the third day of the new year, the imperial edict was issued to promote corrupt officials.

古文：壬辰，以曾怀为右丞相。
现代文：初七，任命曾怀为右承相。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, Zeng Huai was appointed as the right-hand minister.

古文：己酉，姚宪南康军居住。
现代文：二十四日，姚宪贬往南康军居住。
English: On the 24th, Yao Xian went to live in Nankangjun.

古文：八月己未，张说罢为太尉，提举隆兴府玉隆观。
现代文：八月初五，张说罢为太尉，提举隆兴府玉隆观。
English: On the 5th day of the 8th month of the year, Zhang said that he would be promoted to the rank of captain and promoted Longxingfu Yu Longguan.

古文：以徽猷阁学士杨倓为昭庆军节度使、签书枢密院事。
现代文：任命徽酞阁学士杨谈为昭庆军节度使、签书枢密院事。
English: He appointed Yang Dan, an academician of Huizhong Academy, as the festival envoy of the Shaoqing Army and the signing of the letter of the Privy Council.

古文：九月乙酉朔，以曾觌开府仪同三司。
现代文：九月初一，任命曾规为开府仪同三司。
English: On the first day of September, Zeng Jie was appointed as the head of the three departments of the General Office of the Communist Party of China.

古文：壬寅，幸玉津园宴射。
现代文：十八日，到玉津园设宴射箭。
English: On the 18th, a banquet was held in Tamatsuen Garden and archery was played.

古文：乙巳，罢宜州市马。
现代文：二十一日，废罢宜州买马。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the ban on buying horses in Yizhou was lifted.

古文：冬十月辛酉，立金银出界罪赏。
现代文：冬十月初七，立金银出界罪赏。
English: On the 7th day of the 10th month of winter, the bounty on gold and silver was set.

古文：壬戌，遣蔡洸使金贺正旦。
现代文：初八，派遣蔡洗出使金国祝贺正旦。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Cai Jie sent an envoy to the State of Jin to congratulate Zhengdan.

古文：癸亥，以积雨，命中外决系囚。
现代文：初九，因积雨，命令中外处理关押囚犯。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, because of the rain, the central and foreign governments were ordered to deal with the prisoners.

古文：丙寅，郑闻薨。
现代文：十二日，郑闻逝世。
English: On the 12th, Zheng Wen passed away.

古文：乙亥，金遣完颜让等来贺会庆节。
现代文：二十一日，金国派遣完颜让等来祝贺会庆节。
English: On the twenty-first day, Kim Guo dispatched Yan Zheng and others to congratulate the festival.

古文：戊寅，占城入贡。
现代文：二十四日，占城国来进贡。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the state of Zamsheng came to pay tribute.

古文：辛巳，再蠲临安府民身丁钱三年。
现代文：二十七日，再次免除临安府民身丁钱三年。
English: On the 27th, Lin'an citizens were once again exempted from paying the fine for three years.

古文：壬午，以魏王恺判明州。
现代文：二十八日，委任魏王赵恺判明州。
English: On the 28th, Wei King Zhao Zhen was appointed as the governor.

古文：蠲郴州、桂阳军借贷常平米。
现代文：免除郴州、桂阳军借贷常平米。
English: Exemption of loans for the Bozhou and Guiyang armies.

古文：十一月甲申朔，日有食之。
现代文：十一月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of November, there will be a solar eclipse.

古文：戊戌，以礼部侍郎龚茂良参知政事。
现代文：十五日，任命礼部侍郎龚茂良为参知政事。
English: On the fifteenth day, he appointed Shimo Moroyoshi, an attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies, as a member of the Council of State.

古文：杨倓罢，以叶衡兼权知枢密院事。
现代文：杨谈被罢免，任命叶衡兼权知枢密院事。
English: Yang Dan was ousted and Ye Heng was appointed to the Privy Council.

古文：丙午，曾怀罢。
现代文：二十三日，曾怀被罢免。
English: On the 23rd, Zeng Huai was dismissed.

古文：戊申，以叶衡为右丞相兼枢密使。
现代文：二十五日，任命叶衡为右承相兼枢密使。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, Ye Heng was appointed to the post of Ujosho and Privy Councilor.

古文：十二月丁巳，以吏部尚书李彦颖签书枢密院事。
现代文：十二月初四，任命吏部尚书李彦颖为签书枢密院事。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of December, Li Yanying was appointed as the secretary of the Privy Council.

古文：壬戌，遣吴琚等贺金主生辰。
现代文：初九，派遣吴据等祝贺金主生日。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Wu Zhen and others were dispatched to congratulate Jin on his birthday.

古文：丙寅，罢铁钱，改铸铜钱。
现代文：十三日，废罢铸铁钱，改铸铜钱。
English: On the 13th, the casting of iron money was abolished and replaced by the casting of copper money.

古文：庚午，诏礼官论复魏悼王袭封。
现代文：十七日，诏令礼官讨论恢复魏悼王袭封。
English: On the 17th, the imperial edict ordered the etiquette officials to discuss the restoration of the Wei Lai King's seal.

古文：壬申，叶衡等上《真宗玉牒》。
现代文：十九日，叶衡等呈上滇宗玉碟。
English: On the 19th, Ye Heng et al. presented the Zongzong jade plate.

古文：金遣刘仲诲等来贺明年正旦。
现代文：金国派遣刘仲诲等来祝贺明年新春。
English: The People's Republic of China sent Liu Zhongyun and others to congratulate the Chinese New Year next year.

古文：以资政殿学士、知江陵府沈夏升大学士，为四川宣抚使，仍命升差从主帅，场务还军中。
现代文：资政殿学士、江陵知府沈夏升为大学士，担任四川宣抚使，并且命令升差听从主帅，场务归还军中。
English: Shen Xia Sheng, a scholar of the Academy of the Palace of the Great Counselor and the governor of Jiangling Province, became a university scholar, served as the Sichuan envoy, and ordered the envoy to obey the commander and return the field work to the army.

古文：新四川制置使范成大改管内制置使。
现代文：新四川制置使范成大改管内制置使。
English: The new Sichuan system made Fan Chengda change the internal system.

古文：二年春正月癸巳，前宰相梁克家、曾怀坐擅改堂除，克家落观文殿学士，怀降为观文殿学士。
现代文：淳熙二年春正月初十，前宰相梁克家、曾怀因擅改堂除，梁克家被解除观文殿学士，曾怀降为观文殿学士。
English: On the 10th day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of the Spring of Chunxi, the former Prime Minister Liang Ke and Zeng Huai were expelled for changing the hall without permission. Liang Ke and Zeng Huai were dismissed from the Academy of the Academy of Fine Arts, and Zeng Huai was reduced to the Academy of the Academy of the Academy of Fine Arts.

古文：甲午，废同安、蕲春监。
现代文：十一日，废除同安薪春监。
English: On the 11th, the spring inspection of the same salary was abolished.

古文：丁未，以两淮诸庄归正人安业，徐子寅等行赏有差。
现代文：二十四日，因两淮各庄归正人安居归业，徐子寅等得到奖赏不等。
English: On the 24th, Xu Ziying and others received varying rewards for the safe return of the two Huai Zhuang to their families and their safe return to work.

古文：庚戌，诏籍诸军子弟为背嵬军。
现代文：二十七日，诏令登记各军子弟为背鬼军。
English: On the 27th, a decree was issued to register the sons and daughters of each army as the Ghost Army.

古文：三月丙申，以太上皇寿七十，诏礼官讨论庆寿典礼。
现代文：三月十五日，太上皇年纪七十，诏令礼官讨论庆寿典礼。
English: On March 15th, when the Emperor was 70 years old, he ordered the etiquette officials to discuss the celebration ceremony.

古文：乙巳，诏武举第一人补秉义郎，堂除诸军计议官。
现代文：二十四日，诏令武举第一名补为秉义郎，堂除为各军计议官。
English: On the 24th, the imperial edict added the first name of Wuhuo as Bingyiro, and Dojo was removed as the military budget officer.

古文：夏四月乙卯，赐礼部进士詹骙以下四百二十有六人及第、出身。
现代文：夏四月初四，赐礼部进士鲁癸以下四百二十六人及第、出身。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4

古文：己巳，幸玉津园。
现代文：十八日，到玉津园。
English: On the 18th, to Tamatsuen.

古文：是月，茶寇赖文政起湖北，转入湖南、江西，官军数为所败，命江州都统皇甫倜招之。
现代文：这个月，茶寇赖文政起自湖北，转人湖南、江西，官军多次被打败，命令江州都统皇甫调招降他。
English: This month, the tea guerrilla Lai Wen Zheng was transferred from Hubei Province to Hunan Province and Jiangxi Province. The government army was defeated many times, and ordered the Emperor of Jiangsu Province to transfer and recruit him.

古文：五月辛卯，谕宰相以朝政阙失，士民皆得献言。
现代文：五月十一日，告谕宰相朝政缺失，士民都可以上书直言。
English: On May 11th, the prime minister announced that there was a lack of government, and that the people could speak their minds in writing.

古文：庚子，命鄂州都统李川调兵捕茶寇。
现代文：二十日，命令鄂州都统李川调兵捕捉茶寇。
English: On the 20th, he ordered Li Chuan, the Ezhou Metropolitan Government, to dispatch troops to capture the tea thief.

古文：乙巳，诏知县三年为任。
现代文：二十五日，诏令知县三年为一个任期。
English: On the 25th, Zhao decreed that Zhixian would serve a three-year term.

古文：六月庚戌朔，诏自今宰执、侍从以下除外任，非有功绩者不除职名，外任人非有劳效，亦不除职。
现代文：六月初一，诏令宰执、侍从官以下授外任，没有功绩者不授给职名，外任人没有治绩者也不授给职名。
English: On the first day of June, the Emperor issued an edict to appoint officials below the rank of chief officer and attendant officer to posts outside the palace. Those without merit would not be given a title, and those without merit would not be given a title.

古文：以沈夏同知枢密院事。
现代文：任命沈夏为同知枢密院事。
English: Appointed Shen Xia as Tongzhi Privy Councillor.

古文：辛酉，罢四川宣抚司。
现代文：十二日，废罢四川宣抚司。
English: On the 12th, the Sichuan Publicity Department was abolished.

古文：以仓部郎中辛弃疾为江西提刑，节制诸军，讨捕茶寇。
现代文：任命仓部郎中辛弃疾为江西提刑，节制各军，讨捕茶寇。
English: Appointed Kurabe's son-in-law, Xin Qianji, as the leader of Jiangxi Province to impose punishment, restrain the troops, and catch the tea thief.

古文：丁卯，用左司谏汤邦彦言，落蒋芾、王炎观文殿大学士，张说落节度使，芾建昌军、炎袁州、说抚州，并居住。
现代文：十八日，采纳左司谏汤邦彦的意见，解除蒋莆和王炎观文殿大学士职衔，张说解除节度使职衔，分别贬往建昌军、袁州、抚州居住。
English: On the 18th, adopting the opinion of Zuo Jian Tong Bangyan, Jiang Jian and Wang Yan Guan were relieved of the title of Benten University. Zhang Jian said that he was relieved of the title of the festival, and they were demoted to Jianchang Army, Yuanzhou and Fuzhou respectively.

古文：戊辰，振济湖南、江西被寇州县。
现代文：十九日，贩济湖南和江西被茶寇劫掠的州县。
English: On the 19th, tea traders from Hunan and Jiangxi were looted by tea robbers.

古文：是月，茶寇自湖南犯广东。
现代文：这个月，茶寇从湖南进犯广东。
English: This month, the tea thieves invaded Guangdong from Hunan.

古文：秋七月辛丑，有星孛于西方。
现代文：秋七月二十二日，西方出现彗星。
English: In autumn, on July 22, a comet appeared in the west.

古文：八月丙辰，江西总管贾和仲以捕茶寇失律，除名、贺州编管。
现代文：八月初八，江西总管贾和仲因捕捉茶寇失去控制被除名，贺州编管。
English: On the eighth day of the eighth month of August, Jiangxi Governor Jia Hezhong was removed from his post for losing control over the capture of tea thieves, and Hezhou was made governor.

古文：甲子，赐安南国王印。
现代文：十六日，赐给安南国王印。
English: On the 16th, the seal was given to King Anan.

古文：丁卯，蠲湖南、江西被寇州县租税。
现代文：十九日，免除湖南、江西被攻掠州县租税。
English: On the 19th, Hunan and Jiangxi were exempted from the tax of the attacked and plundered counties.

古文：丁丑，遣左司谏汤邦彦等使金申议。
现代文：二十九日，派遣左司谏汤邦彦等出使金朝申明朝廷意见。
English: On the 29th, the Left Division of the Shogunate dispatched Tong Bangyan and other envoys to the Kim dynasty to express the opinion of the imperial court.

古文：九月乙卯朔，汤邦彦请分扬、庐州、荆南、襄阳府、金州、兴元府、兴州为七路，每路文臣一人充安抚使以治民，武臣一人充都总管以治兵，三载视其成以议诛赏。
现代文：九月乙卯朔，汤邦彦请求分扬州、庐州、荆南府、襄阳府、金州、兴元府、兴州为七路，每路文臣一人，担任安抚使管理百姓；武臣一人，担任都总管管理军队，三年后视其成效作为诛赏的依据，孝宗采纳了这个意见。
English: In September, Tang Bangyan requested that Yangzhou, Zhangzhou, Jingnan, Xiangyang, Jinzhou, Xingyuan, and Xingzhou be divided into seven provinces, with each province having one civil officer to serve as a pacifying envoy to manage the people, and one military officer to serve as the chief administrator to manage the army. Three years later, considering its effectiveness as the basis for reward, Xiaozong adopted this opinion.

古文：从之。乙酉，振恤淮南水旱州县。乙未，叶衡罢。
现代文：初七，贩济抚恤淮南水早州县。十七日，叶衡被罢免。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Ye Heng, a peddler of alms in Wuzhou County, Huainan Province, was removed from his post.

古文：丁未，沈夏罢。
现代文：二十九日，沈夏被罢免。
English: On the 29th, Shen Xia was dismissed.

古文：赠赵鼎为太傅，还其爵邑，追封丰国公。
现代文：赠赵鼎为太傅，还其爵邑，追封为丰国公。
English: Zhao Ding was given the title of Taifu, his peerage was restored, and he was posthumously awarded the title of Feng Guogong.

古文：闰月丁巳，以李彦颖参知政事，翰林学士王淮签书枢密院事。
现代文：闰九月初九，任命李彦颖为参知政事，翰林学士王淮为签书枢密院事。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th lunar month, Li Yanying was appointed as a member of the Council of State, and Hanlin Scholar Wang Huai was appointed as a member of the Privy Council.

古文：甲子，诏武臣从军毋带内职。
现代文：十六日，诏令武臣从军不带内职。
English: On the 16th, the emperor ordered the samurai retainers to leave the army without taking up their posts.

古文：是月，辛弃疾诱赖文政杀之，茶寇平。
现代文：这个月，辛弃疾诱杀赖文政，茶寇平定。
English: This month, the illness of abandonment was induced to kill Lai Wen Zheng, and the tea party was pacified.

古文：冬十月戊寅朔，赏平茶寇功，湖南、江西、广东监帅黜陟有差。
现代文：冬十月初一，奖赏平定茶寇功劳，湖南、江西、广东监帅升降不等。
English: In winter, on the first day of October, rewards were given for the achievements in the suppression of the tea thieves, and supervisors in Hunan, Jiangxi, and Guangdong were promoted and demoted.

古文：庚辰，大风。
现代文：初三，大风。
English: On the third day of junior high school, the wind picked up.

古文：壬午，诣德寿宫，加上光尧寿圣宪天体道太上皇帝尊号曰光尧寿圣宪天体道性仁诚德经武纬文太上皇帝，寿圣明慈太上皇后尊号曰寿圣齐明广慈太上皇后。
现代文：初五，到德寿宫，加上光尧寿圣宪天体道太上皇帝尊号为光尧寿圣宪天体道性仁诚德经武纬文太上皇帝，寿圣明慈太上皇后尊号为寿圣齐明广慈太上皇后。
English: On the fifth day of the first lunar month, he went to Deoksugung Palace, and together with the celestial body of the Emperor Guangxu, the celestial body of the Empress Dowager Guangxu, the celestial body of the Empress Dowager Guangxu, the celestial body of the Empress Dowager Guangxu, the celestial body of the Empress Dowager Guangxu, the celestial body of the Empress Dowager Guangxu, the celestial body of the Empress Dowager Guangxu, the celestial body of the Empress Dowager Guangxu, the celestial body of the Empress Dowager Guangxu, the celestial body

古文：乙酉，遣谢廓然等使金贺正旦。
现代文：初八，派遣谢廓然等出使金朝祝贺新春。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Xie Ku-Ran was dispatched to congratulate the New Year.

古文：戊戌，金遣完颜禧等来贺会庆节。
现代文：二十一日，金国派遣完颜禧等来祝贺会庆节。
English: On the twenty-first day, Kim Guo dispatched the full-fledged jubilee troops to congratulate the festival.

古文：十一月戊申朔，奉上太上皇、太上皇后册宝于德寿宫。
现代文：十一月初一，到德寿宫奉上太上皇、太上皇后册宝。
English: On the first day of November, it was presented to the Retired Emperor and Empress Dowager at Deoksugung Palace.

古文：庚戌，丽正门内火。
现代文：初三，丽正门内发生火灾。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, a fire broke out inside the Lisheng Gate.

古文：癸丑，大风。
现代文：初六，大风。
English: It's the sixth day of the month, and it's windy.

古文：戊午，提点坑冶王揖进羡余十万缗，诏却之。
现代文：十一日，提点坑冶王揖进羡余十万络，诏令拒绝。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Wang Huanjin, a mining engineer, proposed to invest more than 100,000 rupees, but the imperial edict refused.

古文：十二月辛巳，班《淳熙吏部七司法》。
现代文：十二月初四，颁布淳熙吏部七司含。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of December, the seven departments of the Junxi Personnel Department were promulgated.

古文：遣张宗元等贺金主生辰。
现代文：派遣张宗元等祝贺金主生日。
English: Zhang Zongyuan and others were sent to congratulate Kim Jong Nam on his birthday.

古文：甲午，朝德寿宫，行庆寿礼。大赦。文武官封父母，赏诸军。
现代文：十七日，朝拜德寿宫，行庆寿礼，大赦，文武官封父母，赏赐各军。
English: On the 17th, they paid homage to the De Shou Palace, celebrated the anniversary, granted amnesty, appointed civil and military officials as parents, and rewarded the troops.

古文：议放天下苗税三之一，大臣言国用不足，乃止。
现代文：讨论减免天下苗税三分之一，大臣说国用不足，于是没有结果。
English: A discussion on reducing and exempting one-third of the world's seedling tax, the minister said that the state was insufficient, so there was no result.

古文：丙申，更定强盗赃法。
现代文：十九日，改定强盗赃法。
English: On the 19th, the Law on the Punishment of Robbers was amended.

古文：甲辰，金遣完颜迨等来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十七日，金国派遣完颜追等来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 27th, Kim Jong-un sent a string of emissaries to congratulate the upcoming Spring Festival.

古文：三年春正月甲寅，以常州旱，宽其逋负之半。
现代文：淳熙三年春正月初八，因常州早灾，宽免拖欠钱物的一半。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the spring of the third year of Aung Hee, due to the early disaster in Changzhou, half of the arrears of money and goods were forgiven.

古文：删犯赃荫补法。
现代文：删定犯赃荫补法。
English: The amendment to the Criminal Law was deleted.

古文：振淮东饥，仍命贷贫民种。
现代文：贩济淮东饥民，并且命令贷给贫民种子。
English: He sold food to the starving people in Huadong and ordered that seeds be loaned to the poor.

古文：乙丑，振恤归正人。
现代文：十九日，贩济抚恤归正人。
English: On the 19th, the peddler was rehabilitated.

古文：二月壬午，蠲两淮教阅民兵夏税。
现代文：二月初六，免除两淮训练民兵夏税。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2

古文：癸未，以伯圭为安德军节度使。
现代文：初七，任命赵伯圭为安德军节度使。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Zhao Bokei was appointed as the chief envoy of the Anding Army.

古文：甲申，诏四川监司、帅守，闻命之官毋候告敕。
现代文：初八，诏令四川临司、帅守，闻命之官不必等候任命书。
English: On the eighth day of the first lunar month, the emperor decreed that Sichuan's chief magistrate, commander-in-chief, and officer of death did not have to wait for the appointment letter.

古文：辛亥，上《太上皇日历》于德寿宫。
现代文：封给韩世忠溢号为忠武。这个月，废罢各路警没官田。三月初一，日食，露云没有显现。初六，到德寿宫呈上太上皇日历。
English: Han Shizhong was given the title of "Chungwu." This month, all traffic policemen were dismissed and lost their official fields. On the first day of March, the solar eclipse, the dew cloud did not appear. On the sixth day of the first month, the calendar of the Emperor was presented to the Deoksugung Palace.

古文：己未，置六部编敕司。
现代文：十四日，设置六部编救司。
English: On the 14th, a six-department relief division was set up.

古文：癸亥，幸报恩寺，遂幸聚景园。
现代文：十八日，到报恩寺，于是到聚景园。
English: On the 18th, they went to Baon Temple, and then to the scenic park.

古文：己巳，并左藏四库为二。
现代文：二十四日，左藏四库合并为二。
English: On the 24th, the four libraries of Zuozang were merged into two.

古文：辛未，诏四川制置司岁择梁、洋义士材武者二人，遣赴枢密院。
现代文：二十六日，诏令四川制置司每年选择梁、洋州义士才武者二人，送往枢密院。
English: On the 26th, the Sichuan Provincial Government ordered the Sichuan Provincial Government to select two Liang and Yangzhou noblemen every year and send them to the Privy Council.

古文：壬申，立任子参选覆试法。
现代文：二十七日，立任子参选复试法。
English: On the 27th, Ren Zi was allowed to run for re-election.

古文：夏四月戊寅，诏侍从、台谏、两省官岁举监司、郡守各五人。
现代文：夏四月初三，诏令侍从、台谏、两省官每年推举监司、郡守各五人。
English: On the third day of the fourth month of the summer, the attendants of the imperial edict, the Taiwan government, and the two provincial officials elected five supervisors and five county governors each year.

古文：辛巳，靖州人寇边，遣兵讨捕之。
现代文：初六，靖州摇人攻打边境，派兵讨捕。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the Jingzhou Shakers attacked the border and sent troops to arrest them.

古文：丁亥，雨雹。
现代文：十二日，降冰雹。
English: On the 14th, hail fell.

古文：己丑，责授叶衡德军节度副使、郴州安置。
现代文：十四日，叶衡被贬降为安德军节度副使，郴州安置。
English: On the 14th, Ye Heng was demoted to the vice-envoy of the Andor army, and resettled in Zhangzhou.

古文：丁酉，汤邦彦、陈雷奉使无状，除名，邦彦新州、雷永州编管。
现代文：二十二日，汤邦彦、陈雷奉命出使金国没有成绩被除名，分别编管新州、永州。
English: On the 22nd, Tang Bangyan and Chen Lei were ordered to send Jin Guo to be removed from the list without any achievement, and they were assigned to be in charge of Xinzhou and Yongzhou, respectively.

古文：己亥，诏诸路提刑岁五月理囚。
现代文：二十四日，诏令各路提刑司每年五月处理囚犯。
English: On the 24th, it ordered the Criminal Investigation Departments to deal with prisoners in May every year.

古文：五月癸丑，合利州东、西路为一。
现代文：五月初九，利州东西路合而为一。
English: On the ninth day of the fifth month, the east and west roads of Lizhou were merged into one.

古文：安南国王李天祚卒。
现代文：安南国王李天柞逝世。
English: Li Tianyao, King of Annam, passed away.

古文：戊午，遣使吊祭。
现代文：十四日，派遣使臣吊祭。
English: On the 14th, an envoy was sent to perform the hanging ceremony.

古文：壬申，太白昼见。
现代文：二十八日，太白星白天显现。
English: On the 26th, the too-white Venus appeared in the daytime.

古文：六月乙酉，减四川酒课四十七万余缗。
现代文：六月十二日，减少四川酒课四十七万多络。
English: On June 12, the Sichuan wine class was reduced by more than 470,000.

古文：甲午，以朱熹屡诏不起，特命为秘书郎，熹不就。
现代文：二十一日，因朱熹屡诏不起，特命为秘书郎，朱熹没有到任。
English: On the twenty-first day, Zhu Xi did not arrive at the office, as he was specially appointed as secretary due to Zhu Xi's repeated absences.

古文：秋七月乙丑，禁浙西围田。
现代文：秋七月二十二日，禁止浙西围田。
English: On the 22nd day of the 7th month of autumn, the enclosing of fields in western Zhejiang was prohibited.

古文：八月乙亥，以王淮同知枢密院事，礼部尚书赵雄签书枢密院事。
现代文：八月初三，任命王淮同为知枢密院事，礼部尚书赵雄为签书枢密院事。
English: On the third day of August, Wang Huai Tong was appointed as the Secretary of the Privy Council, and Zhao Xiong, the Secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies, was appointed as the Secretary of the Privy Council.

古文：诏六察官纠察庶务，台纲益振，各进二官。
现代文：诏令六察官纠察庶务，朝纲得到振肃，各进二官。
English: The emperor ordered six procurators to picket the general affairs, the morning program was suppressed, and two procurators were promoted each.

古文：庚辰，太上皇诏立贵妃谢氏为皇后。
现代文：初八，太上皇诏立贵妃谢氏为皇后。
English: On the 8th day of the 1st month, the Emperor decreed that Guifei Xie would become the Empress.

古文：壬午，以久雨，命中外决系囚。
现代文：初十，因久雨不晴，命令中外处理关押囚犯。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, because it had been raining for a long time and the weather was cloudy, the central and foreign governments were ordered to deal with the prisoners.

古文：戊戌，靖州寇平。
现代文：二十六日，靖州摇贼平定。
English: On the 26th, the Jingzhou bandits were subdued.

古文：九月癸亥，诏自今犯公罪至死者，其荫补具所犯奏裁，著为令。
现代文：九月二十一日，下诏： 从今以后犯公罪至死者，其荫补要附上所犯罪行，听候奏裁，著为令。 
English: On September 21st, the following edict was issued: From now on, when a public crime is committed and the offender dies, the shadow of the crime must be attached to the sentence, and the sentence must be written.

古文：冬十月甲戌，以久雨，命中外决系囚。
现代文：冬十月初三，因久雨不晴，命令中外处决关押囚犯。
English: On the third day of the third month of winter, because of the long rain and cloudy weather, it was ordered to execute the prisoners at home and abroad.

古文：丙子，御文德殿，册皇后。
现代文：初五，到文德殿，册立皇后。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, she went to the Emperor's Residence to be proclaimed empress.

古文：丁丑，命临安守臣严禁逾侈。
现代文：初六，命令临安守臣严禁过度奢侈。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, he ordered the Lin'an governors to strictly prohibit excessive extravagance.

古文：庚辰，诏自今非歉岁不许鬻爵。
现代文：初九，诏令今后不是歉岁不许警爵。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, the emperor decreed that the sheriff would not be allowed to perform in the future unless he apologized.

古文：癸未，遣阎苍舒等使金贺正旦。
现代文：十二日，派遣阎苍舒等出使金国祝贺新春。
English: On the 12th, Yan Cangshu and other emissaries were sent to congratulate the Chinese New Year.

古文：壬辰，金遣蒲察通等来贺会庆节。
现代文：二十一日，金国派遣蒲察通等来祝贺会庆节。
English: On the 21st, the People's Republic of China sent Pu Zha Tong and others to congratulate the festival.

古文：十一月癸丑，合祀天地于圜丘，大赦。
现代文：十一月十二日，在圆丘合祭天地，大赦。
English: On November 12th, at the Round Mound Festival, there will be an amnesty.

古文：庚午，遣张子正等贺金主生辰。
现代文：二十九日，派遣张子正等祝贺金主生日。
English: On the 29th, Zhang Zizheng and others were dispatched to congratulate Jin on his birthday.

古文：十二月己丑，黎州蛮寇边，官军失利，蛮亦遁去。
现代文：十二月十八日，黎州蛮攻打边境，官军失利，蛮人也逃走。
English: On December 18th, the Lizhou barbarians attacked the border, the official army was defeated, and the barbarians also fled.

古文：甲午，诏职事官补外者，复除职如故事。
现代文：二十三日，诏令职事官补外者，复除职如陈规。
English: On the 23rd, he issued an edict that officials who make up for others will be removed from their posts.

古文：追封吴玠为涪王。
现代文：追封吴为涪王。
English: Wu was crowned as the king of Qi.

古文：丁酉，定铸钱司岁铸额为十五万缗。
现代文：二十六日，确定铸钱司每年铸额为十五万络。
English: On the 26th, it was determined that the annual mintage of the mint would be 150,000 rupees.

古文：戊戌，金遣刘珫等来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十七日，金国派遣刘粟等来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 27th, China sent Liu Xiao and others to congratulate the next year's Spring Festival.

古文：是岁，京西湖北诸州、兴元府、金、洋州旱，绍兴府、台、婺州水，并振之。
现代文：这一年，京西湖北各州、兴元府、金州、洋州早灾，绍兴府、台州、姿州水灾，一律给以贩济。
English: In the same year, the early disasters in Beijing and Hubei, Xingyuan, Jinzhou, and Yangzhou, and the floods in Shaoxing, Taizhou, and Zizhou, all contributed to the economy.

古文：四年春正月戊申，诏自今内外诸军岁一阅试。
现代文：淳熙四年春正月初七，诏令从今以后内外各军每年举行一次检阅。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the first month of the spring of the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Junxi, it was decreed that from now on, all armies at home and abroad should hold a review once a year.

古文：庚申，诏沿江诸军岁再习水战。
现代文：十九日，诏令沿江各军每年练习两次水战。
English: On the 19th, the emperor ordered the armies along the river to practice naval warfare twice a year.

古文：丙寅，雨雹。
现代文：二十五日，降冰雹。
English: On the 11th, hail fell.

古文：丁卯，班《淳熙历》。
现代文：二十六日，颁布停熙历。
English: On the 26th, the suspension of the Heisei calendar was announced.

古文：二月乙亥，幸太学，祗谒先圣，退御敦化堂，命国子祭酒林光朝讲《中庸》。
现代文：二月初五，到太学，只拜先圣。退往敦化堂，命令国子祭酒林光朝讲解《中庸。
English: On the 5th day of the 2nd month of the year, he went to Taigaku and only worshipped the previous saint. He retreated to Dunhuatang and ordered Kuniko-sai (a national son's festival) to hold a lecture on "Chung Yeung.

古文：下诏，遂幸武学，谒武成王庙。
现代文：下诏。于是到武学，朝拜武成庙。
English: So he went to study martial arts and worshiped at the Wucheng Temple.

古文：监、学官进秩一等，诸生推恩、赐帛有差。
现代文：监、学官进秩一等，诸生被恩赐奖赏赐帛不等。
English: Supervisors and academic officials were promoted to the first rank, and all sentient beings were given gifts and rewards.

古文：己卯，诏诸军毋以未补官人任军职。
现代文：初九，诏令各军不要以未补官人任军职。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, the emperor ordered all the armies not to appoint military officials who had not yet been appointed.

古文：戊子，立边人逃入溪洞及告捕法。
现代文：十八日，立边人逃人溪洞和告捕法。
English: On the 18th, the Liben people fled the manhole and reported to the law.

古文：癸巳，立武臣授环卫官法。
现代文：二十三日，立武臣授环卫官法。
English: On the 23rd, the Act on the Appointment of Environmental Protection Officers was enacted.

古文：戊戌，以新知荆南府胡元质为四川安抚制置使兼知成都府。
现代文：二十八日，任命新知荆南府胡元质为四川安抚制置使兼成都知府。
English: On the 28th, Hu Yuanquan of Jingnan Prefecture, Xinjiang was appointed as the Sichuan peace-keeping envoy and Chengdu prefectural governor.

古文：三月乙巳，以史浩为少保、观文殿大学士、醴泉观使兼侍读，进封永国公。
现代文：三月初五，任命史浩为少保、观文殿大学士、醛泉观使兼侍读，进封为永国公。
English: On the 5th day of March, Shi Hao was appointed as a Junior Public Security Officer, a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism, and an attendant of the Emperor Yongkook, and was enthroned as Prince Yongkook.

古文：己酉，龚茂良等上《仁宗玉牒》、《徽宗实录》、《皇帝玉牒》。
现代文：初九，龚茂良等呈上仁宗玉碟、撇宗实录、东皇帝玉牌。初十，到玉津园设宴射箭。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, Gong Moliang and others presented the Shangren Zong jade plate, the Abandoned Zong record, and the East Emperor jade plate. On the tenth day of the first month of the year, they set up a banquet for archery in the Jade Garden.

古文：壬子，贷随、郢二州饥民米。
现代文：十二日，贷给随、呈阵二州民米。
English: On the 12th, rice was lent to the people of two states who accompanied and marched with the army.

古文：诏李龙袭封安南国王。
现代文：诏令李龙袭封安南国王。
English: He ordered Li Long to succeed to the throne of King Annan.

古文：甲寅、修韶州城。
现代文：十四日，修韶州城。
English: On the 14th, Zhangzhou City was repaired.

古文：丙寅，幸聚景园。
现代文：二十六日，到聚景园。
English: On the 26th, they gathered at the scenic garden.

古文：夏四月甲戌，以魏王恺为荆南、集庆军节度使、行江陵尹、判明州如故。
现代文：夏四月初五，任命魏王赵恺为荆南、集庆军节度使，行使江陵尹职事，仍然判明州。
English: On the 5th day of the 4th month of the summer, the Wei king Zhao Jun was appointed as the Jingnan and Jieqing military festival envoy, and exercised the duties of Jiangling Yin, but still did not know the state.

古文：乙亥，参知政事龚茂良以曾觌从骑不避道，杖之。
现代文：初六，参知政事龚茂良因曾规随从骑马不让道，杖之。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, the political advisor to the prefectural governor, Zou Moliang, was beaten with a cane because he had followed the rules of riding a horse.

古文：戊寅，上奏乞罢政，不许。
现代文：初九，上奏请求罢职没有得到批准。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, the request for resignation was not approved.

古文：甲午，给归正官子孙田屋。
现代文：十五日，给归正官子孙田屋。
English: On the 15th, it was given to the grandson of the returnee official, Tianya.

古文：五月庚子朔，幸佑圣观。罢四川和籴。
现代文：五月初一，到佑圣观。罢除四川和来。
English: On the first day of May, he went to Yu Shengkun to expel Sichuan and Lai.

古文：六月丁丑，龚茂良罢。
现代文：六月初九，龚茂良被罢免。
English: On June 9, Gong Moliang was removed from office.

古文：己卯，以王淮参知政事。
现代文：十一日，任命王淮为参知政事。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Wang Huai was appointed as a member of the Council of State.

古文：辛巳，班《幸学诏》。
现代文：十三日，颁布伟学许。
English: On the 13th, the Great Learning Permit was issued.

古文：癸未，升蜀州为崇庆府。
现代文：十五日，升蜀州为崇庆府。
English: On the 15th, Shu Prefecture was upgraded to Chongqing Prefecture.

古文：甲申，诏自今宰执朝殿得旨，事须覆奏乃行。
现代文：十六日，诏令从今以后宰执朝殿得旨，须重新上奏批准后执行。
English: On the 16th, the imperial edict from now on is the imperial edict of the Imperial Household, and must be re-submitted for approval before implementation.

古文：秋七月辛丑，禁江上诸军盗易战马。
现代文：秋七月初四，禁止江上诸军盗易战马。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the soldiers on the river were forbidden to steal horses.

古文：振襄阳饥民。
现代文：贩济襄阳饥民。
English: A vendor gives food to the hungry in Xiangyang.

古文：壬寅。立待补太学试法。
现代文：初五，立待补太学试法。
English: In the fifth year of junior high school, I have to take the supplementary study exam.

古文：戊申，班御史台弹奏格。
现代文：十一日，颁布御史台弹奏标准。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the Goshidai standard was promulgated.

古文：乙酉，罢临川伯王雱从祀。
现代文：乙酉日，废罢临川伯王稣从祀。
English: On the first day of the second lunar month, Lin Chuanbo's cult of King Jesus was abolished.

古文：癸丑，龚茂良责授宁远军节度副使、英州安置。
现代文：十六日，龚茂良贬降为宁远军节度副使，英州安置。
English: On the 16th, Zou Moliang was demoted to vice-envoy of the Ningyuan Army, and resettled in Yingzhou.

古文：甲寅，申严四川入蕃茶禁。
现代文：十七日，申严四川人蕃茶禁。
English: On the 17th, Sichuan people were strictly forbidden to drink tea.

古文：甲子，班《淳熙重修敕令格式》。
现代文：二十七日，颁布淳熙重修救令格鸯。
English: On the 27th, the promulgation of the Junxi heavy repair and rescue order.

古文：八月辛巳，禁耕牛过淮。
现代文：八月十四日，禁止耕牛过淮。
English: On August 14th, it was forbidden to overfeed the cows.

古文：九月丁酉朔，日有食之。
现代文：九月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of September, a solar eclipse.

古文：己亥，命修筑海潮所坏塘岸。
现代文：初三，命令修筑海潮毁坏的塘岸。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the order was given to rebuild the banks of the canal, which had been destroyed by the tides.

古文：辛丑，免宰执以下会庆节进奉。
现代文：初五，宰执以下会庆节免除进奉。
English: On the 5th day of the first month of the school year, the leader and those under him are exempted from attending the festival.

古文：庚戌，命礼官定开宝、政和祀礼。
现代文：十四日，命令礼官确定开宝、政和祀礼。
English: On the 14th, the etiquette officer was ordered to determine the opening of treasure, politics and worship.

古文：戊午，阅蹴踘于选德殿。
现代文：二十二日，在选德殿观看踢球。
English: On the 22nd, watching football at the Zhengde Hall.

古文：冬十月丙子，以久阴，命中外决系囚。
现代文：冬十月初十，因久阴，命令中外处理囚犯。
English: On the 10th day of the 10th month of the winter, because of the long shade, the order was issued to deal with the prisoners at home and abroad.

古文：遣钱良臣等使金贺正旦。
现代文：派遣钱良臣等出使金国祝贺新春。
English: Send Qian Liangcheng and other emissaries to congratulate the Chinese New Year.

古文：丁丑，诏监司、守臣岁举武臣堪知县者各二人。
现代文：十一日，诏令监司、守臣每年推举武臣可以担任知县者二名。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the imperial edict ordered the supervisors and guards to nominate two vassals each year who could serve as chihken.

古文：己卯，诏将士智勇杰出者，躐等升差。
现代文：十三日，诏令将士智勇杰出者，可以越级提拔。
English: On the 13th, the imperial edict decreed that those who were outstanding in wisdom and courage could be promoted beyond their grade.

古文：丁亥，金遣完颜忠等来贺会庆节。
现代文：二十一日，金国派遣完颜忠等来祝贺会庆节。
English: On the 21st, China sent Yan Zhong and others to congratulate the festival.

古文：十一月丁酉，诏两淮归正人为强勇军。
现代文：十一月初二，诏令两淮归正人为强勇军。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, the imperial edict ordered the two Huai to return to the righteous people to strengthen the army.

古文：庚子，以赵雄同知枢密院事。
现代文：初五，任命赵雄为同知枢密院事。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Zhao Xiong was appointed Tongzhi Privy Councillor.

古文：壬戌，太白昼见。
现代文：二十七日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 27th, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：癸亥，遣赵思等贺金主生辰。
现代文：二十八日，派遣赵思等祝贺金主生日。
English: On the 28th, Zhao Si and others were dispatched to congratulate the gold master on his birthday.

古文：十二月丁卯，试四川所上义士二人，官而遣之。
现代文：十二月初二，考试四川所选送上来的二名义士，授给他们官职后遣送回去。
English: On the second day of the first month of December, the two eminent scholars selected by Sichuan were sent up for examination, and they were given official positions and sent back.

古文：己巳，诏行荐举事实格法。
现代文：初四，下诏施行荐举事实格法。
English: On the 4th day of the first month of the new year, the law of nominating candidates will be implemented.

古文：乙亥，大阅。
现代文：初十，举行阅军。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, a military parade was held.

古文：辛巳，蠲太平州民贷常平钱米。
现代文：十六日，免除太平州民贷常平钱米。
English: On the 16th, exempted from the Taiping people's loan.

古文：壬辰，金遣完颜炳等来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十七日，金国派完颜炳等来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 27th, Kim Guo-pai sent a full-fledged delegation to congratulate the next year's Spring Festival.

古文：是岁，福州、建宁府、南剑州水，并振之。
现代文：这一年，福州、建宁府、南剑州水灾，进行贩济。
English: This year, Fuzhou, Jianningfu and Nanjianzhou were hit by floods.

