古文：惟一惟一月，既南至，昏昴见，日短件，基践长，微阳动于黄泉，阴降惨于万物。
现代文：在一月冬至过后，黄昏时，昴宿、毕宿现于中天，白昼短到极点，又开始变长起来。微微阳气在地下活动，阴气降于地上惨烈万物。
English: After the winter solstice in January, at dusk, the equinox and the solstice appear in the middle of the sky, the day is short to the extreme, and it begins to grow longer again.

古文：是月，斗柄建子，始昏北指，阳气亏，草木萌荡。
现代文：这个月，斗柄立向子位，刚黄昏，就向北指着。由于阳气亏损，草木开始萌动。
English: This month, as soon as dusk falls, the handle of the bucket points to the north. Due to the loss of yang, plants and trees begin to sprout.

古文：日月俱起于牵牛之初，右回而行月，周天进一次，而与日合宿。
现代文：太阳、月亮都起于牵牛初度，向右运转而西行。月亮绕天一周，每月进一次而与太阳会合。
English: Both the sun and the moon rise at the beginning of the cowherd, move to the right and go west. The moon circles the sky, enters once a month and meets the sun.

古文：日行月一次，而周天历舍于十有二辰，终则复始，是谓日月权舆。
现代文：太阳运行，每月行一次，绕天一周经历十二辰。这样终而复始，这就叫日月权舆。
English: The sun runs, once a month, and goes around the sky for twelve hours. In this way, it ends and begins again, which is called the sun and moon.

古文：周正岁首，数起于时，一而成于十次，一为首，其义则然。
现代文：周正的岁首，从一数起而归结在十月。一月为岁首，其意义就是这样。
English: The first day of the year in Zhou Zheng is counted from one and ends in October. January is the first day of the year, and this is its meaning.

古文：凡四时，成岁，有春夏秋冬，各有孟仲季以名，十有二月，中气以著时。
现代文：凡四季成一年，每年春、夏、秋、冬。四季各有孟、仲、季用以称名十二月，每月有中气，以标明季节的特点。
English: All four seasons are in one year, spring, summer, autumn and winter. Each of the four seasons has meng, zhong and qi, which are used to call December, and each month has zhongqi, to indicate the characteristics of the season.

古文：应春三月中气，惊蛰、春分、清明。夏三月中气，小满、夏至、大暑；秋三曰中气，处暑、秋分、霜降；冬三月中气，小雪、冬至、大寒。
现代文：春季三月的中气是：惊蛰、春分、清明；夏季三月的中气是：小满、夏至、大暑；秋季三月的中气是：处暑、秋分、霜降；冬季三月的中气是：小雪、冬至、大寒。
English: The temperate climate in March in spring is: chilly, vernal equinox, clear and bright; the temperate climate in March in summer is: midsummer, summer solstice, heat wave; the temperate climate in March in autumn is: heat wave, autumnal equinox, frost; the temperate climate in March in winter is: light snow, winter solstice, cold.

古文：闰无中气，指两辰之间。
现代文：闰月没有中气，北斗柄指在两辰之间。
English: The intercalary moon has no middle, and the Big Dipper is between the two stars.

古文：万物春生夏长，秋收、冬藏。
现代文：万物春季萌发，夏季生长，秋季收获，冬季闭藏。
English: All things germinate in spring, grow in summer, harvest in autumn, and close in winter.

古文：天地之正，四时之极，不易之道。
现代文：这是天地的正理，四季的标准，是不可改变的规律。
English: This is the law of heaven and earth, the standard of the four seasons, and an unchangeable law.

古文：夏数得天，百王所同。
现代文：夏正的历数符合天地的正理，是前代百王都行用的。
English: Xia Zheng's calendar is in line with the principles of heaven and earth, and was used by the previous hundred kings.

古文：其在商汤，用师于夏，除民之灾，顺天革命，改正朔，变服殊号，一文一质，示不相沿，以建丑之曰为正，易民之视。
现代文：到商汤时候，向夏桀用兵，消除百姓灾难，顺应天意革夏之命。改换正朔，变化服饰，区别称号，形式与内容，以示不相沿袭。以斗柄指丑位为正月，变更百姓的视听，顺应天时的大变，也是一代的大事。
English: At the time of the Shang and Tang Dynasties, soldiers were sent to the Xia and Qiang Dynasties to eliminate the people's disasters and comply with the mandate of Heaven to reform the Xia and Qiang Dynasties. It is also a great event for a generation to change the lunar calendar, change the dress, distinguish the title, form and content to show that they do not follow each other. To use the handle of the bucket to indicate the ugly position for the New Year, change the people's audio-visual, and comply with the great change of time.

古文：若天时大变，亦一代之事，亦越我周王致伐于商，改正异械，以垂三统，至于敬授民时，巡狩祭享，犹自夏焉。
现代文：又到了我们周王，伐灭商朝，改正朔，换礼器，以垂续三统。至于认真地传授时令给百姓，以及天子巡狩或祭祀宴享等，还采用从夏以来的历数。
English: Then came our King Zhou, the destruction of the Shang Dynasty, the correction of the calendar, and the changing of the rites, in accordance with the three unities. As for conscientiously teaching the season to the people, as well as the heavenly son's hunting or sacrificial feast, the calendar from the summer is also used.

古文：是谓周月，以纪于政。
现代文：这叫做周月，用以统纪政事。
English: This is called Zhou Yue, and it is used to regulate discipline and government affairs.

