古文：起著雍涒滩，尽昭阳赤奋若，凡六年。
现代文：起，止，一共六年。
English: From start to finish, a total of six years.

古文：孝成皇帝中永始四年
现代文：汉成帝永始四年
English: Emperor Hancheng's First Four Years

古文：春，正月，上行幸甘泉，郊泰畤；大赦天下，三月，行幸河东，祠后土。
现代文：春季，正月，成帝前往甘泉，在泰祭天。大赦天下。三月，又前往河东，祭祀后土神。
English: In the spring, in the first month, Emperor Chengdi went to Ganquan to offer sacrifices to the heaven in Thailand. In March, he went to Hedong to offer sacrifices to the soil god.

古文：夏，大旱。
现代文：夏季，大旱。
English: Summer, drought.

古文：四月，癸未，长乐临华殿、未央宫东司马门皆灾。
现代文：四月，癸未，长乐宫临华殿和未央宫东司马门都发生火灾。
English: In April, a fire broke out in the Linhua Hall of the Changle Palace and the East Sima Gate of the Weiyang Palace.

古文：六月，甲午，霸陵园门阙灾。
现代文：六月，甲午，霸陵墓园门阙发生火灾。
English: In the afternoon of June, a fire broke out at the gate of the Mausoleum.

古文：秋，七月，辛未晦，日有食之。
现代文：秋季，七月，辛未晦，出现日食。
English: In autumn, in July, before the waxing of the moon, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：冬，十一月，庚申，卫将军王商病免。
现代文：冬季，十一月，庚申，卫将军王商因病免职。
English: In winter, November, Goshun, Wang Shang, the guard general, was relieved of duty due to illness.

古文：梁王立骄恣无度，至一日十一犯法。
现代文：梁王刘立骄横放纵，没有节制，甚至一天之内犯法十一次。
English: Liang Wang Liu Li is arrogant and indulgent, without restraint, even breaking the law eleven times in one day.

古文：相禹奏 立对外家怨望，有恶言。 
现代文：梁相禹奏报说： 刘立对外戚抱有怨恨，恶言相加。 
English: Liang Xiangyu said, "Liu Li holds a grudge against his relatives, and he is full of harsh words.

古文：有司案验，因发其与姑园子奸事，奏 立禽兽行，请诛。 
现代文：主管机关追查验证，由此揭露出刘立与姑妈刘园子通奸乱伦的丑事。奏报说： 刘立有禽兽行为，请求处以死刑。 
English: The competent authority investigated and verified, thus exposing the scandal of adultery and incest between Liu Li and his aunt Liu Yuanzi. The report said: Liu Li had animal behavior and requested the death penalty.

古文：太中大夫谷永上书曰： 臣闻礼，天子外屏，不欲见外也。
现代文：太中大夫谷永上书说： 臣听说，依照礼仪，天子要在门外修建屏障之墙，是不想直接看见外面的情景。
English: Tai Chung Daifu Gu Yong Shang Shu said: The minister heard that, according to etiquette, the emperor wanted to build a barrier wall outside the door, and did not want to see the outside scene directly.

古文：是故帝王之意，不窥人闺门之私，听闻中冓之言。
现代文：帝王的本意，是不愿窥视别人的闺门隐私，窃听人家在内室的谈话。
English: That's why emperors don't pry into other people's rooms or eavesdrop on their conversations.

古文：《春秋》为亲者讳。
现代文：《春秋》为亲者讳言过失。
English: "Spring and Autumn" is also about an affair between relatives.

古文：今梁王年少，颇有狂病，始以恶言按验，既无事实，而发闺门之私，非本章所指。
现代文：而今梁王年少，疯癫病颇厉害，最初追查验证的是对外戚恶言相加的事，既然无事实证据，却又转而揭露闺门隐私，已不属原本指控的内容了。
English: But now Liang Wang is young and his mental illness is quite severe. At first, the investigation verified that he had spoken ill of his relatives. Since there was no factual evidence, he turned to expose his girlfriend's private life, which was not part of the original accusation.

古文：王辞又不服，猥强劾立，傅致难明之事，独以偏辞成罪断狱，无益于治道。
现代文：梁王的诉辞又不承认，用鄙陋的手段勉强弹劾刘立，附会罗织一些难以查明的事，仅仅以片面之辞定罪，对国家的治理是无益的。
English: It is not beneficial to the governance of the country to use despicable means to forcefully impeach Liu Li, to fabricate some things that are difficult to ascertain, and to convict only with one-sided words.

古文：污蔑宗室以内乱之恶，披布宣扬于天下，非所以为公族隐讳，增朝廷之荣华，昭圣德之风化也。
现代文：玷污宗室，把内部乱的恶行，披露宣扬于天下，这不是为皇族掩饰过失，为朝廷增加光彩，彰明圣德之风化的作法。
English: To tarnish the imperial family and expose the evil deeds of internal turmoil to the world, this is not a way to cover up the faults of the imperial family, add luster to the imperial court, and highlight the sanctity of morality.

古文：臣愚以为王少而父同产长，年齿不伦；梁国之富足以厚聘美女，招致妖丽；父同产亦有耻辱之心。案事者乃验问恶言，何故猥自发舒！
现代文：我愚昧地认为，梁王年少，而姑母年长，两人年龄不相当；以梁国的富裕，足可以用金钱厚聘美女，罗致妖艳；姑母也有耻辱之心，追查者本来是追问诟骂外戚的事，她为什么胡乱揭发起自己的伦之事呢？
English: I foolishly believed that Liang Wang was younger, while his aunt was older, and the two were not of the same age; with Liang's country's wealth, it was enough to hire a beautiful woman with a lot of money, Luo Zhiyuan; the aunt also had a sense of shame, and the investigator was originally asking about the abuse of a relative, why did she wantonly expose her own sexual affair?

古文：以三者揆之，殆非人情，疑有所迫切，过误失言，文吏蹑寻，不得转移。
现代文：从这三点揣测，通奸之事，恐怕不合人情。我怀疑供词是在逼迫的情况下，讲错了话，文吏抓住不放，顺此穷追，使供词没有回转的余地。
English: Judging from the above three points, this matter is not normal. I suspect that Liang Wang was just in an urgent situation and blurted out two wrong words.

古文：萌牙之时，加恩勿治，上也。
现代文：在事情还处于萌芽之时，请陛下开恩，不要处治，这才是上策。
English: If some subordinate officials continue to dig up the roots, it will be detrimental to their self-improvement. When mistakes occur, it is best to give care rather than sanctions.

古文：既已案验举宪，宜及王辞不服，诏廷尉选上德通理之吏更审考清问，著不然之效，定失误之法，而反命于下吏，以广公族附疏之德，为宗室刷污乱之耻，甚得治亲之谊。 
现代文：既然已对此事进行了追查验证，打算依法处理，那就应以梁王对罪状不服为理由，下诏命令廷尉挑选道德高尚、通情达理的官员，重新审理，详加讯问，公布查不属实的结论，确定当初审理的失误，反过来将梁王清白的情况交给有关官员处理，以推广使疏远的皇族亲附的美德，洗刷宗室被诬蔑的耻辱，从而符合处理亲属关系的原则。 
English: Since this matter has been investigated and verified, and it is intended to be dealt with in accordance with the law, Liang Wang's objection to the charges should be used as a reason to issue an order to the court officers to select officials with high morals and reasonableness, re-examine, interrogate in detail, publish the conclusions of the investigation that are not true, determine the mistakes of the original trial, and in turn, hand over the situation of Liang Wang's innocence to the relevant officials for handling, in order to promote the virtues of the estranged royal family, and wash away the stigma of the ancestral family, thus conforming to the principle of dealing with kinship.

古文：天子由是寝而不治。
现代文：成帝于是把此案搁置，不予处理。
English: As a result, the Son of Heaven did not punish King Liang.

古文：是岁，司隶校尉蜀郡何武为京兆尹。
现代文：这年，任命司隶校尉、蜀郡人何武为京兆尹。
English: In the same year, He Wu, a lieutenant of Sili and a native of Shu County, was appointed as the Beijing Zhaoyun.

古文：武为吏，守法尽公，进善退恶，其所居无赫赫名，去后常见思。
现代文：何武做官吏，奉公守法，引进良善之人，斥退邪恶之辈。在位时虽没有赫赫名声，但离开后，常常被人怀念。
English: He Wu served as an official, obeyed the law, introduced good people, and repelled evil people. Although he did not have a great reputation when he was in power, he was often missed after he left.

古文：孝成皇帝中元延元年
现代文：元延元年
English: In the first year of the Genpei era

古文：春，正月，己亥朔，日有食之。
现代文：元延元年春季，正月，己亥朔，出现日食。
English: In the spring of the first year of the Yuan extension, the first month, Ji Hai Shuo, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：壬戌，王商复为大司马、卫将军。
现代文：壬戌，再次任命王商为大司马、卫将军。
English: At the same time, Wang Shang was reappointed as the grand secretary of Ma and Wei generals.

古文：三月，上行幸雍，祠五畤。
现代文：三月，成帝前往雍城，在五祭祀。
English: In March, Emperor Cheng Rong went to Yongcheng to attend the Five Sacred Rites.

古文：夏，四月，丁酉，无云而雷，有流星从日下东南行，四面燿燿如雨，自晡及昏而止。
现代文：夏季，四月，丁酉，天空无云而响雷声。有流星从太阳下面划过，直奔东南而去，光辉照耀四面天空，象在下星雨，自从傍晚申时直到天黑才停止。
English: Summer, April, ding dong, the sky is cloudless and thunderous. A meteor streaks from under the sun and heads straight southeast, shining across the sky like a shower of stars from dusk until nightfall.

古文：赦天下。
现代文：大赦天下。
English: Pardons all around.

古文：秋，七月，有星孛于东井。
现代文：秋季，七月，有异星出现于井宿。
English: In autumn, in July, a strange star appeared in the well.

古文：上以灾变，博谋群臣。
现代文：因为发生灾害和变异，成帝广泛地征求群臣的意见。
English: Due to the occurrence of disasters and mutations, Emperor Chengdi extensively solicited the opinions of his courtiers.

古文：北地太守谷永对曰： 王者躬行道德，承顺天地，则五征时序，百姓寿考，符瑞并降；失道妄行，逆天暴物，则咎征著邮，妖孽并见，饥馑荐臻；终不改寤，恶洽变备，不复谴告，更命有德。
现代文：北地太守谷永回答说： 作为君主，若亲身实行道德，承顺天地的旨意，那么自然的五种征候，会按顺序正常运转，百姓会长寿，祥瑞征兆会同时降临。若不按正道行事，违背上天的旨意，浪费财物，则罪责的征兆就会尤其显著，妖孽同时出现，饥馑连续发生。若终不醒悟改悔，恶行普遍，上天就不再作谴责的警告，而将天命归于另一位有德的君王。
English: The northern governor Gu Yong replied: "As a monarch, if you personally practice morality and obey the will of heaven and earth, then the five natural signs will operate normally in sequence, the people will live longer, and the auspicious signs will come at the same time. If you do not act according to the right path, violate the will of heaven, and waste wealth, then the signs of guilt will be particularly significant, sorcery will appear at the same time, and famine will occur continuously. If you do not wake up and repent, and evil deeds are widespread, heaven will no longer give a warning of condemnation, but will attribute the fate of heaven to another virtuous king.

古文：此天地之常经，百王之所同也。
现代文：这是天地的正常规律，它对所有的君王都是一视同仁的。
English: This is the normal law of heaven and earth, and it is the same for all kings.

古文：加以功德有厚薄，期质有修短，时世有中季，天道有盛衰。
现代文：此外，还会考虑到君王的功德有厚有薄，期限有长有短，资质有高有低，所处时代有中期、晚期，同时天道本身的变化也有盛有衰。
English: In addition, it will also take into account that the merits of the monarch are thick and thin, the period is long and short, the qualifications are high and low, the era is in the middle and late, and the changes in the heavenly way itself are also in and out.

古文：陛下承八世之功业，当阳数之标季，涉三七之节纪，遭《无妄》之卦运，直百六之灾厄，三难异科，杂焉同会。
现代文：陛下继承西汉八位皇帝的功业，正当阳数中的末季，接近二百一十年的劫数，遭逢《易经》上 无妄 卦的命运，正当 百六 之灾难，三种灾难性质都不一样，但却掺杂会合在一起。
English: His Majesty inherited the achievements of the eight emperors of the Western Han Dynasty. He is now in the last quarter of his life, approaching the 210th year of his reign. He suffered the fate of the "I Ching" and the 106th calamity. The three calamities are different in nature, but they are mixed together.

古文：建始元年以来，二十载间，群灾大异，交错锋起，多于《春秋》所书。
现代文：建始元年以来，二十年间，各种灾害和大的天象变异，如群蜂四起，比《春秋》记载的还要多。
English: Since the founding of the People's Republic of China in the first year of the 21st century, there have been more disasters and major meteorological changes, such as swarms of bees, than those recorded in "Spring and Autumn."

古文：内则为深宫后庭，将有骄臣悍妾、醉酒狂悖卒起之败，北宫苑囿街巷之中、臣妾之家幽闲之处征舒、崔杼之乱；外则为诸夏下土，将有樊并、苏令、陈胜、项梁奋臂之祸。
现代文：这表示：对内来说，深宫后庭之中，将有骄横的内臣和凶悍的姬妾、醉酒狂乱，猝起败坏国家。北宫花园街巷之中，侍臣和姬妾家里的幽静之处，将会发生夏征舒、崔杼那样的变乱；对外来说，普天之下，将会发生樊并、苏令、陈胜、项梁之辈奋臂造反的灾祸。
English: This means: for the inside, in the backyard of the Deep Palace, there will be arrogant courtiers and fierce concubines, drunkenness and chaos, suddenly corrupting the country. In the streets and lanes of the North Palace garden, in the quiet places of the courtiers and concubines' homes, there will be turmoil like Xia Zhenshu and Cui Xi; for the outside world, there will be the calamity of the rebellion of Zou Mian, Su Ling, Chen Sheng and Xiang Liang.

古文：安危之分界，宗庙之至忧，臣永所以破胆寒心，豫言之累年。
现代文：现在正处在平安和危机的分界线上，是宗庙能否保存的最为忧愁的时期，所以我谷永甘冒胆破心寒的杀头之祸，连年发出这种预言。
English: The dangerous demarcation is the biggest worry of the ancestral temple, and therefore, Omiya has always been discouraged and has predicted it for many years.

古文：下有其萌，然后变见于上，可不致慎！
现代文：下面有变乱的萌芽，然后才会在上面演化成变乱，怎能不谨慎！
English: There is a hint of calamity below, and then the cataclysm appears above, how can we not be cautious!

古文：祸起细微，奸生所易。
现代文：祸患是从细微逐渐发展而来，奸恶是因轻视忽略而产生。
English: Calamity springs from subtlety, and mischief from oversight.

古文：愿陛下正君臣之义，无复与群小枼黩燕饮；勤三纲之严，修后宫之政，抑远骄妒之宠，崇近婉顺之行；朝觐法驾而后出，陈兵清道而后行，无复轻身独出，饮食臣妾之家。
现代文：愿陛下端正君臣大义，再不要与那群小人亲狎，玷污身份，同他们在一起饮宴。应严格按照 三纲 的原则，治理后宫，压制疏远那些骄横妒嫉的宠妃，尊崐崇贞婉、顺服的德行。出门时，要先朝见皇太后，使用皇帝仪仗，然后才可出宫，在街上布列士兵，清道戒严之后才可走上街头。不要再仅带几个随从就独自出宫，到臣妾家吃饭饮酒。
English: His Majesty should rectify the great righteousness of his princes and ministers, and never again be intimate with that group of villains, tarnish his identity, and dine with them. He should strictly follow the principles of the Three Principles, govern the harem, suppress the alienation of those arrogant and jealous favorite concubines, and respect and venerate the virtue of chastity and obedience. When going out, he should first meet the empress dowager, use the emperor's ceremonial sword, and then go out of the palace, put soldiers on the street, and go out on the street after the road is clear. Don't go out of the palace alone with only a few followers,

古文：三者既除，内乱之路塞矣。
现代文：以上三点除去以后，发生内乱的道路就被堵死了。
English: The three aspects have been rectified, and the road to civil unrest has been blocked.

古文：诸夏举兵，萌在民饥馑而吏不恤，兴于百姓困而赋敛重，发于下怨离而上不知。
现代文：而今天下到处举兵谋反，变乱萌发于人民饥谨，而官吏不加体恤，产生于百姓困苦，而赋敛沉重，发端于下层人民怨恨背离，而上面却不知道。
English: Princes and lords raise an army to start a riot. It starts when the people are hungry and the officials don't show any mercy. It starts when the people are in trouble and the government is heavy-handed. It breaks out when the people are resentful and turn away and the ruler doesn't know about it.

古文：《传》曰： 饥而不损，兹谓泰，厥咎亡。 
现代文：《洪范·传》说： 人民饥馑，不减少赋税，却宣称国泰民安，一定蒙祸而死。 
English: "Hong Fan · Biography" said: The people are starving, do not reduce taxes, but declare that Guotai is safe for the people, and must die of misfortune.

古文：比年郡国伤于水灾，禾麦不收，宜损常税之时，而有司奏请加赋，甚缪经义，逆于民心，市怨趋祸之道也。
现代文：郡国连年遭受水灾的损失，禾麦不收，这正是应该减免常税的时候，而有关官署却奏请增加赋税，这与儒家经典的大义甚为不符，不顺民心，是招怨惹祸的作法。
English: The county and the country have suffered the loss of floods year after year, and the wheat and barley have not been harvested. This is exactly the time when the regular tax should be reduced and exempted, but the relevant government departments have requested an increase in taxes. This is very inconsistent with the great righteousness of the Confucian classics, is not in line with the people's hearts, and is a way to arouse resentment and cause trouble.

古文：臣愿陛下勿许加赋之奏，益减奢泰之费，流恩广施，振赡困乏，敕劝耕桑，以慰绥元元之心，诸夏之乱庶几可息。 
现代文：我请求陛下不批准加赋的奏文，再减少一些奢华的费用，广泛地布施恩泽，赈济赡给困乏之人，下敕书劝民勤于耕田植桑，以此来安抚小民之心，各地的叛乱也许就可平息！ 
English: I implore Your Majesty not to approve the request to increase the stipend, to reduce some of the extravagant expenses, to widely distribute grace, to provide assistance to the needy, and to issue an imperial edict to encourage the people to work hard in cultivating fields and planting mulberry trees, in order to appease the hearts of the common people, and perhaps the rebellions around the country can be quelled!

古文：中垒校尉刘向上书曰： 臣闻帝舜戒伯禹 毋若丹硃敖 ，周公戒成王 毋若殷王纣 ，圣帝明王常以败乱自戒，不讳废兴，故臣敢极陈其愚，唯陛下留神察焉！
现代文：中垒校尉刘向上书说： 我听说，帝舜曾警告伯禹： 不要像丹朱那么骄傲。 周公曾告诫成王： 不要像殷纣王。 圣明的帝王，常以败亡变乱的事例告戒自己，不忌讳谈论王朝的废兴，因此我才敢极力陈述愚昧的见解，请陛下留神考察！ 查考《春秋》二百四十二年里，日食不过才三十六次。
English: Liu, the captain of the middle school, said in his letter to the emperor: I heard that Emperor Qian had warned Bo Yu: Don't be as proud as Dan Zhu. Zhou Gong had warned Cheng Wang: Don't be like King Yin. The emperor of the Holy Light often warned himself with the example of defeat and turmoil, and did not hesitate to talk about the abolition of the dynasty. Therefore, I dared to vigorously state the foolish opinions. Please pay attention to your majesty! In the 242 years of "Spring and Autumn," the solar eclipse was only 36 times.

古文：谨案《春秋》二百四十二年，日食三十六，今连三年比食，自建始以来，二十岁间而八食，率二岁六月而一发，古今罕有。
现代文：可是现在连续三年发生日食，自建始年间以来，二十年的时间，就出现日食八次，平均每二年六个月就出现一次，古今罕有。
English: However, there are now three consecutive years of solar eclipses. In the 20 years since the founding of the People's Republic of China, there have been eight solar eclipses, with an average of one every two years and six months, which is rare.

古文：异有小大希稠，占有舒疾缓急。
现代文：天象变异有大小、疏密之分，而占验结果也有迟早、缓急的区别。
English: Phenomena vary in size and density, and the results of divination tests also differ in terms of time and priority.

古文：观秦、汉之易世，览惠、昭之无后，察昌邑之不终，视孝宣之绍起，皆有变异著于汉纪。
现代文：观秦、汉的改朝换代，看汉惠帝、昭帝都没有后嗣，察昌邑王刘贺被废夺太子位，览孝宣皇帝承天命崛起继位，都有变异明确地记载在汉的编年史书上。
English: The changes of dynasties in the Qin and Han dynasties, the fact that Emperor Hui and Emperor Zhao of the Han dynasty had no heirs, the dethronement of Prince Liu He, King of the Chachan Kingdom, and the succession of Emperor Xiaoxuan in accordance with God's will, are all clearly recorded in the annals of the Han Dynasty.

古文：天之去就，岂不昭昭然哉！
现代文：上天的舍弃和俯就，岂不是十分清楚么！
English: Heaven's abandonment and submission, are they not perfectly clear?

古文：臣幸得托末属，诚见陛下宽明之德，冀销大异而兴高宗、成王之声，以崇刘氏，故恳恳数奸死亡之诛！
现代文：我有幸为皇族弱枝后裔，诚然看到陛下有宽厚贤明的圣德，希望能消除变异，而复兴商高宗、周成王那样的声誉，以增高刘氏的功业，因此才不断恳切地冒死上书。
English: I am fortunate to be a descendant of a weak branch of the imperial family, and I have indeed seen that His Majesty has a generous and wise sanctity, hoping to eliminate variation, and the reputation of revival merchants such as Gaozong and Zhou Chengwang to enhance the work of the Liu clan, so I continue to earnestly risk death to write.

古文：天文难以相晓，臣虽图上，犹须口说，然后可知；愿赐清燕之闲，指图陈状。 
现代文：天象复杂，难以向陛下述说清楚，我虽呈献上天文图表，但仍需口说解释，然后才能使陛下明白，请陛下赐一点清闲的时间，让我指着图表向陛下详述。 
English: The celestial phenomena are complex and difficult to explain clearly to Your Majesty. Although I have presented astronomical charts, I still need to explain orally before I can make Your Majesty understand. Please give Your Majesty a little leisure time and let me point to the charts and explain to Your Majesty in detail.

古文：上辄入之，然终不能用也。
现代文：成帝立即召刘向进宫，但是到底不能采纳他的建议。
English: The Emperor then summoned him, but was ultimately unable to appoint him.

古文：红阳侯立举陈咸方正，对策，拜为光禄大夫、给事中。
现代文：红阳侯王立举荐陈咸为方正，通过御前殿试，被任命为光禄大夫、给事中。
English: Hongyang marquis Wang Li recommended Chen Xian as the Founder, and he passed the imperial examination, and was appointed as the doctor of Guanglu and the middle-ranking official.

古文：丞相方进复奏 咸前为九卿，坐为贪邪免，不当蒙方正举，备内朝臣 ；并劾 红阳侯立选举故不以实。 
现代文：丞相翟方进再次上奏说： 陈咸从前位列九卿，因为贪鄙邪恶而获罪免官，不该以方正资格被举荐，并担任中朝官。 同时弹劾说： 红阳侯王立，在选拔举荐人才时，故意不报告真实情况。 
English: The Minister of Justice, Gong Fangjin, once again made a report, saying: Chen Xian, who was previously ranked among the nine nobles, was convicted and removed from office because of greed and evil, and should not have been recommended as a Founder and served as a member of the Chinese imperial court. At the same time, the impeachment said: Hongyang Hou Wangli, when selecting recommending talents, deliberately did not report the true situation.

古文：有诏免咸，勿劾立。
现代文：成帝下诏免去陈咸的官职，但不许弹劾王立。
English: The imperial edict dismissed Chen Xian, but ordered that he not be impeached.

古文：十二月，乙未，王商为大将军。
现代文：十二月，乙未，任命王商为大将军。
English: In December of the same year, Wang Shang was appointed as the general.

古文：辛亥，商薨。
现代文：辛亥，王商去世。
English: In Xinhai, Wang Shang passed away.

古文：其弟红阳侯立次当辅政，先是立使客因南郡太守李尚占垦草田数百顷，上书以入县官，贵取其直一万万以上，丞相司直孙宝发之，上由是废立，而用其弟光禄勋曲阳侯根。
现代文：他的弟弟红阳侯王立，按照顺序应被任命为辅政大臣。先前，王立曾派他的门客，通过南郡太守李尚以草田名义占夺百姓新开垦田地数百顷，然后上书，把这些田卖给国家，多收取田价约一亿万以上。丞相司直孙宝揭发了这件事，成帝因此废黜王立，而任用他的弟弟、光禄勋、曲阳侯王根。
English: His younger brother, Wang Li, the Prince of Hongyang, was to be appointed as Vice-Minister of State. Previously, Wang Li had sent his protégé to seize hundreds of hectares of newly reclaimed farmland from the people in the name of grassland through Li Shang, the governor of Nanshan County, and then submitted a letter to sell these fields to the state, receiving an additional price of about 100 million yuan. The Prime Minister, Sun Bao, revealed the incident, and Emperor Cheng therefore deposed Wang Li and appointed his younger brother, Guang Rukun, the Prince of Quyang, Wang Gen.

古文：庚申，以根为大司马、骠骑将军。
现代文：庚申，任命王根为大司马、骠骑将军。
English: Goshun, appointed Wang Gen as the grand steed and cavalry general.

古文：特进、安昌侯张禹请平陵肥牛亭地；曲阳侯根争，以为此地当平陵寝庙，衣冠所出游道，宜更赐禹它地。
现代文：官位特进的安昌侯张禹，请求成帝把平陵肥牛亭那片土地赐给他。曲阳侯王根表示反对，认为此片地在平陵墓园寝庙附近，正当衣冠出游的必经之路，应换一块地赐给他。
English: Zhang Yu of Anchang, who was promoted to a special official rank, asked Emperor Cheng to give him the land of Pingling Fei Niu Ting. Wang Gen of Quyang expressed his objection, believing that this piece of land was near the Pingling Cemetery and the Sleeping Temple, and should be given to him in exchange for a piece of land.

古文：上不从，卒以赐禹。
现代文：成帝不听，终于把那块地赐给了张禹。
English: Emperor Cheng did not listen and finally gave the land to Zhang Yu.

古文：根由是害禹宠，数毁恶之。
现代文：王根因此对张禹的得宠十分妒恨，多次在成帝面前诋毁张禹。
English: As a result, Wang Gen was jealous of Zhang Yu's favor, so he repeatedly wrote to denigrate Zhang Yu.

古文：天子愈益敬厚禹，每病，辄以起居闻，车驾自临问之。上亲拜禹床下，禹顿首谢恩。
现代文：但是，成帝却越发尊敬厚待张禹，张禹每次患病，成帝都打听他的饮食休息情况，甚至坐车到张禹家问候，亲自在病床前拜见张禹，张禹叩头谢恩。
English: However, Emperor Chengdu became more and more respectful of Zhang Yu. Every time Zhang Yu fell ill, Emperor Chengdu inquired about his diet and rest, and even took a car to Zhang Yu's home for greetings. He personally visited Zhang Yu in front of his sickbed, and Zhang Yu bowed his head in gratitude.

古文：禹小子未有官，禹数视其小子，上即禹床下拜为黄门郎、给事中。
现代文：张禹的幼子没有官职，张禹频频用眼看那个孩子，成帝就在张禹床前封他为黄门郎、给事中。
English: Zhang Yu's young son did not have an official position, Zhang Yu frequently looked at the child with his eyes, and Chengdi sealed him as Huangmenro in front of Zhang Yu's bed.

古文：禹虽家居，以特进为天子师，国家每有大政，必与定议。
现代文：上天降下灾害变异，含意十分深远，难以明见。因此圣人很少谈论天命，也不说有关神怪的事。
English: Although Zhang Yu has resigned from the post, he still serves as the emperor's teacher as a special promotion officer. Whenever the country has a major decision, the emperor must ask Zhang Yu.

古文：时吏民多上书言灾异之应，讥切王氏专政所致，上意颇然之，未有以明见，乃车驾至禹弟，辟左右，亲问禹以天变，因用吏民所言王氏事示禹。禹自见年老，子孙弱，又与曲阳侯不平，恐为所怨，则谓上曰： 《春秋》日食、地震，或为诸侯相杀，夷狄侵中国。
现代文：性命与天道，连子贡之辈，也未能听到孔子谈论，更何况那些见识肤浅鄙陋的儒生所说的话呢。陛下应该使政治修明，用善来应对上天的警戒，与臣下一同多行善举，这才是儒家经义的本意。那些新学小生，胡言乱语，误人不浅，不要相信和任用他们。
English: Life, death, and the heavenly way are not discussed by Confucius, not even by those who pay tribute to Confucius, let alone by those Confucian scholars who have seen the superficiality and meanness. Your Majesty should clarify politics, respond to Heaven's warning with goodness, and do more good deeds with your subjects. This is the original intention of Confucianism. Do not believe and appoint those new students who talk nonsense and mislead people.

古文：灾变之意，深远难见，故圣人罕言命，不语怪神，性与天道，自子贡之属不得闻，何况浅见鄙儒之所言。陛下宜修政事，以善应之，与下同其福喜，此经义意也。新学小生，乱道误人，宜无信用，以经术断之。 
现代文：一切只按儒学经术。 
English: Everything is done according to Confucianism.

古文：上雅信爱禹，由此不疑王氏。
现代文：成帝一向信任爱戴张禹，因此不再怀疑王氏。
English: Emperor Cheng had always trusted and loved Zhang Yu, so he no longer doubted the Wang clan.

古文：后曲阳侯根及诸王子弟闻知禹言，皆喜说，遂亲就禹。
现代文：后来曲阳侯王根以及诸位王氏子弟听说了张禹的话，都感到欢喜，于是亲近张禹。
English: After the event, Quyang Prince Wang Gen and the sons of the princes heard Zhang Yu's speech, and they were overjoyed and began to approach Zhang Yu.

古文：故槐里令硃云上书求见，公卿在前，云曰： 今朝廷大臣，上不能匡主，下无以益民，皆尸位素餐，孔子所谓 鄙夫不可与事君，苟患失之，亡所不至 者也！
现代文：曾做过槐里县令的朱云，上书求见皇帝。在公卿面前，朱云对成帝说： 现今朝廷大臣，上不能匡扶主上，下不能有益于人民，都是些白占着官位领取俸禄而不干事的人，正如孔子所说： 卑鄙的人不可让他侍奉君王，他们害怕失去官位，会无所不为。 
English: Zhu Yun, who once served as the governor of Bali County, sent a letter to the emperor. In front of the nobles, Zhu Yun said to Emperor Chengdi: Today's ministers of the imperial court, the top cannot support the Lord, and the bottom cannot benefit the people. They are all people who occupy the official position and receive salaries without doing anything. As Confucius said: Despicable people should not be allowed to serve the king. They are afraid of losing their official position and will do anything.

古文：臣愿赐尚方斩马剑，断佞臣一人头以厉其馀！ 
现代文：我请求陛下赐给我尚方斩马剑，斩断一个佞臣的头颅，以警告其他人！ 
English: I ask Your Majesty to give me the Shangfang Zhenma Sword, to cut off the head of a vassal to warn others!

古文：上问： 谁也？ 
现代文：成帝问： 谁是佞臣？ 
English: The emperor asked: Who is it?

古文：对曰： 安昌侯张禹！ 
现代文：朱云回答说： 安昌侯张禹！ 
English: Zhu Yun replied: Anchang Hou Zhang Yu!

古文：上大怒曰： 小臣居下讪上，廷辱师傅，罪死不赦！ 
现代文：成帝大怒，说： 小小官员在下，竟敢诽谤国家重臣，公然在朝廷之上侮辱帝师。处以死罪，决不宽恕！ 
English: Emperor Cheng flew into a rage and said, "How dare a petty official from the lower ranks slander the chief minister of the state and openly insult the emperor above the court. He will be sentenced to death and will never be pardoned!"

古文：御史将云下，云攀殿槛，槛折。云呼曰： 臣得下从龙逄、比干游于地下，足矣！
现代文：御史将朱云逮下，朱云紧抓住宫殿栏杆，栏杆被他拉断，他大呼说： 我能够追随龙逄、比干，游于地下，心满意足了！
English: Gu Shih caught Zhu Yun, Zhu Yun clung to the palace railing, the railing was broken by him, he shouted: I can follow the dragon and dragon, swim in the underground, I am satisfied!

古文：未知圣朝何如耳！ 
现代文：却不知圣明的汉王朝将会有什么下场！ 
English: but they don't know what will happen to the holy Han Dynasty!

古文：御史遂将云去。
现代文：御史挟持着朱云押下殿去。
English: Finally, Goshi led Zhu Yun away.

古文：于是左将军辛庆忌免冠，解印绶，叩头殿下曰： 此臣素著狂直于世，使其言是，一可诛；其言非，因当容之。
现代文：当时左将军辛庆忌脱下官帽，解下印信绶带，伏在殿下叩头说： 朱云这个臣子，一向以狂癫耿直闻名于世，假使他的话说的对，不可以杀他；即使他的话说的不对，也本该宽容他。
English: At that time, General Zuo Xinqingyi took off his official cap, untied the seal ribbon, and prostrated himself before His Royal Highness, saying: Zhu Yun, this courtier, has always been famous for his insanity, if his words are right, you can't kill him; even if his words are wrong, you should have tolerated him.

古文：臣敢以死争！ 
现代文：我敢以死请求陛下！ 
English: I'm dying to ask your majesty!

古文：庆忌叩头流血，上意解，然后得已。
现代文：辛庆忌叩头流血，成帝怒意稍解，杀朱云之事遂作罢。
English: Xin Qing Bo kowtowed and bled, Emperor Cheng's anger eased slightly, and the killing of Zhu Yun was finally stopped.

古文：及后当治槛，上曰： 勿易，因而辑之，以旌直臣！ 
现代文：弟且莫车立，为车牙若单于；以囊知牙斯为左贤王。
English: His younger brother, Shimo Cheryu, was Cheryu Zhaodu; and his younger brother, Cang Zhi Zasu, was Zuoxian Wang.

古文：匈奴搜谐单于将入朝；未入塞，病死。
现代文：匈奴搜谐单于将要到长安朝见，还没进入边塞，就在半途得病而死。
English: Xiongnu Sohu alone was going to see the Chang'an Dynasty, but before entering the border fortress, he got sick and died halfway.

古文：弟且莫车立，为车牙若鞮单于；以囊知牙斯为左贤王。
现代文：他的弟弟且莫车继位，为车牙若单于。他任命囊知牙斯为左贤王。
English: His younger brother and heir apparent, Chacha, was the sole heir, and he appointed Chacha as the next king.

古文：北地都尉张放到官数月，复征入侍中。
现代文：北地都尉张放到任才数月，就又被征召入宫当侍中。
English: After only a few months in office, Captain Zhang of the Northern Regions was summoned to the palace to serve as an attendant.

古文：太后与上书曰： 前所道尚未效，富平侯反复来，其能默虖！ 
现代文：皇太后致书成帝说： 先前我交待你的事，你尚未办，怎么富平侯反而又回到京师，我能不说话吗？ 
English: The empress dowager sent a letter to Emperor Chengdu, saying: I told you about this before, but you still haven't done anything about it. Why did Fuping Hou return to Beijing instead? Can I not speak?

古文：上谢曰： 请今奉诏！ 
现代文：成帝谢罪说： 请让我现在就奉诏去办！ 
English: Cheng Di Xie Sin said: Please let me do it now!

古文：上于是出放为天水属国都尉。引少府许商、光禄勋师丹为光禄大夫，班伯为水衡都尉，并侍中，皆秩中二千石，每朝东宫，常从；及大政，俱使谕指于公卿。
现代文：于是命令张放离京，出任天水属国都尉；擢升少府许商、光禄勋师丹为光禄大夫，班伯为水衡都尉，并兼侍中。官秩都是中二千石。成帝每次朝见太后，常常让他们跟从前去。
English: As a result, Zhang Fang was ordered to leave Beijing to serve as a provincial captain of Tianshui Province; Xu Shang, a minor prefect, was promoted to a merchant, Dan, an honorary doctor of Guanglu, was promoted to a doctor of Guanglu, and Bamber was promoted to a captain of Shuiheng, and also to a chamberlain. The official ranks were all in the middle two thousand koku. Every time Emperor Cheng met the empress dowager in the morning, he often let them follow him.

古文：庆忌为国虎臣，遭世承平，匈奴、西域亲附，敬其威信。孝成皇帝中元延二年
现代文：遇有国家大事，都派他们向公卿传达皇帝的谕旨。成帝也逐渐厌倦了游乐，又重新学习儒家经书。太后大为欢喜。本年，左将军辛庆忌去世。辛庆忌是国家御敌的虎将，适逢天下承平之世，匈奴、西域都亲附中国，也都崇敬他的威信。元延二年
English: In the event of a national event, they were all sent to convey the emperor's edict to the nobles. Emperor Cheng also gradually got tired of the amusement, and re-learned the Confucian scriptures. The empress dowager was greatly pleased. This year, the left general Xin Qing Bo died. Xin Qing Bo was a tiger of the enemy of the country, suitable for the world of peace, the Xiongnu and the Western Regions were closely attached to China, and they also revered his prestige.

古文：春，正月，上行幸甘泉，郊泰畤。
现代文：春季，正月，成帝前往甘泉，在泰祭天。
English: Liu Xing, the king of Zhongshan, and Liu Xin, the king of Dingtao, both went to Chang'an to meet the emperor.

古文：三月，行幸河东，祠后土。
现代文：三月，前往河东，祭祀后土神。
English: In March, they came to the eastern part of the river to hold a memorial service.

古文：既祭，行游龙门，登历观，陟西岳而归。
现代文：祭毕，游览龙门，登上历观。归途又登华山，然后回长安。
English: After the festival, visit the Longmen, climb the Lekan. On the way back, climb Mount Hua, and then return to Chang'an.

古文：夏，四月，立广陵孝王子守为王。
现代文：夏季，四月，命广陵孝王的儿子刘守继承王位。
English: In the summer, in April, Liu Shou, the son of Guangling Xiao Wang, was appointed to succeed to the throne.

古文：初，乌孙小昆弥安日为降民所杀，诸翖侯大乱。
现代文：最初，乌孙王国小昆弥安日，被投降乌孙的人杀死，各翎侯陷于大乱。
English: In the beginning, on the day of Siu Kun Mi's death, the people who surrendered to U Sun were killed, and all the princes fell into chaos.

古文：诏征故金城太守段会宗为左曹、中郎将、光禄大夫，使安辑乌孙；立安日弟末振将为小昆弥，定其国而还。
现代文：成帝下诏征召原先的金城太守段会宗为左曹、中郎将、光禄大夫，命他恢复乌孙秩序，使各方和睦。段会宗扶立安日的弟弟末振将为小昆弥，安定乌孙之后，就返回了。
English: Emperor Cheng issued an edict to conscript the former Kinshiro daimyō, Dankaizō, to serve as his left-hand man, second-in-command, and doctor of laws, ordering him to restore order to the Uson and bring harmony to all parties. Dankaizō's younger brother, Suetsun, who had supported Anri, was to serve as Kounmyo, and after stabilizing the Uson, he returned.

古文：时大昆弥雌栗靡勇健，末振将恐为所并，使贵人乌日领诈降，刺杀雌栗靡。
现代文：当时乌孙大昆弥雌栗靡勇猛剽悍，末振将害怕被他吞并，就派遣贵族乌日领诈降，乘机刺杀了雌栗靡。
English: At that time, the great grandson of Emperor Qunming, Qiangmei, was a brave and fierce warrior. Late Zhen would be afraid of being swallowed up by him, so he sent the nobles of Wuri to defraud and took the opportunity to assassinate Qiangmei.

古文：汉欲以兵讨之而未能，遣中郎将段会宗立公主孙伊秩靡为大昆弥。
现代文：汉朝准备出兵讨伐，而一时未能做到，便派遣中郎将段会宗扶立解忧公主的孙子侯秩靡为大昆弥。
English: The Han Dynasty was preparing to send troops to fight, but for a while they were unable to do so, so they sent Zhong Lang to help Dan Hui Zong raise the grandson of the princess Chichimai to be the Great Kunya.

古文：久之，大昆弥、翕侯难栖杀末振将，安日子安犁靡代为小昆弥。
现代文：很久之后，大昆弥和翎侯难栖杀死了末振将，让安日的儿子安犁靡代替末振将为小昆弥。
English: A long time later, Da Kuniya and Shihou Nanshu killed Suetsubun Shogun, so that Anzai's son, An'yumai, would take the place of Suetsubun Shogun and become Little Kuniya.

古文：汉恨不自诛末振将，复遣段会宗发戊己校尉诸国兵，即诛末振将太子番丘。
现代文：汉朝悔恨没有亲自诛杀末振将，就又派遣段会宗征发戊己校尉统领的诸国兵马，前往诛杀末振将的太子番丘。
English: The Han Dynasty regretted that they did not personally kill the late Zhen Zheng, so they sent troops and horses from all over the country, led by Captain Wu Ji, to the Prince's Hill to kill the late Zhen Zheng.

古文：会宗恐大兵入乌孙，惊番丘，亡逃不可得，即留所发兵垫娄地，选精兵三十弩，径至昆弥所在，召番丘，责以末振将之罪，即手剑击杀番丘，官属以下惊恐，驰归。
现代文：段会宗恐怕大军进入乌孙，会使番丘受惊，若亡命逃跑，就找不到他了。于是让所征发的大军留驻垫娄地，仅挑选三十名精兵，人人带着弓弩，径直来到昆弥住地，召见番丘，向他谴责末振将的罪状，随即亲手举剑刺杀了番丘。
English: Duan Huizong was afraid that if a large army entered Wusun, it would frighten Fanqiu, and if he ran away, he would not be found. Therefore, he had the large army he had conscripted stay in Padan. He selected only thirty elite soldiers, each with a bow and arrow, and went straight to Kunmi's place of residence, summoned Fanqiu, accused him of the crime of the last shivering general, and then killed Fanqiu with his own sword.

古文：小昆弥安犁靡勒兵数千骑围会宗，会宗为言来诛之意， 今围守杀我，如取汉牛一毛耳。
现代文：番丘手下官兵惊恐万分，骑马逃奔回去，小昆弥安犁靡崐率领数千骑兵包围了段会宗。段会宗向他讲了诛杀番丘的来意，又说： 今天你们包围了并杀死我，就象拔下汉牛的一根牛毛罢了。
English: Pancho's officers and soldiers were so terrified that they fled back on horseback. Xiao Kunmian led thousands of cavalry to surround Duan Huizong. Duan Huizong told him the meaning of killing Pancho, and said, "Today, when you surrounded and killed me, it was just like plucking a hair from a Chinese cow."

古文：宛王、郅支头县槀街，乌孙所知也。 
现代文：可是大宛国王、郅支单于的人头高挂在长安街上，也是你们乌孙所知道的。 
English: However, the heads of King Dawan and Emperor Zizan are displayed on the streets of Chang'an, which is also known to your grandchildren.

古文：昆弥以下服，曰： 末振将负汉，诛其子可也，独不可告我，令饮食之邪？ 
现代文：昆弥及手下人等都畏服了。小昆弥说： 末振将有负于汉朝，诛杀他的儿子是可以的，为什么偏偏不告诉我呢？也好让我为他饯别！ 
English: Everyone from King Wusun on down was awestruck and said, "Mutian will abandon the Han Dynasty, and it's okay to kill his son. Can't you tell us first, and let us provide him with his last meal?"

古文：会宗曰： 豫告昆弥，逃匿之，为大罪，即饮食以付我，伤骨肉恩。
现代文：段会宗说： 预先告诉昆弥，你会让他逃跑藏起来，这就犯了大罪。如果你为他饯别后，再把他交给我，会伤害你们的骨肉恩情。
English: Duan Huizong said, "If you told Kunmi in advance that you would make him run away and hide, you would have committed a great sin. If you gave him to me after bidding him farewell, it would hurt your feelings.

古文：故不先告。 
现代文：因此没有事先告诉你。 
English: That's why I didn't tell you beforehand.

古文：昆弥以下号泣罢去。
现代文：昆弥和手下人等号哭撤兵而去。
English: King Uson and his men retreated weeping.

古文：会宗还，奏事，天子赐会宗爵关内侯、黄金百斤。
现代文：段会宗回到长安，奏报事情经过，成帝赐给段会宗关内侯的爵位，赏黄金百斤。
English: Duan Huizong returned to Chang'an and reported the incident. Emperor Cheng gave Duan Huizong the title of Guan Nei Marquis and rewarded him with 100 jin of gold.

古文：会宗以难栖杀末振将，奏以为坚守都尉。
现代文：段会宗奏告：由于难栖诛杀了末振将，请封他为坚守都尉。
English: Duan Huizong made a report: Since Nacui Zhao killed Su Zhen Zheng, please appoint him as the captain of perseverance.

古文：责大禄、大监以雌栗靡见杀状，夺金印、紫绶，更与铜、墨云。
现代文：追究大禄、大监因不能救护雌栗靡而使他被杀的责任，收回他们的金印、紫绶，换为铜印、墨绶。
English: Investigate the responsibility of Dalu and Daijun for killing him because they could not save his life, withdraw their gold seal and purple seal, and replace them with bronze seal and ink seal.

古文：末振将弟卑爰疐本共谋杀大昆弥，将众八万馀口北附康居，谋欲借兵兼并两昆弥；汉复遣会宗与都护孙建并力以备之。
现代文：末振将的弟弟卑爰，本是共谋刺杀大昆弥的主凶之一，率领部众八万人逃往北方，依附康居王国，图谋借用康居兵马兼并两昆弥。汉朝又再一次派遣段会宗，与都护孙建合力防范卑爰。
English: General Sui Zhen's younger brother, Bei Bei, was one of the main culprits in the conspiracy to assassinate Da Kun Mi. He led 80,000 people to flee to the north, attached himself to the Kingdom of Kangju, and attempted to annex the two Kun Mi using Kangju's soldiers and horses. The Han Dynasty once again sent Duan Hui Zong to join forces with Sun Jian, the guardian of the capital, to prevent Bei Bei.

古文：自乌孙分立两昆弥，汉用忧劳，且无宁岁。
现代文：自从乌孙王国分立两个昆弥，汉朝忧虑和辛劳，几乎没有一年安宁。
English: Since the separation of the two kingdoms of Wusun, the Han Dynasty has been worried and hard-working, and there has hardly been a year of peace.

古文：时康居复遣子侍汉，贡献，都护郭舜上言； 本匈奴盛时，非以兼有乌孙、康居故也；及其称臣妾，非以失二国也。
现代文：这时，康居王国又派王子到长安，作为人质入侍汉朝皇帝，并向汉朝进贡。都护郭舜上书说： 过去匈奴强盛，并非因为兼并了乌孙和康居两国；现在向中国称臣归降，也不是因为失去了这两国。
English: At this time, the Kangju Kingdom also sent a prince to Chang'an to serve the emperor of the Han Dynasty as a hostage and pay tribute to the Han Dynasty. The capital guard Guo Yu wrote: In the past, the Huns were strong, not because they annexed the two countries of Wusun and Kangju; now they are surrendering to China, not because they lost these two countries.

古文：汉虽皆受其质子，然三国内相输遗，交通如故；亦相候司，见便则发。
现代文：汉朝虽然都接受了他们送来做人质的王子，但三国之间互相贸易、赠送，来往跟从前一样。
English: Although the Han dynasty accepted the princes they sent as hostages, trade and gifts between the three countries continued as before.

古文：合不能相亲信，离不能相臣役。
现代文：他们也互相窥伺、等待，一有机会即发动攻击。合好时不能互相亲近信任，分离时也不能将对方当做臣属来役使。
English: They also spy on each other, wait for each other, and launch attacks at every opportunity. When they get along, they can't trust each other, and when they separate, they can't use each other as subordinates.

古文：以今言之，结配乌孙，竟未有益，反为中国生事。
现代文：以现在的状况来说，汉朝与乌孙缔结婚姻，终究没有得到利益，反而为中国惹事。
English: In the current situation, the Han Dynasty's marriage with the Wusun ultimately did not benefit China, but caused trouble for China.

古文：然乌孙既结在前，今与匈奴俱称臣，义不可距。
现代文：然而乌孙既然与汉朝早已结好，现在和匈奴都臣服于中国，从大义出发，不可拒绝他们朝贡。
English: But the Ussun has allied itself with us in the past, and today, together with the Xiongnu, has offered itself as a vassal to my court. Morally speaking, it is impossible to refuse.

古文：而康居骄黠，讫不肯拜使者；都护吏至其国，坐之乌孙诸使下，王及贵人先饮食已，乃饮啖都护吏，故为无所省以夸旁国。以此度之，何故遣子入侍？其欲贾市，为好辞之诈也。匈奴，百蛮大国，今事汉甚备；闻康居不拜，且使单于有悔自卑之意。宜归其侍子，绝勿复使，以章汉家不通无礼之国！ 汉为其新通，重致远人，终羁縻不绝。
现代文：终于还是采取笼络政策，没有断绝交往。
English: In the end, they still adopted the policy of co-optation and did not break off contacts.

古文：孝成皇帝中元延三年
现代文：元延三年
English: The third year of the Yuan extension

古文：春，正月，丙寅，蜀郡岷山崩，壅江三日，江水竭。
现代文：春季，正月，丙寅，蜀郡岷山发生山崩，土石堵塞长江达三日之久，下游江水枯竭。
English: In the spring, in the first month of the year, landslides occurred in the mountains of Heping and Lushan in Shu County. The Yangtze River was blocked by debris for three days, and the water in the downstream was exhausted.

古文：刘向大恶之，曰： 昔周岐山崩，三川竭，而幽王亡。
现代文：刘向对此异常现象非常厌恶，说： 从前，周朝时，岐山发生山崩，三条河川都枯竭了，结果周幽王被杀。
English: Liu Xiang was very disgusted by this unusual phenomenon, saying: Once upon a time, during the Zhou Dynasty, a landslide occurred in Qishan, and all three rivers dried up. As a result, Zhou Yu Wang was killed.

古文：岐山者，周所兴也。
现代文：岐山是周朝的兴起之地。
English: Qishan is the place where the Zhou Dynasty arose.

古文：汉家本起于蜀、汉，今所起之地，山崩川竭，星孛又及摄提、大角，从参至辰，殆必亡矣！ 
现代文：汉朝本由蜀、汉兴起，而今初兴之地山崩川竭，彗星长尾又扫过摄提、大角，从参宿一直走到辰宿的位置。
English: The Han Dynasty originally arose from the Shu and Han dynasties, but now the fledgling land has been exhausted, and the comet's long tail has swept through the Zhoti and the Big Horn, from the Betelgeuse all the way to the position of the Dragon.

古文：二月，丙午，封淳于长为定陵侯。
现代文：汉朝恐怕一定要亡了。 二月，丙午，封淳于长为定陵侯。
English: I'm afraid the Han Dynasty must have perished. In February, at noon on the third day of the month, Fuchun Yuchang was enthroned as Dingling Hou.

古文：上将大夸胡人以多禽兽。秋，命右扶风发民入南山，西自褒、斜，东至弘农，南驱汉中，张罗罔罝罘，捕熊罴禽兽，载以槛车，输长杨射熊馆，以罔为周阹，纵禽兽其中，令胡人手搏之，自取其获，上亲临观焉。
现代文：成帝准备在胡人面前夸耀自己有很多禽兽，秋季，命令右扶风发动百姓进入南山，西自褒、斜二谷，东到弘农，南达汉中，张设罗网，捕猎熊罴等禽兽，用槛车装运至长杨宫射熊馆，用网围成围障，把禽兽放到里面，命胡人赤手与野兽搏斗，杀死的野兽归斗兽人所有。成帝亲临观看。
English: Emperor Cheng prepared to boast in front of the Hu people that he had many animals. In the autumn, he ordered the right wind to launch the people into the Nanshan Mountain, the west to the Zibo, the oblique two valleys, the east to the Hongnong, the south to the Han middle, to set up a net, to hunt bears and other animals, to be transported to the Changyang Palace Shooting Bear Hall with a threshold car, to be surrounded by a net, to put the animals inside, and to order the Hu people to fight the beasts with their bare hands. The killed beasts belong to the animal fighters. Emperor Cheng came to watch.

古文：孝成皇帝中元延四年
现代文：元延四年春季，正月，成帝前往甘泉，在泰祭天。
English: In the spring of the fourth year of the Yuan Dynasty, the first month of the year, Emperor Chengdi went to Ganquan to celebrate the New Year in Tai.

古文：春，正月，上行幸甘泉，郊泰畤。
现代文：中山王刘兴和定陶王刘欣，都到长安朝见。
English: Liu Xing, the king of Zhongshan, and Liu Xin, the king of Dingtao, both went to Chang'an to meet the emperor.

古文：中山王兴，定陶王欣皆来朝，中山王独从傅，定陶王尽从傅、相、中尉。上怪之，以问定陶王，对曰： 令：诸侯王朝，得从其国二千石。
现代文：中山王只由傅陪同，而定陶王则把傅、相、中尉都带来了。成帝奇怪，就询问定陶王，他回答说： 汉朝法令规定：诸侯王朝见天子，可以由王国中官秩在二千石的官员陪同。
English: Zhongshan King was only accompanied by Fu, while Ding Tao King brought Fu, Sang, and Lieutenants. Chengdi was puzzled and asked Ding Tao King, who replied: Han Dynasty laws stipulate that princes of dynasties can meet the Son of Heaven if they are accompanied by a middle-ranking official of the kingdom with a rank of 2,000 koku.

古文：傅、相、中尉，皆国二千石，故尽从之。 
现代文：傅、相、中尉都是国中二千石的官员，因此让他们全都来了。 
English: Fu, Sang, and Lieutenants are all officials of 2,000 koku in the middle of the country, so they all came.

古文：上令诵《诗》，通习，能说。
现代文：成帝又命令他背诵《诗经》，他不仅能熟练地背诵，而且还能解释。
English: The emperor asked him to recite the "Poems," which were all familiar and could explain their meaning.

古文：佗日，问中山王： 独从傅在何法令？ 
现代文：另一天，成帝问中山王刘兴说： 你只由师傅一人陪同前来，有什么法令根据？ 
English: On another day, Emperor Cheng asked Liu Xing, the King of Zhongshan, "You only came here accompanied by one master. What is the legal basis for this?

古文：不能对；令诵《尚书》，又废；及赐食于前，后饱；起下，袜系解。
现代文：刘兴不能回答。命他背诵《尚书》，又背不下去。成帝赐饮食与他共餐，成帝已用完餐，他还在吃，吃饱才罢休。吃完起身下去，袜带松开了，他还不知道。
English: Liu Xing couldn't answer. He was ordered to recite the Shangshu, but he couldn't recite it. Emperor Chengdi gave him food and drink to share with him. Emperor Chengdi had finished his meal, but he was still eating. He only stopped eating when he was full. After eating, he got up and went downstairs. His garter was loosened, but he didn't know it yet.

古文：帝由此以为不能，而贤定陶王，数称其材。
现代文：成帝因此认为刘兴没有能力，而认为刘欣贤能，屡次称赞他的才干。
English: Emperor Cheng therefore thought that Liu Xing was not capable, but thought that Liu Xin was capable, and repeatedly praised his talent.

古文：是时诸侯王唯二人于帝为至亲，定陶王祖母傅太后随王来朝，私赂遗赵皇后、昭仪及票骑将军王根。
现代文：当时诸侯王中，只有他们两人跟皇帝血缘关系最为亲近，定陶王祖母傅太后随王一起来朝见，私下馈赠礼物贿赂赵皇后、赵昭仪以及骠骑将军王根。
English: At that time, among the princes and kings, only the two of them were most closely related to the emperor. King Ding Tao's grandmother, Empress Dowager Fu, came to the Imperial Court with the king to privately bribe Empress Zhao, Zhao Zhaoyi, and General Wang Gen with gifts.

古文：后、昭仪、根见上无子，亦欲豫自结，为长久计，皆更称定陶王，劝帝以为嗣。
现代文：皇后、昭仪和王根见皇帝无子，也想预先私自结交诸侯王，以为长久之计，因而轮流在成帝面前称赞定陶王，劝说成帝立他为继嗣。
English: Seeing that the emperor had no son, the empress, Zhao Yi, and Wang Gen also wanted to secretly make friends with the princes in advance, thinking it was a long-term strategy. Therefore, they took turns praising King Ding Tao in front of Emperor Cheng and persuading Emperor Cheng to make him his heir.

古文：帝亦自美其材，为加元服而遣之，时年十七矣。
现代文：成帝自己也很欣赏他的才能，亲自为他主持加冠礼后送他回国。刘欣这年十七岁。
English: Emperor Cheng himself also appreciated his talent and personally presided over the crowning ceremony for him and sent him back to China. Liu Xin was seventeen years old.

古文：三月，上行幸河东，祠后土。
现代文：三月，成帝前往河东，祭祀后土神。
English: In March, Emperor Chengdi went to the eastern part of the river to offer sacrifices to the deity of soil.

古文：陨石于关东二。
现代文：关东一带，坠落两颗陨石。
English: Two meteorites have fallen in the Kanto region.

古文：王根荐谷永，征入，为大司农。
现代文：王根推荐谷永，征召谷永入朝，被任命为大司农。
English: Wang Gen recommended Gu Yong, conscripted Gu Yong into the imperial court, and appointed him as the Chief Secretary of Agriculture.

古文：永前后所上四十馀事，略相反覆，专攻上身与后宫而已；党于王氏，上亦知之，不甚亲信也。
现代文：谷永前后上书四十余次，内容互相略有重复，专门抨击成帝与后宫而已。谷永是王氏党羽，成帝也清楚，不怎么亲近信用他。
English: Gu Yong wrote more than forty times before and after, the contents of which slightly repeated each other, specifically criticizing Emperor Cheng and the harem. Gu Yong was a member of Wang's party, and Emperor Cheng also knew that he was not very close and trusted him.

古文：为大司农岁馀，病；满三月，上不赐告，即时免。
现代文：谷永任大司农一年多，患了病，休假满三个月后，成帝不批准他继续带职病休，即时免去他的官职。
English: Gu Yong, who had served as the chief director of farmers for more than a year, fell ill. After three months of leave, Chengdi did not approve him to continue to take sick leave, and immediately removed him from his official position.

古文：数月，卒。
现代文：谷永数月后去世。
English: Tanaga died a few months later.

古文：孝成皇帝中绥和元年
现代文：绥和元年
English: in the first year of the Heian period

古文：春，正月，大赦天下。
现代文：春季，正月，大赦天下。
English: Spring, the first month of the year, amnesty all over the world.

古文：上召丞相翟方进、御史大夫孔光、右将军廉褒、后将军硃博入禁中，议 中山、定陶王谁宜为嗣者 。
现代文：成帝召丞相翟方进、御史大夫孔光、右将军廉褒、后将军朱博进宫，讨论中山王刘兴和定陶王刘欣，谁更适合继承帝位。
English: Emperor Cheng summoned the chancellor of the imperial court, Gong Fangjin, the imperial historian, Kong Guang, the right general, Ren Bo, and the rear general, Zhu Bo, to the palace to discuss who was more suitable to inherit the imperial throne: the king of Zhongshan, Liu Xing, or the king of Dingtao, Liu Xin.

古文：方进、根、褒、博皆以为： 定陶王，帝弟之子，《礼》曰： 昆弟之子，犹子也。
现代文：翟方进、王根、廉褒、朱博都认为： 定陶王是皇上弟弟的儿子，《礼记》说： 兄弟的儿子，如同自己的儿子。
English: Yu Fangjin, Wang Gen, Liang Bo and Zhu Bo all believed that: King Ding Tao was the son of the emperor's younger brother. "Li Ji" said: The son of a brother is like his own son.

古文：为其后者，为之子也， 定陶王宜为嗣。 
现代文：立他为后嗣，就成为儿子。 定陶王适合立为嗣子。 
English: If you make him your heir, he will become your son, and it is fitting for you to make him your heir.

古文：光独以为： 礼，立嗣以亲。
现代文：只有孔光认为： 依礼，立后嗣应以血缘关系亲疏为根据。
English: Only Kong Guang thought: According to the etiquette, the heir should be based on the blood relationship.

古文：以《尚书·盘庚》殷之及王为比，兄终弟及。
现代文：此照《尚书·盘庚》记载的商朝君王传位的方式，是哥哥去世，弟弟继位。
English: According to the "Shang Shu · Pan Geng," the way the Shang Dynasty monarchs passed on the throne was that the elder brother died and the younger brother succeeded.

古文：中山王，先帝之子，帝亲弟，宜为嗣。 
现代文：中山王是先帝的儿子，皇上的亲弟弟，应立他为后嗣。 
English: Zhongshan Wang was the son of the former emperor, the emperor's own brother, and he should be the heir.

古文：上以 中山王不材；又礼，兄弟不得相入庙， 不从光议。
现代文：成帝认为： 中山王没有才干；再者，依礼，兄弟的牌位不能一同进入宗庙 为理由，没有听从孔光的建议。
English: Emperor Cheng believed: King Zhongshan was not talented; moreover, he did not listen to Kong Guang's suggestion because, according to etiquette, the brothers' cards could not enter the ancestral temple together.

古文：二月，癸丑，诏立定陶王欣为皇太子，封中山王舅谏大夫冯参为宜乡侯，益中山国三万户，以慰其意；使执金吾任宏守大鸿胪，持节征定陶王。
现代文：二月，癸丑，成帝下诏立定陶王刘欣为皇太子。封中山王的舅父、谏大夫冯参为宜乡侯，再增加中山国采邑三万户人家，以示安慰。成帝派执金吾任宏，暂时署理大鸿胪职，持符节征召定陶王入京。
English: In February, at dusk, Emperor Cheng decreed that Liu Xin, the king of Tao, would become the crown prince. Feng San, the uncle of the king of Zhongshan and the doctor of Qi, was appointed as the governor of the township of Yi, and another 30,000 households in the county of Zhongshan were added as a sign of consolation. Emperor Cheng sent Gu Renhong, the governor of Jin, to temporarily take charge of the position of Da Hong, and summoned Ding Tao to Beijing with the festival of characters.

古文：定陶王谢曰： 臣材质不足以假充太子之宫；臣愿且得留国邸，旦夕奉问起居，俟有圣嗣，归国守籓。 
现代文：定陶王上书辞谢说： 以我的才能资质，不足以充当太子。我愿暂时留住京师的定陶国邸，早晚进宫问安，等到皇上有了亲子，我就返回藩国守土。 
English: In his letter of thanks, King Ding Tao said, "With my talents and qualifications, I am not enough to serve as a prince. I am willing to temporarily retain the Ding Tao State Mansion of the Beijing Division, and go to the palace in the morning and evening to say hello. When the emperor has a son, I will return to the domain to defend the land.

古文：书奏，天子报闻。
现代文：成帝览奏，批复说： 已阅。 
English: Chengdi watched the performance and replied, "I have read it."

古文：戊午，孔光以议不合意，左迁廷尉；何武为御史大夫。
现代文：戊午，成帝因为孔光的建议不合自己心意，将他贬调为廷尉。任命何武为御史大夫。
English: In the afternoon, Emperor Cheng, because Kong Guang's suggestion was not to his liking, demoted him to the rank of courtier and appointed He Wu as imperial secretary.

古文：初，诏求殷后，分散为十馀姓，推求其嫡，不能得。
现代文：最初，成帝下诏访求殷商的后裔，发现已分散为十余个姓，无法推算寻找出嫡系子孙。
English: At first, Emperor Chengzhao visited the descendants of Yin Shang and found that they had been scattered into more than ten surnames, and it was impossible to calculate how to find the legitimate descendants.

古文：匡衡、梅福皆以为宜封孔子世为汤后，上从之，封孔吉为殷绍嘉侯。
现代文：匡衡、梅福都认为，应该封孔子的家族为商汤的后裔。成帝听从他们的建议，封孔吉为殷绍嘉侯。
English: Both Kuang Heng and Meifu believed that the family of Confucius should be named as the descendants of Shang Tang. Emperor Chengdi listened to their advice and named Kongji as the Prince of Yin and Shaoxing.

古文：三月，与周承休侯皆进爵为公，地各百里。
现代文：三月，孔吉为周承休侯都晋封为公爵，采邑各一百里。
English: In March, Kongji was promoted to Duke for Zhou Chengxiu Houdu, and each of them gained one hundred li of territory.

古文：上行幸雍，祠五畤。
现代文：成帝前往雍城，在五祭祀。
English: Emperor Han Chengde arrived at Yongcheng and offered sacrifices to the Five Emperors.

古文：初，何武之为廷尉也，建言： 末俗之敝，政事烦多，宰相之材不能及古，而丞相独兼三公之事，所以久废而不治也。
现代文：当初，何武担任廷尉时，曾上书建议说： 末世习俗的弊病是政事繁多，当今宰相的才能又赶不上古代，而丞相一人却独兼三公主管的事务，因而国家长时间不能治理好。
English: At the beginning, when He Wu served as a courtier, he wrote a letter to the emperor, suggesting that: The malady of the custom of the last days is that there are many political affairs, and the talent of today's prime minister is not as good as that of ancient times, while the prime minister is the only one who is in charge of the affairs of the three public officials, so the country cannot be governed well for a long time.

古文：宜建三公官。 
现代文：应该重新建立三公官职。 
English: The three public offices should be re-established.

古文：上从之。
现代文：成帝听从了他的建议。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：夏，四月，赐曲阳侯根大司马印绶，置官属，罢票骑将军官；以御史大夫何武为大司空，封氾乡侯。
现代文：夏季，四月，赐曲阳侯王根大司马印信绶带，设置大司马官属，取消骠骑将军官职；任命御史大夫何武为大司空，封汜乡侯。
English: In the summer, in April, Wang Gen, the grand secretary of Quyang, issued a letter with a horse seal, set up a grand secretary of horse officials, and cancelled the official post of the cavalry general; appointed the chief historian He Wu as the grand secretary of the sky, and sealed him as a villager.

古文：皆增奉如丞相，以备三公焉。
现代文：大司马、大司空的俸禄都增加到与丞相相同，使三公结构齐备。
English: The salary of the grand secretary Ma and the grand secretary Ku were both increased to the same as that of the prime minister, so that the three public structures were complete.

古文：秋，八月，庚戌，中山孝王兴薨。
现代文：秋季，八月，庚戌，中山王刘兴去世。
English: In the autumn, in August, the king of Zhongshan, Liu Xing, passed away.

古文：匈奴车牙单于死；弟囊知牙斯立，为乌珠留若鞮单于。
现代文：匈奴车牙单于死，弟弟囊知牙斯继位，为乌珠留若单于。
English: The Xiongnu Che Zha Shan died, and his younger brother Cang Zhi Zha Si succeeded to the throne, leaving Wu Zhu as the sole heir.

古文：乌珠留单于立，以弟乐为左贤王，舆为右贤王，汉遣中郎将夏侯籓、副校尉韩容使匈奴。
现代文：乌珠留单于继位后，任命弟弟乐为左贤王，舆为右贤王。汉朝派遣中郎将夏侯藩、副校尉韩容出使匈奴。
English: After succeeding to the throne, Wu Zhu Ruzhun appointed his younger brother Le as the left-hand king and Myu as the right-hand king. The Han Dynasty dispatched the middle vassal, Xia Hou, and the vice-captain, Han Yong, as envoys to the Xiongnu.

古文：或说王根曰： 匈奴有斗入汉地，直张掖郡，生奇材木箭竿，鹫羽；如得之，于边甚饶，国家有广地之实，将军显功垂于无穷！ 
现代文：有人劝王根说： 匈奴有块楔入汉边的土地，直达张掖郡，出产奇异的木材、箭竿和鹫鹰羽毛。如果能得到这块地，可使边疆大为富饶，国家有开疆拓土的实惠，将军也可因功业卓著而名垂千古。 
English: Some people advised Wang Gen to say: The Huns have a piece of land wedged into the Han side, right up to Zhangye County, producing strange wood, arrows and eagle feathers. If you can get this piece of land, you can make the frontier very rich, the country has the benefits of opening up the frontier, and the general can be famous for thousands of years for his outstanding achievements.

古文：根为上言其利，上直欲从单于求之，为有不得，伤命损威。
现代文：王根就对成帝陈述了要这块地的利益。成帝想直接向单于要地，又担心单于不答应，有伤诏命尊严，也损害中国的威信。
English: Wang Gen told the emperor about the benefits of this mountain, and the emperor also wanted to ask for this mountain, but he was afraid that the Xiongnu would not agree, which would undermine the dignity of the emperor.

古文：根即但以上指晓籓，令从籓所说而求之。
现代文：王根就将皇帝要地的意思告诉夏侯蕃，指示他以他个人的意见向崐单于要地。
English: Wang Gen told Xia Houyi about the emperor's intention to select the important places, and instructed him to select the important places according to his personal opinion.

古文：籓至匈奴，以语次说单于曰： 窃见匈奴斗入汉地，直张掖郡，汉三都尉居塞上，士卒数百人，寒苦，候望久劳，单于宜上书献此地，直断割之，省两都尉士卒数百人，以复天子厚恩，其报必大。 
现代文：夏侯藩到匈奴后，在与单于交谈时说： 我看匈奴有块土地突出楔入汉朝边地，直达张掖郡，汉朝要委派三名都尉驻守在塞上，士卒则需数百人，在这种苦寒之地，守候时间长了，非常辛苦。单于应主动上书，呈献此地，划道直线，把突出部分割让。可以省去两名都尉数百士卒，以此报答天子的厚恩，天子必然大大回报！ 
English: After the Xia Hou clan came to the Xiongnu, in a conversation with Shan Yu, he said: I see that the Xiongnu has a piece of land protruding into the borderland of the Han Dynasty, right up to Zhangye County. The Han Dynasty wants to assign three captains to be stationed on the plug, and hundreds of soldiers are needed. In this bitterly cold place, the waiting time is long and very hard. Shan Yu should take the initiative to submit a letter, present this place, draw a straight line, and cede the protruding part. You can save two captains and hundreds of soldiers, so as to repay the grace of God, and God will

古文：单于曰： 此天子诏语邪，将从使者所求也？ 
现代文：单于说： 这是天子给你的诏命中所说的话，还是你作为使者提出的要求呢？ 
English: Dai Yu asked: Is this the edict of Han Tianzi, or is it your messenger's request?

古文：籓曰： 诏指也；然籓亦为单于画善计耳。 
现代文：夏侯藩说： 天子诏命中有这个意思，不过，我也是替单于筹划好的计策。 
English: Xia Houhan said, "This is the meaning of God's decree, but I am also a well-planned strategy on behalf of Shan."

古文：单于曰： 此温偶駼王所居地也，未晓其形状、所生，请遣使问之。 
现代文：单于说： 这是温偶王居住的地方，我不清楚它的地形、物产等情况，请让我派人去打听。 
English: He only said, "This is the place where the warm puppet king lives. I don't know about its topography, products, and so on. Please let me send someone to find out."

古文：籓、容归汉；后复使匈奴，至则求地。
现代文：夏侯藩、韩容归国后，又再一次出使奴。到匈奴后，就提出土地的要求。
English: After Xia Hou and Han Rong returned to China, they sent envoys again. After arriving in Xiongnu, they made a request for land.

古文：单于曰： 父兄传五世，汉不求此地，至知独求，何也？
现代文：单于说： 我们匈奴父子兄弟已传位五世，汉朝从不要求此地，偏偏到我继位就提出要求，这是为什么？
English: Zai Yu said: My father and brother have been passed down for five generations, and the Han Dynasty did not want this place. It was only after I became Zai Yu that I came to want it. Why?

古文：已问温偶駼王，匈奴西边诸侯作穹庐及车，皆仰此山材木，且先父地，不敢失也。 
现代文：我已问过温偶王，匈奴西部各诸侯制作帐幕及车子，都依赖此地山上出产的木材。况且这是先父留下的土地，不敢轻易失去。 
English: I have already sent someone to ask King Wenqiu. The western Hunnic kingdoms depend on the wood from this mountain for their accounts and vehicles. Moreover, it is a place left by the Hun ancestors, and I dare not lose it.

古文：籓还，迁为太原太守。
现代文：夏侯藩回国复命，被调任太原太守。
English: Xia Hou returned to China and was transferred to the position of Taiyuan governor-general.

古文：单于遣使上书，以籓求地状闻。
现代文：单于派使者到长安上书，讲了夏侯藩求地的情况。
English: In addition to sending an envoy to Chang'an to submit a letter, he spoke about the situation of Xia Hou's land-seeking.

古文：诏报单于曰： 籓擅称诏，从单于求地，法当死；更大赦二，令徙籓为济南太守，不令当匈奴。 
现代文：成帝下诏回复单于说： 夏侯藩擅自假称诏旨，向单于求地，依法应当处死。因为经过两次大赦，现在把他调往济南，任太守，不使他再面对匈奴。 
English: Emperor Cheng issued an edict in reply to Yu's letter saying: "Xia Hou's clan should be put to death according to the law for falsely claiming to have issued an edict without authorization and asking for land from Yu. Because after two amnesties, he has now been transferred to Jinan to serve as governor-general to prevent him from facing the Xiongnu again."

古文：冬，十月，甲寅，王根病免。
现代文：冬季，十月，甲寅，王根患病，被免去官职。
English: In the winter, in October, Guo Yin and Wang Gen fell ill and were removed from their posts.

古文：上以太子既奉大宗后，不得顾私亲，十一月，立楚孝王孙景为定陶王，以奉恭王后。
现代文：成帝因太子既然已继承大宗，就不能再顾念自己的骨肉亲人，于是在十一月，封楚孝王的孙子刘景为定陶王，使刘欣生父一脉得以延续。
English: Since the crown prince had already inherited the bulk, Emperor Cheng could no longer think about his own flesh and blood relatives. Therefore, in November, Liu Jing, the grandson of King Chu Xiao, was crowned King Ding Tao, so that the line of Liu Xin's father could continue.

古文：太子议欲谢；少傅阎崇以为为人后之礼，不得顾私亲，不当谢；太傅赵玄以为当谢，太子从之。
现代文：刘欣与左右商议，准备上书叩谢皇恩。少傅阎崇认为： 既当别人的继承人，依礼，就不能再顾念自己的骨肉亲人，不应当叩谢。 太傅赵玄却认为： 应当叩谢。 太子听从了赵玄的建议。
English: Liu Xin discussed with the left and right, and prepared to write a letter to thank the imperial grace. Shao Fu Yan Chong thought: Even if he is someone else's heir, according to etiquette, he can no longer consider his own flesh and blood relatives, and should not thank them. Taifu Zhao Xuan, however, thought: He should thank them. The prince listened to Zhao Xuan's suggestion.

古文：诏问所以谢状，尚书劾奏玄，左迁少府；以光禄勋师丹为太傅。
现代文：成帝诏问太子因何叩谢的情况后，尚书上奏弹劾赵玄，赵玄被贬降为少府，而任命光禄勋师丹为太傅。
English: After Emperor Cheng Zhao asked the prince why he did not thank him, he wrote a letter to impeach Zhao Xuan. Zhao Xuan was demoted to a minor prefect, and the Guanglu Honored Teacher Dan was appointed as the Taifu.

古文：初，太子之幼也，王祖母傅太后躬自养视；及为太子，诏傅太后与太子母丁姬自居定陶国邸，不得相见。
现代文：最初，太子幼年时，是由祖母傅太后亲自抚养。等到成为太子，成帝诏令傅太后和太子亲母丁姬留居京师的定陶国邸，不许相见。
English: At first, when the prince was a child, he was personally raised by his grandmother, Empress Dowager Fu. When he became the prince, Emperor Chengdi ordered Empress Dowager Fu and the prince's mother, Ding Ji, to stay at the Jingtao State Mansion in Beijing, and they were not allowed to see each other.

古文：顷之，王太后欲令傅太后、丁姬十日一至太子家，帝曰： 太子承正统，当共养陛下，不得复顾私亲。 
现代文：不久，皇太后想让傅太后、丁姬十天一次去太子宫探望，成帝说： 太子已承继正统，理当奉养太后陛下，不能再顾念自己的骨肉亲人。 
English: Soon after, the empress dowager wanted to let the empress dowager Fu and Ding Ji visit the prince's womb once every ten days. Emperor Cheng said, "The prince has inherited the orthodoxy, and it is his duty to take care of the empress dowager. He can no longer think about his own flesh and blood relatives."

古文：王太后曰： 太子小而傅太后抱养之；今至太子家，以乳母恩耳，不足有所妨。 
现代文：太后说： 太子小时候是傅太后抱养大的，现在允许他到太子宫探望，不过是以乳娘的恩情对待她，不足以造成什么妨碍。 
English: The Empress Dowager said: When Prince Fuzi was a child, he was raised by Empress Dowager Fu. Now, he is allowed to visit the Prince's womb, but he treats her with the kindness of a wet nurse, which is not enough to cause any obstacles.

古文：于是令傅太后得至太子家；丁姬以不养太子，独不得。
现代文：于是下令傅太后可以到太子家探望，丁姬因为没有抚养太子，只有她不能去。
English: Therefore, Fu ordered that the empress dowager could visit the prince's home, but Ding Ji was the only one who could not go because she did not raise the prince.

古文：卫尉、侍中淳于长有宠于上，大见信用，贵倾公卿，外交诸侯、牧、守，赂遗、赏赐累巨万，淫于声色。
现代文：卫尉、侍中淳于长在成帝面前很得宠，大受信任和重用，权贵压倒公卿。他在外结交诸侯、州牧、太守，那些人贿赂他的钱财，和皇帝给予的赏赐，累积巨万，他整日放纵于声色之中。
English: The guard and chamberlain, Jun Yuchang, was favored by Emperor Chengdu, and was greatly trusted and used. He made friends with lords, provincial governors, and governors-general. These people bribed him with money and gifts from the emperor, accumulating huge sums. He indulged in sexual intercourse all day long.

古文：许后姊孊为龙雒思侯夫人，寡居；长与孊私通，因取为小妻。
现代文：许皇后的姐姐许，是龙雒思侯夫人，寡居在家，淳于长与她私通，因而娶她为妾。
English: Queen Xu's elder sister, Xu, was the wife of Long Yu Si Hou. She was a widow, and Jun Yuchang had sexual intercourse with her, thus marrying her as a concubine.

古文：许后时居长定宫，因孊赂遗长，欲求复为婕妤。
现代文：许皇后这时居住在长定宫，通过姐姐许贿赂淳于长，谋求再当婕妤。
English: At this time, Empress Xu was living in Changding Palace. Through her sister, Xu bribed Jun Yuchang to seek re-election.

古文：长受许后金钱、乘舆、服御物前后千馀万，诈许为白上，立以为左皇后。
现代文：淳于长接受了许后的金钱和御用的车马崐、衣物器具等，前后千余万钱的贿赂，欺骗许后，假装许诺为她向成帝请求，立为左皇后。
English: Chun Yuchang accepted Xu's money and royal carriages, clothing and other equipment, bribes of more than ten million yuan, deceived Xu, pretended to promise to ask Emperor Cheng for her, and became the Queen of the Left.

古文：孊每入长定宫，辄与孊书，戏侮许后，嫚易无不言；交通书记，赂遗连年。
现代文：许每次到长定宫探望许后，淳于长就让许捎书信给许后，戏弄侮辱她，侮辱轻薄，无所不言。这种书信往来及贿赂，连续很多年。
English: Every time Xu went to visit Xu at Changding Palace, Junyurong would have Xu Yao write a letter to Xu, teasing and insulting her, insulting her, saying anything and everything. This kind of correspondence and bribery continued for many years.

古文：时曲阳侯根辅政，久病，数乞骸骨。
现代文：这时曲阳侯王根为辅政大臣，久病在床，多次请求辞职。
English: At this time, Qu Yang Hou Wang Gen was an assistant minister of state. He had been ill in bed for a long time and had repeatedly requested to resign.

古文：长以外亲居九卿位，次第当代根。
现代文：淳于长以外戚的身份，又位居九卿，按顺序应当代替王根而掌权柄。
English: By virtue of his status as a maternal relative of the emperor, Junyuchang held the official position of the nine nobles; according to the order, Junyuchang could take up his post.

古文：侍中、骑都尉、光禄大夫王莽心害长宠，私闻其事。
现代文：侍中、骑都尉、光禄大夫王莽对淳于长的得宠心怀妒忌，就暗中打听他的那些坏事。
English: Wang Mang, a chamberlain, cavalry captain, and Guanglu doctor, was jealous of Chun Yulang's favor, and secretly inquired about his bad deeds.

古文：莽侍曲阳侯病，因言： 长见将军久病意喜，自以当代辅政，至对及冠议语署置。 
现代文：王莽在伺候曲阳侯王根的病时，趁机说： 淳于长见将军久病，感到高兴，自以为应当代替将军辅政，甚至已对士大夫及贵族子弟谈论到任官设署等事。 
English: When Wang Mang was attending to the illness of Wang Gen, the lord of Quyang, he took the opportunity to say: "Chun Yu Chang saw that the general had been ill for a long time, felt happy, thought that he should replace the general and assist the government, and even talked about the appointment of officials and the establishment of agencies to the scholar-officials and the sons of nobles.

古文：具言其罪过。
现代文：接着一一说出淳于长的罪过。
English: Wang Mang vigorously exposed the sins of Jun Yulong to Wang Gen.

古文：根怒曰： 即如是，何不白也 ？
现代文：王根大怒说： 如果有这等事，为什么不告诉我！ 
English: Wang Gen said angrily, "If there is such a thing, why don't you tell me!"

古文：莽曰： 未知将军意，故未敢言！ 
现代文：王莽说： 不知将军心里的想法，因此没敢说。 
English: Wang Mang said: I don't know what was in the general's mind, so I didn't dare to say it.

古文：根曰： 趣白东宫！ 
现代文：王根说： 快去禀告太后！ 
English: Wang Gen said: Quickly go and inform the Empress Dowager!

古文：莽求见太后，具言长骄佚，欲代曲阳侯；私与长定贵人姊通，受取其衣物。
现代文：王莽求见太后，详细讲述了淳于长骄奢淫佚，想代替曲阳侯，以及与废后许氏的姐姐私通，收取许氏的衣物等贿赂。
English: Wang Mang asked to see the empress dowager, and described in detail Jun Yu's arrogance, extravagant and lewd behavior, his desire to replace Qu Yang Hou, his adultery with the sister of the disgraced empress Hui, and the bribes he took from Hui's clothing.

古文：太后亦怒曰： 儿至如此！
现代文：太后也发怒说： 这孩子放肆到这种地步！
English: When the Empress Dowager heard this, she flew into a rage and said, "How could my nephew be so bad!

古文：往，白之帝！ 
现代文：快去奏告皇上！ 
English: Go quickly and report to the emperor!

古文：莽白上；上以太后故，免长官，勿治罪，遣就国。
现代文：王莽又报告了成帝，成帝因为淳于长是太后的亲属的缘故，虽免去了他的官职，但不治其罪，把他遣送回封国。
English: Wang Mang also reported to Emperor Cheng, who, although he exempted Chun Yuchang from his official duties because he was a relative of the empress dowager, did not find him guilty and sent him back to the feudal state.

古文：初，红阳侯立不得辅政，疑为长毁谮，常怨毒长；上知之。
现代文：最初，红阳侯王立不能得到辅政不臣的位置，怀疑是淳于长诽谤诬陷的结果，时常怨恨他。这种情况，皇上也清楚。
English: In the beginning, Hongyang Hou Wangli could not get the position of vice-president. He suspected that it was the result of being slandered by Chun Yu Chang, and often resented him. The emperor was also aware of this situation.

古文：及长当就国，立嗣子融从长请车骑，长以珍宝因融重遗立。
现代文：等到淳于长将回封国，王立的嫡长子王融，请求淳于长把车辆马匹送给他，淳于长让王融捎回赠送给王立的珍宝重礼。
English: When King Jun's eldest son, Wang Rong, was about to return to the kingdom, he asked King Jun to give him the chariots and horses, and King Jun asked King Rong to return the precious gifts he had given to King Rong.

古文：立因上封事，为长求留，曰： 陛下既托文以皇太后故，诚不可更有它计。 
现代文：王立因此上密封奏书，请求成帝把淳于长留在京师。他说： 陛下既然在诏书中说因皇太后的缘故不加罪淳于长，就实在不应该再有其他惩罚。 
English: Wang Li therefore sealed his report and asked Emperor Cheng to keep Junyuchang in Beijing. He said: Since His Majesty said in the edict that he would not punish Junyuchang because of the Empress Dowager, there really should not be any other punishment.

古文：于是天子疑焉，下有司按验。
现代文：于是引起成帝怀疑，就把此事交付有关官署去追查验证。
English: This aroused Cheng Di's suspicions, and he handed the matter over to the relevant government agency for investigation and verification.

古文：吏捕融，立令融自杀以灭口。
现代文：主管官吏逮捕了王融，王立令王融自杀以灭口。
English: The officials in charge arrested Wang Rong, and Wang Li ordered Wang Rong to commit suicide to silence him.

古文：上愈疑其有大奸，遂逮长系洛阳诏狱，穷治。长具服戏侮长定宫，谋立左皇后，罪至大逆，死狱中。
现代文：成帝愈发怀疑这其中有大的奸谋，就逮捕了淳于长，关押在洛阳诏狱，对他严厉追究，淳于长全部供出戏弄侮辱废后许氏、承诺立她为左皇后等事，罪名达到 大逆 ，就在狱中处死。
English: Emperor Cheng increasingly suspected that there was a big conspiracy, so he arrested Junyuchang and detained him in Luoyang Dajia Prison. He was severely investigated. Junyuchang was accused of playing tricks, insulting the Empress Hui, and promising to make her the Queen of the Left. The charge reached the level of high treason, and he was executed in prison.

古文：妻子当坐者徙合浦；母若归故郡。
现代文：妻儿们依法当牵连的，被放逐到合浦。母亲王若遣送回原郡。
English: His wife and children, who were legally implicated, were banished to Hapu. His mother, Wang Ruo, was sent back to the original county.

古文：上使廷尉孔光持节赐废后药，自杀。
现代文：成帝派廷尉孔光持节，赐给废后许氏毒药，许氏自杀。
English: Emperor Cheng sent the courtier Kong Guang to hold the festival, gave the poison to the abandoned queen, and Xu committed suicide.

古文：丞相方进复劾奏 红阳侯立，狡猾不阃，请下狱。 
现代文：丞相翟方进又弹劾说： 红阳侯王立，狡猾不遵正道，请求将他逮捕，关进监狱。 
English: The chancellor, Yan Fangjin, also made an impeachment, saying: Hongyang Hou Wangli, cunning and not following the right path, requested that he be arrested and put in prison.

古文：上曰： 红阳侯，朕之舅，不忍致法；遣就国。 
现代文：成帝说： 红阳侯是联的舅父，我不忍心让他受法律制裁，遣送回他的封国。 
English: Emperor Cheng said: Hongyang Hou is Lian's uncle, I can't bear to let him be punished by the law and sent back to his fiefdom.

古文：于是方进复奏立党友后将军硃博、巨鹿太守孙闳，皆免官，与故光禄大夫陈咸皆归故郡。
现代文：于是翟方进又上奏弹劾王立的党羽和密友后将军朱博、钜鹿太守孙闳，他们都被免去官职，和以前的光禄大夫陈咸一起回归原郡。
English: As a result, Yan Fangjin called for the impeachment of Wang Li's followers and close friends, General Zhu Bo and Elk Governor Sun Yat-sen. They were all removed from their official positions and returned to the original county together with the former Guanglu doctor Chen Xian.

古文：咸自知废锢，以忧死。
现代文：陈咸自知从此被废黜禁锢，忧愤而死。
English: Chen Xian knew that he would be deposed and imprisoned from then on, and died of grief and anger.

古文：方进智能有馀，兼通文法吏事，以儒雅缘饰法律，号为通明相，天子器重之；又善求人主微指，奏事无不当意。
现代文：翟方进的智谋才能绰绰有余，又兼精通法令条文和行政事务，善用儒学经典装饰自己的举止谈吐，使其高雅不俗，被人称为通达明理的丞相，受到天子的器重。他又善于揣摩皇上的心思，所奏之事，没有不合皇上心意的。
English: Gong Fangjin's wisdom and ability were more than enough, and he was also proficient in the provisions of laws and administrative affairs. He used Confucian classics to decorate his manners and speech, making them elegant. He was known as a judicious prime minister, and received the weight of heaven. He was also good at guessing the emperor's thoughts, and there was nothing that he played that did not meet the emperor's mind.

古文：方淳于长用事，方进独与长交，称荐之；及长坐大逆诛，上以方进大臣，为之隐讳，方进内惭，上疏谢罪乞骸骨。上报曰： 定陵侯长已伏其辜，君虽交通，《传》不云乎： 朝过夕改，君子与之。 
现代文：当淳于崐长受重用时，翟方进只与淳于长结交，在成帝面前称赞和推荐他。等到淳于长犯大逆罪被处死，成帝因为翟方进是朝廷重臣，为他隐瞒掩饰。翟方进内心惭愧，上疏请求退休，成帝回报说： 定陵侯淳于长已伏罪，你虽与他交往，古书不是说： 早上的过失，晚上改正了，君子都赞许。 
English: When Chunyu Shennanaga was given important assignments, Yan Fangjin only befriended Chunyu Shennanaga, praising and recommending him in front of Emperor Cheng. When Chunyu Shannenaga was executed for high treason, Emperor Cheng covered up for him because Yan Fangjin was a high-ranking court official. Yan Fangjin felt ashamed and asked Shangsuo to retire. Emperor Cheng said in return: Dingling Hou Chunyu Chang has committed a crime, although you have been in contact with him, the ancient book does not say: Mistake in the morning, corrected in the evening, gentlemen all approve.

古文：君何疑焉！
现代文：你还疑虑什么呢！
English: What are you worrying about?

古文：其专心壹意，毋怠医药，以自持。 
现代文：请专心一意休养，不要耽误了医药，自己保重。 
English: Please concentrate on rest and recuperation, do not delay the medicine, and take care of yourself.

古文：方进起视事，复条奏长所厚善京光尹孙宝、右扶风萧育，刺史二千石以上，免二十馀人。
现代文：于是翟方进起来办公，再次上奏，分列条目弹劾与淳于长亲近友善的京兆尹孙宝、右扶风萧育等人，因他指控而被罢免的刺史、二千石以上高级官员有二十余人。
English: Therefore, Gong Fang entered the office and played the record again, listing the articles of impeachment, including Jing Zhao, Yin Sun Bao, and Zuo Fu Feng Xiao Yu, who were close to and friendly with Jun Yu, and more than 20 senior officials with more than 2,000 koku who were dismissed because of his accusation.

古文：函谷都尉、建平侯杜业，素与方进不平，方进奏 业受红阳侯书听请，不敬， 免，就国。
现代文：函谷都尉、建平侯杜业，一向与翟方进不合，翟方进上奏说： 杜业接受红阳侯书信嘱托，犯了不敬罪。 
English: The captains of Hakodate and Jianping, Duye, have always been at odds with Shifang. Shifang said: Duye committed the crime of disrespect by accepting the letter of Hongyang.

古文：上以王莽首发大奸，称其忠直；王根因荐莽自代。
现代文：杜业因而被罢免，遣回封国。成帝因为王莽首先揭发重大奸恶，称赞他忠心正直。王根因而保荐王莽代替自己。
English: As a result, Duye was deposed and sent back to the feudal state. Emperor Cheng first exposed Wang Mang's major treachery and praised him for his loyalty and honesty. Wang Gen thus sponsored Wang Mang to replace himself.

古文：丙寅，以莽为大司马，时年三十八。
现代文：丙寅，任命王莽为大司马，时年三十八岁。
English: At the age of thirty-eight, Wang Mang was appointed as the grand steward of Hsin Yin.

古文：莽既拔出同列，继四父而辅政，欲令名誉过前人，遂克己不倦。
现代文：王莽既然超出同列受到提拔，继四位伯父叔父，成为辅政大臣，就想让自己的名誉超越前人，于是克制自己的欲望，修养不倦。
English: Since Wang Mang was promoted beyond his peers and became an assistant minister of state following his four uncles, he wanted to make his reputation surpass his predecessors, so he restrained his desires and cultivated tirelessly.

古文：聘诸贤良以为掾、史，赏赐、邑钱悉以享士，愈为俭约，母病，公卿列侯遣夫人问疾，莽妻迎之，衣不曳地，布蔽膝，见之者以为僮使，问知其夫人，皆惊。
现代文：聘请各位贤良做掾、史等属官，将皇帝的赏赐和封国的收入全部用来供养名士。他越发俭朴节约，母亲患病，公卿列侯都派夫人去探问，王莽的妻子出来迎客，衣裙的长度不拖地，穿着布围裙，看见她的人，还以为是奴婢，询问之下，才知是王莽夫人。
English: He became more and more frugal and thrifty. His mother fell ill, and nobles and princes sent their wives to inquire about her. Wang Mang's wife came out to welcome the guests. The length of her dress did not drag the ground, and she wore a cloth apron. People who saw her thought she was a slave. Upon inquiry, they learned that she was Wang Mang's wife.

古文：其饰名如此。
现代文：他就是这样矫饰做作，以博取名声。
English: That's the kind of affectation he uses to gain notoriety.

古文：丞相方进、大司空武奏言： 《春秋》之义，用贵治贱，不以卑临尊。
现代文：丞相翟方进、大司空何武奏称： 《春秋》所昭示的大义，是用尊贵者治理卑贱者，而不是让卑贱者控制尊贵者。
English: Vice-Minister Gong Fangjin and Senior Vice-Minister Ku He Wuxiao said: "The great justice proclaimed in Spring and Autumn is to use the noble to govern the lowly, rather than letting the lowly control the noble.

古文：刺史位下大夫而临二千石，轻重不相准。
现代文：刺史的职位是相当于下大夫的小官，却能够督察二千石官，轻重的标准不合。
English: The post of chief historian is a minor official equivalent to a junior doctor, but he is able to supervise a 2,000-stone official. The standards of importance do not match.

古文：臣请罢刺史，更置州牧以应古制！ 
现代文：我们请求撤销刺史，另行设置州牧，以合古制。 
English: We request the revocation of the history and the establishment of a separate state pastoral, in accordance with the old system.

古文：十二月，罢刺史，更置州牧，秩二千石。
现代文：十二月，下诏撤销刺史，改设州牧，官秩二千石。
English: In December, the next imperial edict revoked the imperial edict, and the post of state herdsman was established, with an official rank of 2,000 koku.

古文：犍为郡于水滨得古磬十六枚，议者以为善祥。
现代文：犍为郡有人在水畔得到十六枚古磬，议论者认为这是一种祥瑞。
English: Some people in the county have obtained 16 ancient jars on the waterfront, and commentators believe that this is a kind of auspiciousness.

古文：刘向因是说上： 宜兴辟雍，设庠序，陈礼乐，隆雅颂之声，盛揖让之容，以风化天下。
现代文：刘向因而劝成帝说：应该在京城设立太学，在地方设立学堂，陈列礼器乐器，大力提倡《雅》《颂》之类的诗歌，使礼貌谦让的举止盛行起来，以教化天下。
English: Liu Xiang therefore advised Emperor Cheng that: it is necessary to set up a university in the capital city, a school in the provinces, display ceremonial instruments, vigorously promote poems such as "Grace" and "Ode," and make polite and humble manners prevail in order to enlighten the world.

古文：如此而不治者，未之有也。
现代文：如果这样做了，仍治理不好天下，还从未有过。
English: If this doesn't create world peace, nothing ever will.

古文：或曰：不能具礼。
现代文：或许会有人说： 置备礼器无法周全 。
English: Perhaps someone will say: It is impossible to prepare the ceremonial objects thoroughly.

古文：礼以养人为本，如有过差，是过而养人也。
现代文：礼以培养人为根本目的，如出现过错，这是虽有错，却培养了人。
English: Etiquette is based on educating people. Even if there are mistakes, these mistakes are still educating people.

古文：刑罚之过或至死伤，今之刑非皋陶之法也，而有司请定法，削则削，笔则笔，救时务也。
现代文：刑罚出现过错，或许会致人死伤，今天的刑法也不是皋陶时代的刑法了，而有关机构请求制定刑法，删的删，加的加，用其救治时弊。
English: If there is a mistake in the punishment, it may cause death or injury. Today's criminal law is not the criminal law of the Jintao era, and the relevant agencies request the formulation of a criminal law.

古文：至于礼乐，则曰不敢，是敢于杀人、不敢于养人也。
现代文：至于提到礼乐，则推辞说： 不敢轻举妄动。 这是敢于杀人，而不敢于培养人啊。
English: As for the mention of ceremonial music, the preface said: Do not dare to act rashly. This is daring to kill, but not daring to cultivate people.

古文：为其俎豆、管弦之间小不备，因是绝而不为，是去小不备而就大不备，惑莫甚焉！
现代文：就因为俎、豆等礼器，管、弦等乐器稍有不备，因而放弃礼乐，这是舍弃小不备而趋就于大不备，受迷惑没有比这更严重的了！
English: Just because ceremonial instruments such as gongs and beans, and musical instruments such as pipes and strings are a little unprepared, they give up ceremonial music. This is abandoning small unpreparedness and tending to great unpreparedness. There is no more serious suffering than this!

古文：夫教化之比于刑法，刑法轻，是舍所重而急所轻也。
现代文：教化与刑法比较起来，刑法为轻。不兴礼乐，就是舍弃重的而关注轻的。
English: Compared with indoctrination and criminal law, criminal law is light. If you don't like ceremonial music, it means that you have given up the heavy and are concerned about the light.

古文：教化，所恃以为治也；刑法，所以助治也；今废所恃而独立其所助，非所以致太平也。
现代文：教化是治理国家的依靠，而刑法是治理国家的辅助，而今废弃了依靠，而单单把辅助树立起来，不可能导致太平。
English: Indoctrination is the basis for governing the country, while criminal law is an aid to governing the country. Now, reliance has been abandoned, and establishing an aid alone cannot lead to peace.

古文：自京师有悖逆不顺之子孙，至于陷大辟、受刑戮者不绝，由不习五常之道也。
现代文：连京城都存在悖逆不孝顺的子孙，陷于死刑，遭受刑戮的人不断，都是因为不学习五常崐仁、义、礼、智、信的道理的缘故。
English: Even in the capital city, there are sons and daughters of disobedient and unfilial sons and daughters, who are sentenced to death, and who are constantly tortured, all because they do not learn the principles of the five constants of benevolence, righteousness, propriety, wisdom, and faith.

古文：夫承千岁之衰周，继暴秦之馀敝，民渐渍恶俗，贪饕险诐，不闲义理，不示以大化而独欧以刑罚，终已不改！ 
现代文：汉代承袭了千年衰落的周朝，又继承了残暴的秦朝遗留下的弊病，人民逐渐浸染上恶劣的风俗，贪婪奸险，不熟悉仁义、道理。如果不显示崇高道德去教化他们，而单靠刑罚强迫，这种状况终究不会改变！ 
English: The Han Dynasty inherited the thousand-year decline of the Zhou Dynasty, and also inherited the ills left behind by the brutal Qin Dynasty. The people gradually became infected with bad customs, greed, treachery, and were unfamiliar with benevolence, righteousness, and reason. If we do not show lofty morality to educate them, but rely solely on punishment and coercion, this situation will not change in the end!

古文：帝以向言下公卿议，丞相、大司空奏请立辟雍，按行长安城南营表；未作而罢。
现代文：成帝把刘向的建议交付公卿讨论，丞相、大司空奏请设立京师太学，并请巡行长安城城南，选址和树立标记。
English: Emperor Cheng submitted Liu Xiang's proposal to the nobles for discussion. The prime minister and the grand secretary Kuo Song requested the establishment of the Beijing Normal School, and requested the parade to the south of Chang'an City to select a site and erect a sign.

古文：时又有言 孔子布衣，养徒三千人，今天子太学弟子少。 于是增弟子员三千人，岁馀，复如故。
现代文：还未开工，即作罢。这时，又有人说： 孔子是一介平民，却有门徒三千人，如今天子太学的弟子太少。 于是又增加太学弟子名额到三千人。实行一年多，又恢复原来的名额。
English: At this time, some people said: Confucius is a commoner, but he has three thousand disciples. For example, there are too few students of Confucianism today. Therefore, the number of students of Confucianism was increased to three thousand. After more than a year, the original number of students was restored.

古文：刘向自见得信于上，故常显讼宗室，讥刺王氏及在位大臣，其言多痛切，发于至诚。
现代文：刘向自认为已得到成帝的信任，因而常常公开为刘氏宗室进行争辩，讥刺王氏及在位大臣，言词往往沉痛恳切，出于内心至诚。
English: Liu Xiang believed that he had gained the emperor's trust, so he often publicly argued for Liu's family, ridiculed Wang and the reigning ministers, and his words were often heartfelt and sincere.

古文：上数欲用向为九卿，辄不为王氏居位者及丞相、御史所持，故终不迁，居列大夫官前后三十馀年而卒。
现代文：成帝多次想任用刘向为九卿，然而得不到王氏占据高位的人，以及丞相、御史的附和支持，因此刘向始终得不到升迁，他处在大夫的行列前后三十余年而死。
English: Emperor Cheng repeatedly wanted to appoint Liu Xiang as the Nine Lords, but he could not get the high-ranking people of the Wang clan, as well as the attachments and support of the prime minister and the imperial historian, so Liu Xiang was never promoted. He was in the ranks of doctors for more than 30 years and died.

古文：后十三岁而王氏代汉。
现代文：过了十三年后，王氏取代汉朝。
English: Thirteen years later, the Wang Dynasty replaced the Han Dynasty.

