古文：长沙嗣王业字静旷，高祖长兄懿之子也。
现代文：长沙嗣王萧业，字静旷，是高祖长兄萧懿的儿子。
English: Changsha's successor, King Xiao Ye, whose name means quiet and spacious, was the son of Gao Zu's eldest brother, Xiao Yao.

古文：懿字元达，少有令誉。
现代文：萧懿字元达，少年时有很好的声誉。
English: Xiao Yao's character, Yuan Da, had a good reputation as a boy.

古文：解褐齐安南邵陵王行参军，袭爵临湘县侯。
现代文：入仕查曲任安南邵陵王的行参军，承袭爵位为堕湘县堡。
English: Joined the army as an enlisted soldier of Annan Shao Ling Wang, inheriting the title of the fallen Xiang County Fort.

古文：迁太子舍人、洗马、建安王友。
现代文：又迁任太子舍人、洗马、建安王友。
English: He was also transferred to the positions of Crown Prince Shorenin, Saima, and Jianan Wangyou.

古文：出为晋陵太守，曾未期月，讼理人和，称为善政。
现代文：出任晋医登太守后，不到一个月，诉讼案件被理顺，人人都心平气和，被人称作善政。
English: Less than a month after he took office as Jin Yi and ascended the throne, the lawsuits were straightened out, everyone was at peace, and it was called good governance.

古文：入为中书侍郎。
现代文：后被召入任中书侍郎。
English: He entered the capital as a junior secretary.

古文：永明季，授持节、都督梁、南、北秦、沙四州诸军事、西戎校尉、梁、南秦二州刺史，加冠军将军。
现代文：丞明年间，萧懿被授予持节、都督梁州、南秦州、北秦州、之必四州诸军事、西戎校尉、凿州、南秦州二州刺史，并加冠军将军。
English: In the next year, Xiao Wei was awarded the title of "Holding Festival," "Governor of Liangzhou, South Qinzhou, North Qinzhou," "Military Commander of the Four Provinces," "Colonel of Xirong," "Colonel of Hezhou" and "General of the Two Provinces of South Qinzhou," as well as the title of "Champion General."

古文：是岁，魏人入汉中，遂围南郑。
现代文：这年，魏军侵入汉中，进而包围南郑。
English: This year, the Wei army invaded Hanzhong and then surrounded Nanzheng.

古文：懿随机拒击，伤杀甚多，乃解围遁去。
现代文：萧懿随机应变，阻击魏军，杀伤杀死了很多敌人，魏军遣才解散包围悄悄撤走。
English: Xiao Yao made a random response, blocked the Wei army, killed and injured many enemies, and the Wei army was sent to disband, surround and quietly withdraw.

古文：懿又遣氐帅杨元秀攻魏历城、皋兰、骆谷、坑池等六戍，克之。魏人震惧，边境遂宁。
现代文：萧懿又派遣氐人统帅杨元秀进攻魏潮的历城、皋兰、骆谷、坑池等六个戍所，并占领了这些戍所，魏人大为震惊恐惧，于是边境得到安宁。
English: Xiao Yu also sent the commander Yang Yuanxiu to attack six Wei strongholds such as Licheng, Hulan, Luogu, and Pengchi, and occupied these strongholds. The Wei people were shocked and frightened, so the border was calm.

古文：进号征虏将军，增封三百户，迁督益、宁二州军事、益州刺史。
现代文：萧懿被进封号为征虏将军，增封食邑三百户，迁任督益州、宁州二州军事、益州刺史。
English: Xiao Yao was given the title of Conscript General, increased the number of counties and townships to 300, and transferred to the posts of Governor of Yizhou, Military Governor of Ningzhou and Yizhou Military Governor, and Historian of Yizhou.

古文：入为太子右卫率、尚书吏部郎、卫尉卿。
现代文：又被召入任太子右卫率、尚书吏部郎、卫尉卿。
English: He was also called up to serve as the prince's right guard, secretary, and lieutenant.

古文：永元二年，裴叔业据豫州反，授持节、征虏将军、督豫州诸军事、豫州刺史，领历阳、南谯二郡太守，讨叔业。叔业惧，降于魏。
现代文：永远二年，裴叔遂占据豫州反叛，萧懿被授予持节、征虏将军、督豫州诸军事、豫州刺史，兼任历堡、卢盏二郡的太守，讨伐苤扭业，裴叔塞害怕了，投降了秀困。
English: Forever two years, Pei Shusei finally occupied the Yuzhou rebellion, Xiao Wei was awarded the title of holding festivals, recruiting generals, supervising the military of Yuzhou, and the history of Yuzhou, and also served as the governor of Libo and Lujian two counties, and fought against the torsion industry. Pei Shusei was afraid and surrendered.

古文：既而平西将军崔慧景入寇京邑，奉江夏王宝玄围台城。齐室大乱，诏征懿。
现代文：不久，平西将军崔慧景进犯京城，并跟随江夏王萧寅玄包围台城，齐王朝大乱，皇帝下令召见萧懿。
English: Soon, the Pingxi general Cui Huijing invaded Beijing, and followed the Jiangxia king Xiao Yingxuan to encircle Taicheng. The Qi dynasty was in turmoil, and the emperor ordered Xiao Yao to be summoned.

古文：懿时方食，投箸而起，率锐卒三千人援城。
现代文：当时萧懿正在吃饭，接到命令，立刻扔掉筷子起身，率领精锐士兵三千人救援京城。
English: At that time, Xiao Yao was having dinner. When he received the order, he immediately threw away his chopsticks and got up, leading 3,000 elite soldiers to rescue the capital.

古文：慧景遣其子觉来拒，懿奔击，大破之，觉单骑走。
现代文：崔慧景派他的儿子崔觉来抵挡芦墨，芦蹴率军奔袭把鲎觉打得大败，崔觉一人骑马逃走。
English: Cui Huiqing sent his son Cui Jie to resist Lu Mo, and Lu Ke led an army to attack and defeat Jie Jie. Cui Jie fled alone on horseback.

古文：乘胜而进，慧景众溃，追斩之。
现代文：萧撼军队乘胜追击，崔慧景的队伍被打得四处溃散，萧懿追上并斩杀了慧景。
English: Xiao Shao's army took advantage of the victory to pursue. Cui Huijing's team was scattered everywhere, and Xiao Yao caught up with and killed Huijing.

古文：授侍中、尚书右仆射，未拜。仍迁尚书令、都督征讨水陆诸军事，持节、将军如故，增邑二千五百户。
现代文：萧懿被授予侍中、尚书右仆射，还未拜官，又迁任尚书令、都督征讨水陆诸军事，持节、将军之职依旧，增加食邑二千五百户。
English: Xiao Jie was awarded the title of chamberlain, the title of secretary, the title of right-hand man, and the title of general, but he had not yet been promoted to the rank of official. He was also transferred to the post of secretary and the post of governor to recruit soldiers from the land and sea. He still held the post of general and increased the number of food villages by 2,500.

古文：时东昏肆虐，茹法珍、王咺之等执政，宿臣旧将，并见诛夷，懿既立元勋，独居朝右，深为法珍等所惮，乃说东昏曰： 懿将行隆昌故事，陛下命在晷刻。 
现代文：当时束昏侯在朝，残暴放纵。茹法珍、王晅之等人执掌朝政，前朝的老臣旧将，一个个被诛杀夷族，萧懿建立功勋以后，独居朝廷中的高位。深受茹法珍等人的忌惮，他们就劝东昏侯说： 萧懿将要重演隆昌年间的故事，陛下的性命危在旦夕。 
English: At that time, Zhu Fazhen and Wang Xizhi were in the imperial court and indulged in brutality. Ru Fazhen and Wang Xizhi were in charge of the imperial government. The old vassals and generals of the former imperial court were killed one by one. After Xiao Zhen established his merits, he lived alone in a high position in the imperial court. Deeply feared by Ru Fazhen and others, they advised Dong Xizhen to say: Xiao Zhen will repeat the story of the Longchang period. His Majesty's life is in danger.

古文：东昏信之，将加酷害，而懿所亲知之，密具舟江渚，劝令西奔。
现代文：束昏侯相信了他们的话，要残害萧懿，而与萧懿关系亲密的人知道这个计划后，偷偷地准备了一条小船放在江边，劝说萧懿乘船向西逃走。
English: Sok Dou Hou believed their words and wanted to destroy Xiao Yao, and after the people close to Xiao Yao knew about this plan, they secretly prepared a small boat and placed it on the edge of the river to persuade Xiao Yao to escape to the west by boat.

古文：懿曰： 古皆有死，岂有叛走尚书令耶？ 
现代文：萧蟋说： 自古以来就有死节之事，难道有尚书令叛逃的吗? 
English: Xiao Wei said: Since ancient times, there has been a death festival. Is there still a written order to defect?

古文：遂遇祸。
现代文：于是萧懿遇害。
English: As a result, Xiao Yao was killed.

古文：中兴元年，追赠侍中、中书监、司徒。
现代文：齐中兴元年，追赠他为侍中、中书监、司徒。
English: In the first year of Qi Zongxing, he was posthumously awarded the titles of Samurai Middle Rank, Middle Rank Book Supervisor, and Steward.

古文：宣德太后临朝，改赠太傅。
现代文：宣德太后临朝执政时，改赠萧懿为太傅。
English: When Empress Dowager Xuande was in power in the Lin Dynasty, Xiao Yao was given the title of Taifu.

古文：天监元年，追崇丞相，封长沙郡王，谥曰宣武。
现代文：天监元年，追崇萧懿为丞相，封长沙郡王，谧号宣武。
English: In the first year of the Tenjin era, Sui Chong Xiao Wei was appointed as chancellor, he was named the king of Changsha County, and his posthumous name was Xuan Wu.

古文：给九旒、鸾辂、厓辌车，黄屋左纛，前后部羽葆鼓吹，挽歌二部，虎贲班剑百人，葬礼一依晋安平王故事。
现代文：赠给九旒旗、鸾辖天子之车、韫鲸丧车，黄缯的车盖和挂在车衡左边的旗子，前后部羽葆鼓吹，挽歌二部，虎贲班剑一百人，葬礼完全依照晋安平王的样式进行。
English: He was presented with a nine-branched banner, a chariot of the Son of Heaven, a chariot of the Dead Whale, a yellow-painted chariot cover and a banner hanging on the left side of the chariot scale, feathered trumpets at the front and back, two elegies, and a hundred men with swords, and the funeral was carried out in full accordance with the style of King Jinanping.

古文：业幼而明敏，识度过人。
现代文：萧业年幼就聪明机敏，见识与度量超过常人。
English: At a young age, Xiao Ye was smart and astute, and his insight and measurement exceeded that of an ordinary person.

古文：仕齐为著作郎、太子舍人。
现代文：入仕齐朝任著作郎、太子舍人。
English: He entered the service of the Qi dynasty as a scholar and prince's son.

古文：宣武之难，与二弟藻、象俱逃匿。
现代文：宣武之难发生后，他舆两个弟弟萧藻、萧象一起逃走藏匿起来。
English: After the Battle of Xuanwu, his two younger brothers, Xiao Miao and Xiao Xiang, ran away and hid together.

古文：高祖既至，乃赴于军，以为宁朔将军。
现代文：高祖来到后，就投入高祖的军队，高祖任命芦墓为宁朔将军。
English: After Gaozhu came, he joined Gaozhu's army. Gaozhu appointed Lu Tomb as the general of Ningshuo.

古文：中兴二年，除辅国将军、南琅邪、清河二郡太守。
现代文：中兴二年，萧业任辅国将军、南琅邪、清河二郡太守。
English: In the second year of the rise, Xiao Ye was appointed as the general of Fu Guo, the governor of Nanluo County, and the governor of Qinghe County.

古文：天监二年，袭封长沙王，征为冠军将军，量置佐史，迁秘书监。
现代文：天监二年，袭封长沙王，被召入任冠军将军，量置佐史，迁任秘书监。
English: In the second year of the Heaven's Inspector, he attacked the Changsha King, was called into the champion general, assigned to Sashi, and transferred to the secretary inspector.

古文：四年，改授侍中。
现代文：四年，改任侍中。
English: Four years later, he was reassigned to the position of Samurai Junior Middle Officer.

古文：六年，转散骑常侍、太子右卫率，迁左骁骑将军，寻为中护军，领石头戍军事。
现代文：六年，转任散骑常侍、太子右卫率，迁任左骁骑将军，不久任中护军，兼任石头戍军事。
English: In the sixth year, he was transferred to the position of straggler, prince's right guard, transferred to the position of left-hand cavalry general, and soon served as a middle guard, and also served as a military stone guard.

古文：七年，出为使持节、都督南兗、兗、徐、青、冀五州诸军事、仁威将军、南兗州刺史。
现代文：七年，出任使持节、都督南兖丛、查州、涂业、直业、冀业五州诸军事、仁威将军、南兖州刺史。
English: In seven years, he served as the envoy of Jizhi Festival, the governor of Nanluoguxiang, Chazhou, Tuye, Zhitongye, Jiye five states military, the general of Renwei, and the governor of Nanluoguzhou.

古文：八年，征为护军。
现代文：八年，被召入任护军。
English: Eight years later, he was called up to serve as a military escort.

古文：九年，除中书令，改授安后将军、镇琅、邪彭城二郡、领南琅邪太守。
现代文：九年，任中书令，又改任安后将军、镇守琅邪、彭城二郡、兼任南琅邪郡太守。
English: In the ninth year, he was appointed as the middle secretary, and then he was appointed as the general of Anhou, the town guard of Shiyan, the two counties of Pengcheng, and also the governor of Nan Shiyan County.

古文：十年，征为安右将军、散骑常侍。
现代文：十年，被召入任安右将军、散骑常侍。
English: At the age of ten, he was called up to serve as General An Yu, a samurai.

古文：十四年，复为护军，领南琅邪、彭城，镇于琅邪。
现代文：十四年，又任护军，兼任南琅邪、彭城长官，镇于琅邪。
English: For fourteen years, he also served as a military escort, and concurrently served as the governor of Nanzhuye and Pengcheng, and the town of Nanzhuye.

古文：复征中书令，出为轻车将军、湘州刺史。
现代文：后又被召入任中书令，出任轻车将军、湘州刺史。
English: After that, he was called to the post of Zhongshirong, and served as a light vehicle general and a historian of Xiangzhou.

古文：业性敦笃，所在留惠。
现代文：萧业性情敦厚老实，所到之处都留下恩惠。
English: Xiao Ye is honest and generous, and leaves boons wherever he goes.

古文：深信因果，笃诚佛法，高祖每嘉叹之。
现代文：他深信因果报应，虔诚地事奉佛法，产担经常赞扬他。
English: He is a firm believer in karma, devoutly practices Buddhism, and his family often praises him.

古文：普通三年，征为散骑常侍、护军将军。
现代文：萱通三年，他被召入任散骑常侍、护军将军。
English: Three years later, he was called up to serve as a cavalryman and escort general.

古文：四年，改为侍中、金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：四年，改任侍中、金紫光禄大夫。
English: Four years later, he was reassigned to the post of chamberlain, and became the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu.

古文：七年，薨，时年四十八。
现代文：七年，芦墓去世，终年四十八岁。
English: He died seven years later, at the age of forty-eight.

古文：谥曰元。
现代文：谧号五。
English: 号元.

古文：有文集行于世。
现代文：他有文集流行于世。
English: He has a collection of essays that are popular around the world.

古文：子孝俨嗣。
现代文：儿子蕉耋堡继嗣。
English: His son, Shanyangbao, became the heir.

古文：孝俨字希庄，聪慧有文才。
现代文：孝俨字希庄，聪明智慧，很有文才。
English: Filial piety, cleverness, and literary talent.

古文：射策甲科，除秘书郎、太子舍人。
现代文：在选拔官员的射策考试中，他考中甲科，被任命为秘书郎、太子舍人。
English: In the strategic examination for the selection of officials, he passed the junior high school entrance examination and was appointed as a secretary and a prince's concubine.

古文：从幸华林园，于座献《相风乌》、《华光殿》、《景阳山》等颂，其文甚美，高祖深赏异之。
现代文：跟从皇帝前往华林园，在座席上进献《相风乌》、《华光殿、《景阳山》等颂词，文章非常优美，高祖深为欣赏，认为这是奇文。
English: He followed the emperor to the Hualing Garden, and presented eulogies such as "Sow Wu," "Hua Guang Dian" and "Jing Yang Shan" on the seat. The article was very beautiful, Gao Zu deeply appreciated it, and thought it was a strange text.

古文：普通元年，薨，时年二十三。
现代文：萱通元年，董耋堡去世，终年二十三岁。
English: In the first year of Zhaotong, Dong Qibao died at the age of twenty-three.

古文：谥曰章。
现代文：谧号章。
English: The  sign chapter begins.

古文：子慎嗣。
现代文：他的儿子萧慎继嗣。
English: His son, Xiao Sheng, became his successor.

古文：藻字靖艺，元王弟也。
现代文：董姜字靖艺，是元王的弟弟。
English: Dong Jiang Zi Jing Yi is the younger brother of Yuan Wang.

古文：少立名行，志操清洁。
现代文：年少时树立了好的名声和形象，志向操守清雅高洁。
English: At a young age, he established a good reputation and image, aspiring to be clean and elegant.

古文：齐永元初，释褐著作佐郎。
现代文：齐永元初年，他入仕任著作佐郎。
English: In the first year of the Qiyong Yuan Dynasty, he was appointed to the post of Shosho Saro.

古文：天监元年，封西昌县侯，食邑五百户。
现代文：天监元年，萧藻被封为西昌县侯，食邑五百户。
English: In the first year of Tianjun, Xiao Cao was made the lord of Xichang County, with 500 households in the county.

古文：出为持节、都督益、宁二州诸军事、冠军将军、益州刺史。
现代文：出任持节、都督益、宁二州诸军事、冠军将军、益州刺史。
English: He served as the military commander of Jishie, the governor of Yizhou, the military commander of Ningye, the champion general, and the historian of Yizhou.

古文：时天下草创，边徼未安，州民焦僧护聚众数万，据郫、繁作乱。
现代文：当时国家刚刚建立，边境还不安定，益州人焦僧护聚集了几万人，占据鲤、繁二县后叛乱。
English: At that time, the country had just been established, the border was still unstable, and tens of thousands of people from Yizhou gathered in Jiaozanggu to occupy the two counties of Zou and Xiang.

古文：藻年未弱冠，集僚佐议，欲自击之。
现代文：芦莲此时还不十岁，他召集幕僚佐史商议，想要亲自出击焦僧护。
English: At this time, Lu Lian was not yet ten years old. He summoned his staff member Sashi for discussion and wanted to personally attack Jiao Sangu.

古文：或陈不可，藻大怒，斩于阶侧。
现代文：有人认为不可以这样，芦莲大怒，将那个人杀死在台阶旁边。
English: Some people thought that this was unacceptable, and Lilian flew into a rage and killed the man next to the steps.

古文：乃乘平肩舆，巡行贼垒。
现代文：于是，萧藻乘坐平肩车，到乱贼占据的营垒外巡视。
English: As a result, Xiao Cao took a flat-shouldered car to inspect the outside of the camp occupied by the bandits.

古文：贼弓乱射，矢下如雨，从者举楯御箭，又命除之，由是人心大安。
现代文：乱贼弓箭乱射，箭矢如雨般射向萧藻，跟随的士兵皋起盾牌挡住射来的箭矢，萧藻又命令除去，因此，人心大安。
English: The bandits shot arrows and bows indiscriminately, and the arrows rained down on Xiao Cao. The soldiers who followed raised their shields to block the arrows, and Xiao Cao ordered them to be removed. Therefore, peace of mind.

古文：贼乃夜遁，藻命骑追之，斩首数千级，遂平之。
现代文：乱贼就在夜裹悄悄溜走了，萧藻命令骑兵追杀乱贼，斩杀了敷千人，于是削平了乱军。
English: The ruffians slipped away quietly in the night, and Xiao Mo ordered the cavalry to chase and kill the ruffians, killing thousands of people, and thus leveled the ruffians.

古文：进号信威将军，九年，征为太子中庶子。
现代文：萧姜进封号为信威将军。九年，被召入任太子中庶子。
English: Xiao Jiang Jinfeng's title was General Xinwei. In nine years, he was called to be the prince's middle son.

古文：十年，为左骁骑将军、领南琅邪太守。
现代文：十年，任左骁骑将军、兼任南琅邪郡太守。
English: Ten years later, he was appointed General of the Left Division of Cavalry, and concurrently served as the Governor of Nanluye County.

古文：入为侍中。
现代文：又被召入任侍中。
English: Entered the imperial court as a chamberlain.

古文：藻性谦退，不求闻达。
现代文：董姜性格谦逊退让，不求闻达。
English: Dong Jiang's character is humble and yielding, and he does not seek to be heard.

古文：善属文辞，尤好古体，自非公宴，未尝妄有所为，纵有小文，成辄弃本。
现代文：他擅长作文赋诗，尤其喜好古体诗，但除非是在公宴上作诗文，平时不曾妄有所为，即使有了小文章。一旦作成，就扔掉底稿。
English: He is good at composing poems, and especially likes classical poetry, but unless he is writing a poem at a public banquet, he usually does not do anything, even if he has a small article. Once it is done, throw away the manuscript.

古文：十一年，出为使持节、都督雍、梁、秦三州竟陵、随二郡诸军事、仁威将军、宁蛮校尉、雍州刺史。
现代文：十一年，萧藻出任使持节、都督雍、梁、秦三州和竟陵郡、随二郡诸军事、仁威将军、宁蛮校尉、雍州刺史。
English: In the eleventh year, Xiao Miao served as the envoy of the Jizhi Festival, the governor of Yong, Liang, Qin three provinces and Jingling County, and the military of the two counties, General Ren Wei, Captain Ning Ban, and Yongzhou stabbing history.

古文：十二年，征为使持节、都督南兗、兗、徐、青、冀五州诸军事、兗州刺史，军号如故。
现代文：十二年，被任命为使持节、都督南兖州、兖州、徐州、青州、冀州五州诸军事、兖州刺史，军号如故。
English: In 2012, he was appointed as the envoy of the Jizhi Festival, the governor of the five military regions of South Luzhou, Luzhou, Xuzhou, Qingzhou and Jizhou, and the military historian of Luzhou. His military title remains unchanged.

古文：频莅数镇，民吏称之。
现代文：他频频到好几个镇所去，百姓和官吏都很称赞他。
English: He made frequent visits to several towns and was praised by the people and officials alike.

古文：推善下人，常如弗及。
现代文：他推举善待下人，常常好像是做得还不够。
English: He recommended kindness to subordinates, often as if it were not enough.

古文：征为太子詹事。
现代文：又被召为太子詹事。
English: He was also called to be the crown prince of Zhanji.

古文：普通三年，迁领军将军，加侍中。
现代文：普通三年，迁任领军将军，加任侍中。
English: Three years later, he was transferred to the position of general leading the army, and was also appointed to the position of chamberlain.

古文：六年，为军师将军，与西豊侯正德北伐涡阳，辄班师，为有司所奏，免官削爵土。
现代文：六年，任军师将军，舆西丰侯正蟹一起北伐涡阳，很快就班师回京，被有关官员奏本，免去了他的官职，削减他的爵土。
English: In the sixth year, he was appointed as the general of the military division, and he went to the Northern Expedition against the Turbulent Sun together with Feng Hou Zhengcrab, and soon the division returned to Beijing. He was reprimanded by the relevant officials, relieved of his official post, and his lands were reduced.

古文：七年，起为宗正卿。
现代文：七年。芦蓬被起用，任宗正卿。
English: Seven years later, Lu Peng was appointed to the post of Zong Zhengqing.

古文：八年，复封爵，寻除左卫将军，领步兵校尉。
现代文：八年，又恢复所封爵位，不久，授左卫将军，兼任步兵校尉。
English: Eight years later, his knighthood was restored, and he was soon promoted to the rank of General of the Left Division, also serving as an infantry lieutenant.

古文：大通元年，迁侍中、中护军。
现代文：大通元年，迁任侍中、中护军。
English: In the first year of the Odori era, he was transferred to the positions of Samurai Middle Captain and Middle Bodyguard.

古文：时涡阳始降，乃以藻为使持节、北讨都督、征北大将军，镇于涡阳。
现代文：当时涡阳刚刚投降，就任命芦蓬为使持节、北讨都督、征北大将军，镇守。
English: At that time, Turbuyang had just surrendered, and appointed Lu Peng as the envoy of the festival, the governor of the North, the general of the Northern Expedition, and the town guard.

古文：二年，为中权将军、金紫光禄大夫，置佐史，加侍中。
现代文：三年，盖茎任中权将军、金紫光禄大夫，置佐史，加侍中。
English: In three years, Gaizhong was appointed as the general of the Central Power, Jin Zi Guanglu as the doctor, Okisashi as the leader, and Gaizhong as the attendant.

古文：中大通元年，迁护军将军，中权如故。
现代文：中大通元年，萧藻迁任护军将军，并仍旧担任中权。
English: In the first year of Zhongdaxu, Xiao Moqian was appointed as the general of the garrison, and still served as the central power.

古文：三年，为中军将军、太子詹事，出为丹阳尹。
现代文：三年，任中军将军、太子詹事，出任丹阳尹。
English: For three years, he served as the general of the Chinese army, the prince Zhanji, and as Danyang Yin.

古文：高祖每叹曰： 子弟并如迦叶，吾复何忧。 
现代文：高祖经常赞叹说： 子弟们如果都能像迦叶一样，我还有什么忧虑呢。 
English: Gao Zu often said with admiration: "If my children can all be like Ka Ye, what do I have to worry about?"

古文：迦叶，藻小名也。
现代文：是芦蓬的小名。
English: It is a diminutive of Luopeng.

古文：入为安左将军、尚书左仆射，加侍中，藻固辞不就，诏不许。
现代文：芦茎又被召入任安左将军、尚书左仆射，加侍中，萧藻坚决辞让，不肯接受任命，皇帝命令不许他推让。
English: Liushu was also called to serve as the general of Anzo, Shang Shuzo's right-hand man, and an attendant, but Xiao Mo resolutely refused to accept the appointment, and the emperor ordered him not to give in.

古文：大同五年，迁中卫将军、开府仪同三司、中书令，侍中如故。
现代文：大同五年，迁任中卫将军、开府仪同三司、中书令，并仍担任侍中之职。
English: In the same year, he was transferred to the post of Lieutenant-General, Keifu Ritsuryo Sanji, Chushiro, and still held the post of chamberlain.

古文：藻性恬静，独处一室，床有膝痕，宗室衣冠，莫不楷则。
现代文：董姜性情恬静，他独自一人住一间屋子，他常坐的床具，被膝盖磨出了痕迹，宗室子弟、官绅士大夫，没有一人不以他为效仿的楷模。
English: Dong Jiang's disposition is quiet. He lives alone in a room. The bedding he often sits on is worn out by his knees. There is no one who does not regard him as a role model.

古文：常以爵禄太过，每思屏退，门庭闲寂，宾客罕通，太宗尤敬爱之。
现代文：他经常认为自己所得到的爵位、俸禄太多太高，就想隐退，因此门内庭中空闲寂寞，与宾客们也很少来往，塞塞因此特别敬重喜爱芦莲。
English: He often thought that his title and salary were too much and too high, and he wanted to retreat, so he was idle and lonely in the inner courtyard of the gate, and he rarely came and went with guests, so he especially respected and loved the lily of the valley.

古文：自遭家祸，恒布衣蒲席，不食鲜禽，非在公庭，不听音乐。高祖每以此称之。
现代文：自从遭受家庭灾难以后，萧藻常年穿布衣、垫蒲席，不吃鲜鱼活禽，如果不是在公众场所，就不听音乐，高担常因此而称赞他。
English: Since suffering a family disaster, Xiao Cao has always worn cloth clothes and a cushioned seat, does not eat fresh fish or live poultry, and does not listen to music unless it is in a public place. Gao Dang often praised him for this.

古文：出为使持节、督南徐州刺史。
现代文：芦莲出任使持节、督南徐州刺史。
English: Lulian served as the envoy of the festival, and the governor of South Xuzhou stabbed history.

古文：侯景乱，藻遣长子彧率兵入援，及城开，加散骑常侍、大将军。
现代文：谴之乱发生后，芦蘧派自己的长子芦盛率领兵士进入京城增援，城门解放后，萧藻被加任散骑常侍、大将军。
English: After the Guanzhong Rebellion occurred, Lulu sent his eldest son, Lussheng, to lead the soldiers into the capital to reinforce. After the liberation of the city gate, Xiao Miao was appointed as straggler and general.

古文：景遣其仪同萧邕代之，据京口，藻因感气疾，不自疗。
现代文：侯景派他的仪同萧邕代替自己，占据塞旦时，芦莲染上流行病，他自己不作治疗。
English: Hou Jian sent his son-in-law Xiao Jun to replace him. When they occupied Saidan, Lilian contracted an epidemic, and he did not treat her.

古文：或劝奔江北，藻曰： 吾国之台铉，位任特隆，既不能诛剪逆贼，正当同死朝廷，安能投身异类，欲保余生。 
现代文：有人劝他投奔江北，萧藻说： 我是国家的重臣，地位特别重要，既然不能诛杀剪除逆贼，那么正应当舆朝廷同死生，怎么能卖身投靠异族人，而求保全自己的性命呢。 
English: Some people advised him to go to the north of the Yangtze River. Xiao Miao said, "I am the chief minister of the country, and my position is very important. Since I cannot kill or cut off the traitors, how can I sell myself to the foreigners to save my own life, when I should consider the imperial court as dead and alive?

古文：因不食累日。
现代文：于是，他好几天不吃东西。
English: As a result, he did not eat for several days.

古文：太清三年，薨，时年六十七。
现代文：太清三年，萧藻去世，终年六十七岁。
English: In the third year of the Taiqing Dynasty, Xiao Cao died at the age of sixty-seven.

古文：永阳嗣王伯游，字士仁，高祖次兄敷之子。
现代文：永阳嗣王萧伯游，字士仁，是高祖二哥萧敷的儿子。
English: Yongyang Heir King Xiao Boyu, also known as Zhiren, was the son of Gao Zu's second brother Xiaoshu.

古文：敷字仲达，解褐齐后将军、征虏行参军，辅太子舍人，洗马，迁丹阳尹丞。
现代文：芦堑字处达，入仕变翘担任后军征虏行参军，转任太子舍人，洗马，迁任丹阳尹丞。
English: He reached the position of Lushan, and after serving in the army, he joined the army as a conscript. He was transferred to the position of the prince's attendant, washed horses, and was transferred to the position of Danyang Yinzheng.

古文：入为太子中舍人，除建威将军、随郡内史。
现代文：后被召入任太子中舍人，授官为建威将军、随郡内史。
English: After that, he was called up to serve as a Prince's Junior Privy Councillor, promoted to General Jian Wei, and became a member of the county's history.

古文：招怀远近，黎庶安之，以为前后之政莫之及也。
现代文：萧敷能招抚关怀远近人民，百姓们安居乐业，认为前后几任官员的政绩都比不上他。
English: Xiaojiki is able to care for the people near and far, and the people live and work in peace. He believes that the political achievements of the previous and subsequent officials are not comparable to him.

古文：进号宁朔将军，征为庐陵王谘议参军。
现代文：萧敷进封号为宁朔将军，被征召任庐陵王的谘议参军。
English: Xiao Shiki Jinfeng was called General Ningshuo and was conscripted to serve as an adviser to the King of Fuling to join the army.

古文：建武四年，薨。
现代文：建武四年，蔻錾去世。
English: In the fourth year of Jianwu, Zou died.

古文：高祖即位，追赠侍中、司空，封永阳郡王，谥曰昭。
现代文：直担即位后，追赠盖敷为侍中、司空，封为永阳郡王，谧号昭。
English: After his accession to the throne, he was posthumously given the titles of chamberlain and magistrate, crowned as the King of Yongyang County, and given the posthumous name Zheng Zhao.

古文：伯游美风神，善言玄理。
现代文：萧伯游风度优美，神情俊秀，善于阐述玄理。
English: Xiao Boyu has a graceful demeanor, a handsome appearance, and is good at expounding metaphysics.

古文：天监元年四月，诏曰： 兄子伯游，虽年识未弘，意尚粗可。
现代文：元年四月，皇帝下韶说： 我哥哥的儿子值游，虽然年龄不大，见识不广，想来还可以。
English: In April of the first year of the year, the emperor said: My brother's son is on a tour of duty. Although he is young and not very knowledgeable, he can still come if he wants to.

古文：浙东奥区，宜须抚莅，可督会稽、东阳、新安、永嘉、临海五郡诸军事、辅国将军、会稽太守。 
现代文：逝塞的深山地区，也需要有人管理，伯游可督盒擅、塞墨、塞瞳、丞台、堕堕五郡诸军事、辅国将军、盒擅型太守。 
English: The deep mountain areas that have been blocked also need to be managed by someone, such as Hoyu can be the governor of the five counties, the military, the general of the auxiliary country, and the governor of the five counties.

古文：二年，袭封永阳郡王。
现代文：二年，蔻值游袭封丞阳郡王。
English: In the second year, the king of Fuzhongyang County was attacked.

古文：五年，薨，时年二十三。
现代文：五年，芦值游去世，终年二十三岁。
English: Five years later, Lu Zhenyu passed away at the age of 23.

古文：谥曰恭。
现代文：谧号恭。
English: 号恭.

古文：衡阳嗣王元简，字熙远，高祖第四弟畅之子。
现代文：衡阳嗣王元简，字熙远，是高祖四弟萧畅的儿子。
English: Hengyang's heir, Wang Yuanjian, known as Xi Yuan, was the son of Gao Zu's fourth brother, Xiao Chang.

古文：畅仕齐至太常，封江陵县侯，卒。
现代文：萧畅在直蛮作官至太常，封江陵县侯，后去世。
English: Xiao Chang served as an official in Zhenoban for too long, was appointed as the governor of Jiangling County, and later passed away.

古文：天监元年，追赠侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：丢监元年，被迫赠为侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: In the first year of his imprisonment, he was forced to give up his position as a chamberlain, grand marshal of the imperial cavalry, and keeper of the imperial regalia, as well as three offices.

古文：封衡阳郡王。
现代文：封衡阳郡王。
English: Feng Hengyang County King.

古文：谥曰宣。
现代文：谧号宣。
English: The call went out.

古文：元简三年袭封，除中书郎，迁会稽太守。
现代文：元简三年袭封，授官为中书郎，迁任会擅郦太守。
English: In the third year of Yuan Jian's reign, he was given the title of Chushiro (middle school teacher) and became the new governor.

古文：十三年，入为给事黄门侍郎，出为持节、都督广、交、越三州诸军事、平越中郎将、广州刺史。
现代文：十三年，被召入任给事黄门侍郎，出任为持节、都督广州、交州、越州三州诸军事、平越中郎将、广州刺史。
English: In the thirteenth year, he was called to serve as the attendant of the Yellow Gate, and served as the military commander of Ji Jie, the governor of Guangzhou, Jiaozhou, and Yuezhou Sanzhou, the general of Ping Yue Zhong Lang, and the historian of Guangzhou.

古文：还为太子中庶子，迁使持节、都督郢、司、霍三州诸军事、信武将军、郢州刺史。
现代文：迁任太子中庶子。再迁任使持节、都督郢州、司州、霍州诸军事、信武将军、郢州刺史。
English: He was transferred to the position of the prince's middle child, and then transferred to the position of envoy to Jisai, the governor of Bozhou, Sizhou, the military of Hozhou, General Nobutake, and the governor of Bozhou.

古文：十八年正月，卒于州。
现代文：十八年正月，萧元简在州任上去世。
English: In the first month of the 18th year, Xiao Yuanjian died in his state post.

古文：谥曰孝。
现代文：谧号孝。
English: Shogo Takashi.

古文：子俊嗣。
现代文：他的儿子萧俊继嗣。
English: His son, Xiao Jun, became his successor.

古文：桂阳嗣王象，字世翼，长沙宣武王第九子也。
现代文：桂阳嗣王萧象，字世翼，是长沙宣武王的第九个儿子。
English: King Xiao Xiang of Guiyang, also known as King Xiao, was the ninth son of King Xuanwu of Changsha.

古文：初，叔父融仕齐至太子洗马。
现代文：最初，他的叔父芦融在壶蛮任官，作到了太子洗马。
English: At first, his uncle, Lu Rong, served as an official in Jurchen, and became the prince's horse washer.

古文：永元中，宣武之难，融遇害。
现代文：丞五年间，在宣武之难中，芦融遇害身亡。
English: Five years later, during the Battle of Xuanwu, Lu Rong was killed.

古文：高祖平京邑，赠给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：产担平定京城后，迫赠芦融为给事黄门侍郎。
English: After the procurators had conquered the capital, they forced Lu Rong to become the attendant of the Yellow Gate.

古文：天监元年，加散骑常侍、抚军大将军，封桂阳郡王。
现代文：玉监元年，加赠散骑常侍、抚军大将军，封桂阳郡王。
English: In the first year of the reign of the Jade Emperor, he was also given the title of a knight-errant, a general of the army, and the title of the king of Guiyang County.

古文：谥曰简。
现代文：谧号简。
English: Her nickname is Jane.

古文：无子，乃诏象为嗣，袭封爵。
现代文：萧融没有儿子，于是皇帝下韶让萧象继嗣，袭封爵位。
English: Xiao Rong did not have a son, so the emperor ordered Xiao Xiang to be the heir and inherit the title of nobility.

古文：象容止闲雅，善于交游，事所生母以孝闻。
现代文：萧象仪容举止娴雅，善于交结朋友，他事奉生身母亲非常孝顺，因此而闻名远近。
English: Xiao Xiang has an elegant demeanor and is good at making friends. He is very filial to his biological mother, so he is famous far and wide.

古文：起家宁远将军、丹阳尹。
现代文：他离家当官，任宁远将军、丹阳尹。
English: He left home to become an official, and was named General Ningyuan and Danyang Yin.

古文：到官未几，简王妃薨，去职。
现代文：到官任上不久，因简王妃去世，萧象离职。
English: Shortly after taking office, Xiao Xiang left office due to the death of Queen Jane.

古文：服阕，复授明威将军、丹阳尹。
现代文：服丧期满后，又授官为明威将军、丹阳尹。
English: After the expiration of the mourning period, he was promoted to General Ming Wei and Danyang Yin.

古文：象生长深宫，始亲庶政，举无失德，朝廷称之。
现代文：萧象从小生长在深宫，一开始亲自执行政事，举措就没有失德之处，朝廷裹的人都很称赞他。
English: Xiao Xiang grew up in the Deep Palace. From the very beginning, he personally carried out political affairs. There was nothing immoral about his actions, and people around the court praised him.

古文：出为持节、督司、霍、郢三州诸军事、征远将军、郢州刺史。
现代文：后出任持节、督司州、霍州、郢州三州诸军事、征速将军、郢州刺史。
English: After that, he served as the military commander of the three states of Jizhou, Huzhou, and Zhangzhou, the general of the expeditionary force, and the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：寻迁湘、衡二州诸军事、轻车将军、湘州刺史。
现代文：不久迁任湘州、衡州二州诸军事、轻车将军、湘州刺史。
English: He was soon transferred to the military, light vehicle generals of Xiangzhou and Henzhou two states, and the history of Xiangzhou.

古文：湘州旧多虎暴，及象在任，为之静息，故老咸称德政所感。
现代文：涸州过去老虎很多，经常伤害人、畜，到萧象任刺史时，虎害停止了，老人们都说这是萧象的德政感动了老虎。
English: In the past, there were many tigers in the dry state, often harming people and animals. By the time Xiao Xiangren stabbed history, the tiger harm had stopped. The old people all said that it was Xiao Xiang's German policy that moved the tiger.

古文：除中书侍郎，俄以本官行石头戍军事，转给事黄门侍郎、兼领军，又以本官兼宗正卿。
现代文：萧象又被授官为中书侍郎，不久，以原来的官职执行石头戍的军事，又转任给事黄门侍郎、兼领军，又以本官身份兼任宗正卿。
English: Xiao Xiang was also given the post of the secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters. Soon, he was assigned to the military of the Stone Guard with his original official position, and then he was transferred to the secretary of the Yellow Gate, and also the leader of the army, and he also served as the secretary of Zong Zhengqing with his official status.

古文：寻迁侍中、太子詹事，未拜，改授持节、督江州诸军事、信武将军、江州刺史。
现代文：不久迁任侍中、太子詹事，还未拜官，改任持节、督辽蛆诸军事、信武将军、刺史。
English: He was soon transferred to the position of chamberlain, Prince Zhan Zhi, and before he became an official, he was transferred to the positions of Mochizeki, military governor of Liao, general of Nobutake, and sashimi.

古文：以疾免。
现代文：因生病而免职。
English: He was relieved of his duties due to illness.

古文：寻除太常卿，加侍中，迁秘书监、领步兵校尉。
现代文：不久，又任太常卿，加侍中，迁任秘书监、兼任步兵校尉。
English: Not long after, he was also appointed as Tai Changqing (Chief of the General Staff of the Chinese People's Liberation Army), Gaozhong (Junior Chamberlain), transferred to the post of Secretary Supervisor, and concurrently served as an infantry lieutenant.

古文：大同二年，薨，谥曰敦。
现代文：大同二年，萧象去世，谧号敦。
English: In the second year of the same year, Xiao Xiang died, and his name was changed to Dong.

古文：子慥嗣。
现代文：他的儿子萧糙继嗣。
English: His son, Xiao Gang, became his successor.

古文：史臣曰：长沙诸嗣王，并承袭土宇，光有籓服。
现代文：史臣曰：长沙王的各位嗣王，全都承袭了土地房屋，拥有广阔的封地。
English: Shichen said: All the successors of the King of Changsha have inherited land and houses and have vast fiefs.

古文：桂阳王象以孝闻，在于牧湘，猛虎息暴，盖德惠所致也。
现代文：桂阳王萧象以孝顺闻名，在挝亚当州牧时，猛虎都停止了残暴行为，大概是他的德政恩惠所造成的吧。
English: King Xiao Xiang of Guiyang was famous for his filial piety. When he was a shepherd in Lao Adam Prefecture, the tigers stopped their atrocious behavior, which was probably caused by his benevolence.

古文：昔之善政，何以加焉。
现代文：过去的善政，还有什么可以超过他的呢。
English: After the good government of the past, what could surpass him?

